X 


m         m 

mm    m 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 


Shelf.  _.* 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


|h| 


R5S 


O^S^ra 


7Bn 


B^f*J^: 


m 


r^*\   *4... 


~2tf''v**i 


A  CENTURY  OF 


Baptist  Foreign  Missions. 


AN   OUTLINE   SKETCH. 


BY 

SOPHIE  BRONSON  TITTERINGTON. 


NOV    12  1o9] 

PHILADELPHIA  : 

AMERICAN  BAPTIST  PUBLICATION  SOCIETY, 
1420  Chestnut  Street. 


X^^V\\     V 


The  Library 

ot  Congress 


WASHINGTON 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1891,  by  the 

AMERICAN  BAPTIST  PUBLICATION  SOCIETY, 

In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.    The  Dawn  in  England, 7 

II.    Beginnings  in  America, 13 

BUBMAN   MISSIONS. 

III.  A  New  Gold  Mine, 20 

IV.  Early  Lights  and  Shadows— Martyr  Suf- 

ferings,       26 

V.    Bewards  and  Kesults, 32 

VI.    Varied  Experiences— Enlargement,  ...  40 

VII.    Helping  Hands, 48 

VIII.    Sorrow  and  Joy, 55 

IX.     Later  Years, 62 

KABEN  MISSION. 

X.    A  Eire  Kindled, 67 

XL    Jungle  Victories, 74 

XII.     Success  in  Adversity, 82 

XIII.  Sunshine  and  Shadow, 89 

XIV.  Looking  Beyond, 95 

XV.    Trial  and  Victory 103 

MISSIONS  IN  ASSAM. 

XVI.     Lengthening  Cords, 110 

XVII.     Progress  in  Assam, 116 

XVIII.    The  Kohls,  Nagas,  and  Garos, 122 

SHAN  MISSION. 

XIX.    Mountain  Heathen,  ....,..,..  129 

XX.    Sowing  and  Beaping, 135 

3 


CONTENTS. 


MISSIONS  IN  CHINA. 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XXI.    The  Chinese  Mission  at  Bangkok,    .    .  142 

XXII.    From  Macao  to  Swatow,     ......  148 

XXIII.    Results, 156 

XXIY.    The  Canton  Mission, 163 

XXY.     Quiet  Growth  in  China,     ......  171 

XX VI.    Central  China  Mission,      .    ,    .    .    .    .  180 

XXVII.    Northern  China  or  Shantung  Mission,  186 

XXVIII.    Western  China  Station, 190 

TELITGU  MISSION. 

XXIX.    The  Seed  Planted, 194 

XXX.     Early  Sheaves, 202 

XXXI.     Later  Harvests, 209 

MISSIONS  IN  JAPAN. 

XXXII.    Open  Doors  in  Japan, 217 

XXXIII.  Promise  and  Perplexity, 224 

XXXIV.  The  Crisis  in  Japan, 230 

MISSIONS  IN  AFRICA. 

XXXV.     The  Old  and  the  New,  .......  237 

XXXVI.    Light  in  Darkness, 242 

XXXVII.    Missions  of  the  Southern  Board,     .    .  246 

MISSIONS  IN  WESTERN  HEMISPHERE. 

XXXVIII.    Mission  in  Brazil, ,    .    .  252 

XXXIX.    Mission  in  Cuba, 256 

XL.    Missions  in  Mexico, 258 

MISSIONS  IN  EUROPE. 

XLI.    The  Mission  in  France,  .  ' 263 

XLII.     The  Mission  in  Germany, 268 

XLIII.    The  Mission  in  Sweden, 276 

XLIV.    The  Mission  in  Italy, 281 

XLV.    Missions  in  Denmark,  Greece,  Spain,  .  286 

XL VI.    The    Publication    Society's    Work    in 

Turkey, 292 

XLVII.    Our  Century, ,    ...  295 


INTRODUCTION. 


This  book  is,  of  necessity,  only  an  outline  of  the  work 
of  the  century  in  Baptist  Foreign  Missions,  To  those 
using  it  as  a  text  book,  a  few  suggestions  may  be  helpful. 

An  attempt  has  been  made  to  supply  in  some  degree, 
by  the  Questions  and  Supplementary  Readings,  the  una- 
voidable omissions  in  the  text.  Many  of  the  questions 
call  for  outside  study,  and  the  needed  information  may 
be  found,  in  most  cases,  in  the  Supplementary  Readings. 
The  latter  are  given  in  variety,  as  some  may  be  available 
when  others  are  not.  The  more  thoroughly  the  course 
of  study  indicated  is  followed,  the  greater  will  be  the 
interest,  and  the  more  satisfactory  the  results. 

All  history  is  in  some  sense  a  compilation.  The  writer 
wishes  to  express  deep  gratitude  to  all  who  have  aided 
in  furnishing  the  material  for  this  work.  It  would  be  im- 
possible to  mention  them  all.  The  "  Missionary  Maga- 
zine "  has  been  the  fountain  head  from  which  all  have 

drawn.     The  letters  of  our  missionaries  have  helped  to 

5 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

clothe  the  dry  bones  of  statistics  with  life  and  breath. 
Dr.  Tupper's  two  royal  octavo  volumes  have  been  indis- 
pensable in  the  history  of  the  Southern  work.  Gammers 
"  History  of  Baptist  Missions,"  Dr.  Smith's  "  Missionary 
Sketches/'  "Our  Gold  Mine,"  and  many,  many  other 
helps,  have  contributed  to  the  results  embodied  in  this 
volume. 

With  a  prayer  that  the  book  may  have  its  mission 
among  our  dear  young  people,  now  organizing  for  efficient 
service  for  God  in  the  world,  in  broadening  their  sympa- 
thies, extending  and  clarifying  their  vision,  and  making 
them   more   intelligent  workers,  the   writer   closes   her 

task. 

S.  B.  T. 


A  CENTURY  OF 

BAPTIST  FOREIGN  MISSIONS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE   DAWN   IN    ENGLAND. 

rilHE  darkest  hour  is  just  before  the  dawn.  In  Eng- 
-*-  land,  the  period  of  Baptist  history  immediately 
preceding  the  earliest  beginning  of  missionary  interest 
was  one  of  deep  gloom. 

Many  things  conspired  to  produce  this  result.  The 
Baptists  were,  in  a  measure,  paralyzed  by  the  frown  of 
the  Established  Church ;  false  doctrines  had  weakened 
their  spiritual  power,  and  the  great  body  of  their  mem- 
bership were  poor  and  humble  people.  With  the  excep- 
tion of  Andrew  Fuller,  John  Kyland,  Jr.,  and  some  of 
the  London  pastors,  the  ministry  were  mostly  unedu- 
cated, and  unable  to  cope  with  the  problems  of  the  time. 

Through  what  small  instrumentalities  does  God  work 
out  his  blessed  results!  The  condition  of  the  Baptist 
cause  seemed  desperate,  but  Faith  suggested  a  remedy, 
and  this  remedy  proved  the  seed-germ  of  modern  mis- 


8  BAPTIST   FOKEIGN   MISSIONS. 

sions.  The  ministers  of  the  Northamptonshire  Associa- 
tion drew  up  a  resolution,  beseeching  all  Baptist  churches 
in  England  to  spend  one  stated  hour  a  month  in  earnest, 
united  prayer  for  the  promotion  of  pure  and  undefiled 
religion.  Surely  they  were  inspired  to  add  the  exhorta- 
tion, "Let  the  spread  of  the  gospel  to  the  most  distant  parts 
of  the  habitable  globe  be  the  object  of  your  most  fervent 
requests" 

Thus,  in  August,  1774,  was  instituted  the  monthly 
concert  of  prayer,  the  origin  of  all  subsequent  missionary 
concerts,  and  the  starting  point  of  our  glorious  mission- 
ary achievements.  "  It  was  a  spark  dropped  from  heaven, 
and  it  has  set  the  world  in  a  blaze."  Of  all  missionary 
centennials,  this  comes  truly  the  first ;  as  the  Jerusalem 
prayer  meeting  preceded  Pentecost,  and  Pentecost  the 
missions  of  the  early  church. 

These  good  men  did  not  dream  of  the  significance  of 
their  action.  When  the  churches  began  to  pray  for  con- 
quests in  heathen  lands,  God  was  ready  for  fulfillment. 
Even  before  they  asked,  he  had  called  William  Carey 
from  the  humblest  walks  of  life,  and  was  fitting  him  to 
be  a  chosen  vessel  to  begin  the  work  in  heathen  lands. 

All  through  the  years,  events  had  been  ripening,  and 
in  the  fullness  of  time  this  glorious  enterprise  sprang  into 
being. 

William  Carey  was  born  at  Paulerspury,  near  North- 
ampton, England,  August  17,  1761.     His  earliest  child- 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  9 

hood  was  marked  by  an  intense  thirst  for  knowledge. 
One  special  trait  of  his  character  was  the  resolve  always 
to  finish  what  he  had  once  begun,  no  matter  what 
difficulties  were  in  the  way.  This  was  highly  important 
to  him  in  later  life.  He  was  a  close  observer,  and  this 
proved  helpful  to  the  future  missionary. 

At  fourteen,  he  was  bound  out  to  a  shoemaker.  After 
this,  he  led  a  wild  and  wayward  life ;  but  was  converted 
and  baptized  October  5,  1783.  Immediately  he  began 
preaching  in  a  humble  way,  cobbling  shoes  to  eke  out 
his  scanty  support.  On  the  walls  of  his  shop  hung  a 
map  of  the  world,  which  he  had  drawn  upon  sheets  of 
paper  pasted  together,  and  on  which  he  had  entered  all 
the  information  he  could  gather  regarding  the  condition, 
population,  and  religion  of  every  country  on  the  globe. 
Upon  the  cobbler's  bench  beside  him  was  always  a  book  ; 
sometimes  in  a  language  he  was  learning,  or  a  book  of 
travels.  He  allowed  no  time  to  run  to  waste.  As  he 
studied,  the  needs  of  a  perishing  world  wrung  his  heart. 
Within  nine  years  from  his  baptism,  he  was  the  motive 
power  in  the  organization  of  the  first  missionary  society. 

Carey  did  not  study  and  pray  in  vain.  He  rapidly 
rose  from  his  humble  station  to  a  position  of  eminence 
and  power.  His  linguistic  talent  had  already  shown 
itself  in  the  remarkable  facility  with  which  he  acquired 
a  new  language.  It  is  altogether  probable,  that  he  might 
have  become  one  of  the  foremost  men  in  England.     But 


10  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

the  call  from  the  perishing  millions  was  like  fire  in  his 
bones.  His  zeal  and  fervor  were  contagious,  and  resulted 
in  the  establishment  at  Kettering,  October  2,  1792,  of 
"  The  Baptist  Society  for  Propagating  the  Gospel  Among 
the  Heathen."  The  subscriptions  at  the  time  of  its 
organization  amounted  to  £13  2s  6d.  A  small  deposit 
in  the  Bank  of  Faith,  but  how  royal  have  been  the 
returns ! 

The  new  undertaking  was  begun  in  fear  and  trembling. 
God  forced  his  people  onward  ;  they  dared  not  go  back, 
and  how  could  they  go  forward  ?  Such  an  enterprise 
demanded  large  outlay.  The  London  ministers  turned 
a  cold  shoulder,  for  they  had  little  faith  in  a  movement 
beginning  among  country  pastors.  But  they  were  soon 
drawn  into  the  work  by  the  irresistible  enthusiasm  the 
scheme  inspired  ;  and  after  trials  and  troubles  innum- 
erable, Carey  was  ready  to  set  sail  for  his  work.  A 
companion  had  been  found  in  Dr.  Thomas,  formerly  a 
surgeon  in  Bengal.  He  was  Carey's  opposite  in  many 
respects,  and  perhaps  this  was  well  in  the  outset  of  the 
undertaking.  But  Carey's  piety  and  perseverance  proved 
the  best  qualities  in  the  long  run. 

The  East  India  Company  was  a  trading  organization 
which  ruled  India.  It  was  unfavorable  to  missionary 
labor,  lest  it  might  interfere  with  its  money-making 
schemes.  It  refused  to  carry  the  missionaries  upon  its 
ships,  and,  at  last,  passage  was  secured  upon  a  Danish 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  11 

East  Indiaman,  and  the  party  sailed  from  Dover,  June 
13,  1793. 

The  voyage  was  a  long,  weary  one  of  five  months. 
Carey  spent  the  time  in  studying  Bengali  with  Dr. 
Thomas,  and  beginning  a  translation  of  the  Bible  into 
that  language. 

The  story  of  Carey's  success  in  later  years  is  that  of 
triumph  over  stupendous  difficulties.  The  lack  of  funds 
caused  Carey  and  Thomas  to  don  the  white  jackets  of 
indigo  planters,  thus  also  giving  an  excuse  for  their  stay 
in  the  country  to  the  jealous  East  India  Company.  We 
may  be  sure  Carey  was  faithful  in  this  temporal  matter  ; 
but  every  moment  not  claimed  by  business  was  spent  in 
study  of  the  various  languages,  or  in  direct  missionary 
labor. 

These  five  years  were  God's  training  school  for  the 
future  work.  Then  the  owners  of  the  factories  failed, 
and  the  East  India  Company,  which  had  tolerated  them 
as  indigo  merchants,  was  ready  to  persecute  them  as 
missionaries.  A  refuge  was  offered  at  Serampore,  a 
small  tract,  twenty  acres  in  extent,  fifteen  miles  from 
Calcutta,  held  by  Denmark  as  a  trading  station.  With 
the  beginning  of  1800,  this  became  the  headquarters  of 
the  English  Baptist  Mission,  with  printing  press,  and  a 
reinforcement  of  missionaries  from  England.  It  was 
soon  a  centre  of  gospel  light,  whose  beams  penetrated  far 
into  the  interior.     Dr.  Carey's  "  gift  of  tongues  "  enabled 


12  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

him  to  send  out  portions  of  the  Scriptures  in  many  lan- 
guages. His  translations  are,  even  now,  his  most  endur- 
ing monument. 

British  authorities  had  denied  to  Carey  a  landing- 
place  on  his  arrival  in  India ;  but  when  he  died,  the 
Government  dropped  all  its  flags  to  half-mast  in  honor  of  a 
man  who  had  done  more  for  India  than  all  her  generals. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  was  the  religious  state  of  England  preceding  the  dawn 
of  foreign  mission  work? 

2.  When,  where,  and  how  did  the  monthly  Concert  of  Prayer 
for  Missions  originate  ? 

3.  To  what  has  it  been  likened  ? 

4.  How  was  God  preparing  to  answer  these  prayers  ? 

5.  Tell  the  story  of  William  Carey's  childhood  and  youth. 

6.  How  was  he  influential  in  the  formation  of  the  first  English 
Baptist  Missionary  Society? 

7.  With  what  amount  of  capital  did  it  begin  ? 

8.  What  difficulties  beset  this  first  missionary  work  ? 

9.  Who  went  with  Carey  ?  What  trials  did  they  meet  before 
sailing  ? 

10.  How  did  they  improve  the  time  of  their  voyage  ? 

11.  Give  account  of  their  first  years  in  India. 

12.  When  and  where  were  they  permanently  located? 

13.  What  was  the  final  tribute  of  respect  paid  to  Carey  by  the 
British  Government? 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  HEADINGS. 

BOOKS. 

Lite  of  William  Carey  :  American  Baptist  Publication  Society. 
Our  Gold  Mine,  pages  41-51.  GammePs  History  of  American 
Baptist  Missions.  Kindling  the  Light.  (Sketch  of  Carey,  Marsh- 
man,  and  Ward.) 


CHAPTER  II. 

BEGINNINGS  IN  AMERICA. 

"TT7HILE  Carey  was  concentrating  all  eyes  upon  Ser- 
'  '  ampore,  the  New  World  was  being  made  ready 
for  its  missionary  crisis.  The  Revolutionary  War  was 
ended,  the  Declaration  of  Independence  sustained  at  the 
point  of  the  sword.  The  white  wings  of  peace  hovered 
ever  the  infant  nation,  and  the  great  principles  of  fra- 
ternity and  equality  were  receiving  their  triumphal 
test. 

Carey's  work  enkindled  enthusiasm,  and  missionary 
societies  sprang  up  all  through  New  England  for  its  aid. 
Thus  far,  Christians  of  all  denominations  united  in  the 
support  of  the  Baptist  mission  at  Serampore.  Dr.  Carey 
gratefully  acknowledged  the  receipt  of  six  thousand  dol- 
lars from  American  churches  in  the  years  1806  and  1807. 
This  is  notable  as  the  first  money  raised  in  America  for 
foreign  mission  work. 

These  funds  were  largely  sent  from  Presbyterian 
and  Congregational  churches.  The  same  spirit  ani- 
mated the  Baptists,  but  their  numbers  and  means  were 
small.  The  Baptist  Missionary  Society  of  Massachu- 
setts was  formed  before  1803,  but  it  did  not  look  for 

13 


14  BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

heathen  outside  of  America.  This  year,  Dr.  Baldwin 
began  the  publication  of  "  The  Massachusetts  Baptist 
Missionary  Magazine."  Its  pages  were  made  thrillingly 
attractive  by  letters  from  Carey,  Marsh  man,  and  Ward, 
of  Serampore.  This  fanned  the  spark,  of  foreign  mission 
interest,  until  it  became  a  steady  flame,  and  prepared 
the  churches  for  the  greater  things  in  store. 

It  bore  fruit  in  1812,  in  the  formation  of  the  Salem 
Translation  and  Foreign  Society,  to  aid  the  English  mis- 
sion already  existing  at  Serampore.  All  organizations 
at  this  time  were  local.  It  was  not  as  easy  to  form  gen- 
eral organizations  then  as  now.  It  was  not  yet  the  day 
of  steam  and  electricity,  linking  the  earth  into  one  grand 
whole.  The  missionary  sentiment  needed  some  crisis  to 
force  it  into  action. 

As  we  must  go  to  the  cobbler's  shop  in  Hackleton  for 
the  beginning  of  English  Baptist  missions,  so  we  are 
taken  to  a  haystack  for  the  initial  point  of  American 
foreign  missions.  Three  earnest  Christian  young  men, 
students  at  Williams  College,  were  fired  with  the  same 
zeal  that  had  inspired  Carey;  and  in  a  retired  spot, 
beside  a  sheltering  haystack,  they  communed,  and  prayed, 
and  planned. 

A  little  later,  an  ardent  youth,  with  intellectual  power 
that  promised  a  brilliant  career,  was  reading  in  his  room 
at  Andover  Theological  Seminary,  Buchanan's  "  Star  in 
the  East."     Adoniram  Judson's  consecration  to  God  was 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  15 

in  its  earliest  glow  ;  and  now  he  consecrated  himself  also 
to  the  work  of  foreign  missions. 

These  four  Congregational  young  men  soon  made 
known  their  life  purpose;  and  from  the  thrill  of  this 
impulse  sprang  the  u  American  Board  of  Commissioners 
for  Foreign  Missions," — the  noble  mother  of  all  American 
foreign  missionary  societies.  She  accepted  the  service 
offered,  but  distrusting  the  ability  of  the  churches  to  sup- 
port a  mission  alone,  sent  Judson  to  confer  with  the 
London  Missionary  Society  in  reference  to  a  co-operative 
relation. 

Judson's  trip  to  England  was  fraught  with  strange 
adventures.  His  vessel  was  captured  by  a  French  priva- 
teer, and  he  had  an  unpleasant  taste  of  French  prison 
life.  But  God  brought  him  safely  out  of  all  his  distresses, 
and  he  was  at  last  enabled  to  lay  his  message  before  the 
London  Congregational  Board.  The  English  brethren 
were  willing  to  accept  Judson  and  his  associates  as  their 
own  missionaries,  but  wisely  concluded  that,  with  the 
Atlantic  rolling  between,  it  was  better  that  the  two  soci- 
eties should  act  independently.  They  advised  the  Ameri- 
can churches  to  establish  a  mission  of  their  own. 

Upon  Judson's  return,  he  found  that  this  view  of  the 
subject  prevailed ;  and  accordingly  Messrs.  Judson, 
Newell,  Nott,  and  Mills,  were  appointed.  Luther  Eice 
was  soon  added,  on  condition  that  he  raise  the  money 
for  his  own  outfit  and  passage,  which  he  did  in  six  days. 


16  BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

On  the  5th  of  February,  1812,  Judson  was  married  to 
Ann  Hasseltine,  of  Bradford,  Mass.,  a  young  lady  of 
rare  qualifications,  in  every  way  worthy  to  lead  the  long 
list  of  missionary  heroines  and  martyrs.  In  these  early 
days  of  missions,  it  was  thought  foolhardy  for  a  woman 
to  risk  life  in  pagan  India.  It  was  much  farther  off  than 
now,  and  the  wildest  ideas  prevailed.  One  of  Mrs.  Jud- 
son's  earliest  trials  was  the  general  disapproval  of  her 
prospective  work. 

On  the  19th  of  February,  the  Judsons,  with  Mr. 
Newell  and  wife,  sailed  from  Boston  in  the  ship  Caravan. 
The  Harmony,  with  the  other  missionaries,  sailed  the 
24th  ;  and  in  August  they  met  once  more,  in  Calcutta. 

But  during  the  voyage,  strange  things  had  happened. 
Mr.  Judson  took  up  the  study  of  Scriptural  teachings 
regarding  baptism,  in  order  that  he  might  be  able  to 
meet  the  arguments  of  the  Baptist  brethren  in  Seram- 
pore,  and  also  to  justify  himself  in  sprinkling  the  infants 
of  the  future  converts.  To  his  surprise,  his  investiga- 
tions were  far  from  comforting.  Against  his  will  he 
became  convinced  that  the  Baptist  position  was  right ; 
that  believers  were  the  only  proper  subjects,  and  immer- 
sion the  divinely  commanded  act  of  baptism.  With 
Mr.  Judson,  conviction  produced  action,  and  in  com- 
pany with  Mrs.  Judson,  who  reluctantly  reached  the 
same  conclusion,  he  requested  baptism  at  the  hands  of 
the  Serampore  missionaries.     The  ordinance  was  admin- 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  17 

istered  by  Mr.  Ward,  September  6,  1812.  Luther  Rice, 
on  the  Harmony,  had  followed  the  same  line  of  study, 
and  upon  his  arrival,  Mr.  Judson  had  the  joy  of  finding 
him  a  fellow  Baptist. 

It  is  well  to  stop  a  moment,  and  consider  what  these 
missionaries  had  done.  Strangers  in  a  strange  land,  they 
had,  by  their  own  act,  severed  the  relation  between  them- 
selves and  the  American  Board.  Would  American 
Baptists  take  them  up?  Upon  the  answer  depended 
their  daily  bread.  In  the  true  spirit  of  Christian 
brotherhood,  they  were  bidden  to  draw  funds  from  Ser- 
ampore,  until  they  could  hear  from  Baptists  at  home. 
A  collection  was  also  taken  up  among  the  friends  of  mis- 
sions in  Calcutta.  But  this  supply  could  not  always 
last.  Was  it  not  a  sublime  faith  that  could  thus  launch 
out  on  the  promises  of  God,  and  do  the  duty  made  plain, 
without  heeding  the  consequences  ? 

Trials  and  perplexities  multiplied.  The  East  India 
Company,  nearing  the  end  of  its  despotic  power,  was  just 
at  this  time  particularly  incensed  against  missionaries. 
Such  a  party  arriving  in  India,  roused  their  hostility  into 
energetic  action.  Judson  and  Newell  were  ordered  back 
to  America,  but  obtained  permission  to  go  instead  to  the 
Isle  of  France.  A  ship  was  about  to  sail,  but  as  she 
could  take  only  two  passengers,  the  Newells  embarked, 
leaving  the  Judsons  to  follow  in  the  next  vessel. 

At  last,  as  they  were  compelled  to  leave  at  all  hazards, 

B 


18  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

a  ship  came  in,  bound  for  the  Isle  of  France.  At  first, 
a  pass  was  refused,  but  after  annoyances  and  troubles 
innumerable,  the  Judsons  and  Mr.  Rice  secured  the 
desired  permission.  January  11,  1813,  they  reached  the 
Isle  of  France,  only  to  find  that  Mrs.  Newell  had  been 
buried  some  weeks  before. 

The  terrible  shock  of  this  unexpected  bereavement 
nearly  prostrated  Mrs.  Judson.  To  add  to  their  distress, 
the  island  offered  no  adequate  opening  for  mission  work. 
Mr.  Kice,  impaired  in  health,  sailed  for  America  to 
arouse  the  Baptist  denomination  to  their  great  oppor- 
tunity. Mr.  Newell  went  to  Ceylon,  and  the  Judsons, 
left  alone,  saw  no  alternative  but  to  leave  also.  What 
wonder  that  Mrs.  Judson  wrote  in  her  diary,  "It  seems 
as  if  there  was  no  resting  place  for  me  on  earth  "  ! 

Where  could  they  go  ?  Must  they  again  enter  the 
lion's  jaws  ?  There  seemed  to  be  no  other  way,  and  on 
May  7  they  embarked  for  Madras,  trusting  to  the  guiding 
finger  of  Providence. 

Reaching  Madras,  they  looked  about  for  a  vessel 
sailing  for  some  port  outside  the  jurisdiction  of  the  East 
India  Company.  They  had  no  time  to  lose ;  they  must 
be  away  before  the  lion's  jaws  could  close  upon  them. 
The  only  ship  was  a  miserable,  unseaworthy  hulk,  bound 
for  Rangoon,  in  Burma.  This  seemed  but  a  little 
better.  Even  then,  there  were  mutterings  of  war  be- 
tween  England  and  Burma,  and  it  was  not  to   be  ex- 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  19 

pected  that  the  Burmans  would  make  nice  distinctions 
between  English  and  Americans.  But  they  were  shut  up 
to  this  single  point.  June  22,  they  embarked  on  the  crazy 
old  Georgianna.  Under  the  circumstances,  the  voyage 
could  not  be  a  pleasant  one.  Mrs.  Judson  was  taken 
alarmingly  ill,  and  the  rough  weather  almost  precluded 
the  hope  of  her  recovery.  But  they  were  driven  into  a 
dangerous  strait,  with  black  rocks  on  the  one  hand,  and 
a  shore  infested  with  cannibals  on  the  other.  Here  God 
kept  them,  as  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.  The  perfect 
stillness  saved  Mrs.  Judson 's  life,  and  soon,  with  favoring 
breezes,  they  entered  the  harbor  of  Rangoon. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  was  the  condition  of  the  New  World? 

2.  What  enkindled  the  earliest  missionary  enthusiasm  ? 

3.  What  was  the  first  foreign  missionary  contribution  raised  in 
America  ? 

4.  Give  account  of  the  Massachusetts  Baptist  Missionary  Mag- 
azine. 

5.  What  is  the  initial  point  of  American  foreign  missions  ? 

6.  Describe  Judson's  call  to  foreign  mission  work. 

7.  What  great  Society  resulted  from  the  consecration  of  these 
three  young  men  ? 

8.  Give  causes,  experiences,  and   results   of  Judson's  visit  to 
England. 

9.  Give  the  names  of  the  four  young  men  appointed. 

10    Describe  Judson's  marriage,  and  accompanying  trials. 

11.  Give  a  sketch  of  Ann  Hasseltine. 

12.  Describe  the  sailing  of  this  first  band  of  American  mission- 
aries. 

13.  What  occurred  during  the  voyage  ? 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

BOOKS. 

Life  of  Dr.  Judson.     Missionary  Memorials.     Life  of  Ann  H. 
Judson. 


CHAPTER  III. 

A   NEW   GOLD   MINE. 

A  NDREW  FULLERS  famous  saying,  "There  is  a 
-*--*-  gold  mine  in  India,  but  it  seems  almost  as  deep 
as  the  centre  of  the  earth " ;  and  Carey's  reply,  "  I 
will  go  down,  but,  remember,  you  must  hold  the  ropes," 
found  its  counterpart  in  Burma  with  Judscn,  its  heroic 
explorer.  Our  last  chapter  left  them  at  the  portals 
of  Rangoon. 

Burma  was  not  altogether  virgin  missionary  soil. 
Felix  Carey  had  been  there  five  years.  He  had  learned 
something  of  the  lantrua^e,  had  translated  the  first  six 
chapters  of  Matthew,  and  had  begun  the  preparation  of 
a  Burman  grammar  and  dictionary.  But  he  had  made 
little  impression  on  the  people.  Indeed,  it  had  not  oc- 
curred to  them  that  he  was  anything  more  than  a  civil 
ambassador.  When  the  Judsons'  arrived,  he  was  in  Ava, 
called  thither  by  the  king  on  secular  business. 

The  English  Mission  house  was  a  dreary  place  outside 

the  city  walls,  exposed  to  wild  beasts,  and  near  the  place 

of  public  execution.     Still  it  afforded  a  refuge.     Mrs. 

Judson.  was  so  feeble  that  she  was  carried  on  shore  by 

four  natives.     Being  the  first  white  woman  ever  seen  in 
20 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  21 

Rangoon,  she  was  a  great  curiosity.  Receiving  a  wel- 
come, they  established  themselves  in  the  mission  house, 
and  began  work  in  good  earnest  upon  the  language. 

Leaving  our  missionaries  hard  at  work  over  the  Bur- 
man  tongue,  let  us  see  what  effect  the  strange  tidings 
of  their  change  of  views  had  upon  American  Baptists. 
The  first  news  was  brought  by  the  ship  Tartar,  Janu- 
ary, 1813,  which  bore  letters  from  Mr.  Judson  to 
the  American  Board,  and  also  to  prominent  Baptist 
ministers,  announcing  his  altered  convictions.  The  news 
flew  swiftly  over  the  land,  and  roused  the  Baptists  as 
with  the  sound  of  a  trumpet.  The  glad  surprise  touched 
a  nerve  of  exquisite  feeling  which  vibrated  from  Maine 
to  the  sunny  South.  God  had  placed  at  the  disposal  of 
the  Baptist  denomination  three  fully  equipped  mission- 
aries. As  they  had  cut  themselves  off  from  the  Board 
which  sent  them  out,  action  must  be  prompt  and  decisive. 

Societies  sprang  up  for  the  promotion  of  Baptist 
foreign  missions,  the  most  prominent  of  which  was  the 
one  formed  in  Boston.  This  society  at  once  assumed 
the  support  of  the  Judsons,  but  believing  that  they  would 
receive  comfort  and  direction  by  association  with  the 
Serampore  missionaries,  proposed  to  the  English  Society 
that  Baptists  in  England  and  America  should  co-operate 
in  the  work  of  foreign  missions.  This  did  not  seem  best 
to  the  English  brethren,  and  they  declined  the  propo- 
sition.    Tiie  result  proved  the  wisdom  of  their  decision. 


22  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

The  condition  of  the  Baptist  denomination  at  this  time 
was  a  peculiar  one.  There  was  not  yet  a  consciousness 
of  power.  They  were  a  scattered  and  feebJe  folk,  with 
little  denominational  spirit.  The  call  from  the  foreign 
field  came  like  an  electric  shock.  It  consolidated  the 
Baptist  forces  and  sent  new  life  tingling  through  the 
veins  of  the  denomination.  Mr.  Judson  had  written  the 
significant  words,  "  Should  there  be  formed  a  Baptist 
society  for  the  support  of  a  mission  in  these  parts,  I 
should  be  ready  to  consider  myself  their  missionary." 
These  words  summoned  the  Baptist  hosts  to  the  conflict. 

The  ship  that  bore  the  first  cordial  words  of  accept- 
ance to  Mr.  Judson  passed  Mr.  Rice  in  mid-ocean,  as 
he  was  hastening  back  to  arouse  the  churches  at  home. 
This  was  the  crisis  in  Baptist  history.  It  marked  the 
beginning  of  that  wonderful  growth  that  has  astonished 
the  world.  In  attempting  great  things  for  God,  they 
awoke  to  a  consciousness  of  their  own  power. 

When  Mr.  Rice  arrived,  he  found  the  country  pre- 
pared to  respond  to  his  appeal.  New  societies  were 
formed  in  the  Middle  and  Southern  States,  and  it 
seemed  best  to  devise  some  means  to  secure  concert 
of  action.  Accordingly,  May  18,  1814,  delegates  from 
Baptist  churches  and  missionary  societies  throughout  the 
land  convened  at  the  First  Baptist  Church  in  Philadel- 
phia. This  was  the  first  general  meeting  of  the  denomi- 
nation in  America,  and  great  was  the  enthusiasm  aroused. 


BAPTIST    FOKEIGX    MISSIONS.  23 

At  this  meeting  was  organized  "The  General  Missionary 
Convention  of  the  Baptist  Denomination  of  the  United 
States  of  America  for  Foreign  Missions."  The  local 
societies  contributed  four  thousand  dollars  to  its  treasury, 
and  it  was  thought  an  annual  amount  of  over  five  thou- 
sand might  be  secured  from  the  churches.  It  was  the 
day  of  small  things. 

At  this  first  meeting  of  the  "  Triennial  Convention/' 
as  it  was  more  briefly  called,  Mr.  Judson  was  formally 
appointed  its  missionary  to  Burma,  and  Luther  Rice 
employed  to  labor  in  the  United  States  to  arouse  a 
more  general  interest  in  missions.  Perhaps  no  truer 
estimate  of  the  man  and  his  work  can  be  given  than  an 
extract  from  the  inscription  upon  his  monument,  erected 
by  the  South  Carolina  Baptist  Convention. 

"  If  the  Burmans  have  cause  for  gratitude  toward 
Judson  for  a  faithful  version  of  God's  word,  so  they  will, 
through  generations  to  come,  arise  and  call  Rice  blessed, 
for  it  was  his  eloquent  appeals  for  the  heathen  which 
raised  our  Baptist  churches  to  adopt  the  Burman  Mis- 
sion, and  sustain  Judson  in  his  arduous  toils." 

It  was  not  until  September  7,  1815,  that  Judson 
learned  of  the  organization  of  the  Triennial  Convention, 
and  his  appointment  as  its  missionary.  More  than  two 
years  had  passed  since  his  arrival  in  Burma,  and  when 
the  glad  news  came,  Mrs.  Judson  was  absent  at  Madras, 
for  medical  treatment. 


24  BAPTIST   FOKEIGX   MISSIONS. 

The  exploration  of  the  Burman  gold  mine  was  no  easy 
task.  The  language  was  exceedingly  difficult,  and  he 
had  not  even  an  interpreter.  Fundamentally  differing 
from  any  other  tongue  with  which  he  was  familiar,  he 
had  no  helpful  points  of  analogy.  ,  In  later  years  he  be- 
came the  wonder  and  delight  of  the  Burmans  for  the 
ease  and  fluency  with  which  he  expressed  himself.  The 
severe  application  of  these  first  years  nearly  unfitted  him 
for  further  work ;  and  he  was  on  the  point  of  sailing  for 
Bengal  for  rest  and  medical  advice,  when  the  joyful 
news  came  that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hough,  appointed  by  the 
Board,  had  reached  Calcutta.  This  proved  such  a  tonic 
that  the  proposed  trip  was  not  taken.  Previous  to  this 
they  had  left  the  English  mission  house,  and  were  living 
within  the  city  walls. 

October  15,  181 6,  the  Houghs  reached  Rangoon,  also 
a  printing  press  and  a  font  of  Burman  type,  the  gift  of 
the  Serampore  missionaries.  It  may  be  imagined  with 
what  joy  the  Judsons  welcomed  these  friends,  having 
lived  in  their  self-imposed  exile  for  nearly  three  years. 

Mr.  Hough  could  print  while  studying  the  language, 
so  he  became  immediately  useful.  A  tract,  a  Burmese 
grammar,  and  the  first  chapters  of  Matthew  were  soon 
ready  for  the  press. 

The  proclamation  of  the  gospel  now  began  in  earnest. 
In  March  came  the  first  inquirer,  whose  mind  had  been 
awakened  bv  reading  the  tract  and   catechism.      His 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  25 

great  desire  was  "  for  more  of  that  writing/'  Mr.  Jud- 
son  gave  him  the  first  five  chapters  of  Matthew,  and  he 
went  away.  From  time  to  time  they  heard  of  his  con- 
stant reading  of  the  sacred  books ;  but  he  never  became 
an  avowed  Christian.  Doubtless  the  fear  of  persecution 
deterred  him.  But  it  was  a  comforting  proof  that  the 
Burman  heart  was  not  impenetrable;  and  it  was  a 
prophecy  of  a  coming  harvest. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  In  what  sense  was  Burma  a  gold  mine  ? 

2.  Give  a  description  of  Burma. 

3.  What  is  the  religion  ? 

4.  Where  is  Kangoon  ? 

5.  What  effect  did  Judson's  change  of  views  have  upon  Ameri- 
can Baptists? 

6.  What  offer  was  made  to  the  English  Baptist  Society,  and 
with  what  result? 

7.  What  was  the  condition  of  the  Baptist  denomination  ? 

8.  What  significant  words  had  Mr.  Judson  written?    What  was 
their  effect  ? 

9.  When  and  where  was  the  first  meeting  of  the  denomination  ? 

10.  What  society  was  organized,  and  what  was  its  first  work  ? 

11.  What  was  Luther  Bice's  mission  ? 

12.  What  difficulties  did  Judson  meet  in  the  outset  of  his  work? 

13.  When  did  the  Houghs  reach  Kangoon,  and  what  did  they 
take  with  them  ? 

14.  What  was  the  first  printed  matter  in  Burman  ? 

15.  Tell  the  story  of  the  first  inquirer. 

SUPPLEMENTARY   READINGS. 

BOOKS. 

Our  Gold  Mine,  pages  66-77.    Life  of  Adoniram  Judson,  by  Dr. 
Edward  Judson.     Missionary  Memorials ;  Mrs.  Ann  H.  Judson. 

LEAFLETS. 

The  Burman   Mission.      The   Races  of  Burma.      Women   in 
Burma. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

EARLY    LIGHTS    AND    SHADOWS.       MARTYR    SUFFERINGS. 

TN  1817,  Mr.  Judson  undertook  a  voyage  to  Arakan, 
J-  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a  native  assistant.  By  a 
series  of  most  disastrous  circumstances,  his  expected 
absence  of  a  few  weeks  was  prolonged  to  six  months,  and 
he  was  given  up  for  lost.  Rangoon  becoming  unsafe 
because  of  the  impending  war,  the  Houghs  prepared  to 
leave  for  Bengal,  taking  the  printing  press  with  them, 
but  Mrs.  Judson  refused  to  go.  Very  soon  she  had  the 
joy  of  welcoming  back  Mr.  Judson,  as  one  from  the 
dead,  and  in  spite  of  danger,  the  mission  was  continued. 

September  19,  1818,  Messrs.  Colman  and  Wheelock 
joined  the  mission  at  Rangoon.  They  were  literally  on 
fire  with  missionary  zeal,  too  intense  for  their  frail 
bodies.  In  less  than  a  year  Wheelock  slept  beneath  the 
waters  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  Who  shall  say  the  sacri- 
fice was  in  vain  ?     Column's  career  was  also  brief. 

Public  Christian  worship  was  first  held  in  Rangoon 

April  4,  1819.     It  was  observed  in  a  zayat,  erected  for 

the  purpose,  the  first  house  dedicated  to  the  Lord  in 

Burma.      It  was  a  humble,  unpretending  building,  in 

striking  contrast  with  the  heathen  temples  on  every  hand. 
26 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  27 

June  27, 1819,  was  a  glorious  day.  Mr.  Judson  had 
then  the  joy  of  baptizing  the  first  convert,  after  six  years 
of  weary  seed-sowing  in  the  sterile  soil  of  Burman  hearts. 
On  the  first  of  May,  Moung  Nau  had  appeared  as  an  in- 
quirer. Many  cases  had  seemed  hopeful,  only  to  turn 
back  ;  but  Moung  Nau  soon  gave  good  evidence  of  con- 
version. To  the  reapers  this  first  blade  of  grain  was  the 
prophecy  of  countless  others.  Inquirers  increased,  and 
slowly  the  little  church  grew. 

But  it  could  not  be  concealed  from  the  jealous  eyes  of 
the  Government  at  Ava  that  some  of  its  subjects  were 
embracing  a  foreign  faith.  A  statute  of  the  realm  for- 
bade a  Burman  to  change  his  religion  on  pain  of  death. 
Inquirers  feared  to  come.  In  December,  1819,  Judson 
and  Colman,  taking  their  lives  in  their  hands,  ascended 
the  Irrawaddy  in  a  native  boat  to  Ava,  to  lay  their 
cause  before  the  king  of  Burma  himself,  and,  if  possible, 
secure  toleration  for  the  infant  church  in  Rangoon. 
Five  hundred  weary  miles  they  made  their  way  against 
the  current,  through  scenery  wonderfully  beautiful,  but 
everywhere  desecrated  by  idol  temples. 

As  they  approached  Ava,  difficulties  multiplied.  By 
sending  a  gift  ahead  to  each  petty  official,  they  at  last 
entered  the  golden  palace,  and  obtained  audience  with 
royalty.  As  a  present,  they  had  brought  the  king  a 
beautifully  gilded  copy  of  the  Bible. 

It  was  hard  to  suffer  utter  defeat.     The  king  repulsed 


28  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

them ;  would  not  even  look  at  their  gift,  and  they  went 
away  sad  and  heavy-hearted.  But  God  was  carrying 
out  his  own  purposes.  He  did  not  mean  that  "  his  infant 
cause  in  Burma  should  be  rocked  by  royal  fingers." 

Sorrowfully  they  returned  to  P-angoon,  and  found  to 
their  joy  the  converts  firm  and  undismayed  at  the  pros- 
pect of  persecution.  The  Judsons  resolved  to  stay  with 
the  brave  band  a  little  longer.  Colman  was  sent  to 
Chittagong,  in  British  India,  to  establish  an  asylum  to 
which  they  might  flee,  if  need  be.  But  death  ended  his 
work  in  1822. 

In  1821,  Mrs.  Judson  was  compelled  by  failing  health 
to  go  to  America.  But  Mr.  Judson  was  not  left  alone. 
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Price  had  joined  the  mission,  while  the 
Houghs  had  returned,  bringing  back  the  printing  press. 
Dr.  Price  began  the  practice  of  medicine,  and  the  fame 
of  liis  skill  having  reached  the  "  golden  ears  "  in  Ava, 
he  was  summoned  thither  by  the  king.  Mr.  Judson 
accompanied  him  to  begin  a  mission,  if  the  opening 
should  prove  to  be  a  real  one.  The  church  in  Rangoon 
now  numbered  eighteen  members,  who  were  left  in 
charge  of  Mr.  Hough,  while  native  boats  a  second  time 
bore  Christ's  messengers  up  the  Irrawaddy,  this  time  at 
Government  expense. 

In  January,  1823,  Mr.  Judson  returned  to  Rangoon, 
to  await  Mrs.  Judson's  arrival,  having  secured  the  loan 
of  ground  upon  which  to  build  a  mission  house  in  Ava. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  29 

Her  visit  to  America  had  inspired  fresh  enthusiasm  for 
the  work  in  Burma.  With  her  came  Rev.  Jonathan 
Wade  and  wife.  Leaving  them  with  the  Houghs  to 
carry  on  the  Rangoon  mission,  the  Judsons,  with  their 
worldly  belongings,  hastened  to  Ava.  But  they  found 
the  royal  city  all  astir  with  the  prospect  of  war  with 
England,  Dr.  Price  no  longer  in  favor,  and  Americans 
and  English  alike  under  the  shadow  of  suspicion. 

Soon  came  the  war  in  deadly  earnest.  The  mission- 
aries exchanged  activities  for  martyr  sufferings.  The 
Wades  and  Houghs  in  Rangoon  were  in  terrible  danger, 
as  the  English  fleet  attacked  the  city.  Only  the  speedy 
victory  saved  them,  and  soon  they  escaped  to  Calcutta, 
where  they  remained  until  after  the  war. 

It  took  two  weeks  for  the  news  of  the  English  victory 
to  reach  the  capital.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Judson  had  placed 
themselves  where  there  was  no  escape.  Mr.  Judson  and 
Mr.  Price  were  arrested  under  suspicion  of  being  Eng- 
lish spies,  and  thrust  into  prison.  Mrs.  Price  had  merci- 
fully been  removed  from  the  evil  to  come,  and  Mrs.  Jud- 
son was  called  upon  to  pass  through  experiences  worse 
than  death. 

Words  fail  to  describe  the  terrible  sufferings  of  the 
next  year  and  a  half,  first  at  Ava,  then  at  Amarapura, 
culminating  in  the  horrors  of  the  death  prison  at  Oung- 
pen-la.  Nine  months  they  lay  chained  in  nine,  and 
three    months   in   five   pairs   of    fetters.     The   devilish 


30  BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

cruelty  of  their  jailers,  disease,  and  lack  of  food,  soon 
wasted  them  to  skeletons.  Picture  the  situation  of  Mrs. 
Judson,  solitary  among  enemies.  Her  heroism  alone 
enabled  the  prisoners  to  survive  the  dreadful  sufferings 
and  privations  of  their  long  imprisonment.  To  and  fro 
she  passed,  bearing  tiiem  food  or  clothing,  and  by  brib- 
ing the  prison  officials,  sometimes  obtaining  slight  miti- 
gation of  their  torture;  wearing  the  Burman  dress  to 
appease  the  natives,  and  to  escape  annoyance.  No 
avenue  toward  royal  clemency  was  left  untried.  Vol- 
umes could  be  written  without  telling  the  story  of  this 
terrible  time.  TwTenty-one  months  one  long  continued 
agony!  For  a  time  during  this  period,  her  husband 
missed  her  daily  visits,  and  when  he  crawled  forth,  a 
chained  captive,  to  meet  her  once  more,  he  welcomed  also 
a  puny,  wailing  babe,  born  to  an  inheritance  of  suffering. 
The  most  precious  treasure  they  possessed  was  the 
manuscript  translation  of  the  Burman  New  Testament. 
Mrs.  Judson  sewed  this  up  in  a  pillow,  too  hard  to  excite 
the  cupidity  of  even  a  Burman,  and  gave  it  into  Mr. 
Judson's  keeping.  When  the  prisoners  were  removed 
to  Oung-pen-la,  whither  Mrs.  Judson  followed  them,  it 
was  picked  up  by  one  of  the  Burman  Christians,  and 
carried  to  his  home  as  a  precious  relic  of  his  dear  teach- 
ers, with  no  knowledge  of  what  it  contained.  In  it, 
months  afterward,  was  found  the  priceless  manuscript 
unharmed. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  31 

After  sufferings  beyond  description,  the  English  vic- 
tories rendered  Mr.  Judson's  services  as  ambassador  from 
the  Bur  man  Government  invaluable.  It  was  like  escape 
from  hell,  when  the  Judsons  with  their  infant  daughter 
found  themselves  sailing  down  the  Irrawaddy  to  the 
British  camp.  Here  they  were  received  with  every 
possible  attention  and  kindness. 

The  scenes  of  the  past  months  seemed  like  a  terrible 
dream,  save  that  their  physical  consequences  remained  a 
sad  reality. 

QUESTIONS. 

I.  Give  an  account  of  Mr.  Judson's  attempted  voyage  to  Ara- 
kan. 

2.  Who  were  Colman  and  Wheelock  ? 

3.  When  was  public  Christian  worship  first  held  in  Kangoon  ? 

4.  Give  the  history  of  the  first  convert,  and  the  date  of  baptism. 

5.  Describe  the  beginnings  of  persecution. 

6.  Why  did  Judson  and  Colman  go  to  Ava,  and  what  was  the 
result? 

7.  What  were  the  events  of  1821  ? 

8.  Who  carried  on  the  Rangoon  mission,  upon  the  removal  of 
the  Judsons  to  Ava  ? 

9.  What  was  their  situation  in  the  royal  city? 

10.  For  what  did  the  missionaries  exchange  active  work? 

II.  What  was  the  situation  in  Rangoon? 

12.  Tell  the  story  of  the  twenty-one  months  imprisonment. 

13.  How  was  the  manuscript  New  Testament  preserved? 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

BOOKS. 

Our  Gold  Mine,  pages  78-119.  Life  of  Adoniram  Judson.  Mis- 
sionary Memorials.     Life  of  Ann  H.  Judson. 

LEAFLETS. 

The  Barman  Mission.  A  golden  sheaf  from  Judson's  work  at 
Ava.     Wayside  Preaching.     Sketch  of  the  life  of  Dr.  Judson. 


CHAPTER  V. 


REWARDS   AND   RESULTS. 


ONE  result  of  the  war  was  a  broad  slice  of  Burman 
territory  on  the  coast,  ceded  to  England.  The 
Rangoon  church  was  scattered,  and  it  was  decided  to 
remove  the  mission  to  some  new  location  under  the  pro- 
tection of  the  British  flag.  Amherst  was  chosen  as 
being  the  prospective  capital  of  British  Burma,  and 
thither  Mr.  Judson  removed  his  family. 

But  the  long  strain  had  been  too  much  for  Mrs. 
Judson,  and  she  died  in  Amherst,  October  24,  1826, 
during  Mr.  Judson's  absence  at  Ava  with  the  British 
embassy.  When  he  returned,  he  found  only  her  grave 
under  the  hopia  tree.  This  was  the  culmination  of  all 
the  sorrows  and  distresses  of  this  period  of  his  history. 
Surely  hers  was  the  martyr  crown.  Her  life  of  thirty- 
seven  years  had  been  a  long  one  in  its  measure  of  en- 
deavor and  heroic  endurance.  Soon  the  little  Maria 
slept  beside  her  mother.     It  was  the  climax  of  sorrow. 

The  Wades  joined  Mr.  Judson  in  Amherst,  but  the 

British  headquarters  having  been  moved  to  Moulmein, 

most  of  its  population  flocked  thither.     Early  in  1827, 

Rev.   George   Dana   Boardman   opened    a    mission   in 
32 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  33 

Moulmein,  land  for  its  use  having  been  offered  by 
Sir  Archibald  Campbell.  Times  had  changed,  and  now 
the  English  power  in  India  was  the  warmest  friend  of 
missionaries.  The  following  year  the  Boardmans  went 
to  Tavoy  and  began  the  Karen  mission,  while  Mr. 
Judson  and  the  Wades  removed  to  Moulmein,  leaving 
Amherst  lonely  and  deserted.  But  it  will  ever  be  a 
sacred  spot  to  American  Christians  as  the  last  resting 
place  of  Ann  Hasseltine  Judson. 

The  Moulmein  mission  prospered  greatly.  No  fear  of 
persecution  hindered.  A  school  was  soon  established, 
public  worship  begun,  and  zayats  erected  at  various 
points  for  personal  contact  with  the  people.  Inquirers 
multiplied,  and  between  January  and  September,  1828, 
twenty-one  were  baptized.  About  this  time,  Mr.  Judson 
gave  to  the  Board  in  Boston  his  entire  property  of  six 
thousand  dollars,  in  a  note  signed  simply,  "A  Mission- 
ary." His  services  to  both  the  English  and  Burman 
Governments  had  been  acknowledged  by  generous  gifts, 
and  this,  with  his  other  possessions,  he  now  laid  on  the 
altar  of  missions. 

In  1826,  the  headquarters  of  the  Board  were  changed 
from  Philadelphia  to  Boston.  During  the  two  years  of 
the  war,  no  tidings  had  come  from  the  missionaries  in 
Burma,  and  intense  anxiety  prevailed.  When  the  news 
of  their  marvelous  deliverance  came,  a  thrill  of  grateful 
joy  pervaded  the  denomination.     The  story  of  their  ter- 


34  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

rible  sufferings  was  on  every  tongue.  Missionary  zeal 
was  intensified,  new  candidates  oflered  themselves,  and 
plans  for  immediate  reinforcement  and  enlargement  were 
laid. 

All  this  time,  Mr.  Judson  was, busy  at  work  which  no 
other  man  could  do :  preaching,  writing — especially 
translating.  In  1829,  came  Mr.  Cephas  Bennett,  a 
printer,  to  Moulmein,  bringing  a  press,  which  was 
greatly  needed.  In  1830,  the  Wades  ventured  back 
to  Eangoon,  followed  by  Mr.  Judson,  who  always  best 
loved  the  scene  of  his  earliest  labors.  The  printed 
gospel  was  eagerly  received  by  the  people,  and  the 
little  church  was  gathered  once  more.  Mr.  Judson 
spent  three  and  a  half  months  in  Prome,  sowing  good 
seed,  although  he  was  not  allowed  to  stay  to  reap  the 
harvest.  Returning  to  Rangoon,  he  devoted  himself  to 
the  great  work  of  his  life :  the  translation  of  the  entire 
Scriptures  into  Burman.  Constantly  interrupted,  he 
toiled  in  the  early  morning  hours,  and  until  mid- 
night. 

In  March,  1831,  at  a  great  Buddhist  festival,  which 
drew  people  from  the  remotest  parts  of  the  empire,  was 
seen  wonderful  evidence  of  widespread  interest  in  the 
new  religion,  and  of  the  powerful  influence  exerted  by 
the  printed  gospel.  The  cry  was  for  books.  "  Give  us 
writings !  "  "  Pray,  give  us  the  writing  that  tells  there 
is  an  eternal  hell,  and  but  one  way  to  escape  from  it !  " 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  35 

Others  would  come  asking,  "Are  you  Jesus  Christ's  man? 
Give  us  a  writing  that  tells  about  Jesus  Christ !  "  From 
the  most  distant  points  would  come  this  pleading,  and 
the  applicants  for  books  and  tracts  at  the  mission  house 
were  numbered  by  the  thousands. 

Eighteen  years  had  now  passed  since  the  arrival  of  the 
Judsons  in  Burma.  Then  the  outlook  was  dark  and  dis- 
couraging; now  there  were  four  well-manned  stations. 
The  printing  press  had  sent  out  millions  of  gospel  laden 
pages,  which  had  been  scattered  as  on  the  wings  of  the 
wind.  A  mighty  victory  seemed  at  hand,  and  the  sound 
of  it  thrilled  the  Baptists  at  home.  Contributions  had 
quadrupled,  and  at  the  close  of  1831,  nineteen  new  mis- 
sionaries had  volunteered  to  join  the  ranks  in  Burma. 

The  next  year  is  remarkable  as  the  one  in  which  the 
first  single  woman  was  appointed  a  foreign  missionary. 
Sarah  Cummings  landed  in  Burma,  January,  1833.  She 
has  left  behind  a  brief  but  wonderful  record  of  heroic 
endeavor.  A  station  had  been  planted  in  the  wilderness 
at  Chummerah.  Before  she  had  time  to  acquire  the  lan- 
guage, she  voluntarily  took  her  Burman  teacher  and 
went  alone  to  this  solitary  outpost,  sixty  miles  inland. 
In  all  that  distance  there  was  not  a  soul  that  could  speak 
English.  The  loneliness  and  danger  of  her  position  were 
little  less  than  frightful  at  that  early  day.  Her  home 
was  a  cottage  of  leaves ;  her  surroundings  altogether 
pagan,  save  for  the  few  converts.     A  church  was  organ- 


36  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

ized  and  cared  for  by  native  assistants  under  her  direc- 
tion. Imagine  her  busy  life :  studying  the  language,  super- 
intending the  school,  ministering  to  the  sick,  meeting 
inquirers, — all  in  a  climate  so  deadly  that  the  mission- 
aries besought  her  to  leave.  But  believing  that  God  had 
chosen  her  post  of  duty,  she  stayed  by  it  until  smitten  by 
jungle  fever.  She  took  boat  to  Moulmein,  but  died  in 
August,  1834. 

January  31,  1834,  is  a  date  memorable  to  all  eternity. 
Upon  that  day,  Mr.  Judson  finished  the  translation  of 
the  Bible  into  the  Burman  tongue.  Seven  years  were 
spent  in  revising  it,  and  it  now  stands  the  most  perfect 
work  of  its  kind,  and  seems  destined  to  be  the  standard 
Scripture  for  Burma. 

In  April  of  the  same  year,  Mr.  Judson  married  Mrs. 
Sarah  Boardman.  She  was  a  worthy  successor  to  Ann 
H.  Judson.  Her  intellect  was  of  a  high  order,  and  she 
was  a  true  poet,  as  well  as  an  earnest  missionary. 

The  succeeding  years  were  marked  by  steady  growth. 
The  Burmans  were  slow  to  accept  the  gospel ;  but  once 
convinced,  they  became  steadfast  converts.  As  soon  as 
the  revision  of  the  Burman  Bible  was  completed,  Dr. 
Judson  began  the  preparation  of  a  Burman  dictionary. 
His  health  had  given  way.  His  lungs  were  diseased, 
causing  loss  of  voice,  so  that  preaching  was  impossible. 
Therefore,  he  turned  to  literary  labor  as  another  branch 
of  his  beloved  work. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  37 

Mrs.  Judson's  health  was  also  gradually  failing.  Sick- 
ness attacked  the  children,  and  it  became  imperative  to 
go  to  America.  In  April,  1845,  eleven  years  after  their 
marriage,  they  embarked  for  London.  At  the  Isle  of 
France,  Mrs.  Judson  seemed  better,  and  it  was  decided 
that  Mr.  Judson  should  return  to  Burma,  leaving  her  to 
go  on  alone.  But  a  severe  relapse  forbade  this,  and 
they  took  a  ship  bound  directly  for  the  United  States. 
In  sight  of  St.  Helena  she  died,  and  was  buried  on  its 
rocky  shores.  Lonely  and  desolate,  Dr.  Judson  proceeded 
on  his  way,  and  in  October  arrived  in  Boston  with  his 
motherless  children. 

He  had  been  away  thirty-three  years.  Everything 
was  changed.  The  nation  had  leaped  from  childhood  to 
maturity.  After  his  long  residence  in  the  conservative 
East,  what  wonder  that  he  was  bewildered?  In  his 
humility,  he  did  not  dream  of  the  honors  he  had  won  ; 
and  the  ovations,  everywhere  offered,  astonished  and 
troubled  him.  The  people  were  ready  to  do  him  rever- 
ence. But  his  heart  was  in  Burma,  and  in  a  year  he 
was  ready  to  sail  once  more,  having  married  Miss  Emily 
Chubbuck,  of  Hamilton,  New  York,  known  to  the  liter- 
ary world  as  Fannie  Forrester. 

They  sailed  in  1846.  But  his  life-work  was  nearly 
ended.  For  four  years  he  worked  on  the  Burman  dic- 
tionary, besides  having  general  oversight  of  the  mission. 
Too  feeble  to  preach,  he  was  yet  a  tower  of  strength. 


38  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

He  fought  death  for  months,  that  he  might  complete 
his  last  great  work.  He  was  permitted  to  finish  the 
English  Burman  portion,  published  in  January,  1850. 
This  done,  he  sank  rapidly.  Sea  air  failed  to  revive 
him.  On  the  12th  of  April,  thq  heart  that  had  loved, 
suffered,  and  bled  for  Burma,  stopped  beating,  and  the 
remains  of  Adoniram  Judson  were  committed  to  the 
Indian  Ocean.  But,  although  he  sleeps  under  no  hopia 
tree,  and  no  marble  memorial  marks  his  grave,  his 
monument  is  in  the  hearts  of  converted  Burmans. 

QUESTIONS. 

1 .  What  important  result  of  the  Burman  war  ? 

2.  Where  was  the  mission  removed,  and  why  ? 

3.  Give  circumstances  of  Mrs.  Judson's  death. 

4.  What  second  bereavement  followed  ? 

5.  What  second  removal  became  necessary  ? 

6.  WTho  established  the  mission  in  Moulmein  ? 

7.  What  other  missionaries  had  come  ? 

8.  What  new  station  was  opened  in  1828,  and  by  whom  ? 

9.  Give  facts  regarding  Moulmein  mission. 

10.  What  generous  gift  to  the  Board  from  Dr.  Judson  ? 

11.  What  changes  in  the  headquarters  of  the  Board  in  1826  ? 

12.  Describe  the  suspense  in  America  during  the  Burman  War, 
and  its  results. 

13.  What  printer  began  his  half-century's  work  in  Burma,  and 
when? 

14.  What  year  was   the  Rangoon  mission  re-opened,  and  by 
whom? 

15.  Where  did  Dr.  Judson  labor  for  several  months  ? 

16.  What  was  the  great  work  of  his  life? 

17.  Describe  the  Buddhist  festival  at  Rangoon. 

18.  Give  summary  of  eighteen  years'  work. 

19.  Tell  the  story  of  the  first  single  lady  missionary. 

20.  What  memorable  date  in  1834,  and  why  ? 

21.  What  was  the  date  of  Mr.  Judson's  second  marriage? 

22.  Describe  Sarah  B.  Judson. 

23.  WThat  characteristic  is  shown  by  the  Burmans  ? 

24.  What  was  Dr.  Judson's  second  great  work  ? 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  39 

25.  Describe  loss  of  health  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Judson. 

26.  Give  circumstances  of  Mrs.  Judson's  death  and  burial. 

27.  Describe  Dr.  Judson's  arrival  and  experiences  in  America. 

28.  What  was  the  date  of  his  third  marriage  ? 

29.  Describe  Emily  C.  Judson. 

30.  When  and  where  did  Dr.  Judson  die  ? 

SUPPLEMENTAEY  HEADINGS. 

BOOKS. 

Life  of  Dr.  Judson.  Our  Gold  Mine,  pages  119-121.  Mission- 
ary Memorials.  Lives  of  Sarah  B.  and  Emily  C.  Judson.  Mission- 
ary Sketches,  by  Dr.  S,  F.  Smith. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

VARIED    EXPERIENCES. ENLARGEMENT. 

A  T  Dr.  Judson's  request,  the  completion  of  the 
-*--*-  dictionary  was  given  into  the  hands  of  Rev.  E. 
A.  Stevens.  The  Burman  English  portion  was  published 
in  1852 ;  the  entire  work  furnishing  a  most  important 
aid  for  future  missionaries. 

A  number  of  years  before  this,  a  Burman  theological 
school  had  been  started  in  Moulmein  by  Mr.  Stevens. 
This  had  been  suspended  from  1841  to  1844,  during 
which  time  was  begun  the  publication  of  the  ';  Religious 
Herald,"  a  monthly  paper  for  the  Burmans,  which  is 
still  continued  at  Rangoon.  The  theological  school  was 
afterward  revived,  and  was  a  great  blessing  in  training 
native  preachers.  In  1846,  there  were  eight  students. 
Moulmein  was  the  centre  of  the  Burman  missions.  Mr. 
Haswell  also  labored  for  the  Taligns,  who  were  numerous 
about  the  city. 

In  1845,  a  combination  of  circumstances  in  America 

led  the  Southern  brethren  to  withdraw,  and  organize  the 

Southern  Baptist  Convention.     This  made  necessary  the 

re-organization  of  the  Northern  forces,  which  resulted 

in  the  formation  of  the  American  Baptist  Missionary 
40 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  41 

Union.  It  went  into  operation  under  its  new  charter 
in  May,  1846.  All  the  missionaries,  save  one,  remained 
under  the  direction  of  the  Missionary  Union. 

One  very  happy  event  connected  with  this  change 
was  the  wiping  out  of  the  troublesome  debt,  which  had 
hampered  all  missionary  operations  for  some  years. 
Many  feared  disastrous  results  from  this  division  of 
forces,  but  the  result  has  shown  a  larger  measure  of 
work  accomplished. 

In  1851,  began  the  second  Burman  war  with  England. 
This  brought  the  province  of  Pegu  under  British  control. 
Rangoon  is  its  chief  seaport,  which,  together  with  a  great 
extent  of  surrounding  country,  was  now  thrown  open  to 
the  gospel.  This  made  enlargement  of  the  work  impera- 
tive, and  the  Board  appropriated  fifteen  thousand  dollars 
additional  the  first  year.  A  Deputation  was  also  sent  out 
in  1852,  one  of  whom  was  Solomon  Peck,  d.  d.,  Secretary 
of  the  Board.  It  was  to  look  over  the  field,  and  after 
conference  with  the  missionaries  decide  certain  vexed 
questions,  and  ascertain  what  onward  movements  were 
practicable. 

The  Rangoon  mission,  after  a  lapse  of  sixteen  years, 
was  re-opened  by  Messrs.  Kincaid  and  Dawson,  the  latter 
a  physician,  fitting  up  a  hospital.  A  little  later  came 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ingalls.  Fifteen  members  were  found, 
with  which  to  re-organize  the  Rangoon  church. 

All  the  Burman  missionaries  were  called  to  Moulmein 


42  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

in  April,  1853,  to  meet  the  Deputation.  The  six  weeks' 
conference  covered  every  point  relating  to  missionary 
labor.  Notwithstanding  some  inevitable  differences  of 
opinion,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  cause  was  helped 
forward  many  years. 

New  fields  were  selected  as  the  basis  of  future  opera- 
tions, and  the  charge  of  the  printing  press  was  given  into 
the  hands  of  a  publication  committee  Permanent  Bur- 
man  stations  were  planted  at  Eangoon,  Bassein,  Henzada, 
Prome,  Toungoo,  and  Shwegyen.  The  boundary  line  of 
Burman  dominion  was  north  of  Prome.  Messrs.  Kincaid 
and  Simons  began  work  in  this  city  in  1854.  One  month 
after  the  first  service  three  converts  were  baptized.  The 
seed  sown  by  Dr.  Judson,  during  his  brief  sojourn  in 
Prome,  twenty-two  years  before,  was  found  to  have  taken 
root.  In  1857,  an  entire  Baptist  village  was  discovered, 
that  had  become  Christian  as  a  result  of  tracts  and 
Scriptures  scattered  by  his  hand.  The  work  in  Prome 
early  became  strong  and  successful.  In  July,  1856,  one 
hundred  Burmans  had  been  baptized.  In  1858,  a. gifted 
young  priest  had  renounced  the  yellow  robe  of  his  order, 
and  was  baptized  on  confession  of  his  simple  faith  in 
Christ. 

The  mission  had  times  of  trial.  Twice  was  the  zayat 
burned,  and  also  in  1861  a  beautiful  teak  chapel,  used 
only  five  months.  In  1858,  the  Chins  came  into  notice, 
and  converts  were  won  from  among  them.     The  year  the 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  43 

chapel  was  burned  a  Shan  and  many  Burmans  were 
converted. 

At  Rangoon  there  was  an  immediate  harvest  upon  re- 
opening the  station.  Since  the  time  that  Judson's  feet 
first  trod  its  streets,  too  much  seed  had  been  sown, 
watered  with  bitter  tears,  to  make  any  other  result  pos- 
sible. The  fear  of  persecution  being  removed,  the  word 
of  the  Lord  had  free  course.  A  fine  brick  chapel,  cost- 
ing fifteen  thousand  dollars,  was  dedicated  in  1859. 

Bassein  was  chiefly  a  Karen  field.  Rev.  Mr.  Douglass 
was  sent  to  the  Burmans  in  1854.  He  labored  faithfully 
with  but  a  single  furlough  until  1869.  In  1859,  a  Bur- 
man  church  of  nine  members  was  organized,  and  soon 
after  others  at  outstations  in  the  district. 

Until  1858,  Shwegyen  was  wholly  a  Karen  station.  At 
that  time  Rev.  G.  P.  "Watrous  began  a  Bur  man  depart- 
ment, but  changes  and  loss  of  workers  forced  its  abandon- 
ment for  many  years. 

Rev.  A.  R.  R.  Crawley  founded  the  Burman  mission 
in  Henzada  in  1853.  A  native  preacher  from  Prome 
was  his  assistant  for  a  time.  Two  of  the  first  converts 
were  sent  from  house  to  house,  giving  tracts,  and  telling 
their  glad,  new  story.  In  ten  years  seventy-five  Bur- 
mans had  been  baptized. 

A  Burman  mission  was  begun  at  Toungoo,  under 
charge  of  a  native  preacher,  but  no  American  missionary 
came  to  this  department  for  many  years. 


44  BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

The  work  was  also  making  progress  at  Moulmein. 
Rev.  J.  R.  Haswell,  whose  long  terra  of  faithful  service 
began  in  1840,  was  senior  missionary.  In  1868,  he  was 
stricken  with  palsy,  from  overwork,  and  with  his  wife 
sailed  for  America.  Burma  mourned  his  absence,  but 
his  burning  words  of  appeal  to  American  Christians 
kindled  missionary  enthusiasm.  Eloquently  did  his 
poor,  palsied  arm  tell  of  crushing  burdens  bravely  borne, 
even  at  the  cost  of  physical  wreck.  Not  content  to  rest, 
he  returned  in  1869.  Seven  years  more  were  given  him 
for  Burma,  and  then  he  went  home,  September  13,  1876. 
His  grave,  like  all  missionary  graves,  tells  daily  of  love 
faithful  unto  death. 

Mr.  Ingalls'  work  was  fruitful,  but  brief.  After  his 
beautiful  home-going,  Mrs.  Ingalls  devoted  herself  ar- 
dently to  the  labors  his  hands  had  dropped.  The  fol- 
lowing vivid  glimpse  is  taken  from  "  Our  Gold  Mine  " : 

"  All  through  the  years  that  followed,  we  find  her, 
now  visiting  districts  where  no  white  woman  had  ever 
been  seen,  and  talking  to  groups  that  gathered  round  her 
so  closely  that  she  could  scarcely  breathe,  then  sitting  in 
the  zayat  of  a  Burman  priest,  to  encourage  her  assistants 
who  discussed  and  silenced  him,  visiting  feeble  churches, 
directing  inquirers,  rejoicing  in  conversions,  or  mourning 
over  apostates ;  then  for  a  while  making  her  home  alone 
with  the  natives  in  one  of  those  out-stations,  and  a  few 
years  later,  when  the  church  had  grown    to  forty-five 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  45 

members,  locating  herself  in  a  little  shanty,  a  nest  of 
scorpions,  and  many  smaller  creatures,  superintending 
the  building  of  a  mission  chapel." 

Here  and  there  she  gathered  a  sheaf  from  Judson's 
work  in  Ava.  One  old  lady  who  ministered  to  Mrs. 
Judson  while  her  husband  was  in  the  death  prison,  and 
heard  from  her  lips  the  gospel  story,  came  in  later  years 
to  be  taught  further  by  Mrs.  Ingalls,  and  joyfully  pro- 
fessed the  faith  taught  by  the  "  beautiful  white  teach- 
eress  "  at  Ava. 

In  1859,  Rev.  J.  R.  Haswell,  Jr,  with  his  wife,  sailed 
for  Burma,  to  be  associated  with  his  father.  In  1860,  the 
first  Barman  Association  was  held  in  Thongze.  In  1862, 
the  printing  presses  were  removed  from  Moulmein  to 
Rangoon,  accompanied  by  Cephas  Bennett,  for  more  than 
half  a  century  its  efficient  superintendent.  In  October, 
1865,  was  organized  the  Burman  Baptist  Missionary 
Convention,  composed  of  Baptists  of  all  nationalities. 
Its  object  was  the  evangelization  of  the  numerous  races 
of  Burma.  At  its  second  anniversaiy,  in  1867,  ninety- 
one  members  were  present,  and  $496.25  was  reported 
as  collected  and  expended  for  native  evangelizing 
agencies. 

Miss  Susie  Haswell  was  this  year  appointed  to  take 
charge  of  a  girl's  school  in  Moulmein,  established  by  her 
father.  This  was  an  anticipation  of  similar  work  done 
by  the  woman's  societies  a  little  later. 


46  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Rev.  E.  O.  Stevens  was  sent  to  Prome  in  1866.  The 
year  before  Dr.  Kincaid  had  returned  with  his  family  to 
the  United  States,  bidding  Burma  a  last  farewell,  after 
thirty-five  years  of  missionary  life.  His  daring,  adven- 
turous spirit  had  found  full  scope  in  wide  and  aggressive 
missionary  explorations. 

In  1867,  we  find  the  first  tabulated  statistics  of  the 
Burman  missions,  illustrating  the  growth  from  Judson's 
beginning.  From  the  seven  stations  of  Rangoon,  Moul- 
mein,  Bassein,  Henzada,  Prome,  Tavoy,  and  Thongze, 
were  reported  twenty-four  members,  nine  ordained 
preachers,  fifteen  churches,  seven  hundred  and  eighty 
members,  six  hundred  and  fifty  pupils  in  mission  schools, 
and  a  contribution  of  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
fifty-four  rupees.  (A  rupee  is  about  thirty-five  cents.) 
In  1869,  fifty  years  from  the  baptism  of  the  first  Burman 
convert,  the  number  of  members  in  Burman  Baptist 
churches  was  nine  hundred  and  eighty-five.  Mr.  Doug- 
lass died  in  Bassein,  in  March,  1869,  greatly  lamented. 
Rev.  M.  Jameson  and  wife  arrived  the  next  year.  A 
wonderful  movement  became  manifest  among  the  Bur- 
mans  at  Bassein. 

This  same  year,  the  Henzada  work  took  on  new  inter- 
est. Mr.  and  Mrs.  George  arrived,  and  Miss  Adams 
removed  from  Thongze.  The  school  work  grew  rapidly 
on  her  hands.  An  impression  seemed  to  have  been  made 
on  the  stonv  soil  of  Burman  hearts. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  47 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Who  completed  the  Burman  Dictionary  ?    Date  of  publi- 
cation ? 

2.  Give  facts  regarding  Bnrman  Theological  Seminary. 
.3.  What  was  the  centre  of  Baptist  missions  ? 

4.  For  what  people  did  Mr.  Haswell  labor  ? 

5.  What  division  of  forces  took  place  in  America  in  1842  ? 

6.  What  names  did  the  two  organizations  assume? 

7.  What  favorable  conditions  resulted  ? 

8.  What  were  the  results  of  the  second  Burman  War? 

9.  What  was  the  office  of  the  Deputation  ? 

10.  What  changes  resulted  in  Burma  ? 

11.  Where  was  the  new  boundary  line  of  Burman  dominion? 

12.  Describe  early  work  in  Prome. 

13.  What  tribe  came  first  into  notice  in  1858? 

14.  WThat  followed  the  re-opening  of  the  mission  at  Rangoon  ? 

15.  Give  account  of  early  Burman  work  in  Bassein. 

16.  When  was  Burman  work  begun  in  Shwegyeu  ? 

17.  Who  founded  the  Henzada  Mission,  and  in  what  year  ?  De- 
scribe the  work. 

18.  Sketch  Dr.  Haswell's  labor. 

19.  Tell  the  story  of  Mrs.  Ingall's  heroic  work. 

20.  Give  principal  events  from  1859  to  1865, 

21.  When  was  the  Burman  Baptist  Convention  organized,  of 
whom  was  it  composed,  and  what  was  its  object  ? 

22.  What  was  accomplished  through  its  work  in  two  years  ? 

23.  To  what  work  was  Miss  Susie  Haswell  appointed  ? 

24.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Kincaid,  and  who  took  his  place  at 
Prome  ? 

25.  Give  statistics,  illustrating  growth  of  the  Burman  mission. 

26.  Relate  occurrences  at  Bassein. 

27.  What  encouragement  at  Henzada  ? 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

BOOKS. 

Our  Gold  Mine,  pages  230-240.     Missionary  Sketches. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

HELPING   HAN±>S. 

EAVING  Burma,  we  turn  to  America,  to  note  a 
-*-*  most  significant  movement — Baptist  women,  East 
and  West,  organized  to  aid  in  the  work  for  women  in 
heathen  lands.  The  causes  that  led  to  this  action  had 
been  operating  for  many  years.  Woman's  societies  had 
already  been  formed  in  three  denominations,  and,  the 
Woman's  Union  Missionary  Society  had  done  a  great 
and  blessed  work.  There  were  obvious  reasons  why 
Baptist  women  should  labor  along  denominational  lines, 
and  in  connection  with  the  Missionary  Union.  Baptist 
fields  needed  the  help  that  such  an  organization  could 
give.  Land,  houses,  school  buildings,  chapels,  were 
available,  and  printing  presses  ready  to  aid  in  this 
special  work.  The  name  of  the  Missionary  Union  would 
be  a  tower  of  strength  to  this  new  organization. 

The  first  open  discussion  of  the  matter  was  in  1870. 
A  year  later,  the  officers  of  the  Missionary  Union  signi- 
fied their  hearty  approval.  The  Society  of  the  East, 
with  headquarters  at  Boston,  was  formed  April  3,  1871. 
Its  first  President  was  Mrs.  Gardiner  Colby ;  Secretary, 

Mrs.  M.  H.  Bixby.     The  Society  of  the  West,  with  head- 

48 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  49 

quarters  at  Chicago,  was  organized  the  following  May. 
President,  Mrs.  Robert  Harris ;  Secretary,  Mrs.  C.  F. 
Tolman.  Both  were  organized  upon  the  same  plan, 
strictly  auxiliary  to  the  Missionary  Union,  with  the  east- 
ern boundary  of  Ohio  as  their  dividing  line. 

At  the  National  Anniversaries  in  Chicago,  May,  1871, 
the  two  societies  were  formally  presented  to  the  Mission- 
ary Union  as  helpers  in  its  great  work,  and  accepted  by 
that  body. 

A  broad  field  of  labor  lay  before  the  two  societies.  It 
would  be  interesting  to  trace  their  work,  step  by  step, 
from  small  beginnings  to  the  grand  results  of  the  present 
time.  Two  cents  a  week  from  every  Baptist  woman  is 
the  end  in  view.  But  the  record  of  the  Woman's  Boards 
is  so  interwoven  with  that  of  the  Missionary  Union,  that 
it  cannot  be  separated.  Like  a  thread  of  gold,  it  runs 
through  all.  Most  of  the  medical  work,  the  teachers  for 
mission  schools,  many  of  the  schools  themselves,  may  be 
understood  as  contributed  by  these  helpers.  Their 
workers  are  sent  out  as  missionaries  of  the  Union,  their 
support  being  furnished  by  the  woman's  societies. 

They  have  also  been  an  educational  power  at  home, 
through  their  publications,  their  local  organizations, 
their  inspiring  quarterly  and  annual  convocations. 
Their  influence  is  like  leaven,  working  in  the  hearts  of 
the  people  around  their  hearthstones.  The  result  in 
general  foreign  missionary  interest  is  incalculable.     The 

D 


50  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

first  missionary  sent  out  by  the  Eastern  Board  was  Miss 
Kate  Evans,  associated  with  Mrs.  Ingalls,  at  Thongze. 
The  Western  Society  sent  Miss  A.  L.  Stevens  to  Bassein, 
as  their  first  representative,  and  adopted  Miss  Marie 
Bronson  at  Nowgong,  and  Mrs.  Scott,  at  Gauhati. 
The  Eastern  Board  also  assumed  the  support  of  Miss 
Susie  Haswell,  at  Moulmein  ;  Miss  Adams,  at  Henzada ; 
and  Miss  Gage,  at  Kangoon.  All  subsequent  work  will 
be  reported  in  connection  with  the  current  history  of  the 
various  missions.  Dr.  Stevens,  at  Rangoon,  still  con- 
tinued his  class  of  Burman  theological  students.  This 
was  the  great  work  of  his  life.  In  1872,  Mr.  Crawley, 
and  Miss  Adams,  of  Henzada,  were  compelled  to  recruit 
in  America.  In  December  of  this  year,  Mrs.  Ingalls 
and  Miss  Evans  visited  Mandalay,  the  royal  city.  They 
early  sought  an  interview  with  the  first  queen,  that  Mrs. 
Ingalls  might  present  her  with  an  autograph  Bible,  sent 
by  her  hand  from  Queen  Victoria.  Having  obtained 
audience,  Mrs.  Ingalls  carried  the  English  Bible,  in  its 
beautiful  white  satin  case,  while  Miss  Evans  bore  Jud- 
son's  Burman  Bible.  The  queen  graciously  accepted  the 
books,  and  the  fact  that  the  white  teachers  had  been 
admitted  to  the  "  golden  face/'  gave  them  opportunity  to 
sow  much  precious  seed  in  Mandalay. 

In  1873,  the  Moulmein  mission  was  reinforced  by  the 
arrival  of  Mrs.  Douglass  and  Mrs.  Longley.  Miss 
Helen  Watson  was  sent  to  Henzada,  and  Rev.  F.  H. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  51 

Eveleth  to  Toungoo.  Dr.  Haswell,  at  Moulmein,  too 
feeble  for  general  mission  work,  prepared  tracts  in  the 
Talign.  His  first  missionary  labors  were  among  this 
people,  and  besides  his  wife,  he  was  the  only  missionary 
that  understood  their  language.  The  Henzada  Chris- 
tians were  rejoiced  to  welcome  back  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Crawley. 

When  the  railroad  enters  a  country,  its  sleep  of  ages 
is  broken.  The  Rangoon  and  Prome  Railroad  was 
begun  in  1874,  thereby  opening  up  the  Irrawaddy  valley, 
and  preparing  the  way,  not  only  for  Western  progress, 
but  also  for  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Rev.  H.  W.  Hale  and 
wife  reached  Shwegyen  the  same  year,  the  first  mission- 
ary to  the  Burmans  at  this  station.  Miss  Myra  Stetson 
came  to  Moulmein,  to  assist  Miss  Haswell  in  her  large 
and  flourishing  girls'  school. 

Owing  to  nearly  total  deafness,  the  younger  Mr.  Haswell, 
in  Moulmein,  devoted  himself  almost  entirely  to  transla- 
tion and  public  addresses.  A  new  mission  station  was 
opened  at  Kemmendine,  a  suburb  of  Rangoon,  in  1874. 
Mr.  Rose  was  actively  at  work  in  Rangoon  and  the  sur- 
rounding country.  His  specialty  seemed  to  be  mission- 
ary tours. 

In  February  of  this  year,  all  the  mission  buildings  at 
Sonnway,  a  station  in  Mrs.  Ingalls'  Thongze  field, — 
chapel,  dwelling  house,  parsonage,  and  zayat, — were 
burned.     One  of  these  buildings  was  restored,  only  to  be 


52  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

burned  down  again  within  a  year.  Despite  these  clouds, 
there  was  the  sunshine  of  spiritual  prosperity.  Dr. 
Stevens,  of  .Rangoon,  worn  and  weary,  returned  to 
America. 

In  1875,  the  joyful  news  of  revival  came  from  Moul- 
mein.  The  interest  soon  spread  to  Henzada,  where  a 
wonderful  work  of  grace  rejoiced  the  hearts  of  Mr. 
George  and  Mr.  Crawley. 

In  June,  the  commodious  building  for  the  girls' 
school  at  Kemmendine,  the  gift  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cephas 
Bennett,  was  formally  opened.  This  same  year,  Mr. 
Rose  made  a  trip  to  Mandalay  and  Bhamo,  in  Upper 
Burma,  with  two  missionaries  of  the  China  Inland  Mis- 
sion. He  was  well  received  by  the  king,  and  was  greatly 
impressed  with  the  advantageous  situation  of  Bhamo  for 
a  mission  station.  The  wrork  at  Henzada  resulted  in  the 
opening  of  a  new  station  at  Zigon,  in  the  heart  of  the 
"  revival  district,"  situated  on  the  railroad,  forty  miles 
from  Thongze. 

Mrs.  Jameson  died  at  Bassein,  July  10,  1875,  after  a 
missionary  life  of  five  years. 

A  third  time,  in  1876,  did  the  fire  scourge  pass  over 
Mrs.  Ingalls  in  her  new  location,  taking  everything  but 
the  chapel.  Personal  belongings,  letters,  accounts,  and 
two  valuable  manuscript  translations  were  lost.  But  her 
brave  heart,  though  sorrowful,  was  not  daunted,  and  with 
her  usual  energy  she  set  about  repairing  her  losses.     A 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  53 

month  later,  she  had  sent  out  some  of  her  pupils  as 
teachers,  crowded  the  others  into  every  available  accom- 
modation, divided  the  chapel  by  mat  partitions  into 
quarters  for  herself,  Miss  Evans,  and  the  boarding-school 
girls,  put  one  hundred  dollars  and  the  work  of  the  teach- 
ers and  preachers  on  a  new  schoolhouse,  re-opened  the 
school  and  the  weekday  religious  meetings.  By  another 
month  the  hasty  arrangement  proved  unhealthful.  The 
schoolhouse,  when  built,  was  far  too  small.  Enlarged,  it 
was  still  too  small.  Some  pupils  must  be  dismissed.  The 
situation  might  well  discourage  the  bravest  heart.  No 
house,  no  dormitories,  no  books,  no  school  furniture  or 
apparatus,  nothing  but  naked  and  empty  hands  to  begin 
the  work  anew. 

Two  months,  and  it  was  time  for  home  relief  to  come. 
But  it  was  strangely  delayed,  and  the  suspense  and  per- 
plexity almost  crushed  Mrs.  Ingalls.  But  at  last  the 
new  buildings  went  up  and  comparative  comfort  returned. 
During  this  time  of  fiery  trial  fourteen  were  baptized. 
It  was  a  year  of  troubles  and  a  year  of  blessings. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  significant  movement  began  in  1871  ? 

2.  Describe  organization  of  the  Woman's  Society  of  the  East. 

3.  Society  of  the  West. 

4.  What  is  their  relation  to  the  Missionary  Union  ? 

5.  What  is  their  special  work  abroad? 

6.  What  mission  do  they  fulfill  at  home  ? 

7.  Who  were  the  first  missionaries  of  the  Eastern  Board  ? 

8.  Who  the  first  of  the  Western  Board? 

9.  What  was  the  great  work  of  Dr.  Stevens'  life  ? 


54  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

10.  Describe  Mrs.  Ingalls'  visit  to  Mandalay. 

11.  State  special  events  in  1873. 

12.  When  was  the  first  railroad  opened  in  Burma? 

13.  To  what  field  were  the  Hales  assigned? 

14.  What  was  the  work  of  the  younger  Mr.  Haswell  ? 

15.  What  was  Mr.  Rose's  missionary  specialty? 

16.  Give  account  of  the  Thongze  fire. 

17.  What  joyful  news  in  1875? 

18.  What  beautiful  gift  did  the  girls'   school  at  Kemmendine 
receive  ? 

19.  Describe  Mr.  Rose's  tour  to  Upper  Burma. 

20.  What  new  station  was  opened  on  the  old  Henzada  field  ? 

21.  Describe  Mrs.  Ingalls'  third  fire. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 
Missionary  Sketches. 

LEAFLETS. 

Twenty  Years'  Gleaning;  or,  History  of  Society  of  the  East. 
Twenty  Years'  History  of  Society  of  the  West. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

SORROW   AND   JOY. 

rTIHE  year  1876  brought  changes  to  Moulmein.  Miss 
-■-  Stetson's  work  was  closed  almost  as  soon  as  it  was 
begun..  A  cold,  contracted  on  the  way  to  Burma,  laid 
the  foundation  of  fatal  disease.  She  went  home  to  die 
in  November,  just  two  years  after  her  appointment  by 
the  Woman's  Board.  Her  brief  stay  was  a  blessing  and 
a  benediction  to  all  who  were  associated  with  her. 

For  a  number  of  years,  Rev.  J.  R.  Haswell  edited  the 
"  Burman  Messenger,"  and  did  valuable  work  in  trans- 
lation. Mr.  W.  H.  S.  Hascall  came  from  Rangoon  to 
itinerate,  and  do  special  evangelizing  labor.  Miss  Has- 
well's  school  received  high  commendation  from  the 
English  Chief  Commissioner.  Miss  Sheldon  came  as  her 
associate  in  1877.  The  revival  spirit  was  present  in 
Rangoon. 

The  report  from  Henzada  district  was  a  most  joyful 

one.     Notwithstanding  the  ill  health  of  the  missionaries, 

a   wonderful   harvest   was   gathered.      Eighty-six  were 

baptized  during  the  year.     Mr.  and  Mrs.  George,  and 

Miss  Watson  removed  to  Zigon  to  care  for  the  white 

harvest  of  souls. 

55 


56  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Rev.  Thomas  Simons,  the  veteran  at  Prome,  died  in 
February,  1876.  He  spent  forty-five  years  in  Burma, 
with  but  a  single  furlough.  Thus  ended  another  conse- 
crated life.  Dr.  Harwell's  last  seven  years  of  service 
closed  September  13.  Taligns  and  Burmans  bless  his 
memory. 

Another  name  was  on  the  death  roll  of  the  Burman 
mission  this  same  year.  Mr.  Crawley  died  in  October 
on  his  way  home.  Reaching  Burma  in  1854,  he  founded 
the  Henzada  station,  where  they  were  gathering  rich 
harvests  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  gave  his  life  for 
Burma,  and  departed  in  the  prime  of  a  noble  man- 
hood. 

The  little  Burman  church  in  Tavoy  had  been  without 
a  missionary  for  many  years.  This  year,  Mr.  Hascall 
spent  much  time  in  the  district,  and  found  the  band  of 
eight  members  steadfast.  A  Burman  Christian  woman 
left  money  to  build  a  chapel  costing  a  thousand  dollars ; 
a  notable  thing  in  this  land  of  despised  womanhood. 
The  Rangoon  church  rejoiced  over  the  return  of  Dr. 
and  Mrs.  Stevens.  Mrs.  Bailey,  formerly  Miss  Adams, 
returned  this  year  to  her  beloved  Henzada  pupils. 

Mr.  George  wrote  from  the  "  revival  district " :  "  My 
great  trouble  is  to  provide  pastoral  care.  Of  those  who 
go  astray,  most  go  for  want  of  some  one  to  guide  them. 
What  am  I  to  do  ?  I  go  from  village  to  village  all  I  can, 
but  a  visit  of  a  few  days  is  of  little  importance  in  most 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  57 

cases.  I  am  afraid  to  baptize  converts,  and  afraid  to  re- 
fuse. Oh,  that  God  would  send  me  true  pastors,  called 
by  himself,  to  feed  these  newborn  babes  with  the  sincere 
milk  of  the  word  ! " 

Another  railroad  opened  near  Thongze  gave  Mrs. 
Ingalls  opportunity  for  a  new  work :  the  distributing 
of  tracts  and  books  at  the  station  and  in  the  cars. 
With  the  co-operation  of  the  officials,  she  soon  had  a 
railway  library  and  reading  room,  which  was  a  means  of 
good  to  the  employees. 

Henzada  was  left  without  a  missionary  in  1877,  and 
continued  so  for  many  years.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  E.  O. 
Stevens  returned  to  Prome,  accompanied  by  Miss  Brom- 
ley. Mrs.  and  Miss  Haswell  returned  to  America,  leav- 
ing Miss  Sheldon  in  charge  of  the  girls'  school.  A 
little  later  she  was  joined  by  Miss  Payne.  Miss  Watson 
became  Mrs.  Hancock,  continuing,  however,  her  relations 
with  the  Woman's  Board.  This  year,  the  Hancocks 
were  the  only  missionaries  in  Zigon,  the  Georges  being 
absent  on  furlough. 

Watching  the  course  of  events  in  Burma  from  year  to 
year,  it  is  evident  the  Burman  churches  were  growing — 
assuming  a  larger  share  of  expense  and  responsibility 
regarding  their  own  religious  and  educational  institu- 
tions.  The  Burman  Baptist  Convention  held  annual 
meetings,  reporting  such  systematic  and  efficient  work  as 
would  do  credit  to  a  body  of  American  Christians. 


58  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

The  Hascalls  sickened  and  left  Moulmein  in  April, 
1880.  The  work  was  temporarily  assumed  by  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Hale,  of  Shwegyen.  A  hospital  was  opened  in  the 
city  by  Dr.  Ellen  Mitchell  and  Miss  A.  M.  Barkey.  At 
Rangoon,  Dr.  Stevens  had  two  theological  classes  in 
1879.  A  Burman  Concordance  was  published,  and  the 
'•'Burman  Messenger"  continued.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Manley 
arrived  in  November.  Mr.  Rose  spent  several  months  in 
Mandalay,  where  much  was  accomplished,  in  spite  of 
political  troubles. 

In  1880,  Mr.  Manley  became  pastor  of  the  English 
church.  The  Telugu  and  Tamil  work  was  very  promis- 
ing, and  "he  began  the  study  of  Telugu.  The  next  year 
a  church  was  organized,  and  a  pastor  ordained,  whom 
they  supported,  although  poor. 

The  Kemmendine  Girls'  School  was  grandly  success- 
ful, and  the  teachers,  Misses  Rathbun  and  Buel,  showed 
great  courage  in  maintaining  their  position.  Imagine 
them  in  charge  of  a  school  of  a  hundred  girls,  in 
combustible  buildings,  cholera  and  smallpox  prevalent, 
snakes  and  mad  dogs  "  almost  chronic,"  and  no  mission- 
ary or  white  man  within  a  mile,  and  the  nearest  doctor 
five  miles  away ! 

This  year,  Mr.  Eveleth  was  transferred  to  Toungoo, 
and  the  Shan  and  Burman  church  divided.  Miss 
Upham  was  put  in  charge  of  the  Burman  school.  Mr. 
Jameson   married   Miss  Walling,  and  in  1881  went  to 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  59 

America  for  needed  change,  leaving  Bassein  without  a 
Bur  man  missionary. 

After  over  fifty  years  service  as  superintendent  of  the 
mission  press,  Kev.  Cephas  Bennett  retired  in  1881.  He 
did  mission  work  as  truly  as  those  engaged  in  direct 
evangelizing  labor. 

The  year  1881  was  also  a  notable  one,  in  that  the  old 
trade  route  between  Burma  and  China  was  re-opened,  and 
that,  by  means  of  a  station  planted  by  the  China  Inland 
Mission  at  Tali,  in  the  southwestern  province  of  Yunnan, 
China,  the  chain  of  mission  stations  from  India  across 
the  Chinese  empire  to  the  Pacific  Ocean  was  completed : 
the  dream  of  missionaries  since  missions  began. 

Miss  Susie  Haswell,  with  her  mother,  returned  this 
year  to  Moulmein.  Mrs.  HaswTell,  as  the  only  missionary 
understanding  the  Talign  language,  could  do  an  import- 
ant work.  Miss  Evans  being  absent  in  America,  Miss 
Elwin  became  Mrs.  Ingalls'  assistant  in  Thongze. 

Rev.  E.  W.  Kelly  and  wife  were  sent  to  Moulmein  in 
1882.  Miss  Haswell  superintended  general  evangelizing 
work.  A  Telugu  church  of  twenty  members  was  formed, 
the  outgrowth  of  special  work  by  Dr.  Mitchell. 

Mr.  George  returned  to  Zigon  this  year.  He  writes : 
"  Henzada  is  in  great  peril.  A  few  years  more  of  neglect, 
and  Crawley's  life-work  will  be,  to  a  great  extent, 
lost." 

This  great  need  was  met  a  little  later  by  Mr.  Has  call, 


60  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

on  his  return  to  Burma  in  1883.  Dr.  Jameson  also 
returned  to  Bassein,  after  several  years  absence. 

For  some  time  the  Burman  mission  at  Tavoy  was 
under  the  charge  of  a  native  preacher,  who  did  faithful 
work  and  saved  the  little  church  from  extinction. 

Mrs.  Haswell  died  early  in  the  next  year,  thus  sever- 
ing the  last  link  between  the  days  of  Judson  and  the 
present  time.  Mrs.  Kelly  died  July  20,  the  youngest 
member  of  the  mission  following  the  oldest  to  the  silent 
land.  Still  ]ater,  the  aged  Burman  pastor,  Ko  Shway  A, 
ordained  by  Dr.  Judson,  and  for  thirty  years  shepherd 
of  the  Moulmein  church,  was  called  home.  It  was  the 
death  year  in  Moulmein  annals.  After  her  mother's  de- 
parture, Miss  Haswell  removed  to  Amherst,  the  place  of 
sacred  memories.  The  medical  work  was  proving  a 
great  help  to  the  other  departments.  Dr.  Stevens' 
theological  class  was  both  a  satisfaction  and  a  care. 
The  work  was  exacting,  but  imperative  in  view  of 
the  dependence  of  Burma  upon  native  evangelists  and 
preachers.  He  also  accomplished  much  valuable  liter- 
ary labor  and  translation ;  and  although  in  the  evening 
of  life,  was  able  to  endure  more  labor  than  many  a 

younger  man. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Sketch  Miss  Stetson's  brief  work. 

2.  What  was  the  Burman  religious  paper,  and  by  whom  edited? 

3.  What  glad  report  from  Henzada  ? 

4.  What  two  veterans  died  in  1876  ?    Tell  particulars  of  their 
lives  and  work. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  61 

5.  Give  facts  regarding  Mr.  Crawley's  life  and  death. 

6.  What  notable  event  in  Tavoy  ? 

7.  Quote  Mr.  George's  appeal. 

8.  Describe  Mrs.  Ingalls'  railroad  work. 

9.  What  events  in  1877  ? 

10.  What  progress  evident  from  year  to  year? 

11.  Where  was  the  first  medical  work  of  the  Woman's  Board 
begun,  and  by  whom  ? 

12.  What  special  events  are  noted  at  Kangoon  ? 

13.  What  is  said  of  the  Telugu  and  Tamil  work  ? 

14.  What  of  the  Kemmendine  Girls'  School  ? 

15.  What  of  the  length  and  efficiency  of  Cephas  Bennett's  super- 
intendency  of  the  mission  press  ? 

16.  What  very  significant  event  in  1881  ? 

17.  What  special  work  could  Mrs.  Haswell  do  ? 

18.  WThat  events  in  Moulmein  in  1882? 

19.  What  peril  threatened  Henzada,  and  how  averted  ? 

20.  Who  saved  the  Burman  mission  at  Tavoy  from  extinction? 

21.  What  deaths  at  Moulmein  in  1884? 

22.  To  what  city  did  Miss  Haswell  transfer  her  work  ? 

23.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Stevens? 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  HEADINGS. 
Missionary  Sketches.     Ocean  Sketches,  by  Mrs.  Ingalls. 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

LATER  YEARS. 

THE  year  1886  was  a  significant  one  in  Burman  his- 
tory. The  king  was  dethroned  after  a  brief  strug- 
gle, and  all  Burma  came  under  English  rule.  This 
opened  the  entire  country  to  the  gospel.  But  the  ex- 
cited state  of  public  feeling  made  it  a  barren  year  for 
missionary  effort.  The  great  political  changes  engrossed 
the  minds  of  the  people,  and  they  paid  small  attention  to 
Christ's  messengers.  A  vast  field  was  opened  to  Ameri- 
can Baptists.  Upper  Burma,  with  its  outlying  tribes, 
almost  untouched  by  the  gospel,  contained  millions  of 
souls  perishing  in  heathen  darkness.  The  emergency 
of  the  crisis  appealed  loudly  to  God's  people.  As  soon 
as  it  was  possible,  Mr.  Rose  established  a  station  in  Man 
dalay.  His  heart  had  long  been  yearning  over  Upper 
Burma.  Thither  Mr.  Kelly  was  transferred,  a  little  later, 
having  married  Mary  Van  Meter,  M.  d.  The  mission- 
aries found  numberless  hindrances,  and  many  encourage- 
ments. 

Mr.  George  died  in  Calcutta,  August,  1886.    His  death 
was  unexpected,  and  a  great  blow  to  the  mission.     Dr. 

E.  A.  Stevens  was  called  higher  in  June,  after  a  mission- 
62 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  63 

ary  life  extending  over  half  a  century.  His  work  of 
training  native  preachers  will  leave  a  lasting  impression 
in  Burma.  No  less  than  nine  different  books  bear  his 
name  as  translator  or  author,  beside  Scripture  revision, 
and  much  other  literary  work.  His  was  a  busy  and 
useful  life. 

Early  in  1887,  we  find  Eev.  J.  E.  Cochrane  at  Moul- 
mein.  Mr.  Kelly,  at  Mandalay,  was  pushing  the  work 
energetically.  A  medical  department  was  in  charge  of 
Mrs.  Kelly.  Mrs.  Hancock  located  in  the  north  part  of 
the  city,  Miss  Rathbun  in  the  central,  and  the  Kellys  in 
the  southern.     A  church  was  organized  May  4. 

Many  of  the  missionaries  were  in  great  danger  from 
dacoits,  but  a  loving  Providence  preserved  them.  Rev. 
F.  P.  Sutherland  was  sent  to  the  vacant  post  in  Zigon. 

In  1889,  new  names  appear  on  the  missionary  roll. 
Rev.  E.  Tribolet  and  wife  were  sent  to  Tavoy,  so  long 
without  a  resident  Burman  missionary.  There  were  many 
changes  in  Moulmein  also.  Rev.  B.  F.  Turner,  Rev.  L. 
Q.  Peabody  and  wife,  Miss  Agnes  Whitehead,  were 
laboring  for  the  Burmans.  Miss  Ranney  came  to  be 
with  her  grandmother,  Mrs.  Cephas  Bennett,  and  to  aid 
in  missionary  work.  Mrs.  Ingalls,  so  long  at  Thongze, 
took  a  greatly  needed  furlough,  after  twenty-two  years 
continuous  service.  Miss  Payne  had  entire  charge  of 
mission  work  in  the  ancient  city  of  Pegu.  Rev.  J.  E. 
Cummings  and  wife  were  stationed  at  Henzada,  and  Rev. 


64  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

H.  H.  Tilbe  and  wife  at  Pro  me.  Looking  northward,  a 
new  station  was  formed  at  Myingyan  by  Rev.  J.  E.  Case 
and  wife,  and  a  church  organized  October  20.  Another 
new  point  was  Sagaing,  on  the  Irrawaddy  river,  opposite 
Ava.  The  Hascalls  and  Miss  Phinney  were  placed  in 
charge.  Sickness  compelled  the  Hascalls  to  leave,  and 
Miss  Phinney  was  appointed  to  other  work.  The  Suther- 
lands  were  called  from  Zigon,  in  1890,  for  this  important 
field. 

A  little  later,  and  Mandalay  mourned  the  death  of 
Miss  Rathbun.  Mrs.  Hancock's  house,  with  all  its  con- 
tents, was  burned,  greatly  hampering  her  work. 

In  1889,  another  station  was  opened  at  Meiktila,  be- 
tween Toungoo  and  Mandalay,  by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Packer. 
It  is  a  healthful  and  attractive  location.  Mr.  Stevens 
returned  to  Burma  in  September,  locating  at  Moul- 
niein. 

One  event  worthy  of  notice  is  the  building  of  the  Jud- 
son  Memorial  chapel  at  Mandalay.  August  9,  1888,  was 
the  hundreth  anniversary  of  the  birth  of  Adoniram  Jud- 
son.  In  commemoration  of  this  event  it  was  proposed  to 
build  a  church  near  the  site  of  his  imprisonment,  now 
included  in  the  city  of  Mandalay,  and  two  miles  from 
Oung-pen-la.  An  appeal  was  made  for  ten  thousand 
dollars  for  this  purpose.  The  first  twelve  hundred  dol- 
lars were  contributed  by  an  aged  Burman  woman,  bap- 
tized by  Dr.  Judson.     It  was  finished   and   dedicated 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  65 

November  2,  1890,  Rev.  E.  O.  Stevens  preaching  the 
sermon. 

The  total  cost  was  about  eleven  thousand  dollars,  of 
which  four  thousand  dollars  were  raised  in  Burma.  The 
Burman  Baptist  Missionary  Convention  was  the  first 
body  to  hold  a  session  within  its  walls. 

Miss  Edmunds  took  Miss  Rathbun's  work  in  Mandalay 
in  1890.  We  find  a  theological  class  for  Bur  mans  and 
Ciiins  at  Prome.  Mrs.  Tribolet  died  in  Tavoy,  after  a 
service  of  less  than  a  year.  A  new  edition  of  the  Bur- 
man  Bible  was  printed,  using  a  smaller  character,  making 
the  book  a  royal  octavo  in  a  single  volume,  rather  than 
in  four,  as  in  the  old  edition.  The  translation  is  Dr. 
Judson's,  this  edition  having  corrections  noted  by  Judson 
himself,  inserted  in  the  text  by  the  careful  hand  of  Dr. 
Stevens. 

Mr.  Eveleth  returned  to  Burma  in  December,  assigned 
to  Sandoway,  the  Sanitarium  of  the  old  Arakan  province, 
and  hitherto  without  a  Burman  missionary.  The  force 
at  Mandalay  was  increased  in  the  latter  part  of  1890  by 
Rev.  L.  H.  Mosier. 

The  visit  of  Dr.  Mabie,  in  1891,  was  a  source  of  com- 
fort and  inspiration.  He  visited  some  associations,  and 
as  many  stations  as  his  limited  time  would  permit.  The 
summary  of  the  work  in  1891  gives  the  membership  in 
Burman  churches  as  two  thousand   one    hundred  and 

four.    There  are  fifty  missionaries,  engaged  in  actual  labor 

E 


66  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

on  the  field,  sixty  native  preachers,  fourteen  of  whom  are 
ordained.  The  work  among  the  Burmans  and  Chins  in 
Arakan  is  developing  rapidly.  A  harvest  of  souls  is 
gratefully  reported,  one  hundred  and  eleven  having  been 
baptized.  In  Mandalay  a  new  and  comfortable  house 
has  been  erected  for  Mrs.  Hancock  and  her  associate, 
Miss  Ulery.  A  hospital  for  Mrs.  Kelly's  medical  work 
has  been  provided  by  the  Society  of  the  East.  Bhamo, 
valuable  as  a  strategic  point,  is  at  last  well  manned.  The 
needs  are  great,  and  the  fields  are  white  to  harvest. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  significant  event  in  Burma  in  1886  ? 

2.  Why  was  it  a  barren  year  for  missionary  effort? 

3.  WThat  responsibility  was  thrown  upon  American  Baptists? 

4.  What  station  did  Mr.  Eose  establish  ? 

5.  Sketch  Mr.  George's  life  and  death. 

6.  Give  outline  of  Dr.  Stevens'  work,  and  date  of  death. 

7.  Describe  the  work  in  Mandalay. 

8.  To  what  danger  were  the  missionaries  exposed  ? 

9.  WTho  took  up  the  work  at  Zigon  ? 

10.  What  new  names  appear  on  the  missionary  roll  in  1889  ? 

11.  Give  bird's-eye  view  of  matters  on  the  field. 

12.  What  sorrow  and  loss  came  to  Mandalay  ? 

13.  Give  account  of  new  station  in  Upper  Burma. 

14.  Tell  the  storv  of  the  Judson  memorial  in  Mandalay. 

15.  Who  followed  Miss  Bathbun? 

16.  Describe  the  new  edition  of  the  Burman  Bible. 

17.  Who  assumed  Burman  mission  work  in  Sandoway? 

18.  What  representative  of  the  Missionary  Union  visited  the 
field  in  1891? 

19.  Give  summary  of  the  work  for  1890. 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  BEADING. 

Baptist  Missionary  magazines  for  current  years.     (This  maga- 
zine is  the  authority  and  fountain  of  all  missionary  information.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

A    FIRE   KINDLED. 

FIFTEEN  years  after  Adoniram  Judson  landed  in 
Burma,  the  Karens  came  under  the  observation 
of  the  missionaries.  George  Dana  Boardman  established 
the  Tavoy  mission  in  1828.  A  servant  in  his  family 
was  converted.  An  almost  ungovernable  temper  delayed 
his  baptism  for  a  year,  but  giving  ample  proof  of  genuine 
conversion,  Ko-thah-byu  was  baptized.  Afterward,  by 
remarkable  missionary  labors,  he  won  the  title  of  "  Apostle 
to  the  Karens."  This  race  to  which  he  belonged  was 
quite  distinct  from  the  Burmans.  A  despised  mountain 
people,  they  were  small  in  stature,  more  peaceable  in 
disposition.  Only  Christianity  can  make  the  haughty 
Burman  and  simple  Karen  brothers. 

Ko-thah-byu  went  everywhere,  proclaiming  Christ's 
salvation  to  his  people.  They  received  the  gospel  with 
such  gladness  that  Mr.  Boardman  made  them  the  objects 
of  his  labor.  Without  religion,  save  demon  worship, 
they  were  more  easily  reached  than  Buddha's  followers. 
An  ancient  tradition  taught  that  their  sacred  books,  long 
lost,  would  be  brought  from  the  west  by  white  men.     In 

the  coming  of  the  missionary,  they  read  the  fulfillment. 

67 


68  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Two  years  was  Mr.  Boardman  permitted  to  labor  among 
the  Karens,  then  the  Master  called  him  home.  Rev. 
Francis  Mason  came  in  1831,  and  the  last  effort  of  Mr. 
Boardman's  life  was  to  be  carried  two  days  journey  to 
witness  the  baptism  of  thirty-four  Karens,  February 
9,  1831,  by  Mr.  Mason.  He  died  on  the  return  to 
Tavoy.  Mrs.  Boardman  remained  three  years  to  carry 
on  his  work,  taking  charge  while  the  Masons  learned  the 
language. 

The  Karens  are  subdivided  into  the  Sgau,  Pwo,  Paku, 
Bghais,  Red  Karens,  and  other  tribes,  with  different 
dialects  and  varying  customs.  The  work  began  among 
the  Sgaus. 

When  Mr.  Boardman  died,  seventy  Karens  had  re- 
ceived baptism.  The  gospel  quickly  spread  through  the 
Tenasserim  provinces,  through  the  efforts  of  Ko-thah-byu 
and  the  missionaries.  But  heathen  associations  hindered 
the  converts.  Naturally  a  wandering  race,  advantage 
was  taken  of  this  to  group  them  in  Christian  villages, 
which  idea  has  since  prevailed.  In  1832,  Rev.  Jonathan 
Wade  reduced  the  Sgau  Karen  language  to  written 
form,  and  books  were  prepared. 

Converts  multiplied  rapidly.  From  the  first,  they 
gave  evidence  of  a  missionary  spirit,  each  one  striving 
to  spread  the  glad  news  among  his  countrymen. 

Ko-thah-byu  was  a  born  missionary.  He  pushed  out 
over  the  mountains,  and  through  the  jungles,  even  into 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  69 

distant  provinces.  The  Lord  was  with  him,  and  converts 
came  in  almost  daily,  requesting  baptism  from  far-off 
villages,  the  fruit  of  his  labors.  He  was  not  remarkable 
for  intellectual  endowment,  but  was  instrumental  in 
bringing  thousands  to  the  knowledge  of  the  true 
God. 

In  1834,  the  Tavoy  church  formed  a  missionary  so- 
ciety, resolving  to  support  two  native  preachers,  doubling 
the  effort  the  next  year.  Mr.  Wade  and  family  located 
in  Tavoy  in  1835.  Mrs.  Boardman  had  gone  away  as 
the  wife  of  Dr.  Judson.  The  next  year  Rev.  and  Mrs. 
Vinton  came  to  Rangoon  to  labor  among  the  Karens  in 
the  Pegu  district.  Ko-thah-byu  had  preceded  them,  and 
on  the  first  visit  of  the  missionaries,  one  hundred  and 
seventy  were  baptized. 

A  wonderful  work  followed  among  the  Karens  of  the 
Pegu  and  Rangoon  provinces.  At  first  the  Vintons 
traveled  together,  but  the  calls  from  distant  villages  were 
so  pressing  that  they  separated,  and  for  twenty- four  years 
worked  in  different  directions.  Jungle  travel  was  far 
more  arduous  and  dangerous  than  now,  and  Mrs.  Vinton 
had  many  narrow  escapes. 

Mr.  Vinton  was  a  man  of  strong  faith  and  remarkable 
power  in  prayer.  Before  going  to  Burma,  his  record 
was  notable  in  revival  work.  His  earnestness  and  zeal 
bore  fruit  among  the  Karens.  Mr.  Kincaid,  another 
ardent   missionary,  was   sent   to   the   Burmans,  but  as 


70  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

opportunity  offered,  he  preached  to  the  Karens  also. 
Perhaps  no  man  in  Burma  was  more  beloved. 

A  large  village  of  Christian  Karens  was  formed  in  the 
Tavoy  province.  Its  site  was  beautiful,  and  its  name 
was  Matah,  or  City  of  Love.  It  flourished  greatly,  and 
with  its  three  hundred  Christians,  its  homes,  and  its 
schools,  it  stood  in  the  jungle  as  an  object  lesson  of  the 
uplifting  power  of  the  gospel. 

In  1836,  a  seminary  was  established  at  Tavoy,  under 
charge  of  Mr.  Wade,  for  training  both  Karen  and  Bur- 
man  preachers.  Of  the  first  eighteen  pupils,  twelve  were 
Karens.  For  a  time  the  Karen  books  were  all  in  manu- 
script, but  in  1837  fonts  of  type  were  prepared  and  books 
printed.  Missionary  societies  were  formed  at  different 
points,  which  gathered  funds  for  printing  and  other 
evangelical  work.  The  Tavoy  Society,  in  1839,  supported 
thirteen  native  preachers  and  several  Karen  schools. 

The  Burmans  bitterly  persecuted  the  Christian  Karens. 
In  1835,  the  hostility  took  active  form  in  Kangoon. 
Fines,  imprisonment,  torture,  death  itself,  were  meted 
out  to  the  helpless  flock.  The  persecution  scattered  the 
disciples,  and  they  fled  into  distant  provinces,  preaching 
as  they  went.  The  operations  of  the  missionaries  at 
Rangoon  were  suspended,  although  they  remained  at 
their  post.  But  in  the  jungles  and  mountain  recesses 
the  gospel  was  winning  its  glorious  way,  and  hundreds 
were  turning  to  the  true  God. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  71 

Civil  war  added  its  horrors  in  1837,  but  it  could  not 
stop  God's  work  among  the  Karens.  Rev.  E.  L.  Abbott 
traveled  through  the  districts  of  Maubee  and  Pantenau 
to  Bassein.  His  journey  was  like  a  triumphal  march. 
One  of  the  converts  was  a  promising  young  chief.  The 
political  troubles  forced  the  missionaries  to  leave  Burman 
dominions,  and  they  went  to  Arakan  for  the  protection 
of  the  British  flag.  News  came  in  1839  that  this  man 
was  preaching  continually,  and  that  one  thousand  persons 
were  waiting  to  be  baptized. 

The  Yoma  Mountains  separate  this  province  from 
Burma.  Messrs.  Kincaid  and  Abbott  sought  to  keep  a 
watch  over  their  distant  flocks  from  behind  the  mount- 
ains. Mr.  Abbott  at  Sandoway  sent  word  to  his  Karens 
that  their  teacher  was  in  Arakan.  The  Burmans  jeal- 
ously watched  the  mountain  passes,  but  despite  their 
vigilance,  large  companies  flocked  across  the  hills  for 
baptism  and  instruction.  So  many  of  the  four  thousand 
Karens  in  Burma  fled  to  Arakan  that  the  Burman  gov- 
ernor, fearing  their  emigration  in  a  body,  issued  a  decree 
of  religious  liberty,  which,  however,  was  not  to  be  trusted. 
The  exiles  in  Arakan  found  freedom  to  worship  God, 
but  the  deadly  climate  decimated  their  ranks.  Cholera 
raged  and  claimed  many  victims.  No  pen  can  picture 
what  these  persecuted  Karens  suffered  for  conscience' 
sake.  Mr.  Abbott,  alone  and  unaided,  was  crushed  with 
the  burden  of  caring  for  this  devoted  people  from  behind 


72  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

the  hills  of  Arakan.  It  was  a  task  for  ten  men.  In  a 
single  year  he  buried  his  wife  and  two  children.  The 
climate  was  fever  breeding,  and  in  1845  he  was  obliged 
to  seek  rest  in  America. 

The  Karen  work  in  Moulmein  and  Tavoy  prospered. 
In  1840,  we  find  the  Vintons  at  Moulmein.  The  seven 
out-stations  were  entirely  Karen.  Mergui  had  become 
an  important  station,  with  six  churches.  The  "  Morning 
Star,"  a  Karen  paper,  was  begun  in  Tavoy  in  1843,  and 
continues  until  this  day.  It  was  afterward  removed  to 
Moulmein  with  the  mission  press,  and  has  been  a  means 
of  untold  good. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  When,  where,  and  by  whom  was  the  Karen  Mission  estab- 
lished? 

2.  Tell  the  story  of  Ko-thah-byn. 

3.  Who  took  the  work  from  Boardman's  dying  hands? 

4.  Describe  Boardman's  last  journey  into  the  wilderness. 

5.  How  many  years  did  Mrs.  Boardman  remain  in  Tavoy  to 
carry  on  his  work  ? 

6.  Name  the  Karen  subdivisions. 

7.  Among  which  tribe  did  the  work  begin  ? 

8.  Why  were  the  converts  grouped  in  Christian  villages? 

9.  How  did  the  Tavoy  church  show  its  missionary  spirit  ? 

10.  What  year  did  the  Vintons  begin  their  wonderful  work  ? 

11.  How  many  were  baptized  on  their  first  tour  ? 

12.  Did  they  journev  in  company  ? 

13.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Vinton  ? 

14.  What  was  Mr.  Kincaid's  relation  to  the  Karens  ? 

15.  Give  an  account  of  Mata  church. 

16.  What  seminary  was  established  in  1836,  and  who  was  its 
founder  ? 

17.  WThen  was  the  earliest  printing  in  Karen? 

18.  What  record  of  the  Tavoy  Missionary  Society  in  1839? 

19.  Tell  the  story  of  persecution. 

20.  In  what  year  was  the  civil  war  ? 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  73 

21.  Sketch  the  tour  of  Rev.  E.  L.  Abbott.     In  what  district? 

22.  What  is  told  of  a  young  chief? 

23.  Where  did  the  political  troubles  drive  the  missionaries? 

24.  What  mountains  separate  Arakan  from  Burma? 

25.  Describe  the  work  of  Messrs.  Kincaid  and  Abbott. 

26.  What  pestilence  raged  among  the  Karen  refugees  ? 

27.  Give  an  account  of  Mr.  Abbott's  sorrrowful  experiences. 

28.  Give  events  in  1840. 

29.  Give  an  account  of  the  Karen  religious  paper. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

Missionary  Sketches.     Life  of  Ko-thah-byu.     Missionary  Me- 
morials.   (Mrs.  Sarah  B.  Judson.)   Our  Gold  Mine,  pages  122-132. 

LEAFLETS. 

Early  Mission  Work  among  the  Karens.     The  Karen  Mission. 


CHAPTER  XL 


JUNGLE  VICTORIES. 


rTIHE  rapid  multiplication  of  Karen  churches,  and  the 
-■-  consequent  need  of  native  assistants,  created  an 
imperative  call  for  a  trained  native  ministry.  Messrs. 
Abbott,  Vinton,  Wade,  and  Mason  had  done  much  in 
private  classes.  But  it  was  not  possible  to  do  the  needed 
work  in  this  way.  Dr.  J.  G.  Binney  was  designated  to 
establish  and  direct  a  Karen  Theological  Seminary. 
Mr.  Abbott's  eloquent  appeals  in  America,  and  his  ac- 
counts of  the  glorious  work  in  Arakan,  aided  in  bringing 
about  this  action.  In  1846,  the  Seminary,  under  Dr. 
Binney,  was  opened  at  Moulmein,  and  a  preparatory 
school  at  Tavoy,  by  Rev.  E.  B.  Cross.  At  the  end 
of  the  first  year,  thirty-six  students  were  enrolled  at 
Moulmein. 

Mr.  Abbott  returned  to  Burma  in  1847.  The  work 
had  been  faithfully  prosecuted  by  the  native  preachers 
left  in  charge.  The  two  ordained  ministers  had  baptized 
eleven  hundred  and  fifty,  while  thirty-six  native  assist- 
ants reported  twelve  hundred  awaiting  baptism. 

In   1848,  Messrs.  Van  Meter,  Moore,  and  Benjamin 

were  designated  to  the  Karens  at  Moulmein,  Sandoway, 

74 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  75 

and  Tavoy.  Previously,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Harris  had  come 
to  Moulrnein,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Beecher  to  Arakan.  Mrs. 
Binney  had  also  established  a  Karen  Normal  Girls' 
School  in  Moulrnein. 

As  the  years  passed,  the  Karen  Theological  Seminary 
gave  evidence  of  thorough  and  valuable  work.  Theo- 
logical training  classes,  preparatory  to  the  higher  in- 
struction, were  maintained  at  Tavoy  and  Sandoway. 

The  disparity  of  results  among  Burmans  and  Karens 
was  very  striking.  While  much  more  of  labor  and 
money  had  been  expended  on  Burmans,  there  were,  at 
the  close  of  1847,  six  thousand  and  ninety-three  Karen 
church  members,  to  two  hundred  Burmans.  Dr.  Francis 
Mason  writes  :  "  I  presume  I  have  preached  the  gospel  to 
more  Burmans  than  Karens,  and  I  have  baptized  about 
one  Burman  to  fifty  Karens.  The  reason  of  the  great 
difference  is  the  difference  in  the  preparation  of  these  two 
nations  for  the  gospel.  The  Burmans  are  our  Pharisees 
and  Sadducees — the  Karens  our  publicans  and  sinners." 

The  "  grace  of  giving  "  was  from  the  first  exemplified 
among  the  Karens.  It  was  estimated  that  the  Karen 
Christians  of  Tavoy  were  giving  twice  as  much  in  pro- 
portion to  their  ability  as  American  Baptists.  Not  only 
were  chapels  built,  and  native  pastors  supported,  but  ag- 
gressive foreign  mission  work  carried  on.  In  the  Bassein 
district,  since  1848,  the  Karen  pastors  have  received 
their  entire  support   from    the   churches.       In   1850,    a 


76  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Karen  Home  Mission  Society  was  formed,  entirely  under 
Karen  direction,  and  the  determination  expressed,  to  send 
out  missionaries,  till  "every  Karen  family  shall  have 
seen  the  light  of  God." 

The  Sgau  Karens  had  the  entire  Scriptures  in  1853, 
and  the  Pwo  Karens  the  New  Testament,  besides  much 
other  literature.  Never  was  the  Bible  more  treasured 
than  by  this  people. 

The  second  Burman  War,  in  1852,  brought  renewed 
suffering  to  the  Karens.  The  Burmans  suspected  them 
of  sympathy  with  the  English,  and  perpetrated  horrible 
cruelties.  The  English,  after  the  conquest  of  Pegu,  rec- 
ognized the  valuable  aid  the  Karens  had  given,  and  ac- 
corded them  full  protection.  The  centre  of  the  Karen 
mission  was  removed  from  Sandoway  to  Bassein,  by 
Messrs.  Abbott  and  Van  Meter.  Here  the  Pwo  Karens 
could  be  reached  as  well  as  the  Sgaus,  and  they  received 
the  gospel  readily. 

At  the  solemn  six,  weeks'  deliberation  of  the  mission- 
aries in  Burma  with  the  Deputation  from  America,  in 
1853,  the  Karen  interests  occupied  much  of  the  time. 
Some  decisions  were  made,  which  time  has  modified ;  and 
a  few  of  the  missionaries  refused  to  accept  the  rulings  of 
the  Deputation.  This  caused  much  conflict  for  many 
years,  but  time  has  healed  all  the  differences.  It  cannot 
be  denied  that  the  general  interests  of  the  work  were 
greatly  advanced.     It  was  decided  that  Rangoon,  Bas- 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  77 

sein,  Henzada,  and  Shwegyen  were  to  be  permanent 
Karen  stations.  Mergui  was  abandoned,  becoming  part 
of  the  Tavoy  field.  The  Karen  press  was  removed  from 
Tavoy  to  Moulmein,  which  was  henceforth  to  be  the 
centre  of  publication  for  all  Burma.  Native  agencies 
were  encouraged  ;  normal  and  primary  schools  were  to 
be,  as  far  as  possible,  self-supporting.  Boarding  schools, 
and  the  teaching  of  English  in  mission  schools,  were  not 
approved.  The  Seminary  at  Moulmein  was  to  constitute 
a  general  Karen  Theological  School  for  all  Burma. 

In  consequence  of  the  action  of  the  Deputation,  Messrs. 
Vinton  and  Harris,  Miss  Miranda  Vinton,  and  a  few 
others,  withdrew  from  the  service  of  the  Missionary 
Union,  although  continuing  in  noble  and  effective  service 
on  the  field.  In  1854,  the  Theological  Seminary,  for  a 
while  suspended,  was  re-opened  under  charge  of  Dr. 
Wade.  Kemmendine,  a  suburb  of  Rangoon,  was  made 
the  headquarters  of  the  Rangoon  Sgau  Karen  Mission. 
The  funds  raised  for  the  support  of  the  Vintons,  at  this 
point  and  of  other  seceding  missionaries,  were  transmitted 
through  the  Free  Mission  Society,  as  were  those  for 
Messrs  Harris  and  Beecher,  a  little  later.  Mr.  Hams, 
in  Shwegyen,  was  afflicted  by  the  death  of  his  wife.  He 
committed  his  motherless  children  to  the  care  of  Miss 
Miranda  Vinton,  just  leaving  for  America.  On  her 
return,  she  became  the  wife  of  Mr.  Harris. 

Dr.  Mason,  appointed  to  Toungoo,  was  only  able  to 


78  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

organize  the  station  when  he  was  compelled  to  go  home, 
leaving  the  mission  in  charge  of  Sau  Quala,  an  eminent 
Karen  preacher.  In  two  years,  more  than  two  thousand 
had  been  baptized.  At  every  one  of  the  five  stations 
there  was  a  blessed  work. 

In  the  Kangoon  district,  twenty  churches  were  formed^ 
and  more  than  a  thousand  baptized  the  first  year.  Mr. 
Brayton,  designated  to  the  Pwo  Karens  of  this  district, 
settled  at  Donabew,  as  a  point  from  which  they  were 
easily  accessible.  Little  mission  work  had  been  done 
among  this  tribe. 

At  Henzada,  Mr.  Thomas  found  willing  listeners 
among  a  large  Karen  population,  and  signs  of  harvest 
appeared. 

In  Moulmein,  Dr.  "Wade  continued  in  charge  of  the 
Karen  Theological  Seminary  until  the  return  of  Dr. 
Binney  in  I860.  This  institution  had  grown  in  value 
and  importance  with  the  rapid  growth  of  the  Karen 
missions. 

At  Bassein,  six  hundred  and  forty-four  baptisms  were 
reported  and  self-support  agreed  upon.  In  their  own 
words:  "For  preachers,  pastors,  and  ordained  ministers, 
we  shall  expend  no  more  of  the  money  of  our  American 
brethren."  This  principle  of  self-help  prevailed  at  Tavoy, 
Toungoo,  Shwegyen,  and  Henzada.  The  Moulmein  Ka- 
rens are  reaching  this  point  more  slowly. 

Sau  Quala  worked  with  marvelous  results  in  Toungoo. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  79 

Pressing  calls  came  from  every  quarter,  and  he  plead 
with  pathetic  earnestness  for  a  missionary.  Mr.  Whitaker 
went  to  take  general  charge  of  the  field,  while  a  graduate 
of  the  Theological  Seminary  was  sent  to  assist  Sau  Quala. 
The  number  baptized  under  his  incessant  labors  was 
nearly  fifteen  hundred. 

The  Karens  in  certain  provinces  were  deaf  to  the  gospel. 
Such  a  region  was  that  south  of  Tavoy.  Wherever  the 
Karens  have  received  Buddhism,  they  reject  Christianity. 
This  hinders  the  work  among  many  of  the  Pwos,  and 
especially  among  the  Burmans. 

August  15,  1857,  Mr.  Whitaker  gave  up  his  life  for 
Toungoo.  Fever,  contracted  in  mountain  tours,  brought 
his  useful  career  to  a  sudden  close. 

Mr.  Vinton  died  in  1858.  A  man  of  intense  earnest- 
ness, positive  convictions,  and  fiery  zeal,  he  was  wholly 
consecrated  to  his  work.  Idolized  by  the  Karens,  his 
harvest  of  souls  was  great. 

In  1860,  the  Theological  Seminary  was  removed  to 
Rangoon,  Dr.  Binney  again  at  its  head.  Dr.  Wade  took 
up  the  work  of  preparing  commentaries  and  other  books 
needed  by  the  theological  students.  In  1862,  the  mission 
press  was  also  removed  to  Rangoon,  the  most  accessible 
point  in  Burma, 

In  1860,  ten  hundred  and  ninety-six  were  baptized  in 
the  Toungoo  district,  and  the  work  extended  far  into  the 
interior.     The  Red  Karens  claimed  attention.     The  first 


80  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Red  Karen  tract  was  printed  this  year.  A  view  of  the 
Toungoo  field  revealed  fifteen  different  Karen  tribes 
asking  for  the  gospel.  Two  hundred  and  sixty  thousand 
Karens  were  accessible  to  the  missionary!  This  year 
Mr.  Cross  removed  to  Toungoo. 

In  his  early  missionary  life  Dr.  Wade  reduced  the 
Karen  language  to  written  forms.  In  1860,  he  prepared 
a  Karen  grammar,  a  great  achievement,  and  invaluable 
in  school  work.  The  Van  Meters  returned  to  Bassein, 
to  work  specially  for  the  Pwo  Karens.  The  "  Morning 
Star,"  their  own  paper,  was  prized  by  the  people.  Dr. 
Wade  was  for  many  years  the  editor. 


QUESTIONS. 

1.  Why  was  a  trained  Karen  native  ministry  greatly  needed  ? 

2.  What  missionary  had  given  training  in  private  classes  ? 

3.  By  whom,  when,  and  where  was  the  Karen  Theological 
Seminary  opened? 

4.  Give  account  of  the  preparatory  school. 

5.  What   results  did  Mr.   Abbott   find   on   his  return   from 
America  ? 

6.  Give  the  roll  of  new  missionaries. 

7.  What  was  the  character  of  work  in  the  Theological  Semi- 
nary ? 

8.  What  caused  the  disparity  of  results  among  the  Burmans 
and  Karens?     Give  Dr.  Mason's  opinion. 

9.  Note  some  of  the   beginnings  of  self-support   among  the 
Karens. 

10.  Relate  the  beginnings  of  foreign  mission  work. 

11.  WThat  year  was  the  entire  Bible  given  to  the  Sgau  Karens? 

12.  What  portion  was  about  the  same  time  given  the  Pwos? 

13.  What  renewed  sufferings  did  the  war  in  1852  bring  the 
Karens,  and  what  recognition  by  Government  ? 

14.  When  and  by  whom  was  the  removal  of  the  Karen  mission 
from  Sandoway  to  Bassein? 

15.  Give  results  of  the  visit  of  the  Deputation. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  81 

16.  What  Society   transmitted  funds   for  the   support   of  the 
seceding  missionaries  ? 

17.  What  eminent  Karen  preacher  labored  in  Toungoo  ?     What 
were  the  results? 

18.  What  record  the  first  year  of  the  re-opening  of  the  Eangoon 
district  ? 

19.  What  was  the  location  of  the  Rangoon  Pwo  Karen  work? 
Who  were  in  charge? 

20.  Who  was  the  Henzada  Karen  missionary? 

21.  WThat  is  said  of  the  Karen  Theological  Seminary? 

22.  Give  the  decision  of  the  Bassein  Karens  regarding  self- 
support. 

23.  In  what  other  place  did  this  principle  prevail  ? 

24.  Give  account  of  Sau  Quala  and  the  Toungoo  field. 

25.  Tell  the  story  of  Mr.  Vinton's  life  and  death. 

26.  In   what  year  was   the    Theological    Seminary   removed? 
where,  and  under  whose  charge? 

27.  What  work  did  Dr.  Wade  assume  ? 

'    28.  What  was  the  record  of  1860  in  the  Toungoo  district? 
29.  What  later  work  did  Dr.  Wrade  accomplish  ? 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

Missionary  Sketches.    The  Vintons  and  the  Karens.    The  Story 
of  the  Karen  Mission  in  Bassein. 


F 


CHAPTER  XII. 

SUCCESS   IN   ADVERSITY. 

TOURING  the  years  of  the  civil  war  in  America,  the 
-*-^  straitened  treasury  of  the  Missionary  Union  greatly 
hampered  mission  operations.  Retrenchment  was  im- 
perative to  a  degree  that  was  nearly  fatal  to  certain 
departments.  Many  schools  were  closed,  less  printing 
done,  fewer  native  agencies  employed.  Much  sickness 
left  the  stations  of  Tavoy  and  Shwegven  for  several  years 
without  a  resident  missionary.  This  state  of  affairs  ren- 
dered imperative  the  better  support  of  the  Karen  Theo- 
logical Seminary,  since  the  Karen  tribes,  if  evangelized  at 
all,  must  be  reached  by  their  own  countrymen.  Yet  the 
financial  stringency  compelled  almost  fatal  retrenchment, 
even  here.  In  fact,  during  these  years  of  bloodshed  and 
civil  strife  at  home,  the  missionary  field  presented  a 
panorama  of  languishing  interests,  and  almost  fatal  im- 
poverishment. 

In  1861,  Rev.  J.  B.  Vinton  came  to  Rangoon  to  carry 
on  the  work  of  his  lamented  father,  associated  with  his 
mother,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Luther.  This  was  a  mission, 
as  we  have  seen,  supported  by  independent  funds,  and 

was  remarkably  successful.     A  normal  school  for  Karen 
82 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  83 

lads  was  established  at  Moulinein.  The  churches  sup- 
ported a  Young  Men's  Normal  School  at  Toungoo. 

One  month  after  Mr.  Carpenter  reached  Rangoon,  he 
gives  this  pen-picture : 

"  I  wish  you  could  see  Dr.  Binney's  sixty-two  bare- 
footed, bare-legged  students  of  theology.  They  are  all 
crowded  into  a  one-story  building.  They  probably  do 
not  taste  of  meat  once  a  week.  Their  food  consists 
mainly  of  paddy  (unhulled  rice),  which  they  pound  out 
for  themselves.  They  submit  to  all  this  cheerfully,  and 
dig  like  good  fellows  for  the  sake  of  knowledge,  and  the 
ability  to  read  understandingly,  and  expound  to  their 
countrymen  the  Karen  Bible/' 

Meanwhile,  the  work  was  making  progress  among  the 
Pwos.  In  1863,  the  Pwo  churches  in  the  Bassein  dis- 
trict formed  a  separate  Association. 

Trouble  was  at  hand  in  Toungoo.  Mrs.  Mason,  so 
long  a  faithful  and  earnest  Christian  teacher,  laboring 
under  mental  derangement,  taught  strange  and  fatal 
delusions  to  her  trusting  Karens.  This  resulted  in  an 
almost  general  defection  of  the  churches  under  the  care 
of  the  Masons.  Dr.  Mason  did  not  seem  to  realize  the 
danger  of  her  course,  and  it  became  a  painful  necessity 
to  withdraw  the  patronage  of  the  Union.  In  later  years 
he  saw  his  error,  and  sought  to  undo  it  as  far  as  possible. 
He  died  in  the  service  of  the  Missionary  Union. 

In  1866,  Mr.  Harris  was  re-appointed  a  missionary  of 


84  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

the  Union,  and  returned  to  Shwegyen.  The  devoted 
Karens  remembered  his  former  faithful  labor  among 
them,  and,  in  1865,  entreated  his  return,  contributing 
one  hundred  dollars  toward  his  passage.  Their  letter 
touchingly  closes  thus :  "  Dear  brethren  and  sisters,  in 
every  place,  great  and  small,  male  and  female,  have  pity 
upon  us,  pray  for  us,  and  assist  us  in  getting  back  our 
teachers." 

In  1865,  Mr.  Bunker  was  sent  to  the  Red  Karens, 
with  headquarters  at  Toungoo.  His  musical  training, 
teaching  them  to  sing  part-music,  was  most  attractive  to 
the  music-loving  Karens. 

Dr.  Binney  retired  from  the  theological  seminary  this 
same  year,  on  account  of  Mrs.  Binney's  health.  Rev.  C. 
H.  Carpenter  and  Rev.  D.  A.  W.  Smith,  who  had  been 
associated  with  him  for  three  years,  assumed  the  charge. 
A  few  months  later  Dr.  Binney  returned  to  Burma,  and 
Mr.  Smith  removed  to  Henzada  to  take  the  work  of  Mr. 
Thomas,  who  had  been  transferred  to  Bassein. 

For  thirteen  years  the  Bassein  Sgau  Karen  Mission 
had  been  separated  from  the  Missionary  Union.  It  will 
be  remembered  that  Rev.  Elisha  L.  Abbott  was  the 
founder  of  the  mission,  a  true  spiritual  father.  He 
spared  not  himself,  but  labored  on  until  body  and  spirit 
alike  failed.  Listen  to  his  parting  words  to  his  beloved 
Karens : 

"  The   kingdom  of  Christ   is  here  in  Bassein.     You 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  85 

must  care  for  it,  and  labor  for  it  faithfully.  If  his 
kiugdoni  prospers,  it  will  prosper  through  your  efforts. 
If  it  is  destroyed,  it  will  be  at  your  hands."  Mr.  Abbott 
died  in  America  in  1854. 

Rev.  J.  S.  Beecher,  associated  with  Mr.  Abbott  in  the 
hearts  of  the  Karens,  hastened  at  their  call.  But  events 
caused  him  to  enter  the  service  of  the  American  Baptist 
Free  Mission  Society.  This  change  of  relation,  so  fraught 
with  pain  at  the  time,  was  the  Providence  that  threw  the 
Karen  churches  upon  themselves,  and  developed  their 
splendid  system  of  self-support.  Mr.  Beecher  continued 
the  work  along  Mr.  Abbott's  successful  line.  He  estab- 
lished the  Sgau  Karen  Normal  and  Industrial  Institute, 
so  flourishing  in  these  later  days.  The  Karens  paid  for 
the  school  buildings.  In  recognition  of  Karen  loyalty 
and  service  during  the  war.  Government  granted  them  a 
beautiful  site  often  acres,  free  from  taxes  as  long  as 
used  for  missionary  purposes. 

Mr.  Beecher's  health  failed  in  1866,  and  he  left 
Burma,  never  to  return.  Two  marble  tablets,  side  by 
side,  on  the  west  wall  of  the  fine  memorial  hall  in 
Bassein,  commemorate  in  loving  words  these  two  heroes 
who  gave  their  lives  to  the  Bassein  Karens. 

Lapse  of  time  had  softened  differences,  and  there  is 
reason  to  believe,  if  Mr.  Beecher  had  lived,  he  would 
have  returned  under  the  Missionary  Union.  The  Bassein 
churches  wrote  an  appeal  to  the  executive  committee, 


86  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

asking  that  Mr.  Thomas,  of  Henzada,  be  sent  them.  It 
was  the  Lord  reinstating  the  Missionary  Union  in  its  old 
field.  When  the  appeal  came,  Mr.  Thomas,  with  broken 
health,  was  about  leaving  for  America.  It  seemed  like 
the  voice  of  Providence,  and  hoping  that  strength  would 
come  from  change  of  location,  he  removed,  as  has  been 
seen,  to  Bassein.  But  the  delay  cost  his  life  the  next 
year. 

Who  should  succeed  him  ?  This  was  the  subject  of 
anxious  debate  at  the  meeting  of  the  Burman  Baptist 
Convention,  held  at  Bassein,  November,  1868.  Then  it 
was  that  the  ocean  cable  did  its  first  missionary  work. 
The  executive  committee  in  Boston  gave  answer  to  the 
problem  in  the  dispatch,  "Carpenter  transferred  to 
Bassein,  Smith  to  Rangoon."  The  Bassein  Karens  were 
joyful,  the  Henzada  Karens  cast  down  at  losing  the 
teacher  they  had  learned  to  love.  They  wished  to  raise 
immediately  the  money  to  cable  back  a  protest,  but  wiser 
counsel  prevailed,  and  they  communicated  by  letter. 

In  1869,  Mr.  Norris  removed  from  Moulmein  to  take 
charge  of  the  work  in  Tavoy.  Rev.  S.  B.  Rand  was  this 
year  established  at  Moulmein.  In  1870,  the  sad  Hen- 
zada Karens  were  rejoiced  by  Mr.  Smith's  return,  another 
cablegram  saying,  "Go."  As  a  new  departure,  they 
were  made  the  almoners  of  their  own  contributions.  The 
result  was  most  gratifying,  as  a  step  toward  independent 
action. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  87 

Self-support  in  the  Bassein  Mission  continued  its  won- 
derful development.  In  1868,  the  Missionary  Union 
purchased  the  property  held  by  the  Free  Mission  Society, 
and  assumed  full  control.  The  independence  of  the 
churches  in  providing  largely  for  their  own  religious 
needs  is  remarkable  in  a  poor  people,  as  heavily  taxed 
as  any  people  in  the  world.  Their  chapels,  long  built 
by  themselves,  are  better  than  their  own  dwellings. 
They  are  more  anxious  for  education  than  in  any  other 
province.  Schools  they  will  have,  with  the  best  teachers 
to  be  secured. 

When  Mr.  Carpenter  reached  Bassein,  in  1868,  he 
found  the  school  buildings  nearly  in  ruins.  He  proposed 
a  plan  whereby  in  ten  years  commodious  buildings  could 
be  secured  without  expending  a  dollar  of  American 
money.  At  first  they  were  appalled  by  the  magnitude 
of  the  undertaking,  but  the  result  was  so  overwhelming, 
that  they  willingly  assumed  the  endowment  of  the 
school.  Not  only  did  they  contribute  to  these  home 
interests,  but  they  also  sent  missionaries  into  the  regions 
beyond. 

Shwegyen  was  not  far  behind.  Pastors  and  churches, 
out  of  deep  poverty,  raised  about  three  thousand  rupees, 
and  appointed  a  committe  from  among  themselves  to 
distribute  this  fund,  relieving  the  Missionary  Union 
of  any  appropriation,  either  for  schools  or  native 
preachers. 


88  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  was  the  effect  of  the  straitened  missionary  treasury  ? 

2.  What  special  events  in  1861  ? 

3.  Give  Mr.   Carpenter's    pen-picture   of    Karen    theological 
students. 

4.  What  progress  among  the  Pwos  ? 

5.  Describe  the  defection  in  Toungoo. 

6.  State  facts  regarding  Mr.  Harris'  return. 

7.  What  is  said  of  the  Toungoo  Red  Karens  and  their  mis- 
sionary ? 

8.  What  changes  in  the  Karen  Theological  Seminary  ? 

9.  Tell  the  story  of  the  Bassein  Sgau  Karen  Mission,  and  the 
grand  results  accomplished. 

10.  What  was  the  first  missionary  message  of  the  ocean  cable  ? 

11.  What  changes  at  Moulmein  and  Tavoy  ? 

12.  What  is  said  of  the  Henzada  Karens? 

13.  What  further  facts  regarding  self-support  in  the  Bassein 
Sgau  Karen  Mission? 

14.  Give  outline  of  Mr.  Carpenter's  plans,  and  their  results. 

15.  What  is  said  of  Shwegyen  ? 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

Missionary  Sketches.      Self-support  in  Bassein.     The   Vintons 
and  the  Karens.     The  Story  of  the  Karen  Mission  in  Bassein. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

SUNSHINE  AND   SHADOW. 

TN  1870,  a  memorial  was  addressed  to  the  Missionary 
•*-  Union,  by  the  missionaries,  regarding  the  imperative 
need  of  higher  education  among  the  Karens.  The 
Roman  Catholics  offered  this  advantage,  and  in  self- 
defense  the  Baptists  must  give  their  converts  equal  op- 
portunities. As  a  result,  the  Rangoon  Baptist  College 
was  formally  opened  May  28,  1872,  under  charge  of  Dr. 
Binney  and  Rev.  John  Packer. 

The  year  1871  was  a  notable  year  in  Karen  annals. 
The  Rangoon  Sgau  Karen  work  was  re-united  with  the 
Missionary  Union,  after  a  separation  of  seventeen  years, 
and  Mr.  Vinton  appointed  its  missionary.  The  churches 
in  Toungoo,  led  away  by  Mrs.  Mason,  nearly  all  came  back 
to  their  old  faith,  and  Dr.  Mason  was  re-appointed.  It 
was  also  the  year  of  the  organization  of  the  Women's 
Societies,  whose  work  has  been  most  extended  among  the 
Karens.  Mr.  Cross  revised  the  New  Testament,  making 
a  reference  edition. 

Mrs.  Van  Meter,  laboring  alone  for  the  Bassein  Pwo 

Karens,  while  her  husband  sought  health  in  America, 

received  the  crushing  news  of  his  death.     Instead  of 

89 


90  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

going  home,  she  begged  for  an  associate  for  the  field  she 
loved  better  than  life.  In  a  little  over  a  year,  she  fol- 
lowed her  husband,  the  last  survivor  of  the  three  mis- 
sionary couples  associated  in  Sandoway  in  early  days. 

Mr.  Norris  left  Tavoy  with  broken  health  in  1871. 
The  Carpenters  went  home  on  furlough  the  next  year. 
Mr.  Hopkinson  arrived  in  Bassein  just  after  their  depart- 
ure. Miss  A.  L.  Stevens  was  the  first  gift  of  the 
Woman's  Board  to  the  Bassein  Karens. 

Dr.  Wade  died  in  1872,  having  been  a  missionary  for 
over  fifty  years.  The  Karens  have  reason  to  bless  his 
memory  as  the  man  who  reduced  both  the  Sgau  and  Pwo 
Karen  dialects  to  written  form,  and  prepared  a  Karen 
grammar.  The  Karen  Thesaurus,  a  work  in  five  vol- 
umes, is  of  incalculable  value.  His  labors,  both  literary 
and  evangelical,  are  beyond  enumeration. 

A  bird's-eye  view  in  1873  shows  interesting  advance. 
The  lady  teachers  at  nearly  every  station  are  representa- 
tives of  the  Women's  Boards.  At  Moulmein,  we  find  the 
Sgau  Karen  department  in  charge  of  Rev.  S.  B.  Rand 
and  his  sister,  Miss  C.  H.  Rand.  We  see  Tavoy  sitting 
in  loneliness.  The  eyes  of  the  Karens  are  turned  long- 
ingly toward  America  for  a  teacher.  Its  twenty-three 
churches  need  more  shepherding  than  the  twenty-one 
native  preachers  can  give. 

The  Bassein  Sgau  Karen  work  we  find  in  charge  of 
Mr.  Hopkinson,  and  the  Pwo  Karen  under  care  of  Rev. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  91 

Sabin  T.  Goodell.  The  wise  plans  of  Mr.  Carpenter  are 
being  carried  on  successfully.  Rev.  D.  A.  W.  Smith, 
still  at  Henzada,  is  aided  in  school  work  by  Miss  De 
Wolfe.  The  work  is  also  steadily  advancing  at  Shwegyen. 
Mr.  Harris,  the  veteran,  labors  on,  laying  broad  and  deep 
foundations  for  the  future  independence  of  the  churches. 
Rev.  B.  P.  Cross  is  designated  to  Shwegyen. 

We  close  this  view  of  the  work  in  1873  with  a  glance 
at  Toungoo.  It  has  had  a  checkered  history  since  its 
founding  in  1853.  We  find  Dr.  Cross  in  charge  of  the 
Sgaus,  aided  by  Miss  Shaw.  Dr.  Mason,  in  declining 
health,  is  preparing  a  Karen  concordance.  Those  drawn 
away  in  the  great  apostasy  led  by  Mrs.  Mason  are  fast 
returning.  Rev.  Alonzo  Bunker,  aided  by  Misses  East- 
man and  Butler,  is  in  charge  of  the  Red  Karen  work. 

For  years  a  great  desire  had  been  felt  to  reach  the 
Karens  in  Siam.  When  the  Carpenters  left  Burma  in 
1872,  they  went  by  way  of  this  country,  that  they  might 
visit  the  Karens  beyond  the  border.  Their  trip  from 
Moulmein  to  Bangkok  covered  six  hundred  and  twenty 
miles.  On  their  way  they  scattered  precious  seed,  trust- 
ing God  for  the  harvest.  Two  months  were  thus  spent 
for  the  Siamese  Karens. 

This  same  year,  the  plan  of  weekly  "  pice  "  offerings 
(a  pice  is  a  fraction  of  a  cent)  was  tested  in  Henzada. 
This  was  given  in  addition  to  the  regular  tithe  offerings. 
In  one  year,  this  fund  amounted  to  the  sum  of  five  hun- 


92  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

dred  rupees.  It  was  applied  toward  the  erection  of 
school  buildings. 

Miss  Stevens,  a  worker  of  rare  ability,  was  compelled 
to  leave  Bassein,  utterly  prostrated.  Denied  the  privi- 
lege of  working  abroad,  she  is  doing  good  service  in  the 
home  department. 

Mr,  and  Mrs.  Carpenter  returned  to  Burma  in  1874, 
accompanied  by  Miss  Helen  Watson,  for  Henzada.  Mr. 
Carpenter  was  president  of  Rangoon  Baptist  College 
until  1875.  The  question  of  removing  the  college  to 
Bassein  having  been  decided  adversely,  he  resigned  and 
returned  to  Bassein. 

In  1874,  Dr.  Mason  died  at  Rangoon.  When  he  first 
reached  Burma,  in  1830,  he  took  the  Karen  work  from 
the  dying  hand  of  Mr.  Boardman.  He  planted  the 
Toungoo  mission  in  1853.  His  last  work  was  to  remove 
to  Upper  Burma,  in  the  hope  of  planting  a  station 
among  the  wild  Ka  Khyens.  Before  he  could  accom- 
plish this,  however,  the  Master  called  him  home. 

A  severe  famine  in  the  Toungoo  district  brought  dis- 
tress and  danger.  Great  fatality  among  the  Christian 
Karens  was  only  averted  by  the  concerted  action  of  all 
the  Baptist  churches  in  Burma  in  sending  relief. 

In  1875,  the  gifts  of  the  Bassein  Karens  averaged  four 
rupees  per  member,  given  out  of  deep  poverty. 

Dr.  Binney  returned  to  America  in  1874,  and  Mr. 
Smith  was  called  from  Henzada  to  become  president  of 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  93 

the  theological  seminary.  Dr.  Binney  had  been  for 
thirty  years  connected  with  this  special  work,  of  such 
vital  importance  to  the  evangelizing  of  the  Karens. 

Mr.  Rand,  of  Moulmein,  after  an  unavailing  struggle 
with  disease,  was  driven  home  in  1876,  leaving  Mr.  Col- 
burn  and  Miss  Rand  in  charge  of  the  work.  Mrs.  Cross 
having  been  removed  by  death,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.  P.  Cross 
were  transferred  from  Shwegyen  to  Toungoo,  to  be  associ- 
ated with  Dr.  Cross  in  his  loneliness.  Relieved  of  tour- 
ing work,  the  father  devoted  himself  to  Scripture  revision. 

Mrs.  Thomas,  returning  in  1874,  had  charge  of  the 
Henzada  Karen  Mission.  She  inaugurated  a  plan  to 
have  the  native  pastors  give  a  part  of  each  year  to 
evangelizing  labors,  accompanied  by  one  or  more  helpers. 
More  than  four  thousand  rupees  were  brought  in  1876 
for  religious  purposes. 

At  the  Bassein  Association,  in  1875,  the  Sgau  Karens 
resolved  to  raise  a  special  building  fund  of  twenty 
thousand  rupees  in  three  years,  for  the  Bassein  Normal 
and  Industrial  School.  About  twelve  thousand  rupees 
had  previously  been  raised  for  permanent  school  build- 
ings, making  a  total  of  about  thirty-two  thousand  rupees 
for  education.  The  Bassein  Pwo  Karens  were  endeav- 
oring to  raise  seven  thousand  rupees  within  three  years. 
A  grand  offering  is  thus  shown  from  the  Lord's  poor. 

This  same  year,  Mrs.  Thomas  made  an  interesting  tour 
among  the  mountain  Karens  in  her  district.     Here  the 


94  BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

nation  was  found  in  its  ancient  condition,  untouched  by 
the  uplifting  power  of  the  gospel.  A  religion  of  super- 
stition kept  them  in  bondage  to  fear.  Such  a  trip  would 
have  been  a  serious  undertaking  for  a  strong  man. 

After  many  years  of  desolation,  Tavoy  rejoiced  in 
1876  over  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Morrow.  It  was  no  slight  task 
to  gather  up  the  dropped  threads;  but  it  was  evident  that 
the  Lord  had  his  own,  even  in  Tavoy.  Early  in  1877, 
the  Crumbs  joined  the  Red  Karen  Mission  in  Toungoo. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  led  to  the  founding  of  Rangoon  Baptist  College? 

2.  Where  was  its  formal  opening?     Who  were  in  charge? 

3.  Why  was  1871  a  notable  year? 

4.  What  is  said  of  Mrs.  Van  Meter  ? 

5.  What  changes  in  Bassein  ? 

6.  Give  sketch  of  Dr.  Wade's  life,  and  date  of  death. 

7.  What  of  Moulmein  in  1873? 

8.  What  of  Bassein,  Henzada,  and  Shwegyen  ? 

9.  What  of  Toungoo? 

10.  Describe  the  Carpenters'  tour  in  Siam. 

11.  What  new  plan  of  finance  in  Henzada,  and  what  results? 

12.  What  is  said  of  Miss  Stevens  ? 

13.  What  was  Mr.  Carpenter's  temporary  work,  and  why  did  he 
resign  it? 

14.  Give  sketch  of  Dr.  Francis  Mason's  life  and  death. 

15.  How  did  brotherly  love  save  life  in  Toungoo  ? 

16.  What  were  the  average  gifts  of  Bassein  Sgau  Karens  in 
1875? 

17.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Binney  ? 

18.  Who  became  President  of  Karen  Theological  Seminary  ? 

19.  What  changes  at  Moulmein  and  Toungoo? 

20.  What  is  said  of  Mrs.  Thomas  and  the  Henzada  mission? 

21.  What  new  undertaking  of  Bassein  Karens  in  1875  ? 

22.  Describe  Mrs.  Thomas'  remarkable  tour. 

23.  What  is  said  of  Tavoy  and  Toungoo  ? 

SUPPLEMENTAEY  HEADINGS. 

Missionary  Sketches.  Self-support  in  Bassein.  Life  of  a  Work- 
ing man,  by  Dr.  Francis  Mason. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

LOOKING   BEYOND. 

rTlHE  opening  of  the  Ka  Khyen  field  seemed  to  the 
-■-  Karens  the  call  to  mission  work.  They  assumed 
it  with  great  enthusiasm,  although  bearing  weighty  finan- 
cial burdens  of  their  own.  Men  volunteered  to  go 
among  this  stranger  people,  and  the  churches  promised 
to  sustain  them.  Speh  was  the  first  Karen  missionary  to 
go  into  the  hills.  The  Ka  Khyens  received  him  cor- 
dially, and  promised  to  feed  him. 

Dr.  Binney,  aged  and  feeble,  sailed  again  for  Burma, 
in  1877,  hoping  for  a  lease  of  life  to  finish  certain  Karen 
text  books.  But  it  was  not  to  be.  He  died  on  ship- 
board, eight  days  before  the  steamer  reached  Rangoon. 
His  work  in  training  Karen  preachers  has  left  its  lasting 
impress  upon  Burma.  Mrs.  Binney  remained  to  finish, 
as  far  as  possible,  his  work. 

November  16,  Mr.  Goodell  died  at  Rangoon,  whither 
he  had  gone  for  medical  aid.  The  Bassein  Pwo  Karens 
were  in  mourning  for  their  beloved  teacher,  whose  five 
years  service  had  ended  with  his  life. 

Mr.  Bunker  was  obliged  to  leave  Toungoo,  in  1858. 

He  writes  :  "  It  is  many  times  harder  to  leave  my  work 

95 


96  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

here  to  go  home,  than  it  was  to  leave  home  in  the  begin- 
ning.    I  would  not  do  it  if  I  was  not  compelled." 

In  January,  1878,  three  Karen  men  were  needed 
immediately  for  Upper  Burma.  To  this  simple,  home- 
loving  people,  the  going  into  the  Ka  Khyen  hills  meant 
exile  quite  as  truly  as  the  outgoing  of  an  American  mis- 
sionary to  Burma.  After  much  prayer  and  solemn 
appeal,  two  young  men  from  the  seminary  were  sent. 
Others  held  themselves  in  readiness  to  go  when  needed. 

The  year  1878  was  the  jubilee  of  the  Karen  mission. 
Fifty  years  before,  May  16,  1828,  Ko-thah-byu,  the  first 
convert,  was  baptized  by  Mr.  Boardman,  and  afterward, 
by  his  zeal  and  missionary  spirit,  won  the  name  of  the 
"Karen  Apostle."  This  jubilee  year  found  the  number 
of  Karen  Christians  to  be  over  twenty  thousand.  The 
fine  commodious  building  erected  by  the  Karens  for  the 
Bassein  Normal  and  Industrial  Institute  was  dedicated 
on  this  anniversary  day,  free  of  debt,  and  called 
the  Ko-thah-byu  Memorial  Hall.  It  will  accommodate 
three  hundred  boarding  pupils.  During  this  jubilee 
vear,  the  Bassein  Karens  contributed  fiftv  thousand 
rupees  for  religious  and  educational  purposes.  Later, 
came  the  E.  L.  Abbott  Endowment  Fund,  which  in  1884 
amounted  to  thirteen  thousand  six  hundred  and  ninety- 
nine  dollars  and  fifty  cents.  The  Toungoo  Karens  also 
sent  two  of  their  number  into  Karenee  as  missionaries. 
Others     made    preaching    tours    among    the    villages. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  97 

Auother  native  preacher  labored  among  the  Padoungs. 
A  month  of  field  work  by  Mr.  Smith,  and  the  two  upper 
classes  from  the  seminary  in  a  needy  part  of  the  Henzada 
field,  resulted  in  much  good. 

Mr.  Freiday  writes  in  1878:  "Thank  God,  Brother 
Carpenter's  Bassein  Karens  have  adopted  the  Ka  Khyens 
as  their  mission  field,  for  this  secures  the  Ka  Khyen 
mission  prayers,  men,  and  money  in  an  unusual  degree ; 
as  the  Bassein  Christians  are  not  accustomed  to  look 
back  when  once  they  put  their  hand  to  the  plow." 

Another  signal  event  in  1878  was  the  completion  of  the 
Bible  in  Pwo  Karen  by  Mr.  Brayton.  The  undertaking 
had  covered  thirty  years  of  assiduous  work,  carried  on  in 
connection  with  the  varied  duties  of  a  general  missionary. 
In  1879,  Eangoon  Baptist  College  possessed  a  new  and 
commodious  building. 

A  mysterious  disease  called  beri-beri  caused  great  mor- 
tality and  suffering  among  the  students  of  the  theological 
seminary.  For  years,  varying  plans  were  tried  for  its 
removal,  but  in  vain,  and  the  final  result  was  the  pur- 
chase, in  1890,  of  a  new  location  at  Insein,  nine  miles 
from  Rangoon,  on  the  Prome  Railroad,  and  the  gradual 
removal  of  the  school  from  the  infected  buildings. 

In  1879,  Rev.  J.  T.  Elwell  and  wife  took  Mr.  Goodell's 
Pwo  Karen  work  in  Bassein.  A  new  station,  Maubin, 
was  opened  among  this  tribe,  by  Rev.  W.  Bushnell  and 
wife. 

G 


98  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

At  Toungoo,  the  Red  Karen  work  was  successfully 
carried  on  by  Misses  Eastman  and  Ambrose.  Mr. 
Bunker  returned  in  1880. 

In  April,  1880,  the  Carpenters  made  a  long  desired 
trip  into  the  Ka  Khyen  country,  to  look  after  the  Karen 
foreign  mission  work  in  the  hills.  Most  gratifying  suc- 
cess was  apparent.  A  little  later,  broken  health  drove 
them  to  America.  Rev.  W.  I.  Price,  of  the  Telugu  mis- 
sion, was  transferred  to  Shwegyen. 

Dr.  Vinton  was  most  indefatigible  in  jungle  work. 
Malarious  regions  did  not  turn  him  back ;  the  sure  pros- 
pect of  jungle  fever  did  not  keep  him  from  those  he 
sought.  He  writes  in  1881  :  "  If  you  do  not  hear  from 
me,  take  it  for  granted  that  Vinton  is  in  the  jungle,  with 
headquarters  on  his  elephant's  head,  and  you  will  not  be 
far  wrong." 

Rev.  W.  F.  Thomas  and  wife  came  to  Henzada  in 
1880,  to  the  great  joy  of  his  mother,  heroically  working 
alone.  Immediately  they  set  out  for  the  jungle  in 
company. 

One  marked  feature  of  the  Karen  churches  was  the 
careful  examination  of  candidates  for  baptism.  This 
resulted  in  a  strong  and  spiritual  membership,  with  little 
need  for  discipline. 

In  1881,  at  the  request  of  the  Burma  Baptist  Conven- 
tion, Messrs.  Bushell  and  Webster  made  a  tour  among 
the  Karens  of  Northern  Siam.     Thev  found  large  com- 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  99 

munities  accessible  to  the  gospel.  They  baptized  seventy, 
and  organized  three  churches.  An  attempt  to  prosecute 
the  work  by  purely  native  agencies  having  failed,  the 
Websters  removed  three  years  later  to  Chiengmai. 

Dr.  Vinton,  in  1882,  expressed  great  joy  over  the  bap- 
tism of  some  pupils  from  the  Sgau  Karen  school  in  Kem- 
mendine.  He  says :  "  I  dearly  enjoy  the  privilege  of 
baptizing  any  true  convert ;  but  a  new  thrill  of  pleasure 
comes  when  I  feel  that  I  am  putting  '  sanctified  brains ' 
under  the  water." 

This  year  Mr.  Frank  Phinney  was  appointed  to  the 
superintendency  of  the  mission  press  in  Rangoon,  ren- 
dered vacant  by  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Bennett.  The 
press  of  the  Missionary  Union  is  the  only  one  in  the 
world  printing  in  the  Karen  and  Shan  language. 

Three  of  the  students  in  the  Theological  Seminary  this 
year  were  Karens  from  far-distant  Siam,  sent  by  their 
Chiengmai  brethren  for  two  years'  study.  Rev.  B.  P. 
Cross  and  wife  were  transferred  to  Rangoon  College. 

In  1883,  there  was  great  advance  among  the  Pwo 
Karens  in  Bassein.  They  organized  a  missionary  society. 
Circles  were  formed  among  the  women,  and  bands  among 
the  children.  The  Pwo  Karen  Bible,  translated  and 
revised  by  Mr.  Brayton,  assisted  by  his  daughter,  Mrs. 
Rose,  was  published. 

Mrs.  Binney  died  May  18,  1884,  in  Rangoon.  After 
the  death  of  her  husband  she  devoted  herself  to  com- 


100  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

pleting  his  literary  undertakings.  Her  life  was  blessed  in 
labors  and  results,  and  her  memory  is  precious  in  Burma. 

Mr.  Webster  gives  the  story  in  brief  of  the  mission  in 
Northern  Siam : 

"An  almost  wholly  native  agency,  operating  at  twenty- 
five  days  distance  from  headquarters,  three  years  time ; 
result,  one  hundred  and  sixty  church  members,  two 
churches,  two  schools,  and  several  men  who  show  excep- 
tional gifts  as  evangelists.  This  work  is  supported  by 
Burman  churches,  in  connection  with  the  Karens." 

We  have  already  noted  the  Bassein  Karen  foreign 
mission  among  the  Ka  Khyens.  A  third  field  was  occu- 
pied by  the  Henzada  Karens,  the  work  having  been 
originated  by  Mrs.  Thomas,  and  lies  among  the  Chins  in 
the  western  valley  of  the  Irrawaddy,  extending  into 
Arakan.  In  1884,  were  reported  four  Chin  churches, 
largely  the  result  of  native  effort.  This  interest  among 
the  Chins  of  Arakan  led  to  the  re-establishment  of  the 
old  Sandoway  mission,  the  healthiest  spot  in  the  province, 
which  in  earlier  days  proved  such  a  graveyard  of  mis- 
sionaries. 

Mr.  Crumb,  missionary  to  the  Red  Karens  in  Toun- 
goo,  reported  his  native  preachers  doing  mission  wTork  in 
Karenee.  Seven  men  were  laboring  in  different  direc- 
tions, and  doing  much  good. 

In  1886,  Upper  Burma  was  annexed  by  the  English, 
throwing  a  vast  region  open  to  the  gospel. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  101 

A  movement  was  made  the  same  year  to  throw  the 
support  of  the  Theological  Seminary  upon  the  Karens. 
The  Bassein  Sgaus  pledged  about  one  thousand  rupees, 
and  the  other  districts  were  asked  to  apportion  the 
amount  needed  among  their  membership.  The  gratify- 
ing response  showed  that  systematic  and  persistent  effort 
on  the  part  of  the  pastors  would  bring  in  funds  sufficient 
to  make  the  seminary  a  mighty  power.  Diplomas  were 
given  the  graduates  this  year  for  the  first  time.  The 
graduating  exercises  would  not  have  done  discredit  to  an 
American  seminary.  Its  standing  was  rising  to  the 
level  of  schools  in  the  home-land. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Describe  the  opening  of  the  Ka  Khyen  field  by  the  Bassein 
Sgau  Karens. 

2.  Give  the  circumstances  of  Dr.  Binney's  death. 

3.  What  is  said  of  Mrs.  Binney  ? 

4.  What  bereavement  befell  the  Bassein  Pwo  Karens  in  1877  ? 

5.  Give  Mr.  Bunker's  parting  words. 

6.  Teli  the  story  of  the  consecration  of  Karen  foreign  mission- 
aries for  work  in  Upper  Burma. 

7.  Describe  the  grand  results  of  the  jubilee  year  of  Karen 
foreign  mission  work. 

8.  What  does  Mr.  Freiday  say  in  regard  to  the  Karen  Ka 
Khyen  Mission? 

9.  What  signal  event  in  1878? 

10.  What  is  said  of  beri-beri,  and  what  removal  did  it  make 
necessary  ? 

11.  What  of  Pwo  Karen  work  in  1879? 

12.  What  of  Red  Karen  work  in  Toungoo? 

13.  WThat  trip  by  the  Carpenters  in  1880? 

14.  What  marked  feature  among  Karen  churches? 

15.  What  is  said  of  the  work  among  the  Karens  of  Siam  ? 

16.  What  joyful  experience  did  Dr.  Vinton  relate  ? 

17.  Give  facts  regarding  change  of  superintendency  of  Baptist 
mission  press  in  Rangoon. 


102  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

18.  What  three  foreign  students  in  Karen  Theological  Seminary 
in  1882  ?     Who  sent  them  ? 

19.  What  advance  is  noted  among  Bassein  Pwo  Karens  in  1883? 

20.  When  did  Mrs.  Binney  die,  and  what  had  she  accomplished? 

21.  Give  the  story  of  Northern  Siam  Mission. 

22.  Note  the  new  foreign  mission  fields  undertaken  by  Karens. 

23.  What  important  political  event  in  1886  ? 

24.  What  is  said  of  the  Karen  Theological  Seminary  ? 

SUPPLEMENTAEY  HEADINGS. 

The  Vintons  and  Karens.     Self-support  in  Bassein.     History  of 
Bassein  Karens.     Twenty-six  years  in  Burma,  by  Mrs.  Binney. 

LEAFLETS. 

Mrs.  J.  P.  Binney.     Christianity  and  Karen  women. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

TRIAL  AND  VICTORY. 

rPHE  annexation  of  Upper  Burma  was  followed  by  a 
-*-  period  of  great  excitement  and  peril.  Bands  of 
dacoits  wreaked  vengeance  on  the  Christian  Karens,  es- 
pecially in  Shwegyen  and  Toungoo  districts.  But  the 
Karens,  directed  by  their  missionaries,  rose  to  the  occa- 
sion, and  by  brave  defense,  and  equally  brave  aggression, 
aided  Government  in  restoring  order  to  the  land.  A 
missionary  writes  : 

"  It  is  a  fact  that  the  Karens,  without  exception,  muster 
on  the  English  side,  and  all  through  these  mountains, 
have  done  what  the  English  soldiers  have  failed  to  do : 
they  have  put  down  the  dacoits.  So  the  Karen  hills  are 
becoming,  by  virtue  of  the  Karen  Christians,  a  vast  for- 
tification to  the  British  Government ;  but  which,  if  held 
by  the  Burmans,  would  become  a  vast,  impenetrable  den 
of  thieves. 

"  More  than  once,  the  missionaries  were  compelled  to 

take   up   arms,    and   aid    the    Karens,    in   self-defense. 

From  being  an  oppressed,  obscure  people,  the  events  of 

the  war  have  pushed  them  into  noble  prominence." 

A  sad  loss  was  sustained  in  the  death  of  Dr.  Vinton  at 

103 


104  BAPTIST   FOEEIGX   MISSIONS. 

Rangoon,  in  1887.  The  dacoit  perils  taxed  the  mission- 
aries to  the  utmost.  Dr.  Vinton  held  a  position  of  pecu- 
liar responsibility,  both  to  the  Karens  and  to  Govern- 
ment. His  influence  over  his  people  was  absolute.  He 
spoke  the  language  like  a  native,  and  wrote  many  beau- 
tiful hymns.  His  large  plans  for  '  future  work  were  cut 
short  by  his  sudden  death ;  and  all  Karen  land  was  in 
mourning. 

The  first  scholarships  in  the  Karen  Theological  Semi- 
nary were  given  by  two  natives  ;  one  a  Christian  deacon, 
who  gave  one  hundred  and  fifty  dollars,  wishing  the 
avails  given  to  some  needy  student  from  the  Moulmein 
district.  The  other  was  a  like  amount  from  a  heathen, 
for  the  same  purpose. 

The  year  1887  was  one  of  progress.  New  stations  were 
opened,  and  the  great  opportunities  were  like  a  bugle  call 
to  the  Christians  of  Ameriea,  summoning  them  in  the 
name  of  their  God  to  set  up  their  banners. 

After  eight  years'  faithful  labor  in  Moulmein,  Dr. 
Mitchell  was  compelled  to  leave  her  work  in  Burma  for 
a  time.  It  had  long  been  self-supporting,  paying  her 
salary  and  that  of  her  assistant,  Dr.  Shaw  Loo.  She 
was  the  second  of  a  line  of  medical  missionaries,  sent  by 
the  women's  societies,  and  this  experiment  had  proved 
a  triumphant  success.  More  than  one  thousand  patients 
had  been  treated  at  the  dispensary  in  1887, 

Mrs.  Vinton,  who  so  nobly  carried  on  her  husband's 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  105 

work  after  his  death,  returned  to  America.  From  the 
beginning  of  the  Rangoon  Sgau  Karen  Mission,  it  had 
been  in  charge  of  but  two  persons — Justus  H.  Vinton, 
and  Justus  B.  Vinton,  father  and  son.  Their  monu- 
ment is  in  the  devoted  Karens,  who,  though  stricken, 
rallied  to  make  good  their  loss  by  greater  effort. 

At  Christmas,  1887,  the  Bassein  Karens  observed  their 
Jubilee.  The  gospel  was  first  preached  within  the 
boundaries  of  the  Bassein  district,  Christmas  Eve,  1837, 
by  Rev.  E,  L.  Abbott.  Christmas  Eve,  1887,  watch  meet- 
ings were  held  in  many  places,  attended  by  thousands. 
Special  thanksgiving  services  were  held  on  Christmas 
Day,  and  the  anniversary  was  both  joyful  and  profitable. 

A  new  station  was  opened  for  the  Chins,  at  Thayetmyo, 
in  Upper  Burma.  This  people  inhabit  the  western  Yoma 
mountains,  between  Burma  and  Arakan.  The  mission- 
aries in  charge  are  Rev.  A.  E.  Carson  and  wife. 

In  April,  1888,  the  beautiful  Pwo  Karen  chapel  in 
Bassein  was  dedicated,  free  of  debt.  The  sermon  was 
preached  by  the  venerable  Brayton,  who  had  come  to 
the  Pwo  work  fifty  years  before.  The  chapel  cost  five 
thousand  dollars,  one-third  contributed  by  the  Karens. 
The  upper  story  is  the  chapel,  with  beautiful  schoolrooms 
below. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  Rangoon  Sgau  Karen  Association, 
it  was  enthusiastically  decided  to  erect  a  "Vinton  Memo- 
rial "  on  the  missionary  compound.     This  was  to  take  the 


106  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

form  of  a  large  school  building,  in  memory  of  the  three 
Vintons — father,  mother,  and  son.  At  this  meeting, 
fifteen  hundred  dollars  was  pledged  as  an  earnest  of  the 
larger  amounts  to  follow. 

Mr.  Thomas  returned  from  a  brief  furlough  in  1888, 
and  located  in  Sandoway,  laboring  for  the  Chins  and 
Arakanese. 

In  1889,  came  an  appeal  for  five  hundred  dollars  to 
build  a  Baptist  chapel  in  Hammerfest,  Norway,  near  the 
Arctic  Circle.  The  various  Sunday-schools  in  Rangoon, 
Karen,  Burrnan,  and  English,  responded  with  sixty-six 
dollars  and  thirty-eight  cents  as  their  contribution,  the 
tropics  aiding  the  polar  regions. 

This  same  year  was  organized  the  Arakan  Baptist 
Association,  with  ten  churches.  The  foreign  mission 
spirit  had  here  also  an  early  development. 

A  movement  was  inaugurated  in  the  Tavoy  district  of 
the  greatest  value  to  the  Karens.  Government  granted 
Mr.  Morrow  two  thousand  acres  of  land,  on  which  to 
locate  certain  of  the  Karen  Christians,  teaching  them 
improved  agricultural  methods.  As  the  Karens  are  the 
farmers  of  Burma,  much  is  expected. 

The  Henzada  Karens  erected  a  beautiful  chapel  school- 
house  as  a  "  Thomas  Memorial."  This  Associational  dis- 
trict was  divided,  the  other  half  being  the  Tharrawaddy 
district,  with  headquarters  at  Zigon,  under  charge  of 
Rev.W.  C.  Calder. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  107 

The  Sandoway  mission  embraced  six  distinct  nation- 
alities— Chins,  Arakanese,  Burmese,  Karens,  English, 
and  Telugus.  The  Ka  Khyens  had  as  missionaries  in 
Bhamo,  Eev.  W.  H.  Roberts  and  wife,  besides  two  lady 
teachers. 

In  1889,  the  Bassein  Karens  completed  a  large  and 
beautiful  hospital  as  the  "  Carpenter  Memorial/'  besides 
bearing  much  expense  in  other  directions. 

In  1888,  Mr.  Denchfield  was  put  in  charge  of  the 
Rangoon  Sgau  Karen  work.  In  1890,  Mrs.  Vinton  re- 
turned. Mr.  and  Mrs.  Seagrave  were  also  designated  to 
this  mission.  The  family  relation  to  the  work  continued, 
Mrs.  Seagrave  being  a  daughter  of  Mrs.  Vinton. 

At  the  Fourth  Annual  Conference  of  Baptist  Mission- 
aries in  Burma,  a  scheme  of  uniform  Bible  study  for  all 
the  mission  schools  was  adopted.  Henceforth,  Burman, 
Karen,  Shan,  Ka  Khyen,  Telugu,  and  English  scholars 
will  all  study  the  same  daily  Bible  lesson. 

Mrs.  Brayton  died  at  Rangoon  in  1890,  after  forty- 
eight  years  active  service  in  Burma  among  the  Pwo 
Karens.  Thus  was  another  link  broken  with  the  pioneer 
days,  Mrs.  Brayton  having  gone  to  Burma  when  Dr. 
Judson  and  Sarah  B.  Judson  were  in  the  full  tide  of 
their  usefulness. 

The  statistics  of  the  Karen  mission  for  1891  show 
thirty-six  missionaries  actually  on  the  field,  one  hundred 
and  twenty-two  ordained  and  three  hundred  and  twenty- 


108  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

two  unordained  native  preachers,  four  hundred  and 
ninety-six  churches,  and  twenty-seven  thousand  and  forty 
members. 

The  Theological  Seminary  appeals  for  a  fitting  build- 
ing for  its  beautiful  site  at  Insein.  Prof.  E.  B.  Roach  is 
president  of  Eangocn  Baptist  College.  Prof.  D.  C.  Gil- 
more  and  wife  have  been  added  to  the  faculty. 

New  tribes  of  Karens  are  being  reached.  The  Kachin 
work,  carried  on  as  a  foreign  mission  by  the  Bassein 
Karens,  has  now  an  association  of  its  own.  A  constantly 
increasing  demand  for  higher  education  is  a  prophecy 
of  future  power  and  efficiency  for  the  Karen  nation. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  followed  the  annexation  of  Upper  Burma  ? 

2.  What  is  said  of  Karen  aid  given  the  Government  against 
the  dacoits  ? 

3.  Give  a  sketch  of  Dr.  Vinton's  work,  and  date  of  death. 

4.  Tell  the  story  of  the  two  first  scholarships  in  Karen  Theo- 
logical Seminary. 

5.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Ellen  E.  Mitchell? 

6.  What  relation  had  the  Vintons  borne  to  the  Sgau  Karen 
mission  ? 

7.  Describe  the  Christmas  jubilee  of  the  Bassein  Sgau  Karen 
in  1887.  _ 

8.  Give  facts  regarding  new  stations  for  the  Chins  in  Upper 
Burma. 

9.  Describe  the  dedication  of  Pwo  Karen  chapel  in  Bassein, 
with  date. 

10.  What  was  the  Vinton  memorial  ? 

11.  How  did  the  tropics  aid  the  polar  regions? 

12.  What  event  in  Arakan  in  1889? 

13.  Describe  plan  for  agricultural  instruction  in  Henzada. 

14.  What  and  where  was  the  Thomas  Memorial  ? 

15.  How  and  when  was  the  Henzada  district  divided  ? 

16.  What  nationalities  in  the  Sandoway  mission  ? 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  109 

17.  What  American  missionary  to  the  Ka  Khyens,  and  where 
located  ? 

18.  Where  and  what  was  the  Carpenter  Memorial  ? 

19.  What  is  said  of  Rangoon  Sgau  Karen  work  ? 

20.  Give  plan  of  daily  uniform  Bible  study  for  all  the  mission 
schools. 

21.  What  is  said  of  Mrs.  Bray  ton? 

22.  Give  statistics  for  1890. 

23.  What  changes  in  the  faculty  of  Rangoon  Baptist  College  ? 

24.  Give  latest  facts  in  Karen  work. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READING. 

Self-support  in  Bassein.     The  Story  of  the  Karen  Mission  in 
Bassein. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


LENGTHENING    CORDS. 


niHE  Assam  mission  was  established  in  1836.  The 
■*-  eyes  of  the  Christian  world  were  fixed  longingly 
on  China,  fast  barred  against  outward  influences.  The 
Siam  mission  was  begun  as  an  outpost  of  China,  and  it 
was  believed  that  an  entrance  to  this  kingdom  might  be 
gained  along  the  paths  of  inland  trade.  By  planting  a 
series  of  posts  along  the  Chinese  frontier,  beginning  with 
Siam,  extending  northward  into  Assam,  some  influences 
must  penetrate  the  barrier.  Also,  under  the  protection 
of  the  East  India  Company,  it  was  thought  that  mission- 
aries might  travel  with  the  caravans  that  passed  yearly 
into  China,  and  while  the  mandarians  were  jealously 
watching  their  ports,  Christianity  might  be  planted  in 
the  heart  of  the  Empire.  Another  consideration  favored 
Assam.  A  chain  of  mountain  ranges  extends  between 
Assam  and  Burma.  The  hill  tribes  especially  were 
thought  to  be  nearly  allied  to  the  Shans,  whose  language 
so  closely  resembles  the  Burman  that  missionaries  from 
Burma  could  learn  it  readily. 

The  East  India  Company  had  become  friendly  to  mis- 
sionaries.    It  was  at  the  urgent  appeal  of  its  officers  in 
110 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  Ill 

Assam,  that  Messrs.  Brown  and  Cutter  went  from  Burma 
to  Sadiya,  in  1836.  Captain  Jenkins  offered  five  hun- 
dred dollars  to  the  mission  on  the  arrival  of  the  first 
missionary,  and  a  like  amount  when  the  printing  press 
was  an  established  fact. 

Sadiya  is  far  up  the  province,  on  the  Brahmaputra, 
the  mighty  river  whose  valley  forms  the  plain  of  Assam. 
The  missionaries  had  a  long  weary  journey  of  four 
months,  toiling  against  the  current  in  a  native  boat. 

In  October,  1836,  Rev.  Jacob  Thomas  and  Rev.  Miles 
Bronson,  with  their  wives,  were  sent  to  this  new  mission. 
On  the  journey  up  the  Brahmaputra,  Mr.  Bronson  was 
taken  ill  with  fever.  In  a  small  boat,  w7ith  a  native 
boatman,  Mr.  Thomas  hastened  on  to  obtain  medicine 
and  help.  When  within  sight  of  Sadiya,  a  tree  fell 
across  the  boat,  crushing  it,  and  drowning  Mr.  Thomas 
It  was  a  sad  blow  to  the  mission,  and  to  the  wife  and 
friends  left  behind.  The  name  of  Jacob  Thomas  leads 
the  death  roll  of  the  Assam  mission. 

The  Board  instructed  the  missionaries  always  to  keep 
in  view  the  possible  connection  with  Burma  and  China. 
Mr.  Kincaid's  trip  northward  from  Ava  in  1837  was  an 
attempt  to  reach  Assam.  The  failure  of  this  attempt  had 
not  dispelled  the  idea. 

An  insurrection  in  Sadiya,  in  1839,  drove  out  the  mis- 
sionaries, and  dispersed  the  people.  The  mission  was 
removed  to  Jaipur,  three  days  journey  southward.     Here 


112  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Mr.  Bronson  found  himself  near  the  Singphos,  the  tribe 
to  which  he  had  been  designated.  It  was  also  near  the 
Nagas,  a  fierce,  warlike  people,  among  whom  he  estab- 
lished a  mission  in  1840.  Soon  he  moved  his  family  to 
Namsang,  a  station  in  the  Naga  hills.  In  May,  his 
sister,  Miss  Rhoda  Bronson,  one  of  the  first  single  lady 
missionaries,  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barker,  came  to  Assam. 
Miss  Bronson  joined  her  brother  in  the  hills,  but  con- 
tinued fever  drove  them  back  to  Jaipur,  where  she  died 
at  the  end  of  the  year. 

It  soon  became  evident  that  more  efficient  work  could 
be  done  in  the  densely  populated  plains  of  Central  and 
Lower  Assam,  than  among  the  scattered  tribes  about 
Jaipur.  Mr.  Barker  settled  at  Sibsagor,  and  thither  Mr. 
Brown  followed  in  1841,  Mr.  Cutter  remaining  with  the 
press  at  Jaipur.  Mr.  Bronson  removed  to  Nowgong, 
where  were  representatives  of  many  tribes,  besides  the 
Assamese.  Mrs.  Bronson  opened  a  large  mission  school, 
which  educated  many  of  the  future  native  teachers  and 
preachers  of  Assam.  Mr.  Brown's  especial  work  was 
translating;  Mr.  Cutter's,  printing.  Portions  of  the 
Scripture  and  schoolbooks  were  soon  in  the  hands  of  the 
people.  In  1845,  the  press  was  moved  to  Sibsagor,  Mr. 
Barker  locating  at  Gauhati,  the  most  important  town  in 
Central  Assam.  At  each  of  the  stations,  a  little  church 
was  soon  organized.  The  religion  of  Assam  is  Brahman- 
ism,  with  its  iron  bars  of  caste.     The  sowing  time  was 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  113 

long ;  the  harvest,  like  that  among  the  Burroans,  slow  in 
ripening. 

The  first  convert  in  Assam,  Nidhiram,  was  baptized 
by  Mr.  Bronson,  at  Jaipur,  in  1841.  He  took  the 
Christian  name  of  Nidhi  Levi  Farwell.  Batiram,  the 
second,  was  baptized  in  Sibsagor,  in  1846.  Soon  he  and 
Nidhi  Levi  were  helping  Mr.  Bronson  in  preparing  an 
Assamese  hymn  book.  Nidhi  proved  a  good  hymn 
writer,  and  rendered  invaluable  help  in  translating 
Scripture.  God  spared  him  to  Assam  until  1873,  when 
this  poet,  translator,  and  preacher,  went  home. 

The  school  in  Assam  soon  grew  into  the  orphan  institu- 
tion, an  important  factor  in  the  work.  The  pupils  could 
be  kept  under  the  entire  control  of  the  missionaries.  This 
meant  much,  when  home  influences  were  altogether  de- 
grading. For  ten  years  this  school  flourished,  and  from 
among  its  pupils  were  largely  the  accessions  to  the 
church.  In  1848,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Stoddard  were  appointed 
in  charge,  while  the  Bronsons,  with  broken  health, 
sought  rest  in  America.  In  1850,  Mr.  Daiible  joined 
the  mission  from  the  German  Lutheran  Church,  and  in 
1851,  the  Bronsons  returned,  bringing  with  them  Miss 
Shaw,  as  teacher  in  the  school.  She  afterward  married 
Mr.  Daiible. 

In  1854,  the  Deputation  sent  to  visit  the  Asiatic  missions 
came  to  Assam,  and  a  General  Convention  was  held  in 
Nowgong.     To  the  sorrow  of  the  missionaries,  the  Orphan 

H 


114  BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

Institution  was  practically  disbanded,  and  although  the 
action  was  meant  for  the  best,  the  Assam  mission  has 
ever  since  been  crippled.  From  the  orphans  trained  in 
the  school  came  the  native  Christian  helpers,  and  when 
that  generation  passed,  none  were  ready  to  take  their 
places.  Within  three  years,  by  deaths,  exclusions,  and 
removals,  the  Nowgong  church  was  reduced  to  five  mem- 
bers, one  less  than  its  original  number. 

The  "  Orunodoi,"  an  Assamese  religious  paper,  was  first 
published  in  1840.  In  1853,  Mr.  Cutter's  connection 
with  the  mission  closed,  and  Mr.  Brown  added  printing 
to  the  translation  and  preaching.  In  1855,  he  went  to 
America,  after  twenty  years  continuous  service.  His 
labors  had  truly  been  abundant.  He  had  translated  and 
three  times  revised  the  Assamese  New  Testament,  besides 
portions  of  the  Old.  The  catechism  and  part  of  Genesis 
he  had  translated  into  Shan,  besides  printing  and  editing 
the  "  Orunodoi."  In  1851,  Mr.  Whiting  came  to  Sibsa- 
gor,  and  labored  faithfully  for  ten  years.  In  1861,  he 
was  relieved  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ward,  from  Gauhati,  who 
had  entire  charge  for  the  next  seven  years. 

Assam  is  a  great  tea  garden.  The  immense  tea  plan- 
tations bring  multitudes  of  heathen  laborers,  but  they 
also  bring  the  vices  of  unchristian  Englishmen.  Some 
dissolute  tea  planters  take  delight  in  undoing  the  work 
of  the  missionaries  as  far  as  possible ;  and  as  all  white 
men  stand  as  representatives  of  Christianity  in  the  East, 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  115 

the  result  is  deplorable.  Especially  in  those  early  days 
of  mission  work  was  the  hindrance  a  serious  one.  But 
God  overrules  even  such  stumbling-blocks,  and  multi- 
tudes of  Assamese  have  been  rescued  from  heathenism 
by  the  faithful  labor  of  our  missionaries. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Give  map-lesson  on  Assam. 

2.  Give  facts  regarding  establishment  of  Assam  mission. 

3.  What  relation  did  the  East  India  Company  bear  to  the  new 
enterprise  ? 

4.  Who  were  the  first  missionaries? 

5.  Locate  Sadiya.    What  is  said  of  the  journey  from  Calcutta? 

6.  Tell  the  story  of  Jacob  Thomas'  death. 

7.  Why  and  where  was  the  mission  removed  in  1839? 

8.  What  effort  did  Mr.  Bronson  make  for  the  Nagas  ?     Who 
were  this  people? 

9.  Who  joined  him,  and  what  cause  drove  the  family  to  the 
plains  ? 

10.  Give  reasons  for  removal  to  various  parts  of  Central  Assam? 

11.  Name  the  localities  where  missions  were  established,  and 
the  missionaries  in  charge. 

12.  What  important  school  was  opened  at  Nowgong,  and  by 
whom? 

13.  What  was  Mr.  Brown's  especial  work? 

14.  What  is  the  religion  of  Assam  ? 

15.  Describe  Brahmanism. 

16.  What  is  caste  ? 

17.  Tell  the  story  of  the  first  Assamese  convert. 

18.  What  is  said  of  the  Orphan  Institution  at  Nowgong? 

19.  Who  assumed  charge  in  1848? 

20.  What  fate  befell  the  Orphan  Institution  ?     What  was  the 
result  in  after  years  ? 

21.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Brown's  work  in  Assam  ?     When  did 
it  close  ? 

22.  What  is  the  effect  of  tea  planting  upon  Assam  ? 

SUPPLEMENTAEY  HEADINGS. 
Assam  Jubilee  Volume.     The  Whole  World  Kin;   or,  Life  of 
Nathan  Brown.      Missionary   Sketches.     Our   Gold   Mine,  pages 
296-336. 

LEAFLET. 

Notes  on  Assam. 


M1 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

PROGRESS   IN   ASSAM. 

"  R.  BARKER  settled  in  Gauhati  in  1843,  and,  re- 
maining less  than  six  years,  died  on  his  return 
voyage  to  America.  A  marble  tablet  to  his  memory  may 
be  seen  in  the  brick  mission  chapel  erected  by  European 
residents.  Mr.  Danforth  arrived  in  1848,  and  labored 
in  this  station  for  the  most  of  the  ten  years  of  his  stay  in 
India. 

The  story  of  Kandura  is  one  of  the  many  thrilling 
incidents  in  missionary  annals.  Soon  after  locating  in 
Nowgong,  while  the  Orphan  Institution  was  in  its  infancy, 
Mr.  Bronson  noticed  among  his  hearers  a  blind  beggar, 
of  noble  appearance,  led  by  a  bright  boy.  The  lad  was 
so  prepossessing  that  Mr.  Bronson  longed  to  train  him 
for  Christ.  But  every  effort  to  secure  the  boy  failed. 
To  every  appeal  the  father  would  say,  "  He  is  my  eyes. 
How  can  I  give  up  my  eyes  ? "  But  later,  as  he  was 
about  to  be  thrown  into  prison  for  debt,  he  came  to  the 
missionary,  and  agreed  to  give  up  the  boy,  if  the  debt 
could  be  paid.  This  was  gladly  done,  and  Kandura 
became  a  member  of  the  school.     He  was  baptized  in 

1849,  was  educated  entirely  in  the  Orphan  Institution, 
116 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  117 

and  proved  so  capable  that  a  lucrative  situation  was 
offered  him  under  Government. 

He  accepted  this  for  awhile.  But  he  was  not  satisfied. 
He  had  a  call  to  very  different  work,  and  finally,  resign- 
ing his  Government  position  at  twenty  dollars  a  month, — 
large  pay  for  a  native, — became  pastor  of  the  Gauhati 
church,  at  a  monthly  salary  not  much  exceeding  seven 
dollars.  No  missionary  was  at  the  station.  "  Can  you 
hold  on  till  some  one  arrives?"  asked  Mr.  Bronson. 
"  My  wish  is  to  hold  on  till  death,"  was  his  reply.  God 
gave  him  his  wish,  and  he  was  in  active  service  until 
almost  his  last  breath. 

The  dreadful  years  of  the  mutiny  came  in  1857  and 
1858.  The  Assam  missionaries  who  remained  in  the 
province  escaped  injury,  but  were  in  deadly  peril,  and 
had  little  opportunity  to  prosecute  their  work.  One 
after  another  left  the  field,  until,  for  nearly  a  year,  Mr. 
Whiting  was  the  only  missionary  in  Assam. 

In  1859,  Rev.  C.  F.  Tolman  came  to  Assam.  His  wife 
was  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Bronson.  They  were  appointed 
to  the  Mikirs,  but  the  treacherous  fever,  lying  in  wait  for 
foreigners,  made  him  its  victim  on  his  second  tour,  and 
drove  him  from  the  hills  in  two  years.  He  held  on  until 
the  return  of  Mr.  Bronson  and  Mr.  Ward,  leaving  the 
first  Assamese  and  Mikir  catechism  in  press  and  the 
manuscript  of  a  vocabulary,  then,  more  dead  than  alive, 
sailed  for  America.     He  has  been  denied  the  privilege 


118  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

of  work  abroad,  but  has  done  valiant  service  at  home, 
The  year  1863  witnessed  the  baptism  of  the  first  Garo, 
and  the  first  Mikir  converts.  In  1864,  Kev.  E.  P.  Scott 
and  wife  were  sent  to  the  Mikirs,  but  the  fever  made  him 
its  victim  in  less  than  two  years. 

The  work  among  the  Hill  tribes  was  gaining  in  promi- 
nence yearly.  These  tribes  did  not  worship  idols,  were 
free  from  caste,  but  sacrificed  to  demons,  to  appease  their 
wrath  and  avert  calamity.  A  kind  and  benevolent  Deity 
did  not  need  worship,  according  to  their  idea.  Mission 
work  was  prosecuted  at  this  time  among  the  Mikirs,  the 
Nagas,  and  the  Garos,  at  the  three  central  stations,  and 
by  tours  in  the  Hills.  No  station  was  opened  among 
them  until  a  later  date.  Mr.  Bronson  baptized  the  first 
representatives  from  a  number  of  Hill  tribes  during  his 
long  term  of  missionary  service.  In  1863.  Mr.  Stoddard  re- 
moved to  Goalpara,  a  river  station  near  the  Garo  country. 
In  1869,  there  were  forty  Garo  Christians,  five  churches, 
and  ten  native  preachers.     Schools  flourished  greatly. 

In  1866,  the  Assamese-English  Dictionary,  the  fruit 
of  many  years'  toil  by  Mr.  Bronson,  was  published.  It 
was  a  laborious  undertaking.  He  also  prepared  books 
in  Singpho,  Naga,  Khamti,  and  Assamese,  and  trans- 
lated many  hymns. 

The  finger  of  progress  touched  the  sleepy  Assam  valley, 
and  we  find  about  this  time  the  telegraph  joining  Gau- 
hati  with  Boston,  while  a  railroad  from  Calcutta  to  the 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  119 

borders  of  Assam  shortened  the  distance  wonderfully. 
A  railroad  route  had  already  been  surveyed  through  the 
valley.  Never  again  could  the  situation  be  so  depressing. 
With  Western  influences  came  Western  vice  as  well ; 
but  the  Western  gospel  was  stronger  than  all. 

In  1869,  Dr.  Bronson,  having  buried  the  devoted  wife 
of  his  youth,  returned  to  Assam  with  his  daughter  Maria. 
She  took  up  the  Nowgong  school  work  with  ardor  and 
success.  In  the  same  year,  Mr.  Scott,  who  had  returned 
a  twelve-month  before,  died  of  cholera  in  Nowgong. 
Mrs.  Scott  nobly  strove  to  carry  on  his  work,  removing 
to  Gauhati,  until  the  needs  of  her  little  children  com- 
pelled her  to  return  home. 

Rev.  E.  W.  Clark  joined  the  mission  in  1868.  From 
the  first,  he  was  strongly  drawn  toward  the  Nagas.  He 
located  at  Sibsagor,  taking  Mr.  Ward's  work.  But  his 
heart  was  in  the  Hills  ;  and  in  1876  he  established  him- 
self at  Molung,  among  the  people  of  his  choice. 

In  1871,  Rev.  R.  E.  Neighbor  and  wife  were  sent  to 
Nowgong,  as  Mr.  Scott's  successor  in  the  Mikir  work. 
In  1872,  Dr.  Bronson  married  Mrs.  Danforth,  widow  of 
a  former  missionary  at  Gauhati.  She  died  in  1874,  in 
Burma,  while  in  quest  of  health.  Maria  Bronson  had 
accompanied  her  ;  and  on  the  way  home,  sailing  up  the 
great  river,  she  was  seized  with  cholera,  and  died  in  a  few 
hours.  She  was  buried  at  Goalpara,  with  six  wild  Hill- 
men  as  bearers,  and  only  her  stricken  father  to  utter  a 


120  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

word  of  prayer  over  her  grave.  After  this  double  be- 
reavement, Dr.  Bronson  removed  to  Gauhati,  leaving  Mr. 
Neighbor  alone  at  Nowgong.  Later,  he  married  Miss 
Mary  Rankin,  a  missionary  of  the  Society  of  the  West 
and  gave  Assam  a  few  more  years  of  labor.  He  died 
in  America,  November  10,  1883.  '  In  his  last  days,  his 
weakened  mind  was  in  dear  old  Assam.  He  imagined 
himself  as  talking  with  the  native  Christians,  and  arrang- 
ing for  a  jungle  tour.  This  delusion  mercifully  lasted 
till  his  soul  passed  into  the  clear  light  beyond. 

In  1875,  Miss  Anna  Sweet  came  to  Nowgong,  to  take  up 
zenana  and  school  work,  while  Miss  Orrell  Keeler  labored 
for  two  years  at  Gauhati,  and  then  joined  Miss  Sweet  at 
Nowgongc  The  year  1877  was  notable  for  the  first  ordi- 
nation of  Assamese  preachers.  A  council  of  missionaries 
and  churches  met  at  Gauhati,  and  ordained  Kandura,  of 
whom  we  have  heard  before,  and  Charles  Sonaram. 
Charles  became  pastor  of  the  Nowgong  Church,  and 
continued  in  the  office  until  his  death,  in  1881.  Rev. 
M.  B.  Comfort  and  wife  joined  the  mission  in  1867,  and 
gave  seven  years  of  service.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Neighbor 
were  forced  to  leave  in  1878,  leaving  Miss  Keeler  aloue 
until  the  arrival  of  Rev.  P.  H.  Moore  and  wife  in  1880. 

Mr.  Gurney  finished  the  translation  of  the  Bible  into 
Assamese,  June  21,  1888,  having  carried  it  on  as  best 
he  could,  with  other  overwhelming  burdens  thrown  upon 
him,  since  1874.     The  New  Testament  had  been  trans- 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  121 

lated  and  revised  by  Dr.  Nathan  Brown  years  before  ; 
and  several  books  of  the  Old  Testament  had  also  been 
translated.  Mr.  Guruey's  portion  was  twenty-nine  and  a 
half  books.  Still  further  revision  was  necessary,  before 
it  could  be  put  to  press. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Barker? 

2.  When,  and  how  long  did  Mr.  Danforth  labor? 

3.  Give  the  story  of  Kandura. 

4.  What  was  the  effect  of  the  mutiny  ? 

5.  Sketch  Mr.  Tolman's  work.     Who  were  the  Mikirs  ? 

6.  What  is  said  of  the  hill  tribes  ? 

7.  Who  baptized  the  first  representatives  from  many  hill  tribes? 

8.  When,  and  by  whom,  and  for  whom,  was  Goalpara  opened? 

9.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Bronson's  work  ? 

10.  W^hat  Wrestern  elements  of  progress  touched  the  Assam 
valley  ? 

11.  What  is  said  of  Maria  Bronson  ? 

12.  What  is  said  of  Mrs.  Scott  ? 

13.  To  what  people  was  Mr.  Clark  inclined  ? 

14.  When  and  wThere  did  he  locate  among  them? 

15.  Who  succeeded  Mr.  Scott  in  the  Mikir  wTork  ? 

16.  What  was  the  story  of  Maria  Bronson's  death  and  burial  ? 

17.  Tell  of  the  closing  years  of  Dr.  Bronson's  life. 

18.  In  what  year  were  Miss  Orrell  Keeler  and  Miss  Anna  Sweet 
sent  to  Assam? 

19.  What  is  zenana  work  as  done  by  our  missionaries? 

20.  For  what  was  1879  notable  ? 

21.  When  was  the  translation  of  the  Assamese  Bible  completed, 
and  by  whom  were  its  parts  done  ? 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  HEADINGS. 

Missionary  Sketches.  Assam  Missions,  Jubilee  Volume.  Our 
Gold  Mine,  pages  296-336.  Korno-siga,  the  Mountain  Chief,  by 
Mrs.  Scott. 

LEAFLETS. 

Maria  Bronson.  The  Hill  Tribes  of  Assam.  Aitie's  Story. 
Humeetra's  Own  Story. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

THE  KOHLS,  NAGAS,  AND  GAROS. 

IN  1876,  a  tribe  about  Sibsagor  began  to  attract  much 
attention.  This  people  were  the  Kohls,  natives  of 
Central  India,  imported  by  thousands  to  work  in  the  tea 
gardens.  Baptisms  among  them  became  frequent,  and  it 
was  evident  that  a  rich  harvest  might  be  gathered.  They 
are  a  race  without  caste.  Mr.  Gurney  gave  them  as 
much  attention  as  he  could,  with  translation  and  the 
Assamese  work.  The  Kohl  interest  at  Sibsagor  con- 
trasted strongly  with  the  stony  apathy  of  the  Assamese. 
In  1884,  Rev.  W.  E.  Witter  and  Rev.  S.  W.  Rivenburg, 
with  their  wives,  came  to  Sibsagor  just  as  Mr.  Gurney 
was  leaving  for  America.  The  Rivenburgs  were  desig- 
nated to  Molung,  in  the  Naga  Hills. 

Mr.  Witter,  new  to  the  field  and  to  the  language,  was 
greatly  troubled  by  the  lack  of  native  preachers.  The 
Kohl  work  was  inspiring,  white  to  harvest.  In  1885> 
Mr.  Gurney  returned,  and  ill  health  drove  the  Witters 
to  the  Hills. 

Some  of  these  Christian  Kohls  have  become  permanent 

settlers  in  Assam.    Their  labor  contracts  having  expired, 

they  purchased  land  and  formed  communities  of  their 
122 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  123 

own.  The  largest  of  these,  fifty  miles  from  Sibsagor,  has 
built  a  neat  bamboo  chapel,  and  their  influence  for  good 
is  gratifying. 

In  1889,  God  sent  a  missionary  for  the  Kohls,  Rev. 
E.  Petrick,  who  had  labored  among  this  tribe  in  Chota 
Nagpur.  He  was  led  to  dissolve  his  connection  with  the 
German  mission,  and  entered  the  service  of  the  Mission- 
ary Union  for  Kohl  work  about  Sibsagor.  Here  was  an 
experienced  missionary,  versed  in  the  Kohl  and  Hindi 
languages,  ready  for  immediate  service.  A  conference 
of  Assam  missionaries,  at  Gauhati,  joyfully  ordained 
Mr.  Petrick,  welcoming  him  as  a  choice  laborer  for  one 
of  Assam's  destitute  fields.  His  work  is  already  rich  in 
results. 

The  Nagas,  among  whom  Mr.  Clark  felt  called  to 
labor,  are  divided  into  many  tribes.  Mission  work  has 
been  prosecuted  among  three  of  them.  Mr.  Clark's 
large  parish  is  among  Ao  Nagas.  A  Christian  village — 
Molang — is  the  central  station.  In  1885,  he  was  joined 
by  the  Rivenburgs,  and  the  first  fruits  of  the  coming 
harvest  were  gathered,  In  1887,  they  were  transferred 
to  another  station,  and  in  1890,  Rev.  F.  W.  Kline  and 
wife  were  sent  to  Molung.  In  1889,  the  church  member- 
ship among  the  Ao  Nagas  was  sixty  souls.  In  1888,  the 
English  flag  floated  over  all  Naga  land,  and  the  Hills 
were  at  last  open  to  the  gospel. 

Rev.  C.  D.  King:  came  to  Assam  in  1878,  married  Miss 


124  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Anna  Sweet,  of  Nowgong,  and  made  several  unsuccessful 
attempts  to  locate  among  the  Angami  Nagas.  This  tribe 
is  the  fiercest  of  all.  In  1879,  following  close  in  the 
wake  of  British  troops,  they  established  themselves  for  a 
while  at  Samaguting,  but  in  a  few  months  were  driven 
to  the  plains  by  a  Naga  uprising.1  An  English  expedi- 
tion punished  the  refractory  Nagas  most  thoroughly,  and 
early  in  1881  he  received  permission  to  go  to  Kohima. 
This  station  is  five  thousand  feet  above  the  sea,  beautiful 
for  situation,  with  a  delightful  climate.  Bravely  adapt- 
ing himself  to  circumstances,  he  began  the  study  of 
Angami.  What  a  work  confronted  him !  The  lan- 
guage, once  acquired,  must  be  reduced  to  writing ;  schools 
organized,  and  school  books  made;  teachers  trained, 
preachers  raised  up  from  future  converts;  hymns  and 
hymn  books  prepared,  beside  tracts  and  Scripture  trans- 
lation. 

The  first  baptisms  were  in  1884.  Mrs.  King  joined 
him  after  a  long  absence  in  America.  The  best  site  in 
the  station  was  secured  for  mission  buildings,  and  the 
work  was  well  under  way  when,  in  1886,  they  were  com- 
pelled to  bid  a  sorrowful  farewell  to  their  beloved  Nagas, 
and  seek  for  health  in  the  home  land. 

The  next  year  the  Rivenburgs  went  from  Molung  to 
Kohima.  Alone  on  the  mountain  peak,  they  are  still 
laboring,  sowing  seed  in  Angami  hearts,  and  trusting 
God  for  the  future  harvest. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  125 

The  story  of  the  Lhota  Naga  mission,  at  Wokha,  is  a 
brief  one.  Rev.  W.  E.  Witter  and  wife  located  here  in 
1886.  A  good  beginning  was  made,  and  hopeful  indica- 
tions were  multiplying,  when  loss  of  health  made  it  im- 
perative for  them  to  return  to  America. 

The  work  among  the  Garos  extends  back  to  1863. 
Previous  to  this,  the  English  Government  had  estab- 
lished some  schools  among  them,  and  to  this  agency  we 
are  indebted  for  the  earliest  native  helpers.  Omed  and 
Eamkhe  were  baptized  by  Dr.  Bronson  in  1863,  and 
from  the  labors  of  these  men  a  large  number  of  conver- 
sions resulted. 

Goalpara  became  a  Garo  station  in  1867,  under 
the  care  of  the  Stoddards.  The  Garo  Hills  were  still 
hostile  country,  and  this  was  the  nearest  Government 
station.  The  first  year  closed  with  a  church  of  forty 
members,  with  a  native  pastor.  In  1872,  Rev,  T.  J.  Keith 
and  wife  were  sent  to  Goalpara,  remaining  for  only  a  brief 
term  of  service.  In  1874,  Rev.  M.  C.  Mason  and  Rev. 
E.  G.  Phillips,  with  their  wives,  came  to  take  up  the 
work  that  Mr.  Stoddard's  broken  health  compelled  him 
to  leave.  The  next  year  the  Garo  churches  were  organ- 
ized into  an  Association.  The  churches  also  pledged 
themselves  to  support  an  evangelist  in  the  Hills.  A 
good  beginning  had  been  made  in  Garo  literature. 

In  1877,  Tura,  a  station  in  the  Garo  Hills,  was  occu- 
pied by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Phillips.     From  this  central  loca- 


126  BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

tion  all  parts  of  the  Garo  Hills  were  accessible.  In  1878, 
the  Goalpara  station  was  abandoned,  Mr.  Mason  remov- 
ing to  Tura. 

Miss  Miriam  Russell  was  welcomed  at  Tura  in  1889. 
A  destructive  fire  swept  away  Mr.  Mason's  bungalow,  just 
finished,  the  school  buildings,  and  nearly  all  the  Garo 
books.  Mrs.  Mason  died  in  America,  in  1882.  The  next 
year  Rev.  C.  E.  Burdette  reached  Tura,  only  to  be  left 
alone  by  the  departure  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Phillips  for 
America.  In  1884,  Mr.  Mason  returned  with  his  second 
wife,  formerly  Mrs.  Arthur,  of  Japan.  But  upon  the 
very  threshold  of  her  work,  God  called  her  to  himself. 

At  Christmastide,  1884,  Miss  Russell  became  Mrs. 
Burdette,  and  they  labored  on  in  the  lonely  mountain 
station.     Later,  they  were  transferred  to  Gauhati. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Phillips  returned  to  Tura  in  1885,  bring- 
ing with  them  Miss  Ella  Bond  and  Miss  Stella  Mason. 
In  1890,  Rev.  W.  Dring  and  wife  were  sent  to  Tura. 

The  Garo  churches  are  learning  the  lesson  of  self- 
support.  Great  prosperity  is  evident  in  church  and 
school  work.  Scriptures  are  in  process  of  translation, 
text  books  are  in  preparation,  and  a  Garo  magazine  has 
been  published  for  several  years. 

Aside  from  the  Hill  tribes,  there  is  little  to  report 
from  Assam  in  these  later  days.  In  1887,  Miss  C.  E. 
Purssell  went  to  Nowgong  to  take  up  the  school  work. 
Miss  Orrell  Keeler,  who  had  for  thirteen  years  noblv 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  127 

carried  the  burden,  was  married  to  Mr.  Mason,  of  Tura, 
and  died  eleven  days  after  her  marriage.  In  1889,  Mr. 
Moore  returned  to  his  work  in  Nowgong  after  a  brief 
absence,  and  shortly  after,  Mr.  Mason  married  Miss 
Nettie  Purssell,  for  some  time  on  the  field.  In  1890, 
Miss  Laura  A.  Amy  was  sent  to  aid  Miss  Purssell  in  the 
school  work,  and  Mr.  Penn  Moore  was  associated  with 
his  brother  at  Nowgong. 

The  thought  that  originated  the  Assam  mission  was 
that  an  entrance  might  be  gained  into  China.  Burma 
lies  just  beyond  the  Hills,  and  our  pioneer  missionaries 
long  cherished  the  hope  of  shaking  bands  with  brethren 
on  the  Burman  frontier.  Now,  in  these  later  days,  the 
way  is  opening.  In  1886,  a  British  force  marching  from 
Kohima  made  its  way  over  the  Hills  into  Upper  Burma. 
A  recent  plan  proposes  to  reach  the  seaboard  from  Upper 
Burma  via  Assam,  by  a  line  of  railway  across  the  Hills, 
to  form  junction  with  another  line  through  the  Assam 
valley  to  the  sea.     Thus  is  the  way  of  the  Lord  prepared. 

The  statistics  for  1891  show  a  stirring  among  this  con- 
servative people.  The  Assamese  have  nine  missionaries 
actively  at  work,  eight  native  preachers,  and  four  hun- 
dred and  sixty-seven  members.  The  Garos  have  eight 
missionaries,  twelve  native  preachers,  and  twelve  hundred 
and  seventy-six  members.  The  Nagas  have  six  mission- 
aries on  the  field,  one  unordained  native  preacher,  and 
seventy-five  members.     The  Kohls,  under  care  of  Mr. 


128  BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

Petrick  and  wife,  have  four  churches,  with  seventy-five 
members  and  sixty-four  baptized,  in  1890. 

The  Assamese  have  almost  unbounded  possibilities 
before  them.  Patient  labor,  done  in  the  name  of  the 
Master,  will  bring  rich  reward. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  is  said  of  the  Kohls? 

2.  What  new  workers  in  1884? 

3.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Witter? 

4.  What  Christian  settlements  were  made  in  Assam  ? 

5.  What  missionary  was  appointed  to  the  Kohl  work?  State 
providential  leading. 

6.  What  is  said  of  the  Nagas  ? 

7.  Describe  Mr.  Clark's  parish,  and  the  station  of  Moiling. 

8.  What  changes  occurred? 

9.  Results  in  1889. 

10.  What  did  the  English  flag  proclaim  in  1888? 

11.  What  is  said  of  the  Angami  Nagas? 

12.  Give  Mr.  King's  experience  among  them. 

13.  Describe  Kohima  in  1881. 

14.  Sketch  the  work  before  Mr.  King,  his  first  baptisms,  and 
the  close  of  his  work. 

15.  What  missionaries  are  now  at  Molung? 

16.  Give  the  story  of  the  Lhota  Naga  Mission. 

17.  Give  the  early  history  of  the  Garo  work. 

18.  Who  were  the  first  Garos  baptized,  and  by  whom? 

19.  What  is  said  of  Goalpara  ? 

20.  What  new  workers  came  in  1874? 

21.  What  important  events  the  next  year? 

22.  Where  is  Tura,  and  when  opened? 

23.  What  subsequent  events  at  Tura? 

24.  What  is  said  of  self-support  among  the  Garos  ? 

25.  What  is  said  of  later  work  on  the  plains? 

26.  Give  the  story  of  Mrs.  Orrell  K.  Mason's  life  and  death. 

27.  What  is  the  present  state  of  the  work  in  Nowgong? 

28.  Describe  the  opening  way  to  the  Burman  frontier. 

29.  Give  statistics  for  1891. 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  HEADINGS. 
Leaflet,  Mrs.  Orrell  Keeler  Mason. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

BEGINNINGS   IN   SIAM. 

BURMA  is  the  home  of  many  races.  The  broad  belt 
of  mountains  that  extend  southeast  from  the  Hima- 
layas to  the  Gulf  of  Siam,  having  Burma  on  the  west, 
with  China,  Annam,  and  Siam  on  the  east,  is  the  home 
of  the  kindred  tribe  called  Tai,  or  Shan.  Siam  is  the 
only  valley  country  inhabited  by  this  people. 

The  divisions  of  the  Shan  family  are  numerous.  Siam 
is  now  the  only  independent  Tai  State,  the  Siamese  living 
in  the  south,  and  the  Laos  in  the  northern  half.  The 
Burmese  Shans  live  on  the  Burman  side  of  the  mount- 
ains, while  the  Chinese  Shans  belong  across  the  border. 

The  languages  and  traditions  of  the  Tai  races  show  a 
Chinese  origin.  The  religion  is  Buddhism,  mingled  with 
demon  worship. 

The  Baptists  established  the  first  mission  among  the 
Shan  races.  In  1833,  Rev.  John  Taylor  Jones  went 
from  Burma  to  Bangkok,  Siam.  The  Burman  mission 
was  an  inspiring  fact,  and  there  was  a  call  to  enlarge  the 
field.  It  was  also  hoped  that  from  Siam,  so  close  to  the 
Chinese  border,  an  entrance  might  be  gained  into  the 
Celestial  Empire. 

I  129 


130  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Bangkok,  the  royal  city,  contained  greater  numbers 
of  Chinese  and  Burmans  than  of  the  native  population. 
Mr.  Jones  was  kindly  received,  and  the  Government 
offered  no  opposition.  The  Siamese  language  was  easy 
of  acquisition,  and  in  a  year  he  issued  a  tract.  In  1834, 
he  began  the  translation  of  the  Old  Testament.  The 
New  Testament  was  completed  in  1843.  Thus  far,  the 
printing  was  done  at  Singapore. 

In  1839,  Mr.  Davenport  was  associated  with  Mr.  Jones, 
and  gave  nine  years  of  faithful  service.  Mr.  Slafter 
came  the  same  year,  but  died  in  1841.  Mrs.  Jones' 
death,  in  1838,  was  a  sad  loss.  Other  laborers  were  sent 
at  varying  intervals,  but  notwithstanding  the  faithful 
work  of  the  missionaries,  scarcely  a  convert  was  gained 
from  among  the  Siamese.  A  deadly  indifference  para- 
lyzed all  efforts  in  their  behalf.  In  consequence  of  this 
fruitlessness,  the  mission  to  the  Siamese  was  suspended  in 
1869. 

Bangkok  had  proved  a  good  point  for  labor  among 
the  Chinese,  and  the  story  of  the  Chinese  mission  begins 
in  this  Siamese  capital. 

For  nearly  twenty  years  the  interest  in  the  Shans 
slumbered.  In  1860,  Rev.  Dr.  Bixby  and  wife  were 
designated  to  the  Burman  Shans.  It  was  not  possible 
to  enter  Shanland  on  account  of  Burman  control  and 
Buddhist  opposition.  Just  at  the  time  the  Bixbys  ar- 
rived, ten  thousand  Shans,  driven  out  by  Burmese  extor- 


BAPTIST    FOKEIGN   MISSIONS.  131 

tion,  settled  ten  miles  from  Toungoo,  under  British  pro- 
tection. Guided  by  such  providential  indications,  the 
missionaries  made  their  headquarters  at  Toungoo,  where 
a  wide  and  effectual  field  was  opened  among  the  exiled 
Shans. 

Fever  showed  the  place  to  be  unhealthy,  and  the  Brit- 
ish Commissioner  removed  them,  forming  several  settle- 
ments close  by  Toungoo.  At  the  end  of  a  year,  Dr. 
Bixby  writes ; 

"  We  could  seem  to  see  God's  hand  leading  the  wan- 
dering Shans  to  our  very  door,  and  to  hear  his  voice 
saying,  '  Take  these  rude  children,  and  train  them  for 
me,  and  I  will  give  thee  thy  wages/  " 

The  next  year,  a  chapel,  costing  one  thousand  dollars, 
was  built  with  funds  raised  in  Burma  and  India.  A  bell 
was  sent  from  America. 

The  work  grew  apace.     Dr.  Bixby  writes,  in  1862  : 

"  If  I  could  divide  myself  into  one  hundred  parts, 
every  part  would,  without  delay,  find  a  place  to  work  in 
a  ripe  harvest  field." 

The  year  1863  witnessed  the  beginning  of  the  harvest. 
Dr.  Bixby 's  heart  was  eager  to  penetrate  Shanland,  but 
the  way  was  still  hedged.  The  people  were  sent  to  him 
in  great  numbers.  Six  young  men  were  under  instruc- 
tion, preparing  to  preach. 

The  studies  in  this  theological  seminary  were  conducted 
on  the  field.     Each  Scripture  lesson,  as  fast  as  learned, 


132  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

was  given  to  the  waiting  people.  The  work  was  blessed 
of  God.  Baptisms  were  frequent.  Constant  emigration 
from  Shanland  widened  the  field  daily.  Dr.  Bixby  was 
constrained  to  send  thrilling  appeals  for  men  and  money 
to  care  for  this  whitening  harvest.  • 

At  last,  in  December,  1863,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Bixby,  with 
native  helpers,  started  on  a  mountain  tour.  As  there 
was  still  war  in  the  Shan  States,  the  attempt  was  a  per- 
ilous one.  Mrs.  Bixby's  journal  abounds  in  thrilling 
adventure.  They  penetrated  beyond  British  boundaries, 
through  wonderful  scenery,  up  and  down  the  steep 
mountain  paths,  when  treachery  in  their  camp  compelled 
them "  to  return.  Later  events  opened  an  easier  route, 
and  tours  in  Shanland  became  a  regular  part  of  the 
season's  work.  Jungle  schools,  under  native  teachers, 
were  put  into  operation. 

In  1866,  a  font  of  Shan  type  was  made  and  sent  to 
Rangoon,  the  gift  of  an  American  friend.  In  1867,  the 
arrival  of  Eev.  J.  N.  and  Mrs.  Cushing,  and  Miss  Gage, 
rejoiced  the  heart  of  the  lonely  laborers.  The  Cushings 
at  once  began  the  study  of  Shan,  a  difficult  task  without 
grammar  or  dictionary.  Miss  Gage  studied  Burman,  the 
language  used  in  the  schools. 

In  December,  Mr.  Cushing  and  Mr.  Rose,  of  the  Bur- 
man  mission,  went  to  Mandalay.  A  royal  order  enabled 
them  to  make  an  extended  tour  in  Central  Shanland, 
west  of  the  Salwen.     The  royal  pass  was  written  on  a 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  133 

narrow  strip  of  palm  leaf,  four  feet  long,  carried  in  a 
bamboo  covered  with  a  red  cloth.  The  sight  of  it  se- 
cured the  respect  of  the  people  Without  it,  the  tour 
could  not  have  been  made.  Tracts  and  portions  of  Script- 
ure were  scattered  all  through  these  remote  provinces, 
seed  whose  harvest  will  appear  in  eternity. 

In  a  tour  taken  with  the  Bixbys,  Miss  Gage  speaks 
of  reaching  a  point  literally  above  the  clouds.  Such  is 
mountain  travel. 

In  1869,  impaired  health  drove  Dr.  Bixby  to  the 
United  States,  leaving  Mrs.  Bixby  in  charge  of  the  Shan 
work  in  Toungoo.  Mr.  Cushing  removed  to  Rangoon, 
to  superintend  Shan  printing.  He  also  found  many 
Shans  in  the  Rangoon  province.  A  church  and  school 
were  soon  tangible  results  of  his  work. 

In  1870,  Mrs.  Bixby  joined  her  husband  in  America, 
and  Miss  Gage  went  to  the  help  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Doug- 
lass at  Bassein.  Matters  looked  dark  for  the  Shan  work 
at  Toungoo.  In  November,  1869,  the  Cushings  made  a 
live  months  tour  in  Shanland,  penetrating  almost  to  the 
boundary  of  China.  A  spirit  of  inquiry  awoke,  but  the 
Burman  commander  of  the  district  suppressed  all  indi- 
cations of  interest  in  the  Christian  religion  with  an  iron 
hand. 

Thus,  in  weariness,  peril,  and  hardship,  was  the  truth 
proclaimed  in  the  mountain  homes  of  the  Shan  and  other 
tribes.    More  might  have  been  done  in  a  time  of  peace. 


134  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

But  the  seed  was  sown  in  God's  name,  and  it  could  not 
fall  to  the  ground  void. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Where  is  the  home  of  the  Shan  tribes? 

2.  Give  the  subdivisions  and  location  of  the  Shan  tribes. 

3.  What  origin  is  evident? 

4.  What  is  their  religion  ? 

5.  Where  is  Bangkok? 

6.  Give  date  and  history  of  the  establishment  of  the  Bangkok 
mission. 

7.  Give  account  of  Mr.  Jones'  work. 

8.  What  helpers  came  in  1839  ? 

9.  When  was  the  mission  suspended,  and  for  what  cause  ? 

10.  Among  what  people  was  work  continued  in  Bangkok? 

11.  When  did  interest  in  the  Shans  revive? 

12.  What  providence  decided  the  Bixbys'  location? 

13.  What  was  Dr.  Bixby's  report  at  the  end  of  the  first  year? 

14.  How  was  the  chapel  built? 

15.  Quote  Dr.  Bixby  in  1862. 

16.  What  is  said  of  the  year  1863? 

17.  How  was  theological  study  conducted,  and  what  was  the 
result  ? 

18.  Give  account  of  first  tour  in  Shanland? 

19.  What  valuable  gift  in  1866  ? 

20.  What  new  arrivals  in  1867  ? 

21.  Why  was  the  mastery  of  the  Shan  language  difficult  ? 

22.  Describe  tour  of  Messrs.  Gushing  and  Rose. 

23.  What  experience  -of  mountain  travel  is  given  by  Miss  Gage? 

24.  What  changes  in  1869  and  70? 

25.  What  tour  did  the  Cushings  make  in  1869  ? 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

Missionarv  Sketches.     Child-life  in  Burma.     Our  Gold  Mine, 
pages  273-292. 

LEAFLETS. 

The  Shan  Mission.     Zania,  the  Heathen  Mother. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

SOWING   AND    REAPING. 

TN  1870,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gushing  returned  to  Toungoo. 
-*-  They  found  a  desolate  station,  the  church  scattered, 
and  only  a  faithful  few  remaining.  Matters  soon  im- 
proved, and  past  labors  bore  their  fruit.  In  November, 
1871,  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  and  a  Shan  grammar  were 
published.  Mr.  Cushing  had  also  a  Shan  dictionary  in 
hand.  Although  in  feeble  health,  he  accomplished 
marvels,  holding  services  for  the  Burmans  as  well  as  the 
Shans. 

Rev.  E.  D.  Kelley  and  wife  came  in  1872.  He  was  a 
born  missionary.  In  nine  months  he  was  able  to  preach 
in  Shan,  and  high  hopes  were  entertained  of  his  future 
usefulness.  But  his  career  was  suddenly  ended.  Going 
with  Mr.  Cushing  into  Shanland,  he  was  drowned  Janu- 
ary 1,  1873.  Far  from  the  home  station,  and  the  wife 
that  loved  him,  his  stricken  companions  buried  him  on 
the  shore  of  a  mountain  lake,  where  his  lonely  grave 
still  tells  of  a  love  that  came  to  save. 

The   next   year,  the  Cushings,  utterly  broken  down, 

returned  to  America,  and  for  years,  adversity  seemed  the 

portion  of  the   Shan  mission.     In  1879,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 

135 


136  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

B.  J.  Mix  came  to  Toungoo,  but  he  fell  in  a  few  months,  a 
victim  of  consumption.  Miss  Rockwood  came  in  1880, 
only  to  die  in  one  short  year. 

The  Cushings  returned  to  Burma  in  1876.  They  had 
permission  to  settle  at  Bhamo,  Upper  Burma,  if  practi- 
cable, expecting  a  missionary  in  the  fall  for  the  Shan 
mission  at  Toungoo.  In  this  they  were  disappinted. 
The  needs  of  Toungoo  were  imperative.  Bhamo  must 
be  held,  or  lost  forever  to  American  Baptists.  So,  in 
heroic  self-sacrifice,  husband  and  wife  separated ;  he  re- 
maining to  hold  the  fort  at  Bhamo,  while  she  hastened 
to  Toungoo  to  read  proof  for  the  printing  of  the  gospels, 
to  oversee  the  native  workers  and  the  schools,  and  to 
gather,  as  far  as  possible,  the  harvest  white  for  the  sickle. 
What  wonder  that  Mr.  Cashing  sent  burning  words  back 
to  America,  words  of  appeal  that  seemed  written  with 
his  heart's  blood ! 

The  Ka  Khyens  had  also  a  share  in  his  anxieties. 
The  relative  position  of  the  two  tribes  in  Upper  Burma 
was  such  that  a  mission  to  the  Shans,  in  the  highest 
degree  successful,  would  be  dependent  on  a  mission  to 
the  Ka  Khyens,  as  the  latter  tribe  lived  between  Bhamo 
and  the  Shan  region  beyond.  Such  a  mission  would 
keep  open  the  routes  to  the  Shan  provinces.  Already 
was  this  new  people  asking  for  the  gospel. 

In  December,  1877,  the  reinforcements  came;  Rev.  J. 
A.  and  Mrs.  Freidav  for  the  Shans,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lvon 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  137 

for  the  Ka  Khyens.  But  in  a  few  short  weeks,  in 
sight  of  the  mountains  where  his  work  lay,  Mr.  Lyon 
died. 

The  vacancy  thus  made  was  filled,  early  in  1879,  by 
the  arrival  of  Rev.  W.  H.  Roberts  and  wife.  The  un- 
settled state  of  the  country  made  mission  work  perilous. 
In  the  face  of  anticipated  trouble,  the  missionaries  held 
their  post,  even  when  warned  that  they  remained  in 
Bhamo  at  the  peril  of  their  lives.  Mrs.  Roberts  died  at 
Rangoon,  in  1880,  rejoicing  that  she  had  been  permitted 
to  come  to  Burma,  even  for  two  brief  years.  Later,  Mr. 
Roberts  married  Miss  Alice  Buel,  of  the  Kemmendine 
school.  The  first  Ka  Khyen  baptism  occurred  March 
19,  1882. 

Mrs.  Cushing  remained  at  Toungoo  until  the  close  of 
1879.  In  January,  the  reunited  husband  and  wife  went 
to  Rangoon  to  oversee  the  printing  of  Shan  religious 
literature.  Dr.  Cushing  wished  to  give  his  time  largely 
to  translation.  Mrs.  Cushing  was  compelled  to  return 
home  the  next  July.  Mrs.  Kelley  returned  to  Burma 
the  same  year,  locating  in  the  Moulin ein-Thatone  dis- 
trict, where  she  gathered  converts  into  a  church,  and 
labored  successfully  until  God  called  her  unto  himself. 
In  1881,  a  significant  event  occurred.  The  old  trade 
route  between  China  and  Burma,  long  closed,  was  re- 
opened, and  caravans  entered  Bhamo  from  China.  Thus 
was  Christ's  way  being  prepared.     In  1882,  a  first  edition 


138  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

of  the  Shan  New  Testament  was  printed,  with  the  expec- 
tation of  future  revision. 

Mr.  Freiday  was  encouraged  in  his  work  in  Bhamo. 
He  secured  a  Karen  preacher  and  his  wife  to  make  their 
headquarters  in  a  Chinese  Shan  village. 

In  September,  1882,  Kev.  J.  E.  Case  came  to  the  long- 
waiting  station  of  Toungoo.  Dr.  Cushing,  weary  and 
worn,  was  abundant  in  labors,  especially  in  translations. 

In  1884,  the  harvest  began  among  the  Shans  at  Bhamo. 
Perilous  times  were  at  hand.  Some  wild  Ka  Khyens, 
rebelling  against  Burman  rule,  attacked  Bhamo,  and  for 
a  time  all  were  in  great  danger.  This  time  success  was 
on  the  side  of  the  Burmans,  and  soon  all  was  quiet  again. 

Suddenly,  on  the  8th  of  December,  Bhamo  was  seized 
by  a  party  of  Chinese  for  revenge.  The  city  was  soon  in 
their  hands.  They  made  an  effort  to  protect  the  mission- 
aries and  their  property,  but  they  could  not  control  the 
plundering  mob.  With  great  difficulty  all  the  mission- 
aries escaped  to  an  English  steamer,  with  the  few  trifles 
they  could  carry.  Being  unable  to  retake  Bhamo,  the 
Burmans  bought  it  back,  and  then  completed  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  mission  building,  save  Mr.  Freiday's  new 
house.  This  was  badly  damaged.  Everything  of  value 
was  stolen  or  destroyed. 

The  next  year,  while  matters  were  yet  in  an  unsettled 
and  dangerous  condition,  Mr.  Roberts  bravely  went  back 
to  Bhamo  to  succor  the  Karen  preachers  left  on  the  Ka 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  139 

Khyen  hills.  But  soon  the  final  issue  between  the  Eng- 
lish and  Burmans  compelled  him  to  leave  until  after 
Upper  Burma  had  been  ceded  to  the  English.  Immedi- 
ately after  the  annexation,  Messrs.  Freiday  and  Eoberts 
were  at  the  front  as  Shan  and  Ka  Khyen  interpreters  to 
the  British  army.  In  a  few  months  Mr.  Freiday  re- 
turned to  America.  Mr.  Eoberts  labored  on  at  Bhamo 
for  six  years,  when  he  was  compelled  to  recruit  at  home. 

The  first  five  months  of  1884  were  spent  by  Dr.  Crush- 
ing with  the  Colquhoun  Exploring  Expedition.  The 
route  was  from  Moulmein  in  British  Burma  to  a  point 
on  the  Cambodia  river  in  Siam.  Much  valuable  knowl- 
edge regarding  the  different  tribes  was  obtained,  and  his 
strength  largely  restored.  On  his  return  he  completed 
the  translation  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  his  strength 
again  failing,  he  visited  the  United  States  for  a  brief 
change,  taking  the  manuscript  with  him  for  revision. 
We  find  him  again  in  Burma  in  1887. 

One  result  of  the  war  was  the  unsettled  relation  of  the 
Shan  provinces  to  the  English  Government.  This  pre- 
vented mission  tours  in  most  parts  of  Shanland.  Toun- 
eoo  had  two  lady  teachers,  Mrs.  Mix  and  Miss  Wilson. 
Dr.  Gushing  paid  monthly  visits  to  administer  the  ordi- 
nances. Miss  Wilson  soon  left  with  broken  health  to 
locate  in  the  cooler  climate  of  Japan. 

Rev.  M.  B.  Kirkpatrick,  M.  D.,  and  wife,  were  sent  to 
the  Shans  at  Toungoo  in  1889.    In  November,  Dr.  Cush- 


140  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

ing  gratefully  records  the  completion  of  the  revision  of 
the  Old  Testament.  In  February,  1890,  Dr.  Cushing 
and  Dr.  Kirkpatrick  selected  the  site  for  a  station  in  the 
interior.  Thibaw  is  one  hundred  and  forty  miles  north- 
east of  Mandalay,  in  the  heart  of  the  Shan  country. 
This  is  the  first  station  in  Shanland  itself. 

In  1890,  W.  C.  Griggs,  M.  D.,  and  wife,  were  sent  to 
Bhamo,  reinforcements  for  the  Shan  mission. 

Other  races  are  found  in  Shanland.  A  great  victory 
awaits  God's  hosts  when  they  arise  in  their  strength  to 
take  possession  of  the  mountains. 

Five  missionaries  are  at  present  on  the  field,  two  of 
them  at  Bhamo.  Dr.  Kirkpatrick  and  wife  had  estab- 
lished themselves  at  Thibaw  in  1891.  As  the  country  is 
now  safe  for  foreigners,  other  stations  will  be  opened  as 
rapidly  as  possible.  Great  and  blessed  results  are 
expected  from  the  Shan  mission  in  the  immediate  future. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  is  said  of  Toungoo  in  1870? 

2.  What  Shan  literature  was  published  in  1871  ? 

3.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Cushing? 

4.  Tell  the  story  of  Mr.  Kelley's  brief  service,  and  the  circum- 
stances of  his  death. 

5.  What  changes  and  losses  in  Toungoo  ? 

6.  Give  reasons  for  the  heroic  separation  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Cushing. 

7.  Why  was  a  mission  to  the  Ka  Khyens  at  Bhamo  imperative  ? 

8.  Name  reinforcements  in  1877. 

9.  Whose  work  was  soon  ended  ? 

10.  What  is  said  of  the  Cushings  ? 

11.  Where  did  Mrs.  Kelley  locate,  and  what  were  the  results  of 
her  work  ? 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  141 

12.  What  significant  event  in  1881  ? 

13.  When  was  the  first  edition  of  the  Shan  New  Testament 
printed  ? 

14.  What  is  said  of  the  work  at  Bhamo? 

15.  What  changes  followed  at  Toungoo  ? 
.16.  Describe  first  attack  on  Bhamo. 

17.  Relate  the  story  of  the  second  attack,  and  its  results. 

18.  What  great  political  change  in  1886? 

19.  With  what  expedition  did  Mr.  Cashing  make  a  tour,  and 
in  what  year  ?     Give  the  facts. 

20.  WThat  great  work  did  he  push  forward  on  his  return? 

21.  Events  on  Mrs.  Kelley's  field. 

22.  Give  one  result  of  the  war,  and  its  relation  to  mission  work. 

23.  Work  and  workers  in  Toungoo  ? 

24.  What  event  in  November,  1889  ? 

25.  What  is  said  of  the  establishment  of  Thibaw  ?    Why  is  it 
notable  ? 

26.  Give  present  condition  of  Shan  mission  work. 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

THE    CHINESE   MISSION   AT   BANGKOK. 

THE  first  Baptist  missionary  endeavor  for  the  Chinese 
was  the  translation  of  the  Bible,  by  Dr.  Marsh- 
man,  of  Serampore.  He  began  the  work  in  1806,  revised 
and  published  it  in  1822. 

The  story  of  American  Baptist  Chinese  missions, 
begins  in  Bangkok,  Siam.  As  China  was  not  yet  open 
to  the  gospel,  a  field  was  sought  among  the  large  Chinese 
population  of  that  city.  Rev.  William  Dean  and  wife 
sailed  in  1834  to  this  work.  Mrs.  Dean  died  in  Singa- 
pore, on  her  way  thither.  In  June,  Mr.  Dean  began  his 
work,  and  in  Decembei*,  three  Chinese  were  baptized, 
and  added  to  the  four  already  baptized  by  Mr.  Jones, 
missionary  to  the  Siamese.  In  1836,  Messrs.  Reed  and 
Shuck,  with  their  wives,  were  designated  to  the  Chinese 
mission.  Mr.  Reed  became  associated  with  Mr.  Dean  at 
Bangkok,  while  Mr.  Shuck  sought  an  opening  at  Macao, 
a  Chinese  port  under  Portuguese  jurisdiction. 

The  new  missionaries  had  brought  a  printing  press  to 

Bangkok,  and  it  was  a  great  aid  to  both  departments  of 

the  mission.     Mr.  Dean  had  a  floating  house  on  the  river, 

and  was   indefatigable   in    his   efforts   for   the  Chinese. 
142 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  143 

For  a  time  all  seemed  prosperous.  Mr.  Eeed  died  in 
1837,  when  just  fitted  for  active  work.  This  was  a  great 
blow.  Mr.  Dean  took  a  sea  voyage  for  his  health,  and 
returned  in  May,  1837.  Mr.  Goddard  and  wife  came  in 
1840,  having  studied  the  language  a  year  in  Singapore. 

A  second  printing  press  was  brought  in  1839,  by  Mr. 
Slafter,  who  was  designated  to  the  Siamese  department. 
He  lived  only  eight  months.  Later,  Mrs.  Slafter  married 
Mr.  Dean,  and  was  an  efficient  helper  in  his  work  for 
many  years.  A  theological  class  was  formed  in  1841  by 
Mr.  Dean.  In  this  the  first  Chinese  preachers  were 
trained.  In  1842,  impaired  health  made  a  change  of 
climate  necessary,  and  the  Deans  joined  the  Hong  Kong 
mission,  where  Mrs.  Dean  died.  Not  until  1864,  was  he 
again  located  at  Bangkok.  Mr.  Goddard  labored  alone 
until  the  coming  of  Mr.  Chandler,  in  1843.  Although  a 
lay  worker,  he  did  much  to  advance  Christ's  cause,  not 
only  by  direct  evangelical  work,  but  by  his  mechanical 
genius,  which  made  him  useful  and  influential  at  court. 

In  1848,  the  Goddards  removed  to  Ningpo,  China,  and 
established  a  mission.  Three  years  later,  Rev.  William 
Ashmore  and  wife  were  sent  to  the  languishing  station  at 
Bangkok,  and  labored  there  seven  years.  We  shall  hear 
of  them  later  at  Swatow. 

The  grace  of  giving  began  to  show  itself.  The  Chi- 
nese converts  supported  a  native  assistant,  and  aided  in 
school  work. 


144  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

A  fire  in  1851  caused  almost  the  total  destruction  of 
mission  property.  This  was,  indeed,  a  heavy  loss.  In 
1854,  Kev.  Kobert  Telford  and  wife  were  sent  to  Bang- 
kok. Ten  years  of  faithful  service,  and  then  Mrs.  Tel- 
ford's health  made  return  to  America  imperative. 

Missionary  records  are  full  of  romance  and  heroism. 
In  August,  1864,  a  young  man,  Kev.  Cyrus  Chilcott, 
came  with  high  and  holy  purpose  to  Bangkok.  Ardent 
and  gifted,  great  hopes  were  centered  in  his  future.  But 
a  mysterious  Providence  ordained  for  him  a  brief  career. 
In  one  year  and  five  days  from  his  coming,  he  was  buried 
in  the  little  mission  cemetery  at  Bangkok. 

Eleven  days  before  his  death,  his  promised  wife,  Miss 
Adele  M.  Fielde,  sailed  to  join  him.  No  wire  of  com- 
munication could  touch  her  in  mid-ocean,  and  the 
crushing  news  met  her  as  she  landed  on  stranger  shores. 
But  she  was  of  heroic  stuff,  as  her  later  life  has  abund- 
antly shown.  Burying  her  sorrow  and  heartbreak,  she 
labored  many  years  for  the  Chinese  in  Bangkok.  Dr. 
Dean  returned,  and  the  two  were  associated  in  work. 

The  years  following  were  of  mingled  hope  and  dis- 
couragement. Dr.  Dean  never  faltered  in  his  conviction 
of  the  vital  importance  of  the  mission  at  Bangkok.  In 
1869,  Rev.  S.  B.  Partridge  and  wife  came  as  helpers.  A 
glad  harvest  was  reaped,  and  two  churches  organized  at 
out-stations. 

This  same  year  the  Siamese  department  of  the  mission 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  145 

was  suspended.  In  1871,  Miss  Fielde  was  transferred  to 
Swatow,  the  scene  of  her  future  service. 

The  question  of  the  continuation  of  the  Chinese  mis- 
sion at  Bangkok  was  raised.  The  promising  openings  in 
the  empire  itself  seemed  the  places  to  put  men  and 
means.  Dr.  Dean  uttered  an  emphatic  protest,  giving 
such  good  reasons  that  he  gained  the  day. 

Mr.  Partridge  was  transferred  a  little  later  to  Swatow, 
whither  Mr.  Ashmore  had  preceded  him,  and  Dr.  Dean 
was  left  to  labor  alone. 

His  faith  was  justified  in  1874.  A  great  awakening 
was  apparent.  The  baptisms  in  two  years  rolled  up  a 
total  of  three  hundred  and  seventeen,  a  marvelous  record 
in  this  slow  moving  land. 

Then  came  the  time  of  reaction.  Dr.  Dean  left  for  a 
brief  change.  He  had  rounded  out  forty  years'  service, 
having  organized  six  Chinese  churches,  built  four  chapels, 
and  baptized  three  hundred  and  thirty-nine  Chinese  dis- 
ciples. Subsequent  years  of  lonely  labor  in  Bangkok, 
uncheered  by  an  associate  missionary,  bear  record  of 
heroic  patience  and  steadfast  endeavor.  Dr.  Dean  had 
the  confidence  of  the  Siamese  kings,  and  received  many 
expressions  of  regard  from  the  royal  palace.  In  1882, 
Mrs.  Dean's  health,  which  had  long  been  feeble,  failed 
utterly,  and  she  sailed  for  America.  Dr.  Dean,  vener- 
able and  weary  with  continuous  service,  remained  to 
shepherd  the  little   flock  in  Siam.     June  21,  1882,  he 


146  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

celebrated  his  seventy-fifth  birthday.  At  an  age  when 
most  men  retire  from  active  labor,  he  was  engaged  in 
preaching,  teaching,  and  translating.  He  was  antici- 
pating Mrs.  Dean's  return,  when  the  news  of  her  death, 
in  January,  1883,  came  with  crushing  weight.  The  king 
of  Siam  sent  him  an  autograph  letter  of  condolence. 

Rev.  L.  A.  Eaton,  the  long  expected  associate,  arrived 
December  15,  1882.  In  two  years,  Dr.  Dean  returned 
home,  after  a  half  century  of  missionary  service.  It  is 
interesting  to  note  his  review  of  his  life.  He  says: 
"  My  life  has  not  been  one  of  self-denial  or  sorrow,  but 
of  high  privilege  and  personal  enjoyment.  In  some  of 
my  darkest  days,  my  friends  have  said  in  sympathy  that 
I  was  a  subject  of  congratulation  rather  than  condolence; 
and  in  view  of  the  whole  experience  of  the  past,  I  may 
indorse  the  sentiment  of  another,  who  said,  'Unto  me, 
who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this  grace 
given,  that  I  should  preach  among  the  Gentiles  the  un- 
searchable riches  of  Christ.' " 

After  Dr.  Dean's  departure,  the  Eatons  were  alone  on 
the  field.  In  1891,  Mrs.  Eaton  died,  and  Mr.  Eaton, 
sorely  bereaved,  returned  to  America  to  bring  his 
motherless  children.  After  placing  them  with  friends, 
he  hopes  to  resume  his  labors  at  Bangkok. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  was  the  first  Baptist  effort  for  the  Chinese  ? 

2.  Describe  the  opening  of  Chinese  mission  work  in  Bangkok. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  147 

3.  Who  was  the  first  missionary,  and  what  early  results  from 
his  work  ? 

4.  Give  further  particulars  of  the  mission. 

5.  When  was  theological  instruction  begun  ? 

6.  When,  where,  and  why  did  the  Deans  remove  ? 
•    7.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Chandler  ? 

8.  In  what  year  did  the  Goddards  remove,  and  where  ? 

9.  When  did  the  Ashmores  reach  Bangkok  ? 

10.  In  what  way  was  the  grace  of  giving  evident? 

11.  Give  later  events. 

12.  Tell  the  story  of  Mr.  Chilcott  and  Miss  Fielde. 

13.  In  what  year  did  Dr.  Dean  return  to  Bangkok ? 

14.  What  new  helpers  and  glad  results  in  18b9  ? 

15.  What  field  was  the  scene  of  Miss  Fielde's  most  successful 
service,  and  when  did  she  enter  it  ? 

16.  Whose  plea  saved  the  Chinese  mission  at  Bangkok? 

17.  What  changes  followed  ? 

18.  Which  were  harvest  years?     Give  results. 

19.  Sketch  Dr.  Dean's  forty  years  of  service. 

20.  What  were  his  relations  to  the  Siamese  kings? 

21.  What  is  said  of  his  later  years  ? 

22.  What  associate  wras  sent,  and  when  ? 

23.  Give  Dr.  Dean's  own  review  of  his  life. 

24.  Give  later  events. 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  HEADINGS. 

Missionary  Sketches.    Eambles  in  Mission  Fields. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

FROM   MACAO   TO  SWATOW. 

rfIHE  first  Baptist  mission  in  China  was  established  at 
-*-  Macao  in  1836,  where  Rev.  J.  L.  Shuck  remained 
three  years.  In  1841,  he  was  associated  with  Rev.  I.  J. 
Roberts.  A  handful  of  sheaves  was  gathered.  War 
between  England  and  China  interrupted  mission  work, 
but  proved  the  lever  which  opened  China  to  the  world. 
The  island  of  Hong  Kong  was  ceded  to  England,  and 
five  ports  opened  for  foreign  residence  and  commerce. 
In  1842,  the  missionaries  went  to  Hong  Kong,  and 
thither  Mr.  Dean  followed,  seeking  health  by  change  of 
location.  Government  gave  ample  grounds  for  the  mis- 
sion, and  two  chapels  were  built  by  foreign  residents. 
Soon  there  was  a  church  of  nine  members. 

In  1843  Mrs.  Dean  died.  She  was  a  woman  of  dis- 
tinguished usefulness.  Mr.  Dean's  special  work  was 
among  the  people  speaking  the  Tie  Chiu  dialect,  and  this 
year  he  formed  them  into  a  Tie  Chiu  church  at  Hong  Kong. 

Another  event  of  the  year  was  a  treaty  between  the 

United  States  and  China,  which  secured  to  Americans  all 

advantages  possessed  by  England,  and  gave  our  missions 

a  recognized  footing  in  the  empire. 
148 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  149 

Mr.  Roberts  soon  removed  to  Canton.  Mr.  Shuck, 
with  Dr.  Devan,  followed  after  the  death  of  his  wife  in 
1844,  organized  a  church,  and  sailed  for  the  United 
States  in  1845,  to  solicit  funds  for  a  chapel.  He  was 
transferred  to  the  service  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Con- 
vention soon  after  its  formation,  and  Mr.  Roberts  a  little 
later.  The  Missionary  Union  gave  over  its  mission  in 
Canton  to  the  Southern  Baptist  Board,  the  latter  pur- 
chasing  the  mission  property. 

In  1867,  there  was  a  church  of  sixteen  members  at 
Hong  Kong.  Two  Chinese  women  were  baptized,  the 
first  in  the  history  of  American  Baptist  missions  in  China. 
The  next  year  Rev.  J.  W.  Johnson  and  wife  were  sent 
out,  and  the  work  made  encouraging  progress.  Tracts 
and  portions  of  Scripture  were  scattered  broadcast.  No 
presses  are  used  in  China,  as  printing  is  done  more 
cheaply  by  natives  on  wooden  blocks. 

There  are  many  hindrances  to  mission  work.  Opium 
eating  is  one  of  the  worst,  destroying  body,  soul,  and 
mind.  Buddhism  makes  a  desperate  fight  against  Chris- 
tianity, for  it  knows  that  its  days  are  numbered. 

The  condition  of  woman  in  China  is  not  one  of  abso- 
lute degradation,  but  it  is  pitifully  below  that  in  a  Chris- 
tian country.  It  is  the  mothers  who  perpetuate  idolatry. 
When  they  know  a  Saviour's  love,  China  will  be  won  for 
Christ. 

In  this  light,  the  first  school  for  girls,  established  in 


150  BAPTIST  FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

1852  by  the  wife  of  a  native  preacher,  was  a  significant 
event.  The  training  of  converted  Chinese  women  for 
evangelical  work,  has  developed  a  mighty  force  in  the 
empire. 

Persecution  appeared.  The  converts  suffered  for  the 
faith,  and  became  more  intense  in  their  devotion.  Threat- 
ened hostilities  between  England  and  China  confined  the 
work  for  a  time  to  the  island  of  Hong  Kong. 

After  the  settlement  of  difficulties,  a  wider  field  opened. 
Swatow,  on  the  mainland,  offered  grand  opportunities  for 
work  among  Tie  Chiu  population.  Mr.  Ashmore,  re- 
moving from  Bangkok  in  1858,  assumed  charge  of  this 
new  station.  Swatow  became  an  open  port  in  1861,  and 
on  account  of  its  superior  advantages  for  reaching  the 
people,  it  was  made  the  headquarters  of  the  Southern 
China  mission,  and  Hong  Kong  reduced  to  an  out  station. 
As  foreigners  could  not  yet  live  in  the  city,  the  mission- 
ary residences  were  on  Double  Island,  five  minutes'  sail 
from  Swatow. 

In  three  years  the  English  and  American  offices  were 
removed  to  the  mainland,  and  it  was  necessary  for  the 
mission  to  follow,  for  the  sake  of  protection.  It  was  also 
nearer  the  people.  In  spite  of  opposition,  there  was 
steady  advance  into  the  interior.  The  first  Chinese 
preachers  were  ordained  in  1867,  and  stationed  as  pas- 
tors over  native  churches.  Liberal  giving  was  a  grati- 
fying indication  of  Christian  grace. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  151 

Iii  1867,  the  Johnsons  left  Swatow  in  broken  health. 
A  special  training  class  for  preachers  was  begun,  and  bore 
fruit  in  the  increased  efficiency  of  the  native  helpers. 

Growth  in  grace  was  evident  among  the  Chinese  Chris- 
tians. In  1870,  they  assumed  the  support  of  two  of  their 
number,  selecting  the  station,  hiring  the  house,  and  meet- 
ing nearly  the  entire  expense. 

In  1871,  the  Johnsons  were  welcomed  back  to  Swatow, 
and  Miss  Fielde  transferred  from  Bangkok.  A  little 
later,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Partridge  also  came  from  Bangkok. 
In  1872,  Mr.  Johnson  died,  after  completing  twenty-five 
years  faithful  service.  His  wife  remained  to  carry  on 
her  successful  work  among  Chinese  girls,  six  out  of 
fifteen  being  baptized  this  year. 

Bible  women  begin  to  appear  in  the  records.  One 
missionary  writes : 

"  The  difficulty  of  training  Chinese  women  for  evan- 
gelists among  their  own  sex  is  very  great,  because  of 
their  social  disability,  and  the  fact  that  scarcely  any  of 
them  know  how  to  read  well.  But  if  China  is  to  be 
saved,  this  work  must  be  done,  for  only  women  can  freely 
teach  women  here,  and  as  in  happier  countries,  woman 
is  the  power  behind  the  throne." 

Miss  Fielde  found  her  special  work  in  training  these 
Bible  women,  and  sending  them  out  into  the  neighboring 
villages.  In  1873,  she  built  cottages  in  different  towns 
to  accommodate  her  Bible  women  while  at  their  work, 


152  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

and  affording  a  home  for  herself  when  on  her  tours  of 
superintendence.  A  building  for  the  theological  class 
was  erected  in  Swatow  this  year,  Mr.  Ashmore  and  Mr. 
Partridge  dividing  the  instruction.  Miss  Fielde  prepared 
an  outline  of  the  gospel  story  in  simple  language  for  her 
Bible  women  to  scatter  among  the  villages. 

At  Mrs.  Johnson's  departure,  the  girls'  school  fell  into 
the  hands  of  Mrs.  Partridge.  The  Chinese  Christians 
themselves  organized  a  school  in  Swatow  for  their  chil- 
dren, employing  a  Christian  teacher. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  McKibben  joined  the  mission  in  1875. 
Persecution  tested  the  strength  of  the  converts,  and  a 
spirit  of  inquiry  was  abroad.  In  1876,  Miss  Sophia  A. 
Norwood  and  Mary  E.  Thompson  were  added  to  the 
mission.  Twenty  Bible  women  were  at  work  this  year, 
and  fourteen  native  preachers. 

The  year  1876  was  one  of  great  spiritual  blessing.  One 
hundred  and  sixty-nine  were  baptized,  and  the  churches 
grew  in  grace  and  strength.     Miss  Fielde  writes : 

"  For  five  years  God  has  answered  my  prayers  directly 
and  exactly  in  every  item  of  work  I  have  laid  before 
him."  A  boys'  school  at  Swatow  was  also  under  the  care 
of  this  busy  woman. 

Dr.  Caroline  H.  Daniels  was  a  glad  Christmas  gift  to 
the  mission,  in  December,  1878,  the  first  medical  lady 
missionary  at  Swatow.  This  year,  a  new  requirement 
came  into  force  in  the  girls'  school,  now  in  charge  of 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  153 

Miss  Norwood.  Parents  were  required  to  give  a  bond 
that  their  daughters'  feet  should  not  be  bound,  and  that 
they  should  not  be  betrothed  to  heathen.  This  was  a 
great  step  in  advance. 

In  1879,  there  were  in  the  Southern  China  mission, 
with  headquarters  at  Swatow,  twenty-six  out  stations. 
Fourteen  native  helpers  were  constantly  employed  in 
cariag  for  these  scattered  flocks,  and  in  evangelizing 
work.  There  were  also  volunteer  helpers,  who  supported 
themselves. 

Miss  Fielde  gives  many  vivid  word-pictures  of  her 
Bible  women.  Varying  ages  are  represented,  from  the 
young  women,  to  those  who  can  only  plod  through  their 
lesson  by  the  aid  of  the  strongest  spectacles.  The  diver- 
sity of  character  and  gifts  is  often  amusing. 

Miss  Thompson  spent  much  time  touring  with  her 
Bible  women  in  the  outlying  districts.  Miss  Norwood 
was  partially  engaged  in  teaching,  but  found  time  for 
occasional  tours.  Mr.  Ashmore,  assisted  by  Miss  Fielde, 
was  making  a  colloquial  translation  of  the  Scriptures,  in 
addition  to  theological  instruction,  country  tours,  and  the 
care  of  the  Swatow  Sunday  services. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Where  and  what  is  Macao  ? 

2.  Who  was  the  first  Baptist  missionary  in  China? 

3.  Who  the  later  associate  ? 

4.  What  was  the  result  of  war  between  England  and  China  ? 

5.  Which  were  the  first  five  open  ports? 


154  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

6.  Which  of  these  became  the  location  of  the  mission,  and  in 
what  year  ? 

7.  What  missionaries  were  at  Hong  Kong,  and  what  were  the 
early  results? 

8.  What  is  said  of  Mrs.  Dean  ? 

9.  What  was  Mr.  Dean's  special  work  ? 

10.  What  political  event  in  1843,  and  its  relation  to  the  work  ? 

11.  What  later  changes  ? 

12.  What  Society  took  the  work  at  Cantpn? 

13.  When  were  the  first  Chinese  women  baptized  ? 

14.  What  new  helpers  the  next  year  ? 

15.  Why  are  not  printing  presses  used  in  China  ? 

16.  What  is  said  of  opium  eating  ? 

17.  What  of  Buddhism  ? 

18.  What  is  the  condition  of  women  in  China  ? 

19.  Why  was  the  first  girls'  school  significant?    When  and  by 
whom  established  ? 

20.  What  was  the  result  of  persecution  ? 

21.  Where  is  Hong  Kong  ? 

22.  What  new  station,  and  where  situated  ? 

23.  Who  was  missionary  in  charge  ? 

24.  What  is  said  of  Swatow  ? 

25.  Where  were  the  missionary  residences  for  a  time  ? 

26.  When  were  they  removed  to  the  mainland  ? 

27.  When  was  the  first  ordination  of  Chinese  preachers? 

28.  What  attempt  at  theological  instruction  ? 

29.  What  evidences  of  growth  in  1870  ? 

30.  Give  increase  of  mission  force  in  1871. 

31.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Johnson  ? 

32.  What  was  Mrs.  Johnson's  special  work  ? 

33.  What  is  said  of  the  difficulty  and  necessity  of  having  trained 
native  Christian  women  as  helpers  ? 

34.  Describe  Miss  Fielde's  special  work  among  Bible  women. 

35.  Who  assumed  charge  of  theological  instruction  in  1873  ? 

36.  What  of  the  girls'  schools  ? 

37.  What  new  helpers  in  1875  ? 

38.  How  many  Bible  women  and  native  preachers  ? 

39.  What  glad  results  in  1876  ? 

40.  Give  Miss  Fielde's  testimony. 

41.  What  Christmas  gift  in  1878? 

42.  State  new  requirements  in  girls'  school. 

43.  Describe  foot  binding. 

44.  Give  betrothal  customs. 

45.  Summary  of  work  in  1879. 

46.  What  is  said  of  Bible  women  ? 

47.  What  was  Mr.  Ashmore's  work  ? 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  155 

SUPPLEMENTAEY  HEADINGS. 

Missionary  Sketches.  In  the  Far  East,  by  Miss  Geraldine 
Guinness.     Pagoda  Shadows,  by  Miss  Fielde. 

LEAFLETS. 

AVomen  in  China.  Silver  Flower.  Infanticide  in  China.  Out 
of  the  Depths.  Sister  Yong's  Family.  In  Boats,  Carts,  Homes, 
and  Hearts  in  China.     Glimpses  into  Chinese  Homes. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

RESULTS. 

TN  May,  1880,  Miss  Fielde  gives  this  glimpse  of  her 
■*-     work : 

"  All  the  Bible  women  came  in,  April  1st,  for  a  months 
course  of  study.  Two  women  are  assisting  in  teaching, 
eighteen  are  studying  Genesis,  and  thirteen  are  learning 
to  read.  I  teach  them  for  two  and  a  half  hours  each 
morning.  Miss  Norwood  hears  the  beginners,  and  Dr. 
Ashmore  gives  them  all  a  half-hour's  exposition  of  doc- 
trine daily." 

Miss  Norwood  adds  this  personal  description : 

"A  strange-looking  assembly  they  surely  are.  The 
most  of  them  are  browned  and  sun-burned,  nearly  all 
are  wrinkled,  more  from  hardship  than  old  age ;  but  all 
have  that  in  their  faces  that  makes  them  different  from 
any  similar  company  of  heathen  women ;  a  something 
that  is  peculiar  to  the  faces  of  those  whose  names  are 
written  in  the  Book  of  Life." 

This  same  year  the  Partridges  returned  to  Swatow, 

after  a  brief  furlough.     Be  v.  William  Ashmore,  Jr.,  and 

wife  joined  the  mission.     He  soon  relieved  Miss  Fielde 

of  the  care  of  the  boys'  school.     Dr.  Ashmore  was  griev- 
156 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  157 

ously  afflicted  by  disease  of  the  eyes,  laying  him  aside 
from  active  service  for  more  than  three  years.  Yet, 
even  in  his  semi-blindness,  he  continued  to  do  much  val- 
uable work. 

The  colloquial  versions  were  a  great  aid  in  imparting 
Scripture  knowledge.  The  book  language  of  China  is 
understood  only  by  scholars.  The  fixed  sounds  of  the 
Chinese  tongue,  translated  into  the  language  of  common 
speech,  were  used,  so  that  a  precise  meaning  was  secured 
for  every  sentence  in  Scripture  in  a  form  understood  by 
all.  Such  a  version  also  secures  us  a  form  of  written  Chi- 
nese, which  almost  every  one,  old  or  young,  can  be  taught 
to  read. 

The  Tie  Chiu  population,  the  object  of  the  Swatow 
mission,  occupies  the  plains  near  the  sea  coast.  In  the 
hill  country,  back  from  the  sea,  are  the  Highlanders  of 
China,  the  Hak-ka  people,  with  a  different  dialect.  Gos- 
pel work  was  begun  among  them  by  a  Hak-ka  convert. 
In  May,  1881,  Mr.  McKibben  made  a  tour  in  this  region. 
He  found  a  beautiful,  fertile  country,  with  striking 
scenery.  The  people  were  more  cleanly  and  thrifty  than 
in  the  lowlands.  The  Hak-ka  women  seemed  like  a  dif- 
ferent race.  Foot  binding  was  unknown,  and  they  were 
bright,  strong  faced,  and  intelligent  Near  the  borders 
the  people  were  asking  for  the  gospel.  The  result  of  this 
tour  was  that  the  McKibbens  and  Miss  Thompson,  having 
learned  the  Hak-ka  language,  removed  in  1882  to  Mun 


158  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Keu  Liang,  to  take  up  regular  work  among  the  Hak-kas. 
Here  they  remained  the  greater  part  of  the  year,  return- 
ing to  Swatow  during  the  unhealthful  months. 

Miss  C.  H.  Daniels,  M.  D.,  had  passed  through  a  se- 
vere experience  in  becoming  acclimated.  While  learning 
the  language,  she  did  not  seek  general  medical  work. 
When  she  was  ready  for  it,  she  found  her  hands  more 
than  full  with  the  physical  needs  surrounding  her.  In 
giving  bodily  aid,  many  opportunities  occurred  for  soul 
aid  as  well. 

Mrs.  Partridge  died  January  31,  1882.  Hardly  a 
year  had  passed  since  she  returned  to  her  work  in  China. 
It  was  a  sudden  and  severe  blow  to  the  mission.  Dr. 
Daniels  opened  her  hospital,  and  cared  for  over  one 
thousand  patients  during  the  year.  Miss  Fielde  was 
compelled  to  take  a  vacation,  after  years  of  continuous 
service.  After  superintending  the  printing  of  her 
Swatow  Dictionary  at  Shanghai,  she  sailed  for  the 
United  States. 

In  1884,  Dr.  Ashmore's  recovered  eyesight,  after  a 
trip  to  the  cooler  climate  of  Japan,  is  gratefully  noted. 
Dr.  Daniels'  hospital  work  was  remarkably  successful. 
One  Bible  woman  gave  her  entire  time  to  work  among 
the  patients. 

Many  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  were  now 
in  colloquial  form,  and  thus  accessible  to  the  common 
people.     The  Bible  women  use  no  other  in  their  work. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  159 

Mr.  Partridge,  after  a  brief  absence,  returned  with  a 
wife.  They  were  accompanied  by  Miss  Minnie  Buzzell, 
Oregon's  gift  to  China. 

*  Stormy  times  were  at  hand.  War  between  France 
and  China  intensified  the  hatred  against  all  foreigners, 
and  stirred  up  the  disturbing  element  among  the  people. 
Mobs  do  not  make .  nice  distinctions,  and  while  the  osten- 
sible intention  was  to  drive  out  the  Eoman  Catholics 
with  their  French  priests,  all  the  missionaries  and  con- 
verts were  in  danger.  There  was  a  strong  desire  to 
sweep  all  foreigners  from  the  Empire.  British  gunboats 
reminded  the  magistrates  of  treaty  obligations,  and  be- 
yond the  destruction  of  a  few  chapels,  no  great  hurt  was 
permitted. 

After  the  excitement  had  died  away,  in  1885,  Miss 
Thompson  went  once  more  to  Mun  Keu  Liang,  among 
her  beloved  Hak-kas.  The  McKibbens  had  gone  to 
America,  so  she  was  alone ;  but  not  alone,  for  God  was 
with  her. 

The  Swatow  missionaries  were  very  busy.  A  typhoon 
had  wrecked  all  the  missionary  boats,  and  new  ones  must 
be  built.  New  chapels  must  take  the  place  of  those 
destroyed.  All  this,  in  addition  to  the  labors  pressing 
hard  on  every  hand.  Miss  Norwood,  so  faithful  and 
successful,  married  Dr.  Lyle,  of  the  Presbyterian  Hospital. 
Mrs.  Ashmore's  failing  health  compelled  their  return  to 
America  this  same  year.     She  died  in  September.     Dr. 


160  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Daniels'  strength  also  failed  under  her  heavy  burdens, 
and  she  too  left  for  home.  In  1886,  Miss  Thompson 
sorrowfully  bade  farewell  to  China,  leaving  the  Hak-ka 
work  without  a  missionary.  In  October,  Miss  Fielde 
returned,  after  three  and  a  half  year's  absence.  Christmas 
Day,  Miss  Clara  M.  Hess  reached  Swatow,  joyfully  wel- 
comed by  Miss  Buzzell.  But  their  anticipations  of  work 
together  were  blasted  by  Miss  BuzzelPs  sudden  illness, 
and  her  enforced  return.  The  next  year,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Wm.  Ashmore,  Jr.,  came  home. 

The  missionaries  for  the  Hak-kas,  Rev.  George  Camp- 
bell and  wife,  arrived  late  in  1887,  also  Rev.  J.  M.  Fos- 
ter, designated  to  Swatow.  He  married  Miss  Hess  in 
1889.  Dr.  Ashmore  returned  to  Swatow  to  attend  to 
some  necessary  matters,  prior  to  assuming  his  work  as 
Home  Secretary  of  the  Missionary  Union.  Early  in 
1889,  Rev.  J.  S.  Norvell  and  wife  were  sent  to  the 
Hak-kas. 

The  medical  work  so  efficiently  begun  by  Miss  Daniels, 
M.  D.,  was  taken  up  this  year  by  Dr.  A.  K.  Scott,  formerly, 
,with  her  lamented  husband,  located  in  Assam.  No  longer 
needed  by  her  children,  she  devoted  herself  anew  to 
missionary  work,  leaving  a  lucrative  practice  in  Cleve- 
land, Ohio,  to  care  for  bodies  and  souls  in  China. 

Dr.  Ashmore  did  a  grand  but  brief  work  in  America. 
His  heart  was  in  China,  and  soon  we  find  him  back  on 
the  field,  with  the  added  responsibility  of  looking  after 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  161 

missionary  interests  in  Japan,  in  behalf  of  the  Executive 
Committee.  He  reached  Swatow  in  time  to  bid  farewell 
to  the  Partridges  and  to  Miss  Fielde.  He  writes:  "Miss 
Fielde  is  packed,  and  all  ready  to  depart.  She  came  out 
to  the  mission  field  about  twenty-three  years  ago,  to  join 
a  devoted  young  man  to  whom  she  had  been  engaged, 
but  on  her  arrival  found  herself  plunged  in  a  tremendous 
grief.  She  decided  to  remain  and  take  up  work  as  best 
she  could,  but  Siam  is  not  a  good  place  for  work  among 
Chinese  women.  When  she  came  to  Swatow,  she  found 
a  vast  and  open  field  in  which  she  could  reach  the  women 
of  China.  She  began  to  organize  that  splendid  addition 
to  the  main  work,  known  as  Bible- woman's  work.  She 
picked  out  and  trained  a  company  of  them,  and  directed 
them  with  marvelous  grip.  But  now  she  has  to  go.  She 
can  no  longer  live  in  a  hot  climate.  Indeed,  for  the  past 
two  years  she  has  not  been  able  to  encounter  the  hardship 
of  country  work  that  once  only  put  an  edge  on  her 
splendid  powers  of  endurance.  Eare  qualities  of  body, 
mind,  and  heart  have  been  laid  by  her,  with  unselfish 
devotion,  on  the  altar  of  service  for  the  women  of  China. 
To-morrow,  Miss  Fielde  will  take  her  leave  forever  of 
these  granite  hills,  these  clinging  Bible  women,  and  these 
churchless  multitudes." 

On  September  4,  1890,  Dr.  Ashmore  married  Mrs.  L. 
A.  Brown,  of  Japan,  widow  of  Dr.  Nathan  Brown,  of 
blessed  memory.     Dr.  Scott  welcomed  her  daughter,  Miss 


162  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Mary  K.  Scott,  also  Miss  Dunwiddie,  to  the  work  in 
Swatow.  The  reinforcements  were  larger  than  in  any 
previous  year.  Mrs.  Scott's  medical  work,  in  the  report 
for  1891,  shows  most  gratifying  results.  A  new  station 
was  opened  at  Kayin,  in  the  Hak-ka  country,  under 
charge  of  Kev.  George  Campbell  and  wife  and  Miss  Ella 
Campbell. 

The  signs  of  the  times  are  significant  in  China.  Slow 
and  conservative,  she  will  yet  be  the  power  that  shall 
influence  Asia  for  Christ. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Give  Miss  Fielde's  glimpse  of  her  work. 

2.  Miss  Norwood's  personal  description  ? 

3.  What  addition  to  the  mission  force  in  1880? 

4.  How  was  Dr.  Ashmore  afflicted  ? 

5.  What  is  said  of  the  colloquial  version  ? 

6.  Where  is  the  Tie  Chiu  population  found  ? 

7.  What  is  said  of  the  Hak-kas  ? 

8.  Describe  Dr.  McKibben's  tour  in  1881. 

9.  What  was  its  result? 

10.  Give  facts  regarding  Dr.  Daniels  and  the  medical  work. 

11.  What  great  loss  did  the  mission  sustain  in  1882  ? 

12.  What  encouragements  in  1884? 

13.  Who  was  Oregon's  gift  to  China  ? 

14.  What  hindrances  arose  from  the  war  between  France  and 
China? 

15.  What  special  labor  resulted  for  the  missionaries  ? 

1 6.  What  loss  of  workers  ? 

17.  What  reinforcements  in  1887  ? 

18.  What  work  in  America  awaited  Dr.  Ashmore  ? 

19.  Bv  whom  and  when  was  the  medical  work  re-opened  ? 

20.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Scott  ? 

21.  What  drove  Dr.  Ashmore  back  to  China?  What  added 
responsibility  had  been  given  him  ? 

22.  Give  his  review  of  Miss  Fielde's  work. 

23.  Describe  later  events. 

24.  What  new  Hak-ka  station  was  opened,  and  by  whom  ? 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

THE   SOUTHERN   BAPTIST   MISSION   IN   CANTON. 

TN  1845,  Messrs.  J.  L.  Shuck  and  T.  T.  Devan  removed 
-■-  to  Canton,  and  organized  the  First  Baptist  Church. 
In  1846,  Mr.  Shuck  visited  the  United  States,  accom- 
panied by  Yong,  a  Chinese  preacher,  with  whom  he 
canvassed  the  South  for  funds  to  build  a  chapel  at 
Canton.  No  religion  is  respected  by  the  Chinese  that 
is  not  represented  by  a  public  building.  His  addresses, 
and  those  of  Yong,  aroused  great  enthusiasm. 

The  Southern  Baptist  Convention  had  been  organized 
in  1845,  and  Messrs.  Shuck  and  Eoberts  became  its 
missionaries.  In  June,  1846,  Messrs.  Clopton  and 
Pearcy,  with  their  wives,  were  designated  to  Canton,  the 
first  appointed  missionaries  of  the  Southern  Board. 
Messrs.  Tobey  and  Yates  were  set  apart  to  open  a  mission 
at  Shanghai,  and  Mr.  Shuck  was  transferred  thither  to 
aid  in  establishing  the  new  station.  The  chapel  fund  of 
five  thousand  dollars,  which  he  had  collected,  was  trans- 
ferred with  him  to  Shanghai. 

In   1847,  Mr.  Clopton   died,  and   Mrs.  Clopton   and 

child  returned  to  America.     A  chapel  was  erected  at 

Canton  with  funds  contributed  by  foreign  residents.    Dr. 

163 


164  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Devan  retired  from  Canton,  and  the  Missionary  Union 
surrendered  the  field  to  the  Southern  Board,  the  latter 
society  purchasing  the  mission  property. 

The  mutterings  of  war  between  England  and  China 
had  sadly  interrupted  the  work,  but  peace  was  restored 
the  year  of  Mr.  Clopton's  death.  Mr.  Pearey's  health 
failed  rapidly,  and  in  1848  he  was  transferred  to  the 
higher  latitude  of  Shanghai.  He  retired  from  the 
mission  in  1855. 

Rev.  Francis  Johnson  was  appointed  in  1846,  as 
"  Theological  Tutor  and  Missionary "  to  China.  He 
was  distinguished  for  linguistic  ability.  Failing  health 
compelled  him  to  return  in  1849. 

Miss  Harriet  Baker  reached  Canton  in  1850,  the  first 
single  lady  missionary  appointed  by  the  board.  Her 
especial  work  was  the  care  of  a  girls'  school.  Her 
appointment  was  considered  a  doubtful  experiment. 
Unfortunate  events  connected  with  the  mission,  and  Miss 
Baker's  early  failure  of  health,  causing  her  to  return  in 
1854,  did  not  bring  this  new  policy  into  favor.  Later 
years  have  proved  the  inestimable  value  of  woman's 
work  abroad,  accomplishing  what  man  alone  could  never 
do. 

Rev.  "W.  B.  Whilden  and  wife  were  designated  to 
Canton  in  1848.  It  was  the  prayers  of  his  wife  that 
led  him  to  be  a  missionary.  This  devoted  woman  went 
to  her  heavenly  rest   in  1850.     Mr.  Whilden  took  his 


BAPTIST   FOKEIGN   MISSIONS.  165 

motherless  children  to  America,  and  Mr.  Roberts  being 
also  absent,  Mrs.  Roberts  and  Miss  Baker  were  for  a 
time  in  sole  charge,  aided  by  native  assistants. 

.  Mr.  Roberts,  although  zealous,  was  not  a  prudent  mis- 
sionary. His  connection  with  the  Board  ceased  in  1851. 
He  continued,  however,  an  independent  work. 

There  were  now  two  chapels  in  Canton.  Mr.  Whilden 
returned  in  1853,  with  a  second  wife,  and  labored  faith- 
fully and  successfully  until  1855,  when  his  wife's  partial 
blindness  caused  a  reluctant  farewell  to  China. 

In  1854,  Rev.  C.  W.  Gaillard  and  wife  came  to  the 
almost  deserted  field.  Yong  was  of  untold  value  as 
their  assistant.  Reinforcements  were  pleaded  for,  again 
and  again,  and  in  1856,  Rev.  R.  H.  Graves,  M.  D.,  and 
wife,  were  sent  to  his  aid.  War  again  interrupted  mis- 
sionary effort,  and  Canton  was  abandoned  for  a  time. 

Work  was  resumed  in  1858.  In  1860,  signs  of  pros- 
perity appeared,  and  a  harvest  began,  there  being  bap- 
tisms nearly  every  month  in  the  year.  The  war  at  home 
also  compelled  retrenchment,  and  Mr.  Gaillard  writes : 
"  If  necessity  compels  you  to  call  home  any  of  the  mis- 
sionaries, I  beg  that  I  may  be  the  last.  I  have  no  desire 
and  no  idea  of  ever  seeing  America ;  and  when  I  go  to 
heaven,  I  want  a  whole  army  of  these  people  to  go  with 
me." 

He  never  saw  America  again.  In  July,  1862,  he  was 
killed  in  a  terrible  typhoon,  under  the  falling  timbers  of 


166  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

his  house.     In  1863,  Mrs.  Gaillard  married  Dr.  Graves, 
but  in  another  short  year  her  earthly  work  was  ended. 

Rev.  John  Griffith  Schilling  and  wife  labored  in 
Canton  from  1860  to  1864.  The  civil  war  in  America 
compelling  severe  retrenchment,  the  missionaries  reduced 
their  salaries  one-fifth,  while  the  pay  of  the  native 
helpers  was  reduced  one-tenth. 

After  Mr.  Schilling's  departure,  Dr.  Graves  was  the 
only  American  missionary,  assisted  by  Yong,  and  Wong 
Mui,  the  "Luther  of  the  Chinese  Christians."  In  1866, 
Dr.  Graves  had  eight  assistants,  by  whose  aid  the  gospel 
was  carried  far  into  the  interior.  In  a  single  year,  this 
indefatigable  missionary  traveled  sixteen  hundred  miles 
on  Chinese  boats,  and  distributed  nine  thousand  six 
hundred  and  fifty-eight  tracts.  His  literary  labors  were 
also  abundant,  and  the  calls  upon  his  medical  skill 
continual. 

In  1868,  the  Board  urged  him  to  return  to  Maryland, 
and  recruit  his  failing  health.  But  he  would  not  then 
leave  his  beloved  work,  with  a  chapel  just  begun.  Two 
years  later,  after  thirteen  years  of  exhaustive  and  contin- 
uous toil,  he  sailed  for  home,  occupying  the  most  of  his 
vacation  with  labor  for  the  Chinese  in  California. 

Rev.  E.  Z.  Simmons  and  wife  began  work  in  Canton  in 
1871.  There  were  now  four  churches  in  the  city  and 
vicinity,  and  one  hundred  and  thirty-five  church  mem- 
bers.    In  1874,  Mrs.  Simmons'  illness  drove  them  from 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  167 

China.  Full  of  missionary  zeal,  they  labored  in  San 
Francisco  for  the  Chinese  until  1880,  when  they  returned 
to  Canton,  accompanied  by  Miss  Sallie  Stein. 

•In  1872,  Dr.  Simmons  returned  to  China  with  a  large 
missionary  party,  among  whom  were  the  two  daughters 
of  the  sainted  Mrs.  Whilden,  whose  dying  prayer  had 
been  that  her  children  might  "  spend  and  be  spent  for 
the  heathen."  One  was  married,  and  went  out  with  her 
husband,  Kev.  N.  B.  Williams ;  the  other,  Miss  Lulu 
Whilden,  also  consecrated  her  young  life  to  her  mother's 
work.  Mrs.  Williams'  health  compelled  the  return  of 
herself  and  husband  in  1876. 

Dr.  Graves,  again  blessed  with  a  devoted  wife,  resumed 
work  with  his  old  energy,  training  native  preachers,  per- 
forming literary  labor,  meeting  the  heavy  demands  of 
medical  work,  besides  general  superintendence  of  the 
mission. 

In  1880,  there  was,  for  the  first  time,  a  mission  house 
in  Canton.  Dr.  Graves  reported  seventy-nine  baptisms, 
and  in  1881  there  was  a  church  membership  of  three 
hundred  and  fifty-seven. 

In  1884,  Rev.  F.  C.  Hickson  and  wife,  and  Miss  Emma 
Young  were  added  to  the  missionary  force.  The  next 
year,  the  French-Chinese  war  caused  great  distress  and 
hindrance.  Some  chapels  and  schoolhouses  were  de- 
stroyed. In  1886,  fearful  floods  devastated  the  country ; 
but  in  sorrow  and  loss  the  work  prospered.     The  native 


168  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Christians  gave  nobly  to  rebuild  their  ruined  chapels 
Four  hundred  dollars  being  also  sent  by  Canton  Chris- 
tians to  America. 

Yong,  connected  with  the  mission  since  1845,  and  sup- 
ported by  the  Ladies'  Missionary  Society  of  the  First 
Baptist  Church  of  Richmond,  Virginia,  fell  asleep  in 
Jesus  in  1882.  He  had  done  a  noble  work  among  his 
countrymen. 

In  1885,  a  Baptist  Association  was  organized  in  Can- 
ton, composed  of  representatives  from  six  bodies.  The 
next  year,  Dr.  Graves  expressed  gratitude  that  the  work 
of  "preaching,"  "self-help/'  "Bible  classes,"  "schools," 
"  woman's  work,"  "  tract  and  Scripture  distribution,"  and 
"medical  dispensation,"  were  going  on  so  favorably. 
Mrs.  Graves  died  in  San  Francisco,  on  her  way  home,  in 
in  April,  1888.     A  Chinese  convert  said  of  her : 

"Jesus  Christ  lived  on  earth  a  long  time  ago,  and 
now  he  is  far  off  in  heaven ;  but  when  I  see  how  Mrs. 
Graves  lives  and  loves,  I  can  understand  what  Jesus  was 
like." 

This  same  year,  the  Canton  mission  was  reinforced  by 
Mrs.  Sanford,  Miss  H.  F.  North,  a  self-supporting  mission- 
ary, and  Miss  Nellie  Hartwell.  These  had  been  engaged 
in  the  Canton  Chinese  work  on  the  Pacific  Coast,  and  were 
"  valuable  additions."  Dr.  Graves  returned  to  Canton 
in  1889.  Still  later,  Miss  Mollie  McMinn  was  added  to 
the  working  force.     The  next  year,  Dr.  Graves  and  Mrs. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  169 

Sanford  were  married.  The  mission  rejoiced  greatly  in 
welcoming  back  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Simmons,  and  Miss  Lulu 
Whilden,  as  "laborers  so  devoted." 

Dr.  Graves  reports  as  follows  for  the  year  1890-91  : 
<k  The  year  has  not  been  marked  by  unusual  success. 
There  have  been  seventy-eight  baptisms,  four  hundred 
and  twenty  pupils  in  seven  schools,  thirteen  stations  and 
out-stations,  twenty-two  native  workers,  five  hundred 
and  thirty  church  members,  and  contributions  amount- 
ing to  six  hundred  and  forty-one  dollars." 

So  the  good  work  goes  on.  Here  and  there,  in  China, 
are  centres  of  gospel  light.  God  hasten  the  day  when 
these  shall  meet,  and  the  whole  land  be  one  blaze  of 
glory ! 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Give  the  story  of  Mr.  Shuck's  connection  with  the  mission. 

2.  Who  were  the  first  appointed  missionaries  of  the  Southern 
Board? 

3.  Who  were  designated  to  begin  the  mission  at  Shanghai  ? 

4.  In  what  year  did  the  missionaries  retire  from  Canton  ? 

5.  What  is  said  of  Messrs.  Pearcy  and  Clopton  ? 

6.  What  of  Francis  Johnson  ? 

7.  Give  account  of  Miss  Baker's  work. 

8.  Relate  the  story  of  the  Whildens. 

9.  What  changes  later  ? 

10.  Who  were  sole  missionaries  in  1854? 

11.  What  additions  two  years  later? 

12.  What  interruption  followed? 

13.  What  year  of  harvest  ? 

14.  What  was  Mr.  Gaillard's  request  ? 

15.  What  was  his  fate? 

16.  What  is  said  of  Mrs.  Gaillard  ? 

17.  What  was  Mr.  Schilling's  term  of  service? 

18.  What  was  one  effect  of  the  war? 

19.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Graves'  work? 


170  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

20.  Give  account  of  work  of  Mr.  Simmons  and  wife. 

21.  What  dying  prayer  was  answered  in  1873,  and  how? 

22.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Graves  ? 

23.  Give  report  of  work  in  1880. 

24.  What  additional  workers  in  1884? 

25.  What  troubles  followed? 

26.  WThat  is  said  of  Yong? 

27.  WThen  were  the  churches  organized  into  an  Association  ? 

28.  WThat  deparments  of  work  are  mentioned  by  Dr.  Graves  ? 

29.  What  is  said  of  Mrs.  Graves  ? 

30.  Give  facts  regarding  reinforcements  in  1888. 

31.  What  further  events  the  next  year  ? 

32.  Give  Dr.  Graves'  report. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

QUIET   GROWTH   IN   CHINA. 

nVTINGPO,  one  of  the  five  open  ports,  in  an  early  day 
-^  is  the  headquarters  of  this  mission.  In  1843,  Dr. 
Macgowan  opened  a  hospital  in  Christ's  name.  For  four 
years  he  labored  alone.  In  1849,  twelve  thousand  nine 
hundred  and  fifty-six  patients  were  treated,  and  a  like 
proportion  in  later  years.  Rev.  and  Mrs.  E.  C.  Lord 
came  in  1847.  The  same  year  a  church  was  organized 
at  Ningpo.  In  1849,  the  church  contributed  for  religious 
purposes,  at  the  rate  of  ten  dollars  and  fifty  cents  per 
member.  In  1848,  Mr.  Goddard  was  transferred  from 
Bangkok  to  prosecute  the  work  of  Scripture  translation. 
He  completed  the  New  Testament  in  1853,  and  the  Old 
as  far  as  Leviticus.  He  died  in  1854,  greatly  lamented. 
The  same  year,  Rev.  Miles  Knowlton  and  wife  came  to 
Ningpo  and  began  work  with  characteristic  zeal.  A 
mission  was  begun  on  the  island  of  Chusan  and  a  church 
organized. 

While  there  was  no  marked  ingathering  at  Ningpo, 
the  church  grew  steadily,  with  deep  and  broad  founda- 
tions.    Rev.  H.  Jenkins  and  wife  joined  the  mission  in 

1859.     Outstations  increased  in  number.     A  boarding 

171 


172  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

and  day  school  was  conducted  by  Mrs.  Lord.  The  women 
were  also  reached,  a  marked  evidence  of  progress.  Thir- 
teen women  were  baptized  in  1863.  Dr.  Macgowan  now 
withdrew  from  the  mission. 

Bible  women  were  first  employed  in  1865.  The  native 
church  at  Ningpo  supported  its  own  pastor,  some  giving 
out  of  their  poverty  over  a  dollar  per  month.  A  theo- 
logical class  was  begun. 

Hangchow,  a  city  of  four  hundred  thousand  inhabit- 
ants, was  made  an  outstation  in  1867.  Kev.  J.  R.  God- 
dard,  son  of  the  former  missionary,  came  to  Ningpo  in 
1868.  His  early  knowledge  of  Chinese  returned  at  once, 
so  there  was  no  tedious  delay  with  the  language.  In 
three  months  his  young  wife  died.  One  incident  in  her 
history  is  thrillingly  interesting  in  this  connection. 

In  her  girlhood  days  Mrs.  Goddard  worked  in  a 
Massachusetts  cotton  factory.  A  Christian  girl  in  the 
same  mill,  learning  of  her  burning  desire  for  an  educa- 
tion, with  view  to  work  abroad,  paid  her  expenses  at 
school  out  of  her  slender  earnings,  denying  herself  needed 
food  and  clothing.  This  noble  friend  lived  long  enough 
to  see  her  fitted  for  labor  in  China.  God  accepted  the 
sacrifice,  and  then  summoned  the  young  worker  home. 

Want  of  means  and  lack  of  laborers  alone  prevented 
a  great  ingathering.  In  1870,  Mr.  Goddard  was  left 
alone,  the  Knowltons  being  home  on  furlough.  Mr.  Jen- 
kins had  removed  to  Hangchow.     In  November,  Mr. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  173 

Goddard  married  Miss  F.  A.  Dean,  daughter  of  Dr. 
Dean,  of  Bangkok.  She  was  already  an  experienced 
missionary. 

The  first  Baptist  Association  in  China  was  formed  in 
1872,  with  six  churches  and  two  hundred  and  nineteen 
members.  The  Knowltons  returned  in  the  same  year. 
In  two  years  Dr.  Knowlton  suddenly  died.  He  was 
greatly  loved  by  the  Chinese,  who  called  him  the  Con- 
fucius of  the  West.  Their  language  could  express  no 
higher  honor. 

Kev.  M.  A.  Churchill  and  wife  came  in  1874,  but  Mrs. 
Churchill  died  within  a  year.  Dr.  S.  P.  Barchet  came 
to  take  up  the  medical  work  so  successfully  carried  on 
by  Dr.  Macgowan  twenty-five  years  before.  Mr.  Churchill 
removed  to  Hangchow  in  1877,  but  after  a  brave  fight 
with  disease,  he  returned  to  America.  Mr.  Jenkins  had 
permanently  located  at  Shaohing,  a  station  in  the  hills, 
with  six  preaching  places.  In  December,  1879,  Misses 
F.  B.  Lightfoot  and  Emma  Inveen  came  to  Ningpo,  the 
gift  of  the  Woman's  Society  of  the  West.  Early  in  1881, 
Rev.  G.  L.  Mason  and  wife  reached  Ningpo. 

In  addition  to  all  the  other  pressing  work,  Mr.  God- 
dard was  pushing  forward  the  translation  of  the  Script- 
ures into  the  Ningpo  colloquial.  The  boys'  boarding 
school  completed  its  first  year  successfully,  the  native 
Christians  contributing  one  hundred  and  fifty  dollars 
toward  its  support,  the  annual  amount  pledged.     Two 


174  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

hundred  and  twenty-five  opium  patients  were  cured  at 
the  hospital  in  1881.  This  kind  of  medical  work  appeals 
directly  to  the  hearts  of  the  Chinese. 

Mr.  Jenkins,  at  Shaohing,  was  making  heroic  sacrifice. 
The  needs  of  the  children  in  America  becoming  impera- 
tive, Mrs.  Jenkins  returned  in  1880,  each  consenting  to 
the  separation  that  he  might  preach  Christ  to  the  Chinese. 

The  Chekiang  Association  now  contained  thirteen 
churches,  ten  belonging  to  the  Missionary  Union  and 
three  to  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention,  Dr.  Yates,  of 
Shanghai,  bringing  in  his  delegates  in  1881. 

Mrs.  Lord  died  in  August  of  this  year.  Soon  after  her 
death,  Dr.  Lord,  retiring  from  the  American  Consulate 
he  had  held  for  seventeen  years,  engaged  again  in  mission 
work. 

In  1883,  a  sanitarium  was  established  in  the  hills,  as 
a  retreat  for  the  missionaries  during  the  hot  months. 
Larchfield  was  the  means  of  refreshing  and  strengthen- 
ing many  a  weary  laborer,  and  while  it  did  not  remove 
the  need  of  an  occasional  vacation  at  home,  it  often 
lengthened  the  term  of  continuous  service  by  several 
years. 

This  same  year,  Rev.  J.  S.  Adams,  formerly  a  mission- 
ary of  the  China  Inland  mission,  was  ordained  at 
Ningpo  in  October,  and  located  at  Kinhwa,  under  ser- 
vice of  the  Missionary  Union.  Thus  was  another 
experienced,  acclimated  laborer  secured.     In  1884,  Dr. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  175 

Lord  and  Miss  Flora  B.  Lightfoot  were  married.  Mr. 
Jenkins  went  to  America  for  a  brief  rest,  and  joined  his 
family  in  Hamilton. 

Not  having  seen  his  children  for  ten  years,  they  had 
grown  out  of  his  recollection.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Mason 
removed  to  Shaohing,  to  care  for  the  work  during  his 
absence. 

Mr.  Goddard  thus  compares  past  and  present :  "Much 
of  the  work  done  has  been  of  that  commonplace  char- 
acter which  admits  of  little  description.  This  has  been 
the  characteristic  feature  of  the  work  among  all  the 
missions  in  Ningpo  for  many  years.  My  mind  goes  back 
thirty-five  years  to  the  time  I  first  came  to  Ningpo  with 
my  parents.  Then  there  were  not  a  dozen  native  Chris- 
tians in  the  whole  region.  Not  one  of  the  half  dozen 
large  chapels  now  standing  in  the  city  had  been  erected, 
not  an  outstation  had  been  opened,  or  would  be  allowed 
at  that  time.  Our  audiences  were  wholly  heathen, 
irregular  and  noisy.  What  a  contrast  to  the  quiet,  well- 
dressed,  devout  congregation  of  the  present !  There  are 
perhaps  half  a  hundred  outstations  scattered  through 
the  outlying  towns  and  villages." 

Miss  Inveen  returned  home  in  1886,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Jenkins,  reunited  in  work,  sailed  for  Shaohing. 

The  summer  of  1887  was  a  cholera  summer.  The 
mission  was  sadly  bereaved  in  the  death  of  Dr.  and  Mrs. 
Lord,   September    15th   and   17th.      Dr.    Barchet   was 


176  BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

brought  near  to  death,  and  Mr.  Goddard  seriously 
threatened,  but  a  merciful  providence  spared  their  lives. 
Perhaps  a  juster  estimate  of  the  life  and  labors  of  Dr. 
Lord  cannot  be  found  than  in  these  words  of  Dr.  Bar- 
eness :  "  Toiling  on  these  forty  long  years  for  the 
welfare  of  China,  we  cannot  begrudge  Dr.  Lord  the  rest 
he  now  enjoys ;  but  we  miss  his  wise  counsels  and  the 
fellowship  of  a  noble  worker  for  Christ.  He  justly 
gained,  the  esteem  of  both  foreigners  and  natives.  His 
unflagging  industry  is  shown  in  the  translations  he 
made  from  the  Ningpo  colloquial,  besides  superintending 
schools  and  taking  care  of  a  theological  class.  Neither 
did  he  forget  the  cause  of  Christ  in  his  official  capacity 
during  the  years  he  held  the  United  States  Consulate  at 
Ningpo." 

Mrs.  Lord  had  well  begun  a  good  work  when  God 
called  her  to  a  higher  sphere.  Seeing  death  so  near  she 
was  quite  resigned.  She  only  expressed  the  wish  that 
Dr.  Lord  might  die  at  the  same  time ;  and  this  was 
mercifully  granted. 

We  need  not  look  outside  of  missionary  annals  for 
heroic  deeds. 

The  attempts  of  Rev.  G.  L.  Mason  to  plant  the 
standard  of  the  cross  in  the  interior  of  China  proved 
him  a  man  of  soldierly  mettle.  His  experiences  in  1886 
are  thus  described:  " Huchow, China,  has  been  a  heathen 
fortress   that   defied   assault.     Many  efforts   have   been 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  177 

made  to  establish  a  station  there,  but  the  hostility  of  the 
people  has  rendered  them  abortive.  Mr.  Mason  has 
been  making  quiet  attempts  to  secure  a  foothold  in  that 
city  for  more  than  a  year.  The  man  who  rented  him  a 
house  was  threatened  and  fled.  So  they  imprisoned  his 
wife.  They  threatened  to  burn  the  house  ;  they  broke 
into  it  and  stole  or  destroyed  his  property ;  they  threat- 
ened to  kill  him.  But  by  persistent  courage,  good 
humor,  tact,  and  faith,  he  has  fairly  worn  out  the  oppo- 
sition, and  is  living  within  the  hostile  city  with  his 
family.  Their  situation  was  dangerous  for  a  time,  but 
all  became  quiet  at  last.  By  wearing  the  native  dress, 
and  retaining  the  Chinese  appearance  of  the  house,  Mr. 
Mason  succeeded  in  establishing  himself  where  all  others 
had  failed." 

Many  missionaries  in  China  have  worn  the  native 
dress.  It  is  decent,  comfortable,  comely,  and  health  tul; 
and  in  the  far  interior,  mission  work  would  be  impossible 
without  it. 

Rev.  L.  A.  Gould  settled  in  Ningpo,  November  4, 
1886.  Misses  S.  A.  Young  and  C.  E.  Eighter  were 
designated  to  Kinhwa  in  1889.  Miss  H.  L.  Corbin  was 
sent  to  Ningpo  the  year  previous. 

The  theological  class  had  been  removed  to  Shaohing, 
under  the  care  of  Mr.  Jenkins.  Thither,  in  1889,  Mr. 
Gould  was  transferred  to  aid  in  this  and  other  important 
work. 


178  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Miss  Elizabeth  Stewart,  in  1889,  thus  speaks  of  the 
Romanized  colloquial  translation :  "  What  would  our 
women  in  Ningpo  do  without  our  Romanized  system? 
As  it  is,  the  average  woman  can  read  her  testament  and 
hymn  book  in  three  months.  Women  over  fifty  and 
sixty  learn  to  read.  Seed  is  scattered  plentifully,  and 
living  seed  must  fructify.,, 

Dr.  Barchet,  feeble  and  broken,  was  holding  on  to  his 
work  for  China.  Rev.  J.  S.  Grant,  M.  D.,  arrived  in 
Ningpo  in  1890,  to  take  the  medical  department  from 
his  trembling  hands. 

At  an  associational  meeting  in  1889,  the  question  was 
discussed  among  the  native  Christians  :  "  What  shall  the 
girls  be  taught  ?  "  Tiie  answer,  promptly  given,  was  a 
revelation  of  progress :  "  What  our  sons  are  taught, 
teach  our  daughters." 

The  report  of  1891  shows  the  same  quiet  growth 
that  has  always  characterized  the  Eastern  China  mis- 
sion. Mr.  Jenkins  at  Shaohing  is  devoting  himself 
principally  to  the  theological  school,  assisted  by  Rev. 
L.  A.  Gould. 

China's  white  fields,  vast  and  fertile,  call  loudly  for 
men,  money,  and  prayers. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Where  is  Ningpo  ? 

2.  What  form  of  work  was  first  attempted,  when,  and  by 
whom. 

3.  What  two  events  in  1847  ? 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  179 

4.  In  two  years,  what  rate  per  member  of  contributions  ? 

5.  For  what  work  was  Mr.  Goddard  transferred  from  Bang- 
kok ?     What  did  he  accomplish  ? 

6.  Give  date  of  his  death. 

7.  What  new  workers  the  same  year? 

8.  What  new  mission  was  begun? 

9.  Give  subsequent  events. 

10.  When  were  Bible  women  first  employed? 

11.  What  beginnings  of  self-support  at  Ningpo? 

12.  What  is  said  of  Hangchow  ? 

13.  What  new  worker  in  1868  ? 

14.  Relate  incident  in  Mrs.  Goddard' s  history. 

15.  Note  subsequent  events. 

16.  What  occurred  in  1872  ? 

17.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Knowlton  ? 

18.  What  of  the  Churchills? 

19.  Who  came  to  take  up  Dr.  Macgowan's  work  ? 

20.  What  new  station  had  Mr.  Jenkins  opened  ? 

21.  What  gift  sent  by  the  Woman's  Board  in  1879  ? 

22.  What  other  new  workers  ? 

23.  In  what  special  work  was  Mr.  Goddard  engaged? 

24.  Give  facts  regarding  boys'  boarding  school. 

25.  Of  the  medical  work. 

26.  What  sacrifice  was  made  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jenkins? 

27.  Of  what  was  the  Chekiang  Association  composed  ? 

28.  What  office  had  Dr.  Lord  held  for  seventeen  years  ? 

29.  Where  and  what  is  Larchfield  ? 

30.  What  new  worker  was  secured  in  1885  ? 

31.  What  event  in  1884  ? 

32.  What  changes  at  Shoahing  ? 

33.  Give  Mr.  Goddard's  comparison  of  past  and  present. 

34.  What  occurred  during  the  cholera  summer  of  1887  ? 

35.  Give  Dr.  Barchet's  estimate  of  Dr.  Lord. 

36.  What  is  said  of  Mrs.  Lord? 

37.  Give  the  story  of  Mr.  Mason's  signal  victory  at  Huchow. 

38.  What  is  said  of  the  native  dress  of  missionaries? 

39.  What  new  workers  came  subsequently  ? 

40.  By  whom  and  where  was  theological  instruction  given  ? 

41.  What  does  Miss  Stewart  say  of  the  Romanized  colloquial  ? 

42.  Who  assumed  Dr.  Barchet's  work,  and  when  ? 

43.  What  revelation  of  progress  appears  ? 

44.  What   has  been   the  characteristic  of  the  Eastern  China 
mission  ? 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

THE   CENTRAL   CHINA   MISSION. 

SHANGHAI  is  one  thousand  miles  north  of  Canton, 
and  in  almost  the  same  latitude  as  Savannah,  Ga. 
The  second  China  mission  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Con- 
vention was  established  here  in  1847,  by  Messrs,  Yates, 
Shuck,  Tobev,  and  their  wives.  Later  came  Rev.  A.  B. 
Cabaniss  and  wife,  Rev.  T.  P.  Crawford  and  wife,  Dr. 
G.  W.  Burton,  and  Miss  Baker. 

Dr.  M.  T.  Yates,  the  founder  of  the  Shanghai  mission, 
was  designated  to  his  life  work  in  December,  1846,  to- 
gether with  Rev.  T.  M.  Tobey  and  Dr.  J.  Sexton  James, 
with  their  wives.  Rev.  J.  L.  Shuck,  of  the  Canton 
mission,  had  been  transferred  to  the  new  station.  They 
all  reached  Shanghai  in  1847,  except  Dr.  James  and 
wife,  who  found  a  grave  in  the  ocean  in  sight  of  their 
destination.  The  Tobe}rs  returned  in  1850,  on  account 
of  shattered  health. 

Of  the  early  reinforcements,  Mr.  Cabaniss  and  wife 

labored    faithfully   six    years,    when   they   left,    hoping 

with  renewed  strength  to  return,  which  hope  was  never 

realized. 

Dr.  Burton  entered   upon  his  work  with  such   zeal 
180 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  181 

as  to  induce  an  early  attack  of  brain  fever,  which  neces- 
sitated a  furlough.  With  restored  health,  and  a  wife,  he 
returned  in  1854,  and  labored  for  seven  years  with 
marked  success. 

At  the  end  of  the  first  decade,  we  find  on  the  field 
Messrs.  Yates,  Cabaniss,  Crawford,  and  Dr.  Burton,  with 
their  families.     The  state  of  the  work  was  encouragiug. 

The  years  following  were  those  of  the  terrible  civil 
war  in  China,  and  a  little  later  in  America.  The  mis- 
sion was  sadly  hindered  by  this  twofold  obstacle.  But 
although  supplies  were  greatly  diminished,  congregations 
and  schools  broken  up,  the  missionaries  had  no  thought 
of  yielding  the  field.  In  1860,  Rev.  A.  L.  Bond  and  J. 
L.  A.  Rohrer,  with  their  wives, — Rohrer  designated  to 
Japan,  Bond  to  Shanghai, — found  their  way  to  heaven 
through  a  stormy  sea.  No  human  souls  know  when  and 
where  they  met  their  fate.  It  was  a  costly  sacrifice  ;  but 
one  doubtless  accepted  by  the  God  of  missions.  In  1862, 
cholera  raged  fiercely.  The  principal  chapel  was  burned. 
It  was  a  decade  of  sorrows,  that  ended  with  1865. 

The  year  1866  opened  upon  a  demoralized  people. 
Shanghai  was  in  a  state  of  financial  ruin.  In  1867,  Mr. 
Yates  was  alone  at  Shanghai,  his  former  associates  being 
connected  with  the  mission  in  Shantung  Province,  where 
the  work  flourished  greatly. 

But  the  burdens  were  too  heavy  for  his  strength.  In 
1869,  he  lost  his  voice,  just  as  the  joyful  harvest  tokens 


182  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

were  multiplying.  The  mission  was  left  in  charge  of 
Mrs.  Ya  es  and  Wong,  a  native  preacher  who  had  been 
ordained  pastor  ot  the  church  in  view  of  Mr.  Yates'  en- 
forced absence.  The  missionary,  worn  and  weary,  hast- 
ened to  America,  to  seek  the  restoration  of  his  voice. 
This  accomplished,  he  reached  Shanghai  on  his  return  in 
February,  1871,  most  joyfully  welcomed.  But  in  the 
autumn,  his  voice  was  again  reduced  to  a  whisper,  mak- 
ing a  second  absence  necessary.  Mrs.  Yates  and  Wong 
again  assumed  charge. 

Although  unfitted  for  public  speaking,  he  returned  to 
China  after  a  brief  absence.  Unable  to  preach,  he  ac- 
cepted the  position  of  Vice-Consul  and  interpreter  for 
the  United  States.  He  said:  "As  I  need,  must  have, 
and  will  have  a  chapel,  I  shall  proceed  to  the  work  at 
my  own  expense,  appropriating  all  my  profits  as  Vice- 
Consul,  until  the  work  is  completed."  This  was  accom- 
plished at  a  cost  of  three  thousand  dollars,  including  a 
parsonage  for  the  native  pastor.  Eight  hundred  dollars, 
contributed  by  Christian  Chinese,  Dr.  Yates  asked  to 
have  appropriated,  and  represented  in  the  Southern  Bap- 
tist Convention  of  1884.  This  was  done ;  and  the  first 
Baptist  Church  of  Shanghai  was  represented,  at  the  next 
meeting  of  the  Convention,  convening  in  Texas,  by 
Christian  Seminoles  from  the  Indian  Territory. 

In  December,  1876,  Dr.  Yates  resigned  his  office  as 
Vice-Consul.     The  Consul  General  having  died,  he  was 


BAPTrST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  183 

offered  the  Consulate.  But  his  voice  having  been  re- 
stored, he  said :  "  This  I  could  not  do  without  giving  up 
my  missionary  work — my  life  work.  No  office  in  the 
gift  of  the  Government  could  induce  me  to  do  that  while 
I  am  able  to  preach  and  translate.  I  resign,  therefore, 
the  honor  and  the  emolument." 

In  February,  1876,  he  gave  five  hundred  dollars  as 
a  centennial  offering.  He  also  endowed  a  boys'  school 
for  life. 

The  year  1877  was  notable  for  a  general  conference  of 
all  the  Protestant  missionaries  in  China,  held  at  Shang- 
hai. Many  valuable  papers  were  presented,  and  the 
cause  greatly  advanced  by  the  discussions  and  plans  for 
systematic  effort  for  the  evangelization  of  China.  The 
year  witnessed  also  the  thirtieth  anniversary  of  Dr.  and 
Mrs.  Yates'  arrival  in  Shanghai.  For  many  of  these 
years  they  had  been  the  only  Baptist  missionaries  in  the 
city. 

In  1880,  Dr.  Yates  had  become  a  great  sufferer,  but 
continued  earnestly  at  work.  Connected  with  the  mis- 
sion were  five  outstations,  with  five  native  assistants. 
The  time  had  come  when  this  grand  old  veteran  could 
no  longer  do  the  work  alone.  In  1883,  Rev.  Wm. 
Hunnex  joined  the  Shanghai  mission,  and  was  located 
at  Chinkiang,  one  of  the  five  stations.  Despite  great 
suffering  and  infirmity,  Dr.  Yates  pushed  vigorously  the 
colloquial  translation  of  the  New  Testament.     In  1885, 


184  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Rev.  D.  TV.  Herring  and  wife  came  to  Shanghai,  and 
Rev.  R.  T.  Ryan  and  wife  to  Chinkiang.  Two  years 
later,  Dr.  Yates  writes  of  their  progress  as  phenomenal. 

The  year  1888  was  a  sad  one  for  the  Shanghai  mission. 
The  noble  veteran,  Dr.  Yates,  passed  to  his  reward  in 
March.  A  Presbyterian  missionary,  writing  from  China, 
said  that  Dr.  Yates  was  physically,  morally,  and  men- 
tally at  the  head  of  the  Protestant  missionaries  of  that 
country.  Forty-one  years  of  service  had  been  granted 
him,  and  faithfully  had  he  improved  his  measure  of 
time. 

The  next  year  a  Chinese  mob  destroyed  all  the  mis- 
sionary property  in  Chinkiang,  and  the  missionaries 
were  refugees  at  Shanghai.  Reparation  was  duly  made 
by  the  Chinese  Government.  Rev.  E.  F.  Tatum  and  Miss 
Alice  Flagg  were  sent  to  Shanghai,  and  were  subse- 
quently married.  Rev.  T.  C.  Britton  and  wife  were 
also  sent  to  Suchow,  and  Rev.  L.  N.  Chappell  and 
wife  to  Chinkiang. 

In  May,  1890,  there  were  thirteen  American  mission- 
aries connected  with  the  Shanghai  mission,  besides  the 
native  helpers.  Pastor  TVong  followed  soon  his  beloved 
friend,  Dr.  Yates,  into  the  realms  of  the  blest.  He 
was  an  able  preacher  and  fine  scholar,  and  was  a  val- 
uable aid  to  Dr.  Yates  in  Scripture  translation  and 
literary  work. 

The  visit  of  Dr.  Mabie,  Secretary  of  the  Missionary 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  185 

Union,  was  the  source  of  great  pleasure,  and  he  was 
made  heartily  welcome  to  the  homes  and  hearts  of 
the  missionaries.  The  work  is  full  of  promise,  and 
the  grrand  harvest  time  for  China  seems  to  be  drawing 
near  at  hand. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Where  is  Shanghai  ? 

2.  When  and  by  whom  was  the  mission  established  ? 

3.  What  additions  ? 

4.  Give  account  of  the  founding  of  the  mission. 

5.  WThat  is  said  of  Mr.  Cabaniss  and  wife  ? 

6.  Sketch  of  Dr.  Burton's  work. 

7.  Report  end  of  first  decade. 

8.  Describe  the  years  following. 

9.  Tell  the  story  of  Messrs.  Bond  and  Rohrer. 

10.  What  further  troubles  in  1862? 

11.  Describe  Shanghai  in  1866. 

12.  Tell  the  story  of  Dr.  Yates'  work  and  affliction. 

13.  What  office  did  he  accept  ?  and  what  did  he  do  with  the 
profits  ? 

14.  Why  did  he  decline  the  office  of  Consul  General  ? 

15.  For  what  was  1877  notable  ? 

16.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Yates  in  1880? 

17.  What  helper  came,  when,  and  where  located? 

18.  What  special  work  was  Dr.  Yates  doing  ? 

19.  What  later  helpers,  and  what  is  said  of  them  ? 

20.  When  did  Dr.  Yates  die,  and  what  testimony  regarding 
him? 

21.  What  outbreak  in  Chinkiang? 

22.  Name  additional  missionaries. 

23.  Give  number  of  missionaries  and  native  helpers  in  1890. 

24.  What  is  said  of  Wong  ? 

25.  What  distinguished  visitor  is  mentioned  ? 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

China  as  a  Missionary  Field,  by  Knowlton.     Our  Life  in  China, 
by  Mrs.  Nevins. 

LEAFLETS. 

China  for  Christ.    China,  the  World's  Great  Mission  Field. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

NORTHERN    CHINA   OR    SHANTUNG   MISSION. 

npHE  province  of  Shantung  lies  about  five  hundred 
-*-  miles  north  of  Shanghai.  Rev.  T.  P.  Crawford 
and  wife  joined  the  Shanghai  mission  of  the  Southern 
Board  in  1852,  and  the  next  year  established  the  first 
station  in  the  Shangtung  province  at  Tung-Chow. 
Messrs.  J.  L.  Holmes  and  Jesse  B.  Hartwell,  with  their 
wives,  joined  the  mission  in  December,  1860.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Hartwell  located  at  Tung-Chow,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Holmes  at  Chefoo,  the  open  port  of  the  province,  and  a 
place  of  great  trade.  It  is  also  the  post  office  of  Tung- 
Chow.     The  climate  is  as  cold  as  that  of  Baltimore. 

Mr.  Holmes  entered  ardently  into  the  work,  notwith- 
standing the  hindrances  from  war,  and  the  ravages  of 
rebel  banditti.  In  October,  1861,  he  and  an  Episcopal 
missionary  were  murdered  by  the  rebels,  and  their  bodies 
discovered  eight  days  later.  Mrs.  Holmes  removed  to 
Tung-Chow,  and  continued  in  missionary  work. 

In  1873,  Misses  Edmonia  and  Lottie  Moon  were  added 

to   the  force  at   Tung-Chow.      Miss   Edmonia's   health 

compelled  her  return  in  1876.     Her  sister  has  proved  a 

rarely  efficient  missionary.     In   June,  1872,  the   Hart- 
186 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  187 

wells  opened  a  mission  at  Chefoo,  deeming  it  an  import- 
ant and  promising  field.  But  four  years  later,  the  severe 
and  continued  illness  of  Mrs.  Hartwell  forced  them  to 
leave  the  country.  She  died  a  little  later.  Dr.  Hart- 
well  has  since  devoted  himself  to  work  among  the 
Chinese  in  California,  and  the  Cheefoo  station  has  been 
abandoned. 

During  the  civil  war  in  America,  the  missionaries  had 
ample  opportunity  for  sacrifice.  Nobly  they  held  on 
their  way  in  spite  of  scant  supplies  and  poverty  of  funds. 

Mr.  Hartwell  and  Mr.  Crawford  labored  at  independ- 
ent points  in  Tung-Chow;  and  from  their  labors  resulted 
the  '•  North  Street  Church,"  Mr.  Hartwell,  pastor,  and 
the  "  Monument  Street  Church,"  under  charge  of  Mr. 
Crawford. 

In  1882,  Messrs.  Halcomb  and  Pruitt  joined  the 
Tung-Chow  mission.  The  next  vear  thev  each  married 
lady  missionaries,  and  still  later  the  two  families  were 
sent  to  open  the  new  station  of  Whang-hien.  This  same 
year  Mrs.  Halcomb  died,  and  Mr.  Halcomb  soon  after 
resigned  his  connection  with  the  board. 

Miss  Moon  labored  from  village  to  village  in  the 
Pingtu  region  with  wonderful  success.  The  whole 
country  around  seemed  calling  for  the  gospel. 

Messrs.  Davault  and  Joiner,  with  their  wives,  became 
connected  with  the  Whang-hien  station  in  1884.  Great 
hopes  were  entertained  of  their  future  usefulness,  but 


188  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

God  called  Mr.  Davault  higher,  in  1887.  His  dying 
breath  was  an  appeal  for  China.  His  wife  still  lives 
and  labors  in  this  land  to  which  he  sacrificed  his  life. 
Mr.  Joiner  stricken  with  an  obstinate  disease,  sadly- 
turned  his  face  homeward. 

In  1888,  Dr.  Crawford  speaks  of  having  "simply 
sowed  seed,"  while  Mrs.  Crawford  "  cultivated  her 
patch." 

The  latest  additions  to  the  Northern  China  mission, 
as  reported  in  1890,  are  as  follows:  At  Tung-Chow, 
Misses  Fannie  Knight,  Laura  G.  Barton,  and  M.  J. 
Thornton.  At  Whang-hien,  Rev.  and  Mrs.  G.  P.  Bost- 
wick,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  J.  League. 

Dr.  Burrows,  in  his  "  Historical  Address "  on  the 
Foreign  Work  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention, 
speaks  as  follows:  "The  three  prominent  standard 
bearers  of  our  Chinese  missions,  to  whom  God  has  given 
health,  perseverance,  faculty,  and  executive  tact,  and 
whose  names  will  be  associated  through  all  time  and 
eternity  with  their  respective  mission  fields,  are  Dr. 
Matthew  T.  .Yates,  of  Shanghai,  Dr.  Roswell  H.  Graves, 
of  Canton,  and  Dr.  Thomas  P.  Crawford,  of  Tung-Chow. 
Other  godly  men  and  women  have  been  associated  with 
them  in  these  fields,  some  for  longer  or  shorter  periods ; 
some  whose  broken  health  compelled  retirement  from 
the  work;  but  from  the  beginning  of  labors  at  these 
points,  with  only  occasional  seasons  for  recruiting  health 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  189 

and  energies,  there  they  have  firmly  stood,  always  faith- 
ful and  hopeful,  prayerful  and  laborious.  They  have 
been  the  generals,  associated  with  brave  and  able  officers, 
American  volunteers,  and  native  recruits/' 

What  is  true  of  these  three  men  is  also  true  of  many 
others  in  our  various  missions.  All  honor  to  these 
brave  and  faithful  veterans,  who  have  borne  the  burden 
and  heat  of  the  day ! 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Where  is  Shantung? 

2.  Who  were  the  pioneers  of  the  mission? 

3.  Who  followed,  and  when?     Where  did  they  locate? 

4.  What  is  said  of  Chefoo  ? 

5.  Give  account  of  Mr.  Holmes'  work  and  fate. 

6.  What  is  said  of  the  Misses  Moon  ? 

7.  What  of  the  Hartwells? 

8.  What  was  the  effect  of  the  war  in  America  ? 

9.  What  two  churches  in  Tung-Chow?  and  what  was  their 
origin  ? 

10.  Give  account  of  the  Halcombs  and  PruittS. 

11.  What  is  said  of  Miss  Moon's  country  work  ? 

12.  Kelate  facts  concerning  the  Davaults  and  Joiners. 

13.  How  did  the  Crawfords  describe  their  work? 

14.  What  were  the  additions  in  1890  to  Northern  China  mission. 

15.  Give  Dr.  Burrows'  estimate  of  Drs.  Yates,  Graves,  and 
Crawford. 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  HEADINGS. 

The  Middle  Kingdom,  by  S.  Wells  Williams. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

THE   WESTERN   CHINA   MISSION. 

fTIHE  year  1889  was  one  of  enlargement.  The  Mis- 
-*-  sionary  Union  took  measures  to  push  forward  into 
the  interior  of  China.  The  first  point  chosen  for  occupa- 
tion was  Suchow,  an  important  city  on  the  river  Yangtze, 
that  great  thoroughfare  to  the  heart  of  Asia,  sixteen 
hundred  miles  from  the  sea.  Sz-chuen,  the  province, 
borders  on  Tibet.  It  has  probably  a  population  of  twenty 
millions,  though  other  estimates  have  been  made,  rang- 
ing from  that  up  to  seventy-two  millions. 

Two  young  men  offered  themselves  for  this  work — Rev. 
William  Upcraft  and  Mr.  George  Warner.  Mr.  Upcraft 
was  sent  to  this  very  region  some  years  ago  by  the  British 
Bible  Society.  While  prosecuting  his  work,  he  was 
clubbed  and  stoned  and  left  senseless.  His  injuries  com- 
pelled his  return.  Later,  he  became  pastor  of  a  church 
in  Minnesota,  and  offered  himself  anew  for  work  in  China, 
in  response  to  the  call  from  the  Missionary  Union.  The 
Baptist  young  men  of  Minnesota  have  undertaken  the 
support  of  these  volunteers. 

This  mission  is  established  upon  a  new  basis.     The 

workers  stipulate  for  no  stated  salary,  but  depend  upon 
190 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  191 

the  Lord  and  the  brethren.  They  pledged  themselves  to 
the  work  of  evangelization,  not  to  pastoral  labor.  This 
they  hope  to  provide  from  the  native  converts. 

The  two  missionaries  on  arriving  at  Shanghai  assumed 
the  native  dress  prior  to  attempting  the  journey  into  the 
interior.  This  enabled  them  to  travel  for  less  than  half 
the  expense,  and  they  also  avoided  rousing  hostility. 

It  was  a  long,  adventurous  journey  from  Shanghai  up 
the  river  to  their  distant  destination.  All  boats  ascend- 
ing the  current  must  be  pulled  by  men,  and  this  is 
impossible  in  the  rainy  season  on  account  of  high  water. 
They  were  detained  some  time  for  this  reason,  but  at  last 
passed  safely  through  the  river  gorges,  arriving  at  Suchow 
December  16,  1889.  They  left  Shanghai  in  August,  but 
the  unusual  length  of  the  rainy  season  caused  delay. 
Mr.  Upcraft  had  some  knowledge  of  medicine,  which  was 
helpful  in  winning  his  way  with  the  people. 

Sz-chuen  is  a  splendid  province,  with  beautiful  scenery, 
fertile  soil,  fine  climate,  and  intelligent,  well-to-do  inhab- 
itants. But  the  great  curse  is  opium — opium  growing, 
opium  smoking,  opium  eating,  and  opium  dying.  Nu- 
merous and  costly  temples  show  the  hold  that  Buddhism 
has  upon  the  people. 

The  province  is  a  great  and  open  field  for  missionary 
operations.  The  China  Inland  mission  has  a  few  work- 
ers, but  a  real  impression  for  Christ  is  yet  to  be  made 
Thousands  are  daily  perishing. 


192  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Mr.  Upcraft  at  once  began  evangelizing  tours.  Mr. 
Warner's  work  must  be  upon  the  language  for  the  most 
part  for  a  year  to  come.  They  report  the  women  as  eager 
to  know  when  their  teachers  were  coming.  A  partial 
answer  to  this  inquiry  was  given  by  the  marriage  of  Mr. 
Warner,  January  9,  1891,  to  Miss  Mara  S.  Moorhead,  at 
Isingpo.  At  once  the  newly-wedded  pair  started  on  their 
long,  weary  journey  to  the  far  interior. 

In  1891,  there  were  under  appointment  to  the  Western 
China  Mission,  C.  H.  Finch,  M.  D.,  and  wife,  Kev.  Maurice 
Harrison,  Kev.  Robert  Wellwood  and  wife.  The  report 
says :  "  There  have  been  many  encouraging  features  in 
the  work.  The  field  is  attractive.  The  province  of 
Sz-chuen  is  the  most  fertile  and  prosperous  of  the  eighteen 
provinces  of  China  proper.  The  people  are  intelligent 
and  enterprising,  and  they  seem  less  bigoted  and  more 
hospitable  to  the  gospel  than  the  Chinese  of  the  coast 
regions.  Everything  about  the  opening  of  this  new  work 
in  the  remote  region  of  Western  China  is  encouraging." 

Thus  the  gospel  light  is  penetrating  even  the  far  inte- 
rior of  long-closed  China.     Shall  we  go  up  and  possess 

the  land  ? 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Where  is  the  province  of  Sz-chuen  ? 

2.  What  characterized  the  year  1889  ? 

3.  What  point  of  advance  was  chosen  ? 

4.  Who  offered  themselves  for  the  work  ? 

5.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Upcraft  ? 

6.  Who  have  undertaken  their  support  ? 

7.  Give  the  basis  of  this  mission. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  193 

8.  Describe  the  journey  of  the  missionaries. 

9.  Describe  the  province  of  Sz-chuen. 

10.  What  es-ent  in  1891  added  a  new  worker? 

11.  Give  names  of  those  under  appointment  in  1891. 

12.  What  is  said  of  the  work  ? 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  HEADINGS. 
Missionary  Magazines,  1890,  1891. 


N 


CHAPTEK  XXIX. 

THE   SEED   PLANTED. 

rnELUGU  land  lies  in  the  southeastern  part  of  Hindo- 
-*-  stan,  extending  along  the  shore  of  the  bay  of 
Bengal,  from  Madras  to  Chicacole.  The  Telugus  have 
no  country  of  their  own,  but  this  territory  in  which  they 
chiefly  dwell  is  partly  in  the  Madras  Presidency,  and 
partly  in  the  dominions  of  the  Nizam,  an  independent 
native  prince,  tributary  to  England.  The  Telugus  num- 
ber about  eighteen  millions.  They  are  a  fine,  stalwart 
race,  resembling  Europeans  in  everything  except  color. 
Their  language  is  sweet  and  musical,  ranking  second  to 
the  Tamil.  Their  religion  is  Brahmanism,  with  its  iron 
bars  of  caste. 

For  the  real  originator  of  the  Telugu  mission,  we  must 
go  back  to  Amos  Sutton,  for  many  years  a  beloved 
English  missionary  at  Orissa,  in  India.  He  married  the 
widow  of  the  lamented  Colman,  one  of  our  earliest  mis- 
sionaries to  Burma.  Coming  to  America  in  1835,  his 
eloquent  appeal  for  the  Telugus  led  to  the  appointment 
of  Rev.  S.  S.  Day  and  Rev.  E.  L.  Abbott,  with  their 
wives,  to  the  new  field.     In  Calcutta  it  was  decided  that 

the  Abbotts  should  go  to  the  Karens  of  Burma,  leaving 
194 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  195 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dav  to  found  the  Telugu  mission  alone. 
After  some  experiments,  Mr.  Day  located  in  Madras. 
Three  years'  hard  work  resulted  in-  the  conversion  of  a 
few  souls,  none  of  whom  were  Telugus.  In  1840,  he 
removed  to  Nellore,  in  the  midst  of  a  large  Telugu  pop- 
ulation. Here  the  first  convert  was  baptized,  September 
27,  1840.  A  Government  grant  gave  him  ground  for 
mission  premises.  In  1841,  he  welcomed  as  co-laborers, 
Eev.  S.  Van  Husen  and  wife.  In  1844,  the  Nellore 
church  was  organized  with  eight  members — four  native 
converts  and  the  missionaries.  The  next  year  both 
the  Days  and  Van  Husens  returned  to  America  with 
broken  health. 

Mr.  Day  found  the  Board  strongly  inclined  to  abandon 
the  Telugu  field.  So  earnestly  did  he  plead  for  this  child 
of  his  labor  and  prayers,  that  they  sent  him  back  in 
1848,  in  company  with  Rev.  Lyman  Jewett  and  wife. 
Five  apparently  fruitless  years  followed.  In  1853,  the 
question  of  abandonment  was  again  discussed,  and  an- 
other lease  of  life  granted  the  Telugu  mission.  In  one 
of  the  addresses,  the  speaker,  pointing  to  Nellore  on  the 
map  as  the  only  station,  called  it  the  "  Lone  Star."  Dr. 
S.  F.  Smith,  our  Baptist  poet  and  hymn  writer,  caught 
the  idea,  and  wrought  a  glowing  bit  of  prophecy  into 
verse  before  he  slept ;  a  prophecy  that  has  been  more 
than  fulfilled. 

Late  in  1853,  occurred  the  notable  prayer  meeting 


196  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

which  marks  the  turning  point  in  the  history  of  the 
Telugu  mission.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jewett,  with  three  Telugu 
Christians,  made  a  tour,  reaching  Ongole  in  December. 
Their  labor  in  this  heathen  city  seemed  utterly  void. 
Before  sunrise,  New  Year's  Day,  1854,  they  ascended  the 
Ongole  hill,  overlooking  the  country.  Before  them  lay 
the  city ;  beyond  were  many  towns  and  villages  crowned 
with  mosques  and  temples,  embracing  a  dense  population, 
ignorant  of  the  true  God.  With  bursting  hearts  they 
knelt  to  pray,  offering  special  and  individual  petitions 
that  God  would  send  a  missionary  to  Ongole.  A  strong 
assurance  that  the  prayer  had  been  heard  came  upon 
them.  The  answer  was  long  delayed,  but  the  fullness  of 
its  blessing  came  in  later  vears. 

Early  in  1855,  Eev.  F.  A.  Douglass  and  wife  joined 
the  workers  at  Nellore.  Ten  years'  unceasing  work  ex- 
hausted his  strength,  and  he  returned  home.  In  1862, 
Mr.  Jewett  was  also  obliged  to  seek  rest. 

On  his  arrival,  he  found  the  old  question  before  the 
Board,  who  were  at  the  point  of  speaking  the  fatal  word. 
The  Telugu  field  had  seemed  barren  of  results ;  but  to 
the  laborer,  whose  strength  had  been  spent  in  sowing 
much  precious  seed,  the  thought  of  abandonment  was 
worse  than  death.  He  plead  as  for  his  own  life,  saying : 
"  You  can  give  up  the  Telugu  mission,  but  I  will  never 
abandon  the  Telugus.  I  will  go  back  and  die  in  India." 
His  faith  and  zeal  turned  the  scale,  and  saved  to  the 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  197 

Baptists  the  splendid  results  of  these  later  years.  "Well, 
brother,"  said  the  secretary,  "if  you  will  return,  we  must 
send  somebody  with  you  to  bury  you."  A  solitary  voice, 
uttering  no  uncertain  sound,  had  saved  the  Telugu 
mission. 

Twelve  years  after  that  memorable  meeting  on  Prayer 
Meeting  Hill,  Ongole  had  a  missionary  in  the  person  of 
Rev.  John  E.  Clough.  After  studying  the  language  a 
year  in  Nellore,  the  Cloughs  came  to  their  own  station  in 
1866.  The  harvest  began.  One  by  one  the  sheaves  were 
gathered.  January  1,  1867,  a  church  was  organized 
with  eight  members.  Such  was  the  beginning  of  what 
has  since  become  the  largest  Baptist  church  in  the 
world. 

Rainapatam  was  opened  as  a  station  in  1870,  by  Rev. 
A.  V.  Timpany  and  wife.  Beautiful  and  spacious 
grounds  were  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  mission, 
which  have  greatly  furthered  its  success.  Soon  Rev. 
John  McLaurin  and  wife  joined  Mr.  Timpany,  while 
Rev.  E.  Bullard  went  to  aid  the  Jewetts  at  Nellore. 

The  harvest  had  truly  begun.  Tiie  Telugus  were 
coming  in  great  numbers.  Three  hundred  and  twenty- 
four  were  baptized  in  a  single  month.  In  the  beginning 
of  this  year  the  missionaries  prayed  for  five  hundred  true 
converts.  The  close  of  the  year  records  five  hundred 
and  seventy-three  baptisms. 

The  sending  of  men  and  means  was  greatly  blessed  of 


198  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

the  Lord.  The  hands  of  the  missionaries  were  full  to 
overflowing.  In  1872,  Mr.  Clough  was  obliged  to  take  a 
furlough.  He  rested  while  at  home  by  securing  four  new 
laborers,  and  an  endowment  of  fifty  thousand  dollars  for 
a  theological  seminary.  In  Mr.  Clough's  two  years' 
absence,  Mr.  McLaurin  had  chaige  of  the  Ongole  field, 
and  the  pentecostal  blessing  continued,  one  thousand  and 
eighty  being  baptized. 

Before  this  time,  in  1867,  the  caste  question  had  been 
settled.  When  Mr.  Clough  went  to  Ongole,  he  was  wel- 
comed by  Brahmins  and  the  higher  classes,  offering  him 
their  boys  for  his  school,  furnishing  him  with  all  needed 
funds.  The  Lord  commenced  converting  the  outcasts, 
from  the  Madiga  and  Mala  castes.  They  asked  baptism. 
A  committee  waited  on  Mr.  Clough,  notifying  him  to  let 
the  Pariahs  alone.  The  Brahmins  could  not  even  come 
to  his  house  if  these  people  entered  it.  But  duty  was 
plain,  and  Mr.  Clough  baptized  the  converts,  bringing  on 
himself  the  rage  of  the  high-caste  people.  Not  only 
were  their  boys  taken  from  the  school,  but  they  threat- 
ened suit  for  the  defilement  of  their  tank  by  the 
baptism. 

Sick  at  heart,  Mr.  Clough  sought  his  study.  Taking 
up  a  Bible,  he  opened  to  1  Cor.  1  :  26-29.  Unknown  to 
him,  Mrs.  Clough  was  praying  in  another  room.  Open- 
ing a  Testament,  her  eye  fell  on  this  salf-same  passage. 
It  was  a  voice  from  heaven.      This  double  assurance 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  199 

made  them  content  to  harvest  sheaves  among  the  poor 
and  lowly,  since  they  were  the  called  of  God. 

After  Mr.  Clough's  return,  the  McLaurins  went  to 
Coconada  to  establish  a  mission  in  behalf  of  Canadian 
Baptists.  In  1879,  Mr.  Timpany  left  the  service  of  the 
Missionary  Union,  and  joined  the  mission  at  Coconada. 
In  1885,  he  was  cut  off  by  cholera,  thus  ending  a 
grandly  useful  life.  The  Canadian  mission  has  been 
fruitful  and  inspiring. 

Rev.  D.  Downie  and  wife  arrived  at  Nellore  in  1873, 
and  assumed  Dr.  Jewett's  work,  that  he  might  join  the 
Bible  Revision  Committee  at  Rajamundy.  Early  mis- 
sionaries had  given  some  imperfect  translations  to  the 
people,  and  now  representatives  of  all  the  denomina- 
tional missions  were  engaged  in  preparing  as  perfect 
a  Bible  as  possible  for  the  Telugus.  In  1874,  Dr. 
Jewett's  overtasked  strength  compelled  him  to  return 
home.  Rev.  R.  R.  Williams  took  charge  of  the  seminary 
at  Ramapatam.  It  was  called  Brownson  Theological 
Seminary,  in  honor  of  the  chief  donor  to  its  endowment. 
This  school  was  of  great  importance  in  training  up 
qualified  native  preachers.  The  harvest  could  not  be 
reaped  by  the  missionaries  alone.  An  army  of  native 
helpers  could  be  profitably  employed. 

The  women's  societies  sent  workers  to  Telugu  land. 
Miss  Peabody  came,  in  1872,  to  Ramapatam,  and  Miss 
M.  A.  Wood,  in  1874.     Their  especial  work  was  teach- 


200  BAPTIST   FOKEIGN   MISSIONS. 

ing.  In  July,  1876,  Miss  Wood  married  Kev.  A.  A. 
Newhall.  She  was  a  woman  of  rare  consecration  and 
noble  gifts.  She  gave  her  life  for  the  Telugus,  dying  at 
Eamapatam,  October  9,  1877. 

The  same  year,  Miss  Peabody  married  Rev.  Mr. 
Pearce,  of  the  English  Baptist  Mission. 

In  1874,  thirty-eight  students  were  in  the  seminary  at 
Eamapatam.  A  letter  from  Mr.  Timpany  about  this 
time  sounds  prophetic :  "  I  hardly  dare  express  what  I 
feel  sometimes ;  and  yet,  why  should  we  not  look  for  it — 
the  time  when  the  Telugus  shall  move  like  a  flood, 
sweeping  all  before  them  ?  The  time  is  coming,  must 
come,  when  all  will  leave  their  idols." 

He  was  not  alone.  The  missionaries  unitedly  pre- 
dicted a  glorious  success. 


QUESTIONS. 

1.  Locate  Telugu  land. 

2.  What  is  said  of  the  Telugus? 

3.  Who  was  the  real  originator,  and  what  is  the  story  of  his 
influence  ? 

4.  What  was  the  result  of  this  appeal  ? 

5.  Who  was  the  founder  of  the  Telugu  mission  ? 

6.  Tell  of  his  earliest  efforts. 

7.  When  and  why  did  he  remove  to  Nellore  ? 

8.  When  was  the  first  baptism  ? 

9.  Who  were  the  first  co-laborers  ? 

10.  When  was  the  Nellore  church  organized? 

11.  What  was  the  feeling  of  the  Board  ? 

12.  Who  re-opened  the  work  in  1848? 

13.  How  did  the  mission  obtain  the  name  "The  Lone  Star"? 

14.  Give  the  poem.     (Missionary  Sketches,  page  198.) 

15.  Tell  the  story  of  the  notable  prayer  meeting  in  1853. 

16.  Who  were  the  next  workers  ? 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  201 

17.  Tell  of  Dr.  Jewett's  noble  appeal  in  1862. 

18.  "What  was  its  grand  result? 

19.  Who  was  Ongole's  first  missionary  ?    When  did  he  begin 
his  work  ? 

20.  When  was  the  Ongole  church  organized,  and  what  has  it 
since  become  ? 

21.  What  is  the  early  history  of  Kamapatam  ? 

22.  What  signal  answer  to  prayer  in  1870? 

23.  What  did  Mr.  Clough  accomplish  during  his  vacation  ? 

24.  Kelate  the  settlement  of  the  caste  question  ? 

25.  What  was  done  at  Coconada? 

26.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Jewett  and  Bible  Bevision  ? 

27.  What  of  Brownson  Theological  Seminary? 

28.  What  record  of  Misses  Wood  and  Peabody? 

29.  Give  Mr.  Timpany's  prophecy. 

SUPPLEMENTAEY  HEADINGS. 

Telugu  Jubilee  Volume.    Missionary  Sketches,  Our  Gold  Mine, 
pages  340-368. 

LEAFLETS. 

The  Lone  Star.    Lydia  of  Nellore. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


EARLY   SHEAVES. 


IN  1877  and  '78  came  the  terrible  famine,  such  as  the 
present  generation  of  Telugus  had  never  known. 
The  missionaries  suspended  their  usual  work,  and  bent 
every  energy  to  the  saving  of  life.  Mr.  Clough  organized 
and  superintended  the  people  in  digging  a  portion  of  the 
Buckingham  Canal,  thus  keeping  many  alive.  But  not- 
withstanding all,  and  the  relief  that  poured  in  from  other 
countries  and  from  Government,  thousands  perished.  It 
was  a  pitiful  time. 

When  the  worst  was  over,  multitudes  came  for  bap- 
tism. The  missionaries  sifted  carefully  to  make  sure  that 
gratitude  or  lower  considerations  were  not  the  motive. 
From  June  to  December,  1878,  Mr.  Clough  and  his  as- 
sistants baptized  nine  thousand  six  hundred  and  six, 
bringing  the  native  membership  up  to  twelve  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  four.  At  one  time,  over  a  thousand 
people  from  Ongole  came  to  the  mission  compound,  and 
gave  up  their  idols. 

In  1876,  Miss  Mary  Day,  daughter  of  the  founder  of 

the  Telugu  mission,  came  to  Ongole  to  the  work  her 

father   began.     A   new   station   was   opened   at   Secun- 
202 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  203 

derabad,  by  Rev.  W.  W.  Campbell,  the  first  in  the 
Nizam's  dominion;  and  in  January,  1879,  a  second  at 
Secunderabad,  by  Rev.  A.  Loughridge.  As  the  Nizam 
is.  a  Mohammedan  prince,  the  missionaries  had  in  oppo- 
sition the  forces  of  Islam,  as  well  as  Brahmanism. 

In  1880,  the  Ongole  High  School  was  organized. 
Rev.  W.  R.  Manley,  who  had  been  laboring  among  the 
Telugus  in  Bnrma,  was  appointed  principal.  This  school 
was  early  aided  by  Government,  and  has  had  a  career 
of  great  usefulness.  The  Bible  is  taught,  and  no  caste 
distinctions  allowed.  Two  hundred  and  seventy-four 
names  were  on  the  rolls  in  1884. 

In  1882,  the  membership  on  the  Ongole  field  was  over 
twenty  thousand.  In  1881,  twenty-six  churches  were 
formed  from  the  parent  church.  The  next  year,  the 
large  parish  of  ten  thousand  square  miles  was  divided 
into  five,  making  four  new  stations.  Mr.  Clough  re- 
turned to  America  this  same  year,  leaving  the  Ongole 
station  in  charge  of  Rev.  D.  K.  Rayl,  who  left  in  1884, 
on  account  of  illness.  He  and  his  wife  died  soon  after 
reaching  home.  Mr.  Clough  hastened  back  to  the  de- 
serted field,  absent  only  eleven  months.  Miss  Rauschen- 
busch  came  to  Ongole  in  1883.  Her  special  charge  was 
the  boys'  school. 

Death  and  broken  health  continually  weakened  the 
force  of  missionary  laborers,  but  the  work  went  on. 
The  high-caste  people  were  still  comparatively  untouched, 


204  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

but  the  poor  and  lowly  accepted  the  gospel  preached  to 
them. 

After  six  years  of  incessant  labor  at  Secunderabad,  Mrs. 
Campbell  was  brought  to  the  gates  of  death.  The  home- 
ward voyage  was  beneficial,  but  she  was  never  able  to 
return  to  India.     Mr.  Campbell  came  home  in  1882. 

Kurnool  was  opened  in  1876,  by  Rev.  D.  H.  Drake. 
The  harvest  was  white  in  this  field  also,  but  the  famine 
interfered  with  missionary  work.  In  1879,  Mr.  Drake, 
broken  in  health,  sailed  for  America. 

The  next  year,  Kev.  F.  E.  Morgan  and  wife  came  to 
the  vacant  place,  and  labored  until  1887,  when  he  also 
was  compelled  to  return.     He  died  in  1891. 

Dr.  and  Mrs.  Jewett  rallied  sufficiently  to  return  to 
Madras  in  1878,  locating  in  the  suburb  of  Royapurum, 
where  he  began  work  in  India,  and  where  he  finished  it 
in  1886.  Dr.  Jewett's  daughter,  with  her  husband,  Eev. 
S.  W.  Nichols,  was  associated  with  her  parents.  Her 
early  knowledge  of  Telugu  quickly  returning,  made  her 
at  once  a  valuable  helper.  The  work  in  Madras  did  not 
show  results  as  in  the  interior,  but  it  was  nevertheless 
an  important  work.  Miss  Marie  Menke  came  in  1880 
to  Madras,  devoting  herself  to  school  work  until  her 
marriage  in  1884  to  Mr.  Newhall,  and  her  removal  with 
him  and  with  her  sister,  Miss  Bertha  Menke,  to  Hana- 
maconda.  In  1881,  Rev.  Norman  Waterbury  and  wife 
were  designated  to  Madras.     The  next  year,  two  houses 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  205 

were  bought  in  different  suburbs,  locating  the  work  at 
Vepery  and  Royapurani.  Miss  Day  removed  to  Madras 
in  1884,  devoting  herself  to  the  caste-girls  school,  and 
to  zenana  work. 

The  four  new  stations  on  the  old  Ongole  field  were 
soon  manned.  Cumbum  was  opened  in  1882,  by  Mr. 
Boggs.  This  remote  part  of  the  district  had  not  hitherto 
received  needed  attention.  The  first  year,  seven  hundred 
and  thirty-one  were  baptized.  Mr.  Boggs  gave  several 
years  faithful  work,  before  ill  health  forced  his  return  to 
America. 

Vinukonda  was  opened  the  same  year,  by  Rev.  G.  N. 
Thomssen.  The  converts,  as  elsewhere,  came  by  hun- 
dreds; and  the  training  of  these  multitudes  was  the 
pressing  work.  Two  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty- 
three  members  were  reported  in  1884.  Rev.  J.  Hein- 
richs  assumed  charge  in  1890. 

Nursaravapetta  was  another  of  the  new  stations.  Rev. 
R.  Maplesden  was  its  pioneer  missionary,  locating  there 
in  1884 ;  but  in  a  year  he  was  compelled  to  leave  the 
field.  In  1886,  Rev.  Wm.  Powell  and  wife  were  ap- 
pointed to  the  vacancy. 

The  fourth  of  the  new  stations  on  the  old  Ongole  field 
was  Bapatla.  Rev.  E.  Bui  lard  has  labored  here  since 
1883. 

Udayagiri  is  a  most  important  interior  station,  com- 
manding much  territory.     Rev.  J.  F.  Burditt  undertook 


206  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

the  charge  in  1884.  The  next  year  he  speaks  of  it  as 
hard  and  stony  ground,  with  scarcely  a  Christian,  save 
on  the  confines  of  the  old  Ongole  district.  It  recalls  the 
former  barren  years  in  Telugu  land. 

Palmur  is  one  of  the  youngest  stations.  It  was  opened 
by  Rev.  Elbert  Chute,  in  June,  1885.  Later,  he  was 
joined  by  his  sister,  Miss  Leoni  Chute.  This  station  is 
in  the  Deccan,  between  Secunderabad  and  Kurnool. 

Enough  has  been  said  to  indicate  that  the  Telugu  mis- 
sions really  comprised  two  divisions,  differing  greatly  in 
the  state  of  the  people,  and  the  conditions  of  missionary 
labor.  The  eastern  Ghauts  are  the  dividing  line  between 
the  older  missions  on  the  coast  and  those  in  the  Nizam's 
dominions  on  the  interior  plateau.  Brahmanism  is 
ascendant  on  the  coast  plains,  and  this  is  where  the  great 
Christian  harvests  have  been  reaped.  In  the  interior, 
Mohammedanism  is  the  religion  of  the  rulers,  and  mis- 
sionarv  work  is  hindered  according  v.  These  missions 
are  also  more  of  a  pioneer  character.  These  are  the 
years  of  seed  sowing,  and  equal  harvests  may  be  expected 
in  the  time  to  come. 

In  1884,  the  new  building  for  the  theological  seminary 
at  Ramapatam  was  finished.  It  was  a  grand  monument 
to  the  liberality  of  the  Baptists  of  America.  Dr.  Wil- 
liams thus  describes  it :  "  The  foundations  are  laid  very 
deep,  the  walls  are  massive,  the  wood  work  is  of  first-class 
Burman  teak.     It  is  almost  fireproof.     It  is  built  from 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  207 

the  finest  quality  of  brown-stone,  cut  from  the  quarry, 
and  neatly  dressed.  The  lower  story  is  used  for  class 
rooms,  library,  etc.  The  whole  of  the  upper  story  is  a 
beautiful  audience  room.  There  is  a  fine  tower,  from 
which  will  sound  a  bell  calling  the  people  for  miles 
around.  It  will  sound  the  more  sweetly  to  the  Telugus 
because  it  is  their  gift." 

The  Bucknell  Memorial  at  Nellore,  completed  in  1886, 
is  a  fine  building  for  a  seminary  of  threefold  character : 
a  Bible  school  for  the  education  of  Bible  women,  a 
normal  school  for  training  teachers,  an  industrial  girls' 
school.  This  last  department  has  become  nearly  or 
quite  self-supporting. 

The  high  school  in  Ongole  also  received  a  commodious 
building  through  the  generosity  of  Mr.  Rockafeller, 
and  others.  It  accommodates  more  than  three  hundred 
pupils.  Thus  have  scoools  been  established  in  Telugu 
land  on  deep  and  broad  foundations. 
QUESTIONS. 

1.  Give  the  date  of  the  terrible  famine  and  its  results. 

2.  Describe  the  wonderful  ingathering  after  the  famine. 

3.  What  is  said  of  Miss  Mary  Day  ? 

4.  Names  and  dates  of  two  stations  opened  in  the  Nizam's 
dominions. 

5.  Who  was  the  Nizam? 

6.  Give  facts  regarding  Ongole  high  school. 

7.  Give  membership  on  Ongole  field  in  1882. 

8.  Subsequent  events  at  Ongole. 

9.  What  was  the  result  of  caste  ? 

10.  Work  and  workers  at  Secunderabad. 

11.  WThere  is  Kurnool  ?     When  and  by  whom  opened? 

12.  Sketch  matters  in  Madras  from  1878-84. 


208  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

13.  Give  facts  concerning  four  new  stations  on  the  old  Ongole 
field. 

14.  What  is  said  of  Undayagiri  ? 

15.  Where  is  Palmur  and  what  is  its  history? 

16.  Describe  the  two  divisions  of  the  Telegu  missions. 

17.  Describe  the  new  building  for  the  Brownson  Theological 
Seminary. 

18.  Wrhat  is  the  Bucknell  Memorial? 

19.  What  of  the  High  School  building  in  Ongole? 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  EEADINGS. 
Missionary  Sketches.     Telugu  Jubilee  Volume. 

LEAFLETS. 

Ongole  Girls'  School.    Nellore  Girls'  School.     Woman's  Work 
in  the  Zenanas. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

LATER   HARVESTS. 

IN  February,  1886,  occurred  the  Jubilee  Conference 
of  the  Telugu  mission,  in  which  the  missionaries  of 
both  the  American  and  Canadian  societies  participated. 
The  review  of  the  fifty  years  was  full  of  interest  and 
inspiration. 

Late  in  1885,  Dr.  Jewett  completed  the  revision  of  the 
New  Testament.  The  last  chapters  were  just  completed, 
when  Mrs.  Jewett's  dangerous  illness  hastened  their 
departure,  depriving  the  Jubilee  Conference  of  his  pres- 
ence. The  Jewetts  had  been  sorely  bereaved  in  the 
death  of  Mr.  Nichols,  in  1880,  and  a  year  later  by  that 
of  their  daughter,  Hattie  Jewett  Nichols.  Although 
lonely  and  desolate,  they  remained  until  the  great  work 
of  Dr.  Jewett's  life  was  finished.  Nearly  forty  years 
had  been  given  to  the  Telugus,  and  his  name  is  im- 
mortal as  that  of  the  man  who  saved  the  Telugu 
mission. 

This  same  year,  a  printing  press  was  placed  at  Eama- 
patam,  which  served  the  double  purpose  of  printing  for 
the  mission,  and  giving  employment  to  the  students  in 
schools.     Mr.  Burditt  was  rejoiced  by  the  organization 

O  209 


210  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

of  a  church  at  Udayagiri  of  thirty-five  members,  a  prom- 
ising beginning  in  a  hard,  pioneer  field. 

In  November,  1886,  the  Madras  mission  mourned  the 
death  of  Mr.  Waterbury.  His  life  was  really  a  sacri- 
fice, consumed  on  the -altar  of  missions.  Dr.  Williams, 
for  many  years  the  successful  president  of  Ramapatam 
Theological  Seminary,  was  compelled  to  lay  down  the 
work.  Mr.  Bogg3  was  appointed  to  fill  the  vacancy,  and 
assumed  charge  in  March,  1888. 

Self-support  among  the  Telugu  churches  was  of  slow 
growth,  on  account  of  the  extreme  poverty  of  the  con- 
verts. The  missionaries  early  began  to  preach  the  doc- 
trine of  the  consecration  of  the  tenth  to  God's  service. 
Growth  in  this  direction  has  been  apparent  from  year  to 
year,  and  the  fact  that  the  converts  give  more  to  Christ's 
work  than  they  formerly  gave  to  their  idol  worship 
attests  their  willingness.  Since  God  called  the  very  poor 
among  the  people,  he  has  also  called  American  Christians 
as  helpers  to  sustain  his  cause,  until  the  time  when  the 
Telugus  can  do  it  alone. 

In  1887,  Mr.  Drake  returned,  taking  up  Mr.  Water- 
bury's  work  at  Madras,  and  Miss  Johanna  Schuff  also 
joined  the  teaching  force  the  same  year.  The  next  year, 
the  Manleys  were  obliged  to  take  a  vacation,  leaving  the 
Ongole  High  School  without  an  American  principal.  In 
1888,  Mr.  Maplesden,  of  Secunderabad,  records  encourag- 
ing progress  in  the  Deccan.     Thirteen  years  had  passed 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  211 

since  this  first  station  was  planted  in  the  Nizam's  domin- 
ions ;  and  now  the  greatest  toleration  was  shown  toward 
Christianity  by  his  highness,  the  Nizam,  and  the  leading 
nobility  of  Hyderabad.  Large  grants  in  aid  were  given 
to  the  educational  work  of  the  various  missionary 
societies. 

Mrs.  Pearce,  formerly  Miss  Peabody,  widowed,  re- 
turned to  India  in  1889,  to  teach  in  Madras,  under  the 
auspices  of  the  woman's  society  which  first  sent  her  out. 
About  this  time,  we  read  of  the  Hindu  Tract  Society 
scattering  tracts  to  offset  Christian  literature.  This 
device  aids  our  cause  by  exciting  inquiry. 

The  missionaries,  crushed  by  the  magnitude  of  the 
work,  sent  an  appeal  in  December,  1888.  It  begins  as 
follows  :  "  The  work  of  the  Telugu  mission,  instead  of 
being  almost  completed,  is  scarcely  more  than  begun. 
The  great  body  of  the  Telugu-speaking  Hindus  may 
almost  be  said  to  be  untouched  by  the  gospel,  and  even 
of  the  poor,  ignorant  outcasts,  only  a  portion  have  been 
gathered  in." 

One  plea  advanced  for  more  laborers  was  the  twenty- 
seven  hundred  converts  baptized  in  1888.  This  meant 
"  increased  work,  multiplied  burdens,  and  widening 
reponsibilities." 

It  must  be  remembered  that  these  Telugu  converts 
were  weak  and  ignorant ;  literally  infants  in  knowledge  ; 
and  need  patient,  long-continued  training  to  make  them 


212  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

strong  Christians.  Men  must  be  sent,  or  even  the 
gathered  harvest  will  be  largely  lost. 

The  next  year  Dr.  Jewett's  revision  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment was  published.  A  reference  edition  was  prepared. 
Although  farther  revision  was  contemplated,  yet  the  text 
as  Dr.  Jewett  left  it  was  literal  and  idiomatic. 

In  1887,  the  Telugu  mission  secured  a  sanitarium  at 
Coonoor,  on  the  Nilgiri  hills,  a  delightful  retreat  from  the 
fierce  heat  of  the  plains  during  the  hot  months.  This 
will  prolong  valuable  lives,  and  save  many  furloughs  to 
America.  Coonoor  is  six  thousand  feet  above  the  sea, 
with  a  refreshing  temperature. 

Miss  E.  J.  Cummings,  M.  D.,  at  Ramapatam,  rejoiced 
in  a  new  dispensary,  where  she  could  win  souls  by  min- 
istering to  diseased  bodies.  She  is  reported  as  hard  at 
work  in  many  directions,  and  especially  desirous  to  teach 
the  women  and  girls  lessons  on  the  care  of  health. 

It  seemed  as  if  disabled  workers  were  leaving  faster 
than  new  ones  could  be  secured  to  take  their  places. 
Miss  Day,  Miss  Menke,  the  Newhalls,  laid  down  their 
wrork  about  this  time.  Late  in  1889,  Jacob  Heinrichs 
and  wife  were  sent  to  Vinukonda,  and  Rev.  A.  Friesen 
and  wife  to  Secunderabad.  We  read  of  a  Christian 
Endeavor  Society  in  Nellore. 

Another  appeal,  more  urgent  still,  came  in  December, 
1890,  addressed  to  the  constituency  of  the  Missionary 
Union,  the   purseholders.     The  missionaries  asked    for 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  213 

twenty-five  men  to  strengthen  and  enlarge  the  Telugu 
work.  Quoting  from  their  appeal:  "'This  mission  has 
been,  and  now  is,  to  you  a  crown  of  glory  in  the  eyes  of 
all  Christendom.  From  the  hilltop  near  where  we  are 
now,  the  prayer  of  faith  has  been  answered  in  a  mighty 
downpour  of  blessing.  Since  the  dawn  of  modern  mis- 
sions no  such  Pentecostal  ingathering  has  been  seen. 
You  have  thirty  thousand  converts  in  this  field.  These 
converts  are  your  spiritual  children.  They  are  still 
coming  by  hundreds  and  thousands.  To  you  must  they 
look  for  care  and  nurture  during  the  infancy  of  their 
spiritual  life. 

"These  spiritual  children  have  cast  away  the  polluted 
food  of  idolatry,  but  are  now  receiving  the  bread  of  life 
in  its  place,  as  they  ought.  Have  mercy  on  them  in 
their  piteous  condition  !  As  far  as  we  can,  we  are  teach- 
ing them  to  help  themselves.  In  time  we  hope  they  will 
be  less  of  a  care  to  you,  but  do  have  compassion  upon 
them  now.  They  need  more  missionaries ;  they  need 
guidance;  they  need  leadership;  they  need  to  see  a  mis- 
sionary's face  more  frequently  in  their  villages;  they 
need  missionary  stimulus  and  encouragement.  If  they 
fail  to  get  this,  at  this  most  needy  hour  of  their  history, 
what  can  you  expect  but  declension  of  faith,  stunted 
growth,  unhealthy  development,  and  spiritual  disaster. 
And  if  that  should  come,  your  Telugu  mission,  which  is  to- 
day a  glory,  may  become  a  humiliation  and  a  reproach." 


214  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

These  burning  words  present  vividly  the  needs  in 
Telugu  land.  The  number  baptized  in  1889  was  thirteen 
hundred  and  ten.  The  year  1890  opened  with  a  sound 
of  "going  in  the  trees,"  but  the  overburdened  mission- 
aries could  not  be  gladdened  by  the  prospect  of  additional 
responsibilities.  The  letters  from  the  field  breathe  sighs 
rather  than  songs.  The  Baptist  hearts  at  home  were 
stirred.  As  a  result,  October  9,  1890,  is  memorable  as 
the  day  when  a  large  reinforcement  sailed  for  the  Telugu 
field.  Kev.  C.  Hadley  and  wife  were  sent  to  Madras; 
Rev.  P.  M.  Johnson  and  wife  to  Ongole;  Prof.  W.  E. 
Boggs  and  wife  for  educational  work;  Rev.  G.  M.  Thorns- 
sen  and  wife  were  also  of  the  number,  returning  to  Kur- 
nool.  A  little  later  the  Mauleys  sailed,  designated  to 
Udayagiri. 

The  beginning  of  1891  brought  tidings  of  another 
Pentecostal  revival  on  the  Telugu  field.  In  the  last 
three  months  of  the  preceding  year,  two  thousand  and 
twenty-three  were  baptized,  sixteen  hundred  and  seventy- 
one  in  a  single  day.  Other  parts  of  the  field  shared  in 
the  blessing. 

At  Cumbum,  eleven  hundred  and  ninety-five  were 
baptized  during  1890,  the  result  of  Mr.  Newcomb's  labors. 
In  the  Nizam's  dominions  seed  was  springing.  Mr. 
Friesen  removed  from  Secunderabad  to  locate  at  the 
promising  point  Nalgonda.  Again,  Mr.  Clough  reports 
in  the  Ongole  district  seventeen  hundred  and  fortv-two 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  215 

baptized  from  January  1  to  February  24,  1891 ;  and 
Mr.  Newcomb  from  Cumbum,  fourteen  hundred  and 
sixty-six  baptized  from  January  1  to  February  22.  This 
made  the  baptisms  on  the  Telugu  field  in  five  months 
more  than  five  thousand. 

One  important  event  was  the  visit  of  Dr.  H.  C.  Mabie, 
Home  Secretary  of  the  Missionary  Union,  to  our  missions 
in  Asia.  He  had  the  privilege  of  witnessing  some  of  the 
marvelous  exhibitions  of  divine  power  in  Telugu  land, 
personally  baptizing  many  converts. 

At  the  national  anniversaries  in  1891,  Dr.  Clough's 
presence  aroused  great  enthusiasm.  In  view  of  the  un- 
exampled victories  on  the  Telugu  field,  it  was  resolved 
to  send  twenty-five  men  and  to  raise  fifty  thousand  dol- 
lars to  meet  the  present  emergency.  Quoting  from  the 
Annual  Report  for  1891 :  "  We  find  that  the  complete 
statistics  for  the  past  year  give  the  number  of  baptisms 
in  the  mission  at  more  than  six  thousand,  and  the  total 
number  of  church  members  at  more  than  forty  thousand. 

"  In  the  presence  of  such  displays  of  grace,  we  can 
only  stand  with  bowed  heads  and  humble  hearts  before 
the  Lord  and  give  him  all  the  praise  and  glory  of  the 
great  ingathering.  The  progress  of  the  Telugu  mission 
in  twenty-five  years,  from  thirty-eight  to  forty  thousand 
converts,  has  not  been  due  to  the  extraordinary  amount 
of  labor  and  money  expended  on  the  work,  for  they  have 
not  been  greater  than  on  other  fields.     God  in  his  great 


216  BAPTIST   FOEEIGN   MISSIONS. 

mercy  has  chosen  to  favor  the  Telugu  people  with  a 
special  and  amazing  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
he  has  brought  this  great  result." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Give  date  of  the  Telugu  Jubilee. 

2.  What  was  Dr.  Jewett's  closing  work? 

3.  What  is  said  of  the  death  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Nichols? 

4.  For  what  will  Dr.  Jewett  be  especially  remembered? 

5.  State  double  purpose  of  the  printing  press  at  Eamapatam. 

6.  What  encouragement  at  Udayagiri? 

7.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Waterbury  ? 

8.  Who  was  Dr.  Williams'  successor  in  the  charge  of  Brownson 
Theological  Seminary? 

9.  What  are  the  facts  regarding  self-support  among  the  Telu- 
gus? 

10.  Sketch  events  in  1887  and  1888. 

11.  What  appeal  was  sent  by  the  missionaries  ? 

12.  Why  are  Telugu  converts  in  special  need  of  nurture  ? 

13.  What  was  the  event  of  1889  ? 

14.  WThat  and  where  is  Coonoor  ? 

15.  What  is  said  of  medical  work  in  Eamapatam  ? 

16.  Give  list  of  workers  compelled  to  leave  at  this  time. 

17.  Name  reinforcements. 

18.  Give  substance  of  second  appeal. 

19.  What  new  blessings  in  1890? 

20.  What  result  did  this  bring  about  in  the  way  of  reinforce- 
ments ? 

21.  Describe  the  Pentecostal  ingatherings  in  1890  and  1891. 

22.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Mabie  ? 

23.  What  resolution  was  taken  at  the  national  anniversaries  in 
1891? 

24.  Give  latest  statistics. 

25.  What  is  the  increase  in  twenty-five  years,  and  to  what  is  it 
due? 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

OPEN   DOORS   IN   JAPAN. 

rflHE  Japan  mission  is  one  of  the  later  enterprises  of 
J-  American  Baptists.  Like  China,  the  land  was  for 
centuries  closely  barred  against  foreign  influences.  It  is 
an  empire  of  islands,  with  a  population  of  thirty-three  mil- 
lions. The  national  religion  is  Buddhism,  modified  by  the 
ancient  Shintooism.  Centuries  ago,  the  Roman  Catholic 
religion  was  introduced,  and  flourished  greatly.  The  Gov- 
ernment suppressed  it  by  force,  and  such  was  the  hatred 
aroused,  that  for  many  years  the  figure  of  a  cross  was 
laid  down  upon  the  shore,  and  a  foreigner  could  only 
enter  the  country  by  trampling  this  sacred  symbol  under 
foot. 

The  American  nation  was  the  first  to  compel  Japan  to 
make  a  treaty,  and  open  certain  of  her  ports  for  commerce 
and  supplies.  Other  nations  followed  the  advantage 
gained,  so  that  it  was  said, "  When  the  Susquehanna  sailed 
up  the  Bay  of  Yeddo,  she  led  the  squadrons  of  seventeen 
nations."  This  was  in  1856,  and  under  the  touch  of 
Western  influences,  Japan  awoke,  slowly  at  first,  and 
then  with  a  rapidity  that  has  astonished  the  world. 

The  American  Baptist  Free  Mission  Society  was  the 

217 


218  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

first  Baptist  organization  to  enter  Japan.  Rev.  J.  Goble 
was  the  earliest  Baptist  missionary.  He  confined  his 
labors  to  translating  the  Scriptures,  as  the  time  was  not 
ripe  for  public  work. 

The  close  of  the  war,  and  the  abolition  of  slavery, 
having  removed  all  excuse  for  a  separate  Baptist  Society, 
the  Japan  mission  was  in  1872  offered  to  the  Missionary 
Union,  and  accepted.  Dr.  Nathan  Brown,  for  so  many 
years  an  efficient  missionary  in  Assam,  was  under 
appointment,  at  the  time  of  the  transfer.  Dr.  Brown 
and  wife,  with  Mr.  Goble  and  wife,  arrived  in  Yoko- 
hama, February,  1873.  As  there  were  no  disciples,  no 
mission  buildings,  it  was  really  the  beginning  of  a  new 
enterprise. 

Just  after  the  arrival  of  our  missionaries,  the  ancient 
edict  against  Christianity  was  annulled  by  the  Mikado. 
This  opened  an  effectual  door. 

In  1873,  Rev.  J.  H.  Arthur  and  wife  were  sent  to 
Japan,  and  later,  James  T.  Doyen,  a  teacher  in  the 
country,  was  baptized  at  Yokohama  and  employed  by 
the  Missionary  Union.  He  was  ordained,  and  soon  after 
went  to  Tokio,  the  capital,  at  the  invitation  of  several 
Buddhist  priests,  who  offered  him  quarters  in  one  of  their 
temples  that  they  might  learn  about  the  new  religion. 

In  June,  1874,  the  Arthurs  also  removed  to  Tokio, 
which  brought  them  in  more  direct  contact  with  the 
people.     Dr.  Brown,  whose  linguistic  talent  found  full 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  219 

employment,  remained  at  Yokohama.  Portions  of 
Scripture,  tracts,  hymns,  etc.,  were  rapidly  prepared  and 
scattered  broadcast.  The  Japanese  were  eager  for  new 
things,  and  Christianity  was  one  of  them.  The  first 
Gospel  in  the  language  was  printed  by  the  Baptist  mis- 
sion. Dr.  Brown's  missionary  work  was  also  very  suc- 
cessful. Large  congregations  crowded  the  mission  chapel, 
and  the  little  church  gave  signs  of  steady  and  healthful 
growth. 

In  1875,  Miss  Clara  A.  Sands  was  sent  to  Tokio,  and 
Miss  A.  H.  Kidder  to  Yokohama.  The  two  cities  are 
eighteen  miles  apart  and  connected  by  rail,  so  the  work- 
ers did  not  suffer  from  isolation  as  in  other  countries. 
This  same  year  occurred  the  first  baptism  in  Tokio. 

Kev.  Frank  Dobbins  and  wife  came  to  Yokohama  in 
1875.  Severe  illness  soon  prostrated  Mrs.  Dobbins,  and 
sorrowfully  they  turned  their  faces  homeward. 

The  records  of  these  years  are  marvelous.  A  Govern- 
ment decree  provided  that  all  Government  offices  should 
be  closed  from  Saturday  noon  until  Monday  morning. 
Thus  was  the  Lord's  Day  recognized.  Hitherto,  every 
fifth  day  had  been  a  holiday.  Probably  the  controlling 
idea  was  not  respect  to  Christ,  but  the  belief  that  this 
step  would  contribute  to  national  progress.  Neverthe- 
less, it  wonderfully  smoothed  the  way  for  evangelizing 
work. 

A  dark  shadow  fell.     Mr.  Arthur,  loved,  successful, 


220  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

and  earnest,  was  stricken  at  his  post,  and  died  late  in 
1877  at  Oakland,  California.  The  vacancy  in  Tokio 
caused  by  his  death  was  filled,  in  1878,  by  Rev.  H.  H. 
Rhees  and  wife.  There  was  already  the  nucleus  of  a 
native  ministry. 

Our  missionaries  have  one  great  advantage  in  Japan. 
Its  thirty-three  millions  have  the  same  religion,  speak  the 
same  language,  and  use  the  same  written  character.  There 
is  not  a  multiplicity  of  dialects  and  religions.  Another 
peculiar  phase  of  these  early  years  of  mission  work  is 
that  the  converts  to  Christianity  in  Japan  are  mostly 
from  the  higher  and  educated  classes.  This  fact,  so 
encouraging  at  first,  may  account  for  some  of  the  per- 
plexing problems  in  the  crisis  of  later  years. 

In  July,  1879,  the  Lord  sent  the  Baptists  a  trained,  fully- 
equipped  missionary,  already  on  the  field.  Mr.  Thomas 
P.  Poate  had  been  employed  by  Government  as  a  teacher. 
He  understood  the  language  well,  and  was  familiar  with 
Japanese  customs  and  modes  of  thought.  His  wife  was 
also  an  efficient  helper.  Mr.  Poate  proved  indefatigable. 
Preaching  stations  were  first  established  in  the  vicinity 
of  Yokohama,  and  soon  he  had  a  promising  church  at 
Morioka,  three  hundred  and  seventy  miles  north  of  Yo- 
kohama. A  little  seed  had  taken  root  in  the  wilderness, 
and  its  results  promised  to  be  glorious. 

A  notable  event  was  the  completion  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment in  Japanese  by  Dr.  Brown,  August  1,  1879.     Six 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  221 

years  and  a  half  had  passed  since  his  arrival  in  Japan. 
The  acquisition  of  the  language  and  direct  missionary- 
work  had  allowed  brief  margin  of  time  for  translation. 
Yet,  so  faithful  and  idiomatic  is  its  rendering  that  it  will 
doubtless  remain  the  standard  Bible. 

In  December,  1879,  Rev.  A.  A.  Bennett  and  wife 
arrived  at  Yokohama,  and  Miss  E.  J.  Munson  at  Tokio. 

Mr.  Poate's  letters  from  North  Japan  read  like  the 
story  of  the  Apostle  Paul:  "In  journeyings  often,  in 
perils  of  water,  in  perils  of  robbers,  in  perils  by  the 
heathen,  in  perils  in  the  city,  in  perils  in  the  wilderness, 
in  perils  among  false  brethren.  In  weariness  and  pain- 
fulnesss,  in  watchings  often,  in  hunger  and  thirst,  in 
fastings  often.  Besides  that  which  cometh  upon  me 
daily,  the  care  of  all  the  churches." 

This  work  in  North  Japan  early  bore  precious  fruit. 
In  1880,  a  church  was  formed  at  Sendai,  with  eight 
members.  Christianity  seemed  in  danger  from  its  very 
popularity.  The  missionaries  were  obliged  to  exercise 
the  greatest  care  to  prevent  the  admission  of  unconverted 
members. 

There  was  great  need  of  a  native  ministry  to  enter  the 
vast  fields.  Mr.  Bennett  organized  a  theological  class  at 
Yokohama,  which  proved  the  nucleus  of  a  future  semi- 
nary. In  Mr.  Poate's  northern  tour  in  the  summer  of 
1880,  he  was  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  Miss  Sands. 
The  latter  thus  describes  a  communion  service  at  Mori- 


222  BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

oka:  "A  few  natives  sitting  in  a  circle  upon  the  floor,  a 
small  piece  of  brown  bread  made  by  Mrs.  Poate  (bread 
cannot  be  bought  in  the  country),  a  little  yellow  plate? 
a  small  glass  with  a  stem,  a  black  bottle  containing  the 
wine,  and  with  us  the  presence  of  the  Lord." 

The  needs  of  the  vast  multitudes  in  Tokio,  the  most 
densely  populated  city  in  Japan,  tasked  the  missionaries 
to  the  utmost.  Hindrances  were  more  perplexing  than 
in  the  country  work.  Yet  wonders  were  accomplished. 
The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  stretched  out  in  blessing. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Describe  Japan  and  its  religion. 

2.  What  nation  first  compelled  a  treaty  with  Japan  and  opened 
her  gates  ? 

3.  What  of  other  nations  ? 

4.  What  Baptist  society  first  entered  Japan? 

5.  Who  was  its  first  missionary,  and  what  was  his  work? 

6.  In  what  year  was  the  Japan  mission  transferred  to  the 
Missionary  Union? 

7.  Who  were  the  first  missionaries,  and  where  located? 

8.  What  bar  was  early  removed? 

9.  Sketch  the  work  of  Messrs.  Arthur  and  Doyen. 

10.  WThat  and  where  is  Tokio? 

11.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Brown's  work? 

12.  What  new  workers  in  1875  ? 

13.  Name  some  of  the  concessions  to  Christianity. 

14.  When  and  where  did  Mr.  Arthur  die? 

15.  Who  filled  the  vacancy? 

16.  What  great  advantage  has  mission  work  in  Japan? 

17.  WThat  peculiar  phase  ? 

18.  What  valuable  workers  in  1879? 

19.  What   other  notable  events  this  same  year  ? 

20.  Of  what  are  Mr.  Poate's  letters  from  North  Japan  a  re- 
minder? 

21.  What  are  the  results  of  this  work  ? 

22.  State  the  beginnings  of  theological  instruction. 

23.  Give  Miss  Sand's  description  of  a  communion  at  Morioka. 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  223 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

Life  of  Nathan  Brown.     The  Land  of  the  Rising  Sun.     Mis- 
sionary Sketches. 

LEAFLETS. 

A  Trip  to  Morioka.     Some  Curious  Things  about  Japan.     The 
Women  of  Japan. 


CHAPTER  XXXIIL 

PROMISE   AND   PERPLEXITY. 

TN  1880,  we  find  Dr.  Brown  in  Yokohama,  printing 
■*-  the  revised  New  Testament  in  the  pure  Kana  or 
Japanese  character  for  the  common  people,  also  a  mixed 
edition  in  Chinese  and  Japanese  characters  for  the  edu- 
cated classes.  The  native  preachers  were  growing  into 
efficient  helpers,  vigorous  thinkers,  and  some  of  them 
pulpit  orators.  Evangelists  were  needed  to  send  into  the 
interior.  Mr.  Poate  gives  this  incident  in  one  of  his 
tours  in  1881:  "A  few  days  ago  I  climbed  a  hill  crowned 
with  an  old  Shintoo  temple.  Noting  the  fallen  pillars,  I 
rejoiced;  but  going  down,  I  met  a  party  of  pilgrims. 
Their  guide  was  an  old  woman.  She  knew  nothing  of 
the  way  of  salvation.  As  I  told  it,  she  said,  'What  a 
blessed  thing ! '  When  I  spoke  of  the  death  and  resur- 
rection of  Jesus,  her  excitement  reached  a  climax. 
'What/  asked  she,  'is  the  name  of  him  who  rose  from 
the  dead  ? '  '  The  Lord  Jesus.'  She  began  to  beckon 
with  her  hand  to  the  rest  of  the  party,  and  cry  out, 
'Quick,  quick,  blessed  news! — news  that  we  never  heard 
before!'     Then  they  gathered  around  me,  and  under  the 

eaves  of  the  old  temple  I  preached  Jesus." 
224 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  225 

Rev.  F.  Dobbins  and  wife  returned  late  in  1881, 
locating  at  Tokio.  A  year  later,  disease  compelled  them 
to  take  a  final  leave  of  Japan. 

The  demand  for  Scripture  was  unprecedented,  and  the 
presses  were  taxed  to  their  utmost  to  supply  the  call. 
The  Bible  Society  and  other  agencies  furnished  generous 
aid  to  this  department. 

The  success  of  Christianity  roused  Buddhism  to  active 
opposition.  Public  meetings  were  held  by  the  priests  in 
all  parts  of  the  land.  But  the  ancient  religion  cannot 
long  exist  in  the  light  of  modern  science.  The  conflict 
of  the  future  will  not  be  between  Christianity  and  Budd- 
hism, but  between  Christianity  and  atheism. 

In  1881,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Rhees  removed  to  Kobe,  where 
a  church  had  been  formed.  The  city  lies  in  the  midst 
of  a  dense  population.  Dr.  Brown  writes:  "We  have 
now  a  nucleus  for  each  of  the  four  departments  of  the 
Japan  mission — Yokohama,  Tokio,  Sendai  and  the  North, 
Kobe  and  the  South." 

After  Mr.  Dobbins'  enforced  retirement  from  Tokio, 
Miss  Kidder  was  again  left  alone  with  the  entire  work — 
a  crushing  burden.  April  1,  1885,  Rev.  C.  H.  D.  Fisher 
and  wife  were  transferred  from  Ongole,  India,  to  Tokio. 
In  consequence  of  overwork,  Miss  Kidder  was  prostrated 
by  severe  illness,  but  a  kind  Providence  restored  her. 
Indications  for  good  multiplied.  Much  of  the  harvest 
was  the  result  of  seed  sowing  by  native  colporteurs. 


226  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

The  year  1883  was  a  year  of  revival.  About  two 
thousand  were  added  to  the  different  evangelical  churches, 
of  which  the  Baptists  had  their  share.  Candidates  for 
the  Buddhist  priesthood  were  required  to  pass  examina- 
tions in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  to  be  able  to 
answer  the  missionaries.  Doubtless  this  often  proved  a 
weapon  turned  against  themselves. 

In  the  same  year,  Miss  Kidder  gladly  welcomed  Miss 
H.  A.  Whitman  to  share  her  labors.  In  1884,  Kev.  E. 
H.  Jones  and  wife  were  sent  to  Japan,  locating  at  Sendai. 
In  addition  to  his  other  work,  Mr.  Poate  prepared  two 
courses  of  lectures  on  church  history  for  the  students  in 
the  seminary.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  G.  H.  Appleton,  formerly 
of  China,  were  received  as  missionaries,  and  stationed  at 
Kobe.  In  1885,  Dr.  Brown  writes:  "When  I  think  of 
our  small  beginning  twelve  years  ago,  now  swelled  in 
numbers  to  upward  of  four  hundred  members,  I  can  only 
exclaim,  '  What  hath  God  wrought ! '  " 

This  year  Miss  E.  L.  Rohlman  came  to  Yokohama,  to 
take  Miss  Sands'  work,  and  give  her  an  opportunity  for 
rest  in  America. 

The  death  of  Dr.  Brown,  January  1,  1886;  was  a  sad 
loss  to  the  Japan  mission.  For  nearly  thirteen  years  his 
fine  linguistic  talent,  his  ripe  experience,  his  earnest  con- 
secration, had  been  a  tower  of  strength.  With  his  aid 
the  mission  foundations  had  been  laid  deep  and  strong. 
His  labors  had  been  varied.     Burman,  Assamese,  and 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  227 

Japanese  Christians  sang  hymns  of  his  translating.  As- 
sam, as  well  as  Japan,  received  the  New  Testament  from 
his  hand,  in  their  own  languages.  Death  found  him  with 
work  begun  and  planned,  enough  to  fill  the  span  of  an 
ordinary  lifetime.  More  than  a  half  century  had  passed 
since,  in  the  strength  of  young  manhood,  he  sailed  for  a 
foreign  field.  In  the  ripeness  of  age  he  went  to  rest  in 
Japan.  He  was  buried  in  Yokohama.  He  left  behind 
an  inscription  for  his  simple  monument,  with  only  these 
words,  besides  name  and  date  of  birth  and  death: 

"God  Bless  the  Japanese." 

This  same  year  of  bereavement,  Mr.  Poate,  prostrated 
by  his  untiring  labors,  left  for  a  season  of  rest.  Later, 
Miss  H.  M.  Brown  was  sent  to  Sendai,  and  Rev.  C.  K. 
Harrington  and  wife  to  Yokohama. 

In  1887,  the  Appletons  removed  to  Shimonoseki,  noto- 
riously the  worst  city  in  the  empire.  At  first,  Mrs. 
Appleton  could  not  go  on  the  street  for  fear  of  insult. 
The  people  could  not  be  induced  to  come  to  the  services. 
But  in  less  than  a  year  the  officials  became  friendly,  the 
people  well  disposed,  and  the  meetings  were  largely 
attended.  A  church  of  twenty-three  members  had  been 
formed,  having  the  true  spirit  of  self-sacrifice.  In  the 
same  year  Rev.  F.  G.  Harrington  and  wife  came  to 
Tokio,  and  Miss  Nellie  Fife  to  Sendai.  The  Poates 
returned,    making   Morioka   their   headquarters.      Mrs. 


228  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Brown  had  remained  at  Yokohama  after  her  husband's 
death,  having  charge  of  a  successful  boarding  school  for 
girls.  The  work  was  pressing  hard  upon  the  workers. 
Mr.  Bennett  writes  early  in  1888 :  *  Were  there  twice  or 
thrice  the  number  of  laborers  here  now,  all  would  have 
their  hands  full.  Within  less  than  thirty-six  hours  I 
have  had  three  earnest  requests  to  go  in  as  many  differ- 
ent directions,  and  not  one  of  them  can  I  attend  to.  This 
is  not  uncommon.     Its  commonness  makes  it  significant." 

In  1888,  the  Japanese  Government  took  a  backward 
step,  inclining  toward  its  old  policy  of  repression.  A 
reaction  was  unavoidable.  No  opposition  was  shown 
officially  to  mission  work,  but  grave  fears  were  aroused. 

Shimonoseki  was  soon  deprived  of  its  missionary  by 
failure  of  health.  Miss  L.  A.  Eaton  was  appointed  to 
the  school  work  in  Yokohama.  Miss  Clagett  joined  the 
force  in  Tokio  a  little  earlier.  Mr.  Rhees  being  in  need 
of  a  helper  in  Kobe,  Rev.  and  Mrs.  R.  A.  Thomson  came 
to  share  his  burdens  this  same  year.  Rev.  R.  L.  Halsey 
and  wife  sailed  for  Sendai  in  June,  and  Miss  Sands 
returned  to  labor  in  Morioka.  But  while  these  helpers 
with  eager  hearts  hastened  westward  to  the  work,  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Fisher,  Mrs.  Brown,  and  Miss  Kidder,  turned 
their  weary  faces  eastward  in  search  of  rest  in  the  home 
land. 

The  year  1888  was  the  one  in  which  the  new  constitu- 
tion of  Japan  was  promulgated.     It  established  religious 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  229 

liberty,  providing  for  a  Parliament  to  aid  in  the  govern- 
ment of  the  empire.  On  the  parade  given  in  honor  of 
the  new  constitution,  the  empress  rode  in  the  Staie  car- 
riage with  the  emperor  for  the  first  time  in  the  history 
of  Japan.  Still,  in  some  ways,  the  missionaries  were 
more  restricted.  Passports  for  the  interior  were  not 
so  readily  granted.  There  was  dissatisfaction  with  the 
terms  of  the  treaties,  and  until  these  could  be  revised, 
the  Government  was  rather  chary  of  its  favors  to  for- 
eigners. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  different  characters  are  used  in  printing  Scripture  for 
the  common  people  and  educated  classes? 

2.  What  is  said  of  the  native  preachers? 

3.  What  incident  is  given  by  Mr.  Poate? 

4.  What  is  said  of  Buddhist  opposition?     What  is  the  real 
conflict  of  the  future? 

5.  How  was  the  Japanese  mission  divided  in  1881  ? 

6.  Give  subsequent  events  in  Tokio. 

7.  What  is  said  of  1883? 

8.  What  examination  were  the  candidates  for  the  Buddhist 
priesthood  required  to  pass? 

9.  What  new  workers  are  recorded  ? 

10.  Give  progress  in  ten  years,  as  stated  by  Dr.  Brown. 

11.  Give  a  sketch  of  Dr.  Brown's  mission  work  and  date  of 
death.     What  inscription  on  his  tomb  ? 

12.  What  is  the  early  missionary  history  of  Shimonoseki? 

13.  Subsequent  changes? 

14.  Give  Mr.  Bennett's  description  of  the  work  in  1888. 

15.  What  backward  step  was  taken  by  the  Japanese  Govern- 
ment? 

16.  Tell  of  the  incoming  and  outgoing  laborers. 

17.  What  is  said  of  the  new  constitution  of  Japan? 

18.  What  hindrance  remained  in  mission  work  ? 

SUPPLEMENTAEY  HEADINGS. 

LEAFLET. 

Women  of  Japan.     Life  of  Dr.  Brown. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

THE   CRISIS   IN   JAPAN. 

A  LL  Oriental  travelers  speak  of  the  Japanese  method 
-*-■*-  of  traveling  by  jinrikisha.  This  is  a  small  two- 
wheeled  carriage  propelled  by  man  power,  universally  used 
in  Japan  and  the  coast  cities  of  China,  its  use  rapidly  ex- 
tending in  all  Asiatic  countries.  For  the  invention  of 
this  useful  little  vehicle,  now  indispensable,  Japan  is 
indebted  to  the  first  Baptist  missionary,  Rev.  J.  Goble. 
Entering  the  country  soon  after  its  opening  to  foreigners, 
his  knowledge  of  Western  ideas  and  inventions  was  in- 
valuable to  the  Government.  In  1869,  by  request,  he 
drew  the  plan  for  a  vehicle  to  be  used  in  the  royal  parks 
in  Tokio.  This  jinrikisha,  or  "  pull-man  car,"  as  the 
name  signifies,  became  instantly  popular.  There  are  few 
horses  in  Japan,  and  the  little  cart  met  a  great  need. 
Japan  now  exports  large  numbers  of  jinrikishas ;  and  she 
owes  this  source  of  profit  to  a  Christian  missionary. 

The  treaty  difficulties  made  it  hard  for  the  missionaries 

to  obtain  passports  for  the  interior,  and  native  agencies 

were  utilized  for  carrying  on  the  country  work.     The 

need  of  rest  caused  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Rhees,  of  Kobe,  and 

Miss  Eaton,  of  Yokohama,  to  take  a  furlough  in  1889 
230 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  231 

Late  in  the  }rear,  the  "  Belgic "  brought  four  recruits, 
Rev.  J.  L.  Dearing  to  Yokohama,  Rev.  G.  W.  Taft  and 
wife  to  Tokio,  Rev.  S.  W.  Hamblen  to  Sendai,  and  Rev. 
T.  E.  Shoemaker  and  wife  to  Shimonoseki.  Miss  N.  J. 
Wilson,  from  Burma,  in  search  of  health,  found  herself 
so  much  improved  upon  reaching  Japan,  that  she  devoted 
herself  to  work  in  Yokohama. 

In  1890,  Miss  Kidder  returned  to  Tokio,  accompanied 
by  Miss  L.  Adele  Phillips,  for  Sendai,  and  Miss  Clara 
Converse,  sent  to  aid  Mrs.  Brown  in  her  girls'  boarding 
school  in  Yokohama.  Including  the  missionaries  of  the 
Southern  Board,  and  the  English  Baptist  Mission,  there 
were  thirty-one  Baptist  workers'  wives  included,  at 
Yokohama.  A  great  extension  of  work  was  planned 
at  a  convention  of  nearly  all  the  Baptist  missionaries  in 
Japan.  The  growth  of  the  Theological  Seminary  de- 
manded more  attention  than  the  overworked  laborers 
could  give  ;  and  they  earnestly  besought  that  a  man 
might  be  sent  to  give  this  solemnly  important  work  his 
entire  attention.  There  were  training  classes  for  women 
at  some  of  the  stations,  under  the  care  of  the  missionaries 
of  the  Women's  Board. 

As  the  foreign  workers  were  confined  mostly  to  the 
treaty  towns,  they  could  only  rely  upon  native  agencies 
for  the  interior.  The  anti-foreign  feeling  was  a  great 
hindrance.  "  Japan  for  the  Japanese  !  "  was  the  war 
cry  of  a  large  party. 


232 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 


Miss  Olive  Blunt  went  to  Japan  in  1890,  designated  to 
Shimonoseki.  Miss  Lavinia  Mead  was  also  sent  to  Sen- 
dai.  Miss  Sands,  so  long  identified  with  the  Tokio  work, 
was  married  to  Rev.  J.  C.  Brand,  one  of  the  newly  ap- 
pointed missionaries  to  the  capital.  Mr.  L.  E.  Martin,  for 
years  a  teacher  in  Japan,  entered  into  the  service  of  the 
Missionary  Union.  Mrs.  Ellen  Sharland,  another  ex- 
perienced helper,  was  accepted  as  a  self-supporting  mis- 
sionary, and  designated  to  Shimonoseki. 

A  conference  of  Japan  missionaries  at  Kobe,  in  De- 
cember, 1890,  had  grave  questions  to  consider,  in  view  of 
the  present  crisis.  A  revision  of  the  Japanese  hymn 
book,  and  a  better  support  of  the  religious  paper,  "  The 
Mustard  Seed,"  were  resolved  upon.  The  imperative 
necessity  of  a  high  grade  boys'  school,  to  keep  the  sons 
of  Christians  from  the  contamination  of  government 
schools,  and  to  serve  as  a  feeder  to  the  Theological 
Seminary,  and  its  vital  importance  to  the  Baptist  cause 
in  Japan,  was  recognized.  An  earnest  appeal  for  twenty- 
three  more  men,  needed  to  save  the  Baptist  mission  in 
Japan  from  disaster,  was  signed  by  the  missionaries. 

At  the  Baptist  anniversaries  in  1891,  steps  were  taken 
looking  toward  the  raising  of  twenty-five  thousand  dollars 
for  such  a  boys'  school  in  Japan. 

In  1891,  the  English  Baptist  Board,  in  view  of  urgent 
needs  elsewhere,  offered  to  transfer  its  Japan  mission  to 
the  Missionary  Union,  which  offer  was  accepted. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  233 

The  history  of  Baptist  effort  in  Japan  must  include  a 
sketch  of  the  Nemuro  mission. 

In  1866,  Eev.  C.  H.  Carpenter,  of  blessed  memory 
among  Bassein  Karens,  wished  to  establish  an  independ- 
ent mission  in  some  destitute  place  in  a  temperate  climate. 
His  attention  was  drawn  to  the  Ainos,  on  the  island  of 
Yesso,  Japan.  The  Ainos  are  a  distinct  race  from  the 
Japanese,  probably  the  remnant  of  a  numerous  nation 
inhabiting  Japan  before  its  present  possessors. 

The  Carpenters  chose  Nemuro  as  a  location,  and  ex- 
pected to  spend  two  years  in  the  study  of  the  language 
before  entering  on  mission  work.  But  immediately 
native  Christians  appeared,  urgently  requesting  public 
worship  on  the  Lord's  Day.  A  good  beginning  was 
made,  but  in  less  than  a  year  Mr.  Carpenter  died.  Na- 
tive helpers  carried  on  the  work,  superintended  by  Mrs. 
Carpenter.  In  August,  1877,  Mr.  Carpenter's  brother, 
Mr.  L.  D.  Carpenter,  and  wife,  came  to  Nemuro.  But 
the  old  trouble  of  treaty  revision  came  up,  and  the  mis- 
sionaries could  not  stay,  unless  they  would  teach  an 
English  school.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Carpenter  left  the  mis- 
sion. An  ordained  native  preacher  came  from  Yoko- 
hama, and  after  three  weeks  faithful  labor,  organized 
the  church  in  Nemuro  with  eleven  members.  In  1890 
the  work  came  into  connection  with  the  Missionary 
Union,  while  still  supported  by  Mrs.  Carpenter.  Besides 
this  lady,  Rev.  W.  B.  Parshley  and  wife,  and  Miss  L. 


234  BAPTIST   FOKEIGN   MISSIONS. 

Cummings  are  at  Nemuro,  hard  at  work,  with  bright 
hopes  for  the  future  of  the  Ainos. 

The  report  for  1891  gives  the  native  Baptist  member- 
ship in  Japan  as  one  thousand  fifty-six,  one  hundred  and 
forty-six  of  whom  were  baptized  in  1890.  There  are 
thirty-six  native  preachers  and  forty-five  missionaries. 

The  religious  problem  in  Japan  is  a  grave  one.  The 
converts  to  Christianity  are  from  the  ruling  classes,  the 
educated  people,  with  whom  is  found  intense  national 
feeling.  They  aspire  to  a  Japanese  Christianity,  some- 
thing different  from  the  Western  faith.  The  danger  is 
that  it  will  be  a  composite  Christianity,  mingled  with 
elements  of  Buddhism  and  Shintooism.  Impatience  of 
missionary  control  is  one  of  the  signs  of  the  times. 
Japanese  Christians  are  moving  in  the  direction  of  a 
national  church,  to  the  overthrowing  of  denominational 
bars.  Baptists  will  not  object  if  the  Bible  alone  is  taken 
as  the  standard.  Dr.  Mabie,  the  Home  Secretary  of  the 
Missionary  Union,  after  having  in  1890  made  the  tour 
of  our  Asiatic  missions,  brought  this  word  of  hope  re- 
garding Japan :  "  Let  Baptists  get  ready  for  what  is 
coming  in  Japan  ;  they  are  turning  to  the  simple  Script- 
ures. A  large  body  of  them  propose,  Pedobaptists  that 
that  they  are,  to  dispense  with  infant  baptism.  I  am  not 
alarmed  that  the  Japanese  insist  upon  doing  their  own 
thinking.  They  will  presently  come  round  to  the 
truth." 


BAPTIST    FOKEIGN    MISSIONS.  235 

In  view  of  this,  American  Baptists  should  echo  Dr. 
Brown's  words,  with  prayer  and  purse,  "  God  bless  the 
Japanese  !  " 

In  1860,  the  Foreign  Mission  Board  of  the  Southern 
Baptist  Convention  resolved  upon  a  mission  to  Japan. 
Rev.  J.  Q.  Rohrer  and  wife  were  designated  to  that  field. 
They  sailed  in  October,  1860,  in  company  with  Rev.  A. 
L.  Bond  and  wife,  under  appointment  to  China.  The 
ship  that  bore  them  out  of  sight  of  watching  eyes  in  New 
York  harbor  was  never  heard  from  afterward.  After 
this  sad  event,  no  further  effort  was  made  in  this  direc- 
tion for  many  years. 

In  November,  1889,  Messrs.  McCullom  and  Brunson, 
with  their  wives,  reached  Japan,  appointed  to  begin  a 
mission  in  that  country.  After  inspecting  a  number  of 
places,  they  settled  temporarily  at  Kobe,  with  the  mis- 
sionaries of  the  Union.  With  the  advice  and  kind 
assistance  of  Dr.  Mabie,  while  in  Japan,  Osaka  was 
selected  as  a  point  of  permanent  occupancy.  The  Mis- 
sionary Union  had  made  a  beginning  in  Osaka,  but  they 
withdrew,  leaving  that  entire  field  to  the  Southern 
Board. 

In  March,  1891,  a  church  was  organized  at  Osaka,  of 
fifteen  members.  Forty-five  names  were  on  the  school 
roll.  An  earnest  plea  was  made  by  the  missionaries  for 
one  thousand  dollars  for  a  chapel,  and  for  co-workers  to 
meet  the  great  needs  on  everv  hand. 


236  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 


QUESTIONS. 

1.  Tell  the  story  of  the  jinrikisha. 

2.  What  compelled  the  use  of  native  agencies  in  country  work  ? 

3.  What  workers  on  furlough,  and  what  workers  in  1889  ? 

4.  What  missionary  sent  by  the  Southern  Board  ? 

5.  How  many  Baptist  workers  at  Yokohama  ? 

6.  Sketch  the  general  work  and  its  needs. 

7.  What  was  the  war  cry  of  the  anti  foreign  party  ? 

8.  WThat  new  workers  in  1890  ? 

9.  What  is  said  of  the  missionary  convention  at  Kobe  ? 

10.  What  important  measure  was  resolved  upon  at  the  Anni- 
versaries in  America  in  1891  ? 

11.  What  action  of  the  English  Baptist  Board  the  same  year? 

12.  Give  the  story  of  the  Nemuro  mission. 

13.  What  are  the  statistics  for  1890  ? 

14.  What  is  said  of  the  religious  problem  in  Japan  ? 

15.  What  word  of  hope  did  Dr.  Mabie  bring  from  Japan  ? 

16.  What  sad   providence   attended   the   first  attempt  of  the 
Southern  Board  to  plant  a  mission  in  Japan  ? 

17.  When  and  by  whom  was  the  mission  established? 

18.  Give  the  story  of  their  decision  to  locate  in  Osaka  ? 

19.  Latest  statistics? 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

THE   OLD   AND   THE   NEW. 

T)APTIST  missions  in  Africa  extend  back  nearly  to 
•*-*  the  beginnings  of  American  foreign  mission  work. 
In  1820,  two  colored  men  were  sent  out  by  the  First 
Baptist  Church  of  Richmond,  Virginia,  and  recognized 
as  missionaries  of  the  Triennial  Convention. 

For  some  years  missionaries  were  employed  in  Liberia 
and  West  Africa,  but  they  soon  fell  victims  to  the  deadly 
African  fever.  Going  to  Africa  meant  early  translation 
or  physical  wreck.  In  spite  of  reverses  the  work  ad- 
vanced. The  first  African  Association  was  formed  in 
1835,  numbering  five  churches.  The  Bassa  language 
was  reduced  to  writing  by  Rev.  W.  G.  Crocker,  who  also 
prepared  a  vocabulary  and  spelling  book.  The  printing 
press  came  in  1840,  and  soon  gave  the  people  primary 
books — Matthew,  Acts,  and  a  hymn  book.  In  1846,  a 
dictionary  was  published. 

But  the  West  African  Mission  had  been  attended  with 
such  singular  fatality  that,  in  1856,  it  was  indefinitely 
suspended. 

At  the  close  of  the  war  in  1865,  attention  was  again 

drawn   to   Liberia.     A   memorial   was   presented    from 

237 


238  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Baptist  representatives,  asking  aid  for  missions  already 
planted  in  Africa.  The  Board  appointed  four  colored 
men,  tried  and  true,  laboring  on  the  field.  One  of  these, 
Jacob  Von  Brunn, — a  Bassa  king,  a  Baptist  minister, 
and  a  Liberian  magistrate, — was  signally  successful. 
Kevivals  of  religion  followed  with  many  baptisms. 

War  in  Liberia,  occasioned  by  the  invasion  of  hostile 
tribes,  interfered  with  mission  work.  In  1876,  the  death 
of  Mr.  Von  Brunn  led  to  the  discontinuance  of  appro- 
priations. In  1881,  the  Woman's  Boards  assumed  the 
support  of  two  women  teaching  in  Liberia — Mrs.  Cath- 
erine M.  Hill  and  Mrs.  Matilda  Von  Brunn.  They  had 
charge  of  evangelical  work  as  well  as  of  the  schools. 
The  aid  given  this  field  has  lately  been  withdrawn. 

Thus  closes  the  brief  chapter  of  Baptist  mission  work 
in  West  Africa.     Its  record  is  on  high. 

We  turn  this  leaf  for  the  new  chapter.  Livingstone 
had  explored,  and  prayed,  and  died.  Stanley,  searching 
for  Livingstone,  was  led  to  explore  the  mysteries  of 
Central  Alrica.  The  reports  of  his  discoveries  caused 
English  Christians  to  send  the  gospel  to  the  millions 
in  the  Congo  valley.  What  the  Missisippi  is  to  America, 
the  Yangtze  to  China,  the  Amazon  to  South  America, 
the  Congo  is  to  Africa.  Its  broad,  fertile  valleys  sustain 
many  millions  of  souls,  perishing  in  spiritual  darkness. 

The  Livingstone  Inland  mission  is  of  English  Baptist 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  239 

origin,  and  for  six  years  was  supported  by  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
H.  Grattan  Guinness,  of  London.  In  this  time  it  became 
too  large  an  enterprise  for  private  control.  In  1883,  a 
chain  of  six  stations  connected  the  coast  with  Stanley 
Pool,  the  head  of  navigation  for  the  Upper  Congo.  A 
series  of  cataracts  separates  the  upper  from  the  lower 
river.  A  stern-wheel  paddle  steamer,  the  Henry  Reed, 
was  placed  on  the  Upper  Congo  for  missionary  service. 
Before  this  steamer  lies  open  fourteen  thousand  miles  of 
river  and  lake  shore,  where,  without  leaving  the  vessel, 
the  missionary  can  reach  more  than  half  a  million  souls. 

In  1883,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Guinness  made  a  formal  offer 
of  the  Livingstone  Inland  mission,  with  its  steamer,  its 
staff  of  twenty-six  workers,  its  seven  stations,  its  mission 
property,  to  the  American  Baptist  Missionary  Union, 
upon  the  single  condition  that  it  should  receive  vigorous 
support.  This  offer  was  accepted  in  1884.  The  work  of 
preparation,  rich  in  treasure  and  costly  lives,  had  been 
done,  and  a  prospect  of  magnificent  fruitage  was  at  hand. 
The  climate,  less  deadly  than  on  the  coast,  offers  a  fair 
chance  of  life  and  health  to  the  prudent  foreigner.  The 
death  rate  on  the  Congo  has  been  as  low  as  in  any  other 
mission  of  the  denomination. 

The  work  of  the  Missionary  Union  began  with  stations 
at  Mukimvika,  Palabala,  Banza  Manteke,  Lukunga, 
Leopoldville,  and  Equator  Station. 

The  location  of  the  stations  proved  exceedingly  wrise. 


240  BAPTIST   FOEEIGN   MISSIONS. 

Stanley's  road  was  on  the  north  side,  while  the  missions 
were  all  on  the  south  side  of  the  river.  Later  authorities 
have  adopted  this  route.  The  projected  railroad  con- 
necting the  Upper  and  Lower  Congo  is  surveyed  along 
this  side. 

A  glimpse  of  Palabala  reveals  a  strange  scene.  Mr. 
Clark,  mission  treasurer,  was  stationed  here,  and  his 
duties  seem  peculiar  to  one  unacquainted  with  the  cus- 
toms of  the  country.  There  is  no  currency  on  the  Congo. 
All  trade  is  by  barter.  Everything  is  paid  for  in  goods, 
even  the  salaries  of  the  missionaries.  Whatever  is  needed 
must  be  purchased  in  England  or  America,  and  sent  to 
be  used  just  as  money  would  be  elsewhere.  Palabala  is 
the  distributing  point,  and  therefore  appears  more  like  a 
commercial  establishment  than  a  mission  station,  for  here 
the  goods  are  received,  stored,  and  sent  to  the  up-river 
stations  by  native  carriers.  Yet  this  is  mission  work, 
and  evangelical  labor  is  not  neglected. 

Good  news  from  the  Congo  came  in  1886.  A  wonder- 
ful work  of  grace  began  at  Banza  Manteke,  under  charge 
of  Rev.  Henry  Richards,  and  continued  for  several  years, 
until  more  than  a  thousand  had  been  baptized.  The 
missionary  preached  twice  every  day;  in  a  single  year 
seven  hundred  sermons.  The  Congo  people  wish  sermons 
an  hour  and  a  half  long.  They  have  so  much  to  learn! 
For  six  years  Mr.  Richards  had  labored  without  a  con- 
vert, and  then  the  blessing  came.     The  candidates  were 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  241 

baptized  a  few  at  a  time,  after  careful  instruction.     The 
interest  spread  to  the  neighboring  stations. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  How  far  back  does  mission  work  in  Africa  extend? 

2.  Who  were  the  first  missionaries?     When  and  by  whom  sent 
out? 

3.  In  what  part  of  Africa  were  the  earliest  missionaries  ? 

4.  Sketch  the  early  history. 

5.  In  what  year  was  the  work  resumed? 

6.  Why  and  when  was  the  work  given  up? 

7.  What  later  work  was  done  by  the  women's  societies  ? 

8.  What  is  said  of  Livingstone  and  Stanley? 

9.  Describe  the  origin  of  the  Livingstone  Inland  mission? 

10.  What  was  the  development  of  the  work  in  1883,  as  offered 
to  the  Missionary  Union? 

11.  What  is  said  of  the  climate? 

12.  Name  the  stations  given  to  the  Missionary  Union. 

13.  What  is  said  of  their  location  ? 

14.  Give  a  glimpse  of  the  mission  treasurer's  work  at  Palabala. 

15.  Tell  the  story  of  the  revival  at  Banza  Manteke. 

SUPPLEMEXTAEY  HEADINGS. 

LEAFLETS. 

The  Pentecost  on  the  Congo.     Notes  on  Africa.     The  Congo 
Mission. 


Q 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

LIGHT   IN   DARKNESS. 

A  N  idea  of  one  feature  of  African  mission  work  may 
-£-*-  be  gained  from  the  story  of  the  chapel  at  Banza 
Manteke.  It  is  an  iron  building,  capable  of  seating  five 
hundred  people.  It  was  sent  out  in  sections,  which  were 
divided  into  man-loads,  for  carrying  it  up  country,  over 
ranges  of  hills  and  a  rough  road. 

Mr.  Richards  writes:  "The  chapel  is  not  all  from 
Tunduwa.  It  is  a  great  work,  for  we  have  only  about 
a  hundred  able-bodied  Christian  men  who  can  walk  a 
distance  of  over  fifty  miles,  and  bring  back  a  load  of 
timber  or  iron  upon  their  heads.  Many  of  these  have 
gone  down  four  times  for  loads.  Think  of  men  walking 
four  hundred  miles,  bringing  heavy  loads,  receiving  no 
pay !  The  women,  in  order  to  help,  worked,  and  gave 
their  earnings  to  carriers  for  bringing  chapel  loads.  We 
have  now  about  six  hundred  loads  up — four  hundred  yet 
to  come."  Later  we  read  of  the  chapel  erected,  and  in 
use  for  God's  worship. 

Equator  Station,  on  the  Upper  Congo,  directly  under 
the  equator,  is  planted  among  the  Balolos,  a  tribe  supe- 
rior to  any  other  yet  discovered  on  the  Congo.  With 
242 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  243 

superb  physical  development,  fine  intellect,  friendly,  in- 
dustrious, they  are  destined  to  play  an  important  part  in 
the  future  of  Africa.  They  excel  as  agriculturists,  and 
in  commercial  activity.  Experts  in  the  working  and 
smelting  of  brass,  many  of  the  results  of  their  craft  are 
very  artistic.  Their  dress  shows  their  superior  civiliza- 
tion, Not  an  idol  has  been  found  among  them.  They 
believe  in  a  Superior  Being  and  a  future  life,  but  not  in 
the  Christian's  God.  The  only  means  of  communication 
with  the  lower  river  is  by  the  steamer. 

The  dialects  on  the  Congo  are  varying.  Yet  all  in- 
vestigation goes  to  show  that  they  may  be  reduced  to 
three  or  four  written  languages.  The  New  Testament 
has  been  translated  into  one  of  these  tongues.  The  work 
of  translation  is  yet  in  an  incipient  state. 

Banza  Manteke  learned  the  rudiments  of  self-support 
at  an  early  day.  Mr.  Ingham  writes :  "  They  give  at  the 
meeting  a  collection,  which  is  taken  in  a  Scarboro  trunk, 
consisting  of  beads,  bells,  handkerchiefs,  and  little  bits 
of  cloth.  With  this  they  buy  food  for  the  sick  and  pay 
the  evangelist.  Cloth  that  is  of  no  other  use  will  bind 
up  ulcers,  which  I  must  dress." 

The  exploration  of  the  Upper  Congo  valley,  largely 
due  to  missionaries,  revealed  the  fact  of  a  densely  popu- 
lated, fertile,  well-cultivated  country  in  the  interior.  The 
trade  of  this  region  is  rapidly  increasing,  and  steamers 
are  multiplying  on  the  Upper  Congo.      Missionary  effort 


244  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

must  precede  the  trader,  or  much  valuable  time  will  be 
lost. 

In  1889,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Guinness  inaugurated  the 
Congo  Balolo  mission,  beyond  Equator  Station,  on  two 
main  tributaries  of  the  river.  The  work  is  auxiliary  to 
our  Congo  mission,  and  is  in  strict  co-operation. 

In  1890,  a  steam  launch,  the  "  Evangel,"  was  placed 
on  the  lower  river.  The  expenses  of  the  "  Henry  Reed  " 
had  been  provided  by  a  stock  company,  which  in 
view  of  its  enlarged  work  has  taken  the  name  of  the 
Congo  Steamboat  Company.  The  Congo  Balolo  mission 
built  the  "  Pioneer  "  for  its  use  on  the  upper  river. 

Irebu  was  founded  in  1890,  sixty  miles  below  Equa- 
tor Station.  It  has  probably  the  finest  site  of  any 
station. 

Matadi,  the  starting  point  of  the  Congo  Railway,  is  an 
important  and  busy  place.  A  mission  has  been  estab- 
lished, and  it  is  now  the  point  of  departure  for  the  up- 
country  caravans,  instead  of  Palabala.  Rev.  William  A. 
Hall  is  the  missionary  in  charge,  and  he  holds  services 
with  the  natives  who  come  down  in  caravans,  and  with 
the  workmen  on  the  railroad.  Kinjila  is  the  youngest  of 
the  stations,  established  in  1891. 

The  statistics  of  this,  the  latest  of  our  missionary  enter- 
prises, shows  encouraging  growth.  The  report  for  1890 
gives  thirty-five  missionaries  actually  on  the  field,  ten 
unordained  native  preachers,  four  hundred  and  fifty-four 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  245 

native  membership.    God  has  a  work  for  American  Bap- 
tists in  Congo  land. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Tell  of  the  chapel  at  Banza  Manteke. 

2.  Where  is  Equator  Station  ? 

3.  Describe  the  Balolos. 

4.  What  is  said  of  the  dialects  on  the  Congo  ? 

5.  Describe  a  collection  at  Banza  Manteke. 

6.  What  does  exploration  of  the  Upper  Congo  valley  reveal? 

7.  What  recent  mission  has  been  begun  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Guin- 
ness? 

8.  What  is  the  "  Evangel,"  and  where  is  it  at  work  ? 

9.  WTiat  is  the  Congo  Steamboat  Company? 

10.  What  second  steamer  is  on  the  Upper  Congo  ? 

11.  What  is  said  of  Irebu? 

12.  What  gives  Matadi  its  importance? 

13.  Give  latest  statistics. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 
M  Life  on  the  Congo,"  by  Herbert  Probert 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

LIBERIA   AND   SIERRA   LEONE. 

rjlHE  history  of  Liberian  missions  up  to  the  year  1846 
-*-  is  given  under  that  of  the  Triennial  Convention. 
After  the  organization  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Conven- 
tion, in  1845,  both  boards  had  missions  in  Liberia  and 
Sierra  Leone,  until  1856,  when  the  Missionary  Union 
withdrew  from  the  field. 

John  Day  and  A.  L.  Jones  were  the  first  missionaries 
appointed  by  the  Southern  Board  in  this  country.  Mr. 
Jones  died  before  entering  into  service,  while  Mr.  Day 
gave  thirteen  years  varied  and  efficient  labor,  which  ended 
only  with  his  death,  in  1859.  In  1850  there  were  sixteen 
missionaries,  teachers,  and  assistants  occupying  ten  stations. 

The  record  of  the  years  following  is  one  of  constant 

change  of  laborers.     The  coast  climate  of  Africa  is  most 

deadly  in  its  effect  upon  foreigners.    Nevertheless,  as  one 

worker  fell,  another  was  ready  to  take  his  place,  and  thus 

the  good  work  went  on.     In  1861,  there  were  reported  in 

connection    with    the    Liberian    missions,   twenty-three 

churches,  nineteen  pastors,  sixty-three  baptized  during 

the  year,  and  a  total  of  one  thousand  two  hundred  and 

fifty-eight  members. 
246 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  247 

During  the  war  in  America,  the  churches  in  Liberia 
were  thrown  upon  their  own  resources.  Aid  was  after- 
ward resumed,  although  the  opening  of  the  Yoruba  mis- 
sion, presenting  a  more  promising  and  needy  field,  caused 
the  transfer  thither  of  the  main  operations  of  the  Board 
in  Africa. 

The  Yoruban  mission  was  founded  in  1850  by  Rev.  T. 
J.  Bowen,  under  the  patronage  of  the  Southern  Board. 
His  associate,  Henry  Goodale,  died  in  Africa  before 
reaching  Yoruba.  For  two  years  Bowen  labored  and 
explored  with  indefatigable  zeal.  Returning,  he  pub- 
lished the  results  of  his  explorations  in  a  valuable  work 
on  Central  Africa.  Having  married,  he  hastened  back 
to  his  beloved  field.  In  1853,  Messrs.  J.  S.  Dennard  and 
J.  H.  Lacy,  and  their  wives,  were  sent  to  reinforce  the 
mission.  Rev.  W.  H.  Clarke  went  out  in  1854,  and  in 
1856  three  other  men  with  their  wives.  Four  stations 
were  opened,  missionary  houses  and  chapels  built, 
churches  and  schools  established,  and  the  saving  power 
of  the  gospel  made  evident.  But  death  and  disease 
caused  sad  havoc  among  the  laborers.  The  Dennards, 
earnest  and  devoted,  both  died  within  a  year.  Four  of 
the  rest  came  home  to  die,  and  others  returned  perma- 
nently wrecked  in  health.  Nine  years  faithful  service 
was  given  in  Yoruba  by  Rev.  J.  M.  Harden,  a  colored 
missionary,  transferred  from  Liberia.  After  his  death, 
his  wife  continued  his  work.    Rev.  A.  D.  Phillips  labored 


248  BAPTIST   FOKEIGN   MISSIONS. 

with  signal  success  from  1855  to  1867,  when  war  and 
persecution  drove  him  from  the  field,  leaving  his  beloved 
wife  sleeping  in  Africa.  Another  seven  years  well- 
rounded  service  was  given  by  Rev.  T.  A.  Reid,  who  also 
buried  his  wife  in  Yoruba.  Others  during  varying 
periods  of  labor  aided  in  the  work. 

During  the  war,  the  Yoruban  mission  languished.  In 
1875,  it  was  re-organized  by  Rev.  W.  J.  David  and  Rev. 
W.  W.  Colley.  They  found  gratifying  evidence  of  the 
faithful  work  of  the  preceding  years.  Many  of  the  native 
Christians  had  remained  steadfast,  and  the  leaven  of 
gospel  truth  was  steadily  working.  A  chapel  and  mis- 
sion house,  greatly  needed  at  Lagos,  were  erected  at  an 
expense  of  four  thousand  dollars.  The  work  was  much 
hindered  by  the  terrible  wars  raging  in  the  province. 
Yet  there  was  progress,  and  souls  were  continually  turn- 
ing: to  the  li^ht. 

In  1878,  Mr.  David,  broken  in  health,  came  home  in 
order  to  save  his  life.  The  same  year  he  was  married, 
and  late  the  next  year  sailed  for  Africa  with  his  wife 
and  child,  settling  at  Abbeokuta.  They  soon  buried  the 
little  one  under  the  tropic  palms.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Eubank 
joined  them  in  1882.  Messrs.  Smith,  Cook,  and  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Harvey  reached  Lagos  two  years  later.  In  June, 
1884,  Mr.  David  came  home  for  a  brief  change,  and  by 
six  months  incessant  work  with  tongue  and  pen,  aroused 
a  great  interest  in  Africa.     Returning  to  Yoruba  the 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  249 

next  year,  he  took  -with  him  the  material  for  a  new 
chapel,  costing  five  thousand  dollars.  In  his  absence, 
Mr.  Eubank  had  maintained  a  faithful  oversight  of  the 
mission.  He  says :  "  I  cannot  write  of  earnest  appeals 
for  the  gospel,  but  I  write  of  millions  going  down  to 
dearh,  not  knowing  nor  caring  for  the  way  of  salvation." 

In  1885,  the  harvest  time  began  for  Lagos.  About  a 
hundred  souls  were  converted.  The  next  year  the  mis- 
sion was  sorely  stricken  by  the  death  of  Mrs.  David. 
Her  dying  words  ring  like  a  trumpet  call,  "  Never  give 
up  Africa  !  "  Mr.  David  brought  his  motherless  children 
home,  then  hastening  back,  opened  a  school  for  higher 
education  at  Lagos.  Mr.  Smith  located  at  Abbeokuta 
and  married  Miss  Cynthia  Morris,  who  had  gone  out  to 
Africa.  The  Harveys  and  Eubanks  returned  home  on 
furlough.    The  latter  went  back  to  Africa  the  next  year. 

In  1889,  trouble  arose  in  Lagos,  resulting  in  the  divi- 
sion of  the  church.  The  five  stations  of  the  Southern 
Board  in  Yoruba  are  Lagos,  Abbeokuta,  Ogbomoshaw, 
Gaun,  and  Hausser  Farm.  The  reinforcements  for  1889 
were  Rev.  C.  C.  Newton,  wTife  and  daughter,  for  Lagos  ; 
Rev.  W.  J.  Lumbley  and  wife,  for  Abbeokuta.  The 
Smiths  were  transferred  to  Ogbomoshaw.  The  other 
stations  were  in  care  of  native  evangelists. 

The  next  year  Mrs.  Smith  died,  and  Mr.  Smith  and 
Mr.  David  returned  to  America  to  recruit  failing 
strength.     Four  churches  were  reported  in  Africa,  with 


250  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

fifty-eight  members ;  twenty-eight  schools,  with  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  pupils. 

In  1890,  the  Eubanks  removed  to  Ogbomoshaw.  The 
trouble  in  Lagos  presented  a  perplexing  problem.  But 
amid  the  shadows  there  was  cheering  light.  The  Dark 
Continent  shall  yet  be  illumined  with  the  glorious  beams 
of  the  gospel. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  In  what  year  did  the  Missionary  Union  withdraw  from 
Liberia  ? 

2.  Who  were  the  first  Southern  missionaries,  and  what  is  said 
of  them  ? 

3.  What  is  the  record  of  the  year  following,  and  why  ? 

4.  What  report  in  1861? 

5.  What  was  the  result  of  the  war  in  America? 

6.  To  what  mission  were  the  main  operations  afterward  trans- 
ferred ? 

7.  When  was  the  Yoruba  founded? 

8.  Who  was  his  associate,  and  what  was  his  fate  ? 

9.  WThat  did  Bowen  accomplish  during  the  first  two  years  ? 

10.  Later  reinforcements  ? 

11.  What  was  acomplished? 

12.  What  is  said  of  the  Dennards  ? 

13.  What  of  the  others  ? 

14.  What  is  said  of  the  Hardens  ? 

15.  What  of  the  Phillips  ? 

16.  What  of  theKeids? 

17.  When  and  by  whom  was  the  Yoruban  mission  reorganized  ? 

18.  What  results  of  previous  work  did  they  find  ? 

19.  What  aids  were  secured  at  Lagos  ? 

20.  What  is  said  of  the  work  ? 

21.  Give  account  of  Mr.  David  from  1878  to  1882. 

22.  Who  were  the  later  helpers  ? 

23.  How  did  Mr.  David  employ  his  next  vacation  ? 

24.  How  did  Mr.  Eubank  describe  the  condition  of  the  people  ? 

25.  What  is  said  of  the  harvest  year? 

26.  Give  account  of  the  death  of  Mrs.  David. 

27.  What  further  changes  ? 

28.  What  trouble,  when  and  where? 

29.  What  are  the  five  stations  of  the  Yoruba  mission  ? 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  251 

30.  State  reinforcements  in  1889. 

31.  What  changes  the  next  year? 

32.  Report  of  results  in  Africa. 

33.  Later  intelligence. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 
Central  Africa,  by  Bowen. 

LEAFLETS. 

Africa,  by  T.  R.  Bell.      Africa :  Its  Opportunities  and  Dangers. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

MISSIONS   IN    BRAZIL. 

rpHE  Foreign  Board  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Con- 
-*-  vention  began  work  in  Brazil  in  1859.  Rev.  T. 
J.  Bowen,  returning  from  Yoruba,  Africa,  offered  to  go 
to  Rio  Janeiro.  His  offer  was  accepted,  but  broken 
health  and  other  obstacles  soon  caused  him  to  leave  the 
field,  and  the  mission  was  abandoned. 

In  1873,  letters  were  received  from  a  Baptist  church 
of  English-speaking  people  in  Santa  Barbara.  Through 
their  pastor,  they  appealed  to  the  Southern  Board,  ask- 
ing that  missionaries  be  sent  to  preach  the  gospel  in 
their  country.  This  resulted  in  the  appointment,  in 
1879,  of  Rev.  E.  H.  Quillen,  as  a  missionary  in  Brazil. 
In  1881,  Rev.  W.  H.  Bagby  and  wife  were  sent  to  rein- 
force the  mission.  At  this  time  there  was  a  church  of 
thirty  members  in  Santa  Barbara,  and  another  of  twelve 
members  at  "  Station." 

March  4,  of  the  next  year,  Rev.  and  Mrs.  Z.  C.  Taylor 

joined  Mr.  Bagby.     These  missionaries  soon  removed  to 

Bahia.     A  report  later,  says,  "When  Brethren  Bagby 

and  Taylor  went  to  Brazil,  they  were  young  in  years 

and  experience ;  but  they  have  displayed  great  aptitude 
252 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  253 

in  learning  the  language,  and  ranch  wisdom  in  the  man- 
agement of  their  work." 

In  1884,  twenty  were  baptized  at  Bahia,  and  there- 
was  a  church  of  twenty-five  members.  The  next  year, 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bagby  removed  to  Rio  Janeiro,  and  in 
August,  a  Baptist  church  of  four  members  was  organized. 
A  year  later,  Messrs.  Puthuff  and  Daniel,  with  their 
wives,  and  Miss  Nina  Everett,  were  designated  to  Brazil, 
the  Daniels  to  locate  with  Mr.  Taylor,  at  Bahia,  the 
others  at  Rio  Janeiro. 

The  year  1887  brought  changes.  The  Taylors  and 
Miss  Everett  having  returned  with  broken  health,  and 
the  Bagbys  being  also  absent  on  furlough,  Rev.  E.  H. 
Soper  and  wife  were  placed  in  charge  at  Rio  Janeiro, 
and  the  Puthuffs  at  Santa  Barbara.  The  work  accom- 
plished was  done  in  the  face  of  fiercest  opposition.  The 
following  year,  the  Taylors  and  Bagbys  joyfully  re- 
turned, and  Miss  Maggie  Rice  was  added  to  the  force  at 
Rio  Janeiro,  and  J.  A.  Barker  and  wife  to  Bahia. 

In  1889,  Miss  Rice,  who  had  proved  herself  an  inde- 
fatigable missionary,  fell  a  victim  to  yellow  fever,  sorely 
bereaving  the  mission.  Miss  Emma  Morten  was  at  once 
appointed  to  take  up  her  work.  Fields  were  opening  on 
every  hand,  and  churches  being  established.  A  new 
station  was  begun  at  Meras  Geraes  by  the  Daniels.  The 
ill  health  of  Mrs.  Barker  at  Bahia  caused  Mr.  Taylor  to 
lose  these  valuable  helpers.     The  Sopers  also  were  com- 


254  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

pelled  to  flee,  leaving  the  Taylors  entirely  alone  on  this 
important  field.  A  recent  change  of  government,  in- 
volving civil  marriages,  religious  liberty,  and  separation 
of  Church  and  State,  gave  promise  of  better  things,  and 
the  removal  of  many  barriers  to  mission  work. 

The  Daniels  had  also  broken  down  under  heavy 
burdens,  and  had  gone  away  in  search  of  health  to  the 
States,  leaving  four  Baptist  missionaries  to  preach  to 
fifteen  million  Brazilians.  The  Bahia  church  raised  one 
thousand  dollars  toward  a  house  of  worship,  to  which 
the  Board  added  four  thousand  dollars,  thus  securing  a 
commodious  edifice. 

The  needs  of  this  field  are  as  "  great  as  the  mercies  of 
God.  and  the  depth  of  human  woe."  Rome  claims  fair 
Brazil,  and  only  by  hand-to-hand  conflict  can  her  power 
be  overcome.  But  the  battle  is  the  Lord's,  and  already 
are  there  tokens  of  glorious  victories  in  this  "  Land  of 
the  Southern  Cross." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  board  began  work  in  Brazil,  and  when? 

2.  What  led  to  the  adoption  of  the  field  ? 

3.  Who  was  appointed  as  the  first  missionary  ? 

4.  Who  was  sent  later,  and  what  results  of  work  were  visible  ? 

5.  What  missionaries  followed,  and  where  did  they  locate  ? 

6.  What  is  said  of  Messrs.  Bagbv  and  Taylor? 

7.  What  was  accomplished  at  Bahia? 

8.  To  what  field  did  the  Bagbys  remove? 

9.  Who  were  the  next  reinforcements,  and  where  sent? 

10.  Relate  events  in  1887  ? 

11.  What  loss  in  1889  ?    Who  was  sent  to  fill  the  vacancy? 

12.  What  encouragements  ? 

13.  What  is  said  of  the  Barkers  and  Sopers? 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  255 

14.  What  event  gave  promise  of  better  things  ? 

15.  What  is  said  of  the  Daniels? 

16.  What  evidence  of  self-help  in  Bahia,  and  what  was  the 
result? 

17.  What  is  said  of  the  needs  of  this  field,  and  the  claims  of 
Borne  ? 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

Brazil  and  the  Brazilians. 

LEAFLETS. 

The  Land  of  the  Southern  Cross. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

MISSION   IN   CtJBA. 

rriHIS  mission,  although  prosecuted  by  the  Home 
-*■  Board  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention,  is  as 
truly  a  foreign  mission  as  any  whose  annals  are  given  in 
this  history,  and  deserves  mention. 

When  Dr.  Carey  first  wrote  to  the  Baptists  of  America, 
urging  upon  them  the  claims  of  Judson,  he  said:  "I 
think  your  first  field  should  be  the  West  India  Islands." 
But  through  all  the  years,  this  field,  lying  at  our  very 
gates,  has  been  until  of  late  neglected. 

In  December,  1885,  Alberto  J.  Diaz  was  ordained  as 
a  Baptist  minister.  A  month  later,  a  Baptist  church 
was  organized  in  Havana,  with  Mr.  Diaz  as  its  pastor. 
In  1888,  the  Home  Board  reported  as  follows :  "  One  of 
the  most  remarkable  works  of  modern  missions  is  now  in 
progress  in  the  island  of  Cuba.  In  but  little  more  than 
two  years  since  the  organization  of  the  first  church  on 
that  island,  eleven  hundred  have  been  baptized.  Nine 
native  preachers,  some  of  them  men  of  marked  ability, 
have  been  raised  up  to  preach  the  gospel.  Daily  schools 
and  Sunday-schools  have  been  established,  where  hun- 
dreds of  the  children  are  taught  the  way  of  life.  And  so 
256 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  257 

rapid  1ms  been  the  increase  of  popular  favor  toward  our 
work  that  about  one-half  the  population  of  Havana  are 
in  sympathy  with  our  people.  Nearly  one-half  the  dead 
of  Havana  are  buried  in  our  Baptist  cemetery. 

"One  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  priests  on  the  island 
having  become  a  thorough  convert  to  our  faith,  and 
having  accepted  Christ  as  his  personal  Saviour,  has 
avowed  his  intention  of  uniting  with  our  Baptist  people 
and  preaching  the  gospel  in  Cuba. 

"  The  Lord  has  indeed  done  marvelous  things  in  Cuba 
for  us,  whereof  we  are  glad." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  By  what  Society  is  this  mission  supported  ? 

2.  What  did  Dr.  Carey  say  about  the  West  India  Islands? 

3.  When  was  Alberto  J.  Diaz  ordained  ? 

4.  When  was  the  Baptist  church  in  Havana  organized? 

5.  Who  was  the  pastor? 

6.  When  was  the  Baptist  movement  in  Cuba  first  considered  by 
the  Board  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention? 

7.  What  did  the  Board  say  of  the  work? 

8.  In  two  years,  how  many  had  been  baptized? 

9.  How  many  native  preachers  raised  up  ? 

10.  What  is  said  of  the  prospects  of  the  mission? 


R 


CHAPTER  XL. 

MISSIONS   IN   MEXICO. 

TN  1862,  Rev.  James  Hickey,  an  independent  Baptist 
-■-  minister,  went  into  Mexico,  and  in  1864  established 
a  church  at  Monterey.  This  work  has  been  followed  up 
by  the  Northern  Baptist  Home  Mission  Society. 

The  Foreign  Board  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Conven- 
tion began  work  in  Mexico  in  1880,  appointing  two  men 
already  on  the  field,  Rev.  J.  O.  Westrup,  and  Rev.  Wm. 
Flournoy.  its  missionaries.  Mr.  Westrup  was  murdered 
in  December,  1880,  by  a  band  of  Indians  and  Mexicans, 
probably  at  Roman  Catholic  instigation.  The  blood  of 
the  martyr  missionary  proved  the  seed  of  the  church. 
At  that  time  there  were  eight  Baptist  organizations  in 
Mexico  under  care  of  missionaries  of  the  Southern  Bap- 
tist Convention,  with  two  hundred  members.  Mr.  Flour- 
noy writes  :  "  The  law  gives  every  facility.  The  people 
wish  to  hear,  but  are  slow  to  understand.  The  priests 
oppose,  but  there  is  a  religious  awakening." 

In  1882,  Rev.  Wm.  Powell  and  wife,  and  Miss  Annie 
Mayberry  received  appointment,  reaching  Mexico  in 
October.     Their  location  was  Saltillo,  the  capital  of  the 

State  of  Coahuila. 
258 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  259 

The  work  was  immediately  successful,  the  preaching 
attracting  large  numbers.  Persecution  became  violenr, 
so  that  the  mayor  provided  police  protection  for  the  pub- 
lic services.  One  night  the  house  was  stoned,  but  God 
shielded  his  own. 

Mrs.  Powell  and  Miss  May  berry  opened  a  school  for 
girls.  The  only  way  to  reach  the  women,  who  were 
completely  under  the  control  of  the  priests,  was  to  visit 
them  in  their  houses,  and  tell  them  the  story  of  redeem- 
ing love. 

Eecords  of  success  are  ever  inspiring.  The  story  of 
the  Mexican  mission  cannot  fail  to  stir  the  heart  of  a 
true-hearted  Christian.  A  Baptist  paper  was  begun  in 
1883,  and  more  than  paid  expenses  from  the  beginning  ; 
a  mission  school  in  Saltillo  being  supported  with  the  net 
profits.  It  had  a  larger  circulation  than  the  combined 
membership  of  the  churches,  and  aided  materially  in 
spreading  the  truth.  A  generous  Bible  fund  aided  in 
scattering  the  gospel  far  and  wide  through  papal 
Mexico. 

Through  the  favor  of  Governor  Madero,  valuable 
property  came  into  the  hands  of  the  missionaries  at  Sal- 
tillo, on  exceedingly  favorable  terms.  The  most  classic 
building  in  the  city  was  an  old  unfinished  temple,  with  a 
stone  front  carved  in  beautiful  designs.  The  walls  were 
eighty  feet  wide  by  two  hundred  feet  long.  Work 
ceased  upon  it  in  1810,  waiting  through  all  the  years  for 


260  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

the  fullness  of  time  to  convert  it  into  a  temple  for  the 
Lord.  By  the  favor  of  the  governor,  this  property, 
which  had  cost  twenty-seven  thousand  dollars,  was  pur- 
chased, for  two  thousand  dollars. 

The  corner  stone  of  the  "  Temple  Baptist  Church  "  of 
Saltillo,  was  laid  in  February,  1885,  and  the  building 
stood  complete  in  1887,  a  beautiful  and  fit  monument  of 
the  faith  preached  within  its  walls. 

Beside  the  "  Temple,"  the  Board  purchased  the  "  Mar- 
queta,"  a  large  quadrangular  building,  one  story  high, 
with  court,  fountain,  and  -arcade.  This  was  renovated 
and  prepared  for  a  girls'  normal  school,  named  the 
"  Madero  Institute."  It  was  opened  in  October,  1884, 
with  seventy  pupils.  Miss  Addie  Barton  and  Miss  Mary 
C.  Tupper  were  appointed  teachers.  Senor  Jose  Car- 
denas was  the  principal.  An  Association  of  Mexican 
Baptist  churches  was  organized  at  Saltillo,  in  December 
of  this  year,  with  eight  churches,  representing  a  member- 
ship of  one  hundred  and  fifty.  The  idea  of  self-support 
and  benevolence  was  becoming  prominent.  The  Associ- 
ation raised  seven  hundred  dollars  for  the  support  of 
two  native  missionaries. 

In  1887,  we  find  the  line  of  Southern  Baptist  missions 
in  Mexico  complete  from  the  Kio  Grande  to  the  Pacific. 
In  March  of  this  year,  Eev.  D.  A.  Wilson  and  wife  were 
sent  to  Guadalajara.  Another  new  missionary  was  Rev. 
H.  P.  McCormick,  who,  with  his  wife,  was  designated  to 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  261 

Zacatecas,  where  they  were  joined  by  Miss  Barton.  Miss 
Tupper's  dangerous  illness  compelled  her  departure, 
greatly  to  the  sorrow  of  all* 

In  every  direction  there  was  a  harvest  of  souls,  and 
large  numbers  wTere  baptized.  But  persecution  was  still 
active.  Mr.  Powell  was  imprisoned  while  pursuing  his 
missionary  labors.  He  was  soon  released,  but  was  hin- 
dered by  the  enmity  of  the  priests  in  every  possible  way. 

A  great  enlargement  of  the  work  took  place  in  1888. 
Miss  Mattie  Withers,  Miss  Lucy  Cabaniss,  and  Mrs.  J. 
P.  Duggan,  were  sent  as  missionary  teachers  to  Madero 
Institute.  Rev.  H.  R.  Mosely  and  wife  were  appointed 
to  take  charge  at  Saltillo,  that  Dr.  Powell  might  be 
released  to  take  up  the  work  of  a  general  missionary. 
Rev.  A.  B.  Rudd,  and  Miss  Sallie  Hale,  went  to  Parras, 
Rev.  J.  G.  and  Mrs.  Chastain,  to  Matehuala,  Rev.  A.  C. 
and  Mrs.  Watkins,  to  Musquiz  and  Rio  Grande  district. 

Saltillo  is  the  educational  centre  of  Southern  Baptist 
missions  in  Mexico.  Beside  Madero  Institute,  with  its 
five  teachers,  and  seventy  pupils,  is  Zaragoza  Institute, 
designed  to  educate  young  men  for  the  ministry.  A 
Correspondence  School  is  also  conducted  by  Mr.  Mosely, 
for  the  benefit  of  native  preachers  who  cannot  leave  their 
churches. 

Dr.  Powell  thus  sketches  the  present  state  of  matters 
in  Mexico  :  "  The  morning  cometh !  We  have  carried 
the  work  from  the  Texas  border  to  the  Pacific  coast. 


262  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Opposition  is  waning.  The  Government  gives  us  full 
protection.  The  leading  dailies  in  the  City  of  Mexico 
and  throughout  the  Republic  expose  Romanism,  and 
defend  our  cause.  The  clergy  have  lost  ground  rapidly 
during  the  last  two  years.  All  our  churches  and  mission 
stations  report  prosperity.  Our  force  of  workers  is  in- 
sufficient to  occupy  the  territory  already  open  to  us. 
We  have  eighteen  American  missionaries  and  fifteen 
native  workers.  There  are  eighteen  organized  churches, 
and  about  six  hundred  members.  Truly,  '  this  is  the 
Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvelous  in  our  eyes  ! J  " 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  was  the  first  Baptist  work  in  Mexico,  when  taken  up, 
and  by  what  Society  ? 

2.  Describe  the  early  work  of  the  Southern  Board. 

3.  What  did  Mr.  Flournoy  write  ? 

4.  In  what  year,  and  by  whom,  was  work  begun  in  Saltillo  ? 

5.  What  mingling  of  success  and  persecution? 

6.  What  is  said  of  work  among  Mexican  women? 

7.  What  remarkable  success  attended  the  Baptist  paper? 

8.  Tell  the  story  of  the  "  Temple  Baptist  Church." 

9.  Tell  of  Madero  Institute  and  its  buildings. 

10.  What  is  said  of  the  Baptist  Association? 

11.  What  grand  result  was  accomplished  in  1887? 

12.  What  later  events  in  this  year? 

13.  Describe  the  enlargement  of  work  in  1888. 

14.  What  educational  institutions  in  Saltillo? 

15.  Sketch  the  state  of  the  mission  in  1890. 

SUPPLEMENTARY  READINGS. 

LEAFLETS. 

"Mexico,"  by  Rev.  F.  M.  Ellis,  D.  D. 


CHAPTER  XLL 

THE   MISSION   IN   FRANCE. 

T71RANCE  has  been  the  scene  of  varied  missionary 
-*-  effort.  Not  Paganism,  but  Roman  Catholicism, 
has  been  the  enemy  of  progress  and  gospel  light.  Rev. 
J.  C.  Rostan  opened  a  Baptist  chapel  in  Paris,  in  1832. 
Public  worship  was  maintained  under  successive  mission- 
aries until  1839.  After  this,  the  little  church,  pastorless, 
quietly  evading  the  notice  of  its  enemies,  for  many  years 
held  services  in  private  houses. 

The  Roman  Catholic  religion,  so  long  dominant  in 
France,  bitterly  fought  all  forms  of  Protestantism.  Louis 
Phillipe,  the  "  citizen  king,"  was  completely  controlled 
by  the  priesthood ;  and  the  story  of  Baptist  growth  and 
success  in  France  is  also  the  story  of  continued  persecu- 
tion. It  took  active  form  at  Genlis,  where  a  little  church 
had  been  organized.  One  of  the  members  built  a  neat 
chapel  upon  his  own  estate,  but  for  eleven  years  the 
magistrate  would  not  allow  it  to  be  opened  for  worship. 
The  magistrates  had  in  charge  the  execution  of  the  laws, 
and  were  willing  tools  in  the  hands  of  the  priests.  For 
some  years,  every  preacher- and  colporteur  was  liable  to 

arrest    and    fine    whenever    he    preached    the    gospel, 

263 


264  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Wealthy  brethren,  silk  merchants  in  New  York,  paid 
the  fines  of  these  persecuted  laborers,  that  the  truth 
might  be  proclaimed  in  spite  of  priestly  craft.  The 
magistrates  soon  discovered  the  fact,  and  sought  in  the 
Baptist  Missionary  Magazine  names  and  places  that 
they  might  know  where  to  strike.  Therefore  for  several 
years,  the  reports  from  France  were  printed  with  blank 
spaces,  that  they  might  not  supply  information  to  the 
enemy. 

The  revolution  in  1848  drove  Louis  Phillipe  from  his 
throne,  and  the  Eepublic  of  France  declared  religious 
liberty,  almost  annulling  its  force,  however,  by  declaring 
only  such  forms  of  religion  freed  from  civil  interference 
as  were  recognized  by  law.  The  condition  of  Baptist 
mission  work  was  improved,  but  annoyance  and  hind- 
rance still  remained. 

M.  Cretin  was  one  of  the  most  prominent  and  useful 
of  the  French  pastors.  Dr.  Smith  writes  of  him  in  1876: 
"He  is  a  modest  man,  but  energetic  and  persevering. 
He  has  written  more  on  Baptist  principles  than  any  other 
of  the  French  brethren.  Most  of  the  pastors  and  evan- 
gelists in  the  employ  of  the  mission  have  been  converted 
under  his  labors.  He  is  everywhere  denounced  by  the 
priests,  but  loved  and  honored  by  the  people." 

Dr.  T.  T.  Devan,  formerly  a  missionary  to  China,  was 
appointed  to  Paris  in  1848,  reaching  France  in  the 
earliest  days  of  the  Republic.     The  church  had  been 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  265 

scattered,  but  he  soon  formed  one  with  four  members, 
baptizing  forty-five  within  a  year. 

In  1849,  the  mission  was  divided  into  the  North  and 
Southeastern  departments.  In  the  later  were  Lyons  and 
St.  Etienne.  The  other  portion  was  near  the  eastern 
border  of  the  Great  Northern  Railroad.  Dr.  Devan 
removed  to  Lyons,  organized  a  church  of  four  members. 
In  spite  of  bitter  persecution,  the  work  advanced.  In 
1853,  when  Dr.  Devan  retired,  there  were  one  hundred 
and  six  members.  With  his  departure  the  cause  lan- 
guished, until  revived  under  the  faithful  care  of  M. 
Cretin.  In  the  Northeast  were  also  the  churches  of 
Denain,  Chauny,  and  La  Fere,  existing  against  heavy 
odds. 

M.  Dez,  a  faithful  preacher,  followed  Dr.  Devan  at 
Paris.  A  dark,  inconvenient  school  room  was  the  place 
of  meeting  for  some  years ;  the  only  baptistery  a  large 
tub,  in  which  the  candidate,  sitting  down,  was  submerged 
by  the  administrator,  standing  outside.  In  1873,  the 
church  dedicated  a  beautiful  chapel,  with  marble  front. 
During  the  time  of  the  Franco-Prussian  war,  the  work 
continued.  None  of  the  Baptist  church  members  in 
Paris  suffered  for  food  during  the  terrible  siege,  supplies 
having  previously  been  sent  from  England.  Only  one 
Baptist  French  soldier  was  killed.  In  the  bombarded 
cities,  not  one  of  the  Baptist  families  received  harm. 
Not  one  had  a  house  burned,  or  cattle  stolen. 


266  BAPTIST   FOBEIGN    MISSIONS. 

No  American  missionary  has  been  stationed  in  France 
since  1856.  Native  pastors  do  the  work,  reporting  to 
the  Missionary  Union.  French  Baptists  are  mostly 
poor,  but  much  of  the  means  for  prosecuting  the  work 
is  raised  on  the  field. 

An  educated  ministry  is  a  vital  necessity.  The  people 
have  so  long  been  crushed  under  ecclesiastical  despotism, 
that  it  will  take  years  for  them  to  reach  the  point  of 
independent  forethought  in  religious  matters.  Hence 
the  pastor  must  be  a  leader  in  an  especial  sense.  A 
paper  has  for  some  years  been  published,  called  "  Echo 
de  la  Verite,"  which  fulfills  an  important  mission.  The 
Eastern  Woman's  Board  appointed  three  Bible  readers 
in  1881,  to  labor  among  the  women  and  children. 

In  1833,  theological  training  was  attempted  in  Paris, 
and  continued  successfully  for  several  years,  under 
charge  of  Kev.  Henri  Andru,  assisted  by  two  other 
pastors.  In  1885,  there  were  two  graduates ;  one  a 
young  man  of  exceeding  promise,  M.  Philemon  Vincent. 
He  was  ordained  and  called  to  the  pastorate  of  the  First 
Baptist  Church  in  Paris.  He  has  entered  upon  a  career 
promising  great  usefulness  and  success. 

Rev.  Reuben  Saillens,  a  Baptist  director  in  the  McAll 
mission,  organized  a  second  church  in  Paris,  at  Rue  St. 
Denis,  especially  designed  to  gather  in  the  Baptist  con- 
verts of  the  McAll  mission.  In  1889,  there  were  four 
places  for  Baptist  worship  in  Paris.    In  1891,  we  find  ten 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  267 

churches  in  France,  fifty-two  preaching  places,  and 
thirty-three  workers.  The  immediate  charge  of  the 
work  is  in  the  hands  of  a  committee  appointed  from 
among  the  pastors,  who  decide  upon  all  ordinary  matters, 
and  report  to  the  American   Baptist  Missionary  Union. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  is  the  enemy  of  gospel  light  in  France  ? 

2.  What  is  said  of  Louis  Phillipe? 

3.  Describe  the  persecution  at  Genlis. 

4.  Give  further  details  of  persecution. 

5.  What  were  the  results  of  the  revolution? 

6.  What  does  Dr.  Smith  say  of  M.  Cretin? 

7.  Give  account  of  Dr.  Devan's  work  in  Paris. 

8.  In  what  year  was  the  mission  divided? 

9.  What  were  the  two  divisions  ? 

10.  Sketch  Dr.  Devan's  work  in  Lyons  ? 

11.  What  other  churches  in  the  Northeast? 

12.  What  of  M.  Dez'  work  in  Paris? 

13.  What  was  the  Baptist  record  during  the  Franco-Prussian 
war? 

14.  By  whom  has  the  work  been  done  in  France  since  1856? 

15.  Why  is  an  educated  ministry  a  vital  necessity? 

16.  What  aid  wTas  extended  bv  the  Eastern  Woman's  Board  in 
1881? 

17.  What  year  was  theological  instruction  begun  in  Paris  ? 

18.  What  promising  graduate  in  1885,  and  where  is  he  at  work? 

19.  Give  the  history  of  the  Hue  St.  Denis  church  in  Paris. 

20.  What  is  the  present  condition  of  the  work  in  France? 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  HEADINGS. 

Missionary  Sketches.    Rambles  in  Mission  Fields. 


CHAPTER  XLIL 

THE   MISSION   IN   GERMANY. 

TN  1834,  a  significant  baptism  occurred  in  Hamburg. 
-*-  Seven  persons,  believers  in  the  Baptist  faith,  were 
quietly  baptized  by  starlight,  in  the  river  Elbe,  by  Dr. 
Barnas  Sears,  of  America.  These  seven  constituted  the 
First  Baptist  Church  of  Hamburg.  One  was  John  Ger- 
hard Oncken,  who  became  the  leader  of  Baptist  work  in 
Germany.  He  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  little  flock,  and 
soon  after  entered  the  service  of  the  Missionary  Union  as 
General  Missionary. 

Each  member  of  the  Hamburg  church  became  a  vol- 
unteer evangelist.  The  converts  increased  with  marvel- 
ous rapidity,  and  the  light  spread  in  every  direction.  In 
1838,  the  seven  had  grown  to  seventy- five,  and  in  Ger- 
many there  were  four  churches  and  one  hundred  and 
twenty  members.  Each  of  the  churches  found  a  pastor 
among  its  own  membership. 

Active  persecution  began  in  1837.  In  Germany,  it 
was  the  Lutheran  Church  that  was  the  opposer  of  purer 
forms  of  worship.  The  clergy  made  complaint  to  the 
Hamburg  Senate,  and  the  police  were  directed  to  pre- 
vent any  further  Baptist  proceedings.  Decree  after 
268 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  269 

decree  was  issued  against  them.  A  moderate  degree  of 
success  might  have  been  tolerated,  but  the  wonderful 
increase  in  Baptist  membership  excited  alarm.  In  May, 
1840,  Mr.  Oncken  suffered  a  four  weeks'  imprisonment, 
and  when  set  free,  the  police  sold  his  furniture,  to  pay 
the  costs  of  his  arrest  and  detention.  Others  suffered 
fines  and  incarceration. 

From  the  5th  till  the  8th  of  May,  1842,  a  fierce  con- 
flagration ra^ed  in  Hamburg.  Dr.  Oncken  at  the  time 
wrote  that  "one  quarter  of  the  town  had  been  destroyed, 
and  many  lives  and  much  property  lost.  .  .  .  My  house 
and  those  of  Brethren  Lange  and  Kobner  have  been  full 
since,  having  received  upward  of  fnty  of  the  sufferers  into 
our  new  place  for  preaching,  which  I  had  rented  only 
fourteen  days  before."  On  May  5, 1843,  the  anniversary 
of  the  day  when  this  conflagration  began,  Dr.  Oncken 
received  a  decree  from  the  Senate  of  Hamburg  that  he 
"should  pay  three  hundred  marks  or  be  imprisoned  four 
weeks  for  having  administered  the  sacraments.''  He  was 
accordingly  committed  to  prison  on  May  15th,  the  state 
of  his  health  having  caused  the  short  delay.  Three  days 
later  he  wrote:  "My  heart  bleeds  when  I  think  on  the 
conduct  of  my  persecutors;  if  we  weep,  let  it  be  for 
those  who  forbid  us  to  preach  Christ  to  perishing 
sinners."  It  is  a  pleasure  to  record  the  fact  that  on 
May  19th,  the  day  after  this  letter  of  Dr.  Oncken 
was  written,  the   Senate  of  Hamburg  set  the  prisoner 


270  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

free,  and  that  he  was  afterward  left  undisturbed  in  his 
good  work. 

As  soon  as  these  persecutions  were  noised  abroad,  the 
Baptist  world  was  roused  to  protest.  The  Board  in 
Boston  sent  Dr.  Welch  to  confer  with  the  President  of  the 
United  States,  at  Washington,  requesting  his  influence  in 
favor  of  the  oppressed  Baptists  in  Germany.  There  were 
no  grounds  for  political  interference,  but  a  representation 
was  made  through  the  American  consul.  Various  bodies 
in  England  and  America  sent  petitions,  one  from  the 
former  country  bearing  live  thousand  signatures. 

Such  an  expression  of  outside  opinion  had  its  influence 
with  the  Government,  and  the  church  in  Hamburg  was 
thereafter  free  from  official  interference.  Other  parts  of 
Germany  were  less  favored.  Baptist  doctrines  everywhere 
seemed  to  arouse  the  hostility  of  the  National  Church, 
and  there  was  much  to  be  endured  in  behalf  of  the  faith. 
Still  the  word  of  the  Lord  grew  and  multiplied.  It  over- 
ran boundaries  of  state  and  province,  and  penetrated  far 
into  neighboring  countries. 

In  1837,  a  church  was  formed  in  Berlin  of  six  members, 
Rev.  G.  W.  Lehmann  was  ordained  its  pastor.  It  flour- 
ished greatly  in  spite  of  some  persecution.  In  1861,  it 
dedicated  a  commodious  house  of  worship.  Though 
formerly  a  despised  and  unrecognized  body,  it  dared 
invite  the  king  and  queen  to  the  dedication  of  its  sanctu- 
ary, and  a  deputation  from  the  city  council  was  present 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  271 

in  all  the  bravery  of  its  official  robes.  Mr.  Lehinann 
was  the  beloved  pastor  of  this  church  for  forty-five 
years,  when  he  was  called  above.  His  son,  long  his 
associate,  succeeded  in  the  pastoral  office. 

The  units  of  Baptist  membership  in  Germany  in  1834 
rapidly  multiplied  into  the  hundreds  and  thousands. 
Before  1849,  the  churches  were  banded  into  Associations, 
and  in  this  year  the  five  Associations  were  formed  into  a 
Triennial  Conference.  The  sessions  were  held  in  Ham- 
burg until  1855,  when  the  delegates  gathered  in 
Berlin.  Since  that  time  it  has  been  a  movable  annual 
festival. 

In  1853,  Mr.  Oncken  visited  the  United  States,  plead- 
ing eloquently  and  fervently  for  the  German  mission. 
As  a  result,  the  Board  voted  to  aid  the  missionaries  in 
building  chapels  to  the  extent  of  eight  thousand  dollars  a 
year  for  five  years. 

In  1858,  the  Hamburg  Baptist  Church  received  recog- 
nition from  the  Senate  as  a  religious  corporation.  April 
23,  1859,  this  church  celebrated  its  twenty-fifth  anni- 
versary. The  original  seven  had  become  seven  thou- 
sand, stretching  across  the  German  States  from  the 
North  Sea  to  Russia,  and  from  the  Baltic  to  the  con- 
fines of  Italy.  Still  the  aggressive  Baptist  hosts  of 
Germany  were  pressing  steadily  forward  to  the  four 
quarters  of  the  globe. 

We  find  in  this  twentv-fifth  vear  the  beginnings  of 


272  BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

theological  training  in  Germany.  Eighteen  young  men 
studied  for  seven  months  in  Hamburg.  Twelve  were 
soon  after  ordained  and  sent  into  the  white  harvest  fields. 
In  1881,  the  Missionary  Uuion  voted  an  annual  appro- 
priation of  one  thousand  dollars,  to  supplement  the  funds 
raised  in  Germany. 

In  1878,  Dr.  Philip  Bickel,  formerly  editor  and  mana- 
ger of  the  German  Baptist  Society  in  Cleveland,  Ohio, 
was  sent  by  the  American  Baptist  Publication  Society, 
to  take  charge  of  the  publication  house  in  Hamburg, 
made  over  by  Dr.  Oncken  to  the  German  Baptist  Union. 
Under  his  management  it  became  very  successful, 
gradually  enlarging  its  sphere  of  operations,  till,  besides 
publishing  half  a  dozen  papers  for  church,  Sunday- 
school,  and  mission  work,  it  sent  out  from  its  presses 
great  numbers  of  Bibles,  tracts,  and  other  religious 
literature. 

Dr.  Oncken  died  in  1884.  Born  with  the  century,  he 
labored  till  near  its  close ;  being  the  spiritual  father  of 
Baptist  work  in  Germany. 

The  jubilee  year  of  the  German  mission  was  cele- 
brated in  Hamburg  on  the  23d  of  April,  1884.  The 
original  seven  had  now  increased  to  nearly  thirty-two 
thousand. 

The  German  churches  have  always  given  evidence  of 
a  missionary  spirit.  In  1865,  they  sent  a  missionary  to 
German  colonists  in  South  Africa  ;  and  in  1867  to  China. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  273 

In  1851  the  work  extended  into  Russia,  where  Baptist 
principles  and  persecution  seem  to  flourish  together. 
From  two  hundred  and  forty  baptisms  in  1863,  the  num- 
ber grew  in  ten  years  to  more  than  thirty-five  hundred. 
The  Greek  Church,  the  Kussian  state  religion,  is  intoler- 
ant toward  all  dissenting  bodies.  Whether  imprisoned 
for  the  faith,  or  exiled  to  far  distant  Siberia,  the  laborers 
preached  Christ  to  those  within  their  reach.  In  1888, 
under  compulsion  from  the  Government,  which  will  not 
allow  foreign  organizations  to  control  anything  upon 
Russian  soil,  the  churches  formed  a  Russian  Baptist 
Union.  In  1891,  the  Missionary  Union  aided  the  cause 
to  the  extent  of  two  thousand  seven  hundred  dollars.  It 
was  through  Russian  exiles  that  the  gospel  was  intro- 
duced into  Turkey. 

The  work  in  Germany  has  never  been  conducted  by 
American  missionaries.  In  Mr.  Oncken,  God  gave  a 
leader  who  guided  the  Baptist  hosts  to  grand  victories. 
A  committee,  as  in  France,  appointed  from  the  workers, 
have  charge  of  the  field,  disbursing  wisely  the  appropria- 
tions of  the  Missionary  Union. 

The  work  among  German  young  people  is  most  hope- 
ful. The  young  men  are  active  in  Young  Men's  Chris- 
tian Association  organizations ;  the  young  women,  besides 
aiding  the  home  needs,  support  several  Bible  women 
among  the  Telugus. 

An  important  event  in  1888  was  the  dedication  of  the 


274  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

new  and  commodious  theological  seminary  building  in  a 
handsome  suburb  of  Hamburg.  The  land,  costing  five 
thousand  dollars,  was  the  gift  of  Mr.  J.  D.  Rockafeller, 
of  New  York ;  the  building,  the  result  of  contributions 
from  England,  America,  and  Germany.  The  seminary 
offers  a  four  years  course,  giving  opportunity  for  thor- 
ough study. 

Besides  the  missions  in  Denmark  and  Russia,  which 
have  become  independent  of  their  mother,  the  German 
mission  has  representatives  in  the  Caucasus  nearly  to 
Persia ;  in  Turkey,  Bulgaria,  Roumania,  Galicia,  Hun- 
gary, Poland,  Switzerland,  and  Holland.  "  Thus  are 
the  missions  of  Europe  reaching  out  toward  those  of 
Asia." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Tell  the  story  of  the  first  baptism  in  Hamburg. 

2.  Who  became  leader  of  the  Baptist  work  in  Germany  ? 

3.  What  was  the  marvelous  record  of  the  Hamburg  church  ? 

4.  Give  details  of  persecution. 

5.  The  great  fire  at  Hamburg ;  Dr.  Oncken's  imprisonment. 

6.  What  protest  did  it  arouse,  and  with  what  result  ? 

7.  When  was  the  Berlin  church  organized,  and  what  was  its 
history  ? 

8.  Give  the  date  and  circumstances  that  led  to  the  formation 
of  a  Triennial  Conference. 

9.  Where  were  its  sessions  long  held  ? 

10.  What  was  the  result  of  Mr.  Oncken's  visit  to  the  United 
States  ? 

11.  What  notable  event  in  1858  ? 

12.  Give  the  record  of  the  twenty-fifth  year. 

13.  What  is  said  of  theological  training? 

14.  Give  a  sketch  of  Dr.  Bickel's  work. 

15.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Oncken's  relation  to  Baptist  work  in 
Germany  ? 

16.  Give  date  of  his  death. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  275 

17.  When   was  the  jubilee  of  German  missions  celebrated? 
Give  statistics  of  growth. 

18.  "What  missionary  spirit  did  the  German  churches  evince? 

19.  Sketch  the  work  in  Russia. 

20.  What  is  said  of  the  work  among  the  young  people  ? 

21.  Give  an  account  of  the  dedication  of  the  theological  semi- 
nary building  in  Hamburg. 

22.  Give  the  extension  of  the  German  mission. 

SUPPLEMENTAKY  READINGS. 
Missionary  Sketches.    Rambles  in  Mission  Fields. 


CHAPTER   XLIIL 

MISSIONS   IN   SWEDEN. 

AS  Oncken  was  the  father  of  the  German  Baptist 
mission,  Andreas  Wiberg  was  that  of  the  Swedish. 
A  Swedish  sailor,  F.  O.  Nilsson,  converted  in  New  York, 
was  led,  five  years  later,  to  examine  the  subject  of 
baptism.  His  earnest  study  had  the  usual  result,  and 
seeking  in  vain  for  some  one  in  Sweden  to  baptize  him, 
he  went  to  Hamburg  and  received  baptism  at  the  hands 
of  Mr.  Oncken,  in  1847.  Later  he  was  ordained  in 
Hamburg,  and  returned  to  labor  in  Sweden. 

His  success  roused  Lutheran  hostility,  and  as  neither 
fines  nor  imprisonment  could  silence  him,  he  was  ban- 
ished in  1851,  leaving  behind  him  fifty-six  baptized 
believers.  He  became  pastor  of  the  little  church  in 
Copenhagen,  afterward  going  to  America. 

Mr.  Wiberg  had  been  educated  for  the  Lutheran 
ministry,  but  was  not  converted  until  1842.  He  was  a 
faithful  minister  of  the  Established  Church  for  six 
years.  But,  being  confronted  by  the  question  of  bap- 
tism, after  a  long  and  desperate  mental  struggle,  he 
became  convinced  that  he  had  been  in  error.  Hence- 
forth he  was  an  uncompromising  Baptist. 
276 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  277 

But  how  was  he  to  receive  the  ordinance  ?  The  only 
Baptist  minister  in  Sweden  had  been  banished.  Em- 
barking for  America,  in  search  of  health,  he  found 
himself  detained  at  Copenhagen.  He  received  baptism 
at  the  hands  of  Mr.  Nilsson,  July  23,  1852. 

In  1855,  Mr.  Wiberg  was  sent  back  to  Sweden  by  the 
American  Baptist  Publication  Society,  as  superintendent 
of  colportage.  In  his  absence  the  work  had  gone  on, 
and  he  found  five  hundred  Baptists.  A  book  upon 
baptism,  written  by  him  before  going  to  America,  had 
contributed  to  this  result. 

In  Sweden,  there  was  freedom  of  the  press,  if  not  of 
the  pulpit.  This  led  Mr.  Wiberg  to  put  the  truth  before 
the  people  in  the  "  Evangelist,"  a  semi-monthly  paper, 
begun  in  1856.  It  was  immediately  successful,  and  is 
now  the  organ  of  the  denomination  in  Sweden.  This 
same  year,  four  men  were  ordained,  and  appointed  by 
the  Publication  Society  to  do  colportage  and  mission 
work. 

The  year  1857  was  a  harvest  year,  in  which  one  thou- 
sand two  hundred  and  ninety-two  were  baptized.  An 
executive  committee  was  chosen  to  take  charge  of  the 
interests  of  the  mission.  Three  efficient  workers  were 
added,  Rev.  G.  Palmquist,  and  two  brothers. 

Another  valuable  worker  came  in  1858,  Mr.  Adolph 
Drake,  of  noble  birth,  educated  at  the  University  of 
Upsala.     He  was  baptized  in  Stockholm.     For  several 


278  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

years  he  edited  a  weekly  Baptist  paper,  and  has  long 
been  a  professor  in  the  Bethel  Theological  Seminary. 

A  new  chapel  was  dedicated  in  Stockholm  in  1863, 
costing  thirty-five  thousand  dollars.  Mr.  Wiberg  visited 
England  and  America  to  collect  the  needed  funds.  In 
this  country  he  aroused  great  enthusiasm  in  behalf  of 
the  Swedish  mission. 

The  American  Baptist  Publication  Society  has  the 
honor  of  inaugurating  the  grand  work  in  Sweden,  and 
carrying  it  on  successfully  for  ten  years.  Then  as  the 
work  had  grown  so  rapidly,  and  there  was  need  for  a 
general  missionary  service,  that  was  not  contemplated  by 
the  Publication  Society,  in  1866  it  was  transferred  to  the 
Missionary  Union.  Eev.  A.  Wiberg,  Rev.  K.  O.  Broady, 
and  a  little  later,  Rev.  J.  A.  Edgren,  all  natives  of  Swe- 
den, were  appointed  as  missionaries.  Messrs.  Broady  and 
Edgren  were  designated  to  Stockholm,  to  found  a  theo- 
logical seminary.  Mr.  Wiberg's  work  was  the  prepara- 
tion of  evangelical  Baptist  literature. 

The  Bethel  Theological  Seminary  opened  October  1, 
1866,  with  seven  students,  since  which  time  it  has  been  a« 
permanent  institution,  sending  out  its  yearly  graduates  to 
the  needy  northern  fields.  - 

The  Swedish  churches  were  not  unmindful  of  the 
regions  beyond.  In  1867,  a  church  was  organized  in 
Norway,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1868,  four  were  baptized 
at  Tromsoe,  north  of  the  Arctic  Circle,  near  the  region 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  279 

of  perpetual  snow.  On  the  last  day  of  December,  a 
church  of  fifty  members  was  organized.  The  ordinance 
of  baptism  was  administered  without  difficulty,  in  mid- 
winter, in  this  extreme  northern  latitude.  This  proves 
that  literal  obedience  to  the  Saviour's  command  is  no- 
where impossible.  In  1890,  there  were  reported  twenty- 
two  Baptist  churches,  with  fourteen  hundred  and  seventy- 
four  members  in  Norway. 

In  1868,  the  work  crossed  the  Baltic  into  Finland,  and 
took  firm  root.  The  Swedish  Conference,  in  1872,  formed 
a  Foreign  Mission  Society.  In  1874,  we  find  them  sup- 
porting a  preacher  in  Lapland. 

The  year  1877  was  a  year  of  gospel  triumph.  Two 
thousand  three  hundred  and  sixty  were  baptized.  Not 
one  of  the  twenty-four  provinces  of  Sweden  was  without 
its  Baptist  church.  In  October,  1883,  the  Swedish 
Bethel  Seminary  entered  a  commodious  building  in  the 
northern  portion  of  the  city,  erected  for  its  use  by  a 
liberal-hearted  deacon  in  Stockholm.  He  purposed  to 
make  it  a  free  gift,  but  unexpected  hindrances  prevented. 
It  was,  however,  secured  to  the  school,  and  now  stands  as 
an  institution  indispensable  to  the  Baptist  work  in  Sweden. 

In  1878,  a  second  Baptist  church  was  formed  in  the 
southern  portion  of  the  city.  In  1885,  there  were  re- 
ported five  Baptist  church  organizations  in  Stockholm. 

It  has  been  stated  that  the  United  States  receives  ten 
per  cent,  of  the  preachers  educated  at  Bethel  Seminary, 


280  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

and  also  ten  per  cent,  of  the  Swedish  Baptist  membership ; 
an  illustration  of  the  reflex  benefit  of  European  missions. 
"  He  that  waterebh,  shall  be  watered  also  himself." 

In  1887,  occurred  the  death  of  Dr.  Andreas  Wiberg,  the 
father  of  the  Swedish  mission.  In  1890,  the  number  of 
baptisms  exceeded  three  thousand.  A  great  revival  was 
reported  at  Sundsvall.  Missionary  zeal  was  proven  by 
most  generous  gifts.  The  churches  desiring  to  send 
missionaries  of  their  own,  one  young  man  was  already 
under  appointment  for  China.  How  fast  the  millennial 
day  seems  approaching ! 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Who  was  the  father  of  the  Swedish  mission  ? 

2.  Give  the  links  in  the  chain  leading  to  Wiberg's  baptism. 

3.  In  what  year  was  he  sent  back  to  Sweden,  and  by  whom? 

4.  What  leaven  had  been  working  in  his  absence,  and  with 
what  results? 

5.  What  is  the  history  of  the  "Evangelist"? 

6.  What  events  in  1857? 

7.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Adolph  Drake  ? 

8.  Give  facts  regarding  Stockholm  chapel. 

9.  WThat  Society  inaugurated  Baptist  work  in  Sweden? 

10.  When  was  it  transferred  to  the  Missionary  Union? 

11.  What  missionaries  were  appointed,  and  for  what  special 
work? 

12.  When  was  Bethel  Theological  Seminary  opened? 

13.  Give  an  account  of  work  in  regions  beyond? 

14.  What  is  said  of  the  winter  baptisms  in  Norway? 

15.  Name  the  great  revival  year,  and  its  results. 

16.  Give  an  account  of  the  new  building  for  Bethel  Theological 
Seminary. 

17.  What  reflex  benefit  does  America  receive  from  Swedish 
Baptist  missions? 

18.  What  is  the  date  of  death  of  Mr.  Wiberg? 

19.  What  are  the  recent  developments? 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

MISSIONS   IN   ITALY. 

TN  1870,  Dr.  William  N.  Cote  was  appointed  by  the 
-*-  Southern  Board  to  open  a  mission  in  Southern 
Europe.  In  September,  the  army  of  Victor  Emanuel 
threw  open  the  gates  of  Rome,  and  proclaimed  religious 
liberty  to  all  Italy.  This  event  led  to  the  establishment 
of  a  Baptist  mission  in  Rome,  under  the  very  shadow  of 
the  Vatican.  During  the  first  year  Dr.  Cote  baptized 
twelve  converts  and  organized  a  church.  Dr.  Warren 
Randolph  and  Dr.  J.  A.  Broadus  were  present  on  this 
occasion.  The  latter  wrote  to  the  Board:  "I  had  no 
idea  beforehand  how  interesting  and  promising  a  field 
Rome  would  be.  I  should  exclaim  vehemently  against 
any  idea  of  abandoning  it." 

In  1872,  were  reported  six  churches,  with  a  member- 
ship of  two  hundred  and  seventy-one.  Difficulties  having 
arisen,  Dr.  J.  B.  Jeter  was  sent  to  Rome  as  a  special 
agent  of  the  Board.  As  a  result,  Dr.  Cote  and  some 
native  helpers  retired  from  the  service  of  the  Southern 
Baptist  Convention. 

In  1873,  Rev.  George  B.  Taylor  was  appointed  super- 
intendent of  missions  in  Italy.     It  was  a  difficult  task  set 

281 


282  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

before  him,  to  bring  harmony  out  of  discord,  order  out 
of  confusion,  from  the  ruins  of  what  had  been,  to  lay 
broad  and  deep  foundations  for  better  things.  He 
proved  eminently  the  man  for  the  need,  evincing  singu- 
lar wisdom  and  prudence,  and  although  progress  has 
been  of  necessity  slow,  it  has  been  sure. 

God  raised  for  the  work  faithful  evangelists,  who  went 
about  preaching  the  gospel.  This  aroused  persecution. 
Nothing  else  could  be  expected  in  Rome.  But  the  faith- 
ful preachers  did  not  deny  their  Lord,  and  the  simple 
truth  was  spread  for  and  wide. 

A  chapel  was  built  at  Rome  in  1878,  at  a  cost  of  twenty- 
seven  thousand  dollars,  in  the  raising  of  which  the  South- 
ern Board  was  aided  by  Northern  churches,  and  by 
Baptists  in  Great  Britain.  It  was  a  great  achievement, 
for  many  years  a  crushing  burden  to  Mr.  Taylor,  and 
one  which  had  sorely  tested  his  powers  of  endurance.  In 
1880,  Rev.  J.  H.  and  Mrs.  Eager  joined  the  mission  in 
Rome.  They  are  making  a  grand  record.  Besides 
Messrs.  Taylor  and  Eager,  there  were  ten  Italian 
preachers,  and  twelve  stations,  with  an  aggregate  mem- 
bership of  two  hundred  and  twenty. 

In  1884,  the  churches  in  Italy  organized  into  "  An 
Apostolic  Baptist  Union,"  with  the  view  of  promoting 
the  principles  common  to  Baptists.  A  religious  paper, 
called  "II  Testinionio,"  was  established. 

Dr.  Taylor,  with  enfeebled  health,  was  granted  leave 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  283 

of  absence.  In  his  last  report  before  bis  vacation,  be 
says:  "  If  I  leave  this  mission  for  a  season,  it  is  from  no 
lack  of  devotion  to  its  interests,  but  boping  to  return, 
strengthened  in  body  and  mind  for  the  work." 

The  Island  of  Sardinia  proved  a  peculiarly  interest- 
ing and  hopeful  field.  In  1887,  Baptist  churches 
were  dotting  Italy,  from  the  Alps  to  the  toe  of  the 
great  peninsula.  Rome,  Bologna,  Milan,  Naples,  and 
Venice,  were  all  illuminated  with  beams  of  gospel 
light. 

Dr.  Eager  writes :  "  Italy  is  one  of  the  hard  mission 
fields.  Missionaries  from  India,  Japan,  China,  and  other 
lands,  who  have  been  in  Rome,  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that 
this  field  presents,  in  some  respects,  even  greater  difficul- 
ties than  pagan  fields. 

"  But  there  is  a  bright  side  to  the  picture.  Great  and 
prophetic  changes  have  taken  place  in  Italy,  and  en- 
couraging signs  have  appeared  to  cheer  the  hearts  and 
strengthen  the  hands  of  Christian  laborers." 

Mrs.  Eager  writes :  "  Until  1870  not  one  Roman  dared 
declare  himself  evangelical,  and  no  foreign  Protestant 
could  worship  within  the  walls  of  Rome.  Now,  in  1887, 
there  are,  connected  with  all  denominations,  eight  thou- 
sand seven  hundred  and  eight-one  church  members,  four 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty-eight  Sunday-school 
pupils,  eighty-two  colporteurs,  one  hundred  and  ninety- 
two  preachers,  two  hundred  and  fifty-six  churches  and 


284  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS, 

stations,  fifty  orphan  asylums,  and  nine  religious  papers, 
either  monthly  or  weekly." 

These  figures  represent  much  hard  work  and  many 
tears.  Christian  work  and  influence  cannot  be  tabulated, 
hence  the  above  statistics  give  a  very  inadequate  idea  of 
what  has  been  done  in  Home. 

Dr.  Taylor  speaks  in  these  concluding  words :  "  I  am 
often  cast  down,  but  I  remember  that  in  this  city  the 
Roman  Senate  voted  thanks  even  to  an  imprudent  and 
unsuccessful  consul,  who  had  just  lost  a  great  battle,  be- 
cause he  had  not  despaired  of  the  Republic ;  and  I  am 
by  no  means  in  despair.  I  cannot  believe  our  Roman 
church  was  born  to  die.  But  I  also  remember  the  Roman 
Senate  did  something  more  than  render  thanks  to  their 
executive  agent,  for  they  decreed  new  levies  and  raised 
more  money  to  retrieve  the  past  and  carry  on  the  war. 
Without  a  considerable  increase  of  expense,  we  are  likely 
to  fall  sadly  behind  others,  who  in  every  direction  are 
lengthening  their  cords  and  strengthening  their  stakes, 
at  least  in  the  wav  of  instrurnentalirv." 


QUESTIONS. 

1.  When  and  by  whom  was  Dr.  Cote  appointed? 

2.  What  political  event  led  to  the  selection  of  Rome? 

3.  Describe   the   organization  of  the   church,   and  give   Dr. 
Broadus'  message. 

4.  What  results  in  1872? 

5.  What  was  Dr.  Jeter's  mission,  and  what  were  its  results? 

6.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Taylor's  appointment  ? 

7.  What  is  said  of  the  native  evangelists  ? 

8.  Give  an  account  of  the  chapel  in  Rome. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  285 

9.  What  new  missionaries  in  1880?     What  was  the  working 
force  and  record  for  that  year  ? 

10.  What  organization  of  Italian  churches  in  1884,  and  what 
was  its  object? 

11.  What  paper  was  published ? 

12.  What  is  said  of  Dr.  Taylor? 

13.  What  does  Mr.  Eager  say  of  Italy  ? 

14.  Give  Mrs.  Eager's  summary  of  results. 

15.  {State  Mr.  Eager's  appeal. 

SUPPLEMENTAEY  HEADINGS. 

LEAFLET. 

Evangelical  Italy. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

MISSIONS   IN   DENMARK,    GREECE,   AND   SPAIN. 

BAPTIST  Denmark  is  the  daughter  of  Baptist  Ger- 
many. Mr.  Oncken,  visiting  Copenhagen  in  1839, 
baptized  a  small  band  of  believers,  forming  them  into  a 
church.  This  event  roused  the  bitterest  opposition.  The 
State  Church  could  not  brook  the  Baptist  rejection  of 
infant  baptism  and  baptismal  regeneration.  They  were 
denounced  as  the  successors  of  the  Anabaptists  of  Mun- 
ster,  against  whom  the  sternest  laws  had  been  enforced 
in  an  earlier  century. 

The  little  church,  with  its  pastor,  Peter  Moenster,  was 
forbidden  to  hold  meetings  or  practice  the  ordinances. 
Obedience  to  God  rather  than  man  brought  upon  them 
great  sufferings.  Still  the  light  spread  and  converts  mul- 
tiplied. English  and  American  Baptists  made  repeated 
efforts  to  gain  toleration  for  their  Danish  brethren,  but 
not  till  1850  was  there  much  alleviation.  The  Lutheran 
clergy  were  determined  to  rid  the  kingdom  of  the  Baptist 
plague  spot,  and  only  when  public  opinion  became  too 
strong  for  king  and  clergy  did  the  persecution  lighten. 

The  first  Association  of  Baptist  churches  in  Denmark 

was  formed  in  1849,  the  second  in  1865.     In  1890,  there 

286 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  287 

were  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and  ten  Baptists  in 
the  kingdom.  The  churches  suffer  constant  loss  by  emi- 
gration. Danish  Baptists,  as  a  whole,  are  not  in  favor 
of  ministerial  education,  hence  they  are  not  as  progres- 
sive as  in  Sweden. 

In  1887,  the  Danish  churches  withdrew  from  the  Ger- 
man Baptist  Union,  and  formed  an  independent  organi- 
zation. The  next  year  revivals  swept  the  country,  and 
there  was  a  net  gain  of  two  hundred  and  fourteen  mem- 
bers. A  year  later,  the  Copenhagen  church  built  a  beau- 
tiful chapel,  dedicating  it  October  30,  1889,  its  jubilee 
anniversary. 

The  Danish  department  of  Morgan  Park  Theological 
Seminary,  in  America,  supplies  a  few  trained  laborers, 
and  is  gradually  making  the  churches  more  enlightened 
and  progressive.  Interest  in  foreign  mission  work  is  not 
wanting.  Three  Danish  brethren  are  laboring  on  the 
Congo,  under  the  Missionary  Union.  In  1890,  the  chil- 
dren in  the  Danish  Baptist  Sunday-schools  gave  one 
hundred  dollars  toward  the  work  in  Africa. 

The  reports  for  1890  show  a  revival  spirit  present  in 
Denmark.  The  aid  given  the  struggling  Baptist  cause 
in  this  little  kingdom  is  bringing  forth  fruit  a  hundred- 
fold. 

The  modern  Greek  Church  is  near  of  kin  to  the  Roman 
Catholic,  and  is  equally  intolerant  of  freedom  of  con- 


288  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

science.  In  1836,  Rev.  Horace  Love  and  Rev.  Cephas 
Pasco  located  at  Patras  and  soon  opened  a  school.  In 
1838,  Mr.  Love  removed  to  Zante. 

The  first  convert  was  baptized  in  1840,  at  Corfu,  and 
employed  as  an  assistant.  Rev.  R.  I\  and  Mrs.  Buel  came 
in  1841,  and  the  work  began  to  move  slowly  forward. 

Rev.  A.  N.  Arnold  was  designated  to  Corfu  in  1844. 
Mr.  Buel  removed  to  Pirseus,  and  published  a  Greek 
translation  of  Wayland's  "  Moral  Science,"  and  other 
works,  which  were  received  with  great  favor.  But  the 
success  of  the  mission  seemed  so  doubtful  that  only  the 
persistent  faith  of  the  missionaries  prevented  its  discon- 
tinuance. 

In  1851,  Mr.  Arnold  removed  to  Athens.  Before  this 
there  had  been  mutterings  of  opposition,  but  now  they 
grew  more  pronounced  and  bitter.  The  next  year  the 
church  numbered  thirteen,  of  whom  seven  were  Greeks. 
Mr.  Arnold's  congregation  was  mainly  a  few  young  men 
from  the  university,  attracted  by  the  elegance  of  his 
Greek.  The  year  following,  both  Mr.  Arnold  and  Mr. 
Buel  returned  to  America.  An  assistant,  D.  Sakellarios, 
continued  to  labor  until  1856,  when  the  mission  was  sus- 
pended for  fifteen  years. 

In  1871,  the  Missionary  Union  appointed  Mr.  Sakel- 
larios again  to  labor  in  Greece.  He  had  qualified  him- 
self for  this  work  by  a  course  of  study  at  Newton  Theo- 
logical Seminary.     He  was  ordained,  and  with  his  wife 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  289 

located  at  Athens.  They  were  abundant  in  labors,  with 
here  and  there  a  convert;  but  as  the  set  time  to  favor 
Greece  had  not  yet  appeared,  the  mission  was  discon- 
tinued in  1886. 

The  fall  of  the  Spanish  monarchy,  followed  by  the 
proclamation  of  the  Republic,  opened  the  way  for  Prot- 
estant missions.  The  home  of  the  Inquisition,  Spain  had 
been  for  centuries  the  hotbed  of  Roman  Catholic  bigotry 
and  intolerance.  Prof.  W.  I  Knapp,  having  established 
an  independent  mission  in  Madrid,  was,  in  1870,  adopted 
by  the  Missionary  Union.  In  August  of  this  year,  the 
First  Baptist  Church  of  Madrid  was  organized,  with 
thirty-three  members.  Another  at  Alicante  soon  fol- 
lowed, and  native  Spaniards  ordained  as  pastors.  Mr. 
Knapp  gave  his  attention  to  the  training  of  evangelists. 

In  1871,  G.  S.  Benoliel,  an  eloquent  speaker,  was  con- 
verted and  baptized,  proving  just  the  man  needed  for  the 
Madrid  church.  Large  numbers  were  attracted  to  the 
chapel  by  his  fervid  appeals.  For  several  years  the  work 
prospered  greatly.  There  were  in  1874  four  churches, 
four  native  pastors,  and  a  membership  of  two  hundred 
and  forty-four. 

In  1876,  Mr.  Knapp  returned  to  America.  Missions 
were  planted  at  important  centres,  and  he  believed  the 
work  might  safely  be  left  without  the  presence  of  an 
American   missionary.      But   events   proved   otherwise. 


290  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

Reverses  followed,  hot  persecution  scattered  the  flock, 
until  the  onlv  station  was  at  Barcelona.  In  1881, 
changes  in  the  civil  ministrv  brought  some  relief  from 
persecution.  Rev.  E.  Lund,  a  Swede,  was  sent  from  this 
country  to  Spain  in  1883,  arriving  there  at  a  critical 
moment,  finding  himself  the  only  missionary  to  Spain. 
Under  his  wise  management  the -mission  was  saved  to 
the  Baptist  denomination.  Four  years  later,  Rev.  M.  C. 
Marin  was  associated  with  him.  Ill  health  drove  the 
older  missionary  home,  but  his  return  in  1890  was  the 
signal  for  a  new  campaign  of  evangelizing  effort.  There 
are  three  principal  centres  of  work — at  Barcelona,  Es- 
cala,  and  Figueras.  If  the  present  aggressive  plans  are 
carried  into  execution,  we  may  expect  very  encouraging 
news  from  Spain  in  the  near  future. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  Whose  daughter  is  Baptist  Denmark  ? 

2.  Give  earliest  history  of  the  work. 

3.  Describe  the  persecution  in  detail. 

4.  Give  statistics  of  progress. 

5.  What  is  said  of  Danish  Baptists  ? 

6.  When  was  independent  organization  formed  ? 

7.  Where  is  Danish  theological  instruction  given? 

8.  What  foreign  mission  work  is  carried  on  ? 

9.  What  is  its  present  condition  ? 

10.  What  is  said  of  the  Greek  Church  ? 

11.  Give  early  history  of  work  in  Greece. 

12.  Give  account  of  the  baptism  of  first  convert. 

13.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Buel's  work  ? 

14.  What  kept  the  mission  alive  ? 

15.  Give  details  of  Dr.  Arnold's  work  in  Athens. 

16.  At  what  date  was  the  mission  suspended? 

17.  Tell  the  story  of  the  later  work. 

18.  What  opened  the  way  for  Baptist  missions  in  Spain  ? 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  291 

19.  Give  details  of  the  first  Baptist  missions. 

20.  What  eloquent  man  was  converted  in  1881  ? 

21.  Give  results  in  1874. 

22.  What  followed  Mr.  Knapp's  return  to  America? 

23.  What  brought  some  relief  from  persecution  in  1881  ? 

24.  What  is  said  of  Mr.  Lund's  work  ? 

25.  Who  was  the  later  associate  ? 

26.  What  is  the  present  condition  of  the  work  ? 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

THE   PUBLICATION   SOCIETY'S   WORK   IN   TURKEY. 

A  PROVIDENTIAL  opening  led  the  American 
-*--*-  Baptist  Publication  Society  in  1883,  to  send  Dr. 
Haygooni  as  colporteur  to  Constantinople,  in  the  same 
way  as  colpurteurs,  book  and  tract  distributors  have 
been  sent  to  Germany,  Sweden,  and  Denmark.  In 
explanation  of  the  causes  that  laid  the  work  with  especial 
force  upon  the  Baptist  denomination,  we  quote  the  words 
of  Dr.  Bitting  :  "  All  native  Oriental  sects  are  immer- 
sionists,  even  when  administering  the  rite  to  infants. 
The  use  of  the  Scriptures  is  not  denied  to  the  people, 
who,  by  heredity,  and  by  the  study  of  the  Bible,  believe 
in  the  act  of  immersion  as  Baptists  believe.  Immersion 
is  the  practice  of  both  the  Greeks  and  Gregorians.  It  is 
not  therefore  strange  that  Pedobaptists  make  small 
progress,  and  find  it  difficult  to  persuade  or  retain  their 
adherents  in  the  practice  of  substituting  something  else 
for  Scripture  baptism,  nor  that  some  reaction  should 
occur  among  their  converts. 

"  True  discipleship,  in  modern  times,  is  as  invincible 
as  in  the  old.  Like  Judson,  in  India ;  Oncken,  in  Ger- 
many ;  Wiberg,  in  Sweden ; — these  Armenians  and  Bul- 
292 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  293 

garians  had  studied  the  Scriptures,  and  straightway 
began  to  do  and  to  teach  what  they  had  learned.  The 
movement  among  the  Armenians  was  purely  spontaneous. 
No  missionaries  taught  them,  for  no  Baptists  were  there, 
and  the  men  themselves  tell  us  that  they  did  not  know 
such  a  denomination  existed  separately  from  other  evan- 
gelicals. They  tell  us  that  their  '  convictions  came  from 
the  study  of  the  Scriptures,  and  not  from  the  teachings 
of  missionaries.' " 

Dr.  Melchonian,  an  Armenian  educated  in  this  country, 
and  a  Baptist  from  conviction,  sailed  for  Armenia  in 
March,  1884.  His  heart  burned  with  desire  to  carry  a 
pure  gospel  to  his  countrymen  in  Bible  lands.  The 
Missionary  Union  not  considering  themselves  at  liberty 
to  enter  Turkey  as  a  mission  field,  on  account  of  its  prior 
occupancy  by  another  denomination,  the  Publication 
Society  agreed  to  be  the  medium  of  transmission  for  all 
funds  contributed  for  his  support.  The  work  grew  most 
surprisingly,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  support  fur- 
nished was  far  below  the  needs  of  the  case. 

In  1885,  a  remarkable  thing  occurred.  A  native 
Armenian  pastor,  who  built  up  among  his  people  a  large 
church  of  nearly  seven  hundred  members,  self-supporting, 
and  strong  in  a  spiritual  sense,  came  to  this  country  for 
further  education.  While  here,  he  became  a  Baptist. 
Word  soon  came  that  his  church,  studying  independently, 
ignorant  of  the  experiences  of  their  absent  pastor,  had 


294  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

reached  the  same  convictions,  and  were  ready  to  accept 
Baptist  ordinances  in  a  body.  Funds  were  collected, 
and  he  joyfully  hastened  back  to  his  waiting  people. 

Thus  the  truth  spread,  and  mightily  prevailed.  Bap- 
tist truth  was  on  its  native  soil,  and  its  simple  presenta- 
tion won  for  it  instant  acceptance.  In  1891,  the  work 
had  outgrown  the  scope  of  the  Publication  Society,  and 
in  justice  to  other  claims,  it  could  no  longer  be  carried. 

The  law  of  comity  ruling  in  the  relations  of  the 
various  denominational  societies,  prevented  the  Mission- 
ary Union  from  taking  up  this  deeply  interesting  and 
hopeful  field.  Thus  the  matter  at  present  stands.  May 
God  open  the  way  for  American  Baptists  to  still  further 
aid  these  struggling  churches  in  this  cradle-land  of 
Baptist  ordinances. 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  Society  sent  Dr.  Haygooni  to  Constantinople,  how, 
and  why  ? 

2.  What  are  the  causes  that  give  this  work  an  especial  claim 
upon  American  Baptists? 

3.  What  does  Dr.  Bitting  say  of  the  history  of  this  movement? 

4.  Tell  the  story  of  Dr.  Melchonian. 

5.  What  remarkable  thing  happened  in  1885  ? 

6.  Why  did  Baptist  truth  prevail  so  mightily? 

7.  Why  cannot  the  Missionary  Union  assume  the  work  in 
Turkey  ? 

8.  What  is  the  law  of  comity  ? 


CHAPTER  XLVII. 

OUR   CENTURY. 

rilHE  year  1889  rounded  out  seventy-five  years  of 
-*-  American  Baptist  missionary  effort.  The  year 
1892  completes  the  century  of  Baptist  missions,  dating 
from  the  beginning  in  Kettering,  England.  A  glance 
backward  reveals  glorious  things  accomplished.  But 
there  is  also  a  shadow-side  to  the  picture.  What  has 
been  done,  with  the  partial  consecration  and  compara- 
tively meagre  gifts  of  God's  people,  only  suggests  the 
glory  that  might  have  filled  the  earth  had  all  the  tithes 
been  brought  into  the  storehouse. 

The  Missionary  Union  has  missions  in  three  continents 
— Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa.  In  Asia,  work  is  being 
carried  on  among  twelve  nationalities — Burmans,  Kareus, 
Shans,  Chins,  Kachins,  Telugus,  Assamese,  Garos,  Nagas, 
Kohls,  Chinese,  and  Japanese.  The  tribes  in  the  Congo 
valley  represent  its  work  in  Africa. 

In  Europe,  its  laborers  are  presenting  the  pure  gospel 
in  Sweden,  Germany,  Russia,  Denmark,  France,  and 
Spain.     What  are  the  results? 

Its  missions  in  Europe  report  nine  hundred  and  sixty- 
five  preachers,  a  church  membership  of  seventy-six  thou- 

295 


296  BAPTIST   FOREIGN    MISSIONS. 

sand  and  thirty-nine,  with  six  thousand  three  hundred 
and  fifty-four  baptisms  in  1890,  and  contributions  aggre- 
gating one  hundred  and  eighty-six  thousand  one  hundred 
and  fifty-eight  dollars  and  seventy-two  cents. 

Its  missions  in  heathen  lands  report  eight  hundred  and 
fifty-eight  native  preachers,  a  church  membership  of 
seventy-six  thousand  six  hundred  and  three,  with  eight 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  eight  baptisms  in  1890. 
Contributions,  fifty-one  thousand  and  thirty  eight  dollars 
and  twelve  cents. 

The  Woman's  Societies  auxiliary  to  the  Missionary 
Union  have  gathered  during  the  year  1890-1891,  one 
hundred  and  twenty-seven  thousand  six  hundred  and 
ninety  dollars.  The  Temple  Builders,  an  organization 
of  young  ladie3  in  the  West,  formed  in  1886,  have 
brought  a  goodly  amount  into  the  treasury  of  the  Western 
Society  in  the  four  years  of  its  existence.  The  Mission 
Bands,  formed  of  the  children,  have  done  a  double  work 
of  gathering  the  mites  of  the  little  ones  and  educating 
them  for  future  mission  helpers. 

"  The  Missionary  Magazine "  is  the  organ  of  the  Mis- 
sionary Union,  and  is  now  in  its  seventy-first  volume. 
It  is  valuable  as  containing  the  entire  history  of  the 
missions  of  the  Union  from  their  beginning.  "  The  Help- 
ing Hand"  is  the  organ  of  the  Woman's  Societies,  while 
"The  King's  Messengers"  is  the  children's  missionary 
paper,  issued  monthly,  as  are  the  others. 


BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS.  297 

The  Foreign  Board  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Conven- 
tion has  its  representatives  in  five  continents — China  and 
Japan,  in  Asia;  Yoruba,  in  Africa;  Italy,  in  Europe; 
Brazil,  in  South  America;  and  our  own  neighbor,  Mexico. 

The  foreign  work  of  the  Southern  Board  is  vigorous 
and  aggressive.  Dr.  H.  A  Tupper  is  its  efficient  secre- 
tary. In  the  year  1890-1891,  its  income  was  one  hundred 
and  fifteen  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty-four  dollars 
and  seventy-one  cents.  There  were  reported  in  its  mis- 
sions thirty-eight  stations,  eighty-six  American  mission- 
aries, twenty-three  ordained  native  preachers,  fifty-three 
unordained  native  helpers,  sixty-seven  churches,  two 
thousand  three  hundred  and  seventy-seven  members, 
three  hundred  and  sixty-one  baptisms,  and  eight  hundred 
and  twenty-three  scholars  in  its  various  schools.  Measures 
are  in  contemplation  for  greatly  extended  efforts. 

Woman's  work  in  the  South  is  on  a  different  basis  from 
that  in  the  North.  In  each  State  is  a  Central  Committee, 
composed  of  women  appointed  by  the  Foreign  Mission 
Board  of  the  Convention.  The  office  of  this  committee 
is  the  dissemination  of  missionary  information  and  litera- 
ture, the  organization  of  local  societies,  and  the  receiving 
and  forwarding  of  funds  from  auxiliary  societies  to  the 
Board.  A  contribution  of  five  cents  a  month,  payable 
quarterly,  is  the  condition  of  membership.  Mite  boxes 
have  been  in  use  many  years,  yielding  rich  returns.  The 
year  1891  witnessed  a  completed  union  of  all  the  States 


298  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

in  the  general  organization.  The  treasurer's  report  for 
this  year  showed  contributions  from  the  Woman's  work, 
twenty-three  thousand  seven  hundred  and  sixty-one  dol- 
lars and  thirty-one  cents.  The  organization  of  "Sun- 
beam "  societies  among  the  children  brought  in  for  the 
same  year  four  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty-five 
dollars  and  twenty-five  cents,  a  striking  aggregation  of 
gathered  mites. 

The  organ  of  the  Foreign  Board  is  the  "  Foreign  Mis- 
sion Journal,"  a  monthly  magazine,  with  departments  for 
the  Woman's  and  Children's  work. 

The  Bible  is  in  the  hands  of  most  of  the  peoples  among 
whom  American  Baptists  have  missions.  With  the  com- 
pletion of  the  Shan  Bible,  it  may  fairly  be  claimed  that 
the  word  of  God  has  been  given  to  all  the  people  of 
Burma  who  can  read.  The  Kachins  have  a  dialect 
which  must  be  reduced  to  written  form  before  they  can 
have  the  Scriptures.  The  hill  tribes  of  Assam  are  still 
waiting  for  the  completion  of  their  Bible. 

In  Africa,  the  work  of  Scripture  translation  is  scarcely 
begun.  Central  Africa  lies  as  almost  a  virgin  field  in 
this  respect.  It  may  be  expected  to  make  great  demands 
on  our  Bible  funds  in  the  future. 

We  stand  on  the  threshold  of  the  "Centenary  of 
Baptist  Missions."  What  shall  be  the  record  of  the 
coming  years  ? 


BAPTIST    FOREIGN    MISSIONS.  299 

Missionary  endeavor  among  our  young  people  is  in  its 
incipiency.  Even  with  our  Temple  Builders  and  our 
Mission  Bands  the  rank  and  file  of  Baptist  youth  have 
not  all  been  enlisted  in  this  great  cause.  But  now  we 
hear  the  tread  of  countless  hosts.  July,  1891,  was  a 
historic  month,  notable  as  the  time  when  the  young 
people  of  our  denomination  organized  for  systematic 
endeavor  for  Christ  and  the  church.  With  wise  plans 
for  the  study  of  God's  work  in  the  world,  with  machinery 
of  organization  to  wheel  all  into  orderly,  efficient  rank, 
with  consecrated  tithes,  and  hearts  burning  with  holv 
enthusiasm,  what  may  not  the  future  see  ? 

"  If  our  people  rise  to  the  grand  occasion,  this  Centen- 
nial will  surpass  all  other  centenary  celebrations  as  our 
missionary  age  will  surpass  the  glory  of  all  other  ages  of 
the  world — even  as  the  pyramid  of  Cheops  rises  above 
the  plains  of  Egypt,  as  the  Himalayas  above  the  mount- 
ains of  India." 

QUESTIONS. 

1.  What  does  the  vear  1889  complete  ? 

2.  What  the  year  1892? 

3.  WThat  two  sides  to  the  picture  ? 

4.  In  what  three  continents  is  the  Missionary  Union  laboring? 

5.  Give  the  list  of  nationalities  in  Asia. 

6.  What  tribes  in  Africa? 

7.  Give  the  details  of  work  in  Europe. 

8.  Give  the  results. 

9.  Summary  of  statistics  in  heathen  lands. 

10.  Woman's  work. 

11.  Temple  Builders. 

12.  Mission  Bands. 

13.  Missionary  publications. 


300  BAPTIST   FOREIGN   MISSIONS. 

14.  In  how  many  continents  is  the  Southern  Board  at  work? 

15.  In  what  countries? 

16.  What  is  said  of  the  work  of  the  Southern  Board? 

17.  Give  statistics  for  1890-1891. 

18.  What  is  said  of  Woman's  work  in  the  South  ? 

19.  WThat  magazine  is  the  organ  of  the  board  ? 

20.  What  is  said  of  Bible  work? 

21.  WThat  of  the  work  among  young  people? 

22.  What  is  necessary  for  grand  work  in  the  future? 

23.  Give  the  closing  prophecy. 


THE   END. 


>6z^wS0&& 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Sept,.  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066 
(724)779-2111 


mmm 


M 


