


| L Ve@29beTO TUTE 


lll 


3931109 S,1aVHOIW “LS 40 

















THE 
Pristies TO VEE, EPHESIANS 
AND TO THE COLOSSIANS 


i KO ABBOTT, B:D:, D.Lirt. 





THE INTERNATIONAL CRITICAL COMMENTARY 


A 


SrIviCay AND EXEGETICAL 
COMMENTARY 


ON THE 


aio l hes ere Tbe PHESIANS 
AND TO THE COLOSSIANS 


BY 


REV. x, ABBOTT, B.Dy Dp LIirt: 
FORMERLY PROFESSOR OF BIBLICAL GREEK, NOW OF HBBREW, 
TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIX 


EDINBURGE 
T. & T. CLARK, 38 GEORGE STREET 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
MORRISON AND GIBB LIMITED 
FOR 


T. & T. CLARK, EDINBURGH 


NEW YORK: CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS 


First IMPRESSION . . . 1897 
Reprinted le) wel si) ie) E809 

55 Sg Go 16) Heyes 

x eed Pte eLOe2 

eh see OAO 

” Sorgen onl LOS 

oF Sse cu eueeLO5 0 


MAY 18 1964 


The Rights of Translation and of Reproduction are Reserved 


PREFACE 
=e 


THE following Commentary is primarily philological. Its 
aim is to ascertain with as great precision as possible the 
actual meaning of the writers language. The Com- 
mentaries which have been regularly consulted are those 
of Chrysostom and Theodore of Mopsuestia, amongst the 
ancients; and amongst the moderns, Alford, Barry, De 
Wette, Eadie, Ellicott, Meyer (W. Schmidt), Moule, von 
Soden, and the Speaker’s; also for Ephesians, Harless, 
Stier, and Macpherson; and for Colossians, Lightfoot 
The Commentary of von Soden, though concise, is very 
acute and independent. Mr. Moule’s also, although 
bearing a modest title, is of great value. Other writers 
have been occasionally consulted. Much use has been 
made of Fritzsche’s occasional notes in his various com- 
mentaries, especially in connexion with the illustratior 
of the language of the Epistles from classical and late 
Greek authors. Wetstein, of course, has not been over- 
looked. 

The text adopted is that of the Revisers, except 


where otherwise stated. 
Tt. kK: ABBOTT 


: Gok r 


ae 
Bees dere 


Ss 





CONTENTS. 


senate Oe 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE 
EPHESIANS . : . . ° auinais .-  i-xlv 


§ x. To what Readers Written . ® a ° 2 ° i 

On the reading ¢v Epeom «© © » «© i 

Not written to Ephesus Sed Marin ert 6 iil 

Hypothesis ofa circular letter ». «© e.« e vi 

§ 2. Genuineness of the Epistle. . » .« « e ix 

Extermah Cvidence cptaivercuned worse (8 ween fe ix 

Internal evidencevsidiscies rey uten He | 6 xiii 

Objections from the language . . ° 2 xiv 

Objections from the line of thought . . . xix 

Paley on the internal evidence. " anti ae xx 

§ 3. Relation to the Epistle to the Colossians . . . xxiii 

a . First Epistle of Peter. . . . xxiv 

= 7 Epistle tothe Hebrews . . XXvi 

* w.  vepocalypse:. 4: o,_Ade » 6 = Xxviii 

s Gospel of St. John . . ‘ » _-XXViii 

§ 6. Tee and Place of Writing Span iia ine el He xxix 

Sa7.avocabulary of the Epistle. § 2 © 6%  s' «a xxxi 

§ 8. Contents . : : ° 7 mar ‘ «xxii 

§ 9. Literature . é . ° 2 ° ° ° ‘ XXXV 

§ 10. On some Readings peculiar to one ortwo MSS. xl 
; On the maxim “ The more difficult reading is te 

be preferred” . : “ : Silat : xiv 

AB breviatOnS eect Me bee eS Ls xlvi 


INTRODUCTION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE 
COLOSSIANS . ° : . ° . - xivii-lxv 


§ 1. The Church at Colosse . . s edge . xlvii 


The Colossian ‘ied ° : . ° . ° xlix 
§ « Genuineness ; : ; I 
Holtzmann’s restoration ee the Bi aposed orieinal hi 
Alleged un-Pauline vocabulary. : ; ; lit 


Alleged Gnostic colouring . : ; ° a liv 
Vil 


CONTENTS 


BPEGE 
§ 3. Place and Date of Writing. «© + +5 «© « lix 
§ 4. Relation to other N.T. Writings. ° a ‘ : ab. 
§ 5. Vocabulary of the Epistle . : ' : ‘ 26. 
§ 6. Contents of the Epistle ne te lx 
§ 7/6 Literature . 2 * ‘ é : € Fy 2 bai 


COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO THE 
EPHESIANS . ° e ° * s a 2 I-I91 


Special Notes: On drrodirpocts we eS ee , II 
On pvornpwov sg ‘ 2 3 » 45,174 
On the angelic hicearchy e : 2 ’ 33 
On réxva dice: dpyis « ° ‘ ’ ’ 45 
On rarewodppoocvvy . ‘ : ’ 105 
On *Sit saith” oc eels ye ere i Se 110 
On sacrifice : F e : > 7 147 


COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO THE 
COLOSSIANS,. 2: .WSbSa shin seireneitgs sos 


Special Notes: On mpawrédroxos mdons xtivews « ‘ : 215 
On orotxeta TOU KdopoU : ° s a 247 
On drexdvodpevos tas apxds, K.T.AL 2 257 
On the Epistle “from Laodicea” . ° 304 
Text of the spurious “Epistle to the Laodiceans” . ° 308 
INDEX TO THE NOTES 
1. Subjects and Names. e ® 4 ‘ z ‘ 309 
2. Greek Words . 2 F) e s & ° © F 313 


3. Latin Words . a £ e e e ‘ 3 3 355 


LNA RODUC TION: 


§ 1. TO WHAT READERS WAS THE EPISTLE ADDRESSED? 


THIS question cannot be treated apart from that of the genuine. 
ness of év ’Edéow in 1. I. 

MSS. All extant MS. authority, with three exceptions, is in 
favour of the words. The three exceptions are & B 677. 

In & they are added by a later hand (s*‘). 

In B they are also added by a corrector (B*), although Hug 
was of opinion that the correction was by the first hand. 

In 67 they were written by the original scribe, but are expunged 
by the corrector. Possibly this correction is not independent of 
B. Lightfoot observes that a reading in St. Paul’s Epistles sup- 
ported by & B 67? almost always represents the original text. 

In addition to these, however, we have the express testimony 
of Basil that the words were absent from the most ancient, or 
rather all the ancient, MSS. in his day. His words are: Tots 
“Edeaious eruatéhiwv, Os ywacios 7vopevous TO ovre bv emryvdoews, 
ovTas avTous idtalovTws dvopacer, elma" TOUS dylous TOUS ovot Kal 
TLOTOLS év Xpiore Tyco" ouTw yap Kal ot po pL@v mapadeddixact Kat 
Hpets év Tots TaAaLots TOV dvtrypapuv ebpijxapiey (Ado. Eunom. ii. 19). 
The hypothesis that he is referring, not to év Edéow, but either 
to Trois or to ovow, is quite untenable. How strange it would be 
that he should go on to quote the words kal muotows ev Xp. 'L., 
which had no relation to the interpretation in question, and omit 
the intervening év "E¢éow, the absence of which was no doubt 
what gave rise to it! The ovrw ydp must surely refer to the whole 
quotation as he gives it. Moreover, he distinguishes the MSS. 
from oi zpo pov, by which he doubtless meant Origen, who 
omitted the words. Besides, his proof from this passage (against 
Eunomius), that Christ may be called 6 év, would have no founda- 
tion if he had read év ’Ed¢éow after otow.! 

1Tt has been said that Basil’s statement is not confirmed. The objection is 


doubly fallacious. His statement as to what he had himself seen does not need 
a 


ii THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§1 


Versions. All the Versions have the words, but it must be 
borne in mind that we have no MSS. of any of these as old as 
s B. 

Fathers, etc. Origen’s commentary is quoted in Cramer’s 
Catena as follows: ’Opvyévyns 5€ yo, ert povov “Edeciwv etpopev 
Keievov, TO “Tots aylots Tots ovat” Kal CnTovmev ei py TapeAker (Z.e. is 
redundant) zpocketpevov 76 “ rots dylous Tots ovat” ti dvvaTar onpat- 
ve" dpa ovv ei py worep ev TH “Efddw dvopa pdnow Eavtod 6 
xXenpatilov Mucet 76 dv, odTws ot peréxovtes TOU SvTOs, yivovTaL 
dvres, KaAovpevor olovel ex TOD py Eivae eis TO elvan “ eLeheEaTo yap Oo 
@cds Ta py OvTA” Hyoiv 6 adrds IlatAos “iva ra dvta Katapynon,” 
«.7.A, AS Tots ayiows Tots odow Occurs with év and the name of the 
place in other Epistles (2 Cor., Phil. ; cf. Rom. i. 7), it is clear that 
what Origen refers to as used of the Ephesians only is rots otow 
without év “Edécw. 

Tertullian informs us that Marcion gave the Epistle the title 
“ad Laodicenos” (Adv. Mare. v. 17): “ Ecclesiae quidem veritate 
epistolam istam ad Ephesios habemus emissam, non ad Laodicenos, 
sed Marcion ei titulum aliquando interpolare (z.e. falsify)! gestiit, 
quasi et in isto diligentissimus explorator ; nihil autem de titulis in- 
terest, cum ad omnes apostolus scripserit, dum ad quosdam.” Com- 
pare zdzd. 11, “‘ praetereo hic et de alia epistola, quam nos ad Ephesios 
praescriptum (z.e. superscribed) habemus, haeretici vero ad Laodice- 
nos.” It is clear from this that Marcion had not the words év 
*Edéow in his text. But it is also inferred with great probability that 
Tertullian himself had them not. For he does not charge Marcion 
with falsifying the text but the title, and he vindicates the title “ad 
Ephesios” by an appeal to the “veritas ecclesiae,” not to the actual 
words in the text, which would have been conclusive. Moreover, 
how strange the remark, “nihil autem de titulis interest,” etc., if he 
had év ‘Eéow in the text of the apostle! It is clear that “ titulus ” 
here means the superscription, not the address in the text. 

Lightfoot points out that there are indications in the earlier 
Latin commentators that in the copies they used the word 
“‘Ephesi,” if not absent, was in a different position, which would 
betray its later introduction. Thus in the middle of the fourth 
century, Victorinus Afer writes: “Sed haec cum dicit ‘Sanctis 
qui sunt fidelibus Ephesi,’ quid adjungitur? ‘In Christo Jesu’” - 
(Mai. Script. Vett. Nova Coll. iii. p. 87). 

Ambrosiaster, in his Commentary, ignores “ Ephesi”: “Non 
solum fidelibus scribit, sed et sanctis: ut tunc vere fideles sint, 
si fuerint sancti in Christo Jesu.” 


confirmation, while as to the fact that the most ancient copies in his day did not 
contain the words, he is fully supported. 

1“ Interpolare” in Latin writers means usually to furbish up old articles so 
as to make them look new. 


§ 1) TO WHAT READERS ADDRESSED ili 


Sedulius Scotus (eighth or ninth century) writes: ‘ Sanctis. 
Non omnibus Ephesiis, sed his qui credunt in Christo. Et 
fidelibus. Omnes sancti fideles sunt, non omnes fideles sancti, 
etc. Qui sunt in Christo Jesu. Plures fideles sunt, sed non in 
Christo,” etc. The omission of “ Ephesi” in the quotations from 
the text is of no importance; but the position of “qui sunt” is 
remarkable. It would seem as if some transcriber, finding 
“sanctis qui sunt et fidelibus in Christo Jesu,” and stumbling 
at the order, transposed “qui sunt” into the position in which 
Sedulius, or some earlier writer whom he copies, appears to have 
found them. 

Jerome is doubtless referring to Origen when he says (zm /oc.): 
“ Quidam curiosius (z.e. with more refinement) quam necesse est, 
putant ex eo quod Moysi dictum sit ‘ Haec dices filiis Israel: qui 
est misit me,’ etiam eos qui Ephesi sunt sancti et fideles, essentiae 
vocabulo nuncupatos. . . . Alii vero simpliciter non ad eos, qui 
sint, sed qui Ephesi sancti et fideles sint, scriptum arbitrantur.” 
This is obscurely expressed, and it is not clear whether he means 
to refer to a difference of reading. But as we know that he had 
read Origen’s commentary, he can hardly have been ignorant of 
the fact that the interpretation he quotes implied the omission of 
ev Edéow, and the reader will observe that the word is “scriptum,” 
not “scriptam,” as some commentators have quoted it. If this is 
taken strictly it must refer to the reading. 

When we turn to the Epistle itself we find its whole tone and 
character out of keeping with the traditional designation. St. 
Paul had spent about three years at Ephesus “ceasing not to 
warn every one day and night with tears” (Acts xx. 31). On his 
last journey to Jerusalem he sent for the elders of Ephesus to 
meet him at Miletus. His address to them (Acts xx. 18 sqq.) is 
full of affectionate remembrance of his labours amongst them, and 
of earnest warnings. The parting is described in touching words: 
“They fell on his neck and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for 
the words which he spake, that they should see his face no more.” 
‘There was no Church with which his relations were more close, 
nay, so close and affectionate, or in connexion with which he had 
such sacred and affecting memories. We might expect a letter 
written to Ephesus to be full of personal reminiscences, and 
allusions to his labours amongst them ; instead of which we have 
a composition more like a treatise than a letter, and so absolutely 
destitute of local or personal colouring that it might have been 
written to a Church which St. Paul had never even visited. We 
need not attach much importance to the absence of personal 
greetings. There are no special salutations in the Epp. to the 
Corinthians and to the Philippians, for example, perhaps because, 
as Lightfoot says: ‘ Where all alike are known to us, it becomes 


iv THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§1 


irksome, if not invidious, to select any for special salutation.” 
But there is not even a general friendly greeting as in those 
Epistles ; there is nothing but the impersonal cipyvy tots adeAdots, 
k.7.r., Vi. 23. But in addition to the general greeting in Phil. 
‘or example, doracacGe tavra aywv .. . doralovtar buds ot ovv 
juol adeAdoi, «.7.A., that Epistle abounds in personal reminis- 
-ences, to which there is no parallel here. Even the Epistle to 
tne Colossians, whom St. Paul had never seen, betrays a more 
lively personal interest 

It is impossible to explain this on the supposition that the 
Epistle was addressed to the Ephesian Church, so loving to the 
apostle and so beloved. 

But we may go farther than this, for there are expressions in 
the Epistle which seem impossible to reconcile with the supposition 
that it is addressed to that Church. Ch. i. 15, “ Having heard of 
your faith,” etc., may perhaps be explained, though not very 
naturally, as referring to the period since his departure from them. 
Not so the following: iii. 2, “ For this cause, I Paul, the prisoner 
of Christ Jesus in behalf of you Gentiles,—if indeed ye have heard 
of (or ‘were instructed in’) the dispensation of the grace of God 
which was given me to you-ward”; iv. 21, 22, ‘But ye did not 
so learn Christ, if indeed ye heard of Him, and were taught in 
Him,” etc 

Dr. Hort thinks the usual reply to the argument from the two 
latter passages true and sufficient, namely, that etye “is not in- 
frequently used with a rhetorical or appealing force where no real 
doubt is meant to be expressed,” and St. Paul could not express 
any real doubt in either case about any Church of Proconsular 
Asia, any more than about the Ephesian Church. 

Let it be granted that e/ye does not imply the existence of a 
doubt, it certainly (as an intensified “‘if”) implies that doubt is not 
inconceivable. It cannot mean more than “I am sure,” ‘I do not 
doubt,” “I know,” “I am persuaded.” But this is not the way in 
which a man expresses himself about a matter of his own experi- 
ence, or in which he has himself been the agent. A preacher 
occupying a friend’s pulpit may say “I know,” or “if indeed ye 
have been taught,” but not when addressing those whom he has 
himself taught. 

Dr. Hort in cenfirmation of his remark about the appealing 
force of «tye refers to Ellicott’s note, which is a notable instance of 
petitio principit. Having said that e’ye “does not zz z¢se/f imply the 
rectitude of the assumption made,” as Hermann’s Cazon implies 
(‘‘eiye usurpatur de re quae jure sumpta creditur”), but that this must 
be gathered from the context, he proceeds: “In the present case 
there could be no real doubt ; ‘neque enim ignorare quod hic dicitur 
(iil, 2) poterant Ephesii quibus Paulus ipse evangelium plusquam 


§ 1) TO WHAT READERS ADDRESSED v 


biennio praedicaverat,’ Estius; comp. ch. iv. 21; 2 Cor. v. 3; 
Col. i. 23. No argument, then, can be fairly deduced from these 
words against the inscription of this Ep. to the Ephesians.” That 
is to say, if e’ye implied doubt, the Epistle could not be addressed 
to the Ephesians ; but it was so addressed, therefore «iye does not 
imply doubt, and therefore is not inconsistent with such an 
address. The three passages referred to in illustration are singu- 
larly unsuitable for the purpose. Ch. iv. 21 belongs to the very 
Epistle in question. In 2 Cor. v. 3, elye kai evdvodpevoar ob yupvoi 
etpeOnodpuefa, and in Col. i. 23, elye éripevere TH mioret, K.7.X., it is 
the future that is spoken of, and the particle has its usual sense, 
“if, as I assume.” Lightfoot, indeed (on Gal. iii. 4), expresses the 
opinion that in the N.T. e’ye is even less affirmative than «izep. 

Eph. iii. 4 also (whether we adopt Hort’s view that dvaywo- 
oxovres means “ reading the O.T. Scriptures ” or not) seems to imply 
that the author was not well known to his readers. The Ephesians 
had not now first to learn what St. Paul’s knowledge of the 
mystery was. 

In the early Church the Epistle was universally regarded as 
addressed to the Ephesians. It is so referred to in the Muratorian 
Ganonsyby Wrenacus® (aes 1.9331, 415) 28. 45 v. 2: 36); by 
Tertullian (quoted above); by Clement of Alexandria (S¢rom. 
iv. 65); and by Origen, who, as we saw above, had not év Edéow 
in his text (Comment. zm Joc. and Contra Celsum, iii. 20). 

There is one important exception to this general belief, namely, 
Marcion, who, as above mentioned, held the Epistle to be 
addressed to the Laodiceans. This fact has been generally put 
aside as of no importance, it being supposed that this was a mere 
critical conjecture of Marcion (as Tertullian assumes), and prob- 
ably suggested by Col. iv. 16. But considering the antiquity of 

_Marcion, who was of earlier date than any of the Catholic writers 
cited, we are hardly justified in treating his evidence so lightly, 
seeing that he could have no theological motive for changing the 
title. Even if his ‘ad Laodicenos” was only a critical conjecture, 
this would justify the inference that the destination of the Epistle 
was at that time to some extent an open question. But it is 
unlikely that he should have been led to adopt this title merely by 
the fact that mention is made elsewhere of an Epistle (not to, but) 
from Laodicea. There is nothing in the Epistle itself to suggest 
Laodicea. It is, then, not improbable that he had seen a copy 
with év Aaod:xeca in the text. 

Passing by this, however, for the present, we have the following 
facts to account for: First, the early absence of ev “Edéow. As 
Lightfoot puts it: “We have no direct evidence that a single 
Greek manuscript during this period (second and third centuries) 
contained the words in question. The recent manuscripts to 


v1 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 1 


which Basil refers in the latter half of the fourth century, are the 
earliest of which this can be distinctly affirmed” (Biblical Essays, 
p. 381). Secondly, the early and universal recognition in the 
Church of the Epistle as written to the Ephesians. 

Writers who hold év "E¢éow to have been an integral part of 
the original text suppose the words to have been omitted for 
critical reasons, namely, because they seemed not to agree with 
the character of the Epistle. ‘This theory, to be plausible, would 
require the facts to be reversed, ze. that the words should be 
omitted by the later not the earlier authorities, and that the 
opinion of the early Church should be vacillating. In fact, it 
explains the unanimity of early opinion by supposing that ev 
*Edéow was read without question, and explains the early omission 
of the words by supposing that opinion was not unanimous. 

Apart from this, the theory postulates a critical study of the 
relations between the apostle and the Churches which it would be 
a complete anachronism to ascribe to that early age. Much later, 
indeed, we find Theodore of Mopsuestia led by dxoveas in i. 15 to 
regard the Epistle as written by St. Paul before he had seen the 
Ephesians. ‘‘ Numquam profecto dixisset se auditu de illis cognos- 
centem gratiarum pro illis facere actionem, si eos alicubi vel 
vidisset, vel ad notitiam ejus illa ratione venire potuissent.” So 
also Severianus and Oecumenius. But it did not occur to 
Theodore or the others to question the correctness of the text. 

An accidental omission of the words is out of the question. 
The only hypothesis that agrees with the facts is that the Epistle 
was in some sense an encyclical or circular letter. This seems to 
have been first suggested in a definite form by Ussher (Ann. V. e¢ 
NV. Test. A.D. 64): “ Ubi notandum, in antiquis nonnullis codicibus 
(ut ex Basilii libro 11. adversus Eunomium, et Hieronymi in hunc 
Apostoli locum commentario, apparet) generatim inscriptam fuisse 
hanc epistolam, rots ayious Tots ovat Kal mixTots ev Xpicrtd *Iyooi, vel 
(ut in litterarum encyclicarum descriptione fieri solebat) sactis 
gui sunt... et fidelibus in Christo Jesu, ac si Ephesum primo, 
ut praecipuam, Asiae metropolim missa ea fuisset ; transmittenda 
inde ad reliquas (intersertis singularum nominibus) ejusdem pro- 
vinciae ecclesias: ad quarum aliquot, quas Paulus ipse nunquam 
viderat, illa ipsius verba potissimum spectaverint.” 

There are two forms of this hypothesis. The first (agreeing 
with Ussher’s view) supposes that a blank was originally left after 
trois ovo, which would be filled in with the names of the respective 
Churches for which the copies were intended, while in the Church 
at large some copies would be circulated with a vacant space, in 
which case, of course, in the copies made from these the blank 
would be disregarded. Or we might suppose, with Hort, that 
there was originally only one copy sent by the hand of Tychicus, 


§ 1] TO WHAT READERS ADDRESSED vii 


the blank being filled orally when the Epistle was read in each 
place, and the name so supplied being naturally written in the 
copy or copies which would be made for preservation there. 

The objection most strongly urged against this view is that 
there is no trace of copies with any other name in the place of 
*Edécw in the text, and that it is highly improbable that none such 
should have been preserved. A little consideration will show that 
no weight is to be attached to this argument. The Epistle “from 
Laodicea” was either identical with the present Epistle or distinct 
from it. In the latter case, it has wholly perished, not a single 
copy having been preserved even to the time of Marcion. In the 
former case, only the copies bearing other names than that of 
Ephesus disappeared. Is not this quite natural? When copies 
were in demand, where would they be sought for but in the metro- 
politan city and commercial centre of Ephesus? No interest would 
attach to any particular address. Why, then, should it be thought 
much more probable that all copies should have been allowed 
to perish than that only those with names of minor importance 
should fail to be multiplied? Indeed, the fact itself is not certain, 
for it is not improbable that a transcript from the Laodicean copy 
was in Marcion’s hands. In any case, we have a close parallel in 
the fact that the ancient copies which omitted év “Edéow had 
already before Basil’s day been superseded by those which inserted 
the words, and although 8 B remain (being on vellum), no suc- 
ceeding copyists have a trace of the reading until we come to the 
late corrector of 67. 

It must be admitted that this plan of leaving blanks savours 
more of modern than of ancient manner, and resembles the 
formality of a legal document more than the natural simplicity of 
St. Paul. Indeed, we have examples in 2 Cor. i. 1 and Gal. 1. 2 
of the form of address which he would be likely to adopt in an 
encyclical letter. Besides, any hypothesis which makes Ephesus 
the chief of the Churches addressed, is open, though in a less 
degree, to the objections alleged above against the traditional 
designation. 

A second form of the hypothesis supposes the sentence to be 
complete without anything corresponding to év Edéow. Origen’s 
view of the meaning of the passage when these words are not read 
has been quoted above, viz. ‘to the saints who are.” 

This view has been recently espoused by Dr. Milligan (Zxcyel. 
Brit., art. Ephesians”), who translates: “To the saints existing 
and faithful in Christ Jesus.” But the passages to which he refers 
in justification of this are by no means sufficient for the purpose. 
They are—Col. ii. 3, €v @ eiot waves of Onoarpol . . . droxpudor: 
1b. 10, kal ere év adT@ wemAnpwpevot: ili. 1, 00 6 Xpiords eorw ev 
deEla ToD Ocovd Kabypevos. 


viii THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§1 


In these the predicate is completed by év @, ev aird, ot, and so 
the passages supply no parallel to the supposed absolute use of 
rots ovot here as “those existing.” Besides, xai muerots comes in 
very awkwardly and weakly after such an epithet. Bengel, again, 
interprets: “ Sanctts et fidelibus gui sunt in omnibus iis locis, quo 
Tychicus cum hac epistola venit,” so that rots otaw = “ qui praesto 
sunt,” comparing Acts xiii. 1, kata THv otoay éxxAnoiav, and Rom. 
Xlll. 1, ai d€ otoae é€ovoc/ar. But in the former case év “Avtioyela 
had just preceded, so that only éxet has to be supplied; in the 
latter the verb simply means “to be in existence.” Not to dwell 
on the untenable suggestion that rots ovow should be taken with 
aylous (“the saints who are really such”), there remains the 
perfectly grammatical construction, “the saints who are also 
faithful” (see note ## /oc.). The difficulty of the construction is 
actually diminished by the absence of év "Edécw. 

The Epistle, then, is best regarded as addressed, not to a 
Church, but to the Gentile converts in Laodicea, Hierapolis, and 
Colossae, and elsewhere in Phrygia and the neighbourhood of 
that province. This is the view adopted by Reiche, Ewald, and 
(independently) by Prof. Milligan (who, however, supposes the 
Epistle addressed only to the Gentile converts of Laodicea and 
Colossae). It meets most of the difficulties. It explains the 
absence of local references combined with the local limitation 
implied in vi. 22. It also escapes the difficulty of supposing a 
blank space in i. 1. Further, it explains the remarkable expression, 
Col. iv. 16, “the Epistle from Laodicea.” That the Epistle 
referred to was not written to Laodicea appears highly probable 
from the fact that a salutation is sent through Colossae to the 
Laodiceans, which would be inexplicable if they were receiving by 
the same messenger a letter addressed to themselves; and the 
expression “from Laodicea” agrees with this, since Tychicus 
would reach Laodicea first, so that the Colossians would receive 
the letter from thence. Moreover, the hypothesis explains the 
remarkable fact that the Epistle contains no allusion to doctrinal 
errors such as had taken so great a hold in Colossae. Yet that 
such errors extended at least to Laodicea is not only probable, but 
is confirmed by the apostle’s direction that the Epistle to Colossae | 
should be read in Laodicea also. 

There is no difficulty in understanding how the title “to the 
Ephesians ” would come to be attached to the Epistle, since it was 
from Ephesus that copies would reach the Christian world generally. 
A parallel case is the title of the Epistle to the Hebrews, zpos 
‘EBpatovs, which, though of doubtful appropriateness, was never 
questioned. Once accepted as addressed to the Ephesians, the 
analogy of other Epistles in which tots ovcw is followed by the 
name of a place would naturally suggest the insertion of év “Edéow. 


§ 2] OF THE GENUINENESS OF THE EPISTLE ix 


The hypothesis that the Epistle is a ‘‘circular” letter has been 
adopted (with various modifications) by a very great number of 
scholars, including Bengel, Neander, Harless, Olshausen, Reuss, 
Arch. Robertson, Ellicott, Lightfoot, Hort, B. Weiss, Wold: 
Schmidt, Milligan. 


§ 2. OF THE GENUINENESS OF THE EPISTLE. 


External Evidence.— The earliest express reference to the 
Epistle as St. Paul’s is that of Irenaeus; but inasmuch as, if not 
genuine, it must be much later than St. Paul, evidence of 
acquaintance with it on the part of early writers is important. 
When we add to this the fact that it professes to be St. Paul’s, we 
are fairly justified in saying that evidence of its reception is 
evidence of its genuineness. We begin then with— 

Clement of Rome, c. 64, 6 éxAcEapevos Tov Kiprov “Inooty 
Xpworov Kai yas dv atvtov cis Aadv weprovo.ov. Compare Eph. i. 4, 
5, Kabuws é€eAcato nuas ev ait@. . . mpoopioas jas .. . dua Inoov 
Xpiocrov. Still closer is c. 46, 7 ovdxi eva @eov exopev Kal eva 
Xpuorov; Kal év wvedpa THs yapitos TO exxvblev ep pas Kal pia 
kAjots év Xptord; compare Eph. iv. 4-6. Again, c. 36, yvedxOyoar 
Hav ot 6pOadrpol tis Kapdias; cf. Eph. i. 18. And c. 38, tzorac- 
céobw exactos TH TAYoLov abrov; cf. Eph. v. 21. 

The part of the Dzdaché called the Two Ways contains the 
following (Did. iv. 10, 11, also worked up by Barnabas, xix. 7): 
ovk émitagets SovAw Gov 7) TaLdlaKy Tots ert TOV aiTov Ocov éAriLovew 
év mxpta gov; and to servants: tpeis dé of dovA irotayjoecbe ToIs 
Kuplols tpoav as TiTH Ocod ev aicytvy Kal doBw. Compare Eph. 
vi. 9, 5. The coincidence is in substance rather than in words, 
but it is best accounted for by supposing a knowledge of our 
Epistle. 

Ignatius, Z~. ad Eph, c. 12, WavAov cvppvarar (éore), Tov 
qyacpevov, ... Os ev radon emaToAH pvynpovever tyuav ev Xpiotd 
*Inoov. Many writers (including Hefele, zz /oc., Alford, Harless, 
and, less decidedly, Westcott and Robertson) render this “in all 
his Epistle,” viz. to ycu, or “in every part of his Epistle.” But 
this is untenable. For, in the first place, it is ungrammatical ; 
certainly no example has been produced which is quite parallel. 
Hefele adduces zaoa ‘IepoodAvpa, Matt. ii. 3; and was “IopayA, 
Rom. xi. 26; but these are proper names. Other supposed 
parallels are examined by Lightfoot, zz doc. Two have been 
relied on by later writers, viz. Acts xvii. 26, éxt mavros mpoouov 
ms yns, and Aristot. £¢h. WVic. i. 13. 7, Tav cGpa, But neither are 
these analogous. There is only one zpdcwrov tijs ys, hence this 
term is used (not, indeed, with wav) without the article in the 


x THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 2 


Sept. (Gen. iv. 14, vi. 7, xi. 8, zp. mdons rijs yijs=Luke xxi. 35). 
It is easy to understand, then, how it should come to be so used 
even with zav preceding. 

At first sight zaév cpa in Aristotle, 7¢, seems to present a 
closer parallel. The passage runs: det rov rodutixoy eidévar wos Ta 
mept Wuyns’ dorep kat Tov 6fOadpors Oeparevovta, kal wav copa; 7.€. 
he that heals the eyes must know the whole body. But céya in 
the abstract sense, z.e. as meaning, not this or that individual body, 
but the body as opposed to the soul, is used by Aristotle without 
the article, just as Yvx7 is also used (see, for example, Zz. JVic. i. 8. 
2; 6. 12, etc.). In this particular instance the omission of the 
article was, in fact, necessary to precision; for mav ro capa might 
mean the body of him whose eyes were to be healed, whereas 
what is intended is the human body generally. Since, therefore, 
mav oa@ua here does not mean the whole individual body, it 
furnishes no parallel to the alleged meaning of racy émucrody, and 
we are compelled to abide by the rendering “in every Epistle.” 

But, in the second place, the proposed rendering gives a 
wholly unsuitable sense. The fact of St. Paul devoting a letter to 
the Ephesians would deserve mention, but to what purpose to say, 
“in his whole letter to you he mentions you”? We do not speak 
of making mention of a man to himself, nor did the Greeks so use 
pvnpoveveav. But even if this were possible, it would be, as Light- 
foot says, “singularly unmeaning, if not untrue,” of the present 
Epistle. Alford, indeed, thinks the expression fully justified, and 
quotes Pearson, who says: “Tota enim Epistola ad Ephesios 
scripta, ipsos Ephesios, eorumque honorem et curam, maxime 
spectat, et summe honorificam eorum memoriam ad posteros trans- 
mittit. In aliis epistolis apostolus eos ad quos scribit saepe 
acriter objurgat aut parce laudat. Hic omnibus modis perpetuo 
se Ephesiis applicat,” etc. All this if said of the Ephesians in a 
letter addressed to others might be called pyypovevew, although 
this would be a strangely weak word to use. Does not “acriter 
objurgare” involve pyvynpovevavy as much as “laudare”? But the 
peculiarity of the Epistle is that nothing is mentioned or even 
alluded to which is personal to the Ephesians. 

Kiene (Stud. u. Krit. 1869, p. 286) understands by racy 
éructoAy “an entire letter,” but without attempting to show the 
possibility of this rendering. But can we say that St. Paul 
mentions the Ephesians “in every letter”? Allowing for a 
natural hyperbole we may answer, Yes. Ephesus and the 
Christians there are referred to either alone or with others in Rom. 
KVL5 3, 1. Cor, xv. 32, xvi. 8,195, 2 Cor. 1/8.sq.,; anda sand.2 lim. 

The longer recension of Ignatius has 6s ravtore év rais deqoeow 
airod pyvnpovever buGv. The Armenian Version reads pynpoveva, 
which would be true to fact, for in five out of the six other 


§ 2] OF THE GENUINENESS OF THE EPISTLE xi 


Epistles, Ignatius does mention the Ephesians. But the authority 
is insufficient. 

Accepting, then, the usual reading and the grammatical render- 
ing, we cannot infer from the words that Ignatius knew the Epistle 
as addressed to the Ephesians. Rather they would suggest the 
opposite conclusion. For, when Ignatius desired to remind his 
readers of St. Paul’s regard for them, it would be strange that he 
should only refer to the mention of them in other Epistles, and 
not at all to that which had been specially addressed to them. 

The word ovppviora has been thought to have been suggested 
by Eph, i. 9, iii. 3, 4, 9, etc.; but this is very precarious, for St. 
Paul uses no expression there which would suggest Ignatius’ word, 
and cupptorns is used by Origen (Jz Jes. aue Hom. 7, il. p. 
413), “ipse (Paulus) enim est symmystes Christi,” and by Hip- 
polytus (¢2 Dan. p. 174, Lagarde). 

The question as to Ignatius’ knowledge and reception of the 
Epistle is quite a different one. In the address of his Epistle he 
has several expressions which may have been suggested by the early 
verses of our Epistle : TH evAoynuevy, wAypopart, Tpowpio pevy) ™po 
aidvwv evar... eis ddgav, exheeypeviy, év OeAnpate Tov tratpds. 
More certain is cap. 1., popenra évrTes TOV Mcov, borrowed apparently 
from Eph. v. 1, and Polyc. 5, dyaray ras ovpPiovs ws 6 Kupuos thy 
éxxAynotav, a reminiscence of Eph. v. 29. In the following ch. vi. 
the reference to the Christian’s zavorAia was probably suggested 
by Eph. vi. 11, although the parts of the armour are differently 
assigned. Also Ign. Lph. C. 9; os ovTes Aor vaod watpos, 7Torpac- 
pévor eis oikodopzv Ocod warpds (Eph. ii. 20-22), 

Contemporaneous with Ignatius is the “zstle of Polycarp to 
the Philippians. It contains two quotations from the present 
Epistle in cap. 1, xdpurt éote ceowopevor, odk €& epywr, from Eph. 
li. 5, 8, 9; and c. 12 (of which the Greek is lost), “ut his scripturis 
dictum est, ivascimini et nolite peccare et, sol non occidat super 
tracundiam vestram, from Eph. iv. 26. Some commentators, indeed, 
suppose that Ignatius here is, independently of our Epistle, making 
the same combination of two O.T. texts, or that both adopt 
a combination made by some earlier writer. That is to say, they 
regard “let not the sun go down on your wrath” as a quotation 
from Deut. xxiv. 13, 15, verses which have nothing in common 
with this but the reference to the sun going down, for what they 
deal with is the hire of a poor man and the pledge taken from the 
poor. That two writers should independently connect the words 
in Deut. with those in Ps. iv., changing in the former “his hire” 
into “your anger,” is beyond the bounds of probability. As to 
the difficulty which is found in Polycarp citing the N.T. as 
Scripture, perhaps the explanation may be that, recognising the 
first sentence as a quotation from the O.T., he hastily concluded 


xii THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 2 


that the second was so also. For in the context immediately 
preceding he confesses that his acquaintance with the Scriptures 
was not equal to that of the Philippians. This is at least more 
probable than an accidental coincidence. 

Hermas, Mand. iii., has, aAnOciav ayara wail raca adnbeia éx 
Tov oTopatds gov exropevecOw, doubtless from Eph. iv. 25, 29. A 
little after we have, yde Avrnv érayew TO mretpatt TO TEUVG Kal 
adnOet; cf. 2b. ver. 30. Again, S7m. ix. 13, érovrat cis &v mvedpua Kai 
ev cOpa, and 17, pla riots aitav éyévero, seem to be reminiscences 
of Eph. iv. 4, 5. 

The Valentinians also quoted the Epistle, iii. 4-18, as ypady 
(Hipp. PAzlos. vi. 34). 

By the close of the second century the Epistle was universally 
received as St. Paul’s. Irenaeus, adv. Haer. v. 2. 3, has, ka6ws 6 
peaxaptos Ilatdos pyow, ev TH pds “"Edeciovs émurtodAy* ott peAn 
eopev TOU THpaTos, eK THS Tapkos ai7od Kal ek TOV doTéwy avToOU 
(Eph. v. 30). Also i. 8. 5, he similarly quotes Eph. v. 13. Clem. 
Alex. Strom. iv. § 65, having quoted 1 Cor. xi. 3 and Gal. v. 16 sqq., 
with ¢yoiv 6 amdaroXos, adds, 50 kai ev TH pds “Edeoious ypade 
trotaccdpevor GAAHAos ev POBw Ocod, «.7.X., Eph. v. 21-25. Also 
Paed. i. § 18, 5 aroaroXos éerirteAAwv mpos KopwOiovs pyciv (2 Cor. 
xl. 2)... capéorata dé “Edecios ypadwv . . . Aéywv: wéxpt Kata: 
THhowpev ot wavtes, K.T.A., Eph. iv. 13-15. Tertullian and Marcion 
have already been quoted. 

From this evidence it is all but certain that the Epistle already 
existed about 95 A.D. (Clement), quite certain that it existed about 
110 A.D. (Ignatius, Polycarp). 

Not to be overlooked as an item of evidence of the genuine- 
ness of the Epistle is the mention, in Col. iv. 16, of an Epistle 
“‘from Laodicea.” This has been already referred to for a different 
purpose. We learn from it that St. Paul wrote at or about the 
same time, besides the Epistles to Philemon and to the Colossians, 
an Epistle of a more or less encyclical character, not addressed to the 
Laodiceans, else it would be called the Epistle ‘to Laodicea,” or 
“to the Laodiceans,” and, for a similar reason, not addressed by 
name to any particular Church or Churches. It must also be 
considered highly probable that it was conveyed by the same, 
messenger, Tychicus, for it was not every day that St. Paul would 
have the opportunity of a disciple travelling from Rome (or even 
from Caesarea) to Laodicea. It is hardly credible that a Church 
which carefully preserved and copied the unimportant private letter 
to Philemon, should allow this important encyclical to be lost. 
There was a further guarantee of its preservation in the fact that 
this did not depend on one single Church. Now, here we have 
an Epistle which satisfies these conditions; it is in some sort at 
least an encyclical letter; according to the best evidence, it was 


§ 2] OF THE GENUINENESS OF THE EPISTLE xiii 


not addressed to a particular Church, and indirectly it purports to 
have been written about the same time and conveyed by the same 
messenger, as the Epp. to the Colossians and to Philemon. This 
would amount to nothing if there were reason to suspect a forgery 
suggested by Col. iv. 16. But this is entirely out of the question, 
for there is not the slightest indication in the Epistle which could 
lead an ordinary reader to that identification. So effectually, 
indeed, was it concealed, that with the exception of the heretic 
Marcion, it does not seem to have occurred to any ancient writer ; 
and on what ground Marcion judged that the Epistle was to the 
Laodiceans we do not know. We do know, however, that his 
adoption of that title did not lead others to think of Col. iv. 16, 
and even his own disciples seem not to have followed him.} 

Whatever probability belongs to this identification (and the 
reasons alleged against it have little weight), goes directly to con- 
firm the genuineness of the Epistle, and must in all fairness be 
taken into account. As the Canon of Marcion must have veen 
drawn up before the middle of the second century, there is 
evidence of the general reception of the Epistle as St. Paul’s at 
that period. 

Many of the ablest opponents of the genuineness admit the 
early date of composition and reception of the Epistle. Ewald 
assigned it to about 75-80 a.D. Scholten also to 80. Holtzmann, 
Mangold, and others to about 100. The late date 140, assigned 
by some of the earlier critics, is irreconcilable with the evidence 
of its early recognition. 

Internal Evidence.— Objections. The genuineness of the Epistle 
appears to have been first questioned by Schleiermacher (who 
suggested that Tychicus was commissioned to write it) and Usteri ; 
but the first to examine the internal evidence in detail was De 
Wette. His conclusion was that it is a verbose amplification 
(“‘wortreiche Erweiterung”) of the Epistle to the Colossians, and 
in style shows a notable falling off from that of St. Paul. Against 
the subjective element of this estimate may be placed the judg- 
ment of Chrysostom, Erasmus, Grotius, and Coleridge. Chrysos- 
tom says: ‘The Epistle overflows with lofty thoughts and doctrines 
. . . Things which he scarcely anywhere else utters, he here ex- 
pounds.” tynrAdv odddpa yeuer Tov vonpatwv' & yap pydapod 
epbéyéaro, Tatra évratfa dydot. Erasmus (although noting the 
difference in style, etc.): ““Idem in hac epistola Pauli fervor, 
eadem profunditas, idem omnino spiritus ac pectus.” He adds: 


1 This is Lightfoot’s explanation of the perplexing passage in Epiphanius 
(Haeres. xlii.). Epiphanius speaks of Marcion as recognising the Ep. to the 
Eph., and also portions of the so-called Ep. to the Laodiceans. He blames 
Marcion for citing Eph. iv. 5, not from Eph., but from the Ep. to the 
Laodiceans. See Lightfoot, Bzdlical Essays, p. 383. 


xiv THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 2 


“Verum non alibi sermo hyperbatis, anapodotis, aliisque incom- 
moditatibus molestior, sive id interpretis fuit, quo fuit usus in hac, 
sive sensuum sublimitatem sermonis facultas non est assequnta. 
Certe stilus tantum dissonat a caeteris Pauli epistolis ut alterius 
videri possit nisi pectus atque indoles Paulinae mentis hanc prossus 
illi vindicaret.” Grotius: ‘Rerum sublimitatem adaequam verbis 
sublimioribus quam ulla unquam habuit lingua humana.” Coleridge 
(Table Talk): ‘The Epistle to the Ephesians . .. is one of the 
divinest compositions of man. It embraces every doctrine of 
Christianity ;—first, those doctrines peculiar to Christianity, and 
then those precepts common to it with natural religion.” Others 
have also judged that, as compared with Colossians, it is in system 
“far deeper, and more recondite, and more exquisite” (Alford). 
De Wette was answered by Liinemann, Meyer, and others. 
Some of the critics who followed De Wette went beyond him, 
rejecting the Ep. to the Colossians also, which he fully accepted, 
and assigning to both a much later date. Schwegler and Baur, 
finding in the Epistle traces of Gnostic and Montanist language 
and ideas, ascribed both Epistles to the middle of the second 
century. Similarly Hilgenfeld, who, however, attributed the Epistles 
to distinct authors. The fallacy of these latter speculations has 
been shown by Holtzmann, who has devoted an entire volume to 
the criticism of the two Epistles (Avittk der Epheser und Kolosser- 
briefe auf Grund einer Analyse thres Verwandtschafisverhdaltnisses, 
Leipz. 1872). His conclusion is that the writer of the present 
Epistle had before him a genuine, but much shorter, Epistle to 
the Colossians, on which he founded his encyclical, and that the 
same writer subsequently interpolated the Epistle to the Colossians. 
(This was first suggested by Hitzig, 1870.) Soden (in two articles 
in the Jahrb. f. Prot. Theol. 1885, 1887) maintained the genuine- 
ness of Col. with the exception of nine verses, and in his Comm. 
he withdraws this exception, regarding only i. 164, 17 as a gloss. 
Lastly, the most recent writer on the subject, Jiilicher (77- 
leitung in das Neue Testament, 1894), will only go so far as to say 
that our Epistle cannot with certainty be reckoned as St. Paul’s, 
while neither can its genuineness be unconditionally denied. 
Objections from the Language of the Epistle.—Let us first notice 
the argument from the language of the Epistle. Holtzmann re- 
marks, as favourable to the Pauline authorship, that it contains 
eighteen words not found elsewhere in the N.T. except in St. 
Paul. dpa ovy occurs eight times in Romans, and besides only in 
Gal. i. and 2 Thess. and Eph. each once; 8.0, a favourite of St. 
Paul, occurs in Eph. five times (not in Col.). But the favourable 
impression created by this is outweighed by the peculiarities found 
in the Epistle. It is indeed admitted that the existence of drag 
Xeydweva would be no argument against the genuineness, if only 


§ 2] OF THE GENUINENESS OF THE EPISTLE XV 


they were not so numerous. There are, in fact, 42 words which 
are a. X. (in the N.T.), not including aiyyadwrevew, which is in a 
quotation. (Holtzmann reckoned only 37, but Thayer gives 42.1) 
This number, however, is not greater in proportion than that in 
admitted Epistles of St. Paul. Romans contains 100 (neglecting 
quotations) ; 1 Cor. 108; 2 Cor. 95; Gal. 33; Phil. 41 (Col. has 
38). The percentage is, in fact, rather less in our Epistle (see 
Robertson, Dict. of Bible, i. 954a, note). It is, indeed, fair in such 
a comparison to take account of St. Paul’s vocabulary rather than 
that of the N.T. generally. Accordingly, Holtzmann notes that 
there are here 39 words which, though occurring elsewhere in the 
N.T., are not found in St. Paul (the Pastoral Epp. and Col. are, 
of course, not counted). In Col. there are 15. Some of these, 
indeed, are such common words, that it is somewhat surprising 
that St. Paul has not used them elsewhere, such as a@yvo.a, drardo, 
ddpov, Ppdvynots, vos, to which we may add, though not common, 
cwrTHpiov, evoTAayxvos. But then, each of these occurs only once, 
and hence they cannot be regarded as indications of a different 
writer. Of the other words that have been noted as peculiar, 
some belong to the description of the Christian’s armour, and for 
these there would be no obvious place except in connexion with 
a similar figure; while others, such as xarapticpds, tpookaprépyats, 
dovdrys, cannot properly be reckoned as peculiar, since in other 
Epistles we find xaraprilw, xatapticis, tpooKaprepeiv, daiws. So also, 
although dvo.gis does not occur elsewhere, avouéis tod ordparTos, 
vi. 19, is parallel to 2 Cor. vi. 11, 76 ordpa jydv avéwye. Even 
without making these allowances, there is little difference between 
this Epistle and that to the Galatians, for example, in this respect. 
The latter Epistle, which is rather shorter, contains, in addition to 
32 daa eyoueva, 42 words which, though occurring elsewhere in 
the N.T., are not found in the other Epistles of St. Paul. Such 
calculations are, indeed, futile, except in connexion with words so 
frequently used as to be characteristic of the writer. 

More weight is to be given to the principle of the objection, 
that words are used here to express certain ideas which St. Paul is 
in the habit of expressing differently, and, again, that words used 
by him are here employed with a different meaning. But when 
we come to the instances we find them few, and for the most part 
unimportant. Of the first class; De Wette mentions 7a érovpavia 
for “heaven” (five times) ; ra mvevparixa for “spirits”; duaBoAos 
twice (elsewhere only in 1 and 2 Tim.), xoopoxpdrwp, owrnpuov. 
Soden adds, as favourite words of the writer, pefode’a (twice), and 
Sdéopuos (twice). These, with ra érovpdva and dudBodos, he says, 
it is strange not to find slipping from St. Paul’s pen elsewhere. As 
to decpios, however, it actually occurs in Philemon, and Holtz- 

1 See list at end of the Introduction. 


xvi THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§2 


mann had already pointed out that it was not to be expected 
except in Epistles written when St. Paul was a prisoner. As to 
dia30XA0s, of which much has been made because St. Paul elsewhere 
uses Saravas, if the writer of the Acts, or of the Fourth Gospel, 
and other N.T. writers, could use Senuaenmd duaBoXos indiffer- 
ently, why might not Paul use the former in his earlier Epistles, 
and the latter twice in this? The difference is only that between 
the Hebrew and the Greek forms, and is analogous to that between 
Ilérpos and Kydas, of which the former is used twice and the latter 
four times in the Epistle to the Galatians. Again, although ra 
érovpavia (which is not = “the heavens”) is not found elsewhere in 
St. Paul, the adjective occurs with the meaning “heavenly” in 
1 Cor. xv. 40, 48, 49, and in Phil. ii. ro. Other un-Pauline ex- 
pressions are found in ra GeAyjpara, at dudvovat, mpd KataBodj7s 
Kogpov, pwtilev as a function of the apostle, 6 dpywy tis eEovcias 
Tov depos, 6 Meds tod Kupiov yyav *"Inood Xpiorod (i. 17. 3); mvetpa 
Tov voos, 1) ayta éxxAnoia (ver. 275 not, however, in this form) ; ot 
dyLoe adaTo\o. Kal tpopyTat, tore yeaKovres, SiSsuat twa Ti (1. 22, 
iv. IL); dyabos T pos tt (iv. 29); a@yarav tov Kupwoy (Paul has ay. 
TOV Ocdv), ¢ dyaray tHv exkAnolav, of Christ; eis tacas Tas yeveds TOD 
ai@vos TOV aiwvev. 

It is, for the most part, only by their number that these and 
similar instances can be supposed to carry weight as an objection 
to the Pauline authorship; two or three, however, are somewhat 
striking. On 6 @cds rod Kupiov ajar, see the note. It is certainly 
an unexpected expression, but it is one which no later imitator, 
holding such lofty views of Christ as are here expressed, would 
have ventured on without Pauline precedent. It has its parallel in 
John xx. 17. Again, although the expression 6 Xpicros jyaryce 
tiv exkAnotay taken by itself sounds peculiar, it is not so when we 
find that it is suggested by the preceding words, ot avépes, ayamare 
Tas yuvatkas KaGws Kal, «.T.A, 

The phrase which seems to create the greatest difficulty is rots 
aylos amoordAos Kal mpopyras. It is said that this, especially 
when compared with Col. i. 26, is strongly suggestive of a later 
generation which set the apostles and prophets (of the new dis- 
pensation) on a lofty pedestal as objects of veneration. Some of 
those critics who accept the Epistle as genuine have suggested that 
we have to do with a gloss (the whole or, at least, the latter half 
of ver. 5, Reuss; the word ayiows, Jiilicher), or a dislocation of 
the text (Robertson), aylows being the mediate or general (éave- 
p®6n, Col.), the dr. x. mp. the immediate or special (dzrexadvpOn) 
recipients of the revelation. Lachmann and Tregelles put a 
comma after éyiors, so that da. x. zp. is in apposition with dycors. 
So far as the difficulty is in the writer’s application of the term 
dyiows, it appears to be due very much to the importation into 


§ 2] OF THE GENUINENESS OF THE EPISTLE XVli 


dytous of the modern notion of holiness (see note). However this 
may be, the objection to the genuineness drawn from this word is 
deprived of all force by the words which follow presently in ver. 8, 
énol TO eLaxioTotépw mavtwv dyiwv. It is quite incredible that a 
writer otherwise so successful in assuming the character of St. 
Paul, should here in the same breath forget his part and (as it is 
thought) exaggerate it. The same consideration, in part at least, 
applies to the other difficulty found in the words, viz. that they 
represent the apostles as all recognising the principle of the calling 
of the Gentiles,—a principle which St. Paul elsewhere (and here 
also) claims as specially his gospel. The apostles are spoken of 
collectively also in 1 Cor. xv. 7; and as they had cordially assented 
to St. Paul’s teaching as to the admission of the Gentiles (Gal. 
ii. g), it is quite natural that he should speak of it here as revealed 
“to the apostles.” 

As examples of Pauline words used in a new sense, are quoted 
pvoTyplov, oikovouta, mepiroinos. As to the first, there is really no 
difference between its meaning here and elsewhere in St. Paul; or 
if the sense in ver. 32 is thought to be different, that is a difference 
within this Epistle itself, in which the word occurs five times in its 
usual sense. oikovoyia is found (besides Col. i. 25) in 1 Cor. 
ix. 17 of St. Paul’s own stewardship, while in Eph. it is used of the 
ordering of the fulness of the times (i. 10), or of the grace of God 
(iii. 2), or of the mystery, etc. (iii. 9). Here, again, so little ground 
is there for assuming any serious difference in meaning, that in 
the last two passages the meaning “stewardship” (RV. marg.) 
is perfectly suitable. Again, repuroiyo.s in i. 14 is said to be 
concrete, whereas in 1 Thess. v. 9, 2 Thess. ii. 14, it is abstract. 
Admitting this (which is questioned), the difference is parallel to 
that, for example, in the meaning of dwoxdéAvyis in 1 Cor. xiv. 26 
and i. 7. 

In reference to these objections, and some others that have to 
be mentioned, it is important to remember that we are not dealing 
with an anonymous work. There are many points of difference 
which in such a case might be used with effect against the Pauline 
authorship, but which put on a different aspect when we consider 
that the Epistle makes a distinct claim to be the work of St. Paul,— 
so that, if not genuine, it is the work of a writer who designed that 
it should be mistaken for the work of that apostle,—and when we 
add to this the fact that it was received as such from the earliest 
times. For a writer of such ability as the author, and one so 
familiar with the writings of St. Paul, would take care to avoid, at 
least, obvious deviations from the style and language of the author 
whom he is imitating. From this point of view, not only amrag 
Aeydueva, but still more the use of new expressions for Pauline 


ideas, instead of offering an argument against the Pauline author. 
6 


XViil THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 2 


ship, become arguments against forgery. If, indeed, actual contra- 
dictions or inconsistencies could be shown, it would be different ; 
but they cannot. 

There are, it is true, at first sight, differences in the point of view 
taken in this Epistle and in others of St. Paul; but these have 
been exaggerated. For example, when in v. 1 the expression réxva 
dyamryra occurs, Holtzmann remarks that this is elsewhere used by 
St. Paul, not to urge his readers as beloved children to imitate 
their Father, God, but because they owed their conversion to 
himself, so that he was himself their father (1 Cor. iv. 14, 17, cf. 
2 Tim. i. 2). Yet the expression is quite naturally led up to here. 
“Forgive, for God has forgiven; therefore imitate God, whose 
children ye are.” Addressing those to whom he was a stranger, 
he could not call on them to imitate himself (1 Cor. iv. 16, xi. 1), 
which, moreover, here, where the question is of forgiveness, would 
be an impossible bathos ; nor could he call them his own children. 
As to the expression “children of God,” we have a parallel in 
Rom. viii. 16, ore éopev réxva Ocod. 

Again, 9 Aeyouévyn axpoBvoria, 7 Aeyomevy tepiropy (ii. 11), taken 
by themselves, may seem to deny any real significance to circum- 
cision (contrary to Rom. iii. 1; Phil. iii. 5; Col. ii. 11, 13); yet a 
closer consideration will show that it is not so. ‘Ye who are 
contemptuously called uncircumcision by those who call themselves 
the circumcision, a circumcision in the flesh only (note the 
addition év capx/), as if the mere fleshly circumcision had any 
spiritual value.” Not only does the sense of the whole passage 
agree with Rom. ii. 26-29 (as Holtzmann allows), but the form of 
expression is natural as coming from the writer who in Phil. iii. 2 
uses the strong and scornful word xararown, adding mets yap 
eopev 1 TEplTouy, ol TvevpaTe cod Aartpevovres, k.7.r.: to which we 
may add, for those who accept Colossians, Col. ii. rr. Holtzmann, 
indeed, thinks that Paul would not say, 7 Aeyouevn axpoBvoria, he 
being himself one of the Jews who so designated them (Rom. 
lil. 26, 27, iil, 30, iv. g; Gal. ii. 7). But this corresponds to 
Col. ill, 11, ok G& . . . mepirouy Kal axpoBvoria. (Compare the 
less forcible ovre reprropy te ioxvet, x.7.d., Gal. v. 6, vi. 15.) 

Holtzmann considers this way of speaking of circumcision as . 
belonging to the general view of the Law taken in this Epistle, as 
merely typical. It is not spoken of, says v. Soden, as having a 
religious or moral significance, as taidaywyds eis Xpiotdv, Or as 
working «xardpa, but only in its formal character as the sum of 
evroAai ev ddypacw, its content being left out of view. Compare, 
on the contrary, Rom. ix. 4; Gal. v. 23 (where, however, we have 
vouos, NOt o vopos). Its significance consists in its causing a 
separation and even hostility between Jews and Gentiles. But 
this is not a greater difference than that between the ideas of a 


OF THE GENUINENESS OF THE EPISTLE xix 


madaywyos and a source of xardépa, which we find within one 
epistle, that to the Galatians. 

Objections from the line of thought in the Epistle.—It is said, 
further, that the whole view of the Church as regards the union of 
Jews and Gentiles is peculiar; St. Paul never represents it as the 
object or even an object of Christ’s work to bring into one Jews 
and Gentiles (ii. 13-18, 19-22, ili. 5 sqq., iv. 7-16). This leads 
us further ; we notice that the writer never speaks of local Churches, 
but only of the (one) Church. This has been supposed to indicate 
that he wrote at a time when the several local Churches were 
drawing together in resistance to a common danger, and binding 
themselves together by a single organisation. But the Church 
here is not represented as made up of individual Churches, but of 
individual men; nor is there any mention of external unity or 
common organisation. Nor is the conception of one “Church,” 
which we find here, quite new. Not to mention passages where 
St. Paul speaks of himself as formerly persecuting “the Church of 
God” (1 Cor. xv. 9; Gal. i. 13; Phil, iii. 6), we have in 1 Cor. 
xll. 28, eJero 6 Weds ev TH exxAnoia mpOTov azrocTdAovs, K.7.A. We 
may compare also Acts xx. 28, rv éxxAnolay Tod Ocod Hv Teprerouy- 
gato, k.t.4. In Col. we have 4 éxxAynoia in the same sense, as the 
universal Church (i. 18, 24), although it is also used of local 
Churches (iv. 15, 16). The encyclical character of the present 
Epistle sufficiently accounts for the predominance of the former 
view here. There is, however, no inconsistency in this advance 
upon the earlier conception. It is, indeed, remarkable that in 
Eph. the thought of the unity of the Church is so dominant that 
Christ’s work is represented as having immediate reference to it 
rather than to individuals (compare v. 25-27, 29, 32, with Gal. 
ii. 20); of this He is the Saviour (ver. 23); it is this that He has 
sanctified by His offering of Himself (ver. 26). But it is essential 
to observe that all this occurs, not in an exposition of the nature of 
Christ’s work, but in illustration of the duties of husbands to their 
wives. Any reference to His work in relation to individual men 
would have been entirely irrelevant. That reference comes in 
naturally in i. 7, v. 2, ii. 16 ff. But the first two passages, it is 
said, appear to be only verbal reminiscences of St. Paul. It is, 
however, much easier to conceive St. Paul writing as in vv. 25-32, 
than to suppose it the work of another who wishes to be mistaken 
for him. It is no doubt very remarkable that the whole circle of 
thought which in St. Paul has its centre in the death of Christ, 
here falls into the background. In i. 15-11. 10, where the resurrec- 
tion is twice mentioned, and the whole work of redemption dwelt 
on, the death is not mentioned. So also i. 11-14, 11. 1-21. In 
fact, with the exception of i. 7 (from Col. i. 14), it is only incident- 
ally referred to as a pattern, and then with remarkable differences 


XX THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 2 


from St. Paul, that being attributed to Christ which is elsewhere 
attributed to God. (Yet, on the other hand, in iv. 32 it is God in 
Christ who is said to forgive, while in Col. 11. 13 it is Christ who 
forgives.) The only place in which the death of Christ is dealt 
with in greater detail is ii. 14-16; and there the interest is not in 
the reconciliation of individuals and the forgiveness of their sins, 
but in this, that the Law, and with it the enmity between Jew and 
Gentile, are removed. These and other differences that have been 
pointed out are no doubt striking, but they involve no incon- 
sistencies ; they are only developments of ideas of which the germ 
is found in St. Paul’s other writings. 

The representation of Christ as the Head of the Body, which 
is the Church, is common to Eph. and Col., and therefore cannot 
be alleged against the genuineness of the former by any who admit 
the latter. Elsewhere, when St. Paul uses the figure of the body, 
the whole body is said to be in Christ (Rom. xii. 4, 5), or to be 
Christ (1 Cor. xii. 12), and the head appears only as one member 
among many (2d. 21). But in those cases the point to be illus- 
trated was the mutual relation of the members of the Church, and 
there is nothing inconsistent in the modification of the figure which 
we find in these Epp. 

Again, as to the Person and Office of Christ, we have in both 
Epp. a notable advance beyond the earlier Epistles, as in Col. 
i, 16 ff., “in Him were all things created, in the heaven, and 
upon the earth . . . all things have been created through Him, 
and unto Him; and He is before all things, and in Him all 
things consist.” But we have at least the germ of this in 1 Cor. 
viii. 6, els Kvpuos "Incots Xpicrds, 8° ov Ta madvTa, Kal Tuets 
d¢ avrov. In Eph., however, we have added to this the further 
thought that things in heaven as well as on earth have part in the 
reconciliation effected by Him (Eph. i. 10) ; and all this is referred 
to a purpose of the Divine will directed towards Christ Himself 
from the beginning. 

Once more, the second coming of Christ has fallen into the 
background, and does not appear to have a part in bringing about 
the fulfilment of the promised blessings. Rather does the writer 
seem to anticipate a series of aidves érepxopnevot. But, as Hort 
observes, ‘‘nothing was more natural than that a change like this 
should come over St. Paul’s mind, when year after year passed 
away, and still there was no sign of the Lord’s coming, and when 
the spread of the faith through the Roman Empire, and the results 
which it was producing, would give force to all such ways of think- 
ing as are represented by the image of the leaven leavening the 
lump” (Prolegomena, p. 142). 

Paley on the Internal Evidence.—Paley in his Horae Paulinae 
has replied by anticipation to some, at least, of the objections to 


§ 2] OF THE GENUINENESS OF THE EPISTLE xxi 


the genuineness of the Epistle, and has added some positive argu- 
ments which deserve attention. He remarks that ‘‘ Whoever writes 
two letters or two discourses nearly upon the same subject and at 
no great distance of time, but without any express recollection of 
what he had written before, will find himself repeating some 
sentences in the very order of the words in which he had already 
used them; but he will more frequently find himself employing 
some principal terms, with the order inadvertently changed, or 
with the order disturbed by the intermixture of other words and 
phrases expressive of ideas rising up at the time; or in many 
instances repeating, not single words, nor yet whole sentences, but 
parts and fragments of sentences. Of all these varieties the exam- 
ination of our two Epistles will furnish plain examples; and I 
should rely upon this class of instances more than upon the last ; 
because, although an impostor might transcribe into a forgery 
entire sentences and phrases, yet the dislocation of words, the 
partial recollection of phrases and sentences, the intermixture of 
new terms and new ideas with terms and ideas before used, which 
will appear in the examples that follow, and which are the natural 
properties of writings produced under the circumstances in which 
these Epistles are represented to have been composed, would not, 
I think, have occurred to the invention of a forger; nor, if they 
had occurred, would they have been so easily executed. This 
studied variation was a refinement in forgery, which, I believe, did 
not exist; or if we can suppose it to have been practised in the 
instances adduced below, why, it may be asked, was not the same 
art exercised upon those which we have collected in the preceding 
class? [viz. Eph. i. 7=Col. i. 14; Eph. i, 1o=Col. 1. 20; Eph. 
iii, 2=Col. i. 25; Eph. v. 19=Col. iii. 16; and Eph. vi. 22= 
Col. iv. 8].” Of the second class he specifies Eph. i. 19, il. 5, 
which, if we take away the parentheses, leaves a sentence almost 
the same in terms as Col. ii. 12, 13; but it is in Eph. twice inter- 
rupted by incidental thoughts which St. Paul, as his manner was, 
enlarges upon by the way, and then returns to the thread of his 
discourse. 

Amongst internal marks of genuineness, Paley specifies the 
frequent yet seemingly unaffected use of zAodros used metaphoric- 
ally as an augmentative of the idea to which it happens to be sub- 
joined,—a figurative use familiar to St. Paul, but occurring in no 
other writer in the N.T., except once in Jas. ii. 5, “ Hath not God 
chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith ?”, where it is manifestly 
suggested by the antithesis. (It occurs in 1 Tim. vi. 18.) 

“There is another singularity in St. Paul’s style which, wherever 
it is found, may be deemed a badge of authenticity ; because, if it 
were noticed, it would not, I think, be imitated, inasmuch as it 
almost always produces embarrassment and interruption in the 


xxii THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 2 


reasoning. This singularity is a species of digression which may 
properly, I think (says Paley), be denominated going off at a word. 
It is turning aside from the subject upon the occurrence of some 
particular word, forsaking the train of thought then in hand, and 
entering upon a parenthetic sentence in which that word is the pre- 
vailing term.” An instance is 2 Cor. il. 14, at the word dcpy 
(note vv. 15, 16). Another, 2 Cor. ili, 1, at émucroAGv, which 
gives birth to the following sentence, vv. 2, 3. A third is 2 Cor. 
lil. 13, at the word xdAvypa. The whole allegory, vv. 14-18, 
arises out of the occurrence of this word in v. 13, and in iv. t he 
resumes the proper subject of his discourse almost in the words 
with which he had left it. 

In Eph. we have two similar instances, viz. iv. 8-11, at the word 
avéBn, and again, v. 13-15, at das. 

Again, in Eph. iv. 2-4 and Col. ili. 12-15, we have the words 
Tarewoppoctvn, mpadTns, paxpobupia, avexduevor GAAHAwY in the 
same order ; dydzy is also in both, but in a different connexion ; 
ovvoecpL0s THS eipyvns answers to o. THS TeAELoTNTOS; exANOyTE ev Evi 
oopate to ev cdma Kabws Kal exrAnOynre vy pia eAmidi; yet is this 
similitude found in the midst of sentences otherwise very different. 

Eph. v. 6—8, Col. iii. 6-8, afford, says Paley, a specimen of that 
partial resemblance which is only to be met with where no imita- 
tion is designed, but where the mind, exercised upon the same 
subject, is left to the spontaneous return of such terms and phrases 
as, having been used before, may happen to present themselves 
again. ‘The sentiment of both passages is throughout alike: half 
of that sentiment, the denunciation of God’s wrath, is expressed in 
identical words ; the other half, viz. the admonition to quit their 
former conversation, in words entirely different. 

Eph. vi. 19, 20, furnishes, according to Paley’s very just remark, 
a coincidence (with the Acts) of that minute and less obvious 
kind which is of all others the most to be relied upon. It is the 
coincidence of rpeoBevw év dAvoe with Acts xxvill. 16. From the 
latter passage we learn that at Rome Paul was allowed to dwell by 
himself with one soldier that kept him. In such cases it was 
customary for the prisoner to be bound to the soldier by a single 
chain. 

Accordingly, in ver. 20 St. Paul says, tiv dAvow ravrnv mepixeipa. 
It is to be observed that in the parallel passage in Col. the word 
used is déoa1. A real prisoner might use either the general words 
déouar or év Seopots, or the specific term. Paley, however, omits 
to notice the irony of zpecBevw év adAvoet, to which the choice of 
the word is undoubtedly due. ‘Am an ambassador in chains” 
does not exactly express the force of the original, which is rather 
“act as an ambassador in chains.” As Hort well remarks (p. 156), 
“the writer has in mind, not the mere general thought of being in 


§ 3] RELATION TO EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS xxiii 


bonds, but the visual image of an ambassador standing up to plead 
his sovereign’s cause, and wearing, strangest of contradictions, a 
fetter by way of official adornment.” év decpots would have meant 
“in prison.” 


3. RELATION TO THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS. 


It is impossible even to glance over these two Epistles without 
being struck by the many similarities, and even verbal coincidences, 
between them. On the other hand, the Epistle to the Ephesians 
differs markedly from its twin Epistle in the absence of contro- 
versial matter such as forms so important an element in the other. 
De Wette, admitting the genuineness of Col., thought it possible 
to account for the likeness by supposing that the writer of Eph. 
borrowed from the other Epistle. He gave a list of parallel 
passages (Z7n/. § 1462) as follows :— 





Eph, i. 7 ‘ pe Colssie ira: Bphsivei22ifaie Col. iii. 8 ff. 
blo é eligi ls; 20s elven 2G tole cing abbey tye 
Seno LS = 107) v6 Se aa ee art Selv 20 ay bby ey thie G. 
ts 1S ; ay he Hy IN BU 5) dhs {3} 
ls 27 gy LED SomenlVen 2 x Mb MANE 
Sf mrlnr 225 bin Tiki Airhvs 33 si) bk i 
Seg Liman Se Marty h pre ets set) val Gl ST abby (3% 
edicas OF) Bin RLLuraee pte wV eS 5p 
spe is ee ls EA ea Vs 0 elias 
sp 0 TK SiG) ng tH) TOY pny Welt ah NG oe 
A elle °F < we 1245 55 RH LOVE a ls LONE: 
ny SO Psa 25. A NS oer lllcerS 
np eS) Sain ZOs solte iWon > lee lls, LO 
ay ALG, RS 2g abe Lael NEE Sai Oty 6) 
Boy tty) ea aS ewer igs Nae! elie 2 
cade AV oil Si) ag CTO: | hities Samuels Sy Lise ate ap tbl SIE 
Ay Nee : Sere pede 2) fen eC gern. aunVle ; Ble seal Vac Tis 
rep 1h, Shy A pp MOE e oP ay Notte 5 Suen Vee tts 
Pe muiaVs, iS fey 5 a) Bit, HOD bp NALRIG G Maven Ve Vals 
ELV. CLO np itt6 tin G 


Holtzmann in his Avitik der Epheser- und Kolosser-Brtefe ex- 
amined the problem with great labour and minuteness. He 
argued strongly that in some of the parallels, the priority was on 
the side of Eph. The passages which he selected for detailed 
examination in support of this contention were, 1st, Eph. i. 4 (= 
Col. i. 22); 2nd, Eph. i. 6, 7 (=Col. i. 13, 14); 31d, Eph. ili. 3, 
5, 9 (=Col. i. 26, il. 2); 4th, Eph. ili, 17, 18, iv. 16, i, 20 (= 
Gol, 1. 29; iis 2; 1); 5th, Eph. iv. 16 (=Col. 1. 19) ; 6th, Eph. iv. 
22-24 (=Col. ili. 9, 10); and 7th, Eph. v. 19 (= Col. lll, 16). 
(With respect to the last three he seems to have changed his 
mind before publishing his Zzz/ectung.) His conclusion was that 
there existed an Epistle to the Colossians by St. Paul, which was 


XXiV THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 4 


taken by the writer of Eph. as the basis of his work, and that 
the same writer subsequently interpolated the Epistle to the 
Colossians. He conjectures that this writer was the same who 
added the final doxology to the Epistle to the Romans. 

In the introduction to the Epistle to the Colossians will be 
found a specimen of the result of his analysis of Colossians. The 
principal, indeed the only value of this part of his work is that 
it establishes the inadequacy of the more commonly accepted 
solution of the problem, namely, that Ephesians is simply a 
forgery based on Colossians. Some critics, however, such as 
Hausrath, Mangold, Pfleiderer, think that Holtzmann has at least 
indicated in what direction the solution is to be looked for. But 
all such attempts are attended with much greater difficulty than 
the traditional view. 

There is another difficulty in this theory, and one which, from 
a literary point of view, is really fatal. It is that the words and 
phrases supposed to be borrowed from Col. are introduced into 
different contexts, and yet so as to fit in quite naturally with their 
new surroundings. (See, above, the passages mentioned by 
Paley.) 

It may be asked, moreover, how is it that a writer so well 
acquainted with Pauline thought should have confined his borrow- 
ings almost exclusively to the Epistle to the Colossians, and that 
although the most characteristic element of that Epistle, its special 
polemic against the heretical teachers, seems to have had no 
interest for him. Indeed, it is strange how he succeeds in steering 
clear of all allusions to that subject. In the author of Col. this 
would be done unconsciously ; it is not so easy to account for an 
imitator doing it. 


§ 4. RELATION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER. 


The parallelisms between these two Epistles are so numerous 
that the Epistles may almost be compared throughout. The 
following comparison is chiefly from Holtzmann. After the 
address they begin thus— 


t RED a EPH. i. 
3. evAoynTds 6 Oeds kal marhp Tov 3. eVAoynTds 6 Oeds kal marhp Tov 
Kuplov nuadv’Inood Xpiorod, ddvayevv}-  Kuplov yudv Inood Xpucrod, 6 evdoyy- 
gas Mas. cas Has. 


This commencement, however, is found also in 2 Cor. 1. 3. 

Then follows in each a long passage (1 Pet. i. 5-13; Eph. i. 
5-15) in which the alternation of participles and relative pronouns 
is the same in both until the transition to the succeeding period 


§ 4] RELATION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER XXV 


is made in the one case by 60, in the other by dca rotro. The 
substance of the passage in 1 Pet. i. 3-5 corresponds with that of 
the following passage in Eph. (i. 18-20), the “hope” being 
emphasised in both, and its object being designated the xAnpovopia, 
the connexion with the resurrection of Christ as its ground being 
the same, and in both the dvvayus @cod being put in relation to 
the ziotis. 
1 Pet. ii. 4-6 has much resemblance to Eph. i. 18—22— 


1 PET. ii. EPH. ii. 
4. mpds 6y mpocepxduevor lOov 18. 60’ avdrod éxouer Thy tpocaywynv. 
fGvTa... 1g. . . . olketor TOU Oeod. 
5. kal adrol ws AlBor fGvres olkodo- 20. émorkodounbévtes emi TH OeweXly 
peta Be, olkos mvevpatixés. . . . vTos akpoywvialov atrov Xpiorov 
6. . » « AlGov axpoywriatopy. "Inood, x.7.X. 
22... . gcuvoixodometcbe els KaTot- 


KnT7piov TOU Geo. 


1 Pet., however, is here citing Ps. cxviil. 22 and Isa. xxviii. 16, 
and the former passage may have been in St. Paul’s mind also. 
It had been applied by our Lord to Himself (Matt. xxi. 42), and 
is cited in St. Peter’s speech, Acts iv. 11. Holtzmann thinks the 
citation of Isa. xxvill. 16 was suggested to 1 Pet. by the axpo- 
yeviatov of Eph. 

1 Pet. iii. 18, va qpas tpocayayn TO Oecd, reminds us of Eph. 
ii. 18, 80 atirod éxopev THY Tpocaywynyv mpos Tov warépa, While the 
verses immediately following exhibit the ancient explanation of 
Eph. iv. 8-10. Then follows in 1 Pet. a striking parallel to Eph. 
i, 20-22— 


1 PET. iii. EPH. i. 
22. bs éorw ev detia Tod Oeod mopev- 20. éxd@icevy év detla atrod év Tois 
Gels els otpavdr, éroupavio.s. 
brorayévTwy alt@ ayyéAwy Kal é£ou- 21. brepdvw mdons apxjs Kal éfou- 
ody Kal duvapéwy. clas kal duvdpews .. . 


22. xal wavta brérater. 


Again, 1 Pet. i. ro-12 and Eph. iii. 5, ro are strikingly parallel. 
They both contain the thought found here only in the N.T., that 
the meaning of the prophecies was not clearly known to the pro- 
phets themselves, but has first become so to us— 


1 PET. i. EPH. iii. 
10. mpop7jTa: .. . 5. 6 érépars yeveais otq éyvwplcbn 
11. épewvGrres els Tha... Katpdy ... ws viv dmexadipOn Tois... 
€d7Xou 70 ev atrois mrvetua. mpoprrats év mvetpare. 
12. ols dmexadtgOn bri otx éavrois, 10, Wa yywpicby viv. . + 


tty bé Sinxdvour aird, & viv avyyyéAn. 


Here 1 Pet. goes beyond Eph. in saying that the prophets 
themselves were made acquainted by revelation with their own 


xxvi THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 4 


ignorance. (But on zpopyrais in Eph. iii. 5 = New Test. prophets, 
see note.) 

1 Pet. i. 20 and Eph. iii. g correspond in the same reference 
to the mystery ordained zp6 xaraf{oAns Kéopov, and hitherto hidden, 
but now revealed. And as in Eph. ili. 10 the wise purpose of 
God is now made known to angelic powers, so in 1 Pet. i. 12 they 
desire to search into these things. 

These are but a selection from the parallelisms that have been 
indicated by Holtzmann and others. Some critics have explained 
them by the supposition that the writer of Eph. borrowed from 
1 Pet. (Hilgenfeld, Weiss). But, in fact, the latter Epistle has 
affinities to other Epistles of St. Paul, and especially to that to the 
Romans, with which it has many striking coincidences (see Salmon, 
Introduction, Lect. xxii., and Seufert in Hilgenfeld’s Zectschrift, 
1874, p. 360). 

On the supposition that Eph. is genuine, and that St. Paul 
here borrowed from 1 Pet., we seem obliged to hold (as Weiss 
does) that in the other parallels the former was also the borrower. 
“Imagine,” says Holtzmann, “the most original of all the N.T. 
writers, when composing the 12th chap. of his Ep. to the Romans, 
laboriously gleaning from 1 Pet. the exhortations which his own 
daily experience might have suggested to him, taking xii. 1 from 
1 Pet. il. 5 stripped of its symbolic clothing, then xii. 2 borrowing 
ovoxnparilesOe from 1 Pet. i. 14; next in xii. 3-8 expanding 
1 Pet. iv. 10, 11; taking xii. g out of 1 Pet. i. 22; xii. 10 from 
tT Pet: i.117.7 ete: 

Seufert, adopting an incidental suggestion of Holtzmann, has 
argued at length that Eph. and 1 Pet. are by the same author, 
possibly the same who wrote the third Gospel and the Acts 
(Hilgenfeld’s Zectschrift, 1881, pp. 179, 332). It is not necessary 
to discuss this theory in detail, since it appears to have gained no 
adherents. It may suffice to quote Salmon’s remark, that the 
resemblances between 1 Pet. and Eph. are much less numerous 
and less striking than those between Ephesians and Colossians ; 
whereas, in order to establish Seufert’s theory, they ought to be 
very much stronger: ‘‘ For we clearly can more readily recognise 
resemblances as tokens of common authorship in the case of two 
documents which purport to come from the same author, and’ 
which, from the very earliest times, have been accepted as so 
coming, than when the case is the reverse.” 

There remains the supposition that 1 Pet. borrowed from 
Ephesians. If the former be not genuine, there is, of course, no 
difficulty in this supposition, whether Eph. be genuine or not. 
Nor is there any real difficulty (except to those who will insist on 
putting the two apostles in opposition) in supposing that the 
Apostle Peter when in Rome should become familiar with the 


§ 5] RELATION TO NEW TESTAMENT WRITINGS XXVil 


Epistle to the Romans, and adopt some of its thoughts and 
language. It is difficult, however, to suppose him acquainted with 
Eph. and other Epistles. Salmon suggests another alternative, 
namely, that while Paul was in Rome, Peter may have arrived 
there, in which case there would be a good deal of wivé voce inter- 
course between them, and Paul’s discourses to the Christians at 
Rome may have been heard by Peter. This suggestion appears 
to have been made also by Schott (Der erste Brief Petri, 1851).’ 
Holtzmann’s objection to it is singularly weak, viz. first, that 
according to Gal. i. 18, ii, 1 sq., 11 sqq., we must regard the 
personal intercourse between the two apostles as limited to three 
widely separated moments, and broken off in some bitterness ; and, 
secondly, that St. Peter could not in this way have become 
familiar with Rom. xii. xiii, The latter remark has been replied to 
by anticipation ; as to the former, what sort of idea of the two 
apostles must Holtzmann have, to think that the incident at 
Antioch must have led to a permanent estrangement between 
them! Finally, if 1 Pet. was composed by Silvanus under the 
direction of the apostle, which is possibly what is meant by v. 12, the 
use of St. Paul’s thoughts and language is sufficiently accounted for. 


§ 5. RELATION TO OTHER NEW TESTAMENT WRITINGS. 


Epistle to the Hebrews.—Points of contact with the Ep. to the 
Hebrews have been noted. Lexically, e.g. aiya kat odp§ (elsewhere 
caps Kal aipa), dypumvely, Kpavyy, trepdvw, trepdvw mdvTwv Tov 
otpavav, cis atoAvtpwow, aidv péAAwv, tporpopa Kal Faia, Boudry 
of God, zappyoia in the sense of spiritual assurance. There are 
also peculiar conceptions common to both Epistles: Eph. i. 20, 
éxdbioev év deEia adrod, Heb. i. 3, vili. 1, x. 12: Eph. i. 7, droAvrpwors 
Sua Tov aiparos, Heb. ix. 12: Eph. v. 25, 26, éavrdov rapédwxev trép 
airjs iva aitiy ayidon, Heb. xiii. 12, x. ro. St. Paul, it is said, 
does not represent déy.acpds as the object of Christ’s atoning death, 
but rather justification. Eph. iii. 12, év @ éxomev tiv Tappyciav Kai 
Tyv mpocaywynv, Heb. iv. 16, mpocepywpefa peta mappyoias. The 
Christology, also, of the two Epp. is the same. Of course, if Eph. 
is genuine, there is no difficulty in admitting that the writer to the 
Hebrews used it. V. Soden, however, argues that the latter 
Epistle is the earlier. His reason is that 1 Pet. is dependent on 
Hebrews, and probably earlier than Eph. The former proposition 
is more than doubtful; but we need not discuss it, since, as we 
have seen, it is probably 1 Pet. that has used Eph. 

1 “Peter possessed an eminently sympathetic nature. He was one who 


received impressions easily, and could not without an effort avoid reflecting the 
tone of the company in which he lived” (Salmon, Jntrod., 7th ed., p. 438). 


xxviii THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 5 


The Apocalypse.—There are also noted points of correspond- 
ence with the Apocalypse, e.g. Eph. ii. 20, “foundation of the 
apostles and prophets”; Rev. xxi. 14: Eph. ili. 5, (7@ pvoryplw) 3 

. viv arexadvhOn trois aylous aroarodois adrod Kal mpoOynrats, 
Rev. x. 7, 76 wvaoryptov Tod Meot, ws edyyyéAuce Tots EavTod SovAous 
tous tpopyras : Eph. v. 11, 1) cvyKowwvetre Tots epyous Tos axaprrois 
Tov oxdrous, Rev. xviii. 4, (va wy) ovyKowwvnonte Tails dpaptiats airhs: 
Eph. v. 25 ff., the comparison of the union of Christ and the 
Church to that of husband and wife; cf. Rev. xix. 7, a/.1 Many 
other coincidences are pointed out by Holtzmann, who concludes 
that the author of Eph. made use of the Apocalypse. V. Soden, 
however, judges that they do not prove any dependence either 
literary or spiritual on either side, but that they show that the 
author of Eph. stood much nearer than Paul to the modes of 
expression of Christianity which are attested in the Apocalypse ; 
and he passes a similar judgment on the relation between Eph. 
and the Gospel of John, except that in the latter case the affinity 
extends also to the ideas. 

As to the Apocalypse, it is hard to believe that the writer of 
Eph. v. 23 ff. had before him the fact that the Church had 
already by another writer been expressly designated the Bride of 
Christ. He seems, on the contrary, to have been led up to it step 
by step from the comparison of the headship of the man (=1 Cor, 
xl. 3) to the headship of Christ. Rather does the exposition in 
the Apocalypse appear to be a development of the figure first 
suggested in Eph. The figure of the Bridegroom appears, indeed, 
in the Gospel of St. John iil. 29, but it is used there merely to 
illustrate the superiority of Christ to the Baptist. In fact, the 
Parable of the Ten Virgins in the Synoptic Gospels is much closer 
to the figure here. 

Gospel of St. John.—Comparison with the Gospel of St. John 
gives results such as the following :—The Logos-idea is in substance 
indicated in i. 10, where Christ is represented as the point of union 
in which the divided universe is brought together. As to the 
special application of this fundamental thought to the relation of 
Jews and Gentiles (ii. 13-22, iil. 6), there are significant parallels 
in John (x. 16, xl. 52, xvil. 20, 21). Further, it is especially the 
ideas of yvéo.s and ayarn that in both Epistle and Gospel * 
dominate everything, and in most of the (ten) places in Eph. in 
which a@ydzy occurs the thought is Johannine, as in i. 4, ii. 4. 
Christ is 6 jyarnpévos (1. 6), the absolute object of Divine love, as 
in John ili. 35, x. 17, xv. 9, and especially xvii. 23, 24, 26. The 
words jydryods pe Tpd KataPoAns KOcpov In xvil..24 particularly 

1 Compare also Eph. i. 17, Rev. xix. 10; Eph. i. 8, Rev. xiii. 18; Eph. 
ii! 13) Reve vivo); Ephy iil.o) Revivive Lis x05) Eph ill. 1o;p kev.) xis oT, 
xxi, 15-17; Eph. v. 32, Rev. i. 20. 


§ 6] TIME AND PLACE OF WRITING xxix 


are in touch both with yyarnpévos in i. 6, and with po KcataBoAns 
koopov ini. 4. The work of redemption is in John viewed especially 
as one of dyidZewy (xvii. 17, 19); so also Eph. v. 26. This ayvaZeu 
is accomplished by Christ xafapioas ... év pypart, to which 
corresponds kafapos && tov Aoyov, John xv. 3. Moreover, the 
effect produced on those who are sanctified is described as a 
quickening of the dead (John v. 21, 25, 28; Eph. i. 5,6). The 
contrast between the light which Christ brings and the opposing 
power of darkness is expressed in both with striking similarity. 


EPH. Vv. JOHN. 

8. ws Téxva pwrds wepimatetre. Xil. 35. mepimaretre ws TO pers Exere. 

II. uaddov dé kal éhéyxere (Ta Epya ill, 20. mas yap 6 gatda mpdocowy 
Tov oKéTous). puget TO Pos Kal ovK EpxeTar mpds TA 

Pas iva wh éd\eyxO7 Ta Epya abrod: 

13. Ta dé mavra éheyxdueva vrd TOD iii, 21. 6 6¢ mov Thy ddjOeay 
gpwrds pavepodras’ wav yap Td pavepov- épxerac mpds 7d Ps Wa gavepwiy 
wevoyv pas éoTt. avTov Ta épya. 


Here what comes close together in Eph. appears in the Gospel 
of John in two separate places. ‘The same thing occurs with Eph. 
iv. 8-10 compared with John iil. 31, vil. 39. Indeed, the parallels 
begin with Eph. iv. 7, 7 xdpus kara 76 pérpov THs dwpeds TOD Xpicrod. 
In the Gospel the one exception in which the Spirit is given ovx ék 
pérpov is expressed in iii. 34 in a form which becomes intelligible 
only by presupposing the general statement in Eph. “to each of 
us,” etc. The expressions, too, in Eph. iv. 9, 10, and John iii. 13, 
suggest a literary dependence. | Eph.: 76 6& évéBy ri éorw et put) O74 
kat katéBn .. . 6 kataBas airés éorw Kal 6 dvaBas trepdvw TdvTwv 
TOV ovpavar. 

John: otdels dvaBéByxev eis Tov obpavov ei pH O €x Tod odpavod 
xataf3ds. Here again, says Holtzmann, the passage in the Gospel 
becomes quite clear only on supposition of a reminiscence. 

The correspondence between Eph. and the Johannine writings 
is sufficiently accounted for by the supposition that ‘St. John read 
and valued St. Paul’s writings,” as Salmon remarks. This appears 
strongly confirmed by certain correspondences between the Apoca- 
lypse and the Ep. to the Colossians (see Introd. to Col.). 

Pastoral Episties.—It is not necessary to dwell on the coinci- 
dences with the Pastoral E/istles, since, whether these are accepted 
as genuine or not, it cannot be imagined that the writer of Eph. 
borrowed from them. In fact, no one who questions Eph. accepts 
the Pastorals. 


§ 6. TIME AND PLACE OF WRITING. 


The Epistle was written while St. Paul was a prisoner, iil. 1, 
iv. t, vi. 20. From the mention of Tychicus as the bearer of it, 


XXX THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 6 


vi. 21 compared with Col. iv. 7 and Philemon 13, we may conclude 
that these three Epistles were written at the same time. Most com- 
mentators have supposed that they were written from Rome, but 
some moderns have advocated the claims of Caesarea (Acts 
Xxill, 35, xxiv. 27). The following reasons are adduced in favour 
of this view by Meyer. First, that it is more likely that the 
fugitive slave Onesimus would make his way from Colossae to 
Caesarea than by a long sea voyage to Rome. Wieseler’s reply is 
sufficient, namely, that he would be safer from the pursuit of the 
fugitivartt in the great city. St. Paul, too, seems to have been 
under stricter guard at Caesarea, where only “his own” were 
allowed to attend him (Acts xxiv. 23), than at Rome, where he 
lived in his own hired house and received all that came to him. 
As to the circumstances of Onesimus’ flight we know nothing. 
vt’ Secondly, if the Epistles were sent from Rome, Tychicus and his 
companion Onesimus would have arrived at Ephesus first, and we 
might therefore expect that, with Tychicus, Onesimus would be men- 
tioned, in order to ensure him a kindly reception. This argument 
falls to the ground if the Ep. was not written to Ephesus. 

Thirdly, he argues from Eph. vi. 21, tva dé cidjre cat tuets, that 
before Tychicus would arrive at Ephesus he would have previously 
fulfilled to others the commission here mentioned. But this is 
really to suppose that the readers of the Epistle had previously 
heard of the message to the Colossians. The meaning of kai 
tyets is quite different (see note). Fourthly, it is argued that in 
Philem. 22 Paul asks Philemon to prepare him a lodging, and that 
soon (aya dé kai). This presupposes, says Meyer, that his place of 
imprisonment was nearer to Colossae than Rome, and, which is 
the main point, that Paul intended on his expected release to go 
direct to Phrygia ; whereas from Phil. it. 24 we see that he intended 
to proceed to Macedonia after his liberation (not to Spain, as he 
had at first thought of doing, Rom. xv. 24). And Weiss thinks 
this decisive. But he might well take Philippi on his way to 
Colossae, Philippi being on the great high road between Europe 
and Asia (Lightfoot, Prz/ipprans, p. 48 f.). On the other hand, as 
Mangold observes (Bleek, Zin/. p. 507), the desire to visit Rome 
lay so near the apostle’s heart during his imprisonment in Caesarea - 
(Acts xxiii. 11), that he would not think of making a journey thence 
to Phrygia for which he would order a lodging, even if Phrygia is 
looked on only as a station on the way to Rome. But the 
expression in Philem. implies more than a mere passing through, 
The fact is, however, that the argument treats the request too 
much in the light of a business arrangement instead of a friendly 
suggestion. When St. Paul says, “I hope that through your 
prayers I may be granted to you,” without even adding ‘‘soon,” it 
is clear that his hope was not definitely for a speedy release. Had 


§ 7] VOCABULARY OF THE EPISTLE XXxi 


it been so, he would doubtless have alluded to it in the Ep. to the 
Colossians. Jerome suggests the true explanation, viz. that he 
spoke “dispensatorie ut dum eum expectat Philemon ad se esse 
venturum, magis faciat quod rogatus est.” As Hort puts it: “It 
is but a playful way of saying to Philemon, ‘Remember that I 
mean to come and see with my own eyes whether you have really 
treated your Christian slave as I have been exhorting you’; and 
then giving the thought a serious turn by assuring him that, 
‘coming is no mere jest, for he does indeed hope some day to be 
set free through their prayers, and then he will haste to visit 
them.’” 

Another argument has been founded on the absence from Col. “ 
of any reference to the earthquakes which visited the cities of the 
Lycus about this time. Under the year 60 (which includes the 
last part of the Caesarean imprisonment) Tacitus mentions an 
earthquake which destroyed Laodicea (4mm. xiv. 27). Four years 
later Eusebius’ Chronicle mentions the destruction of Laodicea, 
Hierapolis, and Colossae by an earthquake (O/. 210). It is not 
certain that these notices refer to the same event, but, even 
granting that they do, there is good reason to believe that 
Eusebius is more likely to be right in the date than Tacitus. The 
latter appears to be in error about the date of another earthquake 
of this reign (Schiller, (Vero, 160, 172, referred to by Hort), whereas 
Eusebius appears to have followed unusually good authorities 
about these earthquakes ; for in the case of the great earthquake 
in the reign of Tiberius, he adds Ephesus to the list of ruined 
cities mentioned by Tacitus and Pliny ; and a monument at Naples 
proves his correctness. If Eusebius is right as to the date of the 
earthquake, it would be later than the Epistle. Or, again, if the 
earthquakes in question are not the same, there is no evidence that 
the earlier extended as far as Colossae. 

Lightfoot, in his essay on the “Order of the Epistles of the 
Captivity” (Comm. on Philippians), argues strongly from language 
and style that the Epistle to the Philippians preceded these three. 
If so, and if, as is generally believed, that Epistle was written from 
Rome, we have in this a further proof of the Roman origin of 
Ephesians and the other two. 


§ 7. VOCABULARY OF THE EPISTLE, 
List of dak reyopeva in the Epistle to the Ephesians. 
abeos, aicyporns, aixypadwrevew (but Text. Rec. in 2 Tim. iii. 6), 


dvaveow, dvorgis, aradyciv, aoodos, BéAos, extpépw, éAaxiordreEpos, 
évorys, eEirxvewv, emidvew, eriparvoxe, éeroiwacia, edvoia (Text. Rec. 


XXXll THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [S 8 


has it in 1° Cor. vii. 3), ebrpamredia, 0 yamrnpevos (of Christ), Gupeds, 
KATAapTLT[LOS, KaTWTEpOS, KANpody, KAvdwVilerOal, KoTpoKpaTwp, KpLp7, 
kuPeia, HaKpoxpov.os, peyelos, peOodeia, peoOToLxo, popohoyia, 7aXn, 
TapopyLrp0s, moAvroiktAos, mpoeArilew, TporKaprEpnots, putis, cup- 
peToxos, TyTONTyS, Tvvapporoyeiv, TvVOLKOdOMELY, DUTT WHOS. 


Words found elsewhere, but not in St. Paul, 


The following words are found elsewhere in the N.T., but not 
in St. Paul :—dyvova (Acts, 1 Pet. .); dypumvely (Mark, Luke, Heb.), 
dKpoywveatos (1 Pet: ); Gpeporepot, AVE{LOS, dvuevau (Acts, Heb. ), a eFies; 
amen (Acts), evoTAayxvos (1 Pet. ), paxpav, dpyilerOat, davorys 
(Luke), dogus, mavorAia (Luke), mapouxos (Acts, 1 Pet.), wepilwr- 
vivat, tAdTos (Apoc.), rouuny (= pastor, only 1 Pet., which also has 
épxerounyy), moAureia (Acts), campos, o7tXos, ovyrablew (Luke, but 
intrans.), owT7ptov (Luke, Acts), vdwp, tmodeto Gat, Bos, ppaypos, 
povnots (Luke), xaorrody (Luke), xetporouyros. 

Holtzmann adds the following, which occur in the Pastorals, 
assuming, namely, that they are not genuine :—aiyyadwrevew 
(2 Tim. Rec.), dXvors (2 Tim.), dzrarav (1 Tim.), dowria (Tit., 1 Pet. 
only), dua¢BoAos (1 and 2 Tim. and Tit.), ebayyeAuorys (Acts, 2 Tim. 
only), wadefa (2 Tim.), tyav (1 Tim.). 


IVords common to the Epistles to the Ephesians and the Colossians, 
but not found elsewhere in V.T. 


dvOpwrapeckos, ay, amoxataAAdooew, aradXorpioicba, afew, 
av&nows, 6POarpodovr€la, prlodv, cvlwororetv, ovuPBiBalerv. 
Add the expression é« Wuyi. 


lVords which are common to Ephesians and the Pauline Epistles 
(excluding the Pastorals), but which are not found in other 
N.T. writers. 


ayabwoivyn, GAnOeverv, aveLixyviactos, émxopyyia, evvora (1 Cor. 
vii. 3 Text. Rec., but not in the best texts), evwodia, OaAreww, 
kaprrew, mepixepadraia, mAcoveKTys, molnwa, mperPevewv, mpoerot, 
udlew, mpocaywyy, mpotiverOa, viodecia, trepBddAEw, brepexmepio- 
TOU. 


§ 8. CONTENTS OF THE EPISTLE. 


Ch. i. 1, 2. Salutation. 

3-8. Praise to God for the blessings of acon We were 
BE in Christ as the recipients of these blessings before the 
Creation, and the object of this was that we should be holy and 


§ 8] CONTENTS OF THE EPISTLE Xxxiii 


blameless, being admitted to the adoption of sons through Christ, 
in whom we received redemption. 

g-11. God hath made known to us His purpose to sum up 
all things, whether in heaven or on earth, in Christ. 

12-14. We Jews had even in former times been promised the 
Christ, and had fixed our hopes on Him; but ye Gentiles have also 
received the same blessings, and have been sealed with the Holy 
Spirit as an earnest of the inheritance. 

15-19. Therefore having heard of your faith I always thank 
God for you, and pray that ye may attain the knowledge of the 
hope to which ye are called, the glory of your inheritance, and the 
greatness of the power of God, who gives this inheritance. 

20-23. A striking example of this power was shown in the 
raising of Christ from the dead, who has now been set above all 
authorities and powers, by whatever name they may be. called, 
whether earthly or heavenly, whether belonging to this world or to 
the next. To the Church, however, He stands in a closer relation, 
being the Head to which the Church is related as His Body. 

ii. 1-10. A further instance of His power is that when we 
were dead through our sins He gave us life and made us partakers 
of the resurrection of Christ, and of His exaltation. This was not 
for any merit of our own, but was the undeserved gift of God, who 
loved us even when we were dead through our sins. But although 
our salvation was thus not of works but of grace, our new creation 
had good works in view as its result. 

11-22. Ye Gentiles had formerly no share in the covenants 
of promise, but were aliens from the citizenship of Israel. Now, 
however, Christ, by His death, has done away with the barrier 
between you and the true Israel, and has reconciled both to God. 
So that equally with the Jews, and on the same terms, ye have 
access to the Father. All alike form part of the one holy temple 
in which God dwells. 

ill. 1-9. This truth that the Gentiles are equally with the 
Jews heirs of the inheritance, members of the body and partakers 
of the promise, was hidden from former generations, but has now 
been revealed to the apostles and prophets; and to me, though 
unworthy, has been given the special privilege of preaching Christ 
to the Gentiles, and of making known to all men this mystery. 

10-13. Hereby God designs that even the angelic powers 
may learn through the Church to know the varied wisdom of God 
exemplified in His eternal purpose in Christ. 

14-19. Prayer that they may be given inward spiritual 
strength ; that Christ may dwell in them through faith; and that 
being themselves well grounded in love they may learn to know 
the love of Christ, although, properly speaking, it surpasses know- 
ledge. 


c 


XXXIV THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS |§ 8 


20, 21. Doxology suggested by the thought of the great things 
which have been prayed for. 

iv. 1-3. Exhortation to live a life corresponding to their calling, 
in lowliness, patience, love, and unity. 

4-11. Essential unity of the Church as a spiritual organism, 
inspired by one Spirit, acknowledging one Master, into whose 
name they are all baptized, and all being children of the same 
Divine Father. Within this unity a diversity of gifts and offices is 
to be recognised. 

12-16. The object of all is to make the saints perfect in unity 
of faith and maturity of knowledge, so that they may be secured 
against the changing winds of false doctrine, and that the whole 
body, deriving its supply of nourishment from the Head, even 
Christ, may grow up and be perfected in love. 

17-24. Admonition that remembering the blessings of which 
they have been made partakers, they should put off their former 
life, their old man, and put on the new man. 

25-31. Exhortations against special sins, falsehood, anger, theft, 
idleness, foul speaking, malice, etc. 

32-v. 2. Exhortation to take the love of God in Christ as a 
pattern for imitation, especially in their forgiveness of one another. 

3-14. Special warning against sins of uncleanness. 

15-21. More general exhortation to regulate their conduct 
with wisdom, to make good use of opportunities, and, instead of 
indulging in riotous pleasure, to express their joy and thankfulness 
in spiritual songs. 

22-33. Special injunctions to husbands and wives, illustrated 
by the relation of Christ to the Church, which is compared to that 
of the husband to the wife, so that as the Church is subject to 
Christ, so should the wife be to her husband; and, on the other 
hand, as Christ loved the Church even to the point of giving Him- 
self up for it, so should the husband love his wife. There is, 
indeed, one important point of difference, namely, that Christ is 
the Saviour of the Church of which He is the Head. 

vi. 1-9. Special injunction to children and fathers, slaves and 
masters; slaves to remember that they are doing service to Christ, 
masters that they also have a Master before whom master and 
slave are alike. ; 

1o-12. Exhortation to arm themselves with the whole armour 
of God in preparation for the conflict with the spiritual powers 
which are opposed to them. 

13-18. Detailed specification of the parts of the spiritual armour. 

19, 20. Request for their prayers for himself, that he may have 
freedom of speech to preach the mystery of the gospel. 

21-24. Personal commendation of his messenger Tychicus, 
and final benediction. 


§ 9] LITERATURE OF EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS xxxv 


§ 9. LITERATURE OF THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, 


Commentaries on the entire New Testament are not noticed 
here. For the older works, the lists in the English translation of 
Meyer, and in M‘Clintock and Strong’s Cyclopaedia, have been 
consulted. 


Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries. 


ALTHOFER (Christ.), Animadversiones, etc. Alt. 1641. 

Annotationes in V.T. et tn Ep. ad Ephesios (auctore incerto). 
Cantab. 1653; Amst. 1703. 

Battus (Bartholomaeus), Commentarius in LEpistolam ad 
LEphesios. Gryphisw. 1619. 

BAYNE or Baynes (Paul), Commentary on the Ep. to the 
Ephesians. Lond. 1643. 

BINEMANN, Lxfositio. Lond. 158t. 

Bopius or Boyp (Robert), Zm Ep. ad Ephesios Praelectiones. 
Lond. 1652. 

BuceEr (Martin), Praelectiones in Ep. ad Ephesios (posthumous ; 
ed. by Im. Tremellius). Basil, 1562. 

BUGENHAGEN (Joh.), Adnotatt. in Epp. ad Gal. Eph, Phil. Col. 
etc. Basil, 1527. 

Caixtus (G.), Lxpositio litt. in Epp. ad Eph. Col. ete. 
Helmst. 1664-66. 

Coccetus (Joh.), S. Apost. Pauli Ep. ad Ephesios cum Comm. 
Lugd. Bat. 1667. 

Croctius (Joh.), Comment. in Ep. ad Ephesios. Cassellis, 1642. 

CRELLIUS (Joh.), Comment. et Paraphrasis in Ep. ad Ephesios. 
Eleutherop. 1656. 

Du Bose (Pierre Th.), Sermons sur ?Epitre de St. Paul aux 
Liphéstens (chs. i.-ii. only). 3 tom. Rotterd. 1699. 

FERGUSON (Jas.), A brief Exposition of the Epp. of Paul to 
the Gal. and Eph, London, 1659. 

Goopwin (Thos.), Zxfosition, etc. Lond. 1681. Condensed, 
Lond. 1842. Works: Edinb. 1861. 

HANNEKEN, Lxplicatio, etc. Marp. 1631; Lips. 1718, ad. 

HEMINGE or HEMMINGIUS, Comment. in omnes Epp. Apostol- 
orum, etc, Argent, 1586. 

Lacus (Daniel), Commentatio quadripertita super Ep. ad 
Ephesios, Gryphisw. 1664. 

LUTHER (Martin), Die Ep. an die Epheser ausgelegt ; aus seinem 
Schriften herausgegeben von Chr. G. Eberle. Stuttg. 1878. 

Mayer or Major (Georg), Zxarratio Ep. Pauli scriptae ad 
LEphesios. Vitemb. 1552. 

MEELFUHRER, Commentarius. Norimb. 1628, 


XXXV1 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§9 


MEGANDER, Commentarius. Basil, 1534. 

NAILANT, Larrationes. Ven. 1554; Lond. 1570. 

OLEviaNus (Gaspar), /Votae ex [ejus|] Concionibus, etc. er- 
bosnae, 1588. 

Ripiey (Launcelot), Comm. on Ephesians. Lond. 1540. 
Republ. in Legh Richmond’s Selections of the Reformers, etc. 
Lond. 1817. 

ROLLocK (Robert), Jz Zp. Pauli ad Ephesios Commentarius. 
Edinb. 1590. 

Scumip (Sebastian), Paraphrasis super Ep. ad Ephesios. 
Strassb. 1684. 

STEUART (Peter), Comment. in Ep. ad Ephesios. Ingolstad. 
1593. 

TaRNoviuS, Commentarius. Rost. 1636. 

WanDALIN, Paraphrasts. Slesw. 1650. 

WEINRICH, Lxplicatio. Lips. 1613. 

VELLERUS or WELLER (Hieron.), Comment. in Ep. ad Ephesios. 
Noriberg. 1550. 

WoopHEAD (Abraham), ALLEsTRY (Rich), and WALKER 
(Obadiah), Paraphrase and Annot. on all the Epistles of St. Paul. 
Oxford, 1682, etc.; republ. Oxford, 1852. 

ZANCHIUS (Hieron.), Comm. in Ep. ad Ephesios. Neostad. 
1594. 

Eighteenth Century. 


BAUMGARTEN (Sigmund Jakob), Auslegung der Briefe Pauli an 
die Galater, Epheser, Philip. Col. Philemon u. Thess. Ualle, 1767. 
CHANDLER (Sam.), Paraphrase and Notes on the Lipp. of St. 
Paul to the Gal. and Eph. (with Comm. on Thess.). London, 
1777: 
CRAMER (Joh. Andr.), Vewe Uebersetzung des Briefs an die 
Epheser, nebst einer Auslegung desselben. amb. 1782. 

DinantT (Petrus), De Brief aan die van Efeze verklaart en toege- 
past. Rotterd. 1711. (In Latin), Commentarit, etc. Rotterd. 
Lij2u, al. 

Esmarcu (H. P. C.), Brief an die Epheser tibersetzt. Altona, 
1785. 

Fenp, Erdaiiterungen. (s.l.) 1727. 

GERBADEN, Geopent Door. ‘Traj. ad Rhen. 1707. 

GupkE (Gottlob Friedr.), Griindliche Erlaiiterung des... Briefes 
an die Epheser. Wauban, 1735. 

HazeEvoet, Verklaar. Leyden, 1718. 

Krause (Friedr. Aug. Wilh.), Der Brief an die Epheser iiber- 
setzt u. mit Anmerkungen begleitet, Frankf. a M. 1789. 

Locker (John), Paraphrase and Notes on the Epp. of St. Paut 
to the Gal. Cor. Rom. Eph. London, 1707, ad. 


§ 9] LITERATURE OF EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS  xxxvii 


MOLDENHAUER, Uedersetzung. amb. 1773. 

MicHAELIs (Joh. Dav.), Paraphrase u. Anmerkungen iiber die 
Briefe Pauli an die Galater, Eph. Phil. Col. Bremen u. Gotting. 
E750; £700: 

Morus (S. F. N.), Acroases in Epp. Paulinas ad Galatas et 
Ephesios. Leipz. 1795. 

MULLER, Lrklarung. Heidelb. 1793. 

Piconio (Bernardinus a, z.e. Bernardin de Picquigny), Z/7s- 
tolorum B. Pauli Apost. Triplex Expositio. Paris, 1703; Vesont. 
et Paris, 1853. 

Popp (G. C.), Uebersetzung u. Erkldrung der dret ersten Kapitel 
des Briefs an die E/pheser. Rostock, 1799. 

RoELL (Herm. Alex.), Commentarius in principium Ep. ad 
Ephesios. ‘Traj. ad Rhen. 1715. Comm. pars altera cum brevi 
Lip. ad Col. exegesis; ed. D. A. Roell. Traj. ad Rhen. 1731. 

Royaarps (Albertus), Paulus’ Brief aan de Ephesen schrift- 
matig verklaart. 3 deelen. Amsterd. 1735-38. 

ScHMID (Sebastian), Paraphrasis super Ep. ad Lphesios. 
Strassb. 1684, ad. 

SCHNAPPINGER (Bonif. Martin W.), Brief an die LEpheser 
erklart. Heidelb. 1793. 

Scuttze (Theodore Joh. Abr.), Comm. in Ep. Pauli ad 
Lphesios. Leipz. 1778. 

SPENER (Philip Jak.), Zrklarung der Episteln an die Epheser 
u. Colosser. Halae, 1706, a. 

Van Tit (Solomon), Comm. in quatuor Pauli Epp. nempe 
priorem ad Cor. Eph. Phil. ac Coloss. Amstel. 1726. 

ZACHARIAE (Gotthilf Trangott), Paraphrastische Erklarung der 
Briefe Pauli an die Gal. Eph. Phil. Col. u. Thess. Gotting. 1771, 
1787. 

LVineteenth Century. 


Barry (Alfred, Bishop), “Commentary on Ephesians and 
Colossians” (Ellicott’s ew Zest. Comm. for English Readers). 

BauMGARTEN-Crusius (L. F. O.), Comment. tiber d. Briefe 
Pauli an die Eph. u. Kol. Jena, 1847. 

BEET (J. A.), Commentary on the Epistles to the Ephesians, 
Philippians, Colossians, and Philemon. London, 1890. 

Beck (J. T.), Z7rklarung des Br. Pauli an die Epheser. 
Guterslob, 1891. 

BLAIKIE (W. G.), “ Ephesians, Exposition and Homiletics” 
(Pulpit Commentary). London, 1886. 

BLEEK (Friedr.), Vorlesungen iiber die Briefe an d, Kol. d. 
Philemon und d. Epheser. Berlin, 1865. 

BRAUNE (Karl) in Lange’s Bibe/werk, 1867 and 1875. ‘Trans: 
lated by M. B. Riddle. New York, 1870. 


XXXVIll THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§9 


- Date (R. W.), Zpistle to the Ephesians; its Doctrine and 
Ethics. 3rd ed. 1884. 

Davies (J. Llewelyn), Zhe Epistle to the Ephesians, Colossians, 
and Philemon. 2nd ed. London, 1884. 

EavIr (John), Commentary on the Greek Text of the Epistle of 
Paul to the Ephesians. 3rd ed. Edinb. 1883. 

Ex.icotr (C. J., Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol), Crztical 
and Grammatical Commentary on Ephesians, with a Revised 
Translation. London, 1855, etc. (many editions). 

Ewa.p (G. H. A.), Die Sendschreiben des Ap. P. tibers. und 
erkiart. Gottingen, 1856. 

Ditto, Sreben Sendschreiben des N. B. Gottingen, 1870. 

Finpiay (G. G.), “‘ Ephesians,” in the Zxpositor’s Bible. 1892. 

Fuatt (J. F. v.), Vorlesungen uber ad. Br. an die Gal. u. die 
LEpheser. Tibingen, 1828. 

GRAHAM (Wm.), Lectures, etc. Lond. [1870]. 

HaARLEss, Commentar tber den Brief Pauli an die Epheser. 
2 Aufl. Stuttgart, 1858. 

Hopce (Chas.), Comm. on Ep. to the Ephesians. New York, 
1856, ad. 

V. Hormann (J. Chr. K.), Der Brief Pauli an die Epheser, 
Nordlingen, 1870. 

HouzHausen (F. A.), Der Br. an die Eplrser ibersetst u. 
erkiart. annoy. 1833. 

KuOppER (A.), Der Brief an die Epheser. Gottingen, 189t. 

KAHLER, Predigten. Kiel, 1855. 

LATHROP (Juseph), Déscourses. Philad. 1864. 

Licutroot (J. B., Bishop of Durham), ‘‘ Notes on Epistles of 
St. Paul, from unpublished Commentaries by [him].” London, 
1895. (Contains notes on the first 14 verses only.) 

MacEVvI_ y (John, R.C. Bp. of Galway), Zxposition of the Epistles 
of St. Paul and of the Catholic Epistles. Lond. 1856; Dublin, 1860. 

MacpHERSON (John), Commentary on St. Pauls Epistle to the 
Ephesians. Edinb. 1892. 

M‘GHEE (Rob. J.), “xpository Lectures on the Ep. to the 
Ephesians. 4thed. London, 1861. 

MEIER (Fr. K.), Commentar uber d. Br. Pauli an ad. Epheser. 
Berlin, 1834. ; 

Meyer (H. A. W.), Avitisch exegetisches Handbuch iiber d. 
Pauli an die Epheser. 6te Aufl. Versorgt durch Dr. Woldemar 
Schmidt. Gottingen, 1886. 

Meyrick, “ Ephesians,” in the Speakers Commentary. 

MouteE (H. C. G.), “The Epistle to the Ephesians,” in the 
Cambridge Bibl: for Schools and Colleges. Cambridge, 1895. 

NEWLAND (Henry Garrett), Vew Catena on St. Pauls Epp., A 
Practical and Exegetical Commentary. Lond. 1860. 


§ 9] LITERATURE OF EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS  xxxix 


OLTRAMARE (Hugues), Comm. sur les Epitres de S. Paul aux 
Coloss. aux Ephes. et a Philemon. 3 tom. Paris, 1891. 

PassavanT (Theophilus), Versuch einer praktischen Auslegung 
des Briefes Pauli an die Epheser. Basel, 1836. 

PERcEVAL (A. P.), Lectures, etc. Lond. 1846. 

PripHaM (Arthur), /Vofes, efc. Lond. 1854. 

PULSFORD (John), Christ and His Seed: Expository Discourses 
on Pauls Ep. to the Ephesians. Lond. 1872. 

RUckeErtT (Leopold J.), Der Br. Pauli an die Epheser erlaiitert 
u. Vertherdigt. Leipz. 1834. 

SADLER (M. F.), Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians. London, 
1889. 

SCHENKEL (Dan.), “Die Briefe an die Epheser, Philipper, 
Colosser” (1te Aufl. in Lange’s Azbe/werk, 1862; 2te Aufl. 1867, 
when Braune’s Comm. replaced it in Lange). 

ScumiptT (Woldemar). See MEYER. 

SCHNEDERMANN (G.), in Strack and Zockler’s Kurzgef. Komm. 
Nordlingen, 1888. 

Simcoe (Henry A.), Zp. to Eph. with Texts gathered, etc. 
Lond. 1832. 

Von SopEN (H.), “Die Briefe an die Kolosser, Epheser, 
Philemon ; die Pastoralbriefe” (in Hand-Commentar sum N.T.; 
bearbeitet von H. T. Holtzmann, R. A. Lipsius, u. a.) 2te Aufl. 
Freiburg 1. B., und Leipzig, 1893. 

STIER (Rudolph E.), Die Gemeinde in Christo; Auslegung des 
Br. an die Epheser. Berlin, 1848, 1849. 

TURNER (Samuel Hulbeart), Zhe Ep. to the Ephesians in Greek 
and English, with an Analysis and Exegetical Commentary. New 
York, 1856. 

Weiss (Bernhard), Die Paulinischen Briefe in berichtigten 
Text, mit Kurzer Erlaiiterung. Leipz. 1896. 

WOHLENBERG (G.), ‘Die Briefe an die Epheser, an die 
Colosser, an Philem. u. an die Philipper ausgelegt (in Strack and 
Zockler’s Kurzgef. Comm.). Miinchen, 1895. 


Critical Discussions. 
General works on Introduction are not noticed here. 


ALEXANDER (W. L.), art. “Ephesians” in Kitto’s Cyclopaedia 
of Biblical Literature. Lond. 1863. 

Baur (F. C.), Paulus der Apostel Jesu Christi. Tiibing. 1845. 
English trans. St. Paul, His Life and Work. London, 1873-75. 

BEMMELEN (Van), Zp. ad Eph. et Col. collatae. Lugd. Bat. 
1803. 

HAENLEIN, De lectoribus Ep. ad Ephesios. Erlang. 1797. 


xl THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 10 


HOnic (W.), “‘ Ueber das Verhaltniss des Briefes an die Epheser 
zum Br. an die Kolosser,” in Hilgenfeld’s Zeztschrift. 1872. 

HOoLtTzMANN (H. J.), Avitik der Epheser- und Kolosser-briefe. 
EO 72: 

HILGENFELD (Adolf), Review of the preceding, in his Zezt 
sthrift, 1873, p. 188. 

Hort (F. J. A.), Prolegomena to St. Pauls Epistle to the 
Romans and the Ephesians. (Posthumous.) Lond. 1895. 

Hutu, ‘“ Ep. ad Laod. in encycl. ad Eph.” Erlangen, 1751. 

KrEnE (Adolf), ‘‘ Der Epheserbrief ein Sendschreiben . . . an 
die Heidenchristen der Sieben (?) Kleinasiat. Gemeinden,” etc. 
Studien u. Kritiken, 1869, p. 285. 

KostTErR, De echthetd van de brieven aan de Kol. en aan de Eph. 
Utrecht, 1877. 

KostLin (J.), Der Lehrbegriff des Evang. u. der verwandten 
N.T. Lehrbegriffe. Berlin, 1843. 

Licutroot (J. B., Bishop of Durham), “ Destination of the 
Epistle to the Ephesians” in S7db/ical Essays. (Posthumous.) 
London, 1893. 

Lunemann, De Ep. ad Ephesios authentia. Gotting. 1842. 

MILLIGAN (W.), art. “ Ephesians, Epistle to,” in Lxcyclopaedia 
Britannica. oth ed. 

MontEt (L.), /utrod. in Ep. ad Coloss. Mont. 1841. 

RogertTson (Arch.), art. ‘‘ Ephesians, Epistle to,” in Smith’s 
Dictionary of the Bible. 2nded. Lond. 1893. 

RABIGER (J. Ferd.), De Christologia Paulina contra Baurium 
Commentatio. 1852. 

SCHENKEL (Dan.), art. ‘Epheserbrief,” in his Szdellexicon. 
1869. ° 
SCHNECKENBURGER (Matth.), Ueber d. Alter d. judischen 
Proselyten Taufe, etc. With Appendix, ‘Ueber d. Irrlehren zu 
Kolossae.” 1828. 

SoDEN (H. v.), ‘‘ Epheserbrief” in Jahrb. f. Prot. Theol. 1887. 


§ 10. ON SOME READINGS PECULIAR TO ONE OR TWO MSS. 


Both Epistles are here taken together. 

The more important readings are discussed in their respective 
places. Here are brought together a few isolated or nearly isolated 
readings of particular MSS., several of which are probably errors 
of the respective copyists. 

& stands alone— 

Eph. 1. 18, ris KAnpovopias THs Soséys for THs 5. THS KA. 

lil. 1, €avtav for tpav. 

iil. 4, N* om. ev. 


§10] READINGS PECULIAR TO ONE OR TWO MSS. xii 


ii 7, 8* omits the whole verse (passing from év Xpio7 “Incod 
in ver. 6 to the same words in ver. 7), supplied by &* 

ii. 10, N*, @cod for adrod. 

Vv. 17, 8*, dpovnpa for OeAnpa. 

v. 20 OM. pov. 

Col. ii. 10, 8*, THs dpy7ns exxAnolas for apyns Kal eLovoias. 

ii, 18, 8*, before dyyéAwy add. peddAdvTwr. 

iil. 1, 6 @eds for 6 Xpuords. But the first scribe seems to have 
himself corrected it (‘Tisch.). 

In the following & is not quite alone :— 

Eph. i. 7, 8*, eoxopev (€xopev, 8°) = D*, Boh. Eth, 

ili, 9, N* om. ev. Expressly attributed to Marcion by Ter- 
tullian (AZarc. v. 18), “rapuit haereticus in praepositionem, et ita 
legi fecit: occulti ab aeris deo,” etc. So Dial. 870. 

iv. 24, N*, év dovdrnTe Kal dixatcoovvy for ev Sx. Kx. d0.= 
Ambrosiaster. 

Col. i. 23, Knpvé Kal amdaroXos (for dudxovos) = P. 

A combines this and the genuine text; Eth. has xypvé Kat 
didxovos ; while Euthal. (cod.) has duaKxovos kai drdaroXos. 

i, 24, Tols TaOjpacw tuav for Tots 7. brép tpov (= L 37*). 


A alone has— 

Eph. i. 10, xara rH oikovopiay for eis oik. 

iv. 14, not for vimvoe (v precedes). 

iv. 19, ¢[is dxa|fapoiav mdons for eis épyactay axafapoias 
Taos. 

vi. 23, €Aeos for aydry. 

Col. i. 23, Kppvé kal amdoroAos Kal didxovos for diudkovos. See 
under & 

In Eph. i. 3 A* reads tyets for queis, with D*. 

In i. 11 A agrees with DG in reading exAj@ywey for exAnpo- 
Onpev. 

1. 20, duty for Hpv = 39, 63. 

v. 15, after ovv A adds ddeAdo/, with 8° Vulg. Boh. 


B alone— 

Eph. i. 13, €odpayicOn for éeofpaylcOnre (7 follows; the 
copyist’s eye passed from Tt to 7). 

i. 21, eSovolas kal apis for 4 dp. kat é&, 

il. 1, eriOvptas for dpapriass. 

li. 5, after raparrdpaow B adds kai rats ériPupias, thus repeat- 
ing the expression of ver. 1 with the erroneous reading. These 
can hardly be regarded otherwise than as serious errors. 

v. 17 after Kupiov add jpav. 


xlii THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [§ 10 


Col. i. 3 omits Xprorov. 

i. 4 omits Hv eyere. 

i, I1, 12 after yapas adds dpa. 

i. 12, kaXé€oavte kat ixavicavte for ixavwoavtt, a complete 
reading. 

il. 15, after éfovolas add xai. 

In the following B is not without support :— 

Eph. i. 3 om. kat waryp = Hil. (semel), Victorinus. But Hil. 
has also (zs) marip without 6 @cds kat. 

i. 18 om. bpay = 17 Arm. 

20; ovpavots | for érovpaviows = 71, 213, Hil. Victorin. 

il. 5 before ois maparr. adds év = Arm (?). 

. 3 0m. 67, with d, Victorin. Ambrosiaster. But G, Goth. 
my Kata aaroK. yap, which gives some probability to the omission 
of ort. 

ill. 5 Om. adroordXors, with Ambrosiaster. 

iii. 19, tAnpwOn for wAnpwOyre eis, with 17, 73, 116. 

iv. 7, buav for 7uav = 38, 109, Theodoret. 

vi. 10, duvapotobe for évdvvapodabe = 17. 

Col. i. 14, €rxopnev, with Boh. Arab. (A non liquet). 

ii. 23 om. kai before aped/a, with m, Orig. (intp.) Ambrosiaster. 
ill. 15 om. évé= 67? Sah. 

iv. 3, Ov ov for 6¢ 6=G (71 has & ov). 





In D the following may be noted :— 

D alone (E not being reckoned). 

Eph. i. 6 adds tis before d0€ns. 

i. 16, wavoopat for Tavopat (but so Victorinus). 

ili. 15, D*, xatapticas for xatapyjoas. (The Latin d has 
“ destituens.”) 

ili. 12, D*, &v 7G eXevepwhjvar for év wemoibyjoen, 

Col. i. 14, D* om. tiv adeow. 

i. 26, havepwher for épavepa6n. 

ii. 10, éxkAnolas for apyns Kai é€ovoias (compare &*). 

iv. 6, D*, jpav for ipor. 

In the following it is supported by one or more :— 

Eph. i. 6, D* adds vid airot, with G and one cursive, but many 
versions. See note. 

i. 9 Om. avrov = G, Goth. Boh. 

1, 12 om. aitrod =G. 

il. 5, D*, traits duaprias for rots tapamTrwpacw. So appy. Vulg. 
Hier. etc. (G has 77 apapria). 

7b. after Xpuord add ot rH. G has ob. Some MSS. of the Vulg 
have “ cujus,” with Ambrosiaster. 

ili, 1 after e6vav adds zpecBevw= 10. 


§10] READINGS PECULIAR TO ONE OR TWO MSS. __ xiii 


iil, 21, €v Xpiord “Iyoot kai rH exkAnoia=G, Victorin. Am- 
brosiaster. 

iv. 29, wicrews for xpelas=G, 46, some Verss. and FF. 

v. 14, D*, érufatoes tod Xpicrot, a reading mentioned by 
Chrys. Hier. a/7. = Ambrosiaster, a/. A “Western” reading, WH. 

vi. 11, eis for tpds=G. 

Col. i. 21, THs dtavoias tudy for 77 duavoia = G. 

i. 22, dwoxataAdayévtes = G. Goth. Ambrosiaster. 

ll. 19, after Kepadyy add Xpurrov = = Syr-Harcl. Arm. 

iii. 11, after eve add dpoev Kat O7AV=G. 

ili. 14, €vornros for teAeornTos = G, Ambrosiaster. 

iv. 10, D*, d€facdac for défacbe = G, Theoph. Ambrosiaster. 

iv. 12, D*, Xpicrod for Ocod (with one cursive). 

iv. 13, D*, xémov for rovov =G. 

It is to be remembered that DG are independent witnesses 
of a “ Western” text. 


From G we take the following :— 

G alone (F not being reckoned). 

Eph. 1. 18, iva oldare for eis 7d eidévae tas (looks like a trans- 
lation of the Latin “ut sciatis ”). 

ii. 2, tovrov for tov before wvevparos (but Vulg. has ‘‘aeris 
hujus ”). 

il. 3 OM. Kal 7pets. 

il. 10, Kupfw for Xpurrd. 

ii, 11, dua Todro pyynpovevovtes for 616 pvnpovevete Ste (= Vic- 
torin.). 

ll, 15, Kowvdv for Kawvov. 

iii. 8, after atrn add rov Ocod. 

lil, 11, om. 7@ Xp. “Inood. 

lll, 12, THY Tpocaywyny eis THY Tappyotav. 

Vv. 3, dvopalerw for dvopalécbw. 

v. 5, els tiv Bactdciav for ev TH Bacrrcéa. 

Vv. 20, tpav for ravtwy (Theodoret combines both irép mdvrwv 
bpov). 

Col. i. 6 om. js. 

1. 22 OM. aivrov. 

i. 26, after dyéous add drrooréAors. 

i. 29, ev o for ets 6. Of course, no MS. but F agrees; but the 
Latin has ‘‘in quo.” 

ili. 8, xara for ta, and add after tipdv, pi exropevéoOw. Some 
Vss. agree, but in them the preceding word may be the nomina- 
tive, e.g. “ Stultiloquium.” 

iil, (13, opyny for poppny. 

iii. 24, 79 Kupiw qyadv “Incod Xpiorod  dovAevere. 


xliv THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [$10 


iv. 9, after ra Gde add zpartopeva. This looks like a translation 
from the Latin “quae hic aguntur,” which cannot be cited as 
supporting G, for it is a fitting rendering of ra dde. 

In the following, G is not without support. (For the coinci- 
dences with D see above.) 

Eph. i. 6, om. év Xpior@ “Iyood = Victorin. Hil. 

li. 12, after érayyeAfas add airév = Tert. Victorin. Ambrosiaster, 
Eth. 

7b. after xoopw add rovrw = Victorin. Ambr. Vulg. (some mss.). 

lit. 2S, ehaxiore for ehaxurrorépy = 49. 

il. g, after aidvwv add Kat ao tév yevedv = Syr-Harcl. 

ill, ro Om. viv = Vulg. Syr-Pesh. 

lll, 21 OM. Tov aidvos, with cod. tol. (of Vulg.) Ambrosiaster. 

iv. 15, GAnOiav d&€ rowdvres for aAnfevovres Sé=‘‘ veritatem 
autem facientes,” Vulg. Victorin. Ambrosiaster, Hier. But the 
Latin is probably only an interpretation of dAnfevovtes, in which 
case the reading of G would have to be regarded as a translation 
of the Latin. Jerome in Quaest¢. 10 (Algas.) has “veritatem autem 
loquentes.” 

iv. 16 om. Kar’ évépyevav, with Arm. (Usc.) Iren. (interp.) a7. 

iv. 23, om. 6¢€= Eth. 

Col. 1. 24, dvarAnpo for avravatAnpd = 43, 46, ad. 

ll. 15, Tv odpxa for Tas dpxas Kat = Hil. (47s) Novat. (Syr-Pesh. 
and Goth. seem to combine both). CAPKA may have originated 
from CAPXA, but this would not fully explain the change. It is 
more probable that the reading originated in an interpretation of 
amexdvadpevos, the Syr. and Goth. having had our Greek text, but 
understanding dzexd. to mean “putting off his flesh.” Hil. else- 
where has “‘spolians se carne et principatus et potestates ostentui 
fecit” (204). This interpretation being mistaken by a Greek 
scribe for a various reading, he conformed his text thereto. 

li. 23, after tarewvoppoov’vn add rod voos = Syr-Harcl. Hil. Am- 
brosiaster. (Goth. Boh. add cordis.) This again looks like a 
rendering of a Latin expression. 


It has to be noted that C is defective from Eph. i. 1, IladAos to 
Tpocaywyny, ii. 18, and from iv. 17, rodro ovy to kai ti at in Phil. i. 22. 

As E is only a copy of D (after correction), it has not been 
thought necessary or useful to cite it amongst the witnesses to 
various readings. Similarly, as F, if not copied from G (as Hort 
thinks), is, at best, an inferior copy of the same exemplar, it has 
not been cited. To cite DE, or FG, or DEFG, is to give the 
reader the trouble of calling to mind on each occasion the known 
relationship of the respective pairs. 


§ 10] READINGS PECULIAR TO ONE OR TWO MSS. xlv 


It may not be out of place here to say a word on that much 
misapplied maxim: “The more difficult reading is to be pre- 
ferred” ; a maxim which, pressed to its logical conclusion, would 
oblige us to accept the unintelligible because of its unintelligibility ; 
and which, indeed, is sometimes urged in support of a reading 
which cannot be interpreted without violence. Bengel with his 
usual terseness and precision expressed in four words the true 
maxim of which this is a perversion: “ Proclivi scriptioni praestat 
ardua.” ‘‘ Proclivis scriptio” is not a reading easy to understand, 
but one into which the scribe would easily fall; and “scriptio 
ardua” is that which would come less naturally to him. The 
question is not of the interpreter, but of the scribe. This includes 
the former erroneous maxim so far as it is true; but it may, and 
often does happen that the ‘“‘proclivis scriptio” is a ‘“ difficilis 
lectio.” Bengel’s maxim includes a variety of cases which he 
discusses in detail. 


ABBREVIATIONS. 


Versions. 
Eth. - 
Arm. A 
Boh. 
Tt. or Ital; . 
Sah. a 


Syr-Pesh. 


Syr-Harcl. or Hel. : 


Ethiopic. 

Armenian. 

Bohairic. Cited by Tisch. as 
“Coptic,” by Tregelles as 
** Memphitic,” by WH. as 
it me.” 

Old Latin. 

The Sahidic or Thebaic (“ the.” 
WH.). 

The Peshitto Syriac. 

The Harclean Syriac. 


The following represent MSS. of the Vulgate: viz. am. = Cod. 
Amiatinus ; fuld.=Cod. Fuldensis ; tol. = Cod. Toletanus. 


Editors. 
Tisch. : 
Treg: : 
WH. : 
Alf. ; 
De W. 5 
Ell. : 
W. Schmidt 


Theod. Mops. 


Tischendorf. 

Tregelles. 

Westcott and Hort. 

Alford. 

De Wette. 

Ellicott. 

Woldemar Schmidt, Editor of 
Meyer’s Comm. on Ephesians. 

Theodore of Mopsuestia. 


Other abbreviations will create no difficulty. 


THE 
BES hee wlOUwRE es ;\COLOSSIANS. 


INTRODUCTION: 


Sir. DHE, CHURCH AT: COLOSSAE, 


Cotussak (or Colassae, see i. 2) was situated in Phrygia, on the 
river Lycus, a tributary to the Maeander. Herodotus speaks of it 
as Tods peydAy (vil. 30); Xenophon, as 7Xts oikovpevyn Kal ebdaiuwv 
kai peyaAn (Anad, i. 2. 6). Strabo, however (xii. 8), only reckons 
it as a moAtcpa. Pliny’s mention of it amongst the “oppida 
celeberrima” (4. JV. v. 32, 41) is not inconsistent with this. It is 
after enumerating the considerable towns that he speaks of 
“‘oppida celeberrima, praeter jam dicta,” thus introducing along 
with Colossae, other small and decayed places. Eusebius (Chron. 
Olymp. 210. 4) records its destruction (with that of Laodicea and 
Hierapolis) in the tenth year of Nero. Tacitus (Amz. xiv. 27) 
states that Laodicea, “ex illustribus Asiae urbibus,” was destroyed 
by an earthquake in the seventh year of Nero. (See Introduction 
to Ephesians.) 

The Church at Colossae was not founded by St. Paul, nor had 
it been visited by him (i. 4, 7-9, il. 1). These indications in the 
Epistle agree with the narrative in the Acts of the Apostles, which 
represents his journeys as following a route which would not bring 
him to Colossae. He is, indeed, related to have passed through 
Phrygia on his second and third missionary journeys ; but Phrygia 
was a very comprehensive term, and on neither occasion does the 
direction of his route or anything in the context point to this 
somewhat isolated corner of Phrygia. 

In his second missionary journey, after visiting the Churches 
of Pisidia and Lycaonia, he passes through ri @pvyiav xat 
Todarixyy xwpav (Acts xvi. 6), “e. the Phrygian region of the 


xl vii 


xlviil THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [§1 


province of Galatia, or the Phrygo-Galatic region. (The 77v before 
ToXarixyv in the Text. Pec. is not genuine.) Thence he travelled 
through Mysia (neglecting it, zapéAfovres) to Troas. Thus on 
this journey he kept to the east of the valley of the Lycus. On 
his third journey, he founded no new Churches in Asia Minor, 
but confined himself to revisiting and confirming those already 
founded (Acts xvill. 23). From the Galatic and Phrygian region 
he proceeded to Ephesus by the higher lying and more direct 
route, not the regular trade route down the valleys of the Lycus 
and the Maeander. On this Lightfoot and Ramsay are agreed, 
the former, however, thinking that Paul may have gone as far 
north as Pessinus before leaving Galatia; the latter (consistently 
with his view of the meaning of “ Galatian” in Acts) supposing 
him to have gone directly westward from Antioch to Ephesus. 
Renan supposes him to have traversed the valley of the Lycus, but 
without preaching there, which is hardly consistent with the form 
of expression in il. 1. The founder of the Church at Colossae 
was apparently Epaphras ; at least it had been taught by him (see 
i. 7, Where the correct reading is kafws euabere, not xalas Kail 
e€uadere). 

The Church appears to have consisted of Gentile converts 
(i. 21, 27, il. 13); certainly there is no hint that any of the readers 
were Jews, and the circumstance that the founder was a Gentile 
Christian would have been unfavourable to the reception of his 
preaching by Jews. But they were clearly exposed to Jewish 
influences, and, in fact, we know that there was an important 
Jewish settlement in the neighbourhood, Antiochus the Great 
having transplanted two thousand Jewish families from Babylonia 
and Mesopotamia into Lydia and Phrygia (Joseph. Avfz. xii. 3. 4), 
thus forming a colony which rapidly. increased in numbers. See 
Lightfoot, Zhe Churches of the Lycus, in his Introduction. He 
gives reasons for estimating the number of Jewish adult freemen in 
the district of which Laodicea was the capital in B.c. 62 at not 
less than eleven thousand (p. 20). ‘The Colossians were now in 
danger of being misled by certain false teachers, whose doctrines 
we gather from the counter-statements and warnings of the apostle. 
That there was a Judaic element appears from ii. 11, 14, 16. It 
does not appear, indeed, that circumcision was urged upon them 
as a necessity, or even as a means of perfection. There is nothing 
in the Epistle even remotely resembling the energetic protest 
against such teaching which we have in the Epistle to the Galatians. 
The ascetic precepts alluded to in the Epistle were not based on 
the Mosaic law, for St. Paul says they were derived from the 
tradition of men. The law, too, laid down no general precepts 
about drinks (ii. 16). These rules seem to have been. connected 
with the worship of angels (ii. 16-21). The false teachers claimed 


§ 1] THE CHURCH AT COLOSSAE xlix 


an exclusive and profound insight into the world of intermediate 
spirits, whose favour it was desirable to obtain, and by means of 
whom new revelations and new spiritual powers might be attained. 
It was with a view to this that the body was to be treated with 
severity. 

In the three points of exclusiveness, asceticism, and angelology, 
the Colossian heresy shows affinities with Essenism, which, as Light- 
foot remarks, had an affinity with Gnosticism, so that it might be 
called Gnostic Judaism. Historically, indeed, we do not know of 
any Essenism outside Palestine. But there is no need to assume 
an identity of origin of the Colossian heresy and Essenism ; the 
tendencies were not confined to Palestine. And Phrygia provided 
a congenial soil for the growth of such a type of religion. It was 
the home of the worship of Cybele, and Sabazius, and the Ephesian 
Artemis. In philosophy it had produced Thales and Heraclitus. 
The former declared tov kécpov euvxov kai Satpdvwv zAnpn (Diog. 
Laert. i. 27). 

The natural phenomena of the region about Hierapolis, 
Laodicea, and Colossae were well calculated to encourage a 
belief in demoniac or angelic powers controlling the elementary 
forces of nature. There was, for example, at Hierapolis (and still 
is) an opening, called the Plutonium, which emitted a vapour 
{sulphuretted hydrogen) fatal to animals which came within its 
range. Strabo relates that the eunuchs employed about the 
temple were able to approach and bend over the opening with 
impunity—holding in their breath (néxpe wocod cvexovtas ws emi 76 
moAv TO tvevpa), yet, as he adds, showing in their faces signs of a 
suffocating feeling. See Svoboda, Zhe Seven Churches of Asia, 
1869, p. 29 sqq.; Cockerell apud Leake, Journal of a Tour in 
Asia Minor, 1824, p. 342. A comparison of Cockerell and 
Svoboda’s experiments shows that, as Lavorde also implies, the 
vapour is not always equally fatal. The region was noted for 
earthquakes. 

Notwithstanding its affinities with Gnosticism, the Colossian 
heresy must be regarded as belonging to an earlier stage than 
the developed Gnosticism usually understood by that name, even 
earlier, indeed, than Cerinthus. There is, for example, no 
allusion to the aeons of later Gnosticism, nor to the properly 
Gnostic conception of the relation of the demiurgic agency to the 
supreme God. “That relation (says Lightfoot) was represented, 
first, as imperfect appreciation ; next, as entire ignorance ; lastly, 
as direct antagonism. The second and third are the standing 
points of Cerinthus and of the later Gnostic teachers respectively. 
The first was probably the position of the Colossian false teachers. 
The imperfections of the natural world, they would urge, were due 
to the limited capacities of these angels to whom the demiurgic 


l THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [§ 2 


work was committed, and to their imperfect sympathy with the 
supreme God; but, at the same time, they might fitly receive 
worship as mediators between God and man; and, indeed, 
humanity seemed in its weakness to need the intervention of 
some such beings less remote from itself than the highest heaven.” 
Hence the references in the Epistle to the tarevoppoovvy in con- 
nexion with this angel worship. 

St. Paul assures his readers, with an authority which he clearly 
expects them to accept, that the gospel they had learned from 
Epaphras required no such addition as the false teachers pressed 
upon them. He points out to them that they are members of a 
body of which the Head, Christ, was supreme above all these 
angelic powers of whatever kind. 


! 


§ 2. GENUINENESS OF THE EPISTLE TO THE 
COLOSSIANS, 


There is no certain trace of the Epistle in Clemens Romanus 
or in Hermas. Barnabas, however, has a distinct allusion to Col. 
i. 16 in xii. 7, rHv dd€av Tod "Inood, ott ev aita wavta, Kal eis adrov. 
Ignatius, “pA. x. 3, has édpaio. 7H wiore, and so Polycarp, x. 1, 
doubtless from Col. i. 23. Probably also the division into déparoi 
kal doparoi, in combination with ra érovpdvia, in Ign. Smyrn. vi. 1, 
may be another allusion to i. 16. The connexion also of idolatry 
and covetousness in Polyc. xi. 2 may have been suggested by 
Gol i 23, 20, iii, 5.’ Justin, Dzal. p. 311. (lxxxy), calls ‘Christ 
mpwtdoroKos Tacs KTioews, after Col. i. 15 (cf. tpwrdroKov Tov mavTwv 
Toln“aTwv, Pp. 310); also p. 326 (xcvl), tpwrdtoKov Tod Weod Kal mpo 
TavTwy Tov KTIcpaTtwy. Considering the frequent use of the Epistle 
to the Ephesians, it is remarkable that the traces of this Epistle 
previous to Irenaeus are so few and uncertain. Its shortness 
seems an inadequate explanation. Probably the true account is 
that, the Epistle being so largely controversial, its use would be less 
familiar to those who had no concern with the heresies with which 
it deals. About its early and uncontroverted reception as the 
work of St. Paul, there is no doubt. Irenaeus, ili. 14. 1, says: 
“‘Tterum in ea epistola quae est ad Colossenses ait: ‘Salutat vos 
Lucas medicus dilectus.’” In the following section he quotes 
Col. i. 21, 22, and, indeed, he cites passages from every chapter. 

Clement of Alexandria, S/vom. i. 1, says: kav TH mpos Kodoo- 
gaeis emictoAn vovberotvtes, ypaddel, mavta avOpwrov, x.7.r. = Col. 
i. 28, and again in several other places he cites the Epistle. 

Tertullian also cites passages from each chapter. Origen, 
contra Cels. v. 8, quotes ii. 18, 19, as from St. Paul to the 
Colossians. 


§ 2] GENUINENESS OF EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS hi 


Marcion received the Ep. as St. Paul’s, and the school of 
Valentinus also recognised it. 

In the Muratorian Canon it has the same place as in our MSS. 
The external evidence for the genuineness is in no wise defective, 
nor was any question raised on the point until Mayerhoff (Der 
Brief an die Kolosser, u.s.w. 1838) contested it on the grounds of 
vocabulary, style, and differences from St. Paul in thought and 
expression ; and, in addition to these, its relation to the Epistle to 
the Ephesians, which he considered to be genuine, and its supposed 
reference to Cerinthus. Many critics followed his lead, including 
Baur, Hilgenfeld, Pfleiderer, etc., rejecting, however, the Epistle to 
the Ephesians also. Ewald, partly followed by Renan, explained 
what seemed un-Pauline in the Epistle by the supposition that 
Timothy wrote it under the apostle’s direction,—an hypothesis 
excluded by i. 23, ii. 1, 5. De Wette replied to Mayerhoff’s argu 
ments, rejecting, however, the Epistle to the Ephesians. 

Holtzmann, as we have seen in the Introduction to the latter 
Epistle, regarded the present Epistle as an expansion by an inter- 
polator of a short, genuine Epistle, being led to this conclusion by 
a careful critical examination of certain parallel passages in the two 
Epistles, the result of which was to show conclusively that it was 
impossible to maintain either, with Mayerhoff, the priority in every 
case of Eph., or, with De Wette, that of Col.? 

As a specimen of his restoration of the original nucleus of the 
latter Epistle, the following may suffice. Ch. i. 9-29 reads as 
follows :— 

Ava TOUTO Kal Tpets ov mravoueba % brép bpov Tpomevxopevor FED UGs. 
THT AL bpas dEiws TOU Ocod, ds éppvcato mpas €k 77s eEovcias TOU 
OKOTOUS Kal petéatnoev eis THY Baorr<iav TOU vlov avrov OTL év avTo 
evookyoev katadXasat, Kal tpas wore Ovtas €xOpovs ev Tots Epyous ToIs 
movypots, vuvi de karnAAdyyTE EV TO THpaTt THS GapKos adtov dia Tod 
Oavarov, elye eripevere TH Ticte Edpator Kal pa) peTaKivovpevor G70 
Tov evayyeXiov ov éyevounv eyo IatAos didxovos Kara THY oiKovopiav 
Tov Ocod rHv Sobeicdy por eis tuas tAnpOaa Tov Adyov Tov Meor, eis 
8 Kal KoTL® aywrilopevos KaTa THY evepyelay avTOU TiHVY evepyounevyv ev 
€[.01. 

Of ch. iii. Holtzmann regards as original only vv. 3, 12, 13, 17. 

This is a very ingenious abridgment, and supposes extreme 
ingenuity on the part of the interpolator, who so cleverly dove- 
tailed his own work into St. Paul’s that, had Eph. not existed, no 
one would have suspected Col. of being interpolated. It would be 
strange, too, that the interpolated letter should so completely dis- 
place the Pauline original. It would seem, in fact, as if we were 
compelled to suppose it known only to this interpolator ‘ who 


1 For a list of the principal passages compared, see Introduction to the Z. 
to the Ephesians. 


Iii THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [s 2 


rescued it from oblivion” (K7itik, p. 305) only to consign it 
thither again. Holtzmann’s theory is, as Julicher says, too com- 
plicated to be accepted. In such a case, for example, as Col. i. 27 
compared with Eph. i. 9, 10, and iii. 8, 9, 16, 17; or, again, Col. 
ill, 12-15 with Eph. iv. 2-4, 32, it is involved in inextricable diffi- 
culties. And as this seems to be generally felt, it is not necessary 
to examine his instances in detail. 

Von Soden, in his article in the Jahrb. f. Protest. Theol. 1875, 
limited the interpolations to 1, 15-20, ii. 10, 15, 18 (partly). In his 
Commentary he still further reduces the interpolation to 1. 164, 17, 
2.€. Ta TavTa to cvvéoryKe, Which he regards as a gloss (Zzn/. p. 12). 

Against the genuineness is alleged, first, the absence of St. 
Paul’s favourite terms and turns of expression, together with the 
occurrence of others which are foreign to the acknowledged 
Epistles. For example, dckacos with its derivatives, droxaAvis, 
doxipale, traKoyn, TwTnpia, Kowwvia, vopnos, muoTevew, are absent, 
as well as dpa, 610, dud71, while it is noted that ydép occurs only five 
times (or six if it is read in iii. 24), as against thirty-six times in 
Gal. and some three hundred times in the three other great 
Epistles. But these phenomena are not without parallel in other 
Epistles or parts of Epistles of similar length. dxatoovvn occurs 
in 1 Cor. only once (i. 30), décacos not at all. Both adjective and 
substantive are absent from 1 Thess., as well as the verb. owrypia 
is not used in 1 Cor. or Gal., while in 2 Cor. owfw occurs but 
once ; dzoxaAvyis is not used in Phil. or 1 Thess., and in 2 Cor. 
only in xii. 1, 7, so that the first eleven chs. are without it. 
muotevey iS found in 2 Cor. only in a quotation, iv. 13 ; traKxoy not 
in 1 Cor. Gal. Phil. 1 Thess. ; vouos not in 2 Cor. or Thess. Again, 
as to the conjunctions, épa does not occur in Phil., while dpa ody, 
frequent in Rom., is not used in 1 or 2 Cor., and only once in 
Gal. 66 occurs only once in Gal. (iv. 31, where Rec. has dpa), 
and dévdére once in 1 Cor., not at allin 2 Cor. ydp is hardly more 
frequent (relatively) in Eph., which Mayerhoff accepted, than in 
Col. Its comparative infrequency in both as compared with Rom. 
and Cor. is clearly due to the more argumentative character of the 
latter Epistles. 

As to the dag Aeydmeva, they are not more numerous than was | 
to be expected in an Epistle dealing with novel questions. In 
addition to ten words found only here and in Eph., there are forty- 
eight which do not occur elsewhere in St. Paul. But as Soden 
remarks, Paul had for a considerable time been under the new 
linguistic influence of Rome. Salmon quotes a very pertinent 
remark of Dr. Mahaffy, who compares St. Paul to Xenophon in 
this matter of varying vocabulary. He says: ‘‘ His (Xenophon’s) 
later tracts are full of un-Attic words, picked up from his changing 
surroundings ; and, what is more curious, in each of them there 


§ 2] GENUINENESS OF EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS hii 


are many words only used by him once; so that on the ground ot 
variation in diction each single book might be, and, indeed, has 
been, rejected as non-Xenophontic. This variation not only applies 
to words which might not be required again, but to such terms as 
evavopia (Comm. lil. 3. 12), varied to eiyryia (Ven. 10. 21), edtoApia 
(quoted by Stobaeus), avdpewrns (Anad. vi. 5. 14), all used only 
once. Every page in Sauppe’s Lexilogus Xen. bristles with words 
only once used in this way. Now, of classical writers, Xenophon 
is perhaps (except Herodotus) the only man whose life corre- 
sponded to St. Paul’s in its roving habits, which would bring him 
into contact with the spoken Greek of varying societies.” 

The long sentences, such as i. 9-20, il. 8-12, are not without 
analogy in other Epistles, e.g. Rom. i. 1-7, ii. 5-10, 14-16, 
iii, 23-26; Gal. ii. 3-5, 6-9; Phil. iii. 8-11. The series of 
relatives in i. 13-22 and il. ro-12 is remarkable, but not without 
parallel; and in both cases the connexion shows that what is 
added in the relative clauses, though evident, had been overlooked 
by the heretical teachers. It was therefore properly connected by 
a relative. Anacolutha are particularly frequent in St. Paul. There 
are also many turns of expression which are strikingly Pauline, as: 
i. 4, 8, 17, 18, 23, lll. 14, lv. 6,17. In comparing the general 
tone of the Epistle with that of the other Epistles, it must be 
observed that St. Paul had not here to contend with any opposition 
directed against him or his teaching, nor had he to defend himself 
against objections, but was simply called on to express his judgment 
on the novel additions to the gospel teaching which were being 
pressed on the Colossians. This new teaching had not yet gained 
acceptance or led to factious divisions amongst them. Nor has he 
any longer occasion to argue that Gentiles are admitted to the 
Christian Church on equal terms with Jews; this question is 
no longer agitated here ; St. Paul’s own solution of the problem is 
assumed. Nor was he concerned here with the conditions of 
salvation, whether by faith or by the works of the law. If he does 
not adduce proof from the O.T., neither does he do this in Phil., 
where there might seem to be more occasion for doing so. 

The greater stress laid here on knowledge and wisdom is 
explained by the fact that the false teachers were endeavouring 
to dazzle their hearers by a show of profound wisdom to which the 
apostle opposes the true wisdom. Hence, also, his frequent use 
of such words as pvornpiov, amrokpimrev, daroKpudpos, yvwpicecy, 
pavepovv. 

Mayerhoff notes the hunting after synonyms as an un-Pauline 
characteristic of this Epistle. Of his many examples it may suffice 
to give a few specimens: i. 6, kaprodopovpevov Kai avfavopevov ; 
1b. axovew Kal émywooKkev; 7, otvdovros [Hudv], Sudxovos [rod 
Xpicrot]; 11, tropovy kai paxpobupia; 23, TeGeweAvwpévor Kal 


liv THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [§ 2 


éSpato. kat py petaxwvovpevor (see Eadie, p. xxvii). Many of the 
so-called synonyms are clearly not so; and even where they are 
justly so called, the other Epistles ‘supply parallels. See, for 
example; Phil 1.°3, 7,19; 10, 11,15, 20,) 24) 25: 

An objection to the genuineness of the Epistle, which would be 
serious if well founded, is that the Epistle combats certain errors 
of a Gnostic character which cannot have existed at so early a date. 
It is not enough, however, to show that errors of an analogous 
kind, but more developed, existed in the middle of the second 
century ; it is necessary to show that they could not have existed 
in the time of St. Paul. But we have absolutely no materials 
for forming an opinion on this point, except in the New Testament 
itself. The earliest Gnostic writer of whom we have definite 
information is Cerinthus. 

Indeed, Mayerhoff supposed the writer’s polemic to be directed 
against him. But although there is an affinity between the errors 
of Cerinthus and those of the Colossian teachers, a closer examina- 
tion shows that the latter belong to an earlier stage of development. 
There is no trace in the Epistle of the notion of creation by a 
demiurge ignorant of the supreme God, still less of that by one 
opposed to Him (as in the later Gnostics). Nor did the teaching 
of Cerinthus include asceticism. As to the view of Christ held by 
the Colossian false teachers, it was clearly derogatory, as we may 
infer from the emphatic assertions in i. 19, ii. 9 ; but the generality 
of the language there used shows that their opinions had not been 
stated with such precision as was the case when St. John wrote his 
Gospel, or, not to assume his authorship, when the Gospel bearing 
his name was written. 

Baur, on the other hand, regards the Epistle to the Colossians 
(as well as that to the Ephesians) as written from an early Gnostic 
point of view, at a time, namely, when Gnostic ideas first coming 
into vogue still appeared to be unobjectionable Christian specula- 
tion. The errors combated were, he thought, those of the 
Ebionites, who maintained circumcision, abstained from animal 
food, observed the Jewish Sabbath, and attached high importance 
to the doctrine of angels and religious worship of them, and, lastly, . 
considered Christ to be only one of these: éxtic@ar ws éva Tov 
dpxayyehwv peiLova. de auTav evra, auTov de Kupuevely TOV ayyéAwv 
Kal TavTWY TOV aro TOD TavTOKpaTopos TeTomnuevwy (Epiph. /Zaer. 
XXX.) 0) 

In which of St. Paul’s Epistles, says Baur, do we find ra 
ézrovpavia Classified as they are in Eph. and Col. ? 

The reply is obvious ; the classification of the celestial hierarchy 
which we find in these Epistles is not Paul’s at all (as will be shown 
in the exposition), but that of the false teachers. 

In reference, again, to the assertion in Col. and Eph., that 


§ 2] GENUINENESS OF EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS lv 


Christ is the creative principle of everything existing, and therefore 
that to Him is attributed absolute pre-existence, Baur remarks 
that “it is true that we find certain hints of similar views in the 
homologoumena of the apostle, but they are no more than hints, 
the meaning of which is open to question; while here, on the 
contrary, the absolute premundane existence is the dominating 
the pervading element within which the whole thought of these 
Epistles moves.” For the idea that Christ’s activity comprehends 
heavenly and earthly things at once and in the same degree, there 
is, he says, no analogy in Paul’s writings, but we are here trans- 
ported to a circle of ideas which belongs to a different era, namely, 
the period of Gnosticism (S¢, Pau/, Eng. tr. p. 7). The Gnostic 
systems, says Baur, rest on the root idea that all spiritual life which 
has proceeded from the supreme God has to return to its original 
unity, and to be taken back again into the absolute principle, so 
that every discord which has arisen shall be resolved into harmony. 
And so in these Epistles Christ’s work is mainly that of restoring, 
bringing back, and making unity. His work is contemplated as 
a mediation and atonement whose effects extend to the whole 
universe. 

Accepting Holtzmann’s caution (p. 296), that when critics 
like Baur and himself speak of Gnostic colouring in the Epistle, 
they do not mean Gnosticism proper, we may reply, first, that 
according to the above statement of Baur, the root idea of 
Gnostic systems includes the emanation of inferior spiritual 
existences from the Supreme; and this can hardly be separated 
from the idea of the creation of matter by the inferior spirits, 
since it was just to explain the evil of matter that the theory of 
emanations, etc., was devised. Of these ideas there is no trace 
in the Epistle except by way of opposition. The notion of succes- 
sive evolutions from the Divine nature, forming the links of a chain 
which binds the finite to the Infinite, is utterly opposed to the 
teaching of the Epistle; nor is it conceivable as a later development 
of anything that the writer himself says. It is, however, quite 
consistent with the teaching that he condemns. Secondly, the 
idea of reconciliation is wholly different from that of return to 
the unity of the Divine nature of that which has emanated or been 
evolved from it. 

Baur, indeed, admits the possibility that the conception of the 
work of Christ which is exhibited in these Epistles may be 
harmonised with the Pauline Christology and doctrine of atone- 
ment; yet it is certain, he adds, that with Paul these ideas never 
assume the prominence which they have here. It is a transcen- 
dental region into which Paul looked now and then, but of which 
he had no definite views, and which he never introduced into his 
Epistles from a taste for metaphysical speculation. 


lvi THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [§ 2 


“As even the Christology of these Epistles bears unmistakably 
the impress of Gnosticism,” says Baur, ‘“‘we meet also with other 
Gnostic conceptions”; and he draws attention especially to 7Ajpwpa. 
The Gnostic zA7jpwpa is not the Absolute itself, but it is that in 
which the Absolute realises the conception of itself. According to 
the doctrine of the Valentinians, it is the sum of the aeons by 
which the original Divine source is filled. 

Now this, says Baur, is just the conception of the Pleroma 
which we find in both our Epistles ; the only difference being that 
there is no express mention here of a plurality of aeons as the 
complement of the Pleroma, and that not the supreme God Him- 
self, but Christ, is the Pleroma, since only in Christ does the 
self-existent God unfold Himself in the fulness of concrete life. 
He finds a further remarkable agreement with the Valentinians 
in the comparison of the relation of husband to wife with that 
of Christ to the Church, since, according to the Valentinians, 
the aeons were divided into male and female, united in pairs 
called syzygies. Hence he explains how as Christ is the 7Ajpwpa, 
so also is the Church—that is to say, she is the wAyjpwpa of 
Christ ; since He is the zA7jpwua in the highest sense, she is 76 
TANPwWLA TOD TA TaVTA ev TaCL TANPOYpLEVOV. 

The latter suggestion scarcely merits a serious refutation. To 
compare the position of Christ as viewed by the writer with that 
of one of the aeons of the Valentinians, is to contradict the 
fundamental thesis of the Epistles, namely, that Christ is exalted 
far above all existences, earthly and heavenly, by whatever name 
they may be called. Equally remote from the writer’s thought, 
and irreconcilable with it, is the conception of éxxAyoia as an 
aeon co-ordinate with Christ. Indeed, the whole system of 
syzygies or duads was devised as a theory of successive generation. 
Nothing in the remotest degree resembling this appears in the 
Epistles. Throughout both, the relation of Christ to the Church 
is that of the head to the body; the figure of marriage is 
introduced only incidentally, not with the view of illustrating or 
explaining the union of Christ and the Church by that of man 
and wife, but in order to set forth the love of Christ as the Head, 
for His Body, the Church, as a pattern for the Christian husband ; 
and it is the headship of Christ that is used to illustrate the 
headship of the man—“ For we are members of His body.” The 
idea of the thing illustrated reacts in the writer’s mind on the 
conception of that with which it was compared, and so there grows 
up a new representation of the relation of Christ to the Church. 

As to the word wAyjpwua, so far is the conception in our 
Epistles from being just the same as that of the Valentinians, that 
the difference which Baur himself mentions is a vital one. What 
the writer so emphatically asserts is that the whole zA7jpwpa resides 


§ 2] GENUINENESS OF EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS lvii 


in Christ, not a mere fraction of it, not a single Divine power only, 
as the Gnostic use of the word would suggest. That some such 
view as this, of a part only of the wAxpwpa residing in Christ, was 
held by the Colossian false teachers, may be fairly inferred from 
the writer’s insistence on wav 76 wAyjpwpa, x.7.’. It is simple and 
natural, then, to suppose that he purposely employs a term common 
to himself and them in such a way as to combat directly their 
erroneous views. How can such a fact be supposed to indicate 
a Gnostic tendency on the part of the writer ? 

In fact, once it is admitted that the thoughts expressed in this 
Epistle (or that to the Ephesians) are capable of being reconciled 
to those of St. Paul, it is no longer possible to use the (supposed) 
Gnostic colouring as an argument against the genuineness of a 
writing which bears the name of Paul, and which in addition has 
such strong external support. It is true these thoughts have more 
prominence and are more developed here than in the acknow- 
ledged Epistles, but this is fully accounted for by the nature of the 
errors with which the apostle had to contend. The circumstances 
of Rome, Corinth, and Galatia were not such as to call for such an 
exposition as we find here; indeed, in the Epistles to the last two 
Churches, at least, it would have been singularly out of place. It is 
not to a taste for indulging in metaphysical speculation that we are 
to trace its presence here, but to the exigencies of the case. But, 
then, it is said that although St. Paul did now and then look into 
this transcendental region, he had no definite views of it. What 
then? If the Epistles are genuine, several years had elapsed 
since the writing of the four great Epistles. Was the apostle’s 
mind so rigid that we cannot conceive his views becoming more 
developed and more distinct in the interval of five or six years? 
Nothing was more likely to further their development than the 
presence of erroneous teaching. Just as the articles of the 
Church’s creed took form only gradually as errors sprang up, so in 
an individual mind, even in that of the apostle, a particular truth 
would be more distinctly recognised and more precisely formulated 
when the opposing error presented itself. 

It may be remarked that Baur found traces of Gnostic thought 
in the Epistle to the Philippians also, the genuineness of which has, 
however, been acknowledged by almost all subsequent critics, 
including Hausrath (who supposes it made up of two Epistles), 
Hilgenfeld, Holtzmann, Pfleiderer, Reuss, Renan, Schenkel. 
Indeed, it may be regarded as practically beyond question. This 
is not without importance for the Epistle to the Colossians, for it 
supplies an answer to the objections to the latter Ep. founded on 
the loftiness of the attributes assigned to Christ. For it contains 
nothing that goes beyond Phil. ii. 6-11. On the other hand, the 
Epistle to the Colossians, as Renan observes, cannot be separated 


lvili THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [§ 2 


from the Epistle to Philemon. The coincidence in some of the 
names mentioned might be explained by the hypothesis that the 
forger of the longer Epistle made use of the shorter. But the 
differences exclude this supposition (see Salmon, Jxtroduction, 
ch. xx.). Col. mentions Jesus, surnamed Justus, an otherwise 
unknown person, in addition to those mentioned in Philem., 
while Philemon is not mentioned at all. Again, while Aristarchus 
and Epaphras are mentioned in both Epp., it is the former that is 
called fellow-prisoner in Col., the latter in Philemon. But there 
is nothing in the Ep. to Philemon to suggest Colossae as the city of 
his residence. We learn his connexion with it only by finding his 
runaway slave Onesimus mentioned in Col. as “one of you.” 
Having learned this we observe further that Archippus, who in the 
private Epistle appears as an intimate, perhaps son, of Philemon, is 
mentioned in Col. in such a way as to suggest that he held office 
either there or in Laodicea. Certainly the way in which his name 
is introduced there is as unlike as possible to the contrivance of a 
forger. That Onesimus alone should be mentioned as Paul’s 
messenger in the letter to Philemon, but Tychicus with him in the 
public Epistle, is perfectly natural. 

Now the genuineness of the Epistle to Philemon is beyond 
question ; in fact, in the whole range of literature there is no piece 
which bears more unmistakably the stamp of originality and 
genuineness. ‘l’o quote Renan: “ Paul seul, autant qu’il semble, 
a pu écrire ce petit chef d’oeuvre.” Baur, indeed, felt himself 
compelled to reject it in consequence of its intimate connexion 
with Col. and Eph., and then set himself to confirm his rejection 
by an examination of the diction of the Epistle and of the circum- 
stances supposed. His argument is valuable as a rveductio ad 
absurdum of his whole method. 

V. Soden remarks that there is a striking correspondence both 
in language and thought between the Ep. to the Colossians and to 
the only other document which we possess from the apostle’s hand 
during his Roman imprisonment, viz. the Ep. to the Philippians 
(as he does not accept Eph.). Thus as to language he compares 
mAnpody in mie three times, in Phil. four times: o7Adyxva 


oixtipyod, Col. ili, 12, Phil. ii, 1: Adyos tod ese es i. 255 
Phill zak easleail \Ggurative), ee ii, x1, Phil. a ayo, 
Colhaiis (1; wPhilisisor darelvat, Col. 5s Philiea: deo poi, 


Col. iv. 18, Phil. 1. 7, 13f., 17: 71a Kar éué Col. iv. 7, Phil iali2 
tarewoppootvvyn, Col. il. 23, ili. 12, Phil. i 3: pa ae ae 
Col. i. 10, werAnpwpévor kaprov, Phil. i. 11: Gpue4os, Colin 23: 
Phil. ii. 15: réAevos, Col. i, 28, Phil. ili, 15: xara rv évépyeay, 
Kemae Col i. 20, Phill its) 22 dye; Col.) ites, Phil tae 
ext THs ys, Col. iii. 2, éxtyea, Phil. ii. 19: Bpafetov, Phil. iii. 14, 
kataBpaBevev, Col. ii. 18. As to style, he compares the brevity of 


§ 3-5] PLACE AND DATE OF WRITING lix 


Col. iv. 17 and Phil. iv. 2; the introduction of a judgment by a 
relative, Col. ii. 23, Phil. i. 28, iil, 19: the sentences, Col. 1. 9, 
Phil. i. 11: the prayer for ériyvwous, Col. i. 9f.; Phil. i. g: the 
wish xai 4 eipyvy, «.t.A., Col. ili. 15, Phil. iv. 7: the similar ideas, 
Colt 24.and@ Phil. ii: 10i; ‘Gol ii. 18 and Phil. i. 3 ; Col. i. 24 
and Phil. ii. 30: the references to what the readers had heard, 
Col. i. 7, Phil. iv. 9: and, lastly, the close correspondence of some 
peculiar dogmatic expressions ; see i. 19 ff. 


§ 3. PLACE AND DATE OF WRITING. 


For these see Introduction to the “fzstle to the Ephestans, 
where it is shown to be probable that the Epistle was written from 
Rome about a.p. 63. The occasion seems to have been the 
information furnished by Epaphras of the dangers to which the 
Church at Colossae was exposed from heretical teachers. 


§ 4. RELATION TO OTHER NEW TESTAMENT WRITINGS. 


For the relation to the Epistle to the Ephesians, see the 
Introduction to that Epistle. 

The relation to the Apocalypse deserves particular notice. It 
is especially in the Epistle to Laodicea, Rev. i. 14-21, that we find 
resemblances. In that Epistle, St. John, speaking in the person of 
the Lord, declares almost in the language of St. Paul that He is 
the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, 4 dpxn tis Kticews Tod 
®cov,—an expression which does not occur (nor anything like it) 
in any of the other six Epistles. Compare Col. i. 15, tpwrtdroxos 
maons Kticews. Doubtless there still remained some trace of the 
heresy which St. Paul combated. Again, Rev. iii. 21, décw atte 
kabioat pet euod ev TO Opdvw pov, x.7.Xr., is very parallel to Col. 
iii. 1 and Eph. ii. 6, and here again there is nothing similar in the 
other Epistles. ‘‘ This double coincidence (says Lightfoot), affect- 
ing the two ideas which may be said to cover the whole ground in 
the Epistle to the Colossians, can hardly, I think, be fortuitous, 
and suggests an acquaintance with and recognition of the earlier 
apostle’s teaching on the part of St. John” (p. 42). 


§ 5. VOCABULARY OF THE EPISTLE. 
List of iraé deyopeva in the Epistle to the Colossians. 


30 “ > r , > 4 > a > 50 
aOvpetvy, aicxpoAroyia, dveios, avtavatAnpoiy, avTarodocts, 
> 4 > / > 4 > , > , , 
amexdverOat, améKdvots, amdxpynots, apeoKeia, adedia, PBpafseveu, 


Ix THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [$6 


Soyparilec Oat, Svvaporv (see Eph. vi. 10), éGeAobpyoeta, cipyvororety, 
éuBaredvew, edydprtos, Odrys, KataBpaBedew, peraxweiv, poudy, 
voupnvia, dpatds, mapyyopia, miavoroyia, TANTpPOVyY, mpoaKoveLy, 
mpoonArovww, Tpwrevey, oTEpéewpa, TvAGYwyElY, TwHLATLKOS, pirocodpia, 


xetpdypadov. More than half of these (18) are in ch. il. only. 


Words which occur in other Writers of the N.T\, but not in 
St. Paul. 


GAas, dmoxpiverba, ardoxpudos, apriev, yeverOo, devyparile, 
egadeipew, taparoyilerbar, mixpaivew, rdvos, oKxid, ctvSovros. The 
following are found in the Pastorals: dzroxetofar, xpumrew, 
tAovelws. 


Pauline Words. 


The following are found only in St. Paul: dzreivas, édpaios, eixn, 
epebilew, OpiapBevew, ixavodv, icdrys, Taos, cvvatypadwros, cvvGar- 
Tew, pvoody. 


§ 6. CONTENTS OF THE EPISTLE, 


i. 1, 2. Salutation, briefly specifying Paul’s designation as an 
apostle, not by men, but by the will of God. 

Although the apostle’s purpose in writing to the Colossians was 
to warn them against the errors that threatened to creep in amongst 
them, yet with admirable delicacy, as writing to those to whom he 
was not personally known, he does not introduce his admonition 
until he has prepared the way for its favourable reception by a 
comparatively long introduction, which begins and ends with 
commendation. 

3-8. Thanksgiving for their faith and love, resting on the 
heavenly hope laid up for them. Mention of the hope leads 
naturally to the assurance that the gospel which they had been 
taught by Epaphras was the true gospel, universal and unchange- 
able, and proving its genuineness by the fruit which it was bearing, 
both amongst them and in all the world. 

9-12. Prayer that they may advance further in spiritual know- 
ledge, and that not speculative but practical, so that their life may 
be worthy of their profession. 

13 ff. The prayer passes insensibly into the positive instruction 
which will help to its fulfilment, and furnish a safeguard against the 
attempts that are made to mislead them. They have already been 
transferred into the kingdom of God’s beloved Son. It is in Him 
that they have their redemption. 

15-17. The pre-eminence of Christ, in His nature and in His 
office. In His nature He is superior to all created things, being 


§ 6] CONTENTS OF THE EPISTLE xi 


the visible image of the invisible God, and all things having been 
created through Him, and holding together by Him. 

18-20. In the spiritual order also He is first, the firstborn from 
the dead, and the Head of the Church, all the fulness of God 
dwelling in Him. The work of reconciliation wrought through 
Him extends even to things in the heavens. 

21-23. The Colossians have their share in this reconciliation, 
the object of which is that they may be without blemish and with- 
out reproof in the sight of God. But this depends on their continu- 
ing steadfast in the faith which they have been taught. 

24-29. The apostle’s own qualifications as a minister of this 
gospel, privileged to know and make known the mystery hidden 
from preceding ages, namely, Christ dwelling in them. It is his 
business to proclaim this, and so to admonish and teach, that he 
may present every man perfect ; and this he strenuously labours to 
do through the power of Christ. 

il. 1-7. This effort and anxiety of his extend even to those 
to whom he had not personally preached, that they may be con- 
firmed in the faith and united in love, and, further, may learn to 
know the mystery of God. What they have to aim at is to be 
established in the faith which they have already been taught, firmly 
rooted in Christ, and living accordingly. 

8-15. The apostle has learned (no doubt from Epaphras) that 
there are amongst them teachers who are endeavouring to propagate 
mischievous heresies which would undermine their faith. He does 
not, indeed, adopt this rude manner of expression, but cautions 
them against being led astray. The philosophy of which these 
false teachers make a display is mere deceit, and of human origin ; 
it is not a more advanced teaching, but, on the contrary, belongs 
to an elementary stage. Ye have already been made full in Christ, 
who is above all these angelic beings of whom they speak, since 
the whole fulness of the Godhead dwells in Him. Ye need no 
circumcision of the flesh, for ye have received in Him the true 
circumcision of the Spirit ; it is by Him that ye have been raised 
from death to life, and nothing, remains to be added to His 
work, for He has completely removed the bond that was against 
you. 

16-23. Application of these principles to the practices incul- 
cated by the false teachers. With their precepts about meat and 
drink and days they would have you rest in the shadow, as if you 
had not already the reality. The angel worship which they 
inculcate is not the outcome of true humility, but of carnal pride 
in the fancied possession of superior knowledge; and it leads to 
a setting aside of the Head, through union with which alone can 
the body derive its nourishment and growth. 

ili. 1-4. Your aims and thoughts must be more lofty. Ye 


Ix THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [S$ 7 


have been raised with Christ, and your life is now hid with Him. 
Seek therefore the things where He is, at God’s right hand. 

5-11. Sins to be avoided : not only the grosser ones of appetite, 
but the more subtle sins of temper, etc. 

12-17. Virtues to be cultivated: kindness, love, forgiveness, 
of which we have such a lofty example in God’s forgiveness of us, 
mutual teaching, and in everything thankfulness to God. Every- 
thing to be done in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

18-iv. 1. Special precepts for the several relations of life: 
wives and husbands, children and parents, slaves and masters, 
the motive always being ‘“‘in the Lord.” 

2-6. Exhortation to constant prayer and thanksgiving, with 
request for prayer for the apostle himself in his work, to which 
he adds further practical hints as to wisdom in action and 
speech. 

7-18. Personal commendations and salutations, 


§ 7. LITERATURE OF THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS. 
Commentaries on the entire New Testament are not included. 
Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centurtes. 


ALTING (J.), Analysts exegetica in Ep. ad Coloss. Opp. Amstel. 
1687. 

ARETIUS (Bened.), Comm. Morgis. 1580. 

BAYNE (Paul), Comm. on Ep. to Colossians. Lond. 1634. 

BUGENHAGEN. See Lphesians. 

ByFIELD (Nicholas), An Exposition on the Ep. to the Col. 
Lond. 1617, ad. 

Catixtus. See Ephesians. 

CARTWRIGHT (Thos.), Comm. Lond. 1603, 

CRELLIUS, Comm. et Paraphrasis in Col. 

DavENANT (John, Bp. of Salisbury), Zxpositio Ep. Pauli ad 
Coloss. Cantab. 1627; transl. Lond. 1831. 

DaILLE or DALLAEUS (Joannes), Sermons sur [Epistre aux 
Col. 3 tom. Gen. 1662; transl. Lond. 1672, again Lond. 
1841. 

D’OuTREIN (Joh.), Sexdbrief, etc. Amst. 1695. (In German) 
Frankf. 1696. 

Eton (Edw.), Zxposition of the Ep. to the Colossians ...in 
Sundry Sermons. Lond. 1615, ad. 

FERGUSON (Jas.), 4 brief Exposition of the Epp. to the Phil. 
and Col. Edinb. 1656, ad. 

GRYNAEUS (Jo. Jac.), Lxplicatio... Basil, 1585. 


§ 7] LITERATURE OF EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS _Ixi 


MELANCHTHON (Phil.), Zxarratio Epistolae Pauli ad Coloss. 
Witenb. 1559. 

Muscutus (Wolfg.), Comm. in Epp. ad Philip. Cotoss. ete. 
Basil, 1565. 

OLEviANUuS (Gaspar), JVofae, etc. Gen. 1580. 

Quiros (Aug. de), Comment. Lugd. 1623. 

ROLLock (Rob.), Zz Ep. Pauli ad Col. Comm. Edin 1600 

SLICHTINGIUS, Comm. in plerosque N.T. libros. Eleutherop. 
1656. 

Scumip (Seb.), Laraphrasis super Ep. ad Col.  Strassb. 
1696, a. 

Suicer (J. H.), Zn Ep. S. Pauli ad Col. Comment. crit. 
exeget. theolog. ‘Tiguri, 1669. 

WooDHEAD. See “/phesians. 

ZANCHIUS (Hier.), Comm. Opp. Gen. 16109. 

ZuINGcuIus (Ulr.), Comm. Opp. Tiguri [1545}. 


Eighteenth Century. 


BAUMGARTEN. See “phesians. 

Boysen, Lrklarung, u.s.w. Quedlinb. 1766-81. 

Guricu, Predigten. Dresd. 1717. 

Hazevoet, Verklaering. Leyden, 1720. 

Konino, Openlegging. Leyden, 17309. 

LuTKEN, Predigten. Gardel. 1718, ad. 

MIcHAELIS. See “pheszans. 

PEIRCE (Jas.), 4 Paraphrase and Notes on the Epp. to the Col. 
Phil. and Heb, after the manner of Mr. Locke. ond. 1727, ad. 

RoELL, £p. Pauli ad Col. exegesis. ‘Traj. 1731. 

Storr (Gottlob Chr.), Déssertatio exegetica in Epistolae ad 
Col. partem priorem [et poster]. ‘Tiibing. 1783-87; transl. Edinb. 
1842. 

STRESO, AZeditationes. Amst. 1708. 

Tit (Salomon v.). See Zphesians. 

ZACHARIAE (G. T.). See Zphesians. 


LVineteenth Century. 


ALEXANDER (Wm., Archbishop of Armagh), Commentary ; 1n 
the “ Speaker's Commentary.” London 

BAuHR (Felix), Comment. tiber d. Brief Pauli au die Kol. mit 
stater Beriicksichtigung d. altern u. neuern Ausleger. Basel, 1833. 

Barry. See L£phesians. 

BAUMGARTEN-Crusius. See Zphesians. 

BEET. See /phesians. 

Bispinc, Lrklarung. Minster, 1855 


Ixiv THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [§ 7 


BLEEK. See £phesians. 

BOHMER (W.), Theol. Auslegung des Pauli Sendschreiben an die 
Col. Breslau, 1835. 

BRAUNE. See £phesians. 

Dacm_er (Ed. Fr.), Auslegung, u.s.w. Gotha, 1855. 

DeckeER, Bearbeitung. Hamb. 1848. 

EavikE (John), Commentary on the Greek Text of the Ep. of 
Laul to the Colossians. Edinb. 1855, 1884. 

Exuicott (C. J., Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol), 4 Critical 
and Grammatical Comm. on St. Pauls Epp. to the Philippians, 
Colossians, and to Philemon, with a Revised Translation. Lond. 
1857, a. 

EwaLp. See /phesians. 

Finpxay (G. G.), “Colossians” in Pulpit Commentary. 

Fuatt (J. F. v.), Vorlesung. uber d. Br. Pauli an die Phil. Kol, 
etc, Tubing. 1829. 

GIsBoRNE (Thos.), Lxposition and Application... in Eight 
Sermons. Lond. 1816, 

Hernricus (J. H.), Za Koppe’s Nov. Test. Graec. ete. Gitting. 
1803, al, 

HorMann (J. Chr. v.), Die Briefe Pauli an die Col. u. an 
Philemon. Nordlingen, 1870. 

HuTHER (Joh. Ed.), Comm. u.s.w. amb. 1841. 

JUNKER (Friedr.), Histor. Krit. u. philolog. Comm. Minchen, 
1828. 

KAHLER (C. R.), Auslegung. Eislehen, 1853. 

KiOpperR (A.), Der Brief an die Kolosser. Berlin, 1882. 

Licutroot (J. B., Bishop of Durham), St. Pauls LEpisiles to 
the Colossians and to Philemon, A Revised Text with Introductions, 
Notes, and Dissertations. Lond. 1875, ad. 

Mactar_ENn (Alex.), “Colossians” in Zhe Exposttor’s Bible. 

Messner, £rk/drung. Brixen, 1863. 

MouLe (H.C. G.), “The Epp. to Colossians and to Philemon” 
in the Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges. Camb. 1893. 

SCHNEDERMANN. See L/phesians. 

STEIGER (W.), Der Brief Pauli an die Epheser ; Uebersetzung, 
Lirkléirung, einleitende u. epikritische Abhandlungen. Erlangen, 
1835. 

Tuomasius (G.), Praktische Auslegung, u.s.w. Erlang. 1869. 

Watson (Thos.), Discourses. 3rd ed. Lond. 1838. 

Witson (Dan., Bishop of Calcutta), Lectures, e¢c. Lond. 
1845, ad. 

WIESINGER (J. C. Aug.), In Olshausen’s Comm. Konigsb. 
1850; transl. Edinb. 185 . 

WOHLENBERG. See /phesians. 

Weiss. See “phesians. 


THE 


Pelotite 7 Omir EPIESIANS. 


I.1,%. SALUTATION. 


1, 2. Paul, a divinely appointed apostle, gives Christian greeting 
to the Church at Ephesus. May the heavenly Father, and the 
Lord Jesus Messiah grant you free grace and the peace which none 
else can bestow. 

1. Maddos. It is observable that he does not associate with 
himself Timothy as in Col. and Philemon ; perhaps because it was 
a circular letter without any personal allusions. 

GmdaToNo0s Xptotod “Incod. Xp. ‘In. in this order with BD P 17, 
Syr-Harcl. Boh. “Incod Xp. SAGKL, Syr-Pesh. Arm. 

The genitive is not simply a genitive of possession (as with 
SovAos, Rom. i. 1), although from a purely grammatical point of 
view it may be socalled. But the term dzdcrodos gives it a further 
import. ‘This word had not lost its proper signification, as we see 
in 2 Cor. vill. 23. Phil. ii. 25, ‘‘ A commissioned messenger of—” 
clearly implies, not merely “belonging to,” but “sent by,” as 
* Ambassador of the King of France” obviously means one sent 
from him. The addition of kar’ émirayiv @eod in 1 Tim. i. 1 is no 
objection to this. See on Rom. i. 1. 

81a OeAjpatos Ocod. These words are also found in 1 Cor. i. 1; 
eComd. 1-2Col a 152 Time 1m! Their occurrence in 2 Tim. 
sufficiently proves (to those who accept the Pauline authorship of 
that Ep.) that they are not added in order to enchance the writer’s 
apostolic authority, or to justify his undertaking to instruct a 
Church to which he was a stranger (von Soden on Col.), nor yet 
because he has in his mind “the great subject of what he is about 
to treat, and himself as the authorised expositor of it” (Alford). 
It simply expresses what was always present to his mind, that his 
mission was due to the special and undeserved providence of God, 

I 


2 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [I. 1 


not to any merit of his own. Compare 2 Cor. viii. 5. The same 
idea is expressed in 1 Tim. i. 1 by car éxurayny @cod. 

tots dyiots (= Phil., Col.). In the earlier Epistles the address 
is tT exxAnola (Cor., Gal., Thess.). The substitution is not to be 
attributed to any incompleteness of organisation, for éxxAycia is 
used in Philem. 2, and éxxA. does not seem to include the idea 
of organisation. The use of dy.o. certainly gives a more personal 
colouring to the Epistle as if addressed to the members of the 
Church as individuals rather than as a body. 

oi cyvor, frequent in the N.T., is always a substantive (except 
perhaps Heb. iii. 1). It was a term transferred from the Israel of 
the Old Testament to the Christians as the true people of God, 
its primary sense, like that of the corresponding Hebrew word, 
being ‘consecrated to God.” The notion of inward personal 
holiness becomes attached to it from the thought of the obligation 
laid on those who are so set apart to a “holy” God; and God 
Himself is so called as the object of supremest reverence. 

tots ovcw [ev Epéow], x.t.4. The evidence for and against the 
bracketed words may be here summarily stated (for a fuller dis- 
cussion see Introduction). They are omitted in & B (but supplied 
in both by later hands). In cod. 67 they are expunged by the 
later corrector (who records many very ancient readings). To 
these we must add the MSS. mentioned by S. Basil (fourth cent.) 
and the text used by Origen. They are present in all other MSS., 
and Fathers and all versions. 

Their omission, if they are genuine, would be hard to account 
for. That they should be omitted in consequence of critical 
doubts as to the destination of the Epistle founded on its contents 
is beyond the bounds of probability. On the other hand, if the 
Epistle was addressed to a circle of Churches of which Ephesus 
was chief, the insertion of the words would be natural. 

If we have to interpret rots oto. Kat muorois, x.t.X. the render- 
ing will be: “the saints who are also faithful.” This would by 
no means imply that there might be dy.o. who were not muwrot, 
but would rather give prominence to the thought that the apostle 
did not recognise any as ayo, in the technical sense, unless they - 
were also morot. The only difficulty is that rots otow or ty ovon 
(with exxAnoia) is elsewhere followed by the name of the place 
(Rom., Cor., Phil.). Of course, if we suppose a blank space to 
have been left in the original letter the difficulty does not arise. 
But it is observable that in Col. i. 1 the same thought is expressed, 
Tois dylous Kal murTois adeAdois ev Xpiord, where rots aylos is to be 
taken as a substantive (see note there). 

Others connect otow with dyios, “who are truly saints” 
(Schneckenb.), or with both ay. and mor, in the same sense, or 
understand rots otow as=who are in every place where Tychicus 


I. 2, 3] SALUTATION 3 


comes with the Epistle (Bengel, comparing Acts xiii. 1). Origen’s 
interpretation, ‘‘ those who are,” need only be alluded to here. 
muotois may mean either “ believing” or “ faithful, steadfast.” 
The former sense is adopted by Ellicott, Eadie, Meyer, a/., on the 
ground that here in the address tots dytows alone would not 
adequately define the readers as Christians, and that if we adopt 
the other sense we must either suppose the apostle to distinguish 
the faithful from those who were not so, or to assume that all the 
professed dyio. were faithful. It is alleged also that “faithful to 
Christ” would have required the single dative as in Heb. iii. 2. 
The phrase in 1 Cor. iv. 17, ayamrnrov kal muorov év Kvpiw, being not 
parallel, since év Kup belongs to both adjectives, Grotius, Stier, 
Lightfoot, a/., adopt the other signification, which the word cer- 
fainly has}in Eph. vi 21 5 Colliv.’9 ;) 1 Tim. $i .12% 2) Tim: i. 2 ; 
1 Pet. v. 12. If it meant here “ believing,” says Lightfoot, it 
would add nothing to what is contained in dy/ous. The use of the 
word with ddeAdots in Col. i. 2 is in favour of the latter view, 
which agrees with the classical use; but when used in such a con- 
nexion as here and in Col. i. 2, this presupposes “ believing.” 
Since all the dy.ot ought to be “faithful,” it would be quite in St. 
Paul’s manner to designate them as such, unless he had positive 
reason to the contrary. Whether we take the word as meaning 
“believing” or not, we are not to connect it directly with év 
Xpiord as if=“ believing in Christ Jesus” (mwcrevovtes eis), for 
the adjective is never so construed. “Ev Xpior@ “Incod is best 
taken with the whole conception dy.ot cai musrot. Such they are, 
but only “in Christ.” Compare'vi 23 ; rior. iv. 17 3 Col. 1. ‘2. 

2. Kat Kuptou *Incod Xpiotod. “And (from) the Lord Jesus 
Christ.” The rendering of Erasmus, “ Father of us and of the 
Lord,” is sufficiently disproved by Tit. ii. 4, dad @cod wurpds Kai 
Xpiorod “Incod trod cwrhpos yudv. See on Rom. i. 7. 

3-8. Praise to God for the blessings of salvation. The grant- 
ing of these was no new thing in God’s purposes, but had been 
determined before the creation of the world. The object to be attained 
was that we should be holy and blameless, and with a view to thts 
He has admitted us to the adoption of sons through Christ, in whom 
we have received our redemption. 

3. Eddoyntds, according to the analogy of verbals in -ros, means 
properly, not “on whom blessing is pronounced ” (etAoynp.évos), but 
“worthy of blessing,” érawetoGar Kal Oavpalecbar aéios Theod. 
Mops. Cf. peumrds, “ blameworthy”; dpards, “ visible”; murds, 
“trustworthy.” In the N.T. it is used exclusively of God, and 
so almost always in the Sept. In Mark xiv. 61, 6 etAoynros stands 
alone for ‘‘the Blessed One,” z.e. God, this being a frequent Jewish 
mode of avoiding the needless utterance of the sacred name, 
Here, then, we supply, not éorw, but éo7. See on Lk. i. 68 


4 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [1. 3 


5 Geds kai watip tod K. The natural rendering is “the God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,” @eds and waryp being in 
apposition (so Jerome, Theophylact, Alford, Eadie, Olshausen, 
W. Schmidt, Stier). But Syr., Theodoret, Theod. Mops., followed 
by Harless, Meyer, Ellicott, take the genitive to depend on zaryp 
only. It is said, indeed, that the former rendering would require 
te before kai; but cf. iv. 6, eis Ocds kal watynp wavtwv ; I Pet. il. 25, 
Tov moueva Kal ericxorov. The expression, “God of our Lord 
Jesus Christ,” is used in ver. 17, and the fact that it does not occur 
oftener can be no objection. See also John xx. 17, ‘‘ My God and 
your God.” @cds pév ws capxwhévros, tatnp S& ws Ocod Adyov, 
Theophylact. Chrysostom also prefers this view. We have the 
same combination, 6 @eds cal waryp tod K., Rom. xv. 6; 2 Cor. 
Ig, xinges (Cola. (a2, srr Betn.ta' 

6 eddoyjoas Huds. ‘‘ Who blessed us,” viz. at the time of our 
becoming members of the Christian Church, or simply on sending 
His Son. ‘Theodoret well remarks that men in blessing God can 
only offer Him words that cannot benefit Him, whereas God in 
blessing confirms His words by deed, and bestows manifold 
benefits upon us. Koppe strangely understands jas of Paul him- 
self. Besides the unsuitableness of this in the initial thanksgiving, 
kayw, in ver. 15, is decisive against it. év mdon evtAoyia mvevpartiy. 
Blessings belonging to the spiritual sphere to which the wvetua of 
man properly belongs. This is not quite the same as “ referring 
to the mind or soul of man.” Compare Rom. viii. 4, 9, 10, where 
mvedua is contrasted with oapé, and 1 Cor. ii. 15, where it is 
opposed to yvy7. That these blessings proceed from the Holy 
Spirit is true, but that is not the signification of the word, which 
characterises the nature of the blessings, not their source. Nor is 
the meaning “blessings of the Spirit” made out by the passages 
usually alleged in support of it, such as Rom. i. 11, “ that I may 
impart some ydpiopa rvevpatixov” ; 1 Cor. xil. 1, “ About spiritual 
[gifts]”; xiv. 1, “desire spiritual [gifts].” Compare Rom. xv. 27, 
“The Gentiles have been made partakers of these spiritual things” ; 
1 Cor. ie 11, “ We: have) sown) ra.(ary:?39.x.13,64s phy vino; 
“spiritual songs,” and 1 Cor. xv. 44, c@ua mvevparikov. Surely, if - 
“from the Spirit” had been intended, it would have been more 
naturally expressed by rov wvevmaros. 

Chrysostom interprets the “spiritual blessings” as meant to be 
contrasted with the material and temporal blessings of the Old 
Covenant, in which he is followed by Grotius and others. But 
there is no hint of such antithesis in the context. 

These blessings are not to be timited to the extraordinary 
gifts of the Spirit, as wzdoy sufficiently shows. As Theodoret 
remarks, they include ‘the hope of the resurrection, the promises 
of immortality, the promise of the kingdom of heaven, the dignity 


I. 3] ASCRIPTION OF PRAISE 5 


of adoption,” or more generally what St. Paul enumerates as the 
fruit of the Spirit in Gal. v. 22, love, joy, peace, and all Christian 
virtues. 

év Tois €mroupaviots. The adjective is found several times in the 
N.T. in the sense “ belonging to or seated in heaven.” Sometimes 
opposed to ta émtyea, as in John ili. 12; 1 Cor. xv. 40, 48, 49; 
Phil. ii. 10; with xAnow, Heb. il. 1; Sdwped, 2b. vi. 43 rartpis, 2b. 
xi. 16; Baotreia, 2 Tim. iv. 18. It will be seen that a local sense 
cannot be insisted on in all these places. The contrasted word 
émtyeos also has a transferred sense in Phil. iil. 19, Ta émiyea 
dpovotvtes, and Jas. iil. 15, (copia) éxtyeos, Wuxext. 

In the present passage 7a ézovp. appears to be interpreted by 
Theodoret as = heavenly things, éroupavia yap tra dHpa tadra, and 
so Bengel, “‘declaratur ro spirituali.” But this would be to explain 
the clear and familiar term by one which is less clear. It might, 
however, be taken, not as an explanation, but as a further defini- 
tion of the nature of the blessings. The article is not against 
this view, since it may properly be used to mark a class. It is, 
however, an objection that the phrase év trois éz., not found 
elsewhere, occurs five times in this Epistle, and in three of these 
places has certainly a local signification, viz. i. 20, il. 6, ili. 10. 
The fifth (vi. 12) cannot be quoted as certainly local, so that it is 
not correct to say, with some expositors, that everywhere else in 
this Epistle the signification is local. Those who adopt this 
interpretation, “in the heavenly regions,” are not agreed as to 
the connexion. Beza and others refer the words to God (6 év 
Trois ovpavors evAdyynoas), but this is against the order of the words. 
Meyer takes them as a local definition added to evA. m., “with 
every spiritual blessing in heaven.” ‘The blessings of the Spirit 
are regarded as in heaven, and from thence’ brought down to us. 
Compare the description of the Spirit itself as 7 dwpea 7 ézov- 
pavios. It seems more natural to connect the words with etAdyynoas 
(Lightfoot), or rather with the whole clause «iA. év. m. eid. 
av. Not, however, taking the words as expressing literal locality, 
but as designating the heavenly region in which our citizenship is 
(Phil. iii. 20), where the believer has already been seated with 
Christ (ii. 6), “the heaven which lies within and about the 
true Christian” (Lightfoot). ‘Those spiritual blessings conferred 
on us create heaven within us, and the scenes of Divine bene- 
faction are ‘heavenly places’; for wherever the light and love of 
God’s presence are to be enjoyed, there is heaven.” So substanti- 
ally Harless, but connecting the words (as does Eadie) with evAoyia. 

év Xptoto.1 By virtue of our union with Him, and as 
members of His body. But it must not be left out of sight that 

2 a év Xpior@ in St. Paul, see Weiss, 7heol. Studien u. Kritiken, 1896, 
Pp. 7 tl. 


6 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (1.4 


it is also in Christ that God confers the blessing (iv. 32). Not 
as if =d.a Xpuorod (Chrys.), as if Christ were merely the instrument. 

It answers the question, How? as the preceding clauses 
answered the questions, With what? and Where? the participle 
answering When? ér is omitted in a few cursive MSS., and in the 
edd. of Erasmus, Steph. 3, and Beza; but the omission is too 
slightly supported to deserve notice, except as accounting for the 
explanations of some commentators. 

4. «ass, frequent in later Greek (from Aristotle) for the more 
classical xa@dzep, “according as,” expressing that the blessing was 
in harmony with what follows, so that it has a certain argumenta- 
tive force, but does not mean (as the word sometimes does) 
“because.” The blessing realised the election. 

éfehéfaro. Generally understood as implying, (1) the choosing 
out from the mass of mankind, (2) for Himself. As to (1), although 
the idea of choice from amongst others who are not chosen is 
involved in the form of the word, this is not always prominent. 
For example, in Luke ix. 35, 6 vids pou 6 éxAcAeypevos (the true 
reading), we can hardly say, with Meyer, that it is as chosen out 
of all that is man that Christ is so called (cf. Luke xxiii. 35, 6 rod 
@eod éxAexrds). Here what is chiefly in view is not the fact of 
“selection” (Alford), but the end for which the choice was 
made, «tvat judas, «.tr.A. Oltramare argues from the aorist being 
used, that the election is an act repeated whenever the call is 
heard. God, before the creation of the world, formed the plan of 
saving man (all sinners) in Christ. The condition of faith is 
implicitly contained. The plan is historically realised under the 
forms of xAjjous and exXoyy. Every man who by faith accepts the 
call is €kXextos. ‘The second element, for Himself, as implied in 
the middle voice, must not be pressed too far; cf. Acts vi. 5, 
“They chose Stephen” (éfeAéfavto) ; xv. 22, 25, “to choose out 
men and send them.” See Dale, On Zp., Lect. ii. p. 31. 

év atts, not év avrd, as Morus, Holzh. (and G, which has 
€avté without ev), which would be quite superfluous, but ev 
Xpuisrd, as the context also shows. In Christ as our Head, not 
merely ia trys eis adrov mictews, as Chrysostom. Christ is the - 
spiritual Head as Adam was the natural. Compare 1 Cor. xv. 22, 
“As in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive” ; 
and Gal. il. 16, “thy seed 6s é€o7t Xpwcrds.” Believers were 
viewed in God’s purpose as being in Christ adopted as sons 
through Him, it being God’s purpose to sum up all things in 
Him (ver. 10), Comp. Ei Cr, x3 

mpo KataBohfs kéopoue The same expression occurs John 
xvii. 24; I Pet. 1.20. dd xar. x. is found several times (twice in 
Heb.), but neither expression occurs elsewhere in St. Paul. It is 
= 470 Tov alwvwy, iii. g, “from al) eternity.” 


I. 4] ASCRIPTION OF PRAISE 7 


etvat Has. ‘The infinitive completes the notion of the verb, 
expressing the purpose of the exAoyy=éri tovtTw Wa dyor dpev 
Kat dpwpor, Chrys. Cf. Col. 1. 22, droxarnAAagey rapacticat 
tyas, k.7.A. The usage is quite classical. 

Gyo. and duwpor give the positive and negative sides of the 
idea. dpwpos properly means “without blame.” In the Sept. it 
is used of sacrificial victims, in the sense “without blemish” ; 
the word papos having been adopted by the translators as the 
rendering of the Hebrew for “ blemish,” “spot,” on account of its 
resemblance in sound to the Hebrew mim. In this sense papos 
occurs in 2 Pet. ii. 13, omtAou kai podpor. The adj. apwpos is used 
in the signification ‘‘ without blemish” in Heb. ix. 14; 1 Pet. 1. 19. 
St. Paul uses the word here and v. 27, also Phil. ii. 15 (true text) 
and Col. i. 22. In the last-mentioned place dveyxAyrovs is added 
to dylovs kal djuspous, and this favours the interpretation “ blame- 
less.” In Phil. 11. 15, also, duwpa seems parallel to dueymro, and 
is the opposite of pwpyrd in the passage Deut. xxxii. 5, which is 
there alluded to. On the other hand, in Eph. v. 27 the reference 
to otAoy 7 putida in the context favours the other sense. How- 
ever, as there is no reference to a victim in any of these three 
places, there seems to be no sufficient reason for departing from 
the proper Greek sense. In Jude 24 either sense would be 
suitable, but in Rev. xiv. 5 “blameless” is better, for the con- 
nexion is ‘‘in their mouth.” The word is so understood here by 
Chrysostom and Theophylact, dyos 6 ris mictews peréxwv? apwpos 
8€ 6 kata tov Biov averiAnmros, Theoph. ; dwpos 0 averiAnrrov Biov 
petiwv (éxwv, Catena), Chrys. 

Is this ay. kat dp. etvar to be understood of the actual spiritual 
and moral state (sanctification), or of righteousness imputed 
(justification) ? Harless and Meyer strongly maintain the latter 
view, which is also adopted by Moule on the ground of the 
context, while Harless even thinks that this alone agrees with 
apostolic teaching. The fact appears to be the very opposite. 
The ultimate end of God’s choice, as of Christ’s work, is sancti- 
fication. Compare Phil. ii. 14, “‘Do all things without mur- 
murings and disputings, that ye may be blameless and harmless 
children of God dpwya (true text), . . . among whom ye are seen 
as lights in the world.” In v. 27 words similar to the present are 
used of a future ideal not yet attained. So Col. i. 22 compared 
with 21, 23, 28, 29; 1 Thess. iv. 7, “God hath called us, not ézt 
axafapata, but év dyracpo.” Compare the same Ep. v. 23; 2 Thess. 
ii. 13, “God chose you from the beginning eis cwrypiay év dyvaopd 
mvevpatos.” And very distinctly Tit. ii. 14, ‘‘Gave Himself for us, 
that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself 
a people. . . . zealous of good works.” Indeed, as Eadie 
observes, “the phrase ‘holy and without blame’ is never once 


8 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [I. 5 


applied to our complete justification before God. . . . Men are 
not regarded by God as innocent or sinless, for the fact of their 
sin remains unaltered ; but they are treated as righteous.” It is 
no objection to this that this perfection is not attained here, nor 
need we modify the meaning by understanding ‘“‘as far as can be.” 
What is here specified as the purpose of the ékXéyeoPar must be 
the ultimate purpose to be achieved, and that is perfect holiness. 
This is the view adopted by Chrysostom, Theophylact, Calvin, 
and, amongst recent expositors, Alford, Ellicott, Eadie, Mac- 
pherson, Oltramare, Stier. It is confirmed by the following words; 
nor is it really against the subsequent context; see on vioGec(a. 
KaTevwmiov avTov, z.€. not merely before men, says Chrysostom ; 
dywwovvyy Lyret iv o Tod Ocod dpbadrpos opa. 

év ayaa has been variously joined with éfeAéaro, with dy. Kal 
dp., and with zpoopicas. It is, however, too far removed from 
efeXéEatro (although Macpherson regards this as no objection) ; 
but it is less easy to decide between the other possible connexions. 
In support of the connexion with the preceding words it is 
alleged that the words év dyamy stand after the clause to which 
they) belong ‘insive 2, 15}) 26, iv.02 Gol. ai) 2:5. 2) Tihessyaers 
(Lightfoot). But in all these cases the words preceding are verbs, 
or express a verbal notion (iv. 16), and are such that they could 
not be placed after év dydry. Alford strenuously maintains that, 
‘in the whole construction of this long sentence, the verbs and 
participles . . . precede their qualifying clauses,” e.g. vv. 3, 4, 6, 
8,9, 10. But this is no reason why the qualifying clause should 
not be placed before its verb here, if the writer’s purpose so 
required. Alford adds that this qualification of the preceding 
words is in the highest degree appropriate, love being the element 
in which all Christian graces subsist, and in which all perfection 
before God must be found. Nevertheless, the connexion with the 
adjectives “holy and blameless (or without blemish) in love,” 
appears less natural than with the verb, “having in love fore- 
ordained.us.”. It is fitting, too, at the beginning of the Epistle that 
God’s love should be the first to be mentioned, and very fitting that 
emphasis should be given to the love which moved Him so to 
preordain, by placing év dydzy first. So Chrysostom and the other 
Greek comm., Jerome, and, among moderns, Bengel, Harless, 
Meyer, Stier, Eadie, Ellicott, Soden, ad. 

5. tmpoopicas gives the reason of e&eA¢£aro, it is logically prior ; 
but in the counsels of God there is no priority or order in time. 
Compare Rom. vili. 30, os tpowpicev TovTovs Kal éxdderey, The 
verb appears not to be found in any writer before St. Paul. The 
prefix zpo has reference only to the future realisation, and does not 
of itself indicate that the act was wpo xataBodjs Koopov. 

eis utoPeciay 81a “Il. X. eis adtév. These words belong closely 


I. 5] ASCRIPTION OF PRAISE 9 


together, “unto adoption through Jesus Christ unto Him as His 
sons.” Christ is vids yvyjovos, Son by His nature ; we are sons only 
by adoption through Him. Cf. Gal. iv. 5, “God sent forth His 
Son... that we might receive the adoption of sons”; also 
Gal. ili. 26, “‘ Ye are sons of God, through faith, in Christ Jesus” ; 
and Heb. ii. 10 f. But this viofecia is not yet complete; we are 
still looking forward to its completion, vioOec(ay drexdeyopevor THY 
arodvtpwow Tov copatos 7uov, Rom. vill. 23. The figure of 
adoption is borrowed from Roman law; the practice was unknown 
to the Jews. «is airév most simply and naturally joined with 
viofecia, “adoption unto Him,” viz. as His sons. It is putting too 
much into the preposition to find in it the idea of inward union, 
or to compare with 2 Pet. i. 4, “partakers of the Divine nature.” 
avrév is obviously the Father, not Christ, through whom the adop- 
tion is. V.Soden, however, argues strongly that thus eis airév would 
be superfluous, as vio@. is a fixed terminus for the relation to God. 
The prominence of év airé in vv. 3-14 makes the reference to 
Christ more natural. The dvaxefarawoacba é€v Xp., ver. 10, is the 
realisation of the zpoopi€ew eis adrov. Col. i. 16 is a close parallel. 
kata Thy eddoxiay. According to Jerome the word cidoxia was 
coined by the Sept. “rebus novis nova verba fingentes.” It means 
either ‘good pleasure, purpose,” ed doxeiy, “as it seems good to”; 
“good will,” according as the satisfaction is conceived as in 
the action, or as felt towards a person. The latter is the common 
signification in the Sept., but it also occurs there in the sense of 
“purpose,” Eccles. xi. 17, 7 evdokia avtod evodwOycerar. Where 
the context does not point to a person towards whom the satis- 
te is felt, the former meaning must be adopted; cf. Matt. 
1, 26, ovtws éyévero evdoxia éumpoobev gov. Here, then, it corre- 
deeds to 7 BovAy Tov OeAjparos avrod, ver. 11. 


In the Sept. evdoxla is used frequently in the Psalms to render the Hebrew 
rdtsén, and, with the exception of a passage in Canticles (where it corre- 
sponds to Zzrzah), it is not found in the other canonical books at all. 
Their usual rendering of the Hebrew word is dexres.1 It cannot, then, be 
fairly said that ‘‘the translators” exhibit ‘‘ purpose” or ‘‘ discrimination ” 
in their employment of the word. One translator often uses it, and some- 
times uses 6é\nua when evdoxla would have been more correct; the others 
never. In Ecclus., however, evdoxia occurs fourteen times. 

Fritzsche (on Rom. x. 1) ‘has discussed the meaning of the word at length. 
The verb evdoxety (which is an exception to Scaliger’s rule about the com- 
position of verbs) is found only in later Greek writers, Polybius, Diodorus, 
Dionys. Hal., in the signification “‘to choose or think fit (to do a thing),” 
sometimes with the idea of being glad to do it, as 1 Thess. ii. 8. Greek 
writers also said evdoxd tum or éml rin, ‘Sto be content with something, or 
pleased with some person.” The construction evdoxeiy év tux originated with 
the Alexandrian writers (1 Macc. x. 47; cf. Matt. iii. 17; 1 Cor. x. 5, etc.). 


1 The word is rendered @é\nya several times in the Psalms, including xxx. 
5, 7- In the latter place Symmachus substitutes evdoxla. 


fe) THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (I. 6 


They also said evdoxety m1, a usage not followed in the N.T., and els twa 
(2 Pet. i. 17); but in the meaning of the verb the Biblical writers do not 
differ from the later Greek. The significations of the substantive follow 
those of the text. It means first vo/untas, as in Matt. xi. 26, then ‘‘ content- 
ment,” Ecclus. xxix. 23, ‘‘ delight,” and as in Sept. most frequently ‘‘ good 
will.” See on Lk. ii. 14 and on Rom. x. I. 

6. eis Ematvov THs Bdéys THs Xdpttos adtod. With a view to the 
praise of the glory (glorious manifestation) of His grace. The 
interpretations which make d0éys a mere adjectival attribute, either 
of émawwos (Grotius) or of xdpts (Beza), are weak and inadmissible. 
Chrysostom gives the truer view, va 4 THs xdpiros aitov ddfa 
deux G7. 

“His grace.” We are so accustomed to use the word “grace” 
in a technical religious sense, that we are prone to forget the 
simple meaning which it so often has, “ undeserved bounty,” “ free 
gift,” dwpeay a) avrod xdpitt, Rom. iii. 24 ; Kar exoyiv xXaptTos, 
Rom. xi. 5; xapiti éore ceowopevor, Eph. ii. 5. “ Herein lies the 
magnificence, the glory, of God’s work of redemption, that it has 
not the character of a contract, but of a largess” (Lightfoot). 
This glorious manifestation (cf. Col. i. 27) fills the mind of the 
apostle. He repeats in ver. 7 “wealth of His grace,” and in ver. 
12 “praise of His glory,” and again in il. 7, more emphatically 
still, “the exceeding wealth of His grace.” Hence the verb 
xapiCouat has its signification ‘‘to grant of free favour.” 

fs éxapitwoev nas. is is the reading of SA B Aeth. Syr., and is 
adopted by Lachm. Tisch.8 Treg. Westcott and Hort. év 7 is 
the reading of DG KL and most cursives with the Vulg. It was 
probably a resolution of the somewhat difficult attraction. The 
substitution of 7s for év 7, especially when év is so frequent in the 
context, is very unlikely. 

The attraction is accounted for by the construction xdpiv 
xapiroby, like dydrnv dyarar, iil. 4. Compare xdprtas xapiler Oar, 
Dem. 306. 28. 

Xapitow, by the analogy of verbs in 6w, means “ gratia afficere.” 
Cf. xpvodw, tupydw, Gavatow, poppdw. Admitting this, two mean- 
ings are possible, according as the xdpis bestowed is taken sub- 
jectively or objectively, that is to say, as expressing the state of. 
the individual or the grace of God. Chrysostom takes the former 
view, ov povov duaptnuatwv arndAakev, GAAG Kal érepacTods errolncer, 
‘rendered us loveable,” followed by Theodoret, Corn. 4 Lapide, 
“gratiosos nos reddidit,” and most Roman Catholic interpreters, 
some of whom even use this as an argument for “‘justitia inherens.” 
Chrysostom says, it is as if one were to take a leper and change 
him into a lovely youth. Thus God has adorned our soul and 
made it an object of beauty and love. The partic. xexapirwpevos 
has this sense in Ecclus. xviii. 17. Clem. Alex., loosely quoting 
Ecclus. ix. 8, substitutes it for edudpdov of the original (aed. ili. 11). 


17] ASCRIPTION OF PRAISE II 


But both the prevailing meaning of xdprs in St. Paul, and 
more particularly the context, seem decisive for the other sense, 
for ver. 7 states in what respect God év t@ jyaz., éxapitwce being 
joined to this by év ». And the leading idea of the passage is 
the undeserved goodness of God. With the reading 7s there can 
hardly be any question that this latter meaning is alone possible. 
It resumes the evAdyyaas 7) npas ev To Xp. of ver. 3. 

év T@ HyaTypévw. The MSS. D* G with the Vulgate add vio 
airov, a manifest gloss. The expression is not found elsewhere 
in the N.T. of Christ, but in the Apostolic Fathers it is used of our 
Lord, e & Ep. Barn. 3, ov 7rotpacey év TH yaTnpEvy adtod, 

7. évé (=Col. i. 14), not = dud or per guem; it has a certain 
argumentative force, and can hardly be given a different meaning 
from the év before 7@ jy. “In him, in whom.” Rom. iii. 24, dua 
THs aroXvt. THs ev XpiatS Invod, though parallel in substance is not 
parallel in construction, since here éy is closely connected with 
éxouev. It is not apart from Him, but in Him alone, that we have 
our redemption. 


Exouev. D, Boh. read éoxouev, which B, Boh. have in Col. i. 14. 


thy droddtpwov. The article appears to indicate that which 
you know of, tiv tpocaywyyy, ii. 18 (but see Heb. xi. 35). 


On drodv’tpwots bane: remarks, ‘‘the redemption, namely, from God's 
wrath and penalties.” . . . ‘‘The purchase price was His (Christ’s) blood.” 
Other commentators also ‘say that the word ‘‘ does not mean simply deliver- 
ance, but deliverance effected by the special means of purchase. Even where 
the term is used in the New Testament, without any accompanying statement 
of the price paid, the idea of a ransom price is still present ” (Macpherson). 
The usage of the word and of its cognates by no means bears out this statement. 

First, as to the simple verb Aurpodv. In the active it means primarily 
tO release on receipt of a ransom.” ‘The idea ‘‘redeem by payment of 
a price,” is expressed by the middle. Quite similarly, when Homer speaks of 
the ransom of Hector’s body, it is Achilles who is always said dvewv, while 
Priam is said MecOat. In the Sept. the middle AvrpotcGa: is of very frequent 
occurrence, but not always with the idea of a price paid. On the contrary, 
it often means simply ‘‘to deliver.” Thus it is used of the deliverance from 
Egypt, for which no price was paid. Isaiah (xlili. 3) says, ‘‘I give Egypt 
for thee.’”” Compare 2 Sam. iv. 9, ‘‘ As the LorD liveth, who hath redeemed 
my soul out of all adversity ”; Ps. evii. (cvi.) 2, ** Whom He hath redeemed 
from the hand of the enemy. ny 

So the English word ‘‘ redeem” sometimes means ‘‘ deliver,” _ as in 
Romeo and Juliet, ‘* Before the time that Romeo come to redeem me.’ 

In the N.T. Aurpota Gat occurs thrice: Luke XKIVel 21 (tO ae 
Israel’); Tit. ii. 14, ‘‘. . . from all iniquity”; 1 Pet. i. 18, “* . . . from 
our vain conversation.” 

The substantive Avrpwots occurs in Plut. Avazé. xi. in the sense of “ redemp- 
tion ” (of captives). In the Sept. it is used Lev. xxv. 48 of the ‘right of 
redemption,” and Num. xviii. 16. In the Psalms it occurs thrice in the 
sense of ‘‘ deliverance,” viz. cxi. (cx.) 9, and cxxx. (cxxix. )7: In the N.T. 
it occurs three times: Luke i, 68, érolyoev AiTpwow T@ Aaw avrod ; ii. 38, 
Tois mpocdexouévors AUTPWaL Tapayn ; Heb. ix. 12, alwvlay \vtpwow evbpda- 
uevos. 


12 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [I. 7 


uTpwTHs is used Acts vil. 35 of Moses simply in the sense of 
“ deliverer.” 

The verb dmodurpoiv signifies properly, not ‘‘to redeem” (Aurpoic6at), 
but to release on receiving a ransom. fst. [Phil] ap. Demosth. p. 159, 
"Audidroxov . . . suAAMaBwv Kal Tas éoxdras dvdyKas émidels dreditpwoe 
Ttahdvrwy évvéa. Plutarch, Pomp. xxiv. 4, p. 631 D, iw dé kal Ovyarhp 
*Avrwviov . . . Kal aohhiv Xpnvatwv ameduTpwon. Plato, Legg. xi. 919 A, 
Grorav ws éxOpovs alxuadwrous Kexetpwuevous amoduTpwon. Polyb. xxii. 

. 8, Kal xpvolov auxvod Stomodoynbévtos brép THs yuvaikds, Fryev adrhy 
dmo\uTpwowr (vid. also ii. 6. 6). Lucian, of Achilles, xpnudrwy ddlywv tov 
"Extopos vexpdv daod’Trpwoas. The verb occurs twice in the Sept. viz. 
Ex. xxi, 8, of a master parting with a female slave (E.V. ‘‘he shall let 
her be redeemed”), and Zeph. iii. 1 (where the Hebrew word means 
‘‘licentious,” but was mistaken for one similarly written, which means 
‘* ransomed ”’). 

The substantive dmo\vrpwors is rare. Rost and Pahn give only one 
reference in Greek writers, viz. Plutarch, Pom. xxiv. 2, p. 631 B (speaking 
of the pirates), gwudtwy nyewovrxay apmayal kal méd\ewv aixuadwrwy dmo- 
Aurpwoes (‘holding to ransom”) bvedos Foav THs ‘Pwualwy Ayeuovias. 
Thayer adds other references, Joseph. Am/t, xii. 2. 3, wiecdvwv 6¢ 7 TeTpa- 
koolwy TadhdvTwy THs amoUTPWOEWS yevnTETOaL Pamévwv, TadTa TE TUVEXWpEL 
(of Aristzeus paying the soldiers for their prisoners). Philo, Quod omnis 
probus liber, § 17, p. 882, droyvods drodvTpwowv Acpevos Eavrov Stexpijcaro. 
Diod. Fragm. lib. 37. 5. 3 (Didot’s ed. ii. p. 564, of a slave who had agreed 
with his masters for the purchase of his freedom); Scaevola, ¢@dcas Thy 
amodtTpwolv . . . dveoratpwoev. In the Sept. it occurs only in Dan. iv. 30, 
6 xpévos mov THs adToAUTpHoEws FADE, z.¢. of Nebuchadnezzar’s recovery. 

As far as usage goes, then, it would seem that if we are to attach to 
amoNvTpwots the idea of ransom, the word will mean ‘‘ holding to ransom” 
or “‘ release on receipt of ransom,” not ‘‘ payment of ransom.” In the New 
Testament the word occurs ten times, and in some of these instances it is 
only by a forced explanation that the idea of payment of a price can be 
brought in. In Heb. xi. 35, ‘‘ were beaten, not accepting tiv darod’Tpwou,” 
the meaning connects itself easily with the classical use. It is ‘‘not accept- 
ing release.” If the idea of price is brought in, it can only be apostasy ; 
but those who offer the aod. are the captors. Again in Heb. ix. 15, d7o- 
AUTpwos TOY TapaBdcewv is nearly equivalent to kaBapiopuds TO duapTidy in 
i. 3. The transgressions were put away; there was deliverance from them. 
In Luke xxi. 28, ‘‘lift up your heads, for your dod. draweth nigh,”’ there 
is no suggestion of a price. The opinion that the price is the destruction of 
Jerusalem is very forced. 

In Rom, viil. 23, vloBeclay dwexdexdpevoe Thy dwoh’Tpwow Tod cwuaTOS, 
whatever interpretation is given of the latter words, they do not suggest 
the idea of a price paid. Nor does nuépa dmrodutpwoews, Eph. iv. 30, 
lend itself readily to this view. There are no doubt other passages in 
which it is easy to introduce the idea of payment of a price, but as 
the only ground for insisting on introducing this in every case is 
an erroneous view of the primary meaning of the word, further proof 
is required in each instance.! Certainly, however, the word implies 
deliverance from a state of slavery. The slavery from which we are 
delivered is a slavery to sin, Rom. vii. 23. ‘‘ Captive to the law of 
sin”; it is not death as a punishment, but spiritual death as a state. 
Christ gave Himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 11, 14. We 
were redeemed by the blood of Christ ‘‘from our vain conversation,” 


1On dmrod’rpwots compare Westcott, Hed. pp. 295, 296; Ritschl, Rechif. 
“. Versohn. ii. 222 ff.; and Oltramare, z7 doc. 


I. 7] ASCRIPTION OF PRAISE 13 


I Pet. i. 18. Release from punishment is so far from being the chief idea, 
that it sinks into insignificance in comparison with that of deliverance from 
sin, without which it could not be. Here there is an insuperable difficulty 
in applying the idea of ransom by payment of a price. To whom is the 
ransom paid? We were not in slavery to God, nor is release from punish- 
ment to be obtained by any sort of payment of ransom. Hence the notion 
of early writers, that the ransom was paid to Satan. So Origen: daronv- 
Tpwots is ransom of those who are captives and in the power of the enemies ; 
we were subject to the enemies, the ruler of this world and the evil powers 
under him; the Saviour therefore gave the ransom for us. This was at 
least logical. 

Grotesque as this conception may seem to us, it kept in view the truth 
that it is release from the power of evil that is the main thing; and this was 
rather put out of sight by the later view, which gave most prominence to the 
release from punishment. But this, apart from deliverance from sin, is 
what is truly impossible ; whereas given deliverance from sin, though suffer- 
ing may remain, one ground for it has ceased, and it will be felt more as 
chastisement than as punishment. 

For the notion of purchase, cf. 1 Cor. vi. 20, vii. 23, Christ, whose 
slaves we are there called because He bought us with a price, surely did not 
purchase us from God. So in the O.T. God is said to have purchased His 
people (Ex. xv. 16, etc.). See Dale, Lect. v. 


$.d Tod aipatos adtod. ‘This suggests a different figure, that of 
sacrifice. On the idea of Christ’s blood in the N.T., see Westcott, 
Epistles of St. John, p. 348q. He argues that “in accordance with 
the typical teaching of the Levitical ordinances, the Blood of Christ 
represents Christ’s Life (1) as rendered in free self-sacrifice to God 
for man, and (2) as brought into perfect fellowship with God, 
having been set free by death. The Blood of Christ is, as shed, 
the Life of Christ given for man ; and, as offered, the Life of Christ 
now given to man, the Life which is the spring of their life.” The 
thought of Christ’s Blood (as shed) includes all that is involved in 
His Death, and more, for it “always includes the thought of the 
life preserved and active beyond death.” See especially John vi. 
53-56. 
It is observable that in the parallel passage Col. i. 14, the 
words 614. rod aiparos airod are not added (in the genuine text). 

Thy Gheow Tov dpapTypdtwy (auapri@y, Col.). Why was this 
further definition of the droAvrtpwors so carefully added both here 
and in Col.? Lightfoot (on Col. 1. 14) suggests that this points to 
some false conception of the dod. put forward by heretical 
teachers, as we know was the case with the later Gnostics, who 
applied the term to their own formularies of initiation. Thus 
Trenaeus Gat 3: 6) relates of the Marcosians, 6a tiv drohirpwow 
GKpaTHTOVS Kal dopdrous yer bau TO KpLTH, and Ga. 21. 4) elvac dé 
terclav arohitpwow avtiy THY extyvoow Tod appyrov peyous. 
Not that any direct historical connexion between the Colossian 
heretics and the later Gnostics is likely, but the passages (and 
others cited by Lightfoot) “‘ show how a false idea of dzoAvtpwors 


14 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [x 8 


would naturally be associated with an esoteric doctrine of angelic 
powers.” 

kata Td ThodTos, «.t.A. A term of which St. Paul is particularly 
fond. Paley calls it one of his “cant” words; ‘wealth of grace,” 
“ Wealth of glory,” “wealth of wisdom.” Not to be resolved into 

“His rich grace”; but “the great fulness of His bounty.” The 
wealth of His grace, t.e. bounty, is shown by the great price paid for 
our ransom ; cf. ii. 7, and Rom. ii. 4, rod rAovTov THs xpyotoTnTos 
avrov. 

8. iis émepicoevoev. The verb is transitive, for the attraction of 
the dative, very rare in classical writers, is not found in the N.T. 
(not Rom. iv. 17). For the transitive use of wepuoaevw, cf. 2 Cor. 
ix. 8, duvaret 6 @cds Tacayv yapw Tepiocedoa (2 Cor. iv. 15 is un- 
certain) ; 1 Thess. iii. 12. ‘The meaning then is, “which He made 
to abound” (overflow) ; adOdvws é&éyee, Theoph. The AV. with 
Calvin, a/., takes the verb intransitively, and therefore js as 
attraction for 7, “‘in which He hath abounded.” A third construc- 
tion is possible, viz. that 7s depends directly on repiroevev, since 
ma. Twos may mean “to abound in.” Cf. Luke xv. 17 (zepioc- 
cevovow aptwv, some texts ; but WH wepurcevovrar) ; va... wavTos 
xapioparos teprooevys, Ignat. Pol, 2; so Beza, “qua redundavit” ; 
or, as has been suggested (Ellicott, p. 164), tepucoedew might mean 
“to make an abundance of.” ‘The first-mentioned rendering best 
agrees with the context. 

€v Tach copia kal dpovnoer. The distinction between these 
two words is clearly and pretty unanimously stated by several 
Greek writers. Aristotle (474. Vic. vi. 7) says that copia is TOV 
Tyuwtdrwv, while ppovynows is epi 7a dvOparwa kal mept av €oTe 
Bovreicac Ga ; andin Magna Moralia, i. 35, poov. is mepl Ta TuUe- 
povra, Philo (De Prom. cf Poen. 14) says codia is mpos Oeparreiav 
@cod, Ppdvynots, mpds avOpwrivov Biov d.olkyow. So Plutarch 
(Mor. p. 443 F) says that dpov. is deliberative and practical in 
matters which concern us; and Cicero (Of. i. 43) states that it is 
“rerum expetendarum fugiendarumque scientia,” while codia is 
“rerum divinarum atque humanarum scientia,” which last is the 
common definition of codéa, z.e. in Sextus Empir. and [Plato] Def. - 
411. povynors in the same place is defined (iu¢er alia) duabects Ka” 
nv kpivopev ti mpaxtéov Kat Ti ov mpaxtéov. It is clear from this that 
gpovnots cannot be predicated of God; nor is this refuted by the 
fact that in Prov. ili, r9 and Jer. x. 12 it is so used. It is very 
fallacious to call each individual translator of an O.T. book ‘the 
Seventy,” and to regard such an occasional use as any evidence as 
to what was possible to an original author like St. Paul. With 
more reason might it be alleged that “discretion” might be pro- 
perly predicated of God, because it is so used in the English Version 
in Jer. x. 12. In both instances a word was wanted to balance 


I. 9] GOD’S PURPOSE 15 


codia in the parallel clause (in the parallel passage in Jer. li. the 
word used is ovveors). 1 Kings iii. 28 is irrelevant. Solomon is 
there said to have possessed ¢pdvynois Meod. This is a literal 
rendering of the Hebrew idiom, expressive of the highest degree of 
prudence. 

Nor is taca codia applicable to God, for taca is not “Summa” 
(Wahl, a/.) ; it expresses, as Harless remarks, never intension, but 
extension ; 7aca dvvapus = “every power there is,” Col. i. 11. waa 
tropovy, “all possible patience” (2d.). This is not invalidated by 
mwaoa égovoia, Matt. xxviii. 18; waca dodpadeia, Acts v. 233 oF 
mwaca drodoxy, I Tim. i. 15; or the classical 7. davdyxy 7. Kivduvos, 
etc. In all these was is extensive not intensive. To say of God 
that He has done something racy codia, would imply that, con- 
ceivably, the wisdom might have been only partial. 7 zoAvmoiktXos 
godia, ill. 10, is wholly different, being the very varied manifesta- 
tion or exercise of His wisdom. 

Hence, whether we connect the words with ézep. or with yvwpucas 
they are to be understood of believers. This is confirmed by the 
parallel, Col. i. 9, tva tAnpwhhre tHv eriyvwow Tod GeAjpatos adbrod 
év racy copia Kai cvvécet. Moreover, the main idea in the context 
is the knowledge of the Christian. The connexion with ézep. seems 
decidedly to be preferred to that with yudpicas, against which is the 
consideration that the making known of the “mystery” is not the 
proof of the abundance of grace, but of its abounding in the 
particular matter of codia xait dp. Meyer notes the climax from 
the simple js éxapitwoev Has to Hs éreplooevoer eis HUGs. 

9-11. God hath made known to us His purpose to sum up all 
things in Christ, whether they be things in heaven or on earth. 

9. yvwpicas, z.e. “In that He made known,” cf. Col. ii. 3. 

TO puotipiov. We must be on our guard against importing 
into this word (as is done by some expositors) the meaning of the 
English “mystery,” as in Shakespeare’s “‘ Mysteries which heaven 
will not have earth to know.” It signifies simply “a truth once 
hidden but now revealed.” The truth may be “ mysterious,” in the 
modern sense, but that is not implied in the word (so Lightfoot 
also, who, however, refers to 1 Cor. xv. 51 and Eph. v. 32 as 
instances of this accidental idea; but see fost). Lightfoot thinks 
the term was borrowed from the ancient mysteries, with an inten- 
tional paradox, as the Christian “ mysteries” are freely communi- 
cated to all, and so the idea of secrecy or reserve disappears. (Note 
on Col. i. 26.) In fact, it is almost always placed in connexion 
with words expressing revelation or publication. But there is no 
need to suppose that St. Paul had the heathen mysteries in his 
mind when he used the word. It appears to have been much 
more frequent colloquially than we should have supposed from the 
extant works of classical writers. In these the singular is found 


16 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [ie € 


once only, and that in a fragment of Menander, “ Do not tell thy 
secret (uvornprov) to thy friend.” In Plato, Zheaet. 156 A, the 
plural is used of secrets, “will tell you the secrets of these,” but 
with allusion to the pvorypra in the context. There are, however, 
other sources from which we may infer that it was not an 
uncommon word in the sense “secret,” viz. the Apocrypha, the 
Hexaplar translators, and Cicero. In the Apocrypha we find it in 
Tob. xit.; 7, |11, “It is »good to, conceal, the. .08. jai king”; 
Judith ii. 2, “‘He (Nebuchadnezzar) communicated to them the 
secret (uvorypiov) of his counsel”; 2 Macc. xiii. 21, “ disclosed 
the ‘secrets’ to the enemies”; frequently in Ecclus., and, as in 
Menander, in connexion with warnings against revealing a friend’s 
secret, ¢.g. XXli. 22, Xxvll. 16, 17, 21. In Wisd. xiv. 15, 23 the 
word is used of heathen “mysteries,” E.V. “ceremonies,” but in 
vi. 22, “TI will tell you, and will not hide ‘mysteries’ from you.” 
In two places in Proverbs the Hexaplar translators have 
pvornpwov, “ A talebearer revealeth secrets,” pvorypia ; xi. 13 Sym., 
xx. 19 Theod. So in Ps. xxv. 14, ps. kupfov; Theod. “secret of 
the Lord.” It occurs several times in Daniel, where the AV. has 
“secret,” as il. 18, 19, 27, 29. Cicero is fond of using Greek 
words in his letters, and no doubt the words he uses were familiar. 
Writing to Atticus he says, ‘‘ Our letters contain so much ‘ mysteri- 
orum’ that we usually do not trust them even to secretaries” (iv. 18). 
And in another place he writes a short passage entirely in Greek, 
because it is about some private domestic matter, saying, “illud ad 
te prvotixwtepov scribam,” z.e. more privately (vi. 4). Ausonius again 
has “ Accipe congestas, mysteria frivola, nugas” (Ep. iv. 67).} 
From all this we may conclude that pvorppiov was an ordinary, or 
rather the ordinary, word for ‘“‘a secret.” In the N.T. the same 
meaning holds, only that there it is always (except in the Apocalypse) 
“Ca secret revealed,” and hence is applied to doctrines of revelation. 
Indeed, Rom. xvi. 25 might almost be taken as a definition p. 
xpovors aiwviows ceovynpéevov pavepwhévros dé viv (=Col. i. 26). 
Such doctrines are the “mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,” 
Matt. xiii. 11 (cf. ver. 35), which were communicated by the Lord 
in parables, Luke viii. 10. There is not one passage in which 
this meaning is not suitable. Lightfoot mentions two in which, 
although the signification of the word is the same, there comes in 
from the special circumstances of the case the accidental idea of 
mysteriousness. They are 1 Cor. xv. 51 and Eph. v. 32. In 
neither place is this contained in the word. ‘There is, indeed, one 
place in which other writers suppose this idea to be contained in 
the word itself, viz. 1 Cor. xiv. 2. But the true interpretation of 
that passage is, “He is indeed telling secrets, but to no purpose, 


1 In the Liturgies, when the priest is directed to pray ‘‘ secretly,” wuortKds is 
the word used. 


I. 10] GOD’S PURPOSE IN CHRIST 17 


for no one understands.” It is not because no one understands 
that they are pvorypia. This is, on the contrary, a polite conces- 
sion, as in ver. 17. In the Apocalypse the meaning “secret” still 
holds good, “the secret of the seven stars,” “the secret of the 
woman.’ 

The one doctrine which St. Paul frequently calls the mystery 
of the gospel was the admission of the Gentiles. It was for this 
that he was in bonds. 

Tod VeAnpatos adtod. Gen. of the object, the secret concerning 
His will. 

kata Thy evdoxiay attod. Not to be joined to pvor., which 
would be tautologous with rod 6eX. air., but with yrvwpicas. It 
qualifies yvwpicas here as mpoopicas in ver. 5. €v0.=purpose 
(ver. 5). Compare Book of Enoch xlix. 4, “according to His 
good pleasure.” 

10. wpoéQeto. The prefix in zpotiOec Oa is local, not temporal. 
“Set before oneself = to purpose ” (Rom. i. 13), or “ before others ” 
(Rom. iii. 25). These three are the only places where the verb 
occurs in the N.T., but the substantive zpd@eors is frequent = 
purpose, either Divine or human (Acts xi. 23, xxvii. 13; 2 Tim. 
ill. 10. Cf. rpoxepi€er far, Acts ill. 20; mpoarpetoOa, 2 Cor. ix. 7). 

eis oikovopiav, K.7.A. “ With a view to a dispensation belonging 
to the fulness of the seasons.”  oixovouzéa means either actual 
administration of a household, etc., or the office of an administra- 
tor. In the latter sense the English “stewardship” correctly 
represents it ; in the former, which is the meaning here, though 
“‘ dispensation” in its original sense well corresponds, it does not 
suggest to the reader the idea of ‘‘ house management,” which is 
contained in oixovoyia, This is founded on the conception of the 
Church as God’s household, 1 Tim. iii. 5 ; Heb. x. 21; 1 Pet. iv. 
17; hence in this Epistle believers are called oixetou rod Ocoi, ii. 19. 
In the Gospels in five parables God is figured as otkodeardrns, e.g. 
Matt. xx. 1, 11. In classical writers the word oixovozia extended 
its meaning from the management of a household to that of a 
state. Thus Aristotle says that as household management is a 
sort of kingdom of a house, so a kingdom is oixovoyia, It was also 
applied to systematic arrangement or management generally, as 
of the topics of a speech, of the parts of a building, etc. The 
kingdom of God had its own oikovoyiéa, it involved a place or 
system of administration, the officers or otkovopor of which were 
the apostles and the ministers, 1 Cor. iv. 1; Tit. i. 7. For the 
later use of the term as specifically=the Incarnation, see Light- 
foot’s note, Eph. i. 10; Col. 1. 25. 

V. Soden maintains that olx. here has the same meaning as elsewhere, 
viz. stew.rdship. The thought is that the object of the Divine purpose 


should come to its achievement through an olxovéduos. Until the olkovoula 
2 


18 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS ja. 10 


began the plan rested in God. Who the olkovéos is, is not said in the text; 
probably, in the first place, God Himself (iii. 1). Moule more suitably 
regards the Son as the olxoyduos, the ‘‘ purpose” being that He should be 
the manifested Dispenser of the period of grace. 


tT. TAypdpatos tov katpdv. In substance equivalent to 7A. Tod 
xpévov, as in Gal. iv. 4, but includes the conception of a series of 
kaipoi, or seasons, the last of which is marked by the mission and 
work of the Messiah, so that now the series is closed. Cf. Mark 
i. 15, wewAnjpwrat 6 Katpos. Kaupds includes the notion of fitness or 
propriety. The xa:pot are conceived as spaces filled with events. 
Since a x. is not properly the object of an oixovoyia the genitive 
TAnpdparos is not gen. of object but of nearer definition ; cf. pious 
peydArns yépas, Jude 6. 

dvaxepahadcac8a, “to gather up into one,” seems to be an 
explanatory infinitive supplying at once the content of the 
pvoriprov, the object of the evdox/a, and the object reserved for the 
otk. But asa matter of construction most easily connected with 
the nearest, viz. otkovouéa, Some commentators prefer connecting 
it with zpocbero, others with pvornpiov. In classical writers 
kepddaov means “chief point,” cf. Heb. viii, 1; and both 
kehadauw and dvaxepadaidw mean to sum up, summarise. So 
Rom. xiii. 9, 76 yap ov porxedoes . . . vy To'Tw TE Adyw ava- 
xefadaodrat. So in a fragment of Aristotle, dvaxepaAadcacGat 
mpos évéyynow. And so Quintilian defines the substantive 
dvaxepadatwors, “Rerum repetitio et congregatio quae Graece dicitur 
dy. . . . et totam simul causam ponit ante oculos” (Zms¢. vi. I. 1). 
Compare the late Latin recapitulo, formed in imitation of the 
Greek. Thus there is no ground for assigning to the prefix the 
signification “again,” as if there was in the word a reference to a 
bringing back to a former state, “in Christo omnia revocantur ad 
initium” (Tert. AZonog. 5) (Meyer, a/.). The Vulgate, indeed, 
expresses this idea to the exclusion of xefdAavov, “ instaurare.” 
But as it has the same rendering in Rom. xiii. 9, we cannot con- 
sider it as meant for anything but a verbal equivalent. dva- here 
has the same force as in dvaywocxew, dvadroyiler Gat, dvaperpety, 
viz. the idea “one by one.” So Lightfoot, who remarks that in ° 
the interpretation alluded to Tertullian found a serviceable weapon 
against Marcion, who maintained a direct opposition between the 
work of the Demiurge and the work of Christ. Chrysostom asks, 
ri éorw dvaxeparouscacba; and replies, cvvaya. When he after- 
wards says, mdvras td piav Hyaye Kepadyv, we may suppose that 
he only meant a rhetorical play on words, since the verb is not 
derived from xedadn, but from cepdAacov. 

The middle voice is appropriate as implying the interest 
which God Himself has herein; cf. eis adrov in 1 Cor. vill. 6; 
Rom. xi. 36. 


I. 11] GOD’S PURPOSE rN CHRIST 19 


Ta éml Tots otpavots Kal Ta éwl THs ys. This is the reading of 
N* BDL, Vheodoret,! Oec. and some cursives, and is adopted by Lachm, 
Tisch. Treg. WH. But AGK, most cursives, have éy rots ovp., with Chrys. 
Theodoret,! Theophyl. The variation in case after the same preposition 
has frequent parallels in classical writers. 

On the other hand, the usual contrast is év Tots ovpavots and émt r7s vis 
(iii. 15 ; Col. i. 20, in which latter place there is a poorly attested reading 
éml. perhaps from this passage). It must be admitted also (with Harless) 
that there is something strange in the use of él, ‘‘upon,” with rots ovpavots, 
for the nature of the case as well as the antithesis forbid us to understand it 
as ‘‘above the heavens.” 


Ta mdvta shows that it is not the uniting of things in heaven 
with things on earth that is expressed. ‘These are named in order 
to express the greatest universality. Hence also here, as with aca 
% «riots, Rom. viii. 19 sqq., there is no occasion to introduce any 
limitation except such as the context demands. To the spiritual 
as to the poetic eye all nature seems to share in what strictly and 
literally belongs only to intelligent beings; nor is it hard to see 
that there is a profound truth in such a view. ‘The introduction 
here of this view (new in St. Paul) of the extension of Christ’s 
work to things in heaven, is accounted for by his having in his 
mind the teaching derogatory to Christ, which is more distinctly 
referred to in the Ep. to the Colossians. 

The things in the heavens were understood by Locke to mean 
the Jews (those on earth being the Gentiles), in support of which 
interpretation he refers to Matt. xxiv. 29. He is followed by 
Schoettgen, Ernesti, and others. Chrysostom understands the 
angels, while others interpret the words of the spirits of the just 
of the O.T. (Beza and many others). 


11. éxAnpdbypev, & B cursives generally, Vulg., Chrys. etc. 

éxAyPnpev, ADG, probably not a gloss but a result of ‘‘ parablepsy,” 
assisted by the greater familiarity of the latter word. The converse substitu- 
tion would be wholly unaccountable. 


év @ kal ex\npwbyper. «at Obviously is joined with the verb 
“for whom also,” not “we also,” as if it were xal jets. The 
purpose was “also” carried out. «Anpos, properly a lot, 
then, like the English “lot,” “a portion allotted,” or “ portion” 
generally. It is common in both senses in the Sept. as well as in 
classical Greek. It is not= “inheritance.” The verb xAnpow = 
“to choose by lot” or “‘assign by lot,” hence in the passive, to 
be assigned, as ‘‘éxAypdOyv dovdy.” In this sense Chrysostom, 
Estius, etc., understand it here, xAypov yevopevov nuds e&ed<Earo, 
the word being chosen, according to Estius, to indicate that the 
election was not by our merit, and then zpoopicGévtes being 
added to exclude the idea of chance (Chrys.). 

The Vulgate agrees, ‘‘sorte vocati sumus,” and many modern 
interpreters. But this would be entirely without parallel in the 


20 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS es 11 


language of St. Paul, with whom it is God’s gracious will that is 
the determining source of the €xAoyy, not any Geta Tvxy. 

Many interpreters adopt the rendering, “we were chosen as 
His lot or heritage,” deriving the meaning of the verb from the 
second sense of xAyjpos. So Bengel, Alford, Ellicott. The sense 
is good, but this meaning of «Aypdw, in which the idea of chance 
is lost, is not sufficiently supported, and the idea of “heritage” is 
without justification. On the other hand, the interpretation, “ we 
have obtained «Ayjpos” (KAnpos tov dyiwv, Col. i. 12), is unobjec- 
tionable in point of language; for xAnpotv tu is classical, e.g. 
év exdotw €é€xAjpwoav, Thuc. vi. 42, and it would be quite in 
accordance with analogy that xAnpodcGar should be used in the 
sense “to be assigned a portion,” cf. PAovodpuat, duaxovodpa, Matt. 
Xx. 28; muorevouat, Gal. ii. 7. It is probably in this way that we 
are to explain the usage in later Greek writers, exemplified in 
Aelian, JVat. Hist, v. 31, and Hippocrates, 1287. 15. In the 
former passage the serpent is said to have his heart near his 
throat. tiv Kapdiav KexAjpwrat, x.7.A. In the latter, Hippocrates 
says, mAciova pemifiporpinv 7 TYyLnv KekAnpOcba tHv Téxvnv. In 
both cases the verb seems to mean, not simply “to have,” but “to 
have as one’s portion or xAnpos.” The sense suits well, as it 
corresponds to the notions xAnpovoyzia and zepuroiyots in ver. 14, 
as well as to the éy rots émovpaviows, ver. 3, and coincides with 
that of Col. i. 12 above referred to; we may compare also 
Acts xxvi. 18, tod Aafeiv . . . KANpov ev Tos yacpeEvors, and 
XVil. 4, mpooexAnpdbynocav to TlavAw. ‘The selection of the word 
is explained by the O.T. use of xAjpos, which made it appropriate 
for the possession allotted to the Jewish Christians (so Meyer, 
Soden, Eadie). That these are intended here, although jets 
is not expressed before ver. 12, seems probable from the close 
logical connexion with ver. 12. Besides, if iets be included here, 
vv. 130, 14 would be a weak repetition. 

kata Thy Boudiy Tod GeAjpatos adtod. This specification seems 
meant to exclude all idea of any merit of the Jews in their 
kAnpotoba. As to the distinction between PovdAy and GéAnpa, 


and between the respective verbs, scholars are at issue. The best ° 


supported opinion is that PovAy involves the idea of purpose 
and deliberation, @é\ev and 6€Anua denoting simply will. So 
Ammonius states that 8. is used only of rational beings, 0. also 
of irrational. Thus, as Grimm says, 6é\w would express the will 
that proceeds from inclination, BovAouwa: that from deliberation. 
Cf. Matt. i. 19, ‘not willing (@éAwv) to make her a public example, 
was minded, éBovA7On,” etc. ; 1 Cor. vii. 36, 6 OeAee woveiTw 3 20. 39, 
Xiv. 35, ei dé Te pabety OéXovew. OédAw as the less definite may be 
used there, but BovAopuat would be quite suitable. Some scholars, 
however, reverse this distinction. Here the combination ‘“ counsel 


L 12, 13] THE SEAL OF THE SPIRIT 21 


of His will” seems intended to express emphatically the absolute 
self-determination of God. Compare 1 Pet. ili. 17, «i OAc 70 
GéXAnpa Tov cov. 

12-14. We Jews had even in former times the promise of the 
Christ, which has now been fulfilled ; but the same blessings are now 
extended to you the Gentiles, and as the earnest of your inheritance, 
ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit. 

12. eis 1d civar, k.t.4. It seems best to take rots rpoyAmixdtas 
as the predicate, according to the analogy of eis ém. in ver. 6 and 
ver. 14, and eis érawov d0ys airod parenthetically. The article 
is necessary, since what has to be expressed is not that the 7ets 
were to have had the attribute of having previously hoped, but 
that it was their special privilege to be those amongst the Chris- 
tians who had had a previous hope. And if zponAz. is the subject, 
what reason can be given why zpoopio. eis ér. 6. should be con- 
fined to them, seeing it applies equally to the tyes dxovoartes ? 
Besides, this would be only a repetition of vv. 4, 5. The chief 
objection made to this interpretation is that the distinction be- 
tween Jewish and Gentile Christians does not come in before 
ver. 13; but this is only an assumption, as the exposition of 
ver. I1, just given, shows. We translate, therefore (with Harless, 
Olsh. Soden), “That we, to the praise of His glory, should be 
those who have before had hopes in Christ.” 

Meyer’s interpretation of rots pond. as “ quippe qui” is incon- 
sistent with the article. 

To what does the zpo. refer? mpoeAXrifw might, of course, 
mean simply hope before the event, as zpoopi{w implies an dpuc- 
pos before the object of it appeared; and so Ellicott, Meyer, 
understand the word here, explaining the perfect as indicating 
that the action still continues; but this seems fallacious ; éAziev 
continues, but not zpoeArilev. 

It seems better then, with Beza, Bengel, v. Soden, to under- 
stand the zpo. as referring to the time prior to the conversion of 
the heathen. Whether it be understood thus or as “before the 
coming of Christ,” it is appropriate to the Jewish Christians as 
distinguished from the Gentile. But some expositors deny that 
there is any such distinction here (De Wette), and understand 
apo. as “before the Parousia.” But the xat tes of ver. 13, 
together with the dxovcaavres which is antithetical to zpoyA7., seems 
decisive. Compare Rom. xv. 8, 9, Aé€yw 8€ Xpiordv diudxovov 
yeyerjoGa mrepitopys treép aAnOeias @eor, cis TO PBeBawwWoa ras 
erayyedlas Tov matepwv' Ta Sie vn strep, eA€ovs (ze. not strep 
dAnbetas) Soédcat Tov @edv (not might glorify, as AV. and RV.). 

13. €v @ Kat Spets. “In whom ye also.” There is much 
difference of opinion as to the connexion. Beza, Calvin, a, 
supply 7#Amikare. But if zpondm. is to suggest the supplement, 


22 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS be 13 


it would be zpoyArixate, which is inadmissible. Meyer and 
Alford supply the substantive in accordance with the current 
expression év Xpior@ eivar, “in whom ye also are.” Not only is 
this extremely tame, but, considering the pregnant meaning of 
etvat in this phrase, it is hardly possible that it should be omitted, 
not having occurred in the previous clause. Erasmus, 4 Lapide, 
Harless, aZ, supply exAnpwOyre. The objection of Meyer and 
Ellicott, that €kAnp. would thus be limited to Gentile Christians, 
though it formerly referred to both Jews and Gentiles, loses its 
force if the interpretation of ver. 11 above given be adopted. But 
it is awkward to go back so far, and a much simpler solution is 
that év » is connected with éodpayicOyre, the second év & being a 
resumption of the first, as in RV. with Theodore Mops., Bengel, 
Eadie, Ellicott, Soden. Thus the thought éy Xpiord, Which 
governs the whole section 3 to 14, is with the second ev © once 
more emphatically brought forward, while zucrevoavres, as the 
necessary antecedent of eoppay., is given its proper prominence as 
distinguished from the prior condition aékovcavres. The repetition 
of ipets before musrevoavtes is so far from being necessary that it 
would obscure the importance of that word. 

Tov Néyov Tis GAnPetas. Cf. Col. i.5. The word whose content 
is truth, ze. the gospel, kar’ éfoyyv sermo veritatis quasi extra 
ipsum nulla esset proprie veritas (Calvin), in apposition with 76 
evayyéAvov THs GwTnpias tuav, the gospel, or good tidings, whose 
subject-matter was salvation. 

“In whom I say, when ye also believed, ye were sealed.” ev @, 
not to be taken with zvor., for which there is no parallel in St. Paul, 
but with eodp. Meyer, however, with Calvin, Beza, a/., refers 
év ® to TO evayy., comparing Mark i. 15, muorevere ev 7H evayyedlo, 
and Gal. iil. 26, tious év Xp. I. But it is much more natural to 
understand it as=ev Xpuord; and, of course, if the account just 
given of the first év ® be adopted, this alone is possible. Compare 
Acts xix. 2, ef mvedpya dywov éAdBere miotevoavtes=“ when ye 
believed.” 

éappayicOnte. Compare 2 Cor. i. 22, 6 kal odpaywrdpevos Was 
kal dovs Tov dppaBdva tod rvevparos. The figure is such an obvious 
one that it is needless to seek for its origin in any allusion to 
circumcision, called a seal in Rom. iv. 11, or in the oriypara 
of certain worshippers of heathen deities. In later writers o¢payis 
is used simply for “baptism”; but there is no reason to suppose 
such a reference here, which would be too obscure. - 

TO mv. THS em. “The spirit of promise,” ze. which had been 
promised, ot xara érayy. aitd éA\dBomev, Chrys., who, however, also 
gives a different view, as does Theoph. 7 6ru é& érayyeAias éd06y 7) 
OTL THY TOV pEAAOVTWY ayabav érayyeAtay TO mv. BeBarot. The 

latter interpretation must be rejected. because the word zvedpya 


I. 14] THE SEAL OF THE SPIRIT 23 


does not contain the idea of BeBaiwous. ‘The Spirit which brings 
a promise” would be a possible interpretation ; but it is not the 
Spirit that is the immediate bringer of the promise, and, moreover, 
the other view agrees better with the connexion. 7@ dyiw added 
with emphasis, ‘even the Holy Spirit.” 

14. dppaBdv, a Semitic word (Heb. fiat), which probably (we 


may say certainly) passed from the Phoenicians to the Greeks, and 
from them to the Romans in the sense of our word “earnest,” 
portion of the purchase money given to ratify the contract, and so as 
a pledge of full payment. In the N.T. it is found only here and 
2 Cor. i. 22, ver. 5 (in both places dpp. tod zvevparos). It is to 
be noted, first, that the earnest is of the same kind as the full pay- 
ment. Compare Clem. Alex., Zc/. Proph. xii. p. 982, ovre yap 
wav Kekopiopela ovte ravTds toTEepotpev, GAN’ olov dppaBdva, .. . 
mpooeAndapev. So Irenaeus, “hoc est, pars ejus honoris qui a 
Deo nobis promissus est,” v. 8. 1. To this corresponds %) azapy7) 
tov mv. Rom. viii. 23. “The actual spiritual life of the Christian is 
the same in kind as his future glorified life ; the kingdom of heaven 
is a present kingdom; the believer is already seated at the night 
hand of God,” Lightfoot, who adds that the metaphor suggests 
and doubtless was intended to convey another idea, namely, that 
the recipient of the earnest money pledges himself to accomplish 
his side of the contract. 6s is attracted into the gender of app. 
according to a usual idiom; cf. Mark xv. 16, rHs aiAijs 6 éore mpai- 
twpiov, and Gal, iii. 16, 7d oméppari oov ds €ott Xpiords; also, 
perhaps, 1 Tim. iii. 16; Col. i. 27. 6 is, however, found in 
ABGL, Athan. Cyril, Chrys., and is adopted by Lachm., 
WH. 

cig dmoUTpwow Tis TepiToLncews. Wepiolecy Means properly 
“to cause to remain over, to preserve alive, save.” It is so used 
both in classical writers and in the Sept. In the middle voice it 
means to acquire for oneself. So in N.T. Acts xx. 28, iv 
Tepierolnoato Sa TOV aipatos Tov idiov. The substantive wepuroinots 
occurs once in the Sept. in the sense of survival, 2 Chron. xiv. 13, 
Kat émecov AiOlores GotTe py elvat ev avtols mepuroinow. This 
appears to be the sense intended here by the Sept. “for the 
redemption of those who live.” 

Most commentators compare the expression dads els Tepuroinow, 
1 Pet. ii. 9, which is taken from Mal. ili. 17, €vovraé pou. . . eis 
T., where eis 7. represents the Hebrew that is elsewhere rendered 
mepiovatos; So RV. “God’s own possession.” It is a serious 
objection to this that 7. by itself has not the meaning “ people for 
a possession,” or “God’s possession.” In 1 Pet. it is Aads, and 
in Malachi pou, that determines the meaning; indeed, as St. Peter 
is quoting from Malachi, his words do not supply a second instance 
of even this limited use of the word, nor any at all of N.T. usage 


24 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [I. 15 


Meyer attempts to evade this objection by making airod refer to 
mepu. as well as ddgys, which is very forced. Another very strong 
objection is from the context. It is our inheritance that is in 
question ; it is of it that the earnest is received, and we should 
naturally expect that what follows eis would have reference to the 
complete reception of it. Instead of this, the interpretation quoted 
supposes the figure entirely changed, so that, instead of receiving 
an inheritance, it is we that are the possession ; a figure proper in 
its place, but here involving a confusion of thought which we can 
hardly attribute to St. Paul. Augustine seems to have understood 
the word as=“haereditas acquisita,” perhaps only following the 
Latin version, ‘“acquisitionis.” So Calovius, “plena fruitio 
redemtionis haereditatis nobis acquisitae,” a meaning of z. which is 
unsupported. 

Beza remarks that we have to distinguish two deliverances or 
amroAvtpwoes ; the one which is past and finished, the other, the 
complete deliverance to which we have to look forward in the 
hereafter. The former, he says, might be called ‘‘docendi causa,” 
aroAvtpwos €AevPepdoews, and, correspondingly, the latter az. 
mepiroinoews, “ liberatio vindicationis or assertionis.” His explana- 
tion of the construction, not the meaning of z., seems to be essen- 
tially the same as that of Theodore Mops., Theodoret, and 
Severianus. They, however, understand 7. as 7 pos tov @eov 
olxe(wois. Thus Sever. says we are redeemed tva zepirombipev 
kai oikewHdpev TH OG, SO that the meaning is, “ With a view to 
our full recovery of our privileges as sons of God.” But this is 
open to the objection just now brought against the RV., that 7é 
@ed required to be expressed. We are compelled, therefore, by 
the necessity of the context, to understand zepuroinois of our 
acquisition ; only it is not a thing possessed, the object of dzod., 
but possession or acquisition, the result of the complete dzoA. 
(so Soden, and, in substance, Macpherson), “With a view to a 
complete redemption which will give possession.” In the three 
other passages in which z. occurs in the N.T. it means acquisition 
or saving, in accordance with the classical usage, viz. 1 Thess. 
Vv. 9, cwrnpias; 2 Thess. il. 14, d0€ys; Heb. x. 39, wuxns (cf. Luke ® 
XXi. 19, KTnoeoOe Tas Wuyas tyr). 

15-19. Therefore having heard of your faith, I thank God, and 
I pray that ye may attain a deeper knowledge of the glory of the 
inheritance, and of the mighty power of God who confers it upon 
Ou. 
15. Ava todto. Connected by some with vv. 13, 14, only, ze., 
*‘ Because ye also are in Christ, and have been sealed,” etc., since it 
is only in ver. 13 that the writer turns to the Ephesians. But better 
connected with the whole paragraph, vv. 3-14, ‘‘ because this blessing 
which we share is so mighty.” So Oecum., da 74 dzroxeiweva dyad 


I. 15] THANKSGIVING AND PRAYER 25 


tots 6pOGs mustevovor Kat Brodvor Kai dia TA ev Tots TwOncopmevors 
retaxOar tas. This is to be preferred, if only because 64 todo is 
too emphatic for so limited a reference as the former. It is used 
in transition to a new paragraph in Rom. v. 12; 2 Cor. iv. 1; 
Col. i. 9. The last passage is closely parallel to the present. 

Kays. “I also,” does not express co-operation with the readers 
in their prayers, or with others, of whom there is no hint; nor is 
it ‘‘I who first preached to you”; but it simply notes the transition 
from tpets. It is exactly parallel to kat mets in Col. i. 9, where 
the plural is used because Timothy is associated with Paul in the 
address. 

dkovcas is certainly in favour of the view that the Epistle was 
written, not to the Ephesians, but to readers to whom Paul had 
not personally preached ; and this appears to be confirmed by the 
similar expression in Col. 1. 4. On the other hand, it must be 
observed that the same expression occurs in the Epistle to 
Philemon (ver. 5), Paul’s beloved fellow-worker, except that the 
participle is present tense. But this makes all the difference. 
Theodoret explains dxovcas here as referring to the progress the 
Ephesians had made more recently ; and so many moderns. But 
against this is the fact that in vv. 17 ff. this is prayed for. A frequen- 
tative force of the participle cannot be admitted. The frequentative 
force of the aor. ind. is only the result of its indefiniteness (Luke i. 
55 ff.). The time of the participle is defined by the principal verb. 

Ti Kal’ Spas miotv. “ Apud vos”= ‘among you,” but in sense 
equivalent to tr. m. tpav, Col. 1. 4. Compare Acts xvii. 28, trav 
kal tpas rowutav ; xviii. 15, vd“ov Tod Kal tuas=“the law that 
obtains among you”; xxvi. 3, tév Kata “Iovdaiovs Ov. This 
periphrasis for the genitive seems to have been frequent in later 
Greek ; cf. Aelian, V. 7. li. 12, 4 Kat’ atrov dpery, Diod. S. i. 65. 
H Kara Tiv apxijv ardGeors (laying down the government). There 
seems, therefore, no good reason to say, with Harless and Ellicott, 
that the phrase here denotes the faith of the community viewed 
objectively (the thing in itself), in contradistinction to 4 7. tar, 
which expresses the subjective faith of individuals; or with 
Alford, that it implies the possibility of some not having this faith 
(whereas all are addressed as moroi). At most, perhaps, we may 
say that the form of expression was suggested by a view of the 
different classes of believers. That 7 2. tipav could have been used 
is shown by Col. i. 4. 

mist ev T@ Kupiw “Ingod. év indicates that in which the faith 
rests, as eis expresses that to which it is directed, “ fidem in Christo 
repositam.” The absence of the article before év marks the bind- 
ing of wioris év tr. Kupiw into one conception. 

kal Thy aydrny Ti els WdvTas Tovs Gylouvs. Tiy aydny is omitted by 


S* ABP, Orig. Hier., inserted by 8° DGKL, Syr. Boh., Chrys. The 


26 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS _ [I. 16,17 


insertion is supported by the parallel, Col. i. 4. Internal evidence is strongly 
in its favour, as mlorw els rods aylovs would be an unexampled expression 
(Philem. 6 is not an instance). The omission, too, is very easily accounted for 
by the passing of a copyist’s eye from the first to the second THY. Lachm. 
and Westcott and Hort and RV. omit the words, but Tisch. Treg (not mg.) 
retain them, 


16. 06 tavopar edxapiotay, K.T.’. edxapioretvy, in the sense 
“giving thanks, being thankful,” belongs to the later Greek (from 
Polybius onward). Its earlier meaning was “to do a good turn 
to,” and hence to “ return a favour,” to be grateful. 

08 travopat is usually joined directly with «dy., while pveday 7, 
is made subordinate, as specifying the further direction of the 
edxapiotia. But the following tva seems to require us to take 
pv. m. as the principal notion, “I cease not while giving thanks 
for you to make mention,” etc. It is not clear whether pvecav 
motetsGar, Which also occurs ver. 16, Rom.i. 9, Philem. 4, means 
“to remember” or “to mention.” It is used in the latter sense 
by Plato (Protag. 317 E; Phaed. 254 A). and other writers. Cf. 
PS.cxi. 43 Sept. py. €7r. lie Gavpaciwv avTov. 

For éri trav mpocevyav cf. Rom. i. 10; 1 Thess. i. 2. 


budv (after prelav) of the Text. Rec. is om. by & ABD*, added by 
De KLP; Vulg. Syr. (both) Boh., Orig. Chrys. G have btyav after 
mo.ovevos. Compare the readings in 1 Thess. i. 2, where budv is om. by 
n* AB. 


17. iva. If this passage were to be considered without 
reference to the parallel in Col. i. 9, the rendering “in order 
that” would be tenable (though it would be strange to say, “I 
mention you in order that”). But in Col. the preceding verb is 
airovpevot. A verb of asking must be followed by words express- 
ing the content of the request. And there is an abundance of 
examples to show that in this and similar cases iva has almost or 
rather entirely lost its final sense. Thus we have detofac iva in 
Dion. Hal. eiwé Wva, xeAevew, emitpérew iva. 

Also with @éAev, eg. Matt. vil. 12, dca av O&Ante iva 
mowoow: Mark vi. 25, @€Aw a por dds tiv Kehadryjv "Iwavvov: 
ix. 30, ovk 7Oedrev iva Tis yv@: X. 37, SOs Huiv va: Matt. x. 25, 
apkerov TO pabyrh iva yévyntac: xviii. 6, cupdeper adta iva kpenac Oy : 
cf. &ea wa eri iAov waby, Barn. Lp. v. 13: eAdyuorrov por 
eotw iva, 1 Cor. iv. 3: eorw ovvybeia iva. . . adroAvow, John 
XViii. 39 : pioOos tva, 1 Cor. ix. 18. 

In modern Greek va is used as a sign of the infinitive = “to.” 
Winer quotes from the Conjessto Orthod. mpére va, r€yerar vi. 
The usage above illustrated indicates the transition to this 
complete weakening of the original force of the word. 

6 Oeds Tod Kuplou, x.7.A. Many of the early commentators in 
order to avoid the obvious sense of these words, of which the 


Ez 1%] THANKSGIVING AND PRAYER 27 


Arians made use against the Divinity of Christ, interpreted d0éa 
as signifying the Divine nature, x«vpios the human. Thus 
Theodoret, @ecdv pev ads avOpdrov, marépa bé ws Scot, ddéav yap 
tiv Ociav piow avopacev. Similarly Athanasius, ddgav tov 
poovoyevn kaAet. But this would surely require atrod to be added, 
and the distinction would be out of place in this context. The 
apostle refers to the relation of God to the Lord Jesus Christ as 
an encouragement to hope for the fulfilment of his prayer. More 
inadmissible, and only worthy of note as a singularity of interpreta- 
tion, is the view of Menochius, who takes rod x. 7. I. X. as a 
parenthesis, or that of Estius, “Deus, qui est Domini nostri 
Jesu Christi pater gloriosus.” These devices are unnecessary, 
since the Lord Himself calls God “My God,” John xx. 17; 
Matt. xxvii. 46. The expression is neither more nor less express- 
ive of subordination than this, “the Father is greater than I,” 
which, as Pearson shows, was understood by the Fathers as spoken 
of the Divine nature of Christ. They did not hesitate to call the 
Father the Source, Fountain, Author, etc., of the Son or the whole 
Divinity. 

6 mathp THs Sééys. “The Father to whom belongs glory,” 
ef Acts vil. 25. ‘the God of glory,” 1 Cor. 1. 8; “‘the Lord’ of 
glory,” cf. Jas. il. 1; and watyp trav oixtipyav, 2 Cor. i. 3; also 
xepovBin dd&ys, Heb. ix. 5. 

The interpretation “author or source of glory,” if it were 
tenable, would give a good sense. So Chrys. 6 peydAa mpi 
dcdwxws ayadd. 

But the possibility of the interpretation is not proved. Poetical 
expressions, such as Pindar’s dowav ratyp (of Orpheus, which, 
moreover, is not=‘“‘creator,’ but “inventor”), are not to the 
point, nor “hath the rain a father”? in Job xxxvili. 28; cf. xvii. 
14. “Father of spirits,” Heb. xii. 9, proves nothing, for the term 
there is introduced only as an antithesis to “fathers of our flesh,” 
and besides with the word “spirits,” “father” preserves the double 
notion of “creator” and “ruler,” as indeed the context there 
implies. The nearest parallel is Jas. i. 17, watip tév podtwv, where 
“the lights” are personified, and the notion of control is not 
absent. But there is no parallel to this in St. Paul, whose usage 
is shown by the passages above referred to. Alford’s view is that as 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, God is the Father of the 
glory of the Godhead which shone forth in the manhood of the Son. 

8Wn by Lachm. pointed 6yy as an Ionic conjunctive. The sense points 
to a conjunctive, but the form appears to be known only as epic. WH, 
give it in the margin, but in the text adopt 67, a later form for the 
opt. dol7, B has 6), to which WH. give the second place in the margin. 
If the tva were truly final, the optative would create a difficulty, being pro- 


perly used after the present, when the attainment of the object is doubtful 
(Rost and Palm). 


28 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [I. 18 


mvedua ocopias, x.t.A. According to Eadie, Ellicott, Meyer, 
definitely the Holy Spirit, characterised here suitably to the subject. 
On the absence of the article cf. Gal. v. 5, 16. But these instances, 
where zrv. is used as a proper name without a genitive following, are 
not parallel. 

It is better to understand with RV. after Chrys. Theodoret, 
al., ‘a spirit of wisdom,” etc.; cf. 2 Tim. 1 7 “God did aa give 
you 7. detdias, adda Suvdpews: Kal ayamys Kal cwppovicpod” ; Rom. 
Vili. 15, mv. SovAdeias; Gal. vi. I, 7. mpaorntros ; Rom. xi. 8, mv. 
katavvéews (Sept.). That the spirit of wisdom here is the effect of 
the Holy Spirit, is naturally understood but not expressed. 

copia appears to be the more general term, droxaAvyis having 
reference specially to the “‘ mysteries” revealed to believers, not to 
the gift of prophecy, to which there is no reference in what follows, 
and to which the apostle did not attach so much importance (see 
1 Cor. xiil., xiv.). Harless, followed in substance by Eadie, re- 
gards dzox. as the medium by which codéa is communicated. 
This relation would be more naturally expressed by aroxaAvpews 
Kal acodias. 

ev émyvecet adtod, Z.e. of God, as appears from atrov in wv. 18, 19, 
Christ being first referred to in ver. 20. émyvwous, “full know- 
ledge,” ‘“‘major exactiorque cognitio,” Grot.; see 1 Cor. xiii. 12, 
apt ywwoKw ex pépous, TOTE O& Exvyvweoopat KAOds Kal ereyvdoOnv. 
This is generally joined with the preceding, some taking év for 
eis (4 Lapide, Bengel, a/), or as = “by,” which reverses the 
relation of the knowledge of God with the gift of codia. Meyer 
and Ellicott understand it as marking the sphere or element in 
which they were to receive wisdom and revelation; Stier and 
Eadie, connecting the words especially with dzox., suppose them, 
while formally denoting the sphere, to indicate virtually the 
material of the revelation. If this punctuation be adopted, the 
latter view seems preferable. But all difficulty disappears if, with 
Lachm. WH. (after Chrysostom and Theoph.), we connect the 
words with what follows. The abruptness of redwriopevovs is 
much softened by the previous mention of the means. Indeed, 
the bold figure of enlightenment of the eyes of the heart seems 
to require some such definition as év eémyvdécoe, which then 
naturally precedes, because of its connexion in sense with azoxa- 
Avyts. 

18. mepwricpevous tots dp8adpous, k.7.A. A difficult construc- 
tion. ‘The most probable explanation appears to be that the 
words are in apposition with zvedua as the immediate effect, and 
so dependent on dy, in which case, however, according to the 
sound observation of Bengel, “‘articulus praesupponit oculos jam 
praesentes,” we must render ‘“‘the eyes of your heart enlightened,” 
med. being a tertiary predicate (so Harless, Olsh. Wold. Schmidt, 


I. 18] THANKSGIVING AND PRAYER 29 


Soden). It is also possible to regard zed. as by anacoluthon 
referring to tytv, rods 6¢0. being the accusative of nearer definition. 
Somewhat similar examples of the accusative being used where 
the dative has preceded, and might be expected to be repeated, 
are found in classical writers, ¢g. Ureoti pot Opacos dadutvowv 
KAvovoav daptiws dveipatwy, Soph. £7. 479. The sense would be 
‘enlightened as to the eyes of your heart,” ze. “so that ye 
may be enlightened.” Such an irregularity of construction is 
intelligible where it makes the sentence run more simply, not 
where it makes it obscure. 

A third construction is adopted by Bengel, Eadie, a7, accord- 
ing to whom the zed. agrees with 6¢6., the three words together 
being an accus. absolute, “the eyes, etc., being enlightened.” 
That is, the words are taken as equivalent to redwticpévwy Tov 
é6p0arpov. The possibility of this is questionable. Bernhardy 
(p. 133) maintains that absolute accusatives of participles should 
be banished from Greek grammars (cf. Jelf, § 581. 1). Acts 
Xxvi. 3, cited by Lengel, is not in point, being a case of anacolu- 
thon (Winer). 


kapdtas. This reading rests on decisive authority. It is that of N 
ABDGKLP, Vulg. Syr., Orig. Chrys. etc. The T.R. diavolas is sup- 
ported only by a few cursives, Theodoret and Oecum. 


dpObahpovs iis kapdias, ‘eyes vob the heart 76 ef, Plato; ep: 
P. 533 A, 76 THs Wyss dupa. Aristotle in L7h. JVic. calls Sewdrns, 
TO oppa Ts Woyys (vi. 12, 10). Clement’s Aves xOnoay jpdv ot 
60. tis Kapdias may be an allusion to this passage. It is to be 
observed that xapdéa, with the ancients, was not only the seat of 
emotion, but of thought and moral perception. Here clearly it is 
as the seat of knowledge that it is referred to, hence “ eyes of 
the heart.” See the contrary state, the darkening of the heart, 
Romi, 21. 

tls €otiv 4 eAtis. Not “of what nature,” nor “quanta,” but 
simply ‘‘ quae,” which includes “qualis, quanta et quam certa.” 
€Amis THs KA., the hope which belongs to or is implied in our calling, 
z.e. not merely the subjective emotion produced by our calling 
(taking rjs «A. as gen. of efficient cause, Meyer, Ell.), the know- 
ledge of which does not require a special grace, but certainly 
including the content of this hope, not the object in itself, but as 
a conception (compare the use of our word “ambition,” “what is 
his ambition?” ze. the object of it as a mental conception). 
From the nature of the case the certainty is assumed. Compare 
Col. i. 5, ‘the hope laid up for you in the heavens (= Tit. ii. 13), 
Heb. vi. 18, tpoodexopevor THY pakapiav éAmida, The xAjous gives 
the guarantee for this, and includes it; it is, in fact, to this hope 
that believers are called ; éwt wofais €Amiot kexAjpea, Theodoret, 


30 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (a 19 


tis 6 mdoUTos THs Bdéns THs KANpovopias attod. Not to be 
weakened into “rich glory” or “glorious inheritance.” ‘What a 
full grandiose cumulation, picturing, as it were, the weightiness of 
the matter!” Meyer. Glory is the essential attribute of the 
inheritance to be received, and the apostle wishes the readers to 
know how great the rich fulness of this glory is; cf. Col. i. 27, 
“riches of the glory of this mystery.” 

€v tots dylors. “Among the saints.” This is by most com- 
mentators connected with xAypovouia, a connexion which is 
naturally suggested by Acts xx. 32, dodvar xAnpovopiay ev tote 
yyacpévos maow: cf. 2b, xxvi. 18, KAnpov ev Tois Hyacpévos. It 
is a serious if not fatal objection to this that it would require the 
article t7v to be repeated before ev 7. dy., not simply because 
avrov comes between, but because 7 KAnpovopia @eod is completely 
defined by this airod, In fact, with this connexion the words 
would mean, ‘the inheritance which God has in the saints,” which 
is actually the meaning adopted by Stier, conjoining éxAnpadbnper, 
ver. 11, which he interprets, ‘“‘were made an inheritance.” This, 
however, would be out of harmony with the use of the word 
in. the Ni oi(eh: wer. 24s ach. Wass. Acts vax) 32) _above), as 
well as with the context. Such phrases as tay ovyyevav pou Kara. 
capka (where o. is an adj., Rom. ix. 3) 5 Tov "Ioparr Kara. odpka, 
1 Cor. x. 18; ra €Ovy ev oapki, Eph. ii. 113 tov tudv CpAov strep 
éuov, 2 Cor. vil. 7, are not analogous. 

The construction then is, “ What the riches of the glory of His 
inheritance is among the saints.” The community of believers is 
the sphere in which alone this zAodros, x.7.X., is found. This 
does not require the repetition of 6 before év 7. dy., nor does it 
give too great emphasis to the latter words. The object of the 
kAnpovouia is, of course, the future kingdom of God; but this 
future glory is treated by St. Paul as if present. 

19. kai ti 1d GmepBdddov péyeOos, k.t.4. Supply, as in the 
previous clause, éori, to which then we are to attach «is #pas, not 
duvdpews, “And what the exceeding greatness of His power is to 
usward.” Thus the two clauses are symmetrical, eis as corre- 
sponding in position to év Tots dytots. ; 

The three objects of eidévat are in reality one and the same 
under different points of view; the content of the “hope of the 
calling” is the inheritance of Heb. ix. 15, and this again in its 
realisation is an effect and proof of the dvvapes of God. Thus the 
object of the ér/yvwars is the blessing to be obtained in the future 
kingdom of God. 

kata, THv evépyetav, K.T.A. Many commentators connect these 
words with rots muor., understanding them as expressing the fact 
that faith itself is the result of God’s évépyaa. But this would 
make the whole solemn exposition in ver. 20 subservient to mor., 


I. 20, 21] SUPREMACY OF CHRIST 31 


which is only incidental in the sentence. The connexion would 
be interrupted by a reference to the origin of faith. Besides, this 
would require us to give to xaré some such meaning as “by virtue 
of,” since our faith is not according to the measure of His power. 
The three objects of «idévar are so closely connected in themselves 
that it matters little whether we refer the words xara 7. €. to the 
last only or to all three; naturally, however, the évépyea is 
immediately connected with the last. This év. supplies the 
measure by which to estimate the power of God 

As to the three words icyvs, xparos, évépyea, the distinction 
appears to be that icxvs is inherent power, xpdros power expressing 
itself in overcoming resistance, and évépyea the actual exercise of 
power. The Vulgate has “secundum operationem potentiae 
virtutis ejus.” Each term has here its appropriate meaning, and 
there is no occasion to have recourse to a Hebraism, or to such a 
resolution as xparos ioyupov. 

20-23. This power of God was shown in Fits raising Christ 
Jrom the dead, and setting Him above all created powers by what- 
ever name they may be called, whether on earth or in heaven. His 
relation to the Church, however, ts more intimate. It ts the Body 
of which He is the Head. 

20. fv évipynoev or evipynkev. The latter is read by AB, Cyr., the 
former by § DGKLP. The versions naturally do not help. Lachm. Tisch. 
WH. adopt the perfect, WH. placing the aorist in the margin. Tregelles 
puts the perfect in the margin. The neighbouring aorist might readily lead 
to the substitution of the aorist for the perfect. The counter change would 
not be so easily accounted for. The perfect is properly employed, because 


the effect continues while the separate acts in which this évepyeiy realised 
itself follow in aorists. 


éyelpas. The time is contemporaneous with that of the 
principal verb; not “having raised him”; but as AV. “when 
He raised him”; or “in that He raised Him.” 


21. Kal xaioas. This is the reading of 8% AB, Vulg. The Rec. kal 
éxd@.cev is found in DGK LP, Chrys. etc.; a’rév is added in & A, Boh. Syr. 
(both), but not in BDGKLP, Vulg.  Tischendorf, who reads kal xafloas 
atréy with & A, thinks a difficulty was found in this reading for two reasons, 
first, that although the verb occurs frequently in the N.T. it is transitive only 
in 1 Cor. vi. 4 (compare ouvexd@icev, Eph. ii. 6) ; and, secondly, because 
nowhere else is God said to have placed Christ at His right hand, but Christ 
is said to have sat down at God’s right hand. 

Those who adopt the reading éxd@:cev think that more emphasis is thereby 
given to éyelpas as the principal illustration of the Divine power. The words 
seem to be an indirect quotation of Ps. cx. 1. Compare Ps. xvi. 11, and the 
request of the sons of Zebedee, Mark x. 37; and for the ground of the figure, 
1 Sam. xx. 25; 1 Kings ii. 19. Harless quotes from Pindar (of Minerva), 
Sekvay xara xeipa warpos ifea (Fragm. xi. 9). The words express participa- 
tion in the highest honour and power. So Stephen beholds Jesus standing 
ék deéGv Tod Ocod, Acts vii. 56. 


év tois émoupaviors has, of course, primarily a local signification 


32 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [I. 21 


But so also have xafioas and defia. It is said that these “ distinctly 
local expressions” ‘‘tend to invalidate the vague and idealistic 
‘status coelestis’ urged by Harless” (Ellicott). But these expres- 
sions tell rather the other way. For surely no one will interpret 
the right hand of God locally, or the “sitting.” These words are 
but figurative expressions of honour and dignity. Some writers, 
indeed, lay stress on Stephen’s beholding of Jesus at the right 
hand of God. ‘As Stephen saw Him, so He veritably is,” says 
Alford ; and Stier holds fast the “‘cextum mov of heaven, yea of the 
throne of God in it.” With so literal a view as this ra éroupdvia can 
be nothing but extra-terrestrial space, or more properly (considering 
the earth’s motion), space in general. “The distressed mind 
instinctively looks upward (says Eadie) to the throne of God.” 
And Stier calls a similar observation of Passavant decisive. 
(How about the Antipodes, or ourselves at a later hour?) We 
look upward in order to look away from visible things. 


B reads év rots obpavois, which is adopted by Lachmann. 


21. Gmepdvw, “over above,” is not intensive, va 16 axpdratov 
tos Syddon, “far above,” AV. See Heb. ix. 5, tmepdvw aris 
xepouBiu ; Ezek. xlili. 15, tx. rév xepadtwy myxvs; also 7. viil. 2, 
Xx. 10; 

Compare also izroxdrw, Mark vi. 11, 4. Tov rodGy tov, and Heb. 
ii. 8. There was a tendency to such compounds in later Greek. 

mdéons apxjs Kat efougias Kat Suvdpews Kai Kuptdtyntos. These 
words cannot be considered apart from the parallel enumeration 
in Col. i. 16, Ta ravra ev Tois ovpavots Kal Eri THS yHS TA SpaTa Kal 
Ta aopata eite Opdvor cite KupLoTyres Eire apyal cite CLovola. In Col. 
the abstracts are obviously used for the concrete; it does not, 
however, follow that the same is the case here where the nouns 
are singular. There St. Paul is contending definitely against the 
doctrine of angelic mediators; here he is only alluding to it. 
Vitringa takes the words here as abstract, understanding them as 
titles which belonged to the Messiah. In either case there is 
probably a reference to the use of the words as names of classes 
of angelic powers. ‘The view that limits the meaning of the words 
to earthly powers may be set aside, as this would have little point 
in connexion with such a lofty expression of Christ’s exaltation. 
But the questions remain, Are the powers referred to only 
heavenly, or both earthly and heavenly? Are these heavenly 
powers good or bad, or both? and what conclusion, if any, can we 
draw as to the ranks and subordination of the angels? It will be 
convenient to answer the last question first, which we do without 
hesitation in the words of Lightfoot (on Col.), “In this catalogue 
St. Paul does not profess to describe objective realities, but 
contents himself with repeating subjective opinions.” First, neither 


I. 21) SUPREMACY OF CHRIST 33 


here nor elsewhere does he make any positive statement about 
the orders of angelic powers. To do so here would be, not to 
assist, but to interrupt his exposition of the doctrine of Christ’s 
exaltation. Nor, indeed, is it likely that here and in Col., writing 
to those who were in danger of giving too much prominence to 
angelology, and priding themselves on their knowledge of the 
unseen (Col. ii. 18), St. Paul should enlighten them by “an 
incidental revelation” (Ellicott), which could have no effect but 
to assist them in their futile speculations. The very manner in 
which he expresses himself here, cai ravros dvépuatos dvopalopevor, 
k.7.., indicates the contrary. As Lightfoot well remarks, “ He 
brushes away all these speculations without inquiring how much 
or how little truth there may be in them, because they are 
altogether beside the question.” It is as if he said, “‘ It matters not 
by what title they are called, or whether real or imaginary, Christ 
is elevated above them all.” The «ire . . . etre in Col. gives a 
similar indication. He is impatient with this elaborate angelology. 


No doubt St. Paul took these names from the speculations to which he 
refers in Col. ii. 18, with which the Asiatic readers of this Epistle also were 
familiar. This is not mere conjecture. In the Zestaments of the Twelve 
Patriarchs, an early Jewish-Christian work (probably before A.D. 131), seven 
orders of spirits are named, the two highest, which are in the seventh heaven, 
being called @pédvoc and éfovclar. The others are described by their offices 
(Levi 3). Origen enumerates five classes, called in the Latin in an ascend- 
ing series, ‘‘sancti angeli, principatus (=dpyal), potentates (=éfovclat), sedes 
or throni (=@pévor), dominationes (=xupidryres),” Opp. 1733, pp- 66, 70. 
But this cannot be regarded as independent of St. Paul. Ephrem Syrus, 
commenting on Deut. i. 15, gives three great divisions, subdivided thus: 
(1) Oeol, Opdvor, Kupidrynres; (2) apxdyyeror, dpxal, éovolar; (3) dyyedor, 
duvduers, xepouBlu, cepadlu (Opp. Syr. i. p. 270). (Compare Milton’s 
‘thrones, dominations, princedoms, virtues, powers.’’) 

The treatise of the pseudo-Dionysius ‘‘on the Celestial Hierarchy,” 
written about A.D. 500, and very popular in the Middle Ages, gives three 
classes each with three subdivisions, viz.: (1) @pdvor, xepovBlu, cepadlyu ; 
(2) eEovclat, Kupiérnres, Suvdpmers ; (3) dyyedor, dpxdyyedo, dpxal, Perhaps 
too much importance has been attached in this connexion to these quotations 
by some expositors, as if it might be assumed that they were derived from 
independent sources. Origen seems wholly dependent on St. Paul, saying 
that he does not know whence the apostle took the names. 

It follows from what has been said that it is to no purpose to inquire 
whether the names are arranged in ascending or descending order, especially 
as the order in Colossians is not the same as in Ephesians, nor the reverse ; 
whence Alford supposes that here the first two descend, the next two ascend. 
More wisely Chrysostom calls the names donua kal od yrwpitdueva, and 
Augustine, ‘‘dicant, qui possunt, si tamen possunt probare quod dicunt ; ego 
me ista ignorare fateor.” 

The universality of expression both here and in Colossians, where the 
enumeration is preceded by the words ‘‘in heaven and on earth, visible and 
invisible,” leads us to infer that earthly powers as well as heavenly are 
included. The terms dpxal, éfovclac are used of earthly powers in Tit. iii. 1, 
and in this Epistle in vi. 12 of evil powers. xvupidrns occurs in 2 Pet. ii. 10; 
Jude 8. Compare the Book of Enoch Ixi. 10, ‘‘angels of power and angels 
of principality ” (ed. Charles, p. 46). 

3 


34 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS _ [I. 22, 23 


kat TavTds dvdparos, k.T.A. kai here = and in general, cf. Demosth. 
De Contrib. xxxi. 4, xal tysns Kal apXis | Kal dyaGod Tivos petadap- 
Bavew, and Aeschin. adv. Tim., Sohwv exeivos, 6 wadaos vonobérns 
kat o ASpdkwv kal ot Kara Tovs xpovous éxelvous vopobérat (Fritzsche, 
Matth. pp. 786, 870). dvoua évopalopevov is understood by many 
(including Lightfoot) to mean “every dignity or title (whether real 
or imaginary) which is reverenced.” But dvoua never of itself 
contains the idea of dignity; in such phrases as “the name of 
God,” it is because of the word with which it is joined that it 
acquires this sense ; so again in such phrases as zrovetv dv., Exe Ov., 
év dvopate etvat, the idea of dignity does not reside in the word 
dvoua any more than in our word “name,” which is similarly used 
when we say “to make a name,” etc. The participle dvoyafopeévov 
also shows that the word is to be taken in its simple meaning. 
Nor is it ‘‘every such name,” which is quite arbitrary. 

od povoy, k.t.4. Chrysostom and Theodoret suppose these words 
to refer to our possible knowledge in the future life ; but it is not our 
knowledge that is in question, but the exaltation of Christ, which is 
thus declared to be, not temporary, but eternal. The form of ex- 
pression is common in Jewish writers, who, however, by “the world 
to come” understand the time of the Messiah. Cf. Matt. xii. 32. 

22. kal mdvta, k.t.A., a reminiscence (not a citation as in 1 Cor. 
xv. 27) of Ps. vili. 7, where the words are spoken of man. Here 
the apostle adopts them as typically applicable to Christ, in whom 
they received a higher and more complete fulfilment. The context 
in the psalm itself, “all sheep and oxen,” etc., shows that this is 
not to be regarded as an interpretation of the psalm, but an 
application of its language in a manner familiar with Jewish 
writers. In Christ, humility was raised to a dignity far surpassing 
that which was assigned to it at its first creation. 

kal eSwxev adtov Kedadiy bmep mévra TH éexxAynota. The verb 
édwxev is not for €Oyxev, but with its proper sense, “gave,” is 
directly connected with 77 exkX. The order of the words is not 
against this, for not only is the position of xefadjv %. 7. most 
appropriate to the general sense of the passage, which concerns, 
not the giving, but the giving as Head, but it is also necessary to - 
clearness, in order that 7rus may follow éxxA. directly. xepadrry 
trép mdvra is not=summum caput, as if there were more heads 
than one, but simply ‘‘ Head over all.” 

23. i115 =not the simple relative, but “ which, in fact, is,” “ut 
quae.” In order, says Oecumenius, that hearing of the head you 
may not think merely of rule and authority, cwyatikds ynudv eore 
kepary. There is an organic connexion; the life of the Church 
springs from its union with Christ as its Head. 

76 TANpwpa Tod TA TdvTa év Tao wAnpoupevov. A much vexed 
passage, which is ably discussed by Soden, to the following effect. 


I. 23] SUPREMACY OF CHRIST 35 


having ascended to heaven and thence descending with the gifts 
communicated to the Church. He is here, therefore, called 6 — 
mAnpovpevos TA TATA. 

This He is able to do by virtue of His being the head over 
all. How this is to be understood is suggested by Rom. xiii. 9 sq., 
where that by which the law is fulfilled, namely, dydzy, is also 
that in which the law with all its parts dvaxeduAautra. If we 
transfer this to the present passage, it gives the result that the 
fact that ra wavra are filled by Christ coincides with this; but ra 
mdvra dvaxepadaodrat in Christ, ch. i. 10. And this expression 
corresponds with the conception that the Church, whose function 
is to be the means of this tAnpotcOa, is so because Christ is given 
to her as Head. 

If Christ is to fill all things through the medium of the Church, — 
He must first fill the Chak And with this the figure of copa 
agrees, since in a man the head fills the body with its thoughts 
and purposes, so that each member is determined by it and filled 
by it, and that the more, the maturer the man is: comp. iv. 
13, 16, where the wA7jpwya tod Xp. is attained in proportion as 
the cpa is, so to speak, full grown. In this view wAyjpwpa tod 
Xp. is understood to mean that which is filled with Christ, and 
with some modifications this is the view adopted by most moderns. 

The difficulty is in the genitive relation, 7A. rod Xp. The word 
m\jpwya has been very fully discussed, from a lexical point of 
view, by Fritzsche (Rom. vii. p. 469), to whom later com- 
mentators are indebted for their references; also by Lightfoot in 
an excursus on Col., and by others. The verb _zAypdw means 
either to fill or to fulfil, complete. The meanings of the sub- 
stantive have been generally derived from the former signification, 
but it is important to keep the latter in mind. Like all verbals 
in -ya, the substantive has a passive signification. There are, 
indeed, one or two passages cited by Fritzsche and the lexicons 
as examples of an active sense, ¢g. Eur. Zroad. 824, Zyvos €xets 
KvAikwv tAjpwpa KadAdicrav Aatpeiay, 2.¢. filling the cups of Zeus, 
and Philo, de Adv. (ii. p. 39), miotts 7 mpos Tov Ocdv, tapyyopypa 
Biov, tAHpopa ypyorav éAridwy =bonae spei ad eventum adductio 
(for faith is not the fulfilment of hope). These are not admitted 
by Lightfoot, but they are cited as examples of what would 
be properly called an “active” sense of 7Axjpwua. That which is 
usually so called is really passive ; for since the action of the verb 
has an indirect as well as a direct object, the substantive may 
mean either, “id quo res impletur s. impleta est,” or “id quod 
completur.” vats aAnpotdv is a familiar phrase for “to man 
ships,” and hence 76 7A7jpwpa and ra 7Anpwpara of ships are the 
full complement of their crews or fighters, or both, cf. Xen 


We find in iv. 10 that it is the function of Christ to fill all sw 





36 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [I. 23 


Fell. i. 6. 16, é« modAXGv TANpwpdtov éxAer€yGar Tos apiorous 
epéras. It is also used of the cargo, as by Philo, de vita Mosis 
(ii. 144), who speaks of 7d vA. of the ark. Suidas, too, gives 
TAnpwopata 6 Tav vndv dopros. The passive force in these cases 
will be more clear if we compare Xen. fe//. vi. 2. 14, where 
Iphicrates tas vats érAnpod. ‘The action was that of Iphicrates, 
but neither he nor his action was zAynpwya. The word is also 
used of the ship itself, as in Lucian, Ver. Hist. ii. 37, dad dvo 
TAnpwopatwv eudxovto; 38, mévre yap etyov tANpdpata,—a usage 
explained by Fritzsche from the sense “id quod completur,” 
but more simply as a figure of the same kind as that by which 
in naval histories the admiral’s ship is called ‘‘ the admiral.” 

But we want to know the meaning of wA. with a genitive. 
There appears to be no example of a ship being called 7A. 
ézifarov or the like. aAnpwua tHs moXews Occurs pretty often, of 
the full population of the city, or of a combination of artisans, etc. 
complete enough to form a city (Arist. Pol. iv. 4, p. 1291, tavra 
mavra, 7.¢. all these workmen, yiverat tAnpwpa THs TpwTNS TOAEWS. 
In the Sept. we have 7A. tis ys, THs Gaddooys, etc., and in 
Eccles. iv. 6, 7A. dpaxés, a handful. In the N.T., still in the same 
sense, Mk. vill. 20, oxupidwv tAnpwpata. The sense “abundance,” 
often found, does not concern us here. The only example quoted 
to justify the interpretation of 7A. with a genitive, as = zerAypw- 
pevov, is from Philo, De Praem. et Poen. (ii. p. 418), “The soul 
by these three excellent things, nature, learning, exercise, yevoyevy 
TAnpwpa aperov, leaving in itself no empty space for the entry of 
other things.” But the plural aperév here prevents our accepting 
the passage as a satisfactory parallel to 7A. Xpiorov (or @eov). 
The article also forms an objection to this interpretation. Since 
Christ, in the same sentence, is said to fill all things, how can the 
Church be defined as 75 zAnpwpya, “that which is filled by Him”? 
Moreover, there is on this view no such parallelism between cdma 
and 7A. as the supposition would lead us to expect. The idea of 
the head filling the body is too remote from common notions to 
be left to the reader to supply. 

Fritzsche suggests two alternatives, either “those who are filled - 
by Christ, namely, with blessings,” or taking 7A. = ‘‘ multitudo,” 
“plenum Christi agmen,” the paronomasia in the latter case being 
verbal. Eadie and Ellicott as well as some others do not seem to 
distinguish the two notions “filled with” and “filled by,” calling 
the Church “the filled-up receptacle of spiritual blessing from 
Him” (Eadie, adopted by Ell.). If this is their view it is irrele- 
vant to quote 7A. dperay or, as Fritzsche, tAnpotofat @eod (from 
Pollux). If they understand ‘filled with Christ’s presence or 
life” (as we surely must if this signification of aA. is adopted), the 
words just quoted are inadequate. 


I. 23] SUPREMACY OF CHRIST 37 


Lightfoot’s view is that ‘“‘all the divine graces which reside in 
Him are imparted to her; His fulness is communicated to her ; 
and thus she may be said to be His pleroma.” But this thought 
is not suggested by the connexion, and, besides, the interpretation 
makes c@pa and zAyjpwpa convey quite heterogeneous ideas. 

There is, however, another meaning of zAypwya which would 
give an excellent sense, and which has been adopted by Chrysostom, 
Oecumenius, Thomas Aquinas, and many others, namely, ‘‘com- 
plement” in the second sense of that word, viz. that which makes 
complete. This appears to be the signification in which the word 
occurs in Matt. ix. 16, Mark ii. 21, where 70 éw/BAnpa, the patch 
put on the old garment, is called 76 wAyjpwya (although Lightfoot 
interprets the word otherwise). This agrees with the use of the 
verb in connexion with ypetav=to supply (Thucyd.). The ex- 
pression is then seen to be easy and natural; the Church as the 
body of Christ is the zAjpwua or complement im,_1 d. 
“He says 7Anpwpa,” observes Chrysostom, “just as the head is com- 
pleted by the body, for the body is composed of all the parts and 
has need of each one. See how he brings Him in as needing all. 
For unless we be many, and one a hand, another a foot, and 
another some other part, the whole body is not completed. By 
all then is His body completed. Then the head is completed, 
then the body becomes perfect when we are all joined and united 
together.” To this it is objected that it supposes that Christ without 
the Church would be deficient, since 7Ajpwua implies a previous 
ntrnpa. The objection leaves the figure out of account. When 
Christ is called Head, the figure implies that however complete He 
is in Himself, yet as Head He is not complete without His body. 
As Beza well remarks, ‘‘ Such is Christ’s love for the Church, that 
He, as it were, regards Himself as incomplete unless He has the 
Church united to Him as a body” ; to which the apostle then adds, 
Tov Ta wavta, K.T.., to express that Christ does not of Himself 
need this complement, but that, on the contrary, all our complete- 
ness is from Him. There is here no inconsistency in thought, 
although a superficial inconsistency in words, in fact an oxymoron. 
Amongst recent expositors this view is adopted by Barry. 

Oltramare ably maintains the signification ‘‘ perfection” for rA7jpwua. 7d 
aAipwud Twos means ‘‘that by which a person or thing is filled,” and hence, 
in speaking of persons, he says it signifies that by which a person is filled, 
perfected. John i. 16, ék« rod mAnpdparos abrod edd Boyer, z.e. of that with 
which he is filled,—an allusion to mAjpyns xdpitos kal adnOelas, ver. 14. 
Usually it refers to qualities with which a person is filled, and which render 
him perfect, from mAnpodv, ‘‘to render perfect (things),” as in Phil. ii. 2, 
mAnpdoaré pov Thy xapdv: Eph. iv. 10, tva wAnpdoy Ta wdvra: 2 Thess. i. 11, 
wa... d0cds judy... wAnpdon waoav evdoxlay ayabwaovvns. So mdnpoto- 
Oat, John iii. 29, ) xapa 7 eu wemAjpwrac: xv. 11, Wa... 7) Xapa budr 
awdnpw0q: 2 Cor. x. 6, drav wAnpwOR budv H braxoy: cf. Eph. iii. 19, v. 18; 
Coil. i. 9. Hence merAnpwuévos, ‘made complete, perfect,” John xvi. 24, 


38 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS poe: 


xvii. 13; Phil. i. 11, werd. xaprdv Sixacootvyns, ‘perfect as regards the 
fruit,” etc., not as in Rec. xaprav, “filled with”; Col. ii. 10, éore év adr@ 
memAnpwuévor: Apoc. ili. 2, ov yap epnkd cov Ta Epya memAnpwuéva, K.T.A. 
Hence rAvjpwyua, ‘‘perfection,”! Eph. iii. 19, tva mwAnpwOijre els av TO TH. 
Tov Geod: Col. i. 19, wav 7d TANPwuA: ii. 9, Wav TO Wr. THS GedrHTos: Eph. 
iv. 13, Td wA. TOO Xpicrod. Hence Oltramare renders here ‘‘the perfection 
(objectively, =the perfect work) of Him who makes all perfect.” The 
difficulty in this interpretation is just in the equation ‘‘ perfection = perfect 
work.” This requires further justification. 

We must decidedly reject the exposition which makes m)7jpwua to be in 
apposition with a’réy. This would make jis ¢orw 7d cGpa atrod a useless 
insertion, and worse than useless, as serving only to separate 7X. from @dwxev. 
Moreover, if the words were to mean ‘‘even Him who is,” etc., they should 
come after avrév; as they stand they could only depend on adrdv édwxev, 
“‘ gave Him to be 7X.,” which does not yield a possible sense. 


amAnpoupévou, not passive, as Chrys. (see above) and Vulg. 
(adimpletur), which would make 1a wavta év waou a sclecism, but 
middle. We might interpret the middle here as= “for Himself,” 
but the instance quoted above from Xen. /e//. vi. 2. 14, shows 
that the middle may be used simply in an active signification. 
The participle refers not to God, as Theodoret suggests, saying tov 
pev Xpiorod cipa, tod dé watpds wAypwpya, but to Christ, as the 
parallelism shows as well as iv. 12, where iva tAnpwon 7a Tava is 
said of Christ. év waou “in all” rather than “ with all.” 

II. 1-10. This exhibition of Gods power has not stopped there. 
He has made us partakers of Christ’s resurrection and exaltation, 
having given us life when we were dead through our sins. Not for 
any merit of our own, but of His own free grace, for it was when 
we were dead in our sins that He thus loved us. But though our 
salvation was not on account of any works of ours, it was God’s 
purpose in His new creation of us that we should walk in the path 
of holiness which He designed. 

1. kat Suds from its position means “and you, too.” Resumed 
in ver. 5, where first the verb ovve{woroinoe is expressed. Some 
commentators, indeed, have closely connected this with the pre- 
ceding verse, so as to make duds depend on zAnpovpévov. But 
the relation between vexpovs and ovveg. is decisive against this. 
Lachmann, while taking tas to be dependent on ovveg., puts only 
a comma after i. 23, so as to co-ordinate kat (cvvel.) tuas with © 
aitov édwxe. But in this case we should certainly expect 7uds 
here, since the apostle would be passing from what God has done 
with respect to Christ, to what He has done to Christians ; cf. 
i. 19, els yuads Tovs micr. Moreover, i. 23 has the character of a 
solemn close, not of a parenthetical insertion; while the exposi- 
tion which begins in ii. 1 is too important to be regarded as a 

1 Compare Plutarch, De Plac. Phil. i. 7. 9, #rou évédevrev els evdarpovlay 7 


éret\ihpwro ev paxapiornrt, ‘either he lacked something for happiness, or he was 
complete in happiness.” 


IT. 1] JEWS AND GENTILES DEAD IN SIN 39 


mere appendage to the foregoing. Hence, also, it is not a mere 
exemplification of the general act of grace referred to in i. 23. 
Rather are we to understand that the apostle, having spoken of 
the exceeding power of God towards those that believe, which 
might be recognised by reflection on what He had done in raising 
and exalting Christ, now, applying this to his readers, reminds 
them that in them also God had shown that exceeding power 
(Meyer). The grammatical structure is interrupted before the 
subject or the verb is expressed. It is taken up again with dé in 
ver. 4, where the subject is expressed, and in ver. 5 the object is 
repeated, which, however, is now changed to the first person in 
consequence of the xat 7ets introduced in ver. 3. 

SvTas veKpods Tols TapaTTdpac Kal Tals dpapTiats Spay. tyaov 
is added with sBDG, Syr. (both) Vulg., Theodoret, etc. It is 
omitted by K L, most cursives, Chrys. Oec. A has éavrév évras v., 
“dead as ye were through your trespasses and sins.” Many 
attempts have been made to distinguish between duaprio. and 
mapatrwpata, Tittmann, following Augustine’s distinction (ad Lev. 
qu. 20), supposes the former to be deliberate sins, the latter sins 
of thoughtlessness. Augustine himself in the same place suggests 
a different view, viz. that 7. meant “ desertio boni,” and au. “ per- 
petratio mali.” He seems then to have been guessing. Certainly 
these distinctions are both untenable. Jerome takes zap. to refer 
to the beginnings of sin in thought, ay. to the actual deeds, which 
is not admissible. Many understand ay., which is the more 
general term, as meant to include the sinful disposition, zap. being 
only concrete acts. However reasonable this may be with the 
singular dwapria, it can hardly be maintained of the plural. Ety- 
mology gives no help, for sina ie means to fall or go aside from, 
to miss, ¢.g. THs 6500, Polyb. ili. 54. 5; THs dAnOelas, 2d, xii. 7. 2, 
also without a genitive, to err. “68 that etymologically zap. is the 
same as duaptia. St. Paul appears to use the words as synonymous, 
see Rom. v. 20, va tAcovdon TO TrapdtTwpa; ov Oe érdedvacey 7 
dmaptia, x.t.4. Comp. also Rom. iv. 25 with 1 Cor. xv. 3. 

Nexpous is here taken by Meyer to mean liable to eternal death. 
That vexpot may be used proleptically appears from Rom. viii. ro. 
In that case the dative is instrumental. But this is hard to re- 
concile with the tense of cvvefworoince. And surely it is very 
improbable that the apostle in speaking of the working of God's 
power towards them, would mention only their future deliverance 
from death, and not their actual deliverance from spiritual death. 
Nor could the readers fail to think of spiritual death. This sense 
is sufficiently indicated by rots zap. x.7.A., as well as by the follow- 
ing verse. So Chrysostom, eis €oyatov xaxias nAdoare (TodTo yap 
éort vexpwOjva), This figure of spiritual (or moral) death is fre- 
quent amongst the ancients. Clement of Alexandria says that & 


~ 


40 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [II. 2 


rH BapBapov pirocodia vexpods kadovar rods exrreadvras Tov Soypdrwv 
xo. Kadurordgavtas Tov votv Tots maHect Tots WuxiKois. The Jewish 
Rabbis have similar expressions. But Christianity has given a 
much deeper meaning to “death” in this connexion. We have 
tne same phrase in Col. ii. 13, where év is not part of the genuine 
text, and t7 dxpoBvortia THs capKos tudv is against the mere in- 
strumental sense of the dative. It expresses that in which the 
death consisted. 

2. év ats refers to both substantives, though agreeing in gender 
with the nearer. epizare’v in this sense is a Hebraism. ‘The 
figure has disappeared, so that we are not to press the preposition 
as if marking “the walk which they trod”; see Rom. xiii. 13, 
TEpLTATYHTWLEV, LI) KOmoLs Kal péOaLs, k.7.A., and the parallel use of 
mopeverGat, Acts 1x. 31, 7. TO POBw Tov Kvpiov. It is of frequent 
occurrence in St. Paul and St. John, but is not found in St. James 
or St. Peter, who use advacrpépeo Gar (a classical word, though not 
before Polybius) ; cf. 1 Pet. i. 17. 

kata Tov aid@va tod Kédcpou todTou. “In accordance with the 
course of this world.” This combination of aidy and xoaos creates 
some difficulty. Elsewhere we have 6 aiwv otros (1 Cor. i. 20, 
ii. 6, ill. 18, etc.), or 6 Kdapos otros, 1 Cor. iil. 19. 1) codia Tod x. 
tovrov in the latter passage being synonymous with 7 codia tov ai. 
rovrov in i Cor. il. 6. But the two ‘substantives are not syn 
onymous ; aiwy means a period of time ; xdcpos, the world existing 
in that period. Thus Antoninus (ii. 12) says that all things 
quickly vanish, 76 pev kdopw atta ta ouopata, TO O€ aide at pvjpac 
aitov. The signification “life,” frequent in classical Greek, especi- 
ally in the tragic poets, is never found in the N.T. As a para- 
phrase, however, “‘spirit of the age” fairly represents the sense, 
except that “age” refers to the whole period of this xéopos. 
Comp. Tacitus, “‘corrumpere et corrumpi saeculum vocatur” (Germ. 
i. 9). aiwv being a technical word with the Gnostics, it was to be 
expected that some expositors would adopt a similar meaning here. 
Accordingly, this has been done by Michaelis, who supposes the 
words aiwy tov x. t. to mean “the devil,” with a polemic reference 
to the Gnostic aeons; and by Baur, who regards the expression 
itself as Gnostic, and equivalent to koopoxpdrwp, vi. 12, meaning 
“the devil.” Holtzmann regards it as representing a transition 
stage between Paulinism and Gnosticism. As the ordinary signifi- 
cation of aiwy yields a perfectly good and Pauline sense, there is 
no ground for such hypotheses. If the devil were intended to be 
designated here as ruler of this world, we might expect some such 
expression as 6 Oeds tod aidvos Todrov, as in 2 Cor. iv. 4. 

kata Tov dpxovta THS efoucias Tod dépos. Most expositors take 
e€, here collectively =ai é€ovoto, understanding toé aépos as ex- 
pressing the sphere of their existence. Such words as cvppayxia 





Of 2] JEWS AND GENTILES DEAD IN SIN 4] 


for cvppaxot, SovrAcia for SotAor, mperBeia for mpéaBes, etc., ex- 
emplify this collective use of abstract for concrete terms. So 
occasionally in English, as ‘‘ embassy,” “ flight ” (of arrows). The 
present case, however, is not quite parallel, since the distribution 
for which éé. is supposed to stand is the plural of this word itself, 
viz. ai e€ovoia. This implies that the singular might be used of 
one of the é€ovota:; cf. Rom. xiii. 2, 3, where, however, 7 ¢& does 
not mean a ruling person. To use it collectively for ai é&. is, 
therefore, very different from using 7) ovppayxia for of cippaxor 
Besides, we must not assume that the word can be treated apart 
from the following genitive. 6 dpywv is defined, not by rjs eé., but 
by trys e&. Tod d€pos. For this reason, too, we cannot take r. é. as 
a genitive of apposition=“‘princeps potentissimus.” Now, the 
genitive following efovaia is elsewhere either subjective, as 7 éé. 
tov gatava, Acts xxvi. 18; Tov ayepovos, Lk. xx. 20; tuav, 1 Cor. 
viii. 9 ; or objective, taons capxés, John xvii. 2; mvevpdtwv, Matt. 
X. I; tua@v, 1 Cor. 1x. 12. It is possible, therefore, to understand 
the words as meaning “the ruler to whom belongs the power over 
the region of the air”; but this would create a difficulty in con- 
nexion with zwvevparos. It is therefore perhaps best to take 
n e& tod a. as the power whose seat is in the air. Some com- 
mentators take dyp here as=oxdros; and if this were possible we 
should have obvious parallels in vi. 12, koopoxpatopas tod oKxdtous 
roorov, and Col. i. 13, THs efovelas tod oxdrovs. But although ayp 
is used in Homer and elsewhere of “thick air” in contrast to 
aifyp, as in Plutarch (of the first creation), ért pev otpavoy éxpuTtev 
anp (De esu carn, Or. 1.§ 2), it does not appear that it can be used 
simply for oxoros, nor again that if so used figuratively, it could 
by another figure be used of spiritual darkness. What, then, does 
the expression mean? Oecumenius’ view is that as the rule of 
Satan is under heaven, not above, it must be either in the earth or 
the air; but, being a spirit, it must be in the air, dvots yap rots 
TV EVLA LY n e€vaepLos dcarpeBy ; and this is adopted by Harless and 
others. The air being understood to mean, not merely the region 
of the atmosphere, but “all that supra-terrestrial, but sub-celestial, 
region, which seems to be, if not the abode, yet the haunt of evil 
spirits,” Ellicott, who compares Job 1. 7 LXX, éeurepurarnoay tHv 
tm ovpavov, which surely is not to be appealed to as giving any 
light. Eadie ingeniously suggests that “the dyp and xdopos 
must correspond in relation. As there is an atmosphere round 
the physical globe, so air, dyp, envelops this spiritual «écpos,”—an 
atmosphere “in which it breathes and moves.” Compare our own 
phrases in which “ atmosphere” is used figuratively, “an atmo- 
sphere of flattery,” etc. But if such a figure were intended, some 
word must be added which would indicate the figure, such as the 
words ‘‘ breathes and moves” in Eadie’s explanation. Indeed, he 


42 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS po 2 


admits that it is perhaps too ingenious to be true, and falls back 
on the alternative that either the apostle used current language, 
which did not convey error, as Satan is called Beelzebub, without 
reference to the meaning of the term “ Lord of flies,” or that he 
means to convey the idea of “near propinquity,” or alludes 
to what he had more fully explained during his residence at 
Ephesus. That the notion of the air being the dwelling-place of 
spirits, and specially of evil spirits, was current, appears to be 
beyond doubt. Thus Pythagoras held elva: ravra tov dépa Wuyav 
éumdewv (Diog. L. viii. 32). Philo says, ots adAXor Piddcodor 
Saipovas, ayyéAovs Mwors ciwlev dvondlew* Wuxal 8 eiot Kata Tov 
dépa werouevat. In the Zest. XZZ. Patr. it is said of 6 devrepos 
ovpavds that it has fire, snow, ice ready for the day of the Lord’s 
command, év atra eici rdvra Ta Tvevpata Tay éeraywydv «is 
exdixyow tov dvopwv (Levi, ap. Fabric. Cod. Apoc. V.T. p. 547), 
and in Zest. Benj. p. 729, BeAidép is called 7d dépiov wvedpma. 
Drusius cites from the commentary on Aboth, “sciendum, a 
terra usque ad expansum omnia plena esse turmis et praefectis et 
infra plurimas esse creaturas credentes et accusantes, omnesque 
stare ac volitare in aere . . . quorum alii ad bonum, alii ad 
malum incitant.” There is no difficulty in supposing that St. 
Paul is here alluding to such current notions. Nor are we to 
suppose that he is conveying any special revelation about the 
matter. Harless’ objection, that according to the views referred 
to, the air was inhabited by good spirits as well as bad, is by no 
means fatal, since it is on the bad spirits that men’s thoughts 
would chiefly dwell, and to them would be referred evil sugges- 
tions and desires. 

Tod mvevpatos is understood by some (including Rickert and 
De Wette) as in apposition with tov dpxovra. Winer, while 
rejecting this view, admits that in this case the apostle might most 
easily have wandered from the right construction, namely, on 
account of the preceding genitives. It is, however, unnecessary to 
suppose this, although it must be conceded that the only admis- 
sible alternative, viz. that zv. depends on dpyovra, is more harsh 
as to sense, although the harshness is lessened by the distance | 
from dpxovra. Adopting this, the sense is, “the ruler of the 
spirit,” etc. Here zvetdua is not to be understood collectively, 
which it cannot be; it is what in r Cor. il. 12 is called 76 rvedua 
Tov koopov, the spiritual influence which works in the disobedient. 
It seems to be a sort of explanation of the preceding éfovc/a. 

viv. Not “even now,” which would require xai viv, but in 
contrast to zoré, when this spirit operated in the readers also. 

év Tols utots THS dmeWelas. A Hebrew form of expression. We 
have “son of misery,” Prov. xxxi. 5; ‘sons of iniquity,” 2 Sam. 
vii. 10; “sons of Belial (=worthlessness).” Compare ch. v. 6; 


IL 3] JEWS AND GENTILES DEAD IN SIN 43 


Col. iti. 6; 1 Thess. v. 5 (“sons of light”); 2 Thess. ii. 3 (“son 
of perdition”). Greek authors used the expression rratdes Cwypdgdur 
and the like, but not with abstracts. The opposite to viot az. is 
Téxva wrakons, I Pet. i. 14. ame(Gea is not unbelief, but disobedi- 
ence; compare Rom. xi. 30, kat tyets more yrevOyocate TH Oco. 
Chrysostom very curiously says, épas ore od Bia ovde tupavvids GAAG 
refot mpoodyerar; areifeav yap elrev, WS av TIS EiTOL, araTH Kal 
meGot Tovs mavtas epéAxerat. But on Col. iii. 6 he says, dexvds dre 
Tapa TO py mecOnva év Tovros etow. The former remark looks 
more like a rhetorical play on words than a serious comment. 

8. év ols kal tpets. Kal qets, “we also, we too.” Having 
spoken specially of the Gentiles in the preceding verses, the 
apostle now passes to the Jews. The zdrtes is certainly no objec- 
tion to this. ‘‘ Even amongst us (the chosen people) there was no 
exception.” What more natural than to say “all of us also.” If 
mavres included both Jews and Gentiles, iets would be quite 
superfluous ; and the emphatic kai jets would be unintelligible if 
it included tpets of vv. 1 and 2. éy ois is connected by Stier with 
mapamtopacw (which he thinks appropriate to Jews, as aduaprias to 
Gentiles). His reasons are, first, that as viol trys am. are the 
heathen, not all the unbelieving, it would not be suitable to reckon 
the Jews amongst them ; secondly, that the harshness of supposing 
that év just now used with evepyodvros is immediately used with the 
same object in a different signification; and thirdly, that the 
parallelism of 2 and 3 compels us to take ev ais and ev ots as 
parallel. With the reading tuaév adopted above in ver. 1 it is 
impossible thus to separate zap. from du. It might more plausibly 
be maintained that ofs refers to both substantives, the feminine 
having been adopted only because ay. was the nearest substantive, 
and the neuter being used where that reason does not exist. But 
we cannot well avoid referring the relative to the nearest ante- 
cedent when that gives a suitable sense, and the change of verb 
from epizateiv to avaotpepecba, which is more suitable if ots be 
persons, is in favour of this; ‘‘amongst whom we also,” belonging 
to the same class of the disobedient. 

dveotpapynpev. “ Versabamur,” “lived our life”; ‘speciosius 
quam ambulare,” Bengel, but rather perhaps adopted because 
TepiTaretv €v Tots viots could not be said. 

€v Tats emBupiats HS capKds. odpé, though primarily signifying 
the matter of the body, and hence the appetites arising from the 
body, is not to be limited to these, but includes the whole of the 
lower or psychical nature. In Rom. vii. it appears in the natural 
man as opposed to vos or ey in the higher sense; in Rom. viii. 
in the regenerate it is opposed to zvedua. Amongst the works of 
odp& are “‘strifes,” etc. Gal. v. 19, 22. Compare Col. ii. 18, 

puffed up by the vois of his odpé.” The éaifvycac of the flesh 


44 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [1I. 8 


are therefore not merely the bodily appetites, but in general what 
Butler calls “particular propensions.” So here it includes capé 
proper and d:avorat, 

tovodvtes Ta OeAnpata, K.T.A., expresses the result in act of the 
eriOvpiat; there is no tautology. Acdvova is not found elsewhere 
with a bad signification. In classical authors dvavova means the 
understanding, or a thought or purpose. In Aristotle virtue is 
mpoaipeats eta Adyou Kat Siavoras. The plural also is used by 
Plutarch in a good sense. In the N.T. it occurs frequently in a 
good sense, 1 Pet. i. 13, “girding up the loins of your 6.”; 2 Pet. 
iii. 1, “I stir up your pure 6.”; 1 John v. 20, “hath given us a 
6.”; cf. also ch. 1. 18. Harless conjectures that the plural here 
is used in the sense common in Greek writers, viz. purpose, the 
plural suggesting vacillation ; and he compares the use of codéau in 
Aristoph. Raz., and “sapientiae” in Cic. Zusc. ili. 18. But this is 
too refined. It deserves notice that in ch. iv. 18 and Col. i. 20, 
St. Paul speaks of his readers having been “darkened in their 
diavoia,” and “enemies in their 6.” Here, while by no means 
admitting a hendiadys, “cogitationes carnales,” we must at least 
allow that dvavovév acquires its bad significance from the preceding 
capkés, so that it nearly = “the odpé and its dtavoa.” 

kat jpeOa téxkva gdcer dpyfs. This order, which is that of 
the Text. Rec., is established by 8 B K etc., Chrys. Lachmann 
adopted dice réxva, with AD GLP, Vulg. Syr-Harcl. 

The change from the participle to the finite verb need occasion 
no difficulty ; it is, in fact, required by the sense. Had dvres been 
written it would be co-ordinate with zovdvres and subordinate to 
aveotpapynuev, and explanatory of it, “doing the desires . . . and 
being the children...” Whatever view is taken of the latter 
clause, these two are not co-ordinate. Not merely, therefore, for 
emphasis, but because the latter is a distinct predication, co-ordinate 
with év ois aveorp., or, more exactly, expressing a consequence of 
that, the verb is in the indicative, —‘‘and so we were.” 

tékva épyis is understood by many as =actual objects of God’s 
wrath, réxva being used as suitable to Israel, and then by a sort of 
irony is added, not “of Abraham” or “of God,” but “by nature 
of wrath.” There could be no objection to such an interpretation 
if it corresponded with the context ; but here, if the actual wrath of 
God were intended, we should expect it to be defined by @eod or 
the article, or otherwise. But how strange, if not impossible, would 
be the expression “children of God’s wrath”; and especially so 
here, where in the same breath they are described as at the same 
time objects of God’s love, without anything to soften the apparent 
opposition! Nor can it be said that this is at all implied in the 
word réxva. On the contrary, we have several instances in the 
Old Testament in which “son of” followed by a word denoting 


II. 3] JEWS AND GENTILES DEAD IN SIN 45 


punishment cannot reasonably be given any other meaning than 
either “worthy of,” or “in danger of.” Thus Deut. xxv. 2, “If 
the wicked man be ason of stripes, the judge shall . . . cause him 
to be beaten before his face,” etc.; rightly rendered in the Sept. eav 
ag.os 7 wAnydv. 1 Sam. xxvi. 16 (David to Abner), ‘‘ Ye are sons 
of death, because ye have not kept watch over your lord.” 2 Sam. 
xii. 5 (David to Nathan), ‘‘ The man that hath done this is a son of 
death.” In these two passages the RV. has correctly ‘‘ worthy to 
die,” and in the former no other interpretation is possible. In 
1 Sam. xx. 31, RV. has in the text (with AV.) “shall surely die,” 
but in the margin “is worthy to die.” In Ps. Ixxix. 11 and cil. 20, 
“sons of death” are “those who are in danger of death.” 

These instances, together with the indefiniteness of épyjs, justify 
us in understanding the words to mean “ objects, z.e. fit objects of 
wrath,” “deserving of wrath.” And so they are interpreted by 
Chrysostom, “We have provoked God to wrath, rovréorw,, 
opyn juev Kal ovdey erepov” (explaining that he who is dvOpwov 
téxvov is avOpwros). “mavres éexpdtropev afia dpyns.” Similarly 
Oecumenius, “ As those who do things worthy of perdition or of 
hell are called réxva dmwdcias Kal yeévyns [e.g. 2 Thess. ii. 3; 
Matt. xxiii. 15] ovrw Kai réxva dpyis ot agva dpyis.” 

Why is ¢uce inserted? This question does not seem hard to 
answer. It must first be remarked that ¢vovs is opposed some- 
times to vouos, sometimes to Oeors, avdyxyn, etc., but does not 
necessarily mean “ by birth.” Rom. ii. 14, the Gentiles do dice 
Ta TOU vouov; I Cor. xi. 14, 7 Pots teaches that if a man have long 
hair it is a shame. Josephus says of David that he was dice 
Sixatos kal OeooeByns (Anz. vii. 7. 1), and of the Pharisees dvcer 
éretkOs Exovow (xiii. 10. 6). We have dice piroyewpydraros in 
Xen. Oec. xx. 25. Compare also Philo, De Conf. Ling. p. 327 E, 
GAN ovk dvTiAoyiKol yeydvacw Goo THS EmioTHNs Kal aperns Chrov 
éoxov. It is, in fact, used like our word “naturally.” Here the 
opposition suggested might be to xdpit_; but as the Jews are in 
question, it is more probably to 6éce, their covenant position as 
the people of God, by which they were holy branches of a holy 
root, to whom belonged the viofecia (Rom. xi. 16, 21). ‘We 
Jews, too, just as the heathen, were, apart from the covenant, 
Téxva opyns.” 


From the time of Augustine these words have been supposed by many to 
contain a direct assertion of original sin. Thus Calvin, ‘‘ Paulus nos cum 
peccato gigni testatur, quemadmodum serpentes suum venenum ex utero 
afferunt.” 

But, first, this gives a very great emphasis to @’oet, which its position 
forbids. Secondly, it supposes cal #ueAa to refer to, or at least include, a 
time prior to év ols dv., which seems not possible. Thirdly, it does not 
harmonise with the context. That treats of actual sin (including, of course, 
character), and the immediate context of the Jews only. It would be natural 


46 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [II. 4 


and intelligible that this description should be followed by mention of the 
wrath thereby incurred; it would also be intelligible, though less natural, 
that it should be followed by a statement that in addition to this we inherited 
a sinful and guilty nature. The interpretation in question supposes that 
neither of these is mentioned ; the wrath incurred by actual sin is omitted, 
while that incurred by birth sin is mentioned without mention of its cause, 
which is left to be inferred. And fourthly, even this is stated expressly only 
of the Jews; it is assumed as self-evident of the Gentiles, of Aowrol. The 
reader has to fill up the sentence somewhat in this way, ‘‘ We fulfilled the 
desires of the flesh [and thus became objects of God’s wrath; and, in 
addition to this, we were even before committing any actual sin inheritors of a 
sinful nature, and so] already by nature objects of His wrath.” 

It is true, indeed, that men are born with a sinful and corrupt nature ; but 
to say this is not to say that the infant who has committed no actual sin is an 
actual object of God’s wrath ; still less does it prove that the apostle’s words 
here imply it. Chrysostom has no trace of such an interpretation ; in fact he 
seems even to regard these words as guarding against a similar interpretation 
of OeAjpara capxds. ‘* That is [he says], ovdeév mvevuatixdy gppovodvres. But 
that he may not be suspected of saying this in disparagement of the flesh, 
and lest one should think the offence not great, see how he guards himself. 
Fulfilling the desires, etc.; he (the apostle) says, we provoked God”; adding 
what has been quoted above. Jerome gives as alternatives, ‘‘ Vel propter 
corpus humilitatis corpusque mortis et quod ab adolescentia mens hominum 
apposita sit ad malum.” ‘‘ Vel quod ex eo tempore quo possumus habere 
notitiam Dei, et ad pubertatem venimus, omnes aut opere aut lingua aut 
cogitatione peccemus.”” He mentions some who took ¢vce here to mean 
“‘prorsus”; cf. dAn0Gs or yvnolws, Oecum.; but the word never has this 
meaning, 


ot Aourroi, the heathen, cf. 1 Thess. iv. 13. 

4, 6 5é Oeds resumes from ver. 1 after the interruption, and now 
with the subject; ody is more usual in such a resumption; but 
d€ is more suitable here, on account of the contrast of what is 
now to be said with what precedes. Jerome’s comment is charac- 
teristic, ‘Conjunctionem causalem in eo loco in quo ait: Deus 
autem etc. arbitramur aut ab indoctis scriptoribus additum et 
vitium inolevisse paulatim, aut ab ipso Paulo, qui erat imperitus 
sermone et non scientia, superflue usurpatum.” Erasmus’ remark 
is more correct, ‘‘Hyperbati longioris ambitum ipse correxit 
Apostolus.” 

tAovovos Gy év ede, “ being as He is” (the participle assigning 
the reason), not simply éAejuwv, but “rich in mercy” (Chrys.). 
Compare Rom. ix. 23, “make known the riches of His glory on 
oxevn éXéovs.” In classical writers wAovovos is construed with 
a genitive of the thing, but in the N.T. with ey, see Jas. ii. 5, ev 
miore. ; and similarly the verbs zAouretv, rAourierOar (1 Cor. i. 5). 
Compare the correspondence of éAeos and deeia in Rom. xi. 31. 
ayarn is not a particular form of eos, but is the cause from 
which, or by reason of which, €Aeos was exercised. 

8. Thy twodkAhy dydnp, “ propter,” Vulg. “for His great love” ; 
cf. Philem. 8, “for love’s sake.” v, cognate accusative, a very 
common usage, both in classical and N.T. Greek. Here the 


II. 5] QUICKENED WITH CHRIST 47 


addition *v my. yas, being not necessary to the sense, gives 
great emphasis to the expression of the Divine love. Nor is 
avtov to be neglected, “ His love” marking more distinctly that 
it is from Him alone and His attitude of love that this mercy 
proceeds. 

pas now includes both the tpets of ver. 1 and the 7uas of ver. 3, 
and includes therefore both Jews and Gentiles. 

5. kal dvras pas vexpots. The xai does not signify “us also 
altogether,” which is forbidden by the position of pas (not Kai 
npas), and for the same reason it does not resume the xa/ of ver. 1. 
It is best taken as “Even,” “Even when we were dead,” etc. 
It is objected, indeed, that it is only the dead who can be 
“brought to life,” and for this reason Meyer takes xaé as the 
copula, ‘“‘on account of His great love, and when we were dead” ; 
but these two ideas are not co-ordinate. Soden, for the same 
reason, joins the words with the preceding, ‘‘loved us even when,” 
etc. This, no doubt, gives a good sense, although the antithesis 
between “loved” and “when dead” is not very natural, whereas 
that between vexpovs and elworoinoe is striking. Besides, the 
proposed construction would require xds to be expressed with 
ovveé. not with ovras, since jyarnoev already has its object ex- 
pressed. But the objection is hypercritical. The answer to it is, 
not that vex. is qualified by rots waparr. which has no emphasis, 
nor that ovvel. is defined by ev Xpiord. The true answer is 
found in the position of the verb. ‘‘ Gave life even to the dead” 
would not be a natural mode of expression, but “‘ Even the dead 
He restored to life” is perfectly natural. The kui dvras, x.7.X., 
attracts the reader’s attention to some striking instance of God’s 
love about to be mentioned. Comp. Col. ii. 13, where the 
connexion is unambiguous. Indeed, it is not quite true that 
Cworoety can be only of the dead. See John vi. 63 compared 
with ver. 54; also 1 Cor. xv. 36; 2 Cor. ili. 6. 

Tols TapaTTépacw = our trespasses, the trespasses already men- 
tioned in ver. 1. 

auveLwotoinge TO Xprotd. 


B adds éy after the verb with 17 Arm. and some other authorities,—a 
reading admitted to the margin by Westcott and Hort, and in brackets by 
Lachmann. It might, with equal ease, be omitted or inserted accidentally. 
There couid be no reason for intentional omission, but it might be added 
intentionally from the construction being mistaken. It is observable that 
B, Arm. also insert év after vexpots, if, indeed, a version can be safely cited 
in such a case. Internal evidence is against év, as we get a better sense by 
taking Xpior@ as dependent on ov». 


Meyer, having understood vexpovs to refer to future eternal 
death, of course understands ovveé. as referring to the eternal life 
which begins with the resurrection. This view he regards as alone 


48 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [II. 5 


consistent with the context in which the translation into heaven is 
expressed, and again in ver. 7 the times after the Parousia are 
referred to. His view then is, that God has made believers alive 
with Christ ; that is, that by virtue of the dynamic connexion of 
Christ with His believers as the Head with its body, their re- 
vivification is objectively included in His; “quum autem fides 
suscipitur ea omnia a Deo applicantur homini et ab homine rata 
habentur,” Bengel. The apostle therefore views this as having 
already taken place, although the subjective individual participa- 
tion remains future, and he might have used the future as in 
1 Cor. xv. 22. The peculiar use of the aorist here he refers to 
the principle thus stated by Fritzsche (on Rom. viii. 30, li. p. 206), 
“Ponitur Aoristus de re, quae, quamvis futura sit, tamen pro 
peracta recte censeatur, quum vel alia re jam facta contineatur, 
ut h. 1., vel a conditione suspensa cogitetur, quam jam obtinuisse 
finxeris, v. Hom. /7. iv. 161; John xv. 6.” This usage was first ex- 
plained by Hermann, “ De emend. ratione graecae gr.” pp. 190 ff, 
but, as stated by him, does not apply here. 

Of the two passages to which Fritzsche after Hermann refers, 
that from Homer is, says Hermann, the only instance known to 
me in which it may be reasonably questioned whether the aorist 
has not the signification of the future, viz. Hom. //. iv. 160-162. 
It is as follows :— 


4 / \ > a2 , 3 ay: 
elrep yap Te Kal avtiK OXAvpmtos ovk ETreAcooe, 
* NT 7S \ Lal 4 / > / 
€x Te Kal OWe TeACL, TV TE peyaAw areTLCAY, 
‘\ a a / / 
atv opjow Kepadjor yuvaki Te Kal TeKeecow. 


Here the poet throws himself forward into the time of the verb 
tedel, and sees the instantaneous carrying out of this vindication 
of oaths; as if he said, “And, lo! at once they have paid the 
penalty.” “Rem futuram non ut futuram sed ut praeteritam 
narrat: nimirum post quam Troianos punierit Iuppiter tum illi 
poenas dederunt” (Hermann). ‘The other example is from John 
xv. 6, édv pun Tis petvy ev epol, EBANOn eSw ds Td KAHWA, Kal eEnpavOn. 
Here also a condition is expressed from which the consequence 
necessarily follows. Similarly Epictetus, cap. 59 av brrép Svvapiv 
avahafys TL Tpoowror, Kal ev TOUTH NTXNPLOVATAS, KQ@L 3 ovvaco 
exmAnpooat, tapédures (see Jelf, § 403). In the present passage, if 
ovvel. is referred to the future, there is no resemblance to these 
instances. We have already seen, however, that vexpovs includes 
present spiritual death, and that indeed as its primary notion, 
although it cannot be limited to that, since the consequence, 
natural and eternal death, is necessarily suggested with it. Accord- 
ingly, the vivification, though primarily spiritual, includes in it our 
share in the resurrection and exaltation of Christ. In 1. 20, 21 
the writer has pointed to the resurrection and exaltation of Christ 


II. 6] QUICKENED WITH CHRIST 49 


as an exhibition of Divine power; here he declares that by virtue 
of our union with Him as of members with the head, we participate 
in the same. ‘‘Quamvis salus nostra in spe sit adhuc abscondita 
quantum ad nos spectat: in Christo nihilominus beatam im- 
mortalitatem possidemus,” Calvin. Col. ii, 13 is closely parallel. 
The fact that baptism is there referred to as the means by which 
the individual entered subjectively into fellowship with Christ, and 
is not mentioned here, does not justify the adoption of a different 
meaning for ovveé. here, such as that of Harless, whose view is 
that the risen life and glorification of Christ are here spoken of as 
ours, because they are the glory of “our” Redeemer. 

Chrysostom’ s comment is: ei 7 arapyy fy, Kat Tyjeets™ eCworoinae 
KaKeltvov Kal pas, to. which Theophylact adds: exetvoy évepyeia, 
yeas Svvdpe vdv, per dAtyov O€ Kat evepyeia. ovv- clearly “ with 
Chust” Colm 13. 

Xapitt este cecwopevor. “It is by grace that ye have been 
saved,”—a lively parenthetical reminder suggested by the preced- 
ing words, and vindicating the expression “ vivified when dead.” 
Being dead, ye could do nothing of yourselves, so that it must 
needs be all by grace, z.e. simply by God’s free gift. We are so 
accustomed to use “grace” in a technical theological sense, that 
we are prone to think of that sense where it does not really come 
in. This technical sense of “grace” as something conferred is 
not in question here, and any reference to the distinction between 
prevenient and co-operating grace, etc., is out of place. The 
word is used just as in royal letters the words “by our special 
grace and mere motion.” 


DG, Vulg. a/. prefix 05 (D of rp) to xdpure. 


The perfect €ore ceowopévor here is in striking contrast with 
the aorist éow6ypev in Rom. viii. 24, TH yap €Amidu €o. But the 
perfect is as suitable here as it would have been unsuitable there, 
where it would contradict €Awiév. Then, what was to be said had 
reference to the definite moment of the readers’ introduction into 
the Christian Church, and the point was that the owrypia obtained 
at that definite moment was in part a matter of hope. Here it is 
not a past moment that is in question, as if xapis was over and done 
with, but the readers’ present condition as the continuing result of 
their conversion. In one sense their owrypia was complete, viz. 
regarded with respect to that from which they were delivered ; 
in another incomplete, viz. with respect to that which was 
reserved for them. So to persons rescued from a wreck, but not 
yet arrived in port, we might say either eow6nre or ceowopevor €ore. 

6. ouvyyetpe is nearly synonymous with cvvelworolyce, but sug- 
gests more distinctly physical resurrection. In Col. iii. 1, as here, 
the éyepOjvar oly Xpuor@ is treated as past, and is made the motive 

4 


50 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS {II. a 


for seeking those things which are above, “. . . for ye died, and 
your life is hid with Christ in God.” The present passage ex- 
presses this more vividly and strikingly, ovvexa6ucev €v Tots €7ov- 
paviots. “Non dicit in dextra; Christo sua manet excellentia,” 
Bengel (and so Estius less tersely). ev tots em. denotes the true or 
ideal locality of the Church as the “kingdom of heaven.” Comp. 
Heb. xii. 22, mpooeAndAvOare . . . rdXe Deod Cadvtos, ‘Tepoveadrrp 
€roupaviw. 

€v Xptot after ovy- has caused some perplexity, and led some 
commentators to understand the ovv- in ver. 6 (not in ver. 5) as 
joining tpets and mpets together. But it seems better to under- 
stand év X. as completing and defining with more precision what was 
intended by ovr, for it is not simply together with Christ that this 
vivification and exaltation takes place, but also zz Him, by virtue 
of union with Him as the Head. 

7. wa evdelmTat. The middle does not mean “for His own 
glory,” nor does the language of the verse suggest the idea of 
showing as a sample or specimen. The verb seldom occurs in 
the active voice except as a legal expression, never in N.T. The 
middle involves no more than is already contained in airod, as the 
instances show: Rom. ii. 15, “show the work of the law written 
in their hearts”; 2 Cor. vili. 24, “showing the evdegéis of your 
love and of our boasting” ; 2 Tim. iv. 14, ‘‘ Alexander the copper- 
smith woAAd prot kaka evedeiEato.” See also Tit. ii. 10, iii. 2; Heb. 
vi. 10, 11. These instances also show that the word means, not 
“make known,” but “ exhibit in fact or act.” 

€v Tois aidot Tois emepxopevots. ‘In the coming ages.” It 
seems more suitable to the context, as well as to the use of 
parallel expressions, to understand this of the future life, 6 aiav 
6 péXAwv, in which the state described in the preceding words will 
be actually realised and made manifest. The present participle is 
not against this, for in Mark x. 30 we have 6 aiwy 6 épxdpevos in this 
sense. The plural may at first sight seem against it, but is not 
really so; it only indicates that the apostle viewed the future age 
as involving stages of development in which the exceeding riches 
of God’s grace will be more and more clearly manifested, and that. 
becomes actual, the knowledge of which is mentioned as the 
object of desire in i. 18. Compare the frequent expression eis Tovs 
aidvas tov aiwvwy, also Jude 25, eis wdvtas Trois aidvas; and the 
remarkable expression, 1 Tim. i. 17, 7G Baotd€t tadv aldvwy. These 
aidves may be regarded as constituting a whole in contrast to the 
present life, and so be named in the singular 6 ai. 6 wédAAwv. 

76 UmepBaddov TAodTOS THs XdpiTos adtod. The neuter zAovros 
is best supported here. In modern Greek the word is indifferently 
masculine or neuter. 

€v xpyototnte ep pds. These words are to be so connected, 


IT. 8] SALVATION BY GRACE 51 


not trepBdAXov ed’ Huds. To exhibit ydpis in xpyordrys would be 
tautological. Nor is the absence of the article any objection, for 
xpynororys implies, not merely an inherent quality, but one which 
involves in its idea exercise towards another, so that it requires 
to be completely defined by the expression of this object. 

€v Xpto7@ “Inood. The ground of this kindness shown towards 
us is in Christ, not in us. As Calvin remarks, “ Notanda repetitio 
nominis Christi quia nihil gratiae neque amoris a Deo sperari 
vult, nisi ipso intercedente.” 

8. 7H yap xdpitt, «.7.\. How justly I say ‘the exceeding riches 
of His grace,” for, etc. The apostle now speaks in more detail 
about the truth of which his mind was so full. yadpure has the 
article, because it is the grace already mentioned. 


6:a mlorews without the article, SABD*GP 17, Chrys. Rec. has the 
article, with D° K L and most cursives. 

This is the subjective condition, the “causa apprehendens,” the necessary 
medium on the side of man, ‘‘ the living capacity for receiving the powers of 
the higher world,” Olshausen. The whole emphasis is on 77 xdpitt. The 
article before mlorews would imply that its possession was presupposed : 

“*your faith.” 


kat todto, “and that” (for which xat radra is more frequent in 
classical writers), is referred by the Fathers, Chrysostom, Theodoret, 
and Jerome, to “faith.” Thus Chrysostom says: otd¢ 7 miotis éé 
nov, eb yap ovK 7AGer, et yap pi) exddece, THs HOvVapcOa TcTEdoaL ; 
TOs yap, pyc, mistevoovow eav pa axovowow. He proceeds to 
interpret the words @eod 76 dépov as applying, not to faith, but to 
the grant of salvation on condition of faith, evel més cwler 4 riotts, 
eiré pol, avev epywv; TovTo aitd @eod ddpdv éorw. This is not 
very different from what Theophylact Says: ob tiv miotw héyet 
Sdpov Meod, aGdAAG TO Ova wigtews TwOHvaL, Toto Sdpov éorte Geod. 
Modern commentators (Erasmus, Beza, Bengel, etc.) who have 
adopted the view that rotro refers to miotis, understand the mean- 
ing to be that the power or exercise of faith (faith subjectively 
considered) is the gift of God (as Phil. i. 29), in which case xat 
TovTo to ddpov must be parenthetical, since to say that faith is not 
e€ éywv would be trivial in the extreme. 

The gender of rodro is not fatal to the reference to zioris, but 
to separate ef iyay in this way from é€ ¢pywy does violence to the 
connexion. The latter is a nearer definition of the former. 
Recent commentators refer kai rodro to ceowopévor eore, or, better, 
to the whole clause ; for after xapite had been expressed with cec., 
the emphatic «ai rodro would be out of place. In fact, the apostle 
emphasises and defines r# x. more closely by denying the 
opposites ; first, of the objective source yapis by ovk ef iudy ; and, 
secondly, of the subjective element by ovx €& épywv (Meyer). 

@e0d td Sdpov. God's is the gift =@eod dapov 7d dapdv eortt, 


52 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (II. 9, 1C 


@cod being placed first for the sake of the emphatic contrast with 
UPLWV. 

9. ox €§ pywv. He does not say epywv vouov, because not writ- 
ing to Jewish believers. De Wette (who does not accept the Pauline 
authorship) thinks the opposition in ov« e€ éoywy has no meaning, 
since the writer is not thinking of Jews, and heathen believers did 
not need to be warned against taking pride in the righteousness of 
works, especially after what had preceded in vv. 1 and 5. But the 
ovK €€ épywv was such an essential principle of St. Paul’s teaching 
that no doubt he must have often repeated it amongst both Jews and 
Gentiles ; nor is there any force in the reference to the past condition 
of the readers. Might not Gentile converts be tempted to regard 
their salvation as secured by their new holiness of life? and not 
the less because their former sins were when they were in darkness. 

iva py Tis Kavxnontat. Some commentators insist on giving 
iva its full final force, “in order that”; so that to prevent boasting 
was God’s purpose, or one of His purposes, in appointing that men 
should not be justified by works. Are we then to say that, in 
order that men should not boast, He has refused to allow salvation 
or justification by works? Nay; but no man can be justified by 
his works, and “when they have been betrayed by these,” God 
appointed that He should save them xdpite dua ziocrews. So 
in substance Chrysostom and Theophylact, whose words are: 16 
yap tva ovk airtodoytxdv €or, aXd’ ex THs dtoBdoews TOD TpaypLaToS. 
Yet the clause is not to be reduced to a mere statement of result, 
since it is a result inseparable from God’s purpose. Stier suggests 
that tva, x.7.A., may be viewed as the expression of the writer’s 
purpose: “This I say in order that,” etc. This cannot fairly be 
called unnatural, but it would require the verb to be present. 

10. adtod ydp éopev Toinpa ktisbertes €v XpioT@ emt Epyors dyabois. 
Proof of the foregoing clauses from ovx ef tudv, not of Wa tis... 
only, which is only a secondary thought. If we are God’s work- 
manship, our salvation is not our own work, but the gift of God; 
and if we are created in Christ for good works, there could be no 
works preceding this creation from which any merit could arise. 
The argument turns on avrod, which is emphatic, ‘“ His workman-* 
ship we are,” and on xticGévres ; and the following words still more 
distinctly express the impossibility of any merit preceding this 
KTS. 

moinpa, found again only Rom. i. 20 of the works of creation. 
Here, too, it is referred by Tert. Greg. Naz. and Basil to physical 
creation. This is refuted by the nearer definition given in 
ktirOeévres, «.7.4. Pelagius includes both the physical and the 
spiritual, ‘quod vivimus, quod spiramus, quod intelligimus, quod 
credere possumus, ipsius est, quia ipse conditor nostri est.” The 
word can hardly of itself be used simply of the new or spiritual 


II. 10] CREATED FOR GOOD WORKS 53 


creation ; it may perhaps be chosen to suggest strongly the analogy 
of this to the first creation, the nature of this zoijya being left to 
be defined by the following words. Perhaps we may better say 
that the apostle’s mind was so full of the idea of the “‘new man,” 
that he writes as if this new creation might be regarded as the 
first “ making” of us. 

ktisGevtes. “Created”; for if anyone is in Christ, he is xavvi 
xtious, 2 Cor. v. 17; compare also Gal. vi. 15. «rilew is appro- 
priately used of the xawés avOpwros, the coming into being of 
which is called mahuyyever ia, Ditansso) Weare not,othen, to 
weaken it into “ efficere.” 

€v Xptor@ “Il. Cf. ver. 15 and 2 Cor. v.17, above. év expresses 
the fellowship i in which that new creation takes place. 

Em épyois dyaQots. ez, with the dative, is used to express the 
condition upon which a thing happens or is done; for instance, 
the conditions of a treaty ém’ icous, emt maou Sixators, emt pyrtots, ez’ 
apyupiw, ext TH TOO avdpos Wuy7h (Plato, Aep. ix. p. 590 A) ; davetLew 
ext troOyxn (Dem. p. 908, 21). Hence the expression é¢’ dre. 
Many, if not most, of the instances adduced in support of the 
meaning, “with a view to such and such an end,” are better 
explained by this usage, ¢.g. dwpw ému peyédw in Hom. JZ. x. 304, 
Tis Kev pol TOOE Epyov brogxopevos TeACT ELEY OwWpw Ere p., Certainly not 
“with a view to,” but “on the terms of receiving”; J/. ix. 482, 
povvov, TnAVyeToV, ToAXOiow eri ktedrecow ; and v. 154, “he begat 
no other son,” emi xredéreco. diwéoGa, the possessions being an 
accompanying condition of the sonship. So also in such phrases 
as emt Eevia. déxeoGau or Kadeiv; pdoKovtes ew eAevOepia mpoecravar 
tov “EXAnvev (Dem. p. 661, 16); em eXevbepia (twds KatatiOeva 
xXpypata) (20. p. 1355, 18). Kal ef’ & ev KopivOw pi épyalec Oar. 
Where the condition is (as in the last instance, not in that preced- 
ing) that something be granted, the meaning amounts to the same 
as “with a view to”; but this does not seem to be contained in the 
preposition. Indeed, the following words, xai éd’ o, «.7.A., appear 
to decide the signification of éi here. 

Similarly in Gal. v. 13, em éAevOepia éxdA7Onte means, not 
that freedom was the end or object, but the condition of their 
calling, the terms on which they were called, viz. so as to be free. 
Again, 1 Thess. iv. 7, ob yap éxdAecev Huds 6 @cds emi axabapoia. 
Not on such terms were we called, not so that we should be 
impure. In the following words, dAAa év dyiacpa, év appears to 
be preferred, because dyacpés did not express any outward con- 
dition. 2 Tim. ii. 14, éri xatraotpody tav dxovdvtwy “with a view 
to,” would be clearly out of place; “to the subverting” gives the 
sense correctly. It is the inevitable concomitant. Here épya 
ayafa are not the object of the new creation, but are involved in 
it as an inseparable condition 


54 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS l [II. 10 


ots mpontoipacey 6 Ocds tva ev adtots mepimatyowpev. The 
construction here is much disputed. ‘The most obvious explana 
tion is that ois is in the dative by attraction, “ which God before 
prepared.” Then we ask in what sense can works be said to have 
been prepared, since they have no existence previous to their being 
done. An easy answer appears to be, that they are appointed, 
and so, though not realised in fact, are realised in the divine 
thought or purpose. This is the view taken after Augustine by 
Harless, who thinks this the only possible sense here, since the 
apostle expressly adds that the actual realisation is expected from 
the believers. Thus St. Paul uses wpoeroundgew here of things, in 
the same sense as he had used zpoopi€ew in i. 11 Of persons. De 
Wette and Braune, etc., agree. The difficulty in this view is that 
érousralew is not=dpilew. ‘ Aliud est enim, parare éround ey, aliud 
definire dpilew” (Fritzsche, Rom. ili. 339). The instance which 
Harless cites from Matt. xxv. 34, “the kingdom prepared,” is not 
parallel, nor Gen. xxiv. 14. 

For this reason Ellicott, Eadie, Meyer, etc., reject this view, 
but fail to give a satisfactory interpretation. ‘‘ God (says Ellicott) 
made ready for us, prearranged, prepared a sphere of moral action, 
or (to use the simile of Chrys.) a road, with the intent that we 
should walk in it and not leave it: this sphere, this road, was 
épya ayaba.” Similarly Eadie, who suggests that zpoopifew marks 
the destination, zpoerouu. the means: “they have been prescribed, 
defined, adapted to us,” “by prearranging the works in their 
sphere, character, and suitability, and also by preordaining the 
law which commands, the inducement or appliances which impel, 
and the creation in Christ which qualifies and empowers us,” etc. 
But he does not explain how things non-existent can be arranged 
except by ordaining. These interpretations do not essentially 
differ from the first. 

The similes of a sphere or a road (used by Chrysostom for 
homiletical purposes) are inappropriate. A road exists objectively 
before one walks in it. A truer simile would be a path through 
the seas. Perhaps we might say that the word zpoer. is chosen, not 
as being logically accurate, but in order to express in the most - 
striking manner the truth that the good works do not proceed 
from ourselves ; they are, as it were, received from the Creator as 
out of a treasure, which is thus figuratively conceived as being 
prepared before. But this hardly meets the difficulty. Olshausen 
understands that the circumstances and conditions under which it 
becomes possible to do good works are ordered by God, zpoer. 
differing from zpoop/Zew only as relating more to details (compare 
Eadie, above). 

Stier suggests taking the verb intransitively, ow being the 
dative of reference. ‘‘ For which God made previous prepara- 


II. 11] THE GENTILES AT ONE TIME ALIENS 55 


tion.” The simple verb érousdfew is used intransitively in Luke 
ix. 52, wate éroudcat ait@. This, however, is not entirely 
parallel. The object to be understood there is readily supplied, 
“parare paranda”; just as in English we may say “ prepare,” 
“make ready,” viz. “things.” But here we should have to ask, 
Prepare what? The answer would perhaps be “us.” And as 
Fritzsche points out, this #udas as the object did not require to be 
expressed, since it is sufficiently indicated by the following words, 
iva év avtois tepitatyowpev. This seems, after all, the most un- 
objectionable interpretation, and is adopted by Reuss, v. Soden, 
Oltramare, etc. Eadie also expresses himself as inclined to adopt 
it, if it could be fully justified, but he does not refer to the sug- 
gestion of #uas contained in the following words. This interpreta- 
tion cannot fairly be charged with making tva év airots repurarn- 
owyev a mere tautology. These words strongly accentuate the 
moral purpose of the preparation. The supposition of a Hebraism, 
as if ois . . . év avrots were = éy ols, is inadmissible. 

mpo has its proper force, not, however, as if it meant before the 
Ktiows, as étr. expresses an act, not a purpose; and, of course, not 
after, because of zpo-, therefore at the time of the xricws, so that 
éroacew repeats xrilew éri ép. dy., only with the addition of zpo 
to express that the new creation is the primary thing but has this 
end in view, the works being only a result. It must be observed 
that épya dyafd is general; not rots dy. épyous, the definite good 
works, etc. 

There is no ground for saying that the weight here assigned 
to good works goes beyond what is elsewhere expressed by St. 
Paul, as Baur insists, or that the importance of faith is lessened. 
Here, as elsewhere, works have their ground in faith. Bengel 
well says: “ut ambularemus, non salvaremur, aut viveremus.” 

11-22. Ye Gentiles were formerly aliens from the commonwealth 
of Israel, and had no share in the covenants of promise ; but Christ 
by His death has cast down the barrier which separated you from 
the City of God, and has reconciled you both to God. Now, there- 
fore, all alike have access to Him, the Father, and all alike form 
part of the holy temple which He inhabits. 

11. Avd pynpovedete. These blessings should move them to 
think more of their former state, so that they should be the more 
thankful. “Talis recordatio gratum animum acuit, et fidem 
roborat.” Avd is best taken as referring to the whole section, 
vw. I to Io. 

dt. mote Spets in this order X* ABD* Vulg. Rec. has iets 
more, with X° D°G (prefixes of to mworé), Syr. Harcl. But Syr. Pesh. 
Boh. and some other versions have zore after e6vn. ori is resumed 
by or, ver. 12, and moré by t@ xaip@ ex. Hence we need not 
supply either évres or 7re, but ra €6v7 is in simple apposition to tpets. 


56 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [II. 11 


ta €6vn, with the article as indicating a class. Since ¢6vn ev 
gapxi expresses one single idea, the article does not require re- 
petition before év. év capxi must have the same sense here as in 
the following clause, since the former is explained by of Aeydpevor 
axpoBvaoria, and this has its antithesis in ras Aey. wepirouys. It 
therefore refers to their uncircumcision, not to their former carnal 
state, nor to their descent. Chrysostom and other Fathers take 
ev capki as opposed to év wvevpart. Thus Jerome: “ Ephesios in 
carne vocans ostendit in spiritu esse non gentes.” This contra- 
dicts zoré and ver. 12. ‘The apostle is not exalting them, but 
calling attention to their previous inferiority to the Jews. 

“Remember that formerly ye Gentiles in the flesh called (in 
contempt) Uncircumcision by the so-called Circumcision in the 
flesh, a circumcision merely physical, made with hands.” He 
reminds them of the ignominy which in the mind of the Jews 
attached to the name of heathen and of the uncircumcised. This 
contempt is already predicated in the words oi Aeydpevor axp. ; and 
the lowness of their condition is further shown by the following 
description of those who so despised them, those, namely, who 
prided themselves on a mere fleshly distinction made with hands. 
Why, in fact, does he say Aeyoueévns repitouys, and why xeporroup 
tov? There was no need to give the readers information on the 
name or the fact. The latter word is clearly depreciatory, ‘‘a 
merely external and artificial thing-’ But he is far from depreciat- 
ing circumcision, in its true significance, as the sign of member- 
ship of the commonwealth of the people of God. Hence the use 
of Aeyouévyns, which by its adjectival connexion with zepitouns gets 
the signification “so called.” This is readily explained from the 
apostle’s use of zepitouy elsewhere in a spiritual, as contrasted 
with a merely physical sense, as in Rom. i. 28, 29, ‘ Neither is 
that circumcision which is outward in the flesh . . . circumcision 
is that of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter.” Phil. ii. 2, 
he calls the physical circumcision xataroyy, a term more con- 
temptuous than xeporoujrov here: adding in ver. 3, “‘ We are the 
circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God and glory in Christ 
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh”; and in Col. ii. 11, ° 
which is strikingly illustrative of the present passage, “in whom 
ye were circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands.” 
Soden thinks that yxecporoujrov here is superfluous, because there 
is no reference (as in Col.) to a spiritual circumcision, and év capxi 
sufficiently emphasises the merely external character of the sign; 
and hence he thinks the word introduced out of imitation of Col. 
li. 11. But it seems, on the contrary, to give emphasis and com- 
pleteness to the thought, and would naturally occur to the writer 
who about the same time wrote ayetporounrov in Col. 

Although “circumcision” is not used figuratively in the O.T., 


11.12] THE GENTILES AT ONE TIME ALIENS 57 


“uncircumcision” is. Even in Lev. xxvi. 41 we have “their un- 
circumcised heart.” Jeremiah speaks of the uncircumcised ear of 
those who will not hearken (vi. 10), and calls the house of Israel 
“uncircumcised in heart” (ix. 26). Comp. Ezek. xliv. 7, “un- 
circumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh,” and Acts 
Vii. 51. 

12. dt fre TO karpO exelvw Xwpis Xpiotod. Rec. has év before 
TO karpo. It is omitted by 8 ABDG. 

dtu resumes the former dru. ‘‘ Remember, I say, that.” 

xwpis Xpiotod is taken by De Wette and Bleek as, not a 
predicate, but a circumstantial addition, ‘being at that time with- 
out Christ.” It would thus correspond with év Xpiord, ver. 13, 
and would give the reason of their alienation from the common- 
wealth of Israel. But, considering the position of the words, this 
is a harsh construction, and would deprive the words of the 
emphasis which belongs to them as the opposite of the frequent 
ev Xp. in this Epistle. yxwpis Xp. is, as Meyer says, the first tragic 
predicate.  xwpis is distinguished from dvev by Tittmann as 
follows: ‘“‘xwpts ad subjectum quod ab objecto sejunctum est 
refertur, dvev ad objectum quod a subjecto abesse cogitandum 
est.” According to this, ywpis Xp. would mean ‘“‘ye were far from 
Christ” ; avev Xp. would be ‘Christ was not with you.” But this 
must be received with hesitation, seeing that ywpis occurs in the 
N.T. forty times, and avev only thrice (Ellicott), viz. Matt. x. 29; 
1 Pet. iii. 1, iv. 9. In the last quoted passage dvev yoyyvopod is 
equivalent to xwpis yoyyvopor, Phil. il. 14. 

Schwegler sees here a concession to Judaism which is unlike 
St. Paul; but without reason, since the concession only relates to 
pre-Christian times, and the advantage possessed by the Jews in this 
respect is, as it must be, fully admitted by St. Paul (Rom. iii. 1 ff.). 

What is meant by xwpis Xpiocrod is explained in the following 
words :— 

GmnddoTpiwpevor THs moAttelas Tod “IopandA. The verb dmadXo- 
Tptow occurs also in iv. 18, az. tHs Cwns Tov @eod, and Col. i. 21, 
without a genitive. In Ezek. xiv. 5, 7 we have az. dm’ éuod; in 
3 Macc. i. 4, Tv warpiwy doypatwy. The active verb occurs in 
Eccles. xi. 34, a7. oe T&v idiwy cov. 

The verb always means to estrange; here therefore “estranged 
from” as opposed to “being at home in.” 

moA.reta, was interpreted by the ancients in the sense “ manner 
of life,” ‘ conversatio,” Vulg., a meaning which the word frequently 
has in Christian writers, and not in these alone; see Athen. i. p. 19 A. 
But to take it so here would be contrary to ver. 19, where the 
opposite of am. x.7.A. is ovprodtra. It may mean either citizen- 
ship, or state, commonwealth. Many commentators have taken 
it in the former sense. It is questionable whether it could be so 


58 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [II. 12 


used with a genitive of the nation or city. Nor does the verb 
dmnXX. suggest such a meaning. Besides, the Greek and Roman 
conception of citizenship would not be appropriate here, and, 
further, we should have to explain the exclusion from citizenship 
as arising from exclusion from the commonwealth. Naturally it 
is the theocratic constitution from which they were excluded ; and 
the name Israel implies this, since this was the name of the people 
in their theocratic relation. Yet Chrysostom refers the words to 
the exclusion of the Gentiles from the temporal glories of Israel, 
ele Tept Tv ovpaviwy mpaypatwv, N€yer Kal mepl TOV emt TIS yis, 
éretdy) preydAnv Sdgay elyov rept adray ot ‘Iovdator, in which he was 
followed by some moderns (as by Grotius). As if any Roman 
citizen or subject could regard as a misfortune the exclusion from 
a State which was an object of contempt! 

Many commentators suppose that arnAA. implies a previous 
unity. Thus Bengel: “ Abalienati, non alieni; participia praesup- 
ponunt gentes ante defectionem suam a fide patrum imo potius 
ante lapsum Adami fuisse participes lucis et vitae.” However 
attractive this view may be in itself, the conception is too new and 
important to be introduced here on so slight a ground. If it had 
been in the apostle’s mind, he would doubtless have referred to it 
more explicitly in some part of his writings. It is not hinted at 
in ver. 14, where we might have expected “again made” or the 
like. For an instance of the verb being used without reference to 
a previous state, see Ps. lvii. (Iviil.) 3, darnAAoTpiwO yar of épaptwrAot 
amd pytpas. Olshausen’s view is that the exclusion referred to 
is that which resulted from God’s restriction of His peculiar 
operations of grace to Israel. As far as alienation from God is 
referred to, however, it is true that men are regarded as originally, 
and from an ideal point of view, at one with God. 

kat &€vor tay S.aOyKGv THs érayyeAtas. A further specification 
of what is meant by the preceding clause. €évos is followed 
by a genitive, not of “the point of view” (‘“‘extraneos quod ad 
pactorum promissiones attinet,” Beza), but simply of separation 
or privation. So Soph. Oed. R. 219, §€vos Adyov rovd éepa, 
Eévos 5é tod mpaxOevtos. Plato, Afpol. i, E€vws (Exew) THS evOade 
AeEews. 

“The covenants of the promise.” émayy. is connected with 
diaPyKav, not with é€Aida, as the position of the word shows. The 
covenants were characterised by the promise of the Messiah (cf. 
Acts xiii. 32). The plural is used with reference to the covenants 
with the patriarchs, but the Mosaic covenant is not excruded, 
although it was primarily vopofecia. 

édmida pi) €xovtes. The absence of the article shows that it is 
not the definite hope of the Messiah that is meant, but hope in 
the widest sense, so that the expression is so much the stronger, 


IT. 13] THE GENTILES NOW BROUGHT NIGH 59 


“having no hope.” 7 is used, not because the thought is 
dependent on what precedes, but because it is their own con- 
sciousness that is referred to. ovd« €xovtes would express only 
the writer’s judgment of their state. Cf. ovd« «iddres @edv, Gal. 
iv. 8 

kai deo. “The deepest stage of heathen misery,” Meyer. The 
word aeos is not found in the Sept. or Apocrypha, and only here 
in the N.T. In Greek writers it occurs in three senses, ‘not 
believing in God, atheist” (Plato, Afo/. p. 26C). Secondly, 
“impious, godless” (Plato, Zegg. p. 966 E), or “without God, 
without God’s help,” Soph. Oed. #., érei aGeos adidos 6 Te t¥patov 
éAoiuav. ‘To understand it here as ‘‘forsaken by God” would be 
to introduce a conception not warranted by the expressions in the 
text. They were truly “without God,” as not knowing Him. 
Notwithstanding their many gods, they had no conception of a 
Creator and Governor to be loved and trusted. So far as their 
consciousness was concerned, they had no God. But God had 
not left Himself without a witness amongst them. The description 
is general, of the class to which the readers belonged. This was 
not the occasion for referring to the noble exceptions to the moral 
degradation of heathenism. It was, indeed, in Asia Minor that 
this degradation was lowest, so that the Romans traced to it the 
corruption which spread to the whole empire. 

év T@ Koop, to be joined both with éAwida py éy. and with 
a6eou, “in the world,” with all its troubles, trials, and uncertainties, 
ye were without Divine help; generally understood as contrasted 
with zoAureia, 

13. vuvi 3é év XprotS “Inood, bpets ot wore Svtes paxpay éyernOnte 
éyyls. vuvi opposed to To Kaipd éxeivw. ev Xp. “I. opposed to 
xwpis Xpicrod. We are not to supply either éoré or évres. Since 
the being in Christ was not prior to the being brought near, the 
interpretation, “postquam in Christo estis recepti” (Calvin, Har- 
less), is not admissible. Nor can we understand ‘cum in Christo 
sitis recepti,” which would not only make these words a superfluous 
addition, but would be hard to reconcile with the aorist. 

*Ingod is suitably added to Xpiord here, and indeed was 
almost necessary to the distinct expression of the thought. In 
ver. 12 it could not have been added, since that included times 
preceding the incarnation, and ywpis Xp. “I. would imply the 
existence of the historical Jesus then ; whereas here, not only the 
Messiah as such is referred to, but the personal Jesus as the Christ 
and the Saviour. 

Toté Ovtes paxpdy corresponds to the expressions and\Aotpww- 
evo, K.7.A. paxpav and éyyvs, then, have reference both to the 
moXiteta Tov “Io. with its diaOyKar, and to the éAmis with God 
Himself. Accordingly in the following verses we have two points 


60 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [II. 14 


of view combined, viz. the reconciliation of the Gentiles to God, 
and their admission to the wodureda of Israel, namely, the true 
Israel—the Christian Church. 

The terms poxpav and éyy’s were suggested by Isa. lvii. 19, 
“Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is nigh.” There, 
indeed, as in Acts ii. 39, the words have a local meaning, and 
have no reference to the admission of Gentiles to the theocracy ; 
but they easily lend themselves to this conception, and, in fact, 
were frequently used by Rabbinic writers with reference to pro- 
selytes, who were said to be “‘ brought near.” Many passages may 
be seen in Schoettgen and Wetstein. One may be quoted. “A 
woman came to R. Eliezer confessing certain gross sins, and asked 
to be made a proselyte, saying, ‘ Rabbi, propinquam me fac’; on 
hearing her sin he rejected her. She went to R. Joshua, who re- 
ceived her. His disciples said, ‘R. Eliezer illam removit, tu vero 
eam propinquam facis ?’” 

éyyus yiveoOa., frequent in classical writers, but not found else- 
where in the N.T. 


The order éyev7Onre éyyis is that of SAB, 17. Rec. has éyy. éyev., with 
DGKLP. Ellicott thinks the Rec. genuine, the order here adopted being 
due to a mistaken correction of the emphatic juxtaposition of waxpdy and 
éyyvs. Harless is of the same opinion. But why should copyists correct 
this emphatic juxtaposition? It is just what would strike an ordinary reader. 
Looking closer, we see that the opposition is not merely between these two, 
but between dvres waxpdy and éyev7Onre éyyvs, and that the verb is properly 
placed in the most emphatic position. 


év T atyatt tod Xpiorod more particularly defines the instru- 
mentality. It is not possible to draw any satisfactory distinction 
between this and 6:a Tod at. i. 7. 

14. adtds yap éotiv 4 eipyyyn Hav, “ He Himself is our peace” 
He has not brought about peace by a mere external action or 
arrangement; it is in His own person that He gives it. ‘Non 
modo pacificator nam sui impensa pacem peperit et ipse vinculum 
est utrorumque,” Bengel. The context shows that what is primarily 
intended is the union of Jews and Gentiles ; but as it was not this 
union of itself that was of importance, but the essential basis of 
it, as the union of both in one body of Christ, it is manifest that 
the idea of peace with God could not be absent from the mind of 
the apostle in writing 4 <ipyvn yuov. Comp. ver. 17. 

Schoettgen quotes a Rabbinic writer who calls the Messiah 
“Peace,” in allusion to Isa. ix. 6. 

6 mornoas. “ Quippe qui.” 

Ta dupdtepa év. Both, ze. both Jews and Gentiles. There is 
no ellipsis (as of yévy, e6vy, or the like). It is simply an instance 
of the neuter being used of persons in a general sense; cf. Heb. 
vii. 7, TO €AaTTOV 70 Tod KpeitTovos evAoyeirat; I Cor. i. 27, 28, 


I. 14] THE GENTILES NOW BROUGHT NIGH 61 


Ta pwpa TOD KOopHoV . . . TA dobevn (Opposed to ver. 26, of codoé). 
So in classical Greek, e.g. Xen. Azad. vii. 3. 11, TA Hevyovra ixavol 
eoopeda SudKewv. 

év. Comp. Gal. ili. 28, mdvres duets ev éote é€v Xpiotd “Inood. 
Not, says Chrysostom, that He has brought us to that nobility of 
theirs, but both us and them to a greater; as if one should melt 
down a statue of silver and one of lead, and the two should 
come out gold. 

kat, exegetical=inasmuch as, He, 1d peodtorxov tod ppaypod 
Auoas, “ brake down the partition wall of the fence.” 

peodtotxov is a rare word, found, besides the Fathers, only in 
Eratosth. af. Athen. vii. 281 D (masc.), and Hesychius. The 
genitive has been variously explained, as of quality = “‘ the separating 
partition ” (against which is the fact that this adjectival notion 
belongs to pecdrorxov itself); or of possession, “the wall which 
belonged to the fence”; or better, of apposition, “the partition 
which consisted in the fence.” payyds means a fence, hedge, or 
enclosure, not a separation. 

It seems probable that the figure was suggested by the partition 
which separated the Court of the Gentiles from the temple proper, 
and on which there was an inscription threatening death to any 
alien who passed it. That the Ephesian readers can hardly be 
supposed to be familiar with the arrangements of the temple, is no 
proof that these may not have been in the apostle’s mind. But 
it is worth noticing that it was an Ephesian, Trophimus, that 
St. Paul was charged with bringing into the temple. A more 
serious objection seems to be, that when the Epistle was written 
the wall referred to was still standing. But the apostle is not 
speaking of the literal wall, but using it as an illustration. Any 
reference to the vail which was rent at the time of the crucifixion 
would be out of harmony with the context. That vail did not 
separate Jews and Gentiles. 

Aucas is suitable to the figure; cf. John ii. 19, Avoarte Tov vadv 
tovrov. It is equally suitable to the following €x@pav, since Avew 
€xOpay is of frequent occurrence in classical writers. 

Here it is questioned whether ¢y@pay is to be connected with 
the words preceding or those following, and if with the preceding, 
whether éy 7H oapxt avtov is to be taken with Avoas or with 
katdpynoas. Another alternative will be mentioned presently. 
We have to choose, then, between the following renderings :— 

Having done away with the middle wall, namely, the enmity ; 
having in His flesh annulled the law. 

Having in His flesh done away with the middle wall, namely, 
the enmity, etc. 

Having done away with the middle wall, having in His flesh 
annulled the enmity, namely, the law, etc. 


62 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [II. 14 


The view which connects év tH capki airod with €xOpav as = 
the enmity in his flesh, whether “his flesh” be understood to mean 
humanity in general (Chrys.) or the Jews (cf. Rom. xi. 14), must 
be set aside as inconsistent with the absence of the article before 
év tH capxi. The first-mentioned interpretation gives an awkward 
isolation to €xpav, and adds the harshness of making the specifica- 
tion of manner, év T7 o., precede the object and its verb. 

The third construction is objectionable, first, because the law 
cannot itself be called €y@pa (the designation of it as dvvapus ris 
dpuaptias, 1 Cor. xv. 56, is not analogous); and, secondly, because 
the position of év 77) o. airod would be inexplicable, coming, as it 
does on that supposition, between the two nouns in apposition, 
although it has no relation to either. Indeed, it may be added 
that katapyyoas is not a verb appropriate to €yOpay ; it does not 
properly mean to destroy, but “to make of none effect,” “to 
deprive of power”; of the faith of God, Rom. iii. 3; of the law, 
Rom. iii. 31 ; the promise, iv. 14; persons from the law, vii. 2, 6. 
It is, indeed, used of things coming to an end, as knowledge 
and prophecy, but coming to an end by being superseded. 

The second construction mentioned above seems to have the 
advantage of these two, although it must be admitted that it is not 
without difficulty. For the enmity was not the wall of partition. 
It was not the law only, although that was the ultimate cause, 
but the separation, religious, moral, and social, which forbade fellow- 
ship between Jew and Gentile. This partition was broken down 
by the annulling of the law. 

V. Soden has proposed a view of the passage which, if admis- 
sible, would meet the difficulties. It is that tyv €yOpay is the 
beginning of the participial clause, which, having been interrupted 
by the statement of the process by which the effect was produced, 
is taken up again in ver. 16, where ¢x@pay is repeated. If the text 
had run thus, riv €xOpav, tov vopov trav evt. év Soy. Katdpynaas, 
aréxrewve, there would have been nothing harsh in the order of the 
words. As it is, the parenthesis is enlarged, as in the manner of 
this Epistle, ii. 1 and 4, 11 and 12, ili. 1 and 12, and the inter- 
rupted thought is resumed in ver. 16. The two participles, 
katdpynoas, amoxteivas, in their relation to one another, correspond 
exactly with the two in ver. 14. Soden connects év 77 o. avrod 
with the following clause. The parenthetic digressions, however, 
with which Soden compares this, are not quite parallel. In each 
of them, while the train of thought is interrupted, it is easy to 
account for the interruption by the influence of some particular 
word; they are, in fact, instances of what Paley well calls St. 
Paul’s habit of “ going off at a word.” Thus in ii. 1 he goes off at 
dpapriass, év als; in il. 11 at €Ovy &v capki; in ili. r at brép tudv 
tov Cvwv, 


II. 151 THE GENTILES NOW BROUGHT NIGH 63 


The verbal connexion is in each instance easy. But here 
there is no similar connexion between the words which precede 
the digression and tov vépor, k.T.A. 

The éx6pa is obviously that of Jews and Gentiles. This natur- 
ally loomed much larger in the apostle’s eyes than it does in ours, 
or than it did in those of Chrysostom and his successors. With 
us as with them, the more pressing thought is of the enmity of 
both Jew and Gentile to God. So Oecumenius: peodro.xov 
ppaypod pyot rHv €xOpav tiv pos Oedv, Hudv re kat “lovdaiwy, yrs €x 
Tov yperépwv apartwpatwr. And so Chrysostom interprets tyv 
xOpav év rH capi as being the pecdrorxovT @ Kowvov eivar dudpparypa 
dro @eov diareryilov Has, rejecting the interpretation which makes 
the law the ¢y4pa. But even though 7 éx4pa is not=6 vépos, it 
is the annulling of the law that removes the éy@pa, and the law is 
characterised in terms which exclude the natural law. Moreover, 
the reconciling of both to God is stated as a further object of the 
removal of the enmity and the creating of both into one new man. 

Tov vopov Tay évtohdv ev Sdypacw katdpyyous. TOV Vv. TOY EVT. EV 
8. belong together; “the law of commandments expressed in 
decrees.” The law consisted of évroAad, and the definite form in 
which these were expressed was that of ddyuara, authoritative 
decrees (“‘legem imperiosam,” Erasm.). This connexion does not 
require the article to be repeated after €vrokév. For we might 
with propriety say évroAiy diddvar év doypart, and therefore évroA; 
ev 6. may form a single conception. So Winer in his later editions. 
Compare tov tpav GjAov vrép euod, 2 Cor. vil. 7. In fact, tov 
evr. Tov ev 6. would denote the évroAaé as a particular class, ‘‘ com- 
mandments, even those expressed in decrees.” 

Adypa in classical Greek means, first, an opinion or resolution. 
In the plural it is used of the “placita philosophorum,” whence 
the use of the word in Christian writers in the sense of ‘“ dogma.” 
But it also means a decree (Xen. Demosth. Plato), and this is the 
meaning which alone it has in the N.T. We have e&jdde Sdypa 
mapa Kaicapos, Luke ii. 1; dd0ynara Kaioapos, Acts xvii. 7; 7a 6. 
Kexplipéva vd TOV amoot., 1b. xvi. 4. The word occurs also in 
Lachmann’s text, Heb. xi. 23, 6. rod Paoitéws. The remaining 
passages are the present and Col. il. 14. Chrysostom does not 
seem to have contemplated this meaning. He suggests that what 
is meant is either faith, d0ypa airyy Kkadov, for by faith alone 
He saved us, or the precept tiv zapayyeAtav, as Christ said, 
ey d&¢ A€yw tyiv. He is followed by Theophylact, Theodoret 
(Sdypara tiv evayyeduxiy didacKkadiav éxddeoev), and Oecumenius. 
Theodore Mops. also connects the word with katdpyneas, but 
interprets differently, understanding ddéypata of the facts and 
hopes of the Gospel, “dia rav idiwv doypdrwv' tva ciry, THs 
dvactdcews, THS ApGapaias, THs ADavacias’ S6ypara Kahécas Tadra ds 


64 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS {II. 15 


év mpdypacw ovra, the Divine grace working in us so that we do 
not need commandments and precepts.” ‘This interpretation, as 
well as Chrysostom’s, would clearly require tots déypacw avrod or 
the like. Against Chrysostom’s view, indeed, it is decisive that it 
was not by doctrines or precepts that Christ annulled the law. 
Theodore’s view avoids this error, but gives déyza an impossible 
sense. Of course, when once these commentators connected év. 8. 
with the following, taking év as instrumental, they were driven to 
some such interpretation. 

Harless also connects ey 6. with xarapyyoas, thinking that the 
absence of the article forbids the connexion with evroAoy. But 
his interpretation is that Christ annulled the law only in respect of 
ddypara, comparing Cic. PAz/, i. 7, “In maximis vero rebus, id est 
legibus, acta Caesaris dissolvi ferendum non puto,” and such phrases 
as év TH mlote wveiduce (Arrian, “xp. iii. 30; Bernhardy, p. 212). 
St. Paul has already indicated by ray evr. that he is not speaking 
of the law so far as it belonged to the covenants of promise, and 
now, to avoid all misconception, he adds év doypacr. Olshausen 
follows Harless, who had, indeed, been preceded in this interpreta- 
tion by Crellius. But this would require the article before ddy- 
pactv. Moreover, while it is true that the law as oxia trav pedAov- 
Twv OF as Tadaywyos eis Xpiordv was not annulled, it was superseded. 
Such a limitation of the statement as to the abolition of the law 
would be out of place here, and would require more explicit state- 
ment, since it is not elsewhere referred to. ‘The Mosaic law as 
such, not merely in certain aspects of it, has come to an end in 
Christ. He is the “end of the law,” Rom. x. 4. Faith having 
come, we are no longer t6 ratdaywydv (Gal. ili. 25). 

If év 6. be connected with xardpyynoas, then, considering the 
absence of the article, the only grammatical interpretation seems 
to be Hofmann’s, viz. that Christ deprived the O.T. law of validity, 
by putting an end to all precepts, “Satzungen.” He compares 
the construction in 1 Cor. ii. 7, AaAotpev codiay Oeot ev pvarnpia, 
7.é. N\ahodvres codpiay Nadodpwev pvoerypiov. But surely the N.T. con- 
tains many specific precepts which may be properly called ddypara., 
Comp. also ov véuov trod Xpiorov, Gal. vi. 2; evvonos Xpiorod, 
t Cor. ix. 21; and the parallel to the present passage in Col. li. 14. 
As Meyer observes, the ddyuara of Christianity are the true det 
mapovTa Odypara, Plato, Zheaet. p. 158 D. Had the intention 
been what Hofmann supposes, St. Paul would doubtless have 
added some qualification, such as év ddypacr dovdAeias. vodjos here 
is not to be limited to the ceremonial law; there is nothing in the 
connexion to show such a limitation, which, on the contrary, 
would make the statement very weak. No reader would fail to 
see that, as Theodoret says, ovk dvetAe TO ov potyevoess, K.T.r. 
The moral law retains its obligation, not, however, because the 


IL 16] THE GENTILES NOW BROUGHT NIGH 65 


Jewish law is only partially annulled, but because its obligation was 
independent of the law and universal (Rom. i. 14). Ifa Moham- 
medan becomes a Christian, we do not say that the Koran retains 
its obligation for him in its moral part, although he still acknow- 
ledges the obligation of many moral precepts contained in it. 
The Christian now fulfils the moral law, not because of external 
precepts, but because conformity with it is the natural fruit of the 
Spirit. Hence the contrast between the expressions, “works of 
the law,” “fruits of the Spirit.” 

iva tods Svo KTlion ev abt eis Eva kawvdv aGvOpwrov. The neuter 
was used in ver. 14 to express the general characteristics of the 
two classes; but here, where the Jews and Gentiles are conceived 
as concrete persons, the masculine was necessary. 

kawvéy is necessary because the one is neither Jew nor Greek. 
Both have put off their former religious condition, and have received 
the same new nature. Chrysostom says: dpa&s ovx. tov “EAAnva 
yevopevov "lovdaiov, dAAa Kal totrov Kdxeivoy eis érépay Kataotacw 
HkovTas. ovdx iva TOUTOV ETrEepov épydontat TOV Vomov KaTHpynoev, GAN’ 
iva tovs Ovo xtion. x.7.A. On xri€ew, cf. ver. 10. It is specially 
appropriate here with xawds av6. ovk etre, MetaBddy, iva detEy 7d 
evepyés TOU yevouévov, Says Chrysostom. 

ev aitd. Rec. has Eau, with 8° DG KL and most cursives, 
Chrys. Jerome. avtw is the reading of SA BP, 17. Lachmann, 
Tischendorf, and Tregelles write airé, but Westcott and Hort 
avt@. ‘The sense here is certainly reflexive. 

“JIn Himself.” Not 6c éavrod, as Chrys., but, Christ is Him- 
self the principle and ground of the unity; “ne alibi quam in 
Christo unitatem quaerant,” Calv. Cf. Gal. iii. 28, wavres tyets ets 
éote €v XptotG “Inoov. Chrysostom, indeed, gives another inter- 
pretation, as if it were only a development of the former. ‘ Fusing 
both this and that, he produced one, an admirable one, Himself 
having first become this ; which is a greater thing than the former 
creation. For this is the meaning of ey éavr#, Himself first 
affording the type and pattern.” Oecumenius states the two inter- 
pretations as alternatives, explaining the first as od & dyyéAwv 7) 
ddXwv Tiwy dvvapéwr. 

Today eipyvyy, present participle, “ making peace,” z.e. so that by 
this new creation He makes (not “made”) peace. The words 
explain atrdés eorw 7 cipyvn ijpav of ver. 14. The peace is, from 
the context, that between Jews and Gentiles; but as the basis of 
that is peace with God, the latter thought underlies the former, and 
to it the apostle now turns. 

16. kai dmoxatahddén. The xai is not the mere copula, but 
indicates a logical sequence, “and consequently reconcile both, 
now one body, to God by the Cross, having on it slain the enmity 
previously existing between them.” 


66 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS pee 17 


aoxata\\dooew is found only here and Col. i. 20. It seems 
to be only an intensified form of the usual Greek word a\Adooev. 
a6 in composition frequently has this intensive meaning; cf. 
émekdéxerOat, aroxapadoxely, to await patiently ; so dofappety, azro- 
Gavpalev, arofeacba, etc. In a few instances, indeed, it seems to 
be equivalent to re- and to mean “again,” as in azrodidwp, dzo- 
Aap Bava, aroxabicrnm, aroxatopOdw. In the first two of these the 
idea is rather to give or take what belongs of right to the receiver, 
as aod. ydpwv, trdcxeow. Here it is the idea of remotion from, 
that explains the meaning of the verb. In the other two examples 
also this local idea is involved 

In any case, as this use of azro- is much less common than the 
intensive use, we are not justified in assuming it in a compound 
that does not elsewhere occur. 

év évi odpate is interpreted by Chrysostom as referring to the 
human body of Christ. So Bengel: “in uno corpore cruci affixo.” 
But in that case we should expect ‘His body.” Nor is it easy to 
see why that should be designated €v capa. The order of the 
words indicates the correct interpretation, “both now united in 
one body.” The év cama is the els Kawds avOpwros. So most 
commentators. It is not the Church, for it is only as reconciled 
that Jews and Greeks belong to the Church. But when reconciled 
they become the body of Christ, and so, the Church. 

81a Tod otaupod is joined by Soden with the following, aire 
being read for ait (so G, Vulg. and some Latin codices with 
other authorities). The connexion with the two notions, azo- 
xreivas and éxpa, gives it a subtle point. ‘“ By His death He was 
slain; by death on the Cross, in which the €x@pa showed itself, 
He has overcome the é@pa.” We have a parallel in Col. i. 20, 
only that there, instead of the negative aoxteive tiv €, we have 
the positive <ipyvoroveiv ; also in connexion with 6a rot oravpod. 
év avré, then, as in 154, echoes with emphasis the fundamental 
thought: “He Himself is our peace.” If we read év aira, it 
could not be referred to cdma, because this o. was just mentioned 
as the medium of reconciliation to God, whereas here it is the 
enmity between Jews and Gentiles that is in question. : 

17. kat €NOav ednyyeNioato eipnyyv. ‘And He came and 
preached good tidings of peace.” The preceding verses showed 
how Christ secured peace; this, how He proclaimed it. This, 
therefore, is posterior, and hence cannot refer to His life on earth, 
as Harless, following Chrysostom, understands it. Bengel interprets 
the ‘coming and preaching,” as that of Christ personally after the 
resurrection, “‘ veniens a morte, profectione ad inferos, resurrectione 
victor laetus ipse #/¢ro nuntiavit.” But it is muchbetter to understand 
the words of Christ preaching by His Spirit in the apostles and other 
messengers of His. Not that evyyy. means “ caused to be preached ” 


II. 18) THE GENTILES NOW BROUGHT NIGH 67 


(as Harless objects), for what is thus done by Christ’s Spirit is 
properly said to be done by Him; nor is «Awv superfluous, but, 
on the contrary, important as expressing the spiritual coming 
referred to in John xiv. 18, epyouat zpos buas, and in Acts xxvi. 23, 
(Xpioros) mp&tos e€ dvactdcews vexpav pas péed\rAe katayyé\Aew Te 
te Aa@ Kat Tots €Ovect. 

Spiv tots paxpdy Kat eipyyyny tots é€yyds. The second cipyyny 
has preponderant authority in its favour, X ABDGP, 17, Vulg. 
and other versions except Syr. Contra, K L, most cursives, Syr. 
The repetition is highly emphatic. 

The datives depend on etnyyeAicaro. tots waxpdv comes first, 
because it is these that are addressed, and are chiefly in view in 
the whole passage. This also agrees with the view that it is not 
Christ’s personal preaching that is intended, since that would 
have required rots éyyvs to come first. The repetition of eipyyvnv 
excludes the interpretation of rots éyy’s as in apposition with 
juivy, and so=the Jewish Christians in Ephesus. 

18. dt. 80 adtod exopev Thy Tpocaywyhy ot dupdtepo ev Evi 
Nvedpat. mpds tov watépa. “ For through Him we both have our 
access (or introduction) in one Spirit unto the Father.” 

Proof of what precedes. The emphasis, therefore, is not on 
80 airov, but on of apd. ev évi Iv. Since both have their zpoc. 
in one Spirit to the Father, it follows that the same good tidings 
of peace have been brought to both by Him. zu is “for,” not 
“that,” as if the verse contained the substance of the passage 
which has been already expressed in cipyvy. And it is not the 
common access as such that is in question, but the peace therein 
assured (between Jews and Gentiles). 

éxouev. Compare Rom. v. 2, “d0 08 Kat tHv mpocaywyiy 
érxjkapev .. . cis THY Xdpw Tavtyv év 7 €otiKapev. There, the 
mp. is into the present condition, and accordingly the perfect is 
suitable; here, it is the ap. to the Father, which is a present 
privilege. 

Ipocaywyy in classical writers is usually transitive, but is also 
found fairly frequently in an intransitive sense. 

The word is understood transitively here by Ellicott, Eadie, 
Meyer, after Chrysostom, ot« etrev zpdcodov dAAa rpocaywyiy, od 
yip af éavtdv mpooyAOopev, GAN tx’ adtod mpoorxOnpev ; cf. 
1 Pet. iii. 18, tva nas mpocaydyn TO Wed, and it is supposed that 
there may be an allusion to the zpocaywye’s at Oriental courts. 
Such an allusion would not be in harmony with the context. The 
év wvevpartt is decidedly against the supposition that the apostle 
intended this ceremonial figure. Apart from this, the transitive 
sense is not suitable in iii. 12, where the word is used absolutely, 
and here also the intransitive agrees better with €xomev, especially 
as the tense is present. mpooaywyy is something we possess. 


68 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [II. 19 


tiv mpoo. ‘Our access.” 

év évi IIvevpmari is understood by Anselm (and some moderns) 
of the human spirit (6ofvpadov), against the clear reference to 
Father, Son, and Spirit, 6v’ avrov, év évi II., pds tov Ilarépa. 

19. dpa obv odkér €oté févor kal mdporkor. “So then ye are 
no more strangers and sojourners.” dpa ovv,a favourite combina- 
tion with St. Paul, is not found in classical writers except in the 
interrogative form, dp’ odv. vor kal rdporxot, equivalent to arndAo- 
Tplwwéevor, Ver. 12. é€vos is “foreigner” in general; wdporxos, a 
foreigner dwelling in a state, and not having rights of citizenship. 
In classical Greek, indeed, it seems to be found only in the 
sense of neighbour. Rost and Palm name the Pandects (withoct 
reference) as having the word in the sense “inquilinus.” In the 
Sept. it occurs eleven times as the rendering of 13, which is usually 


rendered zpooyAvros. None of these instances are in Leviticus or 
Numbers. Ten times it occurs as the rendering of 2v4n, “a foreign 


sojourner.” Of this it is the usual rendering. The verb zapouxéw 
occurs in Philo with the corresponding verbal meaning; see on 
Luke xxiv. 18. The noun seems to be equivalent to pérouxos, 
which the Sept. have only once (Jer. xx. 3). In 1 Pet. ii. 11 it 
is used of Christians in the world, and so zapouxéa, 20. 1. 17. 

The meaning “ proselyte”” (Anselm, Whitby) is clearly excluded 
by the context, vv. 11 to 13; the other sense is pressed thus by 


Estius: ‘‘accolas fuisse dicit Gentiles quatenus multi ex illis 
morabantur inter Judaeos ... non tamen iisdem legibus aut 
moribus aut religione utentes.” But such a reference to local 


settlement would be too trivial, and quite out of place in writing to 
Ephesians. Nor had the Gentiles in a figurative sense been 
sojourners in the commonwealth of Israel. The word is simply 
used as contrasted with roAtraz. Bengel, followed by Harless, 
Eadie, a/., supposed maporxor here to be specially opposed to 
oixetor, and £€vor to cuproXtrat, the metaphors being respectively 
from the house and the State. ovpz., says Harless, is sufficient 
to show in what sense €évos is used, so that waporxos is not required 
as a nearer definition. Accordingly, he interprets the word here. 
by Lev. xxii. 10, where the zap. of the priest is mentioned, Ze. 
“‘the guest in the priest’s house,” and thinks there may be even 
an allusion to that passage where the zapocxos of the priest is not 
allowed to eat of the holy things, but the oixoyevets atrov are 
permitted. But this passage is quite insufficient to establish such 
an otherwise unknown sense of the Hebrew, and still less of the 
Greek word. The zdpoixos of the priest is simply the 7. who 
dwells in his house. Nor would the figure be suitable, for the 
Gentiles could not be called guests in the house of God. 

GANG E€oTe oupTOAiTaL TOV Gytwy Kai oixetor Tod Qeod. “ But 


II.20] THE GENTILES NOW BROUGHT NIGH 69 


ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God.” 
The second éore is added on preponderant authority. It gives 
greater independence to the clause, an independence befitting 
its importance. Cf. Rom. viii. 15. 
LupzoXlrns is condemned by Phrynichus, and said by grammarians to be a 
word of later Greek (Josephus, Aelian). It seems strange that they over- 


looked its occurrence in Euripides (Herac/. 826), now noted in the Lexicons. 
(In Aesch. Sept. c. Thet. 601, the true reading is fv moXlrass.) 


tav dylwv. The clear reference to the wodure‘a of Israel shows 
decisively that the ay.o. are those who constitute the people of 
God. Such formerly had been the Jews, but now are all Christians. 
These are now the Israel of God, Gal. vi. 16, the true seed of 
Abraham, 7d. iii. 7, 16; Rom. iv. 16. 

The ayo, then, are not the Jews, nor specially the patriarchs or 
Old Testament saints, tév wepi “ABpadpa kai Mwiojy cat “HAlay, as 
Chrysostom says, nor the angels, as some other commentators. 
Nor, again, does the word mean “holy men of all times and 
places.” The word does not refer to personal holiness, but to 
membership of the spiritual commonwealth to which Jewish and 
Gentile Christians alike belong. Hence in ch. i. 1 the apostle 
addresses his readers as dyvov. 

oiketot Tod Ocou, “ belonging to the o?kos or household of God,” 
the theocracy regarded as a family ; cf. 1 Tim. iii. 15, “to conduct 
thyself év oikw @eov, Aris éotiv éexxAyoia Bcot Cavros” ; Heb. x. 20 ; 
1 Pet. iv. 17. In Gal. vi. 10 we have the adjective as here, zpos 
Tous oikelous THs mictéws, “those that are of the household of 
faith.” But as oixetos was common with such words as ¢iAocodias, 
yewypadias, etc., the reference to an oixos cannot be pressed there. 

Harless, while supposing the word to be specially contrasted 
with zadporxor, remarks that the house is itself nothing but the 
community of the faithful, they being themselves the stones of 
which is built the house in which God dwells. They are oixetou as 
érotkodounbevres. But this would be to confound two figures 
founded on two different senses of ofkos. It is, however, safe 
to say that the idea of ofxos in one sense suggested to the apostle 
the kindred figure. ‘This is quite in accordance with St. Paul’s 
mobility of thought. 

20. érotxodopnOevres. The aorist refers to the time when they 
became Christians. The further building of which they were the 
subjects is referred to in ver. 22. The compound verb does 
not stand merely for the simple, but expresses ‘“ superaedificati.” 
Comp. Col. ii. 7 and 1 Cor. iii. 10. As regards the use of the 
dative case, émi 7d fep., it is easy to see why the accusative is 
not used, as that would suggest the idea of motion towards; cf. 
1 Cor. iii. 12, Rom. xv. 20. It is less easy to give a reason for 
the preference of the dative to the genitive. It can hardly be 


79 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [II. 20 


maintained that the genitive expresses separable superposition 
(Ellicott), for in Luke iv. 29 we have the genitive used of the 
building of a city ona hill, ef’ ob 7 réAus airav wKoddpynto. What 
that passage suggests is that émé with the genitive expresses locality ; 
cf. Matt. x. 27, éwi tov Swudrwy ; xxi. 19, él T. d000 ; XXIV. 30, 
epxopmevov ert r. vepeAdv ; hence it is used loosely of proximity, like 
our ‘fon the river,” ézt 7. OaAdooys, either “on the sea” or “on 
the seashore.” Yet the dative is similarly used, eri Srpvpov 
(Herod. vii. 75). But, in general, the dative seems to imply more 
close and exact superposition. 

T&v dtocTéhwy Kal mpopyntav. The genitive has been understood 
in four ways: first, as the genitive of possession, “ the foundation 
on which the apostles and prophets have built”; secondly, as the 
genitive auctoris, “the foundation they laid”; thirdly, as genitive 
of apposition, “the foundation which consists of the apostles and 
prophets”; fourthly, “the foundation on which they themselves 
have been built.” 

The first view is adopted by Anselm and Beza. Beza’s para- 
phrase is, “Supra Christum qui est apostolicae et propheticae 
structurae fundamentum.” But this interpretation mixes up the 
Gexédvos and the dxpoywr. \ Christ here is spoken of as the corner- w 
stone, not the foundation. The same objection applies to the 
fourth view (Bucer, Alford). The second view is very generally 
adopted, and is supported by reference to 1 Cor. iii. 10. In 
Bengel’s words: ‘Testimonium apostolorum et prophetarum 
substructum est fidei credentium omnium.” Eadie interprets 
the foundation as eip7vy,—not so much Christ in person as Christ 
“our peace”; others more generally of the doctrine preached by 
the apostles and prophets. 

But nowhere is the gospel or any doctrine called the foundation 
of the Church. Moreover, it would be rather incongruous to 
assume as the foundation the system of teaching about Christ, 
and as the corner-stone, Christ’s person. If, in order to preserve 
the congruity of the figure, we identify “Christ preached” with 
“the preaching about Christ,” we identify the corner-stone with . 
the foundation. Moreover, the building consists of persons. In 
1 Cor. ill, ro the figure is different ; the building there is of 
doctrine, and naturally the foundation is doctrinal, ‘ Christ,” ze. 
teaching about Christ. Still further, if this view be adopted, the 
point that is brought out is an incidental one, quite unessential to 
the connexion. ‘The important point was that the Gentiles were 
now along with Jewish believers members of one and the same 
theocracy, or, adopting the apostle’s figure, were stones in the same 
building as the ayo. This would by no means be expressed by 
saying that they were built on a foundation laid by the apostles 
and prophets. 


II.20] § THE GENTILES NOW BROUGHT NIGII 71 


Hence the interpretation of Chrysostom, Oecumenius, etc., is 
preferable, viz. that the apostles and prophets are themselves the 
foundation. It is true that elsewhere, with the exception of Rev. 
xxi. 14, Christ is the foundation, not the apostles ; but here Christ 
is the corner-stone, and the passage in Rey., although not precisely 
parallel, quite justifies our interpretation here. ‘The fact that the 
words there are taken from a vision is surely no objection to this. 
What seems a graver objection is that Christ seems thus to be 
named only as “primus inter pares.” ‘The answer to this is that 
by Orientals the corner-stone was reckoned of greater importance 
than the foundation, and as connecting and concenttating on 
itself the weight of the building. Hence the expression in Isa. 
Xxviii. 16, alluded to here, and 2 Pet. ii. 6; cf. Ps. cxvill. 22 ; Acts 
iv. 11; Matt. xxi. 42. 

Amongst recent commentators, Soden and Macpherson have 
adopted this view. The latter further defends the reference to the 
apostles as the foundation by 2 Tim. i. 19, “The firm founda- 
tion of God standeth,” ‘‘ where undoubtedly the true elect of God 
are intended, who resist all temptations to unfaithfulness.” He 
adds, “In the building up a special rank is given to those who 
have been by immediate Divine calling and inspiration His wit- 
nesses unto all besides. They, in fellowship with Christ, as form- 
ing the first layer, are called the foundation.” 

dyTOS akpoywviatou avtod Xpiotod “Inood. Showing, as Chry- 
sostom says, that it is Christ that holds the whole together ; for 
the corner-stone holds together both the walls and the founda- 
tions. ‘ Participium dvros initio commatis hujus, valde demonstrat 
in praesenti tempore,” Bengel. dxpoy. (AdOov understood, which is 
added in D* G). The figure of the corner-stone as uniting the 
two walls is pressed by Theodoret as referring to the union of 
Jews and Gentiles; and many expositors have followed him. 
But this is not only to press the figure unduly, it is also unsuitable. 
For the point is that Jews and Gentiles now indifferently are built 
into the one building, not as if the Jews were one wall and the 
Gentiles another. 

avrov is referred to QeueAvos by Bengel, Soden, Meeorerssh: 
Bengel urges the absence of the article before Xpurrod “Inood. 
But, in fact, the article would imply the previous mention of 
Christ Jesus, and the sense would be “ He Himself, even Christ 
Jesus”; see Fritzsche on Matt. iii, 4, where airds dé 6 “Iwdvyns 
and airds “Iwavvys (as in D) are equally possible. Similarly John 
iv. 44, where the best texts have airos ‘Ijcots; but the article (as 
inserted in R, 69, a/.) is admissible. Also Luke xx. 42, avros 
Aaveid. It is better to connect atrod with Xp. "IL, since it is more 
to the purpose that Christ should be called the corner-stone of 
the building than of the foundation; and in this connexion the 


72 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [1I. 21 


emphatic pronoun is by no means superfluous, but fittingly dis- 
tinguishes Christ from the apostles and prophets. 

Who are these apostles and prophets? According to Chry- 
sostom they are the Old Testament prophets. The absence of 
the article before zpo¢yrav is against this, though not decisive, 
since the O.T. prophets and the apostles might possibly be regarded 
as constituting one class, though this would hardly be natural. The 
order of the words is also against it, and is not satisfactorily 
accounted for by the superior dignity of the apostles as having 
seen and heard Christ (Estius). Again, we have the analogy of 
ili. 5 and iy. 11, in both of which passages apostles and prophets 
are named together, and the prophets are New Testament prophets. 
These passages also disprove the suggestion that the apostles 
themselves are here called prophets. ‘The absence of the article 
before zpo¢yrav is natural, since the apostles and prophets 
formed one class as teachers of the Church. ‘The objection, that 
the prophets themselves were built on the foundation of the 
apostles (in whichever sense we take the genitive), loses all force 
when we consider, first, the high value which St. Paul sets on the 
gift of prophesying (1 Cor. xiv. 1 ff.) ; and, secondly, that with him 
“apostles” does not mean the Twelve only (see hereafter on 
iv. 11). Nor does there appear any reason here why the apostles 
should be called by this additional title. 

21. & o, 4e. ev Xp. “Inood, not axpoywrvialw, as Theophylact, 
Beza, ad. 

taoa oikodopy. Rec. aca 7 oik. 


The reading is difficult. 

twaoa olkodoun, S* BDGKL and most others, Chrys. (Comment.), 
Theodoret. 

maoa 7 olkodou}, 8° ACP, Arm., Chrys. (text; but this is probably a 
copyist’s error or correction). Thus the balance of documentary evidence is 
strongly against the insertion of the article. Before deciding in favour of this 
reading, we must consider the comparative likelihood of the article being 
either omitted or inserted in error. Reiche, for instance, thinks it probable 
that copyists either neglected the article from lack of exact knowledge of 
Greek, ‘‘ quod in codicibus, qui articulo hic carent, saepe observatur,” or 
misinterpreted the words of the apostle as referring to individual churches, 
or (as Chrysostom) to the various parts of each edifice (Comment. Crit. in 
Joc.). He thinks 4% might more easily be omitted because of the homoeo- 
teleuton olxodouyn, and because in iv. 12, 16 the same word is without the 
article. But this is not a case of possible omission from homoeoteleuton ; if 
the scribe’s eye leaped from 7 to 7, oxodouy would be the word omitted. 
Itacism would be a more plausible explanation. In fact, the accidental 
omission of the article in cases where it is grammatically required is extremely 
rare, even in single MSS. Even where homoeoteleuton or other sources of 
parablepsy might have been expected to cause omission in one or two MSS., 
we find no variation, as in Matt. xxv. 7, maoac al, or 6 before words beginning 
with 0, as mds 6 8xNés, Matt. xiii. 2; Luke vi. 19. Intentional variation in the 
addition or omission of the article is pretty frequent, especially with such 
words as Qeds, Xpiorés, wloris. That the variation is intentional appears 


II. 21] THE GENTILES NOW BROUGHT NIGH 73 


further from the grouping of the MSS. on each side, those to which the 
preference is given by recent critics being usually on the side of omission 
(not Rom. xv. 14 or Col. iii, 16). Nor does any reason appear for the 
intentional omission of the article in these cases. Where the article was 
omitted by the first scribe of x and D (Epp.), it is generally supplied by 
a corrector. A remarkable instance of (probably) erroneous omission is in 
Eph. vi. 16, 7é before werupwuéva (om. BD*G). On the other hand, a 
striking example of the article (probably) added erroneously after ras occurs 
Rom. xv. 14, mdons THs yvwoéws (& BP, but om. ACD and most). In 
Matt. iii. 5, taca 7 "Iovdala, 7 is om. by MIA and about twenty others, 
It is unnecessary before the proper name. In the present case, intentional 
addition is much more likely than intentional omission, since with the 
article the meaning is obvious, and without it there is a difficulty. Such 
a consideration as Reiche suggests does not seem sufficiently obtrusive to 
influence the scribes. 


The word oixodou7 belongs to later Greek, and is condemned by 
Phrynichus. It is used both for oixoddunpa and oixoddopuyots. For 
the former see 1 Chron. xxix. 1; for the latter, Ezek. xvi. 61, 
XVll. 17, where it represents the Hebrew infinitive. In the N.T. 
it seems to have a sort of intermediate sense, like the English 
“building.” Thus in 1 Cor. iii, 9, “ye are God’s husbandry 
(yedpyvov), ye are God’s building (oikodou7),” the word is not 
equivalent either to oixodduynua or to oixoddunos. As yedpycov 
there is that which is cultivated by God, so oix. is that which is 
builded up by God. In Matt. xxiv. 1 and Mark xiii. 1, 2, it is 
used of the buildings of the temple: zorazoi Ai@o. cat zotaral 
oixodopal . . . BAr€res TavTas Tas peyddas oikodopds. Here it does 
not appear to mean “edifices,” for the temple could not properly 
be said to consist of several edifices. The separate A/Gou were 
not oikodouat, but every combination of them might be called an 
oix. Just so we might say, “what carvings,” ‘“ what outlines,” or 
of a picture, “what harmonies.” The Vulgate has in Matt. xxiv. 1 
and Mk. xiil. 2, “aedificationes”; in Mk. xiii. 1, “structurae.” 
In 2 Cor. v. 1, “we have a building from God,” the word is nearly 
equivalent to “structure,” yet it is plain that oixodéuyya would not 
have been so suitable. It is ‘“‘a house that God builds,” not “has 
built.” The English words “building, construction, structure” 
all have a similar ambiguity. The most common meaning of the 
word in the N.T. is the figurative one, “edification” ; that sense it 
has in this Ep., iv. 12, 16. The meaning in iv. 29 is analogous. 

Now let us turn to the text; and first, if the reading with the 
article is adopted, there is no obvious difficulty, “the whole 
building,” that is, the whole organised body of believers. When 
we look closer, indeed, we find something strange in the expres- 
sions. ouvvappodXoyoupéevy is present. It seems strange that the 
whole building should be spoken of thus as in course of being 
framed together. Still more unexpected is avée. The whole 
building is growing into a temple. The ambiguity of the English 


74 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [iI. 21 


“building” disguises this strangeness, which is apparent when we 
substitute “edifice.” ‘The whole edifice is growing into a temple.” 
The words, ‘‘the whole building or edifice,” express the conception 
of a thing completed. If the reading were well established, we 
might explain this as due to a want of precision in the metaphor ; 
but, as we have seen, this reading is not so well supported as the 
other, to which we now turn. 

Many expositors, including Eadie, Ellicott (more doubtfully), 
Barry, Moule, Meyrick, not Findlay, Macpherson, nor the Revisers, 
hold that zaca oixodouy may be rendered as if it were waca 7 oik., 
and they refer especially to Luke iv. 13, wavra wetpacpov: Acts 
li. 36, was olkos “IopanA: Vil. 22, taca copia Aiyurriwv: Homer, 
Zl. xxiv. 407, tdoav ddnfeinv. None of these passages bear out 
the assertion. mdvra veipacpov is not “all the temptation,” but 
‘every temptation,” as RV., z.e. “every form of temptation.” See 
on Luke iv. 13. So in Acts vil. 22, although the English version 
sufficiently expresses the sense, what is meant is not the totality 
of the wisdom of Egypt, but the wisdom in all its branches. In 
Hom. //. xxiv. 407, aye 64 por wacav aAnbetny Katddefov, the 
meaning clearly is: ‘Come, tell me the exact truth, nothing but 
the truth.” The article here would not be appropriate. Similarly 
in Josephus, Antig. iv. 5. 1, wotapos dua warns épyov péewv is a 
river flowing through a country which is all desert. 

otkos ‘IopayA in Acts il. 36 is an expression borrowed from 
the O.T., where it occurs with mds in Jer. ix. 26, Ezek. xxxvi. 10, 
XXXVll. 11, and is treated as a proper name, as it is without ds in 
XXXIX. 12, 22, 23, etc. So, too, olxos Kupéov. So in classical writers 
yn, for example, is treated as a proper name. ‘The general rule is 
that a word cannot be used with zds without the article when the 
sense is “the whole,” unless it is such that without was it can be 
employed definitely, or does not require the article to give it 
definiteness. A somewhat similar rule holds good in English, 
where we can say, not only “all England,” but “all town,” “all 
school,” “all college,” ‘all parliament”; but by no means “all 
house.” It is, no doubt, immemorial use that has enabled such 
words to dispense with the article, when the thing meant, though 
only one of many, is marked out by its familiarity. We can also say 
“all night, “all day,” as the Greeks did. Nor does it appear that 
a. otk. would, to a reader of St. Paul’s time, be any more likely to 
suggest “the whole building” than would “all building” to an 
English reader. We must therefore acquiesce in some such 
rendering as “every building,” or “each several building,” RV., 
modified, perhaps, as will be presently mentioned. 

But what is meant by “every building”? Hardly “every 
church”; for to speak of the several local churches, or of the Jews 
and Gentiles as so many several buildings, would not be in accord- 


II. 22] | THE GENTILES NOW BROUGHT NIGH 75 


ance with the figure in ver. 20, or with St. Paul’s language else- 
where. Moreover, he has just used a forcible figure to express 
the unity of the whole Church, and it would be strange if he now 
weakened it by speaking of several buildings. The individual 
believer, again, is spoken of in 1 Cor. ii. 16 as vads ®cod; but there 
the figure is explained by the context, as founded on the conception 
of the indwelling of the Spirit. This is very different from calling 
each believer an oixodouy. The passages above referred to in 
Matthew and Mark suggest that what is intended is “everything that 
from time to time is builded in,” “every constituent element of the 
building.” The English words “all the building” would admit of 
being understood in this way, but are ambiguous. The image is that 
of an extensive pile of buildings in process of construction at differ- 
ent points on a common plan. ‘The several parts are adjusted to 
each other so as to preserve the unity of design. So Findlay, who 
remarks that an author of the second century, writing in the 
interests of Catholic unity, would scarcely have omitted the article. 

Hofmann compares mdoys xticews, Col. i. 15, which he says 
does not mean “the whole creation,” nor “every creature,” but 
“all that is created,” as taéca codia kai dpovynors in i. 8 is “all 
that is wisdom”; wav 6&Anua rot @eov, Col. iv. 12, “all God’s 
will,” to which we may add zdaéoa ypady, 2 Tim. iii. 163 7. 
avactpodn, 1 Pet. i. 15. Soden’s view is similar. Comp. iv. 16. 

guvappodoyoupern, “‘fitly joined together,” present participle, 
because this harmonious framing together is a process still going on. 
The compound yerb occurs only here and iv. 16. The simple 
verb dppodoyew seems to be equally rare. The classical word is 
cvvapyolw. None of these is found in the Sept. 

auger, “ groweth,” the present, as in the former word, indicating 
the perpetual growth. The verb is neither rare nor poetical, as is 
sometimes stated ; on the contrary, it is more frequent than avédvw 
in the best Attic prose (Thuc. Xen. Plato), but the use of the 
active in an intransitive sense is later (Aristot. Polyb. Diod.). It 
occurs also in Col. ii. 19. 

eis vady dytov é€v Kupiw. ‘‘ Unto a holy temple (or sanctuary) in 
the Lord.” Kvpvos, according to the Pauline usage, must be 
Christ. éy K. seems best connected with dy.os, “holy in the 
Lord” ; to join it with av&e alone would be a tautology. 

22. év @ takes up the év 6 of ver. 21; cf. ch. i. 11 and 12. 

kai dpets, “ye also”; cf. ver. 13. 

guvo.kodopeta0e, not imperative, as Calvin: “ Ephesios hortatur 
ut crescant in fide Christi magis et magis postquam in ea semel 
fuerunt fundati,” but indicative, as is proved by wz. 19, 20, in which 
the apostle describes what the readers are, not what they ought to 
be. Note the present tense, because the building is still going on; 
cf. 1 Pet. ii. 5, ‘are being builded in together,” ze. together with 


76 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [7 2 


the others; ovy- as in cupmodtra. The rdaoa before otk. looks 
forward to this cal vyeis cvvorx., and this is a fitting conclusion to 
the paragraph which commenced with “ye are no more strangers 
and foreigners.” Meyer and Ellicott understand the ovv- differ- 
ently, viz. as referring to the putting together the single parts of 
the building; Meyer quoting Philo, De Proem. § 20, p. 928 E 
(ed. Mang. ii. p. 427), otkiav ed cvvwxodopnpévnv Kal ovvnpooperyy. 
But the whole context favours the interpretation “you together 
with others,” and there is no reason to give any other sense to the 
ovv- in cvvappodoyoupern. 

eis KaTOLKHTHpLov TOG Ocod. KaTouKyTyptov Only in Rey. xviii. 2 in 
N.T., but freq. in the Sept. ‘Into a habitation of God,” the same 
which was expressed by vads dyvos, only further specifying the 
essential nature of this vads. Harless, who reads aca 7 oix., sup- 
poses xaroux. here to be used of each individual Christian in whom 
God dwells, the whole forming a vads ady.os. Griesbach places év @ 
Kal vets cvvolk. In a parenthesis, which is awkward and unnecessary. 

év mvedpati, “in the Spirit.” It is interpreted by Chrysostom 
as = spiritually, otkos mvevyarikds, and so Theophyl. Oecum. 
Olshausen also thinks there is a glance at the vads yetporouyros. 
But there is no suggestion of this in the context ; and as the whole 
is so distinctly figurative, it would be worse than superfluous to add 
this definition. Moreover, it does not appear that év qvevpare 
could be used with a substantive as = spiritual, except so far as the 
substantive involves a verbal notion, as wepiropi ev mv. =T0 Tept- 
Tepver Oar ev mv., deopuos Ev XproTS = dedenevos ev Xp. 

But év here is not merely instrumental, as if=dua. The Spirit 
is not the means or instrument only, but the medium by virtue of 
which God dwells in the Church. The ey refers to the act of 
katoikyos. He by or in His Spirit dwells in this temple. The 
article is not required, as zvevpua is frequently treated as a proper 
name where no ambiguity is caused thereby. 

Ill. 1-7. This truth, that the Gentiles are fellow-heirs with the 
Jews, was hidden from former generations, but has now been revealed 
to the apostles and prophets; and unworthy though I am, yet to me. 
has been given the privilege of making it known, and of preaching 
Christ to the Gentiles. 

1. tovtou xdpiv éyo Maddos 6 Sdopr0s Tou Xpiotod “Incod smép 
ipav tav eOvay. (Tischendorf omits “Iycod, with 8* D*G.) “For 
this reason, I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus in behalf of you 
Gentiles.” ‘For this reason,” ‘“‘hujus rei gratia,” Vulg., z.¢., as 
Theodoret says, “ Knowing well both what ye were and how ye 
were called and on what conditions, I pray God to establish you in 
the faith.” 

Chrysostom supplies «ut. Iam the prisoner of Christ Jesus, 
etc. So the Peshitto and many moderns, including Beza, Meyer, 


1001, 2] PAUL THE APOSTLE OF THE GENTILES 77 


Macpherson, “in order that ye may be built up to the habitation 
of God—in this behoof, that your Christian development may 
advance to that goal.” But this is to give too great prominence to 
the assertion of his imprisonment, as if it were a main point in the 
discourse, instead of being incidental. Besides, we should expect 
in that case déopuos without the article. St. Paul was not likely 
thus to designate himself as “the prisoner of Christ Jesus,” even 
with the addition ‘‘for you Gentiles.” The notoriety of the fact 
does not explain this. Moreover, this view makes rovrov ydpwv 
and trép tov rather tautologous. The analogy of ch. iv. 1 is in 
favour of taking 6 6. in apposition with éy® TatAos. 

Calvin’s “legatione fungor” is a rendering of zpeoBevw, the 
reading of D (from vi. 20). Three cursives add kexavyypat. 

Origen (Ca/ena) supposes a solecism ; that, in fact, what St. Paul 
ought to have written was 7. yap. . . . éyvdpica 70 pvor, Jerome 
also, following Origen, declares that after diligent search he could 
not find the continuation of the sense. But the true key was given 
by Theodore Mops., followed by Theodoret, viz. that vv. 2-13 is a 
parenthesis. tatra mdvta év péow Teeckws dvaAapPdave Tov epi 
mpocevxns Adyov, Theodoret. The apostle having described him- 
self as a prisoner for the Gentiles, is quite characteristically drawn 
off into a digression on the grace granted to him in connexion with 
this ministry to the Gentiles. Oecumenius regards the sentence as 
resumed in ver. 8 with the change of the nominative to the dative, 
a change not without parallels, as he observes, in Thucydides and 
Demosthenes. On that view rovrov ydpw would mean “for this 
purpose,” as in Tit. i. 5. But then 6 décpros would have no point, 
and, besides, ver. 8 is closely connected with 6 and 7. It is much 
more satisfactory to assume, with Theodore and Theodoret, that the 
sense is resumed with the same words, rovrov xdpuv, in ver. 14. 
The supposition of a resumption in ch. iv. 1, adopted in the AV., 
rests apparently only on the repetition of 6 deopuos, and unneces- 
sarily lengthens the parenthesis. 

“The prisoner of Christ Jesus,” so he calls himself in 2 Tim. 
i. 8 and Philem. 9, and in this Ep. iv. 1, “prisoner in the Lord.” 
He looks on his imprisonment, not merely as suffered in the service 
of the Lord, but as part of the lot assigned to him by Christ, so 
that he was Christ’s prisoner. Somewhat similarly in ch. vi. 20, 
trép ov mpeaBetw év advoe. 

“In behalf of you Gentiles.” Since it was his preaching the 
free admission of the Gentiles that led to his persecution at the 
hands of the Jews and to his present imprisonment, Acts xxi. 21. 
28, xxii. 22. 

2. elye qKovcate Thy oikovopiay, “If, indeed, ye have heard of 
the dispensation.” This seems decisive against the supposition 
that the Epistle was addressed to a Church which had been 


78 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IIt. 2 


personally instructed by the writer. The utmost force that can 
be claimed for efye is that, in Hermann’s words, it is used “de re 
quae jure sumpta creditur,” “if, as I take for granted,” being less 
hypothetical than eizep. According to Lightfoot on Gal. iii. 4, this 
rule requires modification when applied to the N.T., where «iye is 
less directly affirmative than «izep. 

Eadie says it is “undeniable” that etye is used in the N.T. of 
things that are certain, quoting iv. 21 and Col. i. 23. The former 
passage is in the same case with the present; in the latter, hope 
only is expressed, not certainty. The only other places where «tye 
occurs in the N.T. are Gal. ill. 4 and in the Received Text 2 Cor. 
v. 3 (eitep, BD). It is found also in Rom. v. 6 in B. But 
allowing that the particle implies certainty as strongly as Her- 
mann’s rule asserts, it could not be used of a fact in the writer’s 
own experience. A preacher addressing a strange congregation 
might say “I am sure,” or even “I know that you have been 
taught so and so,” but no preacher addressing those whom he 
himself had taught would ordinarily express himself in this way.! 

It is said, indeed, that this argument proves too much, since 
“‘what was known of Paul in the Ephesian Church would practi- 
cally be known of him throughout the missions of Asia” (Moule). 
But this is just the kind of case in which the particle may be 
properly used, viz. where the writer may be “ practically” certain, 
but doubt is conceivable. Besides, the details which follow might 
be but imperfectly known to those who had not heard them from 
St. Paul’s own lips. And again, would he, in writing to the 
Ephesians, refer them to what he has just now written, that they 
may appreciate his knowledge in the mystery of Christ? Had 
they not had much more full proof of this during his long ministry? 
Every other attempt to evade this conclusion is equally unsuc- 
cessful. Thus 7xotcare has been rendered “ intellexistis” (Anselm, 
Grotius), a meaning which the verb can have only when “hearing” 
is included; or, again, “hearing” the Epistle read (alluding to earlier 
passages in this Epistle); but cf. dvaywwokovres, ver. 4. Calvin 
says: ‘‘Credibile est, quum ageret Ephesi, eum tacuisse de his, 
rebus.” Ellicott reasons in a circle, ““There could be no real 
doubt ; ‘neque enim ignorare quod hic dicitur poterant Ephesii 
quibus Paulus ipse evangelium plusquam biennio praedicaverat,’ 
Estius. . . . No argument, then, can be fairly deduced,” etc. He 
supposes the apostle to convey the hope that his words had not 
been forgotten. Similarly Eadie, Alford, Macpherson, Meyer, 
(contra, W. Schmidt in last ed. of Meyer). But the words are not 
“if ye remember,” or “if ye know”; but “if ye have heard”; and 
that, if written to the Ephesians, would be = “‘if I told you.” 


1QOn elye and eirep compare Sanday and Headlam, Comm. on Romans, 
iii, 30, with the quotation there from Monro’s Homerzc Grammar. 


III.3] PAUL THE APOSTLE OF THE GENTILES 79 


Thy oikovopiav THs xdpitos Tod Oeod THs Sobelons por eis Spas. 
“The dispensation of the grace of God, the grace given me to you- 
ward.” 

As the explanation which follows is “that by revelation,” 
etc., it is best to understand r. ydprros as the genitive of the object, 
viz. the dispensation or plan or arrangement (namely, God’s 
arrangement) with respect to the grace,” etc. Chrysostom, 
followed by Oecum., takes the genitive as that of the subject. 
oik. xap. THY aroKdAuy pyoiv, OT. ob Tapa dvOpwrov Eeuabev, aXN 
OUTWS WKoVOUNTEV } Xapls Mate pror €€ odpavod aroKxaruPhjvear, Oec. 
But this does not agree so well with the following words, which 
define the xapis as 7 dofetoa eis tuds. Alford, understanding the 
genitive as objective, takes oix. as=‘‘munus dispensandi.” But 
it is not easy to see in what sense St. Paul could dispense the 
grace given to him. Many commentators suppose dofeioys to be 
attracted into the genitive by xdpuros, either understanding that it 
is in and with the grace that the oix. is entrusted to him (for which 
reason the participle has the case of x., v. Soden), or taking r. otk. 
T. xap.as=the gospel dispensation. But, while St. Paul might 
speak of the gospel dispensation as entrusted to him (oikovoyiav 
meriorevpat, I Cor. 1x. 17), he could hardly speak of it as “given 
to him.” Nor does this interpretation agree with the circum- 
stance that the following words take the form of an explanation. 
The explanation of oix., as the apostolic office or stewardship, is 
also not consistent with the explanation, in which it is the act of 
God that is spoken of, not any conduct of the apostle. It is 
tempting to suppose, with some expositors, that the writer, in 
using the word oixovoyéa, has in his mind the building just re- 
ferred to. But although ofkos might suggest the idea of an 
oikovop.os, oikodoun and oixytyprov do not; and the figurative use 
of oixovouia was so common, that if the apostle had intended such 
an allusion, he would have made it more distinct. 

3. 6te Kata droKkddupv eywpicOy por Td puotypiov. ‘That it 
was by way of revelation that the mystery was made known to 
me.” Explanation of ver. 2; hence the emphasis is on xara az., 
which is not really different from 8’ dzoxadvWews, Gal. i. 12. In 
the latter passage, kara could not have been used on account of 
‘Inco Xpiorod following. 

eyvwpic6y is the reading of SABC D*GP, Vulg. Boh. Arm., 
Chrys. The Rec. has éyvdipice, with D° KL, Theoph. Occ. 
For 76 pvaorypiov see on ch. i. 9. Here, not the “mystery” of 
redemption in general is meant, but the particular “mystery” of 
the inclusion of the heathen, for it is thus explained in ver. 6. 

Kalas mpogypapa ev ddiyw. “As I have just written in brief.” 
mpo- is local, not temporal (cf. Gal. iii, 1, mpoeypa¢y), and the 
reference is to the present Epistle, not to an earlier one, as supposed 


80 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (111. 4 


by Chrysostom, Calvin, a/, contrary to the present participle 
dvaywwoKovres. Theodoret and Theophylact have the right view. 
Comp. 1 Cor. v. 9, éypaya ev tH émoroAy; and 1 Pet. v. 12, 
éypawa &’ odiywv. The reference is doubtless to the whole pre- 
ceding exposition about the Gentiles. 

év édtyw, equivalent to év Bpaxet, used by Demosthenes. 
Theodoret, indeed, and some moderns connect this with the zpo- 
in mpoéypaya, as if it meant “paulo ante,” which would be zpo 
édtyov. ev 6A. in a temporal sense would mean, “in a short 
time” (Acts xxvi. 28). Wetstein correctly, “ pauca tantum attigi 
cum multa dici possent.” Oecumenius gives a peculiar turn, ov« 
éypaev doa éxpnv GAN doa éydpovy voeiv, as if the following 
mpos 36 were=“prout,” which would make dvaywocxovtes un- 
meaning. 

4. mpds 6 is, “according to which, or looking to which,” namely, 
to what I have said. Comp. « pos a empacev,” 2. Conv: TO ; 
™pos THY aAnbelav Tov evayy-, Gal. ii. 143 zpos 76 O€Anpa airoi, 
Luke xii. 47. But the usage is quite classical. 

dvay.véokortes, present, because it is “while reading,” or “as 
ye read.” 

vojoat, Where it is indifferent whether the aorist or present 
infinitive is used, the aorist is more frequent (Winer, § 44. 7), 
especially after such verbs as dvvapar, OéAw, etc. Hort thinks this 
avay. refers to reading the O.T. prophecies, comparing Matt. xxiv. 
15. But there the passage “read” is distinctly specified, and 
although in Mark xiii. 14 Daniel is not named, he is quoted. 

Ti auveoiv pou év TO puotnpiw Tod Xpiotod. “ My understanding 
in the mystery of Christ.” The article is not required before év 
TO p., because ovvrevar év is a frequent expression (Josh. i. 7; 
2 Chron. xxxiv. 12). 

pevot. tou Xp. We have the same expression in Col. iv. 3, 
where it clearly means the doctrine of the free admission of the 
Gentiles (dv 0 Kat dedeuar). It is the same here, as explained in 
ver. 6. Similarly, in Col. i. 27 we have rod p. rovTov 6 éotwv Xpicros 
év ipiv. That passage has been used (by Alford, Ellicott, Meyer) 
to prove that the genitive here is one of apposition or identity ; 
but it fails in this, since there it is not Xpiorés, but Xpuoros ev dyiv, 
that constitutes the ». It is better, therefore, to understand “the 
mystery (or doctrine) relating to the Christ”; the genitive being 
that of the object. 

Critics who question the genuineness of the Epistle regard this 
verse as the expression of a boastfulness not in accordance with 
the dignity of an apostle, and only a clumsy imitation of 2 Cor. 
xl. 5, 6, where St. Paul is merely claiming for himself that in which 
his opponents claim to surpass him. But there is no self-laudation 
in this assertion of ovveo.s (see, on the contrary, ver. 8); nor even 


III.5] PAUL THE APOSTLE OF THE GENTILES 81 


as high a claim to exceptional knowledge as is involved in xara 
amoxaAvyw, which it only serves to illustrate. Is it not quite 
natural that in writing to Churches where he was not personally 
known, and where there were teachers whose teaching was of a 
corrupt and paganising tendency (v. 11-14), and threatened to 
cause a schism between the Jewish and the Gentile members of 
the Church, the apostle, who was, in fact, combating these errors, 
and expounding the true nature of the privileges to which the 
Gentiles were admitted, should remind them in some such way 
that the subject was one on which he could speak with authority, 
and thus guard against objections which might possibly be urged 
by these unsound teachers? From this point of view it will be 
seen that this indirect and delicate way of meeting possible opposi- 
tion is thoroughly Pauline. On the other hand, a writer who 
merely assumed the name of Paul, especially one of such power as 
the writer of this Epistle, would hardly put into his mouth an 
expression of such seeming self-complacency, without any hint of 
opposition. Still less would such a writer forthwith add so strik- 
ing an expression of self-depreciation as is contained in ver. 8. 

5. 3 étépais yeveats otk eyvwpicOy Tots ulois TOv dvOpdTrwry. 
“Which in other ages was not made known to the sons of men.” 
év, which in the Received Text precedes érépais, rests on slight 
authority, but it expresses the right construction of ér. yev. Meyer, 
in his earlier editions, adopted the view that the meaning was “to 
other generations,” rots viots, «.7.4., being epexegetical. (So also 
v. Soden.) But the usual interpretation is simpler, and corre- 
sponds better with the antithetical viv. For yeved in this sense, cf. 
Acts xiv. 16, év rats tapwxypevars y.; and for the dative of time, 
il, 12, €7é€pais, 7.e. other than the present. 

“The sons of men,” an expression frequent in the O.T. and 
simply = “men.” Comp. Mark i. 28 (the only N.T. parallel) 
with Matt. xii. 31. It is needless, therefore, to adopt Bengel’s 
remark, “‘latissima appellatio, causam exprimens ignorantiae, ortum 
naturalem cui opponitur Spiritus.” Bengel, indeed, thinks that the 
prophets are especially referred to, because Ezekiel, who writes 
largely of the temple, as St. Paul does here, calls himself the son 
of man; but this is peculiar to him. It seems equally erroneous 
to find in the words a marked contrast with “ His holy apostles,” 
namely, because these were @eod avOpwro (2 Pet. i. 21) (Ellicott). 
This is far-fetched. ‘The apostles and prophets were not the less 
sons of men; and we might, with as much reason, follow Jerome, 
who would exclude the O.T. patriarchs and prophets because they 
were ‘“‘sons of God.” 

ws viv darexahtgOy Tots dylors dmootdAors adTod Kal mpodrjtats ev 
Mvedparr. “As it has now been revealed to His holy apostles and 
prophets in the Spirit.” 

6 


82 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IIlI. 5 


ws is Comparative, with such clearness as now. ovrws axpiBas 
ovk 7Secav ot maAdaol TO pvotnptov, Theoph.; “ fuit illis hoc mys- 
terium quasi procul et cum involucris ostensum,” Beza. 

arexaAvpOy, Not now éyvwpic6y, because the special manner in 
which the knowledge was given is to be brought out. 

“His holy apostles.” How can the writer, if himself an 
apostle, use such an expression? Some critics answer unhesitat- 
ingly that it is incredible that an apostle should do so, and that 
the expression betrays the view which belonged to a later age. 
Baur thinks the dycos an oversight. And the writer who was so 
unskilful as to be guilty of this palpable oversight, is so mindful 
of his assumed character that in the same breath he says, éol 7a 
elaxiotorépw Tavtwv ayiwv. The difficulty seems to arise from the 
use of the word “holy,” and the corresponding words in other 
modern languages, to express the personal character of “holiness.” 
But dyos is used of any thing that is set apart for a sacred pur- 
pose. So we have “holy prophets,” Luke 1. 70; Acts ili. 21. All 
Christians are by their calling dyvo., and St. Paul frequently uses 
the word where he himself is included (e.g. 1 Cor. vi. 2 and Col. 
i. 26). When he calls all believers dyvo.. what delicacy should 
prevent him from calling the apostles by the same word? A 
clergyman is not expected to be prevented, by a feeling of delicacy, 
from speaking of his ‘‘reverend brethren,” or a bishop of his “right 
reverend brethren.” 

Lachmann and Tregelles place a comma after dy/ots, the follow- 
ing words being in apposition: “to the saints, His apostles and 
prophets,” or rather “apostles and prophets of His.” But such 
a separation of the adjective from the following substantive is 
harsh, although it must be admitted that it is suggested by the 
parallel in Col. 1. 26. 

A more considerable difficulty seems to arise from the state- 
ment that the mystery of the free admission of the Gentiles had 
been revealed to “the apostles and prophets,” viz. as a body. For 
this is precisely the special doctrine which St. Paul seems else- 
where, and here in ver. 3, to claim as his own, and which, at least, 
at first, was not accepted by the other apostles (Gal. ii). In ver. 
8, also, this is recognised as the distinctive characteristic of St. 
Paul’s apostleship. For this reason Reuss makes the suggestion 
that the second half of ver. 5 is a gloss. In favour of this sug- 
gestion, it may also be observed that airot has no expressed 
antecedent, unless, indeed, in opposition to most expositors, we 
take it to be Xpicrod. In the parallel in Col. i. 26, rots dyious 
avrov, the antecedent @eod occurs just before. But the authority 
of the MSS. is too strong for this suggestion to be accepted. B, 
indeed, omits droordéAos (with ps. Ambr.), while DG place the 
word after avrov. 


III. 6] PAUL THE APOSTLE OF THE GENTILES 83 


The difficulty, however, is met by the consideration that, not- 
withstanding the doubts which the other apostles at first enter- 
tained, they afterwards fully accepted the doctrine as taught by 
St. Paul, Acts xv., Gal. ii. 7 ff., and that long before the present 
Epistle was written. The “prophets” are manifestly Christian 
prophets. év zvevuare must be joined with the verb, not with zpo- 
¢yrats, to which it would be a superfluous addition, or dyéous, or 
the following «iva. 

6. civar Ta €Ovy cuyKAnpovopa kal cUcowpa . . . (namely) “that 
the Gentiles are fellow-heirs (or joint possessors) and fellow-mem- 
bers of the body.” Epexegetical; stating, not the purpose, but 
the content of the prornpiov. The “should be” of AV. is not 
grammatically tenable. ovy«Anpovoma, fellow-heirs, not with Christ, 
as in Rom. vill. 17 (and Jerome here), for it is ‘‘in Christ,” but 
with the believing Jews. The word ovy«Anpovopos is found four 
times in the N.T. and once in Philo, but not elsewhere. cvcowpa, 
incorporated with them into the body of which Christ is the Head. 
The word is not found elsewhere (except in the Fathers), and is 
supposed to have been perhaps formed by St. Paul. But as 
Aristotle has the compound cvocwpartoroteiv (De Mundo, iv. 30), 
it is more probable that the adjective was in use. 

kal cupperoxa THS eTayyeAlas Ev XpioT@ “Inod. 


The Received Text has avrod after érayy., with D*°GKL, a/.; but the 
word is absent from NA BCD*P 17, al. Xpior@ of the Text Rec. rests on 
nearly the same MS. authority, with the addition of D; while Xpior@ 
"Inood has the authority of § ABC P17. 


“ And joint-partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus.” The 
accumulation of epithets is due to the importance of the matter ; 
there is no climax, for cvppér. is not stronger than cvcowpa. The 
former word is found outside this Epistle only in Josephus, but 
the verb oupperéxw occurs in Xen. and Plato. Jerome renders 
the words “cohaeredes et concorporales et comparticipes pro- 
missionis,” defending the inelegance of the Latin by the import- 
ance of correctly representing the Greek. The genitive érayy. 
depends only on ocvpper. The promise is the promise of salva- 
tion, of a part in the kingdom of the Messiah ; and to be partakers 
of the promise is to be joined with those to whom the promise is 
given. ‘There is no need, then, to take 7 éray. as=the thing pro- 
mised, still less to understand this specially of the Holy Spirit. 
In the passages to which Eadie and others refer in support of such 
a restriction, the Spirit is expressly named, e.g. Gal. ili. 14; ch. 
i013: 

év Xpur7d "Ino od and da rod ebayyed“ov refer to all three epithets. 
“In Christ Jesus through the gospel.” In Christ, not dua, for He 
was not simply the means; it was in His person that this effect 


84 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS poner st 


was produced. Cf. i. 7; and for an analogous distinction between 
év and éd, even where both substantives are impersonal, 1 Pet. 
1. 5, ev Ovvaper Meod povpovpevovs Ova mictews, and Heb. x. 10, év 
® OeAnpate jytacpevor core Sid THS Tpoapopas, K.T.r. 

7. 00 éyevnOnv Sidkovos. “Of which I became a minister” 
(eyernOnv, S ABD*G; but eyevouny, CD° KL). The use of 
yevnOjvat instead of the Attic yevéo6a: is condemned by Phrynichus, 
who calls it Doric; but it is frequent in later Greek writers (Poly- 
bius, Diodorus, Dion. Hal. etc.), as is shown by Lobeck (ad 
Phryn. p. 109). There is no ground, then, for assigning to the 
word here a passive shade of meaning, as is done by Oecum., ovdev 
yap éya €pyov éuov ovveronveyka TH xXapite tavTy. Compare, on 
the contrary, Col. iv. 11, éyevnOyody or tapnyopia ; 1 Thess. ii. 14, 
pupntat eéyevyOnre. 

Siudxovos. Harless maintains that 6. denotes the servant in his 
activity for that service, while tanpérns denotes him in his activity 
for the Master, apparently on the ground that d.akovety re or Twi 
tu is said, and he compares 1 Cor. iv. 1 with Col. i. 7. But 
bryperety tt te is also said (Xen. Axad. vii. 7. 46; Soph. Prz7. 
ror2), and the distinction cannot be maintained; see 2 Cor. 
Xl. 23, Oudxovor Xpiorod ciot; 1 Tim. iv. 6; and for tanpérys, Acts 
Xxvi. 16; Luke i. 2. 

kata Thy Swpedy THs xdpitos Tod Ocod tis Sobeions por kata Thy 
évépyetav THs Suvdpews adtod. According to the gift of that grace 
of God which was given to me “by virtue of the exercise of His 
power.” 7s dofeions is the reading of 8 ABC D*G, Vulg. Boh. 
The accusative is read by D°K L, Syr., Chrys. The genitive is 
one of apposition, the gift being the grace given, so that the two 
readings do not differ in sense; but logically the genitive has the 
advantage, as the grace required this further definition more than 
the gift. 

kata TH év. adtod. ‘These words, which are to be connected 
with do6eicns, are by no means superfluous, but express the ever- 
present consciousness of St. Paul that his mission as an apostle 
was not due to anything in himself, it was the grace of God given” 
with Divine power that alone changed the persecutor into the 
apostle. Hence the accumulation dwped, xdpis, Sofeions, evepyeta, 
Svvapis, proceeding from the feeling of his own unworthiness, 
suggested by ob didk. eyevyOnv. “Nolite respicere quid sim 
meritus, quia dominus ultro mihi sua liberalitate hoc contulit ut 
sim apostolus gentium ; non mea dignitate sed ejus gratia. Nolite 
etiam respicere qualis fuerim; nam domini est homines nihili 
extollere. Haec est potentiae ejus efficacia, ex nihilo grande aliquid 
efficere:3) ySee Dale, ect? xiii: p.s2'35: 

8. éuot TO éNaxtoToTépw TdvTwv dyiwy €360n 7 xdpts aity. Tov 
is added before dyiwv in the Received Text, against a great pre 





III.8] PAUL THE APOSTLE OF THE GENTILES 85 


ponderance of authority. dyiwy is used as a substantive. “To 
me who am less than the least of all saints” (ze. all Christians) 
“was this grace given.” Closely connected in thought with the 
preceding, as expressing his own unworthiness in contrast with 
God’s grace. “EXaxtotétepos. Doutle forms of comparatives and 
superlatives are frequent in the poets. Wetstein quotes Eustathius, 
who has collected numerous instances. But they also occur in the 
later prose writers, e.g. wetfdrepos (Malalas, 490. 9; also 3 John 4); 
éXaxiororatos (Sextus Empir.; also Matt. ill, 54, ix. 406), 
apparently without any increase of meaning. The instances in 
earlier prose writers (Xen. Aristot.) seem to be invented by the 
respective writers. The present instance is remarkable as a com- 
bination of superlative and comparative. It has a curiously 
parallel form in Aristotle, AZe¢aph. x. 4. 7 (Bekker), ovre yap rod 
éoxatov éoyarwtepov ein av tt; but there the form is introduced 
only as expressing an impossible conception, and is construed as a 
comparative; here, on the contrary, éAay.ordrepos appears to 
express a definite idea, not only least of all saints, but even less 
than this implies. It may therefore be considered a unique 
formation. The expression can hardly be interpreted, with some 
eminent expositors, as referring to his consciousness of enduring 
sinfulness, as to which he could not place himself lower than all 
saints. True it is, no doubt, that every Christian, when he looks 
into his own_heart, and is conscious of the sin that still dwells 
there, and knows that he cannot see what is in the heart of others, 
may be ready to exclaim, éyw éAayiordrepos Tavtwy ayiwy ; but this 
does not express a deliberate comparison, and whatever such a 
one may feel at such moments, he would act unwisely if, when 
instructing and exhorting others, he should thus proclaim his own 
inferiority to them. Such a confession would be likely to be mis- 
understood, and either called hypocritical or made the ground of 
the retort, Why, then, take upon you to instruct and reprove your 
betters? Certainly St. Paul gives us little reason to think that he 
would take such a view. He declares that he has “lived in all 
good conscience toward God”; that if any one might have confi- 
dence in the flesh, he might, being blameless as touching the 
righteousness which is in the law. And as one of the dyuou, he 
does not reckon himself amongst the babes in Christ, but the 
mature, téAevoe (Phil. iii. 15). He affirms that in nothing is he 
behind the izepAiay dréocroAo ; nay, he does not hesitate to call 
on his readers to be imitators of him, as he is of Christ. While 
never for a moment forgetting his own nothingness, and that it is 
only by the grace of God that he was what he was, he likewise 
never forgets his true position in Christ’s service. And he was too 
much taken up with his work in that service to have time for 
indulging in that kind of self-examination which consists in analys- 


86 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [III. 8 


ing one’s state of mind or one’s feelings. In Rom. vii. 17, to 
which Harless refers, he is describing the state from which he has 
been delivered (id. ver. 25, vill. 2). 

His recollection, ever vivid, of his former career as a persecutor 
is quite sufficient explanation of the expression here used. 

The same writers who hold that the dy:or drdoroAo, ver. 5, 
could proceed only from an imitator who forgot his part, are of 
opinion that the expression now before us is an exaggerated imita- 
tion of 1 Cor. xv. 9, “I am the least of the apostles, that am not 
meet to be called an apostle.” But there was no occasion there 
for any comparison with believers in general ; he is only speaking 
of himself as one of the apostles ; here he speaks of a grace that 
distinguished him above other believers, and, “ now undeservedly,” 
is his natural feeling. Indeed, we may with more justice say that 
this striking and unique expression could not proceed from calcu- 
lated imitation ; it has the stamp of a spontaneous outflow of an 
intense feeling of unworthiness. Nor does it really go beyond the 
passage in 1 Cor.; for there he declares himself not only the least of 
the apostles, but not meet to be called an apostle ; here he does 
not say that he is not meet to be reckoned amongst the ayo. 
For the reader will not fail to note that notwithstanding the depth 
of his self-depreciation he still counts himself (or is represented as 
counting himself), and that not with hesitation, amongst the ayo, 
the very term which when joined with drécrodo is thought to 
be unapostolic. Yet no one supposes that dyiwy here is incon- 
sistent with humility. 

Tots €Oveow edayyeNtoacbar Td dve§txviactov mottos Tod XpioTod. 
The Rec. Text has éy before rots €6., with DGKL. It is absent 
from NABCP., 

“To preach unto the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of 
Christ.” This is what 7 ydpis atrn consisted in. avry refers to 
what follows. Harless regards the words as an exposition of dwpea, 
éuol to avrn being treated as a parenthesis in order to avoid what 
he thinks would be unnatural, the close of a period within the 
long parenthesis, whose unusual length is only explained by the 
uninterrupted flow of thought. In that case airy would refer 
backward to ver. 7. But it is very awkward to separate evay- 
yeticacfat from the immediately preceding 4 xdpis atry. As to 
vv. 2-13, this is not grammatically a parenthesis, for the sentence in 
ver. 1 is completely broken off, and a new sentence begins in 
ver. 14. 

avetxviaotov. Theodoret well remarks: xat mas xypvrrets 
elrep 6 mAodros avetiyviactos; TodTo yap aiTd, Pyot, KNpUTTY, 
dru aveévxviaaros. The neuter zAodros, however, is the best 
supported reading in the text, being in 8* ABC D*G 17 
67**, while s° D° K L P have the masculine, “the riches of 


III.9] PAUL THE APOSTLE OF THE GENTILES 87 


Christ”; all the inexhaustible blessings contained in Him. 
Comp. Rom. xi. 33 (where the same word aveé.x. occurs), and 
1 Cor. xiii. gQ—12, “‘ We know in part,” etc., and Phil. iii. 10. 


9. kal dwtioa: [wavras]. The reading is doubtful. ¢w7loae without 
mdyras is read by $* A 677, Cyr. Hil. and apparently Jerome. mdvtas is 
added by NS BCDGKLP, Ital., Vulg. Syr., Chrys. a/.; Tisch. Treg. 
Westcott and Hort leave out the word. The insertion seems easy to account 
for, as the verb seemed to require an accusative, which it usually has in the 
N.T. As to the sense, the advantage seems to be on the side of the 
omission. The general meaning is, indeed, pretty much the same with either 
reading, since the result of bringing the olk. to light is that all men are enabled 
to see it. But wdvras would seem to represent this result as attained by 
opening the eyes of men, whereas, since it was by revelation that the apostle 
learned it, opening men’s eyes would not be sufficient ; the mystery itself had 
to be brought to light. Besides, the meaning given to ¢@wricat with the 
reading mdvras, viz. to enlighten by way of instruction, has no parallel in the 
N.T., although it is so used in a few passages in the Sept. (Judg. xiii. 8; 
2 Kings xii. 2, xvii. 27, 28). Moreover, if wdv7as is read, although it is 
not emphatic, it cannot be limited to the Gentiles, and it would hardly be in 
St. Paul’s manner to claim as his the office of enlightening all men as to the 
mystery. 


tig 7] oikovoula tod puorypiou.s The Rec. Text has xowwvia, 
a remarkable variation, but found in few MSS. oixovoyta is in all 
the uncials, most cursives, and the versions and Fathers. 

“What is the arrangement, or administration, of the mystery ?” 
The mystery is that indicated in ver. 6, and that which was ordered 
or arranged as to the carrying out of this is the oix. tr. puor. This 
was entrusted to St. Paul; cf. ver. 2. This seems more natural 
than to interpret oix. as the arrangement which consisted in 
hitherto concealing the mystery and now revealing it. Comp. 
Col. i. 25, tiv otk. Tod Ocod tiv dobciady por cis ipas rAypdoar 
Tov Adyov Tov Meod 1d pvoTHpiov TO dmoKeKpyypevoyv ard Tav 
AtLWVWY, 

Tod dmoKkekpuppevou, “ which was hidden” = ceovynpévov, Rom. 
xvi. 25. Comp. also 1 Cor. il. 7, xaAotpev Ocod codiay év pvorypiw 
THY aTOKEKPUPLMEVAV. 

amd tov aidvwv, equivalent to xpovors aiwviows, Rom. xvi. 25, 
“from the beginning.” The expression occurs only here and Col. 
i. 26 in the N.T. dz’ aidvos (used also by Longinus) occurs in 
Luke i. 70; Acts ili, 21, xv. 18. é« Tod ai., which is used by 
St John, ix. 32, is also found in Greek writers. Comp. zpo 
Tov aiwvwy, I Cor. ii. 7. 

év 79 @cO 14 Ta TdvTa Kticavtt. “In God who created all 
things.” The Rec. Text adds, dua "Iycot Xpicrod, with D°K L, 
Chrys. Theodoret, Oec. But the words are omitted by SABC 
D*GP, Vulg. Syr. Pesh. and Harcl. (text) and other versions, 
Tert. Jerome, Augustine, a/. 

It is not quite clear what is the point here of the words ra ra 


88 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IfI. 10 


m. kticavtt. When the words da "I. Xp. were read, a reference to 
the spiritual or new creation was naturally thought of ; but these 
words being omitted, such a reference is excluded. But, in fact, it 
is remote from the context, and unsuitable to the emphatic and 
unrestricted rdvra, as well as to the simple xricavzu. 

It is clear that «rfGeww cannot be applied to the pvarnprov, which 
is not a thing created. The simplest explanation seems to be that 
the Creator of all was free to make what arrangement He pleased 
as to the concealment and revelation of His purpose. As Bengel 
remarks: “ Rerum omnium creatio fundamentum est omnis reliquae 
oeconomiae pro potestate Dei universali liberrime dispensatae.” 
Harless connects the words with the following: “Created all 
things in order to reveal in the Church His varied wisdom.” But 
so important an assertion as this would hardly be made in so 
incidental a manner in a subordinate clause, especially as it has no 
analogy elsewhere in the N.T. Moreover, viv in the following 
clause is against this view; see on ver. Io. 

10-13. /¢ ts God's purpose, that even the angelic powers should 
learn through the Church the varied wisdom of God as shown in 
Lis eternal purpose in Christ. 

10. iva yvwpic0h viv tats dpxats Kal tats éfouctais év Tots 
€mroupaviotgs 81a THS exkAnolas % ToAuTOiKtNos copia Tod cod. 
“To the end that now might be made known to the princi- 
palities and the powers in the heavenly places the much varied 
wisdom of God.” wa is supposed by some to be connected with 
the whole of the preceding, or specially with ed066n, x.7.A. This 
would make St. Paul ascribe to his own preaching a result in 
which the other apostles had their share. But as yvwpic6y is 
directly opposed to dmoxexp., and viv to ad rév aidvwv, the most 
natural interpretation is that the secret or mystery was conceaied 
in former times in order that now the wisdom of God might be 
manifested in its fulfilment. Braune, however, connects iva with 
tis 7 oik. Tov w. ‘The arrangement is directed to this end, that 
the wisdom of God,” etc. 

Tats dpyais Kat tats éfouciats. Understood by some of the © 
older expositors of earthly powers in general, or of Jewish rulers in 
particular (so Locke), or again of heathen priests, or of Church 
authorities ; all from unwillingness to admit the sublime thought of 
the apostle, that God’s wisdom in the scheme of redemption is an 
object of contemplation to heavenly intelligences. Comp., on the 
contrary, 1 Pet. i. 12, “ which things angels desire to look into.” 

V. Soden, comparing Col. ii. 10-15, understands the words of 
the angelic powers which ministered the law on the one hand, and 
on the other hand the elemental spirits which claimed the venera- 
tion of the heathen. To both was it now made manifest that the 
enmity was at an end. 


III. 11] GOD’S WISDOM DISPLAYED 89 


év tois éroupavio.s, local, cf. i. 3, 20. It qualifies the preceding 
substantive notwithstanding the absence of the article, which is 
not necessary in the case of local definitions. Cf. Demosth. ¢. 
Pantaen, p. 967, tors épyous év Mapwveia: Aeschines, Fads. Leg. 42, 
tv tpirnv mpeoBciav ext 7d Kowov tov ’Apdixtvovwy (Bernhardy, 
p: 4227 f.). 

Sid THs éxkAnolas, Ze. as Theodoret expresses it, dua ris mepi 
Ti éxkAnotav oikovopias. The Church is the phenomenon, which 
by its existence is a proof and exhibition of the Divine wisdom as 
manifested in a scheme of redemption which is world wide. 

mo\uToiktdos does not mean “very wise,” as has been hastily 
inferred from the use of zotxtAos in Aesch. Prom. Vinct. 315, where, 
however, the word means “crafty.” oAvmoikiAos is used by 
Eurip. Zh. Zaur. 1149, of cloth; by Eubulus, af. Athen. 15, 
p. 679d, of flowers. In a figurative sense, as here, it occurs in 
the Orphica (1xi. 4, of discourse), and in Theophilus. The Latin 
here has “ multiformis.” The word probably refers to the variety 
of God’s dealings with Jews and Gentiles in former times, which 
are now seen to have worked to one end. Gregory of Nyssa 
(Hom. viii. in Cant. Cant. followed by Theoph. and Oecum.) 
gives a striking interpretation. ‘Before the incarnation of our 
Saviour the heavenly powers knew the wisdom of God only as 
simple and uniform, effecting wonders in a manner consonant 
with the nature of each thing. There was nothing zo/«.Aov. But 
now by means of the oikovouia, with reference to the Church 
and the human race, the wisdom of God is known no longer 
as simple, but as zoAvzotk.Aos, producing contraries by con- 
traries; by death, life; by dishonour, glory; by sin, righteous- 
ness; by a curse, blessing; by weakness, power. The invisible is 
manifested in flesh. He redeems captives, Himself the purchaser, 
and Himself the price.” The thought is no doubt striking, but the 
adjective zoAvz. does not suggest rapddogov. Perhaps, indeed, the 
word has been too much pressed by some expositors, and is only 
suggested by the thought of the great apparent difference and 
real harmony between the Christian dispensation and that which 
preceded it. 

ll. kata mpd0eow td aidvev. According to the purpose of the 
ages.” The genitive does not seem to be correctly taken as that of 
the object, the purpose concerning the ages, the foreordering of the 
ages (Whitby), since the writer is speaking of the one purpose 
carried out in Christ. Nor can mpdfeo1s be taken as = fore- 
knowledge (Chrys.). Modern commentators generally take it as 
=eternal. Ellicott compares mpdeow . . . mpd xpovwv aiwviwy, 
2 Tim. i. 9; but then the latter words are connected with do6ecicay, 
not with xpd. A better sense is obtained by taking the genitive 
as one of possession, “the purpose that runs through the 


90 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Tax: 12 


ages.” Cf. Tennyson, “through the ages one increasing purpose 
runs.” 

hy érotnoev ev TH Xpiotd “Incod tO Kuplw Hpav. “Which He 
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.” It is questioned whether 
éroiyce means “formed” or “executed” the purpose. The 
immediate connexion favours the former view ; but it is urged by 
Meyer, Ellicott, a7, that what follows belongs to the execution, 
not the formation of the purpose; and this has been thought also 
to account for "Incot being added, since it was not the formation 
of the purpose, but its accomplishment that took place in the 
historical Jesus. For the use of zovety in this sense we are referred 
tomch: 1: ° 35 Mattexoaig1;, Johni-viss 38 and hin) sthes Sept 
t Kings v. 8; Isa. xliv. 28. But in all these passages the object 
of the verb is @éAnua, which primarily means that which is willed, 
so that the exact meaning of 7. 6éAnpa is to perform that which 
God, e.g., has willed. It could not mean to form a purpose. With 
mpoleots it is otherwise. This properly means the purpose as an 
act, although by a natural figure it may also be used of that 
which is purposed. ‘The natural meaning of zovety zp., therefore, 
is to form a purpose, and the passages cited do not prove that 
any other sense is possible. Meyer also compares zoveiy yvopnv, 
Rev. xvii. 17; but even if this were quite parallel, we cannot 
explain St. Paul’s Greek by that of the Apocalypse. In any 
case, when it is a mpdfecis tT&v aidvwy that is in question, zovety 
would be a very weak verb to use. The addition of “Incod is 
sufficiently accounted for by this, that the apostle desired to 
bring to the mind of his readers the thought that He whom 
they know as Jesus their Lord is none other than the Christ in 
whom God had from eternity formed His purpose. So likewise 
chs it 4. 

12. €v @ éxopev Thy Tappyoiav Kat tmpocaywyhy év memoOycer 
Sua THS TloTews adTod. 


So § AB 17 80, Greg-Nyss. The Rec. Text. has rjv before rpocaywynr, 
with C D°K LP, Ath. Chrys. a. 

D** have rhv mpocaywyny Kal Thy mappyclar. : 

G: mpocaywyiv els Thy mappyolay. The article seems more likely to have 
been inserted for grammatical reasons than omitted either accidentally or 
otherwise. 


“In whom we have our boldness and access in confidence 
through our faith in Him.” appyoia is primarily freedom of 
speech, and is frequently found in that sense in the N.T., as well 
as in that of “plainness of speech,” John xvi. 25, 26. It occurs 
in the sense of “confidence” in the Apocrypha and in Josephus, 
e.g. 1 Macc. iv. 18, Ajwere TA oKtAa pera w.; Wisd. v. i, oTHoerae 
év m. moAAW 6 Sixatos; so Phil. i. 20; 1 Tim. iii. 13; Heb. x. 19; 
ef. riJohn! 128, iii.) 21, iv.a7,0 vi 145. The stransition /yol 


EIT. 13] GOD’S WISDOM DISPLAYED gI 


meaning seems not to be by way of generalisation from confidence 
in speaking to confidence generally ; for the primary meaning is 
not “confidence,” but “freedom, openness” of speech. But 
freedom of speech (in the active sense) implies the absence of 
fear or shame; see the passages just referred to in t John ii. 28, 
“have a., and not be ashamed”; iv. 17, “7. in the day of 
judgment.” In John iii. 21 and iv. 12, z. is connected with 
prayer. 

On zpocaywyy see ii. 18. The intransitive sense is obviously 
the more suitable here. If the article is not read we must either 
suppose wappyoia and zpooaywyy to form parts of one conception, 
or we must connect the following words with the latter only. What 
has just been said of zappyoia shows that the former alternative 
is quite possible, Tappyoia kal tpooaywyy being nearly equivalent 
to mpocaywyi pera tappyoias, and the idea would be the same that 
is expressed i in Heb. iv. 16, tpocepxwpcba peta tappyoias 7S Opove 
Ts xapiros. The other ‘alternative would leave zappyoia very 
indefinite. 

How grandly is this confidence expressed in Rom. viil. 38, 39! 
(Meyer.) 

mero(Onous is a word of the later Greek. It occurs several 
times in Josephus, also in Sextus Empiricus and in Philo, but only 
once in the Sept. 2 Kings xviii. 19. 

81a Tis mlotews adtod. The genitive is that of the object, the 
miotts is defined by its object. Soin Mark xi. 22, éyere 7. Oeod; 
Rom. ili. 22, 26; James ii. 1, wy ev mpocwmroAnpias exere THY 
miotw tod Kvpiov yydv, and elsewhere. The words are to be 
connected with éxouey, not with werolnoe. 

13. Ato aitodpat ph éyxaxety év tats OAtpeot pou brep Spay. Ard, 
viz. because I am the minister of so great a matter ; connected, not 
with the preceding verse only, but with 8-12. The greater the 
office, the less becoming would it be to lose heart. 

The following words, however, admit of two interpretations. 
Either, I pray that I may not lose heart, or, I entreat you, not to 
lose heart. The latter view is adopted by the Syr., Theodoret, 
Jerome, Bengel, Harless, Olshausen, Braune. In its favour it is 
alleged that it is much more natural to supply the subject of the 
infinitive from that of the substantive verb ; and, secondly, that it is 
difficult to understand év on the other view. But the chief objec- 
tion to the first-mentioned interpretation, according to Harless, is 
from the structure of the whole passage. Either St. Paul resumes 
in these words the course of thought begun in ver. 1, or he does not. 
Now it is the thought of supplication for his readers that separates 
the subsequent context from the parenthesis. If, then, he does not 
here resume ver. 1, how can we suppose that he could express the 
same thought in the parenthesis itself without observing that the 


92 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [ III. 13 


parenthesis was thereby removed? If he does here resume ver. 1, 
the rovrov xdpw after d.6, instead of «ai, is inexplicable, or rather 
intolerable. The argument assumes that airotwac means, I pray 
(God), and is set aside by taking that word as=I entreat you. 
The difficulties in Theodoret’s interpretation are greater. First, if 
aitotmas is, I pray God, @edv could hardly be omitted. The passages 
cited as parallel, viz. Col. i. 9 and Jas. i. 6, are not really so. In 
the former, airovmevo. only expresses the content of the prayer 
mentioned in zpocevydmevor, which, of course, means prayer to 
God. In the latter, aire(rw repeats the aire‘rw of the previous 
verse, which is defined by zapa rod didovros Weot taaw. Moreover, 
the words ris ears dda tav supply much more naturally a motive 
for the readers than for the apostle. The pov after @Adpeou, too, 
would be superfluous if the apostle were praying for himself. And 
we may add that the implied apprehension lest he should be 
disheartened by persecution is not in harmony with the apostle’s 
character or with his other utterances. He gloried in tribulation, 
and took pleasure in persecution (Rom. v. 3; 2 Cor. xii. 10; Col. 
i. 24). Compare also the passage just referred to in Rom. viii. 38, 
39. But he might have reason to fear that some of the Gentile 
converts might be tempted to lose heart when they saw the per- 
secution to which the apostle was subjected just because of his 
proclaiming the doctrine, here insisted on, of the free and equal 
participation of the Gentiles in the blessings of the Messiah’s 
kingdom. 

év tais OAipeot pou bmép Sudv. “In my tribulations on your 
behalf.” Namely, those which came upon him by reason of his 
being the Apostle of the Gentiles. Compare his touching words, 
Phil. 1. 17, “Even if I am offered on the sacrifice of your faith, I 
rejoice.” év denotes the circumstances in which, etc.; trép tuar is 
clearly to be joined to OAtpeot pov, not to airotuat (as Harless). 
The article is not required, since OA‘BeoOat iép twos is possible 
(@i €or 1:6) sich, Gall avian. 

ATs €ott Sd£a Sudv. ris introduces a reason; it is not simply 
equivalent to 7, but implies that what is predicated belongs to the - 
nature of the thing, “ quippe qui,” “inasmuch as this.” It is 
referred to py éyxaxety by Theodoret, followed by Harless, 
Olshausen, Braune, a/. This, of course, supposes the preceding 
prayer to be for the apostle himself. On this view it would be his 
personal fortitude that is the glory of the Ephesians, which would 
be a strange expression. If it be asked how his afflictions could 
be their glory, Chrysostom replies, ‘‘ Because God so loved them 
as to give His Son for them, and to afflict His servants ; for in 
order that they should obtain so great blessings Paul was im- 
prisoned.” 

14-19. Prayer for the readers, that they may be given spiritual 


III. 14, 15] PRAYER FOR THE READERS 93 


strength ; that Christ may dwell in thetr hearts ; and that they may 
learn to know F1is love, which surpasses knowledge. 

14. toUTou xdpiv kdpmtw Ta yovatd pov. Resumes ver. 1, “On 
this account,” referring to the train of thought in the latter part of 
ch. ii. Although the construction was broken off in ver. 2, the 
thought has continued to turn on the same ideas. “I bend my 
knees,” this expresses the earnestness of the prayer, tiv kara- 
vevuypevnv Oé€now edyAwoev, Chrys. “A signo rem denotat,” 
Calvin. Some, as Caly., have with strange literality supposed that 
the apostle actually knelt while writing ; (against zpds, see below). 
The usual posture in praying was standing: “when ye stand 
praying,” Mark xi. 25; “stood and prayed,” Luke xviii. 11; “the 
publican standing afar off,” 2d. 13. But kneeling is mentioned, 
1 Kings viii. 54 (Solomon); Dan. vi. 10; and, in the N.T., Luke 
xxil. 41; Acts vil. 60, xx. 36, xxi. 5. Eusebius mentions it as the 
custom proper to the Christians: 70 oiketov tots xpiotiavots tov 
evxav os (H.£. v. 5). Justin Martyr and Basil represent 
kneeling as a symbol of our fall by sin. See on Luke xxii. 41. 

mpos Tov Matépa. Kdymrrew yovu in the literal sense takes the 
dative (Rom. xi. 4, xiv. 11 ; both places, however, being quotations). 
Here as the words were equivalent to mpocevxopar, tpds is used as 
indicating the direction of the prayer. 


After Ilarépa the Rec. Text has rod xuplou quwv “Inood Xpiorob, with 
&* DGKL, Syr. Vulg., Chrys. a7. 

The words are wanting in N*ABCP 17 67**, Boh. Aeth., Jerome 
(expressly), and many others. The insertion of the words is easily accounted 
for ; there would be no reason for their omission. Although Jerome expressly 
states, ‘quod sequitur . . . non ut in Latinis Codicibus additum est, ad 
patrem domini nostri Jesu Christ, sed simpliciter ad patrem legendum ut dei 
patris nomen non domino nostro Jesu Christo sed omnibus creaturis ration- 
abilibus coaptetur” (vii. 599), yet a little before he had himself written, ‘‘ad 
patrem domini nostri Jesu Christi.” Whether the reading there is due to him 
or to a copyist, it serves as an illustration of the fact that the evidence of 
readings furnished by quotations in the Fathers as distinguished from express 
statements must be used with caution. 


15. €& of maca tatpid ev otpavots Kal emt yfis dvopdtetar. 
“From whom every family in heaven and on earth is named.” 
We meet here with a perplexity similar to that in ii. 21 (zaoa 
oikodopy), except that here no MSS. appear to have the article. 
We should rather have expected the apostle to say ‘‘the whole 
family,” which would require zwaca % wartpid. Indeed, many 
commentators and translators have so taken the words as they 
stand. This was perhaps even more natural in the case of those 
who read the addition rod Kupiov ypav “Incod Xpiocrot, since it 
appeared easy to take these words as the antecedent to ot, the 
sense thus yielded being that “the whole family” was named from 
Christ. Whether that addition be accepted or not, if waca 7m. is 


94 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [III. 15 


rendered “every family,” the antecedent must be rév Ilarépa. But 
if those words are omitted, the rendering ‘“‘the whole family” loses 
much of its plausibility. Grammatically it cannot be maintained. 

Ilarpid is a quite classical word (although in classical writers 
matpa is more common). It occurs in Herodot. in the sense 
“race” or “tribe,” as when he says there are three warpuai of the 
Babylonians (i. 200). In the Sept. it occurs in a similar sense of 
those descended from a common ancestor, narrower, however, 
than ¢vAy, and wider than ofkos ; see Ex. xil. 3; Num. xxxil. 28; 
but also in a wider sense, as in Ps, xxi. (xxii.) 28, waoae ai 
matpiat tov eOvav. So in Acts ill. 25, macat ai rarpiai tHs yqs, for 
which we have in Gen. xii. 3 and xxvill. 14 dvAai, and in xxii. 18 
and xxvi. 4 €6vn. In Luke ii. 4 we have ée& ofkov kal aarpias 
Aafid. See note ad loc. 

Some of the ancients take 7. in the present passage as = father- 
hood, zarpéryns. Thus Theodoret says: ds dAnfas trdpxer raryp, 
ds ov Tap aAAov TotTo AaBav exe, GAN’ adbrds Tots GAXos peTadddwxe 
rodro, And Athanasius: “God as Father of the Son is the only 
true Father, and all created paternity is a shadow of the true” 
(Orat. tn Arian. i. 24). But, not to insist on the consideration 
that this conception is of a kind foreign to St. Paul’s mode of 
thought, the word itself does not admit such a meaning; and 
those who have adopted it are involved in a difficulty with respect 
to the zarpraé in heaven,—a difficulty which Theodoret solves by 
understanding spiritual fathers to be called heavenly fathers ; 
Jerome, by supposing the archangels to be alluded to as fathers. 

Setting aside this interpretation, we take the words as= 
“every family.” This cannot be understood of “the family on 
earth” and “the family in heaven,” in whatever way these 
respectively are interpreted, for aoa implies a plurality. By 
the zazpiai on earth are doubtless meant the nations, with the 
fundamental division into Jews and Gentiles ; by those in heaven, 
angels regarded as belonging to certain groups or “ tribes.” 

dvopdtetat, ze. gets the name zarpua, not, are called “sons of 
God,” which is not in the words. Nor is it merely the fact of - 
creation that is referred to; for the relation of intelligent beings 
to their author is something deeper than that of things to their 
creator. Of things merely material God is the creator; of per- 
sonal intelligences He is the Father. Hence the words suggest a 
motive for the prayer, and a reason for expecting its fulfilment, 
for those addressed were also zarpia, of whom God was the 
Father. The rendering “every family” is therefore not only 
more grammatical, but more to the purpose than “the whole 
family,” and the addition of the words rod Kupéov, «.7.X., injures the 
sense. 

évopaterat has been taken by some to mean “ exists,” or “is 


III. 16] PRAYER FOR THE READERS 95 


called into existence”; but the verb never has this meaning, 
certainly not in i. 21 or v. 3. Even were it true that xaAety meant 
“to call into existence,” this would prove nothing as to évoydev, 
for xaXetvy means to call in the sense “bid one come,” which in 
certain circumstances might signify to call into existence ; whereas 
év. is simply to give a name to a thing. Nor is it true that xadety 
of itself has the alleged meaning: it is certainly not proved by 
Philo’s words, “ r& pi) 6vta éxadecev eis 70 elvau.” For dvopalerbar 
é twos, cf. Soph. Oed. Tyr. 1036, dar advopacbns éx Tvx7s 
TaiTns, os «tl 

iva 86 Spiv kata Td TAodTOs THs Bdéns adtod, “ That He would 
grant you according to the riches of His glory.” 60 is the reading 
of s ABCG, whilst 307 is read by D K Land most MSS. The 
iva depends on the idea of zpooevxopat implied in the preceding, 
so that this and the following verses express the content of the 
prayer. For tva cf. Col. i, 9. “Riches of His glory,” Rom. 
ix. 23. Not to be limited to power or to grace, but in accordance 
with His whole glorious perfection. The term zAotros is par- 
ticularly suitable when the thought is of God as a giver. 

Suvdpet Kpatatw0fvar Sid Tod Mvedpatos avtod eis Tov e€ow 
avOpwrov. ‘To be strengthened with power through His Spirit in 
the inward man.” dvvape is instrumental, “ut virtute seu fortitudine 
ab eo accepta corroboremini,” Estius. Harless understands it as 
denoting the form in which the strengthening takes place, viz. a 
strengthening in power, not in knowledge or the like, comparing 
Acts iv. 33, “with great power gave the apostles witness”; but 
this does not seem parallel. In the present case this would be 
a tautology, “ be strengthened with strength.” 

kpata.ow, from the poetic xparacds (used also in later prose and 
in Sept.), is a later form for kparive. 

eis indicates the direction of the gift. The meaning of 6 écw 
avOpw7os appears to be decided by Rom. vii. 22, “I delight in the 
law of God,” xara tov €ow av6pwrov. It is not therefore the xatvos 
év6p., but is the higher moral and rational nature, the Reason, 
which, by its constitution, is in harmony with the Divine Law, but 
in the unregenerate is enslaved to the power of sin in the flesh, that 
is, to the appetites and desires which constitute man’s lower nature 
(compare Butler’s Sermons on Human Nature). 6 éow avé. 
requires renewal, and undergoes renewal from day to day, avaxat- 
vovTat ypepa Kal Hepa, 2 Cor. iv. 16. 

It has been maintained, not without plausibility, that the expressions 6 
fw dvOp. and 6 é&w dvOp. are derived from the school of Plato, not directly, 
but through Plato’s use having influenced common speech. We find in Plato, 
Tod dvOpwrov 6 évrds dvOpwiros (Kep. ix. p. 589); in Plotinus, 6 elow dvOp. 
(Znn. v. 1, 10) and 6 ¢w dv@p. The threefold division, rvetua, vovs, gOma, 


in 1 Thess. v. 23, points in the same direction. With St. Paul, however, the 
contrast between the inward man and the outward man is not that between 


96 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [III 17, 18 


the pure and the impure. The inward man includes not only the Reason, 
which accepts the law of God and approves of it, and the Conscience, which 
pronounces the obligation and condemns the violation of it, but also the Will 
from which action proceeds ; see Rom. vii. 17, 18, where éy# is used of both 
parts. St. Paul’s view of the relation of the man to virtue and vice is much 
more like that of Aristotle. The man knows the right, but at the moment of 
action appetite blinds him. 

It deserves notice also that St. Paul does not use mvedua of the unre- 
generate. In them the higher principle is vos, which ineffectively protests 
against the odpt, while in the regenerate mvedua is superior (Rom. vii. 25, 
vill. 4, 9). That he does not mean mvedua and Wvx} to be a complete 
division of the human faculties, would appear from 1 Cor. xiv. 14, 15. 


17. katoukfoat Tov Xpiotév 81a Tis mloTews ev Tats KapSiats Spor. 
“That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith.” xarouxjoas is, by 
many expositors, taken as the end or result of kpataww@jvar on 
account of, 1st, the asyndeton; znd, the emphatic position of the 
verb; and 3rd, the difference in the construction of the two 
clauses, which otherwise must be taken as co-ordinate. But 
although the use of the infinitive of end or result is often very lax, 
none of the instances cited in the grammars are parallel to this. 
Setting aside the cases in which the principal verb is one which 
means ‘‘to will, order,” etc., or which otherwise involves the notion 
of purpose, in those which remain the subject of the infinitive is the 
same as that of the verb on which it depends. The emphatic 
position of xarouxjoat seems sufficiently accounted for by the import- 
ance of the idea it expresses, and the rhetorical advantage of giving 
it a position parallel to that of kpatawwiynvar. The asyndeton need 
cause no difficulty, considering the structure of the whole sentence. 
Katou, iS not something added to xparat., but is a further definition 
of it. «Karouetv is found in N.T. only here and Col. 1. 19, ii. 9 
(but éyxarouxety, 2 Pet. ii. 8). It is very frequent in Sept. (as in 
classical authors also), and is opposed to qapouxety as the per- 
manent to the transitory ; cf. Gen. xxxvii. 1, katoKer laxwB ev tH yn 
ov mapwKnoev 6 tratyp av’tod; and Philo, de Sacrif. Ab, et Cain, 
§ 10, 6 yap Tots éyxukXlous povois éravéxwv TapoiKel copia, ox 
xatouet (Thayer). It is hardly probable that there is any allusion 
to the figure in li. 21, 22, for the indwelling here spoken of is not 
in the Church, but in the individual hearts. ‘‘ How does Christ 
dwell in the hearts?” says Chrysostom. Listen to Christ Himself 
saying, “I and the Father will come and make our abode with 
him.” ‘In your hearts,” ‘ut sciamus non satis esse si in lingua 
versetur aut in cerebro volitet,” Calvin. 

18. év dydmy eppiLwpévor Kal TeOepehiwpevor. “ Rooted and 
grounded in love.” These words seem best taken as an irregular 
nominative, a construction of which there are frequent examples, 
especially with participles. Thus iv. 2, tapaxaX@ tyas repirarjoat 

. dvexopevor; Col. ii. 2, twa wapaxAnfaow ai Kapdiat aitar, 
cup PiBacbertes ; 70, ill. 16, 6 Adyos TOU Xp. eévouxeirw ev ipiv. . . . 


III. 18] PRAYER FOR THE READERS 97 


di0acKovres ; 2 Cor. ix. 10, 11, and 12, 13. Examples in classical 
authors are frequent. 

More prominence is thus given to the thought, and the transi- 
tion to the following clause is made more easy. ‘The result of 
Christ dwelling in their hearts is that they are firmly rooted in 
love, and the consequence is that they are enabled to comprehend, 
etc. This is the view adopted by Origen, Chrysostom, the ancient 
versions (except the Gothic) ; and amongst moderns, Harless, Olsh. 
De Wette, Ellicott, Eadie, Alford. The principal objection made 
to it is founded on the tense of the participles, which, being the 
perfect, would express, not the condition into which the readers 
are to come, but that in which they are already assumed to be. 
This, it is said, would be very illogical in connexion with the wish 
that they should be strengthened, and that Christ might dwell in 
their hearts. The perfect eppifwpevor in Col. ii. 7 is, it is alleged, 
not parallel, since there the reception of Christ is represented as 
preceding wapeAdBere tov Xpiordv. To this it may be replied, first, 
that in ch. ii. 20 the readers are said to be ézoxodopnbevtes, and 
yet in ver. 22 there is still a ovvoixodopetobe necessary ; secondly, 
that the participles here express their complete fixedness on the 
foundation, which does not imply that their building up is com- 
plete ; and accordingly in Col. iil. 7 we have éppilwpévor kai émor- 
Kodopovpevot, the former perfect, the latter present. The fixedness, 
too, is clearly the result of xarouxjoo. The present participle 
would be here quite out of place, “ye being in process of being 
rooted and grounded.” What follows depends, not on the progress, 
but on the completion of their grounding, 

The alternative construction adopted by Photius (ap. Oecum.), 
also Meyer, Braune, Oltram., the English Versions (Authorised 
and Revised), is to take the participles with the following clause: 
“to the end that ye, being rooted,” etc. This construction is 
hardly justified by the passages cited in support of it. In Rom. 
Zab (31 we have To Uperepep eden va... in 2 Cor. ii. 4 TV 
aydrnv iva yvare : in Cophix: 15, n TO Kavynpa pfLov iva. tis KEVOoY 
(but here the best texts read ovdets Kevdoet) : Gal. ii. 10, povov 
TOV TTWXOV iva pv Tpovedoper : John xiii. 2D y. Tots ee iva Tt 8d: 
Acts xix. 4, A€ywv eis TOV EpXOpEvov per avtov Wa morevowot In 
all these instances there is a particular emphasis on the words 
which precede iva, here there is none; the emphasis is on the 
words that follow it. 

That there is a mixture of metaphors here, as in Col. ii. 7 and 
1 Cor. ill. 9, is not to be denied; nor is this disproved by show- 
ing that ffdw was often used without reference to its primitive 
meaning as simply = “to establish firmly,” e.g. a tyranny, Herodot. 
i. 64, or the city (Plutarch), or even a road (Soph. Qed. Col. 1591). 
All that this proves is that there is no reason to suppose that the 

7 


98 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [III. 18 


apostle had two images present to his mind. The best ancient 
writers were less critical in this matter than the moderns. Cicero, 
for example, has sometimes a strange mixture of metaphors (see 
In Cat. i. 12). Lucian has pilac cat Oenédror rHs dpxjoews (De 
Saltat. 34). 

It may be inferred from the use of the two words that St. Paul 
(like Lucian in the place cited) did not intend the reader to think 
definitely of either image, but used the words in their applied 
sense. This seems the true answer to the difficulty that has 
been raised as to the designation of love as the foundation,—a 
position elsewhere ascribed to faith (Col. i. 23, ii. 7), from which 
love springs (1 Tim. i. 6). Beza asks: ‘ Radicis et fundamenti 
nomen quomodo fructibus tribuas?” Harless meets the difficulty 
by supplying the missing object of the participles from the clause 
to which they belong, viz. év Xpuor@; for which there is no sufficient 
reason, especially as we have already a definition by év, so that 
the readers could not think of applying another év. Love is, as 
it were, the soil in which they are firmly fixed. This is not to be 
understood of Christ’s love or God's love, either of which would 
require some defining genitive, but the grace of love in general as 
the “fundamental” principle of the Christian character. Faith 
retains its usual position (da 77s 7.), but it is love that is the 
working principle.} 

There is no difficulty about the absence of the article before 
aydmy. Such omission before names of virtues, vices, etc., is 
frequent in classical writers and in N.T. For dydzy, cf. 2 Cor. 
i Of, Gall -v..G: 

Westcott and Hort connect év aydarn with the foregoing (so 
also Holzhausen), but this overweights that clause. Besides, ta 
say that Christ dwells in the heart in love is a strange expression. 
We might, at least, expect “by faith and love” rather than “by 
faith in love.” Further, this construction leaves épp. kat Te. with- 
out any modal definition, which they seem to demand. 

iva éftcxvonte. “That ye may be fully able.” xaradaBéobar,. 
“to comprehend.” The active alone seems to occur in classical 
writers in this signification (Plato, Phaedr. 250 D), but the middle 
is interpreted by Hesychius as=xaravocicOa. It occurs in this 
sense in Acts iv. 13, “perceiving that they were unlearned”; 
x. 34, “of a truth I perceive”; and xxv. 25, “finding that he had 
committed nothing,” etc. The first and last of these instances 
are sufficient to show that there is no need to call in the idea of 
“the earnestness or spiritual energy with which the action is 
performed”; the voice simply implies, “to grasp for oneself.” 
Kypke (Ods. vol. ii. p. 294) takes the word to mean “occupare,” 


: A somewhat analogous difficulty has been raised in connexion with 
Luke vii. 47: see note ad doc. 


III. 18] PRAYER FOR THE READERS 99 


“ut possitis occupare ... latitudinem quandam,” etc., compar- 
ing the sense to that in ver. 19, as if (“mutato accentu”) ti 70 
aAdtos stood for ré wAdros 7, as by a similar transposition we 
have in Acts vili. 36, éwé 7 vowp. Apart from other objections, 
the article is fatal to this. 

ti Td TAdTos Kal piKos Kal os Kat Bdbos. “What is the 
breadth, and length, and height, and depth.” As to the order of 
the words, tyos precedes Babos in BCDG 17, Vulg. Boh. ad; 
the contrary, NA KL, Syr. aZ. 

The four words seem intended to indicate, not so much the 
thoroughness of the comprehension as the vastness of the thing 
to be comprehended; hardly, however, “ metaphysically con- 
sidered by the ordinary dimensions of space,” which has only 
three dimensions. 

But what is it of which the readers are to learn the dimen- 
sions? Chrysostom replies, “the mystery,” totr éore 76 pvo- 
rnpiov TO wrep yuav oixovounbey pera axprBetas eidevac. So 
‘Theodoret and Theophylact, Beza, Harless, Olshausen, Barry. 
In support of this, Harless remarks that the article shows that 
the substantives refer to something already mentioned. This is 
fallacious, the words being names of attributes, and the article is 
necessary to define them as the breadth, etc., of a definite thing, 
whether that is expressed or implied. Against the interpretation 
is the consideration that a new section of the discourse began in 
ver. 14, after which pvoryjprov is not mentioned ; and, besides, the 
pvotipiov of vv. 4-10 is the admission of the Gentiles, not the 
whole scheme of grace, as some of these expositors interpret. 

Bengel understands the words as referring to the dimensions 
of the Christian temple. Eadie remarks, ‘‘ The figure of a temple 
still loomed before the writer’s fancy, and naturally supplied the 
distinctive imagery of the prayer.” This has much plausibility ; 
but the image has not been dwelt on since the first introduction 
of it, nor is it St. Paul’s habit to work out a figure at such length 
If the remoteness of the substantive was a good reason for not 
adding a pronoun in the genitive, it made it the more necessary 
to repeat the noun. The preceding reOepeAtwpévor is so far from 
keeping up the figure, or showing that it was still in the apostle’s 
mind, that it rather tells the opposite way, unless, indeed, with 
Harless, we suppose év Xpsorm to be understood. Indeed, in 
any case it is not the foundation of the corporate body that is 
there alluded to, but that of individuals. It may, perhaps, be 
replied that in ver. 14 the writer has resumed the thought inter- 
rupted at ver. 2, and that the figure of the temple had immediately 
preceded. But amore serious objection is that the substantives 
simply express magnitude, and the mere magnitude of the temple 
was not likely to be dwelt on with such emphasis. Especially is 


100 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [T0r; 18 


the mention of the fourth dimension, “depth,” adverse to this 
view, considering that the “depth” of the temple would be that 
of its foundation, and the foundation is either Christ or the 
apostles. This difficulty cannot be surmounted except by intro- 
ducing ideas of which the text gives no hint, if, indeed, they are 
not inconsistent with the figure. Thus an old commentator 
(quoted by Wolf, ap. Eadie) says, ‘In its depth it descends to 
Christ.” Bengel understands the depth as “pvofunditas, nulli 
creaturae percontanda”; the length, ‘‘/omgétudo per omnia secula.” 

V. Soden combines these two views, regarding the pvorypiov as 
the principal conception, the description of which, however, is 
finally summed up in the figure of the temple. De Wette finds 
the object in Col. ii. 3, which he supposes to have been before 
the writer’s mind; thus taking it to be the wisdom of God; cf. 
Job xi. 8. Alford supposes the genitive to be left indefinite, “ of 
all that God has revealed or done in and for us”; and this yields 
a very good sense. However, we need not travel beyond the 
immediate context to find a suitable object; it is given us in 
dydrnv Tod Xpiorod in the following verse. The thought comes to a 
climax; having spoken of apprehending the vastness of this, he 
checks himself before adding the genitive to advance a step further 
and declare that the ayamn tod Xpictod is too vast to be compre- 
hended. It has been objected to this, that the simple yvavac 
would be a weakening, not a strengthening, of ver. 18. But, first, 
yvavat is much stronger than xataAaBéoba, which only means 
to come to know a fact (see the passages cited above); and, 
secondly, it is not simply yvavac tHv ayaryv, but yvovar rv 
trepBdAAovcav THs yvdoews aydrnv. The particle ré is not 
opposed to this view of the connexion. é expresses more an 
internal (logical) relation, caf an external (Winer, § 53. 2). Oltra- 
mare understands simply airjs, z.e. dyads. 


Some of the ancients sought to find a special meaning in each of the four 
dimensions, and to such the Cross naturally suggested itself. We find this 
idea already in Origen, ‘‘ All these the cross of Jesus has, by which He 
ascended on high and took captive a captivity, and descended to the lowest 
parts of the earth . . . and has Himself run to all the earth, reaching to the 
breadth and length of it. And he that is crucified with Christ comprehends 
the breadth,” etc. (Catena, p. 162). Gregory Nyssen also says that St. Paul 
describes the power which controls the whole by the figure of the Cross, r@ 
oxhuart TOO cravpod (Cont. Eunom. Ora. iv. p. 582). By the height he 
understands the portion above the crossbeam, by the depth that below ; and 
so St. Augustine, who explains the mystery of the Cross, ‘‘sacramentum 
crucis,” as signifying love in its breadth, hope in its height, patience in its 
length, and humility in its depth. But he was not writing as a commentator. 
According to Severianus, the height alludes to the Lord’s divinity, the depth 
to His humanity, the length and breadth to the extent of the apostolic 
preaching. Jerome is still more fanciful, and finds in the height an allusion 
to the good angels, in the depth to the bad, in the length to men who are on 
the upward path, and in the breadth those on the broad way that leadeth to 


III. 19] PRAYER FOR THE READERS IOI 


destruction. There are other varieties. Such fancies (not altogether extinct 
even in our own days) only deserve notice as a warning of the unprofitable- 
ness of such fanciful methods of interpretation. As Calvin well observes, 
‘“Haec subtilitate sua placent, sed quid ad mentem Pauli?” Nothing, in- 
deed, could be more un-Pauline. 


19. yvavat te Thy SmepBdddoucay Tis yydcews aydany TOU XpioTou. 
* And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge.” 

A 74, Syr. Vulg. read or interpret ri dydrnv tis yrdoeus, 
“supereminentem scientiae charitatem,” a reading interpreted by 
Grotius as meaning the love which flows from the knowledge 
of Christ. Both external and internal evidence are decisive against 
the reading, which may have originated from misunderstanding of 
the oxymoron. The genitive depends on the notion of comparison 
in trepB. Comp. Aesch. Prom. 923, Bpovris imepBaddAovra Kruov. 

“‘ Suavissima haec quasi correctio est,” Bengel. As if the very 
word “ know” at once suggested the thought that such knowledge 
was beyond human capacity. “But even though the love of 
Christ surpasses human knowledge, yet ye shall know it if ye have 
Christ dwelling in you,” Theophylact. There is a relative know- 
ledge which increases in proportion as the believer is filled with the 
spirit of Christ and thereby “ rooted and grounded in love,” for by 
love only is love known. yvévau, then, is used in a pregnant sense. 
7 yvavat, says Theodore Mops., dvzi rod drohatoan Aéyer (referring 
to Ps. xv. 11). So also Theodoret, dvvarov jas dia ris ricTews 
kal dydrns THs mvevparicns Xdpiros drohatcar Kai dua tTavrys 
xatapabev. . .. For a similar oxymoron in St. Paul, see Rom. 
i. 20, Ta dopata avtod . . . Kafopartat. 

A quite different interpretation is adopted by Luther in his 
edition of 1545 (not the earlier), viz. “to love Christ is better than 
knowledge.” Holzhausen defends a similar view, on the ground 
(amongst others) that to express the other meaning St. Paul would 
have said, as in Phil. ii. 4, twepéxovea mdvta vodv. But he desired 
to express the thought as an oxymoron, thus making it more 
striking. Dobree renders, “the exceeding love of God in bestow- 
ing on us the knowledge of Christ” (Advers. 1. p. 573). He gives 
no reason, and it is hard to see how the rendering can be 
defended. 

“ The love of Christ,” z.e. Christ’s love to us. But knowledge 
of whatever kind is not the ultimate end, therefore he adds, not as 
a parallel clause, but as the end of the whole, tva tAnpwfijre cis wav 
TO TAjpwpa Tod Meod, “that ye may be filled up to all the fulness 
of God.” 

This is not of easy interpretation. Chrysostom gives two 
alternatives, either the 7A. tod @cod is the knowledge that God is 
worshipped in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, or he 
urges them to strive dare tAnpodo bar raons aperhs As TAYpys €oTW 


102 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [ III. 19 


6 @cds. This is rendered by Newman, “of which God is the 
fountain-head,” but has been usually taken to mean “be filled, 
even as God is full” (Alford, Olshausen, Ellicott, Eadie). It 
is indeed added, “each in your degree, but all to your utmost 
capacity”; or, again, ‘the difference between God and the saint 
will be, not in kind, but in degree and extent.” But there is no 
such restriction in the text ; it is not, “ filled up to your capacity ” 
(note wav), and the expression is one of degree, not of kind. On 
the same principle of interpretation we might defend such an 
expression as “ wise with all the wisdom of God”; yet the impro- 
priety of this is obvious. Matt. v. 48, “ye shall be réAevox as (as) 
your heavenly Father ts réAeos,” is not in point, for what is there 
referred to is the single virtue of iove, which is to be as all- 
embracing as that of God. ‘They who love those that love them 
are incomplete in love; they who love their enemies are réAc.ot,” 
Euthymius, cf 1 Pet. i. 15. To be filled as God is full, could at 
most be set forth as the ideal to be attained or rather approached 
in a future state. When itis urged (by Olsh. and Ellic.) that where 
Christ dwells there way ro wAnp. Tov cod is already (Col. ii. 9), 
this is really to confound two distinct interpretations. Oltramare, 
taking wAnpwxa to mean “perfection,” and zAypotcfa “to be 
perfected,” understands the words to mean, “that ye may be 
perfect even to the possession of all the perfection of God.” 
“The highest moral ideal that can be presented to him in whose 
heart Christ dwells, who has comprehended the greatness of love, 
and has known the love of God.” 

Theodore Mops. appears to interpret the words of the Churck 
“ita ut et ipsi in portione communis corporis videamini in quod 
ve] maxime inhabitat Deus”; and so some moderns, but does 
violence to the language. 

Theodoret interprets: tva reAelws adrov évorkoy déEnoGe ; and this 
has much in its favour. «is, then, would be as in il. 21, 22, so that 
ye become the zAnp. (as the result of loading a ship is that it 
becomes a 7A7jpwua). God, then, is that with which they are filled, 
as in 1. 23 and iv. 13 it is Christ. So xarouxyrypioy Tod Ocor, il. 22, 
is parallel to katouxjoa tov Xp. év tals Kapdiats, ili. 17 (v. Soden). 
But “to be filled with God” is an expression which, though 
capable of defence, would be open to misconception, and has 
no distinct parallel in the N.T. It appears more consonant with 
St. Paul’s language generally to understand 7A. rod @eod as the 
fulness of the riches of God, all that is ‘ spiritually communicable 
to the saints, [ who are] the ‘ partakers of Divine nature,’ 2 Pet. 1.4” 
(Moule). This is substantially Meyer’s view. 

B has a peculiar reading: tva mAnpw0y wav, which is also that of 17, 73, 


116, of which, however, 17 reads eis judas instead of rod Oeod. Westcott and 
Hort admit the reading of B to their margin, ‘‘ that all the fulness of God 


III. 20, 21] DOXOLOGY 103 


may be filled up.” Comp., however, the loss of -re of éopparyloOnre in B, cap. 
iy: 

20, 21. Doxology suggested by the thought of the glorious things 
prayed for. 

20. 1 dé Suvaperw bwép mdvta movijoar Umepexmeptccod dy 
aitovpeba 4) voodpev. ‘ Now to Him who is able to do more than 
all abundantly beyond what we ask or think.” 

The object of the prayer was a lofty one ; but, lofty as it is, God 
is able to give more than we ask, and even more than we under- 
stand. Neither the narrowness of our knowledge nor the feeble- 
ness of our prayer will limit the richness of His gifts. Surely 
a ground for this ascription of praise, which gives a solemn close to 
the first portion of the Epistle. 

imép is not adverbial; coming as it does close to 7dvra, no 
reader could take it otherwise than as a preposition ; besides, as an 
adverb it would be tautological. tzepexzrepurood, which occurs again 
1 Thess. iii. 10, v. 13, is one of those compounds with t7ép 
of which St. Paul was fond, cf. trepAtav, 2 Cor. xi. 5 ; tmepzepic- 
aevw, Rom. v. 20; 2 Cor. vii. 4. Indeed, St. Mark also has 
ireprepioods, Vil. 37. Ellicott notes that of the twenty-eight words 
compounded with izép, twenty-two are found in St. Paul’s Epistles 
and Heb., and twenty of these are found there alone. 

év is not to be connected with zayra, as there is no difficulty 
about joining it with tzepexepurcod, which by the idea of compari- 
son can govern the genitive (ze. = tovTwr 4). 

kata Thy Sdvapiv thy évepyoupevyy ev ypiv. ‘ According to (or by 
virtue of) the power that worketh in us.”  évepy. is clearly middle, 
not passive (as Estius). Onthovius, indeed, defends the latter view, 
maintaining that évepyetrac is always passive in the N.T., even 
Rom. vii. 5; 1 Thess. ii. 13; Jas. v. 16 (Bibliotheca Bremensis, Classis 
gta, p. 474). According to Winer, St. Paul uses the active of 
personal action, the middle of non-personal. Comp. Col. i. 29. 

21. aia 4 Sdéa ev TH ExkAnoia Kal év Xpiotd “Inaod. “To 
Him be glory in the Church and in Christ Jesus.” Son ABC 17, 
al., Vulg. Boh., Jerome. But xaé is omitted by D’K LP, Syr. 
(both) Arm. Eth. Goth., Chrys. Theodoret, Theoph. Oecum. 
D*G transpose, and read: év Xpiotd “Inootd Kat tH éxxAnoia. 
This transposition is perhaps due to the thought that “ Christ” 
should precede “the Church.” It is not very easy to see why kat 
should have been omitted if genuine ; on the other hand, it is easy 
to see a reason for its insertion. It is, however, hard to resist the 
documentary evidence for the insertion. If «ai is omitted we 
understand “in the Church,” in which thanks and praise are 
given, “in Christ Jesus,” not simply “through” ; but as St. Paul so 
often uses this expression, and “in the Lord”; He is not the 
medium merely, but by virtue of His union with the Church it is 


104 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 1 


in Him that it gives glory to God. Olshausen and Braune, 
with some older commentators, connect év Xpiord *“Iyood with 77 
éxkAnoia. The absence of the article is not inconsistent with this, 
but the addition would be superfluous, since the éx«A. can only be 
that which is in Christ Jesus. 

If «ai, however, is read, we must apparently interpret év similarly 
in both cases. The Church, then, is that by whose greatness and 
perfection the ddéa of God is exhibited, as it is also exhibited in 
Christ Jesus (v. Soden and Moule). 

eis Tdoas TAS yeveds TOU al@vos TOV aidvev duny. “To all genera- 
tions, for ever and ever. Amen.” ‘There seems to be a blending 
of the two formulae yeveat yevedv and aidves, or aidv, Tov aiwver. 
eis Tovs aidvas Tov ai. occurs Gal. 1. 5; Phil. iv. 10; 1 Tim. i. 17; 
2 Tim. iv. 18, besides the Apocalypse ; «is roy aidva téy aidvewy in 
3 Esdr. iv. 38; and ws tov ai. ray ai., Dan. vii. 18 (Theodot.). 
There seems to be no difference in the meaning. The phrase is 
understood by Meyer and others as designating the future aiwy, 
which begins with the Parousia, as the superlative age of all 
ages. It seems much more natural to explain it as the aidv which 
includes many aidves, ‘in omnes generationes quas complectitur 
6 aiwy, qui terminatur in rovs ai@vas perpetuos,” Bengel. But 
when we consider the difficulty of giving a logical analysis which 
shall be also grammatical of our own “world without end,” we 
may be content to accept the meaning without seeking to analyse 
the expression. 

IV. 1ff. He now passes, as usually in his Epistles, after the 
doctrinal exposition to the practical exhortation, in the course of 
which, however, he is presently drawn back (ver. 4) to doctrinal 
teaching to support his exhortation to unity. 

1-4. Lxhortation to live in a manner worthy of their calling, in 
lowliness, patience, love, and unity. 

1. twapakahd otv tpds eyo 6 Sdopros év Kupiw. “I therefore, 
the prisoner in the Lord, entreat you.” ovv may indicate inference 
from the immediately preceding verse, or more probably (since it. 
is the transition between two sections of the Epistle) from the 
whole former part, 6 décpuos ev K. This is not to excite their 
sympathy, or as desiring that they should cheer him in his 
troubles by their obedience; for, as Theodoret remarks, “he 
exults in his bonds for Christ’s sake more than a king in his 
diadem”; but rather to add force to his exhortation. “In the 
Lord” for ‘fin Domini vinculis constrictus est qui év Kupiw ov 
vinctus est,” Fritzsche (2om. ii. p. 84). It does not signify “for 
Christ’s sake”; compare ovvepyds év Xpiotd, Rom. xvi. 3, 93 
ayarnros év Kupiw, 76. 8. It assigns rather the special character 
which distinguished this captivity from others. 

mapakaAa may be either “exhort” or “entreat, beseech”; 


IV. 2] PRACTICAL EXHORTATION 105 


and in both senses it is used either with an infinitive or with a 
conjunction (iva or dws). Either sense would suit here, but 
“exhort” seems too weak for the connexion ; comp. Rom. xii. 1, 
where it is followed by “by the mercies of God,” a strong form of 
appeal. More than exhortation is implied, especially as it is an 
absolute duty to which he calls them. 

dgiws TepiTatjcar THS KAijoeEws Rs EkANOyTe. “To walk worthily 
of the calling wherewith ye were called.” js attracted for jv the 
cognate accusative ; cf.i.6; 2 Cor.i.4. True, the dative might be 
used with xadety (see 2 Tim. i. 9); but the attraction of the dative 
would not be in accordance with N.T. practice. 

2. peta Tdons TaTre_voppootvns kat TpadtyTos. ‘ With all lowli- 
ness and meekness.” era is used of accompanying actions or 
dispositions (see Acts xvii. 11; 2 Cor. vil. 15); mdéoys belongs to 
both substantives. What is tarewodpoovvy? Chrysostom says it 
is Oray Tis péyas oy éavTov tarewot; and elsewhere, dray peydAa Tis 
EaUTO TUVELOWS, UNdeY éya TEpl avTod havtalyrat, Trench says itis 
rather esteeming ourselves small, inasmuch as we are so, the 
thinking truly, and therefore lowlily of ourselves; adding that 
Chrysostom is bringing in pride again under the disguise of 
humility. In this he is followed by Alford and other English com- 
mentators. Yet surely this is not right. A man may be small, 
and know himself to be so, and yet not be humble. But every 
man cannot truly think himself smaller than his fellows ; nor can 
this be the meaning of Phil. i. 3. If a man is really greater than 
others in any quality or attainment, moral, intellectual, or spiritual, 
does the obligation of humility bind him to think falsely that he 
is less than they? It is no doubt true that the more a man 
advances in knowledge or in spiritual insight, the higher his ideal 
becomes, and so the more sensibly he feels how far he comes 
short of it. This is one aspect of humility, but it is not taze- 
voppoovvyn. And St. Paul is speaking of humility as a Christian 
social virtue. St. Paul declares himself to be not a whit inferior to oi 
UmepXiav azdaToAo, and in the same breath says that he humbled 
himself ; he even exhorts his readers to imitate him, and yet he 
attributes this very virtue to himself, Acts xx. 19. And what 
of our Lord Himself, who was meek and lowly, zpdaos kai tazrewvos, 
in heart? One who knows himself greater in relation to others, 
but who is contented to be treated as if he were less, such a 
one is certainly entitled to be called humble-minded ; he exhibits 
tarewodpootvy. Chrysostom’s definition, then, is far truer than 
Trench’s ; it only errs by limiting the possibility of the virtue to 
those who are great. 

This is a peculiarly Christian virtue. The word occurs in 
Josephus and Epictetus, but only in a bad sense as = “‘meanness of 
spirit.” mpadorns is understood by some expositors as meekness 


106 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 3 


toward God and toward men; the spirit ‘‘ which never rises in in 
subordination against God, nor in resentment against man” (Eadie); 
but its use in the N.T. does not justify the introduction of the 
former idea; compare 1 Cor. iv. 21, “Shall I come to you with a 
rod, or in the spirit of zp.”? 2 Tim. i. 25, ‘‘correcting in zp.” 

Tit. ili. 2, “showing all zp. towards all men.” Resignation toward 
God and meekness toward man are distinct though allied virtues. 
The same virtues are mentioned in Col. ii. 12. 

peTa pakpoOupias, ‘with long-suffering,” connected by some 
expositors with the following ; but dvexomevor is already defined by 
év aydan, which is best connected with that word. The repetition 
of perd is rather in favour of than adverse to the parallelism with 
the preceding, raz. and zpa. being taken more closely together as 
being nearly allied virtues. 

pakpoOvpia has two senses: steadfastness, especially in endur- 
ing suffering, as in Plutarch, “‘ Never ask from God freedom from 
trouble, but paxpofvpia” (Luc. 32) cf. Jas. v. 10; Heb. vi. 12; 
but generally in N.T. slowness in avenging wrongs, forbearance, 
explained, in fact, in the following words. Fritzsche defines it, 
“‘ Clementia, qua irae temperans delictum non statim vindices, 
sed ei qui peccaverit poenitendi locum relinquas” (om. 1. p. 
98). Compare 1 Cor. xiii. 4, 9 dydan paxpobupel, xpyoreverat. 
In his comment on that passage, Chrysostom rather curiously 
SayS: paxpodupos dua TodTo A€yerar ered pakpav Twa Kat pweyddynv 
Exe WUXIV. 

dvexopevor GAAjAwv ev dydary. ‘ Forbearing one another in love.” 
This mutual forbearance is the expression in action of paxpofupia. 
It involves bearing with one another’s weaknesses, not ceasing to 
love our neighbour or friend because of those fauits in him which 
perhaps offend or displease us. 

The participles fall into the nominative by a common idiom, 
ipets being the logical subject of déiws wepuat.; cf. ch. iii, 18 and 
Col. i. ro. There is no need, then, with some commentators, to 
supply éoré or yiveoOe. 

3. omouddLoyres Tpelv Thy évdtHTa TOO TvEUBaTOS Ev TH ovydéopy 
Tis eipyyys, “giving diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit i in the 
bond of peace.” ‘‘ Endeavouring,” as in the AV., would imply the 
possibility, if not likelihood, of the endeavour failing. Trench (Ox 
the Authorised Version, p. 44) says that in the time of the trans- 
lators “‘endeavouring” meant “giving all diligence.” But in Acts 
xvi. 10 the word is used to render eCyryoapev, and except in this 
and two other passages it is not used for omovddfew, which, in 
Tit. il. 12 and 2 Pet. i. 14) is rendered “be diligent ?-- ine Limi 
iv. 9, 21, “do thy diligence”; 2 Tim. 11.15; “study.” The other 
passages where the rendering is “endeavour” are 1 Thess. ii. 17, 
where the endeavour did fail, and 2 Pet. i. 15, where failure might 


Iv. 4] UNITY OF THE CHURCH 107 


have appeared possible. Theophylact well expresses the force 
of the word here: otx drévws icyicopev ecipnveveyv. The clause 
expresses the end to be attained by the exercise of the virtues 
mentioned in ver. 2. 

tnpev, “to preserve,” for it is supposed already to exist. 
“Etiam ubi nulla fissura est, monitis opus est,” Bengel. The 
existence of divisions, therefore, is not suggested. “The unity of 
the Spirit,” ze. the unity which the Spirit has given us. ‘The 
Spirit unites those who are separated by race and customs,” Chrys., 
and so most recent commentators ; and this seems to be proved 
by &v Ilvedua in the following verse. But Calvin, Estius, and 
others, following Anselm and ps-Ambrose, understand zv. here of 
the human spirit, “‘animorum concordia.” De Wette, again, thinks 
that the analogy of évérys THis riotews, in ver. 13, is against the 
received interpretation, and accordingly interprets “the unity of 
the spirit of the Christian community,” taking wv. in ver. 4 
similarly. Comp. Grotius, ‘unitatem ecclesiae quae est corpus 
spirituale.” (Theodore Mops. agrees with Chrys. The quotation 
in Ellicott belongs to the next verse.) 

év 7 ouvdéopw THs eipyvyns. Genitive of apposition ; peace is 
the bond in which the unity is kept; cf. cvvderpov ddixias, Acts 
Vill. 23, and ovvderpos etdvoias, Plut. um. 6. The fact that love 
is called the bond of peace in Col. ii. 14 does not justify us in 
taking the words here as meaning “love,” an interpretation adopted, 
probably, in consequence of év being taken instrumentally; in 
which case, as peace could not be the instrument by which the 
unity of the Spirit is maintained, but is itself maintained thereby, 
the genitive could not be one of apposition. But the év is parallel 
to the év before éydzn, and in any case it is not by the bond of 
peace that the unity of the Spirit is kept. 

4-11. Essential unity of the Church. It ts one Body, animated 
by one Spirit, baptized into the name of the one Lord, and all being 
children of the same Father. But the members have their different 
gifts and offices. 

4. vy cpa kat €v Mvedpa Kabds Kat exdyOnte ev pd Amide THs 
k\joews Spay. ‘One Body, and one Spirit, even as ye were called 
in one hope of your calling.” This and the two following verses 
express the objective unity belonging to the Christian dispensa- 
tion in all its aspects. First, the oneness of the Church itself: 
one Body, one Spirit, one Hope. Next, the source and instru- 
ments of that unity, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; and 
lastly, the unity of the Divine Author, who is defined, in a three- 
fold manner, as over all, through all, and in all. 

Although there is no connecting particle, and ydp is certainly 
not to be supplied, the declaration is introduced as supplying a 
motive for the exhortation, but the absence of any such particle 


108 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 5 


makes it more vivid and impressive. We need not even supply 
éori ; it is rather to be viewed as an abrupt and emphatic reminder 
of what the readers well knew, as if the writer were addressing them 
in person. Still less are we to supply, with Theophylact and 
Oecumenius, “ Be ye,” or with others, “Ye are,” neither of which 
would agree with wv. 5 and 6. 

One Body ; namely, the Church itself, so often thus described ; 
one Spirit, the Holy Spirit, which dwells in and is the vivifying 
Spirit of that body ; cf. 1 Cor. xii. 13. The parallelism «is Kvpuos, 
els @eds seems to require this. Comp. 1 Cor. xii. 4-6, where 76 
avTo Ivetpa, 6 aitos Kvpuos, 6 aitos @eds. Chrysostom, however, 
interprets differently ; indeed, he gives choice of several interpreta- 
tions, none of them agreeing with this. ‘‘ Showing (he says) that 
from one body there will be one spirit; or that there may be one 
body but not one spirit, as if one should be a friend of heretics ; 
or that he shames them from that, that is, ye who have received 
one spirit and been made to drink from one fountain ought not to be 
differently minded ; or by spirit here he means readiness, zpoOvpia.” 

ka0ws is not used by Attic writers, who employ xa@dzep or 
xa06. It is called Alexandrian, but is not confined to Alexandrian 
or biblical writers. 

év pug éXridi. év is not instrumental, as Meyer holds. Comp. 
Karey év xdputt, Gal. i. 6; & eipyvy, 1 Cor. vil. 15; &y dyvacpa, 
1 Thess. iv. 7; nor is it=eis or éwi, as Chrysostom. 

It is frequently said in this and similar cases that it indicates 
the “element” in which something takes place. But this is no 
explanation, it merely suggests an indefinite figure, which itself 
requires explanation. Indeed, the word “element” or ‘‘sphere” 
seems to imply something previously existing. What év indicates 
is that the hope was an essential accompaniment of their calling, 
a “conditio” (not “condition” in the English sense). It differs 
from «is in this, that the latter preposition would suggest that the 
“hope,” “peace,” etc., followed the calling in time. In fact, the 
expression eis tu involves a figure taken from motion; he who is- 
called is conceived as leaving the place in which the call reached 
him. But «Ajovs as applied to the Christian calling is pregnant, 
it includes the idea of the state into which the calling brings those 
who are called. ‘‘év exprimit indolem rei,” Bengel on 1 Thess. 
iv. 7; so also the verb. Hence such an expression as «Anrot ay.ot. 
They are so called as to be év éAzié:, év efpyvn, by the very fact of 
their calling, not merely as a result of it. Hence, also, we are not 
to interpret “hope of your calling,” or ‘the hope arising from 
your calling,” which is hardly consistent, by the way, with the idea 
that hope is the “element.” It is rather the hope belonging to 
your calling. 

5. els Kuptos, pla miotis, €v Bdwticpa. “One Lord, one Faith, 


Ev. 6, 7] UNITY OF THE CHURCH 109 


one Baptism.” One Lord, Christ; one faith, of which He is the 
object, one in its nature and essence; and one baptism, by which 
we are brought into the profession of this faith. 

The question has been asked, Why is the other sacrament not 
mentioned? and various answers have been given, of which the 
one that is most to the point, perhaps, is that it is not a ground or 
antecedent condition of unity, but an expression of it. Yet it 
must be admitted that it would supply a strong motive for pre- 
serving unity, as in 1 Cor. x. 17. Probably, as it was not essential 
to mention it, the omission is due in part to the rhythmical 
arrangement of three triads. 

6. eis Oeds Kai tathp mavtwy. “One God and Father of all.” 
Observe the climax: first, the Church, then Christ, then God; also the 
order of the three Persons—Spirit, Lord, Father. Ellicott quotes 
from Cocceius: ‘‘Etiamsi baptizamur in nomen Patris Filii et Spiritus 
Sancti, et filium unum Dominum nominamus, tamen non credimus 
nisi in unum Deum.” It is arbitrary to limit rdvrwv to the faith- 
ful. It is true the context speaks only of Christians, but then 
mavtes has not been used. The writer advances from the Lord of 
the Church to the God and Father of all. For this notion of 
Fatherhood see Pearson, Oz the Creed, Art. 1. 

6 émt wdvtwv kal 81a mdévtwv Kal év maou. ‘“ Who is over all, and 
through all, and in all.” The Received Text adds tiv, with a few 
cursives, and Chrys. (Comm. not text) Theoph. Oec. iv is added 
in DGKL, Vulg. Syr. (both) Arm. Goth., Iren. 

There is no pronoun in SABC P 17 67?, Ign. Orig. a7, It was, 
no doubt, added as a gloss, waow seeming to require a limitation. 

As zaow is undoubtedly masculine, it is most natural to take 
awdvtwv in both places as masculine also. Ver. 7 individualises the 
mavres by évi éxaotrw yudv. Erasmus and some later commentators, 
however, have taken the first and second zavrwy as neuter, whilst 
the Vulg. so takes the second. 

6 éri rdvtwv ; cf. Rom. ix. 5, 6 Gv ért révrwy Weds etAoyytos «is 
Tovs ai@vas. ‘Over all,” as a sovereign ruler. It is less easy to 
say what are the distinct ideas meant to be expressed by dua and 
év respectively. The latter is more individualising, the indwelling 
is an indwelling in each; whereas 6:4 mavtwy expresses a relation 
to the whole body, through the whole of which the influence and 
power of God are diffused. It is a sustaining and working 
presence. This does not involve the supplying of évepyar. 

We are not to suppose a direct reference to the Trinity in these 
three prepositional clauses, for here it is the Father that is specially 
mentioned in parallelism to the Spirit and the Son, previously 
spoken of. 

7. évi S€ Exdotw tpdv €d60y H xdpis Kata Td pétpov THs Swpeds 
Tou Xpiotod. ‘‘ But to each one of us the grace was given according 


[IO THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IV. 8 


to the measure of the gift of Christ.” He passes from the relation 
to the whole to the relation to the individual. In the oneness of 
the body, etc., there is room for diversity, and no one is overlooked ; 
each has his own position. Compare Rom. xii. 4-6; 1 Cor. 
xil. 4ff., where the conception is carried out in detail. “The 
grace,” #.e. the grace which he has. The article is omitted in 
B D*.G L:P*; but is present in'\ AC Df KP", most others,, he 
omission is easy to account for from the adjoining 7 in édd6y. 
“ According to the measure,” etc., z.e. according to what Christ has 
given ; cf. Rom. xii. 6, “gifts differing according to the grace that 
is given to us.” 

8. Avd eye. ‘Wherefore it saith”=“it is said.” If any 
substantive is to be supplied it is 7 ypady; but the verb may well 
be taken impersonally, just as in colloquial English one may often 
hear: “it says,” or the like. Many expositors, however, supply 6 
@eds. Meyer even says, “‘ Who says it is obvious of itself, namely, 
God, whose word the Scripture is.” Similarly Alford and Ellicott. 
If it were St. Paul’s habit to introduce quotations from the O.T., 
by whomsoever spoken in the original text, with the formula 6 @cds 
Aéyet, then this supplement here might be defended. But it is not. 
In quoting he sometimes says Acyet, frequently 7 ypady Aé€yet, at 
other times Aafid eye, ‘Hoaias Aéye. There is not a single 
instance in which 6 @eés is either expressed or implied as the 
subject, except where in the original context God is the speaker, 
as in Rom. ix. 15. Even when that is the case he does not 
hesitate to use a different subject, as in Rom. x. 19, 20, ‘‘ Moses 
saith,” Isaiah iis» very: (bold, sand) (saithy’ 5) Romy ixnwt7, 7 bhe 
Scripture saith to Pharaoh.” 

This being the case, we are certainly not justified in forcing 
upon the apostle here and in ch. v. 14 a form of expression con- 
sistent only with the extreme view of verbal inspiration. When 
Meyer (followed by Alford and Ellicott) says that 7 ypady must 
not be supplied unless it is given by the context, the reply is 
obvious, namely, that, as above stated, 7 ypady A€ya does, in fact,. 
often occur, and therefore the apostle might have used it here, 
whereas 6 @cds Agyes does not occur (except in cases unlike this), 
and we have reason to believe could not be used by St. Paul here. 
It is some additional confirmation of this that both here and in 
ch. v. 14 (if that is a biblical quotation) he does not hesitate to 
make important alterations. This is the view taken by Braune, 
Macpherson, Moule; the latter, however, adding that for St. Paul 
“the word of the Scripture and the word of its Author are con- 
vertible terms.” 

It is objected that although ¢yot is used impersonally, A¢yeu Is 
not. The present passage and ver. 14 are sufficient to prove the 
usage for St. Paul, and there are other passages in his Epistles 


IV. 8] DIVERSITY OF GIFTS III 


where this sense is at least applicable ; cf. Rom. xv. 10, where A€yer 
is parallel to yéypamrau in ver. 9; Gal. ili, 16, where it corresponds 
to éppyOyncayv. But, in fact, the impersonal use of ¢yoi in Greek 
authors is quite different, namely = qaci, “they say” (so 1 Cor. 
x. 10). Classical authors had no opportunity of using Aéye: as it is 
used here, as they did not possess any collection of writings which 
could be referred to as 7 ypady, or by any like word. ‘They could 
say: 6 vomos A€ye, and 7 Aeyopevov. 

*AvaBds els Uos yxpadteucev aixpahwotayv Kat edwxe Sdpata 
tots avOpemors. “When he ascended on high He led a captivity 
captive, and gave gifts unto men.” ‘The words appear to be taken 
from Ps. Ixvili, 18 (where the verbs are in the second person) ; but 
there is an important divergence in the latter clause, which in the 
Hebrew is, “‘Thou has received gifts among men,” the meaning 
being, received tributary gifts amongst the vanquished, or according 
to another interpretation, gifts consisting in the persons of the 
surrendered enemies (Ibn Ezra, Ewald). The Septuagint also 
has éAaBes ddpata ev avOpazw, or, according to another reading, 
avOpwros. Various attempts have been made to account for the 
divergence. Chrysostom simply says the one is the same as the 
other, todro tairov éorw éxetvw ; and so Theophylact, adding, “for 
God giving the gifts receives in return the service.” Meyer, 
followed by Alford and Eadie, maintains that the Hebrew verb 
often has a proleptic signification, ‘‘to fetch,” z.e. to take in order 
to give. The apostle, says Eadie, seizes on the latter portion of 
the sense, and renders—édwxe. Most of the passages cited for 
this are irrelevant to the present purpose, the verb being followed 
by what we may call the dative of a pronoun, e.g. Gen. xv. 9, 
“Take for me”; xxvii. 13, “Fetch me them.” In such cases it is 
plain that the notion of subsequent giving is in the “ mihi,” not in 
the verb, or rather the dative is simply analogous to the dazivus 
commodt, ‘This use is quite parallel to that of the English “ get.” 
In xviii. 5, “I will get a piece of bread and comfort ye your 
hearts,” the pronoun is omitted as needless, the words that follow 
expressing the purpose for which the bread was to be fetched. In 
xlii, 16, “Send one of you and let him fetch your brother,” there is 
no idea of giving. In no case is giving any part of the idea of the 
Hebrew verb any more than of the English “get” or “fetch.” 
But whatever may be thought of this “proleptic use,” this is not 
the sense of the verb in the psalm, so that it would not really help. 
The psalm speaks of receiving (material) gifts from men; the 
apostle, of giving (spiritual) gifts to men. Macpherson says, “The 
modification is quite justifiable, on the ground that Christ, to 
whom the words are applied, receives gifts among men only that 
He may bestow them upon men.” But Christ did not receive 
amongst men the gifts which He is here said to bestow. The 


112 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 8 


Pulpit Commentary states: “ Whereas in the psalm it is said gave 
gifts 70 men” [which is not in the psalm, but in the Epistle], as 
modified by the apostle it is said “‘vece’ved gifts for men,” which is 
neither one nor the other, but a particular interpretation of the 
psalm adopted in the English version. Ellicott, admitting that the 
difference is not diminished by any of the proposed reconciliations, 
takes refuge in the apostolic authority of St. Paul. “The inspired 
apostle, by a slight (?) change of language and substitution of <dwxe 


for the more dubious np, succinctly, suggestively, and authorita- 


tively unfolds.” But he does not profess to be interpreting (as in 
Rom. x. 6, 7, 8), but quoting. Such a view, indeed, would open 
the door to the wildest freaks of interpretation; they might not, 
indeed, command assent as inspired, but they could never be 
rejected as unreasonable. The change here, far from being slight, 
is just in that point in which alone the quotation is connected 
either with what precedes or with what follows. 

The supposition that St. Paul does not intend either to 
quote exactly or to interpret, but in the familiar Jewish fashion 
adapts the passage to his own use, knowing that those of 
his readers who were familiar with the psalm would recognise 
the alteration and see the purpose of it, namely, that instead 
of receiving gifts of homage Christ gives His gifts to men, 
is not open to any serious objection, since he does not found 
any argument on the passage. So Theodore Mops., who re- 
marks that izaddakas 76 eda ddpata ovtws ev TH WaAma Keipevor, 
chwoxe SOdpata eire, TH vraAdayp epi THY oikelav ypyodmevos 
dxoXovGiav’ éxet pev yap mpos THY UTdbcow 7O eAaBev HpporTer, ev- 
tavda S& TO mpoKeevw TO edwKev akodovOov jv. As Oltramare 
observes: Paul wishes to speak of the spiritual gifts granted to the 
Christian in the measure of the gift of Christ, exalted to heaven. 
An expression of Scripture occurs to him, which strikes him as 
being ‘“‘le mot de la situation.” Depicting originally the triumph 
of God, it strikes him as expressing well (mutatis mutandis) the 
triumph of Christ, but he does not identify either the facts or the 
persons. It is, however, remarkable that the same interpretation 
of the words of the psalm is given in the Syriac Version and in the 
Targum. The former may have followed St. Paul, as the Arabic 
and Ethiopic, although made from the Septuagint, have done; 
and it has been suggested that the Targumist, finding a difficulty, 
followed the Syriac,—an improbable supposition. In his expansion 
he interprets the words of Moses, “Thou didst ascend to the 
firmament, Moses the prophet, thou didst take a captivity 
captive, thou didst teach the words of the law, thou gavest gifts 
to the sons of men.” This Targum as we have it is of compara- 
tively late date. But if we may assume, as no doubt we may, that 


IV. 8] DIVERSITY OF GIFTS 113 


it is giving us here an ancient interpretation, we have a solution of 
the difficulty so far as St. Paul is concerned ; he simply made use 
of the Rabbinical interpretation as being suitable to his purpose. 
Compare 1 Cor. x. 4. No doubt the question remains, What led 
the Targumist to take this view of the passage? Hitzig suggests 
that as the receiving of gifts seemed not consonant with, the 
majesty of God, the paraphrast mentally substituted for np> the 
verb pbn, which has the same letters in a different order, and 
means “to divide, give a portion,” etc. This verb is rendered 
didwcw by the Sept. in Gen. xlix. 27 (EV. “ divide”), while in 
2 Chron. xxviii. 21, where it occurs in an otherwise unexampled 
sense “plunder” (EV. “took a portion out of”), the Sept. has 
eAaBev (7a ev). The feeling that prompted the paraphrast here 
shows itself also in Rashi’s comment, “took, that thou mightest 
ive.” 

: This renders needless a recourse to the supposition that the 
quotation is from a Christian hymn, which borrowed from the 
psalm. The objection raised to this and to the preceding view 
from the use of Aéyer, has no force except on the assumption that 
@eds is to be supplied; and, in fact, in ver. 14 many expositors 
suppose that it is a hymn that is quoted in the same manner. 
Nor can it be truly alleged that St. Paul here treats the words as 
belonging to canonical Scripture, for he draws no inference from 
them, as we shall see. Indeed, if he himself had altered them, 
instead of adopting an existing alteration, it would be equally 
impossible for him to argue from the altered text as if it were 
canonical. 

7xparutevoev aixpadwoiav. ‘Took captive a body of captives,” 
the cognate accusative, abstract for concrete, as the same word is 
used in 1 Esdr. v. 45 and Judith ii. 9. We have the same expression 
in the song of Deborah: “ Arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity 
captive, thou son of Abinoam,” Judg. v. 12, which is perhaps the 
source of the expression in the psalm. The interpretation adopted 
in a popular hymn, “captivity is captive led,” as if “captivity” 
meant the power that took captive, is quite untenable, and such a 
use of the abstract is foreign to Hebrew thought. 

Who are these captives? Chrysostom replies: The enemies 
of Christ, viz. Satan, sin, and death. In substance this interpreta- 
tion is no doubt correct, but it is unnecessary to define the 
enemies; the figure is general, that of a triumphant conqueror 
leading his conquered enemies in his train. Compare Col. ii. 15. 
To press the figure further would lead us into difficulties. These 
enemies are not yet finally destroyed, €oyatos éyOpos Katrapyeirat 6 
Odvaros (1 Cor. xv. 25). 

Theodoret interprets the “captives” as the redeemed (as 
Justin had already done), namely, as having been captives of the 

8 


IIl4 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IVv. 9 


devil, ob yap eAevdepovs dvtas yas YYwadrurevoev, GAN td Tov 
diaBorov yeyevnpevous avtnxpadrutevoev, Kal THv eAevsepiav nyiv 
éOwpnoato; and so many moderns. But this does not agree 
with the construction by which the aiywaAwoia must be the 
result of the action of the verb. Besides, the captives are 
distinguished from av@pwro. The same objections hold against 
the view that the captives are the souls of the righteous 
whom Christ delivered from Hades (Lyra, Estius). 

“And gave gifts.” «ai is omitted in N* A C? D* G 17, ad; 
but inserted in 8° B C* and* D° K LP, ad. Syr. A tendency to 
assimilate to the passage in the psalm appears in the reading 
7XHaAwTevoats in A L and several MSS., which nevertheless read 
éowkev, For the gifts compare Acts ii. 33. 

@. 7d Se “AveBy th éotw ei ph Ste kal KaTéBy eis TA KaTHTEpO 
pepn THs yjs- ‘Now that He ascended, what is it but that He 
also descended into the lower parts of the earth?” 


There is here a very important variety of reading— 

katéBn without mp@ror is the reading of §* A C* D G 17 672, Boh. Sahid. 
Eth. Amiat., Iren. Orig. Chrys. (Comm.) Aug. Jerome. 

katéBn mprov is read in 8° BC°KLP, most mss. Vulg. Goth. Syr. 
(both) Arm., Theodoret. 

The weight of authority is decidedly on the side of omission. Transcrip- 
tional evidence points the same way. The meaning which presented itself 
on the surface was that Christ who ascended had had His original seat in 
heaven, and that what the apostle intended, therefore, was that He descended 
before He ascended ; hence rp&rov would naturally suggest itself to the mind 
of a reader. On the other hand, it is not easy to see why it should be 
omitted. Reiche, indeed, takes the opposite view. The word, he says, 
might seem superfluous, since both in ver. 8 and ver. 10 we have dvaBas els 
twos without rpwrov ; or, again, unsuitable, since Christ descended but once, 
supposing, namely, that the reference to dvaSds was missed. He thinks 
mpwrov all but necessary to the argument of the apostle. This is just what 
some early copyists thought, and it is a consideration much more likely to 
have affected them than the opposite one, that the word was superfluous. It 
is rejected by most critics, but Westcott and Hort admit it to a place in the 
margin. 

Hépn after karwrepa has the authority of § ABCD°KLP, while it is 
omitted by D* G (not f). The versions and Fathers are divided. The word 
is read in Vulg. Boh. Arm. Syr-Pesh., Chrys. Theodoret, Aug., but omitted 
by Goth. Syr. (Sch.) Eth., Iren. Theodotus. The insertion or omission makes 
no difference in the sense. Most recent critical editors retain the word. 
Tischendorf rejected it in his seventh, but restored it in his eighth edition. 
Alford, Ellicott, and Meyer pronounce against it; the last-mentioned 
suggesting that it is a gloss due to the old explanation of the descent into 
hell, in order to mark the place as subterranean. 


To 8é *AvéBn, Ze. not the word avéfy, which had not occurred, 
but that which is implied in avaBds. ti eorey et pay, x.7.X., Ze. ‘ what 
does this mean but,” etc. 7a xatwrepa rhs yns. The genitive 
may be either partitive, the lower as distinguished from the higher 
parts of the earth, or of apposition, the lower regions, z.e. those of 


Iv. 9] DIVERSITY OF GIFTS 115 


the earth. With the former interpretation we may understand either 
death simply, as Chrysostom and the other Greeks, ra xdrw pépy 
THs yas Tov Odvarey pyow, ard THs Tov dvOpwTwv vrovoias, quoting 
Gen. xliv. 29; Ps. exlii. 7; or Hades, as the place where departed 
spirits live, which is the view of Tertullian, Irenaeus, Jerome, and 
many moderns, including Bengel, Olshausen, Meyer (later editions), 
Alford, Ellicott, Barry. 

But there are serious objections to this. First, if the apostle had 
meant to say that Christ descended to a depth below which there 
was no deeper, as He ascended to a height above which was none 
higher, he would doubtless have used the superlative. 7a xarurepa 
pepn THS yas, if the genitive is partitive, could mean “the low-lying 
regions of the earth,” in opposition to 7a dvwrepixa pépn (Acts 
xix. 1). Meyer, indeed, takes the genitive as depending on the 
comparative; but this would be an awkward way of expressing 
what would more naturally have been expressed by an adverb. 
Ta KaTérata THs ys occurs in the Sept. Ps. Ixiii. 9, Cxxxix. 15 
(xarwrdtw); but in the former place the words mean death and 
destruction ; in the latter they figuratively denote what is hidden, 
the place of formation of the embryo. The corresponding Hebrew 
phrase is found in Ezek. xxxii. 18, 24, referring to death and 
destruction, but rendered Bd6os rhs ys. Cf. Matt. xi. 23, where 
adov is used similarly. Such passages would support Chrysostom’s 
view rather than that under consideration. But, secondly, all 
these Old Testament expressions are poetic figures, and in a mere 
statement of fact like the present, St. Paul would hardly have given 
such a material local designation to the place of departed spirits, 
especially in connexion with the idea of Christ filling all things. 
Thirdly, the antithesis is between earth and heaven, between an 
ascent from earth to heaven, and a descent which is therefore 
probably from heaven to earth. Some, indeed, who adopt this 
view understand the descent as from heaven, some as from earth. 
For the argument from the connexion, see what follows. 

For these reasons it seems preferable to take “the lower 
parts of the earth” as=“‘this lower earth.” Those who adopt 
this view generally assume that the descent preceded the ascent, 
and therefore understand by the descent, the Incarnation. This 
view, however, is not free from difficulty. St. Paul is speaking of 
the unity of the whole on the one hand, and of the diversity of 
individual gifts on the other. The latter is the topic in ver. 7 
and again in ver. 11. To what purpose would be an interpolation 
such as this? It is not brought in to prove the heavenly pre- 
existence of Christ; that is assumed as known; for ascent to heaven 
does not imply descent thence, except on that assumption. And 
why the emphatic assertion of the identity of Him who ascended 
with Him who had previously descended, which was self-evident ? 


116 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 10, 11 


But, in fact, this ascension is not what is in question, but the 
giving of gifts; what had to be shown was, that a descent was 
necessary, in order that He who ascended should give gifts. The 
descent, then, was contemporaneous with the giving, and, therefore, 
subsequent to the ascent. This seems to be indicated by the kai 
before xaréBy. It seems hardly possible to take kai xaréeBy 
otherwise than as expressing something subsequent to avéBn. 
The meaning then is, that the ascent would be without an object, 
unless it were followed by a descent. This is the descent of 
Christ to His Church alluded to in ii. 17, “‘came and preached” ; 
In ii. 17, “that Christ may dwell in your hearts”; and which we 
also find in John xiv. 23, “we will come to Him”; also 76. 3 and 
xvi. 22. It is now clear why it was necessary to assert that 6 
kataf3ds was the same as 6 avafds. This interpretation is ably 
maintained by v. Soden. 

10. 6 kataBds attés éorw Kai 6 dvaBds Otepdvw mdavTwv TOY 
odpavav iva mAnpdon Ta mavta. “He Himself that descended 
is also He that ascended high above all the heavens, that He 
might fill all things.” 

av7ds is not “the same,” which would be 6 airds, but emphatic. 
ov yap adXos kareAynAvOe Kal GAAos aveAjdAvOev, Theodoret. 

“All the heavens” is probably an allusion to the seven 
heavens of the Jews. Cf. 2 Cor. xii. 2, tpiros ovpavds, and 
Heb. iv. 14, dveAnAvOd7a Tovs ovpavors, “that He might fill all 
things.” 

This has sometimes been understood to mean “that He might 
fill the universe,” as when we read in Jer. xxiii. 24, 2 ovxt Tov 
ovpavov Kal THY ynv éy® tAnpO; But how can the occupation of a 
special place in heaven have for its object presence throughout 
the universe? Moreover, this does not agree with the context, 
which refers to the gifts to men. In fact, in order to explain this 
connexion, the omnipresence is resolved by some commentators 
into the presence everywhere of His gifts (Harless), or else of His 
government (Chrys, a/.), A similar result is reached by others, who 
take zAynpdoy as meaning directly “fill with His gifts” (De Wette, 
Bleek, a/.), 7a wdvra being either the universe, or men, or members 
of the Church. But zAypoir by itself can hardly mean “fill with 
gifts.” Ruckert explains, “accomplish all,” viz. all that He had ta 
accomplish. But the words must clearly be interpreted in accord- 
ance with i. 23, Ta wavra év raow tAnpovpevov, which they obviously 
repeat. Oltramare interprets, “that He might render all perfect, 
and (in conformity with this purpose), He gave,” etc. 

11. Kat adtés edwKev Tods pev &troatédous, Tods S€ Tpodrjtas, TOUS 
Sé edayyehtatds, Tos Sé Troipevas kal Si8ackddous. ‘And He Him- 
self gave some as apostles, some as prophets, some as evangelists, 
some as pastors and teachers.” 


IV. 11] DIVERSITY OF GIFTS 117 


éOwxey is not a Hebraism for é6ero (1 Cor. xii. 28); it is 
obviously chosen because of edwxev dduara in the quotation, as if 
the apostle had said, “‘the gifts He gave were,” etc. It is not 
merely the fact of the institution of the offices that he wishes to 
bring into view, but the fact that they were gifts to the Church. 
Christ gave the persons; the Church appointed to the office (Acts 
xili. 2, xiv. 23). The enumeration here must be compared with 
that in 1 Cor. xii. 28, ““God hath set some in the Church, first, 
apostles ; secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers; then miraculous 
powers, then gifts of healing, helps, governments, divers kinds of 
tongues.” There the order of the first three is expressly defined ; 
the latter gifts are not mentioned here, perhaps, as not expressing 
offices, but special gifts which were only occasional ; and, besides, 
they did not necessarily belong to distinct persons from the 
former. 

“ Apostles.” This word is not to be limited to the Twelve, as 
Lightfoot has shown in detail in his excursus on Gal. i. 17. 
Besides St. Paul himself, Barnabas is certainly so called (Acts 
xiv. 4, 14); apparently also James the Lord’s brother (1 Cor. 
xv. 7; Gal. i. 19), and Silvanus (1 Thess. ii. 6, ‘‘ we might have been 
burdensome to you, being apostles of Christ”). In Irenaeus and 
Tertullian the Seventy are called apostles (Iren. ii. 21. 1; Tert. 
adv. Marc. iv. 24). According to the Greek Fathers, followed by 
Lightfoot, Andronicus and Junia are called apostles in Rom. xvi. 7. 
In 2 Cor. viii. 23 and Phil. ii. 25 the messengers of the Churches 
are called “apostles of the Churches.” But to be an apostle of 
Christ it seems to have been a condition that he should have seen 
Christ, 1 Cor. ix. 1, 2, and have, moreover, been a witness of 
the resurrection (Acts i. 8, 21-23). Their office was not limited 
to any particular locality. Prophets are mentioned along with 
apostles in ii. 20, ili. 5. Chrysostom distinguishes them from 
“teachers” by this, that he who prophesies utters everything from 
the spirit, while he who teaches sometimes discourses from his 
own understanding. “ Foretelling” is not implied in the word 
either etymologically or in classical or N.T. usage. In classical 
writers it is used of interpreters of the gods. For N.T. usage, com- 
pare Matt. xxvi. 68, ‘Prophesy, who is it that smote thee” ; 
Tit. i. 12, “‘a prophet of their own,” where it is used in the sense 
of the Latin “‘vates”; Matt. xv. 7, “well hath Isaiah prophesied 
of you”; and especially 1 Cor. xiv. 3, ‘‘He that prophesieth 
speaketh unto men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort.” 
Also Acts xv. 32, ‘‘ Judas and Silas, being themselves also prophets, 
exhorted the brethren . . . and confirmed them.” The function 
of the prophet has its modern parallel in that of the Christian 
preacher, who discourses ‘to edification, exhortation, and com- 
fort” to those who are already members of the Church. ‘“ Preach- 


118 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 11 


ing,” in the English Version of the N.T., means proclaiming the 
gospel to those who have not yet known it (kypvrrewv, evayyedt- 
Ceo Oar). 

By “evangelists” we are doubtless to understand those whose 
special function it was to preach the gospel to the heathen in sub- 
ordination to the apostles. They did not possess the qualifications 
or the authority of the latter (repuidvres éxjputrov, says Theodoret). 
One of the deacons is specially called an evangelist (Acts xxi. 8). 
Timothy is told by St. Paul to do the work of an evangelist, but 
his office included other functions. 

Tols S€ Toimevas Kat Si8ackddous. The first question is whether 
these words express distinct offices or two characters of the same 
office. Many commentators—both ancient and modern—adopt 
the former view, differing, however, greatly in their definitions. 
Theophylact understands by “pastors,” bishops and_presbyters, 
and by ‘‘teachers,” deacons. But there is no ground for suppos- 
ing that deacons would be called diddcxado. On the other hand, 
the circumstance that rods d€ is not repeated before diudacKaAovs is in 
favour of the view that the words express two aspects of the same 
office. So Jerome: “Non enim ait: alios autem pastores et alios 
magistros, sed alios pastores et magistros, ut qui pastor est, esse 
debeat et magister.” This, indeed, is not quite decisive, since it 
might only mark that the gifts of pastors and of teachers are not 
so sharply distinguished from one another as from those that 
precede ; and it must be admitted that in a concise enumeration 
such as the present, it is in some degree improbable that this 
particular class should have a double designation. This much is 
clear, that “ pastors and teachers” differ from the preceding classes 
in being attached to particular Churches. The name “ pastors” 
implies this, and this term no doubt includes ézicxoro. and 
mpeoBvrepo. Compare 1 Pet. v. 2 (addressing the zpeofvrepor), 
Toudvare TO ev tytv Toimviov TOD Oeor, émusKorodvtes (om. RV. 
mg.): 1 Pet. ii. 25, tov woméva kal éericxotov tov Wyav tydv, 
where ézioxo7rov seems to explain zouwnv: Acts xx. 28, Td ropmvi 
év @ yas TO Ivedpa Oo dyvov eOeto émioKkorovs, Toysaivew THY éKKAr, 
mouznv Was used in the earliest classical writers of rulers of the 
people. Even in Homer we have Agamemnon, for instance, 
called rounv Aadv. The zowyv of a Christian Church would, of 
course, be a teacher as well as a governor; it was his business to 
guide the sheep of the flock; cf. 1 Tim. iil. 2, det rov éxioKomov 
. . . OwWaxrixoy (etvar): also Tit. i. 9. But there would naturally be 
other teachers not invested with the same authority and not form- 
ing a distinct class, much less co-ordinate with the éioxomo. 
Had rods dé been repeated, it might have seemed to separate 
sharpiy the function of teaching from the office of qoyjv. It is 
easy to see that ériacxoros would have been a much less suitable 


GV 12] IDEAL PERFECTION OF THE SAINTS IIg 


word here, since it does not suggest the idea of a moral and 
spiritual relation. 

12-16. The object of all ts the perfection of the saints, that tney 
may be one in the faith, and mature in knowledge, so as not to be 
carried away by the winds of false doctrine ; but that the whole body, 
as one organism deriving its nourishment from the Head, may be 
perfected in love. 

12. mpds tov Kataptiopov Tov dyiwv, eis Epyov Siakovias, eis 
oikoSophy Tod cdpatos Tod Xpiotod. “ With a view to the perfecting 
of the saints unto the work of ministering, unto the building up of 
the body of Christ.” The xataptispos tov dy. is the ultimate 
purpose, with a view to which the teachers, etc., have been given 
cis pyov Siax, «is oik. «.7.4. The Authorised Version follows 
Chrysostom in treating the three clauses as co-ordinate, €xacros 
oikodopel, Exactos Katapri€et, ekaoros diaxovet. The change in the 
prepositions is not decisive against this, for St. Paul is rather fond 
of such variety. But if the three members were parallel, épyov 
Staxovias should certainly come first as the more indefinite and the 
mediate object. In fact, Grotius and others suppose the thoughts 
transposed. A plausible view is that adopted by De Wette and 
many others, that the two latter members depend on the first. 
“With a view to the perfecting of the saints, so that they may be 
able to work in every way to the building up,” etc. But in a 
connexion like this, where offices in the Church are in question, 
dvaxovéa can only mean official service; and this does not belong to 
the saints in general. 

Olshausen supposes the two latter members to be a subdivision 
of the first, thus: “for the perfecting of the saints, namely, on the 
one hand, of those who are endowed with gifts of teaching for the 
fulfilment of their office ; and, on the other hand, as regards the 
hearers, for the building up of the Church.” But it is impossible 
to read into the words this distinction, “‘on the one hand,” “on 
the other hand”; and the oixodop2 tod odparos describes the 
function of teachers rather than of hearers. Besides, we cannot 
suppose the teachers themselves to be included among those who 
are the objects of the functions enumerated in ver. 11. 

The word xatapricyts does not occur elsewhere in the N.T. Galen uses 
it of setting a dislocated joint. The verb karaprifw by its etymology means 
to restore or bring to the condition dprios, and is used Matt. v, 21 of 
“mending” nets; in Heb. xi. 3 of the ‘‘ framing” of the world. It occurs 
Gal. vi. 1 in the figurative sense, ‘‘ restore such one.” In Luke vi. 40 the 
sense is as here, ‘‘to perfect,” xarnpricuévos mas Esra ws 6 diddoKados 
atvrod. Also in 2 Cor. xiii. 11, xarapritecOe. Comp. 2b. 9, Tov buay 
kardpriow. Karapricuds is the completed result of xardpriccs. 

oikodopiy Tov gwparos. The confusion of metaphors is excused 
by the fact that oixoSou7 had for the apostle ceased to suggest its 
primary meaning; cf. 1 Cor. viii. 10; 1 Thess. v. 11, and below, 


120 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 13 


ver. 16. The fact that both ofxodou7y and cpa tod Xpicrov have a 
distinct metaphorical sense accounts for the confusion, but does 
not prove it non-existent. The ancients were less exacting in 
such matters than the moderns; even Cicero has some strange 
examples. See on iii. 18. 

It is useful to bear this in mind when attempts are made else: 
where to press too far the figure involved in some word. 

13. péxpt KkatavTyowper ol mdvtes Eis THY EvdTyTA THS TioTEWS KOL 
THS ETLyvSTEWS TOU Uiod TOD OEod Eis Gvdpa Tédevov, eis ETPOV HAtkias 
Tod wAnpdpatos Tod Xprotod. ‘Till we all (we as a whole) attain 
to the oneness of the faith, and of the thorough knowledge of the 
Son of God, to a full-grown man, to the measure of the stature (or 
maturity) of the fulness of Christ.” jéype is without av because 
the result is not uncertain. oi ravtes, “‘ we, the whole body of us,” 
namely, all believers, not all men (as Jerome), which is against the 
preceding context (trav dy/wv). The oneness of the faith is opposed 
to the kAvowriLdpevor Kal wepipepopevot, K.7.A., Ver. 14. “ Contrarius 
unitati est omnis ventus,” Bengel. émiyvwous is not merely explana- 
tory of wiors, which is indeed a condition of it, but a distinct 
notion. Tov viod tod Meod belongs to both substantives. The Son 
of God is the specific object of Christian faith as well as know- 
ledge. 

eis dvdpa téXeov, a perfect, mature man, to which the following 
vio is opposed. Comp. Polyb. p. 523, eAmicavtes ds madi 
vytiw xpycacba TS Oirir7w, Ova te TH HAtkiav Kal THY dmewplay 
tov pev ®, ebpov téXevov dvdpa. The singular is used because it 
refers to the Church as a whole; it corresponds to the els xauvos 
dvOpwros. It is doubtful whether we are to take 7Aukia as “ age” 
or “stature”; not only #Ackia itself but jérpov yAkéas occurs in 
both senses, the ripeness of full age, and the measure of stature. 
In the N.T. 7Auxéa has the meaning “stature” in Luke xix. 3, 
HAukia puxpos fv, and “age” in John ix. 21, wAuKkiav éxeu. 
“Mature age” is the most common signification in Greek writers, 
whereas the adjective Accds most frequently refers to magnitude. - 
It would appear, therefore, that to a Greek reader it is only the 
connexion in which it stands that would decide. There is nothing 
here to decide for “stature”; pétpov, indeed, might at first sight 
seem to favour this, but we have in Philostratus, Vz7. Soph. p. 543, 
TO peTpov THS YAtkias Talis pev GAAaLs erLTTHpaLs yPws apXy. 

On the other hand, what the context refers to is the idea of 
“maturity”; if “stature” were unambiguously expressed, it could 
only be understood as a mark of maturity ; any comparison with 
physical magnitude would be out of the question. See on LK. ii. 52. 

“Of the fulness of Christ,” ze. to which the fulness of Christ 
belongs. 

Some expositors take wAnpwpa here as if used by a Hebraism 


IV. 14] IDEAL PERFECTION OF THE SAINTS I2I 


for zrer\npwpevos = perfect, complete, either agreeing with Xpuorot 
(xerAnpwpévov) or with yArKias (rerAnpwwévys), thus interpreting 
either “‘the measure of the perfect (mature) Christ,” or “of the 
perfect stature of Christ,” which again may be explained as that 
which Christ produces. But this supposition is inadmissible. We 
cannot separate 76 7Ayjpwpya tod Xpiorod. Or, again, 7d tAnpwua 
tov Xpictod is understood to mean, “ what is filled by Christ,” 
z.e. the Church, which is so called in i. 23. But apart from the 
wrong sense thus given to wAyjpwpya, there is a wide difference 
between predicating 76 7A. of the Church, and using the term as 
synonymous with éxxAyoia. We may ask, too, How can we all 
arrive at the maturity of the Church? A better interpretation 
is that which makes 76 7A. rod Xp.=the fulness of Christ, ze. 
the maturity is that to which belongs the full possession of the 
gifts of Christ. Oltramare objects that this interpretation rests on 
an erroneous view of the sense of 7A7jpwpa tod Xp., which does not 
mean the full possession of Christ, nor the full gracious presence 
of Christ. Moreover, it makes pérpov superfluous, and makes the 
whole clause a mere repetition of eis dvépa réXevov. With his view 
of zAnpwya= perfection (see 1. 23), there is a distinct advance, 
“‘to the measure of the stature (¢.e. to the height) of the perfection 
of Christ.” This is also Riickert’s view. 

It is questioned whether St. Paul here conceives this ideal as one 
to be realised in the present life or only in the future. Amongst the 
ancients, Chrysostom, Theoph., Oecum., Jerome, took the former 
view, Theodoret the latter. It would probably be an error to 
suppose that the apostle meant definitely either one or the other. 
He speaks of an ideal which may be approximated to. But 
though it may not be perfectly attainable it must be aimed at, and 
this supposes that its attainment is not to be represented as 
impossible. See Dale, Lect. xv. p. 283. 

14. iva pyxéte Gpev vitor, KAvSwvildpevor Kal tTepipepdpevor 
TavTt dvépw HS SiSacKkadias. “That we may be no longer 
children tossed and borne to and fro by every wind of teaching.” 
This does not depend on ver. 13, for one does not become a mature 
man in order to grow. Ver. 12 states the final goal of the work of 
the teachers ; ver. 13, that which must take place in the meantime 
in order to the attainment of that end. xAvdwvi<dpmevor from 
«Avdwv, a billow or surge, may mean either tossed by the waves or 
tossed like waves, as in Josephus, Azz. ix. 11. 3, 6 djpos tapac- 
gopevos Kal KAvdwviCdpmevos. Here, as avéuw is most naturally 
connected with it as well as with zepid., the latter seems best ; 
and this corresponds with Jas. 1. 8, duaxpwopevos éouxe xAVdwve 
Gardoons aveplouévw. A similar figure occurs in Jude 12, vepéAau 
dvvdpot bro dvéuwv mapadepopevor: cf. Heb. xiii. 9, dudaxais rrouxiAats 
pn wapadépecbe. 


122 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 14 


dvéuw does not refer to “ emptiness ” nor to ‘impulsive power,” 
but rather is chosen as suitable to the idea of changeableness. So 
Theophylact : rH tpown éupévwv Kat aveuous exdAcoe tas diaddpovs 
diackadias. The article before 8d. does not “give definitive 
prominence to the teaching” (Eadie), but marks teaching in 
the abstract. 

év Th KuBela tav dvOpdrwv. “Through the sleight of men.” 
xuBeia, from xvfos, is properly “ dice-playing,” and hence “ trickery, 
deceit.” Soden prefers to take it as expressing conduct void of 
seriousness ; these persons play with the conscience and the 
soul’s health of the Christians. But this is not the ordinary sense 
of the word. év is instrumental, the words expressing the means 
by which the zepid. «.7.A. is attained. There is no objection to 
this on the ground that it would thus be pleonastic after év avéuw 
(Ell.), since é€v ri «. is not connected with zepupepdpevor, but 
with the whole clause. Ellicott himself says the preposition 
“appears rather to denote the e/emend, the evil atmosphere as it 
were, 7z which the varying currents of doctrine exert their force.” 
“Element” is itself figurative, and requires explanation; and if 
“evil atmosphere,” etc., is intended as an explanation, it is clear 
that no such idea is implied in the Greek, nor would it be at all 
in St. Paul’s way to carry out the figure in such detail, or to 
expect the reader to compare xveia to the atmosphere; see on v. 5. 

év tavoupyla mpos Thy peOodeiav this mAdvys. ‘“‘ By craftiness, 
tending to the scheming of error.” avotpyos and zavoupyia are 
used in the Sept. generally, if not invariably, in a good or an 
indifferent sense, ‘‘ prudent,” Prov. xii. 1; ‘‘ prudence,” Prov. 1. 4, 
vill. 5; ‘‘shrewdness,” Ecclus. xxi. 12; Josh. ix. 4 (though this 
latter may be thought an instance of a bad sense). Polybius also 
uses zravodpyos in the sense of devds, “clever, shrewd.” In classical 
writers the words have almost invariably a bad sense, the substan- 
tive meaning “‘ knavery, unscrupulous conduct.” 

In the N.T. the substantive occurs five times, always in a bad 
sense: (Luke xx,''23 3; x Cori 49)5, 2 Cor, iv. '2):) 3,and*here}= 
the adjective once, 2 Cor. xii. 16, in the sense “crafty.” 

peGodeia is found only here and ch. vi. 11. The verb 
peOodevw is used, however, by Polybius, Diodorus, and the Sept., 
and means to deal craftily (cf. 2 Sam. xix. 27, where Mephibosheth 
says of Ziba, webwdevoev ev Td SovVAW Gov); the substantive péGodos, 
from which it is derived, being used by later authors in the mean- 
ing “cunning device.” mAdvy has its usual meaning “error,” not 
“seduction” (a meaning which it never has, not even in 2 Thess. 
ii. 11), and the genitive is subjective, thus personifying error. In 
the Revised Version zpos is taken as=according to, ‘‘after the 
wiles of error,” a comma being placed after wavovpyie. his 
seems to leave the latter word too isolated. Moreover, this sense 


IV. 15] IDEAL PERFECTION OF THE SAINTS 123 


of zpés, though appropriate after verbs of action, being founded on 
the idea of “looking to,” or the like, does not agree with the 
participles kAvd. and zepup. Codex A adds after aAdvys, rot 
dia3dXov, an addition suggested probably by vi. 11. 

15. ddyOevovtes 8€ ev dyday. ‘But cherishing truth in love.” 
RV. has “speaking truth in love,” only differing from AV. by 
the omission of the article before “truth,” but with “ dealing 
truly” in the margin. Meyer insists that dAnGevew always means 
“to speak the truth.” But the verb cannot be separated from 
dAnOeia. Verbs in -edw express the doing of the action which is 
signified by the corresponding substantive in -eéa. Of this we 
have two examples in ver. 14, xvBeia, which is the action of 
kvBevev, peOodeia of pefodevew. Comp. xodaxeia, xodaxevw ; Bpa- 
Beto, dprtedw, dyyapevw with their substantives in -eta, and many 
others. Now dAnfeca is not limited to spoken truth, least of all 
in the N.T. In this Epistle observe iv. 24, duxarvoovvyn kal dord- 
Tt. THs GAnOeias, also iv. 21 and v. 9; and compare the expres- 
sions “walking in truth,” “the way of truth,” “not obeying the 
truth, but obeying unrighteousness, dé:«ia.” Here, where the 
warning is not to the false teachers, but to those who were in 
danger of being misled like children by them, “speaking truth” 
appears out of place. As to the connexion of év dydzy, it seems 
most natural to join it with aAnGevovres, not only because other- 
wise the latter word would be harshly isolated, but because the 
“growth” is so fully defined by the following words. If, indeed, 
love were not mentioned, as it is, at the end of ver. 16, there 
might be more reason to adopt the connexion with avéjowper, on 
the ground that considering the frequent references to it, as in 
iv. 2, ili, 18, 19, it was not likely to have been omitted in 
speaking of growth. Connected with dAnGevew, ev dydry is not 
a limitation, but a general characteristic of the Christian walk ; 
“Not breaking up, but cementing brotherly love by walking in 
truth” (Alford). Probably, however, the apostle intended é& 
ayday to be connected both with the preceding and the following ; 
his ideas progressing from dAyfeia to dydry, and thence to 
avénous. 

avéjowpev eis adtov TA TavTa Os €oTiv H KEhahy, Xpiotds. ‘‘ May 
grow up unto Him in all things, who is the Head, even Christ.” 

avéyowpev is not transitive as in 1 Cor. ill. 6; 2 Cor. ix. 10, 
etc., and in the older classical writers and the Septuagint, but in- 
transitive as in later Greek writers and Matt. vi. 28; Luke 
i. 80, ii. 40, and elsewhere ; cf. here also ii. 21. 

eis avrov. Meyer understands this to mean “in relation to 
Him,” with the explanation that Christ is the head of the body, 
the growth of whose members is therefore in constant relation to 
Him as determining and regulating it. The commentary on ¢is 


124 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 15 


airév is, he says, given by é& ot, x«.7.., the one expressing the 
ascending, the other the descending direction of the relation of 
the growth to the head, He being thus the goal and the source 
of the development of the life of the Church. However correct 
this explanation may be in itself, it can hardly be extracted from 
the interpretation of eis as “in relation to,” which is vague and 
feeble. Nor does it even appear that eis aitov admits of such a 
rendering at all. Such expressions as és 6= “in regard to which,” 
eis Tatra =“ quod attinet ad . . .” etc., are not parallel. Inter- 
preted according to these analogies, the words would only mean 
“with respect to Him, that we should grow,” and the order would 
be «cis avrov av€. Meyer has adopted this view from his reluctance 
to admit any interpretation which does not agree with the figure 
of the head. But that figure is not suggested until after this. 
We have first the Church as itself becoming avijp rédeos, then 
this figure is departed from, and the readers individually are 
represented as possible vy. The subjects of aifjowpev, then, 
are not yet conceived as members of a body, but as separate 
persons. But as soon as the pronoun introduces Christ, the idea 
that He is the head suggests itself, and leads to the further 
development in ver. 16. 

We can hardly fail to see in avé. eis airdv a variation of 
KatavTyowpev els avopa téAeov, eis pérpov HALKtas Tod mA. TOD 
Xp. ‘Unto Him.” This would seem to mean at once “unto 
Him as a standard,” and “so as to become incorporated with 
Him”; not that eis atrév by itself could combine both meanings, 
but that the thought of the apostle is passing on to the idea 
contained in the words that follow. He begins with the idea of 
children growing up to a certain standard of maturity, and with 
the word airdv passes by a rapid transition to a deeper view of 
the relation of this growth to Christ the Head. 

Harless, to escape the difficulty of avé eis abrdév, connects the 
latter words with év dydzy, “in love to Him.” The order of the 
words is certainly not decisive against this view; instances of such* 
a hyperbaton are sufficiently frequent, but there seems no reason 
for it here, and it would make the introduction of “ Who is the 
Head” very abrupt. 

Ta mavta, the ordinary accusative of definition, ‘in all the parts 
of our growth.” 

Xpiordés. This use of the nominative in apposition with the 
relative, where we might have expected the accusative Xpicroy, is a 
usual Greek construction. Compare Plato, Afol. p. 41 A, etpyoe 
Tous as GAnOads Sixacrds, oirep Kal €yovTar exel duxdlew Mivus re 
kai ‘PadapavOos kai Aiaxos. The Received Text has 6 Xpiorés, with 
DGKL, Chrys. Theod. The article is wanting in 8 A BC, Bas. 
Cyr. 


Iv. 16] DEPENDENCE ON THE HEAD 125 


16. é& of wav 1d cdpa cuvappohoyodpevov Kat oupB.Baldspevor. 
“From whom the whole body fitly framed and put together.” 
ob goes with avéyow woveirax. The present participles indicate 
that the process is still going on. On ovvapp. cf. il. 21. The use 
of the word there forbids the supposition that the derivation from 
dppos, a joint, was before the mind of the writer. cup PiBdlw is 
used by classical writers in the sense of bringing together, either 
persons figuratively (especially by way ef reconciliation) or things. 
Compare Col. ii. 2, cup. €v aydry. As to the difference between 
the two verbs here, Bengel says: ‘‘ocvvapp. pertinet ad 7o regulare, 
ut partes omnes in situ suo et relatione mutua recte aptentur, 
cup. notat simul firmitudinem et consolidationem.” So Alford 
and Eadie. Ellicott thinks the more exact view is that ov. 
refers to the aggregation, ovvapp. to the interadaptation of the 
component parts. This would seem to require that ovpf., as the 
condition of cvvapp., should precede. Perhaps it might be more 
correct to say that ovvapp. corresponds to the figure oGpa, the 
apostle then, in the consciousness that he is speaking of persons, 
adding ovpfv8. (so Harless and, substantially, Meyer). In the 
parallel, Col. li. 19, we have értxopyyovpevov kal cup Pi. Balopevov. 
In that Epistle the main theme is “the vital connexion with the 
Head ; in the Ephesians, the unity in diversity among the mem- 
bers” (Lightfoot). Hence the substitution here of ovvapp. for 
értxop. But the idea involved in the latter is here expressed in 
the corresponding substantive. 

81a rdéons Adis THs émxopyyias. ‘Through every contact with 
the supply.” The parallel in Col. ii. 19 seems to decide that these 
words are to be connected with the participles. 

addy has some difficulty. It has been given the meaning 
“joint,” “sensation,” “contact.” If by “joint” is understood 
those parts of two connected limbs which are close to the touching 
surfaces (which is no doubt the common use of the word), then 
a7 cannot be so understood ; it means “touching” or “contact,” 
and can no more mean “joint” in this sense than these English 
words can have that meaning. And what would be the meaning 
of “every joint of supply”? Eadie answers: ‘‘ Every joint whose 
function it is to afford such aid.” But this is not the function of 
a joint, and this notion of the supply being through joints would 
be a very strange one and strangely expressed. Besides, it would not 
be consistent with the fact that it is from Christ that the émvyopyyia 
proceeds. Theodoret takes a7 to mean “sense” or “sensation.” 
adyy tiv alcOnow mpoonyopevocev, ereidy) Kai attn pia Tov qévTE 
aigOyoewv, that is, ‘the apostle calls sensation ‘touch,’ because 
this is one of the five senses, and he names the whole from the 
part.” Chrysostom is more obscure, and seems to make, not a¢7js 
alone, but adis ths émrty.=alcbyoews ; for when he proceeds to 


126 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IVv. 16 


expound, he says: 10 wvedpa éxetvo Td extxopnyovpevov Tots wéAcow 
dro THs Kehadyns Exdorov péAouvs arTopevoy ovTws evepyet. Theo- 
doret’s interpretation is adopted by Meyer, “every feeling in which 
the supply (namely, that which is given by Christ) is perceived.” 
But although the singular a¢7, which sometimes means the sense 
of touch, might naturally be used to signify ‘“‘ feeling” in general ; 
yet we cannot separate this passage from that in Col. where we 
have the plural; and, as Lightfoot observes, until more cogent 
examples are forthcoming, “we are justified in saying that ai 
agai could no more be used for ai aic@yoes, than in English ‘the 
touches’ could be taken as a synonym for ‘the senses.’” Meyer, 
indeed, takes the, word there as “the feelings, sensations”; but 
there is no evidence that agai could have this meaning either. 
Besides, ‘‘ the conjunction of such incongruous things as trav adav 
Kal ovvdeopwv, under the vinculum of the same article and preposi- 
tion, would be unnatural.” It remains that we take afq in the 
sense of “contact,” which suits both this passage and that in Col. 
Lightfoot, on Col. ii. 19, gives several passages from Galen and 
Aristotle in illustration of this signification. Here we need only 
notice the distinction which Aristotle makes between ovpduors and 
ay, the latter signifying only “contact,” the former ‘‘ cohesion.” 
9 apy THs éx-xopyyias, then, is the touching of, z.e. contact with, the 
supply. amrrecGor rhs émcx. would mean ‘‘to take hold of, or get 
in touch with,” the émy.; hence dia mdoyns apys THs éxty may 
well mean “through each part being in touch with the ministra- 
tion.” So Oecumenius: 7 dro tod Xptotod katiotca mvevpateKy 
Svvapis €vos Exaorov péAovs avrod dmrounévn. Oltramare under- 
stands the gen. as gen. auctoris=éx THs éruyop.=THs adys as 
érexopnynoe, ‘par toute sorte de jointures provenant de sa 
largesse.” émtxopyyia occurs again Phil. i. 19 ; it is found nowhere 
else except in ecclesiastical writers. But the verb émxopiyéw 
(which occurs five times in the N.T.) is also found, though rarely, 
in later Greek writers. 
kat évépye.av év petpw évds Exdotou pépous. 
hépous is the reading of § BD GK LP, Arm., Theodoret, etc. ; but A C, 
Vulg. Syr. Boh., Chrys. have uédous. This is so naturally suggested by the 
figure of o@ua that we can hardly doubt that it came in either by a natural 


mistake or as an intentional emendation. But pépous is really much more 
suitable, as more general. 


*‘ According to the proportionate working of each several part.” 
évépyeta does not mean “ power,” but “acting power,” “activity,” 
“working,” so that the interpretation of car’ évépyevay as adverbial = 
“powerfully,” is excluded. As to the connexion of the following 
words, év pérpw may be taken either with xar’ évepy. or as govern- 
ing évos éx. wep. The latter is the view adopted by many com- 
mentators, with so little hesitation that they do not mention the 


Iv. 17] DEPENDENCE ON THE HEAD 127 


other. Thus Eadie and Ellicott render “according to energy in 
the measure of each individual part.” This is not very lucid, and 
Ellicott therefore explains “‘in the measure of (sc. commensurate 
with).” Alford’s rendering is similar. If this is understood to 
mean “the energy which is distributed to every part,” etc., as it 
apparently must be, we miss some word which should suggest the 
idea of distribution, which éy certainly does not. Moreover, 
évépyeca, from its signification, requires to be followed by some 
defining word, and elsewhere in the N.T. always is so. 

It is preferable, therefore, to join év pérpy closely with évépyeca, 
which it qualifies, and which is then defined by the genitive 
following. It is as if the writer had been about to say kar’ évepy. 
évos éx., and then recalling the thought of ver. 7 inserted év pérpo. 
If this view (which is Bengel’s) is correct, the reason assigned by 
Meyer for connecting these words with avé. rovetrax instead of with 
the participles falls to the ground, viz. that pérpw suits the idea of 
growth better than that of joining together. The RV. appears to 
agree with the view here taken. 

thy avgjow Tod odpatos tovetrar, ‘Carries on the growth of 
the body.” In Col. ii. 19 we have ave tiv avénow; here the 
active participation of the body as a living organism in promoting 
its own growth is brought out, and this especially in order to 
introduce év éydry. The middle zovetra: is not “intensive,” but 
is appropriately used of the body promoting its own growth ; zrovet 
would imply that copa and odparos had a different reference. 
awparos is used instead of éavrot, no doubt because of the remote- 
ness of capa, as well as because éavrod was required presently. 
Compare Luke iii. 19. 

eis otkodopyy éautod év dydryn. On the mixture of metaphors 
cf. ver. 12. oixodop7 is not suitable to the figure of a.body, but is 
suggested by the idea of the thing signified to which the figure in 
oix. is so familiarly applied. It would be awkward to separate ev 
aya7n from oi. and join it with av&jow movetrar, as Meyer does on 
account of the correspondence with ver. 15. Through the work 
of the several parts the building up of the whole is accomplished 
by means of love. Observe that it is the growth of the whole that 
is dwelt on, not that of the individual parts. 

17-24. Admonition, that knowing how great the blessings of 
which they have been made partakers, they should fashion thetr lives 
accordingly, putting off all that belongs to their old life, and putting 
on the new man, 

17. todto obv héyw kal paptdpopat év Kupiw. Resumes from vw. 
1-3. As Theodoret observes: rédw dvédaBe tis mapatvérews TO 
mpooip.ov. ovv, as often, has simply this resumptive force, and does 
not indicate any inference from what precedes ; for the exhorta- 
tion begun vv. 1-3 was interrupted, and the déiws mepurareiv of 


128 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 17 


ver. I is repeated in the negative form in ver. 17. The rovro looks 
forward. 

paprvpopat, “I protest, conjure’ ’ = Siapraprupopae. Polyb. P- 1403, 
ovvdpapdvrav TOV eyyxwplwv Kal paptupopéevwv Tous dvdpas eravayev 
eri tHv apxnv. Thucydides, vill. 53, waptupopevwr Kat éribealovtwv 
py Katdéyew. The notion of exhortation and precept is involved 
in this and Aé€yw by the nature of the following context, pnxére 
mepir., aS in the passage of Thucydides, so that there is no ellipsis 
of detv. 

év Kupiw. Not either “per Dominum” or “calling the Lord 
to witness.” pdptupa tov Kiprov cada, Chrys. Theodoret, ete. 
Some expositors have defended this on the ground that N.T. 
writers, following the Hebrew idiom, wrote dpocat év tt; but it by 
no means follows that & tux without éudcar could be used in this 
sense any more than xara Avs could be used without dpudcat 
instead of zpos Atds. 

Ellicott says: “As usual, defining the element or sphere in 
which the declaration is made”; and so Eadie and Alford. This 
is not explanation. Meyer is a little clearer: ‘Paul does not 
speak in his own individuality, but Christ is the element in which 
his thought and will move.” efva: & tw is a classical phrase 
expressing complete dependence on a person. Soph. Oed. Col. 
247, &v tuiv as Med KeipeOa: Oed. Tyr. 314, €v col ydp éoper: 
Eurip. Al. 277, ev co. 8 eopev kal Cav cai pn. Compare Acts 
xvii. 28, ev aird Capev Kal xwvovpeba Kail éopev. In the N.T., 
indeed, the expression acquires a new significance from the idea 
of fellowship and union with Christ and with God. Whatever the 
believer does, is done with a sense of dependence on Him and 
union with Him. For example, “ speaking the truth” “ marrying ” 
(1 Cor. vii. 39). 

Here, where an apostolic precept is concerned, it is implied 
that the apostle speaks with authority. But the expression would 
hardly have been suitable had he not been addressing those who, 
like himself, had fellowship with the Lord. This interpretation is 
so far from being “‘jejune,” that it implies a personal and spiritual 
relation which is put out of sight by the impersonal figure of an 
“element.” 

pykete Suds mepimatety Kalas kal Ta Evy mepimatet. For the 
infinitive present compare the passages above cited from Thucyd. 
and Polyb. Also Acts xxi. 2, Aeywv py TEPUTEpLVELY 3 XXl. 4, €Aeyov 
py dvaBatve, where the imperative would be used in ovatio directa. 
Demosth. xxvil. 7, Aéyw mavras éveva. Aesch. Agam. 898, déyw 
kat dvdpa, wy Oedv, o€Bew ene. 


Text. Rec. adds Nord before é0vn, with 84D’ K L, Syr., Chrys. ete. 
The word is wanting in § AB D*G, Vulg. Boh. 





Iv. 18] FORMER STATE OF THE GENTILES 129 


The Aourd is more likely to have been added in error than 
omitted. Assuming that it is not genuine, this is an instance of St. 
Paul’s habitual regard for the feelings of his readers. It suggests 
that they are no longer to be classed with the «6vy. They were 
€Ovn only év capxi, but were members of the true commonwealth 
of Israel. 

év patatdtyTt Tod vods adtay. Although in the O.T. idols are 
frequently called para (compare Acts xiv. 15), the substantive is 
not to be limited to idolatry, to which there is no special reference 
here. It is the falseness and emptiness of their thoughts that are 
in question (cf. Rom. i. 21, euarauwOnoay év tots Siadoyiopois adrav). 
Nor, again, are we, with Grotius, to suppose any special reference to 
the philosophers, merely because in 1 Cor. iii. 20 it is said of the 
duadoyiopol Tov copay that they are pdrao. Rather, it refers to 
the whole moral and intellectual character of heathenism ; thei 
powers were wasted without fruit. As Photius (quoted by Harless) 
remarks: ov Ta THS dn beias Ppovorrtes Kat TUTTEVOVTES kal azro- 
dexopevor GAN amep Gv 6 vos airav paryv avarAdon Kal Aoyionra. 
vovs includes both the intellectual and the practical side of reason, 
except where there is some ground for giving prominence to one 
or the other in particular. Here we have both sides, éoxotwpévor 
referring to the intellectual, danAXorpwwpevor to the practical. 

18. eoxotwpevor TH Savoia dvtes, AmnAAoTpLwpévor THS Lwis Tod 
Gcou. 


écxorwuévo. is the form in NAB, while DGKLP have écxoricpuévor. 
The former appears to be the more classical. 


évres is better joined with the preceding than with the 
following. If ovres arndX. be taken together, this would have to 
be regarded as assigning the ground of éoxor, But the darkness 
was not the effect of the alienation, which, on the contrary, was 
the result of the ayvo. The position of dvres is not against this, 
since éoxor. TH 6. express a single notion. Meyer illustrates from 
Herod. i. 35, ov xafapos xetpas ev, and Xen. Ages. xi. 10, tpadraros 
girous dv. The two participles thus stand in an emphatic position 
at the beginning, and this emphasis is lost by joining ovres with 
the following. The change of gender from é6vy to éoxotwpevor 
évres corresponds to a change from the class to the person. 

éoxoTwpéevor is Opposed to rehwricpévor (i. 18). We have the 
same expression Rom. i. 21, éoxoticOn % aovveros aitév Kapdia, 
and a remarkable parallel in Josephus, rijv dudvovay érerxoticpevovs, 
Ant. 1x. 4. 3. Atdvova strictly means the understanding, but is not 
so limited in the N.T. Compare Col. i. 21, éx@pots ti} diavoia: 
2 Pet. lil. 1, dveyeipw . . . THY €iAtKpw7 Sudvoray. Here, however, 
the connexion decides for the meaning “understanding.” On 
amnAX. cf. il. 12. 

9 


130 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (Iv. 18 


ms Cans Tod cod. Explained by Theodoret as=ris ev dperi 
Coys, te. as=the life approved by God, or ‘‘godly life.” But wy 
in N.T. does not mean “course of life,” Bios, but true life as 
opposed to @dvaros. In Gal. v. 25 we have it expressly dis- 
tinguished from ‘‘course of conduct”; «i Conev mvevpart, rvevpare 
Kat oTo.y@pev. Moreover, drnAAotpwwpévor implies separation from 
something real. Erasmus’ explanation of the genitive as one of 
apposition, “‘ vera vita qui est Deus,” is untenable. The analogy 
of 4 eipyvn Tod @cov, Phil. iv. 7; avfyous trod @cov, Col. ii. ro, 
suggests that the words mean “the life which proceeds from God” ; 
“tota vita spiritualis quae in hoc seculo per fidem et justitiam 
inchoatur et in futura beatitudine perficitur, quae tota peculiariter 
vita Dei est, quatenus a Deo per gratiam datur,” Estius. But 
something deeper than this is surely intended by the genitive, 
which naturally conveys the idea of a character or quality. It is 
the life ‘“‘qua Deus vivit in suis,” Beza (who, however, wrongly 
adds to this ‘‘quamque praecipit et approbat ”). Somewhat 
similarly Bengel: ‘‘ Vita spiritualis accenditur in credentibus: ex 
ipsa Dei vita.” Harless, indeed, argues that the life of regenera- 
tion is not here referred to, since what is in question is not the 
opposition of the heathen to Christianity, but to God; so that fw7 
tT. cov is to be compared to John i. 3, where the Adyos is said to be 
(from the beginning) the fw7 and és of the world, and thus there 
was an original fellowship of man with God. So in part many 
expositors, regarding the perfect participles as indicating “ gentes 
ante defectionem suam a fide patrum, imo potius ante lapsum 
Adami, fuisse participes lucis et vzfae,” Bengel. But St. Paul is 
here speaking of the contemporary heathen in contrast to those 
who had become Christians (ver. 17) ; and it is hard to think that if 
he meant to refer to this original divine life in man, he would not 
have expressed himself more fully and precisely. The idea is one 
which he nowhere states explicitly, and it is by no means involved 
of necessity in the tense of the participles, which is sufficiently 
explained as expressing a state. Indeed, the aorist drn\Xorpiwbevres 
would more suitably suggest the idea of a time when they were not 
so; cf. 1 Pet. li. 10, of od nrAenmévor viv 5é eAenOévres. And how 
can we think the Gentiles as at a prehistoric time 77 Siavofa not 
EOKOTWLEVOL P : 

81d Thy dyvovav thy ovcay év adtots 81a Thy TwHpwoL Tis Kapdtas 
aitav. The cause of their alienation from the Divine life is their 
ignorance, and this again results from their hardness of heart. 
Most expositors regard dua... dud as co-ordinate, some con- 
necting both clauses with damyAX. only (Origen, Alford, Eadie, 
Ellicott), others with both participles (Bengel, Harless, Olsh. De 
Wette). Bengel, followed by Olsh. and De Wette, refers dua ryv 
dyv. to éox. and da 7H 7. to dydA. But this is rather too artificial 


IV. 19] FORMER STATE OF THE GENTILES 131 


for aletter. Nor does it yield a satisfactory sense ; for dyvova is not 
the cause of the darkness, but its effect. De Wette evades this by 
saying that dyvo.a refers to speculative knowledge, éoxor. to practi- 
cal. But there is no sufficient ground for this. The substantive 
dyvora does not elsewhere occur in St. Paul’s Epistles (it is in his 
speech, Acts xvii. 30, “the times of this ignorance”; and in 
1 Pet. i. 14, besides Acts ii. 17); but the verb is of frequent 
occurrence, and always of ignorance only, not of the absence of a 
higher faculty of knowledge. Such ignorance was not inaccessible 
to light, as is shown by the instances of the converted Gentiles ; but 
so far as it was due to the hardness of their hearts, it was culp- 
able. It is only by the subordination of the latter clause to the 
former that the use of tiv ovcav é avrois instead of the simple 
airav finds a satisfactory explanation. Compare Rom. i. 18-33. 
Ellicott, following Harless, explains these words as pointing out 
the indwelling deep-seated nature of the dyvoa, and forming a 
sort of parallelism to ris Kapdias airév, and so, as Harless adds, 
opposed to mere external occasions. But there is nothing of this 
in the context, nor in the words ovcayv év airots. The ignorance 
must be in them; and, unless we take the connexion as above 
(with Meyer), the words express nothing more than airav. 

mopwors is “hardness,” not “blindness,” as most of the ancient 
versions interpret. Indeed, it is so explained also by Suidas and 
Hesychius, as if derived from an adjective twpés, “blind” ; which 
seems, however, to be only an invention of the grammarians 
(perhaps from confusion with zypdés, with which it is often 
confounded by copyists). It is really derived (through zwpdw) 
from zé@pos, which originally meant “tufa,” and then “callus,” a 
callosity or hardening of the skin. (It is also used by medical 
writers of the ‘‘callus” formed at the end of fractured bones, and 
of “chalkstones” in the joints.) Hence, from the insensibility of 
the parts covered with hard skin, the verb means to make dull or 
insensible. It is thus correctly explained by Theodoret, ropwory 
Tv eoxarnv avadynoiav éyer’ Kai yap ai TG oopate eyywopeva 
Tupwces ovdeniav atobyow éxovor. Cicero frequently uses “cal- 
lum” in a similar figurative sense, e.g. “ipse labor quasi callum 
quoddam obducit dolori,” Zuse. Disp. il. 15. 

19. oitwes, “quippe qui,” “being persons who.” déamAynxkédtes, 
“being past feeling,” a word appropriate to the figure in rwpwors ; 
it properly means to give over feeling pain, and is used by 
Thucydides with an accusative of the thing, adradyodvtes ra idta, 
ii. 61 ; hence it comes to mean “to be without feeling.” The AV. 
“past feeling” expresses the sense very accurately. Polybius, 
however, has the expression dzadyotvres tats éAriot, and, indeed, 
elsewhere uses the verb in the sense “giving up,” as Hesychius 
interprets, pyxére OéXovres wovetyv. This may be “giving up in 


132 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 19 


despair,” as in i. 58 of the Romans and Carthaginians, képvovtes 
non Tots Tovos dua THY ovvéyeLay THY KUWdUVWY, eis TéLOS GmHAyoUL. 
Hence some commentators have adopted “desperantes” here, 
which is the rendering of the Vulgate. Bengel cites from Cicero 
(Epp. ad famil. ii. 16) what looks like a paraphrase of the word: 
“‘diuturna desperatione serum obduruisse animum ad dolorem 
novum.” “ Dolor, says Bengel, “ urget ad medicinam : dolore autem 
amisso, non modo spes sed etiam studium et cogitatio rerum 
bonarum amittitur, ut homo sit excors, effrons, exspes.” Theophy- 
lact gives a similar interpretation : careppabupykortes, Kai r7 Oédovtes 
Kapely Tpos Tiv Eevperw TOD Kado}, Kal avadyntws SiateHévtes. The 
reading of D G is dmnAmudres (af- G); but evidence for the 
textual reading is predominant, and, moreover, amnAmixdtes would 
give a very poor sense. Jerome appears to regard “ desperantes ” 
of the old Latin as an incorrect rendering of amnAmucres, for 
which he suggests ‘“‘indolentes sive indolorios.” But he did not 
alter the text of the translation. Probably the other versions 
which express the same meaning had not a different reading ; and, 
on the other hand, the reading of D G may have arisen either from 
the influence of the versions or as a gloss. 

éautovs. What is ascribed in Rom. i. 24 to God is ascribed 
here to themselves, in accordance with the hortatory purpose of 
the present passage, so as to fix attention on the part which they 
themselves had in the result. 

doedkyys and doédyera were used by earlier writers (Plato, 
Isaeus, Dem.) in the sense of “insolent, insolence, outrageous ” ; 
Later writers apply them in the sense “lasciviousness.” The 
substantive has that meaning in 2 Cor. xii. 21; Gal. v. 19; 
2 Pet. i. '7, 18i;) Romé adits 134) ny Mark villi 22); qude 4yireret 
iv. 3; 2 Pet. ii. 2, the meaning is less clearly defined. In the 
LXX it occurs only Wisd. xiv. 22 and 2 Macc. ii. 26. The 
derivation is probably from oéAyw, a form of GA yo. 

eis Epyaciay dxalapoias mdons. épyacia suggests the idea that 
they made a business of dxafapoia. So Chrysostom: od zapare- 
advres, pyoiv, juaptov, adr’ eipydlovto aira Ta ded, Kal wed€ry TE 
mpaypate exéxpnvto, It is not, however, to be understood of literal 
trading in impurity, which could not be asserted with such 
generality of the Gentiles. Compare Luke xii. 58, év 77 650 dos 
epyaciav, “give diligence”: see note ad oc. 

év meovegia.  mAecoveéia originally meant (like Aecovéxrys, 
mAeovexteiv) only advantage over another, for example, superiority 
in battle, hence it passed to the idea of unfair advantage, and then 
to that of the desire to take unfair advantage, ‘‘ covetousness.” 
The verb occurs five times in 2 Cor. in the sense “ take advantage 
of.” The substantive wAcovexrys is found (besides Eph. v. 5) in 
t Cor. v. 10, 11, vi. 16. Aeovegéia occurs in all ten times in N.T. 


IV. 19] FORMER STATE OF THE GENTILES 133 


In Luke xii. 15 it is clearly “ covetousness,” and so in 2 Cor. ix. 5 ; 
1 Thess. ii. 5. But all three words are so frequently associated 
with words relating to sins of the flesh, that many expositors, 
ancient and modern, have assigned to them some such special 
signification. ‘Thus wAcovéxtys, 1 Cor. v. 10, 11; mAeovegia, Col. 
ill. 5, mopveiav, dxaGapoiav, mdfos, émibvpiay Kakynv, Kal TijVv 
tAeovesiav, nris eotiv eidwdoAatpeia: besides the present passage 
and Eph. v. 3, maca dxafapoia 7) mXeoveéia, cf. also v. 5. In 
2 Pet. ii. 14, xapdilav yeyupvacpévnv tAcovesias éxovtes, “ covetous- 
ness” does not suit the connexion as well as some more general 
term. But the most striking passage is 1 Thess. iv. 6, TO 7 
vrepBaive Kal mAeovektely ev TO Tpaypatt Tov adeAov avTov, where 
the verb is undoubtedly applied to adultery, viewed as an injustice 
to one’s neighbour. And this suggests that possibly in Mark vii. 
21, where the right order is xAoral, dovor, poryetar, wAcovegiat, there 
is a similiar idea. In Rom. i. 29 also, something grosser than covet- 
ousness seems to be intended. In Polycarp, P/z7. vi., which exists 
only in the Latin, ‘“‘avaritia” undoubtedly represents the original 
mAeoveEia. Polycarp is lamenting the sin of Valens, and says: 
“‘moneo itaque vos ut abstineatis ab avaritia, et sitis casti et 
veraces,” and a little after: “si quis non abstinuerit se ab avaritia, 
ab idololatria coinquinabitur ; et tanquam inter gentes judicabitur.” 
In the present passage Theodoret says the word is used for 
dperpia: “Wdoov dpaptiav toApaot, vrép Kdpov TO SiepOappevw 
Kataxpwpevor Biw tAcovebiav yap THY auetpiav éxddece.” The asso- 
ciation with idolatry in Eph. v. 5 and Col. iii. 5 favours the same 
view. Hammond on Rom. i. 29 has a learned note in support of 
this signification of wAeoveé/a, which, however, he pushes too far. 
Of course it is not alleged that the word of itself had this special 
sense, but that it was with some degree of euphemism so applied, 
and in such a connexion as the present would be so understood. 

It is alleged, on the other side, that covetousness and impurity 
are named together as the two leading sins of the Gentile world ; 
that they even proceed from the same source; that covetousness 
especially is idolatry, as being the worship of Mammon. 

Covetousness was not a peculiarly Gentile sin. The Pharisees 
were covetous (fiAdpyvpor). Our Lord warns His own disciples 
against zAeovegia, in the sense of covetousness, in Luke xii. 15 
above referred to. And the form of the warning there shows that 
covetousness and impurity were not on the same level in respect of 
grossness. This may also be inferred from St. Paul’s 6 xAémrwv 
pykére kXerrérw. Can we conceive him saying 6 po.yedvwv pyxére 
POLXeveTw ? 

That covetousness and impurity proceed from the same source, 
and that “the fierce longing of the creature which has turned from 
God to fill itself with the lower things of sense” (Trench, Syz., after 


134 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IV. 20 


Bengel), is psychologically false. Lust and impurity are excesses 
of a purely animal and bodily passion ; covetousness is a secondary 
desire, seeking as an end in itself that which was originally desired 
only as a means. 

The explanation of ver. 5 by the observation that the covetous 
serve Mammon, not God, is due to Theodoret, who derives it from 
Matt. vi. 24. But that passage does not make it probable that the 
covetous man would be called an idolator without some explanation 
added. St. Paul himself speaks of persons who serve, not the Lord 
Christ, but their own belly (Rom. xvi. 18), and of others ‘‘ whose 
god is their belly”; yet he probably would not call them, without 
qualification, ‘‘idolators.” Indeed, other Greek commentators 
devised various explanations. Chrysostom, for instance, as one 
explanation, suggests that the covetous man treats his gold as 
sacred, because he does not touch it. 

We may ask, further, why should covetousness be specified with 
impurity and filthy speaking as not to be even named ? (Eph. v. 3). 
Impure words suggest impure thoughts, words about covetousness 
have no tendency to suggest covetous thoughts. It is said, indeed, 
that the 7 there between dxafapoia waca and zAcovegia implies 
that the two words cannot refer to sins of the same kind ; but this 
argument seems to be answered by the immediately following pwpo- 
Aoyia 7) edtpamedia. In ver. 5, also, we have rédpvos 7) éxadapros 
7 mAeovéxtys. In the present passage we have, not xal 7A., but 
ev wA. To take this as ev “ covetousness,” or the like, after the 
strong words that have preceded, would be an incredible weakening 
of the charge. 

20. sets Sé obx obtws epdbete Tov Xpiotév. “ But ye, not so 
did ye learn Christ.” Beza, followed by Braune, places a stop 
after ovrws, “‘ But not so ye. Ye have learned Christ.” This, how- 
ever, makes the second clause too abrupt. We should expect sets 
to be repeated, or dAda inserted, as in Luke xxii. 26, ipets dé odx 
ovtws* GAN’ 6 peilwv év ipiv, x.7.4. Besides, the connexion with ver. 21 
is impaired, “‘ ye learned Christ ” is first stated absolutely, and then 
with a qualification. 

ovx ovTws, a litotes; cf. Deut. xvill. 14.  éuaGere, “did learn,” 
viz. when they became Christians. This use of pav@dvw with an 
accus. of a person seems to be without parallel. The instance 
cited by Raphelius from Xenophon, tva aAAjAovs padovey drdcor 
einoav, is clearly not parallel, the object of the verb there being 
éméao, k.t.4. Hence the ancients and many moderns have taken 
Xpiorov as = “ doctrinam Christi,” which is feeble and unsupported. 
Others, as Rickert and Harless, understand éud@ere as “ learned 
to know,” viz. “ what He is and what He desires.” But the key 
to the expression is supplied by the passages which speak of 
preaching @hrist,” Galt, jis pny iE yiCoriianl 28); eaComin LO) 


IV. 21] THE NEW MAN 135 


Phil. i. 15; indeed the following verse (21) speaks of “ hearing 
Him.” As Christ was the content of the preaching, He might 
properly be said to be learned. So Phil. ili. 10, rod yvdvar atrov. 
Col. ii. 6, wapeAaBere tov Xp., is similar. 

Pieverye, | tum erie) (sijsvsee jon 1-12), | Here. also. the 
conjunction is unfavourable to the view that St. Paul is addressing 
those whom he had himself instructed. airéy with emphasis 
placed first, “‘if Him, indeed, ye heard.” év air, not “ by Him,” 
as AV., a construction not admissible with a personal author, 
nor “‘illius nomine, quod ad illum attinet” (Bengel). But as those 
who believe are said to be év Xpio7d, so here they are said to have 
been taught in Him, ze. as in fellowship with Him. There is a 
progress, as Meyer observes, from the first announcement of the 
gospel (#xovcare) to the further instruction which then as converts 
they would have received (év atra é65.), both being included 
in éudbere tov Xpiorov. John x. 27 is not parallel, since dxovew in 
the sense “ hearken to” would take the genitive. 

Kadus éorw dAnfea év 75 “Inood. The AV. “as the truth is in 
Jesus” is incompatible with the absence of the article, but admits 
of being understood in the true sense of the Greek, which is not 
the case with the form in which the words are so often quoted, 
“the truth as it is in Jesus,” which would be tiv dA7Geay Kabus 
éorw, «7.4. Nor do the words mean, as Jerome interprets: 
“quomodo est veritas in Jesu, sic erit in vobis qui didicistis 
Christum,”—an interpretation which is followed by Estius and 
many others, and which makes Jesus be set forth as the pattern 
of truth, z.e. holiness. In addition to the difficulty of so under- 
standing dA7$ea, this supposes tyas to be emphatic, which its 
position forbids; the antithesis would also require that év to 
Inootd should come after kas. Moreover, any interpretation 
which makes doféoOa depend on édiddyOnre is open to the 
objection that in that case duds is superfluous. Ellicott, who adopts 
this construction, suggests that iyds is introduced to mark their 
contrast, not only with other Gentiles, but with their own former 
state as implied in tiv mporépav dvactpopyv. But it is not clear 
how tas can mark such a contrast. Nor is dd. suitable to 
avaveotoba. It seems better to take droféoOar tuds as the subject 
of the clause, dAyfea being understood in the sense “true 
teaching,” opposed to dary. Compare the use of dA7Gea in 
John iii. 21, “he that doeth the truth,” and here, ver. 24. The 
sense will then be, “as is right teaching in Jesus: that ye put off.” 
The change from Xpiorov to “Incod is appropriate. Their introduc- 
tion to Christianity or to the zoA/reva of Israel instructed them in 
the hope centred in the Messiah as a Redeemer. But when 
obedience to the practical teaching of a historical person is referred 
to, the historical name is used. 


136 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IvV. 22 


A very different view of the construction is taken by Credner, 
v. Soden, and Westcott and Hort mg., viz. that Xpuords is the 
subject of éorw, in which case dAnfeaa may be either nom. 
(Credner, Soden) or dative (WH. mg.). Soden remarks that 
considering the emphatic repetition of adrov, év air, which takes 
up rov Xp. from the clause with ovrws, the subject of this clause 
can only be Christ, viz. “‘as He is truth in Jesus,” so that the 
thought is that they must not only believe in a Christ, but 
recognise Him in Jesus; and if they are to live in truth in Christ, 
they must live in Jesus. The thought is parallel to Heb. xiii. 18. 
The dative dAnOe‘a, as in WH. mg., seems preferable, “have been 
taught in Him, as He is in truth, in Jesus.” On dAn@eia in this 
sense, comp. Phil. i. 18, eire tpoddce cite ddnfeia. 

22. drobéoGa, a figure from putting off clothes = drexdvodpevor, 
Col. iii. 9, as evdicacba from putting them on. The frequency of 
the figure in Greek writers puts out of the question any reference 
to change of dress in baptism (Grotius). 

It is rightly rendered in the Vulg. “deponere,” not “ deposu- 
isse,” which would require the perfect inf. The aorist expresses 
the singleness of the act, whereas dvaveovoGat expresses a continu- 
ing process.! The infin. is not for the imperative (as in Phil. 
iii. 16), which is inconsistent with tpas. 

kata Tv mpotépay dvactpopyy. “As concerns your former 
manner of life,” defining the particular respect in which the old 
man was to be put off. dvactpodpy in this sense belongs to later 
Greek. The word originally meant a turning back, thence dwell- 
ing in a place; hence Aeschylus uses it of a “haunt.” We find it 
in Polybius in the sense of “behaviour.” Kata te tHv Aowryv 
dvaotpodpyy Kat Tas tpakers TeHavpucpeévos trép THY HALKkiay (iv. 82. 
1); so also Epict. i. 9. 5. In the Sept. it occurs only in the 
Apocrypha, Tobit iv. 19; 2 Macc. v. 8; both times in this sense. 

vov Tadaov avOpwrov. The éy® capxixds of Rom. vil. 14; éya 
odpé, 1b. 18, opposed to avOpwros 6 Kata Ocdv xricbeis. The 
adoption of the expression the old and the new av@pwzos, indicates 
that the change affects, not some particulars only, but the whole 
personality or éyo. 

tov Oeipdpevov. “Which waxeth corrupt.” This supplies a 
motive for the putting off. The present tense indicates a process 
that is going on. Compare Rom. viii. 21, ‘bondage of Oopd.” 
Meyer thinks the reference is to eternal destruction, the present 
expressing either the future vividly conceived as perfect, or rather 
what already exists in tendency, “qui tendit ad exitium,” Grot. 


1 «« Except after verbs of saying, thinking, etc., the aorist in the infinitive has 
no preterite signification, and differs from the present only in this, that it 
expresses a single transient action ; and even this bye-signification often falls 
away.”—Madvig. 


IV. 23] THE NEW MAN 137 


His reason is that the moral corruption of the old man is already 
existing, not ‘‘becoming.” But though the corruption exists it is 
progressive. The tendency to perdition is expressed by St. Paul 
elsewhere by the term dzroAAvpevov kata Tas érifupias THS amarns. 
Mark the contrast with dAnGetas, ver. 24; THs amdrys, not as in 
AV. a genitive of quality, but a subjective genitive, arary being 
almost personified, not, indeed, by the article alone, but by the 
attributing to it of éru@vpior. It is the deceitful power of sin. Cf. 
amrdrn THs apaptias, Heb. i. 13, and Rom. vil. 11, 7 dpapria 
egarrarnoé pe. Hence the érifvpias derive their power 4 dpapria 

. Katepydcato racav éeriOupiay, 2. 8. It is quite against N.T. 
usage to understand dary here as “error.” Compare amaryn tov 
wAouvTov, Matt. xiii. 22; da. dduxias, 2 Thess. ii. ro. 

katd, “in accordance with,” z.e. as their nature implies. 

28. dvaveodobar. Passive, not middle, for the middle of this 
verb is always used transitively, in an active signification. Nor 
would it be Pauline to represent the renewal as springing from the 
man himself. Compare also dvaxatvovpevov, Col. iii. ro. 

It may be questioned whether ava- here implies restoration to 
a former state, as is generally assumed. In classical writers 
dvaveovofa. means “to restore” ; but then the object expresses the 
original state, etc., which is thus brought into force or existence 
again, dv. dpkous, piAiav, etc. That is not the sense here, or in 
Col. iil. 10, of dvaxawvotcba, Here the object is tuas, and the 
meaning is, not that ye are to be brought out of a state of sus- 
pended existence, but that ye are to be changed so as to become veoé. 
What dva- implies, therefore, is simply change, and the meaning of 
the verb is to be illustrated by that of similar compounds of verbs 
derived from adjectives, where these adjectives would express the 
result of the action of the verbs. Such are: dvicdw, “ to equalise” ; 
dvarAnpow, “to fill”; dvaxowdw, “to communicate”; dviepdw, “to 
consecrate,” #.e. to make tos, tAnpyjs, Kowéds, tepds. 

TO TveUpaTt TOG voos bydv. This is understood of the Holy 
Spirit by Oecumenius and Theophylact, followed by Fritzsche, 
Ellicott, and others (the genitive being thus possessive), the 
“ (Divine) Spirit united with the human zvetya, with which the voids 
as subject is endued, and of which it is the receptaculum.” But 
this would be entirely without parallel. The Holy Spirit is never 
called ro rvedua tudv or Tod vods tyay, nor, indeed, does it seem 
possible that it should be so designated. The spirit of the vots of 
a man must be the man’s spirit. veda, in the sense of the Holy 
Spirit, is sometimes followed by a characterising genitive “of holi- 
ness,” ‘‘of adoption,” or, again, “of Christ,” “of God”; never “ of 
us,” or “of you.” This interpretation is particularly out of place 
if dvaveotofa is taken as depending on ¢diddxOyre. Bengel’s in- 
terpretation is doubtless the correct one, “spiritus est intimum 


138 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IV. 24 


mentis,” the higher principle of life. In Rom. vii. we see vods pro- 
nouncing approval of the law, but unable to resist the motions of sin, 
for it has no motive power. Inch. viii. we see the rvedua inspired 
by God, and we have a description of the man who is dvaveovpevos 
TO Tvevpatt TOD voos airov. For the distinction between vots and 
mvevpa compare, further, 1 Cor. xiv. 14, TO mvedud pov mpocev- 
xerar, 6 d€ vos pov dxapwds éott. The expression here used is 
thus quite in harmony with St. Paul’s usage elsewhere. But in 
Rom. xii. 2 the vods is said to be renewed, petrapoppotole TH 
GVAKALVWOEL TOD VOOs. 

24. kat évdtcac8ar Tov Kady avOpwrov, Note the correctness 
of the tenses: drofécfar and évdvcacGa: aorists, because a single 
act is meant; dvaveoto far present, because a continuing process. 
So in the parallel Col. ili. 9, 10, xawvds differs from véos in that the 
latter refers only to time, new, not long in existence, the former to 
quality also, as opposed to effeteness: cf. Heb. viii. 13. The xauvos 
avOp., like the xav7 dta0yKy, is always xatvos, but not always veds. 

kata Oedv. Compare Col. iii. 10, Tov véov Tov avaxawovpevov 
eis érlyvwow Kat eikdva Tod Kticavtos avrév. From the parallel, 
Meyer and Ellicott conclude that xara @cov = “ad exemplum Dei,” 
there being an allusion to Gen. i. 27. Meyer compares Gal. iv. 28, 
kata Ioaax. But in Col. it is just the word eixéva that expresses 
the idea sought to be introduced here. That xar’ eixdva means 
“after the likeness of,” is no proof that xata=“‘after the likeness 
of.” «ard in that phrase means “‘after the manner of,” and if so 
taken here it would imply that the parallelism was in the action of 
the verb, z.e. that God was xricOe’s. For a similar reason 1 Pet. 
i. 15 is not parallel, cata tov kadécavra jpds ayov, Kal avrol dyvot. 

kata @edv occurs 2 Cor. vil. 9, 10, 11 =“‘in a godly manner,” 
and this suggests the true interpretation, viz. “according to the 
will of God.” It may be said that this is flat compared with the 
other view ; but if so, that does not justify us in giving xara an 
unexampled sense. 

év Sikatoovry kat SovdtyTt THs GAnOelas. The AV. “righteousness 
and true holiness” is doubly wrong; in connecting the genitive 
with the latter substantive only, and in resolving it adjectivally. 
The Bishops’ Bible was correct, “in righteousness and holiness of 
truth.” Yet Chrysostom understood the words as meaning true 
as opposed to false, du. and 6c. The usual distinction between 
these substantives is that éovdrys has reference to God, dixatoovvy to 
men; so Plato, Philo, and other Greek writers distinctively state ; 
but Plato tells us in one place that duxacoovvy was a general term 
including éc.drns ; in fact, it meant righteousness or propriety of 
conduct in itself. In the N.T. the adjectives are combined in Tit. 
i. 8, the adverbs in 1 Thess. ii. 10, and the substantives in Luke 
i. 75 and Clem. Rom. Cor. 48. In Tim. ii. 8, éxafpovtas éctous 


TV. 25, 26] WARNING AGAINST SPECIAL SINS 139 


xelpas xwpls dpyns Kat Siadoywopov, the added words do not define 
the éa.drys. The hands are édovo. when not unfitted to be lifted 
up in prayer. Nor is the use of dovos with apxtepevs, Heb. vil. 26, 
at all peculiar. éovos occurs thrice in the Acts in quotations from 
the O.T. which do not concern St. Paul’s usage. Here, as in 
Luke i. 75 and Wisd. ix. 5, the words seem used in a way which 
had become familiar as a summary of human virtue. The sugges- 
tion that duacoovvy is in contrast to wAeoveéia, and décvdrys to 
dxafapoia (Olsh. Alf. Ell.), has against it, not only the distance 
from ver. 19, and the éy there (not xa/), but also the fact that these 
are not the proper opposites. The opposite of dxaf. is not davWrys 
but dyvorns; and dixavoovvy is very much more than the opposite 
of wAcovegéia in any sense of that word. 

ths dAnbetas. DG, It., Cypr. Hil. read wai adyOeca. 

25-32. Warning against special sins. 

25. Awd dmoGéuevor 7o peddos. There is no need to render 
“having put away,” which would seem to imply a separation in 
time between the two actions. The aorist suits the Greek idiom, 
as falsehood is to be put away once for all; but “ putting away ” 
agrees better with the English. 

yeddos, “falsehood,” is, of course, suggested by dA7Oea; it 1s 
more general than “lying,” which is mentioned immediately after as 
the most obvious example of it. So Col. ili. 8, 7) WevderGe. But 70 
Weddos is falsehood in all its forms; cf. Rom. i. 25; Rev. xxii. 15. 

pevé is more forcible than pds (Zech. viii. 16), implying “in 
your mutual intercourse.” 

Ott eopev GAAHAwv péAn. Chrysostom carries out the figure in a 
striking manner, e.g. if the eye sees a serpent, does it deceive the 
foot? if the tongue tastes what is bitter, does it deceive the 
stomach? etc. This is passable in a homily, but in the text the 
argument is not at all founded on the figure, but on the fact that 
we are members of the body of Christ: “est enim monstrum si 
membra inter se non consentiant, imo se fraudulenter inter se 
agant,” Calvin; cf. Rom. xii. 5, 7d 6& xa@ els GAAHAWY péAy. As 
each member belongs to the rest, they may be called members 
one of the other. Comp. 1 Cor. xii. 15. 

26. dpyifecbe kal pt dpaptdvere. These words are a quotation 
from Ps. iv. 5 (EV. 4), LXX., “Stand in awe, and sin not.” 
But expositors so diverse in their views as Hitzig and Delitzsch 
agree with the rendering of the LXX. The Hebrew verb primarily 
means “‘to tremble,” and unless it were followed by “before me,” 
or the like, could not mean definitely “stand in awe.” It occurs 
in Prov. xxix. 9 and Isa. xxvili. 21 in the sense “to be angry.” 
It is, however, superfluous, as far as the present passage is con- 
cerned, to inquire what the meaning of the original is. St. Paul 
is not arguing from the words, but adopting them as well known, 


140 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IV. 26 


and as expressing the precept he wishes to inculcate. The sense 
here is sufficiently intelligible, “ita irascamini ut ne peccetis.” 
The key is Bengel’s remark, ‘‘saepe vis modi cadit super partem 
duntaxat sermonis.” Thus Matt. xi. 25, “I thank Thee that Thou 
hast hid these things,” etc.; Rom. vi. 17, ‘Thanks be to God 
that ye were the servants of sin, but,” etc. Had St. Paul not 
been quoting from the O.T., he would probably have expressed 
himself differently, e.8. Meni py) Gpaptavere, or the like. The 
phrase is frequently explained by reference to what is called the 
Hebrew idiom (which is by no means peculiarly Hebrew) of com- 
bining two imperatives, so that the former expresses the condition, 
the latter the result, as in Amos v. 4, “‘Seek Me and live.” But 
this would make the words mean, “ Be angry, and so ye shall not 
sin.” Olshausen takes the first imperative hypothetically, “If ye 
are angry, as it is to be foreseen that it will happen, do not sin 
in anger.” For, he says, ‘man’s anger is never in itself just and 
permissible.” God’s alone is holy and just. This is fallacious, 
for anger is only in a figure attributed to God, and would not be 
so if all human anger were wrong. Besides, such a meaning 
would require dAAqa, or the like, instead of kat. Indeed, no one 
acquainted with Butler’s classical discourse on Resentment would 
accept Olshausen’s statement. Apart from sudden (or instinctive) 
anger, which was intended to prevent sudden harm, deliberate 
anger is lawfully aroused by injustice. “It is in us connected 
with a sense of virtue and vice, and in the form of indignation on 
behalf of others is one of the common bonds by which society is 
held together” (cf. Rom. xiii. 4). Nor can the fact that the injury 
is done to ourselves make it unlawful. It becomes so when in- 
dulged where no injustice was intended, or when it is out of pro- 
portion, or when harm is inflicted merely to gratify it. Our Lord was 
angry, Mark iii. 5. Beza, Grotius, and others have taken dpyileoe 
interrogatively, which is inconsistent with its being a quotation. 

6 Atos py émduetw emt Tapopyiopd bpov. 

7@ is added before rapopyicue in Rec., with most MSS. and 
Fathers, but is absent from 8* AB. Alford thinks it may have been 
omitted to give indefiniteness. But it is much more likely to have 
been added for grammatical reasons. 


Tlapopyioués is not found in profane authors; it occurs several times in 
the LXX., but usually of the sins by which Israel ‘‘ provoked” the Lord, 
e.g. 1 Kings xv. 30. In Jer. xxi. 5, in Cod. Alex., it occurs in the sense 
‘“‘anger.” The verb is found (in the passive) in Demosth. 805. 19; in the 
active, in this Epistle, vi. 4. mapopyoués appears to be distinguished from 
épyy as implying a less permanent state, ‘‘ irritation.” 


There is no reason to suppose a reference to the night as 
tending to nourish anger (‘‘affectus noctu retentus alte insidet,” 
Bengel after Chrys.). The precept simply means, as Estius 


IV. 27, 28] WARNING AGAINST SPECIAL SINS 141 


observes, ‘let the day of your anger be the day of your recon- 
ciliation,” for the new day began at sunset. The Pythagoreans, 
as Plutarch informs us, observed the same rule, eizrore zpocayGetev 
eis Aowdopias ir épyns, Tpiv 7 TOV HALov Sdvat, Tas SeEias eu BadAovrTes 
GdAnAots Kal doracdpevor SueAvovTo (Plut. De Am. Frat. 488 B). 
Eadie quotes a quaint comment from Fuller, “Let us take the 
apostle’s meaning rather than his words—with all possible speed 
to depose our passion, not understanding him so literally that we 
may take leave to be angry till sunset, then might our wrath 
lengthen with the days; and men in Greenland, where days last 
above a quarter of a year, have plentiful scope of revenge.” 

27. pydé Sidote témov 7H SiaBddkw. The Rec. has pyre, with 
most cursives ; all the uncials apparently have pydé. pyre would 
imply that St. Paul might have said pyre... pyre, but wrote 
py in the first clause, because not then thinking of the second. 
Such a usage, wy .. + pyre, is so rare in classical authors that 
some scholars have denied its existence, and it is not elsewhere 
found in St. Paul. The distinction between pyre . . . pyre and 
pydé . . . pndé, according to Hermann and others, is that the 
former divide a single negation into parts which are mutually 
exclusive; and neither negation gives a complete whole; thus 
corresponding to “neither . . . neither.” Comp. Matt. vi. 26, 
ov oreipovow ovde OepiLovow od ovvdyovow, ‘they sow not, and 
they reap not, and gather not”; Matt. xii. 32, ovre év tovTw TO 
aidve ovre év TH weAXovTt, “neither in this world nor in the future,” 
these being the two divisions of oi« dpeOjcerar, 

didore Térov, t.e. room to act, since indulgence in angry feelings 
leads to hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness. Comp. Rom. 
Xil. 19, ddre TOrov TH 6pyt. 

TO Sadr. 6 duaBoros is used by St. Paul only in this and 
the Pastorals. Erasmus, Luther, and others understand the word 
here as simply “calumniator,” and so the Syriac. But elsewhere 
in N.T. 6 duaBoXos always means “the devil.” In 1 Tim. iii. 11 ; 
2 Tim. ili. 3; Tit. ii. 3, the word is used as an adjective. 

28. 6 khéntwv pykéte kNewTéTw. Not “qui furabatur,” as Vulg., 
an attempt to soften the proper force of the word. Jerome miti- 
gates the word in a different way, interpreting it of everything 
“quod alterius damno quaeritur,” and favours the application to 
the “‘furtum spirituale” of the false prophets. The present parti- 
ciple seems intermediate between 6 xAéWas and 6 xAémrys. 

paddov S€ Kkomidrw, rather, on the contrary, let him labour, 
epyaldpevos tats [id{ats] xepoty 76 dyaldy. 

There is a considerable variety of reading here— 
tais ldlais xepolv 7d adyaddv, S* ADG, Vulg. Clarom. Goth. Arm, 


tals xepoly 7d ayaddv, %4B, Amiat., Ambrosiaster. 
7d dyabdy rats ldlars xepoly, K 10 mss., Theodoret. 


142 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [Iv. 29 


70 dyabdv Tais xepoly, L most mss., Chrys. Theoph. Oecum. 

The chief question is as to the genuineness of /d/acs. On the one hand, it is 
suggested that it may have been intentionally omitted because its force was 
not perceived, and so it was thought to be superfluous; on the other hand, 
that it may be an interpolation from 1 Cor. iv. 12, Against the former 
suggestion is the circumstance that in the passage in Cor., where the word 
might with even more reason be thought superfluous, no copyist has omitted 
it. The insertion, on the other hand, was very natural. The case of 7d 
dya0dy is very different. The variation in its position is, indeed, suspicious, 
and a nearer definition of épyafduevo. might have seemed necessary (since, as 
Chrys. observes, 6 kAémrwv épydferat, dAAG Kaxdyv), and Gal. vi. 10 would then 
suggest 7d dya0év ; but the only authority for its omission is Tertullian (es. 
Carn. 45). 


76 a@yafév. ‘“ Antitheton ad furtum prius manu piceata male 
commissum,” Bengel. 

iva éxn petadiSdvat TO xpetav Exovre. The motive here alleged 
is striking and characteristic, although surely we cannot say, with 
Olshausen and Ellicott, that this is the true specific object of all 
Christian labour; unless by ‘Christian labour” is meant labour 
over and above what is necessary for the labourer’s own subsistence. 
That, by the law of nature, is the first object, unless we include 
with it the support of his own family. 

Schoettgen infers from this clause that there were some who 
thought their thefts might be atoned for by almsgiving; and he 
quotes passages from Jewish writers which refer to such a delu- 
sion (Yalkut Rubeni, f. 110. 4; Vayyiqra Rabba, f. 147. 1). Not, 
indeed, that there was any such “ Jewish opinion,” as some writers 
assert. But the precept here is too general to be so understood, 
it simply (as Meyer remarks) opposes to unlawful taking, dutiful 
giving. 

29. tas Néyos campos €k TOU OTS}LATOS Opav py Pa 
The negative belongs to the verb; cf. Rom. lll, 20.5 Gal. iy 1G, 
ob SixarwOynoerar Taca odpé: 1 / Cor’, 29, orws py eesiastn Taoa 
aap. The expression is quite logical; whereas in English, if we 
say “all flesh shall not be justified,” the negative really belongs to 
“all,” not to the verb. 

campos is primarily “rotten, diseased,” hence in classical writers 
“disgusting.” In the N.T. it is used of a “worthless” tree, Matt. 
vii. 17, xll. 33; fish, Matt. xii. 48. It is clear, therefore, that the 
word does not of itself mean “filthy,” and Chrys. interprets it as 
meaning 6 py tiv idiay xpelay awAnpot (Hom. iv. on Tim.), and 
Theodoret makes it include aicypodroyla, Aodopia, ocvxoparria, 
BrAacdypla, Wevdoroyla, kai ta TovTos mporduora. With this we 
might compare 7év pjua apydv, Matt. xii. 36. But although 
campos, used of material things, may mean simply what is only fit 
to be thrown away, just as “rotten” is colloquially used by English 
schoolboys, it may be questioned whether in connexion with 
Aoyos it must not have a more specific meaning, something, 


IV. 30] WARNING AGAINST SPECIAL SINS 143 


perhaps, like our word “foul” used of language, including, like it, 
not merely “filthy,” but scurrilous language. So Arrian opposes 
campot Adyou to Komot (Diss. Lpict. ili. 16, p. 298, ap. Kypke) 
aAXAG «i Tis ayabds pds olkodopyy THs xpetas. For xpeias there 
is a remarkable variant, riotrews, in D* G, Vulg-Clem. (but Amiat. 
has xpefas) Goth. Jerome expressly says: “ pro eo quod nos 
posuimus ad aedificationem opportunitatis, hoc est quod dicitur 
Graece rns xpetas, in Latinis codicibus propter euphoniam mutavit 
interpres et posuit ad aedificationem fidet.” 


xpelas is the reading of § A BK LP and nearly all mss. and versions. 
It is somewhat curious that in Rom. xii. 13, D*G substitute ureias for 


xpelacs. 


eis oikodophy THs xpetas, by no means for eis xp. Tis oiK., as 
AV. xpetas is the objective genitive; the actual “need” or 
“occasion” is that which is to be affected by the edifying influence 
of the discourse. In Acts vi. 3 the word seems to mean “occa- 
sion” or “matter in hand” (“whom we may set over this yp.”). 
Field aptly cites Plutarch, Vit. Peric?. viii., unde pnya pndev éxrecetv 
GkovTos aitod mpos THY mpoKeyéevnv xpelav dvdppootov. Thus the 
sense is ‘‘for the improvement of the occasion.” So in substance 
Theophylact : dep oikodopet tov TAHCLOV dvayKatoy bv TH TpoKE ery 
xpeta, and Jerome: ‘“‘juxta opportunitatem loci temporis et 
personae aedificare audientes.” Olshausen and Rickert take 
xpeta as abstract for concrete = those that have need, which would 
make t7s xpetas superfluous. 

iva 8@ xdpiv Tois dxodJouow. “That it may give benefit to 
them that hear.” 

56 xapw has been variously interpreted. Chrysostom somewhat 
strangely understands it to mean “‘make the hearer grateful,” iva 
xapw cor €id7 6 dxovwy, but adding as an alternative, va keyapitw- 
pevous avrovs éepydontat. Theodoret observes, xapw tiv Oupndiav 
exadeoe’ Touréoti iva havi dexros Tots ak. But edifying discourse 
cannot always be acceptable, nor should this be the object aimed 
at; nor, again, does di/dova: xdpw ever have this meaning. Said of 
persons, it means to grant a favour. But Plutarch has the phrase 
with reference to food given to invalids: otdeuiay Addvyv ode yapiv 
arodiéwar, “it confers neither pleasure nor benefit.” And in N.T. 
xépes is similarly used, as in 2 Cor. i. 15, “that ye might have a 
second yx.” ; vill. 6, ‘that he would complete in you this x. also.” 
But as xdprs has a specially spiritual meaning in the N.T. generally, 
there is no reason to deny such a reference here. 

30. kat ph umetre 7d Mvedpa Td “Aytov tod Oeod. The con- 
nexion with the foregoing is well expressed by Theophylact: éay 
elrns pHa wampoy Kal dvdg.ov TOV xpLoTiavod aTOpaTOs, OvK avOpwrov 
eAvrnoas, adda TO rvevpa ToD Meodv. The warning assumes the 


I44 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [IV. 31, 82 


indwelling of the Spirit, and vividly expresses the offence done to 
that Spirit by such sins of the tongue. Aquinas weakens it by 
referring it to grieving the Spirit of God in others. 

€v © e€oppayicOynte. This supplies the ground of the motive. 
elra Kal 4 mpooOnky THs evepyecias, (va peilwv yevytar 1) KaTyopia, 
Chrys. Some of the older as well as later commentators see in 
the words a suggestion that the Spirit may thus be led to depart, 
and the seal be lost. Had this been intended, pu) tapogvvere would 
have been more suitable. But there is no suggestion of a possible 
departure of the Spirit; even the tense of éodpayicOnre, referring 
as it does to a sealing once for all, is against this. But it would 
be equally erroneous to say that the doctrine of “final persever- 
ance” is contained or implied. When a son is warned that if he 
acts in such and such a manner he will grieve his father, this does 
not suggest that his father may cast him off. 

eis Huépay dtrohutpdcews, Z.¢. for, or with a view to, the day of 
complete redemption. On dod. cf. i. 14. 

81. maoa mpia, ‘every kind of bitterness,” the temper which 
cherishes resentful feelings. Aristotle defines the wuxpo/ as ‘‘ hard 
to be reconciled” (dvadiéAvrov), and retaining their anger for a 
long time. 

kal Oupds kal dpyn. These flow from the temper of wuxpéa, pila 
Ovpod Kai dpyns muxpia, Chrys. Of these two, Ovuds expresses 
rather the temporary excitement of passion ; épy7, the more settled 
anger. Thus Greg. Naz. Carm. 34, Ovpos pév éotiw aOpdos Céors 
dpevos, dpyn 5é Ovpos éupévwv. Hence Ecclus. xlviil. 10, koraoar 
opyiv mpo Ovpod, before it bursts out. The Stoics defined Oupds as 
opyn apxonevn (Diog. Laert. vii. 114). 

kal Kpavy} Kat Bhacdypia. Chrysostom well observes: ios 
yap eotw dvaBarnv hépwv 7 Kpavyy Thy 6pyjv' cvpaddicov Tov UrTov, 
Kal Katéeotpewas Tov avaBdarnv. Kpavyy leads to BAacPdypia, which 
is clearly “reviling,” not “ blasphemy.” 

atv mdoy kaxia. Associated also in Col. iii. 8 with dpyy7, 
Ovupos, and BAaodypia, to which is there added aicxpodoyla. It is 
not badness in general, but “malice,” “‘animi pravitas, quae 
humanitati et aeguitati est opposita.” So Suidas: % Tod xax@oau 
Tov 7éAas o7rovdy. It is the very opposite of what follows. 

32.-V. 2. Exhortation to be tender-hearted and forgiving, follow- 
ing as a pattern God's forgiveness in Christ. 

82. yiveobe 8é, “ become, show yourselves.” Corresponding to 
apOjnrw adh tuov on the other side. ypyoroi, “kind.” This is the 
only place in the Epistles where the adjective occurs ; it is used of 
God in Luke vi. 35 ; so the substantive, ch. ii. 7; Tit. iil. 4, ete. 

eVomdayxvor, “tender-hearted,” in this sense only in biblical 
and ecclesiastical writers. Hippocrates has it in the physical 
sense, “having healthy bowels.” Euripides uses the substantive 


Iv. 82] WARNING AGAINST SPECIAL SINS 145 


ciordayxvia in the sense “firmness of heart.” The adjective 
occurs in the same sense as here in the Prayer of Manasses, 7, 
and in Zest. X7J Patr., of God. Comp. the parallel Col. ii. r2, 
oayxva oiktippov. 

xapifdpevor éautois=Col. iii, 13. Origen presses é<avrois as 
indicating that what was done to another was really done to them- 
selves, Sua TO ovcowpovs Fpas evar; Meyer and Alford think it 
implies that the forgiveness they are to show to others has as its 
pattern that which was shown to them as a body in Christ, éavrois 
being thus emphatic. In Col. iii. 12, also, we have dvexopevoe 
GAAjAwv Kat xapiopevor éavrois, and again, 1 Pet. iv. 8-10, tH eis 
éavtods dydayv éxrevy exovtes . . . prrd§evor eis dAAyAovs . . « eis 
éavrovs [7d xdpicpa] diaxovodvres. We are not justified in putting 
so much into the word as Meyer’s explanation supposes ; but so 
much is true, that éavrots suggests, more than aAA7jdous, that they 
are addressed as members of one corporate body. ‘This use of 
the word is quite classical. Demosthenes has BovAcobe .. . 
mepuiovres attav ruvOdverOat (p. 43, 10). Comp. also Xen. Afem. iii. 
5. 16 (quoted by Lightfoot on Col.), avrt pév rod ovvepyety eavrois 
Ta ovpdépovta, exnpedlovaw addArdois, Kat POovotow Eavrois waAov 
}) rots GAXots avOpwrros . . . Kal Tpoarpodvrar paAXov ovTw Kepdaivew 
az ddAjAwv } cvvwdedodytes atrovs. Also Dem. A/a. 101, p. 547. 

The Vulgate has erroneously ‘“donantes,” and Erasmus, “lar- 
gientes,” but the following context shows that the word must 
mean “forgiving.” 

kaQas kat, the same motive that is appealed to in the Parable 
of the Unforgiving Servant. 

5 Ocds év Xpiotg. ‘In Christ,” not “for Christ’s sake,” as AV., 
for which there is no justification. The sense is the same as in 
2 Cor. v. 19, “God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto 
Himself.” Not ‘‘per Christum” (Calvin), nor even pera tod kudvvov 
Tov viod aiTod Kal THs opayys avtod (Theoph.), of which there is no 
hint in the év; but, as in the passage in 2 Cor., God manifesting 
Himself in, acting in (not “through”), Christ. Hence in Col. iii. 
13 it is 6 Kupuos éxapioaro iptv. 


éxapioaro tpiv. The readings here and in ch. v. 2 vary between the 
second and the first person. 
In iv. 32 tuiv is read by SAGP 37, Vulg. (Clem.) Goth. Sah. Boh. 
Eth. jyiv by DK L 17, 47, both Syr. Arm. 
In v. 2 buds by NABP 37, Sah. Eth. judas by S°SDGKL 17 47, Vulg. 
Syr. (both) Boh. Goth. Arm. 
Ib. spav by B 37, Sah. Eth. tydv by SADGKLP 17 47, Vulg. 
Syr. (both) Boh. Goth. Arm. 
Or, to put it otherwise, we have— 
hu. in all three places, DK L 17 47, Syr. Arm. 
vu. in all three, Sah. Eth. 
Up. Up. Ne, NAP. 
10 


146 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


UM. Hu. HM.» &° Vulg. Goth, 
jun dp. bu, B. 
Critics differ in their judgment. Lachmann (judging in the absence of 

&) reads ju. in all three places. Tischendorf (8th ed.) and Tregelles adopt 
vu. bu. Hu. (Treg., however, in iv. 32, giving juiy a place in the margin). So 
WH. (who place ju. in the margin in the first and third places). So v. Soden 
and RV. (with 7. in the mg. in the first place and vu. in the third). Alford, 
Ellicott, and Eadie prefer tu. nu. qu. The confusion of the two pronouns 
is very frequent. As far as documentary evidence is concerned, the reading 
adopted in RV. seems to have the advantage. The evidence for bud in the 
third place is comparatively small, and it is very natural that St. Paul, while 
using the second person in close connexion with the precepts yapitduevor, 
mepimatetre €v ayaa, should pass from that to the more general statement in 
the first person. Indeed, it is perhaps not going too far to say that while 
““God forgave you,” ‘‘ Christ loved you,” are perfectly natural, it would not 
seem so natural to say, ‘‘ Christ gave Himself for you,” although the individual 
believer may say, ‘‘ He gave Himself for me,” Gal. ii. 20. 

éxaptoato, “ forgave,” as referring to a past historical fact. Note 
that in Col. ili. 13 it is 6 Kvpuos, with 6 Xpuords in some texts. 

Vz. 1. yiveoGe ody pipyntal tod Ocod. ‘‘ Become therefore imitators 
of God.” yiverGe resumes the yiverOe of iv. 32. The words of 
that verse, ‘‘forgiving . . . as God forgave you,” show that the 
imitation inculcated is in respect of this particular virtue, and the 
ovr, therefore, connects this verse with that immediately preced- 
ing, not with the whole foregoing subject. Imitators of God! 
The idea is a grand and ennobling one; and our Lord Himself sets 
it before us, and in the same aspect, when He says, “‘ Ye there- 
fore shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect,” namely, 
in that “‘He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, 
and sendeth rain on the just and the unjust” (Matt. v. 45, 48). 
So that we also should love our enemies. 

The forgiveness inculcated is obviously free forgiveness, as in 
the passage just cited and in the Lord’s Prayer. That this is here 
placed on the ground of imitation of God’s forgiveness is a decisive 
proof that St. Paul did not view the Atonement in the light of 
payment of a debt or endurance of a penalty demanded by Divine 
justice. The most unforgiving of men, if not actually vindictive, 
might say, I am quite ready to forgive on the same terms on 
which you say that God forgives, viz. that the debt be fully paid, 
the offence fully atoned for. Chrysostom has a fine comment on 
this ‘forgiving one another.” There is a great difference, he says, 
between God’s forgiveness and ours, “for, if thou forgivest, the 
other will in turn forgive thee; but to God thou hast forgiven 
nought. And thou to thy fellow-servant, but God to His servant, 
and His enemy, and him that hateth Him. And He did not for- 
give simply without peril, but with the peril of His Son. For that 
He might forgive thee He sacrificed the Son,-—rov Yiov €6vae,— 
but thou, although often seeing forgiveness to be without peril or 
expense, dost not exercise it.” 


V. 2] THE DIVINE PATTERN OF LOVE 147 


és téxkva dyamyrd, ze. as children beloved of God. He adds, 
says Chrys., another obligation of imitating God, not only because 
He has conferred benefits on us, but because we are His children, 
nay, His beloved children. ‘If God so loved us, we also ought 
to love one another.” 

2. kal mepimateite é€v dydwy, specifying, further, wherein the 
imitation of God is to be shown. Love is to be the rule of our 
life. 

Ka0ws kat 6 Xpiotds Hydwycevy Gpas, kal Tapedwkey EauTov rep 
ypev. Compare John xiii. 34, ‘as I have loved you, that ye also 
love one another.” «kal wapédwxey expresses wherein this love was 
shown. So ver. 25, “loved the Church, and gave Himself for 
it”; Gal. ii. 20, “loved me, and gave Himself for me.” The verb 
requires no supplement, such as eis @dvarov or To Oeo ; see Rom. 
Vili. 32 ; Gal. ii. 20, and ver. 25. wep, “on behalf of.” 

mpoopopay kal Quciav TH Oe@. TH Oecd is best connected with 
these words for the reason just mentioned ; not with the follow- 
ing, since this would suppose the words placed emphatically 
before «is 6opyv, as if to exclude the idea of human pleasure, 
which is out of the question. zpoogopa and 6voia are sometimes 
said to specify respectively an unbloody anda bloody offering ; but 
such a distinction cannot be maintained either in classical or 
biblical Greek. The idea of “sacrifice” in 6vw is not derived 
from that of slaying, but of ‘‘ smoking,” ‘ burning incense.” This 
was, according to Aristarchus, the meaning of the verb in Homer ; 
cf. Latin ‘ fumus,” “ subfio,” which are from the same root. For 
biblical usage see Gen. iv. 3; Num. vil. 49, 73, etc. The alleged 
sense would be especially out of harmony with the figurative use of 
Ovoia in St. Paul, @voia Goa, Rom. xii. 1; cf. Phil. ii. 17, iv. 18. 
Ellicott supposes that zpoodopa is used as the more general term, 
relating, not to the death only, but to the life of obedience of our 
blessed Lord, His 6voia Céioca ; while 6voia refers more particularly 
to His atoning death. The words appear, however, to be borrowed 
from Ps. xl. 6 (quoted Heb. x. 5), where they are used simply as 
together including all kinds of ceremonial offering. 

cis dopiv edwdtas. “* For a sweet-smelling savour.” The figure 
was founded originally on the heathen idea that the smell of the 
burnt sacrifice did literally ascend to the gods, who thereby 
participated with the worshipper in the sacred feast. So in 
Homer often ; see especially //, xxiv. 69, 70, od ydp poi rote 
Bupos eéevero datos elons, AouBns Te Kvicns Te’ TO yap Adxopev yépas 
jets. It is appropriate only to a burnt-offering. 

That St. Paul here speaks of Christ as a sacrifice cannot, of 
course, be denied. But does he do so by way of stating the 
nature or manner of the atonement? Surely not. There is not 
one word to hint at the relation of this sacrifice to God’s forgive 


148 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [v. 3 


ness. On the contrary, God in Christ forgiving us, and Christ 
showing His love by His offering of Himself, are put forward as 
exactly parallel examples ; indeed, in view of the parallel in Col., 
5 Kupuos éxapicaro, we might say as one and the same. It is this 
single aspect of Christ’s sacrifice as a supreme exhibition of love on 
the part both of the Father and of the Son that is here presented. 
Indeed, in Rom. viii. 32 the very same word wapédoxe is used of 
the Father that is here used of the Son. And if we cannot argue 
as if the apostle were here stating the essential nature of the 
atonement, still less are we justified in assuming that he had in 
his mind the “ substitutionary ” view of sacrifice. Whatever the 
original idea of sacrifice may have been (and certainly the substi- 
tutionary view is not the only one possible), neither psalmists nor 
apostles seem to have had this idea present to their minds whenever 
they spoke of sacrifice. The psalmist speaks of sacrificing thanks- 
giving and praise (Ps. 1. 14); St. Paul, of his offering of the Gentiles 
(Rom. xv. 16). In Rom. xii. 1, already quoted, he calls on his readers 
to present their bodies as a sacrifice. In Phil. i. 17 he represents 
himself as offering their faith as a sacrifice ; and in the same Ep., 
iv. 18, he calls their present to him a sacrifice, an odour of a 
sweet savour. With the exception of 1 Cor. x. 18 (‘they that eat 
of the sacrifices”), these are the only passages beside the present 
in which he uses the words. This gives little support to the 
notion that we are to interpret his words here as if we were 
dealing with a treatise on scientific theology. 

Chrysostom certainly does not err in this way. He observes: 
Spas, To trip exOpav maleiv, oT. dopa ebwdias eri, Kal Ovoia 
edrpordextés; Kav arobdvys, TOTE Eon Ovciat todtro pysjoacbai 
éore TOV Mcov. 

3-11. Special warnings against sins of impurity. 

8. wopvela S€ Kai dxalapoia waca % mheovegia pyde dvopalécbw 
év Opty. 

ropveta is mentioned as being a sin of little account. 
amongst the Gentiles. On mcovegia see iv. 19. This passage, 
says Moule, more perhaps than any other, suggests that the word 
(xAeoveéla) had acquired by usage, in St. Paul’s time, a familiar 
though not fixed connexion with sezswa/ greed, just such as our 
word “covetousness” has acquired with the greed of material 
property. It is urged here that 7 indicates that the two words 
between which it stands belong to different classes. But in the 
following verse we have % between popodoyia and ecdrpazedia, 
which do not belong to different classes. 

und: dvopalécOw. Herodotus says of the Persians : dooa dé ou 
moveew odk eeart, TadTa ovde A€yew eLeoTe (i. 138). But St. Paul’s 
precept refers to particular classes of sin only. Compare ver. 12. 
of yap Adyou Tov Tpaypdrwv eioty doi, Chrys. Bengel suggests 


Vv. 4] WARNING AGAINST IMPURITY 149 


for évou. “mentioned as committed,” “ut facta”; cf. dxoverau & 
tiv wopveta, 1 Cor. v. 1. But, besides that évoy. can hardly mean 
this, ude, “ not even,” is decisive against it. 
4. kai aicxpdtys Kal pwpodoyia # edtpameNia. 
The MSS. and Vss. vary between xal and # in the first and second 
places. 

AD*G, It. Vulg. Sah. have #.. . 4%. 

&® B D¢ K, Boh. Eth. have cal... xal. 

N* P, Syr-Harcl. Arm. have cal... 4 


Lachmann writes #. . . 4, Tischendorf, RV. Kalic 2°. By Wie cal. 2°. Kak 


aicxpérys is not merely “foolish talking,” which would be 
aicypoAoyia, but “shameful conduct.” Plato has (of Rhada- 
manthus inspecting the souls of the dead): dovpperpias te Kai 
aloyporyros yepovcay THY YWuxyv eldev (Gorg. 525 A); but there the 
word means the hideousness stamped on the soul by the vices of 
the living man. 

pwporoyia, “stultiloquium,” only here in bibl. Grk. It is a rare 
word also in classical writers, but occurs in Arist. (/7zs¢. A. i. 11) 
and Plutarch (Mor. 504 B). Plautus uses ‘ morologus,” ‘‘ Amoris 
vitio non meo nunc tibi morologus fio” (ers. i. I. 50). 

eitpareAia. Aristotle defines ecitp. as reradevpévy UBpis. ot 
eupedas railovtes eitpdreAor tpocayopevovra. But he adds that, 
gince most persons are pleased with excessive jesting, of Bwpodrdxor 
citpdreXor tpocayopevovta (Lith. lVic, iv. 14), 7.¢., as in many other 
cases, the extreme usurps the name of the near. This would 
justify St. Paul’s usage, were there nothing else. But for the 
adjective compare also Pindar, Pyth. 1. 178, pi doAwbys edtpa- 
méAots Kepdeoo, and iv. 104, where Jason boasts that he has never 
spoken ézos eitpdreAov. According to Dissen, the word was used 
“cum levitatis et assentationis, simulationis notatione”; but this 
does not seem to be the meaning here, where the context clearly 
points to licentious speech; see ver. 5. Trench compares the 
history of the Latin “urbanitas” and the English “ facetious.” 
He notes that in the AZzZes Gloriosus of Plautus, the old man who 
describes himself as “ cavillator facetus” says : ‘‘ Ephesi sum natus ; 
non enim in Apulis, non Animulae.” 

& od avqxev. SoNABP. Rec. has 74 odk dvjxovra, with DG K L and 
most. 

GAG padAdov edxaptotia. Clement of Alex. understands «vx. 
here of “ gracious speech” ; and so Jerome (but with a “ forsitan ”) : 
“juxta quam grati sive gratiosi et salsi apud homines appellamur,” 
—an opinion followed by Calvin, Hammond, and many others, 
“sracious, pious, religious discourse in general,” Hammond ; 
who points to the iva 66 xdpw rots dx. in iv. 29, and “let your 
speech be always ev xdpit,” in Col. iv. 6. In Prov. xi. 16 we 
have yur?) cdxapiords, “a gracious, pious woman.” The adjective is 


150 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [v. 5 


sometimes so used in classical authors: edxapurrdéraror Adyou, Xen. 
Cyr. 11, 2. 1. This would suit the context very well; but as it is 
not only against St. Paul’s use of the word elsewhere, but, more- 
over, there is no example of the substantive in this sense, it would 
be too bold to adopt it. We have to understand a suitable verb 
from évopatéoGw, both for this and the preceding substantives. 
The sense is not: “let not foolish speech be mentioned but 
thanksgiving,” but : ‘let there not be,” etc. Bengel understands 
avyKker to evxapiotia ; and so Braune ; which with the reading @ ov« 
avnxev is not unnatural, but more harsh. In these cases of 
brachylogy there is really no need to look for a verb, the sense 
is obvious to the reader. 

5. Todto yap tote ywdoKovtes. iore is the reading of NAB 
D* GP, It. Vulg. Goth. Sah. Boh. Arm., Chrys. 

éore, that of D°K L, Theodoret, Theoph. Internal as well as 
external evidence favours the former. are yw. would be a feeble 
periphrasis for oiéare or yevwoxere, since there is no hint here of an 
emphasis on the present tense. 

The combination of the two verbs is not to be explained by 
reference to the Hebrew idiom, which combines a finite verb with 
the infinitive absolute (imitated in Greek by the participle with 
the finite verb), since the verbs here are different. Xenophon’s 
dpav Kal axovwv olda (Cyr. iv, 1. 14) is nearer, but not exactly 
parallel, since there the participles define the kind of knowledge: 
‘“‘T know by observation and hearsay.” The meaning is clear: 
“ve know full well, of your own knowledge.” ‘ore is not im- 
perative, as in the Vulgate and Bengel, etc., which does not at all 
agree with the addition ywaoxovres. Hofmann puts a stop after 
iste, SO as to make rovro refer to the preceding. 

On as ovx cf. iv. 29. 

6 €otiv eldwdoddTpNs. 


There are three readings— 

8 éariv eldwdoddtpys, & B 677, Jerome. 

8s éorw eldwoddtpys, ADK LP, Syr-Harcl. Boh. Arm., Chrys. 

& éorw eldwrodarpela, G, It. Vulg. Goth.; Syr-Pesh. (printed text) has 
or,” which points to 8. 

The last is supposed by Meyer to have been an explanation of the second, 
which he thinks genuine, the first being produced from this by restoring 
eldwoddtpys. But it is quite as easy to account for the third variety as 
arising from the first, because elS5wNoNdTpys was thought unsuitable to 8. If 
the second reading had been the original, it is not easy to see why it should 
have been changed ; but 6 would readily be changed to és for grammatical 
reasons. 


With the reading 6s some commentators (Harless, Braune, 
etc.) refer the relative to all three antecedents ; but this is not so 
natural as the reference to aAeovéxrns, which also corresponds 
with Col. iii. 5, wAcovegiav, nris éoriy cidwAoAarpeia, although there 


V. 6] WARNING AGAINST IMPURITY IS! 


also Harless regards 7rts as by attraction for drwa, as Eph. ili. 13. 
With the reading 6, the latter reference must, of course, be 
adopted. On the designation of 7A. as idolatry, see above on 
iv. 19. The passages from Rabbinical writers, quoted by Schottgen 
and Wetstein, do not throw much light on the matter. They 
represent all kinds of wickedness and vice as idolatry ; pride, anger, 
refusal to give alms. If wAcoveé/a is simply ‘‘ covetousness,” the 
question is, why should this, any more than fornication and im- 
purity, be singled out to be called idolatry? Meyer says that 
mopveta and dxaGapoca are also subtle idolatry (certainly not “ more 
subtle forms,” Ellicott), but that it was natural for St. Paul, whose 
own self-sacrificing spirit was so opposed to this self-seeking, to 
brand this especially as idolatry in order to make it kar’ efoyyv 
abominable. There is nothing in his language elsewhere to sup- 
port this idea. One of Chrysostom’s explanations shows how 
difficult he found it to answer the question. Wouldst thou learn, 
says he, how aa. is idolatry, and worse than idolatry? Idolaters 
worship God’s creatures, but thou worshippest thy own creature, 
for God did not create 7Acoveéia, 

If we give wAcoveéia and mAcovéxrys the wider sense advocated 
on iv. 19, there is no difficulty. 

ovK exet k\ypovopiay, As kAnpovop.ta. does not necessarily imply 
actual possession, but the title to possession, it is not necessary to say 
that the ‘Present is used to express the certainty of future possession. 

év TH Bacthela tod Xprotod kat Gcod. Many expositors (Bengel, 
Harless, etc.) argue from the absence of the article before @eod 
that the words mean “the kingdom of Him who is Christ and 
God.” But @eds is one of the words that do not require an 
article ; comp. 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10, BactAciay cod: also 70. xv. 50 and 
Gal. v. 21. See also Gal. i. 1, da “Inood Xpiorod kai Ocod warpés: 
Rom. xv. 8, ivép aAnOeias Ocod: xill. 4, Oeod dudkovos, etc. There 
is in the context no dogmatic assertion about Christ, and to in- 
troduce such a prediction in this incidental way would be out of 
place. Nor does the apostle’s language elsewhere lead us to sup- 
pose that he would thus absolutely designate Christ, God. Comp. 
iv. 6, “one Lord, one God.” The absence of the article gives 
more unity to the conception; it is not “the kingdom of Christ, 
and also the kingdom of God,” but being the kingdom of Christ 
it is the kingdom of God. 

6. pndels buds dwatdtw Kevots Aéyous. Adyot Kevol, ‘sermones a 
veritate alieni.” Aeschines speaks of a decree written by Demos- 
thenes as kevitepov tv Adywv ods clwHe Néyev Kal Tod Biov dv 
BeBinxe (Cont. Ctes. p. 288); and Plato says: ris év vvovala roigde 
parynv Kevots Adyots altos abrov Koopot; (Laches. 169 B). 

To what persons do these words refer? Grotius thinks, partly 
heathen philosophers, partly Jews, who thought that all Jews would 


152 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [v. 7,8 


have part in the world to come. Meyer sees in them the un- 
believing heathen, which view he supports by reference to the 
following words ; and so Eadie. But the Christians, as such, were 
separate from the unbelieving heathen, and the Epistle gives no 
reason to suppose that they would need to be warned against 
immoral teaching proceeding from them. Rather, we must under- 
stand persons amongst themselves who made light of sins 
of impurity, as too many in Christian communities still do. 
As Bullinger (ap. Harless) says: “‘ Erant apud Ephesios homines 
corrupti, ut hodie apud nos plurimi sunt, qui haec salutaria Dei 
praecepta cachinno excipientes obstrepunt ; humanum esse quod 
faciant amatores, utile quod foeneratores, facetum quod jaculatores, 
et idcirco Deum non usque adeo graviter animadvertere in istius- 
modi lapsus.” The context perfectly harmonises with this: “ Be 
not ye Christians misled into such vices, for it is just these, etc., 
and by falling into them ye would be ovppéroyxor with those who 
are in the darkness from which ye have been delivered.” 

Sid tadta ydp, “for it is on account of these things”; not this 
teaching, but these sins, 

€pxeTat ) dpy} Tod Ocod. spy7 is not to be limited to the ordinary 
judgments of this life, “quorum exempla sunt ante oculos” 
(Calv.) ; nor is there reason to limit it to the wrath of God in the 
day of judgment (Meyer). The wrath of God will be manifested 
then, but it exists now. 

mt Tos ulous THs ateBelas, See il. 2. 

7. pi) odv yiveoOe cuppeétoxor adtay. ‘Do not therefore become 
partakers with them.” aidrdv refers to the persons, not the sins 
(as Braune). This sharing is by some understood of sharing in 
their punishment, but by most expositors of sharing in their sins ; 
Stier combines both, and not unreasonably, since it has just been 
said that these sins bring punishment, and the sense naturally is: 
Have nothing in common with them, for ye surely do not desire 
to share the wrath with them. 

8. jTe ydp mote oxdTos. pev is quite properly absent. To° 
quote Fritzsche: ‘‘ Recte ibi non ponitur, ubi aut non sequitur 
membrum oppositum, aut scriptores oppositionem addere nondum 
constituerant, aut loquentes alterius membri oppositionem qua- 
cunque de causa lectoribus non indixerunt” (Rom. x. 19, vol. ii. 
P- 423). ne , Le 

nte. The emphasis is on the time past; cf. “Troja fuit, 
fuimus Troes.” oxdros. Stronger than “ were in darkness.” They 
were not only in darkness ; darkness was also in them. So viv 8é 
as ev Kuptw. ‘The whole nature of light was to belong to them 
as formerly the whole nature of darkness ; they were not only in the 
light, but penetrated by it, so that they themselves became ‘the 
light of the world,” Matt. v. 14. 


Vv. 9-11] WARNING AGAINST IMPURITY 153 


év Kupfw, “in fellowship with the Lord.” 

ds Tékva dwrds weprmarette. With réxva dwrds cf. viol areHeias, 
ver. 6 and ii. 3. Alford argues from the absence of the article 
before ¢wrés (in contrast with rod pwrds, ver. 9 and Luke xvi. 8), 
that “it is light as “gA¢ that is spoken of.” But the absence of the 
article is in accordance with the settled rule stated by Apollonius, 
that (subject to certain qualifications) nouns in regimen must have 
the article prefixed to both or to neither (see Middleton, Ox the 
Greek Article, iii. 1, 73 3, 6). 

9. 6 yap kapmds T00 gwrds. The walk to which I exhort you 
is that which becomes children of the light, for ete. 


The Rec. Text. has rvevuaros for gwrés, with D* K L, Syr-Pesh., Chrys. 
and most cursives. 

gwrés is the reading of SABD*GP 67%, It. Vulg. Goth. Boh. Arm., 
Origen, Jerome. 

It might be thought possible that gw7és had come in from recollection of 
the same word just preceding, but the figure of ‘‘light” governs the whole 
passage, and épya dxapma oxérous, ver. 10, corresponds to Kkaprds pwrés 
here. Kapmrés mvevuaros undoubtedly came in from the parallel, Gal. v. 22, 
where the contrast is with épya capkés, ver. 19; cf. 17, 18. The variation is 
an important one for the estimate of the character of the authorities that 
support the two readings respectively. 


év doy dyaQwodry kat Sixarootvy Kal ddnBeta. “In all (ze. every 
kind of) goodness and righteousness and truth,” the opposites of 
kakia, douia, Weddoos. ayabwovvyn is not found in classical Greek, 
but is used by St. Paul in three other places, viz. Rom. xvi. 14 ; 
Gal. v. 22; 2 Thess. i. 11. The use of it in the Sept. gives us 
little help. In Eccles., where it occurs several times, it is used for 
“enjoyment.” In Neh. ix. 25, 35, it is used of the goodness of God. 
In Ps. lii. 3 (li. Sept.) it is “good” in general as opposed to “evil” ; 
and so in xxxviil. (xxxvii.) 20. In St. Paul it would seem to mean 
“‘soodness” in the special sense of benevolence; and thus the 
threefold enumeration here would correspond to that in the 
Gospels: “justice, mercy, and truth,” and to Butler’s “justice, 
truth, and regard to common good” (comp. Rom. v. 7). 

As a metaphor the expression “fruit of the light” cannot be 
called “strictly correct,” as if it referred to the necessity of light for 
the production of fruit, etc. The words “children of light” 
convey no intimation of such a figure. 

10. SoxipdLlovtes Tl eat Evdpectoy TO Kupto. Compare Rom. 
xii. 2, eis 7d Soxysdlew tpas ti To Oé€Anpa Tod Weod, rd dyafdv Kai 
evapertov Kal TeACLOV. 

Putting to the proof, partly by thought and partly by experience. 
Stier and some others take the words imperatively, supplying <ore, 
as Rom. xii. 9-13 and vv. 19, 20; but here between two impera- 
tives this is less natural. 

11. kal ph cuyKowvwreite tors Epyots dkdpros Tod oxdtous. ‘‘ Have 


154 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [v. 12 


no fellowship with.” The thought joins on to ver. 7. The verb 
with the dative means (like the simple xowvwvetv) to have fellowship 
or partnership with. In the sense, “to have part in a thing,” it 
takes the genitive. axaprows, for vice has no xaprdés. Thus 
Jerome: “Vitia in semet ipsa finiuntur et pereunt, virtutes 
frugibus pullulant et redundant.” 

11, 12. paddov 8€é Kat ehéyxete, TA yap Kpupy yivopeva bw adtav 
aicxpdv éoTt Kat Neyer. Kpudy yuvdweva cannot be merely syn- 
onymous with ¢pya oxdrovs, as Harless and Olshausen hold; 
oxoros and xpup7 are distinct notions, and épya oxdrovs might 
be open offences. Besides, this would make xpud7 quite super- 
fluous. «kat A€yew, “even to mention.” 

eXéyxere is usually taken to mean “reprove.” This seems to 
imply reproof by words; but then the reason assigned seems 
strange ; they are to be reproved, because even to speak of them 
is shameful. If the conjunction had been “although” and not 
“for,” it would be intelligible. Hence some expositors have 
actually supposed that yap here means “although,” which is, of 
course, impossible. Another view that has been taken is ‘rebuke 
them openly, for to speak of them otherwise is shameful”; but 
this puts too much into Aéyev. Bengel’s view is that the words 
assign, not the reason for éX., but the reason of the apostle’s 
speaking indefinitely of the vices, whilst he enumerates the virtues. 
This is forced, and against the emphatic position of kpud7. Stier’s 
view is that the reproof is to be by the life, not by words: “Ye 
would yourselves be sinning if ye were to name the secret vices” ; 
hence the necessity for walking in the light, that so these deeds 
may be reproved. But St. Paul is not deterred by such scruples 
from speaking plainly of heathen vices when occasion required. 
Harless’ view, that the words are connected with uy ovyk., “ Do 
not commit these sins, for they are too bad even to mention,” 
assumes that 7a xpufpy yuopeva simply = 7a epya Tod oxdTovs, which 
we have seen is untenable. 

Meyer and Eadie assign as the connexion, ‘By all means 
reprove them ; and there is the more need of this, for it is a shame 
even to speak of their secret sins.” This seems to leave the 
difficulty unsolved. Barry says: “In such reproof it should be 
remembered that it would be disgraceful ‘even to speak’ in 
detail of the actual ‘things done in secret.’” This again 
supposes that yap assigns a reason for what is not expressed, 
namely, for some qualification of éAéyxere, not at all for éAéyyere 
itself. 

There is, however, another meaning of éAéyyw very common, 
especially when the object is a thing, not a person, and more 
particularly in connexion with derivatives of xpvrrw, viz. to expose 
or bring to light. Artemidorus, in his interpretations of dreams, 


V. 13] WARNING AGAINST IMPURITY 155 


when speaking of those dreams which forebode the revealing of 
secrets, always speaks of ra xpumTa éd€yxerOar, e.g. il. 36, 7Atos 
amo Svcews Belo Ta KpuTTa éhéyxer Tov AeAnHevar SoKxovvTwv. 
Polybius says: éAéyxerOai facw tas pices tro Tov TeproTacewy 
(p. 1382). He opposes to it duacxoretcba. (p. 1383). And 
Phavorinus defines eAéyxw. 76 kexpuppévov atornpa twos eis POs ayw. 
Cf. Aristoph. Zec/es. 483. 

So the substantive 6 €Aeyyos= proof. The connexion of this 
signification with that of “convict” is obvious. The Zitym. JM. 
has eyxds éorw 6 1a mpdypara cadyvilwy ... 6 yap eX. eis pas 
aye. TA Tpaypara, 

This appears to be the meaning of the verb in John ili. 20, ov« 
€pxerar mpos TO Pas, tva pi) CAeyxO7 Ta Epya airod. Compare in the 
following verse, épxyera mpos 7d Pas, va havepwhy aitod Ta epya. 
Compare also 1 Cor. xiv. 22, éAéyxerau td mavtwv . . . Ta KpUTTS 
THS Kapolas avTov davepa yiverar. The occurrence of «pvp here in 
the immediate context suggests that this meaning was present to 
the apostle’s mind. Adopting it, we obtain as the interpretation: 
Have no participation with the works of darkness, nay, rather 
expose them, for the things they do secretly it is a shame even to 
mention ; but all these things when exposed by the light are made 
manifest in their true character. Then follows the reason, not for 
13a, but for the whole exhortation. This éAéyxew is not useless, 
for it leads to ¢avepoto fa, and so turns oxdros into ¢éas. This is 
Soden’s interpretation. A remarkable parallel is John iii. 20, just 
quoted. There also épya are the object, épya whose nature is 
oxoros (ver. 19); and it is the gas which effects éAéyxeuv, ver. 20, 
and ¢davepoty, ver. 21. 

13. 1a 5é€ mdvta eheyxdpeva bd Tob pwtds havepottar’ wav yap 
Td davepovpevoy pas €or. The difficulty in tracing the connexion 
continues to be felt here. Meyer interprets: But everything 
(=those secret sins) when it is reproved is made manifest by the 
light ; that is, by the light of Christian truth which operates in your 
reproof, it is brought to the light of day in its true moral character ; 
I say, by the light, for—to prove that it can only be by the light— 
whatever is made manifest is light ; it has ceased to have the nature 
of darkness. Assuming, namely, ‘quod est in effectu (¢as éa7v) 
id debet esse in causa (i7d rot dwrds).” This is adopted by 
Ellicott. But it is open to serious objection: first, 76d rod duwrds 
is not emphatic; on the contrary, its position is as unemphatic as 
possible; secondly, éAeyxdpeva is on this view not only super- 
fluous but disturbing ; thirdly, the assumption that what is in the 
effect must be in the cause, is much too recondite a principle to be 
silently assumed in such a discourse as this; and, lastly, this treats 
avepovpevoy as if it were repavepwpevov. Meyer, in fact, endeavours 
to obtain, by the help of a hidden metaphysical assumption, the 


156 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [v. 14 


same sense which Eadie and others obtain by taking qdavepovpevov 
as middle (= AV.). 

Ellicott adds, “ whatever is illumined is light.” But davepow 
does not mean “to illumine,” but to make ¢avepds. It occurs 
nearly fifty times in the N.T. and never=quwrilew. True, it is 
allied to das, but not closely, for its nearest connexion is with the 
stem of ¢aivw, viz. dav, which is already far from ¢és. Again, 
when it is said by Alford (in reply to Eadie’s objection that the 
transformation does not always take place) that, ‘objectively 
taken, it is universally true: everything shone upon 1s LicHT” 
(whether this tends to condemnation or not depending on 
whether the transformation takes place or not), this surely is just 
what is not true. A dark object shone upon does not become /ux 
(the English word is ambiguous). He adds that the key text is 
John iii. 20, but in order to fit this in he interprets ‘ brought into 
light” as “made light.” 

Bengel, followed by Stier, takes davepovpevoy as middle, ‘ quod 
manifestari non refugit; confer mox, éyetpar kal avdora” [the 
correct reading is éyepe]; and on wav, ‘‘ Abstractum pro concreto 
nam hic sermo jam est de homine ipso, coll. v. seq. propterea.” 

We seem almost driven (with Eadie, after Beza, Calvin, 
Grotius, etc.) to take @avepovpevov as middle, in this sense, “ what- 
ever makes manifest is light.” The examples, indeed, of favepotw: 
far as middle, adduced by Eadie, are not quite to the point, viz. 
such as édavepoOn in Mark xvi. 12, where the medial sense is 
much more marked than in the present passage. Bleek thinks it 
necessary to suppose an active sense here, but he proposes to read 
davepotv 76. Oltramare interprets: ‘ All the things done in secret, 
when reproved, are brought into open day by the light [which is 
salutary |, for whatever is so brought out is light.” 

14. Avd Ayer. “ Wherefore it is said.” It is generally held that 
this formula introduces a quotation from canonical Scripture. 
Here the difficulty arises that this is not a quotation from canon- 
ical Scripture. Jerome admits this, saying, “omnes editiones 
veterum scripturarum ipsaque Hebraeorum volumina eventilans 
nunquam hoc scriptum reperi.” He therefore suggests that it is 
from an apocryphal writing ; not that the apostle accepted such a 
writing as authoritative, but that he quoted it as he has quoted 
Aratus, etc. He, at the same time, mentions others who supposed 
the words to be spoken by the apostle himself under inspiration. 
Many moderns, however, think that the original text is Isa. lx. 1, 
“‘ Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lorn is 
risen upon thee, ” the words being, it is said, quoted, not verbally, 
but in essence. It would be more correct to say that the resem- 
blance is verbal rather than in essence; for the differences are 
important. The very word 6 Xpiords is fatal to the idea of a 


Vv. 14) WARNING AGAINST IMPURITY 157 


quotation. Alford, indeed, says that it is a necessary inference 
from the form of the citation (viz. 6 Xp.) that St. Paul is citing 
the language of prophecy in the light of the fulfilment of prophecy, 
which obviously assumes the point in question. It is said, more- 
over, that no surprise can be felt at finding Christ substituted for 
the Lorp (Jehovah) of the O.T., and the true Israel for Jerusalem. 
True: if the question were of the application of words from the 
O.T., as in 1 Pet. ili. 15, or of interpretation added to the quota- 
tion, as in Rom. xi. 6-8. Moreover, the words here are not 
addressed to the Church (6 xaGevdwv), they seem rather addressed 
either to recent converts or to those who do not yet believe. And, 
further, there is nothing in Isaiah about awaking from sleep or 
arising from the dead (though Alford asserts the contrary) ; nor is 
the idea, ‘‘shall give thee light,” at all the same as Isaiah’s, “the 
glory of the Lord has risen upon thee.” 

Hence other commentators find it necessary to suppose a 
reference to other passages either separately or combined with 
this, viz. Isa. ix. 2, xxvi. 19, lii. 1. Such conjectures, in fact, 
refute themselves ; for when the words of a prophet are so com- 
pletely changed, we can no longer speak of a quotation, and dye 
would be quite out of place. Nor can we overlook the fact that 
the point of the connexion seems to lie in the word émugaivcet. 

Others have adopted Jerome’s suggestion as to an apocryphal 
source, some even going so far as to suggest the actual name of 
the book, Epiphanius naming the Prophecy of Elijah; George 
Syncellus, a book of Jeremiah ; the margin of Codex G, the Book 
of Enoch. It is hardly sufficient to allege against this view that 
Aéyet always introduces a quotation from canonical Scripture. But 
6 Xpuords is inconsistent with the idea of an O.T. apocryphon, 
and apart from that the whole expression has a Christian 
stamp. 

Meyer endeavours to reconcile the assertion that A€ye intro- 
duces a citation from canonical Scripture with the fact that this is 
not such a citation, by the supposition that by a lapse of memory 
the apostle cites an apocryphon as if it were canonical. But was 
St. Paul’s knowledge of the Scriptures so imperfect that he 
did not know, for example, that the promised deliverer is never 
in the O.T. distinctly called 6 Xpuords ? 

Others conjecture that it may be a saying of Christ Himself 
that is quoted. The use of 6 Xpiords in the third person is not 
inconsistent with this ; nor, again, the fact that St. Paul does not 
elsewhere quote the sayings of Christ. Why might he not do it 
once? But it is impossible to supply 6 Xpiords or Iyocds as a 
subject without something to suggest it. It is too forced to meet 
this by taking ¢és as the subject. 

The difficulties disappear when we recognise that A¢yee need 


158 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [v.14 


not be taken to mean 6 @eds A€yet,—an assertion which has been 
shown in iv. 8 to be untenable. It means “it says,” or “it 
is said,” and the quotation may probably be from some liturgical 
formula or hymn,—a supposition with which its rhythmical char- 
acter agrees very well. That the words were suggested originally 
by Isa. lx. 1 may be admitted. Theodoret mentions this opinion: 
Twes O€ TOV EppnverTay epacay TvevpaTiKAs xapitos awwfévras Twas 
Warpots ovyypaya, referring to 1 Cor. xiv. 26. He seems to 
have taken this from Severianus (Cramer, vi. 197), who concludes : 
dyAov ovy ote ev Evi ToUTWY TOV TrvEvpaTiKOY WaApav ToL Tpomevyxav 
éketTo TOvTO O éuvypovevoey (COMpare also Origen in the Catena, 
i6.). Stier adopts a similar view, but endeavours to save the sup- 
posed limitation of the use of Aéye by saying that in the Church 
the Spirit speaks. As there are in the Church prophets and pro- 
phetic speakers and poets, so there are liturgical expressions and 
hymns which are holy words. Comparing vv. 18, 19, Col. ili. 16, 
it may be said that the apostle is here giving us an example of this 
self-admonition by new spiritual songs. 

The view that the words are from a liturgical source is adopted 
by Barry, Ewald, Braune, v. Soden, the last-mentioned suggesting 
(after some older writers) that they may have been used in the 
reception after baptism. Compare 1 Tim. iii. 16, which is not 
improbably supposed to have a similar source. 

éyeupe is the reading of a decisive preponderance of authorities, § A BD 
GK LP, apparently all uncials, éyecpae being found only in cursives. In the 
other places where the word occurs (Matt. ix. 5; Mark ii. 9, 11, iii. 3, 
v. 41; Luke v. 23; John v. 8), &yerpe is likewise supported by preponderant 
authority, a third variation éyelpov occurring in some places. Fritzsche on 
Mark ii. 9 has ably defended the propriety of @ye.pe, which is not to be 
understood either as active for middle or as if ceavréy were understood, but 
as a ‘formula excitandi,” ‘‘ Up!” like dye, émevye (Eurip. Orest. 789). So 
in Eurip. 7p. Aul. 624, éyerp’ ddedPijs Ep’ buévacov edrvxws ; and Aristoph. 
Ran. 340, tyepe proyéas Aaumddas ev xepol . . . Twdoowv. This use 
is limited to the single form é@yepe. @yetpat, says Fritzsche, would mean 
‘excita mihi aliquem.” : 

a@vaorta for dvdornfi=Acts xii. 7. This short form is also found in 


Theocritus and Menander. Compare xardBa, Mark xv. 30 (in some MSS. 
including A C), and dvdBa, Apoc. iv. I. 


kal émupatcer cor 6 Xpiotds. eripavoe: from émiupavoxw, which 
is found several times in Job (Sept.) ; D* de and MSS. mentioned 
by Chrysostom and by Jerome read ézupavcets tod Xpicrod. 
Jerome (quoted by Tisch.) relates that he heard some one disput- 
ing in the church, in order to please the people with something 
new, saying that this was said with reference to Adam, who was 
buried on Calvary, and that when the Lord on the Cross hung 
above his grave, the prophecy was fulfilled, ‘Rise Adam, who 
sleepest, and rise from the dead and Christ shall touch thee, 
erupavoet,” t.e. that by the touch of Christ’s body and blood he 


V. 15, 16] GENERAL EXHORTATION 159 


should be brought to life. This story probably indicates how this 
reading arose. 

15-21. General exhortation to regulate their conduct with wis- 
dom, to make their market of the opportunity, and, avoiding riotous 
indulgence, to express their joy and thankfulness in spiritual songs. 

15. Bdéete obv dkpiBOs THs TepiTratette. 

This is the reading of §* B 17 and some other mss., Origen, and prob- 
ably Chrys. But mas dxp.Bds, 8° ADGKLP, with most mss., Vulg. 
Syr. (both) Arm., Theodoret, Jerome, etc. Chrysostom has dxpi8ds mos in 
text and comment, but in the latter mws dxpiBws occurs presently after, also 
Bdérere ws Tweprmaretre. As mws axp. is the common later reading, it is 
probable that its occurrence in the second place in the comm. is due to a 
copyist of Chrys. The variation in the original text may have arisen from an 
accidental omission of rws after -8ws (it is actually om. in Eth.), it being 
there inserted in the wrong place. In Eadie’s comment. ed. 2, mus is 
similarly om. 


ovy is resumptive, “to return to our exhortation.” Some, how- 
ever, regard this as an inference from what immediately precedes, 
viz. “since ye are enlightened by Christ” (Ewald, Braune) ; but as 
the substance of the exhortation is clearly the same as in vv. 8-10, 
it is unnecessary to look on this as an inference from ver. 14. 
Harless follows Calvin, who says: “Si aliorum discutere tenebras 
fideles debent fulgore suo, quanto minus caecutire debent in pro- 
prio vitae instituto?” But this would seem to require an 
emphatic atroé, 

On axpiBds compare Acts xxvi. 5, Kata tiv axpiBeorarny 
aipeow. As wepuraretre is a fact, the indicative is correctly used, 
and is exactly parallel to 1 Cor. iii. 11, €xaoros BAerérw was 
érouxodopet. Most commentators expound the other reading. 
Fritzsche’s view of this has been generally adopted (Ofuscula, p. 
209 n.), viz. that dxp. wep. = “ tanquam ad regulam et amussim vitam 
dirigere,” the whole meaning z@s 76 dxpiBds épyaleabe = “ videte 
quomodo circumspecte vivatis h. e. quomodo illud efficiatis, ut 
provide vivatis.” He exposes the fallacy of Winer’s contention 
(subsequently abandoned), that the words were a concise expression 
for BX€érere was TepuTareire, det b& tuas axpiBds wepiratetvy. He 
thinks the reading axpiBGs was was a correction on the part of 
those who, being familiar with ax. Brérev, «idévar, etc., were 
offended with axp. wepirarety, which is, he says, most suitable to 
this place. 

pi) @s doopo, explaining was, and so dependent, like it, on 
BXérere, hence the subjective negation (Winer, § 55. 1). Then 
mepit@atouvres need not be supplied. 

16. éfayopalépevor tov Koarpdv. “Seizing the opportunity,” 
“making your market to the full from the opportunity of this life” 
(Ramsay, St. Paul as Traveller, etc., p. 149). The same expres- 
sion is used in Col. iv. 5 with special reference to conduct 


160 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS  [V¥.17,18 


towards those outside the Church, év codia wepiraretre mpds Tovs 
ew. tov. e€ay. Lit. “ buying up for yourselves,” ég being intens- 
ive, and corresponding to our “up.” xapov dpets ayopaere occurs 
Dan. ii. 8, but in a different sense, viz. “‘ wish to gain time.” More 
parallel as to sense is Kkepdavréov 7d zapdv, Antonin. vi. 26. 
eEayopatw, in the sense “buy up,” is found in Polyb. iii. 42. 2, 
eEnydpace wap avrav Ta Te povdsvAa wAoia wavta, K.7.A. In Marte. 
Polyc. 2 it has the wholly different sense: “ buy off,” dua puds dpas 
THY aidviov KoAacw e€aryopalopuevot, Chrysostom says the expres- 
sion is obscure, and he illustrates it by the case of robbers entering 
a rich man’s house to kill him, and when he gives much to purchase 
his life, we say that he éényépacev éavtdv. So, he proceeds, “ thou 
hast a great house, and true faith ; they come on thee to take all ; 
give whatever one asks, only save ro xepadavor, that is tyv mio.” 
This completely ignores tov karpov. Oecum. is more to the point: 
6 k. ovK eotw nuilvy BéBaos . . . aydpacov ovy avtov Kal Toincov 
idvov. So Theodore Mops., and so Severianus in Cazena, adding 
that “the present opportunity SovAcde tots movypots, buy it up, 
therefore, so as to use it for piety.” But it is futile to press the 
idea of ‘‘purchasing,” or the force of é&, so as to inquire from 
whom the opportunity is to be bought, as “from evil men” 
(Bengel, cf. Severianus, above), “the devil,” Calvin ; or what price 
is to be paid (ra wavra, Chrys.). The price is the pains and effort 
required. 

Stu ai Hepat movnpat eiow. So that it is the more necessary Tov 
katpov e€ay. The moments for sowing on receptive soil in such 
evil days being few, seize them when they offer themselves. 
movnpat is “morally evil,” not ‘distressful” (Beza, Hammond, 
etc.),—an idea foreign to the context, which contrasts the walk of 
the Christians with that of the heathen. 

17. 81a todro. Viz. because it is necessary to walk axpiBds. 
ei yap éoeabe adpoves axpiBas od wepuratynoere, Schol. ap. Cat. Not 
“because the days are evil,” which was only mentioned in support 
of efay. Tov Kaipov. 

py ylvecbe adpoves. ‘Do not show yourselves senseless.” 
appwv differs from dcodos as referring rather to imprudence or folly 
in action. 

GANG ouviere.n So 8 ABP 17, 672, etc. Rec. has cumevres, 
with D°E KL and most mss., It. Vulg. Syr-Pesh.; while D*G 
have ovviovres, which Meyer, with little reason, prefers as the less 
usual form. 

Somewhat stronger than ywooxere, “understand.” ti 71d 
O€dnpa, cf. ver. Io. 

18. kat ph peOdoxeobe oivw. Kai marks a transition from the 
general to the particular, as in elare rots pabytais attod Kat TO 
(lérpw, Mark xvi. 7; maca 7% “Iovdaia ywpa, kai ot ‘IeporoAvupirat, 


V. 18] GENERAL EXHORTATION 161 


Mark i. 5. Fritzsche, in the latter place, remarks that xa/ in these 
instances is not = “‘imprimis,” but ‘‘scriptores rem singularem jam 
comprehensam communiori propterea insuper adjiciunt copulae 
adjumento, quod illam tanquam gravem impensius inculcatam 
volunt lector.” 

It is out of the question to suppose any reference here to such 
abuses as are mentioned in 1 Cor. xi., which would have called for 
a more explicit censure. 

év @ éoTw dowtia. év @, not oive, but peMoKerfa oive. 
dowria, ‘‘a word in which heathen ethics said much more than 
they intended or knew,” Trench. It is the character of the 
agwros “ perditus,” thus defined by Aristotle: tots axparets Kal eis 
axoAaciay damravypods acdtovs KaAdotpey (Lith. Wie. iv. 1). In 
classical authors the adjective varies in sense between “lost” and 
“prodigal,” the latter, “qui servare nequit,” being the more 
common. ‘The substantive occurs also Tit. i. 6; 1 Pet. iv. 4; 
and the adverb Luke xv. 13, where see note. The Vulg. renders 
by “‘luxuria, luxuriose,” words which in later Latin acquired the 
sense of profligate living. In medizval Latin “luxuria” = “lascivi- 
ousness.” But the meaning in the N.T. is clearly “‘dissoluteness.” 
The remark of Clem. Alex., 76 adoworov tis péOns bia THS aowrias 
aiviédpevos, was natural to a Christian writer accustomed to the 
technical use of owfev, but no such idea seems implied in the use 
of the word in N.T. aowros is not derived from cw, but from 
cow (Hom. ZZ, ix. 393, 424, 681). 

GAG mAypotobe ev mvedpatr. The antithesis is not directly 
between oivos and zvedua, as the order of the words shows, but 
between the two states. Meyer remarks that the imperative 
passive is explained by the possibility of resistance ; but what other 
form could be employed? The signification is middle, for they 
must co-operate. ‘The present tense cannot very well be expressed 
in the English rendering; “be filled” is after all better than 
“become filled,” which would suggest that the filling had yet to 
begin. év mvevpare is usually understood of the Holy Spirit, ¢v 
being instrumental (Meyer), or both instrumental and expressing 
the content of the filling (Ellicott, Macpherson, aZ.). But the use 
of év with zAnpdw to express the content with which a thing is filled 
would be quite unexampled. Phil. iv. 19 is not parallel (Ellicott 
admits it to be doubtful) ; still iess Col. 11, 10, iv. 12 (where, more- 
over, the true reading is rexAnpodopypévor). Plutarch’s érerArjpwro 
ev paxapioryte (Plac. Phil. i. 7. 9) is not parallel; the words there 
(which are used of the Deity) mean ‘‘is complete in blessedness,” 
the alternative being “something is wanting to Him.” Meyer, 
indeed, says that as St. Paul uses genitive, dative, and accusative 
(Col. i. 9) with rAypéw, we cannot be surprised at his using év,—a 
singular argument. The genitive and dative are both classical ; the 

rep 


162 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [v.19 


accusative in Col. i. 9 is not accusative of material. But such 
variety in no way justifies the use of év, the meaning of which is 
wholly unsuitable to the idea “filled with.” The nearest approach 
to this would be the instrumental sense (adopted by Meyer, @/, in 
i. 23). Where the material is only regarded as the means of 
making full, it may conceivably be spoken of as an instrument ; but 
this would require the agent to be expressed, and, besides, would 
be quite inappropriate to the Holy Spirit. For these reasons the 
rendering mentioned in the margin RV. (Braune’s also) is not to 
be hastily rejected. ‘“‘ Be filled in spirit,” not in your carnal part, 
but in your spiritual. Alford attempts to combine both ideas, 
“let this be the region in, and the ingredient with which you are 
filled,” zvedua being the Christian’s “own spirit dwelt in and 
informed by the Holy Spirit of God.” ‘This seems an impossible 
combination, or rather confusion of two distinct ideas. Macpher- 
son, in order to secure a contrast between the ‘stimulation of 
much wine and the stimulation of a large measure of the Spirit,” 
represents the apostle as saying, “conduct yourselves like those 
that are possessed, but see to it that the influence constraining 
you is that of the Holy Spirit.” It is hardly too much to say that 
this is a veductio ad absurdum of the supposed antithesis. There 
is nothing about excitement, nor does St. Paul anywhere sanction 
such conduct. 

19. Aahodvtes EauTois. On éavrois=adAAryXois, see iv. 32. Not 
“to yourselves,” AV.; ‘“‘meditantes vobiscum,” Michaelis. Com- 
pare Pliny’s description, “carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere secum 
invicem” (€avrots) (Z~p. x. 97). But the reference cannot be 
specially to religious services, as the context shows; cf. Col. 
ili. 16. 

ahpots kal Guvorg kal w@Sats mveupatikats = Col. ili. 16, except 
that the copulas are there wanting. The distinction between these 
words is not quite agreed upon. wWadpods from Waddeuw, primarily 
the plucking of the strings, is used by classical authors to mean 
the sound of the harp, and hence any strain of music. The Schol. 
on Aristoph. Aves, 218, says: Wadpmos Kupiws, 6 rHS KiOdpas 7XOS. 
Cyrilli Zex. and Basil on Ps, xxix. define it: Adyos povctkds, drav 
cipvO pws Kata Tors appoviKods Adyous pds TO Opyavov Kpoverat, And 
to the same effect Greg. Nyss. It occurs frequently in the Sept. 
not always of sacred music, e.g. 1 Sam. xvi. 18 of young David, 
elddta Tov Wadporv, 7.e. playing on the harp. 

tyvos is properly a song of praise of some god or hero, 
Arrian says: vpvor pev és tovs Oeovs rovodytat, eratvor be és avOpu- 
mous (Lxped. Alex. iv. 11. 3). Augustine’s definition is well 
known: ‘‘Oportet ut, si sit hymnus, habeat haec tria, et laudem, 
et Dei, et canticum.” Hence tyveiv, to praise by a hymn. 

woy, from deidw, adw, seems to have originally meant any kind 


V. 20, 21] GENERAL EXHORTATION 163 


of song, but was specially used of lyric poetry. It is frequently 
used in Sept. (Ex. xv. 1; Deut. xxxi..19-22; Judg. v. 1, 12, etc.). 


mvevpatixais is omitted by Bde, and bracketed by Lachmann. Not only 
1s it attested by superabundant authority, but it seems essential as a further 
definition of the preceding word or words. Probably it is to be taken (as by 
Hofmann and Soden) with all three. éy is prefixed to Wadpots in B P17 
67°, Vulg., Jerome, and admitted to the margin by WH. After mveup. A 
adds év xdpirt, clearly from Col. iii. 16. 


adovtes Kal Waddovtes TH kapdia Suav TO Kuplo, 
Rec. has év before 77 x., with KL most mss., Syr-Harcl. Arm., while 
Lachm. reads év tats xapdlas, with NCA DGP, It. Vulg. Boh. Syr-Pesh. 
Harcl. mg. But %* B have the singular without év, and so Origen. In 


Col. iii. 16 all MSS. have év, and most MSS. and Vss. the plural, D¢ K L 
reading the singular. 


Chrysostom interprets év TH xapdia as meaning “heartily or 
sincerely”; peta cuvécews mpooéyxovrtes, 7.e. from the heart, not 
merely with the mouth. But this would be é 77s xapdéas without 
bpov. 

20. edxapiotodvtes mavtote Smép mdvtwy, “Even,” says Chrysos- 
tom, “‘if it be disease or poverty. It is nothing great or wonderful 
if when prosperous you give thanks. What is sought is that when 
in affliction you do so. Nay, why speak of afflictions here? we 
must thank God for hell,” explaining that we who attend are much 
benefited by the fear of hell, which is placed as a bridle upon us: 
a profoundly selfish view, to which he was no doubt led only by 
the wish to give the fullest meaning to rdvrwyv. Jerome is more 
sober: “Christianorum virtus est, etiam in his quae adversa 
putantur, referre gratias creatori.” But St. Paul is not specially 
referring to adversity ; on the contrary, the context shows that 
what he had particularly in his mind was occasion of rejoicing. 
Theodoret, however, takes zavtwy as masc., that we must thank 
God for others who have received Divine blessing. But there is 
nothing in the context to favour this. 

év évépatt Tod Kupiou qpav “Incod Xptotod. When | speak of 
doing something in the name of another, this may mean either 
that I do it as representing him, that is, by his authority, or if the 
action is entirely my own, that I place its significance only in its 
reference to him. When an apostle commands in the name of 
Christ, this is in the former sense ; when I pray or give thanks in 
the same name, it is as His disciple and dependent on Him. 

T@ Gc@ kat Marpi, see i. 3. There is no need to refer zarpi 
here to Christ ; the article rather leads to the sense, ‘God, who is 
also the Father,” namely, of us. 

21. brotaccdpevor ddAHAoLs ev PSBw Xprotod, 


Xpicrod with SN ABLP, Vulg. Syr. (both) Boh. etc. Qeod of Rec. is in 
most cursives, and D has Xpiorod Incod; G,’ Inood Xpicrovd. As pbBos Xpiorot 


164 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [V. 21 


is not found elsewhere, copyists naturally wrote 480s Qeod, which was 
familiar. 

“In the fear of Christ,” ze. with reference for Him as the 
guiding motive. 

“Submitting yourselves.” The connexion of this with the preced- 
ing seems rather loose. Ellicott says: “the first three [clauses] 
name three duties, more or less specially in regard to God, the 
last a comprehensive moral duty in regard to man,” suggested by 
the thought of the humble and loving spirit which is the principle 
of edxapioria. This does not meet the difficulty of the connexion. 
Alford refers back to py peOvox., “not blustering, but being sub- 
ject,” and Eadie is inclined to the same view; but this is forced, 
and requires us to interpolate something which is not indicated by 
anything in the text. Much the same may be said of Findlay’s 
view. He illustrates by reference to the confusion in the Church 
meetings in the Corinthian Church (1 Cor. xiv. 26-34), ‘when he 
urges the Asian Christians to seek the full inspiration of the 
Spirit, and to give free utterance in song to the impulses of their 
new life, he adds this word of caution.” This supplies too much, 
and besides, izotacadpevor would be an unsuitable word to express 
such readiness to give way in the matter of prophesying as St. 
Paul directs in 1 Cor. Bloomfield, taking a similar view, supposes 
that what is insisted on is subordination to a leading authority. 
This preserves the sense of wzorz., but not of dAAyAos. Blaikie 
refers back to ver. 15. 

In considering the connexion it must be borne in mind that 
troraoceoOe in the next verse is in all probability not genuine, so 
that the verb has to be supplied from troracodpevor. There is 
therefore no break between vy. 21 and 22. Further, the whole 
following section, which is not a mere digression, depends on the 
thought expressed in this clause of which it is a development. To 
suppose a direct connexion with zAnpotede ev wv. does not yield a 
suitable sense. The connexion with the preceding context is, in | 
fact, only in form, that with what follows is in substance. From 
iv. 32 we have a series of precepts expressed in imperatives and 
participles depending on yiveoOe, repuraretre ; Soxipdlortes, eEayopa- 
Copevor, AaAovvres. Ver. 18 interrupts the series by a direct im- 
perative, as in vv. 3ff., 12 ff. St. Paul elsewhere (Rom. xii. 9) 
carries on in participles a series of precepts begun in a different 
construction, dzoorvyoivtes 1O movnpov, «.t.A. It is therefore 
quite natural that here, where the participles AaAoivres, edyap., 
though not put for imperatives, yet from their connexion involve 
a command, he should make the transition to the new section 
easy by continuing to use the participle. Comp. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 
iii. tr. Meyer admits that it is no objection to this that in what 
follows we have only the imdragis of the wives, while the tzaxoy of 


V. 22] SPECIAL INJUNCTIONS 165 


the children and servants in ch. vi. cannot be connected with 
trotacc.; for in classical writers also, after the prefixing of such 
absolute nominatives which refer collectively to the whole, often 
the discourse passes over to one part only. But he thinks that 
in that case ai yuvaixes would necessarily have a special verb cor- 
relative with izor. It is not easy to see the force of this. 

22-83. Special injunctions to husbands and wives. Wives to be 
subject to their husbands, husbands to love their wives. This rela- 
tionship ts illustrated by that of Christ and the Church. As Christ 
is the Head of the Church, which ts subject to Christ, so the husband 
is the head of the wife, who ts to be suédzect to the husband ; and 
Christ?s love for the Church is to be the pattern of the man’s love 
Jor his wife. The analogy, indeed, ts not perfect, for Christ is not 
only the Head of the Church which is His body, but is also the 
Saviour of it ; but this does not affect the purpose of the comparison 
here. 

22, al yuvatkes Tots iSlors dvSpdow &s TO Kupiw. So without a 
verb B, Clement (when citing vv. 21-25), Jerome’s Greek MSS. His 
note is, “‘ Hoc quod in Latinis exemplaribus additum est: swdditae 
sint, in Graecis Codd. non habetur.” izoraccécOwoav is added 
after dvopaow in SAP 17 a/. Vulg. Goth. Arm. Boh. etc., and 
Clement (when citing ver. 22 only). wtzoraccecbe in K L most 
mss., Syr. (both), Chrys. D G also have irordoceo6e, but after 
yevatxes. Lachmann adopted troraccéofwoar, but later critical 
editors read without the verb. The testimony of Jerome, who 
knew of no Greek MSS. with the verb, is very important. No 
reason can be imagined for its omission if it had been in the text 
originally, whereas the reason for its insertion is obvious, and was 
stated even by Erasmus: ‘“‘adjectum, ut apparet, quo et sensus 
sit lucidior, et capitulum hoc separatim legi queat, si res ita 
postulet.” The latter reason is particularly to be noted. The 
diversity in the MSS. which have the verb is also of weight. The 
shorter reading agrees well with the succinct style of St. Paul in 
his practical admonitions. 

idcos is more than a mere possessive, yet does not imply an 
antithesis to ‘other men”; it seems rather to emphasise the rela- 
tionship, as in the passage quoted from Stobaeus by Harless (//or7/. 
p. 22): Ocavd % IlvOayopixn pirccodos éepwrnbeioa ti mparov ety 
ywaikt .70 70 idiw, ey, adpéoxew dvdpi. Compare also Acta Thomae, 
p. 24 (ed. Thilo): otrws ef as rodiv xpdvov cvpBidcaca TH idiw avdpi. 
That the word was not required to prevent misconception of 
avépact is shown by its absence in the parallel, Col. iii. 18. 

os T3 Kupiw, not “as to their lord,” which would have been 
expressed in the plural, but “as to the Lord Christ,” ‘as” not 
meaning in the same manner as, but expressing the view they are 
to take of their submission ; compare vi. 6, 7. ‘‘ Sudjectio quae ab 


166 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS  [V. 28, 24 


uxore praestatur viro simul praestatur ipsi Domino, Christo,” 
Bengel. So Chrysostom: 6rav treikys TO avdpi, os TO Kupio 
dovrActovca HyoU weiGer Oar. 

23. dt. dvijp €ott Kea THs yuvatkds. Assigns the reason of 
ws TO Kupiw. The article before dévyp in Rec. has no uncial 
authority in its favour. ‘A husband is head of his wife.” 

as kal, “as also.” Compare 1 Cor. xi. 3, wavtds avdpos 7 
kepada 6 Xpiotds éort, Kepady Sé yuvatkds 6 avyp, Kehady dé Tod 
Xpiotov 6 Weds. 

5 Xpiotés Kepadh THs éexkAnalas adtés cwthip Tod cdpatos. 

Rec. has cal airés €ore o., with X°D'°K LP most mss., Syr. (both) 
Arm. But the shorter reading is that of S* ABD*G, Vulg. The added 
words are an obvious gloss. Boh. has éo7e without «al, and Aeth. cal with- 
out €o7t. 

The apostle having compared the headship of the husband to 
that of Christ, could not fail to think how imperfect the analogy 
was; he therefore emphatically calls attention to the point of 
difference ; as if he would say: “‘ A man is the head of his wife, even 
as Christ also is head of the Church, although there is a vast 
difference, since He is Himself the Saviour of the body, of which 
He is the head ; but notwithstanding this difference,” etc. Calvin 
already proposed this view: “‘ Habet quidem id peculiare Christus, 
quod est servator ecclesiae ; nihilominus sciant mulieres, sibi maritos 
praeesse, Christi exemplo, utcunque pari gratia non polleant.” So 
Bengel concisely: ‘Vir autem non est servator uxoris; in eo 
Christus excellit; hine sed sequitur.” Chrys. Theoph. and 
Oecum., however, interpret this clause as equally applicable to 
the husband. kal yap 7 Kepady Tod cwpmatos Gwrnpia éoriv, Chrys. 
And more fully Theoph.: @orep cal 6 Xpiords THs exxAnoias dv 
KepaAn, mpovoetrat aitys Kal ower’ oUTW ToivUY Kal 6 avnp, TwTHpP TOU 
TUpaTos avTOV, TOYTETTL THS yuvatkds. TOs ovV OvK ddeiAer UroTdo- 
cec$ar tH KepardW TO copa, TH Tpovoovpery Kal cwlovcn. So 
Hammond and many others. But atrdés cannot refer to any. 
subject but that which immediately precedes, viz. 6 Xpuoros. 
Moreover, to use c®pua without some qualification for the wife 
would be unintelligible; nor is owrnp ever used in the N.T. 
except of Christ or God. 

24, GAG ds H exxAnola brotdccetar TH XpioT@, otTws Kat ai 
yuvatkes Tots dvipdo.v. There is much difference of opinion as to 
the force to be assigned to aAAd. Olshausen takes it as intro- 
ducing the proof drawn from what precedes; and similarly De 
Wette, “ But (aber) if the man is your head,” a sense which aAAd 
(which is not=6é) never has. Eadie gives the word “an anti- 
thetic reference,” such as d\Ad sometimes has after an implied 
negative. He interprets: “do not disallow the marital headship, 
for it is a divine institution,—éAAd,—but,” etc. He refers for 


V. 25, 26] SPECIAL INJUNCTIONS 167 


this use of dAdd to Luke vii. 7 ; John vii. 49 ; Rom. iii. 31, viii. 37; 
1 Cor. vi. 8, ix. 12. The fact that in most of these cases we might 
not incorrectly render ‘‘ Nay,” or “‘ Nay, on the contrary,” shows 
how unlike the present passage they are. Nor are 2 Cor. viii. 7, 
xiii, 4; 1 Tim. i. 15, 16, or the other passages which he cites, at 
all parallel ; and the negative to which he supposes dAAa to refer 
(“do not disallow,” etc.) is not even hinted at in the text. His 
objection to the interpretation here adopted is that it sounds like 
a truism. Harless and others take a\Aa to be simply resumptive ; 
but the main thought has not been interrupted, and there is no 
reason for rejecting its adversative force. Hofmann, like Eadie, 
reads into the text an objection which dAAd repels, “but even 
where the husband is not this (namely, a cwrip tod o., making 
happy his wife, as Christ the Church), yet,” etc. The view here 
preferred is adopted by Meyer, Alford, Ellicott, Braune, Moule, etc. 

év mavtt. It is presupposed that the authority of the husband 
is in accordance with their relation as corresponding to that of 
Christ to the Church. “as eioeBéou vopoberav wpocreeke TO ev 
mavtt,” Theodoret. 


@omep of the Rec. is the reading of D°KL and most mss.; but as, 
NAD*GP 17 67% etc. (B omits.) 

ldtous is prefixed to dvdpdow by AD*°K LP, Vss., but om. by §BD*G 
17 67%. It has clearly been introduced from ver. 22. 


25. ot dvdpes, dyamate Tas yuvatkas. 


Rec. adds éavray, with DKL, Syr. etc.; but 8 AB 17, Clem. (when 
giving the whole passage) omit. G adds budv. 


Kabws Kal 6 Xpiotds, x.t.4. ‘Si omnia rhetorum argumenta in 
unum conjicias, non tam persuaseris conjugibus dilectionem 
mutuam quam hic Paulus” (Bugenhagen). Meyer also well 
observes: “It is impossible to conceive a more lofty, more ideal 
regulation of married life, and yet flowing immediately from the 
living depth of the Christian consciousness, and, therefore, capable 
of practicable application to all concrete relations.” Chrysostom’s 
comment is very fine: ‘‘ Hast thou seen the measure of obedience? 
hear also the measure of love. Wouldst thou that thy wife should 
obey thee as the Church doth Christ? have care thyself for her, as 
Christ for the Church; and if it should be needful that thou 
shouldest give thy life for her, or be cut to pieces a thousand times, 
or endure anything whatever, refuse it not; yea, if thou hast 
suffered this thou hast not done what Christ did, for thou doest 
this for one to whom thou wert already united, but He for her who 
rejected Him and hated Him . . . He brought her to His feet by 
His great care, not by threats nor fear nor any such thing; so do 
thou conduct thyself towards thy wife.” 

26. iva atti dyidon kabapioas 76 Noutp® Tod Udatos ev pratt. 


168 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [v. 26 


The immediate purpose of éavrov rapédwxey, ver. 25. dyidoy is 
clearly not to be limited to ‘‘consecration” ; it includes the actual 
sanctification or infusion of holiness. It is the positive side, 
xaGapicas expressing the negative, the purification from her former 
sins. But as the remoter object is va rapacrjoy, the ceremonial 
idea of ay:afeww appears to be the prominent one here. Logically, 
kaapilew precedes dyvalew, chronologically they are coincident ; 
cf. 1 Cor. vi. 11, dAAG aeAovoacbe, GAAA HyiccOyre. The tense 
of kalapioas by no means requires the translation ‘‘after He had 
purified ” (cf. i. 9), which would probably have been expressed by 
a passive participle agreeing with atryy, indeed xafapifwv would 
have been quite inappropriate. 

7 Aovtpé tr. ¥. “ By the bath of water,” distinctly referring to 
baptism, and probably with an allusion in Aouzpé to the usual bath 
of the bride before the marriage; the figure in the immediate 
context being that of marriage. 

év pnyatt. The first question is as to the connexion. By 
Augustine the phrase is supposed to qualify 7@ Aovtpd rod vd., 
“‘accedit verbum ad elementum et fit sacramentum.” 

But as the combination is strange, and neither 7d Aourpdv nor 
To vowp can form with é fnpare a single notion (like 7 riots é& 
Xp.), this would require the article to be repeated. The interpre- 
tation, “the bath resting on a command” (Storr, Peile, Klopper), 
would require év fp. Xpiorod. Meyer, following Jerome, connects 
the words with ayacy, “having purified with the bath of water, 
may sanctify her by the word.” ‘The order of the words is strongly 
against this, and, besides, we should expect some addition to 
xa0ap., which should suggest the spiritual signification of “ purify- 
ing with water.” 

It is therefore best connected with xafapicas. But as to the 
meaning? Alford, Eadie, Ellicott, Meyer take pjua to mean the 
gospel or preached word taught preliminary to baptism. pyya is, 
no doubt, used in this sense (not in Acts x. 37 but) Rom. x. 17, 
priya. Xpiorod 5 but there it is defined by Xpucrod, as in ver. 8 by 
THs wioTews ; indeed, fyya is there used, not because of any special 
appropriateness, but for the sake of the quotation. Elsewhere we 
have pjya Ocod, Eph. vi. 17. It is far, indeed, from being correct 
to say that “the gospel” is “the usual meaning of the Greek 
term,” as Eadie states, referring, in addition to the passages 
mentioned above, to Heb. vi. 5 (where the words are @cov pia): 
Acts X. 44, Ta pyyata tatra: xi. 14, AaAnoE Pyywata pds oe. In 
these last two places it is obvious that para means simply 
“words” or “sayings,” as in Acts xxvi. 25, where St. Paul says of 
his speech before Festus, aA7n6eéas Kat cwppoovvijs pyyata amopbey- 
yope. See also Acts ii. 14, évwticacbe ra pjpara pov. Needless 
to say that pyua is used of single sayings very frequently. There 


Vv. 27] SPECIAL INJUNCTIONS 169 


may be even zovypor pjya or épyov pjya (not to mention cases where 
pjpa is used for “a thing mentioned”: see on Luke i. 65). That 
the word is most frequently used, not to signify a Divine or sacred 
saying, but where the connexion implies such a saying, is simply a 
result of the fact that there was little occasion (in the Epp. none) 
to refer to other fyjyata. There is no exaniple of fa by itself 
meaning “the gospel” or anything like this. Had it the article 
here, indeed, there would be good reason for maintaining this 
interpretation. 

The Greek commentators understand f7jpa of the formula of 
baptism. zotw; says Chrysostom, év évépate rod Tlatpos xat tot 
Yiob cat rod dyfov Ivevparos. It is true, as Estius remarks, that 
if this were the sense we should expect xat fyjparos; and Harless 
adds that these definite words could hardly be referred to except 
with the article, 7 pyyarr. But although “of water and pjya” 
might, perhaps, have been expected, év is quite admissible ; com- 
pare ev érayyeAia, vi. 2. The objections from the absence of the 
article, and from the fact that Aja has not elsewhere this meaning, 
fall to the ground when we consider that it is not alleged or sup- 
posed that f7jpa of itself means the formula of baptism; it retains 
its indefinite meaning, and it is only the connexion with the refer- 
ence to baptism in the preceding words that defines what pyjya is 
intended. So Soden. Moule renders, ‘attended by, or condi- 
tioned by, an utterance,” which would agree well with this inter- 
pretation. He explains it as “the revelation of salvation embodied 
in the name of the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost.” Macpher- 
son denies the reference to baptism, and thinks it more natural to 
speak of the cleansing as effected by the bathing (“ washing,” AV.) 
rather than in the bath, especially as “‘of water” is added. ‘The 
reference is most probably to the bath of the bride before mar- 
riage.” Yes, such a reference there is; but what is it which the 
reader is expected to compare with the bridal bath? As there is 
no particle of comparison, the words imply that there is a Aotrpov 
véaros, which is compared to the bath. And surely baptism could 
not fail to be suggested by these words to the original readers. 
As to Aourpév, besides the meaning “ water for bathing,” it has the 
two senses of the English “bath,” viz. the place for bathing and 
the action ; but it does not mean “ washing.” 

27. va trapaotion adtés éaut@, x.t.A. The remoter object of 
mapéowkey depending on dywoyn, etc. The verb is used, as in 
2 Cor. xi. 2, of the presentation of the bride to the bridegroom, 
raplévov ayviv rapactncat T® Xpiotd. The interpretation, “‘ present 
as an offering” (Harless), is opposed to the context as well as 
inconsistent with éavrd. airds is the correct reading, and 
emphasises the fact that it is Christ who, as He gave Himself to 
sanctify the Church, also presents her to Himself. This presenta- 


170 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [V. 28 


tion is not complete in this life, yet Bengel correctly says: ‘‘id 
valet suo modo jam de hac vita.” 

avrds is the reading of § ABD*GL, Vulg. Syr-Harcl. etc. The Rec. 
has a’r#v, with D° K most mss., Syr-Pesh., Chrys. The latter is the read- 
ing which would most readily occur to the copyist; no copyist would be 
likely to depart from it if he had it before him, but av’rés has a peculiar 
emphasis, 

évSobov thy exkAnaiav. The tertiary predicate e&dogov is placed 
with emphasis before its substantive. Not ‘fa glorious Church,” 
but “the Church, glorious,” “that He might present the Church 
to Himself, glorious.” 

py €xoucay omihov. o7idos, which also occurs 2 Pet. li. 13, is a 
word of later Greek (Plutarch, etc.) for xyjAis ; aomAos occurs four 
times in N.T. 

ad’ va 4. Changed structure, as if tva ux éyy had preceded ; 
compare ver. 33. 

28. odtws is connected by Estius and Alford with as following : 
“So... as.” This is not forbidden by grammatical considera- 
tions ; for in spite of Hermann’s rule, that the force of ovrws is “ut 
eo confirmentur praecedentia,” it is used with reference to what 
follows, introduced by os or ozep, both in classical writers and in 
N.T. Compare tots ottws émictapévous eizrely @s ovdels dv aA)os 
dvvatto (Isocr. ap. Rost and Palm. ¢orw yap ovrws dorep otros 
evvérret, Soph. Zrach. 475, is not a good instance, for ovrws may 
ney well be referred to what precedes), And in N.T. 1 Cor. 

i. 15, ovTw O€ ws Ova updos: cf. iv. 1. But in such cases ovrws has 
some emphasis on it, and apart from that it yields a better sense 
here to take ovrws as referring to the preceding statement of 
Christ’s love for the Church. ‘‘Even so ought husbands. . .” 
If xaé is read before ot avdpes, as Treg. WH. and RV., the latter 
view is alone possible. 

The position of d¢elAovew varies in the MSS. °K L 17 and most have 
it before ol dvdpes, AD G P after. The latter group add xal before of dvdpes, 
and of the former group B17. As the position of the verb would hardly be’ 
a reason for inserting xal, it may be presumed to be genuine. 

és Ta éautdv odpata. The sense just ascertained for ovrws 
determines this to mean ‘as being their own bodies” ; and this 
agrees perfectly with what follows: “he that loveth his own wife 
loveth himself.” Moreover, although we speak of a man’s love 
for himself, we do not speak of him as loving his body or having 
an “affection” for it (Alford) ; and to compare a man’s love for his 
wife to his love (?) for his ‘‘ body,” would be to suggest a degrad- 
ing view of the wife, as, indeed, Grotius does, saying: ‘“sicut 
corpus instrumentum animi, ita uxor instrumentum viri ad res 
domesticos, ad quaerendos liberos.” Plutarch comes nearer to the 
apostle’s view: xparety de¢ tov dvdpa tis yuvaiKds, obx ws Seordryny 


V. 29, 30} SPECIAL INJUNCTIONS 17! 


KTjpatos, GAN’ ds Yuyijv codpatos, cvuraGodvta Kal cupmrepuxdta TH 
civoia. domep oily owpartos éote KndETHaL poy Sovrevovta Tais HSovats 
airov Kal tats émiOvplas’ oiTw yvvakos apyew evdppaivovta kal 
xapilopevov (Conj. Praec. p. 422, quoted by Harless). The mean- 
ing is, Even as Christ loved the Church as that which is His 
body, so also should husbands regard their wives as their own 
bodies, and love them as Christ did the Church. 

6 dyanav thy éautod yuvatka éautév dyamd. This is neither 
identical with the preceding nor an inference from it, but rather 
an explanation of as 7a éavtav cwparta. If the latter words meant, 
“as they do their own bodies,” they would fall immeasurably 
short of this. It is, however, going beyond the bounds of 
psychological truth to say that a man’s love for his wife is but 
“complying with the universal law of nature by which we all love 
ourselves,” or that it ‘is in fact self-love,” whether “a hallowed 
phasis” of it or not. If it were so, there would be no need to 
enforce it by precept. Although the husband’s love for his wife 
may be compared to what is called his love for himself, inasmuch 
as it leads him to regard her welfare as his own, and to feel all 
that concerns her as if it concerned himself, the two mental facts 
are entirely different in their essence. There is no emotion in 
self-love ; it is the product of reason, not of feeling; and it is a 
“law” of man’s nature, not in the sense of obligation (although there 
is a certain obligation belonging to it), but in the sense that it 
necessarily belongs to a rational nature. The basis of conjugal 
love is wholly different, and is to be found, not in the rational 
part of man’s nature, but in the affections. The love is reinforced 
by reflection, and made firm by the sense of duty; but it can 
never become a merely rational regard for another’s happiness, as 
“self-love” is for one’s own. 

To refer to the stirring remarks of Chrysostom above cited, 
when a man gives his life for his wife, is that an exercise of 
“self-love”? Surely no more than when a mother gives her life 
for her child. There is none of this false philosophy in the 
language of St. Paul. 

29. thy éavtod odpxa. The word is, no doubt, chosen with 
reference to the odpé pia, quoted ver. 31. It is not perhaps 
correct, however, to say that it is so chosen instead of cdma, for 
it is hardly probable that the apostle would have used cépa in 
this connexion in any case. Rather, the whole sentence is sug- 
gested by the thought of oapé pia. 

30. ott pen eopev tod odpatos attod. Rec. adds & rijs 
GapKos adrov Kai ek TOV dcTéwy avTod, 

For the insertion are 8° DGLP (K has 700 owparos for trav 
éoréwv) nearly all cursive mss., It. Vulg. Syr. (both) Arm., Iren. 
Jerome, etc. 


172 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [vV. 30 


For the omission &* A B 17 672, Boh. Eth., Method. Euthal. 
Ambrst. and apparently Origen. 


It will be seen that the MSS. which omit decidedly outweigh those that 
insert. Ellicott speaks of the testimony of & as ‘‘divided,” which seems 
a singular way of neutralising the evidence of the earlier scribe by that of a 
seventh-century corrector. 

It isan obvious suggestion that the words might have been omitted by 
homoeoteleuton. Reiche, who accepted the words (writing before the dis- 
covery of §\), rightly observes that this can hardly be admitted in the case of 
so many witnesses. He prefers to suppose that they were omitted in con- 
sequence of offence being taken at the apparently material conception 
presented; and some other critics have adopted the same view. The 
objection must have been very strong which would lead to such a deliberate 
omission. But there is no reason to suppose that the words would have 
given offence, especially considering such words as ‘‘a spirit hath not flesh 
and bones as ye see Me have,” not to mention ‘‘ eating My flesh and drinking 
My blood.” Nor do the ancient commentators indicate that any such 
difficulty was felt. Irenaeus, after quoting the words, adds: ‘‘non de 
spirituali aliquo et invisibili homine dicens haec; spiritus enim neque ossa 
neque carnes habet,” etc. Indeed, an ancient reader would be much more 
likely to regard the words as a natural expansion of wédn Tod odpuaros adrod. 
On the other hand, nothing was more likely than that the words should be 
added from recollection of the passage in Genesis, quoted in ver. 31. It is 
objected to this, that the words are not quoted with exactness, ‘‘ bone” 
preceding ‘‘flesh” in Gen. This is to assume an exactness of memory 
which is at least questionable. Once added, the ordinary copyist would, of 
course, prefer the longer text. 

As to the internal evidence, on careful consideration it will be found 
strongly in favour of the shorter text. When Christ is called the Head or 
Foundation, and the Church the Body or House, the language is that of 
analogy, z.e. it suggests, not resemblance of the objects, but of relations ; 
Christ in Himself does not resemble a Head or a Foundation-stone, but His 
relation to the Church resembles the relation of the head to the body and of 
the foundation-stone to the building. But what relation is suggested by the 
bones of Christ? Or if cwuaros be understood of the figurative or mystical 
body, what conceivable meaning can be attached to the bones thereof? 
This fundamental difficulty is not faced by any commentator. While trying 
to attach some meaning to the clause, they do not attempt to show any 
appropriateness in the language. The utmost that could be said is that the 
words express an intimate connexion; but unless this was a proverbial form of, 
expression, of which there is no evidence, this, besides losing the force of ék, 
would leave the difficulty unsolved. Moreover, the clause is so far from 
carrying out the puédy Tod o., that it introduces an entirely different figure. 
This is disguised in the AV. 

Had the words been ‘‘of His flesh and of His blood,” we might have 
understood them as alluding to the Eucharist ; and it is worth noting that 
several expositors have supposed that there is such an allusion; but the 
mention of ‘‘ flesh and bones” instead of ‘‘ flesh and blood” is fatal to 
this. 


The reader may desire to know how the omitted clause has 
been interpreted. Chrysostom, in the first instance, explains it 
of the incarnation, by which, however, Christ might rather be said 
to be “from our flesh.” It is no answer to this to say, with Estius, 
“in hac natura ipse caput est,” which is to change the figure. 


V. 31] SPECIAL INJUNCTIONS 173 


Besides, it is true of all men, not only of Christians, that in this 
sense they are of the same flesh as Christ; but this again is not 
the meaning of éx. Alford says: ‘As the woman owed her 
natural being to the man, her source and head, so we owe our 
spiritual being to Christ, our Source and Head”; and similarly 
Ellicott, Meyer, etc. Surely a strange way of saying that our 
spiritual being is derived from Christ, to say that we are from 
His bones! Others, as above mentioned, interpret of communion 
in the Eucharist (so in part Theodoret and Theophylact, also 
Harless and Olshausen). 

Not without reason did Riickert come to the conclusion that it 
was doubtful whether St. Paul had any definite meaning in the 
words at all. 

81. dvti todtou = evexey rovrov. Compare the use of avri in 
év@ dv. Then the sense will be: because a man is to love his 
wife as Christ the Church. V. Soden, however, takes ayvti tovrov 
to mean “instead of this,” viz. instead of hating (ver. 29), observ- 
ing that the conclusion of this verse returns to the main idea there, 
te. 9 é€avtod capé& See on Lk. xii. 3. 

katahetper dvOpwiros, x.t.A. A quotation from Gen. ii. 24, 
which might have been introduced by “‘as it is written”; but with 
words so familiar this was needless. 

Most commentators interpret this verse of Christ, either 
primarily or secondarily. So Jerome: “primus vates Adam hoc 
de Christo et ecclesia prophetavit ; quod reliquerit Dominus noster 
atque Salvator patrem suum Deum et matrem suam coelestem 
Jerusalem.” So many moderns, including Alford, Ellicott, Meyer, 
the last mentioned, however, referring the words to the Second 
Coming, the tense being future. Ellicott thinks this is pressing 
the tense unnecessarily, whereas it may have the ethical force of 
the future, for which he refers to Winer, § 40. 6, whose examples 
are wholly irrelevant to Ellicott’s purpose. If the passage is inter- 
preted of Christ it refers to a definite fact, and the future must have 
its future sense. Understood of Christ, the expressions av@pwzos 
for Christ, and ‘leave his father and mother,” for ‘leave His seat 
in heaven,” are so strange and so unlike anything else in St. Paul, 
that without an express intimation by the writer it is highly un- 
reasonable so to interpret them. Can we imagine St. Paul writing, 
‘Christ will leave His father and His mother and will cleave to 
His wife, the Church”? We might not be surprised at such an 
expression in a mystical writer of the Middle Ages, but we should 
certainly not recognise it as Pauline. It is, if possible, less likely 
that he should say the same thing, using av@pw7os instead of 
Xp.oros, and expect his readers to understand him. If the future 
is given its proper meaning, the expression “leaving His seat at the 
right hand of God” is inappropriate. 


174 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [v. 32 


On the other hand, the whole passage treats of the duty of 
husbands, the reference to Christ and the Church being introduced 
only incidentally for the purpose of enforcing the practical lesson. 
It was, indeed, almost inevitable that where St. Paul was so full on 
the duty of the husband, he should refer to these words in Genesis 
in their proper original meaning. This meaning being so exactly 
adapted to enforce the practical precept, to take them otherwise, 
and to suppose that they are introduced allegorically, is to break 
the connexion, not to improve it. 

There are some differences of reading. The articles before 
matépa and pytrépa are absent in B D*G, and are omitted by 
Lachm. and Treg., and bracketed by WH. Tischendorf omitted 
them in his 7th ed., but restored them in the 8th in consequence 
of the added evidence of 8. airod is added after zarépa in 
xe A D° K LP, Syr-Pesh. Boh. from LXX; not in x* B D*G 17, 
Vulg. Arm. airod is added after pnrépa in P 47, Vss. 

For pds ty yuvaixa, which is in %° B D°K L, Orig., 79 yuvackl is read 
by §* AD*G._ The readings in the Sept. also vary. 

32. 1d puotryprov TodTo péyo e€oTiv, €yw Sé héyw eis Xpiotdv Kai 
eis Thy exkAnolay. 


The second els is om. by B K and some other authorities. 


We must first determine the meaning of pvaornpiov and of peéye. 
On the former word see oni. 9. It does not mean ‘‘a mysterious 
thing or saying,” ‘fa saying of which the meaning is hidden or 
unfathomable.” As Sanday and Headlam observe (Rom. xi. 25), 
with St. Paul it is a mystery revealed. Again, as to peya, the 
English versions—not only the incorrect AV., ‘‘this is a great 
mystery,” but the grammatically correct RV., ‘this mystery is 
great ”—convey the idea that what is said is, that the mysteriousness 
is great, or, that the mystery is in a high degree a mystery. This is 
not only inconsistent with the meaning of pvorypiov, assuming, as 
it does, that “hiddenness” is the whole of its meaning (for to 
speak of a thing as in a high degree a revealed secret would be 
unintelligible), but it assigns to péya a meaning which does not 
belong to it. In English we may speak of great facility, great 
folly, simplicity, (zoAA7 pwpia, einGeia); great ignorance (zoAAH 
dyvow) ; great perplexity (7oAAj dmopia): but peyas is not so 
used, for it properly expresses magnitude, not intensity. These 
linguistic facts are sufficient to set aside a large number, perhaps 
the majority, of interpretations of the clause. The sense must be 
of this kind: “This doctrine of revelation is an important or 
profound one.” 

What, then, is the puornpiov of which St. Paul thus speaks? 
Some suppose it to be this statement about marriage, which to the 
heathen would be new. But this requires us to take Aeyw in the 


Vv. 33] SPECIAL INJUNCTIONS 175 


sense “I interpret,” or the like, which it does not admit. It is 
better to understand it as referring to the comparison of marriage 
with union of Christ with the Church. The latter clause, then, 
expressly points out that the former does not refer to marriage in 
itself, and A¢yw has the same which it frequently has in St. Paul, 
“‘T mean.” 

V. Soden takes rotro to refer to what follows: “this secret, Z.e. 
that which I am about to say as the secret sense of this sentence, is 
great, but I say it in reference to Christ and the Church,” comparing 
t Cor. xv. 51, pvornpiov ipiv A€yw. This would be very elliptical. 

Hatch translates: “this symbol (sc. of the joining of husband 
and wife into one flesh) is a great one. I interpret it as referring 
to Christ and to the Church” (Zssays, p. 61). 

The rendering of the Vulgate is: ‘“‘Sacramentum hoc magnum 
est ; ego autem dico in Christo et in ecclesia.” There are several 
other places in which pvorypiov is rendered “sacramentum,” viz. 
Bp. i.79; ii. 35195, Collis 27 ;°n Timi. 16% Rev. i) 20: 

It was, however, no doubt, the rendering in this passage which 
led to marriage being entitled a sacrament. In an encyclical 
of 1832 (quoted by Eadie) occurs the statement, ‘ Marriage is, 
according to St. Paul’s expression, a great sacrament in Christ and 
in the Church.” But the greatest scholars of the Church of Rome 
have rejected this view of the present passage. Cardinal Caietan 
says: “ Non habes ex hoc loco, prudens lector, a Paulo conjugium 
esse sacramentum. Non enim dixit esse sacramentum, sed mys- 
terium.” And to the same effect Estius. Erasmus also says: 
“*Neque nego matrimonium esse sacramentum, sed an ex hoc 
loco doceri possit proprie dici sacramentum quemadmodum 
baptismus dicitur, excuti volo.” As to the question whether 
marriage is properly to be reckoned a sacrament or not, this is 
very much a matter of definition. If sacrament is defined as in 
the Catechism of the Churches of England and Ireland and by 
other Reformed Churches, it is not, for it was not instituted by 
Christ. Even if we take Augustine’s definition, ‘‘a visible sign of 
an invisible grace,” there would be a difficulty. But if every rite 
or ceremony which either is, or includes in it, a sign of something 
spiritual, is to be called a sacrament, then marriage is well entitled 
to the name, especially in view of the apostle’s exposition here. 
But to draw any inference of this kind from the present passage is 
doubly fallacious, for this is not the meaning of puoriprov ; and, 
secondly, St. Paul expressly states that it is not to marriage that 
he applies the term, but to his teaching about Christ and the 
Church ; or, according to the interpretation first mentioned, to the 
meaning of the verse from Genesis. 

33. wiv kal bets ot Kal eva Exactos Thy éautTod yuvaika oUTws 
dyamrdtw ws éauTov. 


176 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [V1 1, 4 


aAnv. ‘ Howbeit—not to dwell on this matter of Christ and the 
Church, but to return to what I am treating of—.” 

Kat bets, ye also, viz. after the pattern of Christ. AV. drops 
the «ai, which is important. The precept is individualised by the 
€xaotos, so as to bring more home its force for each man. «s 
éavtov, as being himself, ver. 28. 

4 8é yurh, va poBArar tov dvBpa. 7 yuvy is best taken asa 
nom. abs. and “the wife—let her see,” etc. On dofjrar, Oecum. 
rightly remarks: ws mpére yuvaixa oBeicba, py SovdAomperis. 
“Nunquam enim erit voluntaria subjectio nisi praecedat rever- 
entia,” Calvin. 

VI. 1-9. Secial injunctions to children and fathers, slaves and 
masters. Slaves are called on to regard their service as a service 
done to Christ ; masters are reminded that they, too, are subject to the 
same Master, who has no respect of persons. 

1. Ta Tékva, TakoveTe Tots yovetow Suav év Kupiw. ev Kupiw is 
omitted by B D*G, but added in SA D™K LP, Vulg. Syr. etc. 
Origen expressly, who mentions the ambiguity of the construction, 
7.e. that it may be either rots év Kupiw yovetow or imaxovere ev K. 
If the words had been added from Col. iii. 20 they would probably 
have come after dékavov. Assuming that the words are genuine, as 
seems probable, the latter is the right construction. ‘In the 
Lord,” not as defining the limits of the obedience, év ois av ph 
mpookpovons (Td Kupiw), Chrys., but rather showing the spirit in 
which the obedience is to be yielded. It is assumed that the 
parents exercise their authority as Christian parents should, and 
we cannot suppose that the apostle meant to suggest to the 
children the possibility of the contrary. 

TouTo yap €otw Sixatoy, Ze. kal pice Oikatov Kal dd Tod vopov 
mpootacoerat, Theoph. Compare Col. ili. 20. From the children 
being addressed as members of the Church, Hofmann infers that 
they must have been baptized, since without baptism no one could 
be a member of the Church (Schriften, ii. 2, P. 192). Meyer's 
reply, that the children of Christian parents were dy.o. by virtue of 
their fellowship with their parents (1 Cor. vii. 14), loses much of its 
point in the case of children who were past infancy when their 
parents became Christians. But no conclusion as to infant 
baptism can be deduced. 

2. Aris eotly évtohh mpdtyn €v émayyedia. yrs, “for such is,” 
Alf. To translate “seeing it is” would be to throw the motive to 
obedience too much on the fact of the promise. 

apwtn ev em. has caused difficulty to expositors. The second 
commandment has something which resembles a promise attached. 
Origen, who mentions this difficulty, replies, first, that all the com- 
mandments of the Decalogue were zpwrai, being given first after the 
coming out of Egypt; or. ‘£ this be not admitted, that the promise 


VI. 3] SPECIAL INJUNCTIONS 177 


in the second commandment was a general one, not specially 
attached to the observance of that precept. The latter reply has 
been adopted by most modern commentators. Others have 
supposed “first” to mean “first in the second table”; but the 
Jews assigned five commandments to each table, as we learn 
from Philo and Josephus. See also Lev. xix. 3 and Rom. xiii. 9. 
The position of the precept in the former passage and its omission 
in the latter agree with this arrangement. In either case this 
would be the only commandment with promise. Meyer and 
Ellicott suppose, therefore, that it is not the Decalogue alone that 
is referred to. Brauneand Stier understand zpdry as first in point 
of time, namely, the first which has to be learned. Compare Bengel 
(not adopting this view): “honor parentibus per obedientiam 
praesertim praestitus initio aetatis omnium praeceptorum obedi- 
entiam continet.” 

€v émayyedia. Ellicott, Meyer, and others take this to mean 
‘in regard of, or, in point of, promise.” ‘The first command we 
meet with which involves a promise” (Ell.). Meyer compares 
Diod. Sic. xiii. 37, év d& edyeveia kal tAovTw zpdtos. But to make 
this parallel we should understand the words here: ‘foremost in 
promise,” z.e. having the greatest promise attached, or, at least, 
“having the advantage in point of promise,” which is not their 
interpretation. Chrysostom says: ov ry rafeu eirev aitiy zpHrny, 
GXXG TH éerayyeAia. But it is precisely 7H rage that Ell. and Mey. 
make it first, only not of all the commandments. It is better, then, 
to take éy (with Alford) as=characterised by, accompanied with, 
so that we might translate “‘with a promise.” But to what 
purpose is it to state that this is the first command in order 
accompanied with a promise, especially when it would be equally 
true, and much to the purpose, to say that it is the only command 
with a promise? On the whole, therefore, remembering that it is 
children who are addressed, the interpretation of Stier and Braune 
seems preferable. Westcott and Hort give a place in their margin 
to a different punctuation, viz. placing the comma after zparn, and 
connecting érayyeAia with iva. 

3. iva e6 cou yévntat, «.t.A. The text in the Sept. proceeds: 
Kal iva pakpoxpovios yevn ext THS ys HS Kvpuos 6 Ocds cov didwoi cou 
The latter words are probably omitted purposely as unsuitable to 
those addressed. The future é€oy is to be regarded as dependent 
on tva,—a construction which is found elsewhere in St. Paul, as 
1 Cor. ix. 18, va dddravoy Oyow TO evayy.: Gal. ii. 4, va tpas 
xatadovlwaovow. In Rey. xxil. 14 we have future and conjunctive, 
just as in classical writers future and conjunctive are used after 
dws. It is possible that éoy is used here because there was no 
aor. conj. of the verb. In the passage referred to in Rev. the 


future is éorat. 
12 


178 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [VI. 4-6 


4. xal ot mwatépes. «ai marks that the obligation was not all 
on the side of the children. So kai oi Kupior, ver. 9. mareépes, 
“patres potissimum alloquitur, nam hos facilius aufert iracundia,” 
Bengel. pi mapopyigere, Col. ill, 21, py épebilere, “Do not 
irritate.” 

év madeta Kat vouleoia Kupiov. mardefa occurs only in one 
other place in St. Paul, viz. 2 Tim. iii. 16, maca ypady . . 
@peAipos . . . wpods watdelay tiv ev Sixatcoovvy. The verb zadevw 
also, although used of chastening in 1 Cor. xi. 32; 2 Cor. vi. 9, is 
employed in a wider sense in 2 Tim. il. 25; Tit. ii. 12. There is 
no sufficient reason, then, for supposing that the two substantives 
here are distinguished, as Grotius thinks: ‘“za:deia hic significare 
videtur institutionem per poenas: vovJeoia autem est ea institutio 
quae fit verbis,” followed by Ellicott and Alford. Rather, zra:deéa 
is, as in classical writers, the more general, vovfeoia more specific, 
of instruction and admonition. vovfecia is a later form for 
vovlérnots. Kvupiov is not “concerning the Lord,” as Theodoret, 
etc.,—a meaning which the genitive after such a word as vov@. can 
hardly have, but the subjective genitive ; the Lord is regarded as 
the guiding principle of the education. 

5. ot SovAol, Smakovete Tols Kata odpka kuplos, This is the 
order in NABP, etc. Rec. has rots xupiors kata odpxa. 

Bengel thinks that x. oapxa is added, because after the mention 
of the true xvpios it was not fitting to use «vpiou without qualifica- 
tion. In Col. iii. 22 a sentence intervenes, but still the reason 
holds good, for 6 Kvpios was their «vpios also xara mvedpa. 
deozrdrns is the word used for the master of slaves in the Pastorals 
and 1 Peter. 

peta pdBou Kat tpdpou. These words are similarly associated 
in t Cor. ii. 3; 2 Cor. vii. 15; Phil. ii. 12, expressing only anxious 
solicitude about the performance of duty, so that there is no 
allusion to the hardness of the service. In Col. iii. 22 it is PoPov- 
prevot TOV KUpLoV. 

év dmdryntt THs KapStas. The word amAdrys is used several” 
times by St. Paul (by him only in the N.T.), and always indicates 
singleness and honesty of purpose, sometimes showing itself in 
liberality. (See Fritzsche’s note on Rom. xii. 8, vol. ii. p. 62.) 
Here the meaning is the obvious one, there was to be no double- 
heartedness in their obedience, no feeling of reluctance, but 
genuine heartiness and goodwill. é yap cai pera PdBov Kai tpdpou 
dovrcvev, GAN’ ovK e& civoras, GAD KaKxovpyws, Oecum. 

és TO XpioT@, aS ws TH Kupiw, v. 22, “so that your service to 
your master is regarded as a service to Christ.” 

6. ph kat épOadpoSoudiay. ‘Not in the way of 666.” The 
word is not found elsewhere except in Col. iii. 22, and may have 
been coined by St. Paul. The adjective d6ffarpddovdos is found 


VI. 7, 8] SPECIAL INJUNCTIONS 179 


in the Ajpost. Constit., but with reference to this passage (i. p. 
299 A, ed. Cotel.). The meaning is obvious. 

és dvOpwrdpeckot. This word is not found in classical writers ; 
it occurs in the Sept., Ps. lii. (liii.) 6; not as a rendering of our 
Hebrew text. It is also found in Psa/t. Sol. iv. 8,10. This is the 
opposite of és tr Xpiord as well as of the following words. 

GAN ds SoGA0t Xprotod mrovodvtes Td OEAnpa Tod Oeod. Tov before 
Xpicrod rests on insufficient authority, D° K L, etc., against & D* 
GLP, etc. Not subordinate to the following clause, as if it were 
“‘as servants who are doing,” etc., for the words are clearly in 
contrast to the preceding, and zrovotytes 76 GéX. has much more 
force if taken as a separate character. 

6, 7. ék Wuxis pet edvolas Souhevovtes Gs TH Kupiw. ex Yrx7s 
may be connected either with what precedes or with what follows. 
The latter connexion (adopted by Syr. Chrys. Jerome, Lachm. Alf. 
WH.) seems preferable, for ro.otyres 76 G€Anpa Tod Ocod does not 
require such a qualification, nor is there any tautology in taking 
ex w. with the following, for these words express the source in the 
feeling of the servant towards his work; per’ ecivofas his feeling 
towards his master (Harless). Compare Raphel’s apt quotation 
from Xen.: ovkody evvoray mpGrov, éepyv eyo, Senoer airov [Tov éxi- 
1porrov | éxew cot kai Tots wots el wéAAOL dpKécerv avTi Tov Tapév. (Oecon. 
xii. 5). Treg. puts a comma after eivoias, WH. after dovAcvorres. 

ws before ré Kupiw rests on preponderant evidence, 8 A B D* 
GP, Vulg. Syr. It is omitted by D°K L. Internal evidence is 
in its favour, since dovA. 7 x. would be tautologous with dota 
Xpucrov. 

8. eiddtes Ste Exactos & Gy mojon dyad, ToUTo KopiceTat Tapa 
Kupiou. 

There is great uncertainty as to the reading, 

8rt xacros 8 ay (or dav) rowjon, AD G P 17 37, Vulg. Arm. 

Sr. Exacros édv Tt, B, Petr. Alex. 

8rt édv Te Exacros, L* 46 115. 

8 édy m1 Exacros mroujon, L** and most cursives. This is the Rec. Text. 

ért (probably to be read 8 7) édv mwoijon, %*, corrected by N° by the 
insertion of 8 before édv. 

There are minor variations. 

The best supported reading is that first mentioned, which is adopted by 
Treg. and Tisch. 8; but Meyer and Ellicott think the Rec. better explains 
the others. WH. adopt the reading of B. 

In the reading of Rec. the relative is to be understood as separated from 
mt by tmesis. Cf. Plato, Legg. ix. 864 E, Av dv twa xataBddyy. 

koulcerar, S% ABD*G, is better attested than the Rec. xometrar. rod 


also of Rec. before Kvuplov is rejected on the authority of all the chief 
uncials. 


xopilea Oar is to receive back, as, for example, a deposit, hence 
here it implies an adequate return. Compare 2 Cor. v. 10, ta 
Kopiontat exacTos Ta 1a TOU Gwparos, and Col. iii. 25. 


180 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [ VI. 9,10 


This lesson to slaves is equally a lesson for all kinds of service, 
as the following for all masters. 

9. kal oi kUptor. See on kat, ver. 4. 

+i atta mwoetre. Je. act in a similar manner, in the same 
spirit. De Wette refers it to dyafév. The Greek comm. pressed 
ra avira as if it meant dovAcvere airots. 

évuévtes Thy dehy.“ Giving up your threatening.” The article 
indicates the well known and familiar threatening, “‘ quemadmodum 
vulgus dominorum solet,” Erasmus. 

eidéres, k.t-A. Wetstein cites a remarkable parallel from Seneca, 
Thyest. 607, “Vos, quibus rector maris atque terrae Jus dedit 
magnum necis atque vitae, Ponite inflatos tumidosque vultus. 
Quicquid a vobis minor extimescit, Major hoc vobis dominus 
minatur! Omne sub regno graviore regnum est.” 


kal atv cal ipey is supported by preponderant authority, X* (éavrdv) 
ABD*, Vulg. Boh. Arm., Petr. Alex. etc. D°G have kal atrav tuov: K 
and most cursives, kat tjuav airav. Meyer thinks the mention of slaves 
(avrGv) here appeared unsuitable, partly in itself and partly in comparison 
with Col. iv. 1. Whether this be a correct account of the causes of the 
variation, it cannot be doubted that the reading attested by the best MSS. 
here is the more forcible, expressing, not merely the fact that ‘‘ye also 
have a Master,” but that both you and they are subjects of the same Master. 


mpoowrodypipia, like mpocwroAnpmrys, and the verb mpocw- 
ronprréw, is found only in N.T. and ecclesiastical writers. The 
expression zpécwzov AapPavew has a different meaning in the N.T. 
from that which it had in the O.T. In the latter it only meant to 
show favour, in the former it is to show partiality, especially on 
account of external advantages. 

10-12. Exhortation to prepare for the spiritual combat by 
arming themselves with the panoply of God, remembering that they 
have to do with no mere mortal foes, but with spiritual powers. 

10. tod Norod. So N* AB 17. 

7 Aourove & DGKLP, Chrys. ete. 


Meyer points out that B 17 have duvapyotcde instead of évé., a variation 
which Meyer thinks may have arisen from a confusion of the N of ouréy 
with the N of évduv., thus pointing to the reading Aomdv. Properly, rod 
Xourod means “‘henceforth, for the future,” Gal. vi. 17, in which sense 7d 
ouréy may also be used ; but the latter alone is used in the sense ‘‘ for the 
rest,” Phil. iii. 1, iv. 8; 2 Thess, iii, 1, As the latter is the meaning here, 
we should expect 7d Aouwdy, 


aSeAdot pou is added in Rec. before évduv., with X° K L P, most 
cursives, Syr. (both) Boh., but om. by x* BD 17, Arm. Aeth. 
AG, Vulg. Theodoret have dseAgoé without pov. It has probably 
come in by assimilation to other passages in which 1d Aourdv 
occurs (see above). St. Paul does not address his readers thus in 
this Epistle. 

évSuvapodcbe, “Be strengthened.” Cf. Rom. iv. 20. Not 


VI. 11, 12] THE PANOPLY OF GOD 181 


middle but passive, as elsewhere in N.T. (Acts ix. 22 ; Rom. iv. 20; 
2 Tim. ii. 1; Heb. xi. 34). The active occurs Phil. iv. 23 ; 1 Tim. 
i. 12; 2 Tim. iv. 17. The simple verb dvvaydw, which B 17 have 
here, is used in Col. i. 11 ,and according to 8* A D* in Heb. xi. 34. 
évdvvayovofar occurs once in the Sept. Ps. li. (lii.) 7 rather in a bad 
sense. ‘There is no reason why a verb which occurs once in the 
Sept. and several times in the N.T. should be said to be “ peculiar 
to the Alexandrian Greek.” 

kal év TO kpdtet THS icxvos adtod. Nota hendiadys. Compare 
i, 19. 

11, évddcacbe thy mavoTtay Tod Geos. ‘Put on the panoply of 
God.” avordia occurs also in Luke xi. 22. The emphasis is 
clearly on zav. not on tov @eod. Observe the repetition in ver. 13, 
“of God,” ze. provided by God, aracw diavéwet tiv Baciduxiv mav- 
tevxiav, Theodoret. There is no contrast with other armour, nor 
is wavo7Aia to be taken as merely=“‘armatura.” The complete- 
ness of the armament is the point insisted on. St. Paul was, no 
doubt, thinking of the Roman soldiery, as his readers also would, 
although the Jewish armour was essentially the same. Polybius 
enumerates as belonging to the Roman zavordia, shield, sword, 
greaves, spear, breastplate, helmet. St. Paul omits the spears, and 
adds girdle and shoes, which, though not armour, were an essential 
part of the soldier’s dress. 

mpos 76 Suvac8ar. “To the end that ye may be able.” orjva 
mpos, “to hold your ground against,” an expression suited to the 
military figure. 

Tas peOodeias. Cf. iv. 14. The plural expresses the concrete 
workings of the pefodefa. We can hardly press it as specially 
appropriate to the military metaphor and = “ stratagems.” 

12. Ott odk Eoti Hpiv HY TdAN Tpds atpa Kal odpKa, 

nyiv, with & A D°K L P and most mss. and Vss. 

iuiv, BD*G, Goth. Aeth., adopted by Lach., and admitted to the 
margin by Treg. and WH. The second person would very readily occur to 
a scribe, the whole context being in the second person. 

4 way. “Our wrestling.” The word is suitable to zpos afya 
kal o., but not to the struggle in which the zavordia is required. 
The word is indeed found in a more general sense (see Ellicott), 
but only in poetry, as “wrestling” also might be used in our own 
tongue. But as the word is here used to describe what the 
struggle is not, it is most natural to supply a more general word, 
such as 7 pax or paxeréov, in the following clause, according to 
an idiom frequent i in Greek writers. 

aiva kal odpxa, in this order here only. Jerome understands 
this of our own passions ; but that would be zpos tiv capxa without 
aiva. Moreover, the contrast is clearly not between foes within 
and foes without, but between human and superhuman powers. 


182 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [VI. 12 


Tpos Tas épxds, mpds Tas efoucias. See oni. 21. 

pds Tods koopoxpdropas. “ World-rulers.” The word xoopoxpa- 
rwp occurs in the Orphica (vill. 11, xi. 11); and is used by the 
Schol. on Aristoph. Nub. 397, Xerdyxwors 6 Bares TOV Alyurtiwy 
Koopoxpatwp yeyoves. It frequently occurs in Rabbinical writers 
(transliterated), sometimes of kings whose rule was world-wide, as 
“tres reges xoopoxparopes, dominatores ab extremitate mundi ad 
extremitatem ejus, Nebucadnesar, Evilmerodach, Belsazar” (Shir 
Rab, iii. 4, ap. Wetst.); also of the four kings whom Abraham 
pursued (Bereshith Rabba, fol. 57. 1). These are so called to add 
glory to Abraham’s victory. Also the angel of death is so called, 
and by the Gnostics the Devil (Iren. i. 1). In the Zest, XT Patr., 
Test. Sol. the demons say : jpes éopev TA Acydpeva oToLXeEla, ot 
KOO POKpaTopes TOU Kdg pou tovtov. It appears, therefore, that it 
differs from “rulers” in implying that their rule extends over the 
Koopos. Schoettgen supposes that St. Paul means the Rabbis and 
Doctors of the Jews, and he cites a passage from the Talmud 
where it is argued that the Rabbis are to be called kings; he also 
compares Acts iv. 26. But the context appears to be decisive 
against such a view. ‘The contest is clearly a spiritual one. Com- 
pare the designation of Satan as 6 @eds rod aidvos rovtov, 2 Cor. 
iv. 43 6 dpywy Tov Kéopov Tovrov, John xiv. 30. 

TOU aKdTOUS TOUTOU. 

So, without rod aidvos, 8* A B D* G 17 672, Vulg. Boh. Syr- 
Pesh. and Harcl. (text), etc. 


After oxérous, rod aldvos is added by 8* D°K LP most mss. The 
words were not likely to be omitted because they seemed superfluous or diffi- 
cult to explain ; and an omission from homoeoteleuton is not to be supposed 
in the face of so many documents. They might, on the contrary, have been 
added as a gloss, the phrase oxérovs rovrov being rare. 


Tpds TA TVEULATLKG THS Tovnpias. ‘Against the spirit forces of 
wickedness,” which belong to or are characterised by zrovypia. 
RV. has “ hosts of wickedness.” So Alford, Ellicott, Meyer, com- 
paring TO imrmixov, “the cavalry,” Rev. ix. 16; 7d zoAcrixov, Herod. 
Vii. 1033; Ta ApnorpuKd, Polyaen. v. 14. 141. But these are not 
really parallel ; lrraruKov, primarily meaning “appertaining to im7ou,” 
hence ‘‘ equestrian,” was naturally used for brevity to designate the 
cavalry of an army, as weéuxa the infantry, just like our “horse and 
foot.” Thus Polyb. xv. 3. 5, ‘AvuBas éAXcirwy ois immxois, “in 
the matter of cavalry ” 3 00, xviii. 5. 5s Airodo . . . Kal? doov ev 
TOUS meliKois é\Aureis elot. . . Kata TocOUTOV Tots lmmuKois Suape- 
povot mpos TO BeArvov tov adAdwv “EAXnvov: 20. iii. 114. 5, TO TOV 
immxav mAn00s 7d ovpmay Tots Kapyndoviows eis puplovs. eee Tn 
Rev ix. 16 we have 6 dpiOuos tv otparevparwy Tod trmKod. ‘But 
mvevpatixov never had such a signification, nor would its etymology 
lead us to expect that it could be so used; for it does not mean 


VI. 12] THE PANOPLY OF GOD 183 


what relates to zvevpara, but to 76 zvetpa. It would be almost as 
reasonable to conclude from the use of the English ‘ horse” 
and “foot,” that ‘‘spirit” could be used for a host of spirits, as to 
draw a like conclusion about zvevparixa from the use of immxa, etc. 
Moreover, ta immuxa does not mean “hosts or armies” of horses or 
of horsemen ; and, if we were to follow the analogy of its meaning, 
we should interpret ra rv. ris wov. as=the wvevyarixdy constituent 
of zovynpia. 7a AnotpiKa, too, does not mean “ bands of robbers,” 
but of ‘pirate ships,” which are themselves called Ayozprxai, 
Polyaenus, v. 14. 141; and 70 woAcrixéy, in Herod. vii. 103, means 
that part of the population which consists of zoAdira:. This word, 
like irmxdév, used in such a connexion as it has there, at once 
conveys this meaning. But to give mvevparica here the meaning 
“spiritual armies, or hosts,” is to depart wholly from the ordinary 
use of the word. 

Giving up, therefore, this rendering as untenable, we may trans- 
late ‘‘the spiritual forces, or elements of wickedness.” 

év Tots emoupaviois is connected by Chrysostom with 7 mady 
éoriv, Thus: év rots éx. 4 paxyn xelrar... ws dv ef Cdeyer, FH 
ovvOykn év tive KeiTaL: év xpvod, 2.€. Our contest is for the heavenly 
blessings, and so Theodoret, Oecum. a/, But in the illustration 
cited it is the connexion with xetra: that makes this sense possible ; 
the idea is “rests in, or depends on,” which does not suit 4 adn 
éoriv. 

The view generally adopted by modern expositors is that ra éz, 
means the seat of the evil spirits or spiritual hosts referred to, 
corresponding to the rod dépos of ii. 2. As Alford expresses it, 
that habitation which in ii. 2, when speaking of mere matters of 
fact, was said to be in the ayp, is, now that the difficulty and im- 
portance of the Christian conflict is being set forth, represented as 
év Tois é7.—oOver us and too strong for us without the panoply of 
God. He compares ra zerewda tov ovipavod, Matt. vi. 26. This 
comment seems to amount to this, that these spiritual hosts dwell 
in the air; but to impress us the more with the difficulty of the 
combat, the air is called “heaven.” There is, however, no proof 
that ra érovpdvia meant the atmosphere, and this is not the mean- 
ing of the word elsewhere, ¢.g. i. 3, 20, ii. 6. 

The view of Eadie, a/, is that ra éx. means the celestial spots 
occupied by the Church, and in them this combat is to be 
maintained, “These evil spirits have invaded the Church, are 
attempting to pollute, divide, and overthrow it.” Barry, while 
adopting the former view of ra éz., yet adds that the meaning 
points to the power of evil as directly spiritual, not acting through 
physical and human agency, but attacking the spirit in that higher 
aspect in which it contemplates heavenly things and ascends to the 
communion with God. 


184 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [VI. 18, 14 


In the Book of the Secrets of Enoch, which is pre-Christian, and 
perhaps as early as B.c. 30, we have “a scheme of the seven 
heavens which, in some of its prominent features, agrees with that 
conceived by St. Paul. Paradise is situated in the third heaven 
as in 2 Cor. xii. 2, 3, whereas, according to later Judaism, it be- 
longed to the fourth heaven. In the next place the presence of 
evil in some part of the heavens is recognised. Thus, in Eph. 
vi. 12, we meet with the peculiar statement, Against the spiritual 
hosts of wickedness in the heavens” (Morfill and Charles, p. xl). 
Charles points out other parallels between the Epistle and the 
Book of the Secrets of Enoch ; e.g. Eph. ili. 10, iv. 10, 25 (pp. xxii, 
xli); and the possibility that the present passage has been in- 
fluenced by these speculations must be admitted. 

13-18. Detailed description of the spiritual armour. 

13. év tH tpéepa tH wovnpa. “The evil day,” the day of the 
power of evil, when the conflict is most severe, ‘‘any day of which 
it may be said, ‘this is your hour, and the power of darkness,’” 
Barry. Meyer understands it as referring to the great outbreak of 
Satanic power expected to occur before the second coming. 
aravta Katepyacapevot; Oecum. and Theoph. take this to mean 
“having overcome all,” AV. marg.; but although the verb has this 
sense occasionally in classical writers, or rather “to despatch, to 
finish,” ‘‘ conficere,” it never has it in St. Paul, who uses it twenty 
times. This would not be decisive if this meaning were more 
suitable here. But the conflict is perpetual in this world, it is 
ever being renewed. On the other hand, we cannot without 
tautology understand this clause as merely expressing preparation 
for the combat. kxatepydlecfar, too, means to accomplish a 
difficult work: ‘notat rem arduam,” Fritzsche, and could hardly be 
used of mere arming for the fight. It appears, then, to mean 
having done all that duty requires, viz. from time to time. The 
Vulgate (not Jerome) has ‘‘omnibus perfecti,” or, in some MSS., 
“in omnibus perfecti,” following, as some think, the reading - 
Kateipyacuevo. A has xarepyacpevor, doubtless a mistake for 
Katepyacdpevor, not meant for Katepyacpévor. otHvat, opposed to 
devyew, “hold your ground.” 

14. otjte obv. This ornre cannot be taken in the same sense 
as the preceding, otherwise we should have the end there aimed at, 
here assumed as already attained when the arming begins. 

In the following details of the figure, each part of the equip- 
ment has its appropriate interpretation, which, however, must not 
be pressed too minutely. In the case of the breastplate and the 
helmet, St. Paul follows Isa. lix. 17, évedvoato Stxaroovvnv ws 
Odpaxa, kal mepiebero mrepixepddatov owrnpiov emt THs Kepadjs, but 
the remainder of Isaiah’s description was unsuitable, viz. Kai 
mepieBdArcTo tudriov exducprews Kal Td mepiBdorAaov Lyrov. The 


VI. 15] THE PANOPLY OF GOD 185 


figure of Isaiah is more fully carried out in Wisd. v. 18, 20, 
Anyerau mavotAiav tov CnXdov abrob . . . evdvoerar Owpaxa Sdixato- 
ova, kal meplnoerar Kopv0a. Kpiow dvumrdxptTov. Anyerat ao7mloa 
dxaTapdxnTov dovdtnTa, dévvet Sé dadropov dpyiv eis poudaiay. In 
Isa. xi. 5, Sixauoo vv and adj eva are both girdles. 

tepiLwodpevor thy daddy Suav év ddnOeia. The aorists are 
properly used, since the arming was complete before the orjjre. 
The present would mean that they were to be arming themselves 
when they took up their position, which would be rather a mark of 
unpreparedness. The girdle was a necessary part of the equipment 
of a soldier to make rapid movement possible ; and, indeed, was 
commonly used to support the sword, though not in Homeric 
times. But there is no reference to that use here, the sword being 
not referred to until ver. 17. év dAnGeia, ev, instrumental, “ with” ; 
“truth,” not the objective truth of the gospel, which is the sword, 
ver. 17, but truth in its widest sense as an element of character. 
Compare ch. v. 9. 

tov Odpaxa Tis Sixatoodvys, genitive of apposition. d:x., as in 
ch. v. 9, Christian uprightness of character, which like a breast- 
plate defends the heart from the assaults of evil. Eadie (with 
Harless, a/.) understands it of the righteousness of faith, ze. 
Christ’s justifying righteousness, remarking that the article has a 
special prominence. But the article is used in accordance with 
the ordinary rule, @épaxa having the article. The faith by which 
this justification is attained is mentioned in ver. 16, That no 
Christian possesses entire rectitude is not an objection, the breast- 
plate is not faultlessness, which would, in fact, be inconsistent with 
the figure, but the actual rightness of character wrought by Christ. 

15. dmodnodpevor tods mé8as, no doubt referring to the “cal- 
igae” of the Roman soldier. 

év érousacia. The more classical form is €éroworys, but 
Hippocr. has éroysacia. The word occurs in the Sept. in the 
sense of “preparedness” (Ps. ix. 41, x. 17), but more frequently 
as representing the Hebrew fi29, which they rendered according 


to their view of its etymology, not its meaning. It is quite 
erroneous to interpret it here by this use, or rather misuse, of it, as 
some expositors have done, taking it, for example, to mean “vel 
constantiam in tuenda religione Christi, vel religionem adeo ipsam 
certam illam quidem et fundamento cui insistere possis, similem,” 
Koppe. This is also against the figure. Shoes are not the firm 
foundation on which one stands, but we may compare with them 
the readiness of mind with which one advances to the conflict, and 
which is wrought by the gospel rod eday. It is not preparation to 
preach the gospel that is meant, for the apostle is addressing all 
Christians ; and, moreover, this interpretation does not agree with 
the figure. 


186 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [VI. 16, 17 


Tis eipyyys, peace with God and amongst men, see ch. ii. 17; 
an oxymoron. dy 76 diaBdAw Trorcpapev eipnvevomey rpos Tov Wedv, 
Chrys. 
16. ev maow. SONBP 17, a/., Cat. text, Vulg. Boh. Syr-Harcl. 
Aeth. 

éxt raow, AD GK L most cursives, Syr-Pesh. Arm. ete. 

There is a similar variety in Luke xvi. 26, where & BL Boh. read éy, 
but AD X Aa. érl. This alone is sufficient to set aside Ellicott’s suggestion 


that év here was a correction for the ambiguous érl, Meyer thinks it was 
substituted as the more common. 


If éwi is read it is not to be rendered ‘‘above all,” AV. Beza, 
nor “over all,” but “in addition to all”; cf. Luke iii. 20, tpooé6yxe 
Kal ToUTO émi 7act. 

tov Bupedv. Ovpeds is used in Homer of a great stone placed 
against a door to keep it shut. In later writers, Plutarch, Polybius, 
etc., it means a large oblong shield, “‘scutum,” according to Polyb. 
4 ft. by 24, differing from the dozis, which was small and round. 
But in Wisdom, quoted above, éovdrns is the dois or “ clypeus.” 
St. Paul’s purpose, however, is different, and he is describing a 
heavy armed warrior well furnished for defence. 

Tis Wlotews, genitive of apposition. Only where faith is weak 
does the enemy gain access. In 1 Thess. v. 8 faith and love are 
the breastplate. 

év @ Suvjcecbe. The future is properly used, not because the 
combat does not begin until the day of the great future conflict 
with evil, but because the whole duration of the fight is contem- 
plated. At all times ye shall be able, etc. 

7 BédXn TOO Tovypod Ta weTVUpwpeva, oBéoar. ‘The figure alludes 
to the darts or arrows tipped with tow dipped in pitch and set on 
fire, mentioned, for example, in Herod. viii. 52. Some of the 
older interpreters (Hammond, aZ) understood the word to mean 
poisoned, the word “fiery” being used with reference to the 
sensation produced ; but this is contrary to the grammatical mean- 
ing of the word. ‘Fiery darts” is a suitable figure for fierce 
temptations ; beyond this there is no need to go. 

a éoat is appropriate, since the shields alluded to were of wood 
covered with leather, in which when the arrow fixed itself the fire 
would go out. So Thucydides tells us of hides being used for this 
very purpose (ii. 75). 

7d is omitted by B D*G, and bracketed by Treg. and WH.; omitted by 
Lachm. If omitted, the interpretation would be ‘‘fire tipped as they are.” 
The authority for omission is small; but the insertion would be more easily 
accounted for than the accidental omission. 

17. kal Thy mepixehadatay tod owrnpiov Séfacbe. This verse is 
separated from ver. 16 by a full stop in RV. as well as by Lachm. 
Tisch., not Treg. WH. But though the construction is changed, 


VI. 18] THE PANOPLY OF GOD 187 


as in i, 22, this is only a result of the rapidity of thought for which 
a strict adherence to the participial construction might be a 
hindrance. ‘The same vividness of conception leads the writer to 
put rHv zepex. first. 

Swrypiov is not used elsewhere by St. Paul; here it is taken 
with the preceding word from the Sept. Theodoret understands 
it as masculine, referring to Christ; and so Bengel, “salutaris, ze. 
Christi”; but this is refuted by the parallel, 1 Thess. v. 8, where 
the zepix. is the hope of salvation. Soden thinks that in that 
passage the apostle purposely corrects the cwryjpov of the Sept. 

kal Thy pdxatpay Tod mvedpatos. This cannot well be a genitive 
of apposition, since the following clause explains the sword as fjya 
@cov. Olshausen, indeed, and Soden, take the relative 6 as refer- 
ring to mvevparos. They understand the writer as speaking of the 
Holy Spirit in relation to man, as finding expression in the word 
of God. But there is no parallel for thus calling the Spirit pjya 
@cod. It is much more natural to interpret tov zy. as “ which is 
given by the Spirit”; nor is there any difficulty in taking this 
genitive differently from the others, since this alone is a genitive 
of a personal name. Chrysostom suggests the alternative: rou ro 
Iveta pyow, rou év TH mwvevpatinH paxaipa (or Aro. TO xapiopa TO 
TVEVPLATLKOM, OLA yap TrVEvpaATLKnS paxaipas, K.T.r.). 

3 éotw pipa Ocod. Compare Heb. iv. 12, 6 Adyos Tov Ocod . . . 
TOMUTEPOS Umép TaTaV paxalpay dicToMoV. 

deface, ‘‘ Accipite, oblatum a Domino,” Bengel. 

AD°KL, etc., read défacGa, perhaps only by itacism. The verb is 
omitted by D* G, ai. 

18. 81a mdons mpoceuxis Kal Senoews, «.7.4. These words 
are best taken with the principal imperative orjre, not simply with 
the previous clause, for raoys and év wavti xaip would not agree 
with the momentary act défac6e, which is itself subordinate to 
oryre. ‘ With all prayer, ze. prayer of every form.” 

mporevyy and deyors differ in this respect, that the former is 
used only of prayer, whether supplication or not, to God, while 
dénois means “request,” and may be addressed to either God or 
man. Here, then, we may say that zp. expresses that the prayer 
is addressed to God, and 6., that it involves a request. Compare 
Phil. iv. 6, €v ravti rH mpocevyxy Kal TH Sénoe, and see on Lk. i. 13. 

év waytl katp@ corresponds with the dduadeirtws rporedxerbar of 
1 Thess. v. 17. 

év Mvetpatt. ‘In the Spirit” (cf. Jude 21) not=éx yi, for 
which interpretation St. Paul’s usage supplies no justification, 
besides which it was not necessary to say that the prayer was to be 
from the heart. Chrysostom supposes év zy. to be in contrast to 
Barrodoyiats, which is also open to the objection that he who has put 
on the specified armour must be assumed not to pray év BarroAoyig. 


188 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [ VI. 19 


kat eis adtd. “Thereunto,” ze. to the mpocevydpevon ev mk. 
€V TV. 

Rec. has rofro after at76, with D°J K, etc.; but ad7é alone, § AB (D* 
G, at’rév). The frequent occurrence of av7vd rodro in St. Paul accounts for 
the insertion. 

Gyputvoovtes ev don mpockaptepyoet. Compare Col. iv. 2, rH 
TPOTEVYX TpoTKapTEpELTE, ypnyopovrTes ev airy ev edxapiotia, “ keeping 
watch,” or “being watchful”; cf. Mark xili. 33, d@ypumvetre xal 
mpooevyeobe: 1b. 35, ypnyopetre: Luke xxi. 36, dypumvetre ev zayti 
Kalp@ edpevol, K.T.A. 

IIpocxaprépyois is not found elsewhere, but the verb zpocxap- 
tepew is frequent both in classical writers and N.T. always with the 
sense of continued waiting on, attention to, adherence, ete, nGk 
Acts il. 42, 77 bday : 7b. 46, &v TO iepd : vill. 1 3, TO Pri : 
Mark iii. 9, tva oud prov mpooxaprepy aitG: Rom. xii. 12, TPOTEVyy : 
ib, xiii, 6, cis abr rotro. It is clear, then, that Alford is not justi- 
fied in rendering it ‘importunity ” in order to avoid a hendiadys. 
Practically, there is a hendiadys. 

Tept TdvTwv TOV dyiwv, Kat bmép éwou. «Kai, introducing a special 
case, see ch. v. 18. Harless and Eadie distinguish zepi here from 
trép, regarding the latter as more vague. “They could not know 
much about all saints, and they were to pray about them.” Eadie 
admits, however, that such a distinction cannot be uniformly 
carried out. Meyer, to prove the prepositions synonymous, quotes 
Dem. Phil. ii. p. 74, py Tept TOV Otkaiwy pnd trép Tov ew rpaypatwv 
elvae THY BovAnv, GAN trép Trav év TH xdpa: but this passage rather 
indicates the contrary; “‘not about a question of justice, but in 
defence of.” So also the similar one, ov wept ddéns odd’ brép péepors 
X®pas ToAenovar, Z.¢e. “not about a matter of glory, but in defence 
of,” etc. tmép d0éys might have been used, but the idea would not 
be quite the same. Here, too, trép expresses with more precision 
“on behalf of” ; but the reason of the difference is probably not to 
be found in the difference between zavrwv rév dyiwv and éyod, but 
in the fact that the special object of the latter prayer is stated: 
‘“‘and on behalf of me, that,” etc. See Dale, Lect. xxiv. p. 437. 

19, 20. Zhe apostle’s request for their prayers for himself, that 
he may have freedom to proclaim the mystery of the gospel for which 
he is an ambassador. 

iva por S00 Adyos év dvolfer tod otdpards pou. Adyos, in the 
sense of utterance, as 2 Cor. xi. 2, iduitys TO Adyw. The words 
év dvoiéa Tob or. are by some connected with the following. Thus 
Grotius: “ut ab hac custodia militari liber per omnem urbem 
perferre possem sermonem,’ ” etc., but mappyota never refers to 
external freedom, and its meaning here is further determined by 
rappyoicwpat, ver. 20. To take wappyoia as merely epexegetical 
of avoiéa rt. or. would be very flat. 


VI. 20] REQUEST FOR PRAYER 189 


Taken with the preceding, the words may mean the opening of 
the mouth by God, as in Ps. li. 17. Or they may mean, “when I 
open my mouth.” The latter is the interpretation adopted by 
Alford, Ellicott, Eadie, Meyer. But so understood, the words are 
superfluous, not to say trivial. 

On the other hand, with the former interpretation they give a 
fulness of expression to the idea in 6067 Adyos, which is in harmony 
with the gravity of the thought ; they complete from the subjective 
side what is expressed on the objective side in 4009 Adyos. This 
is the view of Harless, Olsh. Soden. The absence of the article 
is also in its favour. Compare Col. iv. 3, although there it is tva 
5 cds dvoién jpiv Oipay tov Adyov. “Opening the mouth” is an 
expression used only where some grave utterance is in question. 

év mappyola yvwpicat. “To make known with openness of 
speech”; cf. Phil. i. 20. The margin of RV. connects év zappyota 
with the preceding words, as the AV. had done. This involves a 
tautology with rappyciicwpat. 


Soelm of Rec. rests on very slight evidence. 


73 juoTypiov Tod edayy. See ch. i. 9. 

20. imép of mpeoBevw év ddUoer. of refers to 76 pvor., for this is 
the object of yvwpica:, and yvwpica: is in substance connected with 
mpeoBevw. Compare Col. iv. 3, AaAjoar 76 prot. TOD Xpurrod Sv 6 
kai dédenar. The simplest view is probably the best: “I am an 
ambassador in chains”; but Grotius understands the words to 
mean: “nunc quoque non desino legationem”; but this would 
require some emphasis on dAvoe, as, for example, xai év dA. 
apeoBevw: and there is no reference here, as in Phil. i. 12 ff., to the 
good effects of his imprisonment. The oxymoron is noted by 
Bengel and Wetstein: “alias legati, jure gentium sancti et 
inviolabiles, in vinculis haberi non poterant.” So, indeed, 
Theoph., rovs rpéoBets vopos pydév racxew Kaxdv, év dAvoe is in 
distinct opposition to év rappyotg. 

Paley and others have drawn attention to the use of dAvous 
here as referring to the ‘‘custodia militaris” in which St. Paul 
was kept at Rome, Acts xxviii. 16, 20; cf. 2 Tim. i. 16. It is true 
the singular might possibly be used in a general sense, although 
the instances cited from Polyb. of eis tv aAvow éeprimtew (xxi. 3. 
3, iv. 76. 5) are not parallel, since the article there is generic. 
Still it can hardly be denied that the term has a special suitability 
to the circumstances of this imprisonment, or rather custody. Of 
course, decpoi as the general term might also be used, and therefore 
the fact that it is used, Col. iv. 18, is no objection. 

iva év att® mappyordowpar. Co-ordinate with the preceding 
iva. Soden, however, takes the clause as depending on the 
mpeoBevw ev dX., the meaning according to him being that St. Paul 


190 THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS _ [VI. 21-24 


might have been set at liberty on condition that he did not preach 
the gospel, but remained in custody in hope that the result of the 
trial would be that he would be at liberty to preach. This, he adds, 
corresponds to as det we AaARoat, and escapes the tautology involved 
in the other interpretations. 

21-24. Personal commendation of Tychicus, who carries the 
letter, and final benediction. 

21. iva 8é eidiTe kai Gets. Kai is probably simply “ye as well 
as others.” Meyer and others suppose a reference to the Epistle 
to the Colossians, “‘ ye as well as the Colossians”; cf. Col. iv. 7. But 
this seems forced, for this significance of xaé could hardly occur to 
the readers. But it may mean, “although there are no personal 
relations between us.” Alford understands: ‘‘as Z have been 
going at length into the matters concerning you, so if you also, on 
your part, wish,” etc. 

Ta kar éué= Col. iv. 7. 

tt mpdoow, nearer definition of ra kar’ éué, “how I do,” not 
“what I am doing,” which they knew was the one thing that 
always engaged his thoughts. 

Tuxtkos 6 dyamytds ddeNbds Kat mortds SidKovos. Tychicus is 
mentioned, Acts xx. 4, as accompanying St. Paul from Macedonia 
to Asia. His services as dudkovos are alluded to 2 Tim. iv. 12; 
Tit. iil. 12. It was only év Kupiw that he was Paul’s duaxovos. In 

Jol. iv. 7 avvdovdos is added. 

22. dv Emep a eis attéd toto (=Col. iv.), ze. for the very 
purpose now to be mentioned: tva yore ra epi judy, «.7.A. = Col. 
iv. 8 (where, however, there is a difference of reading), 

23. Eipyvn tots adedpots, «.7.A. A truly apostolic benediction 
as to substance, but differing in form from St. Paul’s final benedic- 
tions. First, it is in the third person, not the second, rots ddeAqois 
instead of tpty, pera rdvrwv tov ay. instead of pe tuav. The 
whole form, too, is markedly general. This agrees well with the 
view that the Epistle was addressed to a circle of Churches. 
Secondly, the benediction is in two parts, not, as elsewhere, one; 
and, thirdly, ydpis, which elsewhere comes first, here concludes, 
and eipyvy, elsewhere last, is here first. These points all speak for 
the genuineness of the Epistle, and against the hypothesis of 
imitation. 

dydim peta mictews. mors is presupposed, therefore it is not 
aydan kai 7. Love is the characteristic of a true faith. 


For dydry A has @Xeos, suggested probably by recollection of 1 Tim. i. 13 
BAG Ih HE 


24. ‘H xdpis peta mdvtwy Tov dyamdévtwy Tov Kiptov hpav “Inoody 
Xpiotov ev adpPapoia. 
ap0apoia elsewhere means the incorruptibility of future im- 


VI. 24] CONCLUDING SALUTATION 191 


mortality ; see, for example, Rom. ii. 7; 2 Tim. i. 10. The 
adjective apGapros has a corresponding meaning. God is a¢@apros, 
Rom. i. 23; 1 Tim. i. 17; the dead are raised dd@apro, 1 Cor. 
xv. 52; the Christian’s crown is dp@apros. So 1 Pet. iii. 4, the 
ornament of women is to be év rd apOdptw Tod mpagos Kal Hovyxiov 
mvevpatos. The word, then, does not point merely to time but to 
character, and that suits very well here as an attribute of love. It 
is more than “sincerity” (dOopia, Tit. ii. 7); it is ‘imperish- 
ableness, incorruptibility.” It is a “spiritual, eternal love, and 
thus only is the word worthy to stand as the crown and 
climax of this glorious Epistle,” Alford. Some connect the word 
with xapis. Soden defends the connexion on the following 
grounds: first, that if connected with dyarwvrwv, é& apf. must 
express a character of the dydzy, in which case dyarav év a6. 
would be an unsuitable form of expression for dyaray év ayary 
apGaptw ; and, secondly, that adf@apoia almost always contains a 
point of contrast with the transitory nature which belongs to the 
creature in this world; it belongs to the sphere of heavenly exist- 
ence, serving to designate eternal life as the highest blessing of 
salvation; and this is the gift of yapis, which culminates in the 
bestowal of it. Bengel, who connects a4f0. with xapus, remarks, 
however, well: ‘‘Congruit cum tota summa epistolae: et inde 
redundat etiam dd@apoia in amorem fidelium erga Jesum 
Christum.” The writer, in fact, returns to the fundamental 
thought of i. 3-14. 

There is no analogy for the connexion with tov Kvpuov jpév, 
adopted by some expositors. 


*Apyyv is added in S°D KL P most mss., Amiat.** Syr. (both) Boh., not 
in 8* ABG 17, Arm. Amiat.* 







: , ae 7, 
ViHLAY D a we ay 
wit 

i mu vf ‘ng aii 






_ 
i" 






peer ser payin 
v, \ sh in! hapless 
Sik Miteliaatianet: seh 





Nhs) 
’ 


we; 


(my POY 









4 i f 
ES ary 


x iy r a i erat Same tT? LP 1m i ude we ‘ r 

Y fins a aah aD 4 ape } 
Vf ied ‘ “Tt ‘7? ; { ‘ t i 

Ap dovwyolts b> ap eT sh a 4 


tyrdi eaten xd ie pat 








THE 


PE othe OMe: COLOSSIANS. 


MPOZ KOAOZZAEIS. 


The spelling of the name is uncertain. In the title the spelling KoNoovaers 
is given by § BSD GL 17 (Kondooaes), while A B* K P have Kodaccaets, 
which §& also has twice at the top of the page, and so G once (once also 


Kodogoaers). In the subscription § A B* C K 17 agree in Ko\agcaers, while 
B?D GLP have Kondoccaets. 


In ver. 2% BD G Lhave Kondoooas, K P17, al. Ko\acoats (A non liquet). 


The versions also vary. Syr. (both) have a, with Boh., but Vulg. and 
Arm. o. 

Coins give the spelling with 0, and for the name of the people Kodoonywy 
or Kodoconywy. But the form with a appears in Polyaenus and in some 
MSS. of Herodotus and Xenophon. The latter may have been a provincial 
pronunciation and spelling. WH. and Lightfoot adopt a in the title, o in 
ver. 2; Tregelles has a in both places, as well as in the subscription (which 
WH. omit). Tischendorf preserves the correct spelling with o, remarking, 
‘‘videtur Kodacoac scriptura sensim in usum abisse. At inde non sequitur 
iam Paulum ita scripsisse.” As the heading did not proceed from the pen of 
St. Paul, this conclusion agrees practically with that of WH. and Lightfoot as 
to the spelling here. 


I. 1. SALUTATION. Maédos dtrdctolos, x.t.A. See Eph. i. 1. 

kat Tipobeos. Timothy’s name is joined with that of Paul 
also in 2 Cor. Phil. 1 Thess. 2 Thess. Philemon. In Phil. and 
Philemon, however, the apostle proceeds in the singular, whereas 
here the plural is maintained throughout the thanksgiving. 

6 ddehpds. This does not imply any official position (ovxodv 
kat amootoAos, Chrys.); it is the simplest title that could be 
employed to express Christian brotherhood. So it is used of 
Quartus, Rom. xvi. 23 ; of Sosthenes, 1 Cor. i. 1; and of Apollos, 
1 Cor. xvi. 12; and of an unnamed brother, 2 Cor. viii. 18, xii. 18 
Compare 2 Cor. ix. 3, 5. 

2. Tots év K. dylous kal muotots ddeAdots. dyvors, as in all similar 
salutations, must be taken as a substantive. De Wette, however, 

13 


194 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS (I. 3 


and apparently Syr. and Vulg., connect it as an adjective with 
adeAdots. mirrots is more than “believing,” which would add 
nothing to dytos and adeAgois. It is “true, steadfast.” Cf. Acts 
Xvi. 15. 

év Xptot@. Closely connected with muorois aé., but refers 
chiefly to murrots. Cf. rurrds didxovos év Kupiv, Eph. vi. 21. Only 
in Christ were they “faithful brethren ” ; the article, therefore, is not 
required. év Xp. might, indeed, have been dispensed with; but it 
suits the formality of the introductory greeting. 


After év Xpiorg, "Inood is added in A D* G 17, Vulg. Boh., not in & B D® 
K LP, Syr-Harcl. Arm. etc. (Syr-Pesh. has "Iycod before Xpior@). 


It is remarkable that St. Paul’s earlier Epistles are addressed 
™ éxkAnolg, Tats éxkAnoias ; whereas here, as in Rom. and Eph., 
the address is to the saints and brethren. This can hardly be 
accidental. It certainly gives the address a more personal and 
less official aspect, and may have been adopted because the 
apostle had no personal relations with the heads of these Churches, 
to which he was personally unknown. It has been objected to 
this, that in iv. 16 the Church of the Laodiceans is mentioned ; 
and, again, that the Epistle to the Philippians, to whom St. Paul 
was personally known, is similarly addressed. As to the former 
objection, it may be fairly replied that to speak of his Epistle 
being read in the Church is very different from addressing it to the 
Church ; and as to the second, although the word éxxAnola is not 
used in the address to the Phil., we have what may be regarded as 
an equivalent, ody émurkdrots kat duaxdvors. It is hardly satisfactory 
to say that the disuse of éxxAnoia in the address is characteristic of 
the later Epistles; for, first, this is not an explanation; and, 
secondly, the word is used in Philemon, 77 kar’ otkév cov éxxAnoia. 

Xdpts Sptv kal eipyvyn dd Oeod watpds Hpav—=Eph. i. 2, where 
there follows kat Kupiov “Incot Xpiorod. 


These words are added here also in §% ACG and most MSS, Boh. 
Arm., also P in a different order, ’Incod Xp. ro} Kuplov yudv. The words 
are absent from BD KL 17, a/. Amiat. Fuld. Syr-Pesh. (text). Origen and 
Chrysostom both expressly attest the absence of the words. ‘The latter, after 
quoting the preceding words, observes: rdv uldv éolynoev Kal ob mpocéOnker 
ws év macas Tats émirovats* kal Kuplov "Incood Xpiorod. The addition has 
plainly come in by assimilation to Eph. 


3-8. Thanksgiving for their faith and love, passing on into the 
assurance that the gospel they were taught by Epaphras was the true 
universal gospel, which proved its genuineness by the fruit it produced, 
both among them and in all the world. 

3. edxapiotodpev. In all St. Paul’s Epistles to Churches, with 
the exception of that to the Galatians, the Salutation is followed by 
thanksgiving. In Eph. as in 2 Cor. this is in the form etAoyntos 6 


I. 4 5] THANKSGIVING 195 


@eds, elsewhere in some form of evyapiord. On the verb, see 
Eph. i. 15. 
7 ©e@ watpi. We have the same form of words in iil. 15; 
elsewhere, however, always 6 @eds kal rarnp. 
Here also xal is inserted by § AC? D° K LP, and apparently all other 
mss. except those mentioned below ; Vulg. Arm. Theodoret, a/. 
It is wanting in B C* D* G, Chrys. (D* G Chrys. have 7@ warpl). Old 
Latin, Syr. (both) Boh. Eth. 
Tisch. 8th ed. (in deference to §), restores kal, which he had omitted in 
7th ed. (WH. and RV. omit). Lachm. also omits, but reads 7@ with D* 
FG. Meyer thinks cal was omitted in a mechanical way after the preceding 
cot marpés. 
It is observable that in iii. 17, & A agree with BC in omitting xal, while 
D FG, with K L and nearly all others, as well as Syr-Pesh., insert it. The 
evidence for the omission there is decidedly preponderant. It is less so here, 
yet perhaps decisive enough when we consider how certainly the scribes 
would stumble at the unusual form. The reading 7@ marpl appears to be 
another attempt to get rid of it. Compare i. 12 below, where & 37, with 
other authorities, have Oe@ before warpl. 


edxaptotodpey . . . mdvToTe mept Sudv mpocevyspevor. It is 
questioned whether wdvrore is to be joined with edyapicrodmev or 
with zpooevy. The latter connexion is adopted by the Greek 
commentators, also by Bengel, Olshausen, Alford, Ellicott, etc. 
But Eph. i. 16 is almost decisive for the other connexion, od 
Tavouar evyapioTav imép tyov preiav ipov owovmevos emt Tov 
mpooevxav pov. Compare 1 Cor. i. 4; 1 Thess. i. 2. mpocevy. is, 
in fact, a nearer definition of wdvrore. ‘‘We give thanks on your 
account always in our prayers,” or (as Meyer), ‘‘always when we 
pray for you.” ‘Always praying for you” would require the 
addition of words specifying the object of the prayer. 

The reading varies between mepl and trép. The latter is read by BD*G 
17, al., but AC D°J K, with most mss., have wept. wvmép would readily be 
introduced from ver. 9, where there is no variant. 

4. dxotcavtes Tihv tiotw pay év Xptotd “Inood. Assigns the 
ground of his thanksgiving. He had heard from Epaphras, ver. 8. 
The addition of év Xp. "Inc. as a more precise definition of wicrts, 
which of itself expresses only a psychological conception, is quite 
natural here, where St. Paul is addressing for the first time those 
who were unknown to him. So in Eph.i.15. In Rom.i. 8 the 
specification of wiorius had preceded vv. 2, 3. The article is un- 
necessary, as miorts ev Xp. is one notion. See Eph. Ze 

kal Thy dydarny hy ExeTe Els TavTAs TOUS dylous. 

hv éxere is read in NACD*GP 17 37 47, al. Old Latin, Vulg. Boh. 
Syr-Harcl. Arm. But D°K Land most mss. Chrys. Theod. Syr-Pesh. have 
Ti aydrny Ti els, while B has tiv aydany els. The reading with jy exere 
might be a conformation to Philem. 5, while ryv dydany tiv might be a con- 
formation to Eph. i. 15. 


5. Sia thy €Amida. The Greek comm. and most moderns 


196 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 5 


connect this with the words immediately preceding, “the love 
which ye have to all the saints.” dyawaré, pyow, Tovs ayiovs od 
dud. te avOpdrrwov GAAG bia 7d Arie TA péAXoVTA ayabd, Theoph. 
The reasons alleged are—(1) the remoteness of edxyapiorodmev ; (2) 
the following clause, jv zponxovcare, suggests that the words da 
Thv eArida describe the motives of the Colossians for welldoing, 
rather than the reasons of the apostle for thanksgiving; (3) in 
other Epistles the ground of thanksgiving is the spiritual state of 
the persons addressed ; (4) edxapiorety is never used with da in 
the N.T.; and (5) the connexion with «dx. would break up the 
triad of graces which St. Paul delights in associating together. (So 
Meyer, Soden, Alford, Ellicott, Lightfoot.) (1), (2), (5) are con- 
sidered by Lightfoot decisive. Yet surely there is something 
strange in assigning the future hope as the motive of Christian 
love. As Eadie observes, if the apostle had said that they loved 
one another because of the common hope which they had in 
heaven, or that this prospect of a joint inheritance deepened their 
attachments, the meaning might have been easily apprehended ; 
but why the hope in itself should be selected as the prop of such 
love, we know not. Of all the graces, love has the least of self in 
its nature. Such passages as 2 Cor. ix. 6, Gal. vi. of. are not 
analogous ; for what creates a difficulty is not the mention of 
expected reward as a motive for action, but as a motive for love. 
As é\mis here is not the grace of hope, but the object (tiv dzoxet- 
pevnv), reason (5) loses its force ; as éAmés does not mean the same 
thing as in 1 Thess. i. 3, for example, it is quite natural that it 
should fall into a different connexion. Nor does there seem to be 
much weight in the second reason. The words jv zpoynkovcare, 
k.T.A., involve an appeal to the first teaching they had received, 
which was sound and full. This goes very well with edxapurrotper ; 
but if the hope were described as the motive of their love, what 
appropriateness would there be in referring to their former instruc- 
tion in it? As to (3) and (4), the clause dxovcavres does imply . 
that the ground of his thanksgiving was their faith and love; but 
it is consistent with this that what prompted him to feel thankful 
for these graces was the thought of the hope laid up for them, and 
hence with this connexion é:4 is not only admissible, but is alone 
suitable. The signification of edyapurrety trép (1 Cor. x. 30; Eph, 
v. 20) is not that required here. ‘There is good reason, then, for 
Bengel’s interpretation: “ex spe patet, quanta sit causa gratias 
agendi pro dono fidei et amoris.” If nv exere be omitted the con- 
nexion with aydmny is grammatically harsh. 

Estius, De Wette, Olshausen, and others connect Ova tH éAm. 
with both wiorw and ayarnv. This connexion is certainly awkward, 
and the sentiment not Pauline. Theodore Mops. connects the 
words with zpocevyopevor. 


I. 6] THANKSGIVING 197 


éAris is clearly objective, as in Rom. vill. 24; Gal. v. 5. 

Thy amoKxeevny. The thought of the “hope,” 7z.e. the bless- 
ing hoped for, being already prepared is not expressed in this 
form by St. Paul elsewhere, except perhaps 1 Tim. vi. 19, but is 
clearly put in 1 Pet. i. 4, kAnpovopiav . . . Ternpynmevynv év otparvots. 
In substance it is involved in Phil. iii. 20, and, indeed, in Matt. 
Vi. 20. 

Hv mponkovoate. The zpo- has reference, according to Meyer, 
to the future fulfilment. Bengel understands it simply as “ ante- 
quam scriberem,” but the context rather suggests that the 
reference is to their early teaching in contrast to the later errors. 
The apostle now is not teaching them anything new, but desires 
to confirm them in the true doctrine which they had already learned. 
Compare vv. 7, 23 and v. 6. Hence also the mention of the truth 
of the gospel in the following words :— 

év TH Néyw Tis &dneias Tod evayyedtou. That edayyeAiov is the 
principal notion here is shown by the participle wapévros, which 
agrees with it, and not with aAnfeias. And this is confirmed by 
the connexion of éA7is and eiayyéAvoy in ver. 23. The genitive 
dAnGeias then qualifies Adyos, and this compound notion is 
explained by ctayy. 7 GA. tod etayy., Gal. ii. 5, 14, is not exactly 
parallel, because there the formula has a direct polemical purpose. 
Here the point is that 6 Adyos Tod ebayy. is a Adyos THs aAnOeias in 
opposition to those false teachers who would fain complete it by 
their wapaddcers, ii. 8, which were Kev?) adrn. 

6. tod mapdvtos cis Gyas. A quite classical use of wapetvar as 
implying “has come and remains.” od wapeyévero Kal améory, add’ 
euewe kal éotw exet, Chrys.; cf. Acts xii. 20. It needs, then, no 
further addition. 

KaQas Kal év tavtl TO Kdopw eotly Kaptropopoupevov. mavTi TH 
xoopm here is not an insignificant hyperbole, but intimates the 
catholicity of the true gospel in opposition to the merely local 
character of false gospels ; compare ver. 23. 

Tischendorf, ed. 8, places a comma after éoriv. This con- 
struction escapes the irregularity involved in the doubling back 
of the comparison by the second xafdés. The comparison then 
may be either as to the mere fact of the presence of the gospel, so 
that éoriv = “exists,” or as to the contents of it, which agrees 
better with the designation of the gospel as Adyos tHs aAnOetas. 
The readers then are assured that the gospel which has come to 
and remains with them is the same as in the whole world; they 
need have no fear that it was imperfect; it is the false teachers 
that are not in agreement with the universal gospel. So Soden. 
But most comm. connect éord with kaprodopovjevov kal avé. 


kal is prefixed to éo7ly in D*’GKL, etc. Old Lat. Vulg. Syr. (both) 
Chrys. 


198 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 6 


It is absent from % ABC D* 17, a/. Boh. Arm. Eth. The evidence 
against it, therefore, is quite decisive. It was doubtless added to simplify 
the construction, and is defended on the ground of this simplicity by Ols- 
hausen and Eadie. Ellicott, who had previously hesitated, thinking that it 
rte been omitted to modify the hyperbole, omitted the word in his 
5th 


Kapmopopovpevov. The middle voice is not elsewhere found ; 
its force here is probably intensive, denoting the inherent energy, 
while the active (which is used below, ver. 10) would rather denote 
external diffusion (Lightfoot). Verbs like owdynpodopeto bar, typzravo- 
gopetofar are not parallel, since in them qopetofar means “ to 
wear.” 

Those comm. .who connect éoriy with the participles explain 
this periphrastic present as expressing continuity of action, as in 
2 Cor. ix. 12, od povov éotly mpocavatAnpodoa, x.t.., and Phil. 
il. 26, emurobav jy. ; 

kat adgavduevov rests on preponderant evidence, 8 ABC D* 
GI, Vss. Rec. omits, with D” K, etc. 

avgavdp.evov doubtless refers to the outward expansion, as xapzrod. 
to the personal, inner working. ‘The gospel is not like those 
plants which exhaust themselves in bearing fruit and wither away. 
The external growth keeps pace with the reproductive energy,” 
Lightfoot. Observe the order ; first the preservation of the gospel 
amongst those who received it, and after that its extension to 
new circles. Both are to the Colossians a proof of its trith and 
sufficiency. 

kaQws Kal ev Spiv, so that they did not come behind their 
brethren in this respect. 

If we connect the participles with éoriv, the comparison is 
very curiously doubled back on itself. Moreover, as Olshausen 
observes (defending the addition of xaé after xécpw), the words 
kaOws kai ev duty do not fit the beginning of the proposition, cafas 
kal év mavTl TH KOopw, since the Colossians are, of course, included: 
with the rest in the whole world. Lightfoot explains the irregu- 
larity thus: ‘‘ The clause reciprocating the comparison is an after- 
thought springing out of the apostle’s anxiety not to withhold 
praise where praise can be given,” and he compares t Thess. iv. 1 
(not Rec.), tapaxadodpev ev Kupiw "Incod iva, xafws tapeAdBere rap' 
npav 70 TOs Set buds wepirarely Kal dpéocxey Wed, kaos Kal aepira- 
Teire, iva Tepiocevnre paddov. But that passage is not really 
parallel ; for xafms kai wepurareire is entirely distinct from Kafas 
mapeAdBere, and is a courteous admission that they were actually 
walking as they had been taught. Here there is nothing of the 
kind, and the difficulty (apart from that mentioned by Olshausen) 
is that we have the mere repetition, “in you as also in all the 
world, as also in you.” ‘The difficulty, of course, disappears in the 


I. 7] THANKSGIVING 199 


Rec. Text with the insertion of kai; or, since we are compelled to 
omit xa/, with the adoption of the construction above referred to, 
as then the comparison in xafos xai év tpty is with xapzod¢. 
Kal ave. 

ah is hpepas, x.7.A. To be closely joined with xafas Kai év 
tuiv; the fruitfulness and growth began at once, so that it was 
independent of these later rapaddces. 

qkovoate Kal éméyvwte Thy xdpw. There is no occasion to regard 
THv xapw as the object of the latter verb only (as Meyer, Alford, 
Ellicott, Eadie understanding “‘it,” ze. the gospel, as the object of 
nkovaate).  xapis was the content of the gospel message, which is 
called 16 etayyéAtov THs xdpitos TOD Meod (Acts xx. 24), and as such 
may be said to be heard. We can hardly, indeed, say, with Light- 
foot, that St. Paul uses xdpis as a “‘synonyme for the gospel,” of 
which use he gives as instances 2 Cor. vi. 1, Vill. 9, ywwoxere 
Tv xapw Tod Kvuplov judy Inootd Xpiorod, dre du duds extwdxevce 
mAovotos wv. Here the word suggests a contrast with the false 
gospel, which was one of ddypara (il. 14). Compare Gal. il. 21, ov« 
aera THv xapw TOD Meor, 

éréyvwre implies not so much developed knowledge as active 
conscious recognition, or taking knowledge of; cf. Acts iil, 10, 
iVeenCoeERIe eA, 2G, XxVil, 3, Kxvilla 131 Com ixivy 39.5.2" Cor, 
i. 14 (€réyvwre yas azo pépous). 

év &\nfeta. Even although the gospel was itself Adyos ris 
dAnOeias, there was the possibility that as known by them it was 
imperfect ; hence this is added to guard them against the error of 
the false teachers, who insisted on supplementing it by their philo- 
sophy (ii. 8, 28). 

7. Kabas epdbete Amd “Erappa. This gives them a further 
assurance as to the source of their Christianity ; the apostle gives 
his seal to the teaching of Epaphras, which conveyed the full 
gospel of the grace of God, so that having received this in truth as 
they did, they had no need to listen to strange teachers. 

Epaphras appears from iv. 12 to have been a Colossian ; either 
a native, or now reckoned as an inhabitant of Colossae. From the 
present passage we gather that he was the founder of the Church 
there (compare the xaws and a¢’ js yu<épas.) He was at this time 
a fellow-prisoner of St. Paul (Philemon 23): or perhaps ovvarypd- 
Awros there only means that he was so constantly with St. Paul as 
practically to share his captivity. As the name isa shortened form 
of Epaphroditus, it was natural to conjecture that the Epaphroditus 
of Phil. ii. 25 was the same person. _ But the names were common, 
occurring frequently in inscriptions ; and as Epaphroditus appears 
to be in close connexion with the Philippians (whose daéaroXos he 
was), there is no sufficient ground for the identification. 

tou dyamntod cuvdovhou Hyav. So Tychicus (iv. 7) is called 


200 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 7 


avvoovdos, the servitude being, of course, to Christ. This designa- 
tion appears intended to command high respect for Epaphras, who 
is thus placed as near as possible to the apostle. 

ds é€oT. TLoTOs UTEp Hay Sidkovos Tod Xpictov. See note on the 
reading. The reading 70v makes Epaphras a representative of 
St. Paul in preaching the gospel at Colossae ; probably at the time 
when the apostle was dwelling for two years at Ephesus, at which 
time ‘all that dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus” 
(Acts xix. 10). This would explain the attitude of authority which 
St. Paul assumes in this Epistle towards a Church which he had 
not himself seen. 

dudxovos has clearly its general meaning “ minister,” not the 
special sense “deacon,” as the genitive rod Xpiorod shows. ‘This 
designation of him as mioros trép par, «.7.r., serves still further to 
confirm the confidence of the Colossians in their first teacher. If 
tpov is read, trép tuov would mean “for your benefit,” not 
“instead of you,” for there is no personal reference here, as in 
Philemon 13, iva izép cod pou Siaxovn. The genitive tod Xpuorod 
is, indeed, decisive of this, for this implies that his ministry wes 
one of spiritual benefit, which would not be suitable to a messenger 
from the Colossians to St. Paul. 


There are two rather important varieties of reading in ver. 7. The Rec. 
Text has xal after xa@ws on comparatively weak authority, viz. D°3747 KL 
Syr-Harcl. Arm., against SABCD*G17P Vulg. Syr. Pesh. and other 
Vers. xal was doubtless added from assimilation to the two preceding 
KaOws kal. Ka0ws éudOere without xal can only mean that Epaphras was their 
first teacher. 

The other important variation is between brép judy and rep buay, and 
with respect to this there is a remarkable conflict between MSS. and versions. 
nuGy is read by S*A BD*G. 

Ambrosiaster (Comm. ‘‘ qui eis ministravit gratiam Christi vice Apostoli”), 

buav by 8°C Dbe K L P and most MSS. 

The versions, however, are nearly all on the side of tyuav, Vulg. Syr. 
(both) Boh. Arm. Eth. Goth. Chrys. also interprets tJuav. The other 
Greek comm. are silent as to the word in their comments, and the reading in, 
their texts, which is tuav, may be due to editors. Of the old Latin, d (and e) 
with f have ‘‘ vobis ” (against the Greek D F), while g has ‘‘ nobis ” (agree- 
ing with G). 

Internal evidence favours 7udy. First, “‘ for your benefit ” would hardly 
be expressed by brép buGy, but either by tuay, cf. dudxovoy meprrou7js, Rom. 
xv. 8, or buiv, asin I Pet. i. 12. The form of expression does not indicate 
that any emphasis on ‘‘ for your benefit ” is intended, as if the apostle meant 
to impress on the Col. that whatever Epaphras had done was for their good. 
Secondly, it is easy to understand how tuav might be substituted for quar, 
partly on account of the recurrence of biép juay in the neighbouring context 
(vv. 3, 9) and in connexion with this, from the significance of judy not being 
understood. The two words being pronounced alike, these circumstances 
would naturally lead to tu@v being written by mistake in the first instance, and 
the second to its preference when both readings were deliberately compared. 
On the other hand, Meyer thinks that 7juév is due to the influence of the 
preceding #uGv and the following j4aéy. Editors differ in their judgment ; 


I. 8, 9) PRAYER FOR THE READERS 201 


Lachm, Treg. WH. Lightfoot, RV. Barry, Moule adopt judy, budv being 
given a place in the margin by WH. RV. 

On the other hand, Tisch. Meyer, Ell. Eadie, Soden prefer tuadv. Eadie 
in support of this points out that 7uGy would include Timothy. But there is 
no reason why Timothy should be so pointedly excluded, as would have been 
the case had é€uod been used, any more than with ovydovAov and dyAwoas. 


8. 6 Kat Syddoas Hpiv Thy bpav dydayv ev mvedpati, viz. their 
love to St. Paul in particular. This appears clear from yyy tiv 
tuov, as well as from the subsequent 6a rodro kai jets. The 
words may be regarded as a courteous justification of the didactic 
tone which the apostle adopts, and perhaps also as an indication 
that Epaphras had not made any complaint of the Colossians. 
Meyer (reading tyov) understands love to Epaphras ; Ellicott, 
brotherly love. 

év mvevpate expresses the ground of their love, which was not 
individual sympathy, personal acquaintance, or the like, but 
belonged to the sphere of the Holy Spirit’s influence. It was ov 
capkixy, dAAG mvevpatiuy, Oecum. Compare dco ody éwpadxact TO 
mpocwmrdov pov ev capki (il. 7). 

9-12. Prayer for their advancement in spiritual knowledge, not 
speculative, but practical. 

9. Ava todto. On account, namely, of all that has preceded 
from ver. 4; cf. 1 Thess. il. 4. Chrys. strikingly observes : xaazrep 
év Tos ayaow éxeivous pddiota dveyeipomev Tors eyyvs OvTas Tis 
vukyns’ ovtw 89 Kal 6 IlatAos tovrovs padwTa mapakadet tovs TO 
mAéov KatwpOwkdras. Cf. Eph. i. 15. Kal mets, “we also,” by 
its position emphasises the transition from the conduct of the 
Colossians to its effect on the apostle and his friends. 

ad’ As Hpépas AKovcapev echoes the similar expression in ver. 6. 
So the apostle’s prayer was, as it were, an echo of their faith. 
An encouragement to them to proceed as they had begun. 

ob Tavépe0a tmpocevxdpevor. Cf. Eph. i. 16. Called by Ellicott 
an “affectionate hyperbole”; yet it is hardly to be called a hyper- 
bole, for it would at no moment be true to say that he had ceased 
to pray for them. It is not asserted that the expression of the 
prayer was uninterrupted. As they did not cease to grow and 
bear fruit, so he did not cease to pray. Cf. Acts v. 42, ovx 
éravovro OiddoxKovres, «.7.A., and contra, Acts xiii. 10, od avon 
diactpépwv, and 1 Sam. xii. 23. Kat airovpevor, «.7.d., adds the 
special request to the more general zpocevydpevor. Compare Mk. 
Xl. 24, 00a tpocedxecbe Kal aireiobe. 

iva after words like OéAcv, airetoOau, signifies merely the purport 
of the wish or prayer; cf. Phil. i. 9, where rodro as object of 
mpocevxopar is explained by wa rAnpwbijre tHv éexiyvwow. For the 
accusative, compare Phil. i. 11, wemAnpwpevor Kaprov Sixacoovvys, 
‘that ye may be perfected in,” Oltramare. émiyvwow, stronger 


202 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 9 


than yv@ors: see 1 Cor. xili. 12. The difference, however, seems 
to be rather that the former word implies a more active exercise of 
a faculty, and hence lends itself better to the expression of practical 
knowledge. This distinction agrees well with Rom. i. 21, 28. 
Compare on the verb, ver. 6. Lightfoot remarks that ér/yvwous 
is a favourite word in the later Epistles of St. Paul; but, in fact, 
although it occurs four times in this Epistle and twice in Eph., 
it is used only once in Phil. (i. 9), whereas it is thrice used in 
Rom. In the later Epistles, however, it is always used in refer- 
ence to spiritual knowledge. See Trench, Syz. Ixxv. 

tod Yehjpatos attod. The following context, vv. 10-12, shows 
that what is meant is the Divine will as to their conduct, as in 
iv. 12; 1 Thess. iv. 3, v.18; Rom. xii. 2; not the xdpus mentioned 
as the object of their knowledge in ver. 6 (da rod viod mpoodyerbat 
Hpas aiTd, okére Ov dyyéAwv, Chrys. etc.). The knowledge which 
is here meant is, in fact, the consequence of that which is there 
attributed to them. Knowing the xdpis, they should know also 
that what God required of them was nothing but conduct corre- 
sponding thereto. ‘This in opposition to the false teachers and the 
doctrines of their piAccodia. 

ev mdoy copia kai ovvécer mveupatikyi. “In all spiritual wisdom 
and understanding,” év introducing the manner in which the 
mAypwOnvat is carried out, and radon and mvevpatixy being taken 
with both substantives. To connect rv. with ovvéoe alone would 
be to give the inappropriate meaning, ‘wisdom of all kinds and 
spiritual understanding.” 

On codia see Eph. i. 8, where the words are év mdoy oodia Kai 
gpovyce. These three, codia, ppovgris, ov ovveo.s, are reckoned by 
Aristotle as the three intellectual aperaé or excellences (Z7A. JV. 
i. 13), the first being the most general and thorough, embracing 
the knowledge of first principles as well as that of particulars ; 
while he distinguishes dpdvyos as the practical knowledge of par- 
ticulars from ovveots, which is critical; 7 ppdvyots emitaxriky eatin 

. 7 O€ ovveots Kpitixy (Zth. LV. vi. 7. 11). Demosth. (269. 24) 
defines ovveois, 7 Ta Kada Kal aicypa SiayvocKeta, which agrees 
with Aristotle’s xpurixy. It would appear, therefore, that ovveous 
was the faculty of deciding what was right or wrong in particular 
cases, while copia apprehended the general principles. But 
auveois is used by St. Paul in a more general sense; see Eph. 
ili. 4; cf. Luke ii. 47. The two words frequently occur together 
in the ;OxT.,..¢.9., 0x. -xxxi, 3i3) Isaspodx ra Kccles! exis zion: 
(1 Cor. i. 19 is a quotation), and the corresponding adjectives in 
Matt. xi. 25. 

TVEYHATUKD, given by the Spirit. Compare 1 Cor. xil. 8, @ 
fev dud TOD TV EVHLATOS didorar Noyos codias. 

The word is emphatic in this position, marking the contrast 


I. 10] PRAYER FOR THE READERS 203 


with the false teaching, which had Adyov codias, a pretence of 
wisdom (ii. 23) which really proceeded from 6 vods ris capkés 
(ii. 18). We have the apostle’s copia capxixy, 2 Cor. i. 12; avOpwrivn, 
1 Cor. ii. 5, 13; Tov Koopov TovTov, I Cor. li. 6, etc. 

10. wepimarica: buds dgiws tod Kupiov. A similar expression 
occurs 1 Thess. ii. 12, défws Tov @codv: and Eph. iv. 1, THs KAjoews, 
“in a manner worthy of,” 7.e. befitting your connexion with Him. 
The infinitive expresses the consequence (and proof) of tAnpwhjvat, 
del 7H mioter ovlevyvvct THY Toditetay, Chrys. 

If buds after wepiurarfoae were genuine (Text. Rec.), the infinitive might 
conceivably be regarded as dependent on mpocevxduevor; but it is certainly 
spurious, being omitted by N* ABC D*G 17, a/. Clem., Boh. It is added 
in 8° D°K LP, most mss. Chrys. Theodoret, Arm. 

cis Tacav dpecketay. J.e. “so as to please God in every way.” 
Compare 1 Thess. iv. 5, was det tuds repuratety Kal apécxew Oecd. 
In classical authors dpeoxefa has generally an unfavourable sense, 
“obsequiousness,” and it is so defined both in £¢h. Ludem. (16 
Alav wrpos HOovyy, 11. 3) and by Theophrastus (Char. 5). Polybius 
uses it especially of trying to gain the favour of a sovereign. 
Similarly Philo, ravra kat N€yew Kai rpdrrew éorrovoaLer els dpeckeiav 
Tov matpos Kal BaoWéws (i. p. 34), but he also uses it of pleasing 
God. The dv6paos apécxev is disavowed by the apostle in Gal. 
i. 10; 1 Thess. ii. 4; compare ch. iii. 22. The verb is used, how- 
ever, without any unfavourable connotation, in Rom. xv. 2 (ré 
mAnolov aperxérw) and elsewhere. 

év Tavtt épyw dya0@ qualifies the following, as év rdon Suvdpe 
qualifies the following participle. Most commentators separate 
kaproopovvres and avgavduevor; but then avé. r7 érvyvioes becomes 
tautologous with tAnpwOnre tiv éxiyvwow, ver. 9. Moreover, the 
combination xaprogpopovpevov kat av&. in ver. 6 seems to require 
that the two participles here also should be taken together. What 
is true of the gospel in the world and amongst the Colossians is 
also to hold good of those whose lives are inspired by its teaching. 
The participles refer to the logical subject of wepurarjoat, not to 
mAnpwOnre (Beza, Bengel). Cf. Eph. iv. 2. 77 ériyvwoe trod @eoi, 
“by the knowledge of God,” instrumental dative, a frequent use of 
the dative with avgav. (So Alford, Eadie, Ellicott, Lightfoot, 
Soden, RV.mg.) The fruitfulness and growth are wrought through 
the ériyvwos rod @eod, and this again results from the practice of 
his will, ver. 9. 

Some commentators take the dative as one of reference, as in 
Rom. iv. 20 (?), “increasing in the knowledge of God” (Moule, 
RV. text), which, after rAynpwOjre tHv ervyv., ver. 9, would be 
somewhat of a tautology. 

TH émvyvwoe is the reading of §X ABC D*GP 17, a/. Amiat. Arm. ai, 
év is prefixed in X° 47, and a few others, Chrys. Old Lat. and Vulg-Clem, 


204 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS (ra 


have ‘‘in scientia Dei,” which is doubtful. Text. Rec. has els riy érlyywou, 
with D°K L most mss., Theodoret, Theoph. Oec. This appears to be an 
attempt to simplify the construction. Meyer, on the contrary, regards the 
dative as an explanation of the more difficult (?) els riy ér., which, he thinks, 
is also confirmed by the parallelism in structure of the other participial clauses, 
which conclude with a definition introduced by els. He understands it as ‘‘ in 
respect of,” that is, always more fully attaining to a knowledge of God, els 
indicating the final reference, or direction of the growth, comparing Eph. 
iv. 15 and 2 Pet. i. 8. As to the comparative difficulty of the readings, 
Alford’s judgment, that the simple dative ‘‘is by far the most difficult of the 
three readings,” is surely more correct than Meyer’s. els ryv émlyv. would, 
in fact, present no difficulty to the ordinary reader. 

11. év wdon Suvdper Suvapodpevor. Theodoret takes this év as 
instrumental, 77 Oia porn Kpatvvopevot, and so Eadie, Ellicott, and 
Meyer. ‘Strengthened with all (every form of) strength,” Ell. (a 
translation which is itself ambiguous). 

It is simpler and more natural to understand ev 7. 5. as ‘‘in 
(z.e. in the matter of) all strength” (Alford, Lightfoot). It thus 
corresponds with év réon codig. and év ravti épyw, which are both 
subjective. dvvapovpevor, present, “ becoming strengthened.” The 
simple verb is not used elsewhere by St. Paul, who, however, 
employs évdvvapotc a: several times. But dvvapotcfa is in Heb. 
xi. 34, and B has it in Eph. vi. ro. It is frequently used by the 
Greek translators of the O.T., but is not a classical word. The 
connected virtues here, tzonovy and paxpoOupia, indicate that what 
is referred to in this clause is steadfastness under trial, as the former 
referred to active conduct. 

kata Td Kpdtos THs Sd6&s adto’. ‘According to the might of 
His glory.” Strength is supplied in a manner correspondent with 
the power which belongs to the glory of God, ze. His majesty as 
manifested to men. Compare Eph. i. 19. The rendering of AV. 
(Beza, etc.), ‘‘ His glorious power,” is sufficiently refuted by avrov. 
Thomas Aquinas understands by “ His glory,” ‘His Son Christ 
Jesus.” But although the Son may be called déravyaopa ris dd€s 
avrod, it would not be intelligible to use 7 dda avrod as a sub- 
stitute for His name. Lightfoot remarks that xparos in N.T. is° 
“applied solely to God” ; but see Heb. ii. 14, tov 76 xpdtos éxovra 
tov Gavarov, ToT ate Tov dia BodAov. 

cig Tacav Sropovyy Kat paxpoOuptay. “To all endurance and 
longsuffering.” “Patience” is a very inadequate rendering of 
taropnovn, which includes perseverance or steadfast continuance in a 
course of action. Thus we have xaprodopotew év tropnovy, Luke 
Vill. 15; Uropovy epyov ayafot, Rom. ii. 7; dv’ tropovns tpéxwper, 
Heb. xii. 1. Even the tropuovy of Job, to which James refers, was 
by no means the uncomplaining endurance of suffering to which 
we give the name of “patience.” Job was, in fact, the very 
reverse of “patient”; but he maintained his faith in God and his 
uprightness in spite of his sore trials. paxpo@vuia comes much 


I. 11] PRAYER FOR THE READERS 205 


nearer to our notion of “ patience” (cf. 1 Cor. xiii. 4); not so much, 
however, patience under suffering, but ‘the self-restraint which 
does not hastily retaliate a wrong.” It is the opposite of d6év@vpia. 
Chrysostom distinguishes the two words thus: paxpoOupet tis 
mpos ékeivous ovs OuvaTov Kal aptvacba’ tropever dé ods ov dvvarat 
dpvvacGar; but this, though correct as to paxpofupei, is clearly 
inadequate for tropéver. 

11, 12. peta xapas edxapioroivtes. pera xapas is joined by many 
comm. to the preceding (Theodoret, Olsh. De W. Alf. Eadie, 
Lightfoot, RV.). In defence of this it is said that edyapioreiy of 
itself implies joyfulness, so that era x. if attached to it would be 
flat and unmeaning ; also that by joining the words with «dx. we 
lose the essential idea of joyful endurance. Lightfoot, quoting 
Jas. i. 2, 3, wacav xapav yyjoacbe . . . ray Tetpacpois mepiTéonTe 
toukidous, ywwaKovTes OTL TO OoKipov tpav THs murtéws Karepydlerar 
tropovnv, remarks that this parallel points to the connexion with 
the preceding, and adds that the emphatic position of the words if 
connected with edx. cannot be explained. It may be replied that 
evxapicreity does not necessarily imply joy. See, for example, 
1 Cor. xiv. 18, “I thank God, I speak with tongues more than you 
all,” x. 30; Col. iil. 17. xapdas is so far from being flat or unmean- 
ing, that without it edyxapurrotvres would be too weak. The idea of 
joyful endurance is not lost when the prayer passes from endur- 
ance to joyful thanksgiving; and the emphatic position of the 
words is sufficiently explained by the writer’s desire to emphasise 
this characteristic of their thanksgiving with special reference to 
the trials. implied in tropovy and paxpoOvpia. The words thus 
acquire greater significance than if they slipped in as it were after 
pakpoOvpiav. The connexion with edxapiorotvres is also favoured 
by the structure of the preceding clauses, each of which com- 
mences with a defining adjunct. This connexion is adopted by 
Chrys. Theoph. Oecum., also Ellicott, Meyer, Soden, Lachm. Tisch. 

In any case edy. is not to be connected with ov zavopeba, as 
Chrys. Theoph. a/., which unnaturally separates this clause from 
the preceding, making them parenthetical. This interpretation was 
suggested by the reading yds: but even if that is correct, the 
transition from the second person to the first is quite in St. Paul’s 
manner ; cf. ii. 12, 13. 

76 Martpt. The designation of God thus absolutely as 6 Iarnp, 
when Christ has not been named immediately before (as in Rom. 
vi. 5; Eph. ii. 18; Acts i. 4, 7, ii. 33), is remarkable. But we 
have rod Kvpiov in ver. 10, and, what is perhaps more to the point, 
TOU viod THS aydmrns avrov in Ver. 13. 

N 37 (G, Gew tw rarpt), Vulg-Clem. Boh. a/. prefix Oep rarpl. 


TO tkavdoavte Spas, “ Who qualified you,” or “made you com. 


206 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 12 


petent,” ze. given you atitle. The same verb occurs 2 Cor. iii. 6 
(only). 8s Kal ikdvwcey pds Suaxdvous Kays SuaOyKys, “ qualified us 
to be ministers,” cf. 7d. ver. 5. The adjective ixayds is of frequent 
occurrence in the N.T., always with the idea of reaching to a 
certain standard, “sufficient,” and so when time or quantity is in 
question, “considerable.” See Mark xv. 15; Luke xxii. 38, ixavov 
éore: Acts xxii. 6, p@s ixavov: 2 Cor. ii. 16, pds tadra tis txavés: 
2 Tim. ii. 2, otrwes ixavol érovrar Kal érépous didaéar. It does not 
mean “dignus,” “worthy,” although with a negative that transla- 
tion is not unsuitable in Matt. iii. 11, vill. 8. Here, then, ixavwoev 
is not “dignos fecit,” Vulg., but “‘idoneos fecit.” 

There is an important variety of reading. For lxavdcavtt (which is read 
by SACD°K LP most mss., Vulg. Boh. Syr. (both), Chrys. etc.) we have 
kadéoav7e in D*G17 80, Goth. Arm. Eth., also Didymus (once), Am- 
brosiaster ; while B has xadéoavtt kal txkavwoavTt, which is adopted by 
Lachm., but appears to be a combination of both, readings. The confusion 
between TQTIKANQCANTI and TQOIKAAECANTI would be easy, and the 
latter word would naturally occur to a copyist. 

buds is the reading of SB 4 23 80 115, Amiat. Syr-Pesh. marg. Eth. 
Didymus, Theoph. Ambrosiaster. 

quads, ACDGKLP most mss., Vulg-Clem. Fuld. Syr-Pesh. and Harcl. 
text, Chrys. Theodoret, etc. 

Internal evidence seems rather to favour twas. The natural tendency of 
scribes would be to generalise such a statement, and this would be assisted by 
tas which presently follows. On the other hand, it would be quite natural 
for St. Paul to enforce the exhortation involved in his prayer by such a 
personal application. In the next sentence, where he passes tc a direct 
dogmatic statement, he naturally and of course uses qjuds. (Yet P, a/. Amiat. 
Goth. have buds there also.) Compare Eph. iv. 32, v. 2. studs is adopted 
here by Tisch. WH. Soden, and is given a place in the margin by Tregelles, 
Lightfoot, RV. 

eis Thy pepida tod KAnpou, “for, z.e. to obtain, the portion of 
the lot.” Compare Ps. xv. 5, Kvpuos pepis ris Anpovopias pov. 
KXjjpos (pp. “a lot”) is not synonymous with kAnpovopia, it does 
not designate the whole, but the allotted part ; cf. Acts viii. 21, od 
€oTL Gor pepls ovde Ages Xxvi. 18, KANpov ev Tots Aryan pero. 
What is a pepis in reference to the whole is a xAjpos in reference 
to the possessor. The genitive, then, is one of apposition, ‘the 
portion which consists in the lot” (Lightfoot, Soden). It is, how- 
ever, possible to understand it as partitive, “to have a share in 
the «Azjpos,” and so most comm. Chrysostom observes: dia ri 
kAjpov Kael; Seuxvis OTe ovdels ard KaTopOwpdtwy oikeiwy Bactrelas 
ruyxave, referring to Luke xvii. 10. Compare also Luke xii. 32, 
evooKnoev 6 TaTip tuav Sovvat tuty THY Bactr€ar. 

év T@ gwtt. Chrys. Oec. Theoph. followed by Meyer, a/, 
connect with ixavwcavr,, “by the light,” txavodv év 74 wrt being 
nothing else but kaActy cis 7d fads (1 Pet. il. 9) regarded in its 
moral efficacy, the result of which is that men are és ev Kupiw 
(Eph. v. 8). This light has power, it is the light of life (John 


I. 13] POSITIVE INSTRUCTION 207 


viii. 12); has its weapons (Rom. xiii. 12); produces fruit (Eph. 
v. 9), etc.; and without it men were incapable of partaking in the 
kingdom of Christ. But és is not the means, but the result ; and, 
moreover, the distance of év td wri from ixav. forbids the con- 
nexion, for there is no such emphasis on the words as to account for 
their position. It is the deliverance that is the thought dwelt on, not 
the means. It is better to connect the word with riv pepida, x.7.A. 
(Alf. Lightfoot), or, if with one of the three substantives, with 
kAnpov, which has a local sense (Ellicott, Soden). Thus é& 7 dwri 
=“in the kingdom of light.” Compare 2 Cor. xi. 14; 1 Tim. 
vi. 16; 1 John i. 7; Rev. xxi. 24. KAjpos &v TO gwri, then, is 
equivalent to the Amis aoxewevryn év Tots ovtpavois, pas being here 
chosen because the apostle had already in his thoughts the repre- 
sentation of the natural condition of men as cxdéros. There is 
nothing, therefore, in the objection, that if this were the sense in- 
tended & rots otpavots would have been used, or év rH wy, or the 
like. Eadie’s interpretation, “the inheritance which consists in 
light,” is untenable, and is certainly not supported by his examples 
of xAnpos év from Acts viii. 21, xxvi. 18. 

13 ff. From the prayer for their increase in knowledge, St. Paul 
goes on to give them positive instruction which will be a safeguard 
against the false teaching which threatens them. They have already 
been translated from the kingdom of darkness to the kingdom of 
God’s beloved Son, and it is in Him only that they have redemption. 

18. 85 éppicato (eptoaro, B* GP Lightf.) pais ex tis 
efoucias tod oxdtous. ‘‘Who rescued us from the power of dark- 
ness.” éppvcato, Sexvis dre &s aiyuddAwror eradaitwpovpeba, 
Theoph. éfovova (from éfeor), properly means “liberty of action,” 
as in 1 Cor. ix. 5; hence in relation to others, “authority,” 
generally “delegated authority” (but not always; see Jude 25). 
Lightfoot, following Wetstein, maintains that the word here means 
“arbitrary power, tyranny.” But the instances he cites seem quite 
insufficient to support this. In Demosth., for example, De Jalsa 
Leg. p. 428, tiv dyav tavrnv e€ovolay, it is the word dyay that 
introduces the idea of excess, just as we might speak of the 
“excessive exercise of authority.” From the etymology of the 
word it is applicable, whether the ée&etvar is assumed or rightfully 
derived. Whatever its use, however, in Plutarch or other wr'ters, 
the usage of the N.T. gives no support to Lightfoot’s view. It is 
a word of very frequent occurrence (being found nearly one 
hundred times), and always in the simple sense of “authority” 
(abstract or concrete). If the ‘idea of disorder is involved” in 
9 €€ovela Tov oxorovs here and in Luke xxii. 53, it is suggested by 
gKotous, not by éefovota. When Chrysostom, after explaining 
THs eovaias by rs tvpavvidos, adds: xaAerov" Kal 7d dwAds elvat 
tro 7d SiaBdAw* 7d 52 cal per’ efovoias, rodro xaderwrepov, his 


208 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [E14 


meaning seems to be: “It is hard to be simply under the power 
of the devil ; but that he should also have authority is still harder.” 
This gives much more force to his words. That ¢fovcta is not 
opposed to BaciXe/a, as an arbitrary tyranny to a well-ordered 
sovereignty, see Rev. xil. 10, 7 Bacireia Tod Ocod Hudy Kai 7 
eovcia tod Xpicrov aitov. The whole passage is strikingly 
parallel to Acts xxvi. 18, rot émiotpépat ard oxdrous eis pds Kal 
Ts eSovolas Tov arava evi Tov Meov, Tod AaPeiv avtovs adeow 
dpapTi@v Kal KAHpov ev Tots yytacpevots. oKdTos here is not to be 
regarded as personified, as if it were equivalent to “the devil” 
(Augustine) ; it is rather the characteristic and ruling principle of 
the region in which they dwelt before conversion to Christ. 

kat petéotnoev. The verb is appropriate, being that which is 
employed by classical writers to signify the removal of whole 
bodies of men. Yet it is doubtful whether such an idea is 
present here; cf. Plato, Rep. vil. p. 518 A, ek te dwtds eis oKOTOS 
peOiorapevwy Kai ek oKOToUs «cis POs. 

Tod ulod THS dydmys adtod. Not of angels, as the false teachers 
would have it. wd tov KAnpovopov éeopeév, ody bd Tovs oikéras, 
Severianus. 

Ts aydrns avrov. Augustine understands this as a genitive 
“‘auctoris.” ‘‘Caritas quippe Patris ... nihil est quam ejus 
ipsa natura atque substantia ...ac per hoc filius caritatis 
ejus nullus est alius quam qui de ejus substantia est genitus” 
(De Trin. xv. 19). He is followed by Olshausen and Lightfoot. 
But such a form of expression has no analogy in the N.T. Love 
is not the “substantia” or “natura” of God, but an essential 
attribute. An action might be ascribed to it, but not the genera- 
tion of a person. 

Theodore of Mopsuestia interpreted the expression in an 
opposite way: vidv ayarns attov éxkddecey ws ov Pioet Tod Ilarpos 
ovtTa vidov GAN’ aydryn HS viobecias afwwhévTa TovTwy. But an 
explanation of the nature of the Sonship would be alien to the 
context. The simplest interpretation is, “the Son who is the 
object of His love.” It corresponds exactly with Eph. i. 6, év 
TO Hyarnpevw ev @ Exopev, «.7.X., Only that it gives more pro- 
minence to the attribute. Love is not merely bestowed upon 
Him, but makes Him its own. vids ddvvys pov in Gen. xxxv. 18 
(Meyer, Ellicott) is not parallel. ; 

Lightfoot thinks this interpretation destroys the whole force of 
the expression; but it is not so. It is because Christ is the 
central object of God’s love that those who have been translated 
into His kingdom are assured of the promised blessings thereof. 

14, év @ éxopey, k.t.d. = Eph. i. 7. 

The words 6:4 Tod atuaros atrod of the Rec. Text are an interpolation 
from Eph. i. 7. They are found in many minuscules, and in Vulg-Clem. 


I. 15! PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 209 


Demid. Syr-Pesh. Arm., Theodoret, Oec.; but apparently not in any uncial 
nor in the other versions. 

For éxouev B, Boh. Arab. (Lips. Bedwell) read écxouev. In the 
parallel passage, Eph. i. 7, %* D* (not the Latin d) Boh. Eth., Iren. 
(transl.) have éoxouev. Lightfoot thinks that this reading in Eph, was a 
harmonistic change to conform to the text which these authorities or their 
predecessors found in Col., and judges that érxouev is possibly the correct 
reading here. WH. also give it a place in the margin. Yet it is hard to 
suppose that St. Paul wrote different tenses in the two places. Moreover, 
écxouev does not appear to be a suitable tense; if past time were to be 
expressed, we should expect éox7xapev (cf. Rom. v. 2), Weiss rejects it. 


Thy d&deow tov duaptiay. This expression does not occur in 
the Epistles of St. Paul elsewhere, but twice in his speeches in 
Acts (xiii. 38, xxvi. 18). In Eph. i. 7 we have the equivalent, 
adecw TOV waparTwpatwv ; generally in the Epp. he prefers the 
more positive diuxaootvn. Lightfoot suggests that the studied 
precision in the definition of droAvrpwo.s points to some false 
conception of dod. put forward by the heretical teachers. Later 
Gnostics certainly did pervert the meaning of the term. Irenaeus 
relates of the Marcosians that they held ctvae redelay droAvtpwow 
aityy tiv eriyvwow Tov appyTov peyéfous (i. 21. 4). Hippolytus 
says: A¢yovoi tt fwv}) appitw émirbévres XEipa TO Ti arodvtpwow 
AaBovrt, x.7.A. (Haer. vi. 41). In the baptismal formula of the 
Marcosians are the words: «is €vwow kal arodvtpwow Kai Kowwviav 
tov dvvapewv (Iren. i. 21. 3), where the last words “surely mean 
communion with the (spiritual) powers.” In an alternative 
formula, also given by Irenaeus, the words are eis Avtpwow 
ayyeduxyv, which is explained by Clem. Alex. (Hxc. Theod. 
Pp. 974) as Hv Kal ayyedor Exovow. It is not likely that there was 
any historical connexion between these later Gnostics and the 
Colossian heretics; but, as Lightfoot observes, “the passages quoted 
will serve to show how a false idea of aroAvrpwors would naturally 
be associated with an esoteric doctrine of angelic powers.” 

15-17. The pre-eminence of Christ. In Hs essential nature He 
ts above all created things, being the image of the invisible God; and 
more than that, all things have been created through Him and held 
together by Him. 

15. ds éotw, «7.4. On this verse Lightfoot has a valuable 
excursus. The arrangement of the passage 15-20 is twofold. 
We have, first, the relation of Christ to God and the world, 15-17 ; 
and, secondly, His relation to the Church, 18 ff. This division is 
indicated in the construction of the passage by the repeated ére év 
air, 16, 19, introducing in each case the reason of the preceding 
statement. The relation to the Church begins with xat aids, ver. 18. 

Some commentators regard ‘15-17 as descriptive of the Word 
before the Incarnation, the Adyos doapxos; and 18-20, of the 
Incarnate Word, Adyos é&vaapxos. But this is inconsistent with éo7w, 

14 


210 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 15 


” which shows that St. Paul is speaking of Christ in His present 
glorified state. Compare 2 Cor. iv. 4, Tov pwricpov Tod ebayyeAlov 
THs Od€ys TOD Xpuicrod, 6s eotw elkwv Tod @eov. The exalted Christ 
is now and continues to be what He was in His own nature as 
the Word before He became incarnate, John xvii. 5. 


eikov is primarily an image (so in Rev. often, comp. Matt. xxii. 20), 
It differs from éuolwua, which expresses mere resemblance, whereas elkwv 
implies representation of an archetype. airy yap elxdvos Piors ulunua elvae 
Tov apxeTvrou (Greg. Naz. Orat. 30). It may be used, therefore, to express 
resemblance in some essential character. So in Heb. x. 1, elkdy is con- 
trasted with oxid. Compare I Cor. xv. 49, Thy elkéva Tod xotxod Soo) 0. UHL 
elk. Tod érovpavlov: Rom. viii. 29, ounubppous THs elxdvos Tov vlov a’rod, an 
idea expressed again 2 Cor) iit. 18, Thy adray elxdva perapoppovpeba: and 
Col. iii. 10, Tov dvaKxavotmevov Kar’ cicion Tov ktloavros a’réy. An allusion 
to Gen. i. 26, 28. With the same allusion in 1 Cor. xi. 7 the apostle calls 
the man eixdy xal 56a Oeod. ‘This last passage, in particular, forbids our 
adopting the view of some commentators, that the expression denotes ‘‘ the 
eternal Son’s perfect equality with the Father in respect of His substance, 
nature, and eternity” (Ellicott, quoting Hil. De Syn. § 73: ‘“‘perfectae 
aequalitatis significantiam habet similitudo.”). As Lightfoot remarks: ‘The 
idea of perfection does not lie in the word itself, but must be sought from 
the context, ¢.g. wav 7d mAjpwpa, ver. 19.” 

The expression is frequently used by Philo in reference to the Logos, 
e.g. Tov dbparov Kal vonrdv Oeiov Aébyov elxdva bye Geod (De Mund. Op. 8, 
Opp. I. p. 6); Nbyos 5é ear elkav Oeod Sv ob cipmras 6 Kbcpos ednucoupyetro 
(De Monarch. ii. 5, Il. p. 225); and notably De Somnzzs, I. p. 656, ka@dmep 
Thy dv Oj Lov avyny ws Hrcov ol wh Suvdwevor Tov Hrrov avrov ldetv Opa... . 
olrws Kal thy Tod Ocod elxdva, Tov dayyehov avrod Adyov, ws avrdv KaTavoovdat. 
Compare with this John xiv. 9, 6 éwpaxws ewe éwpakev Tov Tatépa. 

Closely allied to elxwy is XAPAKT Ip, similarly applied to Christ in Heb, 
L. 3, Ov dmat’yacua Ths bbEns Kal xapaxThp THs Vrogrdcews avTod. 


tod dopdtou. This word, which by its position also is emphatic, 
makes prominent the contrast with the eixdv, the visibility of which 
is therefore implied. Compare Rom. i. 20, Ta ddpata airod... 
Tois Tounpace voovjeva KaGoparat, Here Christ is the visible mani- 
festation of the invisible. Chrysostom, indeed, and the Nicene 
and post-Nicene Fathers, argued that, as the archetype is invisible, 
ao must the image be, 7 0 TOU aoparouv eik@v Kal avr d.0paros kal 
dpoiws adparos. But, as Lightfoot says, “the underlying idea of 
the eixav, and, indeed, of the Adyos generally, is the manifestation 
of the hidden.” Compare John i. 18, @cdv ovdets Epaxe marore’ 6 
povoyerijs vids (v.2. povoyevys Meds), 6 Sv eis Tov KdArOV TOU TaTpds, 
éxeivos e€nynoato, and xiv. 9, quoted above. 

TpwrdToKos Tdons KTicews. mpwTdToKos seems to have been a 
recognised title of the Messiah (see Heb. i. 6), perhaps derived 
from Ps. 1xxxix. 28, éy® mpwrdtoxov Onoopat airdv, which is inter- 
preted of the Messiah by R. Nathan in Shemoth Radba, 19, fol. 
118. 4. Israel is called God’s firstborn (Ex. iv. 22; Jer. xxxi. 9), 
and hence the term was readily transferred to the Messiah, as the 
ideal representative of the race. 


E 15] PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 211 


The genitive here is not partitive, as the following context 
clearly shows, for €v airé éxticOy 7a mdvta. Setting this aside, 
commentators are not agreed as to the interpretation of tpwtdtoxos. 
Eadie, Hofmann, a@/., understand it of sovereignty. Alford and 
Lightfoot, while giving the first place to the idea of priority to all 
creation, admit sovereignty over all creation as part of the connota- 
tion. So Theodore of Mops., ov« éri xpdvoy déyerar povov: GANA 
yop xal éxi mpotysjocews (but he interprets xricews of the new 
creation). In defence of this interpretation of the word Ps. 
Ixxxvili. 28 is quoted, where after tpwréroxov Ojnoopa airév the 
explanation is added, twnAdv rapa tots Baoidedor THs vis: also what 
appears as a paraphrase of this, eOnxev KAnpovopiov TavTwV, Heb. 
1.2: also Ex. iv. 22; Rom. vill. 29, eis 7d elvae adtov mpwrdtoKov 
év moXdAots adeAdots. Job xviii. 13, “the firstborn of death,” for 
“‘a fatal malady”; and Isa. xiv. 30, “the firstborn of the poor,” 
for “the very poor,” are also referred to. Lightfoot quotes R. 
Bechai, who calls God Himself the firstborn of the world, and he 
concludes that the words signify “‘ He stands in the relation of zp. 
to all creation,” z.e. “ He is the Firstborn, and as the Firstborn the 
absolute Heir and Sovereign Lord of all creation.” 

The passages cited do not justify this interpretation. In Ex. 
iv. 22 the word does not at all mean ‘‘sovereign,” which would be 
quite out of place even apart from the prefixed “ my,” but “ object 
of favour.” In Ps. Ixxxvill. 28, again, the added words, if taken 
as an explanation of zpwr. simply, would go too far; but it is the 
mpwrtdtoxos Of God, who is said to be “higher than the kings of the 
earth.” @jcopa1 airov zp. is, “I will put him in the position of a 
firstborn,” and the following words are not an explanation of zp., 
but state the result of God’s regarding him as such. Compare the 
English phrase, ‘‘ making one an eldest son by will.” By no means 
would the words of the psalm justify such an expression as zpwrd- 
toxos Tv Bacotéwy, unless it were intended to include the zp 
amongst the Baordets. As the context forbids our including the 
mpwtotokos here amongst the «rious, the interpretation leaves the 
genitive inexplicable. It is called “the genitive of reference” ; but 
this is too vague to explain anything, as will appear by substituting 
either xéopov for xticews, or péyas for mpwr. Thus mpwrdroxos Tod 
xdopov for “sovereign in relation to the world,” and péyas ways 
xtioews are equally impossible. If by “genitive of reference” is 
meant “ genitive of comparison,” then we come back to the relation 
of priority in rparos. In fact, the genitive after zp. must be rst, 
genitive of possession, as “‘ my firstborn,” 2nd, partitive, “ firstborn ” 
of the class, or 3rd, of comparison, as in John i 1. 15, mp@ros pov Hv. 
A moment’s reflection will show that Isa. xiv. 30 is not parallel, 
for there “the firstborn of the poor” is included in the class. In 
Job xviii. 13 (which, moreover, is poetical) the genitive is posses- 


212 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 15 


sive, ‘ death’s chief instrument.” Rom. viii. 29, there is no 
genitive, but zp. is included év wodAXois aded dois. 

Rabbi Bechai’s designation of God as “ firstborn of the world” 
is a fanciful interpretation of Ex. xiii. 2. R. Bechai probably 
meant by the expression “ priority,” not “supremacy.” The first- 
born were to be consecrated to God because He was the First of 
all. But it must be remembered that the Hebrew word is not 
etymologically parallel to tpwrdroxos. 

Hence the only tenable interpretation of the words before us is 
“begotten before waca xriots,” the genitive being like that in 
John 1. 15, zpwrdroxov tod cod Kai mpd mévTwy TOV KTLTpaTwV, 
Justin M. Dial. § 100. The only ideas involved are priority in 
time and distinction from the genus kriois. ovdx ws adeApyv exwv 
THY KTiowW, GAN ws mpd Taos KTicews yevvyGeis, Theodoret ; and so 
Chrysostom : odyi a&ias x. TYysns IAAG xpovov povov eoTe OnpayvTiKor. 
Compare Rev. ill. 14, ) apyi THs KTicews TOD Ocod. mpwrdxTiaTos 
or mpwrd7Aacros Would have implied that Christ was created like 
TGC. KTICLS. 

Isidore of Pelusium, in the interests of orthodoxy, assigns an 
active meaning to zpwrordxos (to be in that case thus accented), 
not, however, a meaning corresponding to the signification of 
mpwtotoxos in Classical writers, which is “ primipara,” and could 
yield no tolerable sense, but as ‘primus auctor.” His words are: 
ov Tp@Tov THS KTicews . . . GAA TPOTOV avTov TeTOKEVvaL TOIT éeoTE 
TeTOLNKEVal THY KTioW va H TpiTys TVAAABHS dévpEevys, Os TpwToKTLoTOS 
(Zp. iii. 31). Basil seems to adopt the same view, for, comparing 
ver. 19, he says: ei d€ pwrdrokos vexpQv elpyrat, dia TO aiTLos elvat 
THS €V VEKPOV GVATTATEWS, OUTW Kal MpwTOTOKOS KTicEWS, OLA TO aiTLOS 
elvat Tov e& otk OvTwy eis TO elvat Tapayayeiv tiv KtTicw (Contra 
Eunom. lib. iv. p. 292 D). (The true reading in ver. 19 is zp. éx 
Tav vexpov, but mp. Tay v. is in Rev. 1. 5.) 

This interpretation is followed by Michaelis and some others. 
In addition, however, to the unsuitableness of rikrew in this 
connexion, zp@ros is unsuitable, since there would be no possibility. 
of a devrepordxos. 

maons Kticews, xKtiows in N.T. has three meanings: 1st, the 
act of creation (the primary meaning of xriovs as of “creation ”), 
Rom. i. 20, aé76 xricews Koopou: 2nd, “creation” as the universe 
of created things, Rom. viii. 22, taéca 7 kriows ovorevacer: 3rd, “a 
creation,” a single created thing, Rom. viii. 39, ovre tus Kriows érépa. 
Here it may be questioned whether wdons xrioews means “all 
creation” (RV. Alford, Lightfoot, a7.) or “every creature” (AV. 
Meyer, Ellicott, a/.). In favour of the latter rendering is the 
absence of the article, which we should expect after was in the 
former sense. It may be replied that xriovs belongs to the class 
of nouns which from their meaning may sometimes dispense with 


I. 15] PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 213 


the article, such as yj (Luke ii. 14; Heb. viii. 4), otpavéds (Acts 
Hinvenenais) cod 0s (ROM. V.eh3. x1. 12,15, a/.). Yetritisivery 
rarely, and only in particular combinations, that these words are 
without the article. As an instance of xricw=the aggregate of 
created things being without the article, is cited Mark xiii. 19, do 
dpxis Kticews, the parallel in Matt. xxiv. 21 having da apyijs Kécpov. 
So also Matt. x. 6; 2 Pet. iii. 4. 

But granting that xriow here=xdopos (which might be ques- 
tioned) the point to be noted is the anarthrous use, not of xrious, 
but of the compound term apy7 xricews, like apy Koopov; and 
this is precisely parallel to the similar use of xataBodi Kdcpov, 
which we have several times with dé and zpo, always without the 
article. So we have frequently az apyjs, ev apxy, e& apyis. 
Similarly, cis téAos, €ws TéAovs, expt TeAOVS. am apxns being regu- 
larly used without the article, it is in accordance with rule that in 
amd apxjs Ktioews the latter word should also be anarthrous. 
Moreover, even xécpos and yy, which are cited as examples of 
words occasionally anarthrous, do not dispense with the article 
when zds precedes, probably because of the possible ambiguity 
which would result. There appears, therefore, no sufficient 
justification for departing from the natural rendering, “every 
created thing.” This furnishes an additional reason against the 
interpretation which would include the zpwrdroxos in zaca 
KTIGLS. 

This exposition of the unique and supreme position of Christ is 
plainly directed against the errors of the false teachers, who denied 
this supremacy. 

The history of the ancient interpretation of the expression 
mpwToToKos T. KT., iS interesting and instructive. The Fathers of 
the second and third centuries understand it correctly of the 
Eternal Word (Justin, Clem. Alex., Tert., Origen, etc.). But when 
the Arians made use of the expression to prove that the Son was 
a created being, many of the orthodox were led to adopt the view 
that the words relate to the Incarnate Christ, understanding, there- 
fore, kriois and xrilecOar of the new spiritual creation, the kav) 
xriots. (Athanasius, Greg. Nyss., Cyril, Theodore Mops.) As 
Lightfoot observes, this interpretation “‘shatters the context,” for, 
as a logical consequence, we must understand év air éxticOy ra 
mavTa ev ToIs Ovpavots Kal ert THs yys and ver. 17 of the work of the 
Incarnation ; and to do this is “to strain language in a way which 
would reduce all theological exegesis to chaos.” In addition to this, 
the interpretation disregards the history of the terms, and “takes 
no account of the cosmogomy and angelology of the false teachers 
against which the apostle’s exposition here is directed.” Basil 
prefers the interpretation which refers the expression to the Eternal 
Word, and so Theodoret and Severianus, and the later Greek 


214 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 16 


writers generally (Theoph. Oecumenius, etc.). Chrysostom’s view 
is not clear. 

16. 6t. introduces the proof of the designation, zpwrdroKos 
maons xt. It leaves, therefore, no doubt as to the meaning of that 
expression, and shows that the zpwréroxos is not included in 7waca 
ktiows, for 7a wavta is equivalent to waca xriats. 

év avt@ is not simply=d adrot, 1 Cor. viii. 6 (Chrys. etc.). 
The latter designates Christ as the mediate instrument, the former 
goes further, and seems to express that the conditioning cause of 
the act of creation resided in Him. The Eternal Word stood in 
the same relation to the created Universe as the Incarnate Christ 
to the Church. The latter relation is constantly expressed by é1, 
which is also used by classical writers to express that the cause of 
a relation exists in some person. Comp. ver. 17, év aiTé ov- 
éornxev, and for the preposition, Acts xvii. 28, év aird Cémev Kal 
kwovpela Kai éopev. The originating cause é€ ot ra wavta is God 
the Father, Rom. xi. 36; 1 Cor. viii. 6. 

The Schoolmen, following, indeed, Origen and Athanasius, inter- 
preted the words of the causa exemplaris, viz. that the zdea omnium 
rerum was in Christ. So that He was, as it were, the Archetypal Uni- 
verse, the summary of finite being as it existed in the Eternal Mind. 
This view has been adopted by Neander, Schleiermacher, Olshausen, 
and others. Olshausen says: “The Son of God is the intelligible 
world, the kéopos vonrds, that is, things in their Idea. In the 
creation they come forth from Him to an independent existence.” 

This would correspond to Philo’s view of the Logos (which to 
him, however, was a philosophical abstraction), ovde 6 é« rdv idedy 
Kdgpmos dAAov av éxor Torov } Tov Oetov Adyov Tov TadTa StaKoopH- 
oavta (De Mundi Op. iv. § 4, tom. i. p. 4), and again: 6ca ay 
evOvpypata téxn, doTep ev oikw TH Adyw SiaGe’s (De Migr. Abr. i. 
tom. i. p. 437). Lightfoot regards the apostle’s teaching as “an 
enlargement of this conception, inasmuch as the Logos is no 
longer a philosophical abstraction, but a Divine Person,” and he 
quotes, seemingly with assent, the words of Hippolytus: eye. ev 
€avT@ Tas ev TH Tatpl mpoevvoneioas idéas GHev KEevovTOS TaTpos 
yiveoOat Kdopov 76 Kata @v Adyos azeredetro dpécxwy Wed (Haer. 
X. 33). 

But, however attractive this interpretation may be, it is incon- 
sistent with éxrio6y, which expresses the historical act of creation, 
not a preceding «iva: év adrg. Nor has it any support elsewhere 
in the N.T. 

éxtiaOy, “were created.” Schleiermacher (Studien u. Kritiken, 
1832) alleges that the verb is never used in Hellenistic Greek of 
creation proper, and therefore understands it here of constitution 
and arrangement; and he interprets the statement as referring to 
the foundation of the Church. The word is often so used in classical 


{. 16] PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 215 


writers. But in the N.T. xrilw, xricis, xrica are always used of 
original creation or production. See for the verb Mark xiii. 19; 
Rommiso5 7. Cor-xii9gf iim iv. 3/Apoc: iv. 11, +x: 6. ‘Its 
use in Eph. ii. ro, 15, iv. 24 is not an exception, the kawds avOpw- 
mos being regarded as a new creation. 

The tenses of éxtiocOn, exrusrar are to be noted; the former is 
suitable to the historical fact of creation, the latter to the per- 
manent relations of the creation to the Creator; comp. cvvéorykev, 
Ver!.07: 

ta mdvta, all things collectively, presently specified as to place 
and nature. év Tols ovpavots kai éxi THs yys, an expression desig- 
nating all created things, the heaven and earth themselves not 
excluded, as Wetstein would have it, who infers that not the 
physical creation is meant, but “habitatores . . . qui recon- 
ciliantur.” The compendious expression is adopted because the 
apostle has chiefly in view the heavenly beings; but ra zavra 
shows that the statement is meant to be universal. 

The 74 of Text. Rec. before év rots otp. is omitted by 8* BD* GP 17, al. 
dfg Vulg. 

Inserted by 8° A D° K L and most mss. 

7d before éml rijs ys is omitted by &* B, dfg Vulg. 

Inserted by SX* ACDGKLP. 

It will be observed that the authority for omission is much greater in the 
first clause than in the second, although the one cannot be inserted or omitted 
without the other. It is possible, therefore, that 7d was accidentally omitted 
in the first clause after rdvra, and then omitted from the second for the sake 
of uniformity. On the other hand, it may have been inserted in both places 
from the parallels in ver. 20 and in Eph, i. 10. 

Ta dépatd kal Ta dépata, a Platonic division; Qdpev ody, «l 
Bovre, én, Svo cidn tOv dvTwy, TO pev Spardv, 76 be dedés. The 
latter term here refers to the spirit world, as the following context 
indicates. Chrys. Theoph. Lightfoot, etc., suppose human souls 
to be included, but it is more probable that man as a whole is 
included among the épard. 

elre Opdvot, k.t.A. In the parallel, Eph. i, 21, we have timepdvw 
raons apxns Kat é€ovaias kal dvvdpews Kal xupiorytos. It will be 
noted that both the names and the order are different. Moreover, 
the addition in Eph., kat ravrds d6véparos évopalopévov, shows that 
St. Paul is only adopting current terms, not communicating any 
incidental revelation about objective facts (see on Eph. i. 21). 
The gist of the passage is to make light of the speculations about 
the orders of angels, but to insist on the supremacy of Christ. 

“His language here shows the same spirit of impatience with 
this elaborate angelology as in ii. 18,” Lightfoot. It is said, 
indeed, that St. Paul ‘is glorifying the Son of God by a view of 
His relation to created being; and assuredly this would not be 
best done by alluding to phases of created being which might all 


216 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 16 


the while be figments of the imagination” (Moule). But it is 
sufficient for the purpose that the existence of angelic beings in 
general should be a reality. If St. Paul accepts as true the funda- 
mental assumption of the heretical angelology, it seems to follow 
that revelations about heavenly existences may be found elsewhere 
than in the Scriptures, for this system of the angelic hierarchy 
could not be derived either from the O.T. or from reason. 

Opévo. are not mentioned elsewhere in the N.T., but in Zes¢. 
XII. Patr. (Levi 3) they are placed in the highest (seventh) heaven. 
Probably the name was meant as a designation of spirits who 
occupied thrones surrounding the throne of God. Comp. Rev. 
iv. 4. Clement of Alex. seems to regard them as so called because 
supporting or forming the throne of God (Profh. Ecl. 57), as the 
cherubim are represented in Ezek. ix. 3, x. 1, xi. 22; Ps. xxx. 2, 
xcix. 1. For a summary of Jewish and Christian speculations as 
to the angelic hierarchy, Lightfoot’s note may be consulted. 

Ta mdvta «.t.A. This is properly separated from the foregoing 
by a colon after éfoveiar. The sentence emphatically restates in a 
form applied to the present what had already been said of the 
relation of Christ to the creation. Thus what was described in 
16 as a historical act by éxric6y, is here repeated, regarded as a 
completed and continuing fact; so év aité ovvéornKey expresses 
what for the present existence of things is the logical consequence 
of their origin év air; and, lastly, cai airés éorw mpd rdvtwv 
repeats mpwrdtoKkos mdoys KTicews. eis addy introduces a new idea. 

eis adtév. The conditions of existence of the created universe 
are so ordered that without Christ it cannot attain its perfection. 
This eis adrdv is nearly equivalent to 8¢ 6v in Heb. ii. 10. He is 
Alpha and Omega, the apy? kat téXos (Apoc. xxii. 13). This eis 
airov éxtirrat is the antecedent condition of the subjection of all 
things to Christ, 1 Cor. xv. 24, 28. There is no inconsistency, then (as 
Holtzmann and others maintain), between this passage and 1 Cor. 
viii. 6 (where the subject of eis adrév is not 7a wav7a, but ets), or 
Rom. xi. 36, where it is said of God, €€ airod cat 8° atrod kat eis 
avrov Ta wdvta. Had ef avrod been used, there would have been 
an inconsistency ; but as the passage stands, the subordination to 
the Father is fully indicated by the form of expression, 8’ avrod 
kat eis avtov extort, implying that it was by the Father that He was 
appointed the reAos. ‘This double use of eis avrév to express the 
immediate end and the final end, is parallel to the double use of 
d¢ avrod with reference to Christ in 1 Cor. viii. 6, and to God in 
Rom. xi. 36. 

The thought in Eph. i. 10, dvaxedadroauwwcacOa Ta ravra év 
Xp.o7d, is very similar to the present; but, of course, we cannot 
quote Eph. in a question touching the genuineness of the present 
Epistle. 


Mee 18] PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 217 


17. cat adtés éotw mpd wdvtwy. adrds is emphatic, as always 
in the nom. ‘He himself,” in contrast, namely, to the created 
things. mpd mdytwv, like mpwrdroxos, is of priority in time not in 
rank (which would be émi wdvtwy, trép rdvta, or the like). In 
Jas. v. 12; 1 Pet. iv. 8, mpd wavrwy is adverbial, “above all,” 
“especially,” and if so taken here, we should render “ He especially 
exists.” The words repeat with emphasis the assertion of pre- 
existence. 7v might have been used, but éor is more suitable to 
express immutability of existence. As we might say, “ His existence 
is before all things” ; compare John viil. 58, zpiy "ABpaap yiverba, 
eyo cit. Lightfoot accentuates the verb ards éorw; but as the 
predicate is 7po mdvtwy, éotiv appears to be only the copula. 

The Latin takes mavrwy as masculine, “ante omnes,” Ze. 
thronos, etc.; but the following 74 wdvra is decisive against this. 

ouvéotyKe. ‘‘ Consist,” “ maintain their coherence.” ‘‘ Corpus 
unum, integrum, perfectum, secum consentiens esse et permanere” 
(Reiske, /udex Demosth.). €« Tod Ocot ra wavta, Kal dia Ocod Hytv 
ovverryKev (Aristot. De Mundo, vi. 471): Evveotdvar TG Tod ovpavod 
Syprovpy@ avrov te Kat Ta ev aitd (Plato, Rep. 530A). Compare 
also Philo, 6 évatmos dyxos, €& éavrod diadvtds dy Kal vexpds, 
ouvéotyke Kal Cwrupetrar tpovoia Mort (Quis Rer. Div. haeres. p. 489). 
The Logos is called by Philo the decpds of the universe. 

18-20. Transition to Christ's relation to the Church. ano tis 
Georoyias eis tiv oikovopiav, Theodoret. Here also He ts first, the 
firstborn from the dead, and the Head of the Church, all the fulness 
of God dwelling in Him. So that even the angelic powers are included 
in the work of reconciliation which has been wrought through Him. 

18. kai aétés, and He and none other, “ipse in quo omnia 
consistunt est caput. 

i) Kepadt TOO cwparos, THs exkAynotas. THs exxAnolas in apposition 
with owparos ; compare ver. 24, 6 €orw 7% exkAnoia, and Eph. i. 23, 
TH EKKA. TUS €oTl TO GOpa avTov. gdparos is added in order to 
define more precisely the meaning of the figure, xehady ris 
exxAnoias. It shows that the writer is not using xepad7 vaguely, 
but with the definite figure of the relation of head to body in his 
thoughts. 

ds €otv dpxy = “in that He is.” In classical Greek ye would 
probably be added. dpxx has special but not exclusive reference to 
the following words, which express the aspect in which épy7 is 
here viewed. zpwrtdroxos implies that other vexpoé follow ; dpyy, that 
He it was who made possible that others should follow. He 
was the Principle and the first example, dpy7, dyotv, éore ris 
dvacTécews, mpd mavtwv dvactds, Theoph. Thus He was the 
amapxy, I Cor. xv. 20, 23; and the dpxyyos ris Cwhs, Acts iii, 14. 
His resurrection is His title to the headship of the Church: cf 
Rom. i. 4. 


218 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 19 


éx Tav vexpov. Not “amongst,” which would be zp. rév vexp. 
as in Rev. i. 5, but “from among.” That others were raised 
before Him is not regarded as an objection to this. Theophy- 
lact observes: ei yap kat aAAoe mpd tovTov avéctycay, dAXA TaAW 
améGavov' avtos bé THY TeAclav GvacTacwW aveoTy. 

iva yévytar. ‘That He may become,” not “be,” as Vulg. As 
eari is used to express what He is, so yévytac of what as a con- 
sequence He is to become, viz. év wacw, «.r.A. “ Himself in all 
things pre-eminent.” dow is not masculine, “inter omnes,” as 
Beza and others take it, but neuter, as the following ra zdvra 
makes certain. mpwrevew does not occur elsewhere in the N.T., 
but is found in classical writers and in the Sept. Thus in a 
connexion similar to the present, Plutarch (Zor. p. 9), orevdovres 
Tous matdas év aor TaxLtov mpwrevew. Demosthenes also has 
mpwtevev ev araot, but with dmaci, masc. (p. 1416). Chrysostom’s 
explanation here is: tavtayod mpadros* dvw mpotos, év TH exKkAnoia 
TpOTOS, EV TH avactace mpaTos. This wpwrevew is the final result 
of the state to which the zpwrdroxov ecivar €k Tav vexpov was the 
introduction, but is not involved in the word zpwréroxos itself. 

19. 511. The correspondence with dr in ver. 16, following 6s 
eat Of ver. 15, shows that this assigns a reason, not for va yévyrat, 
but for ds éorw, ver. 18. The indwelling of the Godhead explains 
the headship of the Church as well as that of the Universe. 

eddédxnoev. The subject may be either 6 @eés or wav 710 
7Anpwpa. The former view is adopted by most comm., including 
Meyer, Alford, Lightfoot, De Wette, Winer. In favour of it, the 
ellipsis of 4 @eds in Jas. i. 12, iv. 6, is quoted, and it is remarked 
that the omission here is the more easy, because “ evdoxia, evdoxeiv, 
etc. (like 6éAynpa), are used absolutely of God’s good purpose, e.g. 
Luke ii. 14; Phil. ii. 13.” But the verb evdoxeivy is used by St. 
Paul even more frequently of men than of God (seven times to 
three). It cannot, therefore, be said that it was in any sense a 
technical term for the Divine counsel, so as to render the express 
mention of 6 @eds as the subject unnecessary; nor is there any 
es of its being used absolutely in this sense; see 1 Cor. 1. 

; Gal. i. 15, where 6 @eds is expressed with the verb. Indeed, 
ee in Luke ii. 14, even the substantive evdoxéa, when it refers 
to God, is always defined either by a genitive (Eph. i. 5, 9) or by 
6 @eds being the subject of the sentence, as in Phil. ii. 13, where 
the article with an abstract noun after a preposition “ necessarily 
brings in a reflexive sense,—to be referred to the subject of the 
sentence,” Alford. 

Here there is nothing in the context from which 6 @eds can be 
supplied, and clearness, especially in such an important passage, 
would require it to be expressed. 

Further, although an example is cited from 2 Macc. xiv. 35 in 


1 19] PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 219 


which the subject of the infinitive after eidoxety is different from the 
subject of the finite verb (cv, Kupre, eiddxnoas vaov tis ons KaTa- 
oKyvacews ev Huiv yevéoba), yet in every instance in the N.T. (six) 
in which cddoxeiv is followed by an infinitive, the subject of both is 
the same. The assumed change of subject to the two infinitives 
Katoux, and azoxart. is also harsh. Lastly, the words seem to be an 
echo of Ps. Ixvili. 17, 6 @eds evddkyoe Karotkety év ait, while in il. 9 
we have a close parallel in dre év aitG Karouxet wav 76 TANpwpa THs 
Oedryros. 

For these reasons it seems best to take way 1ro wd. as the 
subject. So Ewald, Ellicott, Scholefield, Soden, RV. marg. 

A third interpretation, which has little to recommend it, is that 
of Tertullian (adv. Marc. v. 19), according to which the subject of 
evddxyoev is 6 Xpioros; and this is adopted by Conybeare and 
Hofmann. eis airoy then would be “to Himself.” But it was 
not to Christ but to the Father that all things were reconciled 
by Him; compare 2 Cor. v. 19. As Lightfoot observes, the 
interpretation ‘confuses the theology of the passage hopelessly.” 

Although the tense is the aorist, ‘‘hath been pleased to dwell” 
represents the sense better than “was pleased to dwell.” . For as 
the good pleasure must accompany the dwelling, instead of being 
a transient act, antecedent to it, the latter expression would be 
equivalent to “ dwelt,” and so would only refer to past time. 

mwav To wAnjpwpo. If this is the subject of «vd. it, of course, 
means “all the fulness of the Godhead,” ris Oedrytos, as in ii. 9, 
“omnes divitiae divinae naturae” (Fritz.), wav 7o 7A. being 
personified. But even if 6 @eds is taken as the subject, it is most 
natural to interpret this expression by that in ii. 9, where karouxet 
is also used. It is, indeed, objected by Meyer and Eadie that the 
Divine essence dwelt in Christ “necessarily ” (‘‘ nothwendig,” 
Meyer) and “unchangeably” (Eadie), not by the Father’s good 
pleasure and purpose. Hence they understand with Beza, “ cumu- 
latissima omnium divinarum rerum copia . . . ex qua in Christo 
tanquam inexhausto fonte, omnes gratiae in nos . . . deriventur.” 
Alford, while adopting the interpretation, rightly sets aside the 
objection of Meyer and Eadie to the former view, saying that “all 
that is His own right is His Father’s pleasure, and is ever referred 
to that pleasure by Himself.” 

Severianus and Theodoret interpret zAjpwpya of the Church, 
following Eph. i. 23. The latter says: mAnp. tiv exxAnoiav ev 
7H mpos Eqeotous éxadrecev, Os Tov Oelwy xapicpdtov TrerAnpwopéevyy. 
TavTyv en evdoKnoa Tov Ocdv ev TH Xprotd Karouxnoa, Tovréctiv 
aitd ovvjpa ; and so many moderns. Similarly Schleiermacher, 
who, referring to wAyjpwpa tov éOvav in Rom. xi. 12, 25, 26, 
explains the word here of the fulness of the Gentiles and the 
whole of Israel, whose indwelling in Christ is the permanent state 


220 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS |I. 20 


which is necessarily preceded by the complete reconciliation of 
which the peacemaking was the condition. But there is nothing 
to support this either in the absolute use of 7A. or in the context 
here. It is clear that the xarouxjoa is stated as the antecedent, 
not the consequent of dzroxar., “ haec inhabitatio est fundamentum 
reconciliationis,” Bengel. Other interpretations may be found in 
De Wette and Meyer. 

katouxjoat implies permanent, or rather “settled” residence, 
not a mere zrapouxia. Cf. Gen. xxxvl. 44 (XXXvVil. I), Katoxker dé 
TaxoB ev tH yH ob mapdKynoey 6 TaTHp adrod ev yf Xavadv. That 
the word of itself does not always imply ‘‘ permanent residence,” see 
Acts vii. 4, xatoxnoev ev Xappav* xaxeibey peroxicev avdrov eis THY 
ynv tavtnv: see on Lk. xi. 26. The aorist seems to be usually 
employed in the sense, “take up one’s abode in.” Compare Matt. 
li. 23, iv. 13; Acts vii. 2, 4; Eph. ii. 17. This, however, cannot 
be insisted on here, where the infinitive is dependent on an aorist. 

It is probable, as Lightfoot remarks, that the false teachers 
maintained only a partial and transient connexion of the 7Ayjpwpa 
with the Lord. 

20. dmoxatahddgar. The dro may be intensive, “ prorsus 
reconciliare,” Or, aS in dmoxafiordvat, may mean “again” (so 
Alford, Ell., Lightfoot, Soden). ‘‘Conciliari extraneo possent, 
reconciliari vero non alii quam suo,” Tertull. adv. Marc. v. 19. 
But xata\Adooeyv is the word always used by St. Paul in Rom. 
and Cor. of reconciliation to God ; and of a wife to her husband, 
1 Cor. vii. rr. See on Eph. ii. 16. 

Ta wdvta, defined as it is presently after by cite ra eri THs ys, 
k.7.A., cannot be limited to the Church (as Beza), nor to men 
(especially the heathen, Olshausen), nor yet to intelligent beings 
generally. “ How far this restoration of universal nature may be 
subjective, as involved in the changed perceptions of man thus 
brought into harmony with God, and how far it may have an 
objective and independent existence, it were vain to speculate,” 
Lightfoot. Compare dmoxatactdcews wévtwy, Acts ill. 21 ; also 
Rom. viii. 21. . 

eis attév. If our interpretation of this were to be determined 
solely by considerations of language, we should have no hesitation 
in referring avrdv to the same antecedent as év air, dv’ airod, and 
avtrov after oravpod, that is Christ, and that, whatever subject we 
adopt for eiddxnoe, but especially if ray 75 7A. is not taken as the 
subject. On this interpretation the dmoxataAdafor 7a mavra eis 
avrov would refer back to ra wavta eis atrov ... extiotar. If 
€avT@ was necessary in 2 Cor. v. 19, was it not more necessary 
here in order to avoid ambiguity ? 

It is, however, a serious objection to this view that we nowhere 
read of reconciliation to Christ, but only through Him to God. 


I. 20] PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 221 


This objection is, indeed, somewhat weakened by the consideration, 
first, that this is the only place in which the reconciliation of ta 
xdvra is mentioned. In 2 Cor. v. 19 the words which follow éavré, 
viz. wi) AoyiLopevos avtois TA Tapartdépata adrav, x.7.r., show that 
xéopos has not the wide significance of ra +dvra here. Secondly, 
that already in ver. 17 there is predicated of Christ what elsewhere is 
predicated of God, viz. 8v airod Kal cis abroy Ta wdvta (Rom. xi. 35). 
Thirdly, here only is «is used instead of the dative after (azo) 
kataAAdooev. The difference is slight, and only in the point of 
view; but the change would be accounted for by the reference 
to ver. 17 ) 

It deserves notice that some expositors who reject this view use 
language which at least approximates to the idea of reconciliation 
to Christ. Thus Alford, speaking of the “sinless creation,” says it 
‘is lifted into nearer participation and higher glorification of Him, 
and is thus veconciled, though not in the strictest yet in a very 
intelligible and allowable sense.” 

If wav ro rAjpwpa is the subject, and airéy be viewed as 
= tov @edv, this antecedent would be supplied from wav ro 7A. 
in which, on this view, it is involved. On the other hand, if 
the subject of <iddxnoe is 6 eds understood, this, of course, is the 
antecedent. But the reference of atrov (reflexive) to an unexpressed 
subject is harsh, notwithstanding Jas. i. 12. 

eipyvoronoas belongs to the subject of the verb, the masc. 
being adopted xara ovveow, as in il. 19. This was inevitable, 
since the personal character of 6 «ipyvoroijoas could not be lost 
sight of. 

As it is Christ who is specified in Eph. ii. 15 as rowdy eipyvyy, 
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecum. and many moderns, although 
making 0 @eds the subject of edddxnoe, have so understood cipyvo- 
moujoas here “by the common participial anacoluthon”; but this 
is a very harsh separation of the participial clause from the finite 
verb, and introduces confusion amongst the pronouns. 

8: adrod, repeated for the sake of emphasis, ‘‘ by Him, I say.” 
This repetition, especially in so pointed a connexion with ra émi 
THs yas and ra év Tots ovpavots, still further emphasises the fact that 
angelic mediators have no share in the work of reconciliation, nay, 
that these heavenly beings themselves are.included amongst those 
to whom the benefit of Christ’s work extends. 

The second 6’ a’rod is read by SAC DK P and most mss., Syr. (both) 
Boh., Chrys. Theodoret. It is omitted by BD*GL, Old Lat. Vulg. Arm. 


Eth., Theophyl. Ambrosiaster, a/, There would be a tendency to omit them 
as superfluous. 


cite Ta Emt THS yis, elite Ta ev Tois ovpavots. There is much 
diversity of opinion as to the interpretation of this passage ; 
**torquet interpretes,” says Davenant, “et vicissim ab illis tor- 


222 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [t. 20 


quetur.” First, are we to understand ra zavra as limited to 
intelligent creatures, or as including also unreasoning and lifeless 
things? Alford, Meyer, and many others adopt the latter view, 
which, indeed, Alford says is “clearly” the apostle’s meaning. 
Rom. viii. 19-22 is compared, where it is said that the xriows has 
been made subject to parawrns. But it is not easy to see how the 
reversal of this parairns or the delivery from the dovd«ia ris 
p0opas can be called ‘reconciliation to God.” Reconciliation 
implies enmity, and this cannot be predicated of unreasoning and 
lifeless things. The neuter 7a wavra does not bind us to this 
interpretation, it is simply the most concise and striking expression 
of universality. But, further, what is meant by the reconciliation 
of heavenly beings? Many commentators suppose the meaning 
to be that even good angels have need to be in some sense 
“reconciled.” Calvin observes: “duabus de causis Angelos 
quoque oportuit cum Deo pacificari: nam quum creaturae sint, 
extra lapsus periculum non erant, nisi Christi gratia fuissent con- 
firmati . . . Deinde in hac ipsa obedientia quam praestant Deo, 
non est tam exquisita perfectio ut Deo omni exparte et citra 
veniam satisfaciat. Atque huc procul dubio spectat sententia 1sta 
ex libro Job (iv. 18). ‘In Angelis suis reperiet iniquitatem’ ; 
nam si de diabolo exponitur, quid magnam? pronuntiat autem illic 
Spiritus Summam puritatem sordere, si ad Dei iustitiam exigatur.” 
Similarly De Wette, Bleek, Huther, Alford, Moule. The last 
named adopts Alford’s statement: ‘No reconciliation must be 
thought of which shall resemble ours in its process, for Christ took 
not upon Him the seed of angels, nor paid any propitiatory penalty 
in the root of their nature... . But forasmuch as He is their 
Head as well as ours . . . it cannot be but that the great event in 
which He was glorified through suffering should also bring them 
nearer to God. . . . That such increase [of blessedness] might be 
described as a reconciliation is manifest: we know from Job xv. 15 
that ‘the heavens are not clean in His sight’; and 7d. iv. 18, ‘ His 
angels He charged [charges] with folly.” The general -truth may 
be admitted without accepting Eliphaz the Temanite as a final 
authority. But imperfection is not enmity, and the difficulty is in 
the application of the term “reconciled” in the sense of “lifted 
into nearer participation and higher glorification” of God. Dave- 
nant, followed by Alexander, says that Christ has reconciled 
angels “analogically, by taking away from them the possibility of 
falling.” 

It is hardly necessary to dwell on the opinion of Origen, that 
the devil and his angels are referred to; or on that of Beza, van 
Til, aZ., that 7a év tots odpavots are the souls of those who died in 
the Lord before the coming of Christ, and who are supposed to 
have been admitted into heaven by virtue of His work which was 


I. 20] PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 223 


to come. Neither opinion has any support in Scripture. (Bengel 
notes that zdvra “continet etiam defunctos,” but does not suppose 
them referred to as in heaven.) 

A better view is that of Harless (adopted also by Reuss, 
Oltramare, a/.), according to which the reconciliation proper 
applies only to ra ézi rs yns, but the apostle adds ra év Tots otp., 
“not as if there were in heaven any real need of redemption, nor 
as if heaven were only added as a rhetorical figure, but because 
the Lord and Creator of the whole body, whose members are 
heaven and earth, in restoring one member has restored the whole 
body ; and herein consists the greatest significance of the reconcilia- 
tion, that it is not only the restoration of the earthly life, but the 
restoration of the harmony of the universe” (Harless, “p/. p. 53). 

Ritschl thinks that St. Paul refers to the angels concerned in 
the giving of the law, to whom he believes the apostle here and 
elsewhere attributes a certain lack of harmony with the Divine 
plan of redemption (Jahrb. f. Deutsche Theol. 1863, p. 522f.). 
Compare ii. 15. 

Meyer’s solution is that the reference is to angels as a category, 
not as individuals. ‘The original normal relation between God 
and these higher spirits no longer subsists so long as the hostile 
realm of demons still exists; whose power has indeed been 
broken by the death of the Lord, but which shall be fully destroyed 
at the Parousia. 

Hammond argues at considerable length that “heaven and 
earth” was a Hebrew expression for “this lower earth.” Chry- 
sostom takes the accusatives to depend on eipnvorotnoas. This 
is clear from his question, 7a 6 év Tots ovpavols Tas eipyvo- 
moinoe; His reply is that the angels had been made hostile to 
men, seeing their Lord insulted (or as Theodoret more generally 
says, on account of the wickedness of the many). God, then, not 
only made things on earth to be at peace, but brought man to the 
angels, him who was their enemy. ‘This was profound peace. 
Why then, says the apostle, have ye confidence in the angels? 
So far are they from bringing you near, that had not God Himself 
reconciled you to them, ye would not have been at peace. So 
Augustine (Znchir. 62): “ pacificantur coelestia cum terrestribus, 
et terrestria cum coelestibus.” Erasmus adopts the same con- 
struction, amending the Latin version thus: “ pacificatis et iis quae 
in terra sunt, et quae in coelis.” Bengel’s interpretation is similar, 
and he appears to adopt the same construction, for he compares 
Luke xix. 38, eipjvn év otpavd: and comparing this again with 
Luke ii. 14, éwt yjs eipyvy, he remarks that what those in heaven 
call peace on earth, those on earth call peace in heaven. This 
construction does not seem to be open to any grammatical objec- 
tion, Only two instances of eipynvoroveiv are cited in the Lexicons, 


224 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS |I. 21 


one from the Sept., Prov. x. 10, where it is intransitive; the other 
from Hermes, ap. Stob. Ec. Phys. p. 984, where the middle is 
used transitively, rére Kal airy Tov idiov dpdpov cipynvorovetrar. As 
to the form of the compound, Aristotle uses édoroety with an 
accusative, ARhet. i. 1. 2, djAov Ste ely Gv avTa Kal ddorotetv. So 
Aoyorouety takes an accus., ¢.g. ovpdpopds, Lys. p. 165, 26; cf. 
Thuc. vi. 38, a/, It is singular that this construction which yields 
an excellent sense has been entirely overlooked, and the interpreta- 
tion of Chrys., etc., met with the objection that doxaraAdafau 

. €i7e Ta... €lTe Ta Cannot mean to reconcile these two 
with one another. 

May it not be that the difficulty arises from attempting to turn 
what is practically a hypothetical statement into a categorical 
assertion? St. Paul has in his mind throughout this part of the 
Epistle the teaching of the false teachers at Colossae, who knew, 
forsooth, all about the celestial hierarchy, with its various orders, 
some of which were doubtless regarded as not entirely in harmony 
with the Divine will. ‘The apostle no more adopts their view here 
than he adopts their hierarchical system. The point on which he 
insists is that all must be brought into harmony, and that this is 
effected through Christ. 

Are we, however, justified in assuming that all 7a év Tots 
ovpavois (which is not necessarily equivalent to “in heaven”) are 
holy angels, or were so conceived by St. Paul? If there are 
“other worlds than ours,” would not their inhabitants be reckoned 
as €v TOLS Ovpavots P 

21-23. The Colossians are reminded that this reconciliation 
applies to them also, and that the object in view ts that they may be 
blameless in the sight of God. But this depends on their holding fast 
by the truth which they have been taught. 


21. We must first note the difference of reading in the last word of the 
verse. doxatra\\dyyre is read by B, 17 (dmroxarn\\akyrat) ; dmroxatadda- 
yévres, by D*G, the Latindgm Goth., Iren. (transl.) a/.; but all other 
authorities have droxar7j\Nager, Lachm., Meyer, Lightfoot, Weiss adopt dmo- 
karmAddyyre, which is given a place in the margin by Treg. WH. and Rev. 
It is argued that droxarad\ayértes is an emendation, for grammatical reasons, 
of diroxarn\d\dyyre (though a careless one, for it should be accus.). These two 
sets of authorities, then, may be taken together as attesting the passive. As 
between dzroxarn\Adynre and diroxar7j)\Aaéev, there is in favour of the former 
the consideration that, if the latter had been the original reading, the con- 
struction would be plain, and no reason would exist for altering it. Lightfoot 
regards this reading of B as perhaps the highest testimony of all to the great 
value of that MS. 

With the reading dmoxary\\akev there is a slight anacoluthon, there being 
no direct protasis. Examples, however, are not infrequent of a clause with 
6é following a participle which indirectly supplies the protasis. The anaco- 
luthon might indeed be avoided by making tuds depend on dmoxaradAdéat ; 
but this would be more awkward ; and, besides, ver. 21 obviously begins a new 
paragraph, resuming the thought from which the apostle had Gigressed in 15. 


I. 22] PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 225 


With the reading droxarn\ddynre it is possible to regard the clause vuvt 
5é—@avdrov as parenthetical. ‘‘ And you who once were estranged (but now 
ye have been reconciled) to present you, I say,” the second buds repeating 
the first; and so Lachmann, Lightfoot, Moule. But, considering the im- 
portance of the clause, it is perhaps better (with Meyer) to understand the 
construction as an anacoluthon, the apostle having begun the sentence with 
the active in his mind, and, in a manner not unusual with him, passing to a 
more independent form of statement. This, too, seems much more in St. 
Paul’s manner than the parenthesis supposed by Lachmann. 


kal suas, “and you also,” moré dvtas damddotpiwpévous, “ who 
were once in a state of estrangement.” dvtas expresses more 
forcibly the settledness of the alienation. For éradAorpidw see on 
Eph. ii. 12. Here the remote object must be God, as of its opposite 
azroxata\Aaooev, and the word implies that they belonged to another 
(adAdrpuos) (they were, in fact, subject to the éfovata tot oxdrovs), 
and that this was the consequence of movement away from Him 
(azro-). Alford understands the verb here objectively, “ banished ” ; 
but it seems more congruous to the whole context (doxara., 
€xOpovs) to understand it subjectively, ‘estranged (in mind).” 

€xOpods tH Savoia. éxOpovs is taken passively by Meyer, 
“invisos Deo.” But such a meaning is not justified either by the 
context here or by the use of the word elsewhere ; cf. Rom. viii. 7, 
TO Ppovnpa THS TapKos €xOpa eis @cdv. Even in Rom. v. 10, ei yap 
€xOpot ovtes KuTnAAdynpev TO OeG, x.7.A., it is best understood 
actively ; there, as here, the sinner is spoken of as reconciled to 
God, not God to the sinner. Indeed, nowhere in the N.T. is the 
latter expression used. The fact that it occurs in Clement, in the 
Const. Apost., and in the Apocrypha (Meyer), only makes its absence 
from the N.T. the more noticeable. As Lightfoot observes, ‘‘it is 
the mind of man, not the mind of God, which must undergo a 
change, that a reunion may be effected.” It was not because God 
hated the world, but because He loved it, that He sent His Son. 
In Rom. xi. 28, where the Jews are said to be éx@poé in a passive 
sense, this is not absolute, but xara 76 evayyéAvov, and they are at 
the same time dyamyroi. Here, jn particular, the active sense is 
required by the following 77 dvavofa, which Meyer indeed interprets 
as a “causal dative” (as if it were=&a tv duavoiav). But in 
€xOpos tH Savoia the two notions must have the same subject 
(tu@v not being added). Besides, if so intended, dvavoia would 
surely be qualified by zovypa or the like. 77 d:avo/a, then, is the 
dative of the part affected, as in éoxotwpévor 7H Svavoia, Eph. iv. 18 ; 
«aapot tH Kapdia, Matt. v. 8. 

€v Tots Epyors Tots tovnpots, the practical sphere in which the 
preceding characteristics exhibited themselves. A striking contrast 
to the description of the Christian walk in ver. ro. 

22. vuvi Sé, “now,” ze. in the present order of things, not ‘‘at 
the present moment.” The aorist marks that the state of things 

15 


226 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 22 


followed a given event. It is correctly rendered by the English 
perfect. So ver. 26; also Eph. ii. 13, iii. 5; Rom. v. 11, vii. 6, 
XI, 30, 31, XVi2605,2 lim. i. 10; 1 Pet. L to,m mo, 25. We have 
the aorist similarly used in Plato, Symp. 193 A, mp) rot, domep 
A€yw, Ev jwev veri be dia TH dduciay SiwxicOnpev bxd Tod @cot, and 
in Isaeus, De Cleon. her. 20, tore pov... vol dd... éBovrnbn. 

dmoxatn\Ndyyte Or drokat#AAagev, For reading and construc- 
tion, see above. 

év TO odpatt THs capKds adTod, év pointing to the medium of the 
reconciliation. The addition of rs capxds adrot, “consisting in 
His flesh,” has been variously accounted for. Beza, Huther, Barry, 
al., suppose the expression directed against Docetism ; but there is 
no direct evidence of this form of error so early, nor does there 
appear to be any allusion to it in this Epistle. Others, as Bengel, 
Olshausen, Lightfoot, supposed the words added to distinguish 
between the physical and the spiritual cdpa, ze. the Church. But 
this would be irrelevant. Marcion, however, omitted rs capxds 
as inconsistent with his views, and explained év 76 odare of the 
Church. Tertullian, referring to this, says: “in eo corpore jn quo 
mori potuit per carnem mortuus est, non per ecclesiam sed propter 
ecclesiam” (Adv. Marc. v. 19). The most probable explanation 
is that the words have reference to the opinion of the false teachers, 
that angels who were without a capa rijs capxés assisted in the 
work of reconciliation (so Alford, Ellicott, Meyer, Soden). 84 rod 
Gavdrov expresses the manner in which the reconciliation was 
wrought. 


After @avdrov, atrov is added in § A P a/., Boh. Arm. ai, 


Tapaotioat twas. With the reading amroxarj\Aagev this in- 
finitive expresses the final purpose ; comp. 2 Cor. xi. 2, jppooduny 
ipas evi avopl, rapVévov ayviv wapacrnoa ro XpictG. Here, how- 
ever, the verb has its judicial sense; comp. 2 Cor. iv. 14, 6 éye(pas 
tov Kiptoy “Incotv xal jpas civ “Inood éyepet cal rapacticer civ 
ipiv. As this zapacrijoas is thus included by God Himself in His 
work as the consequence of the reconciliation which He has 
accomplished, it follows that there is no room for anything to 
be contributed to this end by man himself. 

With the reading droxarnAXAdyyre two constructions are possible. 
First, it may be taken as dependent on edddxnoev, vevt 8E—Oavdrov 
being parenthetical (Lightfoot). This makes the sentence rather 
involved. Or, secondly, the subject of zapacrjoa and that of 
amoxar. may be the same, viz. ipeis, “ut sisteretis vos.” Comp. 
Rom. vi. 13, tapacrijcare éavrods T6 OG; 2 Tim. ii. 15, crovdacov 
geavtov ddKyLov Tapacrijcu TG @ed. There is here no emphasis on 
the reflexive sense (the words being nearly equivalent to “that ye 
may stand”), so that éavrovs is not required. 


I. 23) PRE-EMINENCE OF CHRIST 227 


Lightfoot regards rapacrjca: here as sacrificial, paraphrasing 
thus: “He will present you a living sacrifice, an acceptable offer- 
ing to Himself.” But this is reading into the words something 
which is not suggested, nor even favoured, by the context. Though 
adylovs Kai auuwpous may seem to be borrowed from the vocabulary of 
sacrifice, the combination does not carry any such connotation 
with it. Comp. Eph. i. 4 (é&eAéfaro as) eivar judas dyiovs Kal 
GpwLovs KaTevwriov avtov; 26, ver. 27 (in connexion with the same 
verb zapacrnvat, where the figure is that of a bride); Jude 24, 
oThoat Kateveoriov THs Odgys adrov aywpous. dveyxAyrous, moreover, 
is not suitable to sacrifice. It is a judicial term, and thus deter- 
mines the sense of the other two, wapaorjoa being quite as much 
a judicial as a sacrificial word ; cf. Acts xxili. 33. May we not add 
that the thought expressed in Lightfoot’s paraphrase has no parallel 
in the N.T.? For Rom. xii. 1 does not support the idea of God pre- 
senting believers to Himself as a sacrifice. Accordingly, this view 
is rejected by most commentators. The adjectives, then, are best 
understood of moral and spiritual character, the first expressing 
the positive aspect, the others the negative ; and xarevwmov airod 
being connected with the verb, which requires such an addition, 
not with the adjectives, nor with the last only. 

23. el ye, “assuming that.” See Eph. ili. 2. 

émupévete, “ye abide, continue in,” a figurative use of émipeveu, 
occurring several times in St. Paul (only), and always with the 
simple dative ; cf. Rom. vi. 1, xi. 22, 23; 1 Tim. iv. 16. (In Acts 
xili. 43 the genuine reading is mpoopévew.) The ém- is not 
intensive, as if émpévey were stronger than pevew (cf. 2 Cor. ix. 9; 
2 Time 1.13 5-1 Tims ti..1'55, Acts)-xviti. 20; ix:.43, xxviii. 12, 14). 
It adds the idea of locality. 

TH Morel, 7.c. tua, referring to i. 4. 

TeOepedwpevor Kal édSpator, the former word referring to the sure 
foundation (Eph. iii. 17), the latter to the firmness of the structure. 
édpatos occurs also in 1 Cor. vii. 37, ds 8 éornxey &v TH Kapdia adrod 
édpatos, and in 1 Cor. xv. 58, édpator yiverbe, apetaxivyro.. 

pi) petaxivodpevor expresses the same idea on the negative side, 
but defined more precisely by the following words. It seems 
better taken as middle than passive, especially considering the 
present tense, “not constantly shifting.” The use of yy implies 
that this clause is conditioned by the preceding (Winer, § 55. 1a). 

G16 tis edmidos. As the three preceding expressions involve 
the same figure, Soden regards these words as connected (by 
zeugma) with the first two as well as with the third. 

tod evayyeNtou, subjective genitive, the hope that belongs to 
the gospel. Comp. 7 éAmis ris kAjoews, Eph. i. 18, iv. 4. 

od jkovoate, x.t.A. Three points to enforce the duty of not 
being moved, etc. They had heard this gospel; the same had 


228 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 24 


been universally preached, and the apostle himself was a minister 
of it. mddAw adrovs dépe paprupas, eira THV olkovpevyny amacav . . 
Kal TovTo «is TO GéidmicTov ouVTEAc. . . . peya yap avTod jv TO 
a&iwpa Aourov mavtaxod adopéevov, kal THS olkovpevys dvTos SidacKdAov, 
Chrys. 

ev wéon xtioe, “in all creation,” RV., or “among every 
creature,” Coverdale, Lightfoot ; cf. Mark xvi. 15 (where, however, 
xriows has the article), xnpvfatre 7O etayyédvov tdoyn TH KTice. In 
both places the thought is of proclamation and of reception by 
faith ; and therefore we can hardly (with Lightfoot) bring in “all 
creation, animate and inanimate.” 

The expression xypvxGévros is probably not to be regarded as 
hyperbolical, but ideal, ‘‘it ‘was’ done when the Saviour . . . bade 
it be done” (Moule). 


After doy, 77 is added in 8° D°K LP and most. It is absent from 
s* ABC D*G 1, etc. 


ob éyevouny €ym Maddog Sidkovos. Returning to his introduction 
of himself in ver. 1, the apostle prepares to say some further words 
of introduction of himself and his calling, before entering on the 
main topic of the Epistle. It is not for the purpose of magnifying 
his office that he thus names himself, but to impress on his readers 
that the gospel which they had heard, and which was proclaimed 
in all the world, was the very gospel that he preached. 

For dudxovos, 8* P read xypv& kai amocrodos. A combines 
both readings. 

24-29. The apostle’s own qualification as a minister of this 
gospel. To him has been given the privilege of knowing and pro- 
claiming this mystery which was hidden from former ages, namely, 
that of Christ dwelling in them. It ts his mission to make this 
known, and so to admonish and teach that he may present every man 
perfect. This he earnestly labours to do through the power of Christ. 

24. viv xaipw. vv is not transitional (‘‘ quae cum ita sint,” 
Liicke), which would require ovr, or the like, but refers to present 
time. Now as a prisoner “with a chain upon my wrist ” (Eadie). 
His active service as dudkovos is at present suspended, but the 
sufferings which it had brought upon him are a source of joy. 
Lightfoot understands it thus: ‘“‘ Now, when I contemplate the 
lavish wealth of God’s mercy, now when I see all the glory of 
bearing a part in this magnificent work, my sorrow is turned into 
joy.” But there is no indication of such a connexion of thought 
in the text. 


8s is prefixed to viv in D* G, Vulg. a/. (AV.). It is, doubtless, a repeti- 
tion of the first syllable of dudkovos, assisted by the desire to supply a connect- 
ing link between the sentences. For examples of similar abruptness compare 
2)/Cor, vii. O)3) 1 Dimi) 12: 


L 24] THE MISSION OF THE APOSTLE 229 


év. Compare Phil. i. 18, ev rovrd xaipw: Rom. v. 3, cavxdpefa 
év tals OAipeow. 


After ma@/puacwv, pov is added in Text. Rec. with &° and many cursives, 


Syr-Pesh. Arm, Eth. a/, 


imép 6pav, to be connected with zafjpaow. His sufferings had 
been brought on him by his labours on behalf of the Gentiles, 
“ propter vestrum gentium salutem,” Estius, and so with a kindly 
personal reference he represents them as endured on behalf of the 
Colossians, who shared in the benefit of his ministry. The article 
is not required before trép tyar, tots rabjpacw being = ois rdc Xu. 

dvtavat\np®. This double compound is not found elsewhere 
in LXX or N.T. dvazAnpoiv is found six times in N.T., twice in 
connexion with torépypa, 1 Cor. xvi. 17; Phil. il. 30. mpooava- 
mAnpowv also occurs twice with torépyya, but in a different sense, 
the former verb referring to a deficiency left by, the latter to one 
felt by, the persons mentioned. What modification is introduced 
in the meaning of dvarAnpoiv by the addition of dv is disputed. 
dvr. in composition with a verb does not imply “instead of 
another,” as Photius here takes it (rovréotw, ’Avrt Seomdrov xal 
SiSacKxddov 6 SodAos éys, «.7.A.), but “ over against,” which may be 
either in opposition, as avriAéyw, dvtixetat, Or in correspondence, in 
turn, as avtiperpéw, dvtixadew (Luke xiv. 12), dvriAapBavopar, etc. 
Here the dv7- has been understood by some as referring to 
Siaxovia, the suffering now taking the place of the former active 
service, or as indicating that the apostle’s afflictions were in 
response to what Christ had done for him. It is, perhaps, 
sufficient to say, with Wetstein, that it indicates the correspond- 
ence with the torepnpa, “avril torepyparos succedit dvarAjpwpa.” 
(So Meyer, Alford, Ellicott, Eadie, Soden.) Lightfoot objects that 
this practically deprives dvr. of any meaning, for dvamAypotv alone 
would denote as much. He adopts Winer’s view, that dytava- 
mAnpowv is used of one who “ adterius torépyya de suo explet,” 
or, as Lightfoot puts it, “that the supply comes from an opposite 
quarter to the deficiency.” Instances are cited in which this idea 
(or rather that of “a different quarter”) is expressed in the context, 
for example, Dion Cass. xliv. 48, ’ dcov . . . évéde, rovTo eK Tis 
mapa tov dAXwv ovvtedcias avtavarAnpwhy7. The requirements of 
this passage seem to be fully met by the idea of correspondence, 
as will appear if we translate: “in order that . . . as much as was 
wanting . . . this might be correspondingly supplied.” And in 
the two instances in which dvazAnpody is used with torépnua, the 
supply is from a different quarter from the deficiency, so that there 
is no more reason for including this idea in dvravamA, than in 
dvamn. 

In Demosth. (De Symm. p. 182), tovtwv tév cuppwpidv éExdorny 


230 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS pe 24 


Suedety KeAevw mévre pepn Kata Swdexa dydpas, avtavamAnpovvtas 
mpods Tov evropwtatov del tos dmopwrdrous, the idea is that the 
poorer members should balance the rich in each pepos, so as to 
equalise the pépy. It is this idea of balance that is expressed 
by the avz-. 

Similarly the substantive évravarAjpwors in Diog. Laert. x. 48, 
kal yap petors dxd THs Tv cwpdrwov eri@odis ouvexys TPBaivel, 
ovk eridnAos alcOioe dia THY avtavarAjpwow, 7.e. on account of 
the counter-supply, z.e. the supply which “meets ” the deficiency. 

It is not, perhaps, an over-refinement to suggest that avtava- 
aAnpo is more unassuming than dva7Anpd, since part of the force 
of the word is thrown on the idea of correspondence. 

ta dotepijpatra. The plural is used because the afflictions are 
not regarded as a unity from which there is a definite shortcoming. 
Compare 1 Thess. iii, 10, 74 torepjpata THs wicTews tuaov, where 
the singular would suggest that their faith, as faith, was defective, 
while the plural suggests that there were points in which it needed 
to be made perfect. 

tav Odtpewy tod Xpiotod. By two classes of commentators these 
words are understood to mean the afflictions which Christ endured. 
First, many Roman Catholic expositors, including Caietan, Bellar. 
mine, and more recently Bisping, find in the passage a support for 
the theory that the merits of the saints constitute a treasure of the 
Church from which indulgences may be granted. Estius, with his 
usual candour, while holding the doctrine to be Catholic and 
apostolic, yet judges that “ex hoc Ap. loco non videtur admodum 
solide statui posse. Non enim sermo iste, quo dicit Ap. se pati 
pro ecclesia, necessario sic accipiendus est, quod pro redimendis 
peccatorum poenis quas fidelis debent, patiatur, quod forte 
nonnihil haberet arrogantiae; sed percommode sic accipitur, 
quomodo proxime dixerat ‘gaudeo in passionibus meis pro 
vobis’ ut nimirum utraque parte significet afflictiones et perse- 
cutiones pro salute fidelium ipsiusque ecclesiae promovendae 
toleratas.” It has been more fully replied (¢.g. by Lightfoot) 
that the sufferings of Christ may be regarded from two different 
points of view, either as satisfactoriae or aedificatoriae. In the 
former sense there can be no torépnua, Christ’s sufferings and 
those of His servants are different in 47md, and therefore in- 
commensurable. But in this sense @Atus would be an unsuitable 
word, and, in fact, it is never applied in any sense to Christ’s 
sufferings. In the second point of view, however, that of minis- 
terial utility, “it is a simple matter of fact that the afflictions 
of every saint and martyr do supplement the afflictions of Christ. 
The Church is built up by repeated acts of self-denial in successive 
_ individuals and successive generations ” (Lightfoot). 

It is no doubt true that these “continue the work which Christ 


Ve 24] THE MISSION OF THE APOSTLE 231 


began” (compare 2 Cor. i. 5; 1 Pet. iv. 13). But to say this is 
not to say that there was any “shortcoming” in the afflictions of 
Christ. His work, including His sufferings, was absolutely com- 
plete; and so far as others carry it on, their work is included in 
His (Phil. iv. 13). To say that He left something “behind” is to 
slur over the meaning of torépnua, which does not mean some- 
thing left behind, but a want of sufficiency. Nowhere in the N.T. 
is anything of the kind suggested. And the Colossians were the 
last to whom St. Paul would use, without explanation, a phrase 
which would be so open to misconception, as tending to foster the 
delusion that either saints or angels could add anything to Christ’s 
work. If affliction could do so, why not (it might be said) self- 
imposed suffering, asceticism, or gratuitous self-denial ? Moreover, 
can it be supposed that St. Paul, who calls himself the least of 
saints, and not meet to be called an apostle, would express him- 
self thus without some qualification? Lightfoot would mitigate 
the apparent arrogance by the remark that “the present tense, 
avtavarAnp®, denotes an inchoate, not a complete act.” The 
term “inchoate” does not seem to be justified. The present, 
indeed, denotes an act continuing and therefore not finished, but 
not incomplete as far as the present moment is concerned. Com- 
pare the instances of dvazAnp@ itself: Matt. xiii. 14, dvarAnpodrac 
avtois 7) mpopyreia, x.7.4.: 1 Cor. xiv. 16, 6 avamAnp&v tov Td7ov 
tov idiwrov: 2 Cor. ix. 12, ov povoy éotl zpocavarAnpodtoa Ta 
totepypata tov ayiwy, GANA Kal wepiscevovoa, k.7.A. Compare 
also the present of zAnpody, Gal. v. 14; Eph. v. 18; Col. iv. 17. 
A third view is adopted by Chrysostom, Theophylact, 
Augustine, and most expositors, ancient and modern. According 
to this, “the afflictions of Christ” are the sufferings of His Body, 
the Church, so called because “He really felt them.” So 
Augustine on Ps. lxi. says of Christ, “qui passus est in capite 
nostro et patitur in membris suis, id est, nobis ipsis.” And Leo, 
quoted by Bohmer (ap. Eadie), “passio Christi perducitur ad 
finem mundi,” etc. This view is adopted amongst late com- 
mentators by Alford, Ellicott, De Wette, Olshausen. But the 
notion that Christ suffers affliction in His people is nowhere 
found inthe N.T. Acts ix. 4, ‘‘ Why persecutest thou Me?” is not 
an instance. ‘There the persecution of His saints is represented as 
directed against Him, but He is not represented as suffering from 
it. The idea that the glorified Christ continues to suffer, and that 
“His tribulations will not be complete till the last pang shall have 
past” (Alf.) (an idea which, as Meyer observes, would seem to 
imply even the thought of Christ’s dying in the martyrs), is incon- 
sistent with the scriptural representations of His exalted state. It 
is true that He sympathises with the afflictions of His people; but 
sympathy is not affliction, nor can the fact of this sympathy justify 


232 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 24 


the use of the term “afflictions of Christ,” without explanation, to 
mean the afflictions of His Church. This would be particularly 
unsuitable in the present connexion, for it would make St. Paul 
say that he rejoiced in His sufferings because they went to 
increase the afflictions of Christ. 

It remains that (with Meyer, Soden, a/.) we take the expression 


| to signify the apostle’s own afflictions; and to this interpretation 


the readers are naturally led, first, by the word 6Aijs, which is 
never used of Christ’s sufferings, but often of the apostle’s ; and, 
secondly, by the defining words év 77) capxé pov, which are best 
connected with rév OAivewv. For if the writer had intended them 
to be taken with the verb, he would doubtless have written dvtava- 
mAnp® ev TH capi pov. It is said, indeed, that the words are 
placed here for the sake of the antithesis to tod awpatos adrod. 
But there would be no purpose served by emphasising this 
antithesis here, and to do so would only distract the attention of 
the reader. 

Meyer, however, while adopting this view of OA. Tov Xp., 
connects év TH o. pov with the verb. On the other hand, Steiger, 
joining these words with 0X. rod Xp., connects both with the follow- 
ing: “the sufferings which Christ endures in my flesh for His 
body.” 

That St. Paul should call his own sufferings in the service of 
Christ the afflictions of Christ in his flesh, is quite in accordance 
with other expressions of his. For instance, in 2 Cor. 1. 5 he 
speaks of the sufferings of Christ overflowing to him, zepiocever 
Ta mwabnpata tov Xpictov eis nas. In Phil. iii. ro he speaks of 
knowing xowwvia tév tabnpatwv abrod cvppoppildpevos TO Gavatw 
avrov. Again, 2 Cor. iv. 10, ravrote THY véexpwow Tov Iycod év To 
THpate TEepipEepovTes. 

The form of expression, then, need not cause any difficulty. 
The question what St. Paul means by calling his own troubles the 
afflictions of Christ in his flesh is a different one, and may be 
answered by saying that Christ’s afflictions are regarded as the 
type of all those that are endured by His followers on behalf of 
the Church. So Theodoret: Xpucros tov trép THs exxAynotas Karte- 
déEato Oavarov . . . kal Ta GAXa Goa bremewe, Kal 0 Oelos ardaToXOS 
aoavtws brép adtys treaty Ta ToikiAa taOypata. Compare Matt. 
XX. 23, TO pev ToTHpLov prov Ter Oe. 

imép Tod odpatos adtod. The use of this designation was prob- 
ably suggested by the mention of oapé. irép is clearly not “in 
the place of,” but “‘on behalf of”; cf. ver. 7. 

3 eat H ekkAnola. The antithesis of c@ua and odpé rendered 
necessary this explanation of the words owparos aitrod. Besides, 
exxAnoia was required by the following éeyevouny didxovos. 

6 éotw has not the same shade of meaning as jris éorwv 


L, 25, 26] THE MISSION OF THE APOSTLE 233 


(1 Tim. iii. 15, év ofkw @eod . . . nts eoriv éxxAnoia). The former 
is equivalent to zd est; the latter to “and such is.” 

25. fis éyevopnv Sidxovos resumes the ob éyev. dudk. of ver. 23, 
carrying out now the active side of the ministry, as ver. 24 the 
passive. 

Kata Thy oiKovontav, ‘According to the stewardship in the 
house of God.” On oix. cf. Eph. i. 10. Here=the office or 
function of a steward, so that he is an oixovduos @eo, cf. 1 Cor. ix. 
17, oixovoplay meriorevpo., and Luke xvi. 2. So the apostles and 
other ministers of the Church are called oixovépo, 1 Cor. iv. 1, 7; 
Tit. i. 7; see also 1 Pet. iv. 10. The Church is otkos tod cod, 
1 Tim. iii. 15. Chrysostom, a/, take oix. in the sense “ dispensa- 
tion,” which is inconsistent with rv dofetody pou. 

eis Opas, cf. ver. 24. Connected by Scholefield and Hofmann 
with the following wAypéoa. But compare Eph. i. 2, ry 
oikovop.av THS XdpiTos TOD Ocod THs SoGelons por eis twas: and Rom. 
xv. 16, tiv xapi THY Sobeicdv por td Tod Wed cis TO elvat pe 
Aeroupyov Xpurrov eis Ta EOvy. 

mAnpocat, not infin. of design, but explanatory of otk. rv 
800. «.7.4. The verb is found in a similar connexion Rom. xv. 19, 
@aTe pe... pexpt TOD IAXAvpixod mwemAnpwxKévat TO edayyéALov Tod 
Xpictod. 6 Adyos Tod Oeod is frequently used by St. Paul for the 
gospela(n Conmxiv. 36);)) 2) Cora ii017561v.02) 50.8 Thess: 1.03); 
compare also Acts iv. 31, a/.). The sense then is: “to carry out 
to the full the preaching of the gospel”; ‘‘ad summa perducere : 
Paulus ubique ad summa tendit,” Bengel. There is doubtless a 
reference to St. Paul’s special office as the apostle of the Gentiles, 
by virtue of which he gave full development to the “ word of 
God.” This is suggested by dofetody por eis tuas. 

Beza takes the phrase to mean ‘‘to fulfil the promise of God” 
(cf. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 21), which does not suit the context. Fritzsche 
understands it as meaning “to complete the teaching begun by 
Epaphras.” See on Lk. viii. 11. 

26. 15 puotypiov. Lightfoot observes: ‘‘This is not the only 
term borrowed from the ancient mysteries, which St. Paul employs 
to describe the teaching of the gospel,” and he mentions 7réAcoyv, 
ver. 28; peuvypot, Phil. iv. 12; and (perhaps) odpayi€eoOau in 
Eph. i. 14. There is, he says, an intentional paradox in the 
employment of the image by St. Paul, since the Christian mysteries 
are not, like the heathen, confined to a narrow circle, but are freely 
communicated to all. But as pvorypiov in the singular is never 
used by Greek writers in connexion with the ancient mysteries, 
and on the other hand appears to have been an ordinary word for 
“secret” (see note on Eph. i. g), there seems to be no ground 
for the assumption that the term is borrowed from the “‘ mysteries.” 
The plural is used thrice only by St. Paul, viz. 1 Cor. iv. 1 


234 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 27 


xill. 2, xiv. 2; but occurs in the Gospels, Matt. xiii. 11 ; Luke viii. 
10. As to wepvnuat, although the verb may have been originally 
borrowed from the mysteries, St. Paul found it already in use in 
the sense in which he employs it; cf. Alciphron, ii. 4, xuvBepvav 
punOyocopa. For téAeos, see on ver. 28. 

TO Gokekpuppevoy . . . viv S€ edavepdOy. These are the two 
characteristics of a yvorypiov in the N.T. Compare Rom. xvi. 25, 
pevatnplov xpovors alwviows cerrynévov, pavepwhevros O& viv. mpd 
tov aidvwyv, used in 1 Cor. il. 7 of God’s purpose, could not properly 
have been said of its concealment. azo trav aiwvwv, K.7.A. dao here 
is of time, being opposed to viv. So dm aldvos, Acts iii. 21, xv. 
18. An aidy includes many yeveai; compare Eph. iii. 21. The 
fact of the long concealment and recent disclosure of the mystery 
is not without point here; it explains the acceptance of the errors 
which the apostle is combating. 

27. ébavepd0y. The anacoluthon gives more emphasis to the 
mention of the ¢avépwors ; cf. ver. 22. 

Tots dylois atrod; ze. Christians in general, not only the 
apostles and prophets of the N.T., as many both of the older 
and later commentators take it, in agreement with Eph. iii. 5. 
Cod. G even adds dzroardAots (and F, of course, agrees). 

ois, “quippe quibus.” 76éAyce 6 @eds. It was God’s free 
choice, so that the yvwptZew was only to those to whom He chose 
to make it known. 

ti 7d TAodtTos THs Sd§ys. Compare Rom. ix. 23, va yvwpion 
tov TAovTov THS Sdgys adrod: and Eph. i. 18, iii. 16. 7é joined to 
a substantive of quantity signifies “how great.”  Aovros (in- 
differeatly masculine and neuter in St. Paul) is a favourite term in 
these Epistles as applied to the dispensation of grace. 

d6fa is not a mere attribute of wAodvros (Erasmus), nor of 
pvornpiov (Beza), but is the principal idea; it is of the dda rod 
pvornptov that it is said that it has shown itself in rich measure. 
It is the glorious manifestation of God’s dealings contained in this 
pvotnpiov, “magniloquus est in extollenda evangelii dignitate,” 
Calvin. oeuvas eire Kai dyKxov éréOnkev amd Todds diahécews, 
erutaces Cntav éeritacewv, Chrys. The latter, however, understands 
the words of the glorious results of the gospel amongst the 
heathen. 

év tois €0veow. It was amongst these especially that this 
mAovros was displayed; gaiverar ev Erépous, moAAG Se wA€ov ev 
Tovrois 1) ToAAI TOV pvorypiov ddga, Chrys. For the construction 
cf. Eph, i. 18. 

o éotw Xpiords ev Syiv. The antecedent may be either 
pevotyptov Or wAotros. The former (Vulg. Chrys.) is that generally 
favoured by expositors: “the mystery consists in this, that Christ 
is év tyiv”; and this seems on the whole the most natural. 


I. 28] THE MISSION OF THE APOSTLE 235 


Mvorypiov is the principal idea in the context (ver. 26, ii. 2), 70 
tAodtos THs Odéys being subsidiary to it. Again, the “mystery” is 
not something distinct from the riches of the glory of it; those to 
whom the former is revealed are made acquainted with the latter. 
This view also agrees with Eph. iil. 6, where the puorypioy rod 
Xpiorod is defined as elvat 7a €Ovn ovyxAnpovopma, «7.4. The 
strongest objection to this view is that it seems to make 6 éoruw, 
k.7.., a merely parenthetical definition, whereas it carries on the 
thread of the discourse. But this is more apparent than real ; it is 
‘the thought of the pvoryjproy that runs through the whole, and the 
clause is not parenthetical, but carries on the description of the 
puernpiov begun in ver. 26, év tutv. The parallelism with év rots 
eOveow favours the interpretation “among you,” rather than “in you.” 

4 éAmis tis S8dé&s. This ddéns is an echo of the former, but 
this does not require us to give both the same signification. 
Oltramare regards this, not as an apposition to 6 Xp., but as a 
second thought succeeding the former in a lively manner, and 
joining on to it, “It is Christ in the midst of you! the hope of 
glory!” 

ti 7) wAodtos is read by AB D** K L (76 zAotros without ri, G), 
while 8 C P have the mase. ris 0 7A. 

6 éotw is read by ABGP17 47 672, probably Lat. Vulg. 
(quod est); os estw by SX CD KL and most, Chrys. Theodoret, ad, 
With the latter reading, 6s is attracted to the gender of Xpucrds. 
But this interferes with the sense, for whether the antecedent be 
mAovTos OF puvaorypiov, it is not Xpiords that is predicated, but 
Xpioros év tpiv. 

28. dv tpets Katayyé\Nopev. ‘And Him we proclaim.” Him, 
i.e. not Xpiordv only, but Xp. év iuiv. jets, emphatic, in opposition 
to the heretical as well as to the Judaising teachers ; ‘‘ we,” himself 
and Timothy in particular. 

vouletodvtes . . . Kal SiSdoKovtes . . . “admonishing ... 
and teaching.” These, as Meyer observes, correspond to the 
petavoeire kal muotevere Of the gospel message. vovOecia pev émi 
THs mpdakews, SidacKkadia de ért doyparwv. 

wdavta dvOpwrov, thrice repeated, emphasises the universality of 
the gospel as taught by St. Paul (iii. 11), in opposition to the 
doctrine of an intellectual exclusiveness taught by the false 
teachers ; probably also it points to the fact that each man 
individually was an object of the apostle’s care, ri A€yas; ravra 
avOpwrov ; val, pyar, rovto arovddlomer, ei 58 pH yevytat, ovdey mpds 
npas, Theophylact. 

ev wdon copia, Zc, peta warns codias Kal suvécews, Chrys. ad, 
expressing the manner of the teaching. The Latin Fathers 
understand the words as denoting the object of the teaching; so 
Moule: “in the whole field of that holy wisdom,” etc. But in 


236 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [I. 29 


the N.T. the object of duddoxew is put in the accusative, not in the 
dative with ev. 

There is no contradiction to 1 Cor. i. 17, ii. 1-16, for there is 
a @eot codia (1 Cor. ii. 7), a divine philosophy, the source of 
which is indicated in ch. ii. 3; cf. Eph. i. 8, tas ydpetos airod Hs 
erepiccevoer eis Huds ev racy copia. Compare ver. 9 and iii. 16. 

iva Tapactiowper, as in ver. 22, refers to presentation before a 
tribunal, not as a sacrifice. 

tékevcov. This is one of the words noted by Lightfoot as 
“probably borrowed from the ancient mysteries, where it seems 
to have been applied to the fully instructed, as opposed to the 
novices,” and in 1 Cor. ii. 6, 7 he finds the same allusion. This 
technical sense of réAeos as applied to persons does not seem 
sufficiently made out; in the passages cited by Lightfoot, with one 
exception, it is not to the persons, but to the mysteries, reAerai, 
that the term is applied. The one exception is Plato, Phaedr. 
249 C, reA€ous det TeAeTas TeAOtpevos TEAEOS GVTWS pOvos yiyveTaL, 
which cannot be regarded as proving the usage. But even if this 
be granted, there seems no sufficient reason for introducing this 
sense here, where what is in question is not complete initiation, or 
knowledge, but maturity of faith and spiritual life. In this sense 
the word is used by St. Paul, Eph. iv. 13, péype xatavryowper «is 
avdpa téXecov: Phil. ili. 15, dau odv TéAeol, TOUTO ppovamev: 1 Cor. 
XIV. 20, Tats @peoi TéXeron yiveobe. Compare Heb. v. 14; Matt. 
v. 48, xix. 21. And in the present Epistle, iv. 12, iva orafyre 
TéAevo Kal metAnpopypevor ev tavtTi OeAnpate Tov Meov. Observe 
also here the defining addition réAevov év Xpiord. For the use of 
the term in early Christian writers to denote the baptized as 
opposed to the catechumens, see Lightfoot’s note. 

29. eis 4, viz. to present every man, etc. 

kat kom. I not only xatayyéAAw, x.7.A., but carry this to the 
point of toiling. Hofmann understands it as meaning, “I become 
weary,” comparing John iv. 6; Apoc. ii. 3, where, however, the 
verb is perfect. ‘The sense, moreover, would be quite unsuitable 
here in connexion with the dywviZecOar in the power of Christ. 
The verb is frequently used by St. Paul of his toilsome labours in 
the Churches ; e.g. 1 Cor. xv. 10; Gal. iv. 11; Phil. ii. 16; also of 
the labours of others; Rom. xvi. 12; 1 Cor. xvi. 16; 1 Thess. 
v. 12. But he also uses it of the labour of the hands; 1 Cor. 
iv. 12; Eph. iv. 28. The change to the singular has its ground in 
the personal experience described. 

dywvilspevos. Compare 1 Tim. iv. I0, els totro Komuapev 
kal dywvilouefa, The reference here is to an inward dydy, as 1s 
shown by the following context ; cf. iv. 12. 

kata Thy évépyevav attod. Not by his own strength, but by that 
which Christ supplies. tov atrod kérov kai adyava to Xpiota 


rE 1} HIS ANXIETY FOR THE CHURCHES 237 


dvariets, Oecum. But Chrys. Theoph. understand the atrod of 
God, against the immediate context. évepyouyevyv, middle, as always 
in St. Paul. Fritzsche on Rom. vii. 5 cbserves: “ évepyety, vim 
exercere de personis, evepycicbar ex se (aut suam) vim exercere de 
rebus collocavit, Gal. v. 6; Col. i. 29; 1 Thess. 11. 13; aZ ut 4.2. 
Passivo . . . nunquam Paulus usus est.” 

év Suvdper, “in power”; cf. Rom. i. 8; 2 Thess. i. 11. Some 
understand this of the power of working miracles, which is quite 
inappropriate to the context, according to which the reference is to 
KoTL® aywvildopevos. 

Il. 1-7. The apostle’s care and anxiety are not limited to those 
Churches which he had himself founded, or to which he had person- 
ally preached, but extended to those whom he had never seen. He ts 
anxtous that they should be confirmed in the faith and united in love, 
and, moreover, may learn to know the mystery, that ts, the revealed 
will of God. It is no new doctrine they are to look for, but to seek 
to be established in the faith which they have already been taught, and 
to live in conformity thereto. 

1. Fdép. ‘‘Striving, I say, for,” etc. The general statement 
Komi® aywvilouevos is supported by this special instance of his 
anxiety for the Colossian Church; and thus although ydp is not 
merely transitional, the transition to the personal application is 
naturally effected. 

Odw yap Spas ciSévar. So 1 Cor. xi. 3. More frequently ov 
Oédw tas dyvoetv. That either phrase does not necessarily com- 
mence a new section is clear from 1 Cor. xi. 3; Rom. xi. 25. 

HAtkov, a classical word, not found in Sept. or Apocrypha, and 
in the N.T. only here and Jas. ili. 5. 

éyava éxyw. As he was now a prisoner this aydv can only be 
an inward one. It is not to be limited to prayer (iv. 12), but 
includes anxiety, etc. 

imép tyav. Here, as often, the reading varies between izép 
and wept. The former is that of SABC DP; the latter of 
DtGuk 4b: 

kal Tov év Aaodikia (sic NA B*C D*GKLP). 

The Laodiceans were probably exposed to the influence of the 
same heretical teaching as the Colossians. Hierapolis is probably 
alluded to in the words xai dco, x.7.A., See iV. 13. Kal Tov ev 
‘TeparoAa is actually added in some mss. (10 31 73 118) and 
in Syr-Harcl.* It is clearly a gloss from iv. 13. 

kat doo, «.t.A. «ai here introduces the general after the 
particular, as in Acts iv. 6 and often. It is only the context that 
decides whether this is the case or whether a new class is intro- 
duced. Here there would be no meaning in mentioning two 
particular Churches which had known him personally, and then in 
general all who had not known him. The inference is therefore 


238 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS {I1. 2 


certain that he had never visited Colossae, and this agrees with the 
incidental references in the Epistle as well as with the narrative in 
the Acts. See on airay, ver. 2. 

éjpaxav (Alexandrian) is better supported than the Attic 
éwpdkaot. The spelling with w is rather better supported here 
than that with o. 

€v capxt does not qualify the verb, as if “seeing in the flesh” 
were contrasted with “seeing in the spirit” (detkvvow évtadéa dre 
édpwv ovvexas év mvevpari, Chrys.), but goes with zpdcwrdv pov, 
giving vividness to the expression. Naturally it is implied that 
they had a knowledge of him, though not personal. 

2. tva mapakdyQdou ai kapdtar aitav. ‘‘ That their hearts may 
be strengthened.” It can hardly be doubted that this is the 
meaning of mapaxadety here, where there is no mention of, or 
allusion to, troubles or persecutions. The sense “comforted, 
consoled” is, indeed, defended by Meyer, Ellicott, Eadie, ad. 
Ellicott observes: “surely those exposed to the sad trial of 
erroneous teachings need consolation”; but there is no trace of 
this view in the Epistle, nor would such consolation be the prime 
object of the apostle’s prayer and anxiety. No; what made him 
anxious was the danger they were in of being carried away by this 
erroneous teaching. It was not consolation that was required, but 
confirmation in the right faith. For this sense of wapaxadetiy cf. 
1 Cor. xiv. 31 (RV. marg.). 

aitGv. We might have expected tua, but airay was suggested 
by the preceding dco. This is decisive as to the Colossians being 
included in the door; for if excluded there, they are excluded here, 
and the writer returns to the Colossians in ver. 4 (tas) in a most 
illogical manner: “This I say about others who do not know me, 
in order that no man may deceive you.” _ 

oupBiBaobdvres. “ United, knit together,” the common meaning 
of the verb, and that which it has elsewhere in this Epistle (ver. 19) 
and in Eph. iv. 16, g.v. In the Sept. it always means to “ instruct,” 
cf. 1 Cor. il. 16 (quotation) and Acts xix. 33. It is so rendered 
here by the Vulg. “instructi.”. The nominative agrees with the 
logical subject of the preceding. 


It is read by NABCD*P a/, Vulg. Syr. (both). The genitive cvpSiB- 
acévrwy is read in §° D° K L and most mss., but is obviously a grammatical 
correction. 


€v dydry. “In love,” which is the “bond of perfection” (iii. 14). 

kal eis expresses the object of the ovuf8.; connected by kat, 
because the verb contains the idea of motion. 

tay mottos THs TAnpodopias THs cuvécews. “All riches of full 
assurance of the understanding.” ‘Full assurance” seems the 
most suitable sense for 7Anpodopia, and it is also suitable in every 


IT. 2] HIS ANXIETY FOR THE CHURCHES 239 


other place in the N.T. where the word occurs (1 Thess. i. 5 ; 
Heb. vi. 11, x. 22). “ Fulness” would also be suitable, except in 
t Thess. i. 5. The word does not occur in Sept. or Apocr., nor in 
classical authors. On ovveous cf. i. 9. It has an intransitive sense, 
and hence never takes a genitive of the object ; here it appears to 
mean the faculty of judging. He desires their judgment to be 
exercised with full certainty. De Wette observes that zAodros 
expresses a quantitative, 7Anpodopéa a qualitative, characteristic. 

eis émlyvwovy, x.T.A., seems best taken as parallel to the preceding 
eis, so that it emphatically points out the special object on which 
the cvvecis is to be exercised. Some, however, connect this with 
mapaxdnfeo.w, on the ground that éziyvwors implies as an ante- 
cedent condition the ovpPiB. «.7.A. For ériyvwors, “full know- 
ledge,” see Eph. i. 17. 

Tod Geod Xptotod. If this reading is adopted, there are three 
conceivable constructions: (@) Xpiorod in apposition to @eo%, 
(4) Xpucrod dependent on @eod, (c) Xpicrod in apposition to 
pvornpiov. The first (adopted by Hilary of Poitiers, also by 
Steiger and Bisping) is generally rejected, either on account of 
the context (Ell.) or because the phrase is destitute of Pauline 
analogy (Meyer, Moule, Lightfoot). But it appears to be inad- 
missible on other grounds. To point rod @eov, Xpicrod, taking 
these in apposition and thus identifying 6 @eds and Xpuovds, is 
obviously impossible, as it would mean, not that @eds could be 
predicated of Xpuorés, but that Xpucrds could be predicated of 
6 @eés, thus ignoring the distinction of Persons. On the other 
hand, if we point rod @cod Xpiorod, and understand “the God 
Christ” (according to the rendering suggested, though not ac- 
cepted, by Moule), the expression seems inconsistent with strict 
Monotheism. It defines @cod by the addition Xpiorod, and 
therefore suggests that other definitions are possible. 06 @eds 
matyp is not analogous, for two reasons ; first, rarjp only suggests 
vids, and, secondly, zaryp expresses a relation proper to the Deity. 
Ellicott, who considers the construction not indefensible, takes it 
to mean “of God, even of Christ.” This is rather to suppose 
puornptov supplied before Xpiorod, which is certainly untenable. 
But this is clearly not what he means, and it suggests that he 
hesitated to accept either of the other renderings. 

According to the third view, Xpiorod is in apposition to 
pvaornpiov, so that Christ personally is the mystery of God 
(Ellicott, Lightfoot, Moule, a/.). If this is the apostle’s meaning, 
he has expressed himself very obscurely. As pvorypiov is an 
abstract name, when it is explained as a person, we should expect 
6 éorw as ini. 24, 27; 1 Cor. iii, 11. Lightfoot understands the 
“mystery ” not as “Christ,” but “ Christ as containing in Himself 
all the treasures of wisdom,” and in illustration of the form of 


240 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [1I. 2 


the sentence compares Eph. iv. 15, eis airév... 6s éorw 7 
Kepary, Xpiotds, e€ ov wav TO cHua, «7.4. This passage, it is 
obvious, adds another example of the use of os éorw in such 
sentences, and it can hardly be said to furnish a parallel to 
Lightfoot’s interpretation of év #, for in Eph. iv. 15 a full stop 
might have been placed after Xpuords without impairing the 
figure. Moreover, the apostle has given a different definition of 
the pvor. in 1. 27 (to which he again alludes in iv. 3), and it is 
hard to suppose that he would give a different definition within a 
few lines, for different this certainly is. The second translation 
mentioned above, “the God of Christ,” has its parallel in the 
phrase, o @eds kai ratinp Inood Xpiorov, and in Eph. 1. 17, 0 @eds 
tov Kupiov nav Iycod Xpiotod. This construction is adopted by 
Meyer and v. Soden. The addition of Xpiorod is explained by 
the consideration that it is only through Christ that God’s plan in 
this mystery is carried out; it is only because and in so far as 
God is the God of Christ that this pvarnpov could exist and be 
revealed. Meyer adds, “ He that has recognised God as the God 
of Christ, to him is the Divine pvorypiov revealed.” This, after 
all, is not quite satisfactory, and requires us to read into the text 
more than is expressed. 

If the shorter reading rod @cod (omitting Xprocrod) is adopted, 
the difficulty disappears ; but the difficulty is not so obvious as to 
tempt the ordinary copyist to omit the word. 


The different readings are as follow :— 

(1) rod Geos. Without any additions D® P 37 67** 71 80 116, 
Adopted by Griesbach, Tisch. 2, Olsh., De Wette, Alford. 

(2) rod Oeod Xpiocrod. B, Hilary of Poitiers (De 7rin. ix. 62, ‘in 
agnitionem sacramenti dei Christi,” adding, ‘‘ Deus Christus sacramentum 
est”). Adopted by Lachmann, Tregelles, and Lightfoot without a comma 
after Qeod ; by Tisch. 8, RV. with a comma, also by Harless (Zp. p. 458), 
Ellicott, Meyer, and v. Soden. 

(3) Tod Qeod, 8 éotw Xpisrds. D* “‘Dei quod est Christus,” de, 
Vigilius Thaps. So Augustine, De Zrim. xiii. 24, ‘‘ Dei quod est Christus 
Jesus.” 

(4) Tod Ocob marpds (add rod, AC 4) Xpicrod, N* AC 4, Vulg. in Codd. 
Amiat. Fuld. f. Boh. (add Inco, Lagarde). 

(5) rod cod cal marpds To Xpicrod, N° two of Scrivener’s MSS. and a 
corrector in the Harclean Syriac. 

(6) rod Geb mwarpds kat tod Xpiorod, 47 73, Syr-Pesh. (ed. princeps and 
Schaaf). 

(7) Tob Oceod Kal marpds kal tod Xpicroh (Rec. Text), D®' KL most 
cursives, Syr-Harcl. (text), Theodoret, etc. 

Isolated readings are-—- 

(8) tof Geod kat Xpiorod, Cyril. Zhes. p. 287. ; 

(9) Tob Geod ev XpiorG, Clem. Alex. v. 10. 12, and with rod before éy, 
17. So Ambrosiaster, ‘‘ Dei in Christo.” tof Xpiorod is given by Tisch. 
from his MS. of Euthalius, but with the remark, ‘‘sed non satis apparet.” 

As far as documentary evidence goes (4) seems the best attested, and is 
probably the source of (5) (6) (7). But it is most probably an attempt to 


II. 3] HIS ANXIETY FOR THE CHURCHES 241 


remove the difficulty of the simpler reading (1) or (2). Of these (2) is pre- 
ferred by the critics above named, as accounting for all the rest, (1) the 
witnesses for which are later, being supposed to have originated from an 
attempt to remove the difficulty of the former reading. Meyer thinks that the 
original reading must have involved some dogmatic difficulty, which (4) does not. 

The short reading, tod Ocod (1), would account for the others, but the 
attestation of it is not sufficiently early, Wescott and Hort suspect some 
corruption. 


8. €v6. The antecedent is probably pvornpiov, not Xpiorod. 
What the apostle is dwelling on is the greatness of the “mystery ” 
(i. 27), and the importance of the knowledge of it, in opposition 
to the supposed wisdom of the false teachers ; hence the statement 
that “all the treasures,” etc., are contained in it. This is con- 
firmed by the use of dadxpudot, which corresponds to pvoripvov. 
So Alford, Eadie, Meyer, Soden, De Wette, etc.; but Ellicott, 
Lightfoot, and many comm. refer the @ to Christ. With this 
latter reference, the wisdom and knowledge are those possessed 
by Christ as a treasure which He communicates. With the 
reference to vor. the terms have an objective sense, these being 
characteristics of the Divine plan. These treasures St. Paul 
calls dméxpvdot, probably in allusion to the pretended hidden 
wisdom of the false teachers, which nevertheless was merely 
superficial and concerned external observances, whereas the true 
Christian wisdom was inward and profound. ‘These treasures of 
wisdom are not “kept concealed,” doxexpuppévor, they are 
“hidden, laid up,” daoxpypor; but capable of being discovered. 
For this reason, as well as on account of the position of the 
_word, dmdéxpydo. is not to be construed with eicitv as the 
direct predicate,—a construction which would require it to come 
next to eioiv. Meyer and Alford take the word as attributive, 
“all the secret treasures.” The absence of the article is against 
this, although not perhaps fatal; since, as Alford observes, ot 
dzdxpudor would imply that there were other treasures, only those 
that are secret being contained, etc. The position of the word, 
however, suggests that it is a secondary predicate (Ellicott, Light- 
foot, v. Soden, a/.), “‘all the treasures, etc., as hidden treasures,” 
i.e. “hiddenly,” Sore rap avdrod det wdvta aireiv. Chrys. “quo 
verbo innuitur quod pretiosum et magnificum est in Christo non 
prominere, aut protinus in oculos incurrere hominum carnalium, 
sed ita latere ut conspiciatur tantummodo ab illis quibus Deus 
oculos dedit aquilinos, id est, spirituales ad videndum,” Davenant, 
quoted by Ellicott. The word occurs in connexion with @ycavpot in 
Isa. xlv. 3, ddcw cor Onoavpodts cKoTeWwors aroxpvpovs: also 1 Macc. 
i. 23, AaBe rods Onaavpods Trois azroxpipovs. On the Gnostic use of 
the word to designate their esoteric writings, see Lightfoot’s note.! 

1 Mr. Charles compares Book of Enoch, 46. 3, ‘‘the Son of Man who 


neveals all the treasures of that which is hidden.” 
16 


242 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 4, 5 


The expression @ncavpos codias is used by Plato, Philed. 15 E, 
as Twa codias eipynkws Onoavpdv, and by Xen. AZem. iv. 2. 9, 
dyapai cov ditt ovK apyvpiov Kat xpvaoliov mpoeihov Onaavpors 
KextnoOar padrAov 7) codias. 

sopias Kal yvwoews. These terms occur together, Rom. xi. 33, 
and several times in Eccles. Sept. ‘While yvaous is simply z7- 
tuitive, copia is ratiocinative also. While yv@ous applies chiefly 
to the apprehension of truths, copia superadds the power of 
reasoning about them and tracing their relations,” Lightfoot. 
Augustine’s distinction is that codia is “intellectualis cognitio 
aeternarum rerum”; yvaous, “rationalis temporalium,” so that 
the former pertains to contemplation, the latter to action (De 
Trin. xii. 20, 25). This, however, is quite opposed to usage. 
Aristotle, Zth. JVic. i. 1, opposed yv@ors to wpagis. And in 1 Cor. 
xiii. 2, St. Paul connects yvaéo.s with the apprehension of eternal 
pvoTypta. 

4, todro héyw. In this expression rotro often refers to what 
follows, but with ta it refers to what precedes ; cf. John v. 34. 
tovro is not to be limited to ver. 3. Ver. 5 shows that 1-3 are 
included, if, indeed, the reference does not extend further back. 


6é is omitted in &* A* (apparently) B, but added in X° Ae CDKLP, 
and apparently all other authorities. Weiss considers it certainly genuine. 
wa pydels. Son* ABCD Pail. a pi tis, N° KL, most MSS. 


tapadoyifntat. In N.T. only here and Jas. i. 22; frequent in 
Sept. and later Greek writers. It applies primarily to false reckon- 
ing, and thence to fallacious reasoning ; hence, zapadoywpds, 
a fallacy or paralogism; cf. dmdry tut mapadoyiodpevos tpas, 
Aeschines, p. 16, 33. 

év miQavodoyia. By persuasive speech,” ‘a persuasive style,” 
Moule. The word occurs in Plato, Zheaet. p. 162 E (miBavodoyia 
te Kat eixdor); the verb mBavodoyeivy in Arist. Lh. LVic. i. 1 ; also 
Diog. Laert. x. 87, a7, In classical writers the sense is only that of 
probable reasoning as opposed to demonstration ; but see Demosth. 
928, 14, Adyous Gavpaciws miHavovs, and 7 miavoAoyixy = “ the art 
of persuasion,” Arrian, Zzct. i. 8. 7. 

Compare St. Paul, 1 Cor. ii. 4, od« ev weiBois codias ddyous; 
GAN’ év amodeifer wvevpatos. miHavodoyia expresses the subjective 
means of persuasion, the personal influence; wapadoy. the objective, 
the appearance of logic. 

5. et yap kat. The xai after ei does not belong to the whole 
clause introduced by «i, but emphasises the word immediately 
following ; cf. 2 Cor. iv. 16, xi. 6. 

TH capKt ameyu. It has been inferred from this that St. Paul 
had been at Colossae; but without reason. The same expression, 
indeed, occurs 1 Cor. v. 3 ; but this proves nothing, yap. 


II. bj HIS ANXIETY FOR THE CHURCHES 243 


add introduces the apodosis, when it is contrasted with a 
hypothetical protasis ; cf. Rom. vi. 5 ; 1 Cor. vill. 6; 2 Cor. v. 16, 
al. 7& rvevpart, “in spirit,” not “ by the spirit,” as Ambrosiaster 
and Grotius, *“‘ Deus Paulo revelat quae Colossis fierent.” The 
antithesis is the common one of body and spirit ; cf. 1 Cor. v. 3, 
arov T6 odpatt, Tapwov 58 TO mvevpart. 

ody Gpiv. Stronger than év tiv, expressing union in a common 
interest. 

xalpwv Kat Bdérwv. There is no need to suppose a logical 
transposition, or to separate the participles as if xatpwy meant 
“rejoicing at being with you in the spirit” (Meyer, Alford). The 
apostle’s joy may have been due to many circumstances, and this 
joy led him to contemplate further their orderly array. 

épav thy tégv. The pronoun is placed emphatically first, not 
so much to accentuate this raéis as an advantage which they 
possessed over others, as because the apostle’s interest was in 
them personally and in the rdéis only as belonging to them. 

thy téév Kal 1d otepéwpa. Both terms are supposed by 
Hofmann, Lightfoot, Soden, a/, to contain a military metaphor, 
perhaps suggested by St. Paul’s enforced companionship with the 
praetorian guard, orepéwua being rendered by Lightfoot “solid 
front, close phalanx” ; by Soden, “ bulwark,” “‘ Bollwerk.” ra&is is 
frequently used of military array, e.g. Xen. Anad. i. 2. 18, idotca 
Tyv Naprpornta Kal TH Tag TOD oTpaTevparos eavpacev: Plut. Vit. 
Pyrrh, 16, xariav tagw te kal pvdakas Kal kdopov aitov Kai TO 
OXIA THs oTparoredeias Cavpace. orepéwpa. is found in the Sept. 
Ps. xviii. 2; Gen. i. 6, a7. 1 Macc. ix. 14 is quoted in support of 
the military sense, «lev 6 “Iovdas 6rt Baxyidys Kal To orepéwpa 
THs tapeuBorrs év Tots deEiors. 

But neither word has this military sense of itself, but from the 
context, and here the context suggests nothing of the kind. rags 
is used equally of the organisation of a state or a household, e.g. 
Demosth. p. 200, 4, tavrnv tyv tagw aipetoPar THs moArTelas. 
Compare also Plato, Gorgias, p. 504 A, tdgews . . . Kal Kdopou 
tuxovca oikia. St. Paul has it again, 1 Cor. xiv. 40, mdvta. . . 
kata taéw ywéobw. Here the idea of a well-ordered state lies 
much nearer than that of an army. The apostle rejoices in the 
orderly arrangement of the Colossian Church. The opposite state 
would be draééa, and of this he finds some instances in Thessalonica, 
where some walked draxtws, and he reminds them 67t ov« raxr7- 
capev ev tyty (2 Thess. iii. 6, 8, 11). 

With orepéwpya tis mictews compare Acts xvi. 5, éorepeotvto TH 
mioret, and 1 Pet. v. 9, © avtiornte otepeot TH miore. It is most 
natural to take the word here as=the firm structure of your faith, 
te. the solidity of your faith. dre woAAd ovvayayov ovyKoAAjoets 
TUKVaS Kal dlacragTas, TOTE TTEPEwna yiverar, Chrys. 


244 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 6,7 


We gather from this that the Church at Colossae was still 
substantially sound in the faith, and it is instructive to observe 
how here as in other Epistles St. Paul is careful to commend what 
he finds deserving of commendation. 

It is worthy of notice that d e translate as if they read torépnya 
for crepéwpa. “ quod deest necessitatibus fidei vestrae.” Augustine 
agrees, quoting, “id quod deest fidei vestrae” (Zp. 149, Joh. 98). 
So also Ambrosiaster. 

6. as otv mapehdBete. ‘As, then, ye received, ze. from 
your teachers ”=kxaOws éudbere do “Exadpa, i. 7 ; xabas eddy Onre, 
yer. 7. (Compare 1) Thess. ‘iv. 1; Kkabars mapeha Bere Tap TOV TO 
Tas Bet, K.T.A. 5 3 1 Cor.xve 1; 2) xi 23% \Gallay gfaie ei inny ey 
(€udbere kai mapeda Bere). 

Ellicott, however, and Moule understand it as meaning that 
they received “Christ “/imse/f, the sum and substance of all 
teaching.” The sense is good, but does not agree so well with the 
usage of rapadauBdvev or with the context, in which we have the 
contrast between true and false teaching in relation to the Christian 
walk (xafws ed1dayOnre, Kata THY Tapdadoow Tov avOp.). 

tov Xpiotév “Incodv tov Kdpiov. As St. Paul does not use the 
phrase 6 Xpicrds “Incots, this is naturally divided into tov Xpucrov 
and ‘Inootv rov Kvpuov, so that tov Xp. is the immediate object of 
mapad. This is confirmed by the frequency of 6 Xpuords in this 
Epistle, and by the designation of the object of the Christian 
preaching as 6 Xpiords in Phil. i. 15, 17. Further, it will be 
observed that in what follows up to iil. 4 it is not the notion 
of “Incods or of Kvupios that is prominent, but that of Xpucrds. 
The Christ, rather than the gospel, is specified as the object 
of the instruction, because “the central point of the Colossian 
heresy was the subversion of the true idea of the Christ,” Lightfoot. 
"Inoovv tov Kupuov adds to the official designation the name of Him 
to whom it belongs, “even Jesus the Lord.” Compare Eph. iv. 
20, 21. The position of tov Kvpuov after "Incodv (instead of the 
usual tév Kipioy “Incotv) points to the two elements of which the 
true doctrine of the Christ consists, viz. first, the recognition of the 
historical person, Jesus ; and, secondly, the acceptance of Him as 
the Lord. 

év att@ mepimatette. This phrase does not occur elsewhere, but 
it corresponds to the idea of tas 6d0vs pov év Xpiord, 1 Cor. iv. 17 ; 
Cavras év Xpiord, Rom. vi. 11, etc. 

7. épprLopévor kal €morxodopodpevor. The propriety of the tenses 
is to be observed ; the settled state, which is the antecedent condi- 
tion of repurarety év air@, is expressed by the perfect ; the continual 
development which is always advancing, by the present. The three 
figures are disparate, the apostle’s thoughts being occupied with 
the lesson to be enforced, without regard to the consistency of his 


II. 7] EXHORTATION TO STEADFASTNESS 245 


metaphor; see Eph. ii. 18. Some commentators put a stop at 
mepirateire, connecting the participles with the following ver. 8 
a construction which leaves év airé =z. very isolated. 

The éme- in ézo.xod. probably does not convey “the accessory 
idea of the foundation,” which would not agree well with ev; 
besides, it is clear from wepurareire and éppi. that the apostle has 
not before him the distinct figure of a building, but is using the 
word as St. Jude does, ver. 20, érouxodopotvres Eavtods TH dywwraryn 
tuav miore, in the derived ethical sense “being built up.” Light- 
foot remarks that in this Epistle and that to the Ephesians, Christ 
is represented rather as the binding element than as the foundation 
of the building ; see Eph. ii. 20. 

BeBatovpevor qualifies the idea of both the preceding participles. 
The present gives the idea “ being more and more stablished.” 

TH wioter is taken by Meyer and Lightfoot as an instrumental 
dative, ‘by your faith.” ‘‘ Faith,” says the latter, ‘‘is, as it were, 
the cement of the building.” But this is to press unduly the 
metaphor in éouxod., which, as we have seen, is not intended any 
more than the other two verbs to convey a definite picture. There 
is no question here of the instrument, and 77 ziore is better taken 
as a dative of reference, as in Jude 20. There zio7is was that 
which needed [PcBaiwors. Kabas edidaxOyre, “even as ye were 
taught,” z.¢. so that ye continue firm and true to the lessons which 
ye were taught by Epaphras ; cf. i. 7, not ‘‘ taught to be established 
by or in your faith.” 

Tepiacevovtes év evxaptotia. “Abounding in thanksgiving.” 
If év airy is read after wepioc., then év edy. is “with thanksgiving,” 
although even with this reading some expositors interpret “in your 
faith abounding in thanksgiving.” 

Ty mlore without év, BD* 17 a/., Vulg., Ambrosiaster, Theoph. év 79 
mlaret, % D°K LP, most mss., Chrys. a/, év micrer, AC 677, év would 
readily come in from the impression made by the repeated éy in the context. 

év alrq is added after wepiccevovres in BD°K L most mss., Syr-Pesh. 
Arm., Chrys. Also x° D* 1 def, Vulg. Syr. mg. have év aivg~. The words 
are absent from §* AC 17 and some other mss., Amiat. Fuld. Eth. The 
words are omitted in the text of RV. but retained in the marginal reading. 
They may have been added originally from a recollection of iv. 2, where we 
have év arg év evxapiorlg. This is rather more probable than that they 
were omitted because mepiccevovres was thought to be sufficiently defined by 
év evxaptorla. So Weiss. 

8-15. The apostle has reason to know (having, no doubt, been 
so informed by Epaphras) that there are amongst the Colossians 
teachers who are propagating mischievous heresies, dangerous to the 
faith, and inculcating precepts not consistent with their position as 
members of Christs kingdom. These teachers make a professsion of 
philosophy, but tt is a mere system of deceit and of human origin, 
and so far is it from being an advance on what they have been 


246 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 8 


taught that tt really belongs to a more elementary stage of progress. 
Ye, he tells them, have been already made full in Christ, in whom 
dwells the whole fulness of the Godhead, and who ts therefore far 
above all these angelic beings of whom they speak. Ye need no ctr- 
cumciston of the flesh, for ye have received in Christ the true circum- 
cision of the spirit. By Him ye have been raised from death to life, 
and His work is complete; He has wholly done away with the 
bond that was against you. 

8. Bdémete py tis buds gorar. “ Beware lest there be anyone,” 
etc. For 7s with the participle and article, cf. Gal. i. 7, «¢ un twés 
ciow of Tapdooovres tas. As it gives prominence to the person 
and his action, it appears to point to some particular person whom 
the apostle has in view but does not wish to name. Compare 
Ignat. Smyrn. 5, dv twes ayvoodvtes dpvotvrae. . . Ta dé dvdpara 
aitav .. . ovk dof€ pou eyypdioar. The future indic. éorae indi- 
cates the reality of the danger, cf. Mark xiv. 2, wyrore eotar GdpuBos, 
and Heb. iii. 12, BAémwere pyrore eorau ev TUL tpov, K.T.A. tuas 
before éorat is somewhat emphatic: “you who are such persons 
as I have thus commended.” 


This order, buds ora, is that of BC K LP; but SAD have éorat bas, 
which, as the more obvious order, was more likely to be written in error. 


6 cukaywydv. A later Greek word (not indeed found till after 
St. Paul) used by Aristaenetus (ii. 22) with ofkov in the sense 
“plunder,” in which sense it is understood here by Chrys. 
Theodoret, and some moderns. Theodoret supplies tiv zrictw, 
Theophyl. rov vodv. If this were the sense here, the object could 
hardly be omitted. But the proper meaning of the word seems to 
be “to carry off as spoil.” So Heliodorus, Aezh. x. 35, 6 riv éuay 
Ovyatepa ovAaywyyoas. And this meaning corresponds with that 
of the analogous compounds, dovAaywyety, cxevaywyetv, Aadupayo- 
yetv. Von Soden remarks that it also corresponds better with 
the idea of a destroyed bond in ver. 14 to suggest that they might 
again be brought into bondage; cf. Gal. v. 1. The Vulgate 
“decipiat ” is very inadequate. 

Sia THS tdocodias. A term not occurring elsewhere in the. 
N.T., and no doubt adopted here because it was used by the false 
teachers themselves. The combination of it here with xev) drary 
indicates that the sense is nearly “his philosophy, so called, which 
is a vain deceit.” Compare Wevddvupos yvaots, 1 Tim. vi. 20. 
Chrysostom remarks : éreidi) doxet cepvov elvar 76 “rhs pirocodias” 
mpooéOnke Kai kevjs aaryns. That the word ¢Aoccodia was in use 
in Jewish circles appears from Philo and Josephus. ‘The former 
applies the word to the religion of the Jews and the law of Moses, 
perhaps for the purpose of giving dignity to them in the eyes of 
Gentile readers. He speaks of 7 xara Mwiiojv pirocodia (De Aut. 


II. 8] WARNING AGAINST FALSE TEACHERS 247 


Vom. 39), % mwatpios gdirocodia (Leg. ad Cat. 23), 4» “lovdaixy 
pirocopia (7. 33). Josephus calls the three Jewish sects 
tpeis dtAocopiac (Ant. xviii. 1. 2). It is clear from the 
connexion with xevjs dmarys that St. Paul is not condemning 
philosophy in general, which, indeed, would be quite beside his 
purpose. 

kal keyns amdtys. The absence of the article shows that this 
is not a different thing from 7 ¢iAocodia, but is a characteristic of 
it. dmadry is opposed to Adyos rs dAnGetas, i. 5, and to codpia xal 
yvaots, il. 3. 

kata Thy tapddoow tav dvOpdmwy. Probably to be connected 
with the immediately preceding words rather than with ovAaywydv. 
The teaching of the Colossian false teachers was essentially tradi- 
tional and esoteric. The Essenes, their spiritual predecessors, as 
well as the Gnostics, subsequently claimed to possess such a 
source of knowledge. The oath taken by the full members of the 
former sect bound them not to communicate any of their doctrines 
to anyone otherwise than as he himself had received them, and, 
further, to guard carefully the books of their sect and the names 
of the angels (Josephus, Be//. Jud. ii. 8. 7; Lightfoot, pp. 89, 90). 
Compare the designation Kabbala, “tradition,” applied by the 
Jews to their later mystic theology. 

KaTa Ta oToLxeta Tod Kdopou. ‘‘ According to the rudiments 
of the world” (?). This xara with the following xara Xpiordv may 
perhaps be best connected with ovAaywyév, as the ideas they 
introduce have a different logical relation to the main idea, and 
ov kata Xpworov is too brief to form the antithesis to the other two 
kata Clauses. 

Ta. oTotxeta (= Gal. iv. 3) (originally = “ letters of the alphabet ”) 
is generally understood by modern commentators as meaning 
“elementary teaching,” “the ABC of religious instruction” ; 
compare raidaywyds in Gal. Then rod xéopov would mean having 
reference to mundane, or material, not spiritual things (Alford, 
Lightfoot, a/.). But De Wette takes xoopos as =‘ humanity,” as 
the subject of this instruction (John iil. 16; 2 Cor. v. 19). So 
Oltramare. Meyer, on the other hand, understands by it “the 
non-Christian world,” “rudiments with which the world concerns 
itself” (= Bleek, Weiss, a/.). 

Neander judges that a comparison of all the Pauline passages 
and the Pauline association of ideas favour our understanding the 
phrase as denoting the earthly, elsewhere termed 7a capkuxa. 
Hence, ii. 20, ororxyeta tov Kéopov and xdapos may, he thinks, be 
considered as synonymous. 


An entirely different interpretation has been adopted by several recent 
commentators. According to this, 74 oroyeta rod xédcpuou are the personal 
elemental spirits. According to Jewish ideas, not only were the stars 


248 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [11. 9 


conceived as animated by spiritual beings,’ but all things had their special 
angels. In the Book of Enoch, 82. Ioff., it is said with reference to the 
angels of the stars that they keep watch, that they may appear at their appointed 
times, in their proper orders, etc. There are, first, the four leaders who divide 
the seasons, then the twelve leaders of the orders (taxiarchs), who divide 
the months ; and for the 360 days there are heads over thousands (chiliarchs), 
who divide the days. Anyone who is curious about the matter may learn 
the principal names in the book itself. In 18. 15 we read of stars which 
suffer punishment because they have transgressed the commandment of God 
as to their appearing. In the Book of Jubilees, cap. 2, amongst the 
creations of the first day are the Angels of the Presence, but also the angels of 
the winds, of clouds, of cold and heat, of hail, hoarfrost, thunder, etc. 
Perhaps Ps. civ. 4 may have some relation to this conception; certainly it 
seems to be illustrated by the Apocalypse, vii. 1, 2, xiv. 18, xvi. 5 (rod 
dyyédou T&v bddrwv), xix. 17 ; and by the interpolation in John v. 4. It is 
obvious that the term properly used of the elements ruled by these spirits 
might readily be applied to the spirits themselves, especially as there was no 
other convenient term. It agrees with this that in Gal. iv. 1 ff. those who 
were dedovlwpuévor bd Ta oToLXEla TOD Kdopov are compared to those who are 
under érirporo. xal olkovéduoc,—a comparison which suggests personality in 
the former. And again, 76. 8, 9, dovAevew Tots pice wi odoww Oeois appears to 
be equivalent to dovAeverv Tots ororxelous, K.T.D. 

_In the present passage the observance of times and seasons, etc., is kara Ta 
oT. T. K., not kara Xp., a contrast which does not agree well with the concep- 
tion of or. as elements of instruction. This view of 7a crovxeta gives special 
pertinence ts cne proposition which follows, é7u év atr@, x.7.d., and ver. 10, 
bs éorw H Kepar) mdons apxjs Kal éEovclas. Ritschl defends this personal 
interpretation of oroxeta at length (Rechtfertigung u. Versihnung, 3rd ed. 
ii. p. 252), but needlessly limits the meaning to the angels of the lawgiving. 
Spitta adopts the more general reference (Der Zwezte Brief des Petras u. 
der Brief des Judas, 1885, 263 ff.). He quotes from the Zest. Levi, c. 4, a 
passage which speaks of the burning up of 7a dépara mvevuara, just as 
2 Pet. iil. 10 speaks of the burning up of oroxeta. ‘This view is unreservedly 
adopted by Kiihl, the recent editor of the Epistles of Peter and Jude in 
Meyer’s Kommentar, and by v. Soden in his comment on the present 
passage.” 

9. ott év abt KaTouKel wav TO TANpwna. See i. 19; and on 
7Ajpwpa, Lightfoot’s dissertation, Colossians, p. 323 ff. 

THs GedtyT0s, “of the Godhead,” ze. of the Divine nature. 
Oeorns, the abstract of 6eds, must not be confounded with 6ewr7s, 
which is used with propriety in Rom. i. 20, and which means, not 
the essence, but the quality of divinity. @eorns is found in Lucian, 
Lcarom, ix., Tov pev Twa TpaTov Ocov érexddovv, Tots bé Ta dSevTepa _ 
Kal Ta Tpita évenov THs Georynros ; and in Plutarch, Mor. p. 415C, 
ex O€ Sapovwv ddiyar pev ere xpdvw TOAAG BL aperns KabapHeioat 
mavramact Oedtntos peteaxov. The dacmoves were always Oetor, but a 
few became in course of time @eot. The same author, Jor. p. 857 A, 
says, waow Aiyurriows Oedtyta mwoAdiy Kal Suxacocvvyv paptupycas, 


1A notion which, it may be remembered, was shared by the great 
astronomer Kepler. 

2In Zest. Solomonzs (Fabricius, Cod. Pseudep. Vet. Test. i. 1047) we read : 
Nets éopev Ta AeyOuEVA TTOLXELA, Of KOT MOKPaTOpEs TOD KbaMoU TOUTOV, AAT, Epts, 
kKAbwy, Fddryn,wAGYy, Svvauus, K.T.X. This, however, is a very late document. 


II. 10] THEIR COMPLETENESS IN CHRIST 249 


t.e.a Divine faculty. The Versions generally, including the Vulgate, 
fail to mark the distinction, doubtless for want of a word to express 
Gedtys. The word deitas was a later coinage (not quite according 
to Latin analogy). Trench quotes from Augustine, De Civ. Dei, 
vii. § 1, “ Hanc divinitatem, vel, ut sic dixerim dezfafem: nam et 
hoc verbo uti jam nostros non piget, ut de Graeco expressius 
transferant id quod illi @eéryra appellant.” 

gwpatikas, “ bodilywise, corporeally.” Not dowudrws as in the 
Adyos before the Incarnation, but in His glorified body cépa 
ts d0éns avrov, Phil. ili. 21. Chrysostom draws attention to the 
accuracy of the expression, py vouloys cov ovyKekAcicOa, ws év 
THLATL 

This interpretation, which is that adopted by most modern 
commentators, is the only one tenable, but many others have been 
suggested. Theophylact and Oecumenius took the word to mean 
“essentially,” otcwdds, ze. not merely as an influence, as in the 
saints or as in the prophets. So Calvin, Beza, and, more recently, 
Olshausen and Usteri. But the word cannot have this meaning. 

Augustine (Z/7st. 149) understands it to mean “really” not 
“typically,” “vere non umbratice,” not ‘‘umbratiliter,” as in the 
temple made with hands; and so many moderns (including Bengel 
and Bleek), comparing ver. 17, where o@ua is contrasted with 
oxid, But there the idea is that of a body which cast a shadow, 
and the passage does not justify our rendering the adverb “really.” 

Others, again, understanding zA7jpwya of the Church, take 
cwpatiKas to mean, ‘‘so that the Church is related to Him as His 
body” (Baumgarten-Crusius, @/.), thus making the body of Christ 
dwell in Christ, instead of Christ in the body. 

10. kat éoré ev att® temAnpwpévor. “And ye are in Him 
made full.” Alford, Ellicott, and Lightfoot render, “ye are in 
Him, made full,” regarding the clause as containing two predica- 
tions. But the connexion seems to require the fact to be 
emphasised, that it is ‘in Him” that the zerAnpwpevoy civac rests ; 
for on this depends the inference that nothing more is lacking 
in our relation to God. The zezAnpwpévor obviously corresponds 
with the zAyjpwya, Christ is werAnpwpévos: ye being in Him 
share in His zAxjpwpa, and are therefore yourselves retAnpwpevor. 
Compare John i, 16, é& tov wAnpwpatos atirod pets martes 
eAdBowev: Eph. ili, 9, va tAnpwOjre eis wav 7d TANPwpa Tod Ocoi, 
also zérd. iv. 13 andi. 23. 

és éottv. So § ACK LP and nearly all mss. with the Latin e fg 
Vulg. and Chrys. Theodoret, a/. But BDG 47° with d have 8 éorw, 
perhaps a correction made on the supposition that avv@ referred to mA}pwua, 
or by oversight c was lost before ec. Lachmann adopts it, placing Kal 
to év a’r@ in a parenthesis. The image, however, would be quite confused 


if the wA7jpwua were represented as the head; 4 xe@ad7 is always Christ. 
Besides, we should be obliged to refer év & also to wAjpwya, and this would 


250 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. ll 


not yield any tolerable sense. Ewald, adopting 8 éoruw, takes it as= ‘‘ scilicet,” 
comparing i, 24, 27 and iii. 17 ; but this would require rp xepadg. , 

H Kehady wdons apx7s kal éEovcias. He is the head of all those angelic 
powers to whose mediation the false teachers would teach you to seek. As 
they are subordinate to Christ, ye have nothing to expect from them which is 
not given you in full completeness in Christ. 

11. év & kal wepretpnOnte. ‘In whom also ye were (not ‘are,’ 
as AV.) circumcised.” ‘Ye have received the circumcision of the 
heart, by which ye have put off the whole body of the flesh, and 
therefore ye have no need of the symbolical circumcision of the 
flesh.” 

The aorists point to the time of their reception into the 
Christian Church by baptism. 

tepttouy, “with a circumcision,” not “ the circumcision.” 

éxetpotrowyjtw, “not wrought by hands,” not physical: cf. Mark 
xiv. 58; 2 Cor. v.1; and Eph. ii. 11, where we have the other side of 
the contrast, oiAcyduevor axpoBvortia id THs eyomevyns TepiTopy ev 
capki xelporonrov. The idea of spiritual circumcision is frequent 
in the O.T.; see note on the passage in Eph. In St. Paul, 
compare Rom. ii. 28; Phil. iii. 3. At first sight it might appear 
from this clause that the Colossians had been tempted like the 
Galatians to submit to circumcision. But in that case we should 
find, as in the Epistle to the Galatians, some direct condemnation 
of the practice; whereas in 16-23 there is no reference to it. 
Possibly the allusion here is to some claim to superiority on the 
part of the false teachers. 

év TH dmexduce. év specifies that in which the zepiroyyn con- 
sisted. The substantive azéxdvo1s has not been found in any 
earlier writer (for the verb, see ver. 15). It expresses a complete 
putting off and laying aside, and was probably chosen with refer- 
ence to the figure of circumcision. The connexion requires it to 
be understood passively, not “ye have put off,” but ‘“ was put off 
from you.” 

Tod cdépatos Tis capkés, Ze. “the body which consists in the 
flesh,” ‘“‘the fleshly body,” so that we are no more ey rH capki 
(Rom. vii. 5, viii. 8, 9). The change is ideally represented as 
complete, which it is in principle. f 

Some expositors take oda in the sense of “ mass, totality” 
(Calvin, Grotius, a/.); but this is against N.T. usage, and does not 
agree so well with the context, the images in which are connected 
with the body, “buried, raised.” The expression cdpa THs capkds, 
i. 22, has a different meaning. 

The Rec. Text after cduaros adds rév dpapridv, with N° D’° K L and 

most mss., Syr., Chrys. etc. 


The words are absent from %* ABCD* GP some good cursives, Old 
Lat. Vulg. Boh. etc. They are clearly a gloss. 


év Ti mepitopy Tov Xpictod. The simplest and most natural 


1. 12] THEIR COMPLETENESS IN CHRIST 251 


interpretation is: “the circumcision which belongs to Christ, and 
is brought about by union with Him,” in contrast to the circum- 
cision of Moses and of the patriarchs. Thus it is nearly equivalent 
to “Christian circumcision,” but expresses the idea that the source 
of this circumcision is in Christ. 

Some commentators have taken Xpucrod as the genitive of the 
object, the thought being supposed to be that in the circumcision 
of Christ we are circumcised. So Schottgen: “ Circumcisio Christi 
qui se nostri causa sponte legi subjecit, tam efficax fuit in omnes 
homines, ut nulla amplius circumcisione carnis opus sit, praecipue 
quum in locum illius baptismus a Christo surrogatus sit.” This is 
not only without support from Scripture analogy, but is foreign to 
the context, in which the circumcision spoken of is éxe:pozroiyros. 
The baptism mentioned in ver. 12, in which we are buried with 
Him, is our baptism. Soden also takes Xpuorod as an objective 
genitive, understanding, however, zepurouy in the sense of dwéxdvors 
TOD TwWpaTos THS GapKos just specified, which echoes i. 22. 

Chrysostom and Theophylact understand the genitive as sub- 
jective, 6 Xpuords wepiréuver ev TO Barticpare arekdvwv Has Tov 
madaiov Biov, Theoph. ‘This does not harmonise with the following 
cvvTaéevres atTO. 

12. cuvtapévtes adit, «.t.A. We have the same figure in Rom. 
vi. 3, 4, which may almost be regarded as a commentary on this 
passage. The figure was naturally suggested by the immersion in 
baptism, which St. Paul interprets as symbolical of burial, the 
emersion similarly symbolising the rising again to newness of life. 

auvtaévtes is to be connected with weprerunOyre, and specifies 
when and how this was brought about. 


év +@ Barticpart. So most authorities, ¥* ACD° K LP, etc. But 
N° B D* FG 47 67? 71 have Bamrricum, which Lightfoot prefers on the 
ground that it is the less usual word in this sense. That it might be so used is 
shown by its occurrence in Josephus, Az. xviii. 5. 2, of the baptism of John. 
But in two of the other three passages in which it occurs in the N.T., it means 
lustration or washing, ¢.g. of vessels : Mark vii. 4 (in Rec. also8); Heb. ix. 10. 
The third passage, Heb. vi. 2, is doubtful. In the Latin version as well as in 
the Latin Fathers, ‘‘baptisma” and “‘ ,paptismus ” are used indifferently. St. 
Paul uses the substantive ‘‘ baptism ” in only two other places (Rom. vi. 4 ; 
Eph. iv. 5), and this is not sufficient to supply any basis for inference as to his 
usage. Etymologically SBamricués would signify rather the act of dipping, 
Bdamriocpa the act as complete. Weiss thinks the former more suitable here. 


év ®, viz. Bamriopart. This seems clearly required by the 
analogy between ovwtadévtes ev and ovvnyepOnre. Chrysostom, 
however, and most comm. understand év Xp. Meyer defends 
this on the ground, first, of the parallelism of év & xai—év 6 kai ; 
secondly, because, if baptism were intended, év would not be suit- 
able to the rising again, and we should expect éé, or at least the 
non-local dia; and, lastly, because as ovvradévres is defined by 


252 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 12 


ev 7@ Bart., SO is cwvyyépOnte by dia THs ticrews ; and, therefore, 
the text suggests no reason for continuing to it the former 
definition also. To the second objection (adopted also by Eadie), 
it may be replied that Baarucpa (Bamticpds) includes the whole 
act. It is only when we take in the two things signified, the 
“death unto sin” and the “new birth unto righteousness,” or 
the putting off of the old man and the putting on of the new, 
that Bamricpa can be identified with wepitop2 ayeporointos ; for 
mepitouy also signified the entrance into a holy state as well as the 
separation from the state of nature. The first objection has 
really no weight, for it is much more natural to connect ovvyyépOnre 
with ovvragévres than with zepreruynfyre; and this is strongly 
confirmed by the passage in Rom. just referred to: cvveradnmev 
aire ba tod Barrticpatos . . . va dorep PyépOn Xpiotds . . . ovTwS 
Kal pets ev Kaworyte Cons mepiratnowpev, x.t.A. Further, as 
Lightfoot observes, the idea of Xpicr® must be reserved for 
ovvnyepOnre, where it is wanted: “ye were raised together with Him.” 
(So Alford, Beza, De Wette, Ellicott, Lightfoot, Soden, a@/.) 

curnyepOnte. Compare Gal. ii 27, door eis Xpiotov éBartic- 

nte Xpiorov érevdvoacbe. The Xpicrov érevdicacar presupposes 

the aréxdvcois rod odpartos THs wapKés. 

S.a THs TloTews THs evepyelas Tod Geod. ‘‘ Through your faith in 
the working of God.” Bengel, De Wette, a/., understand évepycias 
as a genitive of cause, ‘‘faith produced by the operation of God.” 
But the genitive after rioris, when not that of the person, is always 
that of the object. Cf. Mark xi. 22; Acts iil. 16; Rom. iii. 22; 
Gal. ii. 16, 20; Eph. iii. 12; Phil. i. 27, etc. Eph. i. 19 is cited 
in favour of this interpretation, but xara rnv évepyeiay there is not 
to be joined to rots muorevovtas ; see note on the passage. The 
former interpretation is also more suitable to the context. The 
miotis here is specified as faith in the resurrection, turtevovtes yap 
TH TOU Ocod dvvdper tpoopéevopev THY avdoracw, evéxupov ~xovtTes TOD 
deordtov Xpicrod tiv avactacw, Theodoret. ziocrews dAov éoriv" 
emustevoate Ott Svvatat 6 Weds eyetpat, kal ovtws HyépOyre, Chrys. 
Faith is the subjective means by which the grace is received ; 
only by a belief in the resurrection can the rising again with Christ 
be appropriated by the individual. By belief in the resurrection 
of Christ we believe in the power of God, of which it is an 
evidence ; and this belief, again, is the means by which that power 
works in the life and produces an effect analogous to that resurrec- 
tion. Compare Rom. iv. 24, vi. 8, x. 9. 

BDG 17 and most mss. have trav before vexpov ; SACK LP 
and several cursives omit it. In most instances of this or similar 
phrases é« vexpdv is used without rév, and with no variety in codd. 
(In Eph. i. 20 L and some twenty-five mss. prefix 7év.) But in 
1 Thess. i. 10 § BD GLPand many mss., with Chrys. Theodoret. 


IL. 13] THEIR COMPLETENESS IN CHRIST 253 


al., have trav, AC K and many mss. omitting it. It seems, there- 
fore, more probable that rév was omitted here in conformity with 
usage than that it was wrongly added. See on Lk. xx. 35. 
13. kat Gpas, vexpods Sytas Tots TapamTdpact. . . budv. See 
Eph. ii. 1. 
kal tH dxpoBuotia Tis capkés yay. Some commentators 
understand capxés as a genitive of apposition, or “ epexegetical,” 
“the uncircumcision which consisted in your carnal, sinful nature” ; 
“‘exgutsita appellatio peccati originalis,” Bengel. But the apostle 
could hardly have said vexpovs TH capxt tuav without some further 
definition. If, indeed, he were addressing Jews, the expression in 
this sense would be intelligible, since it would be at once obvious 
that dxpo. was figuratively used, and therefore capxds also. But 
though intelligible it would be very strange, as it would imply a 
hidden contrast between the literal and figurative meanings of odpé. 
As addressed to Gentiles, who had the literal dxpoBvoria ris 
capkos, the words can hardly be understood otherwise than as 
referring to the external fact. But it is referred to only on account 
of its symbolical significance. Dead in your trespasses and your 
alienation from God, of which the uncircumcision of your flesh 
was asymbol. ts capxds appears to be added in contrast to the 
Tepito. axeiporroinros, and at the same time to suggest the 
symbolical sense. Hence the apostle does not say jor, although 
presently after he introduces the first person. 
The Rec. Text has év before rots maparTwpyaci, with 8? AC DFGK P 
and most mss. It is omitted by Tisch. Lightfoot, with §* BL 17 and some 


other mss. Chrys. D*G and a few others, with the Latin deg, prefix év to 
Tq akpoBvorla also. 


cuvelworolncer Spas. tas is repeated for emphasis. 


So 8* ACKL and about fifty cursives, Syr. Eth. etc. B 17 37 and 
more than twenty other cursives read 7u@s, conforming to the following qui. 
&°DGP and many mss. Old Lat, Vulg. Boh., Chrys. etc. omit. The 
reasons for omission may have been the desire to simplify the grammar, and 
to avoid the proximity of Juds and jyiv. 

As B reads jas here for buds, so 8° LP and many others, with Vulg. 
Eth., Theodoret, a/., have tuty for juiv. 

On ovvelworoinoe, see Eph. ii. 5. What is the subject? 
Ellicott, following Chrysostom, replies: Christ ; partly on account, 
first, of “the logical difficulty of supplying a nom. from the sub- 
ordinate gen. @cod” ; secondly, of the prominence given to Christ 
throughout the preceding context, the acts described in the 
participles (égaA. «.7.A., compared with Eph. ii. 15, and yxapuo. 
with Col. iii. 13); and, lastly, the difficulty of referring vv. 14 
and 15 to God the Father. On the other hand, the reasons for 
adopting 6 @eds as the subject seem decisive. (1) There is really 
less logical difficulty in supplying 6 @eds from rod @eod rod eyei- 


254 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [1I. 14 


pavros than in supplying 6 Xpicrds from ait or airév, where it is 
the object, or from rod Xpiorod. (2) xai tuas makes it almost 
necessary to understand the same subject to ovvefworolyce as to 
éyeipavtos. (3) This is further confirmed by the ov in ovelo- 
omoincev, and by ovv airé. He that quickened you along with 
Him must surely be the same who is said to have raised Him. 
(4) In St. Paul it is always God, not Christ, who is the subject of 
eyelper, ovveyel(pel, Cworrore’, ovvGwororet. (5) Lastly, in Eph. il. 4, 
which is so closely parallel, 6 @eds is the subject of cuvefworotnoe. 
Hence we seem compelled to take 6 @eds here as the subject, 
whatever the difficulty of vv. 14, 15. And so Meyer, Alford, 
Lightfoot, v. Soden. 

Xxapicdpevos, “having forgiven.” Moule prefers “ forgiving,” 
7.e. in the act of quickening. There is no grammatical objection 
to this; but logically, at least, the yapiZecfac must precede the 
Cworoiv. The verb xapiferfar properly means. “to grant as a 
favour” (see on Eph. iv. 32). Compare in the N.T. Luke vii. 21, 
éxapicaro BXerew: Acts iii. 14, povea xapioOjvar: XXV. II, ovdels 
pe OvvaTat avtois xapicacGar: 7b. 16, xxvii. 24, Kexapioral cor 6 Beds 
mavtas TOUS wAgovtas peta cov. Phil. i. 29; Philem. 22. 

It does not seem necessary to suppose that its use in the 
sense “forgive an offence” is derived from that of “forgiving a 
debt” ; but even if so, there is no reason to think that it continued 
to suggest the latter idea. Here at all events, notwithstanding 
xetpdypadov, it would appear not to have been so intended, else 
TapartoHpata would hardly be used, which would interfere with the 
figure. See on Lk. vii. 21, 42. 


jutv is here the right reading, with »* ABC DGK and most mss., deg 
Goth. Syr. (both), Boh. Arm., Chrys. @/, 

viv is read by 8°L P and many mss. f, Vulg. Eth. The apostle at the 
earliest moment, as we may say, includes himself, claiming his share in the 
transgression and in the forgiveness. Such transition is frequent with him ; 
Ch TO—1 3s iti 4is Vi phe 2 oso nA) lve Ths 2) vate weet Onethe 
converse transition see Gal. iii. 25, 26, iv. 5, 6. If xapicduevos were simul- 
taneous with cuvefworolycev, St. Paul must have used viv here. 


14, ééadelwas, “blotting out” (because simultaneous with 
xapiordsevos, and specifying the act by which the yap. was carried 
out). Strictly, it means “wiping out or away,” “cera obducta 
delere.” It is used of “sins,” Acts iii. 19; of a “name,” Rev. 
iii. 5; of “tears,” Rev. vii. 17, xxi. 4. It is used also in classical 
writers of blotting out or wiping out a writing, e.g. Plato, ef. p. 
386 C, p. 501 B, and hence of abolishing a law, Dem. p. 468, 1, 
ete: 

+d kab” Hpav xeipdypadov. “The bond that was against us.” 
xetpdypadoy, properly an autograph, was in later Greek a technical 
term for a written acknowledgment of debt, for which the older 


II. 14] THE BOND BLOTTED OUT 255 


term was ovyypady or ypapparetov. ‘ Chirographum” became 
the usual Roman legal term; cf. Cic. Fam. vii. 18 ; Juvenal, Saz. 
xvi. 41. 

Here the xeipdypadov is the Mosaic Law, which being unfulfilled 
is analogous to an unpaid “note of hand.” But the figure must 
not be pressed too far, for in this case the xepdypadov was not 
written by the debtor. Nor is it necessary to suppose that the 
apostle had in view the assent of the Jewish people; Deut. xxvii. 
14-26; Ex. xxiv. 3 (Chrys. Oecum. Theoph. Lightfoot, etc.), or 
in the case of the Gentiles the assent of conscience to the moral 
law. ‘The fact of obligation is sufficient to justify the use of the 
figure. Hence it is 76 xa judy xerpoypadov, but not judy xetpo- 
ypapov. Although the Gentiles had not the written law, they had 
“the work of the law written in their hearts,” and therefore come 
under the same obligation. 

For a detailed account of other views of xetpoypadov, see Eadie. 

Sdypaow, “consisting in ddéypuara, z.e. ordinances,” compare 
Eph. ii. 15, tov vépov tav évrohdv év ddypact, where see note on 
the meaning of déyyua, which in the N.T. is always “a decree.” 

The dative is best regarded as closely connected with xeupo- 
ypaov only, being dependent on the idea of yeypaypévoy involved 
in the word. Compare Plato, £/. vii. p. 243 A, 6 89 mracye ra 
yeypappéva trots. So Meyer, Alford, Eadie, Lightfoot, Soden. 
The explanation is not without difficulty, as xeipoy. is a synthetic 
compound; and Lightfoot thinks it possible that év may have 
dropped out after the similar termination -ov. If so, it must 
have been in the earliest ages that the error occurred, since no 
trace remains of the reading év. 

Two or three other explanations deserve notice ; first, that 
of Winer, a/., followed by Ellicott, according to which ddypacr is a 
nearer definition of the whole, 76 xa” jay xeipdypadov expressing 
at the same time what the xetpdypadov was, and in what respect it 
was against us. For this we should expect 76 rots ddypacw Kal 
Hpov X., OF TO Ka yudy x. Tv Soypdrwv, or the like. 

Erasmus, Olshausen, Conybeare, and others connect rots ddy- 
paow with the following clause: “the handwriting, which by its 
ordinances, was against us,” a very unnatural construction, for 
which Acts i. 2 affords no parallel. 

The Greek commentators (Chrysostom, Severianus, Theodore 
Mops., Theodoret, Oec., Theoph.) connect ddypacw with ééadreipas, 
understanding the word to mean the doctrines or precepts of the 
gospel, as the instrument by which the blotting out was effected. 
Jerome adopts this view; and so, amongst moderns, Grotius, Estius, 
Bengel, Fritzsche. 

But this is not only opposed to the use of ddyyua in the N T., 
but, what is of more importance, it is inconsistent with fact. 


256 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 14 


For it 1s not by precepts or doctrines ( etayyeAuky didacKxadia, 
Theoph.), nor by faith (Theodoret), that the handwriting, ze. the 
Mosaic Law, is abrogated. Moreover, the cognate verb doypari- 
CeoGe in ver. 29 has obvious reference to the ddypara here, and it is 
implied that such ddypnara are obsolete. It is remarkable that the 
Greek commentators named above do not even allude to the 
correct interpretation, adopting without question that construction 
which was grammatically simplest. Irenaeus, however (quoted by 
Lightfoot), appears to have taken the more correct view. 

The term déyparTa is used here instead of vouos, doubtless in 
order to fix attention on the formal element, the plurality of 
precepts,—an element which was common to it and the doyparilew 
of the false teachers. It thus prepares for the ri doyparilerGe 
Ofiver. 20, See lon) Lk: a1. 1. 

® iv Gmevarytiov Hpiv. “Which was directly opposed to us.’ 
Here first the idea of the hostility of the Xepoypadoy is eerily 
the xa” tuav only asserting its validity with reference to us. 

brevavtios occurs again Heb. x. 27. The izé does not in this 
word imply either secrecy (Beza, a/.) or mitigation, as = “subcon- 
trarius,” a signification which to in composition often has, but which 
does not belong to tzrevavrios either in the Sept. or in classical writers. 
For the Sept. cf. Gen. xxii. 27; Ex. xxiii. 27; and for classical 
usage, two passages cited by Lightfoot, viz. Arist. De Gen. e¢ Corr 
i. 7, €0ikact ot TovTov Tov TpoTov Aé€yovTes UrevavTia Haiver Oar AEyeLy, 
where it means “self-contradictory,” and [Plato] A/cid. Sec. 138 C, 
SQ. Td patverOa dpa trevavtiov cou Soxet TG ppovetv ; AA. Havy ne 
ov... 139 B, 30. Kat pay dvo ye trevavtia Evi mpdypate mas av 
ein, where the argument turns on the sense of direct opposition 
involved in the word. 

kal adTd fpkey ek tod péoou. “ And it (emphatic) He hath 
taken out of the way.” The yerpoypador, the writing on which had 
been blotted out, has now been itself removed out of the way. aipew 
€k TOU pécov OF ex jeoovd. was a Classical expression for removing 
out of the way, as, on the contrary, év péow etvac meant “to be in 
the way.” For the former, compare Dem. De Corona, p. 354, To 
katawevoerbar Kai du’ éxOpdv te A€yey dvedovras ex pérov; also Acts 
xvii. 33 and 2 Thess. ii. 7, povov 6 Karéxwv apte ews av ex pécov 
yevytat. The idea “from between us and God” is not implied, 
but only that of an obstacle, as these and other passages show. 
The change of structure from the participles to the finite verb is to 
be noted, as well as the perfect jpxev. The perfect fixes attention 
on the present state of freedom resulting from the action which 
was especially before the apostle’s mind. “It is suggested,” says 
Lightfoot, “by the feeling of relief and thanksgiving which rises up 
in the apostle’s mind at this point.” This is quite sufficient to 
account for the change of construction ; but there was another and 


II. 15] THE BOND BLOTTED OUT 257 


more imperative reason in the necessity for adding a further parti- 
cipial definition to the “‘taking away.” It is clear that dpas... 
mpooyjAwoas would not have conveyed the same idea. 


Lightfoot and others suppose a change of subject at jjpxev, viz. from 6 Oeds 
to 6 Xpiords. A new subject, it is thought, must be introduced somewhere, 
because ‘‘no grammatical meaning can be assigned to dmexduodmevos by which 
it could be understood of God the Father,” and the severance created here 
by the change of construction suggests this as the best point of transition, the 
alternative point being at darexdvoduevos, Barry observes that such gramma- 
tical anomalies are not uncommon in St. Paul. But certainly this cannot be 
said of such a misleading confusion or hidden change of subject as this would 
be. Lightfoot compares the transition in i. 17-19. If the interpretation 
given in the note there is correct, there is no hidden transition, the subject of 
evddxnoev being expressed. But even if 6 Oeds is the subject of evdédxnoev in 
i, 19, there is no analogy. For the change of subject there is not concealed, 
and the only peculiarity is that 6 Oeds is not expressed; and the very ground 
on which commentators defend this view of the construction is that the verb 
evdoxety and the substantive evdoxla are so often used absolutely of God’s good 
pleasure that the verb itself suggests ‘‘God” as its subject. Here, on the 
contrary, there is nothing in the words to indicate or suggest a new subject. 
On the contrary, fipxev é€x Tov uécou only expresses a different aspect of the 
same idea that is presented in éfadelYas. No intelligible reason has been 
alleged why St. Paul should say, ‘‘God blotted out the handwriting, Christ 
removed it out of the way.” Indeed, had this been stated with the subjects 
expressed, it would have created a difficulty. 

Further, this view is open to the fatal objection, that it dissociates yapicd- 
pevos and éfadelWas from the Cross. It inevitebly suggests that the forgive- 
ness and the blotting out of the yeupdypadov ascribed to God are one thing, 
and the removal, etc., ascribed to Christ a distinct and subsequent work. 
V. Soden, indeed (who, however, does not suppose any change of subject), 
suggests such a distinction as possible. He remarks that in the figure itself 
alpey mpoon\woavta denotes a step beyond éfadelpew, so that we might 
regard the éfaX. as accomplished in the sending of Christ, the atpew ék Tod 
pécov in His death. He considers it more probable, however, that both 
expressions are figures for one and the same thing, the xaplfec@ar ra mapa- 
m7TwuatTa, the former applying to it in its effect, the latter adding the means by 
which the effect is accomplished. 


Tpoondwoas adits Te otaupo. ‘The aorist expresses the historical 
fact. The verb does not occur elsewhere in the N.T., but is found 
in classical writers, and with oravpé in 3 Macc. iv. 9, and Joseph. 
Bell. Jud. ii. 14. 9. The thought expressed is similar to that in 
Gal. ii. 13. As Meyer observes, “‘since by the death of Christ on 
the Cross the law which condemned men lost its penal authority, 
inasmuch as Christ by His death endured for men the curse of the 
Law and became the end of the Law, hence in the fact that Christ 
as a iNXaoryptov was nailed to the Cross, the Law itself was nailed 
thereon, whereby it ceased to be év péow.” The figure in zpoon- 
Adoas is suggested simply by the idea of the crucifixion; there is 
no reason to suppose, with Grotius, any allusion to a custom of 
driving a nail through obsolete laws or decrees, and so hanging 
them up in public, a custom which seems to be unproved. 

15. dmexducdpevos tas dpxds Kal tas efoucias, ederypdricey, 

17 


258 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 15 


k.t-A. The verb amexdvecGac appears not to occur in any writer 
before St. Paul; its occurrence, therefore, here and in iii. 9, as 
well as that of daéxdvors in ver. 11, is remarkable. It is, no doubt, 
chosen in order to express more emphatically the completeness 
of the action. Both drodvev and éxdvew occur in classical authors 
in the sense “strip,” hence of enemies, “strip of arms, spoliare.” 
For ékdvew in the sense “strip,” see Matt. xxvii. 28, 31; Mark 
xv. 20; Luke x. 30. The middle occurs 2 Cor. v. 4 of putting off 
the mortal body. In this Epistle, ili, 19, dexdvodpevor occurs 
again in the sense “strip off and put away,” viz., tov maAavdv 
avOpwrov. It is very difficult to decide in what sense the word is 
used here. 

First, it has been taken absolutely, “ having put off from himself 
his Jody, he made a show,” etc.,as RV. marg. This, which 
supposes 6 Xpicrds to be the subject, is the interpretation adopted 
by Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, and some other Latins. Probably, 
however, they had before them a Latin counterpart of the reading 
found in G, viz. tiv odpxa Kai tas eEovoias. The Latin of G has 
the same. Thus Hilary has twice, “exutus carnem et potestates 
ostentui fecit” (773, 990); once, however, he has “spolians se 
carne et principatus et potestates ostentui fecit ” (204). 

Novat. also has “exutus carnem potestates dehonestavit” 
(De Trin. 16). It will be observed that these quotations, except 
the third from Hilary, agree with G in omitting ras dpxds. This 
reading may have originated from the eye or ear error of a copyist, 
aided by the suggestion of dzexd. ; but more probably was a gloss, 
which was supposed to be a correction, and so substituted for the 
correct text. There is a trace either of the reading or the inter- 
pretation in a Docetic work quoted by Hippolytus, //aer. viii. 10, 
p. 267, puxy éxeivn ev TH odpate Tpadeioa, arekdvoapeyn TO copa 
kat mpoonrAdoaca mpos 7d EvAov kal OpiapBetoaca Sv aivrod Tas 
apxds, «.7.4. The Syriac Peshitto has the same interpretation, 
“ by the putting off of his body”; and so the Gothic also. 

In support of this interpretation 2 Cor. v. 4 is referred to, 
where the cognate verb exdvcac6a is used absolutely of putting off 
the body. But there the metaphor is not abruptly introduced, 
the verb only carrying out the figure introduced with its explanation 
in vv. 2,3. Here it would be quite isolated, being neither explained 
nor suggested by anything in the context, with which, indeed, the 
idea would have no apparent connexion. Some expositors, indeed, 
have found an allusion to the metaphorical use of daodverba, “ to 
prepare for a contest,” as in Plut. Mor. 811 E, rpos macav arodve- 
pevoe THY TodituKny mpagw. This explanation is very far-fetched, 
and entirely unsuitable. 

2. Ellicott, Lightfoot, a7, adopt the interpretation of the Greek 
commentators, Chrysostom, Severianus, Theodore Mops., and 


Er. 15] SPOILING OF PRINCIPALITIES AND POWERS 259 


Theodoret, viz. taking ras dpyds, x.7.A., as governed by azrexé., the 
sense being, “ having stripped off from himself the hostile powers of 
evil.” “Our Lord by His death stripped away from Himself ali 
the opposing Powers of Evil (observe the article) that sought in 
the nature which He had condescended to assume to win for 
themselves a victory,” Ell. Similarly Lightfoot, ‘“‘ Christ took upon 
Himself our human nature with all its temptations (Heb. iv. 15). 
The powers of evil gathered about Him. Again and again they 
assailed Him; but each fresh assault ended in a new defeat.” 
“The final act in the conflict began with the agony of Gethsemane ; 
it ended with the Cross of Calvary. The victory was complete. 
The enemy of man was defeated. The powers of evil, which had 
clung like a Nessus robe about His humanity, were torn off and 
cast aside for ever. And the victory of mankind is involved in the 
victory of Christ. In His Cross we too are divested of the poisonous 
clinging garments of temptation and sin and death; 7é dmofeoOar 
tHv Ovntotynta, says Theodore, Hv trép tHs Kowys adeirev evepyeoias, 
amedvcaro Kakelve (7. TOV avTiKeyrevwv Suvdpewr) THY aidevteiav Hep 
exéxpnvto Kal” jpav.” 

But this interpretation is open to serious if not fatal objections. 
In the first place, as the verb means to divest of clothing, it requires 
us to regard these hostile powers in the light of a clothing of God 
or Christ, a “ Nessus robe,” as Lightfoot expresses it. 

If the interpretation, “ putting off the body,” is to be rejected 

on the ground that the metaphor, though a natural one, is not 
suggested or explained by the context, the objection applies more 
strongly to the view in question, which supposes a metaphor by no 
means easy to understand and not elsewhere paralleled. The putting 
off the old man, ch. iii. 9, is not at all parallel. Lightfoot compares 
Philo, Quod det. pot. ins. 13 (i. Pp. 199), Where the image in the 
context is that of a wrestling bout, efavacrdvres 5é kai dueperrdpevor 
Tas évtéxvous aitav mepuTAokas edpapas exdvoduefa; but there the 
‘figure is sufficiently explained by the context. Here (and this is 
the second objection) the figure would be irrelevant to the context. 
As Alford observes, “is it in any way relevant to the fact of the 
law being antiquated by God in the Great Sacrifice of the atone- 
ment, to say that He in that act (or, according to others, Christ in 
that act) spoiled and triumphed over the zxfernal potentates?” 
Lastly, there is another very strong objection. If it was only by 
putting off His human body on the Cross that He could put off 
from Himself the powers of evil that beset His humanity, this 
would not be victory, but retreat. 

3. Alford observes, and apparently with justice, that the terms 
dpxai and éfoveiar are general ; and a specific reference to “ infernal 
powers” is not to be assumed unless it is determined by the 
context, as in Eph. vi. 12. ‘‘ Now the words have occurred before 


260 HE ErIsTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 15 


in this very passage, ver. 10, where Christ is exalted as xehady 
maons apxns Kat efovoias, and it is hardly possible to avoid 
connecting our present expression with that, seeing that in ras 
dpxas kat tas e€ovoias the articles seem to contain a manifest 
reference to it.” ‘Taking the words, then, in a more general sense, 
he explains the whole by reference to passages in which the Law is 
said to have been administered by angels, Gal. ili. 19, duarayeis 
du ayyéAwy : Heb. ii. 2, 6 dv ayyéAwv AaAnGeis Adyos : Acts vil. 53, 
eAdBere tov vomov eis duataydas ayyéAwv. Compare Jos. Anz. 
XV. 5. 3, Nuov Ta KdANICTA TOV SoypaTwv, Kal Ta SoLwTaTa TOV éVv 
Tois vopos Ov ayyéAwv Tapa Tod Mcodt paldvrwy, “they were the 
promulgators of the xerpdypadov tots déypacw.” That writing was 
first wiped out, and then nailed to the Cross—abrogated and 
suspended there. ‘Thus God dzefedvcato tas dpxas Kal tas 
efovoias—divested Himself of, put off from Himself, that éyyéAwv 
dvarayy, manifesting Himself henceforward without a veil in the 
exalted Person of Jesus.” It is no objection to this “that thus 
more prominence would be given to angelic agency in the law than 
was really the fact; the answer is, that the prominence which is 
given is owing to the errors of the false teachers, who had evidently 
associated the Jewish observances in some way with the worship of 
angels.” With reference to this, the statement of Theodoret quoted 
below on ver. 18 is important, tots ayyéXous o€Bew eicyyorvro, 
Sa tovtwv Aé€yovtes deddcGou Tov vopov. “St. Paul’s argument will 
go only to this,—that whatever part the angelic powers may have 
had, or be supposed to have had in the previous dispensation, 
all such interposition was now at an end, that dispensation itself 
being once for all antiquated and put away.” Ritschl’s view is 
similar. Ellicott’s objection to this view is that it rests on the 
assumption that the verse refers to @eds, not Xpiords. But, in fact, 
it only assumes that the contrary is not proved. The principal 
objection to taking 6 @eds as the subject throughout is the supposed 
difficulty or impossibility of interpreting azexdvodpevos, x.7.X., of 
God the Father. It is not logical to adopt this argument, and 
then to reject an interpretation which meets this difficulty on the 
ground that the subject must be 6 Xpuords. 

4. The foregoing interpretations assume that dmexdvodpevos, 
being in the middle voice, must mean “stripping from himself.” 
But the middle often only expresses a personal interest, and the 
cognate verb dmedvoduea occurs in Plato, Rep. p. 612 A (quoted 
by Meyer), in the sense “nudavimus.” Nor does the fact that in 
iii. g the same verb in the same voice means “strip from oneself,” 
decide the question as to its meaning here. As Bp. Perowne observes 
(apud Moule), there are classical parallels to such a varying use 
of the middle in neighbouring contexts. See Soph. Ajax, 245, 
647. It is allowable, therefore, to take the verb here in the sense 


IL 15] SPOILING OF PRINCIPALITIES AND POWERS 261 


“spoil, disarm,” the middle conveying the idea “sibi exspoliare.” 
This sense, accordingly, is adopted by Bengel, De Wette, Meyer, 
Moule, Eadie, Soden. Most of these, however, understand as in 
(1) (2) by the dpxai kai é€ovo/a: the infernal powers. Some of the 
objections made to (2) apply to this view also. First, that if these 
were intended we should expect this to be specified ; and, secondly, 
that it does not harmonise with the context. What had the dis- 
arming of the infernal powers to do with the abolition of the 
déypata? or what connexion had the assertion of it with the warn- 
ing against the @pynoxeia tov ayyéAwv ? Meyer’s explanation is that 
it was in sin that these powers had their strength in their hostility 
to God, and “the power of sin was in the Law” (1 Cor. xv. 56) ; 
hence with the law “the infernal power stands and falls.” Surely 
a faulty argument. The abolition of the law does not do away with 
sin. Moule, again, says, ‘‘ He who is King of all orders of good 
angels is here presented as Conqueror of their evil counterpart.” 
This supposes that tas dpxds, x.7.A., here are actually contrasted with 
1dao7ns 4px7s, k.7.A., in ver. 10, of which contrast there is no indication. 

5. V. Soden adopts the translation “spoiled,” z.e. “disarmed,” 
but adopts a view of dpxai kai efovoia. similar to that of Alford 
and Ritschl, viz. that they are the angelic powers in so far as they 
represent the Law, and thereby have power over men, and doubly 
over those who do not fulfil it, that is (since ideally the law was 
valid for all men), not Jews only, but Gentiles also (Gal. iv. 3, 9, 
ili, 19; 1 Cor. vill. 5 sqq.). The fact, which in ver. 14 was 
described on the side of men, is now carried out in its significance 
for the angelic powers who represented those ddéypara, having in 
view the fact that the doyyarifew taught in Colossae, which the 
apostle is combating, was ultimately a OpyoKeia tov dyyeAwv 
(18, 23). 

This view is equally tenable whether the subject is taken to be 
6 @eds or 6 Xpuoros, and it seems less open to objection than the 
former. The remark quoted above from Alford as to the promi- 
nence given to angelic action is equally applicable to this interpre- 
tation. 

ederypaticev. A rare word, which, perhaps, is also to be read in 
Matt. i. 19, px OéAwy airiy Serypatioar:! and Lightfoot also quotes 
a passage from Acta Pauli et Petri, in which it occurs, iva pu) povov 
a0 THS TOD Xtywvos drdrns piywouw, GAda kal Sevrypatricovow adrov, 
where it is explained in the context as “to proclaim.” ‘The sub- 
stantive devywaticpos occurs in the Rosetta inscription. The idea 
involved in devypari€ew is only that of public exhibition, not of 
shame (rapadeypariley). 

ev tappyoia, The rendering “ openly,” as in AV. and retained 


1 The Text. Rec. there has rapadevyparloat,—a word which frequently occurs 
in Folyb. etc. ; also Num. xxv. 4; Isa. iv. 17; Jer. xiii. 22; Ez. xxviii. 17. 


262 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 15 


in RV.,, is approved by Bengel, De Wette, Olsh., Wordsworth, and 
Eadie. Sypocia, ravtwv Spwovrwv, Theoph., Alford would preserve 
the idea of “openness of speech,” “declaring and revealing by the 
Cross that there is none other but Christ the Head zdons dapyjjs 
kat é€ovcias.” ‘Openness of speech,” however, seems unsuitable 
to the connexion. As to the sense “openly, publicly,” it seems to 
be supported by John vii. 4, where év Tappyoig elvat is opposed to 
é€v Kpurte movelv, and xi. 54, Incots ovkére Tappnoia mepuerarer ev 
tots Iovdalous GAAa aandOev exeiGev, x.7.A. In St. Paul, however, it 
always means “with boldness, or confidence” (an idea which is 
also present in the places cited), and so it is understood here by 
Meyer, Ellicott, Lightfoot, Soden. Hofmann connects év rappyoia 
in the sense “openly” with @prapBevoas, which, however, already 
contains that idea. 

OprapBevcas adtovs. avrovs, masc. of the dpyai xat e&., because 
they are treated as personal existences, not with any reference to 
their possible designation as dyyéXovs. 

Oprap,Bevoas, “ triumphing over them,” or, rather, ‘leading them 
in triumph,” as in 2 Cor. ii. 14. This is the usual signification of 
the verb with accus. of person. Z.g. Plut. Zhes. e¢ Rom. 4, 
Baoire’s OpiduBevoe Kat yyeydvas. Wetstein, on Cor. 2c, gives 
other examples. 

év atta. Bengel, De Wette, a/, take this as=éev Xpiord 
But Christ is not mentioned in ver. 14. Most commentators 
understand it as=év oravpo. To this Soden objects that oravpds 
in ver. 14 is only a secondary idea; and he refers the pronoun to 
xepoypadov. In doing away with the xeipdypadoy God triumphed 
over those who administered it. (Meyer, ed. 4 (1874), does not 
mention this view, which is attributed to him by Ellicott (1857) 
and Eadie (1855).) The Vulgate has “in semetipso,” and so RV. 
margin. G reads év éavT. 

The metaphor is a very bold one whether understood of God 
or of Christ. If ai7é refers to oravpé, the words would certainly 
be more suitable to Christ, and in that case the antithesis between 
OpidpBevoas and év oravpd would be extremely striking. ‘The 
violence of the metaphor,” says Lightfoot, “‘is its justification. 
The paradox of the Crucifixion is thus placed in the strongest light 
—triumph in helplessness and glory in shame. The convict’s 
gibbet is the victor’s car.” No doubt this way of putting the 
thought is very striking ; but if this had been the meaning of the 
apostle, might we not expect that he would express it more dis- 
tinctly, instead of almost hiding it, as we may say, in an un- 
emphatic pronoun with an ambiguous preposition é¢v? We might 
have expected some such expression, for instance, as oravpwHeis 
eOpidu.Bevoe, But, in fact, the contrast suggested would be quite 
irrelevant to the apostle’s purpose, and the more striking it is the 


II. 16] PRACTICAL APPLICATION 263 


less likely is it that he would introduce it in this way as a side- 
thought, thus tending to draw the reader’s attention from the argu- 
ment. 

For év ait Origen (in several places) reads év TG f0Aw. So 
also his translator (Zzzé, ii. 416), commenting on “in ligno crucis,” 
says: “‘licet in aliis exemplaribus habeatur ¢viumphans in semetipso, 
sed apud Graecos habetur zm Jigno.” 

16-23. Practical application of these principles to the ascetic 
precepts and the angel-worship of the false teachers. With their 
precepts about eating and drinking and observance of days, they 
would have you attach yourselves to the shadow, whereas you are in 
possession of the reality. The cult of angels ts inculcated as a becom- 
ing exercise of humility ; but this is a false humility, and ts really the 
Jruit of carnal pride, vaunting ttself in the pretended knowledge of 
these angelic powers, and is derogatory to Christ the Head, on whom 
alone we depend for spiritual health and growth. 

16. Mi) obv Tis buds Kpwerw. ‘‘ Therefore,” seeing that the law of 
ordinances has been done away with, ‘‘let not any one,” not pndeis, 
but 7 71s, as in ver. 8, pointing to some definite persons ; xpwvérw, 
not “condemn,” but ‘judge you, take you to task.” Compare 
OM. Xive (3/4731 Cornx.120; 

év Bodice % €v méce, “In eating or in drinking,” #e. in the 
matter of eating or drinking. Compare Rom. xiv. 17, od ydp éorw 
9 Bacrr<ia Tod cod Bpdcis kal moots. Bpaors in St. Paul is always 
the action of eating (1 Cor. vill. 4; 2 Cor. ix. ro), not the thing 
eaten (Bpdpua, 1 Cor. vi. 13, vill. 8, x. 3, a/.; Heb. ix. 10). In 
Homer, indeed, pacts is used for “food” (/7. i. 210, aZ.); and so 
in St. John iv. 32; cf. 34, vi. 27,55. There is a similar difference 
between zéovs and ropa. 

The Mosaic Law contained no prohibition respecting drinks 
except in special cases, namely, those of Nazirite vows and of 
priests ministering in the tabernacle (Num. vi. 3; Lev: x; 9). 
There was also a prohibition of drinking from vessels rendered 
unclean by the dead bodies of unclean animals (Lev. xi. 34). We 
know, however, that the Essenes, the prototypes of the Colossian 
false teachers, went far beyond the Mosaic code, abstaining wholly 
from wine and from animal food (see Lightfoot, p. 86). 

Lightfoot reads kai év wooe, with B, Syr-Pesh. Boh., Tertull. 
Origen. Tertullian, however, reads ef in all four places, therefore 
his evidence in this instance is valueless. The Syriac also has 
“and” in three of the four places, ‘‘or” only in the second; its 
evidence also, therefore, counts for nothing. The apostle might 
have written caf not 7, because Bpdors and wéo1s naturally belong 
together (but so, indeed, do the following three), and the occur- 
rence of 7 in the other three clauses would easily lead a copyist to 
substitute it here. But the authority for xa/ is too slight. 


264 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 17 


Compare 1 Cor. xi. 27, éoOin rov aprov 7» mivy TO woTHptoy, k.T.A., 
where A, some cursives, Syr-Pesh. Boh. Eth., Origen, a/. have xai. 

4 €v péper, “in the matter of”; compare éy tovr@ TO pépet, 
2 Cor. lil, 10, ix. 3; jépos often denotes the class or category, 
especially with verbs like riOévar, as in Plato, Rep. i. 348 EH, &v 
apeTns Kat codias TiOyns pepe THVv adixiav. Chrys. and Theodoret 
take it here in the sense “part,” od yap 8) wdvra Kateiyov Ta 
mporepa, Chrys. 

opts 7 voupnvias 7 caBBdtwy. The words specify the annual, 
monthly, and weekly celebrations ; cf. Gal. iv. ro. 

o43Bara, though plural, means ‘fa Sabbath day,” being, in fact, 
a Greek transliteration of the Aramaic, and from its form mistaken 
for a plural. Thus Josephus distinctly, Azz. ili. ro. 1, €Bdounv 
jpépay yrs od BBara xadetrat; also 7, i. 1. 1. Compare Hor. Sa¢ 
i. 9. 69, “hodie tricesima Sabbata.” See on Lk. iv. 31. 

B G have the spelling veounvias, and so the Vulg. 

17. & €ot oxida TOV peddAdvTwv, Td S€ GHA Xpiotod. axed does 
not mean an outline or sketch (as understood by Calvin and 
many others), which would be ocxiaypadia or cxiaypdgdypa, and 
is excluded by the antithesis of céua. A sketch would be con- 
trasted with the complete picture. It is simply ‘‘shadow,” having 
in itself no substance, but indicating the existence of a body which 
casts the shadow. océpa accordingly retains its proper signification 
“body,” not “‘substance.” Compare Philo, De Conf. Ling. p. 434, 
Ta pev PNTA TOV XPNT POV oKLds TAs doavel TwdTwv elvat: Opposed 
to Ta iheotGra dAnbeia mpdypara, Josephus, Gell. Jud. i. 2. 5, 
oKiav aitnoopevos BaciAcias, Hs HpTacev €avTo TO cua. Compare 
also Heb. x. 1, oxvav eywy 6 vouos tov peddAOvTWV ayaldv, ovK 
aiTnv THV €ikdva TOV Tpaypatwv: 76, Vill. 5, oKia AaTpEvovTL TOV 
érovpaviwv. The figure expresses both the unsubstantiality and 
the supersession of the Mosaic ritual. But the thought found in 
it by some Greek commentators, and adopted by Meyer and 
Lightfoot, that the shadow comes Jéefore the substance (7 oxa 
MpOTpEeXeL TOV TwpaTos), is not contained in the text; for it is no 
part of the idea of a shadow that it goes before the body, or is 
seen before it. Theodoret presses the figure still further : 7 po- 
Aap Paver 7 Q OKLA TO copa dvi Xovros | TOU dwrds' ws elvat TKLAY [eV 
Tov Vopmov capa Se THY Xap, Pos dé Tov SeamwoTrHV Xpioror. 

Meyer again presses the tense of éor so far as to infer that ra 
péAXovra are not the already then existing Christian relations, the 
Kav?) Siabijxn (rather 7a THs Kays dSiabyKys), but belong “ wholly ” 
to the aidy péAdXwv. The present, however, is. sufficiently ex- 
plained by the remark of Davenant (afwd Ellicott), “loquitur 
de illis ut considerantur 7” sua naturd, abstractae a circumstantiis 
temporis.” Yet it may be used in its temporal sense quite as well 
as the presents in Heb. x. 1.sqq. For the observance of these 


II. 18] PRACTICAL APPLICATION 265 


times and seasons had not ceased, although that of which they 
were the shadow had come. Meyer’s interpretation would vitiate 
the apostle’s reasoning, for if ta péAAovra were still wholly future, 
the oxida would not be superseded, and the observances referred to 
would retain their importance. 

V. Soden regards cépa as denoting 7a péAXovra in their con- 
crete organisation, z.e. the Church (cf. ver. 19). 

tod Xptorod, z.¢. belongs to Christ; the blessings typified by 
these observances are found in Him. The article is prefixed in 
x* A C P17 a/, Oec.; omitted in 8° DG KL most mss., Chrys. 
etc. Chrysostom mentions a strange punctuation: of péy ody 
tovro otilover’ do dé copa, Xpiorod, 7 S5é aAnOela ext Xpiorod 
yeyover’ of 82, 7d 8 copa Xpiorod pydeis ipas xaraBpaBevéro, 
rovteotiv, exnpeatéerw. So Augustine, “YZ. 59, “Corpus autem 
Christi nemo vos convincat,” confessing that he does not 
understand it. This connexion is also supported by ABP 
(apparently & also) @/., Eth. 

18. Mydels Spas kataBpaBevérw. KaraSpaGevew is an extremely 
rare word. Jerome reckoned it as one of St. Paul’s Cilicisms, but 
it has been found in two other places. First in Demosth. J/d. 
p. 544 (not as used by the orator, but in a statement of witnesses), 
bua. tavryV TH aitiav émiotdpela Urpatwva tro Mewdiov xataBpafev- 
Oé&ta Kat mapa ravta Ta Sikata atywwhévta. Strato had been 
arbitrator in a cause between Demosthenes and Meidias, and as 
the latter did not appear, gave judgment against him. On this 
account Meidias contrived to have Strato condemned to atupia. 
The other passage quoted in the Lexicons and commentators is 
in Eustathius on Hom. //. A. 402sqq. Speaking of the assistance 
which Briareus, son of Poseidon, rendered to Zeus, when Poseidon, 
with two other deities, conspired against him, Eustathius observes 
that as amongst men sons often differ from their fathers, otrws 
ovde 6 prdixds Bpidpews Pita ppovet TH watpi, GAAa KataBpaBever 
avrov, as dacw of mada.ol, Tov pvotxod Oecpod mpobeuevos Od 
dikatov. Here the word clearly means “decides, or takes part, 
against,” and from the words és dacw oi radatoi, may be regarded 
as almost a definition of the word by a scholar to whom it was 
familiar. It will be observed that neither in this passage nor in 
the former is there any question of a prize. 

This meaning of the verb is confirmed by its etymology. The 
simple verb Bpafevew, which, of course, signifies primarily ‘ to act 
as Bpafevs or umpire,” awarding the prize, Bpafeiov (1 Cor. ix. 24 ; 
Phil. iii. 14), seems, in all the examples that we have of its use, to 
have dropped all reference to a prize, and to mean only “to 
decide.” For instance, Isocr. Aveop. p. 144 B, év tH KAnpdoer THY 
tixnv BpaBevoev. The same writer, Phil. c. 29, uses Ta mapd 
(rivos) BpaBevopeva to express regulations made by a person. In 


266 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 18 


Demosthenes, again, O/ p. 36, 7, 7a Tav ddAwv Sixara BpaBevew is 
“to arbitrate or decide on the rights of others.” So p. 1231, 11, 
of the unequal treatment of rich and poor, todroy tov tpdrov tpav 
tadta BpaBevdvtwv. Josephus, Azfé. ix. 1. 1, has: wapexeAcvoato 
pndevds ovTws ds Tod dukaiov mpovoovpévous Kpivey Tots 6xAOLS . . . 
BpaBevew 8 dract 7d Toov; and Ant. xiv. 9. 5, ws «i Kal roA€uov 
powas BpaBever 76 Oetov. Compare also Col. ill. 15, 9 elpyvy rod 
Xpicrod BpaBeverw év tats xapdias tpav. In accordance with this 
meaning of BpaBevew, xatraBp. would mean “to decide or give 
judgment against”; and it is so interpreted by Photius (af. Oec.) 
and Hesychius, xataxpwérw. So also the Syriac Versions. 

This gives an excellent sense here, the phrase being strorger 
than the similar one in ver. 16, kpwérw. It is adopted instead 
of xataxpwérw, probably in order to suggest the idea of assump- 
tion of authority. This is the interpretation adopted by Reiche, 
Bleek, Field (O¢iwm JVorvicense), and many others. Bengel’s inter- 
pretation is: “ne quis brabeutae potestatem usurpans, atque adeo 
abutens, vos currentes moderetur, perperamque praescribat quid 
sequi quid fugere debeatis praemium accepturi”; and similarly 
a-Lapide and Beza. This seems to put too much into the word. 

The Greek commentators, who seem to have had no independent 
knowledge of the word, take it to be equivalent to rapaBpaBevev, 
which occurs in Polybius and Plutarch, and means to assign the 
prize unfairly. Zonaras (af. Suicer) says: xataBpoPevew ore 70 
py viknoavta aétotv Tod BpaBeiov, GAN Erépw Siddvae aird. This 
implies that 6 karaBpaBedwv is the judge. Suidas’ words are: ro 
dAdov aywviopévov adAov orepavotacba A€éyes 6 aadcTohas KaTa- 
BpaBeverOar. Meyer, adopting this view, supposes the apostle 
to mean “willing (€Awv) to bring it about that the prize may be 
withheld from you and given to him and his.” As their obtaining 
the prize would not involve others losing it, this would imply 
folly as well as malice. The meaning assigned by recent com- 
mentators generally, viz. “rob or beguile you of your prize,” ze. 
“cause you to lose your reward by defeat,” or the like, does not 
agree either with Suidas or Zonaras, and it increases the difficulty 
of Jé\wv. It results from the desire to retain a reference to a 
BpaBetov, which, as we have seen, is not generally retained in the 
simple verb, nor, as far as we can judge, in the compound. 

Od\wv ev tamewvohpootvy. These words are very difficult. 
Many commentators (including Augustine, Estius, Olshausen, 
Bleek, Lightfoot) explain them as a Hebraism in imitation of 
the Hebrew “3 yan, “taking delight in,” or rather (since the 
Hebrew verb does not mean 6éA«w, but eddoxetv), of the occasional 
Septuagint rendering of that expression (1 Sam. xviii. 22; 2 Sam. 
xv.26; 1 Kangs, x, 9;°2 Chron; ix85/ Ps. xia, Jexlvi.) 20); 
In 1 Chron. xxviii. 4, the same words occur as a rendering 


II. 18] FALSE HUMILITY OF ANGEL WORSHIP 267 


of "2 nyo. Lightfoot also quotes from the Zest. X//. Patr. Asher 
1, €av ovy 4H Wux7) GeAn ev Kado. 

The main objection to this, and it is a fatal one, is that St. 
Paul does not use Hebraisms which so violate Greek grammar. 
The fact of such an expression occurring in the Sept., especially in 
Sam. Kings and Chron., is not a reason for attributing it to 
St. Paul. Indeed, except in Ps. cxlvii. 10, the object in the 
Sept. is always a person. In the Apocrypha, @éA«v év is not found. 
The expression OeAnras vopov, 1 Macc. iv. 42, is not parallel. Nor is 
this interpretation relevant to the context, for it is not the pleasure 
which the false teacher takes in his humility, etc., that is in 
question. 

Alford connects @éAwvy with the participle, translating ‘ of 
purpose,” and comparing 2 Pet. iil. 5, Aav@dver yap attovs toto 
GéAovras. He also quotes Theophylact as apparently supporting 
this view, OéAovow tas xataBpaBevew dia tarewodp. But both 
this comment and the passage in 2 Pet. are equally, if not more, 
applicable to the following interpretation. 

Other expositors connect @éAwv with the following words, 
supplying xataBpaBevew. So Theodoret: rotro toivw owe 
BovdAevov éxeivor yiverOat, tarevoppootvyn S7Gev Kexpnuévor (compare 
Theoph. above); and so Photius, Buttmann, Eadie, Ellicott, and 
many others. Theodoret, indeed, presses #éAwy too far; the 
purpose of the false teachers was not directly, but indirectly hostile 
to the Colossians. 

RV. marg. has: “of his own mere will, by humility,” etc. 
This agrees nearly with Beza: “hoc munus sibi a nullo tributum 
exercens,” Reiche, Tittmann, a/, It also corresponds well with 
eOeoOpnoxeia below, and, on the whole, appears to deserve the 
preference. The construction (which is the same as Alford’s) is 
simpler grammatically than that last mentioned, and the sense 
obtained is more satisfactory. Luther (followed by Ewald and 
Tyndale) gives a similar sense to @éXwy, but connects it with 
euParevtwv. 

Lightfoot quotes two conjectural emendations, viz. 0édyov, 
suggested by Leclerc (ad foc.) and Bentley (Cvit. Sacr. p. 59), 
and more plausibly éA@wv, suggested by Toup (Zmend. in Suidam, 
ii. p. 63). We can hardly suppose, however, that if éA@mv had 
stood here originally it could be corrupted into 6éAwy. Hort 
conjectures év éeAotarewvoppooivy. The last word is actually 
employed by Basil, and compounds of éfeAo- were used freely 
when St. Paul wrote. Compare Aug. Zp. 149, § 27: ‘Sic enim et 
vulgo dicitur qui divitem affectat ¢he/odives, et qui sapientem 
thelosapiens, et cetera hujusmodi. Ergo et hic +¢helohumitlis, 
quod plenius dicitur the/on humilis, id est volens humilis, quod 
intelligitur ‘ volens videri humilis,’ ‘affectans humilitatem,’” 


268 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [11. 18 


€v Tatewoppootvyn Kat Opyoxeia tav d&yyédwv. raz. is elsewhere 
(except ver. 23) treated as a virtue, and so in this Ep. iii. re. 
But there is false as well as true humility, and here it is defined 
by the following Opyoxe(a trav dyy., which again is illustrated by it. 
What is referred to, then, is the humility which finds expression 
in the worship of angels, and this worship again is that which is 
inspired by this false humility. Perhaps the false teachers made 
much of humility in inculcating this @pyoxeia, chiefly from false 
notions as to the power of the angels; but partly, it may be, from 
an idea that God Himself was too high and unapproachable for 
men, who must therefore use the mediation of angels. This is 
the explanation given by Theodoret: Aé€yovres ws adparos 6 Tov 
OAwy Weds, avedixtos Te kal akatdAnmTos, Kal mpoorjKer Sia TOV 
dyyéAwv tiv Ociav eipeveray mpaypateverOar, Compare Augustine, 
Conf. x. 42, “Quem invenirem qui me reconciliaret tibi? Am- 
biendum mihi fuit ad angelos? Multi conantes ad te redire, 
neque per se ipsos valentes, sicut audio, tentaverunt haec, et 
inciderunt in desiderium curiosarum visionum, et digni habiti sunt 
illusionibus.” Zonaras, again, in commenting on the 35th Canon 
of the Council of Laodicaea, says there was an ancient heresy of 
some who said that we should not call on Christ for help or 
access to God, but on the angels, as tdxa rod tov Xpuicriv 
érixadetoOar mpos Ta ecipyueva peilovos dvTos THs Hetepas alas 
(Suicer, i. p. 45). So also Chrysostom and Theophylact. This 
latter view, however, would place Christ high above the angels, 
and therefore cannot have been that of the Colossians, who re- 
quired to be taught the superiority of Christ. Nor can Theodoret’s 
explanation be adopted without hesitation, since there is nothing 
in the context about the mediation of angels or of Christ; nor 
does this view of tazewvodp. agree with the following @ éwpaxev, 
x.t.A. Theodoret, however, throws light on the passage when he 
states that of 7@ voum auvyyopotvtes Kal Tois dyyédous oeBev 
atrots elonyobvto, Sa TovTwy A€yovtes Seddcbar Tov vowov, for which 
reason, he adds, the Council at Laodicaea forbade praying to 
angels: kal péxpe O€ Tod viv edxtypia Tod dyiov MuyaiA map’ éxetvois 
Kal Tots Opopots eotiv idelv. 

& édpaxey épBatevew or & ph édpaxev epBatevwr. euGarevew is 
properly to step or stand on (as an éuGdrys). So with gen. Soph. 
Oed. Tyr. 845, ¢uBatevew marpidos. Hence “to dwell in,” Eurip. 
Heracl. 875, xhjpous § éuBarevocobe xOoves: and similarly of a god, 
to “haunt” a place. Soph. Oed. Col. 671, ’ 6 Baxxeawras aie 
Avdvvoos éuBateve. It also means to “enter upon” a country, 
“to invade.” Later, it is found in a figurative sense of “ entering 
into” a subject of inquiry. So Philo, De Flaut. Noe. ii. 19, 
“As some of those who open up wells often fail to find the 
sought-for water,” ovtws ot mpoowrépw xwpodvtes TOV erLoTHMOV Kal 


EE 18] FALSE HUMILITY OF ANGEL WORSHIP 269 


erumdéov éuBarevovtes aitais, ddvvatovat Tod TéAovs emupatoar: and 
so perhaps 2 Mace. ii. 30, To pev éuBarevew kal rept mdvTwv 
moveicOar Adyov . . . TO THS totopias apynyéTyn Kabjxe (but RV. 
“to occupy the ground”). Athanas. on Matt. xi. 27, toApypor 
euBareve tiv arepwontov diow. Nemes. De Vat. Hom. (p. 64, 
ed. Matth.), otpavoy euBareva 77 Oewpia. 

If we read éwpaxey the sense will be, “dwelling in,” as RV. 
‘taking his stand upon,” as RV. marg. or “‘ poring over, busying 
himself with,” or with the idea of pride in his possession, “‘ making 
parade with.” ‘What he hath seen” is then to be understood 
ironically, his ‘‘ visions.” 

Hilgenfeld (quoted by Meyer) understands the words to mean, 
without irony, “taking his stand on the ground of sense”; but 
against this is the perfect éépaxev as well as the expressive éua- 
tevwv. Besides, the error in question was based on a supposed 
knowledge of angels. 

The Rec. Text & pi) éwpaxey conveys the idea, “intruding into 
things which he hath not seen.” At first sight this is easier. But, 
as Alford remarks, it “would be a strange and incongruous ex- 
pression for one who was advocating a religion of fazt#h—whose 
very charter is paxdpioe of py iddvres Kal werurtevKdres—to blame 
aman or a teacher for @ py éwpaxey euBarevev.” We should rather 
expect it to be regarded as a fault in a teacher that he took his 
stand in the realm of sight. 

If, however, the negative was written from the apostle’s point 
of view, we should expect the objective ovy to be used ; if, on the 
other hand, it is from the false teacher’s point of view, “intruding” 
would not be a suitable translation, but “searching,” or the like. 


As to the reading, the evidence is as follows :— 

Without the negative : 

MSS.: &* ABD* 17 28 67? codd. mentioned by Jerome (Z/. 121 ad 
Alg. i. p. 880) ; codd. mentioned by Augustine (Z/. 149, ii. p. 514). 

Versions: Old Latin dem Boh. Arab. (Leipz.) Eth. 

Fathers, etc.: Tertullian (cont. Marc. v. 19, ‘‘ex visionibus angelicis,” 
and apparently Marcion himself also) ; Origen once (in the Latin translation. 
In Cant. iii. p. 63, ‘‘in his quae videt”). Also, cont, Cels. i. p. 583 
(Greek, the editions prior to De la Rue); Lucifer’s De on conv. c. haer. 
p. 782, Migne ; Ambrosiaster (explaining thus : ‘‘inflantur motum pervidentes 
stellarum, quas angelos vocat.” In the citation of the text editions differ). 
Pseudo-Augustine, Quaest. ex V.T. ii. 62, iii. App. p. 156. 

With the negative 7 : 

MSS.: CK LP and all cursives except those above mentioned. 

Versions: Old Latin fg Vulg. Goth. Syr. (both) Arm. 

Fathers, etc.: Origen once (in the Latin transl. / Rom. ix. § 42, iv. p. 
665). Also, cont. Celsum, as above (Greek as edited by De la Rue, who, 
however, says nothing about MSS., but remarks: ‘‘ at Gelenius legit.” a uh 
éwpaxev, Tisch.); Ambrose. Zz Ps. 118, Exp. 20 (i. p. 1222), Pelagius, 
Chrysostom, Theodore Mops., Theodoret, John Dam, 

With of, N°C D’*°G. 


270 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 18 


It will be observed that no MS. older than the ninth century reads pu, 
and with the exception of C none older than the seventh has a negative in 
either form, It is open to question whether ov, inserted by way of correction 
in § and D, was derived from MS. authority or was merely a conjecture. 

The ‘‘ deliberate preference” of Jerome and Augustine cannot rightly be 
reckoned as ‘‘evidence” in favour of “7. The words of the former are: 
‘*Quae nec ipse vidit qui vos superare desiderat, sive vidit (utrumque enim 
habetur in Graeco).” The words of Augustine are: ‘‘Quae non vidit inculcares, 
vel sicut quidam codices habent, quae vidit inculcares.” Their evidence 
amounts simply to this, that some of the MSS. they consulted or were 
acquainted with had the negative and some had not. As to their judgment, 
that is a different thing. Jerome’s ‘‘utrumque habetur in Graeco” expresses 
none. Even Augustine’s do not contain any direct or decided expression of 
preference, nor does he say anything as to the respective value of the MSS. 
which he quotes. 

The reading which omits the negative is preferred by Tisch. Treg. WH. 
(see fost), Alford, Meyer, Soden, Lightfoot (but see fost), Burgon thinks 
the Rec. Text ‘‘cannot seriously be suspected of error” (Reviston Revised, 

6). 

Lightfoot concludes from a review of the evidence that the negative is a 
later insertion ; but as the combination ‘‘invading what he has seen” is so 
hard and incongruous as to be hardly possible, he suspects a corruption of the 
text prior to all existing authorities ; and in this Hort and Taylor agree with 
him. He conjectures alwpa (or éwpg) keveuBaredwv, “‘raised aloft, treading 
on empty air,” the existing text, aewpaxeveuBarevwy, being ‘‘ explained 
partly by an attempt to correct the form édpg into alwpg, or conversely, and 
partly by the perplexity of transcribers when confronted with such unusual 
words.” xeveuBarevev does not itself occur, but keveuBareiv is not infrequent. 
It is used by Plutarch, Basil, and others in a figurative sense, ¢.g. Basil, i. p. 
135, Tov vouv . . . pupla mravnbévTa Kal modAd KeveuBaTioavrTa ; i. p. 596, 
cod 6¢ wh KeveuBarelrw 6 vods. The other word, aldépa, which is used ina 
literal sense, either of the instrument for suspending or of the position of sus- 
pension, as the floating of a boat, the balancing on a rope, the poising 
of a bird, etc., is used figuratively by Philo, De Somn. ii. 6 (i. p. 665), 
brorugotpmevos Um’ aldpas dpevev kal Kevod pvojuatos; Quod Deus Immut. 
§ 36 (i. p. 208), Bomrep én’ alwpas tos Wevdods kat aBeBalov dbéns popetcOat 
Kara Kevov Balvovra, 

Dr. C. Taylor (Journal of Philology, 1876, xiii. 130), followed by West- 
cott and Hort, prefers dépa xeveuBarevwv. There is an earlier conjecture 
which involves even less change, or none, in the text, viz. & éwpa (or 4 
édpaxev) keveuBarevwv. éwpaxey is better than éwpa, and the emendation only 
supposes the common error of omission of a repeated syllable. Ingenious, 
however, as these conjectures are, it does not seem necessary to depart from the 
text of the best MSS. (Blass thinks ceveuBaredwy fairly certain, Gram. p. 67.) 


eik uctodpevos. cixy is by some comm. connected with the 
preceding clause (De W., Conybeare, a/.) in the sense “rashly, 
uselessly.” But eixj in St. Paul precedes the words it qualifies 
(Rom. xiii. 4; 1 Cor. xv. 2; Gal. iv. 11), except Gal. iii. 4, where 
there is a special reason for placing it after érafere. Its usual 
meaning in St. Paul is “to no purpose, fruitlessly” ; and so it is 
understood here by v. Soden; but it equally admits the other 
sense, ‘‘ without reason,” which it has in Matt. v. 22, and this is 
more suitable to dvovotpevos. The false teachers were without 
reason puffed up with the idea of their superior knowledge. There 


II. 19] FALSE HUMILITY OF ANGEL WORSHIP 271 


is a sharp irony in the contrast between tarewodpootvyn and pvcrov- 
pevos. TO O€ ye provovpevos TH Tarrewoppoovvy évdvTLov odK EoTL THY 
pe yap eoxyrrovto, Tod S& tipov Td wabos axpiBGs TepLéKewTo, 
Theodoret. 

bd Too vods THS capkds aitod. ‘By the mind of his flesh.” 
The votds as a natural faculty is in itself indifferent, and may be 
under the influence either of cap& or veda; cf. Rom. i. 28, xii. 2 ; 
Folie vir Gs Pits i) ¥S, and) Rom: vit! )25)3.1) Cor. xiv.’ 14,15. 
The expression here used, “mind of, or belonging to, the flesh” 
(possessive genitive), seems to continue the irony. The false 
teachers claimed a higher intelligence, perhaps a deeper spiritual 
insight; whereas the apostle declares that it was carnal, not 
spiritual. Compare Rev. ii. 24, “which know not the deep things 
of Satan, as they say,” where “as they say” refers to “deep 
things,” which are then bitterly characterised as “of Satan.” 

19. kai od kparay. “And not holding fast.” F or this sense of 
Kparetv with accus., compare Mark vii. 3, 4, 8, Kp. Tv mapddoow : 
Acts il. 24, ovK iy duvatov Kpareto Bat airov wr avrov: iil, 11, 
Kpatowvtos 5€ avrov tov Iérpov kal “Iwdvyny: 2 Thess. il. 15; Rev. 
li, I, 13, 14, 15, 25, ill. 11, vil. 1. Frequently, however, it means 
‘to seize” ; but that sense is inapplicahle here. 

Thy Kedadny, €€ o§. The relative is masculine, because it is a 
person that is referred to as the Head; not because Xpicrod is 
implied; cf. ver. 15. Meyer, however, followed by Eadie, regards ot 
as neuter, referring to the Head, not personally, but in an abstract 
sense “from which source.” To understand it as referring to 
Christ, Eadie thinks, would destroy the harmony of the figure. 
The objection does not apply to the explanation just given. It is 
to be noted that D* Syr-Harcl. Arm. add Xpuoror. 

e€ is causal, “from whom as the source,” and the relative 
clause expresses the perverseness of the od xpardv, «.7.A., as much 
as to say “‘ whereas from this,” etc. 

31a TOY Addy Kat ouvdéopwv. For the meaning of these words 
see note on Eph. iv. 16. ovvdeouos means in general any of the 
connecting bands in the body, whether ligaments proper, or tendons, 
or muscles ; but in its special sense is limited to the “ligaments,” 
as appears from a passage in Galen quoted by Lightfoot. But in 
a passage like the present this technical sense is not to be pressed ; 
the purpose of the figure is to express the complete dependence of 
the Church as a whole, and of all its members as parts of an 
organised body, on Christ directly, angels not intervening. 

emxopnyoupevov Kat oupBiBaldpevov, Compare Eph. iv. 16, 
ovvapporoyovpevov Kal ovpPiBafopevov. There, the main purpose 
was to insist on the vital cohesion and union of the parts with 
each other ; here, on dependence on the Head. Here as there the 
present participles are to be noted; the process is a continuing 


272 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 2c 


one. For értxyop. cf. 2 Cor. ix. 10; Gal. il. 5; 2 Pet. i. 4, 11. 
éme indicates rather direction than intensity. émuxop. seems to be 
the function of the ddai, cv BiB. of the cvvdeouor. For the passive 
of émxop., compare Polyb. iv. 77. 2, moAAais dqoppats ék Picews 
Kexopnynuevos. Arist. Fol. iv. 1, oGpa Kadota repvKds Kal 
KEXopnyn}evov. 

auger Thy avénow, cognate accusative; not a periphrasis, nor 
added “to give force to the meaning of the verb,” but because it 
was desired to define the nature of the avéynois as rod Meod, a 
growth having its root in God, belonging to God; cf. 1 Cor. iii. 6, 
6 @eds nvgavev. In Eph. iv. 16 also “growth” is the result 
aimed at ; but there, in accordance with the difference in the points 
of view just referred to, it is 76 cGpa itself which rv avgéyow tod 
odparos Toveirat eis oiKodopnv Eavtod ev ayary. Lightfoot remarks 
that the discoveries of modern physiology have invested the 
apostle’s language with far greater distinctness and force than it 
can have worn to his own contemporaries. ‘The volition com- 
municated from the brain to the limbs, the sensations of the 
extremities telegraphed back to the brain, the absolute mutual 
sympathy between the head and the members, the instantaneous 
paralysis ensuing on the interruption of continuity,—all these add 
to the completeness and life of the image.” He quotes several 
very interesting passages from Hippocrates, Galen, and others as 
illustrating ancient speculation on the subject, and he reminds us 
that one of the apostle’s most intimate companions at this time 
was “the beloved physician” (iv. 14). It may be remarked, 
however, that the apostle is speaking of supply and _ binding 
together rather than of volition and sensation (unless we adopt 
Meyer’ s view of dai (see on Eph. )). Theophylact also remarks: 
amo THS Kepahijs Tara. aio Onors Kal waoa Kivnots. 

20. ei dwefdvete abv Xpiotd. “If ye died with Christ” (not 
“if ye be dead,” as AV.). They had died with Christ in baptism, 
YO! 1, ‘12; and had risen again with Him. Comp. Jn. vi. 49, 58. 

dd Tv oToLXEtwy TOO Kdopou. aroOvyoKEL aro occurs here only 
in the N.T. The dative is used Rom. vi. 2; Gal. ii. 19. Here 
the preposition is more suitable, masmuch as what is referred to 
is liberation from a dominating power. 

tl ds Caves év kéopw, Not merely as being in the world, ae 
living your life in the world. ‘Their true “life was hid with Christ 
in God,” ili. 3. To live in the world would be etvau év 77) capki. 

Soypatitesbe. Probably best taken with RV. as middle. 
“Why do ye subject yourselves (or allow yourselves to be sub- 
jected) to ordinances?” The middle, indeed, implies some blame 
to the readers. But they were not compelled by force, so that 
even if the verb be understood as passive, it is implied that they 
submitted to the yoke. 


II. 21] FALSE WISDOM OF THE ASCETIC PRECEPTS 273 


The verb Soyparilew occurs frequently in Sept. and Apocr., 
meaning “to issue a decree.” Elsewhere it is used of the precepts 
of philosophers. In the active it takes the indirect object in the 
dative, 2 Macc. x. 8, which therefore may become the subject of 
the passive. 


otv of the Rec. Text has little support, of uncials only %* and X*% 
7@ before Xpicr@ scarcely any. 


21. “ph dyn pyde yevon pyde Oiyns.” Examples of the d0y- 
para, “Handle not, neither taste, nor touch.” dzreoGae is stronger 
than Ovyydvew, suggesting rather “taking hold of” than merely 
* touching.” ‘Thus Themist. Paraphr. Arist. 94, 4 TOv Cdwv adr 
Kpious éorl kal avtiAnyis tov Oryydvovros. Compare Xen. Cyrop. 
i - 3: 5 OTL OF, pavat, Op®, oTav pay Tov aprov awy, eis ovdev Tv 
xeipa daropopevov, dtav b& TovTwy TLvds Oiyyns «ibis droxaGaiper THY 
xelpa cis TO. XELpOPAKT POL. In the N.T. comp. Matt. viii. 3, jaro 
aitov 6 “Incots: 2b. 15, THS XEtpos auras: John xx. 17, 7 pov dmrov 
(often in the Gospel): 1 Cor. vil. 1, yuvatxos pn drtecbor: 2 Cor. 
vi. 17, dkaOdprov pn amrecbe. Gee ey occurs in N.T. only here 
and Heb. xi. 28, xii. 20 (a quotation). Hence there is a climax 
of prohibitions, reversed in the AV., following perhaps (through 
Tyndale) the Latin, which has “tangere” for dmreoat, and “ con- 
trectare” for @uyeiv. Coverdale renders well (except as to the 
order), ‘‘as when they say, touch not this, taste not that, handle 
not that.” There were such prohibitions in the Mosaic law, and 
these were, doubtless, not only re-enacted, but exaggerated by the 
Colossian false teachers, as they had been by the Jewish. The 
form of the Rabbinical precepts was just that here given. The 
Essenes also abstained from the use of wine, oil, and animal food, 
and would not touch food prepared by defiled hands. 

Some commentators have suggested a special object for each 
of the three verbs; for example, for ay (yvvatkds), which others 
have supplied to 6/yys. This form of asceticism, which also was 
practised by the Essenes, is referred to in 1 Tim. iv. 3, cwAvdvtwy 
yapeiv ; but it is not suggested by anything in the present context, 
and would hardly be referred to so obscurely. Other suggestions 
have been offered which do not deserve mention, since it is clear 
that St. Paul is only citing typical forms of prohibition. For the 
same reason we must not suppose the prohibitions limited to food. 

It is a singular illustration of the asceticism of a later date, 
that some Latin commentators (Ambrose, Hilary, Pelagius) re- 
garded these prohibitions as the apostle’s own. In the words 
of Augustine, who argues against this view: “‘tanquam praeceptum 
putatur apostoli, nescio quid tangere, gustare, attaminare, pro- 
hibentis” (Zfzs¢. cxix., li. p. 412). Jerome gives the correct 
interpretation, which he illustrates from the Talmud, i. 84. 

18 


274 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [II. 22 


22. (& é€oT: wdvta els pOopdv rH dmoxpyce.) The clause is 
parenthetical. ‘Which things (the objects which it is forbidden 
to touch) are all (destined) for corruption in their consumption.” 
For efvat eis compare Acts vili. 20, ein eis drwActav: 2 Pet. ii, 12, 
yeyervnpéva. .. eis GAwow kal POopdv. gOopd has its proper 
sense of decomposition, referring to the physical dissolution of 
such things in their natural use; amoypyo.s meaning “ using up,” 
“consumption.” The thought is that these things which are 
merely material, as is shown by their dissolution in the ordinary 
course of nature, have in themselves no moral or spiritual effect. 
The argument is strikingly similar to that in Matt. xv. 17, els 
apedpava éxBddXerar: so much so, indeed, that we might suppose 
that the apostle had this discourse in his mind. Compare also 
1 Cor. vi. 12, where the same consideration is differently applied ; 
and 2d. vili. 8, where the principle is expressed, ‘‘ Meat will not 
commend us to God; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse; 
nor if we eat, are we the better.” This is the view taken by the 
Greek commentators as well as by most moderns. Theodoret 
SayS: ov oKoTEtTE OS poviov TOvTwWY ovdEev: Eis KOTpOV yap aTaVTA 
peraBadrderac: and Oecumenius: pOopa ydp, pyoiv, broxerar ev TG 
aedpove, 

Other interpretations are as follow :— 

First, the antecedent of a is taken to be the precepts referred 
to: “which ddypara all by their use tend to (everlasting) destruc- 
tion.” So Ambrose, Augustine, Corn. a Lapide, a/ For this 
sense of fOopd, see Gal. vi. 8. But aoypnous never means simply 
“use,” but “using up,” “consumption”; nor, indeed, would the 
simple xpyou be suitable in the sense of “observance,” typycts. 
Moreover, the addition r7 dzoypyjce would, on this view, be quite 
superfluous. 

Secondly, it is held by some that these words are those of the 
false teachers, repeated in irony by St. Paul: ‘‘omnia haec (vetita) 
usu suo perniciem afferunt.” Or, again— 

Thirdly, the words, similarly interpreted, are connected with 
the following: kara 7a évrdéApara, x.7.A. ‘Which things tend to 
destruction”; ‘“scil. si ex doctorum Judaicorum praeceptis et 
doctrinis hac de re judicium feratur.” So Kypke, De Wette, and 
others. 

Against both these interpretations the objection from the 
meaning of dzoxpyo.s holds good, for it was not the “using up” 
of these things, but their simple use, that these teachers con- 
demned. 

kata Td évTdd\pata Kat Si8ackarhias tv dvOpdrwv. To be 
connected with vv. 20, 21. The article covers both nouns, which 
belong to the same category, and is generic. These déypara were 
of human invention, not founded on the Divine commands and 


7 


II. 23] FALSE WISDOM OF THE ASCETIC PRECEPTS 275 


teaching. didacxadéas is a term of wider application than évrad- 
para, “precepts and in general teachings.” The expression is 
taken from Isa. xxix. 13, paryv dé ceBovtai pe, Si0doKovres evTdd- 
para avOparwv Kal dvdacKxadias, Compare Matt. xv. 9; Mark vii. 7, 

23. dtd éotw Adyov pev Exovta aodias. drwa=“ which are 
such things as,” or ‘“ which kind of things.” The position of éo7w 
seems to forbid our separating it from éyovra, as Lightfoot and 
others do, joining it with ot« év tywy. Bengel connects it with 
mpos TANT POVHYV, K.T.A. 

éotiv €xovra is not quite the same as exer; the former marks 
that the character of the precepts is such that a Adyos codias 
belongs to them. Dem. 31. 11, ot0@ Adyoy 76 zpaypy’ Exov éori. 

Aéyov copias= “the repute of wisdom.” For this sense of 
Adyov éxew, compare Plato, Lpinomis, p. 987 B, 6 pev yap Ewodpdpos 
eorepos Te dv atros “Adpodirys elvar cxedov exer Aoyov: Herod. v. 66, 
Kreobevns . . . damep 8 Adyov exer THY TUOinv dvareioa. 

This repute is explained by the professed basing of these 
precepts on ¢iAocodia, ver. 8. The addition of pév suggests at 
once that this repute was not well founded. The contrasted 
character which we expect to be introduced with éd€ appears to 
be replaced by the negative characteristic ob« év tyxy, «.7.A. which, 
of course, implies the absence of true wisdom, but is not opposed 
to Adyov codias, but to ev eeAobp. «.7.A. This use of wey without 
the dé clause following is frequent. See Jelf, § 766 ; Winer, § 63. 2... 

év €0ehoOpyoxeia. €v indicating on what this repute for wisdom 
rests. The substantive eGcAofpyoxeia is not found elsewhere (except 
in eccles. writers), but the verb é@eAofpyoxeiv is explained by Suidas, 
idiw OeAjpare c€Bew 76 doxodv. Epiphanius explains the name of the 
Pharisees : 61a 70 addwpicpevous elvar attovs dro TOV dAAwy Oa THY 
edeorrepiacobpyokeiay Tap avrots vevomtopevnv (Haer.i.16). Similar 
compounds, however, are frequent in Greek, as éOeAodovAcia (Plato, 
Conv. 184 C3; Rep. 562 D); ebedXorpogevos, Thuc. iii. 70. 2, where 
the Schol. explains: ad’ éavrod yevopevos kal py KeAevobeis, K.7.A. 
The meaning of éOeAoOp. is therefore clear; it is “self-imposed 
worship.” 

kat Tatewvoppootrvy, viz. what the false teachers called so; see 
ver. 18. Lightfoot supposes the force of é@eXo. to be carried on ; 
but this seems unnecessary. 

kal ddevdia odparos. ‘ And unsparing treatment of the body.” 
The substantive dpedia occurs in the definition of éAevGepia in 
[Plato] Def 412 D, apeadéia ev xpyoe Kat ev xrjoe ovcias. The 
verb adeety Biov occurs in Thue. il. 43 3 ab. cwuarwv in Lys. Or. 
Fan, 25; cf dedds expdvro tots dios cwpaocw eis tiv Kowhv 
vwriypiav, Diod. Sic. xiii. 60. A frequent Latin rendering here 
was “ vexatio,” but Vulg. has “fad non parcendum.” Augustine 
mentions both (Z/. 149). 


276 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [1I. 23 


After rarewogpoctvy, 700 vobs is added in Gdefg Vulg. Syr-Harcl., Hil. a/. 

kal before dgevdlg is omitted by B m Origen (Latin transl. iv. 665), Hil. 
al, Lachmann and Lightfoot bracket it, the latter saying it should probably 
be omitted, dgecdlg being then taken as an instrumental dative. 

dpecdla is the spelling in §B*C DGL and most mss. 


obk év Tyf Twi mpds TAnopovAy GapKés. These words are among 
the most difficult in the Epistle. ‘The Greek commentators under- 
stand év ty tw of the honour to be paid to the body (suggested 
by the preceding apedia. cwparos), and zAnop. THs o. Of the satisfac- 
tion of bodily appetites. 

This view has been adopted by many modern expositors, 
including Corn. a Lapide, Calvin, De Wette, and Scholefield. Estius 
expresses it thus: ‘“Sentit apostolus sapientiam illam aut praecepta 
talia esse, per quae corpori debitus honor, pertinens ad expletionem, 
i. e. justam refectionem carnis, subtrahatur.” It is a decisive objec- 
tion to this interpretation that it assigns an impossible sense to 
aAnopovn, which is never used in the sense of moderate satisfac- 
tion, but always in that of “repletion” or ‘“‘ excessive indulgence.” 
It is expressly so defined by Galen, Of. xv. p. 113 (quoted by 
Lightfoot), who says that not only physicians but the other Greeks 
apply the word paAdAcv wus... tals trepBorais THs cvppéTpov 
mocotyntos. Here, where it would stand in contrast to the asceticism 
of the false teachers, it would be particularly inappropriate. More- 
over, this view supposes oadpé to be used in an indifferent sense as 
equivalent to o@ua, and that in a context in which it has just 
occurred with an ethical meaning. The change from odparos to 
gapxes can be explained only by the latter having an ethical 
meaning here as in ver. 18. 

Lightfoot (followed by RV. and Moule) adopts and ably 
defends the interpretation given by Conybeare (Life and Epistles 
of St. Paul), and before him by Sumner, viz. “ yet not really of any 
value to remedy indulgence of the flesh,” or more literally as RV. 
“but are not of any value against the indulgence of the flesh.” 
St. Paul “allows that this wAyopovy is the great evil to be checked, 
. . . but he will not admit that the remedies prescribed have any 
substantial and lasting efficacy.” 

But this interpretation is open to serious objection from the 
linguistic point cf view. First, as to the meaning assigned to zpos. 
It is, no doubt, often convenient to translate it “against” ; but the 
idea of hostility or opposition is not in the preposition itself, which 
only means “with a view to,” “looking to,” etc., but in the words 
with which it is joined, as in Acts vi. 1, xxiv. 19 ;. Eph. vi. 11. 

Lightfoot shows also that it is frequently used by Aristotle, and 
especially by Galen, after words denoting utility, etc., to introduce 
the object, to check or prevent which the thing is to be employed. 
Thus Aristotle, ist. An. iii. 21, cvppeper mpos tas Stappoias: De 


II. 23] FALSE WISDOM OF THE ASCETIC PRECEPTS 277 


Respir. 8, Bonfet mpds tadtnv tiv POopdv: Galen, De Compos. 
Medic., Opp. xii. p. 420, Tod Sovros aita mpds dAwrexias Paraxpwoets : 
p. 476, Bpaxutarny éxovte Svvapw ws mpos TO TpoKeiwevov ovprTwpe : 
and so very frequently. This use is very parallel (as Lightfoot 
indeed observes) to that of the English “for.” Compare “ good 
for a cold, for a hurt.” 

Here the sense of the preposition seems to be “ with reference 
to,” the object being a state or condition. On the other hand, if 
the object is a word signifying action or the production of an 
effect, ‘‘ for” and zpds still signifying “ with reference to” can only 
suggest “with a view to (producing).” For example, “ good for 
cutting, good for the satisfaction of thirst.” 

Hence it seems to follow that unless tAyopovy be taken in the 
sense of ‘‘a state of repletion,” which would be unsuitable, mpos 
mAnopovyv could only mean “so as to produce 7A.” 

Secondly, as to the sense of év tuys tui, “of real value.” 
Lightfoot, after Wetstein, quotes Lucian, De Merc. Cond. 17, 7a 
Kawa TOV UTodnmdTwv év TYLn TWi Kal éripedeia eotiv, and Hom. JZ. 
ix. 319, év O€ in tiuy, «.7.A. But in these and similar passages 
Ty4n Means “ estimation,” not objectively “ real value,” and ev tiny 
eivat is to be “in esteem,” not to be “of value.” Hence also the 
use of tun in the sense of “price.” Sometimes the two ideas, 
estimation” and “value,” may approximate, as, indeed, our word 
“value” is sometimes incorrectly used as “ valuation.” But here 
the interpretation in question supposes tyu7 to mean “ real value,” 
as opposed to mere “estimation.” No instance has been produced 
which would justify such a supposition. 

Thirdly, as to od . . . twit This can hardly mean “ not any” 
in the sense of “none,” Ze. ovdeuia. tis means “aliquis,” not 
“ullus” (except in poetry). So here the Latin: “in honore 
aliquo.” 

The ov« contradicts the combination ev tiu7 tw, implying that 
on the other side this had been said or assumed. ‘Thus the words 
would mean: “not for some (supposed) tix.” 

These last two objections are fatal to all interpretations which 
require ov« ev tiuy Twi to be understood as “ not of any real value.” 
Eadie regards Aoyov to twvé as participial, and joins éoriv with zpos 
mX., which is very harsh. 

Alford connects pods wAyop. x.7.A. with Soyparilecbe, treating 
all between as parenthetical, and understanding ovx ev ty7j Twi as = 
“not in any real honour done to the body.” ‘ Why are ye suffer- 
ing yourselves to be thus dogmatised, and all for the satisfaction of 
the flesh,” for the following out of a dWacxadia, the ground of 
which is in the @vovotcbat bd Tod vods THs capKos, ver. 18. Then 
follow most naturally the exhortations of the next chapter, vv. 2, 5. 
To the objection that the antithesis presented by ovx ey ri tui is 


278 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [XII. 1, 2 


thus not to efedofp. x.7.A. but merely to adewdia cwparos, he replies 
that “if the apostle wished to bring out a negative antithesis to 
these last words only, he could hardly do so without repeating the 
preposition, the sense of which is carried on to ddedia.” This 
interpretation yields a very appropriate sense, and gives tui its 
proper:sense. But it is difficult to admit so long a parenthesis 
separating the verb from its qualification. It is not analogous to 
other Pauline parentheses. 

It remains that we take ziu7 in the sense of “ honour,” and 
mpos mA. THs capkos as=“for the full satisfaction of the flesh.” 
The words suggest that the observation of such precepts was 
supposed to bring honour, and in contradicting this St. Paul with 
abrupt and sharp irony declares that the only honour would be such 
as satisfied the carnal nature, and that their boasted a@eidia cwparos 
was in very truth tAnopovy THs capkos: and this striking contrast 
explains the adoption of 7A7cpov7 in this unusual sense. 

This is the view adopted by Soden and (nearly) by Meyer. 
Ellicott and Barry take a similar view of the connexion, but under- 
stand tin as “ value.” 

III. 1-4. Ye must have a loftier aim ; ye have risen with Christ 
and your life ts hid with Christ in God. Seek therefore those things 
that are above, where [Te ts, seated at God’s right hand. 

1. ci ody curnyépOnte TO Xpiotd. Not “if ye be risen,” AV., 
but “‘if ye were raised,” viz. at the definite point of time when 
they became Christians, and were in baptism symbolically buried 
and raised again with Him, ch. ii. 12. The death as a death from 
Ta oTOLXELa TOD KOgpov is Mentioned in ii. 20. ei does not express 
a doubt, but, as in ii. 20, the ground of an inference. 

TO dvw {ytette, x.t.A. There is no longer any direct reference 
to the precepts of the false teachers (as if 7a emt tis yijs, ver. 2, 
were 7a 7rept Bpwrdtwv kal yuepwy, Theoph.). These have been cast 
aside as concerning only those living in the world, and the apostle 
rises into a higher region. Your thoughts should be on things 
above, on spiritual things, and the precepts you have to follow 
concern moral conduct. Compare “treasure in heaven,” Matt. 
Vi 20; 70 Bpafseiov THs avw KAnoews, Phil. iii, 14. 

o§ 6 Xptotds éotw, x.t.A. e€orw is not the copula: “ where 
Christ is, seated,” etc. ‘Par enim illuc tendere studia curasque 
membrorum, ubi jam versator caput,” Erasm. 

2. Ta dvw dpovettre. ‘Set your mind on the things above,” 
RV., an advance on €¢nreire. In the AV. “set your affection,” 
etc. The word “affection” was doubtless intended to bear the 
sense of “‘affectus,” “tendency or bias of the mind.” The 
bishops’ Bible had “affections.” The Vulgate has “ sapite,” 
“‘savour,” as Wyclif renders. We have the opposite state of mind 
in Phil. iii. 19, of ra értyeca ppovotvres. Compare Rom. viii. 5. 


? 


III. 3,4] SET YOUR MINDS ON THINGS ABOVE 279 


8. daeOdvete yap. Not “ye are dead,” as AV., but “ ye died.” 
Conybeare, indeed, urges that the associated xéxpurrat shows that 
the aorist is here used for the perfect; but this is erroneous. 
The aorist expresses what occurred at a particular moment in the 
past, while the perfect xékpurra: expresses the resulting and now 
existing state. Nor does the nature of the verb @vjoxw preclude a 
rigorous translation, as even Ellicott suggests. ‘True, in ordinary 
narrative, amelave, “died,” implies, though it does not express, 
‘is dead”; but not so when there is reference to a possible after- 
life. Accordingly, Plato in the Phaedo never confounds OyyjcKew 
or awofaveiv with teOvavar. For example, p. 72 C, ef drofvyjcKor 
wey mavra, doa Tod Lhv perarAdBou, ereidy Oé amoPdvor, pévor ev TOVTH 
TO oxnpatt Ta TeOVeOTA Kal py TaAW dvaBiwoKoito dp od moAAy 
avaykn TeAevTavTa TavTa TeOVavaL Kal pndev Chv; TO TeOvdvar having 
been defined in 71 C as the opposite of 76 {7v, while aroOvycKew 
was the opposite of avaBuioxeoGa, 1d. E. 

So Homer, //. . 365, uses 7é6vafe with critical accuracy, not 
die,” but “lie dead.” 

Here “are dead” would contradict ocvvyyépOnre. They died, 
indeed, but at the same time rose again, and that to a life spiritual 
and heavenly. They were, indeed, vexpot 77 duapria, but Cavres TO 
@ceo, Rom. vi. II. 

4 Cw Spay, your true life, not merely your resurrection life. 
They are seated év rots érovpavious, Eph. ii. 4-6. 

kékpumtat. ‘‘ Neque Christum neque Christianos novit mun- 
dus ; ac ne Christiani quidem plane seipsos,” Bengel. Compare 
Rom. ii. 29, 6 €v 7d kpuTr@ “Iovdatos. 

4. dtav 6 Xpiotds havepwhf, % Lwh pov. ‘When Christ shall 
be manifested, who is our life,” not ‘shall be manifested in the 
character of our life,” as Bengel and Eadie. Compare 6 éywv tov 
vidv éxer Cwyv, 1 John v.12. He is Himself the essence of the 
life ; cf. Gal. ii. 20; Phil. i. 21. The absence of d€ or xai makes 
the expression more striking and vivid. Bengel observes on this: 
‘Sermo absolutus lectorem totum . . . repentina luce percellit.” 
For the transition to the first person cf. 11. 13. 

davepotabar is used here with propriety instead of dzoxadvr- 
teoGat, which does not so distinctly imply actual present existence. 

Tote Kal Spets aby aT havepwOjceabe ev 8d. Compare 1 John 
ill, 2, ovdapev OTe eav avepwOn opoior aitd eodpuea, and Rom. 
Vill. 19, THY amoKdAupw Tov vidv TOV Oeod drexdéyerar: and on év 
dogy, Rom. vill. 17, va Kal ovvdogacbdpev, and 18, tiv péddAoveav 
ddgay aroxaAupOjvar eis Has. 


For the reading ; #@r is read in BD**K L most mss., Syr. (both), Boh., 
Origen. 

budv in SC D*GP 17 47, Vulg. Goth. Arm. Eth. 

bpav was very likely to be substituted for jv on account of the pre- 


280 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [III. 5 


ceeding budv and the following buets. Tischendorf and Tregelles prefer 
buav; WH. and Lightfoot judy; and so Weiss. 

5-11. Sins to be destroyed, as well the more subtle sins of temper 
as the grosser ones of appetite. 

5. Nexpdoate obv. ‘ Make dead, therefore.” As ye died, and 
your true life is hidden, carry out this death to the world, and 
kill whatever is carnal in you. 

Ta pédn TO €wt THS ys. Meyer understands by péAy the literal 
members, hand, foot, eye, etc. (Matt. v. 29), of course, taking the 
verb in an ethical sense. But this would be too strong a figure, 
and is not sufficiently supported by the passage in St. Matt., 
where the precept is not, as here, unqualified and absolute, and the 
verbs, moreover, are used in as literal a sense as the substantives. 
The whole precept there is symbolical, but the words have their 
natural sense. Besides, this interpretation of péAy makes the 
connexion with the following more difficult. It is more natural to 
explain the word by the idea of the “old man,” “In the capa ris 
gapxos.” And this is suggested by the added qualification 7a emt 
Ts yns- ‘The members spoken of are those which belong to the 
body as the instrument of the carnal mind. 

With the whole precept compare Gavarotre: Rom. viil. 13, «i dé 
mvevpatt Tas mpagers TOU Gwparos Oavarotre Cyoere: and Gal. v. 24, 
of tov Xpiotod Tv odpKa eotavpwoav civ Tots TaOjpace Kal Tats 
erOvupiats. 

mopvetav, k.t-A. Usually taken in apposition with péAn, either 
directly, as if zopveia, etc., were themselves called én, ‘‘membra 
quibus vetus homo, i. e. ratio ac voluntas hominis depravata 
perinde utitur ac corpus membris,” Beza; “naturam nostram 
quasi massam ex diversis vitiis conflatam imaginatur,” Calvin ; or 
indirectly, ze. “when I say vexpwoare ra peAn, I mean vexpdoare 
mopvetav, K.7.A., Of which 7a wéAy are instruments.” On either view 
the apposition of the instruments and the activities is extremely 
harsh. Severianus (followed by many moderns) regards sin as the 
body of which the special sins enumerated are the members: oépa 
Kade THY dpaptiay, As Kal TA peAn KatapiOwel; but this only evades 
the difficulty. Alford regards the construction as an instance of 
that form of the double accusative where the first denotes the 
whole, the second a part of it, as in woidv oe éxos piyev épxos 
édovrwy,—an explanation which does not touch the difficulty. 
Braune thinks the body in question is the body of the Church. 

Lightfoot proposes to meet the difficulty by placing a colon 
after yns. Then zopveiay, x.r.r., will be viewed as prospective 
accusatives, which should be governed directly by some such word 
as aw06ece: but several dependent clauses interpose, and the last 
of these suggests incidentally a contrast between the past and the 
present, the thought of which predominating in the apostle’s mind 


SINS TO BE DESTROYED 281 


leads to a recasting of the sentence, vuvi 82 drdbeobe Kal Suels ra 
mavra. Lightfoot illustrates this dislocation of the construction 
occasioned by the contrast of zoré and viv by reference to i. 22, 
vu 8& droxarndAAdyyre (or droxarydAagev): and 26, viv 8 édave- 
p#0y: and to Eph. ii. 1-5, cal tuds ... €v als woré. . . ev ols 
kal... mote... 6 0& Meds... Kal GvTas Has... cvvetwo- 
moinoev. This construction has been characterised as “extremely 
difficult” ; but the difficulty is only of the same kind as that in the 
passages cited. 

After tudy the Rec. Text adds tuav, with 8* AC? D GH K LP most mss., 
Vulg. Goth. other versions, Chrys. a/. 

It is omitted by & BC* 17 67? 71, Clem. a/. 

adQos is used by classical writers of any passive emotion. 
Thus, Aristotle distinguishes these three ev rp Yuyy ywopeva: 7aOn, 
efes, Ouvvapers. man he defines as ols érerax ydov7 7) Avr, including 
erOupia, dpyy, etc. But it is specially used of a violent emotion or 
** passion.” 

In the other two places in which the word occurs in St. Paul 
it 1s defined by a genitive (7a6y ariias, Rom. i. 26; év wade 
eriOupias, 1 Thess. iv. 5). Here the enumeration appears to pro- 
ceed from the more special to the more general, so that zaOos 
probably means not specially “lustfulness.” Still less the ran 
aryzias of Rom. i. 26,—an interpretation which has no linguistic 
justification,—but generally “passion,” as RV. 

émOupiav Kaxyv. This includes all evil longings, and so is 
wider than md6os. idov, yevixOs 76 wav clre’ mdvta yap émibvpla 
kak), Backavia, dpyn, Av@yn, Chrys. émiOvuéa in the N.T. has a 
wide sense; cf. John viii. 44; hence the necessity for kaxnv. 

kal Thy wAeovegiav, k.t.A. See on Eph. iv. 19, v. 5. 

tts €or. ‘Seeing it is.” 

6. & d. This is undoubtedly the correct reading, but a few 
authorities (C* D* G) read dv 6. 

€pxetar 4 Spy Tod Oeod. After Oeov, Rec. adds: ézt rods viods 
rs ameuBetas, as in Eph. v. 6, 

The evidence for the addition is extremely strong, as they are contained in 
all manuscripts except B. In D, however, the words are written in a smaller 
character at the end of the line, an indication apparently that they were not 
present in its archetype. Of Versions the Sahidic omits them, and the Roman 
ed. of the Ethiopic. Clement 294 (mss.) and 531 quotes from vexpdcare to 
Ocod: but it would be unsafe to infer that his copy did not contain the 
addition; he may well have stopped short of it as not necessary for his 
purpose. 

Ambrosiaster omits them in his text, but his comment appears to 
recognise them. 

With these exceptions the addition is supported by all MSS., Versions, 
and Fathers. Its genuineness would be certain were it not that the same 


words occur in the parallel passage Eph. v. 6. It is very credible that they 
were added from that place at a very early period. On the other hand, they 


282 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS (IIT. 7,8 


seem required to complete the sense; certainly without them the thought is 
not the same as in the parallel in Eph. In the one case the words are a 
general warning as to the consequence of these sins; in the other a lesson is 
drawn from the example of others. The kal duets, ver. 7, seems to assume a 
previous mention of the unbelieving Gentiles. 

The evidence in favour of the omission being so slight, it may be con- 
sidered equally probable that the omission was accidental. The words are 
omitted by Tischendorf, Tregelles, WH., Alford, Weiss, and bracketed by 
Lachm. They are retained by Ellicott, Meyer, RV. (om. marg.), 


7. €v ols kal Gets mepreratnaaté mote, Ste eLijte év toUTois. The 
reading rovrois is certain, being that of SABCD* ad, airois is 
read in D°G KL, most mss., Chrys. Theodoret, a/. 

If the doubtful words in ver. 6 are omitted, ots and rovrous are 
of necessity both neuter, and refer to the vices mentioned. If the 
words are retained, the pronouns may be both neuter, or the first 
masculine and the second neuter, or the first neuter, and the 
second masculine. ‘To the last view, which is that of Huther and 
others, it may be objected, that {jv év is never used in the N.T. of 
living amongst persons, while it is frequently used with things, év 
dpaptia, Rom. vi. 2 ; €v KOT HL, li, 20; é€v capxi, Phil. i. 22. So 
in classical writers, ev dpery, €v pirocodia, etc. Meyer, De Wette, 
Braune, and Ellicott take ois as masc., ro’rous neuter. In favour 
of this seems to be the partial parallel, Eph. ii. 2, 3, ei tots viots 
THs dmeibeias év ols Kal Huels waves aveotpadynuey wore, a parallel 
which Ellicott thinks leaves no room for doubt. Of course, 
mepurareiy ev would then be understood to denote not mere 
outward living amongst, but participation in a course of life. 
Alford and Lightfoot argue that, independently of the rejection 
of the doubtful words, it is better to take ois as neuter, since 
mTepurately ev 1s most commonly used of things, not of persons, 
especially in this and the companion Epistle, iv. 5, Eph. ti. 2, 10, 
iv. 17, v. 2. In 2 Thess. iii. 11, indeed, we have twas wepirarotv- 
Tas ev viv ataxtws: but the addition of draxtws there makes the 
expression not quite parallel. So Eph. i. 3 Lightfoot regards as 
not parallel on account of the addition €v rats émiOupias ris 
capkos yuov. But this addition does not affect the connexion of 
ev ols aveotp. And Alford admits that, if the clause ézi 7. vi. 7. 
am. is retained, this parallel goes far to decide the matter. : 

ote eLfjre €v tovTots, Z.e. before ye died to the world ; é¢jre being 
in contrast with drefdvere. The change of tense is to be observed, 
Tepieratyoate, aorist, because denoting single acts, eéjre expressing 
the containing state. For the difference in sense, compare Gal. 
V. 25, ef COmev mvevpart, rvevpate Kal oToLxamev. “ Vivere et am- 
bulare inter se differunt, quemadmodum potentia et actus; vivere 
praecedit, ambulare sequitur,” Calvm. 

8. vuvi 8é, in contrast to the wore above. kal tpets, “ye also,” 
as well as other Christians. As in the former verse they were 


IIL. 9] SINS TO BE DESTROYED 283 


compared with the heathen society from which they had separated, 
so here with the Christian society which they had joined. Holtz- 
mann strangely supposes the xaé to refer to the Christians ad- 
dressed in Eph. ii. 22. 

Ta twadvta, “all of them,” everything that belongs to the old 
man. The asyndeton is thus less harsh than if 7a wdvra be 
understood to be only retrospective (as Meyer, a/.). 

dmd0ec0e, “ put ye away.” 

dpyyy, k.t.A. See on Eph. iv. 31. 

aicxpohoyia occurs in the N.T. here only. The connexion here 
shows that it means “abusive” rather than “filthy” language. 
It denotes the form in which the injurious BAacdypia finds 
expression. Chrysostom takes it in the sense of ‘“ obscene talk ” 
(which he calls 6ynua zopveias), and so many moderns; but the 
sins of uncleanness have been dealt within ver. 5, and the other 
substantives here regard want of charity. The word is used by 
Polybius, viii. 13. 8, in this sense of “abusive language,” 7 xara 
tov didwy aicxpoAoyia: cf. xxxl. 10. 4. The verb has a similar 
meaning in Plato, ef. ili. p. 395 E, xaxyyopotvtds Te Kat Kwpw- 
Sodvras dAAjAovs Kal aicxpodoyodvtas. Compare aicypa érea, Hom. 
Ld, y. 38. 

€k Tod oTdpatos dpav, not “proceeding from,” but dependent 
on ardGecGe, and belonging to both BAac¢. and aicxp. 

9. py Wevdeo0e eis GAANAOus. “ Do not lie towards one another.” 
eis does not express hostility, but direction. In Hist. Sus. 55 we 
have dfevoa eis THY ceavTod Wuyynv: but this is clearly not parallel. 

dmexducdpevor, «.t.A. This may be understood either as 
“putting off,” ‘“exuentes,” Vulg., so as to form part of the 
exhortation, or “seeing that ye have put off.” The former view 
is adopted by Olshausen, De Wette, etc. Lightfoot also defends 
it, observing (1) that though both ideas are found in St. Paul, the 
imperative is the more usual; cf. Rom. xiii. 12; Eph. vi. 11, with 
ver. 14; 1 Thess. v. 8, vppwper evdvoapevor, x.7.A.; (2) that in the 
parallel, Eph. iv. 24, the “putting on” is imperative ; and (3) that 
the participles here are followed by an imperative, ver.12. Gram- 
matically, there is no difficulty in thus understanding the aorist 
participle as synchronous with the present imperative. The aorist 
would, in fact, express a thing done once for all, and would be 
better represented in Latin by an ablative absolute than by a 
present participle. Nevertheless, the other view (adopted by 
Theodoret, and amongst moderns by Meyer, Alford, Ellicott), 
according to which the participles contain the motive for the 
preceding exhortation (from awdfecGe), seems the more probable, 
first, because in what precedes there is nothing to correspond 
with évévoduevor, as the Christian graces are not referred to; 
secondly, because ver. 11 does not fit in so well with an exhorta- 


284 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS’ .- [III. 10 


tion as with an argument ; and thirdly, because the imperative in 
ver. 12 is introduced by otvy. On dzexdvodpevor see ii. 11, 15. 

tov wahaov dvOpwrov. See Eph. iv. 22. 

10. kai évducdpevor tov véov. In the parallel, Eph. iv. 24, it is 
evdvoacbat Tov Kawwov avOp. véos, unlike Kaos, only expresses new- 
ness in point of time, but the idea of xa.wdrys is supplied by the 
participle. 

As the result of évdvcacQat rov véov av@. is that Christ is ra 
mavTa Kal év waow, and as the apostle speaks elsewhere of Xpuorov 
evdioarbar, Gal. ii. 27, Rom. xiii. 14, some commentators infer 
that the véos dvOp. here is Christ ; and hence, again, that 6 zadauds 
avOp. is Adam, whose image men bear, 1 Cor. xv. 49. Ignatius, 
Eph. 20, has the expression eis tov kawvov avOpwrov ‘Incoty Xpicrov. 
If this had been the thought in St. Paul’s mind here, he would 
probably have expressed it more distinctly. It seems better, then, to 
rest satisfied with the interpretation of the ‘‘new man” as “the 
regenerate man formed after Christ.” ‘The ultimate meaning is the 
same. 

dvakatvovmevoy, present participle, because although “ created ” 
once for all (xtucGévra, Eph. iv. 24), its growth and development 
are continually going on. (Compare 2 Cor. iv. 16, 6 éow Tyna 
[4vOpw7os] dvaxatvovrat neepa Kal Pp, and the opposite, TOV 
maAdaov dvOp. tov pbeipdpevov, Eph. iv. 22. The dva does not 
suggest the restoration of the original state, but the contrast to 
that which has lately existed. 

dvaxa.vow is not used by Greek authors, nor by the Sept., but 
avaxa.vifw, The substantive dvaxaivwors (Rom. xii. 2 ; Tit. ili. 5) 
is also peculiar to the N.T. 

eis émtyvwow. “ Unto thorough knowledge.” Meyer connects 
this with the following words: “unto a knowledge which accords 
with the image of God,” z.e. which is in accordance with the Divine 
knowledge. But the Divine knowledge would hardly be set forth 
in this general way as an ideal to be attained; we should expect 
some limitation to moral or spiritual knowledge. It is more 
natural to connect Kar eixdva with dvaxaw. and to supply the object 
of ériyvwors from the context, viz. the knowledge of God and the 
mystery of the gospel ; cf. i. 9, tva tAnpwOAre THY eriyvwow Tod Hedn- 
patos avrov, and il. 2, eis ériyvwow Tod pvorypiov, K.T.A. 

kat’ eikova, k.t.\. Tobe connected with avaxarvovpevov as above. 
An allusion to Gen. i. 26, 28. 

tod Kticavtos aitéy. 6 xticas according to Chrysostom, @/. is 
Christ ; but 6 xrioas is always God, and so here especially, where the 
passage in Genesis is alluded to. airév is the new man, not Tov 
dvOpwrov generally. Compare xrioGévra in Eph. iv. 24, and Kavi 
xtio.s, 2 Cor. v. 17. Soden, who interprets the “new man” of 
Christ, refers atrév to tov dvaxawovpevov. As Christ is the cikwy 


III. 11] SINS TO BE DESTROYED 285 


of God, 2 Cor. iv. 4, Col. i. 15, so Christians, when Christ is 
formed in them, become renewed after the image of God. 

Olshausen presses the designation of Christ as the eixwv of God, 
and accordingly interprets, “after the pattern of Him who is the 
Image of God.” But this does not agree with the allusion to 
Genesis. It is true the Alexandrian school interpreted the expres- 
sion in Genesis of the Logos, but only in a sense borrowed from 
the Platonic doctrine of ideas as 76 dpyérurov mwapddaypa, idéa tay 
idgwv 6 @eod Adyos : and this conception is certainly not in the spirit 
of St. Paul. Besides, the absence of the definite article before 
eixova obliges us to take kar’ eikéva in its natural sense as “ after 
the likeness of.” Those commentators who understand xara @cov, 
Eph. iv. 24, as=“‘after the likeness of,” of course understand the 
expression here as only a more precise definition. 

11. Sov odk év. Compare Gal. iil. 28. This év is not, as 
formerly used to be stated, a contraction of eveor, although it 
is often used in that sense; it is simply the longer form of the 
preposition ev, with éor understood, as in wdpa, dva. The fact that 
év is used with it in 1 Cor. vi. 5 is not inconsistent with this, since 
the word came to be looked upon as equivalent to éveorx. That 
passage, however, shows that we are not to press here the idea of 
“impossibility,” otc a ev %pivy ovdels aodds. The word here 
simply states the objective fact. 

The distinctions enumerated as abolished are first those of 
birth, involving national privileges ; secondly, of legal or ceremonial 
standing (which might be gained by adoption) ; thirdly, those of 
culture ; and fourthly, of social caste. 

"EMAnv Kal “loudatos. In contrast with "Iovdatos, “EAXnv means 
simply “ Gentile” ; and, indeed, even to the present day the Jews 
sometimes speak of other nations as Greeks. 

Tepitopy Kat dxpoBuotia. Abstract for concrete. This clause 
and the former have special reference to the Judaising tendency of 
the heretical teachers. 

BdpBapos, properly one who did not speak Greek (probably 
with the idea of talking ‘ gibberish.” Strabo explains it as onomato- 
poetic.) Hence the Greeks applied the term to all other nations. 
Even the older Roman poets (as Plautus) used the term of them- 
selves ; but later writers excluded the Romans from the class 
“barbari,” and even included them under the term “EAAnves 
(Dion. Hal. Ant. Rom. vy. 8). 

Lightfoot quotes a striking passage from Professor Max Miller: 
“Not till that word darbarian was struck out of the dictionary of 
mankind, and replaced by érother, not till the right of all nations 
of the world to be classed as members of one genus or kind was 
recognised, can we look even for the first beginnings of our science 
(of language). . . . This change was effected by Christianity” 


286 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [III. 12 


(Lectures on the Science of Language, 1st Ser. p. 81. The whole 
passage is too long to cite). 

X«vOys. The natural antithesis to BapBapos would be “EAAny 
(cf. Rom. i. 14); but as that has already been used the apostle 
substitutes for an antithesis a climax, for the Scythians were 
regarded as “ barbaris barbariores,” Bengel. The earlier Greek 
writers, indeed, on the principle “‘omne ignotum pro magnifico,” 
described them as evvopot (Aesch. Frag. 189); but Josephus says 
they are Bpayd tov Onpiwv duahéepovres (contra Ap. il. 37) Cicero 
uses a climax similar to that before us, “ quod nullus in barbaria, 
Quis hoc facit ulla in Scythia tyrannus 5 2” (In Pisonem, vii.). The 
word =xv6ys was used of any rough person, like our “ Goth.” This 
clause has reference, perhaps, to the stress laid by the Gnostic 
teachers on their yv@ous. 

Soddos, éXeUOepos. There was a special reason for St. Paul’s 
thoughts being directed to the relation of master and slave, in the 
incident of Onesimus’ conversion and return to his master. 

nmdvtra and ta wdvra are very frequently used by classical 
writers as predicates of persons. Wetstein on 1 Cor. xv. 28 quotes 
many examples. One or two may suffice here. Dem. De Cor. 
Pp. 240, wdv7’ éxeivos jv atrots;: cont. Ariston, p. 660, mavTa HV 
“Adé€Eavdpos ; Lucian, De Morte Peregr. 11, mpopyrns kai Evvaywyevs, 
Kal TA TavTA MOVOS avTos dv. 

12-17. Virtues to be cultivated, kindness, love, forgiveness, in 
which Goa’s forgiveness of us ts to be the pattern; mutual teaching 
and admonition, and in everything thankfulness, everything being 
done in the name of Jesus Christ. 

12. évivcac0_ ody, having put on the new man, put on also 
these virtues. 

&s éxXextol Tod Geos. Cf. Rom. viii. 33; Tit.ii 1. In St. Paul 
kAyrot and éxXexrol, kAjows and éxAoyy (Rom. xi. 28, 29), are 
coextensive, as indeed they seem to be in other N.T. writers 
(cf. Rev. xvii. 14) except the Gospels, where KAyrot and €xAexrot 
are distinguished (Matt. xxiv. 22, 24, 31 @/). as exAextot has a 
significant connexion with what precedes, since the €xAoyy is 
presupposed i in what is said in wz. 10, II. 

Gyvor kat Hyamnpevor are best taken as predicates of EKAEKTOL, 
which with and without rod @eod is used in several places as a 
substantive. 


cal is om. by B 17 Sah., and Lightfoot brackets it, thinking that the 
sentence gains in force by the omission ; cf. 1 Pet. ii. 6. 


omddyxva oixtippod. “A heart of compassion.” ozradyyxvu, like 
“viscera,” denoted especially the nobler inward parts, heart, liver, 
and lungs, and figuratively the seat of the emotion, as we use the 
word ‘‘ heart.” 


III. 18,14] | VIRTUES TO BE CULTIVATED 287 


The singular oixrippod is supported by very preponderant 
authority. 

xpyotétynta, cf. Eph. i. 7. 

tatewoppocivyn. Eph. iv. 2, tpavryta paxpoupiay, ibid, 

13. dvexdpevor GA\AjAwy, 27d. 

kat xapi{opevor éautoits. For the variation from dAA7jAwy to 
éavrots, see Eph. iv. 32. The latter word marks more strikingly 
than adAAyAos would the correspondence with 6 xvpios éxapicato 
URW. 

popdy, not found elsewhere in the N.T. nor in Sept. or Apocr. 
In classical writers €xev poudyy is frequent. ‘“ Quarrel” of the 
AV. is an archaism. 

ka$ws Kal 6 KUpios éxapicato duiv. To be connected with the 
following words, ovrw kai tpets (as RV.), supplying, therefore, not 
xapilopevor, but xaptlecGe (Eavrots). Assuming, as is probable, that 
6 Kvpwos=6 Xpicrds, this is the only place where Christ is 
directly said to forgive (see on ii. 13). In the parallel in Eph. 
iv. 32, the subject is 6 @eds év Xpicrd. Meyer remarks that the 
very frequent 7) xdpis Tod Kvpiov yay corresponds with the present 
expression. It is perhaps pressing the technical sense of Kvpuos 
too much to suppose, with Lightfoot, that it suggests the duty of 
fellow-servant to fellow-servant, recalling the lesson of the parable 
of the Unforgiving Servant, Matt. xviii. 27 ; compare below, iv. 1. 
It must be observed that the xa@ws has reference only to the fact 
of forgiveness, not to the manner of its exhibition in the death 
of Christ (as Chrys. Theoph. a/.). 

The reading cannot be regarded as certain. For 6 xépios are A B D* 
G 213 defg Vulg. Pelag, 

For 6 Xpiorés, $8° C Dbe K L P almost all mss. Syr. (both), Sah. Boh. 
Eth. Arab. (Bedwell), Clem. Chrys. Euthal. (cod. Tisch.), Theodoret, a/. 
N* has 6 Oeds, while 17 Arm. have 6 Oeds ev Xpic7@. Augustine also has 
the latter reading in one place (Z/. 148), but in another 6 Kvpuos. 

It is suggested, on the one hand, that Xpiorés has been substituted (as in 
other places) as an interpretation of Kvpios, especially as it occurs in Eph. 
iv. 32 (but not in the same connexion); and, on the other side, it has been 
suggested that Kupros originated in an attempt at conformation with the 
passage in Eph. 

Lachmann, Treg. WH. Alford, Meyer, Lightfoot, RV. Weiss read 
Kvpios. Tisch. Ellicott read Xpiords, to which RV. and WH. give a place 
in the margin, 

14, éwi maou 8€ todTos. “And over all these,” the figure of 
clothing being retained, as the verb évdvcacde has still to be 
carried on. 

6 éottv. The pronoun is not without difficulty. The illustra- 
tions cited by Lightfoot from Ignatius are hardly parallel, Rom. 
7, aptov @cod Oérw, 6 eorw capE Xpicrod: Magn. 10, véav Lipnv 
6 éotw “Inoots Xpiords. In these cases the words following 6 
éorw are an explanation of the words preceding, and 6 éorw=‘“‘id 


288 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS {III. 14 


est,” or “by which is to be understood.” So in Mark xii. 42, Aerrd 
Svo0, 6 éote KodpavTyns: XV. 42, Tapackeuy, 6 €or tpoodBBarov. In 
none of these cases does 6 éorw, «.7.. predicate a property or 
character of the antecedent. In order that the present instance 
should be parallel, 7. dydanv and ov. 7. re. should change places. 
Eph. v. 5 is nearer, rXeovéxrys, 6 éorw eidwAoAdrpys, and Ign. 
Trall. 7, dvaxrynoacbe éavrods év tigre 6 éotw caps Tod Kupiov: yet 
neither are these quite parallel. «idwAoAdrpys is not, indeed, an 
explanation of the word zAcovéxtys, but it expresses his true 
character. Probably the form of expression is to be accounted 
for by the figure. ovvdeopos, x.7.A., explains the view taken of 
aydaryv when exit maou rovros is applied to it. An alternative is 
to suppose the antecedent to be 76 évdvcacGar tiv ayarnv: and so 
Huther and Soden. But this certainly does not suit the sense so 
well. 

ouvdeopos tHS TederdTHTos. Love binds the virtues into a 
harmonious whole, not as if they could exist without it, for it 
might be called by a different figure—the root of all; but the 
figure of clothing here adopted required that its relation to the 
other virtues should be put in a different aspect. mdvra éxeiva, 
says Chrysostom, atryn ovodiyye drep av cirns ayabdv, tavrns 
dmovons ovdev eotw, GAAG Siappei, to which Theoph. adds tzéxprors 
P 
OVTa, 

THs TeXerdtyTos. AS it is the ovvdecuos here that makes all 
perfect, the genitive comes rather under the head of the possessive 
than of the objective. Lightfoot seems to take the latter view, 
explaining “the power which unites and holds together all those 
graces and virtues which together make up perfection.” This not 
only involves a very questionable meaning of reAedrys, as if =Ta 
Tv TeAaoTYHTA movotvra, Chrys., but gives an inadequate repre- 
sentation of the function of ayazy. 

Wetstein quotes from Simplicius, in Zict. p. 208 A, a strikingly 
parallel expression of the Pythagoreans: xadés of IvOuyopetor 
Tepiacas TOV GAAwy dperov THY piAiay eripwwy Kal avvderpov avTiV 
Tagav TOV apeTav EXeyov. 

Grotius, Erasmus, Estius and many others take the genitive 
to be one of quality, “the perfect bond,” which is not only feeble, - 
but leaves ovvderpos undefined. Bengel, De Wette, Olshausen, 
al, understand by ovvdecpos the “totality,” as in Herodian, iv. 
12. II, wavta TOV o. TOV émtoToAGv, “the whole bundle of letters.” 
But there is no instance of cvvdeopos being used figuratively in 
this sense; nor does it agree with the context, in which dayazy is 
represented as put on €zi maou, not to say that it would require 
the article. In Eph. iv. 3 the gen. after ovvdeopos is one of 
apposition. 

For redecéryros D* Gd eg and Ambrosiaster have évéryros. 


Wr. 15] VIRTUES TO BE CULTIVATED 289 


15. kat ¥ eipyvy tod Xpiotod. The peace of Christ is the peace 
which He gives and has left to His Church, cipyynv riv eniv 
didwput tuiv, John xiv. 27. But it is Christ’s peace in another 
sense, as the peace which belongs to His kingdom by virtue of 
His sovereignty; compare the expression, “the King’s peace.” 
The immediate reference here is not to the inward peace of the 
soul, but to peace one with another, as the context shows. But 
it cannot be limited to this, the moment the words are uttered or 
heard they suggest the other reference. 

BpaBevérw, only here in N.T.; see on xatafpafevéra, ii. 18. 
As there observed, Bpafsevw had dropped, for the most part, the 
reference to a contest, and was used of deciding or governing in 
general. Josephus, Azz. iv. 3. 2, uses it as synonymous with 
duotxetv ; Moses, in his prayer, says: wdvta of} mpovoia d.orxetrat, 
kal pnoev attroudtws, dAAa kata BovrAnow BpaBevdpevov tiv aiv 
eis TeAos épxerar. Again, 26. BpaBetdwy dpovoiay Kal eipyvnv. Philo, 
Quis Rer. Div. i. p. 494 A, od Oavpaoriv S& wap adnOeia 
BpaBevovcn. 

The transition of meaning is exactly parallel to that of the 
Latin “arbitrium,” which from meaning the sentence of an 
arbitrator comes to signify “will and pleasure.” ‘‘Jovis nutu et 
arbitrio caelum terra mariaque reguntur,” Cic. pro Rosc. Amer. c. 
45. Obtinere arbitrium rei Romanae,” Tac. Azz. vi. c. ult. 

Hence there is no necessity to insist on the idea of a contest 
of opposing parties, and the attempt to introduce it by reference 
to a conflict of motives, etc., really forces on the text more than 
is suggested by it. Chrysostom carries this to an extreme, oradiov 
€vOov éroinoey ev Tois Aoyiopots, Kal dy@va Kal abAnow Kal Bpa- 
Bevrny. 

The sense then appears to be, “‘let the peace of Christ be the 
ruling principle in your hearts.” 

év tats kapdio1s pay. In order that this principle may govern 
your actions and your words, it must first govern in your hearts. 


Xpicrob is the reading of §* A B C* D* G P 37 47, Vulg. Syr. (both), Boh. 
Sah. Arm. Eth. 

cod is in N° C? DC K L117, Goth. As % epyvn rod Oeod occurs in Phil. 
iv. 7, the substitution of O¢0d for Xpuorod is readily accounted for. The 
latter is clearly more suitable to the present context, since elpijvy Tod cod 
could not well be understood of anything but our peace with God. In Phil. 
iv. 7, A has Xpucrod. Bengel and others who defend the reading Oecod here, 
suppose Xpiorod to have come in from 13 or 16. 


eis iv Kau exAnOnte. ‘This is nearly equivalent to “for to that 
we were also called.” Comp. 1 Cor. vii. 15, év eipnvn KéxAnKev 
npas 0 @eds. 
év evi odpatt. Not=eis ev odpa, but expressing the result of 
their calling ; they are so called that they are in one body. It is 
19 


290 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [III. 16 


on the fact that this is their present condition that the stress is 
placed. As there is one body, there should be one spirit; cf. 
Eph. iv. 3, 4, rypetv tiv EvotyTa TOD TvEdpmatos ev TO TrVdETPH THs 
elpynvns, Ev odpa Kat ev mvedua, K.7.X. 

kat edxdpiotot yiveobe. “And become thankful.” Thankfulness 
for this calling is the strongest motive for the preservation of the 
peace to which they were called. The mention of this leads on to 
what follows. -yiveoGe is used because the ideal is not yet reached. 
evxdpioros does not occur elsewhere in N.T. It is not uncommon 
in classical writers, both in the sense “thankful” and “pleasant” 
(so usually of things). It occurs once in Sept., and then in the latter 
sense, Prov. xi. 16, yuvy edydpicros. Some commentators take it 
here in the latter sense (cf. Eph. iv. 32, xpyoro/). So Jerome, 
Beza, a Lapide, Olshausen, Reiche; “in mutuo vestro commercio 
estote gratiost, amabiles, comes . . . qua virtute pax et concordia 
saepe servantur,” Reiche. This sense is certainly not inappropriate ; 
and in favour of it it may be observed that the duty of thankful- 
ness is brought in as the final exhortation in ver. 17. 

16. 6 Adyos Tod Xpiotod. In 1 Thess. i. 8, iv. 15 St. Paul has 
6 Adyos Tod Kvpiov, but more usually 6 A. rod @cov. The change 
here is probably owing to the apostle’s purpose of exalting the posi- 
tion of Christ, which is characteristic of this Epistle. The gen. may 
be either objective, as in evayyéAvov Xpiorod, or subjective (as most 
comm.), “the word delivered by Christ.” It is generally under- 
stood as=the gospel, but Lightfoot interprets it as denoting “ the 
presence of Christ in the heart as an inward monitor. Comp. 
1 John ii. 14, 6 Adyos Tod cod ev tyiv péver, with 7d, 1. 10, 6 Adyos 
airod otk éorw év uiv: and so perhaps Acts xvill. 5, cvvetyero TH 
déyw (the correct reading).” Probably the “teaching of Christ” 
generally is meant; and so apparently Chrysostom, rovreorw, 7 
diacKadrla, Ta Sdypata, x) tapaiveois, See on Lk. vill. 11. 

év éuty. Not “among you,” which would not agree with the idea 
of “indwelling.” Yet it cannot well be understood of each in- 
dividual, as if referring to the faith and knowledge of each. Since 
the context speaks of oral communication one with another, év 
iiv then means, probably, “in you as a collective body.” ‘This is 
not the same as ‘among you.” : 

mdouciws. The fulness of this indwelling exhibits itself in the 
following words. 

év doy copia. Lightfoot joins these words with the foregoing, 
comparing for their position ch. i. 9 and Eph. i. 8, which, however, 
determine nothing. He thinks this connexion is favoured by the 
parallel in Eph. v. 18, 19; but this only decides that aApois, x.7.A., 
are to be connected with the preceding words. On the other 
hand, it may be observed that évouxeirw is already qualified by 
movoiws, which emphatically stands at the end. Ch. i. 28 is 


III. 16] VIRTUES TO BE CULTIVATED 291 


strongly 1 in favour of the connexion with the following, voulerotvres 
wavTa avOpwrov Kal dudacKovres wavTa avOpwirov év Tarn copia. 
Here the correspondence in meaning is surely of more weight than 
the position of the words, which precede in the one case as appro- 
priately as they follow in the other. 

On &SdcKxovtes and vouSetodvtres comp. i. 28; and on wWadpots, 
k.7.4., Eph. v. 18. Here as there the reference does not appear 
to be exclusively or chiefly to public worship, for mutual instruc- 
tion is what is prescribed. 


kat both before and after Uuvas is omitted by NABC* D* FG, defg 
Vulg. (best mss.) Syr-Pesh. Goth. a/. 

It was much more likely to be added than omitted erroneously, and the 
omission is quite Pauline. 


ev [7H] xdpete. 
77 is inserted in %°B DG 672, Chrys. comm. 


Omitted in § AK L (to which we may perhaps add C, in which ev xape 
is written but expunged by dots above and below), Chrys. text. 


The reading with the article is adopted by critical editors 
generally, but Reiche argues strongly in favour of the omission. 
If it is read there are two interpretations possible, for ydépis may 
mean either the Divine grace, or thanksgiving. The former meaning 
is adopted by Meyer, Alford, Ellicott, Lightfoot, etc. For 7 yapus 
=the grace of God, compare ch. iv. 18, 7 xdpis pe” tyav: Acts 
XVlii. 27, Tots wemurtevKdar Sia THS Xadptros: 2 Cor. iv. 15; Gal. v. 4; 
Eph. iv. 7; Phil. i. 7, cvyxowwvovs pov tis xdpiros. It must, 
however, be admitted that none of these passages is parallel to the 
present. In all of them 7 xdpis is spoken of as something con- 
ferred, and therefore can only be 7 x. rov @eod. It is different 
here, where the readers are directed to do something év r#j xdpute. 

Hence the other interpretation, “with thankfulness,” which is 
that of Anselm, De Wette, Bleek (omitting 77), Soden, seems 
preferable. For xdpis in this sense see 1 Cor. x. 30, ef d& eyo 
xapitt peréxw, where the apostle himself interprets yapire in the 
following clause: trép ot eyd edyapiord. The article is sufficiently 
accounted for by the reference to the previous edxapicrot. Meyer, 
on the supposition that xdpis is understood as “thanksgiving,” 
would interpret the article as meaning ‘that which is due.” 

It is not a valid objection to this view of ydpus that the idea of 
thanksgiving is introduced in the next verse ; on the contrary, the 
precept there is an extension of this one; what is here said of 
singing is there said of everything. 

Theophylact’s interpretation is different ; he takes x<pes in the 
sense “venustas,” “ pleasingness,” pera. Xdputos kal ndovas mVEV- 
pariKys domep yep 7a avOpurwa gopara xapwv exeuv doxovor, el a) 
Tvevpatikyy, ovTw Ta Hela, rvevpatixynv ; so also Bengel. Compare 


292 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [III. 17 


for this use of Xapes Ps. xlv. 3, eLexvn Xdpis év xetheot cov ; Eccles. 
X41, Adyou oroparos copov Xepes 5, Luke iv. 22, Barpagor é emt Tots 
Noyors THs xaptros; also ch. iv. 6, 6 Adyos bpav TAaVTOTE év xdprre. 
Compare also Demosth. p. 51 (Phil. i i. 38), 7 TOV Adywy xdpis, and 
so in classical writers frequently. Reiche, adopting this interpreta- 
tion, remarks: “recte et perspicue ev xapure adores ii dicuntur, qui 
carmina sacra cantant et modulantur venuste, decore, suaviter, ita 
ut etiam cultioribus et pulchri sensu praeditis placeant.” To the 
objection that the following words show that the apostle is speaking 
of silent singing in the heart, he replies by defending the reading év 
TH kapdia and interpreting it as = “ex animo, z.e. non ore tantum 
sed etiam cum animi assensu,” a questionable sense of év ry 
kapoia tuav. See on Lk. iv. 22 and Rom. i. 5. 

In conformity with the connexion assigned to év rdon codia, ev 
TM xdpire is to be joined to what follows. Lightfoot naturally takes 
it with the preceding. 

adovtes €v Tats Kapdiats bpdv. These words may either specify 
another effect of the evouxety, «.7.d. (Alford, a/.), or they may denote 
the inward disposition which was to accompany the d.dacxovres, 
«.t.X. If ry xdpere is understood as above, the latter view would 
be the more suitable (Soden). It is preferred apart from that by 
Lightfoot. 


év rais kapdlats is supported by preponderant authority, SA BCD*G, 
defg Vulg. Goth. Syr. (both), Sah. Boh. Arm., Chrys. 

év rq Kxapdlg is supported by D°K L most mss. , Eth., Clem. Ephr. 
Theodoret. Compare Eph. v. 19, where the singular appears to be the 
genuine reading. The singular here, as the plural there, is probably due to 
an attempt to harmonise Eph. and Col. 

T@ Oe is the reading of SA BC*D*G 17 47 67? al., dfg Vulg. Sah. 
Syr r. (both), Armm., Clem. a. 

7@ Kuply is that of C? D° K L most mss. -, Goth. Boh., Ephr. Theodoret, a/. 
(Chrys. varies). This, again, is harmonistic, the parallel in Eph, having Te 
Kvupl@ without variation. 


17. kat wav 6 te édv monte év doyw 4 €v épyw. A nominative 
absolute. Comp. Matt. x. 32, mas ovv dotts Spohoyijoet . 5. Opo- 
Noyjow Kayo év aitd: Luke xii. 10. As wav would become the 
object in the following clause, it is replaced by zavra. 

twdvta. We might supply to this zovotyres, parallel to the other 
participles ; but it is much better to supply zoveire, especially as 
evxapiorodvtes is subordinate. 

ev dvépatt Kupiou “Inood. Comp. Eph. v. 20. “In the name 
of” here means, not “calling on for aid,” as Chrys. etc., nor “in 
honorem,” as Jerome, but in the spirit which regards Christ as all 
and in all, the spirit which belongs to those who bear His name. “Ut 
perinde sit, ac si Christus faciat, ver. 11 [this is too strong] vel certe, 
ut Christo omnia pobetis. Qui potest dicere; Hoe in tuo, Jesu 
Christe, nomine fect, is certe actionem suam Christo probat,” Bengel. 


III. 18-20] SPECIAL PRECEPTS 293 


There is here another difference of reading. 

Kuplov "Incod is the reading of BD°K 17 37 most mss., f. Amiat. Tol. 
Goth. Syr-Pesh. Arm., Chrys. 

"Inood Xpicrod, AC D* Gg. 

Kuplov ’Inoot Xpirod, &, de Vulg. (Clem.), Field, a7, Syr. (Harcl.), Sah. 
Boh. Eth. 

Before warpl, cal is added in D GK L and nearly all mss., de fg Vulg. 
Syr-Pesh. Arm., Chrys. (cf. Eph. v. 20), It is absent from 8 ABC, Sah, 
Boh. Syr. (Harcl.), Eth. Goth. 


18-IV. 1. Special precepts for the several relations of life, the 
motive being in each, that what ts done ts done “in the Lord,” 
18. ai yuvatkes, x.t.A4. Comp. Eph. v. 22. 


iSious, prefixed in Rec. Text to dvdpdouw, has but slight support, and has 
probably come from Eph. v. 22. 


és dviKxev, imperfect, as often in Greek writers with similar 
verbs. Comp. Eph. v. 4, @ ov« dvjxev: Acts xxii. 22, ov yap 
Kadjkev avtov Civ. It is not implied here that the duty has not 
hitherto been rightly performed, but only that the obligation existed 
previously. 

The use of the past tense in the English “ought” is not quite 
parallel, since the present “owe” cannot be used in this sense. 

év Kupiw is to be joined with dvjxev, not with trotdocecbe : see 
ver. 20, evdpeatov eotw ev Kvpiw, “for those who are in the 
Lord.” 

19. of dvSpes, k.t.\. = Eph. v. 25. 

py mukpaivesbe. “ Become not embittered,” or rather, as this 
would seem to imply a lasting temper, “show no bitterness.” 
The word occurs frequently in classical writers. Plato has (Legg. 
731 D), tov Ovuov mpaivew x. 7) akpaxoXotvTa, yuvatkeiws muKpaLvo- 
pevov, duateActy: Pseudo-Dem. 1464, pydevt pyre mikpaiverOar pyre 
pvynotaxety. The adjective axpés is used by Euripides in a 
strikingly illustrative passage, He/en. 303, drav moo. mixpos Evi 
yovaiki. . . Gaveiv xpdtiorov. Plutarch observes that it shows 
weakness of mind when men zpos yivata dvamixpaivovrat, Philo 
uses muxpaiverOar of just anger. De Vita Moysis, ii. pp. 135, 20, 
and 132, 34. The word would seem, then, to correspond more 
nearly with the colloquial “cross” than with “ bitter.” 

20. 1a tékva, x.t.4. See Eph. vi. 1. Disobedience to parents 
is mentioned as a vice of the heathen, Rom. i. 30, xara wavra. 
There would be no propriety in suggesting the possibility in a 
Christian family of a conflict between duty to parents and duty to 
God. 

eddpeotov. There is no need to supply 7d @cd; the adjective 
is taken absolutely, like zpoog:A7 in Phil. iv. 8, and is sufficiently 
defined by év Kupiw, In Rom, xii. 2 evddperroy seems also to be 
absolute, 7d Oé<Anpa Tov Meod 76 dyadv Kal evap. Kal TédeLov. 


294 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [III. 21-28 


The Rec. Text has, instead of év Kuply, r@ Kuplw, with many cursives, 
Boh. Eth., Clem. a. 

év Kuply is the reading of all the uncials, most cursives, and versions. 

The Rec. arose from a desire to give a dative to evdpecrov. 


21. pi éepeOifete. “Do not irritate.” The verb means to “ excite, 


provoke,” not necessarily to anger, or in a bad sense ; and in 2 Cor. 
ix. 2 it is used in a good sense. 


There is another reading, rapopylfere, very strongly supported, being 
read in NAC D*GKL a/. Euthal. (Tisch. cod.), Theodoret (cod.), Theoph. 

épeOifere is read in B D’° K, most mss., Syr. (both, but Harcl. marg. has 
the other reading), Clem. Chrys. 

mapopylgere occurs in the parallel Eph. vi. 4 (with no variety), and to this 
is obviously due its introduction here. 


iva py dbupdow. That they may not lose heart.” ‘“‘Fractus 
animus pestis juventutis,” Bengel. A child frequently irritated by 
over-severity or injustice, to which, nevertheless, it must submit, 
acquires a spirit of sullen resignation, leading to despair. 

22. ot Soddou, «.t.A. Comp. Eph. vi. 5 ff. Here it is observ- 
able that the duties of masters and slaves occupy nearly twice as 
much space as those of husbands and wives, parents and children, 
together. The circumstance is perhaps explained by the incident 
of Onesimus, a Colossian, who was now returning to his master, 
Philemon, in company with the bearer of the Epistle. 

oBovpevor tov Kuptov, z.e. the one Lord and Master, contrasted 
with rots xara odpxa Kupiows. Observe that these words are not 
preceded by #s, whereas avOpwrdpecxo is. It is taken for granted 
that they fear the Lord. 


év dp0adpoSovrelats, the plural is read with § C K L most mss., Clem. 
Theodoret, Oecum., Syr-Harcl. 

ABDG, a/., Boh. have the singular. Chrysostom varies. 

Kupwov is the reading of 8* ABC D* GL ai, fg Amiat. Fuld. Syr. (both), 
Arm., Clem. Chrys. @/, 

@ecéy is read in 8° D° K most mss., d Goth. Boh., Theodoret. This read- 
ing spoils the contrast. 

23. 6 éav monte. This is the correct reading, with N* A BC (D* G) 17 
al., Old Lat. Vul. Goth. Boh. Arm. etc. (D* G have dy for édy). 

The Rec. Text has cal av 8 71 édv, with D> K L most mss., Syr. (both), 
Theodoret, Chrys. (without xal), This reading obviously comes from ver. 17. 


ex puxijs. Eph. vi. 6. pera edvoias. My pera SovAkis avayKys, 
GANG pera. éXevfepias Kat mpoaipécews, Chrys. 

epydtecQe. ‘Do the work.” Not used as particularly appropriate 
to slaves, but because the things done are épya. 

ws TH Kupiy, «7.4. Eph. vi. 7, 24, dad Kvpiov. Lightfoot notes 
the absence of the article here, while it is studiously inserted in 
the context, vv. 22-24. In the parallel in Eph. the preposition is 
apd. Some commentators and grammarians distinguish the two 
prepositions as expressing respectively the immediate (apd) and 


ITI. 24, 25] SPECIAL PRECEPTS 295 


the ultimate source ; but this distinction is untenable. See Light- 
foot on Gal. i. 12. 

24. thy dvtamdsoow. “The full recompense.” The word is 
frequently used both in the Sept. and in classical writers, but not 
elsewhere in N.T. 

THs KAnpovopias. Genitive of apposition, the reward which con- 
sists in the inheritance. There is a special point in the word, 
inasmuch as slaves could not be inheritors of an earthly possession. 
Comp. Rom. viii. 15-17 ; Gal. iv. 1-7. 

7 Kupiw Xpiot@ Soudevete. yap, which in the Rec. Text is 
inserted after 7@, must be rejected. 


In favour of the insertion are DK L most mss., Syr. (both), Arm. Goth. 

For the omission, § ABC D* 17 a/., Vulg. Copt. Euthal. (Tisch. cod.). 
It was clearly added to make the connexion easy. Gd and Ambrosiaster 
have Tod xuplov (judy Inood) Xpicrob @ dovAevere, but d and Ambr, omit the 
words in brackets. 


yép being omitted, the verb is best taken as imperative, “To 
the Master Christ do service.” The combination Kiptos Xpuords 
is not to be taken in the technical sense as=the Lord Jesus 
Christ, a use to which there is no parallel. In Rom. xvi. 18, 
where we have 74 Kupiw jnuadv Xpiord, some MSS. omit judv: but 
its genuineness is beyond question. In 1 Pet. iii, 15 Kvpuoy is 
predicate of tov Xpiordv. This suggests that we should take 
Kvpiw here as relative to dovAevere. The sentence is not so much 
a summary of what precedes as an introduction to the fresh 
point added in ver. 25; Lightfoot. 

Lightfoot takes dovAevere as indicative, on the grounds, first, 
that the indicative is wanted to explain the previous dd Kvpiov 
(but is it?); and, secondly, that the imperative would seem to 
require @s; 76 Kvpiw, as in Eph. vi. 7. On the other hand, how- 
ever, he adds, see Rom. xii. 11, 76 Kvpiw dovdctovres. If the 
interpretation above given is correct, @s is rightly absent, and in 
any case the indicative would be very abrupt and unconnected. 
Moreover, with this view the connexion of ver. 25 (ydp) would be 
hardly intelligible. Lightfoot passes it over in silence. 

25. 6 ydp ducky Komrettat & Adikyoev, kal OK EoTL TpoTwTOAN la. 
The first clause is, of course, a general maxim, but the application 
here chiefly intended appears from the words otk éo7t zpoco- 
moAnwia, which presuppose that the person punished is one higher 
in position. 6 ddixav, also, is much more suitable to the master 
than the slave ; and this view is further confirmed by the mention 
of 76 dikotov in iv. 1. Hence 6 déixéy in the present case is the 
master, and the words are designed to encourage the slave to 
regard himself as the servant of Christ, and as such not to be 
disheartened by unjust treatment, knowing that before the final 
tribunal there will be no respect of persons. So Theodoret, xy 


296 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [Iv.1, 2 


py Tixynte ayabdv avrarodécewv mapa TOV Searorov, éoTi dukaLoKpiTi)s 
Os ovK otde SovAov Kal Seozotov Siadopav, GAAG dikalav ciadeper THY 
Ynpov. But Chrys. Bengel, and others suppose the adixav to be 
the slave. “Tenues saepe putant, sibi propter tenuitatem ipsorum 
esse parcendum. Id negatur,” Bengel; cf. Lev. xix. 15. It must 
be observed, however, that some of those who adopt this view 
have had before them the reading 6 62 aducav (so Chrys.). 

Erasmus, Lightfoot, and many others (following Jerome) sup- 
pose both masters and slaves to be referred to, as in Eph. vi. 8. 
On the other hand, 2d. ver. 9, tpoowroAnia otk gate Tap air, is 
said with respect to the masters only. 

koptettat. ‘Shall be requited for”; cf. Eph. vi. 8, and for 
Tpocwirodnw ia, 20. 9. 

ndiknoev. The tense is past, from the point of view of the time 
referred to in xopetrat. 

For the reading the authorities are : 
For y4p, S ABC D*G 17 ad, Old Lat. Vulg. Goth. Boh., Clem. af. 
For 6é, D° KL, most mss., Syr. (both), Chrys. Theodoret, a. 

IV. 1. 15 Sikatoy kat thy iadtyTa. “Justice and fairness.” iodrys 
differs from 76 dikaov nearly as our “fair” from “just,” denoting 
what cannot be brought under positive rules, but is in accordance 
with the judgment of a fair mind. Compare Philo, De Creat. 
Princ. ii. p. 401, iodtys pev ovv tiv ék Tov brnKOwY evoLaY Kal 
iopareiav apoas Sucatas avtextwovtwv amepydoera. Meyer and 
others suppose the meaning to be that slaves are to be treated as 
equals, not as regards the outward relation, but as regards the 
Christian brotherhood (see Philem. 16). It would be a very 
obscure way of expressing this thought to say 7d dik. Kat rv 
isornta mapexeoGe: nor does it agree well with the following clause, 
kal tpets éxere Kvprov, not as in Eph., atray xat iudy. Perhaps, 
indeed, we may regard ra aira in Eph. (ot kvpior, Ta atta srovetre 
mpos avrovs) as illustrating iodrns here. The same moral principles 
were to govern both. isornra od rHv icormiav exddreoev, GAAG TiV 
Tpoonkovoav eryseAecav, Hs mapa Tov Seawotav aohavew xXpy TOS 
oixerds, Theodoret. Erasmus, Corn. a Lapide understand the 
word of impartiality, not treating one slave differently from others ; 
but this would be consistent with harsh treatment of all. 

mapéxeoe. ‘Supply on your side.” 

2-6. Exhortation to constant prayer and thanksgiving, to which 
ts added the apostle’s request that they would pray for himself in his 
work. Practical advice as te wisdom in action and speech. 

2. Ti Mpoceuxf mpookaptepetre= Rom. xii. 123; cf. 1 Thess. 
v.17. We have the same verb similarly used in Acts i. 14, ii. 46, 
vl. 4. 

yenyopourvtes év adth. ‘‘ Being watchful in it,” ze. not careless 
in the act. ézewdy yap 7d Kaprepety ev Tals edyais pabvpety wéAAaKts 


IV. 3, 4] REQUEST FOR THEIR PRAYERS 297 


Tovel, OLA TOUTS yor ypyyopodvTes TOUTETTL vypovTes, pH PeuPopevor 
(wandering), Chrys. 

ev edxapioriq. With thanksgiving (as an accompaniment ; cf. 
li. 7)- auTn yap n adn Oui} etx ] edxapurtiav éxovra dep TAavTWwV 
Ov lopev kal dv ovk topev, Gv ed éewadopev 7 eOALBoper, & brép TOV 
KOLW@V evepyeotov, Theophylact. 

3. MpooeuxSpevor dpa kat mept hpav. ‘Praying at the same 
time also for us,” including, namely, Timothy, named with St. 
Paul as sending the Epistle, but also, no doubt, including all who 
helped him in his work (vv. 10-14). 

iva, The prayer is not for the personal benefit of the apostle 
and his companions, but for the promotion of their work. 

Ovpav tod Adyou. A door of admission for the word of the 
gospel, ze. the removal of any hindrance which might be in the 
way. The same figure is employed 1 Cor. xvi. 9; 2 Cor. il. 12. 

Corn. a Lapide, Beza, Bengel, and others interpret @vpay rod 
Adyov as “the door of our speech,” 7.é. our mouth,—an interpreta- 
tion suggested by Eph. vi. 19, tva poe 506H Adyos_ év avoiger Tod 
atopatos pov, but certainly not consistent with rot Adyov, which 
must mean “the word.” 

hadjoat, infinitive of the end or object, “so as to speak” 7d 
pvornptov, K.T.r., i. 26, ii. 2; see Eph. 1. 9. 

Su 6 Kal 8éSenar. For it was his preaching the free admission 
of the Gentiles that led to his imprisonment. 

This is the only place in which St. Paul uses déew in the literal 
sense ; but he uses decpoé, Phil. i. 7, 13, and elsewhere, as well as 
déopu0s. The transition to the singular was inevitable when he 
passed from what was common to himself with others to what was 
peculiar to himself. 

4. iva pavepwow, x.t.’. Generally taken as dependent on the 
previous clause, ‘‘that God may open a door . . . in order that,” 
etc. Beza, De Wette, a/., however, make it dependent on zpoo- 
evxdpevot, which, on account of the change from plural to 
singular, is improbable. Bengel joins it with dédeua, ‘ vinctus 
sum ut patefaciam ; paradoxon.” In this he follows Chrysostom, 
Ta Seopa avepot aitdy, ov ovoxiafer: but this is quite untenable. 
V. Soden, who also makes the clause dependent on dédeua, 
proposes a different interpretation. He observes that gavepodv 
is never used of St. Paul’s preaching, nor does the notion of pvo- 
Typiov account for its use here. It must therefore have a special 
significance, and this is to be found in its immediate reference to 
dédenar. St. Paul, as a prisoner awaiting trial, had to explain 
what his preaching was. How this turned out, he relates in 
Phil. i. 12 ff. The sense then, according to v. Soden, is: “in 
order that I may make it manifest, how I am bound to speak,” the 
emphasis being on dei, not as. He desires to make clear to his 


298 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [Iv. 5-8 


judges, not only what he preaches, but that he cannot do other- 
wise ; compare 1 Cor. ix. 16; Acts iv. 20. 


6’ 8 is the reading of § ACD KL nearly all MSS., def Vulg. Goth., 
Clem. Chrys. etc. But BG, g have &’ 8», apparently a correction to suit 
Xp.iorod, but destroying the point of the sentence. 


5. é€v oopta = practical Christian wisdom ; cf. Matt. x. 16. 

mpos. ‘ With respect to,” or “in relation to,” z.e. your behaviour 
towards them. 

tous €€w. Those outside the Church ; compare 1 Cor. v. 12, 13; 
1 Thess. iv. 12. The expression is borrowed from the Jews, who 
so designated the heathen. On the precept Chrys. says, mpos 7a 
péAn TA Oiketa Ov ToraUTySs Huly Set dogadeias, Gans mpds Tos Efw> 
Oa yap adeApoil, ciot kal cvyyvGpat wodXal Kal éyabat. 

tov Katpov égayopdtovres. See Eph, v. 16, where is added a 
reason for the injunction, viz. dru at 7jépar rovnpai cic. 

6. 6 Adyos Spay wdvtote €v xdpitt. Still referring to behaviour, 
mpos tous é€6w. On xdpis=pleasingness, see above, ill. 16.  xdpis 
Adywv is frequent in classical writers. 

Gate Hptupevos. ‘Seasoned with salt”; cf. Mark ix. 49, 50; 
pleasant but not insipid, nor yet coarse. Compare Plut. dor. 
p. 514 F, xdpw twa wapackevdlovtes aAHAOIs, Gowep GAci Tots 
Aoyous eyvdvvover Ti SiarpiByv: and again, p. 669 A, 7) é tOv Gry 
Svvapis . . . Xap aitd Kal Hdoviv mpoariOnor. ddas is a later 
form. 

eidévar, infinitive of object, as in ver. 3, mas det El Exdorw 
dzoxplvec Gat, “to each one,” according, namely, to the character, 
purpose, spirit, etc., of the inquirer. Compare the apostle’s de- 
scription of his own behaviour, 1 Cor. ix. 22, tots maou yéyova 
mévTa wa wavtws Twas oeow. His discourses and answers at 
Athens, and before Felix, Festus, and the Jews at Rome, supply 
the best illustrations. 

7-18. Personal commendations and salutations. 

7. Ta kat éue= Phil. 1. 12, “my matters”; cf. Acts xxv. 14. 
Not a noun absolute, but the object of yvwpice. 

On Tychicus, see Eph. vi. 21, and compare Lightfoot’s very 
full note here. . 

6 dyamytds ddehpds = Eph. Ze. 

kal motos Sidkovos Kat advSoudos év Kupiw. év Kupiw is probably 
to be taken with both substantives, as both require some speci- 
fically Christian definition, which édeA¢ds does not ; and, moreover, 
in Eph. 2c we have muorés dtdxovos év Kupiw. ovvdovdos is perhaps 
added in order to place Tychicus on a level with Epaphras, who 
is so designated i. 7, and who was in high repute at Colossae. 
motos probably covers both substantives. 

8. dv émeppa, x... = Eph. vi. 22. 


IV. 9, 10] PERSONAL COMMENDATIONS 209 


As to the reading, the Rec. Text has tva yo 7a mepl dud, with Ke C 
Dte K L and most MSS., f Vulg. Goth. Syr. (both), Boh., Chrys. (expressly), 
Jerome (on Philemon), Ambrosiaster, a/. 

Wa yvGre Ta wept Huey, A B D* G P a few cursives, de g Arm. Eth., 
Theodore Mops. Theodoret, Jerome (on Eph. vi. 21), Euthalius (cod. 
Tisch.),. 

N* has yvGre with tudv. N° at first corrected dud to 7uGy to suit yrGre, 
but afterwards deleted this correction and substituted yyw for yvGre. The 
context, with the emphatic els atrd todro, so obviously requires yvGre .. . 
neGr, that, considering the weight of authority, we cannot regard this as an 
alteration made in conformity with Eph. vi. 22. Besides, it is very unlikely 
that the writer himself should, to the Ephesians, say, els atrd rofro iva 
yvGre, K.T.»., and to the Colossians of the same messenger, els atrd Toro va 
yv@, x.7.A. On the hypothesis that Eph. is not by the author of Col., it is 
equally improbable that the former should be written instead of the latter. 
The error may have arisen from te accidentally dropping out before 7a, or, as 
Lightfoot suggests, when Judy had once been written in error for Gy (as in 
N*), ywGre would be read yv@ re, as in 111 and John Dam. QA. ii. p. 214, 
and then the superfluous re would be dropped. These authorities, however, 
seem too late to be used to explain so early a corruption. 

Alford defends the Rec. Text, in which he is followed by Klépper ; but 
most critics and commentators adopt the other reading. 


9. obv “Ovycipw TO motd Kal dyamynT@ adeAPd. Observe the 
delicacy with which Onesimus is given, as far as possible, the same 
predicates as Tychicus and Epaphras, he and Tychicus being, 
moreover, associated as subject of yvwpiotcw. He was not da- 
kovos Or cvvdovAos, but as a faithful and beloved brother he is not 
placed below them. Compare Rom. xvi. 6, 12. 

os éoti e§ pay, who is of you, ze. belongs to Colossae; 
hitherto, indeed, only a slave, but now a brother beloved, Philem. 
16. It deserves notice how St. Paul assumes that Onesimus will 
be welcomed as such by his former master and by the Church. 
Calvin’s very natural remark, ‘‘ Vix est credibile hunc esse servum 
illum Philemonis, quia furis et fugitivi nomen dedecori subjectum 
fuisset,” serves to put in strong relief this confidence of the apostle 
in the Colossians. 

wdvta Spiv yywpiodow Ta Ode. This is not a formal restatement 
of 7a kar’ éué, but includes more than that phrase, and ra zrepi 
nov, namely, all that concerned the Church at Rome. This 
would naturally include an account of the conversion of Onesimus, 
who would be to them a living illustration of the success of St. 
Paul’s preaching in Rome. Note the change from yvrwpicea to 
yvwpodor, in order more expressly to commend Onesimus to 
their confidence. 


Gdefg Vulg. Jerome, Ambrosiaster add after Ode, mparréueva, a gloss 
which looks as if it originated in the Latin, which could not literally render 
Ta Ode, 


10, *Aomdfetar Spas "Apiotapxos. Of Aristarchus we know that 
he was a Macedonian of Thessalonica, Acts xix. 20, xx. 4; a 


300 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [Iv. ll 


member of the deputation to Jerusalem (7d.), and a companion of 
St. Paul in the first part, at least, of his journey to Rome, Acts 
xxvil. 2. Lightfoot (PA7/ippians, p. 35) thought it probable that 
he parted from St. Paul at Myra, having accompanied him at first 
only because he was on his way home to Macedonia. If the 
centurion in whose charge St. Paul was had not accidentally fallen in 
at Myra with a ship sailing to Italy, their route would have taken them 
through Philippi. If this view is correct, Aristarchus must have re- 
joined St. Paul at Rome at a later date. In any case, the notices 
in Acts show that he would be well known in proconsular Asia. 

6 cuvaixpddwtés pou. aixuddAwros properly means a captive 
taken in war, and hence it has been supposed that it may here 
have reference to spiritual captivity ; cf. Rom. vii. 23; 2 Cor. x. 5; 
Eph. iv. 8. But none of these passages justify such an interpreta- 
tion. In Rom. the verb is used of captivity to sin; in Eph. it is 
in a quotation from a Psalm; while in Cor. it is the thoughts that 
are brought into captivity so as to be obedient to Christ. There 
is no analogy to support the supposed use of aixycédAwros absolutely 
in the sense supposed. It would be particularly unlikely to be 
so used in a letter actually written from prison. 

On the other hand, St. Paul speaks of the service of Christ in 
terms of military service; cf. 2 Tim. ii. 3, and ovotpariwrns, Phil. 
li. 25; Philemon 2. It is in accordance with this that he should 
use the term ovvatxudAwros here (and of Epaphras in Philem. 23). 
It has been conjectured that St. Paul’s helpers may have volun- 
tarily shared his imprisonment in turn; for Epaphras, who is here 
a ovvepyos, is in Philemon a ovvaxy., and Aristarchus here ovvaryp. 
is there a ovvepyds. 

Mdpxos 6 dveids BapvdéBa, “cousin,” so defined by Pollux, iii. 
28, ddehpav maides dveol, cite ex TaTpadeAduy «ict, cite Ex pyTpa- 
dérquv cite e€ ddeAfod kai adeAdijs, eit ex Svotv appévww adeAdGv elt’ 
ek dvotv OnAe@v. The use of it for “nephew” is very late. 

The relationship explains why Barnabas was more ready than 
Paul to condone Mark’s defection, Acts xv. 37-39. At the same 
time, the passage throws light in turn on the rather remarkable 
form of commendation here, ‘if he comes unto you, receive him.” 
The Pauline Churches, which were aware of the estrangement, - 
might not be very ready to give a very hearty welcome to Mark. 
Comp. 2 Tim. iv. 11. dé€xeo@ar is a regular term for hospitable 
reception. See, for example, Matt. x.14; John iv. 45; often also 
in classical writers. 

mept o¥, k.t.4. These injunctions probably had reference to 
the friendly reception of Mark, so that their purport is repeated 
in the following words. 

11. *Incods 6 Aeyspevos “loGotos. Not mentioned elsewhere. 
The surname Justus is applied to two other persons in the 


IV. 12] PERSONAL SALUTATIONS 301 


N.T., namely, Joseph Barsabbas, Acts i. 23, and a proselyte at 
Corinth, Acts xviii. 7. It was a frequent surname amongst the 
Jews. 

ot dvtes ex wepitopys. These words are best connected with the 
following, oto: pdvor, x.t.A. The sense then is, “of those of the 
circumcision, these alone are,” etc. Otherwise, otro: pdvoc would 
not be true (see vv. 12-14), and oi évres ex 7. would have no signi- 
ficance. This construction, in which the more general notion 
stands first as in a nominative absolute, and the particular notion 
follows with the verb, is used by classical writers. 

On this otrou ovo comp. Phil. ii. 20, oddéva exw iadyvyov. 

suvepyot is the predicate, so that the apostle does not apply the 
term to the opponents. 

oitives as usual specifies, not the individuals, but the character, 
“men that proved.” See on Lk. ii. 4. The aorist éyevyOnoav 
seems to refer to some definite recent occasion. 

tapnyopta, “comfort,” only here in N.T., frequent in Plutarch. 
There is no ground for Bengel’s distinction, that rapapv6ia refers 
to domestic, and zapyyopia to forensic trouble. So far as the 
latter word has a technical sense, it is medical (cf. “ paregoric ”) ; 
but it is commonly used of consolation in general. 

12. *Enadpas, see i. 7. 

6 e€ 6ydv. ‘Who is one of you.” 

Soddos Xpiotod “Incod. A title frequently used by St. Paul of 
himself, once of Timothy in conjunction with himself, Phil. i. 1, 
but not elsewhere of any other. 

mdvrote dywvitspevos, k.t.A. Compare i. 29. 

iva oTyte TéhELor Kal TeTANpopopypevor. “That ye may stand fast, 
perfect and fully assured.” orjvat, as in Eph. vi. 11, 13, a/., con- 
veys the idea of standing firm; hence réAevou kai werd. are secondary 
predicates, the first expressing the objective moment, the second 
the subjective; they were not only to be réAeion ev Xpiord, i. 28, 
but to have full assurance; cf. ii. 2. aAnpodopety in N.T. means 
either “‘to fulfil,” as in 2 Tim. iv. 5, 17, or, ‘‘to persuade fully,” as 
in Rom. iv. 21, tAnpopopyfeis ott. . . Ouvards éotiv; xiv. 5, év TO 
idtw vot tAnpodopeirw. It is read in Rom. xv. 13, in B FG, where 
the sense is “fill”; but the better attested reading is rAynpdoa. 
The Rec. Text here has zerAnpwpeévor. See on Lk. i. 1. 

év wavtt GeAyjpart tod Geod. “In all the will of God” is not quite 
correct, yet we cannot say “‘ every will of God.” Lightfoot renders 
“in everything willed by God.” The words are best connected 
with reA, kai werA., not with orjre, as the order of the words 
shows. mavz7i probably has reference to the variety of circum- 
stances in which the Christian may find himself, with perhaps a 
hint at the contrast with the definite external precepts of the false 
teachers. 


302 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [IV. 18, 14 


orfre is the reading of eA CD GK L P and most mss., Chrys. Theodoret. 

orabjre, X* B23 71 a/., Euthal. (cod. Tisch.). Comp. Matt. ii. 9, xxvii. 
II, in both which passages BC 1 33 have éord6m for the Rec. éorn. The 
passive is adopted by the critical editors in all three places. 
Mt Ebina Cali: SABCD*G ai, Syr-Harcl. marg., Euthal. (cod. 

1scn. ). 

metdnpwuévot, D°K LP most mss., Syr-Harcl. text. and Pesh. Arm., 
Chrys. Theodoret. As, however, rAypoopeiv is sometimes used with the 
meaning ‘‘fill,” the versions cannot be quoted with certainty for the latter 
reading, which probably slipped in as the more familiar and simpler word. 

18. paptup® yap aitg. ‘The apostle confirms by his testimony 
what he has just said of Epaphras. 

ott €xet ToNdY mévov. ‘That he has much labour.” zévos is not 
found elsewhere in N.T. except in the Apocalypse. It is, however, 
a common word for struggle in battle, and hence corresponds with 
the aywv of the apostle himself, ii. 1, and with the éywvfdpevos of 
ver. 12. The two words occur in juxtaposition in Plato, Phaedr. 
247 B, &vOa 81 rovos re kal dyav éxyaros Wuxi} mpdKerrar, 

mwodiv aévov, & A BC P 8o, Euthal. (cod. Tisch.), Old Lat. Vulg. Goth. 
Boh. Arm. 

CiAov wodvv, Rec., with KL most mss., Syr. (both), Chrys. Theodoret. 
Dal. have woddv {Hrov ; D* G, roddv Kédrov. 

Five cursives have 7é0ov, and two (6 67?) dyéva. 

No doubt the rarity of révos in the N.T. is responsible for the variety of 
reading. It is found in the Apocalypse only. 

Smép Spdv Kal Tdv év Aaodixela kal tav év ‘lepamdder. Laodicea 
and Hierapolis stood on opposite sides of the valley at a distance 
of about six miles from one another, and twice as far from 
Colossae. From the conjunction of the three names here i. 
appears probable that Epaphras stood in the same relation, as 
evangelist, to the three, and also that they were threatened by the 
same dangers; as, indeed, their near neighbourhood and con- 
sequent frequent intercourse would suggest. Compare ii. 2. 

14, domdfetat buas Aouxds 6 iatpds 6 dyamntos. “Luke the 
physician, the beloved.” Beyond question the evangelist, named 
also 2 Tim. iv. 11 as well as Philem. 24. It is interesting to find 
two of the evangelists in St. Paul’s company here. The reason of 
his calling being specified may be that he was attending on St. 
Paul in his professional capacity. It has been observed that his ~ 
first appearance in company with St. Paul, Acts xvi. 10, “nearly 
synchronises with an attack of the apostle’s constitutional malady 
(Gal. iv. 13, 14), so that he may have joined him partly in a 
professional capacity ” (Lightfoot). From the manner in which he 
is separated from the group in ver. 1o it is clear that he was a 
Gentile. This is fatal, not only to the tradition that he was one 
of the Seventy (which, indeed, is hardly consistent with the preface 
to his Gospel), but also to the conjecture that he was the author of 
the Epistle to the Hebrews. See on Tk. i. 2, x. 1-16, xxiv. 13-32. 


IV. 15] PERSONAL SALUTATIONS 303 


kat Anpas. Probably a contraction for Demetrius. It is 
remarkable that he is named without any epithet of commenda- 
tion, which is the more striking as coming after 6 dyamryrés. In 
Philem. 24 he is named with Mark, Aristarchus, and Luke as a 
owvepyds of St. Paul. But in 2 Tim. iv. 1o he is mentioned as 
having deserted St. Paul, dyamjoas tov viv aidva, Perhaps the 
curt mention here foreshadows that desertion. 

15. domdcacbe tods év Aaodikela adeAdpous, kal Nupday, kal Thy 
kat otkoy adtay (or adtod) éxxAnotav. Nymphas (if this reading 
is correct) is probably a short form of Nymphodorus ; cf. Artemas 
for Artemidorus, Zenas for Zenodorus (Tit. iii. 12, 13), Olympas 
for Olympiodorus (Rom. xvi. 15), and perhaps Lucas for Lucanus. 

Ti Kat otkoy, k.7.A., 7.e. the Church that assembled in their 
house. The same expression occurs, Rom. xvi. 5 and 1 Cor, 
xvi. 19, of the house of Prisca and Aquila at Rome and at Ephesus 
respectively ; also Philem. 2. Compare Acts xii. 12. Separate 
buildings for the purpose of Christian worship seem not to be 
traced earlier than the third century. Bingham, Azzzg. viil. 1. 13, 
shows that special rooms were so set apart, but gives no instances 
of separate buildings. Probst (Kirchliche Disciplin, p. 181f.) is 
referred to by Lightfoot as affording similar negative evidence. It 
is curious that Chrysostom understands the expression to refer 
only to the household of Nymphas. Spa yotv mwas deikvvcr péyav 
TOV dvdpa, el ye 7) oixia airod exkAnoia. 

airav is difficult. Alford, Lightfoot, @/., understand it as 
referring to of wept Nuudar. Alford compares Xen. Jem. i. 2. 62, 
édy tis pavepos yevntat kAertwv . . . TovToLs Odvards éeotw 7) Cypia, 

which is clearly not parallel, for tus is one of a class, and rovros 
a those belonging to that class. Lightfoot compares Xen. Anab, 

. 3. 7, Mpooyer (Mudprdarns) mpos TOUS “EM yvas" erel & éyyis 
yan k.7.r., and iv. 5. 33, exet & HAPov mpds Xetpicodov, xateAdp- 
Bavov Kai suehvots oxnvovvras. ‘These also are not parallel, since 
here, as in other languages, the force is called by the name of its 
commander. Hence Meyer says that the plural cannot without 
violence be referred to anything but ‘‘the brethren in Laodicea 
and Nymphas.” He thinks, then, that by these brethren is meant 
a Church distinct from that of Laodicea, but in filial relation to it, 
and meeting in the same house. Lightfoot also suggests (as an 
alternative to his first-mentioned view) that the “brethren in 
Laodicea” may refer to a family of Colossians settled in Laodicea. 

The reading varies between atrGv, avrod, and atrfs. 

For the plural, SACP 5 9 17 23 34 39 47 73, Boh. (wrongly quoted by 
Tisch. a/. for adrod, see Lightfoot), Arab. (Leipz.), Euthalius (cod. Tisch.). 

For atrod are DGKL 37 (cod. Leic.) nearly all cursives, Goth., Chrys. 
Theodoret (expressly), Ambrosiaster. 

For atrjjs, B 677. 

The Latin versions have the singular ‘‘ ejus,” and so both Syriac, In the 


304 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [Iv. 16 


latter the gender would be indicated only by a point. The Pesh. is pointed 
inconsistently, making Nympha feminine (Numphé) and the suffix (corre- 
sponding to a’rod or a’rjs) masculine. The Harclean, again, has the suffix 
feminine in the text, masculine in the margin. How the translator intended 
the proper name to be taken is uncertain ; it may be either masc. or fem. 
Lightfoot thinks probably the latter. The Greek name is accented as 
feminine (Nvudav) in B° and Euthalius (cod. Tisch.). 


Nvpday as a feminine name would be Doric, and the occur- 
rence of such a form here is highly improbable. airjs, then, is 
probably a correction suggested by this misunderstanding of 
Nvpdav. But it seems more probable that the scribe who made 
the correction had airod before him than airéy. airay, again, 
might readily have been suggested to the mind of a copyist by his 
recollection of Rom. xvi. 5 and 1 Cor. xvi. 19 assisted by the 
occurrence of adeAovs just before. 

avrjjs is adopted by Lachmann, Tregelles (margin), WH., v. Soden, 
Weiss. Nvuday being accentuated accordingly. 
airéyv, by Tischendorf, Alford, Meyer, Tregelles (text). 


avrod, by De Wette (who designates airay ‘‘false and unmeaning”), 
Ellicott. 


16. kai Stav dvayvwobA wap spiv  émotokn. Obviously the 
present Epistle, as Rom. xvi. 22, Téprios 6 ypdias tiv émearoAyv: 
1 Thess. v. 27, dvayvwoOjvar trav éemioroAnv: 2 Thess. ill. 14, da 
THs émustoAns, these latter verses being of the nature of a post- 
script. 

moujoate iva. Cf. John xi. 37. ovetv, in the sense “take 
care,” is sometimes followed by dzws, as in Herod. i. 8, zotee dxws 
éxeivnv Oenoeat yupyyv: 16. 209, molee Gkws éredv ... Ss pot 
KataoTyoys Tov maida. So with ws, Xen. Cyrof. vi. 3. 18. 

iva Kal év tH Aaodikéwy éxxAyola dvayvwo0A. See the similar 
direction 1 Thess. v. 27, dvayvwoOjvat tiv em. maou Tois adeAdots. 
The present Ep. was to be read in the assembly of the Church, 
and a copy sent to Laodicea and similarly read there. Compare 
the address 2 Cor. i. 1, which implies the sending of copies to 
neighbouring Churches. 

kal Thy ék Aaodixetas. Chrysostom says that some understood 
this of a letter written from Laodicea to St. Paul. The Syriac- 
Pesh. also renders “written from L.”; and so Theodore Mops., 
Theodoret, and many others, including Beza, a Lapide, Estius, 
and some recent commentators. But why should St. Paul direct 
the Colossians to get from Laodicea the letter written to him, of 
which he could not assume even that the Laodiceans had retained 
a copy? and how would the letter of the Laodiceans edify the 
Colossians ? Moreover, xai tpeis obviously implies that the 
Laodiceans were the receivers of the letter. Theophylact sup- 
poses the first Epistle to Timothy to be meant, which, according 
to the subscription, was written from Laodicea. This subscrip- 


IV. 16] THE EPISTLE FROM LAODICEA 305 


tion, indeed, probably owes its origin to the theory, which was 
earlier than Theophylact, and appears in the margin of the 
Philoxenian Syriac. Other Epistles of St. Paul have been similarly 
said in some of the Versions to be “written from Laodicea” (see 
Lightfoot). It is fatal to all such hypotheses that St. Paul had not 
been at Laodicea before this time (ii. 1), and, even had he been 
there, had now been some time in prison, and therefore could not 
have written any letter recently from Laodicea. 

These hypotheses are obviously founded on the error that 7 ék 
A. must mean “the letter written from ‘L.’” But this is not so. 
When the article with a preposition expresses a substantival notion, 
it is often proleptic, a construction which is called the attraction 
of prepositions (Jelf, § 647), Thucyd. ii. 34, @dmrovor tovs éx Tov 
Toéuwv : iii. 22, HoOovTo ot ék TOV TUpywv pidrakes: Vi. 32, Evverev- 
xovro 5& Kal 6 dAXos dpudos 6 ex THs yys. Most of the instances, 
indeed, cited by Jelf, Zc, and others are with verbs implying 
motion, as in Luke xi. 13, xvi. 26. 

Assuming, then, as certain that the Epistle was one written by 
St. Paul to Laodicea, we have three alternatives to choose from. 
First, there is extant an Epistle actually bearing the title ‘To the 
Laodiceans.” It is extant only in Latin, but must have been 
originally written in Greek. Of it Jerome says (Viv. 7/7. 5): 
“legunt quidam et ad Laodicenses, sed ab omnibus exploditur.” 
It is, indeed, abundantly condemned by internal evidence. It is 
a mere cento of Pauline phrases put together with no definite 
connexion or purpose, and absolutely destitute of any local 
allusion, except in the last line, which is obviously borrowed from 
the verse before us, viz.: “et facite legi Colosensibus et Colos- 
ensium vobis.” As Erasmus truly and strikingly expresses it: 
“nihil habet Pauli praeter voculas aliquot ex caeteris ejus epistolis 
mendicatas. . . . Non est cujusvis hominis Paulinum pectus 
effingere. Tonat, fulgurat, meras flammas loquitur Paulus. At 
haec, praeterquam quod brevissima est (about as long as this ch. 
iv.), quam friget, quam jacet! . . . Nullum argumentum efficacius 
persuaserit eam non esse Pauli quam ipsa epistola.” It is found, 
however, in many copies of the Latin Bible from the sixth to the 
fifteenth century, and, as Lightfoot observes, for more than nine 
centuries it “hovered about the doors of the sacred canon, without 
either finding admission or being peremptorily excluded,” until at 
the revival of learning it was finally condemned on all sides. The 
Latin text of the Epistle will be found on p. 308. A full account 
of its history with a collation of the principal MSS., also a transla- 
tion into Greek, will be found in Lightfoot. 

Secondly, it may be a lost Epistle. We have no reason to 
question the possibility of St. Paul having written letters which 


have not come down to us (compare, perhaps, 1 Cor. v. 9); but in 
20 


306 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS [Iv. 17 


the present case we may observe, first, that the Epistle referred to 
was one to which some importance was attached by St. Paul 
himself, so that he himself directs that it be read publicly in two 
distinct Churches (for the passage justifies us in assuming that it 
was publicly read in Laodicea as well as Colossae) ; and, secondly, 
that in consequence of this direction not only must it have been 
copied, but great publicity was, in fact, assured to it. The Epistle 
to Philemon, which was in itself unimportant, and private, was not 


allowed by the Colossians to be lost, how much less an important 


public letter? Again, we know of three Epistles sent at this time 
to Asia Minor, namely, those to the Ephesians, to the Colossians, 
and to Philemon. It is best not to assume a fourth unless we are 
compelled to do so, which it will be seen we are not. In any case 
it could hardly have been an Epistle addressed to the Laodiceans, 
since if it had been we should not have salutations to the Lao- 
liceans in this Epistle, not to say that it would be called rijv zpos 
Aaoduxeas rather than tv é« A. 

The third alternative is that the Epistle is one of those that we 
possess under another title. As early as the fourth century the 
claim was put forward on the part of the Epistle to the Hebrews 
py Philastrius, apparently from conjecture only, and one or two 
modern writers have adopted the same hypothesis. But in spite 
of some partial coincidences, it is really impossible to suppose 
these two Epistles to have been written at the same time by the 
same author to the same neighbourhood. 

The Epistle to Philemon has also been suggested, and Wieseler 
(Chronol. des Apost. Zeitalter, p. 450 ff.) speaks of this identifica- 
tion as scarcely open to doubt; but that Epistle is entirely private, 
and the delicacy of its appeal would be destroyed if St. Paul 
directed it to be read in public. 

There remains the Epistle to the Ephesians, which we know 
to have been written about the same time as the Epistle to the 
Colossians, and conveyed by the same messenger, and which, on 
quite distinct grounds, is, with high probability, regarded as a 
circular letter (see Introduction). 

iva kal Spets dvayvare. “See that ye also read.” It would be 


rather awkward to make this tva depend directly on roujoare. It . 


may be taken independently, as in Gal. ii. 10, povoy trav mrwXov 
iva. pynpovevwev : 2 Cor. vill. 7, va Kal év tavry TH xXapiTL Tepio- 
cevyre (John ix. 3; 2 Thess. iii g; 1 John ii 19 are not quite 
parallel). 

Szws is frequently used by classical writers in a similar manner. 
Here, however, as oujoare has just preceded followed by wa, it 
is perhaps more natural to understand before this iva, “see that,” 
taken out of zoujoare by a sort of zeugma. 

17. cal eimate "Apximmw. Archippus, called by St. Paul his 


Iv. 18; FINAL SALUTATION 307 


avotpatiotys (Philem. 2), was probably a son of Philemon, and a 
leading presbyter at Colossae (to suppose him to be a regular 
bishop would be an anachronism), or perhaps an “evangelist ” 
(Eph. iv. 11). Lightfoot thinks it more probable that he resided 
at Laodicea (of which place the Apostolic Constitutions make him 
bishop), and accounts thus for St. Paul not addressing him 
directly. Contrast the direct address, Phil. iv. 3. But there the 
request addressed to the “true yokefellow” is a special one; here 
it is general, and the form adopted gives it an official character 
which is natural and suitable ; in fact, a direct address would have 
the appearance of harshness and discourtesy to the Colossians, 
and this the more the greater the authority he possessed. Would 
not this be the impression inevitably produced, if after animad- 
verting on the heretical teaching in Colossae, the apostle had 
added, “and thou, see that thou fulfil thy office”? 

Brére, “look to”; compare 1 Cor. i. 26, BAemere THY KARow 
iuav: x. 18, Bdrérere tov “IopayA Kata odpxa. In Phil. iii. 2, 
BAézere rovs Kivas, k.7.rX., the idea is of being on one’s watch 
(against). : 

tv Suaxoviay. Clearly some office more important than the 
diaconate, properly so called, is intended here. So 2 Tim. iv. 5, 
THv dSvaxoviay cov tAnpopPdpyoov: compare Acts xii. 25, mAnpo- 
gavtes THY Svaxoviay (of a special mission to Jerusalem). 

qv wapé\aBes év Kuptw. The qualification év Kvpiw probably 
belongs both to the person and to the reception of the office ; as 
living in the Lord, he received it, and he received it as committed 
to him in the service of the Lord. 

iva, adtyvy wAnpots. For the construction, compare 2 John 8; 
and for the sense, 2 Tim. iv. 5 quoted above. 

The admonition reminds us, indeed, of the admonitions to 
Timothy and Titus. If Archippus was a young man, and recently 
appointed to his office, it would be a natural reminder of its 
greatness and its difficulty ; and there is no need to suppose that 
a covert censure on his previous laxity is implied. 

18. 6 dotacpos 7H ep xerpt Navdkou=1 Cor. xvi. 21; 2 Thess. 
ili. 17. In the latter passage St. Paul states that this was his 
usual custom. 

pynpoveveté pou Tay Seopav. An appeal, touching in its brevity, 
and one which could not proceed trom an imitator. He does not 
ask specially for their prayers, their sympathy, that they should 
spare him further anxiety, or the like; but all these are included 
in the request that they ‘‘ were ever to keep before them the fact 
that one who so deeply cared for them, and loved them, and to 
whom their perils of false doctrine occasioned such anxiety, was a 
prisoner in chains,” Alford; who adds, “when we read of ‘his 
chains’ we should not forget that they moved over the paper as 


308 THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS (Iv. 18 


he wrote. His hand was chained to the soldier that kept him.” 
This circumstance perhaps explains the singular abruptness of the 
request. 

} xdpts pe Sudv. This short form of benediction is used also 
in « Tim. vi. 21 and 2 Tim. iv. 22. 7 xdpis used thus absolutely 
occurs only in the later Epistles. In the earlier it is defined by 
the addition of rod Kupiov [nav] “Iycod [Xpicrod]. 

’Auhy is added in 8° D K L P and most mss., def Vulg. Goth. Syr. 
(both), Boh. etc. 

Omitted in x* ABC F G17 673, g ai. 

For the subscription, § ABCDGL Pal. have mpds Kodaccaes (or 
Kodogoaes, Bor D F GL P, etc.), to which A Be add dard pwns (pwun A), 
and so Syr. (both) ; but Boh. has ‘‘scripta Athenis.” 

Some later authorities, K L and many cursives, add da Tuxixod xal 
’Ovnoluov. For other varieties and additions, see Tischendorf. 


Here follows the text of the spurious Epistle from a MS, in 
the Library of Trinity College, Dublin. 


ApD LAODICENSES, 


Paulus Apostolus non ab hominibus neque per hominem; sed 
per Jhesum Christum fratribus qui sunt Laodicie. Gratia vobis 
et pax a Deo patre nostro et Domino Jhesu Christo. 

Gratias ago Deo meo per omnem orationem meam quod 
permanentes estis in eo et perseverantes in operibus eius, pro- 
missum expectantes in die iudicii. Neque destituant vos quo- 
rundam vaniloquia insinuantium, ut vos avertant a veritate evangelii 
quod a me praedicatur etsi faciet Deus ut qui sunt ex me ad 
perfectum veritatis evangelii et servientes et facientes benignitatem 
operum salutis vite eterne. Et nunc palam sunt vobis vincla mea 
quae patior in Christo quibus laetor et gaudeo et hoc mihi est ad 
salutem perpetuam quod ipsum factum orationibus vestris et 
administrante Spiritu Sancto, sive per vitam sive per mortem, est 
enim michi vivere vita in Christo et mori gaudium et in id ipsum 
vobis faciet misericordiam suam ut eandem dilectionem habeatis 
et sitis unanimes. Ergo dilectissimi ut audistis praesentia mei, ita - 
retinete et facite in timore Dei et erit vobis vita eterna, est enim 
Deus qui operatur in vobis et facite sine retractu quecumque 
facitis et quod est [reliquum] dilectissimi gaudete in Christo et 
praecavete sordidos in lucro. Omnes sint petitiones vestre palam 
apud Deum et estote firmi in sensu Christi et quae integra sunt 
et vera et pudica et iusta et amabilia facite, et quae audistis 
et accepistis in corde retinete et erat [sic] vobis pax. Salutant 
vos sancti. Gratia Domini nostri Jhesu cum spiritu vestro. Et 
facite legi epistolam colosencium vobis. 


INDEX TO; THE 


NOTES: 


I. SUBJECTS AND NAMES. 


Aboth, 42. 
Abstract for concrete collective, 41. 
plural, 32. 


Acta Pauli et Petri, 261. 
Thomae, 165. 
Aelian, 20, 25. 
Aeons, lvi. 
Aeschines, 34, 89, 151, 242. 
Aeschylus, 69, 89, 101, 128, 136, 286. 
‘* Affections, ” 278. 
‘* Afflictions of Christ,” 230. 
Alexander, Abp., 222. 
Alford on character of Ep. to Eph., 
xi; Comm. fasszm. 
Analogy, 172. 
Angelology, 33, 215. 
Angels of the law, 260. 
Anger whether always unlawful, 140. 
Antoninus, 40, 45, 160. 
Apocalypse, relation to Eph., xxviii. 
to Col., lix. 
Aorist, 48, 49, 215, 225, 279, 282, 283. 
infinitive, 1367. 
participle, 257. 
Apocrypha, 16, 57, 136, 144, 145, 184, 
219, 243, 249, 267, 268, 283, xxii. 
Apollonius, 153. 
Apostles, 72, 117. 
Apostolic Constitutions, 307. 
Archippus, 306. 
Arians, 213. 
Aristaenetus, 246. 
Aristarchus, 147, 299. 
Aristophanes, 44, 155. 
Aristotle, 14, 18, 29, 36, 44, 96,149,161, 
203, 217, 224, 242, 256, 272, 276. 
Arrian, 64, 143. 
Artemidorus, 154. 


20* 


Article, 51, 213, 291, ix, x. 

absence of, 58, 135. 

generic, 274. 
Asceticism of a later age, 273. 
Athanasius, 27, 94, 213, 268, 259. 
Athenaeus, 57, 59, 89. 
Atonement, the, 146. 
Augustine, St., 39, 162, 208, -23, 

230, 242, 244, 265, 267, 208, 273. 

Ausonius, 16. 


Bapusm, infant, 176. 
Barnabas, Ep., 11, 26, 300, 1. 
Basil, St.,.93,, 102, 2125270; 1. 
Baur, 40, 82, xiv, liv sqq. 
1° Being in, 71128: 
Bengel’s maxim, Proclive scriptioni 
praestat ardua, xlv. 
remark, saepe vis modi, etc., 140. 
Bentley, 267. 
Bernhardy, 64, 89. 
Bingham, 303. 
Bishops’ Bible, 138. 
Bisping, 230. 
Blaikie, 164. 
Bloomfield, 164. 
‘Body ” not = ‘‘ totality,” 250. 
Bugenhagen, 167. 
Building, the, 73. 
Bullinger, 152. 
Butler, Bp., 95, 140, 153. 


Caesarea, whether Eph. written from, 


XXX. 
‘* Captivity is captive led,” 113. 
Cerinthus, xlix, liv- 

Chains, St. Paul’s, 189, 307. 
Charles, Mr., 241. 


310 


‘‘Children of wrath,” 44. 
Christ as sacrifice, 147. 
whether afflicted in His people, 
231. 
whether the mystery of God, 239. 
Christology of Ep. to Eph., xxii. 
Chrysostom on character of Ep. to 
Eph., xiii; Comm. fasszm. 
Cicero, 14, 16, 44, 64, 98, 131, 
255, 286, 280. 
Cilicism, supposed, 265. 
Circumcision, spiritual, 57, 251. 
Clemens Alex., 10, 21, 39, 161, 
xii, 1. 
Clemens Rom., viii. 
Cockerell, xlix. 
Coleridge on Eph., xiv. 
Colossae, xlvii. 
Colossian heresy, xl viii. 
Colossians had not heard St. 
238. 
Colossians, relation of Ep. to Eph., 
XXI1l1l. 
Conybeare, 255, 260. 
Coverdale, 273. 
Covetousness, 133. 
Creature, reconciliation of, 222. 


ne2; 


209, 


Paul, 


Davenant, 221, 241, 264. 

Delitzsch, 139. 

Demas, 303. 

Demiurge, liv. 

Demosthenes, 12, 34, 53, 89, 128, 145, 
187, 202, 207, 218, 229, 243, 258, 
265, 266, 286, 292, 293. 

Descent into hell, 115. 

De Wette on language of Eph., xv. 

Didaché, viii. 

Dio Cassius, 229. 

Diodorus, 12, 177, 275. 

Diogenes Laertius, 42, 144, 230, xlix. 

Dionysius Halic., 285. 

Dionysius (pseudo), 33. 

Dispensation of the grace of God, 79. 

Dissen, 149. 

Dobree, I10f. 


Earthquakes in Lycus Valley, xxxi. 
‘‘Element” or ‘‘sphere,” 108, 122, 
128. 
Enoch, Book of, 17, 241, 248. 
Epaphras, 199, 298, 300, 302, xlviii. 
Ephesians, to whom written, i, 25, 78. 
external evidence of genuineness, 
ix. 
objections from language, xiv. 
from line of thought, xix. 


INDEX TO THE NOTES 


Ephesians, relation to Col., xxiii; to 
t Pet., xxiv; to Heb., xxvi; 
to Apocalyse, xxviii. 

Ephrem Syrus, 33. 

Epictetus, 48, 136. 

Epiphanius, 275, xiii, liv. 

Erasmus, xlix. 

Eratosthenes, 265. 

Essenes, 247, 273. 

Estius, iv; Comm. pass. 

Eubulus, 89. 

Eucharist, 172. 

Euripides, 35, 69, 89, 144, 268, 293. 

Eusebius, 93, xxxi, xlvii. 

Eustathius, 265. 

Euthymius, 102. 

Evangelists, 118. 

Ewald, 11, I11, 250, viii, xiii. 

Excitement, spiritual, 162. 


‘Father of,” 27. 

Field, Dr., 143, 266. 

Findlay, 164. 

Firstborn of all creation, 211. 

History of the interpretation, 213. 

Forgiveness in Christ, 146. 

Foundation of apostles and prophets, 
271. 

Fritzsche, 9, 34, 35, 48, 54, 71, 104, 
106, 152, 159, 161, 178, 237. 

Future with ‘‘see lest,” 246. 


Galen, 126, 271, 276. 

“* Genitive of reference,” 211. 

Gnostics, 13, 40, 182, 209, 241, 247, 
xlix; on Gnostic conceptions in 
Col., lv sq. 

s Going off at a word,” 62, xxii. 

Grace, I0. 

Greek, modern, 26, 50. 

Gregory Naz., 144. 

Gregory Nyss., 89. 

Grimm, 20. 

Grotius on Ep. to Eph., xiv. 


Hammond, 133, 223. 
Hausrath, xxiv. 
Heavens, 116. 
things in, 222, 

Heavenly powers, 32. 
Hebrews, Ep. to, xxvi. 
Hebraism supposed, 40, 42, 117, 150, 

223, 266. 
Heliodorus, 246. 
Hermann, 48, I4I, iv. 
Hermas, xii. 
Hermes, 224. 


I. SUBJECTS AND NAMES 311 


Herodian, 288. 

Herodotus, 94, 129, 148, 183, 186, 
275, xlvii. 

Hesychius, 61, 98, 131, 266. 

Hierapolis, 237, 302, xlix. 

Hierarchy, celestial, 33. 

Hilary, 258. 

Hilgenfeld, 269, xiv. 

Hippocrates, 20, 144, 185, 272. 

Hippolytus, 214, 258, xii. 

Hitzig, 139. 

Hofmann, 176, 233. 

Holtzmann, 40, 216, xiii, xiv, xxiii, 
li, Za. 

‘* Holy Apostles,” 82. 

Homer, Il, 41, 53, 74, 
186, 277, 279. 

Hope and love, 196. 

Hort, 80, 136, iv, xx, xxli, xxxi. 

Humility, 105. 


118, 147, 


Ignatius, 246, 284, 287, viii, xi. 
‘“Tmitators of God,” 146. 
*< Incidental revelation,” 33. 
‘In the Lord,” 103. 
Infinitive of end, 317. 

of object, 297, 298. 
Irenaeus, 13. 
Isaeus, 226. 
Isidore of Pelusium, 212. 
Isocrates, 170, 265. 
cMitsaith,; IL, 050; 


Jelf, 48, 305. 

Jeremiah, vi, 10, 57. 

Jewish notions, 116, 142, 247, 298. 

Jerome, xxxi; Comm. fasszm. 

John St., Gospel of; its relation to 
Eph., xxviii. 

“‘Joint,” ambiguity of, 125. 

Josephus, 12, 45, 121, 247, 257, 260, 
264, 266, 286, 289, xlviii. 

Judaic element in Colossian Church, 
xlviii. 

Jiilicher, xiv, xvi, lii. 

Justin, 93, 212. 

Juvenal, 255. 


Kepler, 248. 

Kiene, x. 

Kneeling in prayer, 93. 
Kihl, 248. 


Labour, Christian, object of, 142. 
Laodicea, Council of, 268. 
Epistle from, 237, 302, 304, iii, 
v, vii, xii, a/, 


Le Clerc, 267. 

Life of God, 130. 

Lightfoot, ‘‘ Biblical Essays,” v, xiii. 

Liturgy, whether quoted, 158. 

Liturgies, 164. 

Locke, 19, 88. 

‘* Lower parts of the earth,” 115. 

Lucian, 12, 36, 98, 248, 277, 286. 

Luke, 302. 

Lycus Valley, natural phenomena, xlix. 
Churches of, xlviii. 

Lysias, 224, 275. 


Mahaffy, Dr , lii, liii. 

Malalas, 85. 

Mangold, xili, xxx. 

Marcion, 227, ii, xiii, li. 

Marcosians, 13, 209. 

Mark, 300. 

Marriage; why called a 
ment,” 175. 

Mayerhoff, li. 

Metaphors, mixture of, 97, 119, 245. 

Middle voice, 18, 38, 156, 272. 

Middleton, 153. 

Milligan, Dr., vii. 

Milton, 33. 

Monro, Homeric Gram., 78. 

Miller, Max, 285. 

Muratorian Canon, v, li. 

‘* Mystery,” 15. 

Mystery of God, 239. 

Mysteries, words supposed 
borrowed from, 236. 


“© Sacra- 


to be 


Name, ‘‘in the name of,” 163. 
Neander, 247, 

Nemesius, 269. 

Nominative, irregular, 96. 
Nympha or Nymphas, 303. 


Onesimus, 299. 
Onthovius, 103. 
Original sin, 45. 
Origen on the address of Ep. to 
Eph., ii. 
on redemption, 13. 
on angels, 33. 
a peculiar reading of his, 263. 


Paley, 189, xx. 

Pandects, 68. 

‘« Paradox of the Crucifixion,” 262. 
Participle, paraphrases with, 275. 
Paul, St., hisstyle, a singularity of, xxi. 
Pearson, Bp., 109, x. 

Perfect tense, 26. 


312 


Perowne, Bp., 260. 

Persians, 148. 

Philemon, Ep. to, lvii, lviii. 

Philippians, Ep. to, lvii, Iviii. 

Philo, 12, 14, 35, 36, 44, 45, 76, 96, 
203, 210, 214, 217, 246, 259, 264, 
268, 289, 293, 296. 

Philostratus, 120. 

Photius, 129, 229, 266. 

Phrynichus, 69, 73, 84. 

Pindar, 31, 149. 

Plato, 12, 14, 16, 26, 20, 53, 58, 59, 
64, 83, 90, 95, 124, 149, 151, 179, 
215, 217, 226, 236, 242, 243, 256, 
260, 264, 275, 279, 283. 

Plautus, 149, 285. 

Pliny, xlvii. 

Plutarch} 11; 125) 045) 38, 41,, 1075 
141, 143, 149, 161, 170, 218, 243, 
248, 258, 262, 293, 208. 

Platonic doctrine of Ideas, 285. 

Polyaenus, 183. 

Polybius, 12, 39, 120, 122, 128, 131, 
136, 155, 160, 181, 182, 272, 283. 

Polycarp, 133, 139, x1. 

Martyrdom of, 160. 

Present tense, 73. 

Principalities, 88, 259. 

Probst, 303. 

“* Proclivi scriptioni,” etc., xlv. 

“* Prophesy,” 10, I17. 

Pythagoreans, 42, 141, 288. 


Quintilian, 18. 
Quotations from O.T., 110, 157. 


Rabbinic views, 42, 60, 142, I5I, 
182, 210. 

Ramsay, Prof., 159, xlviii. 

Rashi, 113. 

Reading, the more difficult, xlv. 

Reconciliation of things in heaven, 
222. 

Reiche, 114, 172, 290, 292, viii. 

Reiske, 217. 

Renan, xvi. 

Reuss, li, lviii. 

** Right hand of God,” 32, 

Ritschl, 12, 223, 248, 260. 

Robertson (Arch.), xv, xvi. 

Rosetta Stone, 261. 

** Rudiments of the world,” 247. 


Sacrificial words, 227. 

Salmon, Dr., xxvi, xxvii, lii, lviii. 
Sanday and Headlam, 78, 174. 
Scaliger, 9. 


INDEX TO THE NOTES 


Schleiermacher, 214, 219, xiil. 

Scholefield, 233. 

Schottgen, 147, 151, 182, 251. 

Schott, xxvii. 

Schwegler, xiv. 

Scythians, 286. 

Self-love, 171. 

Seneca, 178. 

Seufert, xxvi. 

Seventy (LXX), the fallacious mode 
of reference to, 14. 

Seventy, the, termed apostles, 117. 

Shadow of things to come, 264. 

Shakespeare, II, 15. 

Simplicius, 288. 

Sophocles, 58, 59, 84, 97, 170, 260, 
268. 


Spitta, 248. 

Stobaeus, 165. 

Stoics, 144. 

Strabo, xlvii. 

Suidas, 36. 

Subject, change of, 257. 
Sumner, 276. 

Svoboda, xlix. 


Tacitus, 40, 289, xxxi. 

Targum, I12. 

Taylor, Dr. C., 270. 

Tenses, 73, 136, 144, 244, 279, 284. 

Tertullian, 117, 219, 220, 226, ii, 1. 

Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs, 
33> 42, 145, 182, 216, 267. 

Testamentum Salomonis, 148. 

Themistius, 273. 

Theophrastus, 203. 

Thrones, etc., 216. 

Thucydides, 128, 186, 224, 275, 305. 

Toup, 267. 

Trench, 104, 106, 133, 161, 249 

Trophimus, 61. 

‘¢ Truth as it is in Jesus,” 135. 

Tychicus, 190, 298. 


Ussher, vi. 
Usteri, xiii. 


Vail of the Court of Gentiles, 61. 
Valentinians, x1i, lvi. 

Virtue, threefold division, 153. 
Vitringa, 32. 


Weiss on ‘‘ in Christ,” 5. 
Westcott on Heb. cited, 12. 
on St. John cited, 13. 
Wetstein, 215, 262, 277, 286, 
288, al. 


II. GREEK WORDS 


Wieseler, 306. 
Winer, 26, 100, 103, 228, 229, 255. 


Xenophon, 35, 36, 45, 61, 83, 84, 


313 


129, 134, 145, 150, 179, 242, 243, 
273, 303, xlvii, lii. 


Zonaras, 266, 268. 


II. GREEK WORDS. 


E. stands for Ephesians, C. for Colossians. 


dyabwotrn, E. v. 9. 

dy.o, E. i. 2, ii. 19, 

&Oeos, E. ii. 12. 

aOupety, C, iii. 21. 

aloxpodoyla, C, iii. 8, 

alwy, E. ii. 2. 

adas, Cyiv.0: 

adndevev, E. iv. 15. 

annd, E. v. 243 C. ii. 5. 

Gvots, E. vi. 20. 

Gjiwios, He i. 45v. 275 Gs 1. 22. 

dva-, in compos., E. i. 10, iv. 23. 

dvaxawvoor, C. iil. 10. 

avakepadatodcba, E. i. 10. 

avaotpopn, E. iv. 22. 

aviixev, E. v. 43 C. iii. 18. 

dvravamAnpody, C. i. 24. 

avrambdoats, C. iii. 24. 

dvtt-, in compos., C. i. 24. 

avr rovrov, E. v. 31. 

amexdvecOa, C. ii. 15, iii. 9 

améxdvats, C. ii. 11. 

danAdoTpiwpévot, E. ii. 
CRi; 27. 

amdérns, E. vi. 53 C. ili. 22. 

dmobvicKkew amd, C, ii. 20. 

dmoxata\\dooev, E. ii. 16; C. i. 20, 
22h 

améxpudos, C. ii. 3. 

dtovtpwots, E. i. 7, 14, iv. 30; C. 
iy) TA. 

dméxpnots, C. ii. 22. 

dppaBarv, E. i. 14. 

CONG eile 21s Golalo, 11.9 10; 

dpxal, E, iii. 10, vi. 12; C. i. 16, il. 


12, iv. 18; 


15. 
dcedyela, E. iv. 19. 
dowrla, E. v. 18. 
dpedla, C. ii. 23. 

ddeots, E. i. 7. 

apn, E. iv. 16; C. ii. 19, 
ddbapola, E. vi. 24. 


Bdamricpa, Bamwriopuds,, C. ii. 12. 


BdpBapos, C. iii. 11. 

Brérewv, C. iv. 17. 

Bovrowa, E. i. 11. 

BpaBeverv, C. iii. 5 ; and see on ii. 18, 
Bpaous, C. ii. 15. 


yernbjva, E. iii. 7. 
ywaoKev, pregnant, E. ii. 19. 
yaots, C. li. 3. 


déew, C. iv. 3. 
Oevryparlfew, C. ii. 15, 
déxecOat, C. iv. II. 
bid Boros, E, iv. 27. 
dvaxovla, C. iv. 17. 
Oudvoa, E. ii. 3. 
dvdackanla, C. ii. 22. 
Olkaros, C. iv. I. 
Obyua, E. ii. 15; C. ii. 14, 
Soyparlfew, C. il. 20. 
Odéa, E. i. 17. 


éyerpe, E. v. 14. 

€dedoOpyokela, C, ii. 23. 

elye, Introd. iv; E. iii. 2, iv. 24. 

elk, C. iii, 18. 

elk, C. i. 15. 

elvat els, C, il. 22. 

elpnvotrovetv, E. i. 20. 

éxhéyerOat, E. i. 4. 

édaxiorérepos, E. iii. 8. 

éhéyxew, E. v. 11, 13. 

éuBareverv, C. ii. 18. 

év with dative, whether of the ‘‘ ele- 
ment, or a HADAB LA 7.15 VC A 

évépyea, E ob its 

&, C. iii. 11. 

éfovola, E. i. 21; Tod dépos, ii. 2; 
Tod oxérous, C. i. 13. 

éfovolar, E. iii. 10, vi. 123 C. i. 16, 
ri 

tw, ol Ew, C. iv. 5. 

él, with dative, E. ii. 10. 

éemuywaoKew, C. i. 6. 


314 


émlyvwots, C. i. 9. 

émexopnyev, C. ii. 19. 

éemixopnyla, E. iv. 16. 

érotkodometv, E, ii. 20. 

émoupdvios, E. i, 3, 20, ii. 6, iii. 10, 
vi. 12. 

épydgecOat, C. ili. 23. 

épyacta, E. iv. 19. 

épeOlfew, C. ill. 21. 

érowmacia, E. vi. 15. 

eVdpeoros, E. v. 10. 

evdoxetv, C. i. 19. 

evdoxla, E, i. 5) 9 

eUNoyntos, E. 1. 3. 

ebrparrehia, E. v. 4. 

evxapiorety, E. i. 16. 

evxapioria, aye Wal en Corie 7eukVis 

evxapioros, C. ill. 15. 

€xOpds, C. i. 21. 


fw, E. iv. 18. 
mrukla, E. iv. 13. 


bé\ew, E. i. 11. 
bédwv év, C. ii. 18. 
Georns, C. ii. 9. 
Ouyydvew, C. ii, 21. 
Opiap,Bevev, C. ii. 15. 
Ouvola, E. v. 2. 


wa, E. ii. 93; C. i. 193 position, E. 
iii. 18. 

lodrns, C. iv. I. 

loxvs, E. i. 19. 


kad’ buds, E. i. 15. 

kal, special use of, E. i. 21, v. 18; C. 
il. I, 5- 

kapos, E. i, 10. 

kard, E. iv. 24. 

karaBpaBeve, Cyiser8: 

KaTapric}.0s, E. iv.) 12: 

xaroxely, E. iii. 17; C. i. 19. 

keveuBareverv, ?C. ii. 18. 

kAnpovoula, Cini24% 

kAfjpos, C. i. 2. 

k\npobv, E. i. II. 

koulfecOa, E. vi. 8. 

Koopoxpdrwp, E. vi. 12. 

xparety, C. ii. 19. 

kpdtos, E. i. 19. 

xplvewv, C. ii, 16. 

xrifew, E. ii. 10; C. a 40. 

rious, C. i. 15. 


Aéyer, E. iv. 8, v. 14. 


INDEX TO THE NOTES 


Nbyov exe, C. ii. 23. 

durpodv, see on E. i. 6. 

paxpoOuula, E. iv. 2; C. i. 
12. 

papripoua, with infin., E. iv. 17. 

paravorns, E. iv. 17. 

wéyas, not = English “great,” E, v. 32. 

pév, absent, E. v. 8 

Hépos, év péper, C. ii. 16. 

péoos, év péoou, C. ii. 14. 

peodbroxov, FE. ii. 14. 

unde, uajre, E. Wi 27s 

Houpy, C. iil. 13. 

Muar iptov, E. i. 9, ili. 3).4, 9) Ve 32, 
Vin TO); (Cale 20.927 01len 2: 


II, ii 


vexpos, E. ii. I. 
éévos, with gen., E. ii. 12. 


olkeios, E. ii. 19. 

olxodouy, E. ii. 21. 

olkovoula, E. i. 10; Introd. xvii. 

dvoua, E. i. 21. 

dvopdgewv, E, i. 21, ili. 15. 

dotérns, E. v. 24. 

doris, E. iii. 13, iv. 19, vi. 13 C. iv. 
rire 

otrws, E. v. 28. 

éPOarpodovrcla, E. vi. 63 C. iii. 22. 


mdOos, C. ili. 5. 
mavoupyla, E. iv. 14. 
mapaxadely, E, iv. I, vi. 22. 
maparoylferbat, C. il. 4. 
mapdmrwua, E. i. 7, li. 13 C. ii. 13. 
mapacTioat, E. v. 273 C. i. 22. 
mapnyopla, C. iv. II. 
mapo.xos, E. ii. 19. 
mapopyiopos, E. vi. 4. 
mappnola, E. iii, 12, vi. 
I 
Ce adie: E. vi. 20. 
was, without article, E. ii. 21, iii. 15, 
mwarnp, E. iv. 17. . 
marpid, E. iii. 15. 
mepl and b7ép, E. vi. 18. 
memhnpopopnpevor, C. iv. 12. 
mepirarew ev, E. ii, 23 C. in. 2 
mepurolyots, E. i. 14. 
mOavoroyla, C. ii. 4 
mixpalverOat, C. iti. 19. 
mors év, E. i. I. 
mdeovetla, E. iv. 19, v. 33 C. iii. 5. 
mAnpovmevos, E. i, I 3 
wAnpodv Tov Abyor, C 


19)3 Ch 


Mi aes 


III. LATIN WORDS 315 


twAnpodaba év, E. v. 183; C. il. Io. 

mAnpopopetv, C. iv. 12. 

wnpogopla, C. ii. 2. 

7ARpwpa, E. i. 10, 23, li. 19, iv. 13; 
Car roM 9: 

tAnopovn, C. ii. 23. 

mdovotos, C, iii. 16. 

t)ovros, E.i. 73 C. i. 27 ; Introd. xxi. 

mvevparikos, E. i, 3, vi. 12. 

movetv, E. iii. 11. 

movety wpdbeot, E, iii. 12. 

tolnua, E. ii. 10. 

mouunv, E. iv. 11. 

modrela, E. ii. 12. 

moAvroikivos, E. ili. 10. 

mpecBevw év ddvcet, E. vi. 20; Introd. 
xxii, 

mpoeroruagew, E. ii. 10. 

mpos, C. ii. 23. 

mpos 6, E. iii. 4. 

mpooaywyn, E. ii. 18, iii, 12. 

mpocevxy and dénous, E. vi. 18. 

mpoopopa, E. v. 2. 

mpocwmodnyla, E. vi. 9; C. ili. 25. 

mowrevev, C. i. 18, 

mparos, E. vi. 2. 

mpwréroxos, C. i. 15, 18, 

mwpwots, E. iv. 18. 


phya, E. v. 26. 
pugoby, E. iii. 18. 


campés, E. iv. 29. 

codla, E. i. 8, 17; C. i. 9, il. 3. 
om\ayxva, C, ili. 12. 
omovddgey, E. iv. 3. 

orepéwua, C, il. 5. 

oTjvat, E. Vi. UX, 135 C. 1v. 12. 
oroxeia, C. ii. 8. 

ovAaywyeiv, C. ii. 8. 
suppiBagev, E. iv. 16. 


cuupvorhs, Introd. xi. 
cuvvarxpddwros, C. iv. 10. 
cuvvapponroyeiv, E. iv. 16. 
ouvdecuos, E. iv. 163 C. il. 19. 
ouvepyos, C. iv. II. 

ctveots, C. i. 9. 

ctByiter, (Cp hy PAs iy Taig 3 
cwuaTiKds, C. il. 9. 


raéis, C. ii. 5. 

ratewvoppoctvn, E. iv. 2. 

ré, E. ili. 18. 

Tédevos, C. i. 28, iv. 12. 

Ten, C. i. 23. 

tis, with particip. and article, C. ii. 8 


tuvos, E. v. 19; C. iil. 16. 
UmevavTtos, C. il. 14. 

brép and mrepl, E. vi. 18. 

Umep-, compounds with, E. iii. 20. 
vropovn, C. i. Il. 


pavepody, C. iv. 4. 

gpavepodoba, E. v. 13; C. i. 26, ili. 4 
pirooopla, C. ii. 8. 

ppaypyos, E. ii. 14. 

ppovnots, E. i. 8. 

pvoe, E. ii. 3. 


xdpis, E. i. 6; C. ili. 16, iv. 6, ad. 
xapirodv, E. i. 6. 

xerpoypaporv, C. il. 14. 

xpela, E. iv. 29. 

xwpls, E. ii. 12. 


Waruos, E. v. 19; C. iii. 16. 
WevderOa, C. iii. 9. 

Wevdos, E. iv. 25. 

ux, ék puxijs, E. vi. 6; C, iii. 23. 


64, E. v. 19; C. iii. 16, 


III. LATIN Worps. 


acdificatoriae, 230. 
arbitrium, 280. 

causa exemplarts, 214. 
chirographum, 251. 
Jumus, 147. 


interpolare, ii. 
luxuria, 161. 
morologus, 149. 
satisfactoriae, 230. 
urbanitas, 149 




















Abbott, T. Ke 
Epistles to the Ephesians 
and Colossians. 


Ve36 ' 


Ss 
hae 


“ee 
S, ns 
eter pene 


7 oat 
mem 5 : E ~ 
os i e Sips 
‘ : Sara se Sa 

eit Tees 


“ » 
Meee 
hearth 


oN 
a7 


my 
roe oad 

ire cries 
: 4 





Sevens hey 
0 ee “a 


