/ 


r 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


■I 


http://www.archive.org/details/criticalexegetic01grayuoftl 


Uto  Cestamcnts 


UNDER    THE    EDITORSHIP    OF 


The  Rev.  CHARLES  AUGUSTUS  BRIGGS,  D.D. 

Professor  of  Theological  Ettcyclopedia  and  Symbolics 
Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York 


The  Rev.   SAMUEL  ROLLES  DRIVER,  D.D. 

Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Oxford 

The  Rev.  ALFRED  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 

Late  Master  of  University  College,  Durham 


The  International 

Critical  Commentary 

On  the  Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments 


EDITORS'    PREFACE 


THERE  are  now  before  the  public  many  Commentaries, 
written  by  British  and  American  divines,  of  a  popular 
or  homiletical  character.  The  Cambridge  Bible  for 
Schools,  the  Handbooks  for  Bible  Classes  and  Private  Students, 
The  Speaker's  Comme7itary,  The  Popular  Commentary  (Schaff), 
The  Expositor's  Bible,  and  other  similar  series,  have  their 
special  place  and  importance.  But  they  do  not  enter  into  the 
field  of  Critical  Biblical  scholarship  occupied  by  such  series  of 
Commentaries  as  the  Kurzgefasstes  exegetisches  Handbuch  zum 
A.  T  ;  De  Wette's  Kurzgefasstes  exegetisches  Handbuch  zum 
N.  T. ;  Meyer's  Kritisch-exegetischer  Xom?nentar;  Keil  and 
Delitzsch's  Biblischer  Commentar  iXber  das  A.  T. ;  Lange's 
Theologisch-homiletisches  Bibelwerk ;  Nowack's  Handkommentar 
zum  A.  T.  ;  Holtzmann's  Handkommentar  zufn  N.  T  Several 
of  these  have  been  translated,  edited,  and  in  some  cases  enlarged 
and  adapted,  for  the  English-speaking  public  ;  others  are  in 
process  of  translation.  But  no  corresponding  series  by  British 
or  American  divines  has  hitherto  been  produced.  The  way  has 
been  prepared  by  special  Commentaries  by  Cheyne,  EUicott, 
Kalisch,  Lightfoot,  Perowne,  Westcott,  and  others;  and  the 
time  has  come,  in  the  judgment  of  the  projectors  of  this  enter- 
prise, when  it  is  practicable  to  combine  British  and  American 
scholars  in  the  production  of  a  critical,  comprehensive 
Commentary  that  will  be  abreast  of  modern  biblical  scholarship, 
and  in  a  measure  lead  its  van. 


The  International  Critical  Commentar 


Messrs.  Charles  Scribner's  Sons  of  New  York,  and  Messrs. 
T.  &  T.  Clark  of  Edinburgh,  propose  to  publish  such  a  series 
of  Commentaries  on  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  under  the 
editorship  of  Prof.  C.  A.  Briggs,  D.D.,  D.Litt.,  in  America,  and 
of  Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.,  D.Litt.,  for  the  Old  Testament,  and 
the  Rev.  Alfred  Plummer,  D.D.,  for  the  New  Testament,  in 
Great  Britain. 

The  Commentaries  will  be  international  and  inter-confessional, 
and  will  be  free  from  polemical  and  ecclesiastical  bias.  They 
will  be  based  upon  a  thorough  critical  study  of  the  original  texts 
of  the  Bible,  and  upon  critical  methods  of  interpretation.  They 
are  designed  chiefly  for  students  and  clergymen,  and  will  be 
written  in  a  compact  style.  Each  book  will  be  preceded  by  an 
Introduction,  stating  the  results  of  criticism  upon  it,  and  discuss- 
ing impartially  the  questions  still  remaining  open.  The  details 
of  criticism  will  appear  in  their  proper  place  in  the  body  of  the 
Commentary.  Each  section  of  the  Text  will  be  introduced 
with  a  paraphrase,  or  summary  of  contents.  Technical  details 
of  textual  and  philological  criticism  will,  as  a  rule,  be  kept 
distinct  from  matter  of  a  more  general  character ;  and  in  the 
Old  Testament  the  exegetical  notes  will  be  arranged,  as  far  as 
possible,  so  as  to  be  serviceable  to  students  not  acquainted  with 
Hebrew.  The  History  of  Interpretation  of  the  Books  will  be 
dealt  with,  when  necessary,  in  the  Intfroductions,  with  critical 
notices  of  the  most  important  literature  of  the  subject.  Historical 
and  Archaeological  questions,  as  well  as  questions  of  Biblical 
Theology,  are  included  in  the  plan  of  the  Commentaries,  but 
not  Practical  or  Homiletical  Exegesis.  The  Volumes  will  con- 
stitute a  uniform  series. 


The  International  Critical  Commentary 


ARRANGEMENT   OF   VOLUMES   AND   AUTHORS 

THE  OLD  TESTAMENT 

GENESIS.  The  Rev.  JOHN  Skinner,  D.D.,  Principal  and  Professor  of 
Old  Testament  Language  and  Literature,  College  of  Presbyterian  Church 
of  England,  Cambridge,  England.  [Now  Ready. 

eXODUS.  The  Rev.  A.  R.  S.  KENNEDY,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew, 
University  of  Edinburgh. 

LEVITICUS.    J.  F.  Stenning,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Wadham  College,  Oxford. 

NUMBERS.  The  Rev.  G.  Buchanan  Gray,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew, 
MansfieVi  College,  Oxford-  [JVow  Ready. 

DEUTERONOMY.  The  Rev.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.,  D.Litt.,  Regius  Pro- 
fessor of  Hebrew,  Oxford.  \Now  Ready. 

JOSHUA.  The  Rev.  George  Adam  Smith,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Principal  of  the 
University  of  Aberdeen. 

JUDGES.  The  Rev.  George  Moore,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Theol- 
ogy, Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Mass.  {Norw  Ready. 

SAMUEL.  The  Rev.  H.  P.  Smith,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Old  Testament 
Literature  and  History  of  Religion,  Meadville,  Pa.  \Now  Ready, 

KINGS.  The  Rev.  Francis  Brown,  D.D.,  D.Litt,  LL.D.,  President 
and  Professor  of  Hebrew  and  Cognate  Languages,  Union  Theological 
Seminary,  New  York  City. 

CHRONICLES.  The  Rev.  Edward  L.  Curtis,  D.D.,  Professor  of 
Hebrew,  Yale  University,  New  Haven,  Conn.  [Now  Ready, 

EZRA  AND  NEHEMIAH.  The  Rev.  L.  W.  Batten,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  Pro- 
fessor of  Old  Testament  Literature,  General  Theological  Seminary,  New 
York  City.  ^ 

PSALMS.  The  Rev.  Chas.  A.  Briggs,  D.D.,  D.Litt.,  Graduafe  Fro- 
fessor  of  Theological  Encyclopaedia  and  Symbolics,  Union  Theological 
Seminary,  New  York.  [2  vols.    Now  Ready 

PROVERBS.  The  Rev.  C.  H.  Toy,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew. 
Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Mass.  [Now  Ready, 

JOB.  The  Rev.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.,  D.Litt.  Regius  Professor  of  He- 
brew. Oxford. 


The   International   Critical   Commentary 


ISAIAH.  Chaps.  I-XXVII.  The  Rev.  G.  Buchanan  Gray,  D.D.,  Pro- 
fessor of  Hebrew,  Mansfield  College,  Oxford.  [^IVcrtU  Ready. 

ISAIAH.  Chaps.  XXVIII-LXVI.  The  Rev.  A.  S.  Peake,  M.A.,  D.D., 
Dean  of  the  Theological  Faculty  of  the  Victoria  University  and  Professor  of 
Biblical  Exegesis  in  the  University  of  Manchester,  England. 

JEREMIAH.  The  Rev.  A.  F.  Kirkpatrick,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Ely,  sometime 
Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Cambridge,  England. 

EZEKIEL.  The  Rev.  G.  A.  Cooke,  M.A.,  Oriel  Professor  of  the  Interpre- 
tation of  Holy  Scripture,  University  of  Oxford,  and  the  Rev.  Charles  F. 
BuRNEY,  D.Litt.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  in  Hebrew,  St.  John's  College, 
Oxford. 

DANIEL.  The  Rev.  John  P.  Peters,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  sometime  Professor 
of  Hebrew,  P.  E.  Divinity  School,  Philadelphia,  now  Rector  of  St.  Michael's 
Church,  New  York  City. 

AMOS  AND  HOSEA.  W.  R.  Harper,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.,  sometime  President 
of  the  University  of  Chicago,  Illinois.  \N(yw  Ready. 

MICAH,  ZEPHANIAH,  NAHUM.   HABAKKUK.  OBADIAH.  AND  JOEL. 

Prof.  John  P.  Smith,  University  of  Chicago;  W.  Hayes  Ward,  D.D.,  LL.D., 
Editor  of  The  Independent,  New  York;  Prof.  Julius  A.  Bewer,  Union 
Theological  Seminary,  New  York.  \N(yw  Ready, 

ZECHARIAH  TO  JONAH.  Prof.  H.  G.  MITCHELL,  D.D.,  Prof.  John  P. 
Smith  and  Prof.  J.  A.  Bewer.  {In  Press. 

ESTHER.  The  Rev.  L.  B.  Paton,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Hart- 
ford Theological  Seminary.  [Now  Ready. 

ECCLESIASTES.  Prof.  George  A.  Barton,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Bibli- 
cal Literature,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Pa.  [JVow  Ready. 

RUTH,   SONG  OF  SONGS  AND  LAMENTATIONS.    Rev. Charles A. 

Briggs,  D.D.,  D.Litt.,  Graduate  Professor  of  Theological  Encyclopaedia 
and  Symbolics,  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York. 


THE   NEW  TESTAMENT 

ST.  MATTHEW.    The  Rev.  WiLLOUGHBY  C.  Allen,  M.A.,   Fellow  and 
Lecturer  in  Theology  and  Hebrew,  Exeter  College,  Oxford.       \Now  Ready. 

ST    MARK.    Rev.  E.  P.  GouLD,  D.D.,  sometime  Professor  of  New  Testa- 
ment Literature,   P.  E.  Divinity  School,   Philadelphia.  \_N(m)  Ready. 

ST.  LUKE.    The    Rev.    Alfred   Plummer,   D.D.,    sometime  Master  of 
University  College,  Durham.  {.Njw  Ready. 


The  International  Critical  Commentary 


ST.  JOHN.  The  Very  Rev.  John  Henry  Bernard,  D.D.,  Dean  of  St. 
Patrick's  and  Lecturer  in  Divinity,  University  of  Dublin. 

HARMONY  OF  THE  GOSPELS.  The  Rev.  WiLLlAM  Sanday,  D.D., 
LL.D.,  Lady  Margaret  Professor  of  Divinity,  Oxford,  ana  the  Rev.  WiL- 
LOUGHBY  C.  Allen,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  in  Divinity  and  Hebrew, 
Exeter  College,  Oxford. 

ACTS.  The  Rev.  C.  H.  Turner,  D.D.,  Fellow  of  Magdalen  College, 
Oxford,  and  the  Rev.  H.  N.  Bate,  M.A.,  Examining  Chaplain  to  the 
Bishop  of  London. 

ROMANS.  The  Rev.  William  Sanday,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Lady  Margaret 
Professor  of  Divinity  and  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  and  the  Rev. 
A.  C.  Headlam,  M.A.,  D.D.,  Principal  of  King's  College,  London. 

\_Now  Ready. 

i.  CORINTHIANS.  The  Right  Rev.  Arch  Robertson,  D.D.,  LL.D,, 
Lord  Bishop  of  Exeter,  and  Rev.  Alfred  Plummer,  D.D.,  late  Master  of 
University  College,  Durham.  \Norw  Ready. 

II.  CORINTHIANS.  The  Rev.  Dawson  Walker,  D.D.,  Theological 
Tutor  in  the  University  of  Durham. 

GALATIANS.  The  Rev.  Ernest  D.  Burton.  D.D.,  Professor  of  New 
Testament  Literature,  University  of  Chicago. 

EPHESIANS  AND  COLOSSIANS.  The  Rev.  T.  K.  Abbott,  B.D., 
D.Litt.,  sometime  Professor  of  Biblical  Greek,  Trinity  College,  Dublin, 
now  Librarian  of  the  same.  {Now  Ready. 

PHILIPPIANS  AND  PHILEMON.  The  Rev.  Marvin  R  Vincent, 
D.D.,  Professor  of  Biblical  Literature,  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New 
York  City.  {Now  Ready. 

THESSALONIANS.  The  Rev.  James  E.  Frame,  M.A.,  Professor  of 
Biblical  Theology,  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York  City. 

{In  Press, 
THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  The  Rev.  Walter  Lock,  D.D.,  Warden 
of  Keble  College  and  Professor  of  Exegesis,  Oxford. 

HEBREWS.  The  Rev.  James  Moffatt,  D.D.,  Minister  United  Free 
Church,  Broughty  Ferry,  Scotland. 

ST.  JAMES.  The  Rev.  James  H.  Ropes,  D.D.,  Bussey  Professor  of  New 
Testament  Criticism  in  Harvard  University. 

PETER  AND  JUDE.  The  Rev.  CHARLES  BiGG,  D.D.,  sometime  Regius 
Professor  of  Ecclesiastical  History  and  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford. 

{Now  Ready. 

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN.  The  Rev.  E.  A.  Brooke,  B.D.,  Fellow 
and  Divinity  Lecturer  in  King's  College,  Cambridge. 

REVELATION.    The  Rev.  Robert  H.  Charles,  M.A.,  D.D.,  sometime 

Professor  of  Biblical  Greek  in  the  University  of  Dublin. 


[I 


THE    BOOK   OF   ISAIAH 

GEORGE  BUCHANAN  GRAY 
VOL.  I 


\ 


i 


f}' 


''<'^. 


V.  __ 


^/  ^ 


% 


i 


H 


5  DEPARTMENTAL 


AL   Critical   Commentary 


A 

CRITICAL    AND    EXEGETICAL 
COMMENTARY 


ON 


THE   BOOK  OF  ISAIAH 


I-XXXIX 

BY 

GEORGE  BUCHANAN  GRAY,  D.D.,  D.Litt. 

fROFESSUR  OF    HEBREW   AND   OLD   TESTAMENT   EXEGESIS 
IN    MANSFIELD  COLLEGE,   OXFORD 


XL-LXVI 

BY 

ARTHUR  S.  PEAKE,  D.D. 

RYLANDS    PROFESSOR   OF    BIBLICAL   EXEGESIS 
IN   THE   UNIVERSITY  OF   MANCHESTER 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES 
VOL.  I 
INTRODUCTION,  AND  COMMENTARY  ON  I-XXVII  t 


NEV^  YORK 

CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

1912 


1 


Lop 


.2, 


^ 


^i 


i      i 


%• 


7%e  Rights  of  Translation  and  Reproduction  are  Reserved 


I 


PREFACE. 


This  Commentary  should  have  been  written  by  another ; 
and  all  who  are  in  any  way  familiar  with  the  work  of  the 
late  Dr.  A.  B.  Davidson,  and  conscious  of  the  profound 
sympathy  and  penetrating  insight  that  he  always  brought 
to  the  interpretation  of  Scripture,  must  regret  that  he  had 
made  no  substantial  progress  with  the  Commentary,  which 
the  editors  of  this  series  had  entrusted  to  him,  at  the  time 
when  Christian  scholarship  and  Christian  life  were  left  the 
poorer  by  his  death. 

After  Dr.  Davidson's  death,  the  editors,  with  a  view  to 
the  speedier  completion  of  this  series,  decided  to  make  the 
Commentary  on  Isaiah  the  work  of  two  writers;  and  at 
their  request  I  undertook  the  preparation  of  the  Com- 
mentary on  chs.  1-39.  For  the  present  volume  I  am, 
then,  entirely  responsible ;  and,  owing  to  the  unequal  size 
of  the  two  main  parts  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  the  con- 
clusion of  my  work  must  be  held  over  for  the  second 
volume,  which  will  also  contain  Dr.  Peake's  Commentary 
on  chs.  40-66,  completing  the  work. 

For  the  general  Introduction  to  the  entire  book  I  am 
also  solely  responsible,  though  Dr.  Peake,  who  has  read 
it,  is  in  general  agreement  with  it,  and  in  particutar  with 
such  references  as  it  contains  to  chs.  40-66.  The  more 
special  Introduction  to  those  chapters  will  be  written  by 
him,  and  appear  in  vol.  ii.  The  second  volume  will  also 
contain  full  Indexes  to  the  whole  work. 

I  cannot  claim,  as  1  could  in  writing  my  Preface  to 


Vi  PREFACE 


% 


the  Commentary  on  Numbers,  in  this  series,  that  the  lack 
of  recent  Commentaries  is  in  itself  sufficient  justification 
for  the  publication  of  a  new  one.  Once  again  I  have 
been  able  to  avail  myself  of  the  learning  of  Dillmann, 
with  on  this  occasion  the  additions  or  corrections  of 
Kittel ;  but  as  a  commentator  on  Isaiah,  Dillmann  stands 
far  less  alone.  Like  all  who  have  devoted  themselves  to 
the  study  of  Isaiah  since  1892,  I  am  profoundly  indebted 
to  the  Commentary  of  Bernhard  Duhm,  as  my  frequent 
references  to  him  may  be  left  to  show ;  frequently  agree- 
ing with  him,  I  have  also  frequently  differed  from  him ; 
but  often  when  I  have  differed,  I  have  differed  because 
I  first  have  learnt  from  him.  In  some  respects  Duhm 
seems  to  me  to  have  led  those  astray  who  have  followed 
him  too  closely,  and  particularly  by  his  line-  and  strophe- 
divisions;  but  that  is  only  a  small  offset  to  the  really 
great  service  which  he  has  rendered.  Marti  in  brief  com- 
pass has  found  it  possible  to  advance  frequently  beyond 
Duhm  ;  and  to  his  work  I  have  constantly  turned,  and 
seldom  unrewarded.  But  to  come  now  nearer  home. 
Two  names  of  Oxford  scholars  should  always  be  associ- 
ated with  the  study  of  Isaiah :  they  are  those  of  Robert 
Lowth  (Introduction,  §  44)  and  T.  K.  Cheyne.  The 
Commentary  of  the  latter  at  the  end  of  last  century  for 
long  stood  out  conspicuous,  in  the  general  dearth  of  good 
English  Commentaries  on  the  Old  Testament;  it  was 
itself  the  successor  of  earlier  and  valuable  works  on 
Isaiah,  and  it  has  been  succeeded  and,  in  some  measure 
superseded,  by  his  later  works,  especially  (though  even 
these  are  not  his  latest  discussions  of  Isaiah)  his  edition 
of  the  Hebrew  text  and  of  an  English  Translation  with 
notes  in  Haupt's  Sacred  Books  of  the  Old  Testament. 
But  the  English  student  is  also  happy  in  the  possession 
of  excellent  shorter  Commentaries  by  Skinner  {Cambridge 
Bible),  Whitehouse  {Century  Bible),  and  Wade  {West- 
minster Commentaries).  The  last  appeared  too  recently 
to  be  of  much  use  to  me  in  the  preparation  of  this  volume. 
Briefer  still,  but  admirable  also,  and  to  be  commended  in 


I 


PREFACE  vii 

particular  because,  as  in  Dr.  Skinner's,  the  text  is  printed 
in  poetical  form,  is  McFadyen's  Commentary  in  The  Bible 
for  Home  and  School.  Of  works  not  taking  the  form  of 
a  Commentary  it  must  suffice  to  refer  to  Driver's  Isaiah: 
His  Life  and  Times,  the  famous  volumes  in  the  Expositors 
Bible  by  the  distinguished  Principal  of  Aberdeen  Uni- 
versity, and  to  the  translations  in  poetical  form  by  Box 
(1908),  Glazebrook  {Studies  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  19 10), 
and  Kent  (in  the  Students^  Old  Testament :  The  Sermons, 
Epistles,  and  Apocalypses  of  Israel's  Prophets,  1910).  But 
my  purpose  here  is  not  to  compile  a  catalogue,  or  to  re- 
peat what  will  be  found  elsewhere  (pp.  xvi  fif.) ;  sufficient 
has  been  said  to  show  that  recent  works  on  Isaiah  are 
lacking  neither  in  quality  nor  in  quantity.  One  other 
work  in  French  may  be  referred  to;  I  have  found 
Condamin's  Livre  dlsate  (1905)  valuable  not  only  for  its 
intrinsic  merits,  but  because  it  is  based  on  a  different 
theory  of  rhythm,  and  it  frequently  criticises  the  work 
of  writers  with  whom,  in  general,  I  am  in  greater  agree- 
ment. 

I  have  made  no  attempt  to  record  opinions  with  any- 
thing approaching  the  fullness  of  reference  that  marks 
Harper's  Commentary  on  Amos  and  Hosea  in  this  series. 
Consideration  of  space  alone  forbade  it ;  two  volumes  for 
a  commentary  on  what,  after  all,  is  a  short  book  may  seem 
ample,  yet  they  are  but  little  when  compared  with  the 
1600  double-columned  folio  pages  of  Vitringa,  or  even  the 
i6cx)  smaller  pages  of  Gesenius.  But  I  have  endeavoured 
to  discharge  that  part  of  my  duty  which  consists  in  atten- 
tion to  the  history  of  exegesis  :  if  I  have  seldom  or  never 
referred  to  some  Commentaries  of  the  19th  century,  though 
they  were  excellent  in  their  day,  it  is  because  much  that 
was  said  in  them,  as  much  that  is  said  in  my  own,  has  an 
earlier  origin.  I  have  made  constant  use  of  Jerome's 
Commentary  as  a  good  example  of  patristic  scholarship 
and  exegesis,  and  as  the  source  of  so  much  that  served 
throughout  the  Middle  Ages,  and  of  not  a  little  that  is 
rightly  repeated  to-day.      Another   important  source  of 


Vin  PREFACE 

interpretation  is  to  be  found  in  the  work  of  the  mediaeval 
Jewish  scholars,  among  whom  I  have  chiefly  consulted 
Rashi,  Kimhi,  and  Ibn  Ezra.  I  have  made  more  occa- 
sional use  of,  or  at  least  more  limited  reference  to,  Calvin, 
Grotius,  Vitringa,  and  Koppe;  but  with  Gesenius'  great 
Commentary  (1821)  comes  a  fresh  and  plentiful  source 
of  valuable  information  and  suggestion ;  it  still  repays 
constant  use  of  it ;  Hitzig  and  Ewald,  among  those  who 
fill  up  the  time  before  the  recent  writers  to  whom  1  have 
referred,  also  made  characteristic  contributions  to  the 
interpretation  of  Isaiah. 

The  task  of  interpreting  the  Book  of  Isaiah  is  by  no 
means  complete;  and  this  is  largely  because  the  philo- 
logical basis  is  as  yet  far  from  secure.  This  cannot  be 
conveniently  discussed  in  briefer  commentaries ;  but  as  a 
contributor  to  the  present  series  I  have,  as  in  duty  bound, 
devoted  much  attention  to  it.  I  might  be  more  satisfied 
with  the  result  of  my  labours  if  I  could  feel  that  two  or 
three  important  fields  of  inquiry  were  really  worked  out. 
As  it  is,  I  must  at  least  indicate  here  what  appear  to 
me  certain  general  grounds  for  considering  much  of  the 
interpretation  tentative  and  uncertain. 

I.  The  text  is  frequently  corrupt,  frequently  at  least 
open  to  suspicion  of  corruption,  even  where  it  has  very 
generally  been  accepted  without  demur.  Ultimately  in 
many  passages  we  shall  always  be  driven  back  on  conjec- 
ture ;  but  I  am  persuaded  that  the  evidence  of  the  Greek 
version  has  not  been  as  yet  completely  and  accurately 
sifted  (cp.  Introduction,  §  4). 

Another  but  partially  worked  out  subject  that  bears 
very  considerably  on  the  soundness  of  the  text,  and  often 
in  consequence  on  interpretation,  is  that  of  metre  or 
rhythm.  I  came  to  the  study  of  Isaiah  still  sceptical  on 
the  subject  of  Hebrew  metre;  I  remain  sceptical  of  the 
finality  of  any  existing  theory  of  it ;  but  the  approxima- 
tion to  regularity  in  the  parallel  periods  is  too  striking 
to  be  neglected,  and  I  have  systematically  drawn  atten- 
tion to  it  in  the  small  print  notes  prefixed  to  the  trans- 


PREFACE  IX 

lations:  at  the  same  time  I  have  endeavoured  to  make 
the  irregularities,  which  in  the  present  text  at  all  events 
are  frequent,  as  obvious  as  the  approximations  to  regu- 
larity. At  the  present  stage  metrical  arguments  alone 
appear  to  me  a  precarious  textual  criterion,  but  as  con- 
firmatory of  other  considerations  they  often  have  value. 
I   discuss  the    matter   more    fully   in    the    Introduction 

(§§  44-57). 

2.  Uncertainty  of  another  kind  is  due  to  the  in- 
sufficiency of  our  historical  knowledge.  The  brilliant 
genius  of  Winckler,  in  particular,  has  started  many  theories 
of  ancient  history,  geography,  and  thought  which,  if  sound, 
would  largely  modify  the  interpretation  of  the  Book  of 
Isaiah,  as  well  as  most  of  our  conceptions  of  the  history 
of  Israel  and  the  influence  of  the  Jews  on  religion  and 
history.  I  have  not  found  myself  able  to  go  very  far  in 
adopting  these  theories,  but  the  discussions  of  Winckler 
and  others  serve  at  least  to  throw  into  relief  the  in- 
adequacy of  our  knowledge  of  the  facts  (as  distinguished 
from  theories  based  upon  them)  of  that  history  which 
must  form  the  background  to  the  Book  of  Isaiah. 

The  plan  of  the  present  series  provides  for  a  trans- 
lation of  the  poetical  parts  of  the  Old  Testament :  this 
has  called  for  a  translation  of  by  far  the  greater  part  of 
the  Book  of  Isaiah,  virtually,  indeed,  of  the  whole  of  it 
apart  from  chs.  36-39.  I  have  aimed  at  making  my 
translations  the  pivot  of  the  Commentary ;  apart  from  it 
they  have,  indeed,  little  claim  to  consideration ;  I  have 
deliberately,  where  necessary,  sacrificed  form  and  style,  in 
order  to  make  them  as  expressive  as  possible  of  what 
I  understand  the  Hebrew  text  to  mean,  but  also  of  the 
numerous  uncertainties  which  appear  to  me  at  present 
to  beset  the  text.  For  this  reason  I  have  introduced 
many  marks  of  interrogation;  and  as  additional  marks 
of  interrogation  I  would  suggest  that  the  single  inverted 
commas,  which  indicate  emendation,  should  be  regarded : 
few  emendations  are  certain,  though  many  enable  us  to 
approximate  more  closely  to  the  original  thought  of  the 


X  PREFACE 

writer  than  do  the  prevalent  conjectural  translations  of 
the  existing  Hebrew  text.  By  conjectural  translation 
I  mean  translations  that  rest  on  ancient  or  modern  guesses 
at  the  meaning  of  words  or  phrases,  and  either  lack  sup- 
port in  usage  and  etymology  altogether,  or  obtain  the 
semblance  of  such  support  only  by  means  of  improbable 
inferences  from  actual  usage  (see,  e.g.^  p.  458  top).  In 
some  cases,  if  any  translation  at  all  is  attempted,  there  is 
no  escape  from  guessing,  and  it  is  merely  a  question 
whether  the  guess  shall  take  the  form  of  conjectural 
emendation,  or  of  conjectural  translation.*  Where  the 
sense  seemed  to  me  hopelessly  obscure,  and  any  prevalent 
conjectural  rendering  or  reading  more  likely  to  conceal 
than  to  illumine  the  meaning  of  the  passage  as  a  whole, 
I  have  preferred  to  leave  words  or  lines  entirely  un- 
translated. 

1  would  draw  attention  here  to  what  I  have  discussed 
more  fully  in  the  Introduction :  the  line  divisions  of  the 
translations  are  determined  by  regard  for  parallelism  and 
with  disregard  of  rhythm  or  metre,  where  this  conflicts 
with  parallelism. 

In  general,  I  have  given  entire  in  the  translations  what 
appears  to  me  to  constitute  a  single  poem,  and  no  more ; 
occasionally,  for  particular  purposes,  I  have,  however, 
brought  together  in  translation  what  may  be  a  collection 
of  one  or  more  poems,  or  fragments,  rather  than  a  single 
poem  (see,  e.g.y  i^"^^  5^"^*).  The  small  print  in  the  transla- 
tions indicates  the  possibility  that  the  words  in  question 
are  intrusive ;  but  the  degree  of  uncertainty  so  indicated 
varies  greatly  ;  in  some  cases  it  is  very  slight. 

So  many  features  of  these  Commentaries  are  now 
familiar  that  they  call  for  no  special  explanation  here. 
But  to  one  detail  I  must  refer.     I  have  in  general  followed 

*  I  have  discussed  these  alternatives  in  an  essay  entitled  English  Versions 
and  the  Text  of  the  Old  Testament  (in  Mansfield  College  Essay s^  presented  to 
the  Reverend  A.  M.  Fairbaim,  D.D.^  London,  1909),  and  both  in  that 
Essay  and  in  Hastings'  Smaller  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  art.  Text,  Versions, 
and  Languages,  §  40,  I  have  given  illustrations  of  conjectural  translation  in 
the  EV.     See  also  S.  R.  Driver,  Expositor,  Jan.  1910,  p.  23. 


H 


PREFACE  Xi 

Swete's  text  of  the  Greek  version,  accepting  his  authority 
in  matters  of  accentuation,  etc.,  when  I  had  no  occasion 
to  question  it.  But  one  principle  of  accentuation  followed 
in  that  text  is  misleading  in  relation  to  many,  of  the  more 
or  less  minute,  points  of  philology.  I  refer  to  the  accen- 
tuation of  the  proper  names  and  of  transliterations  of 
Hebrew  words,  for  which  there  is  no  authority  in  the 
oldest  Greek  MSS.  In  Swete's  text  the  accentuation  of 
the  later  MSS  is  abandoned,  and  the  Greek  forms  in 
question  are  accentuated  in  accordance  with  the  accentua- 
tion of  the  vocalised  Hebrew  of  the  Massoretic  text.* 
Unfortunately,  owing  to  a  misunderstanding,  the  accentua- 
tion of  Swete's  text  has  been  allowed  to  stand  in  some  of 
the  transliterations  cited  in  this  Commentary;  it  was  in- 
tended that  all  such  words  should  have  been  consistently, 
as  they  are  frequently,  left  without  accent  as  in  Lagarde's 
edition,  and  in  the  names  cited  in  EBi.  For  the  same 
reason,  breathings  (which  in  Swete's  text  are  inserted  in 
accordance  with  the  existing  Massoretic  Hebrew  text,  so 
that  they  possess  no  authority  of  their  own)  are  omitted. 

Unless,  in  common  with  most  modern  writers  on 
Isaiah,  I  am  fundamentally  wrong  in  the  conclusion  that 
the  Book  of  Isaiah  is  not,  as  we  have  received  it,  the  work 
of  Isaiah,  it  must  be  one  of  the  main  tasks  of  a  com- 
mentator on  the  book  to  disengage  the  work  of  that 
prophet  from  the  accretions  which  it  has  received,  and  so 
to  recover,  as  I  have  attempted  to  do  in  the  last  division 
of  the  Introduction,  the  spirit  and  teaching  of  a  single 
personality  in  place  of  the  confused  and  composite  form 
that  must  present  itself,  if  we  attempt  to  treat  the  entire 
book  as  the  work  of  a  single  mind.  This,  I  say,  is  one 
of  the  tasks  of  the  commentator ;  another  is,  of  course,  to 
do  the  same  service  for  the  author  of  the  main  part  of 
chs.  40-55.  But  there  is  yet  another;  and  that  is  to  do 
justice  to  other  contributors  ,to  the  book,  and,  above  all, 
to  approach  with  sympathy  the  work  of,  perhaps,  many 
nameless  writers  that  now  forms  so  large  a  part  of  it. 

*  Swete,  Old  Testament  in  Greeks  i.  p.  xiii. 


XU  PREFACE 


m 


No  full  justice  can  be  done  to  a  book  which  is  a  great 
monument  of  Jewish  religion  after  the  Exile,  if  all  our 
attention  is  devoted  to  determining  whether  this  or  that 
passage  is  "  genuine,"  and  dismissing  it  as  not  "  genuine," 
if  it  is  not  the  work  of  Isaiah.  In  reference  to  works  such 
as  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  the  term  "  genuine "  is  indeed 
misleading.  None  of  these  nameless  writers  may  have 
possessed  the  religious  genius  of  Isaiah,  but  together  they 
represent  the  play  of  the  earlier  prophetic  teaching  on  the 
Jewish  Church.  In  religion,  as  elsewhere,  great  person- 
alities count  first,  and  it  is  the  privilege  of  a  student  of 
the  Book  of  Isaiah  to  come  face  to  face  with  one,  if  not 
two,  such  personalities :  but  the  religious  community  is 
the  necessary  outcome,  or  field  of  action,  of  the  great 
religious  personality  and  his  teaching,  and  the  student 
of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  has  but  half  entered  into  his  inherit- 
ance, if  he  communes  with  Isaiah  and  the  great  exilic 
prophet,  but  fails  to  feel  the  life  of  that  post-exilic 
religious  community  which  not  only  preserved  for  them- 
selves and  for  us  the  words  of  the  earlier  prophets,  but 
preserved  them  in  books  which  were  also  made  to  breathe 
the  hopes  and  aspirations  that  sustained  the  Jews  through 
centuries  of  isolation,  oppression,  and  temptation. 

I  cannot  bring  this  Preface  to  a  close  without  acknow- 
ledging my  gratitude  to  Dr.  Driver  for  the  help  which 
I  have  again  received  from  his  reading  of  my  proofs,  and 
the  numerous  suggestions  which  he  has  made  with  regard 
to  them.  These  have  withheld  me,  at  times  at  least,  from 
unsafe  places,  and  they  have  enabled  me  to  enrich  my 
Commentary ;  my  only  regret  is  that,  without  more 
extensive  alteration  of  the  printed  sheets  than  seemed 
reasonable,  I  could  not  enrich  it  still  more  from  the  same 
source. 

G.  BUCHANAN   GRAY. 

December  191 1. 


CONTENTS. 


XXlll 

xxiii 

XXV 

xxix 
xxxii 


FAGH 

Principal  Abbreviations  employed,        .  .  •  .       xv 

Addenda  and  Corrigenda,  . 

Introduction, 

§§    1-3.  Title  and  Place  in  the  Canon, 
§       4.  Text  and  Versions, 

§§    5-7"  The  Book  of  Isaiah  a  post-exilic  Compilation, 
§§  8-40.  Origin  and  History  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah, 

'(i)  External  Evidence,  ....     xxxii 

(2)  The  Greek  Version  and  the  Prophetic  Canon,        .    xxxix 

(3)  The  testimony  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  to  itself,         .       xlv 

(4)  Prophetic  teaching  and  Prophetic  literature,  .        Hi! 

(5)  Tentative  synthesis  from  the  preceding  evidence,         Iv 

Kteria  for  distinguishing  the  words  of  Isaiah  from  the 
additions  of  later  writers,        ....       Ivii 

§§  44-57*  The  poetic  forms  of  the  Prophetic  literature,  and  of  the 

Book  of  Isaiah  in  particular,  .  .  .  .        lix 

§§  58-76.  Isaiah  in  relation  to  the  political  and  social  conditions 

of  his  age,       ......    Ixviii 

§§  77-89.  Isaiah  as  Prophet  and  Teacher,  ....     Ixxxi 

Chronological  Table,        .•••«.    xcvii 

Commentary,  .......  i 

Map  I.     Egypt,  Syria  and  Assyria       .  .  .  To  face  title-page 

,,     2.     Moab  and  part  of  Judah,  to  illustrate  the  Commentary  on 

Is  io"-*»  15.  16,  .  .  .  To  face  page  273 

xiii 


■^ 


PRINCIPAL  ABBREVIATIONS  EMPLOYED, 


I.  Texts  and  Versions. 


Aq. 
AV. 
EV. 
MT 


OT. 
RV. 


M  *       •       • 

w>    .    . 

!L  .       .       . 

S   .       .       . 

Symm.     . 

E   .        .        . 

Theod.    . 

H  .       .       . 

Aquila  (p.  xxvi). 

Authorised  Version. 

English  Version. 

The  Massoretic  Text  {t.g.  the  vocalised  text  of  the 
Hebrew  Bible).  Variants  in  the  Hebrew  codices 
have  been  cited  from  De  Rossi,  Variae  Lectiones 
Vet.  Test.y  vol  iii.,  or  R.  Kittel,  Biblia  Hebraica. 

Old  Testament. 

Revised  Version. 

The  Greek  (LXX)  Version  of  the  Old  Testament 
(ed.  Swete,  Cambridge,  1887-1894).  The  readings 
of  the  codices  are,  when  necessary,  distinguished 
thus: — (K^  ©^  (Alexandrian,  Vatican,  etc.).  For 
the  cursives,  reference  has  been  made  to  Vet,  Test. 
Graece^  cum  variis  lectionibus^  ed.  Holmes,  Oxon. 
1798,  which  is  cited  as  HP  followed  by  a  numeral. 

Jewish  recension  of  the  Hebrew  (unvocalised)  text, 
i.e.  the  consonants  of  the  ordinary  Hebrew  MSS 
and  printed  Bibles. 

The  consonants  of  the  traditional  Hebrew  Text  (J^) 
irrespective  of  the  present  word  divisions  and  after 
the  removal  of  the  vowel  consonants  :  see  p.  xxv. 

Old  Latin  version  of  ffi  :  see  p.  xxix  n.  * 

The  Syriac  Version  (Peshitto). 

Symmachus  (p.  xxvi). 

The  Jewish  Aramaic  Version  or  Targum  (p.  xxvi). 

Theodotion  (p.  xxvi). 

Vulgate. 


XVI 


PRINCIPAL  ABBREVIATIONS   EMPLOYED 


2.  Author's  Names  and  Books. 


[See  also  the  literature  cited  at  the  beginning  of  several  sections  of  the 
Commentary ;  the  works  thus  given  are,  within  the  section,  often  cited  by 
the  author's  name  only.] 


AJSL 

ATAO 
Baud. 

BDB 


Box,  G.  E.      . 
Breasted,  J.  H. 


Bredenkamp,  C.  J.  . 
Che[yne],  T.  K.       . 


CIS  ,  ,  , 
Cond[amin],  A.  . 
COT      . 


Dav[idson],  A.  B.    . 
DB         .        ,        , 


Del[itzsch,  Franz]    . 
Del. 


Di[llmann,  A.] 
Dr[iver,  S.  R.] 


American  Journal  of  Semitic  Languages  and  Litera- 
ture. 

See  Jeremias. 

W.  W.  von  Baudissin,  Einleitung  in  die  Biicher  des 
Alien  Testaments,  1901. 

A  Hebrew  and  English  Lexicon  of  the  Old  Testament 
based  on  the  Lexicon  and  Thesaurus  of  Gesenius^ 
by  F.  Brown,  C.  A.  Briggs,  and  S.  R.  Driver, 
Oxford,  1906. 

The  Book  of  Isaiah,  1908. 

{\)  A  History  of  Egypt,  1906; 

(2)  Ancient  Records  of  Egypt,  1906  (a  collection  of 
Egyptian  historical  texts,  transliterated,  translated, 
and  annotated). 

Der  Prophet  Jesaja  erlailtert,  1886- 1887. 

/*/=  The  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,  ed.  5,  1889 ; 

Introd=  Introduction  to  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  1895  ; 

SBOT,  see  SBOT  below. 

Corpus  Inscriptionum  Semiticarum,  Paris,  1881  ff". 

Le  Livre  d^Isaie,  1905. 

The  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  and  the  OT.  ',  a.  transla- 
tion (London,  1885),  by  O.  C.  Whitehouse,  of  the 
second  edition  of  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  alte 
Testament  (abbreviated  KAT),  by  Eb.  Schrader. 
References  are  given  to  the  pages  of  the  2nd 
German  edition  which  are  marked  in  the  margin 
of  the  translation. 

A  third  edition  of  the  German  work  i^KAT^)  has 
been  edited  (and  indeed  entirely  rewritten)  by  H. 
Zimmern  and  H.  Winckler  (1903). 

Hebrew  Syntax  (Edin.  1894). 

Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  and  in  particular  A  Diction- 
ary of  the  Bible,  edited  by  James  Hastings  (Edin. 
1898-1902). 

Biblical  Commentary  on  the  Prophecies  of  Isaiah 
(translated  from  the  4th  edition,  1889),  Edin.  1890. 

In  reference  to  Assyrian  matters  stands  for  Friedrich 
Delitzsch  (especially  Assyrisches  Handworterbuch, 
1896). 

Per  Prophet  Jesaja,  1890. 

{\)  A  Treatise  on  the  Use  of  the  Tenses  in  Hebrew 
(ed.  3,  Oxford,  1892). 

(2)  An   Introduction  to  the    Literature   of  the   OT 


PRINCIPAL  ABBREVIATIONS   EMPLOYED 


XVll 


Dupim,  B.]     . 
EBi, 

Eich[horn,  J.  G.  L.] 

Ew[ald,  H.]    . 
Exp. 

Ges[enius,  W.] 
Ges-B.    . 


Giesebrecht,  Fried. . 
O— Iv.       •        •        • 

Gressmann,  H. 

Hal[6vy,  I.]    . 

Hackmann,  H.         • 
Hitz[ig,  F.]     . 
Houb[igant,  C.  F.]  . 


HPN      . 


•         • 


Ibn  Ezra,  Abraham 

(tii67) 
JBLit.  . 
Jer[ome](t420) 


•         • 


Jeremias,  A. 


/PA 
JThS 
KAT 
KB 


Kennett,  R.     . 

VOL.  I. — b 


(abbreviated  LOT),  cited  according  to  the  pagina- 
tion of  ed.  8  (Edin.  1909),  which  is  also  that  of 
editions  6  and  7. 

Das  Buchjesaiay  1892  (ed.  2,  1902). 

Encyclopaedia  Biblica,  edited  by  T.  K.  Cheyne  and 
J.  S.  Black,  1 899- 1 903. 

(1)  Einleitung  in  das  Alte  Testament,  ed.  2,  1 787; 

(2)  Die  Hebrdischen  Propheten,  1816-1819. 

Die  Propheten  des  Alien  Bundes,  ed.  2,  1867,  1868. 

The  Expositor. 

Der  Prophet  Jesaja,  1821. 

Wilhelm  Gesenius'  Hebrdisches  und  Aramaisckes 
Handw'&rterbuch  ilber  das  Alte  Testament  .  .  . 
bearbeitet  von  Frants  Buhl,  19 10. 

Beitrdge  zur  Jesaiakritik,  1890. 

Gesenius'  Hebrew  Grammar,  as  edited  and  enlarged 
by  the  late  E.  Kautzsch  .  .  .  second  English 
edition,  revised  in  cucordance  with  the  twenty- 
eighth  German  edition  {igog),  by  A.  Cowley, 
1910. 

Der  Ursprung  der  israelitisch-jiidischen  Eschatologie, 

1905. 
Le  Livre  (Tlsaie  (in  course  of  publication  in  Revue 

Semitique :  carried  down  to  ch.  xxii.,  July  191 1). 
Die  Zukunftserwartung  des  fesaia,  1893. 
Der  Prophet  /esaja,  1833. 
Biblia  Hebraica  cum  notis  criticis  et  versione  latina, 

t.  IV,  Prophetae  posteriores,  Paris,  1753. 
Studies  in  Hebrew  Proper  Names,  by  G.  Buchanan 

Gray,  1896. 
Hebrew  Commentary  on  Isaiah  in   Buxtorf's  Biblia 

Rabbinica. 
Journal  of  Biblical  Literature  (Mass.,  U.S.A.). 
Commentariorum   in  Isaiam  libri  octo  et  decem,  in 

Migne's  Patrologia  Latina,  vol.  24. 

(1)  ATAO  —  Das  Alte  Testament  im  Lie hte  des  alien 
Orients  (ed.  2,  1906) ;  English  translation  by 
C.  L.  Beaumont  (191 1) ; 

(2)  BNT=Babylonisches  im  Neuen  Testament,  1905. 
Journal  of  Philology. 

Journal  of  Theological  Studies. 

See  COT. 

Keilinschriftliche  Bibliothek,  ed.  Eb.  Schrader  (Berlin, 

1889  ff.). 
A  collection  of  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  texts 

transliterated  and  translated  into  German  by  various 

scholars. 
The  Composition  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  19 10. 


XVlll 


PRINCIPAL  ABBREVIATIONS   EMPLOYED 


Ki[mhi,     David] 

(t  1230) 
Kit[tel,  R.]     . 

Kon[ig,  Ed.]  • 


Koppe,  J.  B.  • 
Kue[nen,  A.]  . 
Lag[arde,  P.  de] 


Levy,  J.  . 
Liebmann 
LOT  . 
Lowth,  R. 


Luzzatto,  S,  D. 


Marti,  K. 
Meinhold,  J,    . 
NHB      . 
Numbers         . 

NSE      . 
NSI 

Onom,     •        • 


Oo. 

Or[elli,  C.  von] 

Ottley,  R.  R.  , 
PEFQuSt.  . 
PRE      . 

Rashi      .         • 


Hebrew  Commentary  on  Isaiah   in   Buxtorf  s  Biblia 
Rabbinica. 

(1)  Der  Prophet  Jesaj a,  a  new  edition  (1898)  of  Di.  ; 

(2)  Biblia  Hebraica,  1906. 
Historisch-Kritisches    Lehrgebdude    der    Hebrdischen 

Sprache^  1881,  1895  •  the  concluding  volume  (cited 
as  Kon.  iii.  or  simply  Kon.)  appeared  in  1897  with 
a  fresh  title,  Historisch- Comparative  Syntax  der 
Hebrdischen  Sprache. 

The  references  to  the  Syntax  are  to  the  sections,  but 

the  references  to  the  earlier  volumes  are  to  the  pages. 

D.    R,    Lowth's  Jesaias  .    .    .    mit    Zusdtzen    und 

Anmerkungen,  i779fif. 
Historisch  -  critisch  Onderzoek  .  .  .   Tweede  dttly  De 

Profetische  Boeken  des  ouden  verbondes,  1889. 
(i)  Semiiica,  i.,  1878; 
(2)  Uebersicht    iiber    die  .   .  .  iibliche    Bildung  der 

Nomina  :  abbreviated  BN. 
NHB  =■  Neuhebrdisches  u.  Chalddisches  Worlerbuch. 
See  p.  397. 
See  Dr. 

Isaiah:    a    new   translation;    with    a   preliminary 
dissertation^   and  notes^   critical,  philological,   ana 
explanatory y  1778  (ed.  3,  1795,  has  been  used). 
//  Profeta  Isaia  volgarizzato  e  commentato  ad  uso  degP 
Israeliti,  1867  (an  Italian  translation  with  Hebrew 
Commentary). 
Das  Buck  Jesaja,  1900. 
Die  Jesajaerzdhlungen  Jesaja  j6-j9,  1 898. 
See  Levy. 
A  Critical  and  Exegetical  Commentary  on  the  Book  of 

Numbers,  by  George  Buchanan  Gray,  1903. 
Lidzbarski,  Handbuch  der  Nordsem.  Epigraphik,  1898. 
G.  A.  Cooke,  A   Text-book  of  North-Semitic  Inscrip- 
tions, 1903. 
Onomastica  Sacra,  ed.  Lagarde  (Gott.  1887). 

This  contains  several  ancient  Onomastica,  includ- 
ing those  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome. 
H.  Oort  (see  p.  397). 
The  Prophecies  of  Isaiah  (English  translation  by  J.  S. 

Banks,  1889),  '1904. 
Isaiah  according  to  the  Septuagint,  1904,  1906. 
Palestine  Exploration  Fund  Quarterly  Statement. 
Herzog's  Real-Encyklopddie  fiir  Protestantische  Theo- 

logie  u.  Kirche ;  3rd  edition,  by  A.  Hauck. 
R[abboni]  Sh[elomoh]  Y[ishaki]  (1040-1105). 

Hebrew    Commentary    on    Isaiah    in    Buxtorf 's 
Biblia  Rabbinica. 


IK 


PRINCIPAL  ABBREVIATIONS   FMrLOYED 


XIX 


Rev.  Bibl. 


Rogers,  R.  W. 
Saad. 
SBOT    . 


Sievers,  E.      • 


Skinner,  J. 


Smith,  G.  A.  . 
Sta[de,  B.]  . 
Th.  Ti[jd.]     . 

Vitr[inga,  C]  . 

Wade,  G.  W.  . 
Whitehouse,  O.  C. 

ZATfV  . 
ZDMG  . 

ZDPF  , 


Revue  Biblique  Internationale  publide  par  Vkcole 
pratique  d^£tudes  Bihliques  itablie  au  couvent 
Dominicain  Saint- Etienne  de  Jerusalem  (Paris). 

A  History  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria,  ed.  2,  1 90 1. 

Saadiah  (t942). 

The  Sacred  Books  of  the  Old  lestameut,  ed.  Paul 
liaupt.  (Part  lo,  The  Book  of  Isaiah,  by  T.  K. 
Cheyne — Hebrew  Text,  1899;  English  translation, 
1898.) 

Metrische  Studien.  i.  Studien  zur  hebrdischen 
Metrik,  Erster  Theil  ;  Unlersuchungen  :  Zweiter 
Theil ;  Textproben  (including  Is  1-5.  14.  3722^-  ^q). 
These  studies  are  published  in  the  Abhandlungen 
der  Philologisch- Hisiorischen  Classe  der  Kiinig. 
Sdchsichen  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften^  Ein- 
undzwanzigster  Band  (1901). 

The  Book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah  (vol.  i  (i.-xxxix.), 
1896;  vol.  2  (xl.-lxvi.),  1898),  in  The  Cambridge 
Bible  for  Schools  and  Colleges. 

The  Book  of  Isaiah,  1889,  1890. 

Lehrbtuh  der  Hebrdischen  Grammatik,  1879. 

Theologisck  Tifdschrift  (Leiden). 

Theologische  Studien  u.  Kritiken  (Gotha). 

Commentarius  in  librum  pivphetiarum  Jesaiae  .  .  . 
editio  nova,  Leovardiae,  1724. 

Ihe  Book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah  (1911), 

The  Book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah  (^Century  Bible),  i., 
1905. 

Zeitschrift  fiir  die  Alttestamentliche  Wissenschaft. 

Zeitschrift  des  deutschen  morgenldndischen  Gesell- 
schaft. 

Zeitschrift  der  deutschen  Paldstina-  Vereins. 


Biblical  passages  are  cited  according  to  the  Hebrew  enumeration  of 
chapters  and  verses :  where  this  differs  from  the  English  enumeration,  the 
reference  to  the  latter  has  commonly  (except  in  the  philological  notes)  been 
added  in  a  parenthesis. 

The  sign  t,  following  a  series  of  references,  indicates  that  all  examples 
of  the  phrase,  word,  or  form  in  question,  occurring  in  the  OT,  have  been 
quoted. 

The  single  inverted  comma  [e.g.  "and  *he'  strikes  bargains,"  2^)  is  used 
to  indicate  departures  from  the  Hebrew  consonantal  text ;  such  readings  are 
not  necessarily  conjectural ;  many  rest  on  the  evidence  of  (Sr. 

al.=alii  (others). 

Cp.  =  Compare. 

Ct.=  Contrast. 

NH  =  New  Hebrew  (the  language  of  the  Mishnah,  etc.). 


H 


i 


ADDENDA   AND   CORRIGENDA, 


P.  69  (phil.  n.  on  3^*) ;  also  p.  80  (n.  on  4*),  p.  86  (n.  on  5*), 
p.  Ill  (n.  and  phil.  n.  on  6^^).  Whether  or  not  lyn,  to  exter- 
minate, also  developed  the  specific  meaning  to  exterminate  by 
depasturing,  or  whether  or  not  "l^y3,  a  (domestic)  beast,  gave  rise 
to  a  denominative  vb.  meaning  to  depasture,  depasturing  seems 
to  be  in  the  writer's  mind  both  in  3^*,  where  the  treatment  of  the 
vineyard,  however  reckless  and  destructive,  is  yet  probably  con- 
ceived as  yielding  some  profit  (cp.  v.^*^)  to  the  persons  ad- 
dressed, and  in  5^  where  destruction  by  animals  is  suggested  by 
the  parallel  D»"ID.  In  these  passages,  therefore,  even  if  depasture 
could  not  be  defended  as  a  literal  rendering,  it  might  be  admitted 
as  a  paraphrase  bringing  out  the  particular  form  of  destruction 
which  was  probably  in  the  writer's  mind.  If  the  text  of  J^  in 
Ex  22*  was  sound,  and  not,  as  it  probably  is,  corrupt  (see,  e.g.. 
Dr.  ad  loc),  "lyn  might  perhaps  be  a  denominative  of  "i^y3,  beast; 
in  this  case  it  might  either  mean  to  depasture,  or  merely  (being 
quite  synonymous  with  njn)  to  graze.  But,  apart  from  the  very 
doubtful  evidence  of  Ex  22*,  nothing  suggests  that  "lya  was  a 

denominative  of  "l^ya ;  on  the  other  hand,  "i^ya  may  rather  be  a 
noun  created  after  the  root  had  developed  the  meaning  to  de- 
pasture. If  the  meaning  attaching  to  lya,  when  it  is  used  ot 
animals,  is  a  direct  development  from  the  root,  so  far  from  being 
merely  synonymous  with  njn,  to  graze,  it  should  be  to  graze 
destructively,  to  remove  (or  destroy)  by  grazing,  to  depasture ;  for  the 
idea  of  total  removal,  or  destruction,  is  so  fundamental  to,  or  so 
closely  associated  with,  the  root  "iy3  and  its  derivatives,  that,  as 
applied  to  animals,  it  would  naturally  call  up  the  idea  of  the 
destruction  which  they  do,  rather  than  the  profit  they  receive,  by 
feeding ;  lya  would  therefore  be  entirely  fitting  in  reference  to 
the  reckless  indifference  of  the  persons  addressed  in  3^*  and  to 
the  destructive  browsing  of  the  beasts  let  in  through  the  broken 
walls  and  hedges  of  5^  but  (unless  the  word  lost  much  of  its 
force)  "sv^h  would  not  be  a  suitable  substitute  for  r\)rh  in  a 
promise  such  as  Budde  would  make  of  6^^  (see  n.  there) 

Setting  aside  the  meanings  to  burn,  to  blaze  {e.g.  Ex  22^,  Is 


xxii  ADDENDA  AND  CORRIGENDA 


jsi  ^17  ioi7  2^9  ^225  438  52!^  and  so  in  the  Aramaic  of  ST),  as  prob- 
ably going  back  to  a  distinct  root,  a  possible  connection  between 
most  of  the  remaining  meanings  of  "ij;!  can  be  discerned.  In 
Syr.  ^Ik^  bears  the  meanings  to  search  out^  and  then  to  glean 
{i.e.  to  search  out  the  last  grapes  and  remove  them) :  see  Payne 
Smith,  s.v.  jSn, 


^ 


and   cp.    I    K    14^^  (Pesh.)  ^-.S^AlD?    yJ\ 
To  glean  would   suit   Is    3^*    admirably :   Ye 


have  gleaned  my  vineyard  to  the  last  grape ;  but  since  it  would 
not  also  suit  5^,  it  would  be  rather  hazardous  to  postulate  glean 
as  a  meaning  of  lya  in  Hebrew.  The  idea  of  total  removal  (e.g. 
of  y-in,  Dt  136;  !?^3,  I  K  14IO;  \in\>r\,  Dt  2613),  which  is  so  con- 
spicuous in  Hebrew,  may  also  start  from  the  meaning  to  search 
out.  If  the  idea  of  total  removal  of  pasture  by  cattle  was  early 
developed,  the  Heb.  and  Syr.  1^y3,  I^IjO,  a  (domestic)  beast^ 

Ai.jJMy  a  camel,  and,  more  rarely,  an  ass,  Eth.  beraivi,  an  ox, 
may  have  meant  literally  total  removers  (of  herbage),  depasturers. 

Possibly  also  jtJ>  (5cil^,  dung,  was  so  called  as  that  which  is 
put  away :  cp.  i  K  14^0  ^^^  -,^3^  itj^xa.  Other  denominatives 
will  then  have  arisen  with  meanings  derived  directly  from  l^ya, 

beast,  and  ^,  dung]  cp.  "lyn  (Kal,  Niph.,  Piel,  Hiph.),  to  be 
brutish,  stupid  (see,  e.g..  Is  19^^),  ;JLO  (Peal  and  Ethpeal),  to  be 

fierce]  for  derivatives  from    mj,  dung,  see  Lane.  ^' 

P.  321,  line  26.  The  entire  collection  of  the  Elephantine 
papyri  is  now  published;  see  E.  Sachau,  Aramdische  Payprus 
und  Ostraka  aus  einer  jUdischen  Militdr-kolonie  zu  Elephantine, 
Leipzig,  191 1.  It  now  seems  clear  that  the  Jewish  colony  at 
Elephantine  was  military  in  origin. 

P.  382,  1.  8  of  small  print.  K3255^  is  probably,  if  a  Hebrew 
name,  a  hypocoristicon  of  0)n>n:j',  as  is  NtV  of  ^nny,  and  NVDK' 
of  "in^ytDK^.  In  the  OT  (l)n''33B^  occurs  only  in  Chr.,  Ezr.,  Neh. 
But  on  seals,  some  of  which  are  probably  pre-exilic,  it  occurs 
with  some  frequency ;  in^^ntr,  probably  also  n^J^K^,  and  perhaps 
^:3[K']  too,  occur  stamped  on  jar  handles  found  at  Tell  el-Judeideh 
(about  22  miles  from  Jerusalem).  See  M.  A.  Levy,  Siegel  u. 
Gemmen,  pp.  40,  45  ;  Bliss  and  Macalister,  Excavations  in 
Palestine,  119  f.;  Clermont-Ganneau,  PEF  Qu.  St.,  1902,  pp. 
264-266 ;  Lidzbarski,  Ephemeris,  i.  183  (cp.  p.  182),  ii.  70. 


1 


INTRODUCTION. 


5S  1-2.   Title  and  Place  in  the  Canon, 

I.  The  Book  of  Isaiah  is  one  of  the  eight  sections,  or 
volumes,  entitled  D"'fc?''33,  Prophets^  which  constitute  the  second 
of  the  three  parts  of  which  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  D^N'^33  min 
D''l'inD1,  consist.  This  part,  according  to  a  mediaeval  Jewish 
distinction,*  subdivides  into  D^^t^Ni  D"'K''33,  the  Former  Prophets^ 
consisting  of  the  four  books,  Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel,  and  Kings, 
and  the  Q*3inK  D''fc<^3D,  the  Latter  Prophets^  consisting  of  the  four 
books,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  "  The  Twelve "  (the  "  Minor 
Prophets,"  as  the  last  named  is  commonly  called,  constituting  a 
single  volume). 

In  Hebrew  printed  Bibles,  in  Hebrew  MSS,  and  in  Hebrew 
tradition,  the  eight  books  called  "  Prophets  "  form  a  group  which 
is  never  broken  either  by  omission  or  intrusion ;  moreover, 
when  and  where  the  custom  of  confining  a  single  roll  f  to  a  single 
book  \  did  not  exclusively  prevail,  and  many  books  were  written 
in  the  same  roll  or  codex,  the  "  former  prophets  "  always  precede 
the  "  latter  prophets  "  without  variation  of  order.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  is  evidence  of  some  variation  of  order  within  the 
group  of  the  latter  prophets. 

In  Hebrew  printed  Bibles,  Isaiah  immediately  follows  Kings, 
and  is  then  followed  by  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  "The  Twelve"; 
and  this  is  the  order  of  the  latter  prophets  in  the  earliest 
extant  Hebrew  MSS,  such  as  the  codices  at  St.   Petersburg, 

*  H.  E.  Ryle,  The  Canon  of  the  Old  Testament,  p.  228. 

t  H.  St.  J.  Thackeray  argues  that  in  early  times  each  book  occupied  two 

rolls:  %t^JThS\\,^  85-98;  Grammar  of  the  OT  in  Greek,  p.  65. 

X  Lk  4";  Baba  Bathra,  13d. 

xxiii 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION 

dated  in  the  years  which  correspond  to  a.d.  916  and  1009 
respectively,  and  commonly  in  other  MSS,  except  those  written 
in  Germany  or  France.  On  the  other  hand,  according  to  a 
Rabbinic  decision  recorded  in  Baba  Bathra^  i4<^,*  the  correct 
position  of  Isaiah  is  after  Ezekiel;  this  order  is  also  found  in 
many  MSS,  especially  those  written  in  Germany  or  France.  In 
other  MSS,  e,g,  a  Paris  MS  dated  1286  and  Brit.  Mus.  MS 
Oriental  2091,  a  yet  different  arrangement  is  found,  viz.  Jeremiah, 
Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  "The  Twelve";  see,  further,  C.  D.  Ginsburg, 
Introd.  to  the  Massoretico- Critical  Edition  of  the  Hebrew  Bible 
(1897),  pp.  I  ff.  For  different  views  of  the  relative  antiquity  of 
the  different  arrangements  and  for  the  reasons  of  them,  see  Ryle, 
Canofiy  pp.  225-229  ;  E.  Konig,  Einleitung  in  das  AT^  p.  458. 

2.  In  ffir  the  "  latter  prophets "  are  separated  from  the 
"former  prophets,"  Kings  being  followed  by  Chronicles,  and, 
in  most  MSS,  by  other  books  also,  before  any  of  the  "latter 
prophets"  occur.  In  the  arrangement  of  the  group,  Isaiah, 
Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  "The  Twelve,"  the  MSS  of  f&  differ:  in 
some,  e.g.  B  (and  consequently  in  Swete's  edition  of  C&),  A,  and  V, 
the  minor  Prophets  precede  Isaiah,  which  is  followed  by  Jeremiah 
(together  with  Baruch,  Lam.,  and  the  Letter  of  Jeremy)  and 
Ezekiel.  In  K,  Isaiah  stands  first  of  the  group.  Varieties  of 
arrangement  are  also  found  in  various  lists  of  the  Jewish 
Scriptures  in  Greek  and  Latin  writers  :  thus  Isaiah  stands  first 
of  the  group,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  "  The  Twelve,"  in  lists  of 
the  Eastern  Church,  such  as  those  of  Melito  (latter  half  of  2nd 
cent.  A.D.),  Origen  (f  254),  Leontius  (f  c.  543),  and  in  lists  of 
the  Western  Church,  such  those  of  Ruffinus  (f  410),  and  Cassio- 
dorus  (t  c.  570) ;  but  it  stands  after  "  The  Twelve  "  in  the  Eastern 
lists  of  Athanasius  (t  373),  Epiphanius  (f  403),  Amphilochius 
(t  after  394),  John  of  Damascus  (f  before  754),  the  Laodicene 
Canons  (f.  360),  and  in  the  Western  lists  of  Hilary  (f  367),  Augus- 
tine (t  430),  and  the  Council  of  Carthage  (a.d.  397).  See,  further, 
Swete,  Introd.  to  the  OT in  Greeks  pp.  197-230. 

3.  The  title  of  the  Book  in  Heb.  MSS  and  commonly  in 
Hebrew  references  is  simply  iTiyK^,  Isaiah  ;  so  in  fflr  it  is  Ho-ata?. 
Occasionally  in  references  to  the  book  fuller  titles  are  found, 
such  as  Isaiah  the  prophet  (Acts  8^^,  '  Ho-atai/  tov  7rpo<f>T^Tr]v ;  cp. 
v.28)j  f^e  look  of  the  prophet  Isaiah  (Lk  4^'^  /StySAtov  tov  Tr/ao^^Jrou^ 

*  The  passage  is  translated  at  length  in  Ryle,  Canon,  pp.  273  f. 


TEXT  AND  VERSIONS  XXV 

'Ho-aiov) :  in  dSt^  the  title  runs  Ho-atas  opa/xaricrTOS  (rd.  opafiaTiaTrj<i) ; 
but  the  full  title  of  EV  does  not  rest  on  MS  authority. 

The  form  of  the  name  in  the  Title — iTj/r'  (Origen,  Je<T<ria) — differs  from 
that  which  is  used  in  the  Book  itself,  viz.  in'y»\  So  also  of  other  prophets 
whose  names  ended  with  the  divine  name,  the  shorter  form  occurs  in  the  title, 
whether  that  or  the  longer  form  occurs  in  the  books :  see  n'or,  nnay,  iTjcj*, 
n'n3T.  That  is  to  say,  the  form  of  the  name  in  the  title  is  governed  by  the 
usage  of  the  age  when  the  title  was  added,  not  by  the  usage  of  the  Book  to 
which  it  is  prefixed.  On  the  earlier  use  of  both  forms,  see  Bonk,  in  ZA  TfV, 
1891,  pp.  126  ff.  :  at  the  end  of  proper  names  the  shorter  form  n'  is  already 
exclusively  employed  in  the  Assouan  and  Elephantine  Papyri  (5th  cent.  B.C.). 

§  4.   Tgxt  and  Versions, 

4.  It  is  unnecessary  to  write  at  length  on  the  Text  and 
Versions  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  for  all  that  is  of  peculiar  import- 
ance to  the  study  of  this  book  is  limited  to  the  question  of  the 
value  of  the  Greek  version  ;  for  the  rest  the  conditions  are  those 
which  are  discussed  in  any  general  treatment  of  the  Text  and 
Versions  of  the  Old  Testament,*  and  which  have  also  been  briefly 
described  by  the  present  writer  in  Hastings'  Smaller  Dictionary 
of  the  Bible ^  art.  Text  and  Versions.  Elaborate  accounts  of  the 
Versions  of  Isaiah  in  particular  are  given  by  Ges.  (i.  56-106), 
and  (with  special  reference  to  chs.  24-27)  by  Liebmann,  in 
ZATWy  1902,  pp.  1-56,  285-304. 

In  the  present  work  the  symbol  J^^  is  used  as  a  convenient 
abbreviation  for  the  consonants  of  the  traditional  Hebrew  text, 
irrespective  of  the  present  word  divisions  and  after  the  removal 
of  the  vowel  letters  (n,  \  ^).  It  is  important  to  observe  that  the 
symbol  denotes  in  any  particular  instance  a  hypothetical  text ; 
for  though  there  can  be  no  question  that  these  vowel  letters  were 
much  more  sparingly  used  in  the  period  when  the  prophecies 
were  written  than  later  (cp.  G-K.  §  7),  and  that  they  still  were 
more  sparingly  used  as  late  as  the  date  of  the  Greek  version 
(see,  e.g.^  the  phil.  nn.  on  8^^  2i2);  yet  to  some  extent  and  for 
some  purposes,  especially,  for  example,  to  indicate  a  final  vowel, 
they  were  employed  as  early  as  the  age  of  Isaiah  (cp.  the 
Siloam  Inscription,  Mesha's  Inscription,  etc.).  Nevertheless, 
in  all  cases  it  is  important  to  consider  what  meaning  a  passage 
may  have  borne  apart  from  these  vowel  letters ;  for  there  can 
*  See  also  Dr.,  Samuel^  Introd.  §§  3-4  (ed.  i,  pp.  xxxvi-lxxxiv). 


xxvi  INTRODUCTION 


4 


never  be  any  certainty  that  they  are  due  to  the  original  author, 
and  at  times  their  presence  or  absence  makes  a  serious  difference 
to  the  meaning ;  see,  e.g.,  i^^'^^. 

The  variations*  between  the  existing  Hebrew  MSS,  the 
earliest  of  which  is  dated  a.d.  916  (§  i),  present  as  usual  but 
little  of  interest.  Nor  are  the  variants  from  the  consonants  of 
the  Hebrew  text  suggested  by  the  Vulgate,  the  Targum,t  or  the 
Syriac  Version,  J  or  the  surviving  fragments  §  of  the  Greek 
translations  (2nd  cent.  a.d.)  of  Aquila,  Symmachus,  and 
Theodotion,  numerous  or  important;  more  frequently  these 
versions  show  a  different  interpretation  from  that  which  is 
embodied  in  the  vowels  added  by  the  Massoretes  (6th-8th 
cent.  A.D.)  to  the  consonants  of  the  Hebrew  text ;  cp.,  as  an 
interesting   example,  3^^,  where  Aq.  C   render  D*B^3,  but  MT 

points  D''C'3. 

But  in  spite  oF  this  evidence  that  the  text  of  Isaiah,  in 
common  with  that  of  the  rest  of  the  Old  Testament,  has  been 
handed  down  with  great  care  since  the  2nd  cent,  a.d.,  there  can 
be  no  question  that  between  700  B.C.  and  a.d.  100  it  suffered  in 
many  passages  serious  corruption.  This  is  clear  from  internal 
evidence,  as  the  discussion  of  numerous  passages  in  the  Com- 
mentary must  be  left  to  show.  It  is  also  clear  that  the  Greek 
version,  the  date  of  which  was  probably  not  much  later  than 
150  B.C.  (§  22),  was  made  from  a  text  differing  considerably  from 
1^.  But  though  the  difference  between  the  Hebrew  original 
of  the  Greek  version  {(&)  and  the  traditional  Hebrew  text  (J^)  is 
clear,  the  exact  form,  and  in  many  cases  even  the  approximate 
form,  of  the  Hebrew  original  of  ffi  cannot  be  determined. 
Indeed,  it  has  been  questioned  whether  (&  is  of  any  appreciable 
value  for  the  determination  of  the  original  text.  For  example, 
Mr.  Ottley,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  a  useful  edition  of 
Codex  Alexandrinus  (A)  of  Isaiah,  with  introduction  and  notes, 
writes,  "  In  Isaiah  I  find  it  hard  to  see  that  the  LXX  gives  any 

*  Collected  in  De  Rossi,  Variae  Lectiones  Vet.  Test.  (1786),  vol.  iii. 

t  Lagarde,  Prophetae  Chaldaice  (1872).  Cp.  Bacher,  Kritische  unter- 
suchungen  zum  Propheten-Thargum^  in  ZDMG^  1874.  See,  further,  the 
Bibliography  in  Stenning's  art.  Targuni,  in  DB. 

X  D.  L.  Warszawski,  Die  Peschitta  zu  Jesaja  {^Kap.  1-39),  ihr  Verhaltnis 
zum  massoretischen  Texte,  zur  Septitaginta  u.  zum  largurn,  Berlin,  1 897. 

§  Collected  in  F.  Field,  Origenis  Hexaplorum  quae  supersunt. 


TEXT   AND  VERSIONS  XXVii 

proof  at  all  (unless  in  a  few  isolated  exceptions)  of  an  older  and 
superior  Hebrew  text :  because  the  translators  seem  to  have 
been  so  constantly  mistaken  in  reading  their  Hebrew,  or  unable 
to  translate  it,  as  to  deprive  their  witness  of  all  authority  "  (i.  49) ; 
and  again  (p.  50),  "  the  failures  of  the  translator  (or  translators)  in 
reading  his  original  may  have  been  largely  justified  by  illegibility 
of  MSS,  and  very  likely  by  abbreviations  also ;  the  actual  script 
may  have  been  difficult.  But  over  and  above  all  this,  it  seems 
as  if  his  knowledge  of  Hebrew  was  imperfect :  and  if  this  was  so, 
he  may  have  thought  that  he  saw  before  him  not  merely  some- 
thing different  from  the  reality,  but  something  such  as  no  skilled  ' 
Hebrew  writer  would  have  written.  The  hypothetical  Hebrew  ' 
underlying  his  Greek    need   not   therefore  be  always  good  or 

^classical  Hebrew,  and  this  must  be  taken  into  account.  If  this 
view  be  correct,  it  takes  away  yet  more  from  any  claim  of  the 
LXX  to  give  decisive  witness  as  to  a  Hebrew  text  older  than  we 
have,  or  can  trace  from  other  sources."  There  is  much  here 
that  rests  on  correct  observation ;  but  the  conclusions  drawn  are 
unsound.  There  can  be  little  question  (i)  that  the  translators 
sometimes,  and  even  often,  misread  the  Hebrew  before  them; 
(2)  that  their  knowledge  of  Hebrew  was  imperfect ;  (3)  that  the 
Hebrew  which  they  thought  they  saw  before  them  was  such  as 
no  skilled  Hebrew  writer  would  have  written.  But  over  against 
this  we  have  to  observe:  (i)  the  possibility  that  a  translator 
misread  his  text  is  balanced  by  the  equal  or  almost  equal 
probability  that  copyists  of  the  original  text  also  at  times 
misread ;  moreover,  what  was  obviously  misreading  on  the  part 
of  the  translators  does  not  in  all  cases  seriously  conceal  the 
reading  which  was  actually  before  them,  and  which  may  be 
a  valuable  variant  of  the  reading  in  f^,  just  as  while  some 
misprints  are  extremely  confusing,  or,  simply  because  they  make 
some  sense,  dangerous,  others  that  make  nonsense  are  im- 
mediately detected  and  understood.  We  must  then  reckon  with 
the  possibility  of  mis-copying,  whether  we  follow  J^  or  whether 

-we  follow  mSc*  and  we  have  no  more  ground  for  refusing  to  con- 

*  Mr.  Ottley,  indeed,  would  meet  this  by  a  dogmatic  consideration, 
"  Some  minds,  moreover,  will  still  not  refuse  to  entertain  the  idea  that  the 
Heb.  text  has  been  guarded,  not  only  by  the  watchful  care  of  the  Jews,  but 
also  by  the  special  providence  of  the  Almighty  "  (ii.  p.  xvii).  Yet  even  if 
dogmatic  considerations  were  in  place  here  at  all,  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  the 


XXVIU 


INTRODUCTION 


sider  the  evidence  of  C&,  because  the  translators*  sometimes 
misread  their  original,  than  we  have  for  refusing  to  consider  the 
evidence  of  |^ ;  (2)  the  lack  of  knowledge  of  Hebrew  on  the 
part  of  the  translators  may  in  some  passages  make  the  recovery 
of  the  text  which  they  translated  difficult,  or  impossible ;  on  the 
other  hand,  in  other  cases  it  may  be  the  surest  pledge  of  the 
actual  existence  of  a  particular  reading;  even  translators  with 
inadequate  knowledge  do  not  make  nonsense  of  their  translation 
in  mere  wilfulness :  if  only  the  nonsense  in  the  translation  can, 
as  is  sometimes  the  case,  be  seen  to  be  the  equivalent  (or  an 
obvious  misreading)  of  Hebrew  letters  that,  rightly  understood, 
make  good  sense,  we  have  about  the  best  evidence  we  can 
possess  that  such  a  Hebrew  reading  actually  existed;  the 
translators  of  Judges,  as  is  well  known,  makes  nonsense  by 
rendering  the  precative  '^2,  iv  i/xoi;  but  an  €v  i/xot  making 
nonsense  is  better  proof  than  if  it  made  sense  that  the  translators 
actually  read  the  Hebrew  letters  ^3 ;  (3)  **  Hebrew  such  as  no 
skilled  Hebrew  writer  would  have  written "  is  to  be  found  not 
only  in  the  Hebrew  which  the  Greek  translators  in  some  passages 
attempt  to  render,  but  in  the  present  Hebrew  text  itself;  and  in 
some  places  where  the  Hebrew  is  impossible,  or  at  least  poor 
and  improbable,  in  the  present  Hebrew  text,  it  is  good  in  what 
appears  to  have  been  before  the  translators  of  ffi. 

The  main  difficulty  in  the  use  of  ffi  is  occasioned  by  its 
tendency,  which  is  at  times  very  conspicuous,  to  paraphrase. 
But  though  it  is  important  that  this  should  be  fully  recognised, 
and  duly  allowed  for,  it  is  still  the  fact  that  the  mass  of  the 
translation  is  either  not  paraphrastic  at  all,  or  not  paraphrastic  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  prevent  the  recognition  of  the  Hebrew  text 
lying  behind  it.  Generally  speaking,  ffi:  renders  three  different 
forms  of  service:  (i)  where  it  agrees  with  J^,  it  proves  the 
existence  of  the  reading  in  question  at  least  as  early  as  c.  150 
B.C. ;  (2)  where  it  differs  from  J^,  and  the  Hebrew  lying  behind 
it  is  obvious,  it  proves  the  existence  of  a  reading  differing  from 
J^  about  150  B.C. ;  (3)  even  when  it  is  obviously  paraphrastic  it 
may  more  or  less  clearly  support  f^  (cp.  e.g.  8^n.),  or  raise  a 
more  or  less  serious  suspicion  of  J^. 

Almighty  granted  to  the  text  of  the  Jews  a  special  Providence  which  He 
withheld  from  the  Greek  Text,  which  became  the  Bible  of  the  Christian 
Church. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH  A  POST-EXILIC   COMPILATION     XXIX 

Much  more  work  needs  to  be  done,  both  on  the  text  of  G 
itself,  which  at  present  needs  in  many  passages  to  be  laboriously 
sought  for,*  and  on  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  translators ;  and  till 
this  has  been  accomplished,  the  actual  evidence  of  Cr  cannot  be 
either  exhaustively  or  in  all  cases  accurately  determined.  At 
present  it  is  necessary  for  each  succeeding  investigator  of  the 
Book  of  Isaiah  to  test  critically  the  suggestions  of  his  predecessors, 
for  readings  have  been  claimed  for  6r  on  very  questionable 
grounds ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  readings  latent  in  ffi 
that  have  not  been  considered.  A  difficult  practical  question, 
however,  arises,  viz.,  how  in  a  commentary  of  limited  scope  to 
discuss  with  fullness  f  the  evidence  of  this  version,  or  to  indicate 
it  with  brevity  without  at  the  same  time  misleading  the  reader. 
It  has  been  found  impossible  to  include  a  reference  to  all 
variants  or  possible  variants,  and  it  has  seemed  best  where  the 
Hebrew  equivalent  of  (Sc  is  ambiguous  to  quote  the  Greek  rather 
than,  if  not  as  well  as,  a  possible  Hebrew  equivalent.  Occasion- 
ally the  Greek  has  been  cited  without  comment  where  it  may 
seem  to  some  at  least  to  raise  or  strengthen  a  reasonable 
suspicion  of  the  correctness  of  the  text  of  f^. 

Valuable  special  studies  of  the  Greek  translation  of  (&  and 
the  Hebrew  text  underlying  it  are  those  of  Liebmann  (see  p.  397 
below)  on  chs.  24-27,  and  Zillesen  on  oh.  53,  in  ZATPVxxv. 
261-284. 

§§  5-7.  TAe  Book  of  Isaiah  a  post-exilic  Compilation. 

5.  It  is  probable  that  the  title  "Isaiah,"  attached  to  the 
entire  book  (§  3),  was  intended  to  imply  that  the  prophet  Isaiah 
was  the  author  of  the  whole,  and  that  the  book,  as  we  now  have 
it,  owed  its  form  to  him.     It  is  true  that  it  would  be  in  accord- 

*  Swete,  OTin  Greeks  vol.  iii.,  prints  the  text  of  B  with  the  variants  of 
K  A  O  Q  Z  r  ;  other  variants  must  be  sought  in  Holmes  and  Parsons,  Vet.  Test. 
Graece,  iii.  For  attempts  to  group  the  MSS  of  Isaiah,  see  Liebmann,  in 
ZATW,  1902,  pp.  9ff.  ;  Ottley,  i.  Sff.  The  proportion  of  the  Old  Latin 
Version  of  ffi  that  has  survived  is  fortunately  large — about  three-quarters  of 
the  whole ;  see  Petrus  Sabatier,  Bibliorum  sacrorum  versiones  antiquaey  ii. 

515-^39. 

t  A  reference  to  the  notes  on  2*  25^'-  34'^'",  in  ZATW,  191 1,  pp.  m- 
127,  will  show  what  is  the  present  writer's  conception  of  adequate  fullness,  and 
the  consequent  impossibility  of  discussing  all  the  passages  that  need  it,  with 
any  approach  to  fullness  in  the  present  work. 


XXX  INTRODUCTION 

ance  with  Jewish  practice  to  entitle  the  book  from  a  prominent 
word  in  the  opening  sentence,*  and  such  is  the  name  Isaiah, 
though  title  and  book  differ  as  to  the  orthography  of  the  name 
(§  3))  true,  too,  that  the  Talmud,  in  the  passage  already  (§  i) 
referred  to,  records  that  "  Hezekiah  and  his  college  wrote  Isaiah  " 
— whatever  that  may  mean.f  Yet  the  simplest  supposition  is 
that  the  titles  of  the  "  latter  prophets  "  implied  authorship  from  the 
first,  as  they  certainly  suggested  it  later.  Be  this,  however,  as  it 
may,  the  references  in  the  NT  (§§  iif.)  are  sufficient  evidence 
that  it  was  customary,  as  early  as  the  ist  cent,  a.d.,  to 
attribute  anything  and  everything  in  the  book  so  entitled  to 
Isaiah,  and  the  passage  in  Sir.  discussed  below  (§  14)  carries  back 
this  custom  to  the  beginning  of  the  2nd  century  B.C.  It  is 
precarious  to  infer  the  existence  of  a  conflicting  theory,  or 
tradition,  from  the  fact  that  Isaiah,  according  to  some  authorities, 
had    its    place    in    the    Canon    after    Jeremiah    and    Ezekiel 

But  ancient  as  the  theory  that  Isaiah  is  the  author  of  all  that 
is  in  the  book  that  bears  his  name  may  be,  it  is  certainly  very 
erroneous.  The  book  is  badly  arranged  :  to  refer  to  but  a  single 
point,  the  account  of  the  prophet's  call  stands  not  at  the 
beginning,  where  we  might  expect  it  (cp.  Jer  i,  Ezk  i,  Hos  i, 
but  cp.  Am  7^^^*),  but  in  ch.  6.  Yet  bad  arrangement  dy  itself 
need  prove  nothing  more  at  most  than  that  the  arrangement  of 
the  material  was  not  due  to  Isaiah  :  the  material  arranged  might 
still  be  entirely  his ;  Mohammed  was  the  author,  though  not 
the  arranger,  of  the  entire  Koran,  and  an  analogy  for  the  position 
of  the  account  of  Isaiah's  call  in  the  middle  of  the  book  may 
be  found  in  the  fact  that  Mohammed's  call  is  only  recorded 
towards  the  close  of  the  Koran  (Sura  96).! 

6.  The  proof  that  Isaiah  is,  nevertheless,  not  the  author  of 
the  Book  of  Isaiah,  lies  in  the  fact  that  a  large  part  of  the  Book 
was  written  at  the  least  two  centuries  after  his  time,  and  some 
of  it  later  still.  How  large  a  part  is  subsequent  to  the  age  of 
Isaiah  it  may  be  difficult  to  determine ;  but  even  a  superficial 
critical  survey  of  the  Book  must  discern  that  so  much  is  subsequent 

*  Cp.  e.g.  nanD3  as  a  title  of  Numbers :  Numbers,  p.  xx. 
t  Cp.  Driver,  LOT,  p.  viif.  ;  Cheyne,  Introd.  p.  xviii. 
X  Cp.  G.  B.  Gray,  The  Comparative  Study  of  Semitic  Literature,  in  the 
Contemporary  Review,  July  1907,  pp.  84  fF, 


THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH  A  POST-EXILIC  COMPILATION     xxxi 

to  his  age  that  it  is  incorrect  and  misleading  to  speak  or  think  of 
the  Book  as  the  work  of  Isaiah;  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  a 
compilation  of  the  post-exilic  period,  containing,  it  is  true, 
prophecies  of  Isaiah  which  were  already  ancient  when  the  Book 
was  compiled,  but  containing  also,  and  in  larger  quantity, 
prophecies  and  narratives  of  much  more  recent  date. 

Just  as   parts   of  the   Book  unmistakably   presuppose   the 
conditions  of  the  8th  century  b.c.  as  those   under  which  they 
were  written,  so  others  as  clearly  pre-suppose  the  conditions  of 
the   6th   century.     Thus   9*^-10*  pre-supposes  the  existence  oVi^^i'*    Fl^cc^   "^ 
the  Northern  kingdom,  which  came  to  an  end  in  722  B.C.,  and        '  J  Jf    JPy 
predicts  its  fall ;  chs.  40-55  pre-suppose  the  Babylonian  Exile,  ?  ^  ^  </, 

which  began  in  597  (586)  B.C.,  as  an  existing  fact,  and  predict  its 
approaching  end,  presuppose  that  Cyrus  has  already  advanced 
far  in  his  victorious  career,  and  predict  that  he  will  become 
master  of  Babylon  (which  as  a  matter  of  fact  he  did  in  538  b.c.),  ^ 
and  release  the  Jewish  exiles.     A  prophecy,  unless   it   can  be  ; 
shown  to  be  a  vaticifitum  ex  eventu^  must  have  been  written  before   -^ 
what  it  predicts,  but   after  what   it   pre-supposes;   9^-10*  was 
therefore  written  before  722  b.c.,  and  40-55  before  538;  but 
the  latter  section,  since  it  pre-supposes  that  Cyrus  has  already 
achieved  remarkable   victories,    must   have   been   written   after 
c.  550  B.C.     Much  of  chs.  56-66  probably  pre-supposes  conditions 
that  prevailed  nearly  a  century  later — in  the  middle  of  the  5th 
century ;  but  this  is  less  superficially  obvious  and   as  yet   less  ..^ 
generally  admitted.     Ch.  13  pre-supposes  an  age  when  Babylon  ^^  ^      ^^  >  ^ 
was  still  "the  glory  of  kingdoms"  (13^^)  but  already  threatened 
by  the  Medes  :  the  conditions,  not  predicted  but  pre-supposed  as 
already  existing,  are  again  not  those  of  the  age  of  Isaiah,  when 
Assyria  was  the  dominant  worldpower ;  they  are  those  of  the 
6th  century  B.C.,  the  age  of  the  Babylonian  exile,  which  is  almost 
unmistakably  pre-supposed  also  in  14^'*;  thus  132-142,  like  40- 
55,  was  written  long  subsequent  to  the  age  of  Isaiah.     On  similar 
grounds,   not   to   speak   here   of  passages  of  more  ambiguous 
origin,  ai^"^*^  24-27.  34  f.  must  have   been  written   not  earlier 
than  the  6th  century  B.C. 

7.  Thus,  then,  we  have  to  recognise  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah  at 
least  these  different  elements  :  (a)  prophecies  of  the  8th  century 
B.C.,  {b)  prophecies  of  the  6th  century  B.C.  or  later,  and  {c)  the 
work  of  an  editor  who  brought  together  these  prophecies  which, 


xxxii  INTRODUCTION 

though  so  widely  separated  in  time,  are  intermingled  in  a  single 
compilation. 

The  fact  that  the  Book  of  Isaiah  is  not  the  work  of  the 
prophet  of  Isaiah,  but  a  post-exilic  compilation,  ought  to  be  the 
starting-point  in  all  detailed  criticism,  or  interpretation  of  the 
Book.  In  a  continuous  work,  such  as  the  historical  narratives 
of  Josephus  or  Thucydides,  alien  matter  may  have  intruded ;  but, 
unless  signs  of  interpolation  can  be  detected,  the  presumption  is 
that  any  section  of  the  whole  is  of  the  same  origin  as  the  rest. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  a  compilation  of  disconnected  pieces  of 
different  authorship  and  different  ages,  no  such  presumption 
holds  :  each  piece  must  be  judged  by  itself.  It  does  not  follow 
that  a  passage  is  not  Isaiah's  because  it  contains  no  unmistak- 
able evidence  that  it  was  written  in  the  8th  century ;  but  just  as 
little  does  it  follow  that  a  passage  must  be  Isaiah's  because  it 
bears  no  unmistakable  marks  of  belonging  to  a  later  age.  It 
may  well  be  that  much  in  this  or  any  similar  compilation  must, 
for  lack  of  decisive  evidence,  remain  of  uncertain  date  and 
origin.  But  the  fact  that  much  proves  uncertain  or  ambiguous, 
when  we  attempt  a  more  detailed  and  exact  analysis  of  the  Book 
and  its  contents,  cannot  invalidate  the  conclusion  that  follows 
from  what  is  obvious,  viz.,  that  the  Book  is  a  post-exilic  compila- 
tion :  nor  is  it  wise  to  minimise  the  significance  of  this 
conclusion. 

We  may  now  proceed  to  a  more  detailed  examination  of  the 
origin  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah :  and  in  the  first  instance  to  an 
examination  of  the  external  evidence  to  the  existence  of  the 
Book. 

§§  8-19.   Origin  and  History  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah : 
(i)  External  Evidence. 

8.  Apart  from  the  significance  of  the  Greek  version  (§§  20- 
22),  and  the  history  of  the  Prophetic  Canon  (§§  23-26),  external 
evidence  shows :  (i)  that  the  Book  of  Isaiah  in  its  present  form 
and  extent  existed  at  latest  by  the  end  of  the  ist  century  a.d. 
(§§  10-13);  (2)  that  a  Book  of  Isaiah  having  certain  of  the 
most  conspicuous  features  of  the  present  Book,  if  not  the  present 
Book  itself,  existed  about  180  b.c.  (§§  14-17);  moreover,  certain 
external  evidence  suggests  (3)  that  part  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah, 


ORIGIN  AND  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH      xxxill 

viz.  chs.  40-66  in  whole  or  in  part,  about  300-200  b.c.  passed  in 
certain  circles  under  the  name  of  Jeremiah  (§§  18,  19).  The 
most  reasonable  inference  from  the  evidence  is  that  neither  the 
present  Book  of  Isaiah  nor  a  book  either  approaching  it  in 
extent  or  possessing  its  outstanding  features  existed  long  before 
200  B.C.,  but  that  either  this  present  Book  or  a  book  possessing 
the  same  outstanding  features  and  attributed  to  Isaiah  existed  not 
long  after  that  date. 

9.  The  nature  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  as  indicated  in  §§  5-7, 
necessarily  limits  the  significance  of  certain  forms  of  external 
evidence.  A  quotation  of  known  age  from  any  part  of  a  work 
like  the  histories  of  Thucydides  or  Josephus  would  determine 
the  terminus  ad  quern  of  the  entire  work,  even  though  it  were 
anonymous ;  but  a  mere  quotation,  say  from  ch.  66  of  the  Book 
of  Isaiah,  while  it  would  determine  the  terminus  ad  quem  of  that 
particular  prophecy,  would  prove  nothing  as  to  the  date  of  the 
Book  of  Isaiah ;  for  the  quotation  might  be  from  ch.  66  before 
that  chapter  was  included  in  the  compilation  that  now  bears  the 
name  of  Isaiah,  just  as  a  quotation  (Jer  26^^)  from  a  prophecy 
now  included  in  "The  Twelve"  (Mic  3^2^  only  proves  that 
Micah's  prophecy  existed  before  Jeremiah's  time,  and  proves 
nothing  with  regard  to  the  date  of  "  The  Twelve,"  which  as  a 
matter  of  fact  also  contains  prophecies  of  the  5th  cent.  (Malachi), 
and  cannot  have  been  compiled  for  at  least  two  centuries  after 
the  quotation  in  Jeremiah. 

10.  But  there  is  other  evidence  that  is  available  for  proving 
not  only  the  date  of  some  particular  passage,  but  of  the  book  in 
which  such  passages  are  incorporated. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  labour  the  point  that  the  conclusion  of 
the  Canon  of  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  which  may  be  fixed  about 
the  end  of  the  ist  cent,  a.d.,  prevented  henceforth  any  addition 
to,  or  alteration  in,  the  books  included  within  it ;  and  that  since 
Isaiah  formed  part  of  this  Canon,  the  Book  at  that  time  existed 
in  its  present  form  and  extent.  It  will  suffice  to  refer,  for  a 
matter  so  generally  admitted,  to  standard  works  on  the  Canon  of 
the  Old  Testament. 

But  in  view  of  recent  theories  (§  17)  that  would  place  the 
final  stages  in  the  compilation  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  much  later 
than  was  formerly  considered  possible,  it  is  worth  collecting  the 
evidence  of  the  New  Testament  of  which  some  {e.g»  Romans) 

VOL.   I. — c 


XX  XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


carries  us  back  to  the  middle  of  the  ist  cent.  a.d.,  and  all  to 
some  part  of  that  century. 

Quotations  from,  or  allusions  to,  the  Book  of  Isaiah  in  the 
NT  may  be  divided  into  three  classes :  the  first  class  consists  of 
those  quotations  which  specify  Isaiah,  or  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  as 
the  source ;  the  second  specify  or  imply  the  Jewish  Scriptures  as 
the  source ;  and  the  third,  mostly  allusions  rather  than  quotations, 
specify  no  source.  Only  the  first  two  classes  are  of  interest 
here. 

IT.  The  passages  from  Isaiah  (J^  or  ffi)  cited  in  the  NT  with 
direct  reference  to  that  book,  and  the  NT  passages  in  which 
the  citations  are  made,  are  as  follows : 

Is  i^      cited  in  Ro  9^^. 


69f. 


Mt  I3i4f-,  Jn  i240f-,  Ac  2  826f. ;  cp.  Mk  4I2,  Lk  810. 


82391(91^.),,  Mt4i5^-. 


I022f. 

» 

Ro  927^. 

„10 

» 

Ro  1512. 

29I3 

» 

Mt  158^-,  Mk  f^: 

4o3-5 

» 

Mt  33,  Mk  i'^  Lk  3^-6,  Jn  i^. 

42I-4 

» 

Mt  12I8-21. 

53^ 

» 

Ro  iqIS,  Jn  1 25^8. 

53^ 

}) 

Mt  817. 

53'^- 

a 

Ac  832*.. 

6iif- 

» 

Lk  4i8f-. 

651^- 

jj 

Ro  io20f-. 

12.  The  passages  cited  with  some  formula  implying  that  they 
are  derived  from  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  or  in  some  cases  more 
specifically  from  "the  prophet(s)"  (Mt  122,  Jn  6*^  Ac  7*^), 
are : 


IS71* 

cited 

in  Mt  i23. 

814  (  +  2 

'816) 

„  Ro  9=^3  (i  p  28). 

glTf. 

„  He  213. 

25« 

„  I  Co  1554. 

28iif. 

„  I  Co  1421 

2816 

„   Ro  933  loii,  I  P  2« 

29io(  + 

610) 

„  Ro  118. 

2914 

„  I  Co  ii9. 

(406-8) 

„  (i  P  i24f.). 

ORIGIN  AND   HISTORY  OF  THE   BOOK  OF   ISAIAH      XXXV 


45^" 

cited 

in 

Ro  14I1. 

49' 

}f 

>> 

Ac  1347. 

49* 

>» 

)) 

2  Co  62. 

S»» 

>» 

M 

Ro  224. 

5^^  = 

Nah 

■")    „ 

» 

Ro  ioi«. 

52" 

>) 

)> 

2  Co  6^7. 

S3" 

>> 

J) 

(Mk    1528),   Lk  2  237. 

54' 

)> 

J> 

Gal  4^^. 

54" 

i> 

J> 

Jn  645. 

5S» 

>J 

M 

Ac  13^4^ 

56^ 

» 

» 

Mt  2ii3=Mk  iii7  =  Lk  I94«. 

5920f. 

)) 

J> 

Ro   Il26f.. 

64* 

» 

>> 

I  Co  29  (free). 

66Jt 

)) 

)) 

Ac  749^-. 

13.  In  addition  to  these  quotations  in  the  NT,  the  following 
quotations  from  Josephus  {B/^  written  about  73-75  a.d.,  and 
Anf.,  written  about  93  a.d.)  and  other  works  of  the  ist  century 
A.D.  may  be  given  here  : 

Is  i^®  is  referred  to  Isaiah  in  Asc.  Is  3^®. 

19^9*  j^  j^  ^^       Jos.  Anf.  xiii.  3^;  -^vii.  lo^. 

4428  4^1         ^^  ^^  ^^       Jos.  Anf,  xi.  ii^-. 

432  „  „  „       4  Mac  1 81*. 

Philo  (first  half  of  the  ist  cent  a.d.)  refers  Is  i*  to  "a  certain 
prophet,  the  kinsman  and  friend  of  Moses  (Quaes f.  43)." 

14.  We  may  next  consider  the  evidence  of  the  Book  of 
Ecclesiasticus,  which  was  written  about  180  B.c.t  The  author 
in  his  praise  of  famous  men  (44^-5021)  writes  thus  of  Isaiah 

(4822-25)  .  J  __ 

*  It  would  perhaps  be  arguable,  though  the  point  is  not  here  put  forward 
as  having  any  probability,  that  Jos.  refers  to  an  uncanonical  pseudepigraphon 
whence  Is  19^**  was  subsequently  incorporated  in  the  present  Book  ;  he  speaks 
not  only  of  a  or  ^Ae  Book  of  Isaiah,  but  also  of  his  books :  see  An^.  xi.  i^ 
t6  ^i^Xlop  rrjs  avroO  vpoiprjreias  6  'Haatas  KaTiXiire ;  Ant.  x.  2'  diravd*  8<ra 
7rpoe<f>rjT€v<X€v  iyypdyj/as  ^i/3\otj  /carAtTrei'. 

t  Mr.  Hart  {Ecclesiasticus  in  Greek)  argues  ingeniously,  but  unsuccessfully 
(cp.  e.g.  Kennett,  p.  89),  that  Ecclesiasticus  was  written  c.  280  B.C. 

X  Du.  (p,  vii)  remarks,  without,  however,  alleging  any  reason,  that  it  is  by 
no  means  certain  that  Ben  Sirach  wrote  /\%'^'^. 


a- 


XXXVl  INTRODUCTION 

22  For  Hezekiah  did  that  which  was  good,* 

And  was  strong  in  the  ways  of  David,  f 
Which  Isaiah  the  prophet  commanded  (him), 
Who  was  great  and  faithful  in  his  vision.  J 

23  In  his  days  §  the  sun  stood  still,|| 

And  he  added  life  to  the  king; 
.2*  By  the  spirit  of  might  he  saw  the  end, 
-^  And  comforted  the  mourners  in  Sion : 

25  Yor  ever  he  declared  things  that  should  be, 
And  hidden  things  before  they  came. 

Just  before  this  passage,  in  vv.^^^*,  Ben  Sirach  had  summarised, 
as  the  most  significant  events  of  Hezekiah's  days,  the  approach 
and  overthrow  of  Sennacherib,  and,  referring  to  the  prayer  of 
the  people  to  God,  had  said,  playing  on  the  name  of  Isaiah  (cp. 
Is  7^*),  as  in  v.22b  j^g  plays  on  the  name  of  Hezekiah,  that 
Yahweh  "  saved  them  by  the  hand  of  Isaiah  "  (in''yiJ'^  n^3  Dy^'Vl). 

15.  From  the  main  passage  we  can  infer  with  certainty  that 
this  writer  referred,  and  that  apparently  without  any  uncertainty, 
chs.  40-66,  or  at  least  what  is  most  characteristic  in  those 
chapters,  to  the  prophet  Isaiah.  V.^*  refers  unmistakably  to  the 
recurrent  arguments  from  prophecy  in,  e.g.^  4121-24  4^9  ^59  48"^^-, 
and  vv.24*^'  are  intentionally  coloured  with  the  phraseology  of  Is 
40-66  :  what  the  idols  could  not  do,  Isaiah  by  the  spirit  of  might 

(cp.  Is  1 12)  could :  cp.  nnriDii  ni\-i3  T^n  cf?\v  ny  . . .  n^nnx  nrn 
|Kn  ':zh  with  iK'ya  i6  "ik'k  dipdi  rr'nns  h^c^nid  t-^d  (Is  4610), 
nanpn  is^k  ns  i:i>  n'»r  (Is  4122).     Cp.  also  p^x  ^i»3«  Dm''^  with 

^Dj;  IDHD  IDm  (Is  40^),  'li1  VV  '^2^6  D1S5'i»  D-bx  b  Dnji>  (Is  6 1 2^-). 

t  Of  David,  %%-,  ^  his  father,  ©. 

X  Vv.22C'  ^-  23  are  missing,  through  mutilation  of  the  MS,  from  ^.  Vv.22o-  d 
23  above  are  translated  from  ©.  For  "^  5  has  |Ym?  ]  .^  v  ^  ^  Vn  the 
{most)  praiseworthy  of  the  prophets,  ffi  is  probably  correct.  'Ef  opdvet 
aiiTov,  in  his  vision,  probably  corresponds  to  uunn  in  the  original ;  cp.  Spaais 
=  pin  in  40^,  and  also,  e.g.,  in  Is  i^,  Nah  i^ ;  but  it  might  also  =inNnoa  :  cp. 
11^  49^;  that  it  renders  nann  (cp.  46^"),  as  Peters  infers,  is  improbable,  more 
especially  if  opdo-ews  in  46^'  is  a  gloss  from  48^  (Smend,  Peters). 

§'E»'  rats  rj/Jiipais  avrov  :  &  01,  »/^?  ^Q{)V),  becatise  by  his  hand'. 
cp.  46^. 

irAi'e7r65i(re»'  =  nDy,  46^  in  reference  to  Jos  10^^;  here,  too,  probably 
avtirbbKytv  renders  ^Dy,  though  the  allusion  is  to  B'Dcn  dbti,  koX  dvi^-q  0  ijXios, 
Is  388. 


ORIGIN  AND  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH      XXXVii 

i6.  We  can,  further,  infer  with  great  probability  that  in  Ben 
Sirach's  Book  of  Isaiah  chs.  40-66  were  already  preceded  by 
chs.  36-39,  and  certain  visions,  or  prophecies  (cp.  n.  on  ptn  in 
i^  in  the  Commentary),  corresponding  to  some  or  all  of  chs.  i- 
35.  V.23  certainly  refers  to  the  narrative  that  appears  both  in 
2  K  20  and  Is  38 ;  Ben  Sirach  has  already  (vv.^^^i)  drawn  on 
the  group  of  narratives  (2  K  17^^-20  =  Is  36-39)  to  which  this 
belongs  in  his  praise  of  Hezekiah ;  his  recurrence  to  it  in  prais- 
ing Isaiah  is  best  accounted  for  by  the  supposition  that  these 
chapters  stood  in  his  Book  of  Isaiah :  for  he  selects  in  praising 
the  prophets  Jeremiah  (49^^-)  and  Ezekiel  (49^*^-)  certain  phrases 
or  incidents  from  the  books  that  bear  their  names.  The  entire 
first  part  of  Is.,  viz.  chs.  1-35,  would  be  summarily  recalled  by 
the  term  vision  in  v.^s^^  if  that  word  already  stood  in  the  title 
to  the  whole  Book  of  Isaiah  (i^) 

17.  The  great  characteristic  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  as  it  now 
exists  is  that  it  consists  of  a  group  of  prophecies,  chs.  1-35, 
which  we  will  call  A ;  a  historical  section,  chs.  36-39,  B ;  and 
another  group  of  prophecies,  chs.  40-66,  C.  The  present  book, 
then,  expressed  in  a  formula,  is  A  +  B  +  C. 

It  is  highly  probable,  if  not  certain,  that  the  Book  of  Isaiah 
as  it  existed  c.  180  B.C.  already  consisted  of  A  +  B  +  C,  just 
as  the  "  Book  of  the  Twelve  "  must  already  have  contained 
twelve  sections  referred  to  twelve  different  prophets ;  cp.  Sir  49^0. 

But  the  question  remains :  were  the  three  parts  as  they 
existed  then  co-extensive  with  the  three  parts  as  they  exist  now?"^ 

This  is  a  question  which  the  direct  testimony  of  external 
evidence  does  not  answer.  Till  recently  the  identity  of  Ben 
Sirach's  Book  of  Isaiah  and  our  own  was  not  questioned.  But 
Du.  and  several  others  since  have  claimed  that  both  A  and  C 
received  accretions  after  180  B.C.  It  is  entirely  a  question  of 
probability  which  must  be  estimated  in  the  light  of  internal  as 
well  as  external  evidence. 

18.  Meantime  we  may  proceed  to  consider  the  evidence  of 
2  Ch  3622^'  =  Ezr  1^-3.  This  appears  to  give  a  terminus  a  quo  for 
the  Book  of  Isaiah,  to  show  that  when  Chronicles  was  written, 
i.e.  not  earlier  than  300  b.c.,  and  perhaps  later,  though  a  Book 
of  Isaiah  may  have  existed,  and  doubtless  did  exist,  it  was  less 
extensive  than  the  present  Book ;  that  as  yet  chs.  40-66  formed 
no  part  of  it. 


XXXVlll 


INTRODUCTION 


The  last  verses  of  Chronicles  read  as  follows  : 

20^  And  they  (viz.  the  exiles)  were  servants  to  him  (Nebu 
chadnezzar)  and  his  sons,  until  the  rule  of  the  sovereignty  of 
Persia,  ^i  in  order  to  fulfil  (niK^oi')  the  word  of  Yahweh  by  the 
mouth  of  Jeremiah,  until  the  land  enjoyed  her  sabbaths  :  all  the 
days  of  its  desolation,  it  kept  sabbath  to  fulfil  seventy  years. 
22  And  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  in  order  to 
complete  (nii?3f5)  the  word  of  Yahweh  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah, 
Yahweh  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  and  he 
made  proclamation  through  all  his  kingdom  and  also  (put  it)  in 
writing,  saying,  23  Thus  saith  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  "All  the 
kingdoms  of  the  earth  hath  Yahweh,  God  of  Heaven,  given  to 
me,  and  he  hath  commanded  concerning  me  that  I  should  build 
for  him  a  house  in  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  Judah  :  whosoever  then 
is  among  you  of  all  his  people,  Yahweh  his  God  be  with  him, 
and  let  him  go  up  (Ezr  i^)  to  Jerusalem  which  is  in  Judah,  and 
build  the  house  of  Yahweh,  the  God  of  Israel." 

In  v.21  the  Chronicler  quite  obviously,  and  even  explicitly, 
refers  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  in  Jer  29^^  that  the 
Exile  would  last  seventy  years  and  then  come  to  an  end.  In 
vy22f.  and  Ezr  i3  =  Ezr  i^"^  it  seems  equally  obvious  that  the 
Chronicler  is  referring  to  the  fulfilment  of  Yahweh's  words  in 
Is  4428,  Cyrus  "  shall  perform  all  my  pleasure,  even  saying  of 
Jerusalem,  She  shall  be  built,  and  to  the  Temple,  Thy  foundation 
shall  be  laid,"  just  as  the  words  that  immediately  follow  in  Is. 
"  Thus  saith  Yahweh  to  .  .  .  Cyrus,  whose  right  hand  I  have 
holden,  to  subdue  nations  before  him  and  to  loose  the  loins  of 
kings"  (45^),  obviously  seem  to  prompt  the  opening  words  of 
Cyrus'  decree  in  Ezr  i2*. 

19.  But  this  prophecy  in  Is  442^  is  referred  not  to  Isaiah, 
but  to  Jeremiah  !  unless,  therefore,  appearance  deceive  us,  Is  40- 
66  was  attributed  by  the  Chronicler,  and  if  so,  certainly  not  by 
him  alone,  to  Jeremiah ;  in  this  case  chs.  40-66  as  yet  formed 
no  part  of  a  Book  of  Isaiah. 


Du.  seems  to  have  been  the  first  to  recognise  the  obvious  significance  of 
2  Ch  3622''  fQj.  tjjg  history  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah.  It  had  been  obscured 
previously,  and  is  still  obscured,  by  a  prevalent,  but  most  improbable,  inter- 
pretation {e.g.  see  Ryle,  Bertholet,  Curtis  on  the  passage) :  according  to 
this  interpretation,  v.^^  as  well  as  y.^^  refers  to  the  prophecy  of  seventy  years  ; 
but  (i)  v.^2  is  far  more  naturally  taken  as  giving  an  additional  statement  to 


ORIGIN  AND  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH      XXxix 

v.^^  rather  than  a  mere  repetition,  as  referring  to  a  further  fulfihnent  rather 
than  repeating  a  reference  to  the  same  ;  note,  "and  in  the  first  year,"  etc.  ; 

(2)  though  m^aV,  v.^,  might  be  a  mere  synonym  of  hkSdS,  v. 2^,  it  is  at  least  as 
probable  that  it  means  in  order  to  complete  the  fulfilment  of  what  Jeremiah 
said  :  Jeremiah  had  prophesied  that  the  exile  must  last  seventy  years  :  it  had 
done  so,  and  that  prophecy  was  fulfilled  (v.^i) :  Jeremiah  had  also  (in  Is  44^ 
45^)  prophesied  that  Cyrus  would  secure  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple ;  in 
order  to  complete  the  fulfilment  of  Jeremiah's  predictions,  Yahweh  had 
moved  Cyrus  to  give  the  Jews  permission  to  return  and  build  the  Temple ; 

(3)  whether  we  admit  the  distinction  in  (2)  or  not,  v.^  is  closely  linked 
with  v.^,  and  the  prophecy  to  be  fulfilled,  referred  to  in  v.'^,  is  most  naturally 
identified  with  the  prophecy  cited  by  Cyrus  in  his  decree  in  v.^ ;  only  so  is 
the  entire  form  of  vv.^'-  really  explained  ;  if  v.^  was  merely  to  repeat  v.**, 
the  writer  would  rather  have  said  simply,  In  the  first  year  of  Cyrus,  Yahweh 
brought  up  the  people,  or  moved  Cyrus  to  let  the  people  return,  to  Judah  ; 
the  double  reference  to  the  building  of  the  house  clearly  indicates  that  this 
is  the  point  to  which  the  writer  in  v.^  moves  forward. 

It  would  be  preferable,  if  the  interpretation  just  suggested  were  proved 
impossible,  to  infer  that  Jeremiah  in  \.^  has  been  accidentally  substituted 
for  Isaiah,  or  that  the  entire  clause  i.tdt  'S3  m.T  nan  ni'?3'?  in  v. 22  is  a  mis- 
placed variant  of  'n'  'S3  rriiT  'yi'x  rwvhvh  in  v.*^  But  inasmuch  as  other  con- 
siderations tend  to  show  that  the  Book  of  Isaiah  was  certainly  not  complete 
much,  if  at  all,  before  180  B.C.,  and  there  is  certainly  no  evidence  to  show 
that  chs.  40-66  were  attributed  to  Isaiah  much  earlier  than  Sir  48^^"^  {c.  180 
B.C.),  it  is  unnecessary  to  assume  textual  corruption,  and  very  unwise  to 
prefer  an  unnatural  to  an  obvious  interpretation  *  of  2  Ch  36^. 

§§  20-27.   Origin  and  History  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah :  (2)  The 
Greek  Version  and  the  Prophetic  Canon. 

20.  In  addition  to  the  direct  external  testimony  to  the  exist- 
ence of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  before  the  ist  cent,  a.d.,  there  are  two 
important  matters  that  indirectly  testify  to  it — the  existence  of 
an  early  Greek  version   of  the   Book,  and   the   existence  of  a 

*  It  is  interesting  to  observe  how  Josephus,  intentionally  or  unintention- 
ally, softens  down  the  difficulty ;  and  it  is  significant  that  he  quite  clearly 
and  naturally  sees  in  2  Ch  36^  a  fulfilment  of  Is  44^^  45^ :  see  Ant.  xi.  i^*  2, 
especially  §  2,  where  he  says  :  '*  Now  Cyrus  knew  this  (raCra,  viz.  that  Cyrus* 
name  had  been  foretold  by  the  *  prophets,'  etc. )  from  reading  the  book  of 
his  prophecies  which  Isaiah  left  behind  him :  for  this  (prophet)  said  secretly 
[iv  6Liro{)p-f)Tif)  that  God  spoke  thus  to  him  :  *  My  will  is,  that  Cyrus,  whom  I 
have  appointed  king  of  many  and  great  nations,  send  my  people  to  their 
own  land,  and  build  my  Temple.'  This  Isaiah  foretold  140  years  before 
the  Temple  was  demolished.  Accordingly,  when  Cyrus  read  this  ...  an 
earnest  desire  and  ambition  seized  upon  him  to  carry  out  (7rot^<rot)  what  was 
so  written,"  etc. 


xl  INTRODUCTION 

prophetic  canon  prior  to  the  conclusion  of  the  entire  Canon  of 
the  Old  Testament  at  the  end  of  the  ist  cent.  a.d. 

(a)  The  Greek  Version. 

In  respect  of  the  relation  between  the  Hebrew  text  and  the 
Greek  version,  the  Book  of  Isaiah  presents  a  striking  contrast 
to  the  Book  of  Jeremiah.  The  Greek  version  of  the  Book  of 
Jeremiah  differs  widely  from  the  present  Hebrew  text  both  in 
extent  and  in  arrangement :  from  this  fact  it  is  a  reasonable 
inference  that  at  the  time  the  Greek  version  was  made  the  form 
and  extent  of  Jeremiah  had  not  been  firmly  fixed,  and  it  is  a 
tolerably  certain  inference  that  at  that  time  even  the  prophetic 
books  were  not  protected  from  re-arrangement  and  expansion  by 
any  theory  of  the  sanctity  of  Scripture  such  as  protected  the 
entire  Canon  from  the  ist  cent.  a.d.  onward.  In  arrangement 
the  Book  of  the  Twelve  also  differs  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek 
Bibles.  On  the  other  hand,  both  in  extent  and  arrangement^  the 
present  Hebrew  Text  and  the  Greek  Version  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah 
ar^ substantially  identical.  Two  or  three' verses  (2^2  381^  40"^  56^-), 
present  in  |^,  are  absent  in  ©,  and  in  sundry  other  places  ffi  is 
shorter  than  J^  by  a  clause  or  two ;  and  in  much  the  same 
number  of  cases  ©  has  clauses  not  found  in  J^.  There  is  no 
difference  of  arrangement. 

The  most  natural  and  obvious  conclusion  to  draw  is  that,  at 
the  date  when  the  Greek  version  was  made,  the  Book  of  Isaiah  had 
already  reached  its  present  form  and  2i\sOy  with  the  possible  excep- 
tion of  some  or  all  of  the  slight  +  and  -  of  ffi,  its  present  extent. 

21.  An  alternative  conclusion  is,  mdetdi  possible  :  a  Book  of 

Isaiah,  smaller  than  the  present,  may  have  been  translated  into 

Greek  at  a  certain  date;  additions  may  have  been  made  after 

that  date  to  the  Hebrew  text,  and  these  additions  may  have  been 

subsequently  translated  into  Greek,  and  added  to  the  existing  Greek 

version,  yet  so  that  their  position  in  the  version  corresponded 

exactly  to  their  position  in  the  original  (ct.  Jeremiah).     But  if 

this  were  actually  the  case,  the  additions  to  the  original  Greek 

version  should  reveal  themselves  as  such  by  differences  of  style 

and  method,  for  even  quite  brief  additions  to  the  original  text  of 

(&  are  commonly  betrayed  by  stylistic  differences.*     But  as  a 

matter  of  fact  the  Greek  version  of  Isaiah  is  marked  in  general 

*  See  nn.  on  11^  and  the  references  in  Thackeray,  Grammar^  p.  294, 
under  "Interpolations." 


ORIGIN   AND   HISTORY   OF  THE  BOOK  OF   ISAIAH      xH 

by  greater  homogeneity  of  style  than  the  versions  of  Jeremiah  and 
"  the  Twelve" :  such  differences  as  exist  are  not  perhaps  sufficient 
to  prove  difference  of  translators,  and,  if  they  are  sufficient,  they 
would  point  to  chs.  40-66  (or  perhaps  40-55,  56-66)  proceeding  as 
a  whole  from  one  translator  and  chs.  1-39  as  a  whole  from  another ; 
they  would  lend  no  probability  to  a  theory  that  such  parts  of  the 
Book  of  Isaiah  {e.g.  chs.  24-27)  as  have  been  regarded  by  some 
recent  writers  as  the  latest  parts  of  the  book,  and  not  written  before 
the  last  third  of  the  2nd  cent.  B.C.,  were  translated  by  a  different 
hand  from  that  which  translated  the  main  body  of  chs.  1-39. 

Thackeray  has  argued  that  whereas  three  hands  are  distinguishable  in  the 
Greek  version  of  Jeremiah  (a.  chs.  1-28  ;  /3.  29-51  ;  7.  52 — Greek  enumera- 
tion) and  two  in  Ezekiel  (o.  chs.  1-27  and  40-48 ;  /3.  28-39,  including  a 
heterogeneous  section  /3^.  36-^"'^),  there  is  no  similar  evidence  pointing  to  the 
work  of  different  translators  in  Isaiah  ;  he  is  able  10  point  to  common  character- 
istics that  run  through  the  whole  Book  of  Isaiah,  for  example,  the  translitera- 
tion of  mxas  in  the  phrase  ni«3J<  niiT,  which,  rarely  found  outside  Isaiah, 
occurs  in  Isaiah  fifty-three  times  ;  the  phrase  /xiKpbs  kuI  fx^yas,  or  &irb  fiiKpov  ^ws 
fieyiXov,  occurs  in  five  places  (9'^  (^^'  22"*  ^*  23*'  ^^)>  where  the  Hebrew  does 
not  immediately  suggest  it ;  the  phrase  e^s  rbv  aluva  xp^'^o*'  is  used  seven 
times  in  Isaiah,  and  elsewhere  only  in  Ex  14"*,  Bar  3^*^  (cp.  rbv  aldva  xpbvov, 
V.*'),  Jth  15^** :  and  in  general  Isaiah  is  marked  by  greater  correctness  of  style 
than  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel :  see/T/iS  iv.  245-266,  398-41 1 ;  Grammar^  11  f. 
I  have  myself  drawn  attention  to  differences  as  between  chs.  1-39  and  40-66, 
and  amongst  others  to  differences  in  the  use  of  the  article  and  in  the 
rendering  of  tdk  na  and  dkj  ;  the  particles  ?rdXt»',  5iJ,  bioTi^  and  rolvvv,  which 
are  frequent  in  chs.  1-39,  are  almost  entirely  absent  from  chs.  40-66 :  see 
/TAS,  1911,  pp.  286-293. 

22.  What,  then,  is  the  date  of  the  Greek  version  ?  Briefly 
stated,  the  most  important  evidence  is  as  follows : — (i)  the 
author  of  Wisdom,  commonly  supposed  to  have  written  about 
50  B.C.,*  must  have  been  familiar  with  the  existing  version  of 
Isaiah,  for  in  2^2  be  quotes  the  very  peculiar  version  of  Is  3^^  ffi : 
cp.  also  Wis  15^®  with  Is  44^0  ffi.  Other  later  or  more  uncertain 
but  interesting  traces  of  ffir  are  to  be  found  in  4  Mac  iS^*^-  (cp. 
Is  432),  Orac.  Sibyll.  iii.  606  (cp.  Is  2^^^-),  708  ff.  (cp.  Is  ii^ff-); 
(2)  the  translator  of  Ecclesiasticus  in  his  prologue  (c.  132  B.C.) 
refers  to  (Greek)  versions  of  "the  law  and  the  prophecies  (at 
7rpo<j>7)T€Lai)  and  the  rest  of  the  books " ;  (3)  the  style  and 
language  of  the  version. 

*  Thackeray  {Grammar,  61  f.),  on  grounds  of  Greek  orthography,  proposes 
an  earlier  date,  c.  130  B.C.  ;  cp.  Church  Quart.  Keviezv,  Oct.  1910,  pp.  209  f. 


\ 


xlii  INTRODUCTION 

It  is  possible  that  a  more  thorough  and  detailed  investigation  of  the  style 
and  language  of  fflr  may  yield  more  convincing  results  than  have  been  obtained 
at  present.  Thackeray  {JThS  iv.  583,  x.  300-303)  adduces  considerations, 
worthy  indeed  of  attention,  but  by  no  means  final  or  conclusive  on  this 
particular  issue,  to  show  that  Isaiah  was  translated  earlier  than  the  other 
prophetical  books  :  (l)  the  Greek  of  Isaiah  approaches  more  nearly  than  that 
of  the  other  prophetical  books  to  the  classical  style :  in  the  Grammar^ 
Thackeray  classifies  it  as  good  koiv^  Greek  with  the  Pentateuch,  translated  in 
the  3rd  cent.  B.C.,  but  also  with  i  Mac.  which  cannot  have  been  written  before 
the  end  of  the  2nd  cent.  B.C.;  (2)  "the  greater  ease  of  style,  and  the 
tendency  to  give  a  free  rather  than  a  verbatim  rendering,"  may  ho.  "marks 
of  a  comparatively  early  date,"  though  the  analogy  of  the  Aramaic  Versions 
would,  so  far  as  it  had  any  value,  point  to  the  opposite  conclusion;  the 
earliest  Targum  is  far  less  free  than  the  later  Targums ;  (3)  some  of  the 
renderings  in  Isaiah  agree  with  renderings  in  the  Book  of  Exodus;  there 
are  also,  it  may  be  added,  affinities  with  renderings  in  other  books  of  the 
Pentateuch ;  see  Ges.  i.  56,  and  cp.  the  use  of  6.px<^v  as  an  equivalent  in  Pent, 
and  Is.  (also  in  Ezk.)  of  l'?D,  to  which  H.  Wiener  draws  attention  in  Bibli- 
otheca  Sacra^  191 1>  PP-  491  ff.  In  the  Grammar^  Thackeray  "conjectures" 
that  Isaiah  may  have  been  translated  near  the  beginning  of  the  2nd  cent.  B.C., 
the  other  prophetical  books  nearer  its  close.  The  occurrences  in  Isaiah  of 
the  form  ovQd%  (ixrjdels)  and  oidels  {firjdeis)  would  indicate  a  date  not  much,  if 
at  all,  before  132  B.C.,  if  we  could  trust  the  orthographical  tradition: 
unfortunately  we  cannot  do  so ;  see  Thackeray,  Grammar,  pp.  58  ff.  It  is 
scarcely  safe  at  present  to  assert  more  than  that  proof  is  not  yet  forthcoming 
that  the  language  and  style  of  the  version  are  less  compatible  with  a  date 
c.  150  B.C.,  or  even  earlier,  than  with  a  later  date. 

The  Greek  version,  then,  is  certainly  not  later  than  the  Book 
of  Wisdom,  t.e.  than  the  first  half  of  the  ist  cent.  b.c.  More- 
over, either  (a)  this  version  is  earlier  than  132  B.C.,  or  (d)  the 
prophecies  referred  to  in  the  Prologue  to  Sir.  did  not  include 
Is.,  or  (c)  the  version  known  to  the  author  of  the  Prologue  and 
the  existing  version  are  not  identical.  Of  these  alternatives  (a) 
is  the  most  probable,  though  neither  (d)  nor  (c)  can  be  ruled  out 
as  absolutely  impossible;  and,  indeed,  if  Thackeray  is  right  in 
considering  the  version  of  large  parts  of  2-4  Kings  to  be  not 
earlier  than  the  ist  cent.  B.C.,  then  the  TrpofftrjTeiat  of  the  Prologue 
to  Sir.  were  at  all  events  not  co-extensive  with  the  books  of  the 
"  prophetic  Canon  "  (cp.  §1). 

Failing  good  evidence  to  the  contrary,  it  will  be  wise  to 
reckon  with  the  probability  that  the  Greek  version  of  Isaiah 
existed,  if  not  even  earlier,  at  least  very  soon  after  150  B.C.,  and 
consequently  that  by  the  same  date  the  Book  of  Isaiah  had 
attained  its  present  extent,  except  for  any  sections  which  can  be 


ORIGIN   AND   HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF   ISAIAH      xliii 

shown  to  have  been  translated  into  Greek  by  other  hands  than 
those  responsible  for  the  main  body  of  the  work  (cp.  §  21). 

23.  {b)  The  "prophetic  Canon." 

After  the  final  determination  of  the  Canon  of  Scripture  at  the 
end  of  the  First  Century  a.d.,  every  book  included  in  it  was 
protected  from  expansion  or  alteration  (§  10).  But  the  final 
determination  of  the  Canon  was,  probably,  the  last  of  three 
stages,  of  which  the  first  was  the  acceptance  of  the  Law,  i.e.  the 
Pentateuch,  in  the  5th  cent.  B.C.  (Neh  8);  the  second  consisted 
in  the  constitution  of  a  second  group  of  sacred  writings,  which 
continue  to  exist  as  the  second  part  of  the  Hebrew  Bible, 
"the  Prophets"  (§  i).  This  second  stage  was  probably  reached 
early  in  the  2nd  cent  B.C. ;  for  Daniel,  written^.  167  B.C.,  though 
it  would  naturally  belong  to  the  group,  as  a  matter  of  fact  forms 
no  part  of  it.* 

24.  Can  we  then  argue :  The  prophetic  Canon  was  complete 
before  the  middle  of  the  2nd  century  B.C.,  probably  even  before 
c.  165  B.C.,  the  Book  of  Isaiah  forms  part  of  that  Canon,  there- 
fore the  Book  of  Isaiah  can  contain  nothing  of  Maccabaean 
origin,  can  scarcely  contain  anything  written  after  the  close  of 
the  3rd  cent.  B.c.  ?  The  argument  has  been  used,  and  its 
validity  has  been  disputed.  It  is  scarcely  safe  to  press  it  too  far, 
or  to  rely  on  it  exclusively.  The  final  determination  of  the 
entire  Canon  falls  at  a  period  (ist-2nd  cent.  a.d.)  when  we  have 
evidence  that  a  very  strict  theory  of  the  letter  of  Scripture  was 
developing.  But  we  are  not  justified  in  assuming  that  the  same 
theory  existed  in  the  2nd  cent.  B.C.,  and  that  it  was  applied  to 
the  earlier  and  smaller  bodies  of  Scripture  that  had  gained,  or 
were  then  gaining,  form  and  recognition.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
we  have  evidence  that  such  a  theory,  even  if  it  existed,  was 
ineffective :  "  the  Law "  received  additions  after  the  time  of 
Ezra  (Numbers^  p.  xxxi  ff".),  the  Books  of  Jeremiah  and  "The 
Twelve  "  differ  in  extent  or  arrangement  or  both  in  fflr  and  J^, 
Isaiah  (J^)  itself  has  in  all  probability  received  some  very  slight 
additions  even  after  the  date  of  €r,  and  harmless  additions 
to  the  text  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  {Numbers^  p.  xxxviii  f.) 

*  For  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  summary  statements  of  this  section,  refer- 
ence must  again  be  made  to  standard  works  on  the  Canon.  It  is  to  be 
observed  that  Du.  (p.  vif.)  disputes  the  value  of  the  argument  from  the 
absence  of  Daniel. 


xliv  INTRODUCTION 

show  a  similar  tendency  in  the  neighbouring  Samaritan  com- 
munity. 

Thus  the  rigid  theory  of  the  finality  of  Scripture  and  the  strict 
division  between  Scripture  and  its  interpretation,  which  prevailed 
from  the  ist  cent.  a.d.  downwards,  had  been  preceded  by  a 
period  during  which  the  ancient  words  of  the  prophets  were 
subject  to  adaptation  to  the  new  conditions  and  needs  of  later 
generations.  Ancient  promise  or  threat  and  modern  interpreta- 
tion, application,  or  modification,  were  at  this  period  not  kept 
absolutely  distinct,  but  were  combined  into  new  written  words 
adapted  to  present  needs. 

25.  And  yet  the  failure  of  Daniel  to  be  incorporated  in  the 
prophetic  Canon  shows  that  in  some  degree  the  extent  of 
expansion  or  change  to  which  "  the  Prophets "  were  subjected 
was  limited.  Is  it  likely  that  entire  sections  like  chs.  24-27, 
(32)  34-35  were  first  incorporated  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah  after  the 
middle,  or  even  after  the  end,  of  the  2nd  cent.  b.c.  ?  Daniel 
and,  say.  Is  24-27  are,  indeed,  not  quite  in  the  same  case: 
to  have  included  Daniel  in  the  prophetic  Canon  would  have  been 
to  expand  that  Canon  by  the  introduction  of  the  work  of  a 
prophet  not  yet  recognised  ;  whereas,  if  chs.  24-27  had  indepen- 
dently established  a  claim  to  be  Isaiah's,  their  inclusion  merely 
meant  that  the  work  of  a  prophet  already  recognised  in  the 
Canon  was  made  more  complete. 

On  the  whole,  it  seems  improbable  that  long  sections  not 
obviously  related  to  the  existing  Book,  and  the  place  which  they 
now  occupy  in  it,  were  first  incorporated  in  it  after  "the 
Prophets "  had  become  a  body  of  Scripture.  They  would 
naturally,  like  Daniel,  have  found  their  way  into  the  "writings." 

26.  Du.  and  Marti  dismiss  the  argument  from  the  Canon 
altogether,  on  the  ground  that  the  History  of  the  Canon  must  be 
judged  by  what  it  contains  and  not  vice  versa.  This  is  perfectly 
true ;  and  if  any  section  of  the  Book  bears  unmistakable  evidence 
of  having  been  written  at  the  end  of  the  2nd  cent.  B.C.,  it 
certainly  follows  that  the  Book  of  Isaiah  and  the  prophetic  Canon 
were  still  open  to  expansion  as  late  as  that.  But  if  it  is  a  case  of 
probability  merely,  if  it  merely  seems  probable,  without  appearing 
certain,  that  a  section  of  the  Book  was  written  at  so  late  a  date, 
then  we  are  justified  in  placing  probability  over-against  prob- 
ability :  a  possible,  but  not  necessary,  theory  of  the  interpretation 


ORIGIN  AND   HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF   ISAIAH      xlv 

and  origin  of  a  section  may  rightly  be  judged  unproven  if  it 
conflicts  with  the  probable,  even  though  not  certain,  history  of 
the  prophetic  Canon. 

27.  Reviewing  the  various  lines  of  evidence  which  have 
already  been  discussed,  we  should  not  expect  to  find  much  in 
the  present  Book  of  Isaiah  that  was  written  after  c.  180  B.C.,  still 
less  to  find  much  that  was  written  after  r.  150  B.C.,  unless  differenced 
in  (K  can  be  established  which  point  to  different  translators. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  reason  why  even  much  of  the 
Book  may  not  have  been  written  as  late  as  the  3rd  cent.  B.C.,  for 
our  present  Book,  in  common  probably  with  the  Book  of  the 
Twelve,  appears  to  have  taken  shape  within  that  century,  and 
rather  perhaps  towards  its  close  than  its  beginning.  Whether 
matter  so  late  even  as  the  3rd  cent.  B.C.,  and,  if  any,  how  much 
of  such  matter  is  to  be  found  in  the  Book,  will  be  determined 
mainly  by  internal  evidence. 

§  28-35.   Origin  and  History  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  :  (3)  The 
Testimony  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  to  itself. 

28.  When  we  turn  to  interrogate  the  Book  itself  as  to  its 
origin  and  history,  two  significant  features  at  once  strike  us:  (i) 
the  arrangement  of  the  matter;  (2)  the  presence  of  several  titles. 

To  the  arrangement  of  the  Book  a  passing  reference  has 
already  been  made  in  §  5.  Certain  principles  of  arrangement 
can  be  detected,*  but  none  is  consistently  carried  through. 
Regard  for  the  subject-matter  may  have  exercised  some  influence 
in  keeping,  if  not  in  bringing,  together  kindred  prophecies  or 
sections:  as  in  Ezekiel  (chs.  25-32)  and  Jeremiah  (chs.  46-51), 
so  in  Isaiah  (chs.  13-23),  prophecies  concerning  foreign  nations 
are  grouped  together ;  yet  this  principle  of  arrangement  is  less 
consistently  carried  through  in  Isaiah,  for  (i)  the  foreign 
prophecies  in  chs.  13-23  are  interrupted  by  a  section,  or 
sections,  dealing  with  Judah  in  ch.  22 ;  (2)  other  foreign 
prophecies  appear  elsewhere  in  the  Book ;  Edom  is  the  subject 
of  ch.  34,  Babylon  of  ch.  47  ;  so  in  the  book  of  "  The  Twelve  " 
prophecies  concerning  foreign  nations  are  separated  from  one 
another ;  see,  e.g..  Am  i  f.,  Nahum ;  in  this  case  the  reason  is 
obvious :  the  book  of  "  The  Twelve "  is  a  compilation  which  in 

*  Ges.  pp.  iSff.  ;  Cornill,  Die  Composition  des  Buches  fesaia^  in  ZATW 
iv.  83-105  ;  Che.  Introd.  xxii. 


Xlvi  INTRODUCTION 

its  arrangement  is  primarily  governed  by  the  principle  that 
previously  existing  books  (Amos,  Nahum,  etc.)  should  be  retained 
distinct  in  the  compilation :  the  same  principle  is  probably 
responsible  for  the  separation  in  the  existing  Book  of  Isaiah  of 
chs.  34  and  47  from  chs.  13-23. 

Another  principle  that  has  exercised  some  influence  in  the 
"arrangement  of  Isaiah  is  regard  for  chronology :  "  the  year  in 
which  Uzziah  died"  (6^),  i.e.  c.  740  B.C.,  is  followed  in  ch.  7  by  a 
section  that  refers  definitely  to  the  reign  of  the  next  king  but  one 
to  Uzziah,  Ahaz  (from  c.  735  B.C.);  14^^  refers  to  "the  year  in 
which  king  Ahaz  died,"  which  was  not  later  than  715  B.C.;  20^ 
refers  to  the  year  711  B.C.,  and  the  Assyrian  king  Sargon;  chs. 
36-39,  to  the  days  of  Hezekiah  and  Sennacherib,  the  successor 
of  Sargon;  44^^  etc.  to  Cyrus,  c.  550  B.C.  Yet  a  detailed 
examination  shows  that,  apart  from  the  striking  disregard  of 
chronology,  which  allows  ch.  6,  the  record  of  Isaiah's  call  to  be 
a  prophet,  to  stand  after  a  group  of  his  prophecies  (chs.  1-5), 
chronological  sequence  is  frequently  violated  in  the  present 
arrangement  of  the  Book.  The  extent  to  which  prophecies  are 
out  of  chronological  sequence  may  be  in  part  due  to  the 
inadequacy  of  the  post-exilic  (§§  5-7)  editor's  knowledge  ;  but 
in  part  this  also  is  probably  due  to  the  desire  to  keep  distinct  the 
previously  existing  books  which  he  has  incorporated  in  his 
compilation.  And  in  any  case  the  extent  of  chronological 
inconsequence  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah  is  after  all  no  greater  than 
in  the  Kor'an,  though  that  work  was  arranged  within  a  generation 
of  its  composition,  and  while  a  considerable  amount  of  valuable 
tradition  as  to  the  age  of  its  several  parts  was  still  young. 

29.  Certainly  the  presence  of  various  titles  strongly  suggests 
that  the  editor  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  has  incorporated  in  his 
compilation  previously  existing  books  much  as  he  found  them, 
without  attempting  any  free  and  general  rearrangement  of  the 
material  thus  at  his  command.  This  editor  may  himself  be  the 
author  of  the  title  in  i^,  but  scarcely  of  the  title  in  2^  for  2^,  far 
from  being  the  heading  of  a  mere  section,  is  as  wide  in  its  scope 
as  i^ ;  it  stands  where  it  does  because  the  editor  has  here 
incorporated,  title  and  all,  a  previously  existing  book.  A  further 
title  occurs  in  13^  which  runs,  "the  Oracle  of  Babylon,  which 
Isaiah  the  son  of  Amos  saw,"  and  in  the  succeeding  chapters 
down  to  ch.  23  a  number  of  sub-titles  follow,  "the  Oracle  of 


V 


ORIGIN   AND   HISTORY   OF   THE  BOOK   OF   ISAIAH      xlvii 

Moab"  (15^),  "the  Oracle  of  Damascus"  (17^),  and  so  forth. 
Was  13^  hke  2^  originally  the  title  of  a  previously  existing  book 
which  the  editor  of  Isaiah  incorporated  entire,  or  was  it  shorter 
like  the  titles  of  15^  17^  etc.,  and  merely  a  sub-title  of  a  section? 
On  the  one  hand,  the  general  title  of  an  entire  book  containing 
oracles  on  several  nations  would  more  appropriately  have  run, 
"  The  Oracles  which  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amos  saw  " ;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  editor  who  had  already  (i^)  prefixed  a  title  indicating 
Isaiah  as  author  of  the  whole  volume,  had  no  obvious  reason  for 
reasserting  his  authorship  in  this  particular  sub-title.  On  the 
whole,  it  seems  most  probable  that  chs.  13-23  are  derived  from 
an  independent  "  Book  of  Oracles  " ;  possibly  this  was  at  one  time 
anonymous,  and  the  later  ascription  to  Isaiah  was  recorded  by 
attaching  a  clause  to  the  title  of  the  first  section  of  the  Book, 
while  it  still  circulated  separately  and  before  it  had  come  to 
form  part  of  the  present  Book  of  Isaiah. 

30.  We  find  no  further  titles;  but  other  sections  of  the 
book  are  marked  off  by  certain  characteristics.  Chs.  28-32 
consist  of  a  series  of  sections  beginning  with  the  exclamation 
"•in  (28^  29^  30^  31^  33^) ;  these  are  widely  separated  from  a  series 
of  shorter  sections  which  begin  with  the  same  exclamation  (5^"^^) ; 
these  two  series  of  similar  sections  are  probably  separated  in  the 
present  Book  of  Isaiah  because  the  editor  found  them  in  different 
works  which  he  has  incorporated  entire :  cp.  the  separation  of 
the  prophecies  in  chs.  34.  47  from  chs.  13-23.  Chs.  36-39 
(except  39^'^^)  are  an  extract  from  the  Book  of  Kings. 

The  book  thus  divides  into  these  sections  : 

a.  I.  General  Title  attributing  authorship  to  Isaiah  (i^),  and     d    ' 
a  small  group  of  prophecies  (i^-^i). 

b.  2-12.  A  Book  of  prophecies  mainly  concerning  "Judah       <" 

and  Jerusalem,"  ascribed  in  a  title  (2®)  to  Isaiah.  /)    1    . 

c.  13-23.  "  Oracles "  which  the  title  to  the  first  section  (13I)   '^^^    -^  p^^ 
probably  intends  to  attribute  to  Isaiah.  ^  p  i,     1 

d.  24-27.  Anonymous  Prophecy.  -  ' 

e.  28-33.  A  collection  of  poems  beginning  with  ^in.  "^*^  Jv^/O-^^ 
/  34  f.  Anonymous  Prophecy.  "" 

g.  36-39.  Mainly  an  extract  from  2  Kings. 
h.  40-66.  Anonymous  Prophecy. 

Of  these  sections,  g.  has  its  analogy  in  Jer  52,  and  the 
analogy   suggests   that   it   once  formed   the  close  of  a  volume 


Xlviii  INTRODUCTION 

attributed  to  Isaiah,  whether  that  volume  contained  the  whole  or 
only  part  (§  17)  of  what  now  stands  between  the  title  i^  and 
this  historical  appendix  in  chs.  36-39.  There  is  also  this  differ- 
ence between  chs.  1-39  and  40-66,  that  whereas  much  in  chs. 
1-39  was  written  later  than  the  age  of  Isaiah  and  as  late  as  most, 
if  not  all,  of  40-66,  yet  throughout  1-39  we  constantly  return 
to  direct  references  to  Isaiah,  or  prophecies  unmistakably  of  his 
age ;  but  in  40-66  there  is  no  reference  to  Isaiah,  nor  are  there 
any  prophecies  of  his  age. 

31.  Probably,  then,  a  stage,  if  not  the  latest,  consisted  in 
attaching  chs.  40-66  to  chs.  36-39,  which  latter  chapters  were 
already  preceded  by  chs.  1-35  in  whole  or  in  part.  Whether  this 
attachment  of  chs.  40-66  to  1-39  was  in  the  first  instance  due 
to  the  fact  that  a  roll  containing  a  Book  of  Isaiah — 1-39 — was 
filled  out  with  what  was  understood  to  be  an  anonymous 
prophecy  (chs.  40-66),  either  simply  to  fill  a  blank  space,  or  to 
make  the  fourth  prophetic  collection  approximate  more  nearly  in 
size  to  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel  and  "  The  Twelve,"  or  whether  chs. 
40-66  were  attached  to  chs.  1-39  because  they  had  already 
come  to  be  attributed  to  Isaiah,  are  speculations  that  need  be 
pursued  no  further  here ;  see,  however,  Eichhorn,  Eitileitung^  iii. 
(1783)  94;  Ges.  pp.  17  f.  ;  Cheyne,  Introd.  xviif.,  237  f. 

Both  books,  chs.  1-39  and  chs.  40-66,  had  had  their  own 
separate  history  before  they  came,  whether  by  accident  or 
design,  to  be  treated  as  a  single  work.  Chs.  40-66  appear  to 
contain  work  of  at  least  two  periods  {c.  540  and  c.  450  b.c.) 
separated  from  one  another  by  nearly  a  century  :  the  matter  will 
be  fully  argued  in  its  proper  place  in  the  Commentary.  An 
editor  must  have  brought  together  the  work  of  these  two  different 
periods,  and  that  scarcely  much  before,  and  possibly,  even 
probably,  considerably  after,  the  close  of  the  5th  century. 

32.  It  remains  to  discuss  here  the  separate  history  and  the 
complexity  of  chs.  1-39  more  fully.  From  the  nature  of  the 
case,  various  alternative  theories  are  often  possible  :  no  attempt 
will  be  made  to  discuss  or  even  to  mention  them  all :  it  must 
suffice  to  indicate  so  much  as  will  suggest  the  complexity  of  the 
problem,  and  the  number  of  stages  by  which  chs.  1-39  may  have 
attained  their  present  form. 

The  Book  that  contained  chs.  40-66  was  in  the  first  instance 
anonymous ;  but  the  Book  that  was  concluded  with  chs.  36-39 — 


ORIGIN   AND   HISTORY  OF   THE   BOOK  OF   ISAIAH       xlix 

the  long  extract  from  Kings  relating  to  Isaiah — was  probably 
from  the  first  understood  to  consist  entirely  of  prophecies  by 
Isaiah  and  narratives  relating  to  him,  in  this  resembling  the 
Books  of  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Is  1-39 
may  contain  the  work  of  nearly  as  many  different  writers  as  the 
book  of  "  the  Twelve,"  but,  unlike  that  book,  it  passed  as  the 
work  of,  or  about,  a  single  prophet. 

33.  But  how  much  of  chs.  1-35  belonged  to  the  Book  of 
which  chs.  36-39  formed  the  closing  section  ?  In  all  probability 
at  least  the  three  sections  which  are  referred  by  separate  titles 
to  Isaiah,  viz.  (a)  ch.  i ;  (d)  chs.  2-12  ;  (c)  chs.  13-23.  But  did 
this  Book  also  include  from  the  first  the  anonymous  chapters 
24-35  ^  Of  these  chapters,  28-33  (32)  contain  much  that  is  ad- 
mittedly the  work  of  Isaiah,  whereas  chs.  24-27.  (33).  34.  35  con- 
tain nothing  that  can  with  any  probability  be  defended  as  work 
of  the  8th  cent.  b.c.  A  theory  that  the  anonymous  sections  24- 
27.  33.  34.  35  are  subsequent  interpolations  cannot  be  considered 
proved,  but  it  would  have  in  itself  nothing  improbable.  Only  it 
would  be  reasonable  to  believe  that  if  chs.  24-27.  33.  34.  35  were 
interpolated  into  a  Book  of  Isaiah  that  consisted  of  i.  2-12.  13- 
23.  28-32,  they  were  so  interpolated  because  they  were  already 
believed  to  be  the  work  of  Isaiah,  or,  if  we  prefer  the  alternative, 
because  the  interpolator  wished  them  to  pass  as  Isaiah's. 
Again,  if  these  prophecies  were  added  to  a  book  that  closed  with 
chs.  36-39,  it  is  easy  to  see  why  they  were  inserted  somewhere  in 
the  middle  among  the  prophecies  rather  than  appended  to  the 
narratives,  though  the  reason  for  the  particular  place  assigned 
them  may  not  be  obvious.  On  the  other  hand,  if  they  were 
interpolated  after  chs.  40-66  had  been  already  added  to  a  book 
which  consisted  of  chs.  i.  2-12.  13-23.  28-32.  36-39,  it  is  by  no 
means  easy  to  see  why  they  were  interpolated  where  they  now 
stand  rather  than  at  the  close  of  the  prophecies  in  chs.  40-66,  for 
they  are  certainly  not  very  obviously  connected  with  their  present 
setting.  From  this  point  of  view,  then,  there  seems  some 
probability  that,  if  interpolated  at  all,  chs.  24-27  and  33-35  were 
interpolated  before  chs.  36-39  and  40-66  were  united,  i.e.  before 
c.  180  B.C. ;  and  if  this  were  so,  it  would  follow  that  chs.  24-27 
and  33-35  were  written  before  180  b.c.  The  case  is  rather 
different  with  i9i7(i9)-25 .  \{  this  were  written  c.  160  b.c,  it  must 
have  been  interpolated ;  but  it  may  equally  well  have  been  inter- 
VOL.   I. — d 


I 


INTRODUCTION 


polated  after  the  union  of  chs.  36-39  and  40-66,  as  before :  after 
66  it  would  have  stood  in  no  natural  connection;  in  ch.  19  the 
verses  are  attached  to  others  which  also  deal  with  Egypt. 

34.  We  proceed  next  to  a  survey  of  the  sections  of  which 
several,  if  not  all,  once  existed  separately  as  smaller  books. 

Ch.  I  may  have  been  a  prophetic  fly-sheet  of  about  the  size 
of  the  Book  of  Obadiah,  or  its  several  parts  may  have  been  first 
put  together  by  the  final  editor  of  the  Book  :  see  Introd,  to  ch.  i 
in  the  Comm. 

2-12.  This  section,  which  opens  with  its  own  title  and 
has  the  main  body  of  its  contents  enclosed  between  poems 
(2^**  12)  relating  to  the  Ideal  Future,  may  well  have  formed 
a  Book  of  Isaiah.  But  if  so,  like  our  present  Book  it  had 
itself  had  a  history.  It  may  be  noted  that  (i)  the  section  is 
wider  in  its  scope  than  "  Judah  and  Jerusalem  "  (2^),  for  see  9^- 
10*;  (2)  the  account  of  Isaiah's  call  falls  in  the  middle  of  it, 
ch.  6 ;  (3)  chs.  6-8  are  more  largely  narrative  than  "  vision," 
ptn  (2^  ;  cp.  n.  on  i^)  ;  (4)  in  525-29  ^^  i^ayg  ^  clear  case  of  mis- 
placement; these  verses  form  the  close  to  9'^- 10*;  (5)  not  a 
little  even  of  these  chapters  is  later  than  the  age  of  Isaiah. 

There  is  room  for  various  conjectures;  6-8^8  shows  in  the 
main  at  least  a  clear  chronological  sequence,  and  is  drawn  in  part, 
if  not  entirely,  from  an  autobiographical  work  by  Isaiah;  chs. 
2-5  contain  prophetic  poems  and  sayings.  It  is  possible  that  2^ 
was  in  the  first  instance  a  title  to  a  small  body  of  prophecy — say 
2-4,  or  2-5,  to  which  the  extracts  from  autobiographical,  or 
biographical,  memoirs — 6-8^8 — were  appended,  as  chs.  36-39 
were  appended  to  1-35.*  The  remainder  of  chs.  2-12,  including 
the  prophetic  poem  on  Ephraim  (g'^-io^),  may  have  gained  its 
way  into  this  Book  at  one  time  or  at  several.  It  is,  of  course, 
conceivable  that  some  or  all  of  such  additional  matter  was 
added  by  the  final  editor  of  the  Book :  but  this  is  not  probable ; 
for  had  he  been  freely  re-arranging  his  material,  it  would  have 
been  natural  to  group  9^-10*  with  other  prophecies  concerning 
Ephraim,  such  as  ly^^^^  28^-*. 


*  It  is  less  probable  that  the  Book,  claiming  in  its  title  to  be  prophecies 
concerning  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  contained,  in  addition  to  2-5,  ^-\q^.  and 
that  6-9^  was  subsequently  interpolated  between  2-5  and  9'-io^  (Di.) ;  nor  is 
Di.'s  argument  that  Isaiah  himself  is  answerable  for  combining  2-5.  6-9" 
(or  6-11^^)  at  all  conclusive. 


ORIGIN   AND  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK   OF  ISAIAH      li 

But  if  we  cannot  speak  with  certainty  as  to  the  original 
contents  of  the  Book  to  which  2^  was  the  prefixed  title,  or  as  to 
its  contents  when  used  by  the  editor  who  incorporated  it  into 
Is  1-39,  so  neither  can  we  speak  with  certainty  as  to  the  date 
of  the  Book,  either  in  its  original  or  expanded  form.  In  its 
expanded  form,  however,  it  must  be  a  work  of  the  post-exilic 
period:  for  not  a  little  of  2-12  was  first  written  in  that  period, 
ch.  12  by  very  general  consent,  probably  also  other  passages, 
viz.  22-4  42-6  (9I-8)  II  and  parts  of  10. 

Chs.  13-23.  This  book  consists  of  (a)  a  series  of  "oracles" 
indicated  by  title  (13^)  and  sub-titles  (15^  17^  19^  ai^-"-^^  22^ 
23I),  (d)  sections  not  entitled  "oracles"  (1424-27.  28-32  1^12-14  jg. 
( 1 917-25).  20.  22^^-^^).  The  term  KBTD,  which  appears  in  the  titles 
that  give  so  striking  an  external  feature  to  this  section,  occurs 
nowhere  else  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah  except  in  30^,  but  it  is  found 
in  the  titles  of  certain  sections  of  the  book  of  "  The  Twelve  " ;  see 
Hab  i\  Nah  i^,  Zee  9I  12^,  Mai  i^.  This  Book  of  Oracles,  if, 
as  seems  likely,  the  ten  sections  entitled  KU'O,  orac/e,  once 
existed  separately,  was  a  post-exilic  work,  for  some  of  the  oracles 
were  themselves  written  in  the  Exile  or  later — certainly  13^-14* 
2ii-i<>,  possibly  also  15  f.  19  (in  whole  or  part),  23 ;  but  the  Book 
also  contained  some  work  belonging  to  the  age  of  Isaiah ;  see 
ch.  17.  It  is  possible,  and  indeed  far  from  improbable,  that  the 
untitled  sections  were,  most  or  all  of  them,  added  to  the  "  Book 
of  Oracles  "  before  that  work  was  utilised  by  the  editor  of  Isaiah 
1-39 ;  but  some  at  least  of  the  additions,  g.^.  c.  20,  must  have 
been  made  after  the  "  Book  of  Oracles  "  as  a  whole  had  been 
attributed  to  Isaiah. 

Chs.  24-27.  This  anonymous  prophecy  is  certainly  post- 
exilic,  and  so,  too  (even  though  they  be  of  independent  origin), 
are  the  songs  now  incorporated  with  it;  see  more  fully  the 
Introduction  to  the  section  in  the  Commentary. 

Chs.  28-33.  Externally  these  chapters  are  held  together  by 
the  recurrent  ^in  at  the  beginning  of  sections.  A  further  striking 
characteristic  is  the  constant  interchange  of  denunciations  which 
bear  the  stamp  of  a  particular  period  in  Isaiah's  career,  and 
passages  of  glowing  promise.  Some  almost  certainly,  and  possibly 
all,  of  the  passages  of  promise  are  of  post-exilic  origin  (see,  g.g.y 
on  28^^-  29i'^-24  30I8-26).  Since  this  feature  does  not  run  through 
the  whole  of  chs.  1-39,   we   may  infer  that  it   marked  these 


Ill  INTRODUCTION 

chapters  before  they  were  incorporated  in  chs.  1-39.  In  chs. 
28-33  we  appear  to  have  a  record  of  a  period  in  Isaiah's  career 
made  the  basis  of  a  (late)  post-exilic  work;  see,  further,  on 
28-33  ')  ^^^  ^or  ^^  elaboration  of  the  hypothesis  barely  suggested 
here,    see   M.    Briickner,   J^ie   Composition   des  Buches  Jes,   cc, 

28-33  if'  1897). 

Chs.  34f.  An  anonymous  post-exilic  prophecy. 

35.  This  summary  statement  of  much  that  will  be  found 
more  fully  discussed  in  the  Commentary  is  enough  to  show  that 
the  Book  of  Isaiah  is  the  final  stage  in  a  literary  process  of 
which  many  of  the  previous  stages  fell  within  the  post-exilic 
period.  And  thus  an  analysis  of  the  Book  itself,  though  it  may 
not  indicate  a  precise  date  for  the  origin  of  the  complete  Book, 
certainly  prepares  us  for  the  suggestion  of  2  Ch  36  (see  above, 
§  18),  that  the  Book  did  not  as  yet  exist  c,  300  b.c.,  and  to 
believe  that  it  did  not  exist  any  long  time  before  180  b.c. 

We  can  only  go  further,  if  we  can  determine  the  age  of  the 
latest  section  of  the  Book ;  for  the  Book,  of  course,  in  its  final  form 
is  later  than  its  latest  section.  Unfortunately  there  are  several 
sections  which  are  clearly  post-exilic,  but  of  which  the  exact  age 
is  anything  but  clear.  The  present  writer  hesitates,  as  the  Com- 
mentary must  be  left  to  show,  to  follow  Du.  and  others  in 
assigning  much,  or  Kennett  in  assigning  more  than  half,  of  the 
book  to  the  2nd  cent.  B.C.,  and  some  passages  even  to  the  end 
of  that  century.  But  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  believe  that 
chs.  24-27  were  written  until  far  on  in  the  post-exilic  period,  and 
1^19-25  may  have  been  written  as  late  as  160  B.C.,  and  inserted 
in  the  then  virtually  closed  Book.  Even  after  that  date  a  few 
brief  notes — marginal  glosses  in  the  first  instance — may  have 
found  their  way  into  the  text  and  probably  did ;  see  2^0  6^3  (last 
clause),  etc. 

The  exact  age  of  the  last  editor's  work  cannot  be  determined ; 
but  the  character  of  the  age  can  be  divined.  Is  24-27  is  an 
apocalyptic  work,  and  forms  part  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  ;  no 
great  time  after  the  conclusion  of  that  Book  we  have  evidence 
of  the  activity  of  apocalyptic  thought  in  Daniel  and  the  earlier 
portions  of  Enoch,  The  latest  editor  of  the  Book,  as  probably 
enough  some  of  the  editors  of  the  books  he  utilised  or  incorpor- 
ated, lived  in  an  age  saturated  with  apocalyptic  thought.  It 
need  not  surprise  us  if  the  thought  of  the  age  has  frequently 


ORIGIN   AND   HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH      liii 

affected  the  form  in  which  even  the  ancient  prophecies  have 
been  handed  on  to  us. 


§§  36-39.  Origin  and  History  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah :  (4)  Prophetic 
Teaching  and  Prophetic  Literature, 

36.  Literature  was  not  the  primary  expression  of  prophecy. 
Elijah  was  a  speaker,  he  was  not  a  writer;  and  (so  far  as  we 
know)  Amos  was  the  first  prophet  to  record  his  teaching  in 
writing.  But  the  earliest  of  even  the  so-called  literary  prophets 
were  speakers  first  and  writers  afterwards :  Amos,  Isaiah,  Micah, 
and  doubtless  Hosea,  too,  were  called  in  the  first  instance  to 
deliver  a  message  to  the  nation  by  word  of  mouth.  The  call  to 
write,  when  it  is  recorded  (Is  30^,  Jer  36^),  came  to  these  prophets 
later ;  their  first  need  was  fitness  or  power  to  speak,  pure  lips, 
and  not  "the  pen  of  the  ready  writer."  Later,  prophecy, 
especially  as  it  passed  over  into  apocalyptic,  became  purely 
literary;  it  was  expressed  from  the  first  in  writing.  There  is 
also  much  of  the  prophetic  literature  of  which  we  cannot  say  with 
certainty  whether  it  rests  on  spoken  prophecy  or  not. 

37.  Much  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  including  perhaps  most  or 
all  of  that  which  is  unrelated  to  the  prophet  Isaiah,  may  rest  on 
no  previously  spoken  word :  it  may  have  had  literary  form  from 
the  first :  in  this  case  all  that  is  needed  is  to  trace  the  literary 
process  to  its  literary  origin.  But  much  certainly  goes  back  to  the 
public  or  private  utterances  of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  and  in  this 
case  we  have  to  inquire  what  is  the  relation  between  the  first 
literary  stage  and  the  spoken  word.  Our  information  on  this 
point  is  unfortunately  scanty,  but  it  is  suggestive ;  so  also  is  the 
form  of  the  written  record  itself.  The  questions  that  arise 
cannot  be  adequately  answered ;  but  much  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah 
can  only  be  satisfactorily  discussed  and  interpreted,  if  the  possi- 
bilities or  probabilities  in  this  matter  are  constantly  kept  in  mind. 

38.  The  records  of  Isaiah's  teaching  consist  of  {a)  prophecies, 
{V)  memoirs  of  the  prophet,  either  (a)  autobiographical,  6-8^^ 
(in  the  main),  and  a  document  underlying  28-32 ;  or  ifi)  bio- 
graphical, 20.  36-39. 

In  b  ((3)  we  certainly  see  Isaiah  through  the  medium  of 
others,  and,  probably,  in  chs.  36-39  through  the  medium  of 
somewhat  long   popular  tradition.     In   d  (a)  we  have  Isaiah's 


liv 


INTRODUCTION 


account  of  himself;  but  how  do  the  prophecies  stand  related  to 
him  and  his  spoken  words  ?  * 

The  first  thing  to  be  remarked  is  that  the  prophecies  are 
almost  without  exception  poems  or  poetic  fragments  (§§  44  ff.), 
and  that  these  poems  are  short.  Probably  the  longest  poem  is 
q7_jq4  and  526-29^  and  this,  in  Hebrew,  scarcely  exceeds  300 
words.  We  have  therefore  no  speech,  sermon,  oration  (or  what- 
ever other  term  we  may  prefer  to  use)  of  Isaiah's  that  would  have 
taken  in  its  present  literary  form  more  than  4  or  5  minutes  to 
deliver. 

Now,  were  these  poems  (a)  Composed  first  and  then  recited  by 
the  prophet  in  public  ;  or  (y8)  were  they  written  after  the  prophet 
had  spoken  or  preached  in  a  different  style  and  at  greater  length, 
in  order  to  perpetuate,  not  the  words  of  his  speech,  but  the  ideas 
that  had  formed  the  substance  of  it ;  or  (y)  are  some  of  them,  and 
particularly  the  more  fragmentary,  pregnant  sayings  remembered 
by  his  hearers,  and  subsequently  grouped  together  much  like  the 
"  Logia  "  of  the  Gospels  ? 

39.  The  alternatives  just  suggested  are  not  mutually  exclusive : 
all  three  processes  may  actually  have  taken  place  and  each  may 
account  for  some  of  the  prophecies  that  have  survived  in  literary 
form.     Certainly  the  prophets  may  at  times  have  availed  them- 


selves of  the  methods  of  the  Moshelim  (Nu  21 2^:  see  Numbers^ 
pp.  299  f.,  xiii  f.) ;  but,  having  gathered  their  audience,  they  may 
have  held  it  by  reciting,  instead  of  songs  of  past  victory,  poems 
of  their  own  composing  in  which  they  laid  bare  the  real  signifi- 
cance of  the  present ;  perchance  the  song  of  the  vineyard  in  5^-^ 
had  such  an  origin.  So,  too,  in  view  of  much  that  is  fragmentary, 
it  is  far  from  improbable  that  we  owe  something  to  the  memory 
of  the  disciples  of  the  prophet  (cp.  S^^-^^);  and  certainly  the 
grouping  of  six  or  seven  brief  "Woes"  in  5^24  recalls  the 
"Beatitudes"  of  the  Gospels  which  we  have  received  in  two 
very  different  groupings,  one  of  which  at  least  is  not  that  of  their 
author.  But  probably  the  bulk  of  the  prophecies  in  the  Book  of 
Isaiah,  as  in  Amos,  Hosea,  Jeremiah,  are  condensations  into 
artistic  poetic  form  of  what  Isaiah  had  said  in  public  at  greater 
length,  but  without  the  same  restraint  of  form.  This  is 
suggested  by  the  particular  instance  recorded  in  30^  (8^^  is 
more  ambiguous),  read  in  the  light  of  the  full  account  given 
*  Cp.  Cheyne,  Introd.  xxix. 


^ 


ORIGIN   AND   HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF   ISAIAH      Iv 

by  Jeremiah  (ch.  36)  of  the  way  in  which  he  came  to  commit 
his  teaching  to  writing :  not  till  Jeremiah  had  been  teaching  for 
more  than  twenty  years  did  he  compose  the  prophetic  poems 
which  summarise  what  he  had  said.  How  early,  or  how  often, 
Isaiah  gave  literary  form  to  his  teaching  we  cannot  determine : 
there  is  some  reason  for  believing  that  it  was  some  years  after 
his  Call  that  he  wrote  his  account  of  it  (see  on  ch.  6),  and  the 
preparation  of  these  memoirs  may  have  been  Isaiah's  first  literary 
work.  In  the  case  of  the  prophecies  on  the  Northern  kingdom, 
the  two  most  probable  alternatives  are  these :  either  (a)  Isaiah 
wrote  9'^-io*  17^"®  28^-*  and  despatched  the  written  poems  to  be 
recited  or  read  by  others,  or  (d)  he  himself,  like  Amos  (Am  7^®"^*), 
proceeded  to  some  place  in  the  North,  delivered  his  message, 
and  subsequently  reduced  the  substance  of  what  he  had  said 
to  literary  form.  Some  of  the  "  oracles  "  on  foreign  nations  were 
presumably  cast  in  literary  form  from  the  first  (cp.  Di.  xxi), 
though  ch.  18  again  may  well  be  a  summary  of  what  Isaiah  had 
previously  spoken. 

§  40.  Origin  and  History  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  :  (5)  A 
tentative  synthesis  from  the  preceding  evidence. 

40.  In  the  preceding  analytical  discussion  it  has  several 
times  been  pointed  out  that  more  than  one  theory  will 
satisfy  many  of  the  phenomena:  no  synthesis  of  results  can 
therefore  be  more  than  tentative;  all  that  is  offered  here 
is  one  such  tentative  theory  *  of  the  origin  of  the  Book  of 
Isaiah. 

At  times  rather  than  continuously  between  the  years  c.  740 
to  701  B.C.,  and  perhaps  somewhat  later,  Isaiah  was  a  public 
teacher  in  Judah ;  he  gradually  gathered  around  him  disciples. 
Some  years  after  he  had  been  teaching  he  wrote  some  memoirs 
recording  the  experience  which  made  him  a  prophet  and  the  way 
in  which  he  had  in  the  earlier  years  (735-732)  of  the  reign  of 
Ahaz  delivered  his  prophetic  message.  He  also  at  various  times 
perpetuated  in  the  form  of  prophetic  poems  the  substance  of 
what  he  had  said  in  rebuke  of  the  sins  of  Judah  (see,  e.g.^  2-4), 
or  Ephraim  (9^-10^  17^'^^  zS^-*),  or  in  reference  to  political  issues 
of  the  day  in  which  foreign  nations  also  were  involved  (see,  e.g., 
*  For  another  recent  theory,  see  Kennett,  pp.  39-42. 


Ivi  INTRODUCTION 

chs.  1 8.  28-31);  in  some  cases  he  was  moved  to  do  this  by 
^  the  unwillingness  of  the  people  to  listen  to  him  (30^). 

The  memoirs  and  prophetic  poems  of  Isaiah,  forming  small 
booklets,  became  the  treasures  of  his  disciples  and  their  suc- 
cessors ;  it  is  probable  enough  that  early  owners  of  these  booklets 
made  annotations  in  them,  and  we  have,  perhaps,  an  instance  of 
7  th  century  annotations  in  7^^'  ^. 

But  the  personality  of  Isaiah  impressed  itself  not  only  on  his 

immediate  disciples :  he  became  the  hero  of  popular  story,  and 

some  of  these  stories  relating  to  the  latest  period(s)  in  his  life 

\  were  a  century  or  more  later  written  down,  and  found  their  way 

'  like  the  similar  cycle  of  stories  about  Elijah  and  Elisha  into  the 

Book  of  Kings  (2  K  18-20). 

Various  writers  during  and  after  the  Exile  wrote  oracles  on 
^    foreign  nations ;  and  a  great  writer  produced  a  book  (Is  40-55) 
intended  to  rouse  and  encourage  the  Exiles  in  Babylon. 

After  the  Exile  much  of  the  existing  prophetic  literature  was 
newly  arranged  and  expanded,  especially  by  the  addition  of 
passages  of  promise  and  comfort ;  and  among  the  results  of  this 
activity  were  books  closely  resembling  chs.  2-12  and  chs.  13-23. 

New  and  independent  prophecy  was  also  produced,  and  in 
1    the  middle  of  the   5th  cent.  b.c.  much  of  56-66  was  written. 
Later,  chs.  40-55  and  56-66  were  combined  into  a  single  book. 

Other  independent  post-exilic  works  are  chs.  34  f.,  24-27 — the 
latter  written  late  in  the  post-exilic  period. 

Possibly  about  the  beginning  of  the  3rd  cent.  b.c.  the 
existing  Books  of  Isaiah  (2-12  and  13-23  and  ?  28-32)  were 
brought  together  by  an  editor  who  prefixed  a  title  i^  and 
another  booklet  of  Isaiah's  (i^"^^),  and  added  (36-39)  to  the 
prophecies  the  narratives  from  2  K  17^^-20  (with  the  omission, 
however,  of  2  K  iS^^-^^  and  the  addition  of  Is  38^-20):  whether 
this  editor  also  included  in  his  work  chs.  24-27  and  33.  34.  35, 
or  whether  these  sections  were  later  interpolated,  is  uncertain. 
i  Some  time  before  180  b.c,  chs.  1-39  (24-27.  ^^f.posstd/y 
being  absent)  and  40-66  were  united  in  a  single  whole,  which 
with  Ezekiel,  Jeremiah,  and  "  The  Twelve  "  formed  four  volumes 
of  prophecy  of  approximately  equal  size. 

After  180  B.C.  the  Book  of  Isaiah  may  have  received  some 

f  additions  such  as  ig^'^-^^y  possibly  even,  though  less  probably,  24- 

27.  34  f. 


CRITERIA   FOR  DISTINGUISHING  WORDS  OF   ISAIAH     Ivii 

About  150  B.C.  the  Book  of  Isaiah  was  translated  into  Greek.       • 
After  this  date  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  Book  received  any 
additions  extending  beyond   a   clause  or  a  verse :   such  small 
additions,  however,  were  made  to  the  Hebrew  text  and  include 
6^3  (last  clause)  220. 

Against  even  such  minor  additions  the  Hebrew  text  was 
secured  from  the  end  of  the  ist  cent.  a.d.  onwards  by  the 
conclusion  of  the  Canon  and  the  doctrine  of  the  finality  of 
Scripture.  Thenceforward  the  Book  of  Isaiah  could  no  longer 
be  adapted  to  the  needs  or  hopes  of  the  living  community  by 
addition  or  alteration,  but  only  by  exegesis  ;  between  the  5th 
and  the  9th  centuries  a.d.  the  approved  exegesis  was  closely 
wedded  with  the  text  by  means  of  the  vowel  points.  At  times 
these  vowel  points  are  flagrantly  at  variance  with  the  actual 
sense  of  the  text,  and  embody  not  a  possible  interpretation  of 
the  prophecies,  but  the  hopes  of  these  later  Jews  (see,  e.g.^  on 

§§  41-43.   Criteria  for  distinguishing  the  words  of  Isaiah  from 
the  additions  of  later  writers. 

41.  The  task  of  interpreting  a  work  with  a  history  so  long 
and  complicated  and  yet  in  detail  so  obscure  and  uncertain  as 
that  which  has  just  been  sketched,  is  difficult  indeed.  There  is 
no  question  that  the  Book  contains  words  of  Isaiah  and  words 
of  other  and  later  authors ;  nor  can  there  be  any  serious  doubt 
that  in  parts  of  the  Book  these  two  elements  are  closely  inter- 
mingled. We  may  immediately  set  aside  chs.  40-66,  24-27, 
34  f.  as  containing  no  words  of  Isaiah,  though  in  their  turn  these 
chapters  also  present  their  own  similar  problems  of  analysis. 
But  in  chs.  1-23,  referred  by  title  to  Isaiah,  and  in  chs.  28-33, 
how  and  to  what  extent  can  the  earlier  and  the  later  elements 
be  distinguished?  The  earlier  critical  method  was  rough  and 
ready,  and  left  correspondingly  rough  places  for  the  interpreter ; 
tacitly  the  accepted  canon  was :  what  cannot  be  clearly  proved 
to  be  later  than  the  age  of  Isaiah  is  the  work  of  Isaiah.  But 
the  canon  is  illegitimate.  The  Book  of  Isaiah  is  a  late  com- 
pilation :  even  the  books  incorporated  in  it  and  attributed  to 
Isaiah — chs.  2-12  and  13-23 — are  post-exilic  works.  All  that 
can  be  strictly  claimed  is  that  what  clearly  proceeds  from  Isaiah 


Iviii 


INTRODUCTION 


is  to  be  regarded  as  his,  all  that  clearly  proceeds  from  other 
or  later  writers  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  his,  and  all  that  is 
neither  clearly  his  nor  clearly  not  his  must  be  regarded  as  un- 
certain. And,  of  course,  there  is  wide  range  in  the  degrees  of 
uncertainty. 

42.  The  criteria  for  distinguishing  the  work  of  different 
writers  and  determining  the  date  of  any  particular  passage  are 
mainly  of  three  kinds. 

(a)  The  Political  and  Social  implications. 

In  some  cases  these  are  clear  and  ample ;  they  show  that 
chs.  6-8  are,  in  the  main,  the  work  of  Isaiah;  that  chs.  132-22 
and  40-55  (in  the  main)  are  works  of  the  exilic  period.  In 
other  cases  the  interpretation  of  what  is  implied  is  less  clear. 
It  is  certain  that  if  11^  implies  that  the  dynasty  of  David  has 
fallen,  the  prophecy,  11^*^,  was  written  no  earlier  than  the 
Exile ;  but  many  interpreters  find  themselves  able  to  place  an 
interpretation  on  the  verse  which  would  leave  the  date  an  open 
question. 

(d)  Style  and  Language. 

These  may  prove  or  help  to  prove  either  (i)  that  a  passage, 
or  even  a  clause,  is  not  Isaiah's ;  or  (2),  more  definitely,  the  ap- 
proximate date  of  such  a  passage.  It  is  unnecessary  to  use  the 
argument  from  style  and  language  to  prove  that  chs.  40-55  are 
not  the  work  of  Isaiah ;  for  it  is  abundantly  clear  from  criteria 
of  class  (a)  alone  that  these  chapters  were  written  150  years 
after  the  close  of  Isaiah's  career.  At  the  same  time,  style  and 
language  alone  would  suffice  to  show  that  40-55  were  not  the 
work  of  Isaiah,  though  they  would  not  quite  so  closely  define 
the  date  of  that  work. 

The  data  have  been  very  carefully  collected  by  Cheyne  {Intro- 
ductioti),  who  at  times  may  overrate  the  significance  of  them. 

(<:)  Ideas. 

In  this  case,  too,  there  is  frequently  room  for  difference  of 
judgment  on  the  facts;  for  we  cannot  write  the  history  of 
Hebrew  ideas  with  such  precision  and  certainty  as  to  rule  out 
the  possibility  that  some  ideas  which  seem  to  find  expression 
solely  in  later  religion  may  not  have  been  current  earlier.  In 
particular  is  there  difference  of  judgment  at  the  present  time 
as  to  the  critical  significance  of  certain  eschatological  ideas  (see 
below,  §  89). 


POETICAL  FORMS  OF  THE  PROPHETIC  LITERATURE      lix 

43.  In  most  cases  a  final  judgment  on  any  passage  will  rest 
in  some  measure  on  criteria  of  all  three  classes ;  and  in  cases 
where  no  single  type  of  criteria  yields  ground  for  certainty,  the 
combination  of  probabilities  derived  from  a  study  of  the  three 
classes  may  yield  a  high  degree  of  probability  approaching 
certainty ;  in  others,  even  all  the  criteria  combined  will  only  give 
a  balance  of  probabilities  (9^"^),  and  sometimes  this  will  be 
of  the  slightest  kind,  so  that  to  one  observer  the  balance  may 
seem,  if  it  inclines  at  all,  to  incline  to  one  side,  though  to 
another  observer  it  will  appear  to  incline  to  the  other. 

Kennett  (pp.  4  f. )  states  the  problem  well ;  but  his  method  of  solution  would 
be  sound  only  if  our  knowledge  of  all  periods  of  Jewish  history  were  full  instead 
of  being  with  reference  to  some  periods  exceedingly  meagre,  and  with  refer- 
ence to  most,  inadequate.  "It  is  necessary,"  he  writes,  "to  inquire  with 
reference  to  each  section  or  fragment  which  literary  criticism  declares  to  be 
homogeneous,  at  what  period  every  one  of  its  phrases  would  have  a  clear 
meaning.  ...  If  history  repeats  itself,  it  seldom  does  so  to  such  an  extent 
that  every  word  and  phrase  of  a  document  written  in  one  age  will  be  equally 
suitable  to  another :  and  for  practical  purpose  it  will  usually  be  enough  to 
point  out  one  period  of  history  to  which  such  a  document  really  corresponds 
in  all  its  parts."  Unfortunately  for  this  method,  there  is  a  vast  difference 
between  suitability  to  a  particular  age  and  suitability  to  what  is  known  of 
the  same  age  :  a  document  may  very  well  correspond,  or  not  be  inconsistent 
with,  what  is  known  of  two  or  three  different  periods  of  all  of  which  next 
to  nothing  is  known ;  and  if  the  correspondence  with  only  one  such  period 
is  pointed  out,  a  false  impression  of  certainty  or  probability  is  necessarily 
given.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  considerable  parts  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  are  not 
inconsistent  with  what  is  known  of  more  periods  than  one  (cp.  e.g.  the 
introduction  to  19^"^') :  if  our  knowledge  were  increased,  the  range  of  ambigu- 
ity might  be  diminished  ;  on  the  other  hand  it  might  be  increased  ;  for  what 
had  seemed  peculiar  to  a  particular  period  may  be  shown  by  fuller  knowledge 
to  have  been  common  to  more  than  one :  till  lately  an  allusion  to  a  Jewish 
Temple  in  Egypt  would  have  corresponded  to  what  was  known  of  the  period 
from  c.  160  B.C.  to  73  A.D.  only ;  it  is  now  known  that  there  was  a  Jewish  , 
Temple  in  Egypt  from  before  525  down  to  411  B.C.  also.  / 

§§  44-57.   The  poetical  forms  of  the  prophetic  literature^ 
and  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  in  particular. 

44.  Robert  Lowth  (1710-1787),  sometime  Professor  of 
Poetry  in  the  University  of  Oxford  and  Bishop  of  London, 
rendered  two  great  services  to  the  critical  study  of  the  Old 
Testament.  He  revealed  by  a  masterly  analysis  the  parallelistic 
structure  of  Hebrew  poetry ;  and  he  perceived  that  the  prophetic 


Ix  INTRODUCTION 

literature  was  poetical  in  form."^  He  also  proved  that  in  trans- 
lating from  Hebrew  poetry  it  is  possible  to  reproduce  not  only 
the  sense,  but  also  the  form,  in  so  far  as  this  depends  on  parallel- 
ism ;  and  in  his  translation  of  Isaiah  he  presented  the  poetical 
form  of  the  original  to  the  eye  of  his  readers.  In  this  he  was 
followed  amongst  others  by  Koppe,  who  translated  his  Isaiah  into 
German,  by  Gesenius  in  the  translation  prefixed  to  his  Com- 
mentary, and  by  the  English  scholar  Henderson  (1840).  Un- 
fortunately this  practice  suffered  a  check ;  and  even  in  Cheyne's 
Commentary,!  which  in  other  respects  marked  a  notable  advance 
in  the  criticism  and  interpretation  of  the  Book,  the  prophecies 
were  translated  throughout  in  the  form  of  prose :  still  more 
unfortunately  the  RV  (1885),  which  presented  the  Psalms,  Job, 
and  other  poetical  parts  of  the  OT  in  poetical  form,  by  printing 
the  Prophets  as  prose,  obscured  the  important  fact  that  the 
greater  part  of  these  books  is  no  less  poetical  in  form  than  either 
Psalms  or  Job. 

Parallelism  is  one  of  the  forms  of  Hebrew  poetry :  is  it  the 
only  one?  Since  the  time  of  Lowth  the  question  of  Hebrew 
metre,  which  he  had  treated  as  non-existent  or  irrecoverable, 
has  received  repeated  attention.  Into  the  general  question  \  it 
is  impossible  to  enter  at  length  here ;  but  it  is  necessary  to 
explain  the  principle  on  which  the  form  given  to  the  translations, 
and  the  account  taken  of  metre  in  the  Commentary,  have  been 
decided. 

45.  In  the  translations  the  division  into  lines  has  been  deter- 
mined primarily  by  regard  to  parallelism :  i.e.  Lowth's  method 
has  been  resumed.  This  would  be  justifiable  even  if  the  metre 
were  always  clearly  to  be  recognised — which  it  is  not;  for  there 
would  be  no  reason  to  adopt  in  translating  from  Hebrew  a 
method  which  for  good  reasons  has  found  no  favour  with  those 
who  have  translated  the  metrical  lines  of  other  poetry:  in 
translations  (which  are  not  themselves  metrical)  from  Homer  or 
Vergil,  for  example,  it  is  not  customary  to  distinguish  in  the 

*  De  Sacra  Poesi  Hebraeorum  Praelectiones  (1753) ;  A  new  translation  of 
Isaiah  (1778). 

t  The  Prophecies  of  Isaiah  (1880,  1882  ;  ed.  5,  1889). 

X  Cp.  Harper,  Amos  and  Hosea  (in  this  series),  pp.  clxiv-clxix,  and  W.  H. 
Cobb,  A  Criticism  of  Systems  of  Hebrew  Metre  (1905), — a  useful  survey  of  the 
subject,  with  (pp.  191-202)  an  extensive  bibliography. 


POETICAL  FORMS  OF  THE  PROPHETIC  LITERATURE      Ixi 

translation  the  lines  of  the  original ;  neither  is  there  any  reason 
so  to  distinguish  the  Hebrew  metrical  lines  if,  or  when,  these 
lines  do  not  coincide  with  the  periods  of  parallelism,  as  Du.,  for 
example,  has  not  infrequently  done  (see,  e.g.,  p.  212  below,  note 
on  the  structure  of  11^"^). 

46.  But  parallelism  is  not  a  constant  phenomenon  of 
Hebrew  poetry :  lines  frequently  occur  which  are  not  related  to 
their  neighbours  by  parallelism  of  terms,  or  even  by  a  general 
parallelism  of  sense.  What  Lowth  called  "synthetic  parallel- 
ism" (Dr.  LOT  363)  is  in  reality  absence  of  parallelism  in 

lines  such  as 

Yet  I  have  set  my  king 
Upon  Zion,  my  holy  hill. 

But  in  a  poem  which  contains  for  the  most  part  lines  parallel  in 
sense,  the  remainder  of  the  poem  in  which  parallelism  is  absent 
tends  to  fall  into  periods  of  the  same  length.  So,  in  the  example 
just  cited, 

'^mp  -in  ji-'v^y 

contains  two  periods  of  the  same  length  as  the  periods  in 
v.i  of  the  same  Psalm  which  are  related  to  one  another  by 
parallelism — 

If  an  entire  poem  contained  no  parallel  lines,  there  would  be  no 
sound  reason  for  distinguishing  the  lines  in  the  English  transla- 
tion ;  yet  if  the  end  of  the  lines  always  coincided  with  a  pause 
in  the  sense,  the  line-division  might  be  retained  in  English  as  a 
form  of  articulation ;  and  when,  as  is  most  frequently  the  case, 
parallelism  is  sometimes  present,  sometimes  (though  generally 
less  frequently)  absent,  it  is  convenient  to  show  the  line-division 
throughout. 

This  approximation  to  a  similar  length  and  rhythmical 
character  in  the  periods  of  a  poem  is  the  best  evidence  that 
parallelism  is  not  the  only  form  of  Hebrew  poetry,  but  that  it 
followed  also  certain  rhythmical  laws,  however  elastic  those  laws 
may  have  been. 

47,  So  far  it  is  assumed  that  the  rhythmical  unit  and  the 


Ixii  INTRODUCTION 

sense  divisions  in  Hebrew  poetry  are  identical;  and  that  that 
poetry  has  nothing  to  show  like — 

Sing,  Heavenly  Muse,  that,  on  the  secret  top 

Of  Oreb,  or  of  Sinai,  didst  inspire 

That  shepherd  who  first  taught  the  chosen  seed 

In  the  beginning  how  the  heavens  and  earth 

Rose  out  of  Chaos;  or  if  Sion  hill 

Delight  thee  more,  and  Siloa's  brook  that  flowed 

Fast  by  the  oracle  of  God,  I  thence 

Invoke  thy  aid  to  my  advent'rous  song — 

in  which  passage  the  rhythmical  units  regularly  close  where  there 
is  no  sense-division,  and  the  pauses  of  sense  occur  in  the  middle  of 
the  rhythmical  units.  If  the  assumption  is  wrong,  and  if  Sievers 
is  right  in  his  contention  that  "  run  on  "  lines  do  occur  even  with 
frequency  in  Hebrew  poetry,  it  might  have  a  considerable  bearing 
on  textual  criticism  ;  but  it  would  not  affect  the  correct  method 
of  dividing  the  lines  in  an  English  translation  :  these  might  and 
should  still  serve  the  useful  purpose  of  clearly  presenting  the 
parallelistic  structure  coinciding  with  sense-divisions. 

But  the  more  elaborate  metrical  analysis  of  Hebrew  texts, 
such  as  Bickell  or  Sievers  oifers,  rest  on  too  precarious  a  basis  to 
be  made  as  yet  a  secure  instrument  even  of  textual  criticism. 

48.  The  prominent  element  in  Hebrew  poetry  is  the  accented 
syllable;  the  laws  that  governed  the  number  of  unaccented 
syllables  that  accompanied  it  are  obscure,  though  it  is  obviously 
an  over-statement,  as  Cobb  (pp.  cit.  123  f.)  caustically  points  out, 
to  say  that  the  number  of  unaccented  syllables  was  "  a  matter  of 
no  consequence"  (Harper,  Amos  and  Hosea,  p.  clxvii).  We 
may,  then,  at  the  present  stage  of  investigations  into  Hebrew 
metre,  obtain  a  provisional  determinant  of  rhythm  in  Hebrew 
poetry  by  observing  the  accented  syllables.  Each  word,  or  each 
complex  of  words  united  by  makkeph,  represents,  generally 
speaking,  a  single-word  accent ;  it  may  be  that  in  some  cases  in 
a  word  of  five  or  more  syllables  the  secondary  accent  also  ranks 

as  a  word-accent,  and  that,  e.g.  ioi^na^  Ps  2^,  DiTnn^njn  Is  lo^sd 
contains  not  one  accent  only,  but  two.  Seeing  that  MT  can  no 
more  be  trusted  in  its  particular  applications  of  makkeph  than  in 


POETICAL  FORMS  OF  THE  PROPHETIC  LITERATURE     Ixiii 

respect  of  the  vowels,  it  will  be  seen  that  there  is  room  even  in 
this  simpler  determination  of  rhythm  for  no  little  uncertainty. 

49.  Broadly  speaking,  the  lines  of  Hebrew  poetry  are  related 
to  one  another  in  one  of  two  ways :  they  are  equal,  or  they  are 
unequal;  in  the  one  case  we  have  a  balancing  rhythm^  in  the 
other  an  echoing  rhythm ;  for  example,  in  i^ 

)r]:\>  niB^  jn^       3'-  "^     '  '     rH 

v5>y3  D)3K  i^om  , .  _  t.«-^  *^^ 


the  lines  in  each  couplet  balance  one  another ;  each  line  of  the 
first  couplet  certainly  contains  three  accents;  each  line  of  the 
second  couplet  also  contains  three  accents,  if  MT  is  right, 
and  it  probably  is  so,  in  leaving  the  nh  in  each  line  unconnected 
by  makkeph  with  the  verb ;  if  the  makkeph  is  inserted  the  lines 
still  balance,  but  the  length  of  each  is  two  accents.  In  the 
one  case  the  couplet  may  be  described  as  3  :  3,  in  the  other 
as  2  :  2. 

50.  Examples  of  echoing  rhythm*  are  found  later  in  the 
same  chapter,  especially  in  vv.^i-^s,  and  also,  e.g.^  in  132-8  14^-21  ^ 
J  21. 26. 27  ujay  serve  as  examples  : 

nW  niTin  na^K       ^  :  ^ 

man  esK'Da  n^v 
npi'ii  rvi^in 

In  each  of  these  couplets  a  line  of  three  accents  is  followed 
by  a  line  of  two  :  the  rhythm  is  3  :  2. 

51.  Within  the  broad  distinction  into  balancing  and  echoing 
couplets,  minor  distinctions  are  to  be  observed,  especially  in 
balancing  couplets :  the  length  of  the  lines  in  balancing  couplets 

*  On  account  of  its  use  in  elegies,  this  rhythm  has  also  been  termed  the 
Ktnah  [elegy)  rhythm.  But  it  can  no  longer  be  maintained  that  the  rhythm 
\s  peculiar  to  elegy,  though  it  may  be  said  to  be  characteristic  of  it.  On  this 
rhythm,  see  Budde,  ZATW^  1882,  pp.  1-52;  Dr.  ZOT' 457-459 ;  EBi.  s.v. 
Lamentation^  §  2,  and  Poetical  Literature^  §  8.  For  examples  in  the  Book 
of  Isaiah  of  the  rhythm  not  in  elegy,  see  i^"'-  40^'' 


V 


t^ 


•,1. 


Ixiv 


INTRODUCTION 


commonly  varies  between  two  and  four  accents  :  e.g.  32^1  contains 
two  couplets  2:2: 

nnton  nm 


and   in   addition   to   i^  given   above,   ^i^^'^'  ^  ^^  may  serve  as 
examples  of  3  :  3 : 

Couplets  which  in  the  last  analysis  are  4  :  4  are  rarer.  Of 
course,  wherever  a  succession  of  couplets  2  :  2  occurs,  it  would 
be  possible,  by  combining  two  lines,  to  express  the  rhythm  as 
4  :  4.  The  real  distinction,  however,  lies  here — that  in  some 
periods  of  four  accents  there  is  a  marked  pause  after  the  second 
accent,  and  also  the  two  parts  of  this  period  of  four  accents  are 
parallel  in  sense  (cp.  32^1  above),  whereas  in  others  there  is 
neither  pause  nor  parallelism  within  the  periods  in  either  line, 
or  at  least  not  in  both  of  the  lines  of  four  accents  that  constitute 
the  couplet.     Clear  examples  of  couplets  4 


4  are  5^^  q^^*  «* : 


"1-VP3  nnDlJ'3  l-JD^  IHDK^ 

See  also  note  on  rhythm  prefixed  to  chs.  15  f. 

Periods  of  five  accents  without  a  pause  scarcely  occur ;  for 
most  couplets  5  :  5  can  also  be  treated  rhythmically  as  double 
couplets  of  3  :  2,  with  2  :  3  as  a  rare  variant.  And  the  same 
is  true  of  periods  of  six  accents,  though  these  may  occasionally, 
from  certain  points  of  view,  be  treated  as  rhythmical  units ;  for 
successive  periods  may  be  differently  divided,  some  into  3  :  3, 
others  in  2:2:2;  see  on  i^^*  and  261-^^;  cp.  also,  e.g.^  Ps  i^ — 
2:2:2  followed  by  3  :  3. 

52.  There  is  less  variety  in  echoing  couplets:  the  prevailing 
type  of  these  is  3  :  2,  already  illustrated  (§  50).  Obviously 
3  :  2  may  be  regarded  as  an  abbreviated  3  :  3,  and  we  might, 
therefore,  expect  2  :  i  and  4  :  3,  abbreviations  of  2  :  2  and  4  :  4 


POETICAL  FORMS  OF  THE  PROPHETIC  LITERATURE      Ixv 

respectively,  to  be  as  frequent  variations  on  3  :  2  as  are  2  :  2 
and  4  :  4  on  3  :  3 ;  but  2  :  i  is  not,  at  least,  a  frequent  variant, 
and  4  :  3  (cp.  Sievers'  frequent  "Siebeners")  rarely  possesses 
the  characteristic  echoing  value  of  3  :  2.  Interchanging  with 
3  :  2  we  find  rather  4  :  2  or  2  :  2. 

That  the  echo  is  the  really  characteristic  thing  in  periods  of 
five  accents  appears  from  two  considerations:  (i)  these  periods 
are,  with  the  rarest  exceptions,  divided  into  3:2;  the  obvious 
alternative  2  :  3,  which  would  give  no  echoing  effect,  does  occur, 
but  with  such  rarity  *  that  some  writers  consider  its  occurrence 
sufficient  evidence  that  the  lines  have  suffered  accidental  trans- 
position:  such  accidents  certainly  occurred,  for  see  Ps  18**^  = 
2  S  22**^;  (2)  the  rhythmic  echo  is  frequently  combined  with  a 
sense  echo,  i.e.  two  terms  of  the  first  line  are  paralleled  in  the 
second  line,  the  third  is  not  merely  not  paralleled, — that  happens 
often  enough  in  parallel  couplets  3  :  3, — but  it  has  nothing 
corresponding  to  it. 

53.  So  far  this  analysis  of  the  rhythmical  facts  has  been 
confined  to  the  couplet, f  or  distich,  which  is  so  prevalent  in 
all  Hebrew  poetry.  There  also  occur,  though  with  far  less 
frequency,  monostichs  and  tristichs;  tetrastichs,  too,  though 
these  can  generally  be  regarded  as  two  distichs.  The  distich 
is  a  rhythmical  complex  in  itself:  the  monostich  is  not ;  it  merely 
acquires  a  specific  rhythmical  quality  from  its  relation  to  other 
lines,  most  of  which  will  almost  invariably  be  found  to  be  com- 
bined into  distichs.  The  monostich  is  a  period  in  a  poem 
equivalent  in  length  to  one  line  of  a  distich.  A  tristich  is  a 
complex  of  three  rhythmically  similar  lines,  and  for  this  reason 
can  only  occur  in  balancing  rhythm.  Both  monostichs  and 
tristichs  are  of  relatively  rare  occurrence  even  in  the  existing 
text,  and  in  the  original  they  were  probably  rarer  still.  Whether 
three  lines  are  to  be  regarded  as  a  tristich,  or  as  a  distich  followed 
or  preceded  by  a  monostich,  will  sometimes,  when  all  three  lines 
are  not  parallels,  be  uncertain.  In  the  translations  the  second 
line  of  the  distich  and  the  second  and  third  of  tristichs  are  inset. 

*  Cp.  Sievers,  Metrische  Siudien,  pp.  1 1 1  f. 

t  It  is  because  the  couplet  is  so  characteristic  of  Hebrew  poetry  that  I 
prefer  the  symbols  2  :  2,  3  :  3,  4  :  4,  3  :  2,  etc.,  which  describe  the  couplet, 
to  the  terms  dimeter,  trimeter,  tetrameter,  pentameter,  hexameter,  for  lines 
of  two,  three,  four,  five,  and  six  accents  respectively. 
VOL.  I. — e 


Ixvi  INTRODUCTION 

54.  Rhythmically  similar  periods  may,  from  the  point  of  view 
of  parallelism,  be  different  in  character :  and  inasmuch  as  par- 
allelism is  made  the  basis  of  the  line-divisions  of  the  translations 
in  this  volume,  rhythmically  similar  periods  are  differently 
treated.  This  applies  more  especially  to  the  typical  echoing 
lines.  In  the  examples  given  above  the  entire  period  of  five 
accents  divides  into  two  unequal  lines,  of  which  the  second  and 
shorter  is  parallel  to  the  first  and  longer : 

And  I  will  restore  thy  judges  as  at  the  first, 
And  thy  counsellors  as  at  the  beginning. 

Denoting  the  ideas  or  main  terms  by  a.  b.  c,  and  the  parallel 
ideas  by  a'  b',  etc.,  the  scheme  is  a.  b.  c  |  b'  c'.  In  other  cases 
there  is  no  parallelism  between  the  unequal  divisions  of  the 
period  of  five  accents ;  and  parallelism,  if  it  occurs,  is  between 
the  entire  periods — the  scheme  being  a.  b.  c.  d.  e  |  a'  b'  c'  d'  e', 
or,  almost  invariably,  with  less  complete  correspondence,  a.  b.  c. 
d.  e — a'  b'  c'  f.  g.,  and  so  forth  ;  cp.,  for  example : 

I  am  satiated  with   burnt-offerings  of  rams  and  fat  of  fed 

beasts ; 
And  in  the  blood  of  bullocks  and  he-goats  I  delight  not. 

Here  the  distich  is  5  :  5,  and  the  parallelism  of  terms  or  ideas, 
which  extends  over  the  entire  length  of  the  lines,  may  be  repre- 
sented thus : — a.  b.  c.  (b).  d  |  b'  c'  d'  a'.  But  if  parallelism 
were  disregarded  and  rhythm  only  considered,  each  line  of  the 
above  distich  would  be  correctly  described  as  3  :  2. 

55.  Enough,  perhaps,  has  been  said  to  indicate  the  chief 
varieties  of  couplets  or  distichs  that  occur  in  Hebrew.  There 
remains  the  question.  How  are  such  distichs  combined  into  a 
poem  ?  Must  a  poem  consist  entirely  of  distichs  identical  both 
in  rhythmical  quantity  and  in  rhythmical  quality?  For  example, 
does  a  poem  necessarily  consist  of  a  succession  of  couplets  3:3; 
and,  if  the  couplets  are  occasionally  interrupted  by  monostichs 
or  tristichs,  must  these  consist  exclusively  of  lines  of  three 
accents?  Or  is  it  possible  for  couplets  3  :  3  to  be  interchanged 
with  other  balancing  distichs  2  :  2  or  4  :  4,  or  even  with  couplets 
of  another  quality  and  kind,  viz.  the  echoing  couplets  3:2? 
Certainly  in  our  present  text  we  get  almost  every  possible 
combination,  within  a  few  verses,  and,  unless  all  the  separate 


POETICAL  FORMS  OF  THE  PROPHETIC  LITERATURE      Ixvii 

poems  are  exceedingly  short,  within  the  same  poem.  But  (i) 
the  mixture  of  lines  of  different  quality,  the  echoing  and  the 
balancing,  is  probably  far  less  frequent  than  the  mixture  of 
lines  of  different  length  but  of  the  same  quality  ;  (2)  the  extent 
of  mixture,  even  of  lines  of  the  same  quality  but  of  different 
length,  was  probably  less  in  the  original  texts ;  (3)  the  extent 
of  mixture  differs  greatly,  at  all  events  in  the  present  text,  in 
different  poems ;  (4)  it  is  generally  possible  to  discern  a 
dominant  rhythm^  i.e.  a  rhythm  which  occurs  more  frequently 
throughout  the  poem  in  question  than  any  other  rhythm,  and 
commonly  more  often  than  all  other  rhythms  put  together. 

56.  If  the  preceding  remarks  suggest  that  there  is  considerable 
uncertainty  or  irregularity  in  Hebrew  rhythms  or  metre,  they 
will  very  correctly  convey  the  impression  left  on  the  present 
writer  by  his  study  of  them.  Is  the  uncertainty  and  irregularity 
so  great  as  to  cast  doubt  on  the  very  existence  of  rhythm,  or,  at 
least,  on  the  value  of  these  rhythmical  uncertainties  and  irregu- 
larities for  the  criticism  or  interpretation  of  the  Book?  Such 
scepticism  is  not  unnaturally  provoked  by  the  far-reaching 
changes  that  are  often  made  in  the  text  in  obedience  to  hypo- 
thetical laws  of  metre.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  too  much 
approximation  even  to  metrical  regularity  to  justify  such  com- 
plete scepticism.  The  notes  on  rhythm  prefixed  to  the  various 
poems  must  be  left  to  tell  their  own  tale :  the  attempt  is  there 
made  to  analyse  the  actual  facts  of  the  existing  text,  and  to  give 
the  reader  a  clue  to,  if  not  always  a  complete  statement  of,  the 
differences  in  quantity  or  quality  in  the  Hebrew  text  of  the 
lines  and  distichs  of  the  poem,  as  presented  in  the  translations. 
Without  some  such  statement  the  reader  would  often  acquire  a 
very  erroneous  impression  —  sometimes  suspecting  irregularity 
where  regularity  prevails,  and  sometimes  the  reverse ;  *  a  refer- 
ence back  to  these  notes  will  also  give  a  measure  of  the  value  to 
be  set  on  the  rhythmical  considerations  when  such  are  sub- 
sequently referred  to  in  the  commentary  or  philological  notes. 

It  may  be  rarely  wise  to  insist  on  any  textual  change  merely 
on  rhythmical  grounds  :  on  the  other  hand,  when  rhythmical  and 
other  considerations  point  towards  the  same  change,  though 
each  consideration  taken  by  itself  may  have  slight  weight,  taken 

*  This  needs  to  be  borne  in  mind  by  those  who  use  the  translations  of  Du. , 
Cheyne,  or  Box. 


Ixviii 


INTRODUCTION 


together  they  may  have  much.  Further,  though  a  line  may  seem 
abnormally  long,  all  that  the  rhythm  will  suggest  is  that  one  or 
more  words  are  intrusive ;  it  will  not  determine  which — unless, 
indeed,  we  can  pass  beyond  the  detection  of  rhythm  of  word 
accents  to  syllabic  rhythm. 

Again,  the  mere  occurrence  of  a  2:2  distich  in  the  midst  ot 
3  :  3  distichs  (as,  e.g.,  in  2^-^)  may  be  a  very  unsafe  ground  for 
treating  the  2  :  2  distich  as  intrusive.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
change  in  the  dominant  rhythm,  as,  say,  from  3  :  3  to  3  :  2  (see 
chs.  13.  34),  may  generally  raise  a  suspicion  that  we  have  passed 
from  one  poem  to  another. 

57.  A  further  form  of  Hebrew  poetry  is  the  strophe.  If  the 
lines  of  the  original  be  leproduced  in  the  translation,  so,  too,  should 
the  strophes.     They  are  marked  off  in  the  translation  by  spaces. 

In  some  cases  the  strophic  division  is  obvious,  as,  e.g.,  in 
g'^-io*,  where  each  strophe  closes  with  a  refrain.  In  other  cases 
the  division  is  less  obvious;  we  can  only  be  guided  by  the 
greater  sense-pauses. 

In  connection  with  the  strophe,  the  question  of  regularity 
again  presents  itself.  Are  the  strophes  of  a  poem  necessarily 
of  the  same  length  ?  In  certain  cases  they  appear  to  be  so ;  in 
others  it  is  doubtful  whether  there  is  more  than  some  approxima- 
tion to  regularity.  Du.,  in  general,  succeeds  in  reducing  the 
poems  to  strophes  of  regular  length,  but  sometimes  at  con- 
siderable cost;  see  the  notes  in  this  Commentary  prefixed  to 


11^-8  13. 


§§  S^~73' — Isaiah  in  relation  to  the  political  and  social 
conditions  of  his  age. 

58.  The  greater  part  of  Isaiah's  life  fell  within  the  last  half 
of  the  8th  cent.  B.C.,  but  he  must  have  been  born  from  ten  to 
twenty  years  before  750 ;  and,  since  he  was  certainly  living  and 
active  in  701,  he  probably  outlived  the  century,  possibly  even  by 
as  much  as  ten  or  twelve  years.  In  his  boyhood  his  countryman 
Amos,  of  the  land  and  kingdom  of  Judah,  prophesied  against 
the  neighbouring  kingdom  of  Israel ;  and  Jerusalem,  the  home  of 
Isaiah,  lay  about  half-way  between  Tekoa,  the  home  of  Amos, 
and  Bethel,  the  scene  of  his  preaching.  Both  Tekoa  and  Bethel 
lay  within  an  easy  day's  walk  of  Jerusalem,  at  a  distance  of 


■ 


POLITICAL  AND  SOCIAL  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  AGE      Ixix 

about  twelve  miles  from  the  capital.  In  Isaiah's  early  manhood 
and  the  first  years  of  his  own  activity  as  a  prophet,  Hosea,  a 
native  of  the  Northern  kingdom,  was  preaching  to  his  own 
people  of  judgment  to  come  ;  and  about  half-way  through  Isaiah's 
active  life  his  teaching  was  enforced  by  Micah.  Isaiah  living 
in  the  capital,  and  Micah  living  in  the  country,  a  day's  journey 
towards  the  coast,  and  the  coast  road  by  which  merchants  and 
soldiers  from  time  immemorial  had  passed,  as  they  still  passed, 
from  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates  to  the  valley  of  the  Nile, 
saw  and  judged  some  things  differently,  yet  with  fundamental 
agreement. 

59.  Isaiah  received  the  call  to  prophesy  in  the  year  that 
Uzziah,  king  of  Judah,  died  (6^),  i.e.  in,  or  within  a  year  or 
two  of,  740  B.C. — as  late  as  738  on  one  interpretation  of 
certain  Assyrian  records,  not  necessarily  quite  so  late  as  740 
on  another. 

Ahaz  became  king  of  Judah  not  later  than  735  B.C.,  for  Tiglath-pileser  *  ^ 
ipentions  him  (Ja-u-ha-zi  (mit)  Ja-u-da-ai)  along  with  other  Syrian  princes  as 
paying  tribute  to  him  in  734  B.C.  ;  and,  according  to  2  K  16',  Is  7^*^',  he  was 
already  king  during  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  which  preceded  Tiglath-pileser's  \ 
campaign  of  734.  To  Ahaz'  predecessor,  Jotham,  the  Book  of  Kings  assigns 
a  reign  of  16  years,  which  would  carry  back  the  death  year  of  Uzziah  to 
751 ;  but,  as  is  well  known,  these  chronological  statements  of  Kings  cannot 
be  implicitly  trusted  ;  a  date  as  early  as  751  for  Isaiah's  call  is  improbable, 
since  he  was  still  active  50,  if  not  60,  years  after  that  date.  .. 

Now,  in  the  Annals  of  the  year  738,  Tiglath-pileser  mentions  an  Azariah  '~)'Z^  i*^' 
(Az-ri-ia-a-u,  1.  131  ;  Az-ri-a-[u],  1.  123  ;  [Az-ri-i]a-a-u,  1.  in  ;  [Is-ri-]ia-a-u, 
104;  Is-ri-ia-u,  105)  of  the  land  of  Ja-u-da-ai  (1.  104),  or  Ja-u-di  (1.  105). 
Since  Uzziah  of  Judah  was  (also)  called  Azariah  according  to  several  passages 
in  the  OT  (cp.  6^n.),  there  seemed  to  be  at  least  a  good  prima  facie  case 
for  the  identification  of  "Az-ri-ia-u  (mat)  Ja-u-da-ai  (Ja-u-di),"  and  n'ly  (or 
nm.T  ^'?D  (nnTy.  S>chra.Aex  {Keilinschriften  und  Geschichtsforshung^  ^^.  395- 
421  ;  cp.  KAT^)  argued  for  the  identification,  and  it  was  generally  accepted, 
with  the  result  that  Uzziah's  death  was  placed  in  740  (the  year  to  which 
Schrader  erroneously  referred  this  part  of  the  Annals)  or  later.  It  thus 
became  necessary  to  contract  Jotham's  reign  within  very  narrow  limits. 

On  the  basis  of  Rost's  edition  of  the  Annals  (1893),  which  placed  several 
things  in  a  new  light,  and  of  native  inscriptions  of  a  land  of  '^N'  in  northern 
Syria  discovered  in  1890  close  to  Zinjirli  (see  now  Cooke,  NSI^  pp.  159  ff-)* 
Winckler  {Altor.  Forschungeriy  i.  1-23)  challenged  the  identification,  and 
argued  that  the  Az-ri-ya-u  of  the  inscriptions  was  not  king  of  Judah  ^^'^'') 
but  of  nx',  to  which  the  Assyrian  Ja-u-di  might  equally  well  correspond. 

*  Clay  Tablet,  Reverse  1.  il. 


Ixx  INTRODUCTION 

Briefly  stated  the  case  stands  thus  :  according  to  the  inscription,  Az-ri-ia-u 
was  the  prime  mover  in  opposition  to  Assyria,  and  was  supported  by  19 
districts  of  Hamath  ;  these  districts  were  conquered  by  Tiglath-pileser  and 
made  an  Assyrian  province  ;  the  fate  of  Az-ri-ia-u  himself  is,  owing  to  a  muti- 
lation of  the  inscription,  obscure  :  "  19  districts  of  Hamath  .  .  .  which  in 
their  sin  and  folly  had  taken  the  side  of  Az-ri-ia-u  I  added  to  the  territory  of 
Assyria"  (11.  130-132) ;  cp.  "who  had  taken  the  side  of  and  strengthened 
Az-ri-ia-u"  (1.  ill). 

Now  it  would  certainly  be  remarkable  if  two  contemporary  kings  of  two 
countries,  the  names  of  which  are  scarcely  distinguishable,  had  the  same 
name  ;  remarkable  also,  in  spite  of  the  parallel  case  of  Jaubidi,  king  of 
Hamath  in  720  B.C.  (Sargon,  Nimrud-inscription,  1.  8),  that  a  king  of  a 
northern  Syrian  state  should  bear  a  name  compounded  with  n\  On  the 
other  hand,  (i)  it  is  not  certain  that  Azariah  rather  than,  or  as  well  as, 
Uzziah  was  the  name  of  the  king  of  Judah  ;  (2)  a  somewhat  parallel  caprice 
of  similarity,  which  certainly  led  to  a  wrong  identification,  is  afforded  by  Mena- 
hem,  king  of  Israel  (and  therefore  of  Samaria),  in  738  B.C.,  and  Menal?em, 
king  of  Samsimuruna  in  701  B.C.  (Sennacherib's  inscription  :  Taylor  Cylinder, 
ii.  47) ;  (3)  nothing  in  the  OT,  or  in  what  is  otherwise  known  of  the  history 
of  the  period,  would  lead  us  to  expect  that  Uzziah  of  Judah  would  be  the 
leader  of  an  opposition  to  Assyria,  and  supported  by  the  distant  districts  of 
Hamath  (only) ;  (4)  so  late  a  date  as  738  for  the  death  of  Uzziah,  though  not 
impossible,  is,  failing  direct  evidence,  not  very  probable. 

60.  Of  Isaiah's  life  between  the  year  of  his  call,  c.  740  b.c. 
and  735  we  have  no  direct  and  unambiguous  records  ;  but  we  may 
infer  from  8^  (n.)  that  he  had  during  these  years  himself  grown 
assured  of,  and  probably  also  gained  recognition  for,  his  pro- 
phetic calling.  In  pursuit  of  it  he  may  have  visited  Ephraim 
(§  39)j  ^^^  spoken  according  to  the  tenor  of  9^-10'*.  In  6-8* 
we  can  trace  his  activity  in  the  opening  years  of  the  reign  of 
Ahaz,  who  succeeded  to  the  throne  c.  735.  He  had  then  been 
already  some  time  married,  and  was  the  father  of  a  child  at  least 
three  or  four  years  old  (7^n.),  to  whom  he  had  given  the  name 
Shear- Yashub,  which,  meaning  "a  Remnant  shall  return,"  ex- 
pressed an  important  element  in  his  teaching  (§  86).  He  appears 
to  have  had  easy  access  to  the  king  (71^- :  chs.  36  ff.),  and  he 
may  have  belonged  to  a  family  of  some  standing,  though  the 
inference  to  this  effect  drawn  from  8^  is  precarious,  and  the  view 
that  he  was  of  royal  blood  (i^n.)  rests  on  nothing  more  than 
Rabbinic  ingenuity.  Another  son  was  born  to  him  in  734,  and 
to  the  younger  as  to  the  elder  he  gave  a  name,  Maher-shalal- 
hash  baz,  embodying  one  prominent  element  in  his  teaching,  his\^ 
conviction,  viz.,  that  Damascus  and  Israel  were  doomed  to  early  1 


V 


POLITICAL  AND  SOCIAL  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  AGE      Ixxi 

extinction.  In  thus  using  these  opportunities  of  his  domestic 
life  to  enforce  and  emphasise  his  teaching,  he  was  adopting 
a  practice,  and  perhaps  dehberately  following  the  example,  of 
Hosea  (Hos  i).  At  this  time,  as  probably  throughout  his  life, 
he  was  resident  in  Jerusalem  (cp.  6^  7^  22^^^-  28^*  36-39). 

61.  For  more  than  twenty  years  (c.  733-711)  the  life  of 
Isaiah  remains  a  blank  to  us,  except  so  far  as  we  can  follow  it  by 
surmise  and  conjecture :  there  is  no  narrative  of  this  period, 
except,  perhaps,  that  which  records  the  embassy  from  Merodach- 
baladan  (ch.  39),  and  no  prophecy  that  can  wt't/i  certainty  be 
referred  to  these  years  (though  see  14^®  n.  28^-^).  And  yet  within 
these  twenty  years  falls  the  most  outstanding  event,  for  a  Jew, 
of  the  whole  century:  in  72*,  Samaria,  the  capital  of  the 
Northern  kingdom,  was,  after  a  three  years'  siege,  captured  by 
the  Assyrians ;  the  tribes,  which  had  hitherto  been  the  more 
numerous  and  more  powerful  common  inheritors  with  Judah  of 
the  Land  of  Promise  which  Yahweh  the  God  of  Israel  had  given 
to  His  people,  were  exiled,  and  their  land  became  an  Assyrian 
province. 

The  fact,  if  it  be  a  fact,*  that  Judah  between  734  and  711 
quietly  accepted  the  Assyrian  over-lordship  and  took  no  part  in 
the  attempts  of  Samaria  in  724-722,  or  of  several  neighbouring 
states  in  720,  to  cast  it  off,  is  at  best  scarcely  more  than  a  partial 
reason  for  this  remarkable  silence.  Isaiah  certainly  preached 
a  policy  of  non-intervention ;  and  if  Judah  during  this  period 
practised  it,  Isaiah  may  have  been  satisfied  with  the  external 
policy  of  Judah,  and  so  have  found  little  occasion  for  reiterating 
this  particular  element  in  his  teaching.  But  the  injustice  and 
unrighteousness  against  which  he  also  raised  his  voice  were 
scarcely  less  in  need  of  denunciation  during  these  years  than 
during  other  parts  of  his  life.  Some  of  the  prophecies,  the  date 
of  which  cannot  be  closely  determined,  may  therefore  belong  to 
these  years  :  for  example,  parts  of  chs.  2-5. 

*  Neither  the  OT  nor  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  directly  record  any 
revolt  of  Judah  from  Assyria  during  this  period.  But  in  an  inscription  of  the 
year  717,  Sargon  speaks  of  himself  as  mu-sak-nis  {mdtu)  Ja-u-du  sa  asar-su 
ru-u-ku,  "subduer  of  the  far-off  land  of  Ja-u-di"  (Nimrod  Inscription,  1.  8  ; 
KB  ii.  37).  From  this  it  has  sometimes  been  inferred  (cp.  KAT^  67)  that 
Judah  took  part  in  the  Syrian  revolt  of  720,  as  it  certainly  did  in  the  revolt 
of  711.  It  is,  however,  possible  that  Ja-u-di  is  here  nK»  and  not  .tiiT.  See 
above,  §  59. 


Ixxii 


INTRODUCTION 


62.  Ch.  20,  a  narrative  referring  to  the  year  711  B.C.,  relates 
that,  on  one  occasion  at  least,  Isaiah  enforced  his  spoken 
message  by  strange  symbolical  action ;  for  three  years  he  went 
barefoot  and  half-clad,  and  so  by  his  conduct  represented  the 
lot  of  those  whose  captivity  he  predicted. 

Again  some  years  are  a  blank,  and  then,  in  a  series  of 
prophecies  (in  chs.  28^-31,  and,  perhaps,  ch.  18)  we  are  able 
to  trace,  and  in  a  group  of  narratives  (chs.  36  f.  and  perhaps 
also  38  f.)  to  see  the  deep  impression  left  on  the  popular  mind 
by,  the  part  which  Isaiah  played  at  the  time  of  Sennacherib's 
invasion  of  Palestine  in  701,  and  probably,  if  Sennacherib  really 
invaded  Palestine  some  ten  years  later  (§  70),  on  that  occasion 
also. 

The  date  of  Isaiah*s  death  is  unknown  :  even  if  the  tradition, 
based  probably  on  some  Midrash,  and  perhaps  alluded  to  in 
He  11^'',  that  Isaiah  was  sawn  asunder  by  King  Manasseh,* 
deserved  credence,  it  would  determine  little ;  for  the  date  of 
Manasseh's  accession  cannot  be  closely  or  certaintly  fixed; 
according  to  some  chronological  schemes  it  is  to  be  placed  as  early 
as  698 — i.e.  29  years  (2  K  18^)  after  727,  in  which  year,  accord- 
ing to  one  statement  in  the  Book  of  Kings  (2  K  i2^%  the  earliest 
date  of  the  accession  of  Hezekiah  must  be  placed,  according 
to  others  as  late  as  686,  i.e.  29  years  after  the  date  which  another 
statement  in  Kings  (2  K  i2>^^),  if  correct,  would  require  us  to 
assign  to  Hezekiah's  accession.  But  the  date  of  Isaiah's  death 
would  be  brought  down  to  about  690  b.c.  at  earliest,  if  he  really 
played  a  part  on  the  occasion  of  Sennacherib's  (hypothetical) 
second  invasion  (§  70). 

63.  Isaiah's  life  was  spent  during  a  time  of  change  in  the 
political  and  social  conditions  of  Judah.  This  change  was  due 
in  large  measure  to  the  new  and  greater  activity  of  Assyria,! 

*  **  Beliar  was  wroth  with  Isaiah  ;  and  he  dwelt  in  the  heart  of  Manasseh, 
and  he  sawed  him  in  sunder  with  a  wooden  saw,"  Ascension  of  Isaiah,  5^ 
(probably  written  in  the  first  century  A.D.) ;  Charles,  Asc.  of  Isaiah,  p.  xliv. 

t  For  the  evidence  for  the  details  enumerated  in  the  following  sections, 
see  the  inscriptions  of  Tiglath-pileser  (ed.  Rost,  1893),  Sargon  (ed.  H. 
Winckler,  1889),  Sennacherib,  Esar-haddon,  and  Asshurbanipal ;  also  the 
Assyrian  Eponym  lists  [KB  i.  204-215)  and  the  Babylonian  Chronicle 
{KB  ii.  273  ff. ).  New  editions  of  the  Inscriptions  of  the  Assyrian  kings  just 
mentioned  are  promised  in  the  Vorderasiatische  Bibliothek,  but  none  has 
yet  appeared.     Meantime  KB  ii.  contains  a  convenient  collection  of  most  of 


4 


POLITICAL  AND  SOCIAL  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  AGE      Ixxili 

which  followed  on  the  accession  of  Tiglaih-pileser  to  the  throne 
of  that  country  in  745  B.C.,  and  which  was  already  beginning  to 
make  itself  felt  in  the  West  by  the  year  742,  and  probably,  there- 
fore, a  year  or  two  before  the  death  of  Uzziah  and  the  call 
of  Isaiah. 

Since  the  disruption  of  the  united  kingdoms  of  Judah  and 
the  northern  tribes  on  the  death  of  Solomon,  c.  930,  Judah  the 
smaller  had  also  been  the  weaker  of  the  two,  and  often  stood 
rather  in  the  position  of  a  vassal-state  to  the  Northern  kingdom. 
The  attendance  of  Jehoshaphat  of  Judah  on  Ahab  of  Israel 
(i  K  22),  when  that  monarch  was  conducting  one  of  those 
campaigns  against  Syria  which  formed  the  characteristic  political 
feature  of  the  9th  cent.  b.c.,  may  not  have  been  altogether 
voluntary,  but  rather  the  service  rendered  by  a  vassal  to  his  over- 
lord. And  this  relation  of  the  two  kingdoms  to  one  another 
may  account  for  there  being  no  direct  reference  to  Judah,  as 
distinct  from  Israel,  in  the  Assyrian  records  of  the  9th  cent.  Be 
this  as  it  may,  Assyria  had  already  in  the  9th  cent,  made  itself 
felt  among  the  Syrian  and  Palestinian  states.  As  early  as  876, 
Asshurnazirpal  with  his  army  reached  the  coast  of  Northern 
Phoenicia,  and  re-established  that  command  of  the  line  of 
communication  with  the  Mediterranean  which  had  been  won 
by  Tiglath-pileser  i.  in  the  12th  cent,  and  subsquently  lost.  To 
secure  what  he  had  won,  Asshurnazirpal  left  an  Assyrian  colony 
in  Aribua,  a  town  near  the  river  Sangara  (mod.  Nahr-el-Kebir), 
and  on  the  northern  frontier  of  the  state  of  Hamath.  Phoenician 
cities  as  far  south  as  Tyre,  far  further  south  than  he  himself  or 
his  army  proceeded,  sent  him  gifts.  On  the  other  hand,  Damascus 
was  neither  attacked  nor,  like  the  Phoenician  states,  induced  to 
send  gifts.  Shalmaneser  11.  made  several  attempts  to  extend  the  ; 
area  of  Assyrian  authority  in  Syria,  though  at  first  without  any 
success.  Ben-hadad  of  Damascus  was  the  leader  of  a  Syrian 
league  which  checked  the  Assyrian  advance ;  his  chief  supporters 
were  Hamath  and  Israel.     In  854,  Shalmaneser  fought  a  battle) 

the  more  important.  A  clear  and  admirable  presentation  of  the  history  of 
Assyria  from  the  accessitm  of  Asshurnazirpal  to  the  death  of  Asshurbanipal 
will  be  found  in  R.  H.  Rogers,  History  of  Babylonia  and  Assyria  {^^.  2,  1903), 
ii.  pp.  46-282  ;  in  the  same  work  fuller  references  to  editions  and  translations 
of  the  inscriptions  relating  to  each  reign  will  also  be  found.  A  recent  full 
discussion  of  Sargon's  reign  in  particular  is,  A.  T.  Olmstead,  Western  Asia 
in  the  days  of  Sargon  of  Assyria  (New  York,  1908). 


Ixxiv 


INTRODUCTION 


against  the  combined  Syrian  forces  at  Karkar  near  the  Orontes 
and  further  south  than  the  Nahr-el-Kebir ;  the  Assyrian  king 
claimed  a  victory,  but,  since  neither  tribute  nor  acquisition  of 
territory  followed,  the  victory  was  barren ;  similarly  fruitless  were 
the  Assyrian  western  campaigns  of  849  and  846  B.C.  The  next 
campaign,  that  of  842  B.C.;  was  more  effective;  Ben-hadad  of 
Damascus  had  now  been  succeeded  by  Hazael,  and  Ahab  of 
Israel  by  Jehu.  Israel  had  fallen  away  from  the  Syrian  league, 
and  Jehu  in  this  year  paid  tribute  to  Assyria,  in  this  perhaps 
anticipating  the  policy  of  Ahaz  of  Judah  a  century  later  {735 
B.C. ;  cp.  Is  7).  Damascus,  though  it  suffered  siege  and  the 
ravaging  of  its  immediate  surroundings,  successfully  resisted 
the  Assyrians,  and  Shalmaneser  was  unable  to  capture  the 
city,  either  in  this  year  or  in  839.  Nor  could  his  successor 
Shamsi-Adad  (825-813  b.c.),  who  rather  lost  ground  in  the  West : 
but  Adad-Nirari  (812-783)  repeated  the  limited  success  of 
Shalmaneser;  he  received  tribute  from  Israel  as  well  as  from 
Sidon,  Tyre,  Edom,  and  Philistia,  and  he  besieged  and  harassed, 
but  failed  to  conquer,  Damascus.  During  the  reigns  of  the  next 
three  kings  (782-745),  Assyria  suffered  a  marked  decline;  a 
(probably)  unsuccessful  campaign  against  Damascus  in  773,  and 
others  against  the  far  more  northern  towns  of  Hadrach  and 
Arpad  in  755  and  754  respectively,  exhausts  the  list  of  the 
Assyrian  western  movements  during  this  period.  Thus  for  a  full 
generation  Assyria  had  passed  practically  out  of  sight  of  Israel 
and  Judah,  and  even  their  bulwark  (172)  Damascus  had  felt  but 
little  shock  from  Assyrian  attack. 

64.  Egypt  during  the  same  period  was  also  weak  and  divided 
(§  68),  and  exercised  little  influence  and  no  restraint  over  Palestine. 
Thus  there  was  the  same  opportunity  which  David  had  used  with 
so  much  vigour  and  success  three  centuries  before  for  the  Pales- 
tinian states  to  enjoy  freedom  from  the  thrall  of  the  great  Empires 
of  the  Nile  and  the  Tigris-Euphrates  valleys,  and  to  strive  for  the 
supremacy  among  themselves.     Alike  in  Israel  and  Judah  the  1 
period  of  Assyria's  greatest  weakness  was  covered  by  a  single  reign    j 
— of  Jeroboam  11.  in  the  North,  and  of  Uzziah  in  Judah.     This   ) 
meant  internal  political  stability  not  only  for  Judah,  but  for  the 
generally  more  unstable  Northern  kingdom.     According  to  2  K 
1425-28  (cp^  Am  6^*),  Jeroboam  re-established  the  dominion  of 
Israel  from  the  Dead  Sea  in  the  South  to  the  entering  in  of 


POLITICAL  AND  SOCIAL  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  AGE      Ixxv 

yamath  (cp.  Nu  13^^  n.)  in  the  North,  and  also  gained  the 
supremacy  over  Damascus.  One  of  the  earliest  and  most  signifi- 
cant of  Uzziah's  achievements  (2  K  14-^),  unless  it  is  rather  to 
be  attributed  to  his  predecessor  Amaziah,  was  the  recovery  of 
Elath  (which  was  lost  again  by  Ahaz,  2  K  16^) ;  he  thereby 
regained  for  Judah  that  command  of  the  trade  route  to  the  Red 
Sea  which  Solomon  had  held  (i  K  g^^),  but  which  had  subse- 
quently been  lost.  The  Chronicler,  in  a  passage  where  he  may 
well  be  drawing  on  ancient  and  trustworthy  data,  gives  further 
illustrations  of  the  success  and  strength  of  Judah  at  this  time  : 
Uzziah  waged  successful  war  against  the  Philistines,  Ammonites, 
and  Meunim  (?  Minaeans) ;  he  strengthened  the  fortifications  of 
Jerusalem ;  he  devoted  himself  to  the  rearing  of  cattle,  of  which 
he  had  many,  and  agriculture  (2  Ch  26®-^^). 

65.  The  Books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles  record  the  success 
and  prosperity  of  the  kings,  Jeroboam  and  Uzziah  ;  but  we  are 
not  left  merely  to  infer  from  this  that  others  besides  the  kings 
were  prosperous ;  the  prophecies  of  Amos  and  Isaiah  speak 
clearly  of  wealth  and  luxury,  and  the  dissoluteness  that  accom- 
panies them,  in  both  the  Northern  (Am  3!^  5I1  6'*-^,  Is  9^  17*  28^-*) 
and  the  Southern  (Is  2^  310^.  59.12f.14.22  gg^f.)  kingdoms.  But 
though  increase  of  wealth  extended  beyond  the  king,  it  was  not 
widely  or  evenly  distributed  ;  the  lot  of  the  weaker  seems  rather 
to  have  become  aggravated.  Not  a  little  of  the  increased  wealth 
was  probably  due  to  trade  (see  below,  p.  53);  and  not  a  little  of 
the  wealth  so  acquired  was  expended  in  bringing  unjust  pressure 
to  bear  on  the  weak,  in  repeating  the  conduct  of  Ahab  towards 
Naboth  which  had  so  provoked  Elijah  ( i  K  2 1) :  the  nouveaux  i-iches 
bought  up  the  patrimonies  of  their  needier  fellow-countrymen  ; 
by  aggregation  great  estates  arose  (below,  pp.  90  ff.),  and  cruel 
evictions  (Mic  2^)  aroused  the  indignation  of  the  humane.  In 
the  courts  the  weak  could  obtain  no  redress,  for  money  again 
bribed  the  judges  (lo^). 

66.  But  if  the  weaker  and  poorer  had  not  shared  in  the 
increased  wealth  and  luxury  of  Uzziah's  time,  there  is  little 
reason  to  suppose  that  they  profited  by  the  changes  that  came 
after  his  death  and  during  the  lifetime  of  Isaiah  :  the  most 
immediate  effect,  so  far  as  Judah  was  concerned,  was  that  that 
country  became  tributary  to  Assyria  in  735-734  B.C.  and  remained 
so :  tribute  meant  heavier  taxation,  and  this  was  doubtless  to  a 


Ixxvi  INTRODUCTION 

large  extent  wrung  out  of  the  poor,  even  though  the  king  obtained 
it  directly  from  the  "mighty  men"  of  Judah  (cp.  2  K  15^0  of 
Israel).  Be  that  as  it  may,  this  is  clear  :  whereas  Isaiah  had 
grown  up  to  early  manhood  in  the  latter  half  of  a  long  and  pros- 
perous reign,  a  citizen  of  a  country  that  paid  no  tribute  to  any 
foreign  power,  near  neighbour  to  the  kindred  kingdom  of  Israel, 
which  was  also  free  and  prosperous,  within  a  year  or  two  of  his 
call  he  had  seen  the  kingdom  of  Israel  torn  by  faction  after  the 
death  of  Jeroboam  {c.  746),  and  heard  of  Assyria's  more  vigorous 
action  in  the  West.  Arpad  offered  a  stern  resistance  to  Tiglath- 
pileser,  but  in  740  it  fell  before  him ;  and  Assyria  recovered  what 
the  kings  of  the  9th  century  had  won  for  it,  and  their  weaker 
successors  had  lost — access  to  the  Mediterranean.  But  this  was 
merely  the  prelude  to  greater  achievements  in  the  West  than  the 
greatest  of  the  past;  in  738,  Tiglath-pileser  defeated  an  extensive 
coalition  of  Syrian  states,  which  included,  or  consisted  of,  "19 
districts  of  Hamath,"  "  which  in  their  disloyalty  had  fallen  away 
to  Azriyau  of  the  land  of  Ja-u-di,"  who  is  identified  by  many 
with  Uzziah  (Azariah),  king  of  Judah  (see  above,  p.  Ixx) ;  these 
districts  he  made  an  Assyrian  province ;  he  captured  Kullani 
(lo"^  n.) ;  he  received  tribute,  amongst  others,  from  Rason  of 
Damascus,  Menahem  of  Samaria  (whose  land,  according  to  2  K 
151^^-,  he  had  invaded),  Hirom  of  Tyre,  and  Zabibi,  queen  of 
Arabia.  About  735,  Ahaz  paid  tribute  (2  K  i6''^-),  and  hence- 
forward Judah  was  tributary  to  Assyria.  In  734,  Tiglath-pileser 
was  in  Philistia,  and  captured  Gaza,  furthest  S.  of  the  Philistine 
cities  and  nearest  to  Egypt;  in  733  and  732  he  was  attacking 
Damascus  and  Israel ;  in  the  former  year  he  captured  the  northern 
districts  of  Israel  (2  K  15^^),  and  in  the  latter  year  he  achieved 
what  his  predecessor  in  the  9th  century  had  attempted  and  failed 
to  achieve,  the  capture  of  Damascus  ;  the  native  sovereignty  was 
abolished  (17^);  Damascus  became  an  Assyrian  province.  Ten 
years  later,  in  consequence  of  Hoshea's  withholding  the  annual 
tribute  to  Assyria  (2  K  17*),  the  same  fate  befell  Samaria,  after  a 
protracted  siege  (724-722)  conducted  by  Shalmaneser  (727-722) 
and  Sargon  (722-705)  successively.  In  accordance  with  the 
new  Assyrian  policy,  the  Israelites  were  carried  captive  to  dis- 
tant districts  (Gozan,  Media,  etc. — 2  K  17^),  while  Babylonians, 
Cuthites,  and  others  were  settled  in  Samaria.  Henceforward, 
instead  of  a  kindred  people,  Judah  had  on  its  northern  border 

I! 


POLITICAL  AND  SOCIAL  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  AGE      Ixxvii 

which  lay  but  an  easy  day's  walk  from  Jerusalem,  an  Assyrian 
province  and  a  mixed  population  (2  K  ly^*-*^). 

67.  In  720,  Sargon  quelled  an  important  and  extensive  rising 
in  Syria,  which  may  have  been  instigated  or  fomented  by 
Merodach-baladan  of  Babylon  (see  on  ch.  39) ;  he  defeated 
Yaubidi  of  Hamath  at  Karkar — the  scene  of  an  earlier  victory 
of  Shalmaneser  11.  (p.  Ixxiv) — and  the  combined  forces  of  IJanno 
of  Gaza  and  Sibe  (Biblical  So,  or  rather  S^w^)  of  Musri  (Egypt? : 
see  §  68  f.)  at  Raphia,  on  the  coast  between  Gaza  and  Egypt ; 
perhaps  also  in  the  same  campaign  he  inflicted  defeat  on  Judah 
(but  see  above,  p.  Ixxi  n.). 

In  715,  Sargon  (Annals,  97-99)  subdued  certain  Arab  tribes, 
and  received  tribute  from,  amongst  others,  Pir'u  (?  Pharaoh), 
king  of  Mu§ur  (?  Egypt).  It  may  be  surmised  that  Judah  did 
not  remain  uninterested  in  these  events,  but  there  is  no  evidence 
that  in  this  year  it  took  any  active  part  in  opposition  to  Sargon, 
or  that  Sargon  came  any  nearer  to  Judah  than  Arabia. 

In  711,  by  his  Tartan  (20^)  rather  than  in  person,  Sargon 
quelled  another  rising,  of  which  Ashdod  was  the  centre,  but  in 
which  not  only  Philistia,  but  also  Moab,  Edom,  and  Judah  were 
concerned  (see  Sargon's  Annals,  205-221  ;  General  Inscription, 
90-110).  Moreover,  behind  these  Palestinian  states  stood, 
according  to  Is  20^,  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  (DnVD  and  triD) ;  accord- 
ing to  Sargon's  inscriptions,  Musur  and  Miluhha,  which  have 
commonly  likewise  been  equated  with  Egypt  and  Ethiopia. 

68.  In  712  (Breasted)  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  established  its  authority  over, 
and  at  the  same  time  brought  union  and  increased  strength  to,  Egypt,  Till 
recently  (see  below)  it  was  supposed  that  Sabako,  the  first  of  the  Ethiopian 
kings  of  Egypt,  succeeded  to  the  throne  as  early  as  728  :  on  that  hypothesis, 
now  known  to  be  erroneous,  there  was  little  difficulty  in  accounting  for 
Egypt,  or,  as  under  the  circumstances,  it  was  quite  natural  to  say,  Ethiopia, 
intriguing  with  the  Syrian  states  and  inducing  them  to  oppose  Assyria  ;  the 
identification  of  So  (Kio,  2  K  17*  MT),  or  rather  S6we  (Kip,  cp.  Assyr.  Sib'i), 
with  Sabako,  though  frequently  made,  was  always  more  questionable  and,  in- 
deed, indefensible.  Before  the  accession  of  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  lies  a  period 
of  great  obscurity  in  Egyptian  history,  though  this  much  may  be  said,  that  the 
Delta  was  at  the  time  governed  by  a  number  of  petty  princes,  and  the  Pharaoh 
of  the  lists  who  is  mentioned  immediately  before  Sabako  is  Bokchoris.  It  is 
possible,  then,  as  Breasted  even  recently  has  written  (A^zV/.  of  Egypt,  S49f.), 
that  So  (2  K  17*)  was  "an  otherwise  unknown  Delta  dynast,"  that  "unable 
to  oppose  the  formidable  armies  of  Assyria,  the  petty  kinglets  of  Egypt  con- 
stantly fomented  discontent  and  revolt  among  the  Syro-Palestinian  states,  in 


Ixxviii  INTRODUCTION 

order,  if  possible,  to  create  a  fringe  of  buffer  states  between  them  and  the 
Assyrians,"  possible  also  that  the  "  Pir'u,  king  of  Musur,"  of  Sargon's  record  of 
715  B.C.  was  Bokchoris,  who  in  that  case  is  mentioned  by  his  title  (Pharaoh) 
instead  of  his  proper  name ;  just  as  Hebrew  writers  use  the  expression,  not 
found  in  Egyptian,  "Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt"  {e.g.  36^  n.,  cp.  F.  LI. 
Griffith,  in  DB,  s.v.  "Pharaoh"). 

Alt  {Israel u.  Aegypten^  pp.  44  ff.)  conceives  the  situation  somewhat  dift'er- 
ently  :  according  to  him,  the  pressure  of  Ethiopia  on  Egypt,  which  had  already 
become  severe  in  the  time  of  the  Ethiopian  Pi'ankhi  (from  about  741  B.C. 
according  to  Breasted's  chronology,  or  earlier  according  to  others),  had  brought 
about  a  certain  reaction  against  the  gradual  dissolution  of  the  Egyptian  kingdom 
into  a  large  number  of  petty  princedoms,  especially  in  the  Delta,  that  marked 
the  period  of  the  22nd  and  23rd  dynasties  {c.  945-f.  718,  Breasted).  The 
Pi'ankhi  stele  (Breasted,  Ancient  Records,  iv.  860-883)  reveals  Tefhakhte 
of  Sais,  whose  son  Bokchoris  became  the  sole  ruler  of  the  24th  dynasty, 
as  exercising  a  supremacy  over  the  Delta  princes,  and  as  so  far  anticipating 
that  renewed  unity  of  Egypt  which  certainly  marks  the  time  of  the  Ethiopian 
dynasty.  Under  these  circumstances,  Tefnakhte  may  already  have  exercised 
sufficient  political  farsightedness  to  have  perceived  the  danger  threatening 
Egypt  from  Assyria,  and  to  have  provoked  the  Palestinian  states  to  oppose 
the  Assyrian  advances. 

But  there  are  certainly  here  unsolved,  or  but  partially  solved,  problems  ; 
and  Winckler,  and  after  him  others,  have  sought  quite  another  way  out. 

69.  As  early  as  1893,  Winckler,  in  Altor.  Forschtmgen,  i.  24  ff.,  argued  that 
the  Assyrian  Musur  and  the  Hebrew  Misraim  in  many  cases  meant  not 
Egypt,  but  "the  country  abutting  on  Edom,  the  later  Nabataea."  In  his 
earlier  or  later  discussions  of  the  subject,  accordingly,  Sibe,  the  ally  of  IJanno 
of  Gaza,  becomes  an  Arab  sheikh,  and  Pir'u  (cp.  the  Sabaean  nn:'  yns),  king 
of  Mu§ur  in  715,  is  Arabian  not  Egyptian;  it  is  again  the  Arabian  people 
whom  Pir'u  ruled,  and  not  Egypt  under  the  new  Ethiopian  dynasty,  that  stand 
behind  the  revolting  Palestinians  in  71 1  and  even  in  701;  Egypt  first 
co-operates  with  Palestine  under  Tirhakah  in  the  (hypothetical)  second  cam- 
paign of  Sennacherib  in  Palestine  about  691  B.C.  (see  §  70).  The  theory 
that  the  Assyrian  Musur  and  the  Hebrew  DnsfD  may  refer  not  only  to  Egypt, 
*  but  also  to  a  district  in  North  Arabia,  has  also  been  presented  by  others ; 
various  forms  of  the  theory  and  various  conclusions  drawn  from  it  may  be 
studied  in  H.  Winckler,  Alt&r.  Forschungen  (1893),  i.  24-41,  Musri-Meluhha, 
Mdin  (1898),  KAT^  (1903),  67,  70-72,  I36-I5i»  ^72,  273  (see  also  Index, 
s.v.  Mu§ri),  Die  jungsten  Kdmpfer  wider  den  Panbabylonismus  (1907); 
F.  Hommel,  Vier  neue  Arabische  Landschaftsnamen ;  T.  K.  Cheyne,  Mizraim^ 
in  EBi.  iii.  (1902),  and,  e.g.,  Traditions  and  Beliefs  of  Ancient  Israel  {i^o^), 
xi  f,  1 71-173;  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Kingdom  of  Judah  (1908),  xiii  ff., 
xlif.,  88;  The  Two  Religions  of  Israel  {\<)ii),  pp.  335,  345.  356-361  (see  also 
references  in  Index  to  Misrim  in  the  three  works  last  named).  It  is  not 
without  significance  that  Breasted  in  his  History  of  Egypt  is  able  to  dispense 
with  the  theory  of  the  North  Arabian  Mu?ri,  and  that  Ed.  Meyer  {Die 
Israeliten  u.  ihre  Nachbarstdmme  { 1 906),  455-47 1 )  decisively  and  totally  rejects 
the  theory  ;  see  also  against  the  theory  in  its  application  to   the   times  of 


POLITICAL  AND  SOCIAL  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  AGE     Ixxix 

Isaiah,  Fr.  Kiichler,  Die  Stellting  des  Propheten  Jesaja  zur  Politk  seiner  Zeit 
(1906) ;  A.  T.  Olmstead,  Western  Asia  in  the  days  of  Sargon  of  Assyria 
(1908),  pp.  56-71.  A.  Alt  in  his  survey  of  the  relations  between  Israel  and 
Egypt  in  the  time  of  Isaiah  {Israel  u.  Aegypten,  1909,  pp.  41-87),  while 
admitting  Pir'u,  king  of  Mu§ur  in  715  B.C.  (Sargon,  Annals,  97),  to  bean 
Arabian,  limits  the  significance  of  the  Arabian  Mu§ur,  and  allows  far  more 
for  the  activity  of  Egypt  in  Palestine  than  do  most  of  those  who  admit  the 
existence  of  a  kingdom  of  Musur  in  Arabia. 

Fortunately  for  the  understanding  of  Isaiah,  it  is  of  relatively  little  im- 
portance whether  between  720  and  701  B.C.  the  power  that  kept  stirring  up 
the  Palestinian  states  was  Egypt,  the  history  of  which  country  immediately 
prior  to  712  is  obscure,  or  Mu§ur  in  North  Arabia,  of  which,  as  an  inde- 
pendent kingdom  in  Arabia  sufficiently  important  to  divide  with  Assyria  the 
interests  of  Palestinian  states,  nothing  is  known  for  certain,  and  which, 
perhaps,  has  never  enjoyed  more  than  a  speculative  existence. 

70.  Sennacherib,  Sargon's  successor,  had  also  once  at  least 
to  secure  Assyrian  authority  in  Syria  by  force:  in  701,  Philistia 
and  Judah  at  the  instigation,  not  of  an  Arabian  kingdom  of 
Musur  or  Meluhha  (Wi.),  but  of  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  in  Egypt, 
were  in  revolt.  In  two  respects  Sennacherib's  campaign,  which 
was  undertaken  to  suppress  this  revolt,  was  not  an  unqualified 
success :  victory  over  the  Egyptians  at  Eltekeh  was  not  followed 
up  by  an  invasion  of  Egypt  itself,  and  Jerusalem,  though  it  was 
besieged,  was  not  captured.  Nevertheless  Judah,  in  common 
with  the  rest  of  Syria,  remained  tributary  to  Assyria.  According 
to  a  hypothesis  which  would  explain  the  allusion  to  Tirhakah 
in  37®,  Sennacherib  was  again  called  back  to  Syria  {c.  690  b.c.)  : 
the  nearest  support  for  this  hypothesis  in  Assyrian  sources  is  an 
account  of  a  campaign  against  Arabia,  the  date  of  which  is  un- 
known, but  which  may  have  taken  place  about  690. 

This  campaign  was  already  known  by  allusions  to  it  in  inscriptions  ot 
Esarhaddon  and  Asshurbanipal,  when  in  1904  (Orientalische  Literatur- 
zeitung,  cols.  69,  70),  Scheil  announced  the  discovery  of  an  inscription  of 
Sennacherib  describing  the  campaign.  This  inscription  was  published  by 
Ungnad,  in  Vorderasiatische  Schriftdenkmdler,  i.  77  ff.;  and  in  a  translation, 
for  which  I  am  indebted  to  Prof.  R.  W.  Rogers,  it  runs  as  follows  : 
*'  Telhunu,  the  queen  of  Arabia,  in  the  desert,  from  her  I  took  away  a 
thousand  camels.  The  fear  of  my  dominion  cast  her  down,  and  Hazail  also. 
They  left  their  tents  and  fled  to  Adummatu,  whose  location  is  in  the  desert, 
a  place  of  thirst,  where  there  is  neither  provision  nor  place  to  drink."  If 
from  Arabia,  Sennacherib  (who  is  himself  described  in  Herod,  (ii.  141)  as 
'*  king  of  the  Arabians  and  of  the  Assyrians,"  and  whose  army,  as  the  "  army 
of  the  Arabians"),  somewhat  repeating  his  movements  of  701,  advanced  on, 
without  entering,  Egypt,  and  also  attacked  Judah,  it  would   be  possible  to 


Ixxx  INTRODUCTION 

regard  the  different  narratives  which,  it  is  clear,  have  been  combined  in 
chs.  36  f.  (see  Comm. ),  as  narratives  of  different  events  and  not  different  and 
discordant  narratives  of  the  same  event,  and  also  to  justify  the  allusion  to 
**  Tirhakah,  king  of  Ethiopia"  (37^) ;  Tirhakah  was  not  king  of  Ethiopia  in 
701,  he  was  king  in  or  soon  after  694.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  doubtful 
whether  either  Hezekiah  or  Isaiah,  who  are  also  associated  with  the  narra- 
tive that  refers  to  Tirhakah,  were  alive  in  690  ;  Isaiah  would  probably  at  that 
time  have  been  between  70  and  80  years  of  age.  Some  further  discussion  of 
these  points  will  be  found  in  the  discussion  of  chs.  36  f.  in  the  Comm. 

71.  Since  the  Egyptian  chronology  comes  into  consideration  on  several 
occasions,  it  may  be  convenient  briefly  to  indicate  here  the  grounds  on  which, 
contrary  to  earlier  views,  the  date  of  Tirhakah's  accession  can  be  fixed  with 
certainty  as  falling  after  701  B.C.,  and  consequently  the  beginning  of  the 
Ethiopian  dynasty  as  falling  about  712  or  714  B.C.,  and  not  as  early  as  728. 

According  to  a  Serapeum  stele  (Breasted,  Ancient  Records^  iv.  959),  an 
Apis  died  at  the  age  of  21  years,  2  months,  7  days,  on  the  21st  day  of  the 
I2th  month  of  the  20th  year  of  Psamtik  :  since  according  to  the  same  stele 
the  Apis  was  born  in  the  26th  year  of  Tirhakah,  Tirhakah's  reign  cannot  have 
exceeded  27  years.  Now  Tirhakah  was  certainly  still  alive  and  king  in 
668-667,  for  Asshurbanipal,  who  became  king  of  Assyria  in  668,  defeated 
Tirhakah  in  his  first  campaign  ;  Asshurbanipal  also  states  of  Tirhakah 
(Rassam  Cylinder,  ii.  21  ;  KB  ii.  p.  166  f.),  il-lik  limat  mu-H-lu,  his  nighi- 
fate  came  {upon  him),  which  should  mean  that  Tirhakah  was  not  only  defeated 
at  that  time,  but  died.  In  that  case  the  year  of  Tirhakah's  succession  is 
694-693  ;  it  cannot  have  been  earlier.  Some  Egyptologists,  disregarding  this 
interpretation  of  the  Assyrian  inscription,  and  reckoning  back  138  years,  a 
number  obtained  from  calculations  based  on  data  given  in  the  Egyptian 
records  (Breasted,  Ancient  Records,  iv.  1026-1029)  from  the  close  of  the 
26th  dynasty  in  525  B.C.,  obtain  663  as  the  date  of  Psamtik  i.'s  accession  and 
Tirhakah's  death  ;  this  gives  689-688  as  the  date  of  Tirhakah's  accession. 

The  years  of  accession  of  Tirhakah's  immediate  predecessors,  Sabako  and 
Shabataka,  the  first  two  kings  of  the  Ethiopian  dynasty,  cannot  be  so  closely 
determined  by  the  inscriptions.  But  from  an  inscription  that  mentions  year 
3  of  Shabataka,  it  appears  that  Shabataka's  third  year  was  near  700  B.C. 
(Breasted,  iv.  887  ;  and  cp.  452  n.  c).  Manetho  assigns  to  Sabako  8,  to 
Shabataka  14  years — in  all  22  years  ;  Syncellus  12  years  to  each  of  these 
kings — in  all  24  years.  Thus  the  earliest  date,  that  rests  on  any  evidence,  for 
the  beginning  of  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  is  24  years  before  694-693,  i.e.  718- 
717  ;  Breasted's  dates  are  712  B.C.  for  Sabako,  700  for  Shabataka. 

Bokchoris,  who  immediately  preceded  Sabako,  reigned  at  least  6  years, 
exactly  the  period  stated  by  Africanus  (44  according  to  Syncellus). 

72.  The  ultimate  goal  of  the  Assyrian  advance  resumed  by 
Tiglath-pileser  iv.  and  his  successors  was  first  attained  after  the 
Hfetime  of  Isaiah  :  after  an  apparently  unsuccessful  invasion  of 
Egypt  in  676,  Esarhaddon  captured  Memphis  in  671,  and 
Assurbanipal  took  Thebes  in  667. 


ISAIAH   AS   PROPHET  AND  TEACHER  Ixxxi 

73.  This  rapid  sketch  may  serve  to  make  clear  the  political 
conditions  under  which  Isaiah  lived,  and  to  which  not  a  little  of 
the  form  of  his  teaching  is  due.  Briefly,  Isaiah's  public  life 
coincided  with  the  first  half  of  the  period  of  80  years  from  the 
accession  of  Tiglath-pileser  to  the  Assyrian  conquest  of  Egypt, 
during  which  the  Assyrian  advance  westwards  and  supremacy  in 
the  West  was,  though  at  first  resisted,  unchecked  :  conquered 
districts  never  permanently  recovered  their  independence,  tribu- 
tary states  never  permanently  escaped  the  necessity  of  paying 
tribute :  for  example,  Damascus  never  recovered  the  indepen- 
dence which  it  lost  in  732,  nor  did  the  retreat  of  Sennacherib 
release  Judah  from  tribute. 

§§  74-89.  Isaiah  as  Prophet  and  Teacher, 

74.  Isaiah  appears  from  the  first  to  have  discerned  the 
meaning  and  issue  of  the  new  spirit  and  policy  (§  63)  of  Assyria, 
and  to  have  realised  the  fruitlessness  of  political  combinations 
against  that  power  :  he  was  certainly  convinced  of  the  wrongness 
of  Judah  in  taking  any  part  in  them.  Against  all  such  combina- 
tions, of  which  there  was  no  lack,  he  consistently  set  himself. 
No  one  who  instigated  these  combinations,  whether  as  at  one 
time  it  was  Merodach-baladan  (721-709  B.C.,  and  also  702  b.c.) 
of  Babylon  (cp.  ch.  39),  or  as  at  others  one  of  the  kings  of 
the  Ethiopian  dynasty  which  established  its  authority  over  Egypt 
about  712  B.C.  (§  71),  or,  as  it  may  have  been  earlier,  one  of  the 
Delta  chieftains  who  divided  authority  in  Egypt  prior  to  712,  or, 
as  some  think,  the  rulers  of  a  region  in  Arabia  called  Mu§ur 
(§  69),  counted  against  Assyria :  they  were  one  and  all  helpless 
and  useless  (cp.  ch.  20). 

The  only,  yet  at  the  same  time  an  overwhelming,  counter- 
weight to  Assyria  was  not  political,  nor  human  :  it  was  the  power 
and  purpose  of  Yahweh.  Yahweh  was  using  Assyria  to  achieve 
His  purpose  (10^) :  so  long  as  Assyria  carried  out  that  purpose  no 
powers  would  avail  against  it :  as  soon  as  Assyria  overstepped  its 
commission,  it,  too,  must  go  down  before  the  greater  power  of 
Yahweh  (10^"^'^).  Not  man,  but  God  determines  history — that 
is  the  key-note  to  Isaiah's  political  action  and  advice;  not  by 
clever  alliances,  but  by  watching  for  and  quietly  carrying  out  the 
will  of  Yahweh  is  the  true  welfare  of  the  state  to  be  secured. 
VOL.  I. — f 


Ixxxii  INTRODUCTION 

The  advance  of  Assyria  was,  according  to  Isaiah,  by  the  will  of 
Yahweh  ;  that  advance  would  necessarily  entail  the  withdrawal 
of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish   army   from   Jerusalem,   therefore  let 
Ahaz  and  his  people  put  away  their  fear  of  Syria  and  Ephraim 
(ch.  7),  nor  pay  Assyria  to  do  what  it  will  assuredly  do,  unpaid  by 
them :  such  seems  to  have  been  Isaiah's  advice  in  735,  and  if 
so  it  included  a  condemnation  of  Ahaz  in  becoming  voluntarily, 
and  while  as  yet  there  was  no  need,  a  tributary  to  Assyria,  in 
seeking  by  political  action  instead  of  reliance   on  Yahweh  to 
escape   the  attack   of    the   combined   forces   of  Ephraim   and 
Damascus.     But,  once  the  step  had  been  taken,  Isaiah  judged 
it  to  be  the  will  of  Yahweh  that  Judah  should  remain  tributary, 
and  certainly  that  it  should  not  attempt  to  escape  that  tribute  by 
yielding   to   the   invitations,  whether  of  Egypt,  or  Babylon,  or 
its  neighbours  in  Palestine,  to  revolt.      Finally,  though  it  was 
the  will  of  Yahweh  that  Assyria  should  punish  not  only  Ephraim 
but  Judah  too,  it  was  (if  we  may  trust  the  popular  biographical 
stories  of  the  prophet  in  chs.  36-39)  the  will  of  Yahweh,  as  Isaiah 
read  it,  that  Jerusalem  should  not  be   taken   by  Sennacherib ; 
consequently  in  701  he  is  as  confident  that  the  Assyrians  will 
not  capture  Jerusalem  as  he  had  been  in  735  that  the  Syro- 
Ephraimitish  army  would  not  do  so ;  and  he  counsels  Hezekiah 
accordingly.      But  though  on   the  one  occasion  he  was  con- 
vinced that  Ra§on,  and  on  the  other  that  Sennacherib,  would 
not  capture  Jerusalem,  it  is  quite  another  question  whether  he 
ever  abandoned  his  belief  that  the  sin  of  Judah  would  lead 
Yahweh  to  destroy  His  people  and  their  land  (§§  85-87). 

75.  In  735,  Isaiah  appears  to  have  appraised  at  its  true  worth 
the  condition  of  Ephraim  and  Syria,  and  in  701  (and  ?  711)  the 
promises  of  Egypt.  Whether  his  diagnosis  of  the  political  situa- 
tion was  at  other  times  and  in  all  respects  equally  correct,  or  his 
policy  of  non-intervention  always  politically  sound,  is  a  secondary 
question.  And  not  only  is  it  a  secondary  question ;  it  may,  if 
it  is  not  kept  in  its  place,  very  seriously  obscure  what  is  of 
primary  significance  in  the  life  and  character  of  Isaiah.  Isaiah 
is  of  "  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets  " ;  and  consequently 
how  far  he  secured  the  safety  of  the  Jewish  state  at  the  time, 
and  so  secured  its  continued  existence  for  another  century,  is  of 
little  moment ;  what  is  all-important  to  determine,  so  far  as  we 
can,  is  his  faithfulness  and  fruitfulness  as  a  teacher  sent  from 


\ 


ISAIAH  AS  PROPHET  AND  TEACHER         Ixxxiii 


God :  what  had  he  himself  learned  from  God,  what  did  he  teach 
his  own  age,  and  what  through  it  has  he  contributed  to  man's 
increasing  knowledge  and  consciousness  of  God  ? 

76.  These  questions  can  be  answered  up  to  a  point;  but, 
owing  to  the  uncertainty  that  hangs  over  many  questions  of  the 
literary  origin  of  much  of  Is  1-39  (§§  8-43),  they  cannot  with 
advantage  be  pursued  into  the  detail  that  has  sometimes  been 
attempted.  Here,  at  all  events,  no  fresh  elaborate  attempt  will 
be  made  to  trace  development  in  Isaiah's  conceptions  and 
teaching,  to  bring  to  light  conflicting  conceptions  in  his  view 
of  the  future,  for  example,  or  in  his  judgment  of  Assyria,  and 
then  to  determine  the  chronological  sequence  of  the  changes. 

All  the  more  elaborate  structures  of  Isaiah's  "  theology  "  rest  of  /  /  ' 

necessity  on  shifting  and  insecure  foundations ;  even  if  it  were  *  i 

certain,  and  it  is  not,  that  passages  such  as  ii^*^  9^'^  32^"*  were         ^[ 
the  work  of  Isaiah  at  all,  it  is  altogether  uncertain  at  wnat  period         jf  X 
of  his  life  he  composed  them,  and  how  he  came  by,  or  how  he 
modified,  his  conceptions  of  a  Messiah.* 

77.  If  there  is  one  passage  in  which,  above  all  others,  we  may 
feel  certain  that  Isaiah  speaks  to  us  in  his  own  words,  it  is  ch.  6 ; 
and  that  chapter,  in  spite,  if  not  also  in  some  measure  in  virtue 
of  its  brevity,  clearly  reveals  to  us  a  personality  of  great  spiritual 
depth  and  moral  power.  And  this  revelation,  though  in  that 
case  the  name  of  the  person  revealed  would  be  unknown,  would 
remain,  even  if  any  one  cared  to  question  Isaiah's  authorship  of 
the  chapter.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  is  no  ground  for  raising 
such  a  question,  or  for  doubting  that  we  owe  that  chapter  and 
much  else  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah  to  one  and  the  same  person. 
But,  in  attempting  a  synthesis  of  Isaiah's  character  and  teaching, 
it  will  be  well  to  start  from,  and  at  every  possible  point  to  return 
to,  this  record.     We  are  not  at  liberty  to  affirm  that  nothing  that 

*  For  theories  of  changing  expectations  of  the  future  attributed  to  Isaiah, 
see,  e.g.^  B.  Duhm,  Die  Theologie  dkr  Propheten  (1875),  pp.  158-168  (in 
some  respects  modified  in  his  Comm.,  1892) ;  H.  Guthe,  Das  Zukunftsbild 
des  Jesaia  (1885),  a  theory  withdrawn  in  Jesaia  {Religionsgeschichtliche  Volks- 
bucher),  1907  ;  F.  Giesebrecht,  Beitrdge  zur  Jesaiakritik  (1890),  pp.  76-84; 
H.  Hackmann,  Die  Zukunftserwartung  des  Jesaia  (1893).  Cp.  also  G.  A. 
Smith,  DB  ii.  489-491,  and  also  in  the  Review  of  Theology  and  Philosophy, 
1907  (July),  pp.  2  ff.,  where,  inter  alia^  the  reason  of  Guthe's  modification  of 
his  earlier  complex  theory  is  criticised.  See  also  Exp.,  1904,  pp.  330-342. 
On  Isaiah's  attitude  towards  Assyria,  see  F.  Wilke's/waw  u.  Assur,  1905. 


Ixxxiv  INTRODUCTION 

finds  no  expression  here  was  ever  elsewhere  expressed  by  Isaiah ; 
but  the  more  clearly  whatever  else  claims  to  be  Isaiah's  can  be 
related  to  this  chapter,  the  more  confident  may  we  feel  that  the 
claim  is  good. 

78.  Isaiah,  though  a  prophet  and  a  pioneer  in  religious  ex- 
perience and  the  apprehension  of  religious  truth,  was  none  the 
less,  and  indeed  necessarily  and  naturally,  the  child  of  his  people's 
past,  the  inheritor  of  their  beliefs  and  experience.  To  him,  as 
to  them,  Sion  had  been  pre-eminently  the  place  of  Yahweh's 
earthly  abode  (8^^ ;  cp.  8^  n.)  from  the  time  that  David,  the 
chosen  of  Yahweh,  had  encamped  there  (29^),  and  by  Yahweh's 
power,  then  and  there  manifested,  had  wrested  it  from  the 
Jebusites  (2  S  5*'^^  6).*  But  the  hereditary  belief  of  childhood 
became  the  conviction  begotten  of  personal  experience ;  it  was 
in  Sion  that  Isaiah  himself  saw  with  his  own  eyes  Yahweh  seated 
on  His  throne  in  royal  state  (6^^-).  Again,  to  Isaiah,  as  to  his 
countrymen,  the  people  of  Israel,  both  (81^)  Judah  and  the  tribes 
of  the  now  separate  Northern  kingdom,  were  connected  by  special 
and  peculiar  ties  with  Yahweh  ;  they  were  Yahweh's  family  (i^), 
Yahweh's  people  (i^),  compared  with  whom  others  were  aliens 
(i'');  they  were  His  treasure  and  carefully  tended  possession 
(51-'').  And  so  in  turn  Yahweh  was  peculiarly  the  possession  of 
Israel :  the  people  recognised  the  existence  of  gods  of  other 
nations  as  well  of  their  own,  and,  when  necessary,  distinguished 
Yahweh  by  the  term  God  of  Israel  (cp.  e.g.  Jg  ii2i-24)-  Isaiah's 
favourite  term  for  Yahweh  is  a  modification  of  this  older  term, 
and  it  retains  (though  with  a  difference  (see  below))  the  sugges- 
tion of  Yahweh's  special  relation  to  Israel :  Yahweh  is  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel.  It  is  unnecessary  to  attempt  any  complete  cata- 
logue of  popular  beliefs,  such  as  that  in  Seraphim  (6^),  which  find 
expression  in  Isaiah.  The  two  that  have  been  more  particularly 
referred  to  are  important  for  this  reason :  though  Isaiah  rises 
above  the  old  limited  thought  of  God  which  confined  Him  in  the 
range  of  His  presence  and  the  extent  of  His  authority,  he  retains 
what  there  was  of  permanent  value  in  the  belief  in  the  local 
manifestation  of  deity  and  His  connection  with  a  single  people ; 
a  more  exalted  conception  of  God  did  not  rob  Isaiah  of  the  great 
intensity  of  the  limited  popular  belief;  God  does  not  cease  to  be 

*  These  passages  are  derived  from  a  Jewish  work  probably  already  ancient 
in  the  time  of  Isaiah,  and  familiar  to  him. 


ISAIAH   AS   PROPHET   AND   TEACHER  Ixxxv 

near  because  He  is  also  afar  off  (lo^n.);  nor,  again,  because 
He  is  God  of  all,  does  Yahweh  cease  to  claim  the  special  service 
of  a  nation  or  an  individual ;  nor,  because  His  glory  fills  the  i 
whole  world,  does  He  cease  to  be  intensely  personal,  commun-  , 
ing  as  a  person  with  His  servants  the  prophets,  and  still  therefore  ' 
best  described  in  that  anthropomorphic  and  anthropopathic  lan- 
guage which  had  its  roots  in  those  more  limited  religious  beliefs, 
in  which  the  personal  qualities  of  a  god,  and  the  devotion  of  his 
worshippers  to  him,  were  accentuated  by  his  relations  or  conflicts 
with  other  and  similar  deities. 

79.  But  Isaiah  is  not  only  the  child  of  his  people,  he  is  the 
child  also  of  the  new  prophetic  movement  which  began  while  he 
was  still  a  boy  (§  58).  There  is  no  direct  allusion,  it  is  true,  in 
any  of  Isaiah's  prophecies  to  either  Amos  or  Hosea,  and  not 
very  much  that  can  be  said  to  be  unmistakably  due  to  either  of 
these  two  older  prophets ;  but  there  is  too  much  resemblance  in 
the  fundamental  positions  of  all  three  prophets  for  it  to  be 
probable  that,  in  a  small  country,  no  knowledge  of  the  earlier 
passed  to  and  influenced  the  later.  Only  this  must  be  added : 
Isaiah,  though,  unlike  Amos  (7^*),  he  did  not  refuse  the  title  ] 
prophet  (8^),  was  no  prophet  of  the  school ;  he  did  not  repeat, 
merely  because  he  approved,  what  he  had  heard  about  Amos' 
preaching  at  Bethel,  or  what  he  had  read  in  some  fly-sheet 
containing  the  substance  of  Hosea's  teaching.  It  is  probable 
enough  that  he  was  familiar  with  what  Amos  had  taught  and 
Hosea  was  teaching  before  the  crucial  day  in  the  year  of  Uzziah's 
death ;  but  he  first  began  to  say  with  power  the  same  things,  or 

to  treat  of  similar  themes,  after  that  day  on  which  he  saw  Yahweh, 
and  heard  and  obeyed  His  call  to  service  (ch.  6).  Even  before  his 
call,  as  we  may  well  believe,  there  had  been  added,  in  the  mind 
of  Isaiah,  to  the  old  and  limited  conceptions  which  he  had 
received  in  childhood  from  his  natural  kinsmen  or  ordinary 
acquaintance,  some  of  the  new  and  wider  conceptions  of  spiritual 
kinsmen  such  as  Amos  and  Hosea ;  and  all  these  conceptions, 
popular  and  prophetic  alike,  were  fused  by  his  own  personal 
experience,  as  recorded  in  ch.  6,  into  a  vital  unity,  which  became 
Yahweh's  message  through  him  to  his  people. 

80.  The  vision  that  showed  Yahweh  seated  in  §ion  con- 
vinced Isaiah  also  that  the  whole  earth  was  the  sphere  of 
Yahweh's  action  (6^) ;  the  sin  of  Israel  (6^-  ^^'),  Yahweh's  own 


Ixxxvi  INTRODUCTION 

peculiar  people,  is  seen  as  a  blot  in  the  world-enveloping  blaze 
of  Yahweh's  glory ;  the  weakness  and  meanness  of  man  and  of 
all  that  man  relies  on  for  help,  or  looks  up  to  as  lofty  and 
majestic,  is  seen  in  heightened  relief  against  the  absolutely 
unrivalled  majesty  and  the  inaccessible  exaltation  of  Yahweh 
^51-6  26-19  2 1  If.).  Neither  here  nor  elsewhere  does  Isaiah  take 
occasion  to  assert  with  precision,  like  the  later  Jewish  prophet 
(45^*  ^^'  22)j  that  there  is  no  God  but  Yahweh,  or,  like  Muhammed, 
that  there  is  no  God  but  the  (one)  God ;  yet  his  conception  of 
Yahweh  leaves  no  room  for  any  other  being  of  the  same  class 
(cp.  2^^^-) ;  the  world  that  is  full  of  Yahweh's  glory  has  no  room 

>  left  in  which  to  reflect  the  glory  of  any  other  God  ;  and  if  Assyria 
is  Yahweh's  instrument  (lo^^-),  made  merely  to  serve  His  pur- 
pose, or,  failing  to  do  so,  to  be  by  Him  destroyed,  there  is  n6 
place  for  any  gods  of  Assyria  to  control  and  guide  that  nation. 
The  images,  whether  of  Yahweh  or  of  other  gods,  which  abounded 
in  Judah  (2^),  and  commanded  the  devotion  of  the  people,  are  of 
no  real  value  and  quite  powerless  to  help  (2^^ :  cp.  2^  n.) ;  and 
the  same  is  true  of  the  spirits  that  were  supposed  to  haunt  trees 
and  gardens  (i^^f- :  cp.  17^®),  and  of  the  spirits  whom  the  necro- 
mancers consulted  (8^^).     But  whether  Isaiah  denied  all  reality 

I  of  existence  to  national  gods  other  than  Yahweh,  or  whether  he 

'  assigned  to  them  some  subordinate  position  in  Yahweh's  world 
government,  we  cannot  determine  with  certainty.  In  this  virtual 
monotheism,  Isaiah  was  anticipated  by  Amos.  Into  a  fuller  dis- 
cussion of  its  origin  and  nature  it  is  not  possible  to  enter  here. 
But  two  things  may  be  said:  (i)  this  apprehension  of  the 
greatness  and  uniqueness  of  Yahweh,  carrying  with  it  the  total 
disregard  of,  if  not  absolute  disbelief  in,  the  gods  of  other 
nations,  was  the  accompaniment  not  of  national  aggrandisement, 
1  but  of  national  decline ;  it  was  the  very  men  who  perceived  before- 
hand the  approaching  doom  of  Israel  and  the  destruction  of  its 
existence  as  a  nation  who  also  believed  and  taught  that  Yahweh 
so  controlled  the  entire  world  that  no  room  was  left  for  any  other 
divine  controllers  ;  and  the  fact  that  in  the  course  of  his  ministry 
the  larger  part  of  Yahweh's  people  perished  or  were  exiled  from 
their  land,  and  that  the  Northern  kingdom  ceased  to  be,  never 
led  Isaiah  to  waver  in  his  conviction  that  Yahweh  alone  was 
exalted  and  great.     In  earlier  times  and  to  the  great  bulk  of 

\  Isaiah's  contemporaries  Israel  seemed  as  necessary  to  Yahweh  as 


ISAIAH   AS  PROPHET  AND  TEACHER        Ixxxvii 

Yahweh  was  to  Israel ;  in  Isaiah's  thought  Israel  owed  everything 
to  Yahweh  (i^),  and  through  Him  alone  could  be;  Yahweh,  on  the 
other  hand,  was  in  no  way  dependent  on  Israel,  but  would  rather 
vindicate  His  greatness  by  Himself  destroying  His  people  since 
they  had  turned  away  from  Him,  and  become  incurably  sinful 
and  corrupt  (6^*^* :  cp.  §§  83-87).  (2)  But  if  the  increased  sense 
of  the  greatness  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  the  new  sense  of  His 
uniqueness  which  characterises  the  prophetic  teaching  in  general 
and  Isaiah's  in  particular,  was  in  no  way  the  reflection  of  an 
increase  in  the  national  strength  and  fame  of  Israel,  so  neither 
was  it  the  outcome  of  speculation  on  the  fusion  of  peoples  and 
of  a  common  principle  lying  behind  all  their  deities.  The  new 
prophetic  conception  of  Yahweh  is  no  abstraction  from  qualities 
common  to  Yahweh  the  god  of  Israel,  and  Chemosh  the  god  of 
Moab,  or  the  gods  of  the  conquering  Assyrians.  And  the 
prophetic  conception  of  Yahweh  is  as  distinct  and  different  from  j 
the  monistic  speculations  which  appear  to  have  arisen  in  1 
Babylon,  as  it  is  from  the  old  popular  Hebrew  religion.  There 
may  be  room  to  question  the  absoluteness,  and  certainly  the 
explicitness,  of  the  monotheism  of  the  prophets  of  the  8th 
century ;  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  intensity  with  which  they 
apprehended  Yahweh  as  a  distinct  and  living  personality.  He  is 
to  them  not  power,  but  person ;  not  the  lowest  common  measure 
of  all  known  deities,  but  a  personal  God  whose  activity  com- 
prehends all  that  seemed  to  them  worthy  in  the  activity  which 
other  nations  had  attributed  to  their  several  gods. 

81.  On  one  occasion  Isaiah  had  been  allowed  to  see  Yahweh ; 
but  not  every  day,  nor,  so  far  as  we  know,  ever  again  after  the 
first  occasion,  did  Isaiah  see  Yahweh  as  he  had  seen  Him  then ; 
yet  what  he  had  once  seen  he  must  have  known  to  be  always 
there,  though  by  no  means  there  alone;  the  power  that  ruled 
the  world  was  Yahweh,  and  Yahweh  dwelt  in  Jerusalem — 
unseen  (cp.  18*),  unheard,  unrecognised  even  or  misunderstood, 
and  the  might  of  His  quiet  working  utterly  unsuspected  (8^  n.), 
by  those  whose  ears  were  heavy  and  whose  eyes  closed,  and 
whose  heart  was  without  understanding  (6^^^-  ^^'^^') ;  and  dwelling 
there  He  was  working  out  His  plan,  which  would  prove  to  be  to 
the  confusion  and  destruction  of  those  who,  regardless  of  it  and 
reckless  of  what  was  not  seen,  formed  plans  of  their  own  {$o^^-  ^*), 
associating  themselves  with  and  trusting  in  flesh  and  not  spirit, 


Ixxxvill  INTRODUCTION 

in  what  was  human  and  not  in  what  was  divine  (30'  3 1^*^:  8^2-15  . 
ct.  28^^"^^).  Isaiah  is  certain  of  Yahweh ;  from  him  the  quiet- 
ness of  His  action,  and  the  fact  that  He  waits  His  time  (18*), 
does  not  conceal  (ct.  5^^^-)  the  all-sufficient  power  and  wisdom 
that  will  carry  through  the  line  of  action  on  which  He  has 
decided.  Yahweh  is  to  him  not  only  the  Supreme  Power  in 
the  World,  but  also  the  consistent  Purpose  which  works  itself  out 
in  human  history,  yet  supreme  power  and  consistent  purpose  in 
a  person ;  "  a  power  not  ourselves  that  makes  for  righteousness  " 
would  be  a  correct  translation  into  abstract  language  of  Isaiah's 
thought,  but  certainly  a  translation  and,  moreover,  a  translation 
which  Isaiah  could  not  and  would  not  have  made  himself.  To 
Isaiah,  Yahweh  is  as  personal  as  the  politicians  of  his  day :  he 
can  compare  them :  each  has  his  plan ;  but  the  plan  of  the 
politicians  is  doomed  to  failure,  because  it  has  no  power  behind 
it ;  because  it  is  not  only  unrelated  to,  but  opposed  to  the  wisdom 
and  power  that  reside  in  Yahweh,  and  are  directed  against 
iniquity.  Cp.  30^'^  31^"^;  also  5^1^-  2821^'  and  if,  or  in  so  far  as, 
the  work  of  Isaiah,  lo^^.  23  j^24. 26f.  22I1. 

82.  The  consummation  and  manifestation  of  Yahweh's  plan 
was  expected  at  a  definite  time,  which  Isaiah,  as  Amos  before 
him  and  many  since  his  day,  expected  in  the  near,  even  the 
immediate,  future.  Isaiah  (2^-^^)  follows  Amos  in  using  the  old 
popular  phrase,  "the  day  of  Yahweh,"  with  a  meaning  quite 
opposed  to  that  which  the  people  generally  put  upon  it ;  *  the 
people  expected  on  that  day  help  from  their  national  God,  the 
God  of  Israel,  and  consequent  prosperity  (Am  518-20^  •  Amos  and 
Isaiah,  to  whom  Yahweh  was  God  of  righteousness  first  and 
God  of  Israel  only  second,  and  in  so  far  as  the  national  relation 
was  not  inconsistent  with  the  moral,  expected  on  that  day 
disaster  to  Israel;  Isaiah  pictures  it  as  manifesting  the  unique 
exaltation  of  Yahweh,  and  convicting  men  of  the  uselessness  of 
all  other  sources  of  help  but  Him.  He  whom  Isaiah  called  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel,  unlike  the  God  of  Israel  of  the  popular 
thought,  does  not  work  necessarily,  and  under  the  present  con- 
ditions  certainly  does   not  work   at   all,  for  the   prosperity  of 

*  Gressmann  argues  that  the  conception  of  the  Day  of  Yahweh  as  a  day  of 
disaster  for  Israel  was  not  a  creation  of  the  prophets,  but  that  they  only 
ethicised  a  previously  existing  popular  belief  in  a  coming  world-catastrophe 
{hr.  jud.  Eschatologie,  pp.  142  ff.). 


ISAIAH   AS   PROPHET  AND   TEACHER         Ixxxix 

Israel ;  He  will  manifest  His  holiness  by  securing  righteousness 
and  destroying,  if  need  be,  the  entire  people  of  Israel  in  order  to 
secure  this  (5^® :  cp.  e.g.  s^-^). 

83.  Yahweh  was  God  controlling  the  whole  world,  and  work- 
ing out  in  the  history  of  mankind  a  consistent  plan  that  would 
establish  and  secure  righteousness :  such  was  Isaiah's  belief:  how 
does  his  favourite  term  for  God,  "the  Holy  One  of  Israel," 
stand  related  to  it  ?  The  term,  as  we  have  seen,  is,  in  respect  of 
its  national  limitation,  rooted  in  the  old,  popular,  national 
religion ;  and  so  also,  of  course,  is  the  first  part  of  the  term 
intimately  associated  with  early  and  even  primitive  religion. 
"Holy"  (K^lp)  is  a  word  which  was  originally,  and  in  certain 
connections  remained  to  the  end,  completely  destitute  of  moral 
import  {Numbers^  pp.  209-211);  but  just  as  Amos  gave,  or  re- 
stored to,  the  *'  Day  of  Yahweh  "  a  meaning  which  it  had  never 
had,  or  had  practically  lost,  in  popular  usage,  and  just  as  Rosea 
charged  with  spiritual  meaning  the  conception  of  the  marriage 
of  the  deity  which  in  the  popular  religion  was  fouled  with  the 
basest  associations,  so  Isaiah,  out  of  a  term  that  was  at  best 
ethically  neutral  and  a  definition  that  suggested  national  limita- 
tion, created  a  phrase  that  served  him  well  in  expressing  a 
conception  of  Gk)d  intensely  moral  and  free  from  national  limi- 
tations. It  has  been  acutely  observed*  that  it  was  the  very 
emptiness  in  respect  of  ethical  meaning  of  the  term  holy  that 
enabled  Isaiah  to  charge  it  with  his  own  deep  ethical  conception 
of  God.  In  itself  it  denotes  not  a  particular  personal  quality, 
but  rather  the  essential  nature  of  deity;  whatever  is  god,  or 
related  to,  or  set  apart  for  the  service  of  the  gods,  is  holy;  if, 
therefore,  the  conception  of  god  is  unethical,  or  non-ethical,  so 
also  are  the  associations  of  the  term  holy ;  but  if  the  conception 
of  God  is  ethical,  so  also  are  the  associations  of  the  term  :  "the 
Holy  God  hath  shown  himself  holy  in  righteousness"  (5^^). 
"  Yahweh  of  Hosts  "  (and  that  which  is  related  to  Him)  exhausts 
for  Isaiah  the  idea  of  holiness  (6^) :  there  are  for  him  no  other 
holy  gods ;  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  is  the  God  who  formed  and 
revealed  Himself  to  and  guided  Israel;  He  is  also  the  One  God 
whose  glory  fills  the  world. 

The  Holy  One  of  Israel  is,  then,  not  limited  by  needing 

*  Cp.  e.g.  W.  R.   Smith,  Prophets^ ^  225;    Davidson,  Ezekiel^  xxxixf.  ; 
Skinner,  xlvi. 


XC  INTRODUCTION 

Israel ;  His  glory  shines  apart  from  Israel.  Nay  more,  the  very 
closeness  of  the  relation  between  Yahweh  and  Israel  can  only 
mean  the  more  necessary  and  more  immediate  destruction  of 
Israel,  if  Israel  is  unholy,  unfit  through  unrighteousness  to  be 
associated  with  Yahweh. 

84.  And  what  constituted  holiness  in  Israel?  what  were  the 
qualities  or  conditions  that  made  the  approach  of  Israel  tolerable 
to  Yahweh  or  safe  to  Israel  ?  Not  that  they  should  come  having 
scrupulously  observed  laws  of  ceremonial  cleanness,  not  that 
they  should  come  with  hands  full  of  presents  of  sacrificial 
animals  for  Yahweh ;  they  showed  zeal  enough  and  to  spare  in 
honouring  Yahweh  thus  in  accordance  with  ancient  custom  and 
prescription  (29^^)  and  ancient  thought  of  what  pleased  Yahweh. 
But  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  was  indifferent  to  these  things ;  He 
loathed  hands  stained  with  the  blood  of  murder,  however  full  of 
sacrificial  presents ;  He  desired  justice  which  He  did  not  find,  not 
sacrifice  with  which  He  was  satiated  (iii-i3  ^7j.  it  is  not  neces- 
sary to  conclude  that  Isaiah  regarded  sacrifice  as  positively 
offensive  and  intolerable  to  God  under  all  conditions,  but  he 
regards  it  as  something  that  Yahweh  does  not  require,  and  that 
in  no  way  palliates  the  sii)  of  those  who  offer  it ;  Israel  has  gone 
deep  in  rebellion  against  God,  and  the  multiplication  of  sacrifices, 
so  far  from  being  proof  of  renewed  loyalty,  merely  affords  fresh 
evidence  that  the  nation  is  without  knowledge  of  Yahweh. 

The  conviction  of  the  sin  of  Yahweh's  people  and  the 
destruction  which  it  necessarily  involved,  in  addition  to  the 
vitalising  and  deepening  of  his  conception  of  God,  was  the  chief 
result  to  Isaiah  of  his  vision.  But  what  more  exactly  did  his 
conviction  involve  ?  With  what  view  of  the  future  of  his  nation 
did  Isaiah  undertake  his  prophetic  mission?  Did  he  remain 
constant  to  that  view  throughout?  These  questions  have 
received,  and,  till  the  literary  origin  of  several  passages  can  be 
determined  with  greater  certainty  than  at  present,  are  likely  to 
receive,  different  answers.  All  that  will  be  attempted  here  is  to 
bring  out  the  salient  ideas  that  must  be  duly  weighed  in  attempt- 
ing any  answer,  and  to  indicate  some  of  the  uncertainties. 

85.  That  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  being  righteous  cannot 
tolerate  unrighteousness,  but  will  destroy  the  unrighteous,  is  a 
fundamental  conviction  with  Isaiah.  But  there  certainly  goes 
along  with  this  a  belief  in  the  grace  and  forgiveness  of  Yahweh, 


ISAIAH   AS   PROPHET   AND  TEACHER  XCl 

Both  these  points  are  illustrated  by  the  vision :  feeling  his  sin 
and  uncleanness,  Isaiah  immediately  awakes  to  the  danger  of 
the  sight  which  he  has  seen,  the  Holy  presence  in  which  he 
stands ;  "  then  cried  I,  Woe  is  me  !  for  I  am  undone  :  for  I  am  a 
man  of  unclean  lips  ...  for  it  is  the  king,  Yahweh  of  Hosts, 
whom  my  eyes  have  seen " ;  but  with  the  awakened  conscious- 
ness of  sin,  and  recognition  of  its  offensiveness  to  the  Holy 
Yahweh  of  Hosts,  comes  immediately  the  sense  of  forgiveness ; 
the  seraph  touches  his  unclean  lips  with  the  burning  coal,  and 
assures  him  that  his  iniquity  will  pass  away  from  him  and  his  sin 
be  expiated.  Freed  from  his  sin,  not  by  sacrifice  or  outward  / 
rite  learned  from  men,  but  by  the  free  grace  of  Yahweh  meeting 
him  at  once  as  he  turns  away  in  horror  from  his  sin  to  Yahweh, 
he  is  not  exposed  to  the  destructive  reaction  of  Yahweh's 
righteousness  against  sin. 

But  Isaiah  associates  with  his  danger  not  only  his  own 
personal  sin,  but  the  sin  of  his  people :  "  I  am  dwelling  in  the 
midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips."  It  might  have  seemed  a 
natural  sequel  if  Isaiah  had  received  a  commission  to  awaken 
the  people  to  a  similar  sense  of  Yahweh's  presence  in  their 
midst  and  of  their  sin,  and,  consequently,  of  the  imminence  of 
destruction,  unless  they  repented  and  received  forgiveness.  But 
this  is  not  the  actual  sequel  in  the  vision  :  Yahweh,  in  the  words 
of  the  commission,  tacitly  accepts  Isaiah's  admission  of  the 
people's  sin ;  He  does  not  dwell  on  it,  but  only  on  the  fact  that 
the  people  will,  sinning  on,  remain  blind  to  the  consequences  of 
sin,  and,  therefore,  suffer  those  consequences  to  the  full :  Israel 
will  perish,  and  the  land  of  Israel  will  be  desolated.  And  Israel, 
the  people  who  are  to  perish,  must  be  understood  as  including 
both  houses  of  Israel,  and  certainly  Judah  ;  the  meaning  of  ch.  6 
must  not  be  blunted  by  limiting  the  people  whose  destruction 
is  determined  to  those  of  the  Northern  kingdom ;  see  n. 
on  6®. 

86.  But  the  possibility  of  forgiveness  and  riddance  from  sin 
which  Isaiah  had  personally  experienced,  he  assuredly  did  not 
limit  to  himself;  not  in  the  vision  itself,  but  in  the  name  which 
he  gave  his  eldest  son  very  shortly  after  his  call  (7^  n.),  we  find 
this  more  directly  implied,  unless  indeed,  which  is  not  very 
likely,  Shear-yashub  is,  as  some  have  supposed,  a  name  of  purely 
sinister  meaning.      Isaiah,  then,  anticipated  that  a  remnant  of 


XCii  INTRODUCTION 

individuals,  a  small  part  of  the  whole  of  Israel,  would  return  to 
Yahweh,  be  forgiven,  and  become  quit  of  their  sin. 

How  then  did  these  ideas  ot  the  irremediable  moral  condition 
of  the  people  necessarily  involving  the  destruction  of  the  nation, 
and  of  a  Remnant  that  should  return  in  penitence  to  Yahweh, 
work  themselves  out  in  Isaiah's  teaching? 

87.  The  belief  in  the  imminent  and  certain  destruction  of  the 
people  is  by  no  means  limited  to  the  narrative  of  the  vision ; 
it  was  expressed  in  the  name  given  by  Isaiah  to  his  second  son 
Maher-shalal-hash-baz  (8^  n.),  and  was  implicit  even  in  the  name 
of  Shear-yashub — the  remnant  that  returns  is  but  the  remnant  of  a 
larger  part  that  perishes ;  and  the  same  belief,  clearly  in  relation  to 
Judah,  is  the  theme,  for  example,  of  the  parable  of  the  Vineyard 
(5^"^)j  a^d  again  it  is  expressed  in  what  is  commonly  understood 
to  be  the  latest  of  Isaiah's  utterances,  "  Surely  this  iniquity  shall 
not  be  expiated  for  you  till  ye  die,"  22H  So  far  as  the  Northern 
kingdom  is  concerned,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  Isaiah 
ever  expected  that  more  than  a  few  individuals  (17^)  would 
escape  destruction  :  see  9^-10* +  526-29  17I-11  28^-*.  On  the  other 
hand,  at  times  he  certainly  seems  to  have  held  that  Judah  would 
survive  at  least  the  perils  immediately  threatening  her  j  so  at  the 
time  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  (735  B.C.)  he  maintained 
against  the  King  and  Court  that  Jerusalem  had  nothing  to  fear 
from  the  invaders  (7^"-^^);  and,  if  we  admit  37^^^'^^^  in  701  B.C. 
Isaiah  maintained  that  Sennacherib  would  not  enter  Jerusalem, 
because  Yahweh  would  defend  it  for  His  own  sake  and  for 
David's  sake.  It  would  be  quite  unsafe  to  press  the  reason 
given  in  this  narrative  (which  is  not  the  work  of  Isaiah,  but  an 
account  based  on  popular  tradition)  for  Isaiah's  belief  that  Jeru- 
salem would  not  fall  to  Sennacherib :  if  he  held  that  belief,  we 
may  more  safely  seek  the  reasons  in  lo^^- :  the  Assyrians  were  not 
to  capture  Jerusalem,  because  their  disregard  of  Yahweh's  com- 
mission must  be  punished  by  ill-success.  But  Isaiah's  conviction, 
after  being  justified  by  the  event,  may  well  have  made  a  deep  im- 
pression on  the  popular  mind :  it  may  have  formed  the  basis  of 
the  popular  stories  that  gathered  round  this  period  of  his  work, 
while  his  own  reasons  for  his  conviction  were  forgotten  and  other 
less  welcome  elements  in  his  teaching  passed  out  of  the  popular 
mind;  and  this  may  account  for  the  fact  that  Jeremiah's  de- 
fenders appeal  not  to  Isaiah,  but  to  Micah  as  an  earlier  prophet 


ISAIAH  AS   PROPHET   AND  TEACHER  xciii 

who  had  predicted  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  and  yet  been  left 
unmolested.  A  conviction  of  Isaiah  that  Jerusalem  would  not 
fall  on  a  particular  occasion  and  under  particular  circumstances 
went,  all  against  the  intention  of  the  prophet,  to  strengthen  the 
popular  dogma  that  on  no  occasion  and  under  no  circumstances 
would  Jerusalem  fall,  because  Yahweh  must  defend  His  own. 

Unless  Isaiah  changed  the  fundamental  conviction  that 
underlies  the  narrative  of  the  vision,  he  must  have  held  through- 
out that  the  only  way  to  safety  for  Jerusalem  lay  in  a  return  to 
Yahweh  and  the  establishment  of  righteousness.  Certainly  the 
terms  of  Yahweh's  commission  in  the  vision  do  not  hold  out  the 
hope  that  Isaiah's  preaching  will  bring  about  the  repentance  of 
the  people  and  the  safety  of  the  state ;  but  in  spite  of  this  a 
conditional  promise  underlies  some  of  the  sayings  of  the  prophet, 
and  other  sayings  which  at  least  cannot  be  clearly  shown  to  be 
not  his:  see  i^^  (and  perhaps  also  i^8(n.))  7*  30^*.  But  the 
condition  implicit  in  7^ — If  ye  believe,  ye  shall  be  established — 
was  not  fulfilled  :  Ahaz  and  his  people  did  not  "  believe  " :  and 
by  this  further  disloyalty  to  Yahweh  they  drew  destruction  nearer, 
not  at  the  hands  of  the  Syrians  and  Ephraimites,  indeed,  whom, 
as  the  prophet  warned  them,  they  needlessly  feared,  but  at  the 
hand  of  the  Assyrians  (S^^^).  So  later,  while  Isaiah  insisted  that 
no  harm  would  befall  the  city  from  Sennacherib,  he  may  have 
held,  and  apparently  did  (22")  hold,  that  harm  would  befall  it 
from  another  quarter,  unless  they  repented.  Whether  he 
expected  that  the  disaster  would  in  this  case  be  due  to  the  direct 
interposition  of  Yahweh  we  cannot  say ;  but  it  is  altogether  im- 
probable that  Isaiah  believed  that  Assyria  by  its  arrogance,  and 
consequent  unfitness  to  be  any  longer  Yahweh's  instrument  of 
punishment,  had  left  Yahweh  without  other  means  of  punishing 
and  destroying  His  own  sinful  people. 

88.  Beyond  the  judgment,  Isaiah  looked  to  the  establishment 
of  a  new  Sion  where  the  corrupt  and  unjust  judges  and  the  faith- 
less counsellors  of  the  present  would  be  replaced  by  just  judges 
and  faithful  counsellors,  and  the  whole  community  would  be 
righteous  and  loyal  to  Yahweh  (i^s) :  cp.  281^-^8.  Out  of  the 
remnant  would  arise  (cp.  S^'^)  a  new  state. 

Yahweh  does  not  need  Israel,  the  actual  sinful  people  ;  nay. 
His  righteousness  must  destroy  them :  but  it  will  also  re-create 
out  of  those  who  by  their  righteousness  come  out  of  the  fire  of 


XCIV  INTRODUCTION 

judgment  a  new  state — in  Sion.  The  influence  of  his  time  and 
people  on  Isaiah  (§  78)  may  still  be  seen ;  it  leads  him  to  place 
the  new  state  in  Sion  ;  but  there  is  nothing  here  inconsistent  with 
the  conviction  that  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  being  resident  in 
Sion,  must  destroy  the  existing  city  and  society."^ 

89.  How  far  and  in  what  way  did  Isaiah  elaborate  his  concep- 
tion of  the  life  in  Sion  after  the  judgment  ?  The  question  turns 
on  the  criticism  of  passages  like  9^"^  ii^'^  ^o^^"^^  32^^^  33  ;  the 
view  taken  in  the  Commentary  is  that  none  of  these  passages  can 
be  assigned  with  certainty  to  Isaiah,  that  several  of  them  are  for 
various  reasons  more  or  less  clearly  not  his  work :  under  these 
circumstances,  reference  should  be  made  to  the  commentary  on 
the  various  passages  for  the  more  elaborate  details  of  the  future 
which  are  to  be  found  in  them. 

But  a  few  general  remarks  may  be  made  here  : 
(i)  Though  unquestionably  Isaiah  was  in  the  first  instance  a 
prophet  of  judgment,  and  his  narrative  of  the  vision  contains  no 
word  of  promise,  or  any  suggestion  of  a  happier  future  and  the 
establishment  of  a  righteous  society  beyond  judgment,  it  would 
be  quite  unreasonable,  even  if  there  were  no  evidence  at  all  to 
the  contrary,  such  as  i^^,  to  infer  that  his  mind  never  dwelt  on 
the  ideal  which  should  be  the  very  opposite  of  the  present  state. 
With  his  conception  of  Yahweh,  and  especially  of  Yahweh's 
work  in  history.  His  carefully-maturing  plans,  he  could  not  well 
have  thought  that  Yahweh's  work  would  be  complete  with  the 
destruction  first  of  Israel  and  then  of  arrogant  Assyria.  Yahweh 
looked  for  righteousness  (5^) :  but  if,  as  assuredly  He  would  do, 
He  destroyed  the  people  whom  He  had  chosen  that  they  might 
produce  it,  but  to  whom  He  had  looked  for  it  in  vain.  He  would 
renew  His  work  of  choice  and  construction  till  He  obtained  the 
righteous  society  of  His  desire.  Nothing  could  be  more  natural 
than  that  the  idea  of  a  righteous  state  on  earth  should  possess 
Isaiah ;  and  if  so,  nothing  again  could  be  more  natural  than  for 
him  to  place  it  in  Sion,  where  Yahweh  dwelt  (§§  78,  88).  And  this 
is  precisely  what  he  does  in  i2i-26^  where  the  picture  of  the  ideal 
state  is  most  intimately  and  closely  connected  with  the  picture 
and  condemnation  of  the  actual  city.     Unfortunately  none  of  the 

*  It  is  probable  that  G.  A.  Smith  (DB  ii.  490)  considerably  overstates 
Isaiah's  conviction  when  he  says,  "There  was  no  other  way  for  a  spiritual 
community  to  exist  in  Isaiah's  day  except  through  the  security  of  Jerusalem." 


■ 


ISAIAH   AS  PROPHET  AND  TEACHER  XCV 

other  passages  that  deal  with  this  ideal  future  are  thus  inti- 
mately connected  with  the  condemnation  of  the  present.  This, 
of  course,  is  not  proof  that  such  passages  are  not  the  work  of 
Isaiah,  but  it  does  distinctly  weaken  the  positive  grounds  for 
holding  that  they  are. 

(2)  Many  of  the  passages  in  question  are  attached  to  pro- 
phecies of  judgment  without  being  organically  connected  with 
them.  In  these  cases  it  would  be  difficult  to  believe  that  in  one 
and  the  same  speech  Isaiah  drew  alarming  pictures  of  coming 
disaster  and  bright  pictures  of  coming  glory,  without  in  any  way 
marking  or  defining  the  relation  between  them.  But  again  this 
is  not  in  itself  necessary  proof  that  the  passages  of  promise  are 
not  the  work  of  Isaiah  :  the  present  arrangement  may  be  due  to 
editors.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  perhaps  remarkable  that  121-20 
stands  almost  alone  in  organically  connecting  the  two  ideas. 

(3)  There  were  probably  two  sides  to  Isaiah's  activity :  he 
spoke  in  public  to  the  people,  he  delivered  to  the  nation 
Yahweh's  message  of  national  doom  ;  he  also  probably  taught  his 
disciples  (8^^  n.).  There  is  nothing  impossible  in  the  view  that 
more  elaborate  pictures  of  the  glorious  future,  though  they  formed 
no  part  of  his  public  teaching,  were  yet  presented  by  him  to  his 
disciples.  At  the  same  time  it  must  b^ admitted  that  there  is 
nothing  in  most,  if  indeed  in  any  of  the  passages  in  question, 
that  suggests  this  more  limited  audience. 

(4)  Though  the  mere  fact  that  a  passage  implies  the  belief  that 
a  glorious  future  awaits  Judah  or  Sion,  or  again  that  Assyria,  the 
enemy  of  Judah,  will  be  destroyed,  is  no  evidence  that  the  pass- 
age cannot  be  the  work  of  Isaiah  (cp.  (i));  and  though  it  could 
be  shown  that  all  the  ideas  contained  in  such  passages  are  frag- 
ments of  a  pre-prophetic  eschatology,  as  Gressmann  has  argued,  it 
is  anything  but  probable  that  Isaiah,  out  of  patriotic  sympathy, 
was  content  to  perpetuate  the  traditional  eschatological  matter 
"without  much  troubling  about  the  inner  unity"  (Gressmann, 
p.  243)  of  his  teaching.  Patriotic  sympathy  of  that  kind,  we 
may  be  fairly  sure,  was  as  absent  from  Isaiah  as  later  from  Jere- 
miah. Isaiah  may  have  utilised  such  traditional  eschatological 
ideas ;  but  if  so,  we  shall  be  safer  in  believing  that  he  modified 
them  by  the  setting  he  gave  them,  and  by  the  inner  unity  into  which 
he  worked  them  with  that  message  of  judgment  which  he  had 
received  in  his  vision      In  a  word,  if  the  more  elaborate  pictures 


XCVl  INTRODUCTION 

of  eschatological  blessedness  which  stand  in  Is  1-39  are,  any 
of  them,  the  work  of  Isaiah,  they  have  reached  us  independently 
of  their  original  setting  (cp.  (3)).  In  another  respect  Gressmann 
scarcely  conceives  the  problem  correctly.  Those  who  have 
argued  against  the  genuineness  of  the  eschatological  passages 
may  too  often  have  relied  over  much  on  the  criterion  of  ideas ; 
it  may  be,  for  example,  that  an  allusion  to  a  multiplicity  of 
nations  receiving  judgment  before  Jerusalem  {e.g.  17^2-14.  ^p. 
pp.  307  f.)  is  not  a  conclusive  proof  that  the  passage  which  con- 
tains it  is  later  than  the  8th  century ;  but  Gressmann  is  himself 
one-sided,  even  if  less  dangerously  so,  when  he  claims  that  the  only 
"  legitimate  criterion  for  so  denying  the  genuineness  (of  a  passage) 
consists  of  the  historical  circumstances  pre-supposed  in  it"  ("als 
einzig  berechtigtes  Kriterium,  um  die  Echtheit  zu  leugnen,  sind 
nur  die  vorausgesetzten  zeitgeschichtlichen  Verhaltnisse  anzu- 
sehen");  and  he  is  wrong  in  his  conclusion  that  "so  long  as 
these  (historical  circumstances  pre-supposed)  do  not  speak  against 
the  original  authorship  of  him  in  whose  book  the  future  hope 
{Heilseschaiologie)  is  handed  down,  so  long  may  the  'genuine- 
ness' be  maintained  "  ("so  lange  wird  man  die  Echtheit  aufrecht 
erhalten  diirfen  ") :  all  that  follows,  in  the  case  of  the  Book  of 
Isaiah  at  least,  is  this,  that  provided  the  historical  pre-suppositions 
are  not  inconsistent  with  the  age  of  Isaiah,  so  long  may  the 
genuineness  of  any  particular  passage  remain  an  open  question ; 
the  passage  may  be  Isaiah's,  or  it  may  be  the  work  of  some  writer 
living  in  any  age  with  which  also  the  historical  pre-suppositions 
are  not  inconsistent  (cp.  §  43).  For  though  the  book  bears  the 
name  of  Isaiah,  considerable  parts  even  of  chs.  1-39  are  by 
general  consent  the  work  of  later  ages ;  and,  moreover,  the  edi- 
torial processes  through  which  the  book  has  passed  belong  to 
periods  when  eschatology  was  rife.*  Generations  subsequent 
to  Isaiah  have  played  too  large  a  part  in  the  composition  of  the 
Book  of  Isaiah  for  it  to  be  more  than  one  possibility  among 
several  that  a  passage,  the  historical  pre-suppositions  of  which 
are  vague,  is  Isaiah's.  The  possibilities  in  such  cases  must  be 
reduced  in  number,  if  at  all,  by  other  criteria. 

*Cp.  Th.  L.  W.  van  Ravensteyn,  De  Eenheid  der  eschatologischen  Voorstel- 
lingen  in  het  Boek  Jesaja  (Utrecht,  1910),  in  which  as  against  Gressmann  it  is 
argued  that  the  eschatology  (as  distinct  from  the  prophetic  elements)  of  all  parts  of 
the  Book  of  Isaiah  belong  to  a  single  period,  and  that  probably  the  4th  century. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLES 


XCVll 


»0\0  xri       O 


0\ 


"o  i  2i  «J 
^  ctf  ^ 

O    C  ii    IK 

Si' 


C  4>  "5 

t«  o 

lA  b     A> 

it!  flj-S 


C    _ 


.C3 


.^ 

rt 

o 

c 

C 

^ 

4J 

ba 

^ 

^ 

+ 
7 

r- 


0) 


ooW;z;| 


Ex} 

< 
H 

o 


o 
o 

u 


<5 

>•  s 


C    c3 


(/J 


•-2  S 


c 
.2 
>% 

CO 
CO 

< 

O 

V  • 

c  : 
Q 


0) 

a 


a 

pq 


O  C'U 

o  3 

I'  >>  |i4      CO 

*-      X  o  U3  r^ 

— ».-§"^l- 


-^  g 


« 


c 
o 

co- 
os 


T3 
C 
at 


Xt 


S      Us 


,i2 
O 


Is 


C 
ci 

I 
•t 

c 


C 
C3 


J3. 


Si 


II 

^  6  rt 


6     -^ 


a> 


ti  **  C  S  <u 

rt    *J  "^   jg     ft, 

u 


00 


00 


00  r->.  tt 


g 


00 
CO 


i 


^ 


XCVlll 


INTRODUCTION 


•=:; 

"^^ 

'^                           ^                                               Pq 

-< 

•5 

■>^    '                                       "n*           c» 

.2  «                                   ^    «    .. 

(«  ^              w                                    to         t«  ^ 

t 

i\  745-718  Dynasty 
XXIII.  Egypt  dis- 
united.  Nomarchs 
divide  authority 

T 

w 

< 

< 
U 

o 
o 

o 

o 

< 

to  Tiglath-pileser 
Philistine  campaign 
Capture  of  Gaza 

Campaign  against 
Damascus 

Capture  of  Dam- 
ascus 

Shalmaneser  IV. 
Sarg^on 

C/3 

"1 

End  of  the 
Kingdom 
of    Dam- 
ascus 

J 
w 

en 

1-1 

Exile  of  North- 
ern Israelites 

Pekalj  slain 
Hoshea      suc- 
ceeds him  as 
an    Assyrian 
vassal 

Siege  and  fall 
of  Samaria 

End  of  the 
Northern 
Kingdom 

Ahaz  pays  tribute 

• 
(or  715)   Death   of 
Ahaz.   Hezekiah 

[Dates 

that  are 

certain  are 

in  heavy 

type.] 

41 


i 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLES 


xcix 


< 
H 

•J 
< 
U 

l-H 

o 
o 

o 
:^ 
o 
(^ 

u 


^ 

T 

< 

k> 

N 

4;  t^ 

M 

o 

»^ 

<ti  "^ 

M 

r>. 

O 

<»- 

1^ 

vl 

!>. 

s 

t 


m 


8 


•g  N  - 


I: 


Q 


Ph 


4J  Q  'O 
o  o  ^ 

2*3,d 


o 

I-] 
>« 
pa 

< 


b*4  («^  Vl_|     4_( 

O   O         O   ot 


c.S 


OS 


5-^ 


Jrt 


S  o  "^ 


"la  o       rt 

13  t^  >.  S    «« 

2    «  rt    W3rt 

S         CO 


o  c  a  o 

Im  ■'T   ^h    4-* 

r  1   bflr^   «> 


3 
o 
^  _. 


>  r 


•^   '^   C   S   43 


N  MM 


d 


a 

CO 
> 


o  cn 


O  O  On 


a, 


4> 
CO 


INTRODUCTION 


ON                                                                                                                                                                     "^ 

< 
w 

o 

c  3                    ^  --                           >^':^ 

.So.                        2i  g                                 o  s» 

rr^     :.  ^  tn                   00 1^                             '^Zr 

to           .  >^  (U                           mm                                         c  ^ 
oZ^^o                          NON                                       m^ 

1 

T 

< 

fc 

p- 
o 
M 

Earliest  possible  date  for  the 
accession  of  Tirhakah 

Memphis 
Tirhakah 
Thebes 

Pharaoh-necoh 

< 

U 
»— t 

O 

o 
o 
o 

u 

H 

s 

>• 

PQ 

<; 
eq 

>- 

1 

Sennacherib  in  Arabia  (and 

??  Palestine) 
Esar-haddon 

Esar-haddon             captures 
Asshurbanipal    overthrows 
Capture                                of 
Nabopolassar,     independent 
king  of  Babylon 

Fall  of  Assyria:  Capture 

of   Nineveh    by   Medes  * 

(and  Babylonians) 
Battle        of       Carchemish : 

Nebuchadnezzar        defeats 
Nebuchadnezzar,   king  of 

Babylon 

of  Jewish  Exile  in  Babylon 

Median  Empire  overthrown 

by  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia 

1 

Josiah's  Reformation 

Fall  of  Jerusalem 

597>  586  Commencement 

[Dates 

that  are 

certain  are 

in  heavy 

type.] 

694 

c.  690 
682 

671 
668 
667 
625 

621 
c.  607 

605 
604 
586 

549 

CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLES 


CI 


o 


O  O 


(g*- 


VO 


O 


I 


C 

•s 
a 


I-"  VO 


</>  ^  ^ 

o  ow 

5«  H  o 

5;J  ^  S 

TO  rn     W 


•^ 


•§       'S 


I  ns 


5        rt  V  "/  C 
o       rs  00  ^  -^ 

o  <?  p    .  «  2i      2  i2 

O   ;3"rS  N  to   I   VO  CO  -.« 

O   '^^    '1         1    ^  ci   fl 

•— i-^i-i    iJ-0   rf(U  t)Q 


C/) 


V 


s«  e  r.      ■«      -2      -J     *^ 


V    lU 


Oi 


Sou 


*^    r' 


c4  i—i 


8 

B 

V 

•o 

V 


g   w 

a. 

0)   o 

>—,  a, 
o 


S 


„  c 
**  o 


•O 
C 
(« 

S 
I 

c 
oi 

B 
B 

D 


3 1 

-Q   O 

OS      .. 
(J  tn 

C  tn 


ID 

9 


•c 

CO 


02.  \P 


coo 
'S      o 

O   b£0 

Q.S-g 

'lo   CuO  O 


V  CQ  I— I    lU 
O  4>    3  <4_ 


o 
o 


5^ 


CO 


•— >>»c 


G  p  y  *J 


•§> 


c 

H 

a; 

O 

a; 

0) 

w 

O 

C 

O 

•3 

s 

C 

U 

b 

Q 

8 

< 

. 

COMMENTARY. 


**Quae  si  longa  tibi  videbitur,  non  mihi  imputes,  sed 
Scripturae  sanctae  difficultati,  praecipueque  Isaiae  prophetae, 
qui  tantis  obscuritatibus  involutus  est,  ut  prae  magnitudine 
rei  brevem  explanationem  putem,  quae  per  se  longa  est. 
Certe  nos  studiosis  scribimus,  et  sanctam  Scripturam  scire 
cupiencibus,  non  fastidiosis,  et  ad  singula  nauseantibus." 

Jerome. 


A  COMMENTARY  ON  THE 
BOOK  OF  ISAIAH. 


'I.  I.  A  title  defining  the  subject  and  age  of  Isaiah's  pro- 
phecies. It  served,  in  the  first  instance,  perhaps,  as  a  title  of 
chs.  I-I2  only.  It  was  prefixed,  not  by  Isaiah,  but  by  a  post- 
exilic  editor.  Isaiah,  in  accordance  with  the  prominence  given 
by  him  to  Jerusalem  throughout  his  prophecies  (i2iff.  ^leff. 
(4^-)  io32ff-  22^*^*  28i''^-  29^^-  30^®*-),  speaks  of  Jerusalem  and 
Judah  (3^-^  5^  22^1:  occasionally  elsewhere,  2  K  24^^,  Ezr  2^); 
in  the  title,  as  in  2^  and,  e.g.^  2  K  18^^,  2  Ch  34^- ^  the  order  is 
Judah  and  Jerusalem,  A  contemporary  Jew  would  have  had 
no  occasion  to  add  to  the  list  of  kings  the  explanatory  clause 
kings  of  Judah  (cp.  Jer  i^^-,  Mic  2^) ;  an  editor  looking  back  on 
the  monarchy  as  a  vanished  institution  might  well  do  so.  It  is 
doubtful,  too,  whether  Isaiah  would  have  applied  the  term 
vision  to  his  collected  prophecies  (see  below).  The  period  of 
Isaiah's  prophetic  activity  may  be  correctly  described,  though 
this  is  not  certain  (cp.  6^  n.),  as  beginning  in  the  reign  of  Uzziah  : 
and  the  title  is  certainly  correct  in  extending  the  period  into  the 
reign  of  Hezekiah  (cp.  chs.  36-39) :  but  Judah  and  Jerusalefn 
is  an  inadequate  description  of  the  scope  of  Isaiah's  teaching, 
still  more  of  chs.  1-39 ;  chs.  13-23  contain  a  series  of  oracles 
directed  against  foreign  nations;  and  even  within  chs.  1-12 
at  least  one  prophecy  (9^-10*)  is  primarily  concerned  with 
Ephraim. 

The  vision"]  fitn  signifies  (i)  a  vision,  then  (2)  the  verbal 
record  of  what  is  seen  in  vision,  and  also,  perhaps,  with  a  total 
loss   of  the   original   sense  of  the  word,  (3)  any  revelation   or 

VOL.  I. — I 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


prophetic  discourse  even  though  it  has  not  been  suggested  by 
vision.  The  word  is  used  here  with  either  the  second  or  the 
third  of  these  meanings  ;  in  illustration  of  these,  cp.  "  the  book 
of  the  vision  of  Nahum,"  Nah  i^;  "the  vision  of  Obadiah,"  i^; 
"  the  matter  ("I3nn)  which  Isaiah  saw-in-vision  "  (ntn),  Is  2^ ;  "  the 
rest  of  the  affairs  of  Hezekiah  .  .  .  behold  they  are  written  in 
the  vision  of  Isaiah,"  2  Ch  32^2  ;  "  write  the  vision  and  inscribe 
it  on  the  tablets,"  Hab  2^.  Certainly  neither  the  verb  ntn  nor 
the  noun  ptn  is  necessarily  late,  nor  the  belief  that  God  revealed 
things  to  some  prophets  by  means  of  vision  (cp.  Nu  12^  24**  1*, 
I  K  22i^-i^,  Am  7-9,  Jer  i^i-^^^.  Nevertheless,  since  actual 
vision  plays  but  little  part  in  the  recorded  experience  of  Isaiah, 
and  when  he  does  refer  to  such  experiences  (6^),  he,  like  Amos, 
uses  the  verb  ns"),  the  use  of  fitn  in  this  and  similar  titles 
may  be  due  to  the  later  conception  that  the  chief  function  of 
prophecy  was  apocalyptic,  that  prophecy  was  a  revelation  of  the 
final  stage  of  history:  cp.  e.g.  Dn  8^  and  Ben  Sirach's  (48^) 
description  of  Isaiah  n^nriN  ntn  miaa  V\T\1.  To  the  authors  of 
these  titles  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  Nahum,  Obadiah  may 
have  been,  as  they  subsequently  were  to  many  generations  of 
Christian  scholars,  not  so  much  or  at  all  the  teaching  of  these 
prophets  to  their  own  age,  but  a  record  of  events  seen  in  vision 
several  centuries  before  they  actually  happened.  Consequently, 
vision  not  improbably  retains  here  the  second  of  the  meanings 
mentioned  above. — l5aiaK\  the  name  means  Yahweh  has  delivered^ 
or  Yahweh  is  deliverance  (cp.  Ps.  29^ ;  see  phil.  n.) :  the  prophet 
is  the  only  pre-exilic  person  of  the  name  who  is  known  ;  but 
several  persons  so  named  are  mentioned  in  Chr.  Ezr.  Neh.  and 
also  in  the  Assouan  papyri  (5th  cent.  B.C.). — Son  of  'Amos]  the 
name  'Amos  is  otherwise  unknown;  but  the  root  'ama§,  to  be 
mighty^  occurs  in  Amaziah — a  fact  which  probably  created, 
without  in  the  slightest  justifying,  a  Rabbinic  theory  that  Isaiah's 
father  and  King  Amaziah  were  brothers  (cp.  Pesikta  d.  Rab 
Kahana,  117b).  By  a  grosser  blunder,  resting  on  ignorance  of 
Hebrew,  but  assisted  perhaps  by  the  Rabbinic  canon,  that 
where  a  prophet's  father  is  mentioned  the  father  himself  was 
a  prophet,  Isaiah's  father  (|*CK,  ffi  'Aftws)  was  identified  with  the 
prophet  *Amos  (DDV,  ffi  'A/aws).  m 

liTyr']  so  always  throughout  the  book  :  in  the  title  of  the  book  •Tye'',  see 
ntrod.  §  3.     MX  may  be  right  in  pointing  "in;ytt':  (cp.  'Hcrafas,  ffi),  and  the 


*^ 


I.  2-31  3 

name  may,  as  Del.  maintains,  consist  of  a  3rd  pf.  +i.T — a  formation  already 
common  in  the  8th  cent.  {HPN  176  f.  :  cp.  192),  cp.  <rt6<rct  Kuptos  {Onom. 
Cotslinianum,  in  Lag.  Onom.  165*^) ;  but  since  vv  does  not  occur  in  the  Kal 
and  the  n.  pr.  rvv^^n  actually  occurs  later,  yc  may  be  a  noun,  yet  scarcely 
a  noun  in  the  construct,  so  that  the  name  means  (Turrripla  KvpLov,  sa/us  domini 
(Jer.  al. :  see  Lag.  Otiom.  69',  173"*,  191*°),  but  rather  predicative  (cp.  HPN 
75  ff.,  175  f.) —  Yahweh  is  salvation  :  cp.  in  the  inverse  order  yr'^K,  where  the 
second  element,  in  spite  of  MT  pointing,  is  yr'  rather  than  yr,  and  also  VKyr», 
Lidzbarski,  NSI.  The  original  pronounciation  may  have  been  'n;y^»,  like 
i.Tp^n,  XeXK(e)ias :  cp.  Origen's  *l€(r<rta,  and  'Iea(r(c)/ou  in  (J&,  2  Ch  26". 

I.  2-31. — A  Collection  of  Prophetic  Poems, 

This  section  stands  between  two  titles  (i^  2^):  and  it  is 
natural  to  infer  from  this  fact  that  the  editor  derived  it  from 
another  source  than  ch.  2  ff. :  see  Introd.  §  29.  Why  the 
editor,  who  can  scarcely  have  been  Isaiah  himself,  placed  this 
section  first  cannot  be  determined ;  it  has  been  suggested  that 
the  reason  may  be  found  in  its  general  character  and  "immediate 
applicability  to  many  other  circumstances "  of  ancient,  or  later 
(Ro  9^*),  Jewish  life  (Di.).  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  did 
not  prove  more  widely  applicable  than  other  sections  of  the 
book:  6-8^®,  or  even  ch.  6  by  itself,  which  on  chronological 
grounds  should  stand  first,  is  also  cited  more  frequently  in  the 
NT. 

It  must  also  remain  uncertain  whether  the  editor  found  the 
chapter  circulating  by  itself, — a  prophetic  fly-sheet  of  about  the 
same  size  as  the  prophecy  of  Obadiah, — or  himself  arranged 
passages  drawn  from  some  larger  collection,  or  even  from  dif- 
ferent sources.  However  this  may  be,  the  section  is  not  a 
single  poem  or  prophetic  oration :  it  consists  of  several  distinct 
poems  or  fragments.  Most  clearly  distinct  is  vv. 21-26  (28) ;  this  is 
a  complete  poem  with  well-marked  rhythmical  character,  and 
reflects  a  different  historical  situation  from  w.^-^*:  in  vv.*^-^^ 
judgment  is  still  to  come ;  in  vv.*^*^  it  is  in  process  of  fulfilment. 
Since  there  is  no  indication  that  these  vv.  have  been  interpolated, 
the  chapter  immediately  falls  into  at  least  three  independent 
sections— vv. 2-20,  21-26(28)^  27(29).3i.  But  of  these  sections  the  first 
is  scarcely  a  unity;  the  fresh  start  in  v.^^  suggests,  and  the 
contents,  if  not  also  the  rhythm,  favour,  the  conclusion  that 
vv.  18-20  are  an  independent  saying  or  sayings.  Whether  even 
vv.2-17  are  a  single  poem  is  uncertain. 


4  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Koppe  distinguished  as  separate  poems  or  fragments  vv.''*  (time  of  AliaJt) 
and  vv. ^'^'^ (time  of  riezekiah) ;  Lagarde  (Semih'ca,  i.  if.) and  Corn.  (ZA TIV, 
1884,  pp.  86-88),  VV.2'.  4-9. 10-17.  Cheyne  {Inlrod.),  vv.^-^- «-»•  i»-"  (cp.  Stade, 
Gesch.  i.  586  n.  2,  622). 

But  whether  vv.^'^'  be  a  unity  or  not,  the  difficulty  of  maintaining  the 
strict  unity  of  the  entire  chapter  has  been  increasingly  felt  since  Koppe  first 
seriously  raised  the  question.  Some,  however,  still  maintain  that  it  is  a 
literary  unity;  for  example,  Di.  says,  "The  chapter  is  just  as  little  as 
many  others  an  oratorical  unity  or  the  accurate  report  of  a  speech  actually 
delivered  :  it  is  too  rich  in  ideas  and  varied  in  contents  for  this,  and  the  con- 
nection both  within  vv.^'*"^^  and  between  these  verses  and  vv.^"^  and  ^^  is  not 
close  enough.  But  in  view  of  the  relation  of  v.^"  to  v.',  and  the  references 
back  from  v.^  to  vv."  and  ^^''j  and  from  v.*^  to  v.**,  the  literary  unity  of  the 
chapter  cannot  reasonably  be  denied :  that  is  to  say,  we  must  see  in  it  a 
literary  work  composed  by  Isaiah  himself,  in  which  he  has  enriched  a  speech 
delivered  on  some  particular  occasion  with  leading  thoughts  and  turns  from 
other  similar  speeches  delivered  at  not  too  widely  separated  periods,  and 
reduced  the  whole  to  a  form  used  by  earlier  and  later  prophets  (Hos  4^,  Mic  6, 
Ps  50)  of  a  legal  process  between  God  and  the  people  "  (but  see  below, 
p.  27).  Cond.  has  recently  maintained  that  his  strophic  theory  proves 
yy  a-27  to  be  a  single  poem,  which  is  unfortunate  for  the  strophic  theory. 

If  the  chapter  consists  of  different  poems,  questions  of  date, 
so  far  as  they  can  be  answered,  fall  for  consideration  in  connec- 
tion with  the  several  sections.  Here  it  must  suffice  simply  to 
record  the  earlier  view  elaborately  maintained  as  late  as  the 
19th  cent,  by  C.  P.  Caspari,*  that  the  chapter  belongs  to  the 
reign  of  Uzziah  and  is  earlier  than  ch.  6 ;  and  the  wide  diverg- 
ence of  judgment  among  other  writers  who  have  maintained  the 
unity  of  the  chapter,  the  two  main  views  being  that  it  belongs  to 
the  period  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  in  735  (Ges.,  Del.,  Di.), 
the  other  that  it  belongs  to  the  time  of  Sennacherib's  invasion 
in  701  (Vitr.,  Eich.,  W.  R.  Smith).  Many  other  theories  are 
referred  to  by  Caspari  (p.  iff.). 

So  also  the  question  of  rhythm  is  dealt  with  in  detail  in  the  various 
sections.  For  a  different  view  from  that  which  is  taken  below  of  the  changes 
of  rhythm  in  this  chapter,  see  Francis  Brown,  The  Measurements  of  Hebreiv 
Poetry^  mJBLit.y  1 890,  82-86,  who  finds  w.^"*  six- toned,  vv.^'^"  five-toned, 
yy  21-28  six-toned,  vv.^"*^  five-toned. 

I.  2-17. — The  sin  of  Yahweh^s  people,  their  punishment  and 
mistaken  sense  of  His  requirements. 

Rhythm  and  Parallelism. — Cp.  Introd.  "On  Poetic  forms."  Within 
vv.*'^'  there  is  a  marked  difference  between  vv.^'^-  ^^''-  "  and  ^°'^^'' :  balancing 

*  Beilriige  zur  Einleitung  in  das  B.  fes.y  Berlin,  1848. 


I 


I.  2-17  5 

rhythm  is  dominant  in  the  first  named  verses,  echoing  rhythm  (3  :  2)  is  dearly 
to  be  recognised  in  vv.'°*  "•  ^^-  (omitting  ddtd)  i*"-  '*'•  (omitting  D3D)  "»»•  '"o-io^ 
^"';  the  rest  of  vv."'''^''is  more  uncertain,  partly  at  least  owing  to  textual 
corruption.  Of  the  lines  clearly  3  :  2  only  vv.^^**'  ^*^  show  parallelism  of  sense 
between  their  parts:  but  the  entire  periods  5  :  5  are  parallel  in  vv.'**"'***^ 
15a.  b .  jj^us  absence  of  parallelism,  or  parallelism  only  of  longer  periods,  as 
well  as  difference  of  rhythm,  sharply  distinguishes  vv. '""'"'  from  vv.^"*  and 

16c.  17^ 

Where  the  balancing  rhythm  prevails,  some  diflcrence  of  length  in  the 
lines  may  be  observed  : 

(fl)  Vv.2- '  consist  of  one  tristich — 2  : 2  :  2,  and  three  distichs  3  : 3,  t.e.  four 
complete  periods  of  six  accents. 

{6)  Vv.*"' :  most  of  the  distichs  are  unmistakably  2  :  2,  but  v.***''  is  3  :  3 
unless  'in  is  rhythmically  independent  (see  p.  89)  and  }iyi33,  one 
accent:  in  MT  it  is  two.  Insert  makkephs  as  follows:  no^Sy  (so 
generally  in  MT),  niyian  in  v."*,  after  K^  in  v.',  and  perhaps  in 
rK-n(i)DnB'  in  v.'  (see  phil.  n.).  Lines  irregularly  of  three  accents 
are  v.'*,  unless  nriK  be  omitted  :  and  vv.*'*  unless  v.***  '•  »  (2  : 3  :  2  in 
1^,  2:3  in  (JEr)  is  intrusive  (see  Comm.);  '•  omitted  in  the  trans- 
lation is  probably  a  gloss  (see  Comm.). 

(c)  Vv.^*''  " :  distichs  2  :  2. 

(d)  V.',  if  tsyos  be  omitted  (ffi),  consists  of  two  distichs,  3:3  and  2:2 

respectively ;  i.e.  it  is  like  vv.''"^  in  balancing  rhythm.     If  tsyoa  be 

retained  and  taken  with  what  follows,  '*'•  ^  is  3  :  2  and  rhythmically 

similar  to  vv.^***''*  ;  **•*•  might  perhaps  with  difficulty  be  read  in  the 

same  rhythm  by  inserting  makkeph,  uS'Tnin. 

Strophes. — The  translation  will  show  that  vv.^"*  falls  into  four,  or  w.^' 

into  three,  almost  equal  sense-divibions ;  v.'  is  but  half  the  length  of  any  one 

of  them.     Again,  two  sets  of  four  lines  of  five  accents  are  recognisable  in 

vv."'  ^^  and  ^"-^^t",  and  the  intervening  verses  before  they  were  amplified  may 

have  been  of  the  same  length  :  then  v.^*  with  its  two  lines  stands  by  itself. 

If  the  text  of  |^  were  preferable  to  (K  in  v."  (see  above),  it  would  be  tempting 

to  see  in  vv.^"®  and  ^'^^^  two  poems  rhythmically  different  in  character  but  each 

divided  into  four  equal  strophes. 

The  marked  difference  in  poetical  form  between  vv.***  and 
yv.io-16^  which  has  just  been  pointed  out  and  is  in  some  measure 
indicated  in  the  translation,  makes  the  unity  of  vv.^-i^  uncertain. 
But  the  thought  of  the  two  poems,  if  there  are  two  poems  here 
rather  than  one,  is  not  so  different  that  either  suffers  much  by 
being  read  with  the  other,  and  in  a  consecutive  translation  of 
vv.2-17  the  relation  of  v.®  can  be  more  readily  considered ;  that 
verse  may  be  rhythmically,  textually,  and  exegetically  uncertain, 
and  may  possibly  be  intrusive,  but  it  cannot  be  rejected  with 
confidence. 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


Israels  unfilial  conduct  and  its  punishment. 
2  Hear,  O  heaven, 

And  give  ear,  O  earth  ! 
For  'tis  Yahweh  hath  spoken — 
"Children  have  I  reared  and  brought  up^ 
But  they  have  rebelled  against  me; 
'  An  ox  knoweth  its  owner. 

And  an  ass  it's  master's  manger; 
Israel  doth  not  know, 

My  people  doth  not  consider.** 

*  Ah  !   sinful  nation, 

People  whose  guilt  is  heavy, 
Brood  that  doeth  evil, 

Children  that  deal  corruptly — 
Who  have  forsaken  Yahweh, 

Contemned  the  Holy  One  of  Israel, 

Are  estranged  (?)  backward — 

*  Wherefore  will  ye  yet  be  smitten, 

(Wherefore)  continue  in  your  defection? 

The  whole  head  is  sick, 

And  the  whole  heart  diseased: 
®  From  the  sole  of  the  foot  to  the  very  head 

No  soundness  is  in  him ; 
(But)  bruises  and  contusions 

And  still  bleeding  wounds, 
Not  pressed  out,  nor  bound  up, 

Nor  softened  with  oil. 

^  Your  land  is  a  desolation, 

Your  cities  are  burned  with  fire; 
Your  tilled  land  before  you, 
Aliens  are  devouring  it ; 

•  And  the  daughter  of  Sion  is  left 

Like  a  booth  in  a  vineyard. 
Like  a  night  refuge  in  a  cucumber-field, 
Like  a  tower  (?)  for  the  watch  (?). 

•  Had  not  Yahweh  of  Hosts 

Left  of  us  some  that  escaped, 
Like  Sodom  had  we  become, 
Gomorrah  had  we  resembled. 


I.  a-17  7 

Not  Sacrifice  I 

^^  Hear  the  word  of  Yahweh,  |  ye  chiefs  of  Sodom ! 

Give    ear    to    the    instruction    of    our    God,  |  people    of 

Gomorrah  ! 

11  What  good  to  me  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices?  |  saith 

Yahweh. 
I  am  satiated  with  burnt-offerings  of  rams  |  and  fat  of  fed 

beasts ; 
And  in  the  blood  of  bullocks  and  he-goats  |  I  delight  not. 

12  When  ye  come  to  see  my  face,  |  who  hath  required  this  at 

your  hand  7 

Trample  my  courts  ^^  shall  ye  no  more, 

To  bring  gifts  is  vain. 

Smoke  (of  sacrifice)  is  an  abomination  to  me. 
New  moon  and  sabbath,  convoking  of  convocations,  I  cannot  (endure); 

Fast  and  sacred  seasons  ^*  your  new  moons  and  your  set  times  my 

soul  hateth. 
They  have  become  a  burden  upon  me,  |  I  weary  of  carrying. 

15  And  when   ye   spread   out   your  hands,  |  I  will   hide   mine 

eyes   from  you 

Yea  when  ye  make  many  prayers,  |  I  do  not  listen. 
Your  hands  are  full  of  shed-blood :  |  ^^  wash  youselves  pure ; 
Put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  |  from  before  mine  eyes. 

But  Justice, 

!•"  Cease  to  do  evil, 

1^  Learn  to  do  well ; 
Seek  out  the  right, 

Make  the  violent  (?)  keep  straight  (?) ; 
Secure  the  right  of  the  orphan, 

Undertake  the  cause  of  the  widow. 

Heaven  and  earth  are  summoned  to  listen  to  Yahweh's  charge 
against  His  people :  they  have  requited  His  fatherly  care  with 
indifference  and  open  rebellion  (vv.^^*).  Sufficient  reason  this 
that  blow  after  blow  has  fallen  till  Judah  is  covered  with  bruises 
and  wounds  from  head  to  foot  (vv.^^^),  that  the  land  of  Judah 


8  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

has  been  desolated  and  its  cities  burned  by  a  foreign  army, 
which  now  invests  Jerusalem  itself  (vv.''^^-).  Indeed,  had  not 
Yahweh  saved  a  few,  Judah  would  have  been  wiped  out  of 
existence  as  completely  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (v.^).  But 
even  now  in  the  beleaguered  city — so  we  must  understand  the 
transition  if  the  poem  is  one — rulers  and  people  alike  utterly 
misunderstand  Yahweh :  misfortune  has  at  last  awakened  them 
to  their  need  of  Him,  but  not  to  the  nature  of  their  sins,  or  of 
His  demands :  they  bring  Him  in  abundance  sacrifices  which 
He  abhors,  they  are  still  indifferent  to  justice  and  humanity 
which  He  requires — the  very  hands  which  they  stretch  out  to 
Him  in  prayer  are  stained  with  the  blood  of  murder  (vv.^**"^^). 
Yahweh's  word  to  them  (v.^^),  if  they  would  really  find  Him,  is  : 
Not  sacrifice  (vv.^^'^^),  nor  prayers  unaccompanied  by  moral 
change  (^'''•),  but  justice  ! 

The  leading  ideas  of  w.^-i^^  are  {a)  sin,  {b)  punishment, 
{c)  misunderstanding  of  what  Yahweh  demands,  {d)  what 
Yahweh  actually  demands ;  {a)  and  {b\  (c)  and  (d)  are,  each 
pair  taken  separately,  very  natural  sequences,  but  it  is  a  question 
whether  (^),  which  is  really  an  explication  of  (a),  would  not  im- 
mediately have  followed  (a)  had  all  entered  into  the  same  poem. 
The  date  of  the  poem,  or  at  least  of  vv.^-s,  is  701  b.c.  ;  see  n.  on 
vJy  where  other  less  probable  theories  are  cited.  Nothing  in 
vv.2-1^  is  inconsistent  with  the  date  701,  for  it  is  only  by  a  very 
improbable  interpretation  that  v.^  can  be  made  to  imply  a  present 
state  of  national  prosperity.  On  the  other  hand,  nothing  either  in 
vv.^'  or  vv.i^'i'''  independently  points  to  the  year  701 ;  and  if  any 
of  these  verses  are  derived  from  different  poems,  their  exact  date 
is  uncertain  :  the  ideas  are  such  as  Isaiah  might  have  expressed 
at  almost  any  time  of  his  life. 

2a.  b.  C.  Kxordium. — Since  the  prophet  is  about  to  utter 
the  words  of  none  other  than  Yahweh,  words  which  Yahweh  kas 
spoken  to  him,  which  he  must  not  and  cannot  keep  to  himself 
(cp.  Am  3^^-,  Jer  20^),  heaven  and  earth  (cp.  Jer  2^2)  aj-g  called 
upon  to  give  audience  ;  cp.  Dt  32^  for  the  same  rhetorical  appeal, 
and  for  a  similar  one  Mic  6^ ;  for  heaven  and  earth  as  witnesses, 
cp.  also  Dt  4^*'  30^^  32^9. — Hear  .  .  .  give  ear]  cp.  28^3  32^, 
Gn  4^^ :  this  type  of  prelude  may,  as  Du.  suggests,  have  been 
derived  from  popular  poetry. 


I.  2,  3  9 

2d.  e.  3.  Yahweh  charges  Israel  with  unfilial  con- 
duct.— Yahweh's  charge  against  His  people  is  that  in  return 
for  His  fatherly  (Hos  ii^-*)  care  (cp.  Am  3^)  they  have  broken 
loose  from  Him  and  become  rebels  against  His  authority. — 
Children]  EV  rightly  renders  D^33  thus,  as  in  the  phrase 
"children  of  Israel,"  and  %  correctly  interprets  the  word  as 
equivalent  to  "my  people"  (v.^).  Less  satisfactory  is  the 
rendering  sons;*  for  though,  when  the  Hebrews  spoke  of 
children  they  no  doubt  thought  primarily  of  sons,  the  plural 
D^33  is  not  limited  in  meaning  to  male  children  (see  Gn  3^^, 
Jos  17^),  and  note,  even  in  the  sing.,  a  male  child  ("13?  p)  in 
Jer  20^2.  Where  parallelism  admits  (it  does  not  here)  the  use 
of  the  terms,  Yahweh's  people  may  be  described  as  His  "  sons  " 
and  "daughters"  (43®). — Brought  up  and  reared]  i.e.  played 
the  part  of  a  parent  by  them.  For  T\l  in  this  sense,  cp.  23* 
4921  ^iis^  2  K  10*,  Hos  9^2;  and  for  DDn,  23*,  also  the  analogous 
use  in  Ezk  31*:  so  ina  in  the  Kal  is  used  of  the  growth  of  the 
infant  (Gn  21^)  or  youth  (Gn  2\^).  Both  verbs  have  also  the 
meaning  to  make  greats  powerful^  exalted',  and  the  second  by 
many  f  and  both  by  some  %  have  been  so  understood  here ;  but 
the  two  verbs  should  be  rendered  as  synonyms  (see  phil.  n.); 
and  both  the  parallel  in  23*  and  the  context  here  (see  vv.^^-) 
favour  interpreting  the  ,line  of  Yahweh's  parental  care§  for 
Israel,  not  of  the  pre-eminence  of  Israel  among  the  nations,  or 
of  the  greatness  of  Israel  in  numbers  and  military  power.  Con- 
sequently, there  is  no  allusion  to  the  prosperity  of  Judah,  and 
the  case  for  assigning  this  passage  to  the  same  early  period  of 
Isaiah's  activity  as  2^^-  (Che.  Introd.  p.  2)  falls  to  the  ground. 
In  the  simplest  terms,  without  the  pathetic  details  of  Hosea's 
picture  of  Yahweh  training  and  tending  His  child  (Hos  ii^-, 
esp.  V.8),  Isaiah  places  in  contrast  Yahweh's  parental  care  which 
had  brought  Israel  to  manhood,  and  Israel's  unfilial  conduct 
in  casting  off  the  father's  authority  and  disobeying  the  father's 
commands. — They  have  rebelled  against  me]  '3  VK^Q  means  to 
revolt  from  one's  ruler  {e.g.  i  K  12^^,  2  K  i^),  to  renounce 
authority  (cp.  ^min  h"^  IVK'S,  Hos  8^) :  here  it  is  used  of  a  child's 
renunciation  of  a  father's  authority.     A  reference  to  idolatry, 

*  Ew.,  Di.,  Che.,  Du.,  Whitehouse,  Box. 

t  fflr  (C^wtra),  U  {exaliavt)^  Di.,  Du.,  Che.,  Marti,  al. 

t  ]p.,  RVmarg.  §  AV,  RV  (text),  Ges.,  Cond. 


«l 


lO  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

which  has  sometimes  been  suspected  here,  would  be  possible 
(cp.  Jer  2^-  2^  3^^),  but  it  is  very  far  from  certain ;  other  ways  of 
rebelling  against  Yahweh  were  to  rely  on  Egypt  or  Assyria 
(Hos  7^^),  or  to  be  unjust,  inhumane ;  cp.  59^^^-  and  the  use  of 
the  noun  ytJ'Q  in  Am  5^2 .  moreover,  Am.  chs.  i.  2  are  simply  a 
series  of  illustrations  of  inhumanity  regarded  in  the  light  of 
rebellion  against  Yahweh. 

3.  Israel  has  not  only  been  an  unfilial  child  of  Yahweh,  but 
has  shown  himself  less  intelligent  than  the  animals  (cp.  Jer  8^) 
that  form  part  of  a  household  (Ex  20^^).  Ox  and  ass  find  their 
way  to  their  stables ;  but  Israel  cares  nothing  for  Yahweh,  nor 
discerns  that  it  owes  everything  to  Him :  cp.  the  thought  of 
Hos  2^^^^\  Dt  32^*^,  where  it  is  implied  that  Israel  not  only  did 
not  recognise  Yahweh,  their  true  Baal  or  owner,  as  the  giver  of 
harvest,  but  attributed  the  produce  of  Canaan  to  the  ancient 
Baals  of  the  land. — Owner  .  .  .  master\  the  first  word  ^'^\>) 
denotes  tov  KTrjcrdfievov  (ffi),  one  who  has  come  into  possession 
of  anything  as,  for  example,  by  purchase  (cp.  Lv  25^*^,  Zee  11^); 
the  second  (bv^)  is  commonly  used  of  the  person  to  whom 
property  belongs  (e.g.  Ex  21^8,  Jg  1922). — Israel]  If  vv.^  and  ^ 
belong  to  the  same  poem,  Israel  is  not  the  Northern  kingdom, 
but  Judah  :  cp.  ^"^  n.  ^ 

4-9.  Israel  sinful  and  suffering. — Isaiah,  like  Amos  in 
3^-8,  follows  up  the  brief  saying  of  Yahweh  {w.^^-  <*•  ^)  with  speech  ^ 
in  his  own  person.  4.  And  first  with  a  cry  of  threat  and  lamenta- 
tion, Ak/  or  JVoe/  (5^*^^  etc.),  he  emphasises  by  means  of  a 
succession  of  short  clauses  the  rebellious  and  unfilial  conduct 
of  Israel,  the  nation^  people^  race,  and  children  of  Yahweh :  they 
are  sinful^  heavily  laden  with  guilty  evil-doers  (cp.  9^^  312),  and 
of  corrupt  life  (cp.  Gn  6^2^  Zeph  3^,  Ps  14^). — 4e.  f.  g.  One  at 
least  of  the  last  three  lines  of  v.*  is  probably  not  original,  possibly 
none  of  them  are  (Marti),  though  strophic  regularity  requires  two 
lines  here,  ffi  omits  the  last  line,  and  the  previous  one  is 
rhythmically  suspicious.  If  the  lines  stood  by  themselves  they 
would  probably,  if  not  quite  necessarily,  imply  idolatry  (C); 
but  the  remainder  of  the  poem  suggests  that  Isaiah  had, 
instead  of  idolatry,  ethical  offences  in  mind.  To  forsake 
Yahweh  often,  though  not  invariably  (Dt  282^),  with  writers 
later  than  Isaiah,  means  specifically  to  abandon  Him  for  another 
God;  see,  e.g.^  Jg  2"^-  lo^-^o,  Dt  31^*,  Jer  i^'  2^^  5^;  and  if 


1 


■ 


I.  3-6  II 

vv.28f.  below  were  originally  connected  with  one  another,  the 
same  specific  sense  was  intended  there.  To  contemn  (|*W)  God 
was  to  think  little  of  His  power,  to  distrust  His  capacity  to 
fulfil  His  promises  or  His  threats  (Nu  52*  12'^  1411-28  x6M 
Ps  lo^'is  y^io.  18J.  and  once  (Dt  3120)  it  is  associated  with 
serving  other  gods.  The  verb  in  the  last  line  (see  phil.  n.)  refers 
to  idolatry  in  Ezk  14*,  and  so  do  similar  phrases  in  Ps  44I* 
78*''. — The  Holy  One  of  Israel]  Isaiah's  favourite  term  for  Yah- 
weh  :  see  Introduction. — 5a.  b.  The  question  put  to  the  persons 
addressed  in  ^-  ^'  '^  <*.  — Why  will  the  people  invite  fresh  punish- 
ment by  renewing  and  continuing  their  sinful  courses  ?  Judah 
to  Isaiah,  as  Israel  to  Amos  (4*'^^),  appears  to  have  suffered 
already  often  and  severely. —  Wherefore]  the  regular  meaning  of 
nD"i>j;.  Many  modern  interpreters*  appeal  to  Job  38*  and 
render  on  what  (part  of  the  body)  will  ye  yet  be  smitten^  seeing 
that  none  is  left  which  has  not  already  been  smitten :  this 
destroys  the  parallelism,  and,  as  Cond.  justly  urges,  it  pro- 
duces an  "image  assez  froide,"  for  the  person  who  chastises 
does  not  take  pains  to  discover  a  spot  on  which  no  stroke  has 
yet  fallen. — ( Wherefore)  will  ye  continue  in  your  defection]  the 
force  of  wherefore  in  the  previous  line  is  carried  on  into  this, 
and  these  two  lines  are,  like  their  neighbours,  parallel  in  sense — 
liy  being  parallel  in  thought  to  1D"'Din,  and  mo,  defection,  which 
necessarily  implies  punishment,  to  \2T\.  Generally  the  second 
line  is  taken  to  be  circumstantial  (G-K.  156^;  Or.  §  163)  or 
relative — seeing  that^  or  ye  that^  continue^  etc.  The  term  defection 
occurs  also  in  31^,  Jer  281^,  Dt  13*.  The  original  sense  of  the 
verb  "no  is  to  turn  aside  from  one's  course,  from  the  straight 
road  (Dt  2^7,  Jg  4I8  148) .  then  morally  it  means  to  turn  aside^ 
whether  from  the  right — from  Yahweh,  His  commands,  etc. 
(Ex  32^,  I  S  1220) — or  from  the  wrong  Qob  28^8,  Ps  341'');  but, 
used  absolutely,  the  verb,  like  the  noun  here,  has  the  sinister 
sense — Ps  14^,  Jer  523,  Dt  iii^  171^;  religiously  it  is  the  anti- 
thesis of  7N  or  ny  y\^ — how  long  will  this  people  turn  away  from 
Yahweh  to  their  undoing,  instead  of  returning  to  Him  to  be 
healed  ?     Cp.  Hos  61,  Am  4^  ny  DnnB^  xi^l  .  .  .  Ti^Dn. 

5C.  d.  6.  The  whole  body  politic  is  sick.     In  contrast  with 
v.***^  (plural  vbs.),  we  have  now  one  of  those  personifications 
of  the  entire  nation  which  are  so  frequent  with  Hebrew  writers 
*  Ges.,  Ew.,  DL,  Du.,  Che.,  Guthe,  Marti,  Whitehouse ;  cp.  "S  super  quo. 


12 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


(cp.  Numbers^  pp.  265  f.,  370) : — Judah  is  a  wounded  man  whose 
bruises  and  sores,  so  recent  that  the  blood  still  flows,  receive 
no  attention  :  there  is  nought  of  soundness  in  him ;  cp.  particularly 
Hos  5^^,  "  Ephraim  perceived  his  sickness,  and  Judah  his  wound," 
and  Hos  7^,  where  Ephraim  is  described  as  a  man  sapped  of  his 
strength  and  grown  grey  without  realising  it.  The  injuries  are 
described  by  three  terms :  yvs,  bruises^  produced  by  crushing 
{j\2\  Dt  232),  or  smiting  {^'2r\,  Ca  5^,  i  K  20^^) :  the  term  also 
occurs  in  Job  9^'',  Pr  27^^  (fig'X  ^.nd,  coupled  as  here  with 
mnn,  in  Ex  2i25,  Gn  4^8,  Pr  20^0  (^)  f ;  the  remaining  instances 
of  mnn  are  53^  Ps  38^  (festering  stripes) :  the  third  term  n30  is 
of  wide  meaning  (cp.  nan),  but  it  includes  open,  bleeding  wounds 
(i  K  22^5),  and  it  is  such  that  are  here  pictured — they  are  n^"il3, 
moist^  juicy  (Jg  15^'' :  cp.  ,c^),  i.e.  still  bleeding.  These  wounds 
have  not  been  pressed  out  to  purify  them  from  purulent  matter, 
nor  bound  up  with  bandages,  nor  softened  and  the  pain  of  them 
assuaged  by  the  pouring  in  of  oil  (cp.  Jer.  8^2,  Lk  lo^*). 

7.  8.  The  figurative  (vv.^^-<^)  is  followed  by  a  literal 
description  of  the  desperate  state  of  Judah :  the  whole  country 
lies  desolated  by  the  ravages  of  war,  the  cities  have  been  burnt 
out,  and,  at  the  moment,  before  the  very  eyes  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Jerusalem,  an  army  of  foreigners  is  encamped  and  supporting 
itself  on  the  produce  of  the  fields.  The  capital,  indeed,  still 
stands,  but  insecure  as  the  slight  structures  made  for  their 
refuge  by  those  working  in  the  fields,  too  far  away  from  their 
homes  to  return  to  them  at  night. 

The  only  known  circumstances  that  correspond  to  this  description  are 
those  of  the  year  701  B.C.  Sennacherib  in  his  account  of  his  campaign  of 
that  year  writes :  '*  Hezekiah  of  Judah,  who  had  not  bowed  himself  under 
the  yoke,  46  of  his  fortified  towns,  fortresses,  and  small  cities  in  their 
neighbourhood  innumerable,  with  casting  down  of  battering-rams  and  assault 
of  siege-engines,  with  attack  of  infantry,  of  arrows  ...  I  besieged,  I 
captured.  .  .  .  Himself,  like  a  bird  in  a  cage,  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem, 
the  city  of  his  kingship,  I  shut  up.  Fortifications  against  him  I  erected,  and 
those  coming  forth  from  the  gates  of  his  city  I  turned  back  "  (Taylor  Cylinder, 
iii.  11-17  and  20-23).  "V.' describes  what  those  shut  up  in  the  capital  could 
see,  and  is  silent  about  the  200,000  Jews  whom  Sennacherib  boasts  of  having 
taken  prisoners  (from  the  other  cities  ;  Taylor  Cylinder,  iii.  17-20) — probably 
because  they  had  as  yet  no  knowledge  of  this"  (Du.).  The  actual  descrip- 
tion of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  (see  on  ch.  7)>  even  with  the  additional 
details  of  2  Ch  28,  falls  short  of  the  present,  but  some  [e.g.  Di. )  infer  from 
the  general  character  of  ancient  warfare  that  the  circumstances  of  that  war 


I.  6-8 


13 


must  have  been  such  as  to  justify  the  terms  in  which  Isaiah  here  speaks. 
It  has  been  questioned  whether  an  army  lai^ely  composed  of  Israelites  would 
be  called  "aliens"  (D'li).  No  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Sargon,  to  which  some 
referred  this  description,*  is  recorded,  and  the  hypothesis  that  there  was 
such  a  siege  is  now  generally  abandoned. f 

Your  tilled  land  before  you]  the  fields  or  cultivated  country 
(riDIK,  cp.  Gn  3^^),  within  sight  of  those  addressed,  i.e.  the  besieged 
in  Jerusalem. — Aliens]  the  word  means  belonging  to  another  class^ 
or  circle  (Nu  i*^  n.),  here,  therefore,  belonging  to  another  race^ 
foreigners  (cp.  Jer  5^^,  Ezk  28^,  La  5^) :  this  would  very  naturally 
describe  either  Assyrians  or  Syrians,  but  much  less  naturally  an 
army  consisting  equally  of  Syrians  and  Ephraimites,  since  the 
latter  were  not  D^T  in  the  sense  here  intended. — Are  devouring 
ii\  for  the  idiom  nD15<  7D^{,  to  eat  the  landy  meaning  to  live  on  its 
produce,  see  Gn  3^'^;  for  its  use  of  an  enemy  living  on  the 
produce  of  an  invaded  or  conquered  country,  cp.  Jer  8^*.  The 
enemy  have  reduced  the  country  behind  them  to  ruin  by  fire 
and  sword,  and  they  have  now  closed  in  on  Jerusalem  and  are 
living  on  its  immediate  neighbourhood;  the  addition  at  this 
point  of  the  phrase,  and  {it  is)  a  desolation  like  the  overthrow 
of  .  .  .  does  not  seem  very  suitable  :  it  is,  moreover,  structurally 
redundant.  Probably  the  words  are  a  gloss  \  on  the  word 
desolation  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse,  meaning  your  land  is  a 
desolation — and  that  a  desolation  like  the  overthrow  of.  .  .  . 
Grammatically,  the  clause,  an  overthrow  of  aliens  (f^ffi),  may 
mean  either  such  an  overthrow  as  barbarians  customarily  bring 
about,  or  such  an  overthrow  as  customarily  befalls  barbarians 
(cp.  Del.) ;  but  neither  meaning  is  very  probable.  It  is  far  more 
probable  that  D''"»T,  aliens^  has  replaced  ono,  Sodom ;  §  everywhere 
else  the  word  overthrow  (nasriD)  refers  to  the  overthrow  of 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (13^^  Dt  29^2,  Am  4",  Jer  49^^  50*^). — 
8.  Daughter  of  Sioti]  Cities  with  their  inhabitants  are  poetically 
regarded  as  a  woman;  cp.  e.g.  "daughter  of  Babylon,"  47I; 
"  virgin  Israel,"  Am  5^.  Sion  here  is  used  widely  of  the  entire 
city,  not  of  the  South-Eastern  Hill  alone  (cp.  G.  A.  Smith, 
Jerusalem^  i.  269). — A  booth]  for  the  slightness  and  insecurity  of 
the  n3D,  cp.  Job  27^^;  and  of  the  night-refuge  (njfc).  Is  2420, 

*  Cp.  Che.  /Y,  Introd.  notes  to  x.  5-xii.  6. 

t  Che.  Introd.  p.  3f.  (with  references);  cp.  Driver,  Isaiah  (188$),  p.  loi. 

X  So  Du.,  Che.,  Marti,  Cond.  al. 

§  So,  e.g.,  Ew.,  Che.,  Du.,  Mar. 


14  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

"  It  shall  shake  to  and  fro  like  a  night-refuge."  For  a  picture 
of  a  modern  structure  of  this  kind,  see  SBOT^  p.  162. — Like 
a  tower  for  tjie  wafcJi]  No  entirely  satisfactory  rendering  of 
mi^3  T'ya  can  be  suggested;  like  a  tower  for  the  watch  (cp. 
D'^lXli  7liD,  2  K  17^)  fits  in  well  with  the  two  preceding  lines, 
but  n^y,  meaning  alarm-post^  or  to7ver  (?  cp.  "i^V:  Kon.),  and 
miVJ,  watch,  are  both  uncertain.  Besieged,  too,  is  a  questionable 
rendering  of  miV3 ;  and  it  is  an  objection  both  to  as  a  besieged 
city  (RV)  and  like  a  ^forsaken'  (naity,  cp.  66^^  62^2)  ^(y 
(Che.  SBOT\  that  Sion  not  merely  resembles,  but  actually  is, 
a  besieged,  or  forsaken,  city.  A  well-guarded  city  would  be  the 
safest  rendering,  and  yet  it  can  only  really  express  the  meaning 
if  Haupt  (see  SBOT)  is  right  in  treating  the  clause  as  a  gloss ; 
and  this  is  improbable,  for  the  structure  of  the  poem  seems  to 
require  the  line.     See  also  phil.  n. 

9.  Had  not  Yahweh  allowed  some  of  the  Jews  to  escape,  the 
nation  would  have  perished  as  completely  as  the  "  cities  of  the 
plain"  (Gn  iq^s,  Dt  29^2^.  According  to  v.^,  Jerusalem  stands 
entire,  though  isolated  now  and  insecure:  the  escaped  of  this 
V.  ought  to  be,  then,  the  besieged  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and 
the  conviction  lying  behind  the  words  that  in  Jerusalem  they  are 
safe,  that  the  capital  is  inviolable :  and  yet  v.*  suggests  anything 
but  the  invincibility  of  Jerusalem;  and  for  this  reason  Marti 
suspects  the  originality  of  v.*  in  its  present  position.  On  the 
difference  in  rhythm  and  strophic  length  that  distinguishes  v.^ 
from  vv.**^,  see  above. — Some  that  escaped\  RV  inadequately 
renders  remnant ;  T»"iB^,  from  a  root  meaning  to  take  fright,  run 
away  (cp.  Ar.  sarada),  is  one  who  survives  from  defeat,  one 
who  escapes',  cp.  e.g.  Jer  31^,  Nu  24^*.  In  MT,  though  not  in 
ffirS»H,  the  survivors  are  said  to  be  like  a  little,  i.e.  very  few :  cp. 
yj-i  Dyes,  "like  a  little  moment,"  2620.  J^  also  admits  of  the 
word  DyJOD  being  taken  with  the  next  clause — almost  had  we 
become  (cp.  Gn  26^^;  BDB  590a).  But  this  fails  to  do  justice 
to  the  obvious  thought  of  v.®,  for  if  Yahweh  had  not  allowed 
some  to  escape,  Judah  would  have  been  clean  wiped  out,  and,  < 
therefore,  not  almost,  but  quite  like  Sodom.  I 

2.  'nDDm  'nVnj]  the  simple  (not  consecutive)  waw  coupling  two  synonymous 
terms  (Dr.  §  131  f.)-  Ki-  rightly  remarks,  "Two  words  of  like  meaning  are 
used  for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  but  the  sense  of  both  is  one  and  the  same  "  ; 
he  is  wrong,  however  (see  above),  in  the  meaning  which  he  gives  to  both — 
□y  Va  SyD  n^nDom  oniN  ^ih-yx  '3. — oni]  but  they ;  the  emphasis  implied  by  the 


I.    9    AND    I.    2-6  15 

use  of  the  separate  pronoun  is  in  such  cases  as  this  best  expressed  by  rendering 
]y  due,  instead  of  and;  cp.  Gn  42^,  and  further,  Dr.  §  160,  Ohs.  (p.  201). — 
3.  onx]  sere  for  bateph  seghol :  G-K.  84a,  ^.  «y  03k,  means  /<?  /ged  up, 
fatten,  and  DUK  is  iht  feeding  trough  :  cp.  Job  39''. — v^ya]  pluralis  majesiatis  ; 
G-K.  1241. — yT  K*?  '?»!nB"]  (&  'l<rpa^\  5^  yue  oi/k  iyvto:  the  ace.  pronoun 
here  (and  in  the  next  clause)  is  an  interpretation,  not  a  variant.  The 
objects  in  Hebrew  are  left  to  be  supplied  in  thought:  cp.  6'. — "oy]  some  30 
MSS  and  also  dSc&'B  read  'Dyi — a  mistaken  assimilation  to  the  previous 
lines. — 4.  in]  may  be  followed  by  the  3rd  pers.  as  in  5^^^  10"  17^'  and 
often :  see  Kon.  iii.  321a,  d.  But  'in  is  also  followed  by  the  2nd  pers.  {e.g. 
33*  SSS  J^"^  47*)»  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  sound,  both  here  and  in  5*  by  the  3rd 
pers.  (v.*,  cf.  *  J^  ;  dSc,  2nd  pers.)  passing  over  into  the  2nd  (v."*). — \\i!  122] 
for  this  genitival  cstr.,  see  G-K.  I28.;t;  and  for  1^1  =  159,  Sta.  §  202^. — yni 
D'jriD]  the  two  terms,  whether  in  apposition  or  cstr.  and  gen.  (Ron.  337^), 
are  co-extensive;  cp.  65^®:  hence  not  seedy  i.e.  descendants,  of  evil-doers, 
but  seedy  i.e.  race^  consisting  of  evil-doers  \  (K,  correctly,  <nr4pna  irovtipdv 
(cp.  €^5).  It  is  possible  that  D'j;TD=Djno  was  originally  yno,  and  that  the 
clause  was  symmetrical  with  its  three  fellows. — D'n'nrD]  sc.  oam  (Gn  6^),  or 
something  similar. — rnp  nx  .  .  .  m.T  nn]  Marti  finds  the  repeated  prosaic  nn 
suspicious. — TinK  nu]  <&  om.  The  punctuators  treat  nij  as  Niph.  of  tit,  as 
also,  though  in  view  of  v.'  doubtfully,  in  Ezk  14*  ;  the  cstr.  is  then  pregnant, 
they  are  estranged  (from  Yahweh  and  gone)  backward — a  strange  mixture  of 
two  figures  each  in  itself  sufficient  (Marti).  So  already  U  etbalienati  sunt 
retrorsum.  The  consonants  may  also  be  punctuated  r\\i  (cp.  Ezk  14'),  Niph. 
of  ^T^,  but  they  have  dedicated  themselves  backwards  is  no  more  probable. 
t?r  (cp.  Sb)  has  KmnKS  nm  nnnOK— the  same  phrase  that  is  used  to  render  jidj 
mnK  in  50" ;  whether  %  actually  read  1J03  for  r\n  is  doubtful,  but  this  has  been 
suggested  as  the  original  reading  by  Marti :  for  nnx  jd3,  cp.  Ps  40^*  70*  and 
references  above.  Since  the  poem  is  for  the  most  part  composed  of  distichs, 
one  (if  not  all)  of  the  last  three  clauses  of  the  v.  seems  superfluous :  the 
last  being  absent  from  (&  has  not  unnaturally  been  suspected  (Brown,  Du.) ; 
but  rhythmically  the  clause  Skib"  vnp  nx  ij^kj,  with  three  accents  against  the 
prevailing  two  accent  lines,  is  more  doubtful ;  it  is  also  a  less  satisfactory 
balance  to  .Tin'-nK  i3ij;  than  ninK  ihia.  Haupt  (SBOTy  p.  109)  attempts 
to  meet  the  case  by  transposing  mo  (emended  to  is'oin)  iB'Din  from  v." 
and  making  it  parallel  to  mnw  ni3.— 5.  no  Vy]  Kit.  no-ny?  Possible,  but 
unnecessary. — tfKT  Sd]  with  poet,  omission  of  the  art.  :  G-K.  127^.  Hence 
the  whole  head,  not  every  head  (RVmarg.),  as  if  every  individual  Israelite 
were  physically  sick  and  covered  with  actual  sores. — '^n^]  probably  *?  of  the 
product :  cp.  2  Ch  21^*. — 6.  dhd  u  j'k]  (&  has  no  equivalent  for  ono  12,  but 
it  is  a  mistake  when  Marti  says  that  (&  omits  the  whole  clause :  the  oike  6i 
(&  implies  that  they  read  pK ;  and  as  without  ono  ^^2  the  sentence  (there  is  no 
wound,  etc. )  is  impossible  in  the  context,  we  must  suppose  that  (&  used  a 
text  from  which  onD  13  had  accidentally  dropped  out.  The  clause  is  not  a  gloss 
from  Ps  38^*  ^  MT  punctuates  DhD — a  strange  nominal  formation  from  taon, 
on  which  see  Kon.  ii.  98  n.  i.  Better  with  Haupt,  in  SBOT{p.  no),  dfio, 
there  is  nought  of  soundness. — ni]  MT  by  accentuating  on  the  penult,  perhaps 
intended  to  connect  the    form  with   mi  (see  Del.).     Going  back  to  the 


1 6  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

consonants  alone  we  may  connect  it  with  TiT,  mr,  or  mt.     Olsh.  (p.  536) 

treated  it  as  pass.  Kal  (^^^5  ij)*  froiw  m  (cp.  G-K.  52^,  67m):  we  must 

then  suppose  "ni  is  an  otherwise  unused  modification  of  nns,  io  bind  up^  with  a 
special  technical  sense  (cp.  Du.,  Kon.  i.  328,  333f.)«  Sta.  (§  415^)  considers 
ni  to  be  Pual  of  mi ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  sense  required  here  could 
naturally  be  derived  from  mi,  to  disperse^  scatter,  winnow.  BDB  treats  the 
form  as  pass,  of  nn  =  5 01 ,  J\,to cotnpress;  cp.  iTttin,  Job  39^',  and  the  ambiguous 
forms  in  Is  59"  {pressed  under  foot)  and  Jg  6^  {pressing,  wringing  out  a 
fleece).  However  the  form  be  explained,  the  sense  is  reasonably  well  secured. 
— naan  .  .  .  itrnn  .  .  .  ni]  nDST  (a  transcriptional  error  for  133T?)  could  be 
explained  by  G-K.  14&/,  but  the  change  of  cstr.  is  extraordinary,  and  is  not 
satisfactorily  explained  by  calling  it  an  approximation  to  a  chiasm  (Del. ),  or 
by  treating  naan  as  impersonal  cstr.  (G-K.  144*) — and  there  has  been  no 
softening  with  oil,  or  by  the  distance  from  the  subject  (cp.  35^,  Jer  44'^'' ; 
Kon.  3463).  Marti,  partly  on  the  ground  of  the  cstr.,  partly  on  the  ground 
that  binding  up  should  follow,  not  precede,  the  treatment  with  oil,  deletes 
'n  vh^  n;  n^  as  a  gloss  on  mum  yss,  which,  when  it  came  into  the  text,  led  to 
]  being  prefixed  to  noan  k^.  Both  objections  could  be  met  less  drastically 
by  supposing  that  n'na  nam  originally  followed  it^nn  kSi  ni  vh  ;  and,  since 
□no  13  J'N  is  not  a  gloss,  the  distichic  structure  would  favour  this  alternative. — 
7.  VH  msntyjif  the  line  is  of  two  accents,  v^-msrw,  or  perhaps  trK-ns-i.?'  (cp.  64^" 
9^  <&) :  or  omit  B'K  as  a  gloss. — nnK  D''?3K]  insert  makkeph,  or  omit  nnx. — d'^dn, 
are  (now)  devouring'.  Dr.  §  135  (2). — n"j«}  Ty]  nw  regularly  means  to  watch, 
guard  (from  danger) — hence  a  city  guarded  (from  danger).  The  sense 
besiege  is  but  doubtfully  supported  by  Ezk  (i^"^,  where  the  meaning  may 
rather  be  preserved,  and  Jer  4^*,  where  ffi  suggests  omx.  The  regular  word  for 
to  besiege  is  Sy  'sya,  cp.  e.g.  29'  2  K  (?^  :  hence  Di.  explains  misj  as  the  Niph. 
part,  of  this  vb.  Du.  and  Marti  treat  mua  as  an  infin.  noun  like  ^V^v,  rvs^zi'^, 
miaa,  meaning  watch  {Beobachtung).  ^, 

10-17.  The  futility  of  sacrifices. — With  the  formula, 
Hear  the  word  of  Yahweh,  a.  fresh  section,  if  not  a  fresh  poem, 
begins,  and  the  change  is  marked  by  a  change  of  rhythm  (see 
above,  p.  4  f.).  There  has  been  too  much  sacrifice  and  too  httle 
justice — that  is  what  has  alienated  Yahweh  from  Israel  and  led 
Him  to  punish  His  people  again  and  again  (vv.^*^),  and  that  is 
why  even  now  He  takes  no  notice  of  their  prayers  (v.^^)  so  as 
to  rescue  them. 

This  is  one  of  the  most  notable  statements  of  the  common 
standpoint  of  the  prophets :  that  what  He  demands  of  those 
who  worship  Him  is  not  sacrifice,  but  justice  and  humanity. 
Compare,  for  example,  among  those  who  preceded  Isaiah, 
Hos  6^-^  and  Am  4*  521-25 ;  and  among  those  who  followed  him, 
Mic  66-8,  Jer  f-  2if.^  jg  40I6. 


I.    6-9    AND    10-17  17 

Sacrifice  and  many  of  the  forms  of  religion  Israel  shared  with 
the  nations,  and  it  is  not  the  institution,  but  the  repudiation,  of 
sacrifice  that  distinguishes  the  religion  of  Israel.  Not,  perhaps, 
that  the  utterances  of  the  prophets  need  be  taken  as  a  prohibi- 
tion absolute  of  sacrifice  (ct.  30^9)  for  their  own  time ;  but  cer- 
tainly a  non-sacrificial,  not  less  than  a  monotheistic,  religion  was 
the  natural  outcome  of  their  teaching.  Historically,  the  unessen- 
tial character  of  sacrifice  in  the  higher  development  of  Hebrew 
religion  is  shown  by  the  continuance  of  the  religion  without 
sacrifice  during  the  first  Exile  and,  subsequently,  both  in  Judaism, 
after  the  fall  of  the  Temple,  and  in  Christianity.  Prior  to  the 
Exile  the  practical  outcome  of  prophetic  teaching  did  not  extend 
to  the  suppression  of  sacrifice,  but  only  to  its  purification  and 
centralisation  (Deuteronomy :  the  reforms  of  Josiah) ;  but  the 
emphasis  laid  by  the  prophets  on  the  essentially  ethical  nature  of 
Yahweh  and  of  His  demands  upon  men  (cp.  Mic  6^-^)  enabled 
the  nation  not  only  to  survive  the  Exile,  but  as  a  religious  com- 
munity to  emerge  from  it  even  stronger. 

10.  Under  the  suggestive  and  caustic  titles  cAt'e/s  of  Sodom, 
people  of  Gomorrahy  Isaiah  addresses  the  prophets  of  Jerusalem 
and  Judah,  and  especially  their  leaders,  whom  he  elsewhere  re- 
gards as  responsible  for  the  moral  condition  of  the  people  (v.^s). 
"  V.^<>  is  most  closely  connected  with  v.^,  for  the  address  to  the 
chiefs  of  Sodom,  etc.,  would  be  unintelligible  without  v.^ ;  even 
if  the  persons  intended  could  be  conjectured,  it  would  remain 
obscure  why  the  people  of  Jerusalem  are  so  termed.  This,  to  be 
sure,  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  w.'^^^'  were  not  spoken 
in  the  same  breath  with  vv.^-^.  .  .  .  Jerusalem  is  compared  with 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  first  instance  because  of  their 
almost  identical  fate ;  whether  also  on  account  of  the  similarity 
of  their  moral  state  could  only  be  decided  if  it  were  known 
what  Isaiah  understood  'the  cry  of  Sodom'  (Gn  iS^*^)  to  mean  : 
if  he  had  Gn  19  in  mind,  a  moral  comparison  would  have 
implied  great  exaggeration"  (Du.).  This  is  probably  right  if 
the  connection  is  due  to  Isaiah,  and  not,  as  some  think,  to  a 
later  editor,  who  brought  together  two  independent  poems  on 
account  of  the  verbal  resemblances  in  w.*  and  ^*',  or  supplied 
V.®  as  a  link  between  vv.^*^  and  ^®'^^.  Certainly  the  fate  (13^^, 
Am  41**,  Jer  20^^  49^^,  Zeph  2*)  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is 
more  frequently  alluded  to  in  the  OT  than  their  sins  (La  4^, 
VOL.  I. — 2 


1 8  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


A. 


Dt  32^2^  Ezk  i6i6ff-),  though  both  are  naturally  enough  some 
times  thought  of  at  the  same  time  (Dt  29^2),  as  is  so  frequently 
the  case  with  the  references  in  the  Koran  to  Ad  and  Thamud. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  Sodom  typifies  for  Isaiah  the  same  sins — 
pride,  fullness  of  bread,  prosperous  ease,  failure  to  help  the  poor 
and  the  needy — as  it  did  a  century  and  more  later  for  Ezekiel 
(16**),  the  comparison  of  the  moral  state  of  Judah  with  Gomorrah 
would  have  been  quite  in  harmony  with  his  general  point  of 
view,  and  sufficiently  obvious  for  him  to  begin  an  address  to  a 
crowd  assembled  in  the  temple  courts  (w.^^-^^j^  which  numbered 
among  it  persons  of  position,  with  the  epithets  cAie/s  of  Sodom^ 
people  oj  Gomorrah. — Chiefs]  the  word  '^^'^  is  a  synonym  of  K^KT  in 
the  sense  of  leader-,  cp.  Mic  3^-  *  (in  parallelism  with  B^«"i),  Jg  1 1^- 
{=K'K1,  vv.8-  9)  11  (coupled  with  t^Ni).  In  Jg  1 1«- ",  Jos  lo^*  (JE), 
Dn  11^8  the  word  is  used  of  a  leader  in  war:  in  Is  3^^  22^, 
Mic  3^*',  Pr  6''t  (a  leader  of  the  ants)  it  is  used  more  generally  ; 
in  Pr  25^*  pvp  is  corrupt.  In  Hebrew  the  word  appears  to 
have  retained  less  of  the  apparently  original  meaning  decide 
than  has  the  Arabic  Kadi.  Chiefs  of  the  people  of  Yahweh 
ought  to  make  it  their  aim  to  keep  things  right  in  the  State 
(Mic  3^);  but,  since  Isaiah  shares  with  Micah  (3^)  the  view 
that  their  aim  is  just  the  opposite,  he  addresses  them  not  as  I 
chiefs  of  Yahweh's  people,  but  as  chiefs  of  Sodom ;  so  also  the 
people  misled  by  them  are  worthily  termed  people  of  Gomorrah. 
Yet  the  prophet  has  for  these  misleading  chiefs  and  misled 
people  a  communication  from  Yahweh :  they  have  gone  astray 
because  they  have  misunderstood  what  Yahweh  really  cares 
for.  The  doom  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  will  only  become 
actually  theirs  if  they  refuse  to  obey  the  word  of  God  by  His 
prophet :  cp.  the  survey  of  neglected  prophetic  monitions  in  the 
Koran,  Sura  7. — The  instruction  of  our  God]  the  word  min  in 
passages  such  as  these  is  very  unsatisfactorily  represented  by  law 
(RV).  Both  in  the  sing,  and  the  plural  it  is  used  in  Ex.-Dt.  and 
elsewhere  of  laws  properly  so  called ;  but  an  earlier  sense,  which 
was  also  retained  even  after  the  special  sense  of  law  had  become 
established,  was  instruction^  teachings  direction^  in  the  first  instance 
probably  a  communication  of  the  will  of  the  god  ;  cp.  the  Assyr. 
t^rtu^  if  the  term  is  derived  from  Babylon  (KAT^,  p.  606);  or, 
perhaps,  m\  to  cast  lots,  Jos  18^,  if  the  word  is  of  Hebrew  origin. 
The  word  is  also  used  of  the  teaching  given  to  a  child  by  a  parent, 


I.   10-14  19 

which  may  be  in  the  form  of  command  or  law  (cp.  Pr  6**-  2^),  or 
of  much  wider  scope;  and,  as  the  context  suggests,  in  Pr  4^  i^, 
it  is  the  imparting  of  wisdom.  The  instruction  of  God  is  teach- 
ing concerning  the  will  and  ways  of  God  (2^),  more  especially  as 
communicated  through  prophets  (8^  30^:  cp.  La  2*,  Job  22^^^ 
or  priests  (Hos  4^  Jer  2^  18^^). — II.  Why  this  constant  bringing 
of  sacrifices?  that  is  the  question  which  Yahweh  is  repeatedly 
putting  to  the  people.  How  mistaken  a  proceeding,  if  it  is 
intended  to  please,  not  the  people  themselves  (Am  4*),  but 
Yahweh  I  He  has  no  good  of  sacrifices ;  cp.  Am  521^-,  Jer  6^0, 
Is  i5^2f..  The  first  term  DDTiat  (v.^^*)  is  used  widely  of  all  slain 
sacrifices,  many  of  which  went  mainly  to  furnish  forth  a  feast 
for  those  who  sacrificed;  the  two  following  lines  refer  to  the 
special  sacrifices,  the  burnt-offerings  and  to  the  special  parts 
(Lv  3^^,  cp.  2  S  2^^^'  i4S2f.)  Qf  all  sacrifices,  to  wit,  the  fat  and  the 
blood  (Lv  3^'^,  cp.  2  S  7}^'^'  14^^^-),  which  were  not  consumed  by 
the  people,  but  reserved  entirely  as  holy  to  Yahweh — Failings] 
except  in  1 1*  the  word  K^"ID  is  always  used  (Am  5^2,  Ezk  39^^^  2  S 
6^^  I  K  i^"^^-  26)  of  beasts  fattened  for  sacrifice ;  in  some  cases 
it  is  clear  that  these  fatted  beasts  were  eaten  (apart  from  the 
flesh  and  the  blood)  by  the  worshippers  (so  i  K  i). — Bullocks'] 
^  adds,  and  lambs;  but  the  words  are  due  to  an  annotator 
who  desired  completeness;  they  are  absent  from  (K,  and  the 
tone  and  sense  are  rhythmically  and  rhetorically  complete  without 
them. 

12-14.  As  vocalised  and  accented  by  the  Massoretes,  the 
Hebrew  text  yields  a  less  severe  utterance  than  ffi.  Alike  in  J^ 
and  ®r,  v.^^  has  implicitly  denied  that  sacrifices  form  any  essen- 
tial part  of  the  religion  of  Yahweh — What  good  are  they  to 
Him  ?  At  any  rate,  He  has  received  them  in  superabundance : 
and  they  give  Him  no  pleasure.  Then  ffir  (followed  in  the 
translation  above)  continues :  Certainly  it  is  not  God  who  has 
asked  man  to  bring  sacrifices  when  they  come  to  worship  Him  : 
offerings  are  useless;  the  smoke  ascending  from  them  when 
burnt  on  the  altar  is  an  absolute  abomination  to  Him;  the 
sacred  seasons  with  the  preparatory  fast  and  the  accompanying 
gluttonous  (cp.  28^^)  feasts  are  hateful  to  Him.     Cp.  Am  521-26, 

Offence  was  probably  given  at  a  relatively  early  period  by 
this  unqualified  condemnation  of  religious  worship;  and  by  a 
single  slight  change  in  the  consonantal  text,  viz.  the  substitution 


20  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

of  jIN,  iniquity^  for  D1V,/flj-/ (so  fflr),  in  v.^^,  a  milder  interpretation 
was  made  possible.  According  to  MT,  Yahweh  repudiates  not 
the  bringing  of  sacrifice,  but  the  trampling  of  His  courts,  and 
condemns  not  all  offerings  and  sacred  seasons,  but  vain  offerings 
and  iniquitous  festivals.  This  interpretation  already  appears  in 
.SSTF ;  but  though  much  older  than  the  Massoretic  punctuation, 
it  is  in  all  probability  not  original.  That  the  severity  of  such 
a  saying  was  softened,  is  far  more  probable  than  that  it  was 
enhanced.  There  are  reasons  for  thinking  that  the  text  of 
these  verses  has  suffered  enlargements  or  other  changes  (see 
phil.  n.)  to  which  even  €r  gives  no  clue ;  but  these  do  not  appear 
to  have  affected  the  fundamental  meaning  of  the  passage. 

12.  To  see  my  face\  i.e.  to  worship  Me.  The  anthropo- 
morphism implicit  in  the  phrase,  which  is  frequently  used  of 
visiting,  or  being  admitted  to  the  presence  of  men  (Gn  43^, 
Ex  10^8,  2  K  25^^),  has  been  obscured  by  the  punctuators  (see 
phil.  n.),  hence  EV  to  appear  before  me.  A  similar  attempt  to 
soften  down  a  phrase  that  implied  the  visibility  of  God  is 
seen  in  (&'s  paraphrase  of  Ex  24^®:  J^  there  runs,  "and  they 
saw  the  God  of  Israel,"  dSi  "and  they  saw  the  place  where 
the  God  of  Israel  stood." —  Wko  hath  required  this  ?]  viz.  offer- 
ings (v.^i) — certainly  not  Yahweh.  Isaiah  criticises  the  law 
and  religious  customs  of  his  time  with  the  same  freedom  as 
Jeremiah  (y^^^*),  and,  later,  our  Lord  Himself  (Mt  5).  Even 
the  earliest  law  required  that  the  Hebrews  when  they  came  "  to 
see  Yahweh's  face"  should  not  come  empty-handed  (Ex  23^^ 
3420). — Trample  my  courts']  i.e.  the  courts  of  the  Temple  in 
Jerusalem.  The  trampling  may  be  that  of  the  sacrificial 
animals  (v.^^)  which  the  worshippers  bring  with  them  (cp.  Ezk 
26^^),  or  the  irreverent  entrance  of  the  worshippers  themselves 
into  the  sacred  precincts ;  cp.  the  use  of  irarctv,  (K's  rendering 
here,  in  Jer  11 2,  and  of  KarairaT€Lv  (  =  DD-i  16*)  in  i  Mac  3*5.61 
4®®.  The  awe  which  fell  upon  Isaiah  as  he  entered  the  temple- 
precincts,  the  place  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  (cp.  ch.  6),  makes 
the  careless  familiarity  with  which  others  treated  them  peculiarly 
offensive  to  him  (cp.  288n.). — 13.  Offerings']  the  word  nrUD 
means  etymologically,  and  frequently  in  Hebrew  usage,  presents^ 
gifts :  it  is  here  used  with  its  widest  sacrificial  sense  of  any 
offerings  made  to  the  deity,  whether  of  vegetables  or  animals ; 
cp.  Gn  4^"^  J  ffir  (o-c/AtSoAts  also  66^)  gives  it  the  specific  sense  of 


I.    12,    13  21 

cereal  offering  which  it  acquired  later  (P). — Sacrificial  savours] 
mop,  later  used  {e.g.  by  P)  of  the  fragrant  smoke  produced  by 
burning  aromatic  substances,  originally  (see  phil.  n.)  meant  the 
smell  of  the  burning  flesh  of  sacrifices,  and  this  is  its  meaning  here. 
The  early  Hebrews,  in  common  with  the  Babylonians,  thought 
of  the  gods  as  delighting  in  these  savoury  smells;  in  the 
Babylonian  Flood  story  we  read,  "The  gods  smelt  the  savour, 
the  gods  smelt  the  sweet  savour;  the  gods  gathered  like  flies 
over  the  sacrificer  " ;  cp.  in  Heb.  Gn  9^1,  i  S  26^^,  and  the  sacri- 
ficial term  "savour  of  gratification"  (EV,  sweet  savour)  which 
held  its  own  to  the  latest  times.  The  prophets  with  their  more 
spiritual  conception  of  Yahweh  repudiate  the  belief;  the  scent 
of  burnt  flesh  is  not  a  pleasure,  but  an  abomination  to  God 
(cp.  Am  5^^). — New  moon  and  sabbatK\  for  the  coupling  of  these 
two  sacred  days,  cp.  2  K  4^8,  Am  8^ ;  for  the  religious  observance 
of  the  new  moon,  i  S  20^^-,  and  see  Benzinger,  Arch.  §  69.  The 
attitude  of  the  successors  of  the  prophets  is  in  striking  contrast 
to  Isaiah's:  see  56** •,  Jer  17210.  (both  post-exilic). — The  calling 
of  assembly]  or,  as  we  may  render  so  as  to  retain  the  etymological 
connection  of  vb.  and  noun  (fc<"ipD  Nip),  the  convoking  of  convoca- 
tions. If  the  clause  is  a  part  of  the  original  text  (see  phil.  n.),  it 
explains  that  what  is  particularly  intolerable  to  Yahweh  on  the 
sacred  days  is  the  meetings,  or  rather,  the  summoning  of  such 
meetings,  to  which  the  Jews  were  probably  called  by  the  voice,  as 
are  the  Moslems  to-day.  In  P  (Ex  12,  Lv  23,  Nu  28  f. — 19  times 
in  all)  KHp  N"ipD,  holy  assembly^  is  the  technical  term  for  the  meet- 
ing of  the  community  on  the  Sabbath,  the  new  moon,  and  other 
sacred  occasions ;  and  fc<"ip»,  assembly^  unqualified,  both  here  and 
in  4**,  must  have  the  same  meaning.  The  only  other  occurrences 
of  tilpD  are  Neh  8^,  Nu  lo^,  where  the  sense  is  entirely  different. 
— Fast  and  sacred  season]  so  fflr,  cp.  Joel  i^*  2^*^;  f^  has  the 
milder,  and  therefore  probably  not  the  original,  reading  iniquity 
aftd  sacred  gathering  (see  phil.  n.) ;  this  would  mean  that  God 
does  not  tolerate  sacred  gatherings  associated  with  iniquity; 
cp.  iniquity  and  teraphim^  i  S  15^^.  According  to  6r,  we  have 
another  of  the  absolute  statements  that  abound  here:  fasting 
and  sacred  seasons  are  not  demanded  by  Yahweh  under  any 
circumstances :  He  cannot  endure  them.  The  fasting  intended 
is  quite  probably  that  fasting  which  was  widely  practised  "  as  a 
preparation  for  the  sacramental  eating  of  the  holy  flesh  "  (W.  R, 


22  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Smith,  Rel,  Sem.^  413):  the  sacramental  eating  itself  would  be 
intimately  associated  in  Isaiah's  mind  with  the  second  term — 
mvy,  cp.  Am  521,  2  K  io20-24.  The  precise  force  of  niVV  is  not 
clear.  Except  in  Jer  9^  (2)  j^  jg  always  used  of  something  sacred 
or  religious  (cp.  2  K  lo^o  hv^h  TS'TiV  it^'li^) ;  but  whether  it  is 
a  sacred  gathering,  as  Jer  9^(2)  and  perhaps  2  K  lo^^  would 
suggest,  or  a  sacred  season,  as  the  parallelism  with  an  in  Am  5^1, 
and  perhaps  the  remaining  uses  would  rather  suggest,  is  not 
quite  certain.  In  the  laws  (Dt  16^,  Lv  23^6,  Nu  29^^)  it  is  re- 
quired that  the  mvy  shall  be  accompanied  by  abstinence  from 
work  (cp.  (&  apyiav).  In  view  of  this  taboo  on  work,  which 
may  well  be  ancient,  and  the  use  of  the  word  "Tivy  in  Jer  36^ 
Neh  6^0  and  of  "1W3  in  i  S  21^,  Marti's  suggestion  is  probable 
that  mvy  meant  a  time  during  which  men  are  under  taboo. 
Such  gatherings  or  seasons  occurred  annually  on  the  last  day  of 
the  Feast  of  Massoth  (Dt  16^),  and  of  Booths  (Lv  2326,  Nu  292^, 
2  Ch  7^,  Neh  8^^) ;  they  were  also  proclaimed  when  it  seemed 
specially  necessary  to  appease  Yahweh  or  seek  His  favour  (Joel 
J 14  215-17  and  perhaps  Am  521). — 14,  Your  new  moons  and  your 
set  times\  perhaps  a  gloss  on  new  moon  and  sabbath :  see  above. 
The  set  times  (D^yio)  are  seasons  that  recur  in  the  course  of  the 
year  (Gn  i^*),  annual  sacred  days  or  times. — A  burden"]  the 
noun  (nntD),  Dt  i^^;  the  vb..  Job  37".  It  is  a  burden  that  rests 
upon  (isy)  Yahweh,  and  which  He  has  grown  weary  of  carrying. 
The  bold  anthropomorphism  (J^SU)  is  euphemized  by  ffiST. 

15  f.  Prayers,  too,  though  long  and  frequent  (cp.  Mt  6'^),  when 
offered  by  blood-stained  evil-doers  who  persist  in  their  wrong- 
doing, are  of  no  avail.  It  is  significant  that  the  absolute  terms 
in  which  the  inefficacy  of  sacrifices  and  sacred  seasons  is 
asserted  is  followed  by  a  careful  definition  of  the  prayers 
that  are  without  effect.  Not  all  prayers,  but  your  prayers,  are 
useless ;  not  imto  all  who  call  upon  Him  does  Yahweh  turn  a 
deaf  ear,  but  to  those  who  pray  without  recognising  the  need  for 
amendment  of  life;  even  these  murderers,  and  these  violent  and 
oppressive  men  whom  Isaiah  addresses  will  find  Yahweh  ready 
to  hear  if  they  cease  from  their  evil  ways,  and  instead  of  defraud- 
ing and  oppressing  the  weak — the  widow  and  the  orphans — see 
that  they  get  their  rights.  The  prophet's  teaching  anticipates  that 
of  our  Lord  in  Mt  523^- ;  Pr  28^  j  5^-  ^9  may  also  be  compared. 

When  ye  spread  out  your  hands]  The  gesture  of  prayer  was 


I.  14-17  23 

to  spread  out  the  palm  (t)3)  of  the  hands  (cp.  Ex  ^^'^-  ^^  Ez  9*, 
Job  11^^  Ps  4421,  and  (with  t)  Ps  1^^^).  From  the  time  that 
Yahweh  was  thought  to  dwell  in  heaven,  the  hands  were 
stretched  heavenwards  (i  K  g^^-w^  2  Mac  320).  Cp.  the  varying 
custom  of  the  Greeks,  "The  suppliant  stood  with  face  and 
hands  upraised  to  heaven  when  he  called  upon  the  dwellers 
therein.  In  addressing  the  deities  of  the  sea,  he  might  merely 
stretch  his  arms  towards  the  waters.  And  when  the  beings 
addressed  were  those  of  the  nether  world,  the  suppliant  would 
stretch  his  hands  downwards";  Gardner  and  Jevons,  Greek 
Antiquities  J  p.  223.  The  attitude  was  that  more  generally  of 
entreaty  (65^,  La  i^^). — I  will  hide  mine  eyes  from  you]  turn  away 
from  and  disregard  you :  cp.  Pr  2827.  Yahweh  turns  away  His 
eyes  from  hands  red  with  shed  blood.  The  blood  (D^Dl)  is  not 
the  sacrificial  blood  of  v.^^,  which  would  be,  as  it  is  there,  Dl 
(G-K.  124  n.) ;  nor  is  it  simply  blood  as  rendering  ceremonially 
unclean,  so  that  Hector's  plea  {Iliad,  vi.  268)  that  he  cannot 
pray  "  imbued  with  blood  and  dust,"  though  cited  here  by  Ges., 
is  but  a  very  partial  parallel :  it  is  blood  (guiltily)  shed ;  cp.  4*, 
Hos  I*  4*,  Gn  410^-. 

16.  Wash  you^  make  yourselves  pure\  wash  yourselves  pure, 
figuratively  for  what  is  stated  literally  in  the  next  line.  The 
word  wash  is  used  ritually,  but  when  so  used  the  result  is 
ritual  cleanness  ("inD — e.g.  Lv  14*).  Here  the  result  is  moral 
purity,  righteousness ;  nST  is  never  used  of  ceremonial  cleanness, 
but  of  ethical  purity:  cp.  Job  15*  25*  (where  it  is  parallel  with 
pIV  to  be  righteous\  Ps  57^  Mic  6^^  (shall  I  be  pure  with  wicked 
balances  and  with  a  bag  of  deceitful  weights?),  Ps  73^*  H9^  and 
the  use  of  the  kindred  root  ^3T,  especially  in  Job  8^  9^0. — 16,  17. 
Cease  to  do  evily  learn  to  do  well]  "  an  abstract  paraphrase  of  the 
highly  concrete  exhortations"  (Che.  SBOT,  p.  in),  and  there- 
fore judged  by  Du.,  Che.,  Marti  to  be  a  gloss ;  Du.  also  argues 
that  the  clauses  overload  the  metre ;  yet  the  two  clauses  metri- 
cally resemble  the  four  that  follow.  Marti  refers  to  Jer  4^2  7^  • 
but  the  second  of  these  passages  serves  as  a  parallel  to  the 
present  combination  of  the  general  and  the  particular.  — 
17b.  C.  d.  e.  Illustrations  of  the  positive  requirements  of  Yahweh 
— the  powerful  must  be  kept  within  bounds,  the  rights  of  the 
weak  must  be  secured :  cp.  the  denunciation  of  the  opposite 
conduct   in    lo^. — Seek  out  right]  inquire   what   is  demanded 


24  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

by  tDStJ'D,  i.e.  old  established  custom  which  rested  on  the  will  o 
Yahweh  as  it  had  been  declared  of  old  by  successive  decisions ; 
such  customs  were  gathered  together  into  a  body  of  customs  or 
Judgments  before  the  time  of  Isaiah,  and  one  such  collection  has 
come  down  to  us  (Ex  2ii^').  As  our  Lord  selected  (Mt  22^^^), 
or  approved  (Lk  lo^^  the  selection,  from  the  great  bulk  of  the 
later  Jewish  law,  of  two  principles,  love  of  God  and  love  of  man, 
as  a  summary  of  the  law  of  God,  so  Isaiah  here  selects  (cp.  Ex 
2220f.  23^*^')  the  duty  of  maintaining  even-handed  justice  between 
the  strong  and  the  weak  as  the  very  essence  of  Yahweh's 
demands.  Cp.  the  somewhat  fuller  summary  of  a  later  writer 
in  Mic  6^ — Make  the  violent  keep  straight"]  so,  in  spite  of  some 
uncertainty,  the  clause  may  best  be  rendered ;  see  phil.  n.  The 
versions  agree  in  expressing  a  sense  similar  to  U,  subvenite 
oppresso^  whence  EV. — Secure  the  right  of]  or  do  justice  tOy  a 
frequent  sense  of  tDDtJ',  cp.  6^8  11*,  i  S  24!^,  Ps  43^  72*. 

9,  iriKSJC  mn«]  for  the  breviloquence,  cp.  G-K.  125-^. — nntr]  (&  (xvipfxa, 

V  semen ;  variants?— II.  "h  no"?]  for  this  idiom,  see  Gn  27^,  Am  5". — TDK'] 

frequentative  impf.  ;   Dr.   §  33.— 12.   "Jfl  rfK-j^]  see  G-K.   51/  for   other 

instances  where  MT  assumes  syncope  of  the  n  of  Niph.  inf.  :  and  see  Kon. 

ii.  pp.  312  f.  for  the  use  of  the  ace.  of  D'JS  if  the  vb.  were  really  Niph.     But 

the  punctuation  is  due  to  scruples  against  the  suggestion  that  man  could  see 

God  (Geiger,  Urschrift,  pp.  337  ff.).     Point  ':b  n"ix-j^.— V.^*  should  end  with 

D3T  (cp.  (K),  and  nsn  odt  be  carried  over  to  ".     In  ^*  punctuate  KUf  nhjtp 

(cp.  (ffir)  instead  of  Nwnof?,  and  for  pN  read  mx  (with  (ffir).     Then  "  and  " 

stand  thus : 

«\v\  nnJD  K'an  is'oin  K?  nsn  odt 

"h  K'n  najnn  fmep 

'?DiN  vh  t  NipD  xip  t  ''^•'^  "J^n 

TSJ  nwts'  foDnyiDi  OD'ennf  rxyn'^  dis 

.tKB'J  nx^i  rrxh  '^y  vnf 

The  lines,  it  will  be  observed,  are  irregular.  Marti  by  omitting  the  words 
enclosed  between  t  and  in  v.^^  D3TD  reduces  the  passage  to  "tolerably  regular  " 
lines  of  four  accents  (the  rhythm  of  vv.^"^  but  not  of  vv.'<*^  ^^  ^^^).  Certainly 
'di  uyvix\  {youTf  not  necessarily  all,  new  moons),  which  might  well  be  a  gloss 
intended  to  mitigate  the  absoluteness  of  naB'i  tnn  and  K^pi:>  Kip,  is  (in  spite 
of  the  parallel  in  Ps  45°-  *,  Job  42'  cited  by  Del. )  an  awkward  asyndeton  ;  but 
the  arguments  in  favour  of  the  other  omissions  are  far  less  substantial.  Haupt 
gains  rhythmical  regularity  by  omitting  DD'nyiDi  UTv^n  and  me'?  "h]}  vn  (with 
Marti)  and  also  n^fn  DDi,  m!ij;i  pK  Vdik  vh,  "'vamHW.  Though  the  rhythmical 
irregularity  is  probably  due  to  some  and  perhaps  considerable  textual  corrup- 
tion, no  reconstruction  in  detail  seems  likely  to  command  general  assent. — 
12.  nxi]  this,  viz.  the  conduct  just  described;  cp.,  for  this  use  of  nxi  (fem. 
G-K.  122^),  Dt  32*,  Jg  7",  Ps  1 1 8^3  etc.     The  /ikt  is  clearly  understood 


1. 9-17  25 

thus,  and  rightly,  by  (ffir ;  but  according  to  MT  and  the  verse  division  nxi 
points  forward  (cp.  27',  Jer  9=®,  i  S  11')  to  "^^n  om. — qdtd]  t  in  such 
phrases  is  not  w^^wjar/Tj/ literal :  cp.  pr^  T2,  Pr  iS'^^  and,  frequently,  T3  nan, 
/<?  j/^a/&  djy  the  hand  of .  In  itself,  therefore,  this  phrase  does  not  exclude  the 
possibility  of  the  cstr.  in  MT.  A  Hebrew  would  certainly  not  have  said  who 
hath  required  D3'Sa"iD  that  ye  should  trample^  as  Du.'s  criticism  would  suggest. 
— nsn  DDn]  in  MT  a  permutative  of  r«i :  grammatically  possible,  for  rpa  may 
take  as  its  obj.  the  simple  ace.  without  S  (Jer  26^).  But  according  to  (K  dot 
n^cn  is  the  ace.  of  iB'Oin  vh  (v."),  preceding  its  vb.  like  the  ace.  infin.  in  Gn 
48". — iB'oin  kS]  the  k^  of  emphatic  command  :  G-K.  \o^o. — K'2n]  in  MT  inf. 
cstr.  without  ^  (G-K.  \i^m)  dependent  on  ^ID' ;  but  it  is  rather  an  inf.  cstr. 
constituting  together  with  its  ace.  nniD  the  subj.  of  a  sentence :  cp.  7",  i  S 
23^. — mop]  the  smell  produced  by  aromatic  substances  is  expressed  in 
P  either  by  the  full  phrase  d'DD  mop  (Ex  25*  etc.)  or  by  mop  alone  (Nu  i6*^*-)' 
By  a  natural  extension  of  meaning  mop  came  to  mean  also,  alike  in  Heb. 
(Lv  10")  and  Phoen.  (see  G.  A.  Cooke,  NSI^  p.  126),  the  substance  which 
produced  this  smell.  But  etjrmolc^ically  nap  (nnp)  has  a  much  wider  meaning : 
note  the  sense  of  smoke  in  Heb.  no'p  (Gn  19^),  Assyr.  J^utru  {i.e.  nnp), 

Aram.  KnBip(=i«'y,  Ps  i8'),  Jo  (=*uip),  to  smoke  (of  a  fire),  and  the  develop- 
ment from  that  meaning  ofyo,  aloe  wood  burnt  for  fumigation^  and  juaS, 
scent  of  flesh-meats  roasted  on  live  coals  (cp.  EBi.  2165  n.  i).  Hence,  too, 
the  verbal  forms  in  Heb.  nop  and  Ttspn  mean  to  bum  so  as  to  produce  smoke  : 
so  Am  4*  (of  leavened  material),  i  S  2^'  (of  fat) ;  and  then  they  are  used  very 
frequently  without  an  object  and  sometimes  in  parallelism  with  a  wide  term 
like  nai  (Hos  4^'  11",  Is  6$''):  i.e.  nop  or  n*Bp.n  and  nni  are  general  terms 
alluding  to  different  aspects  of  sacrifice — nai  to  the  slaying  of  the  victim,  "^^ 
to  the  burning  of  the  victim  so  as  to  produce  a  savour  agreeable  to  the  Deity. 
In  a  similar  wide  sense  is  nnop  used  here  and  in  Ps  66^  and  nniop  in  Dt  33^°. 
In  view  of  the  well-established  pre-exilic  use  of  the  vb.  it  is  quite  unnecessary 
to  doubt,  with  Marti,  whether  Isaiah  could  have  used  the  noun. — \ih  .  .  .  cnn 
'\s\  pK  ^31k]  on  the  cstr.  of  MT,  see  Dr.  §  197,  Obs.  2.  —  Knpo  vr\'^'\  (5U 
felt  the  lack  of  the  copula  (see  above)  and  supplied  it — koX  ijfiipav  fxeydXrjp 
(cp.  Jn  7^),  et  festivitates  alias. — ^3"ik  vh]  hy=able  to  endure^  only  here  and 
Ps  loi' (doubtful).  But  cp.  also  Hos  6",  Job  42^.  Perhaps  DNt?^  has  dropped 
out;  cp.  Jer  44^^. — 14.  Kb^  ^T\vhi\  cstr.  as  Jer  6^^  9*  15'  20^:  Hb}  is  instead 
of  the  usual  n«r ;  G-K.  76b.  (&  renders  paraphrastically  oi)Kh-i  dvijo-w  rds 
ifiaprlas  bfuav  ;  KB'3  might,  of  course,  va&dXi  forgive,  yet  not  naturally  here  after 
the  preceding  clause,  ffi  also  paraphrases  nno  by  TrXfja-nov^. — 15.  D2{fn9?'] 
G-K.  6of.,  61*.  The  vocalised  text  assumes  a  use  of  the  Piel  for  the  more 
common  Kal  in  some  other  places  also :  see  65^,  Jer  4'^,  La  i",  Ps  143'. — 
ikVd  D'Dn  Dan']  on  the  order,  see  Dr.  §  208  (3).— 16.  lai.n  ijtnn]  cp.  G-K. 
121^,  h. — lim]  as  accented  Hithp.  of  nai  (G-K.  54^/) ;  but  perhaps  rather 
Niph.  of  131 — ^laf.n. — j;n.n]  infin.  absolute  as  direct  obj.:  G-K.  113^;  so  3'e\n 
in  v.". — 17.  nsTK]  nB'N  means  to  go  straight  on  (Pr  9"  and,  MT  Piel,  4^*) ;  the 
Piel  in  3^^  9^"*  to  cause  to  go  straight  on  (antithesis  to  nyn.n) ;  whether  it  further 
developed  the  meaning  to  keep  within  bounds,  which  would  be  very  suitable 


26  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

here,  is  uncertain ;  but  it  is  almost  suggested  by  the  association  with  pen — 
make  the  violent,  instead  of  breaking  all  bounds  by  ill-treatment  of  the  weak, 
keep  straight.  Punishment  of  the  violent  is  not  required  by  the  context,  and 
Che.*s  proposal  n?:  unnecessary.  The  versions  probably  connected  ifffti  with 
i^N,  nB-N,  happiness^  and  then  rendered  freely :  (&.  pijaaa-de,  C5  Q-OJ^Io,  Vg. 
subveniie. — pon]  the  Versions  give  the  word  a  passive  sense  :  (&  dSiKotjfievov, 
S  |V)  wfc?  ^  D'JNi,  U  oppresso.  But  the  form  Slop  has  in  some  cases 
an  active  sense  ;  cp.  P'ijpVj  J^r  22^,  jin^,  Jer  (P.  The  meaning  must  be  inferred 
from  the  association  of  {'Din  with  Wd  in  Ps  71^,  and  the  root  may  be  a  by-form 
of  Don,  to  treat  violently ^  rather  than  of  fon,  to  be  sour,  sharp, 

18-20. —  Yahweh's  Invitation, 

The  sajdngs  between  the  opening  line  {4  accents)  and  the  closing  formula 
are  distichs  consisting  of  long  lines  containing  4  or  5  accents  each  and  parallel 
in  sense.  Perhaps  originally  each  line  contained  5  accents  (=3  +  2). 
These  distichs  resemble  some  of  those  in  vv.^°"^*,  but  are  quite  dissimilar  to 
those  that  follow  in  vv.^^"^^  where  the  lines  are  shorter  (3  or  2)  and  the 
parellelism  is  between  lines  unequal  in  length. 

1^  Come,  now,  and  let  us  reprove  one  another,  saith  Yahweh : — 
Though  your  sins  were  like  scarlet  (robes),  they  might  become 

white  like  snow; 
Though  they  were  red   like  crimson,  they  might  become 

like  wool. 
^^  If  ye  be  willing  and  obey,  on  the  best  of  the  land  shall  ye 

feed, 
20  But  if  ye  refuse  and  rebel,  on  husks  (?)  shall  ye  feed — 
For  the  mouth  of  Yahweh  has  spoken  it. 

Attempts  have  been  made  to  find  a  connection  between  these 
lines  and  vv.^-i^  "Jehovah  has  been  addressing  His  people  in 
anger,  but  even  in  the  exhortations  of  vv.^^-  ^'^  His  love  had  begun 
to  move.  This  love,  which  seeks  not  the  destruction  of  Israel, 
but  their  inward  and  outward  salvation,  now  breaks  forth  in  v.^^" 
(Del.)  But  the  lack  of  close  connection  has  by  no  means 
escaped  notice.  Ew.  suspected  the  loss  of  a  v.  before  v.^^ ;  Di. 
suggested  that  Isaiah  placed  the  section,  though  delivered  under 
other  circumstances,  side  by  side  with  the  foregoing,  because 
both  sections  agree  in  maintaining  that  only  by  repentance  and 
acquiescence  in  the  ethical  demands  of  God  can  the  people  be 
saved. 

It  certainly  seems  doubtful  whether  Isaiah  would  in  im- 
mediate  succession   first   represent   the   people   as   red-handed 


I.  18-20  27 

criminals   (v.^^)  and   then   treat  the   redness   of  their  sins   as 
hypothetical  (v.^^). 

Nor  must  we  claim  the  unity  of  a  trial  scene  for  the  chapter.  Whether 
the  vb.  in  v.**  implies  the  figure  of  a  trial  (see  below)  or  not,  Cheyne 
{Introd.  6)  is  right  in  withdrawing  his  earlier  {PI)  acquiescence  in  Ewald's 
theory  that  vv.^"*  introduce  a  great  trial  scene,  of  which  vv.^^"'^  give  the 
conclusion,  and  in  abandoning  as  illegitimate  his  earlier  translation,  *  *  Come 
now  and  let  us  bring  our  dispute  to  an  end." 

Du.  suspects  and  Marti  concludes  that  vv.**  and  ^''  **  are  unconnected 
sayings.  The  reasons  are  partly  formal  ( * '  in  v.^  Yahweh  speaks,  cp.  mn'  tdk'  ; 
in  v.^^'  the  prophet,  otherwise  the  closing  formula  would  run  :  for  my  mouth 
hath  spoken  it"  (Marti)),  partly  based  on  the  interpretation  (see  below). 

18.  Come^  now]  the  introductory  (w)  nai?  or  («3)  13P  expresses 
various  emotions,  and  is  used  by  persons  of  different  positions, 
as  (i)  by  one  equal  to  another,  Gn  31**  19^^^  i  S'20",  2  K  14*; 

(2)  by  a  superior  to  an  inferior,  e.g.  Jg  19^^,  i  S  9^*^  14^;   or 

(3)  by  an  inferior  to  a  superior  Jg  19^^.  Other  instances  are 
Gn  3720-87,  2  K  7*,  Neh  62-7,  Ps  83^,  Is  23,  Ca  712.  The  phrase 
commonly  introduces  a  proposal  for  the  mutual  benefit  of  the 
parties,  or,  at  least,  for  that  of  the  party  addressed. — Let  us 
reprove  one  another]  the  various  efforts  to  render  nnaw  show  how 
difficult  it  is  to  discover  an  English  equivalent  that  is  at  once 
etymologically  justifiable  and  suitable  to  the  context.  The 
Niphal  of  na*  occurs  but  twice  elsewhere :  in  Gn  20^^  it  means 
to  be  righted \  in  Job  23^  (followed  by  DV)  it  means  to  argue  with^ 
put  one's  case.  Here  the  Niphal  must  be  reciprocal.  In  Job  23^ 
the  Niph.  and  in  Mic  t^'  the  Hithp.  occur  in  connection  with 
the  figure  of  a  lawsuit ;  so  also  the  Hiph.  is  often  used  of  giving 
judicial  decisions  {e.g,  2*  1 1^^-,  Job  9^2)^  or  in  passages  where  the 
figure  of  a  law-court  or  of  judgment  is  or  may  be  present ;  see 
Job  138-15  i9»  22*,  Ps  518-21,  pr  2^26^  Is  2921,  Am  5I0,  Hab  i^\ 
Hence  many  claim  that  it  means  here  let  us  go  to  law  with  one 
another^  carry  on  litigation  with  one  another^  and  tacitly,  therefore, 
that  "Israel  is  worthy  of  death"  (Del.);  whence  Del.  further  infers 
that  Yahweh  "is  willing  to  remit  the  punishment,"  and  to  deal 
with  Israel  "  not  in  accordance  with  His  retributive  justice,  but 
according  to  His  free  mercy  alone."  Marti  and  Du.,  starting  from 
the  same  translation,  argue  that  in  a  court  of  law,  justice  and  not 
mercy  must  rule,  and  that  therefore  the  following  saying  cannot 
contain  an  offer  of  free  pardon,  but  something  very  different. 
Yet  it  is  very  precarious  to  base  the  interpretation  of  the  whole 


28  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

passage  on  the  assumption  that  nn313  must  imply  a  lawsuit ;  the 
Hiph.  (as  also  the  noun  nnain)  is  frequently  used  where  any  such 
process  is  definitely  excluded  or  not  necessarily  present — Gn  21^5, 
Ezk  326,  Pr  312  97f.  1512  1925  2823,  Ps  1416,  Job  5^7.  The  occur- 
rence of  nriDin  and  nvy  in  parallelism  (Pr  i25. 30)  suggests  that 
nn313  was  nearly =nvvi3  {e.g.  Neh  6^),  and  meant  little  more  than 
advise  together^  reason  together  (EV).  Or,  derived  from  the  Hiph 
in  the  sense  to  reprove^  find  fault  with  {e.g.  Ezk  32^,  Job  62^),  the 
Niph.  may  mean  to  reprove  one  another^  to  point  out  one  another's 
faults,  to  discuss  with  one  another  who  is  right  and  who  wrong. 
Cp.  Rashi's  comment,  "nnD13,  i.e.  I  and  you  together,  that  we 
may  know  who  has  wronged  whom :  and  if  it  is  you  who  have 
wronged  me,  I  will  yet  give  you  hope  of  repentance."  For 
the  offer  of  free  pardon  in  such  a  connection,  cp.  4322-28  * — 
Saith  YahweK\  the  frequentative  sense  again :  i^^  n. — Though 
your  sins  were]  the  case  is  put  as  a  merely  imaginary 
one  (Driver,  §  143:  cp.  e.g.  Nu  22^8,  Jer  222),  and  the  argu- 
ment is :  even  though  the  people  may  have  committed  the 
most  flagrant  sins,  they  may  regain  the  highest  degree  of 
innocence ;  and  if,  hereafter,  they  continue  obedient  to  Yahweh 
(v.^®),  they  may  enjoy  prosperity.  The  Hebrew  might  also 
be  rendered,!  If  your  sins  are  .  .  .  they  shall  become  (cp.  Dr. 
§  136  (^)),  and,  perhaps,  even  though  your  sins  are  like  scarlet 
robes,  shall  they  become  white  like  snow  ?  and  so  in  the  next  line. 
But  Dr.  Burney  has  lately  argued  with  much  force  that  "  no  clear 
case  occurs  throughout  the  OT  in  which  a  question  is  to  be 
assumed  as  implied  by  the  speaker's  tone  (without  use  of  an 
interrogative  particle)  in  the  apodosis  of  a  conditional  or  con- 
cessive sentence  "  {JThS  xi.  433-35). 

Especially  since  the  time  of  J.  D.  Michaelis,  exception  has  been  taken  to 
the  interpretation  of  v.*^  as  an  offer  of  forgiveness,  and  various  others  have 
been  proposed.  It  is  urged  that  such  an  offer  of  complete  forgiveness  is  out 
of  place  in  a  summons  to  judgment  (yet  cp.  hbsb'J  in  43^  after  v.^^),  that  it 
is  out  of  accord  with  vv.^"^^' ^^^  ^\  that  Isaiah  "nowhere  so  complacently 
offers  the  people  free  forgiveness:  ct.  22^*"  (Du.).  Unless  nnsu  (see  n. 
above)  necessarily  implies  the  figure  of  judgment,  the  first  objection  falls  to 
the  ground,  the  second  can  be  met  by  abandoning  the  unity  of  the  chapter 

*  Since  the  above  note  was  written,  C.  F.  Burney  {JThS  xi.  433-438) 
also  has  challenged  the  prevalent  view  that  nnDU  implies  a  legal  process. 

t  J.  D.  Mich.,  Koppe,  Eichh.,  We.,  Box.  Cp.  G-K.  150a;  Davidson, 
Syn.  121. 


I.  i8  29 

(for  doing  which  there  are  other  good  reasons) ;  the  third,  if  its  cogency 
were  admitted,  by  questioning  the  Isaianic  authorship  of  the  verse. 

Elsewhere  in  OT  forgiveness  is  represented  as  ( i )  a  removal  of  sin,  the 
vbs.  used  being  kj^j,  tdh,  p'n^n,  mart;  cp.  Mic  7^'  and  the  "scapegoat"; 
(2)  a  covering  over  or  hiding  of  sin  :  nos  and  ?"1S3  (BDB,  Kon.  £T  xxii. 
233) ;  (3)  a  disregarding  of  sin :  cp.  "ot  k*?,  43^5 ;  jsn  "^k,  Dn  9',  see  also 
Is  38" ;  (4)  a  cleansing  from  sins  or  a  wiping  away  of  sins,  nno  and  ?  nca 
(Ges-B. ;  ATAT^y  601);  cp.  Ps  Si*-",  Zee  13^  The  figure  here  employed 
would  certainly  be  unparalleled,  if  it  refers  to  forgiveness.  It  has  been  ai^ed 
that  it  would  also  be  unsuitable,  representing  the  sins,  not  as  vanishing,  but 
as  changing  their  appearance  :  they  remain  as  white  sins.  But  the  language 
is  that  of  poetry  not  of  science,  and  sins  "covered  over"  also  remain.  It 
has  also  been  urged  that  the  saying  makes  no  allusion  to  Yahweh's  action 
in  forgiveness,  the  sins  of  themselves  just  become  white  sins.  Yet  the  intro- 
ductory formula  may  be  held  to  suggest  Yahweh's  action. 

The  interrogative  interpretation,  though  grammatically  questionable  (see 
above),  would  accord  with  prophetic  teaching  (see,  e.g.y  We.  Proleg.  c.  11, 
§  I  end ;  ed.  4,  p.  423  f. ).  If  the  sins  are  really  flagrant,  are  they  to  put 
on  the  appearance  of  mere  trifling  errors  ?  The  whole  argument  of  Yahweh 
in  vv.^^-'*  then  embodies  the  fundamental  new  teaching  of  the  prophets : 
that  Yahweh  is  Israel's  God  does  not  make  Him  more  lenient  to  Israel's 
sin  (cp.  Am  3^) :  scarlet  sins  He  will  treat  as  scarlet,  not  as  white  (v.^) : 
only  through  obedience  to  Yahweh's  moral  demands  can  Yahweh's  favour 
be  gained  (v.^') :  disobedience  must  invoke  disaster  (v.^). 

Du.  and  Marti  prefer  to  give  the  saying  a  sarcastic  tone :  though  your 
sins  were  scarlet,  of  course  they  can  easily  turn  white :  of  course  you  know 
how  to  make  innocent  lambs  of  yourselves.  Then  cp.  Jer  2^  for  a  direct 
negation  of  what  is  here  implicit  in  the  sarcasm.  But  this  gives  a  less 
satisfactory  connection  between  vv.^*  and  ",  which  Marti  (perhaps  rightly) 
does  not  seek  to  establish.  Hackm.  (p,  118  n.)  raises  the  question  whether 
scarlet  robes  are  not  here  symbols  of  pomp  and  majesty  (cp.  Rev  17*),  and 
the  meaning  consequently.  Your  sins,  though  they  may  now  flaunt  forth  in 
all  the  glory  of  colour,  will  lose  it  and  become  washed  out.  But  the  associa- 
tion of  whiteness  with  innocence  as  contrasted  with  sin  seems  too  close  to 
admit  of  this  interpretation. 

Scarlet  .  .  .  crimson\  not  two  colours,  but  one:  the  second 
word  (cp.  La  4*^)  means  primarily  worm,  the  insect  whence  the 
colour  was  obtained  (see  EBi,  Colours  §  14,  Crimson,  Scarlet). 
The  first  word  is  pi.  D^^K^,  and  means  as  in  Pr  3121  (cp.  sing. 
2  S  1^4,  Jer  4^0)  scarlet  clothes :  cp.  D"'n3,  linen  clothes  (G-K.  125^. 
Sin  is  conceived  of  as  a  blood-stained  (cp.  63^-2)  garment 
enwrapping  the  sinner:  cp.  the  "filthy  garments"  of  iniquity 
(Zee  33^-). —  White  as  snow]  cp.  Ps  51*.  Ges.  recalls  here  the 
saying  of  the  Arabs,  that  the  holy  stone  of  Mecca  fell  white 
from  heaven  but  became  black  on  account  of  the  sins  of  men ; 


30  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

cp.  also,  for  the  whiteness  of  restored  innocence,  Rev  yis^- 1^'-. — 
Like  wool]  a  sheep's  fleece  as  typical  of  whiteness  may  appear 
to  us  anti-climactic  after  snow;  but  not  so  to  the  Hebrews. 
Black  sheep  were  exceptional  (Gn  ^o^^^') :  the  colour  of  wool 
was  regularly  white:  hence  the  "beloved's"  teeth  are  compared 
to  ewes  shorn  and  washed  (Ca  4^),  and  the  hair  of  the 
"Ancient  of  Days"  is  compared  to  wool  as  well  as  snow 
(Dan  7^):  Rev  i^*,  however,  is  explicit — "as  white  wool." 

19.  The  alternative  here  presented — obedience  and  prosperity, 
or  disobedience  and  destruction — recalls  Isaiah's  attitude  when 
the  Syro-Ephraimitish  army  was  approaching  Jerusalem  (ch.  7  f.) : 
cp.  also  3o9ff-i5ff.. — The  good  of  the  land]  i.e.  the  produce  of  the 
land:  Gn  ^f^''^\—Feed]  i)3N  as  in  \J.—On  husks  shall  ye  feed] 
J^  is  ambiguous  and  the  exact  meaning  uncertain.  If  this  line 
is  symmetrical  with  the  preceding,  2'\T\  should  be  the  direct 
object  of  li>3Kn  (Kal);  then  render  either  {i)  ye  shall  feed  on 
desolation  (3in),  but  an  abstract  noun  is  not  very  probable  here, 

or  (2)  .  .  .  on  desolations  (Du.  reading  nb"in  ;  note  following  n), 

an  idiom  used  of  animals  in  5^^,  but  less  obviously  applicable 
to  men,  or  (3)  .  .  .  on  husksy  lit.  the  carob^  or  carob-pods  (3^n, 

or  D^3-in  •  see  Che.  SBOT,  and  Husks  in  EBiX     There  is  no 

certain  example  of  this  word  in  the  text  of  the  OT,  but  it  is 
frequent  in  NH  and  Aramaic.  Carobs  were  the  food  of  swine 
(Lk  15^^)  and  donkeys  (Levy,  NHB,  s.v.\  and,  in  time  of  dis- 
tress, of  men:  cp.  Lk  15^^  and  the  saying  in  Midrash  R.  cited 
by  Levy  {NHB  iL  105b),  "When  Israelites  are  reduced  to  the 
carob  (xinni)  i)K"it5^  r^^"!^),  they  repent."  If  v.^*  and  v.  20*  are 
not  perfectly  symmetrical,  J^  may  be  treated  as  a  bold  passive 
(MT)  construction  and  rendered  either  (4)  ye  shall  be  devoured 
with  the  sword  (RV),  or,  less  probably,  (5)  ye  shall  be  made  to 
devour  the  sword  (Ges-B.  s.v.  73K).  For  the  idiom  the  sword 
devours  in  the  act.,  cp.  2  S  2^^  18^. — For  the  mouth  of  Yahweh 
hath  spoken  (/V)]  Perhaps  a  late  addition :  cp.  40^  58^^  Mic  4^ 
and  see  Cheyne,  Introd.  p.  7  n.  3.  If  not,  and  vv.^^'^o  belong 
together,  the  divine  speech  ends  at  v.^^,  and  vv.^^*  contains  the 
prophet's  comment :  cp.  on  vv.^-*. 

18.  D'JB's]  4  MSS  (cp.  VV.)  'atrD. — iDnx'-DK]  many  MSS  dki:  possibly 
right,  cp.  v.^ — note  the  rhythm,  but  note  also  133^'  preceding. — 20.  ^V?><^  ain] 
to  the  cstr.  assumed  by  RV  (see  no.  4  above),  an  exact  parallel  is  afforded 


I.    19    AND    21-26  31 

by  the  Arabic  idiom  cited  by  Kon.  iii.  102,  huriqa  Utaubu  ^ImismSra,  the 
garment  was  torn  with  the  nail.  See,  further,  on  Hebrew  constructions  more 
or  less  similar,  G-K.  121c.  d;  Kon.  iii.  3322;. 

I.  21-26  (28). — An  Elegy  on  Jerusalem. 

In  this,  as  in  other  ktnoth^  i.e.  elegies  {e.g.  La  1-4),  the  echoing  rhythm 
(see  Introd.)  is  employed.  Parallelism  is  constant,  but  within  the  distichs 
(3 : 2),  not  as  in  vv.^*^**  ^^'^j  between  the  periods  of  5  accents.  Of  the  12 
distichs,  or  strictly  11  distichs  and  a  line  (^^)  in  the  present  text,  5  are 
unambiguously  3  :  2,  viz.  vv.2i»«  t .  28c.  d  .  24c.  d  .  mo.  d  .  2«».  b^  ^nd  another 
(2^  ')  is  2  : 3  (makkeph  ibeb"-n^  and  n3D'?K-3'ni)  unless  by  transposing  the  lines 
(cp.  Introduction)  we  make  this  also  3  :  2.  Another  distich  (26*-  •*)  is  4  :  2. 
Two  distichs  consist  in  the  present  text  of  lines  that  are  rhythmically  balanced, 
viz.  ***•  "^  (3  :  3)  and  2"*-  *»  (2  :  2) :  on  these  and  on  the  irregularities  in  2i«-  «>• 
24*.  b.  as*  seg  notes  below. 

Yy  21-86  divide  into  two  equal  strophes,  each  containing  6  distichs  (in 
the  present  text  the  second  contains  but  5i) :  the  first  strophe  beginning 
with  na'H  deals  with  the  present  state  of  the  city :  the  second  introduced  by 
pS  with  its  future. 

Vv.'"'*  contain  two  distichs  of  which  the  former  (3  :  2)  is  exactly  similar 
in  type  to  those  of  w.*^*^  :  the  second  (4  :  3)  less  so. 

21  How  hath  she  become  a  harlot  1 

The  (once)  faithful  city, 
Sion  which  was  full  of  justice 

Wherein  righteousness  abode,  but  now  murder«i». 

22  Thy  silver  hath  become  dross, 

Thy  drink  adulterated  (?)  with  wat«r. 

23  Thy  rulers  are  unruly, 

And  associates  of  thieves; 
Every  one  loveth  bribes. 

And  pursueth  rewards; 
They  secure  not  the  right  of  the  orphan, 

Nor  doth  the  widow's  cause  come  unto  them. 

2*  Therefore  saith  the  Lord 

Yahweh   of  Hosts  the  Mighty  One  of  Israel : 

Ah  1  I  will  get  me  comfort  from  my  adversaries, 

Avenge  myself  on  my  foes. 
25  And  I  will  turn  my  hand  against  thee. 

•  •••••* 

And  I  will  smelt  out  thy  dross  'in  the  furnace,' 

And  remove  all  thine  alloy. 


32 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


26  And  I  will  restore  thy  judges  as  at  the  first, 
And  thy  counsellors  as  at  the  beginning ; 
Afterwards  thou  shalt  be  called  City  of  Justice, 
Faithful  City. 


27  Sion  shall  find  redemption  through  justice, 

And  they  that  turn  of  her  through  righteousness : 

28  And  the  destruction  of  rebels  and  sinners  shall  be  together, 

And  those  that  forsake  Yahweh  shall  be  consumed. 

The  following  considerations  indicate  that  vv.2i-26  contain  a 
complete  poem  distinct  from  what  now  precedes  it  and  follows 
it:  (i)  it  opens  with  the  characteristic  opening  of  independent 
elegies — na^K  as  in  La  i^  2^  4I,  Jer  481^,  cp.  TtK  in  2  S  i^^; 

(2)  it  is  a  complete  treatment  of  a  subject  which  is  artistically 
treated  under  two  aspects  in  two  symmetrical  strophes  (see 
above) — Jerusalem,  its  present  state  (vv. 21-23),  its  future  (vv.24-26)  • 

(3)  in  V.26  the  subject  reaches  an  effective  close ;  (4)  the  relation 
between  rhythm  and  parallelism  (see  above),  which  is  maintained 
almost  unbroken  throughout  vv.21-26,  scarcely  appears  at  all  in 
vv.1-20  •  V.27  is  similar,  but  in  addition  to  the  first  three  of  the 
considerations  just  stated,  exegesis  (see  below)  favours  the  con- 
clusion that  vv.27f'  formed  no  original  part  of  the  elegy.  M 

The  date  of  the  poem  is  uncertain.  The  criteria  on  which 
Du.  and  Hackm.  rely  for  referring  it  to  the  time  before  or 
during  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war,  and  those  which  lead  Che. 
and  Marti  to  refer  it  to  about  705  B.C.,  are  unlike  insufficient. 
Du.  argues  that  the  eschatology  which  arose  out  of  the  crisis 
described  in  chs.  7,  8  is  not  yet  represented  here ;  Hackm.,  that 
the  eschatology  agrees  with  that  of  ch.  8;  Che.  and  Marti 
consider  that  the  parallelism  in  thought  of  vv.23^  and  ^"^  connects 
the  two  pieces  in  time,  and  Marti  sees  in  the  misleading  leaders 
(v. 23)  an  allusion  to  the  party  favouring  the  Egyptian  alliance. 
If  the  similarity  of  v.23  and  v.^^  is  not  sufficient  (and  it  is  not) 
to  prove  that  both  belong  to  the  same  piece,  it  proves  nothing : 
the  affliction  of  the  orphan  and  widow  was  perennial,  and  cannot 
have  attracted  Isaiah's  attention  at  one  period  of  his  life  only. 
The  similarity  may  rather  have  been  the  cause  that  led  an  editor 
— whether  Isaiah  or  another — to  place  the  one  poem  after  the 
other. 


■_ 


I.  21-23  33 

21-23.  First  Strophe. — §ion,  once  the  faithful  city,  has  turned 
faithless ;  once  the  loyal  wife  of  Yahweh,  she  has  wandered  from 
Him  and  become  a  harlot  (cp.  Hos  2).  By  a  further  figure 
(v.22)  and  by  illustrative  literal  charges  (v.^^),  the  present 
unrighteousness  of  Sion,  once  the  home  of  righteousness,  is 
emphasised:  the  leaders  of  the  people  lead  them  only  into 
rebellion  against  Yahweh ;  they  pervert  justice,  letting  thieves 
go  unpunished  in  return  for  a  share  in  their  gains,  and  through 
their  love  of  unjust  gain  (cp.  5^8,  Mic  3^^)  they  deprive  the  poor 
who  can  pay  them  nothing  for  their  right  (cp.  vv.^^^-). 

Adopting  allusively  Hosea's  figure  of  the  nation,  or  city,  as 
Yahweh's  wife,  Isaiah  gives  it  an  even  more  direct  ethical 
application.  Judah  is  here  Yahweh's  faithless  wife  because  she 
has  taken  to  be  her  paramours,  not  other  gods,  the  Baals,  but 
unrighteousness. 

21.  The  faithful  city\  nnp  is  a  choice  synonym  for  "i^y,  the 
ordinary  word  for  city  (cp.  Nu  2i28,  Ps  48^),  and  occurs  again 
when  Isaiah  (29^)  describes  Jerusalem  as  "the  city  where  David 
encamped."  Of  the  days  of  David  the  prophet  may  be  here 
thinking.  The  phrase  recurs  as  the  closing  words  of  the  poem  : 
what  Sion  once  was  it  will  again  become,  when  it  has  passed 
through  the  purifying  judgment. — Abode\  impf.  was  wont  to 
abide ;  p  to  spend  the  night  (cp.  lo^*),  perhaps  because  a  man's 
place  by  night  is  his  home,  developed  the  further  sense  to  abide ; 
cp.  Job  172  19*,  Ps  25^^^ — V.21,  unless  the  rhythm  is  quite 
irregular,  contains  two  words  too  much.  Possibly  the  intrusive 
clause  is  the  faithful  city :  if  this  were  omitted,  vP-  would  contain 
two  good  echoing  distichs,  each  contrasting  (though  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  two  would  be  chiastic)  the  present  and  past  character 
of  the  city.  Du.  omits  the  last  clause  of  the  v.,  but  now  murderers^ 
which  in  this  case  must  be  a  note  based  on  w.^*-  ^^ :  then  the 
first  clause  of  the  v.  describes  the  present  condition  (cp.  vv.^*-  28^^ 
and  the  three  remaining  clauses  glance  back  at  the  past  con- 
dition of  the  city :  in  this  case  Sion  (ffi :  cp.  vv.^^*^-  J^)  in  v.^i^ 
has  been  accidentally  omitted  in  J^  :  Haupt  selects  for  omission 
the  clause  that  was  full  of  justice. — 22.  In  two  figures  present 
and  past  are  contrasted :  the  degeneration  of  the  city  is  like 
the  exchange  of  silver  for  dross,  or  good  sound  wine  for  a 
disagreeable  drink  (see  phil.  n.). — 23.  Thy  rulers  are  unruly^  so 
Che.  brings  out  this  (D''"niD  T"'^^),  the  first  of  several  paronomasias, 
VOL.  I. — 3 


34  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

which  occur  in  Isaiah's  writings ;  it  may  have  been  borrowed,  t<^ 
gether  with  the  figure  of  the  harlot  (v.^^),  from  Hosea  (2.  4^^). 
The  word  DmiD  means  stubborn^  rebellious  (Dt  21^^) ;  it  is  chiefly 
used  of  conduct  towards  Yahweh,  see,  e.g.^  30^  65^,  and  cp.  the 
figure  in  Hos  4^^. — 23b.  Every  one\  or  rather  the  whole  mass  of 
them-,  cp.  9^^  15^,  and  see  BDB  481^  (bot).  The  judges  not 
only  take  bribes  when  offered,  but  go  in  pursuit  of,  follow  eagerly 
after,  payments:  they  pursue  not  peace  (Dw,  Ps  34^^),  but 
payment  {WZ'oh^,  here  only).  i|j 

24-26.  Second  Strophe. — This  opens  with  a  different  figure : 
Judah  by  her  unrighteousness  has  become,  not  as  in  v.^^  the 
wandering,  disloyal  wife,  but  the  enemy  of  Yahweh  on  whom 
He  is  about  to  avenge  Himself.  But  Yahweh  contemplates 
more  than  punishment ;  He  has  in  view  refinement  and  purifica- 
tion ;  taking  up  one  of  the  figures  of  the  first  strophe  (v.*^),  the 
prophet  asserts  that  Yahweh  will  smelt  away  the  dross  and 
bring  again  pure  silver  (v.^^);  and  then,  corresponding  to  the 
literal  charges  of  v.^,  comes  the  promise  that  Yahweh  will 
restore  again  just  judges  as  in  the  first  days  of  the  city,  the 
days  of  David,  and  the  city  will  become  again  as  of  yore  the 
home  of  righteousness  (v.^^) 

24.  The  Lord  Yahweh  of  Hosts'l  so  3^  io1«-m  19*:  but 
here  perhaps  the  words  are  an  addition  (Du.) ;  Budde  and  Marti 
omit  instead  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob  (Gn  49^*),  thinking  this 
less  in  place  than  Yahweh  of  Hosts,  which  might  here  very 
suitably  suggest — Yahweh  who  makes  war  upon  His  people. 
^  read  the  phrase  Mighty  One  of  Jacob  in  the  form  mighty  ones 
of  Jacob  after  the  following  word  ^in ;  and  this  increases  the 
suspicion  that  the  words  may  not  be  original. — 24b.  Yahweh 
will  comfort  himself  {^V\1)^  as,  e.g.,  Ezk  5^^,  Jer  31^^)  by  taking 
vengeance  on  those  unjust  rulers  who  by  their  unrighteousness 
had  made  themselves  His  enemies.  In  the  popular  use  of  the 
phrase  the  enemies  of  Yahweh  were  the  enemies  of  Israel 
(2r :  cp.  e.g.  Jg  5^^) :  with  Isaiah,  as  with  Amos  (cp.  Am  5^^'^^), 
Yahweh's  enemies  are  His  own  people. — 25-  1 2«////  turn  my  hand 
against  thee\  so  Am  i*.  Zee  13^,  Ps  81^^:  not  "I  will  bring  my 
hand  again "  (RVmarg.),  as  though  another  judgment,  such  as 
is  described  in  vv.^^-,  had  already  visited  Israel. — /  will  smelt 
away  thy  dross  as  with  alkali]  so  J^ ;  ^  perhaps  differently  (see 
phil.  n.).     If  the  assertion  is  correct  that  alkalies  were  used  by 


I 


I.   23-26   AND   21,    23  35 

the  ancients  to  accelerate  the  separation  of  the  dross  in  the 
ore  from  the  metal  (Nowack,  Arch.  i.  245  ;  Ges.),  |^  should 
mean,  I  will  smelt  thee  quickly,  or  clean  ((5 :  cp.  EV) — as 
quickly,  or  clean,  as  if  I  used  alkali  in  smelting  silver  ore.  But 
this  is  very  doubtful  (cp.  Dr.  on  Mai  3^).  Elsewhere  alkali  is 
mentioned  only  as  cleansing  the  person  or  clothes — see  Mai  3*, 
Jer  2^2  (nnn),  and,  perhaps,  Job  9^*  (">3).  Since  the  i8th  century 
(Seeker,  Lowth)  many  have  emended  "13D  into  133,  in  the  furnace ; 
and  this,  or  IDD,  as  in  the  furnace,  is  probably  right. — 25  f-  The 
verse  is  important  in  its  bearing  on  Isaiah's  view,  or  ideal,  of  the 
Future.  No  individual  ruler  figures  here :  the  prophet  does 
not  think  of  a  king;  but  those  who  advise  and  give  decisions 
in  the  State,  those  who  mould  its  life,  are  to  be  men  of  char- 
acter: under  their  guidance  the  people  will  no  longer,  as  at 
present  (v. 2^),  be  led  into  revolt  against  Yahweh,  but  will  again 
become  faithful  and  righteous.  The  name,  as  in  all  such  cases, 
denotes  the  actual  character  of  the  city  (cp.  62*,  Ezk  482^) :  it 
will  actually  be  the  city  of  righteousness.  Again,  Isaiah  does  not 
expect  the  annihilation  of  Judah,  as  perhaps  Amos  expected 
that  of  Israel:  the  judgment  will  be  severe:  good  and  bad 
alike  must  suffer — according  to  the  figure  that  is  used,  the  whole 
city  must  pass  through  the  furnace :  but  in  the  result  the  good 
will  come  forth  as  pure  gold,  the  bad  will  be  cast  away  as 
worthless  dross.  The  removal  of  the  bad  is  expressed  figurat- 
ively (v.25^*  *') ;  the  discovery  of  the  good  directly  (v.^^). 

21.  'nttVo]  G-K.  90/. — nn  p^'  pnjt]  three  accents,  or  (n3-pV')  two.     On  the 


10 


IS 


impf.  \h\  see  Dr.  §  30. — 22.  1K30]  since  the  text  in  Hos  4^^  Nah  i 
doubtful,  this  may  be  the  only  occurrence  in  Heb.  of  the  noun.  The  vb. 
is  used  of  hard  drinking  (56*^,  Dt  21**,  Pr  23^).  In  Ass.  sabu  means  sesame- 
wine,  and  possibly  in  Heb.  Kao  meant  specifically  some  strong  or  choice 

wine.  In  Arabic  UU;  (probably  a  loan  word)  and  some  derivative  nouns  are 
used  of  or  with  reference  to  wine  generally. — ^ino]  meaning  uncertain.  The 
suggestions  offered  are  (i)  that  ^no,  which  in  NH  means  to  circumcise  (cp. 
Sid),  meant  also,  though  of  this  there  is  no  evidence,  to  cut.  Then  for  to 
cut  wine,  meaning  to   spoil  it  by  adulteration  with  water,  many  parallels 

are  cited  by  Ges.   (after  Schultens)  from  Arabic,  e.g.    u:i,s;sj.aj-l    iJ^A> 

W>5f-l^  'j'  lasi-i'  y-^csN',  and  other  languages  (e.g.  "scelus  est  jugulare 
Falemum":  Martial  i^'),  and  Marti  compares  the  French  couper  du  vin. 
The  versions,  including  EV,  paraphrase  mixed',  better,  adulterated — for  the 
figure  has  in  view  wine  adulterated  in  commerce  rather  than  simply  weakened 


36  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

with  water  for  table  use.     Cp.  fflr  ol  KdirrfKol  aov  filayova-i  rhv  oXvov  ^dari 
which,  however,  wrongly  turns  the  figure  into  a  direct  charge.     (2)  Others 
(cp.  J.  Barth,  Beitrdge  z.  Erkl.  des  Jes.  p.  3  f. )  interpret  the  word   in  the 

light  of  NH  "^mo,  Ar.  ^J^-*,  "the  dark  turbid  liquid  pressed  out  of  olives" 
(Nold.,  Che.). — D'on]  probably  a  gloss  to  secure  the  understanding  of  Vinn  : 
it  is  rhythmically  superfluous. — 23.  Two  weighty  words  (subj.  and  pred.) 
in  a  against  two  closely  connected  in  b :  cp.  Dr.  LOT,  p.  458.  Budde  to 
establish  three  accents  in  the  first  line  adds  vn. — 24.  }3^]  frequent  in  Isaiah  : 
BDB  4863.-25.  y^V  n'  nn'B'Ki]  either  the  long  line  of  a  distich  of  which 
the  shorter  line  has  been  lost,  or  a  gloss ;  see  Marti's  Comm.  where  several 
possibilities  are  discussed.  The  remainder  of  the  v.  is  a  distich  3:2.  It 
is  most  unlikely  that  Du.'s  harsh  lines  (3  :  2  and  2  :  2)  are  original ;  he 
divides : 

(&  renders  the  entire  v.  as  follows  :  Kai  iird^w  rrjv  x«/>a  fiov  irl  ck  koI  irvpdxru) 
els  KaOapSp.  rods  d^  a-rreidovvTas  dwoX^ffu  Kal  dtpeXCj  Trdvras  dvdfMovs  dvb  aov  : 
but  we  cannot  safely  infer  that  ffi's  Hebrew  text  was  fuller  and  contained 
the  now  missing  half  line ;  for  the  overlined  words  are  probably  a  later 
addition  to  (&  :  see  Thackeray,  Grammar^  p.  230. 

27/  28.  Two  distichs  re-open,  or  enforce,  the  theme  apparently 
closed  in  v.2<J.  In  thought  v.^^  is  parallel  to  v.^^  (the  survival 
of  the  good),  V.28  to  v.^s^.  c  (^^  destruction  of  the  bad). 

Yet  the  thought  is  not  quite  the  same :  here  the  writer  does 
not  speak  of  any  judgment  yet  to  come  which  is  to  affect  all 
alike  (v.^s  and  even  Am  p^*):  for  the  (true)  Sion,  viz.  those 
in  her  who  turn  away  from  unrighteousness,  the  future  has  only 
deliverance  (msn) :  the  coming  destruction  will  affect  only  the 
sinners  (cp.  33^-  ^^•);  ct.  her  converts^  or  they  that  turn  of  her,  i.e. 
converts  who  belong  to  §ion,  with  the  terms  in  v.^s  without  the 
pronoun — sinners  have  no  part  or  lot  in  Sion. 

Still  greater  is  the  difference  if  IDDK^D  and  nplX  are  used  of 
man^s  justice  and  righteousness,*  as  in  5^  9^,  Am  ^'^  6^2 .  for  then 
V.27  means  §ion  will  be  delivered  because  she  is  just  and 
righteous.  As  another  writer  puts  it,  Yahweh  will  repay  accord- 
ing to  deserts  :  to  Sion,  deliverance,  for  her  conduct  has  deserved 
it;  to  sinners,  destruction  (5 9^''-20  61^).  If  this  be  the  correct 
interpretation  the  verses  can  scarcely  be  Isaiah's. 

In  view  of  the  parallelism  of  the  clauses  we  must  not  with 
3E  (cp.  (&)  take  tOSK'D  as  meaning  the  Judgment  (Day)  as  in 
Ps.  i^,  and  npnv  righteousness;  the  meanings  should  be  parallel. 
*  Rashi,  ]^i.,  Ges.,  Che.  al. 


J 


I.  23-28  37 

If  Isaiah's,  the  thought  is  rather  this — Sion,  i.e.  those  in  her 
who  turn  away  from  sin,  will  be  delivered  by  means  of  Yahweh's 
refining  judgment  and  by  His  judicial  righteousness,  which  will 
distinguish  the  just  from  the  unjust :  cp.  the  thought  of  v.^^ 
and  the  use  of  13BB^  and  r\\n'^  in  5!^  28^^.  The  hope  of  the 
righteous  in  Sion  was  in  the  fact  that  Yahweh  must  do  right 
and  therefore  cannot  destroy  §ion,  for  in  so  doing  He  would 
carry  away  good  and  bad  alike  (cp.  Gn  18). 

27.  Shall  be  ransomed]  ms  strictly  means  to  buy  a  person 
or  animal  off  from  death,  etc.,  by  means  of  a  substitute  or 
money-payment  (e.g.  Ex  13^^) :  it  is  used  figuratively  of  deliver- 
ance from  trouble,  danger,  etc. — Hos  13^*,  Ps  78*2  (see  Dr.  Deut 
loi).  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  press  the  figure  as  closely  as 
Du.  does — "  Sion  is  to  be  ransomed,  is  consequently  at  present 
a  slave  or  debtor.  But  the  strange  owner  or  creditor  has  not 
the  right  or  the  full  right  that  he  claims.  Therefore  Sion  is  not  to 
be  set  at  liberty  by  payment,  but  by  a  just  judgment " :  though, 
if  the  passage  be  post-exilic,  it  is  likely  enough  that  Du.  divines 
the  writer's  thought. — They  thai  turn  of  her]  cp.  6^0  7*  lo^^.  J^ 
may  also  mean  her  captivity  (HJ^K'),  and  is  so  taken  by  (&Sb. 

28.  '131  ■Q?'i]  abrupt  and  unusual :  perhaps  rather  n?f  1,  or  n3¥h. 

Vv.*'*'  cannot  be  referred  with  any  confidence  to  Isaiah :  see  the  foregoing 
interpretation.  Che.  {Introd.  p.  7)  urges :  "Of  the  four  participial  class 
names,  though  three  have  points  of  contact  with  Isaiah  (see  6^*^  7'  i^*  ^),  none 
actually  occur  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  except  in  prophecies  which  on  many 
grounds  cannot  be  Isaiah's  (a.  yrs  '3!?,  5920;  b.  D'VB'Ij,  46^  5312;  c.  n'»<»n,  13* 
33";  d.  m.T  'aiy,  65".  Add  to  this  that  ms  (though  found  in  Hos  7^3  13^^) 
does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  true  Isaiah,  29^  35^",  not  to  add  51^^,  being 
late  passages."  Not  quite  conclusive,  though  suggestive.  More  suspicious 
is  the  sharp  division  of  the  people  into  two  classes  defined  by  their  respective 
labels  :  ct.  the  sinfulness  of  the  entire  nation  in  w.^  '^^'  ^^  2^"^'  3^  5^"''  ^'  d^'  **• 
8'.  Certainly  we  find  in  Isaiah  the  germ  of  the  subsequently  permanent 
distinction  between  the  two  classes  in  Israel — the  sinner  and  the  righteous  : 
see  8^^'^^,  and  cp.  the  distinction  of  silver  and  dross,  which,  however,  a  fiery 
smelting,  i.e.  a  severe  judgment  affecting  the  whole  people,  \% first  to  rendet 
manifest.  In  vv.^'*  the  judgment,  so  it  would  seem,  is  to  consume  a  previously 
distinguished  class  of  sinners  and  to  rescue  those  who  had  previously  mani- 
fested their  righteousness :  cp.  65^^-,  Mai  3"''^  (3^^-4'). 

I.  29-31. — Fragments:  Condemnation  of  Tree  Worship, 

Vv.2»''  contains  two  distichs  of  parallel  lines  in  4  :  4  rhythm  (makkeph 
vn'-'D  and  ira'-'a) :   there  is  nothing  like  them  in  the  rest  of  the  chapter. 


38  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

V.^^  contains  two  disticns  m  3  :  2  rhythm  :  in  the  first  the  lines  are  parallel 
in  sense.     V.^^  resembles  v.^. 

2^  For   *  ye '  shall  be   ashamed  of  the   terebinths   in   which 
ye  delighted,  d\ 

And  abashed  because  of  the  gardens  that  ye  chose; 
80  For  ye  shall  be  as  a  terebinth  whose  leafage  fades, 

And  as  a  garden  which  hath  no  water. 


^^  And  the  strong  one  shall  become  tow; 
And  his  work  a  spark; 
And  they  shall  both  burn  together, 
With  none  to  quench  them. 

The  sinners  will  perish  (v.^s),  because  Yahweh  whom  they 
have  forsaken  will  not,  and  the  gods  housing  in  trees  and  beside 
springs,  whom  they  have  chosen  in  His  stead,  cannot  save 
them.     Cp.  220  if'  11,  Jer  226-28. 

Such  is  the  connection  if  vv.27-3i  form  a  connected  whole 
and  do  not  rather  consist  of  two  fragments — vv.27f- 29-31  *  jf 
the  connection  be  real,  (&  may  be  right  in  reading  all  the  verbs 
in  vv.29f-  in  the  3rd  pers. ;  but  see  phil.  n. 

Nothing  in  the  verses  indicates  clearly  either  date  or  author- 
ship. They  may  have  been  written  by  Isaiah  either  before 
722  B.C.  and  addressed,  like  9^-10*,  to  the  Northern  kingdom,! 
or  after  that  year  and  addressed  to  Judah ;  or,  again,  they  may 
have  been  written  in  the  5th  cent,  and  addressed  to  apostate  Jews 
by  a  man  like-minded  with  the  author  of  65^2  553f.  (note  "in3 : 
little  used  by  Isaiah).  |  The  practices  condemned  were  of  great 
antiquity  and  persisted  later  (Jer  2^"^  172,  Ezk  6^^,  Is  57**^*  65^). 

29.  J^or  ye  shall  be  ashamed]  i.e.  fail  to  receive  expected 
help;  see  2o5*"-,  Jer  12^^  ^gis^  -^[^  ^r  (||  ^-,q|-|  ^s  here  and  Job 620), 
Ps  252^'  37^^.  Ve  is  conjecturally  substituted  for  Ihey  (J^ffi) : 
see  phil.  n. — Terebinths]  or,  more  widely,  sacred  trees.  Dv[^]t<  may 
at  times  (cp.  Hos  4^^^  refer  specifically  to  terebinths ;  so  (£  in 
v. 3^,  and  see  EBi.  and  DB^  s.v. ;  but  even  more  frequently  the 
word  is  used  of  any  large  umbrageous  tree,  such  as  palms,  appa- 
rently, at  Elim  (Ex  1 52^),  which  a  numen  7N  was  popularly  supposed 
to  inhabit  or  frequent.  This  wider  meaning  is  intended  here, 
and  ^  significantly  paraphrases  twi'  ctSwAwv  avrwi/.     The  venera- 

♦  Che.,  Du.  t  Du.,  Che.  %  Marti. 


I.  29-31  39 

tion  of  such  trees  was  ancient,  and  must  have  prevailed  in 
Canaan  before  the  Hebrew  invasion ;  the  Hebrews  who  were 
loyal  to  Yahweh  either  identified  the  numen  with  Him  (cp.  Gn 
13I8  iS^*^-,  Jg  9^7  etc.),  or  like  Hosea  (4^^^-)  and  this  writer,  they 
recoiled  entirely  from  the  veneration  of  these  trees — doubtless 
on  account  of  the  cults  connected  with  them.  Many  trees  in 
Palestine  are  still  thought  to  be  inhabited  by  spirits,  and  are  the 
objects  of  vows  and  offerings  from  both  Bedawin  and  Fellahiin : 
see  S.  I.  Curtiss,  Primitive  Sem.  ReL  90  ff.,  and  the  material 
collected  by  J.  G.  Frazer  in  Sacred  Oaks  and  Terebinths  (pp. 
iiof.),  one  of  the  Anthropological  Essays  presented  to  E.  B. 
Tylor.  Lagrange  (ReL  Skm.  173)  denies  that  the  trees  themselves 
were  objects  of  worship.  —  30.  These  worshippers  will  perish 
like  the  objects  they  worship.  The  life  of  the  holy  tree  is  seen 
in  its  thick  foliage,  of  the  numen  of  a  spring  in  its  bubbling 
waters :  these  idolaters  will  shrivel  up  and  fail  like  a  tree  whose 
leaves  wither  and  a  garden  in  which  the  fountain  that  made  it 
luxurious  flows  no  more. — 31.  This  v.  might  continue  v.*  as 
well  as  v.^ :  rhythmically,  it  is  similar  to  vv.^^t  and  dissimilar  to 
yv.29f.^  It  is  capable  of  more  than  one  interpretation  as  it  stands, 
and  various  emendations  have  been  proposed  (see  phil.  n.). 
Perhaps  the  work  of  the  strong  means  preparations  for  war, 
alliances,  and  so  forth  (cp.  31^^')  j  these  works  are  the  sparks 
which  set  fire  to  the  strong  who  become  as  tow  (mj;3,  Jg  i6*), 
ue.  inflammable,  and  so  the  strong  and  all  his  works  come  to 
nothing — such  a  meaning  would  quite  accord  with  Isaiah's 
standpoint :  cp.  9^^". 

29.  W3']  3rd  pers. ;  but  in  the  dependent  relative  clause  and  in  the  succeed- 
ing lines  the  vbs.  are  2nd  pers. — omnn,  nann,  omon,  vnn.  That  this  change 
was  due  to  the  excitement  of  the  author  at  the  end  of  his  discourse  (Del. )  is  not 
rendered  probable  by  Di.'s  reference  to  5*  22^*  31*.  Three  Heb.  MSS  and 
%  read  it^an — a  correction  rather  than  a  survival  from  a  continuous  correct 
tradition.  The  real  question  is  whether  wa'  is  a  survival  of  the  true  text  in 
which  the  verbs  were  in  the  3rd  pers.  (so  (JR),  or  an  early  error  for  iB'nn  due 
to  accident,  or  a  deliberate  substitute  for  iran,  the  purpose  of  which  was  to  . 
create  a  connection  with  v.*.  Failing  good  reasons  to  the  contrary,  it  is 
better  to  assume  a  single  error  {yoy  for  iB'an)  than  four.  Marti  suggests  that 
the  2nd  pers.  arose  after  Dmon,  meant  to  be  DCJon,  was  read  onn^n ;  but 
dR,  which  has  the  3rd  pers.  (probably  substituted  for  the  2nd  pers.  of  J^  to 
improve  the  connection),  does  not  appear  to  have  read  D^i-npn  ;  if  i\^oi\ovro 
really  presupposes  anything  but  Dnion,  it  presupposes  non. — d'S'xd]  the 
absence  of  the  art.  here  is  noticeable :   ct.  nuano. — rhii]  agrees  with   rhyt 


40  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

(fem.)  not  with  nVy  (masc.) ;  cp.  ]W  t23  oy,  v.*. — 31.  fon]  Am  2't  (d'31^n3  ^ 
of  the  Amorites).  For  jon,  Lagarde  proposed  to  read  \on,  and  for  iVys 
in  the  next  clause  "i^ya — a  sun-image  and  its  Baal.  Du.'s  criticism  of  this 
emendation  has  not  been  met. — i^;/&]  possibly  for  ^^]^.9 ;  cp.  nKFi,  52''*; 
G-K.  93^ ;  Kon.  ii.  493.  More  probably  Ki.  interprets  MT  (though  not  |§) 
correctly  when  he  sees  in  }on  idol,  and  ^\!^  the  part. — he  that  makes  it.  The 
fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  he  then  finds  in  the  fact  that  'nn  '?3  r^v  pNnnai 
D''?''?Kni  D'^'oan  vn  onni  t^xa  oVt^iT. — ps'j]  Att.  Xe7.  ;  cp.  fsj  (Ezk  i^),  NH 

pw,  Ar.  j^lj,  to  shine ^  flashy  sparkle,  whence  the  sense  spark  is  inferred — 
perhaps  not  quite  securely.  Rubens  ( Crit.  Remarks y  p.  1 1  n. )  suggests  f  xyj 
(cp.  7'^  55^*)>  which  as  inflammable  stuff  would  be  a  good  parallel  to  my3  and 
would  better  account  for  nn*  nyni  in  the  next  line. 


II.-XII. — Prophecies  mainly  devoted  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem. 

These  chapters  very  much  in  their  present  form  probably 
constituted  a  distinct  book  before  the  larger  work  of  which 
they  now  are  part  came  into  existence.  When  they  were 
incorporated  in  the  larger  work,  the  title  which  had  previously 
attached  to  them  was  retained  (2^),  in  spite  of  the  fact  that 
another  was  prefixed  (i^)  to  the  first  chapter  of  the  larger  work 
(see  Introd.  §  29).  The  title,  2^,  describes  the  prophecies  as 
the  word^  or  matter^  which  Isaiah  the  son  of  ^ Amos  saw  (in  vision  : 
cp.  13^)  concerning  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  On  the  names  and  on 
the  conceptions  underlying  the  terminology,  see  i^  n.  The 
scope  of  these  chapters  is  fairly  well  described  as  Judah  and 
Jerusalem  (i^  n.),  though  this  is  not  an  exhaustive  description, 
since  g'^-io*  is  primarily  concerned  with  Ephraim;  but  this 
title  was,  of  course,  never  intended  to  cover  chs.  13-23,  which 
mainly  consist  of  prophecies  concerning  foreign  nations,  and  are 
provided  with  another  title  (13^). 

It  has  been  argued  that  originally  the  title  2^  stood  immediately 
before  2*  and  that  22-*,  now  misplaced,  formed  the  conclusion, 
and  that  an  admirable  one,  to  i^^*^^  (Lagarde,  Stade,  Gesch.  i. 
608  ;  Cheyne,  Marti) ;  but  the  argument  is  very  precarious. 

These  chapters  fall  into  groups  as  follows  :  2-4,  5,  6-9^,  9''-ioS 
10^-12. 

1 1. -IV. — Jerusalem  ideal  and  actual.  «P 

The  sections  into  which  these  chapters  fall  and  their 
contents  may  be  briefly  described  thus : — 2^  Title  (see  above) ; 
2^"*  Jerusalem  the  religious  centre  of  the  entire  world ;  2^*22  Tj^g 


I.  31-II.  4  41 

Day  of  Yahweh,  which  is  about  to  bring  low  the  land  of  Jacob, 
now  wealthy,  self- sufficient,  and  forgetful  of  Yahweh ;  3^-^'^ 
Jerusalem  and  Judah  denounced  and  threatened;  3^*^-4^ 
Denunciation  of  the  women  of  Jerusalem ;  42-^  The  holiness 
and  glory  of  Jerusalem  after  a  purifying  judgment. 

Jerusalem  is  the  prominent,  when  it  is  not  the  exclusive, 
subject  of  every  section,  except  2'^"22.  The  entire  section  consists 
of  warnings  by  Isaiah  of  judgment  to  come  (2*^-41)  enclosed 
between  two  poems  of  exilic  or  post-exilic  writers  who  had  an 
eye  only  for  glory  to  come,  and  either  disregarded  judgment 
altogether  {2^"^),  or  looked  upon  it  as,  in  large  part  at  least, 
accomplished  (4^'®). 

II.  I. — Title. — See  above. 

njn  njTKj  (&  6  yepSfievos  wpds,  i.e.  Vk  7\''7\  nts-K  ;  cp.  Hos  iS  Jl  1*.  With 
J^,  cp.  Am  I*  :  in  Mic  i'  both  Vk  .Tn  ne'K  and  nm  nrK  occur. 

II.  2-4. — ^ion  the  religious  Capital  of  the  World, 

Including  the  two  final  lines,  absent  from  the  text  of  Is.  but  found  in  Mic 
4*,  the  following  poem  contains  ten  distichs  of  balanced  (3  :  3,  or  2  :  2)  and 
parallel  lines.  V.***'  •  is  a  2:2  distich  ;  the  remaining  distichs  are  3  :  3, 
except  that  the  now  uncertain  text  of  v.^**^  /«ay  have  contained  irregularities, 
and  v.^,  if  the  nD«  is  original,  contained  four  accents  ;  in  v.^  Dn'nin'jm  was 
probably  read  as  two,  and  in  v.^  ♦U"^k-ij  (cp.  Sievers)  as  one. 

I. 

2  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  end  of  the  days 
The  mountain  of  Yahweh  a  shall  be 
Firmly  set  on  the  top  of  the  mountains, 
And  raised  higher  than  the  hills. 

2. 

And  nations  shall  come  streaming  to  it, 
3  And  many  peoples  shall  go  and  say  : 
Come  and  let  us  go  up  to  Yahweh's  mountain, 
And  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob : 

3- 

That  he  may  instruct  us  out  of  his  ways, 

And  that  we  may  walk  in  his  paths. 
For  from  §ion  instruction  goes  forth. 

And  the  word  of  Yahweh  from  Jerusalem, 


42  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

*  And  he  will  judge  between  the  nations, 
And  give  decisions  for  many  peoples; 
And  they  will  beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares, 
And  their  spears  into  pruning-knives. 

5- 

Nation  against  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword. 
Nor  learn  any  more  (the  art  of)  war, 
[Mic  *  But  they  will  dwell  each  under  his  vine 

And  under  his  fig-tree,  with  none  to  terrify.] 

A  strophic  arrangement  so  naturally  reveals  itself  that  it 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  it  was  intended :  the  ten  distichs 
divide  into  five  sets  of  twos  (Marti),  each  of  which  deals  with  a 
distinct  point  or  aspect  of  the  subject,  thus : 

1.  The  exaltation  of  Sion. 

2.  The  advent  of  the  Nations  ; 

3.  To  obtain,  at  its  source,  instruction  in  the  religion  of 
Yahweh. 

4.  Yahweh,  the  arbiter  of  the  Nations. 

5.  Under  Yahweh's  government  (strophe  4)  there  will  be 
universal  peace  and  unmolested  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  the 
earth. 

Du.'s  division  into  three  strophes  of  six  lines  is  much  less  probable.  That 
the  poem  may  be  read  in  its  completeness,  the  final  lines  from  Micah  are 
added  in  square  brackets,  without  prejudice  to  the  question  whether  they 
ever  formed  part  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah.  So  in  regard  to  the  numerous 
variations  between  the  text  of  the  poem  as  given  in  Is.  and  Mic.  (Hebrew 
and  Greek)  it  is  impossible  to  determine  whether  the  inferior  readings  arose 
before,  at  the  time  of,  or  after  incorporation  in  either  book  ;  consequently 
the  translation  is  based  on  what  appears  to  be  the  nearest  that  we  can  get  to 
the  original  text  of  the  poem  by  a  comparison  of  the  two  forms  in  which  it 
occurs. 

The  origin  of  the  poem  is  obscure ;  that  it  occurs  both  in  the 
Book  of  Isaiah  and  in  the  Book  of  the  Twelve  (Mic  2'^-^) 
necessarily  raises  questions,  and  these  have  been  very  differently 
answered. 

In  the  earlier  stages  of  criticism  the  questions  asked  were — Was  the  poem 
written  by  Isaiah  and  borrowed  by  Micah  ?  or  written  by  Micah  and  borrowed 


11.  2-4  43 

by  Isaiah?  or  borrowed  by  both  these  prophets  from  some  now  unknown 
predecessor  ?  It  was  assumed  that  one  at  least  of  the  two  prophets  must  have 
borrowed.  We  need  scarcely  with  Du.  pronounce  such  borrowing  on  the  part 
of  a  true  prophet  incredible,  or,  if  real,  a  theft  (Jer  23^) ;  still  there  is  no 
other  clear  example  of  a  prophet  borrowing  from  another  at  this  length,  and 
this  being  so  it  would  be  strange  that  this  particular  poem  should  be  cited 
independently  by  two  prophets.  But  once  due  weight  is  given  to  the 
character  of  the  books  of  prophetic  literature,  this  assumption  that  either 
prophet  borrowed  becomes  unnecessary,  not  to  say  precarious.  The  Book  of 
Isaiah  and  the  Book  of  the  Twelve  are  alike  collections  made  after  the  Exile, 
and  indeed  not  long  before  the  end  of  the  3rd  cent.  B.C.  (Introd.  §§  8ff.  35) ; 
this  poem  has  been  preserved  in  both  collections,  just  as  some  Psalms  {e.g.  14 
=  53)  have  been  preserved  in  more  than  one  hymn-book.  It  is  perfectly 
possible  that  this  poem  owes  its  double  preservation  not  to  a  double  process 
either  of  quotation  or  interpolation,  but  to  the  fact  that  at  some  time  before 
the  close  of  the  3rd  cent,  it  passed  under  two  ascriptions, — to  Micah  and 
Isaiah  respectively, — and  was  therefore  incorporated  by  two  editors  in  their 
different  compilations.  It  is  important  to  observe  that  the  poem  stands 
isolated  in  both  books ;  in  Isaiah  it  follows  a  title,  and  has  therefore  no 
connection  with  what  precedes  ;  in  Micah  it  follows  the  statement  that  §ion, 
Jerusalem,  and  the  mountain  of  the  house  will  be  reduced  to  desolation.  If 
the  poem  were  really  appended  by  Micah,  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  he 
would  have  left  the  strong  contrast  entirely  unmarked  ;  so  necessary  is  it  to  mark 
it  (if  the  passages  are  really  connected)  that  RV  mistranslates  n'm,  but  it  shall 
come  to  pass  i  etc.,  in  order  to  create  an  antithesis,  though  as  a  matter  of  fact 
iTiTi  marks  sequence  not  contrast.  Even  if  Micah  were  quoting,  he  could 
have  secured  the  contrast  by  simply  dropping  rrm  and  starting  his  quotation 
with  the  next  word.  If  Micah  added  4^"*  to  3^'^^  the  apologists  for  Jeremiah 
were  singularly  audacious  in  their  use  of  3^^  (Jer  26^^).  What  follows  the 
poem  in  Isaiah  has  some  sort  of  connection  with  it  (see  on  v.''),  so  also  has 
what  follows  in  Micah  ;  yet  in  neither  place  is  it  the  connection  of  originally 
continuous  passages.  Both  editors,  wishing  to  include  the  poem  in  their  collec- 
tions, had  to  find  some  place  for  it ;  but  the  reasons  for  the  particular  place 
given  elude  us  just  as  do  the  reasons  for  the  order  in  which  Psalm  follows 
Psalm,  though  the  editor  of  Micah  may  have  been  guided  by  the  principle  of 
catch-word  arrangement  ("mountain  of  the  house" — 3^^  4^).  Whether  the 
poem  owes  its  place  in  Isaiah  to  the  final  editor  of  the  book,  or  to  the 
compiler  of  chs.  2-12,  is  uncertain  :  perhaps  the  latter  alternative  is  the  more 
probable. 

Judged  by  itself,  without  prejudice  derived  from  its  present 
position,  the  poem  perhaps  does  not  betray  its  origin  un- 
mistakably. But  if  the  arguments  that  have  been  adduced 
be  insufficient  to  prove  that  it  was  not  written  in  the  8th  cent. 
B.C.,  still  more  insufficient  are  the  arguments  to  prove  that  it 
was.  The  spirit  of  the  whole  and  some  of  the  particular  ideas, 
as  hinted  in  the  commentary  that  follows,  leave  the  impression 


44  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

of  a  passage  that  was  written  nearer  to  the  time  of  chs.  40-55  and 
Ezek.  than  of  Isaiah.  jjii 

If  Zee  8^*^'*^,  Jl  4^"  be  reminiscences  and  not  anticipations  of  lines  of 
the  poem,  a  minimum  date  is  fixed ;  the  poem  in  that  case  is  earlier  than 
520  B.C.  For  the  theory,  still  preferred  by  Box,  that  the  poem  is  the  work  of 
a  prophet  earlier  than  either  Mic.  or  Is.,  see  Koppe,  Hitz.,  Ew.,  Del.,  Di.  ; 
the  similarities  to  Joel  on  which  this  theory  partly  rested  now  point,  for  what 
they  are  worth,  to  a  post-exilic  origin,  for  the  theory  of  the  early  origin  of 
Joel  scarcely  continues  to  be  defensible.  The  authorship  of  Isaiah  is  still 
maintained  by  Du.  (who  connects  the  passage  with  11^"^  32^"'''  ^''"'^  as  products 
of  Isaiah's  old  age) ;  the  authorship  of  Mic.  by  Ryssel,  Textgeschichte  des  Micha^ 
218-224  (see  also  Ges.) ;  G.  A.  Smith  argues  for  the  *'  possibility  of  a  date  in 
the  8th  or  beginning  of  the  7th  cent."  {Book  of  the  Twelve,  i.  365-367).  The 
later  origin  of  the  poem  suggested  by  Stade  {ZATJV,  1881,  165-167,  and 
1884,  292)  is  accepted  by  We.  {Klcine  Proph.  I39f.),  Nowack  {Kleine 
Propheten)^  Hackmann  (126 fF. ),  Cheyne  {introd.  9-16),  and  Toy  {Judaism  and 
Christianity y  313).  Toy,  with  whom  Marti  agrees,  dates  the  poem  about 
500  B.C.,  though  he  considers  the  beginning  of  the  Greek  period  also  possible. 

2a.  b.  C.  d.  First  Strophe.  —  The  text  is  in  some  details 
uncertain  (see  phil.  n.). — In  the  end  of  the  days]  "  the  final 
period  of  the  future  so  far  as  it  falls  within  the  range  of  the 
speaker's  perspective  "  (Dr.  Deut.  p.  74) :  the  phrase  is  applied, 
for  example,  to  Israel's  settlement  in  Canaan  (Gn  49^),  to 
Israel's  conquest  of  Edom  and  Moab  (Nu  24^*),  and,  as  here, 
to  the  Messianic  age ;  cp.  e.g.  Hos  3^  Jer  2320,  and  in  NT  He 
I*,  I  P  1^0,  Jn  6^^  12^8.  The  phrase  itself  is  not  late  (cp.  in 
Assyr.  ina  ahrat  umi)\  nor  is  it  safe  to  conclude  with  Che. 
{Introd.  11)  and  Marti  that  it  is  necessarily  so  when  used  in 
connection  with  Messianic  expectations ;  so  soon  as  such 
expectations  arose  and  needed  expression,  such  a  phrase  being 
obviously  suitable  would  naturally  be  employed. —  YahweKs 
mountain]  i.e.  Mt.  Sion.  YahweKs  mountain  is  the  reading  of 
ffi  both  here  and  in  Mic.  J^  in  both  places  has  the  unique 
phrase  mountain  of  YahwehUs  house  \  cp.  mountain  of  the 
House^  Mic  3'^^  The  temple  is  directly  mentioned  in  the  next 
line. — Firmly  set]  for  the  force  of  }133,  cp.  Jg  162^  and 
especially  Ps  93^^- ;  the  word  is  the  opposite  of  DID,  which 
describes  the  tottering  or  shaking  of  that  which  has  become 
insecure,  whether  mountains  (Ps  46^)  or  kingdoms  (i^.  vJ). 
After  all  the  commotions  which  will  precede  the  Messianic  age, 
removing  the  things  that  can  be  shaken  (Hag  2^^-,  He  1226^-), 


".  2,  3  45 

Mt.  Sion  and  the  universal  kingdom  of  which  it  will  be  the 
centre  (Ps  87)  will  remain  immovable,  unshaken,  because  the 
one  true  God,  governor  and  judge  of  all  nations  (strophe  4),  is 
there  (Ps  46^).  The  poet  breathes  the  same  spiritual  atmosphere 
as  the  authors  of  Ps  46  and  87  :  cp.  also  Is  9®. — On  the  top  of 
the  mountains]  this  is  but  one  of  the  possible  translations  of  the 
phrase  D^"inn  6^X13 :  for  this  rendering,  cp.  e.g.  Ex  24^^,  Is  42^^ 
Doubtless  {^Ni  i>y  might  have  been  used  to  express  this  (Di.), 
but  is  scarcely  necessary.  Other  possible  translations  are  (i)  as 
the  chief  of  the  mountains^  or  the  chief  choicest  mountain  :  for  the 
1  essentiae,  cp.  G-K.  119/,  BDB  88^;  and  for  ^^'^  =  chief  cp.  e.g. 
Jg  10^^,  Ezk  2']^^  {choicest) ;  (2)  on  the  chief  of  the  mountains ;  Du. 
adopts  this  in  connection  with  a  reading  of  fit  "  and  the  house 
of  (our)  God  (shall  be  established)  on  the  chief  of  the  moun- 
tains." But  this  is  not  the  most  probable  text :  see  phil.  n. 
The  effect  of  it  is  to  predict  the  coming  exaltation  directly  of 
the  temple  and  only  indirectly  of  Mt.  Sion.  Whatever  translation 
be  correct,  the  entire  meaning  is  hardly  that  mountain  will  be 
piled  on  mountain  and  Mt.  Sion  on  the  top  of  all,  though  this 
interpretation  appears  in  Rabbinic  literature  :  "  The  Holy  One 
will  bring  Sinai  and  Tabor  and  Carmel,  and  build  the  Sanctuary 
on  the  top  of  them  "  (Fesi^ta  R.  Kahana,  144^).  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  unlikely  that  it  is  merely  metaphorical  (Di.) ;  but  as 
Messianic  expectation  looked  forward  to  various  transformations 
in  the  physical  world  (40*  41^^^-,  Ezk  47^^-,  Jl  4(3)^^  Zee  14), 
so  here  to  the  elevation  of  Mt.  Sion  to  such  a  height  that  it 
should  overtop  all  mountains  instead  of  being,  as  in  the  actual 
world,  overtopped  by  other  mountains  of  Palestine  (Ps  68^'^*^') 
and  even  by  the  neighbouring  mountains ;  the  Mt.  of  Olives,  for 
example,  is  nearly  300  feet  higher.  To  Ezekiel,  the  temple  hill 
in  vision  appeared  "  very  high  "  (40^),  and  the  author  of  Zee  14^® 
expected  the  relative  elevation  of  Sion  to  be  produced  by  the 
depression  of  the  surrounding  country  (cp.  below,  vv.^^ff.^^ 

2e,  3a.  b.  C.  Second  Strophe. — All  nations  will  come 
streaming  (x^nTf  Jer  31^2  51^4)  to  this  conspicuous  and  immov- 
able mountain — to  Sion  and  to  Yahweh,  no  more  to  Babylon 
and  to  Bel  (Jer  51^).  The  expectation  of  such  an  advent  of  the 
nations  frequently  occurs  in  late  prophecies,  e.g.  60,  66^3,  Jer 
3!^  Zee  820-22  14I6-W  Hag  2^^-:  cp.  Ps  651^-  etc.— But  did  the 
prophets  of  the  8th  cent,  attach  this  world-wide  significance  to 


46 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


the  Temple  and  the  Temple  Mount  ?  —  God  of  Jacob'\  The 
phrase  occurs  nowhere  else  in  either  Isaiah  or  Micah :  it  is 
frequent  in  the  Psalms  {^e.g.  46^  75^^  76'^  84^) :  see  also  2  S  23^. 

3d.  e.  f.  g.  Third  Strophe. — The  object  of  the  nations  in 
coming  to  Sion  will  be  to  learn  and  practise  the  only  true 
religion — the  ways^  or  conduct,  which  Yahweh  prescribes  and 
approves.  The  nations  are  to  feel  the  moral  attraction  of  the 
Hebrew  or  Jewish  religion.  The  standpoint  is  substantially  that 
of  chs.  40-55  (see,  e.g.^  42^^')  with  some  differences  in  detail;  in 
40-55  the  missionary  people  are  to  carry  the  knowledge  of 
Yahweh  to  the  nations ;  here,  the  nations  are  to  come  to  §ion 
to  receive  it  (cp.  Ps  87,  Zee  820-22):  in  40-55  Israel  is  the 
Teacher ;  here,  Yahweh  Himself  (cp.  Ps  94^^).  But  the  political 
subserviency  of  the  nations  to  Israel,  as  sometimes  anticipated 
{e.g.  60^2)^  seems  as  little  thought  of  here  as  in  chs.  40-55.  Du., 
however,  in  defending  the  Isaianic  authorship  minimises  the 
meaning  unduly  :  "  perhaps,"  he  says,  "  the  nations  will  not  even 
give  up  their  own  cults  :  they  merely  acknowledge  that  Yahweh 
is  the  most  upright  and  truest  God.  Recognition  to  a  certain 
extent  of  strange  gods  was  something  quite  usual  in  antiquity : 
even  earlier,  foreigners  sought  Yahweh  (Naaman),  or  Israelites 
other  gods  (2  K  i)."  But  the  outlook  here  is  to  something 
unusual,  something  fresh  and  remarkable. — That  he  may  instruct 
us  of  his  ways]  of  (p)  =  out  of  (the  treasure  of),  not  concerning : 
cp.  Ps  94^2^  cp,  Ec  7^^ — For  from  Sion  (emphatic)  .  .  .  from 
Jerusalem]   the   lines  are  perhaps  echoed   in    37^2  (Meinhold, 

p.  47> 

4a.  b.  C.  d.  Fourth  Strophe. — If  all  the  nations  practise  the 
moral  requirements  of  the  religion  of  Yahweh  (strophe  3),  they 
will  naturally  refer  their  disputes  to  Him,  He  alone  being  God 
and  King  ;  there  will  be  no  further  need  for  the  arbitrament  of 
war.  The  writer's  ideal  is  universal  peace  (strophe  5) ;  ct.  the 
conceptions  underlying  the  ancient  phrases  "  the  Wars  of 
Yahweh,"  "the  day  of  Yahweh."  The  reverse  of  the  last  two 
lines  occurs  in  Jl  4^^ :  on  the  relation  between  the  two  passages, 
see  Exp.^  Sept.  1893,  pp.  214  f.,  218  f. — Ploughshares]  is  the 
conventional  rendering  of  DTIN,  which  is  obviously  the  name 
of  an  agricultural  implement;  but  precisely  what,  neither  the 
etymology,  which  is  obscure,  nor  the  usage  (i  S  \'^^^\  Jl  4^^  Mic 
4^t),  suffices  to  determine. 


II.  2-4  47 

4   e.   f. +  Mic   4**•^    Filth    Strophe. — The    poem    closed 
with  a  picture  of  world-wide  peace  and  quiet  agricultural  life. 

2.  It  is  not  certain  that  the  existing  evidence  preserves  quite  completely 
the  original  words  of  this  first  strophe.  However  we  choose  amongst  it, 
some  awkwardness  remains.  On  the  whole,  Mic.  seems  distinctly  better  than 
Is. ;  the  rhythm  in  Mic.  is  that  of  the  rest  of  the  poem,  and  the  parallelism 
is  better.  To  make  this  clear  both  texts  are  given  here,  rhythmically 
marked : 

Is.         mn'-nu  in  |  iT.t  p33  |  cd'h  nnnN3 1|  .rm 

.niynjD  hvzi  \  w^nn  J5'K^3 
Mic.  ni.T  n'3  -in  n\T  |  wen  nnnwa  n'm 

.niyaao  Kin  HVi^  \  D'-inn  vmi  pn 

In  Isaiah,  after  throwing  n'm  out  of  the  rhythmical  scheme,  we  have  the 
long  six-accented  line  with  two  caesuras,  which  is  unparalleled,  and  scarcely 
very  suitable,  in  this  poem.  The  words  mynjo  HVi^  nnnn  vmi  also  awaken 
suspicion,  not  because  they  would  form  a  2  :  2  distich  (v.*^  *),  but  because  they 
seem  insufficiently  independent  to  form  a  distich  at  all.  This  second  objec- 
tion applies  also  in  some  degree  to  the  second  distich  in  Mic,  unless  we  may 
give  to  n'-T  a  force  greater  than  that  of  the  mere  copulative  or  auxiliary : 
if  it  could  mean  here,  as,  of  course,  it  often  does  elsewhere  {e.g.  Gn  i  and  BDB, 
col.  226  bot.),  come  into  existence^  the  two  distichs  would  be  sufficiently  inde- 
pendent. Was  there  a  belief  that  there  would  be  a  new  creation  of  the  mountain 
of  Yahweh  in  the  Messianic  age  ?  and  even  if  so  could  such  a  belief  be  expressed 
by  n\T  ?  But  the  reading  n'.T  is  not  free  from  suspicion :  for  it  (apparently)  Mic. 
(K  has  ifi(f>avis,  and  Is.  dSt  has  ifi<pavh  for  n\T  p33 ;  iii<j>avii  might  conceivably 
(cp.  65^)  point  to  rrr  (Niph.  of  m  as  used  in  Am  5"),  if  this  vb.  yielded  a 
meaning  more  suitable  to  the  strophe  instead  of  one  that  anticipates  the  next. 
For  some  other  features  of  (&  see  following  notes,  and  for  a  view  in  some 
respects  different  see  SBOT. — .t.t  .  .  .  .rni]  cp.  ^'^ -.  also  718.21^  ^nd  see 
Dr.  §  121.  For  n'm  ffi  reads  n'rr  o,  which  Du.  adopts.— m.T  ma  nn]  the 
phrase  occurs  nowhere  else ;  it  may  be  the  result  of  a  conflation  of  the 
readings.  (K  in  Mic.  simply  has  rh  6pos  toO  Kvpiov,  i.e.  n'3  is  absent,  while 
here  (K  reads  rh  6pos  Kvpiov  Kal  6  oTkos  tov  deov,  i.e.  D'n'?K  n'3i  ni.T  nn — the 
two  readings  not  yet  conflate  (cp.  v.'). — niyaJD  nb'Ji]  Mic.  mynjD  Kin  kwi  ; 
the  length  of  the  line  in  Mic.  is  more  probably  correct  than  in  Is.  On  the 
other  hand,  Kin,  if  to  be  expressed,  might  rather  be  expected  in  the  previous 
clause.  (&  Is.  koL  v^w^ijcrerat  inr^pdvu)  tCjp  ^ovvdv,  (&  Mic.  koI  fieTeupiadi/ia-eTai 
{nrepdv(o  tQv  povvwv ;  except  in  these  two  passages  inrepdvu)  nowhere  else  renders 
the  simple  D.  Did  ^  ^yo  once  stand  here  (cp.  Mai  i'',  Gn  5')?  Possibly ^ 
but  the  corruption  of  *?  '?j;d  into  D  Kin  is  not  easy. — v'?k]  Mic.  v^y. — D'un-'?3] 
read  D'la  ;  cp.  Mic.  ;  So  makes  o'm  of  the  parallel  clause  anti-climactic.  In  Mic. 
D'u  stands  in  the  next  line,  D'Dy  here  :  ©  has  here  (ret)  iQpt]  in  both  clauses 
(  =  D'u).  The  same  difference  between  the  Hebrew  texts  occurs  in  v.*»*  *•  = 
Mic  4**'  ^ — 4.  D'm  D'DV  .  .  .  D'un]  Mic.  pirn  ny  D'Dsy  d'u  .  .  .  D'm  o'oy  (K 
supporting  |§).  Rhythm  strongly  favours  the  originality  of  Is.  here ;  the 
text  of  Mic.  may  have  been  influenced  by  Zee  2P^, 


48  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


1 

4 


5.  A  brief  homiletic  reflection  which  unites  the  poem 
that  precedes  with  that  which  follows,  and  derives  its  phraseology 
in  part  from  the  one,  in  part  from  the  other  : — O  house  of  Jacob 
(cp.  v.^),  come  and  let  us  go  (cp.  v.^)  in  the  light  of  Yahweh :  i.e. 
let  us  not  be  behind  the  nations  as  while  what  is  next  described 
continues  (w.^^*),  we  are ;  they  propose  to  walk  in  Yahweh's  paths  : 
let  us  do  the  same,  following  the  path  lighted  w^  by  the  law  (cp.  Ps 
I  \(^^^y  Pr  6^3).  The  words  are  apparently  prose,  and  certainly  out- 
side the  rhythmic  and  strophic  scheme  of  either  the  preceding 
or  the  following  poem :  they  are  probably  an  editorial  remark. 

Mic  4^'*  ( =  Is  2^**)  is  followed  by  (i)  the  concluding  formula,  "for  the 
mouth  of  Yahweh  of  Hosts  hath  spoken  it"  (cp.  Is  \^  ^o^  58^^),  and  then  (2) 
by  a  homiletic  reflection  fuller  and  more  rhythmical  than  Is.  :  in  Micah  the 
point  is — at  present  the  nations  walk  each  in  the  name  of  its  god,  but  we  in 
the  way  of  our  God,  the  true  God.  Mic.  asserts  what  Is.  exhorts  to.  What 
then  is  the  relation  between  the  two  ?  or  are  they  the  independent  comments  on 
the  poem  of  two  different  editors  ?  Obviously  the  words  O  house  of  Jacob  are  to 
be  explained  from  what  follows  in  Is.,  i.e.  so  much  of  Is.  is  independent :  thus 

the  common  matter  is  reduced  to  m.r  nwa  r\:hy\  13^  (Is.)  and  13*?'  D'oyn  Va  ♦a 

njn  oSiy^  irn^x  m.T  ^vi  i?i  unJKi  mn*  or 3  vh  (Mic),  and  the  actual  verbal 
coincidence  is  limited  to  the  overlined  words  ;  these  are  derived  from  the 
poem,  and  in  making  a  variation  on  the  phrase  used  in  the  poem  mK3  ^Vn 
mn'.  Is.  and  Mic.  differ  from  one  another  (Is.  mw,  Mic.  Dv).  If  either  passage  is 
dependent  on  the  other,  is  Mic  4'  an  expansion  of  Is  2°  (Che.),  or  Is  2"  an 
abbreviation  of  Mic  4°  (Marti)?  If,  as  has  been  urged,  the  editor  of  Is. 
abbreviated  because  there  was  merely  so  much  space  to  fill  up,  why  did  he 
add  O  house  of  Jacob}  The  closer  approximation  of  the  na^ji  ^^h  of  Is.  as 
compared  with  the  "i'?J  ijnJNi  of  Mic.  to  the  phraseology  of  the  poem  (nVyji  laS 
and  '3  nsVii)  might  seem  to  favour  the  priority  of  Is.  But  the  question  is 
hardly  to  be  answered  with  confidence  either  way. 

II.  6-22. — The  Day  of  Yahweh. 
This  section,  pronounced  by  Du.  to  be  the  worst  preserved 
of  the  entire  book,  has  certainly  suffered  very  serious  mutilation 
in  transmission.  (&  preserves  some  better  readings  than  |^  (see 
V.®  n.),  but  the  text  had  already  fallen  into  disorder  before  the 
time  of  ffi.  In  the  main  the  sense  is  clear  in  spite  of  the  state 
of  the  text,  but  it  is  more  difficult  to  determine  with  certainty  the 
form  of  the  poem  (or  poems). 

The  presence  of  refrains  (v."  =  v.",  cp.  v.*  :  and  v.^*'  =  v,^=v.2i)  points 
to  a  poem  (or  poems)  divided  into  strophes.  But  what  is  the  rhythm  ?  In 
vyia-17  (down  to  n3'7 ;  in  v.  ^'  omit  o'NB'jm  CDnn)  and  in  v.^^  we  have  15 
lines  of  three  accents,  for  the  most  part  combined  into  distichs  of  parallel 


II.  5,  6-22  49 

lines;  six,  or  if  we  makkeph  3nn  »)D3  in  v.'*  all,  of  the  seven  lines  in  vv."- 
and  the  last  line  of  the  refrain  in  vv.^^-  ^^  are  of  the  same  length  ;  so  also  is 
the  last  line  of  v.',  which  at  present  stands  isolated  and  without  a  parallel. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  first  part  of  v.*  in  "^  certainly  is  not  in  3  :  3  rhythna  ; 
possibly  it  should  be  read  as  two  distichs  3  :  2,  though  the  second  of  these 
is  certainly  corrupt  and  the  first  is  rather  2  :  2,  if  not  indeed  u  sin^^le  line  of 
three  accents  (Sievers).  There  is  at  least  one  distich  3  :  2,  perhaps  two,  in 
the  refrain  as  it  appears  in  vv.^^'^^ :  but  as  it  appears  in  v.^"  it  contains  at  most 
one  3  :  2  distich  ;  even  that,  as  the  other  distich  certainly  is,  may  be  2  :  2. 
Whether  in  any  of  the  three  places  the  refrain  now  retains  its  original  form 
may  be  doubted.  Clearly  then  the  dominant  rhythm  throughout  w.''^^  is 
3  :  3,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  this  rhythm  was  originally  maintained 
unbroken.  Du.,  followed  by  Cheyne,  has  indeed  postulated  two  fragments 
with  different  rhythm :  (a)  vv."*^^,  rhythm  3  :  3  ;  (^)  vv.'^^"-  ^^'^i,  long  lines 
(3  +  2,  or  the  like).  But  the  difference  in  rhythm,  if  it  existed  at  all,  did  not 
originally,  nor  does  it  now,  coincide  with  this  division. 

Obviously  v.®  is  not  the  beginning  of  a  poem,  perhaps  one  or 
two  strophes  have  been  lost  (Du.) ;  or  the  refrain  now  appearing 
in  w.^^- 1^-  21  was  an  opening  refrain,  and  this  alone  preceded  v.* ; 
then  w.^and  ^^  are  closing  refrains  (Marti).  The  matter  peculiar 
to  each  strophe  probably  consisted  of  twelve  lines,  i.e.  six  distichs. 
Enough  has  been  said  to  indicate  that  the  form  of  the 
following  translation  is  only  an  approximation  to  that  of  the 
original  poem. 

I. 
*•  Enter  into  the  caves  of  the  rocks, 

And  [hide  yourselves]  in  the  holes  of  the  dust; 
Away  from  the  terror  of  Yahweh, 
And  from  His  glorious  majesty, 
When  he  arises  to  terrify  the  earth. 

•  For  he  hath  abandoned  his  people, 

.  .  .  the  house  of  Jacob, 
For  his  land  is  full  of  'traders'  (?) 

And  '  he '  strikes  bargains  with  (?)  the  children  of  foreigners, 
'^  And  (so)  his  land  has  become  full  of  silver  and  gold. 
And  there  is  no  end  to  his  stores; 
And  (so)  his  land  has  become  full  of  horses, 
And  there  is  no  end  to  his  chariots; 

•  And  so  his  land  has  become  full  of  idols, 

To  the  work  of  his  hands  'he*  bows  down. 
To  that  which  his  fingers  have  made. 
VOL.  I. — 4 


50  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

(9)  1^  '  And '  the  pride  of  man  shall  *  sink  low,' 
And  the  loftiness  of  man  be  '  abased ' ; 
And  Yahweh  alone  shall  be  exalted,  a 
[But  the  idols  shall  one  and  all  vanish] 

2. 

^®  Enter  into  [the  caves  of]  the  rock, 

And  hide  yourselves  in  [the  holes  of]  the  dust; 
Away  from  the  terror  of  Yahweh 
And  from  His  glorious  majesty. 

^  For  Yahweh  of  Hosts  hath  a  day, 

Against  everything  that  is  proud  and  lofty, 
And  against  everything  that  is  uplifted  and  'high,' 


^  And  against  all  cedars  of  Lebanon,  a  a 

And  against  all  oaks  of  Bashan; 
^*  And  against  all  lofty  mountains, 

And  against  all  uplifted  hills; 
^^  And  against  every  high  tower. 

And  against  every  fortified  wall; 
^^  And  against  all  ships  of  Tarshish, 

And  against  all  .  .  . 

^^  And  the  pride  of  man  shall  sink  low, 
And  the  loftiness  of  man  be  abased: 
And  Yahweh  alone  shall  be  exalted  a  a 
^8  But  the  idols  shall  one  and  all  vanish. 

The  subject  of  the  poem  is  the  Day  of  Yahweh  {y^^)f  when 
Yahweh  will  gloriously  and  terribly  manifest  His  presence  (v.^<>). 
Isaiah  follows  Amos  in  depicting  this  "  Day,"  which  was  popularly 
expected  to  bring  "light"  and  national  success  (Am  5^^),  as  a 
day  of  terror  for  Israel  no  less  than  for  the  rest  of  the  world.  It 
is  not  to  be  a  day  on  which  Israel's  foes  will  for  ever  go  under 
and  Israel  emerge  successful,  but  on  which  Israel  with  the  rest  of 
mankind  will  do  well  to  seek  out  holes  and  crannies  (w.^®*  ^^),  if 
haply  they  may  there  cower  away  from  Yahweh.  And  the  reason 
for  this  common  doom  that  awaits  Israel  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the 
world  is  Israel's  abandonment  of  Yahweh,  which  has  led  in  turn 
to  His  abandonment  of  them.     Israel  has  grown  wealthy,  and  has 


II.    6-22  5' 

expended  its  wealth  on  equipments  for  war  (vJ)  and  on  the 
manufacture  of  idols  (v.^)  and  in  these  has  placed  its  trust; 
thereby  in  Yahweh's  judgment,  if  not  in  its  own,  showing  dis- 
loyalty to  Yahweh  :  consequently  Yahweh  has  abandoned  Israel ; 
it  is  no  more  His  people,  has  no  longer  closer  ties  with  Him  than 
the  rest  of  mankind,  and  must  therefore  share  the  result  of  the 
common  overthrow  of  all  wherein  man  places  his  pride  and 
confidence  on  the  day  which  will  show  Yahweh  alone  supreme, 
and  all  the  works  of  man's  hands,  including  the  idols,  valueless 
(yyii.  19),  According  to  the  present  text  of  v.^  a  specific  offence 
of  Israel  has  been  the  practice  of  magic ;  whether  this  is  what 
was  originally  intended  by  that  line,  or  whether  it  spoke  of  a 
recent  increase  in  foreign  trade  as  the  cause  of  the  increased 
wealth  that  has  led  to  abandonment  of  Yahweh,  is  discussed 
below.  The  first  strophe  dwells  more  fully  on  the  present 
condition  of  Israel  (^^'^),  the  two  refrains  and  the  ominous  words 
of  v.^*  ^  indicating  the  coming  doom.  The  second  strophe  is 
entirely  devoted  to  a  description  of  that  doom — the  day  of 
Yahweh  is  at  hand,  when  He  will  overthrow  all  lofty  and  towering 
objects  and  man's  pride  itself,  all  that  rises  above  the  ordinary 
level  and  thereby  even  distantly  competes  with  the  sole  exaltation 
of  Yahweh  which  the  "  Day "  is  to  manifest,  and  consequently 
all  the  objects  in  which  foolish  man,  not  recognising  Him  that  is 
truly  High  and  lifted  up,  has  vainly  placed  his  trust. 

Whether  these  two  strophes  constituted  the  entire  poem  or 
not,  the  connection  of  the  two  main  subjects — prevailing  sin  and 
inevitable  judgment — is  clear  and  characteristically  prophetic; 
and  each  is  forcibly  expressed  by  the  monotonous  cast  of  the 
sentences  :  wealth,  wealth,  nothing  but  wealth  and  the  trust  in  it 
(yy  6-8) ;  overthrow,  overthrow,  nothing  but  overthrow  of  all  else 
but  Yahweh  (w.^^-iej^ 

Since  the  term  "  House  of  Jacob "  in  v.^  is  ambiguous,  it 
must  remain  uncertain  whether  Isaiah  is  here  depicting  the  doom 
of  the  Northern  Kingdom  (as  in  g''^'  1 7^-*),  or  of  the  Southern 
Kingdom,  or  of  both  together.  In  either  case  the  prevalence  of 
wealth  and  the  easy  confidence  in  the  more  than  sufficiency  of 
the  military  resources  of  the  kingdom  point  to  a  very  early  period 
in  Isaiah's  career — say  before  the  Assyrian  campaign  of  738  B.C., 
— as  the  probable  if  not  certain  date  of  the  poem  ;  some,  too,  detect 
the  "rush  and  abandon'*  of  youth  in  the  composition,  and  the 


52  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

influence  in  vv.^^'^^  of  the  great  earthquake  that  occurred  in 
Isaiah's  childhood  (Am  i^,  Zee  14^). 

6.  For  he.  hath  abandoned  his  people\  so  ^ :  }^  for  thou  has\ 
abandoned  thy  people  (see  phil.  n.).  The  words  are  obviously 
not  the  beginning  of  a  poem ;  nor  could  they  be  so  regarded, 
even  if  '•D  might  be  rendered  surely^  or  certainly  (BDB,  p. 
472^5 :  cp.  Nu  23*^^  n.).  Nor  can  they  give  the  reason  for  v.*; 
they  cannot  mean  "  for  thou  (Israel)  hast  abandoned  thy 
nationality,  or  national  character "  * — an  interpretation  which 
places  on  DV  an  impossible  meaning.  The  subject  of  the  vb., 
whether  the  3rd  pers.  (ffi)  or  the  2nd  (f^),  is  God.  What  originally 
preceded  v.^  can  only  be  conjectured ;  if,  as  in  the  translation 
above,  the  refrain  of  ysP-  ^®-  ^i,  the  reading  of  ffi  is  the  more 
suitable.— ^<3^<?^]  €r  Israel',  either  term  might  refer  exclusively 
to  the  Northern  kingdom  (9^^) ;  but  8^*  proves  that  "  Israel "  with 
Isaiah  included  Judah,  and  the  same  is  doubtless  true  of  Jacob 
(cp.,  further,  5^  8^''  \qP-  29^2).  In  Mic  2,^-  Jacobs  House  of  Jacobs 
is  even  used  when  the  reference  is  to  Judah  exclusively. — For  his 
(i.e.  Jacob's)  land  is  full  of  etc.]  so  fflr,  in  harmony  with  the  follow 
ing  lines  :  '^for  they  are  full  of  The  last  part  of  v.^  is  certainly 
more  or  less  corrupt  (see  phil.  n.).     Literally  rendered,  |^  reads ; 

For  they  are  full  from  (or,  fuller  than)  the  East, 

(or.  For  they  are  full  from  of  old) 

And  of  (or,  and  (they  are))  soothsayers  like  the  Philistines, 

And    they   strike    (bargains)    with    (?)    the    children    of 

foreigners. 
ffi  reads : 

And  their  land  is  full  as  of  old  of  soothsayings  like  that  of 

the  Philistines, 
And  many  alien  children  have  been  born  to  them. 

The  first  line  in  J^  obviously  lacks  an  object :  RV  "  for  they 
be  filled  (with  customs)  from  the  East "  is  not  a  translation  of  ?^, 
but  virtually  rests  on  an  unacknowledged  and  improbable  con- 
jectural emendation.  Many  others  since  Lowth  have  conjecturally 
supplied,  as  an  object  to  they  are  full  of  the  word  diviners :  then 
the  first  and  second  lines  in  J§  thus  emended  express  the  same 
general  thought  as  the  first  line  in  ffi — the  land  of  Jacob  is  full 
of  soothsayers.     The  connection  between  the  presence  of  sooth^ 

*  Saad.,  Hitz.  I 


II.  6  53 

sayers  and  the  striking  of  bargains  with  foreigners  (third  line  in  f^) 
is  not  obvious ;  and  since  the  meaning  of  the  third  line  is  by  no 
means  beyond  question,  Marti  suspects  a  third  reference  in  that 
line  to  magic  or  enchantment  Still  no  such  meaning  can  be 
extracted  from  the  text  of  the  third  line  or  from  any  obvious 
emendation  of  it.  But  if  we  look  at  the  wider  context,  another 
question  arises,  viz..  Is  any  reference  to  soothsaying  or  the  like 
probable?  Ought  we  not  rather  to  find  in  the  line(s)  that  precede 
a  sense  parallel  to  that  of  the  third  line  ?  By  a  conjecture  dis- 
cussed in  the  phil.  n.  and  more  fully  in  ZATW^  191 1,  pp.  112  ff., 
and  tentatively  expressed  in  the  above  translation,  this  is  obtained. 
Judah  (or  Israel)  has  become  a  busy  commercial  people  thronged 
with  foreign  traders :  hence  flows  wealth,  which  is  expended  on 
munitions  of  war  and  the  manufacture  of  handiwork  to  which, 
instead  of  Yahweh,  the  people  pay  worship.  The  word  DiWD, 
conjecturally  substituted  for  D^33y  and  rendered  ^^  traders ^^  is 
literally  Canaanites  (cp.  Zeph  i^^,  Ezk  i629,  and?  Hos  12®;  Is 
238,  Pr  3i24,  and  ?  Zee  14^^) — a  fact  which  would  increase  the 
suitability  di  foreigners  in  the  parallel.  For  the  association  of  the 
presence  of  foreigners  with  a  wealth-producing  commerce,  cp. 
ch.  23,  Ezk  27.  On  the  increase  of  trade  in  Israel  in  the  sixth 
century  B.C.,  see  G.  A.  Smith  in  EBi.  5174,  "  the  Hebrew  prophets 
from  Amos  onwards  bear  witness  to  an  extraordinary  increase  of 
trade,  and  to  the  tempers  which  grow  with  it.  .  .  .  The  old  agri- 
cultural economy  is  disturbed ;  farmers  give  place  on  their  ancestral 
lands  to  a  new  class  of  rich  men,  who  can  only  have  been  created 
by  trade ;  and  the  rural  districts  are  partly  depopulated  (Is  5^*^, 
Mic  2^-^'  ^).  The  sins  of  trade  :  covetousness,  false  weights,  and 
the  oppression  of  debtors  and  of  the  poor,  are  frequently  castigated 
(Am  2«  4I  S^ff-,  Hos  12^,  Is  36-  ^  523,  Mic  2  and  3)."— Z//^^  the 
Philistines^  the  appropriateness  of  the  comparison  in  the  text  of 
1^  or  ffi  is  obscure.  We  have  no  other  indication  that  the 
Philistines  were  pre-eminent  in  divination.  That  the  Philistines 
consulted  oracles  (2  K  i^)  and  resorted  to  magic  practices  (i  S 
62)  merely  shows  that  they  formed  no  exception  to  the  general 
habits  of  the  ancient  world.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Philistines 
were  great  traders,  and  Gaza  was  one  of  the  great  markets  of  the 
ancient  world :  cp.  G.  A.  Smith,  Hist.  Geog.,  ch.  ix.  If  we  retain 
the  Hebrew  text,  we  may  perhaps  best  explain — alike  from  East 
and  West  (cp.  9^1  ii^*)  they  borrow  their  magic  customs.     The 


54  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

particular  form  of  magic  expressed  by  D''33y,  which  is  denounced 
in  Dt  1 8^0,  Lv  19^6,  and  otherwise  referred  to  in  Jg  q^^^,  Mic  5^1, 
Is  57^,  2  K  21^,  is  uncertain;  it  has  been  variously  explained 
from  py,  a  cloud,  hence  rain-producers,  from  |^y,  the  eye,  hence 
persons  who  exercise  the  power  of  the  evil-eye,  a  power  widely 
believed  in  and  dreaded  down  to  the  present  day  in  Palestine ; 
from  the  Arabic  gunnat,  a  twang,  the  hum  of  insects,  hence 
diviners  as  the  interpreters  of  such  sounds,  or  as  delivering  their 
instruction  with  such  sounds,  or  "  singing "  *  their  spells ;  and 
from  the  Arabic  'anna,  to  appear,  hence  dealers  in  phenomena 
(see  references  in  BDB,  j.z;.). — He  strikes  bargains  with  foreigners^ 
f^  they,  etc. :  the  sing,  in  reference  to  Jacob,  the  personified 
people,  should  probably  be  restored  in  agreement  with  the 
following  clauses.  On  the  degree  of  uncertainty  attaching  to  the 
verb,  see  phil.  n. :  the  rendering  adopted  seems  at  least  more 
probable  than  the  alternative  they  abound  with  (©,  AVmarg.). — 7. 
Whether  the  previous  v.  had  led  up  to  it  or  not,  we  have  here 
clearly  enough  a  description  and  tacit  condemnation  of  the 
multiplication  of  material  resources  {gold,  silver,  and  stores)  and 
equipment  of  war  {horses,  chariots)  which  had  been  the  result  of 
the  long  and  successful  reign  of  Jeroboam  11.  in  the  N.  and  of 
Uzziah  in  the  S.  Isaiah  in  common  with  other  prophetic  writers 
condemns  these  things  because  they  blind  men  to  worthy  and 
spiritual  ideals,  which  are  summed  up  for  him  in  Yahweh  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel:  cp.  3015-17  31I-3,  Mic  510,  Hos  2>^\  Zee  46 
9!^  Dt  1716^-  (cp.  20I-4),  ps  208.— 8.  Idols]  the  word  h'h^^  also 
occurs  in  w.^^-  20  loiof-  191-  »  3i7  Ezk  30I3,  Hab  2^8,  Ps  96^ 
(=  I  Ch  i626)  97^,  Lv  19*  26^.  It  often  conveys  an  unmistakable 
suggestion  of  contempt.  The  meaning  of  the  word  as  used  by 
the  prophets  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  expressions  Wkh  ^y"i, 
worthless  shepherds  (Zee  ii^^),  and  h'h^  "'65S1,  good-for-nothing 
physicians  (Job  13*).  It  is  possible  that  it  was  originally  a 
respectable  word  for  gods,t  just  as  D^1D3  must  have  been  for 
priests,  and  that  it  was  the  irony  of  the  prophets  that  associated 
it  with  the  adjective  ^'h^,  worthless  (cp.  Syr.  ^^jJl|),  or  perchance 
the  negative  h\^,  perhaps,  too,  with  a  play  on  fjK,  strong]  so  here, 

*  Cp.  Incantatio,  carmen,  iiraoiS-^,  and  see  references  and  illustrations  in 
J.  B.  Jevons's  Essay,  "  Graeco-Italian  Magic,"  in  Anthropology  and  the  Classics 
(ed.  R.  R.  Marett),  pp.  94flf.,  99  f. 

t  See  BDB. 


E 


n.  7-^5  55 

his  land  is  full,  not  of  strong  ones,  but  of  noughts  or  good-for- 
nothings. — The  work  of  his  hands  .  .  .  that  which  his  fingers 
have  made]  cp.  17®,  Hos  13^. — 9.  The  v.  omitted  in  the  transla- 
tion above  is  parallel  in  sense  to  v.^^;  the  last  clause  seems 
corrupt;  the  first  two  clauses  re-appear  in  5^*,  whence  perhaps 
they  were  transferred  to  the  present  passage,  in  the  first  instance 
as  a  marginal  parallel :  see,  further,  phil.  n. — 10.  Variants  of  the 
refrain  occur  in  vv.^^  and  ^i  for  which  see  phil.  n. ;  on  the  original 
position  of  the  refrain,  see  above,  p.  49. — When  Yahweh  marches 
forth  on  His  day,  the  earth  quakes  (Jg  5*),  or  He  comes  in  the 
thunder-storm.  If  from  human  enemies  men  run  for  safety  to 
the  caves  (i  S  13^),  how  much  more  before  this  foe!  cp.  Hos 
108. — From  before  the  terror  of  Yahweh^  and  from  his  glorious 
majesty]  cp.  the  expressions  of  Assyrian  conquerors,  pul-ha-at 
bilii-ti-ia  na-mur-rat  kakki-ia  iz-zu-ti  ip-la-hu-ma^  "of  the  terror 
of  my  lordship,  the  panic  of  my  mighty  weapons  they  were  afraid  " 
(Shalmaneser,  Monolith,  ii.  79  =  ^^  i.  171);  "Him,  Hezekiah, 
terror  of  the  glory  of  my  lordship  (pul-hi  mf-lamm{  bilfi-ti-ia) 
overwhelmed"  (Sennacherib,  Taylor  Cylinder,   iiL   2^  =  KB  ii. 

95)- 

12-17.  V.^2  states  the  general  theme  of  the  strophe :  Yahweh 

on  His  Day  will  lay  low  every  lofty  object,  that  His  own  unique 
exaltation  may  appear  (v.^^) ;  then  in  detail  the  prophet  pictures 
the  overwhelming  and  irresistible  might  of  Yahweh,  affecting  first 
Lebanon  (lo^*  148  etc.)  and  Bashan  (33^  n.),  laying  low  the  great 
and  strong  trees  that  cover  them  iy?^)  and  the  hills  themselves 
(v.i*),  and  then  the  creations  of  man's  pride  and  confidence — 
on  land,  his  citadels  and  walled  cities  (v.^^),  and  on  sea,  his 
ships  (v.i^).  The  line  of  movement  is  from  the  N.E.  (Lebanon 
N.,  Bashan  E.) :  does  the  prophet  think  of  the  Assyrians  as 
Yahweh's  warriors  (cp.  10*)? — 15  f.  In  these  verses  Isaiah  may 
have  specially  in  mind,  though  not  exclusively,  the  towers  and 
fortifications  which  Uzziah  built  and  the  new  sea  trade  which 
resulted  from  Uzziah's  capture  of  Elath  on  the  Red  Sea  (2  K 
1422).  "Moreover  Uzziah  built  towers  in  Jerusalem  over  the 
corner  gate,  and  over  the  valley  gate,  and  over  the  angle  (of  the 
wall),  and  fortified  them,"  and  Jotham  "  built  much  on  the  wall 
of  Ophel"  (2  Ch  26^  27^;  cp.  G.  A.  Smith,  Jerusalem^  ii.  119  f., 
125). — 15.  Fortified]  miVD  means  cut  off,  inaccessible,  and  %o  forti- 
fied, impregnable  (cp.  Jer  15^^) :  cp.  "  thy  high  and  fortified  walls 


56  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

wherein  thou  trustest"(Dt  28^2) — j^^  Ships  of  TarshisK\  ships 
fit  to  make  the  longest  voyages,  large  ships,  consequently  ships 
with  lofty  masts.  The  meaning  is  obvious  from  the  context  here 
and  in  some  of  the  other  passages  where  the  phrase  occurs  (23^*  ^^ 
6o9,  Ezk  2725,  Ps  48^,  2  Ch  921).  ffi  either  transliterates  the 
proper  name  (60^),  or  renders  by  TrXota  Kapx^Sovos  (23^*  1*),  or,  as 
perhaps  here,  by  ttAoiov  OaXda-a-r]^  (but  see  £Bi.  4897  n.  i);  see 
also  Ezk  27^5.  The  best  identification  of  Tarshish  still  seems 
to  be  Tartessus  (23^  n.)  in  Spain — at  the  remote  corner  of  the 
ancient  world. — And  against  all  ...  ^  the  phrase  (monn  nVSK') 
might  perhaps  (see  phil.  n.)  mean  desirable  or  costly  imagery^  but 
this  does  not  suit  the  context,  which  requires  that  the  phrase 
should  describe  some  lofty  object;  moreover,  the  analogy  of 
vv.13-16  suggests  that  the  phrase  should  describe  something  closely 
resembling,  or  intimately  connected  with,  large  ships.  None  of 
the  various  suggested  renderings  of  the  phrase,  as  in  |^  or 
emended,  satisfy  both  these  requirements  (see  phil.  n.). — 17.  Cp. 
v.^*. — 18.  But  the  idols  will  one  and  all  vanish  forms  an  excellent 
antithetical  parallel  to  the  third  line  of  v.^^  Yahweh  alone  will 
be  exalted',  cp.  Ps  102^^  heaven  and  earth  vanish  (P|7nashere: 
also  Job  9^6),  Yahweh  abides. 

19.  Cp.  v.i^,  and  see  phil.  n. —  When  he  arises  to  terrify  the 
eartK\  pKH  py?,  ut  terreat  terram. — Enter  into  the  caves\  so  v.^^ 
®r ;  ^  and  they  shall  enter^  which  would  mean  that  the  idols  will 
enter  into  the  caves. — 20.  An  annotation  in  prose,  or,  at  least,  not 
in  the  dominant  rhythm  of  the  poem.  It  explains  how  the  idols 
will  get  into  the  caves  (v.^^  f^).  Men  perceiving  the  uselessness 
of  the  idols  will  throw  them  away  (cp.  30^2  317)  to  animals  that 
house  in  the  darkness  of  caves  and  holes. — Moles^^  or  rats. 
The  noun  mDiDn  means  literally  a  much-digging  (animal).  AV, 
RV  rightly,  though  without  acknowledgment,  abandon  the 
unintelligible  MT  (m2  isni))  and  follow  U  talpes.— Bats']  "The 
majority  of  the  bats  of  Palestine  (and  they  are  very  numerous) 
inhabit  caves,  caverns,  tombs,  ruins,  and  disused  buildings " 
{EBi.).  With  the  standpoint  of  this  annotator,  cp.  Bar  6'^^^-, 
"  They  are  as  one  of  the  beams  of  the  temple ;  and  men  say 
their  hearts  are  eaten  out,  when  things  creeping  out  of  the  earth 
devour  both  them  and  their  raiment  .  .  .  upon  their  bodies  and 
heads  alight  bats,  swallows,  and  birds ;  and  in  like  manner  the 
cats  also.     Whereby  ye  may  know  that  they  are  no  gods." — 


II.    l6-22  57 

21.  Either  a  corrupt  variant  of  vv.^^  and  ^^  (Du.),  or  the  annotator 
(v.20)  has  slightly  modified  the  refrain  to  convey  his  meaning — 
men  will  cast  away  the  idols  so  that  they,  the  idols,  may  find 
themselves  clefts  and  crannies  (Marti). — 22.  A  still  later  annota- 
tion,* for,  unlike  v.^o  (21),  it  is  later  than  ffi,  from  which  the  v.  is 
absent.  It  is  an  obvious  reflection  on  the  chapter — cease  to 
place  confidence  in  man  (cp.  Jer  ly^  Ps  1468^-),  who  is  of  no 
account ;  but  it  is  the  reflection  of  some  reader  possessed  of 
a  roll  of  the  prophet  rather  than  (as  Di.  suggests)  of  Isaiah 
himself  when  he  put  ch.  2  and  ch.  3  together. — In  whose  nostril  is 
a  breathy  Cp.  Gn  2^  7^,  Job  27^.  The  breath  being  given  by 
God,  man  lives  ;  but  being  withdrawn,  he  dies  (nil,  Ps  104^^). 

The  history  of  the  interpretation  of  the  v.  is  interesting  and  explains 
the  rendering  of  the  H,  and  consequently  of  some  English  versions.  Jews, 
correctly  understanding  the  clause  at  what  is  he  accounted  to  mean  that  he 
is  of  no  worth,  referred  the  passage  to  Christ.  Jerome  met  this  not  by 
denying  the  reference  to  Christ,  but  by  placing  on  the  words  atrm  noa  '3  an 
impossible  meaning.  He  points  out,  correctly,  of  course,  that  nD3  may  be 
pronounced  bamma  at  what,  or  bamah,  which  he  interprets  excelsus  (it  is,  of 
course,  the  (heathen)  high  place).  He  renders  the  whole  verse,  "Quiescite 
ergo  ab  homine,  cuius  spiritus  in  naribus  eius  :  quia  excelsus  reputatus  est 
ipse,"  and  comments,  "Quisquam  ne  hominum  ita  quempiam  laudet  ut  dicat : 
cavete  ne  offendatis  eum,  qui  omnino  nihili  est?  Ergo  e  contrario  sic 
intellegendum :  Cum  haec  universa  ventura  sint  vobis,  et  prophetali  spiritu 
praedicantur,  moneo  atque  praecipio,  ut  quiescatis  ab  eo  qui  secundum 
camem  quidem  homo  est,  et  habet  animam,  et  ita  spirat,  et  naribus  halitum 
trahit  ut  nos  homines  spiramus  et  vivimus  :  sed  secundum  divinam  majestatem 
excelsus  et  est  et  reputatur  et  creditur.  Tacita  mecum  mente  pertractans,  non 
possum  invenire  rationem  quare  LXX  tam  perspicuam  de  Christo  prophetiam 
in  Graecum  noluerint  vertere.  Caeteri  enim,  qui  verterunt  quidem,  sed 
sermonem  ambiguum  ad  impietatis  traxere  sensum,  non  mirum  cur  male 
interpretati  sint,  nee  voluerint  de  Christo  gloriosum  quid  dicere  in  quern 
non  credebant :  videlicet  Judaei  aut  Semijudaei,  id  est,  Ebionitae." 

6.  "PV  nne'ttj]  For  the  form  nnroj,  see  G-K.  44^.  (&  (IL)  reads  6.vriKev 
yip  rhv  \a.hv  airov.  It  is  disputed  whether  this  represents  a  real  Hebrew 
variant  icy  vnni  (so  Mar.  ;  cp.  Du.)  or  not  (Che.  SBOT).  (ffir  fits  the 
context  better,  for  nowhere  else  throughout  the  entire  passage  is  Yahweh 
addressed,  except  in  a  probably  corrupt  clause  (v.*).  On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  difficult  to  account  for  the  derivation  of  |^  from  (Ir's  reading.  If  the 
stichos  be  editorial  (Che.),  ^  may  be  right ;  but  if  part  of  the  poem,  (&  is  to  be 
preferred.  If  the  text  were  substantially  correct  a  suggestion  of  W.  R. 
Smith  in  a  letter  to  Che.  {SBOT)  would  deserve  attention;  this  is,  that  n 
(lost  by  haplography  after  rnn')  should   be  prefixed  to  '3,  so  as  to  give  a 

*  So  Che.  (following  Studer  :  see  SBOT),  Du.,  Marti,  Cond. 


58  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

sentence  of  the  form  of  Mic  4''  and  of  the  same  tenour  as  Ezk  8^^,  Jer  2*,  2  K  i*. 
— :ip]}'''\  (&  'la-pa-^X. — 1n'?d]  (S  iveirkijadr),  i.e.  n'?D  or  rather  hnSd,  since  (K 
read  iJjnN  after  Dipo. — DipD]  (&  ws  rb  aw'  dpxrjs  (cp.  U2r<S)  perhaps  freely  for 
|§,  or  reading  DnpD3  ;  after  dpxv^,  (Sc  continues  i)  X'^P^  airruv  (^  p3j;nN)=i2i"iJ< 
(cp.  V.'),  and  then  for  D'Jjyi  has  KKTjdovia-fiQv,  i.e.  D'JJJ?  without  the  waw. 
Apparently,  then,  ffi's  Hebrew  text  read  D'33y  "udk  DipD2  nN^D  »a ;  this  is 
probably  nearer  at  least  to  the  original  text  than  |§  MT,  which  arose  from 
the  accidental  loss  of  {'nx  in  D'iiyisnx  and  the  subsequent  change  of  hnVd 
into  IN^D.  If  CEr  read  mpD3,  the  3  also  dropped  out.  But  <&  even  is 
scarcely  the  original  text.  Possibly  mpD3  is  a  corrupt  dittograph  of  hn^ds. 
This  would  leave  a  better  sentence  than  |^,  but  substantially  the  same  sense  : 
their  land  is  full  of  enchanters  like  the  Philistines.  If  the  allusion  to 
enchanters  is  rightly  suspected  (see  comm.),  we  may  conjecture  that  D'^ay  is  an 
error  for  D':y33,  traffickers ;  by  also  omitting  D'nty^SD  we  should  obtain,  finally, 
a  line  not  only  parallel  to  the  probable  sense  of,  but  rhythmically  equal  to, 
ip'SB>»  0^33  *nVui.  That  the  clauses  D'nB''?S3  D'jjyi  mpo  ikVd  o  are  in  some 
measure  corrupt  is  generally  admitted  ;  the  emendation  most  usually  adopted, 
since  the  time  of  Lowth,  has  been  the  insertion  of  DopD  or  'Dop  or  D'DDp  before 
mpD,  or  the  substitution  of  one  of  these  words  for  onpo ;  but  there  are  serious 
objections  to  this  widely  accepted  emendation:  (i)  in'7D  with  a  personjil 
subject  and  a  personal  object  is  improbable  ;  (2)  the  emendation  fails  to 
explain  (K,  and  falls  to  the  ground  if  fir's  text,  which  contains  an  object  tor 
"ikVd,  be  correct ;  (3)  wvmh^z  D'33in  is  left  awkwardly  limping,  if  a  second 
object  of  in'?d,  and  inelegant,  though  abstractly  possible  (Dr.  §  135  (6)),  if  it 
be  a  new  predicate  ;  (4)  DTity^SD  .  .  .  ikSd  '3  is  too  long  for  one  line,  somewhat 
too  short  for  two,  and  if  two  lines,  the  following  line  is  left  isolated. — D'jajn] 
if  the  text  be  correct  (but  see  last  n. ),  D'Jay  is  Poel  part,  without  the  performa- 
tive D,  as  in  Jer  27* ;  G-K.  52^. — ip'sr*  Dn33  n'?'3i]  w-oi  nS',  if  the  text  is 
correct,  must  be  a  unique  variant  of  133  'J3  or  Dn33 ;  it  scarcely  means 
young  foreigners  {T)!.).  Hitz.  proposed  *n'?  for  n^-3.  Thevb.  pats",  to  suffice, 
occurs  once  in  the  ICal  in  a  North  Palestinian  source  (i  K  20^"),  and  the  noun 
pHJC,  sufficiency y  in  Job  20^  j  the  vb.  also  occurs  in  the  late  Heb.  of  Ecclus. 
(3933  (Kal),  39^*  42"  (Hiph.)),  and  pBD  is  common  in  Aramaic.  The  use  by 
Isaiah  of  a  vb.  with  such  a  history  is  not  very  probable,  though  it  was  natural 
for  (&  to  assume  its  use.  It  is  safer  to  suppose  that  pssr  here  =  pSD  (G-K. 
6k) ;  this  (with  D'S3)  means  to  strike  hands  (in  anger,  Nu  24^",  or  mockery, 

La  2^*,  Job  27^) ;  cp.  /jji-j,  and  the  citation  by  Lane  {Arab.  Diet.  1373) 

of  the  tradition  **  ^yu!i\     ^  xIAmJI  means  the  striking  of  hands  of  the 

contracting  parties  on  the  occasion  of  selling  and  buying  in  token  of  ratifica- 
tion thereof  in  the  markets. ^^  Unless  we  adopt  Hitz.'s  emendation  we 
must  suppose  that  pi5r(r»)  is  here  a  breviloquence  for  D'S3  pSB'(n),  cp.  ypn, 

Pr  11^'*= 13  ypn,  Pr  17^^  22^,  and  the  alternative  expressions  iJu  /ii-tfj 
i Jo  .  ^  ip^y  ^^^  (S^*^  (Lane,  p.  17CX)),  meaning  to  strike  hands  in 
concluding  a  bargain:  cp.  also  djii*^,  (i)  a  striking  of  the  hands,  (2) 
a  contract, — The  most  suspicious  thing  in  the  present  text  is  the  prep.  3  :  we 


■ 


II.  6-i8  59 

should  rather  expect  h  or  Dy.— 7.  h  r\)ip  pni]  Nah  2".— 8.  D'S'^k  wtk  kSdhi] 
very  probably  a  parallel  line  has  fallen  out :  Du.  suggests  vnaity^  n:tp  pKi. — 
nnnr']  read  ninnt?%  note  vt  :  otherwise  explain  by  G-K.  145m. — 9.  oriH  ne"i 
□nV  Hvn  ^Ki  r'K  "^B^'i]  a«^  j<7  mankind  is  bowed  down  and  man  humbled: 
the  consequences  of  v.^  though  actually  appertaining  to  the  future,  are 
described  as  though  they  had  already  ensued  (Dr.  7>«j« ',  p.  94) :  and  {there- 
fore) do  thou  (Yahweh)  not  forgive  them^  a  poetical  way  of  expressing — and 
therefore  shall  they  not  be  forgiven  (Dr.  §  57).  So  with  some  ingenuity,  but 
without  probability,  ^  may  be  explained.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that 
yy  9.  ii».  b  are  anything  but  corrupt  variants  of  the  refrain  which  occurs  in 
nearly  its  original  form  in  vv."*  ^^.  Yet  another  variant  probably  occurs  in 
5^' :  there  the  first  four  words  are  as  here,  but  instead  of  the  almost  certainly 
corrupt  on*?  Kirn  Vki,  5^"  has  r\htx;T\  D'n33  'ryi.  For  KB'n,  ffi  has  dj'ij(rw  = 
KBfK. — 10.  The  refrain  occurs  with  variants  in  v.^'  :  it  is  improbable  that  the 
rhythmical  dissimilarity  of  the  two  occurrences  of  the  refrain  is  original ;  since 
the  rhythm  was  probably  3  :  3,  restore  nnyo  (or  rnpa,  cp.  v.^i)  and  ni'?nD  as 
in  v.".  Moreover,  read  ik3  (ffi  :  cp.  v.^*)  for  ku  and  "UDon  for  pen :  in  v.^^ 
supply  from  here  udb.t  before  ni'?nD.  At  the  end  of  the  v.  (K  read  pyS  iDipa 
pK  as  in  vv.^*' 2^  |^. — IJIKJ  nnno]  for  similar  combinations  of  synonyms, 
cp.  Ps  145'-  ^' :  J.  Kennedy  proposes  uikj  m-inp  (cp.  i  S  14^°) :  unnecessary ; 
see  Che.  SBOT.—ii,  '*?sv  mnaj  'ry]  G-K.  146a:  but  the  text  is  probably 
corrupt.  See  on  v.*. — Kinn  dv3]  rhythmically  redundant  and  probably  an 
editorial  addition ;  but  the  refrain  should  be  completed  as  in  "'•  by  restoring 
here  iflSn'  S'^a  O'V'Vk.ti. — 12.  hsm]  (&  kuI  /xerioipop  Kal  raireiPud'^ovTcUf  of 
which  the  first  two  words  =  ?ii9i  or  a  word  of  a  similar  sense.  The  parallel 
suggests  that  this  was  right ;  xal  rair.  rendered  Van  after  it  had  come  into 
the  text. — 13.  D'Krjfn  D'cnn]  Sta.,  Marti  omit:  the  words  are  rhythmically 
redundant  and  they  weaken  the  sense,  for  cedars  of  Lebanon  being  the  tallest 
of  their  kind  need  no  epithet  (cp.  **  ships  of  Tarshish"  without  epithet). 

x6.  monrr  nvar]  mon  means  that  which  is  desirable,  or,  by  a  slight  and 
easy  transference  of  meaning,  precious,  costly  (see  2  Ch  36^'*  "all  the  costly 
furniture "  of  the  temple ;  cp.  Hag  2').  But  the  art.  is  suspicious :  ct.  '^3 
mon  regularly :  possibly  monn  as  well  as  nrar  is  corrupt.  The  idea  of 
desirableness  or  costliness  does  not  elsewhere  in  this  strophe  interrupt  the 
monotonous  expression  of  the  idea  of  loftiness.  t\V2V  together  with  nioro, 
the  only  other  derivative  of  the  root  found  in  OT  (see  Nu  33'^i  n.),  is 
explained  by  the  Aram.  K3D,  to  look  out,  look  for,  expect.  Meanings  that 
have  been  su^ested  are  imagery  (EV  :  cp.  noB'D  in  Nu. ;  and  (&  here  koI  ivl 
iracrav  diav  ir\oi(av  KciWovs),  watch  towers  (?  &  i^OJ,  Ew.,  RVmsirg.), ^ags 
(of  ships  as  being  conspicuous ;  Ges.  Thes. ).  Other  renderings  presumably 
based  on  the  text,  but  either  questionable,  or  paraphrastic,  are  palaces  (^),  H 
^uod  visu  pulchrum  est  (for  both  words).  The  most  interesting  emendation 
suggested  in  m3'BB'=n3'SD  (Jon  i''),  ships  (Siegfried-Stade) ;  while  Bennett 
(see  BDB,  s.v.)  and  others  have  suggested  that  rwyo  itself  may  have  been 
a  term  for  a  particular  kind  of  ship:  cp.  Che.  in  SBOT,  who  ultimately 
prefers  to  read  monn  niKOD ;  both  emendations  half,  but  only  half,  meet  the 
case  (see  comm.  above). — 18.  '^xv  S'hz  D'S^SK.ni]  exactly  equal  rhythmically 
to  the  first  two  lines  of  v.^'^  and  also  to  the  last  line,  if  we  omit  KVin  era  as 


60  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


editorial.  Restore  iKa  I3^n'  (Marti) ;  this  gives  at  once  the  pi.  vb.  required 
after  D''?''?Nn  (cp.  CBr  KaTaKp6\pov<nv)  and  the  imper.  at  the  beginning  of 
v.^^  corresponding  to  v.^".     '?''?3  is  ace.   (cp.  G-K.    Ii8,  5)  in  entirety,  all 

together,  one  and  all ;  cp.  \xJ-^s>-  />wljO^  as  a  variant  on  /juwlJo^  %.^j<a>^- 
( Wright,  Ar.  Gram.  ii.  82^),  and,  e.g.,  lx^/«.5»-   St^^'  ^^  forth  all  together 

(Kor.  4,  73),  lx>^5»-  L-xi  ^^j^Ss  ^J^  i<-^*^'  ^'^^^^  *^^y  ^^^^^  ^^^ 
have  entered  therein  [ib.  6,  36). — 20.  itJ'J?]  subj.,  ace.  to  Hitz.,  Di.,  is  they,  viz. 
the  craftsmen  :  improbable.  Either  VT  has  dropped  out  (cp.  31'),  or  the  vb. 
was  sing. — rway,  scarcely  IB'V  (Lag.,  Du.)  with  retention  of  the  original  3rd 
radical  (cp.  G-K.  TSb).  (&  also  has  no  equivalent  for  i*?. — nns  nsn*?]  the 
correct  Massoretic  text,  though  a  few  Hebrew  MSS  have  gone  back  to  the 
original  reading  of  ^  nnsisn?.  fflr  (rots  /naraiois)  clearly  read  one  word 
only :  so  Thcod.  0a/)^a/9c«;^.  For  meanings  that  have  been  suggested  for  the 
impossible  nns  nan*?,  see  Ges.,  Di.  ;  for  the  nominal  form  msisn,  G-K.  84^. — 
22.  JO  1*?^]  So  with  different  nuances,  Ex  14^^  i  S  9^  Pr  23*,  Job  7^*,  2  Ch 
35^^ — asyna]  with  gerundive  force,  G-K.  116^.— noa]  upretii-.  G-K.  119/. 


III.    I-15. 

This  section  has  been  commonly  regarded  as  a  single  con- 
tinuous whole.  More  probably,  as  Du.  has  suggested,  it  consists 
of  two  poems,  (i)  vv.^"^^^  (2)  w.^^'^*^;  the  first  has  been  enlarged 
by  the  incorporation  of  notes  and  parallels,  the  second  perhaps 
lacks  its  conclusion. 

The  reasons  for  supposing  that  there  are  two  poems  here 
are  briefly  these :  (1)  v.^^  constitutes  an  obviously  suitable 
commencement  of  a  poem ;  (2)  the  attitude  towards  the  rulers  in 
vv.^'^  and  v.^*  is  different ;  the  point  of  the  former  verses  is  that 
the  rulers  are  to  be  removed,  and  that  their  removal  will  cause 
the  fall  of  the  state,  the  point  of  the  latter  that  the  conduct  of 
the  rulers  has  brought  Yahweh  to  judgment;  (3)  a  marked 
difference  of  rhythm  and  structure. 

In  vv.^"^*  a  consistent  rhythm  is  very  clearly  maintained  (3  :  3)  and  in 
three  out  of  the  four  couplets  the  lines  are  parallel  in  sense ;  in  vv.^"^^ 
no  single  rhythm  is  maintained  throughout  in  the  present  text,  but  the 
dominant  rhythm  is  3  :  2  ;  see  v.^  (to  njyu'Di,  two  distichs),  v.**  (two  distichs), 
v.*  (to  Ssj)  ;  v.*  is  ambiguous — 3  :  2  (MT)  or  3  :  3.  Another  good  3  :  2 
distich  may  be  obtained  by  transposing  '•  and  reading  \"ii^  'JD'B'n'KV 
vfin  r\''r\^-vh  \  Dy.  The  interruption  of  the  3  :  2  rhythm  may  be  partly,  or 
entirely,  due  to  textual  corruption  and  interpolation  ;  but  whether  this 
be  so  or  not,  there  is  certainly  but  little  of  the   rhythm  and  parallelistic 


i^ 


II.   20-22   AND  III.   T-15  61 

structure  of  w.^"  invv.*'";  it  appears  only  in  v.'^  and  possibly  also  v.* ; 
yy  10.  n  clivide  into  periods  of  three  accents,  but  the  periods  of  parallelism 
are  6  :  6.  Thus,  judged  by  rhythm  alone,  v.^-  might  go  with  vv.'^"*°; 
but  if  1"^'  is  not  continuous,  the  new  start  in  vJ^  obviously  marks  the  main 
division. 


III.  1-12. — A  Prophecy  of  Anarchy  in  Judah. 

Rhythm. — Irregular,  but  in  vv.^"®  the  distichs  shown  in  the  translation  are 
mostly  3  :  2,  in  ***""  they  are  6  :  6.     See  more  fully  just  above. 

1  For  behold  the  Lord 
Yahweh  of  Hosts 
Is  removing  from  Jerusalem  and  Judah 
Staff  and  stay. 

^  The  whole  staff  of  bread  and  the  whole  staff  of  water.  The  mighty  man 
and  the  warrior,  the  judge  and  the  prophet  and  the  diviner  and  the 
elder  ;  *  the  captain  of  fifty  and  the  man  of  repute  and  the  counsellor 
and  the  skilled  in  magic  arts  and  the  expert  in  charms. 

*  And  I  will  give  youths  to  be  their  captains, 

And  caprice  shall  rule  over  them ; 

*  And  the  people  shall  tyrannise  man  over  man, 

Yea,  each  one  over  his  neighbour; 
The  youth  shall  act  rudely  towards  the  old  man, 
And  the  lightly  esteemed  towards  the  highly  respected. 

*  When  a  man  shall  lay  hold  on  his  fellow, 

In  whose  father's  house  is  a  mantle  (saying,) 
Come,  thou  shalt  bei  our  ruler. 

And  this  ruin  shall  be  under  thine  hand, 
7  He  shall  make  utterance  in  that  day,  saying, 
I  will  not  be  a  binder  up, 
For  in  my  father's  house  there  is  no  bread, 

And  there  is  no  mantle; 
Ye  shall  not  make  me  ruler  of  the  people; 

*  For  Jerusalem  hath  stumbled. 

And  Judah  hath  fallen; 
For  their  tongue  and  their  deeds  are  against  Yahweh, 

(?)  Provoking  the  eyes  (?)  of  His  glory. 
Their  partiality  hath  witnessed  against  them. 

And  they  have  given  evidence  of  their  sin  like  Sodom 
^  without  concealing  ought. 


62  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Woe  to  themselves,  for  they  have  done  themselves  harm. 

10  '  Happy  is '  the  righteous,  for  he   is  fortunate :   for  they 

eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings. 

11  Woe   to   the  unrighteous :    he   is    unfortunate :    for   the 

dealing  of  his  hands  is  done  unto  him. 

12  The  taskmasters  of  my  people  deal  cruelly, 

And  exactors  of  usury  rule  them. 
O  my  people,  thy  guides  mislead. 
And  confound  the  way  of  thy  paths. 

The  main  theme  of  the  foregoing  verses  is  as  follows : 
Yahweh  is  on  the  point  of  removing  from  Judah  all  those  who 
give  stability  to  the  state  by  the  discharge  of  civil  or  military 
duties,  or  by  advice.  All  effective  administration  will  then  come 
to  an  end,  violence  will  pervail,  age  and  character  will  no  longer 
command  respect,  and,  even  if  appealed  to,  men  of  standing  and 
substance  will  refuse  to  act  as  leaders.  This  imminent  and  cer- 
tain collapse  of  the  state  (vv.i^'^)  is  Yahweh's  judgment  on  His 
people  for  evil  ways  and  unblushing  sins  (vv.^*). 

As  a  matter  of  fact  this  theme  is  exhausted  in  w.  *"•*»,  and  indeed  is 
sufficiently  presented  in  the  rhythmically  similar  distichs  (3  :  2)  within 
vv.^'*.  Vv.*'  **"^2  may  be  sayings  that  had  at  one  time  another  setting. 
The  last  clauses  of  v.^  have  been  generally,  and  rightly,  regarded  as 
a  gloss  (see  below):  and  some  (cp.  Che.  Introd.  17)  consider  that  the 
catalogue  in  vv.***,  which  seems  to  be  in  prose,  has  been  interpolated  or  at 
least  expanded. 

For  all  that  is  known  the  main  theme  of  vv.i*^  might  have 
been  handled  at  many  periods  of  Isaiah's  life.  The  argumient 
drawn  from  vv.*- 1^  that  these  verses  were  written  in  anticipation, 
or  at  the  beginning,  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  is  very  precarious  (see 
comm.);  and  not  much  less  so  Hackmann's  argument  (p.  122) 
that  the  wickedness  of  which  Isaiah  speaks  must  have  been 
long  observed  by  him  and  in  vain  denounced,  to  account  for  his 
certainty  of  ruin. 

I.  For\  the  ^3  links  3I-15  to  26^-  (Marti),  or  222  (DL),  but  is 
perhaps  editorial,  and  was  possibly  absent  from  the  text  of  ffi 
(see  phil.  n.). — The  Lord  Yahweh  of  Hosts]  i^*  n.^Jerusalem 
and  JudaK\  cp.  ii  n. — Staff  and  stay]  all  means  of  support 
whatsoever,  all  "pillars  of  the  state"  (cp.  191^,  Jg  20^,  i  S  14^^ 
Zee  10*):  EV  by  its  alliteration  happily  secui^  some  similarity 


in.  1-3  63 

to  the  original  (see  phil.  n.). — "Staff  and  stay"  appears  to 
receive  two  explications  :  first,  in  the  clause  every  staff  of  bread 
and  every  staff  of  water^  it  is  interpreted  of  what  supports 
physical  life ;  the  removal  or  breaking  of  such  a  staff  means 
famine,  see  Lv  2626,  Ezk  4^^  5^^  14^3  (where  staff  vs,  ntOD,  not  ^ma). 
Since  there  is  no  further  suggestion  of  famine  (except,  at  most 
subsidiarily,  in  v.'),  but  the  entire  prophecy  turns  on  the  removal 
of  the  staff  2iS  next  explained,  this  clause  is  generally  considered 
to  be  a  gloss  supplied  by  a  reader  who  was  familiar  with  Ezekiel, 
and  who  saw  in  the  present  passage  a  prophecy  of  the  famine  that 
accompanied  the  Fall  of  Jerusalem  in  586.'* — 2.  3.  An  enumera- 
tion of  typical  pillars  of  state, — military,  judicial,  religious ;  vv>^- 
the  social  disorder  and  confusion  which  follows  when  every  such 
staff  and  stay  (v.^)  is  removed.  The  pillars  of  state  are  enumer- 
ated mostly  in  pairs,  but  in  a  curious  order,  or  lack  of  order ;  v.^ 
contains  a  second  and  similar  series  rather  than  a  continuation  of 
the  series  begun  in  v.^,  yet  scarcely  of  less  important  though 
similar  officials  (Di.),  for  the  classes  mentioned  second  and  third  in 
v.^  are  certainly  important  Further,  the  enumeration  is  of  persons 
whom  the  prophet's  audience  accounted  sources  of  strength: 
"  diviners  "  and  "  charmers  "  could  never  have  appeared  such  to 
Isaiah  himself,  and  indeed  his  fundamental  thought  here  as  in  ch.  2 
is  that  Yahweh  alone  is  the  true  strength  of  Judah  j  in  alienating 
Him  and  thus  losing  His  support,  the  people  work  their  own  fall 
and  ruin  (v.^). — The  mighty  man  and  the  man  of  war']  cp.  Ezk 
3920  where  the  prefixing  of  "  all "  to  the  second  term  (nonfe  \i^Vi) 
suggests  that  the  first  (lUi)  denotes  the  soldier  under  some 
aspect  ot  superiority,  whether  the  veteran  or  soldier  in  command 
(Di.),  or  the  soldier  by  profession,  Berufsoldat  (Ges-B.),  a 
member  of  the  bodyguard  as  distinguished  from  the  man  who 
simply  takes  to  arms  in  time  of  war  (cp.  2  S  23^,  Jer  5^^).  In 
view  of  such  passages  as  i  S  16^^  17^^,  2  S  17^,  the  distinction, 
if  it  ever  existed  apart  from  the  suggestion  of  the  context,  was 
scarcely  well-marked. — The  diviner]  the  term  DDp  denotes  a 
person  who  obtained  information  by  divination,  as,  for  example, 
by  drawing  lots  with  arrows  (Ezk  21 26^-  (21^-))^  the  practice  is 
directly  or  tacitly  condemned  whenever  it  is  referred  to  in  OT 
(cp.  e.g.  Dt  iS^o^-).  See  fuller  notes  in  Numbers^  329,  355. — 3, 
Captain  of  fifty]  may  be  intended  to  refer  typically  to  petty 
*So,  or  substantially  so,  Ges.,  Hitz.,  Di.,  Che.,  Du.,  Cond.,  Marti. 


64  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

military  officers :  or  possibly  f^  should  be  differently  punctu- 
ated and  the  term  rendered  "  captain  of  the  armed  men  "  (see 
phil.  n.). — The  man  of  repute]  lit.  he  whose  face  is  lifted  up  (xi{}': 
D'^JQ),  the  person  whose  reputation  rests  on  actual  achievement 
rather  than  on  mere  occupation  of  office ;  cp.  2  K  5^  Naaman 
not  only  held  high  office,  but  enjoyed  a  high  repute  because  of 
his  victories  over  Israel;  the  phrase  also  occurs  in  9^*,  Job  22^ 
(II  jmt  B^''K). — The  counsellor]  an  important  person — see  i^e  95 
19^1,  Mic  4®,  Job  3^*  12^'^. — The  skilled  in  magic  arts]  so  with 
RVmarg.  rather  than  the  cunning  artificer  or  craftsman^ 
see  phil.  n. — The  expert  in  charms]  or,  more  literally,  he  that 
has  understanding  of  whispering  charms ;  the  adjectives  (D3n, 
J133)  used  in  the  two  parallel  clauses  are  frequently  combined 
(Gn  4188.39  Dt  lis  48,  I  K  3^2).  The  noun  ^rh,  starting  from  the 
sense  of  whisperings  found  in  the  vb.  in  2  S  12^^,  Ps  41',  and 
in  Aram,  and  Eth.,  came  to  be  used  specifically  of  the  speech  of 
the  serpent-charmer  (Ec  lo^^  cp.  Ps  58®),  and  then,  as  apparently 
here,  more  widely  of  charms  or  spells  (cp.  320). 

4.  And  I  will  make  youths  their  captains]  the  sudden  intro- 
duction between  w.^"8  and  w.^*^*  of  Yahweh  speaking  in  the  first 
person  is  strange :  the  v.  is  possibly  not  in  its  original  position 
(see  above). — Captain]  "IK^  as  in  v. 2. — And  caprice  shall  rule 
them]  abstract  for  concrete — capricious  persons.  The  kind  of 
conduct  intended  by  D^i^li^yn  is  illustrated  less  by  the  only  other 
occurrence  of  the  noun  (66*)  than  by  some  uses  of  the  vb. 
(i'i?ynn),  which  means  to  treat  some  one  (maliciously)  y^r  one's  own 
pleasure,  with  the  result  that  they  are  made  to  look  ridiculous,  or 
lose  character  (Nu  2  2^9,  Ex  10*,  i  S  6*,  Jg  19^).  The  noun  seems 
to  denote  here  the  habit  of  mind  that  leads  to  action  guided 
by  no  sound  or  grave  reason. — If  this  v.  stands  in  its  original 
position,  it  repeats  the  thought  of  vv.^'  8  under  another  form. 
"  In  removing  the  elders  he  virtually  makes  youths  captains  over 
them  "  (Di.).  The  terms  are  quite  general,  and  there  is  no  good 
reason  for  detecting,  as  many  do,  a  specific  allusion  to  Ahaz,  who 
succeeded  to  the  throne  in  735  B.a  at  the  age  of  twenty  (2  K  16*); 
and  if  there  were  any  such  allusion,  it  would  be  to  the  prospect 
(Che.  Introd,  18  f.)  of  such  a  succession,  not  (as  Del.  and  others 
assume)  to  the  actual  reign  of  Ahaz  :  the  tenses  in  vv.^***  naturally 
refer  to  the  future. — 5.  Political  and  moral  anarchy.  Respect 
for  the  old  is  a  duty  coupled  in  Lv  1 9^2  with  the  fear  of  God. 


III.  6-8  65 

6-8.  In  this  condition  of  things,  when  the  state  is  obviously 
falling  to  pieces,  authority  and  leadership  will  no  longer  be 
desired,  but  will  be  refused  even  by  those  upon  whom  it  is 
thrust. —  When  a  man  lays  hold  on  his  clansman  in  whose  father's 
house  is  a  mantle  {saying),  Come]  the  words  may  also  be  trans- 
lated, When  a  man  lays  hold  on  his  clansman  in  his  father's  house 
(saying),  Thou  hast  a  mantle  :  the  first  translation  is  supported 
by  the  reply  in  my  father's  house  there  is  .  .  .  no  mantle  (v.^). — 
Clansman]  not  brother  in  the  limited  English  sense  of  the  word, 
for  note  his  (not,  their)  father,  and  below  (v.^  my  (not,  our). — 
In  his  father's  house]  if  this  be  the  right  translation  (see  above), 
the  suggestion  is  that  in  this  evil  time  men  keep  at  home  and 
need  to  be  dragged  into  public  (cp.  Am  ^^).  Does  it  also 
imply  that  the  man  addressed  is  a  person  of  family  who  lives  in 
his  own  ancestral  home  ?  Or  should  we  draw  just  the  opposite 
conclusion,  viz.  that  authority  goes  begging  (cp.  4^)  to  the 
lower  classes,  to  those  who  are  singled  out  by  the  mere 
possession  of  a  mantle?  Or  is  mantle  here  a  robe  of  office, 
and  the  meaning :  you  belong  to  a  family  which  has  furnished 
officers  of  state?* — This  ruin]  the  overthrown  mass  {rh^'2'0T\) 
caused  by  the  fall  of  the  state  (cp.  min^  rh^2,  \.^). —  Under  thy 
hand]  or  authority:  cp.  Gn  16^  and  (n^  nnn»)  Ex  i8i<>.  The 
phrase  is  parallel  to  thou  shall  be  ruler  in  the  previous  line : 
cp.  "  Edom  revolted  from  under  the  hand  of  Judah  and  made  a 
king  over  themselves,"  2  K  S^o. — 7,  A  binder  up]  of  wounds  or 
fractures  received  by  the  state  in  its  fall  (ni»65^3D,  v.* :  ni^K'a,  v.^) ; 
cp.  I*  30^8,  Hos  6^. — 8.  The  reason  for  the  imminent  and,  as 
the  prophetic  perfects  in  line  a  imply,  certain  fall  of  the  state  is 
the  opposition  of  the  people  to  Yahweh  in  both  word  and  deed. 
On  the  strange  style  of  line  b,  see  phil.  n. — 9.  Their  partiality] 
lit.  their  regard  for  faces,  viz.  in  dispensing  justice.  This  is 
certainly  the  most  obvious  interpretation ;  f  it  assumes  that  the 
nominal  phrase  Dn^ja  mDn  follows  the  meaning  of  D^:a  Tan  in 
Dt  ii7  i6i»,  Pr  2423  2821.  On  the  ground  that  the  entire  people 
rather  than  the  judicial  class  alone  is  here  condemned  many 
consider  the  interpretation  unsuitable,  and  rather  hazardously 
propose  either  (i)  the  show  (or,  appearance)  of  their  faces, %  or 
the  examination   of  their  faces \   or  (2)   their  impudence '.%   but 

•  Marti.  t  QTS,  RVmarg.,  Du.,  Marti,  Che. 

t  Di.,  AV,  Ges.,  Del.,  Cond.  §  Joseph  Kimhi,  Di. 

VOL.  I.— 5 


66 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


4 

A 


(2)  assumes  that  man  is  from  V"i3n  (Job  19^!),  itself  of  most 
uncertain  meaning  (BDB);  cp.  (&  ala-xvvq.  Some  such 
meaning  as  the  last  would  no  doubt  give  a  good  parallel  to  the 
following  line,  and  would  be  acceptable  if  it  were  philologically 
better  supported :  the  whole  v.  would  then  mean :  they  are 
shameless  as  the  men  of  Sodom  in  their  sin.  ||h 

pc,  10,  II.  General  moral  reflections. — "The  connec- 
tion is  certainly  rather  loose  and  .  .  .  Isaiah  is  here  merely 
putting  together  in  writing  leading  ideas  of  prophecy"  (Di.); 
but  the  sayings  may  be  later  than  the  age  of  Isaiah,  and  probably 
are  if  Du.  is  right,  as  he  well  may  be,  in  detecting  here  (ct  vv.^"^) 
a  well-marked  doctrine  of  individual  retribution,  and  in  the 
righteous  and  the  unrighteous  the  pious  observer  and  the 
careless  disregarder  of  the  Law  respectively. — ii.  The  dealing 
of  his  hands']  Jg  9^^,  Pr  12^^ :  for  the  idea  that  as  a  man  deals  he 
is  dealt  with,  see  33^  (of  nations). 

12.  Misgoverned  and  misled. — The  first  distich  describes 
the  pitiable  state  of  Yahweh's  people  due  to  the  cruelties  of 
severe  rulers  and  money-lenders  (€r),  or  to  the  caprice  of 
incompetent  rulers — boys  (cp.  v.*)  and  women  (MT,  EV). 
Those  who  adopt  the  latter  interpretation  find  an  allusion  here 
to  Ahaz  and  his  harem.  Here  as  in  v.*  Yahweh  is  the  speaker, 
and,  as  probably  there,  the  rhythm  (3  :  3)  is  unlike  that  which 
most  prevails  in  vv.^"^.  Unlike  v.*  which  predicts,  this  distich 
describes  an  existing  state  of  things. — c.  d.  The  change  from  the 
3rd  pers.  of  description  to  the  2nd  of  address  suggests  that  the 
two  couplets  of  v.^2  may  come  from  different  poems.  A  variant 
of  this  one  occurs,  probably  out  of  place,  in  9^^ 

I.  njn  '3]®r  ^5oi>  5i^,  possibly  =r\zr\  without  'r,  cp.  22"  10^  and  also  13^ 
62^^  where  7\v\  is  rendered  t5oi>  7(i/). — TDD  .  .  .  r\ir\'\  of  the  imminent  future  : 
Dr-  §  13s  (S)- — '"'"'''''''O"'  d'?«!'ttd]  in  ®r  (except  B)  the  order  is  reversed  :  cp.  i^ 
2^  in  1^  ;  but  ct.  3^  both  <&  and  |^. — rcyts-Di  jycj-D]  masc.  and  fem.  forms 
combined  to  exhaust  an  idea  :  see  Kon.  iii.  91,  who  cites  Nah  2^^,  Ex  35"^, 
Is  11^^,  2  8  19^^  and  Ges.  on  this  passage,  who  cites  Arabic  examples,  such  as 

i ^  ^.  -^1  <y  \^y  he  has  neither  male  nor  female  sheep y  i.e.  nothing  at 
all.  Neither  njytfD  nor  (thus  pointed)  jy^'D  occurs  again :  with  jy^p  (cstr. ), 
cp.  2  S  22^^=Ps  iS^^t- — 'j'^i  .  .  .  *?3]  ®r  omits  '?3  in  both  clauses.— 2.  ni2J] 
ffi  •^i'^o.vra.  KoX  laxiovTo.,  scarcely  a  real  variant,  but  the  last  two  words  in  ffi 
may  be  a  dittograph  from  v.^,  or  a  doublet. — 3.  D'B'Dn  ne']  the  versions 
anticipate  the  D>"pq  of  MT  with  which  Haupt  {SBOT)  compares  the  Assyr. 
rob  ^anJa.      Che.  (after  Sta.)  points  DToq  the  armed  men\  for  D'if'Dn,  see 


III.    I-I2  6^ 

Ex  13^',  Jos  i^*  4^',  Jg  7",  and  cp.  Ges-B."  pp.  239^,  240a,  with  references 
there  given. — j'yvi  D'js  kw3i]  ffi  koX  dav/xaffrbv  <t6(jl§ovKov  (ep.  9') :  instead  of 
the  two  terms  of  J^,  (K  probably  had  but  one :  we  should  perhaps  omit  {'jn'i  (Gun. 
in  Sievers),  then  v.*  would  consist  of  pairs  of  grammatically  symmetrical  terms  ; 
it  cannot  safely  be  claimed  (Marti)  that  (&  omits  D'jb  Kirji,  for  cp.  redavfioff- 
fi4voi  irpo<rdy!r(p  =  's  Kirj  in  2  (4)  K  5^ — D'tenn  cam]  H  sapientem  de  architectis^ 
and,  but  that  the  superlative  would  be  out  of  place,  ^  might  certainly  mean 
the  cunningest  craftsman  (G-K.  133^,  //).  But  the  gen.  is  rather  that  of 
improper  annexion  (G-K.  \2&x)  and  D't^nn  pi.  of  an  assumed  sing,  enn, 
meaning  crafts^  handiwork  (cp.  EV),  or,  more  probably,  in  view  of  the 
following  clause,  magic  arts  :  cp.  «.^;_k»,  to  practise  magic,  see,  further,  BDB. 
—4.  □'^i'?vn]  abstract  pi.  ;  G-K.  85^. — 5.  b33i]  generally  taken  to  be  Niphal, 
with  reciprocal  sense  (G-K.  ^id)  of  baj,  to  drive  (to  work  :  58^),  be  a  task- 
master (cp.  Ex  3')  or  a  ruler,  especially  a  foreign  or  oppressive  ruler  (9'  14*). 
The  Niph.  with  a  different  force  occurs  in  53'^,  i  S  13^  (?  14*^*).  b>J3  read  by 
8  MSS  is  not  preferable.  The  Versions  read  differently  or  rendered  inade- 
quately— (JR  KoX  a-vfiveaeiTai,  %  pnjn'i,  Sh  ^-2U0. — 6.  nxin  rhv^Qrci]  (& 
apparently  read  '9^5«i?i — wrong ;  note  uV,  plural  suf.,  in  the  previous  clause. — 
naS]  either  ^  +  2nd  sing.  m.  suff.  as  in  Gn  27^,  2  S  18^  (G-K.  I03^and9ifl0> 
or  2nd  sing.  impr.  of  iSn  with  emphatic  ending  (G-K.  48/). — 8.  nnD'?]=nnDn'? 
(G-K.  53^),  but  many  of  the  alleged  instances  of  this  syncope  are  questionable, 
mo,  to  be  contentious,  rebellious  {towards),  is  commonly  used  either  absolutely 
or  with  a  personal,  or  virtually  personal  (rm),  object,  or  with  an  ace.  signifying 
a  command  :  'jy  if='3'y  is  a  strange  object  for  the  vb.  The  sentence  uiveh  "2 
.  .  .  ni33  'jy  is  rhythmically  overloaded  and  awkward,  whether  with  Di.  we 
interpret  their  tongue  and  their  deeds  are  in  relation  to  Yahweh  of  such  a 
kind  that  they  must  provoke,  etc.,  or  with  Du.  al.  assume  that  Vk  stands  for 
Sy.  (ffir  renders  koX  al  '{KOxraai  airuv  fierk  dvofdas,  rd  irpbs  Kjjpiov  dTreidovvres. 
5i6ti  vvv  iTaireivudi)  ij  56^a  airwv,  which  may  point  to  the  presence  between 
niToS  and  'jy  of  some  letters  now  lost  in  |^  (cp.  &tlL).  For  'jy,  C&  probably 
read  m];,  &  py;  neither  variant  is  preferable  to  J^  or  supports  Gratz's 
conjecture  '3£3.  The  scriptio  defectiva  'jy  for  'J'y  (read  by  a  few  Heb.  MSS)  is 
suspicious,  though  it  occurs  in  Phoenician  :  see  Lidzbarski,  NSE  339,  Eph. 
i.  158. — 10.  31D  '3  p'"i)t  noK]  awkward,  even  if  '3  is  =  3rt  recitative  (BDB 
471^  bottom),  pns  subj.  of  3ia  prefixed  for  emphasis  (cp.  Gn  i82<',  Dt3i^, 
Mic  5*),  and  3io  means  fortunate,  prosperous  (Jer  44^",  Ps  112'^) — Say  ye 
the  righteous  is  fortunate.  Lowth,  al.  read  'ttk  for  noK,  which  makes  310  '3 
rather  superfluous.  (K  renders  curiously  or  from  a  fuller  text  dirbvTt^ 
A-f{(ru)fJLev  (Wis  2^^  ''EvedpeCaw/j.ev)  rbv  SUaiov,  8ti  Sycxpijcrroj  ijfjuv  iariv. — 
11.  y>  yvh  '1k]  rather  awkward  whether  vvh  be  connected  with  'ik  or  with 
ri.— 12.  ^'?iyD]  "  hh^V  1D3,"  ^fi.  ;  but  there  is  no  other  instance  of  '?'?iyD  for  the 
frequently  occurring  hhVt  child.  This  interpretation  is  as  ancient  as  Symm., 
and  has  been  adopted  by  a  stream  of  interpreters  since ;  a  slight  variation  of  it 
Is  obtained  by  treating  SViyo  as  part.  Poel  of  an  otherwise  unknown  denom. 
vb.  from  VSiy,  child,  meaning  to  cut  the  child  (BDB  "jSob).  W.  R.  Smith 
cited  by  Che.  (SBOT)  attempted  to  obtain  a  less  questionable  basis  for  this 
interpretation  by  emending  '?'?iyD  vvii  into  ^Siy  crjj.     In  spite  of  the  lack  of 


68 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


^S^^^K 


an  expressed  object  it  is  more  probable  that  f?'?iyD  is  part.  Poel  of  SVy,  to 
glean  (ffilTS',  Aq.,  Theod.,  U  spoiiaverunt),  or  to  act  with  severity  towards 
(Marti,  Cond.).  For  the  sing.  pred.  distributing  the  pi.  subj.  (Vb'jj),  see,  e.g.y 
Gn  272"  and,  further,  G-K.  145/.  Others  take  vb'jj  as  //.  majestatis  (G-K. 
I24>&),  referring  to  a  single  person.  — D'ty:]  (R,  Aq.  01  dirairoOi'Tes,  ®  Nmn  'td, 

Theod.  daveia-ral,  i.e.  D^a  (so  Houb.,  Marti,  Cond.);  %  \-m^,'ff mu/ieres, 
i.e.  D';^: — MT,  Rashi,  Ki.,  and  most  moderns. — T^nntt  im]  the  expression 
is  curious :  but  fflr  scarcely  suggests  a  real  variant  (T^JT  'n),  and  Cheyne's 
omission  of  inT  on  rhythmical  grounds  is  very  unsafe  in  view  of  the  varieties  of 
rhythm  in  the  chapter  :  |^  is  an  excellent  balanced  distich. — "I'nn-jN]  for  Tnn")K 
— lengthened  vowel  due  to  t  and  the  counter  tone  :  Sta.  109. — iy'?3]  by  a  bold 
figure,  paths,  of  which  all  trace  had  been  obliterated,  might  perhaps  have  been 
described  as  swallowed  up.  But  we  may  infer  that  yVa,  to  swallow  up, 
developed,  or  a  distinct  root  (allied  to  V71)  furnished,  the  meaning  to  confuse^ 
confound,  see  28'  g^^  j^s^  pg  1072?  5510 ;  Barth,  Beitrdge,  4f. 


III.  13-15. — A  Judgment  Scene, 


M 


The  rhythm  is  3  :  3 ;  in  three  of  the  four  distichs  the  lines  are  parallel 
in  sense.     The  concluding  formula  is  a  monostich  of  three  accents. 

18  Yahweh  is  taking  his  stand  to  plead, 

And  is  standing  to  judge  'his  people*; 
1*  Even  Yahweh  will  enter  into  judgment 

With  the  elders  and  princes  of  his  people. 
"And  ye,  ye  have  depastured  the  vineyard. 

What  ye  have  plundered  from  the  poor  is  in    your 

houses : 
"  What  mean  ye  that  ye  crush  my  people, 

And  grind  the  faces  of  the  poor?"  ^ 

Is  the  oracle  of  the  Lord  Yahweh  of  Hosts. 

The  prophet  sees  Yahweh  in  the  act  (2V3,  ^oy,  participles^ 
Dr.  §  135)  of  taking  up  His  position  as  judge  (v.^^);  so  far  it  is 
the  fact  that  a  judgment  scene  is  opening  that  the  order  of  the 
words  emphasises.  But  in  v.^*  the  emphasis  changes :  it  is  on 
the  judge ;  it  is  none  other  than  Yahweh  who  comes,  and  He 
comes  to  call  to  account  the  rulers  of  His  people.  Then  in  vv.^**'-  <* 
15a.  b  He  lays  the  charge  which  opens  with  effective  abruptness — 
and  ye — ye  rulers,  the  very  persons  appointed  to  protect  the 
poor — ye  have  robbed  and  wronged  them. 

The  more  elaborate  judgment  scene  of  Mic  6^  opens  also 
more  elaborately.  Cp.,  too,  the  opening  of  the  judgment  scene 
of  Ps  82. 


III.  I3-IV.  I  69 

13.  His  people]  so  rightly  ffi ;  cp.  v.^*;  "^peoples^  which  Du. 
explains,  unsatisfactorily,  of  the  Hebrew  tribes ;  the  reading  has 
rather  arisen  from  the  desire  to  turn  the  particular  judgment  of 
Israel  into  a  world  judgment. — 14.  The  elders]  representatives 
of  the  families,  survivals  from  the  earlier  clan-constitution  of 
IsraeL — The  princes]  the  officials  of  the  royal  government. —  Ye 
have  depastured  the  vineyard]  perhaps  a  proverbial  expression 
(Du.) :  if  the  vineyard  were  used  figuratively  of  the  Hebrew 
people  or  state,  perhaps  we  should  have  had  my  vineyard  (so  ffi). 
In  either  case  the  meaning  is — instead  of  tending  the  vineyard,  as 
true  guardians  should  have  done,  so  that  the  shoots  of  the  vines 
should  not  be  eaten  off  by  intruding  animals,  they  have  used  it 
recklessly  for  their  own  immediate  profit  (cp.  v.^**^)  by  letting  loose 
their  own  animals  to  eat  it  down. — Grind  the  faces]  the  verb  JPID 
is  commonly  used  of  grinding  corn  between  the  mill-stones. — 
The  poor]  here  plural,  in  v.^*  singular  collective. 

14.  DnKi]  cp.  '3K1,  Ps  2*. — omya]  cp.  nya  in  5*  where  the  parallel  odtd  and 
the  context  (cp.  5'  n. )  suggest  that  "lya  refers  to  destruction  by  animals  (cp. 
Ex  22*  ?).  Depasture  may  be  a  specific  development  of  the  meaning  exter- 
minate (4*  n.  6",  Nu  24^),  or  "lya,  to  depasture,  may  have  been  originally  a 
distinct  root;  see,  further,  Addenda.— rhii]  G-K.  95A. —'jyn  rhn}  plunder 
taken  from  the  poor ;  cp.  T3'K  ^^r,  spoil  taken  from  thine  enemies^  Dt  20^*  j 
G-K.  128^.-05^5]  G-K.  yjc.—i^,  rmyi  .  .  .  ow]  (!R  omits. 


III.  16-IV.  I, — The  Doom  of  the  Ladies  of  Jerusalem. 

The  lines  in  most  of  these  distichs  are  parallel  in  sense,  but  the  rhythm 
varies  :  in  3^"'  4^  and  probably  in  3*  also  (note  the  tQ\\ovc\g  parallelism)  it  is 
still  predominantly  and  was  once  perhaps  exclusively,  an  echoing  rhythm  ; 
but  the  lines  balance  (3  :  3  or  4  :  4)  in  '^'  *  ^6  certainly,  and  in  3=^*  •»  if 
n'.T)  be  disregarded  and  n'n»"pD  makkephed  :  so  also,  if  these  verses  be  not 
prose,  in  "^^^  and  in  3*,  if  TiniaJi  be  read  as  two  accents  (Sievers). 

^^  Because  they  are  haughty — 
The  daughters  of  $ion, 
And  go  with  outstretched  necks, 

And  ogling  with  their  eyes; 
Yea,  go  tripping  ever  as  they  go, 
And  jingling  with  their  feet: 
^^  The   Lord   shall    smite    with    a    scab    the   scalps    of    the 

daughters  of  §ion. 
And  Vahweh  shall  lay  bare  their  shame  (?). 


70 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


^®  In  that  day  the  Lord  will  turn  away  the  finery  of  the  anklets  and  the 
net-bands  (?)  and  the  moons,  ^'  the  ear-rings  and  the  bracelets  and  the  veils, 
^  the  head-dresses  and  the  armlets  and  the  sashes  and  the  perfume-boxes  and 
the  charms,  ^^  the  signet-rings  and  the  nose-rings,  ^  the  state-gowns  and  the 
mantles  and  the  shawls  and  the  satchels  (?),  *^  the  diaphanous  garments  and 
the  linen  garments  and  the  turbans  and  the  large  veils.  ^^  And  it  shall  come 
to  pass. 

Instead  of  perfume  there  shall  be  rottenness, 

And  instead  of  a  girdle  a  rope ; 
And  instead  of  workmanship  of  hair  well  dressed  (?),  baldness 

And  instead  of  a  rich  dress  girding  of  sackcloth, 
Branding  instead  of  beauty. 

25  Thy  men  shall  fall  by  the  sword, 

And  thy  mighty  in  the  battle. 

26  Its  gates  shall  mourn  and  lament, 

And  it  shall  be  clean  empty  sitting  on  the  ground. 


dness, 


4^  And  seven  women  shall  lay  hold 

On  a  single  man  in  that  day, 
Saying,  We  will  eat  our  own  bread, 

And  wear  our  own  mantle : 
Only  be  thy  name  called  over  us; 

Take  away  our  reproach. 

The  ladies  of  Jerusalem,  who  now  spend  their  days  walking 
about  the  city,  casting  wanton  looks,  and  calling  attention  to 
themselves,  will  be  smitten  with  unclean  disease  and  exposed  to 
insult  (vv.^6^-) ;  they  will  be  deprived  of  all  their  choice  clothing, 
perfumes,  amulets,  and  knick-knacks  (w.^^-^s) ;  instead  they  will 
become  offensive,  will  feceive  coarse  clothing  and  turn  bald 
(v.^"*) :  in  the  city,  which  will  have  lost  its  men  in  battle  (v.^^) 
and  be  lying  empty  and  desolate  (v.^^),  seven  women  will  think 
themselves  fortunate  if  they  can  find  a  single  man  to  take  them 
into  his  possession  without  providing  them  with  either  food  or 
clothing. 

The  fates  of  the  women  are  alternatives:  for  the  seven 
women  of  4^  are  scarcely  the  leprous  women  of  3^^. 

Possibly  these  alternatives  did  not  originally  appear  in  the  same  poem. 
Rhythmical  differences  in  3^^-4^  have  been  pointed  out  above.  There  are 
other  features  that  throw  doubt  on  the  unity,  or  completeness,  of  the  passage  ; 
in  V.25  there  is  a  very  sudden  address  to  a  city,  presumably  Sion  ;  in  v.^^  the 


III.  I6-IV.  1  71 

city  is  spoken  of  in  the  3rd  pers.  ;  if  vv.*'*  really  led  up  to  4*,  neither  the 
loss  of  men  nor  the  emptiness  of  the  city  must  be  taken  absolutely.  V.^ 
might  be  a  development  of  v."  though  it  is  rhythmically  different  from  w.^'*-  ; 
but  if  it  is,  the  catalogue  of  w.^^'^s  ««  completely  conceals  the  close  connection 
between  v." and  v.'*"  (Cheyne).  In  the  catalogue,  note  the  use  of  the  article 
21  times,  and  ct.  the  anarthrous  nouns  in  v.**.  It  is  also  claimed  that  the 
catalogue  "displays  an  attention  to  trifles  which  is  out  of  character  with 
Isaiah,  who  in  his  description  selects  representative  features  (see,  e.g.^  9**  "), 
and  abstains  from  giving  exhaustive  catalogues  (ct.  Ezk  27)."  On  the  other 
hand.  Gun.  sees  in  the  "jaw-breaking"  (Zungenbrecherische)  list  (Sievers) 
an  expression  of  the  prophet's  anger  (cp.  Whitehouse).  Du.,  Che.,  Marti, 
Box  attribute  vv.^^"^*  to  "the  inveterate  editorial  habit  of  supplementing,' 
and  treat  vv.'^'*  as  a  misplaced  fragment  of  an  elegy  ;  this  leaves,  as  a  single 
poem  in  denunciation  of  the  women,  3^'**  ^  4^.  Possibly,  if  the  unity  of  the 
passage  is  abandoned,  and  it  is  difficult  to  defend  it,  3^"'  is  a  little  poem  by 
itself :  it  would  be  quite  complete,  and  as  long  as  some  of  the  shorter  and 
earlier  suras  of  the  ^oran  ;  3^*  is  not  in  the  same  rhythm,  and,  perhaps,  not 
even  4^.  Another  possibility  is  that  lines  have  been  lost  (between  w.***  **•  ^) 
and  others  mutilated. 

There  is  little  to  determine  the  date  of  this  passage:  in 
specially  denouncing  women  (cp.  32^-),  Isaiah  follows  Amos 
(4^*^');  and  the  picture  of  the  women  in  search  of  a  husband 
(4^)  may  have  been  written  about  the  same  time  as  its  companion 
— the  men  in  search  of  a  ruler  (3*"^).  Du.  suggests  that  ^^'  is 
too  elegiac  in  tone  to  be  Isaiah's. 

16.  And  Yahweh  said]  these  words  were  probably  prefixed 
by  an  editor  *  who  wished  to  indicate  the  commencement  of  a 
new  poem,  and  overlooked  the  fact  that  the  prophet,  not  Yahweh 
(cp.  v.^^),  is  the  speaker. — Haughty]  n23,  to  be  highy  acquired  the 
meaning  to  be  proud^  set  up^  stuck  up^  self-sufficient-,  cp.  Jer  13^^, 
Ezk  16^^,  Zeph  3^^ — The  daughters  of  Sioti]  the  ladies  of  the 
"  West-end "  :  on  Sion  lay  the  royal  palace. — Tripping]  the  vb. 
fl^DlD  (here  only)  probably  signifies  the  quick,  tripping  gait,  making 
a  patter  on  the  ground,  of  the  women  whose  legs  were  bound 
by  ornamental  chains  (v.^o  ?) ;  just  as  t]l3  denotes  little  children, 
probably  on   account  of  their  pattering  walk.     The  word  is 

onomatopoetic :  cp.  the  like  sounding  Aryan  tap-.  l-c1^  has 
amongst  other  meanings  that  of  passing  by  quickly^  and  -*^^<^  f^ 
is  used  of  a  flickering  candle.  Cp.  U,  plaudebant  ambulabant 
pedibus  suis. — -Jingling  with  their  feet]  so  walking  that  the  metal 
anklets,  a   favourite   ornament   with   the  women   of  the   East, 

*  Che.,  Marti. 


72  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

striking  against  one  another,  make  a  jingling  noise  and  attract 
attention.  Cp.  Muhammed's  prohibition — "  Let  them  not  strike 
with  their  feet,  so  that  those  ornaments  of  theirs  that  be  hidden 
be  made  known"  (Kor.  24^1). — 17.  A  scab']  such  as  accompanies 
leprosy,  Lv  13  f. — Shame]  cp.  47^,  Jer  1326,  La  i^,  Ezk  i637;  but 
the  meaning  of  J^  is  very  doubtful.  U  renders  hair^  and  this  has 
been  defended  by  Sta. :  the  veil  worn  by  women  of  position  will  be 
stripped  away  (cp.  47^),  and  the  hair  exposed ;  see,  further,  phil.  n. 
18-23.  A  catalogue  of  one-and-twenty  articles  of  women's 
finery :  probably  a  prose  addition  to  the  poem :  see  small  print 
n.  above.  Some  of  the  terms  are  of  uncertain  meaning,  and  it  is 
therefore  difficult  to  say  whether  the  catalogue  is  carelessly 
compiled  without  any  principle  of  arrangement,  or  an  artistically 
constructed  list.  Cond.  ingeniously  defends  the  latter  view,  and 
argues  that  the  bijoux  and  analogous  articles  are  mentioned  first 
(vv.^^"2i),  and  then  the  sumptuous  vestments  (vv.22^-).  But  DnxB, 
head-dresses  (v.^o),  and  niQ''3V,  turbans  (v.^i),  are  widely  separated 
from  one  another.  Cond.  also  detects  a  subtle  arrangement  of 
grammatical  forms ;  the  2 1  forms  fall  into  three  groups  of  8,  5 
and  8;  the  first  8  nouns  consist  of  3  masc.  pi. +  3  fem.  pi.  f 
I  masc.  + 1  fem. ;  the  second  8  are  disposed  in  an  inverse  order, 
3  fem.  pi.  +  3  masc.  pi.  +  i  fem.  + 1  masc.  Two  earlier  scholars 
wrote  extensive  monographs  on  this  list :  N.  W.  Schroder,  Comm. 
de  vestitu  mulierum  Heb.  adjes.  3^^^*,  1745,  and  A.  Th.  Hartmann, 
Die  Hebrderin  am  Putztischy  1809  ;  see  also  the  commentaries  of 
Ges.,  Del.,  Di.  The  following  notes  merely  attempt  to  indicate 
briefly  the  nature  of  the  evidence  for  the  meanings  attributed  to 
the  words. — 18.    Anklets]   cp.  the  sing.   DDy  in   Pr   7^21    (text 

doubtful),  the  denominative  vb.  in  v.^^  and  ^juwK^,  the  cord  tied 

in  the  forepart  of  the  nose  of  a  camel  to  his  fore-legs  (Lane). — 
The  net-bands]  the  D''3K^  in  NH  was  the  ornamental  band  that 
passed  from  ear  to  ear  over  the  n33D,  a  net  covering  and  enclos- 
ing the  hair  (Levy,  iv.  498) ;  ffir  ra  cttAokui.  Less  probably  1  and 
D  have  interchanged,  and  the  word  means  a  little  sun  (-ouj<^«^), 

a  pendant  worn  round  the  neck.  Cp.  the  next  term. — The  moons] 
amulets  worn  by  animals  (Jg  S^i-  26|)  as  well  as  women.  They 
were  pendants  in  the  shape  of  the  moon,  in  particular  perhaps  of 
the  new,  or  crescent  (RV),  moon ;  the  meaning  was  evident  to 
(K  firjvLaKOL  (cp.  U  lunulae\  and  is  supported  by  the  etymology. 


III.  17-20  73 

which  is  obvious :  pnt5^  is  a  derivative,  not  necessarily  a  diminu- 
tive (G-K.  86^),  from  "inc  (= -y-2*,^  the  new  moon\  which  occurs 

not  only  in  Aramaic  literature  (see  Levy,  s.v.  Kin^D,  N"inD),  but 
also  in  early  Aramaic  and  in  South-Arabian  inscriptions  as 
the  name  of  the  moon,  or  moon-God ;  the  god  inB^  is  men- 
tioned along  with  ^^^  in  the  Aramaic  inscription  of  Zakir 
(9th  cent.  B.C.).*  Similarly,  hildly  the  new  moon^  is  also  used 
of  crescent-shaped  ornaments  or  amulets :  We.  Reste  d.  Arab. 
Heidenthums^^  145. — 19.  The  ear-rings]  Jg  S^^f  :  there  also  coupled 
with  "  moons."  These  nefiphoth  were  probably  drop-like  or  pearl 
ear-rings;  cp.  C]ID3,  to  drip^  nitphi  (cstr.),  drops  (of  water);  Ar. 
nafafat,  an  ear-ring  or  small  pearly  naffafa,  to  put  on  ear-rings, 
and  (reflexive)  tanafiafa. — Bracelets]  with  ni"ll5't  cp.  the  Aram. 
];  >  *j  K"i^B',  chains,  both  for  the  arms  and  other  parts  of  the  body. 
5r  is  here  explicit,  NH^  n^6J^ :  cp.  also  Arab,  siwdr^  a  bracelet,  and 
Assyr.  hmiru  {^sewiru,  sawiru)  with  the  same  meaning:  see 
Zimmern  in  ZA  17,  242.     BDB  derive  from  ^|'\'^'^. —  Veils]  with 

H^ixnfj  cp.  Jxj,  a  kind  of  veil  (Freytag).  It  is  doubtful  whether 
(&%  recognised  this  meaning.  —  20.  Head-dresses]  onNB  else- 
where used  of  the  ornamental  cap  of  a  bridegroom  (61 3-  ^o)  or  of 
priests  (Ex  392®,  Ezk  2417.  28  4418^)^ — Armlets]  with  nnyvf,  cp. 

mWN  (Nu  31*^  (n.),  2  S  1^0)  and  Juic,  the  upper  part  of  the  arm. 
jLit,  a  large  bracelet.  Others  derive  from  1j;v,  to  march,  and 
render  step-chains,  i.e.  chains  connecting  the  anklets  (v.^^). — 
Sashes]  Jer  2^'^\  :  cp.  the  vb.  in  Is  41^. — The  perfume  boxes]  lit. 
houses  of  soul,  or  soul-houses,  these  may  have  been  carried  in  the 
sashes;  cp.  Ca  i^^.  Unfortunately  the  meaning  is  far  from 
certain;  Pr  27®  gives  very  uncertain  support  for  K'BJ  meaning 
perfume.  Nor  is  boxes  of  desire,  or  exciting  the  sense  of  smell,  very 
probable :  see  BDB  66i«,  109^.  Haupt  {SBOT,  p.  82)  would 
derive  tJ'Sa  here  from  the  Assyr.  pasdsu,  and  explain  ointment-boxes. 
Frazer  retains  the  normal  sense  of  soul  for  B^B3,  and  traces  the 
phrase  to  the  belief  in  the  external  soul :  "  it  may  well  be  that 
these  *  houses  of  the  soul '  were  amulets  in  which  the  soul  of  the 
wearer  was  supposed  to  lodge"  :  Anthropological  Essays  presented 

*  Pognon,  Inscriptions  Simitiques  (1908),  no.  86,  ii.  24,  reproduced  by 
Driver  in  -ff^/.,  June  1908,  pp.  481  ff.,  with  note  on  Sahar  (p.  489).  See  also 
Cooke,  NSI 188. 


74  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

to  E.  B.  Tylor,  p.  148. — Charms'\  or  amulets  probably  consisting 
of  something  inscribed  with  magic  formulae  :  with  D^K^np  here,  cp. 
K^np  in  V.3. — 21.  Signet-rings]  see,  e.g.^  Est  3^2  Q^  ^1^2 — j\^ose- 
rings]  cp.  e.g.  Gn  24*''. — 22.  State-gowns]  Zee  3*:  apparently 
so  called  as  those  which  were  stripped  off  (K^n)  before  resuming 
ordinary  life :  ct.  the  English  "  undress,"  dress  not  worn  on 
formal  occasions. — Mantles]  niStOVD  f  :  cp.  fjOy,  to  envelope  oneself 
II  C'i?,  to  clothe  oneself  Ps  65^* ;  i_jLac,  a  mantle, — Shawls]  or  veils 
{DB  i.  627^):  Ru  3i5f.^ — Satchels]  or  purses  \  with  D^tDnnf,  cp. 
«itk)  ^r»-  with  the  same  meaning.    Peiser,  on  the  ground  that  pockets 

are  out  of  place  here,  surmises  that  this  is  another  term  for  clothing, 
ZATWy  1897,  341. — 23.  Diaphanous  garments]  €r,  apparently 
for  D''31vli,  has  Sia^av^  AaKojnKa ;  if  this  be  the  right  meaning,  the 
garments  are  so  termed  as  revealing  {rhi)  the  form  beneath  :  cp. 

Assyr.    gul^nu^   an    article    of  clothing,   Arab.    ^^^^  fine  silk 

garments.  Others  render  mirrors,  i.e.  tablets  (cp.  8^  n.),  that 
reveal  the  reflected  face. — Linen  garments]  Jg  14^2.  w  p^  3ii!4| ,. 
cp.  Assyr.  sudinnu,  a  garment)  see  EBi.  2933;  M.00TQ,  Judges, 
335,  337. — Turbans]  costly  or  official:  see  especially  Ecclus  ii^; 
see  also  62^,  Zee  3*,  Job  29^*,  Ecclus  47^t- — Large  veils]  like 
the  modern  izar  {DB  i.  627)  may  be  intended  by  DH^Ti  (Ca  5^!): 
cp.  lfj»?5l,  NTTi,  in  Gn  246^  381*,  SiW'  =  ^  ^l^yv. 

24.  Perfume]  the  smell  of  sweet  aromatics  used,  for  example, 
by  women  in  purification  (Est  2^^),  or  at  burial  (2  Ch  16^*).  The 
contrast  is  rottenness  (po),  i.e.  the  smell  of  scabs  or  festers  iy.^'^) : 
cp.  "  my  wounds  fester  (lp03)  stinkingly,"  Ps  38^. — A  rope\]  that 
encircles  {f\pi,  29^)  the  waist. — Hair  well  dressed]  nc^pp  f  is  to 

be  interpreted,  in  the  light  of  the  context  and  nc'pp,  hammered, 
or  turned,  metal  work,  of  some  artistic  treatment  of  the  hair. — A 
rich  dress]  such  should  be  the  meaning  of  the  obscure  7i^nBt  : 
(5r  XtTu>v  fi€a-o'7r6pc}>vpo<s. — Sackcloth]  20^  n. — Branding  for  beauty] 
the  clause,  if  not  a  popular  assonance  placed  on  the  margin  by  a 
reader  (Du.),  may  be  a  fragment  of  a  distich.  With  ^3  cp.  n^ia, 
Ex  21^^  Sta.  {ZATW,  1905,  133)  suggests  that  it  is  not  the 
branding  of  punishment  that  is  referred  to,  but  branding  as  a 
means  of  cure.  This  is  energetically  applied  to  men  and  children, 
but  the  beauty  of  women  and  girls  is  spared :  they  will  be  so 


ik< 


III.    2I-IV.    I    AND   III.    16-24  75 

spared  no  more,  when  the  days  of  catastrophe  come. — 25,  26. 

On  the  relation  of  these  verses  to  the  rest,  see  pp.  70  f. —  Thy  .  .  . 
ifs  .  .  .  /V]  these  pronouns  are  fern,  and  refer  to  the  city  (of 
Jerusalem).  The  gates  (D^nnD,  13^)  mourn  (^1^^  13K,  19*), 
because  people  no  longer  pass  through  them.  The  empty  city  is 
pictured  as  one  sunk  to  the  ground  and  mourning :  cp.  La  2^'', 
Job  2I8,  Is  47I. — IV.  I.  Women  will  not  wait  for  men  to  ask  them 
in  marriage,  but  will  press  to  be  married,  promising  to  forego  the 
food  and  raiment  which  a  husband  should  provide  (Ex  21^**),  if 
only  they  may  gain  protection  against  insults  by  passing  into  a 
man's  possession. — Be  thy  name  called  over  us\  i.e.  pass  as  our 
owner,  or  possessor :  cp.  631'^,  2  S  1228,  Dt  28^*^,  Am  9^^^ 

III.  16.  '3  jy]  7"  8«  29"  :  also  Nu  ii»  i  K  13"  2i»t.  Isaiah  docs  not 
use  the  more  frequent  nrK  |y\ — nnoj]  i.e.  riwxi)  with  preservation  of  the 
radical  (G-K.  T^v) :  K*re,  nvtp^. — nnpbD]  not,  as  in  some  MSS  and  the 
Bomberg  edition,  '«W3,  whence  AVmarg.  deceiving  with  their  eyes.  nBJf  is 
dir.  Xe7.  in  Hebrew,  but  cp.  Aram.  npD,  to  look  out,  eye,  especially  with  evil 
intent  (so  i  S  iS*  5),  or  to  look  abotit :  cp.  also  \\  ornVn,  squint-eyed.  In 
wy]}  "[pv  the  vb.  may  be  causative  and  the  noun  a  direct  ace,  making  the  eyes 
look  about,  or  more  probably  the  Piel  is  intensive  and  the  noun,  as  in  the 
previous  clause,  an  epexegetical  gen.  (G-K.  128^:),  ogling  with  the  eyes.     (& 

renders  here  iv  vtvfuanriv  6<f>0a\/jMv,  ^  1 1  »  V^  j]^;^,  U  nutibus  oculorum, 
C  pi'y  IpsnoD  may  express  the  same  sense  (cp.  Levy,  Aram.  Worterbuch,  ii. 
571),  or,  as  some  think,  it  vatKus  anointing  their  eyes  with  stibium.  "  Rabbi 
Jose  of  Caesarea  explained,  'they  painted  their  eyes  with  Knp'O';  Resh 
Lakish  said,  'with  red  collyrium '"  (Pesikta  d.  R.  Kahana,  132a,  b). — 
nja^n  f]i£)ai  ^^'?^]  G-K.  113J,  w.— on^Sj-ia]  on- for  }n- ;  G-K.  135^. — njDjyn] 
pathah  for  Sere  :  cp.  13^^  and  see  G-K.  $2n.  The  vb.  is  a  denominative  of 
Day  ;  v."  n.— 17.  nsri]  b  for  d  :  G-K.  6k  :  cp.  nn£o(D),  a  scab,  Lv  i3»-8  14". 
— pns]  in  I  K  7**  nine  denotes  the  sockets  in  the  lintel  and  threshold  in 

which  the  doors  turned,  and  the  Arabic  Ci->fti    means   interstitium,   space 

between  two  fingers  ;  hence  it  has  been  most  precariously  inferred  that  ne 
meant  pudenda  muliebria.  If  this  meaning,  which  seems  in  harmony  with 
the  context,  was  intended,  it  is  not  improbable  that  jnns,  or  rather  jnnD  mnn, 
is  a  corruption  of  jnninm,  nsnn  being  used  as  in  47' ;  see  J.  Bachmann  in 
TSKy  1894,  p.  650.  ffi,SC  may  have  detected  this  meaning  and  euphemiscd 
— t6  <rx^/*a  ainQ)p,  »m  » Vr>  .  nmj^  mp\  U.  crinem  earum,  on  the 
other  hand,  treated  fnnfl  as  =  {nnKS  (G-K.  23/) ;  and  this  explanation  has 
been  defended  by  Sta.,  as  earlier  by  Koppe  and  Hitz.,  in  ZATW  vi.  336, 
xxvi.  130-133. — 18.  mKBn]  this  cstr.  case  is  followed  by  twenty-one  genitives 
— an  extraordinary  instance  of  a  construction  which,  even  in  milder  forms, 
the  language  preferred  to  avoid;  G-K.  128a:  Kon.  iii.  276. — 24.  nB'yo] 
pointless  before  rwpa,  and  probably  a  dittograph  of  it  (Du.). — n"unD]  perhaps 


^6  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

the  original,  or  a  dittograph,  of  mun  above,  — 24,  25.  xro  'S'  nnn  'd]  (&  Kal  6 
vl6s  (Tov  6  KdWiffTos  8p  dyair^s,  perhaps  presupposes  a  different  text.  With 
the  form  *?(=  'i?),  cp.  %  %  's ;  see  G-K.  24^,  937. — 26.  am  px'?  nnpji] 
with  this  cstr.  cp.  29'* ;  and  see  Dr.  §  163  Obs.  To  be  cleaned  out  (cp.  Zee 
5*^),  though  rare  in  Hebrew,  may  be  the  original  meaning  of  n^i :  see  BDB. 
— IV.  I.  vc\Tir\  DV3]  ffir  cm. 


IV.  2-6. — -Judah  and  Jerusalem  after  the  Judgment 

There  is  unquestionably  a  marked  tendency  in  the  following  poem  to  a 
rhythm  formed  by  groups  of  two  accents,  one,  two  or  three  such  groups 
forming  lines,  which  are  combined  into  balanced  distichs  and  are  parallel  in 
sense.  If  the  words  represented  in  the  translation  by  small  print  be 
additions,  and  nos  n\T  (^)  be  read  as  one  accent  (cp.  Sievers),  this  rhythm 
is  not  merely  dominant  but  maintained  unbroken.  The  separate  lines,  or  the 
sections  marked  off  by  ],  correspond  (the  small  print  being  disregarded)  to 
two  accents  in  the  Hebrew.  The  transposition  in  v.'*  (ddv  jjy  before  ""jyi 
.TxipD)  does  not  affect  the  rhythm,  but  it  secures  greater  independence  and 
more  complete  parallelism  for  the  two  lines. 

Other  views  of  the  rhythmical  structure  will  be  found  in  Marti,  Sievers, 
Cond.,  and  Box.     Du.  and  Che.  print  the  whole  as  prose. 

2  In  that  day  |  the  vegetation  of  Yahweh   shall   be  |  a  beauty 

and  a  glory, 
And  the  fruit  of  the  land  |  a  pride  and   an  adornment  | 

for  the  escaped  of  Israel. 

3  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  thosc  that  remain  in  Sion, 

And  those  that  are  left  in  Jerusalem — 
Holy  shall  they  be  called, 

All  that  are  written  for  life  in  Jerusalem. 
*  When   the    Lord  shall    have    washed    away  |  the    filth   of  the 

daughters    of   §ion. 

And  shall  rinse  away   from   its   midst  |  the   bloodstains  of 

Jerusalem, 
With  the  spirit  of  judgment. 
And  the  spirit  of  extermination, 
^  Then  will  Yahweh  create  |  over  the  whole  site  of  Mount  §ion  | 

*a  cloud  by  day, 
And   over  its   assemblies'  |  smoke  and  brightness   of    fire  |  a 

flame  by  night ; 
For  over  all  glory  is  a  canopy'  and  a  booth, 
And  he  will  be  a  shade  |  by  day  (?)  from  the  heat, 
A  refuge  and  a  shelter  |  from  storm  and  from  rain. 


IV.  2-6  ^^ 

After  Yahweh,  by  means  of  an  exterminating  judgment  (v.*) 
which  will  allow  few  to  escape  (vv.^^-  ^),  has  cleansed  Jerusalem 
from  moral  filth  and  bloodstains  (v.*),  a  time  will  come  when 
the  land  of  Israel  will  be  clothed  again  with  verdure  and  will 
produce  crops,  which  will  make  the  Jewish  survivors  from  the 
judgment  and  their  land  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the  nations  (v.^). 
§ion  will  again  become  a  city  of  sacred  convocations  (v.*) ;  the 
entire  community  will  be  holy  (v.^);  and  Yahweh  will  visibly 
manifest  His  presence  in  the  same  way  as  at  the  Exodus — in 
cloud  by  day  and  flaming  brightness  by  night  (v.**) ;  and  He  will 
protect  His  city  and  people  from  all  manner  of  misfortune  and 
disaster  (v.*). 

Even  if  this  poem  were  Isaiah's,  it  would  be  doubtful  in  what 
period  of  his  life  it  was  written ;  it  has  often  been  assigned  to 
the  same  period  as  3^^-4\  but  the  connection  of  4*  and  3^®  is 
probably  illusory  :  see  below. 

It  is  more  probably  of  exilic,  or  post-exilic,  origin,  though  by 
no  means  necessarily  so  late  as  the  2nd  cent.  (Du.).  Whether 
written  for  the  purpose  or  obtained  from  some  already  existing 
book,  it  may  have  been  added  to  $^^-4^  in  order  that  the  little 
book  consisting  of  chs.  2-4  might  have  a  consolatory  conclusion. 

Though  the  awkwardness  and  incoherence  of  style,  the  absence  of  rhythm 
and  the  slight  amount  of  parallelism,  which  have  been  alleged  as  reasons  for 
questioning  the  Isaianic  authorship  (Che.  Introd.  20  f. ),  may  be  in  large  part 
due  to  textual  corruption,  or  incorrect  analysis  of  the  rhythm  and  parallelism 
(see  above),  the  ideas  and  thought  of  the  passage  alone  are  sufficient  to 
render  a  late  date  very  probable.  "Jerusalem  is  already  first  and  foremost 
a  city  of  religious  rites  (cp.  33^).  The  '  convocations '  are  the  *  holy 'ones 
of  the  later  legislation  (Ex  I2^«,  Lv  232-  *• «',  Nu  2.%^-  2*  29^  ^-  ").  To 
Isaiah  such  festivals  were  uncongenial  (l^').  ...  To  the  writer  of  i^"^  they 
would  be  glorified  in  the  future  by  a  constant  appearance  of  the  glory  of 
Yahweh  (cp.  2428  6oi-  '•  i»-  «>,  Ezk  42^-')  "  (Che.).  The  writer  by  no  means 
disregards  ethical  qualities  (v.*),  but  in  his  union  of  ritual  and  ethical  he 
more  closely  resembles  Ezekiel  (ch.  18  with  40-48)  and  later  writers  (48^  52^ 
62",  Zee  1420-",  Jl  4",  Ezr  828)  than  Isaiah  {e.g.  i^**-).  See,  further,  the 
Comm. 

In  language  the  most  significant  fact  is  the  use  of  Kna  (ffi  K3)  in  v.',  a 
word  which  is  predominantly,  if  not  exclusively,  late  ;  cp.  Che.  Introd.  p.  21, 
and  Ges-B.  s.v.^  with  the  references  there  given. 

In  1884  {ZA  TW,  pp.  149-15 1 ),  Sta.  thought  it  possible  to  regard  w.**  *•  ^ 
(in  this  order)  as  Isaiah's,  and  only  vv."*  '  as  late  ;  and  some  still  admit  the 
late  origin  only  of  v.*  (with '*) :  so  Di.,  Cond.,  Whitehouse.  But  there  is 
really  no  good  ground  for  separating  v.*  from  what  precedes  ;  on  the  other 
hand,   a  common  rhythmical  character   probably  runs   through   vv.^-^   (see 


78  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

above),  and  v.'  is  connected  with  v.^  by  a  point  of  style  (see  phil.  n.  on  v.*). 
Du.,  Che.,  Marti,  Kent  agree  in  regarding  the  whole  of  4-'*  as  late,  while 
Dr.  {LOT)  still  assigns  the  whole  to  Isaiah. 

2.  In  that  day]  not  the  day  that  is  mentioned  in  v.^,  3^*,  but 
a  time  determined  by  what  follows,  to  wit,  after  the  judgment. — 
T/ie  vegetation  of  YahweK\  all  that  Yahweh  will  cause  to  grow  out 
of  the  soil;  cp.  Gn  2^,  Ps  104^*  i47^-     In  order  to  emphasise 
the  point  that  Yahweh  will  be  the  source  of  the  future  fertility, 
the  writer  employs  nin"'  nox  as  an  alternative  to  the  more  usual 
phrases  T^yy^ixr^  nov  (Gn  1926),  me^n  'V  (Ezk  la'') ;  but  it  is  at  least 
unnecessary  to  think  of  the  land  yielding  a  miraculous  growth 
without  any  work  of  man  (Marti) :  for  see  Ps  104^*.     HD^f  means 
not  branch  (EV),  but  whatever  grows  or  shoots  forth  from  the 
ground,   whether   herbage   (Gn    2^),    or  trees  (Ex  10*) ;   meta- 
phorically it  is  used  as  a  term  for  him  who  should  re-establish 
the  Davidic  monarchy  (Jer  23^  33^^,  Zee  3^  6^2^,  and  it  has  often  * 
been  given  a  Messianic  sense  in  this  passage ;  but  this  is  incon- 
sistent with  the  parallel  the  fruit  of  the  ground^  which  indeed 
Del.  unsuccessfully  labours  to   show  also  means  the  Messiah  ! 
Di.  criticises  this  and  some   other   mistaken  interpretations  at 
length.— 7%<?  fruit  of  the  land]  of  Palestine  (cp.  Nu  1326).     The 
land  of  promise  was  a  fruitful  land  (Dt  8^-^^,  cp.  28^-1*),  but  from 
the  first  promise  was  accompanied  by  warning  :  if  the  people 
neglected  Yahweh  the  fertility  of  the  goodly  land  was   to   be 
destroyed,    or    neutralised,    by   war,    depopulation,    continuous 
drought,  bad  seasons  ;  see  Lv  26,  Dt  28,  esp.  vv.22-24.  ss.  ssff.^  ^nd 
cp.  Mai  3^"^2,     The  people  had  neglected  Yahweh :  the  threats 
had  been  carried  out,  harvests  were  yielding  little,  and  what  this 
poem  promises  is  a  restoration  of  the  natural  fertility  of  the  land 
to  those  that  escape  and  remain  (v.^),  after  the  cleansing,  exter- 
minating judgment  (v.'*) ;   the  fertility  and  fruitfulness  of  their 
land   is   to   be    the   pride   and  glory   of  the  community   that 
survives,  making  it  enviable   in   the  eyes   of  the  nations :   cp. 
3730-82  6oi4f.  622-4,  Jer  3I9,  Ezk  2o«  3425-29._7%^  escaped  of  Israel] 
the  abstract  riD^^Q  is  used  for  the  concrete:  cp.  io20  15^  3731^-, 
Jg  21^^,  2  S  15I*;  it  is  not  confined  to  late  writers,  though  in 
its  technical  sense   of  those   that   escape   the  (final)  judgment 
(cp.  Ob  ^^,  Jl  3^)  it  not  improbably  is. — 3.   Those  that  remain 
.  .  .  those  that  are  left  .  .  .  they  .  .  .  all  that  are  written]  all 
*  E,  Ki.,  Vitr.,  Del.,  Lag. 


IV.  2-4  79 

these  words  in  Heb.  are  sing,  collectives ;  for  such  sing,  collect, 
participles,  see  7*^,  2  Ch  34^^ :  cp.  also  Gn  4.^^,  and  see  O-K. 
126/. — //ofy  shall  they  be  called^  because  they  will  actually  be 
(i*^  n.)  such:  cp.  Zee  \/^^^'. — All  that  are  written  for  life  in 
Jerusalem]  a  third  description  of  the  community  referred  to  in 
a,  b ;  for  it  is  altogether  improbable  that  the  clause  is  restrictive 
(Di.),  meaning  that  though  there  will  be  some  who  will  acci- 
dentally (!)  escape  the  judgment,  only  those  who  escape  by  the 
pre-ordination  of  Yahweh  will  be  called  holy.  The  v.  may  be 
awkward,  but  the  awkwardness  is  not  overcome  thus,  nor  by 
rejecting  this  last  line  as  a  gloss  (Sta.),  for  this  does  not  restore 
either  ease  of  style  or  regularity  of  parallelism.  Those  who  will 
be  found  to  have  been  written  for  life  will  consist  of  those  who 
sought  and  feared  Yahweh  (Am  5*,  Mai  3^*),  who  did  good  and 
not  evil  (Am  5^*,  Ps  69^^),  and  so  avoided  the  exterminating  judg- 
ment (v.*),  which  destroys  the  wicked  (Mai  3^^).  To  be  written 
for  life  is  to  have  one's  name  written  in  "  the  book  of  Yahweh," 
otherwise  known  as  "  the  book  of  life  (or  the  living),"  etc. ; 
those  whose  names  are  written  there  live,  those  whose  names 
have  never  been  written  there,  or  have  been  erased,  die.  The 
earliest  reference  in  the  OT  to  this  book  is  Ex  3282^- ;  later 
references  are  frequent:  see  Mai  3^^,  Ps  692^,  Dn  12^,  En  47^ 
104I  io83.  Jubilees  3020-22,  Lk  io20,  Ph  48,  He  1223,  Rev  3* 
138  lyS  20^2. 16  2i27.  In  most  of  thcse  later  references  the 
life  secured  for  those  whose  names  are  written  is  that  of  the 
blessed  after  death  j  here  it  is  life  on  earth  as  a  member  of  the 
holy  Jewish  community.  The  idea  of  the  book  of  Yahweh,  or 
of  life,  has  its  parallel,  if  not  indeed  its  origin,  in  Babylon :  the 
god  Nebo  wrote  on  tables  "not  only  the  fate  of  the  world,  but 
also  that  of  individuals,"  and  there  were  "tables  of  favour"  and 
"  of  good  works  " :  see  JCAI^,  pp.  402  ff. ;  and  Jeremias'  article 
"Book  of  Life,"  in  Hastings,  Encyc.  of  Rel.  and  Ethics. — 4.  The 
daughters  of  ^ion\  (&Jhe  sons  and  daughters  of  $ion  :  this  is  not 
a  variant,  but  an  amplified  translation  expressing  the  probably 
correct  conclusion  that  the  context  requires  a  reference  to  the 
entire  population  and  not  merely  to  the  women ;  m32,  the 
daughters  of  is  very  probably  an  annotator's  insertion  *  to 
establish  a  connection  with  3^^ :  the  omission  of  the  word 
improves  the  balance  of  the  two  lines  and  restores  the  normal 
*  So  tentatively  Marti. 


8o 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


parallelism  Sion  .  .  .  Jerusalem :  cp.  e.g.  40^  41^7  64®,  Mic 
^10. 12^  Then  with  the  filth  of  Sion,  cp.  "  the  uncleanness "  of 
Jerusalem,  Ezk  22^^. — The  bloodstains  of  Jerusalem]  cp.  Ezk 
2  22^-,  Jer  2^*;  the  writer  may  be  thinking  in  particular  of  the 
innocent  blood  that  was  the  cause  of  the  Exile:  2  K  21^^  24^^'? 
Ezk  723  222-4,  and  ?  Ps  51^^. — Rinsed  out]  nn  is  used  in  Ezk  4088, 
2  Ch  4^  of  rinsing  clean  animals  offered  for  sacrifices :  later  (Levy, 
NHB^  s.v,\  of  rinsing  out  cups  also.  In  Assyr.  dihu  and  rihsu 
are  synonyms,  as  nn  and  I'm  here :  see  Del.  Proleg,  2770.  i. — 
With  the  spirit  of  judgment^  etc.]  that  unseen  power,  the  spirit  of 
Yahweh,  which  at  other  times  is  creative  or  life-giving  (Gn  i^, 
Ps  104^0),  will  come  into  play,  executing  judgment  on  those  who 
have  filled  Jerusalem  with  blood,  and  exterminating  all  evil-doers 
(i28,  Am  9^0).  The  word  "lya,  extermination  (C),  may  be  used 
with  conscious  reference  to  the  Deuteronomic  phrase,  "Thou 
shalt  exterminate  that  which  is  evil  from  thy  midst";  e.g,  Dt  13*. 
lya  also  means  to  burn :  hence  ffi,SU,  E  V,  the  spirit  of  burning : 

cp.  Mt  3^^. — 5*  Over  the  city  thus  purified  will  rest  the  same 
physical  phenomena  that  marked  Yahweh's  presence  at  the 
Exodus,  Ex  1321^-. — Then  will  Yahweh  create]  ffi  And  he 
will  come  and  {it  shall)  be ;  but  this  is  not  preferable  to  J^  (see 
phil.  n.).  The  creation  of  the  cloud  by  day  and  the  fiame  by 
night  is  a  parallel  to  the  return  of  the  "  glory  of  Yahweh  "  (Ezk 
431-4)  after  the  Exile  to  the  holy  city,  which  becomes  in  conse- 
quence the  city  of  Yahweh's  presence  (Ezk  48^5) ;  these 
accompaniments  of  the  divine  presence  are  to  cover  not  only 
the  Temple  (cp.  Ex  ^o^-^\  i  K  S^o'-),  but  the  whole  site  of  Mount 
Sion. — Its  assemblies]  i^^  ^^ — ^^  ^ygf^  ^11  glory  is  a  canopy]  or 
for  over  all  (cp.  Gn  16^2  24I),  glory  is  a  canopy.  This  strange 
remark,  which  is  not  much  illuminated  by  the  quotation  in  Ecclus 
40^7,  is  probably  an  annotation :  it  may  be  corrupt ;  the  opening 
words  of  v.^  and  a  booths  probably  belong  to  it,  either  as  a 
synonym  added  to  a  canopy  or  a  note  explaining  it.  nan  in 
Jl  2^^,  Ps  19^1  is  the  bridal  chamber:  here  it  is  supposed  to 
have  a  less  restricted  meaning — canopy,  covering :  cp.  the  vb.  in 
2  S  15^^  Jer  143.  "As  the  king  sits  under,  as  the  bride  and 
bridegroom  go  under,  a  canopy,  so  the  Temple  Mount  as  a 
king's  throne,  the  religious  community  as  bride  of  the  heavenly 
bridegroom,  must  have  a  canopy  over  it"  (Du.). — 6.  And  he 
will  be]  so  ffi ;  ?^  and  a  booth  (emphatic)  will  be,  or,  a  booth  will 

^1 


i 


IV.  2-6,  V.  8 1 

it  (viz.  Sion)  be ;  both  most  improbable,  for  booths  (cp.  Jon  4*) 
and  cities  at  all  times  furnished  some  sort  of  shelter  from 
weather,  but  the  point  of  the  v.  is  that  Yahweh  will  be  the  shelter 
and  protection  of  the  community,  and  that  therefore  no  harm  or 
hurt  will  befall  it:  cp.  25^  and  Ps  <^\^^  (where  i)V,  nono,  and 
">nD  are  predicated  of  Yahweh  as  are  i>V,  nono,  and  linOD  here), 
I2i6f.  (Yahweh  giving  shade  from  the  heat),  Jl  4^®  (Yahweh  a 
refuge ;  and  so  often  in  Pss.). 

2.  Whether  (!&  read  very  differently  (Che. )  or  paraphrased  a  text  similar 
to  f§  (cp.  Oort,  Th.  Tijd.  xx.  565)  is  uncertain  ;  perhaps  nos  was  read  nn:* 
(  =  X(iAt7reti',  La  4'). — ^3.  TDK'  .  .  .  n'm]  Dr.  §  I2i,  Obs.  i  ;  but  tvtu  can  be 
spared,  and  it  seems  to  be  rhythmically  redundant. — 1^  TDK']  'V  nDK3,  to  be 
called,  occurs  also  in  19"  32'  61^  62H. — 4.  d«]  ivheriy  cp.  24^'  7.%^  and,  in 
narrative  of  the  past,  Gn  38^  Nu  21*,  and,  if  the  text  be  sound,  Am  7^.  V.* 
is  taken  by  many  as  the  completion  of  v.*,  not  the  commencement  of  v.". — 
5.  nin»  Kn3i]  J^^'STF  ;  but  fflr  reads  /cai -^^ei  koX  #(j-rat  =  .Tm  xni.  Che.,  who 
renders  He  will  come  and  there  will  be,  and  Marti  adopt  ffi  ;  Du.  Cond. 
combine  ffi  and  f^  and  read  ni.T  k31  ;  this  involves,  as  Du.  perceives,  the 
omission,  which  is  supported  by  neither  J^  nor  ffi,  of  Sa  before  psD ;  for 
Vy  K3  in  a  friendly  sense,  cp.  Ex  18^. — nx^pD]  some  MSS  read  -TNipo. — 
nmpD  Vyi]  fflr  koX  irdvTa  tA  ireptKi^xXy  avrrjs  (claimed  by  Oort  as  =  n'B'njD),  S  (?) 
C7Lk5{3«»  NIL,  ^  n'wor  n»a  vik  '?j;i,  U  «/  ubi  invocatus  est.  ffi's  Tdti'Ta  may 
render  Sv  misread  Sa,  or  Va  may  have  been  lost  in  J^  (cp.  ||  pan  Sa) ;  Du. 
with  less  probability  omits  Sy  altogether.  The  parallelism  is  improved  if 
we  suppose  this  clause  originally  stood  after  ddv. — '1  jB'yi]  jry  is  perhaps  a 
dittograph  of  py,  and  the  two  \  subsequent  additions.  —  5,  6.  nna^Va-Vy  '3 
n'nn  naoi  nsn]  (K  /cal  irdcri;  r^  86^]?  aKewaadi^erai  Kal  (ffrai.  In  ffi  (TKeiraa- 
d-^<T€Tai  (=130,  Ex  40*-  2^)  renders  one  of  the  words  nsn  and  naoi,  and  has  no 
equivalent  for  the  other.  Instead  of  n'nn,  dSc  probably  read  n\ni  ;  and  this, 
moreover,  is  probably  the  true  reading,  for  which  n\nn  was  substituted  after 
nao  was  erroneously  separated  from  what  precedes.  From  n'ni  to  the  end  of 
v.*  is  a  well-balanced  distich  (4  :  4)  of  parallel  lines ;  though  the  balance 
would  be  imperfect  if  ®r  is  correct  in  omitting  ddv  :  probably  in  this  respect 
1^  is  preferable  to  ffi,  though  it  is  possible  DDV  conceals  a  synonym  to  ^s — 
Yahweh  will  be  a  shade  and  a  .  .  .  from  the  heat ;  note  the  writer's  fondness 
for  synonyms :  see  vv.^  *••  "^  and  probably  ^^,  If  the  reading  n'm  be  correct, 
the  intrusive  nature  of  nam  nsjn  maa-^a-Vy  'a  is  obvious. 


V. 

This  chapter  is  in  no  sense  a  continuation  of  ch.  4 :  from 
the  Messianic  hopes  at  the  end  of  chs.  2-4  we  return  here  to 
announcements  of  judgments  in  three  very  distinct  and  un- 
connected   poems — (i)    w.^-*^,    the   parable   of  the   vineyard; 

VOL  I. — 6 


82 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


(2)  vv.^-24,  a  collection  of  "woes";   (3)  w.^^-si,  the  misplaced 
conclusion  of  9'^-io* 


V.  1-7. — The  Parable  of  the  Vineyard, 

Special  Discussions  : — P.  Cersoy,  "  L' Apologue  de  la  Vigne,"  in  Rev,  Bibl,^ 
1899,  pp.  2-12  ;  P.  Haupt,  •*  Isaiah's  Parable  of  the  Vineyard,"  AJSL  xix. 
193-202. 

The  rhythm  of  the  poem  can  only  be  reduced  to  regularity  by  extensive 
omissions  such  as  Haupt  makes  in  reducing  the  whole  to  four  stanzas,  each 
consisting  of  four  lines,  each  line  containing  four  accents  equally  divided  by  a 
caesura.  If  the  present  text  is  substantially  correct,  the  quality  of  the  rhythm 
appears  to  change  ;  the  light  tripping  effect  of  short  lines  (down  to  v.^^)  gives 
place  to  longer  and  weightier  lines  in  the  grave  and  solemn  application  of  the 
parable  at  the  close.     The  following  types  of  distich  occur  : 

2  :  2  in  vv.^*-  ^  (makkeph   wm'B'K  and   nn-m'»),   ••  ^    (if  'h'r\''7\  be 
substituted  for  nn'^),  **•  »>•  ^  •*. 


2c.  d.  4a.  b 


(?)  ^-  *»  (makkeph  'JK'nts'K-nK)  *^  <*. 


3  :  3  m  w. 

3  :  2  in  vv.i«-  ^  (|§),  2e.  f.  Sa.  b.  4».  b  (probably). 

4  :  2  in  v.^-  **. 

4  :  4  in  vv.''*'*  **•  '■-  *•  (makkeph  'r"-n'a  or  omit  niK3s). 

4  :  3  in  vv.**'  •>  (if  tdi'-k^  and  myK*?!  may  each  be  read  as  one  accent), 

1  Let  me  sing  of  my  loved  one,  I  pray, 

A  song  of  .  .  .  touching  his  vineyard. 

A  vineyard  belonged  to  my  loved  one 
On  a  fertile  hill-top; 

2  And  he  opened  up  the  ground,  and  cleared  out  its  stones, 

And  he  planted  it  with  the  choicest  vines ; 
And  he  built  in  its  midst  a  tower, 

And  hewed  out  in  it  also  a  wine-press; 
And  he  expected  it  to  yield  grapes, 

And  it  yielded — wildings. 

8  And  now,  ye  dwellers  in  Jerusalem, 
And  ye  men  of  Judah, 
Judge,  pray,  between  me 
And  between  my  vineyard. 
*  What  remained  to  do  for  my  vineyard 
That  I  had  not  done  in  it? 
Why  when  I  looked  for  yield  of  grapes 
Yielded  it — wildings? 


V.  1-7  83 

»  And  now,  pray,  let  me  acquaint  you 
With  what  I  shall  do  to  my  vineyard; 
1  will  take  away  its  hedge  that  it  be  depastured, 

I  will  make  breaches  in  its  walls  that  it  be  trampled  down, 
*  I  will  make  it  a  waste,  unpruned  and  unhoed, 
And  it  shall  spring  up  with  thorns  and  briars; 
And  I  will  command  the  clouds 
That  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it. 

''  For  the  vineyard  of  Yahweh  Sebaoth  is  the  House  of  Israel, 
And  the   men   of  Judah   the    plantation    in    which    he 

delighted ; 
And  he  expected  justice,  but,  behold,  bloodshed, 
Righteousness,  but,  behold,  a  cry! 

In  J^  the  poem  is  articulated  as  follows  :  v.^**  \  introduction  ; 
^"-^f  the  prophet's  description  of  the  vineyard ;  ^"^,  the  speech 
of  the  owner  of  the  vineyard  which  towards  its  close  (v.^''-  ^) 
somewhat  clearly  reveals  the  speaker  to  be  Yahweh ;  vJ,  the 
prophet's  interpretation  of  the  parable.  In  ffi  vv.^^-  ^  also  belong 
to  the  speech  of  the  owner. 

The  vineyard  which  has  received  all  the  care  that  any  vine- 
yard could  receive  is  Judah ;  its  owner,  Yahweh ;  the  fruit  it 
should  have  yielded,  righteousness  and  justice ;  the  fruit  actually 
yielded,  violence  and  inhumanity.  With  great  rhetorical  effect- 
iveness the  ultimate  conclusion  is  left  for  the  audience  to  draw 
for  themselves — Yahweh  will  abandon  Judah  to  destruction. 

With  the  theme  of  the  parable,  cp.  the  teaching  of  Amos 
at  Bethel  a  generation  before :  see  especially  Am  3^.  For 
other  applications  of  the  figure  of  the  vineyard  to  Israel,  see 
27^*,  Jer  2^1  i2iof.^  Ps  8o»^-,  Mt  2188^-.  In  the  specific  applica- 
tion of  details,  as  of  the  tower  in  v.*  to  the  Temple,  of  the 
wine-press  to  the  altar,  C  (cp.  Jerome)  is  mistaken. 

Possibly  enough  this  poem  was  recited  by  Isaiah  (cp. 
Introd.  §§  36  ff.)  on  a  great  national  feast  day  :  at  the  close  of  the 
vintage  and  in  the  Temple  Courts  he  would  easily  have  found 
men  of  the  country  as  well  as  of  the  city — v.**-  ^ :  cp.  Jer  36^. 
But  the  year  in  which  the  poem  was  either  written  or  recited 
cannot  be  even  approximately  determined :  the  thoughts 
expressed  in  it  may  have  occupied  Isaiah's  mind  at  almost  any 
period  of  his  life.     Du.  argues,  inconclusively,  that  the  parable 


84 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


form  indicates  that  the  poem  was  written  early,  since  later  the 
audience  would  have  guessed  from  the  start  the  burden  of  the 
song;  Hackm.  (p.  123),  that  it  was  written  late,  when  Isaiah, 
being  long  known  as  a  prophet  of  evil,  had  to  conceal  his 
meaning  in  order  to  gain  a  hearing.  An  early  date  has  been 
inferred  by  others  rather  on  account  of  the  early  date,  assumed 
or  proved,  of  the  neighbouring  poems  (chs.  2-4  5^"^®)  than 
from  anything  in  the  parable  itself. 

la.  b.  These  lines  are  ambiguous,  and  the  text  not  beyond 
question. — My  loved  one]  Tl^  is  used  of  Judah  (Jer  ii^^^  Ps  60^), 
and  Benjamin  (Dt  33^2^  ^s  the  loved  one  of  Yahweh :  cp.  also 
Ps  1272.  Here,  if  the  text  in  v.^*'  is  correct,  it  must  be  applied 
to  Yahweh :  yet  it  is  remarkable  that  Isaiah  should  use,  even  in 
parable,  so  familiar  a  term  :  poets  of  another  race  and  temper 
may  speak  of  God  as  "  my  darling,"  *  but  to  Isaiah,  Yahweh  was 
the  Holy  One,  the  Lord,  the  Mighty  One.  If  v.^*'  is  corrupt  we 
might  render  in  ^^  to  my  loved  one^  i.e.  Israel  (cp.  ffiFC,  AV),  or  of 
my  beloved  (vineyard) :  see  below.  That  Tn^  in  v.^*  is  Israel  and 
in  in  v.i^  and  by  restoration  in  v.^*'  is  Yahweh,  as  Sta.  {ZA  W 
xxvi.  134)  proposed,  is  very  improbable. — The  song  of ,  .  .]  nn, 
left  untranslated  on  account  of  its  ambiguity,  may  be  a  synonym 
(cp.  e.g.  Ca  i^^^-)  of  in"'  in  the  previous  line  :  in  also  means 
uncle,  and  is  actually  rendered  here  by  Jer.,  though  with  obvious 
unsuitability,  patruelis.  In  the  pi.  DHIT  means  love^  but  always 
perhaps  specifically  sexual  desire  or  its  satisfaction :  see  Ezk 
158  2317^  Pr  7I8,  Ca  i^-*  410  5I.  If  we  render  the  song  of  my 
beloved  (MT,  EV),  then  v.^*  will  imply  that  the  loved  one  is  the 
subject  of  the  poem,  or  the  person  to  whom  it  is  addressed,  ^^ 
that  he  is  the  author  of  the  song  and  his  vineyard  the  subject : 
this  is  awkward  and  improbable  in  itself;  moreover,  the  next 
lines  show  that  the  friend  is  not  the  author,  but  the  subject  of 
the  poem  :  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  3rd  pers.  Di.  indeed,  though 
quite  unsatisfactorily,  attempts  to  meet  this  difficulty  by  suggest- 
ing that  Isaiah  has  translated  the  words  of  the  friend  into  the 
3rd  pers.  and  so  avoided  making  God  recite  a  popular  song  (ct. 
272-6). — His  vineyard^  fflc  my  vineyard.  If  we  adopt  ffi,  and 
also  the  ist  persons  of  (&  in  v.^,  and  assume  further  that 
"•in^fj  in  line  c  is  a  corruption,  under  the  influence  of  the  same 
word  in  the  previous  line,  of  ^7,  that  *in^  might  be  used  of  life- 
*  E.  G.  Browne,  A  Year  amongst  the  Persians,  p.  490. 


V.    I,    2  85 

less  objects,  and  that  *in  was  not  limited  to  sexual  desire, 
then,  pointing  ^llT  we  should  have  an  excellent  introductory 

couplet : 

Let  me  sing  of  the  thing  that  I  love. 

The  song  of  my  love  for  my  vineyard. 

Then  the  entire  song,  so  far  as  it  treats  directly  of  the  vineyard,  is 
in  the  first  person :  the  prophet  in  reciting  it  seems  at  first  to  be 
referring  to  a  vineyard  of  his  own,  and  only  towards  the  close 
does  he  allow  it  to  be  seen  that  he  is  speaking  in  Yahweh's 
name.  But  the  difficulties  of  the  v.,  and  of  the  relation  of  f^ 
and  (&J  have  as  yet  reached  no  solution. 

ia-2.  The  site  of  the  vineyard  is  an  isolated  hill-top  or  hill, 
which  catches  all  the  sunshine :  the  soil  is  fertile.  The  owner 
has  carefully  turned  the  soil  to  increase  its  power  to  bear  well, 
and  cleared  it  of  stones,  an  important  process  in  the  rocky, 
stony  but  potentially  fruitful  soil  of  Palestine;  cp.  Job  5^8,  ct. 
2  K  3^'.  On  this  well-chosen  and  well-prepared  soil  vines  of 
choice  stock  have  been  planted,  and  something  more  than  a 
mere  temporary  shelter  (i  8),  a  permanent  tower  (cp.  Mt  21^3),  has 
been  erected  for  the  protection  of  the  vineyard.  Finally,  a  wine- 
press is  hewn  out  in  the  rock  to  receive  the  juice  of  the  grapes 
which  ought  to  be  the  result  of  all  this  care.  The  actual  crop 
consists  of  worthless  berries. 

My  loved  one]  possibly  an  error  for  to  mei  see  last  n.  on 
v.^^ — A  fertile  hilltop]  in  Heb.  idiom,  which  U  renders  literally, 
and  after  it,  Wycliffe,  a  horn  the  son  of  oil.  The  use  of  pp,  hom^  is 
paralleled  by  ^^.5,  a  small  hill,  or  a  part  of  a  hill  separated  from 

the  rest,  and  by  Alpine  names  such  as  Gabelhorn,  Matterhom ; 
with  pK^,  oil,  for  fatness,  fertility,  cp.  D^3»K^  S"'i,  28^,  and  the  use  of 
the  vb.  in  Dt  32^* ;  and  for  the  idiomatic  use  of  "  son,"  see  BDB, 
s.v,  8. — 2.  He  opened  up  the  ground]  in  NH  the  vb.  pTV  (here  only 
in  OT)  means  to  turn  over  the  ground,  as,  for  example,  under  olive- 
trees  (vn^T  nnn  pnyu^  1KV»),  or  in  a  graveyard,  to  see  whether  bones 
remain  there  :  see  Levy,  NHB,  s.v.  In  Arabic  the  root  occurs 
with  a  similar  meaning.  MT  perhaps  rightly  treats  the  word  as  a 
Piel — he  well,  ox  frequently,  turned  over  the  ground',  ffiF,  AV,  he 
fenced  it,  anticipate  a  point  that  comes  out  in  v.*. — Choicest 
vines]  %  Sore^ — apparently  the  name  of  a  specially  choice 
vine :  cp.  Jer  2^^\,     The  nonien  unitatis  PlplB^  in  Gn  49^^!. — A 


86 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


wine-press]  the  Dp"*  is  strictly  the  lower  trough  into  which  the 
juice  pressed  out  in  the  upper  trough  drained  off;  but  it  is 
sometimes  used  of  the  whole  press:  see  EBi.  531  iff.  The 
wine-press  is  hewn  out^  i.e.  in  the  solid  rock,  which  in  Palestine 
rises  close  to  the  surface  of  the  soil  and  often  crops  out  above 
it. —  Wildings]  U  renders  D''B'N3  (v.*!)  by  labruscas^  i.e.  grapes 
that  grow  wild :  and  this  is  doubtless  right.  The  root  in  Aram, 
means  to  be  bad,  evil^  in  Heb.  to  have  a  bad  smell. — 3.  For  the 
transition  in  5^  at  this  point  to  the  ist  person,  see  above.  Du. 
supposes  that  up  till  now  the  audience  treat  the  matter  as  a  joke, 
ask  themselves,  will  the  owner  get  rid  of  the  vineyard  to  us, 
or  turn  it  into  pasture,  or  perchance  try  the  experiment  of 
planting  it  with  wild  vines.  But  the  owner  does  not  ask  the 
audience  what  he  should  do :  on  this  his  mind  is  made  up  and 
communicated  immediately  (w.^*^-).  He  asks  for  their  judgment 
on  the  vineyard,  i.e.  on  themselves.  Like  David  (2  S  12),  they 
are  driven  to  self-condemnation ;  for  they  can  only  avoid  self- 
condemnation  by  denying  the  applicability  of  the  parable,  i.e.  by 
denying  Yahweh's  care  (v.*^*-  ^),  or  the  present  prevalence  in 
Israel  of  violence  and  unrighteousness  (7*'*  ^). — 4.  After  this  v., 
before  the  first  and  now  of  v.^  (cp.  v.^),  a  pause  may  be  assumed 
in  which  the  audience  silently  allow  that  the  owner  had  done  all 
that  was  required  for  the  vineyard,  and  that  for  the  vineyard  itself 
no  excuse  can  be  offered. — 5  f*  Judgment  on  the  vineyard  :  all 
protection,  care,  and  attention  to  be  withdrawn  from  it.  V.*  fills 
in  fresh  features  of  the  picture.  The  vineyard  had  been  pro- 
tected by  a  hedge  such  as  those  hedges  of  the  prickly  pear  which 
form  so  efficient  a  protection  to  the  gardens  of  modern  Palestine 
— around  Beirut  or  Gaza  and  elsewhere,  and  by  a  wall^  perhaps 
of  stone  (cp.  Nu  22*).  Hedge  and  wall  will  be  removed,  so 
that  cattle  and  wild  beasts  will  be  no  longer  hindered  from  coming 
in  to  depasture  and  trample  down ;  cp.  Ecclus  363^.  Much  of  the 
present  treeless  character  of  Palestine  is  due  to  the  grazing  off 
of  unprotected  young  shoots  by  goats :  cp.  72*. — 6.  All  that 
the  site,  henceforth  unpruned  and  untilled,  will  yield  will  be 
thorns  and  briars.  Even  rain  will  be  withheld  from  it  by 
command  of  the  owner. — 7«  ^^^  ^^  owner  is  Yahweh,  who  has 
power  to  withhold  rain,  and  does  do  so  as  a  punishment  for  wrong- 
doing: cp.  Am  4'',  Dt  ii^^-i'^. — Bloodshed]  the  exact  meaning  is 
not  quite  certain  :  see  phil.  n.     The  word  was  probably  a  rare  one 


V.  1-7  8; 

chosen  to  gain  one  of  the  two  effective  assonances  of  these  final 
lines  which  cannot  be  satisfactorily  represented  in  English — he 
looked  for  mispaf,  and  lo  1  mispahi.^  Jor  ^dhakah,  and  lo  I  ^"akahy 
the  cry  especially  of  the  wronged  :  see,  e.g.,  Gn  27^,  Ps  9^^ — The 
house  of  Israel]  either  (i)  this  refers  (whether  exclusively  or  in- 
clusively) to  the  northern  kingdom,  in  which  case  the  parable  was 
composed  before  722  b.c.  ;  but,  in  view  of  the  distinct  limitation 
to  Judah  in  v.*,  this  seems  a  little  improbable ;  or  (2)  it  is  a 
synonym  for  Judah,  as  Israel  perhaps  is  in  i^  (op.  8^**  ^*  31*, 
Mic  I  ^^'•,  cf.  I  K  12^^);  but  this  usage,  though  frequent  enough 
later,  was  certainly,  and  naturally,  rare  before  the  Fall  of  Samaria. 

I.  •'^^'•vh']  for  the  )  here  and  in  iDnaV,  q>.  e.g.  Gn  20",  Ps  3*.  (&  apparently 
read  TT^  without  the  suffix  (r^  -^airrj/x^vifi). — iDia]  C5  'Dna;  see  Comm. — 
'Tin  rn'r]  Lowth,  whom  many  have  followed,  suggested  wm  'v,  a  love-song^ 
which  does  not  meet  the  difficulties  mentioned  above,  and  labours  under  the 
fresh  difficulty  that  the  song  is  scarcely  a  love-song  in  a  general  and  unde- 
fined sense. — 2.  inSpo'i]  Piel  privative  :  G-K.  52A. — 4.  nwy'?]  Dr.  §  203. — 
WVHi  .  .  .  yiTO]  for  the  interrogative  affecting  the  entire  chain  of  sentences, 
cp.  22^2  56". — 5.  rw]i  '3k]  fuL  instans  :  Dr.  135  (3). — non]  the  infin.  Abs.  is 
explained  by  G-K.  113^  as  virtually  dependent  on  the  notion  of  willing 
implied  in  rw^  :  by  Kon.  400^,  as  in  virtual  apposition  to  the  objec.  irx. — 
nawD]  in  MT  the  a  is  dagheshed,  which  would  suggest  as  the  root  "I3B'  More 
probably  (note  wawplene)  the  3  should  be  raphi^  as  in  Pr  1 5^^  and,  with  d 
for  r,  in  Mic  7*.  The  root  is  -pr  (Job  i'»,  Hos  2^1)  =  TD  (Job  32*  388),  to 
shut  in. — nna]  the  context  is  the  best  clue  to  the  meaning  of  this  word,  which, 
if  it  occurs  s^ain,  occurs  only  in  7^'.  In  7^  MT  points  niB3,  here  n^p  ;  if 
the  words  are  from  the  same  root  and  that  root  nna,   the  word  should  be 

punctuated  here  n^s.     In  Arabic    c^-o  means  to  cut  off^  to  cut,  whence  it  is 

customary  to  explain  n'na  in  7^'  as  cut  off,  abrupt  places,  precipices,  and  nni 
here  as  end  or  destruction,  and  the  whole  phrase  nna  n'C  as  parallel  to  n'?D  nry 
(10^),  to  make  an  utter  end  of .  But  this  is  all  uncertain.  The  addition  of 
the  clauses  'in  lOr  k^  favours  a  rather  different  meaning,  such  as  waste  or 
derelict  land. — 6.  n*?!;]  cp.  34^',  Pr  24'^ — nsbo]  ffi's  avo^iiav,  H  iniquitas, 
are  general  renderings  guessed  from  the  context;  %  |jlj2)Q-Ajsj,  rapine, 
plunder,  is  more  specific.  Del.,  though  without  reference  to  %,  argues  for 
such  a  meaning  on  precarious  etymological  grounds.     If  t?  stands  incorrectly 

for  D  (cp.  (j-K.  6i),  the  word  may  be  explained  from  the  Arabic  >^su^,  to 
pour  out,  to  shed  (blood) :  Lane,  s.v.,  cites  the  phrase  --Ia«j   /•^>:>»  there 

is  shedding  of  blood  between  them.     Cp.  U»-yi*u^  L«t>,  Kor.  6^"^.     Cp.  n'so, 

Is  37*' :  also,  if  correctly  read,  Job  14^'  and,  in  the  Mishnah,  n£0  of  a  river 
/^«r/«^ «?«/ alluvial  soil  (see  Levy).  Haupt  proposes  to  read  onk;'o  =  nnB'D, 
corruption,  instead  of  nsro. 


88  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

V.  8-24. — A  Collection  of  Denunciations. 

Six,  or  perhaps  in  the  original  text  seven  or  more  (cp; 
yy  14. 23  nn.)f  classes  of  persons  are  successively  threatened  iri 
sections  introduced  by  the  word  ''in,  ah  !  (v.^  n.).  \ 

The  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  sections  are  the  shortest ;  they 
consist  of  a  single  tetrastich,  tristich,  and  distich  respectively: 
each  defines  a  class  that  is  threatened,  but  indicates  its  fate  by 
means  of  the  ominous  interjection  alone. 

In  the  first,  second,  and  sixth  sections,  not  only  the  class  but 
its  punishment  is  described  :  the  threat  is  introduced  by  Ah  I  the 
punishment  by  therefore^  in  vv.^^-  2*  and  (by  emendation)  in  v.*. 
So  "'in  is  followed  by  pi^  in  Am  (^-^^  Mic  2^-^,  Jer  22^^-^^  2'^-  50^7, 
Ezk  133-8- 18-20  342-7,  Since,  however,  in  28I  2^'^^,  Jer  48I,  Am 
5I8,  Zeph  2*,  Hab  2,  no  therefore  follows  ah  I  it  is  unnecessary 
to  assume  with  Du.  that  a  description  of  punishment  so  intro- 
duced must  have  fallen  out  of  the  text  in  sections  3,  4,  5. 

The  rhythmical  differences,  as  well  as  these  differences  of 
structure,  suggest  that  the  following  sections  are  sayings  uttered 
at  different  times,  perhaps  also  memorised,  or  recorded  by 
different  disciples  of  the  prophet,  and  then  ultimately  brought 
together  by  an  editor  on  account  of  their  beginning  with  the 
same  interjection :  cp.  chs.  28-33,  ^"<i  the  Beatitudes  of  the 
Gospels  of  which  one  at  least  of  the  two  arrangements  (Mt  58-12, 
Lk  620-26)  must  be  due  to  an  editor. 

It  is  customary  to  refer  these  sayings  to  an  early  period  of 
Isaiah's  life,  and  to  assume  that  they  refer  to  Judah.  The 
latter  assumption  at  least  is  probable,  failing  clear  evidence  to 
the  contrary.  Yet  neither  the  dates  at  which  nor  the  audience  to 
which  they  were  delivered  can  be  considered  absolutely  certain. 

To  facilitate  the  perception  of  differences  of  structure, 
the  translation  of  all  the  denunciations  is  given  together. 
Several  re-arrangements  have  been  suggested  and  are  recorded 
by  Giesebrecht,  who  himself  suggests  the  following:  iqI  5^8 
io2-4  ^8-10.  22. 11-13. 17-19. 14-16.  20.  21.  24  (^Bcitrdge,  21-23).  No  great 
probability  attaches  to  any  of  these  suggestions. 

Parallelism  is  conspicuous  and  the  parallel  lines  balance  perfectly,  or  give 
at  least  more  the  impression  of  balance  than  of  echo  :  the  distichs  are  certainly 
not  for  the  most  part  3  :  2  (Du.).  The  distichs  are  3  :  3  in  vv.i^^'-  «•  2»-  ^'  \ 
and  probably  in  ^^'  «*•  "•  i»-  " ;  4  :  4  in  w.i«-  "^  and  probably  22 ;  5  :  5  in  »»>.  « ; 


V.  8-24  89 

6  :  6  (?)  in  ".     In  **•  "*•  ^*  (cp.  28^  31^  33^)  'in  forms  no  part  of  the  balance 
of  the  distich  :  in  ^^*  it  does.     Cp.  Sievers,  360  ff. 


I. 

8  Ah !  they  that  add  house  to  house, 
That  join  field  to  field; 
Till  there  is  no  more  room  .  .  . 
...  in  the  midst  of  the  land. 
*  *  Therefore '  Yahweh  of  Hosts  '  hath  sworn  *  in  mine  ears : 
"  Surely  many  houses  shall  become  a  desolation, 
Great  and  goodly  (houses)  without  inhabitant ; 
^^  For  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  but  one  bath, 
And  a  homer  of  seed  shall  yield  but  an  ephah.'* 

2. 

11  Ah  I   they   that  rise   early    in   the   morning   in   pursuit   of 

strong  drink. 
That  tarry  into  the  twilight  while  wine  inflames  them ; 
^2  Whose  feast   is  wont   to   be   (made   merry  with)  lute   and 

harp,  timbrel  and  flute  and  wine, 
But  who  behold  not  the  activity  of  Yahweh, 
And  see  not  the  work  of  his  hands. 
*'  Therefore  my   people   hath   gone   into    exile   for   lack   of 

knowledge, 
And  its  nobility  are  dying  of  hunger, 

And  its  populace  are  parched  with  thirst 
•  ••••••• 

"  Therefore  Sheol  hath  enlarged  its  appetite, 
And  opened  its  mouth  immeasurably  wide. 
And    her    splendour    and    her    populace    shall    descend 

(thither), 
And  her  tumult  and  (all)  in  her  that  (now)  is  exultant. 
^^  And  man  sinketh  down  and  men  are  brought  low, 

And  the  eyes  of  the  exalted  are  brought  low, 
1^  And  so  Yahweh  of  Hosts   hath    become  exalted  in   judg- 
ment. 
And  the   Holy   God  hath  shown  himself  holy  in  right- 
eousness. 
^^  And  lambs  shall  graze  .  .  . 

And  '  kids '  shall  feed  upon  the  ruins. 


90 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


1*  Ah !   they   that   draw  guilt  (on   themselves)  with  cords  of 

ungodliness, 

And  (the  punishment  of  their)  sin  as  with  wagon-ropes; 

1*  Who  say,  Let  him   speedily  hasten  his  work  that  we  may 

see, 

And  let  the   purpose   of  the   Holy  One  of  Israel  draw 

near  and  be  fulfilled  that  we  may  know  (it). 


^^'  Ah !  they  that  call  evil  good  and  good  evil, 

Making  light  into  darkness  and  darkness  into  light, 
Making  sweet  into  bitter  and  bitter  into  sweet. 


21  Ah !  they  that  are  wise  in  their  own  eyes, 
And  in  their  own  sight  intelligent. 


6. 

22  Ah !  the  mighty  topers  of  wine, 

And  the  valiant  in  mixing  strong  drinks, 

23  Who  acquit  the  guilty  in  return  for  a  bribe. 

And  deprive  the  innocent  of  his  acquittal. 
^  Therefore,  as  a  tongue  of  fire  devoureth  stubble, 
And  hay  falls  (to  ashes)  in  the  flame, 
Their  root  shall  be  as  rottenness, 

And  their  blossom  when  it  opens  as  dust 
^For   they   have    despised    the    instruction   of   Yahweh    of 

Hosts, 
And  contemned  the  word  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel. 

8-10.  Denunciation  of  those  who  dispossess  their  neighbours 
of  their  homesteads  in  order  to  increase  their  own  estates. 
Such  dispossession,  whether  brought  about  by  fraudulent  or 
oppressive  action  (Mic  2^)  or  by  purchase  (cp.  i  K  21^''),  cut 
deep  into  a  strong  religious  feeling  in  favour  of  the  perpetua- 
tion in  the  family  of  the  family  land.  It  is  probable  that 
religious   feeling    and    the    immediate   appeal    to   the   human 


V.  8-10  gi 

sentiment  occasioned  by  evictions  rather  than  a  far-seeing  percep- 
tion of  the  effect  which  the  new  fashion  might  have  on  the 
national  economy,  account  for  the  common  criticism  of  Isaiah 
and  Micah :  Micah  appears  to  feel  most  keenly  the  sufferings  of 
the  evicted,  Isaiah  perhaps  the  effect  on  the  powerful  appropri- 
ators.  But  Yahweh  has  sworn,  and  Isaiah  heard  the  oath,  that 
these  men  who  trust  in  the  greatness  of  their  estates,  purchased, 
perhaps,  with  money  gained  in  trade  (cp.  2*  n.),  will  find  in  them 
the  cause  of  their  own  ruin.  Deprived  by  Yahweh  of  its  fertility, 
the  land  will  yield  no  return,  and  will  therefore  swallow  up  the 
money  spent  on  working  it. — 8.  AA/]  cp.  i*  28^  29^  etc. — 7/7/ 
/here  is  no  room  .  .  .]  left  for  any  but  these  rich  land  purchasers, 
till  the  old  yeoman  class  ceases  to  retain  any  position  in  the 
country.  This  is  what  the  context  suggests :  whether  it  is  ex- 
pressed by  the  two  words  which  follow  in  ^,  and  which  may  be 
translated  and  ye  are  made  to  dwell  alone^  is  doubtful :  see  phil.  n. 
— 9.  Therefore  Yahweh  of  Hosts  hath  sworn  in  my  ears\  RV  tacitly 
emends  the  text,  but  badly.  J^  is  certainly  wrong ;  it  can  only  be 
translated  in  my  ears  is  Yahweh  of  Hosts ^  which  is  nonsense,  or  in 
the  ears  of  Yahweh  of  HostSy  which  would  be  obviously  defective. 
(&  goes  far  to  support  the  conjecture  adopted  in  the  trans. :  see 
phil.  n. — In  my  ears]  the  prophet  has  heard  Yahweh's  threat. 
Am  3^". — 10.  Ten  acres]  ten  times  as  much  ground  as  a  yoke  of 
oxen  can  plough  in  a  day,  will  only  yield  one  dathj  i.e.  about 
8  gallons  of  wine  :  and  seed  sown  will  only  yield  a  ^^^th ;  a  ^omer 
=  io~epIiahs,  Ezk  45". 

8.  unp' .  .  .  'y^JD]  Dr.  §  1 17  f.— Dipo  osh  ny]  fK  tva  toG  vXrjcriov  itp^Xuvral  ti 
— a  paraphrastic  rendering  of  perhaps  the  same  words  as  now  stand  in  |^.  — 
□DnnV  DDDB'ini]  ffi  fi^  oiKT^aere  fjidvoi  may  imply  very  nearly  the  same  letters  as  ^. 
But  the  sudden  introduction  of  the  2nd  pers.  casts  suspicion  on  |^  ;  and  it  is 
very  doubtful  vv'hether  the  Hophal  of  ae"  (Is  44^=/<?  6g  inhabited)  really  meant 
to  be  a  tandowner  (Du.). — 9.  nin»  »3TK3]  (ffir  ^Koiadij  yhp  els  rd  (Bra  Kvpiov,  i.e. 
♦"'  'iJK3  HDtPi  ?,  which  is  obviously  in  itself  unsuitable,  but  points  to  [l]3[S] 
'"'  •'iiH2  ]12V3  as  the  original  text  (Marti) ;  for  the  frequent  confusion  of  D 
and  a,  cp.  Driver,  Samuel^  p.  Ixviii.  Note  the  formula  of  the  oath  Kf?"DK  which 
follows.  Others,  on  the  ground  of  22**,  restore  n^aa  pV. — '"nox]  for  the  closed 
syllable  in  the  cstr.  pi.,  see  G-K.  93/w. 

II-13.  Woe  to  those  who  give  themselves  up  to  carousals, 
drinking  from  early  morning  till  late  in  the  evening,  made  merry 
with  music,  and  blinded  by  their  gaieties  to  the  work  of 
Yahweh,  or,  as  we  might  say,  to  the  reality  of  the  unseen.     The 


92  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 


4 


punishment  of  these  wine-bibbers  and  gluttons  will  be  hunger  and 
thirst  accompanying  exile.  Similar  denunciations  occur  in  Am 
6*^,  and  of  women  who  drink  in  4^  :  cp.  also  Ecclus  lo^^^- — 
Twilight]  strictly  the  time  when  the  (evening)  breeze  springs  up : 
cp.  Gn  3^. — Hath  gone  into  exile]  the  perfect  used  with  reference 
to  a  future  irrevocably  fixed. — 13.  For  lack  of  knowledge]  cp. 
Hos  4^ ;  for  lack  of  the  knowledge  of  God  (cp.  i^),  which  the 
leaders  ought  to  have  given,  but  had  not,  the  whole  people  is 
doomed  :  a  general  captivity  is  imminent :  cp.  Am  6^.  Possible 
also  is  the  rendering  without  knowledge^  unawares^  i.e.  in  their 
intoxication  they  will  fail  to  realise  their  fate :  cp.  Job  4^^. — Its 
nobility]  or  those  held  in  honour :  11133  is  abstract  for  concrete 
(cp.  3^^),  and  the  sing.  suf.  refers  to  my  people. — Dying  with 
hunger]  3^1  ""riD,  or  '"i  ""np  (MT),  men  of  hunger^  i.e.  famished 
with  hunger. — Its  populace]  or,  the  crowd  thereof-,  the  entire 
people  (1^),  plebs*  (^^*')  as  well  as  nobles  (i^^),  will  suffer 
privation.  For  1133  and  jion  as  antithetic  terms,  see  16^*;  and 
for  jicn,  meaning  the  undistinguished  mass  of  people,  2  S  6^^ 
The  crowd  JIDH  is  so  called  from  the  noise  {^x:iT^  of  a  multitude, 
and  mostf  give  the  word  here  a  specific  reference  to  the 
noisy  revellers  (cp.  v.^*)  of  v.^^^  making  the  terms  of  ^*^*  °  co- 
extensive instead  of  complementary. 

14.  Therefore]  cp.  v.^^ ;  the  recurrence  of  therefore  with  no 
ah  \  intervening  suggests  that  a  verse  (beginning  with  ah !)  has 
been  lost  at  this  point ;  note  also  that  there  is  nothing  in  v.^^  to 
which  the  four  pronominal  suffixes  {her^  of  v.^*  can  attach ;  these 
pronouns  doubtless  refer  to  a  city,  probably  Jerusalem. — 
Sheot]  is  personified  as  an  insatiable  (Hab  2^,  Pr  30^^)  monster 
ready  to  swallow  up  in  an  instant  the  whole  of  the  gay  city- 
throng  (cp.  2  2^^-);  but  alongside  of  this  personification,  the 
belief  in  Sheol  as  a  country  under  the  earth  makes  itself  felt ; 
the  multitude  go  down  into  it :  cp.  Gn  37-'^^ — 15.  A  repetition, 
with  some  variation,  of  2^'^^  ^-  i^*-^  ;  here  probably  out  of  place,  as 
Eichhorn  already  perceived.  V.^*  speaks  of  men  perishing,  v.^*  of 
their  being  brought  low;  and,  unlike  the  rest  of  vv.^^^^  which 
speaks  of  definite  classes,  v.^^  refers  to  mankind  in  general. — 
16.  Cp.  2^'^^^  but  the  resemblance  here  is  much  less  close  than  in 
the  previous  v.     Nevertheless  many  %  consider  that  this  v.  also  is 

*  Du.  t  Hitz.,  Ew.,  Del.,  Di.,  Che.,  Marti. 

X  Eich.,  Sta.,  Du.,  Che.,  Kit.,  Marti,  Cond. 


V.  II-I7  93 

interpolated ;  yet  it  would  not  be  impossible  to  discover  a  con 
nection  between  v.^*  and  v.^* :  the  holiness  of  God  is  revealed 
through  His  righteousness,  His  righteousness  through  His  judg- 
ment on  His  own  people  and  city  (v.^^),  who  have  violated  His 
demands  for  justice  and  humanity  (cp.  5^). — 17.  A  picture  of 
desolation,  which  once  perhaps  immediately  followed  not  v.^®  * 
but  v.^*,  forming  its  sequel :  on  the  desolate  site  of  the  once  busy 
and  exultant  city,  cattle  now  feed :  cp.  17^  32^^  The  point  of  the 
V.  is  clear  from  the  words.  And  lambs  shall  graze  .  .  .  and  (on) 
ruins  .  .  .  shall  .  .  .  feed :  the  other  words  are  uncertain ;  but 
probably  kids  (cp.  C&)  was  the  subject  of  the  2nd  vb.  Line  b  f^ 
is  commonly  understood  to  mean,  (Shepherd-)wanderers  shall 
feed^  i.e.  cause  their  flocks  to  feed,  on  the  ruins,  which  were  once 
the  home  of  the  fat,  i.e.  of  the  prosperous  persons ;  but  this  is 
impossible ;  not  to  speak  of  other  improbabilities,  D''"IJ  does  not 
mean  wanderers.  The  corruption  of  D^li  (ffli),  kids,  into  D^"i3  (5^), 
sojourners,  may  be  not  unconnected  with  an  early  allegorising 
interpretation  which  may  even  underlie  ffir,  "  and  they  that  were 
spoiled  shall  feed  like  bulls,  and  lambs  shall  devour  the  wastes  of 
them  that  were  led  away,"  and  appears  clearly  in  21^,  "  and  the 
righteous  shall  feed,  as  was  said  concerning  them :  they  shall 
multiply,  and  the  righteous  shall  possess  the  substance  of  the 
unrighteous."  Jer.  gives  a  Christian  turn  to  the  allegory,  "  Tunc 
qui  fuerunt  de  agnorum  numero  non  haedorum  pascentur  in 
Ecclesiae  pratis."  Finally,  Rashi  (abbreviated) — "  the  poor  will 
now  come  to  sojourn  {yd^p)  in  the  houses  of  the  rich  who  had 
oppressed  them,  and  will  devour  their  portion."  These  are 
interesting  examples  of  interpretation  eliciting  the  exact  opposite 
of  the  writer's  intention. 

II.  ipaa  'D'3BTD]  cstr.  before  a  prep.  ;  G-K.  130a. — op'^i*]  Dr.  §  163. — 
12.  D.TJiB'D]  sing.  ;  G-K.  93JJ. — 13.  nyi  »V3d]  for  the  causal  p,  cp.  Dt  9**. — 
'09]  MT  seems  to  embody  a  late  interpretation  ;  ffitZT^U  all  imply  'Cp. 
With  MT,  cp.  Kir  'no  and  p«  'no,  Job  11"  22^^  Hitzig's  suggestion  to  read 
here  niD  after  Dt  32^  (itself  doubtful)  has  found  considerable  favour. — 14. 
nrsj]  trsj,  appetite,  as  29^,  Pr  23^. — '3  B'npj]  to  show  oneself  holy  in  or  by  means 
of:  Nu  20^^  (P)  and  several  times  in  Ezek. ,  e.g.  28^*  ^. — 17,  D^a^^]  (K  (is  raOpoi, 
i.e.  Dn3N3.  V  {juxta  ordinem  suum),  Rashi,  Ki.,  AV,  give  "OT  the  meaning 
oi manner  (cp.  e.g.  Dt  15^^) — feeble  and  improbable;  modem  scholars,  since 
Ges.,  have  commonly  assumed  that  '\2i  =  ')2iD,  pasture  (cp.  \i^^  feld),  and 

•  Ew.,  Guthe,  Cond. 


^ 


94 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


4 


rendered  as  in  their  pasture,  i.e.  freely  ;  but  in  Mic  2^t,  where  nm,  pasture  (?) 
is  supposed  to  occur,  the  text  is  very  doubtful.  Marti  proposes  naiDa. — 
i'?DK'  nnj  D'nD  nmni]  corrupt ;  for  ona  ^,  (&  read  ona,  kids  (dpves,  cp.  &pva  = 
nj,  Ex  23^*  etc. ) ;  and  this  was  not  suggested  by  d'?'??,  lambs,  in  the  parallel 
clause,  since  ffi  there  renders  dnjpTrcurfi^uoi,  i.e.  Q'^^^.  Whether  even  Cii 
is  the  original  text,  or  a  note  explaining /a/Zz^^j-  (?),  D'nD  (Du. )  is  not  quite 
certain ;  but  on  the  whole  the  simple  term  kids  is  a  more  likely  parallel  to 

/amds.     For  the  meaning  of  D'Hof,  cp.  D'n*D  (nhSiy)  Ps  66*'' t :  ;^^y^,  to  contain 

marrow,  be  fat ;  (nb),  marrow.  D'nD  may  be  a  corruption  of  Dn'[n3nn],  or  the 
like.  Unless  a  word  has  dropped  out  in  a  (see  Marti),  b  should  contain  only 
three  words,  i.e.  either  ona  or  D'no  is  superfluous. 

18,  19.  Woe  to  those  who  give  themselves  up  to  sin  in  the 
belief  that  Yahweh  will  not  punish  them. —  Who  draw  guilt] 
with  its  punishment  near  to  themselves  by  their  carelessness : 
for  "|K^D  and  the  parallel  terms  cords,  wagon-ropes,  see  Hos  1 1*. 
The  figure  of  v.^^  is  heightened  in  '^^^ :  wagon-ropes  are  strong, 
unbreakable. — 19.  Scepticism  with  regard  not  to  God's  existence, 
but  the  reality  of  His  moral  government  (cp.  v.^^),  underlies  this 
mocking  speech;  cp.  Ps  lo^*^  36^"*.  Possibly  v.^^  has  lost  an 
initial  ^VT ;  it  is  rhythmically  unlike  v.^*. 

20.  Woe  to  those  who  deny  the  reality  of  moral  distinctions  \ 
ct.  32^ — 21.  Cp.  28^'  29!*^ — 22  f.  If  these  verses  are  really 
connected  they  condemn  those  who  drink  heavily  and  also 
pervert  justice.  Isaiah  might  very  well  have  pronounced  woe 
on  those  who  go  fuddled  into  court  (cp.  28^^),  but  this  is  not 
what  is  done  here :  these  persons  acquit  the  guilty  not  because 
they  are  too  intoxicated  to  see  who  is  guilty  and  who  innocent, 
but  because  they  have  taken  a  bribe  from  the  guilty  party ;  cp. 
1^3,  Ex  23^.  It  is  forced,  too,  to  assume  that  the  line  of  thought 
is — Drinking  is  expensive,  and  bribes  are  necessary  to  pay  the 
bill.  Drunkenness  has  already  been  denounced,  v.^^;  some 
transpose  v.^s  to  follow  v.^^. — The  valiant  in  mixing  strong 
drinks']  Heady  mixtures  are  also  referred  to  in  Ca  8^,  Pr  238O ; 
and  the  spiced  wines  used  by  the  modern  Jews  of  Hebron  and 
Jerusalem  are  such  mixtures.  See  Kennedy  in  EBi.,  Wine,  §  29. 
The  sin  denounced  is  certainly  not  that  of  mingling  water  with 
the  wine !  (Del.). — The  guilty  .  .  .  the  innocent]  not  the  wicked 
.  .  ,  the  righteous  (RV);  here  as  in  Dt  25I  ytn — pnv  retain 
their  original  forensic  sense. — 24.  Quickly  as  chaff  and  stubble 
catch  fire  and  are  reduced  to  ashes,  will  judgment  fall  on  those 


V.  i8-24,  25-30  95 

who  have  neglected  to  comply  with  Yahweh's  expressed  will. 
This  judgment  is  not  closely  related  to  the  sins  denounced  in 
w.22f. .  the  cause  for  it  is  given  in  what  follows  in  lines  c  and  f. 
Thus  the  v.  has  a  distinct  character,  and  it  may  not  have  reached 
us  in  its  original  form  (Du.).  Note,  too,  that  the  judgment  is 
described  figuratively  (c,  d);  and  enforced  by  comparison  with 
another  and  discordant  figure  (a,  b). — Their  root  shall  be  as 
rottenness^  etc.]  stock  and  shoot  will  become  worthless,  the  stock 
will  rot,  and  the  fruit  grow  mouldy.  Cp.  Am  2®,  Hos  9^*,  Mai  3^^ 
and  Eshmunazar's  curse  "  Let  them  have  no  root  below  or  fruit 
above"  {CIS'i,  11.  11,  12).  The  ms  is  the  budding  shoots  or 
foliage  (Nah  i*),  the  bud  or  blossom  (18*). — For  they  have 
despised,  etc.]  Cp.  i*. 

x8.  Line  a  is  longer  than  b ;  Da.  would  supply  a  vb.  i|  to  *avD ;  Sievers 
would  omit  nKBn,  thereby  making  v."  a  single  line  of  6  accents. — 20.  jn^]  ^ 
as  in  v.*. — 23.  o'p'i:*]  read  p"^^  with  (& :  note  the  ||  ;?n  and  the  following 
UDD. — 24.  rK  prS  rp  V3K3]  the  obj.  of  the  infin.  first,  then  the  subj. :  a  rare 
cstr.,  G-K.  ii5>&. — nzrh  vvTi\  flaming  hay  (Kon.  iii.  306c);  or  nan^  is  ace. 
—CiSa/' (sinks  down)  into  (or,  as)  flame  (Marti).— nn*]  Dr.  §§  117,  X18. 


V.  25-30. — 77ie  Final  Destruction  of  Ephraim* 

yy^26<i-29  contain  the  conclusion  to  9^-10* ;  the  translation  and 
critical  discussion  will  be  found  on  pp.  177  fif.  Some  attribute 
yy  26a-c  and  80  also  to  that  poem :  more  probably  they  are  fragments 
or  editorial  additions. 

25a-c.  The  rhythm  is  obscure  (see  Sievers),  or  lacking ;  but 
the  opening  words  of  the  v.  may  be  a  distich  4:4: 

Wherefore  the  anger  of  Yahweh  was  hot  against  his  people. 
And  he  stretched  out  his  hand  against  him  and  smote  him. 

Wherefore\  this  v.  is  not  needed  to  give  the  consequence  of 
y  246.  f  fQj  ^2X  has  been  already  stated  in  v.^^*^.  Moreover,  the 
judgment  in  v.^  is  complete — the  people  are  there  described  as 
being  destroyed  root  and  branch  ;  but  v.^s*  even  in  itself  and  still 
more  as  leading  up  to  vv. 20-29  describes  a  partial  judgment — a 
destructive  but  not  an  absolutely  annihilating  earthquake : — the 
mountains  quaked,  and  their  corpses  became  like  refuse  in  the  midst 
of  the  streets. — Against  him'\  the  people :  ct.  their  in  c. 


96 


COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 


I 


Y  25a-c  jj^j^y  ]u,g  aj^  editorial  link  to  prepare  the  way  for  ^^'  *  by  indicating 
a  partial  judgment  that  has  not  exhausted  Yahweh's  power  to  punish  ;  it 
seems  to  be  in  part  educed  from  the  refrain  itself  and  in  part  built  up  with 
the  help  of  frequently  repeated  details  of  theophanies  and  judgments  :  with 
the  quaking  mountains,  cp.  13'^"^*,  Am  8^,  Mic  i**',  Nah  i^  etc.,  with  corpses 
abandoned  in  the  streets,  Jer  9^^  16^  25^,  Zeph  i^^  :  so  Giesebrecht,  Beitrdge^ 
p.  9.     Others  {e.g.  Du. )  hold  that  ^*'*'  is  part  of  a  lost  strophe  of  the  poem. 

^^'di-Tl^.  Conclusion  of  p"^-!©*. — 25d.  e.  The  refrain  of 
a  lost  strophe,  or  of  the  last  strophe  in  9'^-io*. — His  anger 
turned  not  bacJi\  cp.  12^  Jer  4^,  Hos  14^,  Ps  85^  etc. — His  hand 
is  still  stretched  out]  to  smite  and  to  destroy  :  cp.  Ex  9^^,  2  S  24^^. 
— 26-29.  This  last  strophe  describes  the  final  destruction  of 
Ephraim :  a  nation  from  the  end  of  the  earth  is  depicted 
advancing  swiftly,  irresistibly  on  the  doomed  nation;  Ephraim 
will  resemble  the  prey  of  a  lion  whereof  nothing  is  rescued  (ct. 
Am  3^2) .  it  will  perish  utterly,  and  none  will  remain  to  provoke 
Yahweh's  anger  further.  At  the  end  of  this  strophe,  the  refrain 
(y  25d.  e^^  which  closes  all  the  other  strophes  of  the  poem,  would 
clearly  be  out  of  place. 

It  has  been  commonly  supposed  that  Isaiah  without  naming 
them  refers  to  the  Assyrians  (cp.  Am  6^*),  the  only  people  on  his 
horizon  that  satisfy  the  terms  used.  Gressmann  (pp.  174  ff.), 
indeed,  has  argued  that  the  description  does  not  strictly  apply  to 
the  Assyrians,  that  it  was  not  written  from  Isaiah's  knowledge 
of  them  and  their  methods,  but  was  derived  from  the  stereotyped 
indefinite  descriptions  of  the  Destroying  Army  which  formed 
a  feature  of  the  (hypothetical)  pre-prophetic  Eschatology.  It  is 
true  that  there  is  nothing  so  distinctive  in  the  description  that 
it  might  not  have  been  applied  by  later  writers  to  other  invaders 
— Egyptians,  Babylonians,  Persians,  Greeks,  or  Romans;  but 
this  is  not  strange  in  a  brief  poetical  description  of  an  expected 
invasion.  That  there  is  anything  actually  unsuitable  to  the 
Assyrians  is  a  conclusion  which  appears  to  rest  on  prosaic 
interpretation  (see  v.^^b  n.). 

26a.  b.  Yahweh  summons  a  nation  in  arms  from  the  ends  of' 
the  earth. — A  signal]  cp.  nio.  12  jga-  placed  on  a  bare  height 
such  a  signal  was  conspicuous  afar.  In  Nu  21^^-  D3  signifies 
a  \o{ty  poky  in  Ezk  27^",  Is  33^^  apparently  a  sail  ox  pennon ^  here 
probably  a  lofty  pole  with  a  flag  attached. — A  nation  afar  off] 
so  ffir ;  J^  nations  afar  offy  a  reading  which  has  arisen  accident- 
ally (see  phil.  n.),  or  is  due  to  a  scribe  who  wished  to  assimilate 


V.  25-29  97 

to  11^*  or  to  introduce  the  plurality  of  nations  to  which  later 
writers  frequently  refer.  |^  has  been  explained  of  the  nations 
united  in  the  Assyrian  army  (cp.  14^^  ly^^f.  j^Tf.  ^q28  ^^s^^  qj.  ^s 
a  conventional  eschatological  usage  (Gressmann).  But  the 
correctness  of  the  reading  of  dSt  is  proved  by  the  consistent  use 
of  the  singular,  rendered  by  plurals  in  RV,  throughout  the  rest 
of  the  strophe.  The  term  nation  afar  off  (pniDO  ^W)  is  applied 
in  Jer  5^*  to  another  people,  probably  the  Scythians.  On  the 
idea  of  distance,  see  10^  n. —  Whistle  for  ii\  summon  it;  7**  n. 
— From  the  end  of  the  earth]  cp.  Jer  6^2.  The  centre  of  the 
Assyrian  empire  lay  some  thirty  days'  journey  from  Palestine. 
Du.,  Di.,  and  others  infer  that  Isaiah's  earth  was  a  small  one ; 
Gressmann  (p.  176),  that  he  here  uses  the  phrase  because  it  was 
a  technical  eschatological  expression.  Both  conclusions  are 
precarious :  Isaiah  was  a  poet. — 26  c-27  a.  Assyria  comes  with 
all  speed,  but  without  fatigue.  With  the  way  in  which,  while 
speaking  of  the  entire  armed  nation  as  a  single  personality  (cp. 
Numbers^  pp.  265  f.),  Isaiah  yet  thinks  of  the  individuals 
composing  it,  cp.  Dt  25^^,  Remember  how  Amalek  .  .  .  fell  in 
with  thee,  and  smote  at  thy  rear  all  those  that  were  fagged  (for 
there  were  such),  seeing  that  thou  {i.e.  the  entire  body  of  the 
Israelites)  wast  faint  and  weary. — 27b.  //  slumbers  not  nor  sleeps] 
the  line  is  not  improbably  intrusive  (see  p.  177),  though  it  is 
rather  prosaic  of  Du.  to  insist  that  it  must  be  so  because  the 
words  could  apply  to  God  only  (Ps  121^). — 27c.  d.  The  army  is 
all  trim,  and,  28a.  b,  its  weapons  ready. — Its  bows  bent]  as  they 
would  be  only  on  the  point  of  being  used.  For  the  bows  and 
arrows  of  Assyrian  armies,  see  21^*  22^  37^^;  of  other  armies,  e.g. 
Jer  5^^. — 28c.  d.  The  cavalry,  too,  of  the  Assyrians  (cp.  22^^- 
36*)  sweeps  on  unhindered  and  with  the  pace  and  onset  of  the 
whirlwind. — Its  horses'  hoofs  are  like  flint]  horses  were  not  shod, 
and  therefore  hard  hoofs  were  a  highly  prized  virtue  in  them  : 
Ges.  compares  the  ^^(pXKOTto^  lttttoi  of  Homer,  and  gives  other 
classical  and  Arabic  illustrations. — Its  wheels  like  the  whirlwind] 
cp.,  in  a  similar  description,  Jer  4^* ;  in  Is  66^*  Yahweh's  chariots 
are  compared  to  the  whirlwind,  which  leads  Gressmann  to 
consider  the  present  description  "  fabulous " :  poetical  rather, 
like  the  dcAAoTroScs  tTTTrot,  "horses  with  feet  as  swift  as  the 
storm,"  of  the  Homeric  Hymn  {in  Ven.  217),  or  Fitzgerald's 
"  I  came  like  water,  and  like  wind  I  go." — 29.  The  form  of  the 
VOL.  I — 7 


98 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


text  is  suspicious,  see  phil.  n.,  but  the  sense  is  clear.  The 
noise  of  the  advancing  army,  compared  in  1 7^2  to  the  tumult  of 
mighty  waters,  is  here  compared  to  the  dread  (Am  3^)  roar  (njfc^K^) 
of  a  lion  (cp.  Jer  2^\  Ps  74*) ;  the  figure  thus  introduced  is  de- 
veloped, and  the  utter  destruction  of  Israel  to  which  the  poem 
works  up  as  its  climax  is  expressed,  by  the  statement  that  the  lion 
(Assyria)  growling  (onr)  seizes  (THK"'),  or  holds  fast  {o.^^.  W.  R.  Smith 
Proph.^,  p.  24)  its  prey  (Israel),  whom  no  one  attempts  to  deliver. 

26.  piniD  D'W^]  D*u  may  be  an  error  for  *u  through  dittography  of  D,  or 
read  pmOD  *M^  (Roorda,  al.  mult. ) :  cp.  Jer  5^* ;  after  the  words  had  been 
wrongly  divided  the  scriptio  plena  was  inserted  inpm. — ^p  r\'\r\xi\  cp.  mrsD  ^p, 
Jl  4*  :  mno  is  adverbial,  Vp  ace.  of  the  state — hastily  as  a  fleet  one, — 28.  is] 

flinty  thus  pointed  here  only,  but  cp.  nx  and  Arab.    Aj. — v^J^ai  urra]  read 

rather  with  (K  vSaVa  urw  (so  Sievers) :  this  balances  the  lines  better ;  "%  is 
due  to  dittography  of  the  \ — 29,  30a.  There  are  several  considerations 
which  justify  suspicion  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  text:  (i)  The  Hebrew 
variant  JNen,  y»xr  in  v.^** ;  (2)  the  virtual  repetition  of  the  first  word  of  v.*** 
in  "^^  (JNB"  naKB') :  (3)  the  undue  shortness  of  one  of  the  four  lines  of  v.* — 
of  2«bj  if  D.nn  be  thrown  forward  to  ",  or  of  *  if  this  line  is  limited  to  S"^  pKi ; 
(4)  the  position  of  onj'i  in  f&  after  mK'i ;  (5)  certain  other  features  of  (ffi: : 
thus  1^  naKB'  =  d/>7tw<rti'  (al.  opjMuxnp),  but  iHtff''='jrap4<rTr)Kav ;  tj'^S'i  =  ^*r)3aXet, 
whereas  ^/c/SdXXetJ'  nowhere  else=DVs;  in  Is  2^  it  renders  I'Vcn ;  in  22^^, 
•^es^is ;  (6)  the  improbable  meaning  that  has  to  be  attached  to  tt'?S'i  in  the 
present  text.  There  is  no  means  of  restoring  the  exact  form  of  the  text,  nor 
is  it  very  necessary,  for  the  sense  is  sufficiently  established,  jkk"  is  not 
improbably  a  gloss  on,  or  variant  of,  '^  njNC. — a''?3'i]  this  is  supposed  to  mean 
carries  off  into  security y  i.e.  the  lion  carries  oflf  the  prey  to  a  place  where  it 
may  eat  undisturbed.  But  the  sense  of  escape^  deliverance  is  so  prominent  in 
the  uses  of  the  root  that  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  Hiphil  expressed  the 
very  opposite. 

30.  The  succession  of  intelligible  distichs  of  regular  rhythm 
leading  up  to  a  climax  and  a  conclusion  in  v.^^,  is  here  followed 
by  some  exceedingly  obscure  sentences.  Rhythm  is  not  obvious, 
but  is  certainly  different  from  that  which  prevails  in  w.^^-^^. 
,  Render :  And  he  will  growl  over  him  in  that  day  as  the  growling  of 
the  sea  ;  and  if  he  looks  to  the  earthy  then  lot  distressful  Q^  darkness^ 
and  the  light  has  grown  dark  in  the  clouds  (??)  thereof  There  are 
two  main  theories  of  interpretation  :  (i)  Some,  including  Del., 
consider  that  the  subject  and  object  of  the  growl  are  the  same  as 
the  subject  and  object  in  w.^^-^s :  Assyria  growls,  and  Israel  hears 
the  ominous  sound.  The  growl,  and  the  unrelieved  darkness  on 
which  the  eyes  of  the  prey  rest,  imply  the  doom  of  Israel.     On 


V.  26-30,  VI.  99 

this  interpretation  v.*®  is  parallel  to  v.^*^  ^ ;  it  does  not  carry  the 
thought  as  far  as  v.^^' •  ^ ;  for  this  reason,  v.^®  would  probably  be 
a  parallel,  not  belonging  to  vv.^c'-^^.  (2)  Others  *  consider  that 
the  subject  changes :  it  is  Assyria  here  against  whom  the  growl 
is  uttered,  and  Assyria  whose  outlook  is  unrelieved  gloom.  In 
this  case  it  is  equally  difficult  to  believe  that  v.^  is  the  original 
sequel  to  v.**. 

»33i]  Piel  or  Niph.  Elsewhere  Heb.  always  uses  the  Hiph.  of  this  vb. 
Du.  has  pointed  out  the  similarity  to  8'^  of  v.^^  (J^),  and  the  still  greater 
similarity  of  v.**^  ffi,  which  omits  iB'n  niKi.  That  the  two  passages  are  not 
unrelated  is  probable ;  that  a  process  of  assimilation  has  gone  on  is  also 
probable.  Under  the  circumstances  it  is  safest  to  question,  or  accept  very 
tentatively,  the  strange  interpretations  that  have  been  offered  of  5**.  »]ny  is 
probably  a  mere  corruption  (cp.  8^  and  fflr  in  both  passages).  The  accentua- 
tion and  punctuation  of  MT  niKi  "xa  iB'n  embodies  an  old  interpretation  (noticed 
by  Rashi)  which  took  mKi  n!«  together  ia&  =  moon  (n:f  =  nnD  !)  and  sun,  Cond., 
making  one  or  two  emendations,  attaches  8^*^  ^'  ^  to  ^-''^, 

VI.  The  Vision  and  the  Call  of  Isaiah. 

There  is  no  reason  to  question  the  impression  conveyed  by 
this  chapter  that  we  are  here  reading  the  prophet's  autobiography, 
from  which  we  have  further  extracts  in  S^-^^  and,  perhaps,  in 
yi-16  'pijg  narrative  is  in  prose ;  the  words  spoken  by  the 
seraphim  and  by  Yahweh  are  in  poetical  form,  perhaps  also  the 
words  of  the  seraph  in  v.'^.  The  interrogations  of  Isaiah  in  w.^*  * 
are  too  brief  to  show  poetical  form,  and  the  rhythmical  quality  of 
his  first  startled  cry  in  v.*  is  not  obvious ;  the  words  may  be 
read  as  three  lines  (so  in  Kittel's  text)  of  six  accents  each,  but 
without  parallelism ;  Du.  divides  them  into  four  words  of  unequal 
length.  Cond.  remarks :  "  Le  style  rhythm^,  propre  k  la  solennit^ 
des  oracles,  convient  mal  \  la  spontaneity  de  ce  cri  d'effroi," 
which  has  some  force,  and  would  have  more  if  the  cry  at  the 
time  formulated  itself  in  spoken  words,  and  if  Isaiah  necessarily 
repeated  verbatim  in  his  narrative  written  subsequently  the 
words  he  heard,  or  the  words  he  uttered,  at  the  time  of  the 
vision.  The  translation  distinguishes  the  words  that  seem  more 
clearly  poetical  in  form. 

^  In  the  year  that  king  Uzziah  died  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on 
a  throne  that  was  lofty  and  uplifted,  and  his  skirts  filling  the 

*  Du.,  Marti;  cp.  E. 


100  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Temple.  ^  Seraphim  were  standing  above  him :  each  had  six 
wings — two  to  cover  the  face,  two  the  feet,  and  two  to  fly  with. 
3  And  they  kept  calling  to  each  other,  and  saying. 

Holy,  holy,  holy  is  Yahweh  of  Hosts, 
The  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glory. 

*  And  the  foundations  (?)  of  the  threshold  trembled  at  the  voice 
of  them  that  called,  and  the  House  began  to  fill  with  smoke. 

^  And  I  said,  "  Woe  is  me !  for  I  am  undone ;  for  I  am  a 
man  of  unclean  lips,  and  am  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of 
unclean  lips :  for  it  is  the  King,  Yahweh  of  Hosts,  whom  mine 
eyes  have  seen."  ®  Then  one  of  the  seraphim  flew  to  me  with  a 
red-hot  stone  in  his  hand,  which  with  tongs  he  had  taken  off"  the 
altar, ''  and  with  it  he  touched  my  mouth,  and  said,  Lo  !  this  has 
touched  thy  lips :  thy  iniquity  will  pass  away  (from  thee),  and 
thy  sin  will  be  expiated.     ^  And  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord, 

saying, 

Whom  shall  I  send? 

And  who  will  go  for  us? 

And  I  said,  Here  am  I :  send  me.  •  Then  he  said.  Go,  and 
say  unto  this  people, 

Hearken  on,  but  understand  not! 
See,  yea,  see,  but  perceive  not! 

1*  Make  dull  the  heart  of  this  people, 

And  make  its  ears  heavy,  and  plaster  over  its  eyes; 
Lest  it  see  with  its  eyes  and  hear  with  its  ears. 
And  its  heart  understand,  and  it  be  healed  once  more. 

11  And  I  said :  How  long,  O  Lord  ?    And  he  said, 
Until  they  lie  waste — 

Cities  without  inhabitant 

And  houses  without  human  beings — 
And  the  ground  be  left  a  desolation; 

12  And  Yahweh  remove  men  far  away, 

And  the  forsaken  places  in  the  land  be  many: 
18  And  though  a  tenth  yet  (remain)  in  it : 
It  must  again  be  exterminated. 
Like  an  oak  or  a  terebinth,  wherein  at  the  felling  is  a  stump. 

On   a  day  within   a  few  months   of  the  death  of  Uzziah, 


VI.  lOI 

though  whether  before  or  after  that  event  is  uncertain,  Isaiah 
came  up  to  the  Temple.  And  falling  into  an  ecstasy,  he  saw 
and  heard  more  than  he  had  been  wont  to  see  and  hear — things 
that  others  who  were  present  that  day  in  the  Temple  Courts 
neither  saw  nor  heard  :  he  saw  Yahweh  in  kingly  state ;  in  His 
Holy  presence  he  felt  his  own  uncleanness ;  he  realised  the 
power  of  Yahweh  to  forgive  immediately  without  sacrifice  or  gift 
on  man's  part  (ct.  i"-^*) ;  he  heard,  understood,  and  obeyed  His 
call  to  service. 

This  is  record  oi  fact]  but  the  fact  is  spiritual  experience, 
which  must  be  described,  though  inadequately,  by  means  of 
material  terms  and  pictures. 

The  central  fact  is  the  decision  of  the  prophet  to  deliver 
Yahweh's  message  to  His  people ;  and  this  decision  was  taken  on 
a  single  particular  day.  Yet,  though  we  cannot  be  certain,  we 
may  somewhat  safely  assume  that  the  vision  of  Yahweh,  bring- 
ing with  it  the  clear  apprehension  on  the  prophet's  part  of 
Yahweh's  purpose  concerning  him,  was  the  culmination  of  a 
longer  experience;  not,  we  may  well  believe,  for  the  first  time 
on  that  day  had  he  felt  his  own  unworthiness,  or  contrasted  the 
moral  uncleanness  of  his  people  with  the  ethical  holiness  of 
God  (vv.*-  ^) ;  he  had  been  anxious  to  speak  to  his  people,  but 
had  not  yet  been  sure  of  the  divine  commission  to  speak,  nor 
certain  what  to  say.  Some  such  experience  before  the  call  is 
suggested,  if  not  by  one  or  two  details  in  the  account  of  the 
day  of  decision,  yet  certainly  by  the  analogy  of  the  experience 
of  other  great  religious  personalities  —  of  Mohammed,  for 
example,  who  had  long  felt  that  his  people  were  astray  from 
God  before  the  particular  day  when  the  call  came  to  him, 
"  Recite,  in  the  name  of  thy  Lord,  recite  "  ( Kor.  96^). 

It  is  not  only  probable  that  the  narrative  thus  presupposes 
a  religious  experience  of  which  it  records  the  culmination,  but  it 
is  possible  that,  as  some  have  supposed,  it  is  coloured  by  the 
prophet's  experience  after  the  day  of  decision.  It  is  generally 
held,  and  certainly  probable,  that  this  account  of  his  call  was  not 
written  by  Isaiah  immediately  after  the  event,  but  some  years 
later,  when  it  was  natural  to  define  the  year  to  which  the  record 
refers.  It  may  be  then  that  the  terms  of  the  divine  commission 
in  vv.^*^  reflect  the  discouraging  effect  on  Isaiah  of  years  of 
fruitless  warning  (but  see  below). 


I02  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

1-4.  The  Vision. — I.  In  the  year  that  king  Uzziah  died] 
for  this  method  of  dating,  see  1428,  and  cp.  KAT\  p.  323.  The 
Hebrew  year  ran  from  autumn  to  autumn  {EBi.  5365).  Between 
two  autumns  King  Uzziah  died :  between  the  same  two  autumns 
Isaiah  received  his  call.  That  is  all  that  can  be  inferred  with 
certainty  from  the  clause.  It  leaves  the  question  open  whether 
Isaiah  received  his  call  before  (cp.  i^)  or  after  Uzziah's  death. 
Early  Babylonian  usage  defined  the  remainder  of  a  year  after 
the  accession  of  a  new  ruler  as  "  the  year  in  which  N.  [the  new 
ruler's  predecessor]  entered  into  the  house  of  his  father  " :  later, 
when  the  system  of  numbering  the  years  of  a  king  from  the 
1st  of  Nisan  after  his  accession  prevailed,  i.e,  from  about  1500 
B.C.,  the  broken  year  before  that  ist  of  Nisan  was  known  as 
"  the  beginning  of  his  reign  "  (E.  Meyer,  Gesch.  d,  Alterthums\ 
I.  ii.  pp.  330  f.).  If  Hebrew  usage  followed  contemporary 
Assyrian  usage,  Isaiah's  call  took  place  before  the  death  of 
Uzziah.  Uzziah  died  within  a  few  years  of  740  b.c.  :  some 
time  before  735  (cp.  7^),  but  after  738,  if  Uzziah  (Azariah)  is 
correctly  identified  with  the  Azriyau  of  Jaudi  mentioned  by 
Tiglath-pileser  in  his  annals  of  the  year  738.  If  that  identifica- 
tion is  fallacious  (see  Introduction),  Uzziah's  death  may  have 
occurred  before  740,  yet  not  so  early  as  753  (Jerome,  cp. 
T>q\.).— Uzziah]  so  (in>Ty)  i^  7^,  2  K  1532.34^  2  Ch  261^-  272,  and 
(nny)  2  K  1513-30,  Hos  i^,  Am  i\  Zee  14^,  perhaps  also  Uzzah 
(2  K  2118-26);  but  Azariah  (nnry),  2  K  1421  15I.  7.  i7.  23.  27^  j  q^ 
312,  and  (innry)  2  K  156- ».  Unless  the  king  bore  both  names, 
the  distribution  of  the  evidence  in  OT  favours  Uzziah.  Azariah 
would  be  confirmed  if  the  identification  of  this  king  with  Azriyau 
of  Jaudi  (last  note)  were  certain. 

/  saw  the  Lord]  There  is  no  elaborate  description  of  the 
divine  being  here  (cp.  Am  7^  9I;  ct.  Ezk  i,  Dn  7^);  but  the 
very  terseness  heightens  the  impression  that  is  given  of  the 
ideas  that  dominated  Isaiah  at  this  moment;  he  is  absorbed 
with  the  thought  of  the  kingliness  of  Yahweh ;  he  sees  nothing 
but  Yahweh  enthroned :  his  eyes  cannot  linger  on  the  divine 
face  (cp.  Ex  33^^'^^),  they  fall  instinctively  to  the  skirts  of  His 
robes  which  fill  the  Temple, — On  a  throne]  Isaiah,  like  Micah 
the  Morashtite  (i  K  22^^),  sees  Yahweh  in  kingly  state,  enthroned 
on  a  conspicuously  lofty  throne.  —  His  skirts]  this,  however 
aesthetically  unsatisfactory  in  English,  and  not  train  (RV),  is  the 


VI.   1-4  I03 

• 

correct  rendering  of  O^b)^;  for  the  D^inB^  are  the  loose-flowing 
parts  of  the  robe  or  upper  garment  (i'^VD,  Ex  28^),  especially  the 
part  from  the  waist  downward  (cp.  Jer  1322.26^  ^ah  3*);  here  the 
word  is  used  of  the  robe  as  it  flows  down  over  the  knees  of 
Yahweh  seated  on  the  throne,  and  reaches  to  and  covers  the 
floor.  This  boldly  anthropomorphic  touch  was  euphemised 
away  by  the  ancient  translators :  (&  renders  Ais  glory  (cp.  Jn 
12^1),  2r  the  brilliance  of  his  glory,  U  (following  Symm.,  Theod.) 
quae  sub  ipso  erant.  Ibn  Ezra  gains  the  same  end  by  an  interest- 
ing, though  improbable,  explanation ;  he  refers  the  suffix  to  the 
throne,  and  sees  in  the  skirts  the  loose  hanging  draperies  with 
which  it  is  "  the  custom  of  kings  "  to  have  their  thrones  covered. 
Filling  the  Temple\  i.e.  covering  the  entire  floor,  unless,  indeed, 
we  could  suppose  with  Jer.  and  some  Jewish  commentators  that 
the  throne  was  lifted  up  high  above  the  Temple,  and  that  the 
Temple  itself  was  filled  by  the  flowing  skirts ;  but  had  this  been 
the  meaning,  covering  the  Temple  would  seem  the  more  appropri- 
ate description. — The  Temple']  in  Hebrew,  as  in  Sumerian  (e-gal), 
from  whence  through  the  Assyrian  (e-kallu)  the  Hebrews 
borrowed  the  word,  iaST  denotes  primarily  a  great  house,  a  royal 
residence,  a  palace  (i  K  21^,  2  K  20^',  Pr  3028)  j  \^yj^^  \^  actual 
usage  it  more  frequently  refers  to  the  "  House  of  Yahweh "  or 
Temple,  whether  to  the  whole  (i  S  i®  3*,  2  K  23*  24^^,  Hag  2^^, 
Neh  6^*'),  or  the  front  and  larger  chamber  (i  K  6^^^,  Ezk  41^)  as 
distinguished  from  the  smaller  inner  chamber  (l*m).  In  one 
passage  clearly  (Ps  11*),  in  others  (Mic  i',  cp.  vv.*^,  Ps  18^  29*, 
cp.  wv}^')  probably,  the  term  i)3M  is  used  of  Yahweh*s  heavenly 
residence;  but  in  none  of  these  passages  is  the  sense  temple 
rather  than  palace  required.  At  a  later  period  the  idea  of  a 
Temple  in  heaven  was  familiar  in  certain  Jewish  pircles ;  this  can 
be  first  traced  clearly  at  the  end  of  the  2nd  cent  B.a  (Test.  Levi 
5I),  and  then  frequently  in  John's  Apocalypse  (e.g,  'j\  ct.  n^®). 
That  such  an  idea  existed  in  Israel  in  the  time  of  Isaiah  there 
is  no  direct  proof,  and  the  attempt  to  prove  the  early  existence 
in  Babylonia  of  such  an  idea  has  so  far  met  with  doubtful 
success.  But  even  though  such  an  idea  may  have  been 
familiar  to  Isaiah,  and  though,  in  that  case,  he  might  have  used 
the  term  f)3\T  of  the  heavenly  as  well  as  of  the  earthly  Temple,  it 
is  not  to  any  such  heavenly  temple,  as  many  *  have  supposed, 
*  E,  Koppe,  Del.,  Di.,  Jeremias  (ATAC^,  p.  565,  BNT6S). 


104  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

that  Isaiah  here  refers,  but  to  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem  *  which 
was  daily  before  his  eyes.  He  sees  in  vision  no  strange  and 
unfamiliar  scene,  but  a  long  familiar  scene  transfigured.  This 
interpretation  is  favoured  by  (i)  the  unqualified  reference  to  the 
temple  and  the  altar  (v.^),  contrasted  with  the  careful  qualification 
("  the  temple  that  is  in  heaven  ")  of  such  writers  as  the  authors 
of  the  Testaments  and  the  Apocalypse  of  John,  and  (2)  by  the 
analogy  of  the  visions  of  Amos  (9^),  where  an  earthly  altar  and  an 
earthly  temple  are  unmistakably  the  scene  of  vision,  and  of 
Ezekiel  (8^  10*).  Nor  can  it  be  safely  urged  in  favour  of  the 
alternative  interpretation,  that  "the  presence  of  the  seraphim 
is  a  sufficient  indication  that  the  scene  is  in  heaven  .  .  if  Elisha's 
servant,  when  his  eyes  were  opened,  saw  horses  and  chariots  of 
fire  in  Dothan  (2  K  6^'^),  Isaiah,  with  eyes  open  in  vision,  might 
well  see  seraphim  in  Jerusalem.  It  is  indeed  the  very  fact  that 
he  sees  Yahweh  holding  court  in  Jerusalem  that  gives  full  point 
to  his  alarm ;  it  is  the  actual  presence  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel 
in  the  midst  of  Israel  and  not  remote  in  heaven  that  spells 
doom  to  the  unclean  people ;  the  sinners  in  Sion  must  needs  be 
alarmed  (cp.  33^*)."  t  A  persistent  Jewish  exegetical  tradition,  as 
represented  indirectly  by  Jer.  and  directly  by  Rashi,  explains 
that  Isaiah  saw  Yahweh  "  sitting  on  his  throne  in  heaven  with 
his  feet  in  the  (earthly)  Temple,  '  the  footstool  of  his  feet ' " 
(Rashi);  cp.  "non  ipse  Dominus  implebat  Templum  cuius 
coelum  thronus  est  et  terra  scabellum  pedum  eius  .  .  sed  ea  quae 
sub  pedibus  eius  erant  implebant  Templum  "  (Jer.). — 2.  Beside 
Yahweh  stand  seraphim :  since  He  is  seated  and  they  stand- 
ing, they  rise  adove  him — not  //,  viz.  the  Temple  (Jer.).  Each 
seraph  has  six  wings  (cp.  Rev  4^),  one  pair  to  screen  their  faces 
from  the  unbearable  brightness  of  the  divine  presence  (cp.  Ex  3*, 
1  K  19^^),  one  to  conceal  their  feet,  i.e.  their  nakedness  (so 
720  36^2  K^re;  cp.  "their  bodies,"  Ezk  i"),  from  the  divine  eye 
(Ex  2o26  28'^2ff.)^  and  one  to  use  in  flight  (cp.  y.^).  Again,  Isaiah 
only  particularises  what  closely  concerns  him  at  the  moment. 
His  allusions  to  the  seraphim  serve  to  emphasise  his  thought  of 
Yahweh's  majesty  and  kingliness  ;  if  these  lofty  and  superhuman 

*Lowth,  Ges.,  Du.,  Cheyne  {SBOT  i^SL),  Skinner,  Whitehouse. 

t  Cited  from  an  article  by  the  present  writer,  "The  Heavenly  Temple 
and  the  Heavenly  Altar  "  {ExJ>.,  May,  June,  1908,  pp.  385-402,  530-546),  in 
which  the  points  summarised  in  the  text  are  discussed  at  length. 


VI.  2  I05 

beings  must  screen  their  faces,  how  much  more  mortals  (cp.  Job 
4^''^^') :  so  again  not  slowly  with  feet,  but  with  the  rapidity  of 
flight  they  move  to  do  Yahweh's  bidding,  ffi  represents  the 
seraphim  as  standing  round  Yahweh  {kvkXu}  avrov),  feeling 
perhaps  that  the  majesty  of  Yahweh  requires  that  He  should, 
even  when  seated,  tower  above  His  attendants.  But  to  Isaiah, 
Yahweh  appeared  majestic  in  size  and  attended  by  beings 
equally  colossal.  It  is  unnecessary  to  press  the  sense  of  loy  so 
as  to  insist  that  the  seraphim  stood  on  their  feet  (though  see 
next  clause) :  the  vb.  is  certainly  used  of  objects  or  beings 
without  feet  (Nu  14^*).  But  the  attempt  made  by  Del.,  Di.,  Che. 
(in  /V),  and  others  to  prove  that  it  means  "  to  hover,"  is  not 
successful. 

Many  interesting  questions  are  raised  by  this  description  which  it  was  no 
concern  of  Isaiah's  to  satisfy,  and  which  modem  investigation  has  only 
partially  illumined.  What  was  the  form  of  the  seraphim  ?  Were  they  human  ? 
Were  they  serpentine?  How  many  were  attending  Yahweh?  As  to  their 
form :  they  stand  (^Dy,  see  above),  and  have  feet  (v.^)  and  hands  (v.*),  and 
therefore,  if  originally  connected  with  serpents,  they  have  acquired  non- 
serpentine  characteristics.  Beings  half  human  half  animal  in  appearance 
figure  in  later  descriptions  (Ezk  i.  Rev  4').  The  connection  of  the 
seraphim  with  serpents  is  suggested  by  the  name  itt,  which,  meaning  io 
burity  is  used  in  Nu  2i"'  of  serpents,  apparently  so  called  from  the  burning 
sensation  produced  by  their  bite  (see  Numbers^  p.  277),  and  in  Is  14^  30*  of 
flying  serpents  (||  trnj,  npsK).  According  to  2  K  18*,  at  the  time  of  Isaiah's 
vision  there  still  stood  (probably  in  the  Temple  Court)  the  bronze  serpent, 
or  seraph,  the  erection  of  which  popular  tradition  attributed  to  Moses  (Nu 
21^*) ;  on  this  object  Isaiah's  eye  may  have  been  resting  just  before  he  fell 
into  ecstasy.  We  may  infer,  if  not  with  certainty  yet  with  probability,  from 
v.*  that  the  seraphim  of  Isaiah's  vision  were  stationed  about  the  threshold 
of  the  temple,  and  by  a  further  inference  may  be  led  to  suspect  that  the 
seraphim  belong  to  the  class  of  guardians  of  thresholds — that  part  of  the 
dwelling  with  which  so  much  religious  or  superstitious  awe  has  been  widely 
associated  (H.  Clay  Trumbull,  The  Threshold  Covenant^  1890) — who  repel 
intruders,  or,  as  rather  here  (v.'**),  admit  under  fit  conditions  to  the  presence 
of,  or  communication  with,  the  deity.  Some  analogy  both  to  the  name  and 
to  this  function  of  the  seraphim  has  often  been  sought  in  the  Egyptian  Sefr 
(demotic  Serref),  a  winged  griffin  guarding  an  Egyptian  tomb  ;  see,  further, 
BDB,  Ges-B.,  EBi.^  and  DBy  s.v.  On  the  other  hand,  the  connection 
sought  by  some  Assyriologists  (Del.,  Hommel)  between  D*£nB'  and  Sarrabu  (or 
^arrapu),  a  name  said  to  have  been  borne  by  the  god  Lugalgira  (?  Nergal) 
in  the  westland,  is  denied  by  Zimmern  {KAT^  415)-  The  number  of 
seraphs  that  attend  Yahweh  in  Isaiah's  vision  is  uncertain;  the  phrase 
nr^M  ni  (v.*)  rather  suggests  two  (see  phil.  n.),  the  plural  D'fl*w  (not  O'Bnr  "w) 
in  V.*,  on  the  other  hand,  rather  suggests  many.     Early  Christian  interpreters 


l66  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

commonly  thought  of  two,  and  allegorised :  the  two  seraphim  were  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  attending  the  Father — a  view  not  unnaturally  rejected 
by  Jerome  as  "impious."  The  view  that  the  two  seraphim  represented  the 
Old  and  New  Testament  found  more  favour.  Jewish  interpreters  differed  as 
to  the  number — Dun  paam  d'w  ohDK  b"  (Ibn  Ezra). 

3.  The  constantly  repeated  (K"ipl)  refrain  of  the  seraphim 
sung  antiphonally  (n?  hi<  riT).  For  other  allusions  to  songs  sung 
by  heavenly  beings,  see  Ps  29^-  ^-  ^,  Job  38*^,  Rev  5^^-  y^i^-. — Ho/y] 
thrice  repeated  for  the  sake  of  emphasis:  cp.  Jer  7*  222^,  Ezk 
21^2^  One  of  the  main  tasks  of  the  prophets  was  to  transform, 
and  especially  to  ethicise,  current  religious  terms  :  so  Amos 
dealt  with  the  "  Day  of  Yahweh,"  so  Hosea  with  "  the  marriage 
of  Yahweh,"  and  so  Isaiah  ethicises  the  word  "  Holy."  Originally 
a  term  without,  in  Isaiah's  hands  it  became  charged  with,  moral 
import,  so  that  when  he  speaks  of  the  "  Holy  One  of  Israel "  he 
thinks  of  a  power  that  executes  justice  and  demands  just  dealing 
of  His  worshippers.  How  unethical  a  term  the  prophets  found  it 
may  be  most  briefly  suggested  by  the  fact  that  the  religious 
prostitution  which  Hosea  denounced  was  carried  on  by  "  holy  " 
men  and  women  (see,  further,  JVum^erSj  pp.  209-2 11).  In  Isaiah's 
conception  we  see  points  of  contact  with  the  popular  thought ; 
with  him,  too,  it  is  dangerous  to  approach  that  which  is  Holy 
(v.^) ;  with  him,  too,  a  common  quality  is  needed  in  the  Holy 
Being  and  those  who  approach  Him ;  but  with  Isaiah  this  common 
quality  is  freedom  from  sin  (DNDn) :  what  this  in  turn  is  may  be 
seen  by  noting  such  passages  as  i^^^* ;  it  is  moral,  not  ceremonial ; 
it  is  acquired  not  by  expiatory  sacrifices,  but  by  turning  from  evil 
to  good,  by  executing  justice  and  cultivating  mercy  (cp.  also 
^7  (i6)j  One  of  a  sinful  nation  whose  lips  are  rendered  unclean, 
unfit  to  speak  to  Yahweh,  Isaiah  is  himself  sinful,  unable  to 
address  Yahweh;  he  does  not  even,  like  the  publican  of  the 
parable  (Lk  iS^^),  cry  to  God  for  forgiveness;  his  lips  open,  but 
in  self-address — "  Wretched  man  that  I  am."  But  freed  from 
sin  (v."^),  Isaiah  is  fitted  to  be  entrusted  with  the  secret  of 
Yahweh  (cp.  Am  3^^),  or,  as  we  might  express  it,  for  communion 
with  God.  This  holy,  moral  power  which  is  revealed  to  Isaiah 
in  his  vision  is  Lord  of  the  (heavenly)  hosts,  and  the  whole  world 
reflects  the  lustre  of  His  righteousness.  History,  human  life  is 
under  the  government  of  a  righteous  power  that  rules  the  world, 
and  is  not  devoted  merely  to  satisfying  the  unethical  desires  of 


VI.  3,  4  lo; 

a  petty  nation  or  tolerating  its  sins.  Isaiah  is  no  exponent,  like 
the  author  of  chs.  40-55,  of  an  intellectual  monotheism,  but  he  is 
possessed  by  the  moral  thought  that  in  due  time  demanded  an 
explicit  monotheistic  statement. — His  glory\  here,  as  in  Nu  1421, 
Ps  72^*  968,  of  Yahweh's  self-revelation  in  His  dealing  with  men. 
4.  The  Temple  quakes  to  its  foundations  (?)  with  the  sound  of 
the  song  of  the  seraphim,  just  as  mountains  tremble  when 
Yahweh  appears  (Ex  19^^,  Jg  5*);  whether  a  heavenly  temple 
would  have  quaked  at  what  in  a  heavenly  temple  should  have 
been  an  ordinary  occurrence,  may  be  doubted. — The  foundations 
of  the  thresholds^  the  exact  sense  of  the  Hebrew  phrase  is 
uncertain :  see  phil.  n. — Them  that  called]  i.e.  the  seraphim,* 
who  alone  as  yet  have  called  (v.*) :  the  sing.  part.  (N"i1pn)  is  used 
collectively  as  are  other  sing,  participles  elsewhere  ;  see,  e.g.^  Jos 
6^- ^,  Gn  4^0;  G-K.  126m;  Kon.  iii.  256.  Others  have  given  to 
the  part,  a  sing,  sense  and  referred  it,  inappropriately,  to  Yahweh 
thundering  out  "welcome"  to  Isaiah  (Ew.),  or  expressing  anger 
at  the  sin  of  the  people  (Di.). — The  house]  the  Temple:  cp. 
I  K  6**  *  etc. — Began  to  fill  with  smoke]  in  spite  of  "  cloud  " 
rather  than  smoke  being  mentioned  there,  Ezk  10*  seems  the 
nearest  parallel,  and  to  suggest  that  the  smoke  here  is  the  cloud 
that  so  commonly  accompanied  theophanies — Ex  14^*  40^4, 
I  K  8»f-,  Is  45  (cp.  EBi.,  Pillar  of  cloud,  Theophany).  Only  for 
a  moment  does  Isaiah  see  the  unveiled  glory  of  Yahweh.  Others 
explain  the  smoke  as  the  breath  of  the  seraphim  (cp.  Ps  18*: 
so  Du.),  or  as  the  smoke  of  Yahweh's  anger  (Ps  74^  So^  (^),  Dt 
29";  Di.). 

I.  nmin  .  .  .  xvwi\  Dr.  Tenses,  127/3.  (ffir  begins  with  koX  iyhero  to 
establish  a  connection,  which  did  not  originally  exist,  with  ch.  5. — "inn]  here 
and  in  v.*  many  MSS  read  ni.T  :  so  in  3^'*  ^^. — Hvy\  m]  not  grammatically 
parallel  to  2»\  and,  as  in  57^",  directly  descriptive  of  Yahweh,  but  (as  in  (& 
clearly)  attributives  of  kd3. — 2.  i*?  "ryDO]  adove  hint,  cp.  14",  Dn  I2'**,  Gn 
22^ ;  S  Sv'^'Ci  loy  is  not  merely  the  same  as  Sv  noy,  to  stand  in  attendance  on — 
Jg  3^^,  Jer  36"^  (reading  hv  for  Vyo). — n03']  this  and  the  following  imperfects 
describe  what  is  liable  to  occur  (Dr.  33/3),  really  therefore  the  purpose  of  the 
wings,  rather  than  what  Isaiah  actually  saw  frequently  occur  (Dr.  Tenses, 
30  a). — 3.  nONi  .  .  .  xnpi]  frequentatives  :  Dr.  §  120,  G-K.  1 12-^. — nt  *?{<  ni]  the 
one  to  the  other;  cp.  Ex  14^''.  In  similar  correlative  usages  ni  refers  definitely 
to  one  of  two  (Gn  29^',  Ex  14''®,  i  K  3^),  or  to  a  single  individual  of  a  series 
(i  K  22*",  Is  44*^).     In  Ps  75^  nt  appears  to  correspond  to  the  English 

*  So  €r,  Ges.,  Del.,  Du.,  Marti. 


I08  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

indefinite  one  .  .  .  another:  cp.  the  second  nr  in  Job  x^'^-'^^,  but  to  the 
Hebrew  mind  the  nr  was  probably  vivid  and  definite.  Certainly  rw  ^k  ni  is 
not  the  normal  Hebrew  for  "to  one  another,"  which  is  expressed  by  the 
plural  vb.  with  in^T  W  tf'X  (G-K.  I39<?).  Nor  again  would  it  normally  express 
"  the  one  group  to  the  other  group"  :  this  should  be  n"?**  *?«  n'?N  (cp.  Dt  2.*]^^-^ 
2  S  2^^,  I  K  20^,  Dn  12^).  Unless  nj  •?«  ni  here  implies  i?zy<7  seraphs  only, 
we  can  only  find  a  somewhat  inadequate  parallel  in  Ec  '^'^  where  one  nr  refers 
to  a  pi.  (c-;«<n  '33)  and  the  other  to  a  collective  (nDna). — nuD  \-\^Ti  '?3  nVd] 
cp.  8^,  and  for  the  cstr.,  Driver,  §  189.  Possibly  nx^D  should  be  read  :  cp. 
(HBr^ST,  and  see  Nestle  in  ZATW^  1905,  218 ff.— 4.  D'sjon  didn]  hdn  (apart  from 
'\f.  — cubit  and,  in  2  S  8^,  mother-city)  here  only.  It  has  been  explained  as  a 
metaphorical  development  from  □«,  mother,  and  htnce foundations ;  uncertain ; 

but  cp.  Assyr.  ammatu.  ^0  regularly  means  threshold,  though  ^2ICD  has  also 
the  meaning  porchy  doorpost.  (&  renders  the  two  words  by  the  single  word 
viripdvpov,  lintel  (cp.  2rU,S).  Gra.  suggests  /^[jJdn,  supporters,  i.t.  pillars 
(2  K  18^^),  which  brings  us  back,  so  far  as  the  mt  aning  goes,  very  nearly  to  the 
posts  of  the  doors  of  AV,  which  rests  on  a  philologically  questionable  Jewish 
exegesis  ;  cp.  Rashi. — kVd']  impf.  of  incipient  action  :  Dr.  §§  26,  27. 

5-8.  The  effect  of  the  vision  on  Isaiah. — 5.  Having 
in  vv.^'*  described  what  he  saw,  the  vision  proper,  Isaiah  passes 
on  to  speak  of  the  effect  on  himself ;  the  alarm  which  he  felt  was 
the  effect  of  the  whole  of  what  he  saw,  not  merely  of  the  last  or 
any  other  single  detail.  He  is  a  sinful  man,  member  of  a  sinful 
nation,  and  yet  he  has  seen  God!  cp.  Lk  5*,  Ex  33^^,  Jg  1322. 
He  is  in  the  presence  of  God,  but  has  not  that  cleanness  of  lips 
which  they  need  who  would  call  upon  God  (Zeph  3^).  He 
cannot  pray  for  himself,  or  his  sinful  folk. — For  I  am  undone] 
for  the  vb.  see,  tf.^.,  15^,  Hos  10''.  An  ancient  theory  that  Isaiah 
was  struck  dumb  for  not  rebuking  Uzziah's  presumption  (2  Ch 
2  6i6flF.^  was  based  on  the  confusion  of  the  roots  noT  and  W01  {to 
be  silent)  :  hence  U  quia  tacui^  Aq.  ia-iwTrrja-a,  cp.  C  and  possibly 
ffi^'s  KaravivvyixjcLi. — 6,  7'  ^^^  Isaiah  does  not  find  himself  driven 
forth  on  account  of  his  sinfulness :  on  the  other  hand,  the  same 
vision  which  had  intensified  his  consciousness  of  sin  is,  before  it 
vanishes,  to  assure  him  of  the  removal  of  his  sin.  One  of  the 
seraphim,  leaving  his  fellow(s)  at  the  threshold,  flew  to  the  altar 
which  stood  just  in  front  of  the  porch  of  the  Temple,  and,  taking 
off  the  altar  a  glowing  coal,  or  stone,  continued  his  flight  across 
the  court  of  the  Temple  to  the  place  where  Isaiah  stood,  perhaps 
near  its  entrance,  and  touched  his  unclean  lips  with  it,  purging 
them  with  fire  (cp.  Mai  32^-,  Lk  3^^)  and  making  them  clean ;  his 
Ups  being  cleansed  he  can  address  Yahweh  (v.^). — Thy  iniquity 


«. 


VI.  4-9  I09 

will  depart]  the  sense  of  the  pf.  with  waw  Conv.  must  be  future 
here  (Dr.  119  a):  EV  is  taken  atvay^  is  wrong  both  in  respect  of 
the  tense  and  the  passive  vb. ;  ID  in  Heb.  is  intrans.  to  remove^ 
depart,  pass  away.  For  such  quasi-personification  of  sin  as  the 
expression  implies,  cp.  2  K  7^,  Iniquity  (punishment)  will  find, 
overtake,  us  (iJXVDl) ;  cp.  (with  riNDn  as  subj.)  Nu  32^3. — g.  The 
sense  of  forgiveness  in  Isaiah  is  immediately  accompanied  by  the 
desire  for  service;  cp.  the  prayer  of  Ps  5113-15(11-13).  purification 
from  sin  has  set  him  free  to  understand  Yahweh's  will ;  he  now 
hears  Him  consulting  the  members  of  His  court  (i  K  22^®^-)  and 
asking  who  shall  be  His  messenger  ;  Isaiah  offers  himself.  The 
passage  is  important  for  the  light  it  throws  on  the  nature  of  the 
prophetic  consciousness  and  inspiration.  Isaiah  becomes  a 
prophet  owing  to  no  physical  compulsion,  but  by  a  perfectly 
free  choice,  or  at  least  all  that  compels  him  is  his  sympathy  with 
the  purposes  of  Yahweh ;  cp.  Am  3^''. 

5.  'n'Dnj]  Houtsma  in  ZATW,  1907,  p.  57,  conjectures  'Ji'P^j  = 'nKDOJ. — 
6.  ritDTi]  also  i  K   19" — D'*3n  (njy),  (bread  baked  on)  hot  stones ;  cp.  Syr. 

(^  \h,   bread  baked  on   ashes ;    Ar.  /i«^  •»   «  hot  stone,     nsjn,  pavement 

(Ezk4o"),  is  from  a  different  root,  /iitf  1,  k2)f5;  see  BDB.  (Br  rightly 
&v6pa^. — 7.  yj'i]  MT  rightly  points  as  Hiphil;  the  unemphatic  object  is 
omitted.— m]  neuter;  see  Kon.  iii.  45.-8.  13^]  €r,  perhaps  to  avoid  the 
question  raised  by  |§  (see  above),  substitutes  vphs  rbv  \ahv  toOtop  :  cp.  v.^ 

9-13.  The  message  entrusted  to  Isaiah  by  Yahweh. 

— The  doom  of  the  people  is  inevitably  fixed :  there  is  to  be  no 
further  healing  of  their  sick  state  (cp.  !**•) ;  let  them  now  persist 
in  their  insensitivity  (cp.  i*)  to  the  voice  and  will  of  God :  even 
the  prophet's  preaching  is  but  to  render  them  blinder,  deafer, 
and  more  insensitive.  The  gradual  hardening  and  ultimately 
fatal  effect  on  character  of  continued  disobedience  to  the  voice 
of  God  is  here  stated  in  the  bold,  direct,  dramatic  speech  of 
prophecy.  The  doings  of  God  will  still  be  before  the  people, 
the  voice  of  God  will  still  speak  through  the  prophets  and  in  the 
events  of  the  time,  but  they  will  not  understand  ! — T/iis  people] 
so  also  8^'  12  9I6  2811- 1*  29^3.  u  contemptuously,  and  always, 
except  in  9^^,  of  the  unbelief  or  superstitions  of  the  people  (Du.). 
The  phrase  is  ambiguous,  and  raises  the  question  whether  at  his 
call  Isaiah  was  charged  with  a  mission  to  Judah  only  or  to  the 
Northern  kingdom  only,  or  to  both  kingdoms.     Against  limiting 


no  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

the  phrase  to  Judah  is  the  fact  that  much  of  Isaiah's  earHer 
prophecies  was  actually  addressed  in  whole  or  in  part  to  the 
Northern  kingdom  (g"^^-  17^^-  28^-*).  Hackmann  (pp.  52-54, 
70-76)  has  argued  strongly  that  the  phrase  here  refers  to  Israel 
only;  he  points  out  that  the  prophecies  clearly  belonging  to 
Isaiah's  early  life  are  mainly  devoted  to  Israel,  that  the  fate  of 
Israel  predicted  in  them  is  along  the  lines  of  the  preaching  of 
Amos  and  Hosea,  and  agrees  with  the  terms  of  the  commission 
here — total  destruction ;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  Isaiah's  attitude 
towards  Judah  as  depicted  in  ch.  7  f.  does  not  correspond  to  the 
commission.  The  fatal  objection  to  this  otherwise  attractive 
theory,  which  is  insufficiently  criticised  by  Cheyne  {Introd. 
p.  28),  is  that  the  people  in  v.*  cannot  well  be  an  entirely 
different  body  from  the  people  of  v.^,  and  that  in  v.*  the  people 
must  at  least  include  Judah.  But  if  we  must  conclude  that 
"this  people"  includes  Judah  as  well  as  Israel,  or  even,  as  surely 
v.^  suggests,  refers  particularly  to  Judah,  how  is  the  unrelieved 
pessimism  as  to  the  national  future  to  be  accounted  for  in  view 
of  ch.  7  ?  And  how  on  any  interpretation  is  the  absence  of 
any  reference  to  Isaiah's  fundamental  (7^  n.)  doctrine  of  the 
remnant  to  be  explained  ?  Cheyne  (p.  29)  finds  it  sufficient  to 
assume  that  ch.  6  was  originally  intended  as  a  prologue  to  7^-8^* 
(in  the  course  of  which  the  doctrine  of  the  remnant  is  developed) ; 
others,  following  Ew.,  think  that  this  record  of  Isaiah's  call  having 
been  written  long  after  his  call,  was  influenced  by  the  darker 
outlook  of  a  later  time.  The  difficulty  is  not  completely  over- 
come, but  escape  is  least  of  all  to  be  found  by  retaining,  against 
the  evidence  of  ffi,  the  last  clause  of  y?^. — Dull  the  heart'] 
Heb.  make  fat ^  i.e.  insensitive;  cp.  Ps  119^®. — Plaster  over  its 
eyes]  as  with  the  sticky  secretion  that  exudes  from  diseased  eyes. 
— And  it  be  healed  once  more]  as  it  had  been  wont  to  be  healed 
by  Yahweh  (Hos  6^).  (R  replaces  the  indefinite  subj.  of  |^  by 
the  ist  pers.,  And  I  heal  them.  EV,  "  and  turn  again  \i.e.  to  God] 
and  be  healed,"  follows  the  erroneous  punctuation  of  MT. — 
II-13.  How  long,  asks  Isaiah,  is  this  hardening  process  to 
proceed  ?  The  answer  comes  clearly :  till  the  nation  be  no 
more,  till  it  be  destroyed  root  and  branch,  and  the  country  which 
it  now  inhabttfs  be  left  full  of  uninhabited  ruins  and  untilled :  cp. 
22^*. — Be  left  a  desolation]  so  6r;  "^be  wasted  into  a  desolation. 
— 13.  And  Yahweh  remove  men]  Yahweh  will  not  Himself  be 


VI.  9-13  m 

destroyed,  as  the  people  supposed,  in  the  destruction  of  His 
people ;  He  is  Himself  the  cause  of  it.  Israel  will  vanish ; 
Yahweh  will  remain.  The  land  of  Israel  will  become  a  desola- 
tion, but  the  whole  earth  (v.*)  will  still  reflect  Yahweh's  righteous- 
ness ;  the  very  desolation  of  Yahweh's  country  will  speak  of  His 
righteous  anger,  which  will  not  tolerate  the  sins  of  those  whom 
He  had  chosen  to  be  peculiarly  His  own  (cp.  ^^'"^f  Am  32).  This 
thought  remains  implicit  in  the  entire  suggestion  of  the  vision 
(cp.  especially  v.*),  even  if  with  Marti  we  were  to  consider  v.^^f. 
a  post-exilic  explanatory  addition  to  v.^^ ;  but  his  arguments  are 
hardly  quite  conclusive ;  for  it  is  perhaps  hypercritical  to  claim 
that  men  cannot  be  removed  (v.  12)  from  an  already  (v.^^) 
desolated  country ;  and  the  use  of  Yahweh  in  words  attributed 
to  Yahweh — particularly  at  some  little  distance  from  the 
beginning  of  the  speech,  is  hardly  sufficient  by  itself  to  prove 
that  v. ^2  was  not  the  original  continuation  of  v.^^ — 13.  Even 
though  a  fraction  of  the  population,  a  tenths  is  left  behind  in 
Judah  when  Yahweh  exiles  the  rest  (v.^^a^,  it  will  not  escape,  but 
it  too  must  be  exterminated^  as  when  a  tree  is  cut  down,  the 
stump  which  remains  is  also  destroyed — such  seems  the  intention 
of  the  text.  If  the  last  clause  of  the  v.  were  really  original^  and 
not  a  late  gloss  added  to  J^  after  the  time  of  ffi,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  suppose  that  the  announcement  of  judgment  closes 
with  the  word  exterminated  ("»J?3)  ;  and  that  then  a  figure  of  hope 
is  abruptly  introduced — As  an  oak  or  a  terebinth  wherein  at 
felling  is  a  stump,  so  the  holy  seed  is  its  stump,  from  which  a  new 
and  holy  Israel  will  spring ;  such  in  any  case  is  the  meaning  of 
the  annotator  who  added  the  last  clause.  With  the  phrase  holy 
seed,  cp.  the  post-exilic  ^inpT^  int  of  Ezr  9^  and  DMi'N  ynt,  Mai  2^^. 

9.  yiDtr  iyD»]  G-K.  113^.-10.  aif'}]  point  so,  connecting  closely  with 
what  follows  (cp.  v.^'),  not  n^f'i  (MT). — Kflni]  and  one  heal;  indef.  subj. — 
G-K.  I44df. — II.  nKB'n]  (K  AcaTa\et00^6Tat=nNfp.  f^  is  a  poor  repetition 
of  the  vb.  in  the  first  line ;  MT  attempts  to  create  a  difference  by  pointing 
this  form  Niphal;  but  note  the  different  sense  of  Niphal  in  17^^. — 13.  .Tn'ni 
lyaS]  cstr.  as  in  5**,  but  the  meaning  of  nyn  is  different :  here  to  exterminate 
(cp.  4*,  2  S  4^S  Dt  13^'  etc. ),  there  to  depasture.  Budde,  indeed  {New  Worlds 
1895,  p.  12),  adopts  the  latter  meaning  here — it  shall  be  for  {cattle)  to  feed  on^ 
and  sees  in  the  words  a  promise  that  Judah  will  return  to  pastoral  life  and 
the  divine  favour. — 13.  p^KDi  nVx^]  probably  neither  term  denotes  a  distinct 
species  of  tree  (i'*  n.):  the  combination  of  the  two  terms  is  curious:  Kit. 
tentatively  proposes  the  omission  of  jiSkoi  :  note  that  about  100  Hebrew  MSS 
(and  ?  (!&)  read  na,  not  03,  in  the  next  clause. 


112  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

VII.  i-VIII.  1 8. — Incidents  and  Prophecies  at  the  time  of  the 
Syro-Epraimitish  War  (735-734  B.C.).  fl 

Special  Literature: — F.  Giesebrecht,   *'Die  Immanuel  Weissagung,"  in 
TSKy  1888,  pp.  217-264  (in  the  main  a  detailed  discussion  of  ch.  8);  A.  B. 
Davidson,  "Immanuel"  (in  £>B) ;  A.  S.  Peake,  "Immanuel"  (in  Z)ici.  of 
Christ  and  the  Gospels).     See,  further,  pp.  135  f. 

This  section  consists  of  {a)  narratives  in  prose  relating 
Isaiah's  interview  with  Ahaz  7^"^^,  his  use  of  the  name  Maher- 
shalal-hash-baz,  8^"*,  and  his  use  of  his  disciples  and  his  children, 
816-18  ;'(/^)  poems,  717-25  g^-io-n-iB;  {c)  prose  notes  (S^- n) 
prefixed  by  Isaiah  to  the  last  two  of  these  poems. 

In  8i'i8  both  the  prose  style  and  the  autobiographical 
character  of  ch.  6  re-appear,  see  Z^-^-  ^-  n-  i^-is ;  but  the  narrative 
parts  of  ch.  7  speak  of  Isaiah  in  the  3rd  person.  That  Isaiah 
spoke  of  himself  in  immediately  consecutive  passages,  now  in  the 
ist,  now  in  the  3rd  pers.  (Di.),  is  not  very  likely.  More  probably 
the  use  of  the  3rd  pers.  indicates  either  {a)  that  the  author  of 
7 1-16  was  not  Isaiah  himself,  but  that  the  passage  like  chs.  20  and 
36-39  is  biographical ;  or  {b)  that  71-16,  originally  like  chs.  6,  8 
autobiographical,  was  modified  by  an  editor  who  added  v.^,  and 
for  reasons  no  longer  obvious  substituted  the  3rd  for  the  ist 
person.  Of  these  alternatives  the  second  is  favoured  by  a  usage 
(^3  IV)  characteristic  of  Isaiah  in  7^  and  by  the  general  similarity 
of  style  throughout  the  narratives  of  chs.  7  f. ;  cp.  7^  and  86,  7^ 
and  816,  7I6  and  8^,  7!*- 16  and  Z^^'.  Isaiah's  memoirs  must  then 
have  suffered  a  similar  fortune  to  those  of  Ezra,  surviving  in 
part  intact  (cp.  e.g.  Ezr  9),  in  part  modified  by  an  editor  who 
substituted  the  3rd  pers.  for  the  ist  (cp.  e.g.  Ezr  10). 

The  prophecy  in  8i^-23  is  scarcely  derived  from  Isaiah's 
memoirs,  still  less  9i"6;  nor  again  within  6I-8I8  is  717-26  go 
derived ;  see  below  on  the  several  passages. 

VII.  I.  A  summary  statement  of  the  ill-success  of 
the  operations  of  Syria  and  Israel  against  Judah. — The 
V.  is  logically  out  of  place,  the  hostile  approach  of  the  Syro- 
Ephraimitish  army  to  Jerusalem  and  the  failure  of  the  attack 
are  events  which  occurred  after  what  is  related  in  vv.^-i^.  The 
verse  with  some  verbal  variations  not  affecting  the  sense  occurs 
also  in  2  K  i6^  It  was  probably  derived  from  Kings  (cp.  chs. 
36-39)  by  the  editor  of  the  present  passage  ;  ct.  the  genealogical 
description  of  Ahaz  with  Isaiah's  simple  reference  to  Uzziah  in  6I. 


VII.    I-VIII.    1 8  113 

The  priority  of  Is  7^,  at  one  time  commonly  assumed  or  maintained,  is 
now  generally  abandoned,  but  Di.  still  defended  it  on  these  grounds:  (i) 
2  K  16'  stands  very  isolated  ;  (2)  Is  7'  recjuires  some  introductitm  ;  (3)  the 
omission  of  n'Vy  at  the  end  of  the  v.  in  Kings  is  less  correct ;  iVa*  (Ki.)  is  easier 
than  ^3'  (Is.)»  ^^^  therefore  presumably  secondary.  Of  these  arguments  the 
second  is  the  weightiest,  and  indeed  it  should  be  recognised  that  something 
once  preceded  and  introduced  v.^.  Either  that  introduction  was  lost  through 
mutilation  before  the  passage  came  into  the  hands  of  the  editor,  or  for 
some  reason  unknown  he  preferred  to  substitute  for  it  2  K  16".  The  first 
argument  is  of  little  weight ;  2  K  16"  may  stand  isolated,  but  Is  7^  is  logically 
out  of  place  (see  above).  As  to  the  3rd  argument,  the  reading  ^3'  in  Is.  is 
uncertain :  dSc  has  the  //.  The  additional  clause  inK  Sy  nj«i  of  Ki.  is  not 
strikingly  like  an  editorial  expansion  to  improve  the  bad  style  of  Is.  ;  the 
awkwardness  of  Is.  is  rather  due  to  abbreviation. 

And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  Ahaz  .  .  .  king  of  JudaH\ 
this  rather  vague  time  definition  was  correctly  inferred  by  the 
editor  from  what  immediately  precedes  2  K  16^;  the  phrase- 
ology is  not  that  of  a  contemporary,  who  would  have  said  "  At 
the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz,"  or  "  In  the  first  year  of 
Ahaz." — Re^on\  EV  Rezin  (see  phil.  n.).  Reson  was  king  of 
Damascus  as  early  as  738,  for  he  is  mentioned  by  Tiglath-pileser 
in  his  annals  of  that  year ;  but  Pel^ah's  accession  must  be  placed 
later,  for  the  king  of  Israel  who  paid  tribute  to  Tiglath-pileser  in 
738  was  Menahem,  and  between  Menahem  and  Peljiah  intervened 
the  reign  of  Pekahiah. —  Went  up\  so  regularly  of  motion  towards 
Jerusalem  (cp.  e.g.  2^,  Ezr  7^,  Jn  2^8,  ct.  Lk  9^^),  departure  from 
Jerusalem  being  expressed  by  to  go  down  (i  K  22^,  Ac  8*). — 
Reson  went  up  ...  to  Jerusalem  to  attack  it,  but  could  not  attack 
it]  2  K  16*  runs:  "Reson  .  .  .  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  attack 
(it),  and  laid  siege  to  Ahaz  {&  '  to  it '),  but  could  not  attack  it." 
The  meaning  of  Kings  is  clear :  Reson  and  Pekah  reached 
Jerusalem  and  invested  it,  but  were  unable  to  proceed  to  actual 
assaults  on  the  city :  no  sooner  was  the  investment  complete 
than  the  besiegers  were  called  away.  The  meaning  of  Is.  is  the 
same,  though  it  is  more  awkwardly  expressed :  the  last  clause 
is  more  specific  than  "they  could  not  prevail  against  it"  (RV), 
which  might  imply  failure  after  a  long  siege;  it  means  that  they 
were  not  even  able  to  make  any  active  assault  on  the  city.  The 
speedy  withdrawal  from  Jerusalem  may  be  attributed  to  news 
having  reached  the  besiegers  that  the  Assyrians  were  advancing 
westwards.  In  735,  as  in  the  two  previous  years,  Tiglath-pileser 
had  been  campaigning  to  the  S.E.  and  N.  of  Assyria,  i.e.  in  parts 
VOL.  I. — 8 


4 


114  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

remote  from  Syria ;  to  this  period  we  may  attribute  the  raid  on 
Judah  in  the  last  year(s)  of  Jotham  (2  K  15^^).  In  the  early 
spring  of  734  we  may  suppose  that  the  allied  armies  marched 
on  Jerusalem,  but  had  scarcely  laid  siege  to  the  city  when  news 
reached  them  that  Tiglath-pileser  was  moving  westward;  his 
objective  in  this  year  was,  as  we  know  from  the  Eponym 
Canon,  Philistia.  Starting  about  the  same  time  (cp.  2  S  11^), 
Reson  might  well  traverse  the  distance  (about  140  miles)  from 
Damascus  to  Jerusalem,  and  prepare  to  lay  siege  to  the  latter 
city,  before  he  received  news,  that  this  year  the  Assyrian  king 
was  marching  from  Nineveh  on  his  own  capital;  the  military 
route  from  Nineveh  to  Damascus  would  be  about  550  miles  (cp. 
EBt.  5167). 

^3*  H^^  .  ,  .  npsi  .  .  ,  pjn  n^y]  if  Sa*  is  correct,  the  waw  before  nps  is  waw 
concomitantiae^  which  in  Arabic  requires  the  ace.  after  it — Re^6n  with  Pekah 
went  up  and  was  unable  ;  the  instances  in  Heb.  are  at  best  few  ;  see  G-K. 
1 54a  footnote ;  BDB  253a.  In  this  case  Reson  appears  as  the  principal 
person.  More  probably  Vd"-  should  be  read  ^p;  with  2  Ki.,  |^  and  ffir,  and  (15 
here:  then  nSy  is  sing,  as  preceding  the  subj.  ;  G-K.  146/". — pn]  "^  \sr\  wjis 
erroneously  amplified  in  1^^  to  \'sr\  instead  of  pxn ;  €r,  "Paao-wj/,  'Pao-o-wy  (with 
late  variants 'Paacii'  accommodated  to  |^^),  and  the  Assyrian  Ra-§un-nu  alike 
indicate  that  the  final  vowel  was  0. — n'^y  nDnf^D"?]  2  Ki.,  inN  •?];  ns'i  nDn'?D^, 
where  thk  ^y  is  perhaps  an  erroneous  specification  of  an  original  n'^y  (Stade) ; 
whether  the  omission  of  nsM  in  Is.  was  editorial  or  transcriptional  is  uncertain. 
The  actual  investment  of  a  city  is  expressed  by  Sy  mx,  the  more  active 
operations,  such  as  assaults  on  the  walls,  carried  on  during  the  investment  in 
order  to  reduce  the  city,  or  as  the  immediate  prelude  to  its  capture  (^^^),  by 
Sy  □n'?n  (Dt  20^^,  2  K  12^*,  Jos  10*^),  or  a  urhn  (i  K  20^,  Jg  9^^  2  S 
J 22a.  27.  2»^  Is  20^)  or  simply  Dn'?n  (2  S  ii^*'^).  The  purpose  of  a  hostile 
approach  to  a  city  may,  of  course,  be  described  either  as  "to  besiege  it,"  or 
"  to  attack  it "  {rs-hrf  onSn*?,  Dt  20^*>  and  here,  with  the  noun  instead  of  the 
infin.  .T'?y  hdh'td'?).  onSn  does  not  mean  "to  continue  the  fight"  (Box),  or 
"to  be  successful  in  fighting" — "to  prevail,"  not  even  in  Nu  22"  cited  for 
this  sense  by  BDB  ;  success  is  there  implied  by  the  following  verb  vnsnai. 

2-16.  Isaiah's  interview  with  Ahaz.     "Immanuel. 

— At  a  time  when  news  has  reached  Jerusalem  of  the  union 
of  the  Syrian  with  the  Ephraimite  army  at  two  or  three  days' 
distance  from  Jerusalem,  and  the  court  and  people  are  in 
great  alarm,  Isaiah  is  commanded  by  Yahweh  to  take  with  him 
his  son  Shear-jashub,  whose  name  signified  "  A  Remnant  shall 
return,"  and  to  meet  Ahaz  outside  the  city  in  the  "  Fuller's  Field 
Road  " ;  he  is  to  exhort  the  king  to  keep  calm,  and  to  assure  him 


VII.  i-i6  115 

that  Syria  and  Ephraim  possess  no  power  to  do  Judah  serious 
mischief,  or  to  carry  out  their  plan  of  taking  Jerusalem  and 
overthrowing  the  Davidic  dynasty  in  favour  of  an  outsider 
(probably  a  Syrian).  Lack  of  trust  in  Yahweh  can  alone,  but 
would  surely,  lead  to  Judah's  undoing.  In  a  further  appeal, 
Ahaz  is  offered  any  sign  (of  Yahweh's  sufficiency)  that  he  likes 
to  choose,  but  he  declines  the  offer.  Thereupon  Isaiah 
announces  that  Yahweh  nevertheless  will  (hereafter)  give  a  sign 
of  His  own  choosing :  the  nature  and  purpose  of  this  sign  has 
been  much  discussed,  and  no  general  agreement  has  been 
reached  (see  below);  but  Isaiah  goes  on  to  predict  (v.^^)  that 
within  two  or  three  years  Ephraim  and  Syria  will  be  a  land  of 
ruins.  In  w.^^**,  which  probably  do  not  belong  to  the  original 
account  of  the  interview,  the  desolation  of  Judah  also  is 
predicted. 

In  this  passage  much  is  obscure ;  two  things  are  clear : 
Isaiah's  contemptuous  disbelief  in  the  power  of  the  allied  armies 
of  Syria  and  Israel,  and  his  profound  belief  in  Yahweh :  in  both 
respects  he  differs  from  king  and  people,  who  fear  the  foe  and 
have  no  sustaining  confidence  in  Yahweh. 

Isaiah's  attitude  to  Assyria  is  not  definitely  stated  in  w.^'^^ ; 
and  it  must  be  a  matter  of  inference  only  whether  Ahaz  had 
already  paid  tribute  to  Assyria,  or  was  at  the  time  contemplating 
doing  so.  Isaiah  may  have  judged  the  allied  armies  as  he  did, 
because  he  was  convinced  that  an  immediate  advance  of  Assyria 
to  the  West  would  force  them  to  turn  back  before  they  could 
inflict  serious  injury  on  Judah  ;  but  even  if  so,  this  was  but  the 
form  which  his  belief  in  Yahweh  took,  for  with  him  Yahweh 
directed  the  movements  of  Assyria. 

The  date  of  this  interview  is  the  early  part  of  734.  It  fell 
some  few  years  later  than  Isaiah's  call  (ch.  6) :  see  on  v.^. 

2.  News  comes  to  the  court  in  Jerusalem  that  the  plans  of 
Syria  and  Ephraim  (v.^)  for  attacking  Jerusalem  and  over- 
throwing the  Davidic  dynasty  (w.*-  ^)  are  now  taking  practical 
and  menacing  effect  The  entire  might  of  Syria  has  settled  for 
the  moment  in  the  country  of  its  allies,  the  Ephraimites;  the 
Syrian  army  has  covered  more  than  half  the  distance  between 
Damascus  and  Jerusalem,  and  is  within  two  or  three  days'  march 
of  its  goal.  King  and  people  quail  at  the  news,  like  trees  bending 
before  the  wind  (cp.  Mt  11^). — The  house  of  David\  so  w.^^  ^'^. 


Il6  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

The  substitution  of  an  alien  for  the  reigning  king  (v.^)  would 
involve  loss  of  place  and  power  for  the  entire  house  or  entourage 
(cp.  e.g.  2  S  9)  of  the  king.  They  therefore,  and  not  Ahaz 
alone,  are  described  as  recipients  of  the  news,  and  active  • 
promoters  of  the  policy  directed  against  Syria  and  Ephraim 
(v.i^) ;  but  it  is  unnecessary  to  conclude  that  on  account  of  the 
youth  of  the  king,  who  may  have  been  barely  twenty-one  (2  K 
16^;  but  see  2  Ch  28^,  Kit.),  other  members  of  the  royal  house 
took  at  this  time  a  more  than  ordinary  part  in  government. — 
Syria  hath  settled  down  upon  Ephraini\  the  phrase  to  settle  upon 
(i>y  ni3)  is  used  (11^)  of  the  spirit  taking  possession  of  men,  of 
the  ark  grounding  on  Mt.  Ararat  (Gn  8*),  of  carrion  birds 
lighting  on  dead  bodies  (2  S  21^^);  construed  with  1  the  verb  is 
also  used  of  insects,  such  as  locusts  (Ex  10^*),  settling  on  a 
tract  of  country  (v.^^).  None  of  these  uses  quite  corresponds 
to  what  the  context  here  seems  to  require,  the  friendly  and 
temporary  halt  of  an  army  in  the  country  of  allies ;  the  nearest 
parallel  for  the  temporary  halt  is  the  absolute  use  of  the  vb.  in 
Nu  10^^.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  verb  was  so  associated  with 
swarms  of  insects  as  to  suggest  by  itself  that  the  army  of  Syria 
was  large  (Di.).  The  unjustifiable  rendering  is  confederate  with 
(EV),  or  conjectural  emendations  to  obtain  such  a  sense,  increase, 
if  they  do  not  create,  difficulty ;  the  hostile  alliance  in  itself  was 
no  new  thing  needing  to  be  announced  :  it  already  existed  before 
Ahaz  became  king,  2  K  \<^'^. 

3-9.  Yahweh  commands  Isaiah  to  interview  Ahaz  outside 
the  city,  and  to  assure  him  that  he  has  no  cause  for  fear;  for 
the  plans  of  the  allied  powers  will  be  frustrated.  The  carrying 
out  of  the  command  is  not  directly  recorded;  it  is  merely 
implied  by  the  fact  that  in  vv.^^^-  the  actual  interview  is  in 
progress;  so  the  fulfilment  of  Jer  19^'*  is  implied  in  19^*  but  not 
directly  recorded. 

3.  Shear-jashub]  unless  with  Che.  {Crit.  Bib.)  we  substitute 
for  2\^^  "ISC'  of  5^  niK'^  "itJ'X,  a  name  of  purely  sinister  meaning — 
"Asshur  shall  return,"  the  name  of  the  son  whom  Isaiah  is 
bidden  to  take  with  him,  is  at  once  a  warning  and  a  promise :  a 
large  part  of  the  whole  will  perish  and  not  return,  but  the 
remnant  will  return  and  be  saved.  Isaiah  may  at  different 
times  have  explained  the  whole  and  the  remnant  differently ; 
but  on  this  occasion  he  would  explain  it  as  meaning  that  the 


VII.  2,  3 


117 


larger  part  of  "  the  whole  house  of  Israel,"  the  northern  kingdom, 
will  certainly  perish;  but  the  remnant,  Judah,  may  return  to 
Yahweh  and  be  saved  (cp.  vv.^*-^^).  In  any  case  we  must 
assume  that  Isaiah  takes  his  son,  whose  name  was  a  sign  (8^^), 
because  he  knows  that  King  Ahaz  when  he  sees  the  boy  will 
recall  his  name  and  its  significance.  Before  this  time  Isaiah  had 
probably  drawn  public  attention  to  his  elder  son's  name,  as  later 
he  did  to  the  name  of  the  younger  (S^^-),  and  an  account  of  this 
may  have  stood  originally  in  the  memoirs.  There  is  no 
suggestion  that  Isaiah  was  to  carry  Shear-jashub :  the  child 
therefore  must  have  been  old  enough  to  go  for  a  walk.  The 
name  with  its  prophetic  significance  must  have  been  given  after 
the  call  (ch.  6) :  therefore  this  incident  falls  at  least  two  or  three, 
perhaps  several  years,  after  that  event. — Go  out  .  .  .  to  the  end  of 
the  channel  of  the  upper  pool,  to  the  Fuller's  Field  Road^  we  may 
assume  that  Ahaz  was  engaged  at  the  time  in  inspecting  the 
water  supply  of  the  city  against  the  siege  which  might  now  be 
expected  within  a  day  or  two.  The  city  of  Jerusalem  contains 
no  springs,  but  is  and  must  always  have  been  entirely  dependent 
for  its  water  supply  *  on  cisterns  filled  by  (i)  the  rain  of  winter, 
or  (2)  by  aqueducts  from  springs,  or  reservoirs,  outside  the  city. 
The  only  perennial  supply  of  water  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
Jerusalem  is  the  Virgin's  Spring,  "'Ain  Sitti  Maryam":  this  was 
connected,  perhaps  later  than  the  time  of  Ahaz  (cp.  2  K  2o2<^, 
2  Ch  32^®),  by  an  underground  passage,  586  yards  long,  with 
the  pool  of  Siloam  within  the  city,  and  so  made  available 
for  the  inhabitants  in  time  of  siege.  An  external  conduit  had 
previously  connected  these  points  (Benzinger,  Kon.  187),  but 
this  was  liable  to  be  cut  by  an  enemy.  The  place  of  the 
interview,  in  spite  of  the  full  definition,  cannot  be  identified ; 
perhaps  it  lay  to  the  north  of  the  city,  for  the  Assyrian  army  is 
said  to  have  encamped  there  (362),  and  the  north  is  the  natural 
side  from  which  to  attack  Jerusalem,  as  the  Romans  also  later 
perceived.  Others  f  put  it  to  the  S.E.,  below  the  city  "at  the 
mouth  of  the  Tyropoeon  valley."  The  Fuller's  Field  may 
indeed  have  lain  there,  *'  where  alone  water  abounded  " ;  but  was 
the  entire  course  of  the  Fuller's  Field  Road  below  the  city  ?    The 

*  G.  A.  Smith,  y<?/-«ja/tfw,  i.  15  and  ch.  v. 

t  Sta.  Gesch.  i.  592  f.  (with  plan);  G.  A.  Smith,  ferusatem,  i.  105,  Ii4ff,, 
ii.  127. 


ii8 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


verb  Go  out  does  not  suggest  descent  into  the  valley. — 4.  Isaiah 
is  to  say  to  Ahaz :  See  to  it  that  you  keep  quiet,  free  from  agitation, 
not  like  trees  trembling  in  the  wind  (v.^) ;  have  no  fear  of  Syria 
and  Ephraim,  who,  worn  out  with  their  previous  internecine 
warfare,  have  little  power  of  mischief  left,  but  are  like  the  stumps 
of  fire  brands  now  smouldering  before  they  finally  grow  cold  and 
harmless.  Smoke,  not  fire,  is  all  that  the  latest  news  means. 
Isaiah  condemns  two  things  in  Ahaz :  his  fear,  for  it  is  needless ; 
his  faith  in  material  resources — here  typified  by  a  secure  water 
supply  in  time  of  siege ;  the  only  faith  that  will  secure  the  real 
solidity  of  the  state  is  faith  in  Yahweh  (v.®).  He  demands  of 
Ahaz,  directly  by  his  words,  confidence  and,  by  the  presence  of 
his  son  Shear-jashub,  "  return  "  to  Yahweh.  The  point  of  view 
is  essentially  the  same  years  later,  and  expressed  in  part  by  the 
same  terms:  "in  returning  {shubah)  and  resting  shall  ye  find 
support,  in  keeping  quiet  (topJJ'n,  as  here  and  32^7,  cp.  18*)  and 
confidence  shall  your  strength  lie "  (30^^),  not  in  cavalry  or  the 
power  of  Egypt  (30^^). — At  the  heat  of  the  anger  of  Reson  and 
Syria,  and  Remalial^s  son\  an  explanation,  supplied  perhaps  by 
the  editor,  of  the  figure  of  the  smouldering  stumps  in  the 
previous  clause.  The  combination  of  the  terms  Re^on,  Syna, 
RemaliaJCs  son  is  curious.  RemaliaKs  son  appears  to  be  a 
contemptuous  mode  of  reference  to  Pekah :  cp.  i  S  20^^  and, 
below,  "  the  son  of  Tabeel." — 5,  6.  The  plan  of  the  allies,  which 
has  alarmed  Ahaz,  but  appears  to  Isaiah  certain  of  frustration 
(v.^,  is  to  take  Jerusalem  by  storm  and  then  dethrone  Ahaz, 
overturn  the  house  of  David,  and  set  up  as  king  of  Judah  a 
creature  of  their  own,  called  contemptuously  not  by  his  own 
name,  but  merely  the  son  of  Tabeel,  If  ffi  preserve  the  correct 
pronunciation,  Ta^o}\,  the  name  (cp.  Ezr  4^)  of  the  father  is 
Aramaic  and  the  man,  presumably,  an  Aramaean.  If  this  be 
so,  then,  whether  Winckler  be  right  or  not  in  identifying  the  son 
of  Tabeel  with  Reson,*  we  have  here  an  indication  that  Syria  is 
the  dominant  power  in  the  alliance. — Let  us  go  up  into  Judah  and 
cause  her  to  be  in  dread]  or,  more  probably,  reading  n3p''V3  for 
njVp^,  and  let  us  bring  her  into  straits,  cp.  29'^. — And  let  us  break 
into  her\  here,  if  not  in  the  previous  clause,  the  suffix  refers  to 
Jerusalem  rather  than  to  Judah  as  a  whole ;  it  can  scarcely  be 
"let  us  force  a  passage  into  her  territory"  (Box),  for  the  first 
*  ATUntersuchungen,  74  ;  KAT^  135. 


VII.  4-8  119 

clause  of  the  v.  already  expresses  invasion  of  the  territory.  For 
the  vb.  (vpn,  Kal,  Niph.)  of  breaking  into  cities,  see  2  Ch  32^, 
2  K  25^  Ezk  30I6,  Jer  392.  Even  in  2  Ch  211^  r\)]}p2'^'\  is  prob- 
ably a  breviloquence  for  "and  broke  into  the  cities  thereof." 
— I^or  us]  let  us  break  in  it  so  as  to  bring  it  unfo  us  (l3^^fc<,  cp. 
2  Ch  32^),  i.e.  into  our  hands. 

7-9.  Over  against  the  fears  of  Ahaz  and  the  plans  of  Syria 
and  Ephraim  is  now  set  the  sentence  of  Yahweh.  The  evil  plan 
(nyi,  V.*)  will  not  be  carried  out.  Reson  is  head  of  Damascus, 
Damascus  capital  of  Syria,  Pel^ah  head  of  Samaria,  and  Samaria 
capital  of  Ephraim,  and  they  will  never  be  anything  more ;  not  to 
them  belongs,  or  ever  will  belong,  the  headship  of  Judah.  So 
far  as  they  are  concerned,  Judah  is  safe.  But  its  ultimate  safety 
and  continuance  rest  on  its  relation  to  Yahweh.  It  is  not  really 
threatened  by  the  evil  plans  of  its  foes  ;  it  is  not  rendered  safe 
because  their  plans  are  foiled.  Safety  will  be  secured  by  a 
practical  and  personal  belief  in  and  understanding  of  Yahweh, 
which  will  lead  to  a  quiet  confidence  in  His  sufficiency  (v.*  30^^^-), 
and  to  righteousness  of  life  (cp.  Gn  15^);  but  if  yg  believe  not^ye 
shall  not  be  established',  an  early  and  correct  interpretation  of 
this  great  saying  is  found  in  2  Ch  20^0 ;  the  positive  alternative, 
here  left  to  be  understood,  is  expressed  by  Isaiah  in  28^^.  Note 
the  paronomasia — Hm  lo  tcHaminu  ki  lo  tVdmenUy  cp.  i^s  ^7  ^^.c^ 
This  passage  or  Gn  15®  is  the  earliest  extant  containing  the 
expression  to  believe. 

8b.  Sixty-five  years  hence  Ephraim  shall  be  broken  in  pieces^ 
that  it  be  no  more  a  people. — Eich.  and  Ges.  pointed  out,  and 
later  scholars  have  very  generally  recognised,  that  these  words  are 
an  annotation  by  a  later  writer.  Like  the  Aramaic  gloss  in 
Jer  lo^^  they  spoil  a  sentence  by  intruding  into  the  middle  of  it. 
Moreover,  the  note  in  its  present  position  anticipates  the  allusion 
to  Ephraim  (v.^)  which  it  attempts  to  explain.  The  origin  and 
nature  of  the  clause  are  sufficiently  indicated  by  its  position ; 
but  it  may  be  observed  further  that  it  could  afford  Ahaz  little 
assurance  that  the  present  peril  was  unreal,  to  know  that  long 
after  he  was  dead  Ephraim  would  be  destroyed.  The  precise  dat- 
ing of  a  prediction,  too,  would  be  without  analogy  in  Hebrew  pro- 
phecy, round  numbers  occur,  16I*  20^  21^^,  Jer  2^^^'.  The  writer 
of  the  note  refers  to  some  event  in  the  history  of  Ephraim  that 
occurred  65  years  after  735  B.C.,  i.e.  in  670-669  B.c.     The  Book 


120 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


of  Kings  appears  to  know  nothing  of  any  kingdom  of  Ephraim 
after  its  conquest  by  Sargon  in  722  B.C.  (2  K  17).  On  the  other 
hand,  Ezr  42- 10  speaks  of  settlements  of  Babylonian  peoples  in 
Samaria  in  the  time  of  Esar-haddon  (681-668)  and  Osnappar  = 
Asshurbanipal  (668-626).  Since  there  is  no  obvious  reason  why 
a  late  annotator  should  invent  the  number  65,  it  is  probable  that 
the  gloss  is  the  note  of  a  seventh  century  scribe,  and  records 
some  deportation  of  the  inhabitants  of  Ephraim  by  Esar-haddon 
or  Asshurbanipal.     Cp.  Winckler,  ATUntersuchungen^  97  ff- 

2.  nnj]  Fem.,  in  reference  to  the  whole  people  of  Aram  :  cp.  21*42", 
Ex  12^,  and  see  G-K.,  122A,  i.  Houb.  emended  to  niSj,  Lag.  to  nnK3,  a 
verbal  form  assumed  from  n«,  brother.  If  emendation  were  necessary,  njn  (cp. 
Sebastian  Munster)  would  be  easy,  but  the  prep,  ^y  would  give  it  an  inap- 
propriate hostile  force,  ffir  renders  <ri;j'e0c6»'97(rei'(='nan,  Gn  14';  nN(Niph.), 
2  K  128),  ^  innnN,  ,S  «^oZl»1.— 4.  T^  Kal  impf.  in  a,  G-K.  67/.— »]t<  nna 
'ui  J'J«n]  loosely  attached  to  the  foregoing.  For  this  clause  and  the  whole  of 
the  next  v.  (J5  has  firay  7ip  bprfy  rod  dvfiov  fiov  y^vrjrai,  irdXiv  Idao/xai'  Kal  6 
vlbs  Tov  'ApA/4  Kal  6  vlbs  tov  'FofieXlov  8ti  i^ovXe^aavro  ^ovXtjt  Trovijp&v.  This 
is  obviously  not  the  original  sense  ;  nor  is  an  original  text  to  be  obtained  by 
mere  retranslation.'  But  possibly  the  difference  between  |^  and  (&  is  in  part 
due  to  a  short  original  text  having  been  expanded  by  glosses  which  did  not 
find  quite  the  same  place  in  ^  and  the  original  of  fflr.  Perhaps  the  original 
of  vv.*''  (from  nnn)  and  "^  consisted  simply  of  nin  yh]}  ijj;'  '3-|j;'  j  all  beyond 
this  adds  words,  but  nothing  to  the  sense. — 5.  *3  |y']  rather  characteristic  of 
Isaiah:  3^*  n. — 6.  n-^n":!  n'?j;j]  3  nSy  implies  actual  entrance  m/^  the  city  or 
district  concerned,  not  mere  approach  to  it :  see  2  S  2^,  Jg  i^,  i  Ch  14", 
2  Ch  21",  and  even  in  Jer  48^^,  where  the  object  is  the  personified  people  (cp. 
Jos  9^). — njji'pj]  Hiph.  (here  only)  of  X^^i  in  the  sense  found  in  v.^*,  Ex  i^^^ 
Nu  22*.  Read  rather  (with  Ges.  Tkes.  al.)  n^p;'4} — a  better  transition  to 
ny]j''p2y  ffi  (Tvv\a'K'fiaavTe$  airroh,  doubtful. — ^N3t5]  if  Aramaic,  cp.  pmno, 
Ta^epeixd.  (i  K  15^*),  the  name  of  Ben-hadad's  father.  If  the  name  was 
Hebrew,  it  was  pronounced  '?><3b,  and  would  then  have  been  transliterated  by 
aScTuPi^X:  cp.  .T3-IB,  lu^Las.  MT  ('?><3b)  in  the  first  syllable  preserves  the 
tradition  that  the  name  is  Aramaic  ;  in  the  second  the  pathah  is  hardly  pausal  for 
sere,  but  rather  a  punctuator's  witticism,  who  would  have  the  name  mean  '*  No- 
good." — 7.  i*n.T  ':in]  CEr  Kvpios  ffa^aibd. — 9.  ••3]  surely,  as  in  nny  '3,  etc.  :  BDB 
472<J ;  G-K.  i59S^^^But  '3  may  be  an  error  for  '3  ;  on  this  and  on  ffi  (iL^) 
avuiJTe  intellegatis —  \i2r^  for  i3D(K)n  ;  see  Nestle  in  ZATW,  1905,  pp.  215  ff. — 
8.  nn']  for  the  less  usual  sense  of  >/nnn,  to  be  shattered,  cp.  the  use  of  the  Hiph. 
in  9^  of  D'nn  (pi.)  in  i  S  2*,  and  of  nnnn  (?  Piel)  in  Jer  51^^.  The  use  of  the 
Kal  in  30^^,  often  cited  as  parallel,  is  ambiguous.  For  the  more  usual  sense 
to  be  dismay ed^  cp.  8'n. 

10-13.  Isaiah  offers,  and  Ahaz  provokes  his  indigna- 
tion by  refusing,  a  sign. — 10  f.  Isaiah  offers  then  and  there 


VII.  2-9,   IO-I3  121 

to  Ahaz  any  sign  he  may  like  to  demand,  in  Heaven  above  or 
Sheol  below,  in  proof  that  Yahweh  determines  what  shall  come 
to  pass,  and  that  it  is  His  present  will  that  Jerusalem  shall  suffer 
nothing  from  the  advancing  armies  of  Ephraim  and  Syria,  but 
that  these  armies  will  within  a  short  time  retire  and  leave  Judah 
unmolested. 

Obviously  we  have  no  full  account  of  the  interview.  We 
must,  therefore,  infer  what  definite  statements  by  Isaiah  preceded 
this  offer  of  a  sign,  and  what  that  sign  was  to  prove. 

And  Yahweh  again  spake\  Yahweh  spoke  through  His 
prophet,  Isaiah :  cp.  3^^  In  the  original  form  of  the  narrative, 
if  autobiographical,  the  clause  must  have  run,  "  I  spake  again." — 
W,  A  sign\  a  sign  (niK)  is  an  event  which  is  the  pledge  for  the 
fulfilment  of  a  prophecy,  the  genuineness  of  a  promise,  the 
reality  of  an  experience,  and  the  like.  It  may  be  given  as  a  token 
that  something  really  will  happen  in  the  future,  or  as  a  reminder 
that  something  predicted  previously  has  now  actually  happened. 
The  sign  may  be  a  quite  ordinary  event,  especially  if  it  is  itself 
a  matter  of  prophecy  (as  in  v.^*),  or  it  may  be  of  an  extraordinary, 
miraculous  nature,  in  which  case  it  is  also  a  "  wonder ''  (naiD). 
An  example  of  the  first  kind  is  afforded  by  i  S  2^'^'^^  where  the 
removal  of  the  priesthood  from  the  house  of  Eli  is  predicted ;  and 
the  sign  that  this  prediction  will  come  true  is  that,  in  the  nearer 
future,  Eli's  two  sons  will  die  on  a  single  day — a  striking,  but  by 
no  means  a  miraculous,  occurrence.  Again  the  sign,  or  reminder 
(Ex  3^2),  that  it  really  was  Yahweh  that  spoke  to  and  commis- 
sioned Moses,  will  be  the  fact  that  in  Sinai  the  Hebrews  will 
worship  God,  i.e.  the  later  event  confirms  the  reality  of  a  previous 
experience.  Jeremiah  confirms  his  prediction  of  the  annihilation 
of  the  Jews  in  Egypt  by  the  prediction  that  (in  the  nearer  future) 
the  king  of  Egypt  will  fall  into  the  hand  of  his  enemies  (Jer 
442^-).  For  signs  which  are  also  wonders,  see  38'^'  ^2^  Jg  6^'^. 
Here  Isaiah  first  offers  Ahaz  a  miraculous  sign  to  take  place  at 
the  present  moment  in  proof  that  things  will  happen  as  he  has 
said.  But  (v.^^^  Ahaz  declines  the  offer,  asserting  that  he  is 
unwilling  to  tempt  Yahweh  by  making  Him  prove  His  power 
(cp.  Ex  17^).  Isaiah  is  not  deceived  by  this  show  of  piety,  but 
interprets  the  king's  refusal  of  a  sign  as  an  indication  of  his 
unwillingness  to  accept  the  guidance  of  Yahweh,  and  his 
determination  to  pursue  his  own  policy.     With  the  king  and 


1 


122  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

(v.^^)  court  in  this  mood  a  miraculous  sign  at  the  present  momen 
becomes  useless ;  on  the  other  hand,  Yahweh  insists  that  whether 
Ahaz  and  his  court  will  it  or  not,  a  sign  they  shall  have,  not  now 
but  after  the  event,  which  will  recall  the  correctness  of  the 
prophet's  prediction,  and  refer  the  relief  from  the  siege  not  to  the 
human  efforts  of  Ahaz,  but  to  the  will  of  Yahweh.  This  sign  will 
be  not  of  Ahaz',  but  of  Yahweh's  choosing,  and,  its  purpose  being 
different,  it  will  not  need  to  be  miraculous  like  that  offered  to  and 
rejected  by  Ahaz. — Ask  a  sign  from  Yahweh  .  .  .  deep  down  in 
Sheol  or  high  up  above\  Yahweh's  power  extends  to  Sheol  below, 
as  well  as  to  the  heights  above,  Am  9^ ;  alike  in  Sheol  and  in 
heaven,  He  can  work  wonders.  Isaiah's  willingness  that  Ahaz 
shall  choose  the  sign,  indicates  that  he  had  already  proved  by 
experience  his  power  to  work  wonders,  unless  we  should  detect 
here  the  result  of  an  enthusiastic  disciple's  exaggerated  conception 
of  the  prophet's  powers  (cp.  Che.  EBi.  3859).  There  is,  of 
course,  no  question  of  necromancy :  the  sign  is  to  be  a  sign  from 
Yahweh.  But  to  avoid  misunderstanding,  ST  paraphrased — Ask 
of  thee  a  sign  from  the  Lord  :  ask  that  a  miracle  may  be  done  on 
earth,  or  that  a  sign  may  appear  in  heaven.  But  to  interpret  J^ 
Ask  it  either  in  the  depth  (MT,  EV),  instead  of  deep  down  in  Sh^ol^ 
though  idiomatically  possible,  is  certainly  wrong:  it  involves  a 
weak  repetition  of  ask  and  a  mutilation  of  the  parallelism  in  the 
last  clauses  of  the  v. —  Yahweh  thy  God]  Isaiah  addresses  Ahaz, 
and  Ahaz  replies  (v.^^),  as  a  servant  of  Yahweh :  after  Ahaz' 
answer,  interpreted  by  Isaiah  as  contumacious,  Isaiah  significantly 
varies  the  phrase  and  says  "  my  God  "  (v.^^). — 12.  See  n.  on  sign, 
v.^\ — 13.  And  he  said]  sc.  Isaiah  ;  originally  perhaps  and  I  said'. 
see  v.^®  n. — Let  Ahaz  and  his  courtiers  know  that  it  is  not  only 
men,  prophets  like  and  including  himself,  whose  patience  they 
exhaust :  they  weary  (cp.  i^*)  out  Yahweh  Himself  by  their  per- 
sistent disregard  of  what  He  really  requires. 

14-16.  Immanuel. — Christian  interpreters,  dominated  by 
the  use  in  Mt  1^3  of  v.^*,  for  many  centuries  saw  in  these  verses 
an  assertion  that  our  Lord  was  **  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
born  of  the  Virgin  Mary."  Jewish  interpreters  have  throughout 
insisted  that  what  Isaiah  here  predicts  is  a  birth  due  to  ordinary 
human  intercourse,  and  about  to  take  place  in  the  normal  manner. 
Modern  interpreters,  whether  Jews  or  Christians,  are  much 
divided,  and  in  particular  on  these  points :  (i)  Who  is  the  mother 


VII.  i3-i6  123 

and  who  the  son  referred  to  in  v.^*  ?  (2)  What  is  the  sign  given 
by  Yahweh  Himself,  and  what  does  it  signify  ?  Is  it  miraculous  ? 
Wherein  precisely  does  it  consist  ?  Does  it  signify  (a)  that  Judah 
will  be  delivered,  or  (d)  that  it  will  be  destroyed,  or  (c)  that  it  will 
be  first  delivered  and  then  destroyed?  The  ambiguities  and 
awkwardnesses  of  the  passage  are  so  numerous  as  to  give  little 
hope  of  reaching  an  interpretation  that  will  command  general 
assent;  and  under  these  circumstances  even  the  dogmatic  or 
traditional  Christian  interpretation  will  doubtless  continue  to 
find  defenders,  while  others  may  infer  that  the  text  has  been 
deeply  corrupted  and  must  be  reconstructed  by  bold  and  exten- 
sive conjectures :  see  Che.,  most  recently  in  the  Two  Religions^ 
309  ff.  It  will  be  convenient  to  summarise  here  before  passing 
on  to  the  discussion  of  details,  pp.  123-133,  and  the  history  of 
the  interpretation,  pp.  133-136,  what  appears  on  the  whole  to  be 
the  most  probable  interpretation  of  two  disputed  particulars,  and 
the  general  meaning  of  the  verses  on  the  supposition  that  |^  is 
not  hopelessly  corrupt :  (i)  the  predicted  birth  will  be  in  no  way 
abnormal ;  but  a  child  (or  children)  conceived  and  bom  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  nature  will  be  named  Immanuel,  God  with 
us ;  (2)  v.^*^  predicts  plenty  and  not  starvation.  The  general 
meaning  of  the  whole  is  this :  Judah  will  not  suffer  harm  from 
Ephraim  and  Syria  (cp.  v.*) ;  on  the  other  hand  (v.^^),  Ephraim 
and  Syria  will  within  two  or  three  years  be  in  ruins.  If  this 
interpretation  is  correct,  Isaiah  concludes  his  interview  with  Ahaz 
by  reiterating  what  he  was  sent  to  tell  him  (v.*).  Such  a  con- 
clusion would  be  altogether  natural,  and  the  interpretation  just 
suggested  might  be  regarded  as  certain,  but  for  v. ^3,  in  which 
Isaiah  expresses  his  indignation  at  the  unbelief  of  Ahaz  and  the 
court.  Some  interpreters  out  of  regard  to  v.^^  interpret  vv.^*-^^  as 
wholly  or  in  part  a  threat :  v.^*  can  be  ingeniously  interpreted  in  this 
sense;  v.^*  is  commonly,  but  mistakenly,  construed  as  a  threat  by 
modern  scholars :  v.^^  can  be  turned  into  a  threat  only  by  omitting 
the  last  part  of  it,  or  by  an  illegitimate  view  of  the  construction. 

14,  Ahaz  refused  (v.*^)  to  accept  Yahweh's  offer  (v.^*)  that  he 
might  choose  any  sign  he  liked  to  be  wrought  at  once ;  there- 
fore Yahweh  Himself  chooses  the  sign,  and  will  see  that  it  takes 
place  not  at  once,  indeed,  but  in  the  near  future.  It  has  been 
repeatedly  argued  by  Christian  scholars  from  Justin  Martyr  down- 
wards that  the  sign  which  Yahweh  is  Himself  to  choose  and  give 


I 


124  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

must  be  a  miracle :  "  Signum  autem  a  Deo,  nisi  novitas  aliqua 
monstruosa  fuisset,  signum  non  videretur  "  (Tert.  Adv.  Jud.  9) ; 
but  the  argument  rests  on  a  misconception  of  what  the  term  niK, 
sigriy  necessarily  implies,  and  of  the  purpose  of  the  particular  sign 
here  contemplated  \  Yahweh  had  been  willing  to  do  a  miracle  to 
convince  Ahaz,  but  a  very  ordinary  event  may  serve  to  remind 
him,  when  the  time  comes,  that  what  His  prophet  predicted 
has  come  true.  The  miracle  here,  so  far  as  there  is  a  miracle, 
may  lie  solely  in  the  prediction.  Neither  the  term  niN,  sign  (see 
v.^^  n.),  nor  the  circumstances  compel  us  to  seek  a  miracle  in  the 
event  predicted.  This  being  so,  we  shall  be  safest  in  understanding 
the  statement  of  vv.^*"^®  as  follows  :  within  a  few  months  at  most, 
and  perhaps  immediately,  a  child  (or  children)  now  in  the  womb 
will  be  receiving  the  name  Immanuel,  God  is  with  us :  for  the 
present  popular  tension  will  be  relieved;  and  mothers  will 
express  the  general  feeling  of  relief  at  the  favourable  turn  in 
public  events  (ct.  i  S  4^1)  when  they  name  their  children.  Such 
children  with  their  names  will  be  a  reminder  that  the  terror 
of  the  king  and  the  people  (v. 2)  was  groundless,  and  the  con- 
fidence of  the  prophet  justified.  Moreover,  the  withdrawal  of 
Syria  and  Ephraim  will  not  be  merely  temporary ;  the  child(ren) 
to  be  born  will  neither  starve  as  they  grow  up  in  a  beleaguered 
city,  nor  in  a  devastated  country  side :  they  will  feed  on  curds 
and  honey  (v.^^) — the  highly  prized  products  of  the  land  of 
promise.  For  within  two  or  three  years,  Ephraim  and  Syria 
will  have  perished,  their  land  will  be  a  land  of  ruins  (v.^^).  The 
sign  lies  not,  as  the  traditional  Christian  and  some  recent 
theories  assume,  in  the  circumstances  of  the  birth,  but  in  the 
chain  of  events  now  predicted,  and  their  association  with  the 
birth  and  naming  of  a  child,  and  in  the  time  and  order  of  their 
occurrence  being  determined  by  reference  to  the  child's  growth, 
as  in  8^^-  This  interpretation  is  by  no  means  beyond  criticism 
or  without  difficulty;  but  it  is  at  least  less  improbable  than 
others  that  have  been  offered. — Therefore]  p7  often  introduces  a 
threat,  as  in  i^*  518-  24  .  buj-  \i  (joes  not  always  do  so  (cp.  Jer  i6i^), 
and  it  is  therefore  precarious  to  argue,  as  Di.  does,  that  the  sign 
so  introduced  must  be  a  threat  of  punishment.  Again,  it  would 
not  have  been  surprising  to  find  that  Isaiah,  driven  by  the  king's 
contumacy,  substituted  a  threat  (cp.  i^^^-)  for  the  promise  which 
he  came   to  bring :   still  the  v.  does  not  as  a  matter  of  fact 


VII.  14  125 

refer  to  any  such  change ;  the  v.  does  draw  attention  to  a 
change ;  but,  as  the  emphasis  shows,  it  is  a  change  of  the  person 
who  chooses  the  sign,  and  indeed  of  the  sign,  but  not  of  the 
future  to  which  that  sign  is  to  refer :  the  Lord  (v.l.  Yahweh) 
himself  will  now  choose  and  give  a  sign.  V.^^  clearly  con- 
templates the  same  view  of  the  future  as  vv.***,  and  these  con- 
template nothing  that  would  justify  fear  in  Judah.  Certainly  the 
presence  of  God  of  which  the  sign  speaks  might  mean  a  great 
deal  more  than  relief  from  the  threatened  invasion  if  Ahaz  and 
his  court  continued  contumacious,  but  it  is  not  clear  that  it  was 
Isaiah's  purpose  at  this  interview  to  dwell  on  this  side  of  the 
matter. — Behold,  a  damsel  is  with  child,  and  shall  bring  forth  a 
son,  and  call  his  name  Immanuet\  the  Hebrew  article  is  ambiguous 
(see  phil.  n.) :  nDfjyn  may  mean  either  the  damsel^  or  a  damsel,  or 
even  damsels.  That  it  has  here  one  of  the  two  latter  meanings 
is  the  view  advocated  above ;  among  earlier  advocates  of  this 
view  are  J.  D.  Mich.,  Eich.,  Kuen.,  Du.,  W.  R.  Smith,  Budde, 
Sta.,  Marti.  It  falls  to  the  ground  if,  as  is  possible,  though  not 
necessary,  in  J^,  and  impossible  in  fflr,  Immanuel  is  addressed 
in  the  vocative  in  8^.  If  a  particular  definite  individual  is 
intended,  it  is  curious  that  she  is  not  more  precisely 
specified.  The  damsel  would  be  a  strange  mode  of  reference 
either  to  the  wife  (or  a  concubine)  of  the  king,*  to  the  prophet's 
own  wife,t  or  to  some  pregnant  woman  present  at  the  interview 
and  singled  out  by  the  prophet  for  his  purpose ;  %  but  for  this 
much  might  be  said  for  identifying  the  damsel  with  Isaiah's  wife, 
who  is,  however,  called  "  the  prophetess  "  in  8^  :  knowing  that  she 
was  near  child-birth,  Isaiah  would  be  thinking  of  a  sign  that  he 
could  be  certain  of  bringing  about,  except  so  far  as  the  sex  of 
the  child  is  concerned,  and  that  is  immaterial  to  the  sign.  The 
sign,  moreover,  would  be  of  the  same  kind  as  the  signs  that  he 
(S^^* :  cp.  8^^  7^)  and  other  prophets  (Hos  i)  employed.  The 
mode  of  reference  would  be  better  satisfied  by  a  theory  of 
Rosenmiiller's  which  has  been  recently  revived  in  a  modified  form 
by  Gressmann  and  others.     Gressmann  §  postulates  the  existence 

•Early  Jewish  Exegesis  (see  Jer.),  Ki.,  and,  recently,  C.  M.  Brown  in_ 
fBLit.y  1890,  118-127;  Maspero,  Histoire  Ancienne,  iii.  1^4, 

t  Rashi,  Ibn  Ezra,  Grotius,  Ges. ,  Hitz.  %  Isenbiehl. 

%Eschatotogie,  pp.  276  f.,  cp.  2706".,  284;  cp.  Burney  (independently)  in 
IThSx.  580-584  ;  Jeremias,  ATAO  556 f.  ;  Box. 


126  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

in  Judah  before  and  at  the  time  of  Isaiah  of  a  well-known 
prophecy  that  a  wonderful  child  was  to  be  born  and  was  to  be 
called  Immanuel,  was  to  eat  milk  and  honey  in  his  infancy,  and 
before  he  was  five  years  old  deliver  his  people.  All  that  Isaiah 
does,  according  to  this  theory,  is  to  assert  that  this  (hypo- 
thetically)  well-known  prophecy  is  on  the  point  of  fulfilment, 
the  damsel  familiar  to  every  one  in  the  current  prophecy  is  about 
to  bear  her  child,  the  divine  mother  is  to  give  birth  to  a  divine 
child.  Difficulties  arise,  as  Gressmann  admits,  if  we  begin  to 
press  the  words  of  the  text :  e^g.  the  words  taken  strictly  mean 
that  the  delivery  of  Judah  is  to  be  delayed  for  the  child  to 
accomplish,  i.e.  five  years.  Gressmann  accounts  for  these  diffi- 
culties, which  he  does  not  eliminate,  by  the  assumption  that  in 
reproducing  traditional  material  Isaiah  retains  irrelevances.  This 
theory  and  all  theories  that  detect  the  influence  of  mythology 
here  start  from  an  alleged  but  unreal  necessity  for  satisfying  two 
conditions  of  which  the  text  says  nothing :  it  is  assumed  that 
there  must  be  something  miraculous  here,  though  the  text  speaks 
merely  of  a  sign^  and  that  the  child  must  be  a  deliverer,  whereas 
the  text  neither  says  nor  implies  anything  of  the  kind;  and, 
indeed,  the  passive  tense  in  v.^^  is  altogether  unfavourable  to  the 
assumption  that  Judah  will  be  delivered  by  Immanuel.  There 
is  just  as  Httle  suggestion  here  that  Immanuel  will  deliver  Judah 
as  there  is  in  Hos  i  that  Hosea's  son  Jezreel  would  exact 
vengeance  on  the  house  of  Jehu. — Damsel^  ffi  TrapOevoSj  EV 
virgin ;  but  this  rendering  is  unquestionably,  and  is  now  gener- 
ally admitted  to  be,  unjustifiable.  The  word  noijy  is  fern,  of 
t^hv,  youth^  which  is  used  in  i  S  17^*  20^2  and  corresponds  to 
^Li,  a  derivative  not  from  the  root  D^jy,  to  conceal^  which  seems 

to  be  unknown  in  Arabic,  but  from  oi^V,  *ii,  to  be  lustful ;  r\xh^ 

means  a  girl,  or  young  woman,  above  the  age  of  childhood  and 
sexual  immaturity  (in  this  being  more  specific  than  the 
synonymous  myj),  a  person  of  the  age  at  which  sexual  emotion 
awakens  and  becomes  potent ;  it  asserts  neither  virginity  nor  the 
lack  of  it ;  it  is  naturally  in  actual  usage  often  applied  to  women 
who  were  as  a  matter  of  fact  certainly  (Gn  24^^,  Ex  2^),  or 
probably  (Ca  i^  6^,  Ps  6826),  virgins.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
also  used  in  Pr  30^9  where  the  marvels  of  procreation  and 
embryology  (cp.  Ps  139^^"^^  Ec  11^)  seem  to  be  alluded  to,  and 


VII.   14  127 

the  corresponding  term  (or  terms)  is  used  in  Aramaic  of  persons 
certainly  not  virgin,  as,  e.g.^  in  C  Jg  19^  of  a  concubine  who 
had  proved  unfaithful ;  in  Palmyrene  it  is  used  of  harlots,  and 
in  a  bi-lingual  inscription  NHDIPV  apparently  corresponds  to 
[€]Tat/)oj[v] :  see  Cooke,  North- Semitic  Inscriptions^  pp.  330,  335, 
340.  The  Hebrew  word  for  virgin  is  rh\T\2  (Ex  22^^,  Lv  21^^), 
and  corresponding  to  the  difference  between  rhwsi  and  i\rhv  are 
the  different  abstract  nouns  D^Dipy,  youth  and  youthful  vigour^ 
naturally  including  sexual  maturity  (Job  20^1  332*,  Ps  89*^,  Is 
54*),  and  D^^na,  virginity  (Jg  1 1^^^,  Dt  22^^).  Where  stress  needed 
to  be  laid  on  a  woman's  virginity  even  more  unambiguous 
phraseology  was  employed ;  see  Nu  31 3^.  All  this  serves  to 
show  how  the  prophet  would  have  expressed  himself  if  he  had 
had  to  announce  the  miracle  of  birth  without  loss  of  virginity. 
Why  the  term  rxohv  in  preference,  say,  to  HK'X  or  my:  was  chosen, 
no  theory  yet  propounded  explains,  but  least  of  all  the  theories 
that  require  the  passage  to  express  the  fact  that  the  woman  con- 
ceives and  bears  without  ceasing  to  be  a  virgin. — Is  with  childy 
and  shall  bear"]  this  rendering  is  justified  by  Gn  16^^  where  the 
same  phraseology  is  used  of  a  woman  who  has  already  conceived 
(cp.  vv.*^-)  and  is  near  giving  birth.  If  this  is  intended  here,  the 
promise  is  that  within  a  few  weeks,  or  days  even,  God's  act  of 
deliverance  will  be  in  every  one's  mouth.  The  alternative 
rendering,  shall  be  with  child  and  bring  forth,  would  postpone  the 
deliverance  for  the  best  part  of  a  year,  whereas  the  narrative 
seems  to  suggest  that  Isaiah  expected  it  at  once. — And  shall  call 
his  name^  MT  rightly  punctuates  nxnp — an  unusual  form  of  the 

3rd  pers.  fem. :  the  child  is  to  receive  his  name  in  the  ordinary 
way,  viz.  from  his  mother :  see  Hastings,  DB  iii.  480^ ;  prophets 
who  wished  to  use  their  children's  names  as  signs  naturally 
availed  themselves  of  the  less  usual  naming  by  the  father ;  see 
8^,  Hos  I.  1^  can  indeed,  and  would  most  obviously,  be  pointed 
nxij?,  thou  shall  call\  so  ffi^^  Aq.,  Symm.,  Theod.,  cp.  H 
vocabitis ;  ST  is  ambiguous,  but  SH  render  by  the  passive ;  cp.  the 
3rd  pi.  of  ^  and  of  Mt  i^^.  Thou  shall  call  would,  of  course, 
imply  that  the  child  was  to  be  a  son  of  Ahaz. — Immanuet\  this 
name,  God  is  with  us,  no  more  implies  that  the  child  will  be 
God,  as  Christian  exegetical  tradition  kept  affirming,  or  that  he 
will  in  any  other  way  be  remarkable,    than   do   other   names. 


128  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

which  predicate  something  of  God  or  Yahweh,  assert  anything  in 
reference  to  those  who  bore  them.  The  name  in  9^  is  different 
in  character.  The  name  Immanuel  asserts  that  God  will  be 
present  with  the  Jews,  that  they  will  experience  success,  deliver- 
ance, freedom  from  danger  and  anxiety ;  the  meaning  and  result 
of  God's  presence  can  be  gathered  from  such  sayings  as  "  I  fear 
no  evil,  because  thou  art  with  me,"  Ps  23** ;  "I  will  be  with  thee, 
and  bless  thee,"  Gn  26^;  "Yahweh  of  Hosts  is  with  us" — the 
refrain  in  the  confident  lines  of  Ps  46 ;  cp.  also  Jg  6^2f.  16  ^nd 
Am  5I*,  where  the  synonymous  prep,  (nx)  is  used,  "  Seek  ye  good 
.  .  .  that  ye  may  live,  and  that  Yahweh  God  of  Hosts  may 
be  with  you,  as  ye  say."  Porter  in  JBLit.^  1895,  pp.  19-35, 
has  argued  that  such  a  prediction  of  the  beneficent  presence 
of  God  with  Judah,  is  inconsistent  with  the  standpoint  of  the 
pre-exilic  prophets,  including  Isaiah.  He  suggests,  therefore, 
that  "  the  name  Immanuel  expresses  not  the  prophet's  faith,  but 
the  false  faith,  the  ungrounded  confidence,  of  the  king  and  the 
people.  It  is  a  name  which  a  Jewish  woman,  soon  to  give 
birth,  might  naturally  give  to  her  son,  but  which  the  experiences 
of  such  a  son,  even  in  his  earliest  infancy,  would  contradict. 
The  sign  consists,  then,  not  in  the  name,  nor  in  the  lot,  of  the 
boy,  but  in  the  relation  of  the  two,  in  the  contradiction  of  the 
name  by  the  lot."  But  this  is  really  difficult  and  unsatisfactory ; 
it  is  also  inconsistent  with  the  rest  of  the  narrative,  according  to 
which  Isaiah  did  expect  immediate  relief  for  Judah,  and  so  far 
at  least  such  a  beneficent  presence  of  God  as  to  justify  the  name. 
If  Porter's  objection  to  the  common  interpretation  of  the  name 
holds  good,  the  genuineness  of  the  whole  passage  would  have  to 
be  questioned,  or  with  Che.  {The  Two  Religions^  p.  316)  we 
should  have  to  suppose  that  a  name  implying  a  threat  has  been 
altered  so  as  to  convey  a  consolatory  sense  by  an  editor  who 
modified  this  ancient  prophecy  in  the  interests  of  a  Messianic 
interpretation. — 15,  16.  After  the  name,  the  reason  might  be 
expected,  as,  e.g.^  in  Gn  16^^  "Thou  shalt  call  his  name  Ishmael 
(God  hears),  because  God  hath  heard  " ;  but  these  verses  at  best 
imply  a  reason.  V.^*,  indeed,  opens  with  ^3,  because^  but  it  refers 
to  what  is  to  happen  some  years  after  the  birth  of  the  child,  not 
to  anything  which  happening  at  the  birth  might  account  for  the 
name ;  for  the  explanation  of  the  name  we  must  turn  back  to 
what  precedes  v.^*  and  infer  that  the  presence  of  God  with  Judah 


VII.  15,  i6  129 

at  the  time  when  the  child  is  born  will  be  manifested  in  the 
withdrawal  just  at  that  time  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  army.  A 
considerable  degree  of  awkwardness  in  the  composition  at  this 
point  is  not  to  be  overlooked ;  it  may,  like  other  features  in  the 
narrative,  be  due  to  abbreviation  and  alteration  of  the  original 
memoirs.  This  awkwardness  is  not  eliminated,  nor  even 
diminished,  by  omitting  either  v.^^,*  or  v.^*.t  On  the  other 
hand,  the  omission  of  both  verses  would  allow  the  narrative  to 
conclude  appropriately  and  clearly ;  yet  it  would  be  difficult  to 
give  any  reason  for  the  subsequent  addition  of  the  two  verses. — 
Curds  and  honey  shall  he  eai\  "  Victus  ei  affluet "  is  Grotius* 
terse  and  pertinent  comment:  he  rightly  sees  in  these  words  a 
promise  ;  %  for  milk  and  honey  were  highly  esteemed.§  Neverthe- 
less, since  J.  D.  Mich,  most  modern  interpreters,  including  Koppe, 
Ges.,  Ew.,  Del.,  Di.,  Che.,  Du.,  Marti,  Skinner,  Peake  treat  the 
V.  as  a  threat ;  see  below.  Curds  (riNOn)  are  milk  (37n)  that  has 
thickened :  in  several  passages  of  the  OT,  including  the  present, 
it  seems  to  answer  to  leben^  or  sour  milk,  which  is  used,  not  by 
any  means  alone  by  nomads,  in  Syria  to-day :  it  is  a  valued  and 
refreshing  article  of  diet :  see,  e.g.^  EBi.  3089.  This  form  of  milk 
was  offered  by  Abraham  to  the  three  men  who  came  to  him  in 
the  heat  of  the  day  (Gn  18^),  by  Jael  to  the  weary  Sisera  (Jg  5^5), 
to  David  and  his  thirsty  company  (2  S  ly^^-^^).  The  value  set 
on  it  is  also  attested  by  the  part  it  plays  in  descriptions  of 
abundance,  and  that  not  only  in  the  OT  (Job  20^^  29^);  an 
Assyrian  prayer  has  been  cited  {EBi.  2104),  which  in  invoking  a 
blessing  on  a  king  begs  that  God  may  cause  to  flow  into  his 
channels  "  honey  and  curds "  {di^pa  himeta).  Honey  and 
curds,  moreover,  play  an  important  part  in  Babylonian  cultus ; 
see  KAT^  526.  Since  nxon  is  a  valued  form  of  milk,  it  is 
extremely  difficult  to  believe  that,  though  "  milk  and  honey  shall 
he  eat "  would  have  been  a  promise,  "  curds  and  honey  shall  he 
eat "  was  a  threat :  we  may  rather  with  safety  cite  as  further 
illustrations  of  the  promise  here  made,  the  fact  that  "  milk  and 
honey  "  are  the  two  things  singled  out  to  indicate  the  abundance 

•Hitz.,  Du.,  Che.,  Marti,  Peake. 

t  Budde,  cited  and  supported  by  Kuen.  Onderzoek,  ii.  43  f. 

itCp.  Rashi,  Lowth,  and  recently  F.  Wilke,  Jesaja  u.  Assur,  1905,  pp. 

37-39. 

§See  at  length  Bochart,  Hierozoicon,  iv.  12. 

VOL.    I. — 9 


I30  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

of  the  land  of  promise  ;  the  land  in  which  the  Hebrews  were  to 
exchange  their  nomadic  for  a  settled  life  was  in  the  oft-recurring 
phrase  "  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey " ;  in  a  longer 
description  of  the  land  of  promise  both  forms  of  milk  are 
mentioned — "curds  of  kine  and  new  milk  of  sheep,"  Dt  32i3^-, 
cp.  Gn  iS^:  and  much  later  Ben  Sirach  defines  the  staple  of 
food  as  consisting  of  "flour  of  wheat,  and  honey,  and  milk,  the 
blood  of  the  grape,  and  oil"  (Sir  39^^).  It  should  be  clear 
then  what  "  curds  and  honey  "  meant  to  Hebrews  of  the  time  of 
Isaiah,  whether  we  feel  free  or  not  to  accept  an  attractive  theory 
that  has  recently  been  advanced,  according  to  which  the  phrase 
"curds  (milk)  and  honey,"  describing  in  the  first  instance  the 
food  of  the  gods,  had  its  brigin  in  mythology  and,  in  particular 
perhaps  in  Iranian  mythology,  which  knew  of  heavenly  honey 
and  holy  cows ;  whence  the  phrase  descended  through  Babylonia 
to  the  Hebrews  and  by  another  line  to  the  Greeks,  who  described 
the  food  of  the  infant  Zeus  on  Crete  as  curds  and  honey.*  A 
phrase  with  such  associations  cannot  either  here  or  in  v.22  imply 
hardship  ;  and  to  make  v.^*^  mean  he  shall  eat  (nothing  but)  honey 
and  curds,  because  these  will  be  the  only  products  of  a  land 
devastated  by  war,  is  much  as  if  we  were  to  say  in  English — it 
will  be  all  butter  and  honey  then,  so  reduced  will  they  have 
become  !  or  as  if  we  were  to  justify  calling  a  painful  career  "  a 
path  of  roses,"  by  remarking  that  roses  have  thorns  !  And  not 
only  do  the  associations  of  the  phrase  suggest  the  very  reverse  of 
a  threat :  so  too  does  the  context ;  v.^*  says  God  will  be  with 
Judah  at  the  time  of  the  child's  birth,  and  v.^^  that  before  the 
child  is  two  or  three  years  old,  Ephraim  and  Syria,  which  now 
threaten  Judah,  will  be  destroyed.  V.^^  gives  the  ground  for  v.^, 
and  a  promise  cannot  be  the  reason  for  a  threat.  Nor  again  is 
the  V.  a  veiled  promise  and  the  meaning  that  Immanuel  shall  be 
brought  up  on  the  fare  of  nomads  and  Judah  in  his  childhood 
return  to  nomadic  life  for  its  moral  warfare  (cp.  Hos  2) :  f  for 
"eating  curds  and  honey  "  cannot  have  meant  living  the  nomadic 
life  to  a  people  who  called  the  land  in  which  they  had  abandoned 
the  nomadic  life  "a  land  of  milk  and  honey,"  and  centuries 
after  they  had  outlived  the  nomadic  stage  of  their  history  held 

*  See  H.    Usener  in   Rhein.   Museum  fur  Phil,,   1902,  pp.    l*n~l9S » 

Eichhorn  as  cited  in  Gressmann,  p.  291, 
t  Budde. 


VII.  15,   i6  131 

"  curds  (milk)  and  honey  "  in  the  esteem  indicated  by  the  passages 
mentioned  above,  especially  Sir  39^^,  Dt  ^2^^^'. — Af  the  time 
that  he  kn(nvs\  at  about  three  years  of  age :  see  next  n.  The 
alternative  rendering,  that  he  may  knoWy  is  grammatically 
legiiimate,  but  this  translation  stands  or  falls  with  the  interpreta- 
tion rejected  at  the  end  of  the  last  n. — To  reject  the  bad  and 
choose  the  good]  this  most  probably  refers  to  the  power  to  distinguish 
between  good  and  bad,  palatable  or  unpalatable,  food ;  a  child 
without  this  power  (Dt  i^^)  is  a  child  as  yet  unweaned,  or  but 
lately  weaned,  i.e.  of  two  or  three  years  of  age  (cp.  2  Mac  7^7). 

The  point  is  illustrated  by  a  modern  Syrian  popular  tale  :  **  It  is  said  of 
Moses  that  when  he  was  three  years  of  age,  Pharaoh  set  him  on  his  lap  ;  and 
Moses  stretched  out  his  hand  to  Pharaoh's  beard,  and  pulled  some  hairs  from 
it.  And  Pharaoh  was  angry,  and  said  :  This  is  my  enemy  :  he  must  be  killed. 
And  Asiah,  Pharaoh's  wife,  said  to  him  :  It  is  the  nature  of  small  children  : 
they  have  no  knowledge  ;  and  I  will  show  thee  a  thing  that  will  prove  it  to 
thee.  And  she  went  and  brought  two  vessels,  in  one  a  stone,  in  the  other 
fruit,  and  put  them  before  Moses,  that  Pharaoh  might  know  the  nature  of 
small  children.  And  Moses  chose  the  vessel  in  which  was  the  stone,  and 
Pharaoh  ceased  from  his  wrath  against  Moses,  when  he  saw  that  he  knew  not 
to  distinguish  between  them"  {PEF  Qu  St.,  1909,  p.  37). 

Some  *  interpret  the  phrase  "  knowledge  to  reject  the  evil 
and  choose  the  good  "  of  moral  perception,  and  place  the  age 
here  implied  much  later  than  the  3rd  year  (e.g.  10  or  20;  Di.). 
But  the  analogy  of  8*  and  the  proof  thereby  afforded  that  Isaiah 
a  little  later  certainly  expected  the  desolation  of  Ephraim  and 
Syria  within  a  year  or  two,  favour  an  interpretation  of  the  phrase 
that  implies  a  brief  period  in  the  life  of  the  child. — 16.  Within 
two  or  three  years  (see  last  note)  from  the  present  time  and  the 
immediately  expected  birth  of  Immanuel,  Ephraim  and  Syria  will 
be  depopulated.  With  this  final  stage  in  the  future  of  Ephraim 
and  Syria,  the  word  of  Yahweh  (v.^),  with  which  Isaiah  was 
sent  to  Ahaz,  reaches  its  natural  conclusion.  It  is  improbable 
that  vv.i^^-  predicting  the  desolation  of  Judah  formed  any  part 
of  Isaiah's  speech  on  this  occasion.  The  v.  does  not,  as  the 
introductory  for  might  suggest,  give  the  reason  for  the  name 
Imma7iuel\  the  name  will  be  given  in  consequence  of  the  with- 
drawal of  Ephraim  and  Syria  from  Judah;  but  this  v.  looks 
forward  to  a  later  stage  of  events  :  the  Assyrians  will  first  by  their 
advance   recall    the    Syrians    and    Ephraimites    to   their  own 

*  Ew.,  Di. 


132  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

territory,  and  then  after  defeating  them  devastate  their  country. 
Isaiah  expected  the  subjection  of  Ephraim  and  Syria  to  take 
some  little  time :  and  his  forecast  was  substantially  justified  by 
events.  We  may  place  the  interview  with  Ahaz  early  in  734. 
Damascus  was  reduced  in  732.  The  captivity  of  Galilee 
(2  K  1529)  may  be  placed  in  734. — The  child]  The  term  ("1^3)  is 
used  of  any  age  from  infancy  (Ex  2^,  i  S  i^^)  up  to  early  man- 
hood (Gn  34^^,  Jar  i^-  '^). — The  land  of  Ephraim  and  Syria,  0 
whose  two  kings,  Reson  and  Pekah  thou  art  in  dread  (|*p,  see 
BDB),  shall  be  left  by  (3TVn),  and  so  be  empty  of,  its  inhabitants  ; 
cp.  Jer.  429,  Zeph.  2*,  and  naity  in  6^2  179.  The  singular  nnnxn, 
land,  for  the  two  countries  of  Syria  and  Ephraim  is  curious ;  if 
Isaiah's  sign  was  a  threat,  and  if  v.^'^  was  the  direct  continuation 
of  v.^^,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  suspect  that  the  last  clause  of 
the  v.  is  intrusive  and  that  the  original  text  ran:  For  before  the 
child  knows,  etc.,  the  land  (viz.  of  Judah)  shall  be  abandoned', 
^"^  Yahweh  shall  bring  upon  thee  (viz.  Ahaz)  and  upon  thy  people, 
etc.  Cond.  has  revived  the  attempt  to  gain  the  same  sense  by 
following  ©  but  retaining  the  last  clause  :  the  land  (viz.  of  Judah) 
for  which  thou  art  in  dread  because  of  two  kings  :  but  see  phil.  n. 

II.  rhv(v  P'0VT(\  the  construction  implied  by  MT  n^K^  is,  of  course,  in 
itself  possible  and  thoroughly  idiomatic — go  deep,  ask,  i.e.  ask  in  the  depth, 
the  first  verb  having  an  adverbial  force  (G-K.  II4«):  cp.  Ps  51*.  For 
the  emphatic  form  of  the  imperative  thus  presupposed,  cp.  nj;^'??',  •"'O/'P* 
and  cp.  G-K.  48/.  The  construction  was  so  understood  by  %  (and  ?  C), 
but  wrongly.  3J  in  profundum  inferni,  Aq.,  Symm.,  Theod.  {eh  &8rjv), 
and  perhaps  (&  with  its  brief  rendering  of  the  two  clauses  els  ^ddoi  ^  eh  (jx/zos, 
correctly  read  n^Ntf',  to  SheoL  It  is  unlikely  that  MT  meant  "  to  Sheol"  and 
yet  pointed  npx^,  to  gain  an  assonance  with  rhv^  (Kon.  i.  p.  262). — 14.  'jhn] 
some  40  MSS  read  nin\ — Kin]  G-K.  135a,  c. — riNnpi  p  mS'i  7\-\r\  nrh^n  r\v<\ 
"the  part,  is  used,  lastly,  of  future  time,  which  it  represents  as  already 
beginning  :  hence,  if  the  event  designated  can  only  in  fact  occur  after  an 
interval,  it  asserts  forcibly  and  suggestively  the  certainty  of  its  approach." 
"  The  part.,  after  r\v\  does  not  necessarily  refer  to  the  future  ...  it  may 
describe  an  occurrence  in  the  present,  Jg  9'"^,  I  S  14^^"  (Driver,  §  135  (3)  and 
Obs.  i).  In  Gn  16^^  the  first  part,  after  the  Ti'in  refers  to  the  present,  the 
second  to  the  fut.  :  and  so  probably  here.  Similar  combinations  of  the  vbs. 
r\-yn,  nV%  Nnp  occur  in  Jg  13''  '. — nD'?i;n]  this  may,  of  course,  according  to  the 
commonest  use  of  the  art.  in  Hebrew  as  in  other  languages,  mean  '*  the  (well- 
known)  young  woman " — some  one  so  known  already  to  Isaiah  and  his 
audience  that  it  was  unnecessary  to  define  her  further.  But  the  art.  may  also 
"indicate  a  particular  unknown  person  or  thing  which  under  the  given 
circumstances  is  to  be  thought  of  as  being  concerned  "  (G-K.    126^ ;  Dav. 


VII.   ii-i6  133 

Syntax^  21  (e) :  see,  e.g.y  Am  3'^  5*',  i  K  20^).  In  Am  3^'  the  circumstances 
are  such  as  may  affect  many  members  of  the  class  defined,  and  7\'^'\t\  liecomes 
equivalent  to  shepherds.  So  here  the  future  circumstances  may  similarly 
affect  more  than  one  young  woman :  no"?!;.!  may  therefore  mean  *'  a  young 
woman  "  as  yet  unknown,  but  whom  future  circumstances  may  define,  or  since 
the  circumstances  may  similarly  affect  an  indefinite  number,  "young  women." 
Which  of  these  grammatical  possibilities  was  intended  must  be  determined 
(if  possible)  by  the  entire  context. — nmp  if  3rd  sing.  fem.  pf.,  as  in  MT 
TK-jp,  it  stands  for  nK-ijj,  a  form  retaining  like  n^m  the  orig.  n  of  the  fem.  Cp. 
the  forms  nN^iJj,  Ps  ii8®j  nxan,  Gn  33";  G-K.  74^.  The  form  can  be 
pointed  riK-jj; ;  but  had  the  writer  intended  to  change  the  subject  and  to  make 
the  point  that  Ahaz  himself  would  give  the  name  that  was  to  convict  him  of 
ungrounded  lack  of  faith,  he  would  almost  certainly  have  expressed  the  subject 
Nipn  nnNi. — 15.  inyn'?]  at  the  time  that  he  knows — h  of  the  point  (rather  than  the 
period)  of  time,  as  in  Gn  3^  Dvn  nn*?,  8"  3iy  ny*?,  2  S  iiS  Ps  30',  and,  with  an 
infin.  as  here,  np3,  my  mas'?,  Gn  24^,  Ps  46^.  The  use  of  "?,  meaning  up  to,  till 
(for  which  ny  is  normally  used),  is  rarer  ;  but  see  Ex  34^^,  Am  4'  (not  infinitives) ; 
V,  with  the  infin.  meaning  in  order  that^  is,  of  course,  common  (G-K.  114/,  g\ 
BDB  5I7«).  (ffi  renders  "Kplv  ^  yvGivax  influenced  by  v.^'  rather  than  by  a 
variant  tnyi  '3sS. — dind]  inf.  abs.,  direct  obj.  of  inyn :  G-K.  w^fd. — noiNn 

n's^D  'Jir  'j£3D  fp  nnK  ik'k]  Cond. ,  after  Ephraem  Syrus  ^-»-j5j  JJCTI  p*)] 
m  .  \v  ^oAj |,  renders  la  terre pour  laquelle  tu  redoutes  les  deux  rois ;  but 
this  would  require  in  |^  no  less  than  in  Syriac  the  addition  of  .T^y.  Moreover, 
the  indef.  D'a^D  which  Cond.  substitutes  for  .tdSd  would  be  unsuitable,  and 
D'D^Dn  which  his  translation  {,les,  .  .  .  rois)  really  implies  is  less  like  |^. 

History  of  the  interpretation  of  w.'^^'^*  (^^). — The  earliest  interpretation  is 
to  be  found  in  Mic  5^,  if,  as  is  commonly  assumed,  the  words  m^'  nihv  ny  ny 
refer  to  Is  7"  (but  see  Exp.,  April  191 1,  p.  209 f.).  The  writer,  whatever  his 
date,  then  identifies  the  child  to  be  born  with  the  coming  deliverer  of  Israel, 
synchronises  with  his  birth  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  Yahweh's  favour,  and 
probably  (see  v.^)  regards  the  coming  deliverer  as  a  scion  of  the  House  of 
David,  though  some  infer  from  the  last  words  of  v.^  that  the  child  will  be  of 
divine  h'neage.  The  term  m"?!'  used  in  Micah  is  far  more  colourless  than 
no^y,  and  does  not  even  remotely  suggest  that  the  mother  must  necessarily  be 
young  or  unmarried,  still  less  that  she  must  be  virgin.  Indeed,  the  use  of 
this  colourless  word  is  to  be  explained  by  G-K.  144^,  so  that  the  sentence 
means  until  his  mother,  whoever  she  may  be,  shall  have  borne  him,  i.e.  until 
he  is  born. 

Apart  from  Mic  5^,  the  earliest  interpretation  of  Is  y^*"^*  is  ffi.  Here  we 
note  the  following  as  the  main  points  :  ( i )  mn  is  rendered  iv  yaarpl  XiJ/ti/'crat, 
i.e.  the  conception  as  well  as  the  birth  of  the  child  is  still  future ;  (2)  if 
Ka\4o-eis  (BA,  cp.  Mt  l'^)  be  the  true  text  of  ©  and  not  Ka\4<T€c  (n),  or 
Ka\4a€T€  (Q*),  or  Kokiaowriv  (F,  Mt  i^^),  the  child  is  to  receive  its  name  from 
Ahaz,  and  is  therefore  presumably  to  be  the  child  of  Ahaz  ;  the  variants  in  (& 
may  be  due  to  a  change  of  interpretation  of  this  point  ;  (3)  here  as  in 
Gn  24^,  f&  renders  noSyn  by  ^  trapdevos ;  this  should  imply  at  least  that  (K 
understood  and  wished  to  make  clear  that  ot  the  time  the  sign  was  ^ven  the 


134  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

future  mother  was  a  virgin  and  that  Immanuel  would  be  her  first-bom.  But 
it  is  very  far  from  certain  that  the  translators  held  that  the  mother  would  still 
be  virgin  when  the  child  was  born.  On  the  other  hand,  their  rendering 
would  be  entirely  explained  and  in  harmony  with  the  reading  KoKiaeis  and 
the  future  rendering  of  n^rt,  if  (Sc,  anticipating  the  later  Jewish  interpretation, 
saw  in  the  child  to  be  born  Hezekiah  the  first-bom  of  Ahaz,  and  conceived 
the  interview  as  taking  place  in  immediate  prospect  of  the  marriage  of  Ahaz. 

It  is  then  very  doubtful  whether,  and,  if  KoXiffeis  be  the  true  text  in 
Is  7^*  fflr,  exceedingly  improbable  that,  (&  gave  to  Is  712-14  ^ny  Messianic 
significance.  It  is  certainly  worthy  of  note  that  in  8^  fflr  does  not,  like  many 
modern  interpreters,  who  thereby  support  the  Messianic  interpretation  of 
7^*,  treat  ha  ijoy  as  a  proper  name  in  the  vocative,  but  (like  hn  woy  »3  in  8^*) 
as  a  sentence.  For  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  place  of  ffir  in  the  history  of  the 
interpretation  of  Is  7^^-18,  see  £xp.,  April  191 1,  pp.  3(X)fF. 

The  first  clear  and  unmistakable  Messianic  interpretation  of  the  passage 
is  to  be  found  in  Mt  ii8-28^  Jt  is  an  interesting  question  whether  the 
quotation  goes  back  to  the  Aramaic  original  of  the  Gospel,  or  first  appears  in 
the  existing  Greek  version  ;  unlike  irapd^vos,  noSy  would  not  suggest  to  the 
Aramaic  writer  virginity ;  and  if  the  quotation  goes  back  to  the  Aramaic,  it 
was  introduced  without  any  intention  of  specifically  matching  the  virginity  of 
Mary  with  the  prediction  :  the  primary  point  was  the  identification  of  Jesus 
and  Immanuel  (cp.  Tertullian,  Adv.  Marc.  iii.  12).  But  once  the  Gospel 
was  current  in  Greek  form.  Christian  interpreters  of  Is  7"  were  compelled  to 
recognise  in  it  the  prediction  not  only  of  the  incarnation  and  redeeming  work 
of  Jesus,  but  also  of  the  virginity  of  His  mother. 

Henceforward  down  to  the  i6th  century,  and  in  the  main  for  yet  another 
two  centuries,  Jewish  and  Christian  exegesis  remained  totally  opposed ;  Chris- 
tians affirmed  and  Jews  denied  that  Isaiah  spoke  of  the  birth  of  the  Messiah 
from  a  virgin  mother  ;  Jews  affirmed  and  Christians  denied  that  Isaiah  spoke 
of  a  birth  which  was  to  take  place  in  his  own  age  of  the  son  of  a  human 
father  and  a  woman  not  virgin.  The  influence  of  this  opposition  is  seen  in 
the  substitution  of  the  more  correct  veavii  for  the  irapd^vos  of  (&  in  the 
versions  of  Aq.,  Symm.,  Theod.  (2nd  cent.  A.D.),  for  which  these  translators 
were  very  naturally,  though  most  unjustifiably,  upbraided  by  Christian 
scholars ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  translation  of  no^j;  by  jA^oAs 
in  the  (probably)  Christian  version  .S  ;  IL,  of  course,  and  H  render  vtrgo. 

In  greater  detail  we  can  watch  the  conflict  of  interpretation  in  the 
writings  of  many  of  the  Fathers,  and  first  in  Justin  Martyr  (Dial.  43,  48,  66, 
67-71,  77  f.,  84).  In  Justin's  dialogue,  Trypho  the  Jew  maintains  that 
noSy  means  veavis  and  not  irapdivos,  and  that  the  child  to  be  born  dudpurros 
i^  dvdpd}irov  was  Hezekiah,  the  first-born  (cp.  c.  84)  son  of  Ahaz.  Justin 
uses  but  a  single  argument  against  this,  viz.  that  the  birth  of  a  first-born  after 
ordinary  human  intercourse  would  be  no  sign ;  7^-1*  8*  7"  thus  combined 
(though  8*  refers  to  Isaiah's  son  !)  explains  to  believers  what  is,  and  what  Is. 
elsewhere  (53^)  implies  to  be,  inexplicable  to  men  in  general,  viz.  that  the 
birth  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  will  take  place  without  loss  of  virginity  by  His 
mother  :  Justin  does  not  reject  Trypho's  statement  that  such  an  interpretation 
makes  the  prophecy  as  silly  as  the  Greek  fable  of  the  birth  of  Perseus  from 


VII.  i2-i6  135 

the  union  of  Zeus  with  the  virgin  Danae,  but  argues  that  the  Greek  fable  is  a 
devilish  imitation  of  the  prophecy,  which  is  a  prediction  of  actual  fact. 

Very  different  from  the  rhetoric  of  Justin  is  the  refutation  of  the  Jewish 
theory  by  Jerome.  Following  Eusebius  {Dem.  Ev.  vii.  i),  he  shows  that 
Hezekiah  was  already  born  before  the  sign  was  given  (2  K  16*  18',  2  Ch.  28^), 
and  by  a  philological  argument  defensible  then,  though  so  no  longer,  argues 
that  noVy  meant  "virgoabsconditaet  secreta,  quae  nunquam  virorum  patuerit 
aspectibus."  The  child  to  be  born  so  long  afterwards  will  yet  be  able  to  save 
immediately,  for  he  is  identical  with  Him  who  appeared  to  Abraham  and 
spoke  to  Moses ;  and,  a  point  already  made  by  Irenaeus  (iii.  21.  4),  he  will 
be  no  phantasm,  but  will  eat  butyrum  et  mel  in  proof  of  his  humanity.  For 
further  patristic  interpretations,  see  Iren.  Haer.  iii.  2i^"* ;  Tert.  Adv.  MarCy 
iii.  13,  iv.  10,  Adv.  Jud.  9 ;  Origen,  Contra  Celsum^  i.  34  f.  ;  Eus.  Dem. 
Ev.  vii.  I  ;  Cyril.  Hier.  Cat.  xii.  ;  Basil.  Comm.  in  Is.  ;  Cyril.  Alex.  In  Is. 

The  patristic  criticisms  of  the  early  Jewish  theory,  that  the  child  to 
be  bom  was  Hezekiah,  had  its  effect ;  when  we  come  to  mediaeval  Jewish 
scholars  we  find  them  identifying  the  noVy  either  (i)  with  the  wife  of  Isaiah 
— a  view  already  mentioned  as  that  of  some  Christians  {qutdam  de  nostris) 
by  Jer.  ;  so  Rashi,  Ibn  Ezra ;  or  (2)  with  another  wife  of  Ahaz,  Ki. 

Protestant  scholars  in  the  i6th  cent,  follow  in  the  main  the  traditional 
Catholic  tradition,  though  Luther  (cited  by  Del.)  and  Calvin,  for  example,  are 
Mailing  to  grant  that  Tvch]}  need  not  necessarily  mean,  though  here,  as  often, 
it  actually  does  refer  to,  a  woman  still  virgin.  Pellicanus  attributed  to  the 
passage  a  double  meaning  —  the  current  Christian  interpretation  and,  for 
Ahaz  who  could  not  appreciate  this,  the  meaning  that  "quae  hodie  virgo  est 
propediem  conceptura  sit  et  filium  paritura  qui  et  nomen  habiturus  sit  Im- 
manuel  in  signum  proxime  ingruentis  redemptionis  vestrae."  Later,  Grotius 
abandoned  the  traditional  Christian  interpretation.  The  Catholic  J.  L. 
Isenbiehl  in  1778  published  a  monograph,  Neuer  verstuh  iiber  die  Weissa- 
gung  vom  Immanuely  in  which  he  argued  at  length  that  the  prophecy  related 
to  the  time  of  Isaiah ;  he  also  argued  that  the  noVy  was  some  woman  present 
at  the  interview,  and  that  the  article  was  used  deiKTiKus.  Isenbiehl 
suffered  heavy  pains  and  penalties  for  his  temerity  (see  Ges.  p.  309) ;  but 
from  this  time  onward  an  exclusive  Messianic  interpretation  became  increas- 
ingly less  frequent,  and  an  increasing  number,  especially  of  Protestant  scholars 
(see  Che.'s  article  "Immanuel,"  in  EBi.),  denied  that  the  prophet  intended 
to  make  any  reference  to  the  birth  of  Jesus. 

But  no  sooner  had  Christian  scholars  begun  in  numbers  to  accept  the 
fundamentally  more  defensible  interpretation  of  the  Jews  than  Rosenmiiller 
gave  a  new  turn  to  the  Messianic  interpretation,  substantially  anticipating 
an  exegetical  theory  which  has  recently  been  expounded  and  defended  by  a 
number  of  scholars — Gressmann,  Jeremiais,  Box,  Burney.  Rosenmiiller  in 
a  monograph  published  in  Gahler^s  Journal /.  auserlesenetheol.  Lit.  1806,  and 
in  the  2nd  edit,  of  his  Scholia,  argued  that  Isaiah  did  definitely  intend  to 
speak  of  the  virgin-birth  of  the  Messiah,  and  in  defence  of  this  view  appealed 
to  numerous  ancient  myths  which  speak  of  great  men  born  of  virgins  or  in 
other  marvellous  ways.  Rosenmiiller  cites  many  of  these ;  and  it  is  now 
possible  to  survey  them  conveniently  in  E.  S.  Hartland,   The  Legend  of 


136  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Perseus^  vol.  i. ;  but  Ges.  rightly  disputes  the  relevance  of  them  to  the  passage 
in  Isaiah.  Recent  exponents  of  this  theory  lay  stress,  in  particular,  on  what 
is  claimed  to  have  been  a  belief  dominating  the  entire  Orient  (Jeremias) ; 
Burney  recalls  the  remarkable  circumstances  attending  the  birth  of  many 
Hebrew  heroes  (Gn  11^  i8^^-  2521^-  30^,  Jg  13,  i  S  i),  and  the  birth  and 
infancy  of  Sargon  of  Agade  ;  he  appeals  to  Mic  5^  to  show  that  in  the  age 
of  Isaiah  the  birth  of  a  great  deliverer  was  expected,  and  he  argues  that 
Isaiah's  sign  consists  in  setting  a  time  in  the  immediate  future  when  the 
damsel,  well  known  to  every  one  from  the  part  assigned  to  her  in  the  current 
expectation,  would  bring  forth  the  Deliverer  in  marvellous  circumstances 
befitting  his  high  destiny :  see/TAS  x.  580-584.  All  such  theories  are  vitiated 
by  the  fact  that  Is  y^'^-^^  speaks  clearly  of  a  Deliverance,  but  is  silent  as  to  a 
Deliverer:  it  is  not  said  that  Immanuel  will  deliver,  and  the  passive  in  v.^' 
rather  clearly  implies  that  he  will  not.  Different  forms  of  another  improbable 
theory,  noted  in  EBt.  (/.^.),  and  recently  favoured  by  Whitehouse,  treat  no^yn 
as  a  personification  (cp.  nSnn,  Am  5^)  of  the  house  of  David,  or  the  com- 
munity of  §ion,  Immanuel  as  the  new  generation,  or  the  ideal  ruler. 

17-25.  A  prophecy,  or  a  collection  of  prophetic  frag- 
ments, predicting  ruin  and  especially  depopulation  of  a 

country  which,  according  to  v.^^,  is  unmistakably  Judah. 

Attempts  have  been  made  to  discover  a  connection,  either 
between  vv.^*^^  and  ^"^'^  or,  v.^^  being  omitted  as  a  gloss,  between 
1-^^  and  ^^"2^  If  v.^*^  (with  its  reference  to  Judah)  be  omitted, 
18-25  can  be  treated  (Hackm.  p.  66)  as  an  amplification  in  detail 
of  what  is  stated  summarily,  but  sufficiently,  in  v.^^^,  the  ruin  of 
Ephraim  and  Syria.  But  the  theory  of  Du.,  Che.,  Marti,  that 
v.i^  is  a  gloss  written  to  connect  vv.^'^^  and  vv.^^-^^  founders  on 
the  fact  that  it  is  particularly  between  v.i^  and  y.^"^  that  the  lack 
of  connection  is  most  conspicuous ;  ffir  feeling  this  supplied  dAAa 
at  the  beginning  of  v.^^.  To  attribute  v.^^  to  a  glossator  who 
wished  to  create  a  connection  between  ^-^^  and  ^^"^^  is  at  the 
same  time  to  accuse  him  of  failing  in  his  attempt.  The  entire 
tenor  of  ^'^^  as  interpreted  above  is  that  Judah  has  nothing 
to  fear,  is  not  to  suffer  ruin ;  the  entire  tenor  of  w.^^-^^  is  that  a 
most  complete  ruin  is  impending  over  the  country:  of  course 
either  Isaiah  himself  or  a  glossator  may  very  well  have  held 
that  these  two  contrary  fortunes  were  to  be  successive  stages  in 
the  future,  but  v.^^  fails  to  mark  a  transition  from  one  stage  to 
another.  Or  again,  Isaiah's  promise  of  (lasting)  safety  for  Judah 
may  have  been  and  indeed  was  (cp.  v.'-^)  conditional,  so  that 
vv.17-25  would  have  been  intelligible  if  they  had  immediately 
followed  v.i^ ;  we  could  have  understood  Isaiah  illustrating  his 


VII.  17-25  137 

general  principle  enunciated  in  v.®  by  saying  to  Ahaz,  You  have 
refused  to  believe,  therefore  Judah  shall  not  stand  but  come  to 
ruin.  He  does  not  do  this,  but  makes  the  promise  of  w.^**^^. 
After  that,  to  such  a  threat  as  is  contained  in  w.i7-26  some  clearly 
marked  transition  would  be  required.  Even  if  it  were  correct 
to  see  in  v.^^  a  threat,  it  would  still  remain  altogether  forced  and 
artificial  to  treat  vv.^^  and  ^'^  together  as  the  ground  of  vv.^*  and 
^5  taken  together,  v.^^  justifying  the  promise  of  v.^*  and  v.^^  the 
threat  of  v.^^;  and  yet  this  is  the  best  that  can  be  done  to 
connect  the  two  passages — a  significant  indication  that  there 
is  no  organic  connection.  Vv.^-^^  and  ^"^-^^  are  of  independent 
origin.  They  were  placed  in  juxtaposition  by  an  editor,  possibly 
on  account  of  the  similarity  of  vv.^^^-  and  y.^^. 

Some  early  annotations  have  crept  into  the  text :  such  are 
the  words  "  the  king  of  Assyria "  (vv.^^  and  ^o)  at  least,  as  most 
scholars  since  Houb.  and  Lowth  have  recognised,  perhaps  also 
(Du.,  Mar.)  "at  the  end  of  the  streams  of  Egypt"  and  "which 
is  in  the  land  of  Assyria"  (v.^^).  Even  what  is  left  after  the 
removal  of  these  notes  looks  more  like  an  editor's  collection 
and  restoration  of  fragments  than  a  prophetic  poem  in  its  original 
form :  note  the  recurrent  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that 
day  "  (vv.^^-  ^o-  21.  23j^  ^^e  awkward  fourfold  occurrence  of  n\T  in 
V.23,  and  the  apparent  mixture  of  rhythmical  and  unrhythmical 
elements.  To  what  part  of  Isaiah's  lifetime  the  groundwork 
belonged,  and  what  precisely  are  the  limits  of  Isaiah's  work, 
cannot  be  determined  with  certainty. 

17.  Yahweh  will  bring  upon  thee]  the  words  are  addressed  to 
a  king  of  Judah — possibly  Ahaz  in  any  case,  and  certainly  if 
v.^^  is  the  continuation  of  v.^^. — Days  such  as  have  not  come]  the 
loss  of  the  ten  tribes  was  as  nothing  to  the  loss  of  population 
that  now  awaits  Judah — such  is  probably  the  thought  of  the 
writer ;  but  an  early  annotator  explained  these  words  as  mean- 
ing the  king  of  Assyria. — Since  Ephraitn  withdrew  from  union 
with  Judah]  Ephraim  is  used  for  the  entire  Northern  kingdom, 
as  in  9^  and  Hos.  The  standpoint  is  obviously  that  of  Judah. — 
18  f.  Under  the  figure  of  swarming  and  ferocious  insects  the 
writer  predicts  that  Yahweh  is  about  to  bring  on  Judah  (v.^^)  an 
overwhelming  invasion.  If  his  verses  have  reached  us  in  their 
original  form,  he  expected  invasion  from  both  Assyria  and 
Egypt — a  point  of  view  which  finds  an  incomplete  parallel  in 


138  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


J 


Hos  9^,  and  none  at  all  in  Isaiah.  Elsewhere  Isaiah  feared 
alliance  with  (chs.  29-30),  not  invasion  from,  Egypt.  Moreover, 
previous  to  Sabako's  accession,  ^.712  B.C.,  Egypt  was  too  weak 
to  cause  much  fear  in  her  neighbours.  If  which  is  in  the  end 
of  the  streams  of  Egypt  and  which  is  in  the  land  of  Assyria 
are  notes  added  to  the  text  by  an  annotator  who  mistakenly 
inferred  that  two  insects  must  imply  two  nations,*  Isaiah  was 
predicting  here,  as  elsewhere,  an  Assyrian  invasion.  The 
omission  of  the  prosaic  annotations  leaves  two  almost  perfect 
distichs  4 :  4 — 

Yahweh  will  whistle  for  the  fly  and  the  bee. 

And  they  will  come  .  .  .  and  settle  all  of  them, 

In  inaccessible  wadys  and  clefts  of  the  rocks. 
And  on  all  the  thorn-bushes  and  all  the  pastures. 

Will  whistle']  cp.  5^^,  Zee  10^,  with  men  as  obj. ;  here  perhaps  the 
word  is  used  in  strict  keeping  with  the  figure.  Bochart  {Hieroz, 
Lib.  iv.  c.  X.)  has  collected  a  number  of  ancient  testimonies  to 
the  custom  of  summoning  bees  by  various  noises,  such  as  the 
clanging  of  brass  instruments  (Verg.  Georgics,  iv.  64),  of  which  the 
most  pertinent,  if  it  is  not  merely  educed  from  the  biblical 
passages,  is  Cyril's  comment  on  this  v. :  "  Bee-keepers  are  ac- 
customed to  whistle  {(rvpt^€Lv,  as  fflr  here)  to  the  bees,  and  so 
entice  them  out  of  their  hives  to  the  flowers  and  herbs,  or  get 
them  in  from  the  fields  and  make  them  stop  at  home." — Thefiy'\ 
Flies  abounded  in  Egypt,  but  were,  of  course,  frequent  elsewhere, 
though,  curiously  enough,  allusions  to  the  fly  in  the  OT  are  con- 
fined to  this  passage  and  Ec  10^  and  the  divine  name  Baal-zebub. 
A  further  allusion  to  the  flies  of  Egypt  has  been  often  but  mis- 
takenly discovered  in  18^.  Apart  from  the  following  clause  the 
fly  would  not  suggest  Egypt ;  it  suggests  number  (cp.  Hom.  //. 
ii.  469)  and  noisomeness,  not  locality. — In  the  end  of  the  streams 
of  Egypt']  in  far-distant  Upper  Egypt.  The  plural  streams  (D^IX^) 
is  also  used  of  Upper  Egypt  in  Nah  3* :  ffi  here  has  the  sing. — 
The  dee]  a  figure  for  persistent,  numerous  and  ferocious  enemies ; 
see  Dt  I**,  Ps  it 8^2,  also  Homer,  //.  ii.  87  fl". ;  the  bees  of  the 
East  are  a  far  more  aggressive  race  than  those  of  England  (EBi.f 
s.v.  Bee). — And  settle]  v.^  n.  The  figure  is  maintained:  the 
invading  insects  settle  in  such  places  as  they  are  wont  to  settle 

*Du.,  Che.,  Marti. 


4 


VH.   18-22  139 

in,  where  they  can  find  food  and  shelter;  but  there  is  also 
probably  an  implicit  resolution  of  the  figure ;  the  Jews  will  find 
no  escape  from  the  Assyrians  even  in  inaccessible  wadys  and  in 
clefts  of  the  rocks  (cp.  Dt  720). — Thorn-  (?)  bushes  and  pastures  (?)] 
ffi  caves  and  clefts.  But  although  the  2nd  term  (o^i^^jna)  occurs 
nowhere  else  and  the  first  (D^vivy:)  only  once  (55^^  sing.),  it  is 
probable  that  both  refer  to  feeding-places  of  insects :  see,  further, 
phil.  n. — 20.  A  new  figure  of  devastation  and  depopulation  : 
here,  whatever  may  be  the  case  in  v.^^  Yahweh's  agent  (cp.  10'') 
is  Assyria  only.  In  i^^-  Judah  is  personified  as  a  man  with  no 
sound  spot  left  in  his  body ;  here,  as  a  man  who  is  to  be  subjected 
to  the  extreme  ignominy  of  being  shorn  of  his  hair  from  head  to 
foot  (cp.  2  S  10*). — With  a  razor]  correctly,  but  unnecessarily — 
for  Assyria  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  phrase  (in  the  parts) 
beyond  the  River ^  i.e.  the  Euphrates  (cp.  Jos  242  and  often) — an 
annotator  added,  with  the  king  of  Assyria.  The  razor  is  said 
to  be  hired^  because  Yahweh  pays  for  services  rendered:  cp. 
Ezk  29^^-.  Others  see  in  the  expression  an  allusion  to  Assyria 
hired  by  Ahaz's  tribute  (2  K  16'^^-). — The  hair  of  the  feet]  euphe- 
mistic :  cp.  "  water  of  the  feet,"  36^2 .  ^p^  ^Iso  62. — 21,  22.  These 
verses  no  doubt  contained  a  further  picture  of  the  ruin  and  de- 
population of  the  country;  but  as  they  now  stand  in  J^  they 
seem  to  speak,  in  the  main,  of  abundance — there  is  to  be  an 
abundant  yield  of  milk,  and  every  one  is  to  find  good  food  {curds 
and  honey)  to  eat.  It  is  true  that  here  as  in  v.^*  (see  n.  there) 
most  modern  interpreters  have  endeavoured,  contrary  to  the 
regular  force  of  the  phrase,  to  make  eating  curds  and  honey 
mean  privation;  Del.,  for  example,  writes,  "Whoever  has 
escaped  .  .  .  eats  curds  and  honey :  this,  and  nothing  but  this, 
without  change  ad  nauseam.''^  Others  make  the  expression 
typical  of  nomadic  fare,  and  so  indirectly  of  (relative)  privation. 
But  the  earlier  interpreters,  like  C,  which  paraphrases  "  on  curds 
and  honey  shall  all  the  righteous  live,"  and  the  mediaeval  Jewish 
commentators,  Rashi,  Ki.,  Ibn  Ezra,  were  certainly  right  in  re- 
taining here  the  well  established  meaning  of  the  expression. 
Yet  though  the  allusions  in  the  v.  to  abundance  must  not  be 
explained  away,  there  are  also  suggestions  of  privation :  for  a 
man  to  succeed  in  keepifig  alive  a  you?tg  cow  and  two  fe?nale 
("•nc),  i.e.  milch,  sheep,  or  goats  (|KV),  is  not  a  sign  of  wealth,  and 
the  phrase  all  that  are  left  in  the  tnidst  of  the  land  suggests  that 


140  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

the  people  are  not  only  poor  but  few.  Justice  can  be  done  both 
to  the  suggestions  of  privation  and  to  those  of  abundance  if  it  be 
assumed  that  J^  has  been  (accidentally)  amplified  and  that  (&  is 
the  better  reading ;  read  :  and  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  {if) 
a  man  shall  preserve  alive  a  young  cow  and  two  {milch)  sheep,  then 
it  shall  come  to  pass  that  owing  to  the  abundatice  of  the  yield  of 
milk,  every  one  that  is  left  in  the  midst  of  the  land  shall  eat  curds 
and  honey ;  this  is  an  effective  picture  of  depopulation :  two  or 
three  cattle  will  yield  more  than  enough  for  the  handful  of 
survivors,  and  enable  them  to  enjoy  the  best  of  fare.  The 
difficulties  of  the  vv.  are  insufficiently  met  by  simply  eliminating 
from  1^  because  of  the  abundance  of  milk,  he  shall  eat  curds,  as  "an 
eschatological  fragment  describing  the  happy  lot  of  those  who 
live  on  into  the  New  Era"  (Box).  Nor  do  these  words  in 
themselves  ring  true  to  the  custom  of  the  country  where  the 
milk  is  likely  to  be  consumed  by  preference  in  the  form  of  curds 
(nKDPi),  whether  it  be  abundant  or  not. — 23-25.  The  whole 
country  will  go  out  of  cultivation,  even  the  land  where  the 
richest  vines  were  trained  will,  like  the  rest,  yield  only  thorns 
and  briats,  or  (v.^^)  at  best  serve  for  grazing :  cp.  5^*^*  32^2f.^ — ^ 
thousand  vines  at  a  thousand  of  silver  shekels,  i.e.  vines  worth  a 
shekel  (about  2s.  6d.)  a  piece — a  high  price  (cp.  Ca.  8^^), 
greatly  in  excess  of  the  normal  value  of  a  vine  in  modern  Syria, 
which,  acccording  to  Del.,  is  a  piasta,  i.e.  about  twopence. — 
Shall  be  for'\  shall  belong  to  (p  n-n^  as  17^)  thorns  and  briars. — 24. 
Through  fear  of  wild  animals,  which  will  house  there,  or  to  gain 
food  from  the  chase,  men  will  not  go  into  this  thicket  covered 
country  without  bows  and  arrows. — 25.  And  all  the  hills  which 
used  to  be  hoed  with  the  hoe,  thou  shall  not  come  thither  out  of  fear 
of  thorns  and  briars  ;  this  is  partly  a  repetition  of  v.^^,  and  the 
change  to  the  2nd  sing,  is  without  apparent  reason.  Probably 
the  text  has  suffered  more  or  less :  see  phil.  n. 

17.  mn']  ffi  6  ^c6s. — ySv  .  .  .  n'^^]  Sv  ki3,  Sv  N'an,  rarely  used  of 
bringing  good  fortune  (Jos  23'^  cp.  Gn  27^^),  is  commonly  used  of  mis- 
fortune {e.g.  47»,  Dt2926,  I  K  g^).— nt^N]  such  as:  cp.  e.g.  Ex  io«  34^*.— 
dvd'?]  the  double  prep,  as  Jg  IQ^",  287^:  see  BDB  583^.— '?yD  .  .  .  nio] 
to  withdraw  from  union  with  ;  for  the  force  of  the  compound  prep.  cp. 
Jer  32*0  (same  phrase),  2  K  1721,  Is  56^  ;  BDB  759a.— 18.  ninan]  cp.  5«  n.  ; 
apparently  mnan  'Vna  means  ivadys  of  the  cut  off  places,  i.e.  ravines  of  the 
precipices  (BDB),  inaccessible  ravines.  The  Versions  seem  to  have  guessed  at 
the  meaning. — D'xisyi]  in  Is  55^^  psya  is  clearly  a  plant  or  bush  of  some  kind  : 


■- 


VII.  17-25,  VIII.  1-4  14^ 

aSt  there  renders  by  (rroifi^  ;  and  this,  according  to  Pliny,  21.  15,  §  54>  ^^  ^ 
plant  with  a  prickly  stalk.  U  hex^frutetis.  In  favour  of  the  meaning  2i prickly 
shrub  or  thorn  bush  in  particular  it  is  customary  to  refer  to  the  New  Hebrew 
fyj ;  but  though  this  certainly  means  to  thrust  or  wedge  in^  it  much  less 
certainly  means  to  prick  (cp.  Levy,  s.v.).     The  Arabic  dictionaries  (Freytag), 

however,  cite  ^yaxi  as  the  name  of  a  prickly  shrub  frequently  found  in  the 

Hejaz. — D'SSnj]  Not,  of  course,  from  v/*?^,  as  C  takes  it  (nnnncnn  'M,  cp. 
"commendable  trees,"  RV  marg.),  but  from  Vnj  (Barth,  NB^  §  142),  the 
primary  meaning  of  which  appears  to  have  been  to  lead  to  a  watering  place  ; 

like  ^y^t^X/*,  therefore,  ^^."T3  may  have  meant  watering  plcue,  or  perhaps 
more  generally  pastures.  AV  bushes  goes  back  on  an  etymologically 
unsupported  guess  of  Jewish  scholars  (Saad.,  Abul-Walid). — 20.  rjT3rn  nyn|] 
MT  assumes  that  nyn  is  cstr.  ;  but  though  in  Ps  52*  nyn  is  masc,  it  is 
shown  by  nson  below  to  be  fem.  here.  Point,  therefore,  morn  nyng ; 
cp.  (&  T<fi  ^vp<p  T(^  fx€fjLi<xd(t)fi^v(^  (or  fi€fxedv(rfi4v(p  =  nT^v),  H  novcuula  con- 
ducta. — nnj  nnyn]  the  pi.  nay  might  mean  the  parts  beyond  (Ges.  124^), 
and  nnj  (without  the  art. )  Euphrates :  cp.  Jer  2^^  But  read  inan  naya  (ffi 
Trkpav  rov  TToranoO). — 22.  '3  nNDn  h^H"]  (&  om.  If  the  omission  from  dB  is 
not  accidental,  but  represents  the  original  text  (see  above),  the  addition  of 
the  words  in  ^  may  be  due  to  the  incorporation  of  a  Hebrew  variant  in 
which  SaK'  preceded  instead  of  following  cam  nKOn. — 23.  .t.t  (2)]  like  pmy 
of  what  used  to  recur  (Driver,  §  30).  — 1D3  'jSna]  Beth  pretii:  G-K.  119/. 
For  the  omission  of  ^pr  (supplied  by  CR),  see  G-K.  I34«. — 24.  «3']  for  the 
indef.  subj.,  see  G-K.  144^;  the  expression  of  the  indef.  subj.  by  the  2nd 
sing.  (K3n  V.25)  is  rarer;  G-K.  144A. — 25.  n'ri  TOr  nxT  nor  Nun-K*?]  may 
well  be  intrusive  (cp.  Box),  and  is  perhaps  a  variant  (slightly  corrupt)  of 
n'n  .  .  .  nor  M3'  in  v.^*.  Nun  is  probably  wrong,  Q.nd  perhaps  <&  (^xei  0(J/3o5 
^orat  7A/3  dir6  r^s  X'^P<^°^  '^^'^  dKdvdrjs  els  (idaKruxa.)  may  point  to  further 
corruption.  For  the  ace.  of  cause  "lOr  nxT,  which  is  common  in  Arabic 
(Wright,  Arabic  Grammar,  44^  =  ^  ii.  p.  132),  see  G-K.  118/;  Kon.  iii. 
332/ ;  for  nxT,  terror,  dread,  cp.  Dt  2^,  Ps  55*.  It  is  altogether  improbable 
that  nNT  is  subj.  of  Nun  (AV).  Nor  is  Kennedy's  suggestion.  If  (n^)  thou 
wert  to  go  thither,  then  thou  shouldest  see  (hnii  for  hkt),  convincing  ;  but  he 
has  good  reason  to  suspect  the  text  and  existing  interpretations  of  it  {Exp. 
Times,  viii.  477  f.). 

VIII.  1-4.  Maher-shalal-bash-baz. — A  further  extract 
from  Isaiah's  autobiography  (Introd.  §§  34,  38).  Some  time 
before  the  fall  of  Damascus  (732  b.c.),  Isaiah,  at  the  command  of 
Yahweh,  records  in  two  different  ways  and  at  different  times  his 
conviction  of  the  approaching  fate  of  both  Damascus  and  Samaria: 
(i)  he  writes  down,  or  engraves,  in  the  presence  of  witnesses,  the 
legend,  "Belonging  to  Maher-shalal-ljash-baz  (spoil  is  speedy — 
plunder  hasteneth)";  (2)  nearly  a  year  later  he  names  his  new- 
born son  Maher-shalal-bash-baz,  in  the  expectation  that  Assyria 


4 


142  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH  ^g| 

will  have  despoiled  both  Damascus  and  Samaria  before  the  clinc 
is  more  than  about  a  year  old. 

The  point  of  view  is  the  same  as  in  7^^^^ ;  only  the  security 
of  Judah  against  Ephraim  and  Syria  is  there  explicitly,  is  here 
implicitly,  asserted.  In  7^*^^  Isaiah  addresses  the  king,  here  he 
makes  his  outlook  on  affairs  known  to  the  people  at  large. 

It  is  probable  that  Isaiah  crystallised  his  teaching  into  the 
phrase  Maher-shalal-hash-haz  de/ore  Ahaz,  by  appealing  to 
Assyria,  gave  the  people  of  Judah  reason,  beyond  or  apart  from 
the  prophet's  word,  to  hope  that  Samaria  and  Damascus  would 
be  spoiled.  The  inscription  may  have  been  engraved  in  735  B.C., 
the  child  born  and  named  in  734. 

In  710-16  gi-*  Isaiah  predicts  three  features,  or  stages,  in  the  immediate 
future:  (i)  the  relief  of  Judah,  7";  (2)  the  desolation  of  Ephraim  and 
Syria,  7^* ;  (3)  the  spoiling  of  Samaria  and  Damascus,  8^ ;  according  to  a 
frequent  but  improbable  interpretation  (see  on  714-I6)  he  also  predicted 
(715.  i7ff.)  (^j  the  desolation  of  Judah. 

The  first  stage  he  expected  within  nine  or  ten  months  at  most  of  his 
interview  with  Ahaz  (7^^) ;  the  second  within  two  or  three  years  after  the 
first  (f^).  The  fourth,  if  really  referred  to  in  7"-  "^s  would  fall  after  (2). 
Possibly  Isaiah  placed  (3)  between  (i)  and  (2);  for  the  stage  in  child  life 
defined  in  8"*  is  somewhat  earlier  than  that  defined  in  7** ;  on  the  other  hanci, 
Maher-shalal-hash-baz  may  not  have  been  born  till  some  months  after  Isaiah 
expected  the  birth  of  Immanuel ;  and,  moreover,  Isaiah  may  never  have 
sharply  defined  the  chronological  relation  of  (2)  and  (3). 

On  the  main  issue  Isaiah's  prophecies  were  justified.  Judah  was  quickly 
relieved,  much  of  Ephraim  and  Syria  desolated,  and  Damascus  captured  and 
spoiled,  within  three  years  of  the  interview  with  Ahaz.  The  destruction  of 
Samaria  was  deferred  another  ten  or  eleven  years — rather  longer  than  Isaiah 
anticipated. 

I.  A  large  tablet]  In  2!^^  ]'\'h^  is  some  ornament  or  article 
of  toilet,  and  possibly  a  hand  mirror  of  polished  metal,  which 
reflects  and  so  reveals  irhi)  the  beholder.  So  some  under- 
stand |Vf>i  to  be  here  a  polished  tablet  of  wood  (Ezk  37^'^), 
or  stone  (Ex  34^),  or  metal  (Job  iq^^?)  for  receiving  writing. 
But  the  Mishnah  use  of  the  word  for  the  margin,  i.e.  the  still 
blank  part  of  a  page,  suggests  that  pvJ  may  have  been  widely 
applicable  to  any  blank  surface  intended  for  writing,  whether 
tablets,  parchment,  or  papyrus ;  ffi  to/xoi/  (xaprov)  Kaivov,  Aq. 
K€<^aAt8a,  Symm.  tcvx©?;  ST  trh.  Whatever  it  was,  the  object 
being  large  would  be  conspicuous  and  attract  attention. —  Write 
upon  it  in  common  characters  (?)1  The  exact  force  of  {5^3^  Din  is 


f 


VIII.    I,    2  143 

uncertain,  but  the  general  sense  seems  to  be,  write  so  that  every 
one  who  sees  this  conspicuous  tablet  may  be  able  to  read  it ;  cp. 
Hab  2*.  IDin  (Ex  32*  t  ?)  is,  apparently,  a  synonym  for  oy  (Jer 
17I,  Job  19^*),  and  means  a  stylus  \  8^365  is  a  poetical  synonym 
for  B'^K,  so  that  on  the  analogy  of  K^K  riDK,  an  ordinary  cubit 
(Dt  3^^),  Kn3K  t3"in  should  mean  an  ordinary  stylus.  C  (cp.  Di.) 
paraphrases  write  clearly ;  but  it  would  presumably  be  as  easy  to 
write  illegibly  with  an  ordinary  as  with  an  extraordinary  stylus. 
Perhaps  Din  also  meant  written  character \  cp.  "style,"  from 
"stylus,"  "to  write  round  hand"  -,  then  the  command  is  to  use 
the  ordinary  alphabet  with  which  every  one  was  familiar 
Benzinger  {Arch.^  176  if.)  thinks  that  the  implied  contrast  is 
between  the  human,  i.e,  the  Phoenician,  and  the  divine  (Ex  31^® 
32^^),  i.e.  the  cuneiform,  characters,  both  of  which  he  infers 
were  concurrently  in  use  as  late  as  the  7th  century ;  two  cunei- 
form contract  tablets  discovered  at  Gezer  were  drawn  up  in 
649  and  647  B.C.  respectively,  and  in  one  of  these  one  of  the 
parties  is  a  Jew.  Sta.  (ZATIV,  1906,  pp.  135  f.)  also  argues  that 
the  implied  antithesis  is  human  and  divine,  but  that  what  is 
referred  to  is  the  substance  of  the  inscription,  not  the  character 
in  which  it  is  written. — Belonging  to  Maher-shalal-hash-baz\  the 
legend  is  in  form  like  that  inscribed  by  Ezekiel  on  two  sticks 
(Ezk  37^^),  or  those  which  occur  on  old  Hebrew  or  Canaanite 
seals ;  cp.  e.g.  "  Belonging  to  Shama*  the  servant  of  Jeroboam  " 
(DVm^  12J?  V^^%  the  legend  on  a  seal  of  about  the  9th  cent. 
B.C.  discovered  at  Megiddo,  and  reproduced  in  Steuernagel,  Tell 
el  Mutesellim^  117:  also  in  Driver,  Modern  Research  as  illustrat- 
ing the  Bible,  p.  91 ;  for  other  examples,  see  Cooke,  North-Sem. 
Inscriptions^  360  f.;  Lidzbarski,  Ephemeris^  ii.  i4off. — The  name 
means,  swift  is  the  spoil  to  come,  speedy  is  the  prey,  and 
portends  the  imminent  destruction  of  Samaria  and  Damascus 
(v.*). — 2.  The  inscription  is  to  be  witnessed  by  credible  witnesses. 
In  6r,  V.2  continues  the  command  of  v.^  and  cause  trustworthy 
witnesses  to  attest  the  writing  ^r  me  (Yahweh).  This  is  probably 
right.  J^  may  be  rendered,  and  I  caused^  etc. ;  or  and  I  will  cause 
(MT,  EV) ;  in  the  former  case  the  first  person  refers  to  Isaiah,  in 
the  latter  to  Yahweh.  Of  the  two  witnesses,  Uriah  the  priest  ^2& 
certainly  a  person  of  importance  (2  K  1 6i<^-i6) ;  Zechariah  was 
probably  of  similar  standing.  Neither  was  necessarily  a  close 
friend  of  the  prophet ;  their  testimony  would  be  more  effective 


^r 


144 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


if  they  were  not. — It  is  generally  inferred  (i)  that  Isaiah  put  up 
his  inscription  in  some  public  place  for  all  to  read,  and  (2)  that 
he  had  it  witnessed,  so  that  when  events  proved  his  forecast 
correct,  the  prophet  might  be  believed  to  have  spoken  the  word 
of  Yahweh;  (i)  is  a  reasonable  inference  from  the  size  of  the 
tablet  and  from  C^1J&<  D*in3,  if  the  interpretation  given  above  is 
correct ;  (2)  is  the  only  reasonable  inference  from  v. 2.  Yet  it  is 
not  entirely  clear  why  an  inscription  publicly  exposed  long  before 
it  was  verified  by  events  required  witnesses ;  they  would  be  more 
necessary  for  a  document  sealed  and  put  away  for  a  time  (cp. 
v.^^). — 3.  Then  I  drew  near]  Not  JVow  I  had  drawn  near :  the 
tense  cannot  be  pluperfect  (Driver,  Tenses^  §  76  Obs.).  It  would 
be  better  to  assume  a  misplacement  (cp.  3821)  of  vv.^^'  than 
a  plupf.  sense  for  anpNI.  If  vv.^^-  stood  before  vv.^^-,  the  tablet 
of  v.^  would  have  a  clear  destination ;  it  would  be  for  Isaiah's 
son.  As  the  text  stands,  the  tablet  is  inscribed  with  a  name  that 
attaches  to  no  one. — The  prophetess]  nN^33  here  means  the  wife  of 
a  prophet,  as  riD^D  commonly  means  the  wife  of  a  king.  Isaiah, 
unlike  Amos  (7^^),  did  not  repudiate  the  title  prophet. 

I,  ino]  is  a  verbal  adj.  quick  to  come  (cp.  Zeph  i^^  unless  nno  should  be 
read  nnoD),  and  B'n  a  part.  It  would,  however,  be  equally  possible  to  point  "irtp 
and  take  both  verbs  as  prophetic  perfects. — 2.  m'i'Ni]  MT  n^'i'^i,  but  point 
preferably,  if  |^  be  retained,  nryxi,  arid  I  took  \  Sta.  ZATW,  1906,  p.  136. 
dR  Kal  fxdpTvpds  fioi  iroLrfcrov,  i.e.  m'y.Ti,  of  which  it  is  just  possible  that  %l  is 
merely  an  Aramaic  scribe's  orthography.  Cp.  (Ibn  Ezra)  ')"^Kn  '3  D'nDN  tsf 
H"n  nnn. — hv']  G-K.  144^:  cp.  K3',  7^  (n.). 

5-10.  The  Extreme  Peril  and  Complete  Security  of 
Judah. — 

The  prevailing  rhythm,  though,  in  the  present  text,  at  all  events,  it  is  not 
maintained  unbroken,  is  4  :  4  in  vv.""^ ;  3  :  3  in  vv.'*^". 


JudaJUs  Peril, 

^  Because  this  people  have  rejected 

The  gently  flowing  waters  of  Shiloah,  a  a 
■^  Therefore  behold  the  Lord  is  causing  to  rise  a 

The  mighty  and  many  waters  of  the  River,  a  a 
And  it  shall  rise  over  all  its  channels, 

And  go  over  all  its  banks, 
^  And  it  shall  sweep  on  into  Judah,  an  over-flowing  flood, 

,  .  .  reaching  even  to  the  neck. 


VIII.  i-io  145 

Judah^s  Safety. 

•  ••••••a 

^  And  his  outstretched  wings  will  cover 
The  entire  width  of  the  land — 
For  God  is  with  us. 

•  Take  knowledge  ye  peoples  and  be  dismayed, 

Give  ear  all  ye  distant  parts  of  the  earth,  a 
1^  Plan  plans,  and  they  shall  come  to  nought, 

Scheme  schemes,  and  they  shall  not  be  carried  out : 
For  God  is  with  us. 

Textual  corruption,  the  intrusion  of  glosses, — omitted  in 
the  preceding  translation, — and,  probably,  the  juxtaposition  of 
passages  of  different  origin,  have  obscured  the  meaning  of  these 
verses. 

yv.6-8b  predict,  under  the  figure  of  a  vast  flood,  due  to  the 
rise  of  the  Euphrates,  which  is  to  inundate  the  land  of  Judah  to 
a  dangerous  depth,  the  devastation  of  Judah  by  Assyria ;  ww.^-^^ 
the  complete  security  of  Judah  owing  to  the  presence  of  God, 
which  frustrates  the  hostile  plans  of  the  nations  of  the  world. 
There  is  no  transition  from  the  one  theme  to  the  other,  but 
there  is  probably  a  change  of  rhythm, — facts  which  point  to 
yy  6-8b  2tx\di  ^^'^^  being  of  different  origin. 

Yy  6-8b  are  rather  later  than  the  interview  with  Ahaz  (7^'^^), 
if  the  conclusion  is  right  that  Isaiah's  object  at  that  time  was  to 
enforce  the  security  of  Judah  from  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  attack. 

Yy  sc-io  are  probably  post-exilic  (see  below),  and  contain 
a  fragment  of  a  poem  which  consisted  of  short  stanzas  closing 
with  the  refrain,  "For  God  is  with  us."  On  account  of  the 
refrain  the  poem  was  given  a  place  near  7^*. 

5.  Cp.  7^^. — 6-8b.  Because  Judah  has  rejected  Yahweh, 
therefore  Yahweh  will  subject  Judah  to  a  devastating  Assyrian 
invasion. —  This  people\  6®  n.  Here  the  phrase  clearly  means  the 
Jews,  see  v.^.  The  entire  people,  and  not  only  the  king's  court 
(7^3)  are  here  condemned. — The  gently  flowing  waters  of  ShiloaK\ 
the  waters  of  Shiloah  are  the  waters  flowing  from  the  one 
spring  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem,  the  modern  *Ain  sitti 
Maryam,  which  rises  in  a  cave  on  the  eastern  declivity  of  the 
eastern  hill  of  Jerusalem,  that  is  the  ancient  Mount  Sion,  about 
VOL.   I. — 10 


n 


146  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

353  yards  south  of  the  south-east  angle  of  the  Temple  area  :  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  ravine  lies  the  modern  village  of  Silwan 
(  =  Shiloah),  and  lower  down  on  the  same  side,  at  a  distance  in  a 
direct  line  of  1090  feet,  the  Birket,  or  *Ain,  Silwan,  probably 
identical  with  the  rh^n  n3"i3  of  Neh  3^^  The  words,  tke  gently 
flowing  waters  of  Shiloah^  suggest  waters  whose  flow  could  be 
watched;  they  are  not  the  waters  of  the  tunnel  in  which  the 
Siloam  inscription  was  found,  even  if  that  were  as  ancient  as  the 
time  of  Ahaz  (cp.  7^  n.),  but  they  are  either  the  water  conveyed 
by  the  open  conduit,  which  existed  before  the  tunnel,  or  more 
probably  the  waters  flowing  down  the  valley  (cp.  G.  A.  Smith, 
Jerusalem^  i.  90).  From  the  nature  of  their  source,  these  waters 
must  have  flowed  gently,  and,  like  the  artificially  controlled  water 
of  to-day,  they  doubtless  served  to  irrigate  the  gardens  of  the 
valley.  These  waters,  then,  were  closely  associated  with  Sion, 
the  site  of  Yahweh's  temple  and  the  royal  palace ;  and  they  were 
the  "  living "  waters  of  Jerusalem,  as  contrasted  with  the  waters 
stored  in  cisterns  (cp.  7^  n.).  Isaiah  is  obviously  speaking  in 
metaphor ;  the  most  probable  explanation  of  the  metaphor  seems 
to  be  that  the  living  waters  of  Shiloah  rising  under  Sion  stand 
for  Yahweh,  who  in  Jeremiah  (2^^)  is  compared  to  a  "  fountain 
of  living  waters."  The  waters  of  Shiloah,  "  however  beneficent, 
are  to  outward  appearance  insignificant "  (Che.) ;  so  the  power 
of  Yahweh,  wlych  had  been  the  source  of  Judah's  welfare  {e.g, 
5^^-),  and  to  Isaiah  seemed  an  all-sufificient  ground  for  quiet 
confidence  (7*  30^^),  was  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  insignificant, 
not  to  be  trusted,  but  forsaken  for  other  sources  of  strength  (cp, 
3o2- 12. 16  31I-8).  For  the  "  gentleness  "  of  Yahweh's  activity,  cp. 
Job  15^^.  The  explanations  of  "the  waters  of  Shiloah"  as  the 
house  of  David,*  or  as  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  invasion,!  or  as  an 
allusion  to  some  lost  poem  or  some  now  unknown  popular 
idea,  J  may  be  dismissed.  The  last  words  of  v.^,  omitted  from 
the  above  translation,  are  awkward  and  difficult;  if  they  have 
any  meaning  (see  phil.  n.),  the  meaning  is  and  a  rejoicing  (or, 
and  because  they  rejoice)  with  Reson  and  the  son  of  Remaliah ; 
which  is  inconsistent  with  the  context,  for  the  Jews,  so  far  from 
rejoicing  with  Reson  and  the  son  of  Remaliah,  stood  in  dread  of 
them  (72^-1     An  emended  text  (see  phil.  n.)  may  be  rendered, 

♦  Ibn  Ezra.  '  t  F-  C.  Burkitt,  infThS  xii.  294. 

X  Gressmann,  p.  68. 


VIII.  6-8  147 

And  have  melted  with  fear  because  of  Reson^  etc.  But  (i)  the 
emendation  is  not  free  from  serious  objection ;  (2)  the  immediate 
transition  which  takes  place,  if  the  words  be  omitted,  from  the 
figure  of  Shiloah  with  its  gentle  flow  to  the  Euphrates  in 
desolating  flood,  is  very  eflective ;  and  (3)  the  words,  like  those 
generally  recognised  to  be  a  gloss  in  v.'^,  form  an  isolated  stichos. 
Probably,  therefore,  Re^on  and  the  son  of  Remaliah  are  an  early 
annotator's  erroneous  explanation  of  "the  waters  of  Shiloah," 
and  the  first  word  of  the  v.  (B^K^)  a  corrupt  variant  of  D«0 
above,  or  an  isolated  fragment,  or  possibly,  as  Bredenkamp, 
Giesebrecht,  and  Burkitt  have  suggested,  though  on  rhythmical 
grounds  this  is  not  very  probable,  BnK'D  is  a  synonym  {oozing, 
trickling  ?)  of  Dn!?  :  note  the  two  synonyms  in  v.''^. — 7.  Yahweh 
will  punish  His  disloyal  people  by  causing  a  fateful  rise  of  the 
Euphrates,  i.e.  by  an  Assyrian  invasion :  so  the  destruction  of 
Philistia  by  the  Chaldaeans  is  predicted  under  the  figure  of  a 
fateful  rise  of  the  waters  from  the  north  (Jer  47^).  The  figure 
here  is  blurred  even  in  ^  and  still  more  in  EV,  which  makes 
the  king  of  Assyria  overflow  his  banks  and  reach  even  to  the 
neck!  An  early  annotator  explained  the  River  (720  n.)  as  the 
king  of  Assyria  and  all  his  glory,  and  also  perhaps  added  UTfhVy 
against  thetn,  which  explain  rather  unnecessarily  the  destination 
of  the  flood. — 8.  And  it  shall  sweep  on]  for  f[hn,  cp.  21^. — Into 
/udah]  this  is  the  destination  of  the  desolating  flow  of  waters : 
nothing  is  said  of  the  flood  affecting  Ephraim  on  the  way,  for 
Ephraim  is  not  in  the  poet's  thoughts. — An  overflowing  flood] 
more  literally,  having  flooded  and  overflowed,  unless,  omitting  the 
waw,  we  restore  the  phrase  used  in  Nah  i*. — Reaching  even  to 
the  neck]  of  dangerous  depth.  Cp.  "an  overflowing  torrent 
reaching  (nvn%  synonymous  with  y^r  here)  up  to  the  neck,"  3028. 
The  swelling  stream  described  in  Ezk  47^-5  rose  gradually  from 
being  ankle-deep  to  being  knee-deep  and  deep  as  the  loins,  after 
which  it  became  too  deep  to  be  passed  through,  and  required  to 
be  swum  if  the  passage  of  it  was  to  be  safely  made. 

6.  '3  ]]l']  3^^  n.— pxT  DK  enro^]  Di.  explains  MT  thus  :  bibo  is  the  constr. 
case  of  nro  (32^')  before  the  prep,  nn,  and  dependent  on  jr — on  account  of 
the  rejoicing  with  Res6n.  Ges.  similarly,  except  that  he  takes  nK  as  the  nota 
ace.  and  cites  35^  (corrupt)  as  justifying  nr  with  the  ace.  But  nK  bik^  is 
very  doubtful,  and  but  partially  paralleled  by  5^^  or  9^.  G-K.  130a  cites  no 
case  of  the  cstr.  before  the  prep.  nK  and  only  one  before  nK,  the  sign  of  the 
ace. — ^Jer  33^2  (text  very  doubtful ;  cp.  v.'*).     Kon.  (iii.  p.  115  n.  3)  suggests 


148 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


that  tyiB'Di  may  be  inf.  abs.  {v^&^)  with  D  prefixed  to  gain  alliteration  with 
DND ;  but  it  is  doubtful  wisdom  to  seek  forced  explanations  of  a  text  which  is 
exegetically  condemned  (see  above).  The  emendation  of  the  text  adopted  by 
Du.,  Marti,  and  others  goes  back  to  a  suggestion  of  Hitzig's,  that  vwd  is  a 
mis  written  form  of  the  like  sounding  didd,  to  melt  away  (in  fear  ;  not  used  by 
Is.,  but  see  13^) ;  then,  inasmuch  as  ddd  is  not  followed  by  the  ace,  it  becomes^ 
necessary  to  emend  further  by  reading  'jsd  for  hm  ;  that  nt«  was  substituted  by  a 
scribe  for  'JSD  after  the  hypothetical  didd  (inf  abs. )  had  become  v\\on  is  improb- 
able, inasmuch  as  'JSD  vr\&  could  not  have  seemed  so  strange  as  to  demand 
alteration.  Du.  further  omits  'o  at  the  beginning  of  the  v.  in  order  that  \T 
may  govern  DiDD.  ffir  apparently  paraphrased  the  present  text  of  |^,  dXXd 
jSoAec^at  ?x^*''  'Pao'O't*"'  t^-oX  rbv  vlbv  'Po/j.e\iov  j8a<rt\^a  i4>  iffiuv. — J.  J37l]  Waw 
before  ph  is  quite  unusual ;  ffi  om.  :  it  is  probably  dittographic. — Dn'^y]  omit 
(see  above),  and  so  restore  a  line  of  four  accents. — VT\ii  ^3  Sy  ^m]  cp.  «'?D 
vnnj  '?3  Vy  (of  Jordan),  Jos  3^°. — ']13B']  pf.  in  a  description  of  the  fut.  to  give 
variety  to  the  scene  or  confer  emphasis  on  individual  isolated  traits  in  it  (Dr. 
§  14  7) :  nayi  is  co-ordinated  with  fpv  (Dr.  §§  131,  132).  But  the  writer  may 
have  intended  niyi  fpi^  (G-K.  113^),  if  he  did  not  actually  write  i3y  r]Viv. 

8a-iO.  The  safety  of  Judah. — The  last  words  of  v.^  are 
obscure.  If  they  are,  as  till  Du.  commentators  always  took 
them  to  be,  the  direct  continuation  of  v.^-  ^  the  pronouns  in  kis 
(or  its)  outstretched  wings  must  refer  to  the  River,  or,  possibly,  to 
that  of  which  the  River  is  a  figure,  viz.  Assyria  or  the  king 
of  Assyria.  The  wings  have  been  explained  as  "  masses  of  water 
branching  off  like  wings  from  the  main  current"  (Che.  PI  i.  53), 
or  as  the  cavalry  of  the  Assyrian  army  (Ges.) ;  then  cp.  the  Lat. 
alae,  the  Arabic  Jj^^  --Uj»-»  wings  of  the  cavalry^  Siud.  possibly 

the  Hebrew  CaJK ;  cp.  ST  "the  people  of  his  army."  Others 
see  in  the  words  the  introduction  of  an  entirely  fresh  figure.  In 
this  case,  if  ^'^-  ^  goes  with  ^'^^  the  figure  must  be  that  of  a  hostile 
bird  of  prey  hovering  over  Judah  (cp.  Hos  8^,  Ezk  17^"^^  Jer 
48^^).  But  "  the  outstretched  wings  "  far  more  naturally  imply 
protection;  cp.  Ru  2^2^  Ps  17^  36^  572  61^  63^  91*,  Mt  23^^  = 
Lk  13^* ;  if  that  is  implied  here  also,  the  point  of  the  figure  is  that 
,  the  entire  land  of  Judah  will  dwell  in  safety  under  the  protecting 
wings  of  the  Almighty,  undisturbed  by  any  futile  raging  of  the 
nations,  vv.^^-. — The  land.  For  God  is  with  US']  this  way  of 
reading  the  Hebrew  consonants  *  is  favoured  by  the  recurrence 
of  the  last  clause,  which  may  well  have  been  a  refrain  (cp.  Ps 
46),  in  y}^.  The  consonants  may  also  be  divided  as  in  J^,  and 
rendered  either  (i)  thy  land.    God  is  with  us;  so  ^  and  Abarbanel 

*  Du.,  Che.,  Marti. 


VIII.  8-IO  149 

(cited  by  Vitr.  p.  i86);  or  (2)  thy  land^  O  Imfnanuel',  so  dTSF, 
Rashi,  EV,  and  most  interpreters.  The  last-mentioned  inter- 
pretation has  to  contend  with  the  difficulty,  never  satisfactorily 
met,  of  explaining  an  appeal  to  Immanuel,  and  the  description  of 
Judah  as  his  land ;  even  if  Immanuel  was  some  single  definite 
child,  whose  birth  Isaiah  expected  (see  on  7^*),  he  was  not  yet 
born  if  this  passage  is  continuous  with  8^-^ ;  and,  if  the  passage  be 
later,  and  Immanuel  the  name  of  an  actually  existing  person,  it  is 
strange  that  no  more  is  heard  of  him.  To  base  a  far-reaching 
construction  of  Messianic  belief  on  so  ambiguous  a  passage  is 
a  mistake. — 9  f,  God's  presence  (in  §ion)  ensures  the  futility  of 
all  schemes  of  the  nations  directed  against  the  people  of  God. 
The  outlook  resembles  that  of  Pss  2  and  46,  Ezk  38  f..  Is  54^*"^'^ 
and  perhaps  lo^^  (see  note  there),  and  the  passage  is  probably  no 
earlier  than  these :  in  that  case  it  owes  its  position  here  to  one 
of  the  post-exilic  editors  of  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  and  was 
intended  to  alleviate  the  minatory  tone  of  the  preceding  verses. 

The  argument  against  Isaiah's  authorship  of  vv."*  ^^  is  well  stated  by 
Marti:  "If  the  'peoples'  of  v.*  could  be  Ephraim  and  Syria,  the  verses 
might  refer  to  the  protection  of  Judah  in  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war.  But 
the  peoples  absolutely  are  addressed,  and  the  Syrians  and  Ephraimites  do  not 
dwell  at  the  end  of  the  earth.  If  it  is  urged  that  Isaiah  immediately  extends 
his  horizon  from  these  neighbours  to  all  peoples  and  all  times,  this  is  irrecon- 
cilable with  Isaiah's  attitude  to  Assyria,  whose  plans  s^ainst  Judah  he  did 
not  expect  to  fail  (vv.^*  ^) ;  finally,  to  limit  the  plans  of  the  nations  which 
were  to  fail  to  the  *  bad '  plans  and  so  to  make  an  exception  of  Assyria,  who 
came  commissioned  by  Yahweh,  lays  an  emphasis  on  "lyi  which  it  cannot  bear, 
even  if  that  word  were  textually  more  certain  than  it  is." 

9.  Take  'knowledge]  a  suitable  parallel  to  give  ear  in  the  next 
line :  so  ffi  ( =  Heb.  lyi).  Cp.  Ps  46"  (lo),  l^ss  probable  is  the 
reading  of  J^  iy"»,  rendered  associate  yourselves  in  AV,  or  make 
an  uproar^  RV  :  see  phil.  n. — Be  dismayed]  this  is  the  regular 
meaning  conveyed  by  the  root  nnn  in  Heb. ;  see,  e.g.,  20^  31**^ 
3727  5i7j  and  note  the  frequent  parallelism  with  6<1"',  to  fear  {e.g, 
Dt  1^^).  Cp.  Assyr.  hattu,  terror.  Some  render  be  shattered,  see 
phil.  n.  on  7^;  in  this  case,  if  f^  be  followed  in  the  previous 
clause,  the  two  imperatives  constitute  a  virtual  conditional 
sentence  (G-K.  no/) — though  ye  make  an  uproar  (?),  ye  shall 
be  shattered. — All  ye  far  parts  of  the  earth]  \\  to  peoples  used 
absolutely,  as  is  D^'5n"i»  in  Zee  10'. — f^,  which  is  paraphrased 
by  ffi,  adds   the  words    Gird  yourselves  (cp.  Job  38^)   and  be 


ISO  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


i 


dismayed  (or  shattered)   (repeated   twice) ;   but    see   phll.'  h. 
10.  Cp.  7^-^. 

8.  ^KuOy  ISIk]  in  f^^  this  could  have  been  read  equally  well  '?Ni3Dy  3  pK  ; 
o  is  written  plene  in  the  Siloam  inscription  and  on  the  Moabite  Stone  ;  but 
the  Phoenician  inscriptions  afford  many  examples  of  the  form  3 ;  e.g.  "n»<ni 
NH  pis  iVd  3  injB'i  ID',  Byblus  Inscr.  1.  9;  Cooke,  N-Sem.  Inscr.  p.  18; 
Lidzbarski,  Nord.  Sent.  Ep.  p.  295. 

9.  1^1]  The  form  cannot  be  satisfactorily  explained.  Explanations  that 
have  been  offered  are  that  it  is  the  impr.  of  (i)  yyn,  and  means  be  wicked ; 
or  (2)  of  yjn,  the  Aramaic  equivalent  of  ya^  and  means  breaks  or  more  doubt- 
fully still,  be  broken ;  or  (3)  of  yn,  whence  comes  nynn,  war-cry,  and  means 
make  an  uproar ;  but  it  is  the  Hiph.  of  this  vb.  that  is  used  elsewhere  ;  or  (4) 
of  nyn  (whence  ai),  and  means  associate  yourselves  (RV  2nd  marg.) ;  but  this 
would  require  a  reflexive  conjugation. — u'tkhi]  the  1  is  probably  dittographic  : 
6r  iiraKoijffaTe. — {bis)  inm  nmnn]  perhaps  these  rather  curious  clauses  of  two 
accents,  which  do  not  agree  with  the  prevailing  3  :  3  rhythm,  are  due  to  a 
miswriting  of  iriKm  inn. 

11-15.  The  way  of  the  prophet  and  his  disciples  and 
the  way  of  the  people. — In  an  autobiographical  note,  Isaiah 
records  that  Yahweh  made  a  communication  to  him  warning 
him  not  to  share  the  standpoint  of  his  fellow-countrymen.  The 
lines  that  follow  are  not  addressed  to  Isaiah  only,  for  the  2nd 
pers.  plural  is  used  throughout ;  nor  to  the  people  at  large  (note 
sy^%  but  to  Isaiah  and  his  disciples  (cp.  v.^^) ;  these  are  not  to 
fear  what  the  people  at  large  fear,  for  danger  does  not  lie  where 
the  people  fear  it,  but  in  Yahweh,  whom  they  have  ceased  to  fear 
(cp.  31^'^) :  He  will  destroy  "  many  "  of  the  two  houses  of  Israel 
and  of  Jerusalem,  but,  so  it  is  implied,  will  save  those  who  fear 
Him. 

It  is  commonly  assumed  that  this  section  refers  to  the  same  period  as  7^- 
8*",  i.e.  the  period  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war — **  parallel  to  vv.*"^,  but  of 
slightly  earlier  date  "  (Che.  Introd.  p.  40).  Beyond  the  mere  position  of  the 
passage  the  positive  grounds  for  this  are  two:  (i)  the  '3  with  which  the 
section  opens ;  precarious,  for  the  word  is  absent  from  fflr^  ;  (2)  the  allusion 
to  the  alliance  of  Pekah  and  Reson  supposed  to  occur  in  v.^^a^  This  rests  on 
a  text  that  is  doubtful  and,  if  correct,  ambiguous.  In  any  case  the  passage  is 
earlier  than  the  fall  of  Samaria  in  722  (v.^'*). 

V.^^  is  prose  ;  in  vv.^2-15  ^j^g  rhythm  is  irregular  and  uncertain.  Vv.^^b. 
^  and  (more  doubtfully)  ^*  are  lines  of  4  accents ;  ^'  is  ambiguous  :  v.^^  falls 
into  no  scheme,  whether  treated  as  one  line  (Du.)  or  two  (Cond.). 

1^  For  thus  Yahweh  said  unto  me  when  the  Hand  grasped 
(me)  that  he  might  warn  me  not  to  go  in  the  way  of  this  people, 
saying, 


VIII.  8-15  ^5' 

**  Ye  shall  not  call  ...  all  that  this  people  calls  .  .  • 

And  their  fear  ye  shall  not  fear  nor  dread; 
*'  Yahweh  of  Hosts — him  shall  ye  .  .  . 

And  he  shall  be  your  fear,  and  he  your  dread. 
**  And    he    shall    become    a  .  .  .    and    a    stone   to    strike 

against, 

And  a  rock  of  stumbling  to  both  Houses  of  Israel; 
A  trap  and  a  snare  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem. 
^*  And  many  of  them  shall  stumble  and  fall,  and  be  broken 

And  snared  and  captured. 

11.  When  the  hand  grasped  (me)]  lit.  wifh  strength,  or 
pressure,  of  the  hand  of  God ;  with  'V\\  npTna,  cp.  'h^  mn^  n*1 
nptn,  Ezk  3^*.  The  sense  of  prophetic  inspiration  was  traced  not 
only  to  the  invasion  of  the  personality  by  the  spirit  of  God,  but 
also  to  the  hand  of  God,  which,  grasping  and  sometimes  throwing 
down  (cp.  ?  Nu  24'^  i>B3)  the  recipient,  induced  the  prophetic 
trance  or  ecstasy  (2  K  3!^).  Ezek.  has  several  allusions  to  the 
hand  of  Yahweh  as  accompanying  inspiration,  see  Ezk  i^  3^2  37I 
(i^y  nn-n),  8^  (f)y  bam);  cp.  also  Jer  1517,  "because  of  thy  hand 
I  have  sat  alone :  for  thou  hast  filled  me  with  indignation." 
That  the  communication  which  follows  must  be  of  an  extra- 
ordinary and  special  nature  (Du.),  is  a  precarious  inference. — 
That  he  might  warn  me  not  to  go]  1^  may  also  be  read  ^3">p^ 
(cp.  Dt  7*),  and  withdrew  me  from  going.  Isaiah,  like  Jeremiah 
(1^17-21^^  may  have  had  inward  conflict  in  order  to  refram  from 
following  the  easier  path  of  acquiescence. 

12,  13.  The  two  verses  are  negative  and  positive  comple- 
ments of  one  another.  Not  the  way  of  the  people  (v.  ^2),  but  of 
Yahweh  (v.^^),  are  Isaiah  and  his  disciples  to  follow.  Not  the 
baseless  objects  of  the  people's  fear,  but  Yahweh,  who  alone  has 
power  to  destroy  (vv.^^^-),  are  they  to  fear :  cp.  the  antithesis  in 
Luke  12*^-.  V.i2b  and  v.^^^  correspond  to  one  another  in  the  use 
of  terms ;  but  at  present  vv.^^a  ^^^  isa  ^Jq  f,Qj .  ^^  words  left 
untranslated  above  are  ^^a  (twice)  "i^kJ'P,  a  conspiracy,  but  in  1** 
ItJ^lpn,  ye  shall  sanctify.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  it 
has  been  proposed  that  BH'p,  holy,  should  be  read  in  v.^^a^*  or 
n^SJ'pn  shall  ye  count  a   cofispirator  in   v.^f     Still    there   are 

*  Seeker,  Lowth,  Lag.,  Sta.  {ZATW,  1906,  p.  137). 
t  Du.,  Hackm.,  Buhl  (in  Ges-B.). 


152  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

difficulties  in  both  suggestions  and  also  in  f^.  Even  ^^^  and  ^^^ 
are  ambiguous.  So  far  as  usage  goes,  their  fear  (ij^iid),  viz.  the 
object  of  the  people's  fear,  in  v.^^a  jjj^y  be  human  beings,  their 
enemies  Reson  and  Pekah,  of  whom,  if  vv.^^'^^  are  a  direct 
continuation  of  7^-8^®,  it  is  natural  to  think ;  cp.  the  use  of  KTiD 
in  Gn  9^,  Dt  ii^^  In  this  case  the  warning  here  addressed  to 
Isaiah  and  his  disciples  is  substantially  identical  with  the  warning 
addressed  by  Isaiah  himself  to  Ahaz  in  7*.  On  the  other  hand, 
their  fear^  if  the  passage  stood  by  itself,  would  in  view  of  v.^^ 
most  certainly  suggest  supernatural  objects  of  fear :  Fear  not  the 
gods  of  this  people  (cp.  v.^^) :  cp.  the  constant  use  of  i<T  of 
fearing,  i.e.  worshipping,  God,  and  the  use  of  the  synonymous 
noun  ins  in  the  expression  "fear  of  Isaac"  (||  "God  of  Abraham") 
in  Gn  31^2,  If  the  text  of  v.^^a  |-,g  sound,  it  would  decide  in  favour 
of  the  former  of  these  interpretations.  Keeping  the  text  we  may 
render  v.  ^2*,  Call  not  everything  a  conspiracy  which  this  people 
calls  a  conspiracy^  in  defence  of  which  Che.  {Introd.  40)  argues 
that  itJ^p  (noun  and  verb)  is  "  used  of  those  leagues  which  have  a 
destructive  object — leagues  of  subjects  against  a  king  (i  822^- 1^, 
2  S  15^^' ^\  2  K  11^*,  Am  7^^),  of  men  banded  together  for 
immoral  or  heathenish  ends  (Jer  11^,  Ezk  22^^),  or  of  the 
confederated  enemies  of  a  single  nation  (Neh  4^).  This  last 
application  of  the  term  is  suitable  here.  On  the  first  news  of 
the  Syro-Ephraimitish  invasion  there  was  a  cry,  "iK^p,  i.e.  the 
enemies  of  Judah  are  confederated  against  it.  But  Isaiah  is 
warned  by  a  strong  impulse  from  above  that  this  is  an  abuse  of 
terms.  Syria  and  Israel  are  but  "  two  stumps  of  smoking  fire- 
brands " :  how  can  such  feeble  powers  be  said  to  have  formed  a 
"iK^p  ?  {Binding  implies   strength  :   cp.   D^ie'p,  Gn  30^2)^      xhe 

warning  is  expressed  in  general  terms,  "IK'K  73?,  because  the  same 
circumstances  may  arise  again.  To  Isaiah  a  itJ'p  only  becomes 
worthy  of  its  name  when  Yahweh  is  the  chief  member  of  the 
league,  as  when  he  "  sends  "  Assyria  "  against  the  people  of  his 
wrath"  (10^).  But  the  true  fear  of  Yahweh,  which  shows  itself 
equally  in  obedience  to  His  tord  (see  1 10-1 7)  and  in  perfect  reliance 
on  His  word  of  promise  (7^),  binds  him  to  the  side  of  his  people." 
Che.,  though  agreeing  substantially  in  interpretation  with  Du., 
prefers  not  to  follow  him  in  substituting  for  ItJ'npn,  ye  shall 
sanctify^  the  unique  Hiphil  'n"'lt'pn —  Yahweh  of  Hosts  ^  him  shall  ye 
make  your  conspirator.    "  Those  who  sanctify  him,"  he  adds.  "  by 


VIII.  13-14  153 

fearing  Yah  web  in  the  right  way  .  .  .  make  Yah  web  their  ally." 
The  very  elaboration  of  this  interpretation  makes  it  doubtful ;  it 
also  fails  effectually  to  parry  Di.'s  criticisms.     The  combination 
of  Syria  and  Ephraim  was  a  fact ;  it  was  no  part  of  Isaiah's  work 
to  quibble  over  the  use  of  terms,  whether  to  call  this  combination 
a  conspiracy  or  something  else ;  he  differed  from  the  people  not 
as  to  the  fact,  nor  as  to  the  name  by  which  it  should  be  called, 
but  as  to  the  interpretation  of  it :  to  them  it  was  dangerous,  in 
Isaiah's  judgment  it  was  not.     They  feared  that  the  "  destructive 
object "  of  the  league  would  be  attained :  Isaiah,  without  denying 
that  the  league  had  a  destructive  object,  was  convinced  that  it 
would  fail.     Di.  himself  interprets   the   term  conspiracy  of  the 
understandings   which   the  people   imagined  to   exist  between 
Isaiah  and    the    enemy   (cp.    the    suspicions    that    fell   upon 
Jeremiah),  but  which  did  not  exist  in  fact :  he  further  suggests 
that  these  popular  suspicions  had  made  Isaiah's  disciples  begin 
to  doubt  whether  Isaiah's  principles  were  sound.     This  interpre- 
tation also  is  unconvincing  and  fails  more  than  the  other  to 
account  for  the  antithetical  line,  v.^**.     The  narrower  context  of 
vv.  12-16  strongly  favours  the  emendation  KHp  in  v.^^a  suggested  by 
IK^npn  (v.^*^) :  Ye  shall  not  call  everything  holy  that  this  people  call 
holy  .  .  .  Yahweh  of  Hosts ^  him  shall  ye  hallo7v  (cp.  2922^-  ?  late); 
but  if  w.^^'^^  be  the  continuation  of  7^-8^<*,  the  wider  context  is 
against  it.    Either  w.^^'^^  were  not  originally  the  direct  continua- 
tion of  what  precedes,  or  they  call  for  a  more  satisfactory  inter- 
pretation than  they  have  yet  received. — 14.  And  he  shall  become 
a  sanctuary^  if  the  text  is  correct,  which  is  very  doubtful,  this 
means  He  will  become  a  holy  object,  which  no  man  touches  or 
injures  unpunished — cp.  5^®  (Di.).     To  interpret  *  He  shall  be 
an  asylum  (cp.  Ezk  ii^^,  also  Ex  21^*,  i  K  i'^^')  for  those  who 
hallow  Him,  but  to  others  a  cause  of  ruin,  is  to  create  an  anti- 
thesis which  does  not  exist  in  the  text.     Not  improbably  ^inpy:h 
is  a  corruption  of  ^p\o\  which  was  itself  erroneously  substituted 
from  the  following  distich  for  the  term  which  stood  in  the  original 
text. — The  two  Houses  of  Israel]  the  Northern  and  Southern 
kingdoms.     Marti  suspects  that  the  phrase  is  a  generalising  sub- 
stitution for  "  men  of  Judah." — A  trap  and  a  lure]  the  figure  is 
resumed  in  v.^^^     The  HD  (mod.  Ar.fakh;  PEF  Qu.  St.,  1905, 
p.  38)  is  a  trap  kept  open  till  the  bird,  alighting  on  a  trigger, 

•  MX  accents,  F,  RV. 


154  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

causes  the  trap  to  close  and  itself  to  be  caught.  Whether  S^pltD 
was  the  name  for  such  a  (baited)  trigger  (cp.  Am  3^  |^ ;  but  see 
ffi),  or  for  a  snare^  or  noose  (Kennedy,  EBi.  1561),  or  (if  J^p^  = 
B^p3,  to  strike)  for  a  clap-board  (cp.  /3.),  which  strikes  the  enticed 
bird  down,  is  not  clear.  But  in  certain  passages  K'pio  seems  to 
have  the  meaning,  whether  original  or  derived,  of  lure  (cp.  e.g.  i  S 
1 821,  ps  1 06^6) ;  so,  too,  both  here  and  in  Jer  502*  (|^)  the  vb.  CTp* 
expresses  what  precedes  the  act  of  capture  {^y>\  presumably  the 
act  of  alluring  or  enticing,  though  in  Pr  6^,  it  is  true,  Cp^  seems 
to  be  more  exactly  synonymous  with  Id!?,  and  in  Ec  9^2  ^j^h 
tnt?. — Be  broken]  of  broken  limbs,  as  Ex  22^- 1^,  La  ii^*. 

II.  '3]  ffl<S  om.— npma]  some  MSS  npins. — 'jno'i]  Not  pf.  Piel  of  10% 
for  the  waw  conv.  with  the  impf.  would  be  the  correct  cstr.  to  express  and  he 
instructed  me  (RV).  It  may  be  either  the  impf.  Kal  with  simple  waw  (Dr. 
§  59  ff. )  of  "10%  that  he  might  admonish  me,  which  is  a  little  unnatural,  or 
impf.  Hiph.  with  waw  conv.  of  "iiD.  ffi  &ireidov<rtv  probably  connected  the 
form  with  T10. — 12.  TK'p]  (ffir,  both  times,  crK\rjp6v,  i.e.  rivp.  If  np  was  the 
original  reading,  the  transposition  of  the  last  two  letters  which  produces  f^ 
nrp  had  taken  place  earlier  than  (&. — 13.  mK3s]  (K  om. — DSKmD]  (ffi  2nd  sing. 
suf. — DDJinyo]  Hiph.  part.  ;  but  with  a  different  sense  from  the  Hiphil  in  v.*"^ 
and  29^  :  hence  Gra.,  Du.  suggest  DDinyD,  a  noun  parallel  to  ODKniD. — 14.  '3«r] 
(&^  om. — 3^']  some  MSS  and  the  VV  "ivv — note  "  following.— 15.  D3]  among 
them  :  cp.  Ex.  14*,  Lv  26^*.  Others  give  3  its  instrumental  sense — by  means 
of  them,  i.e.  the  rocks  just  mentioned. 

16-18.  The  Epilogue  to  Isaiah's  Memoir. — ^^  {I  wilt) 
tie  up  the  testimony  {and)  seal  the  teaching  in  (?)  my  disciples. 
^"^  And  I  will  wait  for  Yahweh  who  hideth  his  face  from  the 
House  of  Jacobs  and  I  will  look  for  him,  ^'  Behold,  I  and  the 
children  whom  Yahweh  hath  given  to  me  are  for  signs  and 
portents  in  Israel  from  Yahweh  of  Hosts  who  dwelleth  in 
Mount  ^ion. 

In  spite  of  some  ambiguity  in  v.^*,  these  words  read  like 
the  conclusion  of  the  autobiographical  memoir  which  recorded 
Isaiah's  teaching  during  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  by  word  and 
symbol  and  the  significant  names  of  his  children,  Shear-Jashub 
and  Maher-shalal-hash-baz.  They  also  give  the  impression  that 
Isaiah  realised  that  a  stage  in  his  ministry  was  closed  ;  that  for 
an  indefinite  time  to  come  he  might  speak  to  his  people  no 
more  as  he  had  been  speaking ;  a  time  of  waiting  for  Yahweh — 
of  waiting  in  perfect  confidence — lay  before  him  ;  and  during 
this   time  his   teaching   would   be   with  (?  incorporated  in)  his 


VIII.  11-15,   i6-i8  155 

disciples,  and  perpetually  eloquent  in  himself  and  the  names  of 
his  children.  The  words  received  of  Yahweh  at  the  time  of  his 
call  have  come  true  :  the  people  have  not  listened,  and  Yahweh 
is  alienated  from  them.  True,  too,  has  proved  the  conviction 
that  led  him  to  name  his  child  "  A  Remnant  shall  return  " :  he 
has  not  indeed  led  Judah  to  repentance;  but  he  has  made 
disciples.  If  the  doubtful  and  ambiguous  v.^^  will  bear  the 
weight  of  the  conclusion,  those  are  not  wrong  who  see  here  an 
important  epoch  in  the  history  of  religion — the  emergence  of  a 
spiritual,  as  distinct  from  a  national,  religious  society;  Isaiah, 
unlike  Amos  and  Hosea,  is  not  a  voice  crying  unheeded;  his 
distinction  lies  less  in  a  doctrine  of  the  remnant  than  in  the 
practical  step  of  creating  the  remnant  in  which  he  believed. 

16.  {I  will)  tie  up  .  ,  .  seaf\  the  verbal  forms  are  ambiguous 
(see  phil.  n.) :  they  may  be  assertive,  in  which  case  Ki.  correctly 
expresses  the  nuance — nothing  remains  for  me  but  to  tie  up, 
etc. ;  or  they  may  be  imperative,  tie  up.  V.^'^  favours  the  former 
view.  If  the  words  were  a  command,  Yahweh  would  be  the 
speaker ;  my  disciples  (^ ;  ffiCS  otherwise)  would  then  mean 
"  those  taught  by  my  prophet,"  i.e.  Isaiah's  disciples ;  and  this 
meaning  would  even  more  directly  attach  to  the  words  on  the 
other  view.  To  the  sealing  of  documents  there  are  several 
allusions  in  the  OT:  see  29^1,  Jer  32i<^^-,  i  K  21^,  Dn  12*. 
The  Jewish  Aramaic  papyri  of  Assouan  (5th  cent.  b.c.)  were 
found  tied  with  string  and  sealed :  see  illustrations  on  the  title 
page  of  Cowley  and  Sayce's  edition. — The  testimony  .  ,  .  the 
instruction]  the  two  terms  cover  the  contents  of  a  single 
document  which  is  both  tied  up  and  sealed.  The  testimony 
(miyn,  v.^*,  Ru  4^t  in  a  different  sense)  more  particularly  refers 
to  such  sides  of  Isaiah's  public  utterances  as  his  assertions  that 
Ephraim  and  Syria  would  do  Judah  no  harm,  but  would  be 
speedily  destroyed  :  cp.  the  attesting  of  the  name  Maher-shalal- 
hash-baz  in  8^'* :  the  teaching  (min,  i^®  n.)  is  more  particularly 
his  insistence  on  the  need  for  quiet  confidence  and  faith  in 
Yahweh. — In  my  disciples]  the  preposition  (3),  read  differently  by 
ffi,  is  difficult,  and  has  called  forth  many  interpretations:  (i) 
deposited  in  the  custody  off*  but  this  would  probably  have 
required  n^  ^N  or  n^D,  and  in  any  case  why  should  Isaiah 
deliver  his  teaching  to  his  disciples  in  a  sealed  book  which  they 
*  ?^i..  Dr.  {Isaiah:  his  Lift  and  Times^  p.  35),  Che.  {SBOT). 


156  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

could  not  read  (cp.  29^^)?  (2)  with*  i.e,  having  my  disciples  pre- 
sent ;  cp.  Di.,  "  in  the  presence  of  and  witnessed  by  " ;  but  this 
also  is  pointless  and  strains  the  meaning  of  3;  (3)  by  means  of 
(Ew.),  which  would  rather  require  ^"3.  Least  objection  seems 
to  beset  an  interpretation  which  goes  back  to  Rashi,  who  equates 
3  with  nS  hVi  and  has  been  developed  by  Del.,  Du.,  Marti.  This 
interpretation  gives  3  its  common  force  in  (of  place) ;  the 
question  (cp.  Di.)  is  whether  it  sufficiently  accounts  for  the 
nature  of  the  figure,  for  it  makes  the  tying  and  sealing  of  the 
law  figurative ;  Isaiah  on  this  view  determines  to  place  his 
teaching  in  the  hearts  of  his  disciples  and  to  make  of  them 
"living  oracles":  cp.  Jeremiah's  "law  written  upon  the  heart" 
(Jer  31^^),  and  St.  Paul's  figure,  "Ye  are  an  epistle  of  Christ  .  .  . 
written  not  with  ink,  but  with  the  spirit  of  the  living  God  "  (2  Co 
3^). — 17.  Isaiah  will  rest  firm  in  his  belief  in  Yahweh,  though 
troubled  for  his  people  who  have  caused  Yahweh  to  hide  his  face, 
i.e.  withdraw  His  favour,  from  them,  and  have  thereby  exposed 
themselves  to  destruction. — 18.  Isaiah's  children  are  signs  and 
portents  in  virtue  of  their  names ;  he  himself  as  the  prophet  and 
representative  of  Yahweh.  Whether  Isaiah  made  his  own  name 
Yahweh  hath  saved  (i^  n.)  a  text  on  which  to  base  his  doctrine 
that  Yahweh  was  the  only  true  ground  of  confidence,  we  do  not 
know.  In  any  case  he  is  scarcely  thinking  merely  of  his  name 
here. —  Yahweh  of  Hosts  who  dwelleth  in  Mt.  ^ion"]  the  last  clause 
need  not  be  omitted  as  the  addition  of  a  late  scribe  to  whom  it 
was  a  standing  epithet  of  Yahweh ;  it  is  a  natural  expression  of 
personal  experience.  Isaiah  closes  his  memoir  with  words  which 
recall  the  great  experience  recorded  at  the  outset  (ch.  6). 

l6.  As  the  equivalent  or  substitute  for  the  words  which  in  |^  lie  between 
naSai  at  the  end  of  v.^°  and  'n'am  at  the  beginning  of  v.^'^,  <&  has  dvdpcoiroi  iu 
d(r<f>a\eig..  Tdre  ^avepol  iffovrai  ol  atppayi^biicvoi  rbv  vofiov  rod  fiTj  ixadeXv  koL 
ipei.  That  the  translators  read  (and  read  wrongly)  [']nD'?3  nmn  Dinn  as  Di)h 
iD^D  min  is  clear  :  how  they  read  the  rest  is  very  doubtful.  Neither  C  nor 
Si  recognises  any  reference  to  disciples — Dinn  .  .  .  nis]  the  scriptio  plena  of 
the  2nd  word  is  not  ancient ;  cp.  ffi.  The  present  orthography  is  probably 
due  to  interpreters  who  read  the  verbs  as  infinitives  absolute  Dhij  nx,  and 
inserted  the  1  to  distinguish  the  originally  long  vowel  of  the  inf.  abs.  from 
the  merely  tone-long  vowel  of  inf.  cstr.  and  imperative  (G-K.  67«).  Cp. 
the  usual  (though  not  invariable)  orthography  of  the  strong  vb.  in  f^ — 
inf.  cstr.  Vap,  but  inf.  abs.  *?iop  (G-K.  4Sa).     For  ns  as  the  inf.  abs.  instead 

*  Dr.  in  BDB  89*. 


VIII.  i6-i8,   19-23  157 

of  n*)y,  cp.  3^,  Nu  23^8 ;  Sfc>,  Ru  2^* :  for  the  syntax,  G-K.  ii3<5/5 ;  apart  from 
aSc  and  the  authors  of  the  scriptio  plena^  early  interpreters  took  the  forms  as 
imperatives ;  so  C  (deriving  mx  from  1:^3),  5  {plurals),  U.  The  sequence  of 
'noni,  v.",  is  normal  (Dr.  §  113,  p.  126)  if  the  vbs.  be  inf.  abs.:  cp.  especially 
Jer  7"' — The  exact  process  implied  by  ms  is  to  tie  up  rather  than  to  bind 
together  \  so  the  n"n^  is  the  pouch  (i  S  2^)  ox  purse  (Gn  42**)  which  is  closed 
by  having  string  tied  round  its  mouth. 


VIII.   19-23. — Three  Fragments. 

These  are  {a)  a  warning  against  necromancy  and  magic, 
w.^^'^' ;  ip)  a  picture  of  some  person,  or  people,  starved  and 
encompassed  by  darkness,  vv.^^^-  and  probably  the  last  words  of 
v.*^ ;  {c)  a  promise  of  a  better  day  for  Galilee,  v.^s. 

Of  these  fragments,  {a)  and  {c)  are  prose ;  {b)  consists  of 
distichs  of  balanced  (3  :  3  or  2  :  2)  and  parallel  lines. 

This  difference  of  style  at  once  suggests,  as  Du.  has  clearly 
perceived,  that  w.^^^^s  are  not  all  of  a  piece.  And  this  is  still 
more  strongly  suggested  by  the  inability  of  interpreters,  who 
assume  their  unity,  to  establish  a  probable  as  distinct  from  an 
ingenious  connection  between  the  verses  themselves,  or  between 
the  verses  and  what  precedes  or  follows  them.  Note  provision- 
ally that  vv.^^'^8  do  not  supply  any  natural  explanation  of  the 
subject  in  they  say^  v.^®,  or  the  pronoun  you ;  in  v.^i  through  it 
refers  to  nothing  in  vv.^^^*,  nor  does  the  singular  pronoun 
throughout  the  last  clause  of  v.^®  and  v^P^  find  any  satisfactory 
explanation  in  w.^^* 

The  verses  are  in  several  respects  ambiguous,  and  probably 
contain  more  than  one  corruption.  Under  the  circumstances  it 
cannot  be  expected  that  the  Isaianic  authorship  or  the  date  of 
any  or  all  of  them  can  be  either  maintained  or  denied  with 
certainty.  It  is  inconclusive  to  say,  for  example,  that  vv.^®''  are 
too  didactic  for  Isaiah. 

19  f.  A  warning  against  necromancy  and  magic. — 
Such  a  warning  would  have  been  timely  at  most  periods  of 
Hebrew  history ;  see  Dt  iS^-i^,  i  S  28,  Lv  198I,  2  K  216,  Is  65*. 
—  When  they  say]  the  subj.  is  indef.  (G-K.  144/) ;  it  is  not 
resumptive  of  a  plural  in  vv.^^"^^,  since,  for  various  reasons,  the 
several  plurals  in  those  verses  are  obviously  unsuitable. —  C/nto 
you]  it  is  improbable  that  this  belongs  to  S^^-ie .  \f  jt  did  it  would 
naturally  have  stood  de/ore  vv.^^"^^.     The  n^n^  behold^  of  v?^  does 


158  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

not  suggest  you  (Di.).     The   persons  addressed  may  be   th 
disciples  of  the  person  who  is  speaking,  and  this  may  be  Isaiah. 
How  far  the  invitation  to  necromancy  extends  and  where  the 
rejection  of  the. invitation  begins  is  uncertain  (see  phil.  n.).     The 
chief  views  that  have  been  taken  have  been  these :  (i)  When  they 
say  unto  you^  "  Consult  the  ghosts  and  the  familiar  spirits  that  chirp 
and  that  murmur"  (Ye  shall  say  unto  them,)  *^ Should  not  a 
people  consult  its  god?  on  behalf  of  the  living  (should  they  consult) 
the  dead  ?  "    This  may  represent  substantially  the  meaning  of  the 
original  text,  but  as  the  text   now  runs   it   is  open  to  serious 
objections  :  (a)  the  first  assumed  ellipsis  is  very  harsh  and  but  very 
partially  paralleled  by  Ps  8*^- ;  (d)  the  second  ellipsis  is  question- 
able in  that  it  carries  forward  the  influence  of  the  interrogative 
part  of  the  particle  (wn)  without  the  negative — should  they  not 
consult  the  dead  would   be  the   natural  way   of  supplying  the 
ellipsis.     (2)  The  other  view,  which  admits  of  many  variations, 
regards  the  speech  as  extending  to  the  end  of  v.^^  and  the  reply 
to  it  as  beginning  with  v.2<>, —  When  they  say  unto  you^  "  Consult 
the  ghosts  and  the  familiar  spirits  that  chirp  and  that  mutter. 
Should  not  a  people  consult  its  gods  ?  on  behalf  of  the  living  {should 
they  not  consult)  the  dead?"     ^o  p^ay,  but  to  the  law  and  to  the 
testimony — unless  they  speak  according  to  this  word  (viz.  "  to  the 
law  and  the  testimony  ").     In  brief,  Do  not  consult  ghosts,  but 
the    scriptures,   or,    according    to    another  interpretation,  the 
prophetic  teaching.     On  the  whole,  the  argumentative  "  should 
not  a  people,"  etc.,  seems  improbable  in  the  invitation  ;  and  yet 
these  sentences  probably  were  argumentative  in   their  original 
form. — The  ghosts  and  the  familiar  spirits']  the  terms  (ni)3K  and 
(D)^3yi^  together  as  frequently,  Lv  19^1  20^-  27,  i  S  283-  ^  2  K  21* 
(  =  2  Ch  33^)  232*,  Is  19^.     The  distinction  between  them  seems 
to  be  that  a  person  who  divined  by  the  nUK  claimed  to  have  power 
to  summon  any  ghost  (i  S  28^^),  whereas  the  person  who  divined 
by  a  ^3yn^  consulted  his  own  particular  or  familiar  spirit  (Ac  i6^% 
which  was  at  his  beck  or  call ;  see  Dr.  on  Dt  1 8".    The  dead  at  the 
end  of  the  v.  covers  both  sets  of  spirits,  and  on  the  2nd  interpreta- 
tion noted  above  so  also  does  Vnij^,  its  gods ;  cp.  the  use  of  D^n7K, 
god,  for  the  manes  of  Samuel  in  i  S  28^3. — That  chirp  and  that 
murmur]  for  the  squeaking  and  gibbering  of  the  spirits,  cp.  29*  n. ; 
to  chirp  (si^BV),  used  of  the  thin  notes  of  birds,  see  lo^*;  and 
murmur  (Hin)  of  doves,  see  38^*  59". — 20.  According  to  one  way 


VIII.   19,   20  159 

of  regarding  this  v.,  it  completes  the  sentence  begun  in  v.^® :  see 
on  v.^^.  According  to  another,  it  is  complete  in  itself:  when 
things  have  grown  desperate  and  a  man  is  without  hope,  he  will, 
but  too  late,  penitently  exclaim,  To  the  Law  and  the  Tesiimony, 
i.e.  the  Scriptures  (Du.).  Men  will  at  last  seek  for  the  word  of 
Yahweh  and  not  find  it  (cp.  Ezk  72^,  Am  8"^- :  and  see  Che. 
Introd.  p.  42).  Most  improbable  of  all  is  the  view  that  v.*®  is  a 
protasis  of  which  v.*^  is  the  apodosis — improbable  in  itself,  and 
condemned  too  by  the  fact  that  v. 20  is  prose  and  v.^i  poetry. 
It  is  impossible  to  interpret  the  v.  satisfactorily  :  probably  the 
last  clause  is  not  the  original  continuation  of  the  first  part. — To 
the  Law  and  to  the  Testimony^  the  same  terms  in  inverse  order 
occur  in  v.^^  of  Isaiah's  teaching.  If  w.^^'^s  are  not  the  con- 
tinuation of  vv.^'^*,  the  terms  may  not  have  the  same  meaning  as 
in  v.^^.  If  V.20  is  late,  Torah^  Law,  may  mean  written  law,  the 
Scriptures,  and  miyn,  Testimony ^  like  nny  in  Ps  19®,  may  be 
a  synonym  of  Torah  in  this  sense. — If  they  speak  not]  possible 
also  is  surely  they  shall  speak :  see  phil.  n.  But  in  either  case 
this  clause  is  very  awkward  if  joined  with  the  next :  examples  of 
the  improbable  sentences  thus  produced  are :  if  they  speak  not 
thuSy  he  (note  change  of  number)  shall  have  no  dawning^  or 
surely  they  shall  speak  thus  who  (lit.  he  who)  has  no  dawning.  It 
is  more  probable  that  the  last  three  or  four  words  (from  ISTK  or 
I^N)  belong  to  the  poem  of  which  another  and  larger  fragment  is 
contained  in  v. 21^. — For  whom  there  is  no  dawn]  whose  state  is 
desperate,  because  no  morning  will  ever  break  on  his  present 
night  of  distress;  cp.  21"'*  (n.)  58^  Ps  30^ 

tm"  vn^K  Sk  oy-KiVn]  commentators  assign  no  reason  for  the  emphatic 
position  of  the  subj.  oy.  Not  improbably  «nT  goes  with  the  following  words, 
and  vn^K  Vk  oy  niS.t  is  a  corrupt  fragment ;  the  corruption  in  this  case  is  the 
cause  of  the  ambiguity  of  the  v.  (see  above).  It  is  one  reason  against  Ruben's 
elaborate  reconstruction  of  vv.*''^  that  he  allows  this  difficulty  to  remain. — 
'i3i  D"nr»  nya]  ffi  prefixes  rl  iK^rirovaiv,  supplying,  like  modern  translators, 
something  where  something,  though  not  obviously  this,  is  needed  in  the 
present  probably  corrupt  text :  see  last  n. — 20.  ©is  paraphrastic,  but  read 
nnr  for  nnc. — nne'  -h  yn  iifK  nm  nana  itdk'  vh  dk]  the  best  proof  that  these 
words  were  not  originally  connected  is  the  mere  statement  of  the  devices 
which  have  been  resorted  to  in  order  to  construe  them,  (i)  iV  has  been 
explained  as  a  sing,  distributing  the  pi.  in  itdk',  in  support  of  which  2^  5^ 
(themselves  probably  corrupt)  have  been  cited  (Kon.  348^).  Du.  reads  ton'. 
Grammatically  the  most  straightforward  course  is  to  make  nai  the  antecedent 
of  \h  ((!&,  Ruben) ;  but  exegetically  this  is  improbable.    (2)  The  relation  of  the 


i6o 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


two  parts  of  the  sentence  has  been  variously,  but  always'  unsatisfactorily, 
explained,  (a)  If  they  speak  not  thus^  {surely)  he  shall  have  no  dawning',  cp. 
RV.  But  (BDB  84a)  there  is  a  complete  absence  of  evidence  that  ick  was 
ever  used  (like  1)  as  the  simple  introducer  of  the  apodosis  (Ges.,  cp.  Kon. 
4I5«),  or,  like  O,  as  an  affirmative,  {b)  Surely  they  will  speak  thus ^  when  he 
has  no  dawning  \  this  translation  might  pass  if  when  were  temporal,  but 
usage  only  admits  of  its  being  conditional  (cp.  e.g.  Dt  11^,  Jos  4*'),  on  con- 
dition that ;  and  this  sense  is  incompatible  with  the  tenor  of  the  passage,  for  if 
it  is  a  unity,  the  writer  regards  calamity  as  a  certainty,  (r)  Surely  they  will 
speak  thus  who  (really  he  who)  have  no  dawning 'y  but  nan  and  not  the  subj.  of 
TTDN',  both  on  account  of  its  neighbourhood  to  nt^x  and  agreement  in  number 
with  1^,  is  the  natural  antecedent  to  "w^.  It  is,  no  doubt,  tempting  in  view  of 
Jer  8^'  to  take  '\vx)  in  the  sense  of  witchcraft ^  counter-spell  (cp.  47^^  n.),  and 
render,  {d)  This  word  against  which  there  is  no  counter-spell.  But  Ruben, 
who  has  revived  the  suggestion,  is  compelled  to  resort  to  violent  textual 
correction  to  make  the  meaning  harmonise  with  the  context :  he  reads  udk' 
1313  for  nana  noN',  and  places  D'non  "^k  D"nn  nya  after  D'ayn*.  Those  who 
infer  that  the  real  cause  of  these  difficulties  lies  in  the  fact  that  nni?  iV  px  nrK 
and  'i3i  TON'  kS'DK  belonged  originally  to  different  contexts,  generally  consider 
that  nnB'  i"?  J'K  ntrx  formed  a  fragment  of  the  poem  to  which  vv.^'*  belonged  : 
Cond.  thinks  they  form  the  direct  continuation  of  5^. 

21,  22.  The  poetic  fragment  which  appears  to  begin  in 
the  middle  of  a  distich ;  the  last  words  of  v. 20,  if  they  belonged 
to  the  poem,  are  scarcely  the  first  lines  of  the  distich  of  which 
V.21*  is  the  second,  for  the  lines  would  not  be  parallel,  nor  would 
the  last  clause   of  v.^o  contain  the  antecedent  of  na,  through 

it.  The  fragment  appears  to  picture  a  man — whether  Jew  or 
Ephraimite  or  even  foreigner,  cannot,  of  course,  be  determined — 
passing  through  a  country,  probably  his  own  (?  in  search  of  food, 
cp.  I  K  18^*^,  Am  48  8^^^*),  distressed  and  famishing  ;  angry  at  his 
plight,  he  curses  his  king  and  his  God,  from  whom  he  can  gain 
no  help ;  whether  he  looks  up  or  down  there  is  no  ray  of  light 
to  be  seen :  he  is  surrounded  by  impenetrable  gloom. 

In  the  following  translation,  to  heaven  (v.2i<*)  and  beneath 
(v.22a)  are  taken  from  ^.  The  distich  is  then  3  :  3,  which  appears 
to  have  been  the  rhythm  of  the  poem. 

21  And  he  shall  pass  through  it  hard  pressed  and  hungry ; 
And  being  hungry  he  will  become  enraged. 

And  curse  his  king  and  his  God. 
And  he  will  turn  (his  eyes)  *  to  heaven '  above, 

22  And  he  will  look  to  the  earth  '  beneath ' ; 
And  behold  distress  and  darkness. 

Thick  impenetrable  (?)  gloom. 


VIII.    21-23  i6i 

21.  And  curse  his  king]  Finding  no  help  from  king  and  God, 
from  whom  he  might  have  expected  it  (cp.  2  K  G"^*^^-)^  and 
smarting  under  his  grievances,  the  man  grows  reckless  and 
commits  the  mortal  (i  K  21^*^,  Lv  24"^*,  cp.  Ex  2227(28))  offence 
of  cursing  king  and  God.  Cp.  Rev  i6^\  "And  they  blasphemed 
the  God  of  heaven  because  of  their  pains  and  their  sores." — 
Elsewhere  the  obj.  of  hh^  is  in  the  ace,  and  in  i  S  1 7*^  2  K  2^^ 
3,  which  introduces  both  y270  and  Vni>K  here,  is  used  of  the  person 
in  whose  name  the  curse  is  pronounced.  We  might  therefore 
render  curse  by  his  king  and  by  his  god ;  but  this  would  leave  the 
object  cursed  unnamed ;  and,  seeing  that  the  prep,  is  repeated,  it 
would  give  us  an  altogether  unusual  case  of  cursing  in  the  name 
of  a  king. — His  God]  possible  also  is  the  rendering  his  gods 
{vP  n.) :  then  cp.  220.  But  cp.  i  K  2  i^o-  ^^.— Thick  impenetrable  (?) 
gloom]  this  translation  merely  represents  what  was,  as  suggested 
by  the  previous  line,  the  general  sense  of  this  one.  The  text  of 
1^  is  most  questionable,  and  (K  is  probably  paraphrastic.  The 
attempt  to  gain  a  transition  from  the  gloom  of  v.  21^-  to  the 
bright  hopes  of  v.^  and  9^*^  by  rendering  and  thick  darkness 
shall  be  driven  away :  23  for  there  shall  be  no  gloom  to  her 
that  was  in  anguish  (RVmarg.),  involves  a  number  of  improb- 
abilities, disregards  the  parallelism  and  rhythm  of  the  poem, 
and  assumes  a  transition  from  the  poetic  fragment  ta  the  prose 

of  V.28. 

23  (9^).  Apart  from  the  opening  sentence  (see  last  n.),  this  v. 
is  a  prose  note  explaining  that  the  darkened  land  of  the  poetical 
fragment  (82i'-),  to  wit,  the  northern  and  north-eastern  territory 
of  Israel  (cp.  Zee  10^^,  Mic  7^*)  will  be  compensated  for  its 
former  distress  by  a  corresponding  glory  (9^^^  (2-7)).  If  either 
32if.  or  ^-^  is  not  the  work  of  Isaiah,  neither  is  this  note;  if 
both  are,  this  note  may  have  been  added  by  him  when  he 
combined  two  poems  of  different  periods.  In  this  case  he  looks 
back  on  the  humiliation  of  Naphtali^  which  took  place  in  734  b.c. 
as  long  past ;  it  belongs  to  ihQ  former  time. — The  land  of  Zebulon 
and  the  land  of  Naphtalt]  northern  and  north-eastern  Palestine; 
cp.  Ps  6828  (27)^  Naphtali  is  explicitly  mentioned  in  2  K  152*. 
The  terms  in  the  antithetical  clause  are  all  direct  objects — he 
hath  made  glorious  the  way  of  the  sea^  the  land  beyond  Jordan^ 
Galilee  of  the  nations.  These  terms  are  more  extensive  than 
those  in  the  previous  clause,  for  they  include  the  country  East  of 

VOL.  I.  —  II 


l62  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Jordan  (  =  Gilead,  2  K  15^^).  Cp.  EBL  1629. — The  way  of  the 
sea]  according  to  Jer.,  Rashi,  a/.,  the  sea  meant  is  the  Lake  of 
Galilee  (cp.  Dt  33^^).  More  frequently  D\T  means  the  Medi- 
terranean ;  and  so  here  the  way  of  {i.e.  leading  to :  cp.  On  32*) 
the  sea  probably  is,  like  the  '  Via  Maris '  of  the  Crusaders,  the 
caravan  route  which  ran  from  Damascus  to  the  Mediterranean 
sea  at  Acre. — The  land  beyond  Jordan]  pTn  nay,  as  frequently 
of  the  country  E.  of  Jordan  (BDB  719). — The  Galil  of  the 
nations]  cp.  Jos  1 2^3,  "  the  nations  of  the  Galil,"  if  as  against 
f^  (**of  Gilgal")  this  reading  of  ffir^  be  correct;  also  raXtAata 
dA.Xo<^v\a)v,  I  Mac  5^5 ;  elsewhere  in  OT  the  *  Galil,'  hhlT\  (Jos 
2o7  2i32,  I  K  9I1  I  ch  66it)  or  7h'^\r\  (2  K  1529),  is  undefined. 
The  term  means  circuit,  but  is  always  used  specifically  of  a 
district  in  Northern  Palestine;  cp.  the  different  specific  refer- 
ence of  naan,  "The  Round"  (Gn  19").  But  the  district 
covered  by  the  term  was  not  always,  nor  need  it  be  here,  as 
extensive  as  the  later  Galilee :  Ges.  suggested  that  at  one  time 
it  defined  a  relatively  small  district  round  Kedesh  (Jos  20^ 
2i82=i  Ch  6«i,  To  r2,  I  Mac  ii^s):  in  i  K  1529  it  appears 
less  extensive  than  Naphtali,  which  it  subsequently  included : 
see,  further,  EBi,,  s.v.  Galilee.  The  definition  given  here  and 
in  I  Mac  5^^  (cp.  Jos  1223  ffi^)  reflects  the  mixed  population 
which  was  at  all  periods  more  or  less  characteristic  of  this 
northern  territory. 

21.  ayn  ntrpa  nn  najn]  (5  koI  ^?«  i<t!  i/juii  aKXrjpd,  \iix6s  =  nvp  dd3  najn 
ajn,  which  is  obviously  corrupt.  ^  is  quite  possible,  since  the  absence  of  an 
antecedent  to  na  may  be  due  to  these  words  being  the  beginning  of  a 
fr^ment. — nVyD*?]  (&  els  rhv  oiipavhv  &vu>. — 22.  pK  ^ni]  (&  koI  els  t^v  yrjp 
koIto). — mJD  n"?£3Ni  npis  ^lyo]  signs  of  corruption  here  are  :  (i)  these  four  words 
overbalance,  or  if  'd  h'^ski  be  separated  (Du.,  Cond.)  then  np^  fjiyn  is  too 
short  for,  the  parallel  line  n^vm  msf  nam ;  (2)  however  construed,  mjD  mSbki 
destroys  the  parallelism  with  the  first  line ;  (3)  for  mao,  fflr  read  niK-ip ;  (4) 
npi}i  is  detached  from  ms  with  which  it  is  coupled  in  30^,  Pr  i^,  cp.  mj<  or 
npixDi,  Zeph  i^° ;  (5)  the  difficulty  of  construing  mjD  nV»5K.  The  conclusions 
that  appear  probable  are:  (i)  one  word  between  miD  .  .  .  njni  is  superfluous: 
(2)  mjD  is  a  corruption  of  some  qualification  of  n'?SN,  cp.  Am  ^^  nj3  k^)  ^sk 
*.S.  Possibly  npij£  f]ii;D  is  a  misplaced  corruption  of  npi!fD  (Zeph  i^^),  and  just 
possibly  ffi's  hkid  is  correct — a  poetic  breviloquence  to  express  what  Ex  icP^' 
expresses  more  fully  in  prose,  vnx  hk  r'K  i«t  vh  ,  ,  .  nSstt  '\vn  '.Ti.  Then 
we  may  restore 

npixDi  m:«  njm 

.nNTD   n'?BN1    HDJ^n 


I 


VIII:  21-23  i63 

nam]  Mic  3«  (%  not  MT),  Gn  15"  (JE?),  Ps  18"  (not  2  S  22")  82»  139" ; 
pi.  Is  50*"  t. — T^d]  the  existence  of  a  root  »)iy,  /o  ^  <&r/t,  is  well  secured ; 
but  this  form  is  doubtful,  for  (i)  there  also  exist  from  the  same  root  as  nouns 
meaning  darkness  ns'y  and  noiyn  ;  (2)  masc.  nouns  of  the  form  maktHl  from 
i'V  roots  are  exceedingly  rare  (St.  275a),  while,  if  against  MT  we  treat 
»)iyD  as  a  form  like  Dipc,  it  would  more  probably  mean  place  of  darkness, 
especially  in  view  of  the  existence  of  nD'y,  nsiyn.  The  term  is  perhaps  due  to 
an  early  corruption  (see  above). — mjD  hSbki]  The  rendering  and  into  darkness 
he  is  driven^  or  banished  (cp.  Jer  23^^),  is  the  only  one  that  continues  or 
completes  the  thought  of  the  distich  ;  but  n^5t|  for  nSsK  Sk  is  exceedingly  harsh 
(this  might  be  partially  met  by  pointing  n^ek  with  he  locative),  the  suppression 
ofthenewand  different  subj.  is  awkward,  and  the  clause  is  somewhat  of  a 
hysteron-proteron,  for  the  man  is  depicted  as  already  encompassed  by  darkness. 
The  alternative  rendering,  and  darkness  is  driven  away,  banished,  may  be 
justified  grammatically,  for  n'"*£3N  (fern.)  might  be  the  obj.,  not  the  subj.,  of  the 
masc.  pass.  part.  (17^  n.,  Ps  87^) ;  but  it  is  very  improbable  :  m3  is  not  a  suit- 
able word  for  the  dispersal  of  darkness  ;  a  fresh  synonym  for  darkness,  if  the 
thought  of  the  preceding  words  is  continued,  would  be  suitable,  but  quite  the 
reverse  if  the  sentence  is  a  strong  antithesis.  As  part  of  the  same  distich,  too, 
the  clause,  had  it  this  meaning,  would  be  intolerable.  That  these  two  obscure 
and  ambiguous  words  are  **  the  turning  point  to  which  v. ^-9'  attaches 
itself"  (Di.)  is  anything  but  "  natural. "—23.  rh  pyiD  "wnh  f]yiD  mS  'a]  the 
attempt  is  made  by  those  who  treat  8^'-9*  as  a  unity  and  as  free  from 
corruption,  to  make  this  the  reason  for  the  last  clause  of  v.'^^  (second  transla- 
tion) \h\xs—for  {there  shall)  not  {be)  gloom  {to  the  land)  to  which  there  {was) 
distress ;  but  again  the  change  of  words  (from  nVsK  to  »]yiD,  from  ^yiD  to  pJfiD) 
is  most  improbable,  and  the  change  of  tense  which  is  all-important  is  in  no 
way  indicated  in  the  text.  At  least  more  probable  than  this  is  Du.'s 
suggestion  that  the  sentence  is  a  gloss  on  fjiyo  in  v.^,  explaining  that  that 
word  is  used  metaphorically  :  for  is  not  »]yiD  used  (metaphorically)  of  a  person 
who  is  said  to  be  in  distress  ? — nya]  at  the  former  time,  3  of  point  of  time  : 
BDB  453^. — pB'Nin  nys]  the  fern,  n  being  regarded  as  radical  was  treated  by 
some  writers  from  the  time  of  Ezek.  (7'*  ^^)  onwards  as  masc.  :  cp.  Kon.  iii. 
251/. — 1^33.1  .  .  .  Vpn]  are  antithetical — literally,  to  make  light  and  to  make 
heavy,  and  then  in  accordance  with  common  metaphorical  usage  to  render 
inglorious  and  to  render  glorious :  cp.  the  antithesis  of  the  Niphals  of  the 
two  vbs.  in  2  S  6^^.  The  subj.  in  each  case  is  perhaps  best  treated  as 
undefined  (G-K.  144^^);  others  consider  it  to  be  Yahweh  unnamed,  "after 
the  well-known  later  custom"  (Du.).  Jewish  commentators  {e.g.  Rashi) 
make  Tiglath-pileser  subj,  of  h^r\  and  Sennacherib  of  T33n,  with,  of  course, 
a  very  different  and  an  illegitimate  interpretation  of  the  whole  sentence. 
T33n  is  proph.  pf. — nxnn]  pK  +  old  ace.  ending  ;  it  is  by  accident  rather  than 
design  that  the  noun  actually  is  in  the  ace.  here  :  G-K.  90. —  In  view  of  the 
absence  of  the  n  in  the  next  sentence  it  is  hardly  likely  that  nsnN  is  ace.  of 
direction — he  brought  shame  towards  the  latid  .  .  .  he  brought  honour  towards 
the  way  (Du.,  Marti). — jnnK.Ti]  ace.  temporis  (G-K.  118/),  and  in  the  latter 
(time). 


164 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


i 


IX.    1-6  (2-7).  —  The  glorious  Future  of  YahweKs  now 
enslaved  People, 

The  poem  consists  of  distichs,  except  perhaps  in  the  last  four  lines.  The 
lines  of  the  distichs  balance  one  another,  except  perhaps  in  vv.^-  ''•  *"•  ^ ;  the 
last  line  also  is  longer  than  the  three  which  precede.  These  irregularities  may 
possibly  be  due  to  corruption,  but  independent  signs  of  this  are  slight. 
Although  the  lines  within  the  several  distichs  balance  one  another,  the  length 
of  line  in  different  distichs  varies  from  clearly  2  in  vv.^  **•  ^*  •*  to  clearly  3 
in  v.^,  and  4  in  ^'  *.  In  v."  some  (Du.,  cp.  Lowth)  make  ^  rhythmically 
equivalent  to  ^'  ^  and  divide  ^'  *•  '•  ^'  ^  at  Wonderful  Counsellor  into  two 
rhythmically  equal  halves,  the  whole  being  rhythmically  equivalent  to  ^-  •*. 
Certainly  *•  '•  *•  **  might  easily  be  read  as  a  single  distich  4  :  4  instead  of  two 
distichs  2:2;  but  in  any  case  it  is  probable  that  the  significance  of  the  name 
was  heightened  by  being  thrown  into  an  independent  distich. 

Parallelism  of  lines  is  prominent :  in  v.^,  the  parallelism  extends  over  the 
entire  distichs,  though  a  subordinate  parallelism  of  antithesis  marks  the  lines 
within  each  distich. 

1  The  people  that  were  walking  in  darkness 

Have  seen  a  great  light; 
They  that  dwelt  in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death, 
Light  hath  shone  upon  them. 

2  Thou  hast  multiplied  *  the  rejoicing,* 

Thou  hast  made  great  the  joy ; 
They  have  joyed  before  thee  as  men  joy  at  harvest, 
As  they  rejoice  when  they  divide  the  spoil. 

8  For  the  yoke  of  his  burden, 

And  the  *  bars'  about  his  shoulder, 
The  stick  of  his  driver 

Hast  thou  shattered  as  in  the  day  of  Midian. 


*  For  every  shoe  worn  in  tumult  (of  battle)  (?), 
And  (every)  garment  *  stained'  (?)  with  blood, 
Shall  be  for  burning, 
For  fuel  of  the  fire. 

5  For  a  child  has  been  born  to  us, 
A  son  has  been  given  to  us ; 
And  dominion  is  upon  his  shoulder ; 
And  his  name  has  been  called — 


IX.  1-6  i6s 

Wonderful  Counsellor, 

Mighty  God, 
A  Father  for  ever, 

Prince  of  Peace. 

•  Great  is  the  dominion, 

And  endless  is  the  peace. 
Upon  the  throne  of  David, 
And  throughout  his  dominion; 

To  establish  it  and  to  support  it 

In  justice  and  righteousness — 
From  henceforth  and  for  ever, 

The  jealousy  of  Yahweh  of  Hosts  will  do  this. 

Light  now  shines  on  the  people  that  have  been  (long)  in 
darkness  (v.^),  and  they  rejoice  before  Yahweh  with  great  joy 
(v.^).  For  (i)  Yahweh  has  delivered  the  people  from  the  yoke 
of  a  foreign  oppressor  (v. 8) ;  (2)  He  has  also  made  an  end  of 
war  (v.^)  ;  moreover,  (3)  a  child  has  been  born,  who,  as  a  native 
ruler  in  contrast  to  the  (foreign)  oppressor  of  v.*,  will  exercise 
dominion,  and  is  marked  out  as  exceptional  by  the  name  which 
he  receives,  v.*.  He  will  rule  justly  and  righteously  from  the 
throne  of  David  over  a  vast  dominion  undisturbed  to  its  furthest 
bound  by  any  breach  of  peace  ;  this  righteous  government  by  the 
will  and  act  of  Yahweh  is  to  be  endless  (v.*). 

Except  in  vv.**  ®  the  tenses  used  throughout  the  poem  are 
perfects  and  imperfects  with  waw  conversive,  i.e.  tenses  naturally 
used  in  historical  narrative.  But  the  situation  described  in 
vv.i-8'  6  in  no  way  corresponds  to  any  known  circumstances,  and 
the  name  in  v.**  has  no  appearance  of  being  one  borne  by  an 
actual  person.  It  has  therefore  been  widely  and  correctly  held 
that  the  poem  is,  at  least  in  part,  prophetic. 

It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  the  perfects  are  in  part  prophetic, 
in  part  historical ;  if  this  were  actually  so,  the  question  would 
arise,  how  much  is  prophetic,  how  much  historical?  Has  the 
great  deliverance  from  foreign  oppression  actually  taken  place  ? 
Has  some  birth  awakened  the  poet*s  hopes,  but  the  actual 
present  not  yet  fulfilled  them  by  bringing  the  child  born  to  the 
throne  of  David  ?     Many  have  held  that  the  birth  is  historic,  and 


1 66  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

that  the  poet  refers  in  particular  to  the  birth  of  Hezekiah ;  but 
this  view  is  now  generally  and  rightly  abandoned. 

It  is  more  probable  that  the  poem  is  prophetic  throughout  in 
all  its  direct  statements — the  light  has  not  yet  actually  shone,  the 
people  have  not  yet  actually  rejoiced,  the  child  has  not  yet 
actually  been  born ;  all  these  things  are  past,  not  in  reality,  but 
only  in  the  hopeful  vision  of  the  poet.  The  circumstances  under 
which  the  poem  was  written  can  only,  but  may  probably,  be 
detected  in  the  implicit  statements ;  from  these  we  may  infer  two 
things  :  (i)  the  people  were  at  the  time  in  "  darkness,"  i.e.  distress ; 
and  (2)  under  a  foreign  yoke.  On  one  interpretation  of  v.*,  if 
not  also  from  v. 5,  it  would  also  follow  that  (3)  the  throne  of 
David  was  at  the  time  vacant ;  another  interpretation  would  still 
admit,  but  no  longer  require,  such  a  situation  (see  note  on  v. 5). 

If  all  we  can  infer  are  the  two  circumstances  first  mentioned, 
the  historical  situation  presupposed  is  obviously  one  that 
occurred  even  in  Isaiah's  lifetime,  for  Judah  felt  the  pressure 
of  Assyria  and  paid  tribute;  but  it  also  frequently  recurred 
later,  when  the  yoke  of  Babylon,  Persia,  the  Ptolemies  or  the 
Seleucids  rested  on  the  Jews. 

The  determination  of  the  date  and  authorship  of  the  poem 
must  therefore  turn  on  other  considerations ;  but  these,  too,  are 
unfortunately  less  decisive  than  could  be  desired. 

1.  Language. — Cp.  Cheyne,  Introd.  p.  44  ;  Hackmann,  p.  148.  This 
is  indecisive.  On  the  one  hand,  the  only  occurrences  of  S^fa  (as  distinct 
from  ^^p)  are  in  v.*  10^  14^,  passages  commonly,  though  not  unanimously, 
attributed  to  Isaiah  ;  on  the  other,  nv,  pei-petuity^  and  niD^x,  both  frequent 
later,  occur  in  no  passage  certainly  as  early  as  the  81  h  cent,  (see  phil.  notes). 
It  is  the  idea  rather  than  the  word  ^^i^  that  is  significant.  For  the  rest,  the 
language  is  such  that  it  might  equally  well,  so  far  as  we  know,  have  been 
employed  in  the  8th  century  or  much  later,  though  jiko,  if  loaned  from 
Aramaic  rather  than  Assyrian  (cp.  v.*  n.),  would  more  easily  be  explained 
by  a  date  later  than  the  8th  century. 

2.  It  is  urged  that  no  echo  of  the  passage  is  found  in  Jer.,  Ezek.,  Is  40-66. 
This  is  correct,  but  inconclusive.  It  is,  of  course,  at  once  explained  if  the 
passage  was  written  later  than  these  writers ;  but  unless  we  place  it  as  late  as 
the  2nd  cent.  B.C.  (Kennett),  why  does  it  also  find  no  echo  in  still  later 
writers,  Zech.,  Hag.,  Mai.,  the  Psalms?  or  should  we  possibly  find  echoes 
of  it  in  Ps  72  ?  The  connection  with  Is  1 1  does  indeed  seem  probable,  and 
if  that  connection  is  due  to  unity  of  authorship,  the  exilic  or  post-exilic  date 
to  which  that  passage  is  probably  to  be  referred  is  the  date  also  of  this. 

3.  Ideas. — The  conception  of  Yahweh's  "zeal"  (v.*)  is  probably  enough 
that  which  is  characteristic  of  Ezekiel  and  of  subsequent  writers,  yet  <*TK3p  may 


IX.  1-6  16; 

be  so  interpreted  as  not  to  be  absolutely  incompatible  with  Isaiah's  thought 
(see  n.  on  v.*).  Several  writers  (see  especially  Volz,  Die  vorexilische  Jahwe- 
prophetic^  pp.  3  and  6fF.)  treat  the  reference  to  the  Messianic  king  as  in  itself 
conclusive  proof  of  post-exilic  origin  ;  this  is  unsafe.  At  the  same  time  two 
facts  remain  :  ( i )  the  Messianic  king  does  figure  in  later  writers ;  (2)  we  lack 
positive  proof  that  the  prophets  of  the  8th  cent,  were  acquainted  with  the 
idea,  or,  if  acquainted  with  it,  also  tnade  use  of  it.  Marti  rather  overstates 
the  case  when  he  says  that  the  Messiah  here  is  **  throughout  a  political  figure 
(Grosse)  which  has  no  direct  significance  for  Religion  " — at  least  the  remark 
would  equally  apply  to  the  judges  and  counsellors  to  whom  Isaiah  looks 
forward  in  i'-^.  If  Isaiah  did  look  forward  to  a  king  in  the  future  and  had 
wished  to  describe  him,  he  must  have  described  him  much  as  he  is  here 
described — righteous,  just,  mighty  in  defence  of  the  weak  (see  notes  on  vv.*'  •). 
The  ideal  certainly  has  its  national  limitations :  the  king  will  be  a  Jew  and  yet 
have  a  wide,  a  universal  dominion,  but  no  stress  is  laid  on  the  servitude  of 
the  nations  to  Israel.  Certainly,  too,  the  ideal  falls  below  that  of  the  ' '  servant 
of  Yahweh  "  ;  but  at  the  same  time  this  ideal  of  the  kingdom  established  in 
righteousness  and  of  the  peace-loving,  justice-securing  king  b  anything  but 
ignoble. 

The  best  complete  vindication  of  Isaianic  authorship  would  be  to  establish 
a  clear  connection  with  some  period  of  the  prophet's  activity ;  but,  unfortun- 
ately, those  who  agree  in  rejecting  the  view  that  the  passage  is  post- Isaianic, 
differ  as  to  the  period  of  Isaiah's  activity  to  which  it  belongs.  It  must 
suffice  to  refer  to  two  or  three  theories  of  date. 

Kit.  argues  that  the  passage  fits  into  the  range  of  ideas  found  in  chs.  6-8 
and  other  passages  of  the  period  to  which  these  chapters  belong.  Isaiah  then 
expected  the  conquest  of  the  country  and  the  city,  and  the  overthrow  of  the 
monarchy  (2*^*  3^**  5*"') ;  but  also  that  a  remnant  would  survive  (7'  6'^) ; 
from  the  remnant  would  arise  a  deliverer,  Immanuel,  representative  of  the 
new  generation,  who  would  grow  up  in  affliction.  Judah  must  drink  the  cup 
of  affliction  at  the  hand  of  Assyria  {f^-  ^^i'^«'^«-).  Then  the  hope 
represented  in  Immanuel  is  realised,  8^^*'''.  It  increases,  8^'',  and  reaches  its 
climax,  p^"^' — Assyria  must  fall.  The  climax  was  not  clearly  perceived  at  first, 
but  may  have  been  so  after  722,  when  the  section  8-9*  may  have  been  written 
down.  The  sequence  of  thought  and,  perhaps,  the  original  sequence  of  the 
sections  is— 8^2.  m  (20).  2if.^  Disaster  ;  8^«-"-  20,  Hope  ;  S^'-  ^^^',  Fulfilment. 
This  elaborate  construction  rests  on  details,  such  as  the  identification  of 
Immanuel  and  the  prince  of  9*,  which,  according  to  the  view  taken  in  this 
commentary,  are  insecure,  or  definitely  unsound.  It  certainly  mitigates  to 
some  extent  the  difficulties  attached  to  the  view  that  9^**  was  the  direct 
sequence  of  ch.  7,  and  written  at  the  time  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war. 
Would  Isaiah  have  described  the  people  as  walking  in  darkness,  because  they 
were  threatened,  in  his  own  phrase,  by  two  fagends  of  smoked  out  fire-brands  ? 

Du.  holds  that  the  "driver"  of  v.'  must  be  Assyria,  and  the  "soldier"  of 
v.*  Sennacherib's  army. 

The  Isaianic  authorship  seems  to  have  been  first  questioned  by  Stade, 
Gesch.  i.  596,  ii.  209 f.,  ZATW  vi.  161  ;  then  by  H.  Hackmann,  Die 
Zukunftserwartung  des  Jesaia^  130-136,  143  if.  ;  Cheyne,  Introd.  pp.  44  f.  ; 


1 68 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


Marti,  Comm.  ;  Volz,  Die  vorexilische  Jahweprophetie^  pp.  57-60 ;  R.  H. 
Kennett, yZ'^.S' vii.  (1906),  321-342.  Sta.,  Che.,  Hack,  suggest  a  post-exilic 
date  not  closely  defined,  Kennett,  who  treats  the  passage  as  historical^ 
refers  it  to  about  140  B.C.,  when  "the  yoke  of  the  heathen  was  taken  away 
from  Israel"  (i  Mac  13*^),  and  Simon  held  a  rejoicing  "because  a  great 
enemy  was  destroyed  out  of  Israel "  (i  Mac  13''^).  In  addition  to  the  general 
objection  to  assuming  a  Maccabaean  origin  for  any  parts  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah 
(see  Introd.  §§  26  f. ),  this  theory  rests  on  several  very  questionable  assumptions : 
(i)  that  8^  (9^)  is  part  of  the  poem ;  (2)  that  the  name  given  to  the  prince 
implies  a  warrior  ;  (3)  that  the  boots  of  v.*  must  be  boots  of  Greek  soldiery ; 
(4)  that  the  child  of  v.*^  is  not  a  child^  as  suchy  but  the  offspring  given  to 
the  nation,  to  wit,  Simon.  Marti  with  far  more  probability  places  the 
prophecy  between  540  and  440  B.C.,  roughly  about  500,  not  far  remote  in 
time  from  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  both  of  whom  expected  a  Messiah  of  the 
Davidic  house. 

On  the  whole,  if  the  passage  was  not  written  by  Isaiah,  it 
may  be  best  regarded  as  a  lyrical  counterpart  of  chs.  40-55, 
though  the  work  of  an  author  with  different  ideals,  written 
towards  the  close  of  the  Exile,  when  the  people  had  long  been 
walking  in  the  darkness  of  captivity,  long  dwelling  in  the  land 
of  the  shadow  of  death — Babylon.  Like  Ezekiel,  the  writer 
was  convinced  that  the  jealousy  of  Yahweh  must  bring  about 
the  restoration  and  exaltation  of  his  people:  like  Haggai  and 
Zechariah,  he  looked  for  a  Davidic  Messiah ;  unlike  Ezekiel,  he 
gives  to  his  prince  a  supreme  place  in  the  restored  community ; 
though,  like  the  Deutero-Isaiah,  he  expects  the  restoration  itself 
to  be  the  direct  act  of  Yahweh  without  the  mediation  of  the 
Messiah :  this  is  a  possible,  even  a  probable,  but  at  the  same 
time  not  a  certain  theory  of  the  origin  of  the  poem.  If  it 
should  be  correct,  we  have  three  great  ideals  represented  in  the 
literature  of  the  Exile  —  Ezekiel's,  of  the  Holy  Community 
devoted  to  ritual  and  sanctified  by  the  presence  of  God  in 
its  midst ;  the  Deutero-Isaiah*s,  of  the  Prophetic  People  preach- 
ing true  religion  to  the  nations ;  and  this  writer's,  of  the  Righteous 
Kingdom  with  its  king  righteously  ruling  from  Jerusalem  over  an 
unlimited  empire. 

I  (2).  The  people]  the  entire  people  of  Israel,  descendants  of 
those  who  had  constituted  the  kingdom  of  David  (v.®);  the  subject 
is  not  the  same  as  in  8^3  (9I),  nor  as  in  S^i^-  (note  the  consistent 
use  of  sing,  there  and  pi.  here);  it  is  rather  the  new  subject 
of  an  entirely  independent  poem. — Darkness  .  .  .  light]  for  these 
figures  of  calamities  of  various  kinds  and  prosperity  or  deliver- 


IX.  1-3  1 69 

ance  from  calamity  respectively,  cp.  e.g.  588-  ^^  59*  60^,  La  3^, 
Job  1522^-.  Darkness  signifies,  in  particular,  captivity.  Cp., 
either  for  this  last  point  or  for  the  phrases  used  in  this  v.,  42^ 
{}^n2  ^2^\  49»  ("iK'na  -ib^n  ||  onioN),  Mic  7^-  (ncna  aK^s  o 
iiNi>  ^3K*^''  '  .  .  'h  y\^  rm%  Ps  107I0.  u  ^-,^55^  nio^  "itj'n  ^2^) 
[>T\T  Dn^miDiDi  moi^yi  "iK'no  DN^yi^  .  .  .  bnai  ^^V).—The  land  of 
the  shadow  of  death\  or,  of  gloom  (see  phil.  n.) ;  the  phrase  pK 
niiD7V  occurs  here  only ;  but  cp.  "  the  land  of  darkness  and  the 
shadow  of  death"  (Job  lo^^  cp.  38^'^),  i.e.  Sheol :  this  meaning 
can  scarcely  be  intended  here ;  what  is  meant  is  either  the  land 
of  Israel  temporarily  obscured  by  calamity,  or  Babylon,  the 
land  of  captivity.  ST  avoids  both  these  applications  by  para- 
phrase— "  The  people  of  the  house  of  Israel  who  were  walking 
in  Egypt  as  in  darkness  came  forth  to  see  a  great  light ;  they 
that  dwelt  in  the  shadow  of  death,  light  hath  shone  upon  them." 
2  (3).  Thou  hast  multiplied  the  rejoicings  etc.]  the  translation  rests 
on  a  very  slight  conjectural  emendation ;  see  phil.  n.  J^  reads 
thou  hast  multiplied  the  nation :  thou  hast  not  increased  the  joy^ 
which  is  obviously  unsuitable ;  the  K®re  (RV)  is  probably  an  early 
conjectural  emendation  which  restores  sense  at  the  expense  of 
style  and  without  restoring  the  parallelism  (see  phil.  n.).  The 
two  figures  which  enforce  the  greatness  of  the  joy  both  recur; 
see  Ps  4^  126^  (joy  in  harvest),  Ps  119^^2  (joy  over  spoil).  It 
no  more  follows  that  the  poet  expected  the  new  era  to  open 
after  a  victorious  battle,  than  that  he  expected  it  to  begin  at 
the  end  of  harvest. — 3  (4).  The  great  joy  is  on  account  of  the 
end  of  Israel's  servitude.  The  people  referred  to  in  the  pi.  in 
vv.i^*  are  here  collectively  represented  by  singular  suffixes ;  the 
change  is  occasioned  by  the  introduction  of  a  figure  (cp.  i^^- 
after  i*).  Israel  is  compared  to  an  animal  with  a  burdensome 
yoke  resting  on  its  neck  and  compelled  to  work  by  its  driver, 
who  uses  his  stick  upon  it.  In  the  terms  of  the  figure,  Yahweh 
(not  the  Messiah)  brings  Israel's  servitude  to  an  end  by  breaking 
in  pieces  both  the  yoke  and  the  driver's  stick :  burden  and 
blows  are  alike  done  away.  The  figure  of  the  yoke  is  a  favour- 
ite one  with  Hebrew  writers,  and  is  used  of  the  oppressive 
government  of  native  rulers  (i  K  12*- ^^•),  of  the  hard  treat- 
ment by  foreigners  (Assyrians,  142^  lo^^,  Jer  27^-  "'^' ;  cp.  Dt  28^^) 
of  Israel  in  its  own  land,  or  in  a  land  not  theirs  (Lv  26^^). — 
The  yoke  of  his  burden^  the  yoke  that  is  his  burden,  his  burden- 


I/O  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

some  yoke:  cp.  lo^''  14^^  where  yoke  and  burde?i  stand 
synonymous  parallelism.  The  yoke  (^V)  is  specifically  the  heavy 
cross-beam  that  rested  on  the  neck  of  the  animal;  through 
holes  in  this  passed  wooden  pegs  or  bars  (nt30),  which,  being 
tied  below,  enclosed  the  animal's  neck;  see  the  illustration  in 
PEF  Qu.  St.,  1891,  p.  113,  reproduced  in  EBL  78.  MT  and 
probably  |^  (though  cp.  Nah  i^^)  means  the  rod  (niSD)  of  his 
shoulder,  or  neck,  i.e.  the  rod  with  which  his  neck  was  beaten ; 
but  (i)  this  would  anticipate  the  driver  of  the  next  distich,  and 
(2)  the  neck  protected  by  the  yoke  was  not  the  special  recipient 
of  blows. —  The  stick  of  his  driver']  it  is  unnecessary  to  follow 
RV  and  introduce  a  new  figure  by  rendering  of  his  taskmaster : 
for  driver,  cp.  Job  39'^.  Nor,  in  view  of  the  reference  to  the 
stick  {p2^)  for  beating  (cp.  e.g.  Ex  21^0,  Pr  10^^),  is  the  render- 
ing oppressor  (14*  n.)  suitable. — As  in  the  day  of  Midian\  an 
allusion  to  the  ending  of  another  foreign  oppression  (Jg  6-8). 
With  the  phrase  day  of  Midian,  cp.  "  day  of  Jezreel,"  Hos  2^ 
(i");  "day  of  Egypt,"  Ezk  30^;  "day  of  Jerusalem,"  Ps  1371 
Why  does  the  poet  refer  in  particular  to  the  deliverance  from 
Midian?  Is  it  because  the  story  told  then,  as  it  is  read  now 
(Jg  7^),  illustrated  the  prophetic  doctrine  that  deliverance  is 
wrought  not  by  the  size  and  equipment  of  human  armies,  but 
by  Yahweh  ?  In  any  case  the  poet  does  not  say  that  the  "  light " 
will  shine,  the  change  of  fortunes  come,  after  a  great  battle. — 4  (5). 
For\  this  v.  does  not  give  the  reason  for  v.^,  but  a  further  reason 
for  the  joy  of  v.^;  men  will  rejoice  because  the  age  of  universal 
and  unbroken  peace  (2*)  has  begun.  War  is  already  abolished, 
and  everything  that  pertains  to  it,  typically  illustrated  by  the 
soldier's  dress,  will  be  destroyed  by  fire.  Cp.  especially  Ezk 
399,  also  Is  2^  Hos  220(18),  Zee  9I0,  Ps  4610(9)  754(3).  It  is  curious 
that  the  writer  selects  the  soldier's  dress  rather  than  the  imple- 
ments of  war  for  destruction ;  Che.  {SBOT  p.  89)  reconstructs 
the  text  on  the  basis  of  the  references  just  given,  so  that  shields, 
bows,  arrows,  and  quivers  may  be  consumed  by  the  flames 
instead. — Every  shoe  worn  in  tumult  {of  battle)]  the  last  part  of 
this  translation  in  particular  is  uncertain ;  pSDf  is  not  battle 
(AV),  nor  armour  (RV),  but  foot-gear.  It  has  been  claimed 
that  the  word  means  in  particular  the  heavy  military  boot ;  and 
Ges.  referred  to  Josephus'  description  {Bell.  Jud.  vi.  i.  8)  of  the 
"  shoes  all  full  of  thick  and  sharp  nails  "  of  the  Roman  soldiers 


IX.  4  171 

in  illustration  of  its  character;  but  neither  the  Assyr.  shiu  nor 
the  Aram.  WD,  (JolcD,  from  either  of  which  Heb.  may  have 
borrowed  the  word,  has  any  such  specific  sense ;  N^D  is  used, 
e.g.,  in  5r  Ex  3^,  Dt  25®,  Jos  5^^  "ljo]rD  (for  which  the  Peshitta 
prefers  ]i]rr>Vo)  in  the  Harklensian  version  of  Mt  3^^  Lk  10*  1522. 
Abimilki  of  Tyre  in  his  letters  to  the  king  of  Egypt  describes  him- 
self as  "  the  dust  under  the  shoe  {Sinu)  of  my  lord  the  king  (Tell 
el-Amarna  Tablets,  152*,  and  elsewhere).  Yet  though  the  word 
pND  is  not  specifically  a  heavy  military  boot,  the  writer  would 
probably  have  had  such  in  mind  if  the  following  words  really 
mean  "  of  him  that  is  heavily  booted  "  (Kennett),  or  "  of  him 
that  makes  an  earthquake  as  he  treads  "  (cp.  BDB  under  both 
words);  but  both  these  renderings  are  very  questionable,  the 
denominative  vb.  (jND)  should,  as  in  Assyr.  and  Aram.,  mean  no 
more  than  to  draw  on,  to  wear  a  shoe.  If  the  text  is  right,  which 
is  doubtful,  worn  in  the  tumult  of  battle  is  the  safest  rendering 
of  J^,  which  should  be  pointed  |Np  not  [ND  (MT).  This  gives 
the  best  parallelism,  adopts  the  most  probable  meaning  of  the 
denominative,  and  for  the  rendering  of  tJ'V"'  by  tumult  {of  battle) 
has  the  close,  though  not  exact,  parallel  of  Jer  10^2 ;  cp.  also 
Is  29**.  Elsewhere  the  noun  I5>jn  means  a  trembling  or  quaking^ 
an  actual  earthquake,  or,  by  hyperbole,  the  shaking  of  the  earth 
attributed  to  war-chariots  (Jer  47  8,  Nah  3^).  The  poet  then 
has  no  special  type  of  boot  in  mind;  it  is  the  fact  that  shoe 
(|1t?D)  and  garment  (n»DB^),  of  whatever  nature,  have  been  worn 
in  battle,  that  condemns  them  to  the  flames.  In  the  golden 
age  of  peace,  war  and  all  that  pertains  to  war  will  be  taboo, 
and  must,  as  things  unclean,  be  destroyed.  Consequently 
that  part  of  Kennett's  ingenious  argument*  for  the  late  date 
of  the  poem,  which  rests  on  the  conclusion  that  pND  must  refer 
to  the  heavy  nailed  boots  which  were  characteristic  of  the  Syro- 
Greek  soldiery,  falls  to  the  ground.  It  remains  noticeable, 
however,  that  in  Is  5^^  Isaiah  calls  the  foot-gear  of  the 
Assyrians  7M\  sandals. — Stained  with  blood]  reading  by  con- 
jecture n^Nip ;  \07)y0y  f^,  rolled,  or  weltering,  in  blood,  seems  to 

*  fotimal  of  Theol.  Studies,  vii.  327-331  f.,  338:  criticised  by  C.  F. 
Burney,  ib.  xi.  438-441,  to  whom  Kennett  replies,  ib.  xii.  114  f.  My  own 
note  above  stands  as  it  was  written  before  the  appearance  of  Dr.  Burney's 
note. 


172  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

say  too  much ;  Amasa  is  fitly  described  as  "  weltering "  (i?^3nD) 
in  his  blood  (2  S  20^2),  but  the  garments  to  be  consigned  to 
the  flames  are  scarcely  limited  to  those  which  had  "  weltered  " 
in  blood ;  enough  that  they  had  met  the  usual  fate  of  soldiers' 
garments,  and  had  become  blood-stained  (cp.  Is  63^). — 5  (6).  The 
third  cause  of  the  people's  joy  is  the  birth  of  a  prince  of  their 
own  race  \to  us),  who  receives  (at  once)  the  dominion  and  power 
over  them  that  had  been  exercised  in  the  days  of  darkness  (v.^) 
by  an  alien  ruler  (v.^),  and  who  is  (v.^)  to  extend  his  dominion 
widely  but  peacefully.  This  child  is  Hezekiah  according  to 
mediaeval  Jewish  interpreters  (Rashi,  Ki.,  Ibn  Ezra),  Simon  the 
Maccabee  according  to  Kennett,  the  Messiah  according  to  most 
(cp.  ST).  The  ideal  standpoint  of  the  poet  seems  to  be  (shortly) 
after  the  birth  of  the  prince,  after  he  has  been  recognised  as 
prince  of  Israel,  but  before  the  wide  extension  of  his  kingdom 
has  begun. — Child  .  .  .  so?t\  placed  first  in  their  respective 
sentences  for  emphasis;  *TT  is  applicable  to  an  infant  as  yet 
unweaned  (Gn  21^)  as  well  as  to  older  children. — To  us]  the 
poet  who  has  hitherto  spoken  of  his  people  in  the  3rd  pers.  here 
associates  himself  with  them.  —  And  the  dominion  is  upon  his 
shoulder]  is  this  fact  mentioned  between  the  birth  and  the  nam- 
ing because  the  name  was  given  after  the  prince  had  grown  up 
and  earned  it  by  his  exploits  (Du.)?  or  is  the  meaning  that  the 
name  is  given  as  usual  a  few  days  after  birth,  and  that  the 
child  is  "born  in  the  purple"  (Grotius),  because,  though  the 
house  of  David  survived  (v.^),  it  had  at  the  time  no  reigning 
prince  (Marti)?  or  is  the  position  of  the  clause  without  signifi- 
cance? tXWO,  dominion,  appears  to  mean  here  the  royal  dignity, 
in  v.^t  the  royal  authority;  the  entire  phrase  here  refers  to 
entering  on  a  reign  rather  than  to  the  burden  of  governing; 
it  may  possibly  have  originated  in  a  practice  of  wearing  a  royal 
robe  on  the  shoulder:  cp.  22^2. — His  name  has  been  called]  cp. 
i26  n. — The  eight  words  of  the  name  fall  into  four  clauses,  each 
containing  two  words  closely  connected:  less  probable  views 
are  that  the  first  four  (Jer.),  or  the  first  two  (EV,  Ges.),  words 
should  be  taken  singly ;  some  Jewish  interpreters  distribute  the 
names  among  God  and  the  child,  e.g.  "  God  who  is  marvellous 
in  counsel.  Mighty  God,  Everlasting  Father,  gave  him  the  name 
Prince  of  Peace  (Rashi,  Ki. :  cp.  ST) ;  but  Ibn  Ezra  rightly 
insisted   that   the  whole   eight  words   belonged   to   the   child's 


IX.  5  173 

name.  Luzzatto  treated  the  names  as  a  sentence,  predicating 
(like  Immanuel,  7^*  n.)  something  of  God,  and  therefore  imply- 
ing nothing  as  to  the  child.  Some  of  the  names  singly,  and 
even  more  in  combination,  are  as  applied  to  men  unparalleled 
in  the  OT,  and  on  this  account  are  regarded  by  Gressmann 
(p.  280  ff.)  as  mythological  and  traditional :  cp.  also  Rosenmiiller's 
Scholia.  —  Wonderful  Counsellor]  Like  God  Himself  (28^  25^), 
the  Messiah  will  give  counsel  that  will  be  exceptional,  exceeding 
what  has  hitherto  been  known  or  heard. — Mighty  God]  cp.  lo^i; 
"the  great  (and)  the  mighty  God,"  Dt  lo^^,  Neh  9^2,  Jer 
32^8.  The  ambiguous  Dnni  ^ijfc5  of  Ezk  32^1,  the  application 
of  D^IJ  i'N  to  Nebuchadnezzar  in  Ezk  31I1,  and  the  fact,  if  it  be 
such,  that  in  the  remaining  three  clauses  of  the  name  here  the 
words  are  cstr.  and  gen.,  scarcely  justify  a  departure  from  the 
obvious  rendering  mighty  God  in  favour  oi  god  of  a  hero,  and  still 
less  a  whittling  down  of  the  meaning  of  7K  to  hero,  so  that  the 
clause  means  no  more  than  tnighty  hero.  The  child  is  to  be  more 
than  mighty  (fj^pn,  Ibn  Ezra),  more  than  a  mighty  man  ("lUa  5^65, 
I  S  14^2),  more  than  a  mighty  king  ("1133  I^D,  Dn  ii^) :  he  is  to 
be  a  mighty  7K,  god.  This  attribution  of  divinity,  implying  that 
the  Messiah  is  to  be  a  kind  of  demigod,  is  without  clear  analogy 
in  the  OT,  for  Ps  45^  <^>  is  ambiguous.  Not  only  i)N  but  "lUi  has 
been  differently  interpreted :  "lua  is  often  used  of  warriors,  and 
many  understand  it  to  refer  here  to  the  military  success  of  the 
Messiah.  But  if  the  writer  had  wished  to  summon  up  the 
thought  of  one  who  gained  renown  in  war  before  he  became 
prince  of  peace,  he  might  better  have  chosen  an  unambiguous 
term,  such,  for  example,  as  nonte  "IU3,  mighty  in  battle  (Ps  24®). 
At  all  events  lUJ  is  also  used  of  might  manifested  in  other 
ways  than  those  of  war  (cp.  e.g.  Gn  10^).  As  the  lion  is 
mightiest  of  beasts  because  he  quails  before  no  other  (Pr  30^®), 
so  Yahweh  is  mighty  as  one  who  cannot  be  browbeaten  or 
bribed  into  abandoning  the  defence  and  care  of  the  helpless 
and  the  poor(Dt  10^^).  In  Jer  32^^  the  idea  of  Yahweh's  might, 
conveyed  in  the  epithets  "great,  mighty,"  "terrible,"  is  particular- 
ised in  what  follows  as  greatness  in  counsel  (nvy)  and  action,  in 
the  signs  wrought  in  Egypt,  and  in  finding  nothing  beyond  his 
power  (xi'D*  IDO).  Mighty  is  to  be  taken  here  with  this  wider 
reference.  Yahweh  Himself  will  bring  war  to  an  end  and  so  bring 
in  the  Messianic  age  of  peace :   the  Messiah  endued  with  the 


174 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


Spirit  of  God,  "  a  spirit  of  counsel  and  might "  (nnnJI  nvv  nn), 
will  like  the  mighty  God    Himself  fearlessly  defend  the  rights 
of  the   weak   and   poor,  and,  after  judicial  process,   have   the 
violent  and  guilty  disturbers  of  civic  peace  slain  (ii^-^). — Father 
forever]  the  benevolent  guardian  of  His  people  so  long  as  He  and 
they  endure.     For  the  cstr.  and  force  of  ly  here,  cp.,  on  one 
view  of  the  construction  there,  iy  m3J,  a  lady  for  ever,  47'',  and 
the  phrase  with  the  synonymous  Dpiy?  ub^V  "l^y,  a  slave  for  ever, 
Dt  15^7^  I  S  2712^  Job  4o28.     For  ny  predicated  of  the  (Messianic  ?) 
king,  see,  e.g.^  Ps  21^-'^;  in  view  of  these  and  other  references  it 
is  unnecessary  to  take  the  phrase  as  equivalent  to  Eternal  father 
(cp.  xhs^  ^'rh^  4o28).     For  father  used  figuratively  of  a  protector 
or  benefactor,  see  Job  29^^,  Is  22^1.     Two  alternative  interpreta- 
tions. Eternal  One,  and  Father^  i.e.  acquirer  or  distributor,  of 
booty,  are   both   open  to   the   serious  objection   that   they  pre- 
suppose an  Arabic  use  of  2K,  father,  which  has  no  parallel   in 
Hebrew,  not  even  as  has   sometimes   been  assumed  in  proper 
names  Uke  Abihud,  Abihail ;  see  HPN  p.  7  7  ff. — 6  (7).  The  zeal 
of  Yahweh  will  secure  the  endurance  of  the  wide  and  peaceful 
dominion  of  the  new  Davidic  dynasty,  will  secure  also  that  it  is 
both   established   and   maintained  in  justice  and  righteousness. 
— To  support  it  in  justice  and  righteousness]  cp.  16^,  and  Pr  20^8 
"his  throne  shall  be  supported  in  mercy  (S  righteousness)." — 
The  jealousy  of  Yahweh  of  Hosts  will  do  this]  the  same  phrase  in 
3732.     The  term  nwp,  used  of  passionate  emotion  in  man  {e.g. 
Ca  8^),  here  refers  to  Yahweh's  emotion :  so,  with  other  terms  of 
emotion,  in  63^^    This  jealousy,  or  ardour,  or  passion,  of  Yahweh, 
which  will  not  suffer  Him  to  be  deprived  of  His  due,  especially 
of  the   proper  regard  for  His  power  and  honour,  is   frequently 
referred  to  by  Ezekiel  and   later  writers ;   it  led  to  the  punish- 
ment by  captivity  of  His  people  who  had  been  disloyal  to  Him, 
but  it  subsequently  necessitated  the  restoration  of  Israel,  lest  the 
nations  should  think  Yahweh  weak;  cp.  Ezk  3925-29  ^iso  5IS  16^^ 
2325  365ff.^  Is  42I3  5917,  Zee  i"f.  82f-,  Jl  2^8^-,  Nah  i2.     The  phrase 
and  the  idea  expressed  by  it  would  be  entirely  in  place  if  this 
prophecy  is  exilic   or  post-exilic;   and  it  would   be   difficult  to 
think  it  earlier,  if  the  main  thought  is  that  the  jealousy  of  Yahweh 
will  restore  the  Jewish  monarchy.     But  if  the  main  thought  is 
that  Yahweh  will  establish  and  maintain  a  righteous  government, 
it  may  be  merely  a  more  passionate  expression  of  Isaiah's  ideal 


IX.  6,  1-4  175 

in  i^.  The  attribution  of  nn^p,  jealousy,  to  Yahweh  would  still 
remain  unique  so  far  as  Isaiah's  extant  writings  are  concerned. 
Cp.  Kiichler,  Der  Gedanke  des  Eifers  Jahwes  im  AT^  in  ZATW^ 
1908,  pp.  42-52. 

IX.  I.  iKi]  (!I5  treats  this  as  impv.  with  Dj/n  vocative,  renders  njj  by 
impf.  and  reads  D3''?y — scarcely  real  variants.  On  the  text  of  the  quotation 
in  Mt  4^",  see  Swete,  OT  in  Greek,  396  f. — pKa  '3^']  5"  n. — The  clause  is  a 
casus  pendens,  the  cstr.  being  doubtless  chosen  for  purposes  both  of  rhythm 
and  emphasis:  Dr.  §  197.  i. — niD^K]  Am  5^  being  probably  later  than  the 
8th  cent.,  the  earliest  occurrences  of  mDS:«  elsewhere  are  Jer  2^  13"  :  it  occurs 
besides  four  times  in  Psalms  (23^  44^0  loy^*** ")  and  ten  times  in  Job.  The 
traditional  view  (i^Cffi)  that  nioSsf  is  =  n]ip  +  '?y,  rather  generally  abandoned 
for  a  time  in  favour  of  Ew.'s  suggestion  that  it  is  =m  +  dSs,  niopv,  has  perhaps 

rightly  been   revived   by  No.  {ZATIV,  1897,  pp.   183 ff.);   the  root  aUc', 

Assyr.  saldmu,  is  not  otherwise  represented  in  Hebrew. — njj]  Kal  as  Job  18" 
22^* ;  Hiph.  13^'',  2  S  22^=  Ps  i2P\  ;  but  the  noun  occurs  early,  e.g.  Am  5^  : 
cp.  Assyr.  nag^,  to  shine.  Possibly  the  writer  intended  the  noun  here,  iik  in 
that  case  being  3rd  pf.  :  note  the  order  and  cp.  Pr  4^^;  but  (!I5  =  MT. — 2. 
nnocn  nVun  kS  'un  n'mn]  so  K*tib  :  K^re  reads  *h  for  k*?,  cp.  the  same 
variants  in  Ps  lOo",  Job  13";  Sb  Olii^,  VL  jm"?  agree  with  the  ]^«re,  F, 
Symm.  with  the  K^tib.  (&  is  paraphrastic  and  ambiguous.  In  favour  of  the 
emendation  S'jn  {e.g.  16^'')  or  nV'jn  (65^^  probably  also  35^t)>  "ote  that  lines 
a.  b  thus  show  the  parallelism  nS'an,  nnorn  as  c.  d  show  iSu',  inOB'.  The 
conjecture,  now  commonly  accepted,  is  due  to  W.  Selwyn,  Horae  Hebraicae, 
Camb.  1848.  For  a  defence  of  the  K*re,  see  Del.  ;  but  he  fails  to  justify  the 
emphatic  position  given  by  it  to  i*? ;  in  the  passages  he  cites  (45^,  Lv  7'-', 
I  S  2',  Job  29^',  Ps  7^*  139")  1^  is  either  really  emphatic  (so  pre-eminently  in 
Lv  7'""),  or  textually  questionable.— 3.  'i'?;|D]  for  "iSap ;  G-K.  93^.  For  the 
noun,  see  lo'"  I4^t  >  the  root  was  in  use  at  all  peiiods. — nnnn]  7^  n. — 
4.  pND]  dir.  X67.  :  see  above.  If  Isaianic,  the  word  is  probably  loaned  from 
Assyr.  ;  for  D= Assyr.  §  in  such  loan  words,  cp.  \\y^^  =  Sarrukin  ;  pD  =  JfaX'««. 
For  the  vowel  change  pKD  =  i<?«w,  Haupt  in  SBOT  compares  rrm^tirlu, 
]H^=fMu. — For  B'i;n3  ]tiO  pxo,  ffi  has  aroXriv  iinavvrjy/jiivrjv  86\(p,  probably 
following  much  the  same  text  as  f^,  but  perhaps  reading  ]}f\  for  «?in.  The 
length  of  the  line  and  the  difficulty  of  finding  a  translation  in  all  respects 
beyond  criticism  create  some  suspicion  of  ^,  but  we  are  in  no  position  to 
emend, — nn'm]  the  waw  introducing  the  direct  pred.  is  uncommon,  but  not 
unparalleled  (Dr.  §  123a)  ;  so  also  is  the  agreement  with  the  immediately 
preceding  part  (n'?D2')  of  the  compound  subj.  (G-K.  146^  ;  Kon.  349/),  cp. 
Jer  7^.  The  combination  of  the  unusual  together  with  the  shortness  of  this 
and  the  next  line  (yet  cp.  2****),  and  the  fact  that  r«  n'?3KD  in  idea  echoes 
rather  than  balances  r\tr\'eh  nn'm,  may  reasonably  raise  the  question  whether 
the  text  is  sound  at  this  point. — r\*r\v\  perhaps,  in  view  of  the  parallel,  that 
which  is  bwnt ;  see  Numbers,  p.  208.  This  meaning  is  also  possible  in  Gn 
11^  (C). — nSsND]  the  word  is  no  indication  of  date  ;  it  is  true  it  occurs  again 


iy6  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

only  in  v.**,  where  the  text  is  doubtful,  and  in  the  form  n^so  in  1X5^*; 
but  the  root  is  one  of  the  commonest  at  all  periods,  the  noun  form  is  paralleled 
by  mano,  mano,  npVno,  mabo,  all  occurring  in  early  literature,  and  the  corre- 

sponding  forms  occur  in  both  Syr.  and  Arabic — |A\r}nKp  ^i^. — 
5.  mB'Dn]  v.*t.  (&  renders  apx^J.  ^  Ol  1  t>\o  •,  V  in  v.®  principatus^  in 
v.^  imperium,  W  Knmx,  /aw,  which  is  obviously  wrong,  and  due  to  connect- 
ing the  word  with  no'  (cp.  Symm.,  Theod.  i)  iraideLa).    MT  n-i^-a  presupposes  a 

meaning  /<?  rule  for  the  root  me',  ^^Jm,  of  which  there  is  no  evidence.    Point 

rather  n"jB^  or  n"it?p,  from  "W,  a  prince,  denom.  ■nt?,  to  nde  {e.g.  Jg  <f^).  The 
punctuation  of  MT  can  be  traced  as  early  as  Jerome  (MESRA)  and  perhaps 
Aquila,  who  renders  rh  fiirpov,  being  deceived  by  the  similar  sound  of  the 
Latin  mensura  (Lagarde,  Sem.  i.  15). 

TOB'KnpM]  either  (i)  Kal  unpn  (MT)  with  indef.  subj.  (Kon.  iii.  324^),  as 
certainly  in  Gn  25^,  and  possibly  in  some  of  the  apparent  cases  of  naming 
by  the  father  (see  Hastings,  DB  iii.  480'').  This  would  be  the  common 
idiom  for  naming  a  child  at  birth  (see,  e.g.,  7^^  8^).  Since  the  important 
matter  here  is  the  name,  and  the  person  who  gives  it  unessential,  the  in- 
definite idiom  cannot  be  considered  improbable  ;  less  probable  views  of  the 
cstr.  with  the  same  punctuation  is  that  God  unnamed,  or  named  in  part  of 
the  names  that  follow  (C),  is  the  subj.  ;  or  (2)  Niphal  Nii5»i :  this  idiom 
is  used  of  names  given  in  later  life ;  see  Dt  25^^,  Dn  10^,  cp.  Gn  35*''. — 
I'yv  N^£3]  commonly  explained  on  the  analogy  of  onit  KiiJ,  a  wild  ass  of  a  man, 
DiK  ^''Q^,  fool  of  a  man  (c^.  G-K.  128/;  Kon.  iii.  337^)  as  meaning  literally 
a  wonder  of  a  counsellor,  or  rather  taking  j^yv  like  mx  as  collect. ,  a  wonder 
among  counsellors,  most  wonderful  of  counsellors.  Possible  also  is  it  that  nS*) 
is  the  ace.  prefixed  (cp.  22^),  giver  of  wonderful  counsel.  On  the  differing 
traditions  as  to  the  punctuation  kSs,  k^s  (the  second  being  intended  to  mark 
the  status  constructus),  see  Kon.  ii.  p.  66. — ly  '3n]  ny,  booty,  is  an  early  word, 
Gn  49^  ;  but  it  is  not  intended  here  (see  above),  and  consequently  the  pro- 
posed substitution  of  hhv  for  uhv  below  (Neubauer,  Margolis,  cited  by 
Cheyne  in  SBOT)  falls  to  the  ground,  ny,  perpetuity,  is  predominantly,  if 
not  exclusively,  late  ;  no  indisputable  instance  can  be  found  earlier  than  the 
Exile  :  frequent  in  the  Psalms,  it  occurs  also  in  such  passages  of  doubtful  age 
as  Am  i",  Mic  4^  Pr  12^^,  Ex  i^^. — 6.  nmo'?]  the  final  D  in  the  middle  of  the 
word  (K^tib),  which  is  corrected  in  the  K^re,  points  to  an  early  corruption 
or  ambiguity  of  the  text.  In  the  translation  above  Gratz's  suggestion  ( Gesch. 
ii.  I,  p.  223)  has  been  adopted,  viz.  that  □*?  is  a  dittograph  of  ^\v\  a 
relatively  late  dittograph,  for  it  presupposes  the  use  of  the  final  letters. 
fflr  at  the  end  of  ^  and  beginning  of  '  has  d^w  7Ap  elp-^prjv  eirl  roi>s  dpxopras 
Kal  ir/elav  avrc^'  fxeydXr}  17  dpx^  airrov  :  the  overlined  words  seem  to  represent 
a  conflate  text  nm  nnD*?,  the  first  of  these  two  words  being  wrongly  read  by 
©  Nana  'h  (Cheyne  in  SBOT).  The  parallelism  and  independence  of  the 
short  two-accented  lines  is  best  preserved  by  reading  nm.  The  word  nano, 
presupposed  by  the  other  reading,  occurs  again  in  33^t'  See,  further,  on  the 
text,  Cheyne  in  SBOT;  Lagarde,  Semitica,  i.  17.  If  the  reading  naTD^  be 
retained,  Gressmann's  (p.  279)  suggestion  to  read  ivon  (cp.   11*,  Mai  2*, 


IX.  7-X.  4,  V.   26-29  177 

Ps  45'  67')  for  mron  is  worth  considering. — niK3x]  possibly  an  addition,  sec 
2  K  I9»>  Knib  (without)  =  Is  37**  (with). 

IX.  7  (8)-X.  4,  V.  26-29.-7%^  Doom  of  Ephraim. 

The  five  strophes  of  the  following  poem,  even  in  the  present  text,  are  of 
very  nearly  equal  length  :  in  the  original  poem  each  strophe  probably  con- 
tained exactly  14  lines.  The  third  strophe  still  contains  this  number,  and  so 
do  the  second  and  the  fourth  ;  but  the  genuineness  of  two,  or  four,  lines  of 
the  second,  and  the  whole  of  the  fourth,  has  been  suspected.  The  first 
strophe  now  contains  13  lines,  but  there  are  strong  grounds  for  suspecting 
that  a  line  has  fallen  out  after  v.^W^  The  fifth  strophe  contains  15  lines, 
but  one  of  these  {^^)  rests  under  suspicion  as  being  a  monostich. 

The  regular  succession  of  distichs  is  broken  in  the  present  text  by  four 
monostichs ;  but  one  of  these  is  (in  \.^)  probably  due  to  the  loss  of  its 
parallel,  and  two  others,  <^^'  ^^  <^*''  ^'^\  are  probably  two  parts  of  a  distich 
which  have  been  accidentally  separated  from  one  another  (see  Comm. ) :  in 
the  following  translation  they  are  restored  to  fellowship.  The  remaining 
monostich  is  5^** ;  it  is  probably  intrusive,  for  the  fifth  strophe  is  at  present 
a  line  too  long. 

We  may  conclude  that  the  poem  originally  contained  four  or  five  equal 
strophes,  and  each  strophe  seven  distichs. 

The  lines  of  the  distichs  are  for  the  most  part  parallel  in  sense  and 
balanced.  Of  the  35  distichs,  19  are  clearly  3:3;  so,  too,  probably  are 
gi6a.  b  (omit  unK),  io2»-  •*  (read  o-^jy  for  nDy  "jy),  ^-  ^  (reading  vSaSj  for 
vSi^ji),  perhaps  also  lo**-  •»  (ynp-'p^?^)  and  <y^'  27*  (Kn'-"??).  There  is  at  least 
one  distich  4  :  4,  viz.  9'  ;  other  probable,  or  possible,  examples  are  9^*^  **  ((ffi 
4:4,  |§  5:4),  9^*"*  •*  (omit  mn'),  <^^-  *»  (omit  makkeph  in  ns  Vm).  The 
gloss  in  9^*  is  also  4  : 4.  The  opening  distich  (9')  is  exceptionally  4 : 2, 
and  9^°  also  may  originally  have  been  4  :  2.  On  the  other  hand,  ^'  •*  was 
probably  3  :  3,  and  has  been  turned  in  transcription  into  4:2.  On  ^  and 
5*,  see  notes. 

Note. — The  prophetic  past  tenses  of  the  original  are  retained  in  the 
translation  ;  but  the  whole  poem  is  a  forecast  of  the  future,  not  a  survey  of 
the  actual  past :  see  below. 

I. 

f^  The  Lord  hath  sent  a  word  against  Jacob, 
And  it  shall  fall  upon  Israel. 

*  And  all  the  people  shall  recognise  (it), 

Ephraim  and  the  inhabitants  of  Samaria. 
[For  they  said  .  .  .] 

Proudly  and  greatly  daring, 

•  "  Bricks  have  fallen,  but  with  hewn  stone  we  will  rebuild  ; 

Sycomores  have  been  cut  down,  but   with  cedars  will 

we  replace  them." 
VOL.  I. — 12 


178 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


10  And  (so)  Yahweh  exalted  (?)  '  his '  adversaries  against  him, 

And  will  spur  on  his  enemies — 

11  Syria  on  the  East  and  the  Philistines  on  the  West, 

And  they  devoured  Israel  with  full  mouth. 
In  spite  of  all  this  his  anger  turned  not  back, 
But  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still. 

2. 

12  Yet  the  people  returned  not  to  him  that  smote  them, 

Nor  inquired  of  Yahweh  of  Hosts ; 
12  So  he  Yahweh  cut  off  from  Israel  head  and  tail, 

Palm-branch  and  reed  in  a  single  day. 
^^  The  elder  and  the  person  held  in  respect,  that  is  "  the  head," 

And  the  prophet  who  delivers  false  oracles,  that  is  "the  tail." 
^'  And  those  who  should  have  led  this  people  aright  led  them  astray, 
And  those  who  should  have  been  led  aright  were  swallowed  up. 
1^  Therefore  the  Lord  will  not  rejoice  over  his  young  men, 
Nor  show  compassion  to  his  orphans  and  widows, 
Because  he  is  wholly  profane  and  given  to  evil, 

And  every  mouth  is  speaking  impiety. 
In  spite  of  all  this  his  anger  turned  not  back, 
But  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still. 


1^  For  unrighteousness  burnt  like  a  fire : 
It  (first)  consumed  thorns  and  briars, 
And  (then)  it  kindled  the  thickets  of  the  forest, 

And  they  twisted  about  in  a  (rising)  column  of  smoke. 
1^  Through  the  overflowing  anger  of  Yahweh  the  land  .  Pj,^^4 

And  the  people  became  like  '  devourers '  of  men ; 
1^  They  carved  (slices)  on  the  right  hand  and  were  hungry, 
And  they  ate  on  the  left  hand  and  were  not  satisfied. 
18^  None  will  show  any  pity  to  his  brother, 

i^^'But  each  shall  devour' his  'neighbour's'  flesh — 
-0  Manasseh  (devouring)  Ephraim  and  Ephraim,  Manasseh, 
Together  (will)  they  (be)  against  Judah. 
In  spite  of  all  this  his  anger  turned  not  back. 
But  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still. 


tqI  Ah !  they  that  decree  mischievous  decrees, 

And  that,  busily  writing,  write  nought  but  trouble, 


IX.   lO-X.  4,  V.  26-29  179 

2  That  they  may  turn  aside  the  needy  from  judgment, 
And  make  plunder  of  the  right  of  the  poor,  a 
That  widows  may  become  their  spoil, 

And  that  they  may  make  a  prey  of  orphans. 

*  What  then  will  ye  do  in  the  day  of  visitation, 

And  at  (the  time  of)  the  storm  that  cometh  from  afar? 
And  to  whom  will  ye  flee  for  help, 
And  whither  will  ye  abandon  your  glory, 

*  'To  avoid' .crouching  under  (?)  the  prisoners, 

And  falling  under  the  slain? 
In  spite  of  all  this  his  anger  turned  not  back, 
But  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still. 

5- 
52s  Then  will  he  raise  a  signal  for  a  *  nation '  afar  off, 
And  whistle  for  it  from  the  end  of  the  earth : 
And,  lo !  speedily,  quickly  will  it  come, 
27  With  none  of  it(s  number)  growing  faint  or  stumbling  ; 
It  slumbers  not  nor  sleeps 

The  waistcloth  about  its  loins  has  not  been  untied, 
The  thong  of  its  sandals  has  not  snapped; 
•*  Its  arrows  are  sharpened. 

And  all  its  bows  bent  (ready); 
Its  horses'  hoofs  are  like  flint, 

Its  wheels  are  accounted  like  the  whirlwind; 
28  Its  roaring  is  like  that  of  a  lioness. 

And  it  will  roar  (?)  like  young  lions : 
And  it  will  growl  and  seize  the  prey 
And  carry  it  off,  with  none  to  rescue. 

The  grounds  for  believing  that  526-29  originally  formed  the 
close  of  the  poem  in  g'^-io*  are  these  :  (i)  the  refrain  that  marks 
the  close  of  the  several  strophes  and,  in  consequence,  immedi- 
ately precedes  the  commencement  of  each  strophe  but  the  first 
in  9^-10*,  also  immediately  precedes  52«-29 .  (2)  the  burden  of 
this  refrain  is  that  yet  more  of  the  divine  chastisement  is  to 
descend  on  Ephraim :  admirably  adapted,  therefore,  as  it  is  for 
the  close  of  each  of  the  earlier  strophes,  it  is  not  adapted  to 
close  the  entire  poem :  consequently  10*  is  not  the  close  of  the 
poem,  and  the  final  strophe  of  the  original  poem  lacked  the 
refrain ;  so  in  Am  4^-^2^  ^  poem  which  not  improbably  influenced 


i8o 


COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 


Isaiah  in  the  composition  of  his  own,  a  four  times  repeated 
refrain  (mn^  D^53  '•ly  Dn3K^  ^h))  was  unsuitable  to  close  the  poem. 
(3)  At  the  close  of  a  strophe  almost,  or  (if  we  omit  ^^"^^  as 
intrusive)  exactly,  equal  in  length  to  the  (second),  third  (and 
fourth)  strophes,  and  to  what,  as  it  would  seem,  was  the  original 
length  of  the  first  strophe  in  9''- 10*,  occurs  a  suitable  climax  to 
the  whole  poem — the  utter  destruction  of  the  threatened  people 
of  whom  none  escapes ;  (4)  not  only  the  climax,  but  also  the 
general  tenor  of  the  14  lines  of  5^^"^^,  form  a  suitable  sequence 
in  thought  to  9^-10* ;  (5)  the  structure  (a  succession  of  distichs) 
and  the  rhythm  (mainly  3  :  3)  of  526-29  jg  the  same  as  that  of 
9^-10*;  (6)  the  conclusion  of  9'^-io*  is  not  in  lo^^-,  for  this  deals 
with  a  totally  different  subject;  nor  (7)  is  the  introduction  to 
^25-29  to  be  found  in  51-2*  (see  notes  thereon). 

That  525-80^  in  whole  or  in  part,  formed  a  part  of  the  same  poem  as  9^-10* 
has  been  very  generally  recognised.  Ew.  reconstructed  thus  :  5^  +  9'  to  1 C 
+  5^*^»  seeing  in  9'  a  new  start  in  a  great  speech  which  included  2^-5^  and 
9^-10*.  Giesebrecht  introduced  an  important  modification  of  this  view  by 
insisting  that  9'  is  the  beginning  of  an  altogether  independent  poem. 
According  to  him,  9'"^°  closed  with  526-30  .  jqI-s  jg  g.  misplaced  fragment  to 
which  the  refrain  was  added  after  it  had  become  attached  to  9'"^^  j  5^'^  is  a 
gloss.  Di.,  Du.,  Hackmann,  Che.  {Inirod.),  Marti  closely  follow  Giesebrecht, 
except  that  Du.,  Che.,  Marii  find  the  close  of  the  poem  in  5^^  (not  5^)  and 
Du.,  Che.  do  not  delete  10^"^;  Di.  and  Du.  consider  5^^'  the  fragment  of 
one  or  more  lost  strophes  (on  Judah,  Di.),  and  Hackmann  treats  10^  as  an 
original  part  of  the  poem.  The  contents  (see  below),  the  marked  change  of 
rhythm  in  5^,  the  length  of  the  strophe,  all  point  to  5^,  not  5^",  being  the 
real  close  of  the  poem.  The  arguments  against  10^'^  are  strong  (see  below), 
but  not  absolutely  conclusive.  In  addition  to  the  commentaries,  see  especi- 
ally Giesebrecht,  Beitrdge  (1890),  3-24;  Hackmann,  54  ff.  ;  Cheyne,  Introd. 
24  f.,  46  f. 

Two  different  views  have  been  widely  held  with  regard  to  the 
purpose  and  general  character  of  the  poem.  According  to  one, 
the  entire  poem  is  prophetic,  predicting  a  succession  of 
calamities  that  are  to  fall  on  Israel;*  according  to  the  other, 
it  is  for  the  most  part  an  historical  survey  of  past  calamities 
(9^-20),  closing  (5^^"^^)  with  the  prediction  of  a  yet  more  complete 
calamity  which  is  still  to  come.f 

*  Ges.,  Driver  {Isaiah^  37 f.,  LOT)y  Du.,  Marti,  Whitehouse,  Gressmann 
(p.  171). 

t  Ew.,  Giesebrecht,  Di.,  Kue.,  Che.  {Introd.),  Kon.  (369^,  368-^),  Sta. 
{ZATWf  1895,  P-  138 f.),  Skinner,  F.  Wilke  {Jesaja  und  Assur,  p.  25). 


IX.  7-X.  4,  V.   26-29  181 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  tenses  in  9'*  ^  and  s^***  have  a  future  force, 
and  also  that  the  perfects  in  the  words  spoken  by  the  Ephraimites  in  9"  refer 
to  the  past.  But  Sta.  treats  vv."*  also  as  historic,  and  therefore  points  t^^  ((!K) 
in  v.^*,  reads  VflJ  Sbji  in  v.'**,  and  points  ^jn*!  in  v.^.  It  is,  however,  the  force 
of  the  tenses  in  g}'^'^  that  is  most  disputed.  If  the  section  is  a  survey  of  the 
past,  perfects  and  imperfect  consecutive  tenses  are  normal  and  require  no 
explanation,  but  perfect  consecutives  and  simple  imperfects  must  be  explained  ; 
whereas,  if  the  section  is  predictive,  it  is  the  perfects  and  imperfect  consecutives 
alone  that  require  explanation.  The  consonantal  text  distinguishes  the  impf. 
consec.  from  the  impf.  with  simple  waw  in  one  case  only  ('.ti,  v.'")  ;  for  the 
rest  we  must  be  guided  by  the  sense  in  determining  whether  the  waw  before 
an  impf.  or  a  pf.  is  simple  or  consecutive. 

The  tenses  used  in  9^"-^  are  5  perfects  {2V  '2,  wm  ^\  n-)]}!  ",  onyj  '*,  lyar  ") 
in  addition  to  2V  in  the  thrice  repeated  refrain,  9  impf.  with  waw  (nam'", 
iVdk'i",  m3'i'3^  ViTi^*^,  nsm",  i33Nn'i",  wi^^,  nini',  Sdk'i'^),  5  imperfects 
(IDDD'  ^",  nov,  onr  ^*,  iVon'  ^^,  i'^^n'  ^^),  and  i  pf.  with  waw  (ny^1 '»). 

If  910-20  jjg  narrative,  the  most  difficult  imperfects  to  explain  are  those 
in  ^^  and  ^^  Of  1D3D',  Di.  says  that  it  expresses  duration  in  the  past ;  but 
mere  continuance,  in  the  sense  of  duration  without  progress y  is  never  expressed 
by  the  impf.  (Dr.  §  31).  Giesebrecht  treats  it  (apparently)  as  a  **  picturesque  " 
impf.  or,  hazardously  (cp.  Dr.  §§  83-85,  170-173),  as  a  case  of  the  impf. 
consec.  separated  from  its  waw  ;  Sta.  substitutes  the  pf.  ^ppp  for  the  impf.  of 
^.  On  v.i',  Di.  says,  "The  Impff.  .  .  .  express  the  principle  according  to 
which  God  always  acts  in  such  cases  and  so  has  also  (v.^^)  acted  with  them  " ; 
but  this  is  surely  a  counsel  of  despair  :  the  jrVy  and  the  suffixes  both  render 
it  improbable :  had  the  writer  wished  to  express  what  Di.  suggests,  he  would 
rather  have  written  something  as  follows:  'wi  nots"  vh  cyn  nina  ^y  mn»i. 
Giesebrecht  apparently  would  attribute  the  use  of  the  impfF.  here  to  the  fact 
that  they  describe  circumstances  lasting  up  to  the  present. 

If  910-20  be  prophetic,  the  difficulty  of  the  perfects  and  imperfect  consecutives 
does  not  lie  in  any  particular  instance  ;  for  it  is  a  well-known  prophetic  usage 
to  employ  either  tense  or  both  tenses  in  describing  the  future  (Dr.  §§  14,  81  f.) ; 
it  lies  rather  in  the  multiplication  of  the  instances  in  a  short  passage  ;  and  even 
this  multiplication  of  narrative  tenses  can  be  paralleled  ;  see  9^"^  where  we  find 
ten  narrative  tenses,  and  two  only  (nn'ni,  v.*;  njyyn,  v.')  that  immediately 
suggest  the  future  ;  cf.,  further,  lo^"^^.  But  between  9^"' and  9^'2°  Giesebrecht 
draws  a  real  distinction  :  in  9^"^  future  events  are  described  which  will  all  fall 
at  pretty  much  the  same  time,  but  910-20^  brings  before  us  a  chain  of  events  as 
they  follow  one  on  another.  If  predictive,  9^0-20  jg  jj^  some  respects  a  unique 
example  of  the  sustained  use  of  the  prophetic  past  in  describing  an  unfolding 
future.  But  apart  from  ^^'^^  9^"^  (generally  though  not  unanimously  admitted 
to  be  prophetic)  would  be  a  unique  example  of  the  sustained  use  of  the 
prophetic  past ;  it  would  scarcely  be  safe  therefore  to  deny  the  prophetic 
character  of  9^''-*>  ©n  the  ground  that  it  is  unique.  Moreover,  if  9'*"*  with 
the  introductory  lines  clearly  pointing  forward  would  naturally  suggest  the 
future  to  a  reader,  the  refrain  would  mark  a  stage  after  which  the  reader  may 
naturally  expect  another  future  event. 

In  a  further  distinction  which  Giesebrecht  seeks  to  draw,  he  is  even  less 


1 82  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

successful :  he  says  that  in  9'"^  "the  ideal"  standpoint  is  clearly  indicated  in 
the  first  verse.  Allowing  that  this  is  so  (and  it  would  scarcely  hold  of  10^), 
it  is  not  to  the  point ;  for  the  same  is  true  of  9'"^^  It  is  indeed  precisely 
because  in  the  solemn  opening  of  the  poem  the  poet  carries  us  forward  into 
the  future,  that  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  greater  part  of  it  is  a  mere 
survey  of  the  past.  The  first  verb  of  the  poem  may  be  pf.  of  past  fact 
or  prophetic  pf.  :  it  makes  but  little  difference  whether  the  poet  represents 
the  divine  decision  as  already  taken  or  immediately  to  be  taken  ;  the  essential 
point  is  that  the  action  of  the  self-fulfilling  word  of  God,  according  to  |^  at 
least,  has  not  yet  begun  :  the  "  word  "  has  yet  to  fall  (V331)  into  Israel,  and  then 
disaster  will  happen  and  become  apparent  (9'^'''  ^).  After  such  an  opening 
we  naturally  expect  to  see  not  a  panorama  of  the  past,  but  of  the  future  (cp. 
the  perfects  in  14'"*  after  the  opening  in  14**) ;  and  the  first  scene  in  the 
future  as  it  unfolds  itself  before  the  prophet's  eyes  is  given  in  9^"*  ^^  after  he 
has  briefly  indicated  its  cause  in  the  self-confident  temper  of  the  people  who 
have  not  profited  by  calamities  already  past  (^*''  ^).  It  is  surely  artificial  in 
the  extreme  to  make  the  words,  **  And  Yahweh  hath  exalted  his  enemies  over 
him"  (v.^''),  explicative  of  "Bricks  have  fallen  down"  (in  v.^ :  so  Kon.). 
The  impf.  consec.  is  impressive  and  effective  if  it  is  the  equivalent  of  a  proph. 
pf.  (Dr.  §  82) ;  for  in  this  case  it  represents  the  coming  calamity  "  not  merely 
with  the  certainty  of  the  prophetic  pf. ,  but  as  flowing  naturally  out  of^  being 
an  immediate  consequence  of"  Israel's  self-confident  speech  (^'•),  just  as  the 
future  humiliation  of  man  is  prophetically  conceived  as  the  certain  and 
immediate  sequence  to  the  present  custom  of  idolatry  in  2^"'(n8''i  .  .  .  iinnc"). 
On  this  ground  it  is  not  advisable  (with  Du.,  Box)  to  turn  the  impf.  consec. 
(ails';!)  into  the  impf.  with  simple  waw  (3a'8''i).  In  the  parallel  clause  the 
simple  impf.  alternates,  as  often  (Dr.  §  14),  with  the  prophetic  past. 

If  lo^'^  be  an  original  part  of  the  poem,  which  is  doubtful,  then,  since  the 
tacit  threat  of  v.^  obviously  and  admittedly  refers  to  the  future,  the  refrain  in 
one  instance  (10*)  certainly  comes  after  a  strophe  which  has  the  future  in 
view. 

7-1 1.  Ephraim's  pride  to  be  humbled  by  the  Philis- 
tines and  Syrians.  —  The  opening  lines  announce  that 
Yahweh  has  determined  the  doom  of  the  Northern  kingdom; 
this  will  now  work  itself  out  in  such  a  way  that  the  people 
must  recognise  what  is  happening.  The  fifth  line  of  the  poem 
(now  lost)  appears  to  have  given  the  reason  for  this  decisive 
judgment;  or  to  have  suggested  the  difference  between  the 
judgment  yet  to  come,  the  significance  of  which  men  will  be 
compelled  to  see,  and  the  past  calamities  which  they  have  light- 
heartedly  minimised  (v.^).  In  w.^^^-^i*-^  the  first  stage  of  the 
coming  judgment  is  then  described;  it  will  consist  of  devas- 
tating attacks  by  external  foes,  the  Syrians  and  the  Philistines 
being  definitely  named. 

7,  The  word  of  God   once  sent  forth  (Ps   10720  14715.  is)^ 


IX.  7-1 I  183 

whether  its  purpose  be  the  destruction  or  the  well-being  of  men, 
cannot  return  to  God  till  it  has  wrought  His  purpose  (Is  55^°'- ; 
cp.  133^t5'N  ifhj  Am  1 3  etc.).  Even  the  solemnly  uttered  word  of 
men,  especially  the  blessing  or  the  curse,  was  conceived  as 
acquiring  after  utterance  an  existence  of  its  own  independent  of 
the  speaker:  cp.  Nu  22®  n.  This  destructive  word  dispatched 
by  Yahweh  will  find  its  mark  :  it  will /a//  info  Israel.  Israel  and 
Jacob  are  synonymous,  and  here  mean  specifically  the  Northern 
kingdom ;  for  a  third  synonym  is  (8)  all  the  people ;  and  this  phrase 
in  turn  is  unmistakably  explained  in  the  parallel  line  as 
Ephraim,  the  leading  tribe,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Samaria^  the 
capital,  of  the  Northern  kingdom. — All  the  people  shall  recognise 
(//)]  when  the  destructive  word  of  Yahweh  has  reached  its  goal 
and  begun  to  work,  the  people  will  learn  by  actual  experience  of 
its  effects  how  overwhelming  the  coming  calamity  is  to  be :  for 
to  know  or  to  recognise^  cp.  5^^,  Hos  ^. — For  they  said  .  .  .]  the 
Hebrew  text  is  mutilated  at  this  point  (see  phil.  n.);  RV  "that 
say  in  pride,"  etc.,  rests  on  a  (tacitly)  emended  text. —  Greatly 
daring]  lit.  in  greatness  0/ heart;  but  "the  heart  "  was  the  seat 
of  courage,  cp.  2  S  17^^,  Ps  76^,  Dn  ii^s.  A  day  of  Yahweh  is 
coming  that  will  abase  pride  (2'^^^'),  and  prove  the  insecurity  of 
all  confidence  which,  instead  of  resting  on  Yahweh  (7^),  rests  on 
self  (cp.  Am  6^^),  or  any  other  human  power  (30^"^  3^^'^)- — p. 
These  words,  perhaps  a  popular  proverb,  reveal  the  self-reliant, 
God-forgetful  temper  that  makes  the  coming  doom  inevitable : 
the  people  are  confident  that  they  can  themselves  much  more 
than  make  good  the  losses  that  they  have  suffered.  Common 
houses  were  made  of  bricks  of  sun-dried  clay  which  easily  fell  to 
pieces  (Job  4^^) ;  the  houses  of  the  wealthy  of  hezvn  stone  (Am 
5^1).  Sycomores  were  common,  and  stood  to  the  highly-prized 
cedars  as  stone  to  silver  (i  K  lo^^).  What  are  the  losses  of 
which  the  Ephraimites  make  so  light?  Not,  if  the  poem  is 
prophetic,  those  caused  by  the  Assyrian  invasion  in  734-732, 
but  rather  those  due  to  Tiglath-pileser's  exaction  of  tribute  in 
738,  and  (or  perhaps  even  only*)  those  that  resulted  from  the 
anarchic  period  that  followed  the  death  of  Jeroboam  11.,  c.  746 
B.C.  The  entire  situation  suggested  in  this  v.  closely  resembles 
that  described  by  Hosea  (7^^-) :  Hosea  and  Isaiah  alike  see  the 
gravity  of  what  the  people  treat  so  lightly ;  old  age  bringing  with 

*Di. 


1 84  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

it  the  loss  of  the  strength  of  youth  has,  as  Hosea  puts  it,  crept 
on  the  nation  unawares.  The  connection  between  Hosea  and 
Isaiah  is  even  closer,  amounting  to  the  verbal  dependence  of 
one  on  the  other,  if  Hos  710  ('\r]^p2  i6)  D3\t^K  mn>  i>K  niJ'  i6) 
nj^T  7D3)  be  original,  and  not,  as  some  suppose,  a  gloss. — Ift's 
adversaries  .  .  .  his  enemies'\  the  singular  pronoun  refers  to 
Israel,  the  Northern  kingdom,  cp.  vv.^^-  ^^  The  general  terms 
adversaries^  enemies^  are  explained  in  v.^^  to  be  the  Philistines 
and  Syria  \  so  the  special  follow  and  explain  the  general 
terms  in  w.**-  ^-  ^^'  ^oa.  His  adversaries  is  a  conjectural,  but 
fairly  certain,  reading;  J^  has  suffered  from  the  invasion  of  a 
misleading  gloss  ;  it  reads  the  adversaries  of  Resin,  king  of  Syria 
(7I  n.),  which  has  been  understood  to  mean  the  Assyrians ;  but 
this  would  be  inconsistent  with  v.^^  Several  Hebrew  MSS  read 
princes  of  Resin,  but  this  is  either  a  transcriptional  error  (n^  for 
nv)  or  a  conjecture;  see,  further,  phil.  n. — II.  If  prophetic,  the 
meaning  of  this  v.  taken  together  with  the  preceding  is  clear : 
Israel  is  to  become  the  prey  of  foes  who  will  fall  on  it  from 
all  sides,  East  and  West  being  specified,  and  Syria  and  the 
Philistines  being  named  as  typical  of  neighbouring  peoples  from 
whom,  as  having  been  frequently  hostile  in  the  past,  hostility 
might  be  expected.  In  this  case  the  prophecy  was  probably 
delivered  before  Ephraim  and  Syria  became  allies,  i.e.  before 
c.  736  B.C.  If  the  verses  are  a  survey  of  recent  history,  they 
refer  to  events  of  which  we  have  no  other  knowledge ;  for  the 
Philistines'  attack  on/udah  in  the  time  of  Ahaz  (2  Ch  28^^)  is  no 
evidence  of  an  attack  on  Ephraim,  which  is  the  sole  subject  of 
this  strophe  at  least  (v.^),  and  Am  i®  is  ambiguous. — iic.  d. 
Cp.  5^^ 

7.  lan]  <&  ddvarov  (cp.  Am  4^^)  vocalising  n^^,  which  is  adopted  as 
correct  by  Sta.  {ZATW,  1905,  p.  140) ;  MT  n^^  is  right  (so  E^F  and  the 
later  text  of  (&  ^*^). — ^BTi]  pf.  with  waw  conv.  after  a  prophetic  pf.  :  Dr. 
§  113  (i).  Du.,  Marti  think  v.'**  over-short,  and  Marti  suggests  reading 
Ssj  ^331.  But  even  this  would  not  balance  the  lines  :  apparently  here,  as  in 
9^^  and  probably  in  9^*^,  the  full  unit  of  six  accents  is  divided  into  4  +  2  instead 
of  the  prevailing  3  +  3. — 8.  iSd  oyn]  more  emphatic  and  rhythmically  more 
suitable  than  oyrrVs  :  cp.  I4-''-  ^^,  and  see  Driver,  Samuel,  p.  187  (on  2  S  2^). 
— tdk'?  .  .  .  niNJ3]  ffi  had  the  same  text,  but  it  is  now  generally  admitted 
that  the  clause  is  corrupt,  hdn*?  can  only  be  a  gerundial  continuation  of  lyiM, 
they  shall  know  {it)  .  .  .  saying;  and  this  gives  no  satisfactory  sense.  The 
clause   is,    to  judge   from    the   well    marked  structure  of   the   poem,    the 


IX.  7-1 I,  12-16  185 

remnant  of  six  words :  I  suspect  that  three  words,  in  part  parallel  to  mMJ3 
22^  h'\i2^,  have  dropped  out  before  mKJ3,  and  that  TDK?  was  added  after  this 
loss.  Emendations  have  mostly  proceeded  from  the  supposition  that  two 
words  have  been  lost  before  niKJ3 :  Bick.  supplies  iSSnnn  -itk,  Che.  (SBOT) 
Dflny  Dnppon,  Marti  im  ttk,  Cond.  and  RV  tacitly  nOK  "wn. — xo.  33«n]  the 
idea  of  inaccessibility  as  well  as  that  of  height,  seems  frequently  to  be  ex- 
pressed by  the  root  2iv ;  so  the  Piel  may  mean  to  render  {^inaccessibly)  highy 
and  hence  secure  ;  see  Ps  20^  59^  91"  (||  oVa)  and  cp.  the  force  of  Kal,  Dt  2* : 
see  also  Is  2^^  But  this  would  obviously  give  no  suitable  sense  here ;  for 
the  clause  would  mean  that  the  enemies  would  be  placed  beyond  attack.  It 
is  usual  (see  BDB)  therefore  to  assume  a  unique  nuance  for  ivo  in  the  pre- 
sent passage,  viz.  to  exalt  (in  effective  hostility) ;  but  even  so  the  sentence 
is  not  altogether  satisfactory.  Versions  earlier  than  U  {elevavit)  do  not 
recognise  any  such  sense  here  ;  ^  ']'pm  and  &  ^Jik-.^^  both  meaning  to  make 
'strong.  It  is  not  clear  that  (Sr's  text  had  3JB'1:  f>da<reiVy  which  stands  for 
it  here,  represents  ran  in  13'*,  voi  in  Jer  23^,  but  never  2iv.  And  yet  2W 
and  its  derivatives  were  understood  by  the  Greek  translator  of  Isaiah  : 
for  though  he  uses  different  words  (dxvpds,  26'  and  probably  30"*,  dyiosy 
33',  and  iyj/wO-fyreTai  in  2"*  *'),  all  of  them  are  true  to  the  sense  of  inac- 
cessibility or  height.  The  reading  3Jri  thus  rests  under  suspicion. — nx  nit 
vhv  \'^'\  The  overlined  letters  obviously  stood  in  (!Er  as  well  as  in  ^  j  for  ffi 
renders  roi/s  ivaviarafi^ovs  iirl  6poi  Zctcby  iir  airrdv  of  which  the  last  four 
words  are  certainly =v^j;  pjf  in.  Du.  claims  that  (&  read  in  full  pst  in  iy, 
and  that  this  was  an  incorrect  division  of  a  stage  in  J^,  pjn  rvvt^  due  to  the 
intrusion  of  pJ<n  which  had  been  a  gloss  on  mx  (=nj<,  G-K.  gie).  It  is  not 
certain  that  (&  read  (')n^ ;  but  that  p^fT  should  be  rejected  as  a  gloss  is  fairly 
certain,  and  that  we  should  read  vnx  (Bredenkamp,  al.)  not  improbable; 
the  presence  of  psn  disturbs  the  reference  of  the  pronoun  in  the  next  line  and 
makes  its  own  line  overlong  and  the  whole  difficult  of  interpretation.  The 
omission  of  pj^T  gives  for  the  whole  v.  the  same  rhythm  as  in  v.',  viz.  4+2. — 
1030']  and  'nsDOO,  i9^t,  are  now  generally  regarded  as  forms  with  substitution 

of  0  for  b  of  13b,  whence  Ife',  a  thorn  :  cp.  Ar.  CJ  w»,  to  pierce ;  hence  1030,  to 
spur  on.  Rather  less  vividly  %  my,  and  in  19*  nan :  (ffi  in  19*  iTreyep- 
d-^aovrat. — iVdki]  ST  pf.  ;  ^H  future ;  MT  impf.  with  waw  conv. ;  (jR  rodt 
KaTe<rdLovTas  =  chjiiri. — na  ^3]  cp.  I*  n. 

12-16.  A  day  of  overwhelming  disaster. — The  first 
judgment  leads  to  no  greater  regard  for  Yahweh  (v.^^),  complete 
depravity  continues  (v.^^®*  <*).  Consequently  Yahweh  will  bring 
about  a  single  day  of  overwhelming  disaster  when  high  and  low 
will  perish  (v.^^).  The  flower  of  Israel's  youth,  its  widows  and 
orphans,  no  longer  enjoy  Yahweh's  care  (v.^®).  The  vagueness  of 
the  description  points  to  the  strophe  being  prophetic,  not 
historical.  Even  Di.,  who  would  interpret  historically,  doubts 
whether  the  "  day  "  is  a  day  of  battle  (cp.  v.^),  or  of  revolution,  as 


1 86  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

when  Pekah  with  fifty  companions  slew  Pelj:ahiah  (2  K  15^^). 
In  any  case  the  strophe  does  not  refer  to  any  known  event, 
much  less  to  any  event  known  to  have  occurred  between  what  is 
described  in  the  preceding  and  following  strophes, 

12.  The  people  returned  noi\  Hos  7^^,  Am  4^  etc. — Him  that 
smote  theni\  i.e.  Yahweh  :  cp.  Hos  6^,  and  ct.  the  entirely  different 
use  of  the  phrase  in  lo^o. — 12b.  Cp.  31^. — Head  and  tail,  palm- 
branch  and  reed]  the  high  and  the  low,  or  the  leaders  and  the 
rank-and-file.  Cp.  19^^  Dt  28^^-^.  Ges.  cites  from  the  Arabic, 
"Some  are  the  nose  and  the  rest  the  tail." — 14.  An  annotation,* 
interpreting  "  the  head  "  and  "  the  tail "  of  v.^^.  Note  the  charac- 
teristic fc?in,  used  alike  by  Jewish  and  Arabic  annotators,  the 
borrowed  phraseology  (cp.  32^-),  and  the  fact  that  the  interpretation 
agrees  neither  with  the  context  nor  with  19^^ — 15.  A  variation 
of  3^2c.  d  This  v.,  too,  may  be  a  gloss ;  it  neither  makes  a  good 
sequence  to  v.^^,  nor  gives  ground  for  the  therefore  of  v.^^. — 16. 
He  will  not  rejoice  over]  the  phrase  (39^)  is  perhaps  too  weak  for 
the  context,  see  phil.  n. —  Young  men]  Am  4^^. — Because  he  is 
wholly  profane]  the  pron.  refers  to  the  personified  nation. — 
Impiety]  cp.  32^  n. 

12.  inaon]  Originally,  perhaps,  nann  (so  one  MS) ;  but  inaon  (with  both 
art.  and  suffix),  called  in  question  by  Lag.,  is  defended  by  No.  {ZDMC^ 
1878,  p.  402);  the  suf.  is  ace.  :  G-K.  ii6/".— iiik3s]  (&  omits. — 13.  .ti.t]  is 
unnecessary,  and  apparently  disturbs  the  rhythm. — 15.  Dy'?3D]  3^2  jj^ — jg^ 
nofc"]  Lag.  nB'3'  =  nD3',  31*:  cp.  Ex  i^^-^, — ^y\H]  possibly  an  addition 
after  the  intrusion  of  w.***  ("). 

17-20.  Civil  War  is  the  fresh  element  in  this  third  picture 
of  coming  jndgment :  Israelite  relentlessly  pursues  Israelite,  tribe 
is  ranged  against  tribe. — 17,  More  punishment  must  come,  for 
unrighteousness  will  still  pervade  the  State  like  a  destructive  fire 
which,  kindling  in  inflammable  briars  of  the  steppes,  spreads  to 
and  destroys  the  forest. — 18.  This  land,  whose  people  are  wholly 
unrighteous  (v.^^),  will  suffer  from  the  overflow  of  YahweKs  anger 
{r\\r\''  mnv).  So  in  10*  the  "profane  nation"  of  Judah  is  "the 
people  of,  i.e.  who  provoke,  my  overflowing  anger"  (^ni3y  Dy). 
The  meaning  of  the  vb.  in  v.^^,  left  untranslated  above,  is 
altogether  uncertain ;  see  phil.  n. — l8b.  And  the  people  became 
like]  the  point  of  comparison  is  ambiguously  expressed :  J^  may 

*  So  Koppe,  Ges.,  and  with  few  exceptions  {e.g.  Del.,  Cond.)  all  writers 
since. 


IX.   12-20  1 87 

mt2tn  food  for  fire,  as  in  v.*,  or  food  for  men^  or  with  the  alteration 
of  a  single  letter,  devourers  of  men^  cp.  Ezk  36^^  (see  phil.  n.) ;  if 
the  last  be  correct,  v.^^^  forms  a  suitable  introduction  to  the 
description  that  follows  of  the  cannibal-like  hostility  of  the 
Israelites  towards  one  another.  On  the  other  hand,  |^,  however 
interpreted,  forms  no  suitable  introduction  to  vv.^^*  '^  \  in  MT, 
RV,  the  line  recurs  to  the  figure  of  a  fire,  though  that  figure 
appears  to  be  complete  in  v.^^;  and  the  people  as  a  whole 
are  represented  as  consumed  by  fire  before  they  fall  on  one 
another. — i8c  is  out  of  place  in  J§ :  it  should  follow  ^®^ :  see 
phil.  n. — 19a.  b.  The  inappeasable  hostility  of  the  people  is 
compared  to  a  hunger  which  is  constantly  and  largely  fed  but 
never  satisfied. — Ipc.  His  neighbour's  flesh"]  see  phil.  n.  ?^  has 
the  flesh  of  his  own  arm. — 20.  As  participants  in  the  Civil  War, 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh  are  singled  out  for  mention,  partly 
because  these  tribes  were  the  two  chief  constituents  of  the 
Northern  kingdom,  partly  because,  as  sons  of  Joseph,  they  were 
the  most  closely  related.  In  prophecy  this  would  be  perfectly 
natural  and  effective,  and  in  a  poetical  retrospect  of  the  past 
scarcely  impossible,  even  though  the  actual  feuds  of  recent 
years  had  not  been  limited  to  the  two  tribes  that  are  named. 
Winckler,  however,  thinks  that  the  references  to  the  past  are 
specific  and  precise;  he  argues  that  the  characteristic  of  the 
period  between  the  death  of  Jeroboam  11.  and  the  reorganisation 
of  Israel  by  Assyria  was  strife  between  the  people  E.  and  W.  of 
Jordan,  i.e.  Ephraim  and  Manasseh;  he  sees  in  Shallum  ben 
fabesh  who  overthrew  Zechariah  (2  K  15^®)  a  citizen  of  Jabesh- 
Gilead  in  Manasseh  (KAT^  263).  However  that  may  be,  in 
Yy^i6-20a  Isaiah  certainly  is  describing,  whether  historically  or 
(as  is  more  probable)  prophetically,  a  state  of  affairs  similar  to 
what  he  actually  witnessed  in  the  Northern  kingdom.  Within 
a  single  year  Jeroboam  11.  died,  and  his  successor  Zechariah  was 
overthrown  by  Shallum,  and  Shallum  in  his  turn  by  Menahem 
b.  Gadi  (2  K  15^^'-). — Together  .  .  .  against  JudaK\  not  al- 
together easy  to  explain  either  historically  or  prophetically  if 
the  words  are  a  part  of  the  original  poem.  It  would  be  curious 
in  a  historical  reference  to  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  not  even 
to  mention  Syria,  the  chief  opponent  of  Judah.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  it  is  prophecy,  the  point  of  this  strophe,  which  is  that 
the  Northern  kingdom  will   be  punished   by  civil  discord,  is 


1 88  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

blunted  by  being  made  to  close  with  the  announcement  that  the 
civil  discord  will  give  place  to  union,  even  though  that  union  be 
utilised  for  an  attack  on  Judah.  Possibly  Eichhorn  was  right, 
even  though  his  reasons  were  wrong,  in  treating  these  words  as 
a  gloss.  They  may  be  the  comment  of  a  scribe  who  had  in 
mind  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war,  and  the  original  text  may  have 
brought  the  strophe  to  an  effective  close  on  the  note  of  civil 
discord  within  the  Northern  kingdom.  The  distich  in  the 
present  text  is  rhythmically  peculiar  (4  +  3  :  see  above) ;  at  need 
it  could  be  read  differently  (3  +  3  +  3) ;  then  Manasseh^  Ephraim^ 
and  Ephraim^  Manassehy  instead  of  being  a  single  line,  makes 
two  parallel  lines  in  the  normal  rhythm  of  the  poem.  If  the 
next  strophe  is  intrusive  (see  below),  this  description  of  civil  war 
was  immediately  followed  by  the  description  of  the  Assyrian 
invasion  which  is  to  subdue  all  these  tribes  now  set  against  one 
another.  The  sequence  in  this  case,  and  the  phraseology  at  the 
close  of  this  strophe,  may  be  paralleled  by  the  prediction  in  the 
legend  of  Dibbarra  of  the  wars  which  are  to  involve  all  creation  : — 
And  thus  the  warrior  Dibbarra  spoke :  Sea-coast  (against)  sea- 
coast,  Subartu  against  Subartu,  Assyrian  against  Assyrian,  .  .  . 
country  against  country,  house  against  house,  man  against  man. 
Brother  is  to  show  no  mercy  towards  brother ;  they  shall  kill  one 
another.  .  .  .  After  a  time  the  Akkadian  will  come,  overthrow 
all  and  conquer  all  of  them;  cited  by  M.  Jastrow,  Bab.  Ass. 
Eel.  532  :  cp.  KB  vi.  67. 

17,  "l32Kni]  (&  <rv7/faTa0a7crat=l^3Kni.  fj^  is  a  Snc.  X67.,  but  cp.  Assyr. 
ab&ku  (see  Haupt  in  SBO  T).  i3Knn,  if  akin  to  iB.nnn,  should  mean  to  twist 
about ;  cp.  the  similar  nuances  of  isnnrt  in  Gn  3^*,  Job  37^^,  Jg  7^', — jjyy  niNJ] 
modal  ace.  (cp.  G-K.  §  Ii8<7),  or  ace.  of  the  product  (G-K.  117//).  mna  of 
physical  uplifting  is  rare  ;  but  see  Ps  89^". — 18.  niK3J<]  ffi  om.  :  in  |^  rhyth- 
mically suspicious. — pK  Dny:]  Doubtful.  Note  (!)(!&  ffvyK^Kaxrrai  ij  7^  ^^7 ; 
(2)  pK  is  indef.,  but  the  ||  Dyn  defined  ;  (3)  px  is  fem.,  onyj  masc. ;  yet 
see  G-K.  145*? ;  (4)  onyj  is  from  a  root  otherwise  unknown  in  Heb.  or  Aram. 

Arabic  has  (a)  Jkc,  t9  be  late ;  {b)  itJ^%  to  be  dogged  in  speech ;  aJLc»  suffocating 

hecU\  whence  onyj  has  been  supposed  to  mean  either  (i)  to  be  dark^  or  (2)  to 
be  burnt  up ;  but  see  W.  R.  Smith  mJPh.^  1885,  p.  61.  We  are  reduced  to 
guessing  either  the  meaning  of  onya  or  the  word  of  which  anyj  is  a  corruption. 
€r  avyK^Kavrai,  tZH  nann  (v.l.  nann),  S  AlI  (=V>i,  242®);  U  conturbata  est. 
Kroch.,  Kit.,  Che.  propose  nnyi,  which  would  be  a  feeble  repetition  ofthevb. 
in  v."® ;  Marti  nyna  {reels) ;  but  whether  this  or  7\^-i  (,S)  is  the  right  word  to 
introduce  the  next  line  is  doubtful.— sfN  n^DKoa]  MT  i?n,  as  in  v.*;  but  »n 


IX.  I7-20,  X.  1-4  1^9 

is  possible ;  «"k  is  always  written  vh  in  the  Siloam  Inscr.  Then  reading 
♦^jk  03  for  nVDKDD,  Du.  obtains  /t'ke  devomers  of  men. — 19.  iivi]  subj.— oyn 
in  v.^'*»,  from  which  v.'^  is  now  separated  by  the  misplacement  of  v.**"  (sec 

above),  iia  means  to  cut,  particularly  to  cut  in  twoy  or  like  y^^^  to  cut  off. — 
V3r]  read  yar ;  note  ffi  and  the  three  preceding  vbs. — ijnJ]  read  with  Seeker, 
al.  ^y"! :  (!K^  has  fipaxiovot  toO  ddeXtpov — a  doublet  in  which  the  first  word  b 
secondary  ;  tJT  n'2np. 

X.  1-4.  The  Doom  of  unjust  Judges.— This  strophe 
is  curiously  unlike  those  that  precede :  in  each  of  those,  judgment 
is  categorically  announced,  and  the  cause  for  it  directly  stated ; 
here  the  coming  of  "  a  day  of  visitation  "  is  assumed  in  a  question 
put  to  those  whom  it  will  overtake,  and  the  ground  of  judgment 
is  implied  in  the  description  of  those  to  whom  the  opening  inter- 
jection of  calamity  refers.  The  subject  of  the  first  three  strophes 
is  an  entire  people  or  country,  which  is  throughout  referred  to  in 
the  third  person :  the  subject  of  this  strophe  is  a  particular  class 
— the  judges  that  take  bribes  and  wrong  the  poorer  litigants ;  and 
these  people  are  here  addressed  in  the  second  person. 

Largely  on  the  ground  of  this  change  some  scholars  treat  lo*****,  or  lo^"' 
(Marti),  as  intrusive  (see  above,  p.  180).  Other  reasons  urged  are  that  if  lo* 
be  original,  ^^'^  would  describe  a  catastrophe  after  the  catastrophe,  that  the 
opening  'in  connects  10*"*  with  5^"^,  that  lo^"'  forms  no  advance  in  the  ascending 
series  of  punishments,  that  the  care  for  the  widow  expressed  in  10'  represents 
rather  a  less  severe  attitude  than  that  of  9^'.  A  further  argument  urged  by 
some  is  that  this  strophe  refers  to  Judah,  and  is  therefore  out  of  place  in  a 
poem  directed  against  Israel.  Apart  from  the  last  (on  which  see  below),  some 
of  these  arguments  taken  singly  and  still  more  when  taken  together  are  weighty. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  urged,  though  perhaps  with  scarcely  equivalent 
force,  that  it  would  be  curious  for  an  intrusive  section  to  be  of  the  exact 
length  of  the  other  strophes.  Even  if  intrusive,  the  section  is  probably 
Isaianic,  and  possibly  it  once  formed  part  of  the  collection  of  **  Ah's"  in  5^"^ : 
it  is  slightly  longer  than  5^'^,  somewhat  shorter  than  5""" ;  but  the  question 
and  the  address  in  10^  differentiates  this  section  no  less  from  the  **  Ah's"  of 
5®"^  than  from  the  other  strophes  of  the  poem.  See  in  addition  to  the 
Commentaries,  Giesebrecht,  10  ff.  ;  Hackmann,  54. 

It  has  been  supposed  by  many  *  that  this  strophe  refers  to 
Judah.  That  it  could  refer  to  Judah,  if  it  stood  by  itself,  is 
obvious  ;  but  that  it  must  refer  to  Judah,  because  it  could  not 
refer  to  the  Northern  kingdom,  holds  only,  if  even  then,  provided 
the  reading  "  the  poor  of  my  people  "  in  v.^  be  retained.  Other 
arguments  prove  no  more  than  that  the  section,  if  it  stood  by 
itself,  might  refer  to  Judah  :  thus  it  is  true  that  the  interjection 

•Ew.,  Che.,  Di. 


190  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

MH  is  common  to  the  several  sections  of  5^-2*  and  to  this ;  but 
while  it  is  not  certain  that  the  whole  of  5^"^*  refers  to  Judah,  it  is 
certain  that  ""in  also  introduces  Isaiah's  denunciations  of  Ephraim 
in  28^-*.     Charges  against  the  rulers  of  greed  and  unrighteousness 
do  indeed  "  run  like   a  red   thread  through  Isaiah's   speeches 
against  Judah"  (3'^'^^-  ^^-"^^  jiz.  26j.  i^^t  the  same  disorder  pre- 
vailed in  the  Northern  kingdom  (cp.  e.g.  Am  5^2).     Finally,  Di. 
urges  that  9^0  forms  the  transition  to  Judah ;  but  the  allusion 
to  Judah  in  9^0  is  perhaps  secondary  (see  above),  and  in  any 
case,  though  9^0  may  mention,  it  forms  no  transition  to,  Judah ; 
it  contains  no  indication  that  the  poet  having  spoken  of  Ephraim 
hitherto,  is  now  going  to  limit  himself  to  Judah.     On  the  other 
hand,  if  lo^^*  refers  to  Judah,  it  is  not  both  the  immediate  sequel 
to  ^^^  and  the  immediate  prelude  to  526-29  ;  it  is  either  intrusive, 
or  the  transition  has  been  lost.     For,  on  the  supposition  that 
10^-*  refers  to  Judah,  and  that  with  ^''^^  and  526-29  it  forms  a 
complete  poem,  we  should  have  this  highly  improbable  result : 
in  three  strophes   condemnation   of  the   entire  people  of  the 
Northern   kingdom,  in   one   strophe   condemnation   of  a  very 
limited  class  in  the  Southern  kingdom,  in  a  final  strophe  the  same 
complete  judgment  for  the  two  kingdoms,  whose  cup  of  iniquity 
(as  described)  is  so  unequally  filled. 

We  must  conclude,  then,  that  this  strophe,  if  it  formed  the 
fourth  of  a  poem  complete  in  five  strophes,  referred  like  the  rest 
to  Ephraim ;  but  that  if  it  is  not  an  original  part  of  the  poem,  it 
may  have  referred  to  either  Judah  or  Ephraim  (or  both)  if  "  my 
people"  in  lo^  be  rejected,  but  in  all  probability  to  Judah  only 
if  "  my  people  "  be  retained. 

I,  2.  One  class  of  persons,  not  two  (RV),  are  here  denounced, 
and  their  evil  activity  is  described  by  two  parallel  and  synonymous 
expressions  (see  phil.  n.).  The  persons  referred  to  are  not  the 
makers  of  laws  (Di.) — for  new  laws,  whether  good  or  bad,  were 
not  an  annual  production  as  in  modern  states — but  the  admin- 
istrators of  the  laws,  the  judges  or  arbitrators;  these,  being 
bribed,  assigned  property  in  dispute,  or  determined  penalties 
without  regard  to  the  rights  of  the  question,  but  merely  according 
to  the  price  paid  for  their  decision,  so  that  the  poor  lost  their 
cases,  or  the  substance  of  widows  and  orphans  was  wasted  in 
trying  to  pay  a  high  enough  price  for  what  was  theirs  by  right. 
Thus  the  decrees^  or  decisions^  of  these  judges  are  mischievous^  or 


X.  1-3  191 

hurtful  to,  and  entail  suffering  on,  the  weaker  parties.  The  force 
of  pN,  hurt,  or  mischief  may  be  illustrated  by  Pr  12^^  22^,  Jer 
4^^  cp.  also  Nu  23*1  n. ;  and  of  the  synonymous  i^oy,  which  is  not 
perverseness  (RV),  by  59*,  Ps  7^^,  and  especially  9420.  When  the 
judges  are  said  to  inscribe  and  write  the  decrees,  it  is  not,  of 
course,  meant  that  they  necessarily  did  the  actual  writing,  but 
that  they  were  the  authors  of  the  decisions  and  had  them  written 
down :  this  use  of  the  vb.  to  write,  not  uncommon  in  other 
languages,  occurs  clearly  in  Jer  36^8  (cp.  yP\  Est  8*-^®,  and 
doubtless  often  elsewhere,  e.g.  Dt  24^  17^^;  but  cp.  especially 
Job  13^^  "Thou  writest  (or  registerest)  (a  bitter  decision)  against 
me,  and  causest  me  to  inherit  the  iniquities  of  my  youth,"  where 
the  Kal  (nn^n)  seems  to  be  used  with  the  same  technical,  legal 
sense  as  the  Piel  (DUnao)  here. 

A  very  large  number  of  the  written  records  of  decisions  of  the  Assjrian 
and  Babylonian  law-courts  have  been  preserved  ;  these  deal  with  a  great 
variety  of  disputes  touching  inheritance,  deposits,  partnerships,  lands,  houses, 
and  other  property  (see  Johns,  Bab.  and  Ass.  Laws,  Contracts,  and  Letters, 
ch.  vi.);  the  procedure  in  some  cases  is  described,  e.g.  "two  parties  dispute 
as  to  the  possession  of  a  sum  which  is  actually  in  the  hands  of  a  banker.  The 
banker  accordingly  undertakes  to  produce  the  sum  and  its  interest  in  court, 
and  to  pay  it  over  to  the  successful  party  in  the  suit.  The  decision  was 
written  down  and  the  notary  of  the  court  gave  a  copy  to  the  plaintiff,  if  not 
also  to  the  defendant,  and  kept  one  copy  for  the  archives"  {ib.  p.  109). 
Similar  Jewish  documents  of  the  5th  cent.  B.C.  have  been  found;  for  some 
of  the  Assouan  papyri  are  agreements  with  regard  to  property  drawn  up  after 
an  appeal  to  the  tribunal.  In  Jer  3a''**  we  have  a  precise  account  of  the 
writing  of  a  deed  of  sale. 

2.  See  under  I. — The  poor\  J^ffi  -Vof  my  people.  But  the 
addition  has  probably  resulted  from  dittography :  it  overloads 
the  line,  has  nothing  corresponding  to  it  in  the  parallel  line,  and 
it  suddenly  introduces  the  first  person,  which  appears  nowhere 
else  in  the  poem.  If  my  people  be  original,  or  an  intentional 
addition  to  the  text,  the  pronoun  refers  either  (i),  least  unnatur- 
ally, to  the  prophet:  cp.  22*  and  perhaps  3^2  22I8.  is^  or  (2)  to 
Yahweh,  as  in  3^^  10**  and  perhaps  312  (cp.  3*- 1*).  If  (i)  be 
right,  the  people  must  be  Judah ;  if  (2)  either  Judah,  or  Israel, 
or  both,  though  perhaps  more  probably  Judah. — 3.  What  will 
ye  do  (cp.  Hos  9^),  ye  judges,  who  have  provoked  Yahweh  by 
your  unrighteous  abuse  of  your  office  (cp.  i^^^  5^),  when  His  day 
comes  ? — The  day  of  visitation']  i.e.  of  punishment ;  cp.  Hos  g^ 


192 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


the  days  of  visitation^  the  sing,  and  pi.  interchanging  as  in  the 
phrases  "  that  day,"  or  "  those  days,"  applied  to  the  great 
future  day  when  Yahweh  will  appear. — The  storni\  tempestuous 
weather  is  one  of  the  accompaniments  of  a  theophany,  or  the 
means  whereby  Yahweh  executes  judgment ;  see  2^^*^  Z^^i  Nah  i^. 
Ps  508,  Zee  9l^  Am  i^*,  Job  9!^  381  40^,  i  K  19".  So  here 
the  day  of  visitation  of  Yahweh  is  thought  of  as  a  desolating 
storm  already  brewing  in  the  distance,  noisy  with  thunder  and 
hail :  men  would  fain  flee  from  it  (cp.  Ex  gi^ff.)  to  some  place  of 
refuge  for  themselves  and  their  glory,  i.e.  valuable  possessions 
(61*,  Gn  31^,  Ps  49^^) ;  but  Yahweh,  the  true  refuge  {e.g.  25*, 
Ps  46^),  is  Himself  the  cause  of  this  storm,  and  consequently  for 
the  unjust  judges  here  addressed  there  will  be  no  refuge  to  flee  to. 
— That  cometh  from  afar]  c^.  5^6  30^7  "the  conception  of  distance 
had  a  peculiar  fascination  for  the  early  prophets.  For  the 
common  Numina  were  gods  *  near  at  hand  * :  Yahweh  alone  sees 
and  works  in  the  distance ;  cp.  especially  Jer  2322^,  a  passage 
which  clearly  shows  how  the  conception  of  a  distant  god  formed 
the  bridge  to  the  idea  of  the  all-present  God"  (Du.);  cp.  also 
Ps  138^ — 4.  The  text  of  the  first  line  must  be  wrong  (see  phil.  n.) : 
the  translation  above  presupposes  that  J^  has  suffered  through  the 
loss  of  a  single  letter ;  possibly  the  corruption  may  be  deeper ; 
if  not,  there  appears  to  be  a  rapid  transition  from  the  picture  of 
the  storm  to  that  of  a  battle,  in  which  many  fall  prisoners  to 
Yahweh  and  the  rest  are  slain.  Lagarde,  by  a  re-division  of  the 
words  in  J^,  obtained  the  meaning  Beltis  is  crouching,  Osiris  is 
broken  in  pieces  (cp.  46^,  Jer  50^),  and  therefore  cannot  be  your 
refuge.  But  there  is  no  independent  proof  that  the  Hebrews 
worshipped  Beltis  (  =  Isis)  at  all,  nor  evidence  of  any  prevalence 
of  the  worship  of  Osiris  ;  yet  it  must  be  obvious  that  Isaiah 
could  only  have  closed  his  strophe  thus,  if  these  two  deities  were 
among  those  most  widely  worshipped  at  that  time  by  Israelites 
disloyal  to  Yahweh.  At  a  later  date,  Plutarch  {Isis  et  Osiris,  15, 
16)  refers  to  the  worship  of  Osiris  at  Byblus  ;  and  some,  though 
comparatively  few,  images  of  Osiris  have  been  found  at  Gezer; 
see  Exp.,  May  1909,  p.  440. 

I.  D'3n3D .  ,  ,  D'ppnn]  o'dddd  without  the  art.  (€r  as  well  as  |^)  is  probably 
WQ\. parallel  to  li''p^r\n  with  the  art.  ;  nor  is  una  '?Dy  a  rel.  sent.,  but  ian3  is 
the  finite  vb.  carrying  on  what  was  begun  with  the  part.  D'ppnn  (Dr.  §  117  J 
G-K.  ii6jf),  and  it  is  strengthened  by  D'ansD,  which,  being  in  the  ace,  is 


X.  1-4  193 

therefore  undefined,  as,  e.g.^  in  Ps  56' 92"  (G-K.  118/).  The  Piel  (inten- 
sive) of  ana  occurs  here  only. — 'ppn]  G-K.  93M.— cow  nni]  hk  with  an 
undefined  noun— rare  :  G-K.  i\Td\  BDB  85a. — ua']  G-K.  114^. — ^3. 
rjKirV)]  S  resumes  dv^  of  v.**,  though  even  by  itself  it  means  at  the  time  of 
(7"  n.).— nKW]  storm  (as  Pr  i",  Ezk  38',  Zeph  i"),  is  from  \/»n»,  which  is 
parallel  to  \^iw  :  derivatives  from  both  roots  seem  to  point  to  the  meanings 
of  noisiness  and  wasteness ;  prob.  that  of  noisiness  (whence  the  meaning 
storm)  is  the  original ;  see  especially  jiKr  (from  r\wtf)  used  of  various  noises, 
TiiMf  (Is  i7^-'*)»  Tmxn\  (Is  22^^). — 'D  Sy]  prob.  pregnant — to  whom  will  ye  flee 
and  rely  on  them? — 4.  "I'OK  nnn  jna  ^nSa]  impossible.  Most  attempted 
translations  assume  for  'nVa  a  meaning,  or  usage,  which  cannot  be  justified. 
The  actual  Hebrew  usage  of  'nVa  is  as  follows  :  i.  it  may  be  =  nVa+  1st  pers. 
sing,  suffix,  and  mean  except  me  (Hos  13*,  i  S  2't) ;  but  this  does  not  justify 
without  me — RVmarg.,  and  some  earlier  interpreters  (cp.  Ges. ) ;  or  2.  it 
may  be  =  n^a  +  a  binding  vowel.  In  this  case  it  is  used  (a)  as  an  adv.  meaning 
not  before  adjectives  {e.g.  14*,  i  S  20^) — obviously  inapplicable  here  :  or  {b) 
as  an  adv.,  but  always  after  a  negative  expressed  or  implied,  meaning  except 
{e.g.  Gn  21^,  Nu  32^^):  cp.  usage  i  ;  or  (^)  as  a  conj.,  but  always  after  a 
negative  expressed  or  implied  :  cp.  Gn  43',  Nu  1 1*,  and  with  the  addition  of 
DK,  Am  3*'  *.  BDB  bring  the  present  passage  under  the  last  usage,  explaining 
"  (And  where  will  ye  leave  your  glory  ?)  save  that  they  bow  down  under  the 
prisoners,  and  fall  under  the  slain,  i.e.  (iron.)  their  only  refuge  will  be  among 
the  corpses  of  a  battle-field."  Grammatically  this  might  do,  if  the  verbs  in 
the  exceptive  sentence  were  in  the  same  person  as  that  in  the  principal ;  as  a 
matter  of  fact  the  2nd  pi.  (laiyn)  of  the  principal  sentence  is  followed  in  the 
exceptive  sentence  by  one  vb.  in  the  3rd  sing.  pf.  (yna)  and  one  in  the  3rd  pi. 
impf.  (^Vfl')*  This  really  separates  the  present  passage  sharply  from  Nu  1 1*, 
its  nearest  parallel.  RV  They  shall  only  bow  down^  etc.,  might  find  some 
support  in  Phoenician  usage,  for  the  Tabnith  Inscription  (Cooke,  NSI^  p.  26) 
contains  this  sentence :  i  jina  aar  ijk  n^a  .  .  .  pn  |Sik  'K,  /  have  nogoldy 
I  am  only  lying  in  this  coffin  ;  but  the  use  of  the  binding  vowel  with  such  a 
meaning  would  be  strange,  and  Hebrew  has  its  own  particle  to  express  only, 
viz.  "IH.  From  this  surely  it  will  be  seen  that  it  is  only  by  assuming  an 
unparalleled  usage  of  TiSa  that  it  is  possible  to  obtain  even  such  highly  im- 
probable translations  as  unless  one  stoops  under  a  prisoner  they  must  fall  under 
the  slain  (Di.).  The  corruption  of  the  text  is  probably  as  old  as  (& :  the 
whole  V.  runs  in  ^  tov  fx\)  ifnreffeiv  els  iirayuiyfiv,  with  the  addition  in  **a,  of  koI 
inroK&roi  dLvrjp-qfiiviav  veaovvrai ;  rod  fi^  points  to  'nSa  ;  with  ifiireffeiv  cp.  the 
simple  veaeTv  as  a  rendering  of  yna  in  46^  65*^,  and  with  dirayury^  the  use  of 
the  vb.  Airdyeiv  in  Gn  39^  40'  42^^ ;  the  noun  dTa7W7^  occurs  only  in  I  Es 
8**  and  Sir  38^'.  (&  may  have  read  'n^a^ ;  but  whether  it  did  so  or  not  the 
restoration  of  'n^a^  and  the  substitution  of  iSfin  for  iVb»  in  the  next  line  gives 
an  excellent  Hebrew  construction  iSfln  .  .  .  yh?  'nSaS :  cp.  11a*  ,  .  .  wnV, 
v.*  n.  ;  or  as  an  alternative,  epigraphically  somewhat  likelier,  we  might  read 
'n^ao,  assuming  that  D  was  lost  through  haplography.  But  is  to  crouch  under 
the  prisoners  (tdr  coll.)  a  probable  idiom?  Lagarde  {Academy ^  15  Dec. 
1370= Symmicta,  i.   105)  proposed  tdk  nn  nyna  ♦nSa,  Beltis  is  crouching, 

VOL,  I» — 13 


194 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


\ 


Osiris  is  shattered',  cp.  46^  Jer  50^;  nyns  being  a  part.,  the  subj.  'nVa  would 
precede  it  according  to  rule  (Dr.  §  135  (4)) ;  for  idn  (of  which  ton  would  be 
merely  a  later  scriptio  plena),  Osiris,  cp.,  in  Phoenician,  e.g.  iDcnoN,  noKnay 
{CIS  i.  122  :  Malta,  2nd  cent.  B.C.),  and  the  same  form  in  other  Phoenician 
names. 

X.  5'"34* — Three  Poems^  together  with  annotations  and  addenda. 

The  poems,  or  poetical  fragments,  are  {a)  w.*-®*  i^-^^  (i^)  \ 
prevailing  rhythm  3  :  3  (:  3) :  to  this  w.^^-^^  may  also  belong ; 
{b)  VV.27C-32  •  prevailing  rhythm  2:2;  (<:)  vv.^^^- ;  rhythm  probably 
3:3.  Prose  notes  and  addenda  are  v v.  i^- 19. 20-23.  24-26.  other 
addenda  are  the  distich  in  v. 27  and  vv.^^*  ^^  (prose  ?). 

Isaiah's  authorship  of  («),  at  least  of  vv.^-^*  i^^-,  is  probable : 
there  are  no  conclusive  positive  arguments  either  for  or  against 
his  authorship  of  (f)  and  (<:).  The  dates  of  the  poems  cannot  be 
very  closely  determined :  the  prose  addenda  are  late. 

A  close  and  detailed  interpretation  of  the  passage  is  the  best  proof  that 
it  lacks  the  unity  of  a  speech  or  prophecy  written  on  or  for  a  single  particular 
occasion.  Two  views  that  its  heterogeneous  elements  have  been  welded  into 
a  literary  unity  may  be  referred  to.  (i)  Di.,  who  extends  this  literary  unity 
down  to  11^*,  remarks,  "The  passage  is,  to  be  sure,  a  literary,  but  not 
a  rhetorical  unity.  .  .  .  The  double  description  of  the  punishment  of  Assyria 
with  the  result  therefrom  ensuing  for  Israel  (lo^^'^-  ^■^)  does  not  leave  the 
impression  of  having  been  spoken  at  the  same  time;  11"*^' though  cleverly 
united  by  v.^°  with  w.^"*  is  yet  too  dissimilar  to  vv.^"*  to  have  been  announced 
in  one  and  the  same  discourse  with  it,  and  11^"^  again  can  scarcely  have  been 
originally  attached  to  lo^'**,  since  there  is  no  indication  there  of  the  setting 
aside,  or  previous  abdication,  of  the  reigning  king.  The  entire  passage  seems 
rather  to  be  an  artistic  collection  of  the  leading  thoughts  of  Isaiah's  speeches 
between  732  and  716  (at  latest  Tii),  possibly  made  for  the  purpose  of  serving 
as  a  conclusion  to  chs.  7ff.  (or  iff.)."  This  theory  breaks  down  if  the  view 
taken  below  of  vv.*^*"  (see  also  on  v.^*'**)  be  correct ;  on  the  other  hand,  it 
would  still  be  possible  to  hold  (2)  Marti's  theory,  according  to  which  lo"***  is 
a  skilful  arrangement  of  fragments  made  by  an  editor  so  as  to  produce  a  small 
picture  depicting  the  pangs  of  the  Last  Days,  and  the  assembling  of  the 
world  power  of  Antichrist  before  the  Gates  of  Jerusalem,  and  of  its  destruction 
there. 

X.  5-17. — The  fatal  arrogance  of  Assyria,  41 

After  the  removal  of  nDN(')  '3  {y\.^^),  which  is  doubtless  an  editorial 
addition,  the  prevailing  rhythm  in  vv."''*  ^^'*  is  the  line  of  three  accents 
arranged  in  distichs  or  tristichs.  Lines  of  doubtful  or  different  length  are 
vv.sb.  «c.  d.  8. 14b  In  y^5a  ,,,t  j^ay  stand  by  itself  (cp.  ^-^ :  see  p.  89) ;  in 
Y_i3d  D.Tm'ny  is  two  accents.     The  '•hythm  3  :  3  also  appears  in  v.^,  and  by 


am 

wroth 

I 

com- 

mand 

him, 

like 

mire 

of 

the 

Streets. 

X.  5-34  195 

emendation,  partly  after  (Br,  in  w."-  '*»  ;  but  in  v.**  it  is  6  :  6.     Vv.*'"**  are 
mostly  or  entirely  prose,  and  are  omitted  from  the  translation. 

5  Ah! 
Assyria  the  rod  of  my  anger, 

And  .  .  .  the  staff  of  my  indignation. 
*  Against  a  profane  nation  I  send  him, 
And  against  the  people  with  whom  I 

To  take  spoil  and  acquire  plunder, 
And    to    make    them    trampled   upon 


^  But  he  thinketh  not  so, 

Nor  thus  doth  his  heart  devise; 
But  to  destroy  is  in  his  heart, 

And  to  cut  off  nations  not  a  few : — 

®  "Are  not  my  rulers  one  and  all  kings? 
•  Is  not  Calno  like  Carchemish  ? 

Is  not  Hamath  like  Arpad? 

Is  not  Samaria  like  Damascus? 

13  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  have  I  wrought, 
And  by  my  wisdom,  for  I  have  discernment. 
I  have  removed  the  boundaries  of  peoples. 
And  I  have  plundered  their  stores  (?), 
And  I  have  brought  down  *in  the  dust'  the  enthroned. 

1*  And  my  hand  hath  reached  as  to  a  nest 

To  the  wealth  of  the  peoples; 
And  as  one  gathereth  eggs 

/  have  gathered  the  whole  earth : 
And  there  was  none  that  fluttered  wing, 

Or  opened  mouth  or  chirped." 

1^  Should  the  axe  vaunt  itself  against  him  that  heweth  there- 
with? 
Or  the  saw  magnify  itself  against  him  that  draweth  it  to 

and  fro? 
(Nay,    that    would    be)    like    the    rod    swinging    him    that 

raiseth  it, 
Like  the  staff  raising  (him  that  is)  not  wood. 


196 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


i 


^^  Therefore  Yahweh  of  Hosts  will  send  leanness  into  his  fat, 
And   under  his   glory   hath   he   kindled   a   kindling   as  a 

kindling  of  fire; 
^*'  And  it  shall  be  .  .  .  ^^^  consuming  soul  and  body. 

^"^  And  the  light  of  Israel  shall  become  a  fire, 
And  his  Holy  One  a  'burning'  flame; 
And  it  shall  devour  his  thorns  and  briars  a, 

^8  And  the  glory  of  his  forest  and  his  garden  land. 

Assyria,  who  was  being  used  by  Yahweh  to  punish  His 
disobedient  people  (cp.  g^-io^  +  ^^^-^^),  had  arrogantly  attributed 
all  its  success  to  its  own  power,  not  discerning  that  it  was  a  mere 
instrument  in  Yahweh's  hands :  therefore  it  must  be  destroyed 
(cp.  vv.i^^-). 

The  allusions  in  v.®  show  that  this  poem  was  written  after 
717  B.C.  Further  than  that  nothing  conclusive  can  be  said. 
Some  think  that  it  was  written  in  711  B.C. ;  others  in  701.  Che. 
{Introd.  pp.  50  f.)  gives  a  survey  of  theories  and  arguments.  If 
V.®  forms  no  part  of  the  poem  (Marti,  Comnu  p.  104  f.),  the  date 
becomes  so  much  the  more  undefined ;  and  Konig  {Einleitungy 
p.  315),  though  he  retains  v.^,  attempts  to  assign  io*-ii^*^  to  the 
years  724-722  B.c. 

5  f.  Assyria  is  the  rod  (Pr  23^^-)  with  which  Yahweh  whips 
His  rebellious  children  (i^)  for  their  good;  in  order  to  satisfy 
His  righteous  anger  with  His  people,  He  suffers  Assyria  to  plunder 
Judah  and  trample  it  down. — The  staff  of  my  indignation]  the 
two  parts  of  the  phrase  (cp.  the  parallel  phrase)  are  interrupted 
in  5^  by  the  words  //  is  in  their  hand-,  these  are  probably  the 
note  of  a  reader  who  had  remarked  that  in  v.^^  Assyria  wields 
the  rod.  RV  by  straining  the  Hebrew  obtains  the  bizarre  figure 
of  a  staff  holding  indignation  in  its  hand. — 6.  A  profane  nation] 
cp.  9^^. — /  send  him]  the  tense  may  be  frequentative,  am  1 
wont  to  send  him.  Yahweh's  will  is  that  His  people  shall  be 
plundered  (cp.  8*  of  Ephraim)  and  downtrodden  (cp.  28^8  56 
725) ;  but  7,  Assyria  thinks  otherwise ;  it  is  in  his  heart  (63*,  i  S 
14'',  2  K  lo^^'),  i.e,  he  intends,  {a)  to  destroy  and  not  only  to 
plunder  and  trample  down ;  {b)  to  exterminate  many  nations 
irrespective  of  their  having  provoked  Yahweh's  anger.  Such  is 
the  thought  suggested  by  the  present  connection;  it  may  be 
summed  up  in  this — Assyria  is  guided  not  by  the  will  of  Yahweh, j 


X.  5-17  197 

but  by  its  own  cruel  lust ;  consequently  it  exceeds  its  commission. 
Assyria's  other  thoughts  are  also  expressed  in  vv.^"^*  ^^^-^  but  there 
the  emphasis  falls  rather  on  the  pride  and  self-confidence  of  the 
nation  or  its  king. — 9.  All  cities  are  alike  before  it,  is  the  boast 
of  Assyria.  The  six  capitals  of  states  here  mentioned  represent 
the  ominous  extension  of  Assyria's  conquest  towards  Jerusalem  : 
Carchemesh,  the  most  remote,  begins  the  list ;  each  following 
name  is  nearer  Jerusalem  than  that  which  precedes,  and  the  list 
ends  with  Samaria  nearest  both  geographically  and  by  the  tie  of 
kinship  of  its  inhabitants.  The  order  is  clearly  geographical; 
it  is  not  chronological.  Carchemish^  mod.  Jerabis  on  the 
Euphrates,  is  about  360  miles  in  a  direct  line  from  Jerusalem, 
and  further  by  the  military  and  trade  route.  Calno  is  in  all 
probability  the  Kullani  of  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  (see  phil.  n.), 
which  was  in  Northern  Syria:  the  name  perhaps  survives  in 
Kullanhou,  about  6  miles  from  Tell  Arfad  (Arpad);  see  KAT^ 
55,  186,  and  S.  R.  Driver's  note  on  Am  6^,  where  other  less 
probable  views  are  also  mentioned.  Kullani  lay  about  50  miles 
S.W.  of  Carchemish,  Arpad  lies  13  miles  N.W.  of  Aleppo, 
^amath  on  the  Orontes  is  about  100  miles  S.  of  Arpad  and 
rather  more  than  that  distance  N.  of  Damascus^  Damascus  being 
again  about  100  miles  N.E.  of  Samaria.  Some  of  these  places 
were  frequently  made  tributary  and  even  captured  by  Assyria; 
but  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  mention  of  Damascus  and 
Samaria  refer  to  anything  but  the  capture  of  the  former  in  734 
by  Tiglath-pileser,  and  of  the  latter  in  722  by  Sargon.  Conse- 
quently we  have  here  the  conquests  of  Assyria  (cp.  v.** ;  ct.  vy^\ 
not  of  a  single  Assyrian  king.  The  references  are  probably  to 
the  captures  of  Carchemish  in  7 1 7  B.C.,  Kullani  in  738,  the  event 
of  that  year  in  the  Eponym  list,  Arpad  in  740,  Qamath  in  720, 
Damascus  in  734,  Samaria  in  722. 

10  f.  Since  the  great  cities  mentioned  in  v.^  have  fallen, 
Jerusalem  need  not  expect  to  stand;  cp.  36^^-  37^^"^^  also 
Am  62.  The  argument  is  sufficiently  suggested  by  the  order  in. 
which  the  towns  are  mentioned  in  v.®,  and  not  improbably  the 
original  poem  adopted  the  rhetorically  effective  device  of  leaving 
the  ominous  conclusion  to  be  drawn  (cp.  5''  n.) :  for  w.^<^-,  which 
indicate  the  conclusion  explicitly,  may  be  an  addition  :  v}^  seems 
to  be  prose,  and  though  v.^^  may  be  a  distich,  yet  the  lines 
would  be  longer  than  those  which  prevail  in  the  poem. — 10.  |^ 


198 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


As  my  hand  has  reached  to  the  kingdoms  of  the  idol{s)  (2*  n.) 
and  their  graven  images  than  {ox  from)  Jerusalem  and  Samaria,  is 
mutilated  (see  phil.  n.),  but  the  general"  sense  is  clear. — 11.  Shall 
I  not,  as  I  have  done  to  Samaria  and  its  idols,  so  do  to  Jerusalem 
and  its  images  ?]  In  another  context  these  might  well  be  words  of 
Yahweh.  In  the  mouth  of  Assyria  they  are  blasphemy  against 
Yahweh,  for  they  imply  that  He  is  but  one  of  the  not-gods.  V.io 
appears  to  contrast  the  cities  which  are  said  to  have  fallen  (v.^) 
with  Jerusalem  and  Samaria  as  still  standing,  but  in  v.^  Samaria 
is  one  of  those  that  had  fallen ;  v.^^  reverts  to  the  standpoint  of 
v.^  and  expresses  the  conclusion,  which  v.®  suggests,  that  after 
Samaria  comes  the  turn  of  Jerusalem. 

12.  Yahweh,  having  punished  Jerusalem  by  means  of  Assyria 
(v.''),  will  round  off  His  work  in  Mt.  Sion  by  punishing  the  king 
of  Assyria  for  his  arrogance :  in  w.^^*^-  this  arrogance  appears  to 
consist  in  attributing  success  to  his  own  power. — And  it  shall 
come  to  pass  when  the  Lord  finishes  off  all  his  work  in  Mt,  Sion\ 
for  the  expressive  vb.  yxa,  cp.  Zee  4^,  "  the  hands  of  Zerubbabel 
have  laid  the  foundations  of  this  house ;  his  hands  shall  also  give 
it  the  finishing  touch."  The  punishment  of  Assyria  in  Jerusalem 
will  be  the  finishing  touch  in  the  work  that  Yahweh  has  to  do 
there.  The  v.  is  prose :  of  its  origin  two  views  may  be  taken : 
(i)  it  is  a  prose  note  added  by  Isaiah  or  an  early  editor  at  the 
time  when  the  present  chapter  was  pieced  together  (cp.  Cond. 
p.  95) ;  or  (2)  it  is  the  note  of  a  late  editor  or  scribe.  If  (i)  be 
correct,  the  v.  may  be  the  literary  germ  of  the  eschatological  idea 
subsequently  elaborated,  that  a  great  judgment  on  the  nations 
that  had  attacked  Israel  would  take  place  in  or  about  Jerusalem  : 
see  Ezk  chs.  38  f.,  Jl  4  (3)12-17,  Zec  12I-9,  Dn  ii«  If  (2)  be 
correct,  it  is  a  summary  statement  of  this  idea,  or  a  deduction 
from  it,  applied  to  the  specific  case  of  Assyria.  Gressmann 
(pp.  177-179)  cites  as  rare  references  to  this  idea  in  pre-exilic 
prophecy.  Is  8^^-  i74ff.  i2ff.^  ]y[ic  4;  but  in  the  case  of  each  of 
these  passages  either  the  proposed  date  or  interpretation  is 
questionable :  see  above  on  8^^*. — He  will  punish']  so  ffi ;  J^ 
I  will  punish. — Greatness  of  heart"]  i.e.  audacity,  9^  n. ;  tYvQ  fruit 
of  audacity  is  perhaps  audacious  speech  (cp.  BDB  Z26b). — King 
of  Assyria]  in  the  poem,  Assyria  is  the  subject :  the  singular 
referring  to  Assyria  being  taken  individually  instead  of  collect- 
ively, suggested  the  king  to  the  annotator. — The  height  of  his 


X.  II-I9  *99 

eyes]  i.e.  his  pride:  the  phrase  occurs  in  Pr  21*,  the  idea  in 
Is  2". 

13  f.  Assyria  attributes  its  conquests,  so  easily  and  completely 
obtained  (v.^^),  to  its  own  power  and  wisdom  (v.^^). — Their  stores 
I  plundered]  the  text  is  anything  but  certain,  for  why  should  the 
conqueror  plunder  only  things  laid  up  in  store?  In  Dt  32^  the 
word  rendered  stores  seems  to  mean  "the  destined  future" 
(Driver,  ad  loc.) :  elsewhere  it  is  used  of  persons  ready  or  pre- 
pared to  do  something  (Job  152*,  Est  3I*  8^3,  Job  3^).— /«  the 
dust]  for  the  conjecture,  see  phil.  n.  J^  like  a  mighty  one 
(Job  2tA^^  La  1^5),  or,  by  a  more  questionable  translation  (Di.), 
like  a  bull  (cp.  Ps  22^^  50^^);  ffi  cities. — The  enthroned]  for  2K'\ 
to  sit  (enthroned)^  see  Ps  2*  29^^,  and  perhaps  Am  i^'^.  If  the 
wider  sense  inhabitants  is  meant,  cp.  "Bring  down  peoples," 
Ps  56®C^. — 14.  In  vivid  figures  the  speaker  enforces  v.^^;  he 
has  robbed,  captured,  and  silenced  the  whole  earth. 

15.  In  attributing  all  its  success  to  its  own  power  (v.^**-), 
Assyria  had  vaunted  itself  against  Yahweh  (cp.  Jg  7^),  or,  being  in 
the  terms  of  v.*  a  rod  and  stick  in  the  hand  of  Yahweh,  had 
vaunted  itself  of  guiding  the  hand  that  used  it.  Yet  this  was  a 
vain  boast:  as  a  matter  of  fact,  and  as  everyday  life  proves, 
implements  such  as  the  axe  or  the  saw  have  no  power  of  them- 
selves, everything  depends  on  the  purpose  and  power  of  the  man 
who  uses  them.  So  the  boast  of  Assyria  is  vain :  history  is  the 
revelation  of  Yahweh's  purpose,  not  of  Assyria's  might.  Such 
seems  to  be  the  thought,  but  it  is  awkwardly  expressed,  for 
which  reason  Du.  considers  it  to  be  a  late  addition,  and  Cond. 
places  it  after  v.''. 

16-19.  The  punishment  of  Assyria.— Something  like 
the  substance  of  these  verses  is  certainly  required  at  this  point 
to  carry  out  the  threat  suggested  by  the  previous  vv. ;  but  a 
number  of  scholars  have  agreed  with  Du.  that  this  section 
cannot  in  its  present  form  be  the  work  of  Isaiah  ;  the  conclusion 
is  correct,  but  it  might  be  more  widely  stated,  viz.  that  in  their 
present  form  these  verses  do  not  represent  the  work  of  any 
writer,  but  that  they  have  suffered  from  some  transposition  of 
lines  and  other  corruption.  For  it  seems  incredible  that  even  a 
bungling  imitator  of  Isaiah  would  have  made  quite  such  a 
muddle  of  borrowed  material  as  is  found  in  the  present  text. 
Du.  holds  that  v.^^'  ^  is  borrowed  from  17*,  i^°*  ^  suggested  by  9*, 


200  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

ira  by  2i9^  17b  (fire  and  flame)  by  so^o,  that  i7«- **  =  9"  +  (in  one 
day)  9^^,  and  that  v.^^^-  (wood  and  garden  land)  comes  from  32^^, 
and  "the  child"  in  v.^^  from  11^.  If  all  this  is  really  borrowed 
material,  the  passage  is  doubtless  the  work  of  a  late  supple- 
menter.  In  that  case  the  conclusion  of  the  poem  in  vv.^-  ^'  ^^'  ^^ 
has  been  lost:  it  is  not  to  be  sought  with  Che.  in  i42*-27. 
Even  if  the  verses  belong  to  the  same  poem,  they  may  not 
be  the  immediate  continuation  of  v.^^^^*)^  the  suffixes  in  v.^^ 
suggest  a  more  recent  direct  mention  of  Assyria.  The 
coming  destruction  is  expressed  by  means  of  two  figures — the 
one  of  fatal  disease  attacking  a  healthy  body,  the  other  of  a 
destructive  fire,  consuming  everything  before  it  save  for  a  few 
trees  that  escape.  At  present  the  clauses  referring  to  illness, 
y  18b.  0^  stand  in  the  middle  of  the  description  of  the  forest  fire : 
it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  they  are  misplaced.  \ 

16.  Assyria,  like  Israel  in  i^,  is  compared  to  a  human  body; 
at  present  it  is  in  lusty  health,  /at  and  flourishing.  But  into  this 
body  Yahweh  dispatches  leanness  that  it  may  waste  the  man 
away.  The  figure  is  paralleled  by  17*,  the  phraseology  by 
Ps  106^^  (if  the  text  there  be  correct).  But  in  spite  of  this  the  idea 
is  independently  expressed,  and  with  freshness  and  vigour  which 
by  no  means  suggest  a  mere  imitator. — His  fai\  D^JtttJ'D  are  the 
fat  parts  of  the  body,  cp.  17*  (sing.),  and,  figuratively,  Dn  11 2*; 
less  probably  his  fat  ones  (RV),  i.e,  the  warriors,  cp.  Ps  78^1. 
Fat  to  the  Hebrews  was  a  sign  of  health  and  strength ;  cp. 
Jg  3^^' — Like  the  kindling  offire\  this  clause,  if  the  kindling  is  an 
actual  fire,  as  is  generally  assumed,  is  a  mere  multiplication  of 
sound  and  words  which  may  be  attributed  to  the  incompetent 
imitator  (Du.),  or  (?  cp.  (K)  to  textual  accretion  (Kit.,  Mar.).  But 
the  kindling  need  not  be  a  literal  fire ;  it  may  refer  to  fever :  cp. 
"like  a  burning  fire  shut  up  within  my  bones"  (Jer  20^).  Then 
Assyria  is  conceived  as  a  man  not  only  fat  and  strong,  but 
gloriously  apparelled ;  under  the  outward  glory ^  i.e.  the  splendid 
raiment  (cp.  Ex  282-  ^o^  Ps  45I*  (?),  Mt  6^9),  the  body  burns  with 
fever  which  consumes  both  soul  and  body  (v.^^^) ;  cp.  "  consumption 
and  fever  which  consume  the  eyes  and  make  the  soul  pine  away  " 
(Lv  26^^).  V.^6  indicates  that  Assyria  will  rapidly  decay;  the 
figure  of  fire  (v.^")  suggests  even  more  sudden  destruction, 
particuarly  if  in  that  day  be  original.  Other  explanations  oi  glory 
are  (i)  that  it  refers  to  the  imposing  military  might  of  Assyria 


X.   1 6- 1 9,  5-9  201 

regarded  as  a  mass  of  inflammable  material;  so  Di.,  and  very 
similarly  Du.,  who  compares  9* ;  (2)  that,  as  in  5^*,  it  means  the 
nobility,  the  nobles  of  Assyria  (Ges.),  who  are  to  be  burnt  up  with 
the  fire  of  war.  In  no  case  are  both  the  significance  of  nu3  and 
the  figure  the  same  as  in  1 7*. — 17.  A  fresh  figure :  Yahweh  the 
light  of  Israel  (q."^.  Ps  27^),  illuminating  the  way  along  which  His 
people  should  walk  (2*^),  is  also  a  destructive  fire,  destroying 
their  enemies  (Dt  9^) ;  the  Assyrians  (cp.  yy^'^^\  who  if  the  v. 
occupies  its  original  position  must  be  referred  to  here,  are  by 
the  requirements  of  the  figure,  the  thorns  and  thistles^  in  which  a 
fire  kindles,  forest  and  garden-land^  or  orchard^  too,  to  which 
such  a  fire  may  spread. — In  a  single  day]  6r  in  that  day.  The 
clause  is  out  of  place  between  the  two  sets  of  vegetation  which 
the  flame  consumes.  With  its  omission  ^^*-  ^**  becomes,  like 
the  preceding,  a  3  :  3  distich. — Consuming  soul  and  flesh]  the 
clause,  being  inapplicable  to  trees  (^^),  is  out  of  place ;  see  above. 
— And  it  shall  be  .  .  .]  the  words  that  follow  are  doubtful  (phil.  n.) ; 
neither  as  when  a  standard-bearer  fainteth^  nor  as  when  a  sick  man 
pineth  away,  would  be  in  place  here;  this  clause,  too,  may  be 
misplaced  as  well  as  corrupt. — 19.  The  destruction  is  not  quite 
complete ;  trees  so  few  that  they  can  easily  be  counted,  or  that 
a  child  can  make  a  list  of  them,  survive.  Possibly  the  v.  comes 
from  a  description  of  Yahweh's  consuming  fire  destroying  Israel 
(Dt  4^4),  but  sparing  an  exiguous  remnant  (17^).  The  rhythm 
is  not  that  of  vv.^'^-  ^**. 

5.  DT3  Kin] a  gloss  (Hitz.,  al.  :  see  Che.  SBOT) ;  note  {a)  the  3rd//.  suffix 
in  reference  to  nu^K  contrasts  with  the  3rd  sing,  in  the  poem  ;  {b)  the  words 
divide  'Dyi  noD,  the  synonymous  parallel  to  'BK  B3t7  (v.***) ;  (c)  their  presence 
creates  bad  sense  and  poor  parallelism.  Probably  some  word  either  before 
(cp.  Che.  SBOT,  p.  195)  or  after  'oyj  ntsD  has  dropped  out;  *in  in  the  first 
line  is  outside  the  rhythm  of  the  distich  :  see  note  introductory  to  5^"^  (p.  89). 
For  Kin  ntsD  some  MSS  have  wbd. — 6.  la  la^  S^r  Shvhl  cp.  Ezk  29'*  38^''*. 
This  and  the  next  line  read  naturally  as  a  4  : 4  distich.  Are  the  lines  an 
original  part  of  the  poem  ?  If  they  stand,  v.'"*  ^  seems  to  express  the  excess 
of  Assyria's  action  over  Yahweh's  commission ;  yet  is  there  much  difference 
between  trampling  a  people  to  mire  and  destroying  it? — tdk'  'a]  an  error, 
through  dittography,  for  not*  '3  (cp.  v.")? — 9.  iJ*?a]  MT  points  \3^3,  in  Am 
6^,  where  the  association  with  Hamath  makes  it  fairly  certain  that  the  same 
place  is  intended,  nj^s  :  probably  the  name  was  'jV|i  ;  cp.  (K  XoXawi;,  Assyr. 
Ep.  list  Kul-la-ni-i.  But  (5r  wrongly  identifies  this  XaXaypii  with  the 
XaXavvT?  of  Gn  lo^**  and  adds  the  note,  inferred  from  Gn  10^®  ll^**,  o5  hirip^oi 
(pKodofJL'^dr} ;  the  tower  of  Babel  seems  to  have  been  a  favourite  thought  with 


202 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


ffi,  cp.  9^*.  (K  further  substitutes  Arabia  for  Arpad  and  Hamath,  and  in 
other  respects  renders  vv.^*^'  very  freely. — 10.  It  is  very  doubtful  whether 
this  V.  ought  to  be  made  a  little  more  tolerable  in  its  context  by  reading  nhttn 
for  h'hun  and  omitting  |nDsyDi  (Che.  in  SB07\  following  suggestions  of  Gratz, 
Hackm.,  Giesebrecht) :  Marti  rightly  argues  that  ffir's  iXoXiJIare  (="i^'^'n)  is 
nearer  '?''?Kn  than  rhnn  -.  certainly  (It's  TaiJras,  in  view  of  its  position  and  the 
paraphrase  in  ffir,  is  no  evidence  that  rhi<ri  stood  after  nia^Da*?. — Dn'!?'D£3i 
nSm'D]  commonly  explained  to  be  a  circumstantial  clause  and  an  ellipsis  for 
uhm'T  ♦V'DSD  13T  d.t'?'D31,  Kon.  SoS^-;  G-K.  133*  :  but  in  the  alleged  parallels 
the  text  (Mic  7*,  Pr  iS^^),  or  the  interpretation  (Koh  4"  9",  Is  412^,  Ps  62^0) 
is  doubtful,  or  the  cast  of  the  sentence  is  different;  in  Job  11"  a  vb.  is 
expressed,  and  in  Ezk  15',  Ca  5'  no.— 13.  nniKi  .  .  .  Toxi]  <&  consistently 
renders  all  the  vbs.  of  vv."** "  by  futures,  understanding  that  what  Assyria 
intends,  Yahweh  does  not  allow  him  to  do.  This  interpretation  also  under- 
lies the  scriptio  plena  TDK,  ttk.  MT  is  inconsistent — TpNi,  TniN],  but 
Ny^fil.  The  pf.  tenses  show  that  the  writer  intended  npx;,  ni'iNi,  'dbi  :  the 
scriptio  plena  and  ffi  are  wrong.— D.Tm'njn]  The  K"re  'ninyi  differentiates  the 
word  here  from  'nJnyi  in  Dt  32^.  On  the  Aramaic  colouring  of  the  word, 
see  Driver,  Deut.  pp.  374  f.  It  would  be  easy  to  restore  onmnyi;  cp.  U 
principeSi  and  see  14®. — "•ne'ir]  = 'noiB'  (cp.  42^4;  see  G-K.  6k) 'j  T'Dit?  is 
read  by  some  MSS.— Taio  nniNi]  K^tib  T9><?,  K«r6  T93  (17"  28=*),  <&  koI 
aelffo)  irSXeis.  Du.,  combining  |^  and  (&,  conjecturally  restores  any  miNi 
nsi^^  (or  iJJNn) ;  if  nsya  is  rightly  conjectured,  nsyn  nmw  was  probably  the 
source  of  both  -i2K3  nxi  (|§^)  and  my  mwi  {(B). — 14.  (&  abbreviates  lines  a-d, 
paraphrases  e-f ;  b  is  short  in  |^. — 15.  fi'jna]  with  the  like  of  a  staff's 
shaking:  see  BDB,  s.v.  3,  p.  454b;  cp.  Wright,  Arabic  Gram.  ii.  63:  or 
perhaps  3  represents  a  whole  sentence.  For  instruments  to  boast  them- 
selves against  the  agent  (^'^**  *•)  is  like  claiming  to  be  themselves  actually 
agents. — ntao  .  .  .  ena']  without  the  art.  :  ct.  jnjn,  mrDn  :  this  difference 
is  the  stranger  if  a2B'  refers  back  to  v.*. — vd'TDTx]  some  MSS  read  'D-riNi. 
The  pi.  is  an  attempt  by  means  of  the  pluralis  majestatis  to  make  the 
reference  to  Yahweh  clear:  some  MSS  more  correctly  read  tenD. — {'y  k"?] 
cp.  jf'N-N'?,  318. — 16.  \r\\i^Ti\  3  MSS  and  ffir  omit.— nnm]  C5  KaX  d%.—Vj.  itjmpi 
TC\vy\  Tiirhhl  ^  koX  ayidtxei  avrbu  iv  irvpl  Kaiofihcp  =  rf)]!2  n^nhn  Sv-^p];  read 
mj)2  nmh^  i8'i(?i,  which  is  rhythmically  equal,  and  parallel  in  sense,  to  JT'T 
vnh  'b"'Tin. — 18.  DD3  DDD3]  (&  6  ^€&y<av  (l)s  6  (f>eijy<i>v  dirb  (pXoybs  Kaio/n^prji ;  % 

pnyi  T3n  ;  SS  (001  |\j  y|  |001J0  ;  '}B  terror e  prof ugus.  These  guesses 
are  significant.  Later,  ddj  suggested  to  Rashi  dd,  a  wormy  and  to  Ki.  03,  a 
standard  {c^.  AV,  RVmarg,),  The  similar  ending  of  the  two  words  is  sus- 
picious. Like  a  sick  man^s  melting  away,  as  when  a  sick  man,  etc.,  are  very 
questionable  renderings ;  for  0D3,  to  be  sick,  is  without  parallel  in  Heb.,  and 
Syr.  «DQJ,  to  be  sick,  may  be  derived  from  v6aoi  !  see  Che.  in  SBOT.  The 
text  is  corrupt.  j 

20-27.    An    Appendix    to    the    preceding    poem, 

explaining  that  Yahweh's  anger  against  His  people  is  all  but 
spent ;  that  immediately  those  of  them  who  have  escaped  and 


^ 


X.   io-i8,  20-27  203 

remain,  will  be  set  free  from  the  bondage  of  "  Assyria,"  which 
will  in  turn  become  the  object  of  Yahweh's  anger. 

Two  things  are  clear:  (i)  w. 20-27  are  connected  with  w.*^-, 
for  his  smiter,  v. 20,  ike  rod^  v. 2*,  and  the  stick,  v.2«,  are  obvious 
references  back  to  v.*:  (2)  these  verses  are  prose,  except  that 
v.*'^  closes  with  a  distich. 

Isaiah  wrote  prose  as  well  as  poetry,  but  there  is  no  reason 
to  believe  that  he  allowed  fine  poems  to  dribble  out  in  prose 
conclusions.  Either  {a)  vv. 20-27  are  due  to  some  disciple  of 
Isaiah,  who  recalled  the  substance,  but  no  longer  the  form,  of  the 
conclusion  of  the  poem  preserved  fragmentarily  in  \\y^^\  or, 
more  probably,  {p)  the  verses  are  the  work  of  some  late  student 
of  Scripture,  who  sought,  mainly  by  compiling  a  cento  of  Scrip- 
ture texts  and  phrases  (see  references  in  the  notes  that  follow), 
to  give  the  old  poem  greater  suitability  in  an  age  which  required 
positive  comfort  for  itself  as  well  as  a  promise  that  Assyria  should 
be  destroyed. 

20.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day]  7^'  and  often. — 
The  remnant  (hnC^)  of  Israet]  so  the  remnant  of  Jacob,  v.^i.  Cp. 
"The  remnant  (nn«K^)  of  Israel,"  Jer  31 7,  Mic  2^2,  Ezk  ii^S; 
"of  Jacob,"  Mic  5«^.  Cp.  also  "the  remnant  (nxt^)  of  his 
people,"  1 1"-  ^«  285  .  «« of  Syria,"  178  x\.—And  the  escaped]  42  n.— 
Of  the  House  of  Jacob]  2*  n.  ffi  here  omits  the  House  of — Shall 
no  more  lean  for  support  upon  him  that  smote  it]  the  remnant  will 
no  more  trust  in  foreign  powers  as  the  nation  had  done  in  days 
of  old,  as  when  Ahaz  in  734  B.C.  relied  on  Assyria  (ch.  7),  which 
smote  Judah  in  701  b.c.  Du.'s  epigram,  "Ahaz  leant  for  support 
on  Assyria  (2  K  16),  but  was  not  smitten ;  Hezekiah  was  smitten, 
but  did  not  lean  for  support  on  Assyria,"  is  true,  for  it  would  be 
too  odd  to  describe  Assyria  as  smiting  Ahaz  when,  though  at 
a  ruinous  cost,  they  gave  him  the  support  for  which  he  appealed 
(Kon.  Einleitung,  p.  305).  The  writer  is  oblivious  of  the 
chronology  of  Isaiah's  age :  whether  Du.'s  detailed  explanation 
is  correct  is  more  doubtful  (see  Introd.  §  26  f.) :  according  to  him, 
the  writer  is  applying  the  old  threat  against  the  Assyria  of  Isaiah's 
day  to  the  New  Assyria  (cp.  Ezr  6^2,  Ps  83®?),  the  Seleucid 
Empire,  which  prevailed  in  his  own ;  under  Alkimus  and,  later, 
John  Hyrcanus,  the  Jewish  community,  willingly  or  unwillingly, 
rested  on  the  Seleucids  and  were  smitten  by  them ;  freedom 
was  expected  by  the  pious  as  soon  as  Israel  rested  solely  on 


204  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Yahweh. — Him  that  smote  it]  cp.  and  ct.  9^2^ — But  shall  lean 
for  support  upon]  30^2  ^i^,  2  Ch  13^^  14^®  i6'^'*:  differently 
Mic  ^^\—The  Holy  One  of  Israef]  i*  i\.—In  truth]  \6^  388  48^ 
618 :  cp.  also  Jg  9^^  i  S  122*. — 21.  The  remnant  shall  return] 
73  n. —  Unto  the  Mighty  God]  9^  n.  The  v.  is  a  proof  of  what 
has  been  asserted  in  v. 20,  drawn  not  by  Isaiah  from  his  own 
prophecies,  but  by  a  late  student  from  Scripture.  Whether 
to  this  student  the  Mighty  God  meant  the  Messiah  as  in  9*,  or 
God  Himself,  is  not  quite  clear. — 22.  Here  the  writer  seems  to 
reflect  on  two  prophecies,  one  foretelling  that  the  people  of  Israel 
shall  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea  (Hos  2^  (i^^),  cp.  Gn  22^^"  32^^),  the 
other  that  only  a  remnant  of  them  will  return.  In  the  2nd  cent 
B.C.,  and  even  a  century  or  two  earlier,  the  Jews,  including  the 
millions  living  in  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia,  had  become,  what 
they  were  not  in  Isaiah's  day,  very  numerous ;  but  there  were 
among  them  "many  apostates,  still  more  indifferentists :  those 
loyal  to  the  law,  the  Ilasidim,  the  little  band  who  fought  for 
freedom,  were  only  a  little  band"  (Du.). — 22b,  23.  This  double 
aspect  of  the  future  will  certainly  be  realised,  for  Yahweh  has 
irrevocably  determined  a  judgment  which,  taking  place  in  the 
midst  of  the  earth,  will  be  universal  in  its  scope ;  it  will  give  over- 
flowing proof  of  Yahweh's  righteousness  (cp.  i^'^  5^^)  by  working 
deliverance  of  the  elect,  and  accomplishing  ''^  the  annihilation 
already  decisively  determined"  (28^),  of  the  wicked,  whether 
Israelite  or  heathen  (cp.  59^*'*'2^). 

24-27.  Sion  has  nothing  to  fear  from  Yahweh's  anger — a 
point  of  view  radically  unlike  that  commonly  taken  by  Isaiah, 
but  resembling  that  of,  e.g.,  40^*'*. — Therefore  thus  saith]  30^2^ — 
The  Lord  Yahweh  of  Hosts]  -^.—Fear  not]  7*  35*  4110- 1^^-  43!-  « 
44^. — My  people]  i'  40^  and  often. —  Who  dwell  in  Sion]  cp.  30^^ 
— Because  of  Assyria]  see  v.^o  n. —  When  he  smites  with  the  rod] 
V.5  30^1. — And  lifts  up  his  stick]  v.^ — After  the  manner  of  Egypt] 
Am  4^*^ :  here  Assyria  whips  the  Jews,  as  the  Egyptians  whipped 
Israel  in  Egypt  (Ex  5^*'^^);  in  v.^^  the  stick  is  used  against 
Assyria,  as  it  was  used  against  Egypt. — 25.  There  is  no  need 
for  Yahweh's  people  to  fear  {y.'^%for  within  a  very  little  time 
(29^^)  Yahweh's  wrath  (DVT,  v.**,  Dn  8^^)  against  them  will  be  spent 
(Dn  11'*,  cp.  Is  26^0):  the  last  blows  which  His  righteous  anger 
against  their  sin  compelled  Him  to  inflict  on  them  with  His  rod, 
"  Assyria  "  (v.*),  are  now  falling ;  He  is  about  to  scourge  Assyria 


X.    21-27  205 

instead  (v.*^).  The  last  clause  of  v.^  is  commonly  supposed  to 
mark  the  transition  from  v.^s*  to  v.*^ :  assuming  a  rather  harsh 
and  improbable  ellipsis,  J^  may  be  rendered  and  my  anger  (shall 
turn)  to  their  destruction ;  but  the  style  is  most  awkward,  and  the 
use  of  bv  and  of  the  3rd  pi.  in  reference  to  Assyria  very  sus- 
picious, f^,  if  the  consonants  were  differently  divided,  might 
also  mean,  and  my  anger  against  the  world  shall  be  at  an  end : 
but  this,  too,  would  be  awkward ;  for  "  the  world  "  in  that  case 
must  exclude  Assyria  and  refer  only  to  that  part  which  is  en- 
slaved by  Assyria  (cp.  14^^.  But  if  we  omit  hlD  f»y,  against  the 
world,  as  a  gloss,  what  remains  is  an  excellent  parallel  to  the 
previous  clause ;  for  the  two  vbs.  nh^  and  DDD  in  parallelism,  cp. 
16*  and  (reading  ion)  La  3^2. — 26.  And  Yahweh  of  Hosts  will 
brandish  over  him\  i.e.  over  Assyria :  "niy,  brandish,  as  2  S  23^ — 
A  scourge]  28^^ — As  when  Midian  was  smitten]  9^  n.,  Ps  83^^^. 
—At  the  rock  of'Oreb]  Jg  725,  cp.  Ps  83I2  (M),—And  his  stick  over 
the  sea — he  will  raise  it  after  the  manner  of  Egypt]  Ex  14^^:  see 
above,  v. 2*  n. — 27.  After  the  opening  formula  (cp.  v.20),  if  ^n* 
be  read  for  biv\\  an  excellent  distich  (4  :  4),  a  variation  of  142^ 
(cp.  9^  n.),  is  recovered — 

His  burden  shall  depart  from  upon  thy  shoulder, 

And  his  yoke  shall  cease  from  (resting)  upon  thy  neck. 

The  remaining  words  of  the  v.  (jDK'  *:BD  fjy)  have  been  slightly 
mutilated  and  wrongly  detached  from  v. 28.  The  attempts  to 
interpret  J^  as  it  stands  are  the  best  proof  that  it  is  corrupt :  the 
last  sentence  can,  of  course,  be  translated  and  a  yoke  will  be 
ruined  because  of  oil,  or  fat  (5^  n.) ;  these  words,  it  is  said,  con- 
tain a  comparison  of  Judah  to  an  animal  grown  so  fat  that  the 
yoke  is  broken  by  the  counter  pressure  of  its  fat  neck,  the  pur- 
pose of  the  comparison  being  to  indicate  that  deliverance  is  to 
come  from  within  as  well  as  from  without  (Del.).  For  other 
explanations  neither  better  nor  worse,  see  Ges.  and  Di. 

22.  318"  .  .  .  r\'>7\''  DK]  Dr.  §§  136,  143.-103;]  (&.  oy.— u  .  .  .  nxr]  cp. 
Din  nxB'jn,  Lv  5* :  see  BDB  88a  (bottom).— |v'?3]  Dt  28<»  f  (in  a  different 
sense). — pnn]  the  Kal  meaning,  to  determine,  occurs  again  only  in  Job  14' ; 
but  cp.  the  Niphal  in  v.^ ;  and  see  Dn  q^^'-  i  i^,  which  are,  in  other  respects 
also,  phraseologically  connected  with  this  passage. — np'x^i  rjor]  ace.  after  verba 
copiae:  G-K.  1170.— ^3.  mK3s  m.r]  (!R  om.— 24.  -jntt]  ffi^  om.— nD3']  G-K. 
58^, «.— 25.  nyiD]  16"  24«  29"t.— dj;t]  Che.  proposes  TDyi ;  cp.  the  parallel  'BK  : 
but  perhaps  'SN  arose  by  dittography  from  on'  r\H :  see  next  n, — Dn'^an  ^y  'ijK] 


206  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

a  few  MSS  read  on'Von,  which  would  be  synonymous  with  Dn'Vnn  f  ;  for  n'^an 

from  vn^  would  mean  a  wearing  out,  destruction,  hv  is  used  to  express 
direction  towards,  **  not  common  except  in  the  sense  against "  (BDB  757a) ;  but 
examples  of  the  use  of  hv  such  as  Ca  7^^,  2  Ch  20^^,  cited  in  BDB  757^  (under 
7c  {c)),  are  really  very  different  from  that  commonly  assumed  here.  The 
obvious  meaning  if  it  were  suitable  in  the  context  would  be  my  anger  at 
(roused  by)  their  destruction."  Luzzatto  proposed  tipc,  Vag  Vy  *9ij ;  this  is 
improbable  (see  above) :  on  the  other  hand,  on'  'Ski  oyt  n^ai  gives  all  that 
seems  to  be  wanted ;  San  Vy  was  perhaps  the  note  of  some  reader  who  took  the 
verbs  nSa  and  DOn  in  their  other  sense  to  be  fulfilled,  and  explained  the  wrath 
as  that  which  would  affect  the  whole  world  in  the  last  judgment. — 26.  aits'] 
possibly,  through  similarity  of  sound,  for  v>2V  (v.^).  (&  omits. — D'n  hu  inoDi 
wtJ'Ji]  rather  poor  Hebrew.  Winckler  {ATUntersuchungen,  177)  suggests 
vw>  d.tVj;  ;  but  this  introduces  the  suspicious  pi.  suffix :  Marti,  ^v  vVy. 
Perhaps  the  corruption  goes  deeper,  fflr  renders  koX  6  dvfxbs  avrov  ry  oSy  ry 
KarcL  dakaaaav. — 27.  Sam]  this  is  an  early  error  for  Sin',  which  is  parallel  to 
niD'  and  completes  the  rhythm  of  the  distich  4  :  4.  The  emendation  is  due  to 
W.  R.  Smith  (Journal  of  Philology,  xiii.  62  f.). — pv  'jsd  '^y]  yields  no  sense  : 
see  above  and  phil.  n.  on  p.  209. 

X.  27C-32. — A  Dramatic  IdylL 

The  prevailing  rhythm  in  vv.  *'"***  is  2  :  2  ;  in  vv.*^^"'^  the  rhythm  becomes 
more  uncertain,  and  the  text  at  the  same  time  shows  signs  of  corruption  (see 
phil.  n. ).  The  poem  is  probably  defective  :  perhaps  two  lines  at  the  ban- 
ning and  four  of  the  last  strophe  have  been  lost. 

27c  He  hath  gone  up  from  Pene  *  Rimmon,* 

28  He  hath  fallen  on  'Ayyath  j  ^Hl 

He  hath  passed  through  Migron,  ^"' 

At  Michmas  he  depositeth  his  baggage; 
2*  *  He  hath '  passed  over  the  ravine, 
(In)  Geba  is  *his*  night  quarters. 

Ramah  hath  trembled, 
Gibeah  of  Saul  hath  fled. 
^  Give  a  shrill  cry,  .  .  .  . ! 

daughter  of  Gallim  I 

Give  heed,  Laishah ! 
Answer  her,  Anathoth ! 
*^  Madmenah  hath  run  away, 

The  inhabitants  of  Gebim  have  sought  refuge. 

«2  To-day 

He  will  swing  his  hand. 
Towards  the  Mount  of  the  daughter  of  §ion, 
The  hill  of  Jerusalem. 


I 


X.   26-32  207 

The  poet  assumes  the  standpoint  of  one  who  is  in  Jerusalem 
on  the  morrow  after  an  invader,  marching  from  the  north,  has 
entered  Judaean  territory  and  encamped  within  a  few  miles  of  the 
capital,  ready  to  strike  at  it  the  next  day. 

First,  the  invader's  march  is  described  in  a  succession  of  short 
telling  clauses,  w.27-29:  from  Pene  Rimmon,  some  ten  miles 
north  of  Jerusalem,  he  has  advanced  through  *Ai  and  Migron  to 
Michmas ;  leaving  his  heavy  baggage  there,  he  has  without  delay 
descended  into  the  deep  Wady  Suwenit  below  Michmas,  crossed 
its  bottom  and  made  the  steep  ascent  to  Geba*,  where  at  less 
than  six  miles  from  Jerusalem  he  has  encamped  for  the  night. 
This  concludes  the  description  of  the  march,  for  in  w.^^'^-^^  the 
subject  of  the  verb  is  no  longer  the  invader,  and  the  towns 
mentioned  do  not  lie  on  any  single  route  from  Geba*  to 
Jerusalem.  The  object  of  w,^^-^^  is  to  indicate,  partly  by 
descriptive  tenses,  partly  by  imperatives  addressed  to  the 
terrified  towns,  the  terror  of  the  country  between  Geba'  and 
Jerusalem  as  news  reaches  them  the  same  evening  of  the  near 
presence  of  the  hostile  army.  The  poem  closes  with  the 
inevitable  yet  ominous  inference.  To-day  the  invader  will  fall 
on  Jerusalem  itself,  v.^. 

Many  have  supposed  that  the  poem  ends  not  at  v.**,  but  at  v.** ;  in  that 
case  Isaiah's  purpose  in  the  whole  would  be  to  describe  the  invading  army, 
whether  Syro-Ephraimitish  or,  more  probably,  Assyrian,  advancing  right  up 
to  Jerusalem,  only  to  fall  there  before  the  unseen  power  of  Yahweh.  But 
this  is  improbable  :  for  (i)  the  rhythm  in  vv.*^'-  is  different ;  (2)  the  figurative 
language  of  vv.*^'*  has  no  natural  connection  with  the  simple  and  sustained 
literalism  of  w.*'"* ;  cp.  Cheyne,  Introd.  p.  56. 

If  the  poem  concludes  with  v.*^,  it  threatens  Jerusalem 
without  any  alleviating  promise,  and  is  therefore  inconsistent 
with  Isaiah's  attitude  at  the  time  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war 
(c.  7) ;  but  it  may  have  been  written  by  him  later,  in  expectation 
of  some  assault  by  Assyria,  though  it  is  improbable  that  Assyria 
would  ever  have  followed  the  line  of  march  indicated. 

Isaiah's  authorship  has  been  questioned  (Du.,  Marti)  on  the  grounds  of 
(i)  the  numerous  paronomasias:  cp.  Mic  i^-ia  .  ^2)  the  special  emphasis 
on  Jerusalem  ;  (3)  the  objective  character  of  the  description  which  scarcely 
suggests  a  prophet  living  in  the  midst  of  the  circumstances.  Against  (2),  cp. 
i^  n.,  and  note  that  vv.'^'^^  show  feeling  for  the  country  as  well  as  the  city. 
The  number  of  plays  on  words,  or  paronomasias,  has  been  exaggerated  ;  the 


208  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

supposed  play  on  the  name  of  Michmas,  for  example,  rests  on  a  very  question- 
able etymology.  i 

27c-29b.  The  Invader's  March. — Be  hath  gone  up]  ^ 
a  yoke,  see  phil.  n.,  and  above  on  v.^''^ — Pen^  Rimmon']  Du.'s 
conjecture  for  pene  shemen  (J^).  The  name  means  Face  of 
Rimmon\  cp.  Peniel,  Face  of  God\  the  deity  Rimmon  is 
mentioned  in  2  K  5^^.  The  modern  Rammon  lies  about  3 
miles  N.N.E.  of  Michmas. — 28.  *AyyatK\  probably  the  same  as 
Ai,  which  lay  to  the  E.  of  and  near  Bethel  (Gn  1 2^,  Jos  7^),  and 
consequently  a  little  to  the  N.  of  Michmas.  It  is  identified  by 
some  with  Der  Diwan,  about  3  miles  N.  of  Michmas. — Migron\ 
obviously  lay  N.  of  Michmas,  perhaps  on  the  site  of  the  modern 
Makrfin.  W.  R.  Smith,*  indeed,  argued  that  the  Migron 
mentioned  in  i  S  14^,  which  must  have  lain  South  of  Michmas, 
was  intended  here ;  and  that  a  detachment  of  the  invaders  fell 
upon  it  and  secured  it  before  the  main  body  attempted  the 
difficult  passage  of  the  Wady  es-Suwenit :  but  the  rendering  of 
3  nay  by  to  fall  upon  is  not  justified. — At  Michmas]  mod. 
Muhmas,  7  J  miles  N.  of  Jerusalem.  It  lies  at  an  elevation  of 
1990  feet,  distant  about  2  miles,  and  separated  by  the  deep  Wady 
es-Suwenit,  from  Geba*  (2220  feet),  which  stands  on  the  top  of 
the  opposite  slope.  To  avoid  the  difficulty  of  transport  over  this 
troublesome  piece  of  country,  the  invader  deposits  his  heavy 
baggage  at  Michmas. — 29.  He]  so  (!& ;  J^  they^  but  note  the  3rd 
sing,  in  other  sentences  in  J^. — Has  crossed  the  ravine]  lit.  has 
passed  the  passage  (mayc),  or  crossed  the  crossing,  viz.  of  the  wady 
between  Michmas  and  Geba*;  this  crossing  in  i  S  132^  is  called 
"  thepassage,  or  crossing  (i^VD),  of  Michmas."  The  passage  (nayo) 
of  Jabbok  (Gn  32^3)  was  a  real  ford ;  but  the  Wady  es-Suwenit  is 
often  dry:  the  present  writer  found  it  so  on  Feb.  25,  1904:  cp. 
Dalman  in  ZDFV  xxv'ni.  163  f.  Ravine  is  not  a  strict  equivalent 
of  nnayo,  but  it  is  used  here  in  order  to  summon  up  the  picture 
which  the  phrase  would  recall  to  a  Hebrew  familiar  with  the 
district :  (B  TrapeXtva-erai  ^dpayya  retains  the  picture ;  but  RV, 
they  are  gone  over  the  pass^  suggests  an  ascent,  a  passage  of  the 
top,  and  a  descent,  whereas  what  is  actually  described  is  a  steep 
descent,  a  passage  of  the  bottom,  and  a  steep  ascent — (/«)  Gebct 
are  his  night-quarters]  see  phil.  n.  J^  might  best  be  rendered 
Gebci  be  our  night-quarters,  a  dramatic  cry  of  the  army  as  it 
*  fPh.,  1884,  p.  63:  cp.  Driver,  Isaiah^  p.  72;  Stenning,  in  Z>^  ii.  169. 


m 


X.  27-32  209 

climbs  the  southern  slope  of  the  valley  to  Geba*,  which  lies 
within  six  miles  of  Jerusalem. 

29C-31.  The  alarm  of  the  country-side. — Ramah']  is 
er-Ram,  35  minutes  along  the  crest  of  the  hill  W.S.W.  from 
Geba*  (Baed.  Pai.  2^2>).—Gibeah  of  Sauf]  probably  Tell  el-FOl, 
the  site  of  which  satisfies  the  requirements  of  Jg  19^2-16^  j  g  io2-7. 
10-":  see  EBL  and  DB,  s.v.  Gibeah.—I^W  el-FQl  lies  about  2  J 
miles  S.S.E.  of  er-Ram,  about  3  miles  S.S.W.  of  Geba*,  and 
about  I J  miles  N.W.  of  *Anata  (Anathoth). — 30.  Three  or  four 
towns  between  Geba*  and  Jerusalem  are  dramatically  invited  to 
participate  in  the  lamentation  which  the  approach  of  the  invaders 
occasions. — Gallim  and  Laishah  (which  is  scarcely  el-*Isawiyyeh, 
between  *Anata  and  Jerusalem)  are  not  identified :  but  cp. 
"Palti,  the  son  of  Laish,  which  was  of  Gallim,"  i  S  25*^ — Answer 
her,  'Anathoth^  or,  less  probably,  O  poor  one,  'Anathoth;  in 
either  case  there  is  a  paronomasia — *aniah  'anathoth,  or  *aniyyah 
'anathoth.  *Anathoth  is  the  mod.  'An^ti,  2  J  miles  from  Jerusalem 
and  on  the  road  that  runs  from  Geba*  to  Jerusalem  through 
yizmeh ;  another  road  from  Geba*  to  Jerusalem  ran  through  er- 
Rim  (Ramah). — 31.  Madmenah  and  Gebim  are  both  unknown 
cities. — Have  sought  refuge\  for  themselves  and  their  belongings ; 
cp.  Ex  9^®,  where  the  obj.  of  ryn  is  expressed,  and  Jer  4®  6^, 
where,  as  here,  it  is  omitted  :  cp.  also  the  use  of  Kal  in  30*,  and 
the  noun  ny»  in  1 7'. 

32.  Assault  on  Jerusalem  is  imnjinent. — The  text  is  in 
several  respects  uncertain :  see  phil.  n.  To-day  is  the  morning 
after  the  night  spent  by  the  invaders  at  Geba*  (v.^^) ;  speaking 
dramatically,  as  one  risen  early  on  that  day  and  in  receipt  of  the 
news  which  has  already  thrown  the  places  between  Geba*  and 
Jerusalem  into  alarm,  the  poet  draws  the  conclusion  :  To-day  the 
foe  will  take  up  its  position  before  the  walls  of  Jerusalem. — In 
No^  the  text  is  doubtful,  and  the  site  of  Nob  uncertain.  Neh 
1 1^2  mentions  this  place  next  to  *Anathoth,  and  as  occupied  by 
Benjamites:  1  S  2i2(i)  22®- ^^  f  fails,  even  if  the  text  be  correct, 
to  define  the  site  more  closely.  Mainly  on  the  ground  of  the 
present  passage,  it  has  been  located  at  some  point  on  the  high 
ground  to  the  N.  of,  and  over-looking,  Jerusalem.  See,  further, 
Nob,  in  DB, 

27.  joty  '3DD  Sy]  1^  yields  no  sense  :  see  p.  206.     ^^—xh^;  cp.  33  =  n33  in 
Phoenician  inscriptions,  e.g.  CIS  i.  4'  =  Cooke,  NSI 6^ :  cp.  ib.  33^     For  'J£D 
VOL.  I. — 14 


2IO  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

jots',  W.  R.  Smith  {J Ph.  xiii.  63  ff.)  proposed  mt?  jssd,  the  waster  {i.e.  Assyria) 
from  the  North  ;  Du.  JQ"i  '33D,  which  is  easier  and  preferable  (see  above).  (& 
airb  Twv  (bfitap  {//iQv. — 28.  ^y  K3]  of  hostile  approach  :  so  Gn  342^,  i  S  12^*, 
Jg  18"  {v./.  ny).— n'y]  =  »«%  n'V  (Neh  ii^i,  i  Ch  7^)  with  retention  of  the  old 
fem.  n.  The  position  of  n^y  between  Michmas  and  Bethel  points  to  identifica- 
tion also  with  'yn.  dSt  €l$  t^v  t6\iv  ^Ayyai  (of  which  koX  ij^ei  els '  kyYO-f'  in  v.^ 
may  be  a  variant)  should  represent  'yn  "^vt^,  which  might  be  a  text  conflate  of 
two  variants  of  n'y. — Tp£3'  bODD*?]  many  editions  have  tddd^,  which  is  incorrect. 
It  is  very  questionable  whether  troDD  means  store-place ;  odd  in  Dt  32^  is 
probably  an  error  for  033.  In  Jer  36^®  3721  ^pan,  to  deposit ^  is  followed  by  5 ; 
with  7  the  vb.  may  mean  to  the  town  of  Michmas  he  entrusts  his  baggage 
(Ges.),  though  the  person  to  whom  a  deposit  is  entrusted  is  elsewhere  intro- 
duced by  T  ^y  (i  K  14"),  or  T3  (Ps  31'),  or  nK  (Jer  40').— 29.  nny]  ffl^ 
7ra/!)eXei;(rerai  =  n3y,  or  perhaps  rather  nny  (note  v'pa  preceding).  The  3rd 
sing.  pf.  is  right. — ^h  p^D  yaj]  13^  if  correct  is  either  \i)  for  us:  the  pi.  in 
such  a  dramatic  cry  would  not  be  impossible  in  spite  of  the  prevalent  singu- 
lars ;  or  (2)  3rd  pi.  pf.  of  pV,  {the  night-quarters  where)  they  have  spent  the 
night ;  but  this  would  give  a  pointless  redundance,  and  a  3rd  pi.  instead  of 
the  3rd  sing.,  which  is  used  of  the  invader  throughout  the  poem.  More 
probably  "u^  pSo =13^3^0  has  arisen  through  dittography  from  \h^. — ^30.  ♦^nst 
n*?!?]  double  subj.  :  G-K.  144OT.  (!&  omits  the  words  ;  but  possibly  even  |^ 
is  incomplete,  the  present  line  of  three  accents  being  a  mutilation  of  a  distich 
2  :  2. — D*^3*na]  perhaps  n3  =  n'3,  then  for  the  equivalence  of  names  with  and 
without  B*a,  see  HPN  127  £.—32.  Qvn  -ny]  this  very  day  (RV)  would  be  a 
suitable,  if  it  were  a  less  questionable,  rendering  :  niy  is  nowhere  else  used 
with  the  sense  presupposed  in  it.  Dr.  in  BDB  728^  renders  "j/zV/  to-day 
(such  is  his  haste)  will  he  tarry  in  Nob."  But  what  day  is  intended  ?  If  the 
day  on  which  the  invaders  reach  Geba',  the  clause  seems  inconsistent  with 
Geba'  being  the  night-quarters ;  but  if  the  morrow  is  intended,  the  clause 
becomes  rather  feeble,  for  Jerusalem  is  but  a  couple  of  hours'  march  from 
Geba'.  Other  established  meanings  of  niy  seem  equally  unsuitable  here  :  for 
example,  stilly  as  he  has  been  doing,  will  he  tarry  ;  again  will  he  tarry ;  in 
Noby  mx)reover  (as  well  as  in  other  places),  will  he  tarry.  Probably  iiy  is  a 
corruption  :  it  is  absent  from  C5,  and  ly  may  have  been  a  dittograph  of  Tyn= 
'W^'n  at  the  end  of  v.". — 333]  perhaps  corrupt :  see  above  and  Che.  EBi.  3430. 
(!Er  iv  6d(^. — ncyS]  he  must  tarry :  Dr.  §  204.  But  perhaps  noy  should  be 
restored,  unless  the  corruption  of  the  text  goes  deeper. — \y  «]£313']  the  Polel  of 
»)13  occurs  here  only;  the  Hiphil  used  more  or  less  similarly  occurs  in  li" 
19^',  Zee  2**,  Job  31''^,  Sir  12^*. — '\r\\  is  commonly  explained  as  the  ace.  of 
direction  (cp.  G-K.  118/");  but  the  omission  of  Vy  (cp.  references  in  last  n.) 
is  suspicious. — jvx  n'3  nn]  the  K®tib  gives  an  unparalleled  phrase :  K*re 
's  na  nn  as  i6^ — nysa]  CK  ol  povvol=T\:}2i.  The  phrase  0'"?^^  '3  does  not 
occur  again. — The  accumulation  of  unusual,  and  in  some  cases  suspicious, 
phenomena  render  it  probable  that  the  text  of  v.^  has  suffered.  It  is  unsafe, 
therefore,  to  assume  a  change  of  rhythm  (cp.  Di.);  the  last  two  clauses  are 
2  :  2,  the  dominant  rhythm  of  the  poem. 


X.  28-34  AND  XI.  1-8  211 

X.  33,  34. —  The  Fall  of  the  Forest 

V."**  is  of  two  accents;  •*••  "^  of  four,  but  perhaps  \\\nr\  (cp.  v.**)  in  the 
one  and  Snaa  (see  phil.  n.)  in  the  other  should  be  omitted.  The  original 
rhythm  was  then  3  :  3  with  the  variant  3  :  2  in  v.**^  *. 

*8  Behold  the  Lord  Yahwch  of  Hosts 

Is  lopping  off  the  branches  with  a  terrible  crash ; 
And  those  that  have  grown  high  will  be  hewn  down, 

And  the  lofty  will  be  brought  low. 
**  And  he  will  strike  away  the  thickets  of  the  forest  with  iron, 

And  Lebanon  with  *its*  majestic  (cedars)  shall  falL 

Under  the  figure  of  a  forest  of  lofty  trees  felled  by  the  woodman, 
this  brief  fragment  describes  the  approaching  destruction  of  some 
people  that  have  provoked  Yahweh's  majesty  by  their  pride  (cp. 
2iiff-). 

The  fragment,  though  not  the  original  conclusion  of  w.27-82 
(see  p.  207),  may  have  been  placed  here  by  the  compiler  in 
order  to  suggest  that  any  enemy  approaching  the  sacred  city 
would  perish.  The  figure  of  a  forest  occurs  in  w.^*^*  1** ;  but 
there  destruction  is  by  fire;  for  destruction  by  felling,  cp.  Dn 
^^11.  (i4)flf.^  Zee  II*,  and  especially  the  elaborate  description  of 
Assyria  under  the  figure  of  a  cedar  in  Ezk  31. 

34.  Thickets  of  the  forest]  9^^. —  With  *  its  *  majestic  (cedars)] 
cp.  2^%  Zee  11*,  and  see  phil.  n. ;  J§  is  commonly  understood  to 
mean  Ify  a  Majestic  one,  viz.  Yahweh. 

33.  mNB]  ^«r6  .TnB:  with  the  Knib,  cp.  niKS,  Ezk  17*  3i»'«  8.  m.  _ 
n2<nyD3]  this  derivative  from  \^])  (2^"'  *^)  occurs  here  only :  Du.  conjectures 
n!<yD3,  with  an  axe. — 34.  'jpii]  Piel,  the  subj.  being  Yahweh,  or  Niph.,  the 
pi.  subj.  following  the  pred.  (G-K.  i45<7).— mna  .  .  .  ^naa]  these  should 
be  parallel  terms,  but  they  are  not :  hence  some  substitute  for  thk  the  name 
of  an  implement  such  as  mnp  or  V'ra  (Ges.).  It  is  better  to  read  v^^tt  (cp. 
(&  ffifp  rots  i\{/T]\ois)  and  omit  Sn33  as  a  gloss  (note  the  rhythm).  So  Che., 
Marti. 

XI.  1-8. — The  Righteous  Ruler  of  the  Stock  ofjesse^  and  the 
Return  of  the  Golden  Age. 

Apart  from  the  first  three  words  of  v.",  which  are  a  dittograph,  |^  contains 
23  lines.  It  is  argued  in  the  n.  on  v.**  that  one  of  these  (v.**)  is  intrusive 
and  one  (v.'*')  misplaced ;  the  22  lines  that  remain  fall  into  eleven  distichs. 
An  alternative  theory  retains  v.'**  and  inserts  from  65^  a  line  which  there 
accompanies  v.'" :  this  would  bring  up  the  number  of  lines  to  24. 


212 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


The  distichs  (3:3,  or  4  :  4)  are  mostly  well-balanced  and  marked  by 
great  regularity  of  parallelism.  Some  apparent  exceptions  are  probably  due 
to  textual  corruption:  see  notes  on  vv.****^'*;  in  v.^  read  n^nn  (see  n.)  or 
makkeph  mn^-riNT,  the  two  words  forming  a  single  idea.  But  vv.'*-  *•  and  ^ 
are  two  distichs  4  :  3. 

Whether  we  reduce  the  number  of  lines  to  22,  or  raise  them  to  24,  or 
keep  them  at  23,  the  main  divisions  of  sense  do  not  give  strophes  of  exactly 
equal  lengths.  The  first  strophe  contains  6,  the  second  8,  the  third  8,  9,  or  10 
lines  according  to  the  view  taken  of  vv.*'  and  '^°.  If  the  poem  once  possessed 
complete  strophic  regularity,  it  most  probably  consisted  of  three  strophes  each 
containing  four  distichs.  In  that  case  it  is  probably  the  opening  distich  of 
the  poem  that  has  been  lost.  At  present  the  poem  opens  with  Waw  Conv. 
and  the  pf.  :  yet  so  also  does  2'. 

Du.  obtains  strophic  regularity  in  another  way  :  he  finds  four  strophes, 
each  of  six  lines,  ending  with  vv.^-  *•  *  and  ^  respectively.  But  this  division 
involves  several  improbabilities  :  (i)  v.°  is  torn  away  from  the  description  of 
the  king,  of  which  it  forms  a  part,  to  be  coupled  with  the  first  half  of  the 
description  of  the  beasts  ;  (2)  the  description  of  the  beasts  is  divided  into  two 
strophes  ;  and  (3)  in  order  to  eke  out  w.'**  into  six  lines,  v.*''  is  very  mistakenly 
(see  phil.  n. )  divided  into  two,  with  the  result  that  the  suckling  playing  about 
the  serpent's  hole  shares  a  distich  with  the  lion  eating  straw,  while  his  true 
mate,  the  weaned  child,  stands  apart  in  a  separate  distich  examining  the 
basilisk's  eye. 

^  And  there  shall  come   forth  a   shoot  from   the  stump  of 

Jesse, 

And  a  scion  from  his  roots  shall  bear  fruit; 
2  And  there  shall  rest  upon  him  the  spirit  of  Yahweh, 
The  spirit  of  wisdom  and  discernment, 
The  spirit  of  counsel  and  might, 

The  spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of  Yahweh. 


He  will  not  judge  by  that  which  his  eyes  see, 

Nor  by  that  which  his  ears  hear  will  he  decide; 
But  he  will  judge  the  needy  with  righteousness. 

And  decide  with  equity  for  the  poor  of  the  earth, 
And  he  will  smite  the  ruthless  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth, 

And  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  will  he  slay  the  wicked. 
And  righteousness  will  be  the  'girdle'  about  his  waist, 

And  faithfulness  the  waist-cloth  around  his  loins. 


^  And  the  wolf  shall  dwell  as  a  guest  with  the  lamb. 

And  the  leopard  shall  have  the  same  lair  with  the  kid; 

'■'^  And  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox, 

^"^  And  the  calf  and  the  young  lion  *  will  graze '  together ; 
With  a  little  child  acting  as  their  driver. 


XI.  1-8  213 

^*  And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  be  'companions  to  one 

another,* 
Together  shall  their  young  make  their  lair; 
8  And  the  suckling  shall  play  over  the  hole  of  the  asp, 
And  over  the  dwelling  (?)  of  the  viper  shall  the  weaned 

child  *  trip  about '  (?). 

The  poem  predicts  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  monarchy  in 
the  person  of  a  king  sprung  from  the  family  of  Jesse,  the  father 
of  David,  who  will  be  equipped  by  Yahweh's  spirit  for  all  the 
duties  of  a  righteous  ruler,  w.^**.  Thus  equipped,  he  will  in 
virtue  of  his  wisdom  discern  what  is  right,  and  in  virtue  of 
his  might  achieve  it,  securing  for  the  weak  what  is  due  to  them, 
and  smiting  down  the  powerful  who  do  wrong.  All  that  he  does 
will  be  done  in  righteousness  and  faithfulness,  vv.^-*.  In  his 
days  the  conditions  of  Paradise  will  return ;  the  beasts  will  no 
longer  be  at  enmity  with  one  another  and  with  men,  but  all  will 
live  together  in  peace  and  friendship,  w.^ 

The  thought  of  the  poet  is  concentrated  on  the  future  of  the 
Jews,  though  he  sees  it  in  the  light  of  conditions  (w.^-^)  which 
will  presumably  be  universal  and  not  limited  to  Palestine.  The 
larger  thought,  too,  of  the  world-wide  government  of  the  king 
breaks  through  in  v.*,  if  the  words  of  the  earth  be  original. 

Of  the  conditions  which  immediately  precede  the  reign  of 
this  king  he  says  nothing  directly,  nor  gives  any  indication  how 
soon  the  future  which  he  predicts  may  be  expected.  It  is 
possible  that  an  opening  distich  has  been  lost  (see  above,  p.  212) 
which  may  have  resembled  9^  ^^^  in  its  tenor. 

The  editor,  whether  Isaiah  himself  (Di.  p.  104),  or  another  [e.g,  Marti), 
who  is  responsible  for  the  present  arrangement  of  Isaiah  chs.  io''-i2,  may 
indeed  have  intended  that  this  reign  was  to  begin  when  the  world-power  has 
been  destroyed  and  the  destruction  of  everything  opposed  to  God  within 
Israel  and  without  (lo^^*)  has  been  accomplished.  But  Di.,  no  less  than 
Du.,  argued  that  ii^*-  is  not  the  immediate  continuation  of  lo""**;  and  in 
spite  of  Kit's  attempt  to  prove  the  contrary,  this  remains  clear  (see  above  on 
lo""**).  It  is  not  even  probable  that  lo^'*,  which  is  certainly  not  the  original 
continuation  of  lo^"^,  contains  the  opening  distich,  or  distichs,  of  ii*''^' : 
10",  indeed,  if  we  omit  "with  iron,"  is  a  distich  similar  in  rhythm  and 
parallelistic  structure  to  ii^*^,  but  by  itself  it  forms  a  less  probable  beginning 
than  11^  On  the  other  hand,  10**  is  less  similar  to  ii^"®  and  is  still  no  good 
opening  ;  moreover,  the  elaborate  metaphors  of  lo"***  contrast  with  the 
general  literalness  of  11^-*  :  the  figure  in  11*  is  simple,  and  ii**^  is,  of  course. 


214  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

intended  literally,  not  metaphorically.  Finally,  the  antithesis  sought  between 
lo^'*  and  11^ — the  Assyrian  cedar  forest  is  smitten  down,  the  tree  of  Jesse  is 
rejuvenated — is  anything  but  inevitable — ("unverkennbar,"  Di.),  and  is 
certainly  not  suggested  by  the  order  of  the  words.  Had  the  writer  of  ii* 
been  the  author  also  of  the  antithesis  attributed  to  him  by  those  who  make 
11^  the  immediate  continuation  of  lo**,  it  is  probable  that  he  would  have 
written  KS*  npn  v*  yjJDi. 

It  follows  that  ll^"®  must  be  judged  by  itself  and  not  in  connection 
with  I0»-". 

If  the  most  obvious  is  the  correct  interpretation  of  v.^,  the 
poem  was  written  after  586  b.c.  (see  on  v.^).  A  downward  limit 
of  date  is  fixed  by  the  quotation  in  6525.  Like  9^-^  the  poem  might 
well  have  been  written  towards  the  end  of  the  Exile  when  men's 
minds  were  turning  towards  Restoration,  and  when  some  may 
have  been  setting  high  hopes  on  Zerubbabel,  of  the  stock  of 
Jesse,  who  immediately  after  the  Return  certainly  focussed  such 
hopes  upon  himself  (Hag.,  Zech.). 

Apart  from  the  historical  presuppositions  of  v.*,  which  point  more 
decisively  than  those  of  Q*"*  to  an  exilic  or  post-exilic  date,  the  evidence  is 
no  more  conclusive  than  in  the  case  of  9^**.  The  language  is  certainly 
compatible  with  a  post-exilic  date,  and  the  occurrence  of  the  three  words  yu, 
ion,  nw  in  v.*  is  even  better  explained  by  it  than  by  an  earlier  date.  For 
the  significance  of  the  ideas,  reference  must  be  made  to  the  commentary. 

Among  those  who  assign  the  poem  to  Isaiah,  much  difference  of  opinion 
prevails  as  to  the  period  of  his  life  to  which  it  belongs.  For  the  most  part  it 
is  connected  with  lo""'*,  and  simply  on  the  ground  of  that  supposed  connection 
assigned  to  the  same  period:  see,  e.g.,  Dr.  LOT^  210 f.,  where  the  date 
701  B.C.  is  suggested,  and  allusion  is  made  (with  references)  to  other  theories 
placing  the  prophecy  early  in  Sargon's  reign  (W.  R.  Smith,  Prophets'^,  296  ff.), 
or  at  the  end  of  Sargon's  reign.  Earlier  writers  thought  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz 
(Vitringa).  Finally,  Du.  groups  ii^**  with  2^-^  32*''  as  one  of  Isaiah's 
** swan-songs"  written  in  extreme  old  age,  in  the  reign  of  Manasseh,  for  the 
private  use  of  his  disciples  and  not  for  publication. 

I,  2.  The  origin  and  endowments  of  the  Future 
King". — I.  The  poem  opens  with  a  prediction  of  the  restoration 
of  the  Davidic  monarchy.  This  is  expressed  figuratively.  Jesse, 
the  father  of  David,  is  compared  to  a  root  from  which  there 
had  grown  a  tree — the  line  of  Jewish  monarchs  descended  from 
David ;  this  tree  has  been  cut  down  \  but  the  roots  remain  in 
the  earth  and  a  mere  stump  above  ground,  />.  the  throne  of 
David  has  fallen,  but  the  family  of  David  survives ;  as  from  the 
stump  of  a  tree  that  has  been  felled  there  may  shoot  forth  new 
growth  (Job  i4''-^,  cp.  Is  6^^),  so  while  the  family  of  David  sur- 


XI.    I,    2  215 

vives,  hope  remains  that  some  member  of  it  may  re-establish 
the  monarchy,  and  thus,  in  the  terms  of  the  figure,  become  the 
new  shoot  and  green  growth  from  the  old  roots.  What  the 
opening  distich  of  the  poem  asserts  is  that  this  hope  will  be 
actually  realised.  The  revival,  and  not  the  fall  of  the  tree,  is 
the  subject  of  prediction.  The  fall  of  the  tree  belongs  to  the 
past ;  the  stump  is  an  existing  fact  familiar  to  the  poet  and  his 
audience.  Thus  this  v.  presupposes  a  period  when  no  Davidic 
king  was  reigning.  The  necessary  inference  is  that  the  poem 
was  written  some  time  after  586  B.C.  This  inference  can  only 
be  avoided  by  adopting  less  natural  and  obvious  interpreta- 
tions :  thus  (i)  Di.  considers  that  the  implication  of  the  figure 
is  that  each  successive  king  from  David  downwards  was  a  tree 
sprung  from  the  root  and  stump  of  Jesse;  by  means  of  an 
improbable  figure  Isaiah  would  then  be  expressing  the  rather 
jejune  idea  that  as  there  had  already  been  a  dozen  kings  or 
more  descended  from  Jesse,  one  of  whom  was  reigning  at  the 
present  moment,  so  there  would  be  another;  (2)  Du.  sees  in 
the  passage  a  prediction  that  the  Messiah  will  not  spring  from 
David,  but  as  being  himself  a  new  David  will  spring  from 
another  branch  of  the  house  of  Jesse,  in  the  terms  of  the  figure 
from  another  of  the  roots  (^plural) — an  unparalleled  and  most 
improbable  idea ;  moreover,  this  interpretation  does  not  explain 
the  assumption  that  the  tree  of  David  has  already  fallen.  On 
this  Du.  says  that  the  expression  yw,  stocky  indicates  that  before 
the  Messianic  age  the  Dynasty  will  suffer  ill. — A  shoot]  iDn,  Pr 
14^  t«  In  Aramaic,  early  and  late,  and  Assyrian  the  word  meant 
sceptre  (see  phil.  n.). — The  stu7tip'\  40^^,  Job  14't.  The  word 
yn  is  derived  from  a  root  meaning  to  cut,  (so  c  j^  commonly) ; 

in  view  of  this,  of  the  parallel  here,  and  of  the  parallel  and  the 
context  in  Job,  the  word  probably  meant  primarily  the  part 
(above  ground)  left  after  felling.  In  40^  it  seems  rather  to  be 
used  of  the  bole  of  a  growing,  newly  planted  tree;  cp.  the 
New  Hebrew  usage  :  see  Levy,  NHB,  s.v, — The  stump  of  Jesse'] 
this  phrase  well  reflects  the  fact  that  the  Jewish  monarchy  is  no 
more,  though  the  family,  from  which  it  sprang,  survives;  "the 
stump  of  David"  would  have  reflected  this  less  clearly  and 
might  more  appropriately  have  been  used  if  the  monarchy  had 
merely  lost  power  and   glory  as  at  the  Disruption. — A  scion] 


2l6  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

14^^  (?)  60*^,  Dn  11^,  Sir  40^5  (margin).     The  word  "iVi  comes 
probably   from   the   root   which   in  Arabic  (^*a))  means  to  be 

fresh  and  beautiful^  and,  of  the  foliage  of  a  tree,  to  become  green ; 
it  was  presumably  applied  to  vigorous  growth  from  a  tree, 
whether  as  here  and  in  60^1  directly  from  the  root,  or  from  some 
other  part;  it  is  used  in  NH  of  withies -y  cp.  IVJ  i>3n,  a  rope  of 
withies  \  D^nV3  ^^D,  a  basket  made  of  withies  (Levy,  NHB  iii.  431^)- 
— Shall  bear  fruit']  if  the  text  is  right,  the  2nd  line  of  the  distich 
goes  beyond  the  first — not  only  will  a  new  tree  grow  from  the 
old  root,  but  it  will  yield  fruit ;  not  only  will  the  Davidic  monarchy 
be  restored,  but  the  new  king  will  prosper  (cp.  Ps  i^).  But 
ma"*  may  be  an  error  for  ms^  shall  sprout  forth  (cp.  Job  14®), 
and  the  two  lines  throughout  synonymously  parallel. — 2.  The 
king  will  be  a  man  on  whom  the  spirit  of  Yahweh  rests 
(Nu  ii^^'*,  cp.  2  K  2^*,  Nu  11^''  n.),  and  therefore  fit  for  ex- 
ceptional achievements;  as  the  spirit  gives  the  exceptional 
craftsman  (Ex  31^  35*^)>  or  the  warrior  (Jg  6^  11^  132* 
146' 19),  or  the  prophet  (Nu  ii^s^*.  Is  61I),  or  the  interpreter  of 
dreams  (Gn  41^^),  the  power  to  do  or  be  something  beyond  the 
ordinary  (cp.  2  K  2^^),  so  it  gives  kingliness  to  the  king 
(1  S  1 6^^^*).  King  and  people  often  seemed  to  the  prophets  to 
forget  this,  and  in  consequence  to  trust  in  "  flesh "  rather  than 
in  "spirit"  (31^);  but  the  Messianic  age  will  be  distinguished 
by  the  outpouring  of  the  spirit  (32^^  Jl  ^^'  (2^^^'))  on  all  men, 
and,  in  particular,  the  point  with  which  alone  the  present  passage 
is  concerned,  on  the  Messiah.  The  spirit  of  Yahweh  settles 
upon  the  king  as  a  spirit  of  or,  as  we  should  say,  imparting, 
wisdom  and  discernment  {c,"^.  Ex  31^),  a  capacity  to  discern  what 
rightly  belongs  to  the  king's  office  and  to  the  right  discharge 
of  it,  and  to  detect  the  right  in  difficult  circumstances  (v.^,  cp. 
I  K  3^"^-  28).  The  spirit  is  also  one  of  counsel  and  mighty  i.e. 
the  king  receives  power  not  only  to  discern  the  right,  but  to 
execute  it,  to  secure  for  the  weak  their  due,  and  to  punish  and 
put  to  death  the  guilty,  however  powerful  (v.*).  By  the  spirit 
of  Yahweh  the  king  becomes  a  wonderful,  or  exceptional. 
Counsellor  and  Mighty  One  (9^).  In  spite  of  36^,  it  is  very 
questionable  whether  the  king  is  here  represented  as  a  great 
soldier.  Finally,  the  spirit  makes  him  careful  for  the  will  of 
God   and  a    true   worshipper   of    Yahweh,   and    consequently 


XI.  2-5  217 

righteous,  v.',  cp.  Jer  23^'- :  he  is  possessed  of  knowledge  and 
fear  of  Yahweh :  knowledge  is  here  not  knowledge  of  his  craft, 
as  in  Ex  31®,  an  idea  sufficiently  covered  by  v. 2^,  but  knowledge 
of  God  which  shows  itself  in  care  for  the  poor  and  weak :  cp. 
Jer  22^®.  5E  gives  to  the  spirit  of  Yahweh  the  specialised  sense 
of  the  spirit  of  prophecy  —  an  interpretation  which  made  the 
passage  a  convenient  proof,  though  it  is  certainly  not  the 
ultimate  source  of  the  idea,  of  "the  seven  spirits  which  are 
before  the  throne  of  God  "  (Rev  i*) ;  for  the  idea,  see  Schottgen 
Horae  Talmudicae ;  for  its  origin,  cp.  Gunkel,  Schopfung  u,  Chaos^ 
pp.  294-302;  KAT^  624 f. — The  opening  words  of  3  J^  are 
obviously  the  result  of  dittography,  or  of  the  intrusion  into 
the  text  of  variants  (see  phil.  n.).  As  they  stand  they  are 
meaningless :  literally  translated  they  read,  and  his  enjoyment  of 
the  scent  of  the  fear  of  Yahweh,  or,  assuming  an  awkward  sup- 
pression of  the  copula,  and  the  scent  that  he  enjoys  is  the  fear 
of  Yahweh,  which  is  paraphrased  by  RV  into  "  and  his  delight 
shall  be  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord " ;  i.e.  himself  God-fearing, 
he  will  delight  to  find  the  fear  of  God  in  others. — The  real 
sense  of  the  phrase  used  in  fl^  is  clear  in  Ex  30^,  "  Whosoever 
makes  anything  like  it  (this  sweet  incense),  to  enjoy  the  scent  of  it, 
shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people";  cp.  Lv  26^^.  Since  the 
feasts  and  solemn  assemblies  of  the  Hebrews  were  thick  with 
the  fumes  of  sacrificial  victims,  it  was  quite  appropriate  to  say, 
"  I  will  not  enjoy  the  scent  of  them  (Am  5^1) " ;  but  "  the  fear 
of  Yahweh,"  which  is  here  made  the  object  of  the  vb.,  was  not 
a  smell.  Another  meaning  that  has  frequently  been  tortured 
out  of  the  words  is  this,  He  will  scent  out  the  fear  of  God,  re- 
cognise at  once  the  God-fearing;  but  in  this  sense  n^n  takes 
the  simple  ace.  (Job  39^^). 

3-5.  The  character  of  the  king  and  his  method  of 
government,  which  will  spring  from  his  spiritual  endowments 
(v.^).  Here  there  is  certainly  no  hint  that  the  king  will  be  a 
warrior :  he  reigns  after  war  has  been  abolished  (cp.  9*^).  The 
king  will  possess  something  of  the  wisdom  of  God;  he  will 
know  all  that  goes  on  in  his  country  (cp.  2  S  14^^),  and  will  be 
able  like  God  (i  S  iS'^),  or  a  prophet  of  God  (i  S  9^^),  to  probe 
things  to  the  bottom  (cp.  Pr  25^),  not  being  misled  by  deceitful 
appearances  or  lying  words,  but  reading  men's  hearts.  En 
49*,  which  may  be  a  paraphrase  of  the  v.,  gets  near  to  the 


21 8  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

meaning — "He  will  judge  the  secret  things,  and  no  one  will 
be  able  to  utter  a  lying  word  before  him." — 4.  As  the  perversion 
of  justice  by  which  the  poor  and  weak  suffered  was  a  constant 
feature  in  actual  life  (i^^-  23  io2),  so  it  is  natural  that  the 
securing  of  the  rights  of  these  classes  becomes  a  permanent 
feature  of  the  ideal  ruler,  cp.  Ps  72. — The  7ieedy.  .  .  the  poor]  lo^. 
1^  here  has  ''13^,  the  humble-minded,  meek;  but  the  parallel 
suggests  that  this  is  an  error  for  ^^:v ;  the  two  forms  were  liable 
to  be  confused:  see  Dr.  DB  iv.  20. — Of  the  earth]  not  required 
by  the  parallelism  and  perhaps  an  addition.  It  indicates  the  world- 
wide sway  of  the  king  (cp.  9^);  for  the  rendering  of  the  land* 
is  improbable. — 4c.  d.  The  Messianic  age  is  not  to  be  an  age 
free  from  sin  (cp.  6520  32^);  the  conception  is  thus  entirely 
different  from  the  later  conception  of  heaven.  But  the  wicked 
will  not  as  now  sin  on  with  impunity:  the  king  will  make 
use  of  the  divine  power  given  to  him,  to  smite  such  sin- 
ners dead  with  a  word;  cp.  9^^^  n.,  Ac  51-10. — The  ruthless] 
reading  py  (13II   n.)   for  pN   (fl^(3r),   earth   or   land.     Earth 

cannot  by  itself  mean  the  godless  world  (Del.).  A  real  parallel 
to  ytn,  the  wicked,  of  the  next  line  is  required,  and  such  is  pV ; 
cp.  Job  1520  27!^:  note  also  the  connections  in  which  pj;  is 
used  in  2920,  Ps  3785^  Jer  1521. — The  rod  of  his  mouth]  i.e.  by  a 
mere  word:  see  above.  Cp.  the  two-edged  sword  proceeding 
from  the  mouth  in  Rev  i^*.  More  remote  parallels  to  the  idea 
of  speech  as  a  deadly,  cutting  instrument  may  be  found  in 
Jer  1 818,  Ps  575(*>. — The  breath  of  his  lips]  this  also  means 
speech;  cp.  Ps  33^  "the  word  of  the  Lord  .  .  .  the  breath 
of  his  mouth." — The  wicked]  the  Hebrew  term  is  sing.,  but,  of 
course,  generic  in  meaning.  Nevertheless  it  is  interpreted  indi- 
vidually of  Antichrist  by  3^,  "  He  will  kill  the  wicked  Armillos," 
and  by  Paul  in  2  Th  2^. — 5*  The  description  of  the  king's  char- 
acter closes  with  a  figure  derived  from  the  custom  of  girding  up 
the  clothes  before  undertaking  any  active  work :  whatever  he 
undertakes  is  undertaken  in  righteousness  and  faithfulness :  cp. 
plV  and  ni^OK  of  man,  Hab  2*,  i  S  262^,  and  of  Yahweh  as 
King,  Ps  96^^. — It  corresponds  closely  to  the  justice  and  right- 
eousness of  9^ 

6-8.  The  return  of  the  golden  age. — Nature  will  be 


♦Du.,  Che.,  Box. 


XI.  4-6  219 

transformed  in  the  days  of  this  king ;  the  golden  age  of  the  past 
will  return ;  wild  beasts  will  no  longer  prey  on  one  another,  or 
be  hurtful  to  men.  The  harmlessness  of  the  wild  beasts  is 
clearly  connected  in  v.'^*'  with  the  expectation  that  in  the 
age  to  come  they  will  cease  to  be  carnivorous  and  become 
graminivorous,  as  they,  like  man  (ct.  after  the  Flood,  Gn  9^),  were 
first  created  (Gn  i^^);  the  same  idea  may  be,  but  is  much  less 
clearly  suggested  by  y.^%  in  a  passage  that  depends  on  the 
present  (65^^) ;  this  harmlessness  of  the  beasts  is  rather  ineptly 
heightened  by  making  the  serpent  continue  to  eat  dust,  which 
was  not  a  feature  of  the  golden  age,  but  part  of  the  curse  that  fell 
on  the  serpent.  For  security  from  the  present  hurtful  habits  of 
wild  beasts  in  pictures  of  the  future,  see  Hos  2^0  (is) ;  less  genially 
expressed,  Ezk  34^^'^^,  cp.  Lv  26^.  The  idea  was  wide-spread; 
Virgil's  use  of  it  (£c/.  iv.  21  f.,  v.  60)  is  famous,  and  many  other 
parallels  are  cited  by  Ges.  i.  425  f.  It  is  far  less  probable  that 
Virgil  is  dependent  on  Isaiah  than  that  both  Hebrew  prophet  and 
Latin  poet  are  common  users  of  an  ancient  oriental  idea;  cp. 
Gressmann,  193  flf.,  and  Conway's  Essay  in  Mayor,  Fowler  and 
Conway's  VirgiPs  Messianic  Eclogue. 

6a.  b.  Wolves  will  no  longer  devour  lambs,  nor  leopards  kids, 
but  these  strong  and  ferocious  beasts  will  dwell  together  with  the 
others  and  under  their  protection  !  They  will  be  gerim  (14^  n. : 
cp.  NumberSy  p.  175)  of  these  domestic  animals. — 6c.  The  calf 
and  the  young  lion\  against  the  analogy  of  6a.  b.  7a.  c  ^^^p^  y  sa.  bj^  j^ 
adds  a  second  domestic  beast,  the  fatling  (i^^  n.) ;  apart  from  ffi 
it  would  be  fairly  obvious  that  this  third  term  has  driven  out,  or 
is  a  corruption  of,  a  verb :  the  young  of  oxen  and  lions  will  graze 
on  the  same  pastures.  Probably  v.'^*'  once  formed  the  first  line 
of  this  distich,  which  then  resembled  the  next  (vJ**  ^)  in  mention- 
ing the  two  kinds — the  wild  and  the  domestic — in  the  first  line, 
their  young  in  the  second.  In  this  case  v.**,  which  introduces 
the  little  child  fearlessly  driving  young  lions  as  well  as  calves,  was 
supplied  by  some  annotator,  probably  from  a  parallel  poem.  If 
these  suppositions  are  correct,  the  marked  parallelism  of  terms  in 
the  two  lines  of  each  distich,  which  characterises  most  of  the 
poem  in  any  case,  would  be  maintained  without  break ;  the  one 
monostich  (v.''^*')  which  at  present  stands  isolated  among  the 
distichs  would  disappear ;  and  the  poet  would  complete  at  once 
what  he  had  to  say  of  lions,  instead  of  introducing  the  bears 


220  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

between  the  young  lion  and  the  lion. — 7*  After  the  males  (v.^an 
perhaps  "^^  see  last  n.),  the  females — cow  and  she-bear — (m,  fem., 
as  2  K  2^*). — Shall  be  companions  to  one  another]  as  Lagarde  per- 
ceived, one  of  the  two  D's  at  the  beginning  of  n3''y"inn  (cp.  Pr 
22^*)  has  accidentally  dropped  out,  leaving  in  f^  nrynn,  shall  feed, 
which  by  itself  is  pointless ;  for,  since  the  cow  as  well  as  the  bear 
is  mentioned,  the  point  cannot  be  that  the  bear  will  graze  instead 
of  continuing  to  hunt  (Di.). — 'jc  =  65^5 ;  this  line  should  precede 
v.^*:  see  above.  Like  stalled  animals  such  as  the  ox  (i^),  the 
lion  will  eat  chopped  straw  (Gn  2425-  32^  Jg  19I9,  i  K  5^). — 8. 
Not  only  with  one  another,  but  with  man  will  animals,  now  hurt- 
ful, be  friends:  the  point  is  expressed  by  picturing  the  safety 
with  which  the  weakest  members  of  the  human  race,  babies 
under  two  or  three  years  of  age,  will  approach  with  safety  the 
most  malignant  of  beasts  (Gn  3^^),  the  serpent,  and  make  its 
haunts  their  favourite  playground. — The  weaned  child\  is  the  child 
just  weaned  (cp.  28',  Ps  131^),  i.e.  two  or  three  years  old  (2  Mac 
72'). — Shall  play  about]  or  take  its  delight :  in  any  case  the  vb. 
suggests  more  than  the  mere  fact  of  playing  with  immunity, 
it  implies  delight.  Cp.  the  use  of  the  vb.  {WW)i  or  noun 
(D^yc^j;t5'),  in  57  6612,  jg^  ^i^o,  Pr  S^o^- :  in  Syriac  the  vb.  is  used 
of  diverting  oneself  with  hounds,  with  a  ball,  etc. — The  hole]  "in 
occurs  in  the  pi.  in  42^2,  and  (differently  punctuated)  in  i  S  14^^  of 
holes  in  the  ground;  in  Zee  14^2  jt  jg  used  of  the  socket  of  the 
eye.  To  infer  from  the  last  usage  a  reference  here  to  the  eye  of 
the  snake  is  precarious. — Asp  .  .  .  viper]  it  is  impossible  and,  for 
the  appreciation  of  this  passage,  unimportant  to  determine  the 
precise  species  of  serpents  intended :  see  EBi.  and  DB^  s.v. 
Serpent. — The  dwelling]  a  term  with  such  a  meaning  as  this  is 
required  by  the  parallel,  but  it  is  very  questionable  whether 
miXD,  f^,  which  means  place  of  lights  meant  also  specifically 
lighthole  (BDB),  den  (RV);  Di.,  Du.  take  the  word  to  mean 
the  shining  {thi?tg),  i.e.  the  serpent's  shining,  glistening  eye; 
unfortunately,  if  this  meaning  of  miKD  could  be  admitted,  the 
parallel  would  still  make  it  improbable  that  the  poet  is  here 
making  use  of  the  observation  that  babies  "  readily  stretch  out 
their  hands  to  shining  objects."  We  should  perhaps  read  mVD, 
hole  (Che.),  or  HDiyo,  lair  (Beer). — Trip  about]  the  translation 
rests  on  a  conjectural  emendation ;  RV  put  for  \\in  is  a  con- 
jectural rendering  of  the  very  questionable  text  of  fl^. 


XI.   1-8  221 

I.  Ten,  ytj,  nxa]  all  three  words  "are  first  found  in  the  later  [OT]  litera- 
ture" (Hackmann,  p.  149);  this  is  correct  and  not  altogether  insignificant, 
nan  was  in  use  in  the  Aramaic  dialect  of  N.  Syria  before  the  age  of  Isaiah  : 
cp.  naaVn  nen  .  .  .  nn  n'a  jnj,  Zinjerli  Inscriptions  (Hadad),  I.  3= Cooke, 
NSI 61' ;  and  it  is  frequent  in  later  Aramaic.  Kioin  renders  oar,  sceptre  (Ps 
45'  ^).  ot  noD,  staff  (iixx  17'^  C) ;  in  Gn  30"  %  it  is  used  of  fresh  cut  poplar 

wands,  and  in  Nu  17^^  C  of  the  rod  that  was  to  bud.     In  Syriac  f^i^Q^^ 

c 

means  stuffy  rod,  sceptre ;  in  Assyr.  hutartu  means  staff  \  and  Aari-  has,  as 

one  of  its  meanings  according  to  the  l^amiis  as  cited  by  Lane,  a  branch  of  a 
tree,  "ion  (Pr  14' t)  may  have  been  more  frequently  in  use  with  the  Hebrews 
than  the  two  occurrences  suggest. — n«]  possibly  late  (see  last  n.),  but  not  due 

to  Aramaic  influence,  for  /^ii;j  =  n«=^»aJ  (cp.  Dr.  §  178)  does  not  appear 

to  occur  in  Aramaic. — 2.  mn'  nNTi  nyn]  one  of  the  rare  instances  of  two 
co-ordinated  construct  cases  depending  on  the  same  gen.  (G-K.  128a;  Kon. 
iii.  275^).  But  possibly  even  this  is  the  result  of  textual  error.  V.^**  is  at 
present  longer  than  **,  and  ffi  renders  mn'  nKT  by  ey<rc/3c/a$  without  the 
addition  of  irpis  rhv  KiJ/Jtoj/  (33*).  The  original  text  may  have  had  hkt,  and  this 
may  have  been  replaced  by  a  correct  marginal  note  explaining  hkt  to  be  nitv 
nin\ — 3.  ni.T  nKTD  innm]  a  corrupt  dittograph  of  nm*  nKTi  nyn  nn,  not  (Beer) 
an  error  for  '*'♦  tkt  n  n'jm  (cp.  Ezk  24").  Note  that  (!&  renders  mn'  hkt 
by  0<J/Soi;  Qtov  in  v.*,  by  tiffipeia  in  v.* ;  v.**  (Br  may  be  the  addition  of  a 
later  hand. — 5.  tiik  .  .  Tijn]  so  read  instead  of  Tim  .  ,  mm  |^  (cp.  16' n.). 
The  evidence  of  (&  in  favour  of  two  diflFerent  words  is  strong,  for  ^uvyiieip, 
idivni  are  frequently  used  for  both  njn,  nm  (and  derivatives)  ;  here,  where  both 
words  occur  together,  dXrjuivoif  which  nowhere  else  renders  either  word,  is 
adopted  in  order  to  preserve  the  diflference. — 6.  k'tdi]  read  ijn' :  the  strongest 
evidence  is  given  above.  After  Kal  X^wv=td31,  (St  continues  dfia  ^wTK-rid-fyrov- 
rat ;  ffi  also  inserts  between  Kal  tioax'i-pi-ov  ( =  Vain)  and  koI  \iwv  the  words 
Kal  ravpos  (  =  ?  K'TDi  in  a  different  position  from  f§). — D3  JfW]  (S  d^et  airrovs, 
Di.  draws  attention  to  the  cstr.  with  3  instead  of  the  normal  ace,  and 
therefore  renders  a  driver  among  them. — 8.  mn  n']  Doubtful,  for  note  (a) 
vr\7\  would  be  the  only  occurrence  in  the  poem  of  a  pf.  tense,  and  this 
remains  suspicious  in  spite  of  Driver,  §  147 ;  {h)  the  length  of  the  line ;  [c) 
apart  firom  the  possibility  of  its  being  found  in  the  proper  name  *nn%  nn,  the 

root  is  unknown  in  Hebrew:  in  Arabic  and  Syriac  (,^J^,  pOl)  it  is 
frequent,  and  means  to  lead,  direct ;  yet  no  trace  is  to  be  found  in  either  of 
these  languages  of  the  meaning  to  stretch  out  commonly  attributed  to  it  in 
this  passage.  The  second  of  these  objections  is  merely  brought  into  relief,  but 
not  removed,  by  chopping  v.  ***  into  two  lines  at  Uiyfix,  for  the  whole  of  **•  is 
parallel  to  **  :  the  halves  are  parallel  neither  to  one  another,  nor  to  v.*». 
mfriT  is  an  early  error,  and  conceals  a  single  word  which  was  the  imperfect 
tense  of  a  verb  parallel  in  sense  to  j/B'^en  in  v.^,  possibly  iTnn'  (38**  n.),  shall 
trip  about,  with  the  movements  natural  to  a  child  learning  to  walk. 


222 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


XI.  9-16. — The  Return  of  the  Dispersion  to  the  Holy  Land. 

This  passage  is  not  entirely  poetical  (Lowth.),  nor  even  with  the  excep- 
tion of  v.^^  from  onnsD  to  the  end  (Du.,  Cond. ),  but  in  part  prose,  as  shown 
below.  Che.  treats  w.^'^^-  ^*,  Box  i<"-  ^^,  Marti  "■",  as  prose.  In  w.^^-w  ^^ 
dominant  rhythm  in  3  :  3  ;  this  is  probably  not  continued  in  v.^^,  though  the 
V.  has  almost  certainly  suffered  some  textual  corruption,  leaving  the  exact 
nature  of  the  rhythm  an  open  question.  Marti  treats  vv.^^'^^  as  a  poem  of 
four  strophes  each  containing  two  distichs  :  if  this  were  right,  the  poem  con- 
tained ahysteron  proteron,  see  on  v.^'. 

•  No  harm  nor  destruction  shall  be  wrought  throughout  all 
my  holy  mountain :  for  the  land  will  have  become  full  of  the 
knowledge  of  Yahweh  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  ^^  And  it 
shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day  the  root  of  Jesse  which  will  be 
standing  for  a  signal  to  the  peoples —  Jl 

Him  shall  the  nations  consult, 

And  his  resting-place  shall  be  glorious. 

11  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day  the  Lord  shall  again 
'raise'  his  hand  to  acquire  the  remnant  of  his  people,  which 
remains  over,  from  Assyria  and  from  Egypt  and  from  Pathros  and 
from  Cush  and  from  'Elam  and  from  Shin*ar  and  from  Hamath 
and  from  the  isles  of  the  sea. 

^2  And  he  will  raise  a  signal  to  the  nations ; 
And  he  will  gather  the  outcasts  of  Israel, 
And  collect  the  dispersed  (fem.)  of  Judah 
From  the  four  corners  of  the  earth. 


18  And  jealousy  of  Ephraim  shall  cease, 

And  the  vexers  of  Judah  shall  be  cut  off; 
Ephraim  shall  not  be  jealous  of  Judah, 
Nor  shall  Judah  vex  Ephraim. 

1*  And   they   shall   swoop   down   upon   the   shoulder  of  the 

Philistines,  westward, 
Together  shall  they  plunder  the  sons  of  the  East ; 
Edom  and  Moab  shall  be  brought  under  their  dominion. 
And    the   children   of    Ammon   shall    be    obedient    to 

them. 


XI.  9-i6  223 

i'^  And    Yahweh   will    *  dry  up '    the   tongue   of    the    sea    of 

Egypt, 
And  he  will  swing  his  hand  over  the  River  .  .  . 
And  he  will  smite  it  into  seven  wadys, 

And  make  it  (a  way)  to  be  trodden  with  sandals. 

^*  And  there  shall  be  a  highway  for  the  remnant  of  his  people 
who  remain  over  from  Assyria,  as  there  was  for  Israel  in  the  day 
that  it  came  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt. 

The  well-marked  and  sustained  rhythm  and  parallelism,  which 
is  so  conspicuous  in  vv.^^^,  is  not  continued  in  vv.®*^^.  In 
yv.12-14  something  similar  reappears,  and  but  for  the  fact  that 
the  tenor  and  spirit  of  these  verses  is  different,  and  vv.^^^ 
sufficiently  complete  in  themselves,  w.^*^-  ^^-i*  might  be  regarded 
as  a  single  poem  which  has  been  interpolated  (vv.*'^^)  and  added 
to  (vv.15^-) 

Vv.9-16  appear  to  be  a  collection  of  brief  pieces,  in  part  prose, 
in  part  poetry  (see  above).  They  are  arranged  in  no  very  obvious 
order,  but  they  deal  with  related  subjects,  viz.  the  future  glory  of 
Sion,  and  its  attractiveness,  as  the  home  of  true  Religion,  for 
the  Gentiles,  vv.*'- ;  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  at  present  dis- 
persed throughout  the  world,  vv.^^*^  ^*'' ;  the  freedom  of  the  future 
community  from  attack  and  internal  dissensions  (v.^^),  and  its 
success  in  establishing  its  authority  over  its  neighbours,  v.H 

It  is  very  doubtful  whether  any  part  of  this  section  is  the  work 
of  Isaiah  :  most  of  it  is  clearly  post-exilic,  since  it  presupposes 
the  Exile  and  the  Dispersion  of  the  Jews  as  existing  facts.  The 
argument  for  post-exilic  date  is  well  and  fully  stated  by  Che.  in 
Introd.  pp.  59-62. 

9  =  6525b  +  Hab  2I*.  In  652*  the  subject  of  the  vbs.  are 
clearly  the  harmful  beasts,  and  the  fact  that  65  ^^^^^  is  a  speech  of 
Yahweh's  immediately  accounts  for  the  first  person  in  the  phrase 
my  holy  mountain  :  in  Hab.  pKH  clearly  means  the  earth,  and 
not  merely  the  land  of  Judah.  Here  the  first  person  is  not 
accounted  for  by  the  context,  and  both  the  subject  of  the  vbs. 
and  the  meaning  of  pNn  are  ambiguous.  This  closer  cohesion 
of  the  two  parts  of  the  v.  with  their  respective  contexts  in  6525 
and  Hab  2^*  is  good  reason  for  holding  that  their  original  homes 
are  there,  and  that  here  they  are  quotations  carrying  out  the 
general  thought  of  what  proceeds,  viz.  that  there  will  be  no  more 


224  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

harm  and  destruction,  but  not  harmonising  closely  either  with 
thought  or  structure  of  the  passage.  If,  now,  v.^  is  the  original 
continuation  of  vv.^"^,  those  verses  must  be  later  than  Hab.  and 
65^5;  so,  e.g.^  Hackm.  pp.  136-138,  146;  but  v.^  is  rhythmically 
distinguished,  and  should  be  separated  from  vv.^^^  So  long  as 
ch.  II  in  its  entirety  was  referred  to  Isaiah,  it  was  naturally 
assumed,  rather  than  critically  maintained,  that  v.^  was  the  source 
whence  two  later  writers  derived  their  words.  I 

Owing  to  the  ambiguities  referred  to  above,  the  exact  point 
which  the  annotator,  who  combined  two  quotations  and  inserted 
them  here,  wished  to  make  is  not  clear :  possibly  that  Yahweh's 
territory  will  no  longer  suffer  from  the  nations  of  the  world,  for  the 
whole  earth  will  have  come  to  know  that  Yahweh  is  Yahweh,  and 
that  His  people  are  not  to  be  molested  with  impunity,  a  line  of 
thought  found  in  Ezk  39^^^'^^  ;  but  the  modification  of  Habakkuk's 
phrase,  "  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  Yahweh  "  (cp.  Is  66i^^-)  to 
the  knowledge  of  Yahweh,  does  not  favour  this.  More  probably  we 
should  abandon  the  meaning  earth,  which  p&iii  has  in  Hab.,  and 
seek  another  interpretation  of  the  subjects  of  the  vbs.  They  shall 
not  hurt,  etc.,  obviously  cannot  refer  to  the  weaned  child  and  the 
suckling,  the  last  mentioned  subjects  in  vv.^^^,  nor,  since  they 
are  incapable  of  the  knowledge  of  Yahweh,  to  the  wild  beasts  of 
vv.^*^  That  the  thought  passes  far  back  to  attach  itself  only  to 
the  ruthless  and  the  wicked  men  of  v.*  is  altogether  improbable : 
the  subjects  are  best  taken  in  the  most  indefinite  way — no  one 
shall  hurt,  no  hurt  shall  be  done  by  man,  for  the  knowledge  of 
Yahweh,  which  restrains  from  such  conduct,  will  prevail  throughout 
the  land. — All  my  holy  mountain^  this  may  mean  here  the  entire 
Holy  Land,  for  this  was  a  mountain  country,  and,  as  belonging  to 
Yahweh,  holy ;  all  is  then  explained,  and  the  phrase  is  co-extensive 
with  the  land  in  the  next  sentence.  Naturally,  of  course, 
Yahweh's  "holy  mountain,"  a  phrase  never  used  by  Isaiah,  is 
Mount  Sion. — As  the  waters  cover  the  sea"]  the  comparison  would 
most  naturally  suggest  itself  to  one  who  was  thinking  of  the  whole 
earth  (Hab.). — 10.  The  capital  of  the  monarchy  of  the  restored 
Jewish  community  will  be  famous,  and  the  nations  of  the  world 
will  come  and  consult  the  king  as  an  organ  of  the  revelation  of 
the  one  true  God  ;  cp.  2^** :  but  here  prominence  is  given  to  the 
vehicle  of  Yahweh's  Revelation ;  there  the  nations  are  said  to 
obtain   instruction   from  Yahweh  Himself. — The  root  of  /esse] 


^ 


XI.   lo,    II  225 

i.e.  the  new  shoot  from  the  old  root  (cp.  v.^),  root  being  used  in 
the  same  sense  as  in  53^. —  Which  will  be  standing]  the  part  here 
is  in  any  case  awkward,  but  the  future  sense  (ST)  is  preferable  to 
the  present  (U,  RV).  The  pf.  tense  would  be  stylistically  prefer- 
able, but  unsuitable  in  the  context. — As  a  signal  to  the  peoples'] 
cp.  5^^  (n.)  :  also  49^*.  That  a  root  should  stand  as  a  signal,  or 
banner,  is  an  extraordinary  combination  of  figures;  root  no 
doubt,  as  a  technical  term,  might  at  once  suggest  a  person, 
the  Messianic  king ;  cp.  "  my  servant  the  Shoot,"  Zee  3^ ;  but 
it  remains  extraordinary  that  a  person  stands  like  a  signal  or 
banner  (ct.  v.^^).  Possibly  here,  as  in  v.*  the  writer  is  citing 
phrases  from  different  places  without  welding  them  well  together. 
— Him  shall  the  nations  consult]  so  as  to  obtain  oracles  (S^^),  or 
religious  instruction  (cp.  2^),  from  him. — And  his  resting-place 
shall  be  glorious]  glorious  things  will  be  spoken  of  Sion,  the  city 
of  Yahweh,  the  resting-place  (cp.  e.g.  Dt  12*,  i  K  S^^)  of  His 
Messiah  and  the  birthplace  of  the  nations  into  a  new  life  (cp. 
Ps  87) ;  or,  perhaps,  we  might  compare  4^  nm^O  is  used  also 
of  Yahweh's  abode  in  the  midst  of  His  people  (Ps  95"  132^*). 
U  renders  "  his  sepulchre  "  ;  this  reflects  an  exegesis  which  saw  in 
the  "  signal "  of  the  first  part  of  the  v.  the  Cross ;  it  is  not  due 
to  an  etymology  based  on  the  use  of  the  vb.  m3  in  57*. 

II.  The  Lord  will  re-possess  himself  of  the  survivors  of  his 
people  now  scattered  over  the  known  world.  The  style  is 
awkward  and  some  details  are  ambiguous;  but  the  general 
impression  of  a  wide  dispersion  of  the  Jews  as  an  existing  fact  is 
too  strongly  and  clearly  conveyed  for  the  passage  to  be  pre-exilic : 
cp.  Zee  io^"^2^ — Th£  Lord  shall  again  *  raise^  his  hand  to  acquire 
the  remnant  of  his  people]  taken  strictly,  this  should  mean  that  the 
remnant  has  already  once  been  acquired,  to  wit,  when  Yahweh 
brought  back  some  of  the  exiled  Jews  from  Babylon.  But 
possibly  the  style  is  loose,  and  all  that  the  writer  means  is  that 
there  will  be  a  second  acquisition  :  at  the  Exodus,  Yahweh 
acquired  (^yi  \^^^  cp.  Ps  74^)  a  whole  people;  He  is  now  going 
to  acquire  what  remains  of  His  people  by  gathering  the  exiled 
Jews  from  all  quarters  of  the  earth. — From  Assyria^  etc.]  either 
the  clauses  define  from  whom  the  acquisition  is  to  be  made,  in 
which  case  the  clause  which  remains  over  is  otiose ;  or  there 
is  an  awkward  breviloquence — the  remnant  .  .  .  which  remains 
over  of  (those  who  were  in)  Assyria^  etc. — Assyria,  which  as  in 
VOL.  I. — 15 


226  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Ezr  6^*  (cp.  I  ©20  n.)  may  refer  to  the  Persian  Empire  as  the 
contemporary  occupant  of  the  Tigris-Euphrates  valley  which 
formerly  belonged  to  Assyria,  and  Egypt  are  mentioned  first  as 
being  the  centres  of  the  two  great  civilisations  of  the  Ancient 
World.  After  these  two  wide  terms  follow  (i)  two  specific  districts 
of  the  Nile  valley,  Pathros  and  Cush :  Pathros  is  upper  Egypt : 
the  Egyptian  P-to-res  meant  South  Land,  and  more  particularly, 
perhaps,  the  country  extending  from  a  few  miles  S.  of  Memphis 
to  Syene  (Assouan)  at  the  First  Cataract;*  Cush  (cp.  iS^  n.)  is 
Ethiopia,  and  extended  southwards  from  the  First  Cataract ;  (2) 
two  specific  districts  of  the  Tigris-Euphrates  basins,  Elam^  lying 
to  the  E.  of  the  lower  Tigris  (21^  n.),  and  Shinar  (Gn  ii^,  Jos 
7^^,  Zee  5^^,  Dn  i^),  i.e.  Babylonia,  the  district  in  which  the 
city  of  Babylon  and  also  Erech,  Accad,  and  Calneh  were  situated 
(Gn  10^*^) ;  (3)  Ifamath  on  the  Orontes  (10^  n.),  for  which  Lag., 
deeming  the  reference  to  a  city  so  relatively  near  Judah  improb- 
able, proposed  to  substitute  a  more  remote  district,  and  the  isles, 
or  coastlandSy  of  the  Mediterranean  sea.  The  last  term,  never 
used  by  Isaiah,  is  a  favourite  with  the  Deutero-Isaiah,  who  thereby 
indicates  his  far  western  horizon.  W.  Max  Miiller  {DB — 
Pathros)  takes  a  different  view  of  the  relation  of  the  terms 
Egypt,  Pathros,  and  Cush :  he  would  give  to  Egypt  here  the 
limited  sense  of  lower  Egypt ;  then  the  three  terms  together 
cover  the  Nile  valley.  So  Esar-haddon  describes  himself  as  king 
of  the  kings  of  Musur,  Paturisi,  and  Ku-si.  Some  f  hold  that 
from  Pathros  to  the  end  of  the  v.  is  a  subsequent  addition.  (& 
has  a  rather  different  list. 

12.  The  thought  that  Yahweh  will  gather  home  His  widely 
scattered  people,  expressed  in  prose  and  with  geographical  partic- 
ularity in  v.^^,  is  here  expressed  in  poetry  with  poetical  brevity 
and  expressiveness.  The  Dispersion  will  be  brought  ha-ckfrom 
the  four  corners  of  the  earth  (Ezk  7^,  Job  37^);  Yahweh  will  raise 
a  signal  {^^  n.),  in  response  to  which  the  nations  will  bring  home 
the  exiled  people  (49^2  6620),  and  indeed  the  whole  of  it,  Israel 
as  well  as  Judah,  males  (^mj)  and  females  (niVD3)  alike  (cp.  49^2 
60*). — 13.  Israel,  now  called  Ephraim  (cp.  9^),  andjudah,  thus 
restored  (v. ^2^,  will  no  more  be  subject  to  the  envy  and  opposi- 
tion of  the  nations,  nor  will  the  internal  feuds  which  marked 

*  W.  Max  Miiller,  in  DB  iii.  693. 

t  Sta.,  Du.,  Cond.  j  but  not  Di.,  Che.,  Marti. 


XI.  i2-i6  227 

the  actual  history  of  Yahweh's  people  (cp.  9^0  (21))^  be  renewed  in 
the  age  to  come.  For  the  future  unity  of  Israel  and  Judah,  see 
Ezk  37^^^*  and  Hos  2^  (i^^);  cp.  "unto  David  their  king"  in 
Hos  3^ ;  for  the  cessation  of  outward  hostilities,  cp.  e.g.  9**  ^^. 
—Jealousy  of  Ephraim  .  .  ,  the  vexers  of  JudaK\  D'*"1D«  nK3p 
may,  of  course,  mean  (G-K.  128^,  135^)  either  the  jealousy 
which  Ephraim  feels,  or  the  jealousy  of  which  Ephraim  is  the 
object  (cp.  Ezk  35^^) ;  and  r\'y\\\'^  mv  either  those  who  had  op- 
posed or  oppressed  Judah,  or  those  in  and  of  Judah  who  are 
at  enmity  with  another  country  (RV  marg.).  But  to  treat  the 
genitives  as  subjective  gives  an  unsatisfactory  antithesis : — 
Ephraimite  sentiment  will  change,  but  in  Judah  opposition  to 
Ephraim  will  only  be  brought  to  an  end  by  an  annihilation  of 
those  who  will  still  cherish  enmity  towards  Ephraim.  The  two 
distichs  of  v.^^  speak  of  different  things ;  consequently  the  second 
is  not  superfluous,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  omitting  it  with 
Du.,  Che.,  al. — 14.  Re-united  (v.^^),  Yahweh's  people  will,  as  of 
old  under  David,  exercise  dominion  over  the  whole  of  Palestine, 
East  and  West  of  Jordan;  cp.  Am  9^^-,  also  Ps  608-10(9-"). — 
They  shall  swoop]  cp.  Hab  i®  ft^V). — The  shoulder  of  the 
Philistines]  the  hills  between  the  maritime  plain  and  the  Judaean 
highlands  which  formed  a  debatable  ground  between  Judah  and 
Philistia.  For  the  idiom,  cp.  "the  shoulder  of  the  sea  of 
Chinnereth"(Nu  34II),  "the  shoulder  of  Moab"  (Ezk  259).— 
The  sons  of  the  East]  the  nomadic  tribes  of  the  desert  to  the  E. 
of  trans-Jordanic  Palestine;  cp.  Jer  4928^.,  Jg  (fi, — Shall  be 
brought  under  their  dominion]  lit.  are  the  outstretching  of  their 
handf  i.e.  that  which  their  hand  stretches  out  to  take  possession 
of:  cp.  Ex  227.io(8.ii)._i5^  l5.  Cp.  Zee  iqIO*^-.  The  second 
Exodus  (v.i^),  in  which  the  Remnant  will  depart  as  easily  from 
Assyria  as  Israel  of  old  from  Egypt  (v.^^),  would  in  reality  be  the 
prelude  to  the  unmolested  life  and  victorious  undertakings  of  the 
restored  exiles  (v.^^^-).  The  present  connection,  or  the  order,  of 
vv.18-16  is  perhaps  not  the  original. —  Will  dry  up]  so  ffi  (  =  nnnm, 
cp.  50^) :  J^  D^inm,  will  ban,  devote. — The  tongue  of  the  sea  of 
Egypt]  the  Red  Sea;  tongue  is  also  used  for  a  tongue-shaped 
piece  of  water  in  Jos  1$^'^  iS^*. — He  will  swing  his  hand]  1082  n., 
19!^ — The  River]  probably  the  Euphrates  (7^0  n.);  possibly  the 
Nile  (cp.  "in3  without  the  art.  in  19^). —  With  the  glowing  heat  of 
his  breath]  or  wind  (see  phil.  n.).     The  clause,  if  the  rendering 


228  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

at  all  represents  its  meaning,  goes  oddly  with  he  shall  swing  %zs 
hand',  perhaps  it  is  a  gloss  on  the  previous  line  (Du.,  al.). — 
The  last  part  of  the  v.  also  is  inadequately  explained :  it  is 
supposed  to  mean  that  the  Euphrates  will  be  smitten  into 
"  seven  (shallow)  streams  "  (Che.  SBOT),  so  that  the  returning 
exiles  may  easily  wade  over.  But  why  wear  sandals  to  wade  ? 
Why  seven  streams?  And  would  not  this  miracle  be  anti- 
climactic  after  the  complete  drying  up  of  the  Egyptian  sea? 
Others  think  of  waterless  wadys  over  which  the  exiles  pass  in 
sandals,  i.e,  dry-shod  (Rashi,  Ki.).  The  f)n3,  wady^  is  not  speci- 
fically a  shallow  stream ;  it  may  be  deep  and  strong  enough  to 
carry  away  those  who  attempt  to  cross  it  (Jg  5^1,  cp.  Ezk  47^), 
and  at  other  times  it  dried  up  completely  (i  K  17^). — 16.  A 
highway]  for  the  returning  exiles :  cp.  40^,  the  source  (Du.) 
rather  than  an  echo  (Di.)  of  this  v. 

9.  r[^'\']  cp.  28',  Ex  2* ;  ct.  nyn,  ii^  On  the  ace.  **'  nw,  see  G-K.  ii$d^ 
E  renders  inn*  nx  r\]n  by  *"'i  KnSm  n'  j;nD'?='"'  133  nx  nynS,  Hab  2". 
Houb.,Cond.  read  '^»nKTi  nyi  (cp.  v."). — d'03D  d*^  d'dd]  "a  unique  form  of 
expression  "  with  more  analogy  in  Arabic  than  Hebrew  :  the  nearest  parallel 
in  Hebrew  is  Nu  lo^"  (P) ;  remote  parallels  are  14^,  Nu  25^*  (P),  Dt  4^ ;  Dr. 
§  13s  (7)  Obs.— II.  'n«]  many  MSS  read  nw\— n'jr]  (&  rod  dei^ai;  read 
riN^  (Marti).  If  |§  be  retained,  it  is  necessary  to  assume  an  ellipse  of  an 
infinitive  dependent  on  1*01*  and  governing  n\ — 12.  'nnj]  for  the  omission 
of  daghesh  in  the  t,  see  G-K.  20m.  The  Niph.  part,  of  ma  is  also  used  of 
banished,  exiled  Hebrews  in  27^'  56^  Mic  4'  (Zeph  3"),  Dt  30*  (Neh  i*). — 
14.  »]n|]  MT  is  due  to  erroneous  interpretation :  cp.  W,  and  see  Dr.  §  190, 
Obs.  ;  the  cstr.  is  ^n^,  which  should  be  read  here. — 15.  The  four  lines  are 
unequal.    The  text  may  have  suffered  considerably. — irm  D'ya]  D'y  is  a  Att.  Xey. 

In  Arabic  aIjJ   means  io  be  cloudy ^   to  become  thirsty y  to  be  affected  with 

internal  heat  (see  Lane) ;  but  this  does  not  make  it  very  probable  that  D'yn 
inn  is  a  rare  synonym  for  ifJK  pin^,  and  means  in  the  heat  of  his  spirit ^  still 
less  that  it  means  in  the  glowing  heat  of  his  wind.  Ges.  ( Thes. ),  al.  read 
inn  Dsy3  (cp.  Ex  14**) ;  whether  (!&  xyeiJ/xart  /Stafy  (cp.  U  in  fortitudine 
spiritus  sui)  read  this,  or  guesed  at  the  meaning  of  |^,  is  uncertain — 16. 
"WHD  -nvHD  nKB"  nrx  .  .  .  nKts']  this  persistent  alliteration  may  have  been 
intended  :  there  is  nothing  like  it  in  Isa. — nwKD]  (&  iv  AlyOm-ip, 


XII. — Songs  of  Deliverance :  to  be  sung  on  the  occasion  of  the  New 

Exodus  {11'^^'^^). 

The  chapter  consists  of  two  songs,  (a)  vv.^*^,  (d)  vv.**^,  each 
of  which  is  provided  with  an  introductory  formula,  resembling 


XI.  9-1 6  AND  XII.  229 

those  which  introduce  similar  songs  (25*  26^  27^,  cp.  14^^)  in 
chs.  24-27  ;  and  (c)  a  prophetic  promise  (v.*). 

Each  song  written  for  the  New  Exodus  (ii^^-^*)  is  suitably 
enough  reminiscent  of  the  song  (Ex  15^'^^)  which,  according  to 
the  tradition  already  current  in  the  writer's  age,  had  been  sung 
by  Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel  on  the  occasion  of  the  First 
Exodus;  with  v.**^<*  cp.  Ex  15**-^;  with  v.*^.  Ex  15I. 

The  first  song  expresses  Israel's  gratitude  that  though 
Yahweh  had  been  angry  (cp.  lo'^),  His  anger  had  turned  away 
(io25),  and  He  had  comforted  His  people  (cp.  40^-),  delivering 
them  and  restoring  them  to  their  land,  and  to  an  unmolested  (v. 2^) 
and  glorious  life  there  (ch.  11).  The  second  song  calls  for  the 
proclamation  to  the  nations  of  the  might  of  Yahweh  displayed 
in  the  restoration  of  His  people,  and  (v.^)  for  §ion  to  cry  out 
joyously  at  the  presence  in  her  midst  of  her  great  and  Holy  God. 

It  thus  seems  obvious  that  the  chapter  was  written  to  occupy 
its  present  position  after  a  collection  of  prophecies  that  spoke  of 
Yahweh's  anger  with  His  people,  but  concluded  with  an  account 
of  the  New  Exodus.  Whether  this  collection  of  prophecies  was 
io*-ii^^  only  or  chs.  i-n,  ch.  12,  being  the  sequel  to  ii^^^-^*,  is 
no  earlier  than  that  passage,  and,  therefore,  post-exilic. 

The  argument  as  to  date  just  stated  is  the  briefest,  and  it  is  sufficient. 
But  the  chapter,  even  if  it  be  regarded  by  itself  and  independently  of  its 
relation  to  what  precedes,  is  clearly  post-exilic.  Ew.  in  1840  was  the  first  to 
detect  that  it  was  not  Isaiah's:  "Words,  figures,  terms  of  expression,  yes, 
and  the  entire  contents  and  spirit,  are  not  Isaiah's :  and  this  is  so  clear  that 
further  proof  would  be  superfluous.  .  .  .  The  colour  and  character  of  the 
passage  clearly  refer  it  to  the  times  soon  after  chs.  40-66  ;  and  an  old  scribe  or 
reader  who  found  with  great  delight  a  fulfilment  of  the  words  of  ii^"'*  in  the 
release  from  the  Babylonian  exile  may  at  that  time  have  enlarged  Isaiah's 
oracle  with  these  exultant  words"  {Propheten  des  AB^^  i.  459,  cp.  pp.  77 f.). 
Ew.'s  discovery  remained  for  some  time  unfruitful ;  but  his  conclusion  was 
emphatically  endorsed  by  Lag.  in  1878  (Semiticay  i.),  and  has  since  then  been 
widely  admitted:  see  Stade  {ZATIV,  1883,  p.  i6),  Kuenen  {Ottd.^iu  57), 
Francis  Brown  {JBLit.y  1890,  pp.  128,  131),  Di.,  Du.,  Kon.  {Einleitung, 
319),  Che.  {Introd.  57-59),  G.  A.  Smith  (in  Hastings'  DB),  Marti;  cp.,  less 
decisively,  Dr.  in  ZOT*  ;  and  for  a  defence  of  Isaiah's  authorship,  see  W.  H. 
Cobb,  viiJBLit.,  1891,  pp.  131-143.  A  date  very  considerably  later  than  the 
Exile  seems  more  probable  than  that  suggested  by  Ew.  in  view  of  the  relation 
of  the  poem  to  late  Psalms.  **  In  scope  and  expression,  in  its  conceptions 
and  its  hopes,  it  is  closely  allied  to  the  late  Psalms,  such  as  118,  138,  145  : 
cp.  also  91-100,  107,  III"  (Brown). 

Rhythm. — In  w.**-,  balanced  dislichs — 3  :  3  ;  in  *'•  the  distichs  are  all 


230 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


balanced,  but  of  different  length  :  the  first  distich  in  v.*  is  2  :  2,  the  seconc 
3:3;  those  in  vv.^**  are  4  :  4,  each  line  being  divided  by  a  caesura  into  2  :  2. 

1  And  thou  shalt  say  in  that  day : — 

^  I  give  thanks  to  thee,  Yahweh,  for  thou  wast  angry  with 

me, 
*And'  thine  anger  turned  away  and  thou   comfortedst 

me. 

2  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation, 

I  trust  and  dread  not; 
For  my  strength  and  *my'  song  is  Yah, 
And  he  has  become  my  salvation. 

^  And  ye  shall  draw  water  with  joy  out  of  the  fountains  of 
salvation,  *  and  ye  shall  say  in  that  day : — 
Give  thanks  to  Yahweh, 

Invoke  his  name; 
Make  known  among  the  people  his  deeds, 
Make  mention  that  his  name  is  exalted. 
^  Make  melody  to  Yahweh,  for  he  hath  wrought  proudly ; 

Let  this  be  known  throughout  the  whole  earth. 
*  Give  a  shrill  cry,  give  a  ringing  cry,  O  inhabitress  of  Sion 
For  great  in  thy  midst  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel. 


I.  Thou  shalt  5ay'\  Israel,  who  speaks  in  the  first  pers.  sing. 
in  the  following  poem,  as  so  often  in  the  Psalter,  is  here  addressed. 
Ct.  the  distributive  pi.  of  v.*  (5^). — I  give  thee  thanks]  the  word 
(min)  occurs  also  in  v.^  25^  3818-  ^^  and  nowhere  else  in  the  Book  of 
Isaiah:  it  occurs  in  Gn  29^^,  very  frequently  in  the  Psalter,  and 
elsewhere  most  frequently  in  Chron. ;  cp.  Driver,  Parallel  Psalter, 
pp.  461  f.  Israel  gives  thanks  because  Yahweh's  anger  had  not 
been  drawn  out  to  all  generations  (cp.  Ps  85^),  but  had  turned 
away  (ct.  9II  etc.).  The  vb.  c^jx  is  used  here  only  in  the  Book  of 
Isaiah ;  other  occurrences  of  it  are  worth  comparing  in  illustra- 
tion of  the  similarity  in  tone  and  temper  of  this  Psalm  and  late 
liturgical  pieces :  see  Ps  60^  79^  85^,  i  K  8^^  (with  the  following 
verses). — And  thine  anger  tiirtied  away\  it  is  best  to  assume  a 
slight  mutilation  of  the  text  (see  phil.  n.) :  let  thine  anger  turn 
away  (RVmarg.)  is  a  correct  rendering  of  |^,  but  leaves  Yahweh's 
anger  as  the  sole  ground  for  giving  thanks,  which  is  highly 
improbable.-iG^d?^]  7X  without  the  art.  absolutely  of  the   one 


H 


XII.  1-6  231 

true  God,  as  in  Deutero-Isaiah  (40^^  45^*)  and  Psalms  (e.g. 
16I  i7«  106").  Cp.  "with  us  is  God "  (El)  in  2fi'  10,  and  perhaps 
"the  stars  of  God  (El)"  in  14^^^  but  the  predicative  use  in  31^ 
is,  of  course,  different,  as  also  are  the  remaining  occurrences  of 
h^  in  1-39,  viz.  9^=  lo^^  (El  Gibbor)  and  5^^  (with  the  art). — 
2C.  d  =  Ex  1 52,  which  is  also  used  in  Ps  11 8^* :  see  above. — And 
dread  not]  19^^  n. —  Yakwek]  is  inserted  in  J^  after  Yah  (cp.  26*), 
but  it  is  absent  from  ffi  and  from  Ex  15^,  and  it  overloads  the 
line. — 3.  The  restored  Israelites  will  rejoice  as  they  draw  on  the 
unfailing  fountain  of  Yahweh's  grace ;  cp.  55^,  Jer  33^0'- ;  for  the 
figure  of  Yahweh  as  a  fountain  or  cistern,  see  Jer  2^^  17^^,  cp.  Ps 
^6^^  87^. — 4.  And  ye]  (!K  And  thou ;  cf.  v.^. — 4a.  b.  C  =  Ps  105^. — 
4d.  Cp.  Ps  148^8 :  ct.  "Yahweh  (not  his  name,  as  here)  is  exalted," 
217. — 5.  Cp.  Ex.  15^^ — Make  melody  to]  this  word  ("IDT)  is  very 
characteristic  of  the  Psalter,  and  occurs  outside  it  only  here 
and  in  Jg  5^ — He  hath  wrought  proudly]  niW  nt^y :  in  Ex 
15I   rm  Tm\   cf.  Ps  93I  IJ'nij  nis:  .  .  .  niiT;  niW  is  similarly 

used  in  26^®,  but  with  different  nuances  by  Isaiah  (9^^  28^). — 
Let  this  be  known]  this  with  backward  reference  to  the  fact  of 
God's  proud  and  majestic  achievements. — 6.  Give  a  shrill  cry] 
so  24I*  54I,  Jer  31'^ — all,  as  here,  synonymous  with  pi:  in  lo^^^ 
i)nv  has  a  different  force. — Inhabitress  of  Sion]  Jer  51^*^  f:  cp. 
"inhabitress  of  Shaphir,"  "of  Maroth,"  "of  Lachish,"  Mic  i". 
What  is  meant  is  the  entire  population  of  the  city. — For  great  in 
thy  midst]  cp.  "  Great  is  Yahweh  ...  in  the  city  of  our  God," 
Ps  482  0) ;  cp.  Ps  g^^.—The  Holy  One  of  Israel]  this  favourite 
term  of  Isaiah's  and  the  Deutero-Isaiah's  is  used  by  this  Psalmist 
in  common  with  two  or  three  other  Psalmists:  see  Ps  71^  78*1 
89I9. 

I,  'ipn^i  ^£5K  a^;]  MT  clearly  takes  the  vbs.  as  jussives :  cp.  the  fut.  of 
5n,  "When  I  shall  have  returned  to  thy  Law  thy  anger  will  turn  away  from 
me  and  thou  wilt  have  pity  on  me "  ;  but  f&  {koX  dir^cTT/jc^as  rbv  0v/jl6v  <rov 
Kal  ^\iT](rds  /le),  5  =  ^f^l  (Hiph.  ;  cp.  Ps  78^,  Job  9^*  •).  Read,  'JOnjBi  ibn  3;fJn. 
Marti  prefers  to  read  a«?,  assuming  a  dittography  of '  in  |§  ;  but  the  coupling  . 
of  the  vbs.  {(&)  is  far  more  probable,  since  the  real  reason  ('3)  of  Ttik  is  first 
reached  in  the  last  two  (cp.  5*).  This  point  also  weighs  against  the  theory 
that  the  text  is  sound  and  ^tff"  a  *'  poetically  shortened  "  form  for  a^','!,  a  theory 
that  is  precariously  supported  by  reference  to  Hos  6*  (note  preceding  1)  and 
Ps  18"  (ct.  2  S  22^2)  .  cp.  Dr.  §  174.— 2.  n'  man]  mon  has  suffered  the  loss 
of'  before  .t. — 3.  'Jiyi^p  for  the  two  pathahs,  cp.  ni^y:  from  nbji;! ;  in  i  K  18' 
the  alternative  form  'j^yj?  occurs. — 5.  nyn'c]  K«tib,  Pual  part.  ;  K*r^  ny?D, 


232  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Hoph.  part.  The  Pual  part,  elsewhere  means  acquaintance.  The  IC're  (Lv 
4^-  ^t)  is  preferable,  the  part,  being  gerundial  (G-K.  Ii6^);  but  perhaps 
lyYin  (ffi)  was  the  original  reading  ;  cp.  the  1|  noi  and  v.*. 


XIII.-XXIII. — Prophecies  mainly  devoted  to  Foreign  Nations, 

This  main  section  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  falls  into  the  follow- 
ing subsections  : — The  Oracle  of  Babylon,  13^-1428;  The  Fall  of 
Assyria,  1424-27;  of  Philistia,  1429-32;  The  Oracle  of  Moab,  i5f.; 
The  Oracle  of  Damascus  (and  Ephraim),  1 7^"^^ ;  The  Tumult  of 
many  Nations,  17^2-14.  The  Land  beyond  the  rivers  of  Cush,  18; 
The  Oracle  of  Egypt,  19;  Isaiah  a  sign  against  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia,  20 ;  The  Oracle  of  "the  Wilderness  of  the  Sea,"  21^*1**; 
The  Oracle  of  Dumah,  2iii^-;  The  Oracle  "In  Arabia,"  21I3-I6; 
The  Oracle  of  the  Valley  of  Vision,  22'-^'^;  The  Fate  of  Shebna, 
2  216-25;  The  Oracle  of  Tyre,  23. 

The  nine,  or  (including  1429-32)  ten,  "oracles,"  either  in  whole 
or  in  part,  not  improbably  at  one  time  formed  by  themselves  an 
anonymous  "  Book  of  Oracles  " ;  to  these  the  sections  not  defined 
as  oracles  were  in  that  case  subsequently  added ;  the  addition  of 
the  words  "  which  Isaiah  the  son  of  'Amos  saw "  to  the  title  of 
the  first  section  (13^),  may  indicate  that  the  whole  of  the  enlarged 
work  came  to  be  attributed  to  Isaiah :  see,  further,  Introduction 
§§33f. 


XIII.  i-XIV.  2Z.— Babylon. 


The  "  Oracle  of  Babylon  "  consists  of  {a)  a  poem  predicting 
the  capture  of  Babylon,  "  the  beauty  of  kingdoms,"  by  the  Medes, 
and  the  complete  and  permanent  desolation  of  the  site  of  the 
city,  132-22;  (^)  a  section,  part  poetry,  part  prose,  explaining  that 
the  Fall  of  Babylon  will  be  the  prelude  to  Yahweh's  restoration 
of  the  Israelites  to  their  land,  and  the  subjection  to  them  there 
of  those  who  at  present  exact  from  them  the  hard  service  of 
captives,  14^"^;  possibly  13220.(1  belongs  to  this  section:  see 
Geiger,  Urschrift,  p.  353 ;  (r)  a  song  of  triumph  over  a  cruel  and 
arrogant  tyrant  who  had  conquered  and  held  in  subjection  the 
entire  world,  14*^-21 ;  according  to  section  (b)  this  king  was  a 
king  of  Babylon  (14^*);  {d)  a  prose  re-statement  of  the  theme 
of  {a) — Yahweh  is  about  to  exterminate  the  Babylonians  and 
make  the  site  of  the  city  desolate ;  {d)  also  appears  to  refer  to  {c). 


m 


XIII.  i-xiv.  23  233 

Whoever  is  answerable  for  the  final  form  of  the  oracle  quite 
clearly,  whether  correctly  or  not,  understood  the  whole  to  refer 
to  Babylon.  The  poem  in  ch.  13  was  written  at  a  time  when 
Babylon  was  the  commanding  city  of  the  entire  world  (13^^),  and 
when  it  was  natural  to  expect  that  her  supremacy,  if  wrested 
from  her  at  all,  would  be  wrested  by  the  Medes  (13^^);  i.e.  it 
was  written  at  some  time  after  the  Fall  of  Nineveh  in  c.  606  b.c., 
but  before  the  actual  Fall  of  Babylon  in  538  b.c.  ;  not  later  than 
538,  for  the  fate  of  Babylon  is  described  in  1319-22  prophetically, 
not  ex  eventu ;  the  desolation  of  the  site  of  the  city  was  by  no 
means  what  the  writer  depicts.  A  date  about,  or  a  little  before, 
550  B.C.  best  meets  the  case  (see  below  on  13^^). 

Clearly,  then,  the  oracle  of  Babylon  is  no  earlier  than  the 
Exile:  it  is  probably  later,  for  141-** (22f.)  js  post-exilic  rather 
than  exilic;  Babylon  to  the  writer  of  these  verses  may  be  a 
symbolic  name  for  all  those  that  oppress  Israel;  the  Israelites 
who  are  to  be  restored  are  to  come  from  many  quarters  (see 
141-^).  The  song  of  triumph  (14*'^^)  judged  by  itself  less  clearly 
reveals  its  date  (see  below) ;  but  it  is  fairly  safe  to  infer,  if  merely 
from  the  striking  difference  in  style,  that  it  is  not  the  work  of  the 
author  of  i4^-^. 

We  may  then  attribute  the  oracle  in  its  present  form  to  a 
post-exilic  editor  who  wrote  14^***  to  connect  two  poems  (132-22 
and  14*^*21)  which  he  understood,  and  in  the  case  of  the  first  at 
least  correctly,  to  refer  to  the  Fall  of  Babylon.  He,  too,  may 
have  added  1422^-,  and  perhaps  have  introduced  some  modifica- 
tions into  132-22. 

For  some  two  thousand  years  and  more  the  singularly  unfortimate  guess 
of  some  editor  who  thought  that  the  entire  oracle  was  a  prophecy  of  Isaiah's 
(13^)  led  to  the  unquestioning  acceptance  of  Isaiah's  authorship  of  13^-14^. 
The  impossibility  of  this  was  perceived  by  Eichhom,  who,  however,  though 
he  correctly  perceived  the  terminus  a  qu*^  failed  to  see  that  ch.  13  at  least 
was  written  before  the  end  of  the  Exile.  He  treated  the  entire  oracle  as 
post-exilic.  Ges.  correctly  dated  ch.  13  in  the  Exile,  and  with  him,  as  with 
most  succeeding  scholars  till  Du.,  this  was  allowed  to  determine  the  date 
of  the  entire  section.  Bredenkamp,  who  maintained  Isaiah's  authorship  of 
ch.  13,  but  saw  in  i4**'-2®  a  poem  on  the  fall  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  assigned 
14"*  to  a  third  hand.  Rejected  by  Di.  as  "apologetische  Halbheit,"  this 
correct  perception  of  difference  was  utilised  by  Du.,  who  treated  I4^-*^  as  a 
post-exilic  editor's  link  connecting  132-22  (to  ^hich  he  thought  1422*'  might 
also  belong)  and  i4*''-2^,  the  two  poems  being  possibly,  but  not  necessarily,  the 
work  of  the  same  author.     The  analysis  has  been  accepted  by  Che,,  M^rti, 


234  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

and  others  ;  but  with  less  readiness  to  admit  that  the  two  poems  may  be  the 
work  of  the  same  hand,  or  that  ijs^^-  may  belong  to  i^'^.  "There  are  such 
differences  in  the  imaginative  pictures  of  the  judgment  in  the  two  works,  and 
there  is  so  much  more  poetic  heat  in  the  ode  than  in  the  prophecy,  that  the 
conjecture  (already  offered  in  PI  \.  21)  of  a  twofold  authorship  is  a  reason- 
able one  "  (Che.  Introd.  p.  75). 

But  once  i^^'"^^  is  isolated,  the  date  of  it  cannot  be  determined  so  clearly 
or  so  closely  as  the  date  of  132-22.  and  there  have  been  attempts  of  late  to 
show  that  it  is  earlier  and,  indeed,  the  work  of  Isaiah ;  see  below,  pp.  251  f. 

That  the  section  13^-1422  cannot  in  its  entirety  be  the  work  of  Isaiah 
follows  so  obviously  from  the  historical  situation  presupposed  in  13^'^^,  that 
it  need  not  be  more  elaborately  proved  here.  For  such  proof,  see,  e.g..^  Ges., 
Di.,  Che.  Introd.  67  ff.  For  defences  of  Isaiah's  authorship,  see  Uhland, 
Vat.  Jes.  cap.  xiii.  .  .  .  prophet ae  Jesaiae  vindicatum  (Tubingen,  1798),  the 
commentary  of  Or. ,  and  earlier  editions  of  Del. 

XIII.    I.  Title. — The  oracle  of]  i.e.   concerning  Babylon ; 

cp.  15^  17^  19^  21^-11  22^  23I,  Nah  i^     NK^,  oracle^  or  utterance^ 

is  a  noun  derived  from  the  vb.  KK'a  used  as  in  t^  (n.)  42^. — 

Which  Isaiah  saw]  i.e.  received  by  revelation  :  cp.  i^  n.,  2K     See 

further  on  this  title,  Introduction,  §§  28  ff. 


XIII.   2-22. — The  coming  Destruction  of  Babylon. 

The  dominant  rhythm  in  vv.^"®  is  3  :  2,  in  w.^-^  it  is  3  :  3.  In  vv.^"^ 
there  are  12  to  14  distichs,  most  of  which  are  obviously  3:2;  at  most  two  are 
3  :  3,  and  even  these  were  probably  3  :  2,  for  in  v. 2*"  makkeph  Sp'ionn  (cp. 
II  onKB') ;  and  in  v.'*'  truN  may  be  intrusive  (see  n.  below).  Of  some  25 
distichs  in  vv.^"^  most  are  clearly  3  :  3  ;  in  MT  only  one  (v.""*  *»)  is  3  :  2, 
though  by  makkephing  vh  with  the  vb.  in  w.^'**''  22d  two  further  3  :  2  distichs 
could  be  obtained.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  makkeph  be  omitted  after  ^yi, 
even  v.*^**  ^  is  3  :  3,  not  3  :  2. 

By  omitting  a  word  from  the  second  line  of  several  distichs  (viz.  in 
yy  9d.  lid.  12b.  i4dj^  ^y  assuming  the  loss  of  two  words  after  v.*^*  and  also  after 
v.^^'',  by  treating  v.^*  as  two  distichs  (**  Langverse  "),  and  by  other  hazardous 
treatments  of  the  text  and  improbable  line  divisions,  Du.  nearly  succeeds  in 
reducing  the  whole  of  vv.2-22  |.q  ^hat  he,  and  after  him  Marti,  Box,  and 
Whitehouse,  claim  that  it  was — 42  distichs  3  :  2.  Box  is  less  consistent  than 
Du.  in  his  reconstruction,  but  still  boldly  claims  that  the  whole  is  in  the 
rhythm  of  the  Hebrew  dirge.  But  if  the  5  successive  distichs  in  vv.^**  and 
the  6  successive  distichs  in  vv.^^'^'^^  are,  as  they  stand  in  |^  (and  Box  does  not 
emend),  in  the  same  rhythm,  then  there  is  no  such  thing  as  distinction  of 
rhythm  in  Hebrew.     Vv.^'*  are  in  echoing,  vv.^^''"^*  in  balanced  rhythm. 

In  both  parts  of  the  chapter  there  are  irregularities,  i.e.  distichs  neither 
3  :  2  nor  3:3;  but  at  least  some  of  these  are  due  to  textual  corruption  ;  see 
notes  on  vv,'*  ••  '•  *•  ^^-  '^.     Note,  further,  that  vv.'-'-  2"a-  ^  were  2  :  3  unless  a 


XIII.   2-22  235 

word  II  Din  has  dropped  out  after  ipT  in  v."  and  nip  in  v.^''*  (see  n.) ;  v."**  '• 
contains  in  all  only  4  accents  ;  ^'*''  *  is  2  :  2  (balanced,  not  echoing). 

The  strophic  structure,  if  such  was  intended,  is  not  clear,  or,  if  clear, 
irregular.  In  the  translation,  spaces  are  left  where  there  seems  to  be  a  larger 
pause  in  the  sense.  Du.,  followed  by  Box,  distributes  his  hypothetical  42 
long  lines  into  six  strophes  each  containing  exactly  seven  lines,  and  ending 
respectively  with  w.**  ^  ^^'  ^^  ^^'  ^, 

*  "  On  a  bare  hill  raise  the  signal, 

Cry  aloud  to  them; 
Wave  the  hand  that  they  may  enter 
Through  the  gates  of  the  nobles. 

*  (For)  'tis  I  have  charged  *  to  (execute)  my  anger  * 

[The  host  of]  my  consecrated  ones, 
Yea,  I  have  summoned  my  warriors, 
My  proudly  exultant  ones." 

*  Hark !  a  tumult  on  the  mountains 

As  of  much  people ; 
Hark  !  the  din  of  kingdoms, 

Of  nations  assembled. 
Yahweh  of  Hosts  is  mustering 

The  host  of  battle. 

*  They  are  coming  from  a  land  afar  off, 

From  the  end  of  heaven — 
Yahweh  and  the  instruments  of  his  indignation. 
To  ruin  all  the  earth. 

*  Howl !  for  the  day  of  Yahweh  is  near, 

As  devastation  from  the  Almighty  it  cometh. 
"^  Therefore  all  hands  will  hang  slack. 
And  every  heart  of  man  faint. 

*  And  .  .  .  will  be  dismayed  .  ,  . 

•  •••••• 

They  shall  be  seized  with  pangs  and  pains. 

As  a  travailing  woman  shall  they  writhe; 
They  shall  look  at  one  another  in  amazement. 

Their  faces  will  be  aflame. 

*  Behold  the  day  of  Yahwch  cometh, 

Cruel  with  wrath  and  heat  of  anger, 
To  make  the  earth  a  desolation, 

And  to  destroy  the  sinners  thereof  from  it. 


236 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


^0  For  the  stars  of  heaven  and  its  Orions 
Shall  not  give  their  light; 
The  sun  is  dark  when  it  rises, 

And  the  moon  shall  not  let  its  light  shine. 

^^  "And  I  will  punish  the  world  for  'its'  evil, 
And  the  wicked  for  their  iniquity ; 
And  I  will  make  the  pride  of  the  presumptuous  cease. 
And   the   haughtiness   of  the   awe-inspiring  will    I  bring 

low. 
^2  I  will  make  mortals  more  rare  than  fine  gold. 
And  men  than  gold  of  Ophir." 

^3  Therefore  the  heavens  *  will  tremble,* 
And  the  earth  quake  out  of  its  place, 
Through  the  wrath  of  Yahweh  of  Hosts, 
And  in  the  day  of  the  heat  of  his  anger. 

^*  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  as  a  hunted  gazelle, 

And  as  a  flock  with  none  to  gather  it. 
They  shall  turn  every  one  to  his  people. 

And  they  shall  flee  every  one  to  his  land. 
1^  Every  one  that  is  found  shall  be  thrust  through. 

And  every  one  that  is  caught  shall  fall  by  the  sword. 
1^  Their  children  shall  be  dashed  in  pieces  in  their  sight, 

Their  houses  shall  be  spoiled  and  their  wives  ravished 


^''  *'  Behold  I  am  stirring  up 
Against  them  the  Medes, 
Who  take  no  account  of  silver, 
And  in  gold  find  no  delight. 

18  .... 


m 


They  have  no  compassion  on  the  fruit  of  the  womb. 
Nor  doth  their  eye  look  pityingly  on  children. 


^'  And  Babylon  the  beauty  of  kingdoms. 
The  glorious  pride  of  the  Chaldaeans, 
Shall  be  as  when  God  overthrew 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah. 


XIII.    2-22  237 

2®  It  shall  be  uninhabited  for  ever, 

It  shall  be  undwelt  in  to  all  generations : 
The  Arab  shall  not  pitch  tent  there, 
Nor  shepherds  fold  (their  flocks)  there. 
*^  But  yelpers  (?)  shall  make  their  lair  there, 
And  their  houses  shall  be  full  of  shriekers ; 
And  there  shall  ostriches  dwell, 
And  satyrs  shall  dance  there. 
22  And  howling  beasts  shall  sing  in  the  mansions  thereof, 
And  jackals  in  the  delightful  palaces. 
Its  time  is  nearly  come. 
And  its  days  shall  not  be  prolonged. 

The  poem  describes  the  summoning  of  Yahweh's  warriors, 
vv.*'*,  their  assembling  and  advance,  vv>^-,  and  the  terror 
of  the  people  against  whom  they  march,  w.^^^ ;  the  effect 
on  Heaven  and  earth,  vv.^^^^  ;  the  flight  of  the  foreign  people 
in  the  threatened  city  to  their  own  lands  and  the  slaughter 
of  those  that  remain,  w.^^-^^.  In  v.^*^  it  is  first  stated  that  it 
is  the  Medes  who  are  to  be  Yahweh's  warriors,  and  in  v.^®  that 
Babylon  is  the  threatened  city.  The  poem  closes  with  a 
description  of  the  complete  and  eternal  desolation  of  the  site  of 
Babylon. 

The  poem  is  itself,  substantially  as  it  stands,  or  it  rests  upon 
a  poem  which  was,  the  work  of  a  Jew  living  during  the  Exile, 
watching  the  movements  of  the  Medes,  and  anticipating  that  the 
proud  city  and  empire  of  Babylon  would  be  overthrown  by  them ; 
it  must  have  been  written  about  550  b.c.  ;  see  above,  p.  233,  and 
on  v.^^. 

Two  characteristics  of  the  section,  one  of  its  form  and  one 
of  its  substance,  suggest  that  the  original  poem  may  have 
received  additions  and  been  subject  to  modifications  beyond 
those  (of  which  there  are  many)  that  are  due  to  ordinary 
processes  of  textual  corruption.  Firstly,  there  is  a  clearly 
marked  change  in  the  dominant  rhythm  which  formally 
distinguishes  vv.^'^  from  w.®-22  (see  above).  Secondly,  whereas 
in  vv.^'''"^*  the  poem  is  quite  clearly  concerned  with  actual 
conditions,  and  possibilities  closely  related  to  them,  in  other 
places  there  appears  the  vagueness  of  an  eschatological  poem ; 
the  opening  verses  might  well   refer   to  superhuman  armies  of 


n 


238  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH  ^^ 

Yahweh,*  and  by  no  means  obviously  suggest  a  single  specific 
nation — the  Medes :  so  again  the  darkness  (v.^^)  and  the  uni- 
versal commotion  are  eschatological  features,  and  in  v.^^  it  is 
not  Babylon,  but  the  whole  world,  that  is  to  be  punished.  If 
these  eschatological  features  were  limited  to  the  3  :  2  distichs 
(vv.^-8),  we  might  suppose  that  an  eschatological  fragment  has 
been  prefixed  to  a  poem  predicting  the  Fall  of  Babylon  ;  but  they 
are  not ;  they  appear  also  in  vv.^^^^. 

2-4.  Yahweh's  warriors  summoned  and  assembled. 
— Let  those  whose  duty  it  is  to  do  so  make  signals  to  the  Medes 
(v.^^)  to  enter  Babylon  (v.^^)  as  the  executants  of  Yahweh's 
anger. — On  a  bare  hill'\  where  the  signal  will  be  conspicuous. 
With  nSB':  in  f,  cp.  D''^BB',  bare  hills,  e.g.  4118,  jgr  ^2  4II. — 
Raise  the  signal]  Jer  51^7,  see  5^^  n. —  Wave  the  ha?td\  clearly 
as  a  third  way  of  giving  a  signal :  but  this  meaning  of  T  C]"'in 
(11^^  19^^)  does  not  occur  again. — The  gates  of  the  nobles'] 
apparently  the  Babylonians  are  treated  as  nobles  in  relation  to 
the  other  inhabitants  of  the  world  (cp.  47'^).  The  term  D'2n3  is 
applied  to  men  of  rank  and  position  on  whom  society  and 
government  rest;  it  is  parallel  to  "king"  in  Job  34^*,  to 
"princes"  (onC')  in  Nu  21^^  and  Pr  8^^;  cp.  also,  "It  is  better 
to  take  refuge  in  Yahweh  than  to  trust  in  nobles,"  Ps  118^. — 
3.  On  the  conjectural  emendations  underlying  the  translation, 
see  phil.  n. — /]  Yahweh. — Consecrated  ones]  i.e.  soldiers;  see 
next  line.  Cp.  "consecrate  nations  against  her,"  Jer  Si^*^; 
"  consecrate  war,  rouse  up  the  warriors,"  Jl  4  (3)^.  War  was  a 
sacred  institution,  and  therefore  those  who  fought  were  conse- 
crated and  subject  to  strict  laws  of  purity  and  taboo :  see  Dt 
2310-15^  2  S  1 1^1,  also  Jer  6*  22'',  Mic  3^;  F.  Schwally,  Semitische 
Kriegsalterthilmer. — My  proudly  exultant  ones]  Zeph  3^^;  cp. 
2  2^  n. — 4.  The  mountains]  of  Media. — Kingdoms  .  .  .  nations] 
under  the  sway  of  the  king  of  Media;  cp.  Jer  51 2"^-,  "Call 
together  against  her  the  kingdoms  of  Ararat,  Minni,  and 
Ashkenaz   .   .   .   consecrate  against  her  the  nations,  the  king 

*  They  were  so  understood  by  Eus. ,  who,  if  the  poem  has  come  down  in 
its  original  form,  is  rightly  criticised  by  Jer.  in  his  comment  on  v.".  **  Principes 
et  gigantes  juxta  LXX  Translatores  Eusebius  virtutes  Angelicas  interpre- 
tatur,  et  pessimos  daemones,  qui  ad  eversionem  Babylonis  missi  sunt,"  and  on 
v.^'  "  Apertum  est  quod  late  bat :  quod  nequaquam  fortes  et  gigantes,  Angeli 
intelligendi  sunt  et  daemones,  sed  Medorum  gens. 


XIII.  2-6  239 

(dSi)  of  Media,  his  governors  and  all  his  viceroys,  and  all  the 
land  of  his  dominion." 

2.  iK3'i]  followed  by  the  ace  as  in  Ps  loo*. — ^3,  ♦npoS  'n'W  '3k]  for  ^  of 
the  obj.  of  .Tijf,  see  Ex  i'^,  Jer  32^3.  But  the  words  are  probably  a  mutilated 
distich  :  one  of  the  lost  words  ('Bw*?),  perhaps  shifted  down  to  the  next  line 
which  is  over  long.     By  a  further  conjecture  Marti  obtains  two  good  3  :  2 

distichs : 

'tnpo  K3!<  I  'bkS  'nix  'jk 

WKJ    "Vhu  I  '1133   'HKip  D3 

4.  mm]  for  ? :  rare ;  see  BDB  198a. — n'lo^?©]  to  be  so  pointed  (t!D),  not 
nb^Dij  (MT),  which  destroys  both  rhythm  and  parallelism. — 

5-8.  Terror  at  the  approach  of  Yahweh  and  His 
warriors. — 5a.  b.  Cp.  s^^  46I1. — T/ie  instruments  of  his  indig- 
nation'] Jer  50^^ ;  cp.  "  instruments  of  war "  as  applied  to  Saul 
and  Jonathan,  2  S  i^"^. — All  the  earth]  rhetorical  for  the  entire 
Babylonian  empire  (Jer.  al.),  or  eschatological  ?  See  above, 
p.  237  f. — 6.  Hoivl]  Jl  i5-i3.  and  the  remainder  of  v.^  =  Jl  i^^b. 
other  similarities  to  Joel  occur  in  vv.^  ^®*  ^*.  Joel  is  imitative 
{Exp,  1893,  Sept.,  pp.  208-225),  and  may  be  the  borrower,  or 
second  user,  of  most  of  these  common  phrases  or  ideas ;  but  this 
V.  is  rhythmically  peculiar  in  its  present  setting ;  it  is  a  distich 
4  :  3,  or,  apart  from  howl^  3  :  3  i  in  the  latter  case  the  rhythm 
is  that  of  vv.^-22,  but  not  of  w.^-^  (3:2);  in  the  former  it  re- 
sembles the  rhythm  of  neither  part  of  ch.  13.  Possibly  the  v. 
was  interpolated  so  as  to  generalise  a  prophecy  of  the  overthrow 
of  Babylon  by  the  Medes  into  a  prophecy  of  the  final  and 
universal  judgment.  If  original  in  its  present  position,  the 
imperative  wail  must  be  addressed  to  the  Babylonians ;  but  it 
breaks  in  awkwardly  and  forms  a  less  satisfactory  antecedent 
than  v.*  to  the  therefore  of  v.''.  Nothing  is  gained  by  putting 
w.^"8  after  vv.^'^^  (Cond. ). — As  devastation  from  the  Almighty] 
or,  reproducing  the  assonance  in  '•ItJ'D  IB'D,  as  an  overpowering 
from  the  overpowerer  (Dr.,  Joel  and  Amos^  p.  45).  The  coiner 
of  the  present  phrase  associated  the  divine  name  HK'  with, 
the  root  nnU'  (21^  33I  etc.),  and  must  have  understood  it  to  mean 
the  Waster,  or  Devastator.  The  actual  etymology  and  original 
meaning  of  the  term  is  altogether  obscure ;  (&  frequently  renders 
by  TravTOKpaTwp,  whence  EV  Almighty ;  the  later  Greek  versions 
by  Uavos,  which  is  probably  also  intended  by  the  MT  punctua- 
tion "^K^,   he  that  is  sufficient.     By  modern  scholars  it  has  been 


240  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

explained  as  ^*1B^,  my  lord?  (cp.  ^JHK),  or  compared  with  the 
Babylonian  epithet  of  Bel,  sadu  rabbu— great  mountain  (cp.  liv 
as  an  epithet  of  God).  The  term  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the 
Book  of  Isaiah.  Frequent  as  an  archaism  in  Job  and  P,  it 
occurs  rarely  elsewhere :  Gn  49^5,  Nu  24*-  ^^  are,  presumably, 
early,  and  Ezk  i^*  lo^,  Ps  681^  91I,  Ruth  i^o^-,  late  instances  of  its 
use.  See,  further,  on  the  usage,  etymology,  and  meaning  of  the 
name,  HPN  196 ff.;  Dr.,  Joel  and  Amos^  8 if.;  EBi.  3326; 
Ges-B.  s.v. — 7  f'  The  sequence  to  v.^ ;  v.^  being  parenthetic,  if  not 
interpolated.  The  Babylonians  become  paralysed  with  fear. — 
All  hands]  The  seat  of  power,  cp.  Jos  8^^,  Ps  76^. — Hang  down] 
helpless:  cp.  Jer  50*^;  also  2  S  4^,  Jer  62*,  Ezk  'j^'^  21I2,  Zeph 
3^*,  Job  4^. — Every  heart  of  man]  the  heart  of  man  without  every 
is  quite  a  general  expression  :  cp.  Ps  104!^ ;  every  heart  is  a  more 
exact  parallel  to  all  hands.  Of  man  is  perhaps  a  misplaced 
fragment  of  the  mutilated  line  that  follows,  or  an  interpolation 
intended  to  modify  every  (Babylonian)  heart  into  every  heart  of 
mankind.  In  J^  the  distich  is  3:3,  with  the  omission,  like  the 
neighbouring  distichs,  3  :  2. — 8.  And  they  will  be  dismayed] 
according  to  Di.  the  subj.  is  the  owners  of  the  hearts  and  hands 
just  mentioned  in  v.^ :  very  improbable ;  the  word  ^i>n33  is  the 
fragment  of  a  lost  distich. — a.  d.  For  the  figure  of  birth-pangs, 
never  found  in  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  see  21^,  Jl  2^,  Jer  50*^ 
49^*,  Ps  48^^. — Their  faces  are  aflame]  in  feverish  excitement ; 
cp.  Nah  2^1,  Jl  2^. 

7.  The  obvious  parallelism  of  nrsin  D'T  So  and  dd*  33V  ^3,  and  th 
prevalent  parallelism  within  the  distichs,  makes  the  theory  that  'in  dt  j3-^y 
is  one  mutilated  distich  and  i'?n33i  dd'  K'Ijk  33*?  ^3  (Du.,  Che. ,  Box)  is  another,  far 
less  probable  than  the  theory  of  mutilation  stated  above. — 8.  pmK']  either  the 
obj.  them  is  omitted,  or  D'^3m  D'TX  is  the  obj.  ;  for  ton  with  similar  objects, 
cp.  Job  18^  (f^  not  (!K)  21*  (construction  ambiguous). 

9-13.  Darkness  and  universal  commotion  ac- 
companying Yahweh's  judgment  of  the  world  for  its 
wickedness. — 9a.  b.  On  the  text,  see  phil.  n. — 10.  Darkness : 
cp.  58O  822,  Am  89,  Ezk  30I8  32'^-,  Zeph  i^s,  Jl  2^0  3*  4I5  Jer  428: 
see,  further,  KAT^,  p.  393. — loa.  b.  Possibly  a  variant  of  c.  (d.). 
Note  the  absence  of  parallelism. — Its  Orions]  "Orion  and  other 
constellations  of  the  same  brilliancy"  (BDB).  But  thQ  plural 
is  strange,  and  was  perhaps  not  read  by  6r :  see  phil.  n.  Other 
allusions  to  Orion  are  Am  5^,  Job  9^  38^11.     The  identification 


XIII.  7-14  241 

of  i^D3  with  Orion  goes  back  to  (5  and  is  probably  correct ;  if 
so,  the  name  meaning  fool  goes  back  to  a  myth  of  "  some  fool- 
hardy, heaven-daring  rebel,  who  was  chained  to  the  sky  for 
his  impiety"  {Dr. ^  Joel  and  AmoSy  179);  for  etymological 
speculations,  see  Harper's  note  on  Am  5^. — 11  f.  Yahweh  speaks. 
— The  world]  !)2n  is  never,  like  pK,  limited  to  a  single  country. 
The  entire  world  is  to  be  punished  for  its  wickedness  and 
violence;  in  14^'^  it  is  the  object  of  the  wickedness  and  violence 
for  which  the  king  of  Babylon  is  to  be  punished.  The  following 
terms,  the  wicked^  the  presumptuous^  the  awe-inspiring  {2^\  may 
be  as  wide  and  universal  as  the  world  \  but  they  might  also  apply 
specifically  to  the  Babylonians  :  cp.  14^  (Hab  i**  ^3)  for  the  first ; 
and  note  that  "the  most  awe-inspiring  of  the  nations"  is  a 
standing  epithet  with  Ezekiel  for  the  Babylonians :  see  Ezk  3o^<>^- 
32i2f.  287  3ii2._i2.  Gold  of  Ophir]  Cp.  Ps  4510,  Job  28i«,  i  Ch 
29*,  Job  222*.  This  specially  prized  gold  was  brought  from 
Ophir,  a  district  reached  by  ships  sailing  from  *Esion-geber  at 
the  head  of  the  Gulf  of  'Akabah  (i  K  9^-8).  For  the  understand- 
ing of  the  present  passage  it  is  unnecessary  to  discuss  the  exact 
situation  of  Ophir :  for  theories,  see  DB  and  EBi.  s.v. ;  also 
Skinner,  Genesis^  p.  222. — 13a.  b.  Cp.  Jl  2^<*. — The  heavens  will 
tremble']  so  (Sr :  f^,  awkwardly  continuing  the  speech  of  Yahweh 
(vv.^^),  half-way  but  only  half-way  through  v.^^,  /  will  make  the 
heavens  tremble. 

9.  qK  pnm  n-iajn  ni3K  H3  ni.r  dv  7\i7\'\  the  distich  is  scarcely  3  :  3,  still 
less  3:2;  nor  is  the  cast  of  it  quite  like  that  of  the  other  distichs.  If  the 
text  is  correct,  nnn  is  best  taken  as  in  apposition  to  m.T  di»  and  rriDyi  as 
a  case  of  waw  concomitantiae  (7'  n.).  Possibly  ffi  read  may  niSK  (ace.  of 
respect:  G-K.  131/,  y).  Du.  omits  m.T  dv  ;  but  an  expressed  subject  of  k3 
seems  to  be  required.  Possibly,  however,  dv  has  been  inserted  (cp.  v.^') ; 
ni3K  would  go  better  with  m.T  than  with  DV  :  cp.  Job  30^^  (n)3K).  — 10.  'aao  '3 
DiT^'oai  D'DB'n]  (!K  o\  7A/3  AffT^pes  toO  ovpavod  koX  6  'Cipeluv  Kal  iroj  6  K6<rfios  tov 
oirpavov :  are  the  last  two  clauses  a  paraphrase  of  Dn''?'03i  ?  or  did  (&  read 
V'03i,  and  is  the  last  clause  in  (Sr  a  doublet  of  the  first?  Du.  omits  '3313. — 
II.  nyn]  read  a^VT:  cp.  the  parallel  DJiy.  IB  xaKd  probably  =  nyn — inter- 
mediate between  |^  and  the  original  text. — 13.  I'JTK]  ^  is  an  error  for  im» 
ffi  {dvfJt.ud'^aeTai :  cp.  37*). 

14-16.  Flight  from   Slaughter  and   Violation.— All 

foreigners  in  Babylon  (cp.  47^^  Jer  51^)  will  attempt  to  flee 
(v.i*),  but  if  found  there  will  share  the  fate  of  the  Babylonians, 
who  will  perish  one  and  all. — 14.  A  flock]  ffi  a  wandering  (l3K, 

VOL.  I. — 16 


242  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

as  I  S  93-20,  Ezk  i\^)  flock.  For  the  figure,  cp.  i  K  22^7^  Ezk 
34^ — 15  f.  The  Jewish  aspiration  for  vengeance  lies  behind  the 
description :  may  the  Babylonians  be  served  as  they  served  us ! 
Cp.  Ps  137^^-. — Strictly  speaking,  people  who  have  fallen  by  the 
sword  (v.^^)  cannot  subsequently  (v.^^)  see  their  children  dashed 
in  pieces  (Marti);  but  it  would  be  precarious  to  deny  the 
possibility  that  the  present  sequence  of  the  w.  is  original. — 
l6b.  Cp.  Zee  142.  But  the  spoiling  of  the  houses  stands 
curiously  between  the  fate  of  the  children  and  of  the  women. 
The  text  may  be  in  some  disorder.  Haupt  attempts  a  recon- 
struction  {SBOT,  p.  124). 

17  f.  The  Medes. — Yahweh  speaks  again,  revealing  the 
instruments  of  His  indignation — the  Medes — and  (v.^^)  the 
object  of  it,  Babylon.  Whether  the  divine  speech  extends  to 
the  end  of  the  poem,  and  if  not  how  far,  is  uncertain. — 
17.  Behold  I  am  about  to  stir  up  against  them  the  Medes\  cp. 
Jer  57^^  "Yahweh  hath  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  the  king  (ffi ;  J^ 
kings)  of  Media,  because  his  device  is  against  Babylon  to  destroy 
it :  for  it  is  Yahweh's  vengeance,  the  vengeance  for  [what  was 
done  in  586  b.c.  to  (cp.  51^^)]  his  temple."  The  historical  situa- 
tion in  both  passages  is  the  same;  Babylon  still  occupies  a 
supreme  position  in  the  eyes  of  the  world ;  but  the  Medes  are 
threatening  that  supremacy.  This  historical  situation  can  be 
closely  defined :  it  existed  not  earlier  than  561  B.C.,  and  it  ceased 
to  exist  with  the  capture  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus  in  538  b.c.  The 
Medes  (no,  Assyr.  Madai\  in  Persian  inscriptions  Mdda)  are 
first  mentioned  by  Shalmaneser  11.  in  the  9th  cent.  b.c.  ;  and  in 
the  8th  century  raids  against  Median  chieftains  are  recorded  by 
the  Assyrian  kings  Tiglath-pileser  and  Sargon.  Increasing  in 
power  through  the  7th  cent.,  the  Medes,  or  Umman  {i.e.  hordes  of) 
Manda,*  at  the  end  of  that  century,  in  alliance  with,  but  without 
the  active  support  of,  the  Babylonians  destroyed  Nineveh,  and 
subsequently  divided  the  spoils  with  the  Babylonians.  Down  to 
the  end  of  the  reign  of  Nebuchadnezzar  friendly  relations  existed 

*  M^Soi  (Herod,  i.  106,  185  ;  cp.  no,  Jer  $1^) ;  Umman-Manda  (stele  of 
Nabuna'id ;  ed.  Messerschmidt).  For  some  different  explanations  of  the  exact 
relation  of  the  terms  Medes,  Madai,  and  (Umman-)  Manda  to  one  another, 
and  for  fuller  discussion  of  the  points  summarised  above,  see  KAT^  177, 
100-105  ;  S.  Langdon,  Neubabyl.  Konigsinschriften^  3  fF. ;  Jeremias,  PR£?yi\\. 
491 ;  Sayce,  DB,  s.v.  Medes;  Rogers,  Hz'st.  of  Bad.  and  Ass.  ii.  288  ff.,  368  ff. 


XIII.  15-21  243 

between  the  Babylonians  and  the  Medes  (or  Manda) ;  but  these 
ceased  with  his  death  in  561  B.C.  From  the  mention  of  the  Medes 
only  without  reference  either  to  the  Persians  or  Cyrus,  some  infer 
that  the  prophecy  was  written  before  549,  in  which  year  Cyrus 
overthrew  the  Median  empire  of  Astyages  (Dr.  LOT^  2 1 2). —  Who 
regard  not  silver^  etc.]  their  attack  is  not  to  be  turned  aside  by 
money  payments. — 18.  The  opening  words  of  the  v.  can  be  ren- 
dered and  bows  shall  dash  youths  in  pieces^  but  the  text  is  certainly 
corrupt :  see  phil.  n. — The  fruit  of  the  womh\  parallel  to,  and 
synonymous  with,  children  (or,  sons\  i^  n.);  cp.  Ps  127^,  Mic  6^. 

18.  nat^oin  onyj  mnj^pi]  (&.  ro^ei'ifiara  veavlaKuv  awTpirj/ovaiv.  The  order 
— subj.,  obj.,  vb. — is  unusual,  but  not  unknown:  Dr.  §208(3).  The  vb. 
being  ^rd/em.  pi.  onyj  cannot  be  the  subj.,  nor  can  the  subj.  be  either  indef., 
or  the  Medes ;  cp.  ®r,  and  "B  sed  sagittis  parvulos  interficient.  mncp  must  be 
the  subj.,  if  the  text  be  correct;  yet  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  bows  meant 
bowmen^  or  vtr\  could  be  predicated  of  bows :  in  2  K  8",  Ps  137"!  the  subj. 
of  roT  is  personal.  The  three  words  of  |^  occupy  the  place  of  a  whole  distich, 
i.e.  they  are  the  (corrupt)  fragment  of  six  words.  Du.  constructs  two  distichs 
out  of  the  three  words  on  the  basis  of  Jer  50*^^  51^'^;  but  his  distichs  are 
3  :  2,  and  therefore  not  in  the  rhythm  prevailing  in  w.^"^. 

19-22.  The  eternal  desolation  of  Babylon. — Babylon, 
still  as  yet  glorious  and  supreme,  will  be  overthrown  as 
completely  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah :  its  site  will  be  for  ever 
uninhabited ;  even  nomads  will  avoid  it ;  it  will  be  given  up 
to  solitude-loving  and  demonic  beasts. — 19.  The  beauty]  or 
ornament  of  the  many  kingdoms  that  constituted  the  Babylonian 
empire,  or  perhaps  the  phrase  was  intended  even  more  widely. — 
As  when  God  overthrew]  Jer  ^o^^  (49^^):  cp.  i'^  n. — 20a.  b  = 
Jer  50^^^ — The  Arab]  the  Arabs  are  first  mentioned  in  Jer  3^ : 
the  word  means  dweller  in  the  steppes^  and  is  applied  to  the 
Bedawin  of  the  Syro-Arabian  desert. — 21.  Cp.  Jer  50^^. —  Yelpers] 
the  D^^V,  whatever  the  name  precisely  means  (see  phil.  n.), 
appear  in  other  descriptions  of  desolation,  23^^  34^^,  Jer  50^^. — 

Shriekers]  DTlNf ;  precise  meaning  uncertain  :  cp.  — ^,  to  cough ; 

-.U-^,  a  shriek',  the  Assyr.  ahu  may  mean y«r^<«/ (Del.),  but  this 

beast  is  probably  mentioned  just  below  in  y.'^-.  (&  echo! — 
Ostriches]  cp.  34^8  ^^20^  Mic  i^  Job  10^'^ .— Satyrs]  D^^VJ^  is 
commonly  used  of  he-goats^  though  usually  in  the  phrase  Cty  T'VtJ^, 
lit.  a  hairy  one  of  the  goats.     RV  renders  he-goats  here,  but  the  in- 


244  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

troduction  of  domestic  animals  is  improbable.  Here  as  in  34^*, 
Lv  17'^,  2  Ch   iii^,  2  K  238  (point  D^iyb^),   we  must  think  of 

demonic  animals,  howling  after  the  wont  of  demons  and  jinn 
in  unfrequented  places,  of  a  hairy  nature  and  perhaps  goat-like 
in  form ;  see  EBi.  s.v.  Satyr. — 22.  Howling  beasts]  D^^K  (34^*> 
Jer  50^9 1)  are  perhaps  wolves^  perhaps  jackals,  DB  i.  620. — 
Jackals]  D'*3n  (or  wolves,  DB  i.  620)  made  mournful  noises 
(Mic  i^),  and  frequented  desolate  spots  (34^^  Jer  ^^^  \o^'^). 

19.  naSHD]  «<?wtf«  verbi  (c^.  G-K.  45*?)  with  nx ;  cp.  ii'n. — 20.  ntyn  n^] 
Jer  50^^  + my;  if  niy  is  inserted  here,  then  v.^**  **  is  3  :  3,  at  present  it  is 
exceptionally  2  :  3. — V.r]  = '?nK: :  cp.  G-K.  d^k.  (&'^r\^.. — 21.  d"x]  if  the 
text  be  correct  in  23^',  Ps  72^,  the  word  may  be  used  of  human  beings  :  some 

therefore  derive  from  the  root  nix,  ^^,  to  be  parched,  and  give  it  the  meaning 
desert  dweller.  Another  possible  derivation  is  from  the  root  i^^t  ^0  yelp 
(Dozy).  Desert  dweller,  or  yelper,  would  be  applicable  to  many  animals. 
Wild  cats  (Bochart,  Hieroz.  iii.  c.  14)  is  badly  supported  by     .^j^,  which  is 

from  another  root.  The  meaning  was  already  obscure  to  the  early  translators  : 
®rU5  here  render  by  a  general  term  for  wild  beasts,  ^  here  and  in  341', 
Jer  50^*  by  Jion,  which  by  no  means  necessarily  means  monkeys  (Walton) : 
in  34"  f&  has  daifiSvia,  in  Jer  50**  IvMXfiara,  U  dracones. — 22.  njyi]  sing, 
pred.,  pi.  subj.  following  (G-K.  145^)  :  yet  it  is  suspicious  that  this  cstr. 
should  occur  in  just  one  of  several  similar  sentences.  Whether  ®r's  icarot/c^- 
ffovffip  implies  a  reading  i3Dri  is  doubtful. — vnuoVN]  its  widows,  i.e.  deserted 
palaces  !  (Ki.).  But  read  n'nuDnK. — nny  .  .  .  y\'\p]  since  the  pred.  precedes, 
ry  was  not  necessarily  meant  to  be  masc.  (8^  n.). 

XIV.  i-4a.  The  restoration  of  Israel. — Babylon  must 
fall  (ch.  13),  and  that  immediately  (13^^'^'^);  for  (14I)  it  is 
Yahweh's  gracious  purpose  to  set  free  the  Jews  from  their 
present  captivity,  and  to  re-establish  them  in  Canaan  (vv.^^-) : 
restored  to  Canaan,  the  Jews  will  sing  a  paean  (14^^-  2^)  over  the 
fall  of  the  king  of  Babylon. — These  verses  are  probably  an  edi- 
torial link  (see  above,  p.  233);  even  the  distichs  in  vv.^^-  hardly 
formed  the  original  conclusion  of  the  poem  in  ch.  13,  which  is 
rather  to  be  found  at  13^2  (•>  ^^  ^) ;  and  vv.^*-  ^^•,  which  are  prose,  are 
marked  off  from  both  the  poem  that  precedes  and  that  which 
follows.  Whether  the  editor  composed  the  distichs  in  vv.^^*  or 
derived  them  from  elsewhere  {e.g.  Zee  i'^)  is  uncertain. 

Du.,  al.  treat  14^"^  as  prose,  Cond.  as  poetry,  throughout.  It  requires 
some  audacity  to  detect  poetry  in  vv.^-  ^  ;  and  v.^  would  yield  but  a  poor 
distich  4  :  4,  even  if  the  last  clause  were  omitted.     But  v.^**  **•  ^'  *  are  as  a 


XIII.   20-XIV.  4  245 

matter  of  fact  two  distichs  {3  :  3)  of  lines  parallel  in  sense,  and  ^^  a  monostich 
of  3  accents  :  v.'*'*  '  is  3  :  3  or  3  :  2,  according  as  Dn'rJ33  be  read  as  one  or 
two  accents. 

1  For  Yahweh  will  have  pity  on  Jacob, 
And  will  again  choose  Israel; 
And  he  will  settle  them  on  their  ground. 
And  the  ger  will  join  himself  unto  them, 

And  they  will  become  members  of  the  House  of  Jacob. 
2  And  peoples  will  take  them  and  bring  them  to  their  place,  and 
the    House   of  Israel  will  possess   themselves  of  them  on  the 
ground  of  Yahweh  for  slaves  and  slave-girls, 

^  And  they  will  be  captors  to  their  captors, 

And  the  lords  of  their  (former)  task-masters. 
8  And   it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  day   that   Yahweh   giveth 
thee  rest  from  thy  toil  and  turmoil,  and  from  the  hard  service 
which  thou  wast  made  to  serve,*  thou  shalt  utter  this  taunt-song 
against  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  say — 

la.  b.  Cp.  Zee  1^7  2I6. — I.  Por  Yahweh']  (&  and  Yahweh. 
—  Will  again  choose']  the  first  choice  was  at  the  beginning  of 
the  nation's  history :  Dt  7®^-,  Ezk  20^*^'.  Yahweh's  choice  of  Israel 
is  a  favourite  idea  of  the  Deutero-Isaiah's :  see  41^'-  43^°  44^S 
and  Dr.  LOT^,  p.  238.— ic  Cp.  Zee  2^^  and  Ezk  3712.  w  "  I  will 
bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel .  .  .  and  I  will  settle  you  upon 
your  ground."     n''3n  is  generally  used  of  placing  a  person  in  a 

particular  place  after  his  removal  from  another;  cp.  46'^,  Gn  19^*, 
Jos  623,  Lv  24^2^  Nu  15^. — The  ger]  the  term  originally  denoted 
a  person  not  of  the  same  tribe  or  people  as  those  among  whom 
he  lived,  but  enjoying  at  their  hands  certain  conceded  (as 
distinct  from  inherited)  social  rights  and  privileges.  Such  rights 
and  privileges  naturally  carried  with  them  some  accommodation 
on  the  part  of  the  ger  to  Jewish  religious  practices ;  for  example, 
it  was  incumbent  on  the  Jews  to  concede  the  privileges,  and  on 
the  ger  to  observe  the  laws,  of  the  Sabbath  (Ex  20^°  23^^^ ;  yet  as 
late  as  the  Deuteronomic  code  the  ger  was  no  full  member  of 
the  holy  nation :  he  might  eat  unclean  food  (Dt  14^^).  In  P 
the  term  has  become  purely  religious ;  persons  not  Israelite  by 
descent  may  by  accepting  the  rite  of  circumcision  become  as  full 
members  of  the  community  as  those  born  Jews,  and  subject  to 
the  same  rights  and  duties  (see,  e.g.^  Nu  15^^  n.).     P  seems  to 


246  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

contemplate  such  persons  as  were  united  geographically  with  the 
Jewish  community  in  Palestine.  Later  even  this  limitation 
disappears  from  the  word :  the  ger  is  any  person  not  of  Jewish 
descent  who  becomes  a  convert  to  the  Jewish  religion,  a  proselyte ; 
it  is  this  last  sense  that  the  word  bore  to  some  of  the  Greek 
translators,  for  in  some  books  "13  is  rendered  by  ttpootJXvto?,  and 
with  this  sense  it  is  used  in  the  Mishna  (Levy,  NHB,  s.v.).  In 
the  present  passage  the  term  probably  has  much  the  same  sense 
as  in  P,  and  is  very  nearly  equal  to  convert  or  proselyte.  The 
restored  Jewish  community  will  be  enlarged  by  the  inclusion  of 
men  of  other  nations,  who,  seeing  what  Yahweh  has  done  for 
His  people  (cp.  Ps  126^),  will  seek  to  be  united  with  them. 
Foreigners  who  do  not  become  converts  will  pass  into  the 
possession  of  the  restored  people,  as  slaves  and  slave-girls. 
The  writer  contemplates  for  the  world  at  large  two  alternatives — 
conversion  to  Judaism,  or  enslavement  to  the  Jews :  cp.  the 
alternative  presented  elsewhere  (6o^°"^2) — conversion  or  sub- 
mission.—^<?m  himself]  7\yy^  is  used  of  the  close  relationship  of 
husband  and  wife  (Gn  29^*),  of  Levites  and  priests  (Nu  18^),  and 
also  of  religious  union  which  is  elsewhere  defined  as  union  witli 
Yahweh ;  see  563*  ^,  Jer  50^,  and  especially,  as  parallel  to  the 
present  usage,  Zee  2^'^  "and  many  nations  shall  join  themselves 
unto  Yahweh  .  .  .  and  shall  become  his  (ffir)  people,  and  they 
(ffir)  shall  dwell  in  thy  midst." — Andthey'\  the  plural  pronoun  carries 
on  the  sing,  collective  term  ger. —  Will  become  members  of]  nSDJ, 
too,  denotes  close  attachment :  see  182^  (Kal),  Job  30^^  (in 
MT  Pual),  and  especially  1826^^  (Hithp.) ;  Hab  2^^^  is  probably 
corrupt. — 2.  And  peoples  shall  take  them  and  bring  them]  cp. 
4922. — To  their  place]  their  country  or  home ;  cp.  e.g.  Nu  242^. — 
The  ground  of  Yahweh]  Canaan.  Cp.  "  the  land  of  Yahweh," 
Hos  9^;  "the  holy  ground,"  Zee  2^^.  Restored  to  their  land, 
the  Jews  will  need  slaves,  which  the  later  law  forbade  them  to 
seek  from  those  of  their  own  race  (Lv  25*^^-) ;  they  will  therefore 
subject  to  slavery  those  of  the  nations  who  do  not  seek  and 
obtain  incorporation  in  the  Jewish  community  as  gerim  (v.^  n.). 
The  tables  will  be  turned  :  those  who  had  enslaved  the  Jews  will 
now  become  their  slaves.  Babylon  for  the  moment  seems  to  be 
lost  sight  of,  or  rather  has  become  a  generic  term  for  all 
oppressors  of  the  Jews :  the  writer  lives  at  a  time  when  many 
nations  at  one  time  or  another  had  enslaved  the   Jews.     The 


XIV.  2-21  247 

phrase  slaves  and  slave-gtrls  (ninSKn  onay)  is  frequent  {e.g.  Gn 
1 2^^  20^*  30*3  Jer  34®^-) ;  as  compared  with  the  synonymous  nox, 
nriBB^  rather  points  to  more  servile  conditions,  or  the  more 
menial  nature  of  the  tasks  exacted  (BDB,  s.w.).  Not  only 
the  thought,  but  the  phraseology  in  v.^  seems  to  be  affected 
by  Lv  25*^^- ;  irionn  is  confined  to  this  passage,  P  (Lv  25^,  Nu 
32^®  3^54  3413),  and  Ezk  47^^;  here  and  in  Lv  25^  the  objects 
possessed  are  slaves,  in  the  other  passages  land.  So  the  vb. 
rm  probably  echoes  Lv  25^^-  *^-  ^^  and  refers  to  domestic  rule,  not 
to  political  dominion,  which  RV  suggests;  B^i3,  task-master,  is 
used  as  in  Ex  3^  5^  Job  3^^ ;  below  in  v.*  rather  differently. — 
Captors  to  their  captor s'\  Jg  ^^. 

3.  The  exiled  nation  is  now  addressed  :  ct.  vv.^'*. — Giveth 
thee  rest]  releases  thee  from  servitude ;  with  this  use  of  n^Dn,  cp. 
that  of  m:  in  Ex  2312,  Dt  s^S  Job  3^^.  In  Dt.  (e.g.  2$^^)  the 
Hiphil  is  rather  differently  used  :  see  Che.  Introd.  71. — Toit\  cp. 
88^,  Ps  1272. — Turmoif]  Ti"i  denotes  strong  mental  agitation  pro- 
ceeding from  various  causes,  here  the  disquiet  of  the  slave  who 
lives  in  fear  of  "  the  voice  of  the  taskmaster  "  (Job  3^^,  cp.  26). — 
The  hard  service]  Dt  26^,  Ex  i^*  6»  (P).— In  13  Tay  "1K'«,  lit. 
wherewith  it  was  worked  with  thee,  the  Pual  (Dt  2i^t)  is  the  passive 
of  '3  ^3y,  lit.  to  work  by  means  of,  Lv  25*^,  Ex  i^*,  Ezk  34^^  etc. 
— 4.  Thou  shalt  take  up]  on  the  lips,  and  so  utter  \  cp.  i  K  8^^ 
Jer  7^8,  and  the  noun  NKID,  13^  n. — Taunt-song]  so  may  f>tJ^  be 
rendered  here  and  in  Hab  2^,  Mic  2* ;  on  other  meanings,  see 
Numbers,  pp.  299  f.,  344  f.,  xiiif.,  where  it  is  suggested  that  the 
following  poem  may  have  been  modelled  on  the  ancient 
m'shalim  which  used  to  be  actually  recited  (Nu  21^7),  and  of 
which  many  probably  still  existed  in  and  after  the  Exile. 

XIV.  4,h-2i.— The  Fall  of  the  Tyrant, 

The  dominant  rhythm  is  clearly  3:2;  parallelism  is  occasionally  between 
entire  periods  of  5  accents  (see  w.'*  '•  ^'^) ;  but  far  more  frequently  it  is 
between  the  period  of  3  and   the  period  of  2  accents.     The  translation  is' 
arranged  to  bring  into  relief  the  more  frequent  form  of  parallelism. 

Down  to  v.""  and  in  ^^^'  "•  '^-  "•  **'■*•  "*•  ^  the  rhythm  is  for  the  most 
part  obviously  3  :  2.  But  vv.'*  ^^-  ^  are  4  :  2,  unless  we  omit  ni.T  in  the  one 
case  and  B"Nn  in  the  other ;  and  **•  '•  '^^'  *•  are  2  :  2,  and  so  also  is  '^*  ^  in  |^, 
but  prefix  yn.  V. '*'*'•  ^  would  be  3  :  3  if  ony  is  part  of  the  line  (but  see  n.). 
On  the  obviously  mutilated  text  of  v."""^*  see  notes. 

The  first  twenty-one  distichs  (vv.*'''''^)  are  clearly  marked  off,  as  Ew. 


248  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

already  perceived,  into  three  equal  strophes  of  7  distichs  each.  It  is  probable 
that  this  equality  of  strophes  was  maintained  throughout,  but  the  mutilated 
text  in  vv."'^  prevents  certainty  on  this  point.  ^  contains  slightly  less  than 
fourteen  distichs  between  vv.^*  and  ^^ :  but  with  the  addition  of  vv.^*  ^  it 
would  contain  considerably  more. 

On  the  structure  of  the  poem  see  especially  Budde  in  ZA  TIV,  1882,  pp. 
12-15,  where  some  earlier  theories  of  strophic  division  are  noticed  :  Bickell, 
Carmina  Vet.  Test.  (1882)  p.  202  f.,  and  Wiener  Z^itschr.  filr  die  Kunde  des 
Morgenlandesy  viii.  loif. ;  W.  H.  Cobb,  mJBLit.  xv.  iSflf. 

I. 

^  How  hath  the  Tyrant  ceased, 

The  Terror  (?)  ceased  ! 
^  Yahweh  hath  broken  the  staff  of  the  wicked, 

The  rod  of  the  rulers; 
*  Which  smote  the  peoples  in  wrath, 
With  smiting  unceasing. 
Which  angrily  trampled  (?)  on  nations, 
With  *  trampling '  (?)  unrestrained. 
^  All  the  earth  is  at  rest,  is  quiet. 

They  have  broken  forth  into  a  ringing  cry; 
^  The  fir-trees,  too,  have  rejoiced  at  thee. 
The  cedars  of  Lebanon — 
"Since  thou  hast  lain  down,  there  cometh  not  up 
The  feller  against  us." 


2. 

•  Sheol  beneath  is  thrilled  at  thee. 
Meeting  thine  advent ; 
Arousing  for  thee  the  shades, 

All  the  bell-wethers  of  Earth, 
Making  rise  up  from  their  thrones 
All  the  kings  of  the  nations. 
1®  They  shall  all  of  them  answer 
And  say  to  thee, 
*'  ThoUy  too,  art  made  weak  as  we, 
Unto  us  art  made  like." 
^^  Brought  down  unto  Sheol  is  thy  pomp. 
The  music  of  thy  lutes; 
Beneath  thee  maggots  are  spread, 
And  (of)  worms  is  thy  coverlet. 


1 


XIV.  4-21  249 


^*  How  art  thou  fallen  from  Heaven, 
O  Shining  One,  son  of  the  dawn ! 
*How'  art  thou  hewn  down  to  the  earth, 
.  .  .  of  '  all '  nations  ! 
^3  Thou  that  hadst  said  in  thine  heart, 
"Heaven  will  I  scale; 
Above  the  stars  of  God 

Will  I  set  on  high  my  throne. 
That    I     may    sit    (enthroned)    in     the     Mount     of 

Assembly, 
In  the  recesses  of  the  North : 
^*  I  will  ascend  over  the  summits  of  the  clouds, 

Will  be  like  the  Most  High." 
^  Yet  to  Sheol  shalt  thou  be  brought  down, 
To  the  recesses  of  the  Pit 


!•  They  that  see  thee  look  narrowly  at  thee, 
To  thee  give  attention — 
"Is  this  the  man  that  caused  earth  to  thrill, 
That  caused  kingdoms  to  quake; 
^"^  That  made  the  world  like  a  wilderness. 
And  overthrew  its  cities?" 
•  •  *  •  •  •  • 

18  AH  the  kings  of  the  nations, 
They  all  have  lain  down  in  glory, 
Each  one  in  his  house; 
1®  But  tAou  art  cast  forth  *  tom bless,* 

Like  an  abhorred  *  untimely  birth '  (?) 
.    .......     the  slain. 

That  are  thrust  through  with  the  sword, 
That  go  down  to  the  stones  of  the  Pit, 
As  a  corpse  trodden  under  foot. 
2*  Thou  shalt  not  be  joined  with  them  in  burial. 


250  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

5- 

^^  For  thy  land  hast  thou  ruined, 
Thy  people  hast  thou  slain. 
Never  more  shall  it  be  named, 
The  seed  of  evil-doers. 
21  Prepare  a  butchery  for  his  sons, 
For  the  iniquity  of  their  fathers, 
That  they  rise  not  and  possess  the  earth, 
And  fill  the  face  of  the  world. 

The  poem  expresses  the  exultation  over  the  fall  of  a  Tyrant 
who  had  treated  the  peoples  of  the  world  with  unsparing  and 
unremitting  severity :  in  the  first  strophe  the  world-wide  terror, 
which  his  career  had  inspired,  and  the  world-wide  relief  and  joy 
at  his  fall,  are  effectively  contrasted.  The  second  strophe 
illustrates  in  another  way  the  supreme  position  of  the  Tyrant  in 
the  world  of  his  time :  his  entrance  to  Sheol  is  depicted :  he  is 
greeted  by  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  who  are  amazed  that  one 
who  had  been  so  much  greater  and  more  powerful  than  they,  is 
now  weak  as  one  of  themselves.  In  the  third  strophe  the  over- 
weening pride  and  ambition  of  the  Tyrant  is  pictured :  not 
content  with  conquering  earth,  he  would  have  conquered  heaven 
and  dethroned  the  supreme  God  and  King ;  actually  he  attains 
to  the  lowest  depths  of  Sheol.  Such  is  the  fate  of  his  spirit :  the 
fourth  strophe  dwells  on  the  fate  of  his  dead  body :  it  receives 
no  royal  burial  in  the  mausoleum  which  he  had  built  for  himself, 
but  lies  unburied,  one  of  a  heap  of  carcases  on  the  battlefield 
where  he  fell.  The  final  lines,  or  strophe  (vv. 20^-21)^  are  more 
miscellaneous ;  first,  they  find  reason  for  the  Tyrant's  fate  in  the 
fact  that  he  had  ruined  his  own  land  and  people  as  well  as  others, 
and  then  assert  that  he  and  his  race  shall  pass  out  of  memory ; 
and  finally  they  call  for  the  slaughter  of  his  children  that  no 
future  member  of  his  line  may  repeat  his  career. 

How  far  does  this  poem  depict  the  actual  career  of  a  single 
definite  historical  individual  ?  How  much  of  it  was  determined 
by  certain  definite  events,  how  much  by  the  imagination  of  the 
poet  ?  Of  course  the  speeches  of  the  cedars  in  v.^,  of  the  shades 
in  v.i®,  of  the  Tyrant  himself  in  vv.^^f.^  and  of  the  people  on  the 
battlefield  after   the   battle,  v.^^   all  of  which   betray  a   keen 


XIV.  4-21  251 

dramatic  sympathy  and  power  of  expression,  are  due  to  the 
poet's  imagination.  But  how  much  more?  Had  the  Tyrant 
actually  fallen  when  the  poem  was  written  ?  Or  does  the  poet 
merely  throw  himself  forward  in  imagination  to  the  day  and  the 
scene  which  he  feels  would  be  the  fitting  conclusion  to  the  career 
of  the  cruel  and  arrogant  conqueror  under  whose  government  he 
has  lived  and  suffered  ? 

If  v.^^  be  imaginative  prophecy,  then  it  is  simplest  to  see  in 
the  entire  poem  a  paean  over  Assyria,  or  Babylon,  personified  (cp. 
io^-i3),  or  "  totum  corpus  Regum  Assyriorum  et  Babylonicorum  " 
(Vitr.),  rather  than  over  a  particular  Assyrian  or  Babylonian  king. 
So  it  is  of  the  character  and  achievements  of  a  people  rather  than 
of  a  single  definite  monarch  that  Ezekiel  thinks,  even  when  he 
uses  the  term  "  king  of  Tyre,"  "  king  of  Egypt,"  in  prophecies 
that  have  several  points  of  contact  with  this  poem  :  see  Ezk 
28-32.  For  a  briefer  example  of  a  lament  written  to  suit  merely 
anticipated  and  not  actual  conditions,  see  Am  5^ 

But  if  v.i®  refers  to  an  actual  historical  event,  it  refers  to 
details  of  which  nothing  is  otherwise  known,  whether  the  king 
in  question  be  Sennacherib,  Nebuchadnezzar  (Jer.,  l^i.),  or 
Nabonidus  (Hitz.,  Du.).  It  is  indeed  recorded  that  Sargon  was 
"  not  buried  in  his  house  "  (cp.  v.^^) ;  but  this  does  not  necessarily 
imply  that  he  died  a  violent  death,  and  lay  unburied  (cp.  v.^^) : 
moreover,  Sargon  certainly  did  not  involve  his  country  and  people 
in  ruin  (v.^o) :  within  twelve  days  of  his  death  his  son  Senna- 
cherib was  recognised  as  king,  and  Assyria  suffered  no  serious 
check  for  half  a  century  after  Sargon's  death. 

In  Altor.  Forschungeity  i.  193  f.,  Winckler  attempted  to  explain  v.**  as  an 
allusion  to  the  murder  of  Sennacherib  in  682  B.C.  ;  this  obviously  inadequate 
explanation  with  the  claim  that  the  poem  was  written  by  Isaiah  (some  sixty 
years  after  his  Call  !)  was  adopted  by  W.  H.  Cobb  in  JBLit.  xv.  18  ff. 
Later,  Winckler  {ib.  pp.  410 ff.,  KAT*^  pp.  74 f.)  advanced  the  far  more 
satisfactory  theory  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  death  of  Saigon  ;  an  ominous,  but 
through  mutilation  obscure,  reference  in  the  Eponym  canon  for  the  year  705 
B.C.  is  illumined  by  K  4730,  an  inscription  of  Sennacherib  (also  mutilated)  in 
which  he  says,  "  the  death  of  Sargon  .  .  .  in  his  house  he  was  not  buried  .  .  . 
{tna  bttiiu  la  ktb-ru)^  the  transgression  of  Sargon,  my  father  by  expiation  will 
I  expiate  :  I  will  [blot  out]  the  transgression  which  they  (?  he)  committed  against 
a  god  .  .  .  against  the  gods  of  Akkad ;  because  he  the  curse  of  the  king  of  the 
gods  up  [on  himself]  brought,  in  his  house  he  was  not  b[uried] — ina  btti- 
su  la  ^i-biry  Recognising  that  vv.^*^^*  were  unsuitable  to  Sargon,  Wi. 
held  that  the  ode  written  in  705  B.C.  extended  from  v.***  to  v.**  only.     It  is 


252  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

not  impossible  that  an  editor  may  have  found  in  a  collection  of  m^shalim 
(v.*  n.  ;  Numbers^  pp.  xiiif.)  a  paean  over  Sargon  and,  adding  a  strophe 
^yy  20b-2ij  suitable  to  the  Fall  of  Babylon,  have  given  it  here  as  a  song  to  be 
sung  when  "  Babylonian "  tyranny  was  ended.  It  would  not  necessarily 
follow  that  Isaiah  was  the  author  of  the  song :  his  attitude  towards  Assyria 
{not  the  king)  in  lo**'^^  is,  in  spite  of  some  resemblances,  different.  There 
are,  however,  some  linguistic  usages  and  some  ideas  in  the  poem  which  would 
perhaps  find  a  more  easy  explanation  if  even  vv.***'^^  were  written  later  than 
the  age  of  Sargon.  See  notes  below  on  rJJ,  v.* ;  d'Wd,  v.* ;  mo,  v.*  ;  nn  nxs, 
V.'  ;  iv'?y,  Most  High,  v." ;  "na  ( =  Sheol),  v.^* ;  nutrn,  v.^^ ;  hi,  v.^^.  Are  the 
resemblances  between  this  poem  and  Ezekiel,  especially  chs.  28-32  (see 
Comm.  on  vv.^^"^'*  ^'),  due  to  the  dependence  of  Ezekiel  on  this  poem,  or  of 
this  poem  on  Ezekiel,  or  to  the  fact  that  both  belong  to  the  same  century? 
Certainly  this  poem  far  excels  Ezek.  in  poetical  and  dramatic  power,  but 
that  is  precarious  proof  of  priority.  The  same  questions  arise  with  regard 
to  3722-29 .  bjjt^  there  is  not  the  same  difference  in  poetic  quality ;  Is  I4*'''2i 
and  37^'^  might  be  the  work  of  the  same  hand.  Some  of  the  conceptions 
of  Sheol  and  life  after  death  found  here  have  no  earlier  parallels  in  the  OT 
than  Ezekiel :  but  are  they  such  as  to  demand  that  the  author  of  this  ode  must 
have  lived  as  late  as  the  Exile?  see,  on  the  one  hand,  Che.  Introd.  69 f.,  on 
the  other,  Gunkel,  Schopfung  u.  Chaos. 

4b-8.  The  Relief  of  the  World  at  the  Fall  of  the 
Tyrant. — How]  so  v.^^  .  ^p^  p  ^2. — The  tyrani\  cp.  Zee  9^  ;  but 
in  V.2  (n.),  9^  ^yi  has  a  different  meaning. — The  Terror]  uncertain. 
J§  nnmD,  has  been  rendered  the  golden  city  (EV),  the  exactress 
of  gold  (AVmarg.),  the  exactress  (RVmarg.),  tribute  (U) ;  but  all 
these  renderings  rest  on  the  illegitimate  assumption  (cp.  Ki.,  Ibn 
Ezra)  that  a  Hebrew  noun  would  be  derived  from  an  Aramaic 
form  (sm,  gold)  of  which  the  Hebrew  form  (ant)  was  in  constant 
use.  If  1  is,  as  often,  a  mis-written  1,  the  root  is  3m  which  is 
used  in  3^,  in  close  connection  with  K'Ji,  of  the  vulgar  bluster  of 
the  inferior  when  social  restraint  is  withdrawn ;  here,  where  the 
attitude  of  the  superior,  or  stronger,  is  in  question,  the  nuance 
would  be  different :  Che.  renders  raging^  Box  insolent  raging.  But 
since  in  Ca.  6^  STnn  means  something  like  to  terrify  and  Ar. 
e^jb.  certainly  and  often  means  tofear^  namo  may  rather  mean 
Terror^  this  idea  being  associated  with  tyranny  or  oppression  as 
in  51^^. — 5.  Yahweh  has  broken]  perhaps  originally  Broken  has 
been :  see  note  on  rhythm. — The  staff ,  ,  ,  the  rod]  cp.  lo*^  9^ 
The  genitives  that  follow  each  term  may  be  appositional  (Kon. 
iii.  337^.  d),  so  that  the  phrases  mean  the  wicked  staffs  the  imperious 
rod]  the  second  phrase  is  rather  differently  used  in  Ezk  19^^ 
The  king,  or  nation,  which  should  have  corrected  the  wicked,  has 


XIV.  4-1 I  253 

itself  proved  wicked:  cp.  lo'-^l  But  if  this  view  of  the  con- 
struction be  correct,  since  the  terms  Q^VK^T  (i3")»  D^^t^  (49^  52^) 
are  plural,  the  writer  has  not  in  view  merely  a  single  individual. 
— 6.  Which,  smote]  the  sing.  HDO  refers  back  to  rod  and  staff: 
cp.  V.29, — Trampling]  J^  persecution  :  but  see  phil.  n. — 7.  All 
the  earth  is  .  .  ,  quiet]  DpK^  occurs  in  18*,  the  Hiph.  in  7* 
30^5  3217.  It  is  the  vb.  used  in  Judges  {e.g.  i^'^)  of  the  quiet 
enjoyed  after  one  of  the  Judges  had  delivered  Israel  from  a  foreign 
lord:  it  is  also  used  of  the  relief  of  slaves  in  Sheol  in  being  quit 
of  their  taskmasters  (Job  s^^f-  26)._8.  Cp.  372*,  Hab  2I7.  On  a 
rock-relief  in  the  Wady  Brissa  in  Lebanon,  Nebuchadnezzar  is 
represented  "  breaking  the  cedars  with  bare  hands."  But  cedars 
were  felled  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  most  Mesopotamian  monarchs 
and  of  Egyptian  monarchs  too:  see  Jeremias,  ATAO,  p.  494; 
KAT^i  p.  190.  Hebrew  poets  often  represent  inanimate  objects 
participating  in  the  joys  of  others  :  see,  e.g.,  55^2^  Ps  ^6^^^- :  more 
rarely  is  the  emotion  represented  as  due  to  a  cause  peculiarly 
affecting  them  alone.  See  Koberle,  Natur  u.  Geist,  p.  105. — 
Since  thou  hast  lain  down]  in  death ;  v.^^  43^^,  Job  14^2^ 

4.  name]  Del.  suggested  p/ace  where  they  are  made  to  pine  away,  from  an 
otherwise  unknown  2m  =  3Kn,  or  an.  Very  improbable.  It  is  commonly 
supposed  that  fit's  ^irt<nroi;5curTiJs  (whence  also  Sb)  implies  n^rrva ;  but  'id  is 
an  abstract,  ivKrirovS.  a  personal  noun  meaning  one  who  presses  hard  upon 
another :  this  would  indeed  form  an  admirable  parallel  to  rJ3,  but  it  would 
require  TO.V  instead  of  rsrav.  Perhaps  ffi  read  irran  roxf,  but  in  view  of  the 
anarthrous  ifJi  this  is  not  likely  to  have  been  the  original  text.  Che.  {SBOT, 
p.  199)  conjectures  rri2]ir$  ^^i'.  cp.  v.'. — 6.  n^o]  G-K.  I3cwr.— mo-'nSa]  of 
non-cessation  :  a  rare  use  of 'n'?a  :  BDB,  p.  11 63.  With  mo,  cessation,  cp.  the 
use  of  the  vb.  in  11",  Am  6^.  In  i'  31"  the  noun  has  a  different  meaning — 
apostasy.— f^{VO  .  .  .  mn]  the  noun  should  doubtless  be  cognate  with  the  vb. 
as  in  the  previous  line — nan  .  .  .  hdd.  If  mn  is  correct,  the  noun  (cstr.)  was 
nrra  ;  but  nm  to  rule,  though  sometimes  used  of  hard  or  strict  rule,  does  not 
seem  strong  enough  in  the  context.    Either  mn  has  here  exceptionally  the  sense 

to  trample,  like  j^»^,  or  to  chastise,  like  j)5  ;  or  we  may  restore  nino  nni : 
cp.  HIT  in  41',  Ps  144^  and  in  NH  to  beat,  stamp  down. — Ti'^ri  'Va]  MT 
assumes  a  rare  use  of  '^a  with  the  finite  vb.  ;  see  BDB  1153.  Probably  ifon 
was  intended  to  be  an  infin.  or  a  noun. — 7.  nn  inss]  44^3  49I8  54I  5512^  ^^^^ 
without  nil,  52*,  Ps  98*.  The  only  other  occurrence  of  the  root  nsB  is  the 
Piel,  meaning  to  break  in  pieces,  in  Mic  3*.  There  is  no  secure  pre-exilic 
instance  of  njT  meaning  ioyous  cry  :  cp.  Che.  Introd.  p.  268. 

9-11.  The  Tyrant's  reception  in  Sheol.— This  strophe 
depicts  the  excitement  and  emotions  of  the  inhabitants  of  Sheol 


254  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

at  the  descent  into  their  midst  of  a  monarch  whose  fame  ha 
reported  him  so  great  that  he  seemed  likely  to  escape  the 
common  lot  that  had  befallen  even  monarchs  before  him. 
These  kings  of  earlier  days,  according  to  a  prevalent  belief  that 
the  distinctions  of  life  were  in  some  degree  perpetuated  in  Sheol 
(cp.  e.g.  Ezk  3221^-,  I  S  28^^),  sit  each  on  his  throne :  they 
respectfully  rise  to  greet  the  new-comer  and  address  him  with 
words  that  reflect  at  once  their  sense  of  his  greatness  and  a 
certain  satisfaction  that  he  is  now  made  weak  as  they. 

9.   Sheot]  different  conceptions  of  Sheol  mingle  in  the  writer's 
mind :  it  is  a  realm  beneath  (cp.  5"^**^)  the  earth ;   it  is  a  com- 
munity of  the  dead  who  step  forward  to  meet  the  newly  dead 
king  at  his  advent  among  them ;  it  is  a  person  who  has  all  the 
dead,  even  the  dead  kings  of  the  nations^  under   his  control : 
with  this  personification  cp.  28^^- 1^,  where  Sheol  is  a  monarch 
with  whom   those   who  would   avoid   death   would   fain   make 
treaties ;  commoner  is  the  personification  of  Sheol  as  a  monster 
with  an  insatiable  appetite  for  (5^^,  Hab  2^,  Pr  i^^  2720  io^^\  or 
a  hunter  who  snares  (Ps  18^  116^),  the  living.     On  these  and 
other  ideas  with  regard  to  the  dead  which  appear  in  this  passage, 
see,  further,  EBi.  1338  ff. ;  Hastings,  DB  i.  739  f.,  v.  668  f. ;  F. 
Schwally,  Das  Leben  nach  dem  Tode ;  A.  Jeremias,  Die  Bab.  Ass. 
Vorstellungen  vom  Leben  nach  de7ti  Tode  .  .  .  mit  beriicksichtigung 
der  AT Parallelen  \  S.  Langdon,  Baby.  Eschatology^  in  Essays .  .  . 
presented  .  .  .  to  C.  A.  Briggs  (191 1),  pp.    141-161 ;  and  C. 
Griineisen,  Der  Ahnenkultus^  pp.  41-60  (with  full  references  to 
comparative  material). — Is  thrilled]  with  excitement  at  strange 
and  portentous  news  :  Mi,  to  quake  (of  the  earth,  5^^,  i  S  14^^;  of 
kingdoms,  23^^),  is  also  used  of  various  emotions  such  as  fear, 
V.16  64I  3210^-,  or  grief,  2  S  i()\—The  shades']  the  D"'«B"i  are  the 
inhabitants  of  the  world  of  the  dead,  probably  so  called  as  the 
weak  (cp.  nD"i,  e.g.  13'^),  or  enfeebled  (cp.  v.^^),  continuations  of 
the  strong  and  lusty  living.     The  term  occurs  also  in  26'^^'  1^, 
Job  265,  Pr  2I8  9I8  21I6,  Ps  88iit,  and  in  Phoenician:  cp.  e.g. 
"  Mayest  thou  have  no  seed  among  the  living  under  the  sun,  nor 
resting-place   with    the    shades"    (D^KD"i    nx    235^)  —  Tabnith 
Inscr.  c.   300  B.C.   (Cooke,   NSI,  p.   26).      Whether  the   term 
used  for  the  vanished  giant  race  {e.g.  Gn  152O:  cp.  "the  valley 
of  Rephaim,"  17*^)  is  identical  in  origin,  as  well  as  in  form,  is  not 
absolutely  certain;  but  see,  further,  Schwally,  in  ZATW^  1898, 


XIV.  9-15  255 

pp.  127-135. — The  hell-wether s\  D^iny,  he-goats^  used  specifically 
of  the  leaders  of  the  flock  (Jer  50^),  and  figuratively  of  human 
beings  as  in  34**,  Jer  51^^,  Ezk  39^^. — II.  No  throne  in  Sheol  for 
the  once  proud  monarch :  dethroned  and  disgraced  at  the  last 
in  life  he  has  nothing  in  death  but  a  bed  of  maggots  and  a 
coverlet  of  worms :  to  this  has  come  the  pomp  (pw  as  4^  23* 
do^*^)  and  gay  music  (5^*)  amid  which  he  lived. 

9.  D'pn  .  .  .  niiy]  3rd  pfF.  :  cp.  C  iD'pK  .  .  .  nryK ;  but  if  the  vbs.  were 
pff.  the  forms  should  have  been  fern.  Read  therefore  opn  .  .  .  Tiy — infin. 
abs.  (G-K.  1 13-4).— II.  yx']  Pual  pf.  3rd  masc.  ;  noT  is  ace.  ;  G-K.  \2\a.  b. 
— I'DDD]  many  MSS  103D ;  r\^'^^^  coveringy  23'^,  Ezk  27',  Lv  9^' ;  but  also 
with  a  mere  difference  of  pointing  (np??),  Gn  8^'  (J)  and  several  times  in  P. 

I2-IS  The  Tyrant  attains,  not  to  the  heaven  of  his 
ambition,  but  to  the  lowest  hell.  — 12.  The  Tyrant  is  half 
compared,  half  (for  the  moment)  identified,  with  the  radiant 
hero  of  some  astral  myth.  A  similar  instance  of  mingled  com- 
parison and  identification  of  an  earthly  power  with  a  mythic 
figure  occurs  in  Ezk  28^^"^^;  whence  the  myth  came,  whether 
from  Babylon  or  Phoenicia,*  and  what  was  its  exact  form  is 
uncertain.  The  natural  phenomenon  which  gave  rise  to  the 
myth,  and  still  affects  the  phraseology  of  this  passage,  may  be 
the  contrast  between  the  brilliance  of  a  star,  such  as  Venus,t  at 
the  seasons  when  it  is  apparent,  and  its  total  disappearance  at 
other  seasons  :  or  it  may  be  "  the  overpowering  of  the  temporary 
brilliance  of  the  morning  star  by  the  rays  of  the  sun"  {EBi, 
2828) ;  for  other  views,  see  next  n.  but  one. — Shining  one]  "  In 
the  happy  realms  of  light  clothed  with  transcendant  brightness." 
hh'^n  is  to  be  connected  with  9?^]^  to  shine  (13^®,  Job  29^  312^  41IO) . 

Jjfe,  to  begin  to  shine :  cp.  Jlii,  new  moon,  and  Ass.  ellu,  bright. 
fflr  renders  well  cwo-^opos  (cp.  <j>oi(T<f>6pos,  2  P  i^^);  U  Lucifer  (cp. 
Lk  10^8).  Cp.  the  Arabic  name  for  Venus  if  jbj,  the  bright 
shining  one. — Son  of  the  dawn]  so  called  because  the  luminary 
in  question  shines  at  dawn  :  (&  6  vpon  avarikktav  (cp.  Rev  22^^). 
It  would,  of  course,  be  easy,  if  necessary,  for  "iriK^  to  read  "int? 
(3^8  n.)  and  render  son  of  the  moon,  as  VVinckler  has  suggested 
(Gesch,  Isr.   ii.  24) :   then   the  shining  one  might   be  the  new 

crescent  moon  (JiU);  or,  retaining  "iHK',  we  might  suppose  that 

*  Cp.  Gunkel,  Schopfung  u.  Chaos,  132-134  ;  KAT*  464,  565. 
t  Cp.  Jeremias,  ATAO  568,  iia 


256  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

h^'^n  is  the  waning  crescent  moon  {KAT^  565),  which  is  seen 
in  the  morning  sky. — Hewn  down  to  the  earth]  so  the  Tyrian 
king  is  described  as  cast  down  from  Eden  and  the  mount  of  God 
to  the  earth,  Ezk  22>^^-^^.  The  vb.  does  not  necessarily  imply  the 
figure  of  a  tree:  see  222^,  Jer  502^. — .  .  .  of  all  nations]  7)3  ^?^ 
is  not  transitive  (RV)  in  spite  of  Ex  17^^  MT  (see  Dr.  ad  loc.) : 
it  may  be  corrupt  (cp.  S)  and  conceal  an  epithet  like  "  Hammer 
of  all  the  earth,"  Jer  50^8 :  or  the  line  may  have  depicted  the 
shining  one  lying  powerless  on  the  corpses  (nV13  for  D^li*)  of  those 
whom  he  had  led  in  his  warfare  against  the  Most  High. — 13  f. 
The  boasting  of  the  tyrant  is  not  merely  hyperbolic  and  figura- 
tive; he  is  identified  for  the  moment  with,  or  represented  as 
renewing  the  presumptuous  role  of,  the  mythic  hero  (v.^^^.  The 
opening  boast  (v.^^-  ^)  might  indeed  be  mere  hyperbole  (cp. 
Job  20^),  but  not  what  follows  :  the  wicked  may  in  his  pride  act 
as  though  God  did  not  govern  the  earth  (cp.  Job  2212^.),  but  he 
does  not  think  of  dethroning  the  Most  High  and  taking  over  the 
administration  of  Heaven :  yet  this  is  precisely  what  the  speaker 
here  means  (cp.  Ezk  28^) ;  he  is  guided,  as  Milton  very  correctly 
interprets,  by 

**  Ambitious  aim 
Against  the  throne  and  monarchy  of  God." 

The  Most  High,  according  to  the  ancient  (Babylonian)  concep- 
tions which  here  govern  the  poet,  sat  enthroned  above  the  stars 
of  God  in  the  highest  point  of  Heaven,  or,  as  the  next  line  puts 
it,  in  the  Mountain  where  the  gods  assembled  in  the  recesses  of 
the  North. — The  Mountain  of  Assembly]  cp.  "the  Mountain  of 
God,"  Ezk  28i«;  for  Assembly  (njno),  cp.  the  Tent  of  Assembly 
(nyiD  i^nx),  which  may  originally  have  meant  a  tent  for  the 
assembly  of  the  gods,  though  to  the  Hebrews  it  came  to  bear 
quite  another  meaning  (Ex  33^"^0>  ^"^  "^^7  have  had  a  con- 
nection with  the  Babylonian  conception  of  the  World-Mountain 
piercing  into  heaven,  where  the  gods  assembled  to  determine 
destinies  {KAT^  592,  cp.  p.  355  with  references).^ — That  I  may 
sit]  enthroned;  cp.  lo^^,  Ps  61^,  and  frequently  of  Yahweh,  e.g. 
Ps  2*  9*  29^^. —  The  recesses]  lit.  the  two  flanks  ('•DDI*),  but 
idiomatically  the  most  distant  parts-,  see  37^*,  i  S  24*,  Am  6^®, 
Jer  622.     xhe  recesses  of  the  Norths  in  Ezk  386-  ^^  392,  has  not  the 

♦  Gunkel,  Schdpfungy  p.  133 ;  Che.  {SBOT\ 


XIV.  I3-20  257 

same  sense  as  in  the  present  passage  to  which  the  difficult 
passage  in  Ps  48^  may  be  more  closely  parallel ;  here,  as  the 
context  clearly  shows,  it  is  the  seat  of  the  god.  Anu,  the  chief 
member  of  the  principal  divine  triad  of  the  Babylonians,  had  his 
throne  in  heaven,  and,  apparently,  was  particularly  localised  in 
the  Northern  heaven,  at  the  north  pole:  see  KAT^  SS^f-; 
ATACP-  2of.— 14.  The  Most  High]  ^"^^V  here,  as  in  Nu  2\^\  in 
the  mouth  of  a  foreigner.  Very  rare  in  pre-exilic,  but  a 
favourite  term  with  post-exilic,  writers :  see  Che.  Origin  of  the 
Psalter^  p.  84.  Note  also  that,  according  to  Philo  Byblus,  *EXtovi/ 
was  in  use  among  the  Phoenicians  (Eus.  Pr,  Ev.  i.  10). — 15.  The 
Recesses  of  the  Pit]  ct.  "the  Recesses  of  the  North,"  v.^^  (n.).— 
Pitj  113,  "  poetical  and  late  "  (BDB),  is  a  synonym  for  Sheol 
(cp.  e.g.  Ps  88^,  Ezk  2620  32^^-24),  conceived  as  resembling  a 
vast  cistern,  roomy  below  but  with  a  narrow  mouth  or  opening 
(Ps  69i«— 1K3). 

12.  nyiJj]  TX  may  be  prefixed  for  rhythm's  sake. — V^'n]  MT  intends  the 
word  to  mean  Aowt  (15^  n.) :  cp.  (&  howl  in  the  morning. — D'U  Vy  rVm]  (K 
6  dkVwirkXKMv  irpbs  irdvTa  ra  (Ovrj,  reading  nSir,  which  must  be  wrong,  for 
B'Vin,  and  Sa  before  D'U,  which  may  be  right.     With  e''?n,  cp.  Job  14^",  Jl  4^". 

i6-2oa.  The  once  all-conquering  tyrant  lies  on  the 
battlefield  where  he  fell,  a  rotting  and  unburied 
corpse. — 16.  Cp.  the  terms  in  which  Yahweh  speaks  of  His 
treatment  of  the  proud  king  of  Tyre  :  "  I  cast  thee  out  upon  the 
earth,  before  kings  I  set  thee  for  them  to  feast  their  eyes  upon 
thee  ...  I  turned  thee  into  ashes  upon  the  earth  in  the  sight  of 
all  them  that  saw  thee  (^^K'^  ^3,  as  here).  All  that  knew  thee 
among  the  peoples  were  appalled  at  thee,"  Ezk  28^''-^*. — Zook 
narrowly]  the  vb.  is  also  used  of  peering  through  a  window, 
Ca  2®;  of  the  high  priest  Simon  looking  out  of  the  Temple, 
Sir  50*;  of  the  intense  and  hungry  look  of  a  (poor)  man  on 
another's  (well-laden)  table.  Sir  402^;  of  God's  all-seeing  gaze 
out  of  heaven  over  men,  Ps  33^* :  with  the  last  usage,  cp.  NH 
nnasyn.  Providence.  —  l6c.  d.  The  same  kind  of  astonished 
question  occurs  in  23"^. — 17c,  18.  It  is  uncertain,  probably  owing 
to  textual  corruption  at  this  point,  whether  all  or  any  of  the 
words  of  these  lines  belonged  to  the  speech  that  began  in  v.^**'. 
From  the  resumption  of  the  address  to  the  king  (cp.  w.^^f.^ 
16a.  bj^  ^g  may  assume  that  the  speech  has  ended  before  v.^*, 
and  v. ^8^-  *',  which  is  antithetical  to  v.^*,  should  naturally  also 

VOL.  I. — 17 


258  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

fall  outside  the  speech.  V.^'^*'  (J^ :  ^  omits  the  last  word)  may 
be  rendered  his  prisoners  he  released  not  hojuewards ;  if  f^  is  sub- 
stantially correct,  then  v.^^  all  the  kings  of  the  nations  is  best 
regarded  as  the  second  and  shorter  line  of  the  distich,  and  as 
an  explanatory  apposition  to  his  prisoners  (Du.) ;  this,  as  com- 
pared with  the  verse  division  of  J^,  RV,  has  the  merit  of 
maintaining  the  rhythm  of  the  poem  unbroken  through  vv.^^^* 
while  it  still  leaves  the  antithesis  of  vv.^^^*  ®  and  i^-  ^  well 
stated :  all  the  kings  of  the  nations  died  indeed,  but  received 
honourable  burial,  and  now  lie  each  one  in  his  house,  i.e.  in  the 
mausoleum  which  each  had  built  for  himself;  whereas  (v.^^)  the 
king  of  Babylon  is  flung  forth,  dishonoured,  one  of  a  mass  of 
common  corpses  that  lie  unburied  like  his  own.  But  this  inter- 
pretation of  vv.^^'i^  is  open  to  two  objections,  the  second  of 
which  lies  even  more  forcibly  against  J^,  RV.  (i)  Du.  himself 
perceives,  and  states,  and  attempts  to  meet  the  first  of  these 
difficulties :  **  Strictly  speaking,  the  kings  of  the  nations  cannot 
have  been  buried  each  in  his  house,  if  they  had  not  been 
allowed  by  Chaldaea  to  return  home.  The  poet  doubtless, 
means  that  the  kings  were  released  owing  to  the  fall  of  the 
Chaldaean,  so  that  they  recovered  their  kingdoms  and  died  in 
peace ;  and  he  is  guilty  of  a  hysteron  proteron  in  representing 
them  as  already  dead  before  the  now  -  expiring  Babylonian. 
But  the  poet  may  be  pardoned  for  what  would  not  be  tolerated 
in  prose."  (2)  Unreadiness  to  release  prisoners  (ordinary, 
common  captives,  according  to  J^)  is  not  the  greatest  of  enor- 
mities ;  and  therefore  v.^'^*'  comes  as  a  rather  violent  anti-climax 
after  the  preceding  description  of  the  king's  creating  world-wide 
desolation  and  terror.  If  the  main  point  were  the  capture  of  the 
kings,  the  anti-climax  would  be  less ;  and  this  we  could  obtain 
in  a  slightly  emended  text  from  which  nn^3  is  omitted  as  in  ffi, 
and  vh\  "ID«  (J^  ^)  is  read  for  \^  1'»-»^DK, 

He  fettered  and  released  not 
All  the  kings  of  the  nations. 

But  the  hysteron  proteron  (see  above)  still  remains.  Not  im- 
probably v.^'^*'  is  seriously  corrupt.  —  I9-20a.  The  Tyrant's 
corpse,  unlike  those  of  other  kings,  which,  retaining  something 
of  royal  state,  rest  each  in  its  own  mausoleum  (v.^^),  lies  outcast, 
trodden  under  foot,  where  it  fell  pierced  with  the  sword  in  battle. 


XIV.  19,  20  259 

So  much  remains  clear :  but  we  have  the  disjecta  membra  rather 
than  the  whole  of  the  distichs  in  which  the  poet  indicated  the 
contrast  to  v.^^. — Art  cast  fortH\  the  vb.  is  used  of  corpses  left 
to  lie  unburied  (34^,  Jer  14^^  36^^),  or  hurried  unceremoniously 
into  the  nearest  available  tomb  (2  K  13^^),  or,  like  those  of 
malefactors,  thrown  down  to  be  covered  over  with  stones 
(Jos  829).  The  vb.  is  followed  in  ?^  by  Ti3pD,  which  might  be 
rendered  (i)  from  thy  tomb;  but  the  passage  is  clearly  speaking 
not  of  disinterment,  but  of  non-interment;  or,  though  much 
less  naturally  after  napKTl,  (2)  (far)  away  from  thy  tomb ;  see 
BDB  578a,  b.  It  would  be  better  to  treat  "j  as  dittographic  and 
read  laplO,  tombless  (Dr.)  :  cp.  Ps  527(^nso,  tentless),  Job  1 1^*.  (5  Iv 
opicriv  {v.l.  tdvecriv)  probably  read  D''"in3,  on  the  mountains :  see 
phil.  n. — Like  an  abhorred  .  .  .]  the  object  of  comparison  is 
1X3,  which  is  rendered  by  S,  Theod.,  and  U  commonly  shoot 
(ii^  n.).  But  the  adjective  and  noun  in  that  case  seem  ill-suited 
to  one  another.  Di.,  feeling  that  abhorred  or  abominable  (cp. 
Job  15^^;  navin,  abomination^  e.g.  i^^)  is  too  strong  an  epithet 
for  a  useless  shoot  cut  out  of  a  tree  and  thrown  away,  suggests 
that  combined  with  the  idea  of  a  rejected  shoot  is  that  of  the 
scion  of  a  human  family  expelled  and  abhorred  on  account  of 
his  badness :  improbable.  Other  versions  either  gave  a  different 
meaning  to  iva,  or  read  differently :  ffi  v^Kpo'i,  Aq.  i^wp,  Symm. 
€KTpo)/Ma,  3r  isn*;  and  Jer.  alludes  to  sanies  as  a  rendering. 
Schwally  {ZATW,  1891,  p.  258)  conjectured  i>Q3,  untimely  birth 
(Job  3^^);  while  Nestle  {ib.  1904,  pp.  127-129)  claimed  that 
1^3  meant  something  like  putrefying  matter :  cp.  NH  {jv:,  decayed 
matter^  liquid  and  coagulated  portions  of  a  corpse. — The  slain] 
cp.  10*.  ^*2h  might  be  a  noun  (cp.  e.g.  63^),  but  a  garment  of 
the  slain  is  nonsense;  better,  clothed  with  the  slain^  of  which 
fflt  with  mdny  slain  may  be  merely  a  paraphrase ;  but  in  spite  of 
other  rather  similar  metaphorical  uses  of  ^2h  (Job  7^,  Ps  65^*), 
it  is  doubtful  whether  the  text  is  sound  here. — That  go  down  to 
the  stones  of  the  Tit]  MT  treats  mi\  like  the  participles  that  pre- 
cede, as  a  plural ;  and  this  is  probably  right.  That  nnv  is  sing. 
— an  instance  oi  yod  campaginis  (cp.  i^i,  Zee  iii'^.  La  i^) — thou 
that  goes t  down  (Du.),  is  abstractly  possible.  (&  has  those  that  go 
down  to  HadeSy  which  is  probably  a  correct  paraphrase,  if  not 
the  literal  rendering  of  an  earlier  and  shorter  text  containing 
the  phrase  that  occurs  in  38^8,  Ps  30*  etc.      If  ^J3N  i^x,  to  the 


260  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

stones  ofy  is  not  a  corrupt  fragment  that  has  crept  into  f^  since 
6r,  ^33X  is  probably  an  error  for  "i^lX,  the  bases  of  the  Pit,  i.e.  of 
Sheol  (v.^^  n.),  with  which  cp.  the  bases  of  the  earth  (Job  38^), 
a  synonym  with  "the  recesses  of  the  Pit"  (v.^^).*  Others 
understand  by  the  stones  of  the  Pit^  the  tomb  or  grave — the 
stone  or  rock  tomb  of  the  rich  (22^^;  Ges.),  or  the  casual 
grave  into  which  an  enemy  cast  a  fallen  foe,  covering  him  with 
stones  (2  S  18^'';  Du.),  or  the  stones  which  were  rolled  up  to 
or  placed  over  the  mouth  of  a  grave  (Mt  28^;  Hitz.). — 20. 
With  them]  with  whom  ?  doubtful.  Ew.,  Di.  answer,  with  those 
that  go  down  to  the  stones  of  the  pit  {i.e.  the  graves  of  the  rich, 
see  last  n.),  which  clause  they  extract  from  v.^^  and  prefix  as  a 
casus  pendens  to  v.^®.  Du.  prefixes  by  conjecture  thy  fathers — 
thou  shalt  not  be  joined  with  them. 

l6a.  b.  CK  renders  briefly,  and  adds  (cp.  CS)  an  explanatory  koX 
ipovaiv. — i6c.  nm]  fflr  ni. — vny]  nny  would  be  correct ;  '?3n  is  fem. — 17. 
nn'a  nns  kS  vtdk]  on  the  wider  question  of  the  text  as  affected  by  exegesis, 
see  above.  Note  that  (&^  omits  the  preceding  clause  Din  viyi.  dSc  read 
D(')n(')ON  (without  the  suffix)  or  ■i(')dn  (rendered  collectively)  instead  of  vtdix. 
The  emphatic  position  of  the  object  vtdk  in  5&  admits  of  no  obvious  explana- 
tion, and  may  be  a  further  indication  of  corruption.  Che.,  Marti  recon- 
struct w."''-^*  as  follows : 

waS  B"K  I  nns  te*?  vtdk 

7)333  "ISDiy  I  oSa   D'13   "J^D 

But  in'aS  r'K  is  a  feeble  redundance,  whereas  ^'33  vh  where  it  stands  in 

f^  is  efifective.     Kit.  al.  : 

K^|n  n'3  I  nns  kV  vtdn^ 

in'3a  r»K  |  11333  i33t5'  d'?3  di:  '3'?D 

But  the  first  of  these  distichs,  though  rhythmically  tolerable,  is  still  anti- 
climactic  in  sense,  and  the  second  distich  is  rhythmically  bad. — nns]  nn^ 
(MT)  if  Kit.'s  emendation  be  accepted  ;  otherwise  nn? :  cp.  Jer  40*. — 18. 
0*73  D'i3  '3'?D  S3]  it  would  be  unsafe  to  infer  that  (Sc  had  one  only  of  the 
words  ^3,  0^3.  MT  takes  all  four  words  together  (cp.  e.g.  Nu  16*, 
Ezk  11^^).     For  the  idiom  in  Kit.'s  reconstruction,  cp.  9^ — 3in  'jytsD]  for 

the  commoner  'n  'hhn  (22^).  jyo  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  OT,  but  j^*b 
and  Aram,  jyo  are  common.  — 19,  20a.  After  the  first  five  words  the 
rhythmical  scheme  of  the  poem  breaks  down  in  f^.  ffii  differs  to  some  extent, 
but  yields  no  satisfactory  text.  If  iv  6pe(rtj'  =  Dnn3  represents  an  original 
D'Jin3  (Du.,  Che.),  it  is  nearer  the  original  text  than  |^.  On  KaTa^aivdvTuv 
eii  "Adov,  see  above.  For  nJ33  ffi  read  iJ33  and  then  treated  D3"id  as  =  noDisno 
(Ezk  16').  OiK  icTai  Kadapbv  oCrws  ov8k  <ri>  ^(xri  Kadapbs  may  represent 
something  very  different  from  mi3p3  dtik  inn  vh ;  with  '3  .  .  .  inn  k*?,  cp. 

•  Gunkel,  Schopfungu.  Chaos,  p.  133  ;  Che.  {SBOT). 


n 


XIV.  i6-2i  261 

Gn  49*. — Elaborate  reconstructions  such  as  Du.  and  Che.,  who  regard  vv. *•'*'• 
as  the  mutilated  fragment  of  five  distichs,  offer,  are  of  necessity  very  un- 
certain ;  but  it  is  unwise  to  invent  muj  yn  as  a  fitting  introduction  to  ^M3 
while  the  unfitting  epithet  ayw  is  left  attached  to  n«. 

20b-2i.  May  no  descendant  of  the  Tyrant  survive  to 
repeat  his  career. — TAy  land  hast  thou  ruined^  thy  people  hast 
thou  slain]  fflr  my  land  .  .  .  my  people^  doubtless  understanding 
the  words  to  refer  to  Nebuchadnezzar's  treatment  of  the  Jews 
(cp.  Jer.).  J^  means  that  the  conqueror,  who  has  ruined  (cp. 
Ezk  30^1)  other  lands  by  his  conquests  (v.^),  has  also  ruined  his 
own.  But  how?  Merely,  like  all  great  conquerors,  who  press 
heavily  on  their  land  by  the  drain  of  war,  and  expose  many  of 
their  subjects  to  death  in  their  campaigns?*  This  rather 
inadequate  explanation  would  apply  equally  well  to  any  of  the 
great  conquering  kings  of  Assyria  or  Babylon.  Or  is  the 
meaning  that  the  career  of  the  conqueror  has  brought  about  the 
downfall  of  the  state  and  people,  that  the  people  have  exchanged 
the  role  of  the  conqueror  for  the  fate  of  the  conquered  ?  Then 
this  particular  trait  might  fit  Nabonidus,  or  the  last  king  of 
Assyria,  or,  perhaps  best  of  all,  the  personified  nation. — Seed  of 
evil-doers]  ffi  the  evil-doer.  Even  if  the  plural  is  correct,  the 
phrase  has  not  quite  the  same  meaning  as  in  i* :  here  it  means 
the  descendants  of  the  evil  and  hurtful  kings. — 21.  A  butchery] 
n3t3D  t  may  denote  either  the  act  of  slaughtering  animals,  or  the 
place  where  they  are  slaughtered. — Fathers]  6i^  father. — And 
fill  the  face  of  the  world]  '^■Vwith  cities — to  subserve  their 
tyranny  (Del.) :  improbable.  Many  emendations  of  D^iy  have 
been  suggested  (see  below),  but  the  line  is  rhythmically  complete 
without  it  (Du.,  Marti).  Both  Dny  and  ^3B,  the  face  of  which  is 
not  expressed  by  ffir,  may  be  additions;  and  the  original  text 
may  have  had  the  common  parallelism  earth  and  world  (see,  e.g.^ 

24*  34^)- 

21.  iDip''^3]  Si  seems  to  have  the  force  of  so  that  .  .  ,  not\  cp. 
Ps  10'*  78^.  With  the  exception  of  two  not  altogether  certain  occurrences 
in  Hos  7^  9^',  ^3  is  confined  to  the  later  literature — chs.  26.  33.  35,  and 
40-66,  Pr.,  Job,  I  Ch.,  Ps. — any]  (&.  iro\itiu)v,  which  is  probably  an  error 
for  vbXeuv  (Aq.,  Theod.,  Symm.,  and  some  MSS  of  (&),  or  7roXe/Afwi'  =  Dny, 
taken  in  its  Aramaic  sense  of  enemy  (Dn  4'^) :  cp.  tJT.  Among  emendations 
that  have  been  suggested  are  D"j;  (llitz.)i  Q'SPV  (Ew.),  Dny  nmn  (Di.),  niyn, 
to  be  taken  closely  with  'nopi  in  v. 2'  (Cobb). 

*  Cp.  Jer.,  Ges.,  Di.,  al. 


262  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

22-23.  Yahweh  promises  to  wipe  out  the  Baby- 
lonians, and  to  make  of  Babylon  a  desolate  city. — This 
is  scarcely  either  poetry  or  the  original  continuation  of  vv.*^-2i : 
see  above,  p.  233  f. — I  will  arise  against]  312.  The  response  to 
V.21. — Saith]  DW  thrice  in  these  verses  :  nowhere  else  in  13^-1421. 
— I  will  cut  off  name  and  remnant]  and  so  wipe  out  of  existence 
and  memory :  the  response  to  v.^^^^-  ®,  cp.  Zeph  i^ :  similar 
phrases  occur  in  i  S  24^2,  2  S  14*^.  Name  and  remnant  and  kith 
and  kin^  or  more  WteraWy />rogeny  and  posterity  (1331  pj),  are  both 
alliterative  phrases:  *7D3  and  pi  always  occur  together — Gn  21^3, 
Job  1 819,  Sir  4i5  47221 :  in  (^  q{  the  last  passage  1331  p  is  in 
synonymous  parallelism  with  ^"it,  seed. — 23.  The  possession  of  the 
porcupine]  34-^^  n. — /  will  sweep  it  away  with  the  besom  of 
destruction]  the  proud  city  is  implicitly  compared  to  filth  that 
must  be  swept  away :  cp.  for  rather  similar  vigorous  figures, 
I  K  1410,  2  K  2ii3. 

23.  .TOMBxai]  probably  Pilpel  of  ki»,  otherwise  unknown.  For  a  full 
discussion  of  the  form,  see  Konig,  i.  652  f. 

XIV.  24-27. —  Yahweh^ s  plan  to  destroy  Assyria  on  the 
Mountains  of  Palestine. 

The  opening  words  down  to  vh  dn  fall  outside  the  rhythmical  scheme,  are 
absent  from  C&,  and  may  be  editorial.  The  ten  lines  that  follow  fall  into 
5  distichs  of  equal  (or  approximately  equal)  lines  parallel  to  one  another  in 
sense.  Two,  or  if  niKas  be  omitted  in  v.^^*,  three,  of  the  distichs  are  4:41 
23»-  b  is  3  .  3  ;  25«-  d  1^  3  :  4,  or,  with  the  omission  of  nio\  3  :  3. 

^  Yahweh  of  Hosts  hath  sworn,  saying,  Surely 
As  I  have  thought,  so  shall  it  come  to  pass, 

And  as  I  have  planned — even  that  shall  be  realised; 
25  That  I  will  break  Assyria  in  my  land, 
And  trample  him  on  my  mountains. 
And  his  yoke  shall  remove  from  upon  them, 

And  his  burden  from  upon  his  shoulder  shall  remove. 
2*^  This    is   the   plan   that    hath   been   planned   against   the 

whole  earth. 
And    this   is    the  hand    that   has    been    stretched    out 

against  all  the  nations : 

27  For  Yahweh  of  Hosts  hath   planned,  who   then   can  annul? 

And  his  hand   is   the  out-stretched   (hand);   who  then 

can  turn  it  back? 


XIV.  2  2,  23;  24-27  263 

This  poem  or  fragment  is  unconnected  with  that  which 
precedes  it ;  it  is  separated  by  a  concluding  and,  in  J^,  by  an 
initial  formula ;  it  is  also  distinguished  by  difference  of  rhythm 
and  subject ;  vv.^-^^  deal  with  the  approaching  fall  of  Babylon, 
vv.24-27  ^ith  the  approaching  destruction  of  Assyria.  It  is 
separated  from  what  follows  by  a  fresh  editorial  note  (v.^^). 
Some  see  in  the  fragment  a  misplaced  conclusion  to  lo*^"^-  ^^-'^^ 
(Che.),  or  to  io82  (Cond.),  or  to  lo^*  (Ges.),  or  to  iS^  (Ew.); 
but  after  any  of  these  passages  v.^^  would  be  necessary  to  explain 
the  ist  pers.  of  v.^^^,  and  v.^^  is  not  rhythmical. 

If  the  fragment  is  Isaiah's  (cp.  e.g.  Du.,  Che.  Ititrod.  79),  it 
may  have  been  written  during  the  campaign  of  Sennacherib; 
but  the  phrase  my  mountains  (v.^s),  and  ideas  in  v.^^  and  v.^^ 
recalling  Ezekiel  and  later  writers,  leave  room  for  the  suspicion 
that  it  is  the  work  of  a  post-exilic  writer  familiar  with  Isaiah's 
prophecies:  see  Stade  in  ZATW\\\.  16,  and  Marti. 

24.  Yahweh  .  .  .  hath  sworn]  cp.  Am  4^  6^  8*^,  Gn  22^*, 
and,  probably,  Is  5®;  also,  in  later  writings,  e.g.  4523  549  62^, 
Jer  22^,  Ps  95". — As  I  have  thoughi\  Nu  33^^:  ntS"!  occurs  also 
in  10'^,  but  it  is  questionable  whether  this  clause  refers  back  to 
lo*^:  the  subject  of  the  sentence  is  not  emphasised  so  as  to 
suggest  an  antithesis  between  Yahweh's  thought  and  Assyria's. — 
As  I  have  planned]  This,  like  all  Yahweh's  (Ps  33",  Pr  19"), 
but  unlike  many  human  (S^^),  plans,  will  be  carried  out ;  for  yv^ 
or  nvy,  see  also  5^^  19^2. 17  238  25I  4610,  Jer  4920  50*5. — 25. 
Yahweh's  plan  is  to  destroy  Assyria,  and  in  order  that  it  may  be 
clear  that  He  is  the  author  of  this  destruction,  the  destruction  is 
to  take  place  in  His  own  land  (cp.  Ezk  38i«-  22f.  3921^-),  on  the 
hills  of  Palestine;  cp.  lo^^  n.  Yahweh  is  conceived  as  a  warrior 
(cp.  63!-^)  mangling  ("I2B^,  cp.  Jer  141^  19",  Is  3026,  Lev  2ii»)  and 
then  trampling  (Ps  44*  60^*,  Zee  10*)  on  the  prostrate  corpse 
(cp.  14^^)  of  Assyria;  for  similar  personifications  of  nations,  see 
i3  n.  lo^^  n. — Assyria]  if  the  term  has  its  primary  sense  and . 
refers  to  the  Assyrian  Empire,  this  passage  was  written  at  all 
events  before  the  close  of  the  7th  cent,  and  anticipates  the 
elaboration  of  the  idea  in  Ezk  38  f.  If,  as  in  Ezr  6^2,  Assyria  is 
used  of  one  of  the  empires  that  succeeded  Assyria  proper, 
the  passage  may  be  late  and  dependent  on  Ezk  38.  39. — My 
mountains]  cp.  65^,  but  probably  not  Ezk  3821.     With  Ezek.  the 


264 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


term  "  mountains  of  Israel "  is  a  favourite  mode  of  reference  to 
Palestine :  cp.  6^^-  1 9^,  and,  in  reference  to  the  scene  of  the 
destruction  of  the  world  power,  392-  *.  17^ — 25c.  d.  Cp.  lo^''. 
The  lines  may  be  an  interpolation ;  Judah,  to  whom  the  pronouns 
in  upon  them  and  his  shoulder  must  refer,  has  not  been  mentioned. 
— 26.  Not  only  Assyria,  strictly  speaking,  is  the  object  of 
Yahweh's  plan :  all  the  nations  of  the  world  also  must  assemble 
on  the  mountains  of  Judah  to  feel  there  the  destructive  power 
of  Yahweh :  cp.  Jl  4  (3)^2ff.^  Some  understand  all  the  earth  and 
all  the  nations  to  be  entirely  synonymous  with  Assyria :  so  Di., 
who  appeals  to  10^*  8^  ly^^f.  297  30^8,  and  also  13^ — The  hand 
that  has  been  stretched  out]  528  9". — 27.  Cp.  Nu  2$^%  Is  4^^% 
Dn482(36),  job9i2. 


24.  kS-dk  .  .  yajyj]  (&  om.— Dipn  .  .  .  nn'n]  for  the  vbs.  and  the  fem.,  cp. 
7'';  for  the  proph.  pf.,  Dr.  §  14. — 25.  nne''?]  is  dependent  on  'n'Di,  'nxy,  in 
V.**;  in  the  parallel  clause  the  inf.  passes  over  into  the  impf.:  Dr.  §§  117,  118. 
— yoDv]  some  would  read  DDDr :  cp.  on'Syo. — nio']  overloads  the  line  and 
inelegantly  repeats  the  vb.  of  the  parallel  line. 


•^ 


28-32. — The  Fate  of  Philistia, 

The  introductory  note,  v.^,  is  prose ;  vv.*"'*  consist  of  6  distichs,  "*'•  ^ 
is  another  distich ;  the  opening  words  of  v.*^  are  not,  but  look  like  the 
fragment  of  another  distich.  The  distichs  consist  of  balanced  lines  mostly 
parallel  in  sense  :  the  length  of  the  line  is  3  or  4  accents.  On  a  possible 
intrusion  of  B'nj  into  ^^c,  which  at  present  overbalances  ^  see  n.  below  j 
TlOnt<¥''  ii^  v.***^  should  be  read  as  two  accents. 

28  In  the  year  that  King  Ahaz  died  was  this  oracle : — 

^  Rejoice  not,  O  entire  Philistia, 

Because  the  rod  that  smote  thee  has  been  broken; 
For  from  the  root  of  the  serpent  shall  issue  an  asp, 
And  its  fruit  shall  be  a  flying  fiery  serpent. 

^  And  the  poorest  of  the  poor  shall  feed, 
And  the  needy  will  lie  down  in  security ; 
And  *he'  will  cause  thy  root  to  die  of  hunger, 
And  thy  remnant  will  he  slay. 

'^  Howl,  (every)  town !  cry  out,  (every)  city ! 
Faint  away,  entire  Philistia ! 
For  out  of  the  north  smoke  cometh, 
And  there  is  no  straggler  in  his  ranks. 


XIV.  25-27,  28-32  26s 

*  And  what  answer  will  .  .  .  give 

.  .  .  the  messengers  of  the  nation  (?)? 
"That  it  is  Yahweh  who  hath  founded  §ion, 

And  in  her  the  afflicted  of  his  people  take  refuge.** 

Some  event,  presumably  the  death,  overthrow,  or  enfeeble- 
ment  of  some  victorious  adversary,  who  had  inflicted  severe 
suffering  on  the  entire  Philistine  country,  has  led  the  Philistines 
to  rejoice  (cp.  2  S  i^o).  The  prophet  warns  them  that  their 
rejoicing  will  be  short-lived,  for  worse  things  await  them  from 
the  same  quarter ;  an  army  descending  from  the  N.  will  destroy 
the  Philistines,  root  and  branch. 

Appended  to  (v.^^^^  ^nd  at  present  interwoven  with  (v.^**'**  ^), 
this  prediction  of  the  destruction  of  Philistia  are  promises  that 
the  poor  (v.^<^),  i.e.  the  Jewish  nation,  or  the  afflicted  part  of  that 
nation  (v.^^)^  ^^rill  find  security  in  §ion. 

So  much  seems  clear ;  but  the  identification  of  the  adversary 
and  the  determination  of  the  date  of  the  poem  are  closely  related 
problems  which  cannot  be  solved  with  certainty.  Some  theories 
may  be  ruled  out  at  once  as  inconsistent  with  a  sound  exegesis ; 
unless  the  unity  of  the  poem  be  abandoned,  so  that  v.^^  is 
referred  to  one  and  v.^^  to  another  poem,  the  "  asp  "  and  the 
"fiery  serpent"  and  "the  smoke  from  the  North"  all  refer, 
directly  or  indirectly,  to  the  person,  or  power,  that  is  to  destroy 
Philistia.  But,  since  the  "  asp  "  and  "  the  fiery  serpent "  are 
sprung  from  the  same  root  as  "  the  rod  "  that  has  already  inflicted 
injury  on  Philistia,  we  may  infer  (i)  that  the  writer  has  the  same 
hostile  nation  in  view  throughout,  and  believes  that  the  same 
nation  that  has  already  smitten  Philistia  will  destroy  it ;  and  (2) 
that  this  nation  is  not  Judah,  for  Judah  would  have  attacked 
Philistia  from  the  East  (cp.  9^^  n^^);  this  power  descends  from 
the  North :  the  writer  is  doubtless  thinking  of  the  great  coast 
road  from  the  N.  by  which  alike  Assyrian,  Babylonian,  and,  later, 
Greek  invaders  came.  On  the  ground,  then,  of  both  (i)  and  (2) 
we  may  rule  out  the  theories  that  "the  rod"  was  Ahaz  (or 
Uzziah ;  Rashi,  Ki.),  the  "  asp  "  Hezekiah,  and  the  "  fiery  serpent " 
the  Messiah  (Del.;  cp.  ST,  Jer.);  or  that  "the  rod"  was  the 
Jewish,  the  "  asp  "  the  Assyrian,  dominion  over  Philistia  (Di.) : 
on  the  ground  of  (2)  we  may  dismiss  the  theory  that  "rod  "  and 
"  asp  "  indicate  different  periods  of  Jewish  dominion,  interrupted 
by  a  period  of  weakness  (Ges.);  and  on  the  ground  of  (i)  the 


266  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

theory  that  the  "  rod  "  was  the  Persian  dominion,  and  the 
Alexander  the  Great  (Du.,  Marti). 

But  various  possibilities  remain  ;  though  the  number  is  reduced,  if  we  can 
prove  that  the  poem  dates  from  the  8th  century.  According  to  the  introductory 
note,  it  does  do  so  ;  but  the  evidence  of  this  note  has  been  much  challenged. 
Some  hold  that  it  is  an  editor's  inference  from  the  contents  of  the  poem ; 
interpreting  the  rod  of  Ahaz  and  the  asp  of  Hezekiah,  he  inferred,  so  it  is 
suggested,  that  the  occasion  of  the  poem  must  have  been  the  death  of  Ahaz, 
which  the  poem  describes  as  the  breaking  of  the  rod.  This  is  extremely 
improbable  ;  for  Ahaz  did  not  smite  the  Philistines,  but  was  smitten  by  them 
(2  Ch  28^^) ;  it  is  one  thing  for  interpreters  with  the  note  before  them,  and 
even  then  in  desperation,  to  identify  the  rod  with  Ahaz  ;  quite  another  for  an 
editor  uninfluenced  by  the  note  to  stumble  on  an  interpretation  so  improbable 
that  to  avoid  it  the  mediaeval  Jewish  commentators  fell  into  other  improb- 
abilities by  identifying  the  rod  with  Uzziah,  who  died  several  years  before  Ahaz. 
The  possibility  remains  that  a  late  editor  inferred,  on  grounds  no  longer 
obvious,  the  dcUCy  not  the  occasion,  of  the  poem,  and  gave  his  chronological 
note  the  same  form  as  that  in  6^.  Yet  this  is  not  very  probable,  and  were  it 
not  for  the  suspicious  KB'Dn  at  the  end  of  the  note,  might  be  dismissed  ;  but 
KB'Dn  may  be  a  substitute  for  nmn,  or  the  whole  of  the  last  clause  may  be  a 
substitute  for  a  different  conclusion  more  resembling  the  form  of  20^. 

There  is  probability,  then,  that  the  chronological  note  is 
genuinely  ancient,  and  not  a  mere  imitation  of  an  old  type  of 
note ;  its  evidence,  therefore,  must  not  be  lightly  dismissed. 

Unfortunately,  even  if  the  note  be  correct,  the  date  remains 
uncertain  within  limits  of  a  dozen  years  or  so.  Ahaz  was 
certainly  alive  in  728,  but  some  chronological  schemes  place  his 
death  in  727,  i,e.  in  the  6th  year  before  722  B.C.  (2  K  iS^^), 
others  in  715  or  714,  i.e.  in  the  14th  year  before  701  (36^), 
others  at  some  intermediate  date  such  as  720.  If  727  be  the 
correct  date,  the  "  rod  "  would  be  Tiglath-pileser,  who  also  died  in 
that  year  and  had  treated  Philistia  with  severity  ;  the  event  of  the 
year  734  singled  out  for  reference  in  the  Eponym  canon  is  Tiglath- 
pileser's  campaign  in  Philistia,  and  we  have  more  particular 
evidence  of  his  treatment  of  Gaza  and  Ashkelon.  It  can  be  no 
objection  to  this  theory  that  Tiglath-pileser's  immediate  successor, 
Shalmaneser,  inflicted,  so  far  as  is  known,  no  defeat  on  Philistia ; 
for  while  the  "rod"  is  matter  of  history  to  the  prophet,  the 
"asp"  is  subject  of  prediction:  in  727,  Isaiah  may  have  anti- 
cipated a  renewal  of  Assyrian  hostiHty  against  Philistia,  which  as 
a  matter  of  fact  did  not  take  place  till  the  reign  of  Sargon,  just 


XIV.  28-32  26; 

as  he  anticipated  the  destruction  of  Samaria  a  dozen  years  earlier 
than  the  actual  event. 

It  is  possible  that  the  death  of  Shalmaneser  (722)  and  the 
death  of  Ahaz  nearly  synchronised ;  and  some  have  identified  the 
"  rod  "  with  Shalmaneser.  But  it  does  not  seem  probable  that 
Shalmaneser  ever  troubled  Philistia,  though  the  lack  of  inscrip- 
tions by  him  does  not  admit  of  a  positive  statement  on  this 
point. 

Rejecting  the  evidence  of  the  note,  many  have  identified  the 
"rod"  with  Sargon,  whose  death  occurred  in  705.  Sargon's 
treatment  of  Philistia  in  720  and  again  in  71 1  (ch.  20)  was  severer 
even  than  Tiglath-pileser's. 

Accepting  the  note  and  placing  the  death  of  Ahaz  in  720,  i.e. 
16  years  (2  K  16^)  after  c.  735,  when  Ahaz  was  already  (ch.  7), 
though  he  had  probably  only  just  become,  king,  but  abandoning 
the  interpretation  of  the  broken  rod  as  a  reference  to  the  death 
of  a  king,  Wi.  attributes  the  joy  of  Philistia  to  the  effect  of  the 
news  of  the  battle  Dur-ilu  in  721  :  according  to  Sargon's  own 
account,  he  was  successful  in  this  battle  against  the  Elamites,  the 
allies  of  Merodach-baladan ;  but,  according  to  the  Babylonian 
Chronicle,  Sargon  was  defeated,  and  subsequent  events  show  that 
it  was  certainly  several  years  before  Sargon  made  good  his 
position  in  Babylon.  Che.  adopted  this  theory  in  Introd.  p. 
81,  but  abandoned  it  later  {SBOTy  p.  195)  in  favour  of  the 
theory  that  1428-32  jg^  \\\^q  14*'^^  a  post-exilic  poem  referring  to 
Sennacherib's  death  in  681. 

Du.  and  Marti  have  also  argued  for  a  non-Isaianic  origin,  and  indeed  for  a 
post-exilic  date  on  these  grounds:  (i)  v.'^  attributes  the  foundation  of  §ion 
to  Yahweh,  29'  to  David ;  (2)  the  application  of  the  terms  D'*?!,  D'3V3k,  D"jj; 
in  vv.*'*-  **•  ^  ;  (3)  '^^n3  conjecturally  substituted  for  'ni33  in  v.***.  (i)  and  (3) 
have  no  great  weight :  for  if  David's  battles  might  be  called  Yahweh's  battles 
(i  S  25^),  surely  David's  foundation  might  also  be  called  Yahweh's  founda- 
tion :  Isaiah  surely  conceived  Yahweh  as  working  through  David  ;  "vi  in  v.*" 
is  anything  but  certain  (see  n.).  (2)  is  not  without  weight :  see  notes  below. 
But  *'*•  ''•  ^,  the  only  parts  of  the  poem  affected  by  the  argument,  might  well 
be  subsequent  additions  (see  especially  n.  on  ^^  **). 

28.  Cp.  6^ ;  and  on  the  meaning  and  probable  genuineness  of 
the  note,  see  above. — 29.  Philistia]  nc^Q  occurs  in  the  OT  (v.^'. 
Ex  15I*,  Jl  4^  Ps  6o^<>  =  108^0  3^8  8y4|)  only  as  a  poetical  synonym 
for  "the  land  of  the   Philistines"  (D^nK'^3  pN);  but  Palastu^ 


268  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Pilistu^  occurs  in  Assyr.,  e.g.  ana  {matu)  Pilista  in  the  Eponym 
Canon  for  734,  and  Pilesheth  in  Egyptian  Inscription  of  the  22nd 
Dynasty  {c.  945-745  b.c.)  :  see  H.  Vincent,  Canaan^  454. — The 
staff  that  smote  thee\Q.^.  lo^jOx  the  staff  of  thy  smiter{(Bi)\  cp.  1020-2* 
14^  (9^)  i  in  the  latter  case  the  broken  stick  corresponds  directly 
to  the  death  of  the  king  at  whose  hands  Philistia  has  suffered ; 
in  the  former,  to  the  temporary  withdrawal  from  Philistia  of  the 
hostile  army,  probably  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  the  king. 
If  under  the  dead  king  the  Philistines  were  smitten  with  a  stick, 
under  the  new  king  they  will  be  smitten  with  serpents  (cp.  1  K 
1 2^*).  For  suggested  identifications,  see  above. — For  from  the 
root  of  the  serpeni\  rejoice  noX^for  worse  is  to  follow  than  has  yet 
come  and  from  the  same  quarter.  At  present  there  is  an  abrupt 
change  of  figure :  serpent  takes  the  place  of  rod  in  the  previous 
line.  Possibly  serpent  (K^nj)  is  a  gloss  on  the  rare  word  VQV,  asp^ 
and  the  original  text  ran  from  its  root^  i.e.  the  root  whence  the 
rod  came.  In  any  case  the  meaning  is  that  the  future  greater 
mischief  will  issue  from  the  same  quarter  as  the  mischief  that  is 
past ;  if  asp  and  fiery  serpent  refer  to  Assyrian  king(s),  so  too 
does  rod\  and  if  r^^  referred  to  a  Jewish  king  or  dominion,  so 
too  would  asp  and  fiery  serpent.  It  is  quite  unsafe  to  assume 
that  V.29C-  ^  refer  to  successive  stages  in  a  future  increasing  peril 
(Di.),  and  asp  2ind  fiery  serpent  to  distinct  persons,  one  succeeding 
to  and  proving  more  dangerous  than  the  other.  Certainly,  if  {5^n: 
be  original  in  v.^^^^,  it  is  most  natural  to  explain  its  fruit  as 
meaning  the  fruit  of  the  serpent  (t^nj)  rather  than  the  fruit  of  the 
asp :  the  two  lines  are  then  parallel  and  synonymous  statements 
of  the  same  fact  or  anticipation — the  future  issue  and  offspring 
of  the  root  whence  the  rod  was  taken  will  be  dangerous  serpents. 
Again,  there  is  no  sound  evidence  that  three  terms  tJ'n:,  ysv,  and 
5]DiyD  9p;^  refer  to  reptiles  of  differing  degrees  of  venomousness. 
The  first  is  generic  (Gn  3),  but  is  used  of  dangerous  serpents 
(Gn  49^^,  Am  5^^,  Ec  lo^,  Ps  58^  (4)) ;  the  second  and  third  refer 
to  specific  types  of  venomous  reptiles,  actual  or  mythical :  but 
what  particular  types  are  intended  cannot  be  determined.  The 
VBV  mentioned  here  only  may  be  the  same  as  the  "•JVS^  of  1 1^ 
595,  Jer  8^7,  Pr  23^21;  for  the  tlDiyo  cjiK',  see  30^;  and  for  the 
meaning  of  PjlC',  cp.  62  n.,  Nu  21^  n. — 30.  The  hostile  power  will 
destroy  Philistia  with  famine  and  the  sword  of  war,  but  will 
leave  Judah  unmolested  :  the  Jews  will  live  in  peace  and  plenty 


XIV.  30,  3'  269 

(cp.  v.^).  Such  must  be  the  meaning,  if  v.^^*  ^  is  original ;  yet 
the  use  of  the  terms />oor  and  needy  for  Yahweh's  people  savours 
more  of  the  Psalter  than  of  Isaiah  :  lo^,  of  course,  being  different, 
probably  also  ii*.  Possibly  these  lines  at  least  are  later  than 
the  age  of  Isaiah.  In  any  case  they  are  probably  misplaced  : 
for  the  peace  and  plenty  of  the  poor,  v.^oa-  ^^  is  no  natural  sequence 
(iy"i"l)  to  the  succession  to  the  stick  of  a  serpent  (v.^^),  nor  again 
is  the  slaughter  of  the  Philistines  (v.^^*'-  ^)  a  natural  sequence 
(^nom)  to  the  peace  and  plenty  of  Judah ;  on  the  other  hand, 
y  80c.  d  jg  tiie  sequence  of  v.^^ ;  while  ^^^'  ^  could  find  a  more 
suitable  place  after  v.^^^ — The  poorest  of  the  poor]  lit.  the  firstborn 
of  the  poor:  the  nearest  parallels  to  the  idiom  are  in  Job  iS^^ 
Ps  89^8  (27\  But  the  text  is  open  to  suspicion ;  the  superlative 
seems  pointless  (see  line  b),  and  parallelism  suggests  that  man 
conceals  a  term  synonymous  with  ntSDP  in  the  next  line ;  ^^3 
(Dt  33^^,  Jer  49^^ :  cp.  "y^'i>,  Nu  23^,  Mic  7^*)  would  be  suitable, 
the  poor  shall  feed  by  themselves^  unmolested  by  the  nations 
(cp.  Nu  23^).  Easier  palaeographical  emendations  (see  phil.  n.) 
give  a  definition  of  place ;  but  this  would  form  a  less  satisfactory 
parallel :  the  line  then  reads,  And  the  poor  shall  feed  on  my 
meadow  or  on  my  mountains  (v.^^  n.);  in  this  case  Yahweh  is 
the  speaker. — And  he  will  cause  to  die  .  .  .  he  will  slay]  the 
rendering  rests  on  the  reading  n^DH^.  (ffirST)  for  Wni,  I  will  slay ; 
the  subject  is  the  same  as  in  v.^^*'*  \  Many  prefer  to  obtain  two 
vbs.  in  the  first  person  by  following  f^  instead  of  (&  in  the  first 
line,  and  reading  airiN  for  Jin^  in  the  second  :  in  this  case  Yahweh 
is  the  subj. — Thy  root]  in  contrast  to  the  root  of  v.^^,  which  sends 
up  stronger  growth,  the  root  of  Philistia  will  die.  But  (i)  the 
parallel  line  does  not  maintain  the  figure  of  a  tree ;  ct.  5^*,  Hos 
9^^ ;  (2)  a  dead  tree  is  not  a  good  figure  of  complete  destruction 
(cp.  Job  14^);  (3)  trees  die  for  lack  of  water;  the  famine  of 
which  Philistia  is  to  die  is  probably  the  famine  of  beleaguered 
cities  (cp.  5^^),  and  some  term  more  immediately  suggestive  of 
human  beings  seems  wanted  ;  consequently  fflr's  thy  seedio,-^.  e.g. 
54^)  may  represent  the  original  text. — 31.  Touni\  lit.  gate :  cp. 
the  Deuteronomic  phrase  "  within  thy  gates,"  i.e.  in  all  thy 
towns. — From  the  north]  cp.  Jer  i^*  10^2  472^ — Smoke]  if  this  is 
correct,  the  enemy  is  represented  as  capturing  and  burning  the 
country  as  it  moves  southward  towards  Philistia :  the  next  line, 


2fO  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

in  spite  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  last  word  (see  phil.  n.),  suggests 
that  a  more  personal  term  may  have  been  used  ;  the  enemy 
moves  on  compactly  and  rapidly  with  no  straggler^  lit.  one  who 
is  separated^  in  his  ranks ;  cp.  ^'^. — 32.  In  contrast  to  Philistia 
(vv.29-3i)j  Sion,  the  existing  city  (ct.  28^^  n.),  is  safe,  for  none  other 
than  Yahweh  has  founded  it  (cp.  54^^  Ps  87^)  :  in  Sion,  Yahweh's 
people  will  find  a  secure  retreat  (cp.  v.^^*-  ^  with  n.).  So  much  is 
clear;  but  how  this  idea  was  introduced  and  connected  with 
what  proceeds  is  not  clear,  for  the  opening  words  are  a  corrupt 
fragment  of  an  entire  distich  (see  phil.  n.).  It  is  possible  that 
v. ^2  was  not  the  original  continuation  of  v.^^  j  but  if  it  was,  then 
the  odd  expression  the  messengers  of  {the)  nation^  if  not  itself  the 
result  of  corruption,  must  imply  that  the  Philistines  send  envoys 
to  Jerusalem  (cp.  18^,  Jer  27^)  to  seek  aid,  and  receive  in 
response  the  words  of  ^'^^'  ^ — for  them  a  somewhat  irrelevant 
answer.  The  answer  would  doubtless  be  more  relevant  if 
addressed  to  messengers  of  Assyria  demanding  the  capitulation 
of  Jerusalem ;  but  the  difficulty  is  to  establish  the  connection  of 
an  Assyrian  embassy  to  Jerusalem  with  a  threat  of  the  destruction 
of  Philistia ;  the  difficulty  remains  if  we  read  nations  {(B). — The 
afflicted  of  his  people"]  does  this  mean  that  another  portion  of 
Yahweh's  people  will  not  find  refuge  there  ?  If  v.^^b  jg  \^  agree- 
ment with  v.^^*-  ^  and  the  terms  poor  and  needy  here  mean  Judah 
as  opposed  to  Philistia,  this  is  improbable.  At  the  same  time  it 
is  rather  unsatisfactory  to  take  \0V  ^^3y  as  an  appositional  gen. 
and  render  the  afflicted^  {even)  his  people.  Possibly  ''''jy  is  an 
error  (cp.  lo^) :  the  term,  like  those  of  v. 2^*-  ^  is  more  easily 
explicable  by  post-exilic  circumstances  than  by  those  of  the  8th 
cent. 

28.  Ntron]  (K  Tbpij/w.,  as  in  15^  17^  22^  23^—30.  mD3]  ^Tff  MT  'i^2^,Jirsi- 
bof-no/'f  Lowth  'l^s?,  {the  poor  shall  feed  on)  my  choice  first  fruits.  Koppe 
proposed  '1^3,  in  my  meadows  \  and  many  have  adopted  this  or  '")33,  in  my 
meadow  ;  but  see  30^^  n. ;  Che. ,  Marti  'TJij?,  on  my  mountains  ;  but  ct.  'I-tVv, 
v.^^     For  another  suggestion,  see  above,     ffi's  equivalent   for  D'*?!  msn  is 

TTTUXol  5t'  avTOv. — aiq:  .  .  .  'nom]  ffi  dveXet  .  .  .  dj'eXet ;  &  .  .  .  A  »  Vojn 
V.  ^oA  1 :  ^  hv^p*  ,  .  .  n'D'i ;  "B  interire  fcuiam  .  .  .  interficiam.  On  the 
choice  of  readings,  see  above. — iK'ne']  (ffi  rh  airipixa  <xov ;  ST  133. — 31.  "lyjy  'V'^'.n] 
lyt:'  is  here  exceptionally  fern.  ;  Kon.  iii.  249W. — aiDJ]  inf.  abs.  Niph.  :  G-K. 
727/,  ii-^bb. — viyiD]  so  pointed,  here  only;  and  nyio  nowhere  has  quite 
the  sense  required  here ;  the  word  lyiD  is  explained  as  the  place  appointed 
(^y')  for  the  soldier,  i.e.  the  ranks  of  an  army.     Marti  proposes  imoy ;  cp. 


XIV.   28-32   AND  XV.  XVI.  27 1 

fry  in  the  previous  line.  On  (HEr's  rendering  of  injnoa  Tna  pK  by  koI  ovk  fartp 
Tov  elvai,  see  Ges.  p.  102,  and  Ottley.— 32.  'w  'okSd  njy  noi]  certainly,  if  v." 
is  part  of  the  poem  in  ^"^',  these  words  look  like  a  fragment  of  a  distich. 
(Sc  reading  '^Vd  for  '3kSd,  and  (cp.  also  C)  probably  uy  for  njy,  and  D'u  for 
'13,  renders  Kal  rl  iiroKpi6T^<roi>Tai  ^curiXeis  idvdv.  The  best  that  can  be  done 
with  ^  is  to  treat  njy  as  a  vb.  with  an  indefinite  subject  (G-K.  144^,  what 
then  shall  one  answer  (RV) ;  cp.  H :  this  is  obviously  unsatisfactory.  Sb  reads 
njyj,  what  answer  shall  we  give — also  improbable.  Very  unconvincing 
attempts  to  complete  the  distich  have  been  made  by  Bick.,  Du.,  and  Che. 


XV.  X\l.— The  overthrow  of  Moab, 

These  chapters,  containing  the  oracle  (13I  n.)  of  Moah^  in 
part  describe  and  lament,  in  part,  as  it  seems,  predict  a  great 
calamity.  An  appendix,  i6i^^-,  treats  the  entire  oracle  as  a 
"  word  of  Yahweh,"  i.e.  a  prophecy,  which  was  spoken  long  ago 
and  has  hitherto  remained  unfulfilled,  but  is  now  to  be  fulfilled 
within  the  term  of  three  years. 

The  oracle  is  probably  enough  not  the  work  of  a  single 
writer.  It  would  be  easier  to  speak  with  decision  on  this  point 
if  the  text  were  less  corrupt,  and  the  interpretation  of  many 
details  less  uncertain. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  major  part  of  the 
oracle  re-appears  with  many  textual  variations  and  much  differ- 
ence of  order  in  Jer  48.*     Thus  : 

Is  151-2^        absent  from  Jeremiah;  yet  cp.  48^^-  ^8. 

J  e2c-7a  _  Tgj.  ^gSTa.  38.  34a.  31  (cp.  36a.  b)  84b.  6.  34d.  860^ 

i5'''^-i6^  absent  from  Jeremiah. 

1 56-11  _  Jej.  A^l^.  30b.  36a.  b.  32c.  b.  a.  d.  33.  86a.  b 

\G^  absent  from  Jeremiah. 

Even  in  i52c-7a  and  i6^-ii  there  are  a  few  lines,  or  clauses, 
not  incorporated  in  Jer. ;  the  more  important  are  15^^-  ^  i6^-  ^-  ^^ 
But  it  remains  remarkable  that  whereas  almost  the  whole  of 
15!-'^*  i6®-^^  is  quoted,  or  has  left  its  trace,  in  Jer  48,  no  trace  of 
the  long  intervening  section  is  to  be  found  there.  Was  then  the 
compiler  of  the  cento  in  Jer  48  familiar  with  Is  15.  16,  or  did 
he  and  the  editor  of  Is  15.  16  alike  make  use  of  an  elegy  over 
Moab  of  which  the  whole  or  much  of  Is  15^^-1 6^  and  16^2  formed 
no  part  ?  The  latter  alternative  seems  the  more  probable ;  for 
there  is  a  difference  of  character  between  A  15^*^*  id^'^^  and 
*  Cp.  the  translation  and  notes  in  Dr.  Book  offer.  280  fF. 


272  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

much  of  B  i5''^-i65  16^2^  A  is  throughout  descriptive,  or 
expressive,  of  the  emotions  which  naturally  find  an  outlet 
in  elegy:  the  first  person,  when  it  is  used  (Is  15^  i6^-^i:  also 
Jer  48^6  =  Is  16''),  refers  to  the  poet.  On  the  other  hand,  in  B 
the  first  person  (15^^  ?  16^  (&)  refers  to  Yahweh,  and  the  prophetic 
element  is  conspicuous;  note  n\"l1,  i62-i2^  and  the  other  clearly 
prophetic  statements  in  15^^  16*.  A  less  significant  difference  is 
the  dramatic  character,  as  it  appears,  of  16^-*.  But  this  differ- 
ence of  character  in  the  different  sections  of  Is  15.  16  cannot  be 
the  reason  why  Jer  48  does  not  quote  from  B  as  well  as  A ;  for 
Jer  48  has  incorporated  the  passages  from  A,  the  elegy,  into  a 
whole  which  resembles  B  in  being  prophetic,  and  in  introducing 
Yahweh  as  the  speaker  (cp.  e.g.  Jer  481-  ^2.  30.  35. 38^^ 

If  we  are  right  in  this  conclusion,  we  have  to  inquire  whether 
the  extent  of  the  elegy  can  be  more  closely  determined,  (i) 
Such  parts  of  i5'^^-i6^  as  are  not  clearly  prophetic  may  belong 
to  the  elegy  and  have  been  omitted  by  Jer.,  as  are  a  few  lines  of 
the  remainder  of  Is  15.  16.  Not  improbably,  then,  j^'^^-^a- 
belonged  to  the  elegy ;  at  all  events  they  scarcely  formed  part 
of  the  prophecy,  though  it  is  possible  that  they  were  variants  or 
parallels  not  yet  incorporated  in  the  elegy  when  the  editor  of  Jer 
48  made  use  of  it.  Even  162,  if  r^^n)  be  read  for  n\Ti,  might 
have  formed  part  of  the  elegy;  but  the  awkwardness  which  is 
occasioned  by  the  present  position  of  this  v.  may  be  due  to  the 
certainly  corrupt  state  of  16^.  (2)  Possibly  enough  some  of  the 
original  elegy  has  failed  of  preservation  in  either  Is.  or  Jer.  We 
appear  to  have  in  i5^*'*  •*•  ^  16''  and  16^^  a  thrice-repeated, 
though  in  each  case  more  or  less  mutilated,  refrain.  The 
number  of  rhythmically  similar  lines  at  present  preceding  each 
occurrence  of  the  refrain  is  nearly  though  not  quite  equal.  If, 
however,  15^^-16^,  entire  or  in  large  part,  were  included  in  the 
elegy,  great  inequality  would  result ;  and  this  is  some  confirma- 
tion of  the  conclusion  that  most  at  least  of  that  section  is  really 
foreign  to  the  elegy.  (3)  16^  though  also  found  in  Jer.  is  unlike 
the  rest  of  the  elegy  (note  the  isi  plural),  and  may  be  a  reflection 
on  it  which,  at  an  early  period  of  the  text,  was  incorporated  in 
the  elegy. 

To  facilitate  the  study  of  the  section  along  lines  which  seem 
safest  where  all  is  uncertain  and  many  details  most  uncertain, 
a  continuous  translation — in  many  respects  quite  tentative — of 


"8£ 


V 


X 


!'08 


Iti^ 


rvx.vi.se-TSX.el  no 


ftc^"^  tu^  tu  trtb  «»nM\  (VNbW- 


•Jl'^ 


.■,U. !  ,  H.,,,. 


\u  'o*dt    i€»i    %f>eJ 


f 


— . ,       I — Y^      -J 

7       >-•  •■  '• 


Jt. 


':^    •' 


I. 


o«C 


35%o 


35°4-o' 


MOAB 

AND 

PART  OF  JUDAH 

to  illustrate  the  Commentary 
on  Is. X  27-32, IV.IVl 

Scale  of  English  Miles 


Modern  names  are  in  thin  type 


aS'zo' 


Lon^    Eagt    354-0'  of    Greenwich 


36' 


WfcA.K.Johneton  V*  Uinburjh  (,  London 


XV.  XVI.  273 

the  elegy  is  given  first.     The  translation  of  the  prophetic  section 
15^^-16^  is  given  below,  p.  286,  and  of  16^2  jn  its  place. 

XV.  i-ga  +  XVI.  (6)  7-1 1. — An  Elegy  on  Moab. 

The  text  is  so  uncertain,  or  ambiguous,  that  it  is  difficult  to  speak  with 
certainty  of  the  rhythm.  It  is  often  said  to  be  ^irtah  rhythm  ;  but  if  so, 
the  variation  2  :  2  for  3  :  2  is  so  frequent  as  to  give  the  poem  a  very  different 
rhythmical  character  from  14*"^^  Parallelism  occasionally  occurs  between 
periods  of  2  accents  :  see,  e.g.y  i^^  and  the  distich  IS****  "•  ^ ;  more  often  the 
periods  of  parallelism  are  longer — 4  14;  see  16^"^'' with  phil.  n.  The  rhythm 
of  the  refrain  (see  15*°*  **•  °*  i6''")  in  its  original  form  perhaps,  and  of  15**"  •• 
certainly,  was  3  :  3.     On  the  strophic  division,  see  above. 


I. 

*  Because    in    a    (single)    night    *Ar    has    been    spoiled, 

Moab  is  undone; 
Because   in  a  night   ^ir  has   been  spoiled,   Moab   is 

undone. 
•*The    daughter    of    Dibon    hath    ascended    the    high 

places  to  weep; 
On  Nebo  and  on  Medeba,  Moab  doth  howl. 
On  every  *head'  is  baldness,  every  beard  is  clipped, 
Jer  48^^^  [Upon   all  hands  are  gashes,  and   on  all  loins  sack- 
cloth.] 

*  In  his  streets  they  have  girded  on  sackcloth. 

On    *  his '   roofs    and    in    *  his '   squares   (Moab),   one 

and  all,  howls, 
Running  down  (?)  with  weeping. 

*  Heshbon  and  Ele'aleh  cried  out, 

As  far  as  Yahas  was.  their  voice  heard. 
Wherefore  the  loins  of  Moab  (?)  'quiver' 
His  (?)  soul  quivereth  for  himself: 
**  My  heart  crieth  out  for  Moab. 


2. 

^  ^  *^  For  the  ascent  of  Luhith — he  goeth  up  thereon  weeping, 
For   the  way   to  Horonaim — they   raise  (thereon)  the 

cry  of  destruction. 
18 


274 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


^  For  the  waters  of  Nimrim  became  desolations. 
For  the  grass  has  dried  up, 
The  young  grass  is  exhausted, 
Green  things  have  not  grown. 
7  Wherefore  the  abundance  he  had  acquired  and  their  (?)  . . 

Over  the  Wady  of  Willows  they  carry  them  away. 
^  For  the  cry  hath  gone  round  the  border  of  Moab ; 
As  far  as  Eglaim  is  the  howl  thereof. 

And  (as  far  as)  Be'er  Elim  is  the  howl  thereof. 
^*  For  the  waters  of  Dimon  are  full  of  blood, 
j516  \Ye  have  heard  of  the  pride  of  Moab,  very  proud. 

His  haughtiness  and   pride   and   overbearing— not   right  are  his 

pratings. 
7  Therefore  *!'  howl  *for'  Moab, 
For  entire  Moab  '  I '  cry  out. 
For  the  raisin-cakes  of  Kir-'heres' 


I'  moan. 


**  For  the  tract  of  Heshbon  the  vinc  of  Sibmah  hath  languished, 

^The  lords  of  nations  its  red  clusters  smote  down: 
^  Its  tendrils  have  stretched  out,  gone  over  to  the  sea, 
^^  Unto   Ya'zer    have    they    reached,    strayed    into    the 

wilderness. 
9  Wherefore  I  weep  with  the  weeping  of  Ya'zer, 

O    vine    of    Sibmah    I    drench    thee    with   my  tears, 

Heshbon  and  Elealeh  ; 

For  upon   thy   grapes   and   thy  (grape-)harvest  shouting 

(?)  hath  fallen, 
^^  And  joy   is   withdrawn   and   exultation   from    '  thy  vine- 
yards.' 
And  in  the  vineyards  no  ringing  cry  is  given, 

The  wine  'is  not  trodden,'  in  the  vats  'none  is  left'; 
11  Wherefore  my  bowels  for  Moab  sound  like  a  harp. 

And  my  inward  parts  for  Kir-^eres  [sound  like  a  pipe]. 

The  ^rsf  strophe  (151'^*)  states  the  disaster,  and  its  effect, — 
the  destruction  of  Moab, — and  then  depicts  the  lamentation 
that  spreads  with  the  news  through  Moab.  The  disaster  ap- 
pears to  have  been  an  attack  from  the  South ;  *Ar  and  ^ir 
(sites  to  the  S.  of  Arnon),  taken  unawares,  fell  before  the  enemy 


XV.  XVI.  27S 

almost  without  a  blow  (v.^).  The  news  spreads  northwards 
across  Arnon  to  Dibon  and  to  the  extreme  northern  towns  of 
Moab — Heshbon  and  Ele'aleh  (v.^).  The  refrain  in  the  present 
text  records  the  emotion  of  both  Moab  and  the  poet  (vv.^'^-  ^-  ^). 

The  second  strophe^  i^5b-9a(7)  157.  further  scenes  of  lamenta- 
tion and  desolation ;  the  sites  mentioned  are  all  uncertain ;  but 
some  at  least  probably  lay  in  Southern  Moab,  though  not 
necessarily,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of  So*ar,  in  the  extreme 
south,  i.e.  on  the  Edomite  border.  The  refrain  in  the  present 
text  of  Is  (emended  above)  records  the  emotion  of  Moab;  in 
Jer  the  refrain  refers  mainly  to  the  poet's  emotion. 

Many  writers  find  in  this  strophe  a  description  of  the  flight 
of  Moabite  refugees  into  Edom ;  this  view  rests  partly  on 
identifying  the  Wady  of  Willows  with  the  Edomite  border,  partly 
on  emending  15^  so  as  to  introduce  the  word  Edom,  and  partly 
on  a  particular  explanation  of  a  very  obscure  v.,  i6\  An  allusion 
to  flight  into  Edom  is  anything  but  certain,  even  if  15^^-16* 
formed  an  integral  part  of  the  poem. 

Third  strophe^  \(i^'^^\  a  special  feature  in  the  disaster — the 
extensive  and  famous  vineyards  of  Northern  Moab  are  destroyed ; 
the  enemy  have  fallen  on  the  country  in  the  time  of  vintage, 
and  there  will  be  no  joy  of  the  vintage  and  no  wine  for  Moab. 
The  refrain  records  the  poet's  emotion. 

The  age  of  this  elegy  is  very  uncertain.  It  is  earlier  than 
the  Appendix  (i6i3^-),  and  earlier  than  the  composition  of  Jer  48 ; 
but  the  dates  of  these  are  unfortunately  also  uncertain.  It 
belongs  to  an  age  when  the  territory  of  Moab  stretched  far 
north  of  the  Arnon.  In  the  time  of  Omri,  Israel  held  the 
country  as  far  south  as  Arnon ;  Mesha,  toward  the  end  of  the 
9th  century  B.C.,  recovered  this  northern  territory,  at  least  as  far 
north  as  Nebo.  Soon  after,  if  we  may  press  2  K  lo^^f.^  j^ 
passed  back  to  Israel  and  then  into  the  hands  of  the  Syrians ; 
and  then,  possibly  after  another  period  of  Moabite  occupation 
(cp.  2  K  \'^^^'\  if  we  may  rely  on  Am  6^*,  2  K  142^  with  the 
more  specific  implications  of  i  Ch  s^-^'^,  it  was  restored  to 
Israel  by  Jeroboam  11.  in  the  first  half  of  the  8th  century  b.c.  It 
ceased  to  be  Israelite  in  722  at  latest,  and  much  at  least  of  it 
was  Moabite  at  the  beginning  of  the  6th  century  (Ezk  25^) ; 
but  there  is  no  definite  evidence  to  show  precisely  how  long 
before  and  how  long  after  the  time  of  Ezekiel  the  Moabites 


276  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

held  it.  But  we  may  infer  with  great  probability  that  the  dis- 
trict both  south  and  north  of  Arnon  was  overrun  by  Arab 
nomads,  who  so  completely  subjugated  the  ancient  population 
that  they  gave  their  own  name  of  Nabataeans,  or  Arabians,  to 
the  population  of  the  country.  The  chief  facts  are  these :  (i) 
Ezek.  in  the  early  part  of  the  6th  cent,  foresees  such  an  invasion ; 
(2)  Nehemiah  (mid.  5th  cent,  b.c.)  couples  Arabians  and 
Ammonites ;  and  he  may  well  mean  by  Arabians,  inhabitants  of 
Moab  (Neh  4^  W,  cp.  2^*) ;  (3)  in  the  2nd  cent.  B.C.  the  popula- 
tion of  ancient  Moab  is  certainly  Nabataean,  and  Medeba  in 
particular  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Jambri  (an  Arab  name) — 
I  Mac  9^^^- ;  so,  later,  Josephus  terms  the  people  of  this  district 
Arabians  {Ant.  xiv.  i.  4),  and  the  district  formed  part  of  the 
Roman  Provincia  Arabia;  (4)  Mai  i^-^  attests  the  northern  or 
western  movement  of  nomads  from  the  Syrian  wilderness  into 
the  neighbouring  country  of  Edom.  (2)  and  (4)  together 
suggest  the  5th  century  as  the  period  of  the  Nabataean  con- 
quest of  Moab  of  which  we  have  no  direct  information,  but 
which  fell  between  c.  570  and  170  B.C. — (i)  and  (2). 

Not  improbably  the  elegy  actually  relates  this  Nabataean 
conquest  of  the  5th  cent. ;  if  so,  subsequent  events  showed 
that  the  poet  was  not  employing  any  rhetorical  exaggeration 
when  he  declares  that  the  fall  of  *Ar  and  Kir  signified  the 
extinction  of  Moab  as  an  independent  people.  It  would  accord 
with  this  that  the  attack  described  in  the  poem  seems  to  be 
delivered  from  the  south  or  east;  it  is  possible,  too,  that  the 
special  emphasis  laid  on  the  destruction  of  the  vines  reflects 
the  special  animosity  displayed  by  the  Nabataeans  (Diodorus 
19^^)  towards  vine-culture  (so  Marti).  There  is  nothing  in  the 
poem,  even  if  it  included  15^^-16^,  inconsistent  with  this  theory; 
and  the  strong  sympathy  with  Moab  displayed  by  the  poet 
would  find  some  parallel  in  the  Book  of  Ruth,  if  that  book  is 
rightly  attributed  to  the  5  th  century. 

It  is  still  more  difficult  to  determine,  even  approximately, 
the  absolute  date  of  the  Appendix  or  epilogue  {i6^^^'\  or  of 
15^^-16^,  if  this  section  is  rightly  judged  to  be  an  interpolation. 
But  it  will  be  convenient  to  say  what  may  be  said  at  this  point. 

(1)  We  can  hardly  simplify  the  problem  by  attributing  the 
interpolations  in  the  elegy  to  the  writer  of  the  epilogue ;  for  the 
epilogue  certainly  purports  to  be  added  to  a  *'  word  of  Yahweh  " 


XV.  XVI.  277 

concerning  Moab,  which   15^-16^2  j^  its  present  form  is  (see 
15®^),  but  which  the  elegy  was  not. 

(2)  The  style  and  language  of  both  epilogue  and  interpola- 
tion is  indecisive ;  due  regard  being  had  to  the  state  of  the 
text,  they  show  little  or  nothing  necessarily  late,  nor  again 
anything  decisively  Isaianic;  for  the  fact  that  some  of  the 
vocabulary  can  be  paralleled  from  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  no 
more  proves  the  passages  to  be  Isaianic  than  the  fact  that  in 
part  it  cannot  be  so  paralleled  proves  by  itself  that  it  is  non- 
Isaianic  (cp.  Cheyne,  Introd.  83-85).  With  this  epilogue,  cp. 
that  in  23^^'-.  So  long  as  the  Book  of  Isaiah  was  regarded  as 
being  primarily  a  work  compiled  by  Isaiah  into  which  certain 
interpolations  had  crept,  it  was  not  unreasonable  to  argue  that 
no  sufficient  case  was  made  out  against  the  Isaianic  authorship 
of  the  epilogue;  but  once  it  is  recognised  that  the  Book  of 
Isaiah  is  a  prophetic  collection  of  the  3rd  century  B.C.  (Introd. 
§  27),  it  becomes  a  bold  and  unjustifiable  assumption  that  this 
epilogue  to  a  prophecy,  which  is  perhaps  not  much  older  than 
the  3rd  century,  was  itself  written  by  a  particular  prophet 
five  centuries  before ;  more  especially  is  this  so  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  other  "oracles"  in  chs.  13-23  are  clearly  later  than  the 
age  of  Isaiah. 

(3)  At  the  same  time  it  is  no  easier  to  select  a  period  in  the 
age  subsequent  to  Isaiah  than  in  the  age  of  Isaiah  itself  to  which 
the  epilogue  can  be  confidently  assigned. 

Brief  reference  may  be  made  to  some  other  theories.  Since  the  time  of 
Koppe  and  Eichhorn  the  Isaianic  authorship  of  the  elegy  at  least  has  been 
increasingly  questioned  and  is  now  seldom  maintained,  though  it  is  not 
decisively  rejected  by  Driver  (LOT^  213  f.).  This  is  due  to  the  style  and 
manner  of  the  piece  —  the  unrestrained  sympathetic  emotion,  the  absence 
of  any  reference  to  Yahweh,  "the  very  awkward  accumulation  of  the 
particles  '3  and  p  Vy,"  the  excessive  use  of  paronomasia;  see  more  fully 
Che.  Introd.  85  f.,  Di.  p.  146,  where,  however,  the  list  of  expressions  not 
found  in  Isa.  includes  along  with  a  few  which,  taken  together,  have  some 
weight,  some  which  are  textually  doubtful.  The  style,  however — though  this- 
points  decisively  away  from  Isaiah — does  not  point  decisively  to  any  par- 
ticular age :  many,  therefore,  have  attributed  the  elegy  to  a  writer  earlier  than 
Isaiah,  and,  in  particular,  to  the  period  of  the  (assumed)  conquest  of  Moab  by 
Jeroboam  II.  This  theory,  relying  on  the  supposed  reference  to  a  flight 
of  the  Moabites  south  in  15',  assumes,  in  spite  of  15^"°,  that  the  elegy 
describes  an  attack  on  Moab  from  the  north  by  Jeroboam  11.  of  Israel  ;  then 
16^'"*,  treated  as  part  of  the  elegy,  is  supposed  to  refer  to  Jeroboam's  con- 


278  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

temporary  Uzziah  (whose  friendship  was  sought  by  the  Ammonites  (2  Ch  26®), 
and  therefore,  it  is  inferred,  might  have  been  sought  by  the  Moabites  also) 
as  the  king  whose  protection  is  sought  by  the  Moabite  refugees  (6^"^).  So  sub- 
stantially, among  others,  Hitz.,  Reuss,  Wellh.  {EBrit.^  xvi.  535),  W.  R.  Smith, 
Di.,  Skinner,  Whitehouse. 

Du.  ascribes  the  elegy  to  a  very  recent  date :  the  epilogue  only  fits  a 
period  when  the  hope  was  cherished  of  thoroughly  destroying  the  Moabites 
and  the  Nabataeans  ;  such  a  period  is  that  of  Alexander  Jannaeus  (104-78 
B.C.).  The  elegy  itself  should  not  be  much  earlier,  and  may  refer  to  a 
Nabataean  incursion  in  the  2nd  cent.  B.C.,  the  ruler  in  Sion  (16^)  being 
John  Hyrcanus  (135-105  B.C.). 

Marti  suggests  that  the  elegy  written  in  the  5th  cent,  (see  above)  may, 
not  long  after  it  was  written,  have  been  turned  into  a  prophecy  by  the 
addition  of  i5^*'-i6*. 

Ew.  {Propketen^f  i.  380 f.)  already  detected  the  work  of  three  hands  in 
chs.  15.  16,  and  assigned  (l)  15.  16'"^'^  to  a  prophet  who  lived  East  of  the 
Jordan  between  the  beginning  of  the  9th  cent,  and  the  time  of  Amos ;  (2) 
16^"*  to  a  contemporary  of  Uzziah,  who  lived  perhaps  nearly  half  a  century 
before  Isaiah's  appearance  as  prophet ;  (3)  i6^^'*  to  Isaiah. 

For  modern  attempts  to  defend  the  Isaianic  authorship  of  the  entire 
section — elegy  or  prophecy,  epilogue  and  all — reference  may  be  made  to 
Barth,  Beitrdge  (1885),  pp.  20-23,  and  the  commentaries  of  Del.  (Eng.  tr. 
1890)  and  Orelli. 

XV.  i-5a.  First  Strophe  of  the  Elegy. — i.  However 
"•D  be  explained  and  the  lines  punctuated  (see  phil.  n.),  this  v. 
gives  the  cause  of  the  alarm  described  in  the  following  verses. 
*Ar  (Moab)  and  Kir  (Moab)  have  been  taken  by  sudden  assault ; 
the  country  was  hardly  aware  of  danger  till  the  blow  had  actually 
fallen,  and  its  fall  had  been  sealed.  In  vv.^'*  follow  scenes  of 
the  lamentation  called  forth  by  the  news  as  it  travels  northwards 
through  Dibon,  Nebo,  and  Medeba,  to  Heshbon  and  Ele'aleh. 
— In  a  night]  The  suddenness  with  which  the  assault  was  made 
and  the  rapidity  with  which  all  was  over  seem  to  be  expressed 
by  this  phrase,  emphasised  as  it  is  by  being  placed  before  the  vb. 
Cp.  17^*  "At  evening,  lo  !  terror,  before  morning  it  is  no  more." 
— Ar  {of  Moab)]  one  of  the  chief  places  of  Moab ;  see  Nu  21 28, 
where  the  only  (other)  occurrence  of  the  name  in  the  form  *Ar 
of  Moab  is  found.  But  the  same  place  is  intended  by  the 
abbreviated  form  *Ar,  which  on  one  view  of  the  construction  is 
the  form  used  here,  in  Nu  21^^,  Dt  2*- 1^-  2^,  and  probably  by  *Ir 
Moab  in  Nu  22^^*,  'Ir  and  *Ar  being  indistinguishable,  if  the  text 
be  written  without  the  vocalic  consonants.  *Ar  of  Moab  appears 
to  have  lain  on  the  upper  waters   of  the  Arnon  {Numbers^  p. 


XV.   I,   2  279 

286),  i.e,  E.  of  Dibon  and  S.  of  Nebo,  Medeba,  Heshbon  and 
Ele'aleh.  (&  gives  for  Ar  of  Moab^  as  for  Moab  throughout  the 
section,  17  Mwa^Sems :  and  Buhl  (Geog.  p.  269)  thinks  the  name 
covers  a  district — the  region  south  of  Arnon — rather  than  a  city. 
^Kir  Moab'\  is  commonly  identified  with  I^ir-heres  (16''^  n.), 
and  so  with  the  modern  Kerak,  which  is  situated  in  the 
extreme  south  of  Moab  on  a  lofty  spur  between  two  ravines 
whose  bottoms  lie  about  1000  feet  below — a  position  almost 
impregnable  in  ancient  warfare  (Hastings,  DB).  For  fuller 
description,  with  illustrations  of  Kerak,  see  A.  Musil,  Arabia 
Petraea,  \.  45  ff.  But,  as  Buhl  {Geog.  270)  rightly  observes, 
there  is  no  convincing  reason  for  the  equation.  If  it  is  incorrect, 
the  site  of  ^ir  Moab,  which  is  mentioned  here  only,  is  quite 
unknown ;  from  the  northward  line  indicated  in  vv.^-*  we 
might  infer  that  it  lay  somewhere  S.  of  Dibon. — 2.  Lamentation 
in  Dibon,  Nebo,  and  Medeba.  On  certain  views  of  the  wholly 
improbable  text  of  J^  (see  phil.  n.),  a  fourth  place  otherwise 
unknown,  Bayith  (EV),  is  mentioned. — The  daughter  of  Dibon 
hath  ascended]  reading  by  conjecture  \y\  03  nn^jy  (Du.)  for  rhv 
p''^1  n^3n ;  the  daughter  of  Dibon  is  the  personified  population  of 
Dibon  (1^  n.).  Dibon,  mod.  Dhiban,  lay  about  4  miles  N.  of 
Arnon  and  13  E.  of  the  Dead  Sea.  "Dhiban  is  usually  de- 
scribed as  lying  on  two  hills ;  but  there  are  really  three  .  .  . 
Probably  .  .  .  the  ancient  city  comprised  all  three  hills  along 
with  the  col  connecting  them ;  but  .  .  .  also  spread  eastward 
over  the  road  and  the  shallow  wady  beside  it  to  the  slopes  beyond, 
on  which  are  many  scattered  ruins."  "  At  one  period  or  another 
the  town  must  have  been  as  large  as  any  in  Moab:  cp.  the 
epithet  UafifityWr)^  applied  by  Eusebius "  (G.  A.  Smith,  PEjF 
Qu  St. J  1905,  p.  41  f.). — The  high  places  to  weep]  before  their 
god(s);  cp.  16^2^ — Nebo]  the  modern  Jebel  Neba,  on  or  near 
which  the  town  of  the  same  name  presumably  lay,  is  about  18 
miles  due  north  of  Dibon  and  5  S.W.  from  IJeshbon.  It  is 
about  4  miles  N.W.  from  Medeba  (mod.  Madeba),  which  lies 
about  15  miles  slightly  E.  of  N.  from  Dibon.  The  mountain  top, 
which  is  10  miles  back  from,  and  4000  feet  above,  the  Dead 
Sea,  commands  a  very  extensive  view.*  Madeba  lies  on  a  slight 
elevation  rising  from  the  Moabite  plateau.  Both  Nebo 
{Nufubers^  32^^  n.)  and  Medeba  {ib.  21^^  n.)  are  mentioned  in 
*  Expositor^  Nov.  1904,  pp.  322  ff. 


280  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Mesha's  inscription  and  several  times  in  tlie  OT.  The  remain 
of  a  stone-circle,  as  probably  its  name  also,  is  a  token  of  the 
sacred  character  of  Nebo. — 2C,  3.  The  description  of  the 
mourning  continues,  with  particular  reference  to  the  chief  rites 
of  mourners — the  tonsure  of  the  head  (cp.  e.g.  Am  8^*^,  Jer  16^, 
Lev  21^),  the  shorn  beard  (cp.  Jer  41^),  and  the  girding  on  of 
sackcloth  (20^  n.).  The  greater  rhythmical  regularity  of  Jer 
^837. 88a  jjj^y  ijg   ^jug  ^-q   ^jjg   |-gxt   of  thc   pocm   being  better 

preserved  there :  in  particular,  all  his,  viz.  Moab's,  heads  is 
improbable ;  read  with  €r  and  Jer  on  every  head :  cp.  next  clause. 
See,  further,  phil.  n. — In  his  streets']  the  pronoun  (masc.)  refers, 
rather  awkwardly,  to  Moab  (cp.  Jer  48^^). — 4a.  b.  The  cry  of 
distress  raised  by  the  news  in  Heshbon  and  Ele*aleh,  situated 
close  together  in  the  most  northern  district  of  Moab,  is  heard  as 
far  as  Yahas.  Heshbon,  mod.  ^esban,  famous  as  the  city  of  Sihon 
(Nu  2i2i-27  nn.),  lay  5  miles  N.E.  of  Nebo ;  Elealeh  (Nu  32^7  n.), 
mod.  Eral,  about  ij  miles  N.E.  of  Heshbon.  The  site  of 
Yahas  (Nu  2\^'^  n.)  is  unfortunately  uncertain;  if  Mesha's 
statement  (1.  20),  that  he  took  Yahas  "to  add  it  to  Dibon," 
really  implies,  as  it  would  seem  to  do,  that  Yahas  lay  near  Dibon, 
the  point  of  vv.^-*  is  that  lamentation  follows  the  news  of  v.^  as 
it  travels  northward  from  Arnon  to  Ele'aleh  and  echoes  back 
again  through  the  whole  length  of  this  district. — 4c.  The  loins  of 
Moab\  so  (!K  ^  oo-<^v9  (  =  '^i'n)»  ^i  cp-  Jer  30^.  This  gives  a 
better  parallel  to  his  soul  than  MT  ^V^Jn,  the  armed  men ;  cp.  e.g. 
Nu  3227  As  against  MT  it  is  to  be  further  observed  that  the 
poet  deals  throughout  with  the  fate,  the  actions,  the  emotions 
of  an  entire  people,  not  of  particular  classes  within  it.  Yet, 
possibly,  neither  fflr  nor  f^  is  quite  correct ;  for  this  distich  de- 
scribing Moab's  emotion  at  its  own  fate  is  followed  in  v.^*  by  an 
isolated  monostich  expressing  the  poet's  emotion  at  Moab's  fate : 
cp.  1 6^1.  Not  improbably  vv.*''- <*•  ^  are  the  expansion,  due 
mainly  to  transcriptional  accidents,  of  a  distich  expressing 
throughout  the  poet's  emotion  (cp.  16"):  it  may  have  run  some- 
what as  follows : 

4c.  d  Wherefore  my  loins  quiver, 

5*  My  heart  crieth  out  for  Moab. 

1.  '3]  possibly  affirmative  (Di.),  Surely  (7'n.),  or  interjectional  (Marti), 
Ah  !  that ;  more  probably  causal,  the  causal  sentence  being  prefixed  as  in  28'' 


XV.   1-5  ,  28 1 

(BDB  473^).  The  causal  sentence  may  extend  over  the  whole  of  v.',  *3  being 
repeated,  as  is  3  with  the  infin.  rather  similarly  in  Jg  5' ;  more  probably  the 
causal  sentence  ends  in  each  line  after  ny  and  I'p  respectively  ;  so  Jer.  Quia  in 
node  vastata  est  Ar^  Moab  conticuit ;  quia  in  nocte  vastatus  est  Murus^  Moab 
conticuit.  Editions  of  "Sy  indeed,  commonly  place  the  comma  after  Moab, 
but  Jer.'s  commentary  on  the  v.  implies  the  punctuation  given  here  (see 
Migne).  Then,  nDi3  has  a  personal  subject  (cp.  6*),  and '  Ar  occurs,  as  most 
frequently,  in  its  simple  form  (not  *Ar-Moab);  Tp  is  unique,  so  also  would 
3»r«Dn'p  be;  and  if  Tp=Bnn  Tp  below,  a  simple  abbreviation  rather  than  a 
different  genitival  combination  is  perhaps  more  likely  to  occur  in  the  same 
poem.  Du.  makes  the  main  pause  after  nnr ;  in  that  case  the  unusual  post- 
ponement of  the  subj.  to  the  2nd  sentence  would  be  due  to  rhythmical 
considerations:  cp.  4I**''. — ^'!?^i]  21^^  n.  Possibly  here  intended,  though 
wrongly,  to  be  cstr.  (cp.  G-K.  130^). — ny  ne']  ny  is  ace.  after  the  pass.  ; 
G-K.  I2ia :  or  the  name  of  the  city  is,  exceptionally,  masc.  (Kon.  iii.  249a). 
— 3K1D  Tp]  C  3KTD1  H3n3=/^r/r«j  of  Moob  \  probably  identified  by  E  with 
mod.  Kerak,  which  in  Greek  writers  appears  as  Xapaxfiufia :  q>.  Musil, 
Arabia  Petraeay  i.  58. 

2.  pm  vfirx  n^y]  the  least  improbable  translation  of  the  text,  on  the 
supposition  that  |^  is  correct,  is  Bayith  and  Dibon  have  gone  up.  Of  other 
attempts  to  translate,  these  examples  may  suffice :  One^  viz.  Moab,  hath  gone 
up  to  the  [temple)  house  and  Dibon  to  the  high-places  (cp.  ^Li.) :  the  {royal)  house 
and  Dibon  have  gone  up  to  the  high-places  (Jer.).  Modem  interpreters  have 
been  unable  to  improve  on  these  obviously  improbable  interpretations.     The 

text  is  at  fault.  (Sr  unfortunately  is  too  obscure  to  be  useful ;  Sh  ]A  »  <^\ 
yTs  «'>i  .^%  (cp.  O  apparently  read  no  )  before  \y"\  and  no  n  before  nu ;  {3n  n3 
in  Jer  48^*  may  be  a  reminiscence  of  the  correct  text  |3n  n3  nn^y. — niDsn] 
ace.  of  direction  :  G-K.  ii8/". — ^'^rj  for  this  instead  of  ^♦^'♦j  see  G-K.  joc. — 
vrnS]  very  precariously  explained  as  a  colloquial  (Ki.),  or  dialectic  (Di.), 
variation  of  vvtri.  Note  the  sing.  |pi  in  the  next  clause  (cp.  Kon.  ii.  p.  356). 
Read  rKT  with  Jer  48''  and  (&  {ivl  vdffijs  KetpaXijs). — n^n'O]  the  sense  to  shave 
(commonly  expressed  by  rhi),  found  only  here  and  in  the  parallel  passage 

Jer  48*^,  is  common  in  Aramaic,  whence   l^tHi*  ^  barber ;  |  ^^  ^\  iij  a  monk ; 

see  also  Levy,  NHW^  s,v,  ynj.  Many  MSS  have  here  nyrv^:, ;  but  yiJ,  used 
of  hewing  off  a  limb  such  as  an  arm  (cp.  (Sr  here),  does  not  occur  again  in  the 
present  sense. — .Tn3m3  .  .  .  rvmn  .  .  .  vn«n3]  the  change  of  gender  is  rather 
due  to  textual  corruption  than  to  the  fact  that  the  masc.  refers  to  the  people, 
the  fem.  to  the  land,  of  Moab  (Di.).  After  n'nua,  Du.,  al.  add  ibdd  (cp.  Jer 
4888 J — precariously,  for  the  original  text  of  w.*°*  •,  which  may  have  closely 
resembled  that  of  Jer,  is  not  to  be  so  lightly  restored ;  the  suggestion  is 
hardly  supported  by  the  fact  that  ®r  reads  Kal  Kdnreade ^mso  before  nWiJ  Sy  ; 
ct.  K<merbv —"MXXi  in  Jer  6*.  (&  may  be  an  addition  to  the  text  under  the 
influence  of  Jer  4^49'. — '333  it]  also  doubtful,  even  if  with  Che.  we  substitute 
Tpn  (22*)  for  nT.  (K  has  no  equivalent  for  Ti*.  For  '333  Ti'  ^'S"  n^3,  Jer  % 
has  simply  ibod  nVa  and  Jer  ®r  nothing.  The  idiom  to  run  down  in  weeping 
does  not  occur  again  ;  elsewhere  the  eye  runs  down  tearsy  or  {streams  of) 


282  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

•water,  Jer  9",  Lam  i^*  3*^.— 4a.  D^^p  .  .  .  pyini]  here  the  text  of  Is  is 
earlier  and  better  than  in  Jer  48^ ;  cp.  also  Jer  48*  r\p)3\  ly'DBTi.  — 3kid  ''^r(\ 
so  C  3K1D  "niD,  U  expediti  Moab ;  but  ffi^  nr\  dff^ds  rrjs  MwajSetriSos,  and 
similarly  SS.  Perhaps  originally  3K1D  was  absent  and  's^q  was  intended  (see 
above).— 4,  5.  pv^  .  .  .  nyT  .  .  .  lyn']  (!K  /3o^  .  .  .  yvtaffercu  .  .  .  /3o^ ;  F 
ululabunt  .  .  .  ululabit  .  .  ,  clamabit\  ^  .  .  .  |  Vo/  .  .  ,  .n  vnt  1 
V^\  I  1 ;  E  pno'  .  .  .  rmsfO  .  .  .  p^S'o.  If  irr  was  originally  written 
defectively,  both  lyT  and  nyn'  would  be  most  obviously  derived  from  jn\  The 
meaning  is  in  any  case  uncertain.  There  is  no  evidence  (for  Mic  4^  is  corrupt) 
that  ynn,  regularly  used  of  the  shout  of  triumph,  was  also  used  of  the  shout  of 
distress,  which  would  alone  be  in  place  here  (U).  Nor  is  there  any  other 
occurrence  of  yr,  to  quiver,  though  this  meaning  may  be  inferred  as  the  starting- 
point  of  the  meanings  timidity  in  certain  Arabic  derivatives,  and  curtain  in 
nyn'  (an  object  that  easily  shakes). — "i^]  dat.  of  reference;  cp.,  particularly 
with  1^,  2  K  427,  Jer  4".— 5-  3K1D^  'a^]  ffi  i>  KapUa.  rijs  M.  It  would  not 
be  wise  to  change  'aS  (|^5)  into  uS  to  agree  with  w«a  in  v.*** ;  for  probably 
the  text  of  v.**'*  *  has  suffered  :  see  above. 

Sb-pa.  Second  Strophe  of  the  Elegy. — ^V.^^  is  preceded 
in  J^  by  five  words  which  do  not  constitute  a  sentence,  appear 
to  have  no  relation  either  to  what  precedes  or  to  what  follows 
them,  are  scarcely  intelligible,  and  are  probably  corrupt.  The 
first  word  nnna,  absent  from  Jer  48^*  and  rendered  tn  her  by  (Sr, 
has  been  variously  rendered  and  interpreted :  (i)  U  vedes  eius, 
her  {i.e.  Moab's)  bars^  which  is  supposed  to  be  a  metaphor  for 
either  the  defences  or  the  nobles  of  Moab ;  (2)  her  fleeing 
(pnes\  fugitives  (MT,  RVmarg.).  Together  with  the  next  two 
words,  this  is  supposed  to  mean  her  defences  (extend),  or  her 
nobles ^  or  fugitives  (flee),  as  far  as  ^o^ar. — So^ar^  (&  ^rpftap^  and 
in  Jer  48^^  Soyop.  So*ar  is  generally  supposed  to  have  lain  at 
the  South  end  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and,  in  particular,  in  the  verdant 
Ghor  es-Safiye ;  a  place  called  by  Eusebius  Zoopa  and  Stywp,  by 
Jer.  Zoara  or  Segor  {Onom.  258*^  159^*),  and  by  mediaeval  Arabs 
Zughar,  ^ughar,  Sukar.  Some  have  sought  for  §o*ar  to  the  N. 
of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  identified  it  with  Tell  Shaghfir;  but 
ShaghOr  and  So'ar  are  not  philological  equivalents.  See,  further. 
Dr.  in  Z>^,  art.  Zoar-,  and  also  Musil,  Ar.  Fetraea/i,  74. —  Unto 
Soar  ^Eglath  ShelishiyyaK\  ct.  from  Soar  unto  Horonaim  *Eglath 
Shelishiyyah,  Jer  48^4.  That  *Eglath  Shelishiyyah  really  defined 
both  So'ar  and  the  apparently  distant  Horonaim  is  very  improb- 
able ;  but  whether  Is  or  Jer  is  here  nearer  to  the  original  is 
uncertain.  See,  further,  phil.  n.  'Eglath  Shelishiyyah  appears  to 
mean  the  third  *Eglath  and  to  be  the  name  of  a  place,  which 


XV.  4,  5  283 

was  perhaps  *  identical  with  T€XiOiov  mentioned  by  Josephus 
{Anf.  XIII.  XV.  4)  immediately  after  'OpCjvw:  =  J^oro/iaimf  in  a  list 
of  Alexander  Jannaeus'  conquests  in  Moab.  On  the  very 
questionable  supposition  that  these  words  can  mean  a  heifer 
of  three  years  old^\  *Eglath  Shelishiyyah  has  been  taken  as  an 
epithet  expressing  either  the  beauty  and  strength  of  hitherto 
unsubdued  cities,  or  as  comparing  the  cry  of  Moab  (ffi)  to  that 
of  a  heifer  on  the  point  of  being  broken  in,  or  as  alluding  to  the 
celebrated  cattle-rearing  in  the  Ghor  es-§ifiye  (Musil,  Ar. 
Petraea^  i.  74). — 5b.  C.  He  goeth  up  .  .  .  they  raise\  the  subject 
is  Moab;  the  change  from  the  sing.  (cp.  vv.^^-  *  16^)  to  the  pi.  is 
suspicious. — Lu1pitH\  Onom.  (276^2^-)  states  that  there  is  between 
Areopolis  and  So*ar  a  village  now  called  Aov«^a.  If  this 
identification  be  accepted,  Luhith  lay  in  Southern  Moab.| — The 
way  to  fforonaim\  Jer  48^  the  descent  to  Iforonaim  :  cp.  go  down 
to  ^oronaim  (Mesha's  Inscrip.  1.  32).  ^Joronaim  (Jer  483*  *•  w  j  j 
clearly  lay  on,  or  at  the  bottom  of,  some  descent  from  the 
Moabite  plateau ;  the  phrase  "  from  $o*ar  as  far  as  Horonaim  " 
(Jer  48^)  implies  that  it  was  remote  from  §oar.  It  is  not 
mentioned  in  lists  of  Israelite  towns,  whence  it  is  commonly 
inferred,§  by  a  precarious  argument  from  silence,  that  it  lay 
south  of  Arnon,  south  even  of  the  Wady  Kerak.||  All  the  other 
conquests  of  Mesha  lay  north  of  Arnon;  but  he  mentions 
Horonaim  by  itself  at  the  end  of  the  inscription :  it  may 
therefore  have  lain  further  south  than  the  rest.  From  the  order 
in  which  Josephus  {Ant.  xiii.  xv.  4)  mentions  the  Moabite  towns 
— ^eshbon,  Medeba,  Lemba,  Oronas,  Gelithon,  Zara,  the  valley 
of  the  Cilices — it  would  appear  that  IJoronaim  lay  south  of 
Medeba  and  Lemba  (?  =  Libb,  3  hours  S.  of  Medeba);  not 
necessarily  as  far  south  as  Arnon,  but  possibly  somewhere  on 
the  descent  from  Libb  to  ez-Zara,  which  is  on  a  "once  much 
frequented  natural  road  "  running  along  the  E.  of  the  Dead  Sea, 
and  also  on  an  important  way  striking  eastwards  up  to  the 
plateau:  Musil,  Arabia  Petraea,  i.  pp.  20 f.;  cp.  pp.  234 ff. — The 
waters  of  Nimrini]  the  name  Nimrim  may  be  traced  to-day  both 

*  We.,  Deutsche  Lit.  ZeiL,  1890,  31. 
t  ffiS^T  (F)  Ki.,  EVmarg.,  Del.  ;  but  see  phil.  n. 

X  See  S.  R.  Driver,  Exp.  Times,  xxi.  495-497  (in  a  paper  on  the  untrust- 
worthiness  of  current  maps  of  Palestine  with  regard  to  many  ancient  sites). 
§  See,  e.g.y  Buhl,  Geog.  273.  ||  Sec,  e.g.,  Musil  {Ar.  Peiraea,  i.  75). 


284  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

at  the  S.  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  to  the  north  of  it,  to  the  S 
in  Moyet  Numere,  and  the  Wady  en-Numere,*  and  to  the  N.  in 
Tell-Nimrin,  some  8  or  10  miles  N.  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  13  E. 
of  Jordan,  and  in  the  WMy  Nimrin.f  Beth-Nimrah  (Nu  $2^^  n.) 
is  identical  with  Tell-Nimrin ;  but  Eus.  and  Jer.  {Onom.  143^^ 
284^3)  connect  the  waters  of  Nimrim  with  Bennamerium,  "  North 
of  Zoar."  The  question  must  remain  open  unless  on  other 
grounds  it  can  be  shown  whether  the  writer  is  here  referring 
to  North  or  South  Moab. — Desolations]  the  vb.  DDK^  and  its 
derivatives  are  commonly  used  of  the  devastation  and  desolation 
of  countries,  cities,  etc. ;  its  application  to  water  is  unusual. 
"  The  waters  of  Nimrim  "  may  have  given  their  name  to  a  city 
situated  upon  them,  though  Me-jarkon  in  Jos  19*^,  on  account 
of  the  state  of  the  text,  is  a  precarious  parallel.  If  the  water  is 
only,  or  primarily,  thought  of  here,  cp.  2  K  3^5,  which  speaks  of 
the  stopping  up  of  the  springs  of  the  Moabites  by  their  Israelite 
adversaries. — 6b-d.  Absent  from  Jer. — For  the  grass  has  dried 
up]  this  cannot,  of  course,  give  the  reason  for  the  stopping  up  of 
the  waters  of  Nimrim.  The  lines  are  rather,  if  original,  further 
parallels  to  the  preceding  three  lines. — *JB.  =  ]Qr  48^^;  75-16*^  is 
absent  from  Jer.  The  text  of  the  v.  is  very  uncertain  (see  phil. 
n.),  and  consequently  the  interpretation.  Whether  the  v.  really 
related  the  flight  of  the  Moabites  with  all  their  substance  across 
their  southern  border  (Di.)  into  Edom  (Du.),  must  remain 
altogether  doubtful.  On  this  assumption,  the  Wady  of  the  Arabsy 
or  of  the  poplars  % — either  translation  is  possible — may  reasonably 
be  identified  with  the  Widy  el-Ahsa  which  flows  into  the  Southern 
end  of  the  Dead  Sea  from  the  S.E.,  forming  the  boundary 
between  Edom  and  Moab,  as  it  still  forms  that  between  the 
districts  of  el-Kerak  and  Petra  (Numbers^  p.  283).  Apart  from 
the  assumption,  the  Wady  cannot  be  identified;  for  on  this 
assumption  also  rests  the  much  favoured,  but  questionable, 
identification  of  the  Wady  here  mentioned  and  the  Wady  of  the 
Arabah  (Am  6^*). — He  had  acquired  .  .  .  their  .  .  .  they  carry] 
all  the  pronouns  refer  to  Moab ;  if  the  text  is  sound,  which  is 
very  doubtful,  cp.  for  the  transition  from  sing,  to  pi.  v.^. — 8a. 

*  Seetzen,  Reise^  ii.  354 ;  Tristram,  Moahy  56  f.  ;  Buhl,  Geog.  272. 
t  Buhl,  Geog.  264;  Abel  in  RB^  1910,  pp.  341  f. 

X  Cp.  for  the  latter  meaning  the  mod.  W^dy  §af§^f  (Tristram,  Moaby  35, 
58). 


XV.  6-9  285 

The  cry  of  distress  (cp.  v.*)  has  passed  through  the  length  and 
breadth  of  Moab,  and  has  reached,  in  particular,  'Eglaim  and 
Be'er-Elim.  Neither  place  has  yet  been  identified ;  the  parallel 
line  and  the  context  suggest  that  they  lay  at  opposite  extreme 
points  of  Moab :  if  so,  Be'er-Elim  is  scarcely  identical  with  Be'er 
in  Nu  21^^,  nor  *Eglaim  with  AiyoAXci^  8  R.  miles  S.  of 
Areopolis  (Onom.  228^1*^). — pa.  The  waters  of  Dimori]  also  not 
identified.  Dimon  may  be  an  error  for  Dibon,  or  possibly  a 
dialectic  variation,  like  Mecca  and  Becca,  adopted  to  gain  an 
assonance  with  dam^  blood;  Jerome,  indeed,  asserts  that  both 
names  Dimon  and  Dibon  were  in  use  in  his  day. 

5.  ^nn?]  MT  intends  this  to  be  plural ;  cp.  G-K.  <)ik.  Du.  punctuates 
nhnjzr'innn  (cp.  G-K.  91(f),  assuming  that  the  form  is  sing,  with  collective 
force.  Certainly  a  fern,  suffix  between  the  masculines  of  vv.**^  <*  and  ^  is 
strange,  nnn,  fleeing,  occurs  in  27^  Job  26^'  ;  proof  of  the  substantival  use 
( ^.fugitive)  rests  on  this  and  one  other  doubtful  instance — 43^*.  ^  renders 
OT-kjOj.^,  C  pni'D^.  There  is  probably  some  serious  corruption.  Was 
nn(')na  a  corruption  of  Danno,  and  nyjf  y)  D'jnno  a  variant  of  D'jnn  ly  nyxo,  Jer 
48S4p — Thvi\  rhvi  ">D3,  l^i.  :  see  G-K.  So/".  Forms  with  the  old  fem.  ending 
n  occur  in  Mesha's  Inscr.,  e.g.  1.  3,  nni  noan. — r\''vSv\  third,  not  three  years  old 
(Versions),  which  would  be  vxhtra  (cp.  Gn  15*). — \yST'\  possibly  an  error  for, 
or  modification  (G-K.  I^cc)  of,  njny,  Pilpel  of  niy.  But  the  text  is  uncertain  ; 
(K  =  »i;m,  5 =1(5^3;',  and  Jer  48*  has  ijror. — 6.  'D  'o]  Jer  48"  »D  dj  '3.— r3'  'a] 
\iz&  perhaps  not  read  by  (55. — 7*  DO'ipS^  '"'''y  nnn'  p  S\i\  again  very  doubtful, 
especially  the  last  word.  Jer  48'*  reads  nnn  rvo^  irw  p  hv  (in  another  con- 
nection). (&.  renders  here  /a^  koX  oCtws  /tAXei  ataQrflKU.  mn',  a  Bar.  XC7.,  is 
commonly  supposed  to  have  the  same  meaning  as  "in%  abundance',  nry,  to 
acquire,  cp.  Gn  12*:  for  the  cstr.  of  the  sentence,  see  G-K.  155-*. — ompai] 
(fEr  eird^u  ydp,  which  in  v.*  renders  nTK  0,  here  perhaps  implies  a  reading 
'mpsi.  Jer  48^  reads  n3K  (see  last  n.).  It  is  precarious  to  invent  the 
meaning  store  for  mpB  out  of  regard  to  this  most  questionable  passage  and 
Ps  109®  (ambiguous).  ^  renders  pnoinn,  their  boundary,  "B  visitatio — a 
common  meaning  of  mps,  but  unsuitable  here. — D^Htr]  subj.  the  Moabites ; 
D-  {(&  ain-fiv)  refers  to  DmpiJi  mn'  (cp.  Dr.  197  (i)).— 8.  n»«3i  nT\Vy>  D'Vjinj; 
nnV^*  D'^pk]  awkward  :  the  fem.  suffixes  must  refer  to  3K1d,  but  ct.  the  masc. 
suffixes  in  v.=»  i6«.  With  MT  D!^3^,  ct.  ffi  'AyaXKel/i,  F  ad  Gallim.  Before 
D''?K  nK3,  sc.  ny  (G-K.  119^^4);  Perles,  Marti  suggest  that  D'^k  •u<3  is  really 
one  word,  In  Arielaim  (cp.  29*  n.). 

pb-XVI.  5.  Further  distress  is  to  befall  Moab.— This 

exceedingly  difficult  and  obscure  section  seems  to  be  mainly,  or 
entirely,  a  prophetic  interpolation  in  the  elegy  on  Moab :  see 
above,  pp.  276  ff. — The  rhythm  is,  perhaps,  predominantly,  like 
the  elegy,   4:4;  but  the  text   is   too   corrupt,  or  at  least  too 


286  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

questionable,  to  make  it  worth  while  to  discuss  the  rhythm  in 
detail. 

»^  For  I  will  set  .  .  . 

For  the  escaped  of  Moab  a  lion, 
And  for  the  remnant  of  .  .  . 
16^.  ,  .  the  ruler  (?)  of  the  land, 

...  to  the  mountain  of  the  daughter  of  Sion. 
2  And  like  birds  in  flight,  like  nestlings  sent  forth, 

Shall  the  daughters   of  Moab   be  at   the  fords  of 

Arnon. 
'  "  Bring  counsel,  make  decision  ; 
Spread  thy  shade  like  the  night  at  very  noon. 
Conceal  the  outcasts,  disclose  not  the  fugitives. 

*  Let  the   outcasts    of    Moab    find    guest-right    in    thy 

midst, 
Be  to  them  a  concealment  from  the  spoiler." 
For    the     extortioner     has     come     to     an    end,    the 

'spoiler'  has  ceased. 
The  treader    down    *has    been*   consumed  out  of 

the  land ; 

*  And   a    throne    shall   be    established    through  loving- 

kindness, 
And  one  shall  sit  thereon  through  fidelity — 
In  the  tent  of  David  one  who  judges. 

And   both  seeks   out   what  is   right,   and    is    swift 

in  justice. 

9b.  C.  The  distress  described  in  vv.'-**  ("the  elegy"),  which 
has  already  befallen  Moab,  does  not  exhaust  Yahweh's  judg- 
ment: further  distress  is  in  store:  cp.  16^^'^.  Such  appears  to 
be  the  meaning  of  these  lines  and  the  general  purport  of  what 
follows  down  to  16^;  but  the  details  are  most  uncertain. — I  will 
sei\  or  put^  or  lay  (cp.  e.g.  Ex  21^2,  Nu  12^^).  This  is  followed 
in  5^  by  upon  Dimon  (v.^*  n.),  and  then  by  a  word  niSDIi  which 
should  mean  things  addedy  additions :  the  whole  is  supposed  to 
mean,  I  will  place  fresh  calamities  on  Moab  ;  but  neither  the  vb. 
nor  the  object  really  suggests  calamity.  Marti  has  suggested 
that  the  clause  is  a  misplaced  rubric  directing  that  15^^-16^ 
is   to  be  added  to  Dimon^  i.e.   that   the   passage  was   to   follow 


XV.  9-xvi.  5  287 

"Dimon"  in  15**.  (&  is  intelligible,  For  I  will  bring  upon 
Dimon  Arabs ;  but  it  may  be  merely  a  guess :  it  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  derive  Jl^  from  (&. — J*br  the  escaped]  4*  n.  Moab  has 
already  suffered  severely ;  vv.^'®*. — A  lion]  has  been  understood 
to  refer  to  some  pre-exilic  king  of  Judah,  or  the  regent  of 
Jeroboam  11.  (Di,),  or  Alexander  Jannaeus  (Du.),  or  the  Assyrian 
invader  (Che.),  or  lions  (cp.  2  K  ly^^,  Jer.).  In  so  corrupt  and 
obscure  a  passage  it  would  be  easier  to  multiply  guesses  than  to 
justify  them. — The  remnant  of]  the  soil  (MT) :  J^  might  also 
mean  Admah  {/&.  *A8a/xiJ),  one  of  the  fellow  cities  to  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah.  It  would  be  easy  to  read  Edom^  if  the  prophecy 
really  treats  of  Edom  as  well  as  Moab  (16^  n.). 

XVI.  I.  Text  and  interpretation  continue  most  uncertain. 
In  ffi  this  V.  continues  the  threatening  words  of  Yahweh  in 
j^9b.  c — I  will  send  the  likeness  of  creeping  things  upon  the  land, 
jj^  might  be  a  continuation  of  the  description  of  Moab  in  15^'®* — 
they  have  sent^  etc.,  or  an  address  to  some  people,  presumably 
Moabites,  send  ye  (so  MT). — The  obj.  of  the  vb.  in  J^  is  the  lamb 
of  the  ruler  of  the  land^  which  is  commonly  supposed  to  refer  to 
the  tribute  paid  in  kind  by  Moab  to  the  king  of  Israel  (cp,  2  K 
3*)>  or  Judah,  as  overlord  of  Moab.  The  words  that  follow  in 
^  might  mean  {i)from  Sela*  to  Midbar:  Sela*  is  then  identified 
by  many  with  the  great  Edomite,  or  Nabataean,  emporium, 
Petra,  which  was  famous  from  the  4th  cent.  b.c.,  or  with  some 
place  in  Edom  (?  cp.  Jg  i^)  less  remote  from  Moab ;  Midbar 
m2Ly  possibly  be  the  proper  name  of  a  place  in  Moab  (Nu  21^^)1 
or  {7)  from  the  rocks  of  the  Arnon  valley  (Wetzstein),  or  of  Moab 
generally  (Baud,  cited  by  Di.),  or  of  Edom  (Di.),  to  the  wilderness^ 
which  is  supposed  to  mean  in  the  direction  of  Judah,  because 
Moab  and  Judah  were  separated  (if  an  indirect  way  was  taken) 
by  wilderness :  this  would  be  much  as  though  we  were  to  speak 
in  England  of  "  sending  seawards  to  Italy."  It  must  suffice  to 
refer  to  one  or  two  of  the  interpretations  of  the  whole  v.  built 
up  on  these  uncertain  details,  on  which  see,  further,  phil.  notes. 
Di.  sees  in  the  v.  advice  tendered  by  the  Edomites,  or  by  leading 
Moabites,  to  the  Moabite  refugees  in  Edom ;  the  refugees  are 
advised  to  seek  the  protection  of  the  king  of  Sion,  backing  up 
their  request  by  a  present  of  lambs  which  they  are  to  send,  not 
by  the  nearer  route  north  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  across  Jordan, 
which  must  be  supposed  closed  to  them,  but  first  south  over  the 


288  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

rocky  land  of  Edom  and  then  N.  through  the  wilderness.  Da 
explains  similarly,  except  that  he  treats  )nb^  as  pf.  and  descriptive 
rather  than  imperative  and  hortatory.  Marti,  in  part  following 
(&J  renders  ^ke  Edomites  will  send  (the  refugees)  like  a  swarm 
of  insects  on  the  land  to  Sion.  The  assumption  that  Moabite 
refugees  have  fled  to  Edom  is  not  supported  by  any  clear 
indication  of  such  a  flight  in  ch.  15  ;  and  the  following  v.,  if 
in  its  right  position,  is  distinctly  unfavourable  to  it:  for  there 
the  Moabites  appear  at  the  Arnon,  far  away  from  Edom. — 
2.  The  V.  introduced  by  nTil  is  predictive  like  15^^* ",  like  16^ 
also,  if  ffi's  text  for  the  first  word  (see  above)  is  correct.  But 
if  J^  in  v.^  is  correct,  the  predictive  clauses  159^.0  552  ^jg 
awkwardly  separated:  Du.  therefore  places  162  immediately 
after  15^. — In  flight']  from  the  nest:  cp.  Pr  27^. — Nestlings']  p, 
a  nest,  has  here  the  transferred  meaning  brood  that  inhabited 
the  nest. — Daughters  of  Moab]  in  Nu  25I  means  the  women  of 
Moab ;  but  a  limited  reference  to  women  seems  out  of  place 
here.  (&  reads  daughter,  i.e.  population  (lo^^,  cp.  e.g.  La  i^^), 
of  Moab.  Possibly  daughters  was  a  rare  variant  of  daughter  in 
such  phrases  (cp.  ?  Ezk  i627):  or  perhaps  daughters  of  Moab 
means  the  inhabitants  of  the  several  towns  of  Moab :  cp.  ?  Ps 
^812(11). — The  fords]  ox  passages,  cp.  lo^^  n.  Du.  gives  mnyo 
here  the  unproven  meaning  of  banks,  and  treats  the  whole 
phrase,  the  banks  of  Arnon,  as  in  apposition  to  daughters  of 
Moab.  Arnon  cutting  through  its  lofty  canon  formed  at  times 
the  northern  boundary  of  Moab,  but  at  others,  as  here  (15^*  *  n.), 
it  roughly  bisected  the  territory  occupied  and  governed  by 
Moab;  cp.  Numbers,  p.  284. — ^3f.  The  fugitive  Moabites,  thrust 
forth  from  their  country  like  birds  from  their  nest  (v.^),  now 
arrived  in  Jerusalem  (v.^),  supplicate  for  shelter  and  protection 
against  the  devastator  of  their  land. — Bring  counsel,  make 
decision]  these  peculiar  phrases  may  be  due  to  corruption  of 
the  text,  see  phil.  n.  A  request  for  counsel  is  a  curious  open- 
ing for  refugees,  who  want  rather  what  they  go  on  to  ask  for, 
protection.  It  is  disputed  whether  the  second  clause  means 
(i)  settle  (quickly)  whether  we  may  remain  in  your  country,  or 
(2)  decide  the  rights  and  the  wrongs  of  the  case  between  us 
and  our  enemies  ;  perhaps  the  original  text  expressed  something 
entirely  different  and  more  appropriate. — 3b.  Be  to  us  a  protection 
against  the  hot  anger  of  our  foes,  like  deep  shade  at  high  noon- 


XVI.  2-5  289 

day. — 3C.  Hide  us  also  from  them,  do  not  discover  us  to  them. 
— 4.  Let  us,  driven  out  from  Moab,  enjoy  guest-rights  in  thy  land, 
and,  among  them,  the  right  not  to  be  discovered  (cp.  Jg  4**^)  to 
those  who  have  already  devastated  our  country  and  would  destroy 
us. — The  outcasts  of  Moab\  so  (5S.  MT,  U  (by  an  obviously 
wrong  punctuation)  distort  the  sense  of  J^;  hence  RV  my 
outcasts:  as  for  Moab^  etc. :  possible  also,  but  improbable,  would 
be  the  rendering  my  outcasts^  O  Moab ;  see  phil.  n. — Find  guest- 
right  amongst  thee\  be  girim  (i  i^  n.)  in  thy  midst ;  the  prep,  is  3, 
/«,  not  DV,  with^  as  in  11^. — For  the  personifying  sing.  obj.  thee^ 
cp.  Jos  9^,  a  similar  sentence. — 4c.  d,  5.  The  various  attempts, 
some  of  which  are  mentioned  below,  to  explain  this  passage,  as 
it  stands  or  is  arbitrarily  emended,  in  its  present  connection 
have  been  so  unsatisfactory  as  to  lend  considerable  probability 
to  the  suggestion  that  it  is  an  interpolated  Messianic  passage 
which  has  re-acted  on  the  interpretation  of  v.***  ^  turning  what 
was  an  address  to  §ion  (v.^)  into  an  address  to  Moab.  Stand- 
ing by  itself,  the  passage  would  suggest  familiar  features  of  the 
Messianic  age :  the  land  of  Israel  no  more  troubled  by  enemies 
and  war,  2920,  ch.  33,  Ps  8920-24  (i»-23)^  the  throne  of  David  re- 
established through  Yahweh's  loving-kindness  and  fidelity  (cp. 
Ps  8925-  29f.  37f.j^  and  occupied  by  a  just  and  righteous  ruler  (9^'  ^ 
1 1*^  etc.).  The  term  ^i>D,  king^  is  not  actually  applied  to  this 
ruler,  but  the  reference  to  the  throne  and  the  tent  of  David  point 
as  unmistakably  to  a  king  as  does  the  description  in  9^**,  from 
which  the  term  ^pD  is  also  absent.  It  is  quite  unnecessary,  and 
indeed  incorrect,  to  see  here  the  description  of  some  vassal  or 
viceroy  of  the  king  of  Israel  stationed  in  Edom  (Kn.)  or  Moab 
(Di.). — Through  loving-kindness  .  .  .  through  fidelity^  this  trans- 
lation, which  refers  the  qualities  named  to  God,  is  favoured  by 
the  analogy  of  Ps  89  cited  above:  cp.  also  Is  55*.  Others  refer 
the  loving-kindness  to  the  king  (Ges.,  Di.)  who  secures  his  throne 
by  his  humanity  (cp.  ii***,  Pr  16^*  20*^  29"),  or  to  his  subjects 
(Kn.).  The  fidelity  is  also  referred  to  the  king  by  some  (Gesr), 
while  others  again  render  differently  in  security  (cp.  39®,  Jer  14^^), 
i.e,  uninterruptedly  (Di.,  Marti).  Of  attempts  to  interpret  the 
passage  as  an  integral  and  original  part  of  the  prophecy,  two  may 
be  mentioned :  (i)  Ges.  renders  the  pff.  as  prophetic  pff.,  For  the 
oppression  will  cease^  etc.,  and  comments,  "  so  that  we  (Moabites) 
shall  be  able  to  return  again  to  our  country,  and  no  longer  need 
VOL.  I. — 19 


290  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

to  be  a  burden  to  you  (Jews),"  when  the  country  of  Moab  is 
free  from  the  foe :  in  v.^  the  suppHants  urge  as  a  motive  for 
favour  the  blessing  which  such  humanity  would  bring  on  the 
House  of  David ;  (2)  Di.,  adopting  Lagarde's  conjecture  and 
reading  ^3  IV  instead  of  ^3,  translates  and  interprets  ?/nU7  the 
extortioner  shall  have  ceased  .  .  .  out  of  the  land  of  Moab,  and  a 
throne  shall  be  set  up  for  a  vassal  or  viceroy  ruling  in  Moab 
under  the  protecting  shelter  of  his  over-lord  in  Sion  ;  i.e.  the 
passage,  together  with  v.**-  ^,  is  an  insincere  promise  of  the 
Moabites,  in  return  for  shelter  in  their  hour  of  need,  to  be  humble 
subjects  of  the  Jews  hereafter ;  the  Jews,  detecting  this  insincerity, 
refuse  the  request  of  the  Moabites  (v.^). 

9b.  C.  nO'Sfl^  ni«3Di3]  <&  "A/sajSas  koX  d/)w  rh  criripfia :  Kal  d/)w=*nBONi. — 
XVI.  1.  p«  ^riD  nD]  aSc  (hs  ipverd,  iirl  tt}v  7^1/ =  pH'?  conD.  The  sing,  of  13, 
lamb,  occurs  nowhere  else ;  it  is  improbable  that  it  is  a  collective.  Gratz 
proposed  nDtfK. — mmo  yVoD]  IB  petra  deserii'.  this  is  improbable,  for  note  the 
n  locale ;  but  |^  may  well  be  a  corruption  of  some  single  phrase  of  place,  D 
denoting  the  starting-point  and  ^k  in  p's  nn  ^k  the  goal. — 2.  With  the  certainly 
more  or  less  corrupt  text  of  w.^**,  cp.  the  more  or  less  corrupt  text  of  Jer  48^. 
— \y\vh  nnayo]  (&  eVl  rASCi  'Apvdv,  which  points  to  nothing  satisfactory.  ^  is 
a  little  suspicious,  for  (l)  there  is  no  obvious  reason  for  the  periphrasis  of  the 
gen.  (G-K.  129^)  here  i&'B,  Rashi),  and,  indeed,  tS)  (cp.  Ki.)  does  not  treat 
the  S  as  such,  but  takes  mayo  as  Hoph.  part,  and  renders  brought  across  to 
Arnon  ;  (2)  ace.  of  place,  at  the  fords  (G-K.  1 18^),  is,  as  Dr.  has  pointed  out 
(on  I  S  2^),  all  but  confined  to  cases  in  which  the  ace.  is  followed  by  a 
noun  in  the  genitive ;  the  only  case,  except  the  present,  cited  by  Dr.  is  2  Ch 
33^",  but  ct.  ffir  there.  The  S  would  be  best  accounted  for  (cp.  i8\  Dt  30^*) 
if  we  read  S  ^?^!0,  or,  assuming  that  ttq.'^  was  a  synonym  of  nay,  \  fil?];^'?, 
beyond  Arnon. — 3.  Tvi^  iN'an]  apparently  a  synonym  for  nxy  lan  (Jg  20', 
2  S  16^*'),  give  counsel  (to  others) ;  but  the  analogy  of  the  use  of  K'an  in  Ps 
90^^  would  rather  suggest  the  meaning,  unsuitable  here,  take  counsel. — n^'Sfi] 
(Stt.  Xe7.,  apparently  meaning  the  office  or  duty  of  a  V'^£3,  judge  or  umpire.  It 
is  not  clear  that  ®r  had  the  same  text ;  the  words  which  seem  to  correspond 
to  rh'hti  icy  n)i\j  iN'an  are  vKdova.  (in  v.')  ^ovXevov  Troieire  {(rK^irrjp).  For 
ityy  .  .  .  win,  K^tib  (ST),  the  K^re  i&'B)  has  'cy  .  .  .  'K'sn— 2nd  fem.  sing. 
as  in  the  following  clauses.  ®r  does  not  support  the  reading  iK'an. — h'ho] 
could  be  punctuated  '?'^|,  entire,  complete :  cp.  ffi  5i4  "navrb^.  But  the  anti- 
thesis onnjf  gives  probability  to  MT  V:^3  ;  on  h^h.  instead  of  n'?''?,  cp.  21"  n. — 
4.  axiD  'ma]  rhythmically  both  words  go  with  13  r\\i\  constituting  together 
the  first  line  of  a  4:4  (  =  2|2:2|2)  parallel  distich  ;  the  balance  is 
entirely  destroyed,  if  3nid  be  taken  with  'ui  'in  (MT,  RV).— 'in]  in  OT 
nin  =  n'n  is  mostly  late:  see  Gn  272*,  Neh  6',  Ec  2^  ii3(?)t,  and  cp.  Kin, 
Job  37'.  But  dR  read  I'n',  and  03^  below  instead  of  id"?.— fon]  the  following 
nouns  being  anarthrous,  this  was  probably  so  too  ;  consequently  it  is  little  worth 
while  to  labour  the  point  that  J'D,  a  squeezer  (cp.  f'D,  squeezing  or  wringing^ 


XVI.   I-I2  291 

Pr  so"),  might  mean  an  extortioner.  Du.  suggests  j'fcij  (i"  n.).  An  easy 
emendation,  if  psn  really  possessed  the  nuance  suitable  here,     ffi  ^  avfifiaxio. ; 

SS  |>NK.i_»a)  ;  3J  pulvis ;  JZT  Kp'yD. — nr]  probably  an  error,  through  haplo- 
graphy,  for  me' :  Lowth,  al.  ;  cp.  C5. — ddt  ion]  pi.  before  a  sing.  part,  used 
collectively :  G-K.  1450^.  But  in  view  of  the  singulars  nSa,  oek,  the  pi.  iDn 
is  suspicious ;  for  the  same  reason  to  read  Dpijh  for  con  is  unwise  ;  the  change 
in  the  similar  sentence  29™  is  not  parallel,  for  it  is  occasioned  by  the 
introduction  of  So. — 5.  thdi  .  .  .  rnn]  fori  .  .  .  \  =  both  .  .  .  and^  BDB 
253a.     For  BcrD  m,  cp.  i^^ 

6-iz  Conclusion  of  the  second  strophe  of  the 
elegy,  and  the  third  and  concluding  strophe. — V.«  (  =  Jer 

48^*) probably  formed  no  part  of  the  elegy;  note  the  ist  pi.  and 
ct.  the  first  sing,  used  throughout  the  elegy.  It  is  very  question- 
able, too,  whether  v.^  formed  an  original  part  of  the  interpolated 
prediction  (9^^^-i6^):  unlike  the  interpolation,  it  re-appears  in 
Jer.  It  is  customary,  indeed,  to  see  in  v.^  §ion's  reply  to  the 
Moabite  suppliants  (see  on  v.^),  and  refusal  to  grant  them 
protection.  This  is  very  doubtful :  (i)  the  words  contain  no 
actual  refusal ;  (2)  the  reply  is  given  in  the  ist  pi.,  whereas 
the  community  is  addressed  in  the  2nd  sing,  in  vv.^^*  *.  The  v. 
is  best  regarded  as  an  isolated  reflection  on  the  pride  of  Moab. 

7.  Moab's  emotion  at  her  fate;  but  the  original  text,  like 
Jer  48^^,  perhaps  expressed  the  poet's  emotion  at  Moab's  fate ; 
see  phil.  n.,  and  cp.  v.^^  below,  also  v.®  and  15*^'*  n. — The 
raisin-cakes  of  Kir-haresetK\  Jer.  the  men  of  ^ir-heres ;  cp.  Cr  rot? 
Ka.roiKov(Tw  tiered.  Raisin-cakes^  i.e.  cakes  of  dried  grapes,  were 
an  article  of  food ;  see  Hos  3^,  2  S  6^*,  Cant  2*.  Foundations 
(,S,  Ki.,  Ges.,  AV)  is  an  improbable  alternative  translation  of 
''K^''K'N.  If  Kir-heres  is  Kerak  (15^  n.),  and  its  raisin-cakes  rather 
than  its  inhabitants  were  here  mentioned,  it  is  to  the  point  to 
observe  that  there  is  much  vine  culture,  "  for  eating  only,"  round 
Kerak  in  modern  times  (Seetzen,  Reisen^  i.  415),  and  interesting 
to  recall  that,  as  Marti  points  out,  cakes  of  pressed  grapes  and 
fine  meal  are  still  prepared  in  Cyprus  for  festivals — an  inheritance 
of  the  Christian  Church  from  old  Phoenician  custom.  The 
allusion,  like  that  in  v.*,  points  to  autumn  as  the  season  when 
disaster  fell  on  Moab. — /  moan\  J^  ye  moan ;  Jer  48^1  he  moans ; 
by  some  emended  to  they  moan.  J^  adds  utterly  stricken^  which 
being  pi.  implies,  if  correct,  a  plural  subject  to  the  vb. ;  for  it 
more  naturally  forms  an  attribute  to  the  subj.  of  the  sentence 


292  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

than  to  raisin-cakes. — 8-10.  For  the  famous  vines  of  Northern 
Moab  the  poet  now  weeps,  v.^.  They  have  ripened  not  for 
the  Moabites  to  gather  with  the  customary  joy  of  the  vintage, 
but  for  the  enemy  to  destroy.  Of  these  verses  ^-  ^  and  *^  are 
absent  from  Jer  48 ;  while  ^°'  ^  is  found  there  (v.^^)  ^jt^  consider- 
able variations. — Tracts']  cp.  Dt  32^3 :  other  occurrences  of  niDlK^, 
the  etymology  and  exact  meaning  of  which  are  unknown,  are  in 
Hab  3^^^,  Jer  31^*^  (K®re),  and  in  two  passages  where  the  text  is 
doubtful,  37^7,  2  K  23*!. — SibmaK\  "between  ^eshbon  and 
Sibmah  there  are  scarce  five  hundred  paces  "  (Jer.).  A  site  2  J 
miles  W.N.W.  of  Hesban  bearing  the  name  Sumia  may  give  an 
echo  of  the  ancient  Sibmah.  From  Nu  2^2^-  3^,  Jos  i3^^t  we 
should  infer  that  the  place  lay  in  Northern  Moab  though  not 
necessarily  so  close  to  Heshbon  as  Jerome's  Subama,  or  the 
modern  S^mia. — 8b.  So  famous  was  this  vine  that  kings — lords 
of  the  nations — drank  and  became  smitten  down  (28^),  i.e.  drunk, 
with  the  wine  of  it.  Less  probable  is  the  view  that  the  line  gives 
the  cause  of  the  destruction  of  the  vine;  for  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  vb.  would  be  suitable,  the  reason  for  specifying  the 
lords  is  not  obvious,  and  the  cause  of  destruction  would  scarcely 
correspond  to  the  suggestion  of  line  a.  that  the  vine  dies  for  lack 
of  water. — Red-clusters\  n^pliK^ :  cp.  pnK',  5^  n.  Other  suggested 
readings  here  are  vine-tendrils^  or  choice  plants. — 8c.  d.  These 
lines,  translated  above  in  the  better  order  d.  C  (cp.  Jer  48^),  give 
a  hyperbolical  description  of  the  size  and  ramifications  of  the 
celebrated  vine ;  the  site  of  Ya'zer  (Nu  21^*  n.)  is  uncertain,* 
but  according  to  Eus.  it  lay  15  (Roman)  miles  N.  of  IJeshbon 
(jOnom.  264^^^*).  Westwards  the  vine  stretched  out^  i.e.  extended 
tOy  or  perhaps  rather  across,  the  Dead  Sea,  the  N.E.  comer  of 
which  lies  about  16  miles  in  a  straight  line  from  yeshbon  and 
some  4000  feet  below  it.  Eastwards  the  vine  extends  till  the 
cultivated  land  passes  into  the  vast  Syrian  desert — 9.  /  weep 
with  the  weeping  of  Ya*zer'\  the  poet  joins  his  tears  (cp.  22*  n., 
La  i^®)  to  those  of  Ya'zer ;  but  why  he  singles  out  Ya'zer  is  not 
clear,  unless,  indeed,  we  could  believe  that  he  was  himself  a  man 
of  Ya'zer  (cp.  Du.),  and  therefore  a  Moabite. — Heshbon  and 
[Ele'alek]  i5*n. — Thy  grapes  .  .  .  thy  grape-gathering\Khek  .  .  . 
^e^trek ;  for  the  sake  of  the  alliteration  the  writer  appears  to  use 
the  wide  term  j^is,  summer  fruits  (28*),  instead  of  'andbim^  grapes^ 
*  See  S.  R.  Driver,  Exp.  Ti?nes,  xxi.  562  f. 


XVI.  8-12  293 

and  l^^irek^  cuttings  harvest^  instead  of  Ifftrek^  vintage :  Jer  48^^ 
preserves,  or  substitutes,  If^trek, — Shouting  hath  fallen]  'W7\  is 
the  joyous  shouting  of  the  grape  treaders,  Jer  25^.  Not  you, 
but  the  enemy  will  shout  with  joy  over  your  grapes,  and  over 
yourselves  who  will  become  their  vintage;  all  this  may  be 
suggested  by  the  context  and  the  predicate.  But  the  reading  of 
Jer,  the  spoiler  (^*^l^'),  may  be  correct,  ffi  differs  from  both,  but 
is  wrong. — 10.  No  joy  of  the  vintage,  no  wine  for  use:  the 
general  sense  is  clear :  the  text  is  in  considerable  disorder,  see 
phil.  n. — None  is  left]  lit.  //  has  been  caused  to  cease  (cp.  ffir) ;  J^, 
I  have  caused  {ii)  to  cease,  the  subj.  being  Yahweh;  cp.  15®,  but 
between  vv.®  and  ^^,  where  the  first  persons  cannot  refer  to 
Yahweh,  the  reading  of  J^  is  most  improbable.  Even  the  passive 
is  doubtful ;  n3B',  it  has  ceased,  may  be  the  true  text. — II.  =  Jer 
48^^  the  poet's  emotion  ;  here  as  in  v.®  the  first  person  is  certain  ; 
ct.  1 5*^'  6  16^.  The  second  line  has  perhaps  lost  a  clause  of  two 
words,  supplied  in  the  translation,  comparing  the  inward  emotion 
to  the  resounding  of  flutes ;  cp.  Jer. — My  bowels  are  sounding] 
i.e.  my  compassion  is  stirred:  cp.  63^*,  Jer  31^;  for  other 
instances  of  bowels  as  a  term  for  the  seat  of  deep  emotions,  see 
Jer  4^*,  Ca  5*;  and  of  the  vb.  HDH,  to  sound,  murmur,  of  the 
organs  of  emotion,  intelligence,  and  the  like,  see  Jer  4^®  (ni)),  Ps 
42*  (B'S^). — 12.  No  attendance  in  the  sanctuary,  no  prayer  will 
avail  Moab.  The  v.  is  absent  from  Jer,  and  introduces  a 
religious  turn  not  found  in  the  verses  common  to  Is  and  Jer ; 
not  improbably  it  was  added  to  the  elegy  over  Moab  by  the 
same  hand  that  added  15^^-16';  note  the  common  use  of  n^ni 
here  and  in  16^.  In  its  present  form  the  v.  is  unrhythmical.  It 
may  be  rendered.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  Moab  shall  have 
appeared,  when  he  shall  have  wearied  himself  on  the  high  place  and 
shall  (or,  then  he  shall)  enter  into  his  sanctuary  to  pray,  he  shall 
not  prevail 'y  but  either  -when  he  shall  have  appeared  or  when  he 
shall  have  wearied  himself,  should  probably  be  omitted  as  due 
to  dittography;  in  the  former  case  the  inconsistency  with  15^, 
where  Moab  is  depicted  as  being  actually  and  already  on  the 
high  places,  which  might  doubtless  be  attributed  to  the  careless- 
ness of  the  interpolater,  disappears.  For  the  wearisome  practices 
of  the  heathen,  cp.  47^',  i  K  1826^-. 

6.  nxD  Kj]  looks  suspiciously  like  a  dittograph  of  3K0  |N3.     In  Jer.  the  Air. 
X€7.  KJ  is  replaced  by  hkj. — vnajn  uikjt  imnj]  one  of  the  first  two  words  is  not 


294  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


m 


represented  in  (ffir :  the  last  was  misread  'my3.  Jer  482^  reads  iniKJi  wikji  insj, 
but  v.**"  contains  "imay  (immediately  before  ma  p  nVi). — p  n*?]  treated  by  many 
as  a  compound  noun,  the  untruth  {of  his  pratings) ;  but  it  is  questionable 
whether  such  combinations  as  din  nS  in  31^  (G-K.  152a  footnote)  were  ever 
so  completely  treated  as  a  single  word  that  they  could  be  used  in  the  con- 
struct, p  vh  is  predicative ;  cp.  (5.-7.  '?*'?"  n'?3  nNiD"?  dnid  V'^"  pS]  the  re- 
peated S'^"  (so  ^)  is  probably  an  error  (cp.  Iii^n.,  26' n.) :  Jer  48"  reads  p  Sy 
pyiN  n'?3  3nid'?i  V''?'k  3N1D  ^y  ;  note  also  that  in  Jer  "j'^'k  governs  by  means  of 
•^y,  and  pym  by  means  of  ^,  as  in  Is  15^-  ^  respectively.  On  the  question  of 
1st  pers.  or  3rd  (in  Jer  (&.  2nd  pi.  imper.),  see  above.  In  spite  of  DnsD 
DnxD2  (19*),  3N1dV  aNiD  V'S"  remains  awkward,  whether  we  interpret  Moab 
howls  for  {over)  Moab  (Ges.,  Di.),  or  Moab  howls  to  Moaby  i.e.  they  howl 
to  one  another  (Marti).  Nor  is  it  altogether  satisfactory  to  place  the  caesura 
before  nxiD"?:  for  entire  Moab  he  howls.— ■'w^'\  Jer  ^rJK  •?«  =  ©  here. — 
ntynn  Tp]  So  2  K  3^5  |§  ;  but  v.",  Jer  4831-  ^  tynn  n^p.— ijnn]  Jer  4821  nj^' ; 
®r  here  /tteXer7j(rets  =  njnn  :  read  njn«  ;  others  conjecture  un  (n  dittographic 
from  riB'nn)  or  u.t. — D'ks:  HN]  not  in  Jer.  dR  xal  o^/c  ivrpaTri^a-ri.  If  the  text  is 
correct,  for  D'K33,  implying  N33  =  nD3,  cp.  ntoj  nn,  Pr  15^2  1722,  and  the  Niph.  of 
the  vb.  Job  30't;  1»<,  utterly,  as  in  19"  ;  see  BDB,  i.z/.— 8-10.  Most  of  the 
ten  or  eleven  lines  in  these  verses  are  certainly  of  four  accents  ;  but  vv.^a*  »*• 
at  present  are  of  six.  Possibly  jne'n  vrxTW  and  nSySxi  jnt^n  are  glosses  :  note 
that  the  2nd  sing.  fem.  suffixes  in  v.*  refer  naturally  to  the  sing,  rvoiv  }BJ  and 
not  to  the  pi.  nSySni  jUtrn. — 8.  ^"^dk]  the  sing,  after  the  fem.  pi.  moiB'  would 
be  abnormal  in  spite  of  Hab  3"  and  G-K.  145^  ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  'n  monr 
be  omitted  (see  last  n.),  the  sing.  masc.  before  the  fem.  pa  would  be  normal 
(G-K.  145^7) :  cp.  2"  9^8  14"  etc. :  yet  ct.  p3  nSSox,  24'.— .Tpntr]  (J5  ri<f 
dfiTT^Xovs  airrjs  ;  rather  red-clusters  (cp.  pT^  of  the  colour  of  horses  in  Zee  I*), 
whence  the  pntt'  (5^)  vine  receives  its  name. — 9.  "P'''»*]  an  error  for  TnK  with 
retention  of  the  final  radical '  (G-K.  IS^d)  ;  on  the  form,  see  Sta.  634^ : 
Kon.  i.  589  f. ;  in  ®r  the  penultimate  letter  must  have  been  \ — 'd]  Jer  48*2 
cm. — HTn]  Jer  mis' :  ffi  here  koX  Trdura. — 10.  ^okji]  sing,  before  a  com- 
pound subj.  ;  G-K.  I45(?;  Jer  hsdnji  ;  G-K.  146/,  ^.— SD^3^  p]  Jer  Vd-idd, 
which  carries  us  back  half-way  to  l(')Dn3D,  the  reading  of  Is  ffli»<AQr  {iK  rdv 
d/iireXibvcav  ffov),  and  probably  the  original  text.  The  clause  is  followed  in 
Jer  by  3kid  pxDi,  which  is  a  fairly  obvious  gloss  explaining  that  the  whole 
country  and  not  only  the  garden  land  will  grieve.  In  ^  there  follows  D'Dnaai 
pT  «h,  which  looks  at  first  more  likely  to  be  original,  but  the  first  word  is 
probably  merely  a  corrupt  variant  of  TDHDD,  and  ]iV  n*?  is  an  explanation  of 
the  following  yyT  nh  after  that  corrupt  reading  had  arisen.  We  thus  explain 
the  absence  of  3N1D  pNDi  from  Is  and  of  jn'  nh  D'DnD3i  from  Jer. — yi/h;  .  .  .  |}-i;] 
cp.  Zeph  3" ;  but  the  forms  are  probably  no  original  part  of  the  text :  see 
preceding  and  following  notes.     As  they  stand  they  are  impersonal  passives  : 

G-K.  144/t.     (K  may  have  read  iJ3n\— 'nntrn  irn  innn  ^^T  h^  D'3p'3  p'  yyT  K*?] 

Jer  48^  m'n  t<h  m'n  m\n  nm'  h^  'nac'n  D'ap'O  |"i ;  Is  (K  Kal  oi  fi^  iraTi^a-ovffiv 
oXvov  els  rd.  iiroX-fivia,  ^iTravTaiydp  =  n2e;n  D'2p'2  }"  13m'  t<h,  which  is  probably 
the  original  text  or  quite  close  to  it :  note  that  it  is  a  line  of  four  accents 
equally  divided  by  the  caesura.     The  overlined  words  in  f^  are  amplifications. 


XVI.  6-14,  XVII.   i-ii  295 

partly  due  to  glosses  and  partly  due  to  dittography.  In  Is  J^,  moreover,  ViH' 
is  a  corruption  of  (i)3it,  for  ffi's  Tan^ovctv  corresponds  to  this  and  not  to 
T»T  below  (note  the  order  in  ffi).  Perhaps  Qop'D  (Jer  J^)  is  preferable  to 
Isf^dS  Q'3p'3 ;  with  D  nam,  cp.  the  use  of  the  Niph.  in  17*  and  of  the  Hiph. 
in  Lv  26«,  Jer  36»— ynn  T"'  kS]  cstr.  as  28*-^:  cp.  G-K.  144/r.— 12.  Ew. 
treated  the  whole  v.  as  a  protasis,  and  supplied  from  Jer  48^'  as  an  apodosis 
ino3D  roDD  3K1D  r3i :  so  Che.  SBOT;  but  this  is  improbable,  since  v."  is 
absent  from  Jer.— noan]  ^  pi. ;  cp.  nioan,  15'  ^  (not  ffi).— Sav  kVi]  Ae  shall 
mut  with  no  success :  for  the  absolute  use  of  the  vb.,  cp.  Ps  21'',  Jer  5"  20". 

13,  14.  A  Prose  Appendix  (cp.  2ii«f)  to  the  foregoing 
Oracle  of  Moab,  probably  by  a  later  hand  (see  above).  In 
three  brief  years  all  will  be  fulfilled  :  Moab,  as  yet  still  honoured 
and  numerous,  will  become  despised  and  almost  exterminated. — 
13.  The  word  which  Yahweh  spoke]  this  description  suits  the 
interpolated  section  15^^-16*;  for  the  speaker  in  15^^  is  Yahweh, 
but  the  speaker  throughout  the  parts  common  to  Jer  and  Is  is 
not. — In  time  past]  the  phrase  TKD  may  refer  to  a  past  falling 
within  the  speaker's  own  mature  life  (2  S  15^),  or  to  a  more 
remote  past  (Ps  93^,  Pr  S^^).  In  448,  as  here,  it  refers  to  old 
prophecies. — As  the  years  of  a  hireling]  years  strictly  reckoned;  the 
hireling  works  no  longer  than  he  must.  Du.  explains  differently  : 
it  will  only  be  necessary  to  hire  the  mercenaries  (i^DK'  as  in  Jer 
46^1)  for  the  usual  period  of  3  years,  and  sees  an  allusion  to  the 
use  by  Alexander  Jannaeus  of  mercenary  troops. — The  glory  of 
Moab]  cp.  the  glory  of  Assyria,  10^^;  of  Kedar,  21**. — 14.  nan 
TWS]  (Sr  Xeyo).— -lytD  OVO]   io2«  2^^"^^, 


XVII.  I-II.  TTie  coming  Destruction  of  Syria  and  Ephraim. 

The  text  is  faulty ;  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  poem  consisted 
mainly  if  not  exclusively  of  distichs  of  balanced  and,  generally,  parallel  lines. 
But  the  length  of  line  varies  in  different  distichs ;  vv.***-  "•  "*•  ''  are  clear 
instances  of  3  :  3,  which  was  probably  the  most  frequent  rhythm,  and  v.*"*  * 
of  a  longer  distich,  probably  4  :  4. 

The  original  poem  contains  three  equal  or  nearly  equal  strophes  ;  the  first 
and  second  each  consists  of  8  lines  and  an  additional  line  containing  a  con- 
cluding formula  ;  the  second,  like  the  third,  strophe  contains  also  an  opening 
formula:  the  third  strophe  contained  lo  lines,  unless  we  reject  two  as 
intrusive. 

Vv."'  appear  to  be  an  addition  to  the  poem  (see  comm.),  and  are  placed 
at  the  end  of,  and  separated  from,  the  poem  itself  in  the  following  translation. 


296 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


I. 

1  Lo !  Damascus  is  about  to  be  removed  from  being  a  city, 
And  it  shall  become  a  a  ruin  ^  *  forsaken  for  ever  * 
Flocks  shall  possess  *her  cities,' 
And  lie  down,  with  none  to  terrify  (them)  away. 
^  And  Ephraim  shall  lose  (her)  fortress. 

And     the    sovereignty    [shall     be     taken     away]    from 

Damascus 
And  the  remainder  of  Aram  .  .  . 

Like  the  glory  of  the  sons  of  Israel  shall  they  be — 
Is  the  Oracle  of  Yahweh  of  Hosts. 


i 


2. 


m 


*  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day, 
The  glory  of  Jacob  shall  be  diminished. 
And  the  fat  of  his  flesh  shall  become  lean ; 
^  And  it  shall  be  as  when  a  reaper  gathereth  standing  corn, 
And  his  arm  reaps  off  the  ears  a  a  ; 
Or  ^^as  when  an  olive-tree  is  struck, 
**  And  there  remains  thereon  something  to  glean — 
^'^  Two  or  three  berries  on  the  uppermost  branch, 
Four  or  five  on  the  boughs  of  the  fruit  tree — 
Is  the  oracle  of  Yahweh,  God  of  Israel. 


•  In  that  day 
*Thy'  cities  shall  become  forsaken  (ruins), 

Like  the  forsaken  (ruins)  of  *  the  Amorites  and  Hivites,' 
Which  they  forsook  before  the  children  of  Israel,  and  it  shall  become 

a  desolation. 
1®  Because  thou  forgattest  the  God  of  thy  salvation, 
And  didst  not  remember  the  Rock,  thy  Refuge, 
Therefore  (though)  thou  plantest  plantations  of  Adonis, 
And  puttest  in  (vine-)cuttings  of  an  alien  (god), 
^^  (And  though)  on  the  day  thou  plantest,  thou  make  (it)  grow. 
And    (though)    on   the    morrow    thou    make    thy    seed 

blossom — 
The  harvest  has  fled  (?)  in  the  day  of  sickness  (?), 
And  incurable  pain  ... 


XVII.  i-ii  297 

^  In  that  day  shall  man  regard  his  Maker, 

And    his   eyes    shall    look    towards    the    Holy    One    of 

Israel ; 
8  And  he  shall  not  regard  the  a  work  of  his  hands 

Nor  look  upon  what  his  fingers  have  wrought,  a  a 

The  first  strophe  is  devoted  mainly  to  the  fate  of  Syria,  but 
incidentally  also  to  that  of  Ephraim.  Syria  is  to  lose  its  inde- 
pendence :  Damascus,  the  capital,  and  other  cities  are  to  be 
reduced  to  perpetual  desolation.  The  last  two  strophes  are 
devoted  exclusively  to  Ephraim,  i.e.  the  Northern  kingdom  of 
Israel :  in  strophe  2  the  almost  total  depopulation  of  Ephraim  is 
depicted  under  three  figures :  strophe  3  dwells  on  the  inutility  in 
the  day  of  disaster  of  those  cults  to  which  Ephraim  had  devoted 
itself.  In  w.'^^-  the  point  of  the  last  strophe  is  universalised : 
all  mankind  will  be  convinced  in  the  coming  day  of  the  inutility 
of  works  of  men's  hands,  and  will  turn  instead  to  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel,  who  is  also  Maker  of  mankind. 

The  poem  was  composed  before  the  Fall  of  Damascus 
(732  B.C.),  and,  as  we  may  infer  from  the  coupling  of  Ephraim 
and  Damascus,  after  the  formation  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish 
alliance  (ch.  7),  which  took  place  about  736  b.c. 

The  predictions  were  in  large  part  fulfilled :  Re§on  (7^  n.) 
was  the  last  native  sovereign  of  Damascus ;  he  was  slain  by 
Tiglath-pileser  (2  K  16®),  who  was  not  in  the  West  after  732  B.C., 
and  with  him  "  the  sovereignty  was  taken  away  from  Damascus  " 
(v.^),  which  became  an  Assyrian  province  {KAT^  i35)-  Though 
less  complete  and  lasting  than  Isaiah  expected  (for  Damascus 
never  actually  became  an  uninhabited  spot),  the  devastation  of 
Damascus  and  the  neighbouring  country  in  732  b.c.  was  great. 
Tiglath-pileser  speaks  of  cutting  down  numberless  gardens  and 
plantations,  carrying  off  many  captives  with  their  property,  and 
wasting  591  cities  of  16  districts  of  the  land  of  Damascus:  see 
his  Annals^  11.  203-209.  The  full  fate  of  Ephraim  was  not 
simultaneous,  as  Isaiah  seems  to  have  expected  it  to  be,  with 
that  of  Damascus:  Samaria  survived  till  722  B.C.  :  then  the  fall 
of  the  city  was  followed  by  such  extensive  deportations  of  the 
Israelite  population  as  go  far  to  justify  the  terms  of  w.*^:  see 
2  K  17  and  Sargon's  annals. 

I,  The  Oracle  of  Damascus]  13^  n.     The  title  is  taken  from 


298  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

the  first  important  word  only,  and  so  ignores  the  main  subject 
of  the  piece — Ephraim. 

1-3.  The  fate  of  Damascus. — On  the  emendations 
adopted  in  the  translation,  see  phil.  n. — I.  Is  about  to  be  removed^ 
immediately:  not  present  tense  is  taken  away  (EV),  nor  in  v.^  are 
forsaken :  those  renderings  are,  indeed,  grammatically  legitimate 
(7I*  n.),  but  unsuitable  here. — 2.  Flocks  shall  possess^  S^'^  n. — 
Her  cities\  i.e,  the  towns  of  the  country  dependent  on  Damascus  : 
cp-  Jer  34^  49^^  51^^.  J^  (not  ffi)  reads  the  cities  of  ^Arder\ 
this  strange  phrase,  which  is  really  due  to  corruption  of  the 
text,  has  been  explained,  unsatisfactorily,  in  various  ways  :  (1)  the 
two  cities  of  the  name  of  *Aro*er,  one  on  the  northern  edge 
of  the  defile  of  the  Arnon  (162  n. :  cp.  Nu  32^*  n.),  the  other 
near  Rabbath-Ammon  (Jos  13^^);  (2)  the  cities  dependent  on 
the  more  northern  (which  is,  however,  the  less  important)  of  the 
two  *Aro*ers;  both  (i)  and  (2)  are  hazardously  understood  to 
mean  the  country  E.  of  Jordan  :  both  *Aro*ers  are  remote  from 
Damascus;  (3)  Di.  gives  *Aro*er  an  appellative  force,  so  that 
the  phrase  means  the  ruined  cities  \  feeble  and  improbable. — 
3.  Fortress\  perhaps  Samaria  *  the  capital,  or,  giving  "l^:^D  a 
collective  force,  all  Xki'i  fortresses  \  of  the  Northern  kingdom  are 
intended ;  but  on  either  of  these  interpretations  this  line  anti- 
cipates v.*.  More  probably  Damascus  {  is  meant ;  owing  to  its 
geographical  situation,  Damascus  first  invited  the  attack  of  the 
Assyrians  coming  E.,  and  so  formed  a  bulwark  or  fortress  of 
Ephraim.  On  this  interpretation  the  line,  in  common  with  the 
rest  of  v.^,  threatens  Damascus,  while  at  the  same  time  together 
with  the  following  words,  like  the  glory  of  the  children  of  Israel 
(cp.  V.*),  they  form  a  transition  to  vv.*-^-  ^-^^  which  threaten 
Ephraim  exclusively. — The  sovereignty^  see  above. 

1.  nn'm  .  .  .  noiD  .  .  .  njn]  fut.  instans  (Dr.  §  135  (2)),  followed  by  the 
pf.  with  waw  conv.  [ib.  §  113).  The  change  from  iDiD  (Du.  moiD)  to  nn'm  is 
strange,  unless  pt^DT  is  ace.  to  "IDID  (cp.  e.g.  Ps  87^;  G-K.  \z\b). — tj;d]  a 
poetical  breviloquence  for  ry  nvnD  :  cp.  7'  52^*  ;  BDB  583a.— i,  2.  'j;o  nn'm 
"liny  ny  nmy  n'?£3D]  CR  koX  ^trrat  ets  tttCxtlv  KaToXeXi/Ji/xePT]  els  rhv  a^(3i'a  =  nn'm 
ny  'ny  niiy  n'?DD('?).  The  non-form  'yo  in  |§  is  a  scribal  error  later  than  fflr :  not, 
however,  for  'yS  (Di.),  but  through  dittography  of  [nj'yo.  For  the  rest,  (&  is 
near  the  original  text :  read  lynaiy.  n'?2D('?)  nn'ni,  which  balances  the  preceding 

*  Ges.,  Hitz.,  Che.  (SBOT),  Whitehouse.  t  W>  Del. 

t  Jer.,  Eichh.,  Ew.,  Di.,  Du.,  Skinner,  Marti. 


XVII.  1-6  299 

parallel  line,  and  then  nnj;  as  subj.  of  nynn ;  with  ny  ^7%  cp.  oSiy  mn,  Jei 
20"**,  and  see  Kon.  iii.  336^.  The  detection  of  nny  is  due  to  Lag.  and  Du. — 
nj'^ij]  heret,  but  n^gp,  23''  25^!. — 3.  If  the  poem  showed  any  other  trace  of 
the  3  :  2  rhythm,  the  text  of  ^  down  to  pvQiD  need  awaken  no  suspicion  ;  the 
remainder  too,  could,  of  course,  be  construed,  dhk  n«r  being  casus  pendens 
before  v.T  (RVmarg.)  rather  than  a  clause  coupled  with  prCTD  (RV);  but 
however  taken  it  would  be  rhythmically  quite  unlike  the  rest  of  the  poem,  and 
also  lacking  in  parallelism.  The  first  and  third  lines  seem  to  be  correct ; 
each  of  the  intervening  clauses  has  probably  lost  a  word  :  after  prmo  perhaps 
niy^n,  shall  pass  away^  or  k^:  (cp.  8^),  has  dropped  out.  (K  paraphrases 
throughout,  and  on  the  whole  remarkably  well :  it  is  doubtful  whether  it  read 
differently  except  ti33?  for  nna  and  perhaps  vrm  for  x^"".  Du.  proposes  n3K' 
for  ni33D ;  but  it  is  hazardous  to  claim  (K  for  this,  for  ov  ybip  <tv  peXrluv  el  is 
probably  a  paraphrase  of  iu3D,  and  Kal  r^s  Sd^rfs  airrdv  at  the  end  of  the  v. 
a  subsequent  addition  to  (&. 

4-6.  The  fate  of  Ephraim. — 4.  The  nation  is  personified 
(cp.  i*^  n.)  as  a  man  whose  glory^  i.e.  reputation  among  his 
neighbours,  will  become  slight  (through  lack  of  children  :  cp. 
Hos  9^1-1^;  ct.  Ps  127),  and  whose  once  well-nourished  body  will 
become  lean  (cp.  lo^^).  Or  possibly,  with  the  precarious 
support  of  10^^,  we  might  render  his  glory  .  .  .  will  become 
impoverished  (cp.  adj.  pn),  i.e.  Jacob  will  exchange  the  outward 
marks  in  dress,  etc.,  of  a  prosperous  man  for  the  garb  of  a  pauper. 
Glory  is  not,  as  in  5^^  (n.),  dignitaries^  the  nobility  \  for  this  would 
make  Jacob  the  literal  nation  in  v.^,  the  personified  nation  in 
v.***. — 5>  6.  The  point  of  these  verses  is  clear ;  compared  with 
what  the  population  was  before,  the  survivors  in  the  Northern 
kingdom  will  be  as  few  as  the  ears  of  corn  left  uncut,  or  dropped 
by  the  reapers,  or  as  the  olive  berries  still  left  on  a  tree  after  it 
has  been  beaten  (cjpi,  24^^,  cp.  10^;  lD3n,  Dt  24^0)  with  poles  to 
bring  down  the  crop.  But  in  J^  these  comparisons  are  awkwardly 
expressed.  V.^-  ^  alone  sufficiently  suggests  the  figure  from 
com  harvest :  still  it  may  have  been  followed  by  a  distich  com- 
pleting the  figure  by  reference  to  the  few  ears  left  for  gleaners  : 
cp.  the  completion  of  the  figure  of  the  olive  crop.  But  v.^*'  (left 
untranslated  above),  which  is  rhythmically  defective,  instead  of 
completing  the  figure,  starts  off  as  if  it  were  a  fresh  figure,  And 
it  shall  be  as  a  gleaner  of  ears  of  corn  in  the  vale  of  Rephaim^ 
a  fruitful  vale  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bethlehem  (Jos  15^). 
These  words  are  probably  either  a  gloss  (Marti)  or  a  mutilated 
distich.  In  v.^  the  difficulties  are  even  more  serious;  n^OT 
means  the  gleaning  of  grapes,  or  olives,  not  the  gleaning  of  grain, 


300  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

which  is  expressed  by  Dp7  (so  v.^^) ;  consequently  v.^*  is  no 
proper  continuation  of  v.^*' ;  and  M,  therein^  or  thereof^  cannot 
refer  to  the  vale  of  Rephaim.  RV  is  thus  doubly  misleading, 
for  gleaning  in  English  without  any  qualification  suggests  gleaning 
of  grain.  Further,  in  f^  the  figure  of  the  olives,  which  is  the 
real  parallel  to  v.^*-  ^,  can  refer  directly  to  Jacob  only  if  i3> 
meaning  of  him  (i^n.),  resumes  the  distant  2pV^  of  v.*;  otherwise 
it  is  a  comparison  within  a  comparison.  For  Marti's  emendation 
adopted  above,  which  avoids  these  improbabilities,  see  phil.  n. — 
Reaps  off  the  ears]  in  reaping,  the  stalks  of  corn  were  reaped  near 
the  top,  so  that  little  more  than  the  ears  were  cut  off:  see  JEBi., 
Agriculture^  §  7,  with  illustrations. — 6.  Two  (or)  three  .  .  .  four 
(or)  five\  an  indefinite  but  trivial  number :  cp.  2  K  9^2^  Hos  6^, 
Jer  36^3,  and  see  G-K.  134J. — The  fruit  tree]  hap-poriyyah^  with 
a  punning  reference  to  the  popular  etymology  of  Ephraim ; 
Gn  4924,  Hos  13I6. 

5.  "I'sp]  harvest,  would  be  superfluous  before  ncp  :  either  Tsp  also  meant 
harvester,  or  n^p  must  be  read. — nsp»  .  .  .  lyni]  one  of  the  rare  instances  of 
jni  being  masc.  (G-K.  I22a/  ;  Kon.  2490^);  or  an  instance  of  the  "double 
subject"  (G-K.  144/,  in). — 5,  6.  Against  the  present  text,  see  Comm.  ttpSoD 
D'K£n  pDyn  D'Snty  is  a  gloss  or  mutilated  distich :  then  by  transposition  read 
niVVy  13  nNCJi  nn  »]p33  .t.ti. — CKsn]  (!&  onfuq. :  ct.  14*  26^".  Che.  rather  pre- 
cariously reads  Dn'3K  on  the  authority  of  fflr. — mSVy]  possibly,  as  in  NH  (see 
Levy),  this  meant  not  only  gleaning,  but  berries  picked  after  the  crop  had  been 
gathered  (cp.  AV) :  then  onaia  in  the  next  line  may  be  a  gloss  :  its  omission 
assimilates  lines  6b.  c  and  gives  a  better  balance. — tdnI  v.*,  Gn  49^',  both 
doubtful :  in  Gen.  the  meaning  tipper  branch,  crown,  would  be  suitable  :  for 
evidence  that  the  root  implied  height,  see  BDB  55^. —  n'ns  n'syoa]  read 
rt'nsn  'syon  :  it  is  not  a  case  of  the  anticipative  suffix  (G-K.  I3i«). 

7,  8.  Mankind  will  reject  their  idols  and  turn  to  the 
God  of  Israel,  the  Maker  of  all  men. — The  insertion  of 
this  passage,  with  its  universal  outlook,  between  vv.^*^  and  ^'^^, 
which  are  strictly  limited  in  their  outlook  to  Damascus  and 
Ephraim,  may  be  due  to  an  interpolator  ;  as  an  alternative  it 
might  be  held  that  the  verses  are  a  misplaced  conclusion  to  the 
poem  :  they  would  stand  less  awkwardly  after  v.^^.  The  ideas 
rather  suggest  a  relatively  late  writer :  cp.,  with  the  thought  of 
Yahweh  as  Maker,  5113  545^  of  the  idols  as  man  made,  44^-20. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  wide  outlook  has  its  parallel  in  Is 
(210.11.17^  cp.  perhaps  220  3022,  ^os  8i4) ;  cp.,  further,  i29;  and 
note  t«-iD'^  m^X^  (i*n.  1260.)  and  fjy  (22*)  nVB^  (31I). 


XVII.  5-1  i  301 

8.  The  work  of  his  hands  .  .  .  wha/  his  fingers  have  made\ 
these  parallel  and  synonymous  expressions  mean  idols :  cp. 
2^  31^  37^®.  Hos  14*,  Mic  5*2,  Dt  42*.  An  early  annotator, 
whose  notes  have  crept  into  the  text,  destroying  the  rhythm 
and  spoiling  the  style,  erroneously  understood  by  the  first  term 
the  (multiplicity  of)  altars  condemned  by  Dt.,  and  by  the  second, 
less  erroneously  but  too  specifically,  the  Asheriniy  i.e.  the  wooden 
pillars  which  stood  beside  the  old  Canaanite  altars,  but  which 
were  forbidden  in  the  worship  of  Yahweh  (cp.  Ex  34*3,  Jg 
625,  Dt  1 621),  and  the  hammanim  (278,  Lv  26^0,  Ezk  6*-«, 
2  Ch  14*  34^-  '^t)  ct.  2  K  23),  which  were  objects,  probably  of 
stone  or  metal,  associated  with  heathen  altars,  and  perhaps  a 
special  form  of  massebah  (19^^  n.).  The  rendering  sun-images 
(RV),  which  suggests  that  these  objects  were  specially  or 
exclusively  used  in  the  worship  of  the  sun,  rests  on  a  question- 
able derivation  from  the  late  Hebrew  word  ntsn.  sun :  see  Moore 

T    -  ' 

in  EBi.  2976;  G.  A.  Cooke, iVLS"/,  p.  104;  Ges-B.  s.v.;  L.B.  Paton, 
art  "Baal,"  in  Encyc.  of  Re  I.  and  Ethics  ^  especially  pp.  287  f. 

8.  D'jonni  D'nrK.Ti]  either  the  first  waw  is  the  waw  explicatwum  that  is 
often  found  in  glosses  (Haupt  in  SBOT),  or  the  two  wa.vfs  =  do^A  .  .  .  and 
(BDB,  253a). — pn]  cp.  in  Palm.  vDvh  .  .  .  m  KnSyi  nn  Hion,  this  Ijjiamman 
and  this  altar  .  ,  ,  to  Shamash — Cooke,  NSI^  no.  136  (a.d.  85) :  cp.  Lidz. 
Eph.  ii.  p.  280  (a.d.  108).  In  the  frequent  Punic  epithet  pnSya,  jon  may 
be  attributive  (cp.  pmay)  rather  than  the  cult  object  in  the  gen. 

9-1 1.  Ephraim  in  the  hour  of  calamity  will  get  no 
help  from  her  heathen  cults.  —  9.  Thy  cities  shall  be 
abandoned]  so  ffi ;  fl^  has  instead  the  cities  in  which  he  finds 
refuge^  or  asylum 'y  with  nyo,  asylum,  cp.  IT^yn,  10^^  n.  ffi,  with 
its  transition  from  the  3rd  pers.  of  vv.**^  to  the  2nd  pers.  of 
address  at  the  beginning  of  the  strophe,  is  preferable  to  J^,  where 
the  same  transition  does  not  take  place  till  v.^®. — Forsaken 
{ruins)  of  the  Amorites  and  the  Hivites'\  cp.  (&;  this  may  be 
correct,  though  the  reference  to  Hivites,  who  apparently  formed 
a  rather  insignificant  part  of  the  old  Canaanitish  population,  is 
a  little  suspicious ;  for  Amorites,  cp.  Am  2®^-.  J^  is  supposed 
to  mean,  like  the  forsaken  {ruins)  of  the  wood  and  the  mountain 
top ;  for  a  defence  of  this,  see  Del.  6r  supplies,  what  J^  does 
not,  a  personal  antecedent  for  the  following  words,  which  they 
forsook  (so  far  ^  only ;  fir  om.)  from  before  the  children  of  Israel 
— ^a  prosaic  clause,  and  probably  an  annotation. — A?td  it  shall 


302  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

become  a  desolatioii\  these  words,  too,  are  rhythmically  suspicious, 
and  the  context  does  not  explain  the  subject :  they  may  be  a 
further  gloss  (Du.),  or  perhaps  a  fragment  of  another  distich. — 
lOa.  b.   To   the   ideas   and   expressions   of  these   lines   many 
parallels  may  be  found  in  Deut.  and  later  literature ;  see,  e.g.^ 
Dt  811-19  ,5218;  and  for  the  God  of  thy  salvation,  Ps  18^1  (||  "my 
rock")  25^  27^  62'';  for  the  Rock  thy  Refuge,  see  Ps  31^,  and 
compare  the  similar  combinations  in  Ps  62^  Zf^"^  95I  94^^.     On 
account  of  this  late  ring  about  the  v.,  and  the  generality  of  the 
charge  against  Ephraim,  Marti  thinks  the  lines  are  a  glossator's 
attempt  to  assign  the  cause  for  Ephraim's  fate. — Adonis-planta- 
tions .  .  .  (vine-)  cuttings  of  an  alien  (god^  the  adj.  IT,  alien  (i^  n.), 
appears  to  be  an  abbreviation  here  for  the  full  phrase  alien  god 
(Ps  44^1  8ii^),  cp.  "irifc?,  another  =  another  god,  in  Ps  16*      This 
parallelism  suggests  that  D''3Dy3  in  the  previous  line  refers  to 
some  deity,  though  direct  proof  that  Tammuz  (Ezk  8^^),  known 
to  the  Greek  as  Adonis  (pit?),  was  known  in  Syria  by  the  name  or 
epithet   Na'aman  is   not   forthcoming.      But   whatever   be   the 
exact  explanation  of  D"'30j;3,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  prophet 
is  alluding  to  a  custom  similar  to,  if  not  in  all  respects  identical 
with,  the  gardens  of  Adonis  described  by  Greek  writers.     These 
gardens  "  were  baskets  or  pots  filled  with  earth,  in  which  wheat, 
barley,  lettuce,  pease,  and  various  kinds  of  flowers  were  sown 
and  tended  for  eight  days.  .  .  .  Fostered  by  the  sun's  heat,  the 
plants  shot  up  rapidly,  but  having  no  root,  withered  as  rapidly 
away.  .  .  .  These  gardens  are  most  naturally  interpreted  as  repre- 
sentatives of  Adonis  or  manifestations  of  his  powers.  .  .  .  The 
rapid  growth  of  the  wheat  and  barley  in  the  garden  of  Adonis 
was  intended  to  make  the  corn  shoot  up."*     Some  think  that 
the  prominent  part  taken  by  women  in  these  rites  accounts  for 
Israel  being  here  addressed  in  the  2nd  pers.  fem.     The  point 
of  the  prophet  seems  to  be :  you  may  resort  to  foreign  gods, 
they  will  leave  you  helpless  in  the  day  of  calamity;  you  may 
plant  these  symbols  of  fertility  and  bring  them  without  difficulty 
to  leaf  and  blossom,  but  the  harvest  you  wish  to  secure  thereby 
will  never  come.      The  text  of  the  last  two  lines  is  uncertain 
and  the  exact  meaning  doubtful  (see  phil.  n.) :  if  the  day  of 
calamity  is  there  described  as  the  day  of  sickness  and  incurable 

*  Frazer,  Golden  Bough^,  ii.  120,  121  ;  see,  further,  the  authors  cited  by 
him,  and  in  EBi.^  art.  "Adonis"  ;  Che.  SBOT^  p.  146  (with  illustration). 


XVII.  9-1 1,   12-14  303 

paiuy  Du.  may  be  right  in  inferring  that  the  women  used  the 
plants  of  Adonis,  or  their  produce,  as  magical  cures. 

9.  inyD  "ly]  ffi  ol  vh\ti%  <rov  ^KaTa\€\lf^u4val  =  T)^^V  y\]l.  Cond.  pro- 
poses l»yD  ny,  Mj/  strong  cities — possible,  but  not  the  reading  of  6r. — n2iiy3 
SKir'  03  '3SD  uty  ne^K  tdk.ti  rnnn]  (Br  hv  rpoirov  Kar^Xiirov  ol  'Afioppacoi  Kal  ol 
Evaioi  dir6  Trpoffutwov  tCjp  vluv  'I(rpaiJ\  =  V  '33  '3BD  inni  'tdkh  n3ijy3  ;  (Bf  either 
neglects,  or  more  probably  did  not  read,  I3iy  "wh,  a  phrase  which  may  have 
been  inserted  between  the  date  of  (Br  and  the  transposition  and  corruption 
of  in.Ti  'TDKH  into  tdkhi  v\nn. — xo.  DODyj  'yea]  if  this  is  a  "double"  pi. 
(G-K.  124^)  of  pi!3  yeJ,  meaning  plantations  of  Ndaman  (cp.  Gk.  /t^irot 
*A5(i»'i5o$),  it  is  a  unique  instance  of  the  genitive  being  a  proper  name.  (Br 
paraphrases  both  D'JDyj  here  and  ni  in  the  next  line  by  dirwroi',  probably 
detecting  in  each  case  a  reference  to  false  worship. — uynin]  the  suffix  is 
supposed  to  refer  to  the  place  of  planting,  which  may  be  understood  from, 
but  is  not  mentioned  in,  the  context.  More  probably  the  1  should  go  with 
DV3  in  v.^'^  and  lynin  (G-K.  47<»),  or  'ynin,  2nd  fem.,  like  the  neighbouring  vbs., 
was  originally  read  here. — ll.  "ivvsr^  should  be  Pilpel  of  Jir  or  JJr;  31b, 
33b,  and  3i»  do  not  occur  elsewhere  in  Heb.,  and  33B>,  to  wander^  with  which 
ffir  connects  it,  jdelds  no  sense.  Ges.,  Di.,  RV,  BDB  connect  the  present 
form  with  3iD  (Ca  7't — common  in  Aramaic),  to  fence  about:  Ki.,  Ibn  Ezra, 
AV,  Du.,  Marti  give  it  the  meaning  to  cause  to  growy  cp.  K3b,  TM\ff,  to  grow ^ 
grow  great. — n3]  (Br  (eis),  C  perhaps  read  ny,  which  is  hardly  right ;  but  see 
Ges-B.  MT  (AV,  RVmarg.)  nj,  a  heap  (of  water.  Ex  158,  Jos  z^^'  ^*,  Ps  33' 
78^t,  is  very  improbable;  nj,  3rd  pf.  of  m3,  to  flee  away  (cp.  21"  22'),  is 
more  probable  ;  but  even  this  is  doubtful. — n^n3  dV3]  the  day  of  inheritance 
(AVmarg.)  would  be  the  most  obvious  rendering,  but  in  the  context  an 
unsuitable  meaning.  ^,  ]^.,  Ibn  Ezra,  and  most  modern  commentators 
render  in  the  day  of  sickness^  taking  n^n3,  Niph.  Part,  of  nVn,  as  elliptical 
for  nVn3  7\2i^  (Jer  14"),  or  as  itself  substantival  (cp.  nj«nn3,  10®  n.). — 3K31 
Bn3K]  (Br  Kal  Jjj  var^p  &vdpihirov  KKrjpiixr-Q  toTs  vloh  <rov :  this  perhaps  rests 
on  a  longer  text  than  ^.  ^  in  v.""-  **  is  doubtful ;  see  the  preceding  notes, 
and  note  that  the  rhythm  is  questionable.     Cp.  Jer  30'^  13K3D  vmh. 

XVII.   1 2-14. — T/ig  roar  of  the  peoples  stilled. 

The  opening  interjection  in  stands  by  itself  (see  p.  89) :  the  first  five 
words  of  V."  (omitted  in  the  translation)  are  a  dittograph  (with  one  slight 
variant)  of  the  last  five  words  of  v.";  Dn'33  has  accidentally  shifted  from 
y  12c tod.  in  v,i4a  makkeph  anyny"? ;  v.^^a  jg  short  in  |§,  but  ni-T  should  be 
added ;  and  ^**  is  a  short  concluding  line  unless  ^  be  original  (see  phil.  n. ) 
and  WHS*?  be  read  as  two  accents.  The  little  poem  consisted  of  3  :  3  distichs, 
two  distichs  making  a  strophe. 

Ahl 
^  The  booming  of  many  peoples ! 

Like  the  booming  of  seas  they  boom ! 
And  the  roar  of  mighty  nations ! 

As  with  the  roar  of  waters  do  they  roar !  a  a  a 


304  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

^^  But  [Yahweh]  shall  rebuke  him, 

And  he  shall  flee  far  away  and  be  pursued — 
l^ike  chaff  of  the  mountains  before  the  wind, 
And  as  the  whirling  (dust)  before  the  tempest. 

^*  At  eventide — lo  !  terror, 

Ere  morning  he  shall  be  no  more. 
This  (shall  be)  the  lot  of  them  that  spoil  us, 
And  the  portion  of  them  that  plunder  us. 

The  poem  describes  a  future  that  unfolds  itself  to  its  prophetic 
author ;  under  the  figure  of  a  stormy  sea,  suggested  perhaps  by 
the  ancient  myth  of  the  conflict  between  the  primeval  flood  and 
the  Creator,  the  first  strophe  depicts  the  onset  of  a  vast  army ; 
the  army's  goal  is  not  stated,  we  may  pretty  safely  assume  that 
Jerusalem  was  in  the  poet's  mind.  The  second  strophe  predicts 
the  scattering  and  flight  of  this  menacing  power ;  this  is  to  be 
the  result  of  the  rebuke  of  One  who,  in  the  present  text,  is 
unnamed;  unquestionably  Yahweh  is  intended.  The  third 
strophe  dwells  on  the  suddenness  and  completeness  with  which 
the  peril  will  pass,  yet  in  its  closing  distich  alludes  to  the 
spoliation  and  plunder  to  which  the  poet's  countrymen  (the 
Jews)  are  subject  as  he  writes. 

Thus  the  poem  seems  to  imply  an  invasion  (of  Judah),  and 
the  writer's  conviction  that  worse  is  yet  to  threaten,  but  at  the 
last  moment,  and  suddenly,  by  the  will  of  Yahweh,  to  be  averted. 

The  poem  is  thus  the  prophetic  anticipation  of  such  a  course 
of  events  as  is  attributed  in  ch.  36  f.  (cp.  especially  37^^^-)  to 
Sennacherib's  campaign  against  Palestine,  and  in  particular 
Judah,  in  701.  It  is  therefore  assigned  to  Isaiah,  and  referred 
to  that  date  by  many  scholars ;  by  others  with  much  less  reason 
to  other  periods  of  Isaiah's  activity — to  735  (Hitz.,  Del.)  or 
^.723  (Che.  Introd.y 

Since  Assyria  is  not  mentioned,  it  is,  of  course,  possible  that 
this  poem,  like  Ps  46,  was  not  actually  written  at  the  time  of 
Sennacherib's  campaign,  but  is  merely  reminiscent  of  the  story 
of  that  campaign,  and  predictive  of  a  similar  issue  out  of  like 
dangers  in  some  later  age. 

Mainly  on  the  ground  of  the  reference  to  "many  nations" 
(y.i2),  Sta.  {ZATIV,  1883,  p.  16)  and  Marti  consider  the  poem 
to  be  later  than  the  age  of  Isaiah,  and  to  refer,  like  5^^  lo^^^-,  Jl 


XVII.  12-14  305 

4^*,  Ps  46,  to  the  fruitless  assault  of  the  nations  of  the  world  on 
Jerusalem.  But  it  may  be  questioned  whetlier  this  view  so  well 
accounts  for  the  transition  from  the  plurality  of  nations  in  v.'^  iq 
the  singular  in  vv.'"*'^^'',  as  the  more  commonly  accepted  explana- 
tion that  the  nations  of  v.^^  are  the  many  diverse  peoples  that 
composed  the  Assyrian  army,  and  that  the  singular  of  v.^*^^-,  as  in 
525-29  iq5  etc.,  is  Assyria  itself;  in  v.^*''*  ^  the  plural  is  distributive, 
the  Assyrians,  rather  than  a  resumption  of  the  plurals,  nations, 
peoples,  in  v.  ^2. 

The  arguments  against  the  Isaianic  authorship  are  incon- 
clusive ;  those  in  favour  of  it  are  as  strong  as  from  the  nature  of 
the  case  could  be  expected. 

The  question  has  been  much  discussed  whether  17^^'^*  is  (a)  an  inde- 
pendent poem  or  (Lowth,  Eich.,  Che.,  Marti)  fragment,  or  {b)  the  conclusion 
of  17^""  (Del.  al.),  or  (f)  the  introductory  strophe  of  a  poem  completed  m 
ch.  18  (Ges.,  Ew.,  Di.,  Du.,  Cond.).  Against  c.  is  the  fact  that  17^* 
certainly  reads  like  the  end  of  a  poem  (cp.  Jg  5^^),  as  is  admitted  by  Ges., 
and  that  18^,  with  its  apostrophe  to  a  land  not  contemplated  in  I7''"^\  is 
best  taken  as  independent.  The  similar  outlook  in  17"'-  and  18^"^  does  not 
prove  that  both  passages  formed  part  of  the  same  poem  ;  and  even  if  i8'  calls 
for  an  explanation  of  the  pronoun  they,  17^*  supplies  it  very  ill.  Far  less 
probable  is  the  view  that  I7^'"^'^*  is  the  conclusion  of  17^'"  ;  not  only  is  the 
strophic  structure  of  the  two  pieces  apparently  different,  but  no  satisfactory 
connection  can  be  established. 

12.  Cp.  13*  of  the  tumultuous  onset  of  the  Medes  against 
Babylon,  and  Jl  4^*  of  the  final  and  fruitless  assault  of  the 
nations  on  Jerusalem.  With  the  present  comparison  of  an  army 
to  threatening  waters,  cp.  8^. — 13.  Yahwe}i\  since  the  word  is 
emphatic  it  can  scarcely  be  supplied  in  thought,  but  must  have 
fallen  out  of  the  text. — Him\  Assyria :  cp.  for  the  use  of  the 
singular,  526-29^ — Yox  the  power  of  Yahweh's  rebuke,  which  is  but 
a  special  form  of  the  power  of  His  word  (9^  n.),  see  Ps  9^  76'' 
104'^  106^. — Like  chafi  of  the  mountains^  chaff  winnowed  on  the 
lofty  and  windy  places  which  were  chosen  by  preference  for 
winnowing.  For  the  figure,  see  especially  29^. —  Whirling 
(dust)]  hihy  parallel  here  to  yo  as  in  Ps  831*  to  U^p.— 14.  Suddenly 
all  is  over:  cp.  especially  37^^^*,  also  Ps  30^,  Job  27^^. 

12.  D'D']  pi.  as  in  Gn  i'"  (P),  Dn  ii*°,  and  poetry  of  all  periods,  g.g^.  Jg 
5",  Gn  49",  Ezk  27*,  Ps  78^^— p'on^]  for  the  radical  '  and  the  ending  p,  see 
G-K.  75«  and  47W.  See  also  31',  and  in  late  passages  21^2  26"  33'  418. — 
pKB"  nn'33  D'D  jiKB'D  d'DnS  pKBn]  Symmetry  of  structure  and  rhythm  with  v.^^ab. 
is  obtained  by  transposing  D'tdd  and  placing  it  after  D'DkS  ;  a  trace  of  this 
VOL.   I. — 20 


306  COMMENTARY   ON   ISAIAH 

reading  is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  ffi  Kal  vCyros  idvdv  iroWCov  ws  (J5a>/)  t^x^'^^'- 
— 13.  pNB"  .  .  .  d'Dn'?]  S  omits ;  the  words  are  dittographic. — 13  nyai]  both  the 
shortness  of  the  line  and  the  need  for  direct  reference  to  mn'  indicate  some 
loss  in  the  text. — onn  fOD]  Cond.  suggests  omn  in  place  of  cnn  :  cp.  (&  tis 
Xvovv  dx^pov  XiK/McivTcov,  and  note  mr  =  XiK/taj',  30'"^  41^'  etc.  Others  omit  onn 
altogether  on  the  ground  of  metre  (Kit.,  Box) ;  but  if  «]Tt  be  taken  with  D3i 
pnTDD,  as  it  should  be,  the  metrical  objection  falls  to  the  ground. — 14.  any  ny^ 
njni]  cp.  rum  'o'rnn,  Gn  40^  ;  but  this  use  of  1  except  with  the  "  consecutives  "  is 
more  or  less  uncommon  (BDB  254^  bot.).  (&  irpbs  iairipav  Kal  l<rrai,  possibly 
n'm  instead  of  Ti':in\ — ijrN]  ©  and  some  Heb.  MSS  133'ni  :  then  cp.  last  n. 
— n'lii^]  the  ^,  if  not  dittographic  from  VniJ,  was  perhaps  deliberately  pre- 
ferred for  rhythmical  reasons. 

XVIII.-XX.— ^^_y//  and  Ethiopia. 

In  these  chapters  several  prophecies  dealing  with  Cush  and 
Misraim  (Introd.  §§  68  f.),  i.e.,  on  the  usual  interpretation  of 
these  terms,  with  Ethiopia  and  Egypt,  are  here  grouped  together. 
One  of  these  was  derived  from  the  "Book  of  Oracles"  on 
foreign  nations  (see  19^),  the  rest  probably  from  different  sources 
(Introd.  §  34). 

XVIII. — The  Dismissal  of  the  {Ethiopian)  Envoys* 

Special  Literature  : — H.  Winckler,  Das  Land Kus  u.  Jes.  18  '\n  ATUnter- 
suchungen,  146-156;  Stade,  de  Isaiae  vatic.  Aeth^  1873. 

Vv.^"^  consist  of  distichs  of  lines  parallel  in  sense  (except  v.^**  *>),  and 
balanced  in  rhythm  (except  v.***  **  which  is  4  :  2,  and  '*'•  *  which  is  most 
easily  read  as  3  :  4).  The  length  of  the  balanced  distichs  is  mostly  3  :  3, 
but  it  is  2  :  2  in  v.^  **  and  4  :  4  in  vv.'*"-  ^'  ^-  *».  In  vv.^*  ^  both  rhythm  and 
parallelism  have  probably  been  disturbed  by  textual  corruption ;  v.^*  ^  is 
2  .  2  .  y  2c.  g  look  at  present  like  isolated  stichoi;  what  intervenes  between 
2"  and  ^  is  perhaps  an  expansion  of  a  distich  ;  for  suggestions  with  regard  to 
lb.  2c.  g  ggg  below.     In  w.'"*  two  distichs  form  a  strophe. 

^  Ah !  land  of  the  whirring  (?)  of  wings, 

Which  is  beyond  the  rivers  of  Cush ! 
2  Which  sendeth  envoys  (?)  on  the  sea, 

And  A  vessels  of  papyrus  on  the  face  of  the  water. 

Go,  ye  fleet  messengers, 
To  a  nation  tall  (?)  and  of  polished  appearance  (?), 

To  a  people  terrible  .  .  . 

A  nation  mighty  (?)  and  down-treading, 
Whose  land  rivers  dissect  (?). 


XVII.  13,  14;  XVIII  3^7 

'  All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world, 
And  dwellers  on  earth, 
When  a  mountain-signal  is  raised,  see ! 
When  the  trumpet  is  blown,  hearken ! 

*  For  thus  hath  Yahweh  said  to  me, 

I  will  be  quiet  and  look  forth  in  my  abode. 
Like  the  dazzling  heat  above  the  light. 

Like  a  cloud  of  night-mist  in  *  time '  of  harvest. 

^  For  before  the  harvest,  when  the  blossom  is  over, 
And  the  seed-berry  becomes  a  ripening  grape ; 
The  branches  shall  be  cut  off  with  pruning-knives, 
And  the  tendrils  removed,  cut  away. 

*  They  shall  be  abandoned  one  and  all  to  the  carrion  birds 

of  the  mountains. 
And  to  the  beasts  of  the  land; 
And  the  carrion  birds  shall  summer  upon  them, 

And  all  the  beasts  of  the  land  shall  winter  upon  them. 

An  obscure  and  difficult  poem,  obscure  too,  if,  as  Marti  has 
argued,  it  is  rather  a  combination  of  different  short  poems 
(yyi.  2. 4 .  3  .  5. 6 — ^\^q  j^st  being  the  misplaced  conclusion  of  1 7^"^^). 

The  poem  opens  with  an  apostrophe  to  a  land  (v.^)  which 
has  sent  (or,  is  sending)  envoys  by  water,  v. 2*-  ^.  V.2«-8  contains 
words  addressed  to  these  envoys,  bidding  them  depart  to  a 
people  some  of  whose  national  characteristics,  such  as  their 
might  and  their  power  to  inspire  terror,  are  particularised,  and 
whose  land  is  described  as  dissected  (?)  by  rivers.  V.^  is  a 
warning,  addressed  to  the  world  at  large,  to  give  heed  when 
signals  of  war  shall  appear.  In  v.*,  the  poet  claims  to  have 
received  a  revelation  that  Yahweh  will  watch  immovable,  unseen, 
unshaken.  V.^,  under  the  figure  of  a  grape-crop  ripening  to  the 
vintage,  predicts  calamity  and  destruction,  which  in  v.^  are  more 
literally  described — certain  people,  unnamed,  will  perish  and  lie 
long  unburied,  a  prey  to  carrion  birds  and  beasts. 

Not  to  speak  here  of  difficulties  of  connection  between  the 
parts  (see  below  on  vv.^  and  ^),  the  poem  yields  no  clear  and 
unambiguous  answer  to  the  following  questions  among  others 
which  are  yet  necessarily  raised  by  it: — i.  What  is  the  land 


305  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

addressed  in  v.^  ?  2.  Who  delivers  to  the  envoys  the  message 
recorded  in  v.^?  3.  Who,  or  what,  is  figured  forth  by  the 
ripening  crops  of  v.*?  4.  Who  are  the  people  that  are  to  lie 
unburied  ? 

V.i^  seems  to  distinguish  the  land  apostrophised  in  v.^*  from 
the  land  of  Cush  as  one  more  remote  from  the  Jewish  writer : 
nevertheless  it  is  customary  to  identify  "the  land  beyond  the 
rivers  of  Cush  "  with  the  land  of  Cush  itself  Further,  with  the 
exception  of  Winckler,* — who  at  one  time  regarded  Cush  as 
Kash,  i.e.  Southern  Babylonia,  a  land  of  canals,  swamps,  and  reed- 
thickets,  and  infested  with  insects, — most  writers  identify  Cush 
with  "Ethiopia,"  with  the  country,  that  is  to  say,  which  the 
Egyptians  called  K's  and  Ks. 

If  we  disregard  v.^^  as  being  a  gloss,  or  rendered  unintelligible 
through  corruption,  we  may  perhaps  infer  from  the  description 
in  v.^^-  ^"^  (see  notes)  that  the  unnamed  land  apostrophised  is 
Ethiopia,  and  see  in  w.^*  ^  some  trace  of  "  wonder  at  the 
mysterious  country  and  of  regard  for  its  people  who  by  their 
advance  against  Egypt  had  won  [from  c.  712  B.C.  onwards]  a 
place  among  the  leading  powers  of  their  time"  (A.  Alt,  Israel  u. 
Egypten^  p.  83).     V.^?  is  less  favourable  to  this  identification. 

As  to  the  second  question  :  the  general  tenor  of  the  message 
in  v.2*^"^  is  against  the  view,  implied  by  the  insertion  of  saying  in 
EV,  that  it  is  addressed  to  the  envoys  by  those  who  despatched 
them ;  it  rather  contains  the  words  in  which  the  poet  himself 
bids  the  (Ethiopian)  envoys  depart  from  Jerusalem  and  return 
home.  Yet  the  use  of  the  word  Go^  rather  than  returtif  makes 
it  particularly  difficult  for  the  reader  to  seize  the  dramatic  move- 
ment of  the  poem.  Did  some  such  line  as  "Return  to  your 
place,  ye  envoys,"  originally  precede,  and  form  the  parallel  to, 
the  now  isolated  Hne,  ^c? 

Questions  3  and  4  may  be  answered  together ;  if  v.^  is  the 
courteous  refusal  on  the  part  of  the  Jews  of  help  from 
Ethiopia,  vv.^^-  are  best  regarded  as  a  prediction  of  the  over- 
throw of  the  Assyrians.  Still  this  interpretation  is  anything  but 
obvious,  and  would  remain  so  even  if  1712-14  ^gj-g  ^^g  opening 
verses  of  the  poem  (see  p.  305).  If  iS^^-  stood  after  17^^  (Marti), 
the  reference  would  suit  the  Ephrai mites  equally  well.  Another 
alternative  (Jer.),  that  the  people  who  are  to  perish  are  the  people 
*  ATUnterstichungen,  146  ff.  ;  but  see  later,  KAT^  271  n.  I. 


XVIII.  I  309 

of  the  land  apostrophised  in  v.\  has  in  its  favour  that  these  are 
the  only  people  yet  mentioned  in  the  poem,  but  against  it  that 
the  tone  of  vv.^'*  scarcely  suggests  such  a  conclusion. 

If  the  poem  refers  to  an  Ethiopian  embassy  to  Jerusalem,  it 
was  written  not  earlier  than  the  foundation  of  the  Ethiopian 
dynasty  by  Sabako  about  712  B.C.  (Introd.  §  71),  and  may,  with 
most  probability,  be  assigned  to  the  year  702  b.c. 

I.  Ahl'\  simply  exclamatory:  cp.  55^,  Zee  2i<'^-<^'-),  Jer  47*; 
ct.  I*  5^  10*^  17^2. — Land  of  the  whirring  of  wings]  or  land  of 
winged  locusts^  are  the  safest  renderings  of  J^.  "  Merchants  will 
have  brought  home  the  usual  travellers'  tales  of  the  wealth  of 
the  distant  country  in  insects,  in  order  to  maintain  a  high  price 
for  the  wares'brought  thence  and  to  frighten  rivals  away"  (Du.). 
But  on  this  or  any  such  interpretation  the  polite  address 
to  the  envoys  (v.^)  begins  with  an  offensive  apostrophe — O 
insect-infested  land !  Ges.  interprets  wings  as  meaning  armies 
(cp.  8^?);  Che.  in  SBOT  {^x\%.  tr.),  p.  160,  with  more  ingenuity 
than  probability,  combines  both  meanings  :  "  the  flies  of  Ethiopia, 
with  the  metallic  clang  of  their  wings,  are  a  symbol  of  the 
swarming  and  warlike  population  of  that  country."  Other 
translations  that  have  been  proposed  are  (1)  land  of  winged^  i.e. 
swift,  boats :  *  this  is  philologically  ill-supported,  and  anticipates 
V.2;  (2)  land  of  the  shadow  of  both  sides  \  this  has  been  supposed 
to  mean  either  {a)  the  land  over  which  shadow  is  cast  by 
mountains  on  both  sides  of  it,  to  wit,  the  mountains  which  flank 
the  Nile  valley  on  the  E.  and  the  W. ;  or  {b)  the  land  where 
objects  at  noon-day  sometimes  cast  a  shadow  to  the  N.  and 
sometimes  to  the  S.  This  phenomenon  was  indeed  observed 
some  centuries  later  (Strabo,  ii.  5.  37),  but  it  is  highly  improb- 
able that  it  is  alluded  to  in  the  present  obscure  phrase.  The 
text  may  be  corrupt ;  as  it  stands  it  seems  to  be  unintelligible : 
the  interpretations  cited  here  and  others  that  have  been  offered 
are  either  philologically  unsound  or,  in  the  context,  of  doubtful 
fitness  ;  see,  further,  phil.  n. —  Which  is  beyond  the  river  of  Cush] 
cp.  "  from  beyond  the  rivers  of  Cush  they  shall  bring  tribute," 
Zeph  3^^ ;  in  Zeph.  a  vague  term  for  a  remote  region  is  in  place  : 

*  Ew.  ;  cp.  (St,  t!C,  Ki.  ;  the  comment  of  the  last  is,  **he  describes  the 
land  as  d'S33  VsSj^  on  account  of  the  number  of  boats  in  it.  For  when  their 
sails  are  spread,  they  resemble  wings,  and  the  boats  move  by  means  of  them 
as  birds  fly  by  means  of  their  wings.     And  the  sails  cast  a  shadow  (*?:«)." 


310  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

not  so  here;  the  country  in  question  is  one  which  has  sent 
envoys  who  are  now  in  Jerusalem.     Cush  is  the  Egyptian  K's 
or  Ks.     The  Egyptian  government  district  of  Ks  extended  from 
Elephantine  at  the  first  cataract  to  the  fourth  cataract  just  above 
Napata.*    At  Napata  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  which  Sabako,  about 
712  B.C.,  established  over  Egypt  had  its  capital,  and  from  Napata 
any  Ethiopian  embassy   would   presumably   have  come.     But 
from    Elephantine   to   Napata,  and  indeed   for  some   distance 
further  south,  the  country  is  a  country  not  of  rivers,  but  of  a 
single  River,  the  Nile.     Some  way  south  of  Napata,  at  about 
18°  and  15°  North  respectively,  the  Nile  is  joined  by  important 
affluents  from  the  S.E.     Though  the  Egyptian  province  of  Ks 
did  not  extend  so  far  south,  the  name  Ks  may  have  covered  this 
remoter  country,  and  the  rivers  of  Cush  may  be  the  Nile  and 
one  or  both  of  these  affluents.      A  land   beyond  these  rivers 
should  naturally  be  a  land  more  remote ;  and  if  we  should  be 
right  in  treating  the  Nile  and  its  first  affluent  as  the  rivers  of 
Cush,  the  land  beyond  should  be  the  district  of  Meroe ;  in  his 
description  of  Moses'  campaign  southwards  against  the  Ethiopians 
Jos.  {Ant.  II.   lo^)  describes  this  district  as  "encompassed  by 
the  Nile  quite  round,  and  the  other  rivers  Astapus  and  Asta- 
boras  made  it  a  very  difficult  thing   for  such  as  attempted  to 
pass  over  them,"  i.e.  to  Josephus,  Meroe  lay  beyond  the  rivers. 
But  historical  difficulties  would  beset  this  interpretation  :  it  was 
not  until  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  towards 
the  middle  of  the  7th  century  B.C.  that  the  Ethiopians  appear 
to  have  moved  their  capital  to  Meroe,  t  and  at  no  time  after 
this  is  there  any  probability  of  an  Ethiopian  embassy  to  Jeru- 
salem.    Earlier  interpreters  endeavoured  to  escape  some  of  the 
difficulties  of  the  phrase  by  illegitimate  translations,  substituting 
on  this  side  of  or  along  the  side  of  for  beyond',  thus  Jer.  and 
among  modern  commentators  Hitz.,  see  in  the  country  intended 
not  Ethiopia,  but  Egypt.     But  most  modern  interpreters,  except 
Winckler  as  cited  on  p.  306,  rest  content  with  assuming  that  a 
country  can  be  described  as  lying  beyond  its  own  rivers,  although 
that  country  is  a  country  of  a  single  river,  or  at  least  has  no 
second    river  until   its   remotest  parts  are   reached.     Even   if 

*  See  Breasted,  History  of  Egypt,  pp.  136,  255,  325,  and  Ancient  Records, 
ii.  1020,  1025  ;  W.  Max  MUller  in  EBi,  s.v.  Ethiopia, 
t  Breasted,  History  of  Egypt,  560  f. 


XVIII.  2  3^1 

the  plural  """ina  could  mean  not  the  rivers^  but  the  (great)  river 
(Haupt  in  SBOT\  lying  beyond  the  river  of  Cush  would  still  be 
a  strange  way  of  describing  Cush  itself,  for  Cush  is  the  narrow 
strip  of  fertile  soil  on  both  sides  of  the  Nile.  A  phrase  so 
difficult  of  interpretation  in  the  context  seems  little  more  likely 
to  be  due  to  a  glossator  (Du.,  al.)  than  to  the  author  of  the  poem  : 
but  if  v.^^  is  a  gloss,  the  2nd  line  of  the  original  opening  distich 
of  the  poem  perhaps  survives  in  the  now  isolated  line  ^  (Che., 
Marti). — 2.  Envoy 5\  D^^V;  so  57^  (as  here  after  n^K^),  Jer  49I* 
=  Obi  (followed  by  HSh^\  Pr  1317  (||  ^xfjo :  cp.  v.2  here)  25I8 
fyrbih  tON3  "fV).  Possibly  D''1''V  is  an  error  for  D''^V  (V^l), galleys 
(3321),  which  would  be  a  more  exact  parallel  to  vessels  of  papyrus 
in  the  next  line  {(&,  not  f^). — The  sea]  probably  here  and  in  19^, 
Nah  3®,  the  sea  means  the  Nile,  though  this  is  disputed  by  Wi. 
So  in  mod.  Arabic  the  Nile  is  called  El-bahr^  the  sea.  Perhaps 
the  Euphrates  also  is  once  or  twice  called  the  sea  in  the  OT : 
2\\  Jer  51^^?. — And  vessels]  cp.  ffi  (see  phil.  n.) ;  fl^  and  in 
vessels ;  if  envoys  i§  rightly  read  in  the  previous  line,  perhaps  in 
vessels  was  the  original  reading  here.  But  the  parallelism  of  on 
the  sea  and  on  the  face  of  the  waters  suggests  that  v. 2^  was 
parallel  and  not  complementary  to  ^. —  Vessels  of  papyrus]  boats 
that  were  light  and,  therefore,  swift,  suitable  for  the  Nile,  but 
not  for  the  open  sea ;  cp.  the  synonymous  expression  n^K  nV3«, 
Job  9^^  and  see  EBi.  4478.  The  word  N03,  papyrus^  or  rush  (35'', 
Ex  2^,  Job  8"t),  does  not  necessarily  point  to  Egypt,  for  see  35'', 
but  it  entirely  fits  in  with  the  theory  that  the  envoys  come  from 
the  Nile  valley. 

2C-g.  Isaiah  bids  the  Ethiopian  envoys  depart;  Judah 
cannot  accept  the  alliance  they  have  come  to  proffer.  This 
interpretation  *  assumes  great  compression,  not  to  say  obscurity, 
but  it  is  preferable  to  the  alternative  that  makes  the  words  an 
address  of  the  Ethiopians  to  their  envoys  as  they  set  out  on 
their  mission  to  the  Jews.f  The  nation^  or  people^  to  whom  the 
envoys  are  bidden  return  (or  go)  are  described  in  lines  d.  e.  f.  by 
a  series  of  epithets ;  of  these  epithets  the  meaning  of  one  only 
is  clear  and  unambiguous ;  but  since  a  terrible  nation  is  in  the 
context  a  complimentary  epithet,  we  may  assume  that  the  others 
are  of  like  character.     Probably  line  d.  describes  characteristic 

*  Adopted  by  Ew.,  Del.,  Du.,  Che.,  Marti,  Whitehousc 
t  %  Jer.,  Rashi,  ^i.,  AV,  RV. 


I 


312  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH  i 

and  admired  features  of  the  people,  e.  its  fame,  and  f.  its  conquer- 
ing might.  Tall'is  an  unparalleled  meaning  of  "I'^'D^,  inferred* 
from  meanings  which  would  more  usually  be  conveyed  by  the 
words  drawn^  drawn  along^  as,  e.g,^  a  waggon  (5^^),  ox  prolonged 
(cp.  Ps  36^1).  Ges.  infers  the  meaning  strongs  and  refers  to  other 
guesses.  Hitz.,  as  an  alternative  to  polished^  suggests  i^vhose 
days  are) prolonged:  cp.  "the  long-lived  Ethiopians,"  Herod,  iii. 
17,  cp.  23.  Ki.,  keeping  nearer  to  the  normal  meaning,  under- 
stood the  epithet  to  refer  to  the  Jews  dragged  away  by  the 
nations  of  the  world :  hence  AV  scattered^  RVmarg.  dragged 
away.  Of  polished  appearance,^  is  an  unparalleled  meaning  of 
13110,  which  would  more  commonly  mean  with  hair  plucked  out 
(cp.  50*),  or  scoured,  polished  {pi  bronze  utensils,  i  K  7*^).  RV 
smooth,  embodies  an  interpretation  given  by  Del.,  "polished 
especially  by  depilation  and,  therefore,  not  marred  by  a  dis- 
figuring growth  of  hair";  but  the  numerous  derivatives  from 
the  root  DID  in  Heb.,  Arabic,  and  Syriac  refer  to  an  undesirable 
removal  or  absence  of  hair.  If  the  meanings  of  "|6J^JDD  and  tDlID 
given  above  are  approximately  correct,  we  may  compare  45^*  and 
Herodotus'  (iii.  20)  description  of  the  Ethiopians  as  "  the  tallest 
and  most  beautiful  of  men."  There  is  no  reason  why  the 
Hebrews  should  not  have  admired  the  burnished  copper  colour 
of  the  Ethiopians,  for  even  Jer  132^  need  not  be  interpreted  as 
though  the  ancient  Hebrew  shared  the  modern  white  man's 
objection  to  colour. — Terrihle'\  far  and  wide,  ot  from  its  beginning 
onward,  are  renderings  proposed  for  the  words  riKpni  t?in  p 
that  follow  terrible.  Possibly  they  are  a  corruption  of  a  second 
epithet  meaning  famous,  or  something  similar :  see  phil.  n. — 
Mighty\  uncertain  (see  phil.  n.),  but  RV  that  measures  out,  viz. 
in  allotting  the  lands  which  it  has  conquered,  is  not  more 
probable.  —  Down-treading^  down-trodden  (cp.  AV,  RVmarg.) 
would  be  also  possible,  if  the  epithets  were  not  complimentary ; 
see  above. —  Whose  land  the  rivers  divide']  and  render  fruitful 
seems  to  be  the  suggestion ;  but  the  meaning  of  the  vb.  is  un- 
certain :  see  phil.  n.  Ethiopia  is  divided  by  a  single  river,  the 
Nile :  see  above  on  v.^^  Omitting  la?td,  Marti  places  this  line, 
which  the  rivers  divide,  immediately  after  ^*. 

3,  A  warning  addressed  not  in  particular  to  the  envoys  (v.2) 

*  (&,  Koppe,  Ew.,  Del.,  Di.,  Che.,  Du.,  Marti, 
t  Hitz.,  Che.,  Di.,  Du.,  Marti. 


XVIII.  3,  4  313 

or  their  countrymen,  but  to  the  world  at  large.  Yahweh  is  about 
to  manifest  His  might  to  the  nations  :  when  the  signals  are  given, 
let  all  men  give  heed.  Possibly  the  v.  is  the  work  of  an  eschato- 
logical  supplementer  (Marti)  to  whom  the  embassy  of  v.^  was  of 
no  importance,  and  who  had  no  particular  interest  in  the  land 
from  which  it  came ;  note  that  pan,  frequent  in  later  literature, 
never  occurs  elsewhere  in  Isaiah:  cp.  13^^  n.  For  the  raising 
of  the  signal^  see  5^^  13^,  Jer  51^^;  for  the  blowing  of  the  trumpet, 
Jer  4*^  5127. — Mountain-signal]  mountain  is  required  neither 
by  the  parallelism  nor  by  the  rhythm,  and  should  perhaps  be 
omitted  :  see  phil.  n. 

4.  Go  away :  we  need  no  human  alliance ;  for  Yahweh  has 
assured  me  of  His  purpose :  He  is  sufficient.  Such  seems  to  be 
the  connection.  In  real  life  it  would  have  been  inconvenient  to 
leave  unexpressed  what  most  concerned  the  Ethiopians,  viz.  the 
refusal  of  their  alliance ;  but  the  poem  is  not  a  precis  of  Isaiah's 
interview  with  them ;  it  was  written  not  for  them,  but  for  his 
countrymen. — 4a.  So  8^^. — 4b-d.  I  will  be  quiet  and  look  forth] 
the  two  verbs  might  be  freely  rendered  untroubled  I  will  watch. 
The  clause  expresses  not  unconcerned  inactivity,  but  observation 
free  from  anxiety  as  to  the  issue.  It  is  true  the  verb  OpK^  may 
be  used  of  God's  inactivity,  so  Ps  83^ :  cp.  Jer  47^^-,  Is  62^ ; 
but  it  is  also  used  to  express  freedom  from  annoyance  or  care ; 
see  Ezk  16*2,  Ru  3I8,  and,  especially,  the  uses  of  the  Niphil  in 
reference  to  men  in  7*  30^*  32^*^.  The  vb.  D^nn,  look  forth,  is 
used  of  the  divine  observation  of  the  world  and  its  inhabitants 
and  needs ;  so  Ps  33^3'-  80^^,  La  5^,  Is  63^*. — The  world  may 
be  in  turmoil,  but  Yahweh  undisturbed  keeps  watch,  in  readiness 
for  action  in  His  sure  abode '9i\\\QS\  cannot  be  shaken — "  ut  Judaei 
putant,  in  Templo ;  ut  nos,  in  coelestibis  "  (Jer.).  Whatever  the 
reference,  and  Jerome  was  probably  right,  the  term  (p^D)  is 
significant,  and  is  inadequately  represented  by  dwelling-place 
(RV) :  it  is  a  place  which  is  firmly  fixed,  which  endures  and 
cannot  be  shaken :  cp.  the  use  of  the  vb.  in  Ps  93^^-,  and  see 
2*  n. — Like  the  dazzling  heat  above  the  light]  this  line  contains, 
like  the  next,  a  comparison  rather  than,  as  many  *  have  supposed, 
a  note  of  time  (see  phil.  n.).  But  neither  the  translation  nor  the 
point  of  comparison  is  free  from  ambiguity,  nnv  readily 
expresses  both  the  ideas  of  glow  and  of  dazzle ;  cp.  "  a  glowing 

♦«.^.  Ges.,  Del. 


314  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

wind,"  Jer  4",  a  "  dazzling "  (white)  skin,  Ca  510  (adj.).  La  4^ 
(vb.).  Above  the  lights  is  but  one  possible  rendering  of  "1IK  'h^ ; 
others  are,  at  time  of  light  (cp.  the  use  of  7j;  in  Jer  8^^,  and  see 
BDB  754*5) ;  or,  on  the  ground  of  on  account  of  light  (Di. :  cp. 
BDB  754^).  The  word  IIS,  lights  means,  once  at  least  (Job  31^^), 
specifically  the  sun ;  yet  the  phrase  can  scarcely  mean  at  mid-day 
(ffi),  for  in  Neh  8^  "iix  is  contrasted  with  mid-day  as  the  light 
of  the  earlier  part  of  the  day.  If  the  clause  is  temporal,  it 
means  when  it  is  {sun-)light,  in  sunshine^  a.  specification  that 
adds  little  to  the  idea  of  dazzling  heat.  Possibly,  therefore,  Du. 
is  right  in  supposing  that  the  dazzling  heat  is  defined  as  that 
which  seems  to  be  above  the  sun,  not  proceeding  from  it,  but 
belonging  to  another  sphere,  and  regarded  by  many  people  as  the 
region  of  the  highest  gods. — Lihe  a  cloud  of  night-mist^  a  com- 
parison from  the  night,  as  was  the  last  from  the  day.  The  word 
cloudj  2Vi  elsewhere  expresses  clouds  as  the  source  of  rain  (5^),  or 
as  high  in  the  sky  (14^^  Job  20^),  or  as  moving  swiftly  across  the 
sky  (60^).  The  h^  in  time  ((&),  or  heat  (J^),  of  harvest^  is  not  the 
atmospheric  moisture  condensed  by  the  cooling  of  the  ground, 
i.e.  dew  proper,  which  forms  during  spring  and  autumn  in 
Palestine,  but  the  night  mist,  or  rain,  which  is  an  invaluable 
feature  of  the  hot  season  from  May,  and  especially  from  August, 
to  October.  The  westerly  winds  bring  much  moisture  from  the 
Mediterranean,  and  this  condenses  under  the  action  of  the  cool 
night  air  into  something  like  a  Scotch  mist ;  see  Che.  in  EBi. 
1094  f.  (on  the  basis  of  Neil,  Palestine  Explored,  1 29-151).  To 
the  Hebrews  this  moisture,  which  might  be  sufficient  to  drench 
the  hair  of  those  out  in  it  (Ca  5^),  seemed  to  descend  from 
heaven  (Gn  2728,  Dt  3328)  by  night  (Nu  ii^,  Jg  (i^'^-^% 
returning  thither  early  in  the  morning  (Ex  i6i3^-,  Hos  6*)  ;  what, 
then,  is  the  point  of  the  comparison  ?  Do  the  figures  enforce 
the  stillness,  or  the  watchfulness,  or  the  fostering  care  of 
Yahweh?  (i)  Di.  remarks — ^just  as  in  the  harvest  season, 
glowing  heat  by  day  and  heavy  dew  by  night,  both  necessary 
for  the  ripening  of  the  crops,  continue  constant  over  the  country, 
so  will  God  remain  unmoved,  undisturbed,  though  still  ripening 
the  plans  of  the  Assyrians.  (2)  Marti  sees  in  the  glowing 
motionless  heat,  and  in  the  lofty  clouds  driven  by  no  wind,  out 
of  sight  but  pouring  down  the  dew  in  harvest,  altogether  admir- 
able figures  for  the  unseen  but  all-seeing  God,  exalted  far  above 


XVIII.  5,  6  315 

all  that  is  human,  undisturbed  by  the  movements  of  the  world, 
but  carrying  through  His  will.  Like  heat  and  dew-cloud, 
Yahweh  can  remain  quiet  while  events  in  Asia  excite  the  famous, 
powerful,  and  distant  people  of  Ethiopia;  even  so  should 
Yahweh's  people  remain  quiet,  confiding  in  Him.  More  than 
this  is  not  told  the  Ethiopians,  nor  needs  to  be  said  to  the 
Jews,  who  should  know  that  in  quietness  lies  their  deliverance 
(74-9  28i«  3015). 

5.  If  m31  should  be  rendered  then  he  shall  cut  away,  Yahweh 
being  the  subject,  the  words  of  Yahweh  in  v.*  are  here  continued 
by  the  explanation  of  the  prophet,  cp.  Am  ^^'^.  If  the  subject 
be  indefinite,  then  one  will  cut  away,  or  then  will  be  cut  away, 
w.^  and  ^,  like  v.*,  may  be  the  words  of  Yahweh,  though  even 
in  this  case  that  is  not  very  probable.  If  Marti's  theory,  that 
w.^- ^  originally  followed  17^"^^,  were  correct,  the  words  would 
not  be  Yahweh's,  and  the  indefinite  construction  would  be 
appropriate  enough.  Neither  the  indefinite  subj.  nor  the  un- 
expressed subj.  implying  Yahweh  seems  altogether  satisfactory, 
if  v.5  is  the  direct  continuation  of  v.*.  If,  however,  the  connec- 
tion be  original,  the  line  of  thought  must  be  somewhat  as 
follows  :  Yahweh  quietly  watches  (v.*)  the  ripening  vintage  of 
the  Assyrian  plans,  because  he  has  determined  just  before  the 
crop  is  ripe  to  slash  the  vine  to  pieces  (v.^),  i.e,  (v.^)  Yahweh 
permits  the  advance  of  the  Assyrians,  but  just  as  they  expect  to 
gain  the  object  of  their  invasion  He  will  destroy  them ;  one  and 
all  will  lie  unburied  in  the  land  they  have  invaded:  cp.  1712-14 
j^24-27  2636f.^ — Before  the  harvest^  I^Vp  is  here  used  of  the 
vintage;  so  probably  17^^  (cp.  17^®),  and  certainly  16^  (ct.  Jer 
48^^).  In  v.*  the  word  appears  to  have  its  usual  meaning  of 
^2lvs\-harvest ;  in  any  case  the  harvest  of  v.*  is  not  the  same  as 
the  harvest  of  v.'*,  which  is  generally  the  harvest  of  any  year,  and 
introduced  merely  to  complete  a  figure.  This  verbal  coincidence 
combined  with  difference  of  sense  is  somewhat  awkward ;  on  the 
other  hand,  if  as  s^^-^^  became  separated  from  9^^-10*,  so  iS^^- 
became  separated  from  i7^"^\  the  verbal  connection  may  have 
led  an  editor  to  attach  the  fragment  to  18*. — Ripening  grapes^ 
the  "1D3  is  a  fully  formed  but  immature  and  sour  grape,  as  the 
use  of  the  term  in  the  proverb  (Jer  31^®)  sufficiently  shows. — 
6.  The  invaders  will  fall  in  such  numbers  that  carrion  birds  and 
beasts  will  feed  on  them  year   in  year  out;  cp.  Ezk  39^^^-, — 


3l5  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Carrion  birds  of  the  fnountains]  The  phrase  does  not  recur ; 
cp.  Ezk  39*  "  on  the  mountains  of  Israel  .  .  .  shalt  thou  fall  to 
the  carrion  birds."     ffi  birds  of  heaven ;  cp.  i  S  17**-  ^6,  Jer  788. 

7.  A  prose  appendix,  probably  added  to  the  poem  by  a  later 
hand.  In  the  age  to  come  the  people  described  in  v.2<i-s  will 
bring  tribute  to  Yahweh  in  Sion;  cp.  Ps  6830  7210  76^2^  Zeph  3I0. 
— From  a  people]  so  ^ ;  cp.  the  next  clause  in  fflr  and  |^.  Owing 
to  the  obvious  loss  of  12  before  the  first  dV,  the  text  of  5^  makes 
the  tribute  consist  of  the  people  themselves !  Cp.  RV. — The 
place  of  the  name  of  the  Yahweh]  i.e.  the  place  where  Yahweh 
causes  His  name  to  dwell,  where  He  manifests  Himself,  where  all 
acceptable  offerings  must  be  brought ;  Dt  1 2^-  ^^ 

There  is  a  remarkable  difference  in  ffi's  rendering  of  the 
matter  common  to  this  v.  and  v. 2.  This  may  be  due  to  the 
fact  that  v.''  was  rendered  by  a  later  hand,  and  added  to  the 
translation  of  the  main  body  of  the  chapter,  which  may  have 
been  translated  before  J^  contained  v.'''.  Yet  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  v.''  contains  the  transliteration  a-aPawO,  which  is  a  striking 
characteristic  of  the  Greek  version  of  the  entire  book  (Introd.  §  21). 

I.  D'£33D  Vs'js]  ^s^¥  may  be  cstr.  of  a  form  hlf)"^,  or  (Stade,  §  241)  of  the  form 
VsJ'V  (Dt  28^2 -j.)^  which  out  of  pause  would  be  ^)ih^  (see  G-K.  29^  ;  Driver  on 
I  S  1 5^).  ^i)^  in  Dt  28*^  denotes  an  insect,  apparently  of  the  locust  kind  ; 
(cp.  Ges-B.  S.V.).  Hence  the  translation  winged  locusts  (?)  is  obvious ;  yet 
in  the  parallel  expression  ^Ja  ms^f,  winged  birds,  the  sing,  of  ^12  is  used.  No 
instance  of  h^h'ii  =  whirring,  buzzing,  is  found  ;  but  it  is  in  no  way  venturesome 

to  assume  the  meaning,  for  the  root  ^^it—Q^^^h^i  particularly  in  redupli- 
cated derivatives,  expresses  the  idea  of  a  noise  ;  so  ^J^^  ,j>>ALa  expresses 
the  emission  of  noise  when,  e.g.,  iron  is  struck  by  iron,  as  a  helmet  by  swords, 
or  the  tinkling  of  bells ;  p^^Ss  Q''?sVs,  |J  ^  • ,  are  cymbals,  so  called  from 
their  clanging  sound ;  Vs^^,  a  whirring  insect,  prob.  the  locusi  (?)  ;  !?y^^,  the 

harpoon,  which  whizzes  through  the  air  ;  ^J«^Lg  is  the  name  of  a  bird  (see 

I>ane,  and  BDB,  s.w.).  For  the  root  !?^x  =  JI?  =  V^»,  the  meanings  shadow^ 
to  cast  a  shadow,  and  so  forth,  are,  of  course,  very  well  established ;  but  re- 
duplicated forms  from  this  root  are  rarer,  though  one  such  seems  to  be  the 
NH  ^'nh'i,  which  denotes  some  overshadowing  object  smaller  than  a  n^ip 
(Levy,  iv.  195).  Di.,  indeed,  divides  Vs'?S£  into  Vx  •?»,  which  should  mean 
many  shado^vs  rather  than  twofold  shadow  (cp.  G-K.  123^:);  D'SJa  then 
becomes  a  somewhat  awkward  ace.    instead   of  a  gen.     For  the  meaning 

boats,  Ew.'  appeals  to  jMl^,    which   in   the    Kamus  is  interpreted  ^j^, 


XVIII.   7   AND   I,   2  317 

boats ;  but  Lane  suggests  that  this  is  an  error  for  -j*— ',  umbractila :  this 
seems  probable,  and  in  any  case  the  meaning  boats  is  rare  and  derivative  in 
Arabic,  and,  therefore,  a  poor  support  for  such  a  meaning  in  Hebrew.  So 
also  ffir's  rendering  o<mX  7^$  ir\olwv  wr^pvyes  leaves  it  very  doubtful  whether 
^:ihs  had  this  meaning:  and  C,  which- is  very  paraphrastic,  is  still  more  in- 
conclusive. Che.  {SBOT,  p.  104)  obtains  winged  vessels  by  reading  d'BJD  '^3 
instead  of  '3  SjtVx.— na  ^'\ni^  n3j?D]  beyond  the  rivers  of  Cush  :  cp.  Dt  30" 
D'^  nnyn,  beyond  the  sea ;  p^V  layD,  beyond  Jordan  (Nu  22*  and  often).  The 
sense  beyond^  region  beyond^  is  the  only  meaning  in  such  geographical 
expressions  that  is  justified  by  usage  ;  see  BDB,  s,v.  nay  (p.  719).  That 
layo  could  also  mean  exactly  the  opposite,  viz.  on  this  side,  was  formerly 
assumed  by  some  scholars  ;  see  Vitr. ,  Hitz.  Even  the  neutral  sense,  on  the 
side  ofy  along,  adopted  here  by  Grotius  {ad  Jlumina  Ethiopia)  and  Ew. 
{Idngs  den  Stromen),  cannot  be  admitted  ;  the  idioms  in  which  nay  is  taken 
to  mean  side  (BDB,  s.v.  nay  2)  are  different  in  character.  To  express  along, 
Hebrew  employed  a  phrase  with  t,  especially  t  Sy,  e.g.,  Nu  13*;  see 
BDB.— na  ''^r^y'\  Haupt's  contention  (in  SBOT,  p.  108  f.),  that  this  means 
the  Great  River  of  Cush,  is  abstractly  possible,  but  quite  improbable.  The 
well-established  uses  of  the  amplificative  plural  are  of  a  somewhat  different 
character  :  its  use  here  would  create  an  awkward  and  unnecessary  ambiguity  ; 
and  all  of  Haupt's  parallels  are  capable  of  satisfactory  explanations  as 
ordinary  plurals.  That  the  great  river  Euphrates  by  itself  is  intended  by  the 
nnn3  of  Ps  137^  is  altogether  improbable,  since  the  Euphrates  is  so  regularly 
S'nm  "^yn,  or  simply  '\r\v\ ;  and  again  it  is  unlikely  that  in  7^*  19'  37^'  onK' 
(which  in  Ex  7^'  must  mean  the  Nile  arms)  means  the  Nile  stream, 
single  and  undivided.  That  triple-peaked  Hermon  is  not  only  called 
Hermon,  but  once  the  Hermons  (Ps  42'),  is  natural  enough  and  no  real 
parallel  to  the  single  undivided  stream  of  either  the  Euphrates  or  the  Nile 
being  called  the  rivers. — 2.  ''?D3i]  (5  koX  ^irt<rroX(is='S3i ;  this,  or  '^33,  seems 
preferable  to  |^.  fir's  unique  rendering  of  '^3  by  iir.  was  probably  suggested 
by  the  parallel  clause  :  in  Job  9^  (JR  also  fails  to  render  ships  of  papyrus. — 
oniD]  part.  Hoph.  of  otd  with  suppression  of  the  preformative  D  (G-K.  52^). 

The  form  might  also  come  from  the  root.OT,  )oj^  ;  but  this  yields  no  more 
probable  sense  in  the  context.  Whether  fflr  (jiikvov  ?)  read  oniD  is  uncertain  ; 
but  C  KTM3,  ^  I  »  o  V;  U  dilaceratum,  may  be  free  renderings  of  btid. — 
nN'?n'i  Kin  jd]  p  has  been  commonly  treated  here  as  a  conj.  =  nrKD,  and  the 
whole  phrase  rendered  from  where  it  is  and  onwards,  i.e.  far  and  near ;  or 
from  where  it  was  and  onwards,  i.e.  from  the  beginning  of  its  history. 
Doubtful:  but  if  Kin  iD  =  Kin  iB>KD  =  invnD,  cp.  "nyD,  Gn  48";  with  nK^n, 
cp.  I  S  18'  nK'?m  Kinn  ovno ;  for  Kin  embracing  the  pred.  in  itself  (BDB 
2i6a),  cp.  the  very  similar,  but  doubtful,  Kin  'D'D,  Nah  2'.  Not  improbably 
the  text  is  corrupt,  Kin  p  being  a  corrupt  dittograph  of  Km3D[j;],  and  nK^ni  a 
corrupt  second  epithet,  perhaps  '?'?nDi :  this  would  restore  a  line  of  3  accents. 
— ip-ip]  if  the  makkeph  be  omitted,  the  form  (cp.  G-K.  84^,  /)  perhaps 

means  might',  cp.  Ar.  i^  with  that  sense.  Improbable  alternatives  are 
{nation  of,  i.e.  using,  or  subjected  to)  measuring  line  {upon)  measuring 


3l8  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

line ;  or  {nation  ofy  i.e.  given  over  to)  line  {upon)  line  (cp.  28^"),  i.e.  rites  and 
superstitions  (Vitr.  ;  cp.  Del.).  Aq.  virofiivov,  Jer.  exspectantem  connected 
ip  vi^ith  mp,  to  hope ;  ct.  (&.  dviXiria-TOf. — inh  f]  possibly  a  parallel  root  to 
^JpD  to  cleave :  cp.  kdj,  Aram.  ^i^^Q-ti.     Others  (cp.  AV)  have  treated  it  as 

parallel  to  tn,  to  plunder.  It  is  not  clear  that  the  vi^ord  was  read  by  <&. — 
3.  NB'js]  ii4  n. — nnn  03]  the  force  of  the  gen.,  if  it  means  a  signal  on  the 
mountains,  is  curious  and  not  quite  explained  by  G-K.  128^,  x.  Perhaps 
onn  (Hiph.  Inf.  of  on)  is  a  misplaced  variant  (cp.  49^  62^°)  of  ncj. — 4. 
^B  3V3  .  .  .  ns  dhd]  before  an  infin.  and,  rarely,  before  a  verbal  noun,  3 
denotes  time  (BDB  454^) :  but  it  is  never  a  temporal  conjunction ;  the 
rendering  -when  there  is  clear  heat  (RVmarg.)  is  therefore  questionable. 
cnn]  ffiS»U=Dva. — 5.  inn]  if  correct,  a  pausal  form  (G-K.  29$^)  of  inn,  Hiph. 
pf.  of  an  otherwise  unknown  root  nn,  or  (cp.  G-K.  672;)  I'n.  Pointed  i?irr  it 
might  be  Hiph.  of  irw,  which  in  NH  means  to  strike  off  the  head  (of  a  man  or 
animal).     For  the  asyndeton  mn  n'on,  cp.  G-K.  121^. 

XIX.— 7%(?  Oracle  of  Egypt 

The  ch.  consists  of  {a)  a  poem  or  poetical  fragments,  vv.^"^ 
or  15.  (^)  a  prose  section,  vv.^^'^^.  The  attempts  of  Lowth, 
Ges.,  and  recently  Cond.,  to  represent  vv.^^'^^  as  poetry,  are 
unsuccessful. 

The  poem  conceives  Yahweh  as  about  to  visit  Egypt  in 
person,  and  to  punish  it  by  bringing  about  civil  war,  the 
dominion  of  a  *  hard  lord,'  and  the  complete  destruction  of  the 
entire  country  by  the  drying  up  of  the  Nile.  Vv.^^^-  also  speak 
of  a  plan  of  Yahweh  to  punish  Egypt,  terrifying  them  by  means 
of  Judah.  But  vv.^^'^s  are  in  an  entirely  different  tone  :  here  the 
expectation  is  that  Egypt  and  (though  this  point  comes  out 
rather  allusively)  Assyria  also  will  be  converted  to  Yahweh. 

Yv.i-15.  i6f.  18-25  succeed  one  another,  but  it  cannot  be  said 
that  there  is  any  real  transition  from  the  theme  of  vv.^^^^  to 
the  very  different  theme  of  vv.^^'^^ ;  certainly  no  such  transition 
exists  in  vv.^^^-  which  bring  us  no  nearer  than  vv.^'^^  to  vv.^^^^s. 

Probably  the  original  oracle  extended  down  to  v.^*  or  ^^  only ; 
the  remainder  of  the  chapter,  like  chs.  18  and  20,  were 
subsequently  added  to  this  *  oracle'  as  dealing  also  with  the 
Nile  valley. 

The  following  translation  contains  42  lines,  distributed  as  follows :  i 
monostich,  v.*" ;  3  tristichs,  vv.^  8.  i4  .  15  distichs.  Possibly  vv.^  and  ^  were 
originally  distichs  and  have  been  expanded  by  the  incorporation  of  glosses, 
viz.  v.^**  and  in  v.^*  mcyo  ^D3  and  iN'pn. 


XVIII.  3-5 ;  XIX.  3^9 

In  w.*-"  the  rhythm  is  3  :  3,  except,  if  the  text  be  sound,  so  far  as  v.'° 
(two  accents)  and  **  are  concerned. 

In  vv.*'*'  ^^*"  distichs  3  :  3  scarcely  occur  ;  v.****  **  might  certainly  be  so 
read,  and  v.*  if  it  ended  with  vnic;  but  scarcely  v.***  or  "^  The  dominant 
rhythm  is  4  :  4  ;  but  conspicuous  exceptions  to  this  are  due  to  the  lines  of 
two  accents  in  vv.**^  "* ;  moreover,  in  vv.'<'*  **•  **•  *••  "**  ^  the  lines  balance  one 
another  very  ill.     In  v.^^**  mK3x  might  be  omitted. 

Parallelism  more  or  less  complete  marks  most  of  the  distichs.  Absence 
of  parallelism  and  conspicuous  rhythmical  irregularity  coincide  in  vv.^  ***  ^. 


^  Behold  Yahweh  is  riding  upon  a  swift  cloud, 
And  he  will  come  to  Egypl^ 
And  the  idols  of  Egypt  will  tremble  at  his  presence, 
And  the  heart  of  Egypt  will  melt  within  him. 

*  "  And  I  will  spur  on  Egypt  against  Egypt,  and  they  shall 

fight. 
Every  man  against  his  brother,  and  every  man  against 

his  neighbour, 
City  against  city,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom. 
'  And  the  spirit  of  Egypt  within  him  shall  be  emptied  out, 
And  his  plan  will  I  confound ; 
And    they    will    go    to    inquire    of   the    idols    and    the 

mutterers. 
Of  the  ghosts  and  of  the  familiar  spirits; 

*  And   I  will  deliver  (?)  the   Egyptians   into  the  hand  of  a 

hard  lord. 
And  a  mighty  king  shall  have  dominion  over  them " : 
Is  the  oracle  of  the  Lord  Yahweh  of  Hosts. 

fi  And  water  shall  be  dried  up  from  the  sea. 

And  the  river  shall  be  parched  up  and  dry; 
®  And  the  river-branches  shall  stink  (?),  having  dwindled  (?), 
And  the  (Nile-)arms  of  Egypt  shall  be  parched  up. 
Reeds  and  rushes  moulder, 

^  *  And  all  the  sedge-grass  *  on   the  brink  (?)  of  the  Nile 

'  shall  shrivel  away  (?).' 
And  all  that  is  sown  by  the  Nile  shall  dry  up, 
It  is  driven  away  and  is  no  more. 

*  And  the  fishermen  shall  mourn  and  lament, 

All  they  that  cast  hook  in  the  Nile, 

And  they  that  spread  nets  on  the  water  have  languished. 


320  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

8-  9  And  they  that  work  flax  are  ashamed, 

'The  (women)   that  comb'  and   the   (men)   that   weave 

'  have  grown  pale.' 
^^  And   those   of  her  who   *  do  textile   work '   shall   continue 

crushed, 
All  who  earn  wages  (?)  shall  be  vexed  in  soul. 

11  Utterly  foolish  are  the  princes  of  So'an, 

Pharaoh's  wisest   plan-makers   are   (makers  of)  a  witless 

plan  ! 
How  can  ye  say  to  Pharaoh, 

"  A  son  of  the  wise  am  I,  a  son  of  ancient  kings "  ? 

12  Where,  then,  are  thy  wise  men  that  they  may  tell  thee, 

And    make    known    (to    thee)    what    Yahweh    of  Hosts 

hath  planned  against  Egypt? 

13  Befooled  are  the  princes  of  §o*an,  deluded  the  princes  of 

Memphis, 
And  the  chiefs  of  her  tribes  have  led  Egypt  astray. 
1*  Yahweh  hath  mingled  within  *  them  '  the  spirit  of  distortion, 
And  they  have  led  Egypt  astray  in  all  her  works, 
As  a  drunkard  goeth  astray  in  his  vomit. 
15  And  there  shall  be  no  work  for  Egypt, 

Which  head   or  tail,  palm-branch  or  reed,  can  perform. 

It  has  been  questioned  whether  this  poem  is  a  unity  :  many 
have  suspected  that  vv.*-i®  are  from  one  poem,  vv.i"*-  n-i^  from 
another ;  Marti  holds  both  vv.^-i^  and  ii"i*  to  be  later  additions 
to  1"*.  Exegesis  (see  below  on  ^'i®  ad  tnit.)  and  rhythmical 
differences  (see  above)  give  some  justification  for  the  suspicion. 

In  vv.i"^  the  writer  appears  to  have  certain  definite  historical 
circumstances  in  view :  he  is  doubtless  predicting,  yet  he  appears 
to  live  at  a  time  when  there  had  already  ceased  to  be  any 
effective  central  government  in  Egypt,  but  when  (yet  see  Dr. 
LOT  21  <)  some  soldier  or  monarch  had  already  made  a  name 
for  himself,  and  seemed  likely  to  make  Egypt  subject  to  him. 
Unfortunately  such  circumstances,  though  they  existed  in  the 
time  of  Isaiah,  were  recurrent  in  the  history  of  Egypt ;  and  until 
it  is  possible  to  fix  the  date  of  the  prophecy  on  independent 
grounds,  the  identification  of  the  "hard  lord"  of  v.*  must 
remain  a  matter  of  guesswork. 


XIX.  T-is  321 

Many  guesses  have  been  made  ;  it  is  not  even  agreed  that  the  hard  lord  is 
a  foreigner,  though  this  would  seem  to  be  the  intention  of  the  poet.  On  the 
assumption  that  the  poem  is  the  work  of  Isaiah,  interpreters  have  identified 
"the  hard  lord"  with  the  Ethiopian  Piankhi  (Stade,  De  Is.  Vat.  Aeth., 
1873  :  withdrawn,  A  TTheol.  226),  or  Tirhakah  (Com.),  or  one  of  the  Assyrian 
kings  (^i.,  Ibn  Ezr.),  whether  Sargon  (Hitz.,  Driver  in  LOT*  215,  ten- 
tatively), or  Sennacherib  (W.  R.  Smith,  Prophet^^  333).  Many  have 
identified  the  hard  lord  with  Psammetichos  i.  (663-609  B.C.),  who  established 
his  rule  over  the  (contending)  nomes,  or  kingdoms,  by  the  help  of  foreign 
mercenaries;  see  Herod,  ii.  147-154:  Diod.  Sic.  i.  66  ;  and,  for  the  history 
of  the  period  in  the  light  of  most  recent  evidence,  Breasted,  Hist,  of  Egypt ^ 
c.  xxvi.  This  view  was  taken,  according  to  Ges.,  by  Grotius  '*  and  most  of 
the  best  interpreters  since"  ;  by  himself  too,  but  with  an  attempt,  which  later 
knowledge  has  shown  to  be  impossible,  to  throw  back  the  rise  of  Psammetichos 
to  the  lifetime  of  Isaiah  ;  by  Del.  also,  who,  however,  considers  the  poem  a 
detailed  prophecy  of  Isaiah  and  not,  as  Eichhorn  had  already  argued,  the  work 
of  a  contemporary  of  Psammetichos.  This  view  has  been  recently  revived  by 
Steuernagel  {Theol.  Studien  u.  Kritiken,  1909,  pp.  8-12),  who  argues  that 
among  the  mercenaries  employed  by  Psammetichos  were  Jews  supplied  by 
Manasseh,  for  which  he  was  condemned  in  Dt  17^'  ;  that  when  the  poet  says 
Yahweh  will  fight  against  Egypt,  he  means  these  Jewish  mercenaries  will  be 
employed  against  Egypt ;  and  that  some  of  these  mercenaries  were  the 
founders  of  the  Jewish  community  at  Elephantine  the  existence  of  which  has 
been  brought  to  light  by  recent  discoveries  ;  see  Sayce  and  Cowley,  Aramaic 
Papyri  discovered  at  Assuan,  1906 ;  Sachau,  Drei  Aramdische  Papyrusur- 
kunden  aus  Elephantine^  1907-  Descending  later,  we  may  find  a  suitable 
*'  hard  lord  "  in  Cambyses,  at  whose  invasion  the  Jewish  temple  at  Elephantine 
was  spared,  though  the  Egyptian  temples  were  destroyed  (Sachau's  Papyrus ^ 
i.  13  f.) ;  "it  is  most  natural  to  explain  19*  as  referring  to  the  mad  fury  of 
Cambyses,*'  and  "at  any  rate  probable  that  19"'  was  written  sometime 
between  "  525  **  (final  defeat  of  Psamtik  ill.  by  Cambyses)  and  485  (reconquest 
of  Egypt  by  Xerxes) "  :  so  Cheyne,  Introd.  117.  Still  later  Artaxerxes  Ochus, 
by  his  cruel  treatment  of  Egypt  in  343  B.C.,  at  the  end  of  a  period  of  internal 
strife  (see  on  v.  2),  would  fit  the  r61e :  so  Du.,  Marti.  Finally,  Kennett 
(pp.  53 f.)  finds  in  Antiochus  Epiphanes  (D'jb  t;*,  Dn  8®)  the  "hard  lord"  of 
this  poem. 

If  vv.^^"^^  are  of  a  piece  with  vv.^-*,  we  must  seek  a  period  of 
origin  for  both  when  (i)  there  was  a  Pharaoh,  and  (2)  $o'an 
(Tanis)  and  Memphis  were  of  importance  :  (2)  determines  nothing, 
for  So  an  and  Memphis  were  important  at  any  period  that  could 
be  considered  for  this  poem  (see  onv.^^):  (i)  should  probably 
exclude  the  period  of  Persian  (525-404,  343-332  b.c.)  and  Greek 
(332-31  B.C.)  dominion,*  but  scarcely  perhaps  the  period  im- 
mediately preceding  Psammetichos  i.  (so  Alt,  Israel  u.  Aegypten^ 

•  Yet  see  Kennett,  p.  54  n.  i. 
VOL.    I. — 21 


322  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

p.  90),  or  the  similar  period  of  decentralisation  before  the 
establishment  of  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  (712  B.C.). 

It  is  difficult,  as  the  divergence  of  views  cited  above  must 
suffice  to  indicate,  to  give  the  poem  any  secure  place  in  Isaiah's 
literary  and  prophetic  career.  As  an  example  of  attempts  so  to 
place  it,  we  may  cite  W.  R.  Smith  {Frophets,  333) :  "  While  Isaiah 
does  not  cease  to  concentrate  his  chief  attention  on  Israel  .  .  . 
the  largeness  of  the  historical  issues  involved  in  the  downfall  of 
the  supreme  world-power  carries  the  prophetic  vision  far  beyond 
the  narrow  limits  of  Judah  .  .  .  and  so  when  Babylon  had  fallen 
(23^3)  and  Sennacherib  at  length  began  his  destroying  march 
upon  the  western  provinces,  Isaiah  followed  his  progress  with 
absorbing  interest.  First,  he  announces  the  speedy  discomfiture 
of  the  Arab  tribes  (21^^^-).  .  .  .  And  next  .  .  .  the  stroke  shall 
fall  on  the  proud  city  of  Tyre  (ch.  23).  .  .  .  And  still  the  career 
of  the  destroyer  has  not  reached  its  end,  '  Behold  Yahweh  .  .  . 
cometh  unto  Egypt ' "  (ch.  1 9).  Yet  it  is  questionable  whether  this 
assumed  period  does  real  justice  to  v.^ :  Smith  evades  the  point 
by  making  the  advent  of  Sennacherib  dissolve  the  government  of 
Pharaoh  and  set  free  the  intestine  jealousies  of  the  Egyptian 
nomes  (p.  335) ;  but  this  is  contrary  to  the  order  of  events  pre- 
dicted in  the  poem. 

In  the  style  and  ideas  there  is  nothing  that  positively  supports 
an  Isaianic  origin,  for  the  occurrence  of  some  words  and  phrases 
used  by  Isaiah  and  collected  by  Cheyne  {Introd.  112)  cannot  do  so. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  usages  and  ideas  which  favour,  if  they 
do  not  absolutely  require,  a  post-exilic  rather  than  a  pre-exilic  date. 
The  frequent  and  inelegant  repetition  of  Egypt  (5  times  in  w.^"*,  4 
times  in  vv.^2-15^  may,  indeed,  tell  more  against  Isaianic  authorship 
than  in  favour  of  any  particular  date,  for  we  cannot  safely  assume 
that  there  were  no  inelegant  writers  before  the  Exile.  Ew. 
{Propheten^  p.  480),  while  recognising  peculiarities,  was  content 
to  attribute  its  "duller  colour"  and  "deadened  fire,"  of  which  he 
was  conscious,  to  the  advanced  age  at  which  this  *'  the  last  writing 
of  Isaiah  "  was  written ;  cp.  Skinner,  p.  145.  Many  of  the  peculi- 
arities of  vocabulary  or  style  collected  by  Cheyne  (pp.  1 1 1  f.)  are 
entirely  inconclusive  as  to  date,  and  among  these  11VD  (37^^  n.) 
should  be  included.  Others  are  textually  doubtful  (see  below 
on  IT'iTxn,  v.^ ;  nny,  ^),  but  others  have  late  Hebrew  or  Aramaic 
affinities ;  see  notes  below  on  nj^:,  v.^ ;  fep,  v.^ ;  IJ'BJ  ^Da«,  vA 


XIX.  1-4  323 

Very  significant  is  the  use  of  nv)  in  v.^ ;  see  n.  there ;  and  the 
structure  of  v.^^  (n.)  is  noticeable.  Possible,  but  not  absolutely 
certain,  implications  of  v.^  (see  note  on  And  come)  and  v.^^  would 
also  indicate  a  late  date. 

If  more  were  known  of  the  circumstances  and  outlook  of  the 
Jews  at  the  time  of  Artaxerxes  Ochus,  we  might  be  able  with 
some  probability  to  assign  the  poem  to  that  period. 

1-4.  Civil  War  and  the  "hard  lord." — Yahweh  is  about 
to  descend  in  judgment  on  Egypt :  He  will  give  over  the  country 
to  civil  war  (v. 2)  and  the  domination  of  a  cruel  and  mighty  king 
(v.*).  So  both  civil  war  and  foreign  invasion  figure  in  the 
prophecy  of  Ephraim's  fall  (97-10  526-29), 

I.  At  Yahweh's  advent  in  Egypt,  gods  and  people  will 
tremble. —  Yahweh  is  riding]  He  will  make  a  swift  descent, 
riding  through  heaven  (cp.  Dt  332^)  on  a  c/oud-chsinot :  cp. 
Ps  i8iof.(9f.)  6834(33)  for  similar  conceptions;  the  idea  of  Yah- 
weh's cloud-chariot  is  elaborated  in  Ezk  i.  10.  ii22f.. —  ^/// 
come]  the  vb.  is  used  of  Yahweh's  advent  to  judgment  (e.g. 
Ps  96I8).  For  Yahweh's  advent  in  person  to  the  land  which 
He  is  about  to  punish,  cp.  Jer  49^  and  ct.  Is  9*^(8)^  whether 
such  a  representation  any  more  than  that  in  Am  92^-  is  necessarily 
inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  Omnipresence  (Jer  232*,  Ps  139), 
and,  even  if  so,  whether  it  is  necessarily  inconsistent  with 
Isaiah's  conceptions  (cp.  6*),  may  be  doubted.  By  reason  of 
Yahweh's  presence  (72  63I®),  the  idols  {2^  n.)  will  tremble  (6*  72) 
with  fear,  and  the  heart  of  Egypt — the  people  personified  (i^  n.) 
— will  melt  (13^),  i.e.  their  courage  will  vanish  (cp.  Dt  20^, 
2  S  1710). — 2-4.  Yahweh  speaks:  in  (&.  the  first  person  begins 
in  v.^  f^  is  preferable. — I  will  spur  on]  910  phil.  n. — 2b.  Cp.  3^. 
City  against  city  and  kingdom  against  kingdom]  the  two  clauses 
are  almost  synonymous :  the  "  kingdoms "  are  the  nomes  (ffi) 
of  Egypt.  The  form  of  the  prophecy  in  this  v.  would  be  best 
accounted  for  if  it  was  written  in  a  period  when  there  was  no 
effective  central  government  and  no  strong  Pharaoh  (v.^^)  able 
to  control  the  monarchs.  Such  a  period  was  that  which 
preceded  the  establishment  of  the  Ethiopian  Dynasty,  r.  712  B.C. 
(Breasted,  History  of  Egypt^  547  f.) :  another  such  followed  the 
fall  of  the  same  dynasty  {ib.  565  ff.).  So,  too,  the  period 
between  404,  when  the  Egyptians  recovered  their  independence 
of  the  Persians,  and  342  b.c.  was  "  filled  with  internal  discord. 


"l 


324  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


Three  dynasties  (from  Tanis,  Mendes,  and  Sebennytus)  and  at 
least  nine  kings  .  .  .  are  mentioned  "  (W.  Max  Miiller  in  EBi. 
1247). — 3.  Timorous  in  v.^,  fratricidally  courageous,  or  at  least 
pugnacious,  in  v.^,  the    Egyptians   are  now  pictured  as  witless 
and  perplexed.     The  various  pictures  are  unrelated  :    there  is  no 
psychological  development  from  v.  to  v. — The  spirit  within  him 
shall  be  emptied  out']  Egypt  is  personified,  as  in  v.^.     The  phrase 
means  the  Egyptians  will  lose  their  wits ;  cp.  the  parallel  line. 
The  use   of  nn   is   significant :   nil   is   here   an   essential  and 
permanent  part  of  the  personality.     Originally  nil  denoted  an 
invading  spirit  temporarily  taking  possession  of  a  man,  and  was 
thus  distinguished  from  the  t^'SJ,  or  personal  soul,  which  could 
not   be   separated   from  a   man   without   leaving  him   dead  or 
unconscious.      This   distinction   is   largely   maintained   in   pre- 
exilic    literature,    but     became     increasingly    obscured    later : 
^^  ruach  is  not  used  of  the  breath-soul  in  man  in  any  pre-exilic 
document,"  nor  is   it   "  used   with    psychical  predicates  in  any 
pre-exilic  passage,   though  from  the  Exile   onwards  this  usage 
becomes  frequent,  whilst  in  Psalms  and  Proverbs  the  term  is 
practically  employed  as   a  synonym  of  nephesh  and  *  heart'  to 
denote  the  inner  life  in  general.  ...  By  the  time  of  Ezekiel, 
we  find  that  ruach  has  come  to  denote  the  normal  breath-soul, 
as  the   principle  of  life   in   man  (Ezk  37^- ^•^)  .  .  .  from  this 
point  onwards  we  find  ruach  following  a  line  of  development 
similar  to  that  of  nephesh,  with  which  it  is  used  in  parallelism 
{e.g.  Is  26^)."* — 3c.  d.  In  their  perplexity  the  Egyptians  will 
turn  for  counsel  to  their  idols  and  to  the  spirits  of  the  dead; 
but  they  will  get  no  help :  their  idols  are  as  frightened  (v.^)  as 
themselves.     It  seems  unnecessary  to  regard  the  consultation  of 
the  gods  as  a  proof  of  the  senselessness  of  the  Egyptians,  and 
consequently  to  see  in   this   trait   an  indication  of  a  dogmatic 
and    unsympathetic    monotheism    (Du.).       There    is    nothing 
specifically    Egyptian    in   the   forms   of  divination   mentioned : 
for  the  first  term  idols^  see  2*,  for  the  ghosts  and  the  familiar 
spirits,  8^^ ;  the  second  term  D^DN  occurs  here  only ;  the  Arabic 

i?^  means  "to  emit  a  moaning  or  creaking  sound";  mutterers  is 

but  a  third  term  for  the  dead,  who  give  their  responses  with  a 

thin  and  low  voice  (8^^  29^). — 4.  Even  if  the  writer  had  some 

*  H.  W.  Robinson  in  Mansfield  College  Essays,  270-273. 


XIX.  2-5  325 

definite  individual  in  his  mind  whom  he  expected  to  subdue 
Egypt,  the  adjectives  by  which  he  describes  him  tell  us  little, 
unless,  which  is  unlikely,  he  intends  some  native  Egyptian  who 
had  gained  a  reputation  for  severity.  Any  conqueror  would 
ipso  facto  be  mighty  :  any  foreign  ruler  as  the  imposer  of  hard,  />. 
foreign,  service  would  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  conquered, 
especially  in  expectation,  be  a  hard  lord.  For  various  guesses 
at  identification,  see  p.  321.  The  phraseology  in  some  respects 
resembles  that  of  the  curse  of  Eshmun'azar  on  the  individuals 
who  should  tamper  with  his  tomb :  "  May  the  holy  gods  deliver 
them  up  (di:d^)  to  a  noble  prince  ("inx  [nlsteo  n«),  who  shall 
rule  over  them"  {CIS  i.  3^  =  Cooke,  NSIy  p.  30). 

2.  'n3D3Di]  (!R  KoX  iir^-fepd-fiaovTai. — np33i]  G-K.  6^dd. — ySnK]  13"  n. — 4. 
'm3Di]  unless  this  is  an  error  for  'maoi  (Ezk  30^^),  the  root  nao  (in  OT  Gn 

8^,  Ps  63^^),  ;^l£0)  jMf  Assyr.  sikiru,  meaning  to  dam  up  water,  shut  up  the 
mouth  or  ears  and  the  like,  developed  also  the  meaning  to  deliver  up :  cp. 
the  Hebrew  development  of  the  similar  root  nJD  (BDB,  s.v. ). — rwp  d'^k]  pi.  of 
majesty  (G-K.  I24«)  with  sing.  adj.  (G-K.  124^).  (!G,SH  render  by  a  pi. — 
jnKn]  (&.  om. 

5-10.  The  Nile  is  to  dry  up. — Between  vv.^-^  and  "-i^ 
which  prophesy  political  disaster,  comes  this  prediction  that  the 
Nile  and  the  Nile-streams  will  run  dry;  that  all  vegetation 
dependent  on  them  will  wither  away  ;  and  that  all  classes  of 
people  directly  or  indirectly  dependent  on  the  Nile  or  the 
vegetation  promoted  by  it  will  be  distressed.  The  sequence 
within  these  verses  is  natural  and  good,  but  as  between  vv.^-^^ 
and  ^"^  it  is  as  poor  as  within  vv.^-*  (see  above) ;  for  in  spite  of 
the  fact  (see  Ges.)  that  changes  of  Mohammedan  dynasties  have 
occasionally  coincided  with  a  low  Nile  (far  more  than  which  is 
intended  here),  the  drying  up  of  the  Nile  is  no  natural  sequence 
to  the  accession  of  a  hard  lord :  either  might  well  be  conceived 
as  a  judgment  from  Yahweh,  but  they  go  ill  together :  the  com- 
bination in  Ezk  3oi<'-i2  of  the  slaughter  of  the  Egyptians  by 
Nebuchadnezzar's  troops  and  the  drying  up  of  the  Nile  is  less 
unnatural,  for  no  picture  is  there  suggested  of  Nebuchadnezzar 
becoming  the  ruler  of  the  unpeopled  desert:  ct.  still  further 
Ezk  32^2-15^  where  the  waters  flow  on  in  a  country  desolated 
and  depopulated  by  the  sword. 

5.  The  sea]  the   Nile;  iS^  n.— 5b  is  =  Job  14"^;  and  line 


326  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

a.  is  but  a  variant  of  Job  14^1*. — The  river]  the  main  stream  of 
the  Nile :  ct.  7^0  n. — 6.  River-branches\  the  artificial  conduits 
made  from  the  Nile  for  purposes  of  irrigation  ;  so  nnna  is  used  of 
the  canals  of  Babylon,  Ps  137^,  and  "inj  of  a  particular  canal, 
Ezk  i^'  ^  Ezr  831. — 7%^  {Nile-)arms\  the  branches  into  which 
the  Nile  divides  in  the  Delta  may  be  specially  intended,  though 
D''"iK^  is  not  limited  to  these :  7^^  n.  If  -i5<^  is  a  loan-word 
from  Egyptian  {^iotr^  '/<?>,  water-course)^  and  not  an  old  Semitic 
word  (see  Ges-B.  s,v.\  it  may  at  first  have  meant  specifically 
streams  of  Egypt ;  but  any  such  limitation  of  meaning  was  lost 
later  (see  Dn  12^-  '^),  and  then  the  addition  of  Egypt  {o.'^.  7I8  3725) 
was  not  superfluous;  cp.  river  ("»{<"')  of  Egypt  in  Am  8^  9^ — 
probably  late  passages. — 6C-7.  In  four  lines  of  which  7a  cer- 
tainly, and  7c  possibly,  are  corrupt,  the  rotting  and  withering 
of  the  vegetation  are  described. — "Jdi,  Very  uncertain  ;  see  phil.  n. 
Meadows  (RV)  is  a  very  conjectural  rendering  of  miy,  which 
should  mean  bare  places. — All  that  is  sown]  yiTD  f  may  mean 
either  all  land  that  is  sown^  or  all  seed  that  is  sown. — 8.  In  the 
dry  river-bed  no  fish  can  live.  This  would  deeply  affect  the 
whole  of  the  poorer  classes,  who  largely  fed  on  the  abundant  fish 
supply  of  the  Nile:  Nu  11^  (n.). — Shall  mourn  and  lament]  cp. 
32s  ;  to  separate  the  vbs.  (RV)  destroys  the  3  ;  3  rhythm. — 9.  The 
distress  of  the  flax-workers.  Much  flax  was  grown  in  Egypt, 
and  the  growth  and  preparation  of  it  formed  an  important 
industry.  Failure  of  water  meant  failure  of  the  crop.  Two 
processes  in  the  manufacture  of  flax  are  here  particularly 
referred  to:  (i)  the  combing  of  the  stalks  whereby  the  poorer 
fibres,  which  were  used  for  tow,  were  separated  from  the  better 
fibres,  which  were  used  for  (2)  weaving  into  material.  Cp. 
Wilkinson,  Ancient  Egyptians^  iii.  138  f. — They  that  work  in  flax 
.  .  .  the  women  that  comb]  so  omitting  a  single  letter.  |^  appar- 
ently means  they  that  work  in  combed  flax,  i.e.  those  that  work 
the  superior  fibres  of  the  plant  into  material ;  the  adjective 
distinguishes  them  from  another  class  who  may  have  made  the 
tow  into  wicks ;  but  it  is  questionable  whether  this  distinction  is 
probable  here  :  hence,  and  on  rhythmical  grounds,  the  emended 
text  in  this  and  the  next  clause  is  preferable,  yet  perhaps  not 
quite  correct,  for  the  distribution  of  the  work  between  women 
and  men  cannot  be  satisfactorily  explained. — The  men  that  weave 
have  grown  pale]  the  vb.  (nin)  ||  to  "  are  ashamed,"  as  in  29^21. 


XIX.  5-IO  327 

For  the  conjectural  reading  ITin,  J^  has  '•"ilPl,  which  is  conjectured 
to  have  the  same  meaning  as  iin,  white  stuffs  linen  or  cotton, 
Est  i^  8^^ :  J^  might  then  be  rendered  weavers  of  white  stuff. — 
10.  The  distress  of  another  set,  or  two  sets,  of  people  is  here 
described :  unfortunately  the  text  or  meaning  of  the  terms  is 
uncertain.  A  generalising  conclusion  would  not  be  inap- 
propriate; but  whether  the  terms  mean  the  foundations  (cp. 
Ps  11^)  and  workers  for  hire  respectively,  and  therefore  either 
{a)  the  entire  population — the  leading  classes  on  whom  the  state 
rests,  and  the  rank  and  file  who  work  for  hire,  or  {p)  the  entire 
proletariat,  the  two  terms  being  regarded  as  synonymous,  is  very 
doubtful.  Possibly  \P  continues  the  description  of  the  flax- 
workers  begun  in  v.^.  An  allusion  to  the  "  makers  of  dams " 
(RVmarg.)  would  be  belated.     See,  further,  phil.  n. — 

S.  inrji]  MT  Niph.f;  Kal,  41",  Jer  5i«>t.— 6.  imjiKm]  an  error  for 
in'3ini  (G-K.  53/)  ratlier  than  a  unique  instance  of  a  denominative  formed  from 
an  elative  (Ew.  Heb.  Gr.  126^) ;  but  corruption  of  the  text  may  go  deeper  ; 
for  the  meaning  stinky  which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  OT,  we  may,  indeed, 
compare  !^\i  to  stink 'y  but  the  versions  do  not  recognise  the  meaning,  the 
parallel  does  not  secure  it,  and  **  stinking  "  would  be  more  in  place  after  the 
rotting  of  the  reeds  (v.«^).— i'?'?n]  doubtful :  note  (<z)  for  i'?'?t  f,  38",  Job  28* 
have  1*?! ;  see  G-K.  670^,  cc ;  {b)  ^^%  all  prefix  1,  and  dR  seems  to  have 
read  the  word  as  a  second  noun ;  (f)  neither  ^^i,  vb.,  nor  Vn,  adj.,  is  elsewhere 
used  of  water.  The  prevalence  of  the  3  :  3  rhythm  in  vv.*"^*'  suggests  that  i^Si, 
or  whatever  it  stands  for,  went  with  v.^,  not  with  v.***. — I'^op,  Is  33' f  ;  cp. 
^^SidD,  to  be  mouldy. — ^7.  nK'  '£3  '?y  "xvc  Sy  nny]  the  absence  of  a  vb.,  the 
variations  of  the  versions,  the  unsuitability  of  nny,  which  means  if  anything 
bare  places  (not  meadows)^  the  dissimilarity  of  the  neighbouring  lines,  all 
point  to  textual  corruption,  tik'  h]}  and  niK'  "t  Vy  look  like  variants,  'b  is 
difficult ;  the  mouth  of  the  Nile  is  scarcely  a  place  likely  to  be  chosen  in 
illustration  of  fruitfulness,  and  the  suggestion  that  'S  here  means  banks  (Du.), 
a  meaning  which  would  be  appropriate,  rests  on  the  precarious  argument 
that  as  lip  means  one  bank  (e.g.  Gn  41'),  mouth  means  both  banks  :  the 
analogy  of  such  expressions  as  the  mouth  of  a  well,  a  sack,  and  so  forth,  shows 
that,  naturally  enough,  mouth  stood  for  openings,  not  for  what  surrounded  or 
enclosed  an  opening.  (&  has  Kal  rh  Ax*  "^^  'x\<aphv  irav  rb  /ci/^Xy  tov  Trora/toO. 
For  nny,  &  has  P^Q^,  pond-weed,  and  ^,  apparently,  rn^i.  Marti  (followed 
in  the  translation  above)  emends  tentatively  niK'  'fl  ^y  inx  ^3  rnyi :  for  ray, 
see  Jl  i"  (?). — yiiD]  is  best  rendered  seed  (cp.  ^3ND  from  '?3k),  if  rpi  is  said 
of  yiiD ;  otherwise  sown  p/ace,  lajid  sown  is  preferable.  — ijj'ki  »]nj]  <&  dv€/x6<p- 
dopov,  reading  ^^^  and  omitting  uj'ni,  which  might  be  overlooked  before  uxi. 
The  line,  over-short  even  in  |^,  is  perhaps  corrupt.— 8.  tik'3  '3''?B'd]  5^1  n. 
— iVSdn]  if  taken,  as  commonly,  with  what  precedes,  spoils  the  parallelism; 
if  with  v.*  it  is  otiose ;  possibly  its  presence  here  is  not  unconnected  with 


328  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

corruption  in  vv.*'''  ^®. — 9.  np'nB'  D'nc's]  D'ntvs  is  probably  masc.  ;  it  is  plural 
ofni!?S  (Gezer  Calendar  Inscription,  PEF  QuSt.,  1909,  pp.  2,  5),  not,  of  course, 
of  the  nomen  unitatis  nrn5'£3  (Di.).  If  D'nB'£3  is  masc,  nip'nB'  certainly  does  not 
go  with  it.  In  any  case  there  are  other  considerations  (see  above)  against 
taking  nip'ntJ'  with  '•'** ;  either  mpne'  is  itself  a  nomen  agentis^  or,  more 
probably,  an  original  mpiB'  part.  pi.  fem.  has  been  wrongly  written  plene. — 
mn]  see  comm.  above  ;  if  a  vb.  were  not  more  probable  here  than  a  noun,  we 
might  restore  nin,  treating  the  '  as  dittograph  of  the  following  i.  €r  renders 
T^jj/  p6<r<rov. — 10.  nTiriB']  there  is  nothing  in  what  immediately  precedes  for  a  3rd 
fem.  sing.  suff.  to  refer  to ;  both  the  word  and  the  suffix  cause  difficulty ;  the 
comparison  with  Ps  1 1'  was  made  by  Ki.  and  Ibn  Ezra.  The  renderings  of  the 
versions  are,  (&  ol  ipya^dfievoi  avrd ;  5  omits  ;  ^  nhd  "nv  n'3  nnx,  the  place 
where  they  weave  textures ;  3J  irrigua  eius.  tZT,  and  probably  ffi  too,  connect 
the  word  with  a  root  nnr,  to  weave ,  which  is  used  in  Aram.,  and  whence  the 
Heb.  noun  "nv,  warp^  is  derived  ;  punctuate  in  this  case  n'nhis',  or,  since  the 
masc.  DN31D  follows,  read  rcn'r,  which,  if  the  meaning  were  not  entirely 
unsuitable,  might  also  be  rendered  those  who  drink  it. — ir^  'Jfy]  if  the  phrase 
had  anything  to  do  with  hire  (commonly  n;)"^),  it  should  rather  mean  those 
who  actually  obtain  wages ^  than  those  who  work  for  them  (cp.  Pr  1 1^^),  though 
it  is  true  the  former  meaning  would  be  less  suitable  here  ;  the  latter  meaning 
is  expressed  by  Tre'.  (&.%  render  "yyo  by  strong  drink  (IPS').  CH,  Rashi,  ICi. , 
Ibn  Ezra,  AV,  RVmarg.  render  nst?,  assumed  to  be  an  orthographic  variation 
of  n3D,  by  dams,  or  sluices  ;  cp.  the  use  of  the  vb.  in  Gn  8^.  This  meaning  is 
probably  intended  by  MT  ;  but  it  is  altogether  improbable ;  for  (a)  it  would 
return  to  the  fishermen,  who  have  already  been  fully  dealt  with  in  v.* ;  [b)  it 
was  suggested  to  the  earlier  interpreters  by  an  impossible  view  of  rsa  'Da**, 
which  they  took  to  mean  pools  of  soul{s)  (i.e.  fsh  !),  in  apposition  to  nDB'. 
'DJN  is  rather  an  adj.,  occurring  here  only,  meaning  troubled,  depressed;  cp. 
with  the  harder  guttural  'efsi  nojy,  Jb  30^' ;  both  forms  occur  with  this 
sense  in  the  Rabbinic  writings — Hebrew  or  Aramaic  ;  see  Levy,  NUB  iii. 
618,  i.  21,  and  Chald.  Worterbuch,  i.  8,  ii.  222,  though  the  form  with  N  is 
commonly,  or  always,  merely  a  variant  of  the  form  with  y.    Cp. ,  further,  Assyr. 

ag&mu,  to  be  vexed;  /»^'»  to  loathe ;  ^>Q^»^,  to  be  depressed. 

II-15.  The  futility  of  the  wise  men. — The  wise  men 
of  Egypt,  princes  of  the  old  and  famous  cities  of  Tanis  and 
Memphis  (v.^^),  are  proved  foolish  by  the  event :  they  gave 
advice  and  formed  plans,  which  Yahweh  frustrates  (v.^),  but  they 
never  discerned  Yahweh's  plan  (v.^^^^  which  is  carried  out. 
Consequently  deceived  by  Yahweh  (v.^**),  they  delude  them- 
selves and  their  country  (v.^^^-),  and  Egypt  achieves  nothing. 

II.  So^ari]  RV  Zoan.  Heb.  §o'an  and  Gk.  Tavt?  are  both 
transliterations  of  Egyptian  S'nt  (Coptic  Dja(a)ne),  the  name  of 
the  capital  of  the  14th  nome  of  Lower  Egypt.*  The  city  was 
*  W.  Max  Miiller  in  EBi.,  s.v.  Zoan. 


I 


XIX.  9-12  329 

situated  in  the  Delta,  on  one  of  the  Eastern  arms  of  the  Nile 
near  its  mouth,  and  was  thus  one  of  the  nearest  of  the  great 
Egyptian  cities  to  Palestine.  It  was  an  important  city,  as 
excavations  have  shown,  as  early  as  the  12  th  (c.  2000-1788  b.c.  ; 
Breasted),  and  probably  as  early  as  the  6th  (c.  2625-2475) 
dynasty.  The  21st  dynasty  {c.  1090-945)  sprang  from  So  an ; 
so  also,  according  to  Manetho,  did  the  23rd  (c.  745-718  B.C.); 
but  this  is  doubtful  (Breasted,  Hist,  of  Egypt^  535).  Egyptian 
records  show  that  So  an  was  a  residence  of  Egyptian  kings  as 
early  as  Ramses  11.  (13th  cent),  and  that  it  was,  probably,  the 
Egyptian  residence  of  the  kings  of  the  Ethiopian  dynasty 
{c.  712-666).  Stelae  of  Ramses  11.,  Osorkon  11.  (c,  874-853), 
and  Tirhakah  {c.  691-666)  have  been  found  there;  and  the 
temple  of  Amon  at  So*an  made  a  considerable  contribution  to 
Nitocris  in  654  b.c.  ;  see  Breasted,  Ancient  Records  (references 
in  v.  p.  58).  The  Greek  geographers  still  speak  of  So  an  as 
a  "great  city"  (Strabo,  xvii.  i,  20);  it  survives  to-day  as  a  small 
fishing  hamlet,  San.  Its  importance  attracted  the  attention  not 
only  of  Isaiah  (30*)  in  the  8th,  but  also  of  Ezek  (30I*)  in  the  6th 
cent.  Other  OT  references  are  Nu  13^2  (n.),  Ps  7812-  48, — j  j^  jg 
parallel  in  sense  to  v.^^*,  but  the  text  or  construction  is  un- 
certain :  see  phil.  n. — lie.  d.  The  poet  dramatically  asks 
these  Egyptian  counsellors  how,  being  really  devoid  of  wit  and 
wisdom,  they  have  the  effrontery  to  remind  their  king  that  they 
are,  each  one  of  them,  by  right  of  descent  men  of  wisdom  and 
rank.  Professions,  including  those  of  the  priests  and  wise  men, 
were  largely  hereditary  among  the  Egyptians.  — 12.  "  The 
structure  of  v.^^  jg  a  favourite  one  since  Jeremiah's  time  (cp. 
Jer  228,  Dt  3287f.,  Is  47i2f.) »  ;  che.  Introd.  p.  112.  The  Pharaoh 
is  now  addressed  :  if  he  has  any  wise  counsellors  they  could  tell 
him  what  Yahweh  is  about  to  do  to  Egypt ;  but  no  such  coun- 
sellors are  to  be  found  in  Egypt,  or  among  the  priests  of  the 
Egyptian  gods.  From  the  point  of  view  of  late  Jewish  thought 
the  fear  of  Yahweh  is  the  beginning  of  all  wisdom :  those  who 
fear  Him,  alone  know  His  plans.  Cp.  47^^'. — Memphis\  Heb. 
RV  Noph  (see  phil.  n.).  Memphis  occupied  a  site  at  the 
southern  end  of  the  Delta,  about  10  m.  S.  of  Cairo.  Till  the 
18th  dynasty  {c.  1 580-1 350  B.C.)  Memphis  was  the  most  im- 
portant city  of  Egypt ;  at  that  time  it  yielded  first  place  to 
Thebes,  but  maintained  undisputed  the  claim  to  be  the  second 


330  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

city  of  the  Empire.  Stormed  by  the  Ethiopians  in  the  8th  cent., 
by  the  Assyrians  in  the  7th,  by  Cambyses  in  the  6th,  it  does  not 
appear  to  have  suffered  any  considerable  depopulation,  and, 
outliving  Thebes,  continued  to  be  populous  under  the  Ptolemies 
and  second  only  to  Alexandria.*  The  other  references  to 
Memphis  in  the  OT  are  Hos  9^,  Jer  2^^  44I  4614- 1^,  Ezk  3oi3-i6(0; 
in  Ezk  30^3  (if  not  also  in  Jer  46^^)  Memphis  seems  to  be  re- 
garded by  the  Hebrew  writer  as  the  most  important  city  in 
Egypt,  and,  as  here,  it  is  mentioned  in  close  connection  with 
So'an  (Ezk  30^*). — 13b.  TAe  chiefs  of  her  tribes]  cp.  Jg  20^,  i  S 
14^*,  Zee  10*  for  the  use  of  njs,  lit.  a  corner-stone.  The  phrase 
is  best  taken  as  subj.  of  the  sentence  and  synonymous  with 
princes  in  the  preceding  line  :  see,  further,  phil.  n.  The  tribes  of 
the  Egyptians  may  be  the  inhabitants  of  the  several  nomes. 
There  is  no  good  ground  for  giving  the  word  the  sense  of  castes, 
and  then  making  the  whole  phrase  mean  the  chief  i.e.  the  priestly, 
caste. — 14.  Yahweh  is  the  cause  of  the  folly  that  precedes  the 
fall  of  Egypt ;  He  allows  a  spirit  to  possess  them  that  distorts 
their  judgment. —  Within  them]  so  :  the  pronoun  refers  to  the 
princes  or  advisers  mentioned  in  the  last  v. ;  these  with  judg- 
ment warped,  so  that  they  see  nothing  right,  lead  the  whole 
nation  to  its  doom.  J^  reads  within  her;  if  this  is  right  the 
suffix  refers  to  Egypt  as  a  whole :  possessed  by  the  spirit  of 
distortion,  the  people  are  led  on  by  their  leaders  to  their  doom. 
— The  spirit  of  distortion]  cp.  "  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep,"  29^*^, 
"  the  spirit  of  falsehood"  in  the  prophets  of  Yahweh  (i  K  2  2^3), 
"the  evil  spirit"  that  terrified  Saul  (i  S  16^*),  all  alike  performing 
Yahweh's  purpose.  The  distortion  (D^yiy)  which  the  spirit  was 
to  achieve  was  distortion  of  mind  or  judgment :  cp.  the  distorted 
or  perverted  mind  (niV3  3?)  which  produces  the  opposite  of 
wisdom,  Pr  1 2^.  In  all  that  they  undertake,  the  Egyptians  have 
no  more  power  to  go  straight  than  a  drunken  man;  for  the 
figure,  cp.  28^,  Job  \2^\ — 15.  Expresses  awkwardly  much  the 
same  idea :  neither  high  nor  low  (9^^  n.)  will  achieve  anything. 

lib.  myaj  nsy  nynij  'j^y  'Ddh]  the  line  seems  at  least  one  word  too  long; 
is  r\)i]3  intrusive,  and  mj^a  an  error  for  r\v^^f  The  construction  of  |^,  in 
spite  of  such  partial  analogies  as  n'?sn  '3N  (Ps  109* ;  cp.  Dr.  §  109  (2)),  or  the 
usage  of  n:ij;,  is  abnormal ;  we  may  treat  nyns  'sy'  'DDn  as  a  casus  pendens  and 
n^y  as  resumptive,  but  if  we  render  the  wisest  of  Pharcu)Ks  counsellors — a 

*  Based  on  W.  M.  Muller  in  EBi.  s.v.  Neph. 


XIX.  II-I7  33^ 

witless  council  are  they,  we  place  on  nxy,  counsel,  ox  plan,  a  sense  which  it  bears 
nowhere  else;  again,  if  we  render  the  wisest,  etc. — witless  is  {their)  counsel 
((&  and  virtually  RV),  we  assume  a  most  improbable  ellipse  of  the  pronoun 
(nxy  for  Dnj«y)  which  cannot  be  defended  by  reference  to  Ps  9',  for  that  is 
a  corrupt  passage.  For  the  superlative  force  of  'Jty  'Dan,  cp.  G-K.  133A. — 
'3K  .  .  .  iTDKn]  the  pi.  is  distributed  :  cp.  Jer  z". — 12.  \]n;i]\  &VL  MT  ;  prefer- 
able is  ijn'i  (d&F) ;  cp.  47^^ — 13.  iynn]  many  MSS  and  the  versions  lynm. 
— n'tsar  rus]  (&  Kard  ^vXdj.  nas  was  probably  intended  to  be  read  as  a  pi, 
(^T) ;  if  sing.  (MT)  and  subj.  of  lynn,  it  has  a  collective  force  (G-K.  145(5,  c). 
For  the  order  vb.,  obj.,  subj.,  see  Dr.  §  208  (4):  it  emphasises  the  subj. 
rather  unexpectedly  here,  where  the  subj.  seems  to  l)c  merely  parallel  to  the 
unemphasised  subjects  of  v."*. — 14.  nn  naipa  ^0D]  in  5^2  and  elsewhere  lOD 
is  used  of  liquids,  and  means  to  mix.  Ges.,  al.,  suggest  that  it  has  here  lost 
its  full  force,  and,  like  the  Gk.  Kepdwvfu  in  Apoc  14^",  for  example,  means 
merely  to  prepare :  cp.  QT  nn  pn'j'a  not.  In  29'"  the  phrase  used  of  nn  is 
103,  in  1^  +  Vy,  but  see  n.  there  ;  Du.  proposes  HDJ  here.  For  naipa,  canpa 
should  perhaps  be  read  :  cp.  C(!&,  and  see  comm. — D^yiy]  see  21'  24^  nn.,  and 

^V>^,s.v.  my,  i.  ffiS>  connect  with  v'^'''^J'>u^%i  (BDB,  my,  ii.  ;  cp.  Dr.  on 
I  S  20^),  to  err  from  the  way. — inryo]  read  n'^fa.5  ;  note  the  pi.  in  ffiC^, 
and  the  3rd  fern,  suffix  in  moatr,  v.'^^ — 15,  ^"-nx^  m.T  kS]  for  the  use  of  n'rr, 
cp.  7'.  ^  may  meany^r,  and  denote  the  source — no  work  shall  be  performed 
by  Egypt. 

16  f.  Judah  a  terror  to  Egypt. — Egypt  will  tremble  at 
the  impending  judgment  of  Yahweh,  and  will  shudder  at  the  mere 
mention  of  the  land  of  Judah. — 16.  In  that  day]  so  vv.^^-  ^^-  ^i- 
23. 24^ — Egypt]  personified  and  construed  with  the  masc.  sing,  as  in 
vv.^'  ^ :  ct.  v.^^  (fern,  sing.),  w.^i^-  (masc.  pi.). — Ska/l  be  like  women] 
Nah  3^3 ;  Ges.  compares  Xerxes'  speech  at  the  battle  of  Salamis 
ot  /A€V  ai/8p€s  ycyomcrt  /u,ot  ywatKC?  (Herod,  viii.  88). — And  shall 
tremble]  Tin  of  women,  32^^ ;  of  a  city,  lo^^. — And  be  in  dread] 
unlike  Israel  (12^),  secure  in  Yahweh's  help.  The  vb.  ins 
repeated  in  v.^'^  is  a  favourite  with  late  writers.  The  noun  occurs 
in  Is  2^^. — Because  of  the  swinging  of  the  hand  of  Yahweh]  cp.  ii^^ 
and  phil.  n.  on  10^2^  also  30^2^  The  meaning  may  be  that  the 
Jews  (cp.  v.i'^),  by  the  help  of  Yahweh,  will  overwhelm,  or  spoil, 
the  Egyptians ;  cp.  "  battles  of  swinging,"  30^2,  and  for  the  idea 
Ex  14^^,  Zee  2i^(^),  2  Ch  14^3^-;  or  the  writer  may  have  had  in 
mind  some  other  miraculous  intervention  of  Yahweh,  cp.  ii^^ 
— 17.  And  the  land  of  Judah  will  become  a  terror  (see  phil.  n.) 
to  Egypt,  either  because  Yahweh's  conquering  hosts  will  pour 
down  from  Judah  on  Egypt  (see  last  n.),  or  because,  dreading 
Yahweh,  Egypt  will  dread  his  residence  also  (Di.,  Marti). 
Moreover,  whoever  mentions  it,  viz.  the  land  of  Judah,  to  him,  i.e. 


332  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


•^ 


Egypt,  will  he  in  dread. — 17b.  The  cast  of  sentence  monotonously 
repeats  v.^^^ — The  plan  of  Yahweh']  verbally  a  connecting  link 
with  vv.i-i^,  see  v.^^ .  the  writer  may  have  in  mind  what  Ps  2^ 
calls  Yahweh's  decree^  according  to  which  Israel  was  to  treat  with 
severity  all  nations  which  failed  to  serve  them.  Other  terrors 
planned  by  Yahweh  for  those  who  do  not  submit  to  Israel  are 
mentioned  with  specific  reference  to  Egypt  in  Zee  14^2-19, 

16. 1'JD  Nirt  na'K]  more  effective  than  f)'a\  The  use  of  the  expressed  subj.  with 
the  part,  is  normal  (Dr.  §  135  (6))  at  all  periods :  cp.  e.g.  Ex  5^  (JE). — 17.  Kan*?] 
(Lir.  \ey.,  ffir  (pb^rjTpov,  W  t<^ni}?  ;  cp.  <SU.  The  ending  K  is  an  Aramaising 
equivalent  of  n  (G-K.  8o>4) :  the  root  is  an  ;  cp.  •\)3&3  ij?i3i  Mn\  Ps  lo;^^ ; 
if  this  means  (BEWB)  fo  reel  (as  from  festival  excess),  such  a  derivative  meaning 
may  well  be  late ;  in  any  case  the  sense  required  for  the  noun  here  is  only 
paralleled  within  the  OT  by  the  sense  of  the  vb.  in  the  late  Psalm  passage. — 
nns'  r'7N  nnx  tdi'  nts'K  Sd]  awkward,  and  really  rather  pointless  however 
construed.  For  the  translation  above,  cp.  T3in  with  ace.  of  the  thing  and 
^K  of  the  pers.  in  Gn  40^*.  Less  probable  is  the  rendering  every  one  (i.e. 
every  Egyptian)  to  whom  one  mentions  it  is  in  dread',  but  whenever  one 
mentions  it  to  him,  he  (Egypt)  is  in  dread,  would  give  excellent  sense,  if 
I  S  2}^  proved  that  ib'K  ^d  could  mean  whenever.  Improbable  is  the  rendering 
whosoever  makes  mention  of  it,  to  him  he  turneth  in  dread  (Vk  nns,  as  Jer  36^^). 

18-25. — -Jewish  Colonies  in  Egypt.     The  Conversion  of  Egypt. 
The  Religious  Triple  Alliance  of  Egypt ^  Assyria,  and  Israel. 

The  unity  of  the  section  has  been  questioned,  v.^^  or  ^^^  or 
23-25  having  been  by  various  writers  suspected  of  being  interpola- 
tions. The  somewhat  disjointed  character  of  the  section,  marked 
off  by  many  repetitions  of  In  that  day,  gives  some  ground  for  such 
suspicions.  But,  as  the  commentary  that  follows  must  be  left  to 
show,  it  is  by  no  means  difficult  to  interpret  the  several  parts  as 
coherent. 

Neither  style  nor  ideas  admit  the  probability  that  vv.18-25 
were  written  by  Isaiah :  note  on  the  one  hand  the  constant  re- 
petition oi  Egypt  and  in  that  day,  and  the  absence  of  anything 
characteristic  of  Isaiah :  on  the  other,  the  prominence  given  to 
the  ritual  element  in  religion,  vv.^^-  ^i-  23, 

The  style  does  not  point  conclusively  to  any  definite  date, 
though  it  is  just  such  as  a  late  writer  familiar  with  the  Scriptures 
might  have  written. 

The  determination    of  date   rests   in   the   first  place  on  the 
question  whether  the  entire  section  is  prophecy,  or  whether  it  is 


XIX.  i6,  17,  18-25  333 

in  part  history  clothed  as  prophecy.  In  the  former  case  it  seems 
easier  to  account  for  the  prophecy  of  an  altar  (or  rather  in  this 
case  altars),  and  a  massebah  or  massebahs  to  be  erected  in  Egypt 
(v.i^)  before  the  publication  of  Deuteronomy  (ch.  12  ;  16^)  than 
after;  though  the  idea  is  not  easily  associated  with  pre-exilic 
prophecy.  If  the  reference  is  to  a  particular  altar  and  massebah 
already  existing,  no  known  facts  explain  the  reference  to  the 
?nassebah^  and  the  only  known  fact  which  might  explain  the 
allusion  to  the  altar  is  the  Temple  at  Leontopolis  erected  about 
160  B.C.*  It  is  altogether  improbable  that  the  exiled  high  priest 
Onias  had  no  sympathisers  in  Judah  :  and  it  is  possible  that  one 
of  these,  dealing  not  with  an  idea,  but  accepting  the  fact  of  a 
temple  in  Egypt,  saw  in  its  erection  the  realisation  of  what  had 
long  ago  been  pre-determined  by  Yahweh  as  a  means  of  bringing 
Egypt  to  Himself.  What  those,  who  had  driven  Onias  to  Egypt, 
had  intended  for  evil,  God  had  intended  for  good,  to  bring  much 
people  to  Himself  (cp.  Gn  5020). 

18.  The  "City  of  Righteousness"  in  Egypt. — There 
will  be  five  cities  in  Egypt  speaking  Hebrew  and  acknowledging 
Yahweh :  one  of  these  will  be  distinguished  from  the  rest, 
possibly  as  being  the  legitimate  seat  of  Jewish  worship  in  Egypt : 
in  this  case  the  reference  would  be  to  Leontopolis,  where  from 
about  160  B.C.-73  A.D.  there  stood  a  temple  built  by  the  Jewish 
refugee  Onias  iv.,  after  the  model  of  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem 
(Jos.  Ant.  xiii.  3,  War.  i.  i^,  vii.  lo^-^). 

The  specific  reference  to  Leontopolis,  or  the  Temple  of 
Onias,  has  been  recognised  alike  by  many  who  see  in  this  v.  a 
prophecy  written  in  the  8th  cent.  B.C.,  and  by  many  who  regard 
it  as  a  piece  of  history  clothed  in  the  form  of  prophecy,  and 
forming  the  prelude  to  actual  prophecy  in  vv.^o-ss^  just  as  on  a 
larger  scale  history  clothed  as  prophecy  forms  the  prelude  to 
actual  prophecy  in  Dn  7.  Others  question  the  specific 
reference  (see  more  fully  below). 

In  another  respect  affecting  the  general  sense  of  the  v. 
interpreters  have  differed :  some  see  here  a  prophecy  that  a 
few  Egyptian  cities,  as  the  firstfruits  of  the  whole  land  (vv.^^f.), 
will  become  converted  to  the  Jewish  religion,  and  in  proof  of 
their  conversion  speak  Hebrew  (so  Del.) :  others,  with  greater 

*  An  historical  reference  to  both  the  erection  and  destruction  of  this 
temple  given  in  the  form  of  prophecy  is  found  in  Orac.  Sibyl,  v.  488-510. 


334  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

probability,  understand  the  five  cities  to  be  Jewish  colonies  in 
Egypt. 

Five  cities]  the  writer  may  well  mean  five  definite  cities, 
though  these  need  not  necessarily  be  Heliopolis,  Leontopolis, 
Migdol,  Daphnae,  Memphis  (Hitz.).  Others  treat  ^w  as  a  round 
number :  so  that  the  meaning  is  among  the  18,000  to  30,000 
cities  or  townships  of  Egypt,  as  they  were  computed  at  different 
times  (Herod,  ii.  177;  Diod.  i.  31),  a  few  cities  will  speak 
Hebrew.  The  least  hazardous  parallels  to  such  a  use  of  five 
are  i  S  17*^  21^,  for  there  as  here  the  use  of  any  number  is 
unnecessary,  unless  Jive  were  meant  strictly.  Many  of  the 
instances  cited  by  Ges.  ad  loc.  and  Konig  in  DB  iii.  564*  are 
obviously  not  to  the  point ;  for  instance,  Benjamin's  fivefold 
gift  (Gn  43^*  45^^)>  five  fleeing  before  a  hundred  (Lv  26®,  cp. 
I  Co  14^^),  five  sparrows  for  two  farthings  (Lk  12^). —  Will  be 
speaking  the  language  of  Canaan]  i.e.  Hebrew ;  the  five  cities 
will  be  Hebrew-speaking ;  Hebrew,  not  Egyptian,  Greek  (or 
?  Aramaic)  will  be  in  these  cities  the  regular  language  of  inter- 
course. Coupled  as  this  clause  is  with  the  next,  and  swear 
allegiance  (cp.  45^3,  2  Ch  15^^)  to  Yahweh  of  hosts  (©  to  the 
name  of  Yahweh\  the  language  (lit.  lip ;  cp.  Gn  ii^-  ^-  '^'  ^,  Ps  81^) 
of  Canaan  can  scarcely  mean  anything  but  Hebrew;  yet  why 
this  is  not  expressed  by  speaking  Jewish,  as  in  36"  (cp.  36^2),  is 
not  clear,  and  is,  indeed,  strange,  for  in  Neh  132*  Ashdodite  and 
Jewish  {i.e.  Hebrew),  though  both  languages  of  Canaan,  are 
sharply  distinguished. — One  of  them  shall  be  called]  one  of  these 
five  cities  will  be  distinguished  from  the  rest  by  its  peculiar 
character  or  function  :  the  idiom  to  be  called  (i>  "1DX3,  4^  n.  32^ 
62'*,  cp.  i26  n.),  expresses  an  actual  quality  possessed,  or  function 
exercised,  not  a  mere  name  to  express  which  a  different  idiom 
would  be  used  (Gn  io25,  Ex  i^^  jgs^  Nu  ii26,  Ru  i*,  2  S  42); 
and  nns,  one,  can  scarcely  here  mean  each ;  for  in  cases  where  one 
seems  to  have  such  a  meaning  {e.g.  Nu  7^,  2  K  152*^;  BDB  25/*) 
the  distributive  idea  is  suggested  by  repetition,  or  by  a  distri- 
butive preposition,  or  by  the  context.  Unfortunately  what  this 
city  was  to  be  called  is  uncertain ;  there  are  various  readings,  and 
the  interpretation  of  the  variants  is  ambiguous.  But  the  context^ 
in  the  light  of  what  has  been  already  said,  allows  us  to  affirm  : 
I.  that  the  name  must  be  of  favourable  import,  2.  that  it  must 
not  be  merely  the  actual  name  of  some  city,  insignificant  in  the 


m 


XIX.  i8  335 

context  and  serving  merely  to  identify  the  city  intended :  the 
writer's  purpose  is  not  to  disclose  the  actual  name  of  one  of  the 
five  cities,  leaving  the  remaining  four  unnamed,  but  to  indicate 
some  essential  peculiarity  of  this  one  city ;  3.  the  name  must 
not  by  implication  speak  unfavourably  of  the  other  four,  for  they, 
as  well  as  it,  are  obviously  cities  of  Yahweh's  approval.  Many 
theories  which  have  been  suggested  may  be  immediately  dis- 
missed as  violating  one  or  other  of  these  conditions.  The 
readings  with  the  most  probable  translation  attached  in  each  case 
are  as  follows : 

{a)  noXis  ao-cScK,  (&  (variant  ao-cS  17X10V,  K)  =  pnvn  l^y  (i2«), 
City  of  righteousness.  This  reading,  since  it  contains  a  trans- 
literation, certainly  goes  back  to  a  Hebrew  text. 

(J?)  Dinn  Ty,  City  of  Destruction :  so  most  Heb.  MSS,  Syr. 
%CD5oi,  C  (see  under  (^r)),  and  possibly  Aq.  and  Theod.  who  trans- 
literate apes  j  but  this  might  also  =  Dinn  (cp.  Jg  S^^  ^). 

(c)  Dinn  Ty,  City  of  the  Sun :  so  some  Heb.  MSS,  Symm. 
(ttoAis)  yjXioVf  Jer.  civitas  satis.  ST  appears  to  combine  {b)  and  {c) : 
it  renders  ainDi)  m^nyn  K'OC^  n^3  xnip,  City  of  the  house  (i.e. 
temple)  of  the  sun  which  is  about  to  be  destroyed. 

The  oldest  attestation,  that  of  (5,  say  c.  150  b.c.,  is  in  favour 
of  {a) ;  but  the  readings  {J?)  and  {c)  both  go  back  at  least  to  the 
I  St  or  2nd  cent.  a.d.  If  any  of  these  readings  be  the  original 
one,  the  choice  lies  between  {a)  and  {c\  and  must  really  fall  on 
(a) — City  of  Righteousness-,  the  name  recalls  i^^,  and  means 
that  one  of  these  cities  will  be  the  Egyptian  Jerusalem.  But 
Jerusalem  to  the  writer  is  not,  as  in  Isaiah's  ideal,  the  city  of 
just  or  right  government,  it  is  the  city  of  just  or  correct  worship, 
the  place  where  sacrifices  of  righteousness  (Ps  51^^),  i.e.  legitimate 
sacrifice,  can  be  offered.  Thus  interpreted  the  name  satisfies  all 
the  conditions  of  the  context — it  is  of  favourable  import,  it  is 
not  an  actual  proper  name,  it  does  not  by  implication  reflect  on 
the  other  cities :  only  one  of  them  could  be  the  Egyptian 
Jerusalem,  the  city  of  correct  worship,  all  of  them  might  have 
been  cities  of  righteousness  in  any  wider  sense  of  that  term. 

The  reading  xs^r^rx  vy  can  only  mean,  as  tJT  correctly  understood  it,  city  of 
destruction^  i.e.  doomed  to  destruction  (Ki.,  Rashi,  and  most  moderns).  To 
avoid  this  meaning,  impossible  in  the  context,  Seeker  suggested  the  artificial 
interpretation  city  of  the  destruction  (of  heathen  altars,  etc. ) :  so  Del. ,  Orelli, 
and  Che.  (in  /V,  but  not  later).     The  claims  of  the  reading  Dinn  to  originality 


336  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

may  therefore  be  rejected  decisively  on  two  grounds  :  (a)  the  meaning  is 
impossible  in  the  context ;  {d)  reasons  for  the  origin  of  the  reading  are 
obvious  :  it  is  certain  (Jos.  Anf.  xiii.  3)  that  v.^'  and  the  neighbouring  verses* 
were  early  understood  to  refer  to  the  temple  at  Leontopolis,  and  that  this 
temple  provoked  the  displeasure  of  the  Palestinian  Jews  ;  some  Palestinian 
scribe  substituted  for  a  reading  agreeable  to  the  context  a  reading  that 
expressed  his  feelings  with  regard  to  the  schismatic  temple.  The  reading  of 
a  few  MSS  mnn  Ty,  «/y  devoted  (to  destruction),  if  it  had  any  serious  claims 
to  consideration,  would  be  dismissed  on  the  same  grounds.     The  theory  (Du., 

Marti)  that  onn  means  lion^  because  (_/«M>  and  ^/«y&,  derived  from  (J*'j^f 

to  be  voracious,  are  used  as  epithets  of  a  lion,  would  be  philologically  most 
hazardous  ;  and  it  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  context,  for  Dnnn  Ty  then 
becomes  a  mere  proper  name — Leontopolis. 

The  reading  onnn  I'y  has  been  generally  interpreted  City  of  the  Sufty 
mn  occurring  once  certainly  in  OT  (Job  9^,  not  Jg  14^^)  as  a  synonym  of  tyor. 
It  is  assumed  by  some  that  mnn  Ty  is  here  an  equivalent,  synonymous  in 
meaning  with  the  Greek  ''SXiov  irbXis  ((K's  regular  rendering  of  the  Ileb.  pK), 
of  the  Egyptian  city  On.  The  meaning  then  is — one  of  those  cities  is  On, 
Heliopolis.  This  is  probably  the  correct  interpretation  of  the  reading ;  but 
it  does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  context,  though  quite  good  enough 
for  a  scribe  aware  that  the  passage  was  supposed  to  refer  to  the  temple  of 
Onias  in  Leontopolis,  which  was  situated  in  the  nome  of  Heliopolis.  But 
why,  if  the  original  writer  merely  meant  this,  did  he  not  say  On  (as  in  Gn 
4i«.  50  4520^  Ezk  30''),  or  at  least  cDtyn  ry  (cp.  ?  Jer  43'",  ^  not  (5)? 

If,  however,  we  suppose  that  mnn  Ty  means,  indeed,  city  of  the  stoi,  but  was 
not  used  here  as  a  mere  translation  of  the  Egyptian  name  of  the  nome,  what 
quality  of  the  city  was  it  intended  to  express  ?  Certainly  not  that  it  was  to 
be  a  city  distinguished  by  the  worship  of  the  sun  !  yet  this  would  be  the 
obvious  force  of  the  phrase  (cp.  nin'  Ty,  60^^).  Unless  some  more  suitable 
meaning  can  be  discovered  than  hitherto,  this  interpretation  at  least,  if  not  the 
reading  itself,  must  be  dismissed. 

But  mn  has  been  otherwise  explained  as  meaning  {i) potsherd{s) — Jerome, 
as  an  alternative  meaning  to  sun :    Din  is  NH  orthography  for  fcnn ;  (2) 

deliverance,  so  Ges.  on  the  strength  of  the  Arabic  ^jw^^*-,  to  rescue.  But 
neither  meaning  gives  anything  unique  for  a  single  city  as  against  the  five. 
Jerome,  indeed,  takes  it  as  forming  a  proper  name — Ostracine :  but  this  on 
other  grounds  is  to  be  dismissed. 

Whether  onn  or  mn  is  the  earlier  reading  it  is  difficult  to  say.  For  though 
tnr\  as  a  noun  occurs  nowhere  else,  yet  the  vb.  is  very  common ;  and  it  is 
easier  to  account  for  the  substitution  of  this  word  of  sinister  meaning  than  for 
onn  with  its  neutral  meaning ;  mn,  too,  is  very  rare,  and  unless  similarity  of 
form  to  v^n  suggested  the  choice  of  the  rare  word,  we  should  naturally 
expect  a  scribe,  who  was  substituting  a  mere  place  name  for  a  complimentary 
epithet,  to  select  the  common  term  wov. 

*  In  section  l,  Jos.  makes  Onias  cite  part  of  v.^^  and  add,  "and  many 
other  such  things  did  he  (Isaiah)  prophesy  relating  to  that  place." 


XIX.  19-22  337 

It  would  be  extremely  hazardous  to  seek  indirect  support  for  the  priority 
of  D^^  by  assuming,  on  the  ground  of  the  reading  atreS  ijXlov  in  dSi,  that  ffi's 
Hebrew  text  read  non  (Che.,  Burkitt,  cited  by  Ottley,  p.  201  ;  £Bi.  2018). 
The  reading  of  k  is  conflate  ;  cp.  the  interpretation  of  AaedcK  by  diKaioavvrj 
ijXlov  (Lag.  Onom.  iSy**).  It  would  be  extremely  strange  if  a  mere  acci- 
dental addition  of  iK  to  an  original  cureS  should  have  given  the  exact  trans- 
literation of  pnsf.t.  Finally,  lonn  rywill  not  stand  as  the  original  reading,  for 
such  a  quality  would  attach  to  all  five  cities  equally. 

Against  the  originality  of  onnn  is  the  fact  that  neither  an  Egyptian  scribe 
would  have  had  any  compelling  reason  to  substitute  ^"yi^^  nor  a  Palestinian  to 
substitute  zr\r\T\.  If  a  word  of  neutral  significance  had  stood  here  originally, 
it  would  have  been  likely  to  maintain  its  place.  The  textual  facts  are  best, 
if  not  completely,  accounted  for  by  assuming  that  the  chronological  order  of 
the  readings  is  "p^viry,  onnn,  onnn. 

19-22.  An  altar  and  a  ma^^ebah  will  be  erected  to 
Yahweh  in  Egypt  (v.^^),  reminding  Him  that  He  has  wor- 
shippers there ;  when,  therefore,  His  Jewish  worshippers  (scarcely 
His  Egyptian  worshippers :  Skinner)  are  oppressed  and  cry  to 
Him,  He  will  send  and  deliver  them  (v. 20) ;  He  will,  thereafter, 
make  Himself  known  to  the  Egyptians,  and  they,  coming  to  know 
Him,  will  also  serve  Him  with  sacrifice  and  offering,  and  pay  their 
vows  to  Him  (v.^i).  Thenceforward,  being  Yahweh's  worshippers 
(and  people,  v.^*),  Yahweh  will  treat  them  as  He  had  treated 
Israel  in  the  past,  smiting  them,  indeed,  to  discipline  them,  but 
also,  and  as  often  as  they  turn  to  Him,  hearing  their  prayer  and 
healing  them. 

Since  it  is  only  after  the  erection  of  the  altar  to  Yahweh 
(v.^*)  that  the  Egyptians  come  to  know  Yahweh  (v.^i),  the  writer 
cannot  mean  that  the  Egyptians  themselves  erected  this  altar : 
he  thinks  of  aliens  resident  in  Egypt,  viz.  Jews  (cp.  v.^^). 
Attempts  have  been  made  to  avoid  this  conclusion  :  Del.  virtually 
inserts  all  twice  over  in  v. 21,  so  as  to  create  an  antithesis  that 
does  not  exist  in  the  text :  v.^^*,  according  to  Del.,  asserts  that 
Yahweh  reveals  Himself  first  to  a  few  cities  in  Egypt,  and  then 
(v.2i)  «  extends  knowledge  of  Himself  to  the  whole  of  Egypt,  and 
throughout  all  Egypt  there  arises  the  knowledge  of  God."  Cond. 
rearranges  the  verses  in  this  order :  ^^^*  ^'  ^-  ^^"^o.  23f.^  which  removes 
one  hysteron  proteron  only  to  create  another,  for  it  makes  the 
Egyptians  offer  sacrifices  to  Yahweh  before  they  erect  the 
altar. 

19.  An  altar  in  the  midst  of  the  land  .  .  .  and  a  massebah  at 
its  border]  Ges.  suggests  that  the  terms  are  to  be  taken  collect- 

VOL.    I. — 22 


338  COMMENTARY   ON    ISAIAH 

ively  and  the  parallelism  (cp.  ii^^  18^)  interpreted  thus:  There 
will  be  altars  and  massebahs  from  the  centre  of  the  land  to  its  cir- 
cumference. This  would  have  more  probability  if  there  were  more 
parallelism  and  poetical  style  in  the  section,  and  if  the  one  city  (of 
righteousness)  in  v.^^  did  not  make  a  reference  to  a  single  altar  in 
that  city  natural.  Che.  (Introd.  to6)  overrides  the  reference  to  a 
definite  altar  even  more  boldly  and  with  much  less  probability ; 
what  is  meant  is,  he  claims,  "neither  more  nor  less  than  this, 
that  the  regular  worship  of  Yahweh  should  be  set  up  in  Egypt. 
Synagogues  were,  of  course,  just  as  much  a  *  sign '  and  a  '  witness ' 
(v.2^)  as  literal  altars,  and  the  spiritual  sacrifices  ...  of  prayer 
and  obedience  were  infinitely  more  acceptable  than  mere  animal 
sacrifices  (n3T  and  nmo  are  mentioned  to  preserve  the  illusion  of 
Isaianic  authorship;  cp.  i^^-  ^^)."  It  is  safer  to  conclude  that 
the  altar  is  a  real  and  definite  altar ;  and  so  with  the  massebah. 
In  this  case  the  altar  and  massebah  to  which  the  writer  refers 
were  remote  from  one  another,  one  being  in  the  centre,  the  other 
at  the  extremity  of  the  country ;  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume 
that  the  massebah  was  one  connected  with  an  altar  or  with 
worship,  and  consequently  an  object  such  as  the  Deuteronomic 
Law  condemned  (Dt  1622,  cp.  1  K  1423,  2  K  1710  18*  23I*).  We 
cannot  safely  argue  that  even  the  Deuteronomic  school  and  H 
(Lv  26^)  would  have  condemned  commemorative*  massebahs^  or 
steles,  such  as  are  mentioned  in  Gn  31^^  3520,  2  S  18^^,  and  such 
as  still  exist  bearing  Phoenician  inscriptions,  for  example  the 
**  marble  obelisk,  about  5  ft.  high,  terminating  in  a  pyramidal  or 
gabled  top,"  found  at  Kition  and  dedicated  to  the  memory  of  a 
certain  Eshmun-adoni ;  see  Cooke,  NSI^  p.  60  =  CIS  i.  44  (with 
illustration  in  Table  VIII.).  As  according  to  Gn  31*^  a  massebah 
marked  the  boundary  between  the  Aramaeans  and  Hebrews  in 
Gilead,  so  according  to  this  passage  a  massebah  is  to  mark,  or 
rather  already  marks,  the  boundary  of  Egypt.  May  we  surmise 
that  at  some  place,  such  as  Daphnae,  on  the  North-eastern 
boundary  of  Egypt,  one  of  the  five  cities  of  v.^^,  perhaps,  and 
connected  by  the  Jews  of  the  time  with  the  Exodus,  there  stood 

•Even  "commemorative  monuments"  were  condemned  by  Abd  el- 
Wahhab,  the  founder  of  the  Wahhabis  (Hogarth,  Penetration  of  Arabia^  73) ; 
and  similar  extremes  are  familiar  expressions  of  the  reforming  spirit.  But 
idealists,  such  as  this  writer  was,  need  not  share  all  the  extreme  views  of 
reformers  of  religious  practice. 


XIX.  19,  2o  339 

an  inscribed  obelisk  celebrating  Yahweh's  deeds  ?  If  this  were 
prophecy,  it  would  be  easy  to  understand  a  prediction  that  Egypt, 
like  Canaan,  should  have  its  own  place  of  sacrifice  (cp.  Mai  i^^) ; 
but  a  prediction  that  there  should  be  a  massebah  at  the  boundary 
would  be  rather  insignificant,  if  not  positively  meaningless.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  such  a  massebah  as  we  have  surmised  actually 
existed,  it  might  still  find  mention  along  with  the  altar.  The 
altar,  if  not  ideal  and  the  subject  of  prophecy,  but  really  existing 
at  the  time  when  these  words  were  written,  is  most  readily 
understood  of  the  altar  at  Leontopolis  (cp.  v.^^  n.).  Leontopolis 
occupied  the  site  of  Tell-el-Yehudiyyeh ;  this  place  has  been 
excavated  and  the  remains  of  the  Jewish  temple  laid  bare.* 
This  place  lies  north  of  Memphis,  but  at  the  southern  end  of  the 
Delta,  and  therefore  quite  strictly  in  the  midst  of  the  land.  It  is 
certain  that  the  priests  of  Leontopolis  in  the  ist  cent.  a.d. 
applied  this  passage  to  their  temple.  Onias,  according  to 
Josephus  {Ant.  xiii.  3I),  in  making  his  petition,  which  was 
granted,  to  build  a  temple  at  Leontopolis,  wrote  to  Ptolemy 
and  Cleopatra  as  follows :  "  I  pray  you  grant  me  leave  to  build  a 
temple  to  Almighty  God,  after  the  pattern  of  that  in  Jerusalem. 
...  on  behalf  both  of  myself  and  my  wife  and  children,  that  those 
Jews  which  dwell  in  Egypt  may  have  a  place  whither  they  may 
come  and  meet  together  in  mutual  harmony  with  one  another,  for 
the  prophet  Isaiah  prophesied,  '  There  shall  be  an  altar  in  Egypt 
to  the  Lord  God.' "  We  cannot,  of  course,  assume  that  Josephus 
had  the  correspondence  of  Onias  and  Ptolemy  before  him  •  he 
is  rather  in  this  form  giving  the  regular  apology  of  the  priesthood 
of  Leontopolis  for  their  temple.  An  allusion  to  the  altar  and 
temple  of  the  Jewish  colony  at  Elephantine,  built  before  525  b.c. 
and  destroyed  in  411  B.C.,  has  been  suspected  by  Steuernagel 
{ThSK^  1909,  pp.  8-12);  but  (i)  Elephantine  lay  not  "in  the 
midst  of  the  land,"  but  on  the  southern  frontier,  as  Ezekiel  was 
well  aware  (Ezk  30^  291*^);  (2)  we  have  no  evidence,  and  it  is 
improbable,  that  Elephantine  made  any  such  claim  to  a  distinctive 
position  among  Jewish  cities  in  Egypt  as  is  made  in  w.^^-^oa. — 
20.  The  existence  of  the  altar  in  the  centre  and  the  massebah^  or 
inscribed  obelisk,  on  the  frontier  of  Egypt,  will  serve  Yahweh  as 
reminders;  for  this  kind  of  n^&<,  unlike  that  in  7^^,  cp  Ex  13*, 
Gn  ()^^^- ;  thus  the  rainbow  is  a  sign,  nlK,  which  reminds  Yahweh 
*  W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie,  Hyksos  and  Israelite  Cities  (1906),  pp.  19-27. 


340  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

of  His  oath  not  to  destroy  the  earth  by  a  flood ;  so  when  He  sees 
the  altar  and  massebah  in  Egypt,  He  is  reminded  of  His  people 
there  ;  and  therefore  ^o^  when  they  cry  to  Him  because  of  oppressors 
(Jg  2^^),  that  He  may  send  them  a  deliverer  as  of  old  (Jg  3'-  ^^), 
He  will  intervene,  lit.  contend,  or  conduct  His  case  (cp.  especially 
Ps  74^^^')»  ^^^  deliver  them.     Others  render  (but  see  phil.  n.), 
when  they  cry  to  Him  .  .  .  He  sends  them  a  deliverer,  and  He  (the 
deliverer)  contends  for  them  and  delivers  them,  or  when  they  cry,  etc.. 
He  sends  them  a  deliverer  and  a  champion,  and  he  delivers  them ; 
and  some  who  render  thus  think  that  reference  to  actual  histor- 
ical events  still  continues ;  *but  if  so,  the  identity  of  the  deliverer 
is   obscurer  far   than   that   of  the   altar.      More   probably   the 
transition  to  prediction  which  has  certainly  taken  place  in  v.^^ 
has  already  taken  place  in  v.^o. — 21.  By  delivering  His  people 
in  Egypt — whether  because  in  delivering  them  He  delivers  the 
Egyptians  also  is  not  clear — Yahweh  makes  Himself  known  to 
the  Egyptians  (cp.  Ezk  382^) ;  but  not  merely  with  the  result,  on 
which  Ezekiel  lays  so  much  stress,  that  they  realise  that  Yahweh 
is  Yahweh,  i.e.  realise  all  His  might  and  power ;  this  writer  looks 
forward  to  a  conversion  of  Egypt  to  the  Jewish  religion,  which 
could   be   summed   up   as   a   "knowledge   of  Yahweh."     The 
Egyptians  will  know    Yahweh  (cp.    i^   ii^  n.);   but  the  know- 
ledge, or  religion,  of  Yahweh,  for  this  writer  (ct.  1 1^  \^)^  manifests 
itself  in  ritual  (cp.  v.^^;   ct.   i^^^-),  and  therefore  the  converted 
Egyptians  will  give  proof  of  their  conversion  by  offering  sacri- 
fice to  Yahweh ;  they  will  participate  in  the  service  of  the  altar 
(in  Leontopolis  ?). — 22.  Become  Yahweh's  people  (cp.^^),  Egypt 
will  experience  that  goodness   of  Yahweh's   which  shows  itself 
in  fatherly  chastisement,  and  "  leads  to  repentance  "  and  healing. 
— Smiting  and  heali?tg\  cp.  Hos  6^     As  often  as  they  return  from 
the  evil  ways  to  which,  like  Israel,  Yahweh's  first  people,  they 
will  be  prone,  He  will  let  Himself  be  entreated  of  them ;  they  will 
pray  to  be  healed,  and  He  will  heal  them. 

23-25.  The  triple  alliance  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  Israel. 
These  three  powers,  blessed  of  Yahweh,  will  be  a  source  of 
blessing  in  the  whole  world.  The  conversion  of  Egypt,  which 
must  precede  this,  has  been  dwelt  on  in  v.^i^- ;  that  of  Assyria 
is  merely,  but  certainly,  implied.  The  co-operation  of  Assyria 
and  Egypt  implies,  too,  a  general  state  of  peace  which  enters 
into  many  a  prophetic  picture   of  the   ideal   future;    what   is 


XIX.  21-25  341 

remarkable  here,  and  almost  unparalleled,  is  the  co-ordination 
of  Egypt  and  Assyria  with  Israel ;  they  are  not  to  be  subjects  of 
Israel,  and  in  virtue  of  so  being,  objects  of  Yahweh's  regard ;  they 
are  to  be  as  directly  related  to  Yahweh  as  Israel  itself.  This 
unlimited  universalism,  this  entire  elimination  of  racial  pre- 
rogative to  the  favour  of  Yahweh,  was  too  catholic  a  thought  to 
be  immediately  and  generally  accepted ;  (Sr  misses  the  point  of 
the  equal  co-ordination  of  the  three  nations  by  rendering  in  v.*^ 
"  Egypt  shall  serve  Assyria,"  and  reduces  v.*^  to  a  mere  reference 
to  the  Jews  at  home  and  in  the  Diaspora,  rendering,  Blessed  is  my 
people  which  is  in  Egypt^  and  which  is  in  Assyria  and  the  landj 
my  inheritance,  Israel ^  cp.  S  and  even  U.  ST  likewise  paraphrases 
away  the  great  idea  as  follows  :  "  Blessed  is  my  people  whom  I 
brought  out  of  Egypt,  whom  because  they  sinned  before  me 
I  exiled  to  Assyria;  but  when  they  repented  they  were  called 
my  people  and  my  inheritance,  Israel." 

23.  There  will  be  easy  communication  by  means  of  a  highway 
(11^^  40^)  which  Assyrians  and  Egyptians  will  use  equally  for 
friendly  passage  to  one  another's  country. — Assyria']  if  the  verses 
were  written  before  the  last  decade  of  the  7th  cent.,  this  refers  to 
the  Assyrian  Empire;  if  later,  to  one  of  the  Empires  which 
succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  Euphrates  valley — the  Persian 
or  the  Seleucid;  see  11^^  lo^*  n. — The  Egyptians  shall  serve 
with  the  Assyrians']  grammatically  the  sentence  is  ambiguous : 
it  might  equally  well,  and  even  more  obviously,  mean  the 
Egyptians  shall  serve  the  Assyrians ;  but  a  subjection  of  Egypt  to 
Assyria  is  incompatible  with  the  entire  outlook  of  the  verses,  with 
the  co-ordinalion  of  Egypt  and  Assyria  (Egypt  being  mentioned 
first)  in  the  next  v.,  and  the  repetition  of  exactly  the  same  phrase 
(ct.  ffi)  for  the  passage  of  Assyria  to  Egypt  and  Egypt  to 
Assyria.  The  service  in  which  Egypt  and  Assyria  are  to  co- 
operate is  (ritual)  service  to  Yahweh  ;  cp.,  of  Egypt,  v.21. — 24.  A 
blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  earth  25  which  Yahweh  of  Hosts 
hath  blessed,  saying]  so,  following  ffi  in  reading  n313  for  13"i3,. 
which  cannot  be  satisfactorily  explained  (see  phil.  n.).  For 
nD13,  a  blessing,  cf.  Gn  1 2^. — My  people]  Egypt,  in  Ex  3''  and 
often  elsewhere  of  Israel. —  The  work  of  my  hands]  the  term  used 
of  Assyria  was  in  itself  of  the  widest  importance  once  the  belief 
in  Yahweh  as  Creator  had  developed ;  note,  however,  the  use  of 
the  term  in  reference  to  Israel  in  6o2i  5^7 — j/y  inheritance\  of 


342  COMMENTARY   ON    ISAIAH 

Israel  as  often :   so  47^,  where  it  stands  in  parallelism  with  my 
people^  also  meaning  Israel. 

20.  n'ni]  the  subj.  is  the  entire  sense  of  v.^*  (cp.  Kon.  iii.  323^),  i.e.  the 
existence  in  Egypt  of  nmo  and  nnsD  ;  3rd  m.  sing,  as  in  Gn  i^^  etc.  17^^ 
Less  probable  is  the  view  that  the  following  sentence  '1JI  ipy:^'  '3  is  the 
subj. — ny*?!  niN*?]  f&.  eis  arjfieiov  els  rbv  alQva. — nW'i]  that  he  may  send:  this 
is  the  normal  force  of  simple  waw  with  the  impf.  (Dr.  §  62)  ;  and  again, 
the  normal  apodosis  to  a  sentence  beginning  with  '3  and  an  impf.  begins 
with  waw  consec.  and  the  pf.  (3"3i  here) ;  the  waw  with  the  impf.  is  in 
such  cases  very  rare  (Dr.  §  136/3,  cp.  §  125).  Moreover,  the  subj.  of  311  and 
D*?":*.!)  is  quite  naturally  Yahweh  on  the  view  here  taken,  less  naturally 
y'syiD  on  the  other.  MT  371  means  3i  to  be  taken  as  a  part.  :  so  ^TS'IT 
{(&.  ambiguous)  ;  but  after  ytriD  this  is  very  otiose  ;  on  the  other  hand, 
in  the  light  of  Ps  74^  mi,  then  he  will  intervene ^  is  effective  enough. — 
22.  inyji  .  .  .  i3B'i]  for  the  hypothetical  force  of  the  double  waw  conv.  with 
pf,,  see  Dr.  §  149.  For  the  Niph.  of  ^ny^-S  of  those  whose  supplication 
is  permitted  and  granted,  cp.  Gn  25^^,  Ezr  8^. — 21.  nn:Di  nar  n3jn]  (K  koX 
iroti^ffovffiv  dvalas.  But  121;  is  rather  a  technical  term  meaning  to  discharge  a 
(religious)  service  or  duty  :  cp.  Ex  13'  ;  and  v.^  below.  With  the  ace.  of 
the  material  used  in  the  service,  cp.  Ex  10^. — 25.  I3n3  nt^N]  ®r  '^v  e{)\6yri<r€v , 
whence  we  may  read  Ptpi5  -irK,  the  suffix  referring  to  pN.  Retaining  MT, 
some  explain  wherewith  (or  because)  Yahweh  hath  blessed  him,  i.e.  Israel,  or 
distributively,  each  one  of  the  three — all  awkward  and  improbable. 

XX. — Misraim  and  Cush  {Egypt  and  Ethiopia)  are  to  be  taken 

captive  by  Assyria. 

For  three  years,  including  the  year  of  the  capture  of  Ashdod 
by  the  Assyrians,  Isaiah  by  command  of  Yahweh  went  about 
"  naked  "  {i.e.  half-clad)  and  barefoot,  like  a  captive,  as  a  portent 
that  Misraim  and  Cush,  on  whom  the  Palestinian  states  at 
this  time  relied  for  help  against  Assyria,  would,  so  far  from 
giving  help,  themselves  be  taken  captive  by  Assyria. 

Sargon's  inscriptions  (see  below)  enable  us  to  date  the 
capture  of  Ashdod;  it  took  place  in  711  b.c.  These  inscrip- 
tions also  state  directly  that  Judah  was  drawn  into  the  revolt, 
and  into  the  appeal  to  Pir'u,  king  of  Musur,  for  help  against 
Assyria.  Isaiah's  conduct  was  directed,  though  unsuccessfully, 
towards  keeping  Hezekiah  and  Judah  out  of  an  anti-Assyrian 
alliance  with  the  neighbouring  states. 

The  date  is  particularly  significant  if,  as  has  commonly  been 
assumed,  Misraim  and  Cush  are  here,  as  usually  in  the  OT, 
Egypt   and   Ethiopia   (iS^  n.)   respectively.     For  the  siege  of 


XIX.  20-25  ;  XX.  343 

Ashdod  falls  a  year,  or  perhaps  as  much  as  three  years,  after 
Sabako,  in  establishing  the  Ethiopian  dynasty  in  Egypt,  had 
re-established  a  strong  central  government  in  the  Nile  valley. 
Isaiah,  in  this  case,  is  affirming  that  the  new  government  in 
Egypt,  though  it  may  be  stronger,  will  nevertheless  bring  no 
strength  to  the  Palestinian  states  against  Assyria.  His  expecta- 
tion that  Assyria  would  take  captive  and  carry  into  exile  the 
people  of  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  was  not  fulfilled ;  it  was  a  full 
generation  after  the  capture  of  Ashdod  before  an  Assyrian  army 
even  entered  Egypt.  But  it  is  obvious  that  Isaiah  was  right  in 
expecting  that  the  Palestinian  states  would  receive  no  effective 
aid  from  outside  ;  it  is  not  said  whether  the  appeal  to  Musur  for 
help  met  with  any  response ;  but  it  is  directly  stated  that  the 
king  of  Meluhha,  identified  *  by  most  scholars  (not  Winckler) 
with  Ethiopia,  delivered  over  the  leader  of  the  Ashdodites,  who 
had  fled  to  his  kingdom  for  refuge,  to  the  Assyrians. 

But  the  identification  of  the  Misraim  Cush  of  Is  20  and 
the  Musur  and  Melubba  of  the  Assyrian  inscriptions,  relating 
the  revolt  of  Ashdod,  with  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  formerly 
accepted  by  himself,!  so  far  as  Musur  =  Egypt  is  concerned, 
has  been  most  recently  denied  by  Winckler,  who  now  X  regards 
all  three  terms,  Musur  (Misraim),  Melubha,  Cush,  as  districts  of 
Arabia.  Alt  {Israel  u.  Aegypten^  68  fF.)  adopts  an  intermediate 
position,  holding  that  Pir'u,  king  of  Musur,  to  whom  the  Ash- 
dodites and  their  Jewish  and  other  allies  appealed  for  help,  was 
an  Arabian  ruler,  but  the  king  of  Meluhba  who  delivered  up 
Yamani  to  Assyria  was  Sabako  the  king  of  Ethiopia  (and 
Egypt). 

It  will  be  convenient  to  gather  here  the  details  of  the  affair  of  Ashdod 
given  in  Sargon's  inscriptions  (ed.  Winckler,  1889) — Annals,  215-228  ; 
Great  inscriptions  {Prunkinschrift),  90-112  {KB  ii.  65  f.),  and  a  Clay  Prism 
(ed.  Winckler,  186-189).  In  the  Annals  (1.  208)  the  date  is  given  as  the 
nth  year  of  Sargon,  i.e.  711  B.C.;  in  the  Clay  Prism  (1.  i)  as  the  9th  year. 
The  latter  date  may  be  due  to  a  different  mode  of  reckoning,  or  more  prob- 
ably it  is  the  date  of  the  earliest  treasonable  proceedings  in  Ashdod,  while 

*  See,  particularly,  E.  Meyer,  Die  Israeliten  u.  ihre  Nachbarstdmme 
(1906),  where  the  identification  Meluhha  =  Ethiopia,  is  re-argued  at  length 
against  Winckler. 

t  ATUntersttchungen  (1892),  143  f. 

X  KAT^  70 ff.  (where  references  will  be  found  to  his  earlier  arguments) ; 
Die  jUngsten  Kampfer  wider  den  Panbabyloni sinus  (1907),  29  ff. 


344  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH  ^^j 

711  is  the  date  of  the  fall  of  the  city  {A'A T ^70  fi.).  Note  the  three  years' 
duration  of  Isaiah's  portent.  The  course  of  events  was  as  follows :  Azuri, 
king  of  Ashdod,  determined  to  withhold  his  tribute  to  Assyria,  and  invited 
the  kings  of  his  region  to  join  him  in  his  anti-Assyrian  policy.  Sargon 
punished  this  conduct  by  deposing  Azuri  and  making  Azuri's  brother 
A^imiti  king  in  his  place.  The  Ashdodites  refused  to  accept  the  Assyrian 
nominee,  and  set  up  against  him  one,  Yamani  by  name,  who  had  no  right  by 
descent  to  the  throne,  and  who  was,  perhaps  {J^A  T  370  n. ),  an  adventurer 
from  Cyprus  (Yamna)  or  Arabia  (Yemen).  Yamani  fortified  Ashdod,  and  (at 
his  instigation)  the  Ashdodites,  in  common  with  other  Assyrian  vassal-states 
"situated  on  the  sea"  (a-5i-bu-ut  tam-tim),  viz.  the  Philistine  cities,  Judah, 
Edom,  Moab,  brought  presents  to  and  sought,  whether  successfully  or  not  is 
not  stated,  alliance  with  Pir'u,  king  of  Musur  (Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt,  or 
yis,  king  of  a  district  in  Arabia?).  '*  Quick  as  lightning  "  Sargon('s  army) 
marched  from  beyond  Tigris  on  Ashdod.  At  the  first  news  of  his  approach 
Yamani  fled  a-na  i-te-e  mdt  mu-us-ri  ia  pa-at  mdt  me-luh-ha,  i.e.  according 
to  different  interpretations,  to  the  boundary  (or,  in  the  direction)  of  Musur, 
which  is  on  the  side  of  (ox,  belongs  to  the  territory  of)  Meluh^a.  Sargon's 
army  captured  and  spoiled  Ashdod,  Gimti,  and  Ashdodimmu,  and  Sargon 
made  Ashdod  the  seat  of  an  Assyrian  governor.  The  king  of  Melu^ba, 
whose  capital  was  very  remote  from  Assyria,  and  whose  fathers  had  not  sent 
messengers  or  paid  tribute  to  Assyria,  alarmed  by  Sargon's  exploits,  sent 
Yamani  bound  to  Assyria. 

The  chapter  is  probably  in  the  main  derived  from  an  early 
biography  of  the  prophet — not  from  the  autobiography  from 
which  chs.  6-8  are  drawn ;  for  in  v.^  as  well  as  in  v.^  Isaiah  (the 
son  of  Amos,  v.^  as  in  the  titles  i^  2^  13^)  is  referred  to  in  the 
3rd  person.  In  form  the  ch.  consists  of  two  divine  oracles, 
v.2^  and  vv.^-^,  separated  from  one  another  in  time  by  three 
years,  and  a  brief  introduction,  w.^*  ^^,  defining  the  occasion  of 
the  oracles.  The  awkwardness  and  ambiguity  of  w.^'^  (see 
notes  below)  may  be  due  to  subsequent  amplification  of  the 
extract  from  the  biography,  possibly  by  the  insertion  of  v.^,  or 
to  abbreviation  (cp.  ch.  7).  Both  introduction  and  oracles 
seem  to  be  in  prose  (Che.,  Du.,  Cond.,  Box).  The  attempt 
to  represent  the  oracles  as  poetical  in  structure  (Lowth,  Skinner) 
is  not  successful. 

I.  In  the  year\  711  B.C. :  see  above. — That  the  Tartan)^  2  K 
S^^'f.  In  Assyr.  turtdnu^  tartdnu,  is  the  name  of  the  ofificer, 
or  officers — for  as  early  as  Sargon's  time  there  seem  to  have 
been  two — who  ranked  in  the  Assyrian  army  next  after  the  king ; 
see  Johns  in  EBi.  s.v.  Tartan ;  E.  Klauber,  Assyrisches  Beam- 
tentum   (1910),    pp.    60-63. — Came  to   Ashdod^    mod.    Esdud, 


XX.  I,  2  345 

about  33  miles  almost  due  E.  of  Jerusalem  and  2  or  3  miles 
from  the  coast. —  WAen  Sargortj  king  of  Assyria]  from  722-705 
B.C. — Sent  him,  and  he  fought  against  (7^n.)  Ashdod,  and  took 
ii\  all  this  fell  within  a  single  year.  The  Hebrew  narrative 
means  that  the  Tartan,  and  not  Sargon  in  person,  conducted 
the  operations  against  Ashdod.  Sargon  in  his  inscription  says, 
"I  marched  on  Ashdod  ...  I  besieged,  I  conquered  (it)" 
(Annals,  224  f.);  but  this  seems  to  be  merely  a  case  of  a  king 
recording  the  events  of  his  reign  as  his  own  personal  exploits. 
— 2.  At  that  time  Yahweh  spake]  or  Yahweh  had  spoken,  are 
equally  legitimate  renderings  (Dr.  §  7.  16);  neither  expresses 
well  what  appears  to  be  meant,  viz.,  that  three  years  before  the 
capture  of  Ashdod,  Yahweh  bade  Isaiah  go  barefoot.  If  we 
date  the  oracle  of  v. 2,  directing  Isaiah  to  go  barefoot,  in  the 
year  of  the  capture  of  Ashdod,  then  in  v.*,  Yahweh  said  to  me, 
means  really  Yahweh  said  to  me  three  years  later.  The  v.  is  an 
awkward  parenthesis,  perhaps  an  insertion  (Marti) ;  but  if  so,  an 
insertion  based  on  a  fuller  narrative  and  not  merely  elicited  from 
this  passage,  for  v.^  does  not  suggest  the  curious  reference  to  the 
prophet's  sackcloth. — By  the  hand  of  Isaiah]  ffi  to  (Trpos)  Isaiah. 
Later  writers,  particularly  P  and  Ch.,  are  specially  fond  of  the 
phrase,  Yahweh  spake  by  the  hand  of  such  and  such  a  prophet : 
see,  e.g..  Hag  i^*^  Lv  10",  2  Ch  lo^^;  and  for  some  twenty 
instances  in  P,  see  Carpenter  and  Harford,  The  Hexateuch,  i. 
219,  no.  180.  Earlier  examples  of  the  usage  are,  e.g.,  i  K  12^^ 
17!^  (cp.  Hos  12^1,  I  S  2815-  1^).  Its  occurrence  here  is  extra- 
ordinary, for  the  communication  concerns  the  prophet  alone,  and 
is  not  to  be  passed  on  to  some  one  else. — Saying,  Go  and  untie 
the  sackcloth  from  about  thy  loins]  except  in  a  few  passages  where 
it  means  a  sack  (of  grain,  etc.),  pjy  always  denotes  an  article  of 
dress  worn  in  mourning,  or  as  a  token  of  distress.  Consequently, 
"  to  untie  some  one's  sackcloth  "  is  a  figurative  expression  mean- 
ing to  cause,  or  give  to,  any  one  joy  (Ps  30^^).  In  the  present 
passage  pC^  certainly  seems  to  require,  and  has  commonly 
received,  another  interpretation ;  it  is  said  to  be  a  distinctive 
but  regular  dress  of  the  prophet,  and  is  compared  with  the 
"  hairy  garment "  of  the  prophets,  who  are  slightingly  referred  to 
in  Zee  13*,  or  the  camel's-hair  raiment  of  John  the  Baptist,  or 
the  sheepskin,  or  the  like,  which,  it  is  precariously  argued,  was 
Elijah's  official  dress;   cp.   2    K  i^  and  ffi's  /xrjXoiTTj  for  mnx 


346  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

in  I  K  19^3- ^'j  2  K  i^-  i2f.. — Half-clad\  wearing  the  inner  garment 
only  instead  of  the  two  which  constituted  the  normal  attire ;  so 
Mic  i^  and,  perhaps,  Ezk  iS'^-^^,  Is  58'''.  The  Hebrew  words 
Diy,  DT^y  no  doubt  commonly  meant  absolutely  naked  (Gn 
^7.  lof.) .  but,  like  yv/xkds,  ftudus^  they  had  also  the  meaning  of 
half-clad ;  even  in  this  condition  Isaiah  would  have  exposed  him- 
self during  these  years  to  jeers  and  contempt  (cp.  2  S  6i*-20). 
It  is  only  incidentally  from  the  following  oracle  that  we  learn 
the  duration  of  Isaiah's  conduct ;  yet  the  last  half  of  v.^  would 
stand  far  more  naturally  in  v.^ ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that 
the  original  biography  ran,  ^^  And  he  did  so,  going  half-clad  and 
barefoot  ^^  for  three  years  as  a  sign  and  a  portent  (8^^)  against 
Misraim  and  Cush. — 3,  4.  The  meaning  of  Isaiah's  conduct : 
And  Yahweh  said,  As  my  servant  (cp.  Am  3'^)  Isaiah  has  gone 
half-clad  and  barefoot  .  ,  .  so  the  king  of  Assyria  will  drive  away 
the  captives  of  Misraim  and  the  exiles  of  Cush,  young  and  old, 
half-clad  and  barefoot.  This  explanation  of  Isaiah's  conduct  is 
only  given  three  years  after  it  had  begun ;  what  had  happened 
in  the  interval  ?  Had  Isaiah  given  no  explanation  to  questions 
which  his  conduct  must  almost  certainly  have  invoked?  Did 
he  himself  attach  no  significance  to  conduct  which  he  had 
practised  at  the  express  direction  of  God  (v.  2)  ?  We  may  sup- 
pose that  at  first  he  explained  it  differently,  making  it  perhaps 
significant  of  the  exile  that  awaited  Ashdod  and  Judah  if  they 
trusted  in  Misraim  and  Cush ;  and  that  the  first  point  of  the 
second  oracle  is  that  not  only  will  these  countries  give  no  help 
to  the  Palestinian  states,  but  will  themselves  become  the  cap- 
tives of  Assyria. —  With  buttocks  laid  bare]  cp.  2  S  10^.  The 
clause,  which  re-enforces  half  clad  and  barefoot  as  a  description 
of  the  captives,  may  be  an  addition  to  the  text. — The  genitalia 
of  Misraim]  so  the  clause  must  be  translated;  it  is  probably  a 
note  giving  a  more  seemly  expression  which  was  to  be  sub- 
stituted (so  (&)  for  buttocks  in  the  text.  RV,  to  the  shame  of 
Egypt,  places  on  nny  an  unknown  and  improbable  meaning, 
and  produces  a  very  trite  conclusion. — For  the  custom  of  strip- 
ping captives,  see  2  Ch  28^^  (cp.  Is  47*,  2  S  10*) :  Egyptian  and 
Assyrian  reliefs  illustrate  it :  see,  e.g.  Breasted,  History  of  Egypt, 
fig.  119. 

5,  6.  The  effect  which  the  captivity  of  Cush  and  Misraim  is 
to  have  on  the  Philistines  and  their  Palestinian  allies ;  And  they 


XX.  1-6  347 

shall  be  dismayed  (8^  n.)  and  ashamed  because  of  Cush  their  hope 
(DD3D),  to  whom  they  looked  (l3*3n,  22^-^^)  as  a  source  of 
strength  for  help,  and  because  of  Misraim  of  whom  they  had 
made  their  boast,  as  being  with  all  its  irresistible  might  on  their 
side ;  *  and  the  inhabitants  of  this  coast  of  Palestine  shall  say  in 
that  day.  Behold  thus  is  our  hope  become  whither  we  fled  for 
help  to  deliver  ourselves  from  the  king  of  Assyria  ;  how  then  can 
we  be  saved?  The  subject  of  the  vbs.  in  v.*  has  to  be  gathered 
from  the  sufifixes  in  D13DD,  DmxBD ;  it  is  not  more  explicitly 
stated  till  v.^ ;  Marti  accounts  for  this  awkwardness  by  assum- 
ing that  v.*^  is  a  gloss,  Du.  with  more  probability  by  assuming 
that  the  original  biography  has  been  abbreviated  at  this  point. — 
The  inhabitants  of  the  coast"]  Sargon,  not  unnaturally,  at  a  dis- 
tance of  400  miles,  groups  together  the  inhabitants  of  Philistia, 
Judah,  Edom,  and  Moab  as  those  that  inhabit  the  coast;  but  it  is 
strange  for  a  resident  in  Jerusalem  to  use,  if  he  does  so,  the 
phrase  so  comprehensively:  in  232-6  "the  inhabitants  of  the 
coast "  are,  naturally  enough,  the  Phoenicians ;  and  in  Zeph  2' 
"the  inhabitants  of  the  region  of  the  sea  "are  the  Philistines. 
Possibly  we  have  again  some  awkwardness  due  to  abbreviation. 
— How  then  shall  we  escape]  the  pron.  is  emphatic  (cp.  2  K  10*) ; 
it  refers  to  that  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  coast  who  had  not 
previously  fled. 

I.  on^'")  .  .  .  K3  njra]  onS'i  may  carry  on  the  infin.,  In  the  year  the 
Tartan  came  .  .  .  and  fought  (Dr.  §§  iiyf.),  then  the  whole  of  v.^  is  a 
definition  of  the  year  in  which  something  took  place  ;  this  something,  if 
V.2  were  absent,  would  naturally  be  Yahweh's  speech  in  v.*  (tdkm  :  cp.  Dr. 
§  I27j8) :  at  present  v.^  intervenes  most  awkwardly ;  K'nn  nya  would  not  be 
a  normal  way  of  introducing  what  happened  at  the  time  defined  by  'iii  mra, 
even  if  there  were  any  probability  that  the  oracle  of  v.*  was  communicated 
in  711  B.C.,  and  that  of  vv.^*  three  years  later.  In  the  year  the  Tartan 
came,  etc.,  he  fought  .  .  .  and  took,  would  be  a  possible  translation  of  v.^, 
but  it  would  be  rather  pointless. — 2.  prn]  with  the  art.  (cp.  2  S  2i^^  2  K 
6^),  but  l'?y3.  pr,  sackcloth,  with  suffix,  only  occurs  in  late  passages — Est  4*, 
Ps  30^*^. — Diiy]  usage  (see  above)  must  determine  the  degree  of  exposure 
implied  by  this  word,  whether  it  be  rightly  derived  from  my  (Ew.,  Ges., 
Sta.,  as  cited  with  approval  in  BDB ;  and  see  especially  Schwally,  ZATIV, 
1891,  pp.  175  f.),  or  Diy  (Kon.  ii.  120;  Barth,  NB  41  f.). — 3.  Q'Jr  rW]  on 
the  possibility  that  these  and  the  following  words  originally  stood  in  the 
narrative  (cp.  v.^)  rather  than  in  the  oracle,  where  they  have  nothing 
corresponding  to  them  in  the  correlative  sentence  beginning  with  j3,  see 
above.  If  they  are  in  place  here  they  are  ace.  of  duration  (G-K.  118^), 
qualifying  "iSn,  walked  for  three  years.     The  position  of  the  words,  not  to 


348  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

discuss  other  reasons,  is  against  the  alternatives :  ( i )  Walked  (being  thus) 
a  sign  for  three  years  (Del.) ;  (2)  in  the  third  year  a  sign,  etc.,  i.e.  a  sign 
of  what  is  to  happen  three  years  hence — probably  intended  by  accentuation 
of  MT.— 4.  Tchi  .  .  .  'ar]  abstract  for  concrete.  QSc  omits  niSj ;  for  the 
punctuation  mVa,  see  G-K.  95/. — ^in'i  di^v]  ace.  of  the  state  in  the  sing, 
after  plurals:  cp.  Job  24^",  see  G-K  n8^. — 'S^bqi]  MT  treats  the  word  as 
a  sing.  (G-K.  87^) ;  'gisfni  was  intended. 


XXI. 

The  chapter  consists  of  three  poems  (a)  w.^"^® ;  (d)  w.^^'* ; 
(c)  w.i^"^^ ;  and  a  prose  note,  v.^^ 

The  poems  are  correctly  distinguished  from  one  another  by 
titles  characteristic  of  chs.  13-23  (see  13^  n.)  prefixed  to  them. 
Not  improbably  the  poems  are  the  work  of  a  single  writer,  and 
were  composed  in  Palestine  shortly  after  the  middle  of  the  6th 
century  b.c.  "  Common  to  all  three  are  (a)  the  obscure  oracular 
utterance  .  .  .  ,  (^)  the  strongly  marked  visionary  element  in  the 
writer's  experience,  and  (c)  a  certain  readiness  of  sympathy  with 
the  foreign  nations  concerned  in  the  predictions "  (Skinner) ; 
also  (d)  the  dominance  of  a  rhythm  produced  by  the  succession 
of  lines,  or  clauses,  of  two  accents  is  common  to  vv.^"^^  and  ^i^- 

A  date  between  549  and  538  b.c.  best  satisfies  the  historical 
situation  presupposed  in  vv.^'^® ;  the  language  in  vv.^^*^'^  points 
to  a  date  considerably  later  than  Isaiah's. 

XXI.  i-io. — A  vision  of  the  approaching  fall  of  Babylon  {before 

the  Persians). 

Special  Literature:  —  ?.  Kleinert  in  ThSK^  1877,  pp.  174-179; 
H.  Winckler,  ATUniersuchungen,  pp.  120-125  ;  T.  K.  Cheyne,  Introduction 
pp.  121-131  ;  S.  R.  Driver,  Isaiah:  his  Life  and  Times,^  pp.  216-219. 

The  lines,  or  portions  of  lines  marked  off  by  |  (cp.  p.  76),  in  the  following 
translation,  correspond  to  two  accents,  except  that  v.^*  Ms  3  :  4  (or  omitting 
*S'DB,  3  :  3),  and  that  v.^^*  **  could  be  more  easily  read  as  3  :  3  than  as  2  :  2. 

Parallelism  prevails  though  not  quite  uninterruptedly ;  it  is  commonly 
between  periods  of  two  accents,  but  in  v.**-  *•  between  a  combination  of  two, 
and  in  v.*  of  three  such  periods. 

^  [A  roaring  ?]  as  of  storms 

As  they  sweep  through  the  Negebl 
It  cometh  from  the  wilderness, 
From  the  terrible  land. 


XX.  4 ;  XXI.  349 

*  A  stern  vision  |  has  been  told  to  me ; — 
"The  violator  is  violating, 

The  spoiler  is  spoiling. 
Go  up,  O  'Elam, 
Lay  siege,  O  Media, 
Cause  all  the  ...  to  cease." 

3  Therefore  filled  are  |  my  loins  with  writhing, 

Pangs  have  seized  me  |  as  of  a  woman  in  travail. 
I  am  bent  (with  pain)  at  what  I  hear, 
I  am  dismayed  at  what  I  see. 

*  My  mind  wandereth. 

Shuddering  has  affrighted  me; 
The  twilight  that  I  longed  for 

Has  been  turned  for  me  into  trembling. 

*  They  are  arranging  the  tables  ! 

They  are  spreading  the  carpets ! 
They  are  eating,  they  are  drinking  1 
"Rise  up,  O  princes. 
Rub  the  shields  with  oil." 

^  For  thus  said  |  the  Lord  unto  me : — 
"Go  station  the  watcher. 
What  he  sees,  let  him  tell. 
■^  And  if  he  see  a  riding  company, 
Horsemen  in  pairs, 
A  riding  company  on  asses, 

A  riding  company  on  camels. 
Then  let  him  attend  attentively, 
With  great  attention." 

*  And  he  cried  ... 

"Upon  a  watch-tower,  O  Lord,  |  am  I  standing  |  continu- 
ally by  day; 
And    upon    my  guard-post  |  am  I    stationed  |  all   the 

nights. 

*  And,  behold  there,  coming, 
A  riding  company  of  men, 


350  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

Horsemen  in  pairs." 
And  he  resumed  and  said, 
"Fallen,  fallen  is  Babylon, 

And  all  the  images  of  her  gods  are  shattered  to  the  earth." 

^^  O  my  threshed  one  and  my  child  of  the  threshing-floor ! 
What  I  have  heard  |  from  Yahweh  of  Hosts  |  the  God  of 

Israel, 
I  have  told  unto  you. 

The  poem  describes  four  scenes  seen  in  a  vision,  or  a 
succession  of  visions : — (i)  the  horrors  of  war  are  proceeding, 
and  a  cry  is  heard  summoning  Elam  and  Media  to  attack  a  city, 
v.2j  (2)  preparations  are  made  for  a  banquet,  and  the  banquet 
is  proceeding  when  suddenly  there  comes  the  cry.  To  arms ! 
and  the  princes,  or  captains,  are  called  from  the  table  to  the 
field,  v.5 ;  (3)  troops  mounted  on  horses,  asses,  and  camels  are 
advancing,  v.^**',  cp.  v."^;  (4)  Babylon  is  captured  and  all  her 
gods  shattered  to  the  ground.  V.^  is  a  prelude,  in  vv.^^-  the  seer 
describes  the  horror  with  which  the  first  scene  fills  him,  in  v.'^^* 
the  manner  in  which  he  receives  the  visions,  and  in  v.^^,  address- 
ing his  own  much-afflicted  people,  he  ascribes  his  revelations  to 
Yahweh  as  their  source. 

The  city  (implied  by  the  term  "  besiege  ")  of  the  first  scene 
can  hardly  be  other  than  that  of  the  fourth,  viz.  Babylon ;  the 
banquet  of  the  second  scene  is  a  Babylonian  banquet.  The  cry 
in  the  second  scene  carries  events  in  the  city  down  to  the  time 
after  the  advance  of  Elam  and  Media  in  the  third  scene,  at  a 
distance  from  Babylon,  has  begun  :  the  fourth  scene  depicts 
the  fall  of  Babylon  before  this  attacking  force  of  Elam  and 
Media. 

Thus  the  capture  of  Babylon  is  still  future  to  the  writer,  so 
also  probably  is  the  advance  of  Elam  and  Media ;  but  we  may 
infer  that  a  political  situation,  which  made  such  an  advance  prob- 
able, already  existed.  Such  a  situation  existed  between  549 
B.C.,  when  Cyrus  had  united  under  his  sway  Media  as  well  as 
Elam,  and  538  B.C.,  when  Babylon  opened  its  gates  without  a 
struggle  to  Cyrus'  Median  and  Elamite  army.  And  to  these 
years  we  may  refer  the  oracle.  It  was  not  written  after  the 
event;  for  Babylon  avoided  "falling"  (in  the  sense  probably 


XXI.   i-io 


351 


intended  by  the  writer)  by  immediate  capitulation,  and  Cyrus,  so 
far  from  shattering,  made  a  point  of  honouring,  the  gods  of 
Babylon. 

The  language,  even  though  it  does  not  demand  it,  is  quite 
compatible  with  the  date  suggested. 

The  horror  and  dismay  with  which  the  first  scene  fills  the 
seer  contrasts,  it  is  true,  with  the  buoyancy  and  hope  which  the 
career  of  Cyrus  brings  to  the  author  of  chs.  40-55.  But  if  this 
writer  is  also  the  author  of  vv.^^'-,  while  he  shared  with  the  author 
of  chs.  40-55  the  conviction  that  Babylon  would  fall  and  her 
idols  be  destroyed,  he  did  not  share  with  him  his  optimistic 
estimate  of  Persia ;  he  rather  thought  that  a  change  of  masters 
might  mean  no  amelioration  of  the  condition  of  the  Jews ;  and 
in  any  case  he  is  apprehensive  that  the  horrors  of  war  will  in  the 
immediate  future  affect  not  only  Babylon,  but  also  her  captives. 
The  background  of  his  vision  is  uncertain :  the  foreground  is 
fiercely  lighted  with  the  plunder,  the  violence,  the  cruelties  of 
war. 

A  brief  reference  to  two  alternative  theories  must  suffice.  They  have  this 
in  common,  that  they  assign  the  oracle  to  a  time  when,  not  Babylon,  but 
Ass)nria  was  the  oppressor  of  Judah,  with  Babylon  as  its  chief  opponent,  who 
as  such  would  be  likely  to  command  sympathy  among  the  Jews,  (i)  Kleinert 
refers  the  oracle  to  710  B.C.,  when  Sargon's  conquest  of  Babylon  crushed  the 
hopes  that  Hezekiah  (but  surely  not  Isaiah)  had  placed  in  Merodach-Baladan 
(2  K  20^''^^-) ;  on  this  view  v.^***  "  describes  not  Babylon  but  Assyria,  and  the 
Elamites  and  Medians  of  v.^*  •  are  tributaries  serving  in  Sargon's  army.  (2) 
Wi.  arjjues  that  the  situation  presupposed  is  that  of  about  the  year  648  B.C., 
when  Shamash-shum-ukin  of  Babylon  had  formed  a  great  coalition,  including 
Manasseh  of  Judah,  against  Asshurbanipal  of  Assyria. 

The  fatal  objection  (notwithstanding  22")  to  both  these  theories  is  that 
Elam  on  both  occasions  was  acting  w/M  Babylon,  whereas  in  the  vision  Elam 
is  acting  against  it.  This  also  rules  out  the  possibility  that  the  oracle  refers 
to  Sennacherib's  siege  of  Babylon  in  689  (cp.  Che.  Introd,  p.  124). 

I.  Title. — Oracle  (13^  n.)  of  the  wilderness  (see  v.^*).  f^ 
adds  of  {the)  sea ;  but  this  is  absent  from  ffi,  and  no  tolerable 
explanation  of  the  phrase  wilderness  of  the  sea  has  ever  been 
offered.  It  has  been  supposed  to  mean  the  country  bordering 
on  the  Persian  Gulf  and  separating  Elam  from  Babylon ;  but 
this  is  marsh  (Wi.),  not  wilderness.  Probably  D*  in  J^  is  a 
corrupt  fragment  of  the  first  word  of  the  poem,  which  may  be 
missing ;  in  5^,  v.^*  has  but  one  accent. 


352  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

In  the  opening  lines  of  the  poem  the  seer  explains  how  there 
has  come  to  him,  like  tempestuous  weather,  news  from  a  land 
that  had  ever  been  a  cause  of  fear. — A  roaring]  a  trace  of  a 
word  (?  rTiDn,  Marti)  with  some  such  meaning  may  survive  in 
D%  which  in  J^  forms  part  of  the  title.  —As  they  sweep  through 
the  Negeb]  This  vivid  touch  is  more  probably  due  to  personal 
experience  than  to  mere  literary  suggestion;  the  writer  was 
probably  familiar  with  the  Negeb  as  a  resident  in  its  neighbour- 
hood. The  Negeb,  so  called  from  its  dry  and  comparatively 
verdureless  character,  stretched  some  60  miles  northwards  from 
Kadesh  {Numbers^  p.  138);  the  seer,  like  the  author  of  Ps  29, 
had  seen  this  country  *'  shaking  "  with  storms,  and  had  watched 
the  march  of  tempests  such  as,  to  the  minds  of  Hebrew  poets, 
accompanied  Yahweh  when  He  came  from  His  ancient  home 
through  this  district  to  the  help  of  His  people  (Jg  5*,  He  3^, 
Zee  9^*).  It  is  very  improbable  that  Negeb  here  means  the 
desert  south  of  Babylon  (Di.). — //  cometK\  the  indef.  subj.  is 
explained  by  what  follows  in  v. 2*. — The  wilderness']  between  the 
fertile  land  E.  of  Jordan  and  the  Euphrates  \  the  Syrian  desert. 

2.  First  Scene. — A  stem  vision  has  been  told  to  me]  by  the 
watcher,  or  second  consciousness  of  the  seer  (v.^  n.),  or  by 
Yahweh  (v.^°).  It  is  far  less  probable  that  some  other  recipient 
of  visions  is  thought  of.  The  vision  (nitn,  29^^)  is  one  of  the 
stern  (n\i^[>,  Ps  60^,  i  K  14^)  realities  of  war.  V.^^- ''  refers  to 
the  Persians  descending  from  their  mountain  home,  spreading 
ruin  and  disaster  as  they  go  (Du.),  rather  than  to  the  still 
continued  violence  and  treachery  (cp.  33^)  of  Babylon,  which 
Elam  and  Media  (<*•  ®)  are  called  on  to  stop  (Di.,  Che.).  The 
term  li2,  often  used  of  treachery  in  social  relations  (e.g.  of 
adultery),  in  passages  like  the  present  and  24^^  33^,  Hab  i^^, 
appears  to  cover  in  general  all  the  deceits  and  treacheries,  and 
all  the  violations  of  the  social  order,  that  accompany  war. — Go 
up]  ^i^y,  which  gives  an  assonance  with  xh'S^  is  not  strictly 
correct;  a  Persian,  or  almost  any  other,  army  would  actually 
go  down  in  to  Babylon.  The  writer,  resident  in  Judah  (see  on 
v.i),  transfers  to  an  advance  on  the  capital  of  Babylon  the  term 
which  was  appropriately  used  of  approach  to  Jerusalem  (7^  n.). — 
Elam]  is  the  great  plain  E.  of  the  lower  Tigris,  together  with  the 
mountains  enclosing  it  on  the  N.  and  E.,  and  Media  is  the 
country  N.  of  Elam  with  its  centre  at  Ecbatana  (cp.  Ezr  6^). 


X 


XXI.  i-s  353 

The  combination  of  these  two  terms  is  the  natural  mode  of 
reference  by  a  late  exilic  writer  to  the  dominion,  or  army,  of 
Cyrus :  post-exilic  writers  (cp.  v.^  ffi)  might  have  used  the  term 
Persia,  Persians;  cp.  EBu  3661. — Cause  all  the  ,  ,  ,  to  cease"] 
the  vb.  ^n^B^n  should  most  obviously  be,  like  the  two  that 
precede,  2nd  fem.  imper.  MT  /  have  caused  to  cease^  suddenly 
introducing  Yahweh  as  speaker,  is  improbable.  The  obj.  of  the 
vb.  in  J^  is  sighing  \  but  this  cannot  be  satisfactorily  explained 
in  the  context,  whether  we  understand  by  it  (1)  the  sighing  of 
the  Babylonians,  for  then  the  phrase  would  express  bringing  joy 
to  Babylon  (cp.  Hos  2^^)^  or  (2)  the  sighing  of  the  Jews  or  of 
all  Babylon's  victims,  for  this  would  form  a  most  improbable 
introduction  to  the  distress  of  the  seer  described  in  w.^'-; 
see  phil.  n. 

3,  4.  The  seer*s  emotion  at  what  he  has  seen  (v.*). — 

/  am  bent  {with  pain)  at  what  I  hear]  or  /  am  too  bent  .  ,  .  to 
hear^  and  similarly  in  v.**. — 4.  My  mind  wanders]  37,  hearty  as 
often  of  the  organ  of  mental  activities  (BDB  524^^);  the  seer 
sees  a  vision  and  can  describe  it,  but  has  lost  the  wits  to  fathom 
its  fuller  meaning ;  he  is  prophetically  mad  (Jer  292^) ;  "  he  here 
reveals  himself  not  indeed  as  a  great  prophet,  but  as  a  true 
visionary"  (Du.).  nyn  means  wanders  (28'' n.),  not  panteth 
(RV). — Shuddering]  Twh^  denotes  the  physical  effects  of  terror ; 
see  Job  21^,  Ezk  7I8,  Ps  55^  t :  cp.  Jlvi'BnS  Job  ^^—The  twilight] 
5^^  n.  the  cool  of  the  day,  generally  longed  for,  brought  on  this 
occasion  not  pleasant  rest,  but  this  bewildering  vision. 

5.  The  second  scene. — This  picture  of  the  banqueting 
Babylonians  (cp.  Jer  51^^)  is  prophetic,  not  historic.  It  has,  it 
is  true,  some  resemblance  to  the  legendary  accounts  of  the 
capture  of  Babylon  given  in  Dn  5,  Herod,  i.  191 ;  but  it  is 
sufficiently  natural  as  a  prophetic  vision,  and  not  sufficiently 
particular  to  render  it  necessary  to  regard  it  as  an  historical, 
or  legendary,  addition  to  the  prophecy.  The  picture  does  not 
correspond  to  the  actual  course  of  subsequent  events  as  recorded 
in  the  Nabona*id-Cyrus  Chronicle  {KB'\\.  2,  pp.  134 f.);  according 
to  this,  Nabona*id  fled  from  Sippar,  which  was  captured  without 
resistance,  to  Babylon,  which  two  days  later  likewise  yielded 
without  resistance. — They  spread  the  carpets]  on  which  to  recline 
at  the  banquet.  The  rendering  is  riot  certain,  but  more  probable 
than  they  set  the  watch  I  See  phil.  n. — Rub  the  shields  with  oil] 
VOL.  I. — 23 


354  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

that  they  may  not  cut  into  the  flesh  of  those  that  wear  them7 
less  probably,  polish  the  shields  to  make  them  shine. 

6-9.  Third  and  fourth  scenes. — The  Persian  advance 
on  Babylon  and  the  fall  of  Babylon  are  reported  as  seen  not 
by  the  speaker  himself,  but  by  a  third  person  (cp.  v. 2)  called 
naVDH,  the  watcher :  nevertheless  the  substance  of  the  3rd  scene 
is  communicated  direct  to  the  speaker  by  Yahweh  (v.'^) :  all  that 
the  watcher  has  to  do  is  to  report  when  he  sees  what  has  already 
been  particularised.  Thus  the  revelation  of  what  is  coming  is 
made  in  the  first  instance  to  the  seer;  so  in  v.^<*  no  intermediary 
of  revelation  between  Yahweh  and  the  seer  is  recognised.  The 
watcher  is  the  prophet's  second  self,  whom  the  seer  objectifies 
and  orders  to  make  ready  to  receive  a  divine  communication. 
The  nearest  parallel  in  the  OT  seems  to  be  Ezekiel's  ecstasy, 
in  which  it  seemed  to  him  that  his  conscious  self  was  borne 
away  from  the  midst  of  his  companions  in  Babylon  to  Jerusalem, 
and,  after  seeing  much  in  Jerusalem,  returned,  and  enabled  him 
to  tell  his  companions  what  Yahweh  had  shown  him  (Ezk  8^*^ 
1 124^-).  Analogies  in  some  respects  closer  are  obtained  by  the 
comparative  study  of  psychical  phenomena. 

For  the  comparative  data,  see  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture^,  i.  438  f.:  **  Such 
temporary  exit  of  the  soul  has  a  world-wide  application  to  the  proceedings 
of  the  sorcerer,  priest,  or  seer  himself.  He  professes  to  send  forth  his  spirit 
on  distant  journeys,  and  probably  often  believes  his  soul  released  for  a  time 
from  its  bodily  prison,  as  in  the  case  of  that  remarkable  dreamer  and  visionary 
Jerome  Cardan,  who  describes  himself  as  having  the  faculty  of  passing  out  of 
his  senses  as  into  ecstasy  whenever  he  will,  feeling  when  he  goes  into  this 
state  a  sort  of  separation  near  the  heart,  as  if  his  soul  was  departing.  The 
Khond  priest  authenticates  his  claim  to  office  by  remaining  from  one  to 
fourteen  days  in  a  languid  and  dreamy  state,  caused  by  one  of  his  souls 
being  away  in  the  divine  province.  .  .  .  The  Turanian  Shaman  lies  in 
lethargy  while  his  soul  departs  to  bring  hidden  wisdom  from  the  land  of 
spirits.  .  .  .  The  Norse  chief  Ingimund  shut  up  three  Finns  in  a  hut  for 
three  nights,  that  they  might  visit  Iceland  and  inform  him  of  the  lie  of  the 
country  where  he  was  to  settle :  their  bodies  became  rigid,  they  sent  their 
souls  on  the  errand,  and  awakening  after  three  days  they  gave  a  description 
of  the  Vatnsdael." 

6.  Station  the  watcher']  r\ti'i'OT\  noyn ;  Hab.  (2^)  uses  the  same 
figure  of  the  prophetic  activity,  but  without  the  implication  of 
dual  personality  which  has  just  been  discussed. — Let  him  te//] 
to  the  prophet's  first  self :  cp.  "  told  to  me  "  (v.2),  and  "  I  have 
told  "  (v.^^). — 7.  There  is  some  uncertainty  about  the   precise 


^"^R^Hr 


XXI.  6-9  355 

meaning  of  the  terms  in  this  v.  (see  phil.  n.),  but  the  scene  is 
probably  of  the  advance  of  a  hostile  army  with  horses^  asses^  and 
camelSy  in  particular  of  a  cavalcade  advancing  in  double  file, 
partly  mounted  on  horses,  partly  on  asses,  and  partly  on  camels. 
It  is  less  probable  that  the  asses  and  camels  are  here  introduced 
as  baggage  animals.  According  to  Herod,  (i.  80),  Cyrus  largely 
owed  his  victory  over  the  Lydians  to  placing  riders  on  his 
camels,  and  the  Scythians  were  much  hindered  by  the  asses  in 
Darius's  camp  (iv.  129).  Whether,  however,  the  Persians  used 
asses  for  riding  in  battle  is  doubtful :  Ges.,  whose  note  on  this 
point  is  full,  cites  some  evidence  of  the  use  of  asses  for  riding  in 
battle,  though  not  by  the  Persians  in  particular. — And  if  he  5ee\ 
AV,  RVmarg.  "  And  he  saw,"  is  an  illegitimate  translation  (see 
phil.  n.).  Del.'s  exegesis  is  based  on  a  similarly  erroneous  inter- 
pretation of  a^Cypni  nfc<"n ;  v.'',  according  to  him,  describes  how 
the  watcher  sees  the  cavalcade  appear  and  disappear,  hearing 
nothing ;  v.®  his  cry  of  impatience  that  he  has  stood  so  long 
seeing  nothing  more ;  v.®  how  his  complaint  dies  on  his  lips  as 
he  sees  the  cavalcade  re-appear,  this  time  bringing  the  news  of 
the  fall  of  Babylon.  This  would  be  an  attractive  mode  of  sur- 
mounting difficulties  if  it  were  not  philologically  impossible. 
8.  pa  the  watcher  announces  that  he  now  sees  the  cavalcade 
which  he  was  to  expect  (v.*^).  —  Then  he  cried]  '^  ■{-  as  a  lion, 
which  has  been  explained  by  reference  to  Rev  10^,  a  very  poor 
parallel,  for  the  ominous  cry  of  the  angel  there  might  well  be 
compared  to  a  lion's  terrifying  roar  (cp.  Am  3^);  but  why  should 
the  watcher  roar  lion-like  to  God,  or  even  (if  we  point  ""OnK  rather 
than  ^Jnx)  to  the  seer?  The  comparison  with  a  lion  cannot 
simply  indicate  impatience  (Del.),  even  if  that  were  in  place 
here.  Equally  unsatisfactory  is.  Then  he  criedy  A  lion!  The 
word  rT'iK  is  probably  corrupt :  see  phil.  n.  The  remainder  of 
v.*  seems  to  imply  that  the  watcher  stood  long,  at  least  many 
days  and  nights,  on  the  watch  to  which  he  was  appointed  (v.'^), 
before  he  saw  anything.  But  this  allusive  and  inferential  way 
of  marking  a  long  interval  is  not  altogether  natural,  and  v.*  per- 
haps implies  that  the  whole  series  of  visions  came  on  a  single 
evening ;  moreover,  v.^  leads  us  to  expect  that  the  watcher  will 
address  the  seer  and  not  God  (v.^^).  Marti  omits  v.^''-  '^  as  a 
gloss  suggested  by  62*.     But  the  purpose  of  such  a  reflection 


356  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

just  here  is  not  obvious. — pa-C.  The  vision  of  the  cavalcade 
summarily  related.  The  sequence  is  rather  awkward ;  for  it  is 
rather  forced  to  say,  with  Del.,  Di.,  that  as  he  begins  to  complain 
(v.^,  which  does  not  in  itself  at  all  necessarily  suggest  complaint), 
the  vision  comes  and  makes  him  break  off  his  complaint.  Yet 
the  only  escape  from  some  such  attempt  is  to  assume  either 
interpolation  (with  Marti)  or  mutilation. — pd.  e.  See  above, 
p.  350  f. — 10.  The  divine  revelation,  which  he  has  just  received, 
the  seer  now  declares  to  his  long  and  much-afflicted  people  who 
have  been  held  in  thrall  by  Babylon.  The  figurative  singular 
terms  my  threshed  one  and  my  son  of  the  threshing-floor^  pass  over 
into  the  distributive  plural  to  you  at  the  end  of  the  v.  For 
other  uses  of  the  figure  of  threshing  to  express  the  hard  or 
cruel  treatment  of  a  land  or  people,  cp.  41^^  Am  i^,  Mic  4^^, 
Hab  3^2.  With  son  of  my  thres hi ?ig floor,  cp.  Jer  51^^  "The 
daughter  of  Babylon  is  like  a  threshing-floor  at  the  time  when 
it  is  trodden,"  i.e.  trodden  down  hard,  in  readiness  for  the 
threshing  (see  Dr.  ad  loc), 

I.  D'  nano]  Du.  Dn3^D  (an  unparalleled  plural) ;  Che.  Dn8'3 ;  both  im- 
probable ;  see  above. — n'?nS]  Dr.  §  205.  ^n  is  used  of  a  flood  in  8®,  of 
wind  in  Hab  i^^ — 2.  r\vj>  mm]  ace.  with  the  pass,  as  17^  (G-K.  121^] ;  less 
probably  ace.  of  the  state  (G-K.  ii8«). — n«  .  .  .  'Vi^J  fern,  as  7^42",  Jer 
50^**,  2  S  8^ :  see  G-K  122/.  ffir,  incorrectly,  iv  ifiol  =  ''hli,  and  ol  vpia^ets 
=  n?f. — 'nnBTT  nnnax  Vd]  fflr  ^tt'  ifik  ipxovrai'  vvv  aTevd^oj  Kal  irapaKoX^ab) 
i/xavrdv  may  imply  a  longer  text  (cp.  Ruben,  Crit.  Remarks^  p.  8) ;  nnnjK 
suggested  orivd^w  (cp.  24') :  the  rest  is  uncertain. — nnnjN]  with  he  raphe 
(MT)  means  sighing  (G-K  ^og) ;  n^pnjN,  her  sighing.  Both  are  difficult ;  see 
above  :  possibly  the  word  is  an  error  for  nmxJ  (cp.  13^^)  or  •"nnno??'  (cp.  Jer  7*^). 
— 3.  n'?n'?n  'jdd  ik'?d]  cp.  cano  ^yi  rhxhr\\  Nah  tP^. — 'myj]  cp.  PS38';  Ar. 

^tfC-  means  to  bend^  twist  {e.g.  a  bow,  rope). — dintd  .  .  .  yoB'D]  p  is  causal 

(Du.),  as  in  48^,  Dt  7'**  9^,  2  S  3^\  rather  than  negative  or  comparative. — 
Dt?]  the  subj.  isindef.:  G-K.  144^.-5.  nh??  hSzi^  .  .  .  n&^f  .  .  .  7i*iv]  G-K^ 
113^ — n'fli-n  nsx]  not  set  the  watch  (RV),  for  (i)  nBJ<  means  to  watch,  or  in 
Piel  to  xvatch  closely,  (2)  Ji'Bs  is  not  a  probable  form  for  watchman  ;  (3)  the 
idea  is  differently  expressed  in  v.*  ;  (4)  the  meaning  is  not  very  suitable  to  the 
context.  Watch  {in)  the  watch  tower  (AV)  and  observe  the  horoscope  (cp. 
Ew.),  apart  from  other  objections,  are  also  not  probable  in  the  context. 
Both  noun  and  vb.  are  rather  from  the  root  nsif,  which  in  Piel  means  to 
overlay  (with  metal) ;  the  Kal  may  have  meant  to  lay,  the  noun  something 
laid  (cp.  |A<y>  . .  a  mat,  matting),  i.e.  a  carpet,  or,  as  others  think,  a 
table-cloth  :  see,  further,  Che.  Introd.  p.  126,  n.  i. — 6.  'nN  '*?«  ton  ns  o]  so 
v,^^  save  that  the  order  there  is  '*?«  '^n  ;  also  (with  ni.T  for  'JHn)  8^'  18^  31^ 
— nsj^Dn  noyn  i^]  noyn,  make  to  stand,  station  (cp.  e.g.  Nu  ii^*  JE)  is  not 


XXI.  I-I2  357 

necessarily  late:  see  Dr.  LOT'^  503  (^535),  no.  4;  Koppel  {ZATW^  1910, 
pp.  58-60)  is  less  discriminating.  |^  can  be  read  nuxo  moy  naS,  Go^  stand  as 
a  watchman  (Buhl,  ZATIV  \'\n.  157  f.) ;  or  naxon  noy  na*?,  which,  assuming  a 
construction  harsh  in  itself  and  improbable  in  view  of  v.",  might  be  rendered, 
Go,  stand  on  the  watch-tower  (Stade,  ZATW  viii.  165 ff.  :  cp.  Kautzsch  in 
DB  V.  674  n. ).  Either  of  these  readings,  if  all  the  consequential  changes  of 
2nd  or  1st  for  3rd  persons  in  vv.'"'  were  also  adopted,  would  remove  the 
representation  of  a  double  consciousness  in  the  prophet  (see  above).  But  in 
criticism  of  Buhl  and  Sta.,  see  Du.  and  Che.  Introd.  p.  125. — ra'  TiVd"^  (!& 
fSgs  dj'(i77«Xoi' :  so  (v.')  tXhov  instead  of  nxT;  but  in  v.*  <&.  agrees  With  "^ 
in  reading  laK'i  jyi  in  the  3rd  pers.  Cp.  last  n. — 7.  3'rpm  .  .  .  nxni]  Dr. 
§  149.    And  he  saw  (RV)  would  be  K-jn.— aan]  a  collective  noun  (373,  cp.  Ar. 

t^,^.).  or  the  part.  33n  used  collectively  (20^ n.),  meaning  riders,  a  riding 

company,     Cp.  22',  but  in  2  K  7"  the  pi.  3?*i  is  perhaps  more  probable. — 

8.  nn«]  an  early  (cp.  fflr)  error  (see  above) ;  Marti  reads  n»<nK,  and  by  omitting 
the  rest  of  v.^  (see  above)  obtains  the  phrase  nj'Ti  r\\r\tK\  cp.  Zee  2^*'  etc. — 

9.  ni  nam]  ni  is  enclitic  as  in  i  K  19",  Ca  2"- :  see  BDB,  p.  261. — r'lc] 
collective :  cp.  Jos  9''*,  Jg  20^^,  Mesha's  inscription,  11.  10,   13.      Ct  the 

genitives  of  the  animals  ridden  in  v.'  (cp.  Ar.   (J-*>.Sf-   .,_  ^\X     Sta.  omits, 

appealing  precariously  to  (!K  :  rhythmically  some  word  seems  required  here. 
— Tcrh^  ''?'DS]  cp.  Dt  7^  12*.  C&  rd  dydX/iara  a.irrr\%  koL  rb.  xapo-Koi-iYra. 
airrrjs,  which  is  possibly  a  doublet  of  an  early  text  which  read  n'S'OB 
(  =  ^22  's,  Jer  51*')  or  .thSk,  only. — 10.  (K  is  very  free,  but  not  briefer. 


XXI.  II,  12. — An  ambiguous  answer  to  a  question  from  Edom, 
The  distichs  are  2  : 2  (cp.  w.^*^**) ;  v.^^a  j^^s  2,  but  v."»  3,  accents. 

11  Unto  me  one  is  calling  from  Seir : — 
"Watchman,  how  far  is  the  night  spent? 

Watchman,  how  far  is  the  night  spent?" 

12  The  watchman  said, 
"The  morning  hath  come, 

And  the  night,  too; 
Would  ye  inquire,  inquire, 
Come  back  again." 

A  brief,  but  obviously  complete,  oracle.  Some  Edomites 
inquire  of  the  seer  how  far  gone  is  the  night  of  oppression 
through  which  they  are  now  passing.  The  seer  replies  that  a 
change  is  coming,  but  whether  with  it  any  permanent  relief  is  at 
present  obscure  to  him.  If  his  questioners  care  to  do  so,  let 
them  ask  again  another  day. 


358 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


lb»1 


If  this  oracle  is  by  the  same  author  and  approximately  of 
the  same  date  as  vv.^"i^  (see  p.  350  f.),  it  was  written  between 
549  and  538  B.C.  ',  the  night  that  now  is,  is  the  Babylonian 
oppression ;  the  morning  which  he  sees  to  be  coming,  is  the 
imminent  (cp.  v.^^)  overthrow  of  Babylon  by  the  Persians ;  the 
night  beyond  is  the  dominion  of  the  Persians  from  which  Edom 
and  Judah  will  not  escape,  and  which  may  prove  as  veritable  a 
night  as  that  of  the  Babylonians.  The  vision  of  the  Persian 
advance  is  here  a  vision  of  night,  as  in  v.^  it  is  a  vision  filling  the 
seer  with  anguish. 

Apart  from  its  probable  connection  with  vv.^^^^,  there  is 
nothing  that  would  closely  define  the  date  of  this  oracle.  The 
language  suggests  a  relatively  late  date,  say  not  earlier  than  the 
exile.  The  vbs.  SHK  and  nvi  are  the  regular  Aramaic  equivalents 
of  fc<U  and  i^xr ;  nj;3  in  the  Heb.  of  OT  occurs  elsewhere  only 
in  Ob.  v.^;  nnx,  though  not  the  form  KHK  (G-K.  75^^),  occurs 
more  frequently,  viz.  (i)  in  late  writings,  e.g.  7  times  in  Deutero- 
Isaiah;  (2)  as  a  synonym  of  KU  in  Dt  33^;  fc?n^i,  Dt  33^1,  is 
doubtful.  The  multiplication  of  the  forms  with  the  third  radical 
••  (1712  n. ;  G-K.  75?^)  is  also  significant. 

Of  other  theories  of  date  two  may  be  mentioned:  (i)  Buhl 
{Gesch.  der  Edofniter^  pp.  68  f)  refers  the  oracle  to  the  time  of 
"increasing  impatience  and  feverish  unquiet"  occasioned  by 
Tiglath-Pileser,  who  exacted  tribute  of  Kaus-malaka,  king  of 
Edom;  (2)  Che.  {Introd.  130 f.)  dates  the  prophecy  in  589  b.c., 
when  Nebuchadnezzar  moved  into  Syria;  this  would  be  four 
years  after  Edom  united  with  Judah  in  rebelling  against  Babylon 
Qer  27^),  and  just  before  it  "purchased  by  its  malignant  conduct 
the  undying  hatred  of  the  Jews." 

II.  The  Hebrew  title.  The  oracle  of  Dutnah,  presents  an 
unsolved  riddle ;  no  important  Edomite  town  of  the  name  of 
Dumah  is  known,  and  it  is  wholly  improbable  that  an  oracle 
concerned  with  Edom  as  a  whole  would  be  named  after  some 
insignificant  place.  Oracle  of  silence  (nDH,  Ps  94^''  i  is^^'f)  would 
be  contrary  to  the  analogy  of  the  other  titles,  whether  it  be 
explained  as  meaning  oracle  of  {the.  land  that  is  to  be  reduced  to) 
silence^  or  as  a  poor  witticism  suggesting  that  the  oracle  does  not 
say  much  ;  see  also  phil.  n. — Is  calling]  urgently  and  insistently, 
as  the  repetition  of  the  question  suggests. — From  Se'ir]  Edom ; 
so,  e.g.y  Gn  33^*,  Dt  2*.     It  is  the  nation  as  a  whole  that  asks 


,.->.. 


XXI.  ii-is 


359 


the  question,  but  as  the  reply  is  to  a  plurality  of  persons,  the 
question  was  probably  conveyed  to  the  seer  by  certain  Edomite 
individuals.  People  of  one  country  might  consult  the  seers  of 
another  (2  K  i^^*);  so,  apparently,  the  fame  of  this,  to  us  un- 
known, Jewish  seer  extended  to  Edom,  on  or  near  whose  borders 
his  home  may  have  lain  (21^  n.  on  Negeb). —  Watchman']  not 
navD,  one  looking  out  (for  a  foe),  but  "IDK^,  a  guardian^  or  night- 
patrol;  Ca  5^  Ps  127I  130^  Is  62^;  cp.  ^niDCD,  V.7,  Hab  2^ 

II.  non]  ffi  r^s  'ISou/io/as,  possibly  an  interpretation  rather  than  a  variant 
(onK). — K^p]  part.,  is  callings  with  the  indef.  subj.  unexpressed  (Dr.  §  135  (6)). 
— n^'So  no]  the  JD  is  partitive,  how  much  of  the  night  (is  spent) ;  BDB  580^. 
— S'^]  this  shorter  form,  used  here  for  variation,  occurs  also  in  30^  15^  16', 
Ex  12"  (Sam.  n^'*?),  Pr  31^8  (K'tib),  La  2i»  (Ktib).  MT  punctuates  S'^  in 
15*  also.— 12.  vnK  ujf]  G-K.  120^.— r^iy]  forr^ig;  G-K.  76^/. 


XXI.  13-15. — Fugitives  escaping  from  war  into  Arabia. 

Clauses  of  2  (v.^**)  or  3  (vv.'*''-  '')  accents.  These  are  combined  (cp. 
26'"*')  into  units  of  6  accents,  parallel  in  sense,  in  v.^,  and  also  in  v.**  if 
O'jni  mniK  is  a  parallel  to  KD'n  pK  '3»',  and  to  be  connected  with  v.".  V," 
is  doubtful,  and  probably  corrupt. 

1* .  .  .  in  .  .  .  must  ye  spend  the  night. 

The  caravans  of  Dedanites  |  ^*  to  meet  the  thirsty  |  brought 

water ; 
The  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Tema  |  met  the  fugitives 

with  bread. 
15  For  from   the    sword   had   they   fled,  |  from   the   sharpened 

sword, 
And  from  the  bent  bow,  |  and  from  the  stress  of  war. 

These  lines,  probably  a  fragment,  are  ambiguous.  V.^*  may 
be  imperative,  O  caravans  .  .  .  bring,  O  inhabitants  .  .  .  meet) 
and  the  caravans  of  Dedanites  may  belong  to  v.^^  (MT),  as  it  is 
generally  understood  to  do.  But  if  the  above  translation  be 
correct,  the  fugitives  are  not  defined  in  the  fragment.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  the  correct  translation  is,  Ye  must  spend  the  night, 
O  caravans  of  Dedanites.  To  meet  the  thirsty  bring  (or  they 
brought)  water,  etc.,  the  fugitives  of  v.^*,  though  there  spoken  of 
in  the  3rd  person,  may  be  the  Dedanite  caravans  addressed  in 
v.^8.     Then  we  might  assume  that  the  situation  is  as  follows : — 


360  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

Arab  caravans,  instead  of  finding  their  usual  mart  and  returning 
with  merchandise,  have  found  war,  and  have  fled  without  being 
able  to  provision  themselves ;  to  avoid  being  overtaken  they  have 
turned  aside  from  the  caravan  track  and  the  regular  stations  on 
it  where  water  would  be  found.  Consequently  their  friends  in 
Tema  meet  them,  or  are  bidden  to  meet  them,  with  food  and 
drink.  Even  on  this  interpretation  the  place  whence  the  fugitives 
flee  is  undefined :  probably  enough  in  any  case,  and  certainly  if 
this  fragment  be  from  the  same  hand  as  vv.^^^^,  it  is  Babylon, 
though  the  Dedanites  traded  also  elsewhere  {e.g.  Tyre,  Ezk  2720). 
As  to  the  language  of  the  fragment,  note  vnn  (see  above,  p.  358). 

If  the  piece  is  from  the  same  hand  as  vv.^"^®,  then  v.^*  and 
(if  not  imperative)  v.^*  also  probably  describe  what  is  seen  in 
vision,  rather  than  an  actual  historical  flight. 

13.  Oracle  .  .  .]  the  oracle  is  defined  by  11^3,  the  second 
word  of  the  poem  (cp.  v.^) ;  the  meaning  is  uncertain,  see  below. 
The  title  is  entirely  absent  from  ffi,  and  may  have  been  added 
by  a  later  hand  than  that  to  which  the  titles  in  vv.^*  ^^  are  due. 

According  to  J^  (also  ffi),  the  persons  addressed  are  to  spend 
the  night  lyU,  in  the  forest  (cp.  e.g.  7^),  or  thicket^  scrub  (cp. 
Mic  312  and  Syr.  IjJLj,  a  thicket).  The  point  of  this  is  not 
clear,  nor  its  suitability  to  Arabia ;  but  it  is  precarious  to  infer 
that  1V^  has  here  exceptionally  the  sense  of  the  Arab  -cj,  roughs 

stony  ground.  A  second  definition,  possibly  also  of  place, 
follows ;  myn  may,  indeed,  mean  in  the  evening  (so  ffir ;  cp.  Ps 
30^);  but  it  has  also  been  rendered:  {i)  In  Arabia,  yet  else- 
where in  OT  my  is  the  coll.  term  for  the  people,  the  Arabs ;  or 
(2)  in  the  steppe]  in  this  case  niy  here  =7\:r\V  (33^  4°^  4^^^  etc.). 
AH  very  uncertain. — Caravans']  cp.  Gn  37^^  and,  in  spite  of 
different  punctuation.  Job  6^^^-. — Dedanites]  The  references  in 
OT  (Gn  253  (J)  io7  (P),  I  Ch  i^\  Jer  2523  498,  Ezk  (2513)  2720 
38^3)  and  in  the  Minaean  and  Sabaean  inscriptions  suggest  that 
"  Dedan  was  a  tribe  with  permanent  seats  in  S.  and  central 
Arabia,  and  trading  settlements  in  the  N.W."  {EBi.  1053).  In 
Jer  2823  Tema  is  mentioned  immediately  after  Dedan. — 14.  On 
the  connection  of  vv.'^^-  and  on  the  ambiguity  of  the  verbal 
forms  in  v.^*,  see  p.  359.— 7%^  thirsty]  KOV,  like  ma,  is  coll., 
the  thirsty  ones.  RV  creates  an  unreal  distinction  by  rendering 
him  that  is  thirsty  and  then  pi.  fugitives.— Met  .  .  .  with  bread] 


xxr.  13-16;  XXII.  1-14  361 

cp.  Dt  2^.—  Te}}ia\  Gn  251*,  Jer  252^.  Tema,  mod.  Teima  in 
the  Hejaz,  in  N.W.  Arabia,  is  a  place  with  a  famous  water-supply, 
and  was  tor  long  an  important  commercial  station.  Tiglath- 
Pileser  in.  refers  to  it  (smaller  inscriptions,  i.  27,  ed.  Rost;  cp. 
Annals,  218);  and  native  Aramaic  inscriptions,  probably  of  the 
4th  or  5th  cent.  b.c.,  indicate  its  continued  importance,  as  also 
the  influence  on  it  of  both  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  influence :  see 
CIS  ii.  1 13  f. ;  Cooke,  NSI^  pp.  195  ff. 

14.  vnn]  Hiph.  of  nriK  with  quiescence  and  loss  of  k  ;  cp.  Jer  12',  and  see 
G-K.  68/.  Imperative,  or  (G-K.  76^)  pf.— KD'n]  so  CIS  113  ;  in  Job  6^" 
KDn.— iD-np]  <&.  avvoLvrdLTt-xa^^. — 15.  ntritsj]  an  error  for,  or  parallel  form  to, 
ncnef?. — naaj  cp.  mja  nonVDm,  Jg  20** ;  'on  naam,  i  831^. 

16  f.  A  note  in  prose  added  to  the  last  poem,  and  announc- 
ing the  almost  total  destruction  of  the  Arabs  within  a  definitely 
fixed  time.  The  future  of  the  Arabs  is  darker  here  than  in 
yy  18-15 .  there  Arabia  is  the  place  of  flight  from  danger,  here  no 
escape  is  possible.  The  language  is  "  Isaianic  "  throughout  (Di.) 
in  the  sense  that  the  vv.  probably  contain  no  word  which  Isaiah 
did  not  use,  or  might  not  have  used :  but  the  truth  is,  the 
language  is  too  general  to  afford  any  criterion  of  date. 

For  thus  hath  the  Lord  said  unto  me]  cp.  v.^  n. —  Within  a 
year]  cp.  16H  Perhaps,  as  in  i  S  13^,  a  number  has  dropped 
out;  note  the  pi.  (^,  not  ffi)  in  the  following  phrase,  as  the  years 
of  a  hireling  (16^*). — Kedar]  in  Gn  25^^  a  particular  Ishmaelite 
tribe,  but  here  and  in  some  other  passages  (42^^  60^,  Jer  2^^)  it 
is  probably  a  comprehensive  term  for  nomadic  peoples  of  the 
deserts  E.  and  S.  of  Palestine. 

16.  niy3]  so  in  the  gloss  7^  ;  so  also,  e.g.^  Gn  40".  Ct.  D'jr  vSvi,  16".— 
■WB'i]  followed  by  five  genitives :  cp.  lo^^.-  nrp]  the  pi.  would  be  expected  ; 
Houb.,  Lowth,  al.  transpose  nrp  nuj,  warriors  of  the  ^<7a;  =  archer- warriors. 


XXII.  1-14. 

The  rhythm  is  neither  clear  nor,  apparently,  the  same  throughout. 
Vv.'"^*  seem  to  be  mainly  prose,  vv.'^"''"*  may  once  have  been  throughout, 
as  v.^^-  ^  is  still,  4:4;  see  n.  on  v.^^ ;  but  v."*'  "^  is  4  :  6  unless  we  omit  two 
words  in  v.^***' 

In  vv.^"^  the  prevailing  rhythm  is  of  an  echoing  type  :  4:2  in  v.2»-  *> 
and  *=•  **  (but  see  phil.  n.) ;  4  :  3  in  v.^  (but  see  phil.  n.) ;  the  rest  may  b^ 
3:2. 


362  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

In  v.^,   probably  also  in  v.',   and  clearly  again  in  ^^^' "  the  rhythm  is 
balanced. 

1  What  meanest  thou,  then,  that  thou  has  gone  up, 

One  and  all  to  the  house-tops, 

2  Thou  with  uproar  filled,  tumultuous  city, 

Exultant  town? 

Thy  slain  are  not  slain  with  the  sword, 
Nor  dead  in  battle; 

3  All  thy  chieftains  have  taken  to  flight  a  a 

Have  fled  far  away. 

*  Therefore  I  say,  "  Turn  away  from  me. 
Let  me  weep  bitterly; 
Be  not  insistent  to  comfort  me, 

For  the  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  people." 

^  For  a  day  of  panic  and  trampling  and  confusion 
Hath  the  Lord  Yahweh  of  Hosts. 
In  the  valley  of  vision  .  .  , 
...  to  the  mountain. 


*  Elam  took  up  the  quiver,  a  a 

And  Kir  drew  from  its  cover  the  sword. 
^  Thy  choicest  valleys  were  full  of  chariots. 

And  the  horsemen  set  themselves  in  array  towards 

the  gates. 

^^  And  *  ye '  looked  in  that  day  to  the  weapons  in  the  House 

of  the  Forest, 
^  And  perceived  the  breaches  in  the  city  of  David ; 
11^  But  ye  looked  not  to  Him  that  wrought  it. 

Nor  perceived  Him  that  planned  it  long  ago. 


■X- 


^2  And  the  Lord  Yahweh  of  Hosts  hath  called  in  that  day 

To    weeping    and    lamentation    and    baldness    and 

girding  on  of  sackcloth  ; 

* '  And  ye  collected  the  waters  of  the  lower  pool ;  ^°  and  ye  numbered 
the  houses  of  Jerusalem,  and  pulled  down  the  houses  to  fortify  the  (city) 
wall,  ^^  and  a  tank  ye  made  between  the  two  walls  for  the  waters  of  the 
old  pool. 


XXII.  I-I4  3^3 

^*  And  lo !  joy  and  rejoicing, 

Slaying  kine  and  slaughtering  sheep, 
Eating  flesh  and  drinking  wine, 

Eating    and    drinking,    "For,    to-morrow,    we    may 

die." 
^*  And   Yahweh   of  Hosts  hath  revealed  Himself  in  mine 

ears — 
"Surely  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  expiated  for  you 

till  ye  die!" 

Clear  and  insistent  in  this  section  is  the  contrast  between 
the  prophet's  dark  vision  of  destruction  and  the  light-heartedness 
and  recklessness  of  the  people,  who  give  themselves  up  to 
revelry,  either  because  they  do  not  perceive  the  issue  of  things, 
and  see  in  a  temporary  alleviation  a  permanent  relief,  or  because, 
feeling  the  insecurity  of  the  present,  they  are  determined  to 
drown  their  cares  in  wine  and  feasting  (v.^^^-).  But  whether  the 
section  is  a  unity,  and,  if  not,  of  how  many  different  elements 
it  consists,  are  difficult  questions,  especially  the  last :  the  details 
given  in  prose  in  vv.®^^^*  certainly  look  like  an  incorporated  note  ; 
but  of  the  poetical  parts,  separated  from  one  another  in  the 
foregoing  translation  by  lines,  which  (if  any  two)  formed  origin- 
ally parts  of  the  same  poem?  There  seems  to  be  some  dis- 
tinction of  rhythm  (see  above),  and  details  of  connection  are 
discussed  below  in  the  notes.  All  that  need  be  attempted  here 
is  to  indicate  some  general  features  which  have  been  differently 
interpreted. 

Interpreters  have  differed  as  to  whether  this  section  is  a 
prophecy  of  the  future,  or  a  narrative  describing  the  present  or 
the  past,  or  partly  the  one,  partly  the  other.  The  prose  note 
9b-iia  jj^^y  t)g  safely  pronounced  to  be  narrative.  Moreover,  it  is 
quite  rightly  claimed  (Di.)  that  the  prophet  is  unlikely  to  have 
condemned  the  people  (v.^*)  for  sins  they  had  not  yet  committed  : 
it  follows  that  the  revelry  described  in  v.^^  (and,  if  it  belong  to 
the  same  poem,  in  v.^)  is  present  or  past.  On  the  other  hand, 
v.*  is  a  prediction  of  the  coming  day  of  Yahweh  (see  below 
on  v.^). 

We  may  briefly  then  indicate  a  possible,  and  on  the  whole 
most  probable,  interpretation  as  follows :  in  vv.^-  ^  the  poet 
depicts  the   city  of   Jerusalem  as  he  sees  it  actually — noisy, 


_^ 


364  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


% 


exultant,  swarming  up  to  the  housetops  to  watch  some  spectacle : 
in  vv.2<=-3  he  describes  (prophetic  pf.)  his  vision  of  the  real  issue 
of  events  to  which  the  city  is  blind — the  city  forsaken  of  its 
leaders,  captured  by  the  enemy,  and  its  citizens  ignominiously 
executed.  In  v.^  he  rejects  the  efforts  of  some  of  the 
"  maffickers "  to  cheer  him  up ;  he  turns  from  them  to  bewail 
the  still  future,  but  to  him  certain,  destruction  of  his  people, — 
to  him  certain,  for  (v.^)  he  knows  that  the  Day  of  Yahweh  is 
at  hand  and  what  it  means :  it  is  a  day  of  tumult  in  the  valley 
of  vision,  of  panic  in  Jerusalem.  If  vv.^^-  are  a  real  sequence, 
v.^  describes  some  of  the  elements  (Kir  and  Elam)  in  the  army 
which  on  the  day  of  Yahweh  will  attack  Jerusalem,  and  v." 
reinforces  v.^*'-'^;  again,  if  w.^*^^,  apart  from  the  incorporated 
prose  note,  are  a  real  sequence,  ^^-  **•  i^^-  '^  (^  is  altogether  obscure) 
describes  the  people  of  Jerusalem,  thus  attacked,  attending  to 
the  material  defences  of  the  city,  while  neglecting  Yahweh. 
Yy  12-14  brings  us  back  to  an  historical  situation  similar  to  that 
of  v.^,  and  a  similar  estimate  of  its  outcome :  instead  of  mourn- 
ing, to  which  Yahweh  has  called  them,  the  people  are  given  over 
to  feasting,  therefore  their  fate  is  irrevocably  sealed :  they  must 
die. 

The  period  to  which  we  might  most  probably  assign  w.^'^,  ^^-i* 
is  that  of  Sennacherib  :  what  is  described  is  the  revelry  to  which 
the  city  gave  itself  up  when  the  Assyrian  king  in  701  B.C.  raised 
the  siege,  or  blockade,  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  doubtful  whether 
v.^  fits  into  the  political  circumstances  of  that  time  (see  below). 

A  few  diflferent  theories  of  analysis,  interpretation,  and  date  may  be 
briefly  referred  to  :  Among  modern  writers,  Di.,  Hackmann  (pp.  92-97),  and 
Cond.,  for  example,  maintain  the  unity  of  the  entire  passage,  and  Cond. 
regards  even  vv.^^"^^*  as  poetry.  Du.  treats  vv.^"',  ^"^^  (omitting  ^•'-"a.j  as  two 
different  poems,  the  first  written  before  Sennacherib's  attack  on  Jerusalem, 
the  second  somewhat  later.  Che.  distinguishes  vv.^''^  from  ^'^^ ;  in  ®'^*  he 
regards  ^^-^^'^  as  interpolated,  and  suspects  omissions  between  vv.^  and  *, 
^  and  ^,  and  '  and  ^ :  both  poems  he  refers  to  the  removal  of  the  Assyrian 
blockade.  Marti  refers  ^"',  ^^'^^  (not  necessarily  parts  of  the  same  poem)  to 
the  period  of  the  raising  of  the  blockade  ;  in  ^'^^  he  sees  an  interpolation,  later 
than  Deutero-Isaiah,  by  some  one  who  interpreted  the  day  of  panic  (v.°)  of 
Sennacherib's  attack  on  Jerusalem.  On  Sayce's  theory  that  the  date  of  the 
prophecy  was  711,  and  the  occasion  a  hypothetical  siege  of  Jerusalem  by 
Sargon,  see  Dr.  LOT^  217  f.  Accepting  Du.'s  analysis  into  two  poems, 
vv.^*'^,  '*'^*,  Wi.  {Aliorientalische  Forschungen,  ii.  253-259)  eliminates  v.*  and 
in  v.*  the  words  mK3i'  mn'  "VMih  as  the  interpolation  of  an  editor  who  errone- 


XXII.  1-5  3^5 

ously  understood  the  city  referred  to,  to  be  Jerusalem.  In  what  remains  Wi. 
sees  an  "Isaianic"  poem  referring  to  the  attack  of  HalhidaS,  the  Elamite, 
on  the  Babylonian  city  of  Sippar  in  694  B.C.,  and  expressing  the  hope  that 
Elam,  the  great  rival  of  Assyria,  may  succeed.  The  theory  requires  us  to 
read  nv  for  vv  in  v.",  onK  for  dik  in  v.',  and  to  understand  n»  in  v.'  as  a 
proper  name.  The  theory  itself  is  most  improbable ;  but  it  draws  attention  to 
the  real  difficulty  occasioned  by  the  reference  to  Elam.  Corn.  (ZATIV,  1884, 
pp.  96  f. )  doubts  the  Isaianic  origin  of  the  entire  section  on  account  of  its 
incompatibility  with  lo'*'^'  32.  33 :  Stade  {ib.  p.  257),  questioning  rather 
chs.  32.  33,  regarded  22  as  at  one  time  connected  with  28-31,  and  22*""  as  a 
prophecy  delivered  by  Isaiah  in  the  temple  on  the  occasion  of  a  feast. 

I.  Title. — Oracle  (13^  n.)  of  the  valley  of  vision  {v.^  n.). 

1-5.  The  gay  city  and  the  prophet's  vision  of 
disaster  and  death.  —  i-2b.  A  rhetorical  question  ad- 
dressed by  the  prophet  to  the  merry-making  city  which  has 
swarmed  up  to  the  flat  roofs  to  watch  thence  (Jg  162-^  the 
spectacle  of  Sennacherib's  retreat  (cp.  37^^),  or  something 
similarly  pleasing,  such  as  the  entrance  into  the  city  of  the 
captive  Assyrian  vassal  Padi,  king  of  Ekron  (Du.).  The  careless 
merry-makers  (5^*  24^  n.)  think  all  danger  past;  Isaiah  thinks 
otherwise,  and  sings  to  them  2C-3  a  few  lines  of  a  dirge 
depicting  what  he  foresees,  the  slaughter  or  plight  of  the  city's 
defenders,  involving,  as  v.*  (cp.  v.^*)  shows,  the  destruction  of 
the  people. — Thy  slain  are  not  slain  with  the  sword]  nobly 
fighting,  but  have  been  executed  ignominiously  after  the  capture 
of  the  city,  or,  perhaps,  have  died  of  hunger  during  the  siege  : 
cp.  La  4®. — 3.  Chieftains]  i^®  n. — Between  v.^  and  ^^  there 
intervene  in  f^  several  words  which  are  probably  intrusive  and 
almost  certainly  corrupt :  rend.r,  without  the  bow  they  have  been 
bound ;  all  thai  were  found  of  thee  (fflr  all  thy  mighty  ones)  were 
bound  together.  Without  the  bow  has  been  supposed  to  mean 
after  the  bows  had  been  thrown  away,  or  before  there  had  been 
time  to  use  the  bows ;  the  rendering  because  of  the  bow  is  no 
more  satisfactory,  and  by  the  archers  (RV)  very  questionable. — 

4.  Some  of  the  merry-makers  try  to  cheer  up  the  prophet,  who 
weeps  (cp.  16^,  La  i^^)  at  this  sad  vision;  he  refuses  to  be 
comforted  for  the  destruction  of  his  people. — Destruction]  13®  n. 
— The  daughter  of  my  people]  i.e.  the  entire  population  :  cp  i^  n. 
This  phrase  is  not  used  again  by  Is ;  but  see,  e.g.,  Jer  4^1  8^^ — 

5.  For  a  day  .  .  .  hath  Yahweh  of  Hosts]  the  phrase  is  exactly 
the  same  as  in    2^2   (n.).     The  "  day  of  Yahweh  "  is  always  a 


366  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

future  event  to  Hebrew  writers ;  and  it  is  altogether  unsafe  to 
assume  (Di.)  the  contrary  here.  The  day  is  one  of  nfhumah 
um'busah  um'bukah ;  note  the  assonance :  cp.  Nah  2^^ ;  riDino 
is  distraction^  frenzy,  panic,  such  as  makes  men  in  battle  turn 
their  arms  against  one  another,  cp.  i  S  14^*^,  Zee  14^^;  HDUD 
(i82  n.)  is  the  trample  of  the  soldiers;  cp.  the  use  of  the  vb.  in 
Zee  10**;  nD13D  (Mic  7^t)  is  confusion  ox  perplexity,  cp.  the  use 
of  the  vb.  of  Israel  losing  its  way  (Ex  14^). — In  the  valley  of 
vision"]  if  the  clause  goes  with  the  first  part  of  the  v.  (MT,  RV) 
the  sentence  is  a  breviloquence  for  Yahweh  hath  a  day  (when  He 
executes  judgment)  in  the  valley  of  vision  :  cp.  Jer  46^°.  It  is  not 
a  day  directed  against  the  valley  (^),  which  would  require  7V 
(cp.  2^3)  instead  of  2.  More  probably  the  clause  goes  with  the 
last  part  of  the  v.,  which  seems  to  be  corrupt.  What  the  valley 
(K^:i,  28^)  intended  was,  and  why  it  was  so  named,  is  uncertain. 
If  an  attack  on  Jerusalem  is  intended,  the  valley  is  not  the  entire 
city  (2E),  or  Sion  (6r),  as  a  site  that  is  surrounded  by  higher  hills, 
but  one  of  the  valleys  dissecting  the  city,  like  the  Tyropoean,  or 
surrounding  it,  like  the  valley  of  Hinnom.  Suggested  explanations 
of  the  name  are  that  Isaiah  lived  in  this  valley  (Di.),  or  that  it 
contained  an  ancient  oracle  (Du.) :  of  the  two  the  latter  ex- 
planation has  the  more  probability.  The  words  left  untrans- 
lated above  are  very  uncertain  (see  phil.  n.) :  no  less  improbable 
than  any  other  suggestion  is  RV  a  breaking  down  of  the  walls, 
and  a  crying  to  the  mountain.  The  valley  as  the  weakest  part  of 
the  city,  it  is  explained,  is  attacked  first  and  the  walls  of  defence 
broken  down  by  the  enemy.  VIK'  is  a  cry  for  help  \  hence  Ges. 
suggests  that  the  meaning  is : — the  cry  of  the  frightened  people 
in  the  city  resounds  to  the  surrounding  hills  :  this,  though  im- 
probable, is  the  best  that  can  be  done  with  the  text. — According 
to  Ew.  W^,  Shoa*  (Ezk  23^3),  and  also  the  preceding  ip,  Kir  (cp. 
n^p,  V.6),  are  proper  names  of  elements  in  the  besieging  Assyrian 
army  :  see  next  v.  But  the  position  of  the  subj.  Kir  after  the 
part.  '\\r\'^'0  (Dr.  135  (4)),  in  contrast  to  the  position  of  the 
subjects  in  v.^,  is  against  this  view ;  and  also  the  fact  that  the 
vb.  is  left  without  an  object :  moreover,  the  last  clause  would  be 
weak — In  the  valley  of  vision  Kir  breaketh  down,  and  ShocC  is 
toward  the  mountain. 

I.  l'?"no]  3^^  n.— K1SK]  i9i2,_-)^3]  MT  ^iVs  (instead  of  ^Vs,  1429)  gives  an 
assonance  with  ijS  ;  cp.  G-K.  ^le.    For  the  entire  city  thus  regarded  en  masse. 


XXII.  1-6  3^7 

cp.  15';  but  there  the  masc,  here  the  more  usual  fern.,  is  used.  For  an 
elaborate  reconstruction  of  vv.^**,  see  Che.  SBOT,  p.  197. — 2.  mntrn]  ace. 
before  nn'^D:  cp.  Nah  3^  .With  n'Din  ry  nn^D  niKrn,  cp.  rju  ninrn  nnp  pon, 
Job  39'.  Other  occurrences  of  niNtrn  are  Zee  4',  Job  30^''  36^*1. — ^^"^p]  i^^  n. — 
ni'Vy]  with  r\''\p,  32"  ;  so  of  Ty,  Zeph  2"  ;  see  also  23',  and  in  pi.  248  13*,  Zeph 
3^^— 3.  nn'  T«!iD3  *?D  nOK  nsypo  in']  ffi  /coi  ol  aKbvres  <rK\r)pQs  SedefUvoi  elfflv, 
Kal  ol  lirxfjotrres  iv  aol.  Apart  from  the  addition  of  KaL  twice,  (&  repre- 
sents three  variants:  (i)  for  nrpD  in'  (S  =  |§),  n^jj  (?)  Dinj<,  whence  Du. 
nrp  D']q«  :  cp.  2  Ch  25"  njjn  nOT  tnK,  Ca  3^ ;  but  jnK  does  not  occur 
with  ntrp;  (2)  for  TK:fDJ,  ffi  read  T«d«  (cp.  28^,  Am  2^«)  M^  ^^^^^-^(y 
<7«w,  which,  if  parallel  to  TJ'J^p,  would  be  preferable ;  (3)  ffi  and  also  & 
omit  nn»  noK :  this  may  well  be  correct ;  the  occurrence  of  the  words 
after  no«  .  .  .  ^^'  is  poor.  Possibly,  however,  the  whole  of  the  words 
from  nn'  (or  ntrpo)  to  nn'  is  the  result  of  glossing  and  conflation  (Marti) ; 
ima  pmD  |  nn'  m3  TJ'^p-^j  gives  a  good  kinah  line.— ncpo]  p,  without;  Jer 
48**;  BDB  578<5;  or,  ^  consequence  ofy  by,  ib.  579^  (bot.). — 4.  '3D]  so  30*; 
BDB  577^. — 5*  '■'D^"D]  ®r  Tapaxv^  Kal  diruiXeias — a  doublet  rather  than  a 
variant. — nDi3Di  nono]  so  (HR  ;  but  possibly  the  second  word  which  adds  little 
to  the  sense  of  n^nriD  is  an  early  dittograph  :  by  omitting  it,  and  also  'JIK  (ffi) 
in  the  next  clause,  a  good  3  :  2  line  is  restored. — ip  'ip'ipi:i]  the  text  is  un- 
certain :  (&  has  irXapwvTai  &irb  fiiKpov  ?ws  fJLeydXov,  which  seems  to  presuppose 
a  different  and  perhaps  a  fuller  text ;  but  cp.  JThS,  1902,  p.  583  n.  ;  Introd. 
§  21.  If,  however,  np  were  omitted  as  dittographic,  nnn-'?»<  ym  |  '\p'\p'o  jvm  x'aa 
would  give  a  3  :  2  line,  ip  is  ambiguous,  and  the  sing,  rather  suspicious  .*. 
it  generally  means  the  wall  of  a  house,  but  is  used  exceptionally  of  a  town- 
wall,  for  which  the  regular  term  is  nmn  {^Numbers,  p.  468  f.).  npip  in  NH 
(but  not  in  Nu  24^',  where  it  is  an  error  for  "^p-^p)  means  to  tear  down  (the  walls 
of  a  house,  or  a  city  ;  Levy) ;  npipo  might  be  the  part,  of  this,  one  tears  down, 
with  subj.  unexpressed  (Dr.  135  (6)) ;  or  a  verbal  noun.  The  sense  is  not 
recognised  by  %%'S. — "^t^  ^k  yityi]  ©  •Kko.vdvTa.i.  iirl  t4  6prf.  It  would  be 
easy  to  read  yori,  resounds  (lit.  has  been  heard),  for  yiB'i ;  but  this  gives  no 
really  satisfactory  sense  or  rhythm, 

6,  7.  Elam  and  If  ir,  i.e.  soldiers  from  these  two  countries 
or  peoples,  engage  in  the  attack  in  Jerusalem.  On  the 
question  whether  these  vv.  form  part  of  the  vision  of  vv.^'**  s.  6^  see 
above,  pp.  363  ff. 

6.  The  second  line  in  J^ — left  untranslated  above,  is  probably 
both  corrupt  and  intrusive,  for  it  separates  two  lines  which  exactly  . 
balance  one  another  and  correspond  to  one  another,  term  for 
term.  The  words  may  be  rendered  with  chariot{s)  (or,  a  riding 
company^  2i''n.),  man^  horsemen  (or,  horses).  Omitting,  with  (!&, 
the  prep,  with  (3),  reading  D"1K  for  the  scarcely  distinguishable 
DHX,  and  assuming  a  doubtful  construction  of  331  (ace.  of  the 
animal   ridden),  some  have  rendered  Aram  mounted  (or,  rode 


368 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


on)  the  horses',  but  (i)  the  introduction  of  horses  between  the 
far  nearer  parallels  quiver  and  shield  is  improbable;  (2)  ct. 
the  post-fixed  subj.  with  the  pre-fixed  subject  in  lines  a.  and  b. 
The  line  may  be  a  gloss  slightly  corrupted  (lOV  having  be- 
come din)  from  21^  (Marti);  or  due  to  the  intrusion  of 
variants  on  231  and  D"'6yian  in  v.'^;  in  any  case,  the  words 
are  best  neglected  in  attempting  to  determine  the  real  purpose 
and  significance  of  vv.^^-. — Ela?n]  11^^  21^  nn.  Throughout 
the  period  of  Isaiah's  activity  "Elam  is  the  opponent  of 
Assyria,  and  its  rival  for  the  dominion  in  Babylon"  (Wi. 
Altor.  Forsch.  ii.  257) :  Sayce  briefly  sketches  the  relations  of 
the  two  powers  thus:  Umman-nigas,  king  of  Elam,  "in  721 
assisted  Merodach-baladan  against  Sargon  .  .  .  He  died  in  718, 
and  was  succeeded  by  his  sister's  son  Sutruk-Nankhundi,  who  in 
711  again  assisted  Merodach-baladan,  but  this  time  to  no  pur- 
pose. Sargon  defeated  and  captured  his  general  .  .  .  and  added 
the  Elamite  districts  of  latbur,  Lakhiru,  and  Rasi  to  Assyria. 
After  a  reign  of  eighteen  years,  Sutruk-Nankhundi  was  imprisoned 
by  his  brother  Khalludus,  who  seized  the  crown.  He  captured 
Babylon  in  the  rear  of  Sennacherib  .  .  .  and  the  Babylonian  king, 
who  was  a  son  of  Sennacherib,  was  carried  captive  to  Elam" 
{DB  i.  675^).  Thus  though  certain  districts  of  Elam  were 
captured  by  Sargon,  Elam  itself  formed  no  part  of  the  Assyrian 
empire  in  the  latter  half  of  the  8th  cent,  as  it  did  of  the  empire 
of  Cyrus  (21^  n.).  In  the  light  of  these  facts  other  alternatives 
are:  (i)  to  understand  Elam  as  equivalent  to  such  few  Elamite 
mercenaries  as  might  serve  in  an  Assyrian  army  though  Assyria 
and  Elam  were  opposed  to  one  another,  or  soldiers  from  those 
small  portions  of  Elam  which  Sargon  temporarily  annexed  in 
711;  (2)  to  see  in  the  verses  the  work  of  a  later  writer  (cp. 
11^^  21^);  (3)  with  Wi.  to  treat  the  poem  as  a  celebration  of  an 
Elamite  attack,  directed  against  the  interests  of  Assyria,  on  a 
Babylonian  town  (Si[)par), — Kir']  a  district  of  this  name  is 
mentioned  as  the  original  home  of  the  Syrians  (D"iN)  in  Am  9^, 
as  the  place  to  which  the  Syrians  were  to  be  exiled  in  Am  i^, 
and  as  the  place  to  which  they  were  actually  carried  captive  by 
Tiglath-pileser  iii.  in  2  K  i6'.  The  references  in  Am  i^,  2  K  16^ 
may  be  the  result  of  late  inferences  from  Am  9'^  (see  Kir  in  DB). 
Whether  ;^ir  belongs  to  the  original  text  of  this  v.  (see  phil.  n.) 
or  of  v.^;  and  if  so,  whether  it  is  identical  with  the  Kir  of  the 


XXII.  6-1 1  369 

passages  just  cited :  whether  yip  (Ezk  23^3)  is  a  miswritten  Tp, 
or  "fp  here  a  miswritten  yip ;  and  where  I;^ir  was  situated — all 
this  is  entirely  uncertain.  See,  further,  DB  and  EBi.  s.v. ;  also 
the  references  in  Ges-B.  s.v.  l^p.  No  place  or  people  of  the 
name  has  been  discovered  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions. — Drew 
from  its  cover]  lit.  made  naked,  laid  bare  \  cp.  3^". 

7.  The  valleys  round  Jerusalem  are  filled  with,  and  the  city 
itself  beset  by,  hostile  troops. — Full  of  chariots  ;  and  the  horsemen 
have  set  themselves  in  array]  dividing  the  sentence  differently,  and 
treating  DB^  (commonly  taken  to  be  Inf.  Abs.  strengthening  the 
verbal  idea)  as  a  proper  name,  Wi.  (as  cited  on  p.  368)  renders 
full  of  chariots  and  horses,  and  Shot  sets  itself  in  array,  identifying 
Shot  with  the  Sittakenians  ;  but  see  phil.  n. 

6.  D'Cns  D^K  33n3]  dvapdrai  ApOpunroi  i<l>  tinrov$.  dvapdrai  is  a  legitimate 
rendering  of  33t  (see  21'  n.) ;  but  riders,  men  (collect,  sing.),  horsemen  is  an 
improbable  group  of  words.  Another  improbable  makeshift  is  Di.'s  among 
chariots,  men,  horsemen,  an  appositional  phrase  to  oS'y,  mn  being  prefixed  to 
D'nD  to  show  that  the  latter  does  not  here  mean  horses  !  The  reading  of  a 
few  MSS  D'enai  (cp.  RV)  is  pretty  clearly  secondary,  and  does  not  greatly  im- 
prove the  line. — O'tfnD]  Arnold  {fBLit.,  1905,  p.  45  ff.)  argues  that  'd  always 
means  {war-)  horses,  never  horsemen. — po  my  I'pi]  ffi  koI  avvayuyi}  irapa- 
rd^eui,  i.e.  Tp  is  omitted,  and  pD,  which  is  never  rendered  irapdra^ts,  may 
have  been  read  differently ;  but  ffi  read  Tr\V,  which  is  virtually  my.  The  meaning 
of  my  is  unusual ;  but  it  is  at  least  safer  to  accept  it  than  to  correct  to  n-^p  with  an 
even  more  problematical  meaning  (to  raise  (the  shield)),  in  order  to  gain  a 
paronomasia  with  ^p,  such  as  does  not  exist  in  the  parallel  line,  nor,  perhaps, 
originally  in  v.' — '.Ti]  could  well  be  spared :  it  interrupts  the  sequence  of 
vv.**  '  ;  but  it  was  already  in  ffl  in  the  form  vni. — nnao]  the  choice  of:  cp.  37^. 
Wi.  suggests  that  in  all  passages  where  this  word  occurs,  it  means  simply 
the  total  of ,  all,  like  the  Assyr.  napharu. — yNO  ntr]  G-K.  113  n.  ;  but  it  is 
questionable  whether  ^rw  needs  strengthening  any  more  than  other  vbs.  in  the 
context.  The  view  that  rve  is  a  proper  name  and  subj.  of  ^r\v  (see  above) 
would  be  more  probable,  if  the  clause  immediately  followed  those  of  v.* 
which  also  contain  proper  names,  and  if  D'nsni  more  certainly  went  with 
line  a.  xxo  is  not  recognised  by  (!&,SC  :  perhaps  it  is  a  mere  dittograph  : 
then  7r\'^x3r\  inr  D'ciism  is  a  line  of  three  accents  like  those  in  v.*  and  (neglecting 
'HM,  and  retaining  the  makkeph  of  MT)  '*  33n  \vhn  TpDnn3D.  Du.  prefers 
to  omit  the  art.  from  D'trnsm  and  to  connect  it  with  33n ;  this  gives  a  poor 
3  : 2  line  down  to  D'B'nE),  and  makes  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  last  half  of 
the  next  line  was  lost.  For  the  use  of  nr,  cp.  Ps  3^ ;  there  it  is  followed  by 
Vy,  here  by  the  ace. 

8-1 1.  The  main  thought  of  these  verses  clearly  is  that  the 
people  of  Jerusalem  have  looked  to  the  seen  and  not  to  the 
VOL.  I. — 24 


370  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

unseen  :  they  have  attended  to  the  material  defences  of  the  city, 
they  have  left  out  of  account  the  Maker  of  all,  the  author  of  the 
long-formed  plan,  which  works  itself  out  in  human  history. 

At  present  the  two  points  are  presented  with  a  striking  difference  of 
elaboration — attention  to  the  seen  in  vv.^^'^^%  inattention  to  the  unseen  in 
y  lib.  0^  Probably  each  point  was  originally  confined  to  a  single  distich,  and 
either  vv.**  ^'^  or  vv.^  (from  ^^t'^)  to  ^^*  are  intrusive:  for  note  {a)  the  un- 
rhythmical character  of  most  of  vv.^-^'*;  {d)  the  remoteness  of  the  verbal 
antithesis  taani,  w.^^,  and  nntjan  nSi,  v.^^^  The  distich  describing  the  people's 
attention  to  the  seen  may  have  been  vv.®***  **  (Du.,  Marti,  and  in  the  translation 
above),  or  possibly 

And  ye  looked  to  the  weapons  in  the  House  of  the  Forest, 
And  ye  made  the  tank  between  the  wall, 

the  second  line  being  an  allusion  to  some  much  talked  of  undertaking  of  the 
time  (2  K  20^**,  2  Ch  32^"').  There  are  certain  points  which  make  the  view 
that  the  distich  was  *•'•  **  doubtful :  (a)  Dn'MT  in  v.^  {io  see  with  concern)  is 
not  used  with  the  same  nuance  as  in  vJ^ :  {b)  the  prosaic  nN  occurs  in  v.***. 
A  further  question  is  this :  are  vv.*"^^  or  the  two  distichs  contained  in 
them  the  continuation  of  v."',  or  from  a  different  poem?  The  attention  to 
the  defences  of  the  city  seems  belated  after  v.*'* ;  on  the  other  hand,  neither 
v.^*  nor  ^^  is  the  commencement  of  a  new  poem ;  if  not  the  continuation  of 
vv.*^*,  these  verses  are  a  fragment. 

8a.  An  isolated  line,  ambiguous  in  meaning.  The  subject 
of  the  vb.  is  hardly  the  enemy  of  v.'^  personified,  or  (in  the  pre- 
sent position  of  the  v.)  Yahweh :  it  is  indefinite  (cp.  21*,  phil.  n.) 
and  the  vb.  may  be  rendered  by  a  passive — And  the  screen  of 
Judah  was  removed.  The  vb.  xhl  appears  to  be  used  here  as  in 
472  of  bringing  about  exposure  by  removing  a  covering.  The 
noun  "IDD  (v/lDD  to  cover^  screen)  is  something  that  screens  from 
view,  such  as  the  cloth  spread  over  the  well-mouth  to  hide 
refugees  (2  S  17^^),  or  hangings  of  the  tabernacle  such  as  that 
which  screened  the  Holy  of  Holies  from  the  Holy  Place  (Nu 
4^  n.),  or  the  cloud  which  screened  the  Hebrews  from  the 
Egyptians  (Ps  105^^).  The  sentence  may  therefore  mean  Judah, 
personified  as  a  woman,  is  disgraced  by  exposure  (cp.  47^) ;  but 
in  spite  of  such  uses  of  the  vb.  as  occur  in  La  3*^,  Jg  3^*,  it  is 
curious  that  "JDD  should  here  be  used  of  wearing  apparel.  The 
usage  of  1DD  gives  still  less  justification  for  understanding  the 
removal  of  the  screen  as  an  exposure  of  Judah  to  attack ;  and 
it  is  extremely  improbable  that  the  clause  means  that  Jerusalem 


XXII.  8-9  371 

(not  mentioned)  has  been  exposed  by  the  capture  of  the  cities  of 
Judah  (2  K  18^3),  which  formed  the  screen  of  the  capital;  and 
equally  improbable  that  it  means  that  Judah  awakes  to  its  true 
state  because  the  covering  over  its  eyes  has  been  removed. 

8b.  lVea/>ons]  pB^3  is  a  general  term,  cp.  2  K  lo^,  Job  20**, 
and  pCJ  D1%  day  of  weapons^  i.e.  battle,  Ps  140^,  cp.  Job  39^^ — 
The  house  of  the  forest]  of  Lebanon — was  that  part  of  the  royal 
buildings  on  Sion  where  the  weapons  were  kept  (i  K  72-^  10^*^); 
cp.  39^,  Neh  3^^. — In  that  day]  probably  an  addition  when  the 
whole  passage  came  to  be  read  as  a  prophecy. — The  City  of 
David]  i.e.  §ion ;  "  and  David  dwelt  in  the  stronghold  (mVD), 
and  called  it  the  city  of  David,"  2  S  5* ;  G.  A.  Smith  would  limit 
the  "  City  of  David  "  strictly  to  that  part  of  the  East  Hill  lying 
south  of  the  Temple  {Jerusalem^  i.  155  ff.). — 9b.  The  statement 
about  the  collection  of  the  water  of  the  lower  ((S  old^  as  in  v.^'') 
pool covciQS  between  v.^  and  v.^^  which. deal  with  the  walls,  and 
is  separated  from  v.^^^  which  refers  to  the  making  of  another 
reservoir;  some  misplacement  of  clauses  is  not  improbable. 
The  lower  pool  (mentioned  only  here)  may  have  lain  at  the 
southern  end  of  the  Tyropoeon  valley :  we  read  of  an  "upper  pool" 
in  78.  On  the  more  or  less  ancient  and  still  existing  reservoirs, 
and  for  theories  of  identification,  see  G.  A.  Smith,  Jerusalem^  i. 
1 1 2  ff.  The  water  was  gathered  together  in  the  pool  by  construct- 
ing new  conduits  into  it,  or  opening  incoming  conduits  which 
had  been  temporarily  stopped  (cp.  Ges.).  The  vb.  pp  can 
scarcely  mean,  as  recent  commentators  mostly  explain  it,  that 
the  outflow  from  the  pool  was  stopped  and  the  water  thus  held 
back  (cp.  also  G.  A.  Smith,  Jerusalem^  i.  225).  What  is  referred 
to  here  is  a  provision  for  a  supply  of  water  within  the  city,  not  as 
in  2  Ch  322-4  to  cutting  off  the  supply  outside  so  as  to  deprive 
the  attacking  army  of  water.  |*np,  commonly  used  of  gathering 
many  persons  or,  more  rarely,  things  from  different  places  into 
one,  is,  as  here,  applied  to  a  liquid  in  62® ;  but  there  the  gather- 
ing of  wine  refers  either  to  the  bringing  together  of  the  grapes,  or 
the  drainage  of  the  pressed  juice  into  the  wine-vat. — 10.  The 
houses  of  Jerusalem  are  numbered,  and  the  houses  selected  for 
demolition  are  demolished  to  furnish  material  wherewith  to  render 
the  (city)  wall  (no^n)  inaccessible  (1V3,  as  Jer  51^^),  by  filling  up 
its  present  breaches,  or  otherwise  strengthening,  or  repairing, 
breaches  which  will  be  made   by  the  assailants:   cp.  Jer  332* 


372  COMxMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

"the  houses  of  this  city  .  .  .  which  are  demolished  (to  make  a 
defence)  against  the  (siege-)  mounds  and  against  the  sword." 
The  vb.  "^DD  even  in  Kal  seems  at  times  to  mean  more  than 
merely  to  count  \  see  Job  14^^  31^  and  cp.  the  force  of  the  Piel 
and  the  noun  ;  so  that  here  we  may  interpret  it  as  meaning 
almost  to  make  a  list  of.  Keeping  to  the  narrower  meaning,  Ibn 
Ezra  understands  the  first  clause  to  refer  to  the  numbering  of  the 
house-(holds)  of  Jerusalem  to  discover  the  number  of  men 
available  for  the  war. — lia.  The  tank  or  reservoir  here 
mentioned  is  also  unidentified  (see  on  v.^),  but  it  lay  within  the 
city;  so,  too,  the  two  walls  (cp.  2  K  25^  not  necessarily  the 
same)  between  which  it  was  situated ;  it  is  suggested  that  they 
were  the  walls  running  respectively  West  of  the  East  and  East  of 
the  West  Hills ;  for  other  suggestions  see  G.  A.  Smith,  Jerusalem^ 
i.  226  f.  The  tank  was  constructed  to  receive  water  from  the  old 
pool  (unidentified),  either  because  this  lay  outside  the  city,  or,  if 
within,  to  receive  its  overflow. — nb.  Cp.  5^^ ;  for  '^V^  to  frame 
(in  thought),  predetermine^  see  37^^  n.,  and  for  pmD,  25^.  See, 
further,  pp.  369  f. 

12-14.  The  unpardonable  sin  of  Judah. — Regardless  of 
Yahweh's  power  to  help  (^""^  the  people  are  regardless  also  of 
His  call  to  fasting  and  lamentation :  if  the  prophet  warns  them 
that  their  state  is  desperate,  they  admit  it — to-morrow  we  may 
die,  but  find  therein  reason,  not  for  repentance,  but  merely  for 
revelry  and  feasting  while  opportunity  offers;  hence,  as  Isaiah 
has  learned  by  direct  revelation,  their  offence  is  unpardonable ; 
they  must  die.  The  situation  in  v.^^  resembles  that  depicted  in 
v.^,  and  the  condemnation  in  v.^^  the  minatory  vision  of  w.^-^  (7). 
— 12.  Cp.  Jl  2i2ff. .  for  the  mourning  rites,  see  Is  152^- nn.,  32^^^-. 
— 13.  We  may  compare,  for  the  attitude  of  the  people,  the 
Egyptian  rule  of  life  cited  by  Marti  from  Erman's  Aegypten : 
"  Enjoy  the  cheerful  day  and  think  of  joy  ere  that  day  come  when 
you  fare  to  the  land  that  loves  silence " :  or,  again,  the  early 
Babylonian  wisdom  cited  by  Barton  on  Ec  9^^- :  "  Since  the  gods 
created  man,  death  they  ordained  for  man,  life  in  their  hands 
they  hold,  thou,  O  Gilgamesh,  fill  indeed  thy  belly,  day  and  night 
be  thou  joyful,  daily  ordain  gladness,  day  and  night  rage  and 
make  merry."  The  attitude  is  too  obvious  and  natural  for  it  to 
be  necessary  to  assume  that  Isaiah's  contemporaries  borrowed  it 
from  their  Egyptian  allies,  or  that,  like  so  much  else,  it  had  been 


XXII.  8-14,  15-25  373 

adopted  still  earlier  from  Babylon.  St.  Paul  cites  from  these 
words  of  Isaiah  in  i  Co  15^2^  admitting  the  soundness  of  the 
doctrine,  "if  the  dead  are  not  raised." — 14.  Cp.  1  S  3^*,  and  for 
the  opening  words  Is  5^  n. — Saith  the  Lord  Yahweh  of  Host 5\  the 
words  are  absent  from  Cr,  and,  being  very  superfluous  after  the 
opening  clause  of  the  v.,  are  probably  intrusive. 

8.  mw  IDD  nn  Sa'i]  koX  dvaKa\tj\l/ov<Tiv  tA$  irOXas  *Iov8a,  not  better  than 
1^. — lyn  no]  (!R  Tvn  'na,  obviously  corrupt. — oam]  (&  /cat  c>/3\^^ovt(u  ;  so 
all  vbs.  in  ffi  are  3rd  pers.  pi.  to  the  end  of  v.^";  in  v."  in  agreement  with 
^  they  are  2nd  pi.  At  present  in  J^  the  vbs.  of  address  are  2nd  sing.  fem. 
(of  personified  Judah  or  Jerusalem)  in  vv,  i-'- '  :  2nd  pi.  masc.  (addressed  to 
individuals  distinguished  among  the  preceding  whole),  v.* ;  2nd  sing,  masc., 
v.*  ;  2nd  pi.  masc,  vv.**^*.  It  is  improbable  that  all  these  variations  occurred 
in  the  original  text.  V.*  occasions  no  difficulty  ;  but  t33ni,  isolated  between 
2nd  fem.  sing,  in  vv.^"''  and  2nd  pi.  in  *"^*,  is  improbable.  If  the  clause  goes 
with  what  follows,  restore  leani.  The  consistent  use  of  2nd  sing.  fem.  in 
vv.^'',  and,  except  for  B3m,  the  consistent  use  of  2nd  pi.  in  vv."*",  may  be  due 
to  the  two  sections  being  from  distinct  poems. — 10.  iwim]  G-K.  20m. — ii,  n'ry] 
fem.  suffix  to  express  the  neuter  t'i,  viz.  what  happens :  G-K.  122^  with  foot- 
note.— 12.  Kinn  Dvn]  perhaps  an  addition  as  in  v."  :  possibly  also  njn  is  added  : 
these  omissions  would  make  the  v.  4  :  4. — int?  .  .  .  mnt?]  both  must  be 
regarded  as  Inf.  Abs.  ;  it  is  suggested  that  ninr  is  preferred  to  the  normal 
form  to  gain  an  assonance  with  one  :  G-K.  75«. 

XXII.  15-25. — The  Disgrace  of  Skebna  and  the  promotion 

of  Elia^im. 

[Literature. — A.  Kamphausen,  "  Isaiah's  Prophecy  concerning  the 
Major-domo  of  King  Hezekiah,"  in  American  foumal  of  Theology,  1901,  pp. 
43-74,  an  elaborate,  but  unconvincing,  defence  of  the  unity  of  the  passage  and 
of  the  theory  that  vv.^'-  refer  to  Shebna ;  Kemper  Fullerton,  "  A  new  chapter 
out  of  the  life  of  Isaiah,"  ib.,  1905,  pp.  621-642  ;  E.  Konig,  "Shebna  and 
Eliakim,"  ib.,  1906,  pp.  675-686.] 

V.^'  consists  of  two  rhythmically  balanced  distichs  (3  : 3)  marked  by 
parallelism.  Similar,  but  shorter  (2  :  2)  and  isolated  distichs,  may  be  intended 
in  vv.^"  and  ^'  (down  to  lapinK).  For  the  rest,  the  section  consists  of  what 
seems  clearly  prose  (w.^'*  2<».  24f.j^  q^  of  what  may  have  been  once  rhythmic, 
but  has  been  rendered  irregular  or  prosaic  by  corruption  and  misplacements. 
In  the  following  translation  the  attempt  to  represent  poetical  structure  is 
limited  to  v.^';  this  attempt  is  extended  by  Du.  to  vv.^'''^',  by  Cond.  to 
yy  16-24  ^tjoth  omitting  from  the  '*  poem,"  v.^^**). 

1^^  Against  Shebna  who  (had  charge)  over  the  Palace.  ^^'"^  Thus 
said  the  Lord  Yahweh  of  Hosts,  Come  go  to  this  steward  (and 
say), 


374  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

1^  What  hast  thou  here,  and  whom  hast  thou  here, 
That  here  thou  hast  hewn  thee  a  tomb? 
Thou  that  hewest  thy  tomb  in  the  height, 

That  cuttest  out  a  habitation  for  thyself  in  the  rock  ! 

i'^  Behold  Yahweh  will  hurl,  will  hurl  thee,  O  mighty  man  ! 
.  .  .  18  .  .  .  into  a  wide  stretching  land.  There  thou  shalt  die 
and  there  (shall  be)  thy  glorious  chariots  (?),  thou  shame  of  thy 
master's  house. 

1*  And  I  will  thrust  thee  from  thy  post,  and  "  pull "  thee  down 
from  where  thou  standest.  ^o  ^^d  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that 
day,  that  I  will  call  my  servant  Eliakim,  the  son  of  ^ilkiah,  ^i  and 
clothe  him  with  thy  tunic,  and  thy  sash  will  I  bind  about  him, 
and  thy  authority  will  I  give  into  his  hand,  and  he  shall  become 
a  father  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and  the  house  of  Judah  : 
22  And  I  will  put  the  key  of  the  house  of  David  over  his  shoulder, 
and  he  shall  open  and  there  be  none  to  shut,  and  shut  and  there 
be  none  to  open.  ^3  ^^d  I  will  drive  him  in  as  a  (tent-)  peg  in 
a  firm  place,  and  he  shall  be  a  glorious  throne  for  his  father's 
house. 


2*  And  they  will  hang  upon  him  all  the  glory  of  his  father's 
house,  the  offspring  and  the  offscourings  (?),  all  the  least  vessels, 
both  the  bowls  and  the  pitchers.  25  j^  that  day,  is  the  oracle 
of  Yahweh  of  Hosts,  shall  the  peg  which  was  driven  into  a  firm 
place  give  way,  and  be  hewn  down,  and  fall,  and  the  burden, 
which  was  upon  it,  shall  be  cast  off,  for  Yahweh  hath  spoken. 

This  prophecy,  which  contains  the  only  piece  of  personal 
invective  ascribed  to  Isaiah  (but  cp.  Am  y^^^-,  Jer  2o^^-),  is  ad- 
dressed to  Shebna  (36^),  an  official  of  high  rank.  It  predicts  his 
exile  and  death  in  a  foreign  land,  vv.^^-^^,  and  the  promotion  to 
his  office  of  Eliakim  (362),  of  whom  it  is  asserted,  under  the  figure 
of  a  peg,  firmly  fastened,  that  he  will  be  firmly  established  in  his 
position,  vv. 20-23.  in  vv.2*^-  it  is  further  predicted  that  the  firmly 
secured  "peg,"  weighted  down  by  his  family  connections,  will 
ignominiously  fall  and  come  to  ruin. 

We  thus  have  three  stages  in  the  future  predicted :  the  fall 
of  Shebna,  the  promotion  of  Eliakim  to  succeed  him,  the  fall  of 
Eliakim.     Were  all  these  three  things  predicted  at  one  and  the 


XXII.  15-25  375 

same  time?  Scarcely:  for  it  is  certainly  improbable  that  a  pro- 
phet should  at  the  same  moment,  in  an  address  to  the  person  to  be 
deposed,  predict  both  the  promotion  and  the  disgrace  of  his  suc- 
cessor. Several  ways  of  escape  from  this  improbability  have 
been  sought:  some  by  desperate  exegesis  distinguish  the  "peg" 
of  V.25  from  the  "  peg  "  of  v.^s,  making  v.^*  refer  to  the  overthrow 
of  Shebna :  *  others  make  w.^-^^-  a  warning  to  Eliakim  by  means 
of  a  conditional  prophecy  :  t  Eliakim  will  come  to  ruin,  if  he 
practises  nepotism  ;  such  a  warning  addressed  to  Eliakim  himself 
might  be  fitting  enough ;  there  is  no  probability  that  it  would  be 
addressed  to  Shebna :  others  J  again  regard  vv.^^^-  as  a  subse- 
quent addition  to  the  text  made  when,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
Eliakim,  or  his  family,  had  disappointed  the  expectations  set 
upon  him.  This  last  explanation  is  the  least  difficult:  vv.**'* 
read  by  themselves  no  longer  imply  that  they  were  addressed 
to  Shebna.  Obscure  clan  struggles,  or  changing  hopes,  are 
elsewhere  more  or  less  clearly  reflected  in  the  text  of  the  Old 
Testament;  see  Numbers^  p.  193  on  Nu  16  :  and  cp.  the  almost 
certain  elimination  of  Zerubbabel's  name  in  Zee  6^^ 

Del.  inclines  to  the  view  that  Isaiah  wrote  down  22^'"'*  at  one  sitting, 
after  the  fate  of  both  dignitaries  had  been  revealed  to  him  at  two  different  times ; 
in  this  way  the  Isaianic  authorship  and  literary  unity  of  the  passage  is  main- 
tained ;  but  the  form  of  the  prophecy  is  then  a  fiction  :  it  was  never  addressed 
to  Shebna.  Very  improbable.  Cond.  limits  the  extent  of  the  appendix  to 
v.^,  interpreting  v.^  as  a  continuation  of  the  description  of  Eliakim's  glory. 
Also  improbable. 

Is  even  vv.^^-^s  a  unity  ?  or  to  a  threat  addressed  to  Shebna 
(vv.  15-18)  was  the  promise  concerning  Eliak:im  (vv. 20-23)  subse- 
quently added,  whether  by  Isaiah  himself,§  or  a  later  hand  ?  || 

The  two  sections  are  certainly  distinguished  from  one  another  by  the  fact 
that  Yahweh  is  spoken  of  (3rd  pers.)  in  the  former,  but  Himself  speaks 
(ist  pers.)  in  the  latter,  v.^'  in  the  present  text  being  half  in  the  ist  and  half 
in  the  3rd  person.  If  w.^*"*  could  be  regarded  as  an  entirely  independent 
prophecy,  this  difference  might  well  be  significant ;  but  inasmuch  as  the 
promise  no  less  than  the  threat  is  addressed  to  Shebna,  vv.^"'^'  must  from  the 
first  have  been  intended  to  follow  vv.^'^^^^.  This  being  so,  the  change  from 
the  3rd  to  the  ist  pers.  requires  explanation  in  any  case  :  for  was  a  supple- 

♦  Rashi,  ]^i.,  Di.,  Kamph.  f  Kon.,  Orelli. 

X  Hitz.,  Du.,  Che.,  Marti,  Skinner. 

§  Box.  II  Du.,  Che.,  Marti. 


3/6  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 


menter  more  likely  than  the  original  writer  to  make  the  awkward  change  which 
exists  in  the  present  text?  Was  the  first  person  originally  used  in  vv.^^'^^ 
also?  Has  m.T  nzn  replaced  "iin  in  v.^'?  and  has  'ui  nvT-  -\dh  nj  shifted  back 
from  the  beginning  of  v.^'  (cp.  7')  to  v.^^?  Further  arguments  adduced  by 
Du.  in  favour  of  vv.^^"'^^  being  an  addition  are — (i)  the  use  of  Ninn  ora  n'ni 
in  v.^ ;  (2)  the  presence  of  the  words  Oi2H  and  n'?B'DD,  and  the  phrase 
miiT  n'D  (see  notes  below  on  v.^^) ;  (3)  that  v.^^  is  "  post  festum  "  :  if  the  major- 
domo  has  been  hurled  into  exile  (v.^'**),  Yahweh  does  not  need  to  depose 
him  ;  (4)  that  though  Isaiah  might  threaten  a  bad  minister,  he  would  not  so 
far  encroach  on  the  royal  prerogative  as  to  designate  his  successor.  Argu- 
ments (i)  and  (2)  have  some  weight.  The  third  and  fourth  are  of  doubtful 
value  :  if  v.^^  is  a  mere  resumption,  why  should  a  supplementer  have  inserted 
such  a  superfluous  link?  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  argued  that  v.^^  was 
intended  to  correct  v.^'^*  and  to  imply  that  by  the  time  it  was  written, 
Shebna,  instead  of  having  suffered  the  fate  predicted  for  him  in  vv."*-,  had 
merely  exchanged  the  highest  for  another  very  high  office  of  state  (36^),  we 
may  well  ask  whether  it  is  probable  that  Isaiah  or  a  disciple  of  his  would  have 
set  the  high  hopes  expressed  in  v.-"*  on  a  coalition  of  Eliakim  and  Shebna : 
and  again,  whether  the  terms  of  v.^'  are  not  over  strong,  if  the  reference  is 
merely  to  an  exchange  of  offices  ? 

It  is  doubtful  whether  the  difficulties  that  beset  the  assump- 
tion that  vv.  1^-23  as  a  unity  are  greater  than  those  that  beset  the 
theory  that  vv.^^'^^  were  added  to  vv.^^*^^. 

The  date  of  the  prophecy  can  only  be  determined  by  the 
relation  of  the  circumstances  here  implied  to  those  described 
in  ch.  36.  Unfortunately  this  is  not  clear,  or  rather  the  indica- 
tions are  conflicting.  On  the  one  hand,  the  promise  concerning 
Eliakim,  since  it  contains  no  suggestion  that  Eliakim  had  pre- 
viously filled  the  office  in  which  he  is  to  succeed  Shebna,  should 
fall  before  701  b.c,  when  Eliakim  occupies  the  position  (37^) 
here  occupied  (v.^^)  by  Shebna.  On  the  other  hand,  the  secre- 
taryship held  by  Shebna  in  37^  might  quite  as  well  have  been 
a  stage  in  his  advance  to  the  higher  office  held  by  him  here,  as 
a  stage  in  his  falling  fortunes  ;  and  it  is  certainly  strange  if 
Isaiah  had  recently  fulminated  against  Shebna  in  the  terms  of 
vv.^'^^-,  that  Hezekiah  should  have  selected  him  as  one  of  the 
confidential  messengers  who  were  to  intercede  with  the  prophet 
on  the  king's  behalf.  On  the  whole  it  is  preferable  to  date  the 
prophecy  before  701  (37^).  To  escape  the  conflict  by  assuming 
that  two  different  persons  (v.^^  37^)  contemporary  with  Isaiah 
bore  the  same  unusual  name  is  unwise ;  it  would  be  preferable 
to  question  whether  the  official  of  v.^*  was  called  Shebna  (see  n. 
on  v.^5) 


xxir.  1S-18  377 

There  are  enough  unsolved  problems  in  this  section  to  excuse  attempts  at 
new  and  bold  solutions ;  but  the  data  are  inadequate,  and  the  newer  may 
prove  as  little  convincing  as  the  older  solutions.  Brief  reference  may  be 
made  to  one  such  solution.  Fullerton  regards  vv.^*'^*  as  a  prophecy  of 
Isaiah's  later  than  37^  and  delivered  at  the  beginning  of  Manasseh's  reign  ; 
then,  developing  an  unfortunate  suggestion  of  Che.'s  that  the  language  of 
vv.  20-23  is  "almost  Messianic,"  he  interprets  vv.*'"^'  as  a  promise  of  the  cronotty 
made  by  a  disciple  of  Isaiah's  on  behalf  of  a  prophetic  and  revolutionary  party 
who  were  scheming  to  overthrow  Manasseh.  The  revolution  actually  came 
off,  but  was  unsuccessful,  and  w."'*  express  the  contemptuous  exultation  of 
the  prophetic  party  over  Eliakim's  fate. 

15-18.  A  prediction  of  the  disgrace,  exile,  and  death 
of  Shebna,  the  governor  of  the  palace. — 15b.  This  looks 
like  the  misplaced  title  of  the  section  (see  phil.  n.).  It  is  not 
impossible  that  the  title  is  merely  a  late  and  incorrect  inference 
from  36^,  that  Shebna  as  a  matter  of  fact  never  was  governor 
of  the  palace,  and  that  the  object  of  this  invective  is  really 
anonymous. — Come^  g6\  Gn  45^*^,  Ezk  3*  ;  as  those  two  passages 
show,  we  are  not  bound  to  render  go^  enter  in ;  consequently  we 
cannot  infer  that  Isaiah  was  to  seek  Shebna  in  his  house,  or  in 
the  enclosed  grave-ground,  though  v.^^  would  be  particularly 
appropriate  if  addressed  to  him  in  the  act  of  superintending  the 
preparation  of  his  costly  tomb. — This  steward]  the  term  pD,  like 
the  pron.  this  (cp.  6*  n.),  may  convey  a  suggestion  of  contempt : 
the  masc.  form  does  not  occur  again  in  the  OT,  but  the  fern, 
is  used  of  the  maiden  who  was  to  be  sought  out  for  David  and  to 
serve  him  by  giving  warmth  to  his  aged  body.  On  the  other 
hand,  in  Phoenician  the  term  was  used  of  important  officers  or 
deputies  of  the  king :  in  an  inscription  belonging  to  an  age  not 
later  than  Isaiah's  a  donor  in  Cyprus  appears  as  "pD  of  Carthage, 
servant  (n^y)  of  Hiram,  king  of  the  Sidonians  "  {CIS  i.  5  ;  Cooke, 
NSI^  pp.  52  f.);  and  in  Tell-el-Amarna  Tablet  237^  zu-ki-ni 
glosses  the  term  rabisu  used  of  the  king's  officer  before  whom 
the  king  of  Bihisi  takes  flight.  In  Hebrew,  too,  this  honourable 
sense  may  have  attached  to  the  word,  and  the  term,  like  the 
English  minister  in  its  political  usage,  may  have  been  applied 
quite  respectfully  to  the  highest  oflficers  of  state. — Shebnd\  it  is 
commonly  assumed  that  Shebna  was  a  foreigner,  but  the  assump- 
tion is  unsafe  (see  phil.  n.);  that  he  was  a  parvenu  is  a  safer 
inference,  for  between  two  other  officers  whose  fathers'  names  are 
given,  he  stands  without  his  father's  name  (36^  and  elsewhere)  : 


378  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

this  gives  point  to  the  invective  in  v.^^ —  Who  is  over  the  House] 
of  the  king ;  the  Palace,  not  the  Temple  (F),  is  meant.  Great 
private  persons  might  appoint  persons  "  over  their  house,"  and 
the  position  of  such  persons  was  one  of  great  trust  and 
influence  (cp.  Gn  39*  44^*  *) ;  persons  appointed  over  the  king's 
house,  governors  of  the  palace,  naturally  enough  ranked  as  a 
high,  if  not  the  highest,  officer  of  state :  Jotham  during  his 
regency  is  described  as  "over  the  house"  (2  K  15^),  and  the 
occupant  of  this  office  takes  precedence,  at  least  so  far  as  order 
of  mention  is  concerned,  of  the  "IDD  and  l^STD,  who  were  also  high 
officials  (36^  n.);  see,  further,  i  K  4^  16®  18^,  2  K  lo'*.  Little 
detailed  information  as  to  the  duties  of  these  governors  of  the 
palace,  or  major-domos,  is  given ;  but  the  rank  and  influence  of 
the  office  can  be  understood  in  the  light  of  that  of  the  masters  of 
the  palace  in  the  mediaeval  courts,  and  especially  of  the  Prankish 
"mayors  of  the  palace." — 16.  The  intolerable  insolence  of 
Shebna:  he  is  preparing  a  tomb  for  himself  where  he  has  no 
right,  or  family  claim.  Not  in  a  tomb  in  the  height,  such  as 
received  the  bodies  of  kings  (cp.,  for  instance,  2  Ch  32^^)  and 
people  of  rank  and  family,  but  down  in  the  valley  among  the 
graves  of  the  common  people  (Jer  26^3,  2  K  23^),  would  have 
been  the  fitting  place  for  this  man,  whose  father  was  unknown 
(36^).  It  is  the  place,  perhaps  also  the  fact  that  Shebna  prepares 
the  tomb  himself  in  his  lifetime,  that  rouses  ire. —  What  hast 
thou  here]  what  right  have  you  to  be  doing  what  you  are  doing 
here?  None.  The  land  is  not  yours  by  inheritance. —  Whom 
hast  thou  here]  what  kinsman  have  you  in  possession  of  this 
grave-ground  to  secure  your  lawful  admission  to  it.  Since  no 
early  sepulchral  Hebrew  inscriptions  have  been  discovered,  it  is 
uncertain  how  far  Hebrew  burial  custom  was  like  that  of  the  later 
Nabataeans,  who  stringently  limited  the  use  of  their  sepulchres  to 
direct  relatives,  or  otherwise  duly  legitimised  users :  cp.  e.g.  the 
inscription  of  El-Hejra,  B.c.  i  {CIS  ii.  197  =  Cooke,  NSI^  p. 
217) :  "This  is  the  sepulchre  which  *Aidu,  son  of  Kuhailou,  son  of 
Elkasi,  made  for  himself  and  his  children  and  his  posterity,  and 
for  whomsoever  shall  produce  in  his  hand  a  warrant  from  the 
hand  of  *Aidu  .  .  .  and  may  Dfishara  and  Manfithu  and  ^aishah 
curse  every  one  who  shall  sell  this  tomb,  or  buy  it,  or  mortgage 
it,  or  give  it  away,  or  let  it,  or  frame  for  it  any  other  writ,  or  bury 
any  one  in  it  except  those  who  are  written  above";  cp.  the 


XXII.  1 6-1 8  379 

inscription  of  Petra,  ist  cent.  a.d.  (CIS  ii.  150  =  Cooke,  p.  241) : 
"No  man  shall  be  buried  in  this  sepulchre  save  him  who  has 
in  writing  a  contract  to  bury."  It  is  possible  that  merely  in 
preparing  his  own  tomb  in  his  lifetime  Shebna  was  doing  some- 
thing outr^:  this  custom,  so  commonly  practised  later  by  the 
Nabataeans  at  Hejra  and  Palmyra,  was  exceptional  among  the 
Phoenicians,  who  were  closer  both  in  time  and  place  to  Isaiah 
(Lidzbarski,  NSE,  p.  139  f.). — That  thou  hast  hewn  for  thyself 
here]  the  emphasis  falls  on  here^  and  peTha.ps  for  thyself :  in  making 
a  hewn  tomb  Shebna  merely  followed  the  usual  practice  (cp. 
Benzinger,  art.  Tomb,  in  EBi. — In  the  height]  by  cutting  out  the 
tomb  on  an  inaccessible  face  of  rock,  it  was  better  secured  against 
violation  (Benzinger,  ib.\ — A  dwelling-place]  cp.  the  use  of  house^ 
14I8. 

17  f.  Behold]  not  therefore :  v.^*  alludes  to  the  occasion,  not 
the  full  cause  of  the  fate  of  Shebna,  which  is  rather  summed  up, 
though  unfortunately  far  from  clearly,  in  the  last  words  of  v.^^ ;  he 
had  been  the  shame  of  his  master' Sy  the  king  of  Judah's,  house :  but 
how?  by  fostering  the  Egyptian  alliance?  Therefore  he  is  to 
die  far  away  in  the  wide  plains  of  Babylon,  the  land  stretching  far 
in  both  directions  (a  phrase  used  of  the  vale  of  Shechem  in  Gn  34^1 ; 
of  the  country  round  Dan  in  Jg  18^°).  These  are  possible,  but  not 
altogether  certain  implications  of  the  text. — Yahweh  will  hurl^ 
will  hurl  thee^  O  mighty  man]  cp.  Ps  54^-'^  "  Why  boastest  thou 
thyself  of  mischief,  O  mighty  man  .  .  .  God  will  pull  thee  down 
for  ever."  Of  the  vb.  h^bo  the  Pilpel  occurs  here  only,  but  cp. 
the  Hiph.  in  Jer  22^6  "I  will  hurl  thee  and  thy  mother  .  .  . 
into  another  land,  and  there  ye  shall  die."  This  parallel  suggests 
that  the  phrase  will  hurl  thee^  O  mighty  man,  should  be  followed 
immediately  by  into  a  far-stretching  land:  at  present  there 
intervene  several  words,  some  of  doubtful  meaning  but  constitut- 
ing, however  interpreted,  a  hysteron  proteron  to  hurl,  and  a  less 
satisfactory  introduction  to  the  words  into  a  far-stretching  land. 
Not  improbably  there  is  some  textual  corruption :  the  intervening 
words  may  perhaps  be  translated  and  he  will  grasp  thee  forcibly 
(or,  he  will  wrap  thee  up  closely),  and  will  entirely  wind  thee  up  (or, 
make  a  complete  turban  of  thee)  like  (or,  into)  a  ball :  see  phil.  n. 
The  point  of  the  comparison  in  like  a  ball  into  a  far-stretching 
land  has  given  play  to  ingenuity :  Ki.,  followed  by  Del.,  thinks  of 
the  unending  flight  of  a  ball  that  meets  with  no  obstacles :  Du. 


38o  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

of  Shebna  bent  backwards  head  to  feet,  so  that  he  becomes 
defenceless,  and  can  be  slung  away  like  a  ball.  Neither  inter- 
pretation relates  the  figure  to  the  main  point  of  vv.^^'^^,  which 
clearly  is  that  Shebna  is  to  die,  not  in  honour  in  Palestine,  but 
in  dishonour  in  Babylon ;  note  the  repeated  there  in  v.^^, 
emphatically  pointing  the  contrast  to  the  repeated  here  of  v.^^. 
It  is  very  doubtful  whether  Isaiah  used  any  term  meaning  ball 
here  :  see  phil.  n. — And  there  the  chariots  of  thy  glory]  i.e.  thy 
glorious  chariots,  sc.  shall  come  (Marti),  shall  be  (Jer,  RV),  ox  shall 
become  inglorious  (ST :  cp.  Ges.).  But  in  any  case  the  clause  reads 
curiously ;  both  the  special  reference  to  chariots,  a  symbol  of  a 
man's  rank  and  greatness  (Jer  ly^s,  cp.  Ec  lo'^),  in  itself,  and  still 
more  the  reference  to  them  after  the  reference  to  their  owner's 
death,  is  suspicious.  Far  more  correspondent  to  v.^^  would  the 
words  run  and  with  biting  irony,  if  chariots  is  a  corruption 
for  tomb:  and  there  shall  be  thy  glorious  tomb!  So  Cond. — 
19.  Shebna  will  be  deposed  and  his  office  become  vacant  for 
(vv.20f-)  another  to  fill.  Whether  this  transitional  v.  is  original, 
is  discussed  above. — And  I  will  thrust]  the  pron.  must  refer 
to  Yahweh;  cp.  vv.^^"^^. — And  pul[\  H  and  he  will  pull',  see 
phil.  n. 

20-23.  A  prediction  of  the  promotion  of  Elial^im  to 
the  office  vacated  by  Shebna,  and  of  his  glorious 
administration. — Shebna  is  still  addressed,  but  by  Yahweh 
Himself  (ct.  vv.^^'^^). — 20.  Eliakim  the  son  of  HilkiaK]  in  36^ 
occupies  the  position  *held  now  (v.^*^)  by  Shebna. — My  servant] 
20^. — 21.  Eliakim  will  be  clothed  with  the  robes  of  his  office, 
consisting  of  a  distinctive  tunic  (n3nD)  and  sash  (t}33X,  elsewhere 
only  in  P) :  so  also  the  priests  were  distinguished  by  special 
tunics  and  sashes,  and  their  accession  to  office  was  solemnised 
by  a  ceremonial  investiture  with  these  and  other  distinctive 
articles  of  clothing.  Ex  28*-  s^^*,  Lv  S''*  ^^.  With  the  insignia, 
Eliakim  will  also  receive  the  authority  (ni?SJ'»» :  cp.  fjK^D,  Gn  45^) 
of  the  vacant  office ;  but  exercising  it,  unlike  Shebna,  wisely  and 
well,  he  will  become  a  father  of  those  whom  he  governs,  the 
people  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah  (cp.  i^  n.),  in  caring  for  their 
needs  (cp.  9^  Job  29^^) :  even  in  Gn  45^  father  is  no  mere  title ; 
Joseph  had  cared  for  Pharaoh's  interests. — 22.  Eliakim  will  also 
receive  the  key  of  the  house  of  David^  by  which  we  may  again 
understand  a  symbol  of  his  office  rather  than  the  actual  key 


J 


XXII.  19-25  3^1 

with  which  the  palace  was  locked;  another  less  probable  view 
is  that  the  whole  is  figurative,  meaning  merely,  I  will  lay  the 
burden  of  administering  Judah  upon  him.  In  any.  case,  the 
phraseology  reflects  the  custom  of  carrying  the  long  and  heavy 
keys  commonly  used  over  the  shoulder.  Che.  in  SBOT  (ET), 
p.  160,  reproduces  from  Bonomi,  Nineveh  and  its  Palaces^  a 
picture  of  a  modern  Cairene  merchant  thus  carrying  his  keys. 
The  authority  symbolised  is  extensive,  and  includes  the  command 
of  the  royal  chambers  and  the  right  to  admit  to  the  royal 
presence,  or  to  refuse  admittance :  cp.  Mt  16^^,  Rev  3^. — 23.  By 
means  of  two  figures  the  security  of  Elial^im  in  his  office,  and 
the  lustre  which  his  position  will  shed  on  his  entire  family,  are 
expressed.  For  the  figure  of  the  ^^^  which  commonly  denotes 
the  tent-pegy  but  also  a  peg  on  which  articles  may  be  hung 
(Ezk  158),  cp.  Ezr  98,  Zee  lo*.  Sir  142*  (ffi,  not  J?):  also  the 
Arabic  example  cited  by  Ges.  from  the  Life  of  Timur,  when 
the  pegs  {autdd)  of  Mohammed  ibn  Mudaffir  were  firm^  meaning 
when  his  authority  was  secured ;  this  illustrates,  too,  the  develop- 
ment of  the  figure  here,  Elial^im  is  as  secure  as  a  peg  driven 
into  a  place  that  can  be  trusted  to  hold. — A  glorious  throne\  by 
no  means  proves  that  Eliakim  is  destined  to  be  king  (Fullerton) : 
the  throne  (xba)  was  not  a  seat  confined  to  kings ;  see  especially 
2  K  410. 

24  f.  The  peg  (v.^s),  being  misused,  falls  to  the 
ground. — The  peg  here,  whatever  its  meaning  in  v.^^,  is  a  peg 
driven  into  a  wall.  The  meaning  of  the  figure  is  clear ;  all  sorts 
of  cheap  articles  are  hung  upon  the  peg,  till,  being  altogether 
improperly  weighted  with  this  motley  assortment  of  goods,  not 
even  the  best  of  holds  is  of  any  service,  but  peg  and  burden 
come  tumbling  down  together  in  undignified  and  indiscriminate 
ruin :  so  a  governor,  a  peg  of  state,  if  all  his  relatives  insist  on 
his  giving  free  play  to  nepotism,  is  brought  at  last  to  ruin.  But 
is  this  a  prediction  that  Elial^im  will  be  a  gross  nepotist  and, 
in  spite  of  being  firmly  secured  in  Shebna's  office,  himself  come 
to  ruin?  That  such  a  prediction  was  delivered  in  the  same 
breath  with  the  prediction  of  his  glory,  and  in  an  address  to 
Shebna,  seems  incredible ;  quite  as  much  so,  however,  that  the 
peg  of  v. 2*  refers  to  a  different  person  from  v.^s,  viz.  to  Shebna. 
To  treat  vv.^**^-  as  a  hypothetical — but  if  Eliakim  practises  nepot- 
ism, he  will  come  to  ruin — is  an  improbable  makeshift  in  spite 


382  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

of  its  abstract  grammatical  possibility  (Kon.  iii.  390^) ;  there  is 
too  much  detail  and  contemptuous  passion  in  the  protasis  for 
this  to  bd  probable  (see,  further,  p.  37 5  f.)- — All  the  glory  of  his 
father's  house]  contemptuously,  and  perhaps  playing  on  the  root 
meaning  of  nU3,  all  the  weightiness  of  his  family. — The  rest  of 
the  V.  developes  the  idea  of  the  burdensome  family,  first  by 
means  of  two  (?)  literal  terms  for  the  offspring,  or  connections, 
of  a  family,  and  then  by  terms  used  figuratively  to  suit  the  figure 
of  the  peg.  D'*((^i<V,  offspring^  is  a  term  elsewhere  confined  to 
Is  34^  40-66,  Job ;  see  34^  n.  The  exact  force  of  nirsv  is 
doubtful :  it  may  refer  either  to  hangers-on  as  distinguished 
from  actual  members  of  the  family,  or  rather  to  the  ignobler 
members  (see  phil.  n.). — Least]  not  in  size,  for  neither  bowls  (pi<, 
Ex  24^,  Ca  7^  t)  nor  pitchers  (30^^,  Jer  48^2^  were  this,  but  in 
value  :  cp.  La  4^.  —  25-  Ln  that  day]  on  which  the  peg  was 
overloaded;  that  the  same  phrase  occurs  in  v. 20  by  no  means 
necessarily  synchronises  the  two  vv.,  and  certainly  does  not  show 
that  the  peg  of  v.^^  is  a  different  person  from  the  peg  of  v.^^. 

15.  mn*  »3nN]  (&&  omit  one  of  these  words.— nin]  <&  om.— ^y  .  .  .  ^n] 
(&  eh  .  ,  .  irp6t.  The  repetition  of  hn  would  have  been  normal  (G-K.  131^) ; 
but  the  substitution  of  the  stronger  prep,  ^y  is  not ;  the  instances  cited  in 
Kon.  319^  are  either  doubtful,  or  not  real  parallels. — N33B']  (&  116/xvav.  The 
ending  K-  (so  also  37^* ",  but  n-,  2  K  i8^^'  ^)  does  not  prove  that  Shebna 
was  a  Syrian  (or  North  Arabian:  Che.  EBi.).  Hebrew  hypocoristica  also 
end  in  n-  :  cp.  »»y,  2  S  6^  ( =  m]},  286^);  xnay,  Kna,  to'D :  see  Lidzbarski, 
Ephemeris,  ii.  7ff.;  see,  further.  Addenda. — n'an  ^y]  <&  +  Kal  eltrbv  airrip. — 
16.  nnpl  3rd  pers.  after  a  vocative :  cp.  54^  and  see  G-K.  144^. — 17.  n^a^o 
'\2i]  C  KiaaT  ^iu'?B,  assuming  the  n  to  be  not  the  fem.,  but  a  case  ending. 
If  the  construction  were  cstr.  and  gen.,  it  would  be  better  to  re-divide, 
n33n  7t5'?e,  though  ffi  read  naa.  The  pointing  n^a,  strong  man,  is  to  be  preferred 
to  n^a  (MT),  though  even  the  latter,  according  to  a  Rabbinical  explanation, 
implied  a  violent  hurling,  because  a  man  is  stronger  than  a  woman  !  see 
Rashi. — loyi]  nowhere  else  in  Heb.  has  nuy  {/o  be  enveloped,  to  wrap  oneself, 

e.g.  59")  a  trans,  force;  but  Lane  cites  in  Arabic  ^IxiJ'  iU2.c,  young 
manhood  clad  him.  So  possibly  ^Xi'^  ^By1  means  and  he  will  surely  enwrap 
thee,  and  is  more  or  less  synonymous  with  the  next  clause.     Or  possibly  n»y 

here  is  from  another  root ;  cp.  liis,  viii.,  to  take  (with  the  hands) :  then 
render,  he  will  surely  grasp  thee  (Ges.,  al.). — 18.  nn3  nsas  isas'  f]i3s]  (K  koX  rhv 
<Trk^a.vbv  GOV  rhv  ?v5o^ov  Kal  pl\}/ei.  <t€  :  the  last  clause  (cp.  'B  et  7nittet  te)  has 
influenced  EV,  which  inserts  without  any  warrant  in  p^  and  toss  thee,  nsj^, 
like  n'rtsSts,  is  most  probably  a  mere  addiUonal  strengthening  of  the  verbal 
idea ;  others  take  it  as  an  ace.  of  product,  will  wind  thee  into  something 


XXII.  15-25,  XXIII.  383 

wound.  The  vb.  »)35t  occurs  but  once  elsewhere,  in  Lv  16*,  and  there  means 
to  wind  round  {the  head),  to  put  on  (the  turban) ;  otherwise  the  root  in  Heb. 
is  confined  to  nouns  meaning  turban  {e.g.  3^  62').  Whether,  as  is  commonly 
assumed,  ^^^  meant  to  roll  up  as  well  as  to  wind  round,  is  not  quite  certain. 
3r  seems  to  give  the  vb.  first  a  privative  sense  and  then  the  meaning  to  sur- 
round :  it  renders  he  will  take  away  from  thee  the  turban,  and  enemies  shall 
surround  thee. — ina]  SU  anticipated  mediaeval  Jewish  and  modern  interpreters 
in  extracting  the  meaning  ball  from  this  word  ;  but  it  is  disputed  whether  3 
is  radical  and  ^^^^  a  comparatio  decurtata,  or  whether  nn  is  the  noun  and  f 
the  particle.  "Wns,  ball,  occurs  in  NH  and  Aramaic  (Levy,  NHWB  ii.  295  f.); 
the  comparison  of  the  Assyr.  kudHru,  circle,  boundary  (cp.  29*),  does  not 
increase  the  probability  that  nna  in  the  age  of  Isaiah  meant  ball.  It  is  quite 
as  questionable  whether  on  the  strength  of  this  passage  alone,  where  the  point 
of  comparison  with  a  ball  is  anything  but  obvious,  we  ought  to  infer  that  ^n, 
period,  circle  (of  time),  also  meant  ball:  see,  further,  BDB  189^,  462a  with 
references. — nor]  it  is  unnecessary  to  take  this  pregnantly,  thither  (coming) 
thou  shall  die\  for  nDB'  =  De',  cp.  Gn  43^,  Jos  2}  ;  BDB  1027^. — maano  notri 
iniaa]  koX  6-^<r€i  rb  dp/xa  <rov  rh  KoXbv,  which  Cond.  claims  as  supporting  aaTD, 
an  intermediate  step  to  an  original  nap  (see  above).  Possibly  niaano  is 
an  error  for  (n)a3B'D  dwelling  -  place{s),  in  the  sense  of  tomb  (cp.  57', 
Ezk  32^).  — 19.  lonn'i  .  .  .  Tnuim]  the  change  of  pers.  is  precariously 
defended  by  reference  to  10^  (Di-) ;  see,  further,  G-K.  144/:  Konig, 
Stilistik,  248  ff.  :  on  3^-*  see  n.  on  3*.  (&  does  not  render  the  2nd  vb.  ; 
tZr  =  |§;  &TB  read  both  vbs.  in  the  1st  pers.  'and  k  not  infrequently  are 
confused  ;  and  it  is  certainly  easier  to  emend  the  2nd  vb.  to  lonrtNi  than  with 
Cond.  the  ist  vb.  to  Tsnm. — 21.  iiehvrxi]  nWoD  is  used  from  the  end  of  the  7th 
cent,  onwards;  see  Cheyne,  Introd.  137  n. — 24.  niysit]  some  ignoble  flavour 

may  attach  to  the  word,  if  it  is  from  the  same  root  as  ysx,  ^Jl^  (Ges.), 

which  gives  (D)'y'fl:<,  dung,  Ezk  4'°,  and  «-&«i  with  the  same  meaning.  If 
not  from  this  root  (BDB),  it  is  from  one  of  unknown  meaning. — lepn  '^a] 
superlative :  G-K.  133A,  and  (on  pp  a  neuter  subst.  in  the  gen.)  I28w. 


XXIIL— 7%tf  Oracle  of  Tyre. 

This  consists  of  a  poem,  vv.^*^*,  on  the  ruin  of  Phoenicia, 
and  a  prose  appendix,  vv.^^'^^,  predicting  the  restoration  of  the 
commercial  prosperity  of  Tyre. 


1-14. — The  Ruin  of  Phoenicia. 

The  text  is  too  uncertain  to  make  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  rhythm  useful. 
Some  of  the  distichs  are  clearly  3  : 2.  Parallelism  is  as  frequently  absent  as 
present.  The  poem  is  divided  into  three  nearly  equal  strophes,  by  some- 
thing resembling  an  initial  refrain. 


384 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


1. 

1  Howl !  ye  ships  of  Tarshish, 

For  '  your  fortress '  has  been  spoiled ! 
.  ,  .  from  the  land  of  Kittim  it  was  revealed  to  them. 

2  Be  astounded,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  coast, 

Merchants  of  Sidon, 
2c  Who  passed  over  the  sea  (?) 

'  Whose  messengers  ^  were '  on  many  waters, 
'  Whose '  harvest  a  was  the  seed  of  Shihor, 
Whose  revenue  a  the  traffic  with  the  nations 
^  Be  ashamed,  O  Sidon,  .  .  .  saying, 

"I  have  not  travailed,  nor  brought  forth; 
And  I  have  not  brought  up  youths, 
Nor  reared  virgins." 
'  When  the  rumour  (comes)  to  E^ypt, 
They  will  travail  'for'  Tyre. 


2. 

^  Pass  over  to  Tarshish,  howl ! 

Ye  inhabitants  of  the  coast. 
■^  Is  this  your  (city  ever-)  exultant, 
From  the  days  of  old, 
Whose  feet  in  olden  time  did  carry  her, 
Afar  off  to  sojourn? 
^  Who  hath  planned  this. 

Against  Tyre  the  crowned  (city). 
Whose  merchants  were  princes. 

Whose  traders,  the  honoured  of  the  world? 
*  Yahweh  of  Hosts  hath  planned  it, 

To  profane  (what  was  their)  pride  (?), 
All  beauty  to  dishonour, 

All  the  honoured  of  the  world. 


^^  .  .  .,  '  ye  ships '  of  Tarshish, 

There  is  no  girdle  (?)  more. 
^^  His  hand  hath  he  stretched  out  against  the  sea, 

He  hath  made  kingdoms  quake. 
Yahweh  hath  commanded  touching  Canaan, 

To  destroy  her  fortresses. 


XXIII.  I-I4  3^5 

^'  And  he  said,  Thou  shalt  no  morc  exult, 

Thou  oppressed  daughter  of  Sidon ! 
Arise,  pass  over  to  Kiltim  : 

There,  too,  thou  shalt  have  no  rest.^^  a  a 
1*  Howl !  ye  ships  of  Tarshish, 

For  your  fortress  has  been  spoiled. 

The  poem  opens  and  closes  with  the  same  distich,  in  which 
the  Phoenician  mariners  are  summoned  to  lament  for  the  de- 
struction of  their  "fortress."  The  first  strophe  extends  this 
appeal  to  the  inhabitants  of  Phoenicia  generally,  especially  the 
Phoenician  merchants.  In  the  second  strophe  the  Phoenicians 
are  bidden  to  pass  over  to  Tarshish,  and  told  that  the  humilia- 
tion of  Tyre,  the  home  of  merchant  princes  and  the  city  of 
ancient  seafaring  fame,  has  been  decreed  by  Yahweh.  The 
third  strophe  asserts  that  Yahweh  has  also  given  the  word  for 
the  destruction  of  other  Phoenician  fortresses,  and  has  rendered 
the  Phoenician  colonies  insecure.  In  particular,  Cyprus  will  be 
unable  to  give  asylum  to  the  Phoenicians  retreating  from  their 
ruined  homes.  Other  details  filled  out  the  poem  in  its  original 
form,  but  the  insecurity  of  the  text  has  left  them  uncertain  or 
obscure. 

Opinions  differ  greatly  as  to  the  occasion  and  exact  subject 
of  the  poem.  In  v.^,  and  even  in  v.*,  Sidon  may  mean  Phoenicia 
(v.2  n.) ;  but  v.^^  should  refer  to  the  fall  of  the  city  of  Sidon,  and 
vv.^^'  to  the  ruin  of  Tyre.  It  is  true  that  the  two  names  Tyre  and 
Sidon  as  written  in  Phoenician  inscriptions  (iv,  H^))  and  doubt- 
less also  in  the  earliest  stages  of  the  text  of  the  OT,  must  have 
been  liable  to  confusion.  Possibly,  therefore.  Tyre  in  v.^  (and  ^) 
is  a  miswritten  Sidon,  or  Sidon  in  vv.^"*  a  miswritten  Tyre;  in 
which  case  the  original  subject  of  the  poem  may  have  been  ex- 
clusively Sidon  (Du.),  or  exclusively  Tyre.  The  authors  of  the 
title  and  appendix  certainly  understood  the  poem  to  refer  to  Tyre, 
but  whether  exclusively  or  not  is  uncertain;  as  in  17^  the  title 
may  refer  to  one  only  of  two  subjects  of  the  poem  that  follows. 

We  cannot,  then,  with  any  assurance  attempt  to  date  the 
poem  by  considering  which  of  the  many  sieges  of  Tyre  or  Sidon 
most  answers  to  the  details  here  given  ;  as  a  matter  of  fact,  these 
details  are  too  general  or  too  uncertain  to  point  decisively  to  any 
particular  siege. 
VOL.  I. — 25 


386  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Nor  is  it  wise  to  draw  conclusions  from  the  doubtful  and 
unintelligible  reference  to  the  Chaldaeans  (or  any  name  conjec- 
turally  substituted  for  this)  in  v.^^ 

Nor,  again,  do  language  (except  in  v. ^3)  and  ideas  point 
clearly  to  any  known  writer,  or  to  any  particular  period.  The 
vocabulary,  naturally  enough,  contains  words  and  phrases  used 
by  Isaiah ;  and  others  that  do  not  occur  in  his  extant  writings ; 
for  details,  see  Di.  or  Cheyne,  Introd.  p.  142  ;  but  observe  that 
the  words  and  phrases  cited  as  used  by  Isaiah  are,  with  one 
or  two  insignificant  exceptions,  not  peculiar  to  Isaiah,  or  even 
particularly  characteristic  of  him ;  and  they  occur  also  in  later 
writers  (so,  e.g.^  ^];\  vv.^^- ;  n^  niD3,  v.^^). 

Some  theories  of  date  may  be  briefly  referred  to — i.  Dates  within  the  life- 
time of  Isaiah. — [a)  Some,  guided  mainly  by  the  supposed  reference  in  v.*' 
to  a  destructive  attack  of  Assyria  on  Babylon,  place  the  prophecy  near  one 
of  the  years  709,  703,  696  B.C.,  in  all  of  which  Babylonia  was  ravaged  by  the 
Assyrians.  On  the  last  of  these  occasions  Sennacherib  says  of  Babylon, 
"  The  city  and  houses  from  its  foundation  to  the  upper  chambers  I  destroyed, 
I  dug  up,  in  the  fire  I  burnt "  {^RP  ix.  28).  But  any  argument  as  to  the 
date  of  the  poem  based  on  v.^*is  very  precarious  (see  on  v.^^) ;  moreover, 
none  of  these  years  synchronises  with  any  known  disaster  to  Tyre,  though 
Sidon  suffered  in  701  from  Sennacherib,  who  at  that  time  dethroned  Luli, 
king  of  Sidon.  {b)  A  more  adequate  occasion  for  the  poem  is  the  long  siege 
to  which  Tyre  was  subjected  by  Shalmaneser  (727-722  B.C.).  According 
to  Menander  (in  Jos.  Ant.  ix.  14^),  the  Assyrians  ravaged  the  whole  of 
Phoenicia ;  the  other  cities  submitted,  but  Tyre  held  out  and  endured  a  five 
years'  siege.  If  this  is  the  occasion  of  the  poem,  it  does  not  describe  an  actual 
destruction  of  Tyre,  but  merely  predicts  a  destruction  of  the  city  which  did  not 
occur.  This  view  is  defended  by  Cheyne  in  Introd.  p.  144 ;  earlier  {PI) 
he  had  adopted  [a) ;  later  he  abandoned  both  [EBi.  2197)  in  favour  of  the 
theory  that  the  poem  relates  to  a  conquest  of  ni:fD  (so  read  for  nx  and  JTk)  at 
some  undefined  date  {Crit.  Bib.  28). — ii.  Dates  later  than  Isaiah. — Merely 
noting  that  Esarhaddon  made  Sidon  **  like  the  ground"  in  678  (Rogers,  Hist. 
of  Bab.  and  Assyria,  ii.  224),  and  blockaded  Tyre  in  672  (Rogers,  ii.  226), 
and  that  Asshurbanipal  subsequently  (Rogers,  255)  conquered  though  he 
did  not  destroy  the  city,  we  come  to  the  long  siege  of  Tyre  in  585-573,  for 
which  see  Jos.  Ant.  x.  11^,  c.  Ap.  i.  21,  and  cp.  the  predictions  in  Jer  27^, 
Ezk  26-28 ;  see  also  Rogers,  ii.  336  ff.  In  this  siege  some  have  found  the 
occasion,  or  the  subject,  of  the  poem  (cp.  e.g.  Kon.  Etnl.  320).  But  once 
again  it  can  only  be  the  subjectj  if  the  poem  is  a  prediction  unjustified  by 
events :  Tyre  was  not  destroyed,  cp.  Ezk  29"^*,  written  in  570  B.C.  The 
earliest  capture  of  Tyre  known  to  history,  the  earliest  event,  therefore,  of 
which  this  poem  can  be  a  description,  is  the  capture  of  the  city  by  Alexander 
the  Great:  see  Arrian,  ii.  16-24,  and  cp.  e.g.  Holm,  Hist,  of  Greece,  iii.  331- 
333,  337.     Du.  and  Marti,  who  consider  Sidon  to  be  the  subject  of  the  poem, 


XXIII.  1-5  387 

find  the  occasion  of  it  in  the  destruction  of  Sidon  by  Artaxerxes  Ochus  in 
348  B.C. 

1-5.  First  strophe, — la.  b.  Cp.  v.^* ;  the  difference  between 
the  two  occurrences  of  the  distich  in  f^  EV  is  due  to  textual 
corruption :  see  phil.  n. — Ships  of  TarshisK\  2^**  n. ;  here  ships 
actually  returning  from  far  distant  Tarshish  (in  Spain  ?)  are  meant ; 
for  recent  arguments  that  Tarshish  lay  not  in  Spain  but  on  the 
Persian  gulf,  see  Hiising  in  Memnon,  i.  70-79 ;  cp.  R,  von 
Lichtenberg,  Einfliisse  der  dgdischen  Kultur  {i^ii)y  p.  30. — ic. 
From  the  land  of  Kittitn\  i.e.  Cyprus :  Kitti  i^TO)  frequently 
mentioned  in  Phoenician  inscriptions,  was  strictly  the  name  of 
a  town  in  Cyprus  (Gr.  Kition) ;  cp.  Nu  24**  n.  Cyprus  would 
be  the  last  stage  on  the  way  from  Spain  to  Phoenicia;  here, 
according  to  this  line,  which  reads  like  a  gloss  (note  the  3rd  pers., 
and  ct.  the  2nd  in  vv.^*-  (**•  ^^^)),  the  crews  of  the  returning  ships 
hear  of  the  disaster.  The  phrase  is  preceded  in  f^  by  KUD, 
which  may  be  a  corrupt  dittograph  of  n^3D;  MT  accents  and 
EV  connect  it  with  v.^^  (corrupt),  {for  it  is  spoiled^  so  that  there  is 
no  house)y  no  entering  in.  It  has  been  recently  rendered  since 
leaving  the  land  of  Kittim^  and  assumed  to  imply  that  the  news 
was  heard  not  while  the  ships  were  touching  at  Cyprus,  but  by 
signals  from  passing  ships  or  otherwise,  between  Cyprus  and  the 
Phoenician  coast.  This  is  most  uncertain ;  K13  normally  means 
to  enter  in^  arrive^  not  to  go  out  from,  leave, — 2,  Be  astounded] 
lit.  be  dumb,  with  grief  or  astonishment;  cp.  La  2^®,  Ex  15^* :  see 
also  phil.  n.  It  is  no  doubt  a  formal  inconsistency,  but  scarcely  a 
rhetorical  impossibility,  to  call  on  the  same  persons  to  be  dumb 
and  to  howl  (v.*). — The  coast"]  Phoenicia,  rather  than  either  the 
island  on  which  Tyre  stood,  or  collectively  the  islands  or  coasts 
(11^^  n.)  of  the  Mediterranean.  See  also  20'  n. — Merchants  of 
Sidon]  merchants  of  the  city  of  Sidon,  or  more  widely  Phoenician 
merchants ;  so  Sidonians  are  Phoenicians  in  Dt  3^,  Jg  3^,  i  K  168I ; 
in  Greek,  too  (//.  vi.  290),  and  Assyrian ;  and  later  in  Phoenician 
itself  Tyre  is  called  D''3nv  DN,  metropolis  of  the  Sidonians ;  see  EBi. 
s.v.  Sidon. — 2C,  3.  Very  uncertain:  see  phil.  n.  MT  may  be 
rendered  : — ^^  The  merchants  of  Sidon,  '^  the  traversers  of  the  sea 
did  fill  thee  (fem.).  ^  And  on  many  waters  the  seed  of  Shihor,  the 
harvest  of  the  Nile,  was  her  revenue:  and  it  (the  revenue),  or  she 
(the  coast :  elsewhere  masc),  was  the  merchandise  of  nations.  But 
(i)  this  implies  that  the  passage  is  unrhythmical ;  (2)  the  waters  are 


388 


COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 


K 


an  unnatural  place  for  revenue ;  (3)  the  last  clause  is  obviously 
unsuitable :  RV  tra'aslates  unjustifiably  mart  (ct.  v.^^)  0/  nations. 
—  TAe  seed  of  Shi^or]  the  identification  of  Shihor  with  the  Nile 
(cp.  Jer  2^^)  is  found  in  U,  and  has  been  commonly  accepted ; 
but  it  was  not  admitted  by  (&  either  here  or  in  Jer  2^^,  and  it  has 
recently  been  disputed ;  Du.,  who  with  ffi  omits  "JN"',  of  the  Nile 
(19^   n.),    identifies    Shihor   with    the   Shihor-hbnath   in    Asher 


(Jos  19^^),  which  district  he  considers  actually  did  supply  Sidon 
with  corn  (cp.  Gn  49^0,  Ezk  27^^).  For  other  views,  see  Che.  in 
EBL  s.v.  Shihor.  That  the  Phoenician  cities  drew  on  Egypt  * 
as  well  as  on  the  Palestinian  hinterland  for  their  corn  supply,  is 
certainly  probable,  and  an  allusion  to  a  remoter  source  would  be 
rhetorically  more  effective.  Even  if  the  Nile  be  a  gloss,  it  shows 
that  a  reference  to  Egypt  was  early  detected  here. — 4c.  d  is  an 
excellent  3  :  2  distich,  and  its  meaning  is  clear ;  but  the  preceding 
part  of  the  v.  is  too  long  for  one  distich,  too  short  for  two. 
Difficulties  of  interpretation  make  it  additionally  probable  that 
the  text  of  4a.  b  is  in  disorder,  and  it  must  remain  doubtful 
whether  Sidon,  Tyre,  or  the  Sea  is  the  childless  woman.  If  the 
text  of  ?^  is  retained,  Be  ashamed^  O  Sidon,  for  the  sea  hath  said, 
the  fortress  of  the  sea,  saying,  etc.,  nothing  better  can  be  suggested 
than  Di.'s  sufficiently  improbable  interpretation :  Sidon,  i.e. 
Phoenicia  (as  in  v. 2),  is  to  be  ashamed,  i.e.  disappointed  in  her 
hopes,  because  the  sea,  or  more  precisely  the  fortress  (v.^* :  cp. 
v.^  n.)  of  the  sea,  i.e.  Tyre,  has  had  to  confess  the  loss  of  her 
children  in  battle,  or  by  capture.  Even  more  improbable  is  this 
interpretation,  if  the  fortress  of  the  sea  be  identified  with  Sidon  : — 
be  ashamed  Sidon,  for  Sidon  hath  said !  By  following  up  a 
suggestion  of  Olsh.,  and  omitting  the  words  the  fortress  of  the 
sea,  saying,  as  a  gloss,  Du.  obtains  a  more  attractive  meaning 
and  a  rather  poor  4  :  2  line :  Sidon  is  to  be  ashamed,  for  the 
sea  has  become  childless,  and  the  sea  is  poetically  regarded  as 
the  mother  of  the  Sidonians :  if  this  be  correct,  there  may  be 
traces  here  of  an  old  myth  according  to  which  gods  and  men 
sprang  from  the  sea.  By  less  extensive  conjecture  it  is  possible 
to  obtain  a  good  distich;  omit  ^D  with  ffi  and  read  D"»"i[y]  DN 
instead  of  Dnojc,  and  render. 

Be  ashamed,  O  Sidon,  mother  of  cities, 
Fortress  of  the  sea. 

*  Cp.  W.  Max  Muller,  Asien  u.  Ruropa^  p.  359, 


XXIII.  1-9  3^9 

For  mother  of  cities^  cp.  2  S  20^*^;  G.  A.  Cooke,  NSI^  p.  352. 
Still  even  this  is  uncertain. — /  have  not  travailed  nor  brought 
fortK\  a  city  robbed  of  its  population  is  said  by  a  rhetorical 
exaggeration  not  even  to  have  had  children :  cp.  54'  of  §ion  ;  cp. 
also  49^^ — Brought  up  ,  .  .  reared\  i^  n. — 5.  Whether  a  gloss 
(Du.)  or  not,  the  v.  is  very  awkwardly  expressed  and  seems 
prosaic :  it  is  certainly  not  a  normal  3  :  2  line.  It  is  commonly 
supposed  to  mean  that  the  fall  of  Tyre  will  be  ominous  for 
Egypt,  who  will  be  distressed  when  the  news  is  received. 

I.  1^'V'n]  the  masc.  could  be  explained  as  a  cstr.  ad  sensum,  but  at  the  end 
of  the  V.  (")  ihe  fern,  suffix  (p-)  is  used.  Cp.  G-K.  iio/t. — inv]  15^ — n'3D] 
cp.  G-K.  II9J/;  but  the  word  is  really  a  corruption  of  jaiyo ;  (5  Kal  ovk^ti 
=  I><''yi ;  Che.  unnecessarily  substitutes  pino,  your  haven  (Ps  107**)  for  piyo. — 
K13D]  (&  perhaps  read  Qk?  ;  but  the  omission  of  a  subject  makes  it  difficult  to 
treat  this  as  original  and  explain  by  Dr.  §§  167,  169. — rhii]  ity  viz.  the  over- 
throw of  the  stronghold,  has  been  revealed:  G-K.  1443.  The  prosaic,  and 
probably  unrhythmical,  character  of  the  line  raises  the  suspicion  that  the  line 
is  a  gloss  (Olsh.,  Di.,  Che.),  id*?  occurs  in  Is  only  in  30*,  and  then  is 
doubtful  ;  it  was  misread  by  (K,  'D*?.  For  nVjJ,  (K  seems  to  have  read  rhi  K3. 
— 2.  lan]  imperative ;  it  might  also  be  pointed  lai,  pf.  (cp.  (5).  It  is  hardly 
necessary,  out  of  regard  to  v.'  (see  above),  to  suppose  a  unique  occurrence  of 
DDi,  to  wailf  cp.  Assyr.  damamu  with  that  meaning  (see  BDB) :  or  to  emend 
to  1D13  (Che.,  Marti)  which  follows  tw  in  15^  or  isn  (Du.). — pTJ«  ino]  these 
words  may  be  safely  taken,  against  the  accentuation  of  MT,  as  the  synonymous 
parallel  to  'K  'ar*,  the  2nd  part  of  the  3  :  2  distich  characteristically  echoing 
the  first.  The  words  that  follow  are  certainly  more  or  less  corrupt :  ffi  is  not 
improbably  nearer  the  original  text  in  virtue  of  the  absence  from  it  of  tik', 
possibly  a  gloss  on  nnr,  and  'nni,  probably  a  corrupt  dittography  of  nnK[i3n]. 
(Sr  further  differs  from  |^  in  omitting  1  "PkSd  and  inserting  ws  (?  1D3,  or  simply 
d)  between  ^^8'  (read  as  nno)  and  Tifp ;  but  elatpepofx^vov  corresponds  nearly, 
if  not  exactly,  to  nnxiDn.  Du.  follows  (JEr  in  omitting  niK'  and  'nm :  he  also 
reads  D'D3  12x^5  for  D'D31  timVd  (SCF  omit  the  ">  before  Q'D3),  n»xp  for  Txp, 
and  would  point  nriNun  instead  of  nciKun.  Neither  of  the  two  lines  thus 
obtained  is  3  :  2 ;  the  first  is  2  :  3  (an  occasional  variant  on  3  :  2),  and  the 
second  3  :  3. — 4.  '3]  dSc  omits. — 5*  J'^^l  ^^^  ^^^  awkward  occurrence  of  a  noun 
after  nt^Ka,  cp.  26'.  Gratz,  al.  read  y-?^: :  then  cp.  Neh  6^  for  the  construction. 
— njf  j;D85'3]  ffi  irepl  TOpov.  If  |§  is  correct  and  3  is  really  =  a/  fhe  time  o/(iS* 
28^  30^* ;  Di.  ;  BDB,  p.  454^),  the  v.  is  most  awkwardly  expressed  : — when 
the  report  comes  .  .  .  they  will  be  in  travail  at  the  time  of  the  report,  RV 
sorely  pained  at  would  require  '3SD  ;  cp.  Dt  2^,  Jer  ^. 

6-9.  Second  strophe. — Now  that  Tyre,  their  ancient,  proud, 
and  famous  capital,  has  fallen  by  the  decree  of  Yahweh,  let  the 
Phoenicians  of  the  Palestinian  coast-land  flee  lamenting  to  Spain, 


390  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

taking  passage  in  the  ships  that  have  come  thence  (v.^) — yet 
only  to  be  turned  back  again  from  the  haven  that  is  no  more 
(v.^^). — 7«  The  question  rhetorically  points  the  contrast  between 
then  and  now;  cp.  14^^,  La  2^^. — Exultani\  22^  32^3^  cp.  v.^^ 
below. — Since  the  days  of  old]  the  antiquity  of  Tyre  was  consider- 
able, though,  according  to  later  testimony  (Strabo,  xvi.  2,  22), 
reputed  less  than  that  of  Sidon.  The  priests  of  Tyre  told 
Herodotus  (ii.  44)  that  "it  was  a  period  of  2300  years  since  their 
people  began  to  live  at  Tyre."  The  actual  age  of  Tyre  may 
have  been  considerably  less  (cp.  e.g.  EBi.  3732),  but  the  writer 
here  appeals  not  to  fact  but  to  fame.  So,  too,  the  actual 
antiquity  of  the  Phoenician  colonies  or  trading  stations  to  which 
v.*^  refers,  unlike  the  fame  of  them  (cp.  Herod,  i.  i),  may  not 
have  been  very  great;  Meyer  {EBi.  3736)  asserts  that  in  the 
time  of  the  Amarna  tablets  {c,  1400  b.c.)  there  were  no 
Phoenician  colonies.  The  term  to  sojourn  (nj,  142  n.)  corre- 
sponds well  to  the  character  of  these  settlements,  and  the 
connection  of  them  with  Tyre  to  the  generally  current  theory : 
"all  the  Phoenician  colonies  were  anciently  regarded  as  having 
been  founded  from  Tyre ;  and,  so  far  as  the  towns  of  Cyprus  and 
North  Africa  are  concerned,  this  is  confirmed  by  all  our  other 
information.  It  cannot  be  shown  that  any  other  of  the 
Phoenician  towns  planted  colonies "  (Meyer,  EBi.  STSj). — 
Whose  feet  did  carry  her\  The  expression  is  curiously  chosen  for 
the  sea-voyages  of  the  Phoenicians ;  but  the  meaning  flag  for 
hT\  is  far  too  uncertain  (Nu  2^  n.)  to  render  Bredenkamp's  easy 
conjectural  emendation  (rivH  for  HvJl),  whose  flags  did  carry  her^ 
probable.  Nor  can  it  mean  her  feet  will  carry  her  into  captivity ; 
for  the  vb.  nia  in  the  next  clause  is  unfavourable  to  this,  and 
even  ^'•lin  (ct.  2  K  21^). — 8,  9.  Question  and  answer,  as  in 
Ps  24^^-  ^- 1^. — 8.  Is  Tyre,  the  home  of  merchant  princes,  called 
the  crowning  (ST)  city,  as  one  that  founded  small  kingdoms,  or 
as  the  city  that  sent  a  golden  crown  to  the  advancing  Alexander ; 
or  the  crowned  (SU)  city,  as  the  city  which  at  the  time  was 
supreme  over  the  Phoenician  cities?  5^  certainly  means  the 
crownings  fl^^  may  have  been  ambiguous  (mtDyon). —  Whose 
traders]  2^  n.  ^  omits  this,  or  whose  merchants. — 9.  The 
answer  to  v.^ ;  it  is  Yahweh  who  has  planned  the  disgrace  of 
Tyre.  The  v.  has  probably  suffered  some  disarrangement ;  see 
phil.  n. — Pride  .  .  .  beauty]  ^  13^^  6o^^ 


xxm.  7-1 1  391 

7.  03^]  ethic,  dat.,  rather  than  {Is  this  what  has  happened)  to  you  (Del.)* — 
nv^V]  anarthrous  voc.  :  G-K.  I26z,  n. — onp  'D'D]  ^^^, — nnonp]  is  commonly 
given  the  sense  oi  origin  (cp.  'Cip,  Pr  8^*)  and  taken  with  onp  'D*D  ;  but  the 
V.  gives  two  better  echoing  lines  if  it  is  taken  with  mSa',  either  as  a  form  like 
nnyiB"  (G-K.  90^),  in  ancient  time^  or  pointed  ?i{«?")p,  in  her  antiquity. — 9.  If 
the  V.  consists  of  two  3  :  2  distichs,  the  first  should  end  at  pKj  ;  but  this  leaves 
jiKJ  rather  awkwardly  undefined  ;  'ax  '?3  is  also  rather  awkwardly  placed,  yet 
if  we  transpose  '3Jt  Va  hprh  (Che.)  we  make  the  antithetic  terms  h;>T\^  and  n333 
remote  from  one  another.  pK  naaa  h2  hprh  looks  like  the  first  part  of  a 
3:2  distich. 

10-14.  Third  strophe. — Let  the  ships  from  Spain  return 
home  (?) ;  the  ruin  of  Phoenicia  is  irremediable,  for  it  has  come 
to  pass  by  Yahweh's  decree.  The  ruin  extends  as  far  W.  as 
Cyprus. — 10.  1^  and  (R  differ,  and  probably  neither  entirely 
preserves  the  original  sense.  J^  may  be  rendered,  Pass  through^ 
(Dt  2^^)  or  overflow  (8^),  or  pass  over  to  (v.®,  Am  6^),  thy  land^ 
like  the  Nile^  O  daughter  (i^  n.)  of  Tarshish  :  there  is  no  more  a 
girdle  (nTD,  Ps  109^*  f ;  =  n"'TD,  Job  1221).  This  has  been  explained 
as  meaning  that  the  harsh  dominion  of  Tyre  over  her  colonies, 
typically  represented  by  distant  and  important  Tarshish,  has  with 
the  fall  of  Tyre  come  to  an  end,  and  the  inhabitants  of  these 
colonies  may  now  walk  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  their 
land  (cp.  Gn  13^''^)  as  the  independent  owners  of  it.  But,  not  to 
mention  other  difficulties,  the  last  clause  cannot  imply  release 
from  servitude;  the  girdle  is  no  mark  of  bondage:  but  its 
removal  is  a  mark  of  defencelessness  (Job  12^^);  so,  freely  but 
correctly,  Symm.  rendered,  Jerome  approving,  you  will  no  longer 
be  able  to  resist.  (3K  read.  Till  thy  land:  for  indeed  ships  come  no 
more  from  Tarshish,  Originally  the  line  resembled  v.^,  or  v.*,  or 
both,  more  closely  than  it  does  now;  see  phil.  n. — ii,  12. 
Phoenicia  is  undone ;  for  Yahweh  has  decreed  the  destruction  of 
all  the  fortresses  along  the  Palestinian  seaboard,  and  He  has 
threatened  and  shaken  all  the  Phoenician  colonies  scattered  over 
the  Mediterranean.  Consequently  the  inhabitants  of  Sidon 
after  the  fall  of  the  city  will  in  vain  cross  over  to  Cyprus ;  the 
colonies  there  will  have  suffered  likewise,  and  will  furnish  no 
resting  place  to  the  fugitive  Sidonians. — II.  V.^^  ^  and  '^'^^'  ^  have 
perhaps  been  transposed :  the  named  subject  Yahweh  first 
appears  v.^^® ;  and  the  threatening  of  the  colonies  in  J^  precedes 
the  threatening  of  Phoenicia  proper. — His  hand  hath  he  stretched 
out]  525 :  also  in  later  writers,  e.g.  Zeph  i*,  Ex  7^  (P). — /fe  hath 


392  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

made  .  .  .  quake\  used  of  the  earth  14^^,  of  the  heavens  13^^ ; 
the  Kal  is  used  of  the  effect  of  Yahweh's  manifestation  on 
peoples  (64^). — Kingdoms]  as  the  term  is  appHed  to  parts  of 
Egypt  in  19^,  so  here  to  the  various  Phoenician  city-states 
which  were  governed  by  their  own  kings.  Phoenician  inscrip- 
tions speak  of  a  king  of  Gebal  {CIS'i.  i),  a  king  of  Kition  and 
IdaHcn  (e.g.  CIS  i.  11^),  as  well  as  of  a  king  of  the  Sidonians 
(e.g.  CIS  i.  3);  see  Cooke,  NSI,  p.  116.  — 11.  Canaan] 
Phoenicia ;  the  usage,  found  in  Phoenician  (Cooke,  NSI  350), 
does  not  occur  again  in  the  OT ;  but  note  Jos  5^  ^3J?33n  ^ai^o,  ffi 
ot  ySatrtXcts  7^9  ^oLvUrj^. — 12.  And  he  said]  probably  this  is  a 
gloss,  and  this  v.,  like  the  rest  of  the  poem,  was  the  speech  of 
the  poet. — £xuit]  cp.  "exultant,"  \J.  —  Daughter  of  Stdon] 
rhythm  favours  this,  the  reading  of  ffi,  as  against  f^,  Virgin 
daughter  (i^  n.)  of  Sidon.  This  being  so,  no  sufficient  reason 
remains  for  giving  T\\>'^'^'0'T\  the  otherwise  unknown  nuance 
deflowered;  the  antithesis  is  rather  between  the  exulting,  domi- 
neering, wealthy  city  of  the  past,  and  the  ruined  people  of  the 
present,  who  must  suffer  the  harsh  treatment  commonly 
measured  out  to  the  poor  and  helpless ;  cp.  the  use  of  pcy  in 
52*,  Dt  2829-33. — According  to  the  analogy  of  similar  phrases, 
daughter  of  Sidon  should  mean  the  population  of  the  city  of 
Sidon ;  it  is  very  questionable  to  make  it  mean  Phoenicians  in 
general,  or  Tyre,  as  being  the  daughter  city  of  Sidon. — Pass  over] 
v.^. — To  Kittim]  Cyprus,  v.^ — 13.  This  v.  as  a  whole,  and 
especially  in  its  context,  is  quite  unintelligible ;  it  is,  moreover, 
not  in  the  3  :  2  rhythm  which  appears  in,  or  may  underlie,  the 
remainder  of  vv.^"^*,  though  the  last  two  words,  He  hath  made  it 
(Cyprus?  Tyre?  Sidon  ?)  a  ruin,  might  be  the  second  and  shorter 
half  of  such  a  distich.  Attempts  to  interpret  the  v.  fall  into 
two  classes  :  (i)  those  which  read  into  the  present  awkward  text 
meanings  which  are  not  there;  (2)  those  which  conjecturally 
correct  the  text,  or  omit  parts  of  it,  as  glosses.  It  would  be  easy 
to  hazard  fresh  guesses  of  this  type,  but,  as  they  would  be  as 
unconvincing  as  those  which  have  been  offered,  it  must  suffice 
to  refer  to  one  or  two  explanations  of  each  type  that  have 
already  been  offered,  fflr  finds  in  \P  an  alternative  to  v.^^  .  how 
far  its  text  was  different  from  J^,  and  how  far  it  is  merely 
paraphrastic,  it  is  difficult  to  say ;  in  ffi,  ^^b-is  x\xx\%  thus,  and 
if  thou  goest  to  the  Cypriotes,  neither  there  shalt  there  be  rest  for 


XXIII.  II-I3  393 

thee^  ^8  and  {if)  to  the  land  of  the  ChaldaeanSy  that^  too^  has  been 
laid  waste  by  the  Assyrians^  its  wall  has  fallen.  In  what  follows 
the  italicised  words  represent  the  actual  literal  rendering  of  J^, 
the  rest,  the  meanings  read  in  by  interpreters  in  order  to  create 
some  intelligibility : — Behold  the  land  of  the  Chaldaeans  ;  this  is 
the  people  which  until  recently  was  not  of  any  account;  Assyria 
founded  it,  i.e.  the  land  of  Chaldaea,  for  the  Chaldaeans,  who 
had  hitherto  been  inhabitants  of  the  desert  (1321  n.);  they,  the 
Chaldaeans,  set  up  his,  viz.  the  Chaldaeans'  watch-towers  (32^*  n.), 
they  have  laid  bare  the  foundations  of  its  (Tyre's)  palaces ;  he, 
(the  Chaldaeans)  hath  made  it  a  ruin.  The  point  of  all  this  is 
supposed  to  be :  Tyre  will  be  destroyed  by  the  Chaldaeans ;  so 
Lowth,  Ges.,  and  others;  but  the  interpretation  labours  under 
historical,  as  well  as  stylistic,  improbabilities;  the  Chaldaeans 
were  settled  in  Babylon  at  least  as  early  as  900  b.c.  and 
probably  centuries  earlier,  and,  therefore,  even  if  it  were  a  proved 
fact,  and  not  merely  an  unsupported  and  improbable  inference 
from  this  passage,  that  it  was  the  Assyrians  who  settled  the 
Chaldaeans  in  Babylon,  it  was  no  recent  event  even  in  the  days 
of  Isaiah.  Others  would  make  the  v.  mean  Chaldaea  has  already 
destroyed  Assyria,  i.e.  Nineveh  (607  b.c,),  and  will  destroy 
Tyre ;  by  assuming  that  ilK'K  is  a  casus  pendens,  and  straining 
the  meaning  of  ID*,  which  means  to  found  creatively  (so  even 
Ps  1048),  the  crucial  clause  for  this  interpretation  is  rendered, 
/V,  viz.  Chaldaea,  has  appointed  Assyria  for  desert-beasts,  i.e.  for 
destruction  (cp.  Mai  i^) ;  so  at  one  time  Del.,  reviving  a  sugges- 
tion of  Paulus  mentioned  by  Ges.  Others  {e.g.  RV)  with  rather 
less  improbability  give  this  clause  the  opposite  meaning  :  Assyria 
has  destroyed  Chaldaea  (in  709  ?  or  703?  or  696  B.C.).  A  further 
objection  to  both  these  interpretations  is  that  the  remainder  of 
the  V.  can  then  only  naturally  be  taken  to  refer  to  the  fall  of 
Babylon,  and  thus  the  v.  falls  entirely  out  of  relation  to  a  poem 
on  the  fall  of  Tyre.  Ew.  conjecturally  substituted  Canaanites, 
i.e.  Phoenicians  (v.^^  n.),  for  Chaldaeans ;  but  this  necessitates 
retaining  the  questionable  sense  appointed  for  ID**,  and  giving 
.Tn  \^  the  very  questionable  meaning  is  no  more  (RV).  It  has 
been  suggested  that  the  words  "iik^K  HM  ^?^  Dvn  n?,  this  is  the 
people,  it  was  not  Assyria,  are  an  annotation  that  has  intruded 
into  the  text,  drawing  attention  to  the  fact  that  Chaldaea  and 
not  Assyria  destroyed  Tyre :  cp.  Cond.,  Che.  {Introd.  p.   140), 


394  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

but  see  Dr.  Isatah\  219.  Du.  extracts  from  the  v.  the  following 
distich : 

Behold  the  land  of  Kittim, 
He  hath  made  it  a  ruin — 

the  point  of  which  is  that  there  will  be  no  rest  for  Cyprus,  for 
Cyprus,  too,  is  in  ruins.  The  rest  of  the  v.  on  this  theory  is  a 
note  on  Kittim ;  by  the  help  of  some  emendations  the  note  is 
restored  as  follows :  This  is  the  people  which  were  a  foundation^ 
i.e.  a  colony,  of  the  seafarers  who  set  up  its  watch-towers^  its  cities^ 
and  its  palaces 'y  very  doubtful. — 14.  See  on  v.^ 

10.  B'^B'nn  nn  nxo  isin  nay]  ffi  ipyd^^ov  r^v  yrjv  <rov  /cal  ycLp  TrXoia  .  .  . 
ix  KapxvS6vos  =  vvwi  nviti  '3  isnK  'nay ;  from  |^  and  dSc  we  might  conjecture 
viff-[n  nvjN  psn«  nny ;  but  this,  like  both  f^  and  fflr,  seems  over-long  for  the 
first  line  of  a  distich.  Perhaps  JfiK  nay  is  a  dittograph  of  px  n33[3]  at  the 
end  of  v.* ;  and  the  original  opening  of  v.'**  was  'n  nrjN  id3,  IVeep,  ye  ships  of 
T.  (cp.  V.*) ;  see  Du.,  Marti.— niD]  an  error  for  lyo  (vv."'  ^*)  ?  or  for  ThD,  if  this 
meant  haven'i — II.  m.T]  ®r  +  <ra/3aw^. — TDr'?]  38  n. — n'3TyD]  the  3  is  an  error 
rather  than  a  resolution  of  the  reduplicated  T  (G-K.  200). — 12.  r\'^v>'<ir:ir\\  the 
attributive  is  prefixed  for  emphasis  :  cp.  22^. — nSinn]  ®r  om. — pi'Jf]  some  MvSS 
\Vi ;  an  obvious  error. — D^na]  cannot  be  a  vocative ;  but  the  name  of  the 
people  is  used  for  the  country :  cp.  r\'a''^v:^^  Ezk  11^.  But  in  v.*^  'a  px  is 
used. — 13.  Q'^if'3  pN]  Kleinert,  Bredenkamp,  DntfS  p«  (cp.  Gn  14') ;  Ges-B. 
{vielleicht)  nijB'  ^ynx  ;  Marti  tdbti  D'n3  pw,  which  would  give  a  good  parallel 
to  rhixh  HDB',  if  all  that  intervenes  is  a  gloss. — uvn  ni]  scarcely  this  people ^ 
in  spite  of  Ex  32^,  i  K  14",  Ps  104^  (BDB,  loob) ;  but  this  is  the  people^ 
which  certainly  reads  like  the  beginning  of  a  gloss.  Marti,  following  up  Du.'s 
suggestion,  restores  the  gloss  as  follows : — (or  D'otj^V)  D"j«S  mio'  nt^N  Dyn  ni 
vnamNi  vny  vjnn  iD'pn ;  but  mio'  ib'n  would  be  odd  Hebrew,  the  meanings 
settlement  for  miD'  and  seafarers  for  D"J£  questionable,  and  the  very  rare 
word  jn3  unlikely  in  a  gloss. — Ti''7\  vh'\  according  to  MT  accents  this  means 
was  not,  did  not  exist :  cp.  BDB,  s.v.  r\''n,  iii.  i  ;  but  is  no  more  would  be 
expressed  by  means  of  px  and  niy.  In  a  late  gloss  nwK  rx'^n  k^  might  mean 
it  was  not  Assyria  :  cp.  the  use  of  n'n  in  2  Ch  18^2  (cj-^  j  k  22^). — ^I'^'D?] 
K^tib ;  V^in3,  K®re ;  neither  form  occurs  again  unless  jn?,  32^*!,  should  be 
pointed  jn?  or  jns. — miy]  Pol' el  of  nny,  here  only;  cp.  Kal  32",  Pilpel  and 
Hithp.  Jer  51^.— n^SD]  17I  n. 

XXIII.  15-18. — The  Restoration  of  Tyre  for  the  benefit  of 

the  Jews. 

This  appendix  was  not  necessarily,  nor  even  probably,  written 
by  the  author  of  the  poem  in  vv.^'^*.  It  is  prose,  not  poetry ; 
predictive,  not  descriptive.  It  was  written,  presumably,  while 
the  ruin,  which  w.^'^*  describe,  still  continued,  and  after  rather 


XXIII.  lo-is  395 

than  before  the  Exile  ;  for  note  the  ideas  in  v.^^  and  the  probable 
indebtedness  of  the  writer  to  Jer  25^^'-  and  Ezk,  chs.  26-28. 
See,  further,  Che.  Introd.  138  f. 

In  the  following  translation  the  ditty  (2  :  2  :  2  ||  2  :  2  :  2)  cited 
in  v.^*  is  given,  at  the  expense  of  one  or  two  departures  from 
literal  rendering,  in  a  rhymed  version,  in  order  to  bring  out  its 
difference  from  its  prose  setting : 

^^  And  it  will  come  to  pass  in  that  day  that  Tyre  will  be 
forgotten  for  70  years,  like  the  days  of  one  king.  At  the  end  of 
70  years  Tyre  wiU  be  like  the  harlot  in  the  song : 

1^  Take  thou  the  lyre. 

Walk  with  the  throng, 
Harlot  whom  all  forget; 
Play,  play  with  fire, 
Sing  oft  (thy)  song, 

To  be  remembered  (yet). 
I''  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  the  end  of  70  years,  Yahweh 
will  visit  Tyre,  and  she  shall  return  to  her  hire,  and  play  the 
harlot  with  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  upon  the  face  of  the 
earth.  ^^  And  her  gain  and  her  hire  shall  be  a  sacred  gift  to 
Yahweh  :  it  shall  not  be  stored  up,  nor  treasured,  but  her  gain 
shall  belong  to  them  that  sit  before  Yahweh  for  food  in 
abundance  and  for  stately  clothing. 

15.  Shall  be  forgotten^  and  so  lose  her  trade :  cp.  v}^. — 
Seventy  years]  are  (a)  the  normal  term  of  human  life,  Ps  90^^ ; 
(d)  the  length,  according  to  expectation  or  conventional  reckon- 
ing, of  the  Jewish  captivity  in  Babylon,  Jer  25^1^-  29!^^,  Zee  1^2  >j5^ 
Dn  g'^^',  2  Ch  36^^ — As  the  days  of  one  king]  various  explanations, 
none  very  satisfactory,  have  been  offered  of  this  phrase ;  it  has 
been  said  to  mean  the  full  span  of  human  life  (Ges.,  cp.  ffi),  or 
full  years,  measured  liberally  as  befits  a  king,  in  contrast  to  the 
"  years  of  a  hireling"  (16^*  2i^<';  Eich.),  or  a  period  free  from 
change  (Del.,  Di.),  or  the  duration  of  a  dynasty  (cp.  Dn  7!^)^ 
whether  that  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (Ibn  Ezra),  or  of  Alexander 
and  his  Ptolemaic  successors  (Du.,  Marti).  On  the  last  theory, 
allusion  is  made  to  the  fact  that  Tyre  was  eclipsed  by  the 
foundation  of  Alexandria ;  Tyre's  prosperity  returned  when 
Phoenicia  passed  from  the  dominion  of  the  Ptolemies  to  that 


396 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


of  the  Seleucids. — At  the  end  of  seventy  years]  these  words  have 
perhaps  intruded  here  from  v.^''^;  if  they  stand,  vv.^^^-  ^^  and  v.^'^ 
are  synchronous,  which  is  scarcely  suggested  by  the  opening  of 
v.^'^,  or  else  the  writer  had  in  view  two  successive  periods  of 
seventy  years,  which  is  improbable. — 16.  The  song  is  rather 
some  popular  ditty  cited  by  the  writer  than  one  specially  com- 
posed by  himself  (Di.).  The  ditty  is  sarcastic,  for  obviously 
the  worn-out  and  discarded  harlot  would  not  win  much  success 
by  her  wiles ;  Tyre  is  to  be  restored  not  by  her  own  artifices, 
but  (v.^'^)  by  Yahweh's  favour.  The  conduct  described  in 
j^a.  d.  c  corresponds  more  to  that  of  the  Ghawazee  of  Modern 
Egypt  (Lane,  Mod.  Egyptians^  ch.  xix.)  than  to  what  is  elsewhere 
said  of  harlots  in  the  OT.  The  1133,  lyre,  appears  elsewhere 
as  an  instrument  of  dissolute  music,  5^2^ — Walk  with  the 
throng]  lit.  go  about  in  (320,  as  Ca  3^)  the  city. — Flay  thou  with 
fire]  more  lit.  play  skilfully ,  play  your  best:  cp.  i  S  16^'^, 
Ezk  33^2,  Ps  33^ — 17.  Will  visit]  with  favour:  cp.  Jer  29^^ 
Yahweh  will  restore  the  commercial  prosperity  of  Tyre;  the 
figure  by  means  of  which  this  is  expressed  is  suggested  by 
v.^^;  cp.  Apoc.  18^,  where,  rather  more  naturally  in  a  minatory 
context,  trading  and  harlotry  (figuratively)  are  closely  connected. 
Even  in  figure  it  is  surprising  to  find  the  harlofs  price  (pnx) 
made  a  gift  to  Yahweh;  ct.  Dt  23^®. — 18.  Gain]  from  trade; 
cp.  v.^  n. — Hire]  synonymous  with  gain,  but  implying  the  figure 
of  v.^^. — A  sacred  gift]  KHp,  as  Jos  6^^.  The  gains  from  trade 
will  no  longer  be  stored  up  (Zee  9^)  by  Tyre  for  her  own  use, 
but  will  be  paid  into  Yahweh's  coffers,  whence  it  will  be  given 
over  by  Him  to  them  that  sit  before  Him,  i.e.  the  priestly  nation 
of  the  Jews  (6i^^-).  The  thought  that  the  wealth  of  the  nations 
will  flow  into  the  restored  Jewish  state  is  frequent  in  exilic  and 
post-exilic  literature :  see  45^*  4922f.  6o^'  ^-^^^  Hag  2^^' 


15.  nnDB'Ji]  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  this  is  a  part.  (G-K.  44/,  1 16/; 
Dr.  §  159) ;  not  only  should  a  pf.  with  waw  conv.  naturally  follow  .Tm,  but 
if  nnatyj  were  a  part.  nj£  should  naturally  precede  it  (Dr.  135  (4)).  Unless 
nn3B':i  should  be  read,  it  is  a  form  like  rhm  (Dt  32^),  preserving  the  original 
n  of  the  fem. — 17.  njanx]  the  suffix  is  here  written  with  he  raphe;  ct.  v.^^ — 
JDH']  the  vb.  here  only  in  Heb.  ;  cp.  the  noun  }cin,  33^  etc.  In  Aramaic 
(e.g.  Dn  7^  Haph.)  the  vb.  means  to  take  possession  of. — p'ny]  here  only; 
for  the  sense,  choice^  surpassing,  attaching  to  the  root  and  its  derivatives, 

cp.  pOV  in  Pr  8^^  and  ^jSs.  oi  what  precedes ^  and  so  \s  choice. 


XXIII.    1 6-1 8,  XXIV.-XXVII.  397 

XXIV.-XXVII.— ^«  Apocalypse  of  Judgment  on  the  World, 
and  of  YahweKs  reign  and  glory. 

Special  Literature  : — R.  Smend,  in  ZATIV^  1884,  pp.  161-224  J  H.  Oort, 
in  Th.  Tt.,  1886,  pp.  166-194;  E.  Liebmann,  "  Der  Text  zu  Jesaia  24-27," 
in  ZATpy,  1902,  pp.  1-56,  285-304  ;  1903,  pp.  209-286 ;  1904,  pp.  51-104  ; 
1905,  pp.  145-171- 

"  Post  specialem  singulonim  gentium  correptionem,  Judaeae 
(1-12),  Babylonis  (13I-1428),  Philistim  (h^^-^^),  Moab  (15  f.), 
Damasci,  Israel  (17^""),  Aegypti  (18  f.),  deserti  maris  (2i^-i<>), 
Idumaeae  (21^1^-)  et  Arabiae  {21^^-^^),  vallis  visionis  (22i-i*),  et  ad 
extremum  Tyri  (23)  .  .  .  nunc  quid  totus  orbis  in  consumma- 
tione  passurus  sit,  propheticus  sermo  describit,  et  nequaquam 
de  singulis  gentibus,  sed  de  cunctis  pariter  prophetatur." 

Jerome  here  correctly  seizes  the  fundamental  difference 
between  chs.  24-27  and  the  preceding  parts  of  the  book;  at 
times,  indeed,  in  chs.  24-27  the  wider  eschatological  ideas 
appear  (see,  e.g.  13  f.),  and  in  chs.  24-27  there  are  allusions 
in  particular  and  by  name  to  Assyria,  Egypt,  and  Moab,  as  well 
as  to  Jerusalem  ;  nevertheless,  broadly  the  distinction  holds :  in 
chs.  1-23  we  have  in  the  forefront  the  particular  circumstances 
or  fates  of  definite  and  particular  nations  —  Jewish  or  foreign, 
in  chs.  24-27  the  future  both  of  judgment  and  of  promise 
that  awaits  the  world  at  large.  We  pass  from  prophecy  to 
apocalypse. 

The  contents  of  these  chapters,  very  briefly  described,  are 
as  follows : — Yahweh  is  about  to  visit  the  world  in  judgment, 
and  His  judgment  will  culminate  in  the  punishment  and  im- 
prisonment, with  a  view  to  subsequent  and  final  judgment,  of 
the  "  host  of  the  height "  and  the  kings  of  the  earth ;  He  will 
Himself  become  universal  king  and  lord,  reigning  gloriously  from 
Jerusalem  (ch.  24) ;  and  at  His  accession  He  will  give  a  feast  in 
Mount  §ion  to  all  the  peoples  of  the  world  —  the  subjects  of 
Himself  as  universal  Lord;  victorious  over  all  enemies  (2421), 
He  will  also  destroy  death  and,  under  His  rule,  there  will  be 
no  mourning :  in  particular.  He  will  remove  the  reproach  which 
His  people  the  Jews  have  been  suffering  (25^-8).  Between  the 
account  of  Yahweh's  accession  and  coronation  feast  is  inserted 
(25^-*)  a  song  in  which  the  (Jewish)  community,  hitherto  poor 
and  helpless,  celebrates  Yahweh's  victorious  career,  which  has 


398  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

rescued  it,  and  must  exact  homage  from  the  "strong  people" 
and  the  city  of  "the  awe-inspiring."  Another  song  (2  5^^^2)j, 
introduced  as  such  by  an  introductory  formula,  follows  the 
account  of  the  coronation  feast :  in  this,  those  who  have  waited 
for  Yahweh's  salvation  now  express  their  exultation  in  it  This 
song  also  contains,  or  is  followed  by  a  section  which  contains, 
a  prediction  of  the  ignominious  destruction  of  Moab.  A  third 
song,  introduced  by  a  formula  directing  that  it  is  to  be  sung  in 
the  land  of  Judah,  follows  in  26i"i^ :  this  song  contrasts  Jerusalem, 
as  Yahweh  will  then  have  made  it,  in  its  strength  with  the  "  city 
(now)  set  on  high,"  which  Yahweh  will  then  have  abased;  it 
refers  to  the  loyalty  of  the  Jews  to  Yahweh  under  the  foreign 
dominion  to  which  they  have  been  subject :  and  it  concludes 
with  the  prediction,  rather  than  the  mere  hope,  that  the  Jews 
who  have  died  will  come  to  life  again  as  members  of  the  com- 
munity, whose  centre  is  the  City  which  Yahweh  will  have  made 
strong.  At  the  end  of  this  song  comes  a  short  section  in  which 
the  writer  exhorts  his  people  to  keep  at  home  while  the  wrath 
of  Yahweh  goes  forth  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  and 
the  two  Leviathans  and  "the  dragon  which  is  in  the  sea"  (262<>- 
27^).  Then  follows  another  song  in  praise  of  Yahweh's  "  delight- 
ful vineyard,"  which  closes  with,  or  is  followed  by,  the  statement 
that  Israel  shall  flourish  and  "  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit " 
(272-6).  The  connection  of  the  following  verses  is  loose,  but 
they  contain  (i)  the  promise  that  Israel's  iniquity  will  be  purged 
by  destroying  (illegitimate)  altars,  'asherim  and  hammanim  (27^), 
and  (2)  a  description  of  the  desolation  of  the  fortified  city  of 
a  people  without  understanding  and  without  claim  on  its  Maker 
for  mercy  (27^^^*).  The  entire  section  closes  with  a  promise  that 
the  Jews  within  the  ideal  limits  of  the  land  of  promise  will  be 
carefully  (separated  from  the  heathen  ?)  and  gathered  together, 
and  that  the  Jews  of  the  dispersion  in  Egypt  and  Assyria  will 
be  summoned  by  a  great  trumpet  and  will  come  up  to  worship 
Yahweh  in  Jerusalem. 

More  than  once  in  these  chapters  we  seem  to  come  on 
allusions  to  clearly  defined  and  particular  historical  events  or 
circumstances ;  but  as  Del.  well  observes,  "  like  will-o'-the-wisps, 
they  elude  any  attempt  at  following  out  and  grasping  them." 
The  allusion  to  the  city  of  Jerusalem  in  26^  is,  of  course,  un- 
mistakable though  it  is  not  here,  as  it  is  in  24^3,  mentioned  by 


xxiv.-xxvii.  399 

name ;  but  what  are  the  "  City  of  Chaos  "  (24^°),  "  the  fortified 
city"  (27^®),  the  city  set  on  high"  (26^,  cp.  25^2^,  the  citadel" 
and  "the  city  of  the  awe-inspiring"  (252^-)?  are  they  one  and 
the  same?  if  so,  what  city  is  meant?  and  if  they  are  different, 
how  many  and  what  cities  are  intended?  what  people  are 
described  as  the  "strong  people"  (25^)?  It  seems  clear  that 
the  writers  had  a  definite  city,  or  definite  cities,  and  a  definite 
people  in  view,  but  unfortunately  the  descriptions  are  so  vague 
that  they  are  satisfied  by  any  of  the  many  cities  with  which  at 
different  times  and  by  different  writers  they  have  been  identified 
— Nineveh,  Babylon,  Shushan,  Tyre,  Samaria,  and  so  forth. 

But  though  the  definite  and  particular  references  are  elusive, 
certain  general  conditions  are  clear  and  significant :  the  Jews 
are  poor,  distressed,  and  helpless,  waiting  for  the  intervention 
of  Yahweh  to  deliver  them  in  some  marvellous  and  miraculous 
way  (25^- 1"^  26^"i2. 16-18  2^7),  politically  dependent  (26^3),  with  no 
king  of  their  own,  but  with  the  priesthood  as  the  highest  rank 
(to  be  inferred  from  24^),  an  object  of  reproach  throughout  the 
earth  (25^)  over  which  they  are  scattered  (27!^  and,  probably, 
2414-16)^  few  in  number  in  their  own  land  of  Palestine  (the 
present  situation  implied  by  the  prediction  of  26^*^),  and  even 
there ,  mingled  with  the  heathen  (27^2  probably).  All  this  im- 
plies that  we  have  to  do  here  with  a  work  of  the  post-exilic 
period ;  and  even  one  or  two  points,  such  as  the  references  to 
Assyria  (27^^),  and  to  idolatrous  objects  (27^)  still  needing  to  be 
destroyed,  that  to  some  have  seemed  to  suggest  an  earlier  period 
for  at  least  the  groundwork  of  the  whole,  are  not  really  incom- 
patible with  a  post-exilic  period :  indeed,  the  allusion  to  Assyria 
occurs  in  a  passage  where  lateness  of  circumstances,  language, 
and  ideas  is  conspicuous  (see  below,  and  cp.  Smend,  p.  193  n.). 
It  remains  possible,  and  as  we  shall  see  probable,  that  the  entire 
section  is  not  a  unity;  but  the  general  conditions  of  the  post- 
exilic  period  are  reflected  throughout. 

Not  less  decisively  do  the  ideas  that  find  expression  here 
point  to  the  post-exilic  period ;  and  with  probability,  indeed,  to 
a  very  late  part  of  that  period.  The  ideas  convinced  Del.,  who 
originally  maintained  the  Isaianic  authorship  of  chs.  24-27,  that 
it  was  post-Isaianic  (p.  419).  The  difficulty,  indeed,  when  we 
consider  these,  is  not  to  decide  whether  we  are  dealing  with  a  pre- 
exilic  or  a  post- exilic  work,    but   to  see  how  any  part   of  the 


400  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

prophetic  canon  can  be  late  enough  to  contain  them.  The 
entirely  explicit  and  well-established  belief  in  the  resurrection  of 
individual  Israelites  (261^)  carries  us  far  below  Ezekiel,  beyond 
the  Book  of  Job,  and  into  the  region  of  Daniel  and  Enoch 
(/.<?.  c.  165  B.C.  and  later).  Certainly  the  history  of  this  belief 
among  the  Jews  cannot  be  written  with  precision,  and  we  know 
that  some  Jews  (Ecclesiastes,  the  Sadducees)  rejected  it  long 
after  the  majority  held  it  firmly ;  but  could  the  argument  of  the 
Book  of  Job  have  proceeded  as  it  does,  had  any  considerable 
section  of  the  author's  fellow-countrymen  held  the  belief  expressed 
in  Is  26^^,  which  gives  no  indication  whatever  of  being  a  mere 
idiosyncrasy  of  the  writer  ?  But  to  say  that  a  work  is  later  than 
Job  is  to  fix  it  by  reference  to  a  book  whose  date  is  itself  disputed, 
though  few  now  maintain  that  it  is  earlier  than  the  exile.  It  is 
otherwise  with  Daniel ;  and  the  question  arises,  was  Is  26^^ 
written  even  as  much  as  a  century  and  a  half  earlier  than  Dn 
12^,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  age  of  Alexander  the  Great,  to  which 
many  have  referred  it  ?  Possibly ;  but  failing  conclusive  argu- 
ments from  other  data  to  the  contrary,  the  nearer  any  theory 
brings  this  part  at  least  of  the  whole  to  the  Maccabaean  period, 
the  more  likely  is  it  to  approach  the  truth.  Not  less  remarkable 
is  the  prediction  of  the  abolition  of  death  (25^) ;  and  the 
earliest  close  analogy  that  we  find  in  Jewish  literature  to  the 
imprisonment  of  the  heavenly  host  {24^2)  is  again  to  be  found  in 
the  Book  of  Enoch.  Other  ideas  demand,  or  find  their  most 
natural  explanation,  if  we  admit  a  post-exilic  origin  for  chs. 
24-27:  27^  may  contain  ancient  mythology,  but  it  is  probably 
late  Jewish  thought ;  but,  not  to  repeat  here  what  is  said  below, 
it  must  suffice  to  refer  to  the  notes  on  Yahweh's  visible 
enthronement  in  §ion  (2423),  the  conception  of  the  nations  as 
violators  of  the  eternal  covenant  (24^,  cp.  v. 20),  the  echo  or 
development  of  the  Deutero-Isaiah's  universalism  in  25^^-,  the 
idea  of  the  great  trumpet  that  is  to  summon  the  elect  (27^^),  and 
of  the  Jews  as  a  righteous  nation,  loyal  to  Yahweh  (262-  ''^-  ^^  •  ct. 
2y2-6  ^ith  5^'"^),  with  perhaps  a  section  of  wicked  members  (26^, 
cp.  Dn  12^).  See  also  Che.,  Introd.  151-153  ;  Smend,  199-202. 
Finally,  a  third  independent  line  of  proof  points  to  the  con- 
clusion that  24-27  is  post-exilic:  the  style  and  language  may  not, 
indeed,  be  late  post-exilic,  yet  they  are  certainly  post-exilic.  The 
style  in  brief  is  that  of  reproductive  prophecy  or  apocalypse : 


xxiv.-xxvii.  401 

apart  from  passages  where  the  text  is  corrupt,  and  these  are 
numerous,  the  style  is  fluent ;  it  is  that  of  a  writer  whose  mind  is 
retentive  of,  even  saturated  with,  earlier  prophetic  writings,  includ- 
ing, but  by  no  means  confined  to,  those  of  Isaiah.  This  may  be 
safely  said,  even  though  in  individual  cases  it  may  be  open  to 
question,  whether  this  writer  or  another  later  writer  is  the  borrower. 
Many  of  these  correspondences  are  noted  in  the  commentary  or 
notes  that  follow,  and  they  have  been  collected  together  by 
Smend  (p.  196)  and  Cheyne  {Introd,  147). 

But  along  with  this  reproduction  of  the  words  and  phrases  of 
earlier  and  later  writers,  there  are  considerable  peculiarities  of 
vocabulary,  and  one  or  two  of  syntax :  and,  though  the  lists  of 
Smend  (pp.  196-198)  and  Che.  (pp.  148  f.)  contain  some  peculi- 
arities that  may  be  merely  due  to  textual  corruption,  the  evidence 
of  peculiarity  is  too  extensive  to  be  greatly  affected  by  one  or 
two  words  more  or  less.  Moreover,  the  combination  of  peculi- 
arities is  such  as  we  should  find,  not  in  any  pre-exilic  writer,  but 
rather  in  an  author  writing  ±400  b.c.  If  Is  24-27  were  much 
later  than  400  B.C.  (cp.  p.  400),  we  should  expect  certain  features 
(see  p.  464)  which  do  not  appear  there ;  but  the  absence  of  these 
does  not,  perhaps,  render  such  a  later  date  impossible  (cp. 
p.  465).     See,  further,  below,  pp.  463-472. 

A  striking  characteristic  of  this  section,  not  necessarily 
indicative  of  date,  but  rightly  claimed  as  constituting  a  dis- 
similarity to  the  style  of  Isaiah,  is  the  constant  use  of  paronomasia 
and,  in  272-*  and  occasionally  elsewhere,  of  rhyme.  Isaiah, 
indeed,  makes  use  of  paronomasia  to  emphasise  an  important 
saying  (cp.  i^^  5'^  7®) ;  but,  though  such  a  use  may  be  found  in 
24^^^*,  for  the  most  part  paronomasia  with  this  writer  is  rather  a 
mere,  though  sometimes  an  effective,  ornament  of  style. 

Chs.  24-27  are,  then,  a  work  of  the  post-exilic  period.  But 
are  they  a  unity?  Did  the  author,  saturated  as  he  certainly 
is  with  older  literature,  borrow  in  bulk  from  now  lost  earlier 
prophecies,  say  from  Isaiah  in  27^- ^^f.^  from  a  7th  cent,  prophecy 
in  25^-^(^^^-^(so  Ew.)?  It  is  a  reasonable  question  to  ask,  but  the 
attempts  to  analyse  these  chapters  so  as  to  recover  any  such 
Isaianic  or  pre-exilic  basis  have  not  been  successful :  see  p.  399 
on  27^2^-.  Or  has  the  main  work  with  which  we  have  to  do  here 
been  enlarged  by  later  interpolations  ?  One  thing  is  clear  even 
VOL.   I. — 26 


I 


402  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


on  the  surface :  the  entire  section  is  not  of  one  character ;  it  is 
for  the  most  part  a  prophecy  of  a  world-judgment  and  the  New 
Age  which  is  to  follow ;  but  the  prophecy  is  interrupted  at  several 
points  by  the  introduction  of  songs  :  see  2^^-^'  ^-12)  26^-1^  272-5(6). 
Three  theories  are  possible :  the  songs  may  be  earlier  than  the 
prophecy,  originally  written  for  it,  or  subsequently  inserted.  But 
in  any  case  they  are  not  separated  widely  in  time,  for  the  ideas, 
the  circumstances  reflected,  and  the  style  of  songs  and  prophecy 
alike  point  to  a  late  post-exilic  period. 

It  does  not  seem  impossible,  or  indeed  altogether  improbable, 
that  the  writer  of  the  prophecy  should  himself  insert  songs, 
whether  written  by  himself  or  another,  to  be  sung  by  the  citizens 
of  the  new  and  glorious  kingdom  of  Yahweh ;  and  if,  as  may 
well  have  been  the  case,  he  knew  Is  1-12,  he  would  have  had  a 
model  in  the  songs  of  Is  12.  But  the  first  song,  25^*^,  interrupts 
the  closely  connected  passages  24^^  (the  accession  of  Yahweh) 
and  25^'^  (His  coronation-feast)  in  a  manner  which  may  more 
naturally  be  attributed  to  the  necessities  of  an  editor  who  had 
songs  to  insert,  than  to  the  free  choice  of  the  original  writer,  who 
might  have  arranged  his  material  differently.  The  connection 
of  25^-8,  especially  v.^^  and  26^^-2 'j^  also  seems  to  suffer  from  the 
intervention  of  25^-26^*,  though  less  seriously  and  less  obviously. 
The  song  272-6,  and  the  following  verses  2'j'^'^^  seem  at  best 
loosely  connected  with,  but  the  last  verses  2  7^2f.  may  complete,  the 
prophecy  contained  in  24.  25^-8  2  6^0-2  7 1.  In  any  case  the  theme 
of  the  prophecy  can  be  best  understood  by  reading  it  in  the  first 
instance  without  the  songs ;  consequently  the  translation  of  24. 
256-8  26^^-27^  and  27^2. 13  is  given  consecutively  with  merely  an  in- 
dication of  the  points  where  the  songs  come  in.  The  translations  of 
the  songs  will  be  found  at  their  proper  places  in  the  commentary. 

Modern  analytical  theories  of  24-27  start  with  Du.,  though  Ew.  had 
already  observed  the  close  connection  of  24^  and  25^-^,  and  re-established  it 
outwardly  by  transposing  25^*-^^  and  25^-".  Du.  analysed  the  chapters  into 
{a)  prophecy,  24.  25^-^  26^-2^'^  27'^',  but  with  the  remark  that  the  last  section 
is  full  of  difficulties,  and  that  27^2'-  would  attach  best  to  27^ ;  {d)  songs  or 
other  added  matter.  Cheyne  and  Marti  have  adopted  Du.'s  analysis,  except 
that  they  both  definitely  reject  from  the  original  and  prophetic  groundwork 
27'-". 

Earlier,  Koppe  had  analysed  the  section  into  three  independent  pieces — 
24I-1*  24^^-28  25.  26.  27I  272-*  27'-"  2712.  u  The  improvement  in  the  later 
analysis  will  be  seen  to  be  largely  due  to  Ew.'s  detection  of  the  connection  of 
24^  and  26^-8. 


xxiv.-xxvii.  403 

« 

It  remains  to  notice  briefly  some  of  the  theories  that  have  been 
held  with  regard  to  the  particular  historical  circumstances  which 
called  forth  this  prophecy  as  a  whole,  or  any  of  its  various  parts. 
None  of  them  can  be  regarded  as  established. 

So  long  as  the  Isaianic  authorship  of  24-27  was  unquestioned,  the  threatened 
city  was  obviously  Nineveh  :  it  was,  of  course,  not  easy  to  connect  the  pro- 
phecy with  the  known  circumstances  of  the  8th  cent.,  and  Michaelis  is  cited 
by  Ges.  for  the  significant  confession  that  he  was  utterly  unable  to  explain 
the  historical  relation  of  the  prophecy.  Hitz.  placed  the  prophecy  in  the  7th 
cent,  just  before  the  fall  of  Nineveh  {c.  607). 

Ges.  identified  the  threatened  city  with  Babylon,  which  seemed  to  him 
clearly  indicated,  though,  like  Rome  in  Rev.,  not  mentioned  by  name.  He 
therefore  saw  in  chs.  24-27  a  work  contemporary  with  chs.  I3f.,  21.  40-66, 
as  Eichhorn  and  de  Wette  had  done  before  him. 

Ew.,  who  held  that  the  author  of  these  chapters  incorporated  older 
material  (see  above),  and  conjectured  that  it  may  have  been  the  author  of 
ch.  12  who  wrote  and  added  to  chs.  1-23  the  present  section  of  the  book, 
sought  an  occasion  for  this  prophecy  in  Cambyses'  preparations  for  his 
Egyptian  campaign  (525  B.C.),  which  must  have  appeared  peculiarly 
threatening  to  Palestine  (though,  as  we  now  know  from  the  Elephantine 
papyri,  he  treated  Jewish  settlers  in  Egypt  with  consideration) :  25*"°'  ^^  26"* 
2710*.  refer  as  already  past  to  the  overthrow  of  Babylon  by  Darius  Hystaspes, 
and  26^**^'  to  Jerusalem  already  re-established,  though  in  poverty,  after  the 
'Exile.  Di.,  Del.,  Dr.  {LOT  210 f.)  agree  that  it  belongs  to  the  early 
post-exilic  period  ;  Di.  urges  that  26^*"^*  was  written  within  60  or  70  years  of 
the  restoration  of  Jerusalem,  and  27^*  *  not  too  long  after  the  pre-exilic  period  ; 
Dr.  suggests  as  a  possibility  that  it  may  have  been  written  as  an  encourage- 
ment when  the  calamity  referred  to  in  Neh  i*  was  impending.  Oo.  places  it 
in  the  5th  cent.,  but  before  the  governorship  of  Nehemiah,  when  Moab 
became  Nabataean. 

Many  have  referred  the  entire  section  to  the  4th  cent.  :  so,  e.g.^  Kue. 
Onderzoek^,  ii.  99;  Vatke,  in  his  posthumous  Einleitung\  Kirkpatrick, 
Doctrine  of  the  Prophets^  p.  475.  In  favour  of  this  date,  see  especially  the 
elaborate  and  valuable  discussions  of  Smend  and  Cheyne  {Introd.  145-162) ; 
Kennett  (Comp.  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah^  pp.  35  f.)  argues  against  it.  Smend 
treats  the  section  as  a  unity,  and  interprets  the  whole  in  the  light  of  25^''"^2  . 
Moab,  the  one  people  openly  referred  to,  with  the  exception  of  the  Jews 
themselves  and  in  27^2f.  Assyria  and  Egypt,  is  the  special  object  of  the 
writer's  hostility,  and  some  city,  not  to  be  determined,  of  Moab  is  the  "city 
set  on  high,"  etc.  Cheyne  argued  that  the  "Apocalypse  "  (25*"^  26^"-27'  27^2'* ) 
was  called  forth  by  the  calamities  produced  by  Artaxerxes  Ochus  (359-338 
B.C.),  that  27'*^"  was  written  twenty  years  later,  after  this  '*  smiter  "  had  been 
smitten  (27'^)  by  Alexander  at  Issus  (333  B.C.),  26'"^*  a  little  later  (332  B.C.), 
when  Alexander  had  spared  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  same  year  25^*^*  25^'^^  27^". 
Later,  Cheyne  tacitly  withdrew  this  theory  in  favour  of  the  supposition  that 
in  their  original  form  the  component  parts  of  this  "  singular  literary  mosaic" 


404  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

had  a  Jerahmeelite  background,  and  that  their  present  form  is  due  to  a  "  late  " 
redactor,  who  is  responsible,  among  other  things,  for  introducing  the  idea  of 
the  abolition  of  death  {Crit.  Bibl.  30-33). 

Vatke  in  1835  {Bibl.  Theologie,  p.  550)  anticipated  Du.,  Marti,  and 
Kennett  in  referring  this  prophecy  to  the  2nd  cent.,  and,  in  particular  to  the 
Maccabaean  period.  Du.  and  Marti  refer  the  several  sections,  into  which 
they  analyse  the  whole,  as  follows:  (i)  the  main  apocalypse,  to  a  date 
shortly  after  128  B.C. — the  year  in  which  Antiochus  vii.  Sidetes,  who  had 
conquered  Jerusalem,  which  was  still  feeling  the  effects  (24'"^^),  was  defeated 
by  the  Parthians,  the  plunderers  of  24^^"^*  and  one  of  the  three  powers 
symbolised  in  27^ ;  (2)  25^"'*  celebrates  the  destruction  of  Samaria  in  107  B.C., 
and  26^"^  praises  God  for  the  same  event,  and  27^*^  is  of  the  same  period ; 
(3)  25''^^  a  song  of  triumph  over  the  defeat  of  Moab  at  the  end  of  the  reign  of 
John  Hyrcanus,  or  the  beginning  of  that  of  Alexander  Jannaeus ;  27^"" 
between  128  and  iii  B.C. 

The  foregoing  summary  may  serve  to  emphasise  the 
indefiniteness  of  the  historical  allusions;  and  in  conclusion  it 
may  be  added  that  some  writers  consider  the  apparently  definite 
references  to  be  typical  rather  than  literal.  Dr.,  for  example, 
who  recalls  the  fact  that  Babylon  continued  to  be  an  important 
city  down  to  332,  thinks  that  Babylon  is  the  unnamed  city,  yet 
not  the  literal  Babylon  :  "  Babylon  becomes  a  type  of  the  powers 
of  heathenism,  which  the  prophet  imagines  as  entrenched  behind' 
the  walls  of  a  great  city,  strongly  fortified,  but  destined  in  God's 
good  time  to  be  overthrown"  (LOT  210;  cp.  Baudissin,  p. 
374);  and  Cheyne  asks,  "Why  should  not  *Moab'  be  an 
imaginative  type  of  all  the  proud   enemies  of  Israel"  {Introd. 

159). 

But  whether  the  "  city  "  and  Moab  be  literally  or  typically 
intended,  the  particular  historical  circumstances  remain  evasive : 
the  general  political  and  social  conditions,  as  well  as  the  language 
and  style,  compel  us  to  refer  the  prophecy  to  the  post-exilic 
period :  the  ideas  should  warn  us  that  any  theory  which  refers 
the  prophecy  to  an  early  part  of  that  period  is  hazardous. 

XXIV.,  XXV.  6-8,  XXVI.  20,  21,  XXVII.  i,  12,  13. 

An  Apocalyptic  Poem. 

There  are  in  places  conspicuous  rhythmical  irregularities,  or  great  corrup- 
tion of  the  text  [e.g.  24^"*  ^""  ^)  ;  and  27^^^  reads  almost  like  prose :  but  for 
the  most  part  parallelism  is  maintained  and  a  balanced  rhythm.  There  is  no 
trace  of  the  echoing  rhythm  3  :  2,  though  occasionally  in  the  present  text  the 
lines  of  the  distichs  are  in  the  rhythmical  relation  4  :  3  ;  see  24^*'*  °  26^, 


xxiv.-xxvii.,  XXIV.  1-8  405 

The  most  frequent  rhythm  is  3  :  3  (rarely  3  13:3);  this  clearly  appears 
in  24*»-  »>•  8-"-  ^*^  ^  "•  »*""•  ^  *••  21b.  e  257  2621=-  «,  possibly  also  in  24»»-  »» (ffi), 
24*  (neglecting  jrVy  ;  cp.  n.  on  'in,  p.  89  top),  24^**- »»  (where  ffi  omits  yi3,  and 
.munm  may  be  read  as  two  accents),  24'^-  ••  (see  phil.  n.).  The  rhythm 
4  :  4  (or  4  :  4  :  4)  appears  in  25''''  "  262''' ''  27*  and  may  possibly  be  traced  in 
24I  (see  phil.  n.),  24^'  ^'  "•  (see  n.)»  24^*  (neglecting  n'm),  2$^^^  «.  Rarer  are 
the  rhythms  2  :  2  (24*''-**-  "•• '')  and  2:2:2  (24',  but  see  phil.  n.  on  v.*) ;  and 
6  :  6  (2712b.  oj, 

^  Behold,    Yahweh   is   emptying   the   earth   and    making    it 

bare; 
And  he  will  distort  its  surface,  and  disperse  its  inhabit- 
ants. 
2  And  so  the  priest  shall  be  like  the  people, 
The  master  like  the  slave, 

The  mistress  like  the  maid, 
The  seller  like  the  buyer. 

The  borrower  like  the  lender, 
He    of   whom    interest    is    taken   like    him     that    taketh 

interest. 

*  The  earth  shall  be  wholly  emptied. 

And  *the  world*  shall  be  wholly  despoiled, 
For  Yahweh  hath  spoken  this  word. 

*  The  earth  hath  mourned,  withered. 

The  world  hath  latiguished,  withered; 

•  •••••• 

*  And    the    earth    hath    become    polluted    under    its    in- 
habitants. 
Because  they  have  transgressed  laws,  overstepped  statutes, 
Broken  the  eternal  covenant. 

*  Therefore  a  curse  hath  devoured  the  earth, 

And  they  that  dwell  therein  have  paid  penalty; 
Therefore  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  scorched, 
And  few  shall  be  the  mortals  that  are  left. 
^  The  must  hath  mourned. 
The  vine  hath  languished. 
All  the  joyous-hearted  have  sighed. 

*  The  merriment  of  the  timbrels  is  still, 

The  noise  of  the  jubilant  has  ceased, 
The  merriment  of  the  lute  is  still. 


406  COMMENTARY  ON    ISAIAH 

^  With  song  they  shall  not  drink  wine  (any  more), 
Bitter  shall  strong  drink  be  to  them  that  drink  it. 

'^^  The  City  of  Chaos  is  broken, 

Every  house  is  closed  so  that  it  cannot  be  entered. 

^^  There  is  outcry  in  the  streets  for  the  wine, 
All  joy  has  reached  its  eventide, 

The  merriment  of  the  earth  is  exiled. 

12  Desolation  is  left  in  the  city. 

And  the  gate  shall  be  crushed  into  ruins  (?). 

^^  For  thus  shall  it  be  in  the  midst  of  the  earth, 

Among  the  peoples  as  when  olives  are  struck  off, 
As  at  the  gleaning  when  the  vintage  is  complete. 

1*  T/iey  shall  lift  up  their  voice, 

They  shall  ring  out  their  joy  in  the  majesty  of  Yahweh, 
They  have  given  a  shrill  cry  from  the  sea  (?). 
15  Therefore  in  the  .  .  .  glorify  Yahweh, 

In  the  isles  of  the  sea  the  name  of  Yahweh,  the  God 

of  Israel. 
From  the  extremity  of  the  earth  we  have  heard  songs, 
"  Beauty  for  the  righteous !  a  a  a  Woe  to  a  the  dis- 
loyal" A  A 
1*^  Terror  and  pit  and  gin 

Are  upon  thee,  O  (every)  inhabitant  of  the  earth  ! 
18  And  he  that  flees  from  the  sound  of*  the  terror,  shall  fall  into 

the  pit ; 
And   he  that   cometh   up   from  the  midst  of  the  pit,  shall 

be  caught  in  the  gin. 
For  lattices  have  been  opened  in  the  height, 
And  the  foundations  of  the  earth  have  quaked. 
1^  The  earth  has  utterly  broken  asunder. 
The  earth  has  utterly  split, 
The  earth  has  utterly  shaken 

20  The  earth  shall  stagger  like  a  drunkard, 

And  sway  like  a  night-refuge; 
And  its  rebellion  shall  weigh  heavily  on  it. 
And  it  shall  fall,  and  arise  no  more. 

21  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day  Yahweh  will  punish 
The  host  of  the  height  in  the  height, 

And  the  kings  of  the  earth  on  the  earth ; 


XXIV.  9-23,  XXV.  6-8,  XXVI.  20,   21,  XXVII.  i       407 

22  And   they   shall   be   gathered,   as   prisoners   are   gathered, 

into  the  pit. 
And  imprisoned  in  the  prison; 
And  after  many  days  they  shall  be  punished. 
^  And  the  moon  shall  be  abashed. 
And  the  sun  shall  be  ashamed. 
For  Yahweh  of  Hosts  will  have  become  King  in  Moum  §ion, 
And  in  Jerusalem  and  before  his  clders  *  shall  he  show  him- 
self glorious.' 

[25^-5.  A  song :  see  p.  425.] 

25®  And  Yahweh  of  Hosts  will  make  for  all  peoples  in  this  mountain, 
A  feast  of  fat  things,  a  feast  of  wine  on  the  lees. 

Of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of  wine  on  the  lees  well- 
refined  ; 
^  And  he  will  annihilate  in  this  mountain 
The  veil  that  veils  all  the  peoples, 

And  the  web  that  is  woven  over  all  nations; 
*  He  hath  annihilated  death  for  ever ; 
And,  the  Lord  Yahweh  will  wipe  away  tears  from  all  faces, 

And  remove  his  people's  reproach  from  all  the  earth: 
For  'tis  Yahweh  hath  spoken. 

[25* (-12).  A  song:  see  p.  431  f.] 

[26^-1^  A  song :  see  p.  435  f.] 

26^  Go,  my  people,  enter  into  thy  chambers, 
And  shut  thy  doors  about  thee; 
Hide  thyself  for  a  brief  moment, 
Until  Wrath  pass  by. 
21  For  behold  Yahweh  is  coming  forth  from  His  place. 

To  visit   the   iniquity  of  the   inhabitants   of  the   earth 

upon  them  ; 
And  the  earth  shall  reveal  her  blood, 
And  shall  no  more  cover  her  slain. 
27^  In  that  day  Yahweh  shall  visit  (iniquity) 

With  his  fierce  and  great  and  mighty  sword, 
Upon  Leviathan  the  fleeing  serpent, 

And  upon  Leviathan  the  twisted  serpent. 
And  he  shall  slay  the  dragon  that  is  in  the  sea. 


^ 


408  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


[272^-.  A  song:  see  p.  453.] 

^2  And  it  will  come  to  pass  in  that  day, 

Yahweh  will  beat  off  (olives)  from  the  current  (?)  of  the 

River  to  the  Wady  of  Egypt. 
And  ye  shall  be  picked  up  one  by  one,  O  children  of 

Israel. 
1^  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day 

(A  blast)  shall  be  blown  on  a  great  trumpet ; 
And  they  that  were  lost  in  the  land  of  Assyria, 

And  the  outcasts  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  come, 
And  worship  Yahweh 

In  the  holy  mountain  in  Jerusalem. 

XXIV.  1-3.  A  world-judgment  is  imminent— On  two 

points,  which  divided  interpreters  in  the  past,  a  general  agree- 
ment in  the  sense  just  indicated  has  now  been  reached.  The 
object  of  Yahweh's  judgment  is  the  world,*  not  the  northern 
kingdom  of  Israel,!  nor,  at  least  exclusively,  Judah ;  %  the  time 
is  the  immediate  future,§  not  the  past.||  As  to  the  last  point, 
the  part,  with  n^n  normally  denotes  the  immediate  future :  linked 
to  a  preceding  narrative,  it  may,  it  is  true,  particularise  a  scene 
in  the  past  or  an  occurrence  in  the  present;  but  here,  if  the 
reference  was  to  the  past,  the  use  of  this  cstr.  instead  of  the  pf 
at  the  outset  would  be  motiveless  (Dr.  135  (3)  with  Obs.  i) ; 
that  the  normal  future  force  is  here  intended  is  proved  by  the 
tenses  in  vv.^^*  (n^ni,  pnn),  and  the  concluding  formula  in  v.^^ 
There  is  more  reason  to  consider  the  possibility  of  X^'^'^  having 
the  limited  sense  of  land  (RV  marg.)  of  Palestine,  rather  than 
earth  (AV,  RV  text) ;  for  if  the  whole  earth  is  emptied^  whither 
are  the  inhabitants  dispersed"^  Moreover,  in  v.^  the  author  may 
well  seem  to  be  describing  the  country  of  Judah,  where  (after 
the  Exile)  the  priest  was  the  leading  feature ;  and  v.*  may  seem 
to  refer  to  the  violation  of  the  law  revealed  to  Israel.  But  the 
first  point  must  be  attributed  to  a  certain  vagueness  in  the  use 
of  figures,  which  the  writer  multiplies ;  in  v.^  he  thinks  of  the 
society,  and  in  vv.'''-^^  of  the  economic  conditions,  of  the  world 

*  Ki.,  Vitr.,  Del.,  Di.,  Du.,  Cheyne,  Marti. 
\  Rashi  and  many  interpreters  referred  to  by  Ki. 

X  Ges.  :  cp.  Smend  (p.  164),  "the  whole  world,  but  in  the  first  instance 
Judah."  §  So  already  ?:i.  II  Ges. 

I 


XXVII.  12,  13;  XXIV.  1-3  409 

at  large  in  the  light  of  his  own ;  and  v.*  has  another  meaning ; 
see  n.  there.  That  the  earth  is  intended,  is  shown  by  the  use  of 
the  parallel  and  unambiguous  *  ^an,  worlds  in  v.*,  and  the  virtual 
equation  of  X^)lsT\  and  peoples  in  v.^^ — not  to  speak  of  the  inap- 
propriateness  of  the  wide  and  general  eschatological  outlook  to 
the  denunciation  of  a  single  land;  cp.  especially  2^^-^. 

I.  Yahweh  is  about  to  empty  the  world  of  its  inhabitants 
and  transform  its  very  appearance. —  Yahweh  is  emptying  the 
earth"]  "first  by  means  of  plunderers,  then  by  means  of  the 
natural  phenomena  that  accompany  the  world-judgment"  (Du.); 
cp.  VV.8- 1^^'.  The  vb.  pp3  occurs  also  (in  Kal,  Niph.,  or  Pilel)  in 
V.8  193,  Jer  19*^  51^,  Nah  2^  (an  interpolation),  and  its  meaning 
is  most  safely  determined  by  these  occurrences ;  it  is  supposed 
to  derive  its  meaning  to  empty  from  the  gurgling  noise  made  by 

a  bottle  when  being  emptied  (cp.  j:;,  to  make  a  gurgling  noise). — 
And  making  it  dare]  the  word  ph^  (Nah  2"!  Pual)  is  very  rare 
in  Heb. ;  cp.  djXit  a  desert  land^  destitute  of  vegetable  produce 
and  water,  or  of  human  beings^  inhabited  by  none  but  Jinn 
(Lane).  With  the  paronomasia  bokek  .  .  .  ubol^kah,  cp.  bul^ah 
um^bukah  um®bullalj:ah,  Nah  2^^. — And  he  will  distort  its  surface] 
making  it  unrecognisable  by  destroying  places,  plantations,  and 
the  like  upon  it  (cp.  Rev  6^*^),  is  Di.'s  explanation.  Un- 
certain; see  phil.  n.  EV  "and  turneth  it  upside  down"  is 
too  strong. — And  disperse  its  inhabitants]  cp.  Gn  1 1*. — 2.  All 
classes  alike  will  be  affected  by  the  coming  judgment:  rank, 
mastery,  wealth  will  be  of  no  avail :  the  point  is  not  exactly 
the  same  as  in  3^-*  (Du.,  Marti).  Living  under  the  post-exilic 
hierocracy,  the  writer  takes  the  priest  as  typical  of  rank  (cp. 
Ezr  10^),  and  the  (common)  people  as  the  antithesis.  In  Hos 
4*  the  priest  is  introduced  as  the  one  who  has  had,  and  ought 
to  have  imparted,  knowledge  of  Yahweh  to  the  people  of  all 
classes. — The  seller  .  .  .  the  buyer]  Ezk  7^2, — The  borrower ,  .  .  the 
lender  ]  Pr  22^^. — He  of  whom  interest  is  taken,  etc.]  for  ntJ'3,  cp. 
Dt  24",  I  S  222,  Jer  15^°.— 3.  The  world]  see  ffi^ ;  Jj^  omits. 
The  utter  plundering  of  the  earth  is  certain,  for  Yahweh  hath 
spoken  (i^o  n.)  this  word\  the  addition  of  the  obj.  in  this  formula 
is  peculiar  to  this  passage ;  yet  cp.  58^*  (5r. 

*  Smend  (p.  166),  however,  still  asserts  that  ^an  may  have  a  sense  corre- 
sponding to  the  limited  sense  of  fiK. 


410  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

I,  .TJfl  mjn  npSini]  one  vb.  instead  of  two,  and  that  governing  .tjs,  would 
make  v.^  a  good  4  :  4  distich.  Perhaps  the  text  originally  ran  n'JS  p"?3i,  and 
making  a  desert  of  its  surface ;  ct.   naian  Sin  '3D  iK'?m,  27^.     my,  Piel,  in 

La  3^t  evidently  has  the  fundamental  meaning  of  the  root  rw]),  t^*^,  to  bend^ 
twist ;  and  possibly  the  Hebrews  thought  of  a  ruin  as  a  kind  of  distortion  of 
the  face  of  the  earth  into  shapelessness  ;  cp.  'y,  Mic  3^^ ;  njy,  Ezk  21^^. 
Perhaps  'b  '33  niy  might  mean  to  make  a  person  look  sad,  grieved  (Hitz.); 
but  so  strong  a  personification  of  the  earth  would  be  unlikely  here,  ffi  koX 
dvaKa\ij\l/€i.  might  point  to  n'?3i,  which  would  be  no  satisfactory  alternative 
to  1^,  scarcely  to  .Tiyi  (Co.). — 2.  nmnaa]  instead  of  nmn:?,  to  maintain  the 
assonance  with  the  other  eleven  words  beginning  with  3;  G-K  1272, — xb'3] 
many  MSS  rim ;  cp.  rimi. — ^3.  nnn  .  .  .  pun]  instead  of  1311,  p?n,  to  gain 
an  assonance  with  the  infin.  abs.;  cp.  v.^  n. — nnn]  (St  +  riyij,  perhaps  =  ^3n, 
as  in  26^^— '3]  ffi  +  'fl  ;  cp.  25^  58^^ ;  in  40"  |^  has,  and  (Sr  has  not,  'S. 

4-13.  The  world  suffers  for  its  sins,  and  "  the  city  of 
Chaos  "  falls  into  ruins. — It  is  disputed  whether  vv.*-i2  are, 
like  vv.^'3-  ^^,  prophetic  of  the  future  (Smend),  or  descriptive  "  of 
the  tokens  in  the  present  of  the  coming  world  catastrophe" 
(Marti).  The  pf.  tenses  which  predominate  in  vv.^'^^  p^ay,  of 
course,  be  descriptive  of  the  actual  past  or  present,  or  they  may 
be  prophetic  pf. ;  and  again  the  impf.  tenses  or  pf.  with  waw 
in  vv.^***  *•  ^2b  may  be  vivid  touches  in  a  description  of  the  past 
(Dr.  §  36),  in  which  case  v.^  may  well  describe  recurrent  action 
in  the  present,  or  they  may  be  simple  futures  interchanging  with 
the  prophetic  perfects  (Dr.  §  14).  But  the  formula  at  the  end  of 
v.^  possibly  indicates,  as  Di.  argues,  that  the  prophetic  announce- 
ment is  for  the  moment  concluded,  and  gives  place  to  description 


m  vv. 


4-12 


4.  The  whole  world  mourns  and  loses  vital  power.  i^K,  fo 
mourn,  often  appears  joined,  or  in  parallelism,  with  vbs.  such  as 
hboii,  ti^'3%  denoting  loss  of  power  or  vitality;  cp.  e.g.  19^  33^, 
Hos  4^,  Jer  12*.  733,  ^0  wither,  occurs  most  frequently  of 
flowers  or  leaves  withering  and  falling  {e.g.  i^^  28^  34*  40^^),  and 
from  the  root  is  derived  n733  {a)  lifeless  {body),  corpse  \  tTO"^  is 
used  of  cessation  of  fertility  in  women  (i  S  2^,  Jer  15^),  field 
(16^),  trees  (v.^  Jl  i^^)^ — The  highest  of  the  people  of  the  earth 
languish']  lit.  the  height,  etc. ;  cp.  glory  for  glorious  ones,  5^^  n. 
16^*.  A  very  slight  and  easy  emendation  would  give  The 
height  {i.e.  heaven)  and  the  earth  together  languish]  but  if  the 
writer  wished  to  introduce  the  coming  judgment  on  "the  host 
of  the  height "  (v.^i)  here,  he  would  scarcely  have  devoted  two 


XXIV.  r-3,  4-13  411 

and  a  half  lines  to  earth  and  only  a  half  to  heaven ;  moreover, 
in  what  immediately  follows  heaven  passes  out  of  consideration. 
Even  the  specification  of  a  particular  class  of  the  inhabitants 
of  earth  seems  rather  out  of  place  (cp.  v.*).  Possibly  the  line 
is  a  gloss  explaining  what  "  earth  "  means  and  includes ;  in  that 
case  v.*  was  originally  a  distich ;  or,  perhaps,  v.**,  now  corrupt, 
was  the  first  line  of  a  balanced  distich  (4  :  4),  of  which  v.**  was 
the  second. — 5.  The  cause  of  all  this  is  the  pollution  of  the 
earth  by  the  transgressions  of  its  inhabitants,  more  especially 
by  bloodshed;  cp.  26^1.  The  idea  of  the  profanation  of  the 
land  of  Israel  by  the  conduct  of  its  inhabitants  in  shedding  of 
blood,  committing  adultery,  or  practising  idolatry,  is  found  in 
Nu  3533,  Ps  io638,  Jer  3^;  cp.  Dt  21I-9,  Gn  4iof.,  Job  16".  But 
the  shedding  of  blood  was  one  of  the  things  forbidden  not  only 
to  the  Jews,  but  to  the  whole  of  the  descendants  of  Noah,  by 
the  eternal  covenant^  i.e.  the  covenant  made  after  the  Flood 
between  God  and  "all  flesh  which  is  upon  the  earth"  (Gn 
^1-17  p).  Among  the  laws  or  instructions  and  statutes  (for  the 
phraseology,  cp.  the  quotation  from  the  Sibylline  books  given 
below  in  v.^o),  which  men  at  large  have  trangressed,  the  writer 
may  also  have  had  in  view  such  practices  as  are  alluded  to  in 
Zee  ^^  a  passage  which  also  shows  the  influence  of  P ;  cp.  also 
Rev  Q^of*.  In  view  of  73n  in  v."*,  y^'^rs  here  cannot  be  limited 
to  the  land  of  Canaan,  nor  the  transgressors  of  the  laws  to  the 
Jews  (cp.  above),  nor  the  eternal  covenant  to  that  of  Sinai 
(Smend,  p.  165).  The  nations,  as  transgressors  of  statutes  im 
posed  by  God,  are  termed  "all  the  nations  that  forget  God" 
in  Ps  9^8. 

6-9.  Consequences  of  the  corruption  of  men — a  curse  de- 
vours the  earth,  men  are  reduced  to  a  few  in  number,  joy 
departs. — 6.  A  curse  hath  devoured  the  eartK\  cp.  Zee  s^'- :  such 
bold  personifications  in  describing  the  working  of  a  curse  came 
easily  to  those  who  attributed  objective  existence  to  solemnly 
uttered  words  (cp.  Numbers^  p.  327  f.). — Paid  penalty]  suffered 
punishment  for  their  guilt:  for  this  sense  of  DC'N,  cp.  e.g. 
Ps  34^^^-,  Jer  2^. — The  inhabitants  .  .  .  are  scorched]  Rev  16* 
records  that,  as  a  result  of  the  pouring  out  of  the  fourth  vial 
of  God's  wrath,  "men  were  scorched  with  great  heat."  The 
vb.  is  also  used  of  "  burning  with  fever " ;  but  where  this  sense 
is  intended,  the  parts  aff"ected  are  specified  (Job  so^O;  Niph. 


412  COMMENTARY  ON   IS  AT  AH 

Ps  102*).  The  sudden  introduction  of  so  particular  a  punish- 
ment, which  is  not  decisively  suggested  by  the  vb.  devour  (cp. 
^24  ioi7)  in  the  previous  line,  is  a  little  curious;  hence  some 
emend  V\n  to  "ipin,  have  ceased  {to  be)  -,  unfortunately,  this  would 
make  the  next  line  anti-climactic  (see  phil.  n.). 

7-9.  No  more  grapes,  no  more  merry  feasts  with  wine, 
music,  and  song.  The  writer  has  in  mind  5^2- ^*,  Jl  i^o.  12  (note 
also  injW,  v.'';  differently  used  in  Jl  i^^). — The  must  mourns'] 
here  KH^n  seems  used  of  the  juice  in  the  grape  (cp.  65^)  which 
"  mourns  "  or  dries  up. — 8.  The  jubilant]  careless  merrymakers  : 
cp.  22^,  Zeph  2^5  for  the  force  oi  jubilant  (yhv)' 

10-12.  The  destruction  of  a  city  now  becomes  the  theme, 
the  passing  away  of  its  glad  throngs,  the  broken  gates,  the  desola- 
tion that  remains. — The  city  of  Chaos]  the  city  is  probably  the 
capital  of  the  world-empire  under  which  the  writer  lived — whether 
Nineveh,  Babylon,  Susa  depends  on  the  age  in  which  he  lived. 
Unfortunately  the  writer  (or  some  subsequent  editor)  has  chosen 
a  term  and  description  so  ambiguous  that  the  v.  cannot  form  the 
starting-point  in  a  discussion  of  the  origin  of  his  work.  It  is  not 
even  admitted  by  all  that  he  has  a  single  particular  city  in  view ; 
the  noun,  it  is  said,  is  collective  {e.g.  BDB,  s.v.  nnp),  and  <& 
renders  every  city.  V.^^  (Joes  not  favour  this  view,  and  still  less 
the  view  that  "city"  means  two  particular  cities,  Sidon  and 
Jerusalem  (Che.  Introd.  155).  Again,  as  to  the  significance  of 
ChaoSy  there  is  doubt :  the  most  appropriate  and  probable  kind 
of  phrase  (cp.  Jer  49^^)  is  obtained  by  taking  inn,  chaos^  in  the 
sense  which  it  bears  in  i  S  1221,  cp.  Is  412*;  the  city  of  Chaos 
is  the  city  of  idolatry,  of  sham  gods,  in  contrast  to  Jerusalem, 
"  the  city  of  God  " ;  it  is  essentially,  as  the  capital  of  the  world- 
empire  which  is  in  rebellion  against  God,  the  embodiment  of 
those  powers  which  claim  to  be  somewhat,  but  are  truly  unreal 
(cp.  vv.21'2^).  Much  less  natural  is  the  alternative  view  which 
regards  inn,  chaos^  as  used  prophetically — the  city  (or  cities) 
which  will  become  a  chaos  (cp.  34^^)  when  it  has  been  destroyed. 
In  this  latter  sense  the  phrase  is  almost  necessarily  taken  by 
those  {e.g.  Du.,  Marti)  who  identify  the  city,  not  with  the  capital 
of  the  world-empire,  but  with  Jerusalem !  It  was  natural  for 
Ges.  to  take  this  view,  who  limited  the  scope  of  judgment  to 
Palestine,  but  it  is  by  no  means  natural  to  take  it  so  in  a  descrip- 
tion of  a  world-judgment  j  for  in  such  a  connection  city  ("i^y, 


/ 

XXIV.  7-13  413 

n^ip)  is  by  no  means  as  obviously  Jerusalem  as  iroXts  was  Athens 
to  Greece  and  urbs  Rome  to  the  Romans ;  still  less  would  nnp 
inn  immediately  suggest,  even  if  it  could  without  much  explana- 
tion ever  suggest,  Jerusalem. — Is  broken]  cp.  "  Babylon  is  fallen 
and  broken,"  Jer  51^,  like  a  cup  (Jb.  vj).  Possibly  the  writer 
has  this  v.  in  mind,  for  the  use  of  IDK^:  of  the  destruction  of 
a  city  is  uncommon.  It  refers,  here  at  least,  perhaps,  to  the 
breaking  down  of  the  walls,  ^^\  The  city  is  open  to  the  assail- 
ants, and,  therefore,  the  citizens  shut  up  their  houses  against 
intrusion  (cp.  262<^) ;  this  seems  the  best  interpretation  of  the 
line,  though  it  forms  a  curious  introduction  to  v.^^ ;  if  every  one 
is  shut  up  in  his  house,  whence  ^^*  (cp.  Jl  i*)  the  lamentation 
tn  the  streets  of  the  city  (v.^^)  for  the  loss  of  wine  (cp.  32^2^? 
It  is  very  doubtful  whether  n^D  will  bear  the  meaning  required 
by  an  alternative  interpretation — every  house  is  so  blocked  with 
fallen  masonry  and  the  like,  that  no  one,  even  of  the  owners  of 
the  houses,  can  get  in ;  this  would  leave  v.^^*  a  little  less  out 
of  place,  though  Ges.  pertinently  remarks,  "  In  a  city  destroyed 
by  a  barbaric  foe,  in  which  thousands  had  perished,  there  might, 
one  would  have  supposed,  have  been  more  important  things 
to  bemoan  than  that  there  was  no  wine."  Possibly,  however, 
11*  (which  at  present,  whether  regarded  as  a  monostich  or  as  con- 
stituting with  ii^**'  a  tristich,  interrupts  the  sequence  of  distichs) 
is  out  of  place,  and  once  stood  in  another  connection  in  which 
mvin  had  the  meaning  of  {country)  outside  {the  city)^  open  country^ 
as  in  Job  510,  Ps  144I3,  Prov  82«  (?)  2427  (RV  alway  "field(s)"); 
it  may  have  shifted  to  its  present  position  in  the  account  of  the 
city  (vv.^0"^2^  by  one  who  took  the  word  in  the  commoner  sense 
of  streets.  Possibly  it  once  stood  after  '^^  while  '^  formed  a  dis- 
tich with  ^^  now  shifted  out  of  place,  leaving  *^<^  as  another 
distich  (yet  see  phil.  n.  on  v.^). — lib.  All  joy  has  reached  its 
eventide]  the  sun  of  joy  is  set ;  but  the  existence  of  this  fine 
figure  in  the  original  text  is  unfortunately  not  quite  certain ;  the 
vb.  3"iy,  to  becotne  evenings  is  only  paralleled  by  Jg  19^,  where  the 
text  of  f^  is  wrong  1  The  use  of  the  Hiphil  in  i  S  17^^  scarcely 
establishes  the  present  use  of  Kal ;  hence  many  transpose  and 
read  niiy,  has  passed  away. — 12.  Instead  of  gates^  (&  speaks  of 
houses ;  see  phil.  n. — 13.  Whatever  be  the  case  with  vv.  ^'^^^  we 
here  move  again  in  the  sphere  of  prediction  (n''n^) ;  yet  ""D,  for^ 
is  difficult,  if  vv.*-^2  describe   the  past,  for   how   is   something 


414  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

future  the  ground  of  something  past?  For  the  rest  the  v.  is 
clear ;  few  will  survive  the  judgment  that  is  about  to  affect  the 
whole  world  ;  to  express  this  the  writer  uses  the  figures  employed 
by  Isaiah  in  17^  in  reference  to  Ephraim  and  Damascus  only. 

4.  n^^DK,  (i)n^3J]  aSc  om.  ;  and  so,  very  precariously,  on  metrical  grounds, 
Kit.  In  |§  V.***  •*  is  3  : 3,  like,  e.g:,  vv.*-  ^^. — }'^^<n  d^  ditd  i'?'?dn]  a  pi.  vb. 
with  a  noun  having  a  collective  sense  (G-K.  i^^d-d),  if  |^  is  correct. 
Slightly  modifying  a  suggestion  of  Gun.  {Schdpf.  u.  Chaos^  p.  48),  we  might 
read  pK.n  cy  Dinsn  ^Sdn  ;  yet  see  above.  Possibly  fflr  {^)  did  not  read  oy ; 
it  renders  ol  i/^prjXol  rrjs  yrjs :  but  cp.  the  apparent  neglect  or  omission  of  Dy  in 
the  rendering  of  a  parallel  phrase  pN.n  oy  "•tffni  in  Job  12^^.  There  may  be 
serious  corruption  in  the  last  three  words  of  f^,  and  ^b':>Dn  (from  nhhatt  in  the 
last  line)  may  have  accidentally  supplanted  a  vb.  parallel  to  nsjn  in  v.^*. 
— 5.  isVn]  here  only  in  the  sense  ^0  transgress;  but  the  synonymous  nay 
is  frequently  so  used. — nijn]  G^  om. — 6.  pN  nh^H  nhn]  note  the  sustained 
assonance. — nn]  irrcaxoi  ^aovrai,  either  a  guess,  or  for  "iSt;  if  the  latter,  the 
proposed  reading  i^in  (if  correct)  by  the  loss  of  one  letter  became  J§,  of 
another  ffi.  Gratz  proposed  imn  ;  cp.  60^2^ — lyTD]  of  number,  16^^  f. — imw] 
cp.  nniu,  21^  35^<>;  vb.  and  noun  are  "mostly  poet,  and  late"  (BDB,  g'.v.). 
—8.  ni33  vMffD  nnr,  D'sn  k'ib'D  nac]  possibly  variants  (Du.);  if  so,  another 
apparent  tristich  becomes  a  distich.  If  not  variants,  the  second  t^itrD  may  be 
an  error  (ii'n.)  for  another  word  (?  h^p  ;  (&  (pdivfj).  In  this  case  perhaps  v.®*" 
is  misplaced,  and  once  with  v.'°  formed  a  distich ;  vv.^*  ®  together  then 
consisted  of  three  distichs,  not  as  at  present  of  two  distichs. — D'r'?y]  22^  n. 
— 9.   Tra]  for   the   use   of  a,  cp.  30^^     i&  ri(Tx^vdri(Tav  =  ^vi'.    wrongly. — 

10.  inn  nnp  matyj]  (&  ijpttixihdtj  vaaa  7r6Xts,  ^  lA-i^^  Z^l^iZI,  E  mantt 
nxnx  pnmp,  JT,  attrita  est  civitas  vanitatis.  ffir  scarcely  implies  a  different 
text  (cp.  Liebmann) ;  xaaa  may  be  an  interpretation,  or,  even  more  prob- 
ably, due  to  the  transposition  of  ^3  from  the  following  clause  where  (S 
did  not  read  it.— II.  msina  }"n  '?y  nms]  (&  ^XyXiJ^ere,  /ctX.  =im:f.  Hitz.  pro- 
posed {ZWTh.  xviii.  201  f.,  as  cited  by  Di.)  nisinn  pa  rh^  nms  (cp.  Ps  I44^S 
Jer  14^  Prov  26^^):  Siegfr.-St.  'na  nn'?y  nniJt — emendations  which  only  in 
part  meet  the  real  difficulties  of  J§  (see  above). — nany]  ffi  iriiravrai  (  =  naB', 

v.^),  &  A_l4^)  ^  no'^^ty.— tyi^D  n^i]  fflr  om.— 12.  nye'  na'  n'>nen]  n'n&  is  ace. 
of  the  product  (G-K.  1172V,  121a?).  ns;  Hoph.  of  nna  (G-K.  67^,  j).  (B 
{Kal  oIkoi  iyKaToXeXififx^voi  diroXovvrai)  had  a  different  text,  perhaps  n'a  •tkb' 
nae"  (Lieb.). — 13.  na  'a]  ffi^  raOra  irdj'ra. — \'\^n  anpa]  fflr  ^i/  r^  7^. 

14-16.  Praise,  and  a  summons  to  Praise.  —  These 
verses  are  exceedingly  obscure  and  uncertain.  According  to 
the  present  text,  different  sets  of  people  are  introduced  as 
speaking :  note  they  (v.^*) ;  ye,  y}^  (MT,  but  ?  ?^  and  not  ffir) : 
we,  v.i« ;  /,  v.^*  (  ,  but  they  fflr).  A  large  part  of  the  difficulty 
of-  interpretation  consists  in  attempting  to  determine  who  these 


XXIV.  4-i3»   14-16  415 

different  speakers  are,  and  the  exact  purport  of  their  sayings. 
But  V.'*  seems  to  be  seriously  corrupt ;  it  is  really  unintelligible, 
in  spite  of  ingenious  attempts  to  interpret  it,  and  the  rhythmical 
and  parallelistic  structure  of  the  poem  breaks  down  in  it.  The 
latter  half  especially  reads  more  like  prose  than  poetry.  Vv.^**  ^^ 
also  are  probably  not  free  from  corruption,  but  it  is  less  serious. 
Any  attempt  to  interpret  the  verses  must,  therefore,  be  tentative, 
and  no  complete  and  satisfactory  interpretation  of  them  in  their 
present  position  seems  possible.  It  is  not  unreasonable  to  sus- 
pect either  that  the  verses  are  out  of  place,  or  that  something  has 
been  lost  between  vv.^^  and  K  If,  however,  v.^*  is  the  original 
continuation  of  v.J^,  then  non,  f/iey^  at  the  beginning  of  v.^*  must 
be  explained  by  what  precedes.  It  cannot  be  determined  by 
v.i^  to  the  effect  that  it  is  the  antithesis  of  the  /of  that  v.  (Di., 
Du.,  Marti);  for  (i)  the  reading  in  v.^®  is  uncertain ;  and,  what  is 
far  more  important,  (2)  if  there  were  the  strong  antithesis  between 
the  sentiments  of  f/iey  in  v.^*  and  /in  v.^^,  which  the  hypothesis 
supposes,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  express  the  pronoun 
in  v.i* — ^miO«  ^3K1  instead  of  "ICSI.  It  is  only  necessary  to 
compare  the  very  passages  cited  in  support  of  this  theory  to 
perceive  the  insecure  linguistic  basis  on  which  the  theory 
rests;  see  Jer  17^^  "Let  them  be  put  to  shame  that  persecute 
me,  but  let  not  me  be  put  to  shame  "  (^3K  nK'DK  hto),  and  so  in 
the  following  and  parallel  sentence  :  Ps  20^  (^  "  Some  of  horses 
and  some  of  chariots,  but  we  will  make  mention  of  the  name  of 
Yahweh"  (M)  DlJ'a  i:mK1  .  •  .  2313  nf^x) ;  Ps  120^  "I  am  for 
peacCj  they  are  for  war"  (nDTihvh  non  .  .  .  Dli'K'  ^:n);  (3)  the 
remoteness  of  the  supposed  antithesis  makes  it  most  unsuitable 
to  determine  the  sense  of  non  against  the  suggestion  of  what 
precedes.  If  we  seek  to  explain  non  by  what  precedes,  its  only 
possible  reference  is  to  those  who  escape  the  judgment;  that 
small  remnant  which  has  just  been  compared  (v. ^3)  to  the  olives 
left  after  the  striking,  and  the  grapes  on  the  vine  after  the  vintage. 
Of  whom  then  does  this  remnant  consist,  of  Jews  or  Gentiles  ? 
Does  v.^*  describe  the  joyous  praise  of  Yahweh  by  the  Jews  who 
shall  escape  in  the  great  world-judgment,  or  the  confession  by 
Gentile  survivors  of  the  "  God  of  Israel "  (v.^^)  as  the  true  God 
of  all  mankind  ?  The  tone  of  the  v.  no  doubt  rather  favours,  at 
first  sight  at  least,  the  view  generally  taken  that  v.^*  refers  to 
Jews;  but  the  other  view  is  in  itself  by  no  means  impossible; 


41 6  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

and  it  is  at  least  worth  observing  that  17^,  which  is  the  model  of 
v.i^  is  immediately  followed  (17^)  by  a  statement  that  all  man- 
kind will  turn  "to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  Though  if  did 
not  originally  follow  17^,  it  probably  stood  in  its  present  position 
as  early  as  the  age  of  this  writer.  Again,  it  is  not  improbable 
that  among  the  many  other  passages  of  scripture  that  haunted 
the  writer's  memory  was  Ps  47,  which  speaks  of  the  joyful  hand- 
clapping  and  ringing  cries  (nn  b^p,  Ps  47 2,  cp.  here  13T  ub^p) 
with  which  the  heathen  that  survive  will  welcome  the  accession 
of  Yahweh  in  Mt.  Sion  (v. 23)  as  king  of  all  nations  (Ps  4^-  ^) ; 
cp.  below  256,  Yahweh's  coronation-feast  for  all  nations.  The 
connection  in  vv.^^^-  is  on  this  view,  as  on  any  other,  difficult, 
and  perhaps  impossible,  to  establish ;  but  it  is  barely  possible  that 
it  is  as  follows :  because  the  heathen  will  praise  God,  therefore  (ye 
scattered  Jews)  glorify  God  throughout  the  world  (v.^^);  from 
the  end  of  the  earth  we  who  exhort  you  have  heard  (prophetic- 
ally?) songs  celebrating  the  glory  of  the  righteous  Q^  :  ^^^ 
corrupt  and  unintelligible).  Or,  treating  n23  as  pf.  rather  than 
imperative  (MT) : — Therefore,  they  will  by  celebrating  Yahweh 
(v.^*)  have  fulfilled  the  promise  (4210-12)  ^^at  Yahweh's  praise 
should  be  in  the  isles :  they  will  glorify  Him,  saying,  We  have 
heard  songs  from  remote  Jerusalem  to  the  effect  that  glory  belongs 
to  the  righteous.  Certainly  w.^^*^-  greatly  increase  the  difficulty 
of  interpreting  v.^*.  Before  proceeding  to  the  discussion  of 
details,  it  may  be  convenient  to  indicate  yet  another  attempt  to 
explain  the  sequence  of  ideas, — v.^^  predicts  that  mankind  must 
be  yet  further  destroyed  than  it  has  already  been  (vv.*-^^)^ 
vv.i4-i6a  relate  that  the  Jews  of  the  Diaspora  are  already  singing 
songs  of  joy  at  some  great  event  that  has  happened )  but  the 
writer,  a  Jew  of  Palestine,  differs :  such  songs,  he  urges  in 
yy  i6b-2o^  are  out  of  place ;  no  glory  yet,  but  more  violence :  so 
Marti,  substantially  following  Du.  But  (i)  this  involves  defining 
non  in  v.^*  by  v.^^ ;  for  though  the  remnant  from  the  judgment 
(v. ^3)  might  be  Jews  of  the  Dispersion  (see  above),  yet  on  the 
present  hypothesis  x\)iyr\  cannot  refer  to  them,  for  v.-^^  belongs  to 
the  future,  v.^*  to  the  present  or  the  past ;  (2)  this  very  change 
of  time  assumed  is  most  unnatural ;  if  nM**  of  v.^^  refer  to  the 
future  (as  it  must),  the  next  imperfects  (IKK^S  in''),  nothing  sug- 
gesting the  contrary,  can  only  naturally  be  taken  in  the  same 
sense,  and  pnv  (if  the  text  be  sound)  is  prophetic  pf.;  (3)  the 


XXIV.  14,  15  417 

arrangement  would  be  most  inept;  neither  v.^*  (nor  the  pre- 
ceding verses)  explain  either  who  the  singers  of  v.**  are,  or  the 
reason  of  their  joy;  on  the  other  hand,  v."  does  contain  what, 
on  the  hypothesis,  ought  to  have  made  them,  like  their  com 
patriot  in  Jerusalem,  "lean,"  not  joyful;  (4)  the  therefore  of 
v.^*  is  admitted  to  be  awkward,  but  its  presence  is  accounted  for 
as  forming  part  of  a  quotation:  a  possible  explanation,  but 
equally  serviceable  to  help  out  any  other  interpretation  ;  (5)  the 
theory  rests  on  the  extraordinary  and  improbable  interpretations 
of  the  existing  text  of  v.^^^ 

14.  In  the  translation  the  first  two  lines  represent  a  distich 
3:3;  the  last  line  then  stands  isolated,  probably  on  account  of 
textual  error  and  dislocation  (see  phil.  n.).  If,  however,  the 
text  of  v.^*  is  sound,  it  consists  of  a  distich  4  :  4 — 

They  shall  lift  up  their  voice,  they  shall  ring  out  their  joy, 

Of  the  Majesty  of  Yahweh  they  have   cried  aloud  from 

^  the  sea; 

The  parallelism  in  this  case  is  less  neat. — They'\  the  survivors 
from  the  judgment  (v.^^) ;  as  to  whether  these  will  be  Jews  or 
heathen  and  for  another  interpretation  of  the  pronoun,  see  the 
preceding  discussion.  For  inp  NC^3  (////  up  the  voice)  and  pT  {to 
ring  out  joy)  \vi  parallelism,  cp.  52^;  co-ordinated  asyndetos^  as 
they  would  be  if  the  distich  is  4  :  4,  they  do  not  recur  again. 
— The  majesty  of  Yahweh]  cp.  Ex  15"^,  Mic  5^,  "his  glorious 
majesty,"  Is  2^^  (pw  as  here):  also  26^0  12^  (mw). — They  have 
cried  aloud]  7nv,  12^  n. — From  the  sea]  may  mean  from  the  west 
(11^*);  then,  on  one  interpretation,  the  Jews  of  the  Asiatic 
coastland  or  of  Egypt,  living  west  of  the  writer's  standpoint, 
Jerusalem,  would  be  referred  to.  But  the  limitation  of  jubilation 
to  the  survivors  in  one  quarter  of  the  world  only  would  be  curi- 
ous.— 15.  Wherefore]  see  above,  p.  416.  The  word  that  follows 
is  DnK3,  in  the  lights ;  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  this  means  tlje 

East  as  the  region  of  light ;  but  some  term  for  East  in  antithetic 
parallelism  with  the  isles  of  the  sea  (v.^''^),  i.e,  the  West,  may  very 
well  have  stood  here. — Glorify]  J^  can  be  equally  well  rendered 
they  have  glorified.  On  the  subject  of  the  vb.  in  either  case, 
see  above. —  Yahweh^  God  of  Israel]  this  term  for  God  would  be 
particularly  suitable  if  the  heathen  are  the  subject  of  glorify ;  but 
there  is  plenty  of  analogy  for  its  use  ifTews  alone  are  the  subject : 
VOL.  I. — 27  ^ 


4l8  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

cp.  e.g.  21^^  37^^  411*^. — 16.  From  the  extremity  of  the  earth"]  for 
the  sense  of  ci33,  cp.  ii^^^  Jl  37^  381^  (all  pi).  It  is  questioned 
whether  extremity  here  is  an  error  for  extremities  (©),  or  being 
used  collectively  is  equivalent  to  the  pi. ;  or,  if  one  extremity  be 
meant,  whether  that  extremity  be  the  Eastern,  Babylon  (Di.) 
or  Persia  (Kit),  or  the  Southern,  Ethiopia  (Du.).  But  the 
question  cannot  be  answered. —  We\  the  prophet  in  Palestine 
and  his  companions?  see  above.  The  purport  of  the  songs 
(niDT,  2  S  23^  Ps  119^*,  Job  35^0,  Is  25^)  seems  to  be  given  in 
the  words  Beauty  for  the  righteous ;  cp.,  for  the  occurrences  of 
the  word  ""SV,  beauty^  which  may  illustrate  this  passage,  4^  28^*  * 
1319,  Ezk  2o6-i5j  Dn  \\^^'^^.  No  longer  will  great  worldly  but 
unrighteous  empires  like  Babylon  appear  beauteous,  but  the 
righteous  nation  (26^ ;  also  Hab  i**  ^^  2*),  i.e.  the  Israel  of  the 
future  and  those  who,  as  fearing  the  One  True  God,  attach 
themselves  to  it.  The  suggestion  that  the  righteous  means 
Yahweh  has  now  been  rightly  abandoned.  It  is  not  improbable 
that  the  rest  of  the  v.  originally  consisted  merely  of  an  antithesis, 
Woe  to  the  disloyal  (D^nn?  ^1N),  to  those  who  instead  of 
becoming  righteous  by  the  observance  of  the  Law  of  Yahweh, 
deal  treacherously  and  disloyally;  cp.  Hab  i^^,  where  DHH  is 
parallel  to  W^  (the  antithesis  of  p^nv),  and  Ps  25^,  where  it  is 
antithetical  to  "  those  that  wait  on  Yahweh  "  (the  equivalent  of 
the  "  righteous  "  here),  and  Ps  59^  where  px  ^'Ml  ^3  is  parallel  to 
"all  the  nations."  The  present  text  of  f^  may  be  rendered 
literally,  And  I  saidy  I  have  leanness^  I  have  leanness ;  Woe  is 
me;  plunderers  have  plundered  (cp.  21^  n.)  and  plunder 
plunderers  have  plundered  \  ffi  reads,  And  they  shall  say^  Woe 
to  them  that  set  at  nought ;  as  for  them  that  set  at  nought  the 
law  (then  follows  v.^^).  It  is  noticeable  that  in  ffi  the  first 
pers.  sing,  of  f^  entirely  disappears.  The  interpretation  of  those 
who  consider  f^  the  original  text  and  intelligible  is  well  put  by 
Marti :  "  Our  poet  judges  otherwise  (than  the  voices  which  have 
spoken  in  vv.^^'^^).  No,  he  says,  not  *av,  but  '•n ;  not  victory 
{Sieg\  but  sickness  {Siechthuni) ;  not  the  dawn  of  the  Bright 
Age,  but  continuance  of  illness.  The  prophet  proves  this  by 
the  prophecy,  *  Plunderers  plunder.'"  Against  this  it  may  be 
remarked  (i)  that  the  divergence  of  ©  renders  it  all  uncertain; 
(2)  itDX^  even  if  correctly  pointed,  cannot  without  the  expression 
of  the  pronoun   mark   the  strong  antithesis   required;   (3)  the 


XXIV.  I4-20  419 

meaning  of  '*?  T\  is  most  uncertain  (see  phil.  n.) ;  (4)  the  sick- 
ness, on  this  theory  of  interpretation,  is  not  personal ;  conse- 
quently the  change  from  the  ist  pi.  in  v.^^  to  ist  sing,  in  ^^^  is 
unexplained  and  most  improbable  ;  (5)  whereas  in  vv.*-^2  perfects 
mingled  with  imperfects  describe  the  past,  here,  on  the  hypo- 
thesis, a  single  pf.  is  used  to  describe  the  real  future  as  against 
that  pictured  by  others. 

14.  13T]  ffi  oi  S^  KaTa\ei<pdivT€s  iirl  t^$  7^5  (i><f>pavd^<T0VTai ;  the  subj.  in  ffi 
is  probably  an  interpretative  addition  ;  cp.  Lieb. — 14,  15.  p  Sy  d'O  i>nx 
m.T  ntf  D'n  "k3  ni.T  naa  D'tio]  the  overlined  words  or  letters  in  themselves, 
or  in  their  present  positions,  seem  doubtful,  though  a  complete  reconstruction 
is  better  left  unattempted.  In  particular  I  note,  (i)  en  "k3,  onna,  D'D  are 
probably  variants  of  one,  or  perhaps  two,  clauses.  For  D'D,  (&  read  D'.tD  or 
D'lTD  (t6  ddojp  T^s  6a\6.<T(n\s)  ;  (2)  instead  of  i'?n2<,  (fSi  probably  read  "hny  (cp. 
e.g.  13',  Ps  104  (103)'*):  this,  of  course,  is  wrong,  but  may  point  to  an 
original  i^n!«' ;  or,  again,  i'?njf  may  be  a  misplaced  parallel  to  nao  ;  (3)  or  ffi's 
m.T  ni;)  may  be  correct,  and  ||  to  ni-T  uv.  See  on  the  relation  of  <&  to  J^,  Lieb.  's 
full  discussion. — 15.  DnK3]  (&  om.  Lowth,  al.  D"K3 — a  poor  parallel  and 
materially  valueless  if  dm  "kd  be  retained  in  v.^*'».     An  alleged  significance  of 

the  At.  j<^  has  been  very  precariously  used  to  place  on  D'ik  the  sense  North  ; 
see  Ges.,  who  also  discusses  other  views.  Unsatisfactory  emendations  are 
□'TK'a  (cp.  Si)  and  d'^n?. — 16.  '"?  'n]  (&  om.  The  other  versions  and  MT 
(']"j)  understand  'n  to  mean  my  secret ;  n  is  in  Aramaic  a  loan  word  from 
Persian ;  it  is  used  in  Sir  8^®  and  may  well  have  been  used  by  some  glossator 
here.  Most  modem  scholars  treat  'n  as  an  otherwise  unknown  derivative 
from  TW^y  to  be  lean  (cp.  Niph.  17*) ;  in  this  case  it  should  be  pointed  'D  ; 
but  the  meaning  leanness  is  expressed  by  j'n'j  lo^*,  Ps  106^". — Dnj3  »^  ♦ik] 
(&  oial  rois  aderovaiv  (cp.  ^),  i.e.  onaaS  '1K,  which  may  possibly  be  the 
correct  reading  and  the  original  immediate  sequence  to  ^"^Tih  '3X.  ®  para- 
phrases the  remainder  of  the  v.,  ol  dderoOvTei  rbv  vdfiov.  On  v.*'"',  see  Lieb.'s 
full  discussion  :  the  problems  are  far  from  solved. 

17-20.  The  completeness  of  the  World-Judgment.— 

After  the  difficult  and  obscure  parenthesis  (vv.^^-i^),  the  prediction 
of  judgment  on  all  mankind  is  resumed;  and,  first,  ly,  i8a.  b,  by 
means  of  a  different  figure  the  thought  of  v.^^  is  emphasised  :  few 
will  escape  altogether,  for  to  escape  from  one  disaster  will  merely 
be  to  fall  into  another;  cp.  Am  5^^.  The  lines  recur  with  slight 
variations  in  Jer  48^^,  where  they  are  applied  specifically  to  Moab. 
The  germ  of  the  saying  seems  to  occur  in  La  3*^,  though  it  is 
by  no  means  improbable  that  it  is  ultimately  borrowed  from 
popular  speech. — l8c-20.  The  physical  phenomena  that  will 
accompany  or  form   the  judgment :   floods   will   descend   from 


420  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

heaven,  the  foundations  of  earth  will  quake,  and  earth  itself  will 
split  and  crack  and  sway  to  and  fro  and  fall  to  rise  no  more,  like 
one  vast  house  which  cracks,  sways,  and  topples  over  when  its 
foundations  are  shaken  by  an  earthquake.  Few  will  survive 
(^yyis.  17. 18a.  b^^  y^^  ^jj  jj^jg  ^jjj  happen  ;  strictly  speaking,  when  the 

earth  falls  to  rise  no  more,  human  life  should  come  to  an  end ; 
but  v.2^  and  25^  show  that  we  are  not  to  take  the  matter  so 
literally  as  that. 

l8c.  When  t^e  lattices  of  heaven  have  been  opened^  "the 
waters,  which  are  above  the  firmament,"  stream  down,  whether 
to  destroy  (Gn  7"  82  (P)),  or  to  fertilise  (2  K  72,  Mai  3I0). 
Here  a  destructive  downpour  such  as  was  part  cause  of  the 
Flood  is  in  the  writer's  mind ;  such  another  downpour  will  form 
part  of  the  judgment.  Yet  not  by  water  can  Yahweh  again 
destroy  all  flesh  (Gn  9^^) ;  this  time  "  the  fountains  of  the  great 
deep  "  (Gn  7^^)  will  not  break  loose ;  there  will  be  no  need  of  an 
ark  to  preserve  the  remnant,  but  they  must  hide  themselves  from 
the  storm  (2620).  In  figures  i^^'  1^),  meant,  however,  literally 
enough,  not  too  compatible  with  this  picture  of  the  downpour, 
and  incompatible  with  hiding  in  houses  with  doors  shut  (2620), 
the  writer  predicts  that  the  earth  will  burst  and  quake  (cp.  13^^, 
Hag  2^^-). — In  the  height]  of  heaven :  DPD,  as  in  v.21,  is  a 
synonym  for  heaven,  used  in  other  (late)  parts  of  the  Book  of 
Isaiah  and  by  other  (late)  writers :  see  32^5  57!^  58*,  and  below, 
p.  472,  no.  6.  Burney  {JThS  xi.  446)  suggests  that  it  usually 
denotes  "explicitly  or  implicitly,  the  north  pole  or  zenith  of 
the  Ecliptic  (Babylonian  Anu\  i.e.  the  highest  point  of  the 
heavens,  regarded  as  the  abode  of  Deity."  How  much  might  be 
implied  by  the  downpour  from  heaven  may  be  illustrated  by 
Sibyl.  Books  iii.  689  f.,  "  And  God  will  judge  all  .  .  .  with  over- 
whelming rain,  and  sulphur  will  come  down  from  heaven,  storm 
and  hail,  much  and  violent." — 20a.  b.  The  swaying  of  the  earth 
is  depicted  by  means  of  two  bold  figures — the  unsteady  gait  of 
a  drunkard  (cp.  29^,  Ps  10727),  and  the  unsteadiness  of  a  slight, 
temporary  shelter  (cp.  i^). — 20C.  The  cause  of  all  this  is  man's  re- 
bellion (ySJ'a,  cp.  2  K  i^)  against  Yahweh  (cp.  v.^  2621),  the  King 
of  all. — 20d.  Almost  verbally  from  Am  5^,  where  it  is  predicated 
of  Israel.  Du.  well  remarks  that  the  poetic  effect  of  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  "  birth-pangs  "  of  judgment  in  w.^^^-^o  is  undeniable, 
the  constant  repetition  of  the  word  pN,  the  striking  picture  of 


XXIV.  1 8-23  421 

the  colossal  convulsions  of  Nature  by  means  of  the  Hithpolels 
and  Hithpolals,  and  of  the  bursting  and  swaying  of  the  earth  by 
the  assonances,  and  the  grand  way  in  which  (v.^o)  the  ethical 
ground  for  the  wild  seething  of  the  elements  is  allowed  to  appear. 
He  cites  as  a  parallel  Sibylline  Books  iii.  675  f.,  "  Earth  mother 
of  all  things  will  in  those  days  be  moved  by  the  immortal  hand, 
and  the  fish  in  the  sea,  and  all  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and  the 
innumerable  kinds  of  birds,  and  all  souls  of  men,  and  the  entire 
sea  will  shudder  at  the  immortal  Face ;  and  there  will  be  terror. 
The  precipitous  mountain  tops  and  the  vast  hills  will  be  rent, 
and  black  darkness  will  become  visible  to  all.  Dim  rents  in  the 
mountains  will  be  full  of  corpses :  the  rocks  will  stream  with 
blood.  The  finely  built  walls  of  hostile  men  will  all  fall  to  the 
ground,  because  they  have  not  recognised  the  law  of  the  great 
God  and  His  judgment,  but  have  all  brutishly  raised  their  spears 
in  attack  on  the  Temple." 

18.  T^D  .  .  .  Vipo]  Jer  48*  p  .  .  .  'JBD.— 19.  In  a.  read  jn  for  the 
abnormal  nij-^,  and  pK  (as  in  b.  c. )  for  Y-^nn  ;  in  both  cases  n  is  dittographic. 
fflr  omits  c.  The  vb.  yjn  is  an  Aramaism  for  y^iX  Other  occurrences  (mostly 
questionable)  are  Ps  2»(MT),  Jer  ii^«  15^2,  Job  34=",  Pr  25"  (Kal) ;  Pr  i8»< 
(Hithpo.) ;  on  Is  8^  see  n.— nmi£5nn  nis]  Che  (SBOT)  npnsnn  pi-a  (i  K  19") ; 
with  ma  (Poel,  Ps  74^®'*)  op.  J  i,  to  split.— 20.  yu]  (!R  does  not  render  this  ; 
ct.  v.". 

21-23.  Judgment  on  the  host  of  the  height  and  the 
kings  of  the  earth  :  Yahweh  becomes^  King  in  §ion.  — 
21  f.  Yahweh  will  at  that  time  judge  all  His  foes  both  in  heaven 
and  on  earth,  imprisoning  both  the  host  of  heaven  and  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  who  had  opposed  Him,  till  the  far  off  day  of  their 
ultimate  punishment.  This  is  the  last  act  before  the  terrors  of 
the  end  (vv.^-^*  ^3-  ^^^^o  and  ?  ^-^'^\  which  are  succeeded  by  the  New 
Age  of  Glory  for  the  survivors  (v.^^)^  The  writer  is  obviously 
alluding  to  ideas  which  he  presupposes  as  being  well  known ; 
the  best  commentary  on  the  passage  is  to  be  found  in  the  (earlier 
parts  of  the)  Book  of  Enoch,  which  may  have  been  not  much 
younger  than  this  prophecy.  Some  details  in  the  later  writer 
may  have  been  developed  by  reflection  on  Scripture,  pre- 
eminently on  this  Scripture,  but  much  that  is  there  expressed  is 
the  suitable  and,  therefore  in  all  probability,  the  actual  back- 
ground of  the  present  description — in  particular  is  this  the  case 
with  the  double  judgment  on  the  offenders,  human  and  super- 


422  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

human,  imprisonment  now  and  punishment  at  the  end  of 
days ;  for  Di.'s  attempt  to  give  nipsi  in  v.^^c  g,  favourable  mean- 
ing, "  be  visited,"  so  as  to  make  the  line  assert  that  the  persons 
concerned  will  after  imprisonment  be  restored,  like  Jehoiachin 
(Jer  5231),  j-Q  Yahweh's  favour  and  employed  by  Him  as  regents, 
breaks  down.  On  this  and  other  details,  see,  further,  below.  Not 
only  is  much  that  first  appears  in  Enoch  as  old  as  this  writer, 
but  the  fundamental  ideas  are  older  still,  and  to  be  traced  back 
to  Babylonian  mythology ;  but  this  does  not  necessarily  mean, 
nor  is  it  probable,  that  their  emergence  in  Jewish  thought,  or 
at  least  their  use  in  Jewish  theology,  was  also  early. 

21.  Yahweh  will  punish]  lit.  visit  upon:  cp.  27^. — Host  oj 
the  height]  height,  as  in  v.^^,  means  heaven :  hence  host  oj 
the  height  is  the  equivalent  of  the  term  "host  of  heaven" 
frequently  occuring  elsewhere ;  and  this  meaning  stands  even  if 
the  clause  in  the  height  and  on  the  earthy  omitted  by  (&,  be  not 
original.  In  view  of  the  parallel  kings  of  the  earth,  the  particular 
reference  in  the  host  of  the  height  is  to  those  superhuman  beings 
who  had  been  conceived  of  as  rulers  over  men  or  as  receivers 
of  men's  worship,  who  had  thus  rebelled  against  Yahweh  and 
intruded  on  His  sole  sovereign  rights,  the  apxat>  8uva/x€i9,  i^ovaiai 
iv  Tots  iTTOvpaviOL'S  (or  rov  aepos,  or  tov  (tkotovs),  dpovoi,  KvpLOTrjre^  of 
the  NT  (Ro  S^s,  Col  i^e,  Mt  242^,  Lk  2i26,  Eph  3I0  2^  Col  i^^- 1«, 
Eph  i2i.  Col  i^^).  Such  superhuman  beings  might  include  the 
sun,  moon,  and  stars,  who,  as  "  the  host  of  heaven,"  had  received 
men's  worship  (Dt  4^^  1 7^,  Jer  8^,  and  often) ;  and  Enoch  refers 
explicitly  to  the  imprisonment  of  "  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  the 
host  of  heaven,"  but  the  sin  charged  against  them  by  him  is 
that  "they  did  not  come  forth  at  their  appointed  time"  (iS^^^-; 
cp.  Jude  13).  This  writer  is  alluding  here  more  particularly  to 
the  patron  angels  (connected  with  the  stars  in  Dt  4^^)  of  the 
nations  (Dn  lo^s.  20f.^  sir  171^,  Dt  328  (&;  the  "gods"  of  Ps 
58.  82). — The  kings  of  the  earth,  who,  spurred  on  by  the  angels,* 
have  rebelled  against  Yahweh  and  His  anointed  people  (Ps  2), 
will  also  be  punished,  that  Yahweh  may  reign  in  undisputed 
majesty  and  glory  on  Mt.   Sion  (v.23). — 22.  Rebellious   angels 

*  Cp.  En  56''  *  *  In  those  days  will  the  angels  return  and  hurl  themselves 
upon  the  East,  upon  the  Parthians  and  the  Medes,  to  stir  up  the  kings  and  to 
provoke  in  them  a  spirit  of  unrest,  and  rouse  them  from  their  thrones  •  .  .  ; 
and  they  will  march  up  to,  and  tread  under  foot,  the  land  of  his  elect  ones." 


XXIV.  21-23  423 

and  rebellious  human  beings  alike  Yahweh  will  imprison  in 
a  great  subterranean  prison,  the  Pit  (cp.  14**  n.).  For  the 
subterranean  prison,  cp.  2  P  2*  and  En  10*  "Bind  Azazel  hand 
and  foot  and  place  him  in  the  darkness :  make  an  opening  in 
the  desert  .  .  .  and  place  him  therein,  and  place  upon  him 
rough  and  jagged  rocks,  and  cover  him  with  darkness  ";  and  10^2 
(of  the  bastard  offspring  of  angels  and  women)  "  bind  them  fast 
under  the  hills  of  the  earth."  To  limit,  as  Di.  does,  the 
punishment  mentioned  in  v.^^  to  one  half  only  of  the  subject  of 
V.21,  viz.  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  to  interpret  the  pit  of  such 
a  pit  as  Jeremiah  was  committed  to  (Jer  37^^),  is  altogether 
unreasonable.  The  fact  that  in  v.^^*-  ^  a  part  of  the  host  of 
heaven  is  specially  mentioned  after  sP-  is  no  reason  for 
exempting  the  whole  of  the  host  of  heaven  from  the  subject  of 
shall  be  imprisoned  in  v. 22,  and  so  limiting  the  punishment  of  the 
host  of  heaven  to  a  loss  of  their  brightness  and  of  the  human 
worship  rendered  to  them.  If  we  had  no  other  evidence  of  the 
belief  in  the  imprisonment  of  superhuman  beings,  such  as  we 
have,  we  should  be  bound  to  infer  it  from  this  passage.  The 
general  idea  of  such  imprisonment  is,  however,  differently 
applied ;  here  it  is  punishment  for  intruding  on  Yahweh's 
sovereign  rights,  in  En.  for  the  violation  of  the  natural  order 
established  by  Yahweh. — And  after  many  days  they  shall  be 
punished]  lit.  visited.  The  vb.  IpD  can  be  used  of  either  a 
gracious  (23^^,  Gn  21^,  Jer  27^2),  or  a  punitive,  visitation:  the 
context  must  decide ;  as  there  is  no  indication  in  the  context  of 
a  change  from  punishment  to  favour,  it  must  here  mean  to 
punish.  The  contrary  cannot  be  argued  from  the  fact  that  the 
long  detention  before  punishment  is  pointless;  for,  however 
the  idea  arose,  the  idea  existed;  cp.  En  10^*  9i^2ff.^  2  P  2*. — 
23.  Yahweh's  reign  in  glory  on  Mt.  §ion.  The  white  moon  and 
the  glowing  sun^  such  is  the  force  of  the  poetical  terms  here 
used  (cp.  3o2S),  will  pale  before  the  coming  manifestation  of 
Yahweh's  glory.  So  well  known  was  the  idea,  that  the  writer 
does  not  need  to  state  the  cause  so  explicitly  as  in  6o^^-,  and 
therefore,  instead  of  saying :  For  Yahweh  will  be  instead  of  sun 
and  moon,  he  says,  briefly  and  tersely  bringing  out  the  main 
climax  which  he  desires  :  For  Yahweh  will  have  become  king  (cp. 
52"');  no  more  rebels  (v.21)  in  heaven  or  earth,  but  the  ever- 
lasting kingdom,  which  all  kingdoms  shall  serve  and  obey  (Dn 


424  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

y27.  i4j^  y^iii  j^ave  its  centre  in  Sion  (cp.  Ps  2).  The  writer  is 
dominated  by  the  same  ideas  that  govern  the  "accession" 
Psalms.  Cp.  e.g.  Ps  96  :  there,  too,  Yahweh  has  become  king 
in  §ion  (Ps  96^^-),  universal  king  over  gods  (Ps  96*  =  "  host  of 
the  height "  here,  v. 21),  and  the  whole  earth  (cp.  here  "  the  kings 
of  the  earth"  and  Zech  14^),  which  is  called  upon  to  sing  to 
Yahweh  (Ps  96^^- ;  cp.  here  ?  v.^*) ;  earth  and  heaven,  instead  of 
mourning  (Is  241*^*),  exult  (Ps  961^^-),  and  the  earth,  instead  of 
cracking,  splitting,  and  quivering  on  its  breaking  supports  (Is 
2^^i9b.  20^^  yj\\\  become  firm  and  unshaken  (Ps  96).  The  emenda- 
tions (see  phil.  n.)  adopted,  partly  from  (&,  in  the  translation  of 
these  lines  does  not  materially  affect  the  sense,  with  which  cp. 
4^,  but  secures  a  better  couplet.  As  once  on  Mt.  Sinai  (Ex 
24^'),  Yahweh  will  manifest  His  glory  to  His  elders,  i.e.  the  elders 
of  His  people.  Thus  this  writer  finds  no  place  for  a  Messiah, 
or  for  any  other  king  than  Yahweh  Himself.  When  will  the  glory 
of  this  kingdom  be  manifested — before  or  after  the  second  and 
final  judgment  of  the  host  of  heaven  and  the  kings  of  the  earth  ? 
If  we  press  the  order  of  the  sentences,  the  later  term  would  seem 
to  be  the  correct  one,  and  this  would  correspond,  it  is  claimed 
(Du.),  to  the  expectation  in  En  (91^5^-)  that  the  new  heaven  and 
the  age  when  "  sin  will  no  more  be  mentioned  for  ever  "  follows 
"  the  great  eternal  judgment,"  i.e.  the  second  and  final  judgment 
on  the  angels  (cp.  Rev  20^1-^*).  At  the  same  time,  once  the 
rebels  were  securely  imprisoned,  there  could  be  no  hindrance  to 
the  actual  completeness  of  the  kingdom.  The  next  scene  is  the 
Coronation  Feast  which  follows  the  accession  to  the  throne 
(25^-8);  the  sequence  is  interrupted  by  a  song,  25^-^ 

21.  CK  om.  Kinn  Dva  .t.ti,  d^tds,  and  nDnNn-^y. — 22.  ton  n£3Dx]  a  verbal  noun 
enforcing  isdk  and  governing  TDK  in  the  ace.  (cp.  1 1*  n. ) ;  but  read  tokh  f]DK  ; 
cp.  33^. — D'D'  3nDi]  (K  Sib.  iroKKdv  yevewv  ;  Lieb.  D'D'  am  ;  but  was  nps 
applicable  to  the  duration  of  punishment  ? — 23.  nna]  ffir  So^aer^Tjcerai ;  read 
n^a:.  Possibly  also  nn  and  niK3s  should  be  omitted  with  CEr,  and  also 
D'?t5'iT3 ;  then  an  excellent  balanced  distich  3  :  3  remains.  f§  could  be 
taken  as  a  rather  rough  4  :  4  distich. 

XXV.  1-5. — A  song  to  be  sung  by  Israel  in  celebration  of 
YahweKs  wonders  in  deliverance. 


The  lines  as  marked  in  the  translation  are  of  three  accents  except  v. 
which  in  |^  is  four,  in  CR  three ;  and  "^^  which  is  four.     Two  distichs  3 


Sb 


XXIV.  21-23,  XXV.  1-5  425 

form  a  strophe  ;  the  latter  part  of  v.*  and  v."  seem  to  be  seriously  corrupt ; 
see,  further,  ZATW^  191 1,  pp.  1 17-123. 

^  Yahweh,  thou  art  my  God, 

I  will  exalt  thee,  give  thanks  to  thy  name ; 
For  thou  hast  achieved  wonders. 

Plans  (formed)  long  ago,  in  perfect  faithfulness. 

*  For  thou  hast  made  the  city  a  heap, 

The  fortified  town  a  ruin ; 
The  palace  of  the  *  presumptuous '  ,  .  . , 
It  shall  never  more  be  built. 

*  Wherefore  the  strong  people  shall  glorify  thee, 

The  city  of  the  awe-inspiring  a  shall  fear  thee ; 

*  For  thou  hast  been  a  stronghold  to  the  poor, 

A  stronghold  to  the  needy  in  his  distress. 


The  noise  of  the  presumptuous  dost  thou  subdue  a  a 
The  song  of  the  awe-inspiring  *  dost  thou '  humble. 

This  poem  lacks  a  rubric  such  as  those  which  introduce  the 
other  songs  of  this  section  (25^  26^  272).  Yet,  like  the  other 
songs,  this,  too,  is  intended  to  be  sung  after  the  world-judgment 
(ch.  24).  The  speaker  is  the  Jewish  community,  which  is  now 
poor  and  hard  pressed  by  some  undefined  oppressing  power. 
Yahweh's  wonderful  deeds,  which  are  the  subject  of  the  song, 
will  have  been  wrought  in  accordance  with  His  counsels  formed 
long  ago ;  the  wonderful  deliverance  of  His  people  will  not  only 
call  forth  their  praise,  but  will  so  impress  the  mightiest  people 
and  city  of  the  world  that  they,  too,  will  do  homage  to  Yahweh 
and  become  His  worshippers. 

What  particular  city  is  intended  is  as  obscure  here  as  in  24^® 
(see  n.  there) ;  moreover,  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  ruined  city 
of  V.2  is  the  same  as  the  homage-rendering  city  of  v.',  or  whether 
"  the  awe-inspiring  "  of  v.^  and  v.*^  are  identical. 

la.  b.  Cp.  12^  n.,  Ps  54^  ii828  138^  145^- — Achieved  wonders] 

Ex  15II,  Ps  77^5  78^2^ — Long  ago]  cp.  22"  372^n. — In  perfect 

faithfulness]   two  synonyms   |»N  noiDK  are  combined  to  give  a 

superlative  force;  cp.  3^  16^:  but  the  second  does  not  occur 


426  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

again,  and  may  be  a  liturgical  addition  Amen  (cp.  (&%)]  the 
distich  balances  better  without  it.  For  the  construction  pre- 
supposed in  the  translation,  see  G-K.  ii8$r;  an  alternative 
translation  would  be  plans  are  {perfect)  faithfulness ;  i.e.  plans 
long  since  formed  are  now  actually  performed  and  thereby 
proved  faithful:  for  the  construction  in  this  case,  see  Ex  17^^; 
Dr.  §  189  (2). — 2.  The  city  .  .  .  the  town]  the  article  is  not 
expressed  in  5^  on  account  of  poetical  style :  so  the  anarthrous 
TV  and  |D"ifc<  are  used  of  Jerusalem  in  Jer  30^^:  cp.  also  27^^ 
below.  It  is  possible,  but  less  probable,  that  f^  means  any  city 
indefinitely  (Che.  SBOT)y  or,  collectively,  cities  (ffir^E,  Box). — 
Palace']  32^*  and  in  pi.,  34!^  23^^  (p^^  ^m  i*  3^*^  etc.  —  The 
presu7nptuous\  ffi  roiv  da-ePtov  =  DHT :  cp.  1 3^^  n. ;  f§  DHT,  aliens 
(I'^'n.,  6i^),  is  less  expressive  and,  as  the  commoner  word,  the 
easier  and  less  probable  reading;  yet  see  29^  n. — 3.  The  mighty 
and  terrible  nation  which  oppressed  the  poor  Jews,  when  it  has 
experienced  the  judgment  of  Yahweh  (v.^),  will  recognise  in 
Him  a  mightier  than  themselves,  acknowledge  His  glory,  and 
become  His  worshippers;  or,  since  again  the  terms  in  J^  are 
anarthrous,*  the  meaning  may  be  that  the  overthrow  of  the 
oppressing  power  will  lead  many  another  strong  people  to  glorify 
God. — A7ve-inspiring]  13I1  n.,  f^  (not  ([5:)  +  nations ;  see  phil.  n. 
—  Glorify  thee]  acknowledge  Yahweh's  glory  (6^  n.)  displayed 
(2423  26^^)  in  nature  or,  as  here,  in  history;  see  24^^  43^0, 
Ps  22^*. — Shall  fear  thee]  shall  become  fearers,  i.e.  worshippers, 
of  Yahweh  ippf*  ^K^^) :  cp.  Ps  65^  (8). — ^,  Stronghold]  a  place  in 
which  one  seeks  and  finds  refuge  from  weather  or  enemies  :  cp. 
30^  n.  and  phil.  n. — The  poor  .  .  ,  the  needy]  the  Jews  at  present 
suffering  and  oppressed  (cp.  26^^):  cp.  1/^^^  in.)  26^  41^'^  for  the 
terms  used  as  here,  or  with  a  more  limited  force,  e.g.,  lo^  11*. — 
What  follows  the  distich  (^*-  ^)  down  to  the  opening  clause  of 
v.^,  in  so  far  as  it  shows  rhythm  and  parallelism  at  all,  differs  in 
character  from  vv.^'** ;  either  it  contains,  together  with  expansions, 
a  distich,  or  it  is  entirely  intrusive  matter  that  has  caused  the  loss 
of  a  distich  which  once  stood  before  the  distich  preserved  in  v.^ ; 
see,  further,  phil.  n. — A  refuge  from  the  storm  .  .  .  a  shade  from 
the  heat]  the  clauses  occur  in  an  amplified  form  in  4^^;  cp.  322. — 
For  the  breath  of  the  awe-inspiring  is  like  a  winter  storfu]  this 
reads  like  a  note  on  the  previous  clauses  :  the  shelter  and  shade 
*  Go.  prefers  to  emend  and  read  ly  'Dy,  and  to  point  nnjp. 


XXV.  1-5  427 

of  God  was  needed,  for  the  breath  of  the  awe-inspiring  (v.*), 
breathed  out  in  hostility  on  the  poor  Jews,  was  Hke  a  storm  or 
heat :  this  is  the  only  passage  in  which  the  breath  of  wicked  man 
is  regarded  as  destructive  of  others ;  elsewhere  it  is  God's  breath 
that  consumes,  or  bums,  or  floods  away,  those  whom  it  affects 
(see  3o28,  Job  4^ ;  cp.  Ps  1 8^),  or  the  breath  of  the  Ruler  of  the 
stock  of  Jesse  which  slays  the  wicked  (n*),  or  the  breath  of  the 
wicked  consuming  themselves  (?),  33^^. — A  winter  storm]  or 
downpour,  before  which  who  can  stand  unsheltered  without 
suffering  (cp.  Job  247^-,  Ps  14  f^)  ?  So  probably  f^  (ij?,  as  Gn  822). 
MT  as  a  storm  of  a  wall,  has  been  explained  hazardously  as  a 
storm  that  overthrows  a  wall  (Rashi,  Ges.),  or  both  ineptly  and 
hazardously  as  a  storm  that  beats  ineffectually  against  a  wall 
(Del.). — 5.  As  heat  in  a  dry  place]  the  clause  is  best  taken  as 
a  second  comparison  completing  the  last  clause  of  v.^  MT 
takes  it  with  v.^,  thus  destroying  rhythm  and  parallelism  and 
creating  a  most  bizarre  figure,  p^  a  dry  place,  occurs  in  ^z^- : 
3in  has  the  sense  of  heat  in  4^,  Gn  31*^*. — The  noise  of  the  pre- 
sumptuous] cp.  "the  noise  of  them  that  rise  up  against  thee," 
Ps  74^3 :  for  the  presumptuous  {(&),  f^  has  the  aliens,  cp.  v.^  n. 
For  PN6J',  the  noise  (17^^),  Du.,  al.  read,  pw,  the  pride  (cp.  13^^,  also 
Job  40^2) .  but,  unless  with  Du.  we  reject  the  last  line  of  the  v.  as 
a  gloss,  noise  is  a  better  parallel  than  pride  to  song, — At  the  end 
of  line  a.  there  stand  in  f^  the  words  heat  with  the  shadow  of  a 
cloud,  which  is  taken  by  some  as  a  comparison  :  as  heat  is  brought 
low  by  the  shadow  of  cloud,  so  is  the  song  of  the  awe-inspiring. 
Most  improbable.  The  words  are  either  a  dittograph  of  the 
similar  clause  at  the  beginning  of  the  v.,  or  another  gloss. 

I.  nnn]  (&  om.  :  wrongly. — 19?']  instead  of  the  pausal  ^v^,  to  rhyme  with 
si^ijinK. — nij«y  k'?s]  parallel  terms  rather  than  a  single  clause  (Che.  SBOT), 
wonderful  plans  (cp.  9"). — 2a.  "I'yD]  can  only  be  very  artificially  explained  as 
a  case  of  }D  privative  :  thou  hast  made  (the  city)  away  from  (being)  a  city  a 
heap.  Read  ry.  (K  ttAXcis  =  Ty  (cp.  24^")  rather  than  ony.  SiSTU  also  take  no 
account  of  the  d. — Sa^]  rather  Vj^  :  (K  e/j  xOnw.. — 2C.  poiK]  scarcely  collective 
(Di.),  nor  is  ffi's  aiJrwv  rd  de/iiXia  good  evidence  that  a  reading  PMD'w 
existed. — Tyo]  not  to  be  a  city  :  the  privative  force  of  p  is  more  possible  here 
than  in  a.  ;  yet  the  vbs.  in  such  a  passage  as  7^  17^  far  more  readily  suggest 
its  use  than  does  noj?  here.  5'U  agree  with  |^,  but  (5  ir6X(c)ij  points  to  "I'y 
Possibly  owing  to  the  eye  of  a  scribe  passing  back  after  writing  on?  and  before 
writing  n'?SD'?  to  the  Ty  before  SaV,  I'l'D  was  accidentally  substituted  for  the 
word  which  originally  stood  here,  and  which  may  have  been  either  a  third 


428 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


synonym  to  ^i  and  nVsD,  though  not  the  non-form  (17^  n.)  'yiD,  or  a  vb. 
meaning  ikou  hast  (or  is)  overthrown^  or  the  like ;  scarcely,  however,  Tyo 

(J.  D.  Mich.  :  cp.  vji,  /<?  change).— Z.  If  D'lJ,  which  was  absent  from  fflr,  be 
omitted,  this  v.  consists  of  two  exactly  balanced  (3  :  3)  and  parallel  lines. 
It  is,  therefore,  a  mistake  by  disregarding  the  parallelism,  and  by  conjectural 
additions  or  transpositions,  to  represent  it  as  containing  two  distichs  (Bick., 
Che.,  Du.,  Marti,  Box);  Che.  e.g.  after  Bick.  restores  as  follows: 

B'U  nnp  ly  oy 

liNT'  D'jj'ny 
[T3'D»  nyiu]  '3 

For  fuller  criticism  and  discussion,  see  ZATW^  1911,  pp-  118-121. — ty  Dy] 
f&  &  \ab$  6  irrwx<Js  =  '3y  Dy ;  not  to  be  preferred  to  |^  ;  note  the  parallel,  and 
see  Lieb. — 4.  liyo  .  .  .  nyo]  one  of  these  may  have  replaced  a  parallel  and 
synonymous  term  such  as  nono:  cp.  ii"n.  ffir  does  not  render  the  first. — 
4C-5.  The  textual  problems  here  are  complicated  and  far  from  solved.  It 
must  suffice  to  refer  here  briefly  to  points  more  fully  discussed  in  ZA  TIV, 
191 1,  pp.  1 17-123:  see  also  Lieb.  At  the  end  of  v.^  if  ay  Vs3  yv\  be 
omitted  as  a  dittograph  or  a  gloss,  there  remains  a  distich  marked  by  the 
characteristic  balance  (3  :  3)  and  parallelism  of  the  poem ;  substituting  Dm 
((K)  for  Dm  (fl)  and  ruyn  for  nay,  this  runs : 

y'33n  wii  pKBT 
myn  D'jriy  ydi 

The  second  line  is  absent  from  ffir,  and  is  rejected  as  a  gloss  on  the  first  by 
Du.  :  yet  it  is  curious  to  find  tdt  glossing  jiNr,  and  the  gloss  rhythmically  equal 
and  parallel  to  what  it  glosses.  Du.  al.  obtain  a  distich  by  combining  v.**' 
and  the  first  of  the  foregoing  lines  (see  under) : 

mno  Sx  DiiD  nono 

but  this  lacks  both  balance  and  parallelism.  It  is  possible  that  noriD  was  a 
correct  and  misplaced  variant  of  iiyo  in  v.**  or  *» :  the  following  words  ^s  oniD 
3  mno  were  read  by  ffl  D?in  h)(  ohvn  d"i.?d  ;  just  below  "I'p  dit3  was  either  not 
read  by  fflr,  or  rendered  Avdpuiroi  6\iy6\l/vxoi,  and  all  that  corresponds  in  (E 
to  njy  D'iiny  tdi  ay  Sxa  mn  yjan  is  ols  -^/tas  irap^Sw/cas. 

6-8.  Yahweh's  coronation  Feast. — The  continuation  of 
24^3 ;  translated,  p.  407.  As  a  feast  formed  part  of  the  ceremonial 
of  the  coronation  or  solemn  recognition  of  a  king  (i  S  ii^^  i  K 
j9flF.  25^^  sQ^  after  his  accession  to  universal  sovereignty  in  Jerusalem 
(2423),  Yahweh  gives  a  feast  to  all  His  subjects — not  only  to  the 
Jews,  but  to  all  the  peoples.  The  kings  and  the  patron  angels, 
who  hitherto  have  confused  the  peoples  and  kept  them  from 
recognising  Yahweh  as  their  sole  lord  and  king,  have  been  put 
out  of  the  way  (2421^-) ;  the  writer  does  not  express,  even  if  he 


XXV.  3-8  429 

entertained  (cp.  26^1  n.),  the  idea  that  the  peoples,  rid  of  their 
kings,  will  withhold  homage  from  Yahweh,  and  therefore  does 
not  need  to  mar  his  picture  of  joyous  feasting  by  referring  to  the 
destruction  (60^^^^  or  misery  (65^^^-),  of  any  who  may  refuse  to 
acknowledge  the  king  in  Sion.  He  rather  thinks  of  the  incor- 
poration of  all  nations  in  the  new  and  universal  kingdom  which 
will  have  its  centre  at  §ion  (cp.  Ps  87),  and  of  Yahweh's  gracious 
and  tender  care  of  all  those  of  whatever  nation  who  had  suffered 
under  other  kings  (cp.  i  S  S^^^^^)  than  Himself.  His  next  picture 
is  of  mankind  with  face  hidden  under  the  veil  of  mourning ;  the 
peoples  come  up  to  Sion  (cp.  22-^),  still  wearing  the  garb  of 
mourning,  of  mourning  for  all  their  sufferings  (24^^-  ^7-20)^  for  they 
have  not  yet  realised  that  affliction  is  past  (cp.  33^®^-) ;  Yahweh 
sees  the  veil  and,  tearing  it  off,  destroys  it ;  and  on  the  face  revealed, 
when  the  veil  is  withdrawn,  he  sees  the  tears  with  which  recent 
anguish,  and  mourning  for  those  who  have  died,  have  stained  the 
face,  and  He  wipes  these  away — the  last  tears  of  mankind,  for 
death  itself  He  has  now  destroyed.  The  passage  closes  with  a 
special  reference  to  the  Jews,  Yahweh's  peculiar  people :  all  over 
the  earth,  the  Jews  of  the  Diaspora  as  well  as  those  of  Palestine, 
have  in  the  days  of  anguish  that  are  now  past  suffered  the 
reproach  of  the  nations  that  knew  not  God ;  this  reproach  Yahweh 
will  now  remove. 

The  ideas  that  struggle  for  expression  in  these  few  verses  are 
many  and  great ;  and  it  needs  some  imagination  to  expand  the 
hints  and  recover  all  that  filled  the  mind  of  the  writer.  The 
foregoing  argument  is  in  some  of  its  details  necessarily  uncertain. 
But  there  seems  no  reasonable  room  for  doubt  that  we  have  here 
one  of  the  most  catholic  passages  in  the  entire  Old  Testament,  and 
one  of  the  tenderest  presentations  of  Yahweh.  The  writer  has 
certainly  not  thought  himself  so  clear  of  national  limitations  as 
to  make  Mount  §ion  a  thing  indifferent  in  the  future  (Jn  421), 
and  it  is  probable  enough  that  he  conceived  the  kingdom  of 
Yahweh  with  other  Jewish  Hmitations;  but  we  may  with  even 
more  confidence  infer  that  he  extended  to  the  nations  of  the  world 
all  that  is  tenderest  in  the  Hebrew  thought  of  Yahweh's  relation 
to  Israel.  There  is  no  justification  in  the  text  for  the  narrow 
turn  given  to  the  thought  in  ST  and  by  Ki.,  and,  more  elaborately 
in  recent  times,  by  Gratz  :  C  paraphrases  v.*  "  Yahweh  of  Hosts 
will  make  for  all  the  peoples  in  this  mountain  a  meal ;  and  though 


430  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

they  suppose  it  is  an  honour,  it  will  be  a  shame  for  them,  and 
great  plagues,  plagues  from  which  they  will  be  unable  to  escape, 
plagues  whereby  they  will  come  to  their  end." 

The  idea  of  the  abolition  of  death  is  an  advance  on  the 
expectatation  of  greatly  prolonged  life  in  the  New  Age  (6520);  it 
is  expressed  here  in  an  isolated  monostich  between  the  account 
of  the  abolition  of  the  veil  which  reveals,  and  the  removal  from 
the  face  of  the  tears  revealed;  and  for  this  reason  Du.,  al. 
suspect  that  the  line  is  an  addition. 

6.  Yahweh  of  Host s\  these  words  would  be  unnecessary  when 
v.^  formed  the  immediate  sequence  to  24^^ :  they  make  the  line 
in  J^  very  long. — For  all  the  peoples]  repeated  in  v.''  with  the 
parallel  all  the  nations. — In  this  mountain']  Mt.  Sion  (cp.  24^3) ; 
the  writer  was  probably  resident  in  Jerusalem  (cp.  Jn  421). — A 
feast]  the  same  word  that  is  used  in  5^2 .  for  the  phrase  to  make 
afeastfor^  i.e.  to  give  a  feast  to,  see,  e.g.,  Gn  19^  26^^. — The  feast 
of  those  who  attain  to  the  New  Age,  though  without  special 
reference  to  Yahweh's  accession,  is  referred  to  in  Apoc.  Bar.  29, 
according  to  which  the  feast  will  be  furnished  by  the  flesh  of  the 
great  monsters  Behemoth  and  Leviathan  (cp.  also  4  Es  6^'^, 
En  60^*),  and  the  same  general  idea  underlies  several  passages  of 
the  NT;  see  Mt  8",  Lk  1328  1415  22^^^-,  Rev  199.  The  feast 
will  consist  of  food,  fat  and  rich,  and  of  wine  that  has  acquired 
strength  and  flavour  by  remaining  on  its  lees  (cp.  Jer  48^^)  after 
the  first  fermentation,  and  has  been  rendered  clear  by  being 
filtered  before  use. — 7»  The  text  is  uncertain,  and  seems  to  have 
been  read  differently  from  J^,  not  only  by  ffir,  but  even  by  ^5E 
Symm.  (see  phil.  n.).  If  |^  is  correct  (the  versions  are  not  to  be 
preferred),  the  interpretation  is  most  probably  to  be  taken  as 
above :  from  the  peoples  of  the  world  assembled  in  Mount  Sion, 
Yahweh  will  remove  the  symbols  of  mourning,  for  which  there 
will  be  no  more  cause.  For  the  covering  of  the  head  as  a  sign 
of  mourning  or  grief,  see  2  S  15^^,  Jer  143^-,  Est  6^2 — j%^  ^^//j 
lit.  the  face,  i.e.  the  outward  surface  turned  towards  the  beholder, 
of  the  veil',  a  curious  expression  after  the  vb.  V?3  (3^^  19^ 
La  2^-^  etc.),  but  a  fairly  close  parallel  occurs  in  Job  41^(1^). — 
The  web]  the  same  word,  differently  applied,  occurs  in  2820.  It 
is  a  parallel  to  the  veil  of  the  previous  line,  and  does  not  signify 
a  covering  of  the  eyes  which  renders  spiritually  blind  (Del. :  cp. 
2  Co  3^^). — 8a.  Correctly  paraphrased  in  Rev  21*,  Kat  6  ^avaros 


XXV.  6-12 


431 


ovK  €(TTai  €Ti ;  cp.  I  Co  15*^  KaTtfToOr]  6  Odvaro^  ci?  vlko^.  The  vb. 
can,  of  course,  be  pointed  as  passive  y^JB,  but  between  vbs.  of 

which  Yahweh  is  the  subj.  it  is  most  properly  treated  as  act. ;  so 
MT.  St.  Paul's  €is  viKos  (so  Aq.,  Theod.)  rests  on  an  Aramaic 
sense  of  nv:^  (cp.  e.g.  Am  i"  in  (5),  and  is  incorrect.  See, 
further,  above. — Ju?r  Uis  Yahweh  hath  spoken]  24^  n. 

6.  On  (&,  which  is  in  no  respect  preferable  to  J^,  see  Lieb. ;  but  he  is 

wrong  in  tracing  xP^trovrai  fi6pov  to  ySn  in  v.' :  this  clause,  representing  pr 
injyD'  (cp.  Am  6^),  is  all  that  ffi  has  for  the  last  four  words  of  v.*  }^.  It  is  a 
mere  accident  that  D'Dun  h^h  is  omitted  in  MS  Ken  23. — D'jor  nnro]  a  feast 
of  fatnesses  ^  i.e.  of  rich  foods :  cp.  D'JDr  K'J  of  a  rich  and  fertile  valley,  and 
the  use  of  jD?',  adj.,  and  D'JDrD  of  what  is  eaten^  3o2»,  Gn  49'*',  Neh  8^°. — 
D'TDB']  lees^  dregs  (Jer  48",  Zeph  i^',  Ps  75')  is  used  by  a  striking  brevilo- 
quence  for  D'lor}  ': ;  that  wine,  not  dregs,  is  intended,  is  clear  from  the  last 
clause  of  the  v.  Note  the  assonances  in  the  v.  d'tdb' — a'aDc  and  o'ppiD — D'nOD. 
— D'noD]  B.ir.  Xe7. — a  derivative  from  nb,  marrow.  On  the  form,  see  G-K. 
T^dd. — 7.  On  ffi,  see  Lieb.,  but  with  the  qualification  noted  on  v.*.  (!K  omits 
j;^3) ;  in  place  of  ^3  Vy  tihr\  oiSn  '3S  it  has  ira/xiSos  irdvra  ravray  and  for  naccni 
njiojn,  ii  yhp  /SouX^  aOrij.  For  laiVn  oi*?.!,  S  (cp.  tJT)  has  -^  '  ^  ^^  ]  ^  "  ^  ^, 
tAe  ruler  that  rules  {i.e.  Death),  but  'JD  creates  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of 
accepting  this  otherwise  attractive  reading. — fiiVn]  best  taken  as  part,  act., 
veiling :  G-K.  72/ ;  it  might  equally  well  be  pointed  as  part.  pass.  BiVn  (cp. 
I  S  21^°).— D'lan  ^3  h]j']  &  D'un  '?3  ':s  Vy.— 8.  nw"?  nion  y'?a]  (&  KariTriev 
b  ddvaros  /<rxi5(ras.  Deaths  prevailing^  swallowed  {them)  up ;  Gratz  proposes 
oy^a\  And  death  shall  swallow  them  (i.e.  the  nations)  up  for  ever',  this,  of 
course,  would  only  be  possible  on  the  improbable  interpretation  of  v.*  that  the 
feast  is  intended  for  the  confusion  of  the  nations ;  the  transition,  moreover, 
from  the  general  reference  to  the  nations  to  the  special  reference  to  the  Jews 
only  takes  place  after  v.^** ;  D'JB  Va  goes  back  to  nnan  ^3  in  v.'. — 'jik]  absent 
from  ffi,  is  probably  another  late  addition  to  |^  :  cp.  Lieb. — m.T  '3]  (&.  'a  '3 
ni.T  :  cp.  24'  n. 


XXV.  9-i2. — A  Song  of  Deliverance  ;  and  the  humiliation 

of  Moab. 

v.*  contains  an  initial  formula  and  four  lines  arranged  in  two  3  :  3  distichs 
(see  n.  on  v.^).  In  vv.^*'"^*  the  rhythm  seems  irregular;  but  the  text  is 
very  uncertain. 

®  And  it  shall  be  said  in  that  day : — 

Behold,  this  is  our  God, 

We  have  waited  for  him  that  he  might  deliver  us : 
This  is  Yahweh ;  we  have  waited  for  him  : 

Let  us  rejoice  and  exult  in  his  deliverance. 


B 


432 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


10  For  the  hand  of  Yahweh  shall  rest  on  this  mountain, 
^^^  And  Moab  shall  be  trampled  down  in  its  place, 

As  straw  is  trampled  down  in  a  dung-pit. 
^1  And  he  shall  spread  out  his  hands  .  .  . 

•  •••••■ 

And  his  pride  shall  be  brought  low  .  .  . 


I 


And  the  fortifications  the  height  of  thy  walls  he  hath  abased, 
Brought  low,  laid  level  with  the  earth,  even  to  the  dust. 

9.  The  opening  formula,  and  it  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  does 
not  state  that  the  song  which  follows  will  be  sung  by  Jews  (ct. 
26^),  but  the  contents  of  v.^  prove  that  this  is  intended ;  it  is 
not  to  be  sung  by  "  all  the  peoples  "  of  vv.^^-,  but  by  those  last 
mentioned  (v.^'^)  who  have  long  waited  for,  and  have  now  ex- 
perienced, Yahweh's  favour.  The  song  is,  perhaps,  confined  to 
the  two  3 : 3  distichs  (cp.  251'^)  of  v.^,  and  Di.  may  be  right  in 
regarding  vv.^^"^^^  or  perhaps  rather  w.^*^^-  ^^  as  the  writer's  com- 
ment :  the  song  will  have  been  justified  by  the  overthrow  of 
Moab.  Du.,  al.  extend  the  song  to  v.^^,  and  see  in  v.^^  ^  variant 
of  26^ :  certainly  the  vocatives  of  v.^^  differentiate  it  somewhat  in 
tone  from  either  v.®  or  ^^* — This  is  our  God]  or,  our  God  is  such  : 
if  the  rhythm  of  the  v.  is  3  :  3,  MT  is  right  in  taking  nt  demon- 
stratively (cp.  Ps  48^'*)  and  not  as  a  rare  instance  of  nt  relative 
(see  BDB  26i3). 

10.  The  hand  of  Yahweh  shall  rest]  Apparently  this  means  : 
the  power  of  Yahweh  will  manifest  itself,  Sion  will  become  the 
centre  of  the  universal  kingdom  (Du.):  the  idea  is  then  that  of 
24^^,  but  the  expression  of  it  is  curious.  For  the  vb.  ni3  in 
different  connections,  see  7^  112,  and  cp.,  especially,  the  noun  in 
11^^  The  absence  of  an  expressed  obj.  leaves  it  doubtful 
whether  (&  is  right  in  omitting  T*  and  treating  nj''  (so  read  instead 
of  njn  =  f^^)  as  Hiph.,  God  (or,  Yahweh)  ivill  give  resty  viz.  to 
Israel. — I?t  this  mountain]  Sion  :  cp.  v.^ 

lOb.  Instead  of  the  national  enemies  of  Israel  in  general, 
Moab  is  here  singled  out,  as  elsewhere  Edom  (ch.  34.  631*"-)  in 
similar  descriptions.  Saadia,  therefore,  renders  Moab  by  ^^  the 
nations^^  (Ges.).  Why  Moab  is  thus  singled  out  is  obscure,  but 
see  above,  pp.  403  f.  Other  descriptions  of  calamities  befalling 
Moab,  or  prophecies  of  the  punishment  of  that  people,  are  to  be 
found  in  chs.  15  f.,  Jer  48,  Zeph  2^-^^,  Ezk  25^^-    The  tone  here, 


XXV.  9-12  433 

if  the  text  of  J^  may  be  trusted,  is  more  than  usually  con- 
temptuous, and  the  comparison  of  proud  (i6^)  Moab's  end  with 
that  of  a  man  drowned  in  dung-water  recalls  the  malignancy  of 
the  saga  that  told  of  Moab's  birth  (Gn  iqSO-").—/^  its  place] 
in  its  own  land :  this  idiomatic  use  of  nnn  is  not  uncommon :  see, 
e.g.y  46^,  1  S  14^  2  S  2^3. — As  straw  is  trodden  dmvn  in  a  dung- 
pit]  so  K.«re  :  K^tib  in  the  water  of  a  dung-pit.  Madmenah^  with 
which  tnathben^  straw^  forms  an  assonance,  is  not  only  a  common 
noun  meaning  dung-place  or  dung-pit,  but  also,  if  the  text  of  Jer 
48^  may  be  trusted,  the  fem.  form  of  the  proper  name  of  a 
Moabite  town.  At  most  a  doubleefitendre  is  intended  :  the  writer 
certainly  did  not  mean  merely  in  the  water  of  Madmenah. 

II.  And  he]  viz.  Moab  personified;  cp.  i*n. ;  the  point  of 
the  V.  is  pretty  clearly  this :  do  what  he  will,  Moab  will  not 
escape,  but  his  pride  will  be  humbled;  but  the  text  is  very 
uncertain :  see  phil.  n.  ]^  may  be  rendered  literally,  And  he 
shall  {or ^  and  though  he:  Dr.  §  147)  spread  out  his  hands  in  his 
midst  as  a  sivimmer  spreads  out  to  swim,  {and)  one  shall  bring 
low  his  pride  together  with  (or,  adopting  a  very  rare  use  of  oy 
(Neh.  5^^),  in  spite  of)  the  artifices  of  his  hands.  The  idea  of 
swimming  in  a  dung-pit  while  being  trodden  down  is  extra- 
ordinary: Kennett  (p.  68,  n.  i)  suggests  that  "Moab  is  not 
thought  of  as  swimming,  but  as  lying  on  the  ground  in  the 
attitude  of  a  swimmer.  A  man  who  lies  fiat  on  his  chest  with 
arms  and  legs  extended,  with  the  foot  of  his  enemy  planted  on 
his  back,  is  in  a  most  helpless  position."  But  had  this  been 
intended,  passives  in  v.^^  would  have  been  more  natural,  and 
"  arms "  rather  than  hands  would  have  been  specified :  and  his 
arms  shall  be  spread  out  like  the  arms  of  a  swimmer  would  require 
a  very  different  text  from  the  present.  dSt  does  not  recognise 
any  reference  to  swimming,  and  the  original  text  may  rather 
have  referred  to  Moab's  fruitless  prayers  to  his  god  to  save  him 
in  his  distress  (see  phil.  n.). — 12.   See  above,  and  cp.  26^ 


9.  i"?  lyip  rwn'  m  ijyan'i  i"?  >rip  ni  ^yrhH  r^ri]  the  original  text  of  (!K 
omitted  the  overlined  words,  but  rather  owing  to  homoioteleuton,  which 
subsequently  led  to  the  omission  of  the  same  words  from  MS  Ken.  30,  than 
to  their  absence  from  the  Hebrew  text  of  that  time.  Du.,  al.  omit  mn*  nj 
"h  inp,  but  retain  uyriM.— 10.  njono  'D3]  K«tib  '??,  K«re  v:3 ;  but  probably 
enough  even  the  K*tlb  is  a  vocalic  addition  to  n^r^iD  D3  which  arose  from 
n32"iC3  by  dittography  of  the  0.  The  Versions  certainly  did  not  read  '03 ; 
VOL.  I. — 28 


434  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

whether  they  read  1D3  or  3  cannot  be  determined. — For  njoio,  ffi  has  &fxd^ais 
=  n3DnD  or  D'jno. — ii.  vt  a-nai]  tyis  with  on'  or  D'sd  is  commonly  used  else- 
where of  the  gesture  of  prayer:  see,  e.g.,  i^^,  Ps  143^;  and  tiis  sense  it  may 
possibly  have  had  here  in  the  original  text :  see  following  notes. — nnpn]  the 
masc.  sing,  suffix  does  not  refer  naturally  either  to  'D  or  njmo.  The  word  is 
possibly  not  original :  fflr  omits  it. — trns']  (&  Kai  airds :  since  this  makes  no  very 
obvious  or  easy  sentence  in  ffir,  we  may  infer  that  (&  actually  read  Kini  instead 
of  trns'.— ninB'^  nnrn]  i&  iraireivioaev  tov  diroX^aaL  =  nnefh  (n)nB'n  =  |^^  y.^'^"  *» 
is  certainly  difficult  in  f^,  and  may  be  merely  a  makeshift  accommodation  to  a 
corrupt  text  of  which  (&  in  some  points  preserves  a  purer  form.  Lieb.  may  be 
right  in  suspecting  that  the  original  referred  to  Moab's  fruitless  appeal  in  his 
distress  to  his  God,  though  his  actual  reconstruction  of  the  text  is  far  from 
certain :  he  proposes  nne'S  Mne^n  Kim  riD3  Sk  vt  rnsi. — ^"s&m]  (K^  xal 
Ta'jreivu6'/ia€Tai  =  hs-^n], — iniNi]  since  the  figure  of  swimming  is  very  un- 
certain, it  is  unwise  to  postulate  unknown  meanings  for  niN3,  such  as  his 
rising,  which  might  suit  the  figure  better. — nrnx]  n^nx  is  dw.  \ey.  :  cp.  the 
masc.  2-)k  in  Hos  7^,  Jer  g' ;  but  the  word  is  uncertain  here. — 12.  aj^D  nstno] 
®r  Kai  rb  V^os  r^s  /cara^iry^s,  which  is  probably  a  double  rendering  of  DJ^D. 
In  this  case  fflr's  text  lacked  nsnn.  Note  (i)  C^os  in  ffi  never  renders  nsao  ; 
(2)  KaTa<f)vyr]  occurs  nowhere  else  in  Is.,  though  13  times  in  Pss.,  4  in  the 
Pent.,  and  i  each  in  Jer.,  Dan.  (Theod.),  and  2  Mace;  (3)  ajro,  which 
is  very  variously  rendered,  =  Kara^vyij  twice  in  Pss. ;  (4)  2iVD  occurs  but 
once  elsewhere  in  Is.  (33^*),  and  is  there  rendered  laxvpb^:  but  ^iv=ii'^ovv 
in  2^'* "  12*. — ^'flJS'n  ncn]  (&  omits  one  of  these.— px"?]  ffi  omits. 

XXVI.  1-19. 

Du.  appears  to  have  perceived  correctly  the  remarkable  and  unusual 
rhythmical  structure  of  vv.^"^^.  The  poem  consists  of  periods  of  six  accents, 
which  are  divided  into  two  equal  sections  (3 :  3)  by  a  caesura,  or  into  three 
equal  sections  (2:2:2)  by  a  double  caesura  (cp.  i^*  *).  Parallelism  occurs, 
though  it  is  by  no  means  consistently  used.  Where  the  rhythm  is  3:3, 
parallelism,  if  it  occurs,  occurs  between  these  sections  of  the  entire  rhythmical 
period ;  where  the  rhythm  is  2:2:2  the  parallelism  is  between  two  of  the 
three  sections ;  or  there  is  partial  parallelism  of  the  middle  section  with  each 
of  the  other  two  ;  so  in  v. 2. 

In  the  translation  the  lines  correspond  to  the  sections  of  the  periods  of  six 
accents,  and  the  arrangement  will  show  whether  these  periods  divide  into 
3  :  3  or  2  :  2  :  2. 

The  words  in  small  print  destroy  the  regularity  of  the  rhythm  :  in  some 
cases  there  are  independent  reasons  (see  Comm.  and  phil.  nn. )  for  suspecting 
that  they  are  intrusive.  In  addition  the  following  irregularities,  whether 
original  or  due  to  textual  corruption,  are  to  be  noted : — v.*^  is  longer  by  a 
word  than  5®  if  n'?*£3t!"  -uS'St?'  be  retained  :  7**  *»  in  J^  is  3  :  4,  but  J^  is  almost 
certainly  corrupt :  v.*  in  |^  is  irregular  :  Du.,  Cheyne  make  of  it  two  irregular 
periods,  first  3  : 2  and  then  i  :  i  :  2 ;  see  below  for  other  possibilities : 
yy  9b-i2b  contain  several  uncertainties  of  rhythm,  and  also  much  that  is 
textually  uncertain  (see  below).     V.^^"**  J^  (not  ®)  is  2  : 2 : 2  : 2. 


XXV.  II,  12,  XXVI.  I-I9  435 

^  In  that  day  shall  this  song  be  sung  in  the  land  of  Judah : 

A  strong  city  is  ours, 

Salvation  doth  he  make 
Its  walls  and  outworks. 

*  Open  the  gates. 

That  the  righteous  nation  may  enter, 
(Even  he)  that  keepeth  faith. 

*  The  steadfast  disposition 

Dost  thou  maintain  unharmed. 
Because  it  trusteth  in  thee. 

*  Trust  ye  in  Yah  we  h  for  ever. 

For  Yah  Yahweh  is  an  everlasting  Rock. 

*  For  he  hath  brought  low 

The  inhabitants  of  the  height, 
The  city  set  on  high; 
He  abaseth  it  even  to  the  earth, 

He  bringeth  it  even  to  the  dusL 

*  The  foot  shall  trample  it, 

The  feet  of  the  poor, 

The  footsteps  of  the  needy. 

f  The  path  of  the  *  upright  *  is  even  ^ , 

The  track  of  the  righteous  thou  levellest. 
8  Yea,  for  the  path  of  thy  judgments — 
O  Yahweh  we  have  waited  for  ^    thy  name. 

And   for   thy   memorial   hath   been   the   desire    ol 

our  soul. 
8  With  my  soul  have  I  desired  thee  in  the  night, 

Yea,   with    my   spirit   within    me   do   I    seek    thee 

earnestly. 
When  thy  judgments  (come  down)  to  the  earth  (?), 
The  inhabitants  of  the  world 
Learn  righteousness. 
10  [No]  favour  shall  be  shown  (?)  to  the  unrighteous ; 
He  hath  not  learnt  righteousness 
In  the  land  of  truth; 
He  acteth  wickedly  .  .  . , 
And  seeth  not 

The  majesty  of  Yahweh. 


436  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

^^  Yahweh  thy  hand  is  exalted ; 
They  behold  (it)  not; 
They  shall  behold  and  be  ashamed. 
•  •••••• 

Yea,  a  fire  shall  consume  ^    thy  adversaries. 
"  .  .  .  O  Yahweh  .  .  . 

Thou  wilt  appoint  for  us  welfare  j 
For  even  all  our  works 

Hast  thou  done  for  us, 
^^  O  Yahweh,  our  God. 

(Other)  lords  (?)  beside  thee  have  owned  us, 

But  of  thee  (?)   only   we  will   make   mention,   (even) 

of  thy  Name. 
1*  The  dead  shall  live  not. 

The  shades  shall  rise  not; 
Therefore  hast  thou  visited  and  destroyed  them. 
And  caused  all  their  memorial  to  perish. 

^5  Thou   hast   added    to   the    nation,    Yahweh,   thou    hast  added  to  the 

nation,  thou  hast  shown  thyself  glorious ; 
Thou   hast  greatly   extended   all   the   borders   of  the 

land. 
^^  Yahweh  in  distress  '  we '  sought  (?)  thee, 

'We  cried  out  because  of  oppression,' 
When  Thy  chastisement  was  upon  'us.' 
^"^  As  a  woman  with  child. 

When  she  is  near  giving  birth. 
Writhes  crics  out  in  her  pangs. 
So  were  we 

Because  of  thy  presence,  O  Yahweh ; 

18  ^Ve     were    with    child,    we    writhed,    when  we  gave  birth,  (lo !) 


wind. 


We  could  not  make  the  land  safe. 

And  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  did  not  fall. 
i»Thy  dead  shall  live, 

'  Their  '  corpses  shall  arise ; 
They  that  dwell  in  the  dust, 
'Shall'  awake  and  give  a  ringing  cry. 
For  the  dew  of  ...  is  thy  dew, 

And  the  earth  shall  give  birth  to  shades. 


XXVI.  I-I9  437 

The  rubric,  v.^,  fuller  than  in  25^  27^,  quite  clearly  defines 
what  follows  to  be  a  song  which  is  to  be  sung  in  the  land  of 
Judah  in  that  day^  i.e.  at  the  time  when  Yahweh  will  have 
delivered  His  people,  and  begun  His  glorious  reign  in  Jerusalem 
(2423).  The  rubric  does  not,  of  course,  define  the  limits  of  the 
song ;  and  it  is  only  the  opening  verses  which  are  strictly  suitable 
to  the  occasion.  Moreover,  in  vv.^"^,  with  the  exception  (in  the 
present  text)  of  v.^  Yahweh  is  the  subject  and  is  spoken  of  in  the 
3rd  pers. :  in  vv.^"^^  Yahweh  is  addressed.  For  these  reasons  we 
might  regard  the  song  as  closing  with  v.* ;  but  it  has  been  very 
pertinently  observed  in  regard  to  w.^-^^  that  "  the  verse-connec- 
tion is  as  a  rule  very  close,  and  just  at  those  points  where  some 
critics  have  recognised  a  discontinuity  of  thought  {e.g.  after  v.'^ 
or  v.^°  or  v.^^)  the  phraseology  presents  indications  of  a  studied 
transition.  The  poem,  indeed,  is  remarkable  for  its  concatenated 
structure :  that  is  to  say,  a  word  or  idea  is  taken  up  from  one 
verse  and  suggests  a  new  thought  for  the  next  (w.^^-  ^^-  ^^-  ^-  ^^'  ^^f. 
17*^"  (Skinner).  An  additional  common  feature  that  binds 
together  w.^"^^  is  the  peculiar  rhythmic  structure :  see  above. 

Either,  then,  an  already  existing  poem  (cp.  pp  401  f.  above) 
was  here  inserted  on  account  of  the  suitability  of  the  opening 
verses,  or  else  the  influence  of  the  ideal  situation  with  reference  to 
which  the  opening  verses  were  written  weakens  as  the  poem  pro- 
ceeds, and  the  writer  expresses  his  hopes  and  reflections  during 
the  night  (v.^)  of  sorrow  through  which  he  is  passing  rather  than 
the  triumphant  joy  in  Yahweh's  deliverance  and  the  overthrow  of 
"the  city  (now)  set  on  high"  (v.^)  which  he  expects  His  people 
to  experience  when  night  has  given  place  to  morning. 

There  are  several  corrupt  or  obscure  passages  in  the  poem, 
and  these  are  discussed  in  detail  in  the  Comm.  as  they  arise ; 
but  the  line  of  thought  and  the  relation  of  ideas  within  the  poem 
seem  to  be  as  follows  : 

The  Jews  exult  in  Jerusalem  made  impregnable,  v.^,  and 
refilled  with  righteous  observers  of  the  law,  v. 2,  but  only  with 
such,  v.^^;  they  find  in  Yahweh's  maintenance  unharmed  of 
those  who  steadfastly  relied  on  Him,  v. 5,  and  whose  loyalty  to 
Yahweh  no  temptations  had  shaken,  v. ^3,  ground  for  continued 
and  enduring  trust  in  him,  v.*.  The  other  side  to  the  exaltation 
of  Jerusalem  is  the  humiliation  and  destruction  of  the  City  now 
set  on  high,  w.^^-,  and  of  all  Yahweh's  adversaries,  v.^^®. 


438  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

All  this  has  not  yet  happened ;  but  there  are  steadfast  minds, 
v.^,  waiting  for  Yahweh's  judgments,  vv.''^-,  or  renewed  judgments 
(cp.  v.^),  to  teach  the  world  righteousness.  But  even  in  Judah, 
the  land  of  true  religion,  there  are  wicked  men  who  are  contu- 
maciously neglectful  of  the  law,  and  blind  to  the  majesty  of 
Yahweh  that  was  to  be  revealed,  and  even  then  was  revealed  to 
the  eye  of  faith,  vv.^^^-. 

The  Jews  of  themselves  had  achieved  nothing ;  all  that  has 
yet  been  achieved  is  Yahweh's  work,  the  pledge  of  what  He  will 
do  for  His  people  who,  though  aliens  have  exercised  political 
dominion  over  them,  have  never  swerved  in  their  religious 
fidelity  to  Him,  vv.^- 1^.  But  once  these  tyrants  have  been 
destroyed  by  Yahweh  (v.^^®),  they  being  dead  cannot  rise  and 
again  afflict  the  Jews,  v.^*. 

Already  in  fact,  or  to  faith,  the  Jews  have  grown  and 
their  land  has  been  enlarged,  v.^^ ;  but  once  again  the 
writer  insists  that  the  misery  —  "the  night"  of  v.^  —  through 
which  the  Jews  have  been  passing  as  a  chastisement  for 
their  sins  (v.^^'')  had  not  been  (or  will  not  have  been) 
escaped  by  their  own  efforts:  they  had  not  made  the  land  of 
Judah  safe  (cp.  v. 2),  nor  overthrown  their  foes  (cp.  vv.^^-  ^^^); 
this  was  Yahweh's  work  alone,  w.^^-^^.  Nor  will  the  power 
of  Yahweh  be  exhausted  in  re-establishing  His  people  who 
have  survived  on  earth  the  perils  past :  He  will  raise  from 
the  dead  the  Jews  who  had  died,  and  these  will  resume 
on  earth  the  ordinary  earthly  life,  and  join  their  fellows  who 
had  not  died  in  praising  God  in  the  land  of  the  living,  v.^^. 

1-6.  Jerusalem  made  impregnable;  the  city  set  on 
high  destroyed. — I.  The  strong  city  that  belongs  to  those 
who  in  the  land  of  Judah  sing  this  song  is,  though  unnamed, 
unquestionably  Jerusalem ;  the  unnamed  subject  is  Yahweh 
rather  than  indefinite.  The  walls  and  outworks^  or  outer  wall 
(}T\ ;  cp.  2  S  20^^,  La  2^,  Nah  3®),  are  made  impregnable  :  cp. 
3320^-.  The  words  might  have  been  written  for  an  ideal  situation 
(see  above),  or  for  some  such  actual  occasion  as  the  solemn 
dedication  of  the  rebuilt  walls  of  Jerusalem  (Neh  la^-'-^s). 
According  to  an  alternative,  but  less  probable,  interpretation, 
the  V.  means  that  Yahweh's  saving  presence  will  serve  the  city 
instead  of  walls;  cp.  Zee  2®,  Ps  125^.  Another,  but  improbable, 
alternative  would  identify  the  city  with  God  (cp.  Ps  61*):  "urbs 


XXVI.  1-6  439 

fortitudinis  nostrae  Salvator  est,  id  est  Jesus.  Et  ponetur  in  ea 
mums  et  antemurale.  Mums  bonomm  opemm,  et  antemurale 
rectae  fidei,  ut  duplici  septa  sit  munimento"  (Jer.). — 2.  Under 
the  form  of  an  address,  not  to  angels  (Jer.),  but  to  the  gate- 
keepers (cp.  Ps  1 1 8^^),  it  is  made  clear  that  those  only  will  have 
right  of  entry  into  the  city  who  are  righteous  (cp.  i^^ ;  ct.  v.^®), 
and  keep  faith  with  Yahweh  by  observance  of  the  law:  cp.  33^* 
358-10,  Ps  15.  2/^-^. — 3.  The  steadfast  disposition]  ^10D  (cp.  Ps  1 128) 
means  well-stayed  (on  God),  steady^  undisturbed  by  fear,  and 
expresses  very  much  what  Isaiah  expresses  differently  in  7*  30^*. 
The  noun  "IV^  (cp.  the  vb.  in  22^1  2>l'^^)  commonly  denotes  in  OT 
the  purpose  formed  by  man  (Gn  6^  S^i,  Dt  3121,  i  Ch  28^  29^8), 
but  here  rather  disposition — a  transition  to  the  meaning  in  the 
Rabbinic  technical  terms  31Dn  "IV^  and  jnn  "ly,  the  good  and  evil 
impulse  formed  by  God;  and  this  Rabbinic  usage  may  have 
affected  U,  vetus  error  abiit. —  Unharmed]  cp.  Job  5^^;  or  we 
might  render  in  welfare :  cp.  e.g.  Gn  43^^,  and  see  9^  n. :  RV 
in  peace  is  less  satisfactory.  The  repetition  of  the  word  in  f^ 
would  imply  a  superlative  idea  (G-K.  133^), /^^r//y  unharmed \ 
but  it  is  not  supported  by  ffi,  and  is  probably  due  to  dittography. 
—  YahweK]  J^  in  Yah  (12^  n.),  Yahweh  \  but  see  phil.  n. — Rock] 
1 7 10  n. — 5,  6.  Yahweh  has  just  given  proof  that  the  trust  (v.^)  of 
the  righteous  (v. 2)  in  Him  is  well  founded :  for  He  has,  according 
to  His  wont  (Ps  75^'^^),  exalted  the  poor  and  lowly  (v.^),  and 
humbled  the  proud  (v.^).  He  has  laid  in  the  dust  the  City  that 
seemed  out  of  reach,  too  high  (nnaJJ'J,  cp.  Dt  2^^,  Ps  20^  698O  91I4 
139^,  Pr  18^0  2925)  to  be  taken,  challenging  His  sole  exaltation 
(cp.  2I1  1 2*  33^),  and  has  brought  low  (cp.  2^- 1^)  its  inhabitants^ 
who  deemed  themselves  high  up  out  of  harm's  way,  secure  in  the 
height  {c^.  33^^,  Ps  75^);  He  has  given  over  the  city  to  be  trampled 
under  foot  (cp.  Mai  3^1  (4^))  of  the  righteous  Jews  whom  by  its 
oppression  it  had  made,  and  in  its  pride  regarded,  zspoor{2^'^  n.) 
and  needy  (3^^^')* 

I.  nn']  Hoph.  here  only  ;  |^^  "W  was  probably  meant  to  be  Hiph.  :  cp. 
fflr  (pi.  as  in  25^). — u*?  iy  Ty]  MT  liS-iy  Ty,  the  city  is  a  strength  for  us,  but 
makkeph  rather,  laS  iy~i'j;  (cp.  Pr  iS***).  ffiS  om.  13'?;  (5  prefixes  I806  (a 
dittograph  of 'Ioy5[a/as]?). — noin  n'B"  nyir']  on  the  alternative  constructions 
possible,  see  Dr.  §  195. — Note  the  two  assonances  nic"  nyir'  and  hm  niDin. — 
2.  K3'i]  (KS  om.  1— D'3DK]  Pr  13"  14' 20«  (Ps  31^?):  sing.  Dt  32^f.—3, 
•)}in  .  .  .  ns']  another  assonance.     For  "iJf'  Origen's  Hexapla  has  learpo,  i.e. 


440  .      COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

n!£' :  the  suffix  would  refer  to  pnx  ('U),  and  the  first  two  words  of  the  v.  would 
be  not  an  ace.  clause  but  a  sentence. — di'?b'  n"i'?E']  the  second  n^htff  is  probably 
a  dittograph  :  but  see  Lieb. — 13  '3]  |^^  333  (cp.  8^  n.)  may  have  been  an  error 
for  33  =  ia  '3,  and  "isn  above  an  error  for  i^'  :  then  Yahweh  would  be  referred 
to  in  this  v.  as  throughout  vv.^"^  in  the  3rd  pers. — ^1^^3]  pass,  part.,  trusting'. 
cp.  Ps  112',  and  see  Kon.  iii.  235a?;  for  the  omission  of  the  subj.  see  Dr. 
§  135  (6). — 4.  Q'O^iy  "iii£  ni.T  n'3  '3]  ffi  6  ^e6s  6  /t^7as  6  a^civtos ;  .T3-'3,  prob- 
ably absent  from  ffi's  text,  may  be  a  corruption  of  nin'3,  a  correct  marginal 
variant  of  ni.T,  Trust  ye  in  Yahweh  for  ever,  in  Yahweh  the  everlasting 
Rock,     n'3  '3  would  involve  a  remarkable  use  of  |i :  see  BDB  89  a  (top). — 

5.  DiTD  '3B"]  according  to  Marti  this  is  a  play  on  the  name  jitdb'  :  cp.  25^  n. 
Cp.  25^2,  which  may  consist  mainly  of  variants  on  this  v. — rh^tna''  ruV'SB"] 
probably  another  case  of  dittography.  (&.  has  no  equivalent  for  pK  ny  naS'SJt?' ; 
on  the  other  hand,  at  the  beginning  of  the  v.  Taireivibaas  Kar-^yayes  is  more 
than  equivalent  to  nvn  and  perhaps  represents  ^'Bbti  nrn  (cp.  25^2  T^y  Su^h 
a  reading  in  itself  would  be,  on  grounds  both  of  rhythm  and  parallelism, 
altogether  improbable ;  but  it  is  barely  possible  that  v.^  originally  consisted 
of  two  3  :  3  distichs  : 

miD   '3B"    nJ!'iT'3 

yiH  ny  rch'sv 
Tsy  ny  mn^'y 

6.  njDDin]  the  3rd  rhyme  is  nj-?-  within  a  few  words. — '^n  hyi]  another  case  of 
dittography?  But  the  mere  omission  of  *?:">  ((55)  would  leave  the  rhythm 
irregular.  Lieb.  rejects  ^3t  and  conjecturally  supplies  n33"nn  after  D'Vn  :  this 
would  make  v.^  a  distich  3  :  3.  The  sing.  vb.  might  stand  before  either 
^jn  sing,  or  (G-K.  145^)  '^JT  pi. — 'Jy]  read  D"3y  :  cp.  a'hi,  and  see  dSc. 

7-1 1.  Waiting  for  Yahweh's  discriminating  judg- 
ments.— 7*  ^o^  makes  for  the  righteous  a  smooth  way  of  life 
free  from  stumbling-blocks  such  as  cumber  the  way  of  the  wicked 
and  cause  them  to  fall :  the  righteous  thus  pass  through  life 
easily  and  free  from  disaster.  Cp.  for  the  phraseology  or 
ideas  of  the  v.,  Ps  i^,  Pr  3^  4^^  5^-  ^i  nS.  It  is  most  improbable 
that  nC'''  refers  to  God,  T/iou  that  art  upright  (RV) ;  but  on  the 
text  see  phil.  n. — 8.  Speaking  in  the  name  of  the  community, 
the  writer  claims  that  they  have  patiently  and  longingly  waited 
(25^)  for  the  manifestation  of  Yahweh's  power. — For  the  path  of 
Thy  Judgments]  this  entire  clause  is  perhaps  made  up  of  a 
dittograph  from  path  in  v.^,  and  a  gloss  {Thy  Judgments)  on 
Thy  name'y  the  original  rhythm  of  v.^  would  then  have  been 
normal  (3:3);  or,  if  the  rhythm  was  abnormal  (3:3:3)  the  clause 
may  be  taken  as  the  object  of  the  vb.  emphatically  placed  first, 
and  then  resumed  by  an  equivalent  expression  (cp.  Dr.  §  197, 
Obs.  2) ;   but  either  Thee  (J^),  or  Thy  name  {(&)  would  be  a 


XXVI.  4-1 1  441 

strange  permutative  of  the  path  of  thy  judgments.  Reading 
13^1p  we  might  render,  For  the  path  .  .  .  have  we  waited ;  For 
thy  name  and  for  thy  memorial^  etc.;  but  this  (Hke  MT,  RV) 
would  give  a  very  abnormal  rhythm  (4 : 4),  and  would  crowd 
two  parallel  terms  into  a  single  line. — Name  .  .  .  memorial] 
the  expressions  are  synonymous  :  see  Ex  3^*,  Ps  30^  W.  Yahweh 
makes  His  name  remembered  (Ex  202-*)  by  some  striking  mani- 
festation of  His  presence  and  power. — The  desire  of  our  sou/]  this, 
the  reading  of  ffi,  is  doubtless  correct :  it  is  tacitly  adopted  by 
RV.  5^  omits  our. — 9.  Reinforces  v.^ ;  but,  if  ^  is  correct,  with 
a  transition  from  the  ist  pi.  to  the  ist  sing.,  such  as  often  occurs 
in  the  Psalms:  see,  e.g.,  Ps  443-5(4-6), — /„  /^  night]  cp.  2iii'- — 
Within  me]  cp.  Zee  12^,  Ps  39*  55^(4)  10922.  ffi  omits  the 
word  altogether. — pc.  d.  e,  10.  The  desire  for  the  manifestation 
of  Yahweh's  judgment  or  power  is  based  on  experience  (HD^ 
pf.  of  experience) :  when  the  judgments  of  God  no  longer  remain 
high  out  of  sight  of  the  wicked  (Ps  lo**),  allowing  him  to  flatter 
himself  that  he  can  sin  on  with  impunity,  but  come  down  to 
earth,  then  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  at  large  learn  righteous- 
ness, though  the  wicked  do  not  do  so,  with  the  result  that  the 
wicked  are  punished  (Ps  g^^i^'O),  Something  like  this  seems 
to  be  intended,  if  ^  is  in  the  main  correct;  but  the  text 
of  f^  and  (&  differ  considerably,  and  the  original  text  cannot 
be  detected  with  any  certainty,  and  some  of  the  more  exact  turns 
of  thought  remain  very  obscure ;  but  apparently  this  writer 
distinguishes,  whereas  the  author  of  Ps  9^^  seems  to  identify,  the 
inhabitants  of  the  world  (18^),  i.e.  the  heathen  nations,  and  the 
unrighteous.  Convinced  by  Yahweh's  judgments  of  His  power  and 
Godhead,  the  nations  learn  righteousness  of  life  from  the  God  of 
the  Jews  (cp.  22-^).  But  there  is  a  class  of  wicked  people  who 
persistently  shut  their  eyes  (5^2  n.)  to  the  majesty  of  Yahweh 
(12^)  and  refuse  to  learn  and  follow  the  way  approved  by  Him, 
though  they  live  in  the  land  of  uprightness.  If  the  last  phrase 
means,  as  it  probably  does,  the  land  of  Judah,  then  the  unrighteous 
of  v.^^  are  not  heathen  (13^^  i4^'")  but  Jews,  and  the  meaning  is : 
when  Yahweh  manifests  His  power  the  very  heathen  will  adopt 
His  ways;  but  the  ungodly  Jews  are  past  recovery  in  their 
wickedness,  and  (v.2)  will  have  no  right  of  entry  into  Jerusalem. 
— \J^^]  f<^'vour  shall  be  shown]  for  the  conjecture  and  views  of  the 
cstr.,  see  phil.  n.     |^  might  be  translated  shall  the  unrighteous 


442  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

receive  favour  ?  (No),  ke  hath  not,  etc. — In  the  translation  above 
of  vv.^®*®"  ^^  f^  is  closely  followed ;  an  alternative  translation 
based  on  a  text  tentatively  reconstructed  with  reference  to  ffit  as 
well  as  to  f^  and  to  rhythmical  considerations  is  now  given : 

^  For  thy  judgments  are  a  light ; 

The  inhabitants  of  the  world 

Have  learnt  righteousness  (cp.  6o^-s). 
^®  The  unrighteous  shall  cease  to  be 

That  learnt  not  righteousness 

In  the  land  of  uprightness. 
The  wicked  shall  be  taken  away  (cp.  57^), 

And  shall  not  see 

The  majesty  of  Yahweh  (cp.  2423). 

II,  The  wicked  (v.^^)  do  not  yet  perceive  the  power  of  Yahweh, 
that  it  is  He  who  really  achieves  all  things  (v.^^)^  ^ut  ti^gy  goon 
will  see  it  is  to  their  confusion  :  Yahweh  will  consume  them  with 
fire  (cp.  30^^  33^*)- — Thy  hand  is  exa/ted]  cp.  Dt  32^7;  the 
uplifted  hand  is  power  in  action  as  the  dropped  hand  is  absence 
of  power,  or  power  held  in  check  ;  cp.  2  S  4^  17^  24^^ — Line  d. 
omitted  from  the  translation  above  is  corrupt ;  instead  of  the 
three  words  required  by  the  metrical  structure  two  only  survive 
in  ^  :  dStf  ^rjXo's  Xrnixl/trai  Xaov  aTratScvroi/,  may  have  had  more ; 
but  see  Lieb.  f^  makes  no  sense,  whether  connected  with  what 
precedes  (cp.  RV)  or  with  what  follows.  It  is  altogether 
improbable,  apart  from  the  violation  done  thereby  to  the  regular 
metrical  structure  of  the  poem,  that  ny  nN3p,  jealousy  for  the 
people,  is  ace.  to  they  shall  see  (line  a.)  in  spite  of  the  intransitive 
vb.  intervening,  so  that  the  sentence  would  read  they  shall  see, 
and  be  ashamed,  the  jealousy  for  the  people.  Mic  7^^,  to  which  Di. 
appeals,  is  a  good  parallel  for  the  general  sense,  none  at  all  for 
such  an  extraordinary  construction.  RV  really  implies  two 
conjectural  emendations — the  transposition  of  the  two  vbs.  Itn'' 
and  "Wy^,  and  "joy  for  Dy.  Others  take  Dj;  n^<:p,  or,  emending, 
■]0V  nwp,  as  a  first  subject  of  the  vb.  at  the  end  of  the  v.,  and 
XQndiQX  jealousy  for  (or,  of)  the  (or,  thy)  people,  yea,  the  fire  of  {i.e. 
ordained  for)  thy  adversaries  will  consume  them.  Jealousy  of  the 
people  might  mean  either  jealousy  displayed  by  the  people,  i.e., 
the  Jews,  or  jealousy  (9^)  displayed  by  Yahweh  for  (cp.  Ps  69^°) 


J 


XXVI.  7-14  443 

the  Jews.     Originally  line  d.  probably  consisted  of  three  words, 
and  was  parallel  in  sense  to  line  e.  ((5)  as  translated  above. 

7.  The  V.  contains  seven  words,  whereas  the  rhythm  requires  but  six. 
■MS"  in  its  present  position  is  not  satisfactorily  accounted  for,  whether  explained 
as  a  vocative  addressed  to  God,  as  in  apposition  to  the  subj.  of  D^en,  or  as  a 
second  ace.  to  that  vb.  Du.,  al.  therefore  reject  it.  More  probably  nr*  is  the 
misplaced  parallel  to  pn!<  in  lineb.  ;  omit  p'"t^h,  which,  coming  up  from  line  b. 
pnx'?[3yD],  drove  out  ne",  and  read  "W-  mn.  For  other  examples  of  accidental 
repetitions  of  the  same  term  to  the  exclusion  of  one  of  the  synonymous  terms 
in  parallel  lines,  see  24®  n.  ii*n. — 8.  TJip]  read  with  Lowth,  al.  unp. — »)k 
ni.T  ytisvQ  mN]  (&  ^  y^p  d56s  Kvplov  Kplffn. — efsi]  CSC  ij^bj  :  in  |§  the 
suffix  was  lost  before  'vsi.—ga.  b.  dK  omits  in'iK  vffOi,  ^jk,  and  '3np3,  but  adds 
6  debs  at  the  end  of  b.  |^  is  to  be  preferred. — 'mn  .  .  .  veay]  each  word  is  a 
*«  double  subject "  ;  lo^o  n.— TincK]  ffi  dpdpl^ti ;  but  it  is  questionable  to  read 
on  this  account  Tnvn  and  above  I^jn — vbs.  3rd  sing.  fem. — irna  "2]  (5  Silm 
0a;s  =  TiK  '3  or  (8^  n.)  TIK3.  Possibly  <&  is  right,  and  pn"?,  which  would  then 
overload  the  line,  a  gloss.  Bick.,  Du.  omit  n^Ka  as  a  prosaic  variant  of  '3. 
If  "wva  be  retained,  cp.  for  the  form  of  sentence  23'. — 10.  piJ«  "xh  ^3  yen  jn'] 
this  would  be  a  very  exceptional  form  of  hypothetical  sentence  (Dr.  §  155 : 
cp.  1367).  Either  ^3  was  lost  through  haplography  after  Ssn  (Marti),  or 
|n'  is  an  error  for  hixv  (or  Vnn) :  (&  TriwavTai  ydp. — hiy^  nin33]  (&  dX-^Oeiav  ov 
fi7)  TTonJaet'  apdifTU)  6  d<repi^$  =  h}]ii^  fjpHi:  n8'j;(')  ^3  ninD3  ;  this  may  be  nearer 
the  original  text  than  J^,  nis'y,  however,  being  a  variant  of  loV.     Possibly  v.'*> 

once  read 

nin33  pK3  I  pix  nD'?-'?3  |  vvn  hiw 
mn»  niKJ  |  hkt  V31  |  Siyo  ^ok» 

With  ^lyo  II  ytn,  cp.  Ps  71*.— n'.T]  probably  a  dittograph  of  m.r,  ▼.*•. 

12-19.  The  Jews  achieve  nothing  for  themselves, 
but  Yahweh  everything  for  them,  including  the  raising 
from  the  dead  of  those  of  them  who  had  died.  Cp. 
Ps  44^'^. — 12a.  If  the  rhythmical  structure  is  maintained,  two 
words  have  been  lost  here. — I2b-d.  National  welfare  (v.*  n.) 
must  come  from  Yahweh;  the  Jews  themselves  can  achieve 
nothing. — 13.  Politically  the  Jews  have  passed  into  other  owner- 
ship (cp.  i^)  than  that  of  Yahweh  (cp.  63^^);  lords  (19^),  i.e. 
foreign  rulers,  have  made  Judah  part  of  their  property;  yet, 
though  the  Jews  have  not  been  politically  free,  they  have  not 
acknowledged  the  right  of  any  except  Yahweh  to  own  them : 
they  have  been  loyal  to  their  religion,  not  confessing  any  other 
God  (cp.  Ps  4418-23(17-22)^^  (^^  if  correct,  would  express  very 
indirectly  what  J^,  which  is  not  free  from  difficulty  (see  phil.  n.), 
expresses  directly. — 14.  No  more  will  a  foreign  yoke  rest  on 
the  Jews,  for  Yahweh  has  destroyed  these  alien  rulers,  banished 


.h 


444  COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH 

all  memory  of  them,  all  that  would  call  them  to  mind,  such  as 
foreign  coinage,  taxes,  and  the  like;  these  lords  are  dead  men 
all,  shades  (14^)  that  will  never  return  to  vex  the  earth  (14^^ 
Jer  51^^-  ^'').  The  writer  shares  the  old  view  (cp.  Job  14^^) 
that,  so  far  as  mankind  at  large  is  concerned,  there  is  no  resur- 
rection, no  ascent  from  the  realm  of  the  shades  to  a  fuller  or 
higher  life.  For  the  Jews  he  has  a  different  expectation  (v.^^) : 
resurrection  is  national,  not  universal. — Therefore]  the  therefore 
indicates  not  "a  consequence  of  v.*  but  the  development  of  what 
is  implicit  in  it"  (cp.  61^,  Jer  2^3  52,  job  342^  (BDB  487a). 

15-19.  The  writer  is  certain  (prophetic  pf.  in  v.^^)  that 
Yahweh  will  magnify  the  Jewish  nation  and  extend  far  and 
wide  the  borders  of  their  land  (cp.  9*  33^^^  54^^')*  ^^^  chas- 
tisement (v.^^)  had  meant  distress,  foreign  domination,  and 
decaying  population,  and  that  the  Jews  could  make  no  headway 
against  their  foes  (v.^^^);  but  Yahweh  will  listen  to  the  cry  of 
His  people,  withdraw  His  chastening  hand,  achieve  for  them 
(cp.  v.^2)  what  they  could  not  achieve  (cp.  v.^^),  making  their 
land  secure,  enlarging  it,  and  filling  it  with  inhabitants  by  calling 
back  to  life  those  Jews  who  had  died  loyal  to  their  religion 
(v.^^,  cp.  v.^^). — 15.  Thou  hast  added\  "spoken  from  the  stand- 
point of  the  future"  (Dr.  §  20  n.).  Di.  objects  that  this  is 
"  impossible  "  after  the  perfects  of  vv.^^f. .  but  on  his  own  view 
the  perfects  of  vv.^^-ie  ^^{^1  to  different  periods:  vv.^^f.  recent 
past,  v.i^  the  days  of  David  and  Solomon,  v.^^  the  recent  past 
again.  His  alternative  view,  that  the  sentence  may  be  interro- 
gative— Hast  thou  increased  the  people  as  thou  didst  promise  (Hos 
2iS  Mic  2i2f.,  Is  iii4  49i9ff.  54if.,  Jer  301^,  Ezk  36ioff— is  most 
improbable.  Others  give  the  imperative  a  precative  force  :  Add 
to  the  nation  (cp.  CEr) ;  but  this  is  illegitimate  (Dr.  §  20),  unless 
we  prefix  "h  as  in  63^^  (Cond.),  and  then  the  form  of  the  wish 
is  not  very  natural:  O  that  thou  hadst  added  to  (Dr.  §  140);  in 
the  hour  of  distress  their  wish  would  have  been  for  deliverance 
rather  than  enlargement.  The  only  alternative  to  the  view  taken 
above  which  is  worth  considering,  is  that,  like  w.^^f.^  it  refers 
to  the  recent  past :  Yahweh  has  already  not  only  overthrown 
the  foreign  domination,  but  also  widely  extended  the  borders 
of  Judah  ;  Du.,  Marti,  who  interpret  thus,  see  in  v.^^  a  reference 
to  the  extension  of  Jewish  territory  by  John  Hyrcanus.  But 
this  fails  to  do  adequate  justice  to  v.^8^  and  less  naturally  leads 


XXVI.  1 5-1 8  445 

up  to  v.^^ — Thou  hast  shown  thyself  glorious']  cp.  24'^  as  emended, 
Ezk  28^2  39I3.     5^  could  be  rendered  glorious  things^  an  ace.  to 
thou  hast  added  (Oc);  but  the  parallel  supports  MT. — Thou 
hast  greatly  extended]  lit.  thou  hast  made  far  away^  viz.  from 
the  centre  of  the  land  :  for  the  sense  of  great  distance  suggested 
by  pm  and  its  derivatives,  see,  e,g.^  6^2^  Ps  103^2. — All  the  borders 
of  the  land]  of  Judah :  the  same  phrase  with  another  sense  in 
Ps  48"  65<'(5). — 16.  In  distress]  25*. —  We  sought]  J^  has  they 
sought;  but  note  ist  pi.  in  ^^f.  and  ^^^-j  and  that  there  are  signs 
of  corruption  in  this  v. —  We  cried  out  because  of  oppression]  the 
translation  follows  Cheyne's  emendation,     J^  is  altogether  im- 
probable :  it  ought  to  be  rendered  they  melted  (Job  28^)  a  charm 
(38  n.,  Jer  8^^,  Ec  lo^^ :  cp.  Is  3^®t),  and  this  has  been  supposed 
to  mean,  they  poured  out  a  whisper^  i.e.  they  prayed*  (in  a  low 
voice).     Lieb.  attempts  a  different  reconstruction  of  the  text, 
which  might  be  rendered,  thy  visitation  involves  distress^  thy  chas- 
tisement of  us  constraint  and  oppression.     See,  further,  phil.  n. — 
17,  18.  The  elaboration  of  the  figure  (cp.  Hos  13^^,  Mic  4^°)  in 
this  connection  may  have  suggested  the  later  technical  term  for 
the  troubles  which  were  expected  to  herald  the  Messianic  age, 
n-C^cn  'hin^  "  the  birth-pangs  of  the  Messiah." — So  were  we]  (&  ■¥ 
to  the  beloved:  on  this  (?  Christian)  addition  see  Lieb.  i.  42-44. — 
Because  of  thy  presence]  to  chastise  us  (cp.  v.^®),  (&  8ia  tov  ^o^ov 
(Tov :  for  the  phrase,  cp.  e.g.  64^  (63^^),  Jer  42^. — 18.    When  we 
gave  birthf  {lof)  wind]  rhythmically  the  words  appear  to   be 
superfluous,  and  they  may  be  a  gloss  intended  to  complete  the 
figure  so  as  to  make  it  applicable  to  the  two  following  lines — 
all  our  distress  issued  in  wind,  i.e.  nothing;  cp.  412^,  Ec  i^*. 
Ges.  discusses  at  length  the  supposed  reference  to  the  symptoms 
of  pseudo-pregnancy. — l8b.  C  We  could  not,  as  Yahweh  can 
and  will  (v.^),  deliver  our  country  from  the  enemy :  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  world  (v.^),  who  were  all  attacking  us,  did  not  fall 
before  us  in   battle.      This   interpretation   gives   to   the    lines 
parallelism.     Modern  commentators,!  however,  have  generally 
given  to  the  line  c.  another  sense :  inhabitants  of  the  worlds 
"  an   artificial    poetical    expression "    (Du.),   meaning    "  young, 
new-born  *  mortals ' "  (Del.),  do  not  fall^  viz.  from  the  womb, 
i.e.  are  not  born.     On  either  interpretation  the  phraseology  is 

•  e.g.  Ki.,  Ges.,  Del. 

tCoccejus,  Ges.,  Del.,  Di.,  Cheyne,  Du.,  Marti. 


44^  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

unusual.  There  is  no  direct  evidence  that  7D3  in  the  Kal 
meant  to  be  born ;  yet  it  is  not  improbable  that  it  did ;  for  the 
Hiph.  probably  means  to  give  birth  to  in  v.^^,  the   noun  ht^l 

means  an  untimely  birth^  and  the  Arabic  kft«j,  to  fall^  also 
means  to  be  born ;  see  illustrations  of  the  last  and  of  the  Greek 
TTiTTTO),  KaTaTTLTrru}  (Wis  7^)  in  Ges. — 19.  (S'g  text  is  shorter  by 
one,  and  possibly  by  two  words  (see  phil.  n.)  than  J^ :  and  one 
of  the  lines  a.-d.  may  be  an  addition  (see  note  on  the  rhythm), 
but  the  essential  idea  is  expressed  more  than  once.  The  Jews 
who  have  died  will  not  share  the  common  lot  of  man  (v.^^),  but 
they  will  rise  from  their  graves,  not  as  spirits  of  the  dead,  but 
bodily,  and  to  resume  with  gladness  life  upon  the  earth,  in  the 
new  vast  territory  of  the  Jews  (v.^^).  This  remarkable  expres- 
sion of  what  must  have  been  already  a  well-defined  and  clear 
belief  in  a  bodily  resurrection  of  Jews  who  had  died  before  the 
New  Age  began  (cp.  Dn  12^),  forms  an  abrupt  but  effective 
close  to  the  poem ;  abrupt,  for  v.^^  would  naturally  have  had 
as  its  sequence  a  repetition  of  the  opening  thought:  thou, 
Yahweh,  will  secure  our  safety :  what  we  could  not  achieve, 
Thou  wilt;  effective,  for  it  uses  the  belief  in  resurrection  with 
all  its  emotional  richness  at  once  as  an  answer  to  the  question 
how  shall  the  nation  be  increased  (v.^*^),  and  as  a  climax  to  the 
whole  poem. — TAy  dead]  Yahweh  is  still  addressed:  Yahweh"s 
dead  are  those  who  died  loyal  to  Him,  or  even  were  slain  for 
His  sake  (cp.  Ps  4723(24)) — «  mortui  tui,  qui  interfecti  sunt  propter 
te"  (Jer.). — S/iatt  live]  not  may  they  live  (Di.),  even  if  the  impera- 
tives of  ?^  in  line  d.  are  correct ;  but  even  if  i^*  ^  were  taken 
optatively,  the  remainder  of  the  verse  shows  that  we  have  not 
to  deal  with  a  hope  in  resurrection  that  is  merely  breaking 
through,  as  in  Job,  but  with  a  belief  well  established  in  the 
circle  to  which  the  writer  belonged,  though  not  necessarily,  nor 
probably,  throughout  the  entire  nation  (ct.  Eccles.  and  later 
the  Sadducees),  which  included  wicked  unbelievers  in  this,  as 
in  other  things,  that  the  power  of  Yahweh  could  achieve. — 
Their  corpses]  ^  my  corpses,  i.e.  the  dead  bodies  of  the  writer's 
fellow-countrymen;  but  the  expression  would  be  unnatural. 
The  writer  emphasises  the  belief  that  the  actual  body  that  died 
will  be  revivified,  that  it  is  no  mere  ghost  that  is  to  arise ;  and 
the  same  idea  is  implicit  in  the  next  line,  they  that  dwell  in  the 


XXVI.  19 


447 


dust  (cp.  Job  2i2«,  Ps  2  2^®),  now  sleeping  there  the  sleep  of 
death  (cp.  Dn  122),  which  is  not  to  be  for  them  eternal  (Jer  51^^, 
Job  14^^),  will  awake  and  ring  out  their  joy. — Shall  awake  and 
give  a  ringing  cry\  cp.  ffir :  J^  Awake^  and  give  ,  .  .  ye  that  dwell, 
etc.,  which  makes  the  clause  an  address  to  the  dead,  interpolated 
between  clauses  addressed  to  Yahweh. — For  the  dew  of ,  .  ,  is 
thy  dew]  God's  dew,  or  more  strictly  night-mist  (iS^),  falling  on 
the  graves  of  His  dead,  and,  descending  to  the  bodies  that  rest 
there,  will  cause  them  to  live  again ;  in  the  case  of  God's  dead 
there  is  not  the  difference  that  Job  bewailed  between  the  vege- 
table world,  which,  when  apparently  dead,  is  revived  by  water, 
and  man  (Job  14^"^^),  who,  once  dead,  cannot  revive.  For  the 
importance  of  the  dew  or  night-mist  for  the  life  of  vegetation 
in  Palestine,  see  18*  n.  Ges.  quotes  parallels  to  the  thought 
of  the  moistening  of  the  dead  body  with  rain  :  e.g.  "  visit  Ma'an 
and  say  to  his  grave.  May  the  morning  clouds  water  thee  with 
rain  upon  rain."  The  definition  of  the  dew  that  is  to  restore 
life  to  the  dead  Jews  is  unfortunately  obscure ;  f^  and  dSc  differ — 
5^  miK,  ffi  naiK  or  onsiN  (see  phil.  n.).  If  (&  was  correct  we 
should  render  literally  for  thy  dew  is  the  dew  of  {their)  new  flesh ; 
as  God  revives  the  vegetable  world  by  dew,  so  He  will  cause  new 
flesh  to  sprout  (588)  and  cover  the  skeletons  (cp.  Ezk  37^)  of  the 
Jews  now  lying  in  the  grave,  thus  preparing  them  for  re-birth 
(cp.  Ps  139^^"^^).  The  meaning  of  J^  is  obscure:  n"iK  in 
2  K  4^*1  is  a  term  for  herbs^  hence  the  rendering  of  EV  here, 
"  the  dew  of  herbs,"  which  should  mean  that  the  dew  that  is  to 
fall  on  the  dead  will  be  as  reviving  in  their  case  as  the  dew  that 
falls  on  herbs  (Ki.) — very  improbable.  Most  modern  commen- 
tators see  in  miK  an  intensive  pi.  of  miK  (Ps  139^2,  Est  8^^) — 
and  in  the  dew  of  light  "the  dew  of  the  highest  heavenly  region, 
where  is  the  light  with  which  Yahweh  wraps  Himself"  (Ps  1042), 
as  Marti  explains,  or,  light  and  life  being  "interchangeable 
ideas"  (Ps  5614(13)^  Job  3^0  3380),  as  Di.  puts  it,  the  dew  that 
restores  to  the  life  of  light. — The  earth  shall  give  birth  to  {the\ 
shades']  the  rendering  is  not  certain :  on  TBn,  to  give  birth  to, 
see  V.18  n. ;  ffi's  text  of  ^^'^  leads  up  to  the  idea  of  birth.  Shades 
are  in  v.^*  dead  men  in  general,  here  dead  Jews.  Other 
renderings  labour  under  the  disadvantage  of  giving  the  line  a 
poorer  connection,  and  shades  an  entirely  different  sense  from 
that  in  v.^* :  thus  and  the  land  of  the  Rephaim^  Le.  giants  {e.g. 


448  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

Dt  2^^),  regarded  as  impious   (C5),  dost   thou   bring  down   (in 
ruin). 

12.  nsjBT]  nstf  with  the  meaning  to  appoint  (®r,  56s)  occurs  here  only  in 
OT ;  in  2  K  4^,  Ezk  24',  Ps  22^^  ^ntitff  has  other  meanings  :  see  BDB. — 13. 
iprcf  T3t:  i^naV  yh^}  D'nx  I3i'?j;3]  (i)  everywhere  else  ^h'\^  is  used  with  a 
negative ;  {2)  npni^  cannot  be  satisfactorily  explained  :  Di.  treats  13  as  the 
object  (cp.  48S  Ps  20^)  prefixed  to  tdu,  idb'  being  in  apposition  to  it ;  Ges., 
al.  make  13  mean  by  means  of  thee ^  of  thy  help.  In  the  text  of  <&.  both  these 
doubtful  points  disappear  :  ffi  reads  KTrjaai  ijfms'  iKvbs  aov  dWov  ovk  otdafiev, 
rb  6vo/xA  aov  dvofid^^ofxev,  which  represents  not  ^  (cp.  Lieb.),  but 

:  iDB'  T313  I  yir'?3  inVn  |  "iin  Mhi^n 

Be  our  owner,  O  Lord  ; 

We  acknowledge  none  beside  thee, 
We  make  mention  of  thy  name. 

We  might  adopt  this,  but  that  it  gives  us  no  antecedent  for  the  3rd  pi.  pro- 
noun of  v.^^  (DTDrni).  This  we  could  obtain,  though  in  a  rather  bare  way, 
by  reading  D'jix  13^:;? :  Lords  (i.e.  other  lords)  have  owned  us,  {but)  none 
beside  thee  do  we  acknowledge.  For  n^v  =  none  beside,  cp.  i  K  12^,  2  K  24^^ 
— 15.  P«  'i^P  ^^  npm  m333  "M^  nso-'  mn>  'uV  nSD']  ffir  irpSades  avrois  /ca/id, 
KOpie,  irpdades  KUKd,  toU  ivdS^on  t^s  yijs.  To  what  extent  C&'s  text  differed 
from  J§  is  not  clear ;  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been  in  any  respect  superior. 
On  ffi  and  various  unconvincing  emendations  that  have  been  proposed,  see 
Lieb.  f^  probably  preserves  the  sense,  though  if  we  may  assume  that  the 
rhythm  was  regular  throughout  the  poem,  'U*?  nSD'  m.T  is  an  amplification 
of  the  original  text. — 16.  inps]  (fSc  ifivTfia-dTjv  (HP  14  ifipi^adrjfiev)  <rov  =  7\:r\D] 
or  li"!?};  Cheyne,  T[j]ip3;  Lieb.  ^l^^i^s.  ips  occurs  here  only  of  man's 
seeking  God. — id*?  "pDiD  K'n^  ]^P^]  for  id*?  read  13*?:  so  (&  vfxivy  and  cp.  ist 
plural  in  vv.^^*  "*•.  vn^  ppj«  is  also  corrupt ;  not  only  is  the  meaning 
commonly  extracted  from  J^  most  questionable  (see  above),  but  the  form  of 
the  3rd  perfect  pi.  with  \  is  anomalous  and  open  to  the  gravest  suspicion  even 
in  the  latest  OT  literature :  see  Dr.  §  6,  Obs.  n. ,  and  G-K.  44/.  The  anomalous 
form  is  avoided,  but  a  sense  no  more  probable  is  obtained,  if  we  point  jip^ 
c'o!?,  and  assume  that  ]^p)i  is  a  SLv.  "Key.  having  the  same  meaning  as  np^)i  (8^-) 
or  pJfiD  (8^),  and  render  constraint  such  as  is  enforced  by  a  charm  was  thy 
chastisement  (Koppe,  Di.).  6r  ^v  d\i\}/ei  fUKpq.  scarcely  =  |^,  but  it  is 
ambiguous,  perhaps  yrh  \Kip}  Cheyne,  modifying  a  suggestion  of  Houb., 
proposes  yrhn  upy:*  (cp.  65^^) ;  Lieb.  (who  discusses  other  less  probable 
suggestions)  ^n'?  npis.  Lieb.'s  emendation  of  ^^•*'  keeps  nearest  to  the  evi- 
dence of  1^  and  ffir  combined :  Cheyne  gives  what  appears  to  be  a  sense  rather 
more  suitable  to  the  context. — 17.  ^'nn]  absent  from  <&'.  it  is  rhythmically 
superfluous,  and  is  probably  an  addition  made  out  of  regard  for  laVn  below. 
— 18.  nn  in"?'  id3]  id3  (  =  nB'»t3,  Gn  k)^'^)  is  absent  from  (&. — i'?S'-Vai]  <&  &\\k 
ireffovvrat  irdures :  see  Lieb. — 19.  nsy  'JSB'  Uim  i)i'pn  ]V2^p''  'n^jj  i^np  vn']  <&^ 
dvaarijaovTaL  (■^+701/3)  ol  veKpol  koI  iyepdrjaovrai  oi  iv  rots  fxvT]fielois 
Kal  evcppapdrjaovTai  oi  iv  ry  yy  ;  perhaps  this  is  =  (or  iif'p'i)  pDip'  n^DJl  D'nD  vn' 
nay  ''lyo    um  ;    but   ffi  clearly   renders    one   word    less    than    at    present 


XXVI.  12-19,  XXVI.  20-  XXVII.  I  449 

stands  in  fl^.  Cheyne  has  argued  that  the  original  text  of  ffi  rendered  two 
words  less,  arguing  that  the  overlined  words  are  doublets,  each  rendering 
"isy  '33B' ;  but  this  is  far  from  certain,  for  ol  iv  toZj  fxvrjfielon  is  an  admirable 
rendering  for  n'?D3  in  a  passage  where  its  common  equivalent  vexpol  has  already 
been  used.  Nor  in  view  of  38'  is  it  certain  that  i.va.ari\<iovr<3Li  =  JiDip'  (as  in 
v.^*)  rather  than  vn\— I'na]  (E  Q'no :  |^  is  to  be  preferred. — 'nSaa]  the  un- 
suitable '  is  derived  by  dittography  from  the  following  poip' ;  but  nVaa  (?  (&) 
is  scarcely  the  original  reading,  rather  onVai  (5).  nVaa  is  frequently  used 
collectively  as  here.— upi  ^'i'^ril  read  o?1i  «'p:  (cp.  (Sr).— V'sn]  ffi  irfactTat,  i.e. 
•^sn,  which  would  be  ambiguous,  but  might  be  rendered,  But  the  land  of 
Rephaim  will  fall^  i.e.  come  to  ruin :  this  certainly  explains  the  order  of 
the  words ;  but  against  it,  see  above.  For  the  order,  subject,  object,  predi- 
cate, see  Dr.  208  (3). 

20-XXVII.  I.  The  Jews  are  to  keep  safe,  while 
Yahweh  is  abroad  in  the  world  exacting  from  it  penalty 
for  its  crimes. — Continuation  from  258 :  translation  on  p.  407. 
Before  the  final  consummation,  when  Yahweh  is  to  ascend  His 
throne  in  Sion  (24^3),  give  His  coronation  feast  to  all  peoples 
(25^^-),  and  remove  for  ever  the  reproach  of  His  people,  the  Jews 
(258),  there  will  be  a  moment  during  which  His  anger  will  be 
abroad,  exacting  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  penalty  (cp. 
2417-20)  for  their  deeds  of  blood  which  the  earth  will  then  reveal 
(cp.  24^) ;  during  this  moment  of  wrath,  let  the  Jews  keep  close 
at  home,  in  their  chambers  with  closed  doors  (cp.  Ex  1222'-,  also 
Job  14^^).  At  the  same  time,  Yahweh  will  punish  all  that  is 
opposed  to  Him  in  heaven :  as  of  old  He  pierced  the  dragon, 
the  personification  or  leader  of  Chaos,  before  creating  the 
present  world,  so  now  is  He  about  to  slay  these  monsters  who 
have  misled  His  creatures,  as  the  immediate  prelude  to  a  new 
heaven  and  new  earth  over  which  He  will  exercise  sovereignty 
(2423).  In  the  same  way  in  Babylonia  the  killing  of  a  monster 
precedes  Marduk's  accession  to  sovereign  power  {KAT^  499)- — 
20.  Hide]  not  in  terror,  as  in  2^®,  for  Yahweh  now  intends  to  do 
His  people  no  hurt,  but  as  a  precaution,  lest  the  wrath  of  God, 
as  it  roams  abroad,  should  unintentionally  do  hurt  to  the  Jews 
as  well  as  to  others.  —  Wrath]  can  scarcely  be  here  the  last 
expiring  traces  of  Yah weh's  anger  against  His  people  (lo^^n.), 
which  are  to  vanish  completely  when  Yahweh  proceeds  (v.^i) 
to  punish  the  world  (Di.);  v.^i  is  rather  a  reason  why  an  ex- 
plosion of  wrath  is  about  to  take  place,  from  which  the  Jews 
must  keep  out  of  the  way. — 21.  From  his  place]  heaven  ;  Mic  i*. 
VOL.  I. — 29 


4SO  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

— Inhabitants  of  the  earthy  cp.   24^" :    sing,  collective  in  f^. — 
2IC.  d.  When  Yahweh  comes  to  punish,  the  earth  will  lay  bare 
the  blood  of  the  slain  which  it  has  drank  in,  and  the  uncovered 
blood  will  cry  aloud  to  Yahweh  to  avenge  it:   cp.  Gn  4^^^-, 
Job  16^^,  Ezk  24"^-.     Line  d.  is  simply  parallel  to  line  c  :  it  does 
not  introduce  the  new  thought  that  the  martyrs  themselves,  as 
well  as  their  blood,  will  arise  to  testify  (Del.,  al.). — XXVII.  I. 
Does  this  v.  refer  to  war  in  heaven  or  war  on  earth  ?     Do  the 
two  Leviathans  and  the  dragon  belong  solely  to  the  host  of 
heaven  ?  or  do  they  symbolise   three  earthly  kingdoms,  or  a 
single  earthly  kingdom,  or  indefinitely  all  earthly  powers  opposed 
to  Yahweh  and    to    Israel?      If  the  reference   is   to  earthly 
kingdoms,  what  were  these  kingdoms?     On  all   these  points 
interpreters  have  differed,  and  continue  to  differ.      The   close 
correspondence  of  20^^'^^  and  26^^-2 7^  strongly  favours  the  view 
that  this  v.  refers  to  that    "war  in   heaven"  (Rev  12'^)  which 
must  precede  the  birth  of  the  New  World  as  it  preceded  the 
birth  of  the  present  (cp.  Gunkel,  Schopfung  u.   Chaos,  367-371 ; 
XAT^  ^oj  {.);  262<^-2  7^  carries  us  back  to  the  time  before  the 
removal  of  the  reproach  of  the  Jews  (25^)  and  Yahweh's  glorious 
reign  in   Jerusalem  (2623c.  d)^  and   is  therefore  parallel  in  time 
to  2421-23^;  as  26^1  corresponds  to  Yahweh's  visitation  on  "the 
kings  of  the  earth"  (2421c),  27^  might  well  correspond  to  the 
punishment  of  "the  host   of  the  height  in   the   height."     The 
host  above  and  the  kings  are  doubtless  related  (see  n.  on  2421), 
but  we  need  not  seek  for  any  specific  identification  of  the  three 
heavenly  beings  with  three  earthly  kingdoms.     Those  who  do 
seek   such   identification,  whether  including   or  excluding   any 
heavenly  reference,  differ  much  :  e.g.  I^i.,  Rashi  think  of  Assyria, 
Egypt,  Tyre ;  Del.  sees  in  the  dragon  which  is  in  the  sea,  Egypt 
(cp.  57^,  Ps  7413,  Ezk  298  3  2 2),  in  the  fleeing  serpent,  Assyria 
situated   along   the   rushing,   rapid   Tigris,  and  in   the   twisted 
serpent,  Babylon  situated  along  the  Euphrates,  "  which  has  many 
turns  and  labyrinth-like  windings  " ;  Cheyne  and  Box  equate  the 
dragon  with  Egypt,  and  the  two  Leviathans  with  Babylon  and 
Persia;   Du.  agrees  as   to  the  dragon,  but  equates  the  fleeing 
serpent   with   the   Parthians   on   account   of   their  well-known 
manner  of  fighting,  and  the  other  serpent  with  Syria.     Ges.,  a 
representative  of  the  view  that  all  three  descriptions  signify  the 
same  monster,  identifies  this  monster  with  Babylon.      It  will 


XXVI.  21,  XXVII.  I  451 

be  seen  that  there  is  no  agreement  except  with  regard  to  Egypt ; 
and  it  should  be  observed  that  in  some  of  the  passages  quoted 
above  more  than  one  of  these  mythological  epithets  is  conferred 
on  Egypt :  e.g.  in  Ps  74^^  Egypt  is  both  the  dragon  and  Levi- 
athan.    The  point,  then,  of  the  whole  v.  is  just  this :  Yahweh 
will  make  an  end  of  all  that  is  opposed  to  Him  in  heaven,  even 
as  He  executes  punishment  on  all  who  have  offended  Him  on 
earth  (2621);  and  in  order  to  make  this  point  the  writer  avails 
himself  of  current  mythological  ideas  and  terms.     Fundament- 
ally, according  to  this  mythological  theory,  the  opposition  was 
between  the  gods  of  order  and   the   power  of  disorder  —  the 
Chaos-monster:  there  is,  therefore,  a  certain  element  of  truth 
in  the  view  that   the  three  designations  —  the  two  Leviathans 
and  the   dragon  are  a  single   being;   but   the   Hebrew  writer 
clearly  intends  three  distinct  objects  and,  possibly,  as  Dr.  Burney 
has  recently  suggested,*  the   three  conspicuous  constellations 
of  serpentine   form.      It  is   conceivable,  as  Zimmem  remarks 
{KAT^  501  n.  2),  that  several  constellations  were  at  one  and 
the   same   time   regarded    as   representatives   (Entsprechungen) 
of  the  Chaos-monster. — His  sword]  the  conception  of  the  mighty 
sword  of  God  "is,  no  doubt,  ancient  (cp.  Gn   3^*),  but  it  is 
specially  prominent  in  late  eschatological  descriptions ;  cp.  34* 
6617,  Zee  137,  En  go^^-  3*  9112,  Rev  i^s  2I2  etc."  (Cheyne,  Infrod. 
p.  151).     It  is  suggested  that  three  epithets  are  applied  to  the 
sword  to  gain  symmetry  (Du.)  with  the  three  monsters  on  whom 
it  is  to  be  used.     The  first  epithet,  HK^p  {(&  HB^np,  holy),  may 
mean  fierce,  relentless  (cp.  1 9*,  Jg  4^*),  or,  perhaps,  well-tempered, 
doing  much  work  without  becoming  blunted,  a  meaning  which 
would  have  its  nearest  analogy  in  the  application  of  the  adj.  to 
a  stiffened  neck.  —  Leviathan']   a  mythic  serpent ;  cp.  Job  3®, 
Ps  7414  10426,  En  6o7-9-  24f.,  4  Es  6*»-«2,  and  see  EBi.  520  ff.    The 
ideas  doubtless  go  back  to  Babylonian  mythology  in  which  the 
conflict  of  Marduk  with  mythical  serpentine  monsters  plays  a 
conspicuous  part  (cp.  Zimmem,  in  KAT^^^.  498  f.,  500-504),  but 
the  term  Leviathan  has  not  yet  been  found  in  Babylonian :  its 

origin  is  ohscnxe, perhaps  it  means  the  wreathed  or  twisted  (vni?). 

The   duplication   of  Leviathan   here  and  in   the  next   line  is 

curious  j  but  it  is  scarcely  due  to  the  fact  that  the  writer  needed 

*  JThSy  1910,  pp.  443  f.  ;  see  also  Smend's  earlier  identification  with  the 
same  constellations,  ZATWw.  213. 


452  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

three  names  for  three  different  world-powers,  and  therefore  used 
Leviathan  twice,  differentiating  by  means  of  different  epithets 
(Gunkel,  p.  47);  if  he  merely  needed  another  name,  Rahab 
was  at  his  disposal  (cp.  51 9,  Job  2612):  others  think  that  the 
two  Leviathans  denote  two  closely  connected  kingdoms,  such 
as  two  in  the  Euphrates-Tigris  valley.  The  first  Leviathan 
is  described  as  the  fleeing  serpent^  which  in  Job  26^^  is  intimately 
associated  with  the  sky.  Burney  would  identify  this  Leviathan 
with  the  constellation  Serpens  with  which  Ophiuchus,  "  the  serpent- 
grasper,"  is  closely  associated.  The  conception  of  Yahweh  smit- 
ing with  a  sword  a  serpent  that  flees  from  Him,  has  its  analogy 
and  probably  its  origin  in  a  Babylonian  myth  which  is  pictorially 
represented,  for  example,  on  a  Babylonian  seal  of  a  serpent 
pursued  and  about  to  be  smitten,  presumably  Tiamat  pursued 
by  Marduk ;  see  illustration  in  Cheyne,  SBOT,  p.  206,  and  cp. 
KAT^  503.  The  second  Leviathan  is  the  crooked  or  twisted 
(pn7py)  serpent :  this  is  identified  by  Smend  and  Burney  with 
the  constellation  Draco^  "which  winds  its  long-drawn  length 
between  Ursa  major  and  Ursa  minor"  Gunkel,  on  the  other 
hand,  traces  the  epithet  to  the  association  of  Leviathan  the 
primeval  monster  with  the  sea,  which,  according  to  Babylonian 
and  also  Greek  conceptions,  flowed  twisting  round  all  lands. — 
The  Dragon]  cp.  518,  Job  712,  Ps  74I3;  also  Ps  1487  (pL). 
The  dragon  is  described  in  J^  as  that  which  is  in  the  sea  (absent 
from  ^),  and  the  whole  according  to  Di.  means  the  crocodile 
which  is  in  the  sea,  i.e.  the  Nile  (19^  n.),  a  symbol  of  Egypt. 
But  if,  as  is  more  probable,  we  have  here  to  do  with  constella- 
tions, the  sea  is  the  celestial  ocean,  and  the  constellation  is 
Hydra^  which  lies  south  of  the  Ecliptic  in  that  part  of  the 
Heavens  which  ranked  with  the  Babylonians  as  the  ocean 
(Burney,  p.  445). 

20.  1'0?l]  K^tib  ;  1i^^^,  K®r6.  The  latter  assumes  an  otherwise  unknown 
form  rh^ :  if  sing.  {(&.  t^v  dipav  aov),  as  in  2  S  13",  2  K  4^^,  point  rather 
?;n^rj. —  -^nyn  (&  omit;  but  cp.  Jg  s^. — '3n]  not  fem.  (G-K.  75^^),  a  view 
for  which  Del.  offers  a  Rabbinical  explanation ;  but  the  form  is  either  an 
Aramaic  2nd  masc.  sing.  (Olsh.  235^;  Kon.  i.  623),  or  point  '5n=n3n. — 
2X.  iDipDD]  ^  freely  d-rrb  tov  ayiov.  — vhl!  pN.TDE"  py  nps*?]  <&  iirdyei.  t^v 
opy^v  iirl  Toiis  ivoiKouvrai  iTri  r^s  yijs  :  it  is  doubtful  how  far  dSc  differed  from 
|fc]  ;  see  Lieb.  With  the  cstr.  of  |^,  cp.  Am  s^-i^— Tiy]  ffir  omits:  J§  is 
correct. 


XXVI.  20,  XXVII.   2-6 


453 


XXVII.  2-6. —  YahweKs  delightful  vineyard. 

The  song  consists  of  short  lines  of  two  or  three  accents  for  the  most  part 
grouped  in  distichs.  A  remarkable  feature  of  it  is  the  sustained  rhyme  in 
n-^-  in  vv.^"*.  The  text  and,  consequently,  in  detail  the  structure,  are  very 
uncertain. 

A  delightful  vineyard — 
Sing  ye  to  it  (?). 

•  I,  Yahweh,  am  guarding  it, 

Constantly  I  water  it; 
Lest  its  leaves  be  missing, 
Day  and  night  I  guard  it. 

•  Wrath  (?)  have  I  none  (?) ; 

0  that  I  had  thorns,  briars  (?) ; 
In  battle  would  I  step  (?)  on  them, 

1  would  burn  them  altogether 

•  Or  else  let  him  lay  hold  on  my  refuge, 
Let  him  make  peace  with  me. 

Peace  let  him  make  with  me. 

• .  .  .  Jacob  shall  take  root, 

Israel  shall  blossom  and  bud> 
And  they  shall  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit. 

In  these  verses,  as  in  most  of  this  chapter,  either  the  text 
is  corrupt  and  unintelligible,  or  the  thought  of  the  writer  is 
expressed  obscurely  and  in  very  remarkable  ways.  But 
apparently  we  have  here  a  kind  of  contrast  to  the  song  of  the 
vineyard  in  5^"^ :  there,  Yahweh  exercises  all  possible  care,  gets 
no  return  from  it,  and  in  anger  hands  over  the  vineyard  to  be 
wasted  and  trampled  down :  here,  Yahweh  constantly  tends  His 
vineyard,  and  His  hostility  is  reserved  for  thorns  and  briars, 
which  seem  to  symbolise  Israel's  enemies ;  these.  He  will  wage  war 
on,  and  burn  with  fire,  unless  they  come  to  terms  with  Him.  In 
any  case  the  vine  of  Israel  will  grow  marvellously  and  fill  the 
world.  Such  is  as  probable  a  view  as  any  of  the  meaning  of  J^  ; 
but  f^  is  curiously  expressed,  and  ffi,  from  which,  however,  it  would 
be  even  harder  to  extract  any  intelligible  meaning  than  from  J^, 


454  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

may  have  had  a  very  different  text. — For  another  view  of  the 
interpretation,  see  on  v.^-  ^ ;  for  some  of  the  variations  of  ffir,  see 
the  phil.  nn.  below,  and  see,  further,  Lieb. — 2.  In  that  day  .  .  .] 
unless  the  words  are  corrupt,  something  has  dropped  out, 
probably  either  shall  be  said  (cp.  25^),  or  shall  be  sung  (26^). 
Di.  suggests,  indeed,  that  v.^  as  a  whole  constitutes  an  artificial 
variant  on  the  introductory  formulae  in  25®  26^,  and  that  we 
should  render.  On  that  day  a  delightful  vineyard — sing  of  it, 
i.e.  the  following  song  of  the  delightful  vineyard  will  be  sung. 
Of  this  Du.  reasonably  remarks,  "  Even  the  most  helpless  writer 
would  not  stammer  thus." — A  delightful  vineyard]  IDH  D"I3  (ffi 
and  some  Heb.  MSS)  is  a  vineyard  which  is  an  object  of  desire 
(2^^  phil.  n.),  or  delight;  cp.  Am  5^1,  and  "delightful  fields," 
32^2;  cp.  also  the  use  of  the  vb.  in  Ps  68i7(i6),  Ca  2\  f^^lJ 
read  lon  013,  a  vineyard  of  wine  \  "ion,  wine,  occurs  elsewhere 

only  in  Dt  32^*;  but  N"ion,^ri-  are  regular  terms  for  wine.    The 

following  words,  np'l^y,  may  be  rendered,  sing  ye  to  it  (cp.  Nu 
21^'^),  or  sing  ye  of  it  (cp.  5^);  neither  seems  very  probable,  and 
the  text  may  be  suspected. — /,  Yahweh,  am  guarding  it]  cp.  26^, 
or  am  its  watchman,  cp.  Job  27^^,  Pr  27^^;  also  Is  i^ — Con- 
stantly] WVyhi  cp.  Job  7^^  Ezk  26^^ — 3c.  This  line  may  be 
rendered,  lest  its  leaves,  shrivelling  and  dropping  from  lack  of  water 
(ct.  Jer  17^),  be  missing,  or  lest  visitation  be  made  upon  it  (cp. 
Nu  1 629) ;  by  giving  to  7V  "ipa  a  shade  of  meaning  not  supported 
by  usage,  we  could  obtain  something  more  natural  than  either, 
lest  any  hurt  it  (RV).  Very  probably  the  text  is  corrupt. — 
4.  Wrath]  This  is  merely  one  way  of  interpreting  J^;  equally 
possible  renderings  are  wall  (n»n ;   e.g.    26^),  or  sun  or  heat 

(ntsn,  2423,  Ps  iq'}.     None  of  them  gives  a  satisfactory  sense. 

Lowth  adopted  wall  (€r&),  and,  treating  w.^"^  as  a  dialogue 
between  Yahweh  (vv.^*  ^*'*  ^  '^  ^)  and  the  ungrateful  vine- 
yard (w."^*-  ^'  ^^'  *'),  saw  in  v.^  ^  a  complaint  of  the  vineyard, 
/  have  no  wall  for  my  defence  :  O  that  I  had  a  fence  of  thorns 
and  briars.  Most  modern  interpreters  agree  in  rendering  wrath, 
but  differ  as  to  the  object  of  the  wrath  :  if  the  meaning  is,*  I  am 
not  angry  with  my  vineyard  (ct.  5^^-,  Ezk  i7^9^-),  it  seems  very 
superfluous  after  v.^     On  the  other  hand,  Di.(cp.  Ew.,  Hitz.)has 

•  Ges.,  Del.,  Che.,  Du.,  Marti,  Skinner. 


XXVII.  2-6 


455 


to  assume  an  antithesis  which  is  in  no  way  indicated  when  he 
interprets :  Now  that  judgment  has  been  executed,  I  have  no 
wrath  against  any  one,  but  (v.*^-^),  if  occasion  arise,  I  would  take 
the  field  again. — O  that  I  had]  an  optative  phrase  (G-K. 
151^,  b)f  lit.  who  will  give  me. — Thorns^  briars]  5*.  The 
asyndeton  is  improbable:  supply  and]  or  omit  briars  as  an 
accretion.  But  corruption  of  the  text  may  go  deeper:  if  not, 
the  thorns  and  briars  on  which  battle  is  to  be  waged  (cp.  7 2*, 
2  S  23^^-)  by  Yahweh  must  symbolise  His  enemies,  i.e.  the 
enemies  of  Israel. — Step]  the  vb.  VtTD  occurs  here  only  in  OT ; 
but  the  nouns  ptJ'B,  step  (i  S  208),  and  nVB'QO  (  =  nini5',  2  S  10*), 
buttocks  (i  Ch  19*),  are  found.  In  NH  and  Aram,  the  vb. 
means  to  step,  and  in  Syriac  with  ^^  (ct.  3  here),  to  trample  on. 
— 5.  Let  him,  i.e.  one  of  the  offenders  symbolically  called  "  thorns 
and  briars  "  in  v.*,  if  he  does  not  wish  to  share  the  fiery  fate  of 
his  fellows,  lay  hold  of  (cp.  i  K  i^o  2^8)  my  refuge  (30^),  i.e.  let 
him  seek  my  protection. — 6.  As  in  the  other  song  of  Yahweh's 
vineyard,  the  vineyard  is  at  the  end  of  the  poem  openly  identified 
with  Yahweh's  people,  Israel,  Jacob,  who  are,  with  a  slight 
modification  of  the  figure,  now  depicted  as  a  gigantic  vine,  deep- 
rooted,  spreading  over  even  vaster  tracts  than  the  vines  of  16®, 
Ps  80^^'-  (cp.  also  3721,  Hos  i4^^-)»  filling  the  whole  world  with 
its  produce,  i.e.  the  Jews  will  cover  the  earth  or  be  a  blessing  in 
its  midst  (19^*). — Shall  blossom  and  bud]  the  reverse  order, 
Ps  928;  on  these  and  other  terms  of  growth,  see  Numbers,  p. 
216  f. 


WiTin  Di»3]  it  is  possible  that  d(i)'3  is  a  dittograph  of  D'3,  v.\  and  that  Kinn 
was  subsequently  added :  if  not,  add  tdki  or  '\v\ — non  Dia]  (&  &ixve\il)v  koKSs. 
i'iri60/xr]fxa  =  ui3  +  a  double  rendering  of  ton.  C  may  also  have  read  non: 
it  paraphrases  Kno  KynK3  d'«  di33  K'm  '?mB'n  nnB'ja. — nS  uy]  ffi  ^^dpxeiv 
Kar*  avTTjs  {-ov)  =  n^  mjy.  ^,  which  implies  that  ms  is  fem.  here  though  it 
is  elsewhere  masc,  is  uncertain  ;  but  (&  gives  no  clear  light.  Ruben  {Critical 
Remarks,  p.  16)  proposes  "h  'n'jp.— 3.  mn']  (K  TrtJXty.— D'yin*?]  ffi  iiari^v,  prob- 
ably for  DpnV. — mw]  (S  read  the  same  consonants,  but  treated  the  form  as 
fem.  part.  Niph.  of  nix.  Lieb.  would  read  nj^.— n''?y  npD'  js]  C  oXt^erat 
7<ip,  %  ^  ,mn\v  jCLQ^Io,  %  pnao  ynonK^  p-u  pn'3in  ''?i!?«.  ffi  omits 
r!''?y,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  either  ffi  or  S  read  jfl  ;  but  ffi  supports  J^  in 
reading  the  vb.  in  the  3rd  person  against  the  ist  person  of  .S,  which  has  been 
adopted  by  Lowth,  Houb.,  al.  ^'hv,  if  it  means  leaves,  is  probably  an  incorrect 
pleneioxm  of  nj'y  :  for  leafage  is  rhv,  collect,  sing.  (e.g.  i^) :  the  pi.  (Neh  8"t)  « 
used  of  plucked  leaves.— For  npp:,  be  missing,  cp.  e.g.  a  K  lo^*,  Jer  23*;  Oo. 


4S6  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

proposes  pis\  be  torn  off.  MT  nps'  is  best  explained  as  a  case  of  the  indef. 
subj.  f^  is  doubtful,  but  none  of  the  emendations  proposed  are  convincing  : 
from  Lieb.  these  examples  may  be  quoted  of  substitutes  for  the  ^p^'  }S  of  ?^  : 
np£3K  (5>,  Lowth),  npD:  'j^  (Bredenkamp),  npcN  [3  (Gratz),  Via;  \^  (Ruben), 
npty  '3N  or,  in  place  of  the  whole  clause  in  ][§,  nnN  ips  un  (Lieb.).  If 
the  }3  of  1^  be  correct,  the  sentence  may  depend  on  what  precedes  (Du., 
Cheyne),  or  on  what  follows. — 4,  5.  "h  j'N  nnn].  Ruben  proposes  7h  jrx  rvyn. — 
n'8'  TDK']  fflr  (pvXdaaeiv  KaXdfiTjv  iv  d,yp(^  shows  ( I )  that  TDt?  is  a  />kne  form  of 
an  original  lorff,  which  may  or  may  not  have  meant  thorns  ;  (2)  that  n'ty  was 
asyndeton  as  early  as  ®r :  the  emendation  n'B'i  td»  is,  therefore,  rather  risky 
where  much  would  still  remain  that  is  suspicious. — nDn'?D3]  Du.  proposes 
nij^,?3  D'c  I  T'Dt?  'jjn^  'D,  which  would  account  for  the  asyndeton  (see  last  n.) 
and  get  rid  of  Yahweh's  battle  against  thorns :  Lieb.  achieves  the  last  point 
by  reading  nonn :  both  very  uncertain,  nj—  .  .  .  n|]  fem  suff.  referring  to 
n't?  rotf  used  collectively :  G.-K.  135/ ;  Kon.  348^,  h. — 5.  '*?  ne'y*  DiSt?] 
possibly  an  addition  (cp.  6r),  but  the  repetition  may  have  been  intentional. 
— 6.  D'Nnn]  scarcely  a  breviloquence  for  D'N^n  D'cn,  Ec  2^^ :  nor  is  it  very 
probable  that  Ninn  nV3  (Lieb.)  would  get  corrupted  into  D'K3n.  ffl^  ol 
ipx{>lJi'evoL,  T^Kva  probably  read  vrm  instead  of  VW" ;  possibly  D'N3n  conceals 
a  vb.  governing  vyitf,  and  the  whole  was  a  phrase  meaning  struck  deep  root : 
Lowth's  conjecture  i^ntt'D  D'Npn,  or  Du.'s  modification  of  it  rne'D  K3n,  Ma/ 
which  comes  from  the  root  of  Jacob  shall  blossom^  would  give  poor  parallelism 
and  bad  balance  with  v.***.  —  S5'i;f':]  the  punctuation  expresses  a  hope  of  the 
punctuators:  point  »"5f:. — inVoi]  trans.:  cp.  14*;  but  perhaps  nV^^  should 
be  read  :  note  the  singulars  in  lines  a.  b. 


XXVII.  7-1 1. — The  limited  punishment^  and  the  conditions 
of  the  complete  expiation^  of  Israel. 

There  is  a  considerable  amount  of  parallelism  and  of  balanced  rhythm 
(3:3  or  4 : 4)  in  these  verses ;  but  the  text  (see  v.*)  is  not  always  certain, 
and  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  verses  were  originally  continuous.  The 
balance  in  v.^",  though  scarcely  the  sense,  would  be  improved  by  taking  lanOD 
with  v.^*'*' ;  v."^"*  ^  balances  badly,  and  the  balance  of  v.^'*-  *•  would  be  improved 
by  omitting  niKa, 

^  As  his  smiter  is  smitten  did  he  smite  him  ? 
Or  as  his  slayers  are  slain  was  he  slain? 

*  ...  by  dismissing  her  dost  thou  contend  with  her; 

He  hath  removed  her  by  his  fierce  wind  in  the  day  of 

the  sirocco. 

•  Therefore  on  this  condition  shall  the  iniquity  of  Jacob  be 

expiated — 
And  this  shall  be  all  the  fruit  (?)  of  removing  his  sin — 
That  he  make  all  altar-stones  like  pounded  chalk-stones, 
That  asherim  and  fyammdnim  stand  erect  no  more. 


XXVII.  4-II  457 

^*  For  the  fortified  city  is  desolate, 

An  abode  deserted  and  forsaken  like  the  wilderness, 
There  the  calf  feeds, 

And  there  lies  down  and  consumes  the  branches  thereof ; 
*i  When  the  boughs  thereof  are  dry,  they  are  broken  off; 
Women  come,  make  a  fire  of  them ; 
For  it  is  not  a  people  of  understanding, 
Wherefore  its  Maker  shall  show  it  no  mercy, 
And  its  Framer  shall  show  it  no  favour. 

The  connection  of  these  verses  with  what  precedes  and  with 
what  follows  is  loose,  and  they  probably  formed  no  original  part 
either  of  the  apocalypse,  or  still  less  of  the  song  (vv.  2-6).  It 
is  not  certain  even  that  they  are  all  of  a  piece:  the  internal 
connection  is  in  places  very  far  from  clear :  see  on  vv.®*  *•  ^^f.. 

7.  The  meaning  probably  is  :  Has  Yahweh  made  Israel  suffer 
as  severely  as  those  who  had  inflicted  suffering  on  Israel  ?  No, 
for  Israel  at  least  survives  for  a  glorious  future  (v.^),  his  smiters 
(io20)  are  annihilated.  Cp.  Jer  lo^^^-. — 8.  The  fem.  suffixes, 
which  distinguish  this  v.  from  v.'^,  where  both  suffixes  and  parti- 
ciples are  masc,  and  nni'K'3  (cp.  nf'K'D,  v.^^)  form  some  point  of 
connection  between  this  v.  and  v.^®.  It  may  perhaps  be  a  gloss 
on  that  V.  (Du.,  Che.,  Marti)  that  has  crept  into  the  text.  Of 
attempts  to  connect  the  v.  with  the  context,  that  of  Di.  is  no 
more  unsuccessful  than  others ;  according  to  him,  the  meaning 
is  :  Israel  has  been  punished  by  expulsion  and  exile  only,  and  has 
therefore  suffered  less  than  her  enemies  (v.'^) ;  following  J^,  from 
which  ffir  differs,  he  renders  the  first  line,  By  expulsion^  by  dis- 
missing her  (as  a  divorcee),  dost  thou  contend  with  her  (49^^, 
Job  lo^) ;  and  he  explains  the  use  of  the  impf.  tense — in- 
adequately—as due  to  the  fact  that  the  time  of  Yahweh's  dis- 
favour is  not  yet  quite  over  (2620).  Smend  explains:  "finally, 
Israel's  enemies  must  suffer  far  more  severely  than  Israel  itself. 
The  storm  wind  will  carry  them  off,  and  they  will  perish  for  ever." 
This  does  more  justice  to  the  impf.  of  v.**,  but  fails  to  explain 
the  3rd  fem.  sing,  suffixes.  The  first  word  of  the  v.  is  particu- 
larly uncertain :  since  ST,  many  have  connected  nKDKD3  with 
riKD,  the  third  of  an  ephah^  which  is  supposed  to  bear  also 
the  general  sense  measure :  nXD«D3  is  then  supposed  to  be  a 
contraction    for   riKD    nKD3,  and   to   mean   either   (i)   measure 


458  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

for  measure \  so  ST,  "with  what  measure  thou  metedst  shall  it  be 
meted  to  thee  who  didst  dismiss  and  oppress  them  " ;  or  (2)  with 
exact  measure-,  cp.  RV.  All  this  is  most  improbable.  Others, 
including  apparently  ffir  (/Aaxo/Aevos),  see  in  the  form  a  Pilpel  infin. 
preceded  by  3,  and  followed  by  the  fem.  ending,  or  as  in  T\rh^1 
by  the  fem.  suffix ;  then  it  is  guessed  from  the  context  that  KDND 
meant  to  expel-,    the  etymological  support  for  such  a  meaning 

is  precarious  in  the  extreme :  the  Arabic  I-jLj  means  to  make  the 
noise  made  by  camel  or  donkey-drivers  to  hurry  up  their  beasts ; 
hence  it  is  inferred  the  word  may  have  come  to  mean  more 
generally  to  expel ! — 8b.  Seems  to  describe  a  very  severe  fate : 
cp.  Hos  13^^,  Jer  18^^,  Job  2721.  That  a  sirocco  as  blowing 
from  the  east  is  symbolical  of  the  Eastern  peoples,  Assyrians 
and  Babylonians  (Di.),  is  not  very  probable. — The  sirocco']  the 
east  wind  of  Palestine,  blowing  from  the  wilderness,  is  hot  and 
suffocating,  and  destructive  of  vegetation  (Gn  41*,  Hos  13^^); 
it  may  also  be  very  violent  (Ezk  272^,  Ps  48*),  and  carry  all 
before  it  (Jer  iS^^,  Job  2 721).  It  has  been  frequently  described 
by  modern  travellers :  see,  e.g.^  G.  A.  Smith,  Hist.  Geog.  67-69, 
and  cp.  Dr.  on  Am  4^. 

9,  Israel's  iniquity  will  be  wiped  out,  and  his  sin  with  all  its 
grievous  consequences  removed,  by  His  purging  His  land  from  all 
illegitimate  worship  and  objects  of  worship  :  this  seems  to  be  the 
meaning  of  the  v. — Therefore]  can  only  be  laboriously  explained : 
because  Yahweh  is  more  favourable  to  Israel  than  to  his  smiters, 
and  does  not  annihilate  him,  therefore  on  this  condition^  i.e.  the 
condition  defined  below  (v.^*'-  **),  he  can  be  rid  of  iniquity  and  its 
consequences ;  riND  is  resumed  by  1D")6J'3,  exactly  as  by  (yiDna  in 
Gn  34^^:  cp.,  too,  I  S  1 1 2. — The  iniquity  of  Jacob  shall  be  ex- 
piated] ct.  22^*. — The  parallel  line  instead  of  running,  and  on  this 
condition  his  sin  shall  depart  (cp.  (P\  reads  in  f^  thus :  and 
this  is  all  the  fruit  of  making  his  sin  depart.  Cheyne  once  (/V.) 
explained  the  two  lines  as  meaning  that  Israelis  repentance  was  at 
once  the  cause  and  effect  of  its  forgiveness;  "Justice  and  mercy 
are  combined  in  the  removal  of  sin  and  guilt  according  to  the 
Old  Test,  as  well  as  the  New."  Such  excellent  theology  fortun- 
ately does  not  rest  alone  on  so  strange  an  expression  of  it  as  is 
given,  if  given  at  all,  here ;  CEr  reads  "  and  this  shall  be  his  blessing 
when  I  remove  his  sin." — Altar-stones]  altars^  'asherim  and  ^am- 


XXVII.  8-1 1,  7,  8  459 

mdnim  (cp.  1 7'  n.)  are  seductions  from  the  sole  worship  of  Yahweh, 
and  all  such  will  be  absent  from  an  ideal  community :  the  altars 
are  the  altars  other  than  the  legitimate  altar  at  Jerusalem,  such 
as  the  altars  that  survived  from,  or  were  restored  after,  Josiah's 
reformation ;  or,  if  the  prophecy  were  so  late,  altars  on  which  the 
Hellenizing  and  apostate  Jews  offered  (cp.  i  Mac  2^^), 

10  f.  Description  of  a  once  strong  and  fortified  city  that  is 
now  desolate,  a  spot  where  cattle  feed  (cp.  e.g.  5^^)  and  women 
come  in  search  of  firewood — a  vivid  trait  peculiar  to  this 
passage;  the  reason  of  this  fate  was  that  the  inhabitants  were 
without  understanding  and,  therefore,  obtained  neither  favour 
nor  mercy  from  its  maker.  What  city  is  intended  is  altogether 
uncertain ;  some  think  it  is  the  capital  of  the  world-empire 
oppressing  the  Jews;*  others,  that  it  is  Jerusalem;!  others, J 
Samaria,  the  home  of  the  people  without  understanding 
(Sir  50^*).  For  is  a  difficulty  in  any  case. — 10.  A  fortified 
city\  cp.  252  26^  —  Is  desolate']  alone,  dwelling  apart;  of 
Jerusalem,  La  i\ — An  abode  (34^^)  deserted]  lit.  expelled,  Le. 
an  abode  from  which  the  inhabitants  have  been  expelled: 
cp.  an  expelled  nest,  16^. — And  consumes  the  branches  thereof] 
i.e,  the  branches  of  the  bushes  and  trees  that  had  overgrown 
the  long-deserted  spot,  cp.  34^^;  but  the  expression  of  the 
idea  is  curious  and  the  text  doubtful.  Du.  by  emendation 
(see  phil.  n.)  substitutes  for  "^^  as  it  reads  in  f^.  And  thorns 
and  briars  grow  branches:  cp.  32^^  23I2. — iia.  b.  The  dried 
and  broken-off  branches  ("i"'Vp,  Ps  80^2^  Job  14®  18"  29i*>t)  serve 
women  for  firewood. — For  it  is  not  a  people  of  understanding]  this 
might  apply  to  Israel  (cp.  i^),  or  Samaria  (Sir  502^);  but  since 
heathen  nations  can  be  described  as  doomed  to  Sheol  because 
forgetful  of  God  (Ps  9^7  0^)),  any  such  nation  might  well  be 
described  as  failing  to  obtain  mercy  from  God  because  without 
understanding,  i.e.  knowledge  of  God's  ways  (cp.  44^^  Ps  74^^-  22). 
It  is,  indeed,  a  characteristic  of  late  Jewish  thought  that  the 
nations  must  get  instructed  in  Yahweh's  ways  (2^-%  that  if  they 
fail  to  do  so  or  to  act  upon  their  knowledge,  they  will  perish 
(6o^2j^ — jf^  Maker  .  .  .  its  Framer]  the  pronouns  refer  to 
Israel,  43^  442 ;  but  they  might  certainly  refer,  if  the  con- 
text required  it,  to  other  nations:  for  Yahweh  has  made  all 
nations  (Ps  869). 

♦  Di.  t  I^el.,  Du.,  Box,  Skinner.  X  Marti. 


460  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

7.  nn  vjnn  .  .  .  man  inDO]  probably  this  was  originally  either  irvio 
vyp  ...  or  ij-in  .  .  .  inao  {&),  and  either  rtsn  and  iin  or  'la'iq  .  .  .  man.  The 
pass,  vjnq,  MT,  is  in  any  case  most  improbable. — 8.  naann  nnhtP2  nKONoa] 
C&  fiax^fievos  Kal  6v€iSi^ojv  i^airoffreXeT  airoijs  ;  Lieb.  argues  that  this  rendered 
mn^v  nam  nNDNon,  or  '"^b"  '02  nana,  fflr  ought  not  to  be  quoted  as  reading 
nann',  and  it  is,  of  course,  not  certain  that  it  read  precisely  nxDNDn.  For  nNDNoa, 
Cond.  proposes  .nNONtsa  (cp.  14^).  See,  further,  the  full  discussion  in  Kon.  i. 
655-658 ;  and  for  sundry  proposed  emendations,  Lieb. — njn]  MT  probably 
intends  the  form  to  be  3rd  pf.  of  mr^,  to  muse,  meditate :  cp.  QT.  This,  of 
course,  is  impossible.  fJjn,  3rd  pf.  of  nan,  to  separate,  remove  (cp.  Pr  25**-t), 
with  the  3rd  fern,  suffix  as  in  line  a.,  may  have  been  intended.  To  explain 
the  form  by  reference  to  La  i^  (Cheyne),  or  to  the  doubtful  2  S  20^'  (Du.), 
as  Hiph.  of  r\y  with  the  suffix,  ajn,  is  less  satisfactory. — 9.  hntd  p^]  (J5  5t4 
Tovro,  reading  perhaps  only  one  of  the  two  words. — nn  .  .  .  riNis]  a  curious 
change  of  masc.  and  fem. — ns]yir«?V,  suggests  result;  J.  D.  Mich,  (cited  by 
Lieb.)  proposed  '19,  the  bullocks,  i.e.  offerings,  required  ybr  removing  his 
sin  ;  though  this  is  quite  improbable,  it  shows  a  sense  of  the  difficulty  of  J^ 
which  modem  attempts  at  explanation  have  failed  to  surmount  satisfactorily 
(see  above). — iDip'  .  .  .  iDirn]  cstr.  as  5'  n.  With  op,  to  stand  erect,  cp.  the 
use  of  the  Hiphil  =  to  erect,  e.g.  in  Jos  4*. — nj]  Dn  5'  {Aramaic)f  ;  KT3  in 
Am  2^  5D=Tt5'  ^. — 10 f.  On  (ffi,  see  Lieb.'s  full  discussion  ;  but  he  is  wrong 
in  representing  o  as  absent  from  (E  ;  Ty  '3  in  the  form  nya  is  represented  by 
CbffTrep  dpv/ibs  in  a  clause  at  the  end  of  v.*  which  is  incorrectly  rejected  by 
Lieb.  as  a  Greek  gloss. — n'syo  hVdi  y^r  Dt^i]  Du.  ni£3j;D  nV  fpi  Ton:  (& 
already  read  yir  nv). — 11.  niTKD]  TNn,  to  kindle,  as  Mai  i'®,  Ps  18^,  and 
perhaps  50^^ — nnn^n  ^'y"&'p\  if  the  text  is  correct,  the  3rd  fem.  pi.  is  due  to 
Tsp  being  regarded  as  collective  (G-K.  145c) ;  cp.  jna  referring  to  ^pD,  Gn 
30'',  and  njn  to  Ty  in  Jg  i^"^  (cp.  Jer  4^),  but  below  nniM  is  fem.  sing. 
— ni3'3]  pi.  here  only  ;  but  cp.  nwun,  40",  and  see  G-K.  124^. 

12,  13.  Conclusion  of  the  Apocalypse.  .  .  .  Continua- 
tion of  v.i ;  translation,  p.  408.  The  Jews  will  be  gathered 
together,  whether  those  who  dwell  scattered  (and  mingled  with 
the  heathen  (?))  within  the  limits  of  the  ideal  boundaries  of  the 
Land  of  Promise  (v.^^)^  or  those  who  have  wandered,  or  been 
exiled,  beyond  those  limits,  eastwards  or  westwards  ;  these  latter, 
now  too  far  dispersed  to  do  so,  will  come  and  worship  Yahweh 
in  Jerusalem.  The  more  detailed  meaning  and  significance  is 
unfortunately  obscure,  especially  in  v.^^.  but  the  situation  pre- 
supposed is  similar  to  that  in  258^- <*,  possibly  also  to  that  in 
2620f-,  or,  as  Marti  puts  it,  these  verses  give  us  the  positive  side 
of  those  passages  and  the  conclusion  of  the  Apocalypse :  the 
reproach  of  the  Jews  will  cease  (25^),  those  who  reproached  them 
will  be  punished  (2620^-),  the  Jews  themselves  will  be  gathered  to 
Jerusalem  (li^'^^-)  and  to  the  glory  of  Yahweh's  reign  there  (2423). 


XXVII.  9-13  4^1 

—  Yahweh  will  beat  out  {grain)  from  the  corn-ears  of  the  River  to 
{those  of)  the  Wady  of  Egypt^  or  Yahweh  will  beat  off  {olive- 
berries)^  or  beat  out  {grain)  from  the  current  (cp.  ffi)  of  the  River 
to  the  Wady  of  Egypt:  both  translations  can  be  defended,  neither 
can  be  maintained  with  complete  confidence.  The  vb.  D3n 
(28^'^)  means  either  to  beat  out  grains  of  corn  with  a  stick,  Jg  6*^, 
Ruth  2^^,  or  to  beat  an  olive  tree  so  as  to  bring  off  the  berries, 
Dt  242^*;  the  noun  vhl^  means  either  an  ear  (not  grain^  the 
object  of  I33n  in  Jg  6^^)  of  corn,  e.g.  17*,  Gn  41*,  or  else  a 
flow,  or  current^  of  water,  Ps  69^-  ^^  and,  probably,  Jg  1 2*.  The 
use  of  7hl^  is  in  either  case  unnecessarily  awkward :  for  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  I53n  it  is  natural  to  take  it  of  ears  of  grain ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  attached  to  a  term  for  water  like  river, 
its  most  obvious  meaning  is  current-,  the  river  Jordan  flowing 
past  suggested  testing  the  fugitives  by  the  pronunciation  of 
Shibboleth  in  particular  (Jg  12^),  though,  of  course,  any  word 
beginning  with  K^  would  have  done  equally  well.  Again,  there 
seems  no  particular  point  in  saying /r^w  the  current  of  the  River 
instead  of  from  the  River  simply ;  but  it  is  equally  difficult  to 
see  why,  if  the  writer  meant,  Yahweh  will  beat  out  corn  from  the 
River  to  the  Wady^  he  chose  to  say  instead,  Yahweh  will  beat  out 
from  the  corn  ears  of  the  River  to  the  Wady ;  *  vbl^  must,  more- 
over, if  this  is  intended,  be  taken  as  a  collective,  though  it  is  so 
used  nowhere  else.  Again,  Op?,  gleanings  takes  place  before  t33n, 
beatings  of  wheat  (Ru  2^"^) ;  but  berries  would  be  picked  up  after 
they  had  been  beaten  ^the  tree.  On  the  whole,  the  awkwardness 
seems  less  if  lD3n  can  be  taken  of  olive-beating.  But  in  either 
case  the  figure  seems  to  be  badly  expressed.  Ges.  understands  the 
meaning  to  be  that  Israel's  territory  in  its  widest  extent  will  be 
as  thickly  and  quickly  populated  as  though  men  fell  from  trees  ; 
Smend  (pp.  192,  207),  that  Yahweh  will  gather  the  entire  Jewish 
community,  now  scattered  between  Egypt  and  the  Euphrates, 
together,  without  exception,  as  individual  olives  at  the  gleaning  are 
knocked  off  the  trees  and  collected.  Many  modern  commentators 
explain  much  as  Marti,  "Yahweh  institutes  a  great  threshing, 
the  Jews  are  the  good  corn,  the  heathen  the  straw ;  the  Jews  are 

*  Unless,  indeed,  as  Del.  suggests,  the  writer  intended  a  •*  beautiful  [?] 
dil(^y"  which  might  be  roughly  represented  in  English  by,  "Yahweh  will 
pick  from  the  currents  of  the  River,"  etc.,  meaning  "Yahweh  will  pick 
currants  from  the  River  to." 


462  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

picked  up  one  by  one,  the  heathen  removed."  The  straw  in 
this  case  might  also  perhaps  include  unworthy  Israelites :  cp. 
Zee  5^-^. — The  River]  the  Euphrates,  7^0  n.  In  241^  olive- 
beating  is  a  sinister  figure. — The  Wady  of  Egypt]  mod.  Wady 
el-'Arish,  the  ancient  Rhinocolura  (so  ffir  here)  which  flows  into 
the  Mediterranean  at  el-'Arish,  about  half-way  between  Gaza 
and  Pelusium;  see  Numbers^  p.  454.  For  the  River  and  the 
Wady  of  Egypt^  as  ideal  boundaries  of  the  promised  land,  see 
Gn  15^^,  which  mentions  both;  Ex  23^^,  Dt  i^,  Jos  i*,  which 
mention  the  River  \  and  i  K  8^^^  which  mentions  the  Wady. — 
13.  A  great  trumpet]  the  summoning  of  the  elect  by  means 
of  a  trumpet-blast  appears  frequently  in  late  eschatology :  see 
Mt  2431,  I  Co  1552,  I  Th  4^6.  cp.  also  the  diff'erent  use  of 
trumpets  in  Zee  9^^,  Rev  7.  8. — They  that  were  lost]  Dn^Nn  i.e. 
away  from  home  in  a  strange  and  unfamiliar  land.  So  is  126? 
used  of  sheep  that  have  been  allowed  to  stray  off  their  owner's 
land,  and  so  become  lost,  and  consequently  exposed  to  peril 
of  perishing :  cp.  Jer  50^  "  Lost  sheep  have  my  people  become : 
their  shepherds  let  them  go  astray  .  .  .  they  have  gone  from 
mountain  to  hill,  they  have  forgotten  their  place  of  lying  down 
(l^ni :  cp.  Is  2f^)\  Jer  23^  "Woe  to  the  shepherds  that  have 
let  the  sheep  get  lost  (Dn3K»)  and  scattered.  ...  Ye  have 
scattered  my  sheep,  and  cast  them  out  (Din^ni) ;  Ezk  34**^'  "  The 
outcast  (nman)  ye  brought  not  back  (home),  and  the  lost 
(ninxn)  ye  sought  not,  and  they  were  scattered  from  having  no 
shepherd,  and  became  food  for  all  the  beasts  of  the  field"; 
yy  12-16  "As  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his  flock  .  .  .,  so  will  I  seek 
out  my  sheep,  and  rescue  them  from  all  the  places  whither  they 
have  been  scattered;  and  I  will  bring  them  out  from  all  the 
peoples,  and  collect  them  from  all  the  lands,  and  bring  them  to 
their  ground ;  and  I  will  feed  them  on  the  mountains  of  Israel. 
There  shall  they  lie  down  in  a  good  home-stead.  ...  I  myself 
will  feed  my  flock,  and  I  will  cause  them  to  lie  down.  .  .  .  The 
lost  (JTi^Nn)  I  will  seek,  and  the  outcast  (nni3n)  will  I  bring 
back  (home)."  Cp.  also  Ps  119!''^  and  (of  asses)  i  S  9^*  20^  So  in 
the  Hturgy  of  Dt  26  the  Israelite  at  home  in  the  land  of  promise 
(yy  1.  3j  contrasts  (vv.^*  ^'  ^® ;  ^)  his  present  position  in  his  own 
land    under   the   constant  care   of  Yahweh   with  that   of  the 


XXVII.  12,  13  4^3 

father  of  the  nation  who  was  13N  *ID"1K,  a  lost^  i.e.  a  homeless, 
Aramaean^  passing  down  into  Egypt,  a  country  not  his  own,  to 
live  there  as  2l  ger  (142  n.).  As  the  homeless  children  of  Jacob 
were  once  brought  out  of  the  alien  land  of  Egypt  into  their  own 
home-land,  so  will  the  Jews,  now  again  away  from  home,  in  the 
alien  lands  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  return  home  to  Jerusalem. — 
The  land  of  Assyria]  not  necessarily  the  land  of  the  Assyrians 
of  Isaiah's  time,  so  that  we  must  suppose  the  v.  to  have  been 
written  before  the  fall  of  Nineveh,  or  that  a  later  writer  looking 
back  to  that  time  means  in  particular  the  ten  tribes  who  were 
exiled  in  Isaiah's  day  to  Assyria  ( Di.) ;  but  Assyria,  as  in  Ezr 
6^6,  is  the  same  district,  retaining  its  old  name  after  the  fall  of 
the  Assyrian  Empire :  cp.  the  classical  use  of  *Aa-(Tvpia,  and  see 
on  11^^ — a  passage  which  the  present  in  other  respects  closely 
resembles. — The  outcasts]  D^nian  ;  cp.  11^2  i63f:.  ^p.  the  terms 
in  which  Marduk  proclaims  Merodach-baladan  11.  (728-701  b.c.) 
king,  "  This  is  the  shepherd  who  brings  together  the  scattered " 
{niupahhiru  sepj^ati'.  seeXAT^,p.  382 ;  Gressmann,  Eschat.  p.  267. 

12.  nnK  nnK*?]  cp.  nnnS  nnK,  Ec  7" :  for  the  punctuation  inn,  see  G-K. 
130^:  the  form  is  not  cstr.  (cp.  Gn  48^,  2  S  17^). 


ADDITIONAL    NOTE 
ON   THE  STYLE  AND   LANGUAGE  OF  XXIV. -XXVII. 

It  has  been  claimed  above  (pp.  401  f.)  that  the  style  and  language 
of  Is  24-27  independently  point  to  the  post-exilic  origin  of  these 
chapters.  A  number  of  peculiarities  have  been  pointed  out  in 
the  Commentary  and  philological  notes,  and  reference  has  been 
made  to  the  lists  of  peculiarities  given  by  Smend  and  Cheyne. 
But  a  synopsis,  such  as  is  given  below,  of  some  of  the  peculiarities 
in  the  words  used,  or  the  meanings  with  which  certain  words  are 
used,  and  of  certain  significant  forms,  may  enable  the  reader  more 
readily  to  appreciate  the  linguistic  character  of  these  chapters. 

These  peculiarities  and  the  affinities  with  later  writers  are  the 
more  noticeable  because  they  occur  in  the  work  of  a  writer  who 
was  well  versed  in  Scripture  (p.  401),  and  who,  apparently, 
endeavoured  to  reproduce  the  style  of  prophecy. 


464  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  certain 
dissimilarities  between  Is  24-27  and  most  late  post-exilic  writers. 
The  style  of  Is  24-27  forms  no  such  transition  as  does  Ec.  to 
the  New  Hebrew  or  Rabbinic  style,  nor  is  it  marked  (except  in 
corrupt  passages)  by  that  uncouthness  *  which  characterises  Chr., 
Dan.,  and  Est.  Yet  even  a  writer  as  late  as  the  2nd  cent.  B.C. 
could  write  with  ease  and  fluency.  "The  language"  of  Ben 
Sirach  "  is  classical  Hebrew,  the  syntax  displaying  no  traces  of 
the  peculiar  New  Hebrew  constructions,  such  as  occur,  for 
instance,  so  frequently  in  Ecclesiastes.  .  .  .  The  style  is  occasion- 
ally a  little  heavy,  but  this  may  sometimes  be  due  to  corruption 
of  the  text.  Otherwise  (especially  chs.  44  ff.)  it  is  remarkably 
easy  and  flowing.  It  stands  throughout  on  an  altogether  higher 
level  than  that,  for  instance,  of  Chronicles,  Ecclesiastes,  or  the 
Hebrew  parts  of  Daniel."  f 

And  not  only  in  the  general  character  of  the  style  is  Is  24--2  7 
distinguished  from  most  late  post-exilic  works  except  Sir.  It 
contains  no  Greek  words  such  as  (though  few  in  number)  form 
such  a  significant  feature  of  the  Book  of  Daniel ;  nor,  unless 
in  meant  secret^  and  formed  an  original  part  of  the  text  (but  see 
n.  on  24^^),  does  it  contain  any  Persian  words,  such  as  appear  in 
Ec,  Cant.,  Est.,  Dan.,  Chr.,|  and  even,  in  spite  of  its  generally 
more  classic  style,  in  Sir.§  {e.g.  n,  secret).  And,  further.  Is  24-27 
may  be  said  to  be  relatively  free  from  such  marked  Aramaisms 
as  occur  in  Jon.,  Pss  139,  144,  Sir.,  as  well  as  in  the  late  post- 
exilic  writings  already  mentioned;  see  Dr.  LOT^  references  in 
Index  i.  s.v.  "Aramaisms,"  and  the  glossary  in  Cowley  and 
Neubauer's  edition  of  Ecclus. 

Che.  finds  the  style  of  chs.  24-27  artificial,  and  the  chief 
elements  of  its  artificiality  in  "  the  singularity  of  many  phrases 
.  .  .  the  sixteen  paronomasias  (cp.  esp.  24^-  ^'  *•  ®'  ^^-^^  25^*  '^^ 
26^  27^),  the  numerous  rhymes  (24^-  *•  ^^  25^-  *•  ^  262-  ^^  20, 


21 


•Cp.  Dr.  LOTTOS. 

t  Cowley  and  Neubauer,  The  Original  Hebrew  of  a  portion  of  Ecclesi- 
asticus  {xxxix.  jj-xlix.  11),  pp.  xiiif.  ;  cp.  Norbert  Peters,  Hebr.  Text  des 
Buches  Ecclus.  85*.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered  that  the  judgment 
cited  above  was  based  on  chs.  39-49  only,  and  could  hardly  be  passed  on  all 
the  portions  of  Sir.  that  have  been  discovered  since.  Still,  even  chs.  39^^-49^^ 
alone  are  between  three  and  four  times  the  length  of  Is  24-27. 

X  See  Dr.  LOT,  references  in  Index,  s.v.  **  Persian  Words." 

§  But  see  p.  466  n. 


I 


NOTE  ON   STYLE  AND  LANGUAGE  OF   XXIV.-XXVU.      465 

27^-^),  the  antitheses  (24*-  *•  ^*  27^),  the  emphatic  doubling  ot 
words  *  (24^^  25^  263-  *•  1*  27^),  characteristic  also  of  the  II  Isaiah, 
which  indicate  a  consciousness  of  poverty  in  the  writer  (or 
writers)."  But  mere  artificiality  of  style  does  not  closely  define 
the  age  of  a  writer;  and  the  phenomena  correctly  described 
by  Che.  do  not  justify  any  more  precise  conclusion  than 
that  which  he  draws,  viz.,  "  that  they  point  to  an  age  much 
later  than  that  of  the  true  Isaiah,  and  later  even  than  that 
of  the  .  .  .  Second  Isaiah."  And  so  Smend,  after  citing 
several  singular  expressions,  discreetly  leaves  the  definition  of 
time  somewhat  vague :  "  these  modes  of  expression  belong 
essentially  to  rhetoric;  but,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  de- 
pendence of  the  author  elsewhere  on  other  writers,  they  indicate 
a  conscious  striving  after  originality,  and  thereby  betray  a  later 
age  "(p.  197). 

The  synopsis  that  follows  must  be  left  to  make  good  the 
claim  that  the  style  and  language  of  Is  24-27  independently 
prove  its  post-exilic  origin.  They  cannot,  as  the  ideas  probably 
can,  be  safely  used  to  show  that  Is  24-27  is  a  late  post-exilic  work. 
And  if  the  ideas  contained  in  these  chapters  were  compatible 
with  an  early  post-exilic  date,  it  would  be  simplest  to  account  for 
the  dissimilarities  between  the  style  of  Is  24-27  and  of  such 
works  as  Chr.,  Dan.,  Est.,  Ec,  by  the  assumption  that  it  is  earlier 
than  they.  If,  however,  the  ideas  compel  us  to  seek  the  origin 
of  Is  24-27  in  one  of  the  centuries  that  saw  the  production  of 
Chr.,  Dan.,  Est.,  Ec,  Sir.,  we  must  suppose  that  the  author 
having,  like  Ben  Sirach,  "  much  given  himself  to  the  reading  of 
the  law,  and  the  prophets,  and  the  other  books  of  our  fathers," 
was  as  successful  as  Ben  Sirach  in  avoiding  the  uncouthness  of 
Chr.,  Dan.,  Est.,  and  somewhat  more  successful  in  preserving  the 
classicism  of  his  vocabulary,  avoiding  (probably)  altogether  the 

*  But  most  of  these  were  probably  not  present  in  the  original  text ;  see 
notes  above  on  24^^  25^  26^-  '•  ^^  27^  The  same  is  true  of  some  of  the  parono* 
masias  (see  n.  24'*  ^•) ;  yet  the  number  of  paronomasias  remains  strikingly 
large.  Moreover,  the  use  made  of  paronomasia  is  different  from  Isaiah's  use 
of  it  (see  p.  401),  and  more  resembles  that  made  of  it  by  Ben  Sirach  (see  a 
collection  of  paronomasias  in  Sir.  in  Norbert  Peters,  Ecclus.  p.  85*).  So 
far,  indeed,  is  the  writer  from  resembling  the  earlier  prophet  in  his  use  of 
paronomasia,  that  he  might  rather  be  described  as  being  in  this  respect 
a  degenerate  from  Isaiah. 
VOL.  I. — 30 


466  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

use  of  Persian  words  and  the  particle  ^  (for  'ntJ'K),  and  making 
less  use  of  Aramaisms.* 

To  guard  against  misunderstanding,  it  may  be  well  to  state 
explicitly  that  not  every  word  or  usage  cited  below,  even  though 
no  example  of  pre-exilic  usage  can  be  give?iy  was  necessarily  un- 
known before  the  exile.  It  is  the  multiplication  of  words  or 
usages  for  which  little  or  no  early  evidence  exists,  but  for  which 
Aramaic  or  late  analogy  can  be  found,  that  is  significant. 

i.  Particles:  j[ 

All  that  is  peculiar  in  the  use  of  the  particles  is  confined  S 
the  song  in  26^'^^. 

I.  i>3,  one  of  the  Phoenician  negatives  (Cooke,  NSI,  p.  33), 
is  in  Hebrew  confixied  to  poetry;  moreover,  (i)  it  often  occurs 
aggregated  3-7  times  in  one  passage :  (2)  it  is  particularly  fre- 
quent with  the  vb.  01)0  (Pss  10^  16^  17^  21^  30^  46^  93^9610  = 
I  Ch  i630,  Pr  iqSO  128,  Job  41^5 :  ct.  1310  with  «^,  Ps  155  ii2« 
125I  623-7,  Is  4020  4i7).  In  OT  it  occurs  69  times  (BDB), 
and  of  these  occurrences  7  are  in  Is  26^^*  ^^'  ^**  ^^.  Proof  of 
pre-exilic  usage  rests  on  two  uncertain  occurrences  in  Hosea 
^16  (j^e^e),  72  (1^,  but  see  ffir),  and,  as  some  would  claim,  on 
certain  occurrences  in  1$  33,  Psalms,  and  Proverbs.  Apart 
from  Is  26  and  Hos.  the  usage  is  as  follows  (for  references,  see 
Mandelkern,  Cone.  Minor) : 


Is      1421 

I 

^^20.  21.  23.  24 

7 

35« 

I 

4024  (3  t.)  43^^  44«^-  (4  t.) 

8 

Pss.  (10  (5  t.).   16  (4  t). 

17  (3t.).  21  (3  t.).  30. 

32.  46.  49.  58.  78.  93. 

96.     104    (3t.).     119. 

140   (2  t.).   141.    147) 

31 

Pr. 

10 

Job 

I 

iChi630(  =  Ps96io) 

I 

*  It  is  important,  however,  in  making  this  comparison,  to  allow  for  the 
probability  that  the  text  of  Ben  Sirach  has  suffered  considerable  contamina- 
tion in  transmission,  and  that  some  of  the  late  words  may  not  have  stood  in 
the  original  text. 


NOTE  ON   STYLE  AND   LANGUAGE  OF  XXIV.-XXVIL      467 

2.  ciK,  26^-  *•  ".     The  use  of  this  particle  is  very  character- 

istic of  Is  40-48  (25  times):  see  Dr.  LOT^  p.  240; 
but  the  particle,  mainly  poetical,  is  not  confined  to 
post-exilic  literature :  see,  e.g.^  Jg  5**,  Dt  338-  ^o-  28. 

3.  \7y  (26*)  is  (probably)  etymologically  the  earlier  form  of 

ny;  yet  in  OT  it  occurs  mainly,  perhaps  even  ex- 
clusively, in  post-exilic  writings:  see  Nu  24*®*  **,   Is 

65I8,    PSS    83I8    928    10423    132I2.    14    1476^    Job  ^4    2o5t. 

So  also  h^^  (for  h^)  occurs  in  Job  322  520  1522  29191. 
'h^  (for  Wi  certainly  occurs  early  (Gn  49I7-22  (^  times), 

Nu  24^  (twice),  Is  18*),  but  also  twice  in  Dt  32^,  10 
times  in  Psalms,  15  in  Job,  and  3  in  Pr. 

4.  1»i),  2614- 1«  (but  in  v.i«  rd.  \h).     Elsewhere  as  follows  : 

Pre-exilic  Prophecy,  Is  30^  (?),  Hab  2^  (?  Is  16*  23^) 

Other  pre-exilic  Poetry,     Gn  92«f-,  Dt  33^  bis 

Is      35^(?)  I  time 

438  447(?)i6  4821  538  (?)         5  times 
Pss.  (2.   288  (but  read  IDvi') 

44-  49-  55-  56.  58.  59- 

64.  66.  73.  78.  80.  88. 

89.  119)  22     „ 
Dt     32  2     „ 

Lam.  4     „ 

Pr      2320  I  time 

Job  10  times 

Cp.  G-K.  91/:  "the  termination  104  .  .  .  like  Md  and 
\'0^  occurs  with  the  noun  (as  with  the  vb.  §  58^)  almost  ex- 
clusively in  later  poets."  Of  other  particles,  to  the  use  of  which 
Che.  (p.  148)  draws  attention,  a  brief  notice  may  suffice :  the 
relative  use  of  HT  in  25^  is  uncertain  and  indeed  improbable ;  103 
in  2510  (I^*re)  is  textually  doubtful ;  and  1D3  (2617.  18)  and  nint 
(26^^)  have  no  significance  in  reference  to  date. 

ii.  Forms  and  Constructions : 

^an,  unless  it  is  an  orthographic  anomaly  for  nan,  is  a  rather 
striking  Aramaism  (see  26^0  phil.  n.). 

rini'py  and  in^li^  are  both  examples  of  the  ending  |i,  }t  attached 
to  the  feminine  n  and  not  direct  to  the  third  radical.  The  only 
other  example  of  this  in  the  Hebrew  of  the  OT  appears  to  be 


468 


COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


inK^nj  (2  K  18*),  which  Lagarde  {BN,  p.  205)  treated  as  a  loan- 
word.  On  the  other  hand,  in  Aramaic  the  formation  is  far  from 
infrequent;  Barth  {JVB^  §  207^:)  cites  amongst  others  these 
examples  :  l3nO''K  (Dn  7^),  jnii^y,  ^5cn,  Mandaitic  KiNnuxn. 
As  against  the  significance  of  these  facts,  it  should,  however,  be 
observed  that  '\\Th\>V  shows  the  peculiarly  Hebrew  development 
of  the  old  Semitic  ending  -%n  (retained  in  Arabic,  Assyr.,  and 
Aramaic). 

The  hapax  legomenon   njKtt'  (which  is,  however,  from  a  root 

early  in  use,  see  Is  6^1  17^2^  is  of  a  formation  for  which  NH 
showed  a  particular  fondness  (Strack,  Lehrbuch  der  Neuhebr. 
Sprache,  39^:),  yet  which  was  not  unknown  in  early  Hebrew ;  cp. 
e.s",  n>13,  Ex  2 1 25.     The  new  Hebrew  nouns  of  this  form  are 

mainly  "  nomina  actionis." 

The  multiplication  of  intensive  plurals  is  probably  not  in- 
significant; for  the  instances  cited  in  G-K.  124^  are  largely  late. 
In  Is  24-27  note  D^:d«  (26^),  Dnsr^D  (26^;  see  p.  471),  ninD3 
(2610),  njriK'"'  (26I8),  T\^T2  (27II),  and  ??  miN  (2613),  and  D^N  (2415). 

Che.  (p.  149)  claims  that  there  is  "neglect  of  Waw  Con- 
versive " ;  but  at  most  this  neglect  is  very  relative  as  compared 
with  the  conspicuous  neglect  of  it  in  Ec.  (Dr.  Tenses,  §  133). 
For  the  Impf.  with  Waw  Conv.,  see  24^-  ^^  26^^ ;  and  for  the  Pf. 
with  Waw  Conv.,  see  24!-  20.  22.  23  256.  7.  8.  10.  11  2621  271-  lO-  ^K 
Moreover,  the  author  of  Is  24-27  does  not  discard  the  old  con- 
struction of  Waw  Conversive  in  favour  of  the  later  construction 
with  the  simple  Waw  (yet  see,  perhaps,  24^*^),  which  is  what 
Koheleth  does  do  (except  in  i^"^  4^-  '^) ;  his  avoidance  of  Waw 
Conversive  is  mainly  due  to  another  characteristic  of  style  less 
indicative  of  date,  viz.,  his  fondness  for  asyndeton :  cp.  e.g. 
24*  (similarly  33^,  but  ct.  Hos  4^,  Jer  12*)  24^  (last  three  clauses) 


11 


2^7.  8.  9.   10.   11.    18.   14.   16.   19     gC^'  2.  3     265'  ''•  ^^'  '^^'  1^*  1^'  1^*'  ^27 

But  though  there  is  no  such  preference  for  simple  Waw  as  would 
point  to  a  late  post-exilic  date,  the  use  of  Waw  Conversive  can- 
not be  treated  as  proof  positive  of  early  post-exilic  date ;  Ben 
Sirach  also  employs  the  construction  :  see  Cowley  and  Neubauer, 
p.  xiii  n. 

iii.  Vocabulary  and  meanings  of  words  : 
Certain  peculiarities  in  the  application  of  words,  such  as  the 
use  of  ppn  (261^)  of  rising  from  the  dead,  pn^f  (24^6)  in  reference 


NOTE  ON   STYLE  AND  LANGUAGE  OF  XXIV.-XXVIL      469 

to  Israel,  nna  (24^)  with  a  religious  meaning  (though  not  quite 
the  same  as  attaches  to  JV12  in  Is  40-66 ;  Dr.  LOT  240)  are 
not  classified  here ;  they  are  certainly  significant,  but  their 
significance  falls  to  be  treated  under  the  religious  ideas  charac- 
teristic of  the  writer  (see  above,  pp.  399  f.). 

Included  in  the  list  of  hapax  legomena  given  by  Smend  and 
Cheyne,  are  several  words  which  are  textually  uncertain,  or 
which  may  be  glosses :  such  are  Dnx  (241^),  m  (24^*^),  noDK 
(2422),  pK  (25I),  nen^  (Hophal,  26I),  ppx  (26i«),  niiK  (26i»). 
nNDKD  (Pilpel  ?,  2  7^t).  These  are  discussed  above  in  the  notes, 
and  need  not  be  further  considered  here.  It  would  be  unwise  to 
attach  any  weight  to  them  in  determining  the  date  of  Is  24-27. 

The  following  unique  or  very  infrequent  usages  are  mostly 
commented  on  in  the  notes  above,  but  may  for  convenience  be 
grouped  together  here :  n^KK^  (see  under  ii.,  p.  468),  VbB  (27*!), 
D''"i»fiJ^  (25^),  matured  vi'mt  (elsewhere,  Ues^  dregs\  nriD  (denomina- 
tive of  HD,  256!),  Dii>  (2571),  lanio  (25101),  n^  nuns  (25"!).  With 
5]D^  used  with  h  and  the  omission  of  the  ace.  (261^),  cp.  tiD*  with 
hv  and  the  omission  of  the  ace.  in  2  Ch  9^  (ct.  i  K  10^). 

The  following  are  (A)  words  the  use  of  which  is  suggestive  of 
late  date ;  (B)  words  used  with  peculiar  meanings,  or  meanings 
suggestive  of  late  date.  It  is  true  most  of  these  are  attested 
independently  as  occurring  by  or  before  the  close  of  the  exile : 
but  a  few  suggest  a  later  date ;  and  in  the  aggregate,  taken  in 
conjunction  with  those  on  pp.  466-9,  they  seem  to  suggest  a  date 
as  late  as  ±  400  B.C. 

A. 

I.  D^iD^u',  26*  (D^D^Jiy  iivt).  Cp.  D^D^^y  n^jK',  Ps  77^; 
'y  nnn.  Is  51^;  'y  nyicri,  45^^;  'v  b  n\:ho,  Ps 
14513.  Qio^jy  pnv,  Dn  9'^*.  In  such  genitival  phrases 
the  singular  DTiy  is  a  frequent  alternative  to  the  pi.  in 
the  later  literature :  in  the  earlier  literature  it  is  exclu- 
sively employed;  see  X:h\V  ^^?,  Gn  21  ^3;  D^iy  ny3J, 
Gn  49^6;  dSsiv  nnt,  Dt  2783. 

Evidence  of  the  early  use  of  D^D^y  (though  not 
in  such  phrases  as  those  just  cited)  consists  of  i  K 
813  1^,  D^ofjiy  "ynyih  ri30,  ffi  .  .  .  eVl  Kaivorrjro^ -,  in 
2  Ch  6^,  where  the  passage  is  cited,  (&  renders  eVi  tovs 


I 


470  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 


aiwva?.  Some  might  claim  Ps  61^  (D^ofjiy  li^nxa  mijx) 
as  another  pre-exilic  occurrence.  But  in  any  case 
the  great  majority  of  the  occurrences  in  OT  are  exilic 
and  post-exilic,  see  Is  45^^  {bis)  51^,  Ps  776.8  14513^ 
Dn  9^4,  Ec  i^^t :  and  so  in  the  Aramaic  of  Dn  7^8 
2^4  we  find  N-'^^y,  and  in  2*  (ct.  i  K  t^i)  4*  39  ^lo 
PDpy.  The  pi.  of  xh^  also  occurs  in  C;  see,  e.g.^ 
Ex  15I8  K^iD^y  ^ofjy^,  and  in  Ps.  \"i:}>vh  is  the  regular 
equivalent  of  n^iD.  Cp.  also  CIS  ii.  197^  a  Nabataean 
Inscription  of  i  B.C.,  '^'ohv  th^. 

2.  ny  ny,  26* :  also  65I8,  Ps  83I8  928  13212- 1*1.     On  ny, 

see  above,  i.  3. 

3.  13,  27^:  also  Dn  5^  (Aramaic)t.     See  27^  phil.  n. 

4.  nmv,  24I1 :  also  Jer  142  46^2,  Ps  1441*1 ;  vb.  HIV,  Is  42111. 

Note  that  in  C  mv,  snvv  render  pyv,  npyv  the  earlier 
Hebrew  equivalents  of  n\%  nmv:  see,  e.g.^  Gn  27^* 
f^  n!)ni  npyv  pyv^i,  C  «2-i  Knmv  ni^ :  see  also  2  K 
212  4I,  Jer  483. 

5.  yyi  Kal  and  Hithpo.  241^     The  Hithpo.  is  not  a  air.  Xcy., 

as  Sm.  and  Che.  claim,  if  yyrinni)  (Pr  iS^*)  be  rightly 
taken  as  Inf.  Hithpo.  of  VV^  (see  Dr.  in  Exp.  Titnes^ 
xi.  230  f.).  The  use  of  the  Aramaic  ^T\  for  the 
Hebrew  pn  (yyi  in  1^-y^  in  f^)  appeared  in 
Hebrew  as  early  as  Jer.,  if  lyi  in  Jer  iii^  is  derived 
from  this  yyi,  and  if  the  text  of  Jer  1512  can  be 
trusted.  For  the  other  occurrences  (several  question- 
able) in  OT,  see  241^  phil.  n. 

6.  IID  (distinct  from   ns,  whence  IBH,  to  annut)^  Kal  and 

Hithpo.,  241^1.  In  addition  to  ^y,  cited  above  in 
the  phil.  n.,  Ges-B.  cites  Aram.  "1B"IQ,  ;  <^\  <^ 

7.  iDDittnn,  241^1.    Also  Sir  332  tsoioriDi  n-iin  wiir  o^n^  vh 

?iT3K  iyD»n?  It  is  noticeable,  too,  that  in  2E  tDOIDDt^ 
several  times  renders  the  Kal  of  f^ ;  see  Ps  46^  5^ 
Dnn  i:iD3,  %  xniD  pi3Di»nD  na ;  60*  f^  ""s  .  .  .  px 
HDD,  5r  nDDionx  DnK  .  .  .  xynx;  9610  |^  b  fj^n 
ISIDD,  3r  tDDlonn  J<i>n  bn.     See  also  Ps  94I8  i2i3. 

8.  in^l^,  27I :  also  Ps  74I*  1042^,  Job  3^  4o25t.     See  above,  ii. 

9.  D''3Dn,  27^:  also  178  (gloss),  Ezk.  twice,  Lev.  once,  and 

Chr.  three  times.     See  1 7^  n.  (for  references). 


NOTE  ON  STYLE  AND  LANGUAGE  OF  XXIV.-XXVIL      47 1 

10.  inn,    24^^:    also   used   by  Jer.   and   later   writers:    see 

Gn  i2  (P),  Dt  32I0,  I  S  1221  bis  (probably  D),  Is  2921 
(probably  post-exilic)  34^^  40^'^-  28  4129  ^^  45^®'*  49* 
594,  Jer  423,  Ps  107*0,  Job  618  122*  26^1:  also  Sir  41^ 

11.  nvTD,  24®:  also  io25  16^*  291'^t  (probably  all  post-exilic), 

Sir  4815.  Ct.  lyVD ;  e.g.  Gn  1920.  The  only  other  de- 
rivative of  ^/^  in  OT  is  l^VT,  Is  2810- 13  (an  early 
colloquialism?);  cp.,  perhaps  (Ges-B.  p.  201),  zirti, 
a  Canaanite  gloss  in  Tell  el-Amarna  127  (137)^; 
Job  362;  Dn  7^  (Aramaic).  Early  Hebrew  regu- 
larly, and  late  Hebrew  also,  employed  "lyv  and  its 
derivatives. 

The  particular  phrase  "lyTD  {^IJN  used  in  24*  is  a 
variant  on  the  early  Hebrew  ISDO  ^DD  (e.g.  Gn  34^0 ; 
cp.  "IDDD  ^tJ'JN,  Ezk  12^^).  It  may  be  worth  observing 
that  whereas  %  keeps  close  to  "ij;rD  {jnJK,  rendering 
Tyra  NK^3N  (cp.  Is  1025  161*  29^7  "i^j;r3=iyT0),  it  de- 
parts further  from  "iBDD  ^HD,  rendering  by  p:»n  oy 
(cp.  %,  \\  I  lV)n  VNiNo),  i?.^.,  in  Gn  3430. 

12.  DM  ••>«,  24^5;  also  ii",  Est  lo^f.     The  use  of  D^i^K  pi.  is 

mainly  late :  the  use  in  24^*  is  somewhat  different 
from  that  in  Is  40-66  (Dr.  LOT  239). 

13.  now,    24^;    see   phil.  n. :    also   Ezk   4   t.  (9*   21"- 12)^ 

Ex  223  (P),  La  14.8.11-21,  Pr  292,  Jl  1I8.  But  in 
respect  of  this  word  Is  24-27  does  not  so  much 
approximate  to  Aramaic  usage  as  Sir.,  who  uses 
the  Hithpa.  (12^2  25I8  3020) :  cp.  Ithpa.  in  %  of  Is  24^ 

2l2. 

14.  D"'-iK^ID,  267:  also  33!^  4519,  Ps  98  172  532  758  9610  pga 

99*,  Pr  i3  2»  (?)  8«  (23I6),  Ca  i*  (710),  Dn  ii^,  i  Ch 
29171.     Cp.  p.  468  (on  the  pi.). 

B. 

The  following  are  examples  of  words  used  with  peculiar  mean- 
ings, or  with  meanings  that  are  found  mainly  or  exclusively  in 
exilic  or  post-exilic  writings : 

I.  1V^,  disposition^  26^  (see  n.  there).     Cp.  Sir  27^  f*y  TH,'^^  iy 
K'-'K  "IV^  i>y  pnc^n  p  ns  \T  :  also  (with  the  context)  151* 


472  COMMENTARY  ON   ISAIAH 

nv^  "lU  in:n^"i  DIK  n13  .  .  •  D'-nisx,  and  presumably 
iy3i  (30)  2 ill  232  3^3  (gee  Smend,  Strach).  See,  further, 
Taylor,  Sayings  of  the  Jewish  Fathers ,  pp.  37  f.,  148- 
152,  159;  Jewish  Encyc.  xii.  601  f.;  Porter,  The 
Yezer  Hara^  in  Biblical  a?td  Semitic  Studies  (Yale  Bi- 
centennial publications),  1901 ;  and  Charles,  Test,  of  the 
Twelve  Patriarchs^  pp.  t6i  f.  (on  the  V"in  "IV^  and  1V^ 
SIDH,  in  the  Twelve  Patriarchs  and  Rabbinic  Literature). 

2.  nac^j  to  appoifit  (cp.  in:,  D^K>),  26121.     gee  n. 

3.  5]^n  (with  pn  as  obj.),  to  transgress,  24^!.     See  n. 

4.  i>a3,  Kal  (probably  meaning,  to  be  born),  26^^!  and  Hiph. 

(probably)  to  give  birth  to,  26^^!.     Cp.  ?W,  aw  untimely 

birth,  Ps  58^,  Job  3^^,  Koh  6^1 ;  also  (by  conjecture) 
Ex  21^2.     Cp.  Aram.  fj^DX  to  give  untimely  birth  to-. 

e.g.  Ex  2 1 22  51:  J"  Kmi)ii  n^  n^^sixi  =  nni)^  i«vn  J^; 

Levy,  jY^.5  and  C^«/^.   Worterbuch,  s.v.  i)D3,  ^""D:. 

5.  ppT,  Pual,  /^  ^(f  refined,  25^  (of  wine  t)  :  elsewhere  (chiefly 

of  metals) :  Kal,  Job  28^  3627 ;  Piel,  Mai  38;  Pu.,  i  Ch 
28I8  294,  Ps  I2't. 

6.  Dno,  height,  as  a  synonym  for  heaven,  24^8  n.  21  n.  (in  24"* 

and  26^  the  sense  is  probably  different) ;  also  Mic  6^ 
(DUD  ^rh>A),  Jer  2580,  2  K  1922  =  15  3723  (?)^  La  i^s, 
Is  32I5  335  3814  4o26  5715  58*,  Ps  78  18^7  (  =  2  S  22I' 
hence  Ps  144^)  68^9  7  ii9  93*  10220  ^^jjrjp  Dn)0).t  Note 
also  the  use  of  D^OIID  Ps  1481,  Job  i6i»  252  (vdud) 
3i2t.  The  use  of  the  sing,  in  Jer  17^2^  Ps  92®  10^, 
and  of  the  pi.  in  Is  33^^,  is  scarcely  to  be  classed  with 
the   foregoing;    but   see,  further,    Sir    161^   (lONn  fjN 

^:T3r'  ^^  onoDi  M-ino:  nin^D)  43^  (i?«  'Dno)  and  24^ 

{iv  vij/rjXols  =  Dn»3  or  D'^DnOS). 


I 


The 
International  Critical  Commentary 


VOLUMES  NOW  READY 

Numbers.    By  the  Rev.  G.  Buchanan  Gray,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew, 
Mansfield  College,  Oxford. 

"Most  Bible  readers  have  the  impression  that  'Numbers'  is  a  dull 
book  only  relieved  by  the  brilliancy  of  the  Balaam  chapters  and  some 
snatches  of  old  Hebrew  songs,  but,  as  Prof.  Gray  shows  with  admirable 
skill  and  insight,  its  historical  and  religious  value  is  not  that  which  lies 
on  the  surface.  Prof.  Gray's  Commentary  is  distinguished  by  fine 
scholarship  and  sanity  of  judgment;  it  is  impossible  to  commend  it  too 
warmly." — Saturday  Review  (London). 

Crown  8vo.     $3.00  net. 

Deuteronomy.      By  the  Rev.  S.  R.  driver,  D.D.,  D.Litt.,  Regius 
Professor  of  Hebrew,  and  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford. 

"  It  is  a  pleasure  to  see  at  last  a  really  critical  Old  Testament  com- 
mentary in  English  upon  a  portion  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  especially 
one  of  such  merit.  This  I  find  superior  to  any  other  Commentary  in 
any  language  upon  Deuteronomy." 

Professor  E.  L.  Curtis,  of  Yale  University. 
Crown  8vo.     $3.00  net. 

Judges.      By  Rev.  George  Foot  Moore,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Professor  of 
Theology  in  Harvard  University. 

"The  work  is  done  in  an  atmosphere  of  scholarly  interest  and  in' 
difference  to  dogmatism  and  controversy,  which  is  at  least  refreshing. 
...  It  is  a  noble  introduction  to  the  moral  forces,  ideas  and  influences 
that  controlled  the  period  of  the  Judges,  and  a  model  of  what  a 
historical  commentary,  with  a  practical  end  in  view,  should  be." 

— The  Independent. 

Crown  8vo.     $3.00  net. 

The   Books   of   Samuel.  By  Rev.  henry  preserved  smith,  D.D., 
Professor  of  Old  Testament  Literature  and  History  of  Religion,  Meadville,  Pa. 

"  Professor  Smith's  Commentary  will  for  some  time  be  the  standard 
work  on  Samuel,  and  we  heartily  congratulate  him  on  scholarly  work 
so  faithfully  accomplished." — The  Athenaeum. 

Crown  8vo.     $3.00  ne*. 


The  International  Critical  Commentary 


VOLUMES  NOW  READY 

The  Book  of   Psalms.      By    Charles  Augustus  Briggs,  D.D., 

D.Litt.,  Graduate  Professor  of  Theological  Encyclopaedia  and  Symbolics, 
Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York,  and  Emilie  Grace  Briggs,  B.D. 

"  Christian  scholarship  seems  here  to  have  reached  the  highest  level  yet 
attained  in  study  of  the  book  which  in  religious  importance  stands  next 
to  the  Gospels.  His  work  upon  it  is  not  likely  to  be  excelled  in  learning, 
both  massive  and  minute,  by  any  volume  of  the  International  Series,  to 
which  it  belongs." — The  Outlook. 

2  Volumes.   Crown  8vo.    Price,  $3.00  each  net. 

Proverbs.      By  the  Rev.  Crawford  H.  Toy,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Professor  of 
Hebrew  in  Harvard  University. 

"  This  volume  has  the  same  characteristics  of  thoroughness  and  pains- 
taking scholarship  as  the  preceding  issues  of  the  series.  In  the  critical 
treatment  of  the  text,  in  noting  the  various  readings  and  the  force  of 
the  words  in  the  original  Hebrew,  it  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired. 

Crown  8vo.     $3.00  net. 


Amos  and  HoSea.  By  William  Rainey  Harper,  Ph.D.,  LL.D., 
late  Professor  of  Semitic  Languages  and  Literature  and  President  of  the 
University  of  Chicago. 

"  He  has  gone,  with  characteristic  minuteness,  not  only  into  the  analysis 
and  discussion  of  each  point,  endeavoring  in  every  case  to  be  thoroughly 
exhaustive,  but  also  into  the  history  of  exegesis  and  discussion.  Nothing 
at  all  worthy  of  consideration  has  been  passed  by.  The  consequence  is 
that  when  one  carefully  studies  what  has  been  brought  together  in  this 
volume,  either  upon  some  passage  of  the  two  prophets  treated,  or  upon 
some  question  of  critical  or  antiquarian  importance  in  the  introductory 
portion  of  the  volume,  one  feels  that  he  has  obtained  an  adequately 
exhaustive  view  of  the  subject." — The  Interior. 

Crown  8vo.     $3.00  net. 


Esther.        By    L.   B.   Paton,  Ph.D.,   Professor  of  Hebrew,   Hartford 

Theological  Seminary. 

This  scholarly  and  critical  commentary  on  the  Book  of  Esther  presents 
in  full  the  remarkable  additions  to  the  Massoretic  text  and  the  varia- 
tions in  the  various  versions  beginning  with  the  Greek  translation  and 
continuing  through  the  Vulgate  and  Peshitto  down  to  the  Talmud  and 
Targums.  These  are  not  given  in  full  in  any  other  commentary,  yet 
they  are  very  important  both  for  the  history  of  the  text  and  the  history 
of  the  exegesis. 

Crown  Svo.     $2.25  net. 


The  International  Critical  Commentary 


VOLUMES  NOW  READVT 

EcclesiaSteS.       By  George  a.  barton,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Biblical 
Literature,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Pa. 

"  It  is  a  relief  to  find  a  commentator  on  Ecclesiastes  who  is  not  en- 
deavoring to  defend  some  new  theory.  This  volume,  in  the  International 
Commentary  series,  treats  the  book  in  a  scholarly  and  sensible  fashion, 
presenting  the  conclusions  of  earlier  scholars  together  with  the  author's 
own,  and  providing  thus  all  the  information  that  any  student  needs." 

— TJie  Congregationalist. 
Crown  8vo.     $2.25  net. 

St.  Matthew.      By  the  Rev.  Willoughby  C.  Allen,  M.A.,  Fellow 

of  Exeter  College,  Oxford. 

"As  a  microscopic  and  practically  exhaustive  study  and  itemized  state- 
ment of  the  probable  or  possible  sources  of  the  Synoptic  Gospels  and 
of  their  relations,  one  to  another,  this  work  has  net  been  surpassed. 
I  doubt  if  it  has  been  equaled.  And  the  author  is  not  by  any  means 
lacking  in  spiritual  insight." — The  Methodist  Review  (Nashville). 

Crown  8vo.     $3.00  net. 

St.  Mark.      By  the  Rev.  E.  P.  Gould,  D.D.,  sometime  Professor  of  New 
Testament  Exegesis,  P.  E.  Divinity  School,  Philadelphia. 

"  The  whole  make-up  is  that  of  a  thoroughly  helpful,  instructive  critical 
study  of  the  Word,  surpassing  anything  of  the  kind  ever  attempted  in 
the  English  language,  and  to  students  and  clergymen  knowing  the 
proper  use  of  a  commentary  it  will  prove  an  invaluable  aid." 

— The  Lutheran  Quarterly. 

Crown  8vo.     $2.50  net. 

St.  Luke.    By  the  Rev.  Alfred  Plummer,  D.D.,  sometime  Master  of 
University  College,  Durham. 

"  We  are  pleased  with  the  thoroughness  and  scientific  accuracy  of  the 
interpretations.  ...  It  seems  to  us  that  the  prevailing  characteristic  of 
the  book  is  common  sense,  fortified  by  learning  and  piety." 

— The  Herald  and  Presbyter. 
Crown  Svo.     $3.00  net. 

Romans.     By  the  Rev.  William  Sanday,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Lady  Margaret 

Professor  of  Divinity,  and  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  and  the  Rev, 

A.  C.  Headlam,  M.A.,  D.D.,  Principal  of  Kings  College,  London. 

**  We  do  not  hesitate  to  conmiend  this  as  the  best  commentary  on  Romans 
yet  written  in  English.  It  will  do  much  to  popularize  this  admirable 
and  much  needed  series,  by  showing  that  it  is  pxjssible  to  be  critical  and 
scholarly  and  at  the  same  time  devout  and  spiritual,  and  intelligible  to 
plain  Bible  readers." — The  Church  Standard. 

Crown  Svo.     $3.00  nek 


The  International  Critical  Commentary 


^■^^^V'' 


VOLUMES  NOW  READY 

Ephesians  and  Colossians.   By  the  Rev.  t.  k.  abbott,  d.d., 

D.Litt.,  formerly  Professor  of  Biblical  Greek,  now  of  Hebrew,  Trinity  Col- 
lege, Dublin. 

"An  able  and  independent  piece  of  exegesis,  and  one  that  none  of  us  can 
afford  to  be  without.  It  is  the  work  of  a  man  who  has  made  himself 
master  of  this  theme.  His  exegetical  perceptions  are  keen,  and  we  are 
especially  grateful  for  his  strong  defense  of  the  integrity  and  apostolicity 
of  these  two  great  monuments  of  Pauline  teaching." — The  Expositor. 

Crown  8vo.     $2.50  net. 

PhilippianS  and  Philemon.  By  Rev.  Marvin  R.  Vincent,  D.D., 
Professor  of  Biblical  Literature  in  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York. 

"  Professor  Vincent's  Commentary  appears  to  me  not  less  admirable  for 
its  literary  merit  than  for  its  scholarship  and  its  clear  and  discriminating 
discussions  of  the  contents  of  these  Epistles." — Dr.  George  P.  Fisher. 

Crown  8vo.     $2.00  net. 

St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude.  By  the  Rev.  Charles  Bigg,  D.D., 
sometime  Regius  Professor  of  Ecclesiastical  History  in  the  University, 
New  York. 

"  The  careful  and  thorough  student  will  find  here  a  vast  amount  of  in- 
formation most  helpful  to  him  in  his  studies  and  researches.  The  Inter- 
national Critical  Commentary,  to  which  it  belongs,  will  prove  a  great 
boon  to  students  and  ministers." — The  Canadian  Congregationalist. 

Crown  Rvo.     $2.50  net 


Genesis.  By  the  Rev.  John  Skinner,  D.D.,  Principal  and  Professor  of 
Old  Testament  Language  and  Literature,  College  of  Presbyterian  Church 
of  England,  Cambridge,  England. 

"  Exact  scholarship,  a  scientific  temper  of  mind,  and  the  reverence  of 
a  believer  in  Divine  revelation  combine  to  render  Principal  Skinner 
an  ideal  commentator  on  the  Book  of  Genesis.  The  work  before  us 
will  unquestionably  take  its  place  in  the  very  front  rank  of  modern  Old 
Testament  commentaries.  We  can  award  it  no  higher  praise  than  to 
say  that  it  need  not  shrink  from  comparison  with  what  has  hitherto 
been/a«7e  princeps  in  the  series  to  which  it  belongs — Driver's  Deu- 
teronomy."— Rev.  J.  A.  Selbie,  D.D.,  in  The  Expository  Times. 

Crown  8vo,    $3.00  net 


The   International  Critical  Commentary 
The  Books  of  Chronicles.    By  the  rcv.  edward  l.  curtis. 

Ph.D.,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew,  Yale  University,  and  Rev.  Albert  A. 
Madsen,  Ph.D. 

"The  Commentary  deserves  unstinted  praise,  and  will  be  found  of 
extreme  value  by  all  who  are  interested  in  this  late  constituent  of  the 
Canon,  which  possesses  so  much  interest  alike  from  the  literary  and 
the  religious  stand-point.  Dr.  Curtis  has  supplied  the  English-speaking 
student  of  the  Old  Testament  with  precisely  the  work  he  required." 

— Rev.  J.  A.  Selbie,  D.D.,  in  Th^e  Expository  Times, 

Crown  8vo.    $3.00  net  (Postage  additional). 


First  Corinthians.  By  the  Rt.  Rev.  Archibald  Robertson,  D.D., 
LL.D.,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  and  the  Rev.  Alfred  Plummer,  MA.,  D.D., 
late  Master  of  University  College,  Durham. 

"Besides  the  commentary,  which  constitutes  the  bulk  of  the  volume, 
introductory  dissertations  are  included  on  Corinth,  on  the  authenticity 
of  I  Corinthians,  on  its  occasion  and  plan,  place  and  date,  doctrinal 
content,  characteristic  style  and  language,  texts  and  bibliography.  The 
volume  follows  up  the  high  standard  set  for  it  in  its  predecessors." 

—  Y^he  Continent, 

Crown  8vo.    $3.00  net, 

Micah,  Zephaniah,  Nahum,  Habakkuk,  Obadiah,  and 

Joel.  Prof.  John  P.  Smith,  Ph.D.,  University  of  Chicago;  W.  Hayes 
Ward,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Editor  of  The  Independent,  New  York;  Prof.  Julius 
A.  Bewer,  Ph.D.,  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York. 

*'The  introductions  to  the  several  books  contain  a  great  amount  of 
critical  matter  and  show  patient  and  minute  study  of  the  questions  in- 
volved. A  study  of  the  conditions  amid  which  the  prophet  lived  helps 
materially  to  understand  both  the  man  and  his  message.  .  .  .  The 
wide  scope  of  the  work  and  the  constant  use  of  the  latest  results  of 
investigation  make  it  almost  indispensable  to  the  student." 

— The  Christian  Intelligencer. 

Crown  8vo.    $3. 00  net. 


The  International 

Theological  Library 


EDITORS'  PREFACE 

THEOLOGY  has  made  great  and  rapid  advances 
in  recent  years.  New  lines  of  investigation  have 
been  opened  up,  fresh  light  has  been  cast  upon 
many  subjects  of  the  deepest  interest,  and  the  historical 
method  has  been  applied  virith  important  results.  This 
has  prepared  the  way  for  a  Library  of  Theological 
Science,  and  has  created  the  demand  for  it.  It  has  also 
made  it  at  once  opportune  and  practicable  now  to  se- 
cure the  services  of  specialists  in  the  different  depart- 
ments of  Theology,  and  to  associate  them  in  an  enter, 
prise  which  will  furnish  a  record  of  Theological 
inquiry  up  to  date. 

This  Library  is  designed  to  cover  the  whole  field  of 
Christian  Theology.  Each  volume  is  to  be  complete 
in  itself,  while,  at  the  same  time,  it  will  form  part  of  a 
carefully  planned  whole.  One  of  the  Editors  is  to  pre- 
pare a  volume  of  Theological  Encyclopaedia  which  will 
give  the  history  and  literature  of  each  department,  as 
well  as  of  Theology  as  a  whole. 


The  International  Theological  Library 


The  Library  is  intended  to  form  a  series  of  Text 
Books  for  Students  of  Theology. 

The  Authors,  therefore,  aim  at  conciseness  and  com- 
pactness of  statement.  At  the  same  time,  they  have  in 
view  that  large  and  increasing  class  of  students,  in  other 
departments  of  inquiry,  who  desire  to  have  a  systematic 
and  thorough  exposition  of  Theological  Science.  Tech- 
nical matters  will  therefore  be  thrown  into  the  form  of 
notes,  and  the  text  will  be  made  as  readable  and  attract- 
ive as  possible. 

The  Library  is  international  and  interconfessional.  It 
will  be  conducted  in  a  catholic  spirit,  and  in  the 
interests  of  Theology  as  a  science. 

Its  aim  will  be  to  give  full  and  impartial  statements 
both  of  the  results  of  Theological  Science  and  of  ^he 
questions  which  are  still  at  issue  in  the  different 
departments. 

The  Authors  will  be  scholars  of  recognized  reputation 
in  the  several  branches  of  study  assigned  to  them.  They 
will  be  associated  with  each  other  and  with  the  Editors 
in  the  effort  to  provide  a  series  of  volumes  which  may 
adequately  represent  the  present  condition  of  investi- 
gation, and  indicate  the  way  for  further  progress. 

Charles  A.  Briggs 
Stewart  D.  F.  Salmond 


The  International  Theological  Library 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  VOLUMES  AND  AUTHORS 

THEOLOGICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA.  By  CHARLES  A.  Briggs,  D.D., 
D.Litt.,  Professor  of  Theological  Encyclopaedia  and  Symbolics,  Union 
Theological  Seminary,  New  York. 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  LITERATURE  OF  THE  OLD  TESTA- 
MENT. By  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.,  D.Litt.,  Regius  Professor  of  Hebre\« 
and  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford.  [Revised  and  Enlarged  Edition, 

CANON   AND  TEXT  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

[Author  to  be  announced  later. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  HISTORY.  By  Henry  Preserved  Smith,  D.D., 
Professor  of  Old  Testament  Literature,  Meadville,  Pa.  [Now  Ready. 

CONTEMPORARY     HISTORY     OF     THE     OLD     TESTAMENT.      By 

Francis  Brown,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  D.Litt.,  President  and  Professor  of 
Hebrew,  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York. 

THEOLOGY  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  By  A.  B.  DavtdsON,  D.D., 
LL.D.,  sometime  Professor  of  Hebrew,  New  College,  Edinburgh. 

[Now  Ready. 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  LITERATURE  OF  THE  NEW  TESTA- 
MENT. By  Rev.  James  Moffatt,  B.D.,  Minister  United  Free  Church, 
Broughty  Ferry,  Scotland.  [Now  Ready. 

CANON  AND  TEXT  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  By  Caspar  Ren^ 
Gregory,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  New  Testament  Exegesis  in  the 
University  of  Leipzig.  [N(nv  Ready. 

THE  LIFE  OF  CHRIST.  By  William  Sanday,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Lady 
Margaret  Professor  of  Divinity  and  Canon  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford. 

A   HISTORY    OF  CHRISTIANITY   IN    THE    APOSTOLIC    AGE.     By 

Arthur  C.  McGiffert,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Church  History,  Union  Theo- 
logical   Seminary,  New  York.  [Now  Ready. 

CONTEMPORARY    HISTORY    OF    THE     NEW    TESTAMENT.      By 

Frank  C.  Porter,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Biblical  Theology,  Yale  University, 
New  Haven,  Conn. 

THEOLOGY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  By  GEORGE  B.  Stevens, 
D.D.,  sometime  Professor  of  Systematic  Theology,  Yale  University,  New 
Haven,  Conn.  [No7U  Ready. 

BIBLICAL  ARCHAEOLOGY.  By  G.  BUCHANAN  Gray,  D.D.,  Professor 
of  Hebrew,  Mansfield  College,  Oxford. 

THE  ANCIENT  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  By  Robert  Rainey,  D.D., 
LL.D.,  sometime  Principal  of  New  College,  Edinburgh.  [Noio  Ready. 

THE  LATIN  CHURCH  FROM  GREGORY  THE  GREAT  TO  THE 
COUNCIL  OF  TRENT.  [AiUhor  to  be  announced  later. 


The  International  Theological  Library 


THE  GREEK  AND  EASTERN  CHURCHES.  By  W.  F.  Adeney,  D.D., 
Principal  of  Independent  College,  Manchester,  [Now  Ready. 

THE  REFORMATION.  By  T.  M.  LiNDSAY,  D.D.,  Principal  of  the  United 
Free  College,  Glasgow.  [2  vols.     Now  Ready. 

CHRISTIANITY  IN  LATIN  COUNTRIES  SINCE  THE  COUNCIL  OF 
TRENT.    By  Paul  Sabatier,  D.Lilt.,  Drome,  France. 

SYMBOLICS.  By  CHARLES  A.  Briggs,  D.D.,  D.Litt.,  Professor  of 
Theological  Encyclopaedia  and  Symbolics,  Union  Theological  Seminary, 
New  York. 

HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE.  By  G.  P.  FiSHER,  D.D., 
LL.D.,  sometime  Professor  of  Ecclesiastical  History,  Yale  University, 
New  Haven,  Conn.  [Revised  and  Enlarged  Edition. 

CHRISTIAN  INSTITUTIONS.  By  A.  V.  G.  Allen,  D.D.,  sometime 
Professor  of  Ecclesiastical  History,  Protestant  Episcopal  Divinity  School, 
Cambridge,  Mass.  [Now  Ready. 

PHILOSOPHY  OF  RELIGION.  By  George  Gallaway,  D.D.,  Minister 
of  United  Free  Church,  Castle  Douglas,  Scotland. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGIONS.  By  George  F.  Moore,  D.D.,  LL.D., 
Professor  in  Harvard  University. 

APOLOGETICS.  By  A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.,  sometime  Professor  of  New 
Testament  Exegesis,  Free  Church  College,  Glasgow. 

[Jxevisedand  Enlarged  Edition. 

THE  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  OF  GOD.  By  WiLLIAM  N.  Clarke,  D.  D., 
Professor  of  Systematic  Theology,  Hamilton  Theological  Seminary. 

[No^v  Ready. 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  MAN.   By  WiLUAM  P.  Paterson,  D.D.,  Professor 

of  Divinity,  University  of  Edinburgh. 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  CHRIST.  By  H.  R.  Mackintosh,  Ph.D.,  Professor 
of  Systematic  Theology,  New  College,  Edinburgh, 

THE  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  OF  SALVATION.  By  GeoRGE  B.  Ste- 
YENS,  D.D.,  sometime  Professor  of  Systematic  Theology,  Yale  University. 

[N^07u  Ready. 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  By  WiLLIAM  AdamS 
Brown,  D.D.,  Professor  cf  Systematic  Theology,  Union  Theological 
Seminary,  New  York. 

CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.  By  NEWMAN  Smyth,  D.D.,  Pastor  of  Congrega- 
tional Church,  New  Haven.  [Revised  and  Enlarged  Edition. 

THE   CHRISTIAN    PASTOR    AND  THE   WORKING    CHURCH.      By 

Washington  Gladden,  D.D.,  Pastor  of  Congregational  Church,  Columbus, 
Ohio.  \No70  Ready, 

THE  CHRISTIAN    PREACHER.     By  A.  E.  Garvie,  D.D.,  Principal  of 

New  College,  London,  England. 

OTHER  VOLUMES   WILL  BE   ANNOUNCED  LATER. 


The  International  Theological  Library 


VOLUMES  NOW  READY 

An  Introduction  to  the  Literature  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment.    By  Professor  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.,  D.Litt. 

"As  a  whole  there  is  probably  no  book  in  the  English  Language  equal 
to  this  '  Introduction  to  tlic  Literature  of  the  Old  Testament,  for  the 
student  who  desires  to  understand  what  the  modern  criticism  thinks 
about  the  Bible." — Dr.  Lyman  Abbott,  in  The  Outlook. 

Crown  8vo.    $2.50  mt, 

A   History    of   Christianity  in   the  Apostolic  Age. 

By  Arthur  C.  McGitfert,  Ph.D.,  D.D. 

*'  The  clearness,  self-consistency,  and  force  of  the  whole  impression  of 
Apostolic  Christianity  with  which  we  leave  this  book  goes  far  to  guar- 
antee its  permanent  value  and  success." — Tfie  Expositor. 

Crown  8vo.    $2.50  net. 

Christian  Ethics.   By  newman  smyth,  d.d. 

"As  this  book  is  the  latest,  so  it  is  the  fullest  and  most  attractive  treat- 
ment of  the  subject  that  we  are  familiar  with.  Patient  and  exhaustive 
in  its  method  of  inquiry,  and  stimulating  and  suggestive  in  the  topic  it 
handles,  we  are  confident  that  it  will  be  a  help  to  the  task  of  the  moral 
understanding  and  interpretation  of  human  life." — Tfie  Living  Church, 

Crown  8vo.    $2.50  net. 

Apologetics ;    or,    Christianity    Defensively    Stated. 

By  Alexander  Balmain  Bruce,  D.D. 

"  We  have  not  for  a  long  time  taken  a  book  in  hand  that  is  more 
stimulating  to  faith.  .  .  .  Without  commenting  further,  we  repeat  that 
this  volume  is  the  ablest,  most  scholarly,  most  advanced,  and  sharpest 
defence  of  Christianity  that  has  ever  been  written.  No  theological 
library  should  be  without  it." — Zion's  Herald. 

Crown  8vo.     $2.50  net. 

Old  Testament  History,    by  henry  preserved  smith,  d.d. 

"  Prof.  Smith  has,  by  his  comprehensive  and  vitalized  history,  laid  all  who 
care  for  the  Old  Testament  under  great  obligations." — The  Independent. 

Crown  8vo.    $2.50  net. 


The  International  Theological  Library 


VOLUMES  NOW  READY 

The  Theology  of  the  New  Testament.    By  george  b. 

Stevens,  D.D.,  IX.D. 

"  It  is  a  fine  example  of  painstaking,  discriminat/ng,  impartial  research 
and  statement."— r/ic  Congregationalism  Crown  8vo.     $2.50  net. 

History  of   Christian   Doctrine.    By  george  p.  fkher, 

D.D.,  LL.D. 

"  It  is  only  just  to  say  that  Dr.  Fisher  has  produced  the  best  History 
of  Doctrine  that  we  have  in  English," — The  New  York  Evangelist, 

Crown  8vo.     $2.50  net. 

The    Christian    Pastor   and  the   Working   Church. 

By  Washington  Gladden,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

"A  comprehensive,  inspiring  and  helpful  guide  to  a  busy  pastor.  One 
finds  in  it  a  multitude  of  practical  suggestions  for  the  development  of 
the  spiritual  and  working  life  of  the  Church,  and  the  answer  to  many 
problems  that  are  a  constant  perplexity  to  the  faithful  minister." 

— TJie  Christian  Intelligencer. 
Crown  8vo.     $2.50  net. 

Christian     Institutions.        By   Alexander  v.  B.  Allen,  d.d. 

"  Professor  Allen's  Christian  Institutions  may  be  regarded  as  the  most 
important  permanent  contribution  which  the  Protestant  Episcopal 
Church  of  the  United  States  has  yet  made  to  general  theological 
thought." — The  American  Journal  of  TJieology. 

Crown  Svo.    $2.50  net. 

The  Theology  of  the  Old  Testament.    By  a.  b.  Davidson, 

d.d.,  LL.D.,  D.Litt. 

*'  We  hope  every  clergyman  will  not  rest  content  until  he  has  procured 
and  studied  this  most  admirable  and  useful  book.  Every  really  useful 
question  relating  to  man  —  his  nature,  his  fall,  and  his  redemption, 
his  present  life  or  grace,  his  life  after  death,  his  future  life,  is 
treated  of." — The  Canadian  Churchman.  Crown  Svo.     $2.50  net. 

The  Christian  Doctrine  of  Salvation.    By  george  b. 

Stevens,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

"  Professor  Stevens  has  performed  a  task  of  great  importance,  certain  to 
exert  wide  and  helpful  influence  in  settling  the  minds  of  men.  He  has 
treated  the  subject  historically  and  has  given  to  Christ  the  first  place  in 
interpreting  his  own  mission." — Congregationalist  and  Christian  World. 

Crown  Svo.    $2.50  neL 


The  International  Theological  Library 


VOLUMES  NOW  READY 

The  Ancient  Catholic  Church.  By  Robert  rainey,  d.d.,  ll.d. 

"As  a  comprehensive  work  on  the  formative  stage  of  the  Church's  ex- 
perience the  volume  will  easily  find  its  place  in  the  front  rank  among 
books  on  the  subject  composed  in  the  English  language." — The  Interior, 

Crown  8vo.    $2.50  net. 

The  Reformation  in  Germany.    By  thomas  m.  Lindsay, 

MA.,  D.D. 

"The  arrangement  of  the  book  is  most  excellent,  and  while  it  is  a 
worthy  and  scholarly  account  it  is  so  arranged  that  for  the  student  of 
the  Reformation  it  is  almost  encyclopaedic  in  its  convenience  and  con- 
ciseness. It  is  a  book  no  library,  public  or  private,  can  really  be 
without." — Record  of  Christian  Work, 

Crown  8vo.    $2.50  net. 


The  Reformation  in  Lands  Beyond  Germany.  ByXHOMAs 

M.  Lindsay,  D.D. 

•     "  Together  these  two  volumes  will  at  once  take  their  place  as  the  clas- 
sical English  History  of  the  Reformation." — The  Expository  Times. 

"  The  good  balance  of  material  which  he  has  attained  by  a  self-denying 
exclusion,  as  well  as  by  much  research  and  inclusion  of  fresh  material, 
makes  the  work  a  real  addition  to  our  materials  for  study." 

— The  Congregationalist. 

Crown  8vo.     $2.50  net. 

Canon  and  Text  of  the  New  Testament.    By  Caspar  ren^ 

Gregory,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

"  The  book  is  a  treasury  of  learning,  and  its  fairness  in  dealing  with  the 
matter  in  hand  is  admirable.  From  first  to  last,  the  purpose  of  the 
author  is  not  to  show  upon  how  slight  basis  our  confidence  in  the  can- 
onicity  of  the  New  Testament  is  based,  but  rather  upon  how  solid  a 
foundation  our  confidence  rests." — Journal  and  Messenger. 

Crown  8vo.     $2.50  net. 

The  Greek  and  Eastern  Churches.    By  Walter  f.  adeney, 

M.A.,  D.D. 

"It  seems  to  me  an  excellent  and  most  useful  piece  of  work.  I  do 
not  know  anything  in  English  which  covers  the  same  ground  and 
am  sure  Dr.  Adeney  has  put  us  all  in  his  debt  by  his  scholarly,  well- 
balanced  and  judicious  treatment." — Prof.  William  Adams  Brown. 

CrowTi  Svo.     $2.50  net 


II 

The   International  Theological  Library 
VOLUMES  NOW  READY 

The  Christian  Doctrine  of  God.  By  William  n.clarke,d.d. 

"  The  book  is  a  treasury  of  learning,  and  its  fairness  in  dealing  with 
the  matter  in  hand  is  admirable.  From  first  to  last,  the  piu-pose  of  the 
author  is  not  to  show  upon  how  slight  basis  our  confidence  in  the 
canonicity  of  the  New  Testament  is  based,  but  rather  upon  how  solid 
a  foundation  our  confidence  rests." — Journal  and  Messenger. 

Crown  8vo.    $2.50  net. 

An  Introduction  to  the  Literature  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment.   By  James  Moffatt,  B.D.,  D.D. 

"  In  point  of  scholarship,  breadth  of  treatment,  and  mastery  of  the  prob- 
lems at  issue,  it  will  bear  comparison  with  Driver's  companion  volume 
on  the  literature  of  the  Old  Testament,  than  which  no  higher  praise 
can  be  given.  .  .  .  The  student  will  find  in  Dr.  Mofifatt's  volume  the 
most  complete  presentation  as  yet  attempted  by  any  scholar  of  all  that 
modern  critical  scholarship  has  done  for  the  literature  of  the  New 
Testament. ' ' — Scotsman. 

Crown  8vo.    $2.50  net. 


I 


n 


I 


■M 


m^ 


f^-j$f' 


^  H.' 
■■•^v 


!<  V 


\>^'i, 


•■-V,iVi^- 


1515 


Gray,   George   Buchanaji ,  .. . 

A  critical  and^i&^ical 
commentary  | 


PIEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  or'  slips  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


mmk 


