^-,.  _.  >_^      '-^i 


if 

5 


ii'^ 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 

Chap....^!*^!'  Cop3Tiglit  No. 

SheltMil:7t 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


A  Good  Start 


/ 


BY 


F.  B.  MEYER,  M.A. 

AUTHOR    OF    "christian    LIVING,"    "  THE   SHEPHERD 
PSALM,"    ETC. 


f;oV 


f    ^" 


New  York:  46  East  Fourteenth  Street 

THOMAS  Y.  CROWELL  &  COMPANY 

Boston :   too  Purchase  Street 


d 


Copyright,  1897, 
By  Thomas  Y.  Crowell  &  Company. 


The  Library 

OF  CONHRESS 
WASHINGTON 


TYPOGRAPHY    BY   C.   J.    PETERS   &   SON, 
BOSTON. 


PREFACE. 


The  chapters  in  this  little  book  might 
be  called  "  Work-a-day  Sermons."  They 
are  intended  to  bring  the  highest  prin- 
ciples of  our  holy  religion  to  bear  on 
the  practical  business  of  every-day  life. 

Probably  all  our  sermons  should  have 
more  of  this  element  in  them.  The 
Epistles  of  the  New  Testament  are  ad- 
mirable specimens  of  the  blending  of 
the  doctrinal  and  practical.  We  are 
shown  how  to  apply  the  loftiest  princi- 
ples to  the  solution  of  every-day  prob- 
lems. People  are  not  apt  to  do  this  for 
themselves,  and  like  to  be  shown  how 


IV  PREFACE. 

to  eat  and  drink,  and  do  all  they  have 
to  do,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  to  the  glory  of  God.  This  is  what 
these  chapters  aim  to  do.  They  are  a 
piece  of  undressed  cloth  —  homespun. 

One  of  our  greatest  modern  teachers 
tells  us  "  to  hitch  our  wagon  to  a  starP 
And  the  great  purpose  of  this  book  will 
have  been  amply  realized  if  the  readers 
shall  learn  the  art  of  linking  the  sim- 
plest actions  of  life  with  those  eternal 
truths  that  burn  evermore,  as  constella- 
tions in  the  firmament. 

F.  B.  MEYER. 
August  J  1897. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.     A  Good  Start 3 

II.     Tempers,   And   what   to   do   with 

Them 15 

III.  Exaggeration 27 

IV.  On  Falling  in  Love 41 

V.     On  Being  Straight 57 

VI.     On  Doing  a  Good  Day's  Work      .  71 

VII.     Savorless  Salt 85 

VIII.  ,  Our  Holidays 99 

IX.     How  TO  Spend  Sunday iii 

X.     Amusements 127 

XI.     The  Use  of  the  Senses     ....  141 

XII.     Christmas 153 


A    GOOD    START. 


I. 


A    GOOD    START. 

A  New  Year  is  opening  before  us, 
and  there  is  some  satisfaction  in  feeling 
that  an  opportunity  will  be  afforded  of 
making  a  really  new  start.  Each  true 
heart  in  which  there  is  a  spark  of  the 
Divine  life  turns  eagerly  towards  the  un- 
blemished page,  the  untrodden  way,  of 
the  New  Year,  not  with  wonder  simply, 
or  with  hope,  but  with  fervent  resolve 
that  the  dead  past  shall  bury  its  dead, 
and  that  a  nobler,  fuller,  sweeter  spirit 
shall  glisten  in  the  chalice  of  existence. 
Years   ago,   in  Leicester,   I  was   accus- 


4  A    GOOD   START. 

tomed  to  go  into  the  great  workshops 
and  factories  with  my  pledge-cards  on 
the  first  day  of  the  New  Year,  because 
it  was  comparatively  easy  to  induce  men 
to  make  a  new  start  with  the  New  Year. 
It  was  in  the  air. 

But  it  is  of  little  purpose  merely  to 
wish  and  resolve ;  let  us  see  whether 
there  should  not  be  a  definite  dealing 
with  mistakes  and  sins  which  have  lain 
at  the  root  of  the  withered  gourds  that 
represent  the  years  of  the  past.  If  once 
we  could  make  a  new  departure  in  re- 
spect to  these,  there  would  be  some 
reason  for  counting  on  a  permanent  bet- 
terment for  all  coming  time. 

Debt  is  a  fruitful  source  of  misery  and 
failure.  You  may  owe  more  than  you 
may  care  to  tell  your  dearest  friend ;  you 
dare  not   pass   along   certain    thorough- 


A    GOOD   START.  5 

fares  for  fear  of  encountering  individuals 
whom  you  have  put  off  with  repeated 
promises  that  you  have  not  Icept ;  and 
you  hardly  dare  to  open  your  letters  in 
the  morning  lest  they  should  contain 
some  stinging  remonstrance  or  threat. 
Your  weekl}^  or  monthly  wages  are 
pledged  before  you  receive  them,  and 
are  gone  like  a  flake  of  snow  on  the 
river.  All  this  is  very  miserable,  and 
must  be  dealt  with.  Do  not,  however, 
lose  heart.  Worse  troubles  than  this 
have  been  overcome  by  faith,  resolution, 
and  an  earnest,  sincere  purpose. 

Take  my  advice.  First,  kneel  down 
and  confess  the  sin  and  mistake  of  the 
past  to  God,  and  ask  his  help.  Next, 
put  down  a  list  of  your  entire  indebted- 
ness, and  make  a  confidant  of  wife,  or 
husband,  or  parent,  or  friend,  not  neces- 


6  A    GOOD    START. 

sarily  to  gaia  their  pecuniary  assistance, 
but  that  you  may  have  their  sympathy 
and  fellowship.  Further,  look  around 
your  life  to  see  if  there  is  any  means  of 
reducing  present  expenses,  or  of  selling 
articles  of  superfluity  and  luxury  in  order 
to  reduce  your  indebtedness.  Lastly, 
make  a  solemn  resolution  not  to  incur  a 
single  sixpence  of  needless  expense  till 
every  penny  you  owe  is  paid.  Let  this 
be  your  new  start,  and  henceforth  let  it 
be  your  rule,  to  make  no  purchase  and 
incur  no  liability  which  is  not  easily 
within  your  means. 

Evil  and  expensive  habits  drain  away 
the  strength  of  our  lives  and  becloud 
the  inner  horizon.  Is  it  not  with  the 
individual  as  with  the  state  ?  Suppos- 
ing it  were  possible  to  stay  the  extrava- 
gant expenditure  of  our  people  in  Drink, 


A    GOOD   START.  7 

Tobacco,  and  Horse-racing,  would  not 
squalor,  want,  and  misery,  and  all  their 
gaunt  tribes,  which  have  settled  down  on 
our  vast  populations  as  a  horde  of  Kurds, 
fold  up  their  tents,  and  begone  ?  And, 
on  a  small  scale,  are  not  similar  evils  re- 
peating similar  ravages  on  isolated  souls, 
perhaps  on  yours  ?  Would  it  not  be  an 
immense  gain  in  every  way,  if  you  were 
to  give  up  your  Drink  and  Tobacco,  and 
employ  the  money  and  time  which  these 
consume  in  procuring  books,  pursuing 
some  hobby,  planning  for  a  good  sum- 
mer vacation,  or  engaging  in  wholesome 
and  health-giving  recreations  ? 

In  our  schooldays,  when  running  in 
matches,  we  used  to  begin  fairly  well 
clothed ;  but  as  we  ran,  and  found  our- 
selves slowly  losing  ground,  we  tore  off 
one  article  after  another  in  our  anxiety 


o  A    GOOD   START. 

to  reach  the  goal  ;  and  the  course  was 
littered  with  ties,  collars,  and  other  arti- 
cles. Similarly,  in  the  great  race  of  life, 
the  flight  of  the  years  should  be  marked 
by  the  weights  and  sins  that  we  have 
laid  aside.  Each  new  year  would  be  en- 
riched by  the  needless  extravagances  we 
had  learned  to  forego.  We  should  run 
lighter,  breast  the  stormy  waves  with  less 
encumbrance,  and  stand  a  better  chance 
of  getting  beyond  the  rabble  that  clamor 
at  the  mountain-foot,  to  stand  among 
the  rarer  spirits  on  the  higher  ranges. 
May  I  not  prevail  on  you  to  make  some 
such  sacrifice  with  the  opening  of  the 
New  Year  ?  It  would  be  a  new  start 
indeed ! 

Bad  companions  have  made  havoc  with 
the  past.  Women  who  are  perpetually 
dropping  in  to  gossip  ;  neighbors  whose 


A    GOOD   START,  9 

ways  of  spending  Sunday  liave  intro- 
duced a  new  laxity  into  your  family ; 
men  who  talk  lightly  of  God,  and  women, 
and  the  Ten  Commandments.  Most  in- 
sidiously they  have  been  eating  away 
and  deteriorating  your  nobler  life,  like 
the  percolation  of  water  into  the  cliffs, 
which  ultimately  splinters  their  strong 
sides.  The  time  must  come,  if  you  are 
to  save  yourself,  when  such  parasites 
must  be  dropped  off.  There  is  no  al- 
ternative to  save  yourself  from  going 
farther  with  them,  than  to  rid  yourself 
of  their  society.  It  may  seem  hard,  but 
it  is  as  imperative  and  urgent  as  cauter- 
izing a  bite  from  a  mad  dog.  With  bad 
companions  dismiss  bad  books,  that  leave 
a  rotten  taste,  that  disincline  you  to  quiet 
holy  thought,  that  poison  the  springs  of 
love  and  home.     And  to  the  renuncia- 


10  A    GOOD  START. 

tion  of  these  add  all  conversation, 
pastimes,  and  places  of  amusement 
which  shrivel  the  soul,  as  gas  does 
the  plants  that  wither  beneath  its 
blighting  touch.  This  would  be  a  new 
start  indeed  ! 

Laxity  iii  your  religious  life  has,  with- 
out doubt,  had  something  to  do  with 
past  failure.  As  long  as  the  bright  sum- 
mer sun  shines  into  the  forest  glades, 
the  fungus  has  no  chance  to  flourish; 
but  when  the  sunshine  wanes,  in  the 
months  of  autumn,  the  woods  are  filled 
with  these  strange  products  of  decay. 
It  is  because  we  drift  from  God  that  our 
lives  are  the  prey  to  numberless  and 
nameless  ills.  Make  the  best  of  all  new 
starts,  and  returning  to  the  more  earnest 
habits  of  earlier  days,  or  beginning  them 
from  now,  give  yourself  to  God,  believ- 


A    GOOD  START.  II 

ing  that  he  will  receive  and  welcome  you, 
without  a  word  of  remonstrance  or  a 
moment  of  interval.  Form  habits  of 
morning  and  evening  prayer  ;  especially 
in  the  morning  get  time  for  deep  com- 
munion with  God,  waiting  at  his  foot- 
stool, or  in  the  perusal  of  the  Bible,  till 
he  speaks  to  you.  Take  up  again  your 
habits  of  attendance  at  the  house  of 
God ;  in  the  morning  and  the  evening  go 
with  the  multitude  that,  with  the  voice  of 
praise,  keeps  holyday;  and  in  the  after- 
noon find  some  niche  of  Christian  ser- 
vice, in  your  home  or  elsewhere.  Then, 
inasmuch  as  you  do  not  wish  to  be  a 
slip-carriage,  which,  when  the  couplings 
are  unfastened,  runs  for  a  little  behind 
the  express,  but  gets  slower  and  slower 
till  it  comes  to  a  stand,  ask  the  grace  of 
the    Holy  Spirit   to  confirm  these  holy 


12  A    GOOD   START. 

desires,  keeping  you  true  to  them,  caus- 
ing you  to  be  steadfast,  immovable,  and 
set  on  maintaining  life  on  a  higher  level. 
In  all  these  ways  let  the  new  year  wit- 
ness a  fresh  start. 


II 


TEMPERS,    AND    WHAT   TO 
DO    WITH    THEM, 


11. 


TEMPERS,    AND   WHAT    TO    DO    WITH 

THEM. 

• 

What  a  shadow  is  cast  over  lives  and 
homes  by  bad  tempers !  It  is  Sunday 
morning,  God's  day  of  rest  and  peace, 
when  the  worry  and  rush  of  the  world 
should  be  quiet,  and  the  voices  of  news- 
paper boys  and  hawkers  of  small  wares 
should  be  still.  A  family  of  little  chil- 
dren is  waiting  to  be  sweetened  and 
blessed  by  God,  mother,  and  father. 
But  the  mother  has  become  put  out  over 
something ;  she  speaks  peevishly  and 
crossly,  her  husband  hardly  dares  put  in 


1 6  TEMPERS. 

2l  word,  and  the  children  are  scared  and 
talk  to  one  another  in  whispers.  Though 
there  is  everything  in  the  pretty  home  to 
entrap  the  sunbeams  that  play  without, 
a  shadow  lies  over  all  and  mars  the  day. 
Or  it  is  church-time,  and  the  family  is 
late  ;  the  husband  and  father  is  waiting, 
ready  dressed,  for  the  house  of  God,  but 
mother  or  children  are  unready,  and  he 
calls  for  them,  each  time  in  more  irrita- 
ble tones ;  and  when  at  last  they  ap- 
pear, "Late  again,"  "  Always  your  way," 
"  I  am  tired  and  out  of  patience  with 
you,''  bring  some  sharp  retort,  and  the 
rest  of  the  walk  to  the  sanctuary  is  either 
spent  in  silence,  or  the  parents  confine 
their  observations  to  whichever  child 
they  happen  to  be  walking  with.  What 
good  will  the  service  have  after  such  an 
introduction  ? 


TEMPERS  1 7 

How  often  has  a  happy  day's  excur- 
sion been  spoiled  in  the  same  way  !  It 
has  been  the  topic  of  conversation  for 
weeks.  The  wife  has  been  hurrying  all 
her  work  to  be  ready.  Such  prepara- 
tions in  dress  for  herself  and  the  chil- 
dren, such  cooking  of  savory  tartlets 
and  cutting  of  sandwiches.  The  hus- 
band has  got  off  for  the  day  with  no 
little  planning.  Sunshine  augurs  a  happy 
excursion.  But  somehow  things  don't 
go  right.  Perhaps  the  husband  is  un- 
reasonable and  thoughtless,  or  gives  the 
wife  reason  to  think  that  he  doesn't  ap- 
preciate her  careful  provision ;  or,  per- 
haps, she  is  over-tired  and  nervous,  and 
misinterprets  a  remark  meant  quite  in- 
nocently ;  but  one  crosses  the  other,  and 
the  ill-natured  word,  the  sour  look,  the 
sulking    manner,     somehow    make    the 


iS  TEMPERS. 

whole  party  miserable  —  worse   than   a 
shower  of  rain  would. 

It  is  impossible  to  name  all  the  vari- 
ous sorts  of  ilRemper  which  vex  and 
curse  humanity.  The  hot  temper,  which 
flashes  out  with  the  least  provocation. 
The  sullen  temper,  which  is  a  great  deal 
worse  to  deal  with,  because  it  takes  so 
long  to  come  round.  The  jealous  tem- 
per^ which,  in  trying  to  keep  all  for 
itself,  loses  all.  The  suspicious  temper, 
which  is  always  imputing  the  worst  mo- 
tives. The  malicious  temper,  which  loves 
to  instil  the  drop  of  poison,  or  make  the 
almost  imperceptible  stab  with  its  sti- 
letto. Ingenuity  has  sought  to  discover 
analogies  to  these  and  other  forms  of 
bad  temper  among  the  lower  orders  of 
the  animal  creation.  This  is  mulish, 
and  that   bearish    (with    the    additional 


TEMPERS.  19 

allusion,  in  this  case,  to  the  misfortune 
of  a  sore  head),  and  the  other  is  viper- 
ish.  These  comparisons  are  a  little  hard 
on  our  humble  friends  and  companions 
in  this  great  Noah's  ark.  Could  they 
speak,  they  might  say  that  our  sin  has 
introduced  the  jar  and  discord  into  their 
lives  that  might  otherwise  have  been 
peaceful  and  blessed. 

People  who  have  a  temper  are  much 
to  be  pitied.  They  know  when  it  is 
coming  on,  or  has  come,  and  wish  they 
hadn't  yielded,  and  hate  themselves  for 
being  disagreeable ;  yet  cannot  shake 
themselves  loose  from  the  evil  thing  that 
has  sprung  on  them  as  the  jaguar  on  the 
antelope,  or  the  ague  on  the  traveller  in 
the  tropics.  They  are  disposed,  how- 
ever, to  fancy  that  they  cannot  help 
themselves.     They  have  inherited  it,  as 


20  TEMPERS. 

they  did  the  color  of  their  hair,  or  the 
shape  of  their  nose.  Their  mother  had 
it  before  them,  and  her  father  before 
her.  If  you  want  them,  you  must  take 
them  as  they  are  or  leave  them ;  and 
then  it  is,  after  all,  better  to  be  as  they 
are  than  like  some  whom  they  could 
name.  '^  I  grant  you  I  have  a  hot  tem- 
per, but  then  it  soon  burns  itself  out, 
and  I  am  awfully  sorry;  and  as  every 
one  must  have  something,  I  would  rather 
have  this  than  be  unforgiving,  or  re- 
vengeful, or  stupid."  So  I  have  heard 
people  excuse  themselves. 

Now  there  is  some  truth,  no  doubt,  in 
this  talk  about  heredity.  For  good  or 
ill,  past  generations  have  left  their  mark 
upon  us,-  and  parents,  especially  mothers, 
cannot  too  deeply  ponder  it  in  their 
hearts.     What    they   are    their   children 


TEMPERS,  21 

will  become ;  and  if  there  is  a  strong 
taint  in  the  blood,  an  evil  tendency  in 
any  special  directloa,  there  is  the  more 
reason  why  the  mother  should  set  her- 
self resolutely  to  resist  it,  and  replace  it 
by  the  opposite.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
this  can  be  done.  It  has  been  done  in 
thousands  of  instances,  and  may  be 
done  again. 

It  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  value 
of  good  and  sunny  temper,  which  goes 
through  life  with  a  song ;  looking  always 
on  the  bright  side  of  things,  and  yielding 
to  the  blows  of  trial  and  disappointment 
with  an  unfailiag  grace.  It  is  often  as- 
sociated with  a  sound  constitution  and 
abounding  health,  and  there  is  undoubt- 
edly a  close  connection  between  the 
two,  but  it  is  not  dependent  on  these  ; 
for,  as  the  great  Dr.  Arnold  testified  of 


22  TEMPERS. 

his  sister,  who  was  for  years  a  confirmed 
invalid,  but  whose  chamber  was  the 
sunniest  room  in  the  house,  so  suffer- 
ing and  pain  have  often  only  set  forth 
to  greater  advantage  the  well-spring  of 
sweetness  and  good-nature  w^hich  has 
poured  forth  like  strains  of  sweet  mu- 
sic amid  the  clatter  of  a  dusty,  noisy 
thoroughfare. 

But  how  may  those  afflicted  with  ill- 
temper  be  delivered  ?  The  Apostle  says, 
''  Laying  aside  all  malice,  and  all  guile, 
and  hypocrisies,  and  envies,  and  all  evil- 
speakings,  as  newborn  babes,  desire  the 
sincere  milk  of  the  word,  that  ye  may 
grow  thereby''  (i  Pet.  ii.  i,  2).  That  lay- 
ing aside  is  a  remarkable  expression,  for 
it  means  that  the  thing  may  be  done  by 
one  sudden,  definite  act.  We  are  not  to 
wait  till  these  evil  things  die  down  in 


TEMPERS.  23 

our  hearts,  but  are  to  make  up  our  minds, 
once  and  forever,  to  lay  them  aside ;  as 
a  beggar  his  rags  when  new  clothes  are 
offered  him.  It  is  a  definite  act  of  the 
wilL  Will  you  make  it  now  ?  Will  you 
say,  "From  this  moment  I  choose  to  be 
free  of  these  things,  and  I  deliberately 
put  them  off ''  ? 

But  you  fear  that  this  will  not  help 
you,  you  have  so  often  made  good  reso- 
lutions before  and  broken  them.  Then 
take  one  further  step.  Trust  Christ  to 
keep  you.  Look  up  to  him  and  say, 
"  Lord,  I  have  often  tried  to  keep  my 
temper  and  failed,  but  from  henceforth 
I  entrust  its  keeping  with  thee."  Ex- 
pect him  to  undertake  the  charge. 
Every  morning  look  up  into  his  face 
and  say,  *^  I  am  still  trusting  thee  to  be 
between  me  and  my  evil  past,  and  to  fill 


24  TEMPERS. 

me  with  thy  own  sweetness,  gentleness, 
and  patience. '^  In  moments  of  provoca- 
tion dare  to  trust  him  still,  and  to  hold 
to  the  compact  by  which  your  helpless- 
ness and  evil  claim  everything  from  his 
all-sufficiency.  Live  thus,  and  you  will 
become  known  for  the  very  opposite 
temper  to  that  which  has  so  often  caused 
you  poignant  regret. 


Ill 


EX  A  GGERA  TION. 


III. 

EXAGGERATION. 

Beneath  all  exaggeration  there  is  a 
basis  of  truth.  When  an  American  said 
that  the  whey  which  flowed  from  the 
making  of  a  large  cheese  in  his  country 
was  sufficient  to  run  three  sawmills  ;  and 
when  another  affirmed  that  the  soil  of 
his  farm  was  so  prolific  that  the  tendrils 
of  the  vine  w^hich  he  had  just  sown  caught 
him  up  and  entwined  around  his  legs  be- 
fore he  could  get  over  the  fence,  —  there 
was  no  doubt  some  truth  at  the  basis  of 
their  statements,  though  only  as  a  drop  of 
homoeopathic  medicine  in  a  tumblerful 


28  EX  AGGER  A  TION. 

of  water.  And  it  is  this  small  residuum 
of  truth  that  veils  to  the  eyes  of  really 
good  people  the  evil  of  this  habit.  There 
is  no  doubt  that,  in  the  last  analysis,  ex- 
aggeration must  be  classed  under  the 
head  of  lying  and  falsehood.  Those 
that  exaggerate  are  excommunicate  from 
the  Temple  of  Truth. 

I  heard  Mr.  Moody  say  the  other  day 
that  a  lady  had  come  to  him,  asking  how 
she  might  be  delivered  from  the  habit 
of  exaggeration,  to  which  she  was  very 
prone.  "  Call  it  lying,  madam,"  was  the 
uncompromising  answer,  ''  and  deal  with 
it  as  you  would  with  any  other  temptation 
of  the  devil."  A  Greater  has  said,  "'  Let 
your  speech  be  Yea,  yea  ;  Nay,  nay :  for 
whatsoever  is  more  than  these  is  of  the 
evil  one." 

We  exaggerate  in  our  narrations.    When 


EX  A  G  GERA  TION.  29 

a  little  lad,  I  had  been  listening  with 
amazement  to  the  description,  given  by 
a  lady,  of  some  recent  experiences,  when 
my  grandfather  whispered  to  me  slyly, 
*' All  her  geese  are  swans."  The  words 
have  often  come  back  to  me.  When 
mothers  describe  the  excellences  of  their 
children,  their  wit,  precocity,  and  beauty; 
when  travellers  narrate  their  hairbreadth 
escapes,  their  marvellous  experiences  by 
land  or  water,  all  of  which  end  so  neatly 
as  to  resemble  the  often  polished  deal ; 
when  ministers  give  themselves  up  to 
tell  the  story  of  the  crowds  they  address, 
the  magnitude  of  their  church  operations, 
or  the  deftness  with  which  they  have 
managed  to  get  their  own  way,  —  one  is 
inclined  to  think  that,  under  the  idealiz- 
ing effect  of  a  strong  imagination,  geese 
have  become  swans. 


30  EXAGGERATION, 

It  seems  almost  impossible  for  some 
people  to  tell  an  unvarnished  tale.  The 
actual  is  not  wonderful  enough.  They 
must  gild  the  common  sunlight,  and  paint 
the  familiar  petals  of  the  flowers.  They 
think  that  effect  can  be  produced  only  by 
daubing  their  canvas  with  great  masses 
of  gaudy  color.  They  forget  that  the 
quiet  shining  of  the  stars  is  more  healthy 
and  beneficent  than  the  grandest  display 
of  fireworks  that  ever  poured  in  cascades, 
flashed  in  wheels,  or  fllled  the  sky  with 
ten  thousand  vanishing  fairy  lights.  For 
my  part,  I  prefer  the  earlier  paintings  of 
Turner  to  the  later,  and  the  stories  of 
George  Eliot  to  those  of  Disraeli  or 
Bulwer-Lytton ;  and  I  think  that  most 
ordinary  people  would  concur  in  the 
judgment. 

We  exaggerate  in  our  choice  of  words. 


EX  AGGER  A  TION.  3 1 

It  is  too  terrible  to  hear  the  young  ladies 
of  the  period  discussing  a  panorama  of 
Alps,  a  sunset  at  sea,  a  vision  like  that 
of  Fountains  or  Clairvaulx  under  the 
soft  light  of  the  moon.  "  Awful,"  "•  kill- 
ing," ''awfully  jolly,"  "too,  too,  don't- 
yer-know,"  are  quite  the  most  refined 
and  moderate  that  I  need  cite  here  ;  one 
has  no  desire  to  put  more  of  this  base 
coin  into  circulation.  This  pernicious 
habit  arises  in  part  from  ignorance  of 
the  derivation,  meaning,  and  value  of 
words,  but  particularly  from  the  desire 
to  be  conspicuous  among  the  little  group 
around  them.  Many  people  mistake  big- 
ness for  greatness,  bulk  for  value.  They 
resemble  the  Chinamen  in  New  York, 
who  buy  the  largest  boots  procurable  for 
their  money,  under  the  impression  that 
in  this  way  they  can  best  obtain  their 


32  EX  AGGER  A  TION. 

money's  worth.  It  is  a  cheap  and  easy 
manoeuvre  to  hide  the  paucity  of  your 
ideas  beneath  the  vehemence  and  loud- 
ness of  your  speech.  This  accounts  for 
a  good  deal  of  loudness  in  voice  and 
extravagance  in  phrase. 

We  also  exaggerate  i?i  our  religious 
phraseology.  In  certain  prayers  we  are 
wont  to  hear,  there  is  gross  exaggeration 
in  the  confessions  of  sin.  If  all  that  some 
men  say  of  themselves  in  prayer  be  true, 
they  certainly  deserve  to  be  put  out  of 
the  church,  or  be  interviewed  by  their 
ministers.  But  if  you  were  to  take  them 
at  their  word,  and  refuse  to  allow  your 
families  to  associate  with  theirs,  or  with- 
draw your  custom  from  their  stores,  on 
the  ground  of  their  confessions  of  de- 
pravity, they  would  be  very  much  sur- 
prised.    Many  a  man  would  threaten  to 


EXAGGERATION.  33 

knock  you  down  if  you  applied  to  him 
the  epithets  he  applies  to  himself. 

So  with  expressions  of  love  and  devo- 
tion to  the  Saviour.  We  often  hear  him 
addressed  in  prayer  in  the  most  familiar 
and  luscious  terms.  The  tenderest,  love- 
liest names  are  addressed  to  him.  Of 
course,  where  these  are  flowers  gathered 
from  the  garden  of  a  holy  soul,  they  are 
fragrant  and  delightful,  awakening  the 
dull  sense,  and  quickening  the  flagging 
zeal  of  all  who  hear  ;  but  where  they  are 
far  in  advance  of  the  evident  personal 
experience,  and  are  contradicted  by  the 
behavior  of  the  utterer,  as  he  forces  his 
way  into  the  tram-car  from  the  drenching 
shower  in  which  the  meeting  closes,  — 
you  feel  that  there  is  an  air  of  unreality 
and  extravagance  in  the  whole  thing, 
which  must  have  a  terrible  effect  on  him, 


34  EX  A  G  GERA  TION. 

while  it  reacts  on  others  like  the  heavy 
air  that  has  fanned  acres  of  poppies. 

Exaggeration  infects  all  our  life.  The 
bride  exaggerates  the  number  and  value 
of  her  presents.  The  tradesman's  ad- 
vertisements announce  that  he  has  lo,- 
Goo  bedsteads  on  view,  when  he  has 
only  1,000  at  the  most;  that  he  can 
offer  1,000  cheeses  to  choose  from,  when, 
with  great  difficulty,  he  can  get  100  into 
his  cellar ;  that  he  is  selling  off  at  an 
alarming  sacrifice,  when  all  in  the  trade 
know  that  he  is  making  large  profits. 

The  minister  says  there  are  hundreds 
in  his  congregation,  when,  if  heads  were 
reckoned,  it  would  be  found  that  there 
were  only  four  or  ^n^  score,  of  whom 
several  were  children.  Most  of  us  are 
adepts  at  drawing  the  longbow.  We  are 
not  content  with  the  reflection  cast  by 


EX  A  GGERA  TION,  3  5 

events  on  the  plain  glass  of  truth,  but 
distort  them  by  the  convex  or  the  con- 
cave, like  the  two  mirrors  which  are  some- 
times placed  outside  eating-houses  to 
show  the  effect  of  a  good  meal  on  the 
face. 

This  habit  may  be  traced  to  childhood. 
The  simplicity  and  naturalness  of  babe- 
life  is  rapidly  becoming  a  thing  of  the 
past.  We  force  the  growth  of  heaven's 
nurselings,  encourage  them  in  smartness 
and  old-fashionedness,  tell  them  extrava- 
gant fairy  stories,  rear  them  in  artificial 
gaslight,  and  then  complain  that  they 
have  lost  the  sweet  ingenuousness  of 
youth,  and  grown  into  young  men  and 
women  of  the  period  before  they  have 
barely  reached  their  teens.  It  is  as  if 
nature  should  rush  into  summer  with- 
out   a    spring,    or  the    day  spring    into 


36  EX  AGGER  A  TION. 

the  glare  of  noon  without  morning.  We 
must  begin  building  the  Palace  of  Truth 
in  the  earliest  impressions  of  the  nur- 
sery. 

We  should  accustom  ourselves  to  think 
and  speak  accurately.  Nothing  so  tests 
the  quality  of  our  minds  as  our  use  and 
choice  of  adjectives.  When  people  know 
all  your  adjectives  they  have  come  to  the 
end  of  your  treasures.  It  is  partly  due 
to  our  slovenliness  in  observing  and 
describing  that  we  exaggerate  in  our 
speech ;  and  the  evil  would  be  remedied 
if  young  people  would  read  the  best 
poetry  with  careful  discrimination,  ask- 
ing why  Browning  or  Tennyson  uses 
such  a  word  in  such  a  connection.  It 
is  specially  valuable,  with  this  object,  to 
translate  some  foreign  author — Homer, 
Virgil,  Dante,  Racine,  or  Schiller  —  find- 


EX  A  GGERA  TION.  3  7 

ing  an  English  equivalent  for  each  word, 
though  it  consume  an  hour  of  thought 
and  research. 

Let  us,  also,  in  describing  anything  in 
which  we  have  taken  a  part,  remember 
that  God  is  listening,  and  be  on  the 
watch  against  the  natural  tendency  of 
our  tongue  to  take  its  coloring  matter 
from  the  gorgeous  palette  of  the  imagi- 
nation rather  than  from  the  neutral  tints 
of  sober  fact.  Let  us  ask  the  Spirit  of 
Truth  to  set  a  watch  upon  the  door  of 
our  lips,  allowing  nothing  to  pass  out  on 
which  he  cannot  set  his  seal.  Whatever 
we  do,  in  word  as  well  as  deed,  let  us 
do  all  in  the  name  and  for  the  glory  of 
Jesus.  Why  should  we  seek  to  attract 
the  attention  of  men  to  ourselves,  when 
to  do  so  may  detract  from  the  glory  of 
his  workmanship  in  our  character  ?    And 


38 


EXAGGERA  TION. 


\tj  in  the  heat  of  conversation,  we  are 
betrayed  into  exaggeration,  and  are  re- 
minded of  it  afterwards  by  tlie  Holy 
Spirit,  let  us  at  once  make  application 
for  cleansing  in  the  precious  blood,  and 
confess  to  others  the  wrong  we  have 
done  to  the  sacred  majesty  of  Truth. 


IV. 

ON  FALLING  IN  LOVE. 


i 


IV. 


ON    FALLING    IN    LOVE. 

No  flirting,  young  people,  please  !  You 
cannot  flit  around  the  flame  without  the 
risk  of  burning  your  wings  ;  and  remem- 
ber, if  these  are  lost,  you  cannot  get  an- 
other pair ;  you  may  be  able  to  crawl  or 
limp,  but  you  will  never  again  bask  in 
the  sunbeams  or  dance  with  merry- 
hearted  glee  in  the  shadows.  In  other 
words,  you  may  play  at  love-making  till 
you  lose  the  power  of  loving  truly,  ox 
forfeit  for  evermore  the  right  of  entrance 
into  love's  most  hol}^  place.  Finally,  you 
may  find  it  impossible  to  convince  an- 
41 


42 


ON  FALLING  IN  lOVE. 


other  that  for  once  you  are  in  dead  ear- 
nest, and  that  the  time  of  love  has  come 
to  you  at  length.  There  is  nothing  more 
terrible  in  a  woman's  life  than  to  dis- 
cover that  she  has  played  make-believe 
so  long  that  men  treat  her  only  as  their 
plaything  and  toy,  and  think  that  she 
is  incapable  of  the  true  passion.  ''  I 
mean  it  this  time/'  the  flirt  says,  by  look 
and  manner.  ^^I  do  not  believe  you," 
the  answer  is  cast  back,  whether  by  man 
to  woman  or  by  woman  to  man.  ""  I 
have  watched  you  narrowly,  and  can 
count  up  the  hearts  you  have  broken, 
the  lives  you  have  wrecked.  You  are  a 
Siren,  whose  bewitching  music  beguiles 
to  death.''  "  Nay,  but  I  am  genuine  this 
once.  I  mean  what  I  say."  "  I  do  not 
believe  you  ;  I  do  not  believe  you  ;  I  dare 
not  trust  you.'^ 


ON  FALLING   IN  LOVE.  43 

So,  whatever  you  do,  young  people, 
don't  flirt.  Never  appear  to  love  when 
you  don't.  Never  lead  another  on  to 
think  that  you  really  care  w^hen  you 
are  not  sure.  Never  play  with  another's 
affections,  for  fear  you  should  lead  to  the 
giving  of  what  can  never  be  replaced, 
and  for  which  you  have  given  no  equiv- 
alent. I  am  old-fashioned  enough  to 
think  that  a  man  or  woman  loves  7'eaUy 
only  once.  I  know  what  may  be  said  on 
the  other  side,  but  you  must  let  me  think 
so.  The  cream  only  rises  to  the  surface 
in  its  full  wealth  once.  The  perfect 
beauty  of  the  morning  vanishes  an  hour 
after  dawn.  Therefore,  you  who  have 
not  yet  given  the  one  love  of  your 
life,  do  not  let  it  go  until  you  are 
sure  that  it  is  not  wrongly  bestowed. 
And   you   who    are    seeking    the    twin- 


44  ON  FALLING  IN  LOVE. 

soul,  be  sure  of  your  own  love  before 
you  give  a  sign. 

Some  of  the  happiest  marriages  I  have 
known  have  been  those  in  which  the  man 
and  wife  were  boy  and  girl  together. 
They  played  the  same  games,  got  into 
the  same  scrapes,  roamed  the  autumn 
woods  nutting,  and  skated  over  the  win- 
ter ice.  But  not  less  happy  may  those 
unions  be  which  have  the  romantic  inter- 
est of  love  at  first  sight.  It  is  wonderful, 
this  falling  in  love.  A  man  is  going  so- 
berly along  the  path  of  life,  with  no  par- 
ticular interest  in  any  one,  when  suddenly 
a  face,  a  figure,  a  voice,  crosses  his  path, 
and  straightway  his  heart  is  gone.  His 
ideals  are  realized,  his  dreams  have  taken 
shape.  And  from  that  moment,  with  that 
wonderful  idealizing  faculty,  he  imputes 
to  that  young  girl  all  that  the  poet  in  him 


ON  FALLING   IN  LOVE.  45 

can  imagine,  or  the  artist  in  him  depict. 
''  I  don't  see  anything  in  the  girl/''  a 
companion  says.  But  he  might,  poor  pur- 
blind mortal,  as  well  expect  to  see  what 
Turner  saw  in  a  sunset.  Take  care, 
young  girl,  that  you  live  up  to  that  ideal". 
I  pray  you,  do  nothing,  say  nothing,  to 
dash  it  to  the  ground  ;  it  is  the  most  sa- 
cred power  love  can  wield.  Live  worthy 
of  it;  do  not  descend  to  his  level,  but 
lift  him,  lift  him  to  yours.  True  love  is 
built  on  respect. 

We  can  never  forget  that  Robert 
Browning,  when  in  London,  was  wont  to 
repair  to  the  church  in  Marylebone, 
where  he  was  wed,  and  kiss  the  very 
steps  on  which  his  bride  had  stood. 
What  love  was  his,  of  which  she  sings 
in  those  matchless  Portuguese  Sonnets  ! 
But  what  an  inspiration  for  her,  or  any 


46  ON  FALLING   IN  LOVE. 

woman,  to  show  herself  worthy  of  the 
ideal  which  love  flings  over  her  every 
movement,  her  handwriting,  the  very 
trinkets  she  wears,  the  books  she 
reads. 

If  you  may  not  flirt,  you  should  take 
every  means  of  knowing  one  another. 
It  seems  to  me  that  the  practice  among 
the  working-classes,  of  walking  out  to- 
gether before  there  is  any  thought  of 
love-making,  is  an  eminently  wise  one. 
We  should  hear  of  fewer  ill-assorted  mar- 
riages among  the  upper  classes,  if  there 
were  more  opportunities  of  young  men 
and  women  becoming  acquainted  with 
each  other  than  can  be  presented  at  a 
ball  or  a  crush.  In  the  United  States, 
young  men  can  take  young  girls  to 
places  of  public  amusement  without  hav- 
ing their  names  unpleasantly  associated 


ON  FALLING   IN  LOVE,  47 

by  gossip.     This  were  worthy  of  impor- 
tation into  England. 

However  it  is  managed,  be  sure  to 
know  something  more  of  man  or  woman 
than  is  given  when  either  is  dressed  in 
Sunday  best,  and  clothed  in  most  attrac- 
tive and  persuasive  manners.  All  is  not 
gold  that  glitters.  Some  people  are  like 
the  baskets  of  strawberries  sold  in  Lon- 
don streets;  all  the  big  ones  are  at  the 
top,  and  those  below  are  very,  very 
small.  Young  ladies  !  I  am  sorry  to  say 
it,  but  some  of  the  nicest  of  nice  men 
are  the  most  arrant  scamps  that  ever 
walked.  Do  not  believe  their  word,  do 
not  entrust  yourselves  to  them,  unless 
you  know  something  more  of  them  than 
they  say  of  themselves.  And,  young 
men,  I  would  warn  you  not  to  think  that 
a  girl  can  be  judged  by  her  manners  in 


4^  ON  FALLING   IN  LOVE. 

the  drawing-room,  or  at  a  picnic.  Try  to 
drop  in  in  the  morning ;  make  an  excuse 
of  calling.  See  how  she  looks  in  her 
morning  dress  ;  is  it  tidy,  neat,  and  suit- 
able ;  is  she  helping  her  mother  with  the 
younger  children ;  is  she  pleasant  in  her 
behavior  to  the  servants  ?  I  had  once  to 
choose  a  wife  for  a  young  working-man, 
and  was  assured  that  my  anticipations 
as  to  the  suitability  of  a  certain  maiden 
were  justified,  because  she  opened  the 
door  of  her  father's  cottage  at  ten  in  the 
morning  with  her  hair  tidy,  a  neat  print 
dress  (the  sleeves  of  which  were  tucked 
up  above  her  elbows),  and  soapsuds  were 
steaming  all  up  her  bare  arms.  "  She  will 
do,"  I  said  to  myself. 

Notice,  when  you  are  with  the  one  to 
whom  you  are  attracted,  these  points  : 
How  does  the  young  man  speak  of  his 


ON  FALLING  IN  LOVE.  49 

parents  ?  does  he  call  his  mother 
mother  ?  Does  he  take  an  interest  in 
his  younger  brothers  or  sisters  ?  Does 
he  attend  church  for  himself,  or  only 
because  you  go  with  him  ?  Does  he 
ever  suggest  taking  you  into  the  public- 
house,  or  to  some  place  of  amusement 
where  women  are  treated  with  unhal- 
lowed familiarity  and  scant  respect  ? 

As  a  young  man  acts  in  any  of  these 
respects,  you  may  judge  him;  and  re- 
member, that  little  unsuspected  words 
and  acts  on  his  part  are  more  likely  to  re- 
veal his  true  character  than  any  number 
of  protestations  and  vows.  Every  man 
reveals  his  real  self  once  or  twice  to  the 
woman  he  woos ;  and  if  only  women 
would  act  on  the  slight  suspicions  which 
sometimes  cross  them,  how  many  broken 
hearts  would  be  saved  ! 


50  ON  FALLING  IN  LOVE. 

Do  not  suppose  that  you  can  alter  a 
man  after  you  are  wed.  If  you  cannot 
fashion  him  before  marriage,  you  cannot 
after.  A  woman  dreams  that  when  once 
she  is  wife,  she  will  be  able  to  mould 
her  husband  to  her  mind.  It  is  a  vain 
illusion,  which  in  millions  of  cases  has 
been  rudely  dissipated.  Besides  which, 
are  we  always  able  to  command  the  co- 
operation of  the  Holy  Spirit,  especially 
when  we  have  acted  in  direct  violation 
of  his  expostulations  1 

If  you  are  not  sure,  don't  let  your 
heart  go,  young  girl.  Break  off  an  en- 
gagement rather  than  expose  your  wooer 
and  yourself  to  lasting  misery.  ]t  will 
be  kinder  to  him  in  the  end,  because 
where  there  is  not  absolute  oneness 
there  cannot  be  lasting  happiness.  If 
he  threatens  to  commit  suicide,  be  well 


ON  FALLING  IN  LOVE.  5 1 

assured  he  will  never  do  it.  He  has  no 
right  to  talk  to  you  like  that,  and  is  a 
coward  to  play  upon  your  feelings.  Be- 
sides, a  man  who  talks  so  lightly  of 
throwing  away  his  own  life  is  not  one  to 
whom  a  woman  should  entrust  hers. 

Young  men  had  better  consult  their 
mothers  or  sisters  before  they  take  the 
irrevocable  step.  Women  are  quick  at 
reading  character,  and  those  that  love 
you  will  be  most  likely  to  choose  well 
for  you.  Let  the  women  of  your  family 
into  your  secret.  Dear  souls,  they  will 
guess  your  secret  even  if  you  do  not 
tell  it,  and  you  may  as  well  tell  it;  it 
will  please  them,  and  they  will  advise 
you  well. 

There  is  no  harm  in  early  engage- 
ments. When  I  am  sure  that  it  is  a 
love-match,   and  in  other  respects  suita- 


52  ON  FALLING  IN  LOVE. 

ble,  I  am  glad  to  see  two  young  people 
drawn  together,  though  in  their  teens. 
Probably  nothing  will  more  certainly 
keep  them  pure  and  sweet  amid  the  con- 
taminating influences  of  the  world.  Let 
them  begin  early ;  it  does  not  matter 
how  long  the  courtship  lasts.  The  court- 
ing times  are  very  happy  and  blessed 
times,  when  young  hearts  are  not  too 
full  of  hopes  and  plans  and  anticipations 
to  enjoy  the  pathway  over  which  they 
are  passing,  and  cull  its  flowers.  But 
in  these  courting  days  remember  that 
your  relationship  be  kept  on  the  highest 
level.  It  must  be  spirit  to  spirit,  soul  to 
soul.  That  which  begins  and  ends  with 
the  physical  will  sooner  or  later  land 
you  both  in  a  ditch.     Take  care ! 

Beware !     The   physical   must  be  the 
sacrament  and  expression  of  the  spirit- 


ON  FALLING  IN  LOVE.  53 

ual,  else  it  will  widen  into  the  rift  that 
makes  love's  music  mute. 

Mind  that  love-making  be  only  in  the 
Lord.  Let  it  be  ensphered  in  the  love 
of  God.  Then,  like  the  wedding-ring, 
the  beginning  will  be  everywhere,  the 
end  nowhere.  For  a  Christian  to  marry 
one  who  is  out  of  Christ  is  the  grossest 
folly.  Not  only  is  there  a  flagrant  act 
of  disobedience  to  the  distinct  command 
of  Christ,  but  there  is  the  additional  cer- 
tainty that  sooner  or  later  there  will  be 
manifested  an  incongruity,  a  disparity, 
a  want  of  sympathy  in  the  deepest  and 
most  sacred  subjects.  I  have  had  a 
wide  experience,  and  been  admitted  into 
numberless  homes,  but  I  have  never 
seen  perfect  happiness  where  this  dis- 
tinct command  of  the  gospel  has  been 
violated ;  and  I  have  never  met  a  case 


54 


ON  FALLING  IN  LOVE, 


in  which  the  believing  partner  has  won 
the  unbeliever,  except  when  faith  may 
have  come  to  the  heart  of  one  after 
marriage. 

Lastly,  to  all  who  are  unwed,  I  give 
my  fervent  advice :  Make  it  a  matter 
of  earnest  prayer.  Let  your  heavenly 
Father  choose  for  you.  Do  not  think 
that  life  is  necessarily  a  failure  if  no  su- 
preme love  enters  it.  There  are  very 
happy  and  useful  lives  on  every  side 
that  have  never  been  blessed  with  a 
supreme  affection.  Live  for  God.  Make 
him  first.  Wait  on  him  and  keep  his 
way.  In  his  own  good  time  and  way 
he  will  give  you  your  heart's  desire. 


V. 

ON  BEING    STRAIGHT. 


V. 

ON    BEING   STRAIGHT. 

To  be  straight  is  to  be  true.  There 
is  no  more  important  exhortation  on  the 
page  of  Scripture,  than  where  the  Apos- 
tle says,  "  Whatsoever  things  aj^e  t7'2ie  .  .  . 
think  071  these  things P  A  friend  of  mine, 
educated  in  one  of  our  great  EngHsh 
schools,  says  that  the  most  formative 
words  of  his  life  were  addressed  to  him 
by  his  head  master,  as  he  said  good-by  : 
'''Be  true,^^  he  said,  ''always  he  tnie.^^ 
My  friend  records  that  those  words  have 
often  come  back  to  him  at  critical  mo- 
ments of  his  life,  indicating  his  path  as 
with  a  finger  of  light. 
57 


58  ON  BEING  STRAIGHT, 

Every  man,  in  his  heart  of  hearts,  has 
some  knowledge  of  what  is  eternally  right 
and  good.  You  see  it  in  the  little  child 
who  blushes  and  conceals  itself  when  it 
has  told  a  lie,  or  taken  forbidden  fruit, 
and  who  shares  its  sugar-candy  with  its 
little  brother.  It  may  be  but  a  dim 
flicker,  but  it  is  there.  The  radiance 
that  streams  through  the  open  door  of 
heaven  may  have  become  very  faint  by 
the  time  it  reaches  the  spot  on  the  dark 
common  where  you  stand,  but  unless  you 
wilfully  turn  your  back  on  it,  it  falls 
around  your  feet  and  on  your  heart. 

Truth,  so  far  as  it  concerns  us,  is  that 
attitude  of  soul  which  thinks  and  acts  in 
consistence  with  its  highest  ideals.  And 
the  marvel  is,  that  as  we  act  consistently 
with  our  ideals,  they  tend  to  become 
always  nobler  and  purer,  and  to  approxi- 


ON  BEING  STRAIGHT.  59 

mate  more  nearly  to  those  highest  stan- 
dards which  exist  in  the  nature  of  God. 
If  a  man  be  true  to  his  better  self,  he 
will  become  the  pupil  of  the  Spirit  of 
Truth,  and  catch  a  glimpse  of  farther 
horizons,  so  that  ultimately  he  will  come 
out  into  the  great  light  of  eternity,  as  it 
shines  from  the  face  of  Christ. 

Be  true  hi  your  speech.  Do  not  say 
one  thing  to  a  man's  face,  and  another 
behind  his  back.  Do  not  flatter  where 
you  inwardly  despise  and  contemn.  Do 
not  exaggerate  as  you  repeat  your  pet 
stories,  for  the  sake  of  effect,  and  to  win 
a  smile.  Let  your  speech  mirror  your 
convictions,  so  far  as  may  be  right  and 
possible.  Let  your  yea  be  yea,  and  your 
nay,  nay.  Do  not  puff  the  article  you 
want  to  sell  beyond  its  real  value,  or  say 
a  single  word  more  of  it  than  you  can 


6o  ON  BEING   STRAIGHT. 

verify.  In  the  old  fable  the  palace  walls 
were  panelled  with  mirrors,  on  which  a 
mist  arose  when  insincere  and  untruthful 
w^ords  were  uttered  within  their  pre- 
cincts ;  realize  that  such  mirrors  are  ever 
around  you,  and  see  that  you  never  cause 
a  stain  or  blur. 

Be  true  in  your  actions.  If  you  are  an 
artist,  portray  Nature  as  you  find  her, 
never  using  your  colors  for  mere  eifect 
or  display.  If  you  are  a  mechanic,  do 
not  make  articles  merely  for  show  or 
sale,  but  because  they  realize  the  pur- 
pose they  profess,  boots  to  keep  the  feet 
dry,  clothes  to  wear,  furniture  to  last. 
The  world  is  full  of  shoddy  and  sham,  of 
scamped  workmanship  in  our  houses, 
of  mottled  paper  that  looks  like  marble, 
of  tinsel  that  resembles  gold,  of  paste- 
jewels,  and  veneer.     Do   not  choose   a 


ON  BEING   STRAIGHT,  6 1 

trade  for  your  boy  which  is  a  success  in 
proportion  as  it  is  a  mimicry  and  sham. 
Do  not  deal  in  counterfeits,  lest  you  con- 
tract the  habit  of  unveracity  and  false- 
hood. See  that  your  hands  and  eyes  and 
heart  are  in  rhythm  with  your  highest 
conceptions  of  what  is  honest,  lovely,  and 
of  good  report.  Bear  witness,  as  Jesus 
did,  to  the  Reality  of  Things.  Did  Paul 
ever  make  a  tent  which  deceived  the  pur- 
chaser ? 

Be  true  in  your  opinions.  We  are  all 
liable  to  be  warped  in  our  opinions  by 
considerations  of  what  is  popular,  expe- 
dient, and  likely  to  commend  us  to  our 
fellows.  The  statesman  is  sorely  tempted 
to  listen  to  the  wire-pullers  of  his  party, 
the  catch-cries  of  his  constituency,  the 
lead  of  some  popular  organ,  and  to  al- 
low these  to  divert  him  from  the  path  of 


62  ON  BEING  STRAIGHT. 

conviction  and  conscience.  How  often 
have  men  like  Pilate  been  led  to  act 
against  their  clear  judgment  by  the  in- 
sistence and  fear  of  the  mob.  Like 
waves  of  the  sea,  they  are  driven  by  the 
winds  and  tossed.  Like  the  weather- 
vane,  they  move  around  with  the  least 
puff  of  breeze.  This  is  specially  the 
temptation  of  religious  leaders,  who  are 
assailed  by  many  voices,  such  as :  Will 
it  pay?  Will  it  attract  people,  or  aleniate 
them  "^  Will  it  be  popular,  or  the  reverse  ? 
Life  is  pitiable,  indeed,  when  such  con- 
siderations have  to  be  balanced. ' 

"Better  be  a  dog,  and  bay  the  moon!  " 

Of  course  we  must  speak  the  truth  in 
love.  Some  seem  to  think  that  truth- 
fulness, of  necessity,  involves  rudeness 
and  ruggedness  of  speech,  a  rasp  on  the 


ON  BEING  STRAIGHT.  63 

tongue,  an  abruptness  in  the  act.  But 
this  need  not  be.  The  King  of  Truth 
was  also  the  good  shepherd,  whose  words 
were  music,  whose  ways  were  mercy  as 
well  as  truth,  and  whose  glory  comprised, 
in  equal  proportions,  truth  and  grace. 

Whatever  happens,  be  true.  As  you 
stand  behind  the  counter,  a  question  may 
be  asked  by  a  customer  about  some  arti- 
cle you  are  desirous  of  selling.  An  eva- 
sive answer,  or  a  slight  deviation  from  the 
strict  truth  on  your  part,  will  complete 
the  transaction.  The  manager  or  shop- 
walker is  listening.  Shall  you  say  it  .^ 
If  you  do,  no  one  will  be  much  the 
worse.  If  you  don't,  you  will  lose  your 
situation.  What  shall  you  do  ?  Believe 
me,  there  is  no  alternative.  You  must 
follow  your  King,  the  King  of  Truth. 
And  if  you  are  cast  out,  he  will  receive 


64  ON  BEING  STRAIGHT. 

you,  and  count  you  his  companion,  and 
give  you  a  deeper  glimpse  than  ever  into 
his  heart 

Or  you  are  beginning  to  question  cer- 
tain conceptions  of  truth  in  which  you 
have  been  reared.  The  more  you  think 
of  them,  the  more  unable  you  feel  to  ac- 
cept them.  To  renounce  them  will  give 
pain  to  those  you  love,  will  lead  them  to 
look  at  you  shyly,  will  condemn  you  to 
ostracism  and  misunderstanding.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  would  be  easy  to  shut 
your  eyes,  and  sign  your  name  to  what 
all  your  neighbors  hold.  But,  I  pray 
you,  do  not  do  it,  or  you  will  put  out 
your  eyes  as  surely  as  Hubert's  hot  irons 
put  out  Arthur's. 

This  is  why  there  is  so  much  infidel- 
ity in  the  world.  There  are  evidences 
enough,   not  only  in  books,  but   in  the 


ON  BEING   STRAIGHT.  (^S 

heart  and  soul,  in  life,  in  the  world 
around.  The  moonbeam's  silver  path 
comes  across  the  mere  to  the  feet  of 
every  young  warrior,  and  the  hand 
clothed  in  samite  offers  to  each  the  Ex- 
calibur  sword.  For  each  dreamer,  of  all 
the  young  pilgrims  across  the  wold  of 
time,  there  waits  the  angel-ladder.  Be- 
side each  one  of  us  the  bush  in  the 
desert  burns  with  fire.  The  difference 
between  those  who  see  and  do  not  see 
these  things  lies  in  their  devotion  or  dis- 
obedience to  truth,  so  far  as  they  know  it. 

If  a  man  refuses  to  obey  the  truth,  so 
far  as  it  is  revealed  to  him,  the  glimmer- 
ing light  dies  out  from  his  soul,  and  his 
eyes  become  dimmed,  so  that  he  cannot 
see. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  man  obeys  the 
truth,  he  is  like  one  that  had  been  lost 


(>^  ON  BEING  STRAIGHT, 

in  the  catacombs  ;  suddenly  stooping 
down,  he  touches  a  cord,  which  he 
catches  up  and  follows  hour  after  hour, 
until  it  conducts  him  to  the  mouth  of  the 
long  corridor,  whence  he  steps  forth  into 
the  perfect  day. 

It  may  be  that  some  shall  scan  this 
page  who  have  no  faith  in  Christ  or 
Christianity.  I  ask  them  to  follow  this 
simple  recipe  :  Put  away  all  from  your 
life,  in  speech,  thought,  or  act,  which  is 
inconsistent  with  your  highest  concep- 
tions of  the  supremely  Right  and  Good. 
Then  be  true  to  those  conceptions,  and, 
as  you  are,  you  will  find  them  heighten 
and  widen ;  you  will  discover  yourself 
one  in  a  great  company,  who  are  all 
travelling  in  the  same  direction  towards 
the  rising  sun ,'  after  a  while  you  will 
encounter  One  who  speaks  of  things  of 


ON  BEING   STRAIGHT.  67 

which  you  have  become  profoundly  and 
experimentally  convinced  ,^  being  of  the 
truth,  you  will  listen  intently  to  him  as 
he  tells  of  things  that  lie  beyond  your 
view ;  but  as  he  spake  truly  of  things  in 
which  you  could  follow  him,  so  you  will 
believe  that  he  speaks  truly  of  these 
others ;  as  when  he  says  that  God  is  a 
Father,  that  hereafter  there  is  a  home 
for  those  who  trust  and  love,  that  he  is 
the  only  begotten  Son,  to  know  whom  is 
to  know  God,  and  to  follow  whom  is  to 
have  everlasting  life.  Be  straight :  be 
strong :  be  true. 


VI. 

ON  DOING    A    GOOD    DA  V  S 
WORK. 


VI. 


ON    DOING    A    GOOD    DAYS    WORK. 

Longfellow's  village  blacksmith  felt 
that  '^  something  accomplished,  some- 
thing done,"  had  earned  a  night's  re- 
pose ;  and  I  suppose  that  he  did  little 
else  than  shoe  the  farmers'  horses,  or  put 
new  shares  to  their  ploughs  ;  yet  he  had 
the  perpetual  consciousness  that  he 
was  doing  something  in  the  world,  con- 
tributing to  its  well-being,  performing  a 
necessary  part  in  the  machinery  of  the 
village-life.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  the  honest  man  did  his  work  for 
the  money  it  brought  him,  but  for  the 


72       DOING  A    GOOD  DAY'S    WORK, 

love  of  doing  it,  the  pleasure  of  minis- 
tering, however  humbly,  to  the  com- 
mon weal.  However  well  he  were  paid, 
it  would  be  a  source  of  infinite  regret 
and  shame  if  his  work  were  superficially 
and  perfunctorily  executed ;  if  a  horse 
were  lamed,  because  the  nail  was  driven 
too  far  home,  or  a  day's  work  in  the 
sowing-time  were  lost  because  the  share 
broke  in  mid-furrow. 

This  is  the  ideal  of  all  good  work. 
Too  many  work  for  the  wage  to  be  paid 
them  at  the  end  of  the  week,  and  be- 
come so  degraded  in  their  aim  that  they 
will  only  put  in  the  best  work  when 
they  are  promised  the  highest  pay.  Let 
the  remuneration  be  second-rate,  their 
work  will  be  second-rate  ;  let  the  work- 
shop be  a  peasant's  cottage,  their  st34e  of 
workmanship  will  lack  the  finish  which 


DOING  A    GOOD  DAY'S    WORK,       73 

would  certainly  be  put  in  for  a  palace 
or  church.  This  appraising  of  our  work 
by  the  amount  of  wage  it  will  bring  is 
vicious  in  the  extreme,  and  sooner  or 
later  begets  a  perfunctory,  superficial, 
and  mean  disposition.  The  man  who 
reserves  his  best  work  for  the  best  pay 
will  ultimately  be  content  to  put  in  the 
semblance  of  the  best  work,  though  it 
be  a  bit  of  arrant  scamping,  in  order  to 
secure,  as  soon  as  he  may,  the  promised 
wage  J  in  this  case,  however,  it  should 
scorch  his  hand  as  the  wage  of  un- 
righteousness. 

Do  you  think  that  the  old  monks,  who 
built  religiously,  and  for  the  eye  of  God, 
stopped  to  ask  whether  some  curiously 
carved  stone  was  intended  for  the  vaulted 
ceiling,  or  the  ornamentation  of  a  door- 
way through  which    successive   genera- 


74      DOING  A    GOOD  DAY'S    WORK. 

tions  of  admiring  pilgrims  would  pass? 
It  was  enough  to  be  permitted  to  put 
one  piece  of  carving  in  the  house  raised 
for  the  honor  and  glory  of  God ;  there 
must  be  nothing  inferior  there,  nothing 
that  would  cause  the  carver  shame  if 
he  met  the  memory  of  it  in  any  world, 
nothing  that  would  seem  contemptible 
to  future  generations  if  it  should  drop 
from  its  place  to  lie  within  the  easy 
inspection  of  every  passer-by. 

Can  you  imagine  a  true  artist  paint- 
ing an  inferior  picture  because  it  would 
be  skied  in  an  exhibition,  or  sold  cheap 
at  an  auction  ?  He  would  tell  you  that 
he  dared  not  do  it.  He  would  be  untrue 
to  his  loftiest  ideals  ;  if  he  permitted 
himself  to  fall  so  low,  he  would  soon  lose 
his  power  of  realizing  his  dreams,  and 
deteriorate  into  a  sorry  hack.      The  ar- 


DOING  A    GOOD  DAY'S    WORK.       7S 

tist's  eye  would  fail  to  perceive,  the 
artist's  hand  to  achieve.  Nature  would 
veil  her  charms  from  his  eye,  who  sought 
them  only  for  mercenary  ends. 

Would  a  physician,  who  was  inspired 
with  the  true  spirit  of  his  profession, 
reserve  his  deepest  insight,  his  longest 
patience,  his  most  skilful  treatment,  for 
the  rich,  whose  golden  sovereigns  would 
freely  pour  into  his  banking-account, 
whilst  the  child  of  the  peasant  might 
take  its  chance  ? 

And  if  each  of  these  is  expected  to 
do  his  work  in  the  world  for  the  honor 
of  his  profession,  and  the  lasting  benefit 
of  men,  why  should  not  all  men  and 
women  do  whatever  God  has  given  them 
to  do  for  the  same  high  end  ?  Not  for 
fee  or  reward,  not  for  the  wages  which 
are,  of  course,  necessary  and  deserved, 


76      DOING  A    GOOD  DAY'S    WORK. 


not  for  the  applause  and  praise  of  one 
or  many;  but  because  work  is  honor- 
able and  noble,  because  a  true  man 
finds  his  highest  reward  in  putting  his 
noblest  self  into  all  he  does,  because 
it  is  a  scandal  and  shame  to  be  con- 
tent with  anything  less  than  the  best, 
because  God  and  his  high  angels  are 
looking  on,  and  because  scamped  work 
will  return  on  us  in  other  worlds  to  con- 
front and  shame  us.  There  is  no  surer 
sign  of  deterioration  of  character  than 
contentment  with  inferior  work. 

We  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  our 
work  as  a  vocation  or  calling.  Let  every 
man,  says  the  Apostle,  abide  in  the  call- 
ing in  which  he  was  called.  Some  are 
called  to  be  servants,  some  to  be  mas- 
ters ;  some  to  administer  five  talents, 
others  one ;  but  every  man  is  as  much 


DOING  A    GOOD  DAY'S    WORK.       77 

called  of  God  to  his  life-work  as  the 
minister  is  called  to  preach,  or  the  phy- 
sician to  combat  disease.  Do  you  expect 
these  to  be  above  the  questions  of  dol- 
lars and  cents,  there  is  the  same  obli- 
gation on  yourself.  Would  you  think  it 
mean  of  the  servant  of  God  to  preach  at 
half  or  quarter  power  if  he  were  to  re- 
ceive but  a  trifling  solatium,  or  to  cease 
preaching  if  he  shall  have  realized  a 
competence  ?  But  are  you  not  guilty  of 
similar  meanness  if,  in  altered  condi- 
tions, you  permit  your  conduct  to  be  af- 
fected by  sordid  considerations  '^.  Some 
men  are  called  to  sweep  chimneys,  and 
others  to  be  archbishops,  but  in  the 
sight  of  the  Almighty  there  may  be  less 
inequality  than  we  suppose  ;  and  the 
sweep  will  stand  highest  at  last,  if  he  has 
driven  the  soot  out  of  the  intricacies  of 


78      DOING  A    GOOD  DAY'S    WORK, 

old  chimneys  with  more  eager  care  and 
with  nobler  purpose  than  the  archbishop 
has  administered  his  diocese. 

What  counts  in  God's  sight  is  not  the 
work  we  do,  but  the  way  in  which  we  do 
it.  Two  men  may  work  side  by  side  in 
the  same  factory  or  store  :  the  one,  at  the 
end  of  the  day,  shall  have  put  in  a  solid 
block  of  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones  ; 
whilst  the  other  has  contributed  to  the 
fabric  of  his  life-work  an  ephemeral,  in- 
substantial addition  of  wood,  hay,  and 
stubble,  destined  to  be  burnt.  What  is 
the  difference  between  these  two  t  To 
the  eye  of  man,  there  is  none  ;  to  the  eye 
of  God,  much  :  because  the  one  has  been 
animated,  in  the  lowliest,  commonest  ac- 
tions, by  the  lofty  motive  of  pleasing 
God,  and  doing  the  day's  work  thor- 
oughly and  well ;  whilst  the  other  wrought 


DOING  A    GOOD   DAY'S    WORK.       79 

to  escape  blame,  to  secure  the  commen- 
dation of  man,  or  to  win  a  large  wage. 
.  Never  be  ashamed  of  honest  toil,  of 
labors,  however  trivial  or  menial,  which 
you  can  execute  beneath  the  inspiration 
of  noble  aims ;  but  be  ashamed  of  the 
work  which,  though  it  makes  men  hold 
their  breath  in  wonder,  yet,  in  your 
heart,  you  know  to  have  emanated  from 
earthly,  selfish,  and  ignoble  aims. 

What  we  make,  makes  us.  The  slight 
gauze  on  which  the  mantle  of  the  incan- 
descent light  is  formed  flares  away  in  a 
moment,  but  the  solid  fabric  wrought  on 
it  by  chemical  agents  will  be  luminous 
for  a  thousand  hours.  So  the  things 
we  make  in  the  world  pass  away  as  a 
wreath  of  flame,  but  the  motives  with 
which  we  do  them  go  to  make  ourselves 
for  better  or  worse.     If  you  do  your  work 


So       DOING  A    GOOD   DAY'S    WORK. 

in  slovenliness,  you  become  a  sloven.  If 
you  do  your  work  perfunctorily,  you  be- 
come a  hypocrite.  If  you  work  only  for 
the  eye  of  man,  the  sense  of  God  will  die 
out  of  your  life. 

Men  fret,  for  instance,  at  being  tied 
to  a  clerk's  desk.  Surely,  they  say,  any 
one  could  direct  these  envelopes,  copy 
these  letters,  cast  up  these  interminable 
columns  ;  and  in  their  contempt  for  their 
life-work  they  fail  to  see  that  its  very 
unimportance  is  giving  them  a  better 
opportunity  of  cultivating  punctuality, 
patience,  fidelity,  and  similar  passive  vir- 
tues, than  they  would  have  if  they  played 
a  more  conspicuous  part  in  the  world's 
life,  or  in  spheres  where  certain  other 
considerations  nerve  to  supreme  efforts, 
which,  in  their  case,  can  only  be  called 
forth  by  lofty  principle. 


DOING  A    GOOD  DAY'S    WORK.       8 1 

At  the  end  of  life's  brief  day  we  shall 
be  rewarded,  not  according  to  the  work 
we  have  done,  but  to  the  faithfulness 
with  which  we  have  endeavored  to  do 
our  duty,  in  whatever  sphere.  Let  us 
live  and  work  with  that  day  in  view  ;  and 
let  us  never  forget  that  the  ultimate  re- 
ward for  conspicuous  service  will  be 
given  not  to  the  one  who  seemed,  to  the 
eye  of  man,  to  render  it,  but  to  those 
also  who  enabled  him  to  render  it. 

The  servant  who  prepares  my  food,  or 
saves  me  the  necessity  of  doing  the  many 
duties  of  my  home,  thus  setting  me  free 
to  write,  or  preach,  or  minister  to  men, 
will,  in  God's  reckoning,  be  credited  with 
no  inconsiderable  share  of  the  results  of 
anything  which  may  have  been  achieved 
through  my  endeavors.  The  great  deed 
that  blesses  the  race  seems  to  be  wrought 


82       DOING  A    GOOD  DAY'S    WORK. 

by  one,  but  it  is  really  the  result  of  the 
contributed  quotas  of  scores  and  hun- 
dreds of  unnamed  and  unnoticed  work- 
ers ;  and  these,  in  so  far  as  they  entered 
into  the  spirit  of  his  labors,  shall  share 
the  reward.  Those  that  sow  and  those 
that  reap  shall  rejoice  together. 

This  is  the  way  to  do  a  good  day's 
work.  Begin  it  with  God  ;  do  all  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  for  the  glory 
of  God ;  count  nothing  common  or  un- 
clean in  itself — it  can  only  be  so  when 
the  motive  of  your  life  is  low.  Be  not 
content  with  eye-service,  but  as  servants 
of  God  do  everything  from  the  heart,  and 
for  his  "Well  done."  Ask  him  to  kin- 
dle and  maintain  in  your  heart  the  lofti- 
est motives ;  and  be  as  men  that  watch 
for  the  coming  of  the  Master  of  the 
house. 


VII 


SAVORLESS    SALT. 


VII. 


SAVORLESS    SALT. 


No  wonder  that  the  common  people 
hung  on  Christ's  words.  He  was  a  Mas- 
ter of  the  Art  of  Illustration,  because 
he  sought  his  emblems,  not  from  remote 
corners  of  creation,  or  its  recondite  pro- 
cesses, but  from  the  common  incidents 
of  ordinary  human  experience.  Salt  and 
light,  birds  and  lilies,  gates  and  roads, 
trees  and  their  fruit,  houses  and  their 
foundations.  But  there  was  more  than 
art.  He  knew  the  hidden  secrets  of  cre- 
ation, and  could  tell  the  heavenly  pattern 
upon  which  everything  was  fashioned. 
85 


86  SAVORLESS  SALT. 

And  how  full  of  encouragement  he 
was  !  He  was  so  willing  to  give  men 
credit  for  their  best;  and  in  doing  so, 
summoned  to  view  qualities,  the  exist- 
ence of  which  their  possessors  had  never 
dreamed,  or  encouraged  them  to  con- 
tinue in  paths  on  which  they  had  ven- 
tured with  hesitating  steps.  It  was  not 
a  small  encouragement  to  these  humble 
peasants  and  fishermen  to  be  told  that 
they  were  capable  of  checking  the  evil 
that  was  eating  out  the  vitals  of  society 
around  them,  as  salt  stays  the  progress 
of  corruption.  Have  we  ever  realized 
sufficiently,  or  used,  this  antiseptic 
power  with  which  all  good  men  are 
invested  t 

It  is  a  sad  comment  ofi  society  that  it 
needs  salt.  You  do  not  think  of  salting 
life,  but  death,  to  keep  it  from  rotting. 


SAVORLESS  SALT,  S; 

This,  then,  was  Christ's  verdict  on  the 
society  of  his  time.  It  had  enjoyed  the 
benefit  of  all  that  Greek  intellectualism 
and  Roman  government  could  effect,  and 
yet  was  like  a  carcass  on  the  point  of 
putrefaction.  But  is  not  this  the  state 
of  all  society  from  which  religion  is  ban- 
ished, or  where  it  has  become  a  system 
of  rites  and  dogmas  1  Go  into  any  large 
workshop  or  counting-house  or  public- 
house,  where  men  feel  able  to  talk  freely, 
and  there  is  too  often  the  smell  of  the 
charnel-house  in  the  stories  that  pass 
round,  and  the  jokes  that  pass  from  lip 
to  lip.  The  absence  of  ladies  is  sup- 
posed to  give  a  certain  amount  of  li- 
cense, as  if  gentlemen  had  no  special 
squeamishness. 

Here  is  something  iJiat  each  of  us  ca?i  do. 
Perhaps  we  cannot  speak ;   we    cannot 


SS  SAVORLESS  SALT, 

shed  a  far-reaching  ray  of  light  to  warn 
from  the  black  rocks,  and  guide  to  har- 
bor ;  we  seem  shut  away  from  scenes  of 
Christian  activity,  but  we  can  be  good 
salt,  checking  the  evil  which  would  other- 
wise infect  the  air  of  the  world,  and 
breed  disease  in  young  and  healthy 
lives. 

The  salt  has  Just  to  he  salt.  It  need  not 
attempt  to  be  a  voice,  a  spark  of  light,  or 
a  thrill  of  electricity.  Let  it  just  be  good, 
wholesome  salt,  and  quietly,  unobtru- 
sively, it  will  fulfil  its  great  mission.  A 
little  child  has  often  arrested  the  commis- 
sion of  a  horrid  crime,  with  its  innocent 
look  and  its  trembling,  tearful  face.  A 
gentleman  who  travels  much  among 
lonely  farmhouses  told  me  the  other  day, 
that  whenever  a  fierce  dog  ran  barking  at 
him,  he  stooped  down,  and  looked  it  in 


SAVORLESS  SALT.     .  89 

the  face ;  and  he  said  that  he  had  never 
met  a  dog  yet  which  could  stand  a  steady 
gaze;  so  there  is  something  in  the  look  of 
a  really  good  man  that  abashes  sin.  The 
presence  of  a  Henry  Martyn  has  turned 
an  East  Indiaman  from  a  floating  hell 
into  a  very  paradise.  The  look  of  a  Fin- 
ney has  stayed  the  blasphemy  of  a  large 
factory,  and  brought  all  the  mechanics 
to  their  knees.  Billy  Bray's  life  purified 
a  whole  district  of  Cornish  miners.  In 
fact,  it  would  be  impossible  to  tell  of  all 
the  prisons,  the  backwoods  settlements, 
the  soldiers'  camps,  the  slave  planta- 
tions, where  the  progress  of  sin  has  been 
arrested,  and  the  devil  himself  has  slunk 
abashed  to  his  lair,  before  the  presence 
of  a  resolute  genuine  man  of  God.  You 
might  do  the  same,  only  you  must  be  a 
genuine  character.      Salt  must  be  good 


90  SAVORLESS  SALT. 

before  it  can  effect  its  great  preventive 
ministry.  But  if  it  is  good  it  will  do  it. 
And  if  you  really  are  full  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  of  faith,  your  very  presence 
will  be  all  that  is  needful  to  stay  the  evil 
that  cries  to  Heaven. 

When  I  was  in  Liverpool,  the  women 
of  a  large  reformatory  ward  broke  into 
open  rebellion,  expelled  their  warders, 
barred  the  windows  and  doors,  and  gave 
themselves  up  to  every  species  of  inde- 
cency. The  authorities  were  nonplussed, 
and  could  not  tell  what  to  do  ;  but  Mrs. 
Josephine  Butler  volunteered  to  go  alone, 
still  the  disturbance,  and  bring  these 
poor  lost  creatures  back  to  decency.  The 
extreme  difficulty  and  danger  of  the  task 
were  set  before  her  ;  but  she  persisted  in 
her  request,  and  finally  carried  her  point. 
As  soon  as  she  appeared,  she  was  met 


SAVORLESS  SALT.  9^ 

with  a  yell  of  madness ;  but  the  uproar 
at  last  subsided,  that  outburst  of  un- 
womanliness  died  down  before  the  spell 
of  her  sweet  and  holy  presence,  and 
presently  she  opened  the  doors,  and  ad- 
mitted the  warders. 

Biit  good  salt  will  be  pungent.  It  has 
a  savor  about  it  which  bites  and  stings 
whenever  it  comes  in  contact  with  an 
open  wound.  If  you  are  holy,  just,  and 
faithful  with  a  true  man,  he  will  evince 
no  feeling  of  annoyance ;  but  if  with  a 
vicious  man,  he  will  splutter,  make  a  wry 
face,  and  show  violence  of  hand  or  foot. 
Christ  was  salt  to  the  Pharisees,  and 
they  crucified  him.  Joseph  was  salt  to 
his  brethren,  and  they  put  him  in  the 
pit.  Paul  was  salt  to  his  fellow-country- 
men, and  they  arraigned  him  before  the 
bar  of  Caesar. 


92  SAVORLESS  SALT. 

But  always  distinguish  between  salt  and 
acid.  Acid  corrodes,  burns,  kills.  Salt 
smarts,  heals,  saves.  Some  rejoice  in 
what  they  call  plain  speaking ;  but  they 
forget  to  speak  the  truth  in  love,  and 
are  like  a  physician  who  goes  around 
with  wholesome  but  nauseous  medicine, 
and  whenever  he  sees  a  mouth  open 
pours  some  down.  It  is  necessary  to 
wash  the  saints'  feet,  but  be  sure  you 
do  not  do  it  in  scalding  water.  If  you 
have  to  tell  men  that  they  are  the  enemies 
of  the  cross  of  Christ,  do  it  weeping.  Let 
it  be  evident  that  you  had  no  axe  to 
grind,  no  selfish  end  to  serve,  no  grudge 
to  pay,  when  you  rebuke  others  by  life 
or  word  for  things  which  ought  not  to 
pass  unnoticed. 

Salt  may  lose  its  savor.  Housewives 
tell  us  that  if  it  be  allowed  to  get  damp, 


SAVORLESS  SALT,  93 

it  will  lose  all  taste  of  salt,  and  become 
quite  useless.  So  we  may  lose  all  power 
of  arresting  sin.  Yonder  is  a  man  who 
once  stood  high  in  the  opinion  of  the 
church  and  the  world;  but  he  committed 
one  act  of  inconsistency,  and  that  has 
sealed  his  lips.  For  him  to  check  others 
is  like  Satan  rebuking  sin.  They  turn 
and  say,  Take  the  beam  out  of  thine  own 
eye  before  attempting  to  take  the  mote 
from  ours.  Here  is  another,  who  has 
no  power  to  rebuke,  because  he  is  con- 
scious of  some  secret  sin,  which  pro- 
duces indecision  in  his  manner.  In 
another  case  it  is  as  when  Lot  remon- 
strated with  the  men  of  Sodom,  and 
urged  his  children  to  escape.  He  is 
tarred  too  deeply  with  the  same  brush 
for  them  to  heed.  They  ridicule  him 
as  a  childish  dotard. 


94  SAVORLESS   SALT. 

You  cannot  salt  salt.  You  may  salt 
beef  and  mutton  and  pork,  and  a  hun- 
dred other  substances,  but  you  cannot 
salt  salt.  If  it  has  lost  its  savor  it  is 
thenceforward  good  for  nothing;  but  is 
cast  out  on  the  street,  and  trodden  un- 
der foot  of  men.  As  long  as  a  man  has 
never  passed  under  the  influence  of 
Christianity  you  may  hope  for  him  ;  but 
when  he  has  gone  into  it,  and  through 
it,  and  come  out  on  the  other  side  un- 
saved, there  is  little  to  hope  for.  He  is 
fit  neither  for  the  land,  nor  yet  for  the 
dunghill.  He  is  cast  out  as  almost 
hopeless,  so  far  as  human  judgment 
goes,  though  with  God  there  are  limit- 
less possibilities. 

Let  us  beware  of  such  a  fate,  and  live 
daily  such  straight,  strong,  pure,  noble 
lives  that  evil  may  be  abashed  in  our 


SAVORLESS  SALT,  95 

presence  *and  slink  away,  and  that  an  ar- 
rest may  be  put  on  the  plague  that  walk- 
eth  in  darkness,  and  the  pestilence  that 
wasteth  at  noonday.  And  whatever  you 
do,  keep  your  savor. 


VIII 


OUR    HO  LI  DA  YS. 


VIIL 


OUR   HOLIDAYS. 


We  need  to  have  a  pause  in  the  rush 
of  our  Ufe,  whether  by  the  seaside,  on 
the  moor,  or  in  the  green  nook  of  the 
country.  As  nature  needs  the  repose  of 
winter  after  the  exhaustion  of  her  au- 
tumn produce  to  recuperate  herself  for 
the  coming  spring,  so  do  we  need  sea- 
sons in  which  our  intellectual  and  physi- 
cal vigor,  to  say  nothing  of  the  spirit- 
ual, maybe  reinvigorated  and  renewed. 
Hence  the  need  for  summer  holidays. 
There  are  certain  directions,  however, 
which  we  should  bear  in  mind,  if  we 
99 


loo  OUR  HOLIDAYS, 

would  make  the  most  of  our  annual  va- 
cation, which  has  come  to  be  part  of  the 
yearly  programme  of  most  people. 

Be  careful  with  whom  you  traveL  It 
is  certainly  remarkable  how  amiable 
people,  for  the  most  part,  are  when  they 
are  away  from  home ;  that  is,  if  they 
have  got  their  corner  seat,  are  quite  sure 
that  their  luggage  is  safe,  and  have  got 
the  first  place  for  being  served  at  the 
dining-table.  These  conditions  being 
granted,  it  would  seem  as  if  the  mo- 
ment people  leave  their  houses  they 
put  off  all  trace  of  peevishness  and  irri- 
tation, and  array  themselves  in  the 
brightest  and  pleasantest  moods.  The 
little  child  who  asked  his  father,  when 
going  through  a  cemetery,  where  all  the 
bad  people  were  buried,  might  well  ask 
where  all  the  ill-tempered  people  take 


OUR  HOLIDAYS.  loi 

their  holiday.  It  has  been  observed 
that  if  you  meet  a  party  for  the  ascent 
of  Snowdon,  for  a  drive  on  a  coach 
through  the  Highlands,  or  for  a  picnic 
arranged  from  a  "  Hydro,''  you  will  con- 
gratulate yourself  on  having  discovered 
the  most  amiable  of  mortals. 

But  if  you  are  planning  to  spend  all 
the  time  with  another  or  others  in  the 
same  party,  to  share  with  them  the  jolts 
and  mishaps,  the  ups  and  downs,  w^hich 
are  incident  to  journeyings  at  home  and 
abroad,  you  should  be  very  careful  wliom 
you  select.  One  who  looks  on  the 
bright  side  of  things,  who  is  hopeful 
when  the  morning  opens  with  mist  or  a 
downpour  of  rain,  who  can  laugh  glee- 
fully over  a  misadventure,  and  enjoy 
contentedly  the  substitution  of  ship  bis- 
cuits for  ham  sandwiches    in    the  lun- 


I02  OUR  HOLIDAYS. 

cheon-baskets,  with  such  like  mishaps  ; 
one  who  is  capable  of  reverence  amid 
the  sublimities  of  nature,  and  who  will 
not  speak  of  the  roseate  hues  of  morn- 
ing, or  snow  with  evening  pink,  as  "  aw- 
fully jolly  -,  ''  one  who  is  capable  of 
being  quiet  and  hushed  ;  one  who,  after 
the  most  gleeful  froliC;  can  turn  naturally 
to  thoughts  of  God,  —  give  me  such  a 
companion  for  my  summer  holidays. 

Be  careful  to  take  a  good  book  with  you. 
There  are  many  books  which  we  cannot 
read  in  the  rush  of  daily  life.  It  is  well 
to  put  one  of  these  in  the  trunk;  not,  of 
course,  a  deep  theological  treatise,  or 
Balfour's  suggested  basis  for  religious 
faith,  or  a  manual  of  social  and  political 
economy,  however  closely  it  bears  on  the 
problems  of  the  day.  Apart  from  these 
there  are  books,  interesting  and  sugges- 


J 


OUR  HOLIDAYS,  1 03 

live,  stimulating  thought  and  quickening 
imagination,  which  we  can  read  without 
fatigue,  and  to  have  read  which  will 
have  made  the  holiday  memorable. 
There  are,  for  instance,  books  on  nat- 
ural investigation,  works  of  history,  bi- 
ographies, the  highest  class  of  stories. 
These  do  not  tax  the  mind  unduly,  while 
they  give  it  that  delicious  sense  of  exer- 
cise which  turns  the  current  of  the 
thought  into  new  channels,  and  leaves  a 
permanent  possession  of  information  and 
interest. 

Be  careful  io  1hi?ik  about  other  people. 
I  am  beginning  to  see  that  the  people 
who  are  always  making  for  the  best  seats 
do  not  on  the  whole  fare  better  than 
those  who  wait  their  time.  In  any  case, 
the  schemmg  and  pushing,  the  rushing 
and  dashing,  the  fever  and  excitement. 


I04  OUR   HOLIDAYS. 

the  uncomfortable  sense  of  having  acted 
selfishly,  must  deprive  selfish  folks  of 
the  power  of  tranquil  enjoyment.  To 
think  about  other  people  is  to  do  the 
best  for  yourself.  Perhaps  if  you  look 
after  the  luggage  of  that  nervous  travel- 
ler, you  may  find  your  own  in  the  van  , 
if  you  give  up  your  comfortable  corner 
for  that  little  child  to  go  to  sleep  in,  it 
is  as  likely  as  not  that  the  angels  who 
watch  it  will  contrive  to  put  you  into  a 
sound  slumber;  if  you  will  see  to  others 
getting  refreshment,  you  will  probably 
think  less  of  your  own  hunger  and  fa- 
tigue, and  there  will  be  your  share  of 
the  twelve  baskets  full  of  fragments. 
It  is  remarkable  how  often  a  kindness 
done  to  a  stranger  will  open  his  heart, 
secure  you  a  friend  who  will  show  you 
interesting  views  of  the  country  through 


OUR   HOLIDAYS.  1 05 

which  you  are  passing,  and  which  you 
must  otherwise  have  missed. 

Be  polite  and  coiirteoics  to  the  servants 
and  natives.  I  have  seen  disgraceful 
things.  I  remember  a  Saturday  night 
in  Norway,  where  the  people  of  a  quiet 
inn  were  preparing  decorously  for  the 
succeeding  day,  that  a  rowdy  party  of 
young  Englishmen  came  in  and  de- 
manded drink,  behaved  rudely  to  the 
modest  servant-girls,  shouted  boister- 
ously to  each  other,  and  turned  the 
place  into  a  bear-garden.  With  what 
little  humanity  do  many  tourists  treat 
the  tired  servants  of  the  hotels  or  inn  ! 
How  vulgarly  they  speak  to  the  people 
they  meet  on  the  roads,  discussing  their 
manners,  and  commenting  on  their  ways  ! 
What  a  conception  must  be  given  of  the 
average   life    of    English    people !    more 


lo6  OUR  HOLIDAYS. 

fond  of  a  good  dinner  than  of  a  fine 
view,  inclined  to  wrangle  over  their 
bills,  imperious  in  their  demands,  cer- 
tain that  money  will  secure  them  a  right 
of  entrance  anywhere.  On  the  other 
hand,  kind  words  and  little  courtesies 
cost  nothing,  but,  like  oil,  ease  the 
axles. 

Be  specially  careful  that  the  summer 
holiday  should  be  a  time  of  spiritual  re- 
freshme?it,  A  Christian  man  confided 
to  me  the  other  day  his  regret  that  he 
generally  came  home  from  his  summer 
vacation  worse  spiritually  than  he 
started;  and  that  it  took  him  several 
weeks  to  regain  the  old  position.  This 
arises  partly  from  the  occupation  of  our 
mind  with  the  outward,  with  the  fresh 
scenes  and  people  ;  and  thus  our  energy 
is  diverted  from  the  interior  and  eternal. 


OUR   HOLIDAYS,  1 07 

Then  our  habits  of  private  and  domestic 
prayer  are  liable  to  be  broken  in  upon 
by  the  early  morning  start  and  the  late, 
tired  return.  We  are  compelled  to  spend 
our  time  in  the  presence  of  others ;  and 
the  larger  the  party,  the  more  impossible 
to  get  alone.  Then  there  is  the  tempta- 
tion to  let  ourselves  go  into  lightness  of 
speech  and  act,  partly  induced  by  the 
exhilarating  air,  and  partly  by  the  flow 
of  high  spirits  around.  From  all  these 
causes  we  are  liable  to  lose  the  fine  tone 
of  our  spiritual  life,  and  to  get  jaded. 

To  counteract  these  influences  we  must 
get  our  half-hour,  or  hour,  alone  with 
God  and  our  Bible,  though  we  rise  a 
great  while  before  day.  We  should  have 
our  pocket  Bible  at  hand,  that  we  may 
turn  to  the  Psalms  or  the  Prophets,  as 
the  divine  comment  on  nature.     And  it 


Io8  OUR  HOLIDAYS. 

is  well  to  be  provided  with  some  helpful 
devotional  book,  the  reading  of  which 
will  direct  our  aspirations  towards  God 
and  heaven. 

To  me  the  vacation  is  generally  asso- 
ciated with  reading  a  book  or  books  of 
the  Bible  thoughtfully,  trying  to  see 
deeper  into  them  than  before  ;  and  for 
many  years  I  have  read  the  Book  of 
Revelation  though  at  that  time.  There 
is  a  special  congruity  between  the  splen- 
dor of  its  conceptions  and  the  vision  of 
ocean,  sky,  and  mountain.  It  is  well, 
when  we  have  witnessed  the  dawn  6f 
some  new  revelation,  as  well  as  of  the 
morning ;  the  great  deep  of  God's  judg- 
ments, as  well  as  the  ocean  ;  the  moun- 
tains of  his  righteousness,  as  well  as 
Snowdon,  Cader  Idris,  or  Mont  Blanc. 


IX. 

HOW     TO     SPEND     SUNDAY. 


IX. 

HOW    TO    SPEND    SUNDAY. 

"  A  Sabbath  well  spent  brings  a  week  of  content." 

So  the  old  couplet  runs,  but  the  diffi- 
culty lies  in  how  to  spend  Sunday  well. 
Too  many  seem  only  proficient  in  the  art 
of  how  not  to  do  it.  Now  I  feel  able  to 
give  some  advice  on  this  matter,  as  the 
Sundays  of  my  early  life  were  the  red- 
letter  days  of  the  whole  week ;  and  as  I 
look  back  on  them,  the  recollection  sends 
blessed  thrills  of  joy  through  my  heart. 
It  is  as  though  the  light  of  those  days, 
their  fragrance  and  dew,  lie  still  in  the 
garden  of  my  soul,  where  I   now  walk 


112        HOW  TO  SPEND   SUNDAY. 

with  the  many  concerns  and  added  in- 
terests of  manhood. 

The  art  of  making  Sunday  a  happy 
day,  if  art  there  was,  on  the  part  of  my 
parents,  lay  in  their  sharing  its  hours 
with  the  whole  family.  There  was  no 
exclusiveness,  no  withdrawing  from  the 
general  life  for  selfish  purposes,  no  sign 
that  the  children  were  a  bother,  to  be 
got  out  of  the  way  as  expeditiously  and 
for  as  long  a  period  as  possible.  This 
is  where  so  many  families  go  wrong.  The 
children  are  sent  off  to  the  nursery  to 
spend  the  time  with  servants,  who  may 
have  little  interest  in  them  or  religion, 
or  dismissed  to  the  Sunday-school,  that 
the  parents  may  have  unbroken  leisure 
for  sleep  or  pleasure.  It  is  the  only  day 
in  the  week  I  can  get  for  myself,  says 
the   father.     It  is  the   only  day  in  the 


HOW   TO  SPEND   SUNDAY,         1 13 

week  that  I  can  have  my  husband  to 
myself,  says  the  mother.  It  is  the  only 
opportunity  we  have  of  seeing  our  friends, 
say  both.  And  so  the  children  are  left 
to  their  own  devices ;  and  on  those  Sun- 
day afternoons,  however  unconsciously, 
the  seeds  of  bitter  harvests  are  sown. 
Directly  self  comes  into  the  first  place 
in  the  home-life,  we  begin  to  prepare  for 
ourselves  almost  interminable  pains  in 
after  years.  The  path  of  safety  and  true 
happiness  is  in  seeking  the  well-being  of 
those  around,  from  the  smallest  babe  to 
the  most  unkempt  servant  who  has  come 
under  the  shelter  of  our  roof. 

A  well-spent  Sunday  must  not  begin 
with  self-indulgent  lying  in  bed.  Of 
course  breakfast  may  be  a  little  later, 
and  the  very  essence  of  a  happy  Sunday 
lies  in  everything  being  different  from 


114        HOW   TO  SPEND  SUNDAY. 

every  other  day  of  the  week ;  but  when 
the  hour  has  been  fixed,  it  should  be  kept. 
It  makes  such  a  difference  when  the 
father,  mother,  and  children  are  all  to 
time,  and  can  begin  breakfast  together. 
May  I  not  here  put  in  a  strong  plea  for 
family  prayers  on  this,  if  on  no  other, 
day  of  the  week  ?  Where  the  father  is 
absent  on  business,  as  a  commercial,  or 
before  breakfast,  as  a  mechanic,  it  is  not 
possible  for  the  whole  family  to  gather 
at  the  family  altar ;  and  there  is  the 
more  reason  why,  on  Sunday  morning, 
the  father  should  take  his  true  position 
as  head  and  priest  of  his  house  gathered 
before  God.  Why  should  not  each  child 
say  a  text,  mother  and  father  and  servant 
doing  the  same  ?  In  one  family  in  Edin- 
burgh, where  I  love  to  be,  the  father, 
a  professor  in  the  University,  reads  his 


NOW   TO   SPEND  SUNDAY.         II5 

verse  in  the  selected  chapter,  then  each 
of  the  children,  and  the  baby-boy  on  his 
knee  repeats  his  after  his  father,  and 
finally  each  of  the  servants,  down  to  the 
last  boy  who  has  come  in  to  black  boots, 
or  to  the  Scotch  sewing-lassie  wdth  her 
broad  accent.  But  how  ennobling  it  is 
for  them  all  to  take  this  audible  part ! 

After  breakfast  our  mother  used  to 
read  to  us,  and  give  us  references  to  find 
in  our  Bibles.  We  began,  away  back  as 
far  as  I  can  remember,  with  Peep  of  Day., 
then  Line  upon  Liiie.,  Cobbin  ^s  Commentary, 
and  so  upward.  In  many  cases  I  sup- 
pose the  children  of  your  families  will  go 
to  Sunday-school,  instead  of  this  home 
Bible-class ;  but  where  it  is  so,  let  me 
put  in  an  earnest  word  in  favor  of  the 
young  people  meeting  their  parents,  when 
the  school  is  over,  and  sitting  beside  them 


Il6        HOW   TO   SPEND   SUNDAY, 

during  the  service  in  the  house  of  God. 
If  they  sit  with  the  Sunday-school  chil- 
dren, the  fidgetting  around  will  be  almost 
certain  to  divert  their  minds ;  besides 
which,  most  churches  relegate  the  poor 
children  to  the  farthest  and  most  uncom- 
fortable parts  of  the  building,  —  a  dis- 
tant gallery,  with  hard  seats  and  high 
backs,  —  as  if  little  bodies  never  wearied, 
and  little  minds  didn't  find  it  hard  to 
strain  for  the  preacher's  far-travelled 
voice.  What  a  reversal  of  matters  would 
take  place  if  the  Lord  were  to  take  direc- 
tion !  I  believe  he  would  send  all  the 
people  who  occupy  the  best  positions 
packing  from  their  comfortable  seats, 
which  make  them  so  drowsy,  into  the 
uncushioned  gallery,  and  call  all  the 
happy  children  down  to  the  best  softly 
cushioned  pews,   where   he   could   keep 


HOW   TO   SPEND   SUNDAY.         1 1? 

them  well  in  sight,  and  hold  their  quick 
eyes  fixed  on  his  all  the  time. 

If  the  father  would  let  the  boy  sit  next 
him,  and  find  the  places,  and  write  the 
text  out  during  the  sermon,  if  he  were 
too  young  to  attend,  and  make  a  com- 
fortable place  for  his  head  if  he  got 
sleepy;  and  if  the  mother  could  take 
the  little  girl's  hand  in  hers,  to  say  noth- 
ing of  passing  surreptitiously  a  little  piece 
of  sugar-candy  to  keep  her  from  cough- 
ing (!),  I  cannot  but  think  that  those  Sun- 
day services  would  not  be  so  great  a 
weariness,  but  in  after  years  w^ould  be 
recalled  with  pleasure  by  the  lonely  trav- 
eller in  the  backwoods,  or  the  shepherd 
amid  the  Australian  wolds. 

In  many  cases  the  wife  must  stop  at 
home  and  prepare  the  dinner,  and,  with 
a  little  management,  a  hot  dinner  need 


Il8        HOW   TO   SPEND   SUNDAY. 

not  take  more  time  than  a  cold  one.  We 
always  had  a  sirloin  of  beef  and  roast 
potatoes.  Through  a  long  course  of 
years,  without  a  single  variation,  that 
was  so.  Even  now,  when  I  eat  sirloin 
of  beef,  especially  the  undercut,  I  have 
a  kind  of  Sunday  feeling.  I  remember 
that  my  father  always  had  to  turn  the 
joint  upside  down,  and  that  it  was  an 
exciting  moment  for  us  all,  lest  he  should 
splash  a  drop  of  gravy  over  the  clean 
cloth.  If  a  drop  did  go  over,  my  mother 
hastened,  with  a  palliating  excuse,  and 
applied, salt,  for  what  reason  I  have  not 
the  remotest  idea ;  but  it  served  as  a 
temporary  expedient,  and  covered  the 
mishap.  These  things  may  appear  triv- 
ial, but  they  always  were  associated 
with  Sunday,  and  that  made  them  mem- 
orable. 


HOW   TO  SPEND  SUNDAY,         II9 

Have  plenty  of  singing  on  Sunday. 
During  the  afternoon  we  read  our  books 
or  stories,  but,  as  half-past  four  arrived, 
we  felt  that  the  climax  of  the  day  had 
come.  My  mother  was  not  a  pianist, 
but  she  could  just  get  through  the  tunes 
of  the  old  Psalmist ;  so  she  played,  and 
my  father  sat  beside  her,  and  sapg  with 
his  deep  bass  voice,  and  I  stood  beside 
him  and  took  the  air,  and  my  sister  sang 
too.  We  always  had,  ''  How  sweet  the 
Name,"  "  Guide  me,  O  thou  great  Jeho- 
vah "  (to  "Mariners"),  and,  very  often, 
"  Around  the  throne  of  God  in  heaven," 
in  memory  of  a  little  angel  sister.  Why 
should  not  all  the  homes  into  which 
this  little  volume  comes  start  half-an- 
hour's  song-service  each  Sunday  ?  But 
the  father  and  mother  must  themselves 
take  part. 


I20        HOIV   TO  SPEND   SUNDAY. 

Then  tea ;  and  after  tea  we  said  a 
hymn  all  round ;  and,  as  I  got  older,  I 
was  encouraged  to  read  what  I  had 
written  of  the  morning  sermon.  And 
so  the  blessed  day  passed  to  its  close. 
If  old  enough,  there  was  the  evening 
service  and  supper  (oh,  the  rapture  of 
sitting  up  to  eat  a  potato  in  its  jacket, 
with  a  pat  of  butter  inside,  with  pepper 
and  salt !).  Again  you  say,  very  trivial, 
and  quite  unworthy  of  occupying  the 
space  here,  or  the  time  of  the  writer, 
who,  at  fifty  years  of  age,  should  care 
for  something  better.  Well,  reader,  you 
may  say  what  you  like,  but  these  sim- 
ple things  made  Sunday  the  day  of 
days,  and  became  the  seeds  which  have 
yielded  harvests  of  content  and  blessed- 
ness. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  gad  about  from  one 


HOW    TO  SPEND  SUNDAY.         121 

minister  to  another.  It  begets  a  critical 
and  captious  spirit,  and  leads  one  to 
subordinate  the  worship  of  the  sanctuary 
to  the  sermon.  Find  out  the  minister 
who,  on  the  whole,  helps  you  most,  and 
the  church  which  needs  you  most,  and 
concentrate  your  time  and  thought  on 
these.  Never  criticise  the  preacher  be- 
fore your  children,  and  encourage  them 
to  remember  and  repeat  what  they  can. 
Would  that  preachers  would  contrive  to 
drop  a  few  handfuls  on  purpose  for  the 
weary  little  listeners,  whose  eyes  would 
glisten  if  their  story  were  to  be  dropped 
into  the  discourse  ;  and  the  parents  would 
be  proud  to  explain  that  ^^our  minister 
always  thinks  of  the  children." 

It  is  very  important  that  habits  of 
reverence  be  inculcated  in  children. 

"  Why  do  I  make  you  boys  shut  your 


122         HOW   TO  SPEND   SUNDAY. 

eyes  in  prayer  ?  "  asked  a  young  lady  of 
my  congregation,  of  her  class  of  ragged 
boys.  Instantly  two  or  three  ragged 
arms  went  up,  and  one  sharp  youngster 
answered,  — , 

"To  teach  us  manners,  ma'am." 
Was  it  not  exactly  true  ?  The  manners 
of  the  heavenly  court  are  as  exacting 
as  those  of  the  Queen's  drawing-room, 
and  it  is  well  to  begin  early  enough  to 
inculcate  them.  Be  in  time  at  service; 
be  reverent  in  your  demeanor  ;  take  part 
in  all  you  can ;  if  you  cannot  sing,  make 
a  joyful  noise  ;  and  never  allow  the  Bi- 
ble, or  anything  that  belongs  to  God,  to 
be  made  a  subject  for  witticism  in  your 
presence. 

Sunday  company  is,  on  the  whole,  to 
be  eschewed.  But,  if  friends  drop  in,  ask 
them  to  fall  in  with  your  usual  routine ; 


MO IV   TO  SPEND   SUNDAY.  1 23 

and  with  them,  or  in  their  absence,  let 
the  conversation  be  tinctured,  as  far 
as  possible,  with  the  spirit  of  the  day. 
My  parents  never  talked  familiarly  of 
God,  but,  somehow,  there  was  a  Sunday 
air  about  the  conversation ;  and  certain 
subjects,  such  as  business,  or  pleasure- 
seeking,  or  story-books,  would  seem  in- 
congruous. But  there  was  no  restraint, 
no  gloom,  no  Pharisaism,  nothing  irk- 
some and  tedious.  To  look  happy,  to 
dress  in  our  best,  to  sing,  to  talk  cheer- 
fully about  all  that  interested  us,  this 
was  the  high  and  happy  key-note  of  our 
family  life  on  this  best  and  brightest  of 
days. 

Once  more  I  crave  indulgence  if  I 
have  been  too  personal  in  reciting  these 
remembrances  of  the  past,  but  my  mo- 
tive has  been  at  least  innocent  and  trans- 


124         HOW   TO   SPEND   SUNDAY, 

parent ;  for  what  has  been  may  be  done 
again,  and  it  seemed  better  to  photo- 
graph the  dear  old  past  than  to  produce 
a  fancy  picture  which  might  seem  rather 
a  dream  than  a  possibility. 


X. 

AMUSEMENTS. 


X. 


AMUSEMENTS. 

This  difficulty  about  amusements, 
where  to  go  and  where  not  to  go,  is  not 
a  new  one.  It  agitated  the  Christians 
at  Corinth  centuries  ago  as  it  agitates 
us ;  and  led  up  to  one  of  those  questions 
which  the  Apostle  answered  in  his  first 
epistle. 

Dean  Farrar,  in  his  graphic  style,  ex- 
plains the  difficulty  and  perplexity  of 
their  position.  They  were  daily  living 
in  the  great  wicked  streets,  in  sight  and 
hearing  of  everything  that  could  quench 
spiritual  aspirations  and  kindle  carnal 
desires.  The  gay,  common  life  pressed 
127 


1 28  AMUSEMENTS, 

on  them  so  closely,  the  splendid  vision 
of  Christ's  advent  seemed  so  far  away, 
might  they  not  mingle  with  the  heathen 
festivals,  join  in  the  gay  processions, 
watch  the  dancing-girls,  or  take  part  in 
the  fun  and  frolic  of  the  voluptuous  city  ? 
Were  they  to  live  always  on  the  heavenly 
manna,  and  never  taste  the  onion,  leek, 
and  garlic  of  Egypt  ?  Were  they  never 
again  to  drink  of  the  foaming  cup  of 
earthly  pleasure,  and  mingle  in  the 
dance,  the  feast,  the  pantomimic  show  ? 

In  answer  to  these  difficulties,  the 
Apostle  laid  down  two  principles,  which 
contain  between  them  the  very  light  we 
need  to  enable  us  to  pick  our  pathway 
through  the  world,  to  teach  us  how  to 
act  with  regard  to  the  thorny  question 
of  amusements. 

"  All  things  are  lawful  for  me,  but  not 


AMUSEMENTS.  1 29 

all  things  are  expedient:  all  things  are 
lawful  for  me,  but  I  will  not  he  brought 
under  the  power  of  any  ''  (i  Cor.  vi.  12). 

^^AU  things  are  lawful,  but  all  things 
are  not  expedient ;  all  things  are  law- 
ful, but  all  things  edify  not.  Let  no  ma7i 
seek  his  own.,  but  each  his  neighbor's  good'' 
(i  Cor.  X.  23,  24). 

We  must  have  recreation,  times  when 
jaded  nerves  recuperate  themselves,  and 
tired  brains  turn  from  their  absorbing 
thoughts  to  lighter  themes.  We  shall 
perform  the  serious  work  of  life  more 
successfully  if  we  have  seasons  of  res- 
pite. We  shall  breast  the  Hill  Diffi- 
culty more  energetically  after  seasons  of 
rest  in  the  Arbor  of  Ease.  Our  many- 
stringed  nature  craves  for  seasons  when 
laughter,  song,  and  enjoyment  may  take 
the  harp  of  life   and   sweep   its   lighter 


130  AMUSEMENTS. 

chords.  And  surely  Nature's  gayer 
moods,  when  Spring  scatters  her  flowers, 
or  Summer  is  ripening  the  year's  pro- 
duce, suggests,  as  Milton  tells  us  in  his 
immortal  L' Allegro^  the  relaxation  of  the 
severer  strain  of  business  toil.  Little 
children,  with  their  ringing  laughter, 
their  keen  appreciation  of  mirth  and 
frolic,  their  demand  for  good  times, 
arouse  us  from  our  pensive  melancholy 
and  laborious  toils,  quickening  our 
pulses,  awakening  our  laughter,  and 
giving  us  an  excuse,  which  we  are  not 
loth  to  snatch,  for  casting  aside  the 
serious  business  of  life,  and  taking  a 
brief  spell  of  pleasure.  Then  the  per- 
petual question  arises.  How  far  is  all 
this  lawful  and  expedient.^  what  should 
be  our  attitude  as  Christians  to  amuse- 
ment ?     There  are  several  principles  to 


AMUSEMENTS,  1 3 1 

guide  us,  but  the  iiltimate  decision  must 
ever  remain  with  the  individual ;  and  it 
is  by  our  action  on  the  debatable  ground 
of  twilight,  between  the  clearly  defined 
territories  of  absolute  light  or  darkness, 
that  the  most  of  us  are  made  or  marred. 
First  :  We  must  7iot  be  enslaved  by  any 
form  of  pleasure.  The  Apostle  vowed 
that  he  would  not  be  brought  under  the 
power  of  anything,  however  lawful  or  in- 
nocent it  might  be  in  itself.  It  is  mar- 
vellous how  easy  it  is  to  become  enslaved 
to  forms  of  pleasure-taking  which  in 
themselves  are  perfectly  harmless  and 
natural.  A  man  may  be  so  intoxicated 
with  golf  or  cricket,  a  woman  so  fasci- 
nated with  lawn-tennis  or  bicycling,  that 
they  are  spoiled  for  all  the  practical  bus- 
iness of  life ;  and  at  the  call  of  their 
favorite    pastime,   will    at    any    moment 


132  AMUSEMENTS. 

renounce  the  most  urgent  and  press- 
ing engagements.  It  seems  as  if  they 
can  think,  dream,  and  plan  for  nothing 
else. 

When  this  is  the  case,  whether  the 
form  of  amusement  be  one  of  those 
healthy  out-of-door  pursuits  already 
named,  or  the  more  hurtful  absorption 
in  the  theatre,  the  ball,  or  the  music- 
hall  ;  when  what  should  be  only  the 
means  to  an  end  becomes  an  end  in  it- 
self ;  when  we  feel  our  best  energies 
withdrawn  from  the  serious  demands  of 
life,  and  dissipated  in  its  flotsam  and 
jetsam ;  when  our  soul  is  engrossed  by 
the  handling  of  a  bat,  the  striking  of  a 
ball,  the  swiftness  of  a  machine,  —  it  is 
time  to  pull  up  and  consider  which  way 
we  are  drifting.  Surely  life  was  given 
for  higher  purposes  than  these,  and  if  it 


AMUSEMENTS.  133 

be  said  that  all  such  pastimes  react  on 
the  health  and  agility  of  the  body,  still 
we  must  reply,  that  at  the  best  the  body 
is  only  the  organ  and  instrument  of  the 
soul,  and  that  it  must  be  kept  under 
and  made  subservient  to  those  lofty  pur- 
poses which  the  soul  conceives  in  its 
secret  place  and  executes  in  life's  arena. 

Next:  We  must  have  a7i  eye  to  others. 
There  are  forms  of  amusement  which 
we  cannot  indulge  in  without  helping  to 
destroy  the  souls  of  others.  They  not 
only  do  not  build  up,  but  they  destroy 
the  work  of  God.  We  have  no  right  to 
jeopardize  the  eternal  interests  of  those 
who  copy  our  example  or  who  minister 
to  our  enjoyment. 

Paul  says  that,  so  far  as  he  was  con- 
cerned, he  felt  at  liberty  to  accept  an  in- 
vitation to  a  meal  in  the  precincts  of  an 


134  AMUSEMENTS. 

idol-temple ;  but  that  he  would  not  go 
lest  the  weak  conscience  of  some  fellow 
Christian  should  be  defiled.  Our  atti- 
tude towards  certain  places  of  amuse- 
ment and  pastimes  should  be  determined 
by  our  considering  whether  we  would 
wish  those  who  take  their  cue  from  our 
example  to  follow  us  thither.  What 
effect  will  my  conduct  have  on  my  chil- 
dren, my  young  brothers  and  sisters,  the 
scholars  in  my  Sunday-school  class,  and 
others  who  are  not  as  strong  as  I  am 
to  resist  the  pernicious  influences  that 
are  associated  with  this  special  form  of 
amusement.^  Let  me  remember  that 
young  life  is  behind  me,  and  though,  as 
an  experienced  mountaineer,  I  might 
take  the  more  precipitous  route,  for  their 
sake  I  must  follow  the  safe  path. 

Besides,  we  must  consider  whether  the 


AMUSEMENTS.  135 

effect  of  some  system  that  gives  us  pleas- 
ure may  not  be  in  the  highest  degree 
deleterious  in  its  effect  on  those  who 
minister  to  our  laughter  or  love  of  spec- 
tacular display.  Have  we  any  right,  for 
our  pleasure,  to  hold  out  baits  of  money 
to  young  girls  or  children  or  others,  to 
jeopardize  body  and  soul,  and  spend 
their  days  on  the  edge  of  the  precipice  ? 
"All  things  edify  not,"  said  the  Apostle, 
and  we  must  seek  not  only  our  own  but 
another's  weal. 

On  the  whole,  simple  and  ftatural pleas- 
ures ai^e  the  best.  The  skate  over  the 
frozen  pond,  rather  than  the  dance  in 
the  over-heated  ball-room ;  the  family 
party,  with  its  olden  games,  rather  than 
the  scenic  representation  of  music-hall 
or  theatre  ;  the  real  rather  than  the  arti- 
ficial, the  day  rather  than  midnight,  the 


136  AMUSEMENTS. 

dear  ones  of  the  home  rather  than  the 
society  of  strangers.  Let  every  one  have 
a  hobby ;  let  every  one  become  profi- 
cient in  some  branch  of  natural  science 
or  history ;  let  every  one  do  something 
well,  be  it  to  handle  the  oar  or  alpen- 
stock, to  use  the  camera,  glide  over  the 
ringing  ice,  or  climb  the  beetling  crag. 
Let  this  man  collect  geological  speci- 
mens, and  that  flowers  or  ferns,  and  that 
curiosities  from  various  countries  and 
people.  But  let  there  be  some  control- 
ling interest,  which  shall  give  occupation 
in  the  summer  ramble,  or  the  snatch  of 
foreign  travel,  and  shall  afford  amuse- 
ment in  recollection,  arrangement,  and 
comparison,  when  the  long  winter  even- 
ings would  hang  heavily  on  hand. 

Whatever  does  not  leave  a  wry  taste 
in  our   mouth,  nor   causes   a   feeling  of 


AMUSEMENTS.  137 

compunction  and  regret  as  we  review  it, 
nor  exerts  a  baleful  effect  on  those  who 
minister  to  our  enjoyment,  nor  unfits  us 
for  prayer  and  communion  with  God, 
nor  so  dazzles  and  blinds  us  that  we  can 
find  no  pleasure  in  the  simple  delights 
of  home  and  natural  beauty ;  whatever 
is  wholesome  and  health-giving ;  what- 
ever is  capable  of  being  presented  to 
God  in  prayer  as  the  object  of  his  bless- 
ing ;  whatever  is  in  harmony  with  the 
tender,  holy,  unselfish,  and  blessed  na- 
ture of  Jesus,  —  is  an  amusement  which 
we  may  gladly  avail  ourselves  of ;  and 
it  shall  be  to  us  as  the  whetting  of  the 
scythe  amid  the  mower's  toils,  and  as 
the  mending  of  the  nets  torn  by  the 
midnight  fishing-cruise. 


XL 

THE    USE    OF    THE    SENSES. 


XL 

THE    USE    OF    THE    SENSES. 

Our  senses  give  warning  signals  when 
danger  is  near.  This  is  perhaps  their 
secondary  use,  but  it  is  the  most  vital. 
The  eye,  ear,  nose,  the  senses  of  taste 
and  touch,  are  the  channels  through 
which  the  most  exquisite  pleasures  are 
wafted  to  us  —  rapturous  glimpses  of 
natural  beauty,  sweet  sounds,  fragrant 
scents,  delicious  viands,  and  soft  con- 
tacts ;  but  they  are  also  the  avenues 
along  which  ride  post-haste  the  couriers, 
warning  of  the  approach  of  assassins 
that  menace  and  imperil  life.  For  the 
141 


142        THE    USE    OF    THE   SENSES, 

most  part  what  is  inimical  to  health  is 
odious  and  distasteful  to  our  senses,  and 
the  quicker  these  become  the  more  likely 
we  are  to  preserve  the  springs  of  life 
from  being  poisoned  and  vitiated. 

We  are  told  in  more  than  one  Scrip- 
ture, and  notably  in  Heb.  v.  14,  that 
there  are  spiritual  counterparts  to  our 
senses,  and  that  we  should  exercise  these 
to  discern  good  and  evil.  It  is  highly 
important  to  do  so  ;  for  as  attention  to 
the  warning  of  the  physical  senses  will 
preserve  the  health  of  our  body,  so  atten- 
tion to  the  warnings  of  our  inner  senses 
will  forewarn  and  forearm  against  the  in- 
fluences that  are  hostile  to  spiritual  life. 

Take  the  Ear  of  the  SouL  In  the  case 
of  the  savage  the  ear  is  trained  to  such 
precision  as  to  detect  the  footfall  of  a 
stranger  at   an   immense  distance ;  and 


THE    USE   OP    THE  SENSES.        143 

in  the  case  of  the  trained  musician  to 
discriminate  between  the  most  delicate 
shades  of  sound.  Indeed,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  train  a  singer  for  a  place 
in  the  front  rank  of  the  profession  whose 
ear  was  not  extremely  delicate  and  sen- 
sitive ;  and  natural  gifts  in  this  direction 
may  be  still  further  trained  to  almost  any 
degree  of  nicety.  If  the  ear  is  not  sen- 
sitive to  the  slightest  discord,  the  voice 
can  never  be  modulated  to  the  finest 
harmonies. 

And  is  there  anything  more  necessary 
than  to  have  the  inner  ear  trained  and 
exercised  by  contact  with  the  Divine 
notes  of  an  infinite  charity  !  You  may 
hear  people  talking  most  discordantly 
with  this,  criticising  their  neighbors,  dis- 
cussing their  friends,  uttering  sharp  and 
unkind  judgments,  all  of  which  would  be 


144        THE    USE   OF    THE   SENSES. 

impossible  if  their  ears  had  only  been 
educated  to  detect  the  discords  of  their 
speech.  But  they  talk  on  for  years  in 
utter  oblivion  of  their  false  and  disso- 
nant notes.  Amid  so  much  discordance 
let  us  constantly  seek  for  a  pure  ear, 
which  will  tell  us  in  a  moment  when  we 
have  spoken  a  single  word  that  is  incon- 
sistent with  the  perfect  harmonies  of  the 
nature  of  God,  which  is  love. 

The  Eye  of  the  Soul.  The  eye  detects 
the  approach  of  danger,  and,  in  the  case 
of  a  savage,  can  do  so  in  symptoms 
which  are  altogether  meaningless  to  the 
ordinary  vision.  That  bent  blade  of 
grass,  that  snapt  twig,  that  almost  im- 
perceptible trail !  Away  on  the  moun- 
tain side  the  trained  observer  can  see 
masses  of  troops  where  another  finds 
only  the  shadows  of  passing  clouds. 


THE    USE   OF    THE   SENSES.        145 

But  the  training  of  the  eye  of  the  soul 
is  even  more  necessary,  because  it  can 
anticipate  the  advent  of  temptation.  It 
is  bad  when  we  have  no  warning  of  the 
stealthy  approach  of  our  worst  adversary, 
till  like  a  midnight  assassin  he  has  broken 
into  the  house  of  our  life.  Well  is  it 
when  we  can  descry  the  gathering  storm 
when  it  is  still  on  the  horizon,  so  as  to 
reef  our  sails  in  time  ajid  be  prepared 
for  the  squall ;  when  we  can  detect  the 
pitfall  before  we  come  to  it ;  and  see  the 
brigand  gang  lying  in  wait  before  we 
reach  the  dark  thicket ;  and  anticipate 
complications  and  perplexities  before  we 
are  amid  them.  By  that  clear  prescience 
which  is  not  the  least  of  God's  gifts  we 
are  the  more  likely  to  pass  unscathed 
through  life's  ordeal  because  more  able  to 
appeal  beforehand  to  Christ  for  succor. 


146        THE    USE   OF    THE  SENSES. 

The  Scent  of  the  SouL  It  is  good  to 
have  a  keen  sense  of  smell ;  it  will  save 
us  from  many  a  noisome  pestilence  aris- 
ing from  the  drain,  or  brooding  in  the 
plague-laden  air.  If  it  were  not  for  this 
invaluable  gift,  we  might  linger  and 
sleep  amid  deadly  gases,  unconscious  of 
the  peril  we  w^re  incurring.  It  is  well  to 
have  this  sense  exercised.  I  remember 
once,  after  a  voyage  across  the  Atlantic, 
visiting  friends,  who  were  spending 
their  summer  holidays  within  a  mile  of 
a  sewage  farm,  the  near  neighborhood 
of  which  was  not  noticeable  to  them, 
but  to  which  the  pure  ozone  of  the  ocean 
had  made  me  extremely  sensitive. 

If  our  soul's  sense  of  smell  were  more 
keen,  we  should  be  quicker  to  perceive 
when  there  was  impurity  in  the  speech  or 
behavior  of  our  companions,  and  should 


THE    USE   OP    THE  SENSES.        147 

turn  from  them  with  disgust.  The  pure 
lad  would  blush  and  hasten  from  the  way 
of  the  ungodly  and  the  seat  of  the  scorn- 
ful. The  highly  spiritual  and  nobly  tem- 
pered woman  would  take  no  pleasure  in 
the  double  allusions  of  the  music-hall,  or 
the  highly  spiced  conversation  of  chil- 
dren of  fashion.  The  pure  in  heart 
would  rush  from  the  obscenity  and  oaths 
with  which  too  much  of  the  talk  of  so- 
called  gentlemen  is  interlarded,  as  if 
they  had  suddenly  become  aware  of  the 
presence  of  an  open  sewer. 

The  Taste  of  the  Soul,  The  sense  of 
taste  sits  as  a  sentinel  at  the  entrance 
of  the  alimentary  canal  to  prevent  hurt- 
ful and  deleterious  substances  from  en- 
tering. How  often  has  our  first  bite  of 
some  fruit  or  food  led  us  to  eject  it  from 
our  mouth  with  disgust,  thereby  saving 


14^        THE    USE    OF    THE   SENSES. 

our  life !  The  rule  is  not  invariable. 
There  are  substances  which  are  most 
distasteful,  but  are  nevertheless  good  as 
medicines,  and  palatable  things  are 
sometimes  harmful  to  a  degree ;  still,  as 
a  general  rule,  the  palate  may  be  trusted. 
Now,  how  much  evil  might  we  be 
saved  from,  if  only  the  taste  of  the  soul 
were  more  highly  educated  in  respect  to 
the  books  which  come  into  our  hands. 
How  often  do  young  and  inexperienced 
minds  devour  from  beginning  to  end 
books,  novels,  treatises,  which  are  highly 
inimical  to  their  soul-life.  If  only  they 
knew  how  to  distinguish  between  good 
and  evil,  if  only  they  could  detect  the 
subtle  poison  that  had  been  instilled  into 
those  pages  from  the  fangs  of  the  great 
serpent,  if  only  they  were  on  the  alert  to 
reject  that  which  blasts  and  blights  the 


THE    USE   OF    THE   SENSES.        149 

delicate  growth  of  the  better  life,  —  how 
much  suffering  and  consumption  would 
be  averted! 

The  SouVs  Sense  of  Touch,  The  touch 
may  be  brought  to  an  amazing  degree  of 
perfection,  and  become  so  sensitive  that 
it  can  distinguish  between  the  slightest 
variations  in  fabric  or  temperature.  In 
members  of  the  feline  tribe  —  the  cat  or 
tiger  —  this  sense  is  developed  to  its 
fullest  perfection.  But  in  man  also  it 
may  become  extremely  acute. 

Would  that  we  might  have  that  same 
sensitiveness  to  right  and  wrong,  that 
we  might  with  a  touch  be  able  to  discern 
the  one  from  the  other,  and  have  grace 
enough  to  accept  the  good  and  reject  the 
evil.  As  the  experienced  hand  can  tell 
in  a  moment  when  a  coin  is  light  or  not, 
so  we  might  know  whether  a  doctrine  or 


150        THE    USE   OF    THE   SENSES. 

statement  tallied  with   the   standard   of 
God's  truth  or  fell  beneath  it. 

These  distinctions  are  not  to  be  learned 
in  a  moment.  We  may  train  our  facul- 
ties from  less  to  more  ;  by  reason  of  use 
they  may  be  exercised  ;  when  the  Spirit 
comes  on  us  we  shall,  like  our  Master, 
be  "quick  of  scent."  But' it  is  certain 
that  we  cannot  long  preserve  the  fine 
temper  of  the  soul  in  such  a  world  as 
this  unless  we  carefully  attend  to  the 
least  monitions  of  the  Divine  Spirit  op- 
erating through  the  senses  of  the  soul. 


XII. 

CHRISTMAS. 


XII. 


CHRISTMAS. 


Here  again !  Welcome,  thrice  wel- 
come !  The  darkest,  shortest  days  of 
the  year  are  an  appropriate  season  to 
select  for  the  Yule-log,  the  good  cheer, 
the  home-gatherings,  the  presents  and 
gifts  of  young  and  old,  which  Christmas 
brings  ! 

The  Yule-log  I  How  we  love  it !  For 
ordinary  days  the  coal-fire  is  good 
enough ;  but,  oh,  the  spluttering,  the 
crackling,  the  blue  elfish  flame  of  the 
Christmas  log!  We  need  no  candle  or 
gas-light,  when  the  flame  has  caught  it 
153 


154  CHRISTMAS. 

in  its  lambent  arms,  and  creeps  along  its 
edges,  and  eats  into  its  heart.  How  hard 
that  knot  is  fighting  !  What  a  flare  that 
resinous  oil  makes !  How  sweet  the 
scent,  and  fitful  the  light  which  rises 
and  falls  and  flickers  !  Now  is  the  time 
to  gather  round  for  one  brief  hour  of 
blessed,  happy  home-talk,  between  the 
lights  —  the  light  of  the  short  winter  day 
and  the  artificial  light  that  must  soon  be 
brought  in  for  the  evening's  work. 

There  should  be  no  secrets  in  the  fam- 
ily circle.  The  interests  of  each  are  those 
of  all,  and  in  the  happy  intercourse  of  the 
circle  gathered  round  the  flickering  log, 
the  common  life  gets  illustrated  and 
illuminated  by  quip  and  crank,  by  joke 
and  tease,  by  the  original  saying  of  Ihe 
little  child,  and  the  wise  counsel  of  the 
father.     It  reminds  me  of  those  old  mis- 


CHRISTMAS.  155 

sals,  whose  stern  black  letter-press  is  ac- 
companied by  the  gorgeous  margin,  with 
faces  and  figures,  flowers  and  fruits, 
dogs,  monkeys,  birds,  and  animals,  friars 
and  monks,  kings  and  queens,  babes  and 
angels. 

Happy  are  the  children  who  are  born 
into  large  families.  It  is  rare  that  an 
only  child  reaches  its  fullest  develop- 
ment. There  is  a  play,  a  reciprocal 
influence,  a  chipping-off  of  corners,  a 
balancing,  a  taking-off  of  peculiarities,  a 
taking-down  of  pride,  in  a  large  family, 
which  are  priceless.  The  children  are 
sure  to  pair  off  in  twos,  who  will  fight 
for  one  another  against  the  rest,  and  ex- 
change endless  confidences ;  but,  never- 
theless, the  interchange  of  repartee  and 
badinage  between  each  with  all  will  go 
freely  forward,  and  each  member  of  the 


156  CHRISTMAS. 

family  will  appropriate  spoils  from  the 
rest.  Such  free  trade  in  one  another's 
characteristics  prospers  best  in  the  light 
of  the  Yule-log. 

The  Good  Cheer  I  You  tell  me  that 
there  is  waste  and  over-eating,  and  ask 
me  to  rebuke  the  busy  housewives  with 
their  market-baskets  and  bargains,  their 
turkeys,  geese,  plum-puddings,  and  mince 
pies.  Well,  of  course,  there  should  be  no 
extravagance ;  and  we  have  no  right  to 
surfeit  ourselves  when  the  poor  are  starv- 
ing at  our  doors.  Before  we  sit  down  to 
our  Christmas  meals,  we  must  provide 
portions  for  those  that  are  without.  Ma- 
terials for  good  dinners  must  be  sent  to 
poor  families  who  live  in  our  immediate 
neighborhood,  or  our  less  prosperous  rel- 
atives; the  charwoman  that  comes  once 
a  week,  the  widowed  mother  of  the  boy 


CHRISTMAS.  157 

who  brings  the  daily  paper,  the  family  of 
the  poor  crossing-sweep,  the  respectable 
old  couple  that  are  trying  to  keep  them- 
selves respectable  and  to  avoid  as  long 
as  possible  the  workhouse,  or  the  strug- 
gling needlewoman  whose  customers  will 
not  pay  what  they  owe.  Do  not  be 
content  with  giving  your  guinea  to  the 
church  or  parish  fund,  but  find  out  the 
needy  and  distressed,  and  with  your  own 
hand  minister  to  their  need.  And  then, 
with  an  easy  conscience,  you  may  sit 
down  to  your  well-spread  board. 

For  my  part,  I  like  to  see  the  butchers' 
shops  with  the  prize-meat,  the  poulterers' 
with  turkeys,  geese,  and  chickens,  hang- 
ing in  rich  profusion,  the  pastry-cook 
windows  with  their  frosted  cakes,  and 
the  grocers'  with  their  dried  fruits  and 
candies,  their  teas  and  sugars,  and  all  the 


15S  CHRISTMAS. 

cunning  enticements  to  mothers,  sisters, 
wives,  and  daughters,  to  provide  Christ- 
mas cheer.  And  then  that  great  event 
in  the  housewife's  year,  the  Christmas 
dinner  !  I  like  it,  not  of  course  for  the 
rich  and  tempting  dainties  that  resemble 
the  fruit  of  the  forbidden  tree,  in  being 
pleasant  to  the  eye  and  good  for  food  ; 
but  because  of  the  pleasure  it  gives  the 
women  of  our  homes  in  preparing  it ! 

Such  a  vision  of  arms  white  with  flour, 
and  faces  toasted  by  the  fire,  and  whis- 
perings over  new  recipes,  and  mysterious 
disappearances  for  hours  together  in  the 
kitchen,  of  peeling,  mincing,  chopping, 
roasting,  mixing,  boiling,  tasting,  here 
comes  over  me,  that  I  can  but  give  my- 
self up  to  congratulation  for  the  oppor- 
tunity that  Christmas  brings.  Imagine 
the  chance  given  to  so  many  housewives 


CHRISTMAS.  159 

for  planning,  scheming,  arranging,  pur- 
chasing, cooking,  and  serving,  which  are 
purely  altruistic,  of  course.  Free  scope 
is  given  to  so  many  unselfish  qualities  in 
the  preparation  of  that  great  event  of  the 
year  —  the  Christmas  dinner  ! 

71ie  Home- Coming  I  The  boys  and 
girls  have  come  back  from  boarding- 
school  ;  and  those  who  w^ere  fortunate 
enough  not  to  go  away  to  school  have 
holidays.  But  this  is  not  all.  The  eldest 
daughter,  who  has  been  absent  the  whole 
year  in  the  distant  town,  is  leaving  by 
the  night  train,  and  will  be  here  in  the 
morning  ;  and  the  grow^n-up  sons  will 
bring  their  wdves,  and  perhaps  their  ba- 
bies; and  the  little  midshipman  will  be 
back  from  the  long  and  weary  voyage. 
Oh,  blessed  festival  of  home,  when  the 
broken   circles    are    formed    again,    and 


l6o  CHRISTMAS. 

olden  memories  of  the  golden  past  are 
renewed.  How  many  a  life  is  kept  sweet 
and  pure  amid  the  evil  of  the  world,  by 
the  thought  of  the  Christmas  gathering, 
coming  or  passed  ! 

How  shall  we  gather  up  all  the 
threads  which  the  hours  like  swiftly  glid- 
ing shutters  weave  ?  Mother  thinks  that 
Mary  looks  rather  over-wrought,  and  says 
so  to  the  father,  and  they  have  a  talk 
with  her.  She  laughs  merrily  at  their 
anxiety,  and  declares  she  is  perfectly 
well,  only  tired  with  the  Christmas  rush. 
Then  the  father  says  he  never  saw  the 
boys  look  so  well,  he  is  sure  they  have 
grown  an  inch,  and  he  wants  to  know  if 
their  salaries  have  been  raised.  In  the 
middle  of  the  morning  the  sailor-boy 
arrives,  and  his  mother  kisses  again  and 
again  the  bronzed  chubby  face.     In  the 


CHRISTMAS.  l6i 

afternoon  the  girls  go  round  to  see  their 
girl-friends,  not  without  a  hope  that 
their  brothers  will  be  at  home ;  and  the 
lads  manage  to  come  across  the  play- 
mates of  their  boyhood,  whose  faces 
have  been  their  guiding  stars  through 
many  a  mile  of  tossing  foam.  Then 
dinner,  and  the  old  stories,  the  well- 
worn  jokes,  the  reminiscences  of  what 
this  one  did  or  that  in  the  old  days,  the 
babble  of  voices,  the  compliments  to 
mother's  cooking,  the  teasing  of  the  sis- 
ters, their  scathing  answers,  the  happy, 
happy  play  of  life  and  fun,  till  the  whole 
party  from  the  grandparents  to  the 
grandchildren  have  caught  the  infection. 
Oh,  blessed  English  homes,  the  heart  of 
old  England  can  never  grow  old  or  sad 
so  long  as  Christmas  comes  to  stir  your 
smouldering  embers  into  flame  ! 


1 62  .  CHRISTMAS. 

The  Gifts  I  For  weeks  before,  there 
have  been  schemings,  whisperings,  and 
mysterious  parcels  brought  in  under 
cloaks  and  secreted  in  safe  places. 
Hints  dropped  and  caught  at !  Leading 
questions  suggested  !  Shops  ransacked  ! 
Purses  emptied !  Probably  each  gets 
back  an  equivalent  for  what  he  gives  ; 
and  probably  also  a  good  many  things 
are  given  which  are  of  no  kind  of  use. 
Still,  the  thought  for  each  other  is  lovely. 
The  endeavor  to  understand  one  an- 
other's needs  is  wholesome.  And  it  is 
always  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  re- 
ceive. What  a  wealth  of  giving  has  been 
elicited  by  that  Unspeakable  Gift  which 
we  commemorate  at  Christmas. 

•Let  us  put  no  stint  on  our  gifts,  lest 
the  fountains  of  our  life  become  frozen 
at  the    heart.     None    would   become    a 


CHRISTMAS.  163 

Dead  Sea,  always  taking  in,  and  never 
giving  out.  But  let  us  give,  not  only  to 
those  who  can  recompense  us  again,  but 
to  such  as  cannot  repay. 

Thus  our  Christmas  days  come  and  go. 
The  happy  party  breaks  up.  We  take 
our  several  ways,  and  settle  to  our  pur- 
suits. But  the  light  of  the  Yule-log 
flickers  still  in  our  hearts,  and  the  love 
of  the  home  acts  as  a  preservative 
against   the   evils   of  the   world. 

Do  you  know  of  lonely  ones  that  have 
no  Christmas  circles  awaiting  them  1 
Find  them  out,  and  invite  them  to  join 
your  own.  Let  there  be  with  you,  as 
with  Israel,  a  tender  thoughtfulness  for 
the  stranger  that  is  within  your  gates. 
And  be  sure  that  all  the  Christmas  joy 
is  tinctured  with  the  thought  and  love  of 
God.   Let  the  old  family  Bible  be  opened, 


1 64  CHRISTMAS. 

and  thanks  be  rendered  to  him  of  whom 
every  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is 
named.  Let  nothing  be  said  or  done  to 
grieve  his  gentle  and  Holy  Spirit.  Let 
the  home  harmonies  be  keyed  to  those 
of  heaven.  And  if  there  are  the  empty 
chairs,  the  vacant  seats,  the  sad  mem- 
ories of  vanished  hands  and  silenced 
voices,  look  away  to  that  great  home 
festival  in  the  many  mansions  of  the 
Father's  house,  where  the  severed  shall 
reunite,  and  the  circles  be  complete,  and 
from  horizon  to  horizon  shall  be  only 
love  and  peace  and  joy. 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Oct.  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066 
(724)779-2111 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  017  043  667  2 


