f'^. 


m 


n 


TEXTUAL    GUIDE. 


ERRATA. 

Page  2,  line  20,  read\\\\'.  ^iforwxw  15. 
Page  3,  line  9,  read  the  for  its. 
Page  7,  line  2,  r^a^!' affected yi?;*  effected. 
Page  9,  line  20,  r^fl' manuscript  yi?rnianusciipt^. 
Page  13,  line  21,  rt'^ffli' appeared  yi?/- apeared. 
Page  17,  line  17,  read  ^  for  ^. 
Page  21,  line  14,  ;raa' manuscriptsy^r  manuscrij)!. 
Page  27,  line  4,  read  Ano-xx  for  Asian. 
Page  54,  note  3,  read  ix.  14  /i?;'  ii.  14, 
Page  56,  note  2,  ?r«^  collating/^r  collecting. 
Page  73,  line  23,  read  The  for  That. 
Page  93,  note,  7V<7rt^  contravened  yi?;*  controvened. 
Page  95,  line  6,  7rad  'Lwc^v  for  Lucas. 
Page  112,  note  3,  read  t,  for  <\. 
2,^  Page  121,  line  20,  read  Itacism  yi?;-  Italicism. 

Page  128,  line  23,  ;rar/ authenticityy^^r  authencity. 


■; 


A     GUIDE 


TO  THE 


TEXTUAL  CRITICISM 


OF    THE 


NEW  TESTAMENT. 


BY    EDWARD    MILLER,    M.A. 

RECTOR  OF  BUCKNELL,   OXON. 


OJ  Xoyot  Mof  oh  fit)  TzafjkXQojai. — St.  Matt.  xxiv.  35. 
' '  Truth  crushed  to  earth  shall  rise  again. " — Bryant. 


GEORGE  BELL  AND  SONS,  YORK  STREET, 

COVENT  GARDEN,  LONDON. 

1886. 


CHISWICK     press: — C.    WHITTINGHAM    AND    CO.,    TODKS    COURT, 
CHANCERY    LANK, 


TO  THOSE 

WHO, 

WHETHER  AT  THE  OUTSET  OF  THE  WORK,  OR  AT  THE  CLOSE, 

HAVE  KINDLY  GIVEN  HELP  OR  ENCOURAGEMENT, 

CJis  little  ^uatm 

IS  GRATEFULLY    INSCRIBED, 

WITH    THE   PRAYER, 

THAT  IT  MAY  MINISTER  IN  SOME  DEGREE,   HOWEVER  HUMBLE, 

TO  THE  ASCERTAINMENT  AND  ACCEPTANCE 

OF 

The  Genuine  Words  of  Holy  Scripture. 


PREFACE. 

THE  ensuing  treatise  is  intended  to  be  a  brief  Manual 
on  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the  New  Testament  for 
ordinary  students  of  the  Bible,  and  to  induce  those  who 
may  be  disposed  to  enter  more  deeply  into  the  important 
subject  of  it  to  prosecute  further  research  in  "The  Plain 
Introduction  "  of  Dr.  Scrivener,  the  learned  works  of  Dean 
Burgon,  and  in  other  well-known  sources  of  information  upon 
Textual  Criticism. 

The  foot-notes  will  ordinarily  indicate  how  much  1  have 
been  indebted  to  the  labours  of  other  men  in  a  work  which 
pretends  to  be  little  more  than  a  faithful  representation  of 
stores  accumulated  by  the  learned,  and  an  independent  esti- 
mate of  the  conclusions  drawn  by  them. 

To  the  Dean  of  Chichester  I  am  indebted  for  many  pre- 
vious hints  which  I  have  found  invaluable  during  my  prose- 
cution of  a  task  both  laborious  and  difficult.  The  under- 
taking of  it  was  originally  pressed  upon  me  from  without, 
and  I  am  myself  convinced  that  some  such  assistance  as  is 
here  offered  to  the  general  Reader  is  greatly  needed  at  this 
time.  But  I  lay  down  my  pen  with  the  conviction  derived 
from  the  accomplishment  of  my  work,  that  every  Reader 
who  would  really  understand,  and  form  an  opinion  for  him- 
self upon  the  great  questions  at  stake,  must  bestow  on  the 
problem   which   has  suddenly  emerged  into  prominence  a 


PREFACE. 


considerable  amount  of  individual,  unprejudiced  attention. 
He  will  be  able  to  see  with  which  of  the  contending  parties 
the  Truth  must  lie  :  but  he  must  approach  the  problem  in  a 
calm,  judicial  spirit,  must  require  Proof  (as  far  as  Proof  is 
attainable)  instead  of  putting  up  with  Hypothesis,  and  above 
all  must  never  cease  to  exercise  a  large  amount  of  vigilant 
sagacity, — in  fact,  of  Common  Sense. 

My  thanks  are  also  due  to  the  Rev.  R.  Hutchison,  M.A., 
Rector  of  Woodeaton,  and  late  Scholar  of  Exeter  College, 
Oxford,  who  has  kindly  helped  me  in  correcting  the  proof 
sheets. 

E.  M. 

BucKNELL  Rectory, 

Eviber  Week,  Sept.,  1885. 


s>' 


■^o 


■^  JUL    ^   l«M   '^ 


^. 


Officii  Sf^ 


CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Introduction.  Importance  of  the  Subject. 

The  question  stated — seven  instances  of  serious  change — others  also 
advocated — the  number  introduced  into  the  Revised  Version — more 
into  other  editions — the  subject  not  generally  known — importance  of  it 
— plan  of  the  work pp.  1-5. 

CHAPTER   11. 

history    of    textual    criticism. 

First  Part.     Earlier  Stages. 

The  natural  growth  of  the  science  influenced  by  investigation  and 
discovery  .........         pp.  6-7. 

I.  Infancy  : — The  New  Testament  not  printed  till  the  sixteenth 
centuiy — I.  Complutensian  Polyglott.  2.  Erasmus.  3.  Robert  Stephen, 
Theodore  Beza,  and  the  Elzevirs — the  Received  Text       .         pp.  7-12. 

II.  Childhood: — Introduction  of  various  readings,  i.  Bishop  Walton, 
Codex    A,  Courcelles,    and    Fell.      2.    Mill.     3.   Bentley,   Codex    B. 

4.  Bengel,     Wetstein,     Matthsei,     Birch,    Alter,   and    Moldenhawer. 

5.  Griesbach,  families  and   recensions  of  manuscripts,  and   Scholz — 
the  free  advance  of  boyhood  ......         pp.  12-19. 


CHAPTER   III. 

HISTORY    OF    textual    CRITICISM    {conthiued). 

Second  Part.     Contemporary  Growth   .        p.  20. 
III.  Youth  : — Impatience  under  an  overwhelming  mass  of  materials — 


CONTENTS. 


Extreme  Textualism.  i.  Lachmann— rejects  all  but  a  few  witnesses. 
2.  Tregelles — follows  Lachmann — great  services  in  collating  and  edit- 
ing. 3,  Tischendorf— amazing  labours— discovers  the  Sinaitic — zigzag 
course.  4.  Drs,  Westcott  and  Hort — develop  Lachmann's  principles 
—extreme  deference  to  B — surprising  results — followed  mainly  by  Two 
Members  of  the  Revisers'  Company — must  we  follow  them  ?   pp.  20-30. 

IV.  Signs  of  Coming  Maturity  : — Opposition,  i.  Dr.  Scrivener — 
his  published  works— large-minded  principles.  2.  Dean  Burgon — his 
works — misrepresented — his  sound  and  wide  principles.  3.  Canon 
Cook — The  Bishops  Wordsworth,  J.  G.  Reiche,  Kuenen  and  Cobet, 
Dr.  Michelsen,  Vercellone,  Ceriani,  Abbe  Martin — other  Roman 
Catholics .         pp.  30-37. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

SCHOOL  OF  EXTREME  TEXTUALISM. 

The  origin  attributed  by  the  leading  masters  to  Lachmann      .     p.  38 

A.  Theory  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort.  i.  Knowledge  of  Documents 
derived  from  date  and  character  a  prior  requisite  :  B  and  n  are  the  best 
MSS.  2.  Importance  of  Genealogy,  under  which  these  two  MSS.  are 
brought  back  nearly  to  the  Apostolic  autographs.  3.  Four  families, 
sc.  (a)  Syrian,  made  in  a  recension  at  Antioch,  {h)  Western,  {c)  Alexan- 
drian, and(fl^)  Neutral,  which  is  the  best.  4.  Of  these,  two  are  corrupt 
{b  and  c) ;  the  Neutral  alone  reaches  back  to  earliest  times ;  Syrian 
shewn  to  be  worthless  by  analysis,  want  of  antiquity,  and  internal 
evidence.  5.  Hence  N  B  together  nearly  always  right,  and  B  alone 
seldom  wrong pp.  38-44. 

B.  Refutation,  i.  Too  easy  to  be  true,  grounded  on  only  part  of 
the  evidence,  and  destitute  of  real  proof.  2.  Sound  sense  is  violated, 
anxl  opinion  unsupported  by  facts  is  balanced  by  opinions  of  other 
nipsters.  3.  Genealogy  affords  an  unsafe  analogy,  and  in  fact  points 
the  opposite  way.  B  and  K  are  also  condemned  for  want  of  descendants. 
4,  The  theory  about  Families  is  disallowed  by  other  Doctors,  and 
lacks  evidence.  5.  The  "  Syrian,"  or  Traditional  Text,  is  not  proved 
to  be  posterior,  whether  by  an  imaginary  recension,  or  by  a  fanciful 
theory  of  conflation,  or  by  ignoring  proof  of  early  existence,  or  by  sup- 
posed internal  evidence.      6.  The  characters  of  B  and  K  not  superfine  ; 


CONTENTS. 


they  were  rejected  by  the  Church,  were  the  products  of  Semiarian  times, 
are  condemned  by  experts,  and  are  full  of  blunders  .         pp.  44-59. 


CHAPTER   V. 

THE    RIVAL   SCHOOL, 

The  tenets  of  the  Rival  School  already  implied — i.  They  do  not 
maintain  the  Received  Text,  and  are  not  indiscriminate  in  the  use  of 
authorities.  2.  Insist  that  all  authorities  should  be  weighed  and  em- 
ployed ;  and  thus  widen  the  basis.  3.  They  maintain  the  Traditional 
Text,  which  the  Church  of  all  ages  has  acknowledged,  and  no  age 
therefore  can  reject — extreme  importance  of  this  part  of  the  contention ; 
hence  the  need  of  a  history  of  the  Traditional  Text — the  question 
depends  upon  a  just  estimate  of  proportion     .         .         .         pp.  60-64. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

HISTORY   OF   THE    TRADITIONAL   TEXT   TILL   THE    ERA   OF 
ST.    CHRYSOSTOM. 

Difference  between  Sacred  and  Classical  Textual  Criticism,  i.  Con- 
jectural Emendation  inadmissible.  2.  God  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Pre- 
server as  well  as  Inspirer  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  3.  Corporate  as 
well  as  individual  productions         .....         pp.  65-68. 

Early  Corruption  derived  from  oral  teaching,  tampering  with  the  text 
by  heretics,  carelessness  of  scribes,  ignorance  of  Greek  or  of  doctrine — 
Gnosticism — Marcion — Tatian — evidence  of  corruption  .         pp.  68-72. 

Exceeding  care  employed  by  the  faithful — Traditional  Text — Peshito 
— Old  Latin  Versions — Egyptian pp.  72-77. 

Alexandria — Origen — followers  of  Origen — Eusebius — persecution  of 
Diocletian — celebrated  order  of  Constantine — transcription  of  B  and  N 

PP-  77-83- 

Proofs  of  the  Traditional  Text  in  this  period  found  amidst  corruption 
in  its  subsequent  supremacy,  in  the  MSS.  used  by  the  Fathers,  and  in 
contemporaneous  Versions      .  ....         pp.  83-85. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER   VII. 

HISTORY   OF   THE   TRADITIONAL   TEXT   FROM    THE   ERA   OF    ST. 
CHRYSOSTOM    TILL   THE   INVENTION    OF    PRINTING, 

The  previous  period  an  era  of  speculation — the  great  Patristic  Era — 
commentaries,  dictionaries,  and  grammars — punctuation — breathings — 
spelling  —  improvement  in  the  art  of  Transcription  —  monasteries  — 
ibraries — canon  of  Holy  Scripture— supremacy  of  the  Traditional  Text 

pp.  86-94. 

Gothic  Version — Codex  Alexandrinus  (A) — Parisian  Codex  (C) — the 
Fathers  not  uncritical — Uncial  manuscripts — Versions — Vulgate — 
Armenian — Georgian— Ethiopian — other  Uncials  .         pp.  94-100. 

Cursive  manuscripts — their  value— their  agreement  with  the  Uncials 
— Lectionaries — other  Versions — undisputed  predominance  of  the  Tra- 
ditional Text pp.  100-104. 

CHAPTER   VIII. 

MATERIALS    OF   CRITICISM. 

I.  {a)  Uncial  manuscripts — in  Gospels,  Acts  and  Catholic  Epistles, 
Pauline  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse       ....         pp.  105-106. 

((^)  Cursive  manuscripts — their  value  and  vast  number      pp.  106-107. 

Table  of  Uncials pp.  108-109. 

II.  Lectionaries  and  Liturgies — lectionary-system — their  value — 
influence  in  mischief — Evangelistaria — Praxapostoli  — Liturgies 

pp.  1 10- II 2. 

III.  Versions — Table — value^Kirawbacks — Old  Latin     pp.  113-115. 

IV.  Ecclesiastical  Writers — drawbacks — value — the  oldest  class  of 
manuscripts,  but  at  second  hand         ....         pp.  116-117. 

The  field  to  be  explored — MSS.  at  first  hand  wanting  in  antiquity 

p.  "7. 

CHAPTER   IX. 

PRINCIPLES   OF  CRITICISM. 

No  evidence  must   be   discarded — responsibility    of    the    Church — 


CONTENTS. 


I.  The  first  object  the  discovery  of  the  Traditional  Text — begin  with 
the  Received  Text.  2.  All  evidence  must  be  mastered — and  followed. 
3.  Internal  Evidence  not  on  a  par  with  External  proof— seven  canons — 
conclusion  ........         pp.  1 18-122. 


Appendix     I.  The  last  Twelve  Verses  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel 

pp.  125-127. 

II.  The  First  Word  from  the  Cross      .         pp.  127-128. 

III.  The  Record  of  the  strengthening  Angel,  the  Agony, 
and  the  Bloody  Sweat      .         .         pp.  128-130. 

IV.  The  Angelic  Hymn         .         .  .         pp.  130- 131. 
V.  The  Doxology  in  the  Lord's  Prayer         pp.  131- 133. 

VI.  The  Son  of  God's  Eternal  Existence  in  Heaven 

pp.  133-134. 
VII.  God  manifested  in  The  Flesh         .         pp.  134-137.- 


A   GUIDE    TO    THE  TEXTUAL   CRITICISM 
OF   THE   NEW   TESTAMENT. 

CHAPTER   I. 

introduction  . 

Importance  of  the  Subject. 

WHAT  is  the  genuine  Greek — what  the  true  Text  of 
the  New  Testament  ?  Which  are  the  very  words 
which  were  written  by  the  Evangehsts  and  Apostles  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  under  the  Inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 
Have  we  up  to  this  period  received  and  used  for  the  infor- 
mation of  our  faith  and  the  guidance  of  our  lives  a  Form 
of  Text,  which  in  a  vast  number  of  particulars,  many  of 
which  are  of  great  importance,  has  been  fabricated  by  the 
device  or  error  of  men  ? 

This  question  has  been  raised  in  the  research  of  recent 
times,  which  has  brought  to  light  an  amount  of  evidence 
residing  in  ancient  copies  and  translations  of  the  New 
Testament,  that  has  led  many  eminent  scholars  to  reject,  as 
being  in  their  estimation  corruptions  of  the  pure  Text, 
various  passages  which  have  endeared  themselves  to  Chris- 
tians in  the  course  of  centuries.  Thus,  according  to  prin- 
ciples largely  adopted, 

(a)  The  Last  Twelve  Verses  of  the  Gospel  according  to 

B 


INTRODUCTION. 


St.  Mark  must  be  cast  aside,  and  an  abrupt  close  made 
after  the  words,  '  for  they  were  afraid.' 

(b)  In  the  Lord's  Prayer  as  given  by  St.  Luke  (xi.  2-4), 
the  following  clauses  must  be  excised : — '  Our  .... 
which  art  in  Heaven';  'Thy  will  be  done,  as  in 
Heaven,  so  on  earth ' ; — '  but  deliver  us  from  evil.' 

(c)  The  Doxology  must  be  omitted  from  the  Lord's 
Prayer  in  St.  Matthew  (vi.  13),  and  so  all  record  of  it 
lost  in  the  Gospels. 

(d)  Vv.  43,  44  must  no  longer  be  reckoned  in  the  22nd 
chapter  of  St.  Luke,  and  thereby  the  account  must 
disappear  of  the  strengthening  Angel  and  the  '  Bloody 
Sweat,'  as  well  as  the  evangelical  record  of '  the  Agony  in 
the  Garden.' 

(e)  The  first  of  our  Lord's  seven  Sayings  from  the  Cross 
(St.  Luke  xxiii.  34)  must  be  regarded  as  unauthentic, 
*  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  knew  not  what  they 
do.' 

(f)  Also  St.  Luke's  assertion  of  the  Ascent  into  Heaven 
(xxiv.  15), — an  omission  of  the  more  importance, 
because  St.  Mark's  account  of  the  same  event,  which 
included  also  the  session  at  the  Right  Hand  of  God,  is 
supposed  under  these  principles  to  have  vanished  with 
the  last  twelve  verses  of  his  Gospel. 

(g)  St.  Luke's  recital  of  the  Institution  of  the  Holy  Sacra- 
ment (xxii.  19,  20)  must  be  lost,  except  as  far  as  '  This 
is  My  Body.' 

These  seven  instances,  which  might  be  multiplied  ex- 
tensively by  the  addition  of  other  omissions, — such  as  of  the 
descending  angel  and  the  cure  wrought  in  the  pool  of 
Bethesda,  of  the  last  cry  in  St.  Mark's  description  of  the 
centurion's  faith,  of  the  greater  part  of  St.  Luke's  account  of 


RESULTS   OF  RECENT  CRITICISM. 


the  Inscription  on  the  Cross,  of  St.  Peter's  visit  to  the 
Sepulchre  in  the  same  Gospel,  of  the  salutation  '  Peace  be 
unto  you,'  of  the  Lord  shewing  His  Hands  and  His  Feet,  of 
the  word  'broken,'  whereby  a  gash  is  made  and  a  blank 
space  left  in  St.  Paul's  grand  version  of  the  Institution  of  the 
Holy  Sacrament,  and  others  too  numerous  to  recount  here 
— not  to  do  more  than  allude  to  startling  statements,  such 
as  that  our  Lord's  Side  was  pierced  before  death,  and  that 
the  sun  was  eclipsed  at  its  full,^ — may  teach  all  who  revere 
and  love  the  Word  of  God  what  precious  points  are  at 
stake.  If  the  changes  advocated  by  the  modern  school  leave 
enough  behind  in  Holy  Writ  to  support  without  doubt  the 
essentials  of  the  Faith  of  Christendom,  yet  they  are  so 
momentous  in  themselves  as  to  produce  a  painful  wrench  in 
earnest  affections  which  have  attached  themselves  to  words 
familiar  and  deeply  loved  from  childhood,  and  to  prove  that,  at 
least  to  first  appearance,  general  and  special  attention  should 
be  directed  to  what  may  really  be  a  corruption  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures.  Besides  this,  the  number  of  alterations,  amounting 
in  the  most  moderate  of  the  new  recensions  to  5,337,'^  reveals 
the  formidable  nature  of  the  operations  that  are  threatened. 
If  the  majority  of  these  alterations  are  small,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  the  instance  taken  is  one  which  presents 
much  less  change  than  other  editions  of  the  New  Testa- 

^  St.  John  V.  3,  4  :  St.  Mark  xv.  39  :  St.  Luke  xxiii.  38  :  xxiv.  12  : 
xxiv.  36  :  xxiv.  40 :  I  Cor.  ix.  24,  /cXw^utvor  :  St.  Matt,  xxvii.  49 : 
St.  Luke  xxiii.  45.  iKkii-KovToq,  which,  as  Dean  Burgon  truly  says 
("Revision  Revised,"  p.  65),  '  means  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  and  no  other 
thing,'  though  the  Revisers  translate  it  *the  sun's  light  failing.' 

^  The  number  of  changes  in  the  Greek  Text  of  the  Revised  Version 
as  estimated  by  Dr.  Scrivener  (Burgon,  "The  Revision  Revised,"  p. 
405).  The  changes  in  the  English  of  the  Revised  Version  are  said  to 
amount  to  36,191. 


INTRODUCTION. 


ment.  Enough  is  shown  to  establish  beyond  doubt  that 
it  is  the  duty  of  all  Christians,  who  take  an  intelligent  inte- 
rest in  the  controversies  of  their  day,  not  to  sit  still  when 
such  concerns  are  in  jeopardy. 

Yet  at  the  present  time  there  are  comparatively  few  per- 
sons, clerical  or  lay,  who  have  an  intelligent  acquaintance 
with  the  grounds  on  which  this  important  question  rests. 
The  subject  at  first  sight  presents  a  forbidding  aspect  to 
most  minds : — the  exceedingly  valuable  treatises  on  it  are 
too  full  of  learning,  and  too  long  for  such  as  are  not  really 
students  to  master : — and  the  hurry  and  haste  of  modern 
life  demand  a  simpler  mode  of  treatment. 

It  is  therefore  with  the  hope  of  presenting  the  chief 
features  of  Textual  Criticism,  or  such  elementary  con- 
siderations as  are  immediately  involved  in  determining 
the  Greek  Text  of  the  New  Testament,  to  readers  in  a 
clear  and  not  uninteresting  way,  that  in  deference  to  the 
urgent  solicitations  of  some  who  enter  deeply  into  the 
controversy,  the  composition  of  this  little  treatise  has  been 
undertaken.  Inexpressibly  dear  to  all  true  Christians, 
whether  they  range  themselves  on  the  one  side  or  the  other, 
must  be  the  very  expressions, — the  sentences,  the  phrases, 
the  words,  and  even  the  rhythm  and  the  accents, — of  the 
genuine  utterance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  The  general 
sentiment  of  Christianity  has  applied  with  plenary  enlarge- 
ment the  warning  given  at  the  close  of  the  last  Book  in  the 
Bible  against  addition  or  omission.'  '  Let  no  man  add  to 
the  words  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  or  detract  anything  from 
them,'  said  one  of  the  most  renowned  of  the  Fathers.'    '  Let 

^  Rev.  xxii.  i8,  19. 

'  Athanasius,  "Ex  Festali  Epistola,"  xxxix.  (t.  ii.  p.  39,  Eil,  Colon). 


OBIECTS   OF  THE    TREATISE. 


them  fear  the  woe  which  is  destined  for  them  who  add  to  or 
take  away,'  was  the  consentient  admonition  of  another.^ 

The  leading  points  in  the  contention  on  either  side  will 
be  given  in  the  Narrative.  The  questions  in  debate  are 
questions  of  fact,  and  must  be  decided  by  the  facts  of 
history,  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  documents  on  which 
they  depend,  and  due  regard  to  the  proportion  of  the 
Christian  Faith.  They  cannot  be  settled  piecemeal. 
All  the  counts  of  the  case  must  be  before  the  court.  An 
attempt  will  therefore  be  now  made  to  represent  with  all 
candour  the  chief  grounds  on  which  opinion  should  rest, 
as  they  have  been  set  forth  in  the  career  of  the  Science  of 
Textual  Criticism,  in  the  principal  arguments  employed  by 
the  Rival  Schools  of  the  present  day,  in  the  history  of  the 
transmission  of  the  New  Testament  from  age  to  age,  and  in 
the  leading  Materials  of  Criticism ;  and  it  will  be  our  duty 
to  deduce  in  conclusion  the  main  principles  that  ought  to 
regulate  critical  operations  in  any  endeavour  to  revise  and 
remodel  the  Sacred  Text. 

^  Tertullian,  "Adv.  Hennogenem,"  xxiu 


CHAPTER    II. 

history  of  textual  criticism. 

First  Part.  Earlier  Stages,  (i)  Infancy  : — Forma- 
tion OF  THE  '  Received  Text.'  (2)  Childhood  : — 
Critical  Operations  before  1830. 

THE  Science  of  sacred  Textual  Criticism  is  the  child  of 
circumstances,  and  has  been  fostered  by  the  zeal  and 
industry  of  learned  men.  It  has  arisen  from  the  large 
number  of  existing  Copies  of  the  New  Testament,  which  has 
now,  so  far  as  inquiry  has  extended,  reached  no  less  than  some 
two  thousand.^  These  primary  sources  of  information  are 
further  augmented  by  Translations  into  various  languages, 
and  by  quotations  occurring  in  the  works  of  early  Ecclesias- 
tical Writers.  Accordingly,  as  these  numerous  witnesses 
render  evidence  which  is  discordant  in  thousands  of  parti- 
culars, there  is  plainly  a  need  of  guiding  principles  and  of  a 
recognised  system  in  estimating  their  testimony.  Thus  the 
Science  of  sacred  Textual  Criticism  has  been  gradually  grow- 
ing almost  since  the  time  of  the  invention  of  printing. 

And  as  was  natural,  its  growth  and  tendency  have  been 
largely  influenced  from  time  to  time  by  the  materials  that 
research  and  discovery  have  continually  produced.  When 
new  Manuscripts  have  been  brought  to  light,  or  the  verdict 
of  old  ones  has  been  ascertained  by  the  slow  process  of  col- 

^  2003.  Burgon,  **The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  521.  Dean  Burgon 
added  374  in  1883.  Dr.  Scrivener,  including  these  374,  reckons  2094. 
"  Plain  Introduction,"  Appendix,  p.  xxx,  3rd  edition. 


THE  INFANCY. 


lation,  the  importation  of  fresh  evidence  has  necessarily 
effected  the  conclusions  previously  drawn.  A  science  de- 
pending upon  facts  that  can  be  ascertained  only  after  pro- 
tracted processes  of  investigation,  cannot  but  be  late  in 
coming  to  maturity.  At  the  present  time,  hundreds  of 
Manuscripts  are  waiting  to  be  collated,  various  Versions 
need  re-editing,  and  indexes  have  to  be  provided  of  the 
quotations  in  the  Fathers,  before  all  that  is  to  be  said  upon 
controverted  points  can  be  collected  with  exact  accuracy. 
Besides  that,  the  relative  value  of  the  various  classes  and 
subdivisions  of  evidence  cannot  yet  be  determined  so  as  to 
meet  with  universal  acceptance. 

Four  Periods  in  the  history  of  Textual  Criticism  may  be 
distinguished,  so  far  as  it  has  been  yet  evolved,  viz..  Infancy, 
Childhood,  Impetuous  Youth,  and  Incipient  Maturity. 


I.  The  Infancy. 

Although  a  folio  edition  of  the  Bible  in  Latin  was  printed 
by  Gutenberg  as  early  as  a.d.  1455,  none  in  the  original 
Greek  appeared  till  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century. 
The  demand  at  the  time  was  not  great.  Greek  Scribes 
dependent  upon  employment  for  their  living  abounded  in 
Europe  after  the  capture  of  Constantinople  in  1453.  Print- 
ing would  be  much  more  difficult  in  the  unfamiliar  Greek 
type  :  and  the  prevalence  of  clever  and  graceful  abbrevia- 
tions made  the  work  of  copying  at  once  more  rapid  and 
more  artistic.  Therefore  half  a  century  passed  by  before  the 
Church  saw  the  accomplishment  of  a  task  so  formidable,  of 
which  the  want  was  at  once  so  easily  and  so  well  supplied. 

I.  Cardinal  Ximenes,  founder  of  the  University  of  Alcalk, 
and  an  eminent  patron  of  literature,  was  first  in  the  field.    In 


THE  INFANCY. 


the  course  of  his  advancement  he  had  passed  from  a  dungeon, 
where  he  had  spent  six  years  of  his  Hfe,  to  the  Archbishopric 
of  Toledo  and  the  Regency  of  Castile;  and  in  his  later  days 
laid  out  the  vast  income  of  his  See  upon  charitable  or  public 
objects.  Having  collected  together  as  many  Manuscripts 
as  he  could,  he  set  Lopez  de  Stunica  and  other  learned 
editors  to  the  work  in  1502,  on  which  he  expended  more 
than  50,000  ducats,  or  about  ;;^2 3,000.  It  was  intended  to 
commemorate  the  birth  of  Charles  V.  But  many  years 
elapsed  ere  the  completion  of  the  New  Testament  in  Greek 
and  Latin  on  Jan.  10,  1514;  and  the  book  was  not  pub- 
lished till  1520,  after  Ximenes'  death,  and  did  not  get  into 
general  circulation  till  two  years  after. 

The  Complutensian  Polyglott — for  such  was  the  title, 
derived  from  the  Latin  name  {Co?nplutu??i)  of  Alcalk — was 
said  by  the  editors  to  have  been  constructed  from  selected 
Manuscripts  of  great  age  and  accuracy,  supplied  by  Pope 
Leo  X.,  who  was  the  patron  of  the  undertaking.  Attempts 
have  been  made  without  success  to  ascertain  what  these 
Manuscripts  were.  The  only  result  is  that  we  must  abide  by 
the  assertion  of  the  editors  and  the  character  of  the  work. 
The  Complutensian  is  admitted  to  be  a  fair  but  not  by  any 
means  a  faultless  edition  of  the  text  that  had  already  been 
in  vogue,  as  is  universally  admitted,  for  upwards  of  a  thou- 
sand years. 

2.  But  the  Complutensian  Polyglott  was  actually  antici- 
pated in  publication  by  a  Greek  Testament  in  Germany. 

Froben,  the  printer  of  Basle,  hearing  of  the  operations  in 
Spain,  and  wishing  to  forestall  them,  sent  to  Erasmus,  who 
was  then  staying  in  England,  and  pressed  him  earnestly  to 
undertake  the  office  of  editor.  Erasmus  received  the  first 
overtures  on  April  17,  15 15.     But  such  was  the  haste  made 


THE   COMPLUTENSIAN  AND  ERASMUS.  9 

that  the  New  Testament  was  printed  before  the  end  of 
February,  15 16.  Erasmus  had  however,  as  it  appears,  made 
some  preparations  of  his  own  before  he  heard  from  Froben. 
He  seems  to  have  used  what  copies  he  could  procure,  but 
in  a  few  cases  where  he  either  found  or  supposed  his  Greek 
authorities  to  be  deficient,  he  translated  from  the  Vulgate 
into  Greek.^ 

Erasmus'  first  edition  made  its  way  into  Spain,  where  the 
Coraplutensian  was  lying  complete,  but  awaiting  the  Pope's 
imprimatur  for  publication.  Stunica  found  fault  with  it  in 
the  spirit  of  rivalry :  but  the  fine  old  Cardinal  replied, 
*  Would  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were  prophets  !  produce 
better  if  thou  canst ;  condemn  not  the  industry  of  another.'  ^ 

Erasmus  was,  however,  attacked  by  Stunica,  and  also  by 
Edward  Lee,  afterward  Archbishop  of  York,  because  he  had 
omitted  the  testimony  of  the  heavenly  Witnesses  in  i  John  v. 
7,  as  well  as  on  other  grounds.  Erasmus  rephed  that  he  could 
not  find  the  passage  in  his  Greek  manuscripts,  and  that 
even  some  Latin  copies  did  not  give  it.  But  at  length  he 
promised  that  if  any  Greek  manuscripts  were  produced 
containing  the  words,  he  would  in  future  insert  them.  It  is 
remarkable  that  the  celebrated  Vatican  Codex  (B)  was 
on  this  occasion  for  the  first  time  appealed  to  on  a  point  of 
textual  criticism.^  In  course  of  time  the  Codex  Montfor- 
tianus,  now  at  DubHn,  was  brought  forward,  and  in  conse- 
quence the  passage  was  printed  by  Erasmus  in  his  third 
edition  in  1522.  A  fourth  edition  exhibited  the  text  in  three 
parallel  columns,  the  Greek,  the  Latin  Vulgate,  and  a  recen- 
sion of  the  latter  by  Erasmus.     The  last  in  1535  contained 

'  This  was  notably  the  case  in  the  last  six  verses  of  the  Revelation. 
^  Scrivener's  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  431. 
^  Tregelles,  "  Printed  Text,"  p.  22. 


THE  INFANCY. 


only  the  Greek.  Each  successive  edition  underwent  cor- 
rection, but  the  last  did  not  differ  much  from  the  fourth. 
Erasmus  died  at  Basle  in  1536. 

3.  The  editions  of  Robert  Stephen,  Theodore  Beza,  and 
the  Elzevirs,  complete  this  period. 

The  two  first  of  Stephen,  published  at  Paris  respectively 
in  1546  and  1549,  were  most  elegantly  printed  with  type 
cast  at  the  expense  of  Francis  L,  and  are  known  to  connois- 
seurs by  the  title  '  O  mirificam '  from  the  opening  words  ex- 
pressing an  encomium  upon  that  king's  liberality.  The  third, 
in  folio,  came  out  in  1550,  and  for  the  first  time  in  the  his- 
tory of  editions  of  the  Greek  Testament  contained  various 
readings.  Reference  was  made  to  sixteen  authorities,  viz., 
the  Complutensian  Polyglott  and  fifteen  manuscripts, 
amongst  which  the  Codex  Bezae  (D),  now  at  Cambridge,  is 
thought  to  have  been  numbered.'  Erasmus  is  not  mentioned, 
although  Stephen's  two  earliest  editions  were  mainly  grounded 
upon  Erasmus'  readings ;  and  his  third,  according  to  Dr. 
Scrivener's  computation,  differs  from  them  conjointly  in  only 
361  places."-^  Robert  Stephen  did  not  collate  his  authorities 
himself,  but  employed  the  services  of  his  son  Henry. 

His  record  of  readings  in  the  margin  of  his  folio  caused 
great  offence  to  the  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne,  and  Stephen 
withdrew  to  Geneva  to  escape  their  enmity.  Here  he  pub- 
lished in  1 55 1  his  fourth  edition,  almost  unchanged  in  the 
Greek  text  from  the  previous  one,  but  with  one  remarkable 
alteration.  The  chapters,  into  which  Cardinal  Hugo,  of 
Santo  Caro,  had  divided  the  books  of  the  Bible  in  the 
thirteenth  century,  were  in  this  edition  first  subdivided  into 

'  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  121,  438. 
-  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  436  ;  i.e.,  334  times  in  the  text,  and  27 
in  punctuation. 


STEPHEN,   BEZA,    THE  ELZEVIRS.  ii 

verses.  His  son  Henry  said  that  his  father  made  the  sub- 
division 'whilst  riding'  from  Paris  to  Lyons,  probably 
during  the  intervals  of  his  exercise.  His  object  was  to 
facilitate  reference  in  a  Concordance  which  he  had  in 
prospect.^ 

Beza's  text  did  not  differ  much  from  Stephen's.  He  pub- 
lished five  editions,  slightly  varying  upon  one  another,  and 
ranging  from  1565  to  1598.  Of  these  the  fourth,  published 
in  1589,  has  the  highest  reputation,  the  fifth  having  been 
produced  in  'extreme  old  age.'  Besides  the  advantage  of 
Stephen's  collections,  Beza  was  the  possessor  of  two  very 
important  MSS.,  the  one  already  mentioned  (D  of  the 
Gospels  and  Acts),  which  was  presented  by  him  to  the 
University  of  Cambridge,  and  the  Codex  Claromontanus 
(D  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles)  at  Paris,  both  of  which  con- 
tained Greek  and  Latin  texts,  being  therefore  '  bilingual ' 
manuscripts. 

The  Elzevirs — Bonaventure  and  Abraham — brought  out 
two  editions  at  their  celebrated  press,  one  in  1624,  and  the 
other  in  1633.  Their  text  was  made  up  from  those  of 
Stephen  and  Beza.  The  latter  edition  was  remarkable  from 
the  expression  '  Received  Text '  occurring  for  the  first  time. 
Addressing  the  reader  they  said,  '  So  you  have  now  a  text 
universally  received,  in  which  we  give  no  alteration  or 
corruption.' " 

The  text  of  Stephen,  which  was  afterwards  carefully  repro- 

^  This  is  the  ordinary  account.  Dr.  Gregory  however  ("  Prolego- 
mena," pp.  164-66)  maintains  that  Stephen  Langton  was  the  author  of 
the  present  division  into  Chapters,  as  usual  in  the  West.  Some  sort  of 
division  had  been  in  existence  from  the  first  (Ibid.  pp.  140-163). 

^  '  Textum  ergo  habes  nunc  ab  omnibus  receptum,  in  quo  nihil 
immutatum  aut  corruptum  damus,'  referring  to  the  edition  of  1624. 
(Pref.) 


12  THE  CHILDHOOD. 


duced  by  Mill,  has  been  generally  taken  in  England  as  the 
standard  or  '  Received '  text,  and  that  of  the  Elzevirs  has 
been  thus  regarded  on  the  continent.  The  translators,  how- 
ever, of  our  Authorized  Version  did  not  adhere  exclusively 
to  any  one  of  the  chief  editions.^  When  their  authorities 
were  at  variance,  they  sometimes  in  their  interpretation  of 
the  '  Received  Text '  followed  Beza,  sometimes  Stephen, 
sometimes  the  Complutensians,  Erasmus,  or  the  Latin 
Vulgate. 

11.  The  Childhood. 

In  the  period  hitherto  indicated,  there  was  hardly  any 
weighing  of  opposed  readings.  Such  as  presented  themselves 
were  ordinarily  accepted  with  impHcit  confidence.  The  free 
instincts  of  infancy  guided  the  Science  mainly  along  a  track 
that  had  previously  been  trodden  with  the  continued  approval 
of  the  Church  for  centuries.  It  would  be  reckless  haste, 
not  discerning  judgment,  that  would  off-hand  condemn 
results  thus  reached.  The  copies  chiefly  followed  were 
known  to  be  specimens  more  or  less  exact  of  what  had  been 
preserved  in  the  Church  as  the  recognised  form  of  the 
inspired  Word." 

The   Received   Text  of  the   sixteenth  and   seventeenth 

'  Dr.  Scrivener  has  collected  252  passages,  out  of  which  the  trans- 
lators follow  Beza  against  vStephen  in  113,  Stephen  against  Beza  in  59, 
the  Complutensian,  Erasmus,  or  the  Vulgate  against  both  Stephen  and 
Beza  in  80.  — "The  Authorized  Edition  of  the  English  Bible,"  &c., 
by  F.  H.  A.  Scrivener,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Cambridge,  18S4, 
Appendix  E. 

2  This  is  acknowledged  by  both  the  Rival  Schools  of  the  present  day. 
See  Westcott  and  Hort,  "Introduction,"  pp.  91,  92,  no,  142,  145, 
146.  Vol.  i.,  pp.  547,  550,  551.  Burgon,  "The  Revision  Revised," 
pp.  257,  258. 


RECEIVED  AND    TRADITIONAL    TEXTS.  13 

centuries  represented  with  general,  but  far  from  invariable 
accuracy,  the  Traditional  Text  of  the  previous  ages  of  the 
Church.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Church  of  later  times 
could  not  properly  rest  without  ascertaining,  by  all  such  wide 
and  deep  inquiry  as  was  possible,  whether  these  instinctive 
processes  had  issued  in  well-grounded  conclusions.  What 
was  right  would  be  proved  to  be  right  in  full  and  free  investi- 
gation, if  candour  and  largeness  of  mind  and  firmness  in 
faith  kept  away  prejudice  and  narrowness  and  unbelief. 

I.  In  1657,  Brian  Walton,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Chester, 
published  a  Polyglott,  to  which  were  appended  some  various 
readings  both  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  volumes.  In  company 
with  some  colleagues  he  had  devoted  himself  to  this  work 
for  twelve  years  during  the  dark  troubles  that  had  befallen 
the  Church  of  England.  He  included  various  readings  from 
the  Codex  Alexandrinus  (A),  now  in  the  British  Museum, 
which  had  been  presented  by  Cyril  Lucar  to  Charles  I. 
in  1628.  There  were  comprised  in  his  pages  also  the  results 
of  collations  of  sixteen  Manuscripts  made  by  Archbishop 
Ussher. 

In  the  next  year  apeared  at  Amsterdam  a  New  Testament 
by  Curcellaeus  or  Courcelles,  marked  by  Socinian  tendencies. 
And  soon  after,  in  1675,  Dr.  John  Fell,  Bishop  of  Oxford, 
published  a  small  edition,  in  which  collations  from  fresh 
Manuscripts  were  given,  and  citations  were  added  from  the 
Memphitic  or  ancient  Version  of  Lower  Egypt,  and  the 
Gothic,  which  was  made  soon  after  the  Goths  settled  on  the 
confines  of  the  Roman  Empire. 

2.  But  a  greater  and  stronger  start  was  made  at  the  end 
of  the  seventeenth  century.  In  large  measure  through  the 
help  of  Bishop  Fell,  who  during  his  lifetime  supplied 
impetus  and  funds,  Dr.  John  Mill  devoted  the  labour  of 


14  THE  CHILDHOOD. 


thirty  years  to  the  preparation  of  a  grand  New  Testament 
which  was  intended  to  surpass  Stephen's  in  beauty  as  well 
as  in  other  respects.  The  good  bishop's  death  in  1686 
seems  to  have  delayed  the  work  :  and  it  was  not  till  1707, 
three  years  after  Archbishop  Sharpe  obtained  for  the 
struggling  editor  a  stall  at  Canterbury  and  Royal  aid  in  the 
prosecution  of  his  purpose,  that  the  volume  came  out.  Mill 
himself  died  just  a  fortnight  after  the  publication.  Thence- 
forward the  science  of  Textual  Criticism  proceeded  upon  a 
new  career. 

Mill  only  attempted  to  reproduce  the  text  of  Stephen, 
though  he  has  departed  from  it  in  a  few  particulars.^  But 
he  added  some  30,000  readings,  and  an  invaluable  Prole- 
gomena. He  far  excelled  all  his  contemporaries  and  prede- 
cessors in  accuracy  of  collation  and  comprehensiveness  of 
method.  "  Of  the  criticism  of  the  New  Testament  in  the 
hands  of  Dr.  John  Mill  it  may  be  said,  that  he  found  the 
edifice  of  wood,  and  left  it  marble."  ^ 

3.  We  now  come  to  the  grand  design  of  the  great  Richard 
Bentley,  Master  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  which  broke 
forth  with  lofty  promise  but  never  reached  realization.  He 
unfolded  his  plan  to  Archbishop  Wake  in  a  long  letter,  in 
which  after  explaining  his  own  studies  he  professes  his 
belief  that  he  should  be  able  to  restore  the  Text  of  the  New 
Testament  to  the  form  in  which  it  was  couched  at  the  time 
of  the  Council  of  Nicaea.  He  was  led  in  his  enthusiasm  to 
add,  *  so  that  there  shall  not  be  twenty  words,  or  even  par- 
ticles, difference.'  After  describing  the  history  of  the  Vul- 
gate, and  the  editorial  labours  since  the  invention  of  printing, 

^  Dr.  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  450  and  note,  has  speci- 
fied instances  of  this  deflection. 

'^  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  448. 


MILL,   BENTLEY,    AND  BENGEL.  15 

he  concludes  :  '  In  a  word,  I  find  that  by  taking  2000  errors 
out  of  the  Pope's  Vulgate,  and  as  many  out  of  the  Protestant 
Pope  Stephen's,  I  can  set  out  an  edition  of  each  in  columns, 
without  using  any  book  under  900  years  old,  that  shall  so 
exactly  agree  word  for  word,  and,  what  at  first  amazed  me, 
order  for  order,  that  no  two  tallies,  nor  two  indentures  can 
agree  better.'  ^ 

This  was  in  17 16,  and  in  four  years  his  plan  was  definitely 
made  up.  John  Walker,  fellow  of  Trinity  College,  who  had 
already  been  employed  in  collating  MSS.  in  Paris  for  the 
edition,  was  announced  as  '  overseer  and  corrector  of  the 
press.'  John  Walker  continued  to  labour ;  and  Bentley 
himself  too,  so  far  as  other  occupations  and  the  strife  with 
the  Fellows  of  his  College  would  allow  him  :  but  the  edition 
never  came  out.  He  bequeathed  a  valuable  collection  of 
papers  to  his  nephew,  who  made  no  use  of  them.  After  the 
death  of  the  latter,  they  were  published,  including  amongst 
several  collations  one  which  he  had  procured,  and  had  got 
afterwards  corrected,  of  the  Vatican  Manuscript  (B).  This 
vv'as  transcribed  by  Woide  and  printed. 

4.  A  step  in  advance  was  next  made  by  Bengel  in  1734. 
The  large  number  of  authorities  that  had  now  come  to  light 
had  created  embarrassment.  Were  they  all  equally  to  be 
trusted  ?  Did  revision  simply  consist  in  a  process  of  mar- 
shalling the  witnesses  on  the  right  and  left,  and  then  counting 
heads?  or  had  these  witnesses  special  characters  of  their 
own,  which  must  be  investigated  and  known  in  order  to  the 
formation  of  a  true  estimate  of  their  credibility  ? 

Bengel  therefore  suggested  that  inquiries  should  be  made 
into  the  origin  of  each,^  '  whether  taken  smgly  or  in  pairs,  or 

^  Ellis,  "  Bentleii  Critica  Sacra,"  Introductory  Preface,  p.  xv. 


1 6  THE   CHILDHOOD. 


associations,  or  families,  tribes,  and  nations  : '  ^  so  that  they 
should  be  reduced  to  a  genealogical  table  illustrating  their 
several  features  and  relationships.  He  divided  manuscripts 
generally  into  African  and  Asiatic.  In  his  text  he  was  the 
first  to  depart  on  principle  from  the  received  standard."  He 
introduced  the  division  of  the  New  Testament  into  para- 
graphs, with  which  we  have  become  familiar. 

Bengel  was  followed  by  Wetstein,  who  enlarged  greatly 
the  materials  ready  for  criticism.  He  spent  many  years  in 
collation,  including  in  these  labours  about  one  hundred  and 
two  Manuscripts.  He  was  the  first  to  cite  the  Manuscripts 
under  their  present  designation,  quoting  from  A  to  O  of  the 
Uncials  in  the  Gospels,  and  i — 112  of  the  Cursives.^  He 
attached  great  importance  to  the  Codex  Alexandrinus  (A), 
the  oldest  then  generally  known.  He  shed  much  light  upon 
the  Versions,  or  early  Translations  into  other  languages. 
And  he  also  laboured,  though  it  is  thought  not  so  success- 
fully, upon  the  Fathers.  His  services  were  so  considerable 
that  Bishop  Marsh  was  of  opinion  that  he  had  accomplished 
more  than  all  his  predecessors  put  together.*  His  edition 
of  the  Greek  Testament  came  out  in  1751-2. 

Most  important  service  was  rendered  in  the  collection  and 
collation  of  existing  manuscripts  by  C.  F.  Matthaei,  Andrew 
Birch,  and  others.  Matthasi,  a  Thuringian  by  birth,  who 
held  the  Professorship  of  Classical  Literature  at  Moscow, 
found  in  that  capital  a  large  number  of  Manuscripts  brought 

^  Bengel,  "Apparatus  Criticus,"  p.  387. 

2  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  457. 

^  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  460.  Uncial  Manuscripts  are 
those  which  are  written  in  Capital  Letters  :  Cursives,  in  the  running 
hand  of  ordinary  writing.  Uncials  are  designated  for  convenience  by 
capital  letters,  and  Cursives  by  numerals. 

^  Tregelles,  "Printed  Text,"  p.  77. 


WETSTEIN,  MATTH.EIy  AND  GRIESBACH.  17 

in  the  seventeenth  century  from  Mount  Athos,  both  Biblical 
and  Patristic.  ^  He  collated  with  an  accuracy  which  has  drawn 
down  strong  praise  ^  seventy  copies,  consisting  of  these  and 
some  others ;  and  besides  he  assembled  the  citations  from 
Holy  Scripture  contained  in  about  thirty  manuscripts  of  St. 
Chrysostom's  works.  His  Revision  of  the  Greek  Text  was 
exclusively  founded  upon  the  manuscripts  of  his  own 
examining.  Whatever  may  prove  to  be  its  critical  value,  no 
difference  of  opinion  can  be  entertained  about  the  remark- 
able accuracy  of  method  and  scholarship,  in  which  he  has 
set  a  bright  example  to  all  who  come  after  him.  His  colla- 
tions will  remain  a  treasure  for  all  time." 

About  the  same  period  Alter  was  doing  work  at  Vienna, 
similar  in  kind,  but  inferior  in  degree.  And  Birch,  with  the 
assistance  of  Adler  and  Moldenhawer,  laboured  in  Italy, 
Germany,  and  Spain. 

4.  Thus  a  large  mass  of  evidence  grew  up  :  what  seemed 
vast  in  the  days  of  Mill  was  extensively  multiplied.  And 
in  consequence  another  attempt  was  made  to  classify  the 
accumulated  materials  of  criticism.  John  James  Griesbach, 
a  pupil  of  Semler,  following  out,  though  with  corrections, 
what  his  master  had  begun,  urged  that  three  great  families 
of  manuscripts  existed,  each  of  which  was  founded  upon  a 
special  '  Recension,'  or  edition.  He  distinguished  these  as 
respectively  Western,  Alexandrian,  and  Byzantine.  He 
considered  that  the  testimony  of  two  of  these  classes  should 
prevail  against  the  third.  His  theory  was  no  doubt  grounded 
upon  a  certain,  or  rather  an  uncertain,  amount  of  truth.  But 
as  he  carried  it  out,  it  was  overthrown  by  Archbishop 
Laurence.     And   as    to   his   'recensions,'  as  J.  G.  Reiche 

'  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  463. 

^  Burgon,  "The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  246. 

C 


i8  THE  CHILDHOOD. 


afterwards  shewed/  there  was  no  ground  for  them  beyond 
speculation.  Nothing  that  can  be  termed  historical  evidence 
has  been  produced  for  any  such  operations  having  been  ac- 
complished as  would  account  for  Griesbach's  classes. 

But  Griesbach  also  carefully  edited  a  Greek  Testament, 
and  thoroughly  examined  the  citations  of  Holy  Scripture 
made  by  Origen.  This  latter  operation,  of  which  the  results 
may  be  seen  in  his  SymbolcB.  Criticce^  affords  a  specimen  of 
what  must  be  done  in  the  case  at  least  of  the  more  important 
Ecclesiastical  Writers  before  all  the  evidence  adducible  can 
be  brought  to  bear  upon  controverted  points. 

Griesbach  carries  us  into  the  present  century  :  he  died  in 
1812.  The  work  was  continued  by  John  Martin  Augustine 
Scholz,  who  added,  though  with  much  incorrectness,  a  large 
amount  of  materials  to  the  stores  previously  known.  His 
contribution  consists  of  no  less  than  616  Cursive  manus- 
cripts. But  confidence  cannot  be  reposed  in  his  productions, 
as  has  been  shewn  more  than  once.^  It  is  remarkable  that  he 
modified  Griesbach's  theory  of  supposed  Recensions  of 
manuscripts,  including  the  Western  of  Griesbach  amongst 
the  Alexandrian,  and  thus  making  two  instead  of  three. 
"  In  the  Alexandrian  family,"  says  Dr.  Scrivener,  "  he  in- 
cluded the  whole  of  Griesbach's  Western  recension,  from 
which,  indeed,  it  seems  vain  to  distinguish  it  by  any  broad 
line  of  demarcation."  ^ 

'  Burgon,  "The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  3S0  and  notes.  Cook,  "Re- 
vised Version,"  pp.  4-7.  J.  G.  Reiclie,  "  Commentarius  Criticus," 
torn,  iii.,  Observatio  Prcevia. 

-  Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  474,  and  note,  in  which  he 
quotes  from  Dean  Burgon's  letters  to  the  "Guardian." 

^  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  475.  'The  untenable  point  of 
Griesbach's  system,  even  su])posing  that  it  had  historic  basis,  was  the 
impossibility   of   drawing    an   actual   line   of  distinction    between    his 


VIGOROUS  GROWTH.  19 

Such  was  the  growth  of  the  Science  till  towards  the 
middle  of  the  present  century.  It  was  the  natural  develop- 
ment of  boyhood,  invigorated  and  enlarged  by  constant 
action,  and  extending  freely  on  all  sides.  There  was  con- 
tinually an  amplification  of  materials,  and  operations  were 
progressively  prosecuted  over  wider  and  wider  fields.  Theory 
was  pursued  less  actively,  and  with  not  so  happy  results. 
Different  minds  succeeded  in  different  provinces ;  hardly 
any  one  in  all.  '  We  are  thankful,'  says  Dr.  Davidson,  '  to 
the  collators  of  manuscripts  for  their  great  labour.  But  it 
may  be  doubted  whether  they  be  often  competent  to  make 
the  best  critical  text  out  of  existing  materials.  .  .  .  We  should 
rather  see  the  collator  and  the  editor  of  the  text  dissociated. 
We  should  like  to  have  one  person  for  each  department.'  ^ 

Alexandrian   and   Western   recensions.' — Tregelles,    "Printed   Text," 

p.  91- 

^  'Biblical  Criticism,"  vol.  ii.,  pp.  104-5,  quoted  by  Tregelles, 
"  Printed  Text,"  p.  172. 


CHAPTER    III. 

HISTORY  OF    TEXTUAL   CRITICISM. 

Part  II.  Contemporary  Growth.     (3)  Youth  : — Lach- 

MANN    and   the   SEVERAL    DOCTORS    OF   THE    EXTREME 

School.    (4)  Signs  of  Maturity  : — Other  Doctors. 
Widening  of  the  Basis. 

BUT  now  came  a  change.  The  impetuosity  of  youth 
lacked  the  patience  to  await  a  further  growth  of  the 
Science,  and  to  abstain  from  drawing  conclusions  till  all  the 
evidence  had  been  gathered  out  of  all  quarters,  thoroughly 
examined,  sorted,  and  duly  valued.  A  short  and  easy 
method  of  decision  was  sought  and  taken.  It  was  too  hard 
a  lot  to  leave  the  inheritance  of  the  promised  land  to  a 
coming  generation.  If  the  evidence  were  too  unwieldy 
to  be  managed  in  the  mass,  some  was  valuable,  and  some 
not  at  all.  Why  not  select  the  valuable,  and  be  guided 
by  the  verdicts  it  gave  ? 

So  arose  the  School  of  Extreme  Textualism. 

I.  Lachmann,  the  celebrated  philologist  and  critic,  pub- 
lished with  the  aid  of  Philip  Buttmann,  an  edition  of  tlie 
New  Testament  in  two  volumes,  one  of  which  came  out  in 
1842,  and  the  other  in  1850,  and  both  of  them  at  Berlin, 
where  he  was  a  professor.  His  first  principle,  at  which  he  had 
hinted  in  a  small  edition  eleven  years  before,  was  to  discard 


LACHMANN. 


the  readings  of  the  '  Received  Text,'  as  being  in  his  opinion 
only  about  two  centuries  old  ;  whereas  they  conflicted  with 
what  he  conceived  to  be  better  authority.  His  main  object 
was  to  restore,  according  to  the  design  of  Bentley,  the  text 
of  the  fourth  century,  which  he  supposed  had  been  lost. 
For  this  purpose  he  laid  aside  all  the  later  manuscripts,  and 
confined  himself  to  the  few  older  ones.  He  also  admitted 
the  earliest  Latin  versions  which  existed  before  St.  Jerome 
effected  the  Vulgate  revision.  And  lastly,  he  employed 
the  testimony  of  a  few  of  the  oldest  Fathers. 

Thus  in  the  Gospels  he  had  the  guidance  of  the  Alexan- 
drian (A.),  the  Vatican  (B.),  the  Parisian  (C),  and  four 
fragments,'  besides  an  occasional  use  of  the  Cambridge 
manuscript  (D)  : — the  old  Italian  manuscript  in  Latin: — 
and  the  quotations  of  St.  Irenaeus,  St.  Cyprian,  Origen, 
Lucifer,  and  Hilary.  He  made  a  clean  sweep  of  all  the 
rest, — a  very  satisfactory  process  as  far  as  easiness  of  revi- 
sion was  concerned, — choosing  a  'voluntary'  and  comfort- 
able '  poverty '  of  materials,  with  a  haughty  disregard  of  the 
earnest  labours  of  his  predecessors."  Of  his  manuscripts, 
only  one,  the  Vatican  B,  really  conducted  him  into  the 
fourth  century,  and  of  that  he  could  then  use  only  imperfect 
collations.  The  most  important  part  of  his  work  has  been 
considered  to  be  the  toil  which  he  expended  upon  the  old 
Latin  texts,  and  his  vindication  of  their  critical  value, 
though  that  is  not  now  held  to  be  quite  so  high  as  his  esti- 
mate would  make  it. 

2.  Lachmann  was  succeeded  by  Samuel  Prideaux  Tre- 
gelles,  whose  labours  were  much  more  prolific.     Brought  up 

'  P,  Q,  T,  Z. 

^  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  478,  9.  Tregelles,  "Printed 
Text,"  p.  104. 


YOUTH. 


amongst  the  Society  of  Friends,  he  passed  through  the  body 
of  Plymouth  Brethren  into  the  position  of  a  lay  member  of 
the  Church  of  England/  The  most  important  part  of  his 
work  is  to  be  found  in  his  editions,  and  especially  his  colla- 
tions of  manuscripts.  He  edited  two,  the  "  Codex  Zacyn- 
thius"(S7),  belonging  to  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society, 
and  the  fragment  O.  He  collated  with  great  accuracy- 
eighteen  Uncials,  and  thirteen  Cursives.  And  he  devoted 
much  attention  to  Versions  and  Fathers,  especially  to  Origen 
and  Eusebius."^ 

He  discussed  Lachmann's  method,  in  his  "  Account  of 
the  Printed  Text  of  the  New  Testament,"  and  accepted 
unreservedly  the  first  principle.  '  To  Lachmann  must  be 
conceded  this,  that  he  led  the  way  in  casting  aside  the  so- 
called  Textus  Receptus,  and  boldly  placing  the  New  Testa- 
ment wholly  and  entirely  on  the  basis  of  actual  authority." 
With  this  utter  disregard  of  the  Received  Text,  Tregelles 
went  on  to  the  endorsement  of  the  next  principle,  which  was 
found  in  drawing  a  line  of  demarcation  between  the  critical 
aids  that  are  to  be  neglected  as  valueless,  and  those  upon 
which  dependence  was  to  be  placed.  He  divided  manu- 
scripts into  three  classes.  The  assent  of  those  which  were 
anterior  to  the  seventh  century  was  held  by  him  to  be 
essential  for  the  settlement  of  any  reading.  The  Cursives, 
dating  since  the  tenth  century,  were  erroneously  regarded  by 
him  as  in  general  opposed  to  the  ancient  copies.  And  the 
later  Uncials,  between  the  seventh  and  the  eleventh  centuries, 
appeared  to  him  to  be  divided  in  their  agreement  between 
the  modern  and  the  ancient.     So  that  the  only  trustworthy 

^  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  4S7. 

2  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  486. 

3  Ibid.  '   "  Printed  Text,"  p.  99. 


TREGELLES  AND    TISCHENDORF.  23 

authorities  were  the  oldest  of  these.  ^  In  a  similar  spirit,  he 
attended  to  none  but  the  earliest  Versions,  and  to  those 
sparingly,  and  cited  no  Fathers  later  than  Eusebius  in  the 
earlier  half  of  the  fourth  century.  The  reasons  for  this  latter 
Hmitare  :  (i)  because  Eusebius  '  is  on  the  Hne  of  demarcation 
between  the  earlier  text,  and  that  which  afterwards  became 
widely  diffused  ;  and  (2)  because  of  the  absolute  necessity  of 
confining  such  an  examination  between  such  limits  as  it  might 
be  practicable  for  one  individual  to  reach  in  any  moderate 
number  of  years.' '  Tregelles  died  in  1875,  before  his  Greek 
Testament  was  fully  out. 

3.  But  the  most  conspicuous  figure  in  this  school  was 
Constantine  Tischendorf,  a  man  of  the  most  remarkable 
energy  and  success,  who  in  the  services  that  he  rendered  in 
assembling  materials  for  Textual  Criticism,  and  in  present- 
ing them  for  employment  to  establish  the  genuineness  of 
any  reading,  has  out-topped  even  the  most  considerable 
figures  in  the  long  Une  of  his  predecessors.  The  eighth 
edition  of  his  Greek  Testament  is  an  amazing  monument  of 
the  incessant  toil  which  occupied  a  life  that  ended  on  Dec. 
7,  1874,  shortly  before  the  completion  of  his  sixtieth  year. 

A  record  of  his  contributions  to  the  critical  aids  to 
Textual  Criticism  has  been  given  by  Dr.  Caspar  Rene 
Gregory,  who  with  some  assistance  from  Professor  Ezra 
Abbot,  has  written  the  first  part  of  the  "  Prolegomena  "  to 
Tischendorfs  Greek  Testament.     Tischendorf^  discovered 


'  "Printed  Text,"  p.  180.  "Prolegomena  to  Greek  New  Testa- 
ment," ix.  He  virtually  rejected  all  Uncials  later  than  the  end  of 
the  sixth  century,  except  L.  X.,  A.,  9,  and  all  Cursives  whatever, 
except  I,  33,  69,  i.e.,  all  that  sided  with  the  Textus  Receptus. 

*  "Prolegomena,"  xviii.  Home  and  Tregelles  "Introduction  to 
the  New  Testament,"  p,  342,  ^  P.  91. 


24  YOUTH. 


fifteen  Uncials,  including  the  great  Sinaitic  manuscript  ({<), 
besides  using  for  the  first  time  twenty-three ;  he  edited 
twenty-one,  copied  out  four,  and  collated  thirteen,  not  to 
reckon  much  labour  spent  upon  more  than  thirty  others, 
and  toil  of  a  smaller  kind  that  is  scarce  recorded. 

In  the  year  1844,  whilst  travelling  under  the  patronage  of 
Frederick  Augustus  King  of  Saxony,  in  quest  of  manu- 
scripts, Tischendorf  reached  the  Convent  of  St.  Catherine, 
on  Mount  Sinai.  Here  observing  some  old-looking  docu- 
ments in  a  basketful  of  papers  ready  for  lighting  the  stove, 
he  picked  them  out,  and  discovered  that  they  were  forty- 
three  vellum  leaves  of  the  Septuagint  Version.  He  was 
allowed  to  take  these  :  but  in  the  desire  of  saving  the  other 
parts  of  the  manuscript  of  which  he  heard,  he  explained 
their  value  to  the  monks,  who  being  now  enlightened  would 
only  allow  him  to  copy  one  page,  and  refused  to  sell  him 
the  rest.  On  his  return  he  published  in  1846  what  he  had 
succeeded  in  getting,  under  the  title  of  the  "  Codex  Fride- 
rico-Augustanus,"  inscribed  to  his  benefactor.  In  1859,  he 
was  again  in  the  East,  being  sent  by  Alexander  II.,  Em- 
peror of  Russia,  and  was  received  at  the  convent  as  an 
emissary  from  the  Great  Protector  of  the  Eastern  Church. 
One  night  in  a  conversation  with  the  steward,  he  was 
shewn  a  manuscript,  '  written  on  loose  leaves  and  wrapped 
in  a  red  cloth,'  and  was  allowed  to  examine  it.  He  sat  up 
all  night  with  his  treasure,  for  as  he  said,  '  it  seemed  wicked  to 
sleep.'  He  found  a  complete  New  Testament,  a  large  portion 
of  the  Septuagint,  the  Epistle  of  St.  Barnabas,  and  a  fragment 
of  the  Shepherd  of  Hermas.  After  this,  he  was  allowed  to 
copy  the  manuscript,  and  the  Codex  was  in  course  of  time 
presented  to  the  Emperor,  and  is  now  at  St.  Petersburg.^ 

'   "Christian  Remembrancer,"  xlvi.,    p.    194.     Scrivener's    "Plain 


TISCHENDORF.  25 


Before  the  discovery  of  this  important  manuscript,  Tis- 
chendorf  had  issued  seven  editions  of  his  Greek  Testament. 
In  these,  so  far  as  the  third,  he  had  paid  scarcely  any 
attention  to  the  Cursive  manuscripts.  After  that  edition, 
the  course  of  his  studies  led  him  to  introduce  their  record 
into  his  lists  of  authorities  on  passages.  The  consequence 
was  that  his  seventh  edition  has  been  calculated  to  differ  from 
the  third  in  1,296  instances,  'in  no  less  than  595  of  which 
(430  of  the  remainder  being  mere  matters  of  spelUng)  he 
returned  to  the  readings  of  the  Received  Text,  which  he  had 
before  deserted,  but  to  which  fresh  materials  and  larger 
experience  had  brought  him  back.'  ^  The  eighth  edition 
was  constructed  with  the  help  of  the  newly  discovered 
Sinaitic  manuscript  (^)  and  his  attachment  to  the  treasure 
that  he  had  rescued  proved  too  much  for  him.  He  altered 
his  seventh  edition  in  no  less  than  3,369  instances,  generally 
in  compliance  with  the  Sinaitic  copy,  *  to  the  scandal,'  as 
Dr.  Scrivener  justly  remarks,  'of  the  science  of  Comparative 
Criticism,  as  well  as  to  his  own  grave  discredit  for  discern- 
ment and  accuracy.'" 

Much  therefore  as  we  may  and  must  ever  feel  indebted  to 
Tischendorf  for  the  invaluable  results  of  his  labours,  we 
cannot  regard  him  as  a  man  of  sober  and  solid  judgment. 
I  lis  zigzag  course  does  not  impress  us  with  the  soundness  of 
any  position  upon  w^hich  he  found  himself  throughout  it. 

4.  But  the  principles  of  this  School  of  Textualists  have 
reached  their  most  complete  exposition  in  the  "  Introduction 
to  the  Greek  Testament,"  edited  by  Professors  Westcott  and 
Hort.     This  edition  was  founded  upon  labour  in  the  case 

Introduction,  pp.  87,  88.    Tischendorf,  "  Codex  Sinaiticus,  "  Proleg., " 
p.  xxii.      Scrivener,  "Codex  Sinaiticus,"  vii — ix. 

'   Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  529.  '^  Ibid. 


26  YOUTH. 


of  both  those  erudite  men  extending  through  nearly  thirty 
years,  including  the  period  when  as  Revisers  they  were 
assisting  in  the  Revision  of  the  English  Translation. 
Copies  were  however  printed  privately  and  placed  in  the 
hands  of  all  the  Revisers.  It  was  not  till  the  revision  was 
out  that  they  became  public  property.  And  shortly  after- 
wards an  elaborate  and  ingenious  Introduction  was  pub- 
lished, from  the  hand,  as  is  stated,  of  Dr.  Hort.^ 

The  object  of  the  Introduction  is  evidently  to  reduce  to  a 
definite  system  the  principles  of  Lachmann,  and  to  advance 
grounds  upon  which  the  testimony  of  a  few  authorities 
standing  by  themselves  may  be  accepted  in  preference  to 
the  verdict  of  the  great  majority  of  witnesses.  Accordingly 
it  is  argued  that  a  text  which  is  found  in  the  fourth  century, 
although  it  was  rejected  and  lay  in  all  but  oblivion  through- 
out the  succeeding  ages,'  is  the  genuine  form  and  therefore 
must  be  followed.  This  doctrine  leads  to  the  exaltation  of 
B  and  K — but  especially  B  ^ — into  such  an  unique  [)Osition, 
that  after  an  examination  of  these  principles  and  their  appli- 
cation, an  observer  unacquainted  with  the  history  of  manu- 
scripts would  imagine  that  these  two  very  far  surpassed  all 
others  both  in  antiquity  and  in  an  indisputable  purity  of 
expression.  And  indeed  an  attempt  is  made,  based  upon  a 
large  amount  of  speculation,  but  the  very  slenderest  degree 
of  evidence,  to  add  a  couple  of  centuries  to  their  virtual 
age.  But  it  must  ever  be  remembered  that  A  and  C  are 
nearly  as  ancient  as  B  and  K.     Indeed,  one  opinion  makes 

'  P.  1 8.  Yet  it  is  true  that,  '  barely  the  smallest  vestige  of  historical 
evidence  has  ever  been  alleged  in  support  of  the  views  of  these  accom- 
plished editors.'     Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  531. 

■^  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  pp.  91,  92,  no,  142.    Vol.  i., 

PP-  547.  550- 

^  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  pp.  171,  no. 


DKS.    WESTCOTT  AND  HORT.  Vj 

A  only  about  fifty  years  younger  than  B  the  eldest  of  the 
pair.^  Besides  which,  according  to  dates  now  admitted,  B 
and  probably  {^  were  produced  under  the  dark  gloom  of 
Asian  ascendency ;  A  and  C  in  the  light  of  the  most  intel- 
lectual period  of  the  early  Church. 

This  deference  to  B,  amounting  almost  to  a  superstitious 
adulation,-  leads  the  two  learned  Professors  to  follow  it  when- 
ever it  is  supported  by  only  slight  testimony  from  other  quar- 
ters.^ Thus  they  adopt  all  the  readings  already  enumerated 
in  the  Introduction  to  this  little  Treatise,  and  a  vast  number 
of  others  of  the  same  kind.^ 

For  example,  they  make  St.  Mark '  declare  that  the 
dancing-girl  who  demanded  the  head  of  John  the  Baptist  was 
Herod  Antipas'  own  daughter,  and  that  her  name  was  Hero- 
dias,  in  flat  contradiction  to  the  account  in  St.  Matthew  as 
edited  by  themselves,  and  at  variance  also  with  the  his- 
tory of  the  family,  as  given  by  Josephus.*^  Again,  the  Lord 
is  represented  by  them  in  St.  Luke  '  as  preaching  in  the 
synagogues  of  Judea  at  the  very  time  which  He  is  said  by 
St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  to  have  spent  in  doing  the  same 
in  the  synagogues  of  Galilee,  and  when  He  ought  to  have 
been  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Holy  Land  according  to  the 
context  of  the  passage  itself.  Also  in  Acts  x.  19,  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  described  as  telling  St.  Peter  that  two  men  were 

'  Cooke,  "  Revised  Version,"  p.  185. 

-  Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  529,  530. 

■'  Westcott  and  Hort,  "Introduction,  230-246. 

*  Pp.  2,  3: — Occasionally,  as  in  St.  Luke  xxii.  19,  20;  xxiv.  3,  6, 
9,  12,  36,  40,  52,  even  against  the  authority  of  B  and  N. 

''  St.  Mark  vi.  22.  avTov  for  avrtig.  The  context  in  St.  Mark  is 
against  this  reading,  which  is  besides  ungrammatical. 

^  St.  Matt.  xiv.  6.     Josephus,  "  Antiq.,"  xviii.,  5,  §§.  I,  2,  4. 

'  St.  Luke  iv.  44.  'lovdaiag  for  TaXiXaiac.  St.  Matt.  iv.  23,  St. 
Mark  i.  39. 


28  YOUTH. 


seeking  Him,  when  the  seventh  verse  had  made  it  clear  that 
there  were  three,  viz.,  two  of  CorneHus'  servants  and  a  sol- 
dier who  was  his  constant  attendant.^  And  in  Acts  xii.  25, 
St.  Paul  and  St.  Barnabas  are  said  to  have  returned  from 
Jerusalem  to  Jerusalem,  when  they  were  really  going  back 
from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch.  Lastly, — not  to  make  thesj3eci- 
men  instances  too  numerous, — the  Professors  omit,  and  the 
Revisers  too,  'the  precious  verse'  (St.  Matt.  xvii.  21) 
*  which  declares  that  this  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer 
and  fasting,'  notwithstanding  that  only  three  manuscripts,  B 
and  N  and  33,  testify  by  themselves  for  the  omission  against 
a  very  host  of  varied  witnesses.^ 

This  servile  submission  to  B,  in  the  face  of  copious  testi- 
mony, may  be  also  seen  in  their  presentment  of  proper  names. 
Such  are  Melitene  for  Melita,  evidently  a  transcriptional  blun- 
der,^ Nazara  in  two  places  only  for  Nazareth,'  Beezebul  for 
Beelzebul,'  Joanes  for  Joannes,^  the  uncouth  trunks  Koum 
and  Golgoth,''  and — also  a  transcriptional  mistake — the 
singular  appellative   Titius  Justus.^     They  have  also,  with 

'  Also  Acts  xi.  II. 

^  Dean  Burgon,  "The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  91,  92,  supplies  these 
witnesses.     Omission  of  verses  is  very  common  with  these  editors. 

^  MELITIiHNH202.  By  eliding  the  article  »'/,  and  attaching  the 
first  syllable  of  i^jjcroc  to  MtX/r??.  Acts  xxviii.  i.  See  Burgon,  "Re- 
vision Revised,"  p.  177.  The  letters  in  the  oldest  Uncial  Manuscripts 
had  no  spaces  between  them. 

**  St.  ?klatt.  iv.  13  :  St.  Luke  iv.  16.  They  read  elsewhere  Na^opjf^ 
and  No^rtpar. 

^  E.  g.  St.  Matt.  X.  25. 

^  Though  only  due  to  the  scribe  of  B,  /.  c.  also  in  the  parts  of  n 
written  by  that  scribe.      "  Introduction,"  p.  159. 

'  St.  Mark  v.  41  :  St.  Matt,  xxvii.  33  :  St.  Matt.  xv.  22  :  St.  John 
xix.  17. 

8  ONOMATIIOUiiTOU.     Insert  a  second  T  between  the  last  syl- 


EXTREME   RESULTS.  29 

more  reason  and  authority  on  their  side,  but  with  needless 
eccentricity,  changed  the  order  of  Books,  placing  the 
CathoHc  Epistles  before  those  of  St.  Paul. 

To  such  results  as  these  Professors  Westcott  and  Hort 
have  been  guided  in  obedience  to  inexorable  theory.  Never- 
theless, they  have  here  and  there  sacrificed  their  consistency 
to  some  extent,  as,  for  example,  when  they  have  shrunk  from 
disfiguring  St.  Paul's  exquisite  description  of  Charity  by  the 
assertion  that  Charity  '  seeketh  not  what  is  not  her  own,'  and 
therefore  that  she  adds  to  numerous  sublime  traits  a  freedom 
from  gross  violations  of  the  eighth  and  tenth  commandments. 
But  this  fitful  courage  does  not  keep  them  from  admitting 
that  such  a  bathos  as  this  might  possibly  not  have  ofl:ended 
the  inspired  taste  of  St.  Paul,  inasmuch  as  they  have  placed 
in  their  margin  this  stupid  blunder  of  the  scribe  of  B.^ 

The  Theory  of  the  Cambridge  Professors  that  leads  to 
such  results  will  be  explained  and  sifted  in  the  next  chapter. 
But  one  feature  in  it  must  be  noticed  here.  The  authors 
adduce  the  slenderest  support  from  actual  evidence  :  in- 
genious as  it  is,  their  course  of  reasoning  is  '  entirely  destitute 
of  historical  foundation.' "  Dr.  Hort  gives  no  array  of  autho- 
rities in  text  or  notes,  and  does  not  build  up  his  theory  upon 
acknowledged  or  produced  facts. 

The  system  thus  unfolded  has  derived  greater  prominence 
from  its  having  been  mainly  adopted  by  '  Two  Members  of 
the  New  Testament    Company '  in    their    defence   of  the 


lable  of  ovofiari  and  the  first  two  of  'lovcrrov,  and  Tiriov  is  made  imme- 
diately, and  is  due  alone  to  B. 

^  oi)  ZrjTH  TO.  fxi)  tavTrjg  after  a  faulty  MS.  used  by  Clement  of 
Alexandria  (252  Potter,  92  Migne),  who,  however  (947  Potter,  345 
Migne),  gives  the  true  words. 

'  Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  537. 


30  S/GNS  OF  COMING  MATURITY. 

Revisers'  Greek  Text.  No  one  can  read  their  pamphlet/ 
or  examine  the  readings  admitted  by  a  majority  of  the 
Revisers  and  defended  by  them,  without  seeing  that,  although 
their  action  is  in  some  respects  independent  of  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort,  they  generally  uphold  the  principles  advocated  by 
those  learned  men.  Indeed,  alterations  depending  only  upon 
B  and  J>^,  and  sometimes  upon  B  alone  with  some  other 
support,  are  frequently  preferred  in  the  Revised  Version 
before  readings  of  the  Textus  Receptus,  notwithstanding 
that  the  latter  are  so  numerously  and  strongly  attested,  that 
on  no  other  grounds  except  extreme  deference  to  those 
Uncials  could  such  a  verdict  be  rejected. 

The  championship  and  support  of  men  so  learned  and 
illustrious  must  carry  great  weight.  And  the  question  arises 
whether  it  be  not  so  strong  as  to  lead  all  who  admire  their 
great  qualities  to  abide  by  their  conclusions.  Or  is  it 
possible,  that  as  in  the  history  of  much  human  opinion,  even 
they  may  have  been  induced  to  take  a  wrong  turn  in  early 
days,  and  that  they  have  been  led  into  a  valley  attractive  in 
itself  but  whence  the  best  views  have  been  excluded  ?  Strange 
as  such  a  conclusion  might  seem,  the  results  of  the  present 
inquiry  seem  to  point  imperatively  in  no  other  direction. 
And  such  is  the  contention  of  men  quite  as  eminent  in  this 
province  as  the  upholders  of  the  opinions  just  described. 

IV.  Signs  of  Coming  Maturity. 

Textual  Criticism  would  not  be  governed  by  the  principles 
that  underlie  all  movements  of  human  thought,  if  the 
strenuous  pursuance   of  so  limited    a   course   as   the   one 

'  "The  Revisers  and  The  Greek  Text  of  the  New  Testament,"  by 
Two  Members  of  the  New  Testament  Company,  1882. 


DR.    SCRIVENER.  31 


recently  followed  did  not  provoke  a  departure  in  another 
direction.  Accordingly  strong  opposition  was  made  within 
the  Revisers'  Company  by  a  stout  minority  headed  by  Dr. 
Scrivener  the  first  textual  critic  of  the  day,  and  tacitly  sup- 
ported by  Members  of  the  Company  who  had  ceased  to  act, 
as  well  as  by  other  deep  students  of  the  subject,  such  as 
Dean  Burgon  and  Canon  Cook.  And  their  advocacy  has 
been  developed  into  the  teaching  of  a  Rival  and  rising 
School,  under  which  the  basis  is  widened,  and  the  building 
is  being  constructed  out  of  all  the  materials  within  reach. 

I.  The  labour  spent  by  Dr.  Scrivener  upon  Textual 
Criticism  is  well  known  from  his  admirable  Introduction 
to  the  Science,  a  handbook  ^  which  leaves  hardly  anything, 
if  anything,  to  be  desired.  Dr.  Scrivener's  candour,  and 
patient  and  conscientious  consideration  of  every  point  that 
presents  itself,  and  of  every  opinion  resting  upon  intelligence, 
are  conspicuous  in  all  that  he  has  written  upon  this  subject. 
And  his  accuracy,  a  matter  of  extreme  importance  in  these 
matters,  stands  at  the  very  top  of  editorial  and  collational 
work.  '  Let  the  truth  be  told,'  says  the  Dean  of  Chichester, 
*■  C.  F.  Matthaei  and  he  [i.e.  Dr.  Scrivener]  are  the  only  two 
scholars  who  have  collated  any  considerable  number  of 
sacred  codices  with  the  needful  amount  of  accuracy.' " 

In  1853,  Dr.  Scrivener  published  'A  full  and  exact  Colla- 
tion of  about  twenty  Greek  manuscripts  of  the  Holy  Gospels.' 
In  his  Introduction  he  said  :  'The  following  pages  comprise 
a  humble  yet  earnest  attempt  to  revive  among  the  country- 
men  of  Bentley  and   Mill   some    interest  in  a  branch  of 

"'  "A  Plain  Introduction  to  the  Criticism  of  the  New  Testament  for 
the  use  of  Biblical  Students,"  by  F.  H.  A.  Scrivener,  M.A.,  D.C.L., 
LL.D.,  tVc,  3rd  edition,  1883. 

-  "The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  246. 


SIGNS  OF  COMING  MA  TURITY. 


Biblical  learning  which,  for  upwards  of  a  century,  we  have 
tacitly  abandoned  to  continental  scholars.'  The  success  of 
this  attempt,  if  limited  in  these  earlier  days  of  Dr.  Scrivener's 
influence  to  comparatively  a  small  band  of  scholars,  never- 
theless has  been  conspicuous.  This  work  was  followed  in 
1859  by  'An  exact  Transcript  of  the  Codex  Augiensis  .  .  . 
to  which  is  added  a  Full  Collection  of  Fifty  Manuscripts.' 
To  both  of  these  works  valuable  Introductions  are  prefixed, 
explanatory  of  the  principles  of  the  Science,  and  containing 
discussions  upon  controverted  questions,  such  as  whether 
there  are  families  of  Manuscripts,  and  against  the  partial  use 
of  only  a  few  authorities,  as  advocated  by  Lachmann  and 
Tregelles.  In  1864,  he  published  'A  Full  Collation  of  the 
Codex  Sinaiticus'  (K),  with  corrections  of  errata  in  Tischen- 
dorf 's  editions  of  the  same  manuscript.  And  in  the  same 
year  he  edited  for  the  University  of  Cambridge  a  handsome 
volume  containing  the  great  Cambridge  manuscript  (D). 
Such,  with  his  '  Plain  Introduction  '  already  noticed,  have 
been  his  chief,  but  by  no  means  his  only  works. 

The  line  taken  by  Dr.  Scrivener  has  uniformly  been  that 
all  evidence  must  be  employed  in  comparative  or  Textual 
Criticism.  Yet  not  all  indiscriminately;  but  each  being 
assigned  its  proper  value.  Thus  he  by  no  means  accedes 
to  the  proposal  of  neglecting  the  Received  Text.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  he  has  ever  admitted  that  revision  is  required, 
and  has  been  ready  to  submit  to  the  clear  verdict  of  evidence. 
He  would  proceed  with  far-sighted  and  wide-viewed  caution  ; 
and  would  urge  that  everything  possible  should  be  done  to 
make  all  documents  of  whatever  sort  ready  to  minister  in 
their  several  places  to  well-pondered  conclusions. 

2.  Of  about  the  same  age  as  Dr.  Scrivener,  but  in  the  en- 
joyment of  better  health,  the  Dean  of  Chichester  is  a  re- 


DEAN  BURG  ON.  33 

doubtable  champion  upon  the  same  side.  His  first  Book  in 
this  department  was  a  vindication  of  "  The  Last  Twelve 
Verses  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel/'  published  in  1871,  in  which  ac- 
cording to  the  award  of  the  first  living  judge,  he  '  has  thrown 
a  stream  of  light  upon  the  controversy,  nor  does  the  joyous 
tone  of  his  book  misbecome  one  who  is  conscious  of  having 
triumphantly  maintained  a  cause  which  is  very  precious  to 
him.'  Even  so  unfavourable  a  judge  as  Mr.  Hammond 
admits  the  cogency  and  success  of  his  arguments.^  Another, 
marked  with  the  natural  impetuosity  of  Dean  Burgon's  contro 
versial  style,  but  bristling  with  learning,  and  built  upon  re- 
markably strong  and  detailed  foundations,  which,  as  it 
appears,  many  of  his  opponents  have  not  the  patience  to 
examine  accurately,  is  "The  Revision  Revised,"  a  republica- 
tion of  Articles  in  the  "  Quarterly  Review,"  with  additions, 
chiefly  upon  the  disputed  text  in  the  First  Epistle  to  St. 
Timothy."  Besides  these  books  the  Dean  is  constantly  at 
work,  and  is  beUeved  to  have  copious  materials  for  future 
publication.  And  his  "Letters  from  Rome"  (1862),  and 
sundry  letters  from  time  to  time  in  the  "  Guardian  "  news- 
paper, as  well  as  contributions  to  editions  of  Dr.  Scrivener's 
"  Plain  Introduction,"  to  the  last  of  which  he  has  added 
particulars  of  three  hundred  and  seventy-four  manuscripts 
previously  unknown  to  the  world  of  letters,  are  results  of  toil 
which  has  been  continued  for  many  years. 

Dean  Burgon  has  incurred  much  misrepresentation.  He 
does  not  maintain  the  faultlessness  of  the  Received  Text ; 
he  is  not  a  devoted  adherent  of  the  Alexandrian  Codex  (A) ; 

^  "Outlines  of  Textual  Criticism,"  &c.,  by  C.  E.  Hammond, 
M.A.,  3rd  ed.,  pp.  116-23. 

-  I  Timothy  iii.  16.  Geog  instead  of  the  advocated  oq  or  b.  See 
below,  "Appendix,"  vii. 

D 


34  SIGNS  OF  COMING  MATURITY. 

he  does  not  simply  count  his  authorities,  or  follow  the  largest 
number,  irrespectively  of  their  weight  and  value.  But  he 
urges  that  all  should  be  taken  into  account ;  'that  the  Truth 
of  the  Text  of  Scripture  is  to  be  elicited  exclusively  from  the 
consentient  testimony  of  the  largest  number  of  the  best 
Copies,  Fathers,  Versions ; '  ^  that  that  is  the  Truth  which 
*  enjoys  the  earliest,  the  fullest,  the  widest,  the  most  respect- 
able, and — above  all  things — the  most  varied  attestation  ; '  ^ 
that  all  the  existing  Copies  must  be  assembled  and  accu- 
rately collated,  the  Versions  edited,  and  the  Fathers  indexed 
before  a  revision  of  the  Greek  Text  can  be  successfully  ac- 
complished ;  ^  that  evidence  and  examination  prove  con- 
vincingly that  the  Vatican  (B)and  the  Sinaitic  (K)  manuscripts 
exhibit  really  bad,  instead  of  good,  texts ;  ^  and  that  all  must 
be  rested  upon  definite  external  attestation,  not  upon  the 
shifting  sands  of  conjecture,  opinion,  taste,  and  other  internal 
sources  of  inference.^  It  should  be  added,  that  Dean  Burgon 
surpasses  everyone  in  acquaintance  with  Patristic  evidence  of 
readings. 

3.  Another  learned  maintainer  of  this  view  of  the  contro- 
versy is  Canon  Cook,  the  editor  in  chief  of  the  "  Speaker's 
Commentary."  His  controversy  with  the  Bishop  of  Durham 
upon  the  rendering  of  the  last  petition  in  the  Lord's  Prayer, 
on  which  his  last  and  longest  letter  has  remained  as  yet 
unanswered,  and  his  treatise  upon  the  "  Revised  Version  of 
the  First  Three  Gospels,"  have  been  important  contributions 
to  the  literature  of  this  subject.  Calm,  moderate,  weighty  in 
argument,  learned,  persuasive,  he  has  controverted  the  main 
positions  of  the  opposed  School  in  the  latter  of  these  two 

^   "  The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  51S, 

^  Ibid.,  p.  339.  ■''  Ibid.,  pp.  125,  247,  note. 

*  Ibid.,  pp.  11-17,  249,  262-265.  '   Ibid.,  pp.  19-20,  253. 


CANON  COOK  AND   OTHERS,  35 

works  with  great  cogency.  He  maintains  that  the  Vatican 
(B)  and  Sinaitic  (N)  Codices  have  been  unduly  exalted ; 
that  the  Alexandrian  (A),  which  in  the  Gospels  fairly  repre- 
sents the  text  used  by  St.  Chrysostom  and  his  great  contem- 
poraries, is  superior  to  them ;  that  the  former  two  were 
probably  written  under  the  direction  of  Eusebius ;  and  that 
the  theories  and  arguments  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  are 
destitute  of  solid  foundation. 

Also  those  eminent  Scholars,  Bishops  Christopher  and 
Charles  Wordsworth — '  Par  nobile  Fratrum  ' — the  loss  of 
the  first  of  whom  we  are  now  deploring,^  have  spoken  upon 
the  same  side  in  Charges  delivered  to  the  Clergy  of  their 
Dioceses,  deprecating  amongst  other  things  '  too  much 
confidence  in  certain  favourite  manuscripts.'  ^ 

Nor  is  this  contention  without  contemporary  support  upon 
the  Continent.  In  1862,  Dr.  J.  G.  Reiche  warned  scholars 
against  the  dangerous  principles  introduced  by  Lachmann, 
and  the  almost  superstitious  veneration  that  was  then  paid  to 
Lachmann's  text.  And  especially  he  spoke  against  the  prac- 
tice introduced  by  that  learned  scholar  of  consulting  only  a 
few  witnesses,  observing  especially  that  several  of  the  Ver- 
sions are  older  than  any  manuscripts.^  In  i860,  writing  from 
Leyden,  A.   Kuenen  and  C.  G.  Cobet,  in  the  Preface  to  an 

^  Bp.  Chr.  Wordsworth,  Charge,  Nov.  1881. 

^  I  cannot  pass  on  without  a  tribute  to  the  fearless  faithfulness,  the 
vast  mass  of  learning  ever  at  hand,  the  open  munificence,  and  the 
administrative  capacity  of  that  great  man. 

'  Cui  Pudor,  at  Justitise  sorer, 
Incorrupta  Fides,  nudaque  Veritas, 
Quando  ullum  invenient  parem  ? ' 

^  "  Commentarius  Criticus,"  Tomus  iii.  Ep.  ad  Heb.  et  Ep.  Cath. 
continens.  Observatio  prsevia.  Cook,  "Revised  Version,"  pp.  4-7. 
Burgon,  "The  Revision  Revised,"  pp.  380-Sl. 


36  SIGNS  OF  COMING  MA  TURITY. 

edition  of  the  Vatican  Codex,  protested  against  the  notion 
that  because  that  was  the  oldest  manuscript  it  therefore  pos- 
sessed an  authority  paramount  to  that  of  all  others.  On  the 
contrary,  they  asserted,  proving  the  assertion  with  a  copious 
array  of  evidence,  that  '  there  is  no  kind  of  error  that  is  not 
frequently  found  in  that  manuscript  as  in  all  the  rest.'  ^ 
Also  at  the  beginning  of  1884,  Dr.  J.  H.  A.  Michelsen,  in 
the  "  Theologisch  Tijdschrift,"  a  monthly  magazine  pub- 
lished at  Leyden,  submitted  the  text  of  B  and  K  to  a  vigorous 
examination.  From  internal  proofs,  such  as  glosses  intro- 
duced from  other  passages,  readings  plainly  bad  where  better 
exist,  and  omissions  of  verses  and  paragraphs,  all  copiously 
illustrated,  he  drew  the  conclusion  that  the  so-called  Neutral 
Text  is  not  so  good  as  the  advocates  of  it  claim,  and  directed 
attention  to  the  dangerous  traversing  of  the  principle, '  Quod 
semper,  quod  ubique,  quod  ab  omnibus,'  which  is  involved 
in  the  acceptance  of  that  form  of  Text. 

Besides  these,  we  may  reckon  the  strong  sentiment  pre- 
vailing in  the  Roman  Branch  of  the  Church.  Vercellone, 
the  editor  of  B,  now  no  more,  held  no  such  opinions  as  those 
of  Extreme  Textualism.  Ceriani,  of  Milan,  and  a  learned 
writer  in  the  "Dublin  Review,"^  seem  to  represent  what  is 
held  in  those  quarters.  And  the  Abbe  Martin,  of  Paris,  in 
his  elaborate  "  Fascicules  "  maintains  the  same  side  of  the 
controversy. 

It  will  be  seen  from  this  sketch,  that  so  far  from  ques- 
tions being  already  settled  amongst  the  learned  and  ripe 
for  a  general  decision  which  would  enjoy  universal  assent, 
two  Rival  Schools  are  now  contending  for  the  ascendency. 

^  "Novum  Testamentum,  ad  fid.  Cod.  Vat.,  ed.  A.  Kuenen  et 
C.  G.  Cobet,"  Praefatio,  p.  xiii.  &c. 

^  Jan.  1884.     On  "  New  Testament  Vaticanism." 


THE    TWO  RIVAL   SCHOOLS.  37 

The  one,  of  German  origin,  is  strongly  and  ably  maintained 
in  England,  and  reckons  large  support  amongst  Biblical 
Scholars.  The  other,  headed  by  the  first  Textual  Critic  of 
the  day,  and  earnestly  advocated  by  accomplished  Theolo- 
gians, counts  also  among  its  adherents  Roman  Catholics 
in  England  and  on  the  Continent,  including  experts  in  Italy 
and  elsewhere.  Therefore  careful  and  respectful  considera- 
tion is  further  necessary,  in  order  that  after  contrasting  and 
weighing  the  several  characteristics  of  both  Schools,  we 
may  know  from  solid  considerations  which  of  the  two  to 
follow. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

the  school  of  extreme  textualism. 
Theory  of  Westcott  and  Hort  explained  and 

REFUTED. 

'  A  NEW  period  began  in  1831,  when  for  the  first  time  a 
jr\  text  was  constructed  directly  from  the  ancient  docu- 
ments without  the  intervention  of  any  printed  edition,  and 
when  the  first  systematic  attempt  was  made  to  substitute 
scientific  method  for  arbitrary  choice  in  the  discrimination 
of  various  readings.'  So  the  leading  masters  in  the  First  of 
the  Rival  Schools  attribute  its  foundation  to  Lachmann.^ 
Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  began  with  Lachmann's  principles,' 
and  after  many  years  have  brought  them  to  their  natural 
and  extreme  development  in  the  elaborate  system  which  they 
have  constructed,  and  which  is  in  the  main  accepted  and 
upheld  by  other  adherents  of  this  School.'' 

Therefore  the  chief  characteristics  of  the  teaching  of  this 
School,  so  far  as  they  have  been  hitherto  unfolded  in  public, 
may  be  derived  from  Dr.  Hort's  elaborate  Introduction. 

So  far  as  they  are  peculiar  to  the  School,  they  are  suscep- 
tible of  classification  under  the  following  heads  : — Internal 

^  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  p.  13. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  16. 

3  So  the  two  members  of  the  Revisers'  Company  ;  Professor  Sanday 
in  the  "  Contemporaiy  Review,"  Dec.  1881  ;  Archdeacon  Farrar,  "Ex- 
positor," 1882  ;  and  a  writer  in  the  "  Church  Quarterly,''  Jan.  1882. 


THEORY  OF  IVESTCOTT  AND  HORT  EXPLAINED.     39 

iLvidence,  Genealogy,  Families  or  Groups,  the  worth lessness 
of  the  Syrian  Text  (so-called),  and  the  super-eminent  excel- 
lence of  B  and  the  other  representatives  of  the  (so-termed) 
Neutral  Text/ 

I.  In  dealing  with  the  divergent  evidence  which  is  con- 
stantly presented  in  different  passages,  two  main  considera- 
tions, so  Dr.  Hort  tells  us,  offer  themselves,  viz..  Which  is 
in  itself  the  most  probable  reading?  and,  What  is  the  cha- 
racter of  the  documents  by  which  it  is  supported  ?  Now  a 
reading  may  in  the  first  place  be  recommended  by  its  own 
likeHhood.  It  may  make  better  sense  than  the  rival  word, 
or  phrase,  or  clause,  or  sentence.  It  may  be  more  in  keep- 
ing with  the  author's  style  of  writing,  or  his  matter  of  com- 
position, as  gathered  from  other  passages.  But  Dr.  Hort 
lays  no  stress  on  all  this,  and  urges  that  the  most  important 
part  of  what  is  called  Internal  Evidence  consists  in  acquaint- 
ance with  the  character  of  the  Documents  themselves  in 
which  the  readings  are  found.  Hence  his  first  principle : — 
'  Knowledge  of  Documents  should  precede  Final  Judgments 
upon  Readings.' 

Now  the  character  of  a  Document,  he  says,  depends, 
ia)  chiefly  upon  its  date,  {b)  next  upon  the  purity  or  cor- 
ruption of  its  text.  The  character  of  the  text  may  be  dis- 
covered by  a  large  comparison  of  its  readings  with  other 
ascertained  readings,  according  to  careful  methods."  Judged 
in  this  manner,  the  Vatican  MS.  especially,  and  the  Sinaitic 
also,  are    predominant,  not   only  by  reason    of  their   un- 

'  These  terms,  Syrian,  Alexandrian,  Neutral,  as  used  by  the  two 
Professors,  can  only  be  employed  under  protest,  till  they  can  be  proved 
to  have  anything  but  an  imaginary  existence. 

'  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  pp,  30-39.  The  entire  ac- 
count is  too  involved  to  give  here. 


40  EXTREME    TEXTUALISM. 


rivalled  antiquity,  but  also  because    of  the   excellence    of 
their  text. 

2.  But  now,  as  Dr.  Hort  argues,  another  important  factor 
comes  into  sight.  Scribes  transcribed  from  documents, 
and  thus  one  document  became  the  parent  of  the  next. 
So  we  are  introduced  to  the  use  of  arguments  derived 
from  Genealogy.  '  All  trustworthy  restoration  of  corrupted 
texts  is  founded  upon  the  study  of  their  history,  that  is  of 
the  relations  of  descent  or  affinity  which  connect  the  several 
documents.'^  In  this  way,  one  manuscript  may  be  found, 
as  Dr.  Hort  thinks,  to  have  proceeded  from  another,  and 
the  weight  of  authority  from  both  becomes  only  the  weight 
of  authority  possessed  by  the  earlier  of  the  two.  Again, 
two  or  more  documents  are  observed  to  be  so  similar  to  one 
another  that  they  must  have  been  transcribed  either  directly, 
or  through  one  or  more  intervening  ancestors,  from  a 
common  original.  Accordingly,  their  united  authority, 
how  many  soever  they  are,  does  not  exceed  the  authority  of 
their  single  original.  But  '  identity  of  reading  implies  iden- 
tity of  origin ; '  and  the  outlines  of  such  a  common  original 
may  be  deciphered  in  the  resemblances  of  manuscripts,  and 
the  purity  of  a  text  inferred  in  discarding  individual  traces 
of  corruption.  Thus  Dr.  Hort  concludes,  upon  close  exami- 
nation, that  B  and  K  were  derived  from  a  common  original 
much  older  than  themselves,  '  the  date  of  which  cannot  be 
later  than  the  early  part  of  the  second  century,  and  may 
well  be  yet  earlier.'  This  would  bring  our  chief  documen- 
tary authority  nearly  back  to  the  Apostolic  autographs,  and 
would  invest  it  with  paramount  importance. 

3.  The  same  conclusion  is  reached  by  Dr.  Hort  from  a 
consideration  of  the  families  or  groups  into   which  docu- 
'   Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  p.  40. 


THEORY  OF  WESTCOTT  AND  HOKT  EXPLAINED.    41 


ments  are  divided  by  him.  History  shews  that  one  mainly 
uniform  text  has  prevailed  from  the  present  time  as  far  back 
as  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century.  This  he  denomi- 
nates the  '  Syrian'  text  (i.),  which  he  declares  to  have  derived 
its  origin  from  a  recension  made  at  Antioch,  and  to  have 
come  thence  to  Constantinople,  since  Antioch  was  the  '  true 
ecclesiastical  parent  of  Constantinople.'^  Enthroned  thus 
in  the  Eastern  capital,  it  became  dominant  in  the  Christian 
world.  But  there  are  said  by  him  to  have  been  three  other 
texts  '  which  can  be  identified  through  numerous  readings 
distinctively  attested  by  characteristic  groups  of  extant 
documents.'  These  are  called  by  Dr.  Hort  (ii.)  the  Western, 
which  was  found  in  Italy,  Africa,  and  other  parts  of  the 
West,  as  well  as  originally  in  Syria,  and  dealt  largely  in 
paraphrase  and  interpolation,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  Cam- 
bridge Codex  Bez?e  (D),  its  chief  existing  representative ; 
(iii.)  the  Alexandrian,  of  which  but  little  evidence  remains; 
and  (iv.)  the  Neutral,  which  is  free  from  the  peculiarities  of 
either,  and  of  which  there  are  traces,  '  indubitable  and  signi- 
ficant,' 'in  the  remains  of  Clement  and  Origen,  together 
with  the  fragment  of  Dionysius  and  Peter  of  Alexandria,' 
and  '  in  a  certain  measure  in  the  works  of  Eusebius  of 
Cajsarea,  who  was  deeply  versed  in  the  theological  literature 
of  Alexandria.' ' 

4.  It  appears,  therefore,  Dr.  Hort  continues,  that  of  these 
four  types  of  text,  two  are  affected  with  peculiar  traces  of 
corruption,  viz.,  the  Western  which  degenerated  into  para- 
phrase, and  '  incorporation  of  extraneous  matter,'  and  the 
Alexandrian,  which  is  oppressed  with  minor  faults,  such  as 
'incipient  paraphrase  and  skilful  assimilation.'  The  Neutral 
alone  of  the  remaining  two  reached  back  to  earliest  times. 

'  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  p.  143.         -  Ibid.,  p.  127, 


42  EXTREME    TEXTUALISM. 

The  Syrian  is  represented  as  worthless,  because  it  was  made 
up  in  the  fourth  century,  as  is  attempted  to  be  proved  in  the 
following  manner : — 

(i.)  The  analysis  of  certain  passages,  of  which  eight  are 
given,  is  declared  by  Dr.  Hort  to  prove  that  the  '  Syrian ' 
Text  was  made  up  by  an  eclectic  combination  of  the  read- 
ings of  other  texts  into  one  '  conflate '  reading.  For  instance, 
in  St.  Mark  vi.  33,  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  the  'Neutral' 
reading  is  said  to  be  Ka\  TrpoiiXSov  avrov(,  the  '^Vestern' 
avvriXdov  avrov,  both  of  which  are  supposed  to  be  com- 
bined in  the  'Syriac'  into  Kal  TrpoiiXdoy  avrovi;,  teal  avvrjXQov 
irpoQ  avTov.  Dr.  Hort  argues  at  some  length  that  the  last 
phrase  spoils  St.  Mark's  diction.  And  from  this  and  similar 
instances  he  draws  the  conclusion  that  at  some  authori- 
tative revision  the  other  texts  were  blended  into  a  'form 
lucid  and  complete,  smooth  and  attractive,  but  appre- 
ciably impoverished  in  sense  and  force,  more  fitted  for 
cursory  perusal  or  recitation  than  for  repeated  and  diligent 
study.' 

(2.)  The  same  conclusion  is  supposed  to  be  reached  by 
the  evidence  of  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers,  none  of  whom — it 
is  contended — exhibit  a  'Syrian'  Text.  The  Latin  Fathers, 
of  course,  quote  the  Western  ;  and  they  are  said  to  be  fol- 
lowed by  Justin  Martyr,  Irenseus,  Hippolytus,  Methodius, 
and  Eusebius.^  In  the  works  of  Clement  of  Alexandria,  it 
is  maintained  that  non-Western  as  well  as  Western  quota- 
tions are  discoverable,  but  no  'Syrian;'  and  in  those  of 
Origen  all  the  other  kinds  of  texts  can  be  found,  but  none, 
Dr.  Hort  thinks,  of  a  distinctively  '  Syrian  '  character. 

(3.)  This  position,  as  Dr.  Hort  argues,  is  confirmed  by 

'  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  p.  113. 


THEORY  OF  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  EXPLAINED.    43 

the  internal  evidence  of  various  passages,  though  it  is  ad- 
mitted that  the  authors  of  the  '  Syrian '  Text  '  may  have 
copied  from  some  other  equally  ancient  and  perhaps  purer 
text  now  otherwise  lost.'  ^  But  Dr.  Hort  says  that  examina- 
tion shews  that  this  text  was  made  up  by  revisers  from  the 
rest,  sometimes  by  following  one  or  other,  sometimes  by 
modification,  or  by  combination,  or  pruning,  or  by  intro- 
ducing changes  of  their  own  when  they  had  none  to  follow.^ 

Hence,  Dr.  Hort  concludes  that  'all  distinctively  Syrian 
readings  may  be  set  aside  at  once  as  certainly  originating 
after  the  middle  of  the  third  century,  and  therefore,  as  far 
as  transmission  is  concerned,  corruptions  of  the  apostolic 
text.'  He  even  asserts  that  they  can  attest  nothing  by 
themselves,  and  do  not  always  add  strength  to  attestations  of 
the  other  texts,  because  they  may  themselves  be  only  derived 
from  the  original  autographs  through  those  very  texts. 

5.  It  follows,  he  thinks,  that  the  Neutral,  where  it  can  be 
verified,  remains  as  alone  the  pure  representative  of  the  un- 
alloyed Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament.  It  has  been 
already  declared  that,  in  his  opinion,  B  and  ^^,  the  leading 
MSS.  which  set  forth  this  text,  enjoy  a  special  pre-eminence, 
because  of  their  superior  antiquity,  and  by  reason  of  their 
purity  of  text. 

Accordingly,  with  slight  exception,  'readings  of  K  B  should 
be  accepted  as  the  true  readings  until  strong  internal  evidence 
is  found  to  the  contrary,  and  no  readings  of  K  B  can  safely 
be  rejected  absolutely,  though  it  is  sometimes  right  to  place 
them  only  on  an  alternative  footing,  especially  where  they  re- 
ceive no  support  from  Versions  or  Fathers.'  Of  the  two,  B 
is  the  purer,  which  '  must  be  regarded  as  having  preserved 

'  Westcott  and  Hort,  "Introduction,"  p.  115.         ^  Ibid.,  p.  118. 


44  EXTREME    TEXTUALISM. 

not  only  a  very  ancient  text,  but  a  very  pure  line  of  very 
ancient  text,' '  K  having  on  its  way  fallen  upon  '  at  least  two 
early  aberrant  texts.' '  When  therefore  B  stands  with  any 
other  leading  manuscript  alone  without  {<,  its  readings  nearly 
always  '  have  the  ring  of  genuineness.'  '  And  *  even  when 
B  stands  quite  alone,  its  readings  must  never  be  lightly  re- 
jected.' * 

Such,  so  far  as  the  present  limits  will  admit,  are  the  lead- 
ing points  in  the  Theory  of  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort.  If  it 
has  been  improperly  portrayed,  this  is  not  due  to  any  want 
of  desire  to  do  justice  to  it. 

And  indeed  even  what  has  been  here  said,  and  still  more 
the  elaborate  treatises  in  the  Introduction  and  at  the  end  of 
the  text  of  the  Greek  Testament,  must  impress  all  persons 
deeply  with  the  patient  ingenuity,  the  critical  acumen,  and 
the  mastery  of  the  subject  evinced  by  those  distinguished 
scholars. 

But  whether  this  Theory  has  a  strong  and  solid  foundation, 
and  will  endure  the  shock  of  the  long  examination  and 
vigorous  analysis  that  it  is  sure  to  encounter,  or  indeed 
whether  it  has  any  foundation  at  all,  is  quite  another  matter. 
The  solution  which  it  offers  in  all  difficulties  is  too  suspi- 
ciously easy.  It  almost  amounts  to  this  : — '  Do  not  trouble 
yourself  about  other  authorities,  but  attend  to  B  and  J<,  which 
will  supply  all  you  want.'  How  can  it  be  right  to  cast  to  the 
winds  at  least  four-fifths  of  the  evidence — if  it  be  not  vastly 
more — and  to  draw  the  inferences  solely  from  the  remainder  ? 
Such  a  course  cannot  but  carry  with  it  its  own  condemna- 
tion. And  on  studying  and  testing  the  Theory,  the  first 
thing  that  strikes  a  man  of  logical  mind  is,  that  he  sees  an 

'  Westcott  and  Hort,  "Introduction,"  p.  251.         -  Ibid.,  p.  249.^^'^^ 
^  Ibid.,  p.  227.  ^  Ibid.,  Preface,  p.  557. 


THEORY  OF  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  REFUTED.      45 


ambitious  and  lofty  outline,  which  upon  closer  examination 
turns  out  to  be  merely  cloud  reared  upon  cloud.  There 
is  no  firm  footing  for  the  feet  of  an  inquirer.  The  impal- 
pable and  shadowy  nature  of  the  investigation  contrasts 
strangely  with  the  gravity  and  earnestness  of  the  writer. 
There  is  abundance  of  considerations,  surmises,  probabili- 
ties, generalizations,  made  both  from  known  particulars  of 
history  and  from  details  lying  in  the  memories  or  in  the 
private  note-books  of  the  authors ;  but  an  array  of  facts 
strong  enough  to  establish  satisfactorily  each  stage  in  ad- 
vance is  wholly  wanting,  whilst  the  leaps  made  in  ardent 
speculation  here  and  there  over  wide  chasms  reveal  the  in- 
security of  the  country  traversed.  Proofs  are  required  :  and 
no  real  proofs  are  offered.  Seldom  indeed  has  a  theory  been 
advanced  with  so  few  facts  for  its  basis. 

Passing  now  to  the  examination  of  the  general  considera- 
tions that  are  presented,  we  find  too  litde  stress  laid  upon 
such  Internal  Evidence  as  is  grounded  upon  clear  facts  or 
sound  sense,  and  too  much  upon  a  classification  of  docu- 
ments which  rests  exclusively  upon  individual  opinion.  The 
real  judge  of  Internal  Evidence  is  the  sanctified  intellect, 
applying  the  conclusions,  not  of  separate  minds  of  a  peculiar 
cast,  not  of  single  schools  of  opinion  neutralized  by  other 
schools,  but  of  the  corporate  thought  of  the  Church,  resting 
upon  a  clear  foundation  of  sense  or  fact,  ascertained  in  a 
vigorous  exercise  of  mental  power.  And  the  illumination  of 
the  sanctified  intellect  proceeds  from  the  Great  Inspirer  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures  themselves,  the  true  Interpreter  of  their 
form  and  meaning,  the  Source  of  all  the  mental  strength  in 
the  world,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  the  Eternal  God.  But  we  do 
not  hear  from  the  Extreme  Textualist  School  of  any  such 
judgment,  and  so  they  leave  their  common  sense  behind 


46  EXTREME    TEXTUALISM. 

them,  and  we  are  told  that  the  Lord's  side  was  pierced 
before  death,  that  the  sun  was  ecHpsed  when  the  moon  was 
full,  and  that  it  is  possible  that  St.  Paul  may  have  added  to 
the  high  traits  of  Charity  that  she  actually  refrains  from 
seeking  what  is  not  her  own.  On  the  other  hand,  such  in- 
ferences as  are  drawn  from  the  natural  or  known  proclivities 
of  copyists  must  be  employed  sparingly,  and  cannot  support 
much  weight  in  the  face  of  positive  attestation.  And  judg- 
ments upon  the  Internal  character  of  documents,  unless 
generally  accepted  within  the  boundaries  of  the  Science,  or 
supported  by  definite,  produced,  clear  reasons,  cannot  be 
accepted  as  foundations  to  build  upon.  Even  pure  anti- 
quity, when  evidence  is  scanty,  is  too  rude  an  instrument  of 
relative  decision.  The  comparative  assessment  of  the  value  of 
ancient  origin  is  not  of  necessity  measured  by  centuries  or  de- 
cades, because  some  of  the  associations  ofthe  earliest  ages  were 
far  from  good,  and  any  document  may  reflect  them,  whilst 
another  of  later  date  may  be  more  free  from  such  disturbing 
influences.  We  do  not  go  back  merely  to  Ante-Nicene  times  for 
the  Canon  of  Scripture,  or  we  might  find  cause  to  include  the 
Epistle  of  St.  Barnabas  in  the  list  of  books.  At  the  same 
time,  if  we  light  upon  a  pure  strain  of  the  best  antiquity, 
we  cannot  fail  to  be  on  the  right  track.  Again,  there  may 
be  a  great  variety  of  opinions  upon  the  purity  of  any  text. 
Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort,  and  others,  rate  B  and  K  very  high. 
It  may  perhaps  be  more  than  doubted  whether  such  would 
be  the  verdict  of  critics,  if  they  approached  them  without 
knowing  what  they  were.  Dr.  Scrivener,  in  his  calm  and 
dispassionate  manner,  places  the  estimate  some  way  down. 
Dean  Burgon,  upon  plain  and  definite  grounds,  rates  them 
very  low.  Kuenen  and  Cobet  say  that  B  is  full  of  errors. 
Till  agreement  is  reached,  it  is  evident  that  reasons  so  shift- 


THEORY  OF  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  REFUTED.      47 

ing  and  unstable  can  constitute  no  real  pillar  of  support  for 
any  superstructure/ 

Next  of  Genealogy.  Here  evidently  lurk  the  pitfalls  which 
are  involved  in  an  analogy  made  the  groundwork  of  an 
argument.  The  reasoning  is  correct,  so  far  as  it  is  impos- 
sible for  a  good  copy  to  be  made  from  a  bad  exemplar, 
though  to  a  slight  extent  external  influence,  such  as  the  re- 
collection in  the  copyist  of  a  better  guide,  may  somewhat 
improve  the  offspring,  like  good  companionship  or  the  effects 
of  study ;  or  secondly,  as  to  the  probability  that  better  as 
well  as  worse  features  will  be  reproduced  in  the  copies  made 
from  it.  Again,  we  are  told  that,  '  so  far  as  genealogical  re- 
lations are  discovered  with  perfect  certainty,'  '  being  directly 
involved  in  historical  facts,'  '  their  immediate  basis  is  his- 
torical, not  speculative.' "  But  indeed  inasmuch  as  '  no  single 
step  in  the  descent  can  be  produced,  in  other  words,  no 
genealogical  evidence  exists,'^  all  is  precarious  instead  of 

'  Dr.  Hort  goes  so  far  as  to  admit  the  use  of  conjectural  emenda- 
tion. ("  Introd.,"  p.  7.)  Well  may  Dean  Burgon  say,  'Conjectural 
Emendation  can  be  allowed  no  place  whatever  in  the  Textual  Criti- 
cism of  the  New  Testament.'  This  is  an  established  principle 
(Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  490-1.)  It  is  too  dangerous  an 
instrument  in  the  hand  of  any  man,  and  wholly  devoid  of  authority, 
which  is  of  the  essence  of  Holy  Writ.  Besides,  the  wealth  of  illustra- 
tion makes  it  scarce  anywhere  needed.  "  When  ...  it  was  clear 
that  the  channels  of  transmission  was  sufficient  to  supply  evidence  on 
the  text,  there  was  no  one  thing  as  to  which  critical  editors  were  more 
unanimous  than  in  the  rejection  of  all  conjecture  in  the  formation  of 
a  text." — Tregelles,  "Introduction  to  the  Critical  Study,"  &c.,  pp. 
149,  150. 

-  Westcott  and  Hart,  "Introduction,"  p.  d'l. 

*  Dean  Burgon,  "The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  256.  The  Dean 
further  shows  (p.  257)  that  close  relationship  is  known  only  in  three 
instances,  (i)  F.  and  G.  ;  (2)  13,  69,  124,  and  346;  and  (3)  B  and 
H  ;  and  that  these  are  related  as  brothers  (or  sisters)  or  cousins,  not  in 


48  EXTREME    TEXTUALISM. 

being  historical,  and  there  are  no  premisses  and  therefore 
no  inference.  Between  the  actual  facts  and  the  supposed 
conclusion  often  lies  a  long  space  into  which  speculation  is 
but  too  apt  to  enter. 

For  instance,  when  Dr.  Hort  argues  that  the  similarity  to 
one  another  of  those  numerous  Uncials  in  what  he  terms  the 
Syrian  class  shows  that  they  came  from  one  ancestor,  and 
that  although  they  largely  outnumber  X  and  B,  they  can 
therefore  have  at  the  best  only  the  authority  of  one  ancestor 
set  against  another  ancestor,  he  entirely  disregards  the  pre- 
sumption that  a  larger  number  of  descendants  came  from  a 
larger  number  of  ancestors,  and  that  the  majority  may  be 
only  thrust  back  from  one  generation  to  a  previous  one. 
In  truth,  the  argument  from  genealogy — such  as  it  is — con- 
ducts the  unprejudiced  inquirer  to  results  the  very  opposite 
to  those  of  Dr.  Hort. 

Again,  when  it  is  assumed  that  the  common  ancestor  of 
K  and  B  came  into  existence  in  the  early  part  of  the  second 
century,  there  is,  so  far  as  genealogy  is  concerned,  a  lofty 
disregard  of  the  obvious  truth  that  generations  might  be 
propagated  as  fast  as  the  pens  of  scribes  would  admit ;  and 
that  after  the  wholesale  destruction  of  copies  in  the  persecu- 
tion of  Diocletian  and  Galerius,  it  is  almost  certain  that 
transcription  must  have  proceeded  at  a  rapid  rate.  Gene- 
alogy therefore  is  misleading,  for  it  supplies  no  warrant  for 
any  conclusion  as  to  time,  and  in  fact  suggests  an  untrue 
analogy.  If  on  other  grounds  this  is  a  speculative  inference, 
the  instinct  of  such  experienced  scholars  as  Drs.  Westcott 
and  Hort  is  entitled  to   respectful    consideration.     But  it 

any  direct  line  of  genealogy.  To  these  three  instances  must  now  be 
added,  since  the  discovery  of  2,  the  affinity  between  i:  and  N.  Scrive- 
ner, "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  159. 


THEORY  OF  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  REFUTED.     49 

cannot  be  endorsed  by  other  students  than  themselves, 
until  it  is  proved  to  have  foundation  in  well-authenticated 
facts  duly  represented. 

But  the  principle  of  Genealogy  must  be  regarded  on  the 
side  of  descendants  as  well  as  of  ancestors.  Manuscripts  in 
high  repute  ought  to  have  been  largely  copied.  Was  the 
great  era  of  Chrysostom,  of  Basil,  of  the  Gregories,  when  the 
Canon  of  Scripture  was  settled,  and  the  Faith  of  Christen- 
dom fixed,  so  innocent  of  the  value  of  pure  Texts,  that  the 
learned  let  the  true  type  preserved  in  at  least  two  pre- 
eminently good  ones  languish  in  obscurity  and  disuse  ?  Yet 
whilst  the  other  form  of  Text  numbers  its  many  hundreds, 
Dr.  Hort  reckons  only  twelve  Neutral  MSS.  in  all  of  the 
Gospels.^  Can  this  fact  be  accounted  anything  else  than  a 
deliberate  and  unremitting  condemnation  of  the  tv/o  docu- 
ments under  investigation  ?  Incidental  proofs  are  not  want- 
ing that  the  character  of  disputed  passages  and  of  manuscripts 
came  under  careful  discussion  during  this  and  the  succeed- 
ing ages.^  It  is  inconceivable  that,  amidst  the  wealth  of 
dissident  documents,  and  at  a  time  when  the  literary  intellect 
of  the  world  was  occupied  with  ecclesiastical  questions,  and 
the  monuments  of  past  authorship  were  being  stored,  there 
could  have  existed  such  neglect  of  the  purity  of  the  sacred 
writings  of  the  Church  as  is  taken  for  granted  by  Dr.  Hort. 
The  abundance  of  contemporary  commentaries  forbids  such 
a  supposition.  Therefore  the  Vatican  and  Sinaitic  manu- 
scripts cannot  but  receive  very  serious  discredit  from  their 
want  of  following. 

'  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  p.  171.  These  are  B,  h, 
'T  of  St.  Luke  and  St  John,  S  of  St  Luke,  L.,  33,  ^  (in  St.  Mark), 
C,  Z  of  St.  Matthew,  R  of  St.  Luke,  Q,  and  P.' 

^  See  below,  Chapter  VIL 

E 


50  EXTREME    TEXTUALISM. 

Again,  the  theory  of  Families,  or  groups,  of  manuscripts 
cannot  stand  in  any  definite  or  clearly  cut  shape.  Since  it 
was  first  proposed  by  Bentley,  it  has  passed  through  constant 
modifications.  The  foundations  laid  by  one  master  hav^e 
been  disturbed  by  his  successor,  whose  own  excavations  and 
masses  of  cement  have  been  re-made  by  the  next.  The 
difficulties  to  which  the  constructors  of  an  inexorable  theory 
have  been  driven  are  shown  by  the  severing  of  one  manu- 
script, after  the  example  of  Solomon's  award,  into  portions 
supposed  to  belong  to  three  Families.  Dr.  Scrivener  is 
surely  right  in  describing  this  process  as  '  that  violent  and 
most  unlikely  hypothesis,  that  Cod.  A  follows  the  Byzantine 
class  of  authorities  in  the  Gospels,  the  Western  in  the  Acts 
and  Catholic  Epistles,  and  the  Alexandrian  in  St.  Paul.'  ^ 

But  it  may  be  asked,  is  there  then  no  truth  at  all  in  the 
assignment  of  characters  to  manuscripts,  or  in  any  sort  of 
grouping  ?  And  the  answer  of  a  candid  inquirer  must  be 
that  there  may  perhaps  be  an  amount  of  justice  in  the  con- 
notation of  characteristic  features,  but  that  great  care  must 
be  taken  not  to  lay  too  much  stress  upon  it,  and  certainly 
not  to  draw  a  few  broad  and  dark  lines  separating  one 
province  from  another.  And  especially,  generalizations  con- 
structed upon  such  induction  as  the  case  admits,  must  be 
employed  most  sparingly  in  deductive  arguments,  or  logic 
will  stand  aghast. 

And  as  to  the  Families,  or  groups,  suggested  by  Dr.  West- 
cott  and  Hort,  there  are  no  doubt  a  number  of  documents 

'  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  472.  'Qure  cum  ita  sint,  sequitur  exercen- 
tibus  rem  criticam  summa  opus  esse  cautione  in  adhibenda  classium  sive 
recensionum  distinctione  :  quam  ut  summam  normam  aut  fundamentum 
ponere  et  temerarium  et  frustra  est.' — Tischendorf,  quoted  by  Dr.  Caspar 
Rene  Gregory,  Prolegomena,  1884,  p.  196. 


THEORY  OF  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  REFUTED.      51 


which  ordinarily  support  the  Traditional  Text,  there  are  also 
others  which  make  for  what  they  call  the  Neutral  Text,  and 
others  which  support  Western  readings.  And  there  are  many 
that  take  different  sides  :  and  most  of  those  which  are  gene- 
rally found  on  one,  occasionally  appear  on  the  other.  There 
are  also  Western  readings  and  Alexandrian  readings.  But 
the  existence  of  an  'Alexandrian'  text,  as  distinct  from  their 
*  Neutral '  text,  is  more  than  doubtful.  Dr.  Hort's  descrip- 
tion of  it  is  of  the  vaguest,  and  the  materials  of  proof,  which 
are  all  that  he  can  point  to,  are  of  the  scantiest. 

We  now  come  to  the  position  resting  upon  the  supposed 
posteriority  of  the  so-called  Syrian  Text.  Here  again  we  are 
in  the  region  of  pure  speculation  unsustained  by  historical 
facts.  Dr.  Hort  imagines  first  that  there  was  a  recension  of 
the  early  Syrian  Version,  which  this  School  maintains  was 
represented  by  the  Curetonian  Version,  somewhere  between 
250,  A.D.,  and  350,  at  Edessa,  or  Nisibis,  or  Antioch.^  The 
result  of  this  recension  is  said  to  have  been  the  Peshito  Ver- 
sion, which  has  hitherto  been  referred  to  the  second  century. 
We  may  remark,  by  the  way,  that  the  Peshito  must  be  got  rid 
of  by  Extreme  Textualists,  or  it  would  witness  inconveniently 
before  the  Fourth  century  to  the  'Syrian'  Text.  Well 
indeed  may  Dr.  Hort  add  'even  for  conjecture  the  materials 
are  scanty.'  It  would  have  been  truer  to  the  facts  to  have 
said, '  for  such  a  conjecture  there  are  no  materials  at  all,  and 
therefore  it  must  be  abandoned.' " 

But  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  also  maintain  that  an  authori- 
tative recension  of  a  much  larger  character  was  made  after 

^  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  pp.  136,  137. 

•^  See  Dr.  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  233-4,  and  Dean 
Burgon's  elaborate  proof  of  the  groundlessness  of  the  supposition  of  any 
authoritative  recension  at  all,  in  "The  Revision  Revised,"  pp.  272-281. 


52  EXTREME    TEXTUALISM. 

this  at  Antioch,  and  resulted  in  the  formation  of  the  '  Syrian  ' 
Text  of  the  Gospels  in  Greek,  which  was  formed  upon  the 
Vulgate,  or  common  Syriac  Version.  What  proof  exists  any- 
where of  such  an  important  proceeding  ?  A  recension, 
be  it  observed,  so  thorough  and  so  sweeping  in  its  effects, 
that,  according  to  the  theory  under  consideration,  it  must 
have  placed  the  text  it  produced  in  such  a  commanding 
situation  that  it  has  reigned  for  fifteen  centuries  without  a 
rival.  How  could  this  have  occurred  without  an  achieve- 
ment so  great  and  famous  that  the  report  of  it  must  have 
gone  abroad  ?  Surely  this  must  have  been  another  Council 
of  Nicaea,  or  at  least  a  Council  of  Ariminum.  Such  results 
could  not  have  issued  from  a  mystery  like  that  of  the  view- 
less wind.  Yet  there  is  positively  no  record  in  the  history — 
not  to  speak  of  a  Council  of  the  Church — but  of  any  single 
incident  justifying  the  assumption  that  such  an  authoritative 
revision  ever  took  place. ^  Never  surely  was  there  such  an 
attempt  before  made  to  foist  such  pure  fiction  into  history. 
But  besides  that,  the  arguments  for  the  formation  of  a  new 
text  in  the  Fourth  century  thoroughly  break  down. 

(i.)  The  evidence  in  only  the  eight'  instances  given  is 
certainly  not  enough  to  establish  the  existence  of  such  a 
'  conflation,'  or  a  combination  of  supposed  other  texts  into 
one  eclectic  reading  throughout  the  New  Testament.  But 
supposing  for  a  moment  that  these  eight  were  specimens  of 
what  constantly  occurs,  who,  from  internal  evidence  alone, 
can  say  dogmatically  which  is  posterior — the  entire  text,  or 
the  respective  portions  of  it  ?     Surely  the  integral  whole, 

^  See  Burgon's,  "The  Revision  Revised,"  pp.  272-88;  and  Cook's 
"  Revised  Version,"  pp.  195-204.  Dr.  Scrivener  calls  the  two  supposed 
recensions  'phantom  revisions.'     "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  534. 

^  Westcott  and  Hort,  Introduction. 


THEORY  OF  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  REFUTED.      53 

which  Dr.  Hort  (p.  134)  admits  to  possess  'lucidity  and 
completeness,'  and  to  be  '  entirely  blameless  on  either  lite- 
rary or  religious  grounds  as  regards  vulgarized  or  unworthy 
diction,'  has  the  better  title  to  be  held  to  have  been  the 
original  form  than  any  of  the  separate  portions.  Omission 
must  be  a  possible  fault  with  all  copyists ;  ^  and  indubitable 
instances  show  that  the  scribes  of  K  and  B  were  habitual 
offenders  in  this  respect.  With  reference  to  the  character 
of  the  texts,  many  scholars  would  not  agree  with  Drs.  West- 
cott  and  Hort  in  the  value  which  they  set  upon  a  Thucydidean 
ruggedness.^ 

(2.)  As  to  the  alleged  absence  of  readings  of  the  Tradi- 
tional Text  from  the  writings  of  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers, 
Dr.  Hort  draws  largely  upon  his  imagination  and  his  wishes. 
The  persecution  of  Diocletian  is  here  also  the  parent  of 
much  want  of  information.  But  is  there  really  such  a  dearth 
of  these  readings  in  the  works  of  the  Early  Fathers  as  is 
supposed?  Dr.  Scrivener^  maintains  that  Dr.  Hort  speaks 
much  too  sweepingly.  Besides  this,  Dean  Burgon  has  cited 
against  the  readings  advocated  by  the  New  School  more  than 
fifty  authorities  from  Ante-Nicene  writings  upon  five  pas- 
sages.'    Are  these  ten  testimonies  on  an  average  to  each 

'  St.  Jerome  traces  transcriptional  error  to  three  sources  : — 
(i)  Vel  a  vitiosis  interpretibus  male  edita, 

(2)  Vel  a  presumptoribus  imperitis  emendata  perversius, 

(3)  Vel  a  librariis  dormitantibus  addita  sunt.' 

Prcefatio  ad  Damasum. 

^  See  note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter. 

^  "  Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  533-540. 

^  Last  twelve  verses  of  St.  Mark  ;  i  Tim.  iii.  16  ;  St.  Luke  xxii. 
43,  44;  xxiii.  34;  ii.  14.  'The  number  of  Early  Fathers,'  ending 
always  with  Eusebius,  is  about  100.  Burgon,  "Last  Twelve  Verses," 
p.  21  ;  "  The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  290.  See  below.  Chapter  VL, 
end.     Dean  Burgon's  command  of  Patristic  evidence  is  simply  mar- 


54  EXTREME   TEXTUALISM. 

passage  to  be  reckoned  as  alien  to  the  Traditional  Text,  or 
not  rather  as  evident  indications  of  an  earlier  origin  reach- 
ing back  to  the  Apostolic  age  ?  Besides  the  Fathers,  some 
of  the  Versions — notably  the  Peshito,  which  is  referred  by 
the  best  critics  to  the  second  century  ' — that  are  older  than 
any  MSS.,  give  frequent  support  to  the  readings  of  the 
Traditional  Text. 

(3.)  What  is  said  about  Internal  Evidence  is  much  too 
vague  and  misty  to  sustain  so  strong  a  conclusion.  And  it 
is  balanced  with  the  candid  admission,  that  after  all  the 
peculiar  readings  of  the  Received  Text  may  perhaps  be 
derived  from  '  some  equally  ancient  and  perhaps  purer  text 
now  otherwise  lost.'"  What  seems  to  Dr.  Westcott  and  Dr. 
Hort  to  constitute  internal  evidence  in  each  instance  does 
not  seem  so  to  others.  Where  is  the  rock  amidst  this  peri- 
lous sand-drift  ? 

We  are  driven  therefore  to  the  characters  of  N  and  B  as 
the  last  refuge  of  the  Theory  under  examination. 

And  we  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  great  argument  in 
their  favour.  They  are  the  oldest  MSS.  in  existence.  They 
are  extremely  handsome,  and  in  some  respects  are  complete.^ 
Their  verdict  in  the  opinion  of  nearly  all  judges  is  entitled 
to  respectful  attention. 

But  besides  that  they  are  not  much  older  than  A  and  C, 
how  can  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort  get  over  the  central  fact 
that  these  MSS.  have  hardly  any  following  in  the  ages  after 

vellous.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  he  will  communicate  to  the  Church  the 
treasures  that  he  must  have  been  long  amassing. 

^  See  below,  Chapter  VI. 

^  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  p.  115. 

^  N  is  the  only  complete  Uncial  copy  of  the  New  Testament.  B  ends 
at  Heb.  ii.  14,  but  is  complete  so  far,  except  in  its  numerous  omissions. 


THEORY  OF  IVESTCOTT  AND  HOKT  REFUTED.      55 

them,  and  so  have  been  condemned  by  Catholic  antiquity  ? 
They  were  probably  produced  about  a.d.  330-340/  a  short 
time  before  the  Canon  of  Holy  Scripture  was  settled,  when 
the  general  subject  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  must  have  come 
under  discussion.  They  just  antedated  the  most  intelligent 
period  of  the  early  Church,  when  the  finest  intellects  in  the 
world  were  engaged  in  ascertaining  the  exact  lineaments  of 
'  The  Faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.'  How  could  these 
men  have  escaped  from  spending  particular  care  upon  the 
Sacred  Text  ?  We  learn  that  St.  Jerome  did  so  upon  the 
Latin  Versions.  And  the  fact,  acknowledged  over  and  over 
again  by  Dr.  Hort,  that  one  uniform  text  has  prevailed  from 
that  period  till  now,  surely  alone  constitutes  a  decisive  con- 
demnation of  this  so-called  '  Neutral  Text.' 

The  period  too  of  the  production  of  these  two  MSS.  is  in- 
structive. It  was  when  the  Church  was  all  but  Semiarian  : 
of  this  there  is  no  doubt.  But  it  appears  also  extremely 
probable  that  they  were  made  under  the  direction  of  Euse- 
bius  of  Csesarea,  a  leader  of  the  Semiarian  party.  The  scribe 
of  the  Vatican  B  is  supposed  by  Tischendorf,  with  the  agree- 
ment of  Dr.  Scrivener  and  by  the  admission  of  Dr.  Hort,  to 
have  written  part  of  the  Sinaitic  K.^  The  date  of  the  execu- 
tion, as  fixed  upon  other  grounds,  was  about  the  time  when 
Eusebius  was  commissioned  by  Constantine  to  prepare  fifty 
manuscripts  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  send  them  to  Con- 
stantinople. These  two  MSS.  stand  unrivalled  for  the  beauty 
of  their  caligraphy,  and  of  the  vellum  on  which  they  are 
written,  and  in  all  respects  are  just  what  we  should  expect 

'  See  Cook,  "Revised  Version,"  p.  160. 

-  I.e.,  '  six  conjugate  leaves  of  Cod.  N,  being  three  pairs  in  three 
distant  quires,  one  of  them  containing  the  conclusion  of  St.  Mark's 
Gospel.'     "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  92,  note  1. 


56  EXTREME    TEXTUALISM. 

to  have  been  produced  in  obedience  to  an  imperial  man- 
date.^ 

And,  as  has  been  already  stated,  the  text  of  these  two 
manuscripts  is  not  so  perfect  as  would  be  necessary,  if  they 
were  worthy  to  be  placed  upon  the  high  pedestal  that  is 
prepared  for  them  by  their  ardent  advocates.  Dean  Burgon 
after  collations  extending  through  many  years  has  supplied 
figures  which  it  seems  impossible  to  withstand."  The  marks 
of  carelessness  spread  over  them,  especially  prevailing  in  K,are 
incompatible  with  perfection.  Tischendorf,  after  collating  B, 
speaks  of  the  blemishes  that  occur  throughout.^  Dr.  Dobbin 
reckons  2,556  omissions  in  B  as  far  as  Heb.  ix.  14,  where 
it  terminates.'  Vercellone,  the  editor,  tells  of  '  perpetual 
omissions,'  'of  half  a  verse,  a  whole  verse,  and  even  of 
several  verses.'  '  This  is  just  what  examination  reveals : 
and  K  is  unquestionably  worse.  Yet  doubtless  in  the  tem- 
perate words  of  Dr.  Scrivener,  '  we  accord  to  Cod.  B  at 
least  as  much  weight  as  to  any  document  in  existence.'  ^ 
But  we  cannot  agree  with  those  who  rate  either  it  or  the 
Sinaitic  extravagantly  high  :  and  the  fact  that  these  two  are 
frequently  found  with  a  few  others  in  a  small  minority  must 

^  See  below,  Chapter  VII,  Canon  Cook,  "The  Revised  Version," 
pp.  159-183,  argues  this  admirably.     Dean  Burgon  thinks  otherwise. 

-  "Revision  Revised,"  p.  I4,  94-5,  249,  cf.  376,384-6.  My  own 
figures,  derived  from  a  smaller  collation  of  the  five  Uncials,  agree 
mainly  with  those  of  the  Dean,  who  says  that  *  the  task  of  laboriously 
collecting  the  five  "old  uncials"  throughout  the  Gospels,  occupied  me 
for  five-and-a-half  years,  and  taxed  me  severely.'  (P.  376.) 
"  Universa  Scriptura;  Vatican^  Vitiositas." 
Dublin  University  Magazine,"  1859,  p.  620.  Dr.  Dobbin  calcu- 
lates 330  in  St.  Matthew,  365  in  St.  Mark,  439  in  St.  Luke,  357  in  St. 
John,  384  in  the  Acts,  and  681  in  the  Epistles. 

^  Burgon's  "  Lettere  from  Rome,"  p.  18. 

"  See  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  116. 


4    (I 


THEORY  OF  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  REFUTED.      57 

make  us  always  examine  their  testimony,  unless  it  is  strongly 
supported,  with  suspicion  and  care/ 

^  Character  of  B. 

Judged  by  the  ordinary  rules  of  criticism,  the  text  of  B  is  far  from 
being  of  such  a  superior  character  as  to  wai-rant  the  excessive  submis- 
sion that  Extreme  Textualists  claim  for  it.  Thus,  besides  serious 
blemishes  which  have  been  already  mentioned  (above,  pp.  27-29),  we  find 
in  the  face  of  superior  readings  well  attested  : — 

(i.)  Omissions  of  an  entire  verse,  or  of  a  longer  passage,  having  all 
the  appearance  of  being  intrinsically  genuine  : — 

Matt.  xii.  47  ;  xvi.  2,  3  (a  verse  and  eight  words)  ;  xviii.  1 1  ;  xxiii. 
14  ;  Mark  vii.  16  ;  ix.  44,  46 ;  xi.  26  ;  Luke  xvii.  36 ;  xxiii.  17  ;  John  v. 
3,  4  (a  verse  and  five  words)  ;  Acts  xxiv.  6,  7,  8  (a  verse  and  fourteen 
words)  ;  xxviii.  29  ;  Rom.  xv.  24. 

(2.)  Similar  omissions  of  more  than  three  words  : — 

Matt.  V.  44  (12  words)  ;  xx.  16  (7)  ;  22  (6)  ;  23  (7) ;  xxviii.  9  (7)  ; 
Mark  vi.  11  (15) ;  33  (4)  ;  36  (4)  ;  viii.  26  (6) ;  x.  7  (6)  ;  24  (5)  ;  xi. 
8  (5)  ;  xii.  30  (4)  ;  33  (5) ;  Luke  i.  28  (angelic  salutation,  4),  iv.  4  (5)  ; 
5  (5)  ;  vi.  45  (5) ;  viii.  16  (6) ;  43  (6) ;  ix.  55,  56  (24);  x.  22  (8) ;  xi.  44 
(4) ;  xvii.  19  (5) ;  24  (4)  ;  xxii.  64  (6)  ;  xxiv.  i  (4) ;  42  (4) ;  John  i.  27 
(7)  ;  iii.  13  (5)  ;  viii  59  (7) ;  xiii.  32  (6)  ;  xvi.  16  (6) ;  Acts  xv.  18  (7) ; 
24  (6) ;  xviii.  21  (11)  ;  xxi.  22  (4) ;  25  (6) ;  Col.  iii.  6  (5) ;  i  Thess.  i. 
I  (8)  ;  Heb.  ii.  7  (9);  vii.  21  (4). 

(3.)  Short  but  important  omissions  : — 

Matt.  i.  25.  avTijg  tov  irpojToroKov ;  v.  22.  tlKt]  ;  vi.  4,  18.  kv  T(^ 
tpavtptfi ;  xxvi.  28.  icaivijg  (Words  of  Institution) ;  Mark  ix.  29.  icai 
yqcTTeig,;  x.  6.  6  Qe6(; ;  21.  dpag  tov  crravpov  ;  xiii.  18.  ?'/  cpvyt)  vfioJv  ; 
xiv.  22-24.  (payeTc-rb-KaLvfjg  (Words  of  Institution) ;  6S.  Kal  I'jXtKTUjp 
i(P(jjvi]<TEv  ;  Luke  vi.  I.  davTepoTrpcjTq) ;  26.  o'l  TraTspeg  avroJv ;  xxiv.  53. 
aivovvreg  Kai ;  John  vi.  51.  rjp  tyu)  duxroj  ;  xiv.  4.  Kai  .  .  o'iSare  ;  Acts 
iii.  6.  tyeipai  Kai ;  x.  30.  vj](Ttsv(>)v  kui  ;  2  Cor.  v.  14.  ei  ;  Eph.  i.  I.  Lv 
'E<l>s<Ttft ;  15.  TT^v  dyarrijv  Tt)v.  Also  the  frequent  omissions  of  the 
article,  of  ahrbc,  of  Yivpiog,  of  6  lr]aovg,  and  of  similar  subjects,  imports 
an  ungraceful  baldness  into  the  text.  That  many  of  these  omissions, 
at  the  least,  came  from  carelessness  is  shown  by  several  passages  being 
written  twice  over. — Scrivener,  p.  116. 

(4. )  Readings  inferior  to  those  of  the  Traditional  Text : — 

Matt.  xi.  16.  iraidioig  .  .  .  a,  k.t.X.  instead  of  agreeing  participles. 


58  EXTREME    TEXTUALISM. 

The  arguments  therefore  advanced  by  the  School  of  Ex- 
treme, or  as  perhaps  it  should  be  called,  Extravagant 
-Textualism,  break  down   all  along  the  line.     And  we  are 

Matt.  XV.  13.  omission  of  rt'0\wv. 

xvi.  12.  TMV  dpT(i)v  for  tov  aprov. 

xvii.  22.   <jvaTpi.(po}.ikv(x)v  for  avaaTpt(pop.tv(i)v. 
23.   Ti)  Tpu]j.iip(}.  for  ry  Tpny  I'liJ^ip^. 
Mark  ii.  5,  9.   atpierrai  for  tKptuJrTcu,  i.e.,  bis  sins  were  not  then  ac- 
tually forgiven  ! 

iii.  29.   tvoxog  alu^viov  afiapTt'inaroc  for  icpiaeiog. 

xvi.  4.  dvaKiKtikiaTca  for  diroK^KvKiaTai. 
Luke  ii.  14.  Iv  dvi^pMiroig  eucoKidt;.     No  rhythm  and  inferior  sense. 

xii.  56.   Clumsy  repetition  of  o<''/c  o'idciTt  doKi/jidZtiv  for  coKijid'CtTt. 

xxii.  55.    Trtpiaxl/dvTOJV  dk  Trvp  for  d\l/dvTu)V. 
Acts  xxvii.  13.   TTepifXoi^Teg  for  TrepitXOovTSc. 
Rom.  v.  I.   adpKivog  for  aapKiKoc. 

1  Cor.  iii.   l.   aapKivoig  for  (rapKiKoTc. 
James  i.  20.   tpya^erai  for  Karfpyrt^'trat. 

2  Pet.  ii.  12.   jcaj  (p9api)(7ovrai  for  KaTCKpOapijcrovTai. 
5.   Changes  obviously  injurious  to  the  sense  : — 

Matt.  xi.  23.  Too  like  a  jeer,  instead  of  dignified  sorrow. 

xiv.  29.  i]\Oev  for  tXOeiv.     St,  Peter  failed  in  the  coming, 
xxviii.  19.  (BaTTTitravTeQ  for  jSaTrri'C — supposing  that  disciples 
were  to  be  made  after,  instead  of  by,  Baptism. 
Mark  vii.  3.   cid  "^iduji'oc.     A  geographical  solecism. 
Luke  X.  42.   oXiyijJV  ce  XP^'"  ^<^t"'  V  *>'0f- 

xvi.  12.   I'lfifrepoi'  for  vn'iTfpov, — a  patent  blunder. 
Acts  XXV.  13.  d(T7raadi.ievoi  for  a(T7roo-o)t<ti'o/,  i.e.,  greeted  Festus  first, 

and  then  went  to  see  him  ! 
I  Cor.  xiii.  3.   Kav\i](ru)i.iai  for  Kav9fimop.ai. 
I  Thess.  ii.  7.   vqTrioi  for  1)17101. 
Tit.  ii.  5-   oiKovpyovg  dyaridc,  for  oiKovpovc. 

(6)  Changes  spoiling  or  injuring  the  Grammar  : — 
Matt.  viii.  5,   slaeXOovrog  aurov  TrpoaijXOei'  avT(jj. 

XV.  32.   iifi'fpai  for  yfn'ipag.     Awkward  change  of  grammatical 
subject. 
39-   Tuv  TrXdlov. 
xxi.  19.   ov  fitjKtTi  yevtjrai. 
Mark  iii.  28.   /3Xoo-(/»rjjtt«a(  oaa  tdv  ^Xan<pt}pii(Tu)(Tii'  {oaag  dv). 


THEORY  OF  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  REFUTED,     59 

driven  to  seek  a  secure  position  amongst  the  entrenchments 
of  the  Rival  School. 

Mark  vi.  21.   dvyarphq  6pxT}<TafikvT]Q  the  subject  to  ijpetrti'. 
xi.  19.   oral'  kyivero. 

22.    0  idv  tliry. 
xiii.  14.   TO  (3ds\vyiJia  .  .  .  tCTrjKOTa, 
xiv.  35.  tTriTTTev  for  tirtatv  : — glaringly  the  wrong  tense. 
Luke  xvii.  6.   li  ^x^rt  (for  dx^ri)  tXkyere  dv. 
Acts  xvi.  13.   of'  ki'OfiiCofiev  (for  kvo/uiiZ^To)  Trpocevxr]  dvai. 

xiii.  7.   raij'  ^apiaaibiv  Kai  (omit  rwr)  Soc^owKaiwv. 
Rom.  V,  I.   txwjufr  for  txofiiv. 

I  Pet.  iii.  I.  'Iva  KepdijOijaovrat  (for  — (Twrrai).       So  Luke   xiv.    10. 
tra  Ipsl. 

This  list  might  be  easily  and  largely  increased,  besides  that  bad 
spelling — to  call  a  spade  a  spade — is  constant  in  this  manuscript.  See 
Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  543-552.  Burgon,  "  The  Revi- 
sion Revised,"  pp.  315-31 7>  ^^^  reff.  there  given.  Cook,  "  Revised 
Version,"  pp.  136-141.  Michelsen,  in  "  Theologisch  Tijdschrift," 
Jan.  1844.  See  also  Kuenen  and  Cobet,  "  Novum  Test,  ad  fidem  Cod. 
Vaticani."  Leyden,  i860.  Prcefatio.  N  is  admitted  everywhere,  except 
in  the  fond  eyes  of  Tischendorf  and  of  a  few  admirers  here  and  there,  to 
be  greatly  inferior  to  B. 


CHAPTER   V. 

the  rival  school. 

Tenets  of  the  Rival  and  Sound  School  stated  and 
considered. 

IN  treating  of  Extreme  Textualism,  so  much  has  been 
borrowed  from  the  representations  of  the  Rival  School, 
which  of  late  years  has  perhaps  been  chiefly  known  in  re- 
sistance to  aggressive  tenets,  that  much  less  explanation  of 
the  principles  maintained  in  it  is  now  needful  than  would 
otherwise  have  been  required.  Nevertheless  the  position  of 
the  chief  doctors  in  this  School  must  be  defined.  Their 
attitude  has  been  frequently  and  indeed  strangely  misrepre- 
sented. Besides  which,  their  teaching  is  given,  not  merely 
in  opposition  or  protest,  but  in  clear  and  definite  expression 
of  principles. 

I.  And  first,  it  must  be  remarked,  that  it  is  unjust  to  in- 
sinuate that  they  are  set  against  all  revision  of  the  Greek 
Text.  They  would  not  be  Textualists  at  all  if  they  were 
not  ready  to  adopt  what  are  really  the  verdicts  upon  all  the 
evidence.  '  Again  and  again,'  says  Dean  Burgon,  '  we  shall 
have  to  point  out  that  the  Textus  Receptus  needs  correc- 
tion." '  No  one  can  read  Dr.  Scrivener's  "  Plain  Introduc- 
tion," a  work  which  every  clergyman  should  possess  and 
study,  without  observing  that  so  stiff  an  adhesion  to  the 
Text  received  from  the  last  three  centuries  has  no  place  in 
^  "  The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  21,  note. 


THEIR  SOUND    TENETS.  6i 

his  thoughts.     Quotation  or  proof  of  so  notorious  a  circum- 
stance are  absolutely  unnecessary. 

Nor  again  must  it  be  imagined  that  discrimination  in  the 
employment  of  authorities  is  repudiated  by  them.  Whilst 
Dr.  Scrivener  rejects  the  idea  of  families  of  manuscripts,  he 
allows  that  grouping  in  a  moderate  manner  is  necessary  in 
order  to  judge  of  their  character  and  value.  'Now  that 
theories  about  the  formal  recensions  of  whole  classes  of 
these  documents  have  generally  been  given  up  as  purely 
visionary,  and  the  very  word  fajnilies  has  come  into  disre- 
pute by  reason  of  the  exploded  fancies  it  recalls,  we  can 
discern  not  the  less  clearly  that  certain  groups  of  them  have 
in  common  not  only  a  general  resemblance  in  regard  to  the 
readings  they  exhibit,  but  characteristic  peculiarities  attach- 
ing themselves  to  each  group.' ^  It  is  inevitable  that  one 
document  should  have  a  high  reputation,  and  another  be 
rated  deservedly  low.  The  relative  antiquity,  the  circum- 
stances attending  the  production  so  far  as  they  are  known, 
the  nature  of  the  text  so  far  as  it  reveals  itself  to  clear  and 
definite  criticism,  are  admitted  as  demanding  to  be  taken 
into  account.  Objection  is  felt  to  *  the  glorification '  of  a 
few,  so  as  to  make  them  almost  '  objects  of  superstition  and 
iaolatry  : '  but  there  the  objection  ceases. 

2.  The  leading  principle  of  the  School  is  that  all  autho- 
rities should  be  fairly  and  relatively  weighed.  The  old 
Uncial  manuscripts  according  to  their  age  and  character, 
the  later  Uncials  of  the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  centuries, 
the  Cursive  manuscripts  from  the  tenth  century  onwards ; 
the  Versions  with  reference  to  their  antiquity  and  excellence  ; 
Lectionaries,  as  they  were  accredited  and  agreed  with  one 
another  and  with  other  manuscripts;  and  quotations  from 
^   "Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  553,  4.     The  italics  are  Dr.  Scrivener's. 


62  THE   RIVAL  SCHOOL. 


Fathers  after  their  ascertained  merit.^  There  is  much  work 
to  be  done  in  editing,  collating,  and  indexing  before  this  vast 
mass  of  evidence  is  ready  for  use.  Thus  these  men  widen  the 
basis,  and  endeavour  to  build  their  superstructure  upon  the 
broadest  and  surest  foundation.  If  it  be  objected  that  the 
work  of  revision  is  indeed  formidable  and  must  be  delayed 
under  this  method  of  proceeding  for  many  years,  the  answer 
is  ready.  It  is  dangerous  to  meddle  with  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures, which  are  bound  up  so  closely  with  the  Faith.  The 
changes  proposed  are  numerous  and  momentous  :  and  what 
if  they  are  found  to  be  really  corruptions  and  depravations 
of  the  Sacred  Deposit  ?  Reverence  and  caution  are  essen- 
tial in  the  things  of  God.  Whatever  is  done  must  by  all 
means  be  well  done.  A  few  years,  or  a  life-time  or  two, 
long  indeed  in  our  sight,  are  little  in  the  history  of  mankind, 
and  still  less  in  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do. 
It  is  better  to  aid  humbly  in  a  steady  and  wise  advance  than 
to  attempt  hastily  to  settle  questions,  and  to  end  by  un- 
settling them. 

3.  Such  is  the  general  system  of  this  school  of  Sound 
or  High  Textualists.  But  in  one  grand  point  the  school 
is  at  issue  with  the  last.  Extreme  Textualism  seems 
to  look  upon  any  support  derived  from  the  Traditional 
or  Received  Texts  as  merely  supplying  to  readings  a 
title  to  be  abused  and  spurned,^  instead  of  securing  for 
them  considerations  of  respect.  Yet  the  fact,  admitted 
several  times  by  Drs.  Westcott  and  Hort,''  that  the  Tradi- 
tional   Text    is   fifteen    hundred   years    old,    ought    surely 

'  For  particulars,  see  below,  Chapters  VIII.  IX. 
^  Any   reading   labelled   by   Dr.    Hort   as    *  Syrian,'    is   summarily 
rejected  by  him  with  something  very  like  ignominy. 
^  See  above,  p.  26,  note  2. 


THEIR  SOUND    TENETS.  63 


to  ensure  for  it  other  treatment.  Is  is  probable  that  St. 
Chrysostom,  the  Gregories,  and  St.  Basil,  amidst  an  abun- 
dance of  early  manuscripts,  with  which  our  present  stores 
could  not  be  mentioned  on  the  same  day  in  comparison  for 
antiquity  and  value,  would  all  have  been  led  away  in  the 
company  of  their  great  contemporaries  to  prefer  an  inferior 
strain  of  copies  ?  Is  it  likely,  that  if  they  had  missed  the 
right  turn,  their  successors  in  the  following  ages  would  not 
have  discovered  that  they  were  on  the  wrong  road,  and 
would  have  failed  to  work  back  into  the  Royal  Highway  ? 
Is  it  indeed  possible  that  the  great  King  of  the  new  King- 
dom, Who  has  promised  to  be  with  His  subjects  'alway 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,'  should  have  allowed  the 
true  text  of  the  written  laws  of  His  Kingdom  to  lurk  in 
obscurity  for  nearly  fifteen  hundred  years,  and  a  text  vitiated 
in  many  important  particulars  to  have  been  handed  down 
and  venerated  as  the  genuine  form  of  the  Word  of  God  ? 
Could  the  effect  of  the  sacred  Presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  the  Church  be  looked  for  in  any  more  important  and 
peculiar  province,  than  in  the  preservation  of  the  fashion 
and  lineaments  of  that  body  of  written  records  and  teaching 
which  He  Himself  has  inspired? 

Therefore  the  Rival  School  of  Sound  or  High  Textualists 
is  right  in  attributing  the  greatest  importance  to  the  Tradi- 
tional Text,  as  the  Text  undoubtedly  handed  down  in  the 
Church,  and  importance  also  to  the  Received  Text,  as  an 
excellent  though  by  no  means  an  exact  exponent  of  the 
former  of  the  two.  This  is  a  matter  of  so  much  moment,  that 
the  present  inquiry  would  be  far  from  complete,  even  in  the 
limited  scope  which  belongs  to  a  concise  guide  to  the  main 
features  of  Textual  Criticism,  if  it  did  not  include  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  salient  points  in  the  history  of  the  Sacred  Text, 


64  THE   RIVAL   SCHOOL. 

SO  far  as  it  is  known.  Error  usually  arises  from  our  ignoring 
some  essential  element.  And  the  question  really  is,  whether 
we  ought  to  make  a  clean  sweep  of  the  past,  except  so  much 
as  dates  of  documents  are  concerned,  and  rest  solely  upon 
the  uncertain  glimmer  of  criticism  formed  centuries  after  the 
materials  for  that  criticism  were  produced,  or  whether  we 
cannot  indeed  discover  in  the  course  of  actual  events,  so  far 
as  they  have  been  made  known  to  us,  the  virtual  determina- 
tion of  this  important  controversy,  and  solid  grounds  of 
judgment  which  may  compel  and  sustain  a  mature  and  sound 
decision. 

But  before  entering  upon  a  brief  view  of  such  history,  one 
remark  is  needed  as  to  the  nature  of  the  points  at  issue. 

They  depend  upon  an  estimate  of  proportion, — how  much 
value  we  ought  to  attribute  to  this  point,  and  how  much  to 
that.  The  evidence  is  mainly  before  us,  and  its  existence  is 
undisputed.  This  indeed  is  the  pivot  upon  which  judg- 
ments must  turn.  As  in  sculpture,  symmetry  and  beauty  of 
form  depend  upon  each  limb  and  feature  being  represented 
in  due  measure,  and  he  carries  about  with  him  the  true 
sculptor's  eye,  who  with  readiness  and  precision  sees  where 
any  part  of  the  outline  is  enlarged  or  diminished  or  out  of 
place;  so  in  our  decisions,  whether  of  a  pettier  or  a  more 
weighty  kind,  the  greater  part  of  them  are  involved  in  the 
stress  that  we  lay,  or  do  not  lay,  upon  the  particulars  pre- 
sented to  us — in  fact,  upon  the  proportion  which  they  seve- 
rally assume  in  our  view.  We  may  indeed  err  from  insuffi- 
ciency of  evidence,  or  narrowness  of  survey  :  but  more  often 
our  success  or  failure  is  determined  by  correctness  or  error 
in  laying  emphasis,  or  else  by  just  or  false  discernment  in  the 
formation  of  our  estimate. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

HISTORY    OF    THE    TRADITIONAL    TEXT    TILL   THE    ERA    OF 
ST.    CHRYSOSTOM. 

Early  Corruption.  A  Pure  Line.  Early  Versions. 
Rise  within  the  Church  of  Semi-Sceptical  Philo- 
sophy, and  Production  of  a  Vitiated  Text.  Proof 
OF  the  Prevalence  of  the  Traditional  Text. 

COMPARATIVE  Criticism  must  not  be  prosecuted  in 
the  case  of  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament  upon 
exactly  the  same  principles  as  those  which  prevail  in  ascer- 
taining the  text  of  Classical  Authors.  It  is  true  that  gene- 
rally speaking  what  is  sound  in  the  one  case  cannot  be  gain- 
said in  the  other.  The  verdict  of  the  manuscripts  must  be 
taken  according  to  the  principles  dictated  by  critical  acumen 
and  established  by  experience.  But  Sacred  criticism  super- 
adds some  considerations  of  a  very  grave  nature. 

In  the  first  place,  the  mass  of  materials  of  criticism  is  so 
vast,  and  the  wealth  of  attested  readings  is  so  great,  that 
there  is  no  need  of  any  Conjectural  Emendation.  The  sole 
duty  of  the  Textual  Critic  is  found  in  assembling,  weighing, 
and  balancing  the  different  kinds  of  evidence  that  can  be 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  passage  under  review.  There  is 
no  demand  therefore  for  conjecture;  it  is  an  ascertainment 
of  facts  :  besides  that  conjecture  or  surmise  are  entirely  ex- 

F 


66  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

eluded  by  reason  of  the  peculiar  dignity  and  loftiness  of  the 
subject.^ 

Secondly,  the  position  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  inspired 
by  God  the  Holy  Ghost  must  never  be  allowed  to  pass  out 
of  recollection.  The  great  Inspirer  of  the  Writings  is  also 
Himself  the  great  Guide  of  the  Church.  Accordingly,  the 
overruling  care  exercised  by  Him  according  to  promise  is  a 
factor  all  through  the  history  which  must  ever  be  borne  in 
mind.  Not  of  course  that  evil  has  been  excluded  from  co- 
existing along  with  the  good — such  is  the  universal  expe- 
rience :  but  nevertheless  the  Church,  as  the  '  Witness  and 
Keeper  of  Holy  Writ,'  has,  under  His  direction,  cast  out 
the  evil  from  time  to  time,  and  has  kept  to  a  generally 
defined  course.  Serious  errors  might  have  been  committed 
in  the  transmission  of  the  works  of  Homer,  or  of  Thucy- 
dides,  or  of  Aristotle  :  and  indeed  many  of  the  books  of  the 
last  of  these  are  supposed  to  have  perished.  But  it  can 
hardly  be  conceived  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  after  communi- 
cating His  Inspiration  in  the  composition  of  books,  would 
in  the  midst  of  His  overruling  care  have  allowed  those  books 
to  be  varied  according  to  changing  winds  of  human  opinion 
and  human  action,  without  the  maintenance  throughout  of  a 
form  mainly  at  least  free  from  error.  It  can  scarcely  be  but 
that  a  succession  of  copies  pure  from  any  great  corruption 
must  have  existed,  and  existed  too  in  predominance,  all 
down  the  Church's  history. 

Thirdly,  although  the  separate  books  of  the  New  Testa- 

^  See  above,  p.  47,  note  i.  Indeed,  Conjectural  Emendation  in 
editing  classical  writings  must  ever  be  hazardous,  and  is  not  now  rated 
nearly  so  high  as  it  used  to  be.  Dindorf's  earlier  text  of  Sophocles  is 
much  better  than  his  later  one.  Successive  editors  usually  return  to 
the  unamended  text. 


TEXTUAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     67 

ment  were  unquestionably  the  productions  of  separate 
authors,  and  bear  the  traces  of  a  distinct  personality  in  each 
instance,  it  would  be  nevertheless  wrong  to  regard  them — 
especially  the  Gospels — as  solely  individual  compositions. 
In  their  corporate,  apart  from  their  individual  aspect,  they 
were  embodiments  of  a  Teaching  and  Faith,  which  had 
been  imparted  to  the  Church,  and  taught  by  the  Church, 
before  those  books  were  severally  written.  Immediately 
after  the  Lord's  Ascension  and  the  coming  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  there  came  into  operation  a  continual  exercise  of 
oral  teaching,  which  must  have  gradually  assumed  definite 
system  and  recognised  fashion  and  form.  Since  the  events 
of  our  Lord's  Life  must  have  been  related  continually  in  all 
evangelizing  action,  and  there  must  of  necessity  have  been  a 
large  number  of  eager  narrators,  and  since  the  subject  too 
was  one  that  must  have  enlisted  all  the  reverence  in  their 
souls,  there  must  also  have  been  at  work  a  never-ceasing 
corrective  criticism,  under  which  the  stories  told  must  have 
become,  so  to  speak,  almost  stereotyped  with  few  variations.^ 
In  course  of  time,  when  either  the  converts  demanded 
manuals  for  elementary  information,  or  Lections  were  needed 

'  The  accordance  in  so  many  respects  with  one  another  of  the 
Synoptic  Gospels  has  been  explained  upon  three  main  theories  : — 

(i)  That  the  Evangelists  made  use  of  a  common  document,  or 
common  documents,  (Eichhorn), 

(2)  That  the  later  Evangelists  made  use  of  the  writings  of  their 
predecessor,  or  predecessors,  (Townson), 

(3)  That  each  Gospel  was  made  up  from  a  permanent  type  of  oral 
teaching,  (Gieseler.)     See  Lee  on  "  Inspiration,"  Appendix  L. 

The  last  seems  to  me  to  be  the  best  explanation,  as  being  truest  to 
the  facts.  Cf,  St.  Luke  i.  1-4.  Ty  lv^pa<^t{>  rod  Oeiov  KrjpvYfiaroQ  ^iSa<y- 
KaXiq^  Euseb.  "Hist.  Eccl."  ii.  15.  Papias,  ra  Trapd  Z,ioai]Q  (pujvijg, 
Eus.  "  H.  E."  iii.  39.  Irenceus,  Aovkuq  ...  to  vtt'  tK^it'ou  Ki)pv(sa6^uvof 
i-iayy'fXiov  tv  /Si/^Xtr/j  KaTfOero.     Eus.  "  H.  E."  v.  S. 


68  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 


in  the  celebrations  of  the  Holy  Eucharist  or  in  services  of 
Common  Worship,  or  when  the  want  of  authorized  writings 
was  felt  in  the  studies  of  the  faithful  or  in  arguments  with 
heretics,  written  records  became  requisite.  The  care  of  the 
Tradition  and  of  reducing  it  to  writing  fell  upon  a  body  of 
men  told  off  for  the  purpose  under  the  special  name  of 
Evangelists.^  The  foundation  of  all  was  public :  and  it  is 
therefore  the  more  probable,  as  it  is  on  all  grounds  possible, 
that  alterations  of  a  lesser  kind  might  have  been  introduced 
in  what  may  have  been  practically  successive  editions  of  the 
Holy  Gospels.  Besides  this,  in  the  presence  of  such  an 
amount  of  oral  teaching,  which  had  been  rendered  necessary 
by  the  absence  of  accredited  writings  for  some  years,  it 
could  scarcely  be  but  that  in  an  early  multiplication  of 
copies,  w^hen  those  writings  had  been  made,  mistakes  of 
various  kinds  would  be  extensively  introduced,  and  would 
be  very  hard  to  expel. 

Very  soon,  therefore,  after  the  books  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment were  written,  corruption  began  to  affect  them.     Error 

^  Eph.  iii.  II.  Acts  xxi.  8.  2  Tim  iv.  5.  The  two  functions  of 
Evangelists,  i.e.  to  preach  and  to  have  the  special  care  of  the  Word 
(rjyr  tCov  Beiujv  tvayyeXiojv  TrapadiSovai  ypa(pi}v)  is  declared  by  Eusebius, 
"  H.  E."  iii.  37.  St.  Matthew  wrote  for  the  Hebrew  Christians,  St.  Mark 
for  the  Church  at  Rome — in  compliance  with  request  (Eus.  "H.  E."  ii.  15) 
— and  St.  Luke  for  the  Corinthian  Church.  So  the  couplet  attributed 
to  Gregory  Nazianzen — 

y\aTdcuo£  i-dv  typa-^tv  'Ei3paioig  Oavfiara  XpiffTOv, 
MapKOf  d'  'iraXiy,  AovKag  'Axaiidci, 

I.e.,  for  Italy  and  Achaia,  as  'E/3pajoie  shows,  not  as  Townson  takes 
it,  in  each  of  those  places.  St.  Luke,  as  it  appears  to  me,  most  pro- 
bably wrote  his  Gospel  during  St.  Paul's  imprisonment  at  Caesarea, 
when  that  Providential  arrangement  gave  a  pause  in  labour,  and  an 
excellent  opportunity  of  collecting  materials  upon  the  spot  over  Judara, 
Galilee,  and  Samaria. 


EARLY  CORRUPTION.  69 

has  been  said  to  have  arisen  from  four  other  sources.  First, 
there  was  a  determined  wish  to  alter  the  Holy  Scriptures,  so 
that  they  might  witness  to  the  heretical  doctrines  that  were 
from  time  to  time  taken  up.^  Then,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has 
been  asserted  that  the  orthodox  have  not  been  free  from  a 
form  of  doing  evil  that  good  might  come,  in  that  they  may 
perchance  have  tampered  with  the  sacred  Text,  in  order  to 
convict  of  error  assailants  of  the  Faith.  But  in  recent  times 
especially,  this  species  of  error  has  been  vastly  exaggerated  :" 
and  as  far  as  it  did  exist  it  was  chiefly  found  in  the  middle 
ages,  and  on  occasions  w^hen  holiness  and  uprightness  had 
descended  for  the  moment  to  lower  levels.  Next,  a  great 
deal  of  debasement  must  be  attributed  to  the  carelessness  of 
scribes,  chiefly  before  the  act  of  transcribing  was  brought  to 
the  perfection  which  it  was  reaching  after  the  seventh  century. 
And  lastly,  and  especially  in  early  times,  ignorance  of  the 
Greek  language,  or  of  the  doctrine  delivered,  was  a  fruitful 
cause  of  error. 

In  the  first  years,  the  scarcity  of  written  records  cannot 
have  failed  to  produce  much  inaccuracy.  And  the  slowness 
with  which  the  true  Faith  on  the  subject  became  established 
amongst  the  newly  converted,  many  of  whom  were  Christians 
in  name  more  than  in  anything  reaching  as  far  as  sound 
belief,  affected  not  only  an  universal  acceptation  of  the  Ca- 
nonical Books,  but  a  reception  of  the  text  of  those  books. 
Gnostic  doctrines  were  soon  found  in  conflict  with  the  words 

diptTiKibv  av^pS}V  ava-K\a.(y\iara.  Eus.  "  H.  E."  iii.  25. 
-  Mr.  Hammond  ("Outlines  of  Textual  Criticism")  remarks  that 
*  there  appears  no  strong  ground  for  the  suggestion, '  that  any  '  altera- 
tions for  dogmatic  reasons'  exist.  See  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduc- 
tion," p.  18,  note.  This  is  almost  a  bete  noire  with  some  writers,  who 
have  rested  it  upon  supposition,  rather  than  authentic  facts.  See  below, 
Chapter  IX. 


70  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

and  composition  of  the  New  Testament.  And  indeed  this 
could  not  have  been  otherwise.  For  Gnosticism  was  an  at- 
tempt to  combine  the  existing  philosophy  with  the  newly- 
revealed  Christian  Teaching.  As  soon  therefore  as  Christian 
Doctrines  were  expr-essed  in  an  authoritative  shape,  Gnos- 
ticism found  itself  in  opposition  to  them.  Thence  arose 
constant  attempts  to  mould  the  writings  that  came  forth 
into  such  form  and  expression  as  would  not  be  at  va- 
riance with  tenets  agreeing  with,  or  not  so  repugnant  as 
Christianity  to,  the  old  philosophy  and  the  ideas  previously 
entertained. 

The  Books  of  the  New  Testament  did  not  exist  soon 
enough  for  Simon  Magus,  Cerinthus,  and  the  other  heresi- 
archs  of  the  first  period  of  Gnosticism,  to  direct  their  assaults 
upon  them.  But  Basilides,  who  lived  in  the  earlier  half  of 
the  second  century,^  a  native  of  Alexandria,  the  chief  seat  and 
centre  of  Gnosticism,  rejected  the  Pastoral  Epistles  and  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,"  and  added  other  books  to  those 
which  were  canonically  recognised.^  After  him  Valentinus 
is  said  by  Tertullian  to  have  corrected  the  text  and  to  have 
boldly  maintained  that  readings  introduced  by  him  were 
older  than  the  words  generally  received.'  Marcion  went 
much  further.  He  divided  the  New  Testament  into  two 
parts,  '  The  Gospel,'  and  '  The  Apostolicon.'  Of  these,  'the 
Gospel  was  a  recension  of  St.  Luke  with  numerous  omissions 
and  variations  from  the  received  text.  The  Apostolicon 
contained  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  excluding  the  Pastoral 

'  Probably  about  117-138  A.D.  Wordsworth,  "Church  History." 
vol.  i.,  p.  195. 

^  See  Westcott,  "  On  the  Canon,"  p.  296. 

•'  Euseb.  "H.  E.,"iv.  7. 

*  "  De  Prcescriptione  Ilwreticorum,"  §  30. 


EARLY  CORRUPTION.  71 

Epistles  and  that  to  the  Hebrews.'  ^  According  to  Tertul- 
lian  and  Epiphanius,  he  '  mutilated  and  depraved '  the 
text  both  of  Epistles  and  Gospels.'  The  followers  of  these 
men,  as  was  natural,  went  beyond  their  leaders.  Nor 
must  Tatian  be  omitted,  a  disciple  of  Justin  Martyr,  and 
founder  of  the  Sect  of  the  Encratites.  His  "  Diatessaron," 
or  Harmony  of  the  Gospels,  had  such  a  circulation  that 
Theodoret  in  the  fifth  century  found  in  the  churches  of  his 
diocese  alone  upwards  of  two  hundred  copies,  and  objected 
50  much  to  the  mischievous  spirit  in  which  the  work  had 
been  executed,  that  he  substituted  in  their  room  the  Gospel 
of  the  Four  EvangeUsts.^  It  is  surely  not  wrong  to  trace  to 
these  influences  much  of  the  corruption  which  is  repeatedly 
declared  by  writers  about  the  end  of  the  second  century  to 
have  vitiated  the  sacred  Text. 

Thus  Dionysius  of  Corinth  says  that  he  must  not  be  sur- 
prised when  people  altered  his  writings  by  additions  and 
omissions,  if  they  tampered  in  like  manner  with  the  Holy 
Scriptures."*  St.  Irenseus  tells  the  same  story,  and  appears 
to  have  had  the  same  fear.^  Clement  of  Alexandria  complains 

'  Westcott,  "On  the  Canon,"  p.  314.  Burgon's  "Last  Twelve 
Verses,"  p.  95. 

-  Westcott,  p.  314.  The  learned  Professor  doubts  however  whether 
this  was  really  true  as  to  the  Epistles.  Burgon,  "-Last  Twelve  Verses," 
p.  94,  note.  Dean  Burgon,  "  Revision  Revised,"  pp.  34,  35,  traces  the 
mutilation  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  St.  Luke  by  B  and  n  to  Marcion. 

'  See  Burgon's  "Last  Twelve  Verses,"  pp.  317,  318.  The  Dean 
quotes  from  "Hceret.  Fab.,"  i.,  20  (0pp.  Iv.,  208),  which  I  have  veri- 
fied. On  the  authority  of  a  scholion,  the  Dean  traces  to  Tatian  (and 
Diodorus)  the  strange  insertion  by  B  and  H  of  the  piercing  of  the  spear 
into  the  account  of  St.  Matt,  xxvii.  49,  before  the  record  of  our  Lord's 
death. 

'  Euseb.,  "H.  E.,"  iv.,  23. 

■'  Euseb.,  "  H.  E.,"  v.,  20.     Irenaeus,  "Contra  Haeres,"  iv.  6,  i. 


72  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 


of  people  who  introduce  change  into  the  Gospels/  An  un- 
known writer,  quoted  by  Eusebius,  inveighs  against  heretics 
who  laid  hands  without  fear  upon  the  Divine  Scriptures, 
under  the  pretence  of  correcting  them."  Origen  speaks  of 
the  disagreement  between  the  various  manuscripts;  and 
adds,  *But  now,  great  in  truth  has  become  the  diversity  of 
copies,  be  it  from  the  negligence  of  certain  scribes,  or  from 
the  evil  daring  of  some  who  correct  what  is  written,  or  from 
those  who  in  correcting  add  or  take  away  what  they  think 
fit;  ' 

And  yet  indications  are  not  wanting  that  exceeding  care 
was  taken  by  the  orthodox  to  preserve  the  Holy  Books  in 
their  genuine  and  unimpaired  form.  Tertullian,  in  arguing 
with  heretics,  bids  them  consult  the  autographs  of  the 
Apostles  at  Corinth,  or  Thessalonica,  or  Ephesus,  or  Rome, 
where  they  are  preserved  and  read  in  pubHc.^  St.  Irenaeus 
refers  in  one  place  to  '  the  approved  and  ancient  copies '  for 
settling  the  number  666  in  the  Revelation ;  and  in  another 
gives  most  particular  directions  as  to  the  careful  and  correct 
copying  of  a  book  of  his  own.'  We  cannot  be  wrong  in 
seeing  in  this  latter  instance, "  as  well  as  in  the  signatures 
attached  with  extreme  care  to  the  end  of  the  account  of  the 


'  Stromata,  iv. ,  6.     Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  508  note. 

■^  Euseb.,  "H.  E.,"  v.,  28.  Probably  Caius:  Mill,  "  Prolegomena," 
p.  Ixii.,  Routh,  "  Reliquiae  sacr?e." 

^  "Comment,  on  Matt.,"  Tom.  iii.,  p.  671,  Dc  la  Rue,  quoted  by 
Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  509.  I  have  thought  it  well  to  give 
unaltered  Dr.  Scrivener's  translation,  but  have  verified  the  quotation. 

*  "  Ipsse  Authenticce  Literse.  De  Prescript.  Ha;ret.,"  p.  36,  and 
Routh'sNote,  *'  Opuscula,"  pp.  205,  6,  which  Dean  Purgon  kindly  points 
out. 

Toit;  (Tirovdaioig  Kal  ap^^aiuig  dvTiypcKpoig.    "Contra  Hccres,"  v.  30,  I. 
Euseb.,  *'  H.  E,"  v.  20. 


A  PURE  LINE.  73 


Martyrdom  of  St.  Polycarp,  a  reflection  of  the  conscientious 
accuracy,  fortified  in  every  way,  which  must  have  directed 
the  copying  out  of  the  best  and  accredited  manuscripts.  And 
the  deep  and  loving  reverence,  in  which  the  Holy  Scriptures 
were  held,  is  shewn  later  on  in  the  severe  condemnation  of 
those  who  gave  them  up  during  the  violent  persecution  under 
Diocletian,  and  in  the  fact  that  a  Sect  ^  arose  upon  the  ques- 
tion of  the  amount  of  punishment  which  should  be  meted 
out  to  such  betrayers "  of  the  Sacred  Books. 

But  the  original  autographs  perished,  and  nothing  has  de- 
scended to  us  about  them  after  the  expressions  employed  by 
Tertullian. 

We  are,  however,  not  left  to  secondary  evidence  for  proof 
that  the  Traditional  text  was  used  and  handed  on  in  Ante- 
Nicene  days.  The  witness  of  separate  ecclesiastical  writers 
ui)on  controverted  passages,  proving  that  they  had  in  their 
possession  manuscripts  agreeing  with  the  Text  afterwards 
adopted  generally  in  the  Church,  and  the  renderings  of  the 
early  Versions,  especially  the  Syriac  and  Italic,  establish 
satisfactorily  this  position,  as  will  subsequently  appear. 

Early  in  the  second  centur^^  development  in  the  spread  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures  was  made  in  two  directions. 

That  robustness  of  the  stem  of  the  Church  which  grew  up 
at  Antioch  is  indicated  in  two  striking  particulars  recorded 
in  the  Scriptural  account.  The  religion  in  that  place  was  so 
genuine  and  characteristic,  that  the  name  was  first  applied 
there  to  the  converts  which  the  followers  of  the  Lord  have 
kept  ever  since.  And  from  that  city,  replete  with  vice  and 
degradation  but  the  site  of  a  structure  of  wondrous  holiness 
and  zeal, — preferred  as  the  source  of  such   evangelization 

^  Donatists. 

^  '  Traditores,'  the  technical  name  which  was  used. 


74  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

before  Damascus  and  even  Jerusalem, — the  great  Apostle 
of  the  Gentiles  was  sent  forth  on  his  ever  famous  journeys. 

In  the  same  spirit,  the  Holy  Scriptures  were  in  very  early 
times,  whether  at  Antioch,  or  in  Palestine,  or  elsewhere, 
translated  into  'a  tongue  understanded  of  the  people.'  No 
record  remains  of  the  occasion  when  this  translation  was 
effected,  or  of  the  mode  of  action,  or  of  the  actors.  The 
good  was  to  be  wrought,  and  it  was  done.  Aramaic,  or 
Syriac,  was  a  more  flexible  language  than  the  Hebrew.  The 
Peshito,  or  '  Simple '  Version  has  remained  certainly  since 
the  sad  divisions  wrought  in  the  Syrian  Church  during  the 
fifth  century,  because  the  Nestorians  and  Monophysites,  as 
well  as  the  Christians  of  St.  Thomas  in  India  and  the  Maro- 
nites  of  Lebanon,  all  use  it  to  this  day,  and  prove  therefore 
by  such  use  that  we  must  go  back  for  its  origin  at  least  to 
the  time  when  they  had  not  separated.  And  it  appears  most 
probable,  that  it  was  that  which  was  read  at  the  first  in 
Syria. ^     Hegesippus,  in  the  second  century,  seems  to  speak 

^  Since  the  discovery  of  the  Curetonian  Version  in  Syriac  by  Arch- 
deacon Tattam  in  1842  and  Canon  Cureton,  Extreme  Textualists  have 
maintained  that  it  was  older  than  the  Peshito  on  these  main  grounds  : — 

1.  Internal  evidence  proves  that  the  Peshito  cannot  have  been  the 

original  text. 

2.  The  Curetonian  is  just  such  a  text  as  may  have  been  so,  and  would 

have  demanded  revision. 

3.  The  parallels  of  the  Latin  texts  which  were  revised  in  the  Vulgate 

suggests  an  authoritative  revision  between  A.D.  250  and  350. 
These  arguments  depend  upon  a  supposed  historical  parallel,  and  in- 
ternal evidence. 

The  parallel  upon  examination  turns  out  to  be  illusory : — 

1.  There  was  a  definite  recorded  revision  of  the  Latin  Texts,  but  none 

of  the  Syrian.     If  there  had  been,  it  must  have  left  a  trace  in 
history. 

2.  There  was  an  '  infmita  varietas '  ("  August.  De  Doctr.  Christ.,"  ii. 


EARLY  VERSIONS.  75 

of  a  Syrian  translation/  and  Melito  quotes  '  the  Syrian '  in 
170- A.D.  Ephraem  of  Edessa  speaks  of  this  Version  as 
used  familiarly  for  the  national  Scriptures  in  the  fourth 
century.^  The  Peshito  resembles  the  Received  Text.  It  may 
have  been  actually  in  the  hands  of  St.  John.'  It  did  not 
include  all  the  Catholic  Epistles,  or  the  Revelation.  The 
Peshito  has  been  called  '  The  Queen  of  Versions.' 

Soon  afterwards,  or  about  the  same  time,  other  Versions 
were  made  in  the  West.  It  was  not  likely  that  the  great 
Latin  Branch  of  the  Church  should  continue  long  without 
translations  of  her  own.  There  appear  to  have  been  a  large 
number  of  translations  made  independently  of  one  another, 
from  the  expressions  used  by  St.  Jerome  and  St.  Augustine. 
'  There  are  almost  as  many  standards  of  the  text  as  there 

11)  of  discordant  Latin  texts,  but  only  one  Syriac,  so  far  as  is 
known. 
3.   Badness  in  Latin  Texts  is  just  what  we  shoukl  expect  amongst 
people  who  were  poor  Greek  scholars,  and  lived  at  a  distance. 
The  Syrians  on  the  contrary  were  close  to  Judea,  and  Greek  had 
been  known  among  them  for  centuries.   It  was  not  likely  that  within 
reach  of  the  Apostles  and  almost  within  their  lifetime  a  Version 
should  be  made  so  bad  as  to  require  to  be  thrown  off  afterwards. 
As  to  internal  evidence,  the  opinion  of  some  experts  is  balanced  by 
the  opinion  of  other  experts  (see  Abbe  Martin,   "  Des  Versions  Sy- 
riennes,"  Fasc.  4,  obligingly  lent  me  by  Dr.  Scrivener).    The  position  of 
the  Peshito  as  universally  received  by  Syrian  Christians,  and  believed  to 
date  back  to  the  earliest  times,  is  not  to  be  moved  by  mere  conjecture, 
and  a  single  copy  of  another  Version.     The  Abbe  Martin,  after  minute 
examination,  assigns  the  Curetonian  to  the  opening  of  seventh  century. 
^   Euseb.,  "  H.  E.,"  iv.,  22,  tov  "EvpiaKov  tvayysXiov. 
-  Mill,  "  Prolegomena,"  p.  cxxvii,  6  'Evpog. 
'  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  312,  321-4. 
'  Bishop  EUicott,    "  On    Revision,"  pp.   26,    27,    quoted   by  Dean 
Burgon,  "  The  Revision  Revised,"  p.  9.     The  Peshito  omits  the  2nd 
Ep.  of  St.  Peter,  the  2nd  and  3rd  of  St.  John,  the  Epistle  of  Jude  and 
the  Revelation.     MSS.  exist  from  early  in  Cent.  V. 


76  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 


are  manuscripts,'  said  St.  Jerome.^  And  St.  Augustine 
speaks  of  '  the  infinite  variety  of  Latin  translations,'  and 
again  of  *  the  multitude  of  translators.'  ^  Both  of  those  great 
Fathers  tell  of  the  untrustworthiness  of  the  Versions.  And 
no  wonder.  Whilst  in  Syria  Greek  was  well  understood, 
and  it  must  have  been  easy  there  to  get  at  the  autographs 
themselves,  or  at  excellent  copies  made  directly  from  the 
autographs,  in  Italy,  Africa,  and  in  the  other  parts  of  the  West, 
accurate  acquaintance  with  Greek  was  comparatively  rare, 
and  the  distance  must  have  led  to  a  large  crop  of  mistakes. 
Much  obscurity  hangs  over  the  old  Latin  Versions  :  but  it 
appears  probable  that  they  included  three  groups,  African, 
European,  and  Italian.  The  Italian  was  preferred  by  St. 
"Augustine.^ 

Later  than  the  Syrian  and  Latin  translations,  but  probably 
dating  back  as  far  as  the  end  of  the  Second  Century,'  we  find 
the  Memphitic  and  Thebaic  Versions.  Alexandria  very  soon 
became  one  of  the  most  active  centres  of  Christian  teaching. 
Philosophy  and  Christianity  there  came  into  collision. 

'  "  Prefatio  ad  Damasum  :"  'Si  enim  Latinis  exemplaribus  fides  est 
adliibenda,  respondeant  quibus  :  tot  enim  sunt  exeniplaria  pene  quot 
codices.' 

-  "De  Uoctrina  Christiana,"  ii.,  ii,  15.  He  speaks  again  and  again 
of  '  diversitates  interp return,'  and  so  forth. 

^  "  Old  Latin  BibHcal  Texts,"  i.,  Introduction,  p.  xxx,  by  Professor 
Wordsworth,  who  adopts  the  classification  of  Westcott  and  Hort.  Pro- 
fessor vSanday,  in  "  Some  Further  Remarks  on  the  Corbey  St.  James 
(ff.),"  No.  XI.  of  the  Oxford  *' Studia  Biblica,"  p.  236,  which  he  has 
courteously  sent  me,  considers  that  there  were  two  fundamental  main 
stocks,  the  African  and  the  European.  The  f  family,  otherwise  called 
Italian,  the  Professor  supposes,  after  scholarly  and  minute  analysis,  to  be 
a  revision  of  the  European.  Dr.  Hort  too  considers  the  Italian  class  to 
consist  of  Revisions. 

'  Bishop  Lightfoot,  in  Scrivener's  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  371. 


EARLY  VERSIONS.  77 

The  Memphitic,  or  Bahiric,  sometimes  but  with  not  so 
much  propriety  called  the  Coptic,  Version  was  the  produc- 
tion of  Lower  Egypt.  It  is,  speaking  broadly,  a  fair  render- 
ing of  the  Greek,  but  generally  agrees  with  B  and  K  and 
the  it\Y  MSS  of  that  class.     It  omits  the  Apocalypse. 

The  Thebaic  or  Sahidic,  was  the  Version  of  Upper  Egypt. 
This  translation  is  generally  of  a  character  similar  to  the 
Memphitic,  but  having  had  its  field  away  from  Alexandria, 
does  not  resemble  the  class  of  MSS  just  mentioned  so  much 
as  its  neighbour  does.  The  Apocalypse  appears  not  to  have 
formed  part  of  it. 

'  Alexandria  may  be  called  the  mother  of  systematic  theo- 
logical science.'  ^  Situate  near  to  an  isthmus  uniting  two 
continents  and  dividing  two  seas,  from  a  commanding  posi- 
tion of  unrivalled  convenience  it  attracted  to  itself  the  litera- 
ture of  East  and  West.  Greek  language  and  art  had  settled 
down  with  a  '  remarkable  after-growth '  into  what  was  termed 
Alexandrinism.'  Asia  contributed  much  of  her  dreamy 
philosophy.  The  traditions  of  Egyptian  lore  had  not 
perished.  There  flourished  here  a  colony  of  Jews  so  strong 
and  so  greatly  Hellenized  that  they  required  a  translation 
for  themselves  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  into  Greek.'^  And 
as  the  instance  of  Philo  shews,  they  had  learned  to  mingle 
a  tone  of  Platonism  with  their  Jewish  belief. 

It  was  not  unnatural  therefore  that  the  celebrated  Catecheti- 
cal School  should  rise  in  such  a  place.  Alexandria  was  soon 
known  as  one  of  the  headquarters  of  the  Early  Church. 

'  Bishop  Chr.  Wordsworth,  "  Church  Histor)'  to  Council  of  Niccea," 
p.  251. 

-  See  Monimsen's  "  History  of  Rome,"  vol.  iv.  pp.  575,  6. 

^  The  Septuagint,  from  the  seventy-two  translators,  six  for  each 
tribe. 


78  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

From  the  time  of  St.  Mark,  said  to  have  been  the  first  bishop, 
to  the  middle  of  the  second  century  when  the  school 
emerged  into  celebrity  under  Pantaenus,  Christianity  was 
active  there.  And  it  was  only  to  be  expected,  that  as  the 
philosophy  of  the  period  had  in  Gnosticism  already  simu- 
lated to  some  extent  the  form  of  Christianity,  so  it  would 
now  pursue  a  second  course  of  action,  and  would  in  the 
next  place  endeavour  to  modify  the  Faith  from  within  the 
Church. 

Such  is  the  probable  account  of  the  rise  of  Origenism  ; 
and  though  Origen  was  no  Arian,  yet  a  later  offshoot  of  the 
same  great  stock  was  found  in  Arianism.  And  no  one  can 
wonder  if  a  line  of  inferior  texts  can  be  traced — with  a  class 
of  readings  which  were  afterwards  thrown  aside  in  the 
Church — from  Origen  onwards  till  the  time  of  the  close  of 
the  Arian  heresy.  Debased  doctrine,  and  readings  of  Holy 
Scripture  afterwards  to  be  rejected,  would  naturally  go  hand 
in  hand. 

The  employment  of  corrupt  manuscripts  has  been  detected 
in  the  writings  of  Clement  of  Alexandria,  the  immediate 
predecessor  of  Origen  in  the  Catechetical  School,  by  Dean 
Burgon.  The  Dean  has  produced  Clement's  quotation  of 
fifteen  verses  (Mark  x.  17-31),  and  discovers  in  the  297 
words  of  them  1 1 2  variations  from  the  Received  Text,  or  a 
discordance  reaching  to  38  per  cent.^  Origen  must  have 
used  several  copies  and  of  various  kinds."  Indeed,  it  is  very 
questionable  whether   he    did   not   execute  an  edition,  or 

'  The  same  passage  differs  from  Westcott  and  Hort's  Text  in  130 
words,  or  44  per  cent.  See  Burgon,  "  The  Revision  Revised,"  pp. 
326-8. 

-  Abp.  Laurence.  "  Remarks  on  the  Classification  of  iMSS.  adopted 
by  Griesbach,"  chap,  iii.,  iv.,  Appendix. 


SEMI-SCEPTICAL  SCHOOL.  79 


recension,  of  the  works  of  the  Evangelists  and  Apostles.  It 
is  certain  that  he  did  something  like  this  upon  the  Old 
Testament,  and  there  is  a  probability  that  at  least  to  some 
extent  he  continued  the  same  mode  of  treatment  on  to  the 
New.'  His  authority  was  widely  venerated  and  followed  in 
later  time.«=.'"  He  was  a  copious  and  precise  commentator 
upon  Holy  Scripture.  From  numerous  facts  of  history,  he 
may  be  said  to  have  founded  a  School. 

Among  those  whom  we  know  unfavourably  at  this  period 
was  Hesychius,  probably  an  Egyptian  bishop,  who  is  said  by 
St.  Jerome  to  have  introduced  bad  alterations  into  copies 
which  went  by  his  name.  Another  is  Lucian,  presbyter  of 
Antioch,  against  whom  the  same  charge  is  made.^  Again, 
Pamphilus,  bishop  of  Caesarea,  the  great  friend  of  Eusebius, 
from  whom  the  latter  took  his  second  name  (Eusebius  Pam- 
phili)  and  who  set  up  the  famous  library  at  Caesarea,  copied 
out  the  works  of  Origen,   and  kept   them  there.     He  was 

'  Origen,  on  Matt.  xix.  19.  He  speaks  of  the  disagreement  of  the 
copies,  wg  ■KCLvra  ra  Kara  Mar9aiov  /u;)  avvq.^HV  dWt'iXoig,  ofioiujg  dk  Kai 
ra  Kara  ra  Xoiira  EiiayyiXia.  He  adds  that  he  has  corrected  in  the 
Old  Testament  from  other  copies,  keeping  to  their  consentient  testi 
mony,  and  has  put  asterisks  where  the  Hebrew  did  not  give  the  expres- 
sion, not  liking  to  expunge  entirely,  and  leaving  others  to  adopt  his 
reading  or  not,  as  they  thought  fit. 

^  Burgon,  "  Last  Twelve  Verses,"  p.  97  ;  "  The  Revision  Revised," 
p.  292.  Cook,  "The  Revised  Version,"  pp.  155-7.  "Letter  to  Bp.  of 
London." 

'  '*  Pnefatio  ad  Damasum."  See  also  Jerome,  "  Catalogus  Scrip- 
torum  Ecclesiasticorum,"  p.  77.  Cook,  "  Revised  Version,"  p.  152, 
note.  St.  Jerome  tells  us  that  three  editions  of  the  Old  Testament 
existed,  viz.,  one  of  the  Septuagint  by  Hesychius,  which  was  followed 
in  Egypt ;  another  by  Lucian,  which  was  used  from  Antioch  to  Con- 
stantinople ;  and  the  third  in  Palestine,  derived  from  Origen,  and  pub- 
lished by  Pamphilus  and  Eusebius.  "  Praefatio  in  Librum  Paralipo- 
Mienon."    Bingham,  xiv.  3,  17. 


8o  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

said  by  his  disciple  and  friend  '  to  have  surpassed  all  of 
Eusebius'  contemporaries  in  disinterested  study  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  and  in  untiring  and  loving  toil  in  anything  that 
he  undertook/  ^  Records  of  his  labours  undergone  in  con- 
junction with  Eusebius  still  remain.'  Pierius,  a  disciple  of 
Origen,  is  also  known  as  a  diligent  student  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture,^ and  to  have  had,  as  well  as  Origen,  copies  that  were 
called  by  his  name.'  He  was  the  teacher  of  Pamphilus, 
Head  of  the  School  in  Alexandria,  and  not  wholly  orthodox.^ 
So  we  are  brought  from  Origen  to  Eusebius.  And  indeed, 
the  veneration  and  affection  entertained  by  the  latter  for  the 
great  teacher  has  been  expressed  by  him  frequently  in  his 
history.  Csesarea  was  the  adopted  home  of  the  latter  days  of 
Origen.  He  must  have  spent  most  of  his  last  twenty  years 
in  that  city.  It  was  his  refuge  after  troubles  in  Alexandria  : 
there  he  was  at  length  ordained.  His  spirit  must  have  lived 
on  amongst  his  admirers  :  and  in  Eusebius  of  Csesarea  we 
see  a  virtual  successor  to  his  main  opinions  and  tenets.® 

^  Euseb.,  "  H.  E."  "  De  Martyr.  Fairest.,"  p.  ii.  Scrivener, 
"Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  512,  3. 

-  "  Codex  Friderico-Augustanus,"  subscription  to  Book  of  Ezra  and 
Esther. 

^  Euseb.,  "H.  E.,"  vii.,  32. 

'  Jerome  on  Matt.  xxiv.  36  ;  Gal.  iii.  i.  See  vScrivener,  "  Plain 
Introduction,"  p.  516. 

■'  Euseb.,  "H.  E.,"  vii.  32.  Routh,  "  Reliquia:  Sacrre,"  iii.,  pp. 
211-12,  265  (1814). 

^  Jerome,  "Contra  Rufinum,"  vol.  i,,  §  8.  Cook,  "Revised  Ver- 
sion," p.  168.  Eusebius  must  have  been  a  great  student  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture. It  is  to  him  that  we  owe  the  '  Eusebian  Canons,'  and  as  is  pro- 
bable also  the  so-called  '  Ammonian  Sections.'  Fault  being  found  with 
Tatian's  "  Diatessaron,"  because  he  omitted  parts  of  the  Gospels,  Am- 
monius  tried  to  construct  a  Harmony  by  arranging  the  other  Gospels  in 
parallel  columns  with  the  first,  and  cut  them  up  into  sections  in  order 
to  bring  them  into  parallelism  with  St.  Matthew.    The  particulars  of  his 


PRODUCTION  OF  A   VITIATED  TEXT.  8l 

But  during  the  lifetime  of  these  men  a  catastrophe 
occurred  which  must  have  affected  very  greatly  the  trans- 
mission of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  The  persecution  of  Diocle- 
tian and  Galerius,  notwithstanding  the  care  taken  and  the 
firmness  shewn  even  unto  death,  must  have  caused  the  de- 
struction of  a  large  number  of  manuscripts.  Hesychius, 
Lucian,  and  Pamphilus  suffered  martyrdom.  And  after  the 
storm  passed  over,  there  must  have  been  a  serious  lack  of 
copies  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  for  use  in  the  Church,  espe- 
cially where  the  large  increase  of  converts  added  to  the 
number  of  congregations,  and  caused  the  building  of  fresh 
churches. 

Towards  the  end  of  this  long  period  of  history,  and\vhilst 
Constantine  was  in  the  midst  of  his  Semiarian  stage,  he 
gave  the  celebrated  order  to  Eusebius,  probably  between 
A.D.  330  and  340,^  to  send  him  fifty  magnificent  copies  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures.  They  w^ere  to  be  written  on  the  best 
vellum  by  skilful  and  accompHshed  penmen,  and  in  a  form 


Sections  seem  to  have  perished  :  but  Eusebius  tells  us  (Epist.  ad  Car- 
pianum,  init.)  that  he  himself  took  the  hint  from  Ammonius,  and  so 
constructed  his  ten  Canons,  and  as  it  appears  the  Ammonian  Sections. 
He  cut  up  the  Gospels  into  these  Sections,  St.  Matthew  containing  355, 
St.  Mark  233  (or  more),  St.  Luke  342,  St.  John  232,  The  Gospels  ran 
continuously  throughout,  but  the  Sections  marked  in  the  margin  afforded 
a  power  of  reference,  and  the  Canons  or  Tables  supplied  an  Index  accor- 
ding to  which  the  parallel  Sections  could  be  brought  together.  The  first 
Canon  gives  71  places  in  which  all  four  Evangelists  combine  :  the  next 
three,  where  three  agree,  (2)  Matt.,  Mark,  Luke  ;  (3)  Matt.,  Luke,  John; 
(4)  Matt.,  Mark,  John  :  the  next  five,  where  two  coalesce  ;  and  the  last 
supplies  251  places  peculiar  to  some  one  or  other  of  the  Evangelists.  A 
reference  to  the  Canon  was  given  in  the  margin  under  the  number  of 
the  Section,  thus:  i^^.  See  Burgon,  "Last  Twelve  Verses,"  pp. 
125-132,  295-312.  Scrivener,  pp.  56-62. 
'  Cook,  "  Revised  Version,"  p.  160. 

G 


82  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

well  fitted  for  use.  Orders  were  at  the  same  time  issued  to  the 
Governor  of  the  province  to  supply  the  materials  for  the 
work,  which  was  to  be  accomplished  with  all  possible  speed. 
Two  carriages  were  placed  at  the  disposal  of  Eusebius  for 
conveying  the  copies  to  Constantinople,  and  he  sent  them 
off  soon  under  the  charge  of  a  deacon.^ 

Now  there  are  various  reasons  for  supposing  that  B  and 
{^  were  amongst  these  fifty  manuscripts.  They  are  referred 
by  the  best  judges  to  about  the  period  of  Constantine's 
letter,  to  speak  generally.  In  Tischendorf  s  opinion,  which 
is  confirmed  by  Dr.  Scrivener,"  the  scribe  of  B  wrote  six 
'conjugate  leaves'  of  K.  These  manuscripts  are  unrivalled 
for  the  beauty  of  their  vellum  and  for  their  other  grandeur, 
and  are  just  what  we  should  expect  to  find  amongst  such  as 
would  be  supplied  in  obedience  to  an  imperial  command, 
and  executed  with  the  aid  of  imperial  resources.  They  are 
also,  as  has  been  already  stated,  sister  manuscripts,  as  may 
be  inferred  from  their  general  resemblance  in  readings. 
They  abound  in  omissions,  and  show  marks  of  such  care- 
lessness as  would  attend  an   order  carried  out  with  more 

'  Eusebius  sent  them,  rpiaad  Kai  rerpafrcni.  "  Vit.  Const.,"  iv.  37. 
There  are  three  interpretations  of  these  words:  (i)  '  in  triple  or  qua- 
druple sheets,'  in  that  case  it  would  have  been  probably  rpiirXoa  Kai 
TiTpdirKoa  :  (2)  '  written  in  three  or  four  vertical  columns  respectively' 
(Canon  Cook),  which  would  exactly  describe  N  and  B,  only  a  preposition 
would  be  wanted  to  turn  the  adjectival  into  an  adverbial  expression  : 
(3)  combined  with  TrtiT/'/icorra  aojixdnatv  OKpOipanj  tyKaraaKtvoig  (c.  36), 
'  we  sent  abroad  the  collections  [of  writings]  in  richly  adorned  cases, 
three  or  four  in  a  case '  (Archdeacon  Palmer,  quoted  by  Dr.  Scrivener). 
After  examining  the  letters,  I  am  convinced  that  my  friend  Archdeacon 
Palmer  is  right.  See  Cook,  "  Revised  Version,"  p.  162,  3  ;  Scrivener, 
p.  513,  note. 

*  Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  92.  "  Christian  Remem- 
brancer," October,  1867. 


PREVALENCE  OF  THE  TRADITIONAL  TEXT.       83 


than  ordinary  expedition.  And  even  the  corrector/  who 
always  followed  the  copyist,  did  his  work  with  similar  care- 
lessness to  the  scribe  whom  he  was  following."  Besides 
which,  it  is  expressly  stated  in  K  that  it  was  collated  with 
a  very  old  manuscript  corrected  by  Pamphilus  after  the 
Hexapla  of  Origen.^  And  Caesarea  was  the  place  where 
manuscripts  of  Pamphilus  and  Origen  would  be  found. 

There  is  therefore  very  considerable  foundation  for  the 
opinion  entertained  by  many  that  these  two  celebrated 
manuscripts  owe  their  execution  to  the  order  of  Constantine, 
and  show  throughout  the  effects  of  the  care  of  Eusebius,  and 
the  influence  of  Origen,  whose  works  formed  the  staple  of. 
the  Library  of  Pamphilus,  in  the  city  where  they  were  most 
likely  written.* 

Such  was  probably  the  parentage,  and  such  the  produc- 
tion of  these  two  celebrated  manuscripts,  which  are  the  main 
exponents  of  a  form  of  Text  differing  from  that  which  has 
come  down  to  us  from  the  Era  of  Chrysostom,  and  has  since 
that  time  till  very  recent  years  been  recognized  as  mainly 
supreme  in  the  Church.  And  the  question  arises,  which  of 
the  two  was  the  generally  accredited  Text  in  the  period  which 
has  just  passed  under  review. 

I.  Now  it  must  first  be  remembered  that  the  traces  of 
corruption  were  very  widely  spread  in  the  first  ages  of  the 
Church.  It  was  impossible  but  that  oral  transmission  from 
one  to  another,  inaccuracy  and  unskilfulness  in  writing,  de- 

'   Siop9ioTT]g. 

'  Tischendorf,  "Novum  Testamentum  Vaticanum,"  Prolegomena, 
xxiv.     Cook,  "  Revised  Version,"  p.  174. 

^  Subscriptions  to  Ezra  and  Esther.  It  is  true  that  these  are  in  a  hand 
of  the  seventh  century.     Scrivener,  "Plain  Introd.,"  p.  53,  note. 

■*  Dean  Burgon  however  does  not  agree  with  this  conclusion,  but  places 
H  at  least  half  a  century  after  B.     "  Last  Twelve  Verses,"  pp.  293,  4. 


84  BEFORE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

fective  apprehension  of  the  Faith,  and  unbelief  in  various 
phases  and  degrees,  must  have  given  rise  to  a  prolific 
progeny  of  error.  Such  indeed  is  the  story  that  we  hear  in 
many  quarters.  But  meanwhile,  the  amazing  health  and 
vigour  of  fresh  Faithfulness  in  those  early  days  found  effect 
in  the  tree,  that  though  hidden  in  part  at  first  amidst  the 
rank  upgrowth  of  error  shot  out  in  course  of  time,  and  at 
length  permanently  overtopped  the  stunted  plants  that  were 
doomed  soon  to  decay. 

2.  Accordingly,  in  the  next  period  we  shall  find  the  Tra- 
ditional Text  ere  long  indisputably  in  the  ascendant.  Now 
how  could  it  have  been  thus  supreme,  if  it  had  no  true 
title  ?  Unlawful  usurpation  must  have  been  soon  discovered. 
The  fact  that  the  supremacy  was  acknowledged  and  not 
gainsaid,  lays  a  heavy  burden  of  proof  upon  those  who, 
fifteen  centuries  after,  seek  to  question  the  right  and  deny 
the  sway. 

3.  But  there  is  remaining  even  now  to  us  sufficient  de- 
monstration of  the  existence  and  use  of  the  Traditional  Text 
in  the  first  ages.  The  witness  borne  by  the  early  Fathers  to 
controverted  readings  proves  that  they  used  Manuscripts 
belonging  to  the  Traditional  Class  which  were  much  older 
than  any  now  in  existence.  Take,  for  example,  fifteen  pas- 
sages which  are  at  the  present  time  under  discussion,  and 
the  following  Fathers  are  found  to  testify  upon  them  to  the 
Traditional  readings:^ — Ignatius  (i),  Papias  (i),  Justin 
Martyr   (5),    Irenaeus    (6),  Tertullian    (7),    Theophilus    of 

^  The  passages  are,  Matt.  i.  18;  i.  25;  v.  22;  v.  44;  xvii,  21;  Mark 
vi.  20;  xvi.  9-20;  Luke  ii.  14;  xxii.  43,  44;  xxiii.  34;  xxiii.  45;  xxiv. 
40;  John  iii.  13;  v.  3,  4 ;  Acts  xx.  28  ;  i  Tim.  iii.  16.  The  above  are 
almost  entirely  Dean  Burgon's  quotations.  It  is  hard  to  see  how  any 
such  support  can  be  adduced  for  the  readings  of  B  and  ^{. 


PREVALENCE  OF  THE  TRADITIONAL  TEXT.        85 

Antioch  (i),  Hegesippus  (i),  Athenagoras  (i),  Vincentius  (i), 
Marcion  (i),  Clement  of  Alexandria  (3),  Hippolytus  (6), 
Acta  Pilati  (2),  Origen  (11),  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  (3), 
Apostolical  Constitutions  (6),  Ps.  Tatian  (2),  Cyprian  (i), 
Macarius  Magnes  (2),  Julius  Africanus  (i),  Titus  of  Bostra 
(2),  Archelaus  with  Manes  (i),  Ps.  Justin  (i),  Clemen- 
tine Homilies  (i),  Arius  (i),  Eusebius  (9),  Athanasius  (8), 
Aphraates  the  Persian  (4),  Didymus  (10),  Epiphanius  (11), 
Ephraem  Syrus  (6),  Ps.  Ephraem  (i),  Gregory  Nazianzen 
(9),  Gregory  of  Nyssa  (26),  Basil  (8),  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  (2), 
Lucifer  (2),  and  Leontius  (i).  That  is  to  say,  in  165  places 
as  relating  to  only  15  chance  passages  in  Holy  Scripture 
Ecclesiastical  Writers  living  before  the  Era  of  St.  Chrysostom 
are  proved  to  have  followed  Manuscripts  thus  witnessing  to 
the  Traditional  Text.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  it 
was  only  at  the  close  of  this  period  that  K  and  B,  the  two 
oldest  manuscripts  now  existing,  were  produced. 

4.  In  a  similar  manner,  the  Peshito  and  Italic  Versions 
— including  under  the  latter  class  the  best  of  the  Old  Latin 
Versions  ^ — were  made  two  hundred  years  before  those  two 
^Manuscripts,  and — especially  the  former — support  the  Tra- 
ditional Text.  Nor  is  occasional  evidence  subsequently 
wanting  in  the  Egyptian  Versions  which,  as  has  been  seen, 
c?me  out  later  in  the  same  period. 

There  is  therefore,  as  these  specimens  show,  no  warrant 
for  asserting  that  the  Traditional  Text  is  not  traceable  back 
as  far  as  the  earliest  age  of  the  Church.  The  vestiges  of  it 
in  Ante-Nicene  times  are  of  a  character  agreeing  with  its 
unquestionable  ascendency  in  the  future. 

^  "August.  De  Doctr.  Christ.,"  ii.  §  15. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

history  of  the   traditional   text   from   the  era  of 
st.  chrysostom  till  the  invention  of  printing. 

The  Great  Patristic  Era.    Improvement  in  the  Art 
OF  Transcribing.     Ancient  Libraries.     Parallel 

SUPPLIED    BY   the    LATE    SETTLEMENT    OF    THE  CaNON. 

Age  of  Manuscripts,  Versions,  Fathers,  and 
Lectionaries.  Eventual  supremacy  of  the  Tra- 
ditional Text. 

THE  period  of  history  that  we  have  just  surveyed  in 
brief  includes  the  early  struggles  of  the  Church. 
Though  there  were  Christians  who  had  received  in  trans- 
mission from  the  Apostles  the  Faith  in  its  entirety  and  in  its 
varied  life,  and  had  learned  to  realize  it,  and  were  firm  in 
maintaining  it,  yet  the  Church  had  not  yet  come  through- 
out her  length  and  breadth  to  understand  and  hold  it  in  all 
its  proportion  and  detail.  The  work  of  the  great  men  of  the 
time  '  was  to  construct  and  not  to  define.  And  thus  the 
age  was  an  age  of  research  and  thought,  but  at  the  same 
time  it  was  an  age  of  freedom.  The  fabric  of  Christian 
doctrine  was  not  yet  consolidated,  though  the  elements 
which  had  existed  at  first  separately  were  already  combined. 
An  era  of  speculation  preceded  an  era  of  councils ;  for  it 
was  necessary  that  all  the  treasures  of  the  Church  should  be 


THE  GREAT  PATRISTIC  ERA.  87 

regarded  in  their  various  aspects  before  they  could  be  rightly 
arranged.'^ 

But  the  period  that  immediately  succeeded  was  vastly  dif- 
ferent. The  world  of  the  time  had  entered  at  least  in  name 
into  the  Catholic  Church.  And  with  the  disposition  to 
half-faith  which  it  caiTied  along  with  it,  and  which  was 
severely  felt  for  at  least  two  quarters  of  a  century,  it  brought 
besides  a  sense  of  law  and  rule  and  order,  as  well  as  also  a 
greater  width  of  observation,  and  a  desire  of  definition  and 
system  and  of  more  uniformity  in  ritual  and  belief. 

This  period  was  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  of  all  in 
the  history  of  the  Church.  Religious  questions  were  the 
great  questiorrs  of  the  day  :  the  most  eminent  writers  of  the 
time  were  churchmen  :  and  the  subjects  of  their  writings 
were  those  of  the  Catholic  Faith.  Their  great  object  was  to 
ascertain  and  unfold  the  exact  lineaments  of  that  which  was 
once  for  all"  delivered  to  the  saints.  The  Creeds  and  the 
Canons  of  great  Councils  remain  as  the  grand  monuments 
of  their  united  labour.  And  the  works  of  Athanasius,  Cyril 
of  Jerusalem,  Hilary,  Basil,  the  Gregories,  Ambrose,  Chry- 
sostom,  Augustine,  Jerome,  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  Leo  the 
Great,  and  others,  (if  we  may  mention  also  some  of  those 
who  immediately  preceded  this  era)  are  as  beacon-fires  still 
chining  to  later  ages,  and  telling  of  the  greatness  of  the  men 
who  kindled  them. 

Another  point  in  a  sister  field  throws  light  upon  the  settle- 
ment of  the  Sacred  Text  which  must  have  silently  been 
effected  at  this  time  by  the  rejection  of  alien  variations. 

'  Westcott,  "  On  the  Canon  of  Holy  Scripture,"  p.  406. 

-  St.  Jude,  p.  3.  uTra?.  "  August.  Contra  Donatist.,"  iv.  24.  'Quod 
universa  tenet  Ecclesia  nee  conciliis  institutum  sed  semper  retentum  est, 
non  nisi  auctoritate  Apostolica  traditum  rectissime  creditur.' 


S8  SINCE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

Classical  literature  was  in  the  condition  which  always  ensues 
when  a  lengthened  period  of  production  is  succeeded  by  a 
time  of  rest.  The  treasures  of  the  past  are  then  stored, 
studied,  and  regulated.  The  expressions  of  the  old  writers 
are  noted,  their  style  is  analysed,  and  commentators  flourish 
in  congenial  soil.  It  is  a  time  of  dictionaries  and  grammars. 
Accordingly  at  this  time  Hesychius — a  different  man  from 
the  Textual  editor  ^ — wrote  his  celebrated  lexicon  :  and  the 
great  Grammarians,  Charisius,  Diomedes,  Donatus,  and 
Priscian,  pursued  their  researches  and  built  up  their  system. 
And  the  stirring  events  of  the  world,  under  which  literature 
was  surrendered  to  the  studious  few,  who  as  time  went  on 
worked  more  and  more  in  retirement  from  the  turmoil  of 
life,  caused  this  period  to  be  long  protracted,  so  that  it  was 
not  till  the  eighth  or  ninth  century  that  the  system  upon 
which  they  laboured  reached  the  measure  of  perfection  that 
it  ultimately  attained. 

Thus  with  regard  to  punctuation.  '  In  the  papyri  of 
Hyperides,  there  are  no  stops  at  all,  in  the  Herculaneum 
rolls  exceeding  few :  Codd.  Sinaiticus  and  Vaticanus  .  .  . 
have  a  single  point  here  and  there  on  a  level  with  the  letters, 
and  occasionally  a  very  small  break.' ^  It  was  not  till  about 
the  seventh  century,  that  the  single  point  alone  was  used  at 
the  head,  middle,  and  foot  of  letters,  to  indicate  a  full-stop, 
half-stop,  or  comma  respectively.  Points  were  afterwards 
multiplical  (: :  .  ,  : :)  to  express  different  powers.  '  The 
Greek  interrogation  (;)  first  occurs  in  the  ninth  century, 
and  (,)  used  as  a  stop  a  little  later.'  ^     In  the  early  manu- 

^  Cf.  Dr.  Schmidt,  in  Smith's  "  Dictionary  of  Biography, "  s.  v. 
'  See  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  46. 

^  See  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  47.  "  Globe  Encyclo- 
poedia,"  s.  v.  Manuscripts. 


IMPROVEMENT  IN  THE  ART  OF  TRANSCRIBING.     89 

scripts,  there  is  also  no  separation  of  space  between  the 
words. 

Again,  Breathings  do  not  occur  in  Greek  Manuscripts  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures  till  the  end  of  the  seventh  century,  nor 
indeed  Accents.  In  the  ninth  century  they  are  found,  with 
slight  exception,  but  not  affixed  with  accuracy.  In  the 
seventh  or, eighth  centuries  breathings  and  accents  were  in- 
serted in  the  older  manuscripts,  Yet  they  were  said  to  have 
been  originally  invented,  or  more  probably  reduced  to  system, 
by  Aristophanes,  librarian  at  Alexandria  about  240  b.c.^ 

Besides  this,  the  spelling  in  the  early  manuscripts  shewed 
a  great  defect  in  the  art  of  expressing  sounds  by  letters,  and 
a  want  of  recognised  system  in  the  employment  of  adopted 
methods.  We  find  both  rough  variations  of  consonants,^ 
and  confusion  between  the  several  vowels  and  diphthongs.^ 
The  latter  peculiarity  is  so  common  that  it  has  earned  for 
itself  the  special  title  of  Itacism.'  There  is  a  tendency  just 
at  the  present  day  amongst  editors  to  substitute  some  of 
these  ruder  types  of  words  for  those  which  were  previously 
received,  and  which  are  more  in  accordance  with  the  ortho- 
graphy now  accepted  in  Classical  writings."  But  surely  this 
is  rather  to  roll  back  the  wheels  of  progress. 

So  that  it  would  appear  that  the  Art  of  Writing  manuscripts 
did  not  reach  anything  Hke  maturity  till  about  the  eighth 
century.  And  this  is,  in  truth,  held  to  be  the  fact.  It  was 
perfected  in  the  Monasteries.     The  first  care  of  St.  Benedict 

^  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  44. 

"^  Thus  ot't/tv  for  01/^61^ ;  aapKivoi^iox  aapKiKoq'^  Ma96aiov  for  Mar0aiov. 

^  Thus  tyetpe  or  tynpaL ;  Ictre  or  eidere  ;  n-a  KavOijaiOfxai  or  KavOijGOfiai. 
Scrivener,  p.  11. 

^  See  "  Prologomena  "  to  Tischendorf,  8th  edition  by  Dr.  Caspar 
Rene  Gregory,  pp.  71-116.  Also  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  pp. 
10,  12,  14. 


90  SINCE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

was  that  there  should  be  a  library  in  each  newly  formed 
monastery.  At  Monte  Cassino  there  was  a  large  library 
which  was  burnt  by  the  Saracens  in  the  ninth  century. 
Bobbio  was  famous  for  its  palimpsests.  St.  Gall  was  also 
widely  known.  The  Irish  Missionaries,  such  as  Columba, 
Aidan,  Boniface,  Kilian,  were  great  cultivators  of  the  art, 
and  indeed  the  Irish,  like  the  Lombards  and  Anglo-Saxons, 
had  a  style  of  their  own.^  The  beautiful  manuscripts,  now 
preserved  as  invaluable  treasures,  shew  the  pitch  of  perfec- 
tion to  which  the  art  was  brought  in  later  times.  Manuscripts 
formed  the  field  of  painting :  and  the  schools  of  modern 
painters  issued  originally  from  the  bodies  of  artistic 
transcribers. 

But  besides  the  learning,  study,  and  ability  spent  by  the 
Churchmen  of  the  era  succeeding  the  Arian  struggle,  the 
men  of  that  time  had  special  advantages  which  have  not  de- 
scended to  our  own  age.  Owing  to  the  jealous  and  coura- 
geous care  of  the  Church,  a  large  number  of  manuscripts 
must  have  survived  the  persecution  of  Diocletian.  These 
must  have  been  copied,  re-copied,  and  copied  again  and 
again,  and  indeed  large  libraries  existed  in  various  places. 

The  libraries  of  Alexandria  were  especially  celebrated.  In 
the  time  of  Ptolemy  Euergetes,  the  library  in  the  Bruchium 
contained  490,000  volumes,  and  that  at  Serapeum  40,000. 
The  Emperor  Aurelian  in  273  a.d.  destroyed  the  Bruchium, 
and  probably  one  of  the  Hbraries  perished  at  that  time.  But 
though  the  Serapeum  was  afterwards  pulled  down  by  the 
command  of  Theodosius,  the  libraries  in  that  city  were  en- 
larged and  increased  till  the  troubles  in  connection  with  the 
Saracens  ensued,  and  they  perished  in  a.d.  640. 

'  Westwood,  "  Palceographia  Sacra  Pictoria."  Silvestre's  "  Palaeo- 
graphy," ed.  Sir  F.  Madden. 


ANCIENT  LIBRARIES.  91 

A  library  was  formed  at  Constantinople  by  command  of 
Constantine,  and  though  small  at  first,  it  must  have  grown  at 
length  to  a  great  size.  Burnt  in  477  under  the  Emperor 
Zeno,  it  was  again  restored.  And  as  the  imperial  library,  it 
enjoyed  a  high  reputation  in  the  middle  ages  till  the  capture 
of  the  city  by  the  Turks. 

The  library  of  Pamphilus  at  Cssarea  is  said  to  have  been 
increased  by  Eusebius  to  30,000  volumes.  This  library  also 
fell  a  victim  to  the  Saracens.  In  later  times,  Buda  under 
Matthaeus  Corvinus  is  reported  to  have  possessed  50,000 
manuscripts,  till  the  city  sank  into  the  hands  of  the  Turks 
in  1527,  when  the  library  was  destroyed. 

It  seems  surely  clear  from  these  considerations  that  we  of 
the  present  time  are  so  inferior  to  the  Churchmen  of  the 
age  of  St.  Chrysostom  and  of  the  succeeding  ages,  both  in 
the  furniture  of  our  'apparatus  criticus'  and  in  the  knowledge 
of  early  manuscripts,  that  it  would  be  rash  in  the  extreme  to 
overrule  the  verdict  which  they  passed.  And  this  conclu- 
sion is  surely  strengthened  almost  to  demonstration,  when  we 
take  into  consideration  the  overruling  care  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  the  Church.  For  the  Church  does  not  act  by 
Councils  alone,  or  solely  in  Canons  or  Creeds,  but  expresses 
her  decisions  in  the  universal  operations  of  her  common  life. 
When  therefore  we  are  told,  and  find  the  information  to  be 
true  as  we  shall  see,  that  the  text  used  at  Constantinople 
and  by  St.  Chr^'sostom  became  'the  standard  New  Testa- 
ment of  the  East,'  ^  and  that  '  the  fundamental  text  of  late 
extant  Greek  MSS.  generally  is  beyond  all  question  identical 
with  the  dominant  Antiochian  or  Grseco-Syrian  text  of  the 
second  half  of  the  fourth  century,'  we  find  ourselves  face 
to  face  with  a  silent  action  of  the  Church  in  one  of  her 
'  Westcott  and  Hort,  "Introduction,"  p.  143;  vol.  i.,  p.  550. 


92  SINCE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

grandest  periods,  and  we  cannot  but  yield  to  her  virtual 
decision. 

'  Slow  experience  and  spiritual  instinct  decided  the  prac- 
tical judgment  of  the  Church.  Step  by  step  the  books  which 
were  stamped  with  Apostolic  authority  were  separated  from 
the  mass  of  other  works  which  contained  the  traditions  or 
opinions  of  less  authoritative  teachers.  Without  controversy 
and  without  effort  "  the  Gospel  and  the  Apostles  "  were  recog- 
nised as  inspired  sources  of  truth  in  the  same  sense  as  "  the 
Law  and  the  Prophets."  In  both  cases  the  judgment  ap- 
peared as  the  natural  manifestation  of  the  life  of  the  Chris- 
tian body,  and  not  as  a  logical  consequence  of  definite 
principles.'  ^ 

This  striking  description  by  Dr.  Westcott  of  the  settle- 
ment of  the  Canon  of  Holy  Scripture  is  more  than  illustra- 
tive of  the  manner,  in  which  the  form  of  text,  which  now 
asserted  itself  victoriously  and  for  ever,  must  have  come  to 
be  generally  acknowledged  as  supreme.  The  other  species 
of  readings  went  down  before  it.  Practically  and  as  far  as 
recorded  use  goes,  though  the  Codex  Beza  (D)  was  written 
later,  the  Western  text  vanishes.  'The  most  remarkable 
fact,  standing  out  in  striking  contrast  to  the  previous  state 
of  things,  is  the  sudden  collapse  of  the  Western  text  after 
Eusebius.'"  The  Vatican  and  Sinaitic  manuscripts  had  ap- 
peared, but  writers  are  not  found  to  have  quoted  them,  and 
they  have  had  in  succeeding  centuries  so  far  as  we  know  only 
a  follower  here  and  there,  who  again  are  left  successively  in 
rejection  and  solitude. 

Indeed,  so  far  does  this  conclusion  carry  us,  that  we  are 
led  to  call  in  question  the  excessive  value  assigned  by  some 

'  Westcott,  "On  the  Canon,"  p.  350. 

2  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction,"  p.  141. 


SETTLEMENT  OF  THE  CANON.  93 

Textualists  to  the  mere  antiquity  of  manuscripts.  And 
taking  into  account  the  gro\yth  of  the  art  of  transcribing,  and 
the  lapse  of  time  during  the  gradual  expulsion  of  error  from 
the  text  of  the  New  Testament,  we  are  driven  to  the  conclu- 
sion, that  the  relative  value  of  manuscripts  is  not  determined 
by  rude  antiquity ;  but  that  a  manuscript  of  the  seventh  or 
eighth  century,  or  even  of  later  production,  may  be  superior 
to  one  of  the  fourth  or  fifth,  especially  if  the  earlier  bear  indi- 
cations of  suspicious  parentage,  or  be  produced  under  he- 
retical associations.  Such  a  manuscript  though  inferior  to 
another  in  actual  age,  yet  may  deliver  a  testimony  which  is 
virtually  much  older  :  because  it  may  witness  to  Traditional 
teachings  which  may  be  supported  by  evidence  dating  back 
to  the  earliest  times.  We  can  understand  some  German 
critics,  who  deeply  learned  as  they  are,  have  no  sense  of  any 
Catholic  authority  ^  or  of  any  guidance  of  the  Church  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  who  are  haunted  with  the  vision  of  a 
Church  of  the  future  constructed  by  pressing  latent  essence 
out  of  texts  of  Scripture  and  evolving  hidden  truths  out  of 
germs  concealed  within  the  secret  consciousness  of  genius, 
which  shall  not  have  too  much  connection  with  the  past, 
paying  no  attention  to  the  silent  condemnation  of  their 
theory  passed  by  fifteen  centuries.  With  them  antiquity  is 
valued  according  to  its  distance  from  now,  and  its  nearness 
to  the  original  autographs.  But  when  the  closest  proximity 
attainable  is  a  matter  of  nearer  three  than  two  centuries,  and 
the  Church  of  the  time,  with  advantages  with  which  those 
of  the  present  day  cannot  be  compared  for  a  moment,  has  in 

^  Dr.  Michelsen  however,  writing  at  Leyden,  expressly  rejects  the  ex- 
treme Textual  theory  because  it  controvenes  the  principle,  Quod  semper^ 
quod  ubiqite,  ab  qtiod  omnibus,  "  Theologisch  Tijdschrift,"  Jan., 
1884. 


94  SINCE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

tacit  but  consistent  action  pronounced  upon  the  question, 
is  it  not  difficult  to  see  how  those  who  acknowledge  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Church  can  follow  such 
guidance,  except  from  omission  to  observe  the  wide-spread- 
ing reach  of  this  truth  and  its  application  to  the  problem 
before  us?  If  such  a  judgment  is  universally  accepted  as 
valid  in  the  case  of  the  Canon,  why  has  it  not  equal  force 
in  the  determination  of  the  Sacred  Text  ? 

The  earliest  fact  of  great  importance  in  the  history  of  this 
period  was  one  of  striking  interest  in  the  spread  of  the  Church. 
In  the  fourth  century  the  Goths,  upon  their  advance  from  the 
wilds  of  the  north  to  the  fair  south,  were  dwelling  in  Moesia, 
and  in  one  of  their  raids  into  the  Roman  empire  carried  off" 
a  Cappadocian  family.  Ulfilas  was  afterwards  born  amongst 
them,  and  Gothic  became  his  native  language.  Brought 
up  as  a  Christian,  he  and  other  Goths  were  forced  to  leave 
their  native  country  by  persecutions  on  account  of  their 
religion,  and  they  went  under  the  leadership  of  Ulfilas 
within  the  confines  of  the  Roman  Empire.  He  was  after- 
w^ards  consecrated  bishop  by  Eusebius,  and  passed  the 
first  seven  years  of  his  episcopate  amongst  the  Goths  in 
succession  to  Theophilus  their  first  bishop.  The  last 
thirty-three  he  spent  within  the  borders  of  the  Roman 
Empire,  where  he  migrated  again  with  a  larger  number  of 
Goths.' 

Finding  the  need  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  his  native 
tongue,  he  translated  into  Gothic  the  Septuagint  Version 
of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Greek  of  the  New.  He  was 
an  Arian,  but  his  Version  is  nearer  to  the  Traditional  Text 
than  to  any  other.     Afterwards  when  the  Goths  were  in 

^  Max  MUller,  "  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language,"  4th  edition, 
pp.  188-192. 


GOTHIC  VERSION,  A,  AND  C.  95 

Italy,  it  was  corrupted  to  some  extent  from  Latin  sources.^ 
Its  date  is  about  360  a.d. 

Towards  the  end  of  this  century,  or  at  the  beginning  of 
the  fifth,^  the  great  Codex  Alexandrinus  (A),  now  in  the 
British  Museum,  was  produced,  afterwards  the  splendid  gift 
of  Cyril  Lucas,  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  to  Charles  I.  This 
great  manuscript  is  admitted  by  Westcott  and  Hort  to  repre- 
sent fairly  the  text  used  by  the  great  writers  of  its  time.  It 
may  be  regarded  as  the  oldest,  and  yet  an  independent,  ex- 
ponent of  the  Traditional  Text  as  eventually  received.'^  The 
divergence  between  A  on  the  one  side  and  B  and  K  on  the 
other,  if  we  may  regard  those  discordant  witnesses  as  one,  is 
greatest  in  the  Gospels.  In  the  Epistles  there  is  much  more 
agreement  between  them. 

At  some  time  in  the  fifth  century  the  Codex  Ephraemi 
(C),  now  at  Paris,  was  executed.  It  is  a  palimpsest  written 
over  in  the  twelfth  century  with  some  of  the  works  of  St. 
Ephraem  the  Syrian,  according  to  the  custom  introduced 
from  very  early  times  on  account  of  the  scarcity  of  vellum.^ 


^   Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  405. 

-  '  I  venture  to  maintain  that  the  limits  on  both  sides  may  be  A.D. 
380  and  A.D.  410,  and  that  the  earlier  date  is  more  nearly  correct.' — 
Cook,  "Revised  Version,"  p.  185.  The  whole  chapter  should  be  con- 
sidered. Dr.  Scrivener  is  inclined  to  refer  A  to  the  beginning,  or  else 
the  middle  of  the  fifth  century — '  certainly  not  much  later  than  the  end 
of  the  fourth  century. ' — "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  97.  Cf,  Hort,  "In- 
troduction," p.  75,  *  referred  by  the  best  judges  to  the  fifth  centuiy.' 

^  '  The  serious  deflections  of  A  from  the  "  Textus  Receptus,"  amount 
in  all  to  only  842  (in  1 1 1  pages) :  whereas  in  C  they  amount  to  1 798  : 
in  B.  to  2370:  in  ^f,  to  3392:  in  D,  to  4697. '— Burgon,  "Revision  Re- 
vised," p.  14.     My  own  figures — over  a  smaller  area — are  similar. 

^  Palimpsests  were  used  in  the  days  of  Cicero  and  Catullus.  Cicero, 
"' Fam."  vii.  p.  18,  2  ;  "  Catullus,'"  xxii.  5.  Plutarch,  "Moralia,"  ii. 
504  D,  779  C. 


96  SnVCE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

The  original  letters  were  in  Bentley's  time  so  difficult  to  de- 
cipher, that  Wetstein,  to  whom  Bentley  paid  ^50  to  collate 
this  manuscript,  complained  that  it  took  him  two  hours  to 
make  out  one  page.  The  writing  was  renewed  in  1834  by 
chemicals.  This  manuscript  consists  of  fragments  through- 
out the  New  Testament,  amounting  nearly  to  two-thirds  of 
the  whole.  It  lies  as  to  character  of  text  about  midway  be- 
tween A  and  B,  inclining  somewhat  to  the  latter.^ 

Various  indications,  occurring  as  if  by  chance  here  and  there 
amidst  discussions,  prove  that  the  learned  men  of  this  period 
were  quite  aUve  to  the  variations  of  manuscripts,  and  exer- 
cised critical  judgment  in  deciding  between  conflicting  read- 
ings. Thus  St.  Basil  at  Caesarea,  misled  by  his  authorities 
as  to  the  correct  reading  at  the  opening  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians,  refers  to  the  oldest  of  his  manuscripts."  Again, 
Victor  of  Antioch,in  the  earlier  half  of  the  fifth  century,  tells 
how  not  finding  the  last  twelve  verses  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel 
in  several  copies,  he  searched  amongst  accurate  ones,  where 
he  found  it,  and  that  he  especially  discovered  the  passage  in 
a  Palestinian  exemplar  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel.^  And  Severus, 
at  the  end  of  the  same  century,  describes  how  'being  at  Con- 
stantinople he  heard  the  passage  about  the  piercing  of  our 
Lord's  side,  as   supposed  to  be   related   by  St.   Matthew 

^  Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  120.  Dean  Burgon,  whilst 
preferring  it  to  B  and  ^f,  suggests  that  it  was  used  as  a  palimpest  because 
it  was  thought  to  be  of  slight  value  ("  Revision  Revised,"  p.  325).  It  is 
hard  to  conceive  such  an  use  being  made  of  it,  if  it  had  been  rated  high. 
It  was  also  corrected  at  different  times  by  three  revisers, — another  proof 
of  want  of  confidence  in  it. 

^  Burgon,  "  Last  Twelve  Verses,"  p.  93.  "  Basil,"  opp.  i.,  p.  254  E, 
255  A. 

^  Burgon,  "Last  Twelve  Verses,"  p.  64.  Appendix  E.,  p.  288, 
where  the  Scholion  is  given  in  full. 


THE  FATHERS  NOT  UNCRITICAL.  97 

strenuously  discussed :  whereupon  had  been  produced  a 
splendid  copy  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel,  traditionally  said  to 
have  been  found  with  the  body  of  the  Apostle  Barnabas  in 
the  island  of  Cyprus  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Zeno  (a.d. 
474-491);  and  preserved  in  the  palace  with  superstitious 
reverence  in  consequence.  It  contained  no  record  of  the 
piercing  of  the  Saviour's  side.'  ^  It  will  be  observed  in  these 
instances  that  nothing  is  said  about  any  individual  opinion 
as  to  what  ought  to  be  the  reading,  but  that  the  question  is 
treated  as  exclusively  one  of  authority, — what  in  those  days 
when  many  ancient  copies  existed  was  the  verdict  of  the 
oldest  and  best  manuscripts." 

It  will  be  remarked  that  up  to  the  end  of  the  fifth  century 
we  have  four  large  manuscripts.  Of  these  K  alone  supplies 
the  entire  New  Testament.  Of  A  the  greater  part  of  St. 
Matthew  has  perished,  that  is,  as  far  as  xxv.  6,  about  two 
chapters  in  St.  John,  and  about  eight  in  the  Second  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians.^  B  is  perfect  (except  for  omissions) 
down  to  Heb.  ix.  14,  not  including  the  Pastoral  Epistles, 
which  were  often  placed  after  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
that  thus  came  near  the  middle  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  C  is 
full  of  large  gaps,  and,  as  has  been  already  stated,  contains 
not  two-thirds  of  the  whole.     Besides  these,  five  other  frag- 

^  Burgon,  "Last  Twelve  Verses,"  p.  315,  who  refers  to  Assemanni, 
"Bibl.  Orient.,"  ii.,  pp.  81,  82. 

-  See  also  Lee  "On  Inspiration,"  Appendix  G,  who  quotes  Julius 
Africanus,  a.d.  220  (Routh,  "  Rell.  Sacr.,"  ii.,  p.  226),  Cassiodorus,  a.d. 
469,  "  De  Institutione  Divinarum  Literarum,"  Pref.  ii.,  538,  St.  Augus- 
tine (besides  as  already  quoted),  "  De  Consensu  Evangelistarum,"  ii., 
14,  iii.  7,  adding  that  '  similar  illustrations  of  the  critical  spirit  with  which 
the  Fathers  conducted  their  critical  investigations  might  be  multiplied 
to  any  extent.' 

'"  From  John  vi.  50  to  viii.  52,  and  from  2  Cor.  iv.  13  to  xii.  6. 

H 


98  SINCE  ST.   CHRYSOSTOM. 

merits  ^  are  extant  from  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  of  which 
Q  is  the  largest,  containing  fragments  of  235  verses  from  the 
two  last  Gospels.^ 

It  should  be  remarked,  that  these  are  only  the  earliest 
according  to  actual  discovery.  It  is  quite  within  the  bounds 
of  possibility  that  research  may  bring  even  older  manu- 
scripts to  light.  The  cases  of  ^?  and  of  the  Codex  Rossanensis 
(2),  which  was  found  at  Rossano  in  Calabria  in  1879  by 
Messrs.  Oscar  von  Gebhart  and  Adolf  Hamach,  seem  to 
point  to  some  increase  accruing  to  our  transcriptional 
treasures. 

It  must  also  be  remembered  that  some  of  the  Versions  are 
older  than  any  existing  manuscripts  that  have  fallen  into  our 
hands.  The  Peshito  probably  dates  ^  from  early  in  the  second 
century  :  the  old  Latin  Versions  from  nearly  the  same  anti- 
quity :  the  Memphitic  and  Thebaic  from  the  end  of  the  same 
century  :  the  Bashmuric,  another  Egyptian  Version,  from  the 
next :  and  the  Curetonian  Syriac,  of  which  the  date  is  uncer- 
tain, must  have  been  made  before  the  Traditional  Text  was 
generally  received,  and  indeed  as  would  appear  probable, 
about  the  latter  end  of  the  third  or  the  beginning  of  the 
fourth  centuries.*  Next  we  come  to  the  Gothic,  a  contem- 
porary of  B  and  K,  though  a  few  years  their  junior.  And 
the  Vulgate  meets  us  about  a.d.  384  or  385. 

In  382,  Pope  Damasus,  in  consequence  of  the  variety  of 

1  Viz.,  Nb,  T  and  T',  which  are  parts  of  the  same  MS.,  V,  P, 
and  Q. 

^  Scrivener,  *'  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  138.  See  below,  Chapter 
VIII. 

^  See  above,  p.  74. 

*  I  hazard  the  suggestion  that  it  was  made  under  the  influence  of  the 
copies  of  Lucian,  with  which  St.  Jerome  finds  so  much  fault.  The 
Curetonian  shows  great  traces  of  Western  corruption. 


VERSIONS.  99 


readings  and  the  extensive  corruption  that  prevailed  in  the 
Old  Latin  copies,  committed  the  revision  of  them  to  St. 
Jerome.  That  great  scholar  and  theologian  entered  upon 
his  work,  which  included  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  the 
New,  with  great  care  and  prudence,  being  anxious  to  make 
as  few  alterations  as  possible.  With  his  Latin  copies  he 
compared  some  ancient  Greek  exemplars.  He  soon  finished 
the  New  Testament,  but  his  translation  of  the  Old  was  not 
completed  till  the  beginning  of  the  next  century,  and  was 
not  considered  so  successful  as  the  former.  By  degrees  his 
translation  won  its  way,  and  continued  till  the  time  of  the 
Council  of  Trent  to  be  the  recognised  Version  of  the  Western 
Church.  In  obedience  to  a  decree  of  that  Council,  a  Re- 
vision was  made  under  Sixtus  V.,  but  was  found  so  faulty, 
that  only  two  years  afterwards  the  Clementine  Bible  was 
issued  under  Clement  VIIL  (1592,  a.d.),  and  has  held  its 
place  to  the  present  day. 

Besides  these  Versions,  the  New  Testament  was  translated 
into  Armenian  in  the  fifth  century,  soon  after  the  Council  of 
Ephesus  in  a.d.  431 ;  into  Georgian  about  the  same  time;^ 
and  also  into  Ethiopian  at  a  date  which  is  so  uncertain  that 
this  Version  has  been  assigned  by  Dillman  to  the  fourth 
century,  and  by  Gildemeister  and  other  Orientalists  to  the 
sixth  or  seventh.^ 

In  the  sixth  century  the  Cambridge  Manuscript  Codex 
Bezae  (D)  was  produced.  It  contains  the  Gospels  and  the 
chief  part  of  the  Acts  but  with  several  omissions,  and  is  one 
of  those  which  are  called  '  bilingual '  manuscripts,  that  is, 

^  Dr.  Malan("  Select  Readings,"  p.  18),  shews  this  from  the  standard 
'•Histor>'  of  Georgia,"  published  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1849,  and  other 
authorities. 

^  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  409. 


SINCE  ST.  CHRYSOSTOM. 


containing  both  a  Greek  and  a  Latin  version.  It  is  supposed 
to  represent  the  Western  Text,  and  is  extremely  inaccurate 
and  full  of  interpolations.  It  is  said  to  have  six  hundred 
bold  and  extensive  interpolations  in  the  Acts  alone.^  Its 
place  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles  is  considered  to  be  filled  by  the 
Codex  Claromontanus,  so  called  from  having  been  found 
at  Clermont  (D.  of  St.  Paul),  but  as  far  as  the  Greek  ver- 
sion is  concerned,  much  more  correct  than  its  sister. 

To  this  time  also  is  referred  the  Codex  Rossanensis 
(2),  which  contains  the  whole  of  St.  Matthew,  and  St.  Mark 
down  to  xvi.  14,  and  is  remarkable  as  the  earliest  MS.  that 
gives  the  doxology  for  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  St.  Matthew.^ 
Also  the  Codex  Laudianus  (E  of  the  Acts),  now  in  the 
Bodleian  library,  and  various  fragments,  amongst  which  are 
the  palimpsest  Z  at  Dublin,  and  others. 

The  seventh  century  does  not  appear  to  be  rich  in  the 
production  of  extant  copies,  unless  it  be  at  the  end.  But  in 
the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  they  not  only  abound,  but  with 
the  exception  of  L,  H  of  St.  Luke,  and  A  in  St.  Mark,^  wit- 
ness to  a  now  settled  agreement  in  the  Traditional  Text. 
Perhaps  the  most  noticeable  amongst  them  is  the  Codex 
Basiliensis  (E)  now  at  Basle,  which  is  usually  referred  to  the 
eighth  century,  but  is  considered  by  Dean  Burgon  to  belong 
to  the  seventh." 

In  the  tenth  century,  cursive  writing  came  into  vogue,  and 


'  Sciivener,  p.  126. 

^  But  the  Doxology  has  much  earlier  authority  in  the  Peshito  and 
Thebaic,  not  to  mention  the  Curetonian,  in  the  Liturgies,  and  in  the 
Apostolic  Constitutions,  and  the  Teaching  of  the  Apostles.  See  Malan, 
'*  Select  Readings,"  p.  26.     And  below.  Appendix  v. 

^  Westcott  and  Hort,  "Introduction,"  p.  171. 

•*  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  127.  Burgon,  "Guardian" 
newspaper,  Jan.  29,  1873.     See  below,  Chapter  VIII. 


UNCIALS  AND  CURSIVES, 


was  used  thenceforwards  do\vn  to  the  time  when  copying 
gave  way  to  printing.  No  less  than  1997  cursive  copies  are 
now  known  to  exist  in  all  kinds,  that  is,  inclusive  of  Gospels, 
Acts  and  Catholic  Epistles,  St.  Paul,  Apocalypse,  and  Lec- 
tionaries  of  the  Gospels  and  of  the  Apostles.^  With  hardly 
any  exception  the  Cursives  witness  to  the  Traditional  Text. 
Only  a  few,  such  as  i,  t^t^^-  as  well  as  13,  69,  124,  346, 
and  a  very  few  others  here  and  there,  follow  B  and  ^.  Thus 
it  would  appear  that  the  text  of  those  Uncials  was  advocated 
by  a  small  minority,  and  that  it  was  nevertheless  condemned, 
not  because  it  was  not  known,  but  on  account  of  its  faulty 
nature. 

The  question  naturally  arises,  What  is  the  value  of  the 
Cursive  Manuscripts  ?  They  were  produced  so  many  cen- 
turies after  the  Apostles'  time,  that  serious  doubts  have  been 
entertained  about  their  possessing  any  critical  value  at  all. 

Now  a  moderate  application  of  the  principle  of  Genealogy 
here  comes  into  action.  The  Cursive  Manuscripts  were  the 
representatives,  not  only  of  a  long  line  of  ancestors,  but  as 
must  follow  from  the  circumstances  attending  them,  of  a  long 
line  of  respectable  ancestors,  whose  character  as  revealed  in 
their  extant  descendants  proves  them  not  to  have  degene- 
rated— speaking  generally  of  them  in  the  mass — in  any  very 
considerable  degree,  unless  it  be  in  a  few  particulars.  Their 
overwhelming  number  supplies  a  presumption,  and  indeed 
more  than  a  presumption,  that  their  ancestors  were  also 
numerous.  And  their  general  agreement  amongst  themselves 
proves  that  they  express  the  settled  conviction  of  the  Church 
of  their  time,  whilst  their  consonance  with  the  mass  of  the 

^  Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction, "  p.  xxx. 

'  Only  I  and  33  are  quoted  by  Westcott  and  Hort,  "  Introduction," 
p.  171. 


SINCE  ST.  CHRYSOSTOM. 


Uncials  that  went  before  them  demonstrates  their  unbroken 
unison  with  the  ages  that  lately  preceded  them. 

But  to  dream  of  arraying  the  Cursives  as  a  body  on  the 
one  side  against  the  Uncials  as  an  army  on  the  other  would 
be  abhorrent  to  Textual  Criticism,  and  such  a  notion  could 
only  be  suggested  or  imputed  by  those  who  are  innocent  of 
the  facts  of  the  case  as  well  as  of  the  principles  accepted  by 
Textual  Critics.  The  Cursive  Manuscripts,  be  it  never  for- 
gotten, follow  the  main  body  of  the  Uncials  with  a  very 
remarkable  unanimity.  Always  excepting  some  half-dozen — 
those  just  mentioned — they  bear  generally  the  same  wit- 
ness. As  exponents  of  the  Traditional  Text,  they  acquiesce 
in  the  lead  of  the  elder  testimony  which  is  supplied  by  Uncial 
Manuscripts,  Versions,  and  Fathers,  and  add  confirmation  to 
what  is  otherwise  attested.  As  well  suppose  that  the  rank 
and  file  of  the  English  Army  may  be  drawn  up  against  the 
officers,  as  imagine  a  general  conflict  between  the  Cursives 
and  the  Uncials.  It  should  be  remembered,  though  too  much 
stress  must  not  be  laid  upon  this  truth,  that  in  the  age  of  the 
Cursives  the  Art  of  Transcribing  reached  its  highest  point  of 
perfection. 

It  would  not  be  right  to  leave  this  long  period  from  the 
Era  of  St.  Chrj^sostom,  even  in  a  short  sketch  like  the  pre- 
sent, without  lingering  for  a  moment  upon  a  very  important 
and  peculiar  class  of  Manuscripts.  Of  the  Lectionaries  the 
number  discovered  and  catalogued  has  now  mounted  up  to 
more  than  five  hundred.  These  manuscripts  date  back  at 
least  as  far  as  the  eighth  century,  and  represent  a  tradition 
much  earlier  than  that. 

Lectionaries  have  evidently  a  peculiar  value  because  of 
their  use  in  Public  Worship,  where  they  would  be  subjected 
necessarily  to  continual  criticism.   Faults  would  be  corrected, 


LECTIONARIES,    VERSIONS,  AND  FATHERS.       103 

and  a  general  accuracy  ensured  ;  though  no  doubt  such 
errors  as  might  happen  to  creep  in  would  keep  an  obstina.te 
hold  when  once  in  possession. 

As  to  Versions,  there  are  two  in  Syriac  to  be  noticed 
since  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  and  some  of  an  un- 
scientific order.  That  called  the  Jerusalem,  of  which  only 
one  manuscript  exists,  dates  back  certainly  as  far  as  the  sixth 
and  perhaps  to  the  fifth  century.  A  more  important  version 
was  the  Philoxenian,  or  Harclean.  This  was  made  by 
Polycarp,  a  Rural-Bishop  (^wpfTrtcKro^og),  for  Xenaias  or  Phi- 
loxenus,  Monophysite  Bishop  of  Mabug,  or  Hierapolis,  in 
A.D.  508.  About  a  hundred  years  after  (a.d.  616)  it  was 
revised  by  Thomas  of  Harkel.  '  It  is  probably  the  most 
servile  version  of  Scripture  ever  made.'  ^  The  other  Versions 
are  : — the  Slavonic,  of  the  ninth  century ;  the  Anglo-Saxon, 
from  the  eighth  to  the  eleventh ;  a  Prankish  of  the  ninth  ;  two 
Persic,  of  the  Gospels  only,  and  of  uncertain  date;  and 
some  Arabic  translations  of  small  critical  value. 

The  witness  of  the  Fathers  in  the  early  part  of  this  period 
has  been  stated  to  be  consentient,  and  to  be  consistently  in 
favour  of  the  Traditional  Text.  It  has  been  calculated  that 
there  are  about  a  hundred  Fathers  who  wrote  before  the  pro- 
duction of  B,  and  about  two  hundred  more  till  the  end  of 
the  sixth  century. 

We  have  now  reached  the  era  when  printing  was  applied 
to  the  New  Testament,  and  when  therefore  the  periods  cease 
during  which  materials  were  manufactured  for  the  subsequent 
use  of  Textual  Criticism. 

A  few  words  in  retrospect  are  here  necessary. 

The  great  feature  in  this  period  was  the  rise  of  the  Tra- 
ditional Text  into  a  predominance  which  was  scarcely  dis- 
'   Scrivener,  "  Plain  Introduction,"  p.  328. 


104  THE  TRADITIONAL  TEXT. 

puted.  Corruption  of  a  manifold  kind  had  been  infused  in 
the  earliest  times  into  the  Sacred  Writings.  When  they 
were  hardly  emerging  from  the  rude  depravation  to  which 
they  were  subjected  in  many  places,  they  experienced  the 
influence  of  a  School  of  Semi-sceptical  philosophy  within 
the  Church,  and  a  small  Class  of  copies  varying  from  the 
Text  afterwards  accepted  was  produced  in  the  times,  if  not 
as  it  appears  under  the  supervision,  of  a  party  that  was  not 
wholly  orthodox.  Then  ensued  an  era  when  the  Faith  of 
the  Church  and  the  Holy  Scriptures  were  subjected  to  long 
and  anxious  consideration.  The  main  features  of  the  Faith 
once  delivered  were  defined  in  Creeds.  No  special  enact- 
ments embodying  formal  definition  were  made  upon  the 
Canon  or  the  Text  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Nevertheless 
the  number  of  genuine  Books,  and  the  true  Form  of  Text, 
were  settled  quietly  and  yet  decisively.  Divergent  tongues 
were  scarcely  heard  afterwards  except  to  be  silenced.  The 
*  still  small  Voice  '  was  making  Itself  felt  and  acknowledged 
throughout  the  whole  Body,  without  rising  into  loud  tones  of 
command,  or  causing  laws  to  be  written  down  in  special  or 
general  legislation. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

MATERIALS    OF    CRITICISM. 

I.  Manuscripts    (a)  Uncial,    (d)   Cursive;      II.    Lec- 

TIONARIES    AND    LiTURGIES  ;    III.  VERSIONS;    IV.  ECCLE- 
SIASTICAL Writers. 

THE  research  of  modern  times  has  collected,  as  has 
been  already  seen,  a  vast  amount  of  varied  evidence 
upon  the  Text  of  the  New  Testament.  We  may  best 
arrange  their  evidence  under  four  Heads,  viz.,  Manuscripts 
Uncial  and  Cursive,  Lectionaries  and  Liturgies,  Versions, 
and  the  Quotations  that  are  found  in  Ecclesiastical  Writers. 

I.  (a)  Uncial  Manuscripts. 

The  New  Testament  was  formerly  divided  into  four  parts, 
viz..  Gospels,  Acts  and  Catholic  Epistles,  PauHne  Epistles, 
and  the  Apocalypse. 

Uncial  Manuscripts  were  originally  made  up  of  continuous 
writing  in  large  letters  without  any  space  between  the 
words  or  sentences.  The  most  ancient  letters  were  upright 
and  square  :  afterwards  they  became  narrow,  or  oblong,  or 
leaning  ;  and  the  writing  gradually  assumed  a  more  elaborate 
and  artistic  form.  The  copies  of  the  New  Testament  that 
have  descended  to  us  are  not  wTitten  upon  the  reed  papyrus, 
or  on  wax  tablets,  or  the  bark  of  trees,  or  any  such  perish- 


io6  MATERIALS  OF  CRITICISM. 

able  substance,  but  generally  on  either  vellum  or  the  skins 
of  very  young  calves,  or  else  on  parchment  or  the  skins  of 
sheep  and  goats.  The  Sinaitic  is  made  up  of  the  skins  of 
antelopes. 

The  dates  in  the  following  Table  (see  pp.  io8,  109)  are 
taken  from  Dr.  Scrivener's  "  Plain  Introduction,"  with  the 
exception  of  E,  with  respect  to  which  I  have  followed  Dean 
Burgon,  who  has  carefully  examined  that  manuscript. 

Besides  the  Uncial  Manuscripts  which  are  mentioned  in 
the  Table,  there  are  several  smaller  fragments,  which  with 
the  others  make  up  the  following  number  in  all : — 


Gospels         .... 

.     61 

Acts  and  Catholic  Epistles     . 

.     14 

Pauline  Epistles     . 

.     22 

Apocalypse    .... 

•       5 

But  in  this  calculation,  as  will  be  observed,  inasmuch  as  the 
number  of  authorities  in  each  class  is  given,  those  Manu- 
scripts which  include  parts  of  more  than  one  class  are 
reckoned  under  each.  Thus  A  and  K  are  reckoned  in  all 
four  classes,  B  in  three,  and  D  in  two.  Subtracting  these, 
viz.,  7  repetitions  in  the  Acts,  8  in  St.  Paul,  and  4  in  the 
Apocalypse,  we  have  a  general  total  of  Z^  Uncials. 


{l?)  Cursive  Manuscripts. 

The  vast  amount  of  Manuscripts  included  in  this  impor- 
tant class, — important  because  of  their  number,  of  their 
general  consentience  in  rendering,  of  the  strong  body  of 
ancestors  which  they  represent,  of  the  perfection  of  the  art 


UNCIALS  AND  CURSIVES,  107 

with  which  they  were  executed,  and  of  the  generally  accepted 
conclusions  of  which  they  are  the  signs  and  tokens, — with 
the  one  weighty  drawback  of  defect  in  antiquity — prevents 
any  possibility  of  a  list  of  them  being  given  in  a  small  work 
like  the  present.  The  most  celebrated  are  the  handful  of 
dissentients  that  follow  B  and  K  (see  above,  p.  loi),  which 
have  been  thereby  lifted  into  a  prominence  beyond  their 
real  importance,  and  the  following  : — 

13.  Regius,  collated  by  Professor  W.  H.  Ferrar. 

20.  Regius,  188. 

61.  Codex  Monrfortianus  (above,  p.  9). 

66.  Codex  Galei  Londinensis. 

69.  Codex  Leicestriensis. 

71.  Lambeth,  528. 
113.  Codex  Harleianus,  18 10,  Brit.  Mus. 
124.  Caesar- Vindobon.  Nessel.     188,  Lambec.  31. 
237 — 259.  Collated  by  C.  F.  Matthaei. 
507 — 517.  Collated  by  Dr.  Scrivener. 
603.  &c.         &c.         &c. 

Dr.  Scrivener  and  Dean  Burgon  have  raised  the  number 
of  known  Cursives  to — 


Gospels 

.     739 

Acts  and  Catholic  Epistles  . 

.     261 

Pauline  Epistles  .... 

•     338 

Apocalypse          .         .         .         . 

.     122 

1460. 

It  is  improbable,  that  a  list  has  been  yet  obtained  of  all  the 
surviving  treasures  of  this  Class.  Yet  on  the  other  hand,  it 
is  scarcely  conceivable,  that  any  future  discoveries  will  affect 
their  general  testimony  to  the  Traditional  Text. 


3 

< 
< 

^ 

•4n 

=    1 

<        < 

i 

H 

2 

3 

i 

I 

•w   S   3 

1    1 

1    M 

1       1             1         Q    S                             1 

U 

o 

|§ 

0  ^ 

^'^* 

6 

1 

1  1 

1        1 

1                         w     1 

2 

i^ 

fa  fi:    ?r 

^     i  III 

t  :      ^  ^f. 

!-•-           w.i:  u  £  >           S^ 
^  >           >-  >  >  S           5 

10 
■V 

< 

P3%        <!     U     C          Wp             (In     NfiJIZi             [2         f2 

1 

ll 

J  _„  J 

w     1     ^ 

J 

1 

S  S 

3 

c 

1 II 

1         ! 

i  jl  1  III  1  !sl 

.S3 

1 

— 
P3 

2 

H 

o 

> 

> 

> 

> 

All,  except  Matt.  iv.  22— 
V.  14 ;  xxviii.  17-20. 
Mark  x.  16-30;  xv.  2-20. 
John  xxi.  15-25. 
All,  except  Matt.  v.  44 — 
vi.  12  ;  ix.  18— X.  1  ; 
xxii.  14 — xxiii.  35. 
John  xxi    12-25. 
After  John   vii.    39,    in 
Cursives. 
John  xvi.  3— xix.  41. 
Luke  i.  I— xi.  33. 

Fragments. 
All. 

Full  of  hiatus. 

All  Luke,  Mark  except  105 
verses,  531  of  the  rest. 

All,  except  Johnxix.  17-35. 

All,  except  Matt.  iii.  12— 
iv.  18  ;  xix.  12 — XX.  3  ; 
John  viii.  6-39. 

All. 

With  serious  defects. 

1 

J        >             ><w     1  X'-^   'Z    '-      <      c        ^x  \  ^c/3o  ' 

Paris 
Moscow 

Rome 

Bible  Society 

Vatican 

Hamburgh 

Paris 

Cambridge 

Utrecht 

Modena 

Bodleian 

Moscow 

St.  Gall 

Dresden 

Rome 

St.  Petersburg 

St.  Petersburg 

Paris 

Munich 

Venice 
Vatican 
Brit.  Museum 

Regius 

Mosqucnsis 

Barberini 
Zacynthius 
Vaticanus,  2066 

Wolfii  B 

Cyprius 

Augiensis 

Boreeli 

Mutinensis 

Tischendorfianus  IV. 

Mosquensis,  98. 

Sangallensis 

Boernerianus 

Angelicus 

Petropolitanus 

Porphyrianus 

Campianus 

Monacensis 

Nanianus  I. 
Vaticanus,  354 
Harleianus 

> 

x' 

x' 

J>  ^   O—   y 
t3  I  U  g  J 

I  i  §1  f 

■-  o-'.s  s 

t«j,  >    hO° 

•  n  'N^  ■«-'•  c  V 

o~  u  o  6 
V  -'2  V  o 

—    C    U  •-    Q, 

Ia6si 

XPQOQQ 


no  MATERIALS  OF  CRITICISM. 


II.  Lectionaries  and  Liturgies. 

The  value  of  this  class  of  evidence,  the  full  force  of  which 
was  first  advocated  and  explained  by  Dean  Burgon  in  his 
'Last  Twelve  Verses  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel/^  is  very  con- 
siderable and  peculiar. 

It  is  evident  that  what  is  constantly  read  under  authority 
in  public  must  have  a  far  greater  weight  than  the  writings  of 
any  individual  author.  Such  texts  must  have  been  con- 
tinually exposed  to  general  criticism.  Whilst  therefore  it  is 
quite  possible  that  some  of  the  MSS.  that  have  descended 
to  us  may  not  have  been  subjected  to  such  searching  ex- 
amination, and  indeed  that  in  the  natural  wear  and  tear  of 
time  the  best  accredited  may  have  been  most  used  and 
therefore  have  soonest  perished,  whilst  those  that  were  least 
in  repute  may  have  been  preserved  because  of  general  neglect, 
Lectionaries  and  Liturgies  emerge  from  the  full  light  and 
the  never-ceasing  life  of  the  Early  Church.  Add  to  this, 
that  both  these  species  of  evidence  date  from  the  earliest 
times.  The  Lectionary-system  of  the  *  Unchangeable  East ' 
has  remained  from  very  ancient  antiquity,  and  can  be  traced 
back  beyond  B  and  K  to  the  times  at  least  of  Origen  and 
even  Clemens  Alexandrinus  at  the  end  of  the  second  century. 
The  Manuscripts  go  back  as  far  as  the  eighth  century  :  but 
numerous  indications  in  the  works  of  Ecclesiastical  writers 
carry  the  reference  without  doubt  to  the  period  just  men- 
tioned.^ 

This  Lectionary-system  was  drawn  upon  the  main  lines  of 
the  practice  that  previously  prevailed  in  the  Synagogues  of 

'  Pp.  191-211,  214-5,  217-24,  240,  313-5,  318. 
^  Burgon,  "  Last  Twelve  Verses, "  pp.  191-211. 


LECTIONARIES  AND  LITURGIES. 


the  Jews.  There  were  in  their  Services,  as  in  ours,  two 
Lessons,  one  from  each  of  their  great  divisions  of  the  Old 
Testament.  St.  Paul  and  St.  Barnabas  found  at  Antioch  in 
Pisidia  the  ordinary  custom  in  operation  of  reading  both 
from  the  Law  and  the  Prophets.^  This  habit  was  continued  in 
the  Liturgies  by  the  selections  then  made  both  from  the 
Epistles  and  Gospels,  and  in  the  daily  Morning  and  Evening 
Prayers  by  the  Lessons  from  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 
Accordingly,  Justin  Martyr,  writing  about  a.d.  150,  records 
in  his  Apology  that  there  were  readings  during  Divine  Ser- 
vice from  the  Apostles  and  the  Prophets."  The  new  Lec- 
tionary-system  was  thus,  as  well  as  in  other  particulars,'^ 
grounded  upon  the  old.  And  thus  Lectionaries,  as  well  as 
Liturgies,  constitute  a  most  valuable  source  of  true  informa- 
tion and  evidence. 

Several  errors  may  be  traced  to  this  influence.  Thus  the 
omission  of  the  last  twelve  verses  of  St,  Mark's  Gospel  in 
certain  copies,  of  which  B  and  {<  are  the  only  extant  speci- 
mens, is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  those  verses  consti- 
tuted by  themselves  a  Lection,  which  exactly  filHng  the  last 
page  of  the  Gospel  (for  St.  Mark  stood  last  according  to  the 
Western  arrangement)  dropped  off  perforce  with  the  last 
leaf.  A  copyist,  charged  to  transcribe  a  copy  so  mutilated, 
not  unnaturally  mistook  the  end  {teXoq)  marking  the  close 
of  the  previous  Lection  for  the  end  of  the  entire  Gospel. 
Again,  the  two  verses  in  St.  Luke  that  describe  the  minister- 
ing Angel  and  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat ^  were  omitted  in 
the  ordinary  reading  of  the  rest  of  the  passage  on  the  Tues- 

'  Acts  xiii.  15. 

^  "  ApoL,"  i.  p.  67.     Burgon,  "  Last  Twelve  Verses,"  p.  193  note. 

^  E.  g.,  both  began  in  September.     Burgon,  p.  193. 

*  Luke  xxii.  43,  44. 


MATERIALS  OF  CRITICISM. 


day  after  Sexagesima,  and  were  inserted  after  St.  Matt, 
xxvi.  39  on  Maundy  Thursday.  As  marks  were  put  in  the 
Evangelistaria  directing  the  omission,  it  was  even  obvious 
that  some  copyist  would  be  sure  to  leave  the  two  verses  out 
altogether.  So  again,  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  St.  John  is 
made  to  commence  with  the  words,  *  And  Jesus  said  unto 
his  disciples,'  as  any  one  may  see  by  referring  to  the  Gospels 
in  our  Prayer-Book  for  St.  Philip  and  St.  James'  day.^ 
Similar  introductions  and  insertions  were  not  uncommon, 
and  have  crept  into  the  Uncial  Manuscripts." 
Lectionaries  were  of  two  kinds  : — 

1.  Evangelistaria,  or  Evangeliaria,  consisting  of  Lessons 
from  the  Gospels.     Of  these  415  Manuscripts  are  known. 

2.  Praxapostoli  or  Apostoli,  containing  Lessons  from  the 
Acts  and  Epistles,  and  amounting  to  128,  as  hitherto 
reckoned. 

The  value  of  the  Quotations  in  Liturgies  rests  upon  much 
the  same  foundation  as  the  verdicts  of  the  Lectionaries. 
They  'record  the  witness,  not  of  individuals,  but  of  Churches.' 
But  the  quotations  are  rare.  Such  however  is  the  render- 
ing of  the  '  Gloria  in  Excelsis '  in  the  Liturgy  of  St. 
Clement  and  in  that  of  St.  James.  Such  again  is  the  general 
witness  in  favour  of  the  Doxology  as  a  recognized  termina- 
tion of  the  Lord's  Prayer. 

The  Liturgies  reach  at  least  as  far  back  as  the  4th  or  5  th 
Centuries.^ 

^  Compare  the  Gospels  for  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  Sundays  after 
Easter. 

^  See  Burgon's  "Last  Twelve  Verses,"  chapter  xi.,  for  numerous 
instances  of  this  kind. 

*  Daniel,  "Codex  Liturgicus,"  Tom.  iv,,  Prolegom.,  pp.  28-31. 


VERSIONS. 


1^3 


III,  Versions. 

The  chief  Versions  have  been  already  noticed.  The 
general  dates  of  them  all  may  be  seen  together  in  the  fol- 
lowing Table : — 


Syriac. 


Latin. 


Egyptian, 


Single  Versions. 


II.      :Peshito(i)  Old  Latin  (i)  I 

1  sc. 

a.  African  

b.  European  ]  ?  Memphitic,  or 
I  Bahiric  (2) 

;  I  ?  Thebaic,  or 

I      Sahidic  (2) 


III. 


?  Memphitic  and 
Thebaic 


Bashmuric,  or 
Elearchian  (3) 


IV.       ?  Curetonian  (3) 


Vulgate  (2) 


Jerusalem  (3) 
I  Karkaphensian  (3) ; 


VI.       Philoxenian  (3) 
A.D.  508. 


VII.     Harclean(3) 

A.D.  616, 


Gothic  (2) 


Armenian  (2) 
Georgian  (3; 
Ethiopian  (2)! 


Clementine 
I     Revision 

A,D,  1592, 


Slavonic  (3)  IXth. 
Anglo-Saxon  (4)  Vlllth- 

Xlth. 
Prankish  (4)  IXth. 
Persic  (4)  IXth. 
Arabic  (several)  Vlllth, 

&c. 


114  MATERIALS  OF  CRITICISM. 


The  figures  here  attached  to  the  names  of  the  several  Ver- 
sions denote  their  relative  scale  of  excellence  in  a  critical 
light  according  as  Dr.  Scrivener  has  classed  them.  Some  of 
the  Arabic,  and  one  Persic  Version,  may  be  ranked  in  the 
third  class.  But  the  other  Persic  (and  perhaps  one  Arabic) 
version  being  derived  from  the  Peshito  Syriac,  and  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  or  old  English  from  the  Latin  Vulgate,  can  be  applied 
only  to  the  correction  of  their  respective  primary  trans- 
lations.^ 

The  value  of  this  kind  of  evidence  is  patent  upon  an  in- 
spection of  the  Table  above.  Versions  present  the  most 
ancient  form  of  continuous  text.  Some  of  them  are  of  much 
earlier  date  than  the  oldest  Uncials.  But  to  this  lofty  posi- 
tion some  drawbacks  are  attached. 

I.  The  exact  reading  of  a  Version  may  perhaps  be  very 
difficult  to  ascertain.  Questions  as  to  the  true  form  of  the 
text  may  come  into  them  as  they  do  into  the  original  Greek 
Text.  Old  Latin  affords  an  instance  before  all  others,^  since 
it  is  rather  a  Group  of  Versions,  African,  European,  and 
Italian,^  than  a  single  Translation  like  the  rest  that  can  be 

^  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  309. 

'^  "Old  Latin  Biblical  Texts,"  i.,  by  Professor  Wordsworth,  Intro- 
duction, p.  XXX.  The  chief  Texts  for  Jerome's  Vulgate,  which  Professor, 
soon  to  be  Bishop,  Wordsworth  is  engaged  in  editing,  are 

Codex  Amiatinus,  about  A.D.  541.         am. 
next,  ,,      Fuldensis        Vlth.    .         .         fuld.  or  fu. 

perhaps,       ,,       Forojuliensis    Vlth.    .         .         for. 

^  Of  these  Professor  Sanday  considers  the  Italian  to  be  a  Revision  of 
the  European.     See  also,  pp.  75,  76.     Dr.  Hort's  classification  is — 

I.  African,  e,  k,  &c. 

II.  European,  a,  c,ff,  h,  i,  &c. 

III.  Italian,  /  g,  &c. 

"Introduction,"  pp.  78-84.     Wordsworth,  p.  xxx. 

But  no  certain  conclusions  have  been  reached  on  this  point. 


VERSIONS. 


115 


determined  with  more  or  less  accuracy.    Thirty-eight  codices 
exist,  out  of  which  the  highest  in  repute  are : — 


Century. 

Letter. 

Cod.  Vercellensis  . 

IV. 

a. 

„     Veronensis   . 

IV.  or  V. 

b. 

„     Colbertinus  . 

XI. 

c. 

„     Palatinus 

IV.  or  V. 

e. 

„     Brixianus 

VI. 

f. 

„     Corbeiensis  (2)     . 

VIII.      . 

ffi. 

„     Sangermanensis  (2) 

IX. 

gr- 

„     Claromontanus     . 

IV.  or  V. 

h. 

,,     Vindobonensis     . 

V.  or  VI. 

i. 

„     Bobbiensis  . 

IV.  or  V. 

k. 

„     Mai's  Speculum  . 

VI.  or  VII. 

m. 

,,     Monacensis. 

VI. 

q- 

This  drawback  is  not  so  great  in  the  case  of  the  others,  but 
subtracts  from  the  value  of  all. 

2.  From  the  nature  of  Translations,  which,  to  be  good, 
must  adhere  to  the  idiomatic  expression  of  the  language  into 
which  they  are  made,  it  follows  that  great  uncertainty  must 
prevail  as  to  the  original  Greek  words.  Versions,  therefore, 
do  not  always  render  decisive  evidence  upon  the  question 
of  a  single  Greek  expression.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
authority  of  a  Version  as  to  the  authenticity  of  a  clause, 
sentence,  or  longer  passage,  is  unquestionable,  and  may  be 
much  higher  than  that  of  a  single  manuscript,  since  it  has 
presumably  a  public  character,  varying  however  according  to 
circumstances,  and  may  have  a  much  higher  antiquity. 

3.  It  is  evident  that  only  a  master  of  the  language  can  at 
first  hand  pronounce  upon  the  Version. 


i6  MATERIALS  OF  CRITICISM. 


IV.    Ecclesiastical  Writers. 

Ecclesiastical  writers  may  be  said  to  surpass  even  Versions. 
in  reaching  back  to  early,  or  rather  the  earliest  Antiquity. 
Their  authority,  especially  in  confirmation  of  what  is  attested 
by  good  evidence  of  other  kinds,  is  often  of  the  highest  im- 
portance. Their  variety  and  number,  as  representing  various 
parts  and  epochs  of  the  Church,  add  greatly  to  their  weight. 
And  the  positions,  opportunities,  and  abilities  of  very  many 
amongst  them  render  their  witness  nearly  always  entitled  to 
respectful  attention.  But  some  points  subtract  from  their 
authority  in  this  province. 

Their  testimony  is  seldom  continuous,  but  fragmentary,. 
and  sometimes  not  to  be  had  when  we  most  need  it.  They 
often  quote  loosely.as  if  from  memory.  Sometimes  they  cite 
from  the  copy  that  they  happen  to  have  at  the  moment,  and 
so  the  same  passage  is  found  in  different  forms  at  different 
places  in  their  writings. 

But  for  all  this,  they  furnish  a  most  valuable  kind  of 
evidence.  It  is  not  necessary  to  attribute  to  them  severally 
any  critical  acumen,  though  there  is  reason  for  inferring  that 
more  of  this  was  to  be  found  in  earlier  times  than  many 
people  suppose.  Their  chief  value  is  as  witnesses  to  facts. 
Their  evidence  may  be  described  as  that  of  Manuscripts  at 
second  hand,  of  which  the  greater  part  are  either  older  than, 
or  about  as  old  as,  the  oldest  Manuscripts  in  existence. 
They  often  confirm  readings  by  witnessing  to  the  copies 
used  by  them  with  (so  far)  unquestionable  accuracy.  In- 
deed, this  has  been  the  most  neglected  and  undervalued 
help  to  criticism,  and  nevertheless  promises  to  be  one  of  the 
most  important.      Unfortunately,  their  works  want   to   be 


ECCLESIASTICAL   WRITERS.  117 

edited  with  this  view  and  indexed,  before  all  the  treasures 
that  lie  hid  at  present  are  ready  to  the  hand  of  Textual 
Critics.  When  that  is  done,  supplies  will  have  been  pro- 
vided for  a  fresh  and  real  advance. 

Such  is  the  vast  field  that  must  thoroughly  be  explored 
before  a  Revision  of  the  Greek  Text  can  be  satisfactorily 
accomplished.  Trust  must  not  be  reposed  in  one  class  of 
evidence  alone.  Even  Manuscripts  of  the  Greek  Testament, 
superior  as  they  are  in  most  respects  to  all  the  other  classes, 
can  by  no  means  support  a  claim  to  the  highest  antiquity. 
Single  Manuscripts  are  actually  surpassed  in  this  respect 
by  Versions^  and  Fathers,  and  virtually  also  by  Lectionaries 
and  Liturgies. 

^  It  should  be  observed,  with  reference  to  the  age  of  the  Peshito, 
that  MSS.  of  it  exist  as  far  back  as  to  A.D.  411,  the  date  of  Cod.  Add. 
12150,  which  is  nearly  also  the  date  of  A.  See  "An  Account  of  a 
Syriac  Biblical  MS.,"  &c.,  No.  viii.  in  the  Oxford  "  Studia  Biblica," 
by  the  Rev.  G.  H.  Gwilliam,  who  has  courteously  sent  me  a  copy. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

PRINCIPLES    OF    CRITICISM. 

(i)  The  Traditional  Text,  (2)  External  Evidence,  (3) 
The  Seven  Canons  of  Internal  Evidence.  Conclusion. 

AS  the  chief  parts  of  the  province  of  the  Textual  Criti- 
cism of  the  New  Testament  have  now  been  reviewed, 
we  are  in  a  position  to  arrive  at  definite  conclusions  with  re- 
spect to  the  principles  that  ought  to  guide  us  in  the  revision 
of  the  Sacred  Text. 

And  first,  there  can  be  no  sort  of  question  that  it  would 
be  culpably  wrong  to  throw  aside  any  portions  of  the  exist- 
ing evidence.  Besides  the  illogical  nature  of  a  process  that 
would  take  no  note  of  materials  that  must  have  weight  in 
constructing  the  premises  and  determining  the  conclusion  : 
— to  go  no  further  than  the  formidable  project  of  extirpating 
the  vast  mass  of  multiform  proof  both  known  and  increasing  of 
a  Text  other  than  the  one  which  it  is  sought  in  some  quarters 
to  establish,  and  a  very  questionable  attempt  to  get  rid  of 
inconvenient  testimony  : — the  Church  is  answerable  before 
Almighty  God  for  making  due  use,  and  for  the  preservation 
from  generation  to  generation,  of  the  materials  collected  for 
the  maintenance  of  His  Inspired  Word.  If  it  be  repHed  that 
it  is  not  possible  for  any  one  age  to  deal  with  so  large  an 
amount  of  matter,  the  answer  is  ready  that  it  is  our  duty  in 
such  a  case,  where  we  are  dealing,  not  with  human  circum- 


TRADITIONAL  TEXT.  119 


stances  but  with  the  things  of  God,  to  reverse  the  poets' 
maxim,  and  to  say 

Non  mihi  res,  sed  me  rebus  subjungere  conor. 

We  cannot  carve  for  ourselves  the  witness  of  the  Sacred 
Word,  but  we  must  conform  our  deaHngs  to  what  we  find 
existing.  Far  better  is  it  to  Hnger  in  wise  and  reverent 
caution,  than  perhaps  to  rush  in  where  angels  might  fear  to 
enter,  and  to  pull  down  with  hasty  profanity  instead  of 
strengthening  the  pillars  of  the  Temple.  The  Great  Giver 
of  the  Inspired  Word  is  also  the  Preserver  of  it  in  the  witness 
and  keeping  of  Holy  Writ.  He  has  spoken  during  all  the 
the  ages,  though  in  the  still  gentle  Voice  that  He  is  pleased 
to  use,  yet  by  definite  and  manifest  signs  and  tokens.  We 
must  gather  these  together  as  far  as  we  are  able,  and  whilst  we 
shrink  from  refusing  to  hear  their  testimony,  and  from  pre- 
judicing or  forcing  their  decision,  we  must  dutifully  and 
practically  collect  their  verdict. 

I.  It  will  therefore  follow  that  the  first  object  of  a  Textual 
Critic  should  be  to  discover  what  is  in  deed  and  in  fact  The 
Traditional  Text.  How  far  does  the  Received  Text 
accord  with  it  ?  For  with  the  Text  as  now  '  Received ' 
operations  must  be  begun.  The  burden  of  proof  Hes  with 
alterations.  Then,  in  what  particulars  has  human  infirmity 
vitiated  in  any  one  age,  period,  or  epoch,  that  pure  Text 
which  may  become  clear  to  the  view  upon  a  comparison  of 
all  the  ages?  In  the  assemblage  of  the  entire  body  the 
errors  of  any  individual  may  be  made  manifest.  General 
Councils  used  to  correct  the  mistakes  of  single  bishops.^ 
The  Holy  Ghost  does  not  eliminate  all  weakness,  but  He 

'  See  especially.  "Concilium  Hispalense  (a.  D.  619),  Mansi,''  x. 
p.  558.     Canon  VI. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CRITICISM. 


guides  the  awards  of  the  whole  Church.  Any  Father, 
or  Version,  or  even  Lectionary,  or  copy,  however  ancient, 
however  hkely  on  all  grounds  to  have  escaped  blundering, 
may  yet  have  gone  astray.  But  in  the  union  of  them  all, 
and  in  testimony  varied,  multiplied,  and  mainly  consentient, 
there  is  not  only  the  proverbial  strength,  but  there  is  also  the 
promised  Presence,  that  descended  after  the  Lord  left  the 
earth,  and  is  immanent  in  the  Church  onwards  to  the  end. 

II.  Hence  secondly,  all  Testimony  should  be  mustered, 
and  due  importance  assigned  to  every  item  in  it.  The  more 
variety  of  converging  evidence  there  is  found,  the  more 
perfectly  that  all  provinces  in  the  Church,  and  all  periods — 
especially  the  oldest  of  them — concur  in  attestation,  so  much 
the  greater  is  the  weight.  The  sources  of  decision  will  be 
discovered  in  the  classes  described  in  the  last  chapter.  There 
is  never  (speaking  practically)  a  lack  of  sufficient  evidence  : 
and  the  conclusions  will  follow  which,  whether  from  in- 
trinsic importance,  or  from  variety,  or  from  number,  are 
found  after  wise,  enlightened,  and  discriminating  examina- 
tion to  be  in  the  ascendant. 

III.  Internal  evidence  of  either  kind  is  a  long  way  inferior 
to  external  proof,  on  which  the  authenticity  of  passages  will 
be  established,  but  it  is  useful  in  its  place.  Such  are  the 
Seven  Canons,  viz. ; 

1.  The  harder  the  reading,  the  less  likely  is  it  to  have 
been  invented,  and  the  more  likely  to  be  genuine.  '  Pro- 
clivi  lectioni  praestat  ardua '  (Bengel).  Thus  f£i/rf,oo7rpwrw, 
'second  first,'  in  St.  Luke  vi.  i,  could  hardly  have  been 
coined. 

2.  The  more  concise  reading  is  better  than  the  more  dif- 
fuse. '  Brevior  lectio  praeferenda  est  verbosiori '  (Griesbach). 
So  St.  Luke  xii.  56,  'Ye  hypocrites,  ye  know  how  to  interpret 


I 


EXTERNAL  AND  INTERNAL  EVIDENCE. 


the  face  of  the  earth  and  the  heaven :  but  how  is  it  that  ye 
know  not  how  to  interpret  this  time  ?  '  ^  The  second  '  ye 
know  not  how  to  interpret '  {ovk  o'i^are  doKi/na^siv)  spoils  the 
simplicity  of  the  text. 

3.  That  reading  is  preferable,  which  will  explain  the  origin 
of  the  variation  (Tischendorf).  Thus  Melita  (MeXin) )  for 
Melitene  (Acts  xxviii.  i),  as  has  been  before  explained.^ 

4.  The  reading  which  is  characteristic  of  the  author  is  the 
more  probable.  Great  caution  should  be  exercised  in  apply- 
ing this  canon,  as  such  varying  estimates  are  formed  of 
authors'  styles.  But  it  affords  strong  confirmation  of  the 
authenticity  of  the  celebrated  section  of  the  adulteress 
('  Pericope  adulter^e')  since  the  style  of  the  passage  (John  vii. 
53,  viii.  11)  is  just  that  of  St.  John. 

5.  The  special  genius  and  usage  of  each  authority  must  be 
taken  into  account  in  estimating  the  weight  that  it  ought  to 
bear.  Accordingly  we  must  always  suspect  the  omissions 
of  B,  the  carelessness  of  ^,  and  the  interpolations  of  D. 

6.  '  Apparent  probabilities  of  erroneous  transcription,  per- 
mutation of  letters,  itakcism  and  so  forth,'  will  naturally  be 
taken  into  account.  So  ire'poic  (Matt.  xi.  16)  is  evidently  for 
tTdinoic  :  and  the  readings  'Titius'  or  ^  Titus  Justus  '  have 
plainly  arisen  from  a  reiteration  of  letters.^ 

7.  Whatever  makes  nonsense,  or  injures  the  meaning  or 
construction,  is  probably  not  the  true  reading. '^  For  example, 

■   "  Revised  Version."     Contrast  the  neatness  of  the  Authorized. 
Above,  p.  28,  note  3. 
Above,  p.  29,  note  i. 
'  The  seventh  usually  given  is  Griesbach's,  viz.,  that  suspicion  must 
ever  rest  upon  such  readings  as  make  especially  for  orthodoxy.     Arch- 
bishop Magee  and  Dr.  Scrivener  have  fully  disproved  the  soundness  of 
this  imputation  cast  by  sceptics  upon  the  orthodox.      "  Plain  Introduc- 
tion," pp.  497-9.    See  above,  p.  69,  and  note  2.    The  canon  which  I  have 


PRINCIPLES  OF  CRITICISM. 


'  the  last '  (6  eVxarot)  in  St.  Matt.  xxi.  31,  the  reading  of  D, 
making  the  son  who  went  not  to  be  the  obedient  son,  cannot 
have  been  the  true  production  of  the  Evangehst. 

But  all  these  considerations  must  be  wisely  dealt  with,  and 
kept  in  their  place.  Exaggeration  in  the  estimate  of  any  one 
of  them  may  lead  to  false  deduction,  and  authority,  as 
declared  in  external  evidence,  must  mainly  decide  ail 
questions. 

The  true  Guide  in  all  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  Who,  reve- 
rently sought  in  purity  of  heart,  humility  of  soul,  and  wisdom 
of  mind,  will  in  His  Own  due  time  and  after  His  Own  per- 
fect counsels  lead  the  Church  and  Her  children  to  ascertain 
with  sureness,  from  clear  and  decisive  evidence,  the  real  Form 
and  Outline  of  that  Sacred  Word  Which  He  Himself  taught 
His  servants  by  His  Holy  Inspiration  to  deliver. 

May  He  so  receive  and  direct  all  our  study  of  His  Divine 
Sayings  through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ! 

placed  in  the  text  surely  carries  its  own  recommendation.  Whatever  human 
element  is  found  in  the  Inspired  Word  of  God  (see  Lee  on  "Inspiration"), 
nonsense  or  solecism  have  no  place  there.  It  would  be  well  if  more 
weight  were  always  attributed  in  Sacred  Textual  Criticism  to  sound 
sense.  The  best  critics  employ  it  with  manly  strength.  For  instances, 
see  above,  pp.  27-29,  and  p.  57,  note  i. 


APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX. 


\N  examination  of  a  few  important  passages  is  here  ap- 
pended, which  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  controversy  now 
existing,  and  to  exhibit  in  their  operation  the  principles  already 
explained. 

The  evidence  adduced  is  mainly  derived  from  the  eighth 
edition  of  Tischendorf 's  "  Novum  Testamentum  Grasce,"  Dr. 
Scrivener^s  ''  Plain  Introduction,"  Dean  Burgon's  "  The  Revision 
Revised  "  and  "  The  Last  Twelve  Verses  of  St.  Mark/'  Canon 
Cook's  "  Revised  Version  of  the  First  Three  Gospels,"  and  Drs. 
Westcott  and  Hort's  "  The  New  Testament  in  Greek." 


I.  The  Last  Twelve  Verses  of  St,  Mark's  Gospel. 

A.  Against  their  authenticity,  as  alleged  : — 

1.  ^<B.  L  inserts  a  short  and  manifestly  spurious  conclusion 
before  the  Twelve  Verses. 

2.  No  Cursives,     A  few  follow  L. 

3.  One  Old  Latin  MS,  (k),  two  Armenian  MSS  ;  two 
yEthiopic,  and  an  Arabic  Lectionary. 

4.  Eusebius,  Jerome,  and  Severus  of  Antioch,  are  also 
quoted.  These  verses  are  said  to  be  omitted  in  the 
Ammonian  Sections. 

5.  (a)  About  twenty-one  words  and  phrases,  not  found  in 
the  rest  of  St.  Mark,  are  said  to  occur  in  these  verses, 
as  TTopfvoficti,  toIq  fit-'  avTov  ytvoyitvoiQ,  dtdofiai,  fitra  ravra. 

(b).  The  description  of  Mary  Magdalene,  a(p'  ijg  i/c^e/3/}(cet 
ivTa  cainuvia,  is  said  to  be  a  sign  of  the  introduction  of  a 


126  APPENDIX. 


new  passage  not  containing  what  had  gone  before,  where 
she  has  been  recently  mentioned. 

(c).  The  note  of  time  TrpwV  Trpwry  aa^i^drov  is  thought 
to  be  needless,  and  out  of  place.  j>j, 

B.  For  :—  ^/<:^>»4»;/'^ 

1.  All  other  Uncials,  i.e.  ACDEFGHKMSUVX0An2  :— 
also  L.    /-^^v*^*   i'V.    0//1.,  oyw^ 

2.  All  Cursives. />- A  ^i.  '-Z 

3.  (a)  Peshito,  Harclean.  Jerusalem,  and  Curetonian  Syriac. 

(b)  All  Old  Latin  except  k,  and  Vulgate. 

(c)  Memphitic,  and  Thebaic. 

(d)  Gothic,  yEthiopic  (except  two  MSS),  Georgian,  Ar- 

menian (except  two  MSS.),  Arabic. 

4.  All  Lectionaries.     This   passage  was   read   everywhere 
during  the  Season  of  Easter  and  on  Ascension  Day. 

5.  Fathers  : — 

Cent.  II.  Papias,  Irenaeus,  Justin  Martyr,  Tertullian. 

„  III.  Hippolytus,  Vincentius  at  7th  Council  of  Car- 
thage, Acta  Pilati. 

„  IV.  Syriac  Table  of  Canons,  Eusebius,  Macarius 
Magnes,  Aphraates,  Didymus,  Syriac  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  Epiphanius,  Leontius,  Pseudo- 
Ephraem,  Ambrose,  Chrysostom,  Jerome, 
Augustine. 

„  V.  Leo,  Nestorius,  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  Victor  of 
Antioch,  Patricius,  Marius  Mercator. 

„  VI.  and  VIII.  Hesychius,  Gregentius,  Prosper, 
John  (Abp.  of  Thessalonica),  Modestus 
(Bp.  of  Jerusalem). 

Remarks. 
B  leaves  a  whole  blank  column — 'the  only  blank  one  in  the 
whole  volume  ' — i.e.,  of  the  New  Testament,  as  well  as  the  rest 
of  the  one  containing  v.  8,  thus  showing  that  a  passage  was  left 
out.  Either  t^  was  here  simply  copied  from  B,  a  supposition 
probable  on  other  grounds,  and  confirmed  by  Tischendorf 's  and 
Scrivener's  opinion  that  the  Scribe  of  B  wrote  this  part  of  i^,  in 


APPENDIX, 


127 


which  case  we  have  merely  B  over  again,  but  without  its  mute 
confession  of  error  ;  or  they  both  followed  here  the  common 
archetype  from  which  they  were  confessedly  derived.  Eusebius 
elsewhere  witnesses  for  the  verses,  and  here  only  mentions 
loosely  that  some  copies  omit  them.  Jerome  and  Severus  only 
copy  Eusebius'  expressions. 

The  alleged  internal  evidence  has  been  demonstrated  to  be 
visionary, — a  m.ere  mistake  :  and  is  accordingly  no  longer  urged 
by  the  critics. 

Besides  all  this,  the  cause  of  the  omission  by  careless  or  in- 
competent scribes  is  evident.  The  error  of  B  and  i^  was  clearly 
derived  from  a  copy  of  St.  Mark,  which  had  lost  its  last  leaf. 
A  mark  stood  here  in  the  Western  copies  of  the  Gospel.  It  is 
further  not  improbable  that  some  scribe  mistook  the  *  End '  of 
the  Lection,  TeXoc,  for  the  End  of  the  Gospel,  and  a  few  others 
followed  him.     The  error  was  ere  long  discovered. 

This  evidence  plainly  leaves  no  sort  of  doubt.  No  Court  of 
Law  could  decide  against  the  verses.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how- 
it  can  be  otherwise  than  discreditable  to  Textual  Science,  that 
the  question  should  be  held  in  some  quarters  to  lie  still  open. 

II.    The  First  Word  from  the  Cross. 
(St.  Luke  xxiii.  34.) 

A.  Against  their  authenticity  : — 

1.  b*^  (first  corrector),  B,  D*  (first  reading). 

2.  38,  82,  435. 

3.  Two  or  three  MSS.  of  Italic  (a,  b,  d  ?),  Thebaic,  two 
MSS.  of  Memphitic. 

4.  Arethas. 

B.  For  :— 

1.  ^**  ''"'^  ^  (first  reading  and  third  corrector),  ACD  ^'  ^ 
(second  corrector),  FGHKLMOSUVrAAn.  E  puts  an  *  ; 
— these  are  all  the  other  Uncials. 

2.  All  other  Cursives. 

3.  All  other  Versions,  including  the  Syrian,  and  the  other 
Itahc  and  Memphitic  MSS. 


128  APPENDIX. 


4.  Ecclesiastical  Writers  : — 
Cent.  II.  Hegesippus,  Irenaeus. 

„     III.  Hippolytus,    Origen,   Apostolic    Constitutions, 
Clementine  Homilies,  ps.-Tatian,  Archelaus' 
disputation  with  Manes. 
„    IV.  Eusebius,  Athanasius,  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  Theo- 
dorus  of  Heraclea,  Basil,  Chrysostom,  Eph- 
raem  Syrus,  ps.-Ephraem,  ps.-Dionysius  Areo- 
pagita.  Acta  Pilati,  Syriac  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
Ps.-Ignatius,  ps.-Justin. 
„     V.  Theodoret,  Cyril,  Eutherius. 
„     VI.  Anastasius  Sinaita,  Hesychius. 
„     VII.  Antiochus     Monachus,      Maximus,     Andreas 

Creticus. 
„     VIII.  John   Damascene,  ps. -Chrysostom,   ps.-Am- 
philochius,  Opus  Imperfectum. 
Besides  Latin  Writers,  such  as  Ambrose,   Hilary,  Jerome, 

Augustine,  &c.,  &c. 
6.  This  would  be  a  most  unlikely  interpolation  in  all  ways. 
The  internal  evidence  is  also  admitted  (Hort,  68)  to  make 
eminently  for  the  genuineness  of  the  passage. 
Evidence  is  clearly  not  evidence,  if  any  doubts  about  the 
authencity  of  this  passage  remain.     The  errors  of  a  few  scribes, 
in  the  face  of  the  notorious  depravation  of  the  Sacred  Text  in 
early  times,  are  no  foundation  for  doubt. 


III.  The  Record  of  the  Strengthening  Angel,  the 
Agony,  and  the  Bloody  Sweat. 

(St.  Luke  xxii.  43,  44.) 

A.  Against  : — 

1.  ABRT.  In  r  the  verses  are  obelized,  and  they  are 
marked  with  asterisks  in  ESVaft. 

2.  None  (see  below).  Obelized  in  five,  and  asterisks  in  five. 
A  scholion  in  34  says  that  the  verses  are  omitted  in  some 
copies. 


APPENDIX.  129 


3.  Most  Memphitic  codices,  some  Thebaic,  some  Armenian, 
and  f  of  Old  Latin.     Some  Armenian  insert  v.  43. 

4.  Hilary  and  Jerome  say  that  some  Greek  and  Latin  MSS. 
omit  the  passage.  Athanasius  and  Cyril  of  Alexandria 
did  not  mention  it  when  they  might.  John  Damascene 
in  one  passage  omits  it. 

For  :— 

1.  t^^DFGHKLMQUXL.     Also  ESVAH  and  r  (see  above). 

2.  All  Cursives.  But  13,69,  124,346,  insert  the  verses  after 
St.  Matt.  xxvi.  39,  instead  of  in  St.  Luke.  13  inserts  v.  43 
in  the  right  place. 

3.  Peshito,  Curetonian,  Harclean,  Jerusalem,  Ethiopic, 
some  Thebaic,  some  Memphitic,  some  Armenian,  all  but 
one  Old  Latin,  and  the  Vulgate. - 

4.  They  are  thus  transferred  in  all  Evangelistaria,  the  reason 
being  that  they  were  ordered  to  be  read  with  the  passage 
in  St.  Matthew  on  Maundy  Thursday,  and  to  be  omitted 
on  the  Tuesday  after  Sexagesima. 

5.  Cent.  II.  Justin,  Irenaeus. 

„  III.  Hippolytus,  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  ps. 
Tatian. 

„  IV.  Arius,  Eusebius,  Athanasius,  Ephraem  Syrus, 
Didymus,  Gregory  Nazianzen,  Epiphanius,  Chry- 
sostom,  ps.  Dionysius  Areopagita. 

„  V.  Julian  the  Heretic,  Theodorus  of  Mopsuestia, 
Nestorius,  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  Paulus  of  Emesa, 
Gennadius,  Theodoret,  Oriental  Bishops  in 
Council,  Ps.  Caesarius,  Theodosius  of  Alexandria, 
John  Damascene,  Maximus,  Theodorus  the 
Heretic,  Leontinus  of  Byzantium,  Anastasius 
Sinaita,  Photius  ;  besides  the  Latins, — Hilary, 
Jerome,  Augustine,  Cassian,  Paulinus,  Facundus  ; 
— i.e.  in  all  '  upwards  of  forty  famous  personages 
from  every  part  of  ancient  Christendom.'  '^ 

^  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  p.  599,  note. 
*  Malan,  "Select  Readings,"  p.  26. 

'  Burgon,    "Revision    Revised,"   pp.   80,    81.     These   lists   of  the 

K 


130  APPENDIX. 


6.  The  verses  bear  every  trace  of  genuineness.     Even  Dr. 
Hort  admits  (p.  67)  that  '  it  would  be  impossible  to  regard 
these  verses  as  a  product  of  the  inventiveness  of  scribes.' 
The  omission  by  some  scribes,  and  the  obela  and  asterisks 
inserted  by  others — evidently  as  guides  in  reading — are  satis- 
factorily   explained   by  the  Lectionary  usage   of  omitting   the 
verses  in  St.  Luke,  and  reading  them  with  the  parallel  passage 
in  St.  Matthew.     Even  A  inserts  the  mark  of  the  Ammonian 
Section,  and  thereby  confesses  the  omission.     In  the  face  of  so 
much  evidence,  it  is  impossible  that  any  doubt  at  all  should 
remain. 

IV.    The  Angelic  Hymn. 

iv  ch'QpujTroic;  evdoKiag 

for 

iv  m'OpioTToiQ  EvSoKia, 

(St.  Luke  ii.  14.) 

A.  For  the  alteration  : — 

1.  «*  AB*  D. 

2.  No  Cursives. 

3.  Old  Latin,  Vulgate,  and  Gothic. 

4.  Irenaeus  (but  see  below),  Origen  (see  however  below), 
Hilary,  and  the  Latin  Fathers. 

5.  Mozarabic  and  Ambrosian  Liturgies. 

B.  Against  : — 

1.  ««=  B  ^  EGHKLMPSUVFAAS,  i.e.  all  the  rest. 

2.  All  Cursives. 

3.  Peshito,     Harclean,    Jerusalem,    Memphitic,    Ethiopic, 
Georgian,  Armenian,  Slavonic,  Arabic.^ 

4.  Cent.  II.  Iren2?us. 

„      III.  Origen  (3),  Apostolic  Constitutions  (2). 

„      IV.  Eusebius  (2),  Aphraates  (2),  Titus  of  Bostra 

Ancient  Writers  are  extracted  from   the  work  of  the  learned   Dean,    ■ 
who  gives  the  references  in  every  case. 
^  Malan,  "Select  Texts,"  p.  49. 


APPENDIX.  131 


(2),  Didymus  (3),  Gregory  Nazianzen,  Cyril  of 
Jerusalem,  Epiphanius  (2),  Gregory  of  Nyssa  (4), 
Ephraem  Syrus,  Philo  of  Carpasus,  Chrysostom 
(9),  an  Antiochian. 
Cent.  V.  Cyril  of  Alexandria  (14),  Theodoret  (4),  Theo- 
dotus  of  Ancyra  (5),  Proclus,  Paulus  of  Emesa, 
Council  of  Ephesus,  Basil  of  Selencia. 
„     VI.,  VII.,  VIII.— 13  testimonies.^ 

5.  The  Liturgies  of  St.  James  and  St.  Clement,  and  the 
Morning  Hymn  attached  to  the  Psalms  in  A. 

6.  The  rhythm  of  the  hymn  would  be  destroyed,  since  it  con- 
sists of  three  parallel  and  contrasted  members,  making  up 
one  stanza. 

This  evidence  speaks  for  itself.  The  opposed  reading  is  a 
Western  one,  which  was  just  strong  enough  to  make  itself  felt  in 
the  East,  as  the  witness  of  A  shows,  but  got  no  further.  The 
only  consistent  MS.  evidence  for  it  is  found  in  the  Western  D. 

V.    The  Doxology  in  the  Lord's  Prayer. 
(St.  Matt.  vi.  13.) 

A.  Against  the  Passage  : — 

1.  j^BDZ. 

2.  I,  17,  118, 130,209.  Some  scholia  exist  to  the  effect  that 
these  words  are  omitted  in  some  copies. 

3.  Nearly  all  the  Old  Latin  MSS.,  Vulgate,  most  Memphitic, 
Persian  of  Wheelocke. 

4.  Mozarabic,  Ambrosian,  and  other  Latin  Liturgies. 

5.  The  silence  of  the  following  Fathers  : — 
Tertullian  (De  Orat.  8). 

Cyprian  (De  Orat.  Dom.  27). 
Origen  (De  Orat.  18). 
Augustine  (Epist.  Class,  iii.  12). 

(De  Serm.  D.  in  Monte). 

(Serm.  56-59). 

(Enchiridion,  115,  116). 
'  Burgon,  "  Revision  Revised,"  pp.  420,  i. 


132  APPENDIX. 


Cyril  of  Jerusalem  (Cat.  xxiii.)  (Myst.  5,  18.) 
Maximus  (Expos.  Orat.  Dom.) 

Gregory  of  Nyssa  (De  Orat.  Dom.,  v.  end)  may  be  said 
to  be  doubtful. 
6.  It  is  held  that  the  Doxology  was  probably  introduced,  as 
some  writers  confessedly  quote  it,  from  the  Greek  Litur- 
gies, where  too  it  was  separated  by  the  '  Embolismus,^  or 
intercalated  paraphrase  on  '  Deliver  us  from  Evil,'  from 
the  last  petition  in  the  Lord's  Prayer. 
B.  For  :— 

1.  SEGKLMSUVAn.     [ACPr  are  deficient  here] . 

2.  All  other  Cursives,  even  ^iZi  which  usually  sides  with  ^*B. 

3.  Peshito,  Old  Latin,  (k,  f,  g\  q),  Thebaic,  Curetonian, 
Harclean,  Jerusalem,  Ethiopic,  Armenian,  Gothic,  Geor- 
gian, Slavonic,  Erpenius'  Arabic,  Persian  of  Tawos.^ 

4.  Greek  Liturgies.  The  'Embolismus'  was  confessedly 
intercalated  between  integral  parts  of  the  Lord's  Prayer, 
as  a  paraphrase  of  a  petition.  The  following  have  the 
doxology,  though  with  occasional  variations,  St.  James, 
St.  Peter,  St.  John,  St.  Mark,  St.  Clement,  St.  Dionysius, 
St.  Ignatius,  St.  Julius,  St.  Eustathius,  St.  Chrysostom, 
St.  Marutha,  St,  Cyril  of  Philoxenus,  Philoxenus  of 
HierapoliSjDioscorus,  James  Baradatus,  Matth^us  Pastor, 
James  (bp.  of  Botna),  James  of  Edessa,  Moses  Bar-Cepha, 
Philoxenus  (bp.  of  Bagdad),  &c.,  »&:c.- 

5.  Fathers  :  At^axv,  31  (Bryennius)  with  variation. 

Apostolical  Constitutions  (iii.   18)  (vii.  25  with  varia- 
tion.) 
Ambrose  (De  Sacr.  vi.  5.  24.^) 
Cassarius  (Dial.  I.  29.^) 


86-92  ;  Scrivener,  "Plain  Introduction,"  pp.  571-3. 

2  Renaudot,    "  Liturg.    Or.,"  vol.  ii.  ;  Malan,   "Select   Readings," 
p.  26. 

3  St.  Ambrose,  in  "  De  Sacra.,"  v.  4,  professedly  quotes  St.  Luke. 

*  Cf.    In  "S.  Greg.  Libr.  Sacram.  Notae,  Migne,  Bibl    Petr.  Lat." 
78,  p.  291. 


APPENDIX.  133 


Chrysostom  (In  Orat.  Dom.)  (Horn,  in  Matt.  xix.  13.) 
Opus  Imperfectum  (Horn,  in  Matt,  xiv.) 
Isidore  of  Pelusium  (Ep.  iv.  24.) 
Theophylact  (in  Matt  vi.  13.) 

Euthymius  Zigabenus  (in  Matt.  xi.  13.)  (Contra  Mas- 
salianos,  Anath.  '] }) 
6.  (a).  Under  any  circumstances,  with  two  Forms,  there 
must  have  been  many  omissions  by  writers  who  followed 
the  shorter  Form.  Those  who  dispute  the  authenticity 
of  the  Doxology  as  part  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  have  not 
only  to  prove  the  use  of  the  Prayer  without  the  Doxology, 
but  must  also  disprove  the  existence  of  the  Doxology  as 
an  integral  member  of  the  Prayer  ; — the  omission  of  it  not 
only  by  St.  Luke,  but  by  St.  Matthew  also. 

(b).  The  admitted  omission  of  the  Doxology  in  St.  Luke, 
and  the  fact  that  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  its  other  Form  is 
complete  without  the  Doxology  would  satisfactorily  account 
for  its  being  left  out  by  some  scribes  also  in  St.  Matthew, 
besides  that  this  might  have  arisen  solely  from  the  inter- 
calation of  the  Embolismus. 
The  evidence  is  too  strong  and  too  ancient,  reaching  back 
unintemiittedly  to  the    second  century,  as  in  the  Peshito,  the 
Aicaxn,  some  Old  Latin,  and  the  Thebaic,  to  allow  hesitation  in 
receiving   the   Doxology  as   an   authentic  part   of  the    Lord's 
Prayer,  and  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel.     The  omission  is  due  to  a 
Western  reading,  of  a  similar  character  to  the  last,  though  some- 
what more  strongly  supported. 


VI.    The  Son  of  God's  Eternal  Existence  in  Heaven. 

'O  'Qv  iv  T(p  Ovpavqi. 
(St.  John  iii.  13.) 

A.  Against  the  genuineness  of  the  words  : — 
I.  t^BLT  \     iov  is  omitted  by  A.* 
-•  33- 

'  Wrongly  quoted  by  Tischendorf  on  the  other  side. 


[34  APPENDIX. 


3.  'Q-v  is  omitted  by  Evangelistarium  44. 

4.  Ethiopic  (?),  one  MS.  of  the  Memphitic. 

5.  Armenian  versions  of  Ephraem's  Tatian,  Eusebius  (2)  (?), 
Cyril  of  Alexandria  (?),  Origen  (?). 

B.  For  :— 

1.  AEGHKMSUVrAAn.    CDF  fail  us  here. 

2.  All  Cursives,  except  33. 

3.  All  Evangelistaria. 

4.  Peshito,  Curetonian,  Harclean,  Jerusalem,  Old  Latin, 
Vulgate,  Memphitic  (except  one  MS.),  Ethiopic  (?), 
Georgian,  Armenian. 

5.  Origen  (2),  Hippolytus,  Athanasius,  Didymus,  Aphraates, 
Basil,  Epiphanius,  Nonnus,  ps.  Dionysius  Alex.,  Eusta- 
thius,  Chrysostom  (4),  Theodoret  (4),  Cyril  of  Alexandria 
(4),  Paulus  of  Emesa,  Theodorus  of  Mopsuestia,  John 
Damascene  (3),  Ambrose,  Hilary,  Jerome,  Augustine,  and 
eighteen  others,  &c.^ 

6.  The  hardness  of  the  words  renders  it  impossible  for  them 
to  have  been  invented. 

This  evidence  precludes  all  doubt. 

VII.    God  Manifested  in  the  Flesh. 
(i  Tim.  iii.  16.) 
There  are  three  readings,  viz.,  eS  {i.e.  ef6e),"0s,  and"o. 

A.  Evidence  for  "OS,  as  claimed  :  — 

1.  t**  A-:=  (.?)  C=:^(?)  F.'G.? 

2.  17,73,  181? 

3.  Apostolus  12,  85,  86. 

4.  Gothic,  Peshito  t  Memphitic  ?  Thebaic  ?  Armenian  1 
Ethiopic .''  Arabic  of  Erpenius  .? 

5.  Cyril  of  Alexandria  ?  Epiphanius  1  Theodorus  of  Mop- 
suestia .'* 

B.  Evidence  for  "o,  as  claimed  : — 

I.  D*  of  St.  Paul  (Claromontanus). 

^   Burgon,  "  Revision  Revised,"  p.  133. 


APPENDIX.  135 


2.  No  Cursives. 

3.  Old  Latin,  Vulgate,  Peshito?  Memphitic  ?  Thebaic? 
^thiopic  ?  Armenian  ? 

4.  Gelasius  of  Cyzicus,  and  an  Unknown  Writer  (App.  to 
Chr>'sostom). 

C.  Evidence  claimed  for  Q^bc,  (eS) : — 

1.  A?  KLP. 

2.  260  Cursives,  i.e.  all  except  two. 

3.  36  copies  of  the  Apostolus. 

4.  Harclean,  Georgian,  Slavonic. 

5.  Cent.  III.  Dionysius  of  Alexandria. 

„  IV.  Didymus,  Gregory  Nazianzen,  Diodorus  of 
Tarsus,  Gregory  of  Nyssa  (22  times),  Chr>'SOS- 
tom  (3),  a  Book  ITfpi  Biiaq  aapKU)ae(DC. 

„  Y.  Cyril  of  Alexandria  (2),  Theodoret  of  Cyrus  (4) 
an  anonymous  author,  Euthalius,  jNIacedonius. 

,,     VI.  Severus  of  Antioch. 

,  VIII.  &c.  John  Damascene,  Epiphanius  of  Catana 
Theodorus  Studita,  some  Scholia,  CEcumenius, 
Theophylact,  Euthymius. 

Remarks. 
(I)  Evidence  for  "OS  : —  _ 

I.  The  question  whether  A  witnesses  for"Og  or  for  eS  must 
depend  upon  the  answer  to  the  prior  question  whether  the 
two  cross  lines  were  originally  there  or  not.  Now  Patrick 
Young,  Huish,  Bp.  Pearson,  Bp.  Fell,  Mill,  Bentley,  John 
Creyk,  Berriman,  Bengel,  Woide  in  1765,  say  that  the 
reading  was  eS.  On  the  other  hand,  Griesbach,  in  1785, 
and  since  that  time  Davidson,  Tregelles,  Dr.  Westcott, 
Dr.  Hort,  and  Bp.  Ellicott, — Dr.  Scrivener  in  i860  dis- 
sents—pronounce against  the  Hnes.     But 

(a.)  Berriman  added,  '  If  therefore  at  any  time  hereafter 
the  old  line '  {z'.e.  inside  the  6)  '  should  become  alto- 
'  getherundiscoverable,  there  never  will  be  just  cause 
'  to  doubt  but  that  the  genuine  and  original  heading 
'of  the  MS.  was  eS.' 


136  APPENDIX. 


(b)  Woide  in  1785  declared  that  he  could  not  see  the 
lines  which  he  had  actually  seen  in  1765. 

(c)  Any  one  may  convince  himself  by  inspection  that 
the  MS.  is  too  far  gone  to  admit  of  any  trustworthy 
opinion  being  now  formed,  and  as  is  probable  in 
many  a  past  year. 

There  can  be  no  real  doubt,  therefore,  that  A  did  witness 
for  6fot'.  The  adverse  testimonies  have  been  given  since 
Woide  spoke ;  and  indeed  Griesbach  said  in  1785  that 
curious  fingers  had  then  rendered  any  certain  conclusion 
impossible. 

2.  As  to  C,  Wetstein,  Griesbach,  and  Tischendorf  on  one 
side  are  balanced  by  Woide,  Mill,  Weber,  and  Parquoi, 
on  the  other.  A  palimpsest  is  a  most  unsuitable  witness 
in  such  a  delicate  question.  C  must  be  held  to  be 
neutral. 

3.  Both  F  and  G,  which  are  admitted  to  be  copies  of  the 
same  MS.,^  have  here  a  straight  line  above  the  two  letters 
slightly  inclining  upwards.  The  question  is,  whether  it 
be  the  aspirate,  in  which  case  they  would  witness  for  "Of, 
or  the  sign  of  contraction,  as  for  Otog.  The  arguments 
appeared  to  be  balanced.  F  and  G  must  therefore  be  set 
aside  as  neutral. 

4.  Cursive  '  181  '  cannot  be  found. 

5.  The  Peshito,  Memphitic,  Thebaic,  and  Ethiopic  Ver- 
sions, probably  witness  to  "O. 

6.  The  Armenian  and  Arabic  are  indeterminate. 

(II.)  The  evidence  for"0  is  admitted  not  to  be  very  strong. 
Such  as  it  is,  it  is  against  both  of  the  other  readings  and  cannot 
be  held  to  be  confirmatory  of  either. 

(III.)  The  comparison  of  "OS  with  Ofog  remains  : — 

I.  '  Proclivi  lectioni  prasstat  ardua.'  "OS  is  the  harder  gram- 
matically, but  Ofoc  is  decidedly  the  harder  if  the  sense  is 
consulted,  since  there  could  hardly  be  a  more  audacious 
change  than  to  foist  this  word  wrongly  into  the  text. 


^   See  above,  p.  47,  note  3. 


APPENDIX.  137 


2.  "OS  is  likely  to  be  a  degeneration  from  eS  :  but  not  eS 
from  "Of. 

3.  When  admitted,  Ofog  explains  nv<TTi)piov,  and  makes  better 
grammar. 

4.  But  the  burden  of  decision  must,  as  always,  rest  upon 
the  evidence.     Now 

a.  There  is  no  strong  leaning  either  way  of  Uncials 
or  Versions,  though  the  inclination  of  Uncials  is 
towards  Oeog. 

b.  The  very  remarkable  unanimity  of  the  Cursives  in- 
dicates a  practical  decision  of  the  Church  before 
manuscripts  had  reached  their  most  perfect  condition, 
i.e.  in  Uncial  times. 

c.  The  overwhelming  testimony  of  Fathers  to  MSS.  in 
their  use,  reaching  back  further  than  any  existing 
MSS.,  adds  a  very  powerful  witness. 

On  the  whole,  the  evidence  decidedly  shows  that  Beog  is 
genuine. 


INDEX. 

\For  Alexandrian  MS.,  Vatican  MS.,  &^c.,  and  A,  B,  &^c.,  see  under 
Codex  :  and  for  Peshito,  Vulgate,  ^c. ,  see  under  Versions.  ] 


PAGE 

ABBOT,  professor  Ezra    ,       23 
Accents 89 

Acta  Pilati 85 

Acts  and  Catholic  Epistles       loi, 

106,  107 

Agony  and  Bloody  Sweat      2,  ill, 

128-30 

Aidan,  St 90 

Alexander  II.,  the  emperor  .  24 
Alexandria,    77-8,    70,    89— 

libraries  at 90 

Alexandrian  readings  ...  51 
Alexandrian  text  (so-called)    41,  51 

Alter 17 

Ambrose,  St 87 

Ammonian  Sections  .  80  note  6 
Angelic  Hymn,  the .  .  .  130-1 
Angelic  Salutation  ....  57 
Anglo-Saxon  Scribes    ...       90 

Antioch 5i>  73 

Apocalypse     .     .     .    loi,  106,  107 

Apostoli 112 

Apostolical  Constitutions  .     .     85, 

100  note  2 

Aphraates 85 


PAGE 

Archilaus  with  Manes  ...       85 

Arianisni 78,  &c. 

Ariminum,  Council  of  .     .     .       52 

Aristophanes 88 

Arius 85 

Athanasius,  St 85,  87 

Athenagoras 85 

Athos,  Mt 17 

Augustine,  St 75,  87 

Aurelian 90 

Authorized  Version,  from  what 

text 12 

Autographs,  the  ....      72,  93 

Barnabas,  St.,  97 — his  epistle       46 

Basil,  St 62,,  85,  87,  97 

Basilides 70 

Beezebul 28 

Benedict,  St S9 

Bengel 15,  16 

Bentley     .       14-15,  21,  31,  50,  96 

Beza lo-ii,  12 

Bilingual  manuscripts  .     .      n,  99 

Birch 17 

Boniface 90 


140 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Breathings 88 

British     and    Foreign    Bible 

Society 22 

Bruchium 90 

Buda 91 

Burgon,  Dean,  his  works,  33 — 
misrepresented,  30  —  prin- 
ciples, 34 — great  Patristic 
knowledge,  53  note.  Also 
31,  46,  47  notes  I  and  2, 
52  note,  56,  60,  71  note,  78, 

100,  106,  107,  no,  117 
Buttmann,  Philip     ....       20 

Ccesarea 83 

Caius 71 

Canon  of  Holy  Scripture  .     .     104 
Catholic  Antiquity  ....       93 

Ceriani 36 

Cerinthus 70 

Charisius 88 

Childhood  of  Textual  Criticism 

12-19 
Chrysostom,  St.,  17,  35,  63,83 

87,  102 — age  of  .  .  .  86-91 
Church,  the,  silent  action  of, 

91— duty  of  ....  1 18-19 
Clement  of  Alexandria  41,  71,  77 
Clementine  Homilies    ...       85 

Cobet 35 

Codex — see  also  Manuscripts. 
A  (Alexandrinus)  pre- 
sented by  Cyril  Lucar, 
1 3 — when  produced  and 
character,  95.  Also  16, 
21,  26,  33,  35,  50,  97,  106 
B  (Vaticanus)  when  pro- 
duced, 81-3 — character, 
54-9 — blunders,    26-29 


PAGE 
Codex — see  also   Manuscripts 
— {continued). 

— how  estimated,  43-4, 

27,  34.  35.  46,  56. 
Also  9,  15,  21,  36,  39, 
40,  48  &c.,  88,  92,  95, 
97,  loi,  103,  106,  107,  no 

K  (Sinaiticus)  how  found, 
24-5 — when  produced, 
81-3  —  character,  54-9 
—  carelessness,  53  — 
how  estimated,  26,  34, 
35,  46.  Also  26,  36, 39, 
40,  48  &c.,  88,  92,  95, 

97,  loi,  106,  107,  no 

C  (Ephraemi,  Parisian) 
date,  95-6 — character, 
96  .     .     .      Also  21,  26,  97 

D  (Bezae,  or  Cambridge), 
date,  99  —  character, 
100      .  Also  II,  41,  92,  106 

D  of  St.  Paul  (Claromon- 
tanus) II,  100 

E  (Basiliensis)  .     .       100,  106 

E  of  the  Acts  (Laudia- 
nus) 100 

F  of  St.  Paul  (Augiensis)     32, 
47  note  3. 

L    (Regius),     23    note    i, 

49  note  I,  100 

\  (Sangallensis)  in  St. 
Mark 100 

Z  (Zacynthius)       .     .    22,  100 

2  (Rossanensis)       48  note,  98, 
100 

Friderico-Augustanus      .       24 

Montfortianus  (61)      .      9,  107 

See  also  Table,  108,  109, 
and  21  note  i,   22,  49 


INDEX. 


141 


PAGE 

Codex — see  also  Manuscripts 
— {cotitimied). 

note  I,  98,  100,  and 
Uncial  Manuscripts,  and 
Cursive  Manuscripts. 

Columba 90 

Complutensian  Polyglott,  7-8,  10, 12 
Conjectural  Emendation  .  65-6,  47 
note  I 
Constantine  .  .  .  81-3,  55,  90 
Constantinople,  library  at  .  91 
Cook,  Canon,  34-5,  27,  31,  51 

note,  56  note 
Cornelius'  servants  ....  28 
Courcelles,  or  Curcellseus  .  13 
Corruption    of    Text,    causes 

and  extent  of  ...     .       68-72 
Cr)',  Our  Lord's  last     ...         2 
Cure  in  pool  of  Bethesda  .     .         2 
Cursive  Manuscripts,  106-7 — 
number  of,  loo-i — value  of, 
loi -2— follow  the  Uncials, 
102    .     .     .    Also  16,  18,  22,  61 

Cyprian,  St 21,  85 

Cyril  of  Alexandria,  St.  .  .  87 
Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  St.  .  .  85,  87 
Cyril  Lucar 13 

Damasus 98 

Dancing-girl 27 

Davidson,  Dr 19 

Diatessaron,  Tatian's    ...       71 

AiSaxi] 100  note  2 

Didymus 85 

Diocletian,  persecution  of,  48,  73, 90 

Diomedes 88 

Dionysius  of  Alexandria  .  41,  85 
Dionysius  of  Corinth  ...  71 
Dobbin,  Dr 55 


PAGE 

Donatus 88 

Doxology  in  the  Lord's  Prayer, 

131-3,  loo,  112 


Eclipse  of  the  sun 
Edessa  .... 
Elzevir,  Abraham 

Bonaventure 

Encratites  .  . 
Ephraem,  St. 

Ps.     .     .     . 

Epiphanius  .  . 
Erasmus  .  .  . 
Eucharist,  Holy  . 
Eusebian  Canons 
Eusebius    .     79-83 


46 
51 


II 
71 

85 

85 

^85 

,  12 

68 

80  note  6 

22,  23,  35,  41, 

55,  71,  85,  91 

Evangelistaria,  or  Evangeliaria,  1 12 

Evangelists    ....  68  and  note 

Evidence,  External  .      61-2,  32,  34, 

118,  120 

Internal,  place  of,  45-6, 

120 — seven  canons,  120-22. 

Also 39,  54 

Extreme  Textualism      .     .       20-30 

Families  of  MSS.  (so-called), 

40-1,  50-1,  16,  17,  18,  61 
Fathers,  116-7 — their  value, 
1 16 — Manuscripts  at  second 
hand,  116 — older  than  any 
existing  MSS.,  117 — not 
uncritical,  96-7  —  mainly 
support  the  Traditional 
Text,  91,  103  .  Also  7,  16,  21, 
22,  34,  62,  73 

Fell,  bp 13 

Ferrar,  Professor  W.  H.  .  .  107 
Frederic  Augustus  ....  24 
Froben       8 


142 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Gebhart,  Oscar  von  ...  98 
Genealogy  ...  40,  47-9,  loi 
Ghost,  God  the  Holy  66,  119,  122 
Gloria  in  Excelsis    .     .    I12,  130-1 

Gnosticism 7o>  7^ 

God  manifested  in  The  Flesh  134-7 

Golgoth 28 

Gospels,  Synoptic,  whence  rose 
their  accordance,  67  note — 
why    written,    68    note  — 
number  of  MSS.  of    .     106,  107 
Gregory,  Dr.  C.  R.    .      n  note,  23 

Nazianzen,    St.,  63, 

68  note,  85,  87 

of  Nyssa,  St.    .     .    63,  85,  87 

Griesbach 17?  1 8 

Gutenberg 7 

Gwilliam,    Rev.   G.    H.    .  115  note 

Harkel,  Thomas  of  ...  103 
Harnach,  Adolph     ....       98 

Hegesippus 85 

Hesychius 79>  81 

— —  the  Lexicographer     .     .       88 

Hilary,  St 21,  87 

Hippolytus 85 

Hort,     Professor,    25-30,    35, 

38-59,  76  note  3,  1 14  note  3 

Hugo,  Cardinal 10 

Hyperides 88 

Ignatius,  St 84 

Inscription  on  the  Cross    .     .         3 
Infancy  of  Textual  Criticism      1-12 
Institution  of  Holy  Eucharist   3,  57 
Interna]    Evidence,    see   Evi- 
dence. 
Ireneeus,  St.    .     .     .  21,  71,  72,  84 


PAGE 
Irish  Missionaries  ....  90 
Itacism 89 

Jerome,  St.    .  21,  53  note  i,  55,  75, 
87,  98-9 

Joanes 28 

Julius  Africanus 85 

Justin  Martyr      .     .     .  71,  84,  in 
Ps 85 

Kilian,  St 90 

Koum 28 

Kuenen 35 

Lachmann,  20-1,  22.  26,  32,  35,  38 

Laurence,  abp 9 

Lectionaries,  value  of,  102-3, 
1 10-12  —  their  great  virtual 
antiquity,  no,  117 — a  cause 
of  error  .     .        109,  61,  lOI,  1 17 

Lections 67 

Lee,  abp 9 

Leo  the  Great,  St 87 

Leontius 85 

Liturgies  110-12,  100  note  2,  117 
Lombard  Scribes  ....  90 
Lord's  Prayer,  the,  2 — doxo- 

logy  in   .     .     .      131 -3,  100,  112 
Lucian  .     .     .     .  79,  81,  98  note  4 

Lucifer 85 

Luke,  St.,  why  he  wrote  his 
gospel 68  note 

Macarius  Magnes  ....  85 
Manuscripts,  87-90  —  relative 

value  of,  93,  117.     Also  6, 

7,  17.     See  Codex. 
Marcion 7©,  85 


INDEX, 


145 


PAGE 

Mark,  St.,  78 — why  he  wrote 
his  gospel,    68   note  —  last 
twelve  verses   .    125-7,  i,  33,  96, 
III 

Marsh,  bp 16 

Martin,  Abbe 36 

Matthxi,  C.  F.,  16-17,  lo?— 

his  accuracy     .     .     .     .      16,  31 
Matthew,  St.,  why  he  wrote 

his  gospel 68  note 

Melitene 28,  121 

Michelsen,  Dr 36 

Mill,  Dr.  John      .     .    13-14,  17,  31 

Moldenhawer 17 

Monasteries 89 

Monte  Cassino 89 


Nazara 

Neutral  Text  (so-called)     .      41, 
New  Testament,  passages  quo- 
ed  from — 
St.  Matt. 


iv.   13 

—  23 

V.   22 

—  44 

VI.   4 

—  13   • 

—  18 

viii.  5 

X.  25 

xi.  16 

—  23 

xu.  47 

xiv.  6 

—  29 

XV.  13 

—  22    . 

57, 


57 
28 
27 
57 
57 
'^1 
112, 
&c, 
57 
58 
28 
121 
58 
57 
27 
58 
58 


New      Testament,      passages 

quoted  from — {continued). 

St.  Matt.  XV.  32   . 

—  39  • 
xvi.  2,  3 

—  12  . 
xvii.  21 

—  22    . 

—  23  . 
xviii.  II 
XX.  16  . 

—  22  . 

—  2Z  . 
xxi.  19 

—  31  • 
xxiii.  14 
xxvi.  28 

—  39 
xxvii.  33 

—  49  • 
xxviii.  9 

—  19   . 
St.  Mark  i.  39  .     . 

ii.  5  . 

—  9  • 
iii.  28  . 

—  29  . 
V.  41  . 
vi.  II  . 

—  21  . 

—  22  . 


-z^  . 

vii.  3    . 

—  16  . 
viii.  26 
ix.  29   . 

—  44  • 
-46   . 


42, 


58 
58 
57 
58 
28 
58 
58 
57 
57 
57 
57 
58 
122 

57 

57 

112 

57 
3 

58 
27 
5S 
58 
58 
5S 
2S 
57 
59 
27 

57 
57 
58 
57 
57 
'^1 
57 
'^1 


144 


INDEX. 


New      Testament,      passages 
quoted  from — [continued). 
St.  Mark  x.  6 
—  7 


24 


—  21 

—  24 
„         xi.  8 

—  19 

—  22 

„        -26 
,,         xii.  30 

—  33 
,         xiii.  14 

„         -  18 
,,         xiv.  22 

-35 
-68   , 
XV.  39 
xvi.  4 

—  9-20 

St.   Luke   i.  28    . 
ii.  14 

96 
iv.  4     . 

—  5      • 

—  16    . 

—  44   • 
vi.  I.    . 

—  26    . 

—  45  . 
viii.  16 

—  43   • 
ix.  55,  56 
X.  22    . 

—  42   . 
xi.  2-4 
xii.  56  . 
xiv.  10 


57 
57 
57 
57 
57 
59 
59 
57 
57 
57 
59 
57 
57 
59 
57 
3 

58 
53, 
23  &c. 

•  57 
53,  58, 
25  &c. 

57 
57 
28 

27 

[20 

57 
57 
57 
57 
57 
57 
58 
2 

[20 

59 


57, 


58, 


New      Testament,      passages 

quoted  from- 

—{continued). 

St.   Luke 

xiv.  44      . 

•       57 

,, 

xvi.  12 

.       58 

,, 

xvii.  6  .     . 

•       59 

,, 

—  19  .      . 

■       57 

J, 

-36    .     . 

•       57 

—  24   .     . 

•       57 

xxii.  19,  20 

.  2,  27 

,, 

—  43,44 

•  2,53, 

III,  I 

28  &c. 

,, 

-55   .     • 

•       58 

„ 

-64  .     . 

•       57 

,, 

xxiii.  17    . 

•       57 

,, 

—  34    •  2,  5 

3,  III, 

1 

27  &c. 

,, 

-38    .     . 

3 

,, 

-  45    •     . 

2 

,, 

xxiv.  I 

.       57 

,» 

3      •     • 

.       27 

,, 

—  6     .     . 

.       27 

,, 

—  9     •     • 

•       27 

,, 

—  12   ,     . 

•  3,  27 

,, 

—  15    •     . 

2 

,, 

-36   .     . 

3,27 

,, 

—  40  .     . 

3,27 

,, 

—  42   .     . 

57 

,, 

-52   .     . 

•      27 

,, 

-53   •     • 

•       57 

St.    John 

i.    27     .     . 

•       57 

" 

iii.  13   .     . 

■     57, 
[33  cVc. 

J, 

V.  3,  4      • 

•  3,  57 

,5 

vi.  51   •     • 

.       57 

" 

vii.   53  —  vi 

ii.    II 
121 

,, 

viii.    59     • 

•       57 

J, 

xiii.  32      . 

57 

„ 

xiv.  I   . 

112 

• 

INDEX, 


145 


PAGE 


New      Testament,      passages 
quoted  from — {contimied). 


St.    John 


Acts 


XIV.  4  . 

xvi.  16 

xix.  17 

iii.  6     . 

X.  19 

-30 

Rom. 


XI.   II    . 

xii.  25 
xiii.  7  . 
XV.  18  . 

—  24  . 
xvi.  13 
xviii.  7 

—  21  . 
xxi.  22 

—  25  . 

xxiv.  6,  7 
XXV.  13 
xxvii.  13 
xxviii.  I 

—  29 

V.    I 

XV.  24 


I  Cor. 

iii. 

1) 

ix. 

24     . 

,, 

xni 

3     . 

11 

— 

5    . 

2  Cor. 

V.  14      . 

Eph.  i 

1 

.     . 

„  — 

15 

.     . 

Col.  ii 

.  6 

. 

I  Thess.  i. 

I 

j> 

ii 

•  7    . 

I  Tim 

iii. 

16    . 

Tit.  ii. 

S 

. 

Heb.  ii.  7 

. 

S3 


57 
57 
28 

57 
27 

57 
28 
28 
59 

57 
57 
59 
28 

57 
57 
57 
57 
58 
58 
21 

57 
58 
59 
57 
58 
3 
58 
29 

57 
57 
57 
57 
57 
58 
134  &c. 
58 
57 


28, 


New      Testament,      passages 
quoted  from — {continued). 
Heb.  vii.  21 
James  i.  20 

1  Pet.  iii.  I 

2  Pet.  ii.  12 
I  John  v.  7 

Nic£ea,  Council  of 
Nisibis  .... 


57 
58 
59 
58 
9 
14,  52 

51 


Oral  teaching 67 

Origen  .     18,  21,  22,  71,  78-80,  85 

Origenism 78  &c. 

Orthodox,  no  evidence  that 
they  depraved  Holy  Scrip- 
ture   69,  121  note  5 

Pamphilus,  79,  80,  81,  83— 
library  of     ...     .  ,       91 

Pantcenus 78 

Patristic  Era  ....  86  &c.,  104 
Paragraphs,  bible,  due  to  Ben- 
gel       16 

Paul,  St.,  Pauline  Epistles 
loi — number  of  MSS.  of,  106,107 

3 
121 

41 
77 
103 
96 
80 
73 


Peace  be  unto  you  .... 
Pericope  adulterse  .... 
Peter  of  Alexandria .... 

Philo 

Philoxenus 

Piercing  of  our  Lord's  Side    . 

Pierius 

Polycarp,  St.,  Martyrdom  of. 

translator 103 

Praxapostoli   .  .     .     .     ,      II2 

Priscian 88 

Ptolemy  Euergetes  ....       90 


Question,  nature  of  the 


64 


146 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Quotations  from  Ecclesiastical 
Writers I16-7 

Received  Text,  when  first  so- 
called,  II — nature  of,  12 — 
relation  to  Traditional  Text, 
12,  63,  119 — rejected  by 
Lachmann,  21 — by  Tregel- 
les,  22 — how  treated  by  Tis- 
chendorf,  25 — by  Westcott 
and  Hort,  27,  30 — by  Sound 
Textualists 32,  33 

Reiche,  J.  G 17,  35 

Revised  Version,  number  of 
changes  in,  3  note — mainly 
follows  Westcott  and  Hort, 
29-30.     Also  26,  28,  34,  38  note 

Roman  Catholic  opinion    .     .       36 

Sand  ay.  Professor,  38  note, 

76  note  3,  1 14  note  3 

Saracens 90>  91 

Scholz 18 

Scriptures,  the  Holy,  corpo- 
rate  as  well  as   individual 

productions 67 

Scrivener,  Dr.,  his  works  and 
opinions,  30-32,  ii,  12 
note,  18  and  notes  2  and  3, 
26  note  I,  46,  50,  52  note, 
55,  56,  60,  61,  69  note  2, 

82,  106,  107,  114 

Semler 17 

Serapeum 90 

Severus 96 

Sharpe,  abp 14 

vSimon  Magus 70 

Sinai,  Mt 25 

Son  of  God,  the,  Eternal 
Existence  of    ...     .       133*4 


PAGE 

Sound  Textualism   .        30-37,  60-4 
Stephen,  Robert,  his  editions, 

10,  II,  12,  14,  15 

Henry 10,  ii 

Stunica 8,  9 

Syrian    Text — no   foundation 

for  this  term,  39  note,  51-54. 

See  Traditional  Text. 


Tatian,    his    diatessaron,    71, 

80  note  6 

Tatian,  Ps 85 

TertuUian       .     .     .    71,  72,  73,  84 
Textual  Criticism,  prevailing 

ignorance  of,  4 — history  of    6-37 
Textualism,  Sacred,  how  dif- 
fers from  Classical     .     .     .65-8 

Theodoret 71 

Theodosius 90 

Theophilus  of  Antioch  ...       84 
Tischendorf,  his  great  works 
and   labours,    23-25 — not  a 
trustworthy  judge  of   prin- 
ciples, 27    .     .      Also  55,  56,  82 
Titius  or  Titus  Justus  .     .    28,  121 

Titus  of  Bostra 85 

Traditional  Text,  not  the  same 
as  the  Received  Text,  12, 
I3>  63,  119— when  settled, 
91  &c. — the  great  object  of 
discovery,  119-20 — the  true 
Text,  62-4  —  admitted  by 
Extreme  Textualists  to  go 
back  to  St.  Chiysostom,  23 
— called  "Syrian"  and 
treated  as  worthless  by 
Westcott  and  Hort,  42-3 — 
— not  a  late  invention,   51, 


INDEX. 


t47 


PAGE 

53-4— dates  from   the  first, 
73,    83-5.     Also    51,     loi, 

102,  107 
Transcribing,  art  of,  7,  88-90, 

93,  102 
Tregelles,  S.  P.,  his   labours 
and  books     .     .     .     .     21-3,  32 

Uncial  Manuscripts,  105-6— 
table  of,  108-9 — opposition 
of  Cursives  to,  a  figment, 
102     ....     Also  16,  22,  60 

Uncouth  names  in  B     .     .     .       28 

Vercellone 36,  56 

Versions,  1 1 3-15— tableof,  113 
— older   than    manuscripts, 
117— value  of,  1 14.5.    Also 
6,  7,  22,  16,  34,  43,  61,  73,   102 
Anglo-Saxon     ....     103 

Arabic 103 

Armenian 99 

Bahiric,  see  Memphitic. 

Bashmuric 98 

Curetonian  Syriac,  51, 

74  note,  100  note  2 
Elearchian,  see  Bashmuric. 

Ethiopian 99 

Frankish 103 

Georgian 99 

Gothic     .     .     .      94.5,  13,  98 

Harclean 103 

Italic,  see  Old  Latin. 
Latin,  Old,  76  and  note  3, 

21,  85,  98,  115 
Memphitic    .     .     76-7,  13,  98 


PAGE 

Versions — [continued). 

Persic 103 

Peshito,  74-5,  51,  85,  98, 

100  note  2 
Philoxenian  ....  103 
Sahidic,  see  Thebaic. 

Slavonic 103 

Thebaic,  76-7,  98,   100  note  2 

Vulgate 98-99 

Victor  of  Antioch     ....       96 
Vincentius 85 

Wake,  abp 14 

Walker,  John 15 

Walton,  bp 13 

Westcott,    Professor,     25-30, 

38-59,  35 
Western  Readings    .     .     .     41,  51 

Wetstein 16,  96 

Woide 15 

Word,  the  first  from  the  Cross 

127-8,  2 
Wordsworth,  Bp.  Christopher 

35  and  note  2,  -]-] 

Bp.  Charles     ....       35 

Bp.  John     .     .     .      ^^  note  3 

Worship,  Common  ....       68 
Written    records,    scarcity  of 
at  first 71 


Xenaias 103 

Ximenes,  cardinal    ....      7.9 

Youth  of  Textual  Science  .       20-30 

Zacynthius,  see  Codex. 

Zeno,  emperor 97 


CHISWICK    PRESS  :     C.    WHITTINGHAM    AND    CO.,    TOOKS    COURT 
CHANCERY    LANE. 


Recent  Works  by  the  Same  Attthor. 


THE  HISTORY  AND  DOCTRINES  OF  IRVINGISM, 

OR  OF  THE  SO-CALLED  CATHOLIC 
AND  APOSTOLIC  CHURCH. 

Two  Vols.  Large  Post  Zvo^  Cloth,  Price  2^s. 

■■  Mr.  Miller  has  brought  to  his  work  the  rare  qualities  of  unmistakable  fairness 
and  candour,  a  thoroughly  philosophical  mind,  untiring  patience  in  research,  and  a 
calm  spirit  of  charity,  which  must  go  far  to  render  his  volumes  pleasant  and  profitable 
reading  to  the  philosophically-minded  student  of  religious  phenomena  ;  whilst  to  the 
clergy,  and  others  whose  daily  duties  or  charity  may  lead  them  to  cross  the  path  of 
the  adherents  of  this  remarkable  but  undoubtedly  fast-decaying  sect,  the  amount  of 
information  presented,  and  the  great  acumen  with  which  the  author  unravels  the 
mysterious  intricacies  and  sophistry  of  the  system  of  Irvingism,  will  prove  of  perma- 
nent value ;  and  last,  but  by  no  means  least,  the  spirit  and  tone  of  the  work  cannot 
fail  to  appeal  to  Irvingites  themselves,  whether  ministers  or  people.  Mr.  Miller  will, 
at  least,  never  be  accused  of  rashness  of  statement,  of  unfair  inference,  or  of  imper- 
fect information  ;  whilst  his  incisive,  although  quiet  and  masterly,  logic  must  com- 
mend itself,  and  in  many  instances  casry  conviction,  to  the  followers  of  this  nine- 
teenth century  'restored  apostolate.'  ....  The  above  is  a  powerful  passage,  and 
sets  forth  a  somewhat  difficult  subject  in  its  true  theological  aspect,  but  it  by  no  means 
stands  alone  as  a  sample  of  Mr.  Miller's  grasp  of  doctrine  and  generally  literary 
ability.  The  volumes  possess  a  capital  index,  and  in  various  appendices  will  be  found 
sundry  documents,  such  as  the  '  Testimonies,'  which  have  from  time  to  time  emanated 
from  the  Irvingite  authorities.  The  work  is  extremely  well  printed,  and  cannot  fail 
to  become  a  standard  book  of  reference  wherever  the  history  and  doctrines  of  Irvingism 
are  in  question." — Church  Review. 

"  Mr.  Miller  has  done  his  work  very  thoroughly  indeed.  His  first  volume  is  narra- 
tive and  historical  ;  his  second  theological  and  controversial The  work  alto- 
gether is  as  complete  as  could  be  desired,  and  seems  to  us  a  repertory  of  information 
on  the  whole  subject.  Nor  must  we  forget  to  add,  that  it  is  written  as  with  a  con- 
scientious resolve  to  ascertain  everything  honestly  and  state  it  impartially,  so  with 

an  evident  desire  to  be  just  and  even  kindly There  is   no  one  other  book 

which  contains  on  such  matters  information  so  complete  and  so  readily  available." — 
Guardian. 

"  It  is  the  best  and  most  patient  examination  of  these  doctrines  that  we  have  as  yet ; 
the  theological  learning,  philosophical  insight,  and  calm  and  steady  patience  in  dealing 
with  the  adverse  argument  are  most  admirable,  and  the  work  must  for  long  be  a 
standard  one."— Liierary  Churchjnati. 

"Very  ably  treated We  feel  bound  to  say,  after  a  careful  study  of  Mr. 

Miller's  book,  that  we  think  he  has  done  good  service  to  the  cause  of  truth  by  the  able 
and  impartial  manner  in  which  he  has  executed  his  task.  We  had  ourselves,  pre- 
viously, by  an  independent  course  of  reading  and  enquiry,  and  with  access  to  other 


[50        RECENT  WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 


very  important  sources  of  information,  arrived,  in  almost  all  respects,  at  identical  con- 
clusions, and  we  can  endorse  the  accuracy  of  Mr.  Miller's  statements  of  fact." — 
Ckiirch  Qicarterly  Review. 

"The  book  is  thoroughly  interesting  from  the  first  page  to  the  last,  and  every  one 
should  read  it  who  is  interested  in  one  of  the  most  curious  phases  of  the  revival  of 
religious  activity  which  the  nineteenth  century  has  seen. "— /£?/*«  Bull. 

"Mr.  Miller  has  executed  his  work  with  great  moderation,  with  much  ability,  and, 
we  are  persuaded,  with  substantial  accuracy."— CA«rf/i  Tu>ies. 

"  This  is  a  well-written,  sensible,  and,  as  it  appears  to  us,  an  impartial  narration  of 
the  ver^'  remarkable  movement  which  began  about  the  year  1830,  and  was  connected 
with,  though  by  no  means  originated  by,  the  preaching  of  the  celebrated  Edward 
Irving. " — Contemporary  Review. 

"The  author  cites  a  great  number  of  authorities,  and  has  evidently  given  to  his 
subject  much  time  and  thought.  "—yJ/^rw/w^  Post. 

"A  more  vigorous  exposure  of  quasi-hierarchical  tyranny,  combined  with  the 
most  fatuous  enthusiasm,  has  rarely  been  placed  before  the  public  eye,  and  to  the 
multitudes  who  know  nothing  of  the  origin,  progress,  decay,  and  now  imminent 
downfall  of  this  superstition,  the  facts  of  the  case  will  be  especially  interesting,  while 
the  wise  charity  vvherewith  the  false  doctrines  involved  are  tenderly  and  reasonably 
argued  down,  will  commend  itself  to  all  who  seek  for  instruction  as  well  as  amuse- 
ment."— RocA. 

"Mr.  Miller  has  done  well  in  presenting  us,  in  a  compact  and  continuous  form, 
with  the  completest  record  of  the  history  and  doctrines  of  the  Irvingite  community 

which  has  yet  appeared His  tone  is  temperate  and  courteous  throughout,  and 

he  seems  to  have  taken  great  pains  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  facts." — Saturday 
Review. 

"  There  never  were  published  two  goodly  volumes  more  full  of  personal  interest  to 
the  myriads  who  know  next  to  nothing  of  this  sect,  or  more  rightly  seasoned  with 
charity  and  wise  teaching,  than  these  of  Mr.  Miller."— Cz/y  Press. 

"  It  is  rare  to  meet  with  a  book,  the  main  object  of  which  is  necessarily  polemical, 
which  is  written  with  so  much  sobriety,  moderation,  and  gentleness  as  is  this  book  of 
Mr.  Miller's. " — Exaviipier. 

"  His  style  is  clear,  his  judgment  candid,  his  statements  always  moderate." — Theo- 
logical Review. 

"  We  believe  that  every  source  of  information  on  the  subject  has  been  carefully  and 
thoroughly  investigated,  and  the  author  has  invested  the  subject  with  a  charm  which 
renders  it  peculiarly  attractive." — Leatnington  Spa  Courier. 

"We  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  ability  and  conscientiousness  with  which  the 
whole  is  ^Qr\v\&(^."-— Liverpool  IVeekly  Albion. 

"After  a  very  careful  and  interested  study  of  this  book,  we  are  enabled  to  say  that 
it  has  been  written  with  all  the  fairness  and  candour  demanded  by  the  importance  of 
the  subject  under  discussion." — Yorkshire  Post. 

"Mr.  Miller  writes  with  great  ease— sometimes  with  eloquence.  He  is,  at  the 
same  time,  thorough  and  painstaking,  and  also  he  is  clear  and  honest,  both  in  state- 
ment and  argument." — Noucon/onnist. 

"  Mr.  Miller  has  no  great  difficulty  in  exposing  the  baselessness  and  vanity  of  the 
pretensions  of  the  so-called  Catholic  and  Apostolic  Church."—  lyestminster  Review. 

C.  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  &  Co.,  i.  Paternoster  Square. 


RECENT  WORK'S  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR.         151 

THE  CHURCH  IN  RELATION  TO  THE  STATE, 

Price  ys.  6d. 

"  To  those  who  desire  to  understand  the  true  position  of  the  Church  and  State 
question  at  the  present  time,  we  would  earnestly  recommend  an  attentive  perusal  of 

rtie  Rev.  Edward  Miller's  able,  thoughtful,  and  timely  essay Mr.  Miller  has 

not  been  content  with  a  surface  knowledge— he  has  gone  down  to  the  foundation. 
....  From  the  above  brief  summary  of  Mr.  Miller's  volume,  it  will  be  seen  that 
he  has  taken  great  pains  to  present  the  whole  subject  to  the  public  in  a  manner  speci- 
ally calculated  to  wrest  their  attention  at  the  present  moment ;  and  we  earnestly  trust 
that  this  valuable  addition  to  the  present  literature  on  the  Church  and  State  question 
will  meet  with  that  success  which  it  so  entirely  deserves." — National  Church. 

"The  historical  student  will  find  much  to  interest  him  as  well  as  to  instruct  in  the 
remarkably  able  chapters  here  devoted  to  an  historical  survey  of  the  Anglican  Church 
from  its  first  plantation  in  this  country  to  the  present  day. " — Examiner. 

"The  writer  is  not  content  with  a  constitutional  and  historical  survey  of  the  condi- 
tion of  the  Church  in  its  relation  to  the  Laymen  of  the  nation,  but  he  proceeds  to  a 
calm  and  searching  e.xamination  of  the  cause  of  present  embarrassments,  and  con- 
cludes with  the  suggestion  of  remedies  which  may  diminish,  even  if  it  does  not  remove, 
the  friction  which  prevents  the  harmonious  working  of  these  two  forces  on  the  due 
adjustment  of  which  depend  the  well-being  and  the  continuance  of  our  national  life." 
—John  Bull. 

"  His  style  is  clear  and  his  treatment  exhaustive." — Liverpool  Albion. 

"  VVe  thank  Mr  Miller  very  cordially  for  his  very  seasonable  volume,  and  for  the 
manly  and  hopeful  spirit  in  which  he  has  handled  the  very  difficult  and  complicated 
subject  on  which  he  writes." — Churchman' s  Companion. 

"  It  is  well  that  so  candid  and  able  a  champion  of  Church  Defence  has  come  for- 
ward."— Rock. 

"  This  is  a  short  but  very  effectual  chapter  to  examine  historically  and  logically  into 
the  nature  of  the  present  and  past  relation  of  the  Church  and  State,  practically  with 
a  view  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  both,  and  to  do  more  justice  to  the  mission  and 
function  of  the  Church  as  a  Divine  institution." — Literary  Churchman. 

"This  book  is  thoughtful,  comprehensive,  liberal,  and  loyal  to  the  old  paths  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  as  it  is  also  undoubtedly  loyal  to  the  English  const\l\xt\on."— Church 
Review. 

"  The  author  of  this  volume  is  the  same  who  gave  us  lately  the  most  useful  mono- 
graph on  Irvingism  which  has  yet  appeared,  and  having  thus  attested  his  capacity, 
he  IS  entitled  to  be  heard  with  attention  on  the  highly  complicated  question  he  has 
now  chosen  to  discuss.  We  do  not  profess  to  say  that  we  believe  him  to  have  solved 
all  its  difficulties,  but  he  has  certainly  contributed  something  towards  its  ventilation, 
and  to  a  more  intelligent  inquiry  into  its  details  than  is  by  any  means  usual  amongst 
either  clergy  or  laity." — Church  Times. 

_  "The  work  goes  very  thoroughly  and  practically  into  all  the  great  Church  ques- 
tions and  problems  of  the  day,  and  fully  discusses,  solely  in  the  interests  of  the  Church, 
and  from  no  party  standpoint,  the  most  effectual  remedies  for  the  present  condition  of 
the  Church.  "—Ecclesiastical  Gazette. 

"Written  from  the  Author's  point  of  view  with  decided  z):yiX\x.\ ." —Westminster 
Rezneiv. 


[52         RECENT  WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 


"  Mr.  Miller's  volume  is  a  learned,  painstaking,  and  conscientious  attempt  to 
settle  several  very  difficult  matters,  and  to  those  interested  in  the  questions  of  which 
it  treats,  perusal  will  afford  both  profit  and  pleasure." — Leamington  Spa  Courier. 

"  Mr.  Miller  writes  on  the  whole  as  a  High  Churchman,  but  he  is  sensible  and  con- 
ciliatory. He  has  availed  himself  largely  of  the  researches  of  the  Oxford  school  of 
early  English  history,  and  he  has  treated  his  subject  in  a  way  which  must,  we  think, 
command  the  respectful  consideration  of  those  who  differ  most  widely  from  his  con- 
clusions."— Spectator. 

C.  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  &  Co.,  i,  Paternoster  Square,  London. 


TE  DEUM  LAUDAMUS 

SET   TO   CHANTS. 
Second  500.    Price  Twopence. 

London  :  Xovello,  Ewer,  and  Co.,  i,  Berners  Street,  W., 

and  80  and  81,  Queen  Street,  E.C. 

Boston,  New  York,  and  Philadelphia  :  Ditson  and  Co. 

[Pronounced  by  good  Judges  to  be  an  appropriate  setting  of  the 
sense  and  changes  of  this  great  Hyf?m  of  the  Church.,  and 
at  the  same  time  tu7ieful  and  easy  for  Choirs. '\ 


York  Street,  Covent  Garden, 
October  1884. 

SELECTED  LIST  OF 

THKOLOGICAL     AA^ORKS 

PUBLISHED    BY 

GEORGE    BELL    &    SONS. 


ALFORD  (Dean).     The  Greek  Testament.     With  a 

critically  revised  Text ;  a  Digest  of  various  Readings  ;  Marginal 
References  to  Verbal  and  Idiomatic  Usage  ;  Prolegomena  ;  and 
a  Critical  and  Exegetical  Commentary.  For  the  Use  of  Theo- 
logical Students  and  Ministers.  By  the  late  Henry  Alford,  D.  D., 
Dean  of  Canterbur}'.     4  vols.  8vo.     5/.  2s.     Sold  separately. 

The  New  Testament  for  English  Readers.  Con- 
taining the  Authorised  Version,  with  additional  Corrections  of 
Readings  and  Renderings,  Marginal  References,  and  a  Critical 
and  Explanatory  Commentary.  In  4  Parts.  ?/.  145-.  6d.  Sold 
separately. 

BARRETT  (A.  C.)  Companion  to  the  Greek  Tes- 
tament. For  the  Use  of  Theological  Students  and  the  Upper 
Forms  in  Schools.  By  A.  C.  Barrett,  M.A.,  Caius  College. 
4//?  edition,  revised.     Fcap.  8vo.  5^. 

BARRY  (Dr.)  Notes  on  the  Catechism.  For  the 
Use  of  vSchools.  By  the  Rev.  Canon  Barry,  D.D.,  Principal  of 
King's  College,  London.     6t/i.  edition.     Fcao.     2s. 

BLEEK  (F.)  An  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament. 
ByF.  Bleek.  2  vols.  los.  See Bohn's  Libraries.  {Catalogues 
free  on  application.) 

BLENCOWE     (E.)     Plain    Sermons   by    the    Rev. 

E.  Blencowe.     Vol.  I.     dth  edition.     Fcap,  Svo.     6^-. 
BLUNT    (J.    S.)     Readings    on    the    Morning    and 

Evening  Prayer  and  the  Litany.     By  J.  S.  Blunt,     yd  edition. 

Fcap.  Svo.     y.  6d. 

Life  after  Confirmation.    Revised editioji.    i8mo.    \s. 

CARTER  (T.  T.)  The  Devout  Christian's  Help  to 
Meditation  on  the  Life  of  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Containing 
Meditations  and  Prayers  for  every  day  in  the  year.  Edited  by 
the  Rev.  T.  T.  Carter,  Rector  of  Clewer.  2  vols.  Fcap.  Svo. 
\2s.  Or  in  five  Parts.  Part  I.  7.s.  6d.  ;  Part  II.  2s.  ;  Part 
III.  2s.  :   Part  IV.  2s.  6d.  ;    Part  V.  2s.  6d. 


George  Bell  and  Sons' 


COWLEY-BROWN    (G.   J.)     Daily  Lessons   on 

the  Life  of  our  Lord  on  Eartli,  being  llie  (iospel  Narrative  in 
the  Words  of  the  Evangelists.  With  a  short  Exposition  ar- 
ranged for  Daily  Reading  in  the  Household.  Dy  the  Rev. 
G.  J.  Cowley-Brown,  Incumbent  of  St.  John's,  Edinlnirgli. 
Two  vols,  demy  8vo.  lis. 

DAVIES  (G.  J.)  Homilies,  Ancient  and  Modern. 
]jy  the  late  Rev.  ('..  J.  Davies.  A  vSelection  from  the  Writings 
of  the  great  Sermon-writers  of  the  Past,  chiefly  between 
1800  and  1840,  with  short  Memoirs  and  Essays  on  iheir 
Characteristics.     In  Four  Parts,  in  stiff  wrapper,  2s.  dd.  each. 

No.  I.— Sermons  ox  Spfxial  Occasions,  Original,  Selected, 
and  Adapted.  Sunday  Schools,  Church  Restoration,  Benefit 
Clubs,  ^lissions,  Hospital  Sunday,  Funeral,  Harvest  Thank.-.- 
giving,  Assizes,  Holy  Communion.     (Twenty  Sermons.) 

No.  II. — Rev.  Charles  Wolfe,  1791-1823,  Author  of  tlie 
'  Ode  on  the  Burial  of  Sir  John  Moore.' 

No.  III. — Rev.  E.  Cooper,  1770-1835. 

No.  IV. — Rev.  Edward  Blencowe,  1805  43. 
ra])ers  on  Preaching,     yd  editiou.     Revised  anil 

enlarged.     \\  ide  fcap.  8vo.     6-r. 

'  A  perfect  museum  of  valuable  observations  and  illustrations.  It  ouglit 
to  be  studied  by  evcrj"  clergyman  who  desires  to  irake  the  most  of  what  i> 
certainlj- one  of  the  most  effectual  means  of  usefulness  that  lie  within  hi-, 
reach.' — Spcctatoi: 

Successful   Preachers.      Partly  reprinted   from   the 


Guardian.     Wide  fcap.     y.* 

DAVIES  (T.  L.  O.)  Bible-English.  Chapters  on 
Words  and  Phrases  in  the  Authorized  Version  and  the  Book 
of  Common  Prayer,  no  longer  in  common  use.  By  the  Rev. 
T.  Lewis  O.  Davies,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  St.  Mary-extra,  South- 
ampton.    Small  crown  8vo.     5^. 

'  We  can  heartily  commend  this  book.' — Saturday  Review. 

DENTON  (W.)     A  Commentary  on  the  Gospels  and 

Epistles  for  the  .Sundays  and  other  Holy  Days  of  the  Christian 
Year.  By  the  Rev.  W.  Denton,  M.A.,  Worcester  College, 
Oxford,  and  Incumbent  of  St.  Bartholomew's,  Cripplegatc. 
Vol.1.  Advent  to  Easter,  -^rd edition.  iSs.  Vol.11.  Easter 
to  the  Sixteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.  3;'^/  edition.  i8j. 
Vol.  HI.  .Seventeenth  Sunday  after  Trinity  to  Advent;  and 
Holy  Days,  yd  edition.  i8j.  Epistles.  Vol.  I.  Advent  to 
Trinity.     8to.    2nd  edition.     \%s.    Vol.  II.    2nd  edition.     i8.v. 


List  of  Theological  Works. 


DENTON  (W.)  A  Commentary  on  the  Acts  of  the 
Aj)o.stIes.     Vol.  I,     i8j.     Vol.  II.,  completing  the  work,  14^-. 

These  Commentaries  originated  in  Notes  collected  by  the 
compiler  to  aid  in  the  composition  of  expositor}' sermons.  They 
are  derived  from  all  available  sources,  and  especially  from  the 
wide  but  little  known  field  of  theological  comment  found  in  the 
*  Schoolmen  '  of  the  Middle  Ages.  They  are  recommended  to 
ihe  notice  of  all  young  Clergymen,  who  frequently,  while  inex- 
perienced, are  called  upon  to  preach  to  educated  and  intelligent 
congregations.  The  special  nature  of  the  sources  from  which 
they  have  been  derived  ought  to  make  them  indispensable  to  all 
who  wish  to  expound  the  Holy  Scriptures  with  the  same  under- 
standing as  may  be  obtained  by  extraneous  help. 

EUSEBIUS.  Ecclesiastical  History.  5^-.  See  Bo/m's 
Libraries.     {Catalogues  free  on  application.) 

GARNIER  (T.  P.)  Church  or  Dissent?  An 
Appeal  to  Holy  Scripture,  addressed  to  Dissenters.  By  T.  P. 
(iarnicr,  late  Fellow  of  All  Souls' College,  Oxford.  2nd  edition. 
(  rown  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

GOODWIN  (Bp.)  A  Guide  to  the  Parish  Church. 
Hy  the  Right  Rev.  Harvey  Goodwin,  Bishop  of  Carlisle.  C)th 
I  (I  it  ion,  revised.     Fcap.  8vo.     y.  6d. 

Plain  Sermons  on  Ordination  and  the  Ministry  of 

the  Church.     Preached  on  divers  occasions.    Crown  Svo.    6s. 

Parish  Sermons.     First  Series,     -^rd  editio7i.     i2mo. 

6j.  Second  Series  {out  of  print).  Third  Series,  yd  edition. 
i2mo.  7J-.  Fourth  Series.  i2mo.  ^s.  Fifth  Series,  with 
Preface  on  Sermons  and  Sermon-writing.     7^. 

Sermons  Preached  before  the  Universities  of  Oxford 

.'ind  Cambridge.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

Lectures  upon  the  Church  Catechism.      i2mo.     4J-. 

Plain  Thoughts  concerning  the  ^Meaning  of  Holy 


Baptism,     ind  edition.     2d.,  or  25  for  y.  6d. 

-  Confirmation  Day.  A  Book  of  Instruction  for 
Young  Persons  how  to  spend  that  day.  %th  thousand.  2d.,  or 
25  for  IS.  6d. 

—  The  Worthy  Communicant ;  or,  '  Who  may  come 
to  the  Supper  of  the  Lord  ?'    Zth  thousand.    2d.,  or  25  for  3J.  6d. 


George  Bell  and  Sons* 


HARDWICK  (C.    H.)     History  of  the  Articles   of 

Religion.  5^.  Str  Bohii's  Libraries.  {Catalogues  free  on  ap- 
plication.) 

H AWKIN  S  (Canon).  Family  Prayers  : — Containing 
Psalms,  Lessons,  and  Prayers,  for  every  Morning  and  Evening 
in  the  Week.  By  the  late  Rev.  Ernest  Hawkins,  B.D.,  Pre- 
bendary of  St.  Paul's.      i2>th  edition.     Fcap.  8vo.      is. 

HOOK  (W.  F.)  Short  Meditations  for  Every  Day  in 
the  Year.  Edited  by  the  late  Very  Rev.  W.  F.  Hook,  D.D., 
Dean  of  Chichester,  Revised  edition.  1  vols.  Fcap.  8vo. 
Large  type.  14^.  Also  2  vols.  32mo.  Cloth,  5^.  ;  calf,  gilt 
edges,  9^. 

The  Christian  Taught   by  the  Church's   Services. 

Revised  edition^  to  accord  with  the  A^rio  Lectionary.  i  vol. 
Fcap.  8vo.  Large  type.  6s.  6d.  Also  i  vol.  Royal  32mo. 
Cloth,  2s.  6d.  ;  calf,  gilt  edges,  /s^.  6d. 

Holy  Thoughts   and    Prayers,  arranged   for  Daily 

Use  on  each  Day  of  the  Week,  according  to  the  stated  Hours 
of  Prayer.  S^h  edition,  with  additions.  i6mo.  Cloth,  red 
edges,  2J-.  ;  calf,  gilt  edges,  3^-.      Cheap  edition,  3^/. 

Verses    for    Holy  Seasons.     By  C.   F.  Alexander. 


Edited  by  the  late  Very  Rev.  W.  F.  Hook,  D.D.  5M  edition. 
Fcap.  '^s.  6d. 
HUMPHRY  (W.  G.)  An  Historical  and  Explana- 
tory Treatise  on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.  By  W.  G. 
Humphry,  B.D.,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge, 
Prebendary  of  St.  Paul's,  and  Vicar  of  St.  >Lartin-in-the- 
Fields.     dth  edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     4^.  6d. 

The  New  Table  of  Lessons    Explained,  with  the 

Table  of  Lessons  and  a  Tabular  Comparison  of  the  Old  and 
New  Proper  Lessons  for  Sundays  and  Holy  Days.  By  W.  G. 
Ilumphr}-,  J3.D.     Fcap.     i^.  6d. 

JOHNSTONE  (R.)  Parochial  Addresses  and  Les- 
sons. A  Scries  of  Readings  for  such  as  are  tried  by  Sickness, 
Infirmity,  and  Age.  By  Richard  Johnstone,  INLA.,  Assistant 
Curate  of  Moreton  Say.  Fcap.  8vo.  limp  cloth,  for  the 
pocket,  3^-. 

LEWIN  ^T.)     The  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.    By 

the  late  t.  Lcwin,  ISLA.,  F.S.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford, 
Barrister-at-Law.  With  upwards  of  350  Illustrations  finely  en- 
graved on  Wood  ;  Maps,  Plans,  <S:c.  In  2  vols,  /^th  edition. 
Demy  4to.     2/.  2s. 


List  of  Theological  Works. 


LEWIN  (T.)  Fasti  Sacri;  or,  a  Key  to  the  Chro- 
nology of  the  New  Testament.     4to.     21^-. 

LUMBY  (J.  R.)  History  of  the  Creeds.  By  J. 
Kawson  Lumby,  D.D.,  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity,  and  late 
Fellow  of  Magdalene  College.  Cambridge.  2nd  edition.  Crown 
Svo.     7^.  (id. 

MILL  (Dr.)  Lectures  on  the  Catechism.  DeUvered 
in  the  Parish  Church  of  Brasted,  in  the  Diocese  of  Canterbury. 
IJy  W.  H.  Mill,  D.D.,  formerly  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew  in 
the  University  of  Cambridge.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  B.  Webb, 
M.A.     Fcap.  Svo.     ds.  6d. 

Observations    on    the    attempted    AppUcation   of 

Pantheistic  Principles  to  the  Theory  and  Historic  Criticism 
of  the  Gospels.  By  W.  H.  Mill,  D.D.  27id  edition,  with  the 
Author  s  latest  notes  and  additions.  Edited  by  his  Son-in-law, 
the  Rev.  B.  Webb,  M.A.     Svo.     I4i-. 

MONSELL  (Dr.)  Simon  the  Cyrenian,  and  other 
Poems.  By  the  late  Rev.  J.  S.  B.  Monsell,  LL.D.,  Vicar  of 
St.  Nicholas,  Guildford.     2nd  thousand.     32mo.     5^. 

Watches  by  the  Cross.     Short  Meditations,  Hymns, 

and  Litanies  on  the  Last  Seven  Words  of  our  Lord.  4//^  edition. 
Cloth,  red  edges,  \s. 

Near   Home  at    Last.      A   Poem.      %th  thousand. 

Cloth,  red  edges.     Imp.  32mo.     2s.  6d. 

Hymns  of  Love  and  Praise  for  the  Church's  Year. 

2nd  thousand.     Fcap.  Svo.      3^-.  6d. 

Our  New  Vicar ;  or.  Plain  Words  about  Ritual  and 


Parish  Work.     Fcap.  Svo.      loth  edition,     ^s. 

The   Winton    Church  Catechism.     Questions  and 

Answers  on  the  Teaching  of  the  Church  Catechism.  4///  editiojt. 
32mo.  cloth,  3J-.  Also  in  Four  Parts.  Part  I.  6d. ;  Parts  H. 
IIL  and  IV.  gd.  each. 

PEROWNE    (Dean).      The   Book   of  Psalms:    a 

New  Translation,  with  Introductions  and  Notes,  Critical  and 
Explanatory.  By  the  Very  Rev.  J.  J.  Stewart  Perowne,  D.D., 
Dean  of  Peterborough.  Svo.  Vol.  I.  5//i  edition.  iSj.  Vol.  II. 
$th  edition,     ids. 

The   Book   of  Psalms.     An  abridged  Edition  for 

Schools  and  Private  Students.  Crown  Svo.   4///  edition,   iof-.  6d- 


George  Bell  and  Sons' 


PEARSON    (Bp.)      The    Creed.      55-.      See   Bohn's 

Libraries.     {Catalogues  free  on  application.) 

PHILO-JUDAEUS.    Works.    4  vols.    5^.  each.    ^V^ 

Bohiis  Lil>ranes.     ( Catalogues  free  on  application. ) 

SADLER  (M.  F.)  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.  By 
the  Rev.  M.  Y.  Sadler,  Rector  of  Iloniton  and  Prebendary  of 
Wells.  With  Notes,  Critical  and  Practical,  and  Two  Maps. 
Crown  8vo.     7^'.  6d. 

'  It  is  far  the  best  practical  comineiUaiy  we  know,  being  plain-spoken, 
fearless,  and  definite,  and  containing  matter  verj' unlike  the  milk  and  water 

which  is  often  served  up  in   (so-called)  practical  commentaries 

Throughout  the  whole  book  the  writer  is  ever  on  the  watch  for  general 
principles  and  teaching,  applicable  to  the  wants  of  our  own  day,  which  may 
legitimately  be  deducted  from  the  (Jospel  narrative.' — Church  Quarterly 
J\e7>/C7v. 

The  Gospel  of  St.  John,  with  Notes,  Critical  and 

Practical.     Crown  8vo.     "js.  6d. 

'  There  is  a  vigour,  a  freshness,  an  originality  about  his  treatment  of  the 
sacred  words,  which  are  interesting  and  attractive,  and  which  always  make 
his  Commentary  well  worth  consulting.' — Guardian. 

'This  is  admirably  done,  being  exactly  what  is  wanted  for  that  large  and 
increasing  class  of  readers,  who  need  the  results  of  genuine  scholarship  and 
sound  vigorous  thought ;  but  who  are  repelled  by  any  surface  display  of 
erudition,  and  still  more  by  dryness  of  treatment.' — Church  Times. 

The  Gospel  of  St.  Mark.     Crown  8vo.     [Just published. 

Church  Doctrine — Bible  Truth.       32;/^  tJioiisand. 

Fcap.  Svo.     35-.  dd. 

'  Mr.  Sadler  takes  Church  Doctrine,  specifically  so  called,  subject  by 
subject,  and  elaborately  shows  its  specially  marked  Scripturalness.  The 
objective  nature  of  the  faith,  the  Athanasian  Creed,  the  B.iptismal  Services, 
the  Holy  Eucharist,  Absolution  and  the  Priesthood,  Church  Government 
and  Confirmation,  are  some  of  the  more  prominent  subjects  treated.  And 
Mr.  Sadler  handles  each  with  a  marked  degree  of  sound  sense,  and  with  a 
thorough  mastery  of  his  subject.' — Guardian. 

'  We  know  of  no  recent  work  professing  to  cover  the  same  ground  in 
which  the  agreement  of  our  Church  Services  with  the  Scriptures  is  more 
amply  vindicated.'— From  an  adverse  review  in  the  Christian  Obscrz'cr. 

The  Church  Teacher's  Manual  of  Christian  In- 
struction. Being  the  Church  Catechism  expanded  and  explained 
in  Question  and  Answer,  for  the  use  of  Clergymen,  Parents, 
and  Teachers.     28///  thousand.     Fcap.  Svo.     2s.  6d. 

'  Far  the  best  book  of  the  kind  we  have  ever  seen.  It  is  arranged  in  two 
portions;  a  longer  and  more  thorough  Catechism,  and  then,  along  with  each 
>ection  thereof,  a  shorter  and  more  elementary  set  of  questions  on  the  sainc 
subject,  suited  for  less  advanced  pupils.  ...  Its  thoroughness,  its  careful 
explanation  of  words,  its  citation  and  exposition  of  Scripture  passages  and 
their  full  meaning,  in  cases  where  that  full  meaning  is  so  often  explained 
away,  make  it  a  most  valuable  handbook.' — Literary  Churchman. 


List  of  TJieological  Works. 


SADLER  (M.  F.)  Emmanuel;  or,  The  Incarnation 
of  ihe  Son  of  God,  the  Foundation  of  Immutable  Truth.  Revised 
ami  Cheaper  edi/io):.     Fcap.  Svo.      5jr. 

The  One  Offering.      A  Treatise  on  the  Sacrificial 

Nature  of  the  Eucharist.     Fcap.     "ji/i  thousand.     2s.  6d. 

'  There  cannot  be  a  more  grave  and  religious  objection  to  the  doctrine  of 
an  Eucharistic  Sacrifice  than  the  belief  that  it  in  some  way  militates  against 
the  completeness  of  the  sublime  satisfaction  once  for  all  made  upon  Mount 
Calvary'.  .  .  .  Mr.  Sadler  points  out  with  force  and  discrimination  how 
mistaken  an  accusation  it  is  when  it  is  brought  against  the  teaching  of  the 
Fathers  and  of  Anglican  divines,  or  even  against  the  more  moderate  school 
of  Roman  Catholics.  Its  quotations  are  most  apt  and  pertinent. '^CZ/wnVi: 
Quarterly. 

The  Second  Adam  and  the   New  Birth;    or,  the 

Doctrine  of  Baptism  as  contained  in  Holy  Scripture,  ^th  edition. 
Fcap.  Svo.     4J-.  6d. 

'  The  most  striking  peculiarity  of  this  useful  little  work  is  that  its  author 
argues  almost  e.xclusively  from  the  Bible.  We  commend  it  most  earnestly 
to  clergy  and  laity,  as  containing  in  a  small  compass,  and  at  a  trifling  cost. 
a  body  of  sound  and  Scriptural  doctrine  respecting  the  New  Birth,  which 
cannot  be  too  widely  circulated.' — Guardian. 

The  Sacrament  of  Responsibility;    or,  Testimony 

of  the  Scripture  to  the  Teaching  of  the  C'hurch  on  Holy  Baptism, 
with  especial  reference  to  the  Cases  of  Infants  ;  and  Answers  to 
Objections.     2'jth  thotisand.     6d. 

The  Sacrament  of  Responsibility.     With  the  addi 

tion  of  an  Introduction,  in  which  the  religious  speculations 
of  the  last  twenty  years  are  considered  in  their  bearings  on 
the  Church  doctrine  of  Holy  Baptism  ;  and  an  Appendix,  giving 
the  testimony  of  writers  of  all  ages  and  schools  of  thought  in 
the  Church.  On  fine  paper,  and  neatly  bound  in  cloth.  4//: 
edition.     2s.  6d. 

Sermons.     Plain  Speaking  on  Deep  Truths.     6//^ 

edition,    ds.     Abundant  Life,  and  other  Sermons.   6s. 

Scripture  Truths.     A  Series  of  Ten  Tracts  on  Holy 

Baptism,  The  Holy  Communion,  Ordination,  &c.  ^d.  per  set. 
Sold  separately. 

The  Communicant's   Manual;    being   a    Book   of 

.      Self-examination,    Prayer,    Praise,    and   Thanksgiving.     Royal 

32mo.  I'^th  thousand.  Roan,  2s.  ;  cloth,  \s.  6d.  In  best 
morocco,  Ts. 

*^(.*  A  Cheap  Edition  in  limp  cloth.     %d. 


A  Larger  Edition  on  fine  paper,  red  rubrics.     Fcap. 


8vo.  2s.  6d.  ;  roan,  5^.  6d. ;  morocco,  ys. 


List  of  Theological  Woj-ks. 


SCRIVENER  (Dr.)     Novum Testamentum  Gr^cum, 

Textus  Stephanici,  1550.  Accedunt  varire  lectiones  editionum 
Bezce,  Elzeviri,  Lachmanni,  Tischendorfii,  et  Tregellesii. 
Curante  F.  H.  Scrivener,  M.A.,  LL.D.     i6mo.     4J.  6r/. 

Rci'iscd  Edition,  with  "^^QO  Alterations  and  Additions,  giving 
for  the  first  time  all  the  Readings  of  Tregelles  and  of  Tischendor/'s 
eighth  edition. 

An  Edition  with  wide  Margin  for  Notes.     4to.  half  bound, 

12S. 

Codex  Bezas  Cantabrigiensis.     Edited,  with  Prole- 
gomena, Notesand  Facsimiles,  by  F.  H.  Scrivener,M.A,,LL.D., 

Prebendary  of  Exeter.     4to.     26s. 

A  Full  Collation  of  the  Codex  Sinai ticus  with  the 

Received  Text  of  the  New  Testament  ;  to  which  is  prefixed  a 
Critical  Introduction.     2nd  edition,  revised.     Fcap.  8vo.     ^s. 

A  Plain  Introduction  to  the  Criticism  of  the  New 


Testament.  With  Forty  Facsimiles  from  Ancient  M:.  .uscripts. 
Containing  also  an  Account  of  the  Egyptian  Versions  by  Canon 
Lightfoot,  D.D.  For  the  Use  of  Biblical  Students.  Third 
edition,  thoroughly  revised.     Demy  8vo.      i8,f. 

Six  Lectures  on  the  Text  of  the  New  Testament 

and  the  ancient  Manuscripts  which  contain  it.  Chiefly  addressed 
to  those  who  do  not  rtc  1  Greek.  \Yith  Facsimiles  from  MSS. 
&c.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

SOCRATES'     and    SOZOMEN'S     Ecclesiastical 

Histories.  5  j-.  each.  See  Bohns  Libraries.  {Catalogues  free  on 
application.) 

THOMAS  A  KEMPIS.  On  the  Imitation  of  Christ. 
A  New  Translation.  By  the  Rt,  Rev.  II.  (ioodwin,  D.D.  3;?/ 
edition.  With  fine  Steel  Engraving  after  Guido,  3^,  6d.  ;  without 
the  Engraving,  2s.  6d.     Cheap  edition,  is.  cloth  ;  6d.  sewed. 

WIESELER.    Chronological  Synopsis  of  the  Gospels. 

5.5.     Sec  Bohns  Libraries.     {Catalogues free.) 

YOUNG  (Rev.  P.)  Daily  Readings  for  a  Year  on 
the  Life  of  Our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  By  the  Rev. 
Peter  Young,  M.A.     dth  editign.     2  vols.  Svo.      \l.  is. 

Lessons  on  Confirmation.     Revised  editioji.     Fcap. 

Svo.       2S.  6d. 


London  :  Printed  by  S trangkwavs  and  Sons,  Tower  Street,  St.  Martin's  Lane. 


Date  Due                  '^j 

,^ 

' 1 

^"'CTlJi^ 

t 

m  1   ■    ■'■" 

• 

^^Smbm^ 

JtB^ASmkifii"^ 

tfttHT                    ' 

imQM| 

1 

1^ 

■r 

^ 

1 

