
IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 




1.0 



I.I 



1.25 



Ilia 
2.2 



J|||||M 12^ 

u 114 

^ 1^ lllilM 



4 

14 11.6 



vQ 



<^ 



/] 



^;^ 



'c^l 



c': 



c":^' 'j.:^ !>' .^ 







^ 



.V 



<^ 



'W 



V 






Photographic 

Sciences 

Corporation 



23 WEST MAIN STREET 

WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 

(716) 872-4503 





« 



^ .A 



iV 




,v 



9) 



r\ 



V 







% 







^ 



^ 






"^ 



:\ 



iV 



!^. 



CIHM/ECMH 

Microfiche 

Series. 



CIHM/ICMH 
Collection de 
microfiches. 




Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions / Institut Canadian de microreproductions historiques 





Tachnical and Bibliographic Notas/Notes tachniquas at bibliographiquas 



The Instituta has attamptad to obtain tha bast 
original copy availabia for filming. Faaturas of this 
copy which may ba bibliographically uniqua, 
which may altar any of tha imagas in tha 
reproduction, or which may significantly change 
the usual method of filming, are checked below. 



D 



n 



D 



n 



D 



Coloured covers/ 
Couverture de couleur 



r~7] Covers damaged/ 



Couverture endommagde 



Covers restored and/or laminated/ 
Couverture restaurie et/ou pelliculde 



n Cover title missing/ 
Let! 



tre de couverture manque 



□ Coloured maps/ 
Cartes giographiques en couleur 

□ Coloured ink (i.e. other than blue or black)/ 
Encre de couleur (i.e autre que bleue ou noire) 

□ Coloured plates and/or illustrations/ 
Planches et/ou illustrations en couleur 

□ Bourn 
Reli* 



Bound with other material/ 
avec d'autres documents 



Tight binding may causo shadows or distortion 
along interior margin/ 

La re liure serree peut causer de I'ombre ou de la 
distorsion le long de la marge intdrieura 

Blank leaves added during restoration may 
appear within the text. Whenever possible, these 
have been omitted from filming/ 
II ae peut que certaines pages blanches ajouties 
lors d'une restauration apparaissent dans le texte. 
mais, lorsque cela dtait possible, ces pages n'ont 
pas iti film^es. 

Additional comments:/ 
Commentaires suppl^mentaires; 



L'Institut a microfilm^ le msill^ur exemplaire 
qu'il lui a eti possible de se procurer. Les details 
de cet exemplaire qui sont peutdtre uniques du 
point de vue bibliographique, qui peuvent modifier 
une imag« reproduite. ou qui peuvent exiger una 
modification dans ia m^thode normale de filmage 
sont indiquis ci-dassous. 



I~n Coloured pages/ 



Pages de couieur 

Pages damaged/ 
Pages endommagies 



□ Pages restored and/or laminated/ 
Pages restaurdes et/ou pellicul^es 



^ 



Pages discoloured, stained or foxed/ 
Pages ddcolor^es, tachetdes ou piquees 



~~y\ Pages detached/ 
)^ Pages d^tachees 



r~J\ Showthrough/ 



n 



Transparence 

Cuality of prir 

Quality inigale de I'impression 

Includes supplementary materis 
Comprend du matdriel supplementaire 

Only edition available/ 
Seule Edition disponible 



I I Cuality of print varies/ 

|~~| Includes supplementary material/ 

r~n Only edition available/ 



Pagns wholly or partially obscured by errata 
slips, tissues, etc., have been refilmed to 
ensure the best possible image/ 
Les pages totalerhent ou partieilement 
obscurcies par un feuillet d'errata, une pelure, 
etc.. cnt iti film^es A nouveau de facon a 
obtenir la meilhure image possible. 



This item is filmed at the reduction ra'io checked below/ 

Ce document est filmi au taux de reduction indiqui ci-dessous. 

10X 14X 18X 22X 



12X 



/ 

16X 



20X 



26X 



30X 



24X 



28X 



n 

32X 



Th« copy fiimad hmrm har bean raproducad thanka 
to tha ganaroaity of: 

Department of Rare Books 

and Special Collections, 

McGill University, Montreal. 



L'axamplaira filmA fut raproduit grica k la 
ginirosit* da: 

Department of Rare Books 

and Special Collections, 

McGill University, Montreal. 



Tha imagaa appaaring haru ara tha beat quality 
poaaibia conaidering tha condition and lagibility 
of tha original copy and in kaaping with tha 
filming contract spacificationa. 



Laa imagaa suivantaa ont tti raproduitaa avac la 
plua grand soin, compta tanu da la condition at 
da la nattat* da l'axamplaira film*, at an 
conformity avac laa conditiona du contrat da 
filmaga. 



Original copiaa in printad papar covara ara fiimad 
beginning with tha front covar and ending on 
the laat page with a printad or illuatratad imprea* 
sion, or the back cover when appropriate. All 
other original copiaa ara filmed beginning on the 
first page with a printed or illuatratad Imprea- 
sion and ending on the laat page with a printed 
or illuatratad imprasaion. 



The laat recorded frame on each microfiche 
shall contain tha symbol —^(meaning "CON- 
TINUED"), or the symbol V (meaning "END"), 
whichever appliaa. 



Laa axempleirec originaux dont la couverture an 
papier est imprimte sont filmte an commenipant 
par le premier plat at an tarminant soit par la 
demiire page qui comporte une ampreinte 
d'impreaaion ou dllluatration. soit par le second 
plat. s«lon le caa. Tous laa autraa sxampiaires 
originaux sont filmte an commani^ant par la 
premiere page qui comporte une ampreinte 
dimpreasion ou d'illustration et an tarminant par 
la darniire page qui comporte une telle 
empreinte. 

Un dee symbolea suivants apparaftrn sur la 
damlAre image de cheque microfiche, selon le 
caa: le symbols — *- signifie "A SUIVRE ', le 
symbole V signifie "FIN". 



Mapa. plataa, charts, etc.. may be filmed at 
different reduction ratios. Those too iarge to be 
entirely included in one axpoaure ara filmed 
beginning in the upper left hand comer, left to 
right and top to bottom, aa many framea aa 
required. T^s following diagrama illuatrate the 
method: 



Lee cartea. planch**, tableaux, ate. , pauvent dtre 
fiimte it dea taux de rMuction diffirents. 
Lorsque le document est trop grand pour itre 
reproduit en un seul cliche, il est film* i partir 
de Tangle sup^rieur gauche, de gauche i droite. 
at de haut en bee. en prenant le nombre 
d'Imagea nteaaaaira. Lea diagrammes suivants 
iMuatrent la m^thode. 



1 


2 


3 




1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 



I 



c 




d^V? 



■/ 



S' 



\^' 



A LETTER 



UKLATIN<1! TO 



THE DIVISION At MONTREy\L. 



fi 

i 



^i^ li C A 



A LETTER 



RELATING TO 



THE DIVISION AT MONTREAL. 



Beloved Brethren, — 

It is judged by some that a fuller state- 
ment of the facts as to the trouble that has arisen 
among us would be useful to many. I had already in 
my letter in the circular of December 19th given what 
I supposed sufficient, confining myself intentionally 
to what was contained in papers written and circu- 
lated largely among us, so that thus the means of 
judging of what I said might be within reach of all. 
It is true that other things have since transpired, 
and the brethren at the Natural History Hall have 
published their own '' Narrative," which conclusively 
establishes, however, the ground and manner of their 
action, so that it should be plain to every one how 
far removed from Scripture (or from all that has 
been received among us, though that be of little ac- 
count comparatively,) their principles are. Accord- 
ingly it is no wonder to find that wherever the whole 
matter has come up for simple, godly inquiry, it has 
been more or less unanimously decided against them, 
while at Ottawa, Halifax, Toronto, and Philadelphia 
majorities have forced a division by the refusal of 
inquiry and the most open disregard of the con- 




sciences of the saints. Still, if another review of the 
facts of the case may be helpful to any, I am con- 
tent, nay, could not rightly refuse it. May God only 
use it for real help. 

The *• Narrative " makes plain that the attack was 
planned and begun, before ever my last tract was 
printed or written, when all the ground of it was the 
paper on ''Life and the %\i\x\\.^' printed for private 
circulation only\ and not published at all. I'he letter 
of C. W., (copied and circulated zealously, as every 
word of unfavorable criticism since has been,) placed 
at the beginning of their statement, stands there as 
the justification of all that has since taken place. It 
deserves, therefore, the fullest attention, and for this 
purpose I reproduce a quotation here : — 

"Now as to the views themselves, while he held them 
privately, or only let them out occasionally to individuals, 
they might be borne witli, and every effort made to deliver 
him personally from them ; but when, in spite of repeated 
warnings and remonstrances, he promulgates them in 
print, and sends them far and wide, nnd challenges their 
acceptance by God's saints, as views to be received as His 
truth for His Church, it is another question entirely — it 
becomes a heresy, and he a heretic. He gathers a party 
round himself by these views, and makes division or 
heresy in the Church of God." 

These, then, are the principles openly accepted 
by A. P. C. and those with him, and which explain 
their course. 

If held privately, the views might be borne with, 
there was nothing in them fundamentally false. In 
point of fact, they had been " borne with " (if that is 
the right term,) for years past. C. W. "bore with" 
them at Croydon in 1881, (after they had come out 



i 



<^ 



I 



in the meeting there, as the "Narrative" siiows,) he 
urged the holder of them into co-editorship with 
himself in a magazine to teach the saints. But 
more : in Helps by the Way the same views substan- 
tially had been brought out by another under my 
own editorship, and actually sent far and wide and 
acceptance challenged of them as truth for the 
Church. Of this A. P. C. was well aware, as he 
answered the paper in the same periodical ; J. N. 1). 
was well aware of it, as it was the cause of his own 
tract on Sealing being brought out ; and C. W. was 
well aware of it when he undertook, with me, the 
editorship of ^^ Words of Faith'' And still more : 
/ had already stated my expeetation of publishing my 
own vieia. But at this time no one dreamed that 
this was heresy. J. N. D. in his last letter to me, 
without one word of rebuke or remonstrance for my 
views, coupled the writer of the former paper and 
myself together in the wish, " The Lord be with you 
both in your Wv;rk." 

My reasons for printing my first tract I need not 
enter into. We deceive ourselves often, and might 
deceive others as to this ; but it could not be ex- 
pected that I should even imagine it was heresy to 
print it. Of repeated warnings and remonstrances 
not to do so, I am wholly ignorant. A paper upon 
"The difference between *in Christ' and 'in the 
Son ' " I had forwarded, while an editor of it, to C. 
W., for insertion in ^^ Words of Faith,'' and he told 
me he could not put it in without a disclaimer on 
his part of its being his view. He never spoke of 



T 



heresy, and On rny part I did not press its insertion, 
but asked him to send it to J. A. T., who thereupon 
wrote me a kind but very strong letter, in which he 
did urge me not to put forth these views at all. He 
was the only one who did so, and after weighing 
seriously, as I have done all that has been published 
or written on the subject, I felt I could not accede 
to his request. I had no idea it was more than 
brotherly counsel, or that I should be heretical in 
not listening to it. 

My tract was intended to lay my views before 
those who could intelligently judge of them, hoping 
that by conference they might be cleared in points 
that were still indistinct to me, and my own ground 
might be fully known. For this purpose my thought 
had been to get some copies by the electric pen, but 
1 found printing was cheaper, and printed it. Far 
and wide I did not send it, nor press it upon any. 
Some thirty copies I sent to all the laborers in Eng- 
land whose addresses I had, and to a few who were 
not exactly that. In America a still smaller number 
were similarly distributed. They were sent to the 
most unlikely people in the whole world to gather a 
party around myself out of ; and many, I knew, were 
quite opposed to them. A quieter course would 
better have suited heresy. I do not think it possible 
for any one to devise a better method to secure the 
exposure of the error speedily and effectually, if 
error it were. 

Of those to whom I more particularly addressed 
myself, one brother replied alone for a long time. 



*i 



T 



and he most kindly and at some lenjj^th. Afterward, 
our brother W. J. I., wrote, professedly not taking 
up more than a point or two ; and his letter was 
copied and circulated against me. For without 
reasoning or remonstrance with me, before this the 
denunciation had begun. C. W. wrote his letter to 
P. J. L. Another wrote (not to myself), applying 
Romans xvi. to me. A paper which was asked for, 
for a magazine, was shut out, not because of error in 
it, but simply because it was signed with the objec- 
tionable initials. A. P. C. had come to America as 
(according to his own words to me at Plainfield) 
"the representative of English brethren." In short, 
the course was already initiated which has culmin- 
ated in the action of the Natural History Hall. 

My first tract was meagre, written only for a cer- 
tain class, and in some points unsatisfactory, where 
the Lord had (I must for myself still affirm) given 
me since, in various ways, more light. 1 felt I owed 
it to the truth which I believed I had, to write 
another, quoting this time from letters or printed 
writings whatever would contribute to the elucida- 
tion of what was in question. Whether I should 
print all this I had not yet determined,— not for 
some time after. It was completed fully a short 
time before the Plainfield meeting began. 

Meanwhile A. P. C. had come to see xne on his 
way south, but we could not agree ; and every where 
he was already bringing up the matter. At Nap- 
anee, where there was a meeting before the Plainfield 
one, it was pressed hard. I was not at it, and had 



8 



remained for the most part ignorant of what was 
jroinjj^ on, lecturinpf and preaching as usual, not 
knowing or asking whether brethren receiv'ed my 
views or not. At some pkices, when lecturing on 
Romans, they more or less came in necessarily, and 
to a few, with whom 1 was intimate, I showed what 
1 had written. Nowhere and upon none did I press 
them ; so far as 1 remember, wrote to none upon 
the subject even. 

The Plainfield meeting came, and for three days, 
A. P. C. not being there, we had, as nany c^n testify, 
quiet and harmony, the points of difference not be- 
ing introduced. On the Lord's day morning A.P.C. 
arrived, and at the close of the meeting warned 
brethren of Judaism coming in, and that those who 
served the tabernacle could not eat of the Christian 
altar. 

From that time till nearly the close of the meeting 
we heard of it with little intermission. In ihe meet- 
ings no one replied, but outside of these it could 
not be kept entirely out. A. P. C. stated to me in a 
private interview, as before noticed, that he was the 
representative of the English brethren, and that 
J. N. D. had been raised up of God to give us the 
truth, and (save fundamental doctrines) whatever he 
put forth, he (A. P. C.) received as truth. Again he 
urged me to withdraw my tract, and again I stated 
that, until they refuted it, I could not. 

After the more public meeting was over, it was 
agreed that we should meet privately to discuss the 
doctrines in ciuestion, and quite a number stayed. 



( 



f 



\r 



I read part of my last tract in manuscript, and he 
replied. fie contended ajrainst my paper being 
printed, because it took up J. N. I), (whose tract on 
Sealing he was giving to every one throughout the 
meeting), but even yet no charge of heresy was 
made. 

Soon after the meeting, J. A. T.'s paper appeared 
in '* Words of Faith,'' and ^^ecil's answer to my first 
tract came out in Montreal. B' th were scatteied 
widely, and awoke attention every where. Nothing- 
had been published by me as yet t all, and this was 
an additional reason for publication. Otherwise, I 
no more spread the latter tract than the former ; it 
was never advertised, or put into the list of pub- 
lished books ; and about the same number was 
distributed in the same manner as before. After 
this I did no more, but returned to more perfect 
quiet than ever, lecturing on the Psalms at New 
York, on Matthew, or preaching the gospel, at 
Plainfield. 

While I was thus employed, a letter from Canada 
received by another, not myself, informed me that 
A. P. C. had betn pressing these questions unceas- 
ingly at Montreal, and that brethren were much 
troubled about it. I thereupon wrote to the brethren 
through G. Smith, to urge upon them quietness and 
forbearance with one another. I dwelt upon the 
fact that the differences were mainly of long stand- 
ing, and had not hitherto interrupted fellowship, 
and that those who opposed my views did not agree 
with either J. N. D. or one another. I received an 



lO 

answer from Smith, sending me back my letter, at 
the wish of the brothers' meeting, for correction, 
and an extract they had printed from Vol. xxxi. of 
the Collected Writings, to show me that J. N. D. 
taught a double quickening as A. P. C. did, and that 
the latter had stilted that there was nearly a breach 
at Croydon between Mr. Darby and myself on ac- 
count of my doctrines. Moreover, G. Smith said that 
to state that Old-Testament saints had life in the 
Son was (he believed) '^ fundamental error," and 
^lust cause division. I aw that I could do little 
in this case by writing letters, and felt I could not 
excuse myself if division took place without my do- 
ing what I could to avert it. I left, therefore, the 
next day for Montreal. 

I arrived Thursday night. Friday was a lecture 
of Cecil's in the hall. Their - Narrative " shows that 
he was lecturing to public audiences on these very 
subjects, and I found that many would no longer 
attend the lectures, partly on this account, partly 
because of the way in which A. P. C, with Mace 
(who had more lately joined him in it), was openly 
working for division. Some of these brethren wished 
to meet me on Friday night, and did so at a private 
house, perhaps fifteen or so altogether. No effort 
was ever made to deter any from going to the public 
meeting, but I felt free to meet those who could not 
go. At the brothers' meeting at Mr. B.'s, on Satur- 
day, Cecil reproached me with this, saying 1 had 
come for peace and was already causing schism by 
having a meeting when an assembly-meeiing was 



'> 



II 

going on. I denied that it was an assembly-meeting, 
but he still conten-ded that when an acknowledged 
teacher was exercising his gift, this was an assembly- 
meeting. Others declared why they could not attend 
his lectures. I spoke of Smith's letter to me, assured 
them I had not come to Montreal to teach doctrines 
of mine, but simply and really to seek to prevent 
division ; and urged Holden's teaching in his 
" Eternal Life " to be clearly the same as what was 
condemned in me. Cecil replied that Holden was 
young in the truth when his book was written, and 
I was not. 

Finally, we asked for meetings to see where the 
heresy was, and they at last consented to meet in the 
hall the next week. Accordingly we met Monday, 
Tuesday, Friday, and the following Tuesday, again 
to consider this. I do not dwell upon the meetings. 
The doctrines have been treated sufficiently else- 
where. But in the course of them, extracts from 
Holden, Patterson, and J. B. S.. to show that prom- 
inent doctrines objected to were held singly by each 
of these, were read and urged against division. 
They said that was not Scripture, which of course 
we knew, and that we had to prove our doctrines to 
be scriptural, which we denied, contending they 
had to prove that they were heretical. Then A. P. C. 
denied that they meant doctrinal heresy, but making 
a party. I asked where the party had sprung up, 
or how 1 had made it. The answer was, by putting 
forth the doctrines. But what need to discuss the 
doctrines, then? and why speak of fundaiiicnta] 



12 



error, as was done? Would a tract on baptism be 
held as heresy because a party would be made by it ? 
Here they vacillated between the party-making and 
the doctrines, evidently bewiMered. 

On Saturday, I went, at the invitation of a brother, 
to Ottawa, where I had also been openly charged 
with heresy. A meeting had been arranged for the 
evening at a private house, where others could meet 
me ; but Mace had heard of it, was in Ottawa as 
soon as I was, and went round warning every one 
against attending my meetings and inviting brethren 
to another meeting elsewhere the same evening. A 
few came, nevertheless. The next day, at the close 
of the morning meeting, a brother asked for a meet- 
ing to inquire as to my heresy. It was refused. 
Mace and others openly protesting against it. 1 
begged them at least to read my book for themselves, 
and Mace added they would be hypocrites if they 
judged it without doing so. Yet at Montreal they 
had actually been forbidden to do so ; and in 
Ottawa, when afterward, on being urged to sign a 
circular in sympathy with the first Montreal one, 
some objected that they had not read my book. 
Mace himself, or his companion, replied, *' Do you 
not believe what we tell you about it?" 

For Tuesday night, I went back to Montreal. On 
Saturday, at the brothers' meeting, we urged once 
more, Would the matter rest here? or did tbey mean 
to press things to division ? To our astonishment, 
they replied, "No one ever spoke of division but 
yourselves"! I asked, " W1iy, when I read Smith's 



i, 



13 



i 



ir 



letter, which spoke of it, did you not tell us so?" 
Thev a^rain affirmed it. A brother asked, "Then, 
do you mean to say you have no such thought?" - 
"Oh," it was replied, " // ffiay come to that!'' 

Next day, their first circular, rejecting my ministry, 
to which they had got names by private, personal 
solicitation, was read in the meeting. It was asked, 
" You do not claim this as an assembly-act ? " " No," 
they answered, "only of the elder brethren." But 
at the door, A. P. C. himself distributed a tract to 
show that unanimity was not necessary to assembly 
action; and this was sent round (whether every 
where, I cannot say) as companion to the circular ! 

On the Wednesday following that, a prayer- 
meeting took place, at w^ich A. P. C. openly charged 
us (though of course not by name) with schism, 
following human leaders, and hypocrisy in praying 
to God without repentance. Many rose and left 
while he was speaking, for which they were after- 
ward rebuked as disorderly, and declared to have 
no part in discipline meetings. This enabled 
A. P. C.'s party more openly to assume to be the 
assembly when they sent me professedly their 
"second admonition " to Ottawa, where, at the time, 
1 was. This I rejected, as the act of a faction only ; 
and they ended by declaring me outside, spite of all 
protests by a large nu..;ber of the assembly, at a 
meeting on the second Wednesday after the prayer- 
meeting referred to. 

During this time, I was away, visiting by invita- 
tion several of the neighboring gatherings, but 



I 



'4 

returne<l the day after to a meeting of those who 
dissente<l from the action. About forty were pres 
cnt All were pressed to speak openly their mind 
and there was united judgment that the Natural 
Hrstory Hall had ceased to be the table of the Lord 
(Jne or two proposed waiting, but after consider- 
ation it was judged by all that it would only be 
lack of faith to allow the table to lapse in Montreal 
The course pursued by the majority left no hope' 
with regard to them, of any result from this, and to 
wait upon the action of other gatherings would be 
mere feebleness where the case was plain, and prin- 
ciples adopted which were entirely subversive of the 
whole ground on which we met. These principles 
have since been put forth openly i„ their recent 
Narrative, and may well be left, as stated by them- 
selves, to the judgment of brethren. 

On Friday, I left Montreal to return to Plainfield 
and on the second Lord's day after my return a 
a printed circular was read from Montreal announc- 
ing the action against me, and asking for the con- 
currence of the Plainfield -assembly. Their answer 
they have ]HibIicly given, and this was the first real 
assembly-action with regard to the matter. Boston 
about that time, also gave a unanimous judgment,' 
followed, a few days after, by Hyde Park 
^ I do not think it needful to add more. The ques- 
tons presented by all this are exceedingly serious. 
1 he adoption of a creed, none the less real because 
an unwritten one ; the tying down of all ministry to 
confn-mity with this, and the quenching of the free 



^ 



'5 

action of the Spirit among us ; the establishment of 
party-action for that of the assembly; the compul- 
sory subjection of the consciences of the younger to 
those of the elder : in a word, clerisy and sectarian- 
ism m full sway ;-this is what the Natural History 
Hall openly identifies itself with. We need not 
surely, fear that the Lord will allow those who are 
walkmg with Him to be insnared in such open evil 
Yet It IS plain in three years we have traveled far. 
Very truly, in Christ, ever, 

F. IV. GRANT. 

Plainfield, February, 1885. 



P. S.~l have received more than one letter 
urgmg upon me to do what I could to satisfy my 
brethren, and to check even now the lamentable 
division which has begun. I answer, would indeed 
that It lay with me to do so. The cancelling or 
withdrawing of my tracts would satisfy none, as 
long as I was free to teach the doctrine of them But 
this, as long as I hold the doctrine, I dare not give up 
1 hdve examined with care, and prayerfully, all that 
has been written against me, and it has only con- 
firmed me the more. I would gladly have gone any 
where to meet brethren, and confer with them as to 
what I hold, and be instructed where I was in error 
None have asked me ; few cared even to reason with 
me. I sent my tracts to all I knew who could best 
expose my views if false, and for a mere private 



i6 

paper which took substantially only the ground that 
had been publicly taken by others before, I was 
pronounced a heretic. 

As to life in the Son for Old-Testament saints, 
in maintaining which my chief error is supposed to 
lie, J am clear that it is J. N. D.'s own teaching. 
Who can read his Coll. Writings, Proph. iii. 554, 
and deny it ? It is they who have mistaken what he 
has elsewhere said, as I have shown in the February 
number of Help and Food. I am satisfied that as 
to quickening together with Christ, he never meant 
to teach that it was a second quickening. A brother 
has recently written to me that it is indeed out of 
death in sins that we are quickened with Him, but 
that this is the condition reached only in Romans 
vii. 24 ! Is this too J. N. D.'s doctrine ? Surely not. 
In the very article on Colossians in Vol. xxxi, which 
has been elsewhere referred to, I find jt. defined as 
'■^not a movement of my heart towcM'd God,'' and that 
surely is the truth. Out of this state it is we are 
quickened together tvith Christ, and, with that, 
forgiven all trespasses. (Col. ii. 13.) ^ 

If to hold and teach this (and almost all I hold on 
these points hangs upon this) be accounted heresy, 
then we must appeal from the judgment of our 
brethren, to Him upon whose mercy and faithful- 
ness to His own we can surely* count, and leave the 

result to Him. 

F. IV. G. 



*** Copies of this paper may be had from Loizeaux IJroUiers, G3 
Fourth Avenue, New York. Price, 3 cts., or l.^d. 



