The  Leonard  Library 

Wydillt  College 

Toronto 


Shelf  No. 


Register  No. 


»< 


CLARK'S 


FOKEIGN 


THEOLOGICAL    LIBRARY. 


NEW   SERIES. 
VOL.  XXXYI. 


Ccmuuntarg  on  ©enesfe. 
VOL.  I. 


EDIKBUEGH: 
T.  &  T.  CLARK,  38  GEOEGE  STREET. 

1888. 


PRINTED  BV  MORRISON    AND   GIBB, 
FOR 

T.    &    T.    CLARK,    EDINBURGH. 

LONDON,     ...  .  HAMILTON,   ADAMS,   AND  CO. 

DUBLIN, GEORGE  HERBERT. 

NEW  YORK,  ....       SCRIBNER  AND  WKLFORD 


NEW  COMMENTARY 


GENESIS. 


FRANZ    DELITZSCH,    D.D., 

LEIPZIG. 


(Eranslatctf  fig 
SOPHIA    TAYLOR 


VOL.    I. 


EDINBURGH: 

T.    &    T.    CLARK,    38    GEOEGE    STEEET. 

1888. 

[This  Translation  is  Copyright,  by  arrangement  with  the  Author.] 


PREFACE. 


TjlIFTEEN  years  have  elapsed  since  the  fourth  and  last 
appearance  of  this  Commentary.  Among  my  various 
scientific  performances  I  have  always  had  but  a  very  slight 
opinion  of  this.  I  was  therefore  the  more  rejoiced  at  being 
able  to  make  another  attempt  at  a  possibly  improved  execu 
tion  of  this  task.  The  results  of  incessant  labour,  subsequent 
to  1872,  are  deposited  in  this  fifth  edition.  The  exposition 
is  now  proportionably  carried  out  in  conjunction  with  the 
translation  of  the  text,  the  analysis  more  thoroughly  effected 
according  to  the  previous  works  of  AVellhausen,  Kuenen,  and 
especially  Dillmann,  while  various  alterations  of  arrangement 
have  made  the  volume,  thus  shortened  by  many  sheets,  a  more 
serviceable  compendium  and  book  of  reference.  Nevertheless, 
the  praise  of  full  and  complete  scholarship  will  still  be  with 
held  from  it.  For  the  spirit  of  this  Commentary  remains 
unaltered  since  1852.  I  am  not  a  believer  in  the  "  Eeligion 
of  the  times  of  Darwin."  I  am  a  believer  in  two  orders  of 
things  and  not  merely  in  one,  which  the  miraculous  would 
drill  holes  in.  I  believe  in  the  Easter  announcement,  and  I 
accept  its  deductions. 

I  have  explained  my  standpoint  in  an  "  Episodic  lecture  on 
Genesis,"  printed  in  the  23rd  annual  series  (188G)  of  the 
Journal  Saat  avf  Hoffnuny,  of  which  I  am  the  editor.  I 
have  done  so  still  more  thoroughly  in  twenty-four  papers  on 
Gen.  i.  —  Ex.  xx.,  which  have  appeared  under  the  title  of 
Suggestive  Jottings,  in  the  Philadelphia  Sunday -School  Times 
(Dec.  18,  1886,  to  June  4,  1887),  while  to  my  eighteen 
papers  on  the  criticism  of  the  Pentateuch  in  Luthardt's 


VI  PREFACE. 

Zeitschrift  (twelve  in  the  annual  series  for  1880  and  six  in 
that  for  1882),  has  been  added  a  nineteenth,  entitled,  "  Tanz 
und  Pentateuchkritik "  (in  the  series  for  1886).  I  state  this 
for  the  sake  of  those  who  might  care  to  read  more  of  me  than 
the  introduction  to  this  Commentary  furnishes. 

What  author  is  spared  the  sad  experience  that  his  joy 
at  the  completion  of  a  work  is  quickly  disturbed  by  that 
perception  of  defects  which  follows  in  its  track !  It  can 
hardly  be  permitted  me  to  send  forth  a  fresh  revision  of  this 
Commentary.  May  the  Lord  animate  younger  theologians  to 
retain  what  is  good  in  it  and  to  produce  what  is  better ! 

FRANZ  DELITZSCH. 

LEIPZIG,  July  1887. 


TRANSLATOR'S  NOTE. 

To  this  Preface  of  the  author  (revised  for  the  English  edition 
by  himself)  it  must  be  added,  that  while  preparing  the  trans 
lation,  the  translator  has  been  favoured  by  Prof.  Delitzscli 
with  such  numerous  improvements  and  additions,  that  it 
may  be  regarded  as  made  from  a  revised  version  of  the  New 
Commentary  on  Genesis. 

The  abbreviations  DMZ.  and  KAT.,  so  frequently  used 
in  the  work,  stand  respectively  for  Deutsche  Morgcnliindisclien 
Zcitung  and  (Schrader's)  Kcilinscliriften  und  das  alte  Testament. 


INTRODUCTION. 


/^KITICISM  at  present  fixes  the  date  of  the  main  bulk  of  the 
Pentateuch,  the  so-called  Priest  Codex,  together  with  the 
Law  of  Holiness,  which  has  so  striking  a  relation  to  Ezekiel,  at 
the  time  of  the  captivity  and  the  restoration  under  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah.  The  Book  of  Deuteronomy  however  presupposes 
the  primary  legislation  contained  in  Ex.  xix.-xxiv.  and  the 
work  of  the  Jehovistic  historian.  Hence  we  cannot  avoid 
relegating  the  origin  of  certain  component  parts  of  the  Penta 
teuch  to  the  middle  ages  of  the  kings  ;  and,  if  we  continue 
our  critical  analysis,  we  find  ourselves  constrained  to  go  back 
still  farther,  perhaps  even  to  the  times  of  the  Judges,  and 
thus  to  tread  the  soil  of  a  hoar  antiquity  without  incurring 
the  verdict  of  lack  of  scientific  knowledge.  Even  those  who 
insist  upon  transferring  the  conception  of  the  account  of  the 
creation  in  Gen.  i.  1-ii.  4,  and  of  the  primaBval  histories, 
which  are  of  a  form  homogeneous  with  it,  to  the  post-exilian 
period,  do  not,  for  the  most  part,  deny  that  they  are  based 
upon  subjects  and  materials  handed  down  from  long  past  ages. 
For  the  most  part,  we  repeat ;  for  there  are  even  some  who 
think  that  these  primeval  histories,  e.g.  the  account  of  the 
Deluge,  were  not  brought  with  them  by  the  Terahites  at 
their  departure  from  Chaldea,  but  first  obtained  by  the  exiles 
in  Babylon  from  Babylonian  sources,  and  remodelled  in 
Israelite  fashion.  Under  these  circumstances,  and  especially 
on  the  threshold  of  Genesis,  —  that  book  of  origins  and 
primaeval  history, — it  will  be  a  suitable  preparation  for  our 
critical  problems  to  attain  to  historical  certainty  as  to  how  far 
the  art  of  writing  reaches  back  among  the  people  to  whom  the 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

authorship  of  Genesis  belongs,  and  as  to  the  date  at  which  the 
beginnings  of  literature  may  be  found  or  expected  among  them. 
It  is  a  self-understood  fact  that  writing  originally  consisted 
of  ideographic  signs  (figures  of  things),  and  that  these  were 
partly  figurative  signs  (representations  of  what  was  meant)  and 
partly  symbolical  signs  (emblems  of  what  was  meant).  Picture 
writing  is  the  beginning  of  all  writing,  not  only  in  Egypt,  but 
also  in  ancient  Anahuac.  The  Babylonio-Assyrian  cuneiform 
writing  likewise  bears  evident  traces  of  having  been  originally 
a  picture  writing.  Nowhere  however  is  the  progress  by 
which  the  invention  of  writing  was  developed  so  perceptible 
as  in  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphics.  The  cuneiform  never 
advanced  beyond  the  stage  of  syllables.  Even  in  the  Persian 
cuneiform  of  the  first  kind,  the  transition  from  syllable  to 
letter  writing  was  not  as  yet  so  complete  that  the  former  did 
not  still  encroach  upon  the  latter.  Egyptian  writing,  on  the 
contrary,  exhibits  a  matured  alphabet  of  twenty-six  letters, 
and  we  see  plainly  how  an  advance  was  made  in  the  depart 
ment  of  phonetic  signs  (signs  of  sound)  from  those  denoting 
syllables  to  those  denoting  letters.  The  invention  of  writing 
came  to  perfection  by  the  discovery  of  the  acro-phcenician 
principle,  and  J.  Grimm  and  W.  von  Humboldt  will  be  found 
to  be  right  in  regarding  the  invention  of  the  alphabet  as  the 
world  -  famed  act  of  the  Egyptians.  But  when  Egyptian 
writing  had  distinguished  separate  letters,  one  advance  had 
still  to  be  made.  For  even  after  letters  became  fixed  signs 
of  sounds,  the  use  of  pictures  of  things,  partly  per  se, 
partly  as  determinatives,  was  continued  as  a  means  for  the 
expression  of  thought.  It  was  the  Semites  perhaps,  as  Stade 
(Ch-amm.  §  18)  conjectures  the  Hyksos,  who  on  the  one  hand 
derived  their  knowledge  of  writing  from  the  Egyptians,  and 
on  the  other  settled  the  supremacy  of  the  acro-phoenician 
principle  by  remodelling  and  simplifying  the  alphabet  con 
tained  in  the  Egyptian  system  of  writing.  Although  a 
secondary  relation  of  the  Semitic  letter  signs  of  sound  to 
the  Egyptian  (hieroglyphic  or  hieratic)  could  not  be  shown 


OKIGIN  OF  ISRAELITE  WEITING.  3 

(as  by  Bickell,  de  Bouge,  Lenormant,  and  Halevy),  this  would 
prove  nothing  against  the  secondary  relation  in  general,  the 
acro-phoenician  principle  admitting  of  infinite  variation.  The 
alphabetic  names — says  Jacob  Grimm  in  his  history  of  the 
German  language — show  the  natural  surroundings  of  a  people. 
Accordingly,  the  pictures  of  things  used  in  the  Semitic 
alphabet  as  signs  of  sounds  correspond  with  the  simple  life 
of  a  nomadic  people.  It  was  not  the  variegated  and  mingled 
Egpytian  writing,  but  this  simple  stereotyped  Semitic  alpha 
bet,  to  which,  as  Hitzig  says  in  his  work  on  the  invention  of 
the  alphabet  (1840),  all  culture  adheres,  and  with  which  the 
human  mind  traffics. 

It  is  no  slight  commendation  of  the  fidelity  of  Scripture 
history  that  in  the  transaction  between  Abraham  and  the 
Hittites  respecting  the  purchase  of  the  cave  of  Machpelah, 
which  is  related  with  the  accuracy  of  a  protocol  (Gen.  xxiii.), 
not  a  word  is  said  of  the  use  of  writing.  Nor  does  the  verb 
3fD  occur  in  Genesis,  either  in  chap,  xxiii.  or  elsewhere ; 
while  we  find  in  Exodus,  and  onwards  down  to  Deuteronomy, 
both  an  acquaintance  with,  and  the  most  various  use  of 
writing,  3TO  (together  with  -IBB>,  in  the  official  designation 
"it3$,  which  occurs  in  Ex.  Num.  Deut.)  is,  in  distinction  from 
monumental  writing  (by  chiselling),  mn,  Ex.  xxxii.  16,  or 
graving  on  fine  plaster  (Deut.  xxvii.  1-8),  and  ornamental 
writing  (by  carving  nna),  which  recalls  Egyptian  sculpture 
and  lithoglyphy,  the  usual  word  for  "  to  write  ; "  to  put  any 
thing  in  writing.  To  record  officially  is  ">SD2  3TD^  Ex.  xvii.  14  ; 
Num.  v.  23.  Of  writing  on  papyrus,  not  a  trace  is  found.  The 
Hebrew  term  for  book,  ">sp  (from  nao,  to  strip  off,  to  smooth,  syn. 
Die),  refers  to  the  skin  of  an  animal  with  the  hair  stripped  off 
and  smoothed  (compare  ^Sb,  a  scribe,  a  writer,  with  "ISO,  the  post- 
biblical  term  for  a  barber),  or  to  wumbranoe  (2  Tim.  iv.  13).1 

Hence  the  patriarchal  ancestral  families  of  Israel  do  not  as 
yet  manifest  a  knowledge  of  writing,  which  first  appears  among 

1  In  Assyrian  neither  2fD  nor  ISO  is  found,  the  usual  word  for  "to  write" 
being  Satd-nt  (1BB>). 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

the  people  on  their  departure  from  Egypt.  The  Pentateuchal 
history  itself  impresses  upon  us  the  fact  that  Israel  learned 
the  art  of  writing  in  Egypt,  where  the  possession  of  this  art 
reaches  far  back  in  pre-Mosaic  times.  For  the  exodus  took 
place  under  Menephthes,  the  fourth  Pharaoh  of  the  19th 
dynasty,  and  Herodotus  already  saw  the  pyramid  belonging 
to  the  1st  Manethonian  dynasty  covered  with  hieroglyphics. 

Thus  the  people  of  Israel  possessed  in  the  Mosaic  period  at 
latest  the  prerequisites  for  committing  their  memorable  events 
to  writing.  In  ancient  times,  however,  and  especially  in  the 
East,  the  precursors  of  all  literature  were  those  discourses 
which  were  orally  disseminated  before  they  became  written 
documents.  The  sword-lay  of  Lamech,  Gen.  iv.  23  sq.,  and 
other  antediluvian  sayings  cannot  be  regarded  as  such  pre 
cursors  of  Hebrew  literature,  for  the  Hebrew  language 
originated  in  post  -  diluvian  times.  But  the  testamentary 
utterances  of  Isaac  concerning  his  twin  sons,  Gen.  xxvii.,  and 
of  Jacob  concerning  his  sons  as  ancestors  of  the  twelve  tribes, 
Gen.  xlix.,  were,  assuming  their  historical  nature,  delivered  in 
the  language  of  Canaan,  which  Abraham  and  his  descendants 
had  there  appropriated.  Their  contents  show  them  to  be  no 
vaticinia  post  eventum,  and  the  memory  of  the  Orientals  per 
forms  marvels  ;  hence  it  may  be  at  least  esteemed  possible  that 
tradition,  i.e.  oral  narration,  propagated  them  in  their  original 
form.  We  have  undoubtedly  such  an  orally  propagated  dis 
course  in  the  lay  in  Num.  xxi.  27-30,  which  Israel  heard  from 
the  mouth  of  Amorite  poets  (DWD)  when  they  conquered  the 
domain  of  the  Amorite  King  Sihon,  to  whose  kingdom  the 
formerly  Moabite  land  northward  from  Arnon  to  Heshbon  then 
belonged.  This  lay  is  quoted  as  a  proof  that  Heshbon,  which  was 
then  Amorite,  had  formerly  been  Moabite.  Its  peculiar  and 
antique  stamp  speaks  for  the  originality  of  the  document. 
It  is  as  follows: — • 

27  Come  ye  to  Heslibon, 

Let  the  city  of  Sihon  be  built  and  established  : 

28  For  a  fire  is  gone  out  of  Heshbon, 


ORAL  TRADITION.  5 

A  flame  from  the  city  of  Sihon. 

It  hath  devoured  Ar  of  Moab, 

The  Lords  of  the  high  places  of  Arnon. 

29  Woe  to  tliee,  Moab  ! 

Thou  art  undone,  oh  people  of  Chemosh  : 
He  hath  given  his  sons  as  fugitives, 
And  his  daughters  into  captivity 
(Unto  Sihon,  king  of  the  Amorites). 

30  We  have  shot  at  them  ;  Heshbon  is  perished  even  unto  Dibon, 
And  have  laid  waste,  so  that  fire  was  kindled  unto  Medeba. 

No  other  Canaanite  (Phoenician)  written  record  of  even 
approximate  antiquity  is  extant.  Nevertheless,  "i&5  rvnp,  Josh. 

xv.  15,  and  nao  mp,  Josh.  xv.  49  (comp.  ^,  to  furrow, 
to  line,  to  draw,  to  trace  with  a  sharp  instrument),  the  ancient 
name  of  Debir,  situate  on  the  southern  mountain  range  not 
far  from  Hebron,  gives  reason  to  conjecture  that  the  use  of 
writing  dates  back  to  the  Mosaic,  nay,  pre-Mosaic  (though  not 
to  the  patriarchal),  period  among  the  heathen  population  of 
Canaan.  Hitzig  (Gesch.  i.  31)  goes  too  far  when  he  advances 
to  the  hypothesis  that  the  alphabet  was  invented  in  Debir. 
But  the  notice  (Num.  xiii.  22)  that  Hebron,  the  neighbour 
town  of  Debir,  was  built  seven  years  before  Zoan  in  Egypt, 
certainly  gives  rise  to  the  supposition  that  this  Debir  has  an 
importance  with  respect  to  culture  consisting  in  some  sort  of 
connection  with  Egypt.1 

In  the  circle  of  patriarchal  family  life,  oral  tradition  was 
sufficient  to  hand  down  the  experiences  of  the  fathers  to  their 
descendants, — authorship  everywhere  begins  when  the  family 
increases  to  the  people,  and  when  this  people  has  attained  to 
such  a  climax  in  its  development  as  to  have  behind  it  a  great 
past  and  before  it  a  great  future.  Hence  we  may  expect  the 
beginnings  of  Israelite  literature  in  the  time  of  the  sojourn  in 
Egypt.  But  of  this  time  we  know  little.  The  Thorah  hastens 
past  these  four  (Gen.  xv.  13;  Ex.  xii.  40  ;  comp.  Acts  vii.  6) 
or  two  hundred  years  (Ex.  xii.  40,  LXX. ;  comp.  Gal.  iii.  17) 

1  The  name  of  the  city  of  Sippar,  in  which  Xisuthros  is  said  to  have  hidden 
the  sacred  books  of  the  Chaldees  before  the  Flood,  does  not  mean  vili'e  des  lie  res 
(Menant  and  others),  but  is  the  Semiticized  Sumerian  Zimbir.  See  Friedr. 
Delitzsch,  Paradies,  p.  210. 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

to  the  history  of  the  exodus,  which  took  place  under  Mepenthes, 
the  son  of  Eamses  II.,  after  the  rule  of  the  Hyksos  had  been 
already  for  a  long  time  terminated  by  the  conquest  of  their 
stronghold,  Avaris  Pelusium.  It  is,  however,  evident  from 
Josh.  xxiv.  14,  Ezek.  xx.,  that  Israel  was  secularized  and 
Egyptianized  in  Egypt.  The  silence  of  the  Thorah  can  only 
be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  period  was,  with  respect  to 
the  history  of  salvation,  a  barren  waste.  But  the  more  Israel 
was  then  blended  with  Egypt,  the  more  would  it  be  influenced 
by  Egyptian  culture,' — God  so  ordained  it  that  Egypt  was  to 
Israel  a  secular  preparatory  school  for  its  future  national  life 
and  authorship.  No  people  of  antiquity  was  so  adapted  for 
this  purpose  as  Egypt,  which  to  a  certain  extent  became  to 
mankind  in  a  worldly  sense  what  Israel  was  to  become  to 
it  in  a  spiritual  sense.  The  influence  of  the  legalism  and 
multiformity  of  Egyptian  national  and  private  life  is  of  great 
importance  in  forming  a  judgment  of  the  Mosaic  legislation 
and  its  codex.  Whatever  may  be  the  case  with  respect  to 
Deuteronomy,  such  precepts  as  those  respecting  the  king, 
Deut.  xvii.,  the  prophets,  chap,  xvii.,  and  others,  which  pre 
suppose  a  settled  habitation,  are  by  no  means  surprising 
after  Israel  had  d\velt  for  centuries  in  a  country  with  duly 
constituted  king,  priests,  and  prophets. 

There  too  the  impulse  to  authorship  was  powerfully  ex 
cited.  No  Egyptian — says  Herodotus,  ii.  82 — neglects  to 
record  unusual  and  striking  occurrences.  Besides,  it  was  just 
under  the  Pharaohs  of  the  18th  and  19th  dynasties  that 
national  science  and  art  reached  their  highest  splendour  in 
Egypt.  It  was  then  that  the  poem  by  Pentaur,1  the  court 
poet,  on  the  victory  of  Eamses  II.  over  Cheta,  which  has 
been  compared  with  a  lay  of  the  Iliad  t  appeared ;  then  that 
the  passion  for  writing  led  to  competition  in  every  variety  of 
composition,  that  literature  flourished,  and  even  epistolary 

1  See  on  the  poem  of  Pentaur,  Lenormant,  Anfange  der  Cultur  (1875),  i. 
195  sqq.  Id.  Roman  von  den  zwei  Brudern,  i.  249  sqq.  On  fictitious  litera 
ture,  Brugscb,  Aus  dem  Orient  (1864)  ;  and  on  epistolography,  Lincke,  BeMrage. 
zur  Kenntniss  der  altay.  Brieflitcratur  (Leipzig  1879). 


REASONABLE  EXPECTATIONS.  7 

style  was  cultivated.  Hence  a  beginning  of  Israelite  litera 
ture  in  the  period  succeeding  the  exodus  would  be  by  no 
means  too  early. 

"VVe  know  nothing  further  concerning  the  'n  DIDn^D  "1BD 
(Book  of  the  Wars  of  Jahveh),  which  is  quoted  Num.  xxi.  14  sq. 
to  show  that  the  Arnon  was  the  boundary  of  Moab  towards 
the  Amorites,  i.e.  in  the  time  of  the  Entrance,  when  the 
Moabites  had  been  driven  southwards  over  the  Arnon  by  the 
Amorite  king  Sihon.  The  quotation 1  sounds  ancient,  highly 
poetic,  and  to  us  partly  enigmatical, — 

Valieb  in  Supliali 

And  the  rivers  of  Arnon 

And  the  valley  of  the  rivers. 

That  stretches  thither  where  'Ar  lies 

And  leans  upon  the  border  of  Moab. 

If  it  is  the  Jehovist  who  here  cites  this  book,  it  is  a  source 
unknown  since  at  least  the  Assyrian  period  (the  eighth  century). 
It  was,  to  judge  from  its  title,  a  collection  of  heroic  songs. 
If  we  take  into  consideration  the  fact  that  the  poem  of 
Pentaur  exhibits  verses  with  internal  parallelism,  and  offers 
various  parallels  to  the  lyric  poetry  and  prophecy  of  the 
Bible,  it  is  not  too  fantastic  a  notion  to  regard  it  as  possible 
that  the  component  parts  of  this  ancient  Israelite  Harnasa 
reach  back  to  the  Mosaic  period. 

The  history  of  Israel  does  not  begin  with  the  condition  of 
an  ignorant,  rude  and  undisciplined  horde,  but  with  the  transi 
tion  to  a  nation  of  a  race  which  had  come  to  maturity  amidst 
the  most  abundant  means  and  examples  of  culture.  This  is 
a  fact  which  all  criticism  of  the  Pentateuch  has  to  take  into 
account.  Moreover,  this  developing  nation  possessed  un 
doubtedly  traditions  concerning  its  ancestors,  the  patriarchs, 
who  had  come  from  Chaldea  and  Araniea  through  Canaan 
to  Egypt, — remembrances  of  the  events  of  their  lives,  and 
especially  of  their  religious  life,  by  means  of  which  this 

1  See  my  article  011  the  quotation  from  the  Book  of  "Wars  in  Luthardt's 
Zeltachr.  1882,  p.  337  sc^ 


8  IXTEODUCTIOX. 

people,  though  for  the  most  part  Egyptianized,  might  attain  to 
a  perception  of  the  religious  knowledge  granted  and  the 
destiny  allotted  them  since  the  time  of  Abraham.  The 
critic  of  the  Pentateuch  has  also  to  reflect,  that  however 
late  a  date  may  be  assigned  to  the  patriarchal  histories,  their 
roots  must  reach  as  far  back  as  the  sojourn  in  Egypt. 
The  man,  in  whom  the  revived  national  and  religious  con 
sciousness  reached  its  climax,  was  not  only,  as  an  Israelite,  a 
man  of  deep  religious  feeling  and  great  endowments,  but  had 
also,  as  the  adopted  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter, — the  favourite 
daughter,  as  it  appears,  of  Ramses  II., — been  brought  up  at 
the  court,  and  initiated  into  the  science  and  mysteries  of  that 
priestly  caste  which  ranked  next  to  the  king  (Ex.  ii.  10; 
Acts  vii.  22).  This,  too,  is  a  fact  which  criticism  must  not 
fail  to  take  into  account,  lest  it  should  form  too  low  an 
estimate  of  the  share  of  Moses  in  the  legislation  codified  in 
the  Pentateuch.  And  the  more  so,  since  it  cannot  be  denied 
that  this  legislation  points  in  various  institutions,  tendencies, 
and  matters  to  the  Egyptian  fatherland  of  the  legislator.  The 
ark  of  the  covenant  recalls  the  sacred  chests  (KLGTCLI)  of  the 
Egyptians,  and  the  Urim  and  Thummim  the  sapphire  image 
of  the  goddess  of  Truth,  who  wore  the  ap^i^tfcao-r^,  hanging 
from  a  golden  chain  on  her  bosom.  The  law  of  leprosy  in 
Leviticus  is  best  historically  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that 
leprosy  was  an  epidemic  disease  among  the  Egyptian  Semites 
as  well  as  among  the  Israelites,  whose  exodus  was  hence 
transformed  in  the  national  Egyptian  view  into  an  expulsion 
of  lepers.  And  the  monumental  writing  upon  plastered  stones, 
Deut.  xxvii.  2-4,  as  well  as  the  rpa^o  ^ntf,  Lev.  xxvi.  1 ;  JSTum. 
xxxiii.  52),  cannot  be  more  aptly  illustrated  than  by  the  monu 
ments  of  the  land  of  hieroglyphics.  The  admission  of  these 
and  other  references  to  Egypt  may  be  refused,  but  even  the 
most  negative  criticism  cannot  deny  that  the  legislation  of 
the  Pentateuch  bears  in  its  matter  the  impress  of  Egypt. 

If  we  insist  on  making  the  history  of  Israel  begin  with  the 
free  and  unrestrained  life  of  a  half-savage  people,  it  would  be 


INFLUENCE  AND  AFTER  EFFECTS  OF  THE  SOJOURN  IN  EGYPT.     9 

necessary,  in  order  to  make  room  for  such  a  beginning,  to 
plunge  the  sojourn  in  Egypt  in  prehistoric  darkness,  as  Stade 
does  when  he  says  (Gcsch.  L  129):  "If  any  Hebrew  clan 
ever  sojourned  in  Egypt,  no  one  knows  its  name."  But 
who  will  follow  the  bold  doubter  in  this  ?  It  is  true 
that,  as  Eanke  says,  only  history  which  has  been  critically 
investigated  can  be  esteemed  as  history ;  but  if  history  is 
critically  annihilated,  what  is  left  but  to  fill  the  tabula  rasa 
with  modern  myths  ?  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Egyptian 
sojourn  is  a  fact  not  to  be  got  rid  of  by  denying  it,  then 
Pentateuchal  criticism  and  the  reconstruction  of  the  history 
of  Israel  cannot  refuse  to  take  account  of  the  consequences 
of  this  fact ;  then  there  exists  an  internal  connection  between 
the  sojourn  in  Egypt  and  the  Sinaitic  legislation ;  then  the 
Egyptian  sojourn  could  not  have  failed  to  prepare  Israel  for 
its  destiny  as  the  people  of  the  law;  and  then,  finally,  the 
tyrannous  oppression,  which  made  Egypt  a  house  of  bondage 
and  an  iron  furnace,  completed  this  preparation  by  calling  into 
new  life  that  national  and  religious  consciousness  which  had 
disappeared  when  it  was  a  hospitable  place  of  refuge.  We 
shall  never  be  persuaded  that  the  proper  names  in  Ex.  vi., 
Num.  i.,  ii.,  vii.,  x.,  and  elsewhere,  are  just  hit  upon  at  random, 
— they  are  a  significant  mirror  of  contemporary  history,  and 
especially  of  the  religious  disposition  of  the  time.  The 
reawakened  consciousness  of  God  is  expressed  in  such  names 
as  ^RB*D,  b&TO,  "irama,  swii¥,  and  the  reawakened  national 
consciousness  in  such  as  Tirpioy,  3irtty,  "H^tty.  Ditty,  the  name 
of  Moses'  father,  declares  that  Israel  is  an  illustrious  nation ; ' 
and  that  of  his  mother,  133^,  that  the  glory  is  Jahveh's. 
These  two  names  are  as  it  were  the  anagrams  of  the  great 
ideas  which  filled  the  soul  of  Moses,  and  made  him  the 
deliverer  of  his  people. 

1  In  opposition  to  Noldeke,  DMZ.  xl.  185,  we  separate  n^y  and  Ditty;  the 


former  may  be  connected  with  the  Arabic  j^.    (j+z.\  which  means  culture  and 
life. 


1 0  INTRODUCTION. 

It  is  generally  acknowledged,  except  perhaps  by  a  few 
ultra  sceptics,  that  the  time  of  Moses  must  be  regarded  as 
that  really  creative  period  of  Israel  which  is  the  type  and 
standard  for  after  ages.  For  our  part,  we  thence  infer  that 
a  Mosaic  Thorah  is  the  basis  of  the  Pentateuch,  without 
desiring  on  that  account  already  to  pronounce  a  judgment  as 
to  its  form  and  extent,  although  it  seems  to  us  a  priori 
probable  that  it  consisted  of  more  than  the  ten  sayings  of  the 
Decalogue.  We  are  convinced  that  the  history  and  literature  of 
the  post -Mosaic  age  demand  the  existence  of  a  Divine  revela 
tion  of  which  Moses  was  the  mediator,  and  which  raised  the 
now  independent  nation  to  the  self-consciousness  of  being  the 
chosen  people  of  Jahveh. 

The  circumstance  that  the  national  life  of  Israel,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  brighter  intervals,  shows  an  absence  of  the 
normal  influence  of  such  a  Thorah,  does  not  perplex  us  as  to 
its  existence.  The  history  of  the  result  of  laws  does  not 
coincide  with  the  history  of  their  composition.  This  applies 
especially  to  the  law  of  Israel,  which  is  not  a  law  sanctioned 
by  custom,  but  a  revealed,  and  therefore  an  ideal  law  which 
aims  at  becoming  custom. 

Undoubtedly  the  unity  of  God  and  His  worship  without 
the  medium  of  an  image  formed  the  fundamental  dogma  of  the 
Mosaic  Thorah.1  Nevertheless,  Israel  was  never  during  the 
whole  period  of  their  pre-exilian  history  entirely  free  from 
idolatry  and  the  worship  of  false  gods,  and  the  masses  were 
mostly  even  steeped  in  it.  If  the  religion  of  Israel  was,  as 
Kuenen  conceives  it,  an  ethic  monotheism,  the  constant 
resistance  offered  to  it  by  Israelite  nature  shows  that  this 
ethic  monotheism  was  no  spontaneous  growth,  but  was 
the  requirement  of  a  document  of  revelation,  which  set  up  an 
ideal  whose  realization  was  frustrated  by  the  natural  inclina 
tions  of  the  people.  It  is  at  most  but  comparatively  that 
the  religion  of  Jahveh  manifests  itself  as  a  ruling  power 
during  the  reigns  of  Saul,  of  David,  and  the  early  years  of 
1  See  Ed.  Konig,  Bildlosiykeit  des  legitimen  Jahwehcultus,  1886. 


THE  THORAH  AND  POST-MOSAIC  LITERATURE.  11 

Solomon,  and  that  indeed  without  having,  as  under  Asa, 
Jehoshaphat,  Hezekiah,  and  Josiali,  obtained  recognition  by 
means  of  a  violent  reaction.  This  is  a  circumstance  which 
can  hardly  be  otherwise  explained  than  by  assuming  that 
after  the  barbarism  of  the  time  of  the  Judges,  Samuel  effected 
the  same  kind  of  reformation  as  Ezra  did  after  the  captivity. 
That  is  to  say,  that  he  obtained  a  victory  for  the  religion  of  the 
law,  though  only  for  its  substance  ;  for  a  complete  accordance 
of  the  community  and  of  public  custom  with  the  letter  of  the 
law  can  at  no  period,  not  even  the  post-exilian,  be  predicated 
of  Israel. 

The  pre-exilian  history  requires  on  its  bright  side  also  the 
existence  of  a  divine  Thorah  falling  back  upon  the  mediator- 
ship  of  Moses.  The  regulations  of  David  and  Solomon,  the 
reforms  of  Hezekiah  and  Josiah,  are  based  upon  it.  The 
sacred  authority  of  the  prophets,  and  the  oneness  of  spirit 
shown  by  the  prophets  of  both  kingdoms,  notwithstanding 
the  totally  different  circumstances  in  which  they  found  them 
selves,  are,  apart  from  the  radical  unity  of  a  God-given 
documentary  foundation,  incomprehensible. 

The  just  claims  of  the  postulate  of  a  Mosaic  Thorah  find 
confirmation  in  post-Mosaic  literature  also  from  unhesitating 
historical  testimony.  It  is  true  that  neither  ^D  nor  2^n  are 
mentioned  in  the  fifteen  prophetic  books,  but  the  song  of 
Deborah,  Judg.  v.  4,  celebrates  the  revelation  of  God 
upon  Mount  Sinai  as  taking  place  amidst  wondrous 
phenomena  of  nature.  Micah,  vi.  4,  names  Moses,  Aaron, 
and  Miriam  as  leaders  out  of  the  house  of  bondage  in 
Egypt,  at  the  same  time  testifying  that  this  time  of 
deliverance  was  a  time  of  miracles,  which  will,  according  to 
vii.  15,  be  repeated  in  the  latter  days.  It  is  not  only  in  the 
Pentateuch  that  Moses  is  exalted  as  a  prophet,  Hosea  also 
regards  him  as  such  in  a  pre-eminent  sense  when  he  says, 
xii.  13:  By  a  prophet  did  Jahveh  lead  Israel  out  of 
Egypt,  and  by  a  prophet  was  he  preserved.  And  Jeremiah, 
with  unmistakeaule  reference  to  what  is  related  Ex.  xxxii. 


1 2  INTRODUCTION. 

11-14,  31  sq.,  speaks  of  him  (xv.  1)  as  powerful  in  prayer. 
What  we  read,  too,  Isa.  Ixiii.  10  sq.,  is,  though  belonging 
to  the  period  of  the  exile,  a  noteworthy  historical  testimony. 
The  prophet  here  declares  that  when  Israel  was  delivered 
from  bondage  under  Moses,  the  Holy  Spirit  (sjnpn  nrO  mani 
fested  His  agency  in  the  midst  of  the  people.  Thus  post- 
Mosaic  prophecy  confirms  what  is  related,  Num.  xi.  23— 
xii.  13,  of  the  activity  of  prophetic  life  in  the  time  of  Moses, 
and  of  the  closeness  of  his  communion  with  God ;  it  affirms 
that  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  and  what  followed  during 
the  forty  years  between  Egypt  and  Canaan  (Amos  ii.  10),  is 
that  act  of  God  which  impressed  upon  the  people  of  Israel  the 
character  indclebilis  of  their  nationality  ;  and  thus  justifies  us  in 
assuming  a  Mosaic  Thorah,  a  Mosaic  basis  for  the  Pentateuch. 
]STor  less  does  psalmody,  in  which  David  has  at  least  an 
epoch-making  importance,  afford  such  justification.  Ps.  xix. 
is  held  by  Hitzig  to  be  Davidic  in  all  its  three  parts,  and  he 
pronounces  the  second  part  especially  to  be  in  every  respect 
of  great  antiquity.  The  Thorah,  which  David  here  extols, 
must  be  a  documentary  instruction  of  God  as  to  how  we  are  to 
walk  according  to  His  will,  and  it  must  have  had  a  fixed  form, 
for  David  speaks  of  something  universally  known,  while  the 
series  of  synonyms  min,  nny,  "Tips,  TNSfo,  DKT,  "'DB^D  (with 
which  Bielmi  compares  xviii.  23,  31)  testifies  to  the  copious 
ness  of  its  contents.  That  the  piety  expressed  in  the  Psalms 
is  not  a  fruit  of  the  prophecy  of  the  eighth  century,  results 
from  the  fact  that  acknowledged  Davidic  psalms  already 
spiritualize  ceremonies  into  symbols  and  condemn  their 
merely  external  performance.  Ps.  iv.  has,  as  Hitzig  acknow 
ledges,  its  historical  foundation  in  1  Sam.  xxx.  6.  Whether 
pis  TQT»  iv.  6,  are  here  meant  of  sacrifices,  which  consist  in 
righteousness  to  their  offerer,  or  of  such  as  are  offered  with  a 
right  disposition  (which  with  regard  to  Ps.  li.  21,  Deut. 
xxxiii.  19, 1  prefer),  pi¥  TOT  still  remain  a  contrast  to  sacrifices 
as  dead  works,  which  are  worthless  before  God. 


THE  PENTATEUCH  AND  ITS  DIVISIONS.  1  3 

Before  endeavouring  to  obtain  a  historico-critical  view  of 
the  origin  and  composition  of  the  Pentateuch,  we  will  take 
a  view  of  the  work  according  to  its  traditional  appellation, 
division,  and  plan.  It  is  divided  into  five  parts,  into  which, 
in  its  present  state,  it  naturally  separates.  For  the  second 
book  begins  with  a  recapitulation,  the  third  has  a  boundary 
towards  the  second  in  the  homogeneousness  of  its  contents, 
and  towards  the  fourth  in  a  subscribed  formula,  the  fourth 
is  also  terminated  by  a  formula,  and  the  fifth  concludes 
with  the  death  of  Moses,  as  the  first  does  with  the  deaths 
of  Jacob  and  Joseph.  Hence  it  is  called  ?;  irevrdrev^o^,  viz. 
/3//3XO?  (Lat.  pcntatcuchus,  viz.  liber,  therefore  masc.),  which  is 
composed  of  Trevre  and  reO^o?,  according  to  Alexandrian 
diction,  the  same  as  volumcn.  In  the  Hebrew  Codex,  and 
as  the  chief  book  preserved  in  the  sacred  chest  (fritf)  of  the 
synagogue,  and  read  in  divine  worship,  it  is  called  min  (n), 
the  instruction,  viz.  of  God  (from  HT,  to  throw,  Hiph.  to 
throw  out,  i.e.  the  hand  to  point),  in  the  New  Test.  6  vopos  (from 
vepeiv,  to  assign),  the  rule  of  life  or  the  law,  i.e.  of  Israel, 
and  the  five  parts  (books)  are  called  minn  ^Tpin  nwn?  for 
ran  (the  Aramaic  noun  form  answering  to  the  Hebrew 
segolate  ^n)  means  the  fifth.  But  as  Jtti")  means  not  only 
the  fourth  but  also  the  square,  so  WChn  may  also  mean  some 
thing  divided  into  five  (2'tpno) ;  consequently  t?o^n  is  not  only 
the  name  of  each  of  the  five  books,  so  that,  e.g.,  the  first  book 
is  called  minn  win  ntycn^  ppjn  win,  but  also  that  of  the 
five  books  together.  The  Thorah  in  its  extra-synagogal  use,  and 
more  externally  and,  so  to  speak,  secularly  designated,  is  called 
Win.  The  Talmud  also  pluralizes  it  pw^n,  e>^t  Chagiga  14a; 
but  the  Masora  already  calls,  e.g.  a  manuscript  of  the  Thorah 
coming  from  Jericho,  or  perhaps  Lunel  in  France,  NTT  ran. 

That  the  division  into  five  parts  is  testified  by  Philo 
and  Josephus,  is  merely  in  conformity  with  the  LXX. ;  but 
Havernick  and  v.  Lengerke  were  mistaken  in  thinking  that 
it  proceeded  from  the  Alexandrians.  The  Psalter  also  is 
divided  into  pran  nwn  (Kiddusliin  33«),  and  indeed  1:133,  i.e. 


14  INTRODUCTION. 

corresponding  to,  the  five  books  of  the  Thorah  (Midrash  on 
Ps.  i.  1).  It  was  thus  divided  after  the  pattern  of  the  Thorah, 
as  its  echo  from  the  heart  of  the  Church,  as  early  as  the  time 
of  the  Chronicler  (see  chap.  iv.  of  our  introduction  to  the 
Psalter).  Hence  the  division  of  the  Thorah  into  five  parts 
was  a  sacred  custom  long  before  the  end  of  the  Persian 
period.1  We  are  however  entirely  without  a  settled  point 
from  which  to  date  backwards  into  the  pre-exilian  period,  and 
here  already  the  view  presses  itself  upon  us  that  the  Penta 
teuch,  though  coming  down  to  us,  so  far  as  its  foundation  is 
concerned,  from  the  days  of  Moses,  is  as  to  its  present  form 
and  final  redaction  post-exilic. 

The  five  books  are  in  Hebrew  each  designated  by  names  taken 
from  their  opening  words  :  JTO&TQ  "ISO,  niDt?  'D,  sop1*!  'D,  nmDl  'D 
(not  Vajedabber,  as  we  find  it  in  Jerome,  and  which  is  its 
Masoretic  name),  Dnmn  rbs  'D.  Less  usual  is  the  enumera 
tion  |it?jo  D'Din,  "otP  &'Din,  etc.  But  the  title  D'oro  min  (the 
Thorah  of  the  priests)  of  the  third  book  is  in  frequent  use,  as 
is  also  the  name  of  the  fourth  book,  D'Hlpan  ^£in  (the  fifth  of 
the  mustered),  by  which  it  was  already  known  to  Origen. 
The  designation  of  the  first  book  as  n^n  nso  appears  in  the 
Talmud  (jer  Sota  i.  10)  as  a  private  view  connected  with 
2  Sam.  i.  18,  but  it  also  occurs  elsewhere.2  Ben-Asher 
(Dikdukc  hateamim,  ed.  Baer  and  Strack,  p.  57)  gives  it  as 
D'Wn  'D  (book  of  the  upright,  i.e.  ancestors),  in  conformity 
with  Abodali  zarali  25a  (Dn^  i&op:JB>  npjn  pnv  DiTQK  'D). 
The  names  pp^n  'D  and  rnrovi  'D  denote  the  second  and  fifth 
books  synecdochically  according  to  prominent  portions,  the 
former  (book  of  those  who  commit  injuries)  after  Ex.  xxi. 
and  xxii.,  the  latter  (book  of  the  curses)  after  Deut.  xxvii. 
and  xxviii.  The  third  book  bears  the  name  aoBD  (the 

1  The  division  into  seven  books,  spoken  of  Shabbath  116a,  rests  only  upon  the 
private  view  that  the  important  passage,  Num.  x.  35,  36,  constitutes  a  separate 
host,  and  supports  itself  by  Prov.  ix.  1,  njnt5>  HHIDj;  rom 

2  See  Raphael  Kirchheim,  Preface  to  the  Hebrew  commentary  on  Chronicles  of 
the  tenth  century,  edited  by  him  (1874);  comp.  Schiirer,  Neutest.  Zeitgeschichte, 
p.  439. 


HEBREW,  GREEK  AND  SYRIAC  NAMES  OF  THE  FIVE  BOOKS.      1 5 

book)  only  as  the  title  of  the  Midrash  upon  it,  just  as  the 
Day  of  Atonement  bears  the  name  NDV  (the  day)  as  the 
title  of  the  Talmudic  tractate  upon  it.  The  title  min  njB'D 
of  the  fifth  book  will  come  into  special  consideration 
farther  on. 

The  Alexandrino  -  Greek  designations  of  the  five  books, 
copied  in  the  Syriac,  are  short  and  good.  The  first  book  is 
called  Teveais,  complete  Tevecns  KOO-/JLOV,  Syr.  ffritha,  translated 
back  into  Greek,  Krlais,  according  to  which  a  commentary  of 
Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  (Fragments  edited  by  Sachau,  1869) 
was  entitled,  'Eppyveia  rrjs  /cr/a-ew? ;  the  second,  "Eg 0809, 
complete  ".E^oSo?  AlyvTrrov,  Syr.  mapkana ;  the  third, 
AeviTixov  (the  Levites  book,  Lat.  Leviticus,  i.e.  liber),  Syr. 
sefra  dfkdhne  (the  priests'  book) ;  the  fourth,  with  reference  to 
the  enumerations  of  the  people  in  the  second  and  fortieth  years 
of  the  exodus,  'ApiOpol  (Numbers,  or  also,  according  to  the 
phrase  apiOpov  iroieiv,  censum  liabere:  enumerations),  Syr. 
menjane ;  the  fifth,  Aevrepovofjaov,  Syr.  tenjdfyi)  ndmilsd 
(Deuterosis  of  the  Nomos). 

We  will  now  endeavour  to  make  a  survey  of  the  contents 
and  plan  of  this  whole  of  five  parts,  in  which  it  will  be  shown 
that  the  order,  not  only  of  the  historical,  but  also  of  the 
legislative  matter,  is,  or  is  intended  to  be,  chronological.  For 
regulations  and  laws  are  always  described  just  where  the 
course  of  the  national  history  or  even  more  fortuitous  incidents 
gave  occasion  for  them.  It  is  no  systematic  code  that  we 
have  to  deal  with,  but  a  historical  work,  which,  following  the 
thread  of  the  national  development,  describes  how  Israel, 
after  becoming  a  free  nation,  obtained  by  decrees  a  le^al 

o  *  •/  o  o 

constitution. 

The  first  book  begins  with  the  creation  of  the  world  ;  the 
Thorah  has  no  corresponding  conclusion :  the  five  primaeval 
Toledoth  (of  heaven  and  earth,  chaps,  i.-iv.,  of  Adam, 
v.-vi.  8,  of  Noah,  vi.  9-ix.,  of  the  sons  of  Noah,  x.  1-xi.  9, 
of  Shem,  xi.  10—26)  form  the  foundation  of  the  history  of 
redemption  in  its  entire  world-embracing  course.  The  call 


1 6  INTRODUCTION. 

of  Abram  and  his  entrance  into  Canaan  are,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  first  direct  preparation  for  the  setting  apart  of  the  people 
of  the  history  of  redemption,  and  to  this  end  the  five  patriarchal 
Toledoth  (of  Terah,  xi.  27,  xxv.  11,  of  Ishmael,  xxv.  12-18, 
of  Isaac,  xxv.  19,  xxxv.,  of  Esau,  xxxvi.,  of  Jacob,  xxxvii.-l.) 
contribute.  Here  the  covenant  line  is  carried  on,  with  the 
branching  off  of  the  collateral  lines  down  to  where  we  have, 
without  further  ramification,  in  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob,  the 
ancestral  family,  which  was  transplanted  to  Egypt,  there  to 
mature  into  a  nation  of  twelve  tribes.1  In  the  second  book 
Egypt  is  the  scene  of  the  history  till  chap.  xii.  36,  when  upon 
the  occasion  of  the  tenth  Egyptian  plague,  the  slaying  of  the 
first-born,  and  of  the  now  imminent  exodus,  the  Passover 
and  Eeast  of  Unleavened  Bread  were  instituted.  A  continua 
tion  of  the  law  of  the  Passover  and  the  law  of  the  First-born 
is  interwoven  in  the  history  of  the  march  from  Eamses  to  the 
Red  Sea,  xii.  37-xiv.  The  song  of  praise  for  deliverance, 
xv.  1—21,  forms  the  partition  between  the  exodus  and  the 
march  in  the  wilderness.  Israel  arrives,  under  God's  gracious 
and  miraculous  guidance,  at  Sinai,  xv.  22-xvii.  In  two 
ascents  of  Sinai  Moses  receives  the  fundamental  laws, 
xix.— xxiv.,  and  the  directions  concerning  the  sanctuaries  to 
be  prepared,  xxv.-xxxi.  Having  again  obtained  pardon 
from  the  Lord  for  his  rebellious  people,  xxxii.-xxxiv.,  the 
preparation  of  the  sanctuaries  advances,  and  the  abode  of 
Jahveh  is  set  up,  xxxv.-xl.  This  took  place  on  the  first 
day  of  the  first  month  of  the  second  year.  The  third  book 
contains  throughout  precepts  and  proceedings  during  this  one 
first  month.  The  offering  Thorah,  i.-vii.,  is  followed  by  the 
account  of  the  consecration  of  the  priests,  viii.— ix.  (the  perfor 
mance  of  which  was  anticipated  Ex.  xl.  1 6),  interrupted  by  the 
trespass  and  catastrophe  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  (viii.-x.).  A 


1  Lagarde,  Orientalia,  ii.  40  sq. ,  enumerates  the  ten  Toledoths  differently  :  he 
sets  aside  ii.  4,  and  looks  upon  Num.  iii.  1,  the  Toledoth  of  Aaron,  as  the  centre 
of  gravity  of  the  ten.  It  is  also  in  his  eyes  a  proof  of  the  post-exilian  standpoint 
of  the  author  of  the  Hexateuch. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH.  17 

series  of  laws  concerning  cleanness,  uncleanness  and  purification 
begins,  ch.  xi.,  with  the  laws  concerning  clean  and  unclean 
animals.  All  these  laws  find  their  climax  in  the  ritual  of  the 
day  of  atonement,  xi.-xvi.  The  laws  that  follow,  xvii.-xxvi.  2, 
with  the  peroration,  xxvi.  3  sqq.,  are  all  pervaded  with  the 
sentiment  that  the  God  of  Israel  is  the  Holy  One.  They  form 
series  which  are  in  part  connected  with  each  other  (xvii. 
prohibition  of  blood,  xviii.  incest,  xx.  penal  appointments), 
but  are  without  premeditated  succession.  It  is  striking  that 
directions  concerning  the  candelabra  and  the  shewbread,  xxiv. 
1-9,  and  a  further  carrying  out  of  the  penal  law,  xxiv.  10,  are 
inserted  between  the  cycle  of  annual  festivals,  ch.  xxiii.,  and  the 
cycle  of  epoch  festivals,  ch.  xxx.,  while  ch.  xx.  is  a  mosaic  of 
moral,  ritual  and  judicial  precepts.  The  series  of  laws  con 
cerning  sacred  consecrations,  ch.  xxvii.,  already  gives  to  Leviticus 
an  outlook  towards  Numbers.  The  fourth  book  transports  us 
from  the  first  month  of  the  second  year  to  the  beginning  of 
the  second  month.  It  begins,  chs.  i.-x.,  with  measures  to  be 
taken  preparatory  to  decamping ;  but  this  compact  whole, 
concluding  with  the  signal  words  of  Moses,  is  interrupted  by 
interpolations  of  laws  which  seem  inserted  where  the  occur 
rences  of  the  time  call  them  forth.  Manifestations  of  God  in 
mercy  and  judgment  during  the  second  year  follow,  chs.  xi.-xiv., 
and  laws  for  the  period  of  their  future  settlement  in  Canaan, 
ch.  xv.  Then  we  have  in  its  chronological  place  the  history  of 
Koran's  rebellion,  chs.  xvi.-xviii.  The  law  of  the  red  heifer 
comes  in  not  unexpectedly,  ch.  xix.,  in  view  of  the  great  field 
of  dead  bodies.  But  ch.  xx.  leaps  quite  without  notice  or  con 
nection  from  the  second  to  the  fortieth  year.  Israel  is  now  as 
it  was  thirty-eight  years  ago  at  the  fatal  Kadesh-Barnea.  The 
sad  events  of  ch.  xx.  are  followed  by  circumstances  tending 
again  to  exalt  the  people,  especially  the  frustrations  of  Balaam's 
curse,  xxii.-xxiv.,  which  however  is  rendered  vain  by  Israel, 
ch.  xxv.  A  second  numbering  of  the  people  takes  place  in 
the  plains  of  Moab,  ch.  xxvi.  A  demand  on  the  part  of  the 
daughters  of  Zelophehad  gives  rise  to  the  law  concerning 

Y. 


1 8  INTRODUCTION. 

heiresses,  ch.  xxvii.  1-11.  After  Moses  has,  in  view  of  his 
approaching  death,  appointed  the  man  who  is  to  lead  the 
people  into  Canaan,  xxvii.  12  sqq.,  follows  the  completion  of 
the  law  of  sacrifice  with  reference  to  the  ritual  to  be  more 
abundantly  provided  for  by  the  people  now  soon  to  be  settled, 
chs.  xxviii.,  xxix.  The  law  of  vows  of  the  second  year  (in 
Leviticus)  is  also  expanded  by  new  ones,  ch.  xxx.  Moses 
takes  vengeance  on  the  Midianites,  and  on  the  occasion  of  this 
war  laws  are  given  concerning  spoil  and  the  rights  of  war, 
ch.  xxxi.  Eeuben,  Gad,  and  half  Manasseh  receive  the  posses 
sions  awarded  them  in  the  land  east  of  Jordan,  ch.  xxxii. 
In  ch.  xxxiii.,  Moses  specifies  the  stations,  the  boundaries  of 
the  land  are  laid  down  and  its  division  arranged  for,  ch. 
xxxiv.,  the  cities  of  the  Levites  and  the  cities  of  refuge  are 
set  apart,  ch.  xxxv.,  and  a  new  law  restricting  the  marriage  of 
heiresses,  ch.  xxxvi.,  brings  the  Moabite  legislation  to  a  close. 
The  fiftli  book  now  follows ;  it  contains  discourses  and 
institutions  of  Moses  during  the  first  days  of  the  eleventh 
month  of  the  fortieth  year,  and  hence  stands  chronologically 
in  its  right  place.  But  it  may  be  abstracted  from  the  struc 
ture  of  the  Pentateuch  without  destroying  the  latter.  For  at 
ch.  xxxii.  48  the  history  continues  in  the  tone  of  Numbers. 
The  divine  command  to  ascend  Nebo,  one  of  the  mountains 
of  Abarim,  and  to  die  there,  is  repeated ;  and  the  narrative 
continued  to  the  death  of  Moses  and  there  concluded. 

Before  proceeding  to  our  analysis,  we  affirm  upon  the  ground 
of  the  survey  just  taken — (1)  that  the  Pentateuch  is  no  code  of 
law  like  the  portions  of  the  Justinian  legislation  in  the  Corpus 
juris,  civilis ;  it  contains  separate  codices  legitm,  but  is  not  itself 
a  codex  legum.  Nor  is  it  a  code  in  the  form  of  a  history  of 
law,  its  contents  are  not  exhausted  in  the  legal  and  historico- 
legal  portions, — it  is  a  historical  work,  in  which  the  previous 
history  of  Israel  and  their  history  till  the  death  of  Moses  are 
depicted.  It  is  true  that  the  history  of  the  Sinaitic  legislation 
and  of  its  Moabite  development  and  completion  forms  the 
chief  body  of  the  historical  matter.  And  an  observation  with 


THE  COLLECTIVE  HISTORICAL  WORK  AND  ITS  TARTS.  19 

respect  to  this  fact,  which  pressed  upon  us  in  our  reproduction 
of  its  contents  is  (2)  the  correspondence  between  the  succession 
of  the  laws  according  to  their  period  of  origination  and  the 
character  of  the  historical  work  as  such.  For  even  where  the 
historical  circumstances  are  absent,  the  sequence  of  internally 
disconnected  matters  can  only  be  comprehended  on  the 
assumption  of  an  intention  to  give  them  in  chronological 
order.  We  find  an  example  of  this  in  the  fact  that  the  law 
of  the  later  celebration  of  the  Passover,  Num.  ix.  1-14,  an 
addition  to  the  Passover  law  of  Exodus,  stands  in  the  midst 
of  the  history  of  the  second  month  of  the  second  year,  while 
it  is  expressly  said  that,  when  the  Passover  was  to  be  cele 
brated  in  the  first  month  of  the  second  year,  an  additional 
celebration  of  this  festival  was  permitted  to  those  who  were 
prevented  by  defilement.  The  position  of  this  law  is  not 
indeed  that  of  its  origination,  but  it  is  found  with  a  retro 
spective  statement  of  this,  where  it  was  first  put  in  practice.1 
This  circumstance  affords  matter  for  thought.  Could  the 
author,  instead  of  placing  related  matters  in  their  natural 
connection,  have  thrown  together  things  dissimilar  for  the  pur 
pose  of  giving  an  artificial  appearance  of  historical  succession  ? 
We  are  here  placed  in  the  dilemma  between  unfair  suspicion 
and  the  acceptance  of  a  historical  knowledge  apparently 
surpassing  probability. 

The  Pentateuch  is  then  a  historical  work  which  chiefly 
relates  the  circumstances  under  which  the  legislation  arose. 
The  book  of  Joshua  carries  on  the  history,  that  of  Judges 
starts  from  the  close  of  Joshua,  the  books  of  Samuel  begin 
with  a  continuation  of  the  times  of  the  Judges,  the  books  of 
Kings  are  characterized  even  more  than  the  others  as  parts 
of  a  whole  by  their  beginning  with  Tn — the  Pentateuch  in 
its  present  form  appears  as  the  fundamental  portion  of  the 
collective  historical  work  continued  in  Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel, 
and  Kings,  which  beginning  the  history  of  Israel  from  the 

1  See  my  ' '  Pcntatcuch-kritischcn  Studien."  in  Lutliardt's  Zeitschrifl  (1882), 
p.  114  sqtj. 


20  INTRODUCTION. 

Creation  relates  it  down  to  the  middle  of  the  Captivity 
(2  Kings  xxv.  27  sqq.).  It  was  not  till  after  the  Captivity  and, 
as  may  be  inferred  from  the  book  of  Sirach,  in  pre-Maccabean 
times,1  when  the  whole  of  these  specially  distinguished 
national  writings  were  divided  into  min,  DW3J  and  D'OirD,  that 
the  Pentateuch  received  the  name  min,  as  containing  the  law 
of  Israel.  Nowhere  in  the  canonical  books  of  the  0.  T.  itself, 
when  the  expression  the  Thorah,  or  book  of  the  Thorah,  the 
Thorah  of  God,  the  Thorah  of  Moses  is  used,  is  the  writing 
there  intended  equivalent  with  the  Pentateuch  in  its  present 
plan,  composition  and  conclusion.  This  is  not  the  case  either 
in  the  history  of  Joshua,  Josh.  i.  8,  or  Jehoshaphat,  2  Chron. 
xvii.  9,  nor  finally  even  in  the  history  of  Ezra-JSTehemiah,  Neb. 
viii.  1  sq.  Besides,  this  denomination  has  more  frequently  in 
view  Deuteronomy  alone  (Josh.  viii.  30-32  ;  2  Kings  xiv.  6, 
xxii.) ;  moreover,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  the  book  of  the 
Thorah,  which  Moses,  according  to  Dent,  xxxi.,  delivered  to  the 
Levitical  priests,  was  not  entirely  identical  with  Deuteronomy 
in  its  present  state  as  a  fifth  part  of  the  Pentateuch. 

All  individual  criticism,  i.e.  investigation  of  the  character 
and  origin  of  a  work — says  Bockh  2 — ultimately  rests  on  the 
testing  of  the  credibility  of  external  evidence.  The  name 
n^D  min  "ISO,  Josh.  viii.  31,  xxiii.  6,  2  Kings  xiv.  6,  N"eh. 
viii.  1,  or  briefly  nt^D  "ISD,  Ezra  iii.  18,  Neb.  xiii.  1, 
2  Chron.  xxv.  4,  xxxv.  12,  comp.  Mark  xii.  20,  cannot  be 
regarded  as  such  external  evidence  for  the  composition  of  the 
whole  Pentateuch  by  Moses,  even  supposing  that  it  referred  to 
the  Pentateuch  exactly  as  we  have  it.  Eor  although  in  this 
case  nfc?D  is  gen.  suljecti  and  not,  as  e.g.  in  D^bfc  "ISO,  gen.  objedi, 
yet  the  name,  in  the  most  modern  writings  also,  tells  us  no 
more  than  that  Moses  was  the  mediator  of  the  law  codified  in 


1  It  is  more  than  questionable  whether  what  Ezra  read  in  the  year  440  (Bleek, 
Einleitung,  §  273)  was  the  Pentateuch  in  its  present  form  of  a  historical  work, 
it  can  only  be  assumed  that  this  great  collective  work  was  edited  by  Ezra. 

2  Encyklopadie  und  Mclhodologie  (1877),  p.  230. 


21 

the  Pentateuch.  In  the  later  synagogue  indeed  (Sanhedrin 
99#),  and  also  according  to  traditional  church  opinion,  Moses 
is  esteemed  the  composer  of  the  whole  Pentateuch  from  its 
first  letter  to  its  last.  The  last  eight  verses  are  indeed 
declared  by  the  well-known  Mishnic  tradition  (Barajtha)  in 
the  tractate  ItaJba  lathra  to  be  an  addition  by  Joshua.  But 
besides  this  view  there  is  another,  that  no  letter  could  have 
been  missing  in  the  book  of  the  Law  which  Moses  delivered  to 
the  custody  of  the  priests,  and  thus  that  down  "  to  rw 
(xxxiv.  5)  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  He,  spoke,  and  Moses 
repeated  and  wrote  down,  and  that  from  this  n^l  onwards  He 
spake,  and  Moses  wrote  with  tears."  ]  What  an  unpsychologi- 
cal  view  of  the  act  of  inspiration  !  Certainly  on  the  ground 
of  Deut.  xxxi.  24-26,  if  we  identify  the  laws  and  the  history, 
the  opinion  might  be  established,  that  Moses  was  the  author 
of  the  entire  Pentateuch al  history. — In  the  N".  T.  also  the 
Pentateuch  is  called  77  /3//3Xo?  MwiWo)?,  Mark  xii.  26,  or  just 
MCOVOTJS,  Acts  xv.  21,  2  Cor.  iii.  15  ;  and  when  injunctions  or 
sayings  are  quoted  from  it  (e.g.  from  Exodus,  Luke  xx.  37; 
Leviticus,  Mark  i.  44,  Bom.  x.  5  ;  Deuteronomy,  Mark  xii.  19, 
Bom.  x.  19),  Moses  is  named  as  the  speaker  and  writer. — For 
our  Lord  and  His  apostles  conceive  of  the  Thorah  as  might  be 
expected  of  them  as  members  of  their  nation  ;  it  is  to  them 
the  work  of  Moses.  They  regard  it  as  proceeding  from  the 
revelation  of  God.  But  it  is  not  yet  God's  full  and  final 
revelation,  hence  they  intentionally  emphasize  the  human  side 
of  its  origin,  without  regard  to  the  directness  or  indirectness  of 
the  authorship  of  Moses,  which  lay  outside  their  exalted  and 
practical  object,  and  was,  moreover,  alien  to  the  character  of 
their  age.  It  is  important  to  us,  that  they  too  were  penetrated 
by  the  conviction,  that  Moses  was  the  mediator  of  the  law, 
through  which  Israel  became  the  people  of  God ;  but  historico- 
critical  investigation  as  to  his  share  as  author  in  the  com 
position  of  the  Pentateuch  is  left  free  as  far  as  N.  T.  statements 
are  concerned. 

1  Batlira  15a,  and  also  Menachoth  30a. 


INTRODUCTION. 

From  external  traditional  evidence,  we  turn  to  the  evidence 
of  the  Pentateuch  itself  concerning  the  share  Moses  had  in  its 
composition.  There  are  certain  passages  in  the  three  middle 
books,  the  writing  of  which  by  Moses  is  expressly  testified. 
1.  The  Book  of  the  Covenant  contained  in  Ex.  xx.-xxiii.  (ISD 
mnn,  xxiv.  7)  or  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  Sinaitic  cove 
nant,  combined  with  the  Decalogue,  which  laws  Moses  is  said 
(xxiv.  4)  to  have  written  down.  2.  The  laws  of  the  renewed 
Sinaitic  covenant  promulgated  in  connection  with  the  restora 
tion  of  the  two  tables  in  Ex.  xxxiv.,  which,  according  to 
xxxiv.  27,  Moses  was  to  write.  3.  Jahveh's  decree  to  destroy 
Amalek,  which  Moses  was  to  write  in  a  book  for  the  observ 
ance  of  Joshua,  Ex.  xvii.  14  (where  we  have  "ij?B|i,  as  in 
1  Sam.  x.  25).1  4.  The  list  of  the  stations  (Num.  xxxiii.)  which 
Moses  is  said  (xxxiii.  2)  to  have  written.  To  these  must  be 
added,  according  to  the  statements  in  Deuteronomy,  5,  the 
Thorah  contained  in  Dent.  xxxi.  9,  24,  and,  6,  the  nw 
appended  in  cli.  xxxii.  which  Moses  and  Joshua  were  enjoined 
(xxxi.  19)  to  write,  and  which,  according  to  xxxi.  32,  was 
written  by  Moses.  This  testified  writing  of  certain  passages  by 
Moses  does  not  justify  the  conclusion  that  he  was  the  author  of 
the  whole,  which  is  besides  inconceivable  with  respect  to  the 
narrative  of  his  death  and  such  eulogiums  as  we  find  Ex.  xi.  3  ; 
iNiim.  xii.  3.  Eor  even  supposing  that  nNTn  minn,  which  Moses 
is  said,  according  to  Deut.  xxxi.,  to  have  written  to  the  end  in 
a  book,  had  begun  at  Gen.  i.  1  and  closed  with  the  final  testa 
mentary  words  of  Deuteronomy,  still  all  lying  between  this 
beginning  and  ending  could  not  be  without  exception  intended. 
Where  nxrn  minn  or  nrn  laon  or  run  minn  nao  occurs  in 
Deuteronomy,  we  are  nowhere  obliged  to  extend  this  expression 
beyond  the  Deuterosis  of  the  law  in  the  plains  of  Moab. 
Retrospects  of  the  Sinaitic  legislation  appear  in  another  form, 
v.  12,  16,  xxiv.  8,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  nwn  minn  is  at 


1  In  "both  passages  1SD3  3D2j  to  put  in  writing,  the  article  is  the  specific, 


as  in  ")£)D3  in  Isa-  xxxiv.  4. 

V  •"  ** 


EVIDENCE  OF  PENTATEUCH  TO  THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  MOSES.    23 

iv.  5  limited  by  the  addition  "  which  I  set  before  you  this  day  " 
to  the  legislation  of  the  fortieth  year,  minn  nsT,  iv.  44,  points 
onward  to  what  follows,  and  "  this  book  (of  the  Thorah)," 
xxviii.  58,  61,  xxix.  19,  20,  2G,is  evidently  that  which,  when 
the  speaker  alludes  to  it,  is  still  in  process  of  formation  and 
approaching  its  completion.  According  to  this,  DNrn  minn 
also,  i.  5,  points  not  backwards,  but  forwards.  "  Moses  made 
plain  the  following  Thorah,"  i.e.  he  set  about  delivering  it 
(comp.  xxvii.  8),  so  as  to  be  generally  understood.  And 
it  is  self-evident  that  the  command,  xxvii.  8,  to  write  "  all 
the  words  of  this  law  upon  the  stones  of  Mount  Ebal" 
(comp.  Josh.  viii.  30  sqq.),  refers  not  to  the  whole  book  of 
Deuteronomy,  but  only  to  a  nucleus  legis  contained  in 
Deuteronomy. 

Hence  the  evidence  of  direct  writing  down  by  Moses  refers 
to  certain  passages  of  the  Thorah,  not  to  the  whole  Thorah, 
and  by  no  means  to  the  whole  Pentateuch.  And  criticism 
of  the  Pentateuch,  if  it  is  to  proceed  methodically,  must 
commence  with  an  examination  of  this  evidence. 

We  must  not  be  beguiled  from  admitting  a  just  claim  by  the 
fact,  that  adversaries  of  Christianity  and  of  revealed  religion 
were  the  first  to  deny  that  Moses  was  the  author  of  the  five 
books  of  Moses.  A  philosopher  in  the  'ATTOKPITLKOS  of 
Macarius  the  Magnesian  (edited  by  Blondel,  Paris  1876), 
asserts,  that  nothing  written  by  Moses  was  preserved,  but  that 
all  was  burnt  when  the  temple  was  reduced  to  ashes,  and 
that  what  now  bears  the  name  of  Moses  was  written  1800 
years  afterwards  VTTO  "Eo-Spa  KOI  TWV  a^  avrov.  The 
emperor  Julian  (in  Cyril  of  Alexandria)  pronounced  a  more 
moderate  judgment ;  he  regarded  the  Pentateuch,  of  whose 
religious  contents  he  forms  a  low  estimate,  as  not  entirely  the 
work  of  Moses,  but  partly  of  Ezra :  vrore  Be  TOP  "EcrSpav  diro 
<yva)lJi7]$  l$ias  irpocreveyKelv  TLVCU  SiaTeiveTai.  There  is  somewhat 
more  reason  to  be  assigned  for  what  Carlstadt,  de  canonicis 
scripturis,  1520,  Hobbes  in  the  Leviathan,  1670,  and  Spinoza 
in  the  Tractatus  tlicoloyico-politicus,  1670,  already  say  concern- 


2  4  INTRODUCTION. 

ing  the  Pentateuch.1  But  the  beginning  of  critical  analysis 
dates  from  the  French  physician  Astruc,  a  believer  in  Scrip 
ture  (died  at  Paris  1766),  and  the  author  of  Conjectures  sur  les 
Memoires  originaux,  dont  il  paroit  que  Moyse  sest  servi  pour 
composer  le  livre  de  la  Genese,  Brussels  1753,  of  which  Goethe 
says :  "Astruc,  a  physician  of  Louis  XIV.,  was  the  first  to  lay 
line  and  plummet  to  the  Pentateuch ;  and  what  have  not 
amateurs,  interested  in  science  and  unprejudiced  guests,  been 
already  guilty  of !  "  Astruc  is  the  founder  of  the  document 
hypothesis,  and  above  all  of  a  discrimination  of  two  chief 
authors  according  to  their  use  of  the  name  of  God.  Accepted  by 
Eichhorn,  this  document  hypothesis  was  extended  to  the  whole 
Pentateuch,  other  indications  of  authorship  besides  the  name 
of  God  being  discovered.  In  thus  straying  beyond  Genesis,  it 
became  the  fragment  hypothesis.  This  was  confirmed  by  the 
Englishman  Geddes,  and  developed  by  Vater  and  Hartmann, 
who  regard  the  Pentateuch  as  a  variegated  mosaic  in  the 
composition  of  which  there  is  more  of  chance  than  of  plan. 
Dissatisfaction  with  this  opinion,  and  the  endeavour  to  throw 
light  upon  the  origin  of  a  book,  which  was  on  the  whole  and 
in  its  greater  portion  a  single  work,  transformed  the  document 
hypothesis  into  the  completion  hypothesis.  This  was  ingeni 
ously  carried  out  by  Tuch,  who  in  his  Commentary  on  Genesis, 
1838,  distinguishes  throughout  the  Jehovist  as  the  complete! 
and  enlarger  from  the  Elohist,  the  author  of  the  fundamental 
work,  but  without  taking  any  further  part  in  Pentateuch 
criticism.  In  place  of  this  simple  state  of  affairs,  Ewald  puts 
a  complicated  succession  of  five,  or,  reckoning  Deuteronomy, 
six  authors.  This  incited  to  fresh  analysis,  but  without  any 
decided  advance.  Hupfeld's  paper  on  the  Sources  of  Genesis 
(1835),  on  the  contrary,  represents  an  advance  which  has 
stood  the  test.  He  shook  the  completion  hypothesis,  by 
making  it  probable  that  the  Jehovistic  portions  of  the  Penta- 

1  The  most  thorough  information  concerning  these  precursors  of  Pentateuch 
criticism  is  given  in  p.  1  of  Curtis's  "Sketches  on  Pentateuch  Criticism,"  in  the 
Bibliotheca  Sacra,  vol.  xli.  (Oberlin,  Ohio),  1884  and  onwards. 


SKETCH  OF  THE  PROGRESS  OF  PENTATEUCH  CRITICISM.       25 

teucli  had  originally  formed  an  independent  history,  and  by 
showing  (what  Ilgen,  Urkunden  des  jerus.  Tempelarchivs,  1798, 
had  already  remarked)  that  two  Elohistic  narrators  are  to  be 
distinguished.  Thus  the  question  now  arose  as  to  the  relation 
in  which  the  Jehovist  and  the  second  Elohist  stand  to  each 
other.  Hnpfeld  regards  them  as  two  independent  authorities  ; 
but  Noldeke,  in  his  Untersucliungen  zur  Kritik  des  A.  T.  1869, 
endeavours  to  show  that  the  work  of  the  second  Elohist  was 
quoted  and  worked  into  his  own  history  by  the  Jehovist. 
The  author  of  the  so-called  fundamental  narrative  was  still 
esteemed  the  older  of  the  two  Elohists,  till  Graf  (who  died 
1869  as  gymnasial  Professor  at  Meissen),  propagating  and 
developing  the  views  of  Eeuss,  his  Strasburg  tutor,  transformed 
the  theory  thus  far  held  with  respect  to  the  Pentateuch,  by 
pointing  out,  on  grounds  some  of  them  beyond  the  mark,  but 
some  convincing,  that  the  Elohistic  fundamental  narrative  is  not 
the  most  ancient,  but  the  most  recent,  and  indeed  a  post-exilian 
element  of  the  Pentateuch,  including  also  the  primaeval  history 
section.  This  latter  statement  is  as  he  admits,  when  pressed 
by  liiehm,  the  consequence  of  such  a  date  (his  chief  work  is 
Die  geschichtlichen  Bilcher  des  A.  T.  1866).  Kayser  (Das 
vorexilisclie  Bucli  der  Urgeschichte  Israels  und  seine  Enoeiter- 
ungen,  1874)  and  Wellhausen  ("Composition  des  Hexateuchs," 
in  the  Jahrb.fiir  deutsche  Theologie,  1876—77)  have  carried  out 
the  analysis  of  the  Pentateuch  and  the  book  of  Joshua  in  con 
formity  with  these  principles.  Wellhausen's  Geschichte  Israels 
(vol.  i.  1878,  ed.  2,  3,  with  the  T.  Prolegomena  zur  Geschichte 
Israels,  1883,  86)  is  the  most  important  work  on  this  stand 
point.  It  has  attained  in  the  region  of  Scripture  a  power  over 
minds,  which  may  be  compared  to  Hartmann's  Philosophic  des 
Unbewussten.  It  has,  as  the  Evang.  KZ.  says,  "  on  a  sudden 
completely  captivated  a  great  number  of  our  academic  theo 
logians."  It  has  gained  its  most  learned  and  influential  allies 
in  W.  Eobertson  Smith  (chief  work,  The  Old  Testament  in  the 
Jewish  Church,  Edinburgh  1881),  and  Abr.  Kuenen,  whose 
lectures  on  national  and  universal  religion  (German  1883)  are 


26  INTRODUCTION. 

an  ingenious  attempt  to  fit  the  legislation  of  the  middle  books  of 
the  Pentateuch  as  post-exilian  into,  and  to  make  them  appear 
as  essential  members  of  a  state  of  development  aiming  at 
Christianity.  Dillmann,  in  his  new  edition  of  Knobel's  Com 
mentary  on  the  Pentateuch,  takes  up  an  independent  separate 
position.  All  the  divergences  of  his  analysis,  however,  are  of 
small  note  before  the  one  that  he  embraces,  the  pre-exilian  origin 
of  the  legislation  of  the  middle  books,  although  he  makes  the 
final  redaction  of  the  whole  take  place  in  the  time  of  Ezra. 

I  have  purposely  sketched  the  course  of  development  taken 
by  the  criticism  of  the  Pentateuch  only  in  its  main  points, 
and  therefore  incompletely.  Much  has  in  this  department 
been  produced  laboriously,  only  to  be  forgotten,  and  to  serve 
as  litter  to  prepare  the  soil  for  a  fresh  aftergrowth. 

No  intelligent  observer  will  however  deny  that  the  work 
of  investigation  has  gone  onwards  and  not  moved  in  a  circle. 
The  factors  which  have  to  be  taken  account  of  with  respect  to 
the  composition  of  the  Pentateuch  have  obtained  recognition, 
and  since  the  completion  hypothesis  has  been  set  aside,  fellow- 
labourers  in  this  field  are  divided  less  by  the  different  results 
of  analysis,  than  by  their  different  religious  position  towards 
Holy  Scripture,  and  their  different  manner  of  turning  such 
results  to  account  with  respect  to  sacred  history. 

In  the  first  edition  of  ray  Commentary  on  Genesis,  1852,  I 
already  advocated  the  claims  of  critical  analysis,  and  obtained 
herein  the  concurrence  of  J.  H.  Kurtz.  In  the  later  editions 
I  acknowledged  the  necessity  of  distinguishing  two  Elohistic 
narrators.  Later  on  the  more  recent  revolution  in  the  criti 
cism  of  the  Pentateuch  so  far  influenced  me  that  I  now  per 
ceive  also,  as  my  eighteen  articles  in  Luthardt's  Zeitschr.  1880 
and  1881  show,  that  the  writer,  with  whose  account  of  the 
Creation  the  Pentateuch  opens,  is  not  relatively  to  the  narrator 
of  the  occurrences  in  Paradise  the  more  ancient,  but  the  more 
recent,  and  that  the  historico  -  legal  and  literary  process  by 
which  the  Pentateuch  was  brought  into  its  present  form,  was 
continued  down  to  the  post-exilian  period.  Nevertheless  my 


COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH.  27 

view  of  the  circumstances  differs  essentially  and  on  principle 
from  the  modern  one.  This  difference  will  come  out  more 
and  more  distinctly,  when,  before  investigating  the  self- 
evidence  of  the  Thorah,  we  have  explained  the  present  state 
of  analysis  and  its  technical  terms. 

The  work,  which  was  formerly  called  the  Elohistic  funda 
mental  work,  and  may  still  be  entitled  the  fundamental  work, 
inasmuch  as  it  forms  the  scaffolding  of  the  whole  in  the 
form  in  which  the  Pentateuch  at  present  exists,  begins  with 
Gen.  i.  1— ii.  4«.  Dillmann  designates  this  portion,  which  re 
lates  mainly  to  worship  and  law,  A  ;  we,  following  the  more 
usual  and  significant  appellations  of  "Wellhausen,  call  it  Q 
(book  of  four  covenants).  It  is  simply  impossible  that  Gen. 
ii.  5-iv.  should  proceed  from  the  same  author.  The  writer 
whose  book  opens  with  these  primeval  histories  is  the  Jahvist. 
Dillmann  calls  him  0 ;  we  name  him  J.  With  chap,  xx.,  if 
not  before,  a  third  narrator  makes  his  appearance,  who  like 
Q  calls  God  DNlta  down  to  the  Mosaic  turn  of  the  history,  but 
is  distinguished  by  a  mode  of  statement  and  tone  of  speech 
peculiar  to  himself.  As  long  as  Q  was  regarded  as  the  more 
ancient  Elohist,  he  was  called  the  second  Elohist ;  but  their 
relation  is  reversed  :  he  is  the  older  Elohist.  Dillmann  calls 
him  B ;  we  call  him  E.  The  works  of  J  and  E  seem  to  have 
been  blended  into  a  whole  even  before  Deuteronomy  received 
its  final  form  ;  we  call  this  whole  JE,  while  Wellhausen  calls 
the  writer  who  blended  J  and  E  the  Jehovist,  to  distinguish 
him  from  the  Jahvist.  Q  moreover  has  been  gradually 
enlarged,  and  the  work  which  thus  came  to  maturity,  at 
all  events  within  the  priestly  order,  called  as  it  was  to 
propagate  the  law,  is  now  called  the  Priest-Codex,  the  letters 
for  this  being  PC.  To  the  collections  of  laws  included  in 
PC  belongs  a  special  corpus  Icgum  in  Lev.  xvii.-xxv.,  with  the 
peroration  in  xxvi.,  which  we,  after  Klostermann,  call  the 
Law  of  Holiness,  and  designate  by  LH,  because  it  enforces  its 
prescriptions  by  mrv  ^K,  and  therewith  lays  stress  on  the  fact 
that  Jahveh  is  the  Holy  One,  and  He  who  makes  holy.  It 


2  8  INTRODUCTION. 

forms  a  middle  term  between  the  Jehovistic-Peuteronomic 
matter  and  diction  and  that  of  the  Priest- Codex,  with  which 
it  is  now  blended.  The  sign  for  Deuteronomy  in  its  original 
and  independent  form  is  D.  We  call  its  author  the  Deutero- 
nomian ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  we  call  the  writer,  who 
among  the  re-touchers  of  the  Pentateuch  manifests  in  his 
insertions  the  Deuteronomic  view  and  mode  of  statement,  the 
Deuteronomist.  His  interposing  hand  makes  itself  felt  through 
out  the  whole  Pentateuch,  the  purely  legislative  part  of  PC 
excepted,  though  not  by  far  to  the  extent  and  with  the 
frequency  that  it  does  so  in  the  post-Pentateuchal  historical 
books.  Perhaps  he  may  be  identified  with  the  author  ot 
Deuteronomy  in  its  present  form.  If  a  letter  were  wanted 
to  denote  him,  Dt  seems  appropriate,  as  does  7?,  set  down  by 
Dillmann  as  a  joint  designation  for  the  hands  that  took  part 
in  the  final  redaction  and  form  of  the  Pentateuch.  Analysis 
will  have  to  continue  uncertain  and  often  to  be  contented  with 
possibility  and  probability  in  particulars  ;  but,  in  general,  the 
constituents  above  described  may  all  be  distinguished.  Such 
distinction  naturally  involves  temporal  succession,  but  not  a 
prejudgment  concerning  the  date  of  composition  of  each  com 
ponent  part.  And  though  in  more  nearly  determining  such 
dates  we  should  have  to  advance  to  far  more  recent  times  than 
the  Mosaic,  yet  this  does  not  exclude  the  facts,  that  the  nar 
rative  is  based  on  tradition  and  that  the  codified  law  grows  from 
Mosaic  roots.  Dillmann  too  acknowledges  ancient  founda 
tions  in  the  Priest-Codex  and  in  Deuteronomy,  which  he  some 
times  marks  with  S  (Sinai),  his  cipher  for  the  Law  of  Holiness. 
This  leads  us  back  to  that  self-testimony  of  the  Pentateuch 
which  we  were  about  to  examine,  and  first  to  that  Book  of  the 
Covenant,  with  the  Decalogue  at  its  head,  which  according  to 
Ex.  xxiv.  was  written  by  Moses  and  read  by  him  in  the  audience 
of  the  people  when  they  entered  into  covenant  with  God  at  Sinai. 

The  Decalogue  announces  itself  as  that  which  is  relatively 
most  Divine  in  the  Law  ;  but  even  it  forms  no  exception  to  the 


THE  DECALOGUE.  29 

universal  fact,  that  in  Divine  revelation,  whether  by  word  or 
writing,  everything  is.  at  the  same  time,  both  Divine  and 
human.  The  mind  of  the  mediator  must  have  been  the  factory 
in  which  the  Divine  thoughts  of  "  the  ten  words "  took 
linguistic  expression.  The  human  words  in  which  God's 
revelation  is  here  set  are  the  words  of  Moses.  Now  the 
Decalogue  being  esteemed  the  most  radical  document  of  the 
Sinaitic  legislation,  and  (assuming  that  here  all  is  not  doubtful 
and  obscure)  the  most  genuine  of  genuine  productions  (cornp. 
Ps.  xxiv.,  acknowledged  by  Ewald  as  Davidic,  with  Ex.  xx.  7), 
we  may  to  some  extent  form  from  it  an  idea  of  the  mode 
of  thought  and  language  of  Moses.  The  Decalogue  then, 
not  only  in  the  text  of  Deut.  v.  6-18,  but  also  in  the  text 
of  the  Book  of  the  Covenant,  Ex.  xx.  2-17,  is  Jehovistico- 
Deuteronomic,  comp.  DHay  JVUtt,  and  Ex.  xiii.  3,  14;  Deut. 
vi.  12,  viii.  8,  etc.;  DnnK  D'nta  (in  the  Decalogue  and  in  the 
Book  of  the  Covenant,  xxiii.  13),  with  Deut.  vi.  14,  vii.  4, 
etc. ;  i?yo  DWn,  found  only  out  of  the  Decalogue,  Deut.  iv.  39  ; 
pfc6  nnn£  Dson  only  Deut.  iv.  18  ;  N3j?  ?$  as  in  Deut.  iv.  24, 
vi.  15  ;  HCK  as  in  Deuteronomy,  where,  except  xxviii.  68, 
nnafc?  nowhere  occurs ;  "pjftia  as  about  twenty  times  in 
Deuteronomy  and  nowhere  else  in  the  Pentateuch.  Also  D^Q 
of  the  Person  of  God,  r^lion  form,  IDH  with  an  accusative  object, 
probably  also  "W,  testifying  =  to  bear  witness  to,  to  enhance 
the  Jehovistico-Deuteronomic  expression.  The  circumstance 
however  that  "P  ifiJ  "prpK  'n  "it?K  is  a  formula  of  promise  run 
ning  through  the  whole  of  Deuteronomy  from  i.  20  to  xxxii.  52, 
and  that  '^i  "on^O  \yzb  is  a  favourite  Deuteronomic  motive,  iv. 
40,  vi.  2,  xi.  9,  xvii.  20,  xxv.  15,  weighs  more  in  the  balance, 
and  most  of  all,  that  ^ntf?  is  based  upon  the  saying  :  "  Thou  shalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  which  in  the  Pentateuch  is  exclusively 
Deuteronomic,  vi.  5,  xi.  1.  This  one  expression  snn^  shows  by 
itself  that  the  Decalogue  is  written  in  the  spirit  of  Deuteronomy, 
for  just  the  thought,  that  man  can  and  must  love  God,  is  of 
central  importance  in  this  book.  And  if  with  Ed.  Konig, 
Offenbarimgsbegriff,  ii.  346,  Kittle,  Geschichte,  i.  225,  and  others, 


30  INTRODUCTION. 

the  Decalogue  is  regarded  as  "copiously  provided  with  com 
mentating  additions  and  enlargements/'  there  still  remains  in 
the  original  form  to  which  it  is  reduced  the  Jehovistico-Deutero- 
nomian  D'nnN  DTi^x  (xx.  3,  and  in  the  Book  of  the  Covenant 
xxiii.  13  ;  comp.  Deut.  vi.  14,  vii.  4,  viii.  19,  etc.).  ^D'^y, 
comp.  Deut.  iv.  37;  DS3D  =  person,  nnttn,  comp.  Deut.  iv.  1 2, 
xvi.  23,  25  (Reminiscences  of  the  Decalogue),  and  also  Num. 
xii.  8  (Jehov),  *W,  the  same  as  DViy,  Deut.  xxxi.  21  ;  *!E>n  with 
ace.  of  object,  like  Deut.  vii.  25  and  Ex.  xxxiv.  24  (Jehovistic). 
How  then  is  this  Jehovistico  -  Deuteronornic  composition 
of  the  Decalogue  to  be  explained?  "Some  passages,"  says  Well- 
hausen,1  "  have  a  Deuteronornic  tinge  ;  there  is  certainly  a  back 
current  from  Deut.  v.  in  Ex.  xx."  Dillmann  too  does  not  get  on 
without  the  admission  of  such  a  current  from  the  Deuteronornic 
text  of  the  Decalogue  into  that  of  Exodus.  We  however 
relinquish  these  expedients,  and  renounce  the  reduction  of 
the  Decalogue  to  an  imaginary  original  form ;  and  the  ten 
words  being  in  both  texts  equally  Jehovistico-Deuteronomic, 
we  infer,  that  if,  of  the  two  characteristically  distinct  modes 
of  statement  in  the  Pentateuch,  one  falls  back  upon  an  original 
Mosaic  type,  it  is  the  Jehovistic -Deuteronomic  and  not  the 
Elohistic.  Nor  does  the  grounding  of  the  observation  of 
the  Sabbath,  Ex.  xx.  11,  on  the  seventh  day  of  creation 
contain  anything  characteristically  Elohistic.  If  it  did,  it 
would  show  itself  to  be  thereby  a  more  recent  interpolation. 
It  does  not  follow  from  Deut.  v.  15,  where  another  motive 
for  the  Sabbath  commandment  is  given,  that  it  is  such.  The 
Decalogue  is  there  freely  rendered  in  the  flow  of  hortatory 
oratory,  and  not  literally  reproduced.  On  the  other  hand  it 
may  be  inferred,  from  the  lyric  echo  in  Ps.  viii.,  that  this 
narrative  of  the  creation  was  extant  in  the  time  of  David. 
Much  more  then  may  we  assume,  that  the  tradition  therein 
committed  to  writing  was  already  known  to  Moses.  And 
why  should  we  not  admit  that  in  Gen.  ii.  2  sq.  Q  is  conforming 

1  "  Composition  of  the  Hexateuchs, "  in  Jahrb.  fur  deutsche  Theol.  1876,  p. 
558  sq.. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  COVENANT  AND  THE  SECOND  TABLES.       31 

with  the  reason  for  the   Sabbath  commandment  found  in  the 
Decalogue  ? 

We  now  turn  to  the  Book  of  the  Covenant  and  the  law  of 
the  second  tables.  The  former  comprises  the  fundamental 
laws  of  the  first  covenant,  xx.  22  sqq.,  xxi.-xxiii.,  the  latter 
those  of  the  renewed  covenant,  ch.  xxxiv. ;  both  portions 
come  from  JE.  The  fundamental  laws  of  the  renewed  cove 
nant  are  a  compendious  although  in  many  points  an  extended 
repetition  of  the  former  fundamental  laws.  Ch.  xxxiv.  is 
characterized  as  the  more  recent  recapitulation  by  the  circum 
stance,  that  it  gives  for  Dvjn  $?$,  xxiii.  14,  the  more  generally 
comprehensible  DspV2>  vfaw  (ver.  23  sq.)  ;  that  Pentecost  is  not 
here  called,  as  at  xxiii.  16,  •vspn  an,  but  rf5DB>  in  (ver.  22),  as  at 
Dent.  xvi.  10,  16  (in  PC  simply  ff\y\y&),  and  that  in  speaking 
of  the  feast  of  ingathering  or  close  of  harvest  (whose  name 
feast  of  tabernacles  first  appears  Deut.  xvi.  and  xxxi.  10,  the 
reason  for  it  being  stated  Lev.  xxiii.  42)  the  vague  expression 
rupn  nKva,  xxiii.  16,  is  exchanged  for  n:^n  nsipri  (Ver.  22).  The 
legislation  is  extended  vers.  19,  20  (this  ver.  20  verbally  —  xiii. 
13  </),  the  law  of  the  first-born,  which  was  only  sketched  in  the 
Book  of  the  Covenant,  xxii.  2S&,  29,  being  here  more  closely 
defined.  The  fact  that  xxiii.  19  is  verbally  repeated  in 
xxxiv.  26  also  speaks  for  the  secondary  relation  of  the  law 
of  the  second  table  to  the  Book  of  the  Covenant.  Thus  the 
double  testimony  that  "  Moses  wrote,"  given  at  xxiv.  4  and 
xxxiv.  27,  is  reduced  to  the  one,  that  according  to  the  account 
in  JE,  i.e.  both  according  to  J  and  Ey  Moses  committed  to 
writing  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  Sinaitic  covenant,  and 
our  investigation  is  limited  to  the  question,  whether  the  claim 
of  the  undoubtedly  older  series  of  laws,  xx.  22-xxiii.  (apart 
from  the  editorial  additions  which  here  as  everywhere  are 
not  to  be  excluded),  is  to  be  acknowledged  as  justified,  or  at 
least  as  having  no  decisive  reasons  against  it.  We  believe 
that  this  question  must  be  answered  in  the  affirmative.  That 
these  fundamental  laws  were  issued  in  connection  with  the 
l)ecalogue  is  confirmed  by  their  grouping.  Ewald  first  and 


32  INTRODUCTION. 

after  him  Bertheau  (Die  sieben  Gruppen  mosaischcr  Gesetze, 
1840)  called  attention  to  their  tendency  to  form  decades, 
which  here  and  there,  as  Ewald  subsequently  remarked,  may 
be  separated  into  two  pentades.  The  law  too  of  the  sacrificial 
altar,  xx.  24-26,  is  unquestionably  older  than  the  directions 
concerning  the  tabernacle  and  its  altar  of  burnt-offering,  and 
older  than  the  institution  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood.  This  is 
the  only  passage  in  the  Thorah,  which  under  a  certain  con 
dition  legalizes  the  Dim  ;  there  is  not  a  second.  The  language 
bears  the  impress  rather  of  the  Decalogue  than  of  the  Priest 
code,  to  which  e.g.  n^xn  snn  (xxiii.  15)  as  a  name  of  the 
feast  of  the  Passover  is  unknown.  Characteristic  of  the  Book 
of  the  Covenant  are  the  undoubtedly  antique  "TO  xxiii.,  17, 
transferred  thence  to  xxxiv.  33  ;  Deut.  xvi.  16,  xx.  13  ;  the 
designation  of  rulers  by  DTltan  and  also  by  D^^D,  which 
occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Deut.  xxxiii.  31  and  thence  in 
Job  xxxi.  11  ;  D^JO  for  Dsttya  elsewhere  only  in  the  section 
on  Balaam,  Num.  xxii.  28-33.  Much  is  without  further 
authority  in  the  A.  T.;  we  only  bring  forward  ^^  W\  xxi.  2, 
and  TOr6  rhw,  xxi.  26  sq. ;  iaJ3,  with  his  person  =:  he  alone, 
xxi.  3,  and  nw,  to  release,  xxiii.  5,  with  which  Dillmann  com 
pares  aity,  Deut.  xxxii.  36.  The  colouring  is  altogether  different 
from  that  of  the  PC  and  also  of  E  (for  words  such  as  iiEN  and 
j^DS,  the  latter  only  again  in  the  history  of  Joseph,  are  no 
marks  of  E  in  contradistinction  to  J  and  D~),  but  is  just 
that  which  is  peculiar  to  J  and  in  a  more  developed  manner 
to  D.  Especially  has  the  conclusion  with  its  promises  and 
the  peculiar  figure  of  the  angel,  an  unmistakable  Jehovistico- 
Deuteronomic  ring.  We  have  before  us  in  the  Book  of 
the  Covenant  as  well  as  in  the  Decalogue  the  special 
Mosaic  type,  and  that  in  its  relatively  oldest  and  purest 
form. 

On  the  other  hand  God's  penal  sentence,  "  I  will  utterly 
blot  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalek  from  under  heaven," 
which  Moses  was  to  write  in  memoriam,  contains  nothing 
linguistically  characteristic.  The  account  is  however  histori- 


DESIGN"  AND  CHARACTER  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  33 

cal,  for  Dent.  xxv.  17  calls  it  to  remembrance,  and  1  Sam.  xv. 
declares,  that  Saul  has  forfeited  the  throne  for  not  having 
acted  in  strict  accordance  with  it. 

The  fact  too  that  Moses  wrote  a  list  of  the  stations  is 
incontestable ;  but  that  Num.  xxxiii.  is  his  autographic  list,  is 
neither  said,  nor  could  be  proved  to  be  such  if  it  were  said. 
It  is  however  no  fictitious  record  of  either  E  or  Jt  but  an 
ancient  extant  document.  For  (1)  we  have  here  the  names 
of  twenty  stations  occurring  nowhere  else,  of  which  the 
sixteen,  from  Eithmah  onwards,  xxx.  18,  seem  to  belong  to  the 
thirty-seven  years  between  the  2nd  and  40th.  (2)  Instead  of 
the  three  stations  from  Ijje  Abarim,  xxx.  45-47,  seven  others 
are  named  in  xxi.  12-20.  (3)  Four  of  the  forty-one  stations 
are  also  brought  forward,  Deut.  x.  6-9,  but  with  statements 
not  in  harmony  with  Num.  xxxiii.  The  biblical  historians 
reproduce  with  fidelity  traditions  differing  from  each  other, 
and  abstain  on  principle  from  forced  harmonistic  interference. 
In  the  present  case,  the  testing  of  the  mutual  relation  of  the 
historico-geographical  details  is  withheld  from  criticism.  On 
the  whole  there  is  striking  harmony.  For  the  Pentateuchal 
narrators  are  agreed  in  the  two  facts,  that  the  sojourn  in  the 
wilderness  between  Egypt  and  Canaan  lasted  forty  years  (comp. 
Amos  ii.  10,  v.  25),  and  that  the  people  having  arrived  at 
Kadesh  or  its  neighbourhood,  were  turned  back  to  wander 
in  the  desert  for  yet  thirty-eight  years. 

Next  to  Ex.  xxiv.  4,  the  most  important  self-testimony  of 
the  Pentateuch  to  the  n^D  an^l  is  Deut.  xxxi.  9,  24.  To  be 
able  to  examine  it  critically,  we  must  first  call  to  mind  the 
structure  of  this  book.  It  is  a  historical  book.  In  the  prophetic 
books  there  follow  after  a  short  title  the  words  of  the  prophets 
named,  but  here  Moses  is  introduced  as  a  speaker,  and  indeed 
in  such  wise  that  his  discourses  are  set  in  a  broad  frame 
work  of  historical  introductions,  conclusions  and  insertions. 
Two  introductory  discourses,  i.  6-iv.  40,  and  v.  1-xi.  32, 
between  which  occurs  iv.  41-43  (comp.  Num.  xxxv.  14),  the 
appointment  of  the  three  trans  -  Jordanic  cities  of  refuge, 


34  INTRODUCTION. 

prepare  for  the  final  legislation  in  view  of  the  approaching 
occupation  of  the  land  and  unite  it,  by  a  recapitulatory  retro 
spect  of  the  events  from  Horeb  to  Kadesh  and  Moab,  with  the 
fundamental  legislation.  The  middle  of  the  book  is  taken  up 
with  the  corpus  legum,  c.  xii.-xxvi.,  which,  as  it  was  introduced 
by  two  prologues,  is  followed  by  two  perorations.  The  first 
of  these,  xxvii.-xxviii.,  begins  with  the  command  to  write  after 
their  entry  all  the  words  of  this  Thorah  on  stones  in  Mount 
Ebal,  and  to  proclaim  the  blessing  and  the  curse  upon  Mount 
Gerizim  and  Mount  Ebal ;  the  speaker  himself  developing 
both  in  chap,  xxviii.  (a  pendant  to  Lev.  xxvi.).  In  the  second 
peroration,  xxix.— xxx.,  the  covenant  with  Jahveh  is  renewed 
with  a  reference  to  the  acts  of  God  that  have  been  experienced, 
and  the  will  of  God  that  has  been  made  known  :  the  blessing 
and  curse  are  set  before  the  people  for  their  choice,  and  at  the 
same  time  a  future  return  from  captivity  promised  them  if 
they  repent.  Moses  then  confirms  Joshua  in  his  calling,  and 
delivers  to  the  Levitical  priests  and  the  elders  the  Thorah 
written  by  himself  for  periodical  public  reading,  xxxi.  1-1 3.1 
He  and  Joshua  are  also  commanded  to  write  the  song  which 
follows  in  chap,  xxxii.,  and  the  book  of  the  Law  completed  by 
this  appendix  is  delivered  to  the  Levites  to  be  kept  by  the 
side  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  xxxi.  14  sqq.  The  song, 
together  with  the  concluding  exhortation,  is  purposely  placed 
at  the  end  of  the  book.  At  xxxii.  48  the  diction  of  the 
former  books  begins  again,  so  that  the  blessing  of  Moses,  xxxiii., 
lies  outside  Deuteronomy  properly  so  called.  The  historian, 
who  in  Deuteronomy  relates  the  testamentary  discourses  and 
last  directions  of  Moses,  neither  is  Moses  nor  intends  to  be 
taken  for  him,  for  he  introduces  him  as  speaking  (i.  1-5,  iv. 
44-49),  and  admits  into  the  discourses  of  Moses  all  kinds 
of  historical  (iv.  41-43,  x.  6-9)  and  antiquarian  details 
(ii.  10-12,  20-23,  iii.  9,  11,  136,  14),  which  look  the  more 

1  That  nKTn  minn  here  is  Deuteronomy,  is  also  acknowledged  in  Sifri  on 
Deut.  xvii.  18  (105&,  ed.  Friedmann) :  min  iWE  &6«  *?Tl$T\  DV1  p*Vlp  p&5 
*W,*.e.  "  on  the  day  of  assembly  ('VJi?D,  xxxi.  12)  only  Deuteronomy  is  read." 


THE  TESTIMONY  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  35 

strange  the  more  admirable  the  deep  psychological  truth  of 
these  discourses  as  to  both  their  tone  and  contents  is  felt  to 
be  :  they  breathe  the  sincerity  of  one  about  to  depart,  and 
his  grief  at  the  refusal  of  permission  for  him  to  enter 
the  promised  land  gives  them  throughout  a  melancholy 
keynote. 

When  Eichhorn  says  in  vol.  iii.  of  his  Introduction,  that 
"  Deuteronomy  bears  on  every  page  the  stamp  of  a  work 
written  on  the  borders  of  the  grave,"  this  is  a  testimony  to 
the  great  natural  and  spiritual  gifts  of  the  Deuteronomian. 
We  assume  for  these  testamentary  discourses  a  traditional 
substratum,  which  the  free  reproduction  follows.  This  is 
moreover  so  spirited  and  artistic,  that  neither  the  freely 
reproduced  discourses  of  the  older  prophets  in  Kings  and 
Chronicles,  nor  those  Psalms  in  the  Psalter  composed  on  the 
subject  of  David's  condition  and  state  of  mind,  equal  it.  The 
relation  of  the  Deuteronomian  to  Moses  may  be  compared  to 
the  relation  of  the  Isaianic  author  of  Isa.  xl.-lx.  to  that  kine 

o 

among  prophets,  and  to  the  relation  of  the  fourth  evangelist  to 
his  Master  and  Lord.  The  Deuteronomian  has  completely 
appropriated  the  thoughts  and  language  of  Moses,  and  from  a 
genuine  oneness  of  mind  with  him  reproduces  them  in  the 
highest  intensity  of  Divine  inspiration.  The  writing  of 
history  with  a  tendency  or  a  free  invention  of  historical  facts 
would  be  contrary  to  that  veracity  which  is  the  first  of  all 
the  requirements  to  be  made  of  a  historian  ;  on  the  other  hand, 
the  historian  shows,  according  to  the  view  of  antiquity,  the 
measure  of  his  gifts  and  the  dignity  of  his  vocation  in  his  free 
reproduction  of  the  discourses  of  great  men. 

We  cannot  then  lightly  disregard  the  historical  nature  of 
na?!D  sn^l,  Deut.  xxxi.  It  is  not  the  self-testimony  of  Moses, 
but  testimony  concerning  him.  The  Deuteronomian  testifies, 
that  Moses  before  his  departure  left  behind  with  the  priestly 
order  an  autograph  Thorah  to  be  preserved  and  disseminated. 
If  this  nt?D  nnm  were  intended  to  apply  to  the  whole  book  of 
Deuteronomy  in  its  present  state,  it  would  be  a  pseudepi- 


36  INTRODUCTION. 

graphic  work.  But  the  premiss  must  be  denied,  and 
consequently  also  this  conclusion.  The  Mosaic  Thorah  of 
the  fortieth  year  is  indeed  contained  in  Deuteronomy,  but  not 
identical  with  it. 

That  the  testimony,  Deut.  xxxi.  9,  24,  is  to  be  referred 
merely  to  the  kernel  of  the  Moabite  legislation,  framed  as  it 
is  in  history  and  introduced  by  prologues,  may  be  inferred 
from  xxvii.  8,  according  to  which  the  people  having  arrived 
at  Jordan  were  to  write  "  all  the  words  of  this  Thorah "  in 
plastered  stones  on  Mount  Ebal.  The  demonstrative  nstn  in 
n&tfn  minn,  as  already  remarked,  always  points  in  Deuteronomy 
forwards  or  to  the  present,  and  not  backwards  to  the  Sinaitic 
legislation.  So  does  the  ntftn  minn,  i.  5  ;  for  it  is  again  taken 
up  at  iv.  44,  vi.  1,  and  also  the  nwn  minn  in  nwn  minn  nr^D 
of  the  law  concerning  the  king,  xvii.  18,  where  it  is  question 
able,  whether  we  must  translate :  a  copy  of  this  law,  the 
rare  occurrence  of  ritf  before  indeterminate  nouns  seeming 
to  speak  against  it,  or :  the  deuterosis  of  this  law  =  this 
Deuteronomy.  In  this  latter  case  run  would  have  been 
clearer,  but  was  not  necessary,  for  xxviii.  61  also  changes 
ntftn  minn  nao  for  the  more  frequent  nrn  minn  nao,  xxix.  20, 
xxx.  10  ;  Josh.  i.  8.  The  synagogue  tradition  is  itself 
uncertain  ;  the  Midrash,1  like  the  LXX.,  understands  it  of 
Deuteronomy,  Onkelos,  and  with  him  the  Peshitta,  of  a  copy 
,  another  reading  is  pt^na),  the  Talmud,  of  a  duplum  (comp. 
,  Gen.  xliii.  1 5  ;  Deut.  xv.  1 8),  i.e.  a  double  copy.  The 
account  of  the  carrying  out  of  Moses'  injunction,  Deut.  xxvii. 
1-8,  which  we  read  in  Josh.  viii.  30-32,  is  decisive  for  the 
meaning  copy,  as  translated  by  both  the  Targum  and  Peshitta 
in  Josh.  viii.  32.  As  in  xvii.  18  so  here  it  is  a  copy  that  is 
spoken  of,  in  the  law  of  the  king  a  copy  in  a  book,  here  a 
copy  upon  memorial  stones.  And  that  minn  rwo  is  not  a 
designation  of  Deuteronomy,  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact 
that  this  book  is  called  in  the  paragraph  immediately 
preceding  Josh.  viii.  31,  n^E>  min  naD.  Besides,  if  it  were 

1  Slfri  (ed.  Fricdmann)  1056. 


THE  TIIOKAH  OF  THE  FORTIETH  YEAH.  o  t 

used  to  designate  Deuteronomy  we  should  ratlier  expect  nrj'D 
nt^o  nro  "iG5>x  minn  than  nro  IPK  roo  min  nr.r?3.  Hence  we 
must  translate,  "  he  wrote  there  upon  the  stones  the  (a)  copy 
of  the  Thorah,  which  Moses  had  written  in  the  presence  of 
the  children  of  Israel." 

And  the  Thorah  here  meant  is  the  recapitulated,  completed 
and  in  some  respects  modified  Thorah  of  the  Moabite 
covenant,  contained  in  the  codex,  Dent,  xii.—  xxvi.  This 
codex  does  not  however  give  such  an  impression  of  being  a 
document  inserted  in  its  original  form,  as  does  the  Book  of 
the  Covenant  or  even  the  Law  of  Holiness.  For  Deuteronomy 
is  in  like  manner  as  St.  John's  Gospel  entirely  a  work  of  one 
cast.  Its  historical  connecting  links,  conclusions,  transitions 
and  narratives  have  all  the  same  colouring  as  the  discourses  ; 
and  this  oneness  of  tone  is  true  also,  though  in  perceptibly 
slighter  force,  of  the  Deuterosis  of  the  Law  contained  in 
chs.  xii.-xxvi.  Here  too  the  mount  of  legislation  is  called 
^h,  xviii.  16  ;  the  day  of  legislation,  bnpn  DT1,  xviii.  16  ;  the 
land  of  promise,  cam  J?n  rot  ptf,  xxvi.  9,  15  ;  the  people  of 
God,  n^D  Dy,  xiv.  2,  xxvi.  18  (comp.  vii.  6);  the  taking  in 
possession,  PUJBHf,  xii.  1,  xv.  4,  xix.  2,  xxi.  1,  xxiii.  21, 
xxv.  19.1  The  codex  moreover  nowhere  stands  in  actual 
contradiction  with  the  prologues ;  for  in  iv.  41  it  is  the 
setting  apart  of  the  three  trans- Jordanic,  and  in  xix.  of  the 
three  cis-Jordanic  cities  of  refuge  and  their  eventual  increase 
that  is  spoken  of.  Xor  are  references  to  the  Book  of  the 
Covenant,  which  forms  the  basis  of  the  legal  codex,  wanting 
in  the  prologues,  e.g.  vii.  2  2  ;  comp.  Ex.  xxiii.  2  9  sq.,  where  the 
contradiction  to  ix.  3  is  obviated  by  the  consideration  that 
S>Din  &6  has  the  meaning  usual  in  Deuteronomy  of  moral 
impossibility  (thou  canst  not  =  shall  or  must  not). 

Thus  not  only  the  Mosaic  discourses,  but  also  the  Mosaic 
laws  are  throughout  pervaded  by  the  subjectivity  of  the 

1  Comp.  also  *JB»  pj>,  xx.  3,  with  vii.  21,  xxi.  6  5  ^H  (for  ntan),  xix.  11,  as 
in  iv.  42,  vii.  22,  and  TpQri,  xiii.  6,  and  xiii.  11,  xx.  1  (=  Ps.  Ixxxi.  11),  as  m 
viii.  14,  15,  1C. 


3  8  INTRODUCTION. 

Deuteronomian.  In  the  historical  orations  he  gives  a  sketch 
of  traditional  occurrences,  and  this,  in  his  consciousness  of 
unanimity  with  Moses,  he  enlarges  and  further  developes 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  condition  and  frame  of  mind  of 
the  speaker.  In  the  codified  law  he  renovates  the  traditional 
legislation  of  the  fortieth  year  as  the  moral  and  religious 
needs  of  his  time  required.  Not  a  few  laws,  which  were 
without  an  object  in  the  later  times  of  the  kings,  the  times  of 
the  Deuteronomian,  afford  a  proof  that  Deuteronomy  contains 
actual  testamentary  injunctions  of  Moses.  This  applies  to 
xx.  15-18,  for  in  the  later  times  of  the  kings  there  was  no 
longer  war  with  the  old  Canaanite  races ;  to  xxv.  1 7  sqq.,  for 
then  the  decree  of  extirpation  against  Amalek  was  already 
executed ;  to  xxiii.  8  sq.,  for  the  exhortation  to  a  grateful 
demeanour  towards  Edomites  and  Egyptians  is  opposed  to  the 
subsequent  change  of  relations  between  both  these  nations 
and  Israel ;  to  ch.  xii.,  for  that  the  slaughter  of  animals  for 
domestic  use  might  take  place  anywhere  in  the  country,  was 
self-evident  in  post-Mosaic  times  and  needed  no  concession  ; 
to  xvii.  15,  for  the  prohibition  to  make  a  foreigner  king  is 
comprehensible  in  the  mouth  of  Moses,  but  without  motive  or 
object  in  so  late  an  age  as  Josiah's,  and  generally  during  the 
period  of  the  undivided  and  divided  kingdoms  ;  to  xviii.  2 1  sq., 
for  the  criterion  of  the  true  prophet  here  laid  down  could 
no  longer  suffice  in  the  seventh  century.  And  why  should 
not  this  legislation  be  in  its  root  and  stem  Mosaic,  since  it 
must  be  admitted  beforehand  that  Moses  would  before  his 
death  once  more  impress  the  law  of  God  upon  the  heart  of 
the  people,  and  give  a  further  exposition  of  the  will  of  God 
with  reference  to  their  dwelling  in  the  promised  land  !  If 
the  Book  of  the  Covenant  is  genuinely  Mosaic,  then  Mosaic 
foundations  must  be  assumed  for  Deuteronomy ;  for  the 
legislation  of  the  fortieth  year  is  the  Mosaic  Deuterosis  of  the 
Book  of  the  Covenant,  but  Deuteronomy  in  its  present  form, 
as  the  work  of  the  Deuteronomian,  is  a  post-Mosaic  Deuterosis 
of  this  Deuterosis. 


RELATION  OF  DEUTERONOMY  TO  THE  BOOK  OJ?   -L 

All  the  laws  of  the  Sinaitic  legislation  codified  in  the 
Book  of  the  Covenant  are  repeated  and  emended  in  Deutero 
nomy  ;  the  penal  enactments  concerning  injuries  to  limbs  or 
property,  Ex.  xxi.  18-xxii.  14;  the  warning  against  lightly 
speaking  against  rulers,  Ex.  xxii.  2  7  ;  and  the  prohibition  of 
even  uttering  the  names  of  idols,  Ex.  xxiii.  1 3  (comp.  Ps.  xvi. 
4),  alone  excepted.  All  other  fundamental  laws  are  at  least 
brought  to  remembrance,  and  in  some  cases  also  remodelled. 
Instances  of  such  remodelling  are  Deut.  xv.  12,  comp.  Ex.  xxi. 
2,  according  to  which  the  Hebrew  bond-maid  is  to  go  out  free 
in  the  seventh  year,  as  well  as  the  Hebrew  bond  -  man ; 
and  xxiv.  7,  comp.  Ex.  xxi.  16,  by  which  man-stealing  is 
to  be  punished  with  death  only  in  case  he  who  is  stolen  and 
sold  as  a  slave  is  a  fellow-countryman.  The  actually  most 
important  modification  relates  to  worship.  In  Ex.  xx.  24 
sqq.  the  erection  of  a  place  of  sacrifice  is  not  restricted  to  one 
locality,  in  opposition  to  which  Deuteronomy,  in  cli.  xii.  and 
throughout,  has  in  view  a  central  sanctuary,  which  God  will 
choose  out  of  all  the  tribes  as  the  exclusive  place  of  sacrifice. 
But  the  discrepancy  between  Deuteronomy  and  the  Book  of 
the  Covenant  is  in  this  matter  also  only  a  relative  one.  The 
process  which  regulated  the  origin  of  the  Thorah  being 
both  human  and  divine,  it  is  quite  comprehensible  that  the 
first  saying  concerning  the  place  of  sacrifice  should  be  rudi 
mentary,  sketchy,  vague,  and  should,  in  the  further  course  of 
legislation,  be  outdone  and  modified.  This  is  however  already 
done  in  the  Book  of  the  Covenant  itself,  for  the  law  there 
given  of  the  three  great  pilgrimage  festivals,  Ex.  xxiii.  14-18, 
assumes  the  future  establishment  of  a  central  sanctuary.  Still 
a  central  place  of  worship  and  an  exclusive  place  of  worship 
are  not  as  yet  one  and  the  same,  and  it  was  the  legislation  of 
the  fortieth  year  which,  in  view  of  the  approaching  occupation 
of  the  promised  land,  took  this  further  step  and  limited  the 
worship  of  God  by  sacrifices  and  other  offerings  exclusively  to 
the  one  sanctuary.  The  history  too  of  Israel  runs  on  with  a 
tendency  to  this  end.  Even  the  period  of  the  Judges  shows 


38  INTRODUCTION. 

in  the  tabernacle  at  Shiloh  at  least  an  attempt  at  the  in 
stitution  of  a  central  sanctuary.  David  and  Solomon  built 
the  splendid  stone  temple  at  Jerusalem.  Nevertheless  the 
Bamoth  (local  places  of  worship)  were  never  entirely  and 
permanently  done  away  with  in  pre-exilian  times.  Deutero 
nomy,  as  we  have  it,  reproduces  the  testamentary  Thorah 
of  Moses  with  the  evident  purpose  of  giving  support  to  that 
effort  for  centralization  which  aimed  at  the  abolition  of  local 
worship,  but  the  exertions  of  Hezekiali  (Isa.  xxxvi.  7)  and 
the  still  greater  ones  of  Josiah  had  only  a  temporary  success. 
Besides,  the  jus  reformandi  of  these  kings  extended  only  to 
Judah.  For  scarcely  had  David  and  Solomon  built  a  central 
place  of  worship,  than  the  disruption  of  the  kingdom 
occurred  to  thwart  the  recent  unity  of  worship.  The  pro 
phets  and  psalmists  of  Judah  know  but  one  holy  city,  and 
one  sanctuary,  the  temple  on  Zion.  But  the  prophets  of 
the  northern  kingdom  must  have  esteemed  as  permissible, 
on  Ephraimite  soil  also,  the  worship  of  Jehovah  by  sacrifice 
(see  1  Kings  xix.  10  ;  Hos.  ix.  4),  for  the  disruption  of  the 
kingdom  was  an  authorized,  providential  fact,  and  hence  the 
condition  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  a  God-decreed  exceptional 
condition. 

What  however  was  the  case  with  the  tabernacle,  that 
anticipation  of  a  central  place  of  worship  ?  The  people 
needing  during  the  forty  years  a  central  sanctuary  as  well 
as  single  direction  in  general,  the  tabernacle  is  no  anachronism. 
Graf,  however,  in  his  article,  de  templo  Silonensi,  1855,  began 
his  critical  investigation  of  the  Pentateuch  with  the  assertion, 
that  the  Mosaic  tabernacle  was  a  copy  of  the  temple  of  Solomon 
diminished  to  a  portable  tent.  Now  all  who  side  with  him 
have  this  in  common,  that  they  refuse  all  value  to  the  historical 
element,  which  in  the  Priest-codex  forms  the  frame  and  basis  of 
the  legislation.  And  in  fact  this  depreciation  of  the  historical 
element  is  the  result  of  relegating  the  narrator  to  post-exilian 
times,  for  it  is  inconceivable  that  so  vigorous  and  fruitful  a  source 
of  genuine  traditions  from  the  Mosaic  aoje  should  at  so  late  a 


THE  HISTORICAL  ELEMENT  IN  THE  TTJEST- CODEX.  41 

date  be  still  extant.  We  nevertheless  firmly  maintain  (1) 
that  the  preceding  history  of  Israel,  from  the  Elohistic  account 
of  the  creation  to  the  history  of  Joseph,  was  written  in  ancient 
pre-exilian  times.  For  it  must  be  assumed  that  legends  and 
reminiscences  of  these  matters  were  extant,  while  it  may  be 
concluded  from  the  pre-exilian  literature  that  they  had  on  the 
whole  the  form  in  which  they  appear  in  Genesis  ;  (2)  that 
the  historico-legislative  element,  as  well  in  PC  as  in  JE  and  D, 
was  not  independently  invented  for  the  sake  of  foisting  a 
Mosaic  origin  upon  the  legislation,  but  derived  from  tradition, 
which  in  many  points,  as  e.g.  in  respect  of  the  tabernacle 
(whether  oracle  or  place  of  worship),  did  not  everywhere 
furnish  the  same  views  and  statements ;  and  (3)  that  the 
foundation  of  the  legislation  codified  by  an  Elohistic  pen  was 
already  laid  at  the  time  when  Deuteronomy  originated.  For 
(1)  Deuteronomy  points  back,  xxiv.  8,  to  the  law  of  leprosy, 
which  is  found,  Lev.  xiii.— xiv.,  as  a  component  part  of  the 
Priest- codex.  (2)  The  law  as  to  what  animals  might  be 
eaten  and  what  were  forbidden,  Deut.  xiv.  3-20,  is  a  passage 
adopted  from  the  Elohistic  legislation,  Lev.  xi. ;  the  reproduc 
tion  breaking  off,  Deut.  xiv.  19  sq.,  where  Lev.  xi.  21-23 
continues.  (3)  The  setting  apart  of  three  cities  of  refuge 
east  of  the  Jordan,  Deut.  iv.  41  sqq.,  is  the  fulfilment  of  the 
Elohistic  law,  Num.  xxxv.;  and  the  injunction,  Deut.  xix.  1-13, 
is  a  repetition  and  completion  of  this  law.  (4)  What  is  said, 
Deut.  xviii.  2,  of  the  priestly  race  is  a  retrospect  of  Num.  xviii. 
20,  23  sq. ;  and  (5)  wherever  else  Deuteronomy  is  content  to 
give  a  general  outline  of  an  injunction,  it  presupposes  the 
existence  of  more  special  appointments,  (a)  When  it  gives 
the  name  JTODn  in,  xvi.  31,  10,  to  the  feast  at  the  close  of 
harvest,  which  in  the  Book  of  the  Covenant  (Ex.  xxiii.  16) 
and  in  the  law  of  the  second  tables  (Ex.  xxxiv.  22)  is  called 
f^DNn  in,  it  alludes  to  the  historical  reference  in  the  Law  of 
Holiness,  Lev.  xxiii.  42  sq.,  of  which  this  more  recent  name  is 
the  expression.  (5)  When  it  is  forbidden,  xvii.  1,  to  sacrifice 
an  animal  which  has  any  blemish,  there  was  required  for  the 


42  INTRODUCTION. 

layman,  and  still  more  for  the  priest,  information  (by  no  means 
completely  given  xv.  21)  as  to  what  was  and  what  was  not  to 
be  regarded  as  a  blemish  (DID)  involving  incapability  for  sacri 
fice,  and  the  rules  respecting  this  being  given  in  the  Law  of 
Holiness,  Lev.  xxii.  20-25,  are  therefore  essentially  pre- 
Deuteronomian.  (c)  Also  when  it  is  forbidden,  xxiii.  1,  to  take 
a  father's  wife,  it  is  not  intended  to  limit  the  crime  of  incest 
to  this  one  case,  but  the  lawgiver  has  in  view,  beside  this 
one  chief  case,  the  other  nearly  resembling  criminal  acts 
mentioned  Lev.  xviii.  7  sqq.,  as  shown  by  the  anathemas, 
xxvii.  20,  22,  23. 

These  references  of  Deuteronomy  to  the  Elohistic  element 
in  the  Priest -codex  suffice  to  show,  that  together  with 
the  Mosaic  type  of  legal  phraseology  and  the  Jehovistico- 
Deuteronomic  mode  of  statement  formed  upon  it,  the  Elohistic 
type  already  existed  in  the  pre-Deuteronomic  period.  The 
difference  of  time  does  not  suffice  to  explain  the  diversity  of 
these  types.  They  must,  equally  with  the  Asaphite  and 
Korahite  psalmody,  be  referred  to  authorities  at  once  creative 
and  dominant ;  the  Jehovistico  -  Deuteronomic  type  is  of 
Mosaic  origin,  the  Elohistic  originated  with  some  eminent 
priest,  after  whose  example  this  legal  and  historical  phraseo 
logy  was  further  developed  within  the  priestly  order,  just  as 
the  prophetico-historical  style  was  within  the  schools  of  the 
prophets.  The  PC  is  the  product  of  a  successive  develop 
ment  and  formation,  which,  even  supposing  it  to  reach  down 
to  post-exilian  times,  has  still  its  roots  in  the  Mosaic  period. 

Very  erroneously  have  certain  linguistic  characteristics  been 
urged  in  favour  of  the  contemporaneousness  and  high  antiquity 
of  the  component  parts  of  the  Pentateuch.  fcOn  occurs  only 
eleven  times  in  the  Pentateuch  (never  in  Deuteronomy),  tfin 
195  times  (thirty-six  times  in  Deuteronomy).  This  feminine 
Kin,  which  is  by  means  of  the  final  redaction  inseparably 
impressed  upon  the  Pentateuch  in  all  its  component  parts,  is, 
on  the  assumption  that  distinction  of  gender  was  not  con 
sistently  carried  out  in  the  ancient  language,  an  archaism. 


THE  ELOHISTIC  ELEMENT  IN  DEUTERONOMY.  43 

Tliis  assumption  is  questionable;1  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
•nyj,  which  occurs  twenty-one  times  in  the  sense  of  girl,  is  a 
veritable  archaism  ;  Deuteronomy  even  has  frequently  nhra  "iy:, 
and  only  once,  xxiii.  19,  myj.  pun;,  Deut.  viii.  3,  16,  is  no 
archaism,  and  cannot  pass  for  one  (comp.  pipy,  Isa.  xxvi.  16); 
the  |  is  an  appendage  conforming  the  perfect  to  the  imperfect 
as  in  Syriac,  and  here  and  there  in  current  Arabic;  the 
Arabic,  ancient  Ethiopic  and  Aramean  show  that  itap  without  j 
was  the  primitive  form.  pX  too  (with  the  article  ?Nn),  Gen. 
xix.  8,  25,  xxvi.  3,  4,  Lev.  xviii.  27,  Deut,  iv.  42,  vii.  22,  xix. 
11,  is  no  mark  of  an  ancient  period  of  the  language,  for  the 
Arabic  ^\f  ^Ethiopic  cllii,  Aramean  pW,  7]^  (with  a 
strengthening  n  and  /„•),  show  that  this  pronoun  as  the  expression 
of  the  plural  had  originally  a  vowel  termination.  ~No  more 
is  nx,  which  is  twice,  viz.  Num.  xi.  15,  Deut.  v.  27  (as  also 
Ezek.  xxviii.  14),  pointed  ^  as  masculine.  And  granting 
that  inT  exclusively  occurring  in  the  Pentateuch  is,  as  com 
pared  with  in^l,  the  older  form  of  the  name,  yet  this  admission 
cannot  be  utilized  for  critical  purposes  ;  for  in  the  Hagiographa 
also  (Ezra,  Neh.  Chron.)  this  town  is  always  called  in"i\  in 
opposition  to  which  in  the  Nebiim  (from  Joshua  onwards) 
always  in*1"]11  (except  2  Kings  xxv.  5).  So  that  in  this  case 
also  the  uniformity  has  to  be  set  to  the  account  of  the  final 
redaction.  Nor  can  ^K  and  ^K  be  so  critically  handled  as 
by  Giesebrecht ;  for  "OK  is  in  agreement  with  the  Arabic  Ul,  the 
Ethiopic  ana,  the  Aramean  &OX;  the  older  form  (with  analogically 
influenced  transition  of  d  into  £),  ^bs  (from  ana  -f-  ki  with  d 
obscured  to  d),  has  a  secondary  relation  something  like  that  of 
eycoye  to  e<ya). 

In  speaking  of  Deuteronomy  we  have  not  yet  given  an 
opinion  concerning  the  n&TDnWi,  xxxi.  22,  as  applied  to  the  nTS?, 
Deut.  xxxii.  We  now  do  so  by  taking  a  view  of  the  poetry 
of  the  Mosaic  age  in  general.  We  have  already  spoken  of  the 
Amorite  song  of  victory,  Num.  xxi.  27-30,  and  also  of  the  highly 

1  See  Xo.  viii.  of  my  "  Pentateucli-kritischen  Studicn,"  in  Luthardt's  Zeitsch. 
for  1880. 


44  INTRODUCTION. 

poetical  quotation  from  the  Books  of  "Wars,  Num.  xxi.  14  sq. 
The  former  is  not  Israelite,  while  as  to  the  Book  of  the 
Wars,  its  title  and  the  fragment  of  three  lines  given  as  an  ex 
tract,  will  only  allow  of  very  uncertain  conjectures.  There  is 
however  nothing  against  the  supposition,  that  the  foundation 
of  this  Israelite  Iliad  was  laid  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus.  It 
is  possible,  for  a  history  of  such  poetic  tone  and  form  as  the 
Exodus  must  of  necessity  bear  poetic  fruit.  The  people  of 
Jahveh  came  indeed  from  that  land  which  was  intellectually 
the  most  productive  of  all  lands,  bringing  with  them  writing 
materials  and  castanettes  for  dancing.  One  of  the  lays  which 
the  occurrences  of  the  wanderings  brought  forth  is  the  song  of 
the  well,  Num.  xxi. : — 

17  Spring  up,  0  well;  sing  ye  unto  it : 

18  To  the  well,  which  princes  digged, 
Which  the  nobles  of  the  people  delved, 
With  the  sceptre,  and  with  their  staves. 

It  is  there  given  in  explanation  of  the  name  of  the  trans- 
Jordanic  station  Beer. 

That  Moses  was  himself  a  poet  is  understood  when  we 
contemplate  his  life,  a  life  so  ideally  fashioned  by  God  Himself. 
The  poetry  of  thought  and  feeling,  which  wings  and  animates 
the  language  in  the  words  of  the  Book  of  the  Covenant,  as  in 
Ex.  xx.  4,  xxii.  25  sq.,  culminates  in  two  original  Mosaic 
formula,  as  we  believe  them  to  be.  One  is  the  harmoniously 
rising  triad  of  the  priestly  blessing,  Num.  vi. : — 

The  Lord  bless  thee  and  keep  thee  ! 

The  Lord  make  His  face  to  shine  upon  thee,  and  be  gracious  to  thee ! ' 

The  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance  upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace  ! ! ! 

In  the  original  the  first  clause  consists  of  three,  the  second  of 
five,  the  third  of  seven  words,  and  the  seventh  and  last  word 
is  ofe  seven  being  the  number  of  satisfaction  and  peace. 
The  other  formula  is  the  two  sentences  at  the  setting  out  and 
at  the  resting  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant : — 

35  Rise  up,  0  Lord,  and  let  Thine  enemies  be  scattered  ; 
And  let  them  that  hate  Thee  flee  before  Thy  face  ! 

36  Return,  0  Lord,  to  the  myriads  of  the  thousands  of  Israel. 


THE  SONG  OF  MOSES.  4-5 

The  introduction,  Ex.  xv.  1,  does  not  require  Moses  to  have 
been  the  author  of  the  song  of  praise  at  the  Eed  Sea  ;  the  carry 
ing  out  of  the  theme,  15-3,  may  not  have  received  its  present 
form  till  the  arrival  in  Canaan  (see  ver.  13),  but  must  have 
clone  so  in  pre-Davidic  times,  as  the  echoes  in  Ps.  xxiv.  8, 
Ixxviii.  13,  54,  Ixxxix.  7,  demand,  or  at  least  make  probable. 
It  is  here,  ver.  18,  that  the  theocratic  relation  first  finds 
expression,  here  that  we  find  for  the  first  time  (ver.  2)  the 
Divine  name  W,  which  returns,  Ex.  xvii.  16,  in  the  very 
poetically  expressed  saying  of  Moses  concerning  Amalek :  A 
hand  (is  lifted  up)  upon  the  throne  of  Jah  (to  be  explained  by 
Deut.  xxxii.  4  sq.) ;  Jahveh  hath  war  with  Amalek  from 
generation  to  generation  (i.e.  from  the  most  distant  generation 
onwards ;  compare  in  the  similarly  expressed  Divine  saying, 
Ex.  iii.  15,  ~n  VD,  in  generation,  generation — i.e.  to  the  latest 
generation). 

We  must  bring  before  us  these  poetical  pieces,  for  the  pur 
pose  of  not  too  lightly  denying  the  testimony  in  Deut.  xxxi.  that 
the  song  i^TNH,  Deut.  xxxii.,  was  written  by  Moses.  Although 
only  this  one  thing  is  certain,  that  the  signal  words,  Num.  x. 
35  sq.,  were  the  product  of  the  lofty  and  powerful  mind  of 
Moses,  he  may  also  have  been  the  author  of  this  song,  which, 
as  I  have  elsewhere  shown,  contains  nothing  which  may  not 
be  conceived  as  the  production  of  the  natural  gift  of  insight 
of  a  deeply  religious  and  patriotic  poet.  It  is  a  picture,  from 
a  supernaturalistic,  theocratic  standpoint,  of  the  inwardly 
necessary  concatenation  existing  between  the  vicissitudes  of 
Israel's  history, — a  picture  thoroughly  original,  containing 
nothing  that  gives  an  impression  of  being  obtained  from  else 
where,  and  probably  one  of  the  models  of  the  Deuteronomian 
employed  by  him  as  sources  when  reproducing  the  testamentary 
discourses  of  Moses. 

Equally  original  is  the  blessing  of  Moses,  ch.  xxxiii.,  ap 
pended  to  Deuteronomy.  Setting  aside  ver.  4,  which  is  a  more 
recent  interpolation,  this  pendant  to  the  blessing  of  Jacob 
has  throughout  the  Mosaic  period  as  its  historical  basis. 


46  INTRODUCTION. 

It  coincides  with  the  great  song  in  the  national  name 
and  in  D'nax  mnrn  and  mw»  'ata  with  the  signal  words.  But 
it  does  not,  like  the  great  song,  form  an  original  por 
tion  of  Deuteronomy,  hut  was  admitted  into  it  by  the 
redactor,  who  incorporated  Deuteronomy  in  the  Pentateuch, 
i.e.  the  collective  work  on  the  period  of  legislation  and  its 
previous  history.  Till  then  the  blessing  of  Moses  would  have 
been  disseminated  as  a  separate  composition,  like  Ps.  xc., 
whose  title  is  similar  in  form,  and  whose  commencement 
sounds  like  a  development  of  the  three  words  Tita  nsiyD 
Dip,  xxxiii.  27.  The  physiognomy  of  Ps.  xc.  is  like  that 
of  the  blessing  undeniably  Mosaic,  although  this  is  still  no 
irresistible  proof  of  the  authorship  of  Moses.  For  as  the 
Deuteronomian  imitated  the  Mosaic  type  in  orations,  he  might 
also  have  imitated  it  in  poetry.  The  fact  that  the  fourth  book 
of  Psalms  begins  with  this  Ps.  xc.,  speaks  more  for  its  being 
written  according  to  the  mind  of  Moses  than  for  its  being  his 
own  composition.  The  title  is  fully  justified  even  in  the 
former  case.  They  who  judge  otherwise  are  unacquainted 
with  the  spirit  and  custom  of  ancient,  and  especially  of 
Biblical,  history  and  poetry,  which  esteem  it  one  of  their 
tasks  to  appropriate  completely  the  thoughts  and  phraseology 
of  great  men,  and  by  thinking  their  thoughts  and  experi 
encing  their  feelings,  to  make  themselves  their  organs.  There 
are  however  no  internal  grounds  for  compelling  us  to  deny  the 
Mosaic  authorship  of  Ps.  xc.  It  corresponds  with  the  condition 
and  frame  of  mind  of  Moses  in  the  fortieth  year,  and  the  echoes 
of  the  original  Mosaic  diction  of  the  Pentateuch  resounding 
in  it  increase  the  impression  of  its  authenticity. 

There  was  a  time  when  the  horizon  of  Pentateuch  criticism 
was  bounded  by  Genesis  and  the  beginning  of  Exodus.  We 
now  know  that  the  mode  of  composition  found  in  Genesis 
continues  to  the  34th  chapter  of  Deuteronomy.  It  extends 
moreover  beyond  Deut.  xxxiv.,  and  continues  in  the 
book  of  Joshua.  Hence,  both  on  this  account  and  because 


THE  THORAH  AND  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA  A  HEXATEUCH.          47 

the  exodus  and  the  occupation  of  Canaan  together  form  a 
whole,  viz.  the  history  of  the  deliverance  of  Israel  and  of 
its  becoming  an  independent  nation,  we  are  justified  in 
comprising  the  Pentateuch  and  the  book  of  Joshua  as  a 
hexateuch.  And  this  hexateuch  also  is  only  a  component 
part  of  the  great  historical  work  in  five  parts  (viz.  Moses, 
Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel,  Kings),  extending  from  Gen.  i.  to 
2  Kings  xxv.,  of  which  the  Pentateuch  forms  one.  The 
connection  of  the  Pentateuch  and  Joshua  is  however  a 
closer  one  than  that  of  Joshua  and  Judges,  for  the  book  of 
Judges  only  borrows  twice  from  Joshua,  and  gives  extracts 
only  four  times  from  the  same  sources,  while  the  book  of 
Joshua  is  composed  in  entirely  the  same  manner  as  the 
Pentateuch.  In  Judges  are  found  a  few  scattered  fragments 
from  JE  (i.  10-15,  20,  xxi.  27  sq.,  29).  In  the  book  of 
Joshua,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  the  three  chief  modes 
of  statement — the  Jehovistic,  the  Deuteronomic,  and  the 
Elohistic — may  be  distinguished  one  from  the  other. 

The  history  of  the  conquest, chs.i.-xii., is  Jehovistico-Deutero- 
nomic ;  we  meet  with  but  few  traces  of  the  mode  of  statement 
of  the  Priest-codex  (ft  iv.  19,  ix.  15&,  17-21,  LH  v.  10-12). 
On  the  other  hand,  the  part  relating  the  history  of  the  division 
of  the  land,  xiii.— xxi.,  together  with  xxii.,  is  written  in  the  style 
of  ft  but  only  as  far  as  the  main  bulk  is  concerned,  for  we  there 
meet  also  with  the  Jehovistic  mode  of  delineation,  e.g.  xviii. 
3-10,  which  is  a  Jehovistic  as  xiv.  1—5  is  an  Elohistic  prologue 
to  the  business  of  division.  An  impression  of  the  diversity  of 
the  two  styles  may  be  obtained  by  comparing  xviii.  7  with 
Num.  xxxiv.  14,  of  which  it  is,  so  to  speak,  the  Jehovistic 
translation.  Peculiar  to  the  Elohistic  style  are  the  use  of 
for  E:I^  (Deuteronomy  also  has  always  D^Dn^  and  not 
the  designation  of  the  trans- Jordanic  land  by  inT  pT?  "ayo  for 
pT^-ayB ;  the  statement  of  direction  ni^ip  for  nmno,  and  as 
a  favourite  expression  rVQN  rpli,  or  shorter  only  nnx, — all 
these  peculiarities  are  got  rid  of,  xviii.  7.  More  difficult  is 
it  to  distinguish  the  Jehovistic  from  the  Deuteronomic  style. 


48  INTRODUCTION. 

There  are  Jehovistic  passages  which  keep  throughout  within 
the  limits  of  the  Jehovistic  mode  of  statement,  e.g.  xiv.  6  sqq. 
(the  endowment  of  Caleb).  Elsewhere  however  the  two 
nearly  related  modes  encroach  upon  each  other,  yet  not  so 
much  that  we  should  fail  in  tracing  them  to  two  different 
hands. 

The  relation  of  the  book  of  Joshua  to  Deuteronomy  is 
similar  to  that  of  the  book  of  Nehemiah  to  the  book  of  Ezra, 
the  one  is  planned  after  the  model  of  the  other.  The  book 
of  Joshua  begins  ch.  i.  (the  summons  to  Joshua  and  the 
engagement  on  the  part  of  the  people)  in  Deuteronomic  style, 
and  maintaining  it  throughout  terminates  in  the  same  fashion 
in  ch.  xxiii.  (Joshua's  farewell  discourse  to  the  representa 
tives  of  Israel).  The  section,  viii.  30  sqq.,  beginning  with  TN 
run11,  is  just  such  an  intermediate  portion  as  that  in  Deut.  iv. 
41-43  beginning  with  ^HIT1  TK.  The  account  of  the  f  fid- Altar, 
ch.  xxii.,  which  excludes  separate  places  of  worship  beside 
the  central  sanctuary,  is  indeed  as  well  as  ch.  ix.  (the 
successful  stratagem  of  the  Gibeonites)  of  a  mingled  mosaic- 
like  kind,  but  in  tone  Deuteronomic.  And  finally  the  book  of 
Joshua  runs  parallel  with  Deuteronomy  in  the  circumstance, 
that  as  Moses  left  behind  him  a  testamentary  book  of  the 
law  to  be  preserved  beside  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  so  did 
Joshua,  according  to  xxiv.  25,  set  before  the  people  in 
Shechem  "  a  statute  and  an  ordinance  (the  same  expression 
as  that  used  at  the  beginning  of  the  legislation  at  Marah, 
Ex.  xv.  25),  and  wrote  these  words  in  the  book  of  the  law 
of  God."  The  expression  DTita  min  ISO  occurs  only  here ;  for 
D^r6sn  rmn  "iao,  Neh.  vii.  8,  18,  is  not  quite  the  same.  It 
sounds  as  if  that  Elohistic  and  directly  Mosaic  Thorah  were 
intended,  which,  together  with  the  Book  of  the  Covenant,  is 
presupposed  in  the  Deuteronomic  code  of  laws  as  the  lowest 
and  most  ancient  stratum  of  the  priest  codex. 

That  the  literary  activity  of  the  Elohistic  pen  reaches  back 
to  ancient  times  nearly  approaching  those  of  Moses  is  also 
confirmed  by  the  book  of  Joshua.  Modern  criticism  indeed 


FINAL  REDACTION  OF  THE  COLLECTIVE  HISTORICAL  WORK.      49 

greatly  depreciates  the  historical  authority  of  the  priestly 
narrator  in  matters  relating  to  the  history  of  the  conquest ;  but 
the  priestly  narrator  wrote  also  the  main  bulk  of  the  account 
of  the  division,  and  this  may  lay  claim  to  documentary 
authority.  For  that  this  history  of  the  division  is  based 
upon  written  documents  may  be  conjectured  from  its  very 
nature,  while  the  -IBD  of  the  commissioners  entrusted  with  the 
task  of  describing  the  land,  xviii.  19,  shows  that  the  division  of 
the  land  was  carried  out  with  legal  accuracy.  Now  as  there 
were  never  during  the  course  of  Israelite  history  boundary 
disputes  between  the  tribes  (for  the  migration  of  the  tribe  of 
Dan,  Judg.  i.  34,  was  caused  by  the  pressure  of  the  Amorites), 
it  may  be  inferred  that  the  records  of  the  division  of  the 
land  transferred  to  the  book  of  Joshua  had  the  respect  and 
gave  the  sanction  of  a  public  document  reaching  back  to 
well-known  authorities.  It  is  therefore  quite  an  arbitrary 
assertion,  at  least  with  respect  to  the  history  of  the  division, 
that  the  priestly  narrator  of  the  book  of  Joshua  was  of  more 
recent  times  than  the  Jehovist  and  the  Deuteronomian,  and 
it  is  certainly  possible  that  the  Deuteronomian  himself  com 
posed  and  formed  the  book  of  Joshua  from  Jehovistic  and 
Elohistic  models.  But  we  may  here  leave  the  origin  of  the 
book  of  Joshua  undecided.  Two  observations  only  are  of 
importance  with  respect  to  Genesis,  which  is  the  goal  and 
centre  of  all  these  preliminary  investigations  :  (1)  that  the 
book  of  Joshua  also  exhibits  a  similar  structure  with  Genesis, 
though  with  an  unequal  mingling  of  the  component  parts 
(especially  of  the  Deuteronomic,  which  occurs  but  rarely  in 
Genesis) ;  and  (2)  the  circumstance,  deserving  a  further  dis 
cussion,  that  it  was  the  last  redactor  of  the  entire  history 
from  Gen.  i.  to  2  Kings  xxv.  who  incorporated  into  it  the 
book  of  Joshua. 

It  is  mistakenly  urged  against  regarding  the  book  of 
Joshua  as  a  sixth  and  integral  part  with  the  five  books  of 
Moses,  that  if  this  had  been  the  case  the  author  would  not 
again  have  narrated  the  conquest  of  the  country  on  the  east 

D 


5  0  INTRODUCTION. 

of  Jordan  under  Moses,  and  its  division  by  him  among  the 
two  and  a  half  tribes,  nor  the  appointment  by  Moses  of  the 
three  cities  of  refuge  in  that  land.  For  (1)  the  installation  of 
the  two  and  a  half  tribes  in  their  inheritance,  xiii.  15-33,  is  not 
a  mere  repetition,  but  a  recapitulatory  and  completed  retrospect 
of  Num.  xxxii.  33  sqq.;  comp.  xxxi.  sq.,  and  Deut.  iii.  13-15  ; 
and  (2)  the  establishment  of  the  six  cities  of  refuge,  ch.  xx., 
is  the  fulfilment  of  the  injunction,  Num.  xxxv.  9-29  ;  that  of 
the  three  east  of  Jordan  being  but  recapitulated  according 
to  Deut.  iv.  41-43.  The  final  redaction  however  certainly 
dissolved  the  hexateuchal  relation  of  the  book  of  Joshua  to 
the  five  books  of  Moses,  and  placed  these  by  themselves  as 
the  Thorah.  For  Kin  occurs  no  more  in  the  book  of  Joshua ; l 
and  the  city  of  palm  trees  is  not  here  called  inn11  as  in  the 
Pentateuch,  but  as  everywhere  in  the  Prophetce  priores,  with 
the  exception  of  a  single  passage,  in'1"!'1.  The  final  redaction  has 
thereby  emphasized  the  assumption,  that  the  Pentateuch  is  a 
completed  whole  to  the  exclusion  of  all  that  follows,  is  the 
fundamental  book  of  the  canon,  and  that  the  book  of  Joshua 
belongs  as  a  separate  book  to  a  more  advanced  period. 

Thorah  and  Pentateuch  arc  not  identical  ideas,  and  it  was 
not  till  post-exilian  times  that  their  identification  was  arrived 
at.  This  is  a  fact  of  supreme  importance.  Its  consideration  is  of 

1  Of  tlie  three  extra- Pentateuch al  passages,  in  which  the  received  Masoretic 
text  recognises  Sin  with  the  Keri  fcOn  (1  Kings  xvii.  15  ;  Isa.  xxx.  33  ; 
Job  xxxi.  11),  none  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the  double  gendered  Pentateuchal  Siri; 

but  what  is  said,  p.  394  sq.,  of  Xo.  viii.  of  my  Pentateuch-kriliscken  Studien  iiber 
den  Text  des  Cod.  Babyl.  vom  J.  916,  needs  the  correction  given  in  Buhl's  Gam- 
meltestamentlige  Skr /fiver  levering  (1887),  p.  179  :  this  text,  according  to  the 
recension  of  the  ''Snj'lD  (Orientals),  has  in  many  passages  Sin  with  a  Khirik 
written  over  it,  in  which  Sin  can  neither  be  meant  to  be  neuter  nor  referred  to 
a  noun,  which  in  any  case  may  also  be  masculine,  e.g.  Jer.  xxviii.  17,  nj£'2 
Ninn  ;  Ezek.  xiv.  17,  Sinn  psn  ;  xvlii.  20  (the  sinning  soul),  DIDD  Sin  (see 
Baer's  Ezekiel,  p.  108) — an  evident  proof  that  the  separation  of  the  five  books  of 
Moses  from  the  book  of  Joshua  by  certain  characteristics  esteemed  archaic,  such 
as  Sin  and  inT  (for  1PPT),  comes  down  from  a  time  in  which  the  Pentateuch 

as  n~nn  was  disconnected  from  the  entire  history  reaching  from  Genesis  to 
2  Kings,  and  that  the  process  from  which  the  Old  Testament  text  in  its  present 
Palestino-Masoretic  final  form  resulted,  first  came  to  an  end  in  Christian  times. 


THE  OKTATEUCir.  51 

itself  well  adapted  to  raise  us  above  scruples  of  conscience  with 
respect  to  the  criticism  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  to  deliver  us 
from  all  sorts  of  inveterate  prejudices.  Their  identification  is 
not  more  ancient  than  the  construction  of  the  Old  Testament 
canon,  with  which  the  final  redaction  of  the  entire  historical 
work  reaching  from  Gen.  i.  to  2  Kings  xxv.  is  connected. 

When  the  book  of  Joshua  originated,  the  priestly  historical 
book  from  the  creation  of  the  world  to  the  death  of  Moses, 
with  the  extracts  from  JE  which  had  entered  into  it,  was 
already  enlarged  by  the  insertion  of  Deuteronomy  in  the 
Pentateuch,  with  which  the  book  of  Joshua  was  combined  as 
a  sixth.  To  this  Hexateuch  were  added  as  its  successive 
continuations  Judges,  Samuel,  and  Kings,  as  we  at  present 
have  them.  All  the  three  books  have  a  different  form  from 
that  which  they  had  in  their  separate  state.  The  book  of 
Judges  is  fastened  on  to  the  book  of  Joshua  by  ii.  6-10 
(=  Josh.  xxiv.  28-31  :  the  close  of  Joshua's  life).  It 
originally  contained  also  the  history  of  Eli  and  Samuel,  at 
least  down  to  the  victory  over  the  Philistines  at  Ebenezer  (as 
certainly  appears  from  Judg.  xiii.  5,  VE^n?  prp  NirT)  •  this 
concluding  portion  is  now  detached  from  it  and  made  the 
introduction  to  the  history  of  the  kings.  In  LXX.  Samuel 
and  Kings  are,  in  conformity  with  their  subjects,  entitled  : 
Ba(Ti\€itov  TTpwTT],  SevTepa,  TpiTTj,  T6Taprr).  For  1  Kings  i. 
does  not  begin  like  a  commencement,  but  like  a  continuation 
of  the  history  of  the  kings ;  the  notion  of  a  n^tan  -|2D  in 
volving  a  similar  treatment  of  the  history  of  David  and 
Solomon.  Some  author,  under  the  influence  of  Deutero 
nomy,  which  became  after  Joshua  a  spiritual  power,  worked 
up  Judges,  Samuel,  and  Kings,  as  we  have  them,  into  each 
other  and  linked  them  to  the  Hexateuch. 

This  final  Deuteronomic  redaction  of  the  collective  historical 
work  undoubtedly  stands  in  connection  with  the  construction 
of  the  Canon,  but  the  redactor  or  redactors  of  the  Canon  are 
more  recent  than  this  Deuteronomist ;  the  construction  of  the 
Canon  being  prepared  for  by  the  condensation  of  similar 


5  2  INTRODUCTION. 

writings  into  one  whole  (see  Dan.  ix.  2  ;  2  Mace.  ii.  13  f.). 
We  do  not  know  when  and  how  the  Canon  was  brought  into 
the  state  of  an  entire  body  of  writings  in  three  parts,  we  only 
know  that  this  was  already  accomplished  in  the  times  of  the 
son  of  Sirach  (about  200  years  before  Christ)  ;  for  the 
prologue  which  the  grandson  of  Ben- Sirach  prefixed  to  his 
Greek  translation,  composed  in  Egypt,  of  his  grandfather's 
book  of  proverbs,  testifies  that  in  the  latter's  lifetime  the 
holy  writings  as  a  whole  were  divided  into  vopos,  Trpoffirai, 
and  a\\a  irdrpia  {3i{3\la  (i.e.  D'OlfiD). 

It  was  not  till  the  five  books  of  Moses  were  severed  from 
Joshua  and  the  latter  thrown  among  the  D'K'QJ  that  the 
Pentateuch,  upon  which  the  tone  of  its  language  also  im 
pressed  the  mark  of  priority,  obtained  the  name  of  the  Thorah. 
minn  is  not  in  itself  an  apt  name  for  a  historical  book  and  its 
object  and  form;  and  it  is  only  per  synecdoclien  partis  pro  toto 
that  the  Pentateuch  can  be  so  called.  Wherever  the  Thorah 
is  quoted  in  any  Old  Testament  book,  it  is  always  with 
reference  to  Divine  legal  (2  Chron.  xxv.  4  ;  Neh.  xiii.  1—3) 
or  ritual  enactments  (Ezra  iii.  2  ;  Neh.  viii.  14),  including 
the  curses  and  blessings,  promises  and  threats,  by  which  the 
law  is  fenced  round  (Josh.  viii.  34 ;  2  Kings  xxii.  12). 
minn  is  everywhere  instruction  concerning  the  will  of  God 
in  either  a  legislative  or  hortatory  form  ;  the  idea  is  a  wider 
one  than  Z/O/AO?,  though  narrowed  in  the  plural,  nmn  every 
where  meaning  legal  precepts,  Ezek.  xliv.  24  ;  Ps.  cv.  45  ; 
Dan.  ix.  10  ;  JSTeh.  ix.  13  (comp.  'm,  Ezra  vii.  25),  and  Isa. 
xxiv.  5.  The  book  of  the  Thorah,  which,  according  to  Josh.  i. 
7  sq.,  was  not  to  depart  out  of  Joshua's  mouth,  is  the  law  codex 
of  the  law,  not  the  Pentateuch  ;  and  when  Malachi  says,  iii.  22: 
"  Eemember  the  Thorah  of  Moses,  my  servant,"  it  is  the  law 
of  Moses  arid  not  the  Pentateuch  that  is  intended.  It  is  even 
uncertain,  as  we  incidentally  remarked  above,  whether  the 
HE'D  min  "IBD,  which  Ezra  read  publicly  on  the  1st  Tisliri  of 
the  year  444  (Neh.  viii.),  was  the  Priest-codex  or  the  Penta 
teuch  as  we  have  it  as  an  historical  work.  The  fomner  is  the 


PENTATEUCH  AND  THORAII.  53 

more  probable.  It  was  not  till  after  the  canon  was  fixed  as 
a  whole  collection  of  writings,  in  three  parts,  that  the  name 
irnnn  coincided  with  that  of  the  Pentateuch.  The  materials 
of  which  it  is  formed  were  old :  traditional  primaeval  histories, 
a  traditional  history  of  legislation,  and  traditional  though 
not  throughout  ancient  Mosaic  laws.  Assuming  even  that 
a  share  in  the  formation  of  this  collective  work  must  be 
accorded  to  Ezra,  still  the  process  of  formation  was  also  carried 
farther  on  after  him.  The  texts  of  the  Samaritan  and  of  the 
Greek  Pentateuch  show  that  the  form  of  the  text  at  the  time 
when  these  translations  were  made  was  in  many  places 
unsettled.  This  is  seen  especially  in  the  section  concerning 
the  completion  of  the  sanctuaries,  Ex.  xxxv.  sqq.,  which 
betrays  a  more  recent  hand  than  the  section  containing  the 
directions  concerning  their  formation,  and  is  in  the  LXX. 
from  the  hand  of  a  different  translator,  and  displays  many 
variations. 

The  perception  that  the  Pentateuch  contains  the  Thorah, 
but  is  not  identical  with  it,  and  that  it  subsequently  received 
this  name  as  though  it  were  so,  exercises  a  liberative  effect. 
For,  if  this  is  the  case,  it  is  self-evident  that  the  book  of  the 
Thorah,  which  according  to  Deut.  xxxi.  was  written  by  Moses, 
can  have  been  neither  the  Pentateuch  nor  Deuteronomy  in 
its  present  historical  form.  Hence  we  need  entertain  the  less 
scruple  in  holding  that  the  Pentateuch,  like  the  other  historical 
books  of  the  Bible,  is  composed  from  documentary  sources  of 
various  dates  and  different  kinds,  which  critical  analysis  is 
able  to  recognise  and  distinguish  from  each  other  with  more 
or  less  certainty. 

If  inspiration  is  the  mental  influence  which  contributed  to 
the  formation  of  an  authentic  record  of  the  history  of  re 
demption,  such  inspiration  holds  good  not  of  the  several  docu 
ments  of  the  Pentateuch,  but  of  that  extant  whole  into  which 
these  writings,  which,  considered  in  themselves,  might  perhaps 
have  been  incomplete,  one-sided,  and  insufficient,  were  worked 
up.  The  Christian  as  such  regards  the  Pentateuchal  historical 


5  4  INTRODUCTION. 

work  and  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  general  as  a  unity,  the 
product  of  One  spirit,  having  one  meaning  and  one  object. 
And  this  unity  really  exists  in  everything  which  concerns  our 
redemption  and  the  history  of  its  preparation  and  foundation, 
and  is  exalted  far  above  the  discoveries  of  critical  analysis. 
Criticism  seems  indeed,  by  breaking  up  the  single  into  its 
original  and  non-affinitive  elements,  to  threaten  and  question 
this  essential  unity  of  Holy  Scripture.  Hence  it  must 
always  remain  unpopular ;  a  congregation  has  no  interest  in  it, 
but  on  the  contrary  takes  offence  at  it.  And  indeed  there  is 
a  kind  of  criticism  which,  while  dismembering  the  Pentateuch 
like  a  corpus  vile  with  its  dissecting  knife,  finds  such  pleasure 
in  its  ruthless  hunt  for  discrepancies  as  to  thoroughly  disgust 
not  only  the  Christian  layman,  but  also  the  Christian  scholar 
with  analysis.  Still  the  just  claims  of  analysis  are  indisput 
able,  hence  it  is  scientifically  necessary.  It  is  an  indispensable 
requirement  of  the  history  of  literature,  which  it  supplies  with 
copious  material,  and  of  historical  criticism,  to  which  it 
furnishes  the  foundation  of  the  various  traditions  and  autho 
rities. — In  the  department  of  Holy  Scripture  it  is,  however,  a 
dangerous  matter  exposed  to  that  arbitrariness,  ill-will,  and  want 
of  moderation,  which  thinks  to  see  through  everything  and 
crushes  everything  to  atoms.  And  yet  believing  investigation 
of  Scripture  will  not  subdue  this  nuisance  of  critical  analysis, 
unless  it  wrests  the  weapon  from  its  adversary's  hand,  and 
actually  shows  that  analysis  can  be  exercised  without  thereby 
trampling  under  foot  respect  for  Holy  Scripture.  Of  such  a 
process  however  scarcely  a  beginning  has  been  made. 

It  is  true  that  the  present  destructive  proceedings  in  the 
department  of  Old  Testament  criticism,  which  demand  the 
construction  of  a  new  edifice,  is  quite  fitted  to  confuse 
consciences  and  to  entangle  a  weak  faith  in  all  kinds  of 
temptation.  If  however  we  keep  fast  hold  in  this  labyrinth 
of  the  one  truth,  Christus  vere  resurrexit,  we  have  in  our  hands 
Ariadne's  thread  to  lead  us  out  of  it. 

God  is  the  God  of  truth,  n?3K  D*r6s  !     The  love  of  truth, 


FIIEEDOM  AND  OBLIGATION.  55 

submission  to  the  force  of  truth,  the  surrender  of  traditional 
views  which  will  not  stand  the  test  of  truth,  is  a  sacred  duty, 
an  element  of  the  fear  of  God.  Will  ye  be  partisans  for  God  ? 
(•ixl'T)  V:an),  exclaims  Job  (xiii.  8),  reproving  his  friends,  who 
were  assuming  the  part  of  advocates  for  God  towards  him, 
while  misrepresenting  the  facts  of  the  case  ad  majorcm  Dei 
yloriam.  This  great  saying  of  Job,  admired  also  by  Kant 
the  philosopher,  has  always  made  a  deep  impression  upon  me. 
Ever  since  I  began  to  officiate  as  an  academical  tutor  in 
1842,  I  have  taken  up  the  standpoint  of  inquiry,  freely  sur 
rendering  itself  to  the  leadings  of  truth.  I  have  not  been  in 
sympathy  with  the  Hengstenberg  tendency,  because  it  allowed 
the  weight  of  its  adversaries'  reasons  to  have  too  little  influ 
ence  upon  it. 

But  in  my  view  a  correlative  obligation  is,  combined  with 
freedom,  an  obligation  which  is  not  so  much  its  limitation  as  its 
foundation.  I  esteem  the  great  fundamental  facts  of  redemp 
tion  as  exalted  far  above  the  vicissitudes  of  scientific  views 
and  discoveries. — The  certainty  and  security  of  these  facts 
have  no  need  to  wait  for  the  results  of  advancing  science  ;  they 
are  credibly  testified,  and  are  sealed  to  every  Christian  as 
such  by  inward  experience  and  by  continual  perception  of 
their  truth  in  himself  and  others.  And  to  this  obligation 
of  faith  is  added  an  obligation  of  reverence,  and,  so  to  speak, 
of  Christian  decorum.  For  faith  in  these  facts  of  salvation 
naturally  involves  a  reverent  relation  to  Holy  Scripture, 
which  is  to  the  Christian  a  Holy  thing,  because  it  is  the 
record  of  the  works  and  words  of  God,  the  frame  and  image 
of  the  promised  and  manifested  Eedeerner.  Certainly  Holy 
Scripture  is  not  a  book  which  has  fallen  from  heaven, — on 
the  contrary,  the  self-testimony  therein  given  to  the  Divine 
is  affected  by  all  the  marks  of  human,  individual,  local,  tem 
poral  and  educational  diversity.  But  to  the  end  of  time 
the  Church  renovated  by  the  Beformation  will  confess  that, 
Primum  toto  pcclorc  Proplictica  et  Apostolica  scripta  Vetcris  ct 
Novi  Testamenti  ut  limpidissimos  purissimosgue  Israelis  fontcs 


5  6  INTRODUCTION. 

recipimus  et  ampledimur.  And  they  who  thus  confess  with 
her  will  not  make  a  boast  of  uttering  depreciating,  insolent, 
and  contemptuous  criticisms  concerning  the  writers  of  the 
Bible.  Their  attitude  towards  Holy  Scripture  will  be  free 
but  not  free-thinking,  free  but  not  frivolous.  And  this  will 
be  especially  the  case  with  respect  to  Genesis, — that  funda 
mental  book  in  the  Book  of  books.  For  there  is  no  book  in 
the  Old  Testament  which  is  of  such  fundamental  importance 
for  all  true  religion,  and  particularly  for  Christianity,  as  the 
religion  of  redemption,  as  this  first  book  of  the  Pentateuchal 
Thorah,  which  corresponds  with  the  first  book  of  the  quadri- 
forme  Evangelium. 

We  do  not  belong  to  those  moderns  who,  as  the  children 
of  their  age,  are  so  charmed  by  the  most  recent  stage  of  Old 
Testament  science  as  to  see  therein  the  solution  of  all 
enigmas,  and  to  disregard  with  an  easy  mind  all  the  new 
enigmas  created  by  such  solution.  But  as  little  too  are  we 
of  those  ancients  who,  as  the  children  of  an  age  that  has  been 
overtaken,  see  in  the  new  stage  a  product  of  pure  wanton 
ness,  and  are  too  weak  -  brained  or  too  mentally  idle  to 
take  up  an  independent  position  with  respect  to  the  new 
problems  by  surrendering  their  musty  papers.  Only  in  one 
point  do  we  remain  now  as  ever  faithful  to  the  old  school. 
We  are  Christians,  and  therefore  occupy  a  position  with 
regard  to  Holy  Scripture  quite  different  from  that  which 
we  take  towards  the  Homeric  poems,  the  Nibelungen,  or  the 
treasures  of  the  library  of  Asurbanipal.  Holy  Scripture  being 
the  book  of  the  records  of  our  religion,  our  relation  thereto  is 
not  merely  scientific,  but  also  in  the  highest  degree  one  of 
moral  responsibility.  We  will  not  deny  the  human  element 
with  which  it  is  affected,  but  will  not  with  Hamitic  scorn 
discover  the  nakedness  of  Noah.  We  will  not  with  Vandalic 
complacency  reduce  to  ruins  that  which  is  sacred.  We  will 
not  undermine  the  foundations  of  Christianity  for  the  sake  of 
playing  into  the  hands  of  Brahmosamajic,  i.e.  of  Brahmanhic 
or  Buddhistic,  rationalism.  .For  the  notes  that  are  struck  in 


THE  PRIMITIVE  HISTORIES  AND  CHRISTIANITY.  5  / 

German  lecture-halls  and  books  are  at  last  re-echoed  from 
distant  Asia,  and  make  vain  the  efforts  of  our  missionaries. 
We  will  not  give  up  what  is  untenable  without  replacing  it 
wherever  possible  by  that  which  is  tenable.  We  will  interpret 
Genesis  as  theologians,  and  indeed  as  Christian  theologians,  i.e. 
as  believers  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  end  of  all  the  ways 
and  words  of  God. 

There  is  no  people  of  antiquity  that  possesses  a  historical 
work  that  can  be  compared  with  the  book  of  Genesis.  Not  even 
the  Egyptians  ;  for  supposing  they  had  possessed  one,  it  would 
have  been  a  mere  history  of  the  Egyptians,  beginning  with  a 
mythological  jumble,  which  cleaves  to  the  soil  of  Egypt. — But 
here,  before  the  history  of  Israel  commences  in  the  remote 
patriarchal  era,  are  related  the  beginnings  of  the  human  race : 
Godhead  and  mankind  are  strictly  distinguished ;  mankind 
exists  before  nations,  and  the  nation  which  this  history,  com 
mencing  as  it  does  from  the  beginning,  has  in  view,  does  not 
deny  its  later  origin.  This  circumstance  already  bespeaks 
our  confidence  in  the  history.  But  our  interest  in  it  is  not 
merely  historical,  but  religious.  For  the  essential  truth  of 
what  is  here  related  and  the  truth  of  Christianity  stand  in 
closest  mutual  connection.  Its  essential  truth,  we  say, — for 
Christianity  has  no  direct  relation  to  such  questions  as 
whether  Adam  lived  930  years  or  not;  whether  the  descent 
of  one  or  another  nation  can  be  ethnographically  or  linguisti 
cally  verified ;  whether  the  chronological  network  of  the 
ante-diluvian  and  post-diluvian  history  appears  in  presence  of 
the  Egyptian  and  Babylonico-Assyrian  monuments  to  need 
extension  ;  whether  many  narratives  are  but  duplicates,  i.e. 
different  legendary  forms  of  one  and  the  same  occurrence  ; — no, 
Christianity  has  a  height  and  depth  at  which  it  is  unaffected 
by  any  verdict  pronounced  upon  such  matters  as  these.  But 
if  it  were  true  that  geology  can  follow  back  the  age  of  the 
earth  for  myriads,  nay,  millions,  of  years  (Lyellism),  and  that 
man  was  in  the  struggle  for  existence  developed  from  the 


58  INTRODUCTION. 

animal  world  (Darwinism),  if  in  the  place  of  the  child-like 
innocence  of  the  first -created  pair  we  have  to  place  the 
cannibalism  of  the  half-brutal  manhood  of  the  stone  period, 
and  in  that  of  the  Divine  re-elevation  of  the  fallen,  the 
gradual  upward  steps  of  self-culture  during  ten  thousand 
years, — then  indeed,  we  admit  it  without  reserve,  the  Chris 
tian  view  of  the  world  is  condemned  as  from  henceforth 
untenable.  For  documentary  Christianity  professes  to  be  the 
religion  of  the  redemption  of  Adainic  mankind,  and  has  for 
its  inalienable  premises  the  unity  of  the  first  creation  of  man, 
the  fall  of  the  first-created  pair,  and  the  curse  and  promise  by 
which  this  was  succeeded.  Hence,  were  we  even  to  grant 
that  Gen.  i.-iii.  speaks  of  the  beginnings  of  human  history 
with  the  stammering  tongue  of  childhood,  it  must  still  be 
maintained,  if  Christianity  is  to  maintain  its  ground  as  the 
religion  of  the  recovery  of  the  lost,  and  as  the  religion  of  the 
consummation  aimed  at  from  the  beginning,  that  man,  as  the 
creature  of  God,  entered  upon  existence  as  at  once  human  and 
capable  of  development  in  good,  but  fell  from  this  good  be 
ginning  by  failing  to  stand  the  test  of  his  freedom.  Menken 
is  right  when  he  says  :  "  If  the  first  three  chapters  of  Genesis 
are  taken  out  of  the  Bible,  it  is  deprived  of  the  terminus  a 
quo  ;  if  the  last  three  chapters  of  the  Apocalypse  are  taken 
away,  it  is  deprived  of  the  terminus  ad  quern." 

Genesis  is  the  most  difficult  book  of  the  Old  Testament. 
It  is  esteemed  the  easiest  by  reason  of  its  mostly  simple 
diction ;  but  it  deals  all  along  with  the  great  historical 
realities  of  the  world  and  of  redemption,  and  problem  upon 
problem,  through  which  we  have  to  beat  our  way,  rises  in  our 
path.  We  hope  however  to  get  through  without  making 
shipwreck  of  our  faith.  For  the  ground  on  which  our  faith 
is  anchored  is  independent  of  scientific  evidences. 

The  scaffold  of  Genesis  in  its  present  state  is  formed  by 
the  genealogically  planned  pre-Israelite  history,  as  related  by 
the  Elohist  (in  Dillmann  A,  in  Wellhausen  Q),  from  ancient 
sources.  We  distinguish  E  (in  Dillmann  B)  as  the  older 


THE  SCAFFOLD  OF  GENESIS.  59 

Elohist  from  this  Elohist  /car'  ef.,  whose  work  forms  the 
plan  of  Genesis,  and  is  in  this  sense  the  fundamental  writing. 
Hebrew,  like  all  other  historical  writing,  begins  with  ^enea- 

O'  o  *D 

logics,  nn^in.  Hence,  down  to  the  Exodus  from  Egypt, 
genealogy  takes  the  place  of  chronology,  i.e.  the  reckoning- 
according  to  this  or  that  era,  the  historical  narratives  being  as 
to  their  foundation  genealogical.  The  history  encamps  upon  the 
genealogical  table  of  descent,  and  is  quartered  upon  them.  These 
tables  have  Jacob-Israel  in  view,  the  direct  line  is  that  of  the 
chosen  race,  from  which  proceeds  the  chosen  people.  But  the 
genealogy  of  the  most  nearly  related  collateral  lines  proceeding 
from  the  direct  line  is  also  noted, — and  indeed  in  such  wise, 
that  the  branching  off  of  the  collateral  lines  always  precedes 
the  continuation  of  the  main  line,  for  the  purpose  of  giving 
free  space  to  the  latter.  The  direct  or  main  line  begins  with 
the  genealogical  table  from  Adam  to  Noah  (ch.  v.),  reaches  its 
twenty- second  member  with  Jacob,  and  spreads  out  into  the 
genealogies  of  his  twelve  sons  (ch.  xlvi.)  There  are  in  all  ten 
Toledoth,  five  belonging  to  primitive  and  five  to  patriarchal 
history,  as  we  have  already  stated  in  our  survey  of  the  contents 
and  plan  of  the  Pentateuch.  The  number  ten  is  not  accidental. 
The  Elohist,  to  whom  we  undoubtedly  owe  all  these  main  genea 
logical  tables,  deals  with  significant  numbers,  which  the  other 
writers  also  use.  The  Elohist  however,  more  than  any  other, 
makes  them,  as  St.  Matthew  does,  ch.  L,  his  3  x  14  <yeveai, 
the  framework  of  his  matter.  Ten  was  in  ancient  times  re 
garded  as  the  number  of  completeness  and  the  signature  of  the 
finished  whole. 


THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  THE  HEAVEN  AND  THE 
EARTH,  I.  1-IV.  26. 

THE  CREATION  OF  THE  WORLD  AS  THE  FOUNDATION  OF 
ITS  HISTORY,  I.-IT.  4. 

THE  Thorah,  or  rather  the  book  of  the  History  of  Israel, 
begins  with  the  Creation  ;  for  (1)  the  history  of  the  world 
presupposes  its  formation  ;  the  origin  of  Israel  is  later  than 
the  origins  of  the  nations  and  of  mankind  ;  the  theatre  of  the 
history  of  redemption  lies  within  the  circumference  of  heaven 
and  earth.  (2)  The  seal  of  the  Divine  nature  of  the  revelation 
given  to  Israel  is  the  identity  of  the  God  of  this  revelation 
with  the  God  who  created  the  world.  (3)  The  creation  of  the 
world  is  also  the  first  beginning  of  the  Thorah,  inasmuch  as 
the  sanctification  of  the  Sabbath  is  traced  to  the  order  of 
creation  (Ex.  xx.  11,  comp.  xxxi.  17  sq.).  From  this  subse 
quent  self-stated  foundation  of  the  Sabbatic  command  it  is 
also  evident  that  the  creation  of  the  world  in  seven  days  was 
regarded  as  a  fact  by  the  religious  consciousness  of  Israel,  and 
was  hence  no  invention  of  him  who  conceived  this  account  of 
the  creation. 

It  is  no  visionary  revelation  which  he  commits  to  writing, 
for  where  would  be  found  in  Holy  Scripture  an  example  of  a 
revelation  of  things  past  in  visionary  pictures  ?  Even  in 
1  Cor.  xi.  23  the  circumstances  are  quite  different.  No,  the 
author  is  reproducing  what  has  been  handed  down.  We 
meet  in  his  account  the  same  keynote  which  "  resounds  from 
the  Ganges  to  the  Nile  "  (Tuch).  The  cosmogonic  legend  is 
the  common  property  of  the  most  ancient  of  cultured  peoples, 


RELIGIOUS  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  ACCOUNT  OF  TRADITION.       61 

and  even  beyond  the  ancient  regions  of  culture  strikingly 
similar  notions  have  been  found  by  those  who  have  set  foot 
among  the  hitherto  unknown  nations,  of  e.g.  Northern  India 
and  interior  Africa. 

The  cosmogonic  legend  has  experienced  the  most  various 
mythological  transformations ;  we  have  it  here  in  its 
simplest  and  purest  form,  in  which,  no  human  being  having 
been  a  spectator  of  the  creation  (Job  xxxviii.  4),  it  points 
back  to  Divine  information  as  its  source.  It  is  part  of  that 
primitive  revelation  which  resounds  throughout  all  heathen 
dom  in  reminiscences  of  every  kind.  It  is  God  who  disclosed 
to  man  what  we  here  read.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to 
know  all  this  from  himself,  exclusively  lumine  naturce. 

We,  who  have  been  acquainted  with  this  narrative  of  the 
creation  from  our  youth,  only  too  easily  overlook  its  unique 
ness  in  the  world  of  nations.  Its  true  greatness  is  not 
dependent  on  the  confirmation  afforded  or  denied  to  it  by 
physical  science,  though  the  latter  is  obliged,  on  the  whole, 
involuntarily  to  confirm  it.  An  "  ideal  harmony  "  (Zockler), 
i.e.  an  agreement  in  fundamental  features,  actually  exists. 
For  it  is  established,  or  at  least  remains  uncontradicted,  that, 
setting  aside  primitive  matter,  light  is  —  as  this  account 
teaches  us — the  first  of  substances  ;  that  the  formation  of 
stars  was  subsequent  to  the  creation  of  light ;  that  the 
creation  of  plants  preceded  that  of  animals ;  that  creatures 
form  an  ascending  scale,  and  that  man  is  the  close  of  the 
creation  of  land  mammalia.  The  true  greatness  however  of 
this  narrative  of  creation  consists  in  its  proclaiming,  at  a 
period  of  universally  prevailing  idolatry,  the  true  idea  of  God, 
which  is  to  this  very  day  the  basis  of  all  genuine  piety  and 
culture.  This  monotheism  is  specifically  Israelite  ;  and  the 
fact  that  the  natural  heathen  disposition  of  Israel  unceasingly 
reacted  against  it,  shows  that  it  was  no  product  of  nature,  but 
a  gift  of  grace. 

They  are  truths  of  infinite  importance  which  are  expressed 
in  this  account  of  creation,  not  as  dogmas,  but  as  facts  which 


THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  HEAVEN  ASD  EAUTIL 

speak  for  themselves.  These  truths  are  :  1.  There  is  one  God 
who,  as  the  One  Elohim,  unites  in  Himself  all  the  Divine  which 
was  by  the  heathen  world  shattered  to  pieces  and  dispersed 
among  their  many  Elohim.  2.  The  world  is  not  the  necessary 
and  natural  emanation  of  His  being,  but  the  free  appointment 
of  His  will,  and  brought  to  pass  by  His  word.  3.  The  world 
originated  in  an  ascending  gradation  of  creative  acts,  and  this 
successive  nature  of  its  origin  is  the  foundation  of  those  laws 
of  development  according  to  which  its  existence  continues. 
4.  The  object  of  creation  was  man,  who  is  on  the  one  hand 
the  climax  of  the  earthly  world,  on  the  other  the  synthesis  of 
nature  and  spirit,  the  image  of  God  Himself,  and  by  His 
appointment  the  king  of  the  earthly  world.  These  are  the 
great  truths  with  which  we  are  confronted  in  the  tradition  of 
creation,  as  we  here  have  it,  free  from  mythological  deformity. 
If  we  have  in  the  Scripture  narrative  a  heathen  form  of 
that  tradition  reduced  to  what  the  critical  fusion  of  the  spirit 
of  revelation  insists  on,  its  Phoenician  or  Babylonian  form 
affords  the  nearest  comparison.  Our  sources  for  the  Phoenician 
cosmogony  are  Philo  Bybljos  in  Euseb.  prcep.  ev.  i.  10,  and 
Mochos  and  Eudemos  in  Tjamascius,  de  principiis,  c.  125  ;  for 
the  Babylonian  cosmogony,  a  fragment  in  Damascius  on  the 
origin  of  the  gods,  the  detailed  narrative  of  the  process  of  the 
world's  origination  by  Bexosus  (Euscbii  Chronica,  ed.  Schoene, 
i.  col.  11  sqq.),  and  the  clay  table  inscriptions  from  the 
library  of  Asurbanipal  (see  F.  Delitzsch's  German  edition  of 
Smith's  Ckaldee  Genesis,  1876).  It  is  true,  as  Dillmann 
urges,  that  it  is  only  in  the  Phoenician  legend  that  Bdav 
(}rQ=5inh)  occurs  as  the  name  of  primitive  matter  (personified 
as  a  female),  and  there  too  alone  that  we  meet  with  the 
notion  of  the  world-egg  (e«oz>),  that  widely  disseminated  myth, 
which  is  found  both  in  the  Finnish  epos  Kalewdla  (i.  235) 
and  in  the  Indian  Maliabliarata  (DMZ.  xxxviii.  229  sq.),  and 
a  glimmer  of  which  is  seen  in  the  biblical  namo.  The 
Babylonian  legend  however  also  offers,  even  in  the  fragments  in 
which  it  has  been  preserved,  many  still  closer  points  of  contact 


RELATION  TO  HEATHEN  LEGENDS.  63 

with  the  Scripture  narrative,  and  these  Lotz  (De  liistorm 
Sabbati,  1883,  p.  98  sq.)  has  in  my  estimation  undervalued. 
Chaos  is  there  called  tidmat  (=  Eton),  the  origin  of  the  world 
starting  from  the  primal  flood  instead  of  from  the  tohu-wa- 
bohu.  The  creation  of  the  heavenly  bodies  sounds  very  like 
the  work  of  the  fourth  day.  Three  kinds  of  animals  are 
distinguished  :  Ml  =  nom,  um&m  seri  =  psn  nTi,  and  nammassi 
seri  =  niDl^n  W2i~\.  The  twofold  ubaJssim  (u),  "  he  made  (they 
made)  good,"  is  also  a  parallel  to  the  sevenfold  nitt  of  the 
Scripture  account.  To  this  must  be  added,  that  as  nsmD 
alludes  to  the  world-egg,  so  does  nvn  rhwfc'd?  to  King  vSamas ; 
sun  and  king  are  written  with  the  same  ideogram.  And  what 
is  the  chief  matter  :  the  hebdomad  of  days  point  to  Babylon. 
For  the  week  of  seven  days  is,  as  Lotz  has  shown,  a  Babylonian 
institution.  There  too  the  seventh  day  is  called  sabattu, 
which  is  explained  by  umu  null  IMi  (day  of  the  heart's  rest). 
After  every  fourth  week  one  or  two  days  were  there  inserted, 
that  the  beginning  of  the  month  might  coincide  with  the 
beginning  of  a  new  week.  Israel  had  from  Babylon  the  week 
of  seven  days,  but  with  the  abolition  of  the  inserted  days,  the 
Israelite  computation  of  the  week  being  no  longer  combined 
with  that  of  the  month. 

If  then  it  really  is  a  fact,  that  the  account  of  the  creation 
shows  notions  and  expressions  which  are  common  both  to  it 
and  to  the  Babylonian  legend  of  creation,  and  if  it  is  besides 
in  other  respects  established,  that  there  is  an  historical  con 
nection  between  the  Hebrew  and  Babylonian  traditions,  the 
question  arises  as  to  the  period  at  which  this  picture  of 
creation  or  of  single  features  in  it  was  accepted.  Dillmann 
in  his  commentary  and  in  his  academical  essay  on  the  origin 
of  the  primitive  historical  traditions  of  the  Hebrews,  1882, 
does  not  admit  the  premisses  to  the  same  extent  that  we  do ; 
but  the  grounds  on  which  he  opposes  the  assertion  ventured 
upon  on  the  part  especially  of  Assyriology,  that  this  period 
was  that  of  the  captivity,  are  also  ours.  1.  This  dating  from 
the  captivity  is  frustrated  by  the  fact,  that  the  Babylonian 


6-4         THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  HEAVEN  AND  EARTH. 

parallels  in  the  account  of  Creation  as  well  as  of  the  Deluge 
extend  beyond  the  Elohistic  and  into  the  Jehovistic  portion. 
Now  it  is  universally  acknowledged,  that  the  Jehovistic  book, 
or  if  the  expression  is  preferred,  the  Jahvistic  extracts  of  the 
Pentateuch,  are  pre-Deuteronomic  and  therefore  pre-exilic,  and 
pertaining  to  the  period  previous  to  complication  with  the 
Babylonian  world  -  empire.  2.  It  may  indeed  be  perceived 
from  the  book  of  Ezekiel,  that  life  in  the  midst  of  Babylonian 
surroundings  was  not  without  influence  upon  the  ideas  and 
diction  of  the  prophets,  but  "  it  is  incredible  that  the  exiles 
should  have  adopted  whole  portions  from  the  writings  or 
traditions  of  their  oppressors,  and  have  even  placed  them  in 
the  forefront  of  the  Thorah.  The  national  and  religious 
antagonism  was  at  that  time  too  pronounced  to  allow  of  the 
formation  of  a  mythological  syncretism  ;  and  it  was  but  slowly, 
and  not  till  they  were  in  general  use  under  the  Persian 
sovereignty,  that  the  Jews  adopted  even  the  Babylonian 
names  of  the  months."  3.  The  Babylonian  legends  in  question 
were  already  in  their  ancient  cuneiform  character,  and  how 
much  more  then  were  they  subsequently,  "  so  overgrown  and 
interspersed  with  coarsely  sensual  notions  and  a  polymorphous 
mythology,  that  it  would  have  required  such  eminent  religious 
genius,  as  was  not  to  be  expected  from  the  Jews  of  the  exile 
and  restoration,  to  reform  them  to  the  purity  of  their  original 
state,  and  to  restore  to  them  the  monotheistic  simplicity, 
beauty  and  truth  in  which  they  appear  in  the  Bible." 

Moreover  it  is  quite  arbitrary  to  give  so  recent  a  date  to 
the  contents  of  the  account  of  Creation,  and  to  regard  them  as 
borrowed.  That  which  is  common  may  indeed  be  derived 
from  a  common  source.  Might  not  a  tradition  of  the  Cos 
mogony  have  existed  among  men  before  they  parted  into 
nations  and  paganisms  ?  This  might  take  various  forms 
among  the  several  peoples  of  Semitic  speech,  according  to 
their  national  and  religious  peculiarities,  without  however 
denying  the  common  root.  The  sons  of  Terah,  who  subse 
quently  emigrated  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  would  have  their 


REST  OF  THE  SEVENTH  DAY.  05 

own  notions  of  the  process  of  the  world's  creation,  these  would 
be  mythological  and  probably  akin  to  those  of  their  Babylonian 
abode.  The  spirit  of  revelation,  who  delivered  Abraham  from 
the  bonds  of  heathenism,  would  free  these  notions  from  their 
mythologic  deformity  and  reduce  them  to  the  form  of  majestic 
simplicity,  which  belief  in  the  One  premundane  and  super 
mundane  God  induces.  The  essential  matters  in  this  account 
of  the  creation  are  among  the  most  ancient  foundations  of  the 
religion  of  Israel. 

There  was  a  tradition  believed  in  at  least  as  early  as  the 
Mosaic  period,  that  God  after  six  days'  work  sanctified  the 
seventh  as  a  day  of  rest.  We  infer  this  from  the  circum 
stance,  that  the  institution  of  the  Sabbath  is  in  the  Decalogue 
of  the  Book  of  the  Covenant  (Ex.  xx.  11)  based  upon  the  six 
days  of  the  week  of  creation.  This  testimony  may  indeed  be 
got  rid  of  by  deciding  (as  e.g.  Lemme  does  in  his  paper  on 
the  religious  and  historical  importance  of  the  Decalogue,  1880, 
p.  8,  123),  that  Ex.  xx.  11  is  an  insertion  in  the  Decalogue 
of  more  recent  date.  But  this  does  not  follow  from  Deut.  v.  15. 
Eor  here  it  is  not,  as  in  Ex.  xx.  11,  the  institution  of  the 
Sabbath  (compare  xxxi.  17,  probably  from  LH\  but  the  duty 
of  observing  it,  which  is  founded  on  the  favourite  Deuteronomic 
motive,  the  ten  words  being  freely  recapitulated  in  the  flow 
of  hortatory  discourse. 

Another  testimony  is  Ps.  viii.,  of  which  Hitzig  says :  "  This 
psalm  has  on  no  side  the  appearance  of  a  recent  one.  In 
expression,  in  perfection  of  construction,  and  in  genuine  poetic 
value  it  is  thoroughly  worthy  of  David,  and  forms  the  correlate 
of  the  assuredly  Davidic  Ps.  xix."  Well  then  this  Ps.  viii. 
is  a  lyric  echo  of  the  tradition  committed  to  writing  in  the 
Elohistic  account  of  the  creation ;  especially  in  the  fact,  that 
here  just  as  in  Gen.  i.  the  position  of  man  as  supreme  over 
the  earthly  world  is  regarded  as  flowing  directly  from  his 
being  made  in  the  image  of  God. 

When  the  ancient  traditionary  material  received  the  written 
setting  found  in  Gen.  i.-ii.  4  is  another  question.  We  do  not 


66         THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  HEAVEN  AND  EARTH. 

ignore  that  certain  linguistic  indications  seem  to  require  a 
recent  date.  We  do  not  reckon  &TQ  among  them,  for  though 
Kin  (DWQ)  becomes  more  frequent  as  an  appellation  of  God 
in  Old  Testament  literature  the  farther  down  we  come,  yet 
Kin  as  denoting  Divine  creation  is  guaranteed  to  us  as  pre- 
exilianby  Dsr6x  &ro,  Deut.  iv.  32,  and  miT  tna,  Isa.  iv.  5.  Nor 
yp-|,  for  the  antiquity  of  the  name  for  the  firmament  of  heaven 
is  defended  by  Ps.  xix.  2.  Nor  in^n  (i.  24),  which  occurs  ten 
times  in  the  0.  T.,  for  Zepli.  ii.  14  shows  that  pre-exilian 
literature  also  was  not  averse  to  the  use  of  this  archaism.  Nor 
mi  (i.  26,  28),  for  it  is  found  also  in  Ps.  Ixxii.  8,  against 
whose  Solomonian  composition  nothing  valid  can  be  objected. 
Nor  even  piD,  though  it  is  certainly  striking  that  this  word,  so 
frequently  used  by  the  Elohist,  only  occurs  elsewhere  once  in 
Ezek.  xlvii.  10,  and  several  times  in  the  reproduction  of  the  laws 
on  food,  Deut.  xiv.  13-18  ;  for  we  do  not  regard  the  law  of 
clean  and  unclean  animals  with  the  classifying  i:^!?,  in^iD^,  ro^, 
there  reproduced  in  Deuteronomy  as  the  insertion  of  a  more 
recent  redactor,  but  as  an  ancient  pre-Deuteronomic  element  of 
the  Elohistic  Thorah.  There  is  therefore  no  reason  why  }•>£>,  species, 
should  not  be  a  word  belonging  to  the  most  ancient  Hebrew. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  striking  that  the  Elohistic  word  rops 
(especially  in  the  formula  mpjl  "OT,  i.  27,  or  rapJ  IK  -IDT)  is  only 
found,  besides  Deut.  iv.  16,  in  the  enigmatic  saying,  Jer.  xxxi.22. 
It  must  however  be  nevertheless  assumed  that  the  word  is 
pre-Deuteronomic,  for  there  is  no  other  word  in  the  language  to 
designate  the  woman  in  her  sexual  distinction  from  the  man. 
It  is  moreover  striking  that  the  Elohistic  m*n  ma  (i.  22,  28) 
occurs  elsewhere  only  Jer.  iii.  16,  xxiii.  3;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  11  ; 
comp.  Zech.  x.  8  ;  but  this  pairing  of  the  two  synonyms  may 
indeed  be  regarded  as  a  peculiarity  of  style,  but  not  as  a 
characteristic  sign  in  any  language.  Again,  it  is  striking  that 
rilDi  (i.  26,  v.  3),  apart  from  the  chronologically  uncertain 
passages,  Ps.  Iviii.  5,  2  Kings  xvi.  10,  is  found  only  in  2  Isa., 
Ezekiel  and  Daniel,  and  still  more  so  that  the  word  D^%  used 
by  the  Elohist,  i.  26  sq.,  v.  3,  ix.  6,  to  express  man's  likeness 


ELOHISTIC  ACCOUNT  OF  CEEATIOX.  G7 

to  God,  is  without  parallel,  Ps.  xxxix.  7  and  Ixxiii.  20  even 
entering  into  collision  with  this  application  of  the  word.  Him 
however  may,  like  JTO,  Hos.  iv.  11,  vi.  10,  belong  to  the  classic 
period  of  the  language,  and  oh?  is  not  found  for  the  imago 
divina  even  in  post-exilian  writings,  although  we  meet  in  them 
with  tones  in  unison  with  those  of  the  Elohistic  account  of 
the  creation  which  are  absent  from  pre-exilian  writings,  e.g.  the 
waters  that  are  above  the  heavens,  Ps.  cxlviii.  4,  and  the  Dinn, 
which  covered  the  originating  earth  like  a  garment,  civ.  6. 
Accident  and  choice  have  here  prevailed,  as  is  shown  e.g.  by 
allusions  to  the  primordial  imi  inn,  being  found  only  in  Jer. 
iv.  23;  Isa.  xxxiv.  11  ;  Ezekiel  nowhere  uses  the  word  inn 
so  frequent  in  2  Isa. ;  while  on  the  other  hand  its  appearance 
Isa.  xxix.  11  is  a  pledge  that  it  belongs  to  the  classic  period. 

We  might  beforehand  expect  that  more  points  of  contact 
with  the  Priest- codex  would  be  found  in  the  priestly  prophets 
Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  than  elsewhere.  And  if  it  is,  as  we  have 
shown,  the  case  that  Deuteronomy  does  not  indeed  as  yet  pre 
suppose  the  Priest-codex  in  its  complete  form,  but  an  Elohistic 
Thorah,  it  is  easily  conceivable,  that  subsequently  to  the  era  of 
Josiah  literature  would  not  only  be  under  the  preponderating 
influence  of  Deuteronomy,  but  would  here  and  there  receive 
also  an  Elohistic  tinge.  The  style  too  of  the  Jehovist,  in 
passages  where  no  suspicion  of  interpolation  can  arise,  already 
assumes  sometimes  an  Elohistic  colouring,  e.g.  the  expression 
for  the  plague  of  frogs,  Ex.  viii.  3,  corresponds  with  Gen.  i.  20. 
The  non-Elohistic  verses,  Gen.  vii.  8  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxviii.  20) 
and  Deut.  iv.  18  (comp.  Ezek.  viii.  10),  approach  in  their  use  of 
the  peculiarly  Elohistic  B>ID-I  the  Elohistic  style,  while  Hos. 
ii.  20  sounds  like  an  echo  of  Gen.  i.  25,  vi.  20. 

There  are  then  no  marks  of  style  which  constrain  us  to 
relegate  the  Elohistic  account  of  the  creation  to  the  period  of 
the  exile.  If  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  portal  of  the  historical 
work  of  Q,  which  embraces  the  ancient  Elohistic  Thorah  and 
is  homogeneous  with  it,  no  appeal  can  be  made  to  the  account 
of  the  creation  for  relegating  the  origin  of  this  historical  work 


68         THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  HEAVEN  AND  EARTH. 

to  the  period  of  the  exile.  It  is  in  any  case  a  tradition  reaching 
back  to  the  Mosaic  period,  which  the  account  of  the  creation 
reproduces ;  for  the  foundation  of  the  Sabbath  upon  the 
Sabbath  of  creation  is  defended  as  a  matter  of  ancient 
tradition  by  the  Decalogue.  Neither  Ex.  xx.  11  (heaven, 
earth,  sea,  rim,  inenp^)  nor  Ex.  xxxi.  1 7  (^1  ra^)  proves  itself 
to  be  taken  from  the  Elohistic  account  of  the  creation. 

We  are  able  to  separate  into  its  component  parts  the  fabric 
of  the  Pentateuch  (Joshua  included);  but  when  we  proceed  to 
inquire  when  the  separate  elements  here  interwoven  came  into 
existence,  we  are  but  groping  in  the  dark.  Budde  in  his 
work  on  the  Scriptural  primitive  history,  1883,  hazards  the 
conjecture,  that  the  original  account  of  the  creation  (in  the 
Jahvist,  whom  he  letters  as  J2)  came  to  the  Israelites  from 
Mesopotamia,  and  that  in  the  time  of  Ahaz — that  is,  at  the 
time  when  the  cowardly  unbelief  of  Ahaz  purchased  the  help 
of  Assyria,  and  thereby  delivered  up  not  only  Syria  and 
Ephraim,  but  his  own  kingdom  also  to  Assyria.  He  also 
designates  as  "  one  of  the  most  ancient  inheritances  of  genuine 
criticism  "  the  knowledge  that  the  original  account  of  creation 
enumerated  eight  works  (light,  the  firmament,  the  dry  land, 
plants,  the  stars,  air  and  water  animals,  land  animals,  man), 
and  that  Q  impressed  upon  this  older  model,  which  made 
creation  take  place  in  eight  works,  the  period  of  six  days 
with  the  concluding  Sabbath.  This  is  not  shown  by  the 
diction,  for  all  is  of  one  style,  of  one  cast.  But  it  is  said  to 
be  indicated  by  the  fact,  that  the  third  and  fourth  works  (dry 
land  and  plants)  are  forced  together  into  one  day,  the  third, 
while  on  the  contrary  the  second  and  third  (the  firmament 
and  the  dry  land)  are  torn  asunder  and  assigned  to  two  days, 
although  the  creation  of  birds  and  fishes  form  one  work,  and 
consequently  the  firmament  and  the  dry  land  should  also  be 
the  work  of  one  day.  In  any  case  however  there  is  more 
sense  in  the  Hexaemeron  than  in  the  unorganized  eight  works. 
Besides,  the  history  of  the  world  confirms  the  fact  that  in 


THE  IIEXAKAIEEON  OF  THE  ACCOUNT  OF  CUEATIOX.  09 

processes  of  development  the  middle  is  wont  to  be  com 
paratively  weaker  and  the  end  comparatively  stronger  than 
the  beginning.  In  accordance  with  this,  each  triad  of  creative 
acts  in  the  process  of  creation  forms  a  whole  in  which  what 
made  its  appearance  in  the  first  is  continued  in  the  second 
and  attains  its  aim  in  the  third.  There  is  delicate  contrivance 
and,  as  we  think,  fundamental  importance  in  the  circum 
stance,  that  the  course  of  creation  is  effected  according  to  the 
rhythm  —  o  — 

The  Hexaemeron  of  the  account  of  creation  as  now  extant 
falls  into  two  groups  of  three  days,  so  arranged  that  the 
days'  works  of  the  second  group  accord  with  the  correspond 
ing  ones  of  the  first.  On  the  first  day  light  was  created,  on 
the  fourth  the  heavenly  light-giving  bodies  ;  on  the  second 
day  the  vault  of  heaven  dividing  the  waters  from  the  waters, 
on  the  fifth  the  birds  of  heaven  and  the  animals  of  the 
waters  ;  on  the  third  day,  after  the  appearance  of  the  dry 
land,  the  vegetable  world ;  on  the  sixth  land  animals,  to  fill 
the  dry  land  now  provided  with  herbage  for  their  nourishment, 
and  man,  in  whom  the  whole  animal  creation  reaches  its 
climax.  This  parallelism  strikes  the  eye  at  once.  It  remains, 
even  if  an  older  account  enumerating  eight  works  without  a 
division  into  days  is  assumed,  when  two  equally  corresponding 
groups  of  four  take  the  place  of  the  groups  of  three.  In  both 
cases  the  second  series  begins  with  the  creation  of  sun,  moon, 
and  stars.  It  is  questionable  in  what  sense  ;  for  only  if  no 
consistent  connection  at  all  could  be  perceived  could  it  be 
admitted,  that  the  beginning  of  the  second  series  is  out  of 
connection  with  the  first  (v.  Hofm.).  But  this  is  not  the  case. 
It  may  be  conceived,  that  an  advance  is  made  from  the  plants 
which  are  bound  to  the  soil  to  substances  moving  freely  in 
space,  the  stars  above.  So  Drechsler,  Dillmann,  etc.,  and  also 
Kiehm,  who  at  the  same  time  remarks,  that  this  is  not  as 
prominent  in  the  Hexaemeron  as  formerly  :  that  the  fourth 
day's  \vork  has  now  a  hybrid  position,  forming  on  one  side 
the  commencement  of  the  creation  of  the  freer  individual 


70         THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  HEAVEX  AND  EARTH. 

existences,  and  being  on  the  other,  as  the  equipment  of  the  vault 
of  heaven,  the  corresponding  half  to  the  clothing  of  the  earth. 
For  plants  clothe  and  adorn  the  earthly  floor  as  the  heavenly 
bodies  do  the  superstructure  of  the  whole  edifice.  Then 
would  the  narrative  intimate,  as  we  read  in  the  poets,  that 
the  flowers  are  the  stars  of  earth,  and  the  stars  the  flowers  of 
heaven,  as  Riickert  says — 

Die  Sonn'  1st  eine  goldne  Eos'  im  Blauen, 
Die  Eos'  ist  eine  rote  Sonn'  im  Griinen.1 

The  connection  however  of  the  several  acts  of  creation  is 
throughout  closer,  more  genetic,  and  brought  about  in  a  more 
inward  manner.  For  this  very  reason,  the  view  that  the 
creation  of  independent  individual  existences  began  with  the 
stars  and  then  continued  in  the  animals  of  air  and  water  is  an 
unsatisfactory  one.  From  plants  to  the  lower  animals,  and 
from  these  through  the  land  mammalia  to  man,  there  is 
progress ;  but  that  in  this  scale  of  being  sun,  moon  and  stars 
should  form  a  degree  between  plants  and  the  lower  animals, 
is  too  unnatural  and  far-fetched  a  notion  to  be  the  meaning  of 
the  account.  To  me  the  placing  of  the  stars  in  the  midst  of 
the  gradually  progressive  creation  of  this  earthly  world  has 
always  seemed  and  still  seems  to  have  another  intention. 
The  fundamental  condition  of  all  creative  development  is  light, 
therefore  light  opens  the  series  of  the  creative  acts.  But 
after  the  Divine  fiat  has  called  forth  the  vegetable  world,  the 
creation  of  this  fundamental  condition  of  the  continuance 
and  growth  of  all  life  upon  earth  is  completed  by  the  creation 
of  sun,  moon  and  stars.  Hence  this  follows  the  creation  of 
the  vegetable  and  precedes  that  of  the  animal  world.  It  was 
not  possible  that  plants  should  arise  without  light ;  but  when 
the  creation  of  the  independent  creatures  is  about  to  take 
place,  the  light  is  parted  into  bodies  of  light,  and  at  the  same 
time  a  stable,  regular  and  visible  measure  of  time  is  established. 
The  alternation  of  day  and  night  had  hitherto  been  effected 

1  The  sun  is  a  golden  rose  in  the  blue, 
The  rose  is  a  red  sun  in  the  careen. 


THE  HEBDOMAD  OF  DAYS.  71 

by  the  exercise  and  the  cessation  of  God's  creative  agency, 
"but  henceforth  they  alternate  for  the  good  of  the  creatures, 
according  to  the  universal  timepiece  of  the  heavenly  bodies.1 

Even  Budde  concedes,  with  regard  to  the  Decalogue,  that 
the  Hebdomad  of  days  was  not  invented,  but  met  with  by  the 
author  of  the  account,  even  supposing  that  his  original  did  not 
contain  it.  It  is  no  plan  of  his  making,  but  one  Divine  and 
traditional,  and  there  is  objective  truth  in  the  circumstance  that 
three  creative  acts  of  God  twice  form  a  whole,  and  that  the 
third  is  in  both  instances  a  double  one.  For  the  rest 
however  the  author  has  given  play  to  his  subjectivity  by 
impressing  on  the  process  of  creation,  even  within  the  frame 
of  the  seven  days  with  its  twice  three  work  days,  many 
judicious  arithmetical  proportions.  A  creative  and  directing 
word  of  command,  introduced  by  "HO&OI,  is  ten  times  issued  (the 
nnsso  mwy,  Aloth  v.  1,  of  which  i.  3  gives  the  first,  i.  29  the 
tenth)  and  a  seven  times  repeated  TP1  ("rtN^m,  ver.  3,  and  p~TPi, 
vv.  7,  9,  11,  15,  24,  30)  confirms  the  accomplishment  of  the 
uttered  will  of  God.  A  threefold  Nnp^i  refers  to  God  the 
distinctive  names  of  the  separate  creations  ;  a  threefold  "pm 
(vv.  22,  28  and  ii.  3)  records  His  blessing  upon  animals,  men, 
and  the  Sabbath  day  ;  a  sevenfold  mtt  impresses  upon  the 
creature  the  seal  of  the  Divine  approbation.  These  relations 
of  number  are  significant,  but  no  inward  necessity  requires 
their  statement,  for  a  •pm  might  have  followed  ver.  2  5  also,  but 
is  omitted  because  the  narrative  hastens  on  to  the  creation  of 
man  ;  the  threefold  &opl'i  (vv.  5,  8,  10)  is  completed,  v.  2,  by  a 
fourth  ;  and  with  regard  to  the  ten  "inx111),  Dillmann  is  right  in 
saying,  that  in  ver.  22  also  "iD&n  might  stand  instead  of 


The  text  of  the  account  of  creation,  as  translated  by  the 
LXX.,  differs  in  many  though  non-essential  respects  from  our 
Hebrew  text.  This  was  at  that  time  not  as  yet  so  unalterably 

1  In  this  vic\v  the  relation  of  the  narrative  to  physical  science  is  not  one  of 
such  rude  antagonism  as  Driver  thinks,  who  in  his  article  "The  Cosmogony  of 
Genesis,"  in  the  Expositor  1886,  1,  lays  special  stress  on  this  discord. 


72  GENESIS  I.  1. 

fixed  as  subsequently.  Besides,  the  treatment  of  his  text  by 
the  translator  was  then  freer  than  is  now  thought  consistent  with 
the  duty  of  a  believer  in  the  Bible.  Hence  it  is  in  most  cases 
difficult  to  say,  whether  their  Hebrew  text  of  the  LXX.  was  a 
different  one  from  the  Masoretic,  or  whether  their  divergences 
are  free  modifications.  Their  Hebrew  text  seems  to  have 
actually  contained  another  verse  after  ver.  9,  viz.  /cal 
TO  v8a)p  TO  vTro/caTO)  TOV  ovpavov  el?  ra?  away  coy  as 
teal  w(f)07)  77  %r)pd,  for  here  crvvaywyas  avrwv  (DHIDlpD)  pre 
supposes,  instead  of  teal  o-vvfydr]  TO  vSwp,  the  Hebrew  ^jW 
B^D. — In  the  second  day's  work  the  teal  eyeveTO  OVTWS  stands 
in  the  LXX.  not  after  '131  t?jn,  as  in  the  Hebrew  text,  but 
after  the  creative  command  ver.  6,  which  in  itself,  and  as  ver. 
14-16  shows,  is  the  more  fitting  place.  On  the  other  hand 
the  insertion  of  the  /cal  elSev  6  #eo?  OTI  tca\6v  after  the  second 
day's  work  rests  upon  a  short-sighted  desire  for  conformity ; 
it  is  there  purposely  absent,  because  the  gathering  of  the 
waters  under  the  firmament  was  not  as  yet  effected. — In  ver. 
11  it  inserts  after  jnt  VITID,  /caTa  yevos  /cal  ouoioTrjTa,  and 
places  WD^  as  it  stands  in  ver.  12  of  the  Hebrew  text  after 
11  Ijnt  "i^tf.  It  also  translates  the  in^rf*  of  ver.  12  /caTa  70/05 
/cal  6/j,oioT7]Ta,  and  after  the  second  in^rfj  reads  pKJviy  as  in 
ver.  11,  translating  ov  TO  o-Trepfjia  avTov  ev  avTa>  KCLTCL  yevos 
eVt  rf??  ryfjs.  These  divergences  give  an  impression  of 
arbitrariness ;  the  superfluous  /cal  o/^oiOT^ra  may  be  a  gloss 
which  has  slipped  into  the  Greek  text,  especially  as  OJJLOIOTTJS 
is  besides  not  a  Septuagint  word, — real  lyeveTo  OVTWS,  after  ver. 
20,  is  in  accordance  with  the  matter,  but  unnecessary;  the 
other  divergences  are  not  worth  speaking  of.  It  is  just  where 
a  various  reading  in  the  LXX.  would  be  acceptable,  that  it 
leaves  us  in  the  lurch.  Like  the  Hebrew  text,  it  has  the 
striking  /cal  irdcr^  T%  7775,  266,  and  the  extraordinary  teal 
eyeveTo  OVTW?  after  ver.  30. 

I.  1.  The  fact  of  creation  in  a  universal  statement. — In  the 
beginning  Elohim  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  The 
account  is  at  once  designated  as  the  work  of  the  Elohist  by  the 


GENESIS  I.  1.  73 

Divine  name  D'ritf,  for  the  Creator  of  the  world  might  just  as 
well  have  been  called  mrp,  as  e.g.  in  Ps.  xxxiii.  6  ;  comp. 
mrr  N-Q,  Isa.  iv.  5,  with  DM^K  *O3,  Deut.  iv.  32.  This  Divine 
name  DM^N  is  the  plural  of  lirt/g,  which  occurs  only  in  poetry. 
It  is  certainly  striking  that  the  singular  nfttf  is  unused  in 
prose  literature,  and  that  in  proper  names  also  there  is  not  a 
trace  of  its  employment.  But  there  is  no  reason  for  inferring, 
with  Nestle  (Theol.  Studicn  ecus  Wurtcmlcrg,  iii.  243),  that 
D'nta  is  related  to  DvK,  as  nlnttx,  Aram,  nnn^  is  to  the  nearest 
plural  forms  of  nipK,  3^  and  that  in  this  case  as  in  those 
n  is  only  an  insertion  to  be  deducted,  and  hence  that  Fnfa 
cannot  be  regarded  as  the  original  singular  of  DTibtf,  but  on 
the  contrary  as  an  additional  secondary  form  from  this 
epenthetic  plural.  This  inference  rests  on  the  assumption 
that  D\"6tf  and  ?$  are  derived  from  the  same  verbal  root. 
We  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  about  *$  at  xiv.  18.  But 
whether  the  verbal  stem  from  which  it  is  derived  is  ^K  (^1*0 
or  n7N\  and  means  to  be  strong,  or  to  be  foremost,  or  anything 
else,  fi/W,  from  which  DTvN  is  derived,  is  at  all  events  another 
verb,  to  which  the  signification  of  violent  inward  anxiety, 

s-s.      s    ' 

discomposure,  fear,  is  assured  by  the  Arabic  A!!  (<id.).      ,J\  d\ 

means  in  Arabic  exactly  the  same  as  %  ina,  Hos.  iii.  5,  trepide 
confuycre  ad  aliqucm,  and  hence  DTi^x,  with  its  singular  rnta, 
coincides  as  an  appellation  of  God  with  nna.  Gen.  xxxi.  42, 
53  ;  and  tf")io,  Isa.  viii.  13  ;  Fs.  Ixxvi.  12.  Eloah,  Arab,  -z,7aA, 
means  reverence,  and  then  the  object  of  reverence.  Primus 
in  orbe  Deos  fecit  timor,  says  Statins  (Thebais,  ix.  661),  the 
religious  sentiment  was  and  is  in  its  deepest  foundation  a 
feeling  of  dependence  and  limitation.  The  plural  n'nta  ranks 
with  Q^"1^,  &vy3 ;  in  heathenism  it  is  an  external  (numerical), 
in  Israel  an  internally  multiplying  (intensive)  plural.  God  is 
thus  designated  as  He  who  is  in  the  highest  degree  to  be 
reverenced.  D'Wia  as  an  appellation  of  the  all-exalted  Creator, 
Eccles.  xii.  l,is  a  similar  plural  (though,  according  to  Baer,  not 
,  but  ^"N3,  is  the  Masoretically  authorized  reading).  The 


74  GENESIS  I.  1. 

verb  tna,  together  with  which  the  Elohist  has  used  ntjty,  but 
never  ny,  has,  as  its  Piel,  tf'ia,  shows,  the  fundamental  meaning 
of  to  cut,  to  cut  out,  and  then  of  the  forming  and  fashioning 
to  be  thus  effected.  In  other  languages  also  the  verbs  used 
to  designate  the  creative  agency  of  the  Godhead  fall  back 
upon  similar  original  material  meanings,  e.g.  Assyr.  patdku 
(whence  pdtiku,  creator,  synonymous  with  bdnf),  to  break,  to 
split ;  Arab,  u-did-,  to  make,  properly  to  smooth.  With  the 
withdrawal  of  the  original  material  meaning  N"Q  in  Kal  has 
become  the  special  designation  for  Divine  production,  which, 
whether  in  the  realm  of  nature  (Ex.  xxxiv.  10  ;  Num.  xvi.  30) 
or  of  spirit  (Ps.  li.  12),  brings  into  existence  something  new, 
something  not  yet  or  not  thus  existing.  Nowhere  is  Kin  used 
of  human  production,  nowhere  is  it  found  with  an  accusative  of 
the  matter.  It  designates  the  Divine  causality  as  uncondi 
tioned,  and  its  product  as  being,  with  respect  to  its  real  state, 
absolutely  new,  and,  as  to  its  ultimate  cause,  miraculous  and 
God-originated.  There  are  many  modes  of  creation,  e.g.  the 
creation  of  man  was  a  different  process  from  the  creation 
of  animals  ;  the  kernel  of  the  notion  expressed  by  K-Q  is  the 
origination  of  the  absolutely  new,  and  both  the  beginning  in 
time  of  such  origination  and  the  finiteness  of  the  originated 
are  essential  marks  of  the  notion. 

The  account  begins  with  an  alliteration  significant  to  eye 
and  ear,  K"i2  JVIP&rQ.  The  accentuation  distinguishes  as  far 
as  possible  each  word  of  this  supremely  important  verse. 
Tifcha,  the  separative  of  Athnach,  stands  in  nWD  as  the 
definition  of  time  which  is  separated  from  what  follows  ;  in  11 
as  the  separative  of  Silluk  it  keeps  the  two  objects  apart,  and  the 
two  ns  are  made  independent  by  means  of  Mercha,  the  servant 
of  Tifcha  and  Silluk,  while  Athnach  has  its  Munach  as  a  servant. 

Ancient  translators  all  regard  ver.  1  as  an  independent 
proposition.  Hashi  however,  and  among  moderns  Ewald, 
Bunsen,  Schrader,  Budde  construe  :  In  the  beginning,  when 
Elohim  created  heaven  and  earth — and  the  earth  was  waste  and 
desert,  etc. — then  God  said  ;  otherwise,  Abenezra  and  Grotius  : 


GENESIS  T.  1.  75 

In  the  beginning,  when  Elohim  created  the  heaven  and  the 
earth,  the  earth  was  waste  and  desert.  The  former  is,  accord 
ing  to  Hos.  i.  2,  syntactically  admissible.  The  latter  might, 
according  to  vii.  10,  xxii.  1,  seem  equally  so,  but  neither  of  these 
examples  is  exactly  similar  :  vii.  1 0  follows  the  plan  of  contem 
poraneousness,  Josh.  iii.  3,  and  xxii.  1  that,  viz.,  of  making  the 
circumstances  preceding  the  principal  sentence,  xl.  1.  If  the 
account  had  begun  with  JWK"O  M*1"),  xxii.  1  would  be  similar :  It 
came  to  pass  in  the  beginning,  when  God  created  .  .  .  that 
when  the  earth  was  .  .  .  God  said.  Since  however  no  w\ 
stands  first,  we  must  admit  that  the  language  proceeds  para- 
tactically.  The  sole  ground  for  the  periodizing  construction 
is,  that  JW&TD  requires  a  nearer  genitive  definition,  and  that 
without  such  it  must  rather  have  been,  instead  of  JW&O2, 
JWfcna,  as  it  is  transcribed  in  Greek  /3ap7)o-?j9  (Lagarde,  Sym- 
micta,  i.  113  ;  comp.  Getting.  Anzeigcr,  1882,  p.  327  sq.), 
although  even  then  the  a  may  be  but  a  disguised  sheva. 

We  have  here  however  a  similar  case  with  Deut.  xi.  12, 
Isa.  xlvi.  10,  where  nwi  has  neither  genitive  nor  suffix,  but 
the  nearer  definition  has  to  be  supplied  from  the  nature 
of  the  case  or  the  connection.  JTtt'&O  occurs  only  once,  viz. 
Neli.  xii.  44,  with  the  article,  where  nwin  signifies  the 
JW6O  demanded  by  the  law  (Ex.  xxiii.  19  and  elsewhere), 
the  first-fruits  of  the  ground.  Everywhere  besides  it  is 
either  defined  by  the  following  genitive,  or  by  its  suffix,  or 
the  completion  of  the  definition  is  left  to  the  hearer  (reader). 
It  has  been  said  that  nwo  is  in  a  twofold  sense  an  Aramaism  : 
(1)  because  in  being  without  an  article  it  ranks  with  TPli??  (so 
here  Onkelos),  and  (2)  because  in  old  Hebrew  JW&O  does  not 
mean  the  beginning  of  an  event,  but  the  first  (and  generally  the 
best)  part  of  anything.  The  latter  is  however  untrue  ;  Driver 
rightly  refers,  in  opposition  to  it,  to  Hos.  ix.  10,  where  a  fig- 
tree  "  in  its  beginning  "  is  equal  to,  in  the  beginning  of  fig-time  ; 
also  at  Gen.  x.  10,  rvwi  signifies  not  the  first  part,  but  the 
temporal  beginning.  The  beginning  which  precedes  or  stands 
at  the  head  of  a  series  or  course  is  everywhere  called  JT 


76  GENESIS  I.  1. 


(from  ^'&O=^N"i,  the  head  as  the  foremost).  And  with  respect 
to  the  absence  of  the  article,  it  corresponds,  without  being  an 
Aramaism,  with  the  spirit  of  the  old  Hebrew  tongue,  which 
here  as  often  is  undefinable.  We  find  npnna,  but  never 

nn  ;  always  njb^K")3,  never  rup'&oa  ;  and  on  the  other  hand 
*"ip,  Q7.PP,  always  without  an  article.  The  Aramaic 
also  frequently  uses  and  omits  determinatives  only  according 
to  a  certain  feeling  not  to  be  more  precisely  accounted  for. 
The  Targum,  Jer.  ii.,  translates  rrwa  by  K£|K"|»,  but 
Hos.  ix.  10  means  an  undetermined  ?JK3  in  the  beginning 
(early),  and  NTO*i£3  is  used  as  well  as  IW£3  for  initio  (e.g. 
Gen.  xiii.  4).  In  Greek  too  eV  dpxy  is  used  (LXX.  here  and 
John  i.  1),  not  eV  rfj  apxfi  ',  but  TTJV  ^PXJ1V  (John  viii.  23)  is 
under  certain  circumstances  used  for  initio. 

Besides  the  relativity  of  the  JTO&O  is  involved  in  the  notion, 
the  article  does  not  abolish  it.  The  question  still  remains  : 
Beginning  of  what  ?  First  part  of  what  ?  What  is  the 
relation  of  the  relative  notion  which  must  be  here  added  in 
thought  ?  Lyra  (dissenting  herein  from  Eashi)  explains  :  in 
principle,  scil.  temporis,  but  this  is  too  abstract,  vel  productionis 
rcntm,  but  this  gives  a  tautology,  for  heaven  and  earth  are 
res,  and  indeed  the  very  res,  with  which  the  Divine  creation 
not  only  began,  but  in  which  it  came  forth.  Nor  can  the 
meaning  be  :  In  the  beginning  of  the  world  (of  things)  God 
created  the  matter  of  the  universe,  for  heaven  and  earth  are  the 
universe  itself  in  its  twofold  order,  not  the  prima  materia  of 
both.  Hence  rpp&o  will  here  be  the  beginning  of  the  history 
which  follows,  as  eV  dpxfi  is  meant  absolutely  of  the  beginning 
of  existence.  The  history  to  be  related  from  this  point 
onwards  has  heaven  and  earth  for  its  object,  its  scene,  its 
factors.  At  the  head  of  this  history  stands  the  creation  of  the 
world  as  its  commencement,  or  at  all  events  its  foundation. 

The  relation  in  which  ver.  1  stands  to  ver.  2  is  question 
able.  If  the  heaven,  whose  creation  takes  place  farther  on, 
on  the  fourth  day,  coincides  with  own  of  ver.  1,  ver.  1  would 
be  a  summary  of  what  follows.  But  the  heaven  which  was 


GENESIS  I.  1.  77 

created  on  the  fourth  day  is  only  the  heaven  of  the  earthly 
world,  while  Scripture  speaks  also  of  the  heaven  of  heavens, 
Dent.  x.  14,  and  of  the  heaven  of  heavens  which  are  of  old, 
Ps.  Ixviii.  33,  therefore  of  heavenly  spheres  above  the  heaven 
of  this  earth.  Besides,  the  nBtyj,  faciamus,  ver.  26,  presupposes 
beings  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  of  whose  creation 
(prior,  as  it  appears  from  Job  xxxviii.  4-7,  to  that  of  this 
world)  nothing  is  said  in  the  narrative.  Hence  ver.  1  states 
the  fact  of  creation  in  an  extent  which  the  account  that 
follows  does  not  exhaust.  It  is  within  the  all-embracing 
work  of  creation,  stated  in  ver.  1,  that  ver.  2  takes  up  its 
position,  at  the  point  when  the  creation  of  this  earth  and  its 
heaven  begins  :  And  the  earth  was  in  a  state  of  desolation  and 
rigidity,  and  darkness  was  upon  the  surface  of  the  primaeval 
waters,  and  the  Spirit  of  Elohim  brooded  upon  the  surface  of  the 
waters.  The  perfect  thus  preceded  by  its  subject  is  the  usual 
way  of  stating  the  circumstances  under  which  a  following  narra 
tive  takes  place,  iii.  1,  iv.  1,  xviii.  17—20  ;  Num.  xxxii.  1  ; 
Judg.  xi.  1,  vi.  33  ;  1  Kings  i.  1  sqq.  ;  Prov.  iv.  3  sq.  ;  Zech. 
iii.  3  sq.  The  chief  accent  of  nnTi  could  not  here  before 

-L  /r  :  T 

inn  seem  to  have  fallen  back  upon  the  penultima,  because 
then  the  two  similar  tones  tho  and  tha,  would  have  been  in 
danger  of  being  indistinct  ;  in  truth  however  there  is  a 
very  subtile  accentualogical  reason.1  This  nrvn  is  no  mere 
erat,  it  declares  that  the  earth  was  found  in  a  condition  of  inn 
inm,  when  God's  six-days'  creative  agency  began.  Its  primitive 
condition  is  designated  by  a  pair  of  words  of  similar  sound, 

1  The  servus  Mercha  before  Pashta  remains  as  a  rule  in  its  place,  because 
if  it  were  to  recede  it  must  be  changed  into  another  sign,  and  indeed  into  Mehu- 
pach.  It  therefoae  maintains  its  position  unaltered  —  especially  when  the 


accent  Rebia,  precedes.     Hence  here  lilh  HJVn  p^ni;  comp.  J^'  JIJTl 

(xivii.  3),  or6  ^P^J  wn  (Ex.  xvi.  22),  ri2  nwta  ^  (*w.  xxxi 

>  > 

ru  &oar6  ~vn  (i  Sam.  xxvii.  11),  ^  I-IDI  n^n  (2  Sam.  xvii.  s),  -rai 


niy  (isa.  xiv.  i),  nn  ny'i  Dnas  (HOS.  xii.  2),  ^13  \TI  "ivixn  (Mai.  iii.  10), 

and  elsewhere. 


78  GENESIS  I.  1. 

and  such-like  endings  (rhymes)  and  alliterations  (comp. 
KOI  xprfais,  \6<ya)  teal  epyqj,  ep<yov  Kal  eVo?)  are  found  through 
out  the  Pentateuch,  iv.  12;  Ex.  xxiii.  1;  Num.  v.  18,  24; 
Deut.  ii.  15.  inn  (=tf?n=l™;))  comes  from  the  Y.  nnn,  Aram. 
Knn,  Arab.  x\j,  to  roar,  to  be  desolate,  to  be  confounded 
(attonituwi  csse),  and  means  desolation,  vastitas,  emptiness, 
formlessness.  inh  ("lip")??)  has,  according  to  the  Syriac 
and  the  secondary  verb  Enn  (to  be  closed,  deaf,  stupid),  the 
meaning  of  heaviness,  unconsciousness,  lifelessness, — the  inn 
paired  with  inn  does  not  with  the  separative  accent  read 
regularly  ^nhl,  but  with  the  first  sound  kametz,  inhl  (see  Ps. 
Iv.  10).  The  sound  as  well  as  the  meaning  of  the  pair  of 
words  is  awe-inspiring  ;  the  earth  according  to  its  substratum 
was  a  desolate  and  dead  mass,  in  a  word  a  chaos  (%«o?).  The 
book  of  Wisdom  xi.  18  has  for  it  the  philosophic  appellation 
V\T)  a/jLop<j>o?,  in  opposition  to  which  the  LXX.  by  translating 
doparo?  teal  aKarao-fcevacrTos  fixes  in  the  aoparos  that  stage 
of  ideal  pre-existence  in  the  Divine  plan  of  the  world  con 
cerning  which  the  account  is  silent.  The  question  whether 
the  mm  inn  is  to  be  regarded  as  potentially  including  not 
only  earth  but  also  heaven,  must  according  to  the  meaning 
of  the  narrative,  which  herein  agrees  with  other  ancient 
cosmogonies,  be  answered  in  the  affirmative.  The  chaos, 
as  which  the  developing  earth  existed,  embraced  also 
the  heaven  which  was  developing  with  and  for  it.  The 
substance  of  the  imi  inn  is  left  undefined ;  inn  is  the  synonym 
of  f^K,  DSK,  np^3,  Son  and  the  like,  and  is  therefore  a  purely 
negative  notion.  Or  does  the  narrative,  when  it  continues  -jem 
ninn  ^srity,  mean  that  the  mm  inn  were  as  to  their  substance  a 
Dinn,  i.e.  a  mass  of  surging  waters  ?  No,  the  Dinn  is  not  the 
imi  mn  themselves,  but  the  flooding  of  the  chaos,  and,  especially 
if  the  earth  in  its  as  yet  chaotic  state,  already  forms  part  of  the 
preparation  of  the  six  days'  work.  In  this  sense  Ps.  civ.  says  of 
the  earth :  Thou  coveredst  it  with  the  Dinn  as  with  a  garment 
(1JVD3,  per  attract,  for  nn^D3,  comp.  Isa.  Ix.  18,  Ixvi.  8);  and  in  the 
book  of  Job  we  read  of  the  sea,  xxxviii.  8  :  "  I  protected  the  sea 


GENESIS  I.  1.  79 

with  doors,  when  it  brake  forth,  issued  from  the  womb ;  when 
I  made  the  clouds  the  garment  thereof,  and  thick  darkness  a 
swaddling-band  for  it."  This  means  the  state  of  chaos  out  of 
which  the  primeval  waters,  at  first  enveloped  in  vapour  and 
clouds,  came  forth  as  from  their  mother's  womb.  It  corre 
sponds  to  Bdav  O""1?),  personified  as  a  woman  in  the  Phoenician 
cosmogony ;  but  in  the  Babylonian  in  Berosus  it  is  the  dark 
primseval  flood  which  as  'O^opwica  (perhaps  the  same  as 
Umm-arka,  Mother  of  Erech,  a  second  name  of  the  wife 
of  the  moon -god  Sin,  honoured  in  Erech  or  Warka)  is 
personified  as  a  female.  This  becomes  the  rrhr\,  i.e.  the 
originating  cause  (matrix),  there  combined  with  ddXa-rra,  of 
heaven  and  earth,  which  arise  from  its  being  rent  asunder.  In 
the  cuneiform  fragments  also  of  the  Babylonio-Assyrian  legend 
of  the  creation,  the  primseval  deep  and  chaos  are  identical. 
Chaos  is  called  ti'amtu  (tdmtu),  and  this  (a  synon.  of  apsu, 
Ocean)  is  the  producing  mother  of  all  tilings.  Hence  the 
word  is  in  Babylonio-Assyrian  feminine,  as  are  in  Hebr. 
almost  all  nouns  formed  with  the  prefix  ta,  e.g.  n^nri,  nawri. 
The  form  Dinn  is  an  ancient  formation  like  ^f),  "W  •  comp. 
E*P\,  which  is  just  as  old  a  noun-form  with  the  prefix  ja.  If 
the  stem  were  Dnn  (DMZ.  xxvi.  211  sq.),  Qinn  would  be  a  form 
like  "iton,  Aram,  ^n,  lina ;  to  us  however  it  seems  more  probable 
that  Din  (akin  to  iron),  to  roar,  to  bluster,  is  the  stem-word. 

"  A  created  chaos,"  says  Dillmann,  "  is  a  nonentity.  If 
once  the  notion  of  an  Almighty  God  is  so  far  developed  that 
He  is  also  conceived  of  as  the  author  of  matter,  the  application 
of  chaos  in  the  doctrine  of  creation  must  consequently  cease. 
For  such  a  God  will  not  first  create  the  matter  and  then  the 
form,  but  both  together."  Certainly  the  account  does  not 
expressly  say  that  God  created  chaos,  on  which  account  the 
so  -  called  restitution  hypothesis,  as  Zockler,  its  first  post- 
Eeformation  advocate,  disclosed  to  the  Arminian  Episcopius,1 
fancies  itself  justified  in  assuming  that  the  chaos  was  the 

1  But  compare  Job.  Delitzscli  (t  3  Feb.  1876),  "  Ein  altes  Theologumenon," 
in  the  Luth.  Zeitschrift,  1872. 


80  GENESIS  I.  1. 

consequence  of  a  derangement  connected  with  the  fall  of  the 
angels,  and  that  the  six  days'  creation  was  the  restoration  of  a 
new  world  from  the  ruin  of  the  old.  But  (1)  if  by  chaos  were 
meant  the  deposit  of  such  a  process  in  the  spirit-world,  we 
should  have  *nrn  instead  of  nn"m ;  (2)  this  notion  is  a  Theo- 
logumen  read  into  the  text,  and  not  one  to  be  proved  by 
Holy  Scripture ;  and  (3)  we  have  no  need  of  it  to 
understand  that  the  creation  of  the  earthly  world  had  its 
beginning  from  a  chaos.  For  on  the  one  hand  the  all- 
comprising  statement,  ver.  1,  at  the  head  of  the  narrative, 
declares  that  God  is  not  only  the  former,  but  the  creator  of 
the  world,  to  the  exclusion  of  anything  originating  apart  from 
Him ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  circumstance  that  chaos  is  not 
expressly  stated  to  have  been  created  by  God,  is  explained  by 
chaos  being  only  a  means  not  an  end,  only  the  substratum 
of  the  work  of  creation  and  not  properly  such  a  creative  work 
itself;  God  made  it  the  foundation  of  His  creative  agency,  for 
the  purpose  of  gradually  doing  away  with  it.  For  the  world 
is  the  non-Divine,  the  creation  of  the  world  is  the  realization 
of  something  different  from  God.  Hence  the  world  comes 
forth  first  of  all  in  a  condition  which  answers  to  its  contrast 
to  God,  and  it  is  in  the  course  of  the  six  days'  work  raised 
out  of  this  condition  into  one  pleasing  to  God,  and  in  which 
the  problem  of  its  history,  concentrated  as  it  is  in  man,  is  to 
develop  an  ever-increasing  likeness  to  God.  If  it  does  not 
contradict  the  idea  of  an  Almighty  God  that  the  development 
of  the  cosmos  was  effected  in  a  series  of  gradually  advancing 
creative  epochs,  neither  will  the  fact  of  His  having  made 
chaotic  primitive  matter,  as  yet  formless  and  confused,  the 
foundation  of  this  development.  Such  a  foundation  is  even 
of  the  highest  cosmical  and  ethic  significance,  for  the  raising 
up  of  the  world  out  of  chaos  involves  the  possibility  of  its 
reverting  thereto,  and  of  the  relapse  of  man  to  that  materiality 
which  is  the  foundation  of  his  being.  The  possibility  of  such 
a  reversion  to  the  tohu-wa-bohu  is  pointed  out  by  pictures 
of  judgment,  such  as  Isa.  xxxiv.  8-11,  Jer.  iv.  23-26, 


GENESIS  I.  3-5.  81 

which  go  i;ear  to  representing  primitive  matter  as  a  fiery 
stream  ;  the  process  of  formation  was  indeed  prepared  for  by 
the  thohu  being  flooded  over  by  the  thehoni. 

Darkness  (^n  V  t?n,  to  press  together,  to  thicken,  see 
comm.  on  the  Psalms  on  2  Sam.  xxii.  12)  settled  over  this 
flood  of  waters,  in  which  the  fervid  heat  of  chaos  was 
quenched  ;  but  though  there  was  now  present  in  water  the 
solvent  which  brings  all  matter  into  contact  and  inter 
action,  only  accidental  forms  devoid  of  plan  would  have 
resulted  had  not  the  Spirit  of  God  hovered  over  the  waters. 
Dillmann  rightly  finds  in  this  ^Iprnp  a  "  delicate  allusion  "  to 
the  myth  of  the  world-egg.  Cheyne  (art.  "  Cosmogony  "  in  the 
Encycl.  Britannica)  translates  "  the  wind  of  Elohim."  Certainly 
nn  means  breeze  and  spirit,  t\m  however  cannot  be  said  of 
the  wind,  but  indicates  that  the  action  of  the  Spirit  is 
similar  to  that  of  a  bird,  as  Milton  says  : 

"  Dove-like  sat'st  brooding  on  the  vast  abyss." 

For  ^Hi  means,  according  to  its  root,  to  keep  the  wings 
loose,  so  that  they  touch  and  yet  do  not  touch  (DMZ.  xxxix. 
607),  and  then  both  to  brood  with  loose  wings  over  and 
to  hover  down  in  flight  upon  anything.  The  Ethiopia 
translates  jeselel,  he  overshadowed,  with  reference  to  Luke 
i.  35,  but  the  real  New  Testament  parallel  is  Matt.  iii.  16. 
The  sanction  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  even  Him  who  came 
down  in  the  form  of  a  dove  upon  Jesus,  is  compared  with  the 
brooding  of  a  bird.  The  Jerus.  Targum  calls  this  Spirit  Nnn 
I  wn,  the  spirit  of  love,  and  the  Midrash  on  Genesis  ch.  viii.  is 
even  so  bold  as  to  say  that  He  is  /won  "jta  ^  Tin,  the 
Spirit  of  the  future  Christ. 


The  First  Day  of  Creation,  i.  3-5. 

Yer.    2,    beginning   with   the    chief  historical  tense 
states  the  circumstances  under  which  the  creative  acts  of  the 

F 


82  GENESIS  T.  3-5. 

six  days  now  take  place,  in  a  verb  sentence  and  two  noun 
sentences  :  Then  Elohim  said,  Let  ligld  be :  and  light  was.  The 
first  of  the  beings  of  the  Cosmos,  i.e.  of  the  ordered  universe, 
was  light  (nitf  with  the  vibrating  sound  -i,  which  is  also 
characteristic  of  n&n).  The  creation  of  light  forms  the 
commencement  of  the  acts  of  creation ;  for  as  water,  the 
primitive  matter,  leads  to  new  material  combinations,  so  are 
the  forces  manifesting  themselves,  as  light  with  heat  (litf, 
lux,  and  TIN,  calor\  the  conditio  sine  qua  non  of  all  further 
origination  of  separate  beings.  Primitive  light  comes  into 
being,  light  not  at  first  restricted  to  the  heavenly  bodies, 
especially  to  that  source  of  light  the  sun ;  for  the  source  of 
primitive  light  is  God.  But  not  in  an  emanative  sense,  for 
it  comes  into  being  through  the  creative  word  of  command, 
the  fiat  of  God,  that  word  in  which  His  will  is  comprised  and 
energised — t|n*i  ")OS  Nin^  ps.  xxxiii.  9,  comp.  6.  His  calling 
the  light  into  being  is  the  commencement,  and  its  appearing 
good  in  His  sight  is  the  close  of  its  genesis,  ver.  4 :  And  Eloliim 
say:  the  light,  that  it  was  good :  and  Eloliim  divided  between  the 
light  and  the  darkness.  Instead  of  Kin  HID  (comp.  Ex.  xii.  2  ; 
Eccles.  ii.  24)  it  is  here  briefly  niD,  as  in  the  Hodu  Ps.  cvi.  1, 
and  frequently;  and  instead  of:  He  saw  that  the  light  was  good, 
it  is  said :  He  saw  the  light,  that  (it)  was  good,  that  which 
was  perceived  being  divided  into  a  nearer  and  a  more  distant, 
i.e.  a  predicative  object  (corresponding  with  the  classical 
ace.  c.  inf.,  inasmuch  as  the  accusative  is  after  the  model  of 
Apollonios  Dyskolos  attracted  to  the  finite),  as  in  vi.  2,  xii. 
14,  xiii.  10,  xlix.  15  ;  Ex.  ii.  2  ;  Ps.  xxv.  19  ;  Prov.  xxiii.  31  ; 
Eccles.  ii.  24,  viii.  17  ;  Gal.  iv.  11  ;  comp.  the  similar  it?aj  ^ND> 
J"WB?,  1  Kings  xix.  4 ;  Jonah  iv.  8  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  the 
construction  with  the  undivided  object,  iii.  6.  Chaos  with 
the  dark  primaeval  waters  is  far  below  the  ultimate  purpose 
of  God,  who  did  not  create  the  earth,  inn,  i.e.  riot  that  it 
might  be  and  continue  a  inn,  Isa.  xlv.  18.  The  creation  of 
light  was  the  first  of  those  works  by  means  of  which  the 
world,  now  being  brought  into  existence,  became  step  by  step 


GENESIS  I.  3-5.  Sli 

an  object  of  the  Divine  complacency.  The  separation 
between  light  and  darkness  henceforth  secures  to  both  their 
independent  peculiarity.  The  appearance  of  light  is  the  first 
morning  of  creation,  but  does  not  absolutely  do  away  with 
darkness ;  light  and  darkness  are  separated,  that  from  this 
time  forth  they  may  alternate  in  conformity  with  law.  In 
place  of  a  single  p,  the  account  with  circumstantial  solemnity 
prefers  pi  .  .  .  p,  as  e.g.  does  also  Cicero  in  Laelius,  c.  25  : 
quid  intcrsit  inter  popularem  .  .  .  et  inter  constantem.  The 
testimony,  niD  "D,  is  given  to  the  light,  not  to  the  darkness,  but 
both  are  named  by  God,  ver.  5  :  And  Eloliim  called  the  light 
'"Day"  and  the  darkness  called  He  "Night"  And  it  was  evening 
and  was  morning — one  day  (the  first  day).  He  called  the 
light  "  day,"  i.e.  by  the  name  day  —  gave  it  this  name ;  coinp. 
xxxi.  47  with  ii.  20.  xxvi.  18,  where  DS?  also  stands.  The 
name,  as  given  by  God,  is  the  expression  of  the  nature  and 
the  seal  of  the  future  mode  of  appearance  of  light  and  dark 
ness  ;  the  many  -  tongued  human  names  are  but  lisping 
attempts  to  denote  the  nature  of  things.  Day  is  called  in 
Hebrew  D1\  Assyr.  umu,  perhaps  related  with  Dh  (xviii.  1  ; 
comp.  D^,  xxxvi.  24  =  DW,  thermw),  as  the  time  of  warmth 
and  hence  of  light ;  night,  fOT  (here  in  pause  iM,  with  a  tone 
less  and  therefore  an  accusative-adverbial  a,  like  modern  Greek 
7;  vvKTa,  vvftQa),  perhaps  as  the  time  of  veiling  and  enveloping 
(from  W>  out  of  lW?) ;  in  Assyr.  the  plural  is  lildti,  which 
presupposes  a  fern.  sing,  lilatu,  Ultu,  and  besides  usually  means 
the  evening  in  distinction  from  musu,  night.  When  then  it  is 
evening  the  terminus  a  quo  is  the  morning,  which  dawned 
with  the  creation  of  light,  and  the  morning  which  follows  the 
evening  is  that  which  begins  the  second  day,  and  therefore 
terminates  the  first. — Hence  the  days  of  the  Hexaiimeron  are 
not  reckoned  from  evening  to  evening,  w^O^epa  (Dan.  viii. 
14;  2  Cor.  xi.  25),  according  to  the  computation  of  the 
subsequent  ecclesiastical  Mosaic  calendar,  but  from  morning 
to  morning,  as  the  Babylonians  reckoned  their  days.  For, 
says  Pliny,  h.  n.  ii.  79,  alii  aliter  olservavcre,  Balylonii  inter 


84  GENESIS  I.  3-5. 

duos  soils  cxortus.1  The  evening  seems  to  be  called  2"$,  as 
being  the  mingling  of  light  with  darkness,  the  twilight,  in 
which  the  darkness  begins  to  be  overcome  by  the  light. 
According  however  to  the  Assyr.  irib  samsi,  sun  going  in  = 
BWn  K13O,  it  means  the  time  of  the  going  in  (setting)  of  the 
sun,  from  erebu,  to  go  in,  to  go  down,  like  Isa.  xxiv.  11,  nmy 
nrw^D,  all  joy  is  gone  down.  i|?i  without  doubt  means 
properly  the  breaking,  viz.  of  light,  hence  early  morning 
(comp.  ">to?,  'T^s?,  "fin?,  a  youth,  where  the  breaking  forth,  the 
first  appearance,  the  early,  is  everywhere  the  fundamental 
notion),  "inK  Di11  is  found  instead  of  pt?&n  DV,  nntf  being  used 
as  in  ii.  11,  iv.  19,  and  in  rmsfe  in^  ^[a  rwv  aappdrcov, 
Matt,  xxviii.  1,  equivalent  to  juwi ;  the  day  which  forms 
the  cardo  ordinis  is  designated  by  the  cardinal  number,  the 
article  is  absent  as  it  regularly  is  in  a  casting  up  enumera 
tion.  With  respect  to  the  length  of  the  days  of  creation  we 
would  say  with  Augustine  (de  civ.  Dei,  xi.  6) :  Qui  dies  cujus- 
modi  sint,  aut  perdifficile  nobis  aut  etiam  impossibile  est  cogitare, 
guanto  magis  dicere.  Days  of  God  are  intended,  and  with 
Him  a  thousand  years  are  but  as  a  day  that  is  past,  Ps.  xc.  4. 
M'Donald,  Dawson,  and  others,  who  are  convinced  that  the 
days  of  creation  are,  according  to  the  meaning  of  Holy 
Scripture  itself,  not  days  of  four-and-twenty  hours,  but  asons, 
1  are  perfectly  right.2  For  this  earthly  and  human  measurement 
of  time  cannot  apply  to  the  first  three  days,  if  only  because 
the  sun,  the  measurer  of  time,  did  not  as  yet  exist ;  nor  to 
the  Sabbath,  because  there  the  limiting  formula  is  absent ; 
while  it  by  no  means  follows  that  the  remaining  three  days 
were  days  of  four-and-twenty  hours,  because  they  elapsed 

1  This  twofold  manner  of  reckoning  days,  sometimes  from  morning,  some 
times  from  evening  twilight,  is  found  in  the  Avesta  as  well  as  in  the  Thorah  ; 
see  Spiegel,  "Zur  Gesch.  des  Avestakalenders, "  in  DMZ.  xxxviii.  433  sq. 

2  According  to  a  subsequent  Indian  view,  the  history  of  the  world  runs  its 
course  in  an  infinite  series  of  creations  and  destructions  (comp.  a  similar  state 
ment  in  Weber,  Synagogale  Theologie,  p.   193  sq.)  :  "The  entire  duration  of 
the  continuance  of  one  of  these   creations  is   called  a  day,   the  interval  of 
destruction  until  the  next  renovation  a  night  of  Brahma  ; "  see  Holtzmann  in 
DMZ.  xxxviii.  192. 


GENESIS  I.  6-8.  85 

between  morning  and  morning.  The  account  represents  the 
work  of  God  according  to  the  image  of  human  days,  which 
together  with  the  Sabbath  form  the  primitive  type  of  the 
human  week.  It  lies,  however,  in  the  nature  of  the  copy 
that  it  should  correspond  only  on  a  very  reduced  scale  with 
the  incommensurable  greatness  of  its  original.1  A  limit  is 
put  to  the  six  work-days  only  to  give  them  in  distinction 
from  the  Sabbath  the  character  of  terminated  periods.  The 
time  at  which  the  creative  agency  ever  began  anew  is  called 
morning ;  the  time  at  which  the  Creator  brought  His  work  to 
a  close,  evening.2  It  is  a  childish,  or  to  speak  plainly,  a 
foolish  notion,  arbitrarily  forced  upon  the  narrative  with 
out  compulsory  reasons,  to  make  it  measure  the  lapse  of  time 
from  morning  to  evening  and  to  morning  again  by  a  clock 
of  human  manufacture. 


The  Second  Day  of  Creation,  i.  6—8. 

Darkness  having  been  on  the  first  day  broken  up  by  light,  the 
primaeval  waters  are  now  also  broken  up  and  separated,  ver.  6  : 
Then  Elohim  said,  Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the  midst  of  the 
waters,  and  let  it  be  dividing  between  waters  against  waters,  more 
accurately  towards  waters ;  the  h  (with  a  fore-tone  Kametz)  is 
that  of  relation,  here,  as  in  Jonah  ii.  17,  the  local  direction: 
between  the  waters  towards  the  other  waters  ;  in  ver.  7,  when 
the  division  is  effected,  T^i  .  .  .  pa  stands  instead,  as  at  4b. 
The  LXX.  translates  Vi?"),  crrepeco/^a,  Jerome  firmamentum,  Gr. 
Ven.  coming  nearer  to  the  root  notion  with  a  self-made  rd/j,a 
(after  rera^at,  from  Teivco).  The  stem-word  yp"i  means  to  tread 
(comp.  ip-),  .^ij  to  stamp  on  the  ground,  as  in  the  Horatian 
nunc  pedz  libero  pidsanda  tdlusj,  then  also  to  make  thin,  close 

1  Driver  also  admits  "  that  the  writer  may  have  consciously  used  the  term 
figuratively."     We  assert  it. 

2  I  formerly  thought  :  at  which  the  Creator  left  His  work  to  its  own  now 
established  development.     But  if  the   evening  means  a  pause  in  creating,  a 
pause  of  rest  extending  from  the  evening  of  the  sixth  day  till  the  morning  of 
the  seventh  would  have  preceded  the  Sabbath  of  creation. 


86  GENESIS  I.  6-8. 

and  firm,  and  in  this  way  to  extend,  to  stretch  out.  The 
higher  ethereal  region,  the  so-called  atmosphere,  the  sky,  is 
here  meant ;  it  is  represented  as  the  semi-spherical  vault  of 
heaven  stretched  over  the  earth  and  its  waters,  Prov.  viii.  2  7  ; 
Job  xxvi.  10.  What  Petavius  (de  opificio  mundi)  here 
remarks  :  Ccetum  aereum  o-repeco/ua  dicitur  non  natures  propria 
conditions,  sed  ab  effectu,  quod  perinde  aquas  separet,  ac  si  murus 
cssct  solidissimus,  must  have  forced  itself  upon  ancient  observa 
tion  also.  Disnp  might,  agreeably  to  the  meaning,  have  taken 
the  place  of  VI-  ^30  is  not  to  be  understood  as  a  sub 
stantive  in  the  meaning  of  a  partition,  but  as  "  let  it  be 
dividing,"  which  includes  the  notion  "  permanently  "  (Driver, 
Hebrew  Tenses,  §  135.  5).  It  is  intentionally  that  '^)  is  not 
used,  but  that  the  statement  of  what  is  to  be  henceforth  a  law  of 
nature  is  expressed  in  the  tempus  durans  (comp.  Num.  xiv.  33  ; 
Deut.  ix.  7).  Ver.  7  gives  the  carrying  out  of  that  which  was 
thus  called  into  being :  And  Eloliim  made  the  firmament,  and 
divided  between  the  waters  beneath  the  firmament  and  the  waters 
above  the  firmament ;  and  it  was  so.  This  p-\Ti  is  placed  by 
the  LXX.  after  ver.  6,  where,  according  to  vv.  9,  15,  24,  its 
original  place  may  have  been.  It  everywhere  else  stands 
after  the  creative  fiat,  but  here  after  its  accomplishment, 
declaring  that  the  Divine  will  which  had  been  expressed  was 
fulfilled  in  and  by  the  Divine  operation.  Instead  of  "  between 
the  waters  towards  the  waters,"  it  is  here  said,  "between  the 
waters  which  are  below  and  the  waters  which  are  above  the 
firmament ; "  ?  ^nnp  meaning  beneath,  ?  >$?  above,  whereas 
nnnD  with  a  genitive  following  means  from  beneath,  9«,  and 
^J;E>  with  a  genitive  following  means  from  above,  Ex.  xxv. 
22,  vii.  17.  The  upper  waters  are  however  called  in  Ps. 
cxlviii.  4,  "  the  waters  D^'^n  SjJ£ ; "  5>JJD  with  a  gen.  following 
sometimes  coincides  (e.g.  xl.  1 7)  with  t  ^VD,  as  "  over  "  does 
with  "  above."  The  upper  waters  are  the  mists  and  clouds 
which  move  above  us,  the  watery  masses  clinging  to  the  arch 
of  heaven,  from  which  rain,  bursting  from  the  clouds,  descends 
upon  the  earth, — or,  to  use  a  scientific  term  of  similar  meaning, 


GENESIS  I.  C-8.  87 

"  the  meteoric  "  water.  Eain  is  described  in  the  Old  Testament 
as  the  emptying  of  the  water-stores  of  heaven,  the  water-gates 
or  sluices  of  heaven  being  opened  (vii.  11  ;  Ps.  civ.  3,  13),  and 
the  heavenly  waters,  as  it  were,  drawn  off  (Job  xxxvi.  27), 
and  channels,  the  paths  for  the  lightnings,  cleft  for  them  (Job 
xxxviii.  24  sq.) ;  the  ancient  representation  is  herein  still 
incomplete,  but  in  such  descriptions  the  poetic  form  of  state 
ment  chiefly  prevails.  After  God  had  called  forth  the  firmament 
by  His  creative  word,  and  then  effectually  carried  out  His 
purpose  (as  is  stated  by  njyy,  which  corresponds  more  with 
the  Latin  perftcere  than  with  facere),  it  received  from  Him  its 
name,  ver.  8  :  And  Eloliim  called  the  firmament  "  Heaven." 
And  it  was  evening  and  was  morning — a  second  day.  The 
form  &'££'  is  only  apparently  a  dual  (DMZ.  xviii.  104),  being 
really  just  as  much  a  plural  as  the  Phceri.  D^^,  rp!j?,  Assyr. 
same,  with  the  retention  of  the  third  letter  of  the  stem 
(comp.  the  Chald.  participles  of  verbs  £{,,  which  make  j^a, 
pass.  ft|3),  for  the  primitive  form  of  the  verb  nBK>  is  1EB>,  whence 
the  Arab,  plural  samawdt,  or  *OSP,  whence  the  ^Eth.  plural  is 
samajdt ;  it  means,  to  be  high  (Arab.  U^,  with  c_>,  to  raise, 
extollere) ;  also  in  ancient  Greek  <rdp,oi,  according  to  Strabo 
(viii.  19,  x.  17),  means  ra  1^77.  The  spirit  of  the  language 
as  little  thinks  of  a  plurality  of  heavens  in  D^lDty  as  in  ovpavot, 
cccli ;  here  especially  is  meant  the  atmosphere  stretched  over 
us  like  a  vault.  The  plural  (see  on  this  matter  Dietrich's 
Abhandlung  zur  liebr.  Grammatik,  1846)  denotes  the  im 
measurable  heights  and  distances  among  which  the  up-looking 
eye  loses  itself.  Scripture  calls  the  heavens  which  span  in 
continuous  circles  the  heaven  of  this  earthly  world  WJ 
The  LXX.  has,  after  the  Divine  naming,  KOI  elbev  o 
o?  on  KO\OV*  The  account  however  contains  seven  well  con 
sidered  ana  ^,  the  seventh  and  last  of  which  is  IND  niB.  And 
here  "God  saw  that  it  was  good"  would  be  as  yet  out  of 
place,  for  the  firmament  divides  the  upper  from  the  under 
waters,  but  the  waters  beneath  still  form  a  boundless  con 
tinuity,  which  still  holds  imprisoned  within  it  the  developing 


88  GENESIS  I.  9-13. 

earth.     Hence  the  31B  •o  is  reserved  for  the  work  of  the  next 
day. 

The  Third  Day  of  Creation,  i.  9-13. 

The  first  creative  act  of  the  third  day's  work  consisted  in 
the  embanking  of  the  lower  waters  and  the  formation  of  the 
dry  land,  ver.  9  :  And  Elohim  said,  Let  the  waters  gather 
together  from  under  the  heaven  to  one  place,  and  let  the  dry  land 
appear :  and  it  was  so.  The  Niphal  nijpj  has  here  a  reflexive 
meaning,  to  gather  together,  as  at  Jer.  iii.  17,  to  accumulate. 
D'DB'n  nnrip  is  not  a  virtual  adjective  to  D'on  :  the  waters 
situated  under  heaven,  but  belongs  to  the  jussive  :  they  are 
to  gather  together  while  in  sinking  they  recede  from  heaven 
(comp.  Jer.  x.  11).  The  intensive  form  nt^iP  denotes  the  land 
according  to  its  permanent  quality  of  dry  ness.  The  jussive 
nK~£rt  commands  only  the  appearing  which  strikes  the  senses. 
The  account  does  not  tell  us  the  manner  in  which  the  at  first 
embryonic  earth  floating  in  the  waters  with  its  relief  of  hills 
and  valleys  came  into  existence.  What  made  its  appearance 
when  the  waters  gathered  into  one  place  is  graphically  par 
ticularized,  Ps.  civ.  7  sq.  The  mountains  rose,  the  valleys 
sank,  as  Hilarius  Pictav.  says  in  his  Genesis,  ver.  97  sq. :  colics 
tumor  arduus  cffert,  Subsidunt  miles.  The  LXX.  had  in 
their  Hebrew  text  the  description  of  this  event:  ical  (rvvfyQ'r) 
KT\.  after  p  w.  In  our  text  the  allotment  of  the  name- 
follows  immediately  on  p-TVl,  ver.  10  :  And  Elohim  called  the 
dry  land  "Earth;"  and  the  gathering  place  of  the  waters  called 
He  "  Seas :  "  and  Elohim  saw  that  it  (was)  good.  While  God 
separates  things  according  to  their  natures,  He  by  this  very 
act  separates  also  notions  and  names ;  human  naming  is  but 
the  distant  echo  of  this  Divine  act.  Above  it  was  the  earth 
in  its  entirety,  ver.  1,  and  then  the  chaotic  mass,  ver.  2. 
which  was  called  P^n  (as  it  is  always  written  instead  o,f 
pNJ)  »  now>  a^er  tne  separation  of  the  dry  land  and  tlie 
waters,  the  land  obtains  the  name  ptf  (Assyr.  irsituv,  with 
a  feminine  ending),  which  probably  means  properly  time 


GENESIS  I.  9-13.  89 

Mf 

ground  under  our  feet,  from  H?  related  with  pn,  ^>j,  to 
tread  down,  pn,  to  run,  i.e.  according  to  Virgil,  cclcri  peek 
pulsare  humum.  And  the  gathering  place  of  the  waters 
receives  the  name  &&  (different  from  D'EJ,  and  therefore  not 
derived  like  it  from  a  middle  vowelled,  but  from  a  geminatum 
verbal  stem),  the  seas  or  ocean,  for  the  plural  is  here  con 
ceived  of  as  singular  and  intensive  (and  construed  accordingly, 
Ps.  xlvi.  3  ,  sq.).  The  sea  in  its  origin  is  represented  as  a 
connected  whole,  in  respect  of  which  the  lesser  reservoirs, 
especially  the  rivers  which  it  receives  into  itself,  are  un 
noticed.  After  the  basin  of  the  sea,  that  Divine  bulwark 
against  the  pressure  of  the  waves,  Job  xxxviii.  11,  Jer.  v.  22, 
has  come  into  existence — God  finds  it  good.  The  dry  land  how 
ever,  which  is  still  bare  and  empty,  He  cannot  as  yet  find  good. 
Hence  a  second  creative  act  is  on  the  third  day  added  to 
the  first,  the  world  of  plants  arises,  ver.  1 1 :  And  Eloliim 
said,  Let  the  earth  sprouting  sprout  forth  green,  seed-yielding 
herbs,  fruit  trees  bearing  fruit  after  their  (the  fruit  trees)  kind, 
in  which  (in  which  fruit)  their  (the  fruit  trees)  seed  is,  upon 
the  earth :  and  it  was  so.  KWlft  has  the  euphonic  Gaja  to 
ensure  a  clear  pronunciation  to  i  before  w,  as  in  nbhf^  Ex. 
xxviii.  22,  to  "i  before  w.  nb>'y  has  the  tone  falling  back 
regularly  on  the  penultima,  and  *"|S,  Dag.  forte  conjunctivum. 
It  is  a  question  whether  in  fa'w  *n3  np'y  the  suffix  of  iro^  falls 
back  on  na  or  na  py ;  but  certainly  reference  to  the  fruit 
tree  (which  is  also  accented  accordingly)  is  intended,  the 
fruit  of  the  fruit  tree  is  determined  according  to  its  species. 
The  fruit  is  called  na,  as  that  which  has  come  forth  or  from 
(Fr.  Delitzsch,  Proleg.  114),  i.e.  in  virtue  of  the  productive 

vegetative  power  of  the  plant.     The  seed  is  called  snt,  like 

$. 
semen,  from   serere,  the  kind  pp,  from  piD,  finger  e  (comp.  ^U, 

to  think,  to  consider ;  ^U,  fut.  i,  to  feign),  whence  also  n:mri, 
thus  answering  exactly  to  the  Greek  eZ8o?,  and  the  Latin 
species.  The  meaning  sulcarc,  to  which  Dillmann  refers  this 
word  in  the  sense  of  division,  seems  UU,  fut.  i,  to  have  first 


90  GENESIS  I.  9-13. 

gained  the  meaning  sulcare  as  a  clenom.  from  j'Uucv,  furrow; 
and  the  Assyr.  minu,  number  —  mwju  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Hebrew 
Language,  p.  40  sq.),  is  related  to  j^p  =  "iBpO.  Moreover  the 
remark  in  Fr.  Delitzsch's  Proleg.  144,  that  in  collective 
notions  po  does  not  so  much  signify  kind  as  distinction  of 
kinds,  is  correct.  Not  three,  but  two  kinds  of  plants  are 
distinguished.  For  KBH  according  to  the  schema  etymologicum 
belongs  to  Ntjnn,  and  is  hence  the  conception  of  a  species, 
which  is  then  specialized.  KBH  denotes  plants  iA  the  first 
stage  of  their  origin,  the  young  sprouting  green  (comp.  the 
agricultural  picture,  Prov.  xxvii.  25:  "  the  hay  is  carried,  and 
the  sen,  the  second  crop  growing  afterwards,  showeth  itself") 
which  growing  up  becomes,  some  of  it  u^y,  herbs,  some  of  it 
yy,  trees.  The  herbs  are  called  JP")Tp,  seed-forming,  seeding, 
what  they  become  while  maturing ;  cornp.  on  the  other  hand 
SHf,  seed-bearing,  ver.  29,  when  come  to  maturity;  both  Hiph. 
and  Kal  are  in  this  sense  denominative.  The  final  word  oi 
the  creative  fiat,  KlKrrpJJ,  falls  back  upon  N^in ;  for  if  con 
nected  with  imjnT  ")£'S  a  false  distinction  is  the  result,  since 
herbs  also  yield  their  seed  upon  the  earth, — a  distinction  which 
is  also  inadequately  expressed,  for  it  should  be  i?JJD  instead  of 
i?y.  Thus  the  earth  is  to  bring  forth  these  kinds  of  plants 
upon  the  earth,  i.e.  as  a  clothing  for  itself.  The  accomplish 
ment,  ver.  12,  is  thus  stated:  And  the  earth  sprouting  brought 
forth  green,  herbs  yielding  seed  after  their  (the  herbs')  kind,  and 
trees  bearing  fruit,  wherein  is  their  (the  trees')  seed,  after  their 
(the  trees')  kind :  and  Elohim  saw  that  it  was  good.  While 
there  is  now  no  generation  of  organic  existences  from  lifeless 
matter,  the  world  of  plants  originally  came  into  existence 
through  the  earth  being  miraculously  fertilized  by  the  word  of 
God.  And  here,  on  the  third  day,  the  narrative  relegates  the 
severance  of  the  kinds  entirely  to  the  beginning  of  creation. 
Instead  of  frCT  we  have  here  in  ver.  1 2  tfww  twice,  with  the 
suffix  ehu,  from  ahu,  customary  with  nouns  from  verbs  £fo,  but 
elsewhere  rare.  The  second  creative  act  of  the  third  day  is 
also  sealed  with :  "  Elohim  saw  that  it  (was)  good."  On  the 


GENESIS  I.  14—19.  91 


first  day  we  have  niB^S  once,  on  the  second  not  at  all,  on  the 
third  twice.1  Both  triads  represent  the  scheme  —  o—  ver.  13  : 
And  it  was  evening  and  was  morning  —  a  third  day. 

The  Fourth  Day  of  Creation,  i.  14-19. 

The  fourth  work  -  day  is  parallel  with  the  first.  On  the 
first  light  was  created,  on  the  fourth  the  firmament  was 
endowed  with  the  light  -  giving  bodies.  The  generation  and 
existence  of  plants  was  not  possible  without  the  light  created 
on  the  first  day;  but  now,  when  creation  rises  from  plant-life 
to  animated  living  beings,  light  is  separated  and  united  to 
heavenly  bodies  as  regulators  of  the  application  of  its  benefits 
to  the  earth,  ver.  14  :  And  Elohim  said  :  Let  there  be  lights  in  the 
firmament  of  heaven,  to  divide  between  the  day  and  the  night;  and 
let  them  le  for  signs,  and  for  seasons  (serving  to  measure  them), 
and  for  (the  measurement  of)  days  and  years.  The  Divine  : 
Let  there  be,  is  still  ^\  though  followed  by  a  plural  subject, 
as  at  v.  23,  ix.  29,  Num.  ix.  6  ;  and  the  same  enallage  numeri 
is  found  Ex.  xxviii.  7,  even  with  a  not  subsequent  but  preced 
ing  material  subject  (Ges.  §  140.  3);  here  too  it  is  apparent 
that  the  notion  which  is  in  Hebrew  combined  with  the  plural 
is  originally  and  predominantly  rather  cumulative  than  multi 
plicative.  The  light  is  called  "litf,  the  lights  (light-bearers, 
light-bodies)  rrfe,  LXX.  (frwarTJpes  (once,  Ps.  cxxxvi.  7,  with 
poetic  boldness  D^}itf  ;  and  once,  Ezek.  xxxii.  8,  with  peculiar 
accuracy  "NN  ^^p).  The  lights  called  into  existence  in  the 
firmament  of  heaven  have  (A)  the  double  special  purpose  :  1. 
of  dividing  the  entire  day  into  two  halves,  a  day-half  and  a 
night-half  ;  2.  they  are  to  serve  (^ni,  ct  fiant,  ruled  by  the  pre 
ceding  jussive)  (a)  for  nhfc,  signs  (plur.  of  nix  =  awajat,  from  niK, 
related  to  mn,  nxn),2  i.e.  signs  of  the  weather,  of  the  quarters 
of  heaven,  or  also  of  historical  occurrences  (com  p.  Jer.  x.  2, 
where  D^^n  mnK  refer  to  astrological  prognosis),  whether  in  a 


1  Hence  Tuesday  is  called  by  the  Jews  Ki-tol),  and  reckoned  a  lucky  day,  and 
therefore  a  favourite  wedding-day. 

2  So  also  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Proleg.  116  sq. 


92  GENESIS  I.  14-19. 

regular  or,  like  Matt.  ii.  2,  Luke  xxi.  25,  an  extraordinary 
manner ;  (6)  for  &H$D  (comp.  the  echo,  Ps.  civ.  9),  limits  of 
time  (from  nyi,  to  predetermine  whether  space  or  time),  i.e.  for 
the  intimation  and  regulation  of  definite  periods  and  intervals 
of  time,  in  virtue  of  their  periodic  influence  upon  husbandry, 
navigation,  and  the  work  of  other  human  callings,  as  well  as 
upon  the  course  of  plant,  animal  and  human  life  (the  growth 
of  plants,  the  coupling  time  of  animals,  the  migration  of 
birds,  Jer.  viii.  7) ;  (c)  for  D^'fl  tW,  days  and  years,  i.e.  for 
the  demarcation  of  the  length  of  the  days  and  of  the  lunar 
and  solar  years.  The  months  are  included  in  the  D'3B>; 
but  the  week,  as  a  unit  of  time  not  measured  by  either  sun 
or  moon,  is  left  out  of  consideration,  njfe^  <U~:,  Assyr.  sattu, 
(from  santu\  seems  to  mean  change  or  vicissitude,  the  \y 
of  rot?,  to  fold,  to  be  double  (whence  the  name  of  the  number 
two),  having  a  different  phonetic  value  (Aram,  n,  Arab.  ^J) 
from  the  w  of  ruB>,  a  year  (Aram,  t?,  Arab.  ^w).  After  the 
twofold  special  purpose  now  follows  (B)  the  general  one, 
ver.  15  :  And  let  them  be  for  lights  in  the  firmament  of  heaven, 
to  give  light  upon  the  earth :  and  it  was  so.  The  lights  (light- 
bodies)  are  to  become  lights  (light-sources)  to  give  light  upon 
and  for  the  earth.  Wisdom  then  carries  out  what  omnipotence 
called  into  being,  ver.  16  :  And  Elohim  made  the  two  great 
lights  ;  the  great  light  for  the  ruling  of  the  day,  and  the  small 
light  for  the  riding  of  the  night :  and  the  stars.  Both  lights  are 
great  in  respect  of  the  amount  of  light  proceeding  from  them 
to  the  earth,  but  of  different  magnitude  among  themselves. 
The  greater  light  is  appointed  for  the  ruling  of  the  day,  the 
less  for  the  ruling  of  the  night.  Mythology  makes  Samas  and 
Sin  gods  and  kings,  the  lights  of  heaven,  Trpvrdveis  KOCT^OV 
Seoi  (Wisd.  xiii.  2) ;  but  here  ""V?^?  is  a  designation  of  the 
predominant  agency  of  the  two  lights  of  heaven  which  gives 
but  a  distant  reminiscence  of  this  personification  and  deifica 
tion, — heathen  myths  are  in  the  mind  and  speech  of  revealed 
religion  reduced  to  rhetorical  metaphors  and  poetic  images. 
The  sun,  Btet?,  and  moon,  rnj,  are  left  unnamed,  the  narrator 


GENESIS  I.  20-23.  93 

designating  by  describing  them.  And  it  is  intentionally  that 
he  does  not  say  that  God  gave  them  names.  The  Semitic 
names  of  the  sun  and  moon  are  of  so  accidental  a  nature,  that 
the  reference  of  them  to  Divine  appellation  is  deliberately 
omitted.  The  giving  of  names  by  God  is  restricted  to  day, 
night,  heaven,  earth,  sea,  to  which  is  only  added  as  a  sixth, 
v.  2,  the  name  of  man  (DIN).  The  creation  of  the  stars  is 
despatched  in  two  words :  D^Dian  n&o.  The  name  designates 
the  stars  as  round  bodies,  for  3313  is  softened  from  2333  (from 
333,  to  be  rolled,  to  be  round),  just  as  ralral,  Syr.,  becomes 
raurdb.  The  narrative  intends  the  starry  heavens  of  this 
earthly  world,  in  which  the  sun  and  moon  appear  as  great 
lights.  The  formation  of  the  heavenly  lights  is  followed  by 
their  local  establishment  with  a  recapitulation  of  their  desti 
nation,  vv.  17,  18  :  And  Eloliim  placed  them  in  the  firmament 
of  heaven,  to  give  light  upon  the  earth,  and  to  rule  the  day  and 
the  night,  and  to  divide  between  the  light  and  the  darkness :  and 
Eloliim  saw  that  it  was  good.  The  verb  jro  combines  the 
notions  of  Oetvai  and  Sovvai,  like  the  finj  concealed  in 
run,  Ps.  viii.  2.  Light  and  darkness  here  stand  for  day  and 
night,  14a,  and  the  destination,  to  be  for  signs  and  measures 
of  time,  which  there  follows,  145,  is  umnentioned.  The  Divine 
31D  acknowledges  the  work  of  the  fourth  day  to  be  completed, 
and  an  evening  and  morning  now  produced  by  sun  and  moon 
closes  it,  ver.  19  :  And  it  was  evening,  and  was  morning — a 
fourth  day. 

The  Fifth  Day  of  Creation,  i.  20-23. 

The  time  of  all  earthly  occurrences  being  determined 
by  the  creation  of  the  stars,  and  the  regularity  of  light, 
that  fundamental  condition  of  all  earthly  life,  secured, 
the  first  self-moving  animated  beings  are  now  called  into 
existence.  The  work  of  the  second  day  had  separated  the 
waters  below  from  the  waters  above  by  means  of  the  atmo 
sphere,  that  of  the  fifth  peoples  both  the  waters  and  the  air 
with  beings  moving  freely  in  them,  ver.  20  :  And  Elohim 


94  GENESIS  I.  20-23. 

said,  Let  the  waters  swarm  forth  a  swarm  of  living  souls, 
and  let  fowl  fly  upon  the  earth  on  the  face  of  the  firmament  of 
heaven.  The  component  matter  of  the  birds  is  left  undefined,1 
that  of  the  water  animals  also  not  being  distinctly  stated. 
For  n^  with  the  accus.  (like  fSpveiv,  Jas.  iii.  11,  with  the 
intransitive  Ppvew  rm'or  -7-^09)  does  not  necessarily  mean  :  to 
bring  forth  out  of  itself  in  a  swarming  mass,  but  like  Ex.  vii.  2  8 
(Jahv.),  Ps.  cv.  30  :  to  bring  to  light  in  a  swarming  mass. 
Meanwhile  the  narrative  places  the  water  animals  and  birds 
even  at  their  origin  in  a  relation  to  their  elements  water  and  air 
which  limits  their  condition.  The  LXX.  translates  n;n  wm  pp, 
ep7T€Ta  TJrV'Xcov  ^worcov  ;  but  Y~)$  does  not  mean  merely  creeping 
animals,  but,  without  respect  to  magnitude  (see  ver.  21),  swarm 
ing,  i.e.  numerous,  animals  actively  moving  about  among  each 
other.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  correct  that  nTi  K>53  is  not 
in  apposition  to  p£>  (Dillm.  according  to  the  supposed  require 
ment  of  the  ace.),  but  is  governed  by  it  in  the  genitive.  Plants 
are  not,  according  to  Scripture,  without  life  (Job  xiv.  8,  9  ;  Ps. 
lxxvm.47;  Isa.xiv.  3;  Jude  12,  comp.  Ps.  Iviii.  10),  but  animals 
of  even  the  lower  classes  which  now  come  into  existence  are 
•x/rir^al  fwcrat,  i.e.  beings  who  are  indeed  material  (for  £>s:  is 
always  rm,  combined  with  matter),  but  who  have  the  life 
centre  of  a  soul  or  conscious  self-hood.  n»n  in  this  connec 
tion  is  not  a  governed  genitive  (for  ^v^  ?«?}?  is  a  really 
inadmissible  expression,  see  on  ii.  7),  but  a  descriptive 
epithet :  soul  which  lives  and  animates,  viz.  bodies,  and 
"  living  souls."  stands  synecclochically  for  animated  material 
beings,  bodies  having  souls.  "OB  of  the  firmament  of  heaven 
is  its  side  turned  towards  earth  (comp.  Isa.  xxv.  7).  The 
double  command  of  the  Creator  is  fulfilled  as  stated,  ver.  2 1  : 
And  Elohim  created  great  whales,  and  all  kind  of  souls,  the 
living  and  moving,  which  the  waters  swarmed  forth  after  their 

1  Not  indeed  according  to  the  Vulgate,  et  volatile  super  terram  sub  fcr- 
mamento  cadi,  the  influence  of  which  upon  the  ecclesiastical  observance  of  fasts 
produced  abundant  results ;  see  Zockler's  Gesch.  der  Bcziehunyen  zwischen 
Theologie  und  Naturwissenschaft,  i.  174,  etc.,  ii.  133,  etc. 


GENESIS  I.  20-23.  95 

kind  (the  kind  of  these  beings),  and  all  winged  fowls  after 
their  kind:  and  Eloliim  saw  that  it  was  good.  The  great 
Cetaceas  and  Saurians,  which  from  their  long  stretched -out 
shape  are  called  (V  |n)  BTjin,  are  mentioned  in  the  first  place 
only  by  way  of  example.  Both  wzi  and  spy  are  without 
an  article,  ^n  means  all  together,  $o,  all  and  each,  bs  ritf, 
absolute  (ix.  3),  or  with  a  following  indeterminate  genitive 
(viii.  21;  Deut.  ii.  34;  Eccles.  xii.  14):  all  of  every  kind, 
all  without  exception.  The  definition  should  begin  with 
;  but  a  beginning  is  already  made  with  rvnn,  iracrav 
T7]v  %cuaav,  for  rpnn  is  here,  as  always  in  this  connection, 
not  a  substantive  (—  E^nn,  as  in  Elihu  and  Ezekiel),  but  an 
adjective,  and  accented  accordingly.  B^p?  (defectively  written 
like  |n?^n,  iv.  4)  is  the  only  plural  of  fJ?  that  occurs  in  the 
Old  Testament.  *|33  too,  which  might  be  a  substantive,  is 
according  to  vii.  14  intended  as  an  adj.,  LXX.  irav  nrereivov 
irrepwTov.  As  yet  God  has  spoken  to  no  creature ;  but  now 
that  animated,  i.e.  conscious  (though  not  as  yet  self-conscious, 
fully  conscious),  life  has  begun,  He  begins  to  bless,  ver.  2  2  : 
And  Eloliim  blessed  them,  saying :  Be  fruitful,  and  increase, 
and  fill  the  waters  in  the  seas,  and  let  fowl  increase  upon  earth. 
According  to  the  usual  view,  "  blessing  "  is  a  notion  developed 
from  the  fundamental  notion  of  kneeling,  and  indeed  of  kneeling 
in  prayer.  According  however  to  the  Arabic  custom  of  speech, 
the  verb  CJy  has  the  fundamental  meaning  "  to  extend," 
whence  birka,  n?']rl,  pond,  from  the  mass  of  water  extending 
in  breadth,  and  especially  to  lie  down,  so  that  the  knees  or 
breast  lie  upon  the  ground ;  the  knees  are  called  0)3^3,  as  the 
limbs  which  more  especially  participate  in  this  action.  Hence 
too  n?"32,  abundance  of  goods,  Arab,  especially  abundance  of 
fruits,  a  plentiful  harvest,  and  sp3,  to  bless,  is  equivalent 
to,  to  cause  extension,  increase,  prosperity  by  word  and 
deed.  Fr.  Delitzscli  obtains  the  meaning  to  bless  by  another 
path :  Assyr.  bardku  means  to  step  (syn.  asdru),  Pi.  burriiku 
==•  "H?.3:,  to  cause  to  step,  to  bring  onwards,  to  make  prosperous. 
The  knee  is  then  called  birku  as  the  means  of  advancing,  and 


96  GENESIS  I.  24-31. 

the  blessing  nrna  as  a  prosperous  advance  (Prolegomena,  p.  46); 
the  admission  however  of  the  pond,  nrna,  in  this  tissue  of 
notions,  is  a  difficulty.  Here  where  God  blesses,  or  better 
perhaps,  pronounces  a  blessing  (benedicit),  the  wishing  word 
is  at  the  same  time  the  imparting  deed,  the  bestowal  of  gene 
rative  power.  The  pair  of  words  naTi  ma  is  characteristic  of 
the  Elohistic  sections  ;  2T  is  the  jussive  of  Kal.  The  fifth  day 
closes  with  the  Divine  blessing,  ver.  23  :  And  it  was  evening, 
and  icas  morning — a  fifth  day.  The  number  is  written  in 
full,  ^pn ;  the  Dagesh  does  not  appear  till  the  form  in 
creases,  though  not  then  without  exception ;  for  we  find  HE^n 
and  D^pn,  n wn  and  n'tfpn  ;  still  yuintus  is  throughout  ^pn. 


The  Sixth  Day  of  Creation,  i.  24-31. 

The  sixth  day's  work,  like  that  of  the  third,  consists  of  two 
creative  acts,  the  land  which  appeared  on  the  third  day  being 
now  peopled  with  land  animals  and  men.  The  work  of  the  six 
clays  kept  man  in  view.  The  animals  were  created  in  increas 
ing  approximation  to  him,  and  now,  ver.  24,  the  land  animals, 
which  most  nearly  approach  him,  are  created:  And  Elohim  said: 
Let  the  earth  bring  forth  living  soids  after  their  kind  (that  of  these 
living  beings),  cattle,  and  creeping  animals  and  the  wild  least  of 
the  earth  after  its  kind  (that  of  these  wild  beasts  and  of  these 
animals  in  general) :  and  it  was  so.  The  land  animals  are 
divided  into  three  classes :  1 .  nDnn  (from  Qn?}  to  be  dumb, 
dull,  heavy),  here  as  elsewhere  (though  not  exclusively)  the 
name  of  four-footed  domestic  animals.  2.  toj  (from  'w*n,  to 
move,  to  swarm,  a  synonym  of  pp),  in  this  connection :  the 
smaller  creeping  animals,  which  keep  closer  to  the  ground. 
3.  n?~fr^,  the  wild  beast  of  the  earth,  which,  as  representing 
the  most  active  kind  of  animal  life,  is  called  n»n  /car  e'f.  ;  the 
connective  form  is  in  ver.  25  given  in  the  narrative  tone  as 
n*n ;  but  here  in  the  divine  fiat  the  more  ancient  and  therefore 
more  solemn  favn  is  used,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxix.  2,  1.  10,  Zeph.  ii. 
14,  and  frequently,  the  second  word  being  always  without  the 


GENESIS  I.  24-31.  97 

article  (because  the  oldest  form  of  the  language  had  no  article) ; 
the  final  i  is  certainly  not  the  ancient  termination  of  the 
accusative  (0  obscured  from  a),  but  the  nominative  (u  enhanced 
to  0),  Ges.  §  90.  3  (comp.  the  forms,  Num.  xxiv.  3,  15,  Ps. 
cxiv.  8,  with  the  same  case-vowel  faded  into  a  connective 
sound).  The  creative  word  which  calls  into  being  the  three 
kinds  of  animals  is  addressed  to  the  earth :  produced  terra. 
Their  genesis  takes  place  with  the  maternal  participation  as  it 
were  of  the  earth,  hence  their  bodily  nature  is,  as  compared 
with  that  of  fishes  and  birds,  pre-eminently  earthy.  While 
the  creative  word  goes  forth,  what  it  declares  is  realized  by 
the  Creator,  ver.  2  5  :  And  Eloliim  made  the  wild  beast  of  the 
earth  after  its  kind,  and  cattle  after  its  kind,  and  all  creeping 
animals  of  the  ground  after  their  kind :  and  Eloliim  saw  that  it 
(ivas)  good.  W|}  is  here  used  (as  vv.  V,  16)  instead  of  KI^I, 
ver.  2 1  ;  the  latter  means  to  bring  forth  by  creating ;  the 
former,  to  carry  into  execution.  The  succession  of  the  three 
classes  is  here  different  from  that  in  the  former  verse;  there 
the  advance  was  from  the  nearer  to  the  more  distant ;  here,  from 
the  greater  to  the  less.  The  creeping  animals  are  here  called 
more  definitely  nP>™!?  ^-^  the  addition  n£1Kn  not  merely 
colouring  but  defining  (comp.  ver.  21  ;  Lev.  xi.  46  ;  Ps.  Ixix. 
35);  an  echo  is  found  Hos.  ii.  20.  The  earth  is  called  p«, 
as  a  solid  body,  and  especially  as  the  solid  ground  under  our 
feet ;  nEHK  is  the  earthy  covering,  especially  the  mould  or 
humus,  which  covers  the  body  of  the  earth  as  the  skin  does  man. 
We  are  not  specially  told  that  God  blessed  the  land  animals. 
This  is  understood  from  ver.  22.  The  intentionally  only 
threefold  "pm  (Vv.  22,  28,  ii.  3)  sheds  its  light  on  all  sides, 
while  here  the  narrator  hastens  past  the  blessing  of  the  land 
animals  to  the  creation  of  man. 

The  creation  of  man  forms  the  second  half  of  the  sixth  day's 
work.  He  is  made  last  of  all  the  creatures  of  the  six  days  as 
the  noblest,  but  also  as  the  most  needy  of  all ;  for  he  is  in  need 
of  all  the  creatures  that  precede  him,  without  their  being  in 
need  of  him.  Man  does  not  come  into  being  by  &fiat  addressed 

G 


98  GENESIS  I.  24-31. 

to  the  earth.  A  solemn  declaration  of  the  Divine  will  here 
answers  to  the  creative  Let  there  be  :  ver.  26,  And  Elohim  said, 
Let  us  make,  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness  ;  and  let  them 
subject  to  themselves  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  the  birds  of  heaven, 
and  the  cattle,  and  the  whole  earth,  and  every  creeping  tiling 
moving  upon  the  earth.  The  indicative  form  HOT  has  a 
cohortatory  meaning  ;  the  intentional  ah  of  the  cohortative  only 
occurs  once  in  the  Kal  of  a  verb  £t,,  Ps.  cxix.  117  (but  comp. 
also  Ixxvii.  4),  and  once  in  the  Hithpael,  Isa.  xli.  23.  But 
how  are  we  to  understand  this  plural  faciamus  ?  It  is  not  a 
self-objectivizing  plural  (Hitzig  on  Isa.  vi.  8),  for  there  is  no 
example  of  a  speaker  speaking  of  himself  in  the  plural,  while 
his  ego  is  addressing  his  words  to  himself  as  object.  On  the 
other  hand  the  so-called  plur.  majestatis  is  by  no  means  un 
usual  in  the  East  (DMZ.  xxii.  109).  He  who  speaks  in  the 
plural  of  greatness  proper,  appears  to  himself  (without  being 
comprised  with  others)  to  be  of  the  value  of  many.  In  this 
sense  God  frequently  speaks  of  Himself  in  the  Koran  (e.g. 
88.  25  sq.)  as  We.  But  such  a  plural  cannot  be  shown  in 
Holy  Scripture  where  God  is  speaking  of  Himself.  Where 
it  seems  to  be  found,  we  have  to  admit  that  God  the  Father  is 
comprising  Himself  either  with  the  Son  and  the  Spirit  or  with 
the  celestial  spirits.  Scripture  itself  confirms  the  latter,  for 
from  beginning  to  end  it  testifies  that  God  communicates  to 
the  spirits  who  surround  Him  what  He  purposes  to  do  upon 
earth,  1  Kings  xxii.  19-22  ;  Job  i. ;  Dan.  vii.  10;  Luke  ii. 
9  sqq. ;  Bev.  iv.  sq.,  with  Ps.  Ixxxix.  8  and  Dan.  iv.  14,  where 
compare  the  Chaldee  representation  of  the  pTjj,  eyptfyopoi,,  as 
Oeol  j3ov\aloL  (Diodor.  ii.  30).  It  is  in  this  communicative 
sense  that  nby:)  is  intended.  Just  as  Jahveh  comprises  Himself 
with  the  true  Israel,  Isa.  xli.  21  sq,,  so  does  He  with  the 
seraphim,  Isa.  vi.  8,  and  here,  as  also  iii.  22  and  xi.  7,  with 
the  heavenly  spirits  in  general.  This  is  the  explanation  of  the 
Midrasli  (Pesikta  de  Ral>  Cahana,  ed.  Buber,  34&;  comp.  Targ. 
Jer.),  and  in  accordance  with  this  of  Philo  (i.  556,  ed.  Mangey): 
6  TWV  oXw  Trar  rals  eavrov  SwdjLeaiv.  Elohiin 


GENESIS  I.  24-31.  99 

no  more  concedes  thereby  a  share  in  creation  itself  to 
the  Bene  Haelohim  than  He  does  in  sending  (Isa.  vi.  8)  ; 
but  He  does  give  them  an  interest  therein  as  to  their 
knowledge  and  will.  The  communicative  speaker  ever 
remains,  in  relation  to  those  whom  he  thus  comprises 
with  Himself,  the  Higher.  But  He  imparts  to  them  and 
gives  them  an  interest  in  the  matter  in  hand.  It  is  in 
accordance  with  this  that  we  must  understand  "  in  our 
image  and  in  our  likeness  "  as  including  the  angels.  Accord 
ing  to  Scripture,  the  angels  form  together  with  God  one 
family,  and  man,  being  made  in  God's  image,  is  for  this  very 
reason  made  also  in  the  image  of  angels  ({Spa^y  TI  Trap' 
dyyeXovs,  according  to  Ps.  viii.  6,  LXX.),  though  this  is  not 
directly  stated,  and  is  therefore  denied  by  Keerl  as  well  as 
by  most  ancient  teachers  (DMZ.  xxiv.  283  sq.).  We  do  not 
question  that  ^H^D12  is  a  more  particular  nearer  definition  of 
«»5>y:i  (Frank,  System  der  chr.  Wahrheit,  i.  348)  ;  the  LXX. 
arbitrarily  inserts  a  too  sharply  separating  /cat  :  KCUT  el/cova 
rj/jierepav  Kal  /ca9*  ofjioiwcriv.  But  it  is  not  a  secondary,  "  an 
adverbial  "  determinative  (Wendt,  VollJcommenheit,  p.  2  0  0), 
for  then  the  exchange  of  the  words  (ver.  3)  would  not  be 

admissible.      The   noun    WX   (from   D^¥  =  +,&,  to   cut,   to    cut 


away  *)  means  the  image,  and  TO^  =  die  G-leicke  —  a  good 
German  substantive,  mid.  high.  Germ,  gelichc,  which  we 
prefer  to  the  too  abstract  sounding  Grleichheit  or  AehnlichJceit 
(likeness)  ;  both  words  admit  of  a  twofold  use,  and  are  then 
thus  distinguished,  obtf  meaning  original  image  or  imitation  ; 
rn»l,  model  or  copy.  The  idea  of  ^  is  more  rigid,  that 
of  ni£1  more  fluctuating,  and  so  to  speak  more  spiritual  ; 
in  the  former  the  notion  of  the  original  image,  in  the  latter 
that  of  the  ideal  predominates.  It  is  in  accordance  with 
this  that  the  prefixes  n  and  3  are  used,  although  they 

1  Friedr.  Delitzscli  thinks  otherwise,  Prolecj.  141,  from  Q^?=  J^,  to  be  dark 
(whence  TOp¥)  ;  but  it  is  difficult  thence  to  arrive  at  the  idea  shadow-imago 
(something  like  adumbratio}. 


100  GENESIS  I.  24-31. 

might  be  exchanged  (comp.  Lev.  v.  25  with  xxvii.  12  ; 
2  Chron.  xxxi.  17  with  16).  With  2  the  original  form  is 
thought  of  as  though  it  were  a  form  for  casting,  in  3  as  a 
model  set  before  one  (comp.  on  the  other  hand  v.  3). 
Hence  the  Greek  and  many  of  the  Latin  Fathers  started 
from  at  least  a  correct  feeling  when  they  referred  the  tear 
elrcova  of  the  LXX.  to  the  physical,  and  /caO'  O/JLOIWCTIV  to 
the  ethic  side  of  the  imago  divina,  though  there  is  no 
linguistic  necessity  for  this  distinction.  The  narrative  does 
not  expressly  state  wherein  the  Divine  likeness  consisted, 
for  the  dominium  terrce  promised  to  man,  26&,  is  not,  as  the 
Socinians  think,  its  content  but  its  consequence,  or  as  Frank 
thinks  it  better  to  express  it  (ib.  i.  p.  349),  not  its  nature, 
but  the  manifestation  of  that  nature.  Nevertheless  it  results 
as  a  retrospective  inference  from  this  sovereignty  (Ps.  viii.  6  &), 
that  the  Divine  image  in  man  consists  in  his  being  a  creature 
who  has  mastery  over  himself  (self-conscious  and  self-deter 
mining),  and  therefore  exalted  above  all  other  earthly 
creatures.  Because  Dltf  is  used  of  man  in  a  sense  which 
includes  the  species,  the  sentence  goes  on  in  the  plural : 
and  let  them  subject  ("Tin,  suligere,  with  2  of  the  object  as 
usual  in  verbs  of  ruling).  fl*n  seems  to  have  fallen  out 
between  ^221  and  pKn ;  for  if  the  sentence  had  concluded 
with  pNH  ^mi,  we  should  have  had  a  significant  climax 
ascendcns,  while  now  the  enumeration  of  the  kinds  of  animals 
is  continued  contrary  to  expectation.  The  deficiency  must 
however  be  an  old  one,  for  the  LXX.  has  KOI  Trda-rjs  T?}? 
7%  both  at  26&  and  at  ver.  28,  which  it  enlarges  from  26& 
(comp.  Jas.  iii.  7,  where  only  four  kinds  of  animals  are 
enumerated,  and  not  five,  as  would  be  the  case  if  rvn  had 
stood  here)  ;  the  Syriac  alone  among  ancient  versions  inserts 
rpn.  Next  follows  the  carrying  into  execution  of  the  resolution 
formed  in  the  Divine  counsel,  ver.  2  7 :  And  Elohim  created 
man  in  His  own  image :  in  the  image  of  Eloliim  He  created  him  ; 
male  and  female  He  created  them.  We  experience  a  trembling 
joy  at  these  words  ;  the  three  propositions  are  like  a  tripudium, 


GENESIS  I.  21-31.  101 

i.e.  a  dance  of  victory  of  three  measures.  What  is  related  in 
more  detail  in  the  Jahvistic  narrative  is  here  comprised  in  a 
few  winged  words:  God  created  man,  and  that  with  difference 
of  sexes.  The  notion  of  the  pair  predominates  in  nttw  ^\s% 
that  of  sexual  distinction  in  nripil  13T  (LXX.  apaev  KOI  drfkv, 
Lith. :  tin  Menlin  vnd  Frewlin),  stem-words  -or  V  3T,  infigcre, 
and  np3  V  Dp,  cxcavarc.  The  origin  of  man,  though  not 
brought  to  pass  by  a  creative  fiat,  is  nevertheless  called  a 
creation,  ton,  and  may  be  also  so  called  in  respect  of  ii.  7. 
For  the  essential  characteristic  of  creation  is  not  the  exclusion 
of  existing  material,  but  the  achievement,  and  indeed  the 
miraculous  achievement,  of  something  hitherto  non-existent ; 
for  to  appoint  that  anything  shall  henceforth  exist  according 
to  law  is  a  miracle.  The  narrator  now  the  more  opportunely 
reiterates,  that  man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God.  He  has 
now  reached  the  point  towards  which  he  was  steering.  What 
follows  concerning  the  Divine  blessing  announces  also  an 
exalted  frame  of  mind,  ver.  28  :  And  Eloliim  blessed  them :  and 
Eloliim  said  to  them  :  Be  fruitful,  and  increase,  and  Jill  the 
earth,  and  subdue  it,  and  subject  to  yourselves  the  fish  of  the  sea, 
and  the  birds  of  heaven,  and  every  beast  that  moves  upon  the  earth. 
The  brief  "i£fr6  at  the  blessing  of  the  animals,  ver.  22,  is  here, 
in  the  effort  for  poetical  parallelism,  extended  to  Dr6  "lOfcOl 
D\"6tf.  The  authorization  and  vocation  to  dominion  over  the 
earth  employs  such  strong  expressions  as  G5Q3,  proculcare,  and 
nT),  subigere,  because  this  dominion  requires  the  energy  of 
strength  and  the  art  of  wisdom.  We  have  translated  rpn 
by  G-etier  (=  all  beasts),  because  the  word  has  here  a  wider 
meaning  than  at  ver.  24  sq.  The  tenth  nojo1!  of  the  narrative 
points  out  to  man  and  beast  their  means  of  nourishment  in 
vv.  29,  30  :  And  Elohim  said  :  Behold,  I  give  you  every  seed- 
yielding  herb  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  and  all  trees  in 
which  are  seed-yielding  fruits ;  let  it  serve  you  for  food.  And 
to  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and  to  all  the  birds  of  heaven,  and  to 
all  that  moveth  upon  the  earth,  in  which  is  living  soul,  (have  I 
given)  every  green  herb  for  food  :  and  it  ivas  so.  The  perfect 


102  GENESIS  I.  2-1-31. 

Tiro  is  usual  in  agreements,  grants  of  authority,  engagements, 
givings  of  names  (xli.  45)  (Ges.  §  126.  4).  On  ^VIK  with 
an  indeterminate  noun  (all  and  each  of  the  after  -  named 
kind),  see  on  ver.  21.  jnf  followed  by  JHJ  here  means,  in 
distinction  from  jmro,  ver.  11  sq.,  seed-yielding  or  containing. 
In  ver.  30  we  must  supply  WJ  before  1W  P'V-PDTIN,  omnem 
virorem  herbce  (recurring  ix.  3  ;  comp.  Ex.  x.  15  ;  Isa.  xv.  6); 
it  was  absent  also  from  the  Hebrew  text  of  the  LXX.  The 
latter  agrees  with  the  Masoretic  text  in  also  making  ver.  30 
conclude  with  /cal  eyevero  ovrcos.  This  p-\Tl  declares,  that 
the  will  of  God  which  directed  man  as  well  as  beast  to 
vegetable  diet  was  also  carried  into  effect.  There  was  only 
an  unimportant  difference  between  the  food  of  both,  herbs 
only  being  allotted  to  beasts,  but  to  man  fruit  trees  as  well, 
the  inexhaustible  nature  of  such  food  being  indicated  by  3nf 
SHt.  The  announcement  of  the  will  of  God  is  but  cursorily 
sketched,  noni  is  included  in  p^rt  rvn ;  certain  articles  of 
food,  such  as  milk  and  honey,  are  left  out  of  consideration, 
without  being  said  to  be  forbidden.  The  main  point  is  not 
what  is  expressed,  but  its  reverse ;  for  the  direction  to  vege 
table  diet  means  the  restriction  to  this,  to  the  exclusion  of 
the  flesh  of  animals.  It  was  not  till  after  the  Flood  that  man 
was  authorized  to  kill  animals  for  his  food,  ix.  3.  The 
creation  of  God  was  designed  for  propagation,  not  for  de 
struction.  The  subsequent  order  of  the  world  is  not  the 
original ;  at  the  beginning  peace  prevailed  between  man  and 
the  beasts,  and  among  the  beasts  towards  each  other.  Ewald 
and  Dillmann  rightly  see  in  the  p-TPl  an  indication  that  in 
the  beginning  of  the  world's  history  a  Paradisaic  peace  pre 
vailed,  and  find  that  A  (Q)  and  Q.  (J]  are  agreed  on  this 
matter.  Outside  of  Israel  too  the  tradition  is  widely  spread, 
that  men  and  animals  were  originally  satisfied  with  vegetable 
food ;  it  is  not  merely  a  notion  of  Pythagoras.  Such  pro 
phecies  also  as  Isa.  xi.  6-9,  Ixv.  25,  Hos.  ii.  20,  presuppose 
it,  for  they  promise  the  restoration  of  this  aurea  cetas.  We 
cannot  admit  that  this  Paradisaic  peaceful  commencement  of 


GENESIS  I.  24-31.  103 

life  is  but  a  pleasant  dream,  a  shadowy  picture  of  the  imagina 
tion,  if  it  were  only  for  the  fact  that  there  is  more  wisdom  in 
the  traditions  of  nations  than  in  the  views  of  individuals.  The 
objection,  that  the  teeth  and  intestines  of  men.  as  well  as  of 
many  beasts,  are  adapted  for  both  animal  and  vegetable  diet, 
does  not  perplex  us, — the  whole  of  the  six  days'  creation  is, 
so  to  speak,  supralapsarian,  i.e.  so  constituted  that  the  conse 
quences  of  the  foreseen  fall  of  man  were  taken  into  account, 
and  that  there  should  be  no  need  of  remodelling  of  creation. 
That  man  can  live  and  thrive  without  animal  food  is  a  fact 
confirmed  by  experience,  and  there  are  nations  who  live  almost 
entirely  on  vegetable  food  and  the  milk  of  their  flocks,  very 
rarely  eating  flesh,  e.g.  the  nomadic  Arabs  and  the  Indians, 
who  are  nevertheless  very  fine  and  intelligent  races.  Nor 
does  the  reference  to  the  animals  of  the  primceval  world, 
among  whom  devouring  each  other  was  already  customary, 
seem  to  us  any  counter-proof.  For  such  animals  belong  to 
the  time  prior  to  the  world  of  man,  while  the  peace,  which 
restriction  to  vegetable  diet  would  secure,  refers  only  to  the 
animal  world  contemporary  with  man,  and  appointed  to  live 
along  with  him.  It  is  indeed  true  that,  if  we  would  enforce  the 
thesis,  that  the  killing  of  one  living  creature  by  another  was 
not  the  direct  will  of  God  for  the  universe  down  to  the  world  of 
the  infusoria,  we  shall  encounter  insuperable  difficulties.  But 
the  scriptural  narrative  concerning  the  first  beginning  requires 
no  such  far  and  deep  reaching  consequences.  For  why  then  is 
it  silent  concerning  the  animals  of  the  waters  ?  The  dominion 
over  the  DM  nail  also  was  indeed  allotted  to  man,  ver.  28, 
but  in  ver.  29  sq.  the  fish  are  purposely  left  out  of  considera 
tion.  Men  and  animals  are  here  in  question  only  so  far  as 
they  associate  together ;  it  is  only  in  this  department  that  the 
Divine  will,  which  excludes  killing  for  the  purpose  of  food, 
attains  legislative  expression.  The  inference,  that  it  was  not 
then  also  a  law  and  appointment  of  nature,  that  apart  from 
men  and  those  animals  who  formed  their  nearest  surrounding, 
the  life  of  one  creature  might  be  preserved  by  the  killing  of 


104  GENESIS  I.  21-31. 

another,  would  be  unjustifiable.  All  living  creatures  within 
this  earthly  world  exist  in  a  state  of  constant  war.  It  is  in 
the  nature  of  certain  animals  to  torture  their  prey  with  refine 
ment  of  cruelty.  And  it  seems  as  if  it  ought  to  be  and  must 
be  thus,  that  as  a  limit  is  set  to  the  encroachments  of  the 
vegetable  world  by  means  of  the  frugivorous  animals,  so  the 
immoderate  increase  of  the  latter  is  prevented  by  the  beasts 
of  prey,  while  these  are  in  their  turn  kept  under  by  the 
weapons  of  man.  From  the  sanction  however  of  the  peace 
implied  in  ver.  29,  we  may  conclude  that  the  present  world, 
subjected  as  it  is  to  ^a-TaioT^  and  Bov\eia  r?}?  $6opas  (Eom. 
viii.  18-26),  is  not  that  absolutely  best  world,  that  adequate 
exponent  of  the  holy  love  which  is  God's  nature,  but  only  the 
preliminary  stage  of  a  glorified  world,  in  which  love  will  bear 
sole  sway,  and  death  in  every  form  be  cast  out.  The  word  of 
God,  which  made  peace  the  fundamental  law  for  mankind, 
and  for  the  animals  most  nearly  approximating  him,  was  now 
followed  by  the  close  of  the  Hexaemeron,  ver.  31  :  And 
Eloliim  saw  all  that  He  had  made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very 
good.  And  it  was  evening,  and  was  morning — the  sixth  day. 
The  Creator  surveys  all  that  He  has  brought  to  pass,  and 
finds  it  very  good.  The  result  is  introduced  by  nan.  Each 
single  item  is  niD,  if  not  in  itself  alone,  yet  in  its  relative 
adaptation  to  the  whole  ;  but  this  whole,  in  which  are  har 
moniously  comprised  all  the  single  suitable  items,  is  THO  31D. 
The  adverbially  used  INK)  means  mightiness,  and  the  funda 
mental  idea  is  either  weight  (from  n^,  to  burden)  or  extension, 
as  it  seems  to  be  according  to  the  Assyrian,  from  HKD, 
ma'ddu,  to  be  much  (V  ID,  to  extend,  to  stretch).1  Pro 
minence  is  given  to  the  sixth,  as  the  concluding  day  of 
creation,  by  the  article :  a  day,  viz.  the  sixth.  That  the 
connection  of  the  words  is  not  intended  to  be  a  genitive  one 

1  In  the  Thorah  of  R.  Meir  it  is  pessimistically  said,  after  Bereshith  rabba, 
ch.  9,  mo  3113  i"Uni,  by  which  is  meant  certainly  not  the  roll  of  the  Thorah. 
but  the  reading  of  the  Thorah  of  this  R.  Meir  ;  see  Rosen feld's  DnS1D 
(Wilna  1883),  p.  59. 


GENESIS  II.  1-3.  105 


is  seen  e.g.  from  Jer.  xxxviii.  14,  ^'y^n  Nl3»,  entrance  (to  the 
temple),  viz.  the  third.  That  this  connection  of  the  determi 
nate  adjective  with  an  indeterminate  substantive  (like  e.g. 
xli.  26)  is  no  sign  of  a  later  period  of  the  language,  has  been 
shown  by  Driver  (Journal  of  Philology,  vol.  ix.  1883,  p.  229). 
'tftjJn  Dto  with  the  preposition  is  constantly  found,  e.g.  Ex. 
xvi.  5,  xxii.  29  ;  but  Neh.  viii.  18,  Dan.  x.  12,  are  the 
first  examples  of  ^t^n  Dfan,  so  that  the  statistical  discovery 
rather  proves  the  contrary  of  what  Giesebrecht  tries  to  prove. 

The  Sabbath  of  Creation,  ii.  1-3. 

If  the  days  of  creation  are  regarded  as  the  periods  inter 
duos  occasus,  the  Sabbath  of  creation  begins  with  the 
evening,  i.e.  late  in  the  evening  of  the  sixth  day.  Then  how 
ever  we  have  the  incongruous  result,  that  evening  being  the 
beginning  of  rest,  is  also  the  beginning  of  work.  The  matter 
is  rather  as  follows  :  the  days  of  creation  consisted  of  a  morn 
ing  half  and  an  evening  half,  the  morning  reaching  its  climax 
at  noon,  and  the  evening  its  lowest  point  at  midnight,  and 
this  whole  clay  is  reckoned  a  work  -  day.  For  if  it  is  the 
meaning  of  the  narrative,  that  the  Creator  rested  at  the  begin 
ning  of  each  evening,  we  should  then  have  seven  Sabbaths 
instead  of  one.  This  is  what  we  do  find  in  the  Avesta,  which 
is  here  evidently  under  Semitic  influence  (DMZ.  xxvi.  719  sq.  ; 
comp.  xxxv.  642  sqq.).  Ahuramazda,  in  conjunction  with  the 
Amschaspands,  creates  heaven,  the  water,  the  earth,  trees, 
animals,  men,  in  six  periods,  each  containing  an  unequal  number 
of  days,  each  period  being  followed  by  a  festival  of  rest  on  his 
part  (Burnouf,  Yagna,  pp.  294—334).  The  Scripture  narrative 
however  knows  nothing  of  six  Sabbaths  and  a  final  Sabbath, 
but  of  one  only,  which  began  when  the  sixth  day,  with 
its  morning  and  evening  halves,  was  over,  and  the  morning 
of  the  seventh  day  was  beginning.  Having  arrived  thus 
far,  the  form  of  the  narrative  becomes  imitative  of  the  now 
approaching  rest  ;  the  hitherto  more  rapid  flow  of  speech 


106  GENESIS  II.  1-3. 

seems  restrained,  and  extends  itself  tautologically  in  breadth. 
As  Meinecke,  Fragmenta  choliambica,  p.  90,  says  of  Babrios, 
when  the  latter  is  describing  the  luxurious  living  of  the  Assyrian 
ruler  :  non  sine  artis  laude  numeros  argumento  carminis  attem- 
peravit,  so  is  it  due  to  the  art  of  the  narrator,  that  his  language, 
in  describing  the  seventh  day,  gets  slow  and  dragging.  He 
begins  with  a  summary,  ii.  1  :  And  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and 
all  their  host,  were  finished.  The  LXX.  rightly  translates 
crvveT6\ea6i](7av,  heaven  and  earth  were  finished  in  the  manner 
described  ;  comp.  Ex.  xxxix.  32,  «ri],  it  (the  work  of  the  taber 
nacle)  was  finished, — heaven  and  earth,  and  the  totality  of 
the  beings  that  filled  them.  NJV  (from  Nm»%,  prodire,  V  nv,  to 
swell,  to  press  upwards  and  outwards  ;  Arab,  of  the  appear 
ance  of  a  claw,  a  tooth,  a  star),  elsewhere  the  host  of  heaven, 
is  here  to  be  referred  zeugmatically  (comp.  on  the  other 
hand,  Neh.  ix.  6)  to  the  creatures  of  earth  (per  zeugma  we  say? 
because  elsewhere,  when  &os  is  used  of  earthly  beings,  it  means 
only  a  multitude  of  men,  e.g.  Isa,  xxxiv.  2).  The  correspond 
ing  Assyrian  formula  is  Jcissat  (from  tj^a)  sam£  u  irsitim, 
totality  of  heaven  and  earth  (see  the  hymn  to  Merodach  III., 
E.  29,  No.  1),  Sumerian  anJcisarrdna,  troop  of  heaven  of  earth 
(Fr.  Delitzsch  in  Lotz,  Tiglathpileser,  i.  p.  76).  Now  follows  the 
fact  meant  in  ^]\,  which  looks  both  backwards  and  forwards, 
the  fact  by  which  God  impressed  upon  the  now  finished  earth  the 
seal  of  completion,  ver.  2  :  And  Elohim  finished  on  the  seventh 
day  His  work  which  He  had  made  ;  and  He  rested  on  the  seventh 
day  from  all  His  work  which  Pie  had  made.  The  ?5?,  on  the 
seventh  day,  appeared  so  incomprehensible  to  ancient  trans 
lators,  LXX.  Samar.  Syr.  Book  of  Jubilees,  that  they  preferred 
to  read  'wn  DV1 ;  Budde  (Urgesch.  p.  490)  as  well  as 
Olshausen  regards  ^"a^n  as  an  error  of  transcription.  But  the 
Targums  give  back  T2£7i,  and  the  Talmudic  scholars  know  how 
to  manage  with  it.  Indeed  with  a  good  will  there  needs  but 
little  penetration  to  recognise  the  legitimacy  and  the  sense  of 
Complevitgiic  Deus  die  septimo  opus  suum  (Jerome).  The  mean 
ing  is  not  that  on  the  seventh  day  God  continued  and  ended  His 


GENESIS  II.  1-3.  107 

as  yet  uncompleted  work,  but  that  He  made  an  end  (n?3,  like 
Ex.  xli.  33  ;  1  Sam.  x.  13;  comp.  2  Sam.  vi.  18)  of  the 
work,  because  it  was  now  finished,  not  continuing  it  at  the 
beginning  of  the  seventh  day,  but  ceasing  from  further  work, 
and  resting.1  When  the  name  "  work "  is  given  to  God's 
six  clays'  creation,  human  work  is  ennobled  to  the  highest  con 
ceivable  degree,  as  being  the  copy  of  this  model.  The  verb 
means  in  Arab,  and  Ethiop.  to  send:  hence  ro&6»  (out  of 
means  a  sending  (a  mission)  ;  thus  it  means  the  direction  of 
the  business  given  one,  or  which  one  gives  himself,  therefore 
the  work  of  one's  calling.  Creation  is  the  execution  of  a  task 
which  God  set  Himself,  an  achievement  in  which  His  Word 
and  His  Spirit  participate,  and  on  which  all  the  powers  of 
His  Being  are  engaged.  The  rest  of  God,  after  His  work  is 
completed,  is  here  expressed  by  rtl$"i  Ex.  xx.  11  by  ru^ 
Ex.  xxxi.  17  by  t^'a^l  rn&;.  rnsy  (Assyr.  sdbdtu,  Symrn.  yamdru, 
*IDJ)  is  the  most  unambiguous  word,  the  other  two  on  the  con 
trary  have  an  anthropopathic  sound.  In  no  case  must  the  rest 
of  the  Creator  be  understood  as  the  result  of  fatigue  (see  on 
the  contrary,  Isa.  xl.  28) ;  it  was  the  consequence  of  the  now 
perfect  and  harmonious  whole,  combined  with  the  satisfaction 
and  joy  (Ps.  liv.  31)  which  this  whole,  as  IND  niD,  afforded 
Him.  He  now  rested,  not  with  the  intent  of  henceforth 
withdrawing  from  the  world, — He  was  indeed  from  that  time 
onwards  the  governor  of  the  world  and  the  director  of  its 
history, —  but  He  rested  as  Creator  ;  His  creative  agency  was 
now  concluded,  His  rest  belongs  to  that  order  of  the  world 
which  is  binding  upon  the  creatures,  ver.  3  :  And  Elohim 
"blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  hallowed  it ;  for  on  it  He  rested  from 
all  His  work  wliicli  He  had  creatively  effected.  Undoubtedly 
nib'jJ?  refers  back  to  irDfe&E,  to  which  {OH  could  not  be  directly 
referred ;  the  combination  of  the  finite  with  the  infinite  must 
be  explained  according  to  the  Schema,  T\wfa  ^IJPI,  Joel  ii.  20 
(E\v.  §  285a).  This  explanation  being  simple  and  in  con- 

1  The  Arabians  also   explain  c^A**:  etymologically  by:  he  cut  («-.U_*)  the 
thing,  he  put  an  end  to  work  (DMZ.  xxxix.  585). 


108  GENESIS  II.  1-3. 

formity  with  the  style,  is  preferable  to  Knobel's :  which 
He  being  active  created,  or  our  former  one :  which  He 
performing  created.  In  both  cases  quod  (opus)  is  com 
bined  with  creaverat  and  not  with  fadendo ;  it  is  never 
theless  the  most  obvious  to  combine  it  with  fadendo,  like  npy 
naxta :  quod  (opus}  fadendo  creaverat.  However  it  may  be 
explained,  the  inf.  with  *?  has  in  any  case  the  sense  of  fadendo, 
like  Eccles.  ii.  11;  comp.  Judg.  ix.  56;  2  Kings  xix.  1 1  ; 
Ps.  ciii.  20.  The  blessing  and  hallowing  is  not  meant  as 
pointing  onwards  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Mosaic  legisla 
tion, — in  this  respect  God  subsequently  hallowed  the  Sabbath 
at  the  departure  from  Egypt, — but  is  a  fact  following  upon 
the  conclusion  of  creation,  and  having  in  view  the  history  of 
the  world,  which,  now  that  its  creation  is  completed,  is  about  to 
begin.  On  ?p3>  see  on  i.  22  ;  E^Jip  means  the  quality  of  appro 
priating  the  ^ilij,  but  tjnp  (V  "ip,  to  cleave,  to  divide),  used  of 
God,  designates  Him  as  a  Being  separated  from  the  finite 
sinful  world  and  exalted  above  it,  and  used  of  men  and  things, 
it  designates  them  as  separated  from  the  worldly  and  the 
common  ($>h),  and  raised  above  them.1  The  divine  blessing 
endowed  the  seventh  day  with  a  treasure  of  grace  flowing  forth 
from  the  rest  of  the  Creator,  which  is  opened  for  those  who 
keep  it,  and  the  divine  hallowing  removed  it  from  among  the 
week  days  and  invested  it  with  a  special  and  distinguishing 
consecration,  both  retrospectively  and  prospectively,  because  on 
it  He  ru^,  reguievit  or  reyuieverat,  i.e.  entered  into  rest.  Hence 
the  Sabbath,  personally  conceived  of,  is  called,  Isa.  Iviii.  13, 
'n  nip.  The  narrative  points  in  m^l  and  rot?  to  J"I3K>  as  the 
name  of  the  day  of  rest  following  the  six  days.  The  old  view, 
that  H3^  is  contracted  from  1TOP  (e.g.  Lactant.  Inst.  vii.  14), 
must  be,  if  only  on  this  account,  rejected,  nor  is  there  any 
need  for  it  in  explaining  the  use  of  flSUP  for  WWt  week  (comp. 
Lev.  xxiii.  15  with  Deut.  xvi.  9),  "seventh  day"  standing 

1  The  adj.  TcitdduSu  is  in  Assyrian  (comp.  Isa.  x.  17)  one  of  the  synonyms 
which  denote  brilliant  unobscured  light ;  see  Zimmern,  Bdbyl.  Busspsalmen 
a 885),  p.  37  sq. 


GENESIS  II.  1-3.  109 


per  sijnccdochen  partis  pro  toto  for  seven  days,  hebdomas. 
however  is  not  formed  from  nn^,  after  the  formation  ^|5,  for 
the  name  of  the  Sabbath  is  with  rare  exceptions  (Isa.  Ivi.  2,  G, 
comp.  Iviii.  13)  feminine,  and  the  Kametz  is  so  mutable 
as  to  get  evaporated  into  Sheva  (e.g.  rrirm^  ^hr^").  It  is 
contracted  from  nrmKJ,  as  fWB,  1  Kings  i.  15,  is  from  ntryffOt 
and  nn&'D,  Mai.  i.  14,  from  nnnt^  and  means  either  "rest 
time,"  with  a  glance  at  ny,  or  "  rest  "  (Feier')  as  a  self-contained 
notion  (comp.feri^festum,  and  diesfestus).  The  latter  is  pre 
ferable,  as  Lotz,  DC  historia  Sabbati,  pp.  5-8,  has  shown,  rDK> 
is  of  similar  formation  with  n5?7-^>  riN?1?>  n?f?j  and  means,  like 
the  Assyr.  sallattu,  rest  or  repose.  It  is  thus  that  the 
feminine  gender  must  be  explained,  which  (though  as  in  the 
case  of  rriN  it  here  and  there  afterwards  vanished  from  the 
usage  of  the  language)  so  far  predominates,  that  the  Sabbath 
is  liturgically  personified  as  queen  and  bride,  and  even  as 
a  goddess,  under  the  Ethiopia  name  Saribat  among  the  Falashas. 
Thus  also  is  to  be  explained  the  thoroughly  mutable  Kametz 
because  lengthened  from  Pathach,  and  the  various  use  of  the 
word,  which  presupposes  the  general  notion  of  a  holiday. 
The  name  of  the  planet  Saturn,  ^2®,  which  does  not  occur 
earlier  than  in  the  Pharisaico  -  astrological  technical  language, 
in  Epiphanius  in  Book  i.  against  heresies  (Opp.  i.  p.  24,  ed. 
Petav.),  does  not  mean  the  destructive  (from  ni^=nl|3l^n)J  or 
the  pausing  (DMZ.  xl.  202),  but  in  accordance  with  its  form 
the  Sabbatic,  and  is  in  this  sense  a  favourite  Jewish  proper 
name  already  occurring  in  the  books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah 
(Gr.  £a/3/3aTeuo9,  5a/3j3cm?,  5a/3/3arto9),  like  the  proper  names 
Jomtob  (Feast-day),  NovptivLos,  Paschalis,  Sonntag,  Freitag,  etc. 
The  day  first  gave  its  name  to  the  planet,  and  the  name  of 
the  planet  was  then  subsequently  transferred  to  the  day 
(Tibull.  i.  3,  18,  Saturni  sacra  dies,  Eng.  Saturday).  The 
custom  of  naming  the  seven  days  of  the  week  after  the  seven 
planets  is  an  ancient  Babylonian  one  (Schrader  in  Studicn  und 
Kritiken,  1873,  pp.  343-353  ;  and  Lotz,  DC  historia  Sdbbati, 
1883),  and  a  syllabus  (ii.  E,  32,  1G«&)  which  treats  of 


110  GENESIS  II.  4. 

divisions  of  time,  explains  la-lat-tu  by  'Amu  nuh  libbi,  hence 
the  Sabbath  is  also  in  Babylonio-Assyrian  expression  a  day 
of  delightful  and  festal  repose.  At  the  end  of  the  account  of 
the  closing  day  of  creation  we  find  no  "  there  was  morning 
and  there  was  evening,"  for  the  Divine  Sabbath  has  an  infinite 
perspective  :  it  terminates  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  after 
becoming  at  the  close  of  the  world's  history  the  Sabbath  of  the 
creature,  will  last  for  ever  and  ever.  Le  Sabbat  de  Dieu  n'est 
plus  un  jour,  une  periode,  mais  un  fait  (Theophile  Eivier  in 
Le  Eecit  Bibliqiie  de  la  Creation,  18*73). 

II.  4.  The  endorsement  of  the  Elohistic  account  of  the 
creation  is  here  given  in  such  terms  as  to  form  at  the  same 
time  the  transition  to  the  Jahvistic :  These  are  the  generations 
of  the  heaven  and  of  the  earth  when  they  were  created,  on  the  day 
that  Jahveh  Elohim  made  heaven  and  earth.  It  is  a  question 
whether  this  verse  is  the  subscription  to  what  precedes 
or  the  superscription  of  the  section  following.  Luzzatto 
and  Eeggio  (as  already  Easchi),  Ewald,  Knobel,  Stahelin, 
Hoelemann,  Dillmann  regard  it  as  the  former ;  Hengstenberg, 
Baumgarten,  Kurtz,  Hofmann,  Keil,  as  the  latter.  The  chief 
ground  for  viewing  it  as  a  superscription  is,  that  nnpin  n?x 
cannot  mean  :  this  is  (was)  the  origin  of  the  heaven  and 
the  earth,1  for  the  plural  nvi^in  (of  the  sing.  Pnirtfl  or  n*TOfl, 
occurring  only  in  post  -  Biblical  Hebrew,  Assyr.  tdlidtu), 
which  comes  from  i^  in  its  Hiphil  signification,  does  not 
mean  jevea-^  (as  might  be  thought  from  a  mistaken 
inference  from  Matt.  i.  1),  but  as  Gr.  Yen.  translates  it, 
«/evvr]aeis.  The  word  appears  only  in  the  stat.  constr.  or 
with  a  suffix,  and  the  genitive  is  always  the  gen.  siibjecti  not 
dbjecti,  which  always  denotes  the  given  beginning,  and 
rri"6in  the  genealogical,  and  hence  also  more  generally  the 
historical  progress  of  this  beginning  (comp.  Syr.  ^j-*,  t;-*, 
genealogy,  history).2  As  in  the  title  of  the  Jewish  crime- 

1  "Whether  n^tf  is  in  this  formula  subject  or  predicate  is  a  nice  question ; 

according  to  Arabic  syntax  it  would  be  subject. 

2  Such  it  is  also  e.g.  in  the  inference  drawn  in  the  Midrash  from  Gen.  vi.  9 : 


GENESIS  II.  4.  Ill 

book,  IB*  rm^n  'D,  the  \vord  is  generalized  to  the  inclusion  of 
the  history,  so  too  must  the  nr6in  nta  following  the  Sabbath 
of  creation  signify  the  further  history  of  the  heaven  and  the 
earth,  which  is  concentrated  in  man  who  is  at  once  earthly 
and  heavenly.  But  the  theological  notion  that  the  history 
of  man  is  the  history  of  the  world  of  the  Hexaemeron  cannot 
be  expected  from  the  child-like  simplicity  of  this  primeval 
historical  narrative.  It  is  also  at  variance  with  the  under 
standing  of  the  E^jjr1?  (with  He  minusculuni)  as  part  of  the 
title,  whereby,  as  Hoelem.  remarks,  the  said  rrnbin  are  encircled 
in  the  course  of  creation  (comp.  Num.  iii.  1).  On  the  other 
side  the  declaration :  these  are  the  generations,  productions  of 
the  heaven  and  the  earth,  has  its  difficulties.  "  Heaven  and 
earth,"  says  Lagarde  (Orientalia,  ii.  39),  "have  according  to  the 
Hebrew  notion  nothing  to  generate ;  they  certainly  have  not 
at  the  beginning  of  Genesis,  where  the  chief  matter  is  to 
represent  Jahveh  as  the  cause  and  Lord  of  the  world."  Hence 
he  thinks  that  another  form  of  the  word,  signifying  the  birth 
and  process  of  being  born,  must  be  substituted  for  nriTin. 
Certainly  wherever  else  creation  is  conceived  of  as  a  genera 
tion,  as  e.g.  Ps.  xc.  2,  God  is  Himself  the  generator  (without 
any  further  following  up  of  the  notion,  as  in  the  Semitic 
heathen  cosmogonies,  which  start  from  a  male  and  a  female 
principle).  The  fact  however  that  the  pure  idea  of  creation 
does  not  exclude  the  conception  of  heaven  and  earth  as  gene 
rating  or  producing  may  be  inferred  from  Joma  54&:  nn^in 
1&O33  PSB  p«n  nrtan  iK-nj  D^D^D  DWH,  "  the  productions  of 
the  heavens  are  made  of  heavenly  material,  those  of  the  earth 
of  earthly  material."  Hence,  regarding  r&s  as  pointing  back 
wards  (as  at  x.  5,  xx.  31  sq.,  xxxv.  26,  xxxvi.  19),  we  explain 
the  sentence :  these  are  the  generations  of  the  heaven  and 
of  the  earth,  i.e.  the  productions  wherewith  in  the  day,  i.e.  in 
the  period  of  creation,  they,  with  their  own  participation,  were 

"the  nflTlfl  of  man  (i.e.  that  wherein  he  goes  on  living)  are  his  good  works." 
Instead  of  VflH/in  ( Tanchuma,  comp.  Rashi  on  Gen.  vi.  9),  Beresldth  JRabba 
has  Vnvva  (his  fruits). 


112  GENESIS  II.  4. 

gradually  peopled.  Whether  ii.  4a  originally  stood  before 
JWK"a,  i.  1,  and  was  transferred  to  its  present  position  by  the 
redactor1  as  a  boundary  mark  between  the  Elohistic  and 
Jahvistic  narratives,  or  whether  the  author  himself,  for  the 
sake  of  making  his  historical  work  begin  with  rVE'Kti,  placed 
here  the  nv6in  n'pK,  which  he  elsewhere  puts  in  the  first  place, 
cannot  be  ascertained.  Nor  is  it  easier  to  discover  what 
share  Q  or  J  may  have  had  in  the  form  of  ii.  4&.  For  as 
this  half  verse  reads,  it  is  a  link  connecting  the  two  narratives 
and  leading  from  one  to  the  other.  In  the  transposition 
D^^l  pK  (occurring  only  again  Ps.  cxlviii.  13)  the  endorse 
ment  likewise  points  onwards.  The  earth  stands  first,  because 
the  narrative  now  about  to  follow  and  continuing  the  former 
one,  confines  itself  thereto  as  the  dwelling-place  of  man  and 
the  scene  of  the  history  which  revolves  about  him.  And 
that  we  may  even  beforehand  gain  an  impression  of  the 
harmony  between  the  two  narratives,  we  have  here  already 
in  the  prelude  the  twofold  name  of  God,  DTI^K  mm,  which 
predominates  from  this  passage  onwards  throughout  chs.  ii. 
and  iii.  It  is  only  in  the  mouth  of  the  serpent  and  of  the 
woman  that  God  is  called  merely  Dsn^s,  the  narrative  as  such 
everywhere  (twenty  times)  speaking  of  Him  as  DTlta  mm.  Is 
it  the  redactor  who  effects  in  this  manner  the  transition  from 
&rh$,  i.-ii.  3,  to  mm,  ch.  iv.,  by  DTita  mm,  or  is  it  the  Jahvist 
himself  who  has  impressed  upon  the  .momentous  history  of 
Paradise  the  special  stamp  of  this  twofold  name  ?  Looking 
at  the  Jahvistic  verse,  Ex.  ix.  30,  the  latter  also  must  be 
esteemed  possible.  It  is  the  single  passage  in  the  Hexateuch 
in  which  DT&K  mm  occurs  besides  Gen.  ii.  and  iii.,  and  there 
are  but  four  more  passages  in  the  entire  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  in  which  DTita  mm  is  repeated  to  as  many  as  three 

1  According  to  Yatke's  residuary  Introduction,  296,  J  is  the  author  of  the 
transposition,  for  the  succession  of  documentary  sources  is  in  his  opinion  as 
follows  :  E  QJLFf  D.  He  adheres  to  the  completion  hypothesis,  and  his  Intro 
duction  in  its  present  form,  in  which  he  would  certainly  never  have  published 
it  himself,  is  behind  the  march  of  progress,  but  calculated  to  put  a  check 
upon  it. 


GENESIS  II.  4.  113 

times,  viz.  1  Chron.  xvii.  16  sq.  (twice),  2  Chron.  vi.  41  sq. 
(three  times),  2  Sam.  vii.  22,  25  (twice),  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  (once 
D'nta  'n,  once  rn&Qtf  DTi^H  'n) — the  accumulation  here  being  un 
exampled,  and  hence  designed  to  serve  certain  unusual  purposes. 
We  have  already  spoken  of  the  Divine  name  B^N,  i.  1  ;  God 
is  so  called  as  the  summary  of  all  that  commands  reverence, 
as  absolute  majesty  and  power.  The  name  designates  Him, 
not  as  subject,  but  as  object ;  moreover  the  plural  brings  into 
the  foreground  rather  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  substance 
than  the  unity  of  the  Divine  personality.  This  applies  both 
to  D^nbtf  without  an  article,  which,  when  used  of  the  true  God, 
is  equivalent  to  a  proper  name,  and  to  DTPXn^  in  which  the 
article  lays  stress,  not  on  the  personality,  but  on  the  uniqueness 
of  God.  In  the  name  nirv  on  the  other  hand,  which  is  formed 
from  the  Kal  of  the  verb  mn,1  and  was,  according  to  ancient 
tradition  in  Theodoret  and  Epiphanius,  pronounced  'la/Be,  i.e. 
rnrr  or  njiV  (for  ^Ald  is  ^,  and  'law,  in*1),2  the  idea  of  personality 
is  more  impressed,  if  only  because  this  name  was  originally  a 
proper  name,  while  DTibs  on  the  contrary  only  became  a 
proper  name  from  D*r6tfn.  According  to  its  meaning,  mrp  is, 
God  as  the  absolute  Being,  i.e.  the  Being  unlimited  by  time, 
the  super-temporal,  or,  since  the  idea  of  the  verb  run  (irn)  is 
not  so  much  Being  at  rest  as  Being  in  movement  or  self- 
manifesting,  as  He  who  exists  and  lives  in  an  absolute  manner, 
i.e.  who  is  perpetually  positing  and  manifesting  Himself,  whose 
Being  coming  into  appearance  is  the  supporting  foundation, 
and  essential  content  of  the  universe  and  its  history,  and 
especially  of  the  history  of  redemption.  His  own  declaration, 
it™,3  Ex.  iii.  14,  which  makes  this  name  of  God 


1  See  my  treatise,  "  Die  neue  Mode  der  Herleitung  des  Gottesnamens  niiT," 
in  the  Luth.  Zeitschrift,  1877,  pp.  593-599. 

2  See  the  letters  of  Franz  Dietrich  published  by  me  in  Stade's  Zeitschrift, 
1883,  on  the  pronunciation  of  the  Tetragrammaton. 

3  Compare  the  diagram  of  explanations  of  the  flTlS  "1E?K  nTJK  in  Griin- 
baum's  article  "On  the  Shem  hammephorash,"  DMZ.  xxxix.  562-566,  none  of 
which  hits  the  centre  of  the  meaning;  nor  is  it  correct  that  EHlQDn  DB> 
means  nomen  separatum  =  secretum  (arcanum}.  If  it  meant  this  it  would 

II 


114  GENESIS  II.  5. 

the  sign-manual  of  the  period  of  the  Mosaic  deliverance,  adds 
to  the  notion  of  absolute  Being  (ceviternitas)  according  to  the 
syntactic  Schema,  Ex.  xxxiii.  19,  2  Kings  viii.  1,  Ezek. 
xii.  25,  that  of  absolute  freedom  (aseitas),  and  gives  to  that 
which  is  in  itself  a  personal  name  a  still  stronger  personal 
stamp  :  God  is  the  absolutely  self  -  determining  ego,  ever 
equal  to  Himself.  Such  is  the  appellation  of  the  God  who 
unalterably  and  inobstructably  accomplishes  what  He  has 
determined  historically  to  be,  the  God  who  fashions  and 
pervades  history  by  freely  working  according  to  His  own 
counsel.1  "While  D^r6s  is  the  more  especially  appropriate 
name  of  the  Creator,  mrp  designates  more  particularly  the  God 
of  history,  and  indeed  of  the  history  of  redemption,  hence  God 
the  Eedeemer.  The  combination  of  the  two  names  denotes, 
according  to  Ps.  c.  3,  the  oneness  of  the  supermundane  God 
and  the  God  of  history,  the  oneness  of  God  the  Creator  and 
the  God  of  Israel,  or  the  God  of  positive  revelation. 

The  Creation  of  Man,  and  the  Nature  of  his 
Surroundings,  ii.  5  sqq. 

The  so-called  Jahveh-Elohim  document  is  divided  into  two 
parts  :  the  History  of  the  Creation  of  Man,  ii.  5  sqq.,  and  the 
History  of  the  Fall,  ch.  iii.  Part  i.  goes  back  into  the  process  of 
creation,  but  only  so  far  as  its  occurrences  had  man  for  their 
centre  and  object,  and  formed  the  foundation  of  the  eventful 
commencement  of  human  history.  This  diversity  of  tendency 
must  be  considered,  that  the  two  accounts  may  not  be  involved 
in  unnecessary  contradiction.  La  Peyrere,  in  his  Preadamitce, 
1655,  brought  forward  the  daring  view,  that  ch.  i.  related 
the  origin  of  natural  and  heathen  mankind,  and  ch.  ii.  that  of 


be  written  &JH£1)Dn  DK>-  KHIDOH  Dt^  means  nomen  explicitum,  the  name  pro 
nounced  as  it  is  written,  but  not  as  it  ought  to  be  spoken  (the  opposite  of, 
the  D^US  standing  in  its  place,  and  first  of  them  *01fcO. 

1  A  survey  of  present  views  concerning  the  origin  and  meaning  of  the 
name  Jahveh,  with  a  careful  discussion  of  their  several  degrees  of  probability,  is 
given  by  S.  R.  Driver  in  the  Oxford  Studio,  BiUica,  1885. 


GENESIS  II.  5.  115 

Jewish  mankind,  i.e.  of  man  as  the  subject  of  the  history  of 
redemption.1  But  this  is  self-deception  in  the  interest  of 
polygenesis.  The  scriptural  cosmogony  begins  with  one  man, 
and  one  race  of  mankind  developed  from  him.  The  difference 
between  the  two  accounts  is,  that  ch.  i.  relates  the  origin 
of  the  human  race,  and  ch.  ii.  that  of  the  first  man  and  of 
the  first  human  pair;  and  that  in  the  former  man  appears  as 
the  object  and  end  of  the  line  of  creation,  in  the  latter  as  the 
centre  of  the  circle  of  creation. 

There  are  expositors  (Knobel,  Hoelem.  Kohler)  who  make 
the  apodosis  to  45  begin  with  !W"$O1,  ver.  5  ;  but  this  is 
opposed  by  the  division  of  the  verse,  and  is  even,  if  syntac 
tically  possible  (though  without  a  preceding  NTI,  xxii.  1,  it  is 
hardly  so),  yet  with  the  form  DIE,  seq.  impf.,  very  improbable. 
If  45  really  belonged  to  what  follows,  we  should  have,  with 
Hofmann,  Bunsen,  Schrader,  Dillmann,  to  take  lyi,  ver.  7,  as 
apodosis  ;  and  this  would  correspond  with  the  fact  that  the 
narrative  has  in  view  the  creation  of  man  and  the  history 
which  starts  from  it.  But  vv.  5,  6  would  then  be  a  lon<T 

O 

parenthesis,  and  we  should  get  a  clumsy  interpolated  period 
such  as  we  rejected  at  i.  1-3,  because  it  was  not  to  be  expected 
in  this  simple  narrative  style.  To  this  must  be  added  that 
45  has,  according  to  Num.  iii.  1,  if  not  according  to  v.  1,  the 
presumption  of  belonging  to  4a  in  its  favour.  Hence  we  regard 
vv.  5  and  6  as  independent  sentences  related  by  way  of  prepara 
tion  for  ver.  7,  which  opens  with  "tt"l  as  an  expression  of  the  chief 
fact.  The  second  account  begins,  like  e.g.  the  history  of  Isaac's 
marriage,  xxiv.  1,  with  a  double  sentence  descriptive  of  the 
circumstances.  And  no  plant  of  the  field  was  yd  upon  the  earth, 
and  no  hcrl  of  the  field  had  as  yet  sprung  up :  for  Jahveh  Elohim 
had  not  yet  caused  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth,  and  men  there  were 
not  to  till  the  ground.  If  DIE  comes  from  T)D="iDJ  with  the 
termination  cm  (6m,  Euth  iii.  14),  it  would  mean  expectation, 
which  most  easily  explains  the  construction  with  an  impf. 

1  See  on  Peyrere,  S.  J.  Curtis,  "Sketches  of  Pentateuch  Criticism,"  in  the 
North -American  Bibliotheca  sacra  for  1884. 


1  1  6  GENESIS  II.  5. 

following  (exspectandum  erat  ut  fieref) ;  but  supposing  the  stem- 
word  to  be  D")B  (  =  ^j),  which  indeed  no  Semitic  dialect 
presents  with  such  a  first  letter,  it  would  signify  originally 
"  a  cutting  off,"  then  remoteness  from  existence  (compare  the 
nouns  D3K,  73,  \y\  become  particles).  It  is  combined  in  the 
adverbial  sense  nondum,  as  TK  is  in  that  of  turn  with  the 
second  tense,  in  historical  connection  in  the  imperfect  mean 
ing  (nondum  existebat],  xix.  4,  xxiv.  45,  and  out  of  historical 
connection  in  the  present  meaning,  Ex.  ix.  30,  x.  7  (nondum 
timetis,  an  nondum  scis)  ;  a  perfect  following  it  has  a  plu 
perfect  meaning,  xxiv.  15  (nondum  desieraf),  1  Sam.  iii.  7 
(nondum  noverat).  The  almost  tautological  synonymous 
parallelism  of  the  two  sentences,  5 a,  has  its  equal  in  the 
Elohistic  narrative,  i.  28a ;  other  examples  in  historical  prose 
are  xxi.  1 ;  Ex.  iii.  15,  xix.  3.  The  repeated  ni&n  denotes  the 
broad  and  open  plain  (comp.  rwn  JVn,  ii.  19  sq.,  iii.  1,  with 
psn  rvn  in  ch.  i.),  in  distinction  from  the  enclosed  dwelling 
of  man.  There  was  a  time,  says  the  narrator,  when  there  were 
no  shrubs  (T^,  properly  that  which  sprouts,  from  rvt?,  to  sprout, 
Assyr.  sdhul),no  herbs  (2OT,  from  zwy,  Assyr.  esSbu,  to  shoot  up,  to 
grow),  not  to  mention  trees, — a  time  when  the  world  of  plants 
had  not  yet  appeared.  And  why  not  ?  The  two  conditions 
of  their  appearing  were  not  yet  effected.  As  yet  there  was  no 
rain  for  the  fructification  of  the  germs  creatively  deposited  in 
the  earth ;  and  as  yet  man,  to  whose  care  the  vegetable  world 
is  for  the  most  part  relegated,  was  still  absent.  The  construc 
tion  of  the  double  sentence,  5&,  is  like  Isa.  xxxvii.  35,  with  the 
subject  emphatically  preceding  the  1^,  as  it  does  both  there 
and  Num.  xx.  5,  where  we  must  translate  :  water  there  is  not  ; 
and  here :  men  there  were  not,  for  £K  (constr.  P«)  denotes  in 
all  tenses  non-existence.  The  two  "  nots "  are  in  meaning 
equivalent  to  "not  yet,"  for  in  post-biblical  speech  &6  jyiJJ 
means  nondum,  but  in  biblical  Hebrew  tib  liy,  Job  xxiv.  20, 

1  In  Arabic  ^iJw  is  the  name  of  the  thorn  plant  of  the  desert  (Artemisia 

judaica?),   the  wood  of  which  is  the  principal  fuel   of  the  Bedouins.      See 
"Wetzstein  in  the  Reports  of  the  Anthropological  Society,  1882,  p.  465. 


GENESIS  U.  0,  7.  117 

and  ps  Tiy  liave  the  meaning  non  amplius,  and  $h  alone  stands 
also  for  nonclum,  Job  xxii.  16  ;  Hag.  i.  2. 

The  first  condition  effected,  ver.  6  :  And  a  mist  went  up 
from  the  earth,  and  watered  the  whole  face  of  the  ground. 
In  virtue  of  the  historical  connection  n!?j£  has  also  a  past 
meaning ;  it  here  denotes,  in  distinction  from  ?JW,  a  reiterated 
event  (with  a  perfect  following,  like  vi.  4,  xxxi.  8  ;  comp. 
on  ii.  10).  "IN  (from  *nK,  jf>  with  the  fundamental  idea 
of  compressing,  massing,  making  heavy)  means  condensed 
vapour,  as  does  also  the  Arab,  ijad,  atmosphere,  a  synonym  of 
haivd,  atmosphere  ;  the  mist  developed  from  the  moist  air  filled 
with  watery  vapour  and  which  trickles  down  as  rain,  Job 
xxxvi.  27,  and  here  descends  as  dew,  is  thus  called.  From 
this  point  onwards  the  deposition  of  mist  rendered  the  appear 
ance  of  the  plant-world  possible.  The  LXX.  translates  Trrjytj, 
on  which  account  Diestel  regards  ?y  as  original ;  but  "is  is  far 
more  appropriate,  and  rf?y  only  occurs  once,  Num.  xxi.  17,  of 
the  water-flow  of  a  well.  Now  follows  the  first  act  in  effecting 
the  realization  of  the  second  preliminary  condition :  man  comes 
into  existence  as  a  formation  from  the  earth,  7« :  And  Jahveh 
Elohim  formed  man  out  of  the  dust  of  the  ground.  Thus  the 
formation  of  man  does  not  take  place  till  the  necessary  measure 
has  been  taken  for  the  springing  up  of  the  plant-world,  that  is 
to  say,  of  what  is  appointed  to  form  his  nearest  surrounding 
and  to  enter  into  closest  relation  to  him,  for  the  interest  of  the 
narrator  adheres  to  man  and  his  territory.  While  according 
to  ch.  i.  the  creation  of  the  land  animals  culminates  in  man, 
and  that  in  such  wise  that  he,  as  made  in  the  image  of  God,  is 
at  the  same  time  of  higher  nature  and  therefore  no  production 
of  the  earth,  we  here  learn  further  particulars  of  the  peculiar 
mode  of  his  origin.  It  is  not  said  :  God  formed  the  dust  into 
a  man,  but  He  formed  the  man  pulverem  de  humo,  i.e.  so  that 
this  was  the  material  of  which  he  consisted  ;  "iBV  is  the  pre 
dicative  accusative  of  the  material,  as  in  Ex.  xxxviii.  3, 
xxv.  39  (Ges.  §  139.  2).  The  Latins  translate,^  limo  terra, 
and  the  Arabs  call  the  material  from  which  man  was  formed 


118  GENESIS  II.  7. 


-vL  —  and  rightly  so,  for  man  was  formed  of  moistened  dust. 
Syinm.  and  Theod.  translate  :  KOI  eVXacre  /cvpios  o  Oeo?  rov 
d&dfju  ^ovv  diro  rfjs  7779  dSa/jid,  to  give  us  to  understand  that 
man  is  called  D"IN  as  being  formed  of  ncns  ;  but  at  the  same 
time,  if  the  reading  diro  TT)S  7779  dSajjud  is  correct,  from  the 
same  view  which  Josephus  expresses,  Ant.  i.  1.  2,  that  Adam 
meant  Trvppos,  because  formed  diro  T?J$  Trvppds  7%  (frvpaOeio-rjs, 
for  this  was  virgin  and  genuine  earth.  He  means  the 
wonderfully  fruitful  and  aromatic  red  earth,  ard  hamrd,  of  the 
slopes  of  the  Hauran  chain  of  mountains,  which  is  esteemed 
of  marvellously  strong  and  healing  power,  and  which  is  believed 
to  be  self  -  rejuvenescent.  Theodoret  also  says  (Qucest.  60) 
that  dSafjiOd  (NfiDnx,  Aram.  =  n9"[^?)  is  so  named  from  its 
red  colour.  But  whether  noiN  is  to  be  referred  to  the 
fundamental  notion  of  a  flat  covering,  as  the  Arabic,  which 

transfers    the    name    of    the    earthy  -covering    to    the    skin- 

-  -£ 
covering  (aUj],  cutis),  makes  probable,  or,  as  is  inferred  from 

the  Assyrian,  to  the  fundamental  notion  of  tilling  (Fr. 
Delitzscb,  Hebrew  Language,  p.  58  sq.),  it  is  in  no  case  derived 
from  a  word  expressing  colour.  The  appellation  of  man  as 
"  the  red  "  would  be  just  as  superficial  as  that  of  "  the  beautiful 
being  "  (Ludolf  Kn.  Schr.).  The  derivation  of  the  name  from 
the  Ethiopic  adma,  to  be  pleasant,  agreeable,  charming,  may  be 
looked  upon  as  done  away  with  by  Dillmann.  The  meaning 
"  begotten,  created,"  after  the  Assyr.  admu,  child,  especially  the 
young  of  a  bird,  synonymous  with  liddnu  (Fr.  Delitzsch  in 
Hebrew  Language,  ibid.,  and  Prolegom.  pp.  103-105),  would  be 
more  judicious  if  only  a  trace  of  this  D"iK  =  ro:i  could  be  shown 
in  Hebrew  !  In  the  Babylonian  myth  in  Berosus,  man  arose 
from  a  mingling  of  the  drops  of  blood  running  from  the  decapi 
tated  head  of  Bel  with  earth  ;  thus  making  man  the  incorporated 
blood  of  the  god  (Assyr.  ddmu';  Aram.  CH^,  blood).  The  scriptural 
account  however  combines  DTK  with  n»i«,  and  thus  designates 
man  as  777761/779  according  to  the  earthly  part  of  his  nature. 
Schrader  (Jenaische  LZ.  1875,  No.  13)  calls  this  derivation 
"  linguistically  absurd  ;  "  and  this  is  true,  for  there  is  no  second 


GENESIS  II.  7.  119 


denominative  thus  formed,  all  such  names  as  Tn«3  5)0^  ;nj 
being  verbals.  We  are  therefore  of  opinion  that  DIN  is  not  a 
denominative,  but  an  accessory  form  to  n»n&5,  as  in  Arabic 

'-S. 

besides  LcJ\,  +4\  also   occurs  as  the  name  of  the  skin.      Man 

is  called  "  earth,"  as  it  is  said  to  him,  iii.  1  9  :  lay,  i.e.  %oifc6$, 
thou  art.  The  creation  of  man,  as  of  the  whole  present  crea 
tion,  was  planned  in  view  of  the  foreseen  fall,  and  therefore  so 
to  speak  in  an  infralapsarian  manner.  His  origin  from  dust 
makes  his  return  thereto  possible  ;  man  bears  in  his  primaeval 
condition  the  possibility  of  death.  The  second  act  now  follows  : 
the  material  form,  only  at  first  anticipatively  called  DIN,  is 
animated,  7&  .'  And  He  breathed  into  his  nostrils  breath  of  life  ; 
and  so  man  became  a  living  soul.  The  two  acts,  though  near 
to  each  other,  were  not  simultaneous.  The  body  of  man  was 
first  formed  of  the  moist  dust  of  the  ground  by  divine  TrXaert?, 
and  then  man  became  an  animated  being  through  divine 
epirvevo-is.  na»5,  impf.  Kal,  from  nSJ  —  e^vaav,  John  xx.  22. 
The  genitival  combination  Q\sn  nBKfo  with  relation  to  the 
adjectival  njn  ^33,  supposes  an  important  difference  of  ideas. 
For  in  irn  VZ)  (four  times  in  ch.  i.),  rpn  is  an  adjective.  If 
sometimes  n^nn  ^£J  is  met  with  (i.  21,  ix.  10;  Lev.  xi.  10, 
46),  this  must,  according  to  Ges.  §  111.  '2a,  be  syntactically 
condemned  ;  and  when  rpn  E>B3  is  construed  as  masculine  (e.g. 
ii.  19),  this  is  always  done  only  ad  sensum.  That  rpn  is  an 
adjective  is  shown  by  the  difference  of  this  rpn  ^23  from 
D^n  DEttO  and  D^n  nn,  for  which  n»n  n»gtt  is  nowhere  said. 
n»nn  nn,  Trvev^a  £or/5?,  is  found  only  a  few  times  in  Ezekiel, 
i.  20  sq.,  x.  17,  but  in  such  wise  that  rpnn  is  a  subst.  (comp. 
1  Cor.  xv.  45  with  Eev.  xvi.  3,  where  the  text  is  uncertain, 
•^Tw^r]  &cra  however  deserving  the  preference  to  ^rvxv  ?WT)S). 
The  breath,  which  creatively  went  forth  from  God  and  entered 
into  man,  becoming  the  principle  of  his  physical  life,  manifested 
in  breathing  and  of  his  life  in  general,  is  called  D"n  n»CW, 
TrvevfjLd  f&)^?,  that  created  spirit  of  which  the  soul  is  the  mani 
festation  conformable  to  corporeity.  Animals  too  are,  accord- 


120  GENESIS  II.  8. 

ing  to  ii.  19,  though  according  to  i.  24  sq.  not  directly, 
formations  by  God,  and  the  animal  soul  also  is  the  effect  of 
the  D"n  nn  which  entered  into  the  animal  world,  nn  and  t?a3 
everywhere  bear  to  each  other  the  relation  of  the  primary  and 
secondary  principles  of  life  ;  but  the  spirit  and  soul  of  man 
have  this  advantage  over  the  animal  soul,  that  they  are  not 
only  the  individuation  of  the  entire  natural  life,  but  a  gift 
bestowed  on  man  expressly  and  directly  by  the  personal  God. 
The  consciousness  of  this  exaltation  above  the  beast  is  innate 
in  man.  Man  is  as  to  his  physical  nature  the  most  perfect 
and  highly  developed  of  animals ;  nor  is  his  inner  nature,  his 
spiritual  soul,  categorically  different  from  the  animal  inner 
nature,  which  equally  consists  of  nn  and  t?ai — The  difference 
however  is  this,  that  the  spirit-soul  of  man  is  self-conscious, 
and  capable  of  infinite  development,  because  it  is  God- 
descended  in  another  and  a  higher  manner.  If  it  is  asked 
whether  ii.  V  is  in  favour  of  trichotomy  or  dichotomy,  the 
question  is  not,  as  I  have  shown  in  my  Biblisclien  Psychologic, 
2nded.  1861,  correctly  formulated,  the  Scripture  view  of  man 
being  trichotomous  (Ps.  xvi.  9  ;  1  Thess.  v.  23),  and  yet 
dichotomous.  It  distinguishes  in  man  spirit  (heart,  i/ous),  soul 
and  body;  but  spirit  and  soul  belong  to  each  other  o,s  principium 
and  principiatum ;  the  former  is  irvev^a  £0*779,  principium 
principians,  the  latter  tyv%ij  ^ooaa,  principium  principiatum  ; 
the  former  has  its  life  immediately  from  God,  the  latter  medi 
ately  from  the  spirit.  His  having  a  soul  is  the  consequence 
of  his  having  a  spirit,  and  the  latter  is  a  mysteriously  creative 
act  of  God,  exclusively  appropriated  to  the  creation  of  man, 
repeated  whenever  a  man  comes  into  existence,  and  specifically 
distinguishing  him  from  all  other  beings  who  are  also  rrn  6?aj. 
The  plantation  of  Paradise  and  the  placing  of  man  therein, 
ver.  8  :  And  Jahveh  Elohim  planted  a  garden  in  Eden  east 
ward  ;  and  placed  therein  the  man  whom  He  had  formed.  Both 
events  are  first  but  summarily  related,  to  form  as  it  were  the 
theme  of  what  follows.  The  garden  was  of  God's  planting ; 
by  its  beauty  it  gave  the  impression  of  being  more  directly 


GENESIS  II.  8.  121 

of  Divine  origin  than  all  the  earth  and  vegetable  kingdom 
besides.  The  garden  was  in  }"$,  which  means  delight,  and 
here  land  of  delight ;  it  was  then,  as  thus  indicated,  the  centre 
of  the  land  of  delight,  the  ne  plies  ultra  of  delightf illness. 
This  primaeval  seat  of  man  is  elsewhere  called  !*$  |3,  ver.  15, 
iii.  23  sq.,  Joel  ii.  3,  or  the  garden  of  God,  DTita  |3,  Ezek. 
xxxi.  8  ;  DTitan  p,  Ezek.  xxxi.  9  ;  'n  p,  xiii.  10  ;  Isa.  li.  3  ; 
sometimes  H#,  the  name  of  the  district  in  which  it  was 
situated  is  transferred  to  itself,  Ezek.  xxviii.  13,  xxxi.  9  ; 
Isa.  li.  3.  The  name  py,  though  of  appellative  signification,1 
is  meant  to  denote  a  definite  country ;  but  the  Assyrian  Eden, 
Isa.  xxxvii.  12,  Ezek.  xxvii.  23,  and  the  Ccelesyrian  Amos 
i.  5,  are  written  H??>  with  two  Segols.  Perhaps  the  meaning 
of  the  two  names  is  the  same ;  at  least  the  Ccelesyrian  Eden 
is  similarly  explained,  for  n^"^?,  Amos  i.  5,  is  certainly  the 
same  place  as  Hapd&eia-os,  Ptol.  v.  15.  20.  Paradisus,  Plin. 
v.  19,  near  to  Eibla  (different  from  the  village  Bet  'Genii,  near 
the  heights  of  Bettagene  on  the  eastern  declivity  of  Hermon), 
the  valley  between  Libanus  and  Antilibanus,  is  in  the  Moslem 
Sunna  reckoned  as  one  of  the  four  earthly  Paradises,  p  in 
this  passage  is  translated  Trapd&eiacx;  by  LXX.  Sam.  Syr. 
Jerome ;  it  is  the  DY!^  occurring  in  the  Song  of  Solomon  and 
Ecclesiastes,  which,  since  Spiegel,  is  identified  in  my  Mono 
graph  on  the  Song  of  Solomon,  1857,  with  the  Zend,  pam- 
daSza  (from  pairi  =  7repl,  and  dez,  heap,  V  diz,  to  heap,  from 
which  also  comes  dista,  hearth),  in  the  3rd  and  5th  Eargard  of 
the  Vendidad  (see  Justi,  Handbucli  der  Zendspraclic,  p.  ISO).2 
The  word  there  indeed  means  only  "  a  heaping  round,"  and 
not  a  walled  garden ;  but  where  else  than  in  Persia,  if  not 
Babylonia  (see  Er.  Delitzsch,  Paradies,  pp.  95-97),  should 
the  root-word  of  the  Armenian  pardez,  Arab,  firdam,  Heb. 


1  Compare,   not  the   Arab.     ..tXc,  mansio   (as   Beidhawi  on  Sur.   xiii.    23 

explains    ^.c'jj!    ^,Jo^),     but     .,JL£.»    mollities.     On   the   first  explanation, 
eomp.  DMZ.  xxxix.  580  sq. 

2  See  "VVetzstein  in  2nd  ed.  of  my  Jesaia,  p.  G89  sq. 


122  GENESIS  II.  9. 


DT1?,  be  sought  for  ?  It  is  not  the  idea  of  fencing,  but  of 
shading  from  above,  which  is  connected  with  the  stem-word 
of  p,  so  that  13  means  a  place  roofed  over  by  foliage,  as  the 
Aram.  pi33  means  the  Baldachino  (Fleischer  on  Levy's  Chald. 
WB.\.  435).  God  planted  this  garden  in  a  delightful  country, 
B7P.P,  not  :  from  ancient  times  (Trgg.  Syr.  Aq.  Symm.  Theod. 
Jer.),  but  from  the  east  (i.e.  the  quarter  of  heaven  being 
regarded  as  the  fixed  point  whence  the  eye  looks  forth  to 
determine  the  locality  of  the  place1)  :  eastwards,  viz.  east  of  the 
Palestinian  standpoint  of  the  narrator.  In  the  Qucestiones  of 
Jerome  is  found  besides  D1pE>,  the  reading  mtED  ;  in  many  texts 
the  word  is  wanting  entirely  (see  Lagarde,  Genesis,  p.  23  sq.). 
In  this  eastwardly  situated  garden  God  placed  the  man 
whom  He  had  formed  ;  DB>,  not  nfct£  for  vv.  ponendi  are  con 
strued  in  Hebrew  as  in  Latin  (Jer.  in  quo  posuit). 

Particulars  concerning  the  planting  of  Paradise  follow, 
ver.  9  :  And  Jahvch  Elohirn  made  to  spring  out  of  the  earth 
every  kind  of  tree  pleasant  to  the  sight,  and  good  for  food  ;  and 
the  tree  of  life  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  and  the  tree  of  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  The  article  of  fijnn  shows  that 
jni  nto  (the  whole  idea  of  these  contrasts  will  be  discussed 
subsequently)  is  the  accusative  object  (njnn  is  a  substantivized 
infinitive  like  rn$n,  Num.  iv.  1  2)  ;  the  emphasis  falls  upon 
the  knowledge  in  this  accusative  connection  more  than  in  the 
genitive  (comp.  Jer.  xxii.  16).  The  nouns  n^")P  and  <?^p 
without  an  article,  but  supplied  with  ?,  are  also  used  infinitively 
(for  seeing,  for  eating  =  to  see,  to  eat),  and  are  of  really  the 
same  nature  as  the  nomina,  actionis  (similarly  formed  with  a 
preformative  D  in  the  Aramean  manner),  Deut.  x.  11  ;  Num. 
x.  2.  The  tree  of  life  is  distinguished,  as  standing  in  the 
midst  of  the  garden,  from  the  fruit  trees,  which  were  so 
pleasant  to  look  on,  and  which  excited  the  appetite.  The 
chief  emphasis  being  here  laid  upon  the  Divine  authorship, 
f»j?1  with  what  follows  is  to  be  regarded,  as  by  Jer.  Luth.  and 

1  See  Nagelsbacli's  2nd  Excursus  in  his  Anmerkungen  zur  Ilias,  Autenrieth's 
3rd  ed.  1864. 


GENESIS  II.  10.  123 

most  expositors,  as  dependent  on  £'•»*}.  It  is  however 
striking  that  the  tree  of  knowledge  is  mentioned  incidentally, 
and  that  it  is  questionable  whether  it  also  is  to  he  conceived 
of  as  standing  in  the  midst  of  the  garden  or  not.  Hence 
Budde  conjectures,  that  the  original  text  was  njnn  pj?  pn  "prai 
jni  31D,  without  D^nn  py.  This  conjecture  seems  confirmed 
by  the  circumstance,  that  the  woman  only  designates  this  one 
forbidden  tree  as  standing  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  iii.  2. 
From  these  and  other  indications,  especially  that,  according  to 
ii.  16  sq.,  the  eating  of  the  tree  of  life,  as  well  as  of  all  the 
other  trees  of  the  garden,  one  only  excepted,  would  have  been 
granted  to  man,  he  draws  the  conclusion,  that  the  history  of 
the  fall,  which  turns  upon  the  tree  of  knowledge,  is  a  specially 
Israelite  theologumen  of  the  Jahvistic  school,  and  that  the 
tree  of  life  was  afterwards  introduced  into  it  from  popular 
tradition  not  specially  Israelite  (comp.  Prov.  iii.  18,  xi.  30, 
xiii.  12,  xv.  4).  We  should  thus  have  here  an  attempt  to 
explain  the  origin  of  sin  in  the  form  of  a  myth,  which  was 
subsequently  embellished  with  an  alien  element.  The  main 
support  of  this  conjecture  lies  in  the  fact,  that  as  the  narrative 
reads,  the  partaking  of  the  tree  of  life  appears  to  be  freely 
conceded  to  man,  while  we  nevertheless  afterwards  learn, 
iii.  22  sq.,  that  it  was  reserved  as  a  reward  in  the  case  of 
their  standing  their  test.  But  this  is  in  appearance  only. 
The  state  of  the  case  is  as  follows  :  the  narrative  testifies 
indeed  to  the  presence  of  the  tree  of  life  from  the  beginning, 
but  nothing  is  said  to  men  concerning  it.  Only  one  tree,  the 
tree  of  knowledge,  is  put  in  the  foreground  for  their  notice  ; 
as  for  the  tree  of  life,  it  is  at  first  not  present  to  their  notice, 
and  is,  so  to  speak,  not  unmasked  till  after  the  fall. 

But  before  proceeding  to  the  history  of  the  fall,  the  nature  of 
Paradise  and  its  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  world  are  described, 
ver.  10  :  And  a  stream  went  forth  from  Eden  to  water  the 
garden;  and  thence  it  ivas  divided,  and  became  four  new  rivers. 
Jerome  rightly  translates  cgredicbatur,  LXX.  incorrectly  eWo- 
peverat, ;  the  writer  is  indeed  speaking  of  Paradise  as  a  thing 


124  GENESIS  II.  10. 

of  the  past,  and  the  temporal  sense  of  such  a  noun  sentence 
is  always  determined  by  the  connection  (e.g.  Obad.  ver.  11, 
where  fuisti  has  to  be  thought  of).  The  connection  here 
however  is  a  historical  one,  and  N>'*  "inji  therefore  equivalent 
to  NV1  rvn  injl,  like  Ex.  xiii.  21  sq. ;  Judg.  iv.  4  sq.;  2  Sam. 
ix.  11-13  ;  John  i.  11,  comp.  xviii.  16  (an  adverbial  sentence 
in  historical  connection).  Hence  too  T]^  must  also  be  taken 
in  a  past  sense,  dirimebat  se.1  The  stream  was  parted  D$£ 
from  the  garden  onwards,  i.e.  at  its  departure  from  it,  into 
four  D^'an.  According  as  the  movement  of  the  representation 
is  upwards  or  downwards,  does  i?s*i  mean  either  the  upmost, 
that  in  which  anything  culminates  (head,  chief  matter,  sum), 
or  the  foremost,  that  whence  anything  advancing  proceeds.2 
If  waters  are  spoken  of,  w$r\  may  mean  either  caput  fontis  or 
caput  fluvii.  j?yn  p'jn,  Arab,  ra's  el-ain,  is  the  name  given  to 
the  starting-point  of  a  spring,  whence  it  flows  onwards  as  a 
brook.  Many  localities  get  their  names  because  the  source  of 
some  river  begins  in  their  neighbourhood,  e.g.  the  famous 
Mesopotamian  town  Has  el-ain  (in  Steph.  Byz.  Resainct),  with 
the  remarkable  much  sung  of  four  sources  of  the  Chaboras 
(jJUO-  WG  can  hardly  understand  DWI  in  our  passage 
thus  of  py  ^fcO,  beginnings  of  rivers  ;  the  notion  would  then 
be,  that  the  stream  of  Paradise  flowed  on  subterraneously, 
and  broke  forth  farther  on  in  four  springs,  whence  proceeded 
four  other  rivers.  We  must  on  the  contrary  conceive  of  D^fcO 
as  D'iru  "wi,  Assyr.  res  ndri  (Fr.  Delitzsch,  Paradies,  p.  98). 
Arab,  ras  en-nahr  is  also  said  of  the  place  where  a  river 
branches  off  from  another,  as  e.g.  "  there  is  in  the  G-uta  of 
Damascus  an  important  river  called  Hdrus,  which  is  divided 
near  the  village  Hold  into  two  rivers,  the  northern  and  the 
southern  Hdrus;  the  place  where  the  two  rivers  go  forth 


1  The  Hebrew  impf.  denotes  in  historical  connection  continuance  in  the  past, 
e.g.  ii.  6,  xxix.   2,  but  frequently  also  only  what  happened  while  something 
else  was  happening,   e.g.  Ex.  xxxiii.  7  ;  1  Sam.  ii.  19.      In  the  latter  case  it 
answers  to  the  Latin  impf.  as  an  expression  of  the  synchronistic. 

2  So  by  Orelli,  Synonyma  der  Zeit  und  Ewigkeit,  p.  14. 


GENESIS  II.  11,  12.  125 


from  the  one  is  called  ^\  yi>*j,  capita  fluviorum"  (Wetz- 
stein).  Hence  the  meaning  here  is  that  the  stream,  which  rose 
in  Eden  and  flowed  through  Paradise,  became  at  its  exit  there 
from  rerpaK6(f)a\o^,  i.e.  separated  into  four  tributary  rivers. 
The  considerable  size  of  the  branch  may  be  hence  inferred  ; 

for  "if  from  the  ^=J^>  i.e.  from  what  remained  of  the  stream 
after  the  watering  of  Paradise,  four  others  could  be  formed, 
the  stream  must  have  been  very  large,  the  garden  of  great 
extent,  and  its  flora  wonderful  ;  for  we  have  to  imagine,  that 
the  IJirnx  nip^n  was  not  effected,  as  it  is  with  us  in  a  park, 
by  the  stream  simply  flowing  through  it,  but  by  its  being 
divided  into  many  rivulets,  and  thus  led  everywhere,  that  it 
might  from  time  to  time  overflow  the  whole  surface  of  the 

garden,  —  a  mode  of  irrigation  which  is  called  tof  (uJjk),  and 
is  found  in  its  greatest  perfection  in  the  Gutd"  (Wetzstein).  Two 
of  the  rivers  formed  from  the  fed  (overflow  of  water)  of  this 
stream  of  Paradise  are  unquestionably  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates; 
the  two  others  which  are  named  first  are  enigmatical.  Accord 
ing  to  the  traditional  view,  one  is  the  Nile,  the  other  an 
Indian  river.  The  first  branch  river,  vv.  11,  12:  The  name 
of  the  one  ivas  Pison  :  it  is  that  which  flows  around  the  whole 
land  of  Havilah,  ivhere  is  gold  ;  and  the  gold  of  that  land  is 
fine:  there  is  bdellium  and  the  "Sohain  stone.  We  translate 
not  :  the  name  of  the  one  is,  but  iuas,  like  iv.  19,  xxviii.  19, 
and  frequently  ;  the  narrator  is  describing  the  network  of 
waters  as  it  encircled  the  outer  world  from  Paradise.  But 
when  he  continues  snbn  Kin,  he  at  once  identifies  the  four 
rivers  with  such  as  still  existed.  No  such  name  of  a  river  as 
fiB^a  occurs  elsewhere,  hence  we  are  reduced  to  conjecture  and 
inference  from  the  description.  But  we  remark  beforehand, 
that  whatever  may  be  the  inference  drawn  from  names  and 
description,  such  a  state  of  things  as  will  answer  to  the 
picture  cannot  in  reality  be  pointed  out.  The  Tigris  and 
Euphrates  neither  rise  from  one  source  nor  branch  off  from 
one  parent  stream  ;  hence  a  common  starting-point  of  these 


126  GENESIS  II.  11,  12. 

two,  together  with  two  other  rivers,  is  utterly  undiscoverable, 
and  the  effort  to  point  out  the  four  rivers  in  four  that  are  in 
the  closest  possible  approximation  to  each  other  cannot  lead 
to  their  full  identification.  The  prevailing  view  of  ancient 
expositors  was  that  Pison  (Phison)  was  an  Indian  river. 
For  the  notion  of  the  Midrasli,  repeated  by  Saadia,  Kashi, 
and  also  by  the  Arabian  Samarit.,  that  Pison  was  the  Nile, 
because  JIB*Q  points  to  jn^a,  the  raw  material  in  the  manu 
facture  of  linen  (see  Arucli  under  |lB>a),  is  out  of  question. 
Josephus,  the  Fathers  and  the  Byzantines  see  in  Pison  the 
Ganges  (TdyjTj^),  and  in  Gihon  the  Nile,  in  opposition  to 
which  Kosmas  Indikopleustes  thinks  both  were  Indian  rivers, 
and  takes  T^v  for  the  alliterative  name  of  the  Ganges  and 
Qeiauiv  for  the  Indus,  which  is  beyond  comparison  more  prob 
able  (Dillm.  Eiehm  and  others),  since  this  chief  river  of 
Western  India  lay  far  more  within  the  ancient  horizon  than 
the  Ganges  did.  ji^a,  according  to  its  meaning,  corresponds  sur 
prisingly  with  the  Hyphasis,  with  which  Haneberg  compares  it. 
For  as  pt^D  comes  from  c^Q,  to  gallop,  to  rush  wildly,  so  is 
Hyphasis  equivalent  to  vipdsa,  the  unfettered  (Lassen,  Pentapo- 
tamia  Indica,  p.  9).  The  Hyphasis  however,  though  containing 
gold,  is  yet  far  less  renowned  as  a  gold  river  in  a  gold  country 
than  the  Indus  (Sindhu),  the  sacred  river  of  the  Vedas,  which 
unites  in  itself  the  five  rivers  of  the  five  -  river  country 
(Pendschab).  The  land  called  nj'inn  is  designated  by 
nn-jn  D^I^K  as  the  special  abode  of  gold,  and  indeed,  as  I2a 
adds,  of  excellent  gold.  The  Khateph-Pathach  of  irm  serves 
to  enhance  the  pronunciation  of  the  sibilant  like  IHD^  rnfe^ 
pHi",  ris>p.,  etc.,  on  the  feminine  Kin,  which  is  written  Nin^  as 
Keri  perpetuum,  and  which  we  here  meet  with  for  the  first 
time ;  see  the  Introd.  p.  42,  and  my  article  on  it  in  Luthardt's 
Zeitschrift,  1880,  p.  393  sqq.  The  description  suits  India, 
and  especially  the  river-watered  region  of  the  upper  Indus, 
the  renowned  gold  country.  Here  was  the  abode  of  the  gold- 
bringing  Indians  of  Herodotus,  of  the  Darda  (Darada)  of 
Megasthenes,  Arrian,  Strabo  and  Pliny,  of  the  ants  who  threw 


GENESIS  II.  11,  12.  127 

up  their  hills  iu  a  soil  abounding  in  gold.  The  abundance  of 
this  district  in  golden-sanded  rivers,  in  auriferous  earth,  in 
gold-diggings,  has  lately  been  brilliantly  confirmed.  Hence 
fi^OT  P.*?  seems  to  signify  the  land  of  sandy  soil  (from 
$>in,  the  sand  as  driven  about  by  the  wind),  and  especially  of 
golden  sand ;  the  Targ.  Jer.  i.  translates  it  by  •'pnjTi,  i.e.  India ; 
but  it  is  by  no  means  India  alone  that  is  so  called;  for  the 
latter  the  name  rn'n  (—  Hondu)  first  occurs  in  the  book  of 
Egther — Havilah  is  the  name  of  a  distant  south-eastern 
country  inhabited  by  Ishmael  and  Amalek,  with  which  an 
tiquity  combined  what  it  knew  of  Hither  India  (see  the  article 
"Eden"  in  Eiehm's  HIV.).  When  it  is  said  of  Pison  that  it 
compasses  the  whole  land  of  Havilah,  this  does  not  necessarily 
mean,  that  it  surrounds  it  like  an  island,  for  mo  is  also  said, 
Num.  xxi.  4,  Ps.  xxvi.  6,  of  a  crescent-shaped  movement. 
Arabia  was  in  ancient  times  esteemed  as  the  second  gold 
country,  but  the  combination  of  the  Pison  with  the  South 
Arabian  rivers  Bail  and  Bisa,  and  of  Havilah  with  Chaulan 
rjL-u),  attempted  by  Sprengen  in  his  Ancient  Geography  of 
Arabia  (1875),  is  devoid  of  all  probability,  npia  is  named  as 
a  second  product  of  Havilah.  The  word  occurs  again  only 
Xum.  xi.  7,  where  neither  the  name  of  a  precious  stone  (per 
haps  r6-Q  =vaidurja,  according  to  Garbe,  Die  indischcn  Minc- 
ralien,  1882,  the  stone  which  we  call  cat's-eye)  nor  of  a  pearl 
is  suitable,  ninn  is  undoubtedly  the  same  word  as  /3$e\\iov 
/3SeXXa,  bdellium  bdella  (see  Saalfeld's  Thesaurus  Italogrcecus, 
1884),  and  this  is  the  name  of  the  aromatic  gummy  resin  of 
certain  Amyrides  (balm-trees),  such  as  the  Indian  Amyris 
Commifera  Roxburgh  and  Amyris  Agallocha  (see  Geiger, 
Pharmac.  Botanik,  2nd  ed.  p.  1215  sq.).  The  Indian  root- 
word  (Lassen :  maddlaka,  musk-scented,  otherwise  Lagarde, 
Gesammdte  Abh.  p.  20,  No.  39)  is  not  yet  certain;  the  Arab. 
i_?U  is  a  word  dependent  on  a  name  of  Bdellium  commencing 
with  m  (comp.  Pliny,  xii.  35  :  gummi  alii  Irochon  appellant,  alii 
malacham,  alii  maldacon).  That  bdellium  was  chiefly  received 
from  India  is  testified  by  Dioskorides  and  Pliny  (Lassen, 


128  GENESIS  II.  13. 

Indisclie  AK.  i.  339).  It  is  also  the  chief  mine  of  the  vSoham 
stone,  for  Dnt?  means  according  to  LXX.  Ex.  xxviii.  20,  xxix., 
and  indeed  our  passage  also,  where  it  translates  o  \i6o<$  o 
Trpdcnvos,  and  according  to  the  Targums  Syr.  Saad.  the  beryl, 
according  to  LXX.  Job  xxviii.  1 6,  Aq.  Symm.  Theod.  the  onyx, 
according  to  Aq.  in  our  passage  the  sardonyx,  and  according  to 
LXX.  Ex.  xxv.  7,  xxxv.  9,  the  sardis,  both  which  stones  are 
of  the  same  species  as  the  onyx.  India  was  a  chief  treasury 
of  the  sardis,  onyx,  and  sardonyx  (see  v.  Veltheim,  Ueber  die 
Onyx-G-ebirge  des  Ctesias,  1797;  Lassen,  AK.  iii.  12),  and 
also  of  the  beryl,  of  which  Pliny  says :  India  eos  gignit  raro 
alibi  repertos.  Sprenger  explains  the  name  as  the  "  stone  of 
Socheim  "  (^j^^),  which  is  the  name  of  a  Jemanic  district, 
producing  a  specially  fine  onyx,  but  this  is  opposed  by  the 
article  in  Dn$n,  an(j  n  from  .  js  aiso  improbable.  Eodiger 
compares  with  the  name  the  Arab.  ^L,  pcdlidus ;  but  this  is 
no  word  of  colour,  but  means  thin  and  dried  up  by  heat. 
The  second  branch  river,  ver.  1 3  :  And  the  name  of  the  second 
river  was  Gihon :  that  is  it  which  compasses  the  whole  land  of 
OuL  The  name  jirPa,  from  ma  (n\a),  to  break  forth  (like  pT3, 
from  Tia  T3),  is  so  appropriate  a  name  for  a  river,  that  several 
are  so  called.  'Gaihun  is  the  Semitic  name  of  the  Oxus,  and 
'Gaihcln  of  the  Pyramus  in  Asia  Minor  and  Cilicia  (see  the 
explanation  of  both  names  in  the  Geographical  Lexicon 
Merdsid,  edited  by  Juynboll) ;  the  Araxes  is  also,  according 
to  Brugsch,  Persische  Reise,  i.  145  sq.,  called  Gehun  by  the 
Persians.  On  this  account  he  combines  the  Gihon  of  Paradise 
with  the  Araxes,  and  Phison  with  the  4>ao-£?  o  KoA/^o? 
(Herod,  iv.  37  sq.,  45),  whence,  as  also  Kurtz,  Bunsen,  and 
others  assume,  rfrin  would  be  Kolchis  and  eta  the  Asiatic 
Kocraaia.  This  view  obtains  a  support  in  the  Armenian 
tradition,  that  the  lovely  oasis  of  Ordubdd  beyond  'Gulfa  on 
the  left  bank  of  the  Aras  is  a  residue  of  the  garden  of  Eden. 
Other  transmitted  popular  opinions,  however,  place  Paradise 
elsewhere,  and  the  otherwise  interesting  combination  is 


GENESIS  II.  13.  129 

decidedly  opposed  by  the  circumstance,  that  though  Havilah  is 
an  extensible  geographical  notion,  without  fixed  outlines,  it 
must  not  be  sought  so  far  northwards  between  the  Black  and 

O 

Caspian  Seas.  There  is  far  more  weight  in  the  ancient  and 
powerfully  advocated  view,  that  pn^  is  the  name  of  the  Nile 
which  winds  about  tt«o  =  ^Ethiopia  and  especially  Meroe.  The 
objection,  that  the  Nile  is  in  the  Old  Testament  called  by  other 
names,  is  not  to  the  point.  For  such  names  as  "ifr,  "inj,  DJ, 
cannot  be  taken  into  consideration,  but  by  the  side  of  pm  only 
,and  solely  the  name  "NIW*  (=  2ipis,  according  to  Dionys.  Perieg. 
v.  223,  comp.  Pliny,  v.  9,  the  native  name  of  the  Upper  Nile).1 
This  very  name  is  however  rendered  TTJOOV  by  LXX.  Jer.  ii.  18, 
and  that  T^v  was  accessible  from  the  Nile  is  seen  from 
"Wisd.  xxiv.  27  (o  e/cffratv&v  &>?  <£w?  TraiSeiav,  &>?  TIJCDV  ev 
rjfjLepais  rpvyrjTOv),  where  GO?  <£<W9,  the  parallel  of  co?  T^cov, 
rests  on  a  mistaken  translation  of  T)&r:D  pte/?  or  "ti^?),  i.e.  is 
as  the  Nile.  Kewv  too,  registered  in  the  Coptic  Glossaries 
(Journal  Asiatique,  1846,  p.  493  sq.)  as  a  name  of  the  Nile, 
must  be  also  noticed  in  this  connection.  That  the  Nile  was 
so  called  in  its  upper  course  is  shown  by  the  Samar.  Targum, 
which  paraphrases  prpJi  :  *)1pDy,  which  flows  about  the  whole 
land  of  psiD  (for  which  the  Arabic  translation,  edited  by 


Kuenen,  gives  the  ^^sa^,  which  flows  about  the  land  of  Sudan). 


This  fppoy  needs  no  emendation,  as  M.  Heidenheim  (Samar. 
Genesis,  1884,  p.  76)  thinks;  the  Goschop,  which  surrounds  in 
a  spiral-shaped  course  the  Abyssinian  Kaffa  near  the  sources 
of  the  White  Nile  (baJir  el-dbjad),  and  is  therefore  taken  for 
one  of  the  original  sources  of  the  Nile  (see  Eitter,  Ein  Slick 
in  das  Nil-Quelland,  p.  31  sqq.),  is  intended.  In  the  A  vesta 
and  Bundehesch  also  one  river,  in  which  the  stream  of 
Paradise  descending  from  heaven  communicates  itself  to  the 
earth,  is  the  eastward  flowing  Indus  (Veh-rud),  the  other  the 

1  Brugsch  in  the  March  number  of  the  German  Review  regards  T)!TK>  as  Shi- 
Hur,  watercourse  of  the  Horus,  Hebraized,  and  thinks  that  the  eastern  frontier 
channel  of  Egypt  on  the  lower  course  of  the  Pelusian  arm  of  the  Nile  was  so  called. 

I 


130  GENESIS  II.  14. 

westward  flowing  Nile  (Ary-rot\  or  rather  the  Araxes  (^ 
Herod,  i.  202)  and  the  Nile  together.  For  the  Nile  was 
regarded  as  the  Ra'yha  (Vedic,  Rasa)  =  Araxes,  flowing  on 
subterraneously,  and  reappearing  in  Egypt.  According  to 
the  ancient  view,  the  Nile  comes  from  Asia  into  Africa,  the 
Persian  Gulf  and  the  Eed  Sea  being  considered  inland  seas. 
Inspiration  does  not  in  things  natural  raise  its  subject  above 
the  state  of  contemporary  information,  and  we  need  not  be 
astonished  to  find  that  the  picture  of  Paradise  exhibits 
some  of  the  incompleteness  of  the  most  ancient  state  of 
geographical  knowledge.  Every  Israelite  knew  indeed  that  the 
course  of  the  Nile  in  Egypt  was  from  south  to  north,  but 
antiquity  had  only  uncertain  conjectures  as  to  the  mouth  of 
the  river,  the  Egyptian  priests  knew  nothing  of  it,  and  in 
Egypt  Herodotus  could  not  learn  anything  even  tolerably 
probable  about  it.  Alexander  the  Great  was  during  his 
sojourn  in  India  the  subject  of  a  strange  delusion  concerning 
the  sources  of  the  Nile  (see  Geiger,  Alexandri  M.  Historiarum 
Scriptores,  p.  1 1 8  sq.);  Hekataos  too,  the  most  ancient  of  Grecian 
geographers,  launches  forth  into  fables  :  he  transposes  the 
origin  of  the  Nile  beyond  Africa,  and  does  this  with  a  refer 
ence  to  the  Argonauts,  whose  ship  the  old  Hellenic  tradition 
makes  to  come  back  into  the  Mediterranean  Sea  through 
the  Nile  (see  Ebers,  ^%.  und  die  Eb.  Moses,  p.  31  ;  comp. 
Hecatcei  Fragmenta,  ed.  Klausen,  pp.  119-121).  Similarly 
does  Pomponius  Mela  teach,  that  the  Nile  rises  in  the 
Antichthon  (the  land  lying  opposite  to  our  inhabited  part  of 
the  earth),  which  is  separated  from  us  by  the  sea,  flows  on  under 
the  bed  of  the  ocean,  and  at  last  arrives  at  Upper  Egypt.1 
The  third  branch  river,  14a:  And  the  name  of  the  third 
river  was  Hiddekel :  that  is  it  that  floweth  to  the  east  of 
Assyria.  The  Tigris,  named  again  in  the  Old  Testament  only 
Dan.  x.  4,  is  meant.  The  original  name  of  the  river  is 

1  See  the  article  of  Letronne  on  the  situation  of  Paradise  (especially  on  the 
subterranean  course  of  the  rivers)  in  Alex.  v.  Humboldt's  Kritischen  Unters. 
ilber  die  hist.  Entwickelung  der  geogr.  Kenntnisse  von  der  Neuen  Welt,  vol.  ii. , 
1852,  p.  82  sqq. 


GENESIS  II.  14.  131 

Accado-Sumerian,  i.e.  belonging  to  the  language  of  the  non- 
Semitic  original  inhabitants  of  North  and  South  Babylonia, 
viz.  Idigna  (see  on  the  meaning,  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Paradies, 
p.  1*71),  whence  the  Assyrian  Idiklat,  which  the  Hebrew  has 
so  assimilated  by  changing  the  weakly  aspirated  id  into  in 
that  the  name  sounds  like  in,  acutus,  and  ?P,  celer,  and 
also  like  P7Q,  aculeus.  In  the  Bundehesch  it  is  Dagrad,  in  the 
Pehlvi  rnn,  and  in  the  inscriptions  of  Darius  Tirjrd,  which, 
according  to  ancient  testimony,  means  both  the  arrow  and 
the  river  of  arrow-like  swiftness,  the  modern  Persian  too  ij 
(tir],  which  has  been  abbreviated  from  it,  and  is  just  such  an 
Eranian  popular  etymological  assimilation  of  a  foreign  word 
as  ^pnn  is  of  a  Hebrew  one,  combines  both  these  meanings. 
Other  forms  of  the  name,  e.g.  Aram.  npW,  Pehlv.  mn,  Arab. 


(in  ancient  Arabic  always  without  article  and  diptotori), 

x" 

are  on  the  other  hand  only  phonetic  changes,  with  which  no  idea 
or  image  is  combined,  as  in  those  others  which  denote  a  stream 
bursting  from  the  mountains  with  fearful  rapidity,  and  con 
tinually  altering  its  bed.  In  what  sense  however  is  it  said 
that  the  Hiddekel  flows  ll$K  npl?  ?  Most  moderns  (Knobel, 
Keil,  Schrader,  Dillmann,  Fr.  Delitzsch)  translate  :  in  front  of 
Assur,  for  from  the  West  Asiatic  standpoint  of  the  narrator 
the  three  chief  cities  of  the  Assyrian  empire  lay  east  of  the 
Tigris  ;  Nineveh  and  Kelach  close  to  its  left  bank,  and  Dur- 
Sarrukin  farther  landward  :  hence  the  Tigris  flowed  in  a 
westerly  direction  from  this  centre  of  the  Assyrian  world- 
power  and  formed  the  front  of  the  land  of  Assur,  which  lay 
to  the  east  of  it,  and  of  which  it  thus  formed  the  western 
boundary.  The  I^XX.,  which  here  and  at  iv.  16  translates 
noip  by  fcarevavrt,,  may  be  appealed  to  in  favour  of  this  trans 
lation.  But  it  is  very  improbable  that  ncnp  anywhere  means 
the  front  of  a  thing,  and  not  on  the  contrary  everywhere,  both 
here  and  iv.  16,  as  well  as  1  Sam.  xiii.  5,  Ezek.  xxxix.  11, 
that  which  is  the  front  to  any  one  going  eastward,  i.e.  the 
eastern  region.  The  proposed  rendering  of  Pressel  too  : 


132  GENESIS  II.  14. 

towards  the  eastern  side,  which  from  it  onwards  forms  Assyria, 
cannot  be  accepted ;  for  ntnp  does  not  mean  the  east  side  of 
a  thing,  but  the  eastward  direction  from  it.  The  Targums 
translate  :  eastwards  from  Assyria,  and  WK  riEHp  cannot,  even 
if  it  were  an  incompatible  statement,  be  otherwise  under 
stood.  In  fact,  the  Tigris  bisected  the  Assyrian  region,  so 
that  it  might  equally  be  said  of  it,  that  it  flowed  TI^K  HDlp  as 
11£W  nyTO.  The  oldest  capital  of  the  empire,  called  Assur, 
now  buried  under  the  hill  Kalah-Shergat,  lay  on  the  west 
bank  of  the  Tigris,  and  the  plain  of  ancient  Assyrian  ruins 
extends  from  the  western  bank  of  the  Tigris  to  the  neighbour 
hood  of  Chaboras ;  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  Assyrian  power 
in  general  lay  west  of  the  Tigris  towards  Mesopotamia,  and  if 
we  take  II^K  more  in  a  geographical  than  in  a  political  sense, 
so  as  to  make  it — as  Tucli  after  Huet  agrees — comprise  the 
aggregate  of  the  lands  of  the  Upper  Euphrates  and  Tigris  (as 
distinguished  from  Babylonia,  "ijttB>),  we  may  say  with  perfect 
accuracy  that  this  Assyria,  as  to  its  main  body,  has  the 
Tigris  on  the  east.  The  fourth  branch-river,  14&:  And  the 
fourth  river  ivas  the  Phrcith.  The  Euphrates  is  meant.  Its 
name,  like  that  of  the  Tigris,  is  radically  Accado-Sumerian, 
viz.  Pura,  i.e.  stream,  fully  written  Pura-nunu,  i.e.  great 
stream,  quite  corresponding  with  the  Hebrew  name  of  the 
Euphrates  in:  (Isa.  vii.  20;  Micah  vii.  12),  nn:n,  h*un  "injn. 
This  original  name  is  in  Semiticized  Babylonio  -  Assyrian 
Pur  at,  Heb.  rna  (Paradics,  p.  169  sq.),  as  derived  from 
ma :  the  fruit-bearing,  or,  according  to  Bechoroth  555,  the 

—    *j  — 

abounding  in  water,  Arab.  Furat,  as  from  c^i,  to  be  loose, 
soft,  mild  (especially  of  water),  for  the  Euphrates  with  relation 
to  the  Tigris  is,  as  Philo,  Qucest.  in  G-enesin,  says,  mitior  et 
salubrior  magisque  nutritorius.  The  Greek  form  of  the  name 
Ev^pdrr)?,  with  eu  sounding  like  commendation,  resembles 
the  ancient  Persian  Ufrdtu.  What  the  narrator  says  con 
cerning  this  fourth  river  is  strikingly  brief,  because  there  was 
no  need  of  any  more  particular  designation  of  what  was  so 


GENESIS  II.    14.  133 

universally  known,  and  the  memory  of  which  is  entwined  in 
the  name  of  all  E*1"}^  (=  Transeuphratenses).  The  western 
Euphrates  (Frat-sii)  rises  upon  the  Domlu-Dagh,  a  summit 
gorge  valley  of  the  Giaur  -  Dagh  near  Erzerum  ;  the  eastern 
Euphrates  (Murad)  upon  Tschir-Geduk,  one  of  the  ridges  of 
the  Ala-Dagh  in  the  Pashalic  of  Bajazid ;  but  the  Tigris 
northward  of  Diarbekr  in  the  highlands,  surrounded  on  three 
sides  by  the  course  of  the  Upper  Euphrates.  The  main 
sources  indeed  of  the  Tigris  are  only  2000  paces  distant  from 
the  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  but  the  notion  that  the  Tigris  and 
Euphrates  were  originally  only  ramifications  from  one  mother 
stream,  is  inconsistent  with  the  present  condition  of  the  land. 
We  shall  be  obliged  to  admit,  that  with  the  disappearance  of 
Paradise  all  certain  knowledge  of  the  four  rivers  lias  been  lost, 
and  that  the  narrator  is  reproducing  the  tradition  which  regarded 
the  Indus,  Nile,  Tigris,  and  Euphrates,  the  four  largest  and 
most  beneficial  streams  of  the  ancient  horizon,  as  hand-posts 
pointing  backwards  to  the  lost  Paradise,  as  disjecta  membra  of 
the  no  longer  existent  single  stream  of  Paradise.  A  traditional 
saying  of  Mohammed  is  of  similar  import  :  "  The  Saihdn  (i.e. 
the  2dpos  or  IFapo?)  and  the  'Gailidn  and  the  Nile  and  the 
Frat — these  all  belong  to  the  streams  of  Paradise  (Arnold's 
Chrcstom.  arabica,  p.  23) ;  and  a  like  idea  finds  expression  in 
certain  Puranas,  viz.  that  the  Ganga  which  fell  from  heaven 
upon  Mount  Meru  near  the  city  of  Brahma,  flows  through  the 
earth  in  four  arms. 

We  have  now  only  to  sketch  two  more  views  T  which  try 
to  make  the  picture  of  the  five  rivers  more  conceivable  and 
admissible,  so  far  as  this  may  be  done  by  bringing  the 
Pison  and  Gihon  into  close  connection  with  the  Tigris- 
Euphrates.  I.  Pressel  (in  the  art.  "  Paradies,"  in  the  supplement 

1  We  leave  out  of  consideration  Moritz  Engel's  Losung  dcr  Paradiesesfrage 
(Lpz.,  Otto  Schnlzf,  1885),  which  places  Paradise  in  the  oasis  el-Ruhbe  in  the 
midst  of  the  Harra  eastwards  of  Hauran,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  terrible 
volcanic  plateau  of  es-Safa,  and  also  designates  the  Hiddekel  and  Frat  as  rivers 
of  this  oasis  (  Wadi  d-Garz  and  es-vSdm).  See  Ryssel's  notice  of  the  book  in 
the  Palastina-Zeitschr.  viii.  (1885)  p.  233  sqq. 


134:  GENESIS  II.  14. 

to  Herzog's  Real-Encycl.  and  in  his  Gescli.  und  Gwgraphie  der 
Urzeit,  1883)  seeks  for  Paradise  in  the  midst  of  the  western 
shore  lands  of  the  Shatt  el-ardb,  i.e.  the  united  Tigris- 
Euphrates,  the  region  in  which  lies  Basra,  formerly  esteemed 
by  Moslems  as  one  of  the  four  earthly  Paradises.  The  Tigris 
and  Euphrates  join  near  the  town  of  Korna,  and  the  united 
stream  flows  a  distance  of  40  leagues  to  its  mouth.  Eight 
leagues  below  Korna  the  Kerkha  (Choaspes),  from  the  east, 
empties  itself  into  it,  and  twenty  leagues  farther  down  the 
Karun  (the  ^IK  of  the  book  of  Daniel,  the  Eulaos  of  the 
Greeks),  two  leagues  farther  on  the  now  quadruple  river 
begins  to  divide  into  two  branches,  in  which  it  finally  flows 
for  a  distance  of  ten  leagues  to  its  mouth  in  the  Persian  Gulf. 
Pressel  regards  the  Shatt  el-Arab  as  the  stream  out  of  Eden, 
and  the  Kerkha  =  Gihon,  the  Karun  =  Pison,  the  Tigris  and 
Euphrates  as  the  four  "  heads  "  of  the  giant-body  of  the  Shatt 
el- Arab.  But  this  hypothesis  is  built  upon  the  present 
condition  of  the  South  Babylonian  Delta,  and  the  junction  of 
the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  into  one  stream  before  their  reaching 
the  sea  did  not  as  yet  exist  in  ancient  times.  Nor  is  it 
consistent  with  the  language  of  the  description  in  hand.  The 
Tigris  and  Euphrates  uniting  into  one  stream,  and  the  Kerkha 
and  Karun  flowing  into  this  double  stream,  cannot  be  called 
D^fcO  of  that  one,  and  are  not  D'Wi  into  which  it  divides, 
since,  on  the  contrary,  it  arises  itself  from  the  union  of  the 
four  rivers.  II.  It  is  more  conceivable  that  Pison  and  Gihon 
should  have  branched  off  from  the  Euphrates,  and  it  is  accord 
ing  to  this  supposition  that  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  in  his  Wo  lag  das 
Paradies,  1881  (comp.  Sayce,  Alte  Denkmaler,  p.  24),  recon 
structs  the  picture  of  the  one  river  with  its  four  branches. 
According  to  8  a,  Paradise  lay  aipD ;  the  Jahvist  who  tells  us 
so  was  a  Judean,  or  at  least  a  Palestinian ;  but  eastwards 
from  Caanan,  and  separated  from  it  by  the  great  desert,  lies 
Babylon,  not  Armenia,  for  which  we  should  have  expected  pavD 
instead  of  Dlpfc  (mtiDD).  The  stream  out  of  Eden  is  the 
Euphrates  in  its  upper  course ;  &din  and  seru  are  Babylonian 


GENESIS  II.  14.  135 

synonyms  for  depression,  lowland,  plain.1  As  the  valley  of  the 
Jordan  is  called  gor,  so  is  zor  still  the  name  of  the  great  valley 
through  which  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  flow  into  the  Persian 
Gulf.  Accordingly  Eden  is  the  lowland  of  the  twin  streams 
and  the  garden  in  Eden,  the  district  near  Babylon,  so  renowned 
from  of  old  for  its  Paradisaic  beauty,  and  called  by  both 
Babylonians  and  Assyrians  Kar-Dunids,  i.e.  garden  of  the  god 
Dumas.  The  stream  that  waters  this  garden  of  God  is  the 
Euphrates,  and  in  a  certain  sense  the  Euphrates-Tigris,  since  the 
Euphrates  at  its  entrance  into  the  plain  of  Babylon  flows  on  a 
higher  level  than  the  Tigris,  and  is  blended  as  it  were  into 
one  stream  with  it  by  many  rills  flowing  in  its  direction. 
Below7  Babylon  this  large  body  of  water  divides  into  four 
great  water-ways,  by  which  it  is  led  southwards  into  the 
whole  country.  The  first  branch-river,  the  Pisdnu  (the  Baby- 
lonio-Assyrian  word  for  water  reservoir),  is  Pallakopas,  the 
great  channel  of  the  Euphrates,  by  whose  southern  course  lay 
Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  r6'in  is  the  great  desert  contiguous  to  its 
right  bank.  The  second  branch,  the  Gulidnu,  is  the  next  largest 
channel  of  the  Euphrates,  the  so-called  Nile  channel  (Shatt 
en-N'tl),  formerly  a  deep,  broad,  navigable  river  surrounding 
mid-Babylon  in  the  form  of  an  arch,  t^o  is  Northern  Babylon 
proper,  as  the  land  of  the  Kassu  (see  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Die 
Sprache  der  Kossiier,  1884),  the  name  of  which  stands  in  an 
as  yet  unexplained  connection  with  Ethiopia-Egypt.  The  pro 
ducts  of  the  country,  mentioned  ver.  11  sq.,  do  not  oppose 
this  combination.  Tiglath-Pileser  II.  says  concerning  one  of 
his  campaigns  in  the  year  *731,  that  he  received  as  tribute 
from  Merodach  Baladan  Jmrdsa  epir  mdtisu  ana  ma'dS,  gold 
of  his  country  in  great  quantity.  There  was  also  Bdellium 
in  Babylon,  and  this  was  the  nearest  land  from  which  the 
Israelites  could  become  well  acquainted  with  it  (Num.  xi.  7). 
The  stone  vSoham,  Babyl.  sdmtu  (fern,  of  sdmu\  was  a  chief 
product  of  the  province  of  Melulilm  or  of  the  Kassu-country, 
so  rich  in  precious  stones.  We  do  not  consider  it  impossible 

1  Sippar  lay,  as  a  clay  tablet  states,  in  the  land  of  Edinn. 


136  GENESIS  II.  15. 

that  Fr.  Delitzsch's  view  may  receive  further  confirmation 
from  the  monuments.  Friedr.  Philippi's  objection,  in  the 
Theol  LZ.  1882,  No.  7,  that  it  is  no  less  Utopian  than  that 
which  is  rejected,  is  not  to  the  point ;  for  though  the  picture 
thus  obtained  does  not  answer  the  requirements  of  scientific 
hydrography,  it  contains  nothing  impracticably  fantastic.  Of 
Dillmann's  objections,  one  only  is  at  first  striking,  viz.  that 
the  region  of  fig  cultivation  (Gen.  iii.  7)  is  excluded  from  the 
lower  course  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris.1  For  that  it  could 
never  enter  into  the  mind  of  a  Jew  to  regard  Babylonia  as 
the  primitive  seat  of  mankind,  and  the  environs  of  Babel  as  at 
one  time  the  garden  of  God,  is  contradicted  by  Beraclwth  39a, 
and  especially  by  Bcchoroth  55&,  according  to  which  the 
stream  out  of  Eden,  &OPJJD  ma,  is  the  Euphrates  at  its  rise 
(therefore  its  upper  course).  In  the  Talmud,  Midrash  and 
Pijut  it  is  everywhere  assumed  that  the  unnamed  mother 
stream,  the  trunk  as  it  were  of  the  four,  was  continued  in  the 
fourth  branch,2  and  that  this  is  indicated  by  the  brevity  of 
expression  in  ver.  14. 

The  narrator  having  developed  Sa,  and  the  planting  of 
Paradise,  and  more  particularly  described  its  situation,  now 
developes  85,  and  describes  the  placing  of  man  and  the  beings 
associated  with  him  therein,  ver.  1 5  :  And  Jahvch  Elohim  took 
the  man,  and  placed  him  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  to  dress  it,  and 
to  keep  it.  The  verb  H13  has  two  Hiphil  forms,  one  of  which, 
rwn,  means  to  bring  to  rest,  to  quiet,  the  other  rpsn  (comp.  the 
half  passive  in  Zech.  v.  11),  to  settle,  to  leave.  According 
to  this,  man  was  not  made  in  Paradise,  but  made  out  of 
the  earth  somewhere  else,  and  then  transported  into  Paradise ; 
and  indeed  "™?:  •'H??;  >  to  dress  and  to  keep  this  garden  of 

1  Sprenger,  Babylonien,  das  reichste  Land  der  Vorzeit  18S6,  p.  244,  says,  that 
Babylonian  figs  were  not  so  good  as  those  of  Asia  Minor  and  Syria.    Tittu  =  tintu, 
the  name  of  the  fig,  is  a  common  Babylonian  word. 

2  See  Genesis  rabba,  ch.  xxvi.  ;   Lev.  rabba,  ch.   xxii.  ;  Num.  rabba,  ch. 
xxi.  end.     Tanchuma  on  iSmm.  xxviii.  2,  and  Kalir  in  Baer's  Siddur  Abodath 
Jisrael,    p.  653,  rmm  W  TW  ISptfl  mam,  i.e.   the   Euphrates  included 
in  itself  the  waters  of  the  Pison  and  Gihon. 


GENESIS  II.  16,  17.  137 

God.  |3,  elsewhere  masc.,  is  here  treated  as  an  ideal  feminine. 
Hupfeld  thinks  that  the  narrator  adds  this  "  from  the  present 
order  of  things  in  momentary  self-forgetfulness."  Budde  also 
sees  in  it  a  disturbing  addition  by  the  embellisher  of  the 
original  history  of  Paradise  which  was  analysed  by  him  ;  for 
"  man  was  in  Paradise  for  happy  enjoyment,  not  for  work  and 
care-taking."  The  world  of  nature  was  however  designed  to 
be  tilled  and  tended,  it  runs  wild  without  man,  who  can  and 
ought  (as  is  shown,  for  example,  by  corn,  vines  and  date 
palms)  to  make  it  more  useful  and  habitable,  and  to  ennoble 
it  by  taking  an  interest  in  it.  Besides,  "  happy  enjoyment  "  is 
impossible  either  in  heaven  or  earth  in  a  life  of  contemplative 
laziness.  As  in  ii.  1—3  work  is  ennobled  by  creation  itself 
being  called  a  nnfcto,  so  here  in  the  Jahvist  it  is  made  to 
appear  as  Paradisaic.  It  is  however  intelligible  that  the 
horticulture  here  committed  to  man  differed  from  subsequent 
agriculture,  as  the  garden  of  God  differed  from  ordinary 
ground,  and  still  more  from  the  ground  which  was  cursed. 
No  creature  can  be  happy  without  a  calling.  Paradise  was 
the  centre  whence  man's  dominion  over  the  earth  and  the 
drawing  in  and  lifting  up  of  the  natural  into  the  region  of  the 
spiritual  thereby  aimed  at,  was  to  make  its  beginning.  This 
his  nearest  duty  has  both  a  positive  (ad  colcndurti)  and  a 
negative  side  (ad  custodiendum).  From  what  follows  we  may 
infer  that  the  meaning  of  pnDB^l  is  not  restricted  to  keeping 
the  garden  from  running  wild,  or  from  injury  by  animals. 
He  was  also  to  keep  it  by  withstanding  the  power  of  tempta 
tion,  which  was  threatening  to  destroy  him  and  Paradise  with 
him.  In  Paradise  itself  was  not  only  the  tree  of  life,  but 
also  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  (ver.  9),  and 
what  man  was  threatened  with  in  respect  of  the  latter  we  now 
learn,  vv.  16,  17  :  And  Jahvch  EloJiim  commanded  the  man, 
saying  :  Of  every  tree  of  the  garden  thou  may est  freely  cat,  lut  of 
the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  thou  may  est  not  eat,  for 
on  the  day  of  thy  eating  thereof  thou  shalt  die.  The  verb  Httf 
with  $>y  signifies  to  command  strictly,  on  which  account  this 


138  GENESIS  IT.  16,  17. 

construction  is  usual  in  prohibitions  (see  the  Lexicon).  The 
first  tash  (the  pausal  form)  has  a  potential  meaning ;  the  inf. 
intensivus  strengthens  the  notion  of  option.  The  second  ?3Nh 
(the  extra-pausal  form)  has  the  jussive  sense ;  with  yh  it  is,  as 
in  the  Decalogue,  the  expression  of  strict  prohibition.  The  inf. 
of  ^3X  is  sometimes  found  as  ^K,  sometimes  as  ^bis,  with  the 
prefix  2  (Num.  xxvi.  10),  and  always  with  an  added  suffix,  as 
^bx.  The  inf.  intens.  before  niDri  strengthens  the  certainty  of 
what  is  threatened.  All  is  now  prepared  for  the  test  of  man's 
freedom.  The  tree  of  knowledge  bears,  like  the  tree  of  life, 
the  name  of  its  destination,  and  is  therefore  not  called  the 
tree  of  death.  Men  were  by  means  of  this  tree  to  attain  to 
the  knowledge  of  good  arid  evil,  including  the  blessings  and  ills 
resulting  from  them  (Isa.  iii.  10  sq.).  The  final  purpose  of  this 
tree  is  perverted  when  it  is  asserted  that  jni  niD  are  natural 
properties  and  not  moral  distinctions,  and  that  therefore  njH 
jni  311D  is  culture  as  the  knowledge  of  the  agreeable  and  the 
disagreeable,  of  the  profitable  and  the  harmful ;  and  also  when 
jni  31B  is  said,  as  by  others,  to  be  a  proverbial  expression 
for  everything.1  For  how  then  could  the  partaking  of  it  be 
forbidden  ?  If  Jahveli  grudged  men  culture,  He  would  be 
governed  by  malevolence  ((f>0ovos),  like  the  gods  in  Herodotus. 
What  is  in  question  is  not  an  advance  from  childish  ignorance 
to  culture,  but  from  childlike  innocence  to  moral  decision, 
The  two  trees  were  both  trees  of  blessing,  for  the  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil  is  the  characteristic  of  intellectual  maturity, 
of  moral  full  age,  in  contrast  to  vrjTnoTr]^,  Isa.  vii.  15  sq. ; 
Heb.  v.  14.  As  the  tree  of  life  was  by  eating  thereof  to  be 
to  man  the  means  of  life,  as  the  reward  of  his  standing  the 
test,  so  was  the  tree  of  knowledge  to  be  by  avoiding  the 
eating  thereof  the  means  of  the  right  use  of  freedom.  God 

1  Certainly  this  expression  may,  in  negative  sentences  like  xxiv.  50,  xxxi.  24, 
mean  "  absolutely  nothing,"  arid  in  positive  ones  like  2  Sam.  xiv.  17,  comp.  20, 
"absolutely  everything  ;  "  but  even  then  always  as  an  expression  of  contrasts, 
under  which  everything  is  comprised.  These  contrasts  may  be  used  in  a 
physical,  a  purely  intellectual,  or  an  ethical  sense,  according  to  the  object  and 
connection  of  what  is  being  related. 


GENESIS  II.  18.  139 

was  not  thereby  a  tempter  to  evil,  He  did  only  that  which 
could  not  be  omitted,  if  man  was  to  attain  to  moral  decision 
with  respect  to  God.  Only  in  communion  with  God  does 
the  creature  attain  ideal  perfection ;  but  the  idea  of  a  personal 
being  implies  that  this  communion  should  be  union  in  free 
love,  that  therefore  power  and  occasion  must  be  given  to  man 
to  decide  either  for  or  against  God.  Hence  the  primseval  njVD 
gave  man  occasion  to  advance  by  his  free  avoidance  of  evil 
from  the  potential  good  implanted  in  him  to  actual  good,  and 
from  his  innate  liberum  arbitriuin  to  libertas  arbitrii,  i.e. 
positive  freedom — in  other  words,  from  the  freedom  of  choice 
implanted  in  his  nature  to  freedom  of  power  independently 
acquired.  The  result,  according  as  the  test  of  freedom  falls 
out  one  way  or  the  other,  is  either  completeness  of  communion 
with  God  or  separation  from  Him,  happiness  or  unhappiness, 
life  or  death.  In  this  history  everything  turns,  not  upon 
the  externalism  of  what  is  related,  but  upon  the  realities 
which  have  assumed  this  form.  The  question  however  as  to 
whether  death,  which  was  threatened  for  the  eating  of  the 
tree  of  knowledge,  is  thought  of  as  the  direct  penal  con 
sequence  of  disobedience,  or  as  indirectly  such  by  means  of 
the  nature  of  the  tree  of  knowledge,  cannot  certainly  be  set 
aside.  We  shall  have  to  admit,  that  as  the  tree  of  life 
possessed  in  a  sacramental  manner,  so  to  speak,  the  power  of 
immortality,  so  also  did  the  tree  of  knowledge  the  power  of 
death ;  not  however  like  a  poisonous  tree,  as  e.g.  the  Upas,  but 
in  virtue  of  the  Divine  choice  and  appointment.  Hence  it  is 
said  rviEfi,  not  npw — deatli  will  not  be  a  judicial  execution, 
but  a  consequence  involved  in  the  nature  of  the  transgression. 
The  narrator  cannot  directly  proceed  to  the  conduct  of  the 
man  with  respect  to  God,  for  man  did  not  transgress  the 
Divine  command  as  a  single  being,  and  the  creation  of 
woman,  now  to  be  related,  intervenes  between  the  command 
and  the  transgression.  In  ver.  18  we  have  the  resolve  of 
the  Creator :  Then  Jahveli  Eloliim  said,  It  is  not  good  that 
man  should  ~be  alone  ;  I  will  make  him  a  help  meet  for  him.  A 


140  AGENESIS  II.  19,  20. 


help  (Tob.  viii.  6,  @or)6ov  cmjpLj^a),  i.e.  a  being  who  might 
be  his  helpmate,  and  indeed  such  an  one  as  should  be  his 
counterpart,  the  reflection  of  himself,  one  in  whom  he  may 
recognise  himself.  1JJ2,  only  here  in  the  Bible,  is  a  customary 
post-biblical  expression  for  anything  correlative  and  parallel. 
The  Divine  words  are  not  :  I  will  make  him  one  like  to  him, 
that  he  may  propagate  himself.  "itJJ,  adjutorium,  is  not 
intended  of  one  ad  procreandos  liberos  (Augustine,  de  Genesi  ad 
lit.  ix.  3),  but,  according  to  the  connection,  of  a  helpmate  for  the 
fulfilment  of  his  calling,  which,  as  15&  shows,  was  the  tilling 
and  keeping  of  Paradise.  To  be  alone,  to  remain  alone, 
would  not  be  good  for  him  ;  only  in  society  could  he  fulfil  his 
vocation.  For  this  he  needed  the  assistance  of  one  who 
should  be  his  equal,  or  rather  what  to  3  in  distinction  from 
into  denotes,  one  who  by  relative  difference  and  essential 
equality  should  be  his  fitting  complement.  The  preparation 
for  realizing  the  Divine  purpose,  vv.  19,  20  :  And  JahveJi 
Eloliim  formed  out  of  the  ground  every  wild  beast  of  the  field, 
and  every  fowl  of  the  heaven,  and  brought  them  to  the  man, 
to  sec  what  he  would  call  it  :  and  whatever  the  man  called  it} 
the  living  creature,  was  to  lie  its  name.  And  the  man  gave 
names  to  all  cattle,  and  to  the  fowl  of  heaven,  and  to  every  wild 
beast  of  the  field  :  and  for  a  man  he  found  no  fitting  help. 
Much  fuss  has  been  made  about  the  contradiction  between 
this  and  the  former  account  of  creation.  In  the  former  the 
creation  of  animals  precedes  that  of  man,  in  this  the  creation 
of  man  that  of  animals.  But  could  this  narrator  really 
mean  that  the  environment  of  man  was  till  now  exclusively 
a  vegetable  and  a  mineral  one  ?  And  if  his  meaning  had 
been,  that  animals  were  now  first  created,  he  would  not  have 
left  water  animals  and  reptiles  unmentioned,  whereas  he 
speaks  only  of  wild  beasts,  cattle  and  birds.  The  animal 
creation  appears  here  under  a  peculiar  point  of  view,  which 
the  narrator  certainly  did  not  regard  as  its  motive  in  general. 
It  is  the  first  step  towards  the  creation  of  woman,  for  the 
matter  in  question  is  an  associate,  his  equal  in  dignity,  for 


GENESIS  II.  IP,  20.  141 

man  formed  nuDINrrp.  On  this  account  "^'.1  will  have  to  be 
understood  as  the  foundation,  recurring  to  what  is  past,  for 
**?TS!  :  et  formamt  .  .  .  et  adduxit  =  et  cum  formasset  adduxit. 
This  is  possible  as  far  as  style  is  concerned,  and  suitable  to 
the  scriptural  mode  of  writing  history  (e.g.  Isa.  xxxvii.  5  ; 
Jonah  ii.  4;  Zech.  vii.  2  ;  comp.  Hitzig  on  Jeremiah,  p.  288, 
2nd  ed.).  The  Arabic  <_J  also  does  not  always  introduce 
the  successive  in  time,  but  frequently  goes  back  to  the 
cause,  and  is  thus  like  the  Hebrew  i  consec.,  an  expression 
for  a  consequent  connection  looking  either  backwards  or 
forwards.  This  backward  regard  is  moreover  brought  about 
with  a  certain  necessity,  by  the  fact  that  this  second  narra 
tive  has  man  for  its  centre,  and  not  like  the  first,  which 
relates  in  a  continuous  line,  for  its  end  and  climax.  The 
chief  matter  is  that  God,  after  having  created  beasts,  brought 
them  to  Adam  that  he  might  name  them,  njn  t^a^  19£;  is 
in  apposition  to  i^,  ^S3  being,  as  in  enumerations  (see  Num. 
xxxi.  38,  w%)  intf),  regarded  as  masculine.  The  addition  is 
strange  in  itself  and  also  in  the  position  of  the  words,  but 
defended  by  LXX.  :  real  irav  o  eav  e/caXeaev  avro  'ASa^ 
tyvxfjv  ^ojaav.  The  purpose  of  the  bringing  together  of  the 
animals  and  of  naming  them  was,  that  the  desire  for  a  being 
who  should  be  like  himself  and  complete  him,  might  be 
aroused  in  the  man.  He  found  however  none  such  among 
the  animals  D^Kp  for  a  being  such  as  man  is.  DIN  is  not  as 
yet  a  proper  name,  but  is  used  without  an  article  because 
qualitatively :  He  found  among  the  animals  no  creature 
fitted  to  be  his  helpmate,  if  only  because  his  language 
remained  without  response  on  their  part.  For  this  result 
was  arrived  at  while  he  was  naming  them.  No  Divine  com 
mand  is  laid  upon  him  to  do  this.  He  sees  the  animals, 
conceives  notions  of  what  they  are  and  appear  like,  and  such 
notions,  which  are  in  themselves  already  inward  words,  become 
involuntarily  uttered  names,  which  he  gives  to  the  animals, 
and  through  which  he  places  the  impersonal  creatures  in 
the  first  intellectual  relation  to  himself  the  personal  being. 


142  GENESIS  II.  21,  22. 

The  narrative  presupposes  man's  power  of  speech,  for  it  makes 
God  speak  to  man,  ii.  16,  and  man  understand  Him.  Now, 
however  his  power  of  speech  obtains  external  realization,  it 
is  only  a  portion  of  the  genesis  of  speech  which  is  here  related. 
As  the  man  in  naming  the  animals  finds  none  among  them 
adapted  to  his  exalted  position  and  requirements,  and  the 
desire  for  human  intercourse  and  assistance  has  become  active 
within  him,  he  is  placed  in  a  condition  in  which  the  creation 
of  such  a  being  can  proceed,  2la:  Then  Jahveh  Eloliim  caused 
sleep  to  fall  upon  the  man,  and  lie  slept.  The  man  had  to  be 
placed  in  the  condition  of  sleep  ;  because  as  all  creation  external 
to  us  is  withdrawn  from  our  perception,  so  too  must  all  crea 
tive  operations  of  God  upon  us  be  effected  in  the  region  of 
unconsciousness,  and  not  come  into  our  consciousness  until 
they  are  accomplished.  All  the  Greek  words  which  signify 
deep  sleep  are  used  by  Greek  translators  for  npipri  (from  DT% 

to  stuff;   ^,v    to    shut,  to  close);    Aquila   Karac^opd,  Symm. 

icdpos,  Greek  Veil.  KWJJLO,,  LXX.  e/co-Tao-is,  from  eKcrrrjvai,  to  be 
removed  from  the  actuality  of  waking  life  and  placed  in  a 
state  of  mere  passivity  (the  opposite  of  ow^povetv  and  <yeveo-6ai 
ev  eavrw).  In  the  present  case  this  mere  passivity  does  not 
contribute  to  susceptibility  to  impressions  of  the  super- 
sensuous  world ;  it  is  no  ecstatic  sleep  (like  the  so-called 
trance  of  somnambulists)  that  is  intended,  but  natural  though 
Divinely  effected  sleep.  The  process  of  creating  woman 
follows  in  21ft,  22  :  And  He  took  one  of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up 
the  flesh  in  its  stead.  And  Jahveh  Elohim  built  the  rib,  which 
He  had  taken  from  the  man,  into  a  woman,  and  brought  her  to 
the  man.  The  woman  is  e'£  dvbpos,  and  not  the  man  of  the 
woman,  says  St.  Paul,  1  Cor.  xi.  8.  Her  production  is 
designated  neither  by  &TQ  nor  iy,  but  by  run ;  she  is  neither 
made  from  nothing  nor  from  the  dust  of  the  earth,  but  from 
the  first  man,  i.e.  from  his  spiritual  and  material  nature,  and 
already  organized  substance.  For  it  is  the  pre-eminence  of 
mankind  above  the  animals,  to  have  come  into  existence,  not 


GENESIS  II.  23.  143 

as  a  pair  and  species,  but  as  a  person.  This  pre-eminence 
and  the  unity  of  origin  of  the  human  race  in  general  would  be 
forfeited  if  the  woman  had  not  sprung  from  the  one  first  man. 
But  now  all  men  without  distinction  are  as  our  old  poets  say : 
Ein  Gesippe,  Von  des  ersten  Adams  Rippe.  jfef,  from  y^*,  to  bend 
sidewards,  signifies  as  a  part  of  the  human  body,  the  rib  placed 
at  the  side  and  bending  forwards  and  backwards  towards  the 
breast  bone.  The  rib  which  was  used  for  the  building  of  the 
woman  was  consequently  a  supernumerary  one.  Man  has 
twelve  ribs ;  a  thirteenth  above  the  first  or  below  the  last  only 
occurs  as  an  anomaly.  Thomas  of  Aquinas  remarks  in  the 
spirit  of  the  narrative  :  Costa  ilia  fuit  de  pcrfectione  Adcc,  non 
prout  erat  individuum  gtuoddam,  sed  prout  erat  principium  spccici. 
It  was,  as  the  Targ.  Jems,  conceives,  the  thirteenth  upper  rib  of 
the  right  side ;  but  that  God  closed  up  the  flesh  in  the  place 
thereof,  i.e.  filled  up  the  hole  with  flesh,  leads  to  another 
notion.  "if'S,  Heb.  and  Aram,  flesh,  Arab,  skin,  from  1^:3,  to 
streak  something  on  the  surface,  means  properly  materiel 
attractabilis ;  the  palpable  exterior  of  animated  beings,  and 
especially  that  which  manifests  the  distinction  of  sex,  is  so 
called.  n5^nrij  from  Jinn,  not  f^nnpi,  from  the  extensive  plural 
wri,  is  not  intended  to  mean,  like  the  latter,  loco  cju,s,  but  m 
locum  cjus,  and  has  therefore  the  suffix,  which  expresses  the 
accusative  and  not  the  genitive  relation,  the  verbal  instead  of 
the  nominal  suffix.  If  what  is  related  is,  externally  regarded, 
a  myth,  it  yet  covers  a  kernel  of  fact.  The  Elohistic  account 
also  indicates  that  mankind  was  originally  created  as  one. 
Man's  existence  in  a  union  of  the  as  yet  unseparated  contrasts 
of  male  and  female  preceded  the  sexual  differentiation  of  man 
kind,  and  his  glorified  condition  in  another  world  will  corre 
spond  with  this  first  beginning,  Mark  xii.  25  ;  Luke  xx.  35  sq. 
The  exclamation  of  the  man  when  the  woman  is  brought  to 
him,  ver.  2  3  :  Then  the  man  said :  This  is  now  bone  of  my 
bones,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh;  this  shall  le  called  Woman,  for  this 
was  taken  from  man.  When  reviewing  the  animals  the  man 
found  himself  again  and  again  disappointed,  he  fell  asleep 


144  GENESIS  II.  23. 

longing  for  a  companion ;  his  desire  was  now  suddenly  ful 
filled.  All  three  nsf  point  to  the  woman,  on  whom  his  eye 
gladly  and  admiringly  rested  with  the  whole  power  of  first 
love.  If  Dysn  DNT  is  taken  according  to  the  accusative 
connection,  the  sentence  would  want  the  subj.  &on,  or  a  predicate 
like  v  fro  or  WiJ,  hence  nsr  is  the  subject  of  the  sentence  23a. 
Nor  is  the  n^T  needed  for  the  idea :  this  time,  by  this  time ; 
Ojjsn  has  even  without  nxf  the  meaning  this  time,  pregnantly : 
now  at  last  (tandem  aliquando),  xxix.  34  sq.,  xxx.  20,  xlvi.  30  ; 
Ex.  ix.  27.  flNT?  is  like  Job  xxxvii.  1,  while  on  the  other  hand 
Ex.  vii.  23  has  in  pause  with  fore-tone  Kametz  nsfr.  To  K1}^ 
must  be  supplied  in  thought  DB>,  xxxv.  10,  as  in  Isa.  Ixii.  4,  12. 
Instead  of  nnjp^  we  have  nnjg  without  Dagesh,  and  with  d  as  an 
echo  of  the  u  instead  of  simple  vocal  Sheva,  like  ^^P,  Isa.  ix.  3. 
The  expression  is  a  Tristich,  whose  close  returns  retrogressively 
to  its  beginning.  The  poetry  of  love  is  found  here  in  its  first 
origin,  and  gives  poetical  movement  and  flight  to  the  words  of 
the  man.  Perhaps  (for  it  is  neither  necessary  nor  certain)  the 
narrator  regarded  n$K  as  not  only  the  logical,  but  also  the 
etymological  feminine  of  t^N.  Adam  however  did  not  speak 
Hebrew,  nor  is  scientific  etymology  our  subject,  but  in  nsA 
'Ul  B»KD  "3  nc^K  fcnp1  the  thought  finds  expression,  that  the 
woman  is  acknowledged  as  an  offshoot  of  the  man,  as  coming 
into  existence  after  him,  but  of  like  nature  with  him,  and  is  to 
be  named  accordingly.  For  n$s  is  etymologically  related  to 
fc^tf,  not  as  (according  to  Jerome)  virago  is  to  vir,  and  (accord 
ing  to  Luther)  Mcinnin  to  Mann — 1.  Because  t^N  is  not  con 
tracted  from  tt>JX,  its  plural  being  not  D11^  (which  means  igncs, 
from  Bte),  like  ^W,  from  TJJ=tty,  but  CWK,  the  long  i  pointing  to 
a  middle  vowel  stem,  probably  tn&*  (whence  SPBfcnn,  Isa.  xlvi.  8, 
and  the  proper  name  BWrpJ,  to  be  strong.  2.  Because,  as  the 
dialects  show,  the  '&  of  ns?N  is  not  of  the  same  phonetic  value 
as  the  &  of  {^K  ;  for  the  Aramaico  -  Arabic  equivalents  are 

»  ""*""* 

Nnri^  IZAj] ,  .Ju^j  hence  nt^x  comes  from  a  stem  t^jN  whose 
V  is  of  equal  value  with  c^,  and  for  which  the  meaning  "  to 


GENESIS  II.  24.  145 

be  soft,  tender,"  must  be  assumed,  a  meaning  which  the  Arab. 

X      ^^. 

(J^j\  perhaps  has,  but  as  a  denom.  and  hence  more  generally, 

viz.  to  be  weak,  frail.  Thus  n$N  and  Efos,  iv.  26,  come  from 
a  like  verbal  stem  and  fundamental  notion  (see  Fr.  Delitzsch, 
Prolcf/.  160-164,  and  comp.  on  iv.  26).  Now  follows  a 
statement  turning  upon  marriage  as  the  deepest  and  closest 
union,  ver.  24  :  Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his 
mother,  and  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  shall  le  one  flesh.  Is 
this  a  reflection  by  the  narrator,  or  are  these  the  words  of  the 
man  ?  The  New  Testament  Scriptures,  which  quote  this 
verse  as  the  word  of  God,  Matt.  xix.  4  sq.,  do  not  decide  the 
question ;  the  statement  is  the  word  of  God  as  being  a  com 
ponent  part  of  the  inspired  Scriptures.  The  narrator's  custom 
of  interweaving  remarks  beginning  with  \3~*?y  in  the  history, 
x.  9,  xxvL  33,  xxxii.  33,  speaks  for  its  being  a  reflection  of 
his  own.  Such  remarks  are  however  of  an  archaeological  kind, 
and  in  their  position  within  the  historical  statement,  while 
ver.  24  is  on  the  contrary  a  reflection  concerning  a  thing 
future,  and,  since  the  history  of  the  creation  of  woman  does 
not  close  till  ver.  25,  an  interruption  to  the  historical  con 
nection.  On  this  account  we  view  ver.  24  as  a  continuation 
of  Adam's  speech.  That  he  perceives  the  woman  to  have 
been  taken  out  of  himself,  is  the  natural  consequence  of  her 
proceeding  from  his  being.  But  he  also  predictively  reads  in 
her  countenance  the  nature  of  marriage,  he  penetrates  the 
Divine  idea  realized  in  the  creation  of  woman.  The  future 
2fjP  too,  with  the  preterite  ruled  by  it,  speaks  for  the  words 
being  the  continuation  of  Adam's  exclamation.  Marriage  is  a 
relation  in  presence  of  which  even  the  filial  relation  recedes,  a 
relation,  as  e/!?  crdpica  JULICLV  declares,  of  most  intimate,  personal, 
spiritual  and  corporeal  association,  and  to  say  this  is  at  the 
same  time  to  designate  monogamy  as  the  natural  and  God- 
designed  form  of  this  relation.  Supermundane  facts  are, 
according  to  Eph.  v.,  shadowed  forth  in  this  mystery.  The 
creation  of  the  woman  too  is  typical :  Sicut  dormiente  Adamo 


146  GENESIS  III. 

fit  Eva  de  latere,  sic  mortuo  Christo  lancea  percutitur  latus, 
ut  profluant  sacramenta,  quilus  formetur  ecclesia.  State  of 
innocence  of  the  first  pair,  ver.  2  5  :  And  they  were  loth  naked, 
the  man  and  his  wife,  and  were  not  ashamed.  The  formation 
D^vij^  with  the  euphonically  doubled  D  and  the  incorrectly 
retained  mater  lectionis,  is  plur.  of  Ehy,  of  the  same  formation 
as  ?"13,  from  nny,  .^c,  to  peel,  to  expose,  in  opposition  to  which 
Bft^y,  iii.  7,  plur.  of  the  sing.  D'Ty,  iii.  10  sq.,  seems  to  be  derived 
from  -ny  related  to  *ny,  my,  r,  to  strip  (comp.  Stade,  §  327a). 

Instead  of  "  they  were  not  ashamed  "  we  might  also,  in  con 
formity  with  the  meaning,  translate :  they  were  not  ashamed 
before  each  other.  Hoelem.  rightly  refers  to  xlii.  1,  where 
n&nnn  means  not  to  stare  at  themselves,  but  to  stare  at  one 
another;  comp.  on  Ps.  xli.  8,  and  on  the  root  notion  of  BTQ 
(with  W=^J,  n),  perturlari,  on  Ps.  vi.  11.  Shame  is  the 
overpowering  feeling  that  inward  harmony  and  satisfaction 
with  oneself  are  disturbed.  They  were  not  ashamed  of  their 
nakedness  ;  and  why  not  ?  Shame  is  the  correlative  of  sin 
and  guilt.  They  had  no  reason  to  fear  that  the  body  would 
show  sin  in  them.  Their  internal  condition  was  holy,  their 
external  excellent,  though  their  holiness  was  only  of  the  kind 
belonging  to  the  unclouded  innocence  of  childhood,  and  their 
excellence  was  not  as  yet  glory.  It  was  however  a  pure  and 
bright  beginning,  which  might  have  been  followed  by  a  like 
but  progressive  development. 

THE  FALL  OF  THE  FIRST  CHEATED  HUMAN  BEINGS,  CH.  III. 

The  second  part  of  the  so-called  Jahveh-Elohim  document, 
the  history  of  the  trial  of  man's  freedom  and  his  fall,  now  follows. 
The  man  has  now  his  vocation,  beside  him  an  associate  therein, 
around  him  a  flora  and  fauna  created  for  his  service  and 
delight.  What  a  blissful  beginning !  how  overflowing  with 
Divine  blessings  !  Among  the  trees  of  Paradise  there  is  but 
one  behind  which  death  is  lurking,  and  this  one  is  forbidden  to 


GENESIS  III.  1.  147 

man,  that  he  may  not  fall  a  prey  to  the  power  of  death,  but 
conquer  it  by  obedience  to  God.  It  was  possible  for  man  to 
remain  in  the  happy  condition  in  which  he  was  created,  and 
to  establish  it  by  the  submission  of  his  own  to  the  Divine 
will.  But  it  was  also  possible  that  this  subordination  to  God 
as  such  should  be  repulsive  to  him,  and  that  he  should 
entirely  of  his  own  accord  rebelliously  assert  his  ego  against 
the  Divine.  And  it  was  possible  in  the  third  place,  that, 
tempted  from  without  by  an  already  existing  power  of  evil, 
he  should  lose  sight  of  the  Divine  will  and,  seduced  by  the 
charm  of  the  forbidden,  should  fall  into  disobedience.  This 
last  possibility,  the  comparatively  less  evil  of  the  two  latter, 
was  realized.  He  was  tempted  from  without,  and  by  whom  ? 
The  object  of  the  temptation  was  found  in  the  vegetable,  the 
tempter  came  from  the  animal  world,  la :  And  the  serpent 
was  wise  above  every  beast  of  the  field  which  Jahveh  EloJiim  had 
made.  The  adj.  DViy,  callidus,  is,  like  D""W,  nudus,  formed  from  a 
stem  D"iy,  concerning  whose  root-meaning  on  this  side  nothing 
satisfactory  can  be  said  (see  Gesen.  Lex.  10th  ed.).  The  serpent 
is  called  wise  (0poz/tyM>g,  Matt.  x.  16)  in  a  sense  by  which 
praise  is  accorded  to  it.  n^rjn  and  nD"iy  appear  in  Prov.  viii.  1 2 

as  associates.      The  name  P'nj  however  (Arab.  jjuJ^,  E?n,  of 

reptiles  in  general)  is  taken  from  its  present  nature  (from  BTU, 
related  to  wrb,  to  hiss),  and  reminds  of  mischief  (Arab,  nahs, 
against  which  the  Assyrian  nahsu,  by  means  of  a  setting  apart 
of  the  notion  omen  to  faustum  omen,  means  fortune).  The 
comparison :  prce  omnibus  animalibus  arm  quce,  etc.,  assumes 
that  there  are  not  two  creative  principles,  but  that  all  beings 
have  the  one  God  for  their  Creator.  The  question  of  the 
serpent,  Vb :  And  he  said  unto  the  woman,  Is  it  really 
so  that  Elohim  hath  said :  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  all  the 
trees  of  the  garden  ?  !  It  is  a  half -interrogatory,  half -excla 
matory  expression  of  astonishment,  similar  to  xviii.  13 
(DjfcK  *i«n)  and  1  Sam.  xxii.  7  (M  for  wn;  as  here  *|N  for 
*lKn),  but  peculiar  because  in  this  S3  *]N,  which  elsewhere 


148  GENESIS  III.  1. 

has  mostly  the  culminative  signification  quanta  magis,  P)S 
represents  a  whole  sentence :  etiamne  (verumne)  est  quod,  like 
Euth  ii.  21,^3  233  =  accedit  quod.  Has  Elohim  really — asks 
the  serpent — forbidden  you  all  use  of  the  trees  of  the  garden  ? 
Instead  of  DTitan  'n  the  serpent  says  only  av6«;  the  com 
bination  of  the  two  Divine  names  subserving  indeed  a  didactic 
purpose  only  in  the  historical  style  of  the  narrator.  Even  in 
the  mouth  of  man  God  is  not  called  DTiStt?  'n,  nor  is  He  called 
'n  till  after  the  promise  interwoven  in  the  sentence  of  the 
serpent  was  given.  The  astonishment  expressed  by  the  serpent 
is  aimed  at  inspiring  mistrust  towards  God ;  he  speaks  as 
though  God  had  gone  so  far  as  to  say,  that  they  might  not 
eat  of  any  of  the  trees  of  the  garden.  Had  then  the  serpent 
the  faculty  of  speech  ?  If  we  regard  the  narrative  as  history 
clothed  in  figure  (and  to  a  certain  extent  we  may  let  this  pass, 
if  it  is  held  to  be  really  a  history  of  the  all-decisive  first  sin, 
and  not,  with  Eeuss,  as  a  representation  of  the  genesis  of  sin 
in  general,  and  therefore  a  myth  in  the  proper  sense),  this 
question  of  astonishment  is  obviated,  and  the  talking  of  the 
serpent  stands  on  a  level  with  the  talking  of  animals  in  fables. 
In  no  case  is  the  position  of  the  narrator  with  regard  to  the 
matter  of  this  mythic  kind.  He  is  consciously  reproducing  a 
tradition  which,  transmitted  to  the  nations  from  the  original 
home  of  the  human  race,  underwent  among  them  trans 
formations  of  all  kinds.  He  reproduces  it  in  the  fashion 
which  stood  the  criticism  of  the  spirit  of  revelation.  Trans 
posing  ourselves  into  the  mind  of  the  narrator,  \ve  have  to 
ask:  Did  he  then  conceive  of  the  animals  of  Paradise  as 
capable  of  speech  ?  By  no  means;  man  only,  into  whom,  ii.  7, 
God  directly  breathed  the  breath  of  life,  is  regarded  by  him 
as  a  personal  being,  and  therefore  as  capable  of  speech.  Let  it 
not  be  however  forgotten  that  the  deepest  conceivable  wicked 
ness  is  speaking  from  the  mouth  of  the  serpent,  when  it  is 
seeking  to  make  men  mistrustful  of  God.  It  is  not  more 
surprising  that  the  serpent  should  speak,  than  that  it  should 
speak  such  thorough  wickedness.  That  it  should  speak  is  a 


GENESIS  III.  1.  149 

miracle,  though  only  a  phenomenal  one.  And  that  it  should 
utter  such  thorough  wickedness  comes  from  its  being  the 
instrument  of  a  higher  and  deeply  fallen  being.  Hence 
its  speaking  is  a  demoniacal  miracle.  For  it  is  contrary 
to  the  impression  made  by  la  to  consider  it  as  the  inten 
tion  of  the  narrator  to  have  the  serpent  regarded  as  a 
mythical  symbol  or  a  deceptive  phantom.  An  animal  is 
intended,  but  an  animal  not  speaking  of  its  own  accord,  but 
as  made  the  instrument  of  itself  by  the  evil  principle.  By 
the  evil  principle  we  understand  the  evil  which  had  before 
the  fall  of  man  penetrated  the  world  of  spirits,  and  which 
is  subsequently  spoken  of  as  Satan  and  his  angels.  The  six 
days'  work,  ch.  i.,  concludes  with  the  seal  nso  21  to  roni.  It 
was  in  view  of  man  that,  as  ch.  ii.  relates,  the  flora  and 
fauna  which  was  to  form  bis  environment  were  called  into 
being.  That  Satan  would  seek  to  ruin  this  good  creation 
might  be  expected ;  the  shelter  of  Paradise  and  the  trial  of 
man's  freedom  were  designed  to  make  him  contribute  by 
obedience  to  God  to  the  triumph  of  good  over  evil.  It  is  also 
evident  why  Satan  should  seek  to  tempt  man  to  partake  of 
the  forbidden  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge.  He  desired 
that  man  should  open  the  prison  of  death,  and  thereby  deliver 
him,  even  Satan,  from  his  bondage.  The  narrator  confines 
himself  to  the  external  appearance  of  what  took  place,  with 
out  lifting  the  veil  from  the  reality  behind  it.  Elsewhere 
too  the  Old  Testament  speaks  but  very  sparingly  of  the 
demoniacal;  and  it  is  characteristic  that  the  very  same  narrator, 
in  Num.  xxii.,  where  Balaam's  ass  speaks  as  the  serpent  does 
here,  and  where  the  secret  causality  is  a  purely  Divine  one, 
mentions  the  author  of  the  miracle.  Or  was  what  he  narrates 
veiled  to  the  narrator  himself  ?  The  horizon  of  Old  Testament 
believers  was  narrowed  after  the  preparation  for  redemption 
entered  within  the  limits  of  nationality.  Besides,  it  is  a  law 
of  the  history  of  redemption,  that  the  kingdom  of  grace  and 
the  kingdom  of  darkness  should  be  only  gradually  and  in 
mutual  relation  unveiled  to  each  other.  It  is  in  the  Book  of 


150  GENESIS  III.  1. 

Wisdom  ii.  23  sq.  that  we  are  first  told  that  it  was  the  devil 
himself  who  tempted  man  in  the  serpent.  But  it  was  not 
merely  the  Alexandrians,  but  also  the  Palestinians,  who  judged 
thus,  when  they  called  the  devil  P^lipn  t^'nan  •  and  the  fact 
of  the  temptation  of  Jesus,  when  the  tempter  encountered  the 
second  Adam  in  direct  personality,  makes  it  quite  certain  that 
the  serpent  and  Satan  are  in  some  way  identical,  John  viii.  44  ; 
2  Cor.  xi.  3  (comp.  14);  Eom.  xvi.  20;  Eev.  xii.  9,  xx.  2. 
Granting  even  that  the  trees  of  Paradise  and  the  serpent 
were  mere  symbols,  this  much  is  still  left,  that  man  fell  away 
from  that  first  good  development  which  was  implanted  in  him 
through  the  temptation  of  Satan,  —  if  this  is  given  up,  there 
remains  instead  of  Christianity  as  the  religion  of  redemption, 
nothing  but  a  rationalistic  Deism,  which  excludes  the  super 
natural.  It  is  said  that  the  serpent  is  an  emblem  of  the 
seductive  charm  of  the  earthly.  But  why  is  it  just  the  serpent 
that  is  chosen  for  the  purpose  ?  Why,  but  because  it  appeared 
to  antiquity,  and  still  appears  to  the  natural  man,  as  an  un 
canny  being.  In  Sanchuniathon  it  is  called  TO  ££ov  TO  irvev- 
/j,aTiK(t)Tarov  TrdvTcov  TWV  epTrertov  ;  according  to  popular 
Arabic  faith  it  is  no  ordinary  creature,  but  a  'Ginn;  among 
the  Eomans  too  anguis  was  an  image  of-  the  genius,  and  in 
TTvdcov  serpent  and  daemon  are  united,  just  as  in  Heb.  also 
BTU  is  a  homonym  for  serpent  and  witchcraft.  The  serpent 
was  regarded  as  a  ghostly  instrument,  not  only  of  ruin,  but 
also  of  blessing  and  healing,  and  it  is  on  this  view  that  its 
adoration  as  an  dyaOoSalpcov,  of  which  an  Israelite  trace  also 
is  found  in  Num.  xxi.  8  sq.,  comp.  2  Kings  xviii.  4,  is 
founded.1  Hence,  even  if  the  form  of  the  narrative  is  regarded 


x  The  ^Sii^P  Spi^    "flying  serpent,"  in  the  natural  world,  Isa.  xiv.  29,  has 

its  celestial  counterpart  in  the  D^SSiytt  Ds£n^,  Isa.  vi.  2.  The  former  is  au 
emblem  of  the  Messiah,  who  as  with  a  fiery  poisonous  bite  kills  the  world- 
power,  which  is  destructive  to  the  people  of  God.  The  heavenly  seraph  on  the 
other  hand  (Isa.  vi.  6  sq.  )  burns  away  the  sin  which  destroys  man.  The  seraph, 
lifted  up  by  Moses  as  an  antidote  to  the  slaying  D^tW  (Num.  xxi.  6),  is  an 
image  of  a  more  exalted  seraph,  who  slays  not  the  sinner,  but  the  sin  and  the 
ruin  effected  thereby,  and  is  therefore  a  serpent  as  uyettiSaipuv. 


GENESIS  III.  1.  151 

as  mythic  or  symbolic,  the  serpent  was  pre-eminently  adapted 
to  represent  an  earthly  power  of  seduction  with  a  mysterious 
background.  And  this  mysterious  background  is,  as  revela 
tion  in  its  onward  course  discloses,  the  evil  which  before  the 
fall  of  man  had  already  invaded  the  world  of  spirits.  The 
ancient  Persian  tradition  is  that  which  has  remained  most 
faithful  to  the  original  meaning  of  the  scriptural  tradition. 
The  serpent  (DaJmlca)  is  the  first  creature  by  means  of  whom 
Ahriman  destroys  the  first  created  land  of  Ormuzd  (Airjana- 
vatiga)  ;  it  has  "  three  jaws,  three  heads,  six  eyes  and  a  thousand 
senses,"  and  is  called  the  powerful  devilish  monster,  the  un 
godly  one  who  is  destructive  to  all  beings  (DMZ.  xxxvi.  571). 
Ahriman  is  represented  as  appearing  in  serpent  form,  and  is 
himself  called  the  serpent.  The  Trita  of  the  Vedic  legend, 
who  falls  in  conflict  with  the  serpent  (alii  —  6^9),  has  its 
counterpart  in  the  Persian  in  Thraetona,  one  of  its  three 
great  heroes,  who  slays  the  destroying  serpent  (Zend,  aslii 
dahaka),  "  made  by  Ahriman  for  the  ruin  of  the  world : " 
the  serpent,  the  enemy  of  all  good,  according  to  Aryan 
belief,  destroyed  peace,  annihilated  Paradise,  overthrew  Jima 
(DschemscJiid),  the  noble  sovereign  of  the  golden  age,  who  is, 
as  Eoth,  Muir,  Spiegel  have  shown,  one  with  the  Indian  Jama, 
"the  first  man  who  died,"  according  to  Atharveda,  xviii.  3.  14. 
The  Babylonio-Assyrian  tradition  too  stands  in  unmistakable 
connection  with  the  scriptural  history  of  the  fall.  In  it  the 
serpent  as  a  beast  from  the  abyss  is  called  Ti'dmat,  and  as 
the  enemy  KCL-T  e%.  aibu.  Merodach  goes  forth  against  him, 
treads  him  in  the  dust  and  kills  him.  He  is  thus  a  dsemoniac 
being.  If  the  biblical  account  had  placed  in  the  stead  of 
this  serpent,  the  serpent  of  natural  history  as  a  symbol  of 
sensuality  and  the  charms  of  sense,  it  would  have  imparted 
a  moral  shallowness  to  the  national  legends,  while  in  truth 
the  scriptural  reproduction  of  such  national  popular  legends 
has  stripped  them  of  their  mythological  tinsel,  and  reduced 
them  to  the  gerin  of  the  genuine  and  simple  state  of  the 
case. 


152  GENESIS  III.  2,  3. 

The  whole  depth  of  Satan's  wickedness  is  disclosed  in  the 
words  of  the  serpent.  It  is  impossible  that  we  should  con 
ceive  too  highly  of  the  rank  assigned  to  this  spirit  among  the 
heavenly  spirits  and  in  creation  in  general.  His  rebellion 
against  God,  his  efforts  to  supplant  Him  and  to  put  himself  in 
His  place,  his  acquirement  of  the  sovereignty  of  this  world 
through  the  fall  of  man,  can  only  be  explained  as  the  abuse  of 
an  exceptionally  high  place  of  power  bestowed  upon  him  by 
God.  His  subtilty  is  shown  in  his  application  to  the  woman 
as  the  weaker,  and  by  the  manner  in  which  he  begins  his 
temptation  by  representing  in  apparently  inoffensive  ignorance 
the  barrier  which  God  had  drawn  round  man  as  general,  and 
thus  making  it  sensibly  felt.  The  answer  of  the  woman,  vv.  2 
and  3  :  And  the  woman  said  to  the  serpent,  We  may  eat  of  the 
fruit  of  the  trees  of  the  garden,  and  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree 
wliicli  is  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  Elohim  has  said :  You 
shall  not  eat  of  it,  nor  touch  it,  lest  you  die.  The  pausal  <>5K3 
is  certainly  not  equivalent  to  ^ruK  BY?N,  but  first  of  all  a 
potential :  we  may  eat  of  it,  and  are  also  doing  so.  The  p  of 
•nspi  does  not  answer  to  the  Latin  de,  Greek  irepi, — it  is  only 
so  used  in  a  bad  modern  Hebrew  style, — but  the  words  :  and 
of  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  etc.,  stand  first  as  the  apodosis :  and 
as  for  eating  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  etc.  ttfcp,  3a,  refers  to 
the  fruit,  or  even,  according  to  Via,  to  the  tree.  The  woman 
shows  herself  fully  conscious  of  the  Divine  prohibition,  and 
of  the  penalty  with  which  its  transgression  is  threatened.  }3 
states  the  consequence  by  way  of  warning,  and  the  paragogic 
imperfect  j^npn  has  a  more  energetic  sound  than  irpiDn,  Lev. 
x.  7.  The  addition  to  iwn  &Cn  is  mostly  understood  as  a  dis 
tortion  (Ambrose :  dccoloratio]  of  the  prohibition,  betraying  a 
feeling  of  its  harshness  and  strictness.  But  the  command  not 
to  eat  of  the  fruit  of  this  tree  really  involved  the  command 
not  to  touch  it ;  besides,  it  was  not  touching  but  eating  to 
which  the  charms  of  the  tree  finally  seduced  the  woman, 
and,  which  is  the  chief  matter,  the  tempter  would  not  have 
immediately  found  so  receptive  a  soil  for  the  seed  of  mistrust 


GENESIS  III.  4,  5.  153 

which  he  was  sowing.  It  is  more  probable  that  the  woman, 
seized  with  alarmed  foreboding  of  what  the  serpent  was 
trying  to  persuade  her  to,  sought  by  this  addition  to  cut  off 
any  further  allurements.  The  slight  attempt  to  excite  mis 
trust,  which  had  been  so  far  successful  that  the  woman  did 
not  flee  at  his  utterance,  was  now  followed  by  the  bold 
denial  of  what  God  had  threatened,  ver.  4  :  Then  the  serpent 
said  unto  the  woman  :  Ye  shall  not  surely  die.  This  denial  of 
the  truth  of  God  sounds  as  strong  as  possible  :  the  brevity 
and  completeness  of  the  expression  make  the  contradiction 
absolute.  The  finite  verb  is  strengthened  by  the  inf.  inten- 
sivus ;  the  imperfect  form  for  moriemini  is  energetic,  and  fc6 
does  not  stand  between  the  infinitive  and  finite,  but  before 
the  former,  which  is  anomalous  and  rare,  Ps.  xlix.  8  ;  Amos 
ix.  8.  After  denying  the  truth  of  God,  the  tempter  disputes 
His  love,  thus  exciting  first  doubt  and  then  ambition,  ver.  5  : 
For  Elohim  knows,  that  in  the  day  of  your  eating  thereof,  your 
eyes  will  le  opened,  and  you  will  le  like  Elohim,  knowing 
good  and  evil.  The  antecedent  131  Di"2  is  followed  by  the 
perf.  conscc.  with  i  apodosis,  like  Ex.  xxxii.  34,  xvi.  6  sq.  ; 
Prov.  xxiv.  29  ;  comp.  Driver,  Hebrew  Tenses,  §  123.  LXX. 
and  Jerome  here  translate :  sicut  Dii  scicntcs  l)onum  et 
malnm,  thus  leaving  it  uncertain  whether  W  is  meant  as 
an  adj.  to  DTibtf  (for  which  iii.  22,  comp.  2  Sam.  xiv.  17, 
may  be  referred  to)  or  (which  is  favoured  by  the  accentua 
tion)  as  a  second  predicate  to  nrpm,  "  ye  shall  be  like 
God,  ye  shall  be  knowing  good  and  evil."  The  meaning 
is  however  the  same,  whichever  the  combination.  The 
tempter  promises  man,  as  the  reward  of  a  participation 
which  sets  aside  the  prohibition  of  God,  a  knowledge 
which  shall  make  them  like  God.  This  is  to  make  envy, 
which  selfishly  grudges  man  the  highest  good,  envy  the  most 
hateful  contrast  to  love,  the  motive  of  the  prohibition.  There 
is  however  in  the  promised  eritus  sicut  Dcus  an  element  of 
truth  which  makes  its  falsehood  a  blinding  one.  Man 
certainly  was  to  attain  by  this  tree  to  the  knowledge  of  good 


154  GENESIS  III.  6. 

and  evil,  and  so  to  self-dependence  and  thereby  to  likeness 
to  God.  But  the  progress  brought  to  pass  by  partaking  is 
the  exact  opposite  to  the  progress  which,  according  to  the 
purpose  of  God,  was  to  be  brought  about  by  abstaining  from 
partaking.  To  eat  contrary  to  the  command  of  God  was  self- 
emancipation  from  the  restraint  of  law,  self-elevation  to  anti- 
theistic  autonomy,  self- completion  by  deciding  against  God,  in 
one  word  self-apotheosis,  not  by  direct  rebellion  against  God, 
but  through  subjection  to  the  power  of  sense,  6a :  Then  the 
woman  saw  that:  the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and  that  it  was  a 
delight  to  the  eyes,  and  that  the  tree  was  pleasant  to  look  on. 
The  {>  of  ''JNpp  is  like  that  of  n&OD^,  Josh.  xxii.  1 0,  and  indeed 
like  that  of  rmi>,  Song  of  Sol.  i.  3  ;  while  in  D*D^  Job  xxxii.  4, 
it  is  on  the  other  hand  an  expression  of  the  relation,  and  not 
at  the  same  time  of  the  end  intended.  That  which  causes  a 
feeling  of  delight  combined  with  desire  for  possession  is  here 
called  fiJ^R  The  reason  for  the  repetition  of  the  subject  YP.^ 
in  the  third  sentence  is,  that  this  third  sentence  gives  the  sum- 
total  of  the  other  two.  Hence  it  does  not  mean  to  say  that 
the  tree  appeared  to  her  desirable,  because  it  seemed  to  give 
her  that  of  which  the  serpent  held  out  the  prospect,  viz.  the 
means  of  higher  knowledge,  perhaps  because  she  imagined  that 
it  was  to  his  partaking  of  this  fruit  that  the  serpent  was  indebted 
for  his  superiority  to  the  other  beasts  in  wisdom.  Then  ^3&r\ 
would  mean  to  make  intelligent,  wise  (like  Ps.  xxxii.  8  ;  Prov. 
xvi.  23,  xxi.  11,  according  to  which  Gen.  ralla,  c.  19  and  65  : 
it  appeared  to  her  noan  ^DID),  or  rather  (which  would  better 
suit  ipna)  to  become  intelligent,  to  acquire  knowledge  (like  Ps. 
ii.  10,  xciv.  8).  The  translation  however  of  the  LXX.,  apalov 
rov  Karavofjcrai,  comes  nearer  to  the  apparently  summing-up 
character  of  the  third  sentence.  The  consequence  of  the  tree 
appearing  to  her  as  one  good  to  the  taste  and  pleasant  to  the 
eyes,  was  that  she  found  it  agreeable,  and  to  give  herself  to  its 
contemplation.  For  the  Hiph.  ^ajpn,  starting  from  the  notion 
of  thought  and  reflection,  means  attendere,  attente  contemplari 
(with  an  accus.  following,  e.g.  Deut.  xxxii.  29,  or  a  preposition, 


GENESIS  III.  6,  7.  155 


e.g.  ?s,  Ps.  xli.  2).  In  any  case,  ?3wr  }*yn  ^n:n  means  that 
the  tree  had  not  only  a  charming  exterior  in  her  eyes,  but 
that  it  had  also  gained  an  attractive  background.  She 
looked  at  it  in  the  false  light  thrown  upon  it  by  the  serpent, 
and  thus  regarded,  it  reacted  so  irresistibly  upon  her,  that 
lust  conceived  and  immediately  brought  forth  sin,  65:  And 
she  took  of  its  fruit,  and  ate  ;  and  gave  to  her  husband  with  her, 
and  he  ate.  The  pausal  ^?N5}  and  i^xrn  have  the  tone  upon 
the  ultimate;  the  extra-pausal,  xxv.  34,  Lev.  ix.  24,  x.  2, 
upon  the  penultimate;  comp.  below  on  ver.  12,  "To  her 
husband,  fifty,"  does  not  mean  added  to  her  (which  would 
rather  have  been  expressed  by  nfitf,  comp.  Num.  xviii.  1), 
but  found  near  her.  He  whose  existence  in  the  Divine  image 
preceded  that  of  the  woman  remains  at  first  passive  in  the 
transaction  against  God,  and  then  becomes  the  follower  of  his 
wife  in  sin.  The  woman  who  was  the  first  seduced  lost  her 
human  dignity  to  the  serpent,  and  the  man  next  seduced  lost 
over  and  above  his  manly  dignity  to  the  woman.  They  in 
whom  that  work  of  love,  creation,  culminated,  act  as  though 
God  were  mere  arbitrariness  and  malevolence.  A  beast  seduces 
men  made  in  God's  image.  The  lord  of  the  world  and  his 
helpmate  fall  through  a  tree  :  their  natural  environment, 
which  they  were  to  keep  and  to  rule,  entangles  them,  and  thus 
becomes  their  and  its  own  ruin.  Human  sin  has  to  be 
variously  labelled,  and  it  is  in  this  respect  characteristic  that 
the  fall  of  man  was  brought  to  pass  by  Satan  by  means  of  a 
beast  and  about  a  tree.  All  sin  begins  by  being  sensual,  then 
becomes  bestial,  and  finally,  if  the  sinner  advances  on  this 
course,  Satanic.  The  first  results  of  sin  are  shame  and 
avoidance  of  God,  vv.  7-10.  The  promise  of  the  serpent  is 
fulfilled  :  they  gain  knowledge,  but  of  what  ?  Yer.  7  :  Then 
the  eyes  of  loth  were  opened,  and  they  knew  that  they  were 
naked  ;  and  they  sewed  leaves  of  the  fig-tree  together  and  made 
themselves  aprons.  The  verb  yT  means  not  merely  intellectual 
knowledge,  but  at  the  same  time  profound  inward  experience 
(nosse  cum  affcctu  et  cffectu}.  njnparn  states  the  act  us  dircctus  of 


156  GENESIS  III.  7. 


knowledge,  and  the  W]*!  that  follows  the  aclus  reflexus  of 
feeling  nakedness  to  be  a  shame.  Their  spirit  had  broken 
away  from  the  God  of  its  origin,  their  body  was  no  longer 
pervaded  by  spirit  in  union  with  God,  naked  sensuousness  is 
stripped  of  its  innocence,  it  manifests  the  inward  stirrings  of 
sin,  and  reacts  on  the  soul  in  temptation.  Therefore  they 
were  now  ashamed,  and  this  feeling  was  indeed  the  con 
sequence  of  sin,  but  also  a  reaction  against  it.  The  verb  ion 
means,  like  paTrren,  to  sew  together  with  a  needle,  or  to  join 
in  some  other  way,  e.g.  by  means  of  string.  The  apron  is 
called  n^n,  from  "ian,  to  surround,  whence  the  Arab,  higr,  bosom, 
where  the  mother  holds  and  embraces  her  child,  nasn,  Assyr. 
tittu  =  tintu,  according  to  the  common  use  of  the  word  the 
ficus  carica,  is,  according  to  Ftirst,  from  njN  =  n3y,  to  be  bent, 
as  growing  crooked.  But  the  leaves  of  the  common  fig  have 
no  tough  tendrils  and  are  too  soft  for  aprons.  Some  kind 
of  fig  no  longer  ascertainable  is  meant  by  the  fig  -  tree  of 
Paradise.  The  Musa  paradisiaca  however  is,  botanically 
regarded,  no  fig-tree  at  all.  They  made  themselves  aprons  of 
foliage  like  that  of  the  Pisang  or  Banana,  to  cover  the  parts 
where  the  generative  organs,  called  both  in  scriptural  and 
human  language  in  general  the  privy  members,  are  situated. 
These  are  called  nnjf  (e.g.  ix.  22  sq.)  and  "1^3  (e.g.  Lev.  xv.  2  ; 
comp.  Ex.  xxviii.  42),  because  nakedness  and  flesh,  which  shame 
bids  men  to  cover,  culminate  in  them.  Here,  where  all  the 
radii  of  the  natural  life,  now  stripped  of  the  consecration  of 
the  Spirit,  meet,  as  in  its  source,  the  contrast  of  the  natural 
and  the  spiritual,  now  severed  from  each  other,  came  forth  in 
its  greatest  sharpness.  But  it  is  a  wrong  inference  of  recent 
writers  (Wendt,  Lclire  von  der  mensclil.  Vollkommenlicit,  1882, 
p.  203,  Budde  and  others),  that  nakedness  in  itself  fails, 
according  to  the  view  here  presented,  under  the  idea  of  the 
jn  from  which  the  tree  of  knowledge  gets  its  name.  Evil  is 
disobedience,  and  the  feeling  of  shame,  now  excited  by  naked 
ness,  was  only  one  of  its  evil  consequences. 

Mankind  had  now  decided  against  God,  yet  not  directly,  not 


GENESIS  III.  8.  157 

unseduced,  and  not  as  purely  spiritual  beings,  but  as  beings 
composed  of  spirit  and  body ;  hence  this  first  sin,  notwith 
standing  its  infinite  guilt,  did  not,  as  is  immediately  shown, 
exclude  their  capability  of  redemption,  although  redemption  is 
only  a  work  of  free  unmerited  mercy.  The  Creator  approaches 
His  fallen  creatures,  and  that  not  merely  as  a  judge,  8a: 
Then  they  heard  the  sound  of  Jahveh  Eloliim  as  He  walked 
into  the  garden  in  the  -wind  of  the  day.  ^p  is  found  also  at 
2  Sam.  v.  24,  1  Kings  xix.  12,  for  the  sound  which  shows 
that  some  one  is  approaching,  ^nnp  may  be  taken  either  as  in 
genitival  apposition,  or  like  i^rVD,  Ps.  Ixix.  4,  as  an  accusative 
of  circumstance  (according  to  the  Arab  technical  term  as  JU-); 
comp.  on  iv.  10.  Modern  expositors  take  delight  in  making 
this  child -like  narrative  as  childish  as  possible.  But  the 
Hithpael  sjVwn,  spoken  of  God,  does  not  mean  an  aimless 
walking  in  security,  like  Job  xxii.  14,  in  the  mouth  of  the 
Epicurean,  but  a  majestic  walking  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  like 
Lev.  xxvi.  12  ;  Dent,  xxiii.  15  ;  2  Sam.  vii.  6.  &isn  nn  is  the 
time  of  evening  coolness,  as  Oi*n  fin,  xviii.  1,  is  the  time  of 
mid-day  heat.  At  evening  the  distracting  impressions  of  the 
day  are  weaker,  the  mind  is  in  repose,  we  feel  more  alone  with 
ourselves  than  at  other  times,  and  the  feelings  of  melancholy, 
of  longing,  of  isolation,  of  home  sickness  are  awakened.  And 
thus  it  now  came  to  pass  that  at  eventide  our  first  parents 
began  to  recover  from  the  intoxication  of  Satanic  deception ; 
they  grew  quieter,  they  felt  their  isolation  from  communion  with 
God,  their  separation  from  the  home  of  their  origin,  and  the 
approaching  darkness  made  them  aware  that  their  inward  light 
was  extinct.  In  this  condition  they  became  conscious  of  the 
sound  of  God's  footsteps.  It  was  God  their  Creator,  who  now  as 
God  the  Eedeemer  was  seeking  the  lost.  The  anthropomorphic 
character  of  the  event  must  not  be  entirely  set  to  the  account 
of  the  narrative,  it  corresponds  with  the  Paradisaic  mode  of 
God's  intercourse  with  man,  which  culminated  in  the  incarna 
tion,  as  the  restoration  and  completion  of  the  first  beginning 
in  Paradise.  God  did  not  come  down  from  heaven,  but  dwelt 


158  GENESIS  III.  8-10. 

as  yet  on  earth.  A  golden  age,  in  which  God  or  the  gods 
have  not  yet  withdrawn  to  the  distant  heaven,  but  hold  direct 
and  intimate  intercourse  with  men,  forms  the  outer  rim  of 
most  national  histories.  At  the  approach  of  God  they  were 
afraid ;  shame  was  the  first  consequence  of  sin,  avoidance  of 
God  the  second,  8& :  Then  the  man  and  his  wife  hid  themselves 
"before  Jahveh  Elohim  amid  the  trees  of  the  garden,  properly  the 
wood  of  the  garden,  which  is  just  such  a  collective  word  as  fl). 
Here  Pentateuchal  diction  avoids  the  plur.  CW  in  the  sense  of 
trees,  which  it  has  in  the  more  modern  usage  of  the  language, 
and  employs  it  only  in  the  sense  of  words  as  plural  of  the 
product.  Nsnnn  (Kana,  10&)  means  a  temporary  concealment 
occasioned  by  fear,  differing  from  "iflpJ,  to  hide  oneself  (iv.  14). 
A  reproving  conscience  manifests  itself  in  this  concealment, 
as  well  as  in  their  covering  their  nakedness,  while  it  is  at 
the  same  time  shown  that  as  delusion  is  the  cause,  so  also  is 
folly  the  consequence  of  sin ;  for  though  it  is  impossible  that 
man  should  make  himself  undiscoverable  by  God,  the  sinner 
attempts  the  impossible.  Ver.  9  :  Then  Jahveh  Elohim  called 
unto  the  man,  and  said  to  him,  Where  art  thou  ?  nb^K  is  used 
in  inquiring  after  the  place  of  an  object  which  is  being  sought 
for,  e.g.  xxxvii.  16,  and  n»K  (=ajjaj,  as  n$n=hinnaj,  according  to 
the  formation  ^p  •»]«)  in  inquiring  after  the  place  of  a  person 
who  is  missing,  xviii.  1 9  ;  Judg.  vi.  13;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  5  0  ;  hence, 
where  art  thou,  why  art  thou  not  in  the  place  where  thou 
shouldst  be  looked  for  and  found  1  The  question  is  not  where 
are  ye,  for  the  first  man  is  the  man  /car  e'f.  responsible  for  the 
woman  and  for  all  mankind.  God  seeks  him,  not  because  he 
is  lost  from  His  knowledge,  but  from  His  communion.  He 
answers,  ver.  1 0  :  /  heard  Thy  sound  in  the  garden,  and  I  was 
afraid,  for  I  am  naked  ;  and  I  hid  myself.  The  consequence, 
NTNJ  (from  &OJ,  with  the  root  notion  of  trembling),  denotes, 
like  Hab.  iii.  16,  the  effect  of  hearing.  After  the  tie  of 
loving  intercourse  is  broken,  man  occupies  the  position  of  a 
disobedient  servant  towards  God.  The  answer  he  gives  is  not 
untrue,  but  it  conceals  the  sin  itself  behind  what  was  only  its 


GENESIS  III.  11-13.  159 

consequence,  disobedience  behind  the  feeling  of  shame.  And 
as  the  examination  continues,  both  he  and  the  woman  avoid 
open  and  penitent  confession  by  excuses  for  sin.  The  question 
to  the  man,  ver.  11,  is  :  Who  showed  thee  that  thou  wast  naked  ? 
Hast  thou  eaten  of  the  tree  of  which  I  commanded  thee  not  to  eat  ? 
As  njv  is  combined  with  a  double  accusative,  e.g.  vi.  22, 
"iC'K  must  be  taken  accusatively  :  which  I  commanded  thee, 
viz.  not  to  eat  of  it.  ft?n  suggests  confession  to  the  man  ;  but 
instead  of  frankly  owning  his  sin,  he  lays  the  blame  upon 
the  woman,  and  indirectly  upon  God  Himself,  ver.  12  :  Then 
the  man  said,  The  woman  whom  Thou  gavest  to  be  with  me,  she 
gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  ate.  The  certainly  preferable  acces 
sory  from  Hisy  for  W  was  here  desirable,  even  on  account  of 
the  rhythm.  23  KJ  is  the  pausal  form  of  the  first  pers.  with 
Tsere,  while  out  of  pause  it  is  written  «fcj,  xxvii.  33  ; 
both  have  the  tone  on  the  ultima,  for  a  distinction  even  by 
means  of  the  tone  is  only  found  in  the  impf.  cons,  (apart  from 
a  recession  caused  by  a  word  following  with  the  tone  on  the 
first  syllable,  as  in  b^,  2  Sam.  xii.  21  ;  1  Kings  xiii.  22) 

in  the  second  pers.  (tatffll,  iii.   l"7a)   and  the  third  pers.  (e.g. 


J3K*},  iii.  65;  ??^,  xxv.  34).  The  question  to  the  woman,  and 
the  answer,  ver.  13  :  Then  Jahveh  Elohim  said  to  the  woman, 
What  is  this  thou  hast  done  ?  And  the  woman  said,  The 
serpent  beguiled  me,  and  1  ate.  The  demonstrative  nKt  or 
n.T  makes  the  question  in  such  cases  more  vivid,  and  gives  it 
certain  definite  reference  ;  when  n^y  follows,  flNrno  is  usual 
(Ges.  §  37.  1),  Ex.  xiv.  5  ;  Judg.  xv.  11  ;  with  other  verbs, 
nrno,  xxvii.  20;  Judg.  xviii.  24;  1  Sam.  x.  11.  The  man 
had  laid  the  blame  upon  the  woman,  she  lays  it  upon  the 
serpent.  KH0n  means  to  deceive,  to  lead  astray,  to  beguile  any 
one,  i.e.  to  represent  to  him  that  such  and  such  an  evil  will 
not  happen  to  him,  2  Chron.  xxxii.  15  ;  Jer.  xxxvii.  9  ;  comp. 
Qairarav,  2  Cor.  xi.  3  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  14.  It  is  the  right  word 
for  what  the  woman  had  experienced,  but  the  wrong  thing  is 
that  both  did  not  first  of  all  smite  their  own  breasts.  Every 


160  GENESIS  III.  14,  15. 

subsequent  human  sin  looks  so  like  this  original  sin,  because 
we  have  not  only  inherited  the  sinful  nature  of  our  first 
parents,  but  also  the  nature  of  their  sin. 

The  judicial  examination  is  now  followed  by  the  penal 
sentences.  The  first  falls  upon  the  tempter,  vv.  14,  15: 
And  Jahveh  Elohim  said  unto  the  serpent,  Because  tJwu  hast 
done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above,  all  cattle,  and  every  beast  of  the 
field :  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all 
the  days  of  thy  life.  And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and 
the  woman,  and  between  her  seed  and  thy  seed:  it  shall  'bruise, 
thy  head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel.  The  penal  sentence 
begins  with  ^  as  the  relative  conjunction  of  the  reason.  "iVtK 
(from  vi K,  a  word  imitative  of  the  sound  used  under  the 

indignant  experience  of  insolent  behaviour,  comp.^.j&,  detestari, 

abhorrere  *),  similar  to  Kar-dp-aro^,  "  accursed,"  and  then  also 
"  deserving  of  a  curse,"  is  stronger  than  /pp?  (disesteemed, 
extremely  depreciated,  execrated).  The  Semite  uses  for  such 
formulas  of  desire  the  simply  assertive  form  of  expression 
without  an  optative  verb.  The  IP  of  the  two  ^3D  is  not  com 
parative  (more  cursed  than  .  .  .  )  but  selective,  like  e.g.  Judg. 
v.  24.  Jina,  belly,  is  an  old  word  formed  from  jm,  to  bend,  like 
inx  from  pN.  To  go  upon  the  belly  is  to  crawl  (comp.  Sanscr. 
uraga,  breast-goer  =  serpent) ;  animals  of  this  kind  are,  accord 
ing  to  Lev.  xi.  42,  unclean.  To  eat  dust  does  not  mean  the 
proper  nourishment  of  the  serpent,  either  here  or  Isa.  Ixv.  25 
(a  retrospect  at  the  history  of  the  fall),  but,  like  Micah  vii.  1 7, 
to  lick  the  dust  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxii.  9  ;  Isa.  xlix.  23),  the  involun 
tary  result  of  writhing  in  dust.  T?n  *??)'?  means  the  duration  of 
the  life  of  this  serpent  as  the  representative  of  its  species. 
It  is  on  the  animal  that  the  penal  sentence  is  passed,  its 
mode  of  life  being  judicially  changed.  The  cunning  animal, 
which  as  the  instrument  of  an  evil  will  had  raised  itself  above 


1  Friedr.  Delitzsch  on  the  other  hand,  Proleg.  101  :  to  curse  =  to  enchant, 
after  the  Assyr.  ardru,  which  means  to  curse,  arid  is  also  the  stem-word  of  arru 
bird-catcher,  and  irritu,  sling. 


GENESIS  III.  14,  15.  161 

God  and  His  will,  becomes  a  worm  in  the  dust  (serpens,  from 
serperc,  epirew}.  The  serpent  is  the  only  animal  among  those 
having  bony  skeletons  that  goes  upon  its  belly.  Its  punish 
ment  is  analogous  to  that  which  our  body  suffers  in  conse 
quence  of  sin.  Both  suffer  as  organum  animcc  or  spiritus 
pcccantis.  A  beast  is  not  in  itself  responsible  for  its  actions, 
yet  it  is  punished  when  man  has  suffered  any  harm  in  life  or 
body  by  its  means,  ix.  5;  Ex.  xxi.  28  sq. ;  comp.  Lev.  xx. 
15  sq. ;  for  the  irrational  creation  is  destined  for  man,  and  is, 
when  it  breaks  through  this  barrier  of  its  destination,  visited 
with  the  judgment  of  God.  The  degradation  of  the  serpent, 
ver.  14,  is  the  punishment  of  its  exalting  itself  against  God, 
but  the  false  relation  into  which  it  has  entered  with  regard  to 
man  will  also,  according  to  ver.  15,  be  punished.  The  woman, 
having  taken,  in  her  encounter  with  the  serpent,  the  step  which 
decided  the  lot  of  mankind,  is  the  representative  of  the  whole 
race,  and  divine  retribution  puts,  i.e.  establishes  and  appoints,  a 
relation,  not  merely  of  mutual  inward  antipathy,  but  also  (Ps. 
cxxxix.  22)  of  actual  feud,  between  the  serpent  and  the  woman, 
and  not  only  between  the  present  individuals,  but  between 
their  respective  descendants.  And  who  shall  conquer  in  this 
war  thus  made  the  law  of  subsequent  history  ?  "  He  (the  seed 
of  the  woman)  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his 
heel."  For  so  we  translate,  though  it  is  still  esteemed  question 
able  whether  the  verb  rji^  has  here  the  meaning  of  conterere 
(Syr.  Samar.  Saad.  Pers.,  Ar.  Erpen.,  Gr.  Yen.,  Lth.)  or  that  of 
inhiare,  i.e.  of  hostile  effort  (LXX.  rfrjpeli>)  which  way  of  taking 
it  is  also  that  of  Onkelos),  or  whether  both  meanings  are 
in  some  manner  at  once  applicable  (Targ.  Jer.  i.  and  ii.,  which 
amalgamates,  and  Jerome  who  distributes  them:  conteret  .  .  . 
insidiaberis).  We  decide  against  Kn.  Baur,  Ewald  (§  281c) 
and  Dillmann,  and  with  Hengstenberg,  Eodiger,  Fiirst,  Kalisch, 
Keil,  Kohler,  Schultz  (comp.  Hitzig  on  Job  ix.  17),  for  the 
meaning  conterere;  for  (1)  inhiare,  which  is  the  meaning  of 
t)XP,  has  neither  biblical  nor  post-biblical  corroboration  as  that 
of  fp£>,  which  occurs  only  in  Judaic  Aramaean  in  the  sense  of 

L 


162  GENESIS  III.  14,  15. 

"  to  blow."  (2)  The  meaning  inhiare  is  inadmissible,  because 
no  verb  of  hostile  endeavour,  such  as  2"iK  t?|jO  rm  Tfi?  5p"i,  is 
combined  with  a  double  accusative  ;  this  construction  with  the 
accusative  of  the  person  and  of  the  part  or  member  (this 
second  ace.  always  without  the  article)  being  peculiar  to 
verbs  of  hostile  action,  such  as  nsn^  xxxvii.  2  1  ;  Judg.  xv.  8  ; 
2  Sam.  iii.  27;  Ps.  iii.  8;  nn,  Deut.  xxii.  26;  pnD,  Deut. 
xxxiii.  11;  njn,  Jer.  ii.  16;  Ges.  §  139,  note.  (3)  f]1&?  has 
also  the  meaning  conterere  in  Job  ix.  17  (against  which  it  is 
used  in  quite  a  different  sense  in  Ps.  cxxxix.  11,  see  the 
comm.),  and  (derived  from  V  t\w,  to  rub)  is  very  usual  in 
Semitic  (e.g.  in  Syriac,  DMZ.  xxix.  147).  SJIP  is  the  Targum 
word  for  N2H,  jntD  arid  pn$,  ^  (from  KS£>,  to  pound,  to  rub  down) 
the  Targum  word  for  N3T  (comp.  Ps.  li.  17,  Wi  "i^n  J?).1  To 
this  must  be  added,  (4)  that  the  meaning  a-wrptpetVj  conterere, 
Eom.  xvi.  20,  has  the  actual  condition  of  the  sentence  here 
passed  preponderantly  in  its  favour.  For  if  both  Pp£>  here,  and 
indeed  both  times  (since  the  first  must  have  the  same  meaning 
as  the  second,  comp.  xlix.  19),  means  "to  use  hostile  effort," 
the  result  would  be  the  statement  devoid  of  promise,  that  man 
will  attack  the  serpent  in  front,  and  the  serpent  the  man  from 
behind  —  a  graphic  description  merely  of  their  continued 
enmity.  There  would  be  no  declaration  that  the  contest 
would  result  in  the  victory  of  man  ;  and  even  supposing 
it  did  so  as  a  necessary  consequence  from  the  facts  that 
a  curse  was  pronounced  upon  the  serpent,  and  that  tin?, 
contest  was  one  ordained  by  God  (Dillmann),  it  would 
be  just  on  the  chief  matter  that  nothing  would  be  said. 
If  on  the  other  hand  we  take  t\wr  to  mean  conterere,  the 
first  time  by  trampling,  the  second  by  biting,  —  for  bites 
are  always  bruises  as  well,  and  the  root  -  related  t_g.u/> 
unites  in  itself  the  meanings  comminuere  and  mordere,  — 


1  The  name  of  the  serpent,  f^SP,  xlix.  17,  Syr.  NB1BP,  is  on  the  other  hand 

derived  from  P|SD£>  in  its  fundamental  meaning  to  rub,  viz.  the  ground  =  to  creep, 
according  to  which  the  foot  is  in  Assyrian  called  sepu,  as  terens,  conterens, 
calcans. 


GENESIS  III.  14,  15.  163 

and  Tvirreiv  too  are  used  of  both  stab  and  bite, — 
then  the  contest  is  designated  by  the  repetition  of  a  word, 
one  expressing  an  act  as  strongly  as  possible,  as  a  contest  of 
mutual  annihilation,  and  we  obtain  not  merely  an  intimated 
but  an  openly  pronounced  promise  of  the  final  victory  of  the 
seed  of  the  woman  over  the  seed  of  the  serpent,  a  promise 
which  is  a  curse  upon  the  serpent  as  peremptory  as  we 
expect.  If  the  words  are  thus  spoken  in  the  sense  of  a  final 
victory,  the  whole  sentence  has  a  hidden  reverse  side,  by 
which,  while  including  indeed  the  seed  of  the  serpent,  it  is 
directed  to  that  serpent  which  had  plunged  mankind  into 
misery.  The  sentence  applies  in  and  with  this  serpent  to 
Satan  also,  whose  organ  it  had  become.  More  is  in  question 
than  a  conflict  with  a  noxious  animal,  viz.  the  conflict  of 
mankind  seduced,  but  yet  not  given  up  by  God,  with  the 
seducer.  The  serpent  creeping  on  its  belly  and  writhing  in 
the  dust  makes  visible  the  degradation  beneath  all  other 
creatures  of  Satan,  who  by  the  seduction  of  mankind  filled 
up  the  measure  of  his  iniquity;  and  the  spiteful  bite  on  the 
heel,  with  which  in  the  midst  of  its  overthrow  it  requites  the 
bruising  of  its  head,  symbolizes  the  contest  of  mankind  with 
the  devil,  and  all  who  are  etc  TOV  $ia(36\ov  (rrovrjpov)^  and 
therefore  not  so  much  the  seed  of  the  woman  as  of  the  serpent, 
and  the  decisive  victory  of  mankind  in  which  this  contest  is 
to  issue.  It  is  at  first  promised  only  that  mankind  will  gain 
this  victory,  for  Kin  refers  to  n^^  jnr.  But  as  the  promise  of 
victory  speaks  of  victory  over  the  serpent,  from  whom  the 
temptation  proceeded,  and  hence  directly  of  victory  over  the 
original  tempter,  over  6  6'0t?  o  ap^alos  (Rev.  xii.  9,  xx.  2  •=. 
jioipn  B>n:  of  the  Midrash),  the  inference  is  obvious,  that  the 
seed  of  the  woman  would  also  be  concentrated  and  culminate 
in  the  unity  of  a  person,  one  in  whom  the  antagonism  would 
be  enhanced  to  its  extreme  tension,  the  suffering  encountered 
in  the  conflict  with  the  tempter  increased  to  the  utter 
most,  and  his  overthrow  completed  by  utter  deprivation  of 
1  Exactly  thus  Briggs  (Prof,  in  New  York)  in  Messianic  Prophecy  (1886),  p.  76. 


1C4  GENESIS  III.  14,  15. 

power.1  It  is  however  a  mistake  to  think  that  son  has  precisely 
a  single  personal  meaning.  The  idea  of  ton  is  a  circle,  and 
Jesus  the  Christ  or  the  King  Messiah,  who,  as  the  Jerus.  Targum 
declares,  will  bring  final  healing  of  the  serpent's  bite  in  the 
heel,  is  the  centre  of  this  circle,  ever  more  and  more  increasingly 
manifested  during  the  course  of  the  history  of  redemption. 
Not  till  His  appearing,  who  was  to  destroy  the  works  of  the 
devil,  to  triumph  over  the  kingdom  of  the  evil  one,  1  John 
iii.  8,  Col.  ii.  15,  Heb.  ii.  14  sq.,  and  to  be  the  jon  of  the  golden 
Passional,  Isa.  liii.,  was  it  made  quite  clear  that  by  the  victory 
of  One  was  Satan  to  be  bruised  under  the  feet  of  all,  Eom. 
xvi.  20.  What  was  then  brought  to  light  had  been  already 
preform atively  given  in  this  primal  promise,  this  Protevangel. 
Since  jnf  may  just  as  well  be  understood  individually  as 
^collectively  (comp.  iv.  25,  xxi.  12  sq. ;  Gal.  iii.  16),  and  it  is  not 
said  that  it  shall  be  given  to  the  man  to  beget,  but  to  the 
woman  to  bring  forth,  that  which  shall  bruise  the  serpent's 
head,  the  prophecy  is  designed  by  its  form  also  to  concur  with 
its  fulfilment.  For  it  was  necessary  that  Christ,  to  avoid  first 
conquering  in  Himself  the  seed  of  the  serpent,  should  be  nE?K  jnt, 
7ei>o/zez/o9  e/c  yvvaiKos,  in  a  miraculously  exclusive  manner,  a 
heavenly  gift  of  grace  deposited  in  the  womb  of  a  woman. 
This  first  prophecy  of  redemption  is  not  only  the  most  general 
and  most  indefinite ;  it  is  also,  when  regarded  in  the  light  of 
its  fulfilment,  the  most  comprehensive  and  the  most  profound.2 
"  General,  indefinite,  obscure  as  the  prima3val  age  to  which  it 
belongs,"  says  Drechsler,  "  it  lies  marvellously  and  sacredly 
on  the  threshold  of  the  lost  Paradise  like  an  awe-inspiring 
sphinx  before  the  ruins  of  a  mysterious  temple ; "  and  the  Son 

1  To  the  seed  of  the  woman,  not  to  the  woman  ipsa,  according  to  the  reading 
of  the  Vulgate,  which  Bellarmine  and  Passaglia,  the  champions  of  the  doctrine 
of  the  immaculata  conceptio,  unscrupulously  defend. 

2  Hie  sol  consolationis  oritur,  says  Luther  concerning  it  ;  see  Bohl,  Chris- 
tologie,  1882,  p.   71.      The  ancient   synagogue  agrees  with  the    ecclesiastical 
interpretation  of  the  Protevangel :  the  son  of  Pharez,  Ruth  iv.    18,  i.e.  the 
Messiah,  shall  restore  the  good  state  of  the  universe  which  is  disturbed  by  the 
fall  of  man;  see  Bereshith  rabba,  ch.  xii. ;  Bamidbar  rabba,  ch.  xiii.,  and  Targum 
Jer.  i.  on  Gen.  iii.  15. 


GENESIS  III.  1C.  165 

of  the  Virgin  was  the  first — we  add — to  solve  by  fulfilling  it 
the  enigma  of  this  sphinx,  which  had  been  too  difficult  for  all 
the  saints  and  prophets. 

The  obverse  side  of  the  sentence  upon  the  serpent  is  a 
curse  upon  him,  the  reverse  a  promise  for  mankind.  Before 
the  penal  sentence  upon  man  is  pronounced,  the  mercy  of 
God  fashions  the  curse  upon  the  tempter  into  hope  for  the 
tempted.  And  now  follows  the  passing  of  sentence  upon  her 
who,  first  tempted,  became  herself  a  tempter,  ver.  16:  To  the 
woman  He  said :  I  will  greatly  multiply  iliy  sorrow  and  thy 
conception;  with  sorrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth  children,  and  thy 
desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  thee.  The  inf. 
intens.  is,  in  distinction  from  the  adverbially  employed  ninr^ 
Ges.  §  75,  note  15,  n:nn,  HkG  xvi.  10,  xxii.  17.  Frequency 
of  conception  being  no  punishment,  but  on  the  contrary  the 
presupposition  of  the  blessing  of  children,  "HiTi?1!  "H^-^V  is,  if  not 
a  hendiadys :  the  sorrows  connected  with  thy  conception 
(Samar.),  still  to  be  understood  as  a  placing  in  juxtaposition 
of  the  general  and  a  particular ;  thy  sorrow,  and  especially  thy 
conception  with  its  sorrows ;  for  conception  (H"1"]^,  inflected 
^(!,  from  ^~!?,  for  a  chief  form  IV"in  —  hirrdn,  from  a  "nn  =  mn, 
does  not  exist)  is  not  here  regarded  as  motherhood,  but  as  the 
wearisome  bearing  of  the  fruit  of  the  body.  POT  (=  |U>*y, 
as  PnT?  =  iV^  with  the  fore-tone,  like  i^an,  jh3T,  inn,  from 
3W,  c-^ocj  torquere,  Idborare)  is  meant  more  generally  of  the 
troubles  combined  with  the  female  constitution,  apart  from 
conception.  The  sentence  judicially  transforms  the  original 
condition ;  the  woman  has  transgressed  against  the  will 
of  God  for  the  sake  of  earthly  enjoyment,  she  is 
punished  for  this  by  her  sexual  life  being  involved  in 
miseries  of  all  kinds.  God's  original  will  was  that  she 
should  become  a  mother,  but  it  was  a  punishment  that 
she  should  henceforth  bring  forth  children  OT3  (comp.  3$J3  in 
the  derivation  of  the  proper  name  F3.V-,  1  Chron.  iv.  9),  i.e. 
in  the  midst  of  pains,  which  would  threaten  her  life  and  that 
of  the  child.  The  God-offending  independence  with  which 


166  GENESIS  III.  17-19. 

the  woman  acts  in  her  encounter  with  the  tempter  and  then 
sinfully  overcomes  her  husband  is  punished  in  what  is  next 
declared  to  her.  Her  reward  for  this  is  the  almost  morbid 
and  continual  desire  she  should  experience  towards  the 
man  in  spite  of  the  perils  and  pains  of  child-birth  (DMZ. 
xxxix.  606  sq.),  that  natural  attraction  which  will  not  let  her 
free  herself  from  him,  that  weak  dependence  which  impels 
her  to  lean  upon  the  man,  and  to  let  herself  be  sheltered 
and  completed  by  him.  nptfln  seems  related  to  the  Arab. 
sauk,  longing,  desire,  properly  attachment;  but  though  w  some 
times  remains  also  in  the  Arab,  ^i  (DMZ.  xxiv.  667),  a 
derivation  consistent  with  the  prevailing  transmutation  of 
consonants  is  offered  :  jiLs  means,  as  does  also  pv£;,  to  urge, 
to  impel,  whence  npv^Ti  (here  and  iv.  7  ;  Sol.  Song  vii.  10), 
impulse,  i.e.  the  emotion  or  passion  which  urges  to  anything.1 
The  woman  will  henceforth  involuntarily  follow  the  leading  of 
the  man,  and  be  subject  even  against  her  will  to  his  dominion. 
The  subordination  of  the  woman  to  the  man  was  intended  from 
the  beginning ;  but  now  that  the  harmony  of  their  mutual 
wills  in  God  is  destroyed,  this  subordination  becomes  sub 
jection.  The  man  may  command  as  master,  and  the  woman 
is  bound  externally  and  internally  to  obey.  That  slavish 
subjection  of  the  woman  to  the  man  which  was  customary 
in  the  ancient  world,  and  still  is  so  in  the  East,  and  which 
revealed  religion  has  gradually  made  more  tolerable  and  con 
sistent  with  her  human  dignity,  is  the  result  of  sin.  The 
sentence  on  the  man  now  follows,  vers.  17-19  :  And  to  Adam 
He  said:  Because  tJwu  hast  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  tliy  wife,  and 
hast  eaten  of  the  tree,  ichich  I  had  commanded  thee,  saying,  Thou 
shalt  not  eat  of  it:  cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake  ;  in  sorrow 
shalt  thou  cat  of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life ;  and  thorns  and 
thistles  shall  it  "bring  forth  to  thce  ;  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  herb 
of  the  field.  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread,  until 
thou  returnest  to  'the  ground,  for  out  of  it  wast  thou  taken ; 
for  dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  thou  shalt  return.  Here  for 
1  LXX.  3  »*»ffvfoQ*  trav,  as  if  it  had  been  "jmiKTl  (comp.  LXX.  1  Sam.  vii.  17 


GENESIS  III.  17-19.  167 


the  first  time,  as  subsequently  ver.  21,  iv.  25,  v.  1,  tns  is 
used  as  a  proper  name,  for  at  i.  26,  ii.  5,  the  article  was 
inadmissible,  and  at  ii.  20  it  was  purposely  omitted;  but  here 
it  would  be  quite  arbitrary  to  punctuate  D*jwfo  instead  of 
Dish.  The  'prominent  importance  of  this  third  sentence, 
which  includes  the  woman  as  Adam's  helpmate,  is  shown  by 
the  solemn  form  in  which  the  reasons  for  the  decision  are 
previously  stated.  On  ?3Kfrj  (and  thou  hast  eaten)  in  the 
prodosis  with  its  two  Pashtas,  the  first  of  which  marks  the 
tone  syllable,  see  above  on  ver.  12.  The  first  part  of  the 
sentence  affects  the  labour  and  self-maintenance  of  man. 
The  curse  of  sin  consists  first  of  all  in  the  circumstance  that 
the  ground,  far  from  producing  the  necessaries  of  life  with  the 
facility  and  abundance  of  Paradise,  now  requires  wearisome 
exertion,  and  often  renders  this  vain.  In  place  of  the  garden 
planted  by  God,  the  field,  where  the  seed  sown  encounters 
weeds  of  all  kinds  which  threaten  to  choke  and  destroy  it,  is 
appointed  to  man.  "VQJJ  (fruit  =  effect  and  consequence),  else 
where  usual  of  the  motive  for  good,  stands  here  as  at  viii.  2  1 
of  the  motive  to  punish,  pyy  as  already  remarked,  Pesachim 
118a  (see  Goldziher,  Mytlios  lei  den  Hebrdern,  p.  43  sq.),  is 
fuller  and  stronger  than  1VV,  16«,  used  of  birth-labour.  The 
form  napaxh  has  here,  as  Ezek.  iv.  12,  Khateph  instead  of 
simple  Sheva,  according  to  the  rule  of  Ben-Asher.  The  suffix 
refers  to  i"IP'"JN'?,  the  earth  being,  as  at  Isa.  i.  7,  synecdochi- 
cally  put  for  the  produce  of  the  earth.  I'iP'T!  PP  are  a  pair  of 
words,  occurring  only  here  and  Hos.  x.  8,  for  which  Isaiah 
gives  rPB>j  nw.  The  herb  of  the  field  and  bread  (obtained 
from  bread-corn,  Job  xxviii.  5;  Ps.  civ.  14)  are  the  contrast  to 
the  flowers  of  the  garden  and  their  fruits.  Sweat  is  called 
nyt,  not  from  JW,  concutere,  in  which  case  it  would  be  written 
njPT,  like  na<K,  rn^  but  as  the  synonymous  JJP,  Ezek.  xliv.  18, 
shows,  from  yp,  ^J.,  manare,  like  njn  from  JTT,  njty  from  \y\ 
TSK  is  purposely  used  in  conjunction  with  it  instead  of 
TJ.S,  because  the  face  of  one  breathless  and  panting  is  intended. 
Moses  qui  Irevitati  studet  —  remarks  Calvin  —  suo  more  pro  com- 


168  GENESIS  III.  17-19. 

muni  mdcji  captu  attingere  contcntus  fait  quod  magis  apparuit, 
ut  siib  uno  exemplo  discamus,  hominis  vitio  inversum  fuisse  totum 
naturce  ordincm.  The  curse  upon  arable  land  is,  as  other  passages 
of  Scripture  show,  only  a  portion  of  the  SouXe/a  rrjs  fyOopas,  to 
which  the  natural  world  has  since  been  subjected,  Rom.  viii. 
18  sqq.  All  nature  stands,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  closest 
actual  relation  to  man,  who  is,  in  virtue  of  his  personality,  which 
is  at  once  spiritual  and  material,  the  link  between  it  and  God. 
All  that  affects  man  affects  at  the  same  time  that  world  of 
nature  which  was  ordained  for  common  development  with 
himself.  Man  having  fallen  from  communion  with  God,  the 
world  of  nature  became  like  him,  its  appointed  head,  subject 
to  vanity,  and  needed  as  he  did  redemption  and  restoration  to 
recover  its  lost  condition  and  high  destination.  Man,  and 
with  him  nature,  will,  though  by  a  long  and  indirect  path,  at 
length  attain  to  the  eXevOepia  TT}?  £0^779  (Rom.  viii.  21),  ^.e.  be 
free  and  glorified.  Meanwhile  the  curse  which  has  fallen  upon 
the  world  has  a  reverse  side  of  blessing  for  man.  The  curse 
is  not  peremptory  but  pedagogic.  Nature  in  the  resistance 
which  she  offers  to  man,  and  in  the  harm  which  she  inflicts 
on  him,  is  not  only  the  faithful  executrix  of  the  Divine  wrath, 
but  also  his  instructress  in  the  discretion  which  strictly  and 
seriously  opposes  his  pretensions  to  absolutism.  Labour  in 
the  sweat  of  the  brow  is  a  salutary  means  of  discipline  to 
awaken  aspirations  after  heaven.  Though  men  became  through 
the  fall  re/cva  0/07%,  Eph.  ii.  3,  still  they  are  not  Kardpas 
-reicva,  2  Pet.  ii.  14;  they  are,  as  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  says, 
filii  irce,  but  not  filii  furoris.  The  penal  sentences  are,  accord 
ing  to  Gregory  the  Great,  sagittce,  amarce  ex  dulci  manu  Dei. 
This  applies  also  in  truth  to  the  setting  in  force  of  the  threat 
of  death,  though  what  God  purposes  for  man  by  means 
of  death  and  after  death  must  remain  hidden.  A  return  to 
earth,  to  dust,  which  applies  to  the  woman  also,  as  taken 
from  man,  and  so  indirectly  from  the  earth,  is  to  be  the 
painful  issue  of  existence.  Instead  of  "iByrr?K  ni^,  Eccles. 
iii.  20,  comp.  xii.  7,  it  is  here  said  "•sy'px  m^}  like  Job 


GENESIS  III.  20.  169 

xxxiv.  15,  "isy^V  31P,  return  to,  i.e.  become  again  dust  (comp. 
tovny  2W,  in  pulvcrem  redigere,  Ps.  xc.  3).  The  Samar. 
has  in  all  three  texts  :  to  thy  dust,  i.e.  thou  shalt  return 
to  the  dust  of  thy  origin  (comp.  CPQjrta,  Ps.  civ.  29, 
inp'is^  that  is,  to  the  nonx  from  which  he  was  taken, 
Ps.  cxlvi.  4).  The  threat  of  death,  ii.  17,  was  not  now  but 
nwrj.  Hence  it  is  no  contradiction  to  it  that  death  did  not 
enter  as  an  instantaneous  act,  but  as  an  instantaneously  begun 
process,  whose  final  issue  is  here  proclaimed  to  man.  Men 
died  when  they  fell  away  to  sin,  as,  according  to  Hos.  xiii.  1, 
Ephraim  died  when  he  fell  away  to  Baal.  Their  life  is  hence 
forth  the  slow  yet  certain  maturing  of  that  germ  of  death 
which  they  bear  within.  Man  by  sin  withdrew  himself  from 
communion  with  God,  and  his  nature  from  the  sway  of  the 
spirit,  and  is  now  a  natural  structure  exposed  to  the  coming 
and  departing  of  natural  life  around  him,  and  finally  to 
dissolution.  His  path,  which  was  to  tend  upwards,  is  now 
to  lead  downwards  into  the  darkness  of  the  grave  and  Hades. 
He  can  only  attain  to  immortality,  if  his  communion  with 
God,  the  source  of  life,  is  restored.  The  way  to  this  is 
indicated  in  the  Protevangel.  It  is  the  way  of  conflict  even 
unto  blood  with  evil,  and  of  faith  in  the  promise  of  God. 

Adam's  first  act  of  faith,  ver.  20  :  And  Adam  called  the 
name  of  his  icife  Chawwa ;  for  she  became  the  mother  of  all 
living.  This  verse,  says  Budde,  has  for  a  long  time  (i.e.  since 
Ewald)  been  acknowledged  to  be  a  later  interpolation.  But 
even  supposing  that  it  had  not  originally  stood  in  this  connec 
tion,  it  is  still  an  integral  member  of  the  structure  we  are 
considering.  The  woman  has  acquired  a  new  importance  for  the 
man  by  means  of  the  promise  directly  and  indirectly  inter 
mingled  with  the  Divine  penal  sentences.  The  creative  promise 
of  the  propagation  of  the  race  is  not  to  be  abolished  by  the  fall, 
but  on  the  contrary  to  subserve  the  deliverance  of  man,  the 
victory  over  the  power  of  evil  being  promised  to  the  seed  of  the 
woman.  Consequently,  in  the  presence  of  the  death  with  which 
he  is  threatened,  the  woman  has  become  to  Adam  the  pledges  of 


1*70  GENESIS  III.  21. 

both  the  continuance  and  the  victory  of  the  race.  It  is  there 
fore  an  act  of  faith,  an  embracing  of  the  promise  interwoven  in 
the  decree  of  wrath,  that  he  calls  his  wife's  name  njn.  This 
rnn  =  njn  (according  to  the  formations  njn?  rny)  means  life, 
LXX.  fa)?},  not  preserver  (comp.  njn,  xix.  32,  34),  i.e. 
propagator  of  life,  Symm.  £0)0701/05,  for  the  rejection  of 
the  »,  in  the  part,  of  Piel,  is  unusual,  and  only  occurs  in 
the  part,  of  Pual,  and  perhaps  in  the  part.  Pil.  of  verbs  •,£. 
The  woman  is  called  life,  as  a  fountain  of  life  from  which 
the  life  of  the  human  race  is  continually  renewed,  just  as 
Noah,  nJ,  is  called  rest  as  the  bringer  of  rest  (Kohler).  The 
name  i"ijn  is  not  a  name  like  the  God-given  one  ryvvri=genitrix 
and  femina,  which  Corssen  derives  from  feo  (fuo,  $uo>),  Curtius 
fwmfe-lare,  to  suckle,  but  a  proper  name  which,  as  mnenwsynon 
gratice  promisscv  (Melanchthon),  declares  the  special  importance 
of  this  first  of  women  to  the  human  race  and  its  history. 
Hence  it  is  explained  retrospectively  from  its  fulfilment  :  for 
she  became  '•n-TS  DK,  a  mother  (ancestress)  of  every  individual  in 
whom  the  race  lives  on  ;  1  the  life  of  the  race  which  proceeded 
from  her  is,  in  the  midst  of  the  death  of  individuals,  ever  re- 
originating,  and  fulfilment  has  thus  sealed  the  meaning  of 
this  name  of  faith  and  hope.  Adam's  act  of  faith  is  followed 
by  an  act  of  grace  on  the  part  of  God,  ver.  2  1  :  And  Jaliveli 
Eloliim  made  for  Adam  and  his  wife  coats  of  skins,  and  clothed 
them.  ")ty  ni:n3  does  not  mean  coats  ad  cutem  velandam 
(Trg.);  LXX.  correctly  has  ^ircGi/a?  Sepftartvovs,  coats  made 
of  skins  of  beasts,  like  "ity  v3,  leathern  utensils,  Lev.  xiii.  52  ; 
nfaro  is  the  connective  form  of  nforjS,  xirwves,  perhaps  from 
jro,  of  like  meaning  with  Heb.  and  Assyr.  DfD,  Ethiop.  Jcadana, 
to  cover,  like  toga  from  tegere,  in  which  case  the  Aram.  JJV3, 

Arab.  ^US",  flax,  must  be  a  secondary  denominative  formation.2 
The  Thorah  —  says  the  Talmud  Sota  14a  with  reference  to  our 

1  Hence  men  are  called  in  -/Ethiop.  egudla  emma  hejdu,  i.e.  TJ  DK  ^3- 

*j    ^ 

2  The   Arab.     ,b.Si  cotton,   Span,   alyodon,  mid.  high  Germ,   cottun,  Eng. 


cotton,  whence  our  kattun  —  cotton  stuff,  is  not  akin  to  it. 


GENESIS  III.  22,  23.  171 


passage  and  Deut.  xxxiv.  6  —  begins  and  ends  with 
DHDn,  manifestations  of  kindly  interest.  That  God  should  (in 
some  sort  of  indirect  manner  ;  comp.  xxxvii.  3)  Himself  provide 
for  the  covering  of  nakedness,  is  a  proof  both  that  it  is  really 
a  thing  to  be  ashamed  of,  and  at  the  same  time  that  He  will 
not  cast  man  off,  low  as  he  has  fallen.  But  this  clothing 
reaches  its  highest  significance  in  the  fact  that  a  life  must 
suffer  the  violence  of  death  to  furnish  it  for  man.  In  conse 
quence  of  sin,  men  were  in  need  of  a  covering  to  hide  their 
nakedness.  Ashamed  of  this,  they  made  an  attempt,  but  an 
insufficient  and  inappropriate  one,  to  cover  it.  Now  God 
Himself  provides  them  with  a  covering  made  from  the  skin  of 
slain  animals,  i.e.  at  the  cost  of  innocent  lives,  at  the  expense 
of  innocently  shed  blood.  The  whole  work  of  salvation  was 
herein  prefigured.  This  clothing  is  a  foundation  laid  at 
the  beginning,  which  prophetically  points  to  the  middle 
of  the  history  of  salvation,  the  clothing  with  the  righteous 
ness  of  the  God-man,  and  to  its  end,  the  clothing  with  the 
glorified  resurrection  body  in  the  likeness  of  the  God-man. 

Removal  of  the  first  created  pair  from  Paradise,  vv.  22,  23  : 
And  Jahveh  Eloliim  said  :  Behold,  the  man  is  "become  as  one  of 
ns,  to  know  good  and  evil  ;  and  now,  that  he  may  not  streteh 
forth  his  hand,  and  take  also  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  live  for 
ever  —  so  Jahveh  Eloliim  sent  him  forth  out  of  the  garden  Eden, 
to  till  th$  ground  whence  he  was  taken.  The  suffix  of  131DD  (as 
written  by  the  Jews  of  Tiberias  WE»,  which  may  mean  "  of 
him  "  and  "  of  us,"  while  the  Babylonian  mode  of  writing  on 
the  contrary  distinguishes  13BD  from  wrs»)  is  not  singular,  as 
Onk.  and  the  Samar.  understand  it  (a  se  =  independent,  free), 
but  plural,  as  in  DHD  nns,  1  Kings  xix.  2  and  elsewhere  ;  the 
connective  form  occurring  elsewhere  also  in  closely  connected 
speech  like  xlviii.  19,  need  seem  the  less  strange,  since  UDD 
is  a  virtual  genitive  (unus  nostrum).  The  plural  is  com 
municative,  God  comprises  Himself,  as  i.  26,  xi.  7,  with  the 
Dsr6tt  ^2  as,  Isa.  vi.  8,  with  the  seraphim  ;  here  indeed  there 
follows  immediately,  ver.  24.  thp.  mention  of  other  such 


172  GENESIS  III.  22,  23. 

heavenly  beings.  What  the  serpent  promised  to  man  has 
indeed  to  a  certain  extent  come  to  pass.  Man  now  finds 
himself  in  a  state  of  decided  moral  determination,  such  as 
belongs  to  God  and  the  families  of  angels  who  surround  Him. 
But  he  has  attained  it  by  having  decided  against  God  and 
not  owned  his  limitation  by  God  the  all-limiting,  but  made 
himself  autonomous.  In  saying  this,  it  is  presupposed  that 
this  first  act  of  self-decision  was  such,  not  only  for  the  first 
human  pair,  but  also  for  the  whole  human  race,  and  as 
history  and  experience  confirm,  of  decisive  influence  upon 
their  nature  and  lot.  The  resolve  of  God  follows,  as  in 
iv.  11,  with  a  conclusive  nriyi.  Its  motive  is  given  by 
|B  before  what  is  to  be  avoided.  But  instead  of  the 
^!??^1>  which  we  expect,  the  principal  sentence  proceeds 
unconnectedly  to  the  execution  of  the  purpose  with  similar 
haste,  as  at  iv.  8,  xv.  9  sq. ;  Josh.  ix.  2 1  ;  Jonah  ii.  1 1  ;  2  Chron. 
xxxii.  24,  i.  2  sq.  ;  also  Isa.  xlviii.  11  ;  and  in  the  New  Testa 
ment,  Matt.  ix.  6  ;  Acts  i.  4  sq., — all  similar  passages  in 
which  the  expected  progress  of  the  discourse  is  overtaken. 
Man  is,  as  rfe  states,  sent  away  from  Paradise,  and  that 
forcibly,  i.e.  he  is  turned  out,  lest  he  should  wickedly  pre 
sume  to  take  also  of  the  tree  of  life  and  live  (T1],  here 
perfect  of  the  consequence :  et  vivat ;  comp.  ^  mxit,  v.  5) 
for  ever.  There  was — for  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  tree  of 
life — in  Paradise  a  sacramental  means  of  transferring  man 
without  death  to  a  higher  stage  of  physical  life.1  From  the 
participation  of  this  food  of  immortality,  which  men  would 
only  partake  of  to  their  own  judgment,  they  were  now 
excluded,  and,  so  to  speak,  excommunicated.  The  obvious 
question,  according  to  Budcle :  What  if  men  had  eaten  of  it 
before  sinning  or  immediately  after  ?  is  one  of  over  curiosity, 
as  are  all  such  questions  with  reference  to  futuribilia.  In 
fact  they  had  not  eaten  of  it.  Nor  had  anything  been  said 

1  The  author  of  Proverbs  says  of  wisdom,  that  it  is  such  a  D^H  f*J7,  Prov. 
iii.  16-18  ;  that  wisdom  which,  according  to  ch.  viii.,  was  with  God  before  He 
made  the  world  and  by  which  He  made  the  world  ;  comp.  John  vi.  48. 


GENESIS  III.  2-1.  173 

to  them  concerning  the  tree  of  life.  The  enjoyment  of  it 
was  without  their  knowing  it — for  this  object  was  involved 
in  the  trial  of  their  freedom — reserved  as  the  recompense  of 
their  standing  the  test.  But  in  the  condition  in  which  he 
now  found  himself  there  was  no  other  way  to  life  for  man 
but  that  of  hardship  and  tribulation.  He  was  now  glebce 
ndscriptus.  He  must  till  the  earth  in  which  he  will  after  a 
short  span  decay.  In  the  soil  which  he  turns  over  with  his 
spade,  he  has  before  his  eyes  both  his  origin  and  his  future. 
His  driving  out  and  the  impediment  to  his  return,  ver.  24  : 
And  He  drove  out  the  man,  and  He  stationed  at  the  east  of  the 
garden  of  Eden  the  cherubim  and  the  flame  of  a  whirling  sword, 
to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life.  In  place  of  ^fWJ,  which 
has  the  meaning  of  sending  away,  and  only  according  to  the 
connection  that  of  forcible  removal,  we  have  here  PW  as  the 
stronger  and  less  ambiguous  expulit  (comp.  Ex.  xi.  1).  We 
have  translated  "  the  cherubim "  and  not  "  the  cherubs," 
because  the  idea,  not  so  much  of  an  external  plurality  as  of 
a  unity  including  in  itself  a  plurality,  as  in  DTibtf  (of  God) 
and  also  in  D^ain,  seems  here  combined  with  the  plural 
0Nni3.  The  cherubim  here  appear  as  the  guard  of  Paradise, 
just  as,  according  to  the  Indian  and  Old  Persian  notion,  higher 
beings  are  placed  to  keep  watch  over  the  Soma  (Haoma), 
which  makes  those  who  partake  of  it  immortal.1  More 
obvious  still  is  the  comparison  with  the  griffins,  who  guard 
the  gold  of  the  north  (Herodot.  iv.  13,  27  ;  comp.  iii.  116), 
and  whose  name  ypvTres  is  similar  in  sound  to  that  of  the 
cherubs.  The  cherub  also  resembles  the  griffin  in  another 
function ;  in  Ps.  xviii.  1 0,  Jahveh  floats  along  ans"?^,  the 
cherub  here  appearing  as  His  vehicle,  just  as  in  Ezekiel's 
Mercabah  vision  it  forms  the  main  portion  of  the  chariot 
which  bears  the  throne  of  God  (temptingly  suggesting  the 
comparison  2ro=M-|,  ps.  civ.  3).  In  the  Prometheus  too 
of  Aeschylus  (ver.  286,  comp.  395),  Oceanus  comes  flying  TOV 

1  The  Soma,  which  furnishes  the  drink  of  the  gods  and  is  itself  deified,  is, 
botanically  regarded,  the  asdepias  acidia. 


174  GENESIS  III.  21. 

TrrepvjwKrj  TOV$  OIWVQV  (a  griffin,  according  to  Plutarch  and 
Eustathius),  yM^y  o-ro^tcov  arep  evOvvwv.  It  is  true  that 
there  is  no  passage  so  suggestive  as  Ps.  xviii.  10  (corap. 
xix.  1)  for  the  conception  of  the  cherubic  figure.  According 
to  this,  the  cherub  appears  as  the  mythically  incorporated 
storm-cloud,  in  which  God  the  Thunderer  appears,  as  the 
seraphim  are  the  mythically  incorporated  serpent  -  shaped 
lightning  (Eiehm,  De  notione  Cherubum  syinbolica,  1864; 
Goldziher,  Mytlms  lei  den  Hebrciern,  p.  224  sq. ;  Cheyne, 
"  On  the  Seraphim  and  Cherubim,"  in  his  Comm.  on  Isaiah  ; 
Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Paradies,  p.  154,  and  elsewhere).  Ezekiel 
gives  testimony  to  the  connection  of  the  cherubic  image 
with  heathen  mythology  in  his  lamentation  for  the  king 
of  Tyre,  xxviii.  11  sqq.,  by  combining  the  mountain  of  God 
and  the  garden  of  God,  and  making  the  cherub  appear  as 
the  guardian  of  God's  holy  mountain  walking  in  the  midst  of 
fiery  stones,  which  are  conceived  of  as  a  pavement  or  (accord 
ing  to  Eiehm)  a  circumvallation  of  the  Divine  dwelling. 
But  the  cherub,  though  a  creation  of  Semitic  heathenism, 
which  deified  the  powers  of  nature,  underwent  a  thorough 
change  of  form  and  significance  when  revealed  religion 
admitted  it  into  the  sphere  of  its  contemplation.  (1)  Its 
form  is  different,  for  the  cherub  nowhere  appears  entirely  in 
the  shape  of  a  bird  or  entirely  in  that  of  a  beast,  like  the 
Babylonio-Assyrian.  winged  bull-god,  for  whose  name  alpu 
Lenormant  has  discovered  the  synonym  kirubu  (the  stem-word 
of  which  is  considered  by  Fr.  Delitzsch,  Paradies,  p.  184,  to 
be  the  verb  kardbu,  to  be  great,  powerful).  Of  the  cherubs  of 
the  ark  of  the  covenant  in  the  Priest-codex  (indirectly  attested 
besides  only  1  Sam.  iv.  4  ;  2  Sam.  vi.  2),  nothing  further  is 
told  us  than  the  direction  of  their  faces  and  wings.  They 
were,  according  to  all  appearance,  of  human  form,  which  is 
also  corroborated  by  the  two  standing  colossal  cherubs  of 
Solomon's  temple  (1  Kings  vi.  23-28).  The  cherubic  form 
of  Ezekiel  on  the  other  hand  is  new  and  peculiar ;  it  cannot 
be  used  either  to  give  an  idea  of  the  cherubim  of  the  ark  of 


GENESIS  III.  24.  175 

the  covenant  nor  of  those  at  the  gate  of  Paradise.  The 
cherubs  of  the  Mercabah  vision  are  forms  compounded  of  a 
man,  a  lion,  a  bull,  and  an  eagle,  for  which  is  said,  x.  14  : 
cherub,  man,  lion  and  eagle.  This  shows  perhaps  that 
the  bull,  "litJJ,  is  thought  of  as  the  fundamental  element ;  for 
*ttK>=:rro  would  answer  to  alpu  =  kiriibu.  Different  again 
is  the  representation  of  the  New  Testament  Apocalypse  iv.  7, 
developed  from  that  of  Ezekiel,  and  in  which  the  faces  of 
a  lion,  an  ox,  a  man  and  an  eagle  are  distributed  to  four 
heavenly  living  beings  (£c3a  =  nisn}  in  Ezek.,  for  which  the 
name  of  cherub  does  not  make  its  appearance  till  ix.  3),  each 
of  which  has  six  wings.  The  similar  names  convey  the  notion 
of  similar  beings  ;  but  their  nature  and  appearance  are,  as 
belonging  to  another  world,  beyond  human  apprehension, 
while  their  artistic  representations  and  visionary  renderings 
being  dissimilar,  are  therefore  only  symbolic.  To  this  must 
be  added,  (2)  that  revealed  religion,  proceeding  upon  the  view 
that  there  is  a  heaven,  where  God  is  surrounded  by  the  sons 
of  God  (angels)  and  other  superhuman  beings,  who  unite  in 
themselves  the  special  excellences  of  the  highest  stages  of 
created  life,  has  lowered  the  cherubs,  as  well  as  other  powers 
of  nature  (SwdfAeis')  deified  by  heathenism,  to  powers  sub 
ordinate  to  God  the  Lord  of  hosts  (/cvpios  rcov  Swu^ewv). 
The  n^nta  "03  serve  God  as  D^te,  and  these  nvn  too  servo 
His  self-attestation.  They  belong  to  the  nearest  surrounding 
of  Him  who  is  enthroned  in  heaven,  are  His  bearers  when  He 
reveals  Himself  in  His  glory  in  the  world,  are  the  guardians 
of  the  place  of  His  presence  against  all  that  is  incongruous, 
and  without  the  right  of  approaching  it.  Consequently  the 
cherubs  of  the  Bible  are  to  be  regarded  by  us  neither  as 
incorporate  natural  phenomena  nor  as  purely  subjective 
creations  of  the  imagination,  but  as  actual  supersensuous 
heavenly  beings.  Their  sensible  representation  however, 
which  varies  according  to  the  function  in  which  they  appear, 
is  subject  to  the  influence  of  mythological  tradition,  from 
which  revealed  religion  derives  also  sundry  traits  of  its 


176  GENESIS  IV.  l. 

figures  of  speech,  its  imagery  and  its  symbolical  visions. 
Beside  the  cherubim,  stationed  on  the  threshold  of  Paradise, 
is  mentioned  the  flame  (B[v,  from  DHp,  related  with  DJ£,  to 
consume,  burn,  and  scorch ;  comp.  i"1???,  n??,  with  u-^ix-, 
lambere)  of  the  sword,  with  its  threatening  circular  motion. 
The  blade  of  the  sword  is  a  flame  (comp.  Nah.  iii.  3,  "  flame 
of  sword  and  lightning  of  lance  ").  We  are  not  told  that  it 
was  in  the  hand  of  the  cherubim  as  in  that  of  the  angel,  Num. 
xxii.  23,  but  it  is  conceived  of,  as  in  Isa.  xxxiv.  5,  as  an 
independent  penal  power.  V.  Hofmann  (Schriffbewis,  i.  365) 
aptly  compares  the  "  fire  like  the  appearance  of  torches  "  which 
in  Ezekiel's  vision,  i.  13,  goes  up  and  down  among  the  four  nvn. 

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  HISTORY  OUT  OF  PARADISE,  CH.  IV. 

Adam  and  Eve  are  now  out  of  Paradise.  They  were  driven 
eastwards,  and  therefore  had  it  to  the  west  of  them.  Not 
where  the  sun  rose,  but  where  it  vanished,  was  the  place  of 
their  former  communion  with  God.  Every  sunset  would 
remind  them  of  what  they  had  lost  (v.  Hofm.).  Still  Paradise 
and  the  tree  of  life  were  not  destroyed ;  and  hence  the  hope 
of  recovering  what  they  had  forfeited  was  not  cut  off  from 
them. 

The  history  of  the  first  pair  now  extends  to  the  history  of 
the  family.  The  duality  of  man  and  wife  now  grows  into  the 
triad  of  man,  wife  and  child,  and  to  the  connubial  are  added 
the  parental  and  fraternal  ties  and  that  of  kinship,  and 
these  give  rise  to  a  variety  of  new  ethical  relations.  At 
the  same  time  the  two  contrasts  of  sin  and  faith  in  the 
promise,  which  henceforth  rule  all  history  till  the  end  pledged 
by  iii.  15,  are  developed. 

The  first  seed  of  the  woman,  ver.  1 :  And  the  man  knew  his 
wife  Chawwa ;  and  she  conceived,  and  bare  Cain,  and  said,  I 
have  produced  a  man  with  Jahveh.  From  the  fact  that  we 
have  not  here  JH*l,  Eashi  infers  that  the  verb  is  used  in  the 
pluperfect  sense,  which  Heidenheim  confirms  by  comparison 


GENESIS  IV.   I.  177 

with  xxii.  1  ;  2  Kings  viii.  1.  In  these  passages  however  the 
perfect  precedes  the  chief  historical  tense  (imperf.  con-sec.}  as 
an  accessory  fact,  which  describes  the  circumstances  and  acts 
as  a  basis.  The  case  is  the  same  as  with  *ips,  visitavit,  in 
xxi.  1,  and  not  as  with  TON,  which  means  promiserat,  in  the 
same  verse.  Hence  it  cannot  be  syntactically  inferred  from 
JHJ,  that  what  is  stated  had  taken  place  in  the  Paradisaic 
epoch.  If  regarded  also  according  to  the  matter,  it  is  far 
more  probable  that  the  narrator  intends  to  say  the  contrary, 
viz.  that  procreation  did  not  begin  till  now  that  man  was  out 
of  Paradise,  till  now  that  mankind  having  come  to  a  moral 
decision,  they  had  advanced  from  a  state  of  childhood  to  the 
maturity  which  is  the  prerequisite  for  the  consummation  of 
marriage.  The  work  of  procreation  is  common  both  to  man 
and  to  animals,  but  jm  never  occurs  in  this  sense  of  the  animals, 
for  that  which  in  the  latter  is  a  necessary  and  purely  sensual 
process  is  in  the  case  of  man  a  free  act  for  which  he  is 
morally  responsible,  and  one  which,  if  he  has  not  sunk  to  the 
level  of  the  brutes,  is  produced  by  love,  which  rises  to  the 
supersensuous  and  is  consecrated  thereby.  When  Eve  saw 
her  first-born  son,  she  exclaimed  (for  so  is  the  occasion  and 
meaning  of  naming  him  related)  'rrnN  WX  W)\>.  The  verb 
HJp  combines  the  notions  of  KTL^LV  and  /craaOai,  procreare 
(condcre)  and  acquirere ;  for  only  the  owner's  own  work  or 
production  is  his  true  property  and  not  a  merely  accidental 
possession.  Hence  we  may  here  translate :  I  have  produced, 
or  I  have  got  for  my  own — for  both  are  implied  in  Ti^p.  But 
is  HN  here  the  sign  of  the  accusative  or  a  preposition  ?  The 
first  impression  is  that  'n"nx  is  an  explanatory  appositionto 
t^N,  for  a  second  accusative  with  riN  more  nearly  defining  a 
first  is  often  found,  e.y.  vi.  10,  xxvi.  34;  Isa.  vii.  17;  Ezek. 
iv.  1.  Accordingly  Umbreit  explains :  I  have  obtained  a 
man,  Jahveh,  i.e.  I  have  gained  a  man,  through  whom  I  have 
become  a  mother,  Jahveh  Himself,  whose  power  and  goodness 
have  helped  me  herein.  But  since  the  name  pp  is  to  be 
explained,  it  is  not  Jahveh,  but  the  new-born  child,  which  is 

M 


178  GENESIS  IV.  1. 

the  object  obtained.  It  is  impossible  however  that  the  words 
should  be  so  understood  as  to  make  her  regard  herself  as 
Deipara,  as  is  done  by  Korer,  following  Luther's  own  explana 
tion  of  the  passage  in  papers  of  1543  and  1545,  and  in  his 
edition  of  the  Bible  of  1546,  where  he  adopts  the  meaning,  I 
have  the  man,  the  LOKD,  and  by  several  moderns  (Philippi, 
Boehl,  Hoelem.  in  the  Neuen  Bibdstudien,  1866).  Im 
possible,  for  the  primitive  promise  does  not  yet  declare  that 
the  conqueror  of  the  tempter  shall  be  God  and  man  in  one 
person,  and  if  the  words  of  Eve  could  have  such  a  meaning, 
her  knowledge  would  exceed  even  that  of  Mary.  The  im 
pression  nevertheless  that  /rrriK  is  a  second  accusative  is  so 
strong,  that  the  Jerus.  Targum  translates :  I  have  obtained  a 
man,  the  angel  of  Jahveh ;  but  the  angel  of  God  does  not 
appear  in  history  and  consciousness  till  patriarchal  times. 
In  conformity  with  both  time  and  matter  it  may  be  explained: 
I  have  obtained  a  man,  i.e.  a  male  individual,  hence  a  man- 
child  and  therewith  Jahveh,  viz.  communion  with  Him,  since 
He  has  so  wonderfully  favoured  me.  But  rup  with  God  as 
object  is  not  biblical,  and  why  should  not  nx  be  a  preposi 
tion  ?  It  is  true  that  we  have  no  other  example  of  'rrntf, 
"  with  Jahveh,"  but  DTP&TD);  occurs  only  1  Sam.  xiv.  45  ;  and 
inj*  ln>  xxxix.  3  and  elsewhere,  proves,  if  it  were  necessary, 
the  possibility  of  this  form.  Ancient  translators  who  have 
translated  by  Sid  (LXX.),  per  (Jer.),  tnijrip  (Onk),  |B  (Samar.), 
have  all  understood  ntf  of  God  as  helper  and  giver,  as  it  also 
appears  in  the  Babylonian  proper  name  Itti-MarduJc-banu,  i.e. 
begotten  with  Merodach.  According  to  this,  the  correction 
nNE  for  n&5,  though  convenient,  is  not  necessary.  The  choice 
of  the  name  of  God  (comp.  on  the  contrary,  25&)  is  not 
without  significance.  Eve  by  this  first  birth,  this  issue  of  the 
as  yet  unknown  and  mysterious  process  of  pregnancy  and  of  the 
pains  of  parturition,  was  transported  as  by  a  great  marvel  into 
a  state  of  joyous  astonishment,  and  her  joy  was  greatly  exalted 
by  the  circumstance  that  the  promise  of  Jahveh  concerning 
the  seed  of  the  woman  seemed  to  her  to  be  thus  fulfilled. 


GENESIS  IV.  2-4.  179 

According  to  this,  the  name  r.2  means  acquisition  (with  the 
help  of  Jahveh) ;  it  is  formed  from  pp,  ^U  (related  with  po), 
to  set  up,  establish,  prepare  (especially  forge),  which  is  of 
similar  root  with  rup,  IJJf. 

The  birth  of  Abel  and  the  different  vocations  of  the 
brothers,  ver.  2  :  And  she  lore  again  Ms  brother  Hebel.  And 
Hebel  was  a  keeper  of  sheep,  and  Cain  a  tiller  of  the  ground. 
A  second  child,  a  brother  of  Cain,  but  not  a  twin  brother 
(Eeuss),  though  inn}  is  not  repeated  (coinp.  xxx.  10,  12,  21), 
received  the  name  «[},  which  is  not  designated  as  one  given 
him  from  the  beginning.  Since  Oppert  the  word  has  on  the 
Assyriological  side  been  compared  with  the  Assyr.  ablu  (constr. 
ctbal),  which  means  son  ;  but  if  the  name  meant  nothing  else,  it 
would  have  suited  the  first-born  as  the  first  child  of  man,  while 
as  the  name  of  the  second  it  would  be  without  significance,  As 
found  in  Hebrew,  it  means  nothingness,  and  is  the  expression  of 
disappointed  hope,  whether  as  declaring  the  vanity,  the  nothing 
ness  of  human  life  in  general  apart  from  God  and  His  promise, 
or  the  nothingness  of  this  man  whose  life  was  to  last  but  as  a 
breath  (/![},  like  Ps.  xxxix.  6,  Job  vii.  16),  to  pass  away  as 
quickly  as  a  breath.  The  brothers  when  grown  up  divide 
between  them  the  labour  most  necessary  for  their  subsistence. 
fNV  (Assyr.  senu  from  the  verb  ftf¥,  sadnu,  to  be  gentle,  yield 
ing  J)  is  the  collective  appellation  of  tame  small  cattle,  of  sheep 
and  goats.  The  farmer  is  called  n?^  1?'V,  as  in  the  Latin 
agricola.  In  iii.  17  sq.  God  directed  man  to  agriculture,  and 
the  clothing  of  man  with  skins  of  animals  by  God,  consecrated 
the  rearing  of  cattle,  the  purpose  of  which  was  the  obtaining  of 
milk.  For  milk  is  indeed  animal  nourishment,  but  not  nourish 
ment  obtained  by  the  destruction  of  animal  life.  Whether  and 
how  far  the  different  dispositions  of  the  brothers  co-operated  in 
their  choice  of  a  calling  must  remain  undecided.  The  offerings 
of  the  brothers,  vv.  3,  4« :  And  it  came  to  pass  after  the 
lapse  of  some  time,  that  Cain  brought  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground 
an  offering  to  Jahveh.  And  Hcbcl  also  brought  on  his  part  of 
1  FrieiTr.  Dclitzscli,  Helreiv  Language,,  p.  46  f. 


180  GENESIS  IV.  4,  5. 

the  firstlings  of  his  flock,  and  of  the  fat  thereof  With 
the  author  transports  us  into  the  midst  of  the  vocations  of 
the  two  men  ;  ppo,  from  the  end  onwards,  like  viii.  6,  and 
D11^,  like  xl.  4,  comp.  Num.  ix.  22,  a  long  time,  hence  after  the 
end  of  an  indefinite,  a  long  time.  ^^P,  not  from  nro—  won, 

which  is  no  sacrificial  word,  but  from  me,      .Lc,  to  present,  is 


an  all-comprising  appellation  of  sacrifice  (here,  as  e.g.  Judg.  vi. 
18,  1  Sam.  ii.  17,  of  a  bloody  sacrifice  also),  which  has  as  the 
ultimate  basis  of  its  notion  the  sacratio  and  dblatio,  and  is  there 
fore  first  lepelov,  then  Soopov  or  irpoo-fpopd.  ^"133  means  the  first 
lings  of  animals,  as  B^b?  does  first-born  sons,  and  D"n}33i  first- 
fruits.  The  1  of  |H5?n*W  unites  the  particular  to  the  general, 
like  iii.  16  ;  and  indeed  of  their  Mjn.  For  the  i  raphatum 
with  Tsere  marks  fmbnoi  as  a  defectively  written  plural,  like 
Nan.  ii.  8,  and  like  the  frequent  Dr6fc§  ;  the  sing,  is  X>H}  kUb 
(from  c^JisU,  to  scrape  off,  to  loosen,  to  cover  by  redeeming),  to 

be  well  distinguished  from  2?n,  kalal),  milk  (from  in,  L_^U-, 
to  draw,  to  milk).  But  whether  D^bn  here  means  pieces  of 
fat  or  the  fattest  animals,  and  therefore  that  the  offering  of 
Abel  has  the  character  of  the  shelamim  or  whole  offering,  is 
already  disputed  in  Scbacliim  116a.  It  cannot  however  be 
proved  that  DU^n  may  mean  fattest  animals  (Keil).  We  have 
therefore  to  admit,  with  E.  Eliezer  in  the  Talmud,  that  Abel 
offered  to  God  the  fat  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock.  That  the 
brothers  offered  by  the  direction  of  God  is  not  said,  and  it  is 
without  Scripture  proof  to  refer  the  sacrifice,  as  do  Thiersch  and 
Goethe,  to  Divine  institution.  The  very  name  nmo  bears  not 
upon  obligation  but  spontaneity  ;  and  the  circumstance  that 
Cain  was  the  first  to  make  an  offering  leads  us  to  infer  that 
it  is  not  the  fulfilment  of  a  Divine  command;  but  an  act 
resulting  from  a  more  or  less  pure  feeling  of  dependence  which 
is  here  in  question.  The  different  reception  of  the  two  offer 
ings,  4&,  5  :  And  Jahveh  looked  upon  Held  and  his  offering  : 
and  upon  Cain  and  his  offering  He  did  not  look.  As  it  is  not 
said  that  Abel  himself  kindled  his  offering,  it  appears  that 


GENESIS  IV.  5-7.  -  181 

the  visible  sign  of  look  of  favour  (comp.  the  look  from  the 
pillar  of  fire  and  cloud,  Ex.  xiv.  24)  consisted  in  the  kindling 
by  miraculous  fire  of  Abel's  offering  (as  in  Judg.  vi.  21  ; 
1  Kings  xviii.  38  ;  1  Chrcm.  xxi.  26  ;  2  Chron.  vii.  1-3). 
Theodotion  translates  plainly :  KOI  eveTrvpiaev  6  ®eo?.  But 
the  narrator  does  not  say  this,  and  certainly  does  not  mean 
it,  but  scrupulously  abstains  from  all  confusion  of  periods. 
But  what  is  the  reason  that  the  Lord  accepts  Abel's  offering 
and  not  Cain's  1  Both  were  offering  in  accordance  with  their 
callings  and  possessions.  But  Abel  brings  the  firstlings  of 
his  flock,  and  of  these  the  fat  pieces,  thus  depriving  himself 
in  God's  honour  of  the  first  and  the  best.  Cain  on  the  other 
hand  brings  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground  (n&"J&?n,  perhaps  pur 
posely,  not  iJ"iD*i«),  and  therefore  the  first  and  the  best.  It  is 
not  however  the  gifts  themselves  in  their  externalism,  but  the 
inward  disposition  of  the  persons  therein  manifested,  which 
determines  the  conduct  of  God.  The  narrative  designedly 
keeps  the  persons  and  the  offerings  apart.  The  offering  of 
Abel  was  the  expression  of  heartfelt  gratitude,  or  as  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews,  designating  self-divesting  love  according  to 
its  root,  says,  xi.  4,  it  was  the  expression  of  faith.  More  than 
this  is  not  to  be  derived  from  the  narrative,  if  we  regard  it  in 
its  own  light  and  not  in  the  light  of  the  subsequent  law  of 
sacrifice — a  proceeding  of  questionable  authority.  The  im 
pression  upon  Cain,  56 :  And  Cain  burned  with  anger,  and 
Ids  countenance  fell.  The  impf.  apoc.  Kal  ^}  has,  like 
JK??5,  on  account  of  the  guttural,  a  helping  Pathach  instead  of  a 
helping  Segol.  Furious  anger  is  meant ;  but  it  is  unnecessary 
here  and  Num.  xvi.  15,  Jonah  iv.  1,  to  supply  tetf.  The 
inward  heat  of  passion  is  manifested  by  the  falling  of  the 
countenance,  the  gestures  of  angry  brooding,  of  gloomy  morose- 
ness  (comp.  the  Hiph.t  to  cause  the  countenance  to  fall,  Jer. 
in.  12  and  Job  xxix.  24).  The  Divine  warning,  vv.  6,  7: 
And  Jahvch  said  unto  Cain,  Why  dost  thou  lurn  with  anger  ? 
and  why  is  thy  countenance  fallen  ?  Is  there  not  lifting  up,  if 
thou  docst  well  ?  And  if  tlwu  doesl  not  well,  sin  is  a  croucher  at 


182  GENESIS  IV.  G,  7. 

the  door.  And  unto  thee  is  its  desire,  l)ut  thou  sJwuldst  rule  over 
it.  God  seeks  by  private  remonstrance  to  bring  him  to  his 
senses  concerning  the  danger  that  threatens  him.  The  question, 
ver.  6,  is  put  to  him  to  direct  his  attention  to  his  own  heart, 
and  to  the  roots  there  to  be  found  of  his  distorted  gestures. 
In  "i{?  rnn  the  tone  is  drawn  back  to  the  penultima  of  mn, 
but  as  always  in  the  simple  verb  without  a  following  Dagesh, 
conjunctum.  In  ver.  7  there  are  only  two  more  explanations 
to  be  considered  besides  that  given  by  our  translation.  1. 
Arnheim's  and  Kamphausen's  :  Is  not  sin  at  the  door,  whether 
thou  bringest  better  offerings  or  not  ?  But  ris^  has  not  in 
itself  the  meaning  qffetre,  it  can  only  acquire  this  sense  by  the 
addition  of  some  more  particular  definition,  as  in  Ezek.  xx.  31. 
2.  DN^  may,  according  to  the  phrase  DNJS  Ktw,  be  understood, 
to  accept  the  countenance  or  person  of  any  one,  to  make  one 
self  acceptable  (xix.  21,  xxxii.  21,  and  elsewhere;  comp.  n&tt?, 
Prov.  xviii.  5)  ;  if  thou  doest  well,  does  not  a  favourable  recep 

tion  011  the  part  of  God  take  place?  as  Ephrem  glosses  it:  Ax*-^ 
I,  i.e.  (then)  accept  and  receive  thee.  But  wherever  nNE>  is  used 
without  an  addition,  it  means  neither  oNatio  nor  acceptio,  still 
less  remissio  peccati  (Onkelos),  but  elatio  ;  and  the  reverse  of  1^3 
"pD  leads  to  this  meaning,  thus  :  mayst  thou  not  if  thou  doest 
well  lift  up  thy  countenance  —  rrt^n  produces  courage,  which 
is  reflected  in  a  cheerful,  willingly  raised  countenance.  The 
Hiph.  :TDM,  as  intrinsically  transitive,  means  lene  agere  (facere), 
which  may  however  be  equally  said  of  inward  good  disposition 
as  of  external  good  action.  That  Cain  was  angry  with  his 
brother  because  of  the  favourable  reception  of  his  offering  was 
the  point  in  which  he  did  evil,  and  this  secret  evil-doing,  known 
only  to  God,  predisposed  him  to  an  external  open  act  of  sin. 
riNtsn  being  fern.,  Y2  is  conceived  of  as  substantival:  Sin  is 
thought  of  as  a  beast,  of  prey,  and  indeed  (comp.  1  Pet.  v.  8) 
as  a  lion,  which  in  Arabic  is  called  er-rdbid  or  cr-rabldd.1 


1  LXX.  translates  as  though  the  reading  were  :   f*h~]  DXDn  Hfl^p;  see  on  the 

bias  towards  the  ceremonial  law  shown  by  this  twisting  of  the  text,  A.  Fiirst 
in  DMZ.  xxxv.  134-138. 


GENESIS  IV.  8.  183 

When  man  has  once  made  room  for  evil  within,  there  is  "but 
one  step  from  inward  to  outward  evil-doing:  the  sinful  act 
crouches  greedily  like  a  beast  of  prey  at  the  door  of  his  heart 
till  he  shall  step  out  and  fall  a  victim  to  it.  In  the  concluding 
words  te  refers  to  the  croucher,  by  which  figure  sin,  as  impelling 
to  its  own  incorporation  in  an  outward  act,  is  represented. 
We  certainly  expect  that  God  should  rather  require  of  Cain 
that  he  should  suppress  the  passion  fermenting  within  him  ; 
but  the  ruling  over  sin  demanded  from  him  consists  in  keeping 
closed  the  door  which  still  forms  a  barrier  between  the  ill- 
feeling  and  the  criminal  act,  and  in  thus  struggling  to  keep 
down  sinful  thoughts  lest  he  should  be  driven  by  them  into 
crime.  Moral  self-control  is  so  far  possible  to  the  natural 
man  even  since  the  fall. 

The  first  murder,  ver.  8  :  And  Cain  said  to  his  brother  ;  and 
it  came  to  pass,  that  as  they  were  in  the  field,  Cain  rose  up 
against  Hcbel  his  brother,  and  slew  him.  What  did  he  say  to 
him  ?  Tuch,  Baumgarten,  Dr.  supply  "  it,"  referring  to  what 
preceded,  which  is  syntactically  possible,  for  "IDN  is  sometimes 
followed,  not  by  direct  speech,  but  by  a  mere  ace.,  xx.  3, 
xliv.  16,  and  this  ace.  has  sometimes  to  be  supplied, 
Ex.  xix.  25  ;  2  Cliron.  xxxii.  24.  But  Cain  would  not  have 
talked  much  about  that  voice  of  God  in  his  conscience,  nay, 
his  act  shows  that  he  crushed  its  impression.  What  then  did 
he  say  to  Abel  ?  This  question  is  escaped  by  reading,  with 
Bb'ttcher,  Knobel,  Olshausen,  instead  of  -in^oi,  ID^1! :  he  lay  in 
wait  (like  2  Sam.  xi.  16  ;  comp.  Job  xiv.  16) — a  happy  con 
jecture,  if  one  were  needed.  We  have  here  however  a  like 
phenomenon  with  iii.  22  sq. :  the  narrator,  hastening  past 
what  Cain  said,  forthwith  informs  us  of  its  being  carried  into 
execution.  What  Cain  said  is,  like  what  Solomon  said, 
2  Chron.  i.  2,  and  what  Isaiah  said,  2  Cliron.  xxxii.  24,  to  be 
perceived  from  its  results.  He  said  ni&n  n?r;}  (comp.  Sol. 
Song  vii.  11),  as  the  ellipsis  is  supplied  by  LXX.  Targ.  Jer. 
I.  and  II.,  Samar.  in  all  three  texts,  Syr.  Aq.  It.  Jerome.  We 
need  not  suppose  that  the  words  rwn  ro^  have  fallen  out 


18-4  GENESIS  IV.  I). 

by  mistake  (Dillmatm),  perhaps  by  the  eye  wandering  to  the 
succeeding  member  of  the  sentence  terminating  in  rntpn,  and 
so  per  6fjLoioTe\€VTov  (Schrader).  The  invitation  to  go  out 
into  the  field  was  the  foundation  of  his  plan  of  murder.  There 
in  the  solitude  of  the  field  he  rose  against  Abel  (t>K,  scnsu 
hostili,  in  virtue  of  the  connection),  and  struck  him  to  the 
ground  (which  is  the  root  meaning  of  j"in,  as  to  cut  in  pieces 
is  of  bop).  Human  sin  made  a  gigantic  advance  in  this  act. 
The  first  sin  was  caused  by  the  charms  of  sense,  and  in  con 
sequence  of  a  cunningly  planned  temptation ;  now  diabolical 
hatred  and  brutal  barbarity  unite  and  bring  forth  murder. 
Men  now  for  the  first  time  bury  their  dead,  and  this  first  dead 
man  is  the  first  martyr,  and  his  brother  is  his  murderer.  A 
chasm  is  now  established  within  humanity  itself  between  two 
kinds  of  seed,  one  man  placing  himself  on  the  side  of  the  seed 
of  the  woman,  the  other  upon  that  of  the  seed  of  the  serpent. 
Cain  is  the  representative  of  the  class  of  men  which  is  e/c  rov 
irovripov  (1  John  iii.  12),  and  Abel  the  representative  of  the 
Church,  which  is  hated  by  the  world  and  persecuted  even 
unto  blood.  He  is  also  a  type  of  the  righteous  Son  of  the 
Virgin,  whose  blood,  shed  by  His  own  brethren  after  the  flesh, 
speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel,  by  crying,  not  for 
vengeance,  but  for  pardon.  JSTow  follows,  vv.  9-12,  the 
punishment  of  the  fratricide.  Before  sentence  is  passed  he 
is  tried  and  convicted,  ver.  9  :  And  Jahveh  said  to  Cain, 
Where  is  Hcbcl  thy  brother  ?  And  he  said,  I  know  not.  Am 
I  my  brothers  keeper  ?  As  God  asked  Adam,  Where  art 
thou  ?  He  now  asks  Cain :  Where  is  thy  brother  \  As 
in  the  former  case  He  interested  Himself  in  the  fallen 
man,  so  here  in  one  man  as  compared  to  the  other.  ^  is, 
especially  in  indignant  threatening  questions,  the  usual  connec 
tive  form  of  "«  (Deut.  xxxii.  37  ;  1  Sam.  xxvi.  16;  Jer.  v.  7) ; 
it  here  stands  before  n,  before  which  however  n»K  also  occurs, 
xix.  5,  xxii.  7.  Cain's  answer  shows  what  terrible  progress 
sin  had  made  since  the  fall  of  our  first  parents ;  in  their  case 
there  was  timid  anxious  flight  and  excuses,  here  a  bold  lie 


GENESIS  IV.  10,  11.  185 

and  unloving  defiance.  But  denial  was  vain,  ver.  10  :  And 
He  said :  What  hast  thou  done  ?-  the  voice  of  thy  brothers  Hood 
crying  to  me  from  the  ground  !  In  iii.  1 3  it  was  said  nsrn» 
rrLMy ;  here,  because  no  with  a  following  dagessata  of  n,  n,  y  is 
changed  into  np  (Ges.  §  37.  1),  n-frj;  no.  The  sentence 
with  ^ip  is  an  interjectional  one.  ^ip  (followed  by  a  mere 
genitive,  Isa.  Iii.  8,  Zech.  xi.  3,  and  sometimes  with  the 
addition  of  some  other  attribute,  1  Kings  i.  41,  xiv.  G,  comp. 
Sol.  Song  ii.  8,  Jer.  x.  22,  which  may  be  understood  geni- 
tivally  as  an  apposition,  or  accusatively  as  a  definition  of  the 
condition,  like  "^nriD,  iii.  8)  is  spoken  with  an  accent  of 
exclamation  :  Voice  !  —  Hark  !  Attraction  after  the  scheme, 
1  Sam.  ii.  4,  and  perhaps  also  Job  xxix.  10,  is  present  here 
only  so  far  as  what  is  predicated  refers  not  so  much  to  the 
sound,  but  to  the  more  important  notion  of  that  which  gives 
it  forth  :  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood,  of  one  crying,  or :  of 
blood  crying  (while  crying).  The  plur.  DW  is  the  plur.  of  the 
product  (Dietrich,  Abhandlung,  p.  40),  and  means,  in  distinc 
tion  from  D1,  not  the  blood  circulating  in  the  body,  but  that 
which  is  flowing,  or  has  flowed  out  from  it  (Lev.  xx.  18  and 
xii.),  and  which  has  mostly  been  shed  by  violence.1  Blood 
murderously  shed  demands  Divine  vengeance  by  an  inward 
necessity :  Clamat  ad  cesium  vox  sanguinis.  According  to 
Heb.  xi.  4,  Abel  is  still  speaking  after  his  death,  and  is  hence 
undestroyed  and  living.  The  sin  which  he  denied  being  now 
brought  before  the  eyes  of  Cain,  sentence  is  passed  upon  him, 
ver.  1 1  :  And  now  cursed  art  thou  from  the  ground,  which  hath 
opened  its  mouth  to  receive  the  Hood  of  thy  Ir  other  from  thy 
hand.  The  conclusion  is  drawn  as  at  iii.  22  with  nruri.  It 
is  questionable  whether  no'iNrrpp  means  "  from  the  earth  "  or 
"  away  from  the  earth."  The  relative  sentence  seems  to 
suggest  the  former,  according  to  which  the  ground  is  to  be 


1  The  Talmud  (Mishna  Sanhedrin  iv.  5)  concludes  from  iJOl,  that  whoever 
commits  a  murder  is  answerable,  not  only  for  the  blood  of  him  whom  he  has 
slain,  but  also  for  that  of  the  descendants  he  might  have  had  :  his  blood  and 
VJTIJPT  tn  (the  blood  of  his  OV^KTU,  comp.  Gal.  iii.  16). 


186  GENESIS  IV.  12,  13. 

the  means  of  carrying  the  curse  into  execution  (Keil  and 
others).  But  in  view  of  the  climax  in  which  ver.  12  issues, 
and  the  echo  of  the  sentence  from  Cain's  own  mouth,  the 
latter  is  more  obvious  (Gerl.  Kalisch  and  others).  The  relative 
sentence  would  then  still  retain  its  signification  as  stating  the 
motive,  and  the  earth  would  still  remain  the  instrument  of 
execution  :  that  part  of  the  earth  which  has  been  compelled 
to  drink  in  the  innocent  blood  is  henceforth  under  the  curse 
of  blood-guiltiness  (Num.  xxxv.  33  ;  comp.  Isa.  xxvi.  21)  and 
drives  away  the  murderer,  being  smitten  with  barrenness  and 
refusing  to  reward  his  labour,  ver.  12:  When  tJwu  tillest  the 
ground,  it  shall  not  continue  to  yield  to  thee  its  strength. 
Unsettled  and  fugitive  shalt  thou  be  upon  earth.  The  jussive 
*)Dh  (here  in  the  apodosis  of  the  conditional  prodosis,  Ges. 
§  128.  2)  is  followed,  as  at  vii.  10  (comp.  12),  Ex.  viii.  25, 
x.  28  sq.,  Dent.  iii.  26,  by  the  simple  inf.,  instead  of  by  nr&. 
nb,  strength,  is  here,  as  at  Job  xxxi.  39,  Prov.  v.  10,  equivalent 
to  the  result  of  strength,  the  produce  of  fertility.  The  curse 
of  the  first  sin  affected  the  ground  in  the  first  place  and  man 
only  indirectly ;  here,  where  sin  has  reached  the  height  of 
Satanic  murder,  the  curse  affects  first  of  all  the  murderer 
himself.  But  it  is  not  the  curse  of  condemnation,  but  of 
banishment,  for  even  the  murderer  is  not  at  once  given  up  by 
the  grace  of  God.  1JJ  V*,  a  similar  pair  of  Avoids,  Avith  an 
alliterative  kind  of  rhyme,  to  "I33J  p,  Isa.  xix.  22,  is  too 
freely  translated  (nivwv  KOI  Tpe^wv  by  LXX.,  and  more 
successfully  by  Jerome,  vagus  and  profurjus.  yj  means  unsettled, 
though  without  change  of  place ;  13,  restlessly  changing  one 
place  for  another,  used  especially  of  a  bird  driven  from  its 
nest,  Isa.  xvi.  2  ;  Prov.  xxvii.  8  ;  Ps.  xi.  1. 

Alleviation  of  the  curse  by  a  guarantee  of  life,  vv.  13-15. 
Cain's  defiance  is  no\v  exchanged  for  despair,  ver.  13  : 
And  Cain  said  to  Jahveh,  My  guilt  is  great  beyond  hearing. 
The  verb  K550  means  both  taking  away,  i.e.  the  forgiveness 
(Ex.  xxxiv.  7),  and  bearing,  i.e.  the  expiation  of  sin  (Num. 
v.  31).  Ancient  translators  give  for  the  most  part  the 


GENESIS  IV.   14.  187 

former  meaning  (LXX.,  Onkelos,  Jerome  :  qiiam  ut  vcniam 
mcrear),  but  then  we  should  expect  K^nD,  while  Kib>|»  has 
the  speaker  for  its  subject,  and  is  said  for  ^b'Slp,  for  the 
generalization  of  the  thought.  The  Greek  pel&v  3)  Mare 
<j)€peiv  would  correspond  with  it.  That  it  is  not  the  possibility 
of  forgiveness  of  which  Cain  despairs,  but  the  possibility  of 
bearing  the  burden  of  sin,  which  is  at  the  same  time  the 
burden  of  punishment,  is  confirmed  by  ver.  14:  Behold,  Thou 
hast  driven  me  out  from  the  ground  and  soil  on  which  I  dwelt, 
and  I  must  hide  from  Thy  face,  and  I  am  to  le  unsettled  and 
fugitive  upon  the  earth,  and  then  it  will  come  to  pass,  whoever 
finds  me  will  slay  me.  The  curse  of  Jahveh  has  banished  Cain 
from  that  part  of  the  earth's  surface  (^3  75JD)  on  which  he 
had  hitherto  dwelt,  and  he  will  thus  be  obliged  to  hide 
himself  far  away  from  the  face  of  the  Lord,  which  is  turned 
towards  men  in  Eden,  but  cannot  bear  the  sight  of  him,  the 
murderer.  And  thus  wandering  about  on  the  wide  earth 
(H^s),  he  will  be  exposed  to  murder.  It  is  thus  that  the 
first  murderer,  though  God  has  let  him  experience  mercy 
instead  of  justice,  bears  testimony  to  that  law  which  is 
engraven  in  human  nature,  the  law,  viz.,  of  retribution, 
and  especially  of  man's  own  life  being  forfeited  by  blood- 
guiltiness.  But  whom  did  Cain  think  of  meeting  beyond 
Eden  ?  Knobel  thinks  that  acquaintance  with  some  primi 
tive  race  of  man  in  Eastern  Asia  besides  the  Caucasian 
is  here  shown.  But  if  Cain  feared  to  be  recognised 
beyond  Eden  as  a  known  murderer,  does  not  this  pre 
suppose  that  only  one  human  family,  the  family  of  Adam, 
existed  ?  Blood-vengeance  was  not  indeed  as  yet  a  custom, 
but  it  is  the  most  primitive  form  of  the  capital  punishment 
of  the  murderer.  Hence  it  was  but  natural  that  Cain  should 
fear  for  his  life  when  his  father's  family  should  be  increased, 
and  it  was  the  equally  natural  consequence  of  his  evil  con 
science,  that  the  earth  should  seem  to  him  already  full  of 
avengers.  The  answer  of  God  assumes  the  possibility  of  what 
he  feared,  while  He  neither  kills  Cain  Himself,  nor  will  suffer 


188  GENESIS  IV.  15. 

any  other  to  kill  him,  15« :  And  JaJivck  said  to  him, 
Therefore  whoever  Idlleth  Cain,  it  shall  be  avenged  sevenfold. 
LXX.  Tra?  o  ajroKTeivas  Kdlv  eirra  eK^LKovfJieva  irapakvcrei, 
i.e.  he  shall  answer  for  (pay  for)  seven  punishable  trans 
gressions,  septein  vindictas  exsolvet  (see  Jerome,  ep.  ad 
Damasum,  cxxv.).  The  verb  eKbucelaOai  is  just  as  equivocal 
as  the  Hophal  Djjn,  which  may  mean  either  vindicari  (ver.  24) 
or  puniri,  Ex.  xxi.  20  sq. ;  but — and  this  seems  to  have 
occasioned  the  paraphrase  of  the  LXX. — puniri,  not  with  the 
subject  of  the  person,  but  of  the  crime.  Hence  it  must  either 
be  explained  (as  by  Tuch)  according  to  ver.  24:  if  any  one 
kills  Cain,  he  (Cain)  shall  be  avenged  sevenfold,  or :  it  shall  be 
avenged  (punished)  sevenfold.  In  both  cases  ^o  begins  (as  at 
1  Sam.  ii.  13)  a  virtually  hypothetical  prodosis  (quicunque  •=. 
si  quispiam),  and  in  both  (as  e.g.  also  at  ix.  6)  a  change  of  the 
subject  takes  place.  We  prefer  however  the  latter ;  for  the 
thought,  that  God  will  visit  with  punishment  the  murder 
committed  on  Cain,  has  more  to  recommend  it  than  that  He 
will  avenge  Cain.  The  promise  is  followed  by  its  guarantee, 
15&:  And  Jahveh  made  a  sign  for  Cain,  that  whoever  found 
him  might  not  kill  him.  It  is  a  question  whether  this  means : 
He  imparted  a  sign  to  him,  impressed  it  on  him,  or :  He  gave 
him  a  sign,  i.e.  assured  him  of  his  inviolability  by  some 
external  occurrence.  The  Midrash  (Bereshith  rdbba,  c.  22) 
already  hesitates  between  the  two.  E.  Jehudah  thinks  that 
God  made  the  sun  shine  forth  suddenly;  E.  Nehemiah,  that  He 
caused  the  leprosy  to  break  out  on  Cain's  forehead,  so  that  it 
might  be  seen  that  he  was  already  sufficiently  punished. 
When  it  is  considered  that  niK  Dsb>  or  nitf  jw  has  elsewhere 
(Ex.  x.  1  sq.)  the  same  meaning  as  nix  nfc'y  and  rnx  ;nj,  some 
marvel  or  token  given  as  a  guarantee  seems  to  be  intended. 
When  on  the  other  hand  men  call  to  mind  that  a  momentary 
pledge  of  God's  promise  affecting  only  himself  would  have 
been  of  no  use  to  Cain,  but  that  what  he  needed  was  some 
lasting  indication  of  the  inviolability  of  his  person  to  others, 
the  view  is  again  pressed  upon  us  as  in  agreement  with  the 


GENESIS  IV.  16,  17.  189 

circumstances,  that  God  impressed  upon  his  body,  perhaps 
upon  his  brow  (comp.  Ezek.  ix.  4),  the  characteristic  of  inviola 
bility  ;  more  freely  yet  not  incorrectly :  that  he  imparted  to 
his  personality  a  power  of  impression  capable  of  disarming 
those  who  were  laying  snares  for  his  life.  The  use  of  ?  D"1^, 
Ex.  iv.  11,  is  similar.  That  l?i?3  is  not  said,  is  explained  by 
the  !?  commodi  being  indispensable ;  besides,  ppn  would  not 
be  free  from  ambiguity,  for  3  JYiK  D^,  Isa.  Ixvi.  19,  does  not 
mean :  to  make  a  sign  on  some,  but :  to  give  a  sign  to  some 
one.  With  the  inf.  after  V!&?f  (like  Ezek.  xx.  1 5),  the  object  here 
stands  before  the  subject  (Ges.  §  133.  3),  which  seemed  more 
agreeable  as  to  style.  Thus  God  went  no  farther  than  to 
banish  Cain  from  the  neighbourhood  of  His  presence  here  below. 
He  favoured  him  with  the  prolongation  of  his  day  of  grace, 
because  he  acknowledged  sin  as  sin,  and  punishment  as  its 
deserved  consequence,  and  that  all  might  have  in  Cain  the 
punishment  of  murder  before  their  eyes  as  a  warning  and 
example.  To  this  must  be  added,  that  the  continuance  of  the 
human  race  as  yet  required  that  the  lives  of  individuals 
should  be  spared. 

Cain's  new  abode,  ver.  16  :  And  Cain  went  out  from  the 
place  of  Jahveh,  and  settled  in  the  land  of  Nod,  on  the  cast  of 
Eden.  He  went  out  'n  \JBpO,  i.e.  like  Jonah  i.  3,  from  the  place 
where  Jahveh  had  appeared  to  him,  and  at  that  time  was  wont 
to  appear  to  men  in  general.  The  situation  of  the  country  in 
which  he  settled  cannot  be  more  particularly  defined ;  n^i? 
(see  on  ii.  14)  directs  us  to  Eastern  Asia,  for  the  "front"  is  the 
east  side.  The  name  "ria  means  flight  and  misery  (elend,  old 
high  German  elilcnti,  another,  that  is,  a  strange  land). 
Van  Bohlen,  who  is  followed  by  Colenso,  conjectures  that 
it  was  Northern  India ;  and  the  Arabic  reading  really  makes 
J^j  a  proverbially  fertile  Indian  mountain.  Cain's  immediate 
offspring,  ver.  17  :  And  Cain  knew  his  wife,  and  she  con 
ceived,  and  'bare,  Chanokh,  and  he  became  the  builder  of  a  town, 
and  called  the  name  of  the  town  after  the  name  of  his  son 
Chanokh.  Whence  had  Cain  his  wife  ?  Did  he  find  in  the 


190  GENESIS  IV.  17. 

land  of  Nod  human  beings  of  both  sexes  ?  Impossible,  for  the 
actual  unity  of  the  human  race  is  a  fundamental  doctrine  of 
Scripture  which  is  never  broken  through,  and  intends  the 
descendants  of  Adam  to  be  regarded  as  the  entire  human  race. 
In  any  case  we  must  regard  Cain's  wife  as  a  daughter  of  Adam 
(v.  4).  In  saying  this  however  free  play  is  left  to  the  imagina 
tion,  and  the  narrative  appears  without  disguise  to  be  but  a 
fragment  of  some  lost  connected  history.  It  is  a  quite  un 
justifiable  reproach  of  Karl  Hase,  that  Cain's  marriage  with 
his  sister  involves  the  origin  of  mankind  in  incest.  If  the 
human  race  was  to  be  propagated  from  a  single  pair,  such 
closely  related  marriages  were  unavoidable.  The  notion  of 
incest  was  originally  limited  to  the  reciprocal  relation  of 
parents  and  children,  and  afterwards  extended  (but  not 
everywhere  equally)  in  proportion  as  the  possibility  of 
conjugal  connections  was  diversified.  For  marriage,  according 
to  its  essential  definition  (ii.  24  sq.),  was  to  be  a  new 
generic  and  social  beginning,  accompanied  with  a  breaking 
off  from  the  Toledoth  from  which  the  husband  and  wife 
originated.  Cain  called  his  son  "^n  (from  "pn,  denom. 
from  ?jn  —  ^n,  palate,  to  moisten  the  palate,  imbuere), 
dedication,  opening,  beginning ;  and  he  then  gives  the  town 
the  same  name ;  Le  lieu  cst  devenu  une  pcrsonne,  remarks 
Eeuss.  A  town  "pin  being  no  longer  to  be  identified  in 
ancient  geography,  it  might  with  apparently  greater  justice 
be  said  :  La  pcrsonne  est  devemie  un  lieu.  But  elsewhere  too 
this  name  has  been  borne  by  the  first-born  (v.  18,  xlvi.  9, 
but  not  xxv.  4).  Budde  thinks  to  restore  the  original  text 
by  reading :  TOPI  1DBO  n^n  D^  topi  "W  run  \Ti,  he  (viz. 
Chanokh)  became  a  town  builder,  and  called  the  name  of  the 
city  after  his  own  name,  Chanokh.  But  vy  ron  NTi  suits  Cain. 
For  whether  Ty  means  a  watch  or  anything  else  (Accadian 
urn,  Assyrian  £m),  it  is  still  a  dwelling-place,  the  purpose  of 
which  is  self -protection.  A  considerable  time  may  have 
elapsed  between  the  settlement  in  the  eastern  country  and 
the  building  of  the  city.  The  sentence  did  not  state  that 


GENESIS  IV.   18.  191 

Cain  was  to  be  1:1  y:  all  his  life,  its  rrnn  only  speaks  of  an 
indefinite  future ;  besides,  something  of  the  character  of  the 
sentence  pronounced  adhered,  as  its  name  implies,  to  the 
settlement  in  the  land  of  li:.  It  is  said  that  the  discrepancy 
between  iv.  165—25  and  iv.  1—15  is  fundamental,  and  ex 
cludes  the  notion  of  only  one  narrator.  But  does  not  the 
name  of  the  country,  TO,  refer  to  "1:1  yi  ?  And  is  not  the 
building  of  a  city,  which  presupposes  a  large  number  of  men, 
consistent  with  Cain's  fear,  155,  of  meeting  men  far  from 
Eden,  and  being  attacked  by  them.  We  shall  meet  with  yet 
other  mutual  allusions  which  speak  against  the  notion  of  two 
documents.  Besides,  it  should  be  noted  that  175  does  not 
state  that  when  Cain  was  in  the  act  of  building  a  city  a  son 
was  bom  to  him,  but  in  conformity  with  the  syntax,  xxi.  205, 
Judg.  xvi.  21,  2  Kings  xv.  5,  2  Chron.  ix.  26,  that  Cain  became 
cediftcans  urbem — it  is  the  fact  of  an  advance  in  civilisation 
which  is  thus  registered.  If  the  building  of  the  city  had,  as 
Budde  thinks,  Chanokh  for  its  subject,  nil  rr»n  Kin  must  have 
been  said.  No — Cain  together  with  his  son  and  his  wife  formed  a 
family,  a  household,  and  for  this  his  household  Cain  now  builds 

a  house,  and  indeed,  as  Ty  (syn.  ^3,    .  .<,  a  fenced -in   place) 

denotes,  a  complex  of  houses.  His  son  and  his  town,  i.e.  this 
beginning  of  a  town,  receive  the  same  name.  He  called  the 
son  by  whom  he  became  the  head  of  a  family,  and  the  city 
by  which  he  exchanged  his  unsettled  and  fugitive  life  for  a 
permanent  abode,  71311.  The  son  and  the  city  were  together 
the  beginning  of  a  new  epoch.  The  descendants  of  Cain, 
ver.  18  :  And  unto  ChanoJch  was  lorn  Irad:  and  Irad  begat 
Mccliujael :  and  Mcclinjael  Icgat  Methusatl :  and  Mclkusael 
Icgat  Lemecli.  The  ace.  of  the  object  is  combined  with  the 
passive  (here  with  the  Niplml&s  x.  2  5  with  the  Pual\  a  frequent 
construction  throughout  the  Pentateuch,  Ges.  §  143.  la.  And 
"yj  is  here  used  three  times  with  the  meaning  to  beget,  yevvav, 
characteristic  of  the  Jahvistic  style.  The  Elohistic  style  uses 
instead  T^n,  which  was  in  the  more  modern  epoch  of  the 


192  GENESIS  IV.  18. 

language  the  customary  though  not  the  exclusive  expression 
(comp.  IH^P,  parentes  ejus,  Zech.  xiii.  3  ;  rr&pn,  6  yevvijcras 
avrrjv,  Dan.  xi.  6,  and  the  exchange  of  the  HipJi.  and  Kal, 
Job  xxxviii.  28  sq.).  In  the  circumstance  that  the  genealogy 
of  Cain  precedes  that  of  Seth,  ch.  v.,  we  meet  with  one  of 
the  principles  of  arrangement  of  Genesis.  For  in  the  roll  of 
the  nations,  ch.  x.,  the  lists  of  the  Japhethites  and  Hamites 
precede  that  of  the  Shemites,  the  line  of  the  promise  being 
never  carried  on  till  that  which  does  not  belong  to  it  is 
finished  off.  It  is  striking  that  the  names  713  n  and  *pi?  should 
recur  in  the  Sethitic  genealogy,  and  that  the  names  pip  and 
TP  in  the  latter  should  correspond  with  pp  and  *wy  in  the 
Cainitic,  and  fofeno  and  n^nio  with  Sj^ino  and  tawio.  Butt- 
mann  in  his  Mytlwlogus  (vol.  i.  1828,  2nd  ed.  1865)  founds 
thereon  the  assertion,  that  the  two  registers  originally  had  the 
same  object,  viz.  that  of  exhibiting  the  first  beginnings  of 
the  human  race,  which  the  one  derives  from  an  ancestor 
named  Seth,  the  other  from  Cain.  This  is  confirmed  by 
Tuch,  Bottich.,  Hupf.,  Schrader,  Eeuss,  Dillm.,  Kuenen.  The 
genealogy  in  ch.  ix.,  says  Budde,  did  not  originally  reach 
back  beyond  Cain,  Israel  therein  gave  expression  to  their 
descent  from  Cain ;  it  was  Q  who  first  made  the  generic  term 
DISH  into  a  proper  name.  Adam  does  not  belong  to  the 
national  consciousness,  but  to  the  system.  But  it  is  a  castle 
in  the  air  to  make  out  that  the  Israelite  nation  ever  traced 
its  descent  to  Cain.  And  to  say  that  Adam,  as  the  proper 
name  of  the  first  man,  was  an  after  invention,  is  an  arbitrary 
expedient  for  doing  away  with  the  dualism  of  the  two  lines 
by  a  forced  heading.  We  assume  with  greater  justice,  that 
together  with  the  genealogy,  iv.  16-22,  which  terminates  in 
Lemech  and  his  three  sons,  there  was  in  the  Jehovistic  book 
another,  which  starting  from  Adam  terminated  in  Noah  and 
his  three  sons,  the  place  of  which  has  been  taken  by  ch.  v. 
(from  Q).  The  similarity  of  sound  between  the  names  in 
both  lines  may  be  explained  by  the  effort  of  the  tradition  to 
make  apparent  the  parallelism  of  the  two  lines  ;  not  withstand- 


GENESIS  IV.  18.  193 

ing  their  ethic  diversity,  *pb  and  "p:n  are  the  only  identical 
sounds  in  both,  and  it  is  just  these  so  named  persons  who  are 
guarded  by  the  description  given  of  them  from  the  suspicion 
of  original  identity.1  It  is  moreover  quite  comprehensible 
that  in  everything  relating  to  the  form  of  speech  of  these 
primitive  histories  there  would  be  a  freer  treatment,  and  there 
fore  a  greater  vacillation  of  tradition.  The  names  of  these 
first  progenitors  of  our  race  were  not  indeed  Hebrew  nor 
any  Semitic  language,  but  belonged  to  a  tongue  the  know 
ledge  of  which  has  vanished  from  post-diluvian  ages.  The 
present  wording  used  for  these  names  is  an  attempt  to  repro 
duce  them  in  a  manner  intelligible  to  the  then  contemporary 
world,  and  it  may  be  regarded  as  an  indication  of  an  actual 
relation  between  the  original  and  the  now  hebraistically 
written  words,  that  nothing  of  symbolical  invention  can  be 
detected  in  the  names  as  they  at  present  stand.  TVy  defies 
uven  a  probable  interpretation ;  Lagarde  (Orientalia  ii.)  con 
siders  FaiSaB  of  the  LXX.  the  authentic  form  of  the  name, 

which  he  ranks  with  j^  ;  but  no  satisfactory  meaning  is  to 
be  obtained  either  from  this  verb,  which  generally  means,  to 
suffer  from  plague-sores,  or  from  Tiy,  to  be  fleet  (whence 
"ii"W,  wild  ass),  or  from  4.2,  to  shoot  up  or  to  be  hard,  and  the 
form  remains  peculiar.  With  the  reading  "T^V,  W  may  tc> 
some  extent  be  compared  ;  if  the  reading  "TO  ^s  preferred, 
the  more  corresponding  nominal  form  TJ"1?,  ^V,  to  which 
Lagarde,  anf  Olsk.  §  18 la,  refers,  may  be  compared.  -N^np 
or  -^jnp  (with  Joel  redundans)  would,  according  to  the  Hebrew 
nnD,  ls^«,  mean  the  wiped  off  (purified  ?)  of  God;  according  to 
the  Aram.  KPIE  (with  • ),  the  smitten  of  God :  neither  is  satis^ 
factory  ;  Budde's  reading,  V.™  or  V*n»,  God  gives  life, 
is  tempting.  7KpinD  is  more  easy  of  explanation,  which 
means  either  a  suppliant,  or  according  to  the  Assyrian  midn- 

1  Lagarde  in  Orientalia,  ii.  33-38,  endeavours  to  prove  from  LXX.  and  other 
ancient  translations    that    H^C'iriD    also   stood    originally   for   ^fcC'inD,    and 
for  ^inD  in  the  Cainitic  list,  c.  iv. 

X 


194  GENESIS  IV.  19-21. 

sa-ili,  a  man  of  God.  There  is  the  less  to  be  said  about  f\$. 
Budde  thinks  that  this  name  has  in  any  case  a  meaning  of 
violence;  but  the  Arabic  cX*l,  "  to  knead,"  does  not  justify  this 
conclusion.  In  ch.  v.  the  ninth  from  Adam  in  the  line  of 
Seth,  here  the  seventh  from  Adam  in  the  line  of  Cain,  is  so 
named.  In  him  the  Cainitic  tendency  comes  to  a  climax. 
Commencement  of  polygamy,  ver.  19  :  And  Lemcch  took  to 
himself  two  wives :  the  name  of  the  one  was  *  Adah,  and  the 
name  of  the  second  luas  Zillah.  The  narrator — says  Budde— 
does  not  intend  to  depict  this  first  appearance  of  bigamy  as  a 
transgression ;  Jacob  also  had  two  wives.  But  he  surely 
does  intend  it  as  certainly  as  he  declared  monogamy,  ii.  24, 
to  be  the  fundamental  law  of  marriage  at  the  creation.  The 
bigamy  of  Lemech  was  the  first  step  to  the  perversion  of 
this  fundamental  law.  And  among  the  Israelites  and  their 
ancestors  polygamy,  though  tolerated,  did  not  belie  its  nature 
as  an  act  contrary  to  and  alienating  from  God.  Instead  of 
nnxn  .  .  .  rvjtfn,  here  and  Ex.  i.  15,  we  elsewhere  find  also 
nntfn  .  .  .  nnsn,  Deut.  xxi.  15  ;  Ex.  xxxvi.  10,  etc.  The  names  of 
the  two  women,  however  explained,  have  a  sensuous  sound. 
'ASd  is,  according  to  Hesychius,  the  name  of  the  Babylonian 
Hera.  The  first  son  of  Adah,  ver.  20  :  And  Adah  bare  Jdbal :  he 
was  the  father  of  those  dwelling  in  tents,  and  with  cattle.  Jdbal 
(pronounced  'Iw/3?j\  by  the  LXX.)  is  the  founder  of  nomadic 
shepherd  life  as  a  wandering  mode  of  living,  which  was  now 
more  decidedly  than  hitherto  (iv.  2)  separated  from  agriculture. 
Live  stock  had  also  been  extended  beyond  }N¥  to  greater  and 
smaller  breeding  cattle,  and  was  called  fUj?p  (properly  acqui 
sition,  possession,  viz.  peculium,  like  the  Arab.  JU,  DMZ. 
xxviii,  581).  The  verb  3^,  which  with  the  ace.  means  not 
only  to  dwell  in,  but  also  to  dwell  with  something,  is  here 
per  zeugma  the  governing  word  of  rupD  also,  tent  and  cattle 
being  comprised  together  as  moveable  property  (comp.  the 
verbs  possidere  and  bcsitzen,  similar  to  3^  thus  used).  The 
second  son  of  Adah,  ver.  21  :  And  the  name  of  his  brother  was 
Jubal:  he  was  the  father  of  all  that  handle  the  cither  and  pipe. 


GENESIS  IV.  22.  195 

Instrumental  music  had  its  beginning  with  Jubal.  According  to 
this  verse  the  oldest  stringed  instrument  is  "to,  the  cither  (Kivvpa 
or  KiOdpa),  probably  from  "133,  to  creak,  to  rustle.  Dillmann's 
comparison  of  the  Aram.  N")J3,  ostensibly  "  hemp,"  rests  upon  a 
mistake  of  Castelli's  ;  it  is  not  hemp  which  is  so  called,  but  the 
ISTebek,  Zizyphus  Lotus  (Imm.  Low,  Aram.  Pflanzennamcn,  No. 
229).1  :W  (Ps.  cl.  4,  OT),  according  to  the  formation  bw&,  is 
the  pipe  used  to  accompany  love-songs  (for  the  derivation  from 
33y  is  commended  by  the  circumstance  that  the  history  of 
Lemech  breathes  elsewhere  also  of  sensual  love),  and  indeed  the 
avpiyt;,  invented,  according  to  Grecian  mythology,  by  Pan  ;  the 
fistula  (avena)  silvestris  of  the  Latin  poets,  not  the  bagpipe, 
for  the  name  of  which,  a-v^wvia,  the  book  of  Daniel  furnishes 
the  earliest  authority.  The  children  of  Zillah,  ver.  22:  And 
Zillah,  she  also  bare  Tubal-cain,  wlw  hammered  every  hind  of 
cutting  instrument  of  copper  and  iron;  and  the  sister  of  Tubal- 
cain  Naamah.  The  translation  of  the  LXX.,  /cal  rjv  atyvpo- 
KOTTO?  ^aX/ceu?  ^aX/cov  KOL  (TiStfpov,  requires  no  other  text  ;  it 
disguises  the  inconvenient  ^3  by  ^aX«:eu<?.  Budde  however 
picks  out  of  teal  rjv  (KpupoKotros,  -pb  TPl,  declares  the  ^3  to  be 
the  ^3  of  the  preceding  ver.  21  which  has  crept  in  here,  and 
from  these  two  hypotheses  draws  the  conclusion  that  this  TP1 
'Ul  "pb  was  the  original  introduction  of  the  song,  which 
ascribed  the  invention  of  forged  weapons  not  to  Tubal-cain 
but  to  Lemech.  Then  nothing  would  be  told  of  Tubal-cain 
but  the  bare  name,  while  the  narrator  evidently  means  to 
bring  forward  in  the  three  sons  of  Lemech's  double  marriage 
the  inventors  and  founders  of  three  new  kinds  of  employ 
ment.  It  cannot  be  safely  assumed  that  he  wrote  "as  irn  sin 
a  third  time  also,  but  perhaps  &Vp  (from  B>B^,  ^.k!,  to  strike 
with  the  flat  side  of  a  thing,  whence  the  Arab,  miltas,  large 
hammer2)  is  a  gloss  on  ^'%ih>  which  being  received  into  the 

1  Comp.  my  Ein  Tag  in  Capernaum  (3rd  ed.  1886),  p.  134  sq. 

2  Jewish  lexicographers  explain  £^DP  by  *nn  (£Ss>-\    on  which  account  it 


is  in  the  philosophical  diction  of  the  ^liddle  Ages  transferred  to  the  polish  and 
refinement  of  the  mind  ;  see  DMZ.  xxxvii.  488. 


196  GENESIS  IV.  22. 

text  expelled  the  original  (&nn  io)  ^X  (Olsh.),  while  cnn  has 
from  the  original  ^apaaa-wv  (B^.n  or  tsnn)  now  become  the 
neuter  ^apaaaov.  We  do  not  here  read  that  stone  imple 
ments  preceded  the  metal  implements  of  the  ferrea  cctas  as 
described  by  Greece-Roman  poets,  but  it  is  significant  that 
copper  should  precede  iron;  the  former  is  called  n^nj,  apparently 
from  its  bright  polish,  from  eru  V  DT!  ;  the  latter  /na,  from  m, 
to  pierce,  the  metal  being  named  according  to  the  implements 
fashioned  from  it,  especially  the  spear  with,  its  iron  mount 


ing  and  point  (comp.  the  Arabic  name  of  iron, 

to  sharpen,  to  point).  Ewald  sees  in  the  three  sons  of  Lemech 
the  representatives  of  the  three  Aryan  castes  :  the  Vigas 
(craftsmen),  Brahmanas  (artists  and  scholars)  and  Ksatrijas 
(warriors).  In  fact  we  here  see  for  the  first  time  the  teaching 
and  the  military,  added  to  the  labouring  class.  ^  perhaps  gets 
his  name  from  the  wandering  (comp.  DJD'W.  and  OT,  Jer. 
xvii.  8),  i.e.  the  slow  going  to  and  fro  and  onwards  of  shepherds  ; 
'2V  (according  to  the  formation  "»^D,  cage,  Ezek.  xix.  9),  W* 
from  the  loud  playing  of  instruments,  for  ??v  (Vns)  means 
alarm  and  alarm  horn,  and  jubaba  is  the  Peshito  word  for  nyiin, 
the  sound  of  horns  and  blare  of  trumpets.1  pi?  ??r>n  (written 


by  the  Orientals)  is  compounded   with  ££,   ^:,  which 

denotes  the  smith,  and  2  Sam.  xxi.  16  the  spear  as  a  weapon 
forged  by  the  smith  ;  it  is  the  infinitival  noun,  concretely 
used  of  pp,  related  according  to  the  usual  view  to  pp,  to  erect, 
to  prepare,  to  form,  but  perhaps  to  a  word  imitative  of  the 
sound  produced  by  the  stroke  of  the  hammer  (comp.  |ptip,  nj'jp, 

with  tj^i,  lute  player),     teifi  recalls  the  Persian  tuMl,  tupdl 

(in  current  Turkish  also  tuwal\  which  means  iron  shavings, 
according  to  which,  but  contrary  to  the  Hebrew  order  of  the 
words,  liodiger  explains  it  scoriarum  fabcr.  May  not  the 

1  The  meanings  to  wander,  to  flow,  to  rejoice,  for  the  verb  ^l»,  are  derived 
by  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Proleg.  pp.  122-125.  ^  =  Assyr.  abdlu,  to  lead,  would 
also  furnish  a  fitting  root-meaning  for  Jabal. 


GENESIS  IV.  23,  21.  107 

names  of  Lemecli's  three  sons,  bn%  bav,  bain,  be  perhaps  a 
scale  of  noun  forms  from  the  same  verbal  stern  ?  Ewald 
goes  still  farther,  and  assumes  that  though  pp  is  added  only 
to  the  third  name,  all  three  were  so  named  as  descendants  of 
Cain.  We  should  then  have  to  compare  ^1*1,  fruit  =  produc 
tion  (from  ta\  Assyr.  abdlu,  Kal  in  the  sense  of  the  Hiph. 
^3in,  whence  perhaps  also  allu,  son).  It  may  be  only  by 
mere  chance  that  the  name  of  Apollo  is  symphonious  with  the 
first  two  names,  and  that  of  Vulcan  with  the  third,  while  at 
the  same  time  the  name  of  Lemecli's  daughter,  np^,  is  of  like 
signification  with  Venus,  whose  name  in  Sanscrit  is  derived 
from  vanasy  delight,  gracefulness.  The  heathen  gods  are  not 
merely  deified  natural  objects  (Goldziher,  Grill,  Leop.  Einstein), 
but  some  of  them  also  deified  human  beings ;  and  there  is 
nothing  which  in  itself  need  astonish  us  to  find  roots  of  their 
histories  in  the  worldly-minded  house  of  Cain.  The  scriptural 
account  however  shows  the  roots  of  crafts  and  arts  found  in 
it.  The  progress  of  civilisation  has  never  kept  equal  pacu 
with  that  of  religion.  It  overtakes  the  latter  and  sometimes 
even  opposes  it.  Nevertheless  it  has  its  just  claims,  and  every 
acquisition  made  by  natural  secular  development  will  at  last, 
after  undergoing  a  process  of  purification  and  transfiguration, 
become  the  property  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  applies 
especially  to  music,  that  daughter  of  heaven  which  has  come 
down  to  earth. 

The  first  song,  Lemecli's  boastful  defiance  by  reason  of  the 
newly -invented  weapon  of  vengeance,  vv.  23,  24 :  And 
Lemccli  said  unto  his  wires : 

Adah  and  Zillah,  hear  my  voice; 

Ye  wives  of  Lemech,  hearken  unto  my  speech : 

Surely  I  slay  men  for  my  wound, 
And  young  men  for  my  scar. 

For  Cain  is  avenged  sevenfold, 
And  Lemech  seventy  and  seven  times. 

Lemech  is  praising  the  invention  of  Tubal-cain.  This  significa 
tion  of  the  words  of  Lemech  was  first  penetrated  by  Hamann 


198  GENESIS  IV.  23,  24. 

(Werke,  ii.  390)  and  Herder  (Vom  Geist  der  Elrciisclicn  Poesie, 
pt.  i.  Discourse  x.).  Gaunter  (The  Poetry  of  the  Pentateuch, 
1839,  i.  p.  81)  cannot  make  the  fact  that  Lemech's  words  are 
addressed  to  his  wives  agree  with  this.  But  their  very  safety 
depended  on  Lemech's  capability  of  using  arms,  and  the  metal 
weapon,  to  which  this  lyric  effusion  applies,  was  the  invention 
of  the  son  of  Zillah.  Ephrem,  Jerome  and  others  agree  in  read 
ing  out  of  Lemech's  words,  according  to  Jewish  tradition,  that, 
seduced  by  Tubal-cain,  he  had  slain  his  ancestor  Cain  (C^K), 
and  then  in  his  displeasure  thereat  had  killed  this  his  own  son 
(i^).  It  is  but  a  foolish  Haggadah  picked  out  of  the  words.1 
Such  a  fantastic  way  of  treating  history  is  avoided  by  taking 
*3  hypothetically,  and  with  Nagelsbach  making  the  periods  to 
be  :  If  I  have  slain  a  man  .  .  .  then  if  Cain  was  avenged  seven 
fold,  Lemech  would  be  avenged  seventy-seven  times.  But 
this  gives  an  intolerably  clumsy  construction,  in  which  the 
requisite  prominence  of  the  apodosis  is  absent  (comp.  Ex. 
xxii.  22,  23),  and  moreover  an  involved  meaning.  We  do 
not  expect  the  thought  that  Lemech,  having  committed  a 
murder,  will  better  protect  himself  against  blood-vengeance 
than  Cain  was  to  be  protected  by  God,  but  that  he  will  pay 
back  every  attack  by  slaying  him  who  makes  it,  and  will  by 
his  own  power  make  himself  more  inviolable  than  Cain  was 
by  God's  promise.  ^  either  justifies  the  summons  of  23a  by 
the  importance  of  the  matter  (for,  because),  or  gives  forth  the 
substance  of  what  is  to  be  heard  (that  =  on,  subsequently 
faded  into  an  untranslatable  on  recitativum),  or  it  has  an 
affirmative  meaning  confirmative  of  what  preceded  (Ex. 
iv.  25 ;  comp.  Isa,  vii.  9),  as  we  have  translated  above. 
Certainly  sfi)nn  seems  to  state  an  externally  completed  fact ; 
but  in  the  absence  of  certain  knowledge  concerning  this, 
we  take  it  as  a  perfect  of  certainty,  which  states  an 
act  completed  already  as  to  the  consciousness,  but  not 

1  See  the  explanation  of  the  whole  song,  according  to  this  Haggadah,  in  the 
Judseo-Polish  so-called  Weiber-Chumrnasch,  translated  into  English  by  P.  J. 
Hershon  (London  1885)  (Commentars  ilber  die  Genesis  fur  Ungelehrte),  p. 
37  sq. 


GENESIS  IV.  23,  24.  190 

as  yet  externally  accomplished  (comp.  the  prcet.  confident-ice 
of  prayer  and  the  prcet.  propheticum  of  prediction,  Ges. 
§  126.  4).  Beside  W$  we  have  ^.?.<t,  the  young  man, 
which  Buckle  mistakenly  declares  to  be  inadmissible  :  the 
young  men  of  Eehoboam  are  called  DH^,  1  Kings  xiL, 
so  are  the  pages  at  the  royal  court,  Dan.  i.  4  ;  in  Eccles. 
iv.  13,  "6j  (like  nyj,  x.  1C)  is  a  young  man  in  con 
trast  to  |pr.  The  suffix  of  ^A  is  as  usual  passive  (Job 
ix.  17  ;  comp.  "J?3^,  Jer.  x.  19;  Nah.  iii.  19  and  elsewhere),  i.e. 
it  means  the  wound  inflicted  on  some  one,  not  the  wound  he 
inflicts ;  while  on  the  other  hand  in  rrrian  (n"von)  there  is  no 
question  of  the  objective  or  subjective  meaning  of  the  suffix, 
with  a  suffix  it  always  means  the  scar  which  one  has  on 
himself,  Ps.  xxxviii.  5  ;  Isa.  liii.  5.  The  preposition  {j  ex 
presses  both  times,  as  in  Lev.  xix.  28,  the  causal  relation,  the 
external  occasion.  The  meaning  of  W^V]  D^jn^  is  determined 
according  to  QTO3&' ;  it  is  multiplicatively  meant,  and  does  not 
denote  70x7  (Kamphausen),  but  77  times,  which  is  also  the 
sense  of  the  e/SSo/^/coz'Ta/a?  evrra  of  the  LXX.  (comp.  Matt, 
xviii.  22)  and  of  the  septuayies  scpties  of  Jerome.  Elsewhere 
seven  times  is  called  P?^  (with  the  DTO3  understood),  Prov. 
xxiv.  16  ;  here  the  numeral  stands  in  its  primitive  form,  and 
only  becomes  multiplicative  through  the  connection  of  thought 
(Ew.  §  269&).  We  here  see  the  beginnings  of  music  followed 
by  the  beginning  of  its  sister  art  poetry.1  It  is  true  that 
Lemech  did  not  speak  Hebrew,  but  the  song  nevertheless 
exhibits  in  this  Hebrew  reproduction  the  genesis  of  poetry. 
It  began  with  lyric  poetry  as  a  primitive  and  powerful  pour 
ing  forth  of  strong  emotions  in  a  rhythmical  form.  In  this 
song  we  meet  with  all  the  characteristics  of  subsequent  poetry 
in  their  first  beginnings:  viz.  1.  Rhythm,  i.e.  the  regular 
succession  of  rise  and  fall ;  2.  consonance,  i.e.  the  similar 

1  Chas.  Aug.  Briggs  finds  stropliic  poetry  already  in  chs.  i.-iii.  :  viz.  in  the 
Elohistic  account  of  creation  a  poem  in  six  rising  strophes  with  pentametric 
lines,  in  the  Jabvistic  history  of  Paradise  a  poem  in  ten  fourteen -lined  strophes. 
But  Q  and  JE  both  write  prose  and  not  even  poetically,  but  only  here  and  theie 
prose  with  a  poetic  elevation  and  colouring. 


200  GENESIS  IV.  23,  21. 

ending  of  coinciding  members  of  the  verse,  which  in  older 
Semitic  poetry  was  not  developed  beyond  the  rhyme  of 
inflexion  ;  3.  parallelism  in  the  arrangement  of  the  thoughts, 
a  fundamental  property  especially  of  Hebrew  poetry,  which 
may  be  compared  to  the  rhythmic  systole  and  diastole  of  the 
heart,  or  to  the  regular  vibration  of  the  two  halves  of  the 
verse ;  4.  the  construction  of  the  strophes,  for  the  Song  of 
Lemech  must  not  be  judged  according  to  the  two  Masoretic 
verses  into  which  it  is  divided.  It  consists  of  three  dis- 
ticlis,  the  distich  being  the  simplest  and  primitive  form  of 
the  strophe ;  5.  the  more  elevated  diction  shown  by  the 
choice  both  of  rarer  forms,  such  as  i^P^'  for  TOE^',  Isa.  xxxii.  9 
(like  feni?,  call,  Ex.  ii.  20,  for  jaop,  Faith  i.  20;  comp.  Syr. 
kdaUn  for  nj^bjp),  and  of  expressions  like  pTsn  and  n7?^>  which 
are  not  worn  out  in  familiar  language.  With  regard  to  the 
matter  of  the  song,  Budde  is  persuaded  that  simply  the  use  of 
the  new  invention  for  its  lawful  purpose  is  brought  to  notice, 
in  truth  however  that  Titanic  arrogance  of  which  it  is  said, 
Hab.  i.  11,  that  its  might  is  its  god,  and  Job  xii.  6,  that  it 
1  trings  its  god,  viz.  the  sword,  in  its  hand,  is  expressed  therein. 
The  sword  in  his  hand  counts  for  more  with  Lemech  than  a 
threat  in  the  mouth  of  God,  and  he  breathes  out  murder 
although  Cain  his  ancestor  had  fallen  under  the  curse  on 
account  of  it.  The  Cainitic  development  starts  from  murder 
and  culminates  in  that  murderous  lust  of  war,  in  which  the 
ascendancy  of  the  animal  instinct  in  human  nature  manifests 
itself.  It  is  said  that  iv.  1-16  and  17-24  do  not  har 
monize.  But  the  retrospect  of  Lemech's  song :  "  to  whoso 
killeth  Cain,  it  shall  be  avenged  sevenfold,"  loa,  binds  the 
two  supposed  discrepant  pieces  of  history  in  close  connection. 
The  unity  here  is  missed,  while  in  the  two  genealogies,  on  the 
contrary,  the  Cainitic  and  the  Sethitic  of  ch.  v.,  an  original  unity 
is  invented.  The  two  tables  are  however  characteristically 
distinct,  being  of  different  length  and  consciously  pursuing  a 
different  object.  The  Cainitic,  with  its  seven  members,  stops 
where  the  worldly  tendency  of  this  line  culminates,  while  the 


GENESIS  IV.  25.  201 

Si-tliitic  in  cli.  v.  with  its  ten  members  has  in  view  the 
transition  from  primitive  history  to  the  history  of  the  Flood, 
and  according  to  iv.  25  sq.  a  fundamentally  different  tendency 
prevails  in  this  line. 

The  same  narrator  who  described  the  fall  of  man  and  the 
murder  of  Abel  now  continues  the  history  of  Adam  and  his 
wife,  ver.  25  :  And  Adam  kneiv  his  wife,  again;  and  she  bare 
a  son,  and  called  his  name  Seth  :  for  Elohim  has  appointed  me 
another  seed  for  Hebel,  because  Cain  slew  him.  Instead  of 
Dl??,  ver.  1,  where  the  history  of  man  after  the  expulsion 
from  Paradise  begins,  we  here  read  the  proper  name  CHN.1 
Tiy  refers  to  the  two  preceding  births.  Even  if  this  Tiy  were 
absent,  as  in  the  LXX.,  SH*}  would  not  be  enough  to  justify 
the  conclusion,  that  according  to  the  original  text  Seth  was 
the  first  son  of  man  (Buckle).  As  at  1  Sam.  i.  19  the  sub 
ject  treated  of  is  the  blessing  of  children  after  long  barren 
ness,  so  here  it  is  the  blessing  of  children  after  the  parents 
had  lost  Abel,  and  to  a  certain  extent  Cain  also.  The  name 
n'w;  seems,  according  to  this  explanation,  to  mean  the 
appointed,  but  a  passive  ni?=JW  cannot  be  authenticated. 
nir'  considered  as  a  participle  (like  fiD)  signifies  the  appointer, 
viz.  of  a  new  beginning,  or  as  a  substantive  (like  IN)  :  the 
settlement  in  the  sense  of  foundation  (com  p.  n^,  pillar),  and 
indeed  a  new  foundation.  ^  is  followed  by  an  oratio  directa 
(not  ooliqua),  as  at  xxxiii.  31  (comp.  |3,  xxvi.  7).  The 
metheg  in  yHJ?  is  a  sign  of  the  long  a,  as  at  xxxv.  27  ;  Job 
ix.  20.  "  Another  seed  "  is  equal  to  another  descendant,  as 
D^EON  jnt,  1  Sam.  i.  11,  means  a  male  descendant,  and 
DT&N  jnr,  Mai.  ii.  15,  a  descendant  according  to  the  promise. 
Parents  have  already  a  posterity  in  one  descendant,  jnr 


"Tliis  Q1X  as  a  proper  name,  remarks  Biulde,  cannot  proceed  from  the 
same  hand  which  wrote  the  Paradisaic  history  and  iv.  1."  Mere  cobwebs  ! 
DTtfn  and  DIN  are  related  to  each  other  as  DTI^NH  and  DTlipN  ;  the  former 
means  o  civfyuvo;,  the  latter  civfyufos  as  a  proper  name.  It  is  J  who  in  iv.  1-16 
continues  the  history  of  primitive  mankind  ;  the  different  colouring  of  iv.  17-24 
is  explained  by  assuming  that  he  here  draws  from  a  different  source,  and  at 
iv.  25  sq.  recurs  to  the  track  of  his  own  narrative. 


202  GENESIS  IV.  26. 

is  not  always  the  singular  comprehension  of  many.1  The 
words  PP  fa"jn  '•D  are  no  accessory  remark  of  the  narrator, 
but  13  is,  as  at  2  Sam.  xix.  22,  Zeph.  ii.  10,  in  virtue  of  the 
preceding  rinn,  equal  to  ^  nnri,  Deut.  iv.  37  ;  Prov.  i.  29. 
Budde's  degradation  of  pp  ^-in  "o  to  a  patched-on  historical 
remark  is  even  syntactically  refuted.  The  reason  for  Seth's 
mother  here  calling  God  D^nbtf  is  found  by  Dillmann  to  be, 
that  he  who  meant  to  bring  in  265  could  not  well  put  mrp 
into  the  mouth  of  Eve.  But  why  not  ?  Dillmann  himself 
understands  266  of  the  solemn  worship  of  Jahveh,  which 
presupposed  that  men  who  joined  together  for  such  a  purpose 
already  knew  Him.  Hence  it  would  not  seem  strange  to  find 
the  word  nirp  here  (comp.  iv.  1).  Seth,  who  continues  the 
line  of  promise,  was  indeed  a  gift  of  the  God  of  the  promise. 
But  the  fact  that  Eve  here  calls  God  D^r6tf,  shows  that  the 
idea  preponderant  in  her  consciousness  was  that  of  the  creative 
power,  which  had  renewed  the  hope  that  had  blossomed  in 
Abel  and  been  destroyed  by  Cain :  Abel  had  died  childless, 
but  in  Seth  the  line  of  promise,  from  which  Cain  had  wilfully 
broken  off.  is  actually  continued,  ver  26  :  And  Seth,  to  him 
was  lorn  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Ends  ;  then  to  declare  the 
name  of  Jalivcli  icas  leyun.  On  NirrD^  etiam  ci,  see  Ges. 
§  121.  3.  Similar  perhaps  is  the  Nirrcjs  (even  his)  of  Elisha, 


2  Kings  ii.  14.      The  verb  fc^K  (related  to  the  Arab.    <j^j!) 

means  to  be,  or  to  become  weak,  frail,  like  the  Assyr.  en&su 
(comp.  acrOeveia,  sickness),  whence  the  adj.  ensu,  weak.  This 
is  also  undoubtedly  the  meaning  of  ^'foK,  to  whom  as  a 
personage  of  primitive  history  Gajomeret  of  the  Persian  myth 
(who  became  king  in  Firdosi),  and  whose  name,  gaja  maratan, 
signifies  mortal  life,  corresponds.  And  whatever  the  deriva- 


1  The  Mirtrash  frequently  remarks  that  Esther  in  "IHX  DIpEJO  (Esth.  iv.  14) 
has  in  view  "that  seed"  (JDf  VYI&O,  viz.  King  Messiah  (see  Levy  under 
jnj).  St.  Paul  too,  in  Gal.  iii.  16,  takes  his  stand  upon  Jewish  thought  and 

diction,  according  to  which  y~if  may  mean  an  individual,  who  represents  the 
posterity  of  one  hitherto  childless. 


GENESIS  IV.  26.  203 

tion  of  CfiJK,  it  designates,  according  to  the  usage  of  the 
language,  man  on  the  side  of  his  impotence,  frailty,  and 
mortality;  see  Ps.  viii.  5,  ciii.  15;  Job  vii.  1,  17,  especially 
Ps.  xc.  3,  where  the  departing  generation  is  called  t^ns,  in 
distinction  from  that  which  comes  into  its  place,  and  Isa.  li. 
12,  where  the  enemies  of  God  and  the  persecutors  of  His 
Church  are  said,  in  contrast  to  their  supposed  power,  greatness, 
and  imperishableness,  to  be  HIDJ  Ptttf,  as  at  Ps.  x.  18,  pus. 
p&srrfD.1  TN  is  generally  used  to  refer  to  some  elevating  and 
joyful  occurrence.  Even  on  this  account  it  is  improbable 
that  ?rrcn  should  be  intended  as  passive  of  Hiph.,  Ezek.  xxxix. 
7  ;  and  here  is  related  what  Jerome  cites  as  a  Jewish  view 
(as  does  also  in  accordance  with  the  Midrush,  Targ.  Jer.,  comp. 
Abulwalid's  npp"i,  and  Effodi's  GframmatiJc,  p.  154),  quod  tune 
primum  in  nomine  Domini  et  in  similitudine  ejus  fabricata  sint 
idola.  But  even  the  construction  &ripb  i>nin  would  in  this 
sense  be  a  monstrosity.  The  LXX.  effaces  the  TK  and  reads 
^mn  nr,  ovros  rf^irLaev,  for  which  euro?  ?ip%ev  (ijp^aro)  = 
^D\}  nj,  would  alone  be  linguistically  possible.  Aq.  correctly 
gives  Tore  tfpxfy,  and  Gr.  Ven.  Tore  rjp/craL  It  was  then 
begun  to  call  with  or  by  means  of  the  name  of  Jahveh,  i.e. 
(the  obj.  being  conceived  of  as  the  means,  Ges.  §  138,  marginal 

1  While  {}*&{,  with   its   plural  D^tf,  points  Lack  to   the  verb  {jriK,   to  be 
strong,   H$K    (the  V  of  which   has.  according   to   the   Aram.    NnfiN,   Arab. 


..jj',  the  value  of  n,  CL?),  from  the  verb  £OK  =  1*^01,  designates  the  woman 
as  ffKiuos  affhviffrspov.       From  this  same  verb  seem  to  be  derived,  not  only  tH3N, 


but   also  £»;iN,       yu.3^    with  its  plural  D^K  (D^    as  plur.    of  the   wife   is 


different),   ^uJl,   Assyr.  nisu,  plur.  niM  (male  beings)  and  the  like.      The 

verb   iMJ\>  to  cling  to,  to  be  sociable,  also  offers  itself  for  the  ins  used  of  the 

male  relation  and  of  male  names  in  general,  and  this  excites  far  less  suspicion 

-  <*3. 

of  being  a  denominative  than  the  Arab.  L^-J'>  soft  (perhaps  peculiar  to  the 
female  kind)  ;  see  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Frolvy.  p.  162  ;  comp.  Zimmern,  Balyl. 
Busxpsalmen,  p.  20. 


204  GENESIS  IV.  2G. 

remark),  to  call  upon  Him,  viz.  by  prayer  (cornp.  Zeph.  iii.  9  ; 
Jer.  x.  25  ;  Zech.  xiii.  9),  and  by  proclaiming  Him  (Ps.  cv.  1  ; 
comp.  Ex.  xxxiii.  19,  xxxiv.  5,  with  xxxv.  30).  We  have  here 
the  first  link  of  the  chain,  xii.  8,  xiii.  4,  xxi.  33,  xxvi.  25. 
These  continuations  of  the  beginning  here  related  show,  that 
the  meaning  of  the  narrator  is  not,  that  then  began  the  appel 
lation  of  God  by  the  name  Jahveh,  which  gives  Reuss  the 
opportunity  for  making  the  cavilling  remark :  en  cela  I'auteur 
se  contredit  lui-meme,  but  that  then  began  the  formal  and 
solemn  common  worship  of  God,  the  proclaiming  (preaching) 
Church,  hence  the  Church  form  of  confessing  the  God  of 
salvation  (see  Kohler,  Bill.  Geschichte,  i.  51  sq.).  Certainly 
there  is  no  lack  of  connection  between  the  feeling  of  the 
nothingness  of  the  earthly  expressed  in  the  name  Enosh,  and 
the  fact  that  it  was  just  now  that  the  worship  of  the  Church 
had  its  commencement. 


II. 

THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  ADAM,  V.-YL   8. 

THE  GENEALOGY  FROM  ADAM  TO  NOAH,  CII.  V. 
(Parallel,  1  Clirou.  i.  1-4.) 

THE  Toledoth  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth  are  followed  by  the 
second  main  division  of  Genesis,  the  Toledoth  of  Adam,  and 
first  by  the  genealogical  table  of  the  ten  generations  from 
Adam  to  Noah,  to  which  this  title  more  especially  refers,  the 
beginning  of  that  genealogical  chain  running  through  Genesis, 
the  final  link  of  which  is  formed  by  the  tribes  of  Israel.  The 
section  is  Elohistic  (by  §).  The  view  and  mode  of  representa 
tion  of  the  history  of  creation,  that  genealogy  of  heaven  and 
earth,  are  here  continued;  in  one  passage  only,  v.  29,  is 
found  a  retrospective  reference  to  the  Jahveh-Elohim  section, 
and  we  there  have  mrr  and  not  D\-6tf.  In  a  rapid  survey  and 
so-to-speak  in  ten  strophes,  are  the  first  ten  patriarchs  of  the 
earliest  period  of  history  brought  before  us ;  the  tenth  member 
of  the  series  is  however  left  incomplete,  because  Noah  belongs 
as  much  to  the  post-diluvian  as  to  the  ante-diluvian  world. 
In  the  roll  of  the  Cainites,  the  contents  of  which  had  regard  to 
the  history  of  secular  culture,  no  computation  of  years  was 
given.  Here  they  begin  to  form  the  indispensable  scaffolding  of 
the  history  of  redemption,  the  continuation  of  which  is  secured 
through  Seth  the  substitute  of  Abel.  The  narrator  computes 
the  years  of  each  patriarch  to  the  birth  of  the  son  who  was  to 
carry  on  the  line  of  promise  (of  Seth  therefore,  not  of  Cain 
in  the  case  of  Adam),  next  those  of  the  remainder  of  his  life, 
and  then  adds  these  two-year  marks  together  with  ^"^  vrm 
(for  which  we  have,  vv.  23,  31,  and  ix.  29/iTV). 


206  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  ADAM. 

The  year  marks  of  birth  added  together  with  the  100 
years  from  the  birth  of  Shem  to  the  commencement  of 
the  Deluge,  make  1656  years.  The  numbers  in  the  LXX. 
and  Samar.  differ  both  in  ch.  v.  and  ch.  xi.  (Shem  to 
Terah)  from  the  Hebrew  (see  the  table).  The  Septuaginfc 
reckons  from  Adam  to  the  Delude  2242  (according  to 

O  V  O 

another  reading  2262)  years,  the  Samaritan  (with  which 
the  book  of  Jubilees  or  Aerrrr)  Tevecris,  preserved  in 
JEthiopic  and  partially  in  Latin,  and  edited  by  Dillmann 
and  Ronsch,  agrees)  1307  years.  The  computation  of  the 
LXX.  was  long  regarded  as  authentic  by  both  the  Hellenistic 
Jews  and  the  ancient  Church,  whence  it  was  transferred  to 
Moslem  authors :  it  is  advocated  in  the  Eoman  martyrology, 
and  maintained  its  credit,  although  Jerome  in  his  trans 
lation,  which  became  the  Church  one,  keeps  to  the  Hebrew 
text.  Beda  caused  offence  when  in  his  works,  de  temporibus 
and  de  tcmporum  ratione,  he  preferred  the  numbers  of  the 
Hebrew  text,  although  he  could  appeal  to  both  Jerome  and 
Augustine  (Civ.  xv.  13)  in  their  favour.  Among  older 
Protestant  investigators,  Ludw.  Cappellus  and  Is.  Yossius 
defended  the  numbers  of  the  LXX.,  the  former  against  J. 
Buxtorf,  jun.,  the  latter  against  Geo.  Horn.  The  Hebrew  text 
subsequently  found  its  most  learned  advocate  in  J.  D. 
Michaelis,  in  his  treatises,  de  Clironologia  Mosis  ante  diluvium 
and  a  diluvio  ad  Abraliamum,  1763-68,  and  recently  in  Ed. 
Preuss,  Zeitrcclmung  dcr  LXX.  1859.  In  England  on  the 
other  hand  the  authenticity  of  the  Septuagint  figures  found 
zealous  defenders  in  Jackson,  Russell,  Geo.  Rawlinson  (in  his 
ten  articles  on  "  Early  Civilisation  "  in  the  Leisure  Hour,  1876), 
and  lastly  in  Budd,  The  Modern  Hebrew  Numbers,  London  1880. 
The  question,  how  the  variation  in  the  three  computations 
is  to  be  accounted  for,  is  still  undecided.  Gesenius  and  others 
explain  the  differences  of  the  Samaritan  as  resulting  from 
an  effort  for  a  symmetrical  decrease  in  the  length  of  life ; 
Gehringer  (Ti'ibinger  Programm,  1842),  from  accidental 
errors  in  reading  and  writing  in  the  years  of  Methuselah 


DIFFERENCES.  207 

and  Lemech.  The  variations  of  the  LXX.  have  been  ex 
plained  by  Bockh  (Manetlio  und  die  Hundssternperiode, 
p.  470  sqq.)  and  Niebuhr  (Geschichte  Assurs  und  Babels  t 
p.  357  sqq.)  from  an  effort  to  synchronize  the  biblical  and 
Egyptian  chronologies.  The  attempt  of  Niebuhr  labours 
under  violent  expedients  (see  Eosch's  art.  "  Zeitrechnung," 
in  Herzog's  RE.} ;  that  of  Bockh  is  far  the  more  seductive. 
He  sees  in  the  2242  years  to  the  Deluge  of  the  LXX.  a 
reduction  of  nineteen  dog-star  periods  of  the  previous  history 
of  Egypt,  i.e.  of  27,759  years  to  as  many  months  of  29-J  days, 
this  reduction  giving  S18,890i  days  =  2242  Julian  years. 
The  LXX.  might  esteem  such  a  reduction  justifiable,  because 
ancient  tradition  testifies  to  computation  by  years  of  a  month 
each  in  the  primitive  times  of  Egypt.  Eusebius  also  reduces 
the  years  of  the  Egyptian  history  of  Menes  to  months  ;  he 
reckons  however,  not  27,759,  but  24,900. 

But  how  is  the  reckoning  of  the  period  at  1656  years  in 
the  Hebrew  text  to  be  explained  ?  Bertheau  (Jaliresbericlit 
of  the  DMZ.  1845)  thinks  it  is  founded  on  the  assumption, 
that  the  average  length  of  human  life  during  the  first  period 
amounted  to  160  years,  in  the  second  to  120  years,  and 
that  subsequently  the  1600  solar  years  became  1656  lunar 
years  of  355  days  each.  But  in  none  of  the  three  recensions 
is  the  first  period  reckoned  at  1600  and  the  second  at  1200; 
and  it  is  a  very  precarious  expedient  to  assume  that  these 
were  the  original  rates.  Besides,  the  Israelites  never  computed 
by  mere  lunar  years,  but  only  by  lunar  years  compensated  for 
by  the  intercalation  of  solar  years,  so  that  the  prevailing 
measure  of  time  was  really  the  solar  year. 

The  hypothesis  of  Lagarde,  according  to  which  the  com 
putation  of  the  extant  Hebrew  text  was  shortened  by  about 
1000  years  in  a  polemical  interest,  viz.  that  of  depriving 
Christians  of  the  proof  that  the  Messiah  really  appeared  in 
the  year  of  the  world  5500,  has  been  convincingly  refuted 
by  Kuenen  in  a  treatise  published  in  French  under  the  title, 
Lcs  Orif/incs  du  Texte  Masortthigue,  1875.  Certainly  Chris- 


208  THE  TOLEDOTII  OF  ADAM. 

tian  clironographers  reckon  6000  years  of  prechristian  history 
(Chronicon  Paschale,  ii.  p.  117,  ed.  Bonn),  or  more  accurately  : 
it  was  assumed  that  after  the  completion  of  the  fifth  millen 
nium  Christ  appeared  in  the  sixth,  His  birth  being  placed  in 
the  year  5000,  or  more  accurately  in  the  year  5500  after 
the  creation  of  the  world  (see  Byssel,  Georg  der  Bischof  der 
Arctber,  p.  46).  But  the  Jews  would  have  been  caught  in 
their  own  net  by  any  such  curtailment.  For  according  to  the 
ancient  Elijah  tradition,1  the  advent  of  the  Messiah  was  to 
be  expected  after  2000  years  inn  and  2000  years  min, 
therefore  after  the  year  of  the  world  4000 ;  and  the 
Talmudists  are  conscious  that  this  term  has  been  long  ex 
ceeded  without  His  appearing.  According  to  the  computa 
tion  of  the  text  of  the  Hebrew  Bible,  the  advent  of  Christ 
really  falls  pretty  nearly  in  the  year  4000  (according  to 
Scaliger  and  Calvisius,  3950  ;  according  to  Kepler  and 
Petavius,  3984;  according  to  Usher,  4004). 

The  low  figure  of  the  period  elapsing  between  Adam  and 
the  Flood,  viz.  1307  in  the  Samaritan  version,  is  from  an 
historical  point  of  view  the  most  incredible,  and  yet  the 
view  that  these  are  the  original  figures  has  now  obtained 
renowned  advocates.  But  the  circumstance  that  the  gradual 
decline  of  the  duration  of  life  is  here  brought  forward  more 
clearly,  or  to  speak  correctly,  comparatively  more  so,  testifies 
rather  to  tendency  than  originality.  Bertheau  in  his  article 
on  the  numbers  in  Genesis,  ch.  v.  and  xi.,  in  the  Jahrlb.  fur 
deutsclie  Thcologie,  xxiii.  p.  657  sqq.,  has  directed  attention 
to  a  surprising  phenomenon.  The  amounts  of  the  duration  of 
life  seem  to  have  been  obtained  by  means  of  adding  together 
the  numbers  of  the  years  of  generation.  Thus  the  930  years 
of  Adam's  life  result  from  adding  together  the  105  years  of 
Seth,  the  90  of  Enoch,  70  of  Kenan,  65  of  Mahalalel,  500  of 
Noah,  with  the  100  to  the  Flood.  And  Henoch's  365  years 
are  given  by  reckoning  up  the  130  years  of  Adam,  the  70 

1  See  my  essay,   "Der  eschatologisclie  Denkspruch  der  Reformatoren,"  in 
the  Ally.  Ev.  Luth.  KZ.  1884,  pp.  6-8. 


THE  SAMARITAN  AND  HEBREW  COMPUTATION.  209 

of  Kenan,  65  of  Mahalalel,  with  the  100  to  the  Flood. 
Both  these  periods  coincide  equally  in  the  Hebrew  and  in 
the  Samaritan  text,  but  the  910  years  of  Kenan  can  only  be 
attained  by  the  addition  of  the  year-marks  of  generation  of 
the  Samaritan.  Before  however  we  regard  the  year-marks  of 
life  as  the  sum -total  of  so  unintelligent  and  nonsensical 
an  addition,  we  would  see  in  the  possibility  discovered  by 
Bertheau  a  curious  trick  of  accident.  And  that  it  is  such  is 
indeed  evident  from  the  fact  that  the  365  years  of  Henocli's 
life,  though  an  undoubted  tradition,  may  yet  also  be  obtained 
by  such  an  addition  sum.  The  Hebrew  text  reckons  349 
years  more  from  Adam  to  the  Deluge  than  the  Samaritan. 
Certainly  the  motive  of  this  increase  might  be  the  assumption 
that  two- thirds  of  the  4000  years  of  the  world,  i.e.  2666, 
elapsed  between  the  commencement  of  the  world  and  the 
departure  from  Egypt.  And  when  we  consider  the  division 
of  this  plus  of  349  years  among  the  year-marks  furnished  by 
the  periods  when  Jared,  Methuselah,  and  Lemech  begat,  a 
conclusion  more  favourable  to  the  originality  of  the  Samaritan 
text  may  be  drawn.  To  these  proofs  from  probability  of  the 
authenticity  of  the  Samaritan  computation  by  Bertheau  and 
Dillmann,  another  has  been  added  by  Budde  in  his  work  on 
Biblical  Primceval  History,  1883.  He  starts  from  the  view 
that  the  ten  antediluvian  patriarchs,  who  now,  when  opposed 
to  the  Cainites,  all  appear  as  saints  (which  however  is  not  the 
case,  the  contrary  being  proved  by  the  sole  deliverance  of 
Noah),  were  originally  divided  into  a  godly  and  an  ungodly 
half ;  Mahalalel  closing  the  godly  half,  while  with  Jared,  whose 
name  means  decline,  begins  that  decay  of  morals  out  of  which 
Henoch  was  removed.  The  Samaritan  gives  the  most  faithful 
representation  of  this  downfall.  In  the  Hebrew  text  it  is 
only  Methuselah  who  attains  to  the  year  of  the  Deluge  (which 
according  to  the  inconsiderate  division  of  the  year-marks  of 
generation  in  the  LXX.  he  survives  by  about  fourteen  years). 
In  the  Samaritan,  on  the  other  hand,  the  year  of  the  Deluge, 
viz.  1307,  is  the  death  year  alike  of  Jared,  Methuselah,  and 

0 


210  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  ADAM. 

Lemecli.  It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  they  are  to  be 
thought  of  as  perishing  in  the  Flood ;  still  it  is  probable  that 
this  form  of  the  chronological  table  is  designed  to  represent 
how  the  Sethitic  line  at  last  fell  in  their  representatives  into 
moral  corruption  and  incurred  the  judgment  of  the  Flood. 
Budde  thinks  that  the  Hebrew  text  changed  the  1307  (from 
Adam  to  the  Flood)  of  the  Samaritan  into  1656  for  the 
purpose  of  making  Methuselah  alone  survive  till  the  year  of 
the  Deluge,  and  the  others  all  die  previously ;  that  the  1656 
years  are  derived  from  the  1657  which  according  to  the 
Samaritan  elapsed  from  Adam  to  the  death  of  Noah ;  he 
thinks  he  can  also  explain  the  subtraction  of  the  one  year. 

But  all  these  are  mere  possibilities.  What  is  here  regarded 
as  the  intention  of  the  Hebrew  may  on  the  contrary  be 
considered  as  the  intention  of  the  Samaritan.  One  thing  is 
certain,  viz.  that  the  increase  of  the  year-marks  in  the  LXX. 
presupposes  the  shorter  rates  of  the  Hebrew  and  Samaritan. 
But  if  we  further  ask  whether  the  authentic,  i.e.  the  original 
computation  in  the  text  of  the  Pentateuch,  is  that  of  the 
Hebrew  or  that  of  the  Samaritan,  it  must  be  remembered  that 
the  figures  in  both  are  based  upon  arithmetical  reflection ;  and 
since  the  Samaritan  also  can  make  no  higher  claim,  it  speaks 
in  favour  of  the  Hebrew,  that  its  1656  years  show  themselves 
to  be  the  product  of  an  intelligent  systematic  chronology.  For 
if  1656  years  elapsed  between  Adam  and  the  Deluge,  there 
will  be  found,  on  following  the  Hebrew  chronology  on  to  the 
exodus,  2666  years,  and  these  are,  as  Alfred  von  Gutschmid 
perceives,  two -thirds  of  4000  years.  Hence  the  number 
1656  comes  from  a  system  which,  according  to  the  before- 
mentioned  Elijah  tradition,  reckoned  the  duration  of  the 
world  to  the  son  D^iy,  the  time  of  Messiah,  at  4000  years  (i.e. 
100  generations  of  40  years  each),  and  made  two-thirds  of  this 
entire  duration  of  the  world  to  have  elapsed  when  the  exodus 
and  the  giving  of  the  law  laid  the  foundation  of  a  new  period. 
If  one  of  the  three  numbers  from  Adam  to  the  Flood,  1656 
(Heb.),  1307  (Sam.),  and  2242  (LXX.),  can  be  regarded  as 


THE  ENORMOUS  LENGTH  OF  LIFE.  211 

anything  more  than  an  arbitrary  product,  it  is,  as  Noldeke 
also  judges  (Untersuchungcn,  p.  112),  the  1656  of  the 
Hebrew  ;  and  I  agree  with  Ed.  Konig  ("Beitrtige  zur  biblischen 
Chronologic,  i.,"  in  Luthardt's  Zeitschrift,  1883,  p.  281  sqq.), 
that  the  Hebrew  has  preserved  the  most  ancient  and  original 
computation,  while  the  Samaritan  and  LXX.  exhibit  in  this 
respect  secondary  phases  of  the  Old  Testament  text.  It  is 
worthy  of  remark  that  the  Babylonians,  according  to  Berosos, 
reckon  120  Sare  (crapo?,  i.e.  chief  number,  from  the  Accad. 
sar,  many,  mass  =  3600)  =  432,000  years,  from  Aloros  to 
Xisuthros  ;  and  that,  as  Jul.  Oppert  has  shown  in  the  article 
on  the  dates  of  Genesis  in  the  Gutting.  Anzcigen,  1877,  No.  10, 
this  432,000  has  with  the  1656  years  of  the  Hebrew  the 
common  divisor  72. 

But  the  question  as  to  the  motives  for  distributing  these 
1656  years  just  as  has  been  done  among  the  ten  antediluvian 
patriarchs,  has  hitherto  defied  all  ingenuity.  What  cannot  be 
understood  as  the  work  of  reflection  proves  itself  to  be  tradi 
tion.  What  then  is  our  position  with  respect  to  the  state 
ments  of  prolonged  life,  which  reach  from  777  to  969  years  1 
Every  attempt  to  reduce  the  years  to  shorter  periods  has  been 
vain.  Two  Byzantine  monks,  Anianos  and  Panodoros,  and  in 
recent  times  Hensler,  Bask,  Lesueur,  tried  this  expedient. 
The  first  reckoned  the  year  at  three  months,  the  latter  at  one 
month,  the  third  (Revue  archdologique,  1858)  at  Chaldee  Sossi 
of  sixty  days.  But  such  reductions  are  incompatible  with 
the  text  as  it  now  stands ;  the  statements  of  the  years  of 
generation  in  the  cases  of  Mahalalel  and  Henoch  make  them 
impossible,  while  the  total  amount  of  the  period  from  Adam 
to  the  Elood,  which  certainly  is  not  put  too  high  at  1656 
years,  is  intolerably  dwindled.1 

On  the  other  hand,  so  long  a  duration  of  life  as  is  spoken 
of  in  cli.  v.  cannot  be  conceived,  of  either  historic  or  present 

1  The  Babylonian  432,000  years  also  dwindle,  when  viewed  as  the  days  of  a 
year  of  360  days,  to  1200  years, — an  improbable  amount  which  does  not  even 
reach  the  1307  of  the  Samaritan. 


212  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  ADAM. 

human  nature.  In  the  present  time  only  one  out  of  100,000 
attains  the  age  of  100,  and  only  one  out  of  500  that  of  90. 
According  to  Alex.  Becker  however,  a  lifetime  of  150  is  not 
uncommon  in  the  snow  mountains  of  South  Dagestan,  nor, 
according  to  Riley,  Prince  Piickler,  and  others,  one  of  200  in 
the  Arabian  deserts  of  Africa.  In  primeval  times  however  a 
longer  lifetime  than  even  200  years  must  be  esteemed  possible. 
The  state  of  integrity — says  Zockler  in  his  Lehre  vom  Urstande 
der  McnschJieit,  1879 — was  succeeded  by  a  stage  of  transition, 
during  which  death,  the  result  of  sin,  but  slowly  overcame 
the  resistance  offered  by  the  strong  physical  organization  of 
primitive  mankind.  At  all  events  the  climate,  weather,  and 
other  natural  conditions  were  different  from  those  of  the  post 
diluvian  world,  while  life  was  much  simpler  and  flowed  on  in  a 
more  equable  course.  And  what  was  already  probable  in  itself, 
viz.  that  men  should  then  live  longer  than  they  do  at  present, 
is  testified  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  popular  legends.  Accord 
ing  to  Hesiod,  'Epy.  130,  childhood  lasted  in  the  silver  age 
130  years,  which  presupposes  a  lifetime  of  1000  years  in  the 
golden  age.  2  Isaiah  Ixv.  20-22,  predicts  the  restoration  of 
such  length  of  life  in  the  latter  days.  Josephus  (Ant.  i.  3.  9, 
repeated  in  Eusebius,  Prccp.  ix.  15)  appeals  to  Egyptian, 
Chaldee,  Phoenician  and  other  ancient  testimony  for  the 
gradual  shortening  of  human  life  from  1000  years. 

Hence  the  enormous  length  of  life  seems  comparatively  less 
strange  than  the  lateness  of  the  first  births.  Noah  does  not 
become  a  father  till  his  500th  year.  It  is  here  certain 
that  the  letter  conceals  some  enigma,  for  such  long  celibacy 
is  not  connected  with  his  piety,  Henoch  becoming  a  father  at 
65.  And  if  we  further  keep  in  view  the  relation  of  the  years 
of  generation  to  the  length  of  life,  in  Adam  130  and  939,  in 
Enosh  90  and  905,  in  Jared  162  and  962,  in  Henoch  65  and 
365  (the  number  of  days  in  a  solar  year),  the  consideration  is 
pressed  upon  us  that  a  computation  which  is  the  result  of 
reflection  here  takes  the  place  of  deficient  special  tradition. 
From  this  we  may  further  infer  that  the  numbers  930,  912, 


THE  CAINITIC  AND  SETI1ITIC  GENEALOGIES.  213 

905,  etc.,  designate  epochs  of  antediluvian  history  which  are 
named  after  their  chief  representatives,  and  that  the  period 
of  these  epochs  is  allotted  to  the  individual  life  of  these 
chief  representatives,  as  though  it  had  extended  over  the 
whole  period. 

The  Cainitic  and  Setliitic  tables  may  originally  have  been 
one  which  contained  the  descendants  of  Adam,  through  Cain 
and  Seth,  side  by  side.  The  names  in  the  two  lines  were  not 
originally  Hebrew,1  they  were  therefore  linguistically  trans 
formed  by  tradition,  and  much  that  is  striking  in  the  relation 
of  the  names  in  the  one  to  those  in  the  other  may  (although 
it  can  also,  as  we  saw  at  iv.  18,  be  differently  explained)  be 
the  result  of  the  separation  of  the  one  table  into  two. 
Moderns,  since  Buttmann's  Mythologies,  think  otherwise, 
especially  Budde,  according  to  whom  the  original  table  of  the 
Cainites  and  that  of  the  Sethites,  which  was  a  modification  of 
it,  are  two  independent  attempts  to  deduce  primitive  mankind 
from  Adam,  whose  eldest  son  was  according  to  the  one  Cain, 
according  to  the  other  Seth.  The  fratricide  was,  he  thinks,  a 
mere  fiction,  or  else  picked  up  in  some  out-of-the-way  corner 
of  Hebrew  tradition,  perhaps  originally  a  Canaanite  legend, 
which  was  first  inserted  by  J3  for  the  purpose  of  finding  a 
place  for  the  Cainitic  table  of  Jl  and  the  Setliitic  table 
of  J2  in  one  and  the  same  work.  In  the  fundamental  work, 
•i.e.  in  Q,  which  furnishes  the  scaffolding  of  the  present  Genesis, 
there  was  no  Cainitic  table,  and  nothing  about  Cain  and  Abel, 
but  a  mere  register  of  the  Sethites  which  has  been  garnished 
from  that  of  J2.  It  is  therefore  a  fiction,  with  a  tendency, 
which  gave  to  Cain  and  Seth  a  third  brother  Abel,  and 
invented  the  fratricide  and  banishment  of  Cain. 

We  feel  however  greater  confidence  in  the  truthfulness  of 
the  extant  Mosaic  picture  of  primitive  history  than  in  this 
all-knowing  hypercriticism,  which  tears  the  stones  out  of  posi 
tion  and  mixes  them  promiscuously  to  form  from  them  a  new 

1  The  Babylonian  names  of  the  ten  primitive  kings  are  quite  diftVrent.     See 
Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Faradies,  p.  149. 


214  GENESIS  V.  1-3. 

edifice  of  hypotheses,  which  reflects  all  honour  upon  its  pene 
tration,  but  offers  all  the  greater  insult  to  the  biblical  history. 
Title,  v.  la :  This  is  the  look  of  the  generations  of 
Adam,  "iBp  may  designate  any  completed  writing,  even  a 
document  consisting  of  only  a  few  leaves  or  of  a  single  one, 
such  as,  e.g.,  a  writing  of  divorcement,  Deut.  xxiv.  1  ;  or  a 
deed  of  purchase,  Jer.  xxxii.  11  ;  or  a  written  memorial,  Ex. 
xvii.  14  ;  Isa.  xxx.  8.  Gr.  Ven.  correctly  renders  :  avrr]  rj 
(3i/3\os  T&V  yevvtfo-ecDv ;  but  like  LXX.,  Luther  erroneously 
takes  DIN  as  a  generic  instead  of  a  proper  name.  What  follows 
is  not  meant  to  be  a  regressive  genealogy  (as  St.  Matthew 
applies  the  /3//5\o?  yeveo-ews  of  the  LXX.  ii.  4,  v.  1),  but  a 
progressive.  Nevertheless,  for  the  purpose  of  placing  the 
continuation  of  the  beginning  made  in  Adam  in  the  right 
light,  the  origin  of  this  beginning  itself  is  recalled,  Vo :  In  the 
day  that  Elohim  created  Adam,  He  made  him  in  the  likeness  of 
Elohim.  In  ii.  4  and  Num.  iii.  1 ,  what  follows  with  Bi^a 
belongs  to  the  title  ;  here  it  appears,  as  at  vi.  9,  as  the  begin 
ning  of  a  new  sentence.  Schrader  construes  :  On  the  day  that 
God  created  Adam,  etc.,  He  blessed  them  ;  but  this  would  be, 
like  i.  1-3,  ii.  4—7,  an  objectionable  and  clumsy  period.  The 
construction  of  the  sentence  15  is  like  Num.  iii.  13,  viii.  17. 
Ver.  2  continues  in  a  succession  of  short  sentences  like  i.  27  : 
Male  and  female  created  He  them ;  and  He  blessed  them,  and 
called  their  name  Adam  (man),  in  the  day  when  they  were 
created.  There  is  here  another  repetition  of  what  was  alluded 
to  i.  27,  and  related  in  detail  in  ch.  ii.,  viz.  that  man  was  first 
created  as  one,  and  not  paired  till  afterwards.  That  it  was 
God  Himself  who  called  the  first  created  pair  DIN  may  be 
regarded  as  referring  back  to  i.  26,  where  God  speaks  before 
hand  of  the  being  with  whom  He  is  about  to  conclude  the 
series  of  His  creations  as  DIN-  It  is  in  the  nature  of  the 
matter  that  the  name  of  the  first  created  was  a  generic  name, 
which  afterwards  became  his  proper  name.  The  birth  of  Seth, 
vcr.  3  :  And  Adam  lived  a  hundred  and  thirty  years,  then  he 
in  his  likeness  after  his  image  and  called  his  name  Seth. 


GENESIS  V.  4,  5.  215 

After  ^is!  (from  the  Hiph.  "l<l^n,  which  is  more  accurate  and 
customary  than  nf>\  ch.  iv.)  we  have  to  supply  in  thought  fa 
(a  son),  which  the  narrator  omits,  because  he  desires  to  state 
in  a  general  manner  that  Adam  transmitted  his  human  nature 
in  his  own  image.  The  expression :  in  his  likeness,  after  his 
image  (comp.  i.  26,  "  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness  "),  means 
to  say  that  the  nature  of  the  begotten  corresponded  to  that  of 
the  begetter,  and  indeed  in  that  present  precise  condition 
which  the  self  -  decision  that  had  meantime  taken  place 
involved.  The  likeness  of  Adam  is  not  opposed  to,  thougli 
it  differs  from,  the  absolute  directness  of  the  likeness  of  God. 
Adam,  not  the  mother  (iv.  25),  here  appears  as  the  name- 
giver,  the  validity  of  the  name  depending  indeed  upon  his 
acquiescence  and  confirmation.  It  is  as  clear  as  day,  says 
Eudde,  that  the  generation  of  Seth  must  be  regarded  as 
the  first  human  generation.  This  cannot  be  inferred 
from  the  fact  that  there  is  no  Tiy  after  nbw>  for  after  iv.  25 
such  a  Tiy  was  needed,  but  would  be  here  out  of  place. 
Certainly  Seth  becomes  the  first  human  child,  if  we  pre 
suppose  that  the  author  of  this  table  of  Sethites  either 
knew  or  desired  to  know  nothing  of  iv.  25  and  what  is 
connected  with  it.  We  may  regard  this  as  a  matter  of  indif 
ference,  for  the  sources  J  and  Q  have  not  become  canonical, 
and  in  their  combination  the  deficit  of  the  one  is  historically 
and  unhesitatingly  met  by  the  plus  of  the  other.  The  re 
mainder  of  Adam's  lifetime  and  total  amount  of  his  years, 
vv.  4,  5  :  And  the  days  of  Adam,  after  lie  legal  Seth,  amounted 
to  eight  hundred  years,  and  he  begat  sons  and  daughters.  And 
all  the  days  that  Adam  lived  amounted  to  nine  hundred  and 
thirty  years,  and  he  died.  With  regard  to  the  syntax  we 
remark  for  here  and  onwards,  that  (1)  the  numbers  2  to 
10  are  followed  by  the  object  numbered  in  the  plural,  e.g. 
Dsr^  trbn,  the  higher  numbers  by  the  sing.,  e.g.  njtt>  D%KW ; 
65  is  expressed,  ver.  21,  by  rut?  D^WI  wsn,  ver.  15  more  par 
ticularly  by  TO  DWi  wyy  Eton ;  (2)  the  units  precede  the 
tens  and  both  the  hundreds ;  we  also  say  five  and  sixty,  but 


216  GENESIS  V.  G— 20. 

not  thirty  and  a  hundred,  as  e.g.  ver.  3  ;  (3)  in  the  higher 
compound  year  marks  &say,  or  especially  nay,  is  used  with  the 
numbers  up  to  ninety-nine,  and  especially  nay  with  the 
hundreds,  e.g.  na;y  niKS  c6^1  nay  DW1  Eton ;  (4)  because 
nas?  is  feminine,  the  masculine  form  of  the  numerals  3-10, 
\vhich  is  syntactically  the  feminine,  is  combined  with  it ; 
(5)  nay  n^o  (a  hundred  in  years)  is  used  interchangeably,  and 
is  of  like  significance  with  nay  nsrp  (a  century  of  years).  We 
have  translated  the  verb  rrn  in  the  summings  up  by  "  amount 
to  "  (make  up) ;  it  means  to  become,  and  here  the  becoming,  i.e. 
the  resulting  total.  Summary  of  Seth's  life,  vv.  6-8:  And  Setli 
lived  a  hundred  and  five  years,  and  "begat  Ends.  And  Seth 
lived,  after  he  ley  at  Enosh,  eight  hundred  and  seven  years,  and 
begat  sons  and  daughters.  And  all  the  days  of  Seth  amounted  to 
nine  hundred  and  twelve  years,  and  he  died.  Summary  of 
the  life  of  Enosh,  vv.  9-11  :  And  Enosh  lived  ninety  years, 
and  legat  Kenan.  And  Enosh  lived,  after  lie.  "begat  Kenan,  eight 
hundred  and  fifteen  years,  and  legat  sons  and  daughters.  Add 
all  the  days  of  Enosh  amounted  to  nine  hundred  and  jive  years, 
and  he  died.  Summary  of  the  life  of  Kenan,  vv.  12-14: 
Anel  Kenan  lived  seventy  years,  and  legat  Mahalalel.  And 
Kenan  lived,  after  he  legat  Mahalalel,  eight  hundred  and  forty 
years,  and  legat  sons  and  daughters.  And  all  the  days  of  Kenan 
amounted  to  nine  hundred  and  ten  years,  and  he  died.  Sum 
mary  of  the  life  of  Mahalalel,  vv.  15-17:  And  Mahalalel 
lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  legat  Jared.  Anel  Mahalalel 
lived,  after  he  legat  Jared,  eight  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and 
legat  sons  and  daughters.  And  all  the  days  of  Mahalalel 
amounted  to  eight  hundred  and  ninety-five  years,  and  lie  died. 
Summary  of  the  life  of  Jared,  vv.  18-20:  And  Jared  lived 
a  hundred  and  sixty-two  years,  and  legat  Henoch.  And  Jared 
lived,  after  he  legat  Henoch,  eight  hundred  years,  and  legat  sons 
and  daughters.  And  all  the  days  of  Jared  were  nine  hundred 
and  sixty -two  years,  and  he  died.  One  summary  after  another 
ends  with  nb*^  the  pausal  form  of  npsTl.  Death  always  forms 
the  dark  background  of  even  these  long  lifetimes.  All  at  last, 


GENESIS  V.  21-24.  217 

from  Adam  onwards  (Rom.  v.  14),  fall  victims  to  this  reigning 
king  of  terrors.  Henoch  alone  forms  an  exception,  and  is 
translated  to  another  life  without  dying. 

Summary  of  the  life  of  Henoch,  vv.  21-24:  And  Hcnocli 
lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  begat  Methuselah.  And  Henoch 
•walked  with  God,  after  lie  legat  Methuselah,  three  hundred 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  And  the,  sum  of  the  days 
of  Henoch  amounted  to  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  years. 
And  Henoch  walked  with  God,  and  he  u:as  not ;  for  Elohim 
took  him.  At  ver.  22  the  question  of  astonishment  is  sug 
gested  :  "Was  he  not  then  godly  till  after  the  birth  of  his 
eldest  son  ?  (Btidcle,  p.  170  sqq.).  Jerome  meets  this  question 
by  inserting  ct  mxlt  before  postqucim  gcnuit,  as  does  also  the 
LXX.  in  de  Lagarde's  text.  But  amlulavit  cum  Deo  itself 
stands  in  the  case  of  Henoch  for  et  mxit  in  the  other  sum 
maries;  but  ver.  21  is  not  yet  the  place,  as  the  narrator  has 
the  tact  to  perceive,  for  giving  up  the  TP1  everywhere  else 
employed.  Dsnbxn,  used  twice,  is  once  exchanged  for  DTita  ; 
Budde  thinks  that  the  reason  for  Henoch's  removal  was 
perhaps  inserted  from  the  Jahvistic  table  of  Sethites, 
where  perhaps  'n  ^B!J  stood  for  DTltarrntf,  which  R  trans 
formed  to  correspond  better  with  the  neighbouring  DTita 
(p.  174  sq.).  But  is  not  D^KirnK  rj^nnn  defended  as  pro 
ceeding  from  Q  by  vi.  9  ;  and  is  not  n&?  •ppinn,  which  is  in 
the  Old  Testament  predicated  exclusively  of  Henoch  and 
Noah,  something  different  from  ^  "priMn,  xvii.  1,  xxiv.  40, 
and  "nnx,  Deut.  xiii.  5  ?  Are  not  DTl^Kn  and  D^nta  similarly 
exchanged  e.g.  Jonah  iv.  7  sq. ;  and  may  not  any  piece  of 
writing  be  mangled  by  such  overstrained  ingenuity  ?  "  To 
walk  with  God"  means  to  the  narrator  the  most  intimate 
communion  and  closest  intercourse  with  the  Deity.  Similarly 
does  Mai.  ii.  6  say  of  Levi  or  the  priest,  as  admitted  to 
the  greatest  nearness  to  God,  and  as  a  teacher  of  the  know 
ledge  of  God  whose  behaviour  accorded  thereto :  ViK  ?£n. 
Henoch's  intimate  communion  with  God,  from  which  the 
Enoch-legend  inferred  his  close  acquaintance  with  the  secrets 


218  GENESIS  V.  21-24. 

of  the  Deity  (Judg.  v.  14  sq.)  and  the  world  of  spirits,  is, 
considering  the  close  relation  in  which  the  Bible  and  antiquity 
in  general  placed  spirits  and  stars,  connected  also  with  his 
being  esteemed,  by  Eusebius,  Prcep.  ix.  17,  comp.  H.  E.  vii.  32, 
as  the  predecessor  of  Abraham  in  the  knowledge  of  the  stars, 
and  is  in  accordance  with  his  departure  from  the  world.  The 
consecutive  ^JW,  used  with  the  force  of  a  verb  in  the  perfect, 
is  the  expression  of  a  sudden  disappearance  (comp.  xlii.  13,  36  ; 
Job  vii.  8  ;  Ges.  Thes.  p.  82).  On  a  sudden  he  was  gone, 
without  sickness,  without  dying,  without  burial ;  for  Elohim 
had  taken  him,  i.e.  removed  him  from  this  visible  world  and 
taken  Him  to  Himself,  and  hence  to  a  higher  life  (nj?7}  as  at  the 
going  up  of  Elijah,  2  Kings  ii.  3,  9,  10  ;  comp.  the  passages 
in  Ps.  Ixxiii.  24,  xlix.  16,  which  perhaps  are  allusions  to 
this).  Not  that  he  was  made  a  participator  of  the  glory 
which  awaits  the  righteous  at  the  resurrection.  Christ,  who 
was  the  first  to  rise,  was  also  the  first  to  be  glorified.  The 
glorification  of  Henoch  would  deprive  Him  of  the  precedence, 
and  the  translation  of  Henoch  to  the  heaven  of  God  and  the 
angels  would  deprive  Him  of  the  honour  of  having  opened  to 
men  the  heaven,  in  which  no  Old  Testament  visions  show  as 
yet  any  holy  human  being.  God  translated  him  from  this 
world  of  sin  and  sorrow  without  letting  him  be  subject  to 
death  ("Wiscl.  iv.  10  sq. ;  Heb.  xi.  5),  therefore  by  means  of 
eVei/Sim?  without  e/cSvais  (2  Cor.  v.  4  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  51  sq. ; 
1  Thess.  iv.  1*7)  into  a  condition  which  resembled  the  lost 
Paradise  (Irenseus,  c.  Hcer.  iv.  5)  He  thus  exempted  him 
from  the  law  of  death  or  the  return  to  dust,  showing  thereby, 
that  though  He  had  subjected  men  to  this  law,  He  had  not 
bound  Himself  to  it.  The  Babylonian  tradition  makes 
Hasisadra  (Xisuthros  =  Noah)  to  have  experienced  such  a 
removal.  Similar  events  in  heathen  myths  are  kindred 
images  of  heavenward  aspirations  (Nagelsbach,  Homerische 
Theol.  vii.  32).  This  wondrous  issue  of  Henoch's  life,  falling 
in  the  middle  of  the  time  between  Adam  and  the  Flood,  was 
a  preaching  of  repentance  (Ecclus.  xliv.  16),  and  to  the  faithful 


GENESIS  V.  -25-32.  219 

an  object  for  the  eye  of  hope  to  rest  upon — it  was  in  the  midst 
of  the  reign  of  death  a  finger-post  pointing  backwards  to  show 
that  an  ascending  development  of  man  was  possible  even 
without  death,  and  forwards  to  show  that  the  aspiration  after 
redemption  from  the  dominion  of  death  and  Hades  would 
not  remain  unsatisfied.  Summary  of  Methuselah's  life,  vv. 
25-27:  And  Methuselah  lived  a  hundred  and  eighty-seven 
years,  and  legal  Lemcch.  And  Methuselah  lived,  after  he  legat 
Lcmcch,  seven  hundred  and  eighty-two  years,  and  begat  sons  and 
daughters.  And  all  the  days  of  Methuselah  amounted  to  nine 
hundred  and  sixty-nine  years :  and  he  died.  The  name 
rteritt  might  mean  a  man  of  missiles  (— L/),  therefore  an 
armed  man,  but  more  probably  a  man  of  sprouting  (Assyr. 
sillu},  a  scion,  a  descendant.  Summary  of  Lemech's  life, 
with  a  Jahvistic  explanation  of  the  name  of  Xoah  inter 
woven,  vv.  28-32  :  And  Lemcch  lived  a  hundred  and  eighty - 
two  years,  and  begat  a  son,  and  ccdlcd  his  name  Noah,  saying : 
This  same  will  comfort  us  from  our  work  and  from  the  toil  of 
our  hands,  from  the  ground  which  Jahveh  hath  cursed.  And 
Lcmcch  lived  five  hundred  and  ninety-five  years,  and  begat  sons 
and  daughters.  And  the  sum  of  the  days  of  Lcmcch  amounted  to 
seven  hundred  and  seventy-seven  years :  and  he  died.  Lemech 
the  Cainite  was  full  of  insolent  defiance  ;  Lemech  the  Sethite, 
on  the  contrary,  has  no  other  joy  than  in  the  promised  future. 
When  Noah,  the  tenth  from  Adam,  was  born  to  him,  he  com 
bines  with  him  the  hope  of  a  final  close  of  the  troublous  days 
which  have  hitherto  prevailed,  and  in  which  the  curse  of  sin 
has  borne  rule.  His  words  breathe  an  elevated  and  joyous 
frame,  and  are  in  consequence  euphoniously  and  poetically 
arranged.  The  Jahvistic  explanation  of  the  name  nj  has 
been  unjustly  found  fault  with  (DMZ.  xxiv.  208).  Proper 
names  are  as  a  rule  meant  only  as  a  reminder  or  a  hint  (">?f) 
of  the  thoughts  intended  (see  Griinbaum  in  DMZ.  xl.  253). 
Besides,  the  phonetic  groups  nj  and  Dm  are  both  expressions 
imitative  of  the  sound  of  breathing  again ;  ft?  Qna,  to  comfort, 
i.e.  to  cause  to  breathe  again  from  something,  is  here  a  more 
significant  synonym  of  ft?  rvon,  to  procure  rest  (rcspirationem) 


220  GENESIS  V.  32. 

from  anything,  Deut.  xii.  10  ;  Lsa.  xiv.  3  ;  comp.  Esth.  ix.  10. 
While  in  the  house  of  Cain  there  is  rejoicing  even  to  defiance 
over  the  newly  invented  alleviations  and  means  of  security 
for  earthly  life,  we  here  perceive  a  deep  sigli  over  its  toil  on 
account  of  the  Divine  wrath.  Lemech  hopes  that  his  son  is 
the  man  who  will  introduce  a  turn  for  the  better.  And  he 
was  not  deceived.1  For  though  the  final  consolation  was 
reserved  for  the  more  distant  future,  yet  the  transition  from 
a  world  in  which  the  curse  predominated  to  a  world  in  which 
the  blessing  predominated,  and  over  which  the  rainbow  was 
extended  as  the  sign  of  a  new  covenant  of  God  with  man,  a 
pledge  of  the  future  total  abolition  of  the  curse,  the  future 
sole  supremacy  of  love,  was  accomplished  in  Noah.  At 
ver.  32  a  start  is  made  towards  completing  these  Toledoth 
with  the  tenth  genealogical  member :  And  Noah  was  fice 
hundred  years  old:  and  he  legal  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth. 
The  chronological  method  of  these  historical  tables,  according 
to  which  computation  is  always  made  (apart  from  the  case  of 
Seth)  from  the  birth  of  the  first-born  to  that  of  the  succeed 
ing  first-born,  places  it  beyond  doubt  that  Shem,  and  not 
Japheth,  as  might  appear  from  ch.  x.,  is  to  be  thought  of  as  the 
eldest.  The  two  other  sons  are  named  together  with  the  first 
born  without  the  year  of  their  birth  being  stated.  The  five 
hundredth  year  being  that  of  the  birth  of  Shem,  and  the 
terminus  a  quo  for  that  of  the  others.  They  are  named 
together,  because  they  bear  the  same  relation  to  the  post 
diluvian  triple-branched  human  race  that  the  twelve  sons  of 
Jacob  do  to  the  chosen  people.  How  long  Noah  lived  after 
the  birth  of  Shem,  and  what  was  the  entire  duration  of  his 
life,  is  not  here  told,  the  tenth  member  of  the  Toledoth  being 
left  unfinished,  because  it  is  to  be  independently  treated  farther 
on  as  m  rvtan  with  the  history  of  the  Flood  inserted.  We  are 
first  however  made  acquainted,  in  a  passage  of  peculiar  colour 
ing,  with  the  corruption  of  morals  which  had  set  in  in  the 
days  of  Noah. 

1  Budde  thinks  that  it  was  «73  who  added  v.  29,    with   reference  to   the 
cultivation  of  the  vine  which  began  with  2s  oah. 


GENESIS  V. 


221 


TABLE  TO  GENESIS,  GIT.  v.  (comp.  ix.  39). 
The  Antediluvian  Patriarchs. 

The  figures  in  brackets  in  the  LXX.  column  are  the  readings  of  the 
Cod.  Alexandrinns. 


Names  of  the  Ten 


Adam,   . 
Seth,      .     . 
Enosh,  .     . 
Kenan,  .     . 
Mahalah'l.. 
Jered,    . 
Henoch, 

Methuselah, 

Lemech, 
Noah,    .     . 
To  the  Flood. 

From  Adam  t.t 
the  Flood, 


Heh.  Text. 

Samar.  Text. 

Septuagiut. 

•     * 

i       t? 

o 

a- 

| 

c 

,5 

,- 

||| 

||| 

In 

:_" 

•£ 

2 

^ 

3 

S^B 

c  ^  S 

s 

«S 

c 

£ 

4 

0 

s 

=2 

? 

ti^  j 

~ 

^ 

c 

Q 

^ 

o 

Q 

l~^ 

^  ^  ~ 

,S 

c 

•§ 

^ 

c 

"^ 

A 

0 

g 

5  p-^ 

p  ^"^ 

•£« 

Si 
13 

.2 

p 

1 

ai 

fi 

s 

1 

'o  o  c 

a-  O  C 

-  C  ^5 

a 

5 

"o 

K 

§ 

"o 

aS 

5 

•g 

>~  ~  s 

«  c  ia 

?D 

S 

bO 

5 

r: 

to 

c 

§ 

130 

800 

930 

130 

800 

930 

230 

700 

930 

1 

930 

105 

807 

912 

105  807  912 

205 

707 

912 

130 

1042 

90 

815    905 

90!  815  905 

1901 

715 

905 

235 

1140 

70 

840    910 

70  840 

910 

170 

740 

910 

325 

1235 

65 

830 

895 

65 

830 

895 

165 

730 

895 

395 

1290 

162 

800 

962 

621  785 

847 

162 

800 

962 

460 

1422 

65 

300 

365 

65 

300 

365 

165 

200 

365 

622 

987 

187 

782 

969 

67 

653 

720{ 

1672 

(187) 

802 
(782) 

}969 

687 

1656 

182 

595 

/  /  / 

53 

600 

653 

188 

565 

753 

874 

1651 

500 

450 

950 

500 

450 

950 

500 

450 

950 

1056 

2006 

100 

100 

100 

1656 

1307i 

1 

224  2:i 

(2262) 

1656,  Sheni's 
98th  year. 

1  Beside  190,  the  reading  290  is  also  found  (Simon  Halatensis  in  Assemani 
B-ibl.  iii.  213),  but  the  assumed  3000  years  from  the  Creation  to  the  death  o! 
Peleg  (whose  name  Hesy chins  interprets  npiffv,  as  denoting  the  middle  of  the 
6000  years  of  the  world  down  to  Christ)  result  all  the  same  (KKI'VKV,  with  his 
130  years  in  Gen.  xi.  being  omitted)  from  the  number  2262  (which  presupposes 
the  reading  190,  and  also  187),  by  adding  to  this  135  years  to  the  birth  of  Selah, 
130  to  that  of  Eber,  134  to  that  of  Peleg,  and  339  of  Peleg's  lifetime.     Ephrem, 
on  the  other  hand,  reckons  from  the  Flood  to  Abraham  940,  and  consequently 
from  Adam  to  Abraham  3000  years,  which  agrees  with  neither  of  the  three 
systems.     On  the  6000  years  of  prechristian  history,  see  Chronicon  Pasch.  ii. 
p.  117,  ed.  Bonn.     The  Book  of  Jubilees  follows  the  figures  of  the  Samaritan. 

2  Changed  by  Demetrius,  Jul.  Africanus  and  many  others  into  187  (as  A**), 
because  with  the  other  computation  Methuselah  would  have  survived  the  Deluge 
fourteen  years. 

3  This  number  is  chiefly  advocated  by  the  Fathers.     Josephus  reckons  from 
the  Creation  to  the  Flood  2656,  or  rather  2256  years.     See  Kuenen,  Les  Oriyines 
du  Texte  Masorethiqne,  p.  35. 


222  GENESIS  VI.  1,  2. 


JUDGMENT  CALLED  FORTH,  THE  LONG-SUFFERING  OF  GOD,  AND 
THE  DECREE  OF  JUDGMENT,  VI.  1-8. 

The  origin  of  sin  was  related  in  chs.  ii.  and  iii.,  and  its 
increase  in  the  Cainitic  race  with  which  the  Sethitic  is  con 
trasted  in  ch.  iv.,  and  here  its  almost  universal  sway,  which 
inevitably  entailed  the  judgment  of  the  Flood,  vv.  1,  2  :  And 
it  came  to  pass,  when  men  began  to  be  many  on  the  earth, 
and  daughters  were  lorn  to  them,  that  the  sons  of  God 
saw  the  daughters  of  men,  that  they  were  fair,  and  took  to 
themselves  wives  of  all  that  they  chose.  In  ""3  ^  (like  xxvi.  8, 
xxvii.  1  ;  Deut.  xi.  29),  ^3  is  the  same  as  "^3.  3^J  is  dis 
tinguished  from  niarip,  as  to  become  many  is  from  to  multiply. 
The  IP  of  fetp  is  generalizing  and  partitive,  like  vii.  22,  ix.  10, 
xvii.  12,  Dent,  xv.  7,  Lev.  iv.  2,  Song  of  Sol.  iii.  6  :  which 
ever,  quascimque,  they  chose.  E'npxn  rja  being  everywhere  else 
the  name  of  the  angels,  Job  i.  2,  xxxviii.  7,  Ps.  xxix.  1, 
Ixxxix.  7,  Dan.  iii.  25,  and  indeed  nomen  natural,  as  Q'3Kp» 
is  nomen  officii,  it  is  most  obvious  to  think  here  of  angels.  So 
the  LXX.  (the  text  of  which  fluctuates  between  ayye\ot,  TOV 
Seov  in  Philo,  de  yiyantibus,  Eusebius,  Augustine,  and  Ambrose, 
and  the  reading  viol  TOV  &eov,  which  has  prevailed  since 
Cyril  and  Augustine),  Philo,  ibid.;  Josephus,  Ant.  i.  3.  1  ; 
A([iiila  (viol  TWV  Qewv,  also  Jerome  :  Deos  intelligent  angelos 
sive  sanctos) ;  the  Peshito,  which  takes  over  D*r6«  ^3,  like 
Job  i.  6,  ii.  1  (com p.  xxxviii.  7),  untranslated  ;  the  book  of 
Heuocli,  which  understands  the  heavenly  pYjj,  eyprfyopoi ; 
the  Testament  of  the  Twelve  Patriarchs,  the  Book  of  Jubilees, 
the  later  Jewish  Haggadah  (e.g.  in  Midrash  Abchir  in  Jellinek, 
Kleine  Midraschim,  pt.  iv.),  and  most  of  the  ancient  Fathers, 
from  Justin  and  Athenagoras  to  Cyprian  and  Lactantius,  also 
Methodius,  Ambrosius,  Sulpicius  Severus,  and  the  author  of 
the  work  de  singularitate  clericorum.  Tertullian  explains 
1  Cor.  xi.  10  by  referring  to  this  passage  (adv.  Marc.  v.  18, 
de  virg.  velandis,  c.  7,  comp.  the  Fragment  of  Clemens  Alex. 


GENESIS  VI.  1,  2.  223 

p.  980,  eel.  Potter).  Griinbaum  has  treated  on  the  motley 
collection  of  myths  relating  to  the  intercourse  of  angels  with 
the  daughters  of  men,  in  DMZ.  xxxi.  225  sqq. 

But  could  angels  have  had  carnal  intercourse  with  human 
women?  According  to  Bereshith  raliba,  c.  26,  R  Simeon  b. 
Jochai  pronounced  an  anathema  upon  all  who  should  under 
stand  DTliw  ^2  of  angels  (though  the  Sohar  makes  him  affirm 
it  himself);  Augustine  (civ.  Dei,  xv.  23)  advises  rather  to 
relinquish  the  apocryphal  fable ;  Jerome  reserves  his  judg 
ment  ;  Cyril  of  Alexandria  reckons  this  opinion  among  the 
aro7ra)rara ;  Theodoret  calls  its  advocates  e^povrrj-roi,  KOI 
ayav  f]\iQioi  (Quccst.  in  Gen.  §  47) ;  Philastrius  numbers  it 
among  the  heresies ;  the  ancient  Protestant  interpreters  regard 
it  as  a  Jewish  Platonizing  fancy. 

Hence  expedients  have  always  been  sought  for.  Onkelos 
translates  D'ntan  *:a  by  NTs?"]f]  ^3 ;  R  Simeon  b.  Jochai  by 
NW  \D2 ;  as  also  Ephrem,  though  he  vacillates,  by  W  ^l ; 
Symm.  renders  filii  potentium  ;  while  Targ.  Jer.,  the  Samaritan 
translations,  Saadia,  Arabs  Erpenii,  understand  by  DTitan  ^3, 
sons  of  men  of  eminent  position  (like  fAy  ^u,  Ps.  Ixxxii.  6),  and 
by  tHKn  rri33,  daughters  of  people  of  low  condition  (cornp.  DIN, 
opp.  B*K,  Ps.  xlix.  3).  Spinoza  also,  together  with  liashi,  thus 
explains  the  expression  in  his  Tractatus  tJieologico-politicus ; 
and  Herder,  Schiller,  Phil.  Buttmann  have  given  the  narra 
tive  an  imaginative  colouring  in  accordance  herewith.  But 
men  of  eminent  position  are  elsewhere  distinguished  as  B»N  m 
from  D"IN  ^3.  Much  rather  perhaps  may  nsnpNn  sjn  be  under 
stood  of  children  of  God  in  a  spiritual  sense. 

So  Jul.  Africanus  already  has  :  ol  ajro  rov  ^r]9  SI/CCLLOI,  (see 
Gelzer,  Sextus  Jul.  Africanus,  1880,  p.  62),  rejecting  the 
other  view,  on  account  of  the  double  reading  of  the  LXX. 
with  pvBeveraL  o>?  olpai ;  so  also  the  Clement,  llccog.,  accord 
ing  to  the  text  of  Eufins  :  homines  justi  qui  any  dor  um  vixerant 
vitam  (i.  29),  where  nevertheless  the  view  brought  forward  in 
the  eighth  of  the  homilies  concerning  the  mingling  of  "  angelic 
fire  and  female  blood "  peeps  through ;  so  too  Adamsbuch, 


224  GENESIS  VI.  1,  2. 

p.  100  sq.,  translated  by  Dillmann  from  the  ^Ethiopic,  and 
Gregor  Barliebraus  in  his  Syrische  Chronik  (Sethites  who, 
renouncing  marriage,  retired  to  the  solitude  of  Mount  Hermon), 
in  opposition  to  which  the  old  view  is  still  found  in  Bar- 
desanes' "  Book  of  Fate"  (in  Cureton's  Spicilegium,  1885); 
Cyril  Alex.,  Procopius,  Augustine,  who  all  understand  it  of 
the  godly  race  of  Sethites  who,  according  to  tradition,  dwelt 
far  from  the  Cainites  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Paradise,  as 
also  Luther,  after  Lyra,  Melanchthon,  Calvin,  etc.;  and  among 
moderns,  Hengst,  Keil,  J.  P.  Lange,  Kampf  (Brief  Judci, 
1854),  Keerl  (Lelirc  von  der  Herrlicliheit  Gottes,  1863),  Veitli 
(Anf tinge  dcs  Menschengeschleclits,  1865),  Scholz  (Die  Ehen  der 
Solme  Gottes,  1865),  etc., — all  these  find  here  the  statement, 
that  as  the  human  race  became  more  widely  propagated,  the 
distinction  between  Sethites  and  Cainites  was  obliterated,  and 
godly  living  swallowed  up  by  worldly  living. 

The  following  reasons  however  are  decisive  against  this 
ethic  comprehension  of  the  two  notions.  (1)  Though  the 
notion  of  the  fatherhood  of  God  does  indeed  make  a  faint 
start  towards  obtaining  beyond  its  theocratic  limitation  to 
Israel  (Ex.  iv.  22  ;  Deut.  xiv.  1,  xxxii.  5  ;  Hos.  ii.  1)  an 
ethical  and  general  human  significance  (see  especially  Ps. 
Ixxiii.  15,  not  however  Prov.  xiv.  26,  which  must  be  ex 
plained  according  to  Prov.  xx.  7  and  the  like),  yet  this 
extension  and  deepening  goes  neither  in  the  Old  nor  the 
N~ew  Testament  so  far,  that  DTi^n  "on  and  Disn  sjn  could  in 
the  prosaic  style  of  historic  writing  mean  children  of  God 
and  daughters  of  worldly  men.  Such  a  view  is  here  refuted 
by  the  context  itself,  for  (2)  after  DlNn  has  been  used  in 
ver.  1  of  the  human  race  without  any  secondary  meaning,  it 
is  inconceivable  that  Dixn  ni33  should  signify  women  belonging 
to  that  portion  of  mankind  which  was  alienated  from  God, 
and  not  to  the  human  race  in  general.  Hence  it  seems  that 
we  must  really  assume,  with  Kurtz  (Die  Sohne  Gottes,  etc. 
1858),  Hoelemann  ("Die  vorsundflutlichen  Hiinen,"  in  the 
Neuen  Bibelstudien),  Kohler  (Biblical  GescJi.),  Lenormant  (Lea 


GENESIS  VI.  1,  2.  225 

Origines  de  I'Ristoire,  1880,  c.  vii.)  and  others,  that  a  sexual 
intercourse  of  angels  with  women  is  here  related.  It  was 
thus  that  Jude  in  his  Epistle,  ver.  6  sq.,  in  agreement  with 
the  book  of  Henoch,  understands  the  matter;  for  TOVTOIS, 
ver.  7,  refers  back  to  angels,  the  unnatural  sin  of  the  men 
of  Sodom,  who  burnt  with  lust  towards  angels,  being  com 
pared  with  the  unnatural  sin  of  angels,  who  were  in  love 
with  women.  Schelling  rightly  finds  in  the  passage,  vi.  1-4, 
a  peculiarly  deep  mythological  tinge  ;  and  Dinter  justly 
remarks  in  his  Schullehrer  Bibel,  that  "  only  the  scholar 
understands  its  true  meaning  by  comparison  of  this  narrative 
with  the  legends  of  other  ancient  nations."  Among  these  are 
those  Gneco-Eoman  myths  of  the  amours  of  the  gods  which 
are  branded  as  the  disgrace  of  heathenism  by  Christian 
apologists.  The  Eranian  theory,  that  a  demoniacal  corruption 
of  morals  preceded  the  appearance  of  Zarathustra,  and  that  he 
dashed  to  pieces  the  bodies  of  the  angels,  because  they  had  made 
an  evil  use  of  them  for  wandering  on  the  earth,  and  especi 
ally  for  amatory  dealings  with  earthly  women,  sounds  more 
serious  and  nearer  to  the  scriptural  account  (Jagna,  ix.  46). 

The  most  important  of  the  reasons  asserted  by  Keil 
(Luth.  ZeitscJm'ft,  1855,  2)  for  the  ethical  view  of  the  "on 
D^ntan  is,  that  n^K  np^  is  everywhere  used  for  the  contraction 
of  actual  and  lasting  marriages.  And  this  is  certainly  the  case  ; 
comp.  also  n&Js  NBO  of  the  rape  of  the  women  of  Benjamin 
(Judg.  xxi.  23).  The  narrative  as  it  runs  would  hence 
mean,  not  merely  single  acts  of  intercourse,  but  lasting  and, 
with  respect  to  the  angels  (Matt.  xxii.  30),  unnatural  relations 
with  women,  who  are  subjected  by  superior  force  and  crafty 
seduction  to  their  will.  To  make  this  to  a  certain  degree 
conceivable,  we  must  admit  an  assumption  of  human  bodies 
by  angels  ;  and  hence  not  merely  transitory  appearances  of 
angels  in  human  form,  but  actual  angelic  incarnation.  Even 
Servius  however  on  sEneid,  vi.  13,  where  gods  occupy  the 
place  of  the  sons  of  God,  does  not  go  so  far,  but  seeks  to 
make  the  matter  more  conceivable  by  saying :  rorporibiis  se 

P 


226  GENESIS  VI.  1,  2. 

infundebant  potestates  supernce.  This  leads  to  something  like 
possession,  and  here  we  must  let  the  matter  rest.  They 
were  daemons  who  accomplished  what  is  here  narrated,  by 
means  of  men  whom  they  made  their  instruments,  i.e.  through 
demoniacs,  who  with  demoniacal  violence  drew  women  within 
the  radius  of  their  enchantments  and  made  them  subserve 
the  purpose  of  their  sensual  lusts.  In  this  we  are  perhaps 
going  farther  than  the  narrator,  who  here  reduces  to  their 
germ  of  fact  the  obscene  stories  which  heathen  mythology 
delights  to  depict.  He  is  satisfied  with  degrading  to  Dsr6tf  ^3 
the  DTii?K  of  the  heathen  myths  (as  e.g.  Plato  in  the  Kratylos, 
398a,  says  of  the  heroes  as  demi  -  gods  :  Traz/re?  BJJTTOV 
ryeyovaGiv  epacrOevos l  rj  Oeos  OvijTrjs  rj  Bvrjra  $ea?).  The 
short  section,  vi.  1-4,  is  so  peculiar,  that  it  might  come  from 
a  separate  source,  perhaps  the  same  as  iv.  17-24  (the 
inventions  in  the  Cainite  race),  with  which  the  Phoenician 
circle  of  myths  alone  offers  points  of  contact.  But  to  isolate 
vi.  1-4,  with  Dillmann  and  others,  in  such  wise  as  to  deny 
knowledge  of  the  Flood  to  the  original  narrator,  is  arbitrary. 
Whether  vi.  1-4  may  have  been  placed  here  by  J  or  R  (the 
redactor) — and  who  can  decide  this  point  ? — we  have  still 
no  right  to  charge  either  the  one  or  the  other  with  having 
estranged  it  from  its  original  meaning.  What  ingenuity  is  able 
to  effect  has  been  shown  by  Budde,  who,  after  having  excluded 
as  of  more  recent  insertion  the  tree  of  life  and  all  connected  with 
it  from  the  history  of  Paradise,  places  vi.  3  between  iii.  2 1  and 
iii.  23  as  a  penal  decree  in  consequence  of  the  fall,  and  is  of 
opinion  that  "  an  essential  element  of  the  history  of  Paradise 
has  been  preserved  as  by  a  miracle  in  vi.  3  "  (p.  244).  His  J 
also  knows  nothing  of  the  Flood.  We  think  that  even  if  vi.  3 
is  to  be  understood  of  the  diminution  of  the  duration  of  human 
life,  there  is  still  no  sufficient  reason  why  the  narrator  of  vi.  1-4 
should  not  have  regarded  the  disturbance  of  the  boundary 
between  the  spiritual  and  human  sphere  as  a  portion  of  the 
general  and  deep  corruption  which  brought  about  the  Deluge. 

1  So  in  Stallbaum,  Schanz,  etc.  ;  ipetrfarts  is  an  old  error  of  transcription. 


GENESIS  VI.  3.  227 

The  penal  sentence,  2>a :  And  Jahvcli  said :  My  spirit  shall 
not  always  act  in  man,  for  he  indeed  is  also  flesh,  nn  as  the 
name  of  the  wind  is  fern.,  as  the  name  of  the  spirit  it  is 
double-gendered.  It  is  not  the  Holy  Spirit  and  His  office  of 
chastisement  which  is  here  meant  (as  Targ.  II.  and  III.  para 
phrase,  and  Symm.  Grsec.  Yen.  and  Luth.  translate),  but,  the 
object  of  the  resolution  being  the  destruction  or  shortening  of 
physical  life,  the  breath  of  life  by  which  men  are  animated, 
ii.  7,  and  which  by  reason  of  its  Divine  origin  and  kinship 
with  the  Divine  nature,  or  even  as  merely  a  Divine  gift,  is 
called  ^nn  by  God.  This  acts  in  man  so  long  as  it  animates 
and  rules  his  corporeal  nature.  ji"ij  is  the  jussive  of  pl=p, 
Job  xix.  29,  Keri,  Niph.  jnj,  in  the  meaning  of  to  act  (walteri) 
(with  the  ace.  Zech.  iii.  7,  to  rule,  verwalten),  from  which 
also  P"1K,  as  elative  form  for  adwan,  may  be  derived.  The 
verb  pi  is  also  Assyrian ;  this,  together  with  the  middle 
vowelled  ddnu  with  its  irnpf.  idin,  has  also  the  reduplicated 
dandnu,  to  be  powerful.  But  the  Heb.  jn  (p)  means  walten, 
to  act,  to  rule,  not  gewaltig  sein,  to  be  powerful,  so  as  to  let  us 
translate  with  Eiehm  :  My  spirit  shall  not  for  ever  be  power 
ful  in  men  because  of  their  (the  sons  of  God)  error.  The 
meaning  too  of  the  Arab,  ^jj,  to  be  low  (to  which  jn,  in  the 
meaning,  to  have  under  one  =  uberwalten,  to  rule  over,  might 
be  referred),  is  alien  to  the  Hebrew,  on  which  account  the 
explanation  humilietur  (Ges.  Tuch,  Ew.  Dillm.)  is  inadmis 
sible,  as  is  also  the  explanation  hdbitet  (LXX.  Jer.  Onk. 
Syr.  Saad.),  which  is  based  upon  the  confusion  of  pi1* 
with  in*1  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11).  The  meaning  walten  however 
gives  a  consistent  sense,  so  that  there  is  no  need  to  stray 
to  a  distance,  or  even,  with  Noldeke,1  to  find  the  passage 
"  inexplicable."  D^>  .  .  .  *6,  placed  as  here,  has  elsewhere  the 
sense  of  "  now  and  never  (absolutely  not),"  here  of  "  not  for 
ever."  Schrader  compares  Jer.  iii.  12  (Ps.  ciii.  9)  and  Lam. 

1  In  DMZ.  xxxvii.  534.  It  is  there  rightly  shown  that  the  verbs  t"jj  are  not 
abbreviated  Hiphil  forms  of  those  in  V'y,  pi  and  pi  having  both  been  in  use 
together  down  to  the  time  of  the  Talmud. 


228  GENESIS  VI.  3. 

iii.  31.  God  will  not  let  His  spirit  act  in  man  to  an  unlimited 
future.  He  will  take  it  back,  so  that  man  as  an  inanimate 
natural  formation  shall  fall  again  to  the  dust  from  which  he 
was  taken,  and  the  history  of  man  shall  be  over.  And  why  ? 
"iba  Kin  D3B>3.  If  sw  is  thus  pointed  with  Kametz  it  is  the 
inf.  of  JIJB>,  to  stagger  hither  and  thither,  to  go  astray  (comp. 
rw  of  the  intoxication  of  passion,  Prov.  v.  19  sq_.)  :  in  their 
wandering  (that  of  the  men  of  that  time)  he  (man  as  a  species) 
is  flesh,  i.e.  in  such  going  astray  to  ungodly  lust,  man,  the 
being  who  is  both  spiritual  and  material,  becomes,  in  opposi 
tion  to  his  original  nature  and  destiny,  entirely  flesh.  Such  is, 
down  to  Dillmann,  the  prevailing  interpretation.  But  even  the 
formation  B3^2  is  very  precarious,  there  is  nothing  analogous 
to  it  but  era5  (—  I'barram),  Eccles.  iii.  18.  Less  ambiguous 
would  be  E^2  or  EJ^a,  according  to  the  formations,  Isa.  xxx. 
18;  Ps.  cii.  14.  The  enallage  numeri  is  also  objectionable,  since 
the  sing,  sin  here  interchanging  with  the  plur.  nr^n  is  not,  as 
e.g.  at  Ps.  v.  10,  Isa.  ii.  8,  an  individualizing,  but  a  collective 
notion.  The  combination  of  the  letters  DJBD  with  Kin  (not 
rvn,  factus  est)  gives  the  impression  of  a  quoniam,  stating  a 
reason ;  this  is  what  might  be  expected,  and  the  LXX.  (8ia  TO 
dvai  avTov?  o-a/3/ca?)  Targums,  Samar.,  the  ancients  in  general 
and  Jewish  expositors  translate  accordingly,  without  being 
perplexed  by  the  fact  that  the  vocalization  is  not  in  accord 
ance  therewith.  Heidenheim,  who,  in  his  great  unfinished 
commentary  on  Genesis  of  the  year  1797,  points  indeed 
0^3,  but  translates,  because  he  also  is  flesh,  was  the  first  to 
remark  in  his  edition  of  the  Pentateuch,  Mcor  Enajim  1818, 
that  an  ancient  Codex,  the  Soncinian  edit,  of  1488,  and  other 
ancients  vocalize  DJt^'a  with  Pathach.  And  this  we  esteem 
correct.  That  £>="I^N  appears  only  this  once  in  the  Pentateuch 
need  the  less  astonish  us,  that  it  is  used  once  only  in  the 
book  of  Job,  xix.  29.  When  Dillmann  maintains  that  this 
relative  B>  is  North  Palestinian  and  later  Hebrew  and  unknown 
to  the  Pentateuch,  it  may  be  replied,  that  according  to  his 
own  view,  vi.  1-4  is  a  peculiar  section  and  has  a  Phoenician 


GENESIS  VI.  3.  229 

tinge,  and  then  that  this  V  occurs  in  Deborah's  song,  Juclg. 
v.  7,  and  is  therefore,  if  North  Palestinian,  certainly  not  late 
Hebrew.  Also  that  apparently  the  proper  name  ^Kfyp  (who  is 
what  God  (is)  ?),  Ex.  vi.  22,  Lev.  x.  4,  perhaps  also  tawi»,  iv.  18 
(if  it  is  the  same  as  the  Assyr.  mutu  sa  ilu),  contains  it.  ^3  is 
the  same  as  "i^s,  xxxix.  9,  23,  and  K>  is  elsewhere  also,  Judg. 
v.  7,  Song  Sol.  i.  7,  exchanged  for  B*  (D3tP,  Eccles.  i.  17  and 
frequently),  in  an  open  syllable  W,  Judg.  vi.  17.1  Hence 
the  reason  for  the  penal  sentence  would  run :  because  he  also 
is  flesh.  The  reference  of  sin  to  Tin  is  excluded.  Kn. 
explains :  he  also  as  well  as  other  earthly  beings.  But  cer 
tainly  this  is  incorrect,  for  where  there  is  "m  there  is  t?aj,  and 
where  there  is  B>aa  there  also  is  nn  ;  but  only  man  can  become 
entirely  "to  by  the  spirit  losing  its  rule  over  the  flesh ;  the 
carnalized  man  is  as  it  were  devoid  of  spirit,  he  is  trvevfjia  prf 
e^wv  (Jude  19).  Neither,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  reference 
ot'DJ  to  the  whole  sentence,  as  by  Nolde  in  the  Partikel-Con- 
cordanz :  eo  quod  (he  punctuates  WB^i)  eerie  ipsz  caro,  satisfac 
tory.  What  is  most  obvious  is  to  take  sin  DJ  together,  like 
nt  DJ,  Eccles.  i.  1 7  :  He  too  on  his  part,  i.e.  in  the  retaliative 
sense  (as  e.g.  Isa.  Ixvi.  3  sq.) :  God  will  no  longer  let  His 
spirit  act  in  man,  because  he  too  on  his  part  has  withdrawn 
himself  from  the  action  of  the  spirit  and  is  entirely  identified 
with  flesh.  The  notion  of  flesh  is  here  not  merely  a  physical, 
but  at  the  same  time  an  ethical  one,  like  the  New  Testament 
adpj;  aapKiKos,  the  flesh  being  so  called,  not  as  sensible, 
transitory  extern  alism,  but  as  unspiritualized,  unbridled 
sensuousness.  If  then  God  takes  His  nn  from  man,  he 
falls,  according  to  Ps.  civ.  29,  a  prey  to  death.  God  is  there 
fore  about  to  inflict  upon  the  human  race  the  penalty  of  extir 
pation,  but  He  does  not  do  this  at  once,  because  He  is  long- 
suffering,  3b ;  And  let  his  days  be  a  hundred  and  twenty  years. 
Whether  we  understand  this  second  half  of  the  penal  sentence 
as  a  diminution  of  the  length  of  life,  or  as  the  grant  of  a 
1  The  Babylonian  system  of  punctuation  lias  throughout  $  and  "j^tf.  See 
Pinsker,  Einhitung,  p.  xxi. 


230  GENESIS  VI.  3. 

gracious  respite,  the  expression  is  still  strikingly  sparing  in 
words.  In  the  first  case  the  meaning  is,  that  the  days  Wiich 
man  has  henceforth  to  live  shall  amount  to  one  hundred  and 
twenty  years  ;  in  the  second,  that  the  days  he  has  yet  to  live 
shall  amount  to  one  hundred  and  twenty  years;  in  the  former  we 
miss  '"W»,  in  the  latter  niy.  The  alternative  cannot  be  decided 
by  the  style.  It  is  strange  that  such  expositors  as  Havernick 
and  Baumgarten  should,  like  Philo  and  Josephus  before  then, 
understand  the  saying  of  a  diminution  of  the  length  of  life,  for 
to  make  120  the  maximum  is  opposed  to  the  fact  that  the  post 
diluvian  patriarchs  from  Shem  to  Terah  attained  to  a  greater 
age.  For  our  part  we  also  accept  the  view  that  J  wrote  this 
paragraph  without  having  Q  before  him,  —  but  that  this,  vi.  1—4, 
was  originally  unconnected  with  the  history  of  the  Flood 
(Eeuss),  and  that  the  writer  knew  nothing  at  all  of  a  Flood 
(Dillm.),  results  in  our  estimation  from  a  consistently  bungling 
hunt  for  contradictions.  And  even  when  the  above-mentioned 
view  is  accepted,  the  120  years  has  still  the  unquestionable 
durations  of  Sarah's  life  127  years,  of  Abraham's  175,  Isaac's 
180,  and  Jacob's  147  against  it.  Moses  was  120  years 
old  (Deut.  xxxiv.  7  *),  as  was,  according  to  Herodot.  i.  163, 
Arganthonios,  king  of  Tartessos,  and  according  to  iii.  23  the 
greater  part  of  the  ^Ethiopians  ;  but  for  the  primitive  age,  to 
which  this  statement  at  all  events  belongs,  120  years  seems 
too  low  a  figure  for  the  maximum  of  longevity.  In  Jewish 
popular  language,  indeed,  120  years  are  proverbial  for  a  long 
life  ;  see  e.g.  a  Hebrew  inscription  in  the  church  of  S.  Giuliano 
at  Venice,  of  the  year  1544,  in  praise  of  its  restorer  Dr. 
Gianotti  of  Ravenna,  because  his  skill  had  been  able  to 
prolong  the  life  of  man  rw  Dnpjn  riKEtt  inv.  Nevertheless 
both  ancient  and  modern  Jewish  expositors,  e.g.  Kashi  and 
Reggio,  Abenezra  and  Heidenheim,  explain  this  120  years  of 


1  Because  Moses  was  120  years  old,  and  DJKO  has  the  same  numerical  value 
(345)  as  H^Dj  D3KO  becomes  in  the  Jewish  Midrash  (e.g.  Lekach  tob,  p.  P) 
and  in  Samaritan  lays  a  symbolical  name  of  Moses,  see  Geiger  in  DMZ. 
xxviii.  489-491  ;  oomp.  Nestle,  ib.  xxvii.  509,  according  to  which  Trebellius 
Pollio  in  vita  Claudii  and  Barhebraus  ascribe  to  Moses  125  years  of  life. 


GENESIS  VI.  4.  231 

a  respite  accorded  to  men  for  the  purpose  of  obviating  by 
repentance  the  judgment  of  extermination.  It  is  in  this  sense 
that  the  Targums  and  Luther  paraphrase  the  saying,  and  that 
the  Midrash,  Jerome  in  his  Qucestiones,  and  Augustine  in  Civ. 
Dei,  xv.  24,  explain  it.  Among  the  most  recent  expositors, 
Abr.  Geiger  on  the  Jewish,  and  Kohler  in  his  Biblischen  Gescli. 
on  the  Christian  side,  and  now  Schrader  also,  advocate  this 
view,  according  to  which  W  does  not  refer,  as  e.y.  in  Ps. 
cix.  8,  to  the  lifetime  of  a  single  man,  but  to  that  of  men 
taken  together,  i.e.  of  mankind  at  that  era.  A  hundred  and 
twenty  years  are  a  double  Sosse.  In  the  Babylonio-Assyrian 
sexagesimal  system,1  which  preceded  the  centesimal  system, 
computations  were  made  by  Sosses  (sussu  =  60),]Sreres  (600), 
and  Sares  (3600).  Bat  the  figure  of  the  respite  granted  may 
also  be  taken  according  to  the  scriptural  symbolism  of 
numbers.  40  is  the  number  for  the  time  of  waiting  and 
transition,  120  the  tripling  of  this  number  of  the  crisis.  In 
this  time  of  waiting  there  arose  for  the  generation  of  the 
Flood — says  the  Midrash  on  Genesis,  section  30 — a  Ti")3,  viz. 
Noah.  Announcing  the  threatening  judgment,  he  became, 
according  to  2  Pet.  ii.  5,  ^ncaioo-vvT]^  Krjpvt;.  But  the  call  to 
repentance  of  this  announcement  was  without  result,  ver.  4  : 
The  Nephilim  arose  on  the  earth  in  those  days ;  and  also  after 
wards,  when  the  sons  of  God  joined  themselves  unto  the  daughters 
of  men,  and  they  lare  children  to  them,  those  were  the  Gfiblorim 
which  were  of  old,  men  of  renown.  The  notice,  4a ",  is  of  the 
same  kind  as  xii.  6,  xiii.  7  ;  the  order  of  the  words  is  also 
similar,  but  the  connection  with  what  precedes  is  wanting.  A 
connecting  "I  was  however  inadmissible,  and  the  narrator  does 
not  write  vrw,  because  he  wants  to  give  emphatic  prominence  to 
the  subject  O^Sfn.  Even  Dillmann  allows  that  the  narrator 
regards  the  D^B3  as  proceeding  from  the  demoniacal  cohabi 
tations,  although  he  translates  vn,  fuerunt.  In  sentences 

1  On  the  Babylonian  sexagesimal  system  and  its  supposed  origin,  see  Cantor, 
Gesch.  der  MatJiematik,  kap.  iii.  :  Die  Babylonier,  and  the  article,  there  made 
use  of,  of  Friedr.  Delitzsch  :  "  Soss,  Ner,  Sar,"  in  the  jEgyptolog.  Ztitschr.  1878, 
p.  56  sqq. 


232  GENESIS  VI.  4. 

however  of  similar  construction,  like  vii.  6,  x.  15,  1  7,  it  means 
entrance  into  appearance,  then  why  not  here  also  exstiterunt, 
i.e.  they  entered  into  existence  ?  The  D^a:  are  the  same  as 
the  v\lr7)\ol  yiyavT€s,  Judith  xvi.  6,  who,  according  to  Wisd. 
xiv.  6,  3  Mace.  ii.  4,  comp.  Apollodor.  i.  7.  2,  fell  victims  to 
the  Deluge.  If  yiyas  could  be  combined  with  y/f<?  =  Fis,  vis  (but 
see  Curtius,  Etym.  No.  128,  according  to  which,  coming  from 
the  V  <ya,  to  grow,  it  means  as  a  word  of  comparison  one  who 
has  grown  tall,  comp.  Lat.  ingens),  the  derivation  of  ^ai  from 
i?>D  or  ^is  =  Assyr.  pul,  to  be  strong  or  powerful  (whence  abn£ 
pile,  blocks,  squares,  and  the  proper  name  Puluv),  would 
commend  itself.  It  would  then  be  formed  as  TO  is  from 
TT  or  lit,  but  both  these  derivations  are  very  uncertain. 
On  the  other  hand,  Aquila's  ol  eirwrvirrovT&,  whence  Luther 
translates  "  Tyrannen "  (in  the  comm.  homines  violcnti  et 
injurii),  is  also  inadmissible,  because  i?aj  cannot  of  itself  have 
the  meaning  of  hostile  attack  and  surprise.  We  must  perhaps 
take  ^23  in  the  sense  of  Isa.  xxvi.  18,  comp.  b|M,  abortion 
(Miihlau-Volck,  after  Oehler),  and  regard  D^s:  as  designat 
ing,  like  chance-child  =  bastard,  the  fallen  as  unnaturally 
begotten.  "  In  those  days "  refers,  if  we  have  correctly 
understood  ver.  3&,  to  the  prediluvian  times,  and  "  also  after 
that "  to  the  period  of  the  allowed  respite,  and  not  as, 
according  to  Num.  xiii.  33,  it  might  be  thought,  to  the  time 
after  the  Flood,  for  what  the  spies  there  relate  from  hearsay 
cannot  determine  the  conditions  of  what  is  here  stated  his 
torically.  ">?r;K  !?~v?.n.K  DJ1  means  atque  etiam  posted  quum 
(-IG?N,  like  xxx.  38  ;  Lev.  iv.  22),  and  IN^  is  equally  past,  as 
Tjxhn,  xxx.  38.  To  have  carnal  intercourse  with  a  woman  is 
euphemistically  expressed  by  ta  KU  (to  go  in  unto  her),  xvi.  2, 
xxx.  3,  xxxviii.  8,  Deut.  xxii.  13,  or  less  euphemistically  by 
*?y  NU,  xix.  31  ;  Deut.  xxv.  5.  The  apodosis  does  not  begin 
with  Dr6  Vlbjl,  in  which  case  TO.5  or  n^pni  must  have  been 
said.  Hence  the  sense  is,  that  also  afterwards,  when  the 
sons  of  God  associated  with  the  daughters  of  men  and  the 
latter  bore  children  unto  them  (the  dcemonian  begetters),  such 


GENESIS  VI.  5,  6.  23 


D^'M  came  into  existence,  non  will  then  have  to  be  referred 
to  these  later  bom  beings,  the  narrator,  like  later  Greek 
mythology,  distinguishing  between  a  gigantic  race  and  a  heroic 
race  which  followed  it.  Three  particulars  are  told  us  of 
these  later  born:  (1)  They  were  the  heroes,  the  rj^iOewv  76^09 
avbpwv,  of  Homer,  II.  xii.  23,  and  of  Hesiod's  fourth  of  the  five 
ages  of  the  ancient  world,  who  (2)  belonged  to  the  primitive 
age,  fiHy,  in  the  sense  of  /cocr/z,o?  ap%aios,  2  Pet.  ii.  5  — 
a  separate  member  of  the  sentence,  on  which  account  CP?3:in 
has  Tebir,  and  D7IVE  the  still  stronger  separative  Tiphchah  ;  (3) 
they  were  men  of  renown,  i.e.  famous  in  popular  legends 
(Xum.  xvi.  2),  much  spoken  of,  7ro\vdpvX\^roL. 

The  definite  decree  of  judgment,  5-7.  The  motive,  ver.  5  : 
And  Jahveh  saw  that  great  was  the  wickedness  of  man  on  earth, 
and  that  all  the  images  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  were  only 
evil  the  whole  day.  The  character  of  the  picture  is  as  dark 
as  possible.  The  depravity  is  designated  by  nan  (Milra,  and 
therefore  an  adj.)  as  intensely  great  and  widespread  ;  by 
iap  nhtrntt  "i^  ("i^,  Jahvistico  -  Deuteronomic,  viii.  2  1  ;  Deut. 
xxxi.  21,  of  the  forms  of  thought  and  will  in  their  con 
tinual  course)  as  profoundly  inward,  and  pervading  the  heart 
(=  vovs,  the  property  of  self-consciousness  and  self-determina 
tion)  ;  by  ny^D  as  total,  and  by  jn  p~>  (opp.  to  2iD  7|X,  Ps.  Ixxiii. 
1  ;  comp.  Deut.  xxviii.  33  with  the  same,  xvi.  15)  as  radical  ; 
by  Dvrr?^  per  totum  diem  =  omni  tempore,  as  continual  and 
habitual.  Eesult  of  the  judicial  cognition,  ver.  6  :  And  it 
repented  Jahveh  that  He  had  made  man  upon  earth,  and  He 
grieved  in  His  heart.  The  Mph.  Dru  means  to  fetch  a 
deep  breath,  to  grieve,  and  especially  to  feel  repentance.  OTnn, 
to  pierce  oneself,  to  experience  piercing,  and,  as  top'^X  empha 
sizes  it,  heart-piercing  sorrow,  sounds  even  more  anthropopathic. 
Just  so  does  Jahveh  say,  1  Sam.  xv.  11,  TiDna,  and  soon  after 
this  we  read,  1  Sam.  xv.  29  :  God  is  not  man  that  He  should 
repent.  On  the  one  hand,  what  Clem.  Alex,  under  the 
influence  of  the  Stoa  asserts,  that  God  is  absolute  apathy,  is, 
when  rightly  understood  (see  on  Hos.  xi.  9),  not  untrue  ;  on  the 


234  GENESIS  YL  7. 

other,  it  is  not  less  true,  if  rightly  understood,  that  God  feels 
repentance  when  He  sees  the  original  design  of  His  love 
rendered  vain,  that  He  feels  grief  when  His  holy  love  is 
rejected.  He  is  the  living  God,  upon  whom  the  sight  of 
fallen  man,  of  the  deeply  corrupted  world,  does  not  fail  to  react. 
Hence  it  is  not  with  cold  indifference  that  He  resolves  upon 
the  destruction  of  the  world,  ver.  7  :  And  Jahveh  said,  I  will 
destroy  man,  luhom  I  have  made,  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  from 
man  to  cattle,  to  creeping  things,  and  to  birds  of  the  heaven  ;  for 
it  repenteth  me  that  I  have  made  them.  The  verb  nnE,  to  wipe 
out,  to  blot  out,  recurs  in  the  history  of  the  Flood  at  vii. 
4,  23.  The  enumeration  of  living  beings  beginning  with 
D'l&MD  is  literally  the  same  as  at  vii.  23,  and  has  more  an 
Elohistic  than  a  Jahvistic  tinge.  The  unreasoning  creatures 
are  exposed  to  the  same  ruin  as  man,  for  they  were  created 
for  his  .sake  and  are  combined  with  him  in  solidarity.  But 
the  human  race  is  not  exterminated  without  its  continuance 
being  at  the  same  time  kept  in  view.  For  one  among  mankind 
was  the  object  of  divine  favour,  ver.  8  :  And  Noah  found 
grace  in  the  eyes  of  Jahveh,  i.e.  Noah  was  regarded  by  God  as 
worthy  that  He  should  incline  towards  him  (jn  V  |n,  inclinare) 
in  pitying  love.  The  tone  of  NSB  before  |n  falls  back  on  the 
penult.,  which  does  not  take  place  with  Merca  before  Pashta, 
Jer.  xxxi.  2.  The  historical  narrative  of  Genesis  has  now 
again  arrived  at  the  place  where  it  interrupted  the  Toledoth 
of  Adam,  v.  32.  The  overlapping  verse,  v.  32,  was  Q's,  this 
transitional  one,  ver.  8,  is  J's,  who  here  names  Noah  for  the 
first  time,  here  viz.  where  we  have  extracts  from  his  book 
which  are  used  as  the  stones  of  a  mosaic.  This  ver.  8  intro 
duces  the  history  of  Noah,  which  forms  an  independent  section, 
and  the  third  main  portion  of  Genesis. 


III. 

THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  NOAH,  VI.   9-IX.  29. 

THE  title  promises  the  "  generations  "  of  Noah,  i.e.  a  statement 
of  the  posterity  of  which  he  is  the  ancestor,  or  more  generally  : 
a  statement  of  the  history  of  which  he  is  the  starting-point 
and  centre.  This  history,  so  far  as  it  forms  an  essential 
element  of  sacred  history — in  other  words,  of  the  ways  of  God 
with  mankind — is  the  history  of  the  nb  '•o,  Isa.  liv.  9,  the 
history  of  the  Flood,  of  that  great  and  long-lasting  Flood  l  which 
took  place  during  the  life  of  Noah.  The  narrator  tarries  with 
special  interest  at  this  event,  and  describes  it  fully  with  mosaic- 
like  insertion  of  whatever  his  sources  of  information  offered. 
For  the  Deluge  was  an  act,  both  of  judgment  and  salvation,  of 
the  very  greatest  importance  on  the  part  of  God.  It  was  a 
total  judgment  which  made  a  division  as  deep  and  wide,  and  of 
as  violent  and  universal  a  nature  in  the  history  of  mankind,  as 
the  final  judgment  at  the  end  of  this  world  will  alone  produce. 
This  act  of  judgment  however  is  at  the  same  time  an  act  of 
salvation,  this  sunset  the  means  of  a  new  rising  again,  a  new 
beginning. — From  the  New  Testament  standpoint  the  Flood 
appears  as  the  type  of  holy  baptism,  1  Pet.  iii.  21,  and  of 

1  In  old  high  German,  besides  sintfluot,  we  have  more  commonly  the 
original  form  sinftuot,  compounded  with  sin,  not  occurring  alone,  and  meaning 
always,  everywhere  complete  ;  hence  sinjluot  is  equivalent  to  ummaz  flnot 
(immensum  diluvium),  by  which  old  high  German  glosses  of  the  monastery 
of  Rcichenau  of  the  eighth  century  designate  the  Noachian  Deluge.  Csedmon 
has/dd,  saeftdd,  sea-flood,  heahflod,  high-flood,  or  viUflod,  spring-flood,  for  it. 
The  designation  Siindflut  is  just  such  a  popular  etymological  change  of  meaning 
as  Sinngrun  for  singruna,  i.e.  evergreen  pervinca.  Luther  still  writes  Sindflut. 
But  on  how  early  Siindflut  had  already  made  its  appearance  in  place  of 
Sindflut,  see  Weigand's  Deiitsches  WB.,  comp.  Vilmar  in  the  Pastoral-  Theo- 
loyixchen  Bluttern,  1861,  p.  109  sq.,  and  Glosses  to  Luther's  translation  of  the 
Bible  in  the  Theol.  LB.  of  the  Ally.  KZ.  1862,  p.  699  sq. 

235 


236  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  NOAH. 

life  arising  from  death,  on  which  account  the  ancient  Church 
was  wont  to  decorate  mortuary  chapels  with  pictures  of  the 
Deluge.  Extermination  took  place  for  the  purpose  of  pre 
servation,  drowning  for  the  purpose  of  purification,  the  death 
of  the  human  race  for  the  purpose  of  its  new  birth.  The  old 
corrupt  earth  was  buried  in  the  waters  of  the  Flood,  that  from 
this  grave  a  new  world  might  emerge ;  it  was  very  nearly 
thrown  back  to  the  stage  of  chaos,  that  it  might  come  forth 
from  it  as  it  were  transformed.  To  this  must  be  added, 
that  the  mountains  of  Ararat  point  to  Sinai,  the  covenant  of 
Elohim,  which  God  there  made  with  the  holy  seed  that  had 
been  preserved  and  with  the  whole  natural  world,  to  the 
covenant  of  Jahveh.  The  few  and  brief  nb  rja  rrivp  (com 
mandments  for  the  sons  of  Noah)  are  the  commencement  of  a 
positive  Thorah,  are  in  tenor  and  purpose  the  foundation  and 
preparation  for  the  Sinaitic  law,  and  at  the  same  time  a 
prophetic  finger-post  to  point  out  that  as  a  law  binding  on  the 
whole  human  race  preceded  the  law  which  entered  into 
national  limitations,  so  will  the  latter  be  at  last  generalized 
to  a  law  for  all  mankind. 

There  is  a  tendency  of  modern  science  which,  as  recently 
carried  out  with  systematic  consistency  by  Goldziher,  Grill 
and  Jul.  Pepper,  restamps  the  primitive  histories  of  Scripture 
as  having  originated  from  naturalistic  myths.  This  line  has 
been  struck  out  with  regard  to  the  Flood  by  Phil.  Buttmann. 
The  names  of  Sisuthros  and  Sesostris — he  asserts — are  nothing 
more  than  reduplicative  forms  of  the  name  Sothis,  and  there 
fore  symbolical  of  Sirius  (the  dog-star),  and  also  of  rains  and 
floods  in  general.  Noah  moreover,  who  was  the  inventor  of 
wine,  is  also  a  symbol  of  water,  just  as  Ogyges  has  a  similarity 
of  sound  with  Okeanos, — Noah  was  originally  the  deity  of  the 
water,  who  sent  the  great  Flood,  it  was  a  later  form  of  the 
legend  which  made  him  its  central  point  as  a  human  being. 
Schirren  (Wanderungen  der  Neuseelander,  1856),  Gerland  (in 
Waitz'  Anthropologie,  vol.  vi.)  and  Cheyne  (art.  "  Deluge,"  in 
the  Encyclopaedia  Britannicct)  have  advanced  still  further  on 


CHALDEE  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  FLOOD.          237 

this  path.  The  oldest  cosmogonies  originated,  according  to 
Schirren,  from  mythical  descriptions  of  the  rising  of  the  sun, 
and  the  narrative  of  the  Deluge  was  originally  a  mythic  picture 
of  his  setting.  Gerland,  on  the  other  hand,  and  Cheyne,  regard 
an  ether -myth  as  its  foundation.  The  sun  and  moon  are 
represented  as  mountain-tops  emerging  from  the  waters,  some 
times  as  boats  which  navigate  them,  sometimes  as  man  and 
wife,  the  only  beings  (with  perhaps  the  exception  of  the  stars, 
their  children)  who  did  not  perish  in  the  Flood.  Cheyne  finds 
this  confirmed  by  the  names  of  the  Babylonian  Noah  and  his 
father,  but  by  reason  of  an  uncertain  reading  and  an  erroneous 
interpretation.  This  reduction  of  the  primitive  narratives  to 
allegories  of  natural  phenomena  is  like  the  reduction  of  the 
history  of  redemption  to  moral  commonplaces.  It  is  true  that 
to  heathenism,  which  deified  the  forces  of  nature,  natural 
observations  were  transformed  into  mythic  pictures  ;  but  human 
history  too,  like  the  natural  world,  surely  left  its  reflection  in 
the  consciousness,  and  we  may  hence  assume,  that  as  there 
are  nature-myths  in  which  natural  phenomena  were  incorpo 
rated,  so  also  were  historic  memories  transmitted  in  the  form 
of  legends,  which,  though  mythologically  coloured,  have  still 
the  fate  of  actual  men  as  their  subject.  Such  a  legend  is 
that  of  the  Deluge,  which  is  in  the  scriptural  account  brought 
down,  by  the  removal  of  all  mythological  embellishment,  to 
historical  prose.  The  Babylonio-Assyrian  account  is  far  more 
fanciful,  and  hence  more  poetical,  but  like  that  of  the  Bible 
so  specifically  human,  that  it  would  be  quite  as  arbitrary  to 
make  the  waters  of  Noah  a  picture  of  the  ocean  of  heaven,  as 
to  generalize  the  victorious  Eastern  expedition  of  Alexander  into 
a  picture  of  the  victory  of  the  sun  over  mist  and  darkness. 

The  Chaldee  account  of  the  Mood  has  been  preserved  in 
Armenian  in  Eusebius'  Chronicon,  according  to  extracts  from 
Berosos  by  Alexander  Polyhistor,  in  Greek  in  Syncellus  ;  we 
give  it  here  in  a  free,  and  in  some  places  abbreviated  trans 
lation,  placing  together  in  important  passages  the  Armenio- 
Latin  and  the  Greek  texts.  Ardates,  the  ninth  ruler  before 


238  THE  TOLKDOTH  OF  NOAH. 

the  Deluge,  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Xisuthros,  who  reigned  for 
eighteen  sares.  To  him  it  was  announced  in  sleep  by  Kronos, 
that  the  destruction  of  mankind  by  a  flood  would  take  place 
on  the  loth  of  the  month  Daesios,  and  he  was  commanded  to 
commit  to  writing  and  deposit  in  Sispara  (Sipara),  the  city  of 
the  sun,  the  beginning,  middle  and  end  of  all  things.  He  was 
further  bidden  to  build  a  vessel  (cr/ca^o?),  to  enter  it  with  his 
belongings  and  nearest  friends,  to  store  it  with  food  and  drink, 
to  take  in  with  him  all  kinds  of  birds  and  four-footed  beasts, 
and  when  all  was  ready  to  set  out.  If  asked  whither  he  was 
going,  he  was  to  say :  To  the  gods,  to  beg  them  to  show 
favour  to  men.  He  therefore  built  a  ship,  according  to  the 
Divine  command,  of  15  stadia  long  and  2  wide,  and,  having 
collected  all  that  was  directed,  entered  it  with  his  wife, 
children  and  nearest  friends.  When  the  Mood  came  and 
immediately  ceased  (confcstim  cessante,  Gr.  evOews  X^a^ro?), 
Xisuthros  sent  forth  some  birds ;  but  they  finding  neither  food 
nor  resting-place,  came  back  to  the  vessel  (irKolov).  After 
some  days  he  again  sent  forth  the  birds,  and  they  again 
returned  to  the  ship  (vavv)  with  mud  on  their  feet.  When 
however  they  were  sent  forth  for  the  third  time  they  stayed 
away.  Then  Xisuthros  perceived  that  the  land  had  again 
appeared,  and  took  off  a  portion  of  the  roofing  (rwv  rov  irKoiov 
patywv  /ie/3o§  Ti),  and  when  he  saw  that  the  vessel  was  stranded 
on  a  mountain,  he  came  out  with  his  wife,  daughters  and 
pilot,  prayed  upon  the  earth  (Gr.  rr]v  7^),  erected  an  altar, 
sacrificed  to  the  gods  and  immediately  disappeared,  together 
with  those  who  were  with  him.  Those  who  remained  in  the 
ship  waited  in  expectation,  and  when  Xisuthros  and  those 
who  went  with  him  did  not  return,  they  came  forth  and 
sought  him,  calling  him  by  name.  He  however  continued 
invisible,  and  a  voice  resounding  downwards  from  the  air 
exhorted  them  to  the  duty  of  godliness,  and  declared  that 
because  of  his  piety  he  had  gone  to  dwell  with  the  gods,  and 
that  the  same  honour  had  been  bestowed  upon  his  wife,  his 
daughters  and  the  pilot.  It  also  told  them  to  return  to 


CUNEIFORM  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  FLOOD.  239 

Babylon  (ut  rursum  Babilonem  proficiscerentur),  and  that 
there  they  were,  according  to  the  decree  of  the  gods,  to  bring 
the  writings  back  from  Sispara  (Sipara),  and  to  deliver  them 
to  men,  and  that  the  place  in  which  they  now  found  them 
selves  on  coming  out  of  the  ship  was  the  land  of  Armenia. 
When  they  learned  this,  they  sacrificed  to  the  gods  and  went 
on  foot  to  Babylon.  A  portion  of  the  vessel  stranded  in 
Armenia  is  still  found  upon  the  Corduenian  mountains  of 
Armenia,  many  fetch  thence  asphalt  (bitumen),  which  they 
have  scraped  off  the  ship,  and  use  it  to  ward  off  diseases. 
When  they  arrived  at  Babylon  they  dug  out  the  writings  of 
Sispara  (Sipara),  founded  many  cities,  erected  sanctuaries  and 
rebuilt  Babylon  (7ra\t,v  eiritCTia-ai,  TTJV  Baf3v\wva).  Eusebius 
also  gives  us  the  Chaldee  legend  of  the  Flood  according  to 
Abyderius ;  the  parallels  of  this  portion  of  the  Armenian 
Chronicon  are  found  in  his  Prcep.  ev.  ix.  12  ;  comp.  Syncellus, 
Ixx.  2-15.  Here  too  Sisythros  (the  Greek  form  of  the  name 
is  here  used)  sails  to  Armenia,  and  has  speedily  to  experi 
ence  what  he  has  heard  from  God  (KOI  Trapavri/ca  ^iv 
Kare\diji(3ave  ra  e/c  rov  Qeov).  The  sending  forth  of  the  birds 
takes  place  on  the  third  day,  when  the  rain  has  ceased,  and 
for  the  second  time  after  three  days  more.  Mcolaus  Damas- 
cenus,  in  Joseph,  and  Euseb.,  designates  a  high  mountain  in 
Armenia  above  (the  province  of)  Minyas,  which  is  called 
Baris,  as  the  resting-place  of  the  ark. 

The  cuneiform  account  of  the  Deluge,  which  has  been 
published  most  accurately  by  Paul  Haupt  (in  the  Monographic, 
1881,  and  in  Schrader's  Die  Keilinscliriften  und  das  A.  T. 
1883),  coincides  with  the  statement  in  Berosus  in  the  im 
portant  point,  that  Noah,  who  is  there  called  Pir  napistim 
(sprout  of  life),  son  of  the  Ubara-Tutu  (meaning  servant  of 
Merodach),1  having  proved  himself  obedient  to  the  deity  in 
the  time  of  the  Deluge,  was  rewarded  with  removal  to  the 

1  HMsadra,  which  occurs  in  the  inscriptions,  is  not  as  yet  warranted  as  the 
surname  of  the  hero  of  the  Flood,  but  is  according  to  all  appearance  the 
equivalent  of  Si 


240  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  NOAH. 

gods  (on  which  account  he  has  the  surname  ruku :  of  the 
distance).  Izdubar  (Nimrod)  there  seeks  him  "  in  the  dis 
tance  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,"  to  ask  him  how  he,  who 
has  been  smitten  with  sickness  by  the  goddess  Istar,  may 
find  healing.  For  the  cuneiform  account  of  the  Flood  dis 
covered  1872  by  George  Smith  among  the  brick  tablets  of 
the  British  Museum,  and  the  knowledge  of  which  was  trans 
mitted  to  the  world  in  the  Daily  News  of  December  5,  1872, 
is  the  contents  of  the  llth  tablet  of  the  Izdubar-epic,  an 
episode  of  the  history  of  this  Babylonian  national  hero. 
Hasisadra  answers  his  question  by  relating  what  he  has 
himself  experienced,  by  the  history  of  his  deliverance  from 
the  great  Flood  and  of  his  translation.  The  Flood  here 
appears  as  the  work  of  the  gods  Anu,  Bel,  Adar  and  Ennugi ; 
the  god  Ea  only  co-operates  in  the  transaction,  while  according 
to  another  fragment  (interpolated  as  Col.  ii.  36-52),  Ea 
appears  to  be  the  originator  (see  Haupt  in  Schrader,  p.  57). 
We  abbreviate  the  mythologic  accessories,  though  it  is  just 
through  these  that  the  narrative  acquires  its  highly  poetic 
colouring,  and  reproduce  merely  the  succession  of  events, 
beginning  with  the  address  :  "  Surripakite,  son  of  Ubara-Tutu, 
forsake  the  house,  build  a  vessel  (tilippa),  collect  what  living 
creatures  you  can  get."  ]  The  measure  of  the  length,  breadth, 
and  height  of  the  vessel  are  unfortunately  no  longer  legible. 
Hasisadra  fears  to  become  by  the  execution  of  this  building 
the  derision  of  the  people  and  the  elders,  it  is  however  put 
into  his  mouth  what  to  say.  He  hides  his  silver  and  gold  in 
the  ship,  and  brings  into  it  all  his  family,  together  with  his 
servants  and  relatives,  also  the  cattle  of  the  field  (bid  s£ri), 
the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  (umdm  seri),  and  all  that  lives. 
When  then  the  sun  had  brought  on  the  predetermined  time, 
the  call  resounded  :  ina  Uldti  usazn&nu  samutu  Jcebdti,  at 
evening  will  the  heavens  rain  woes  (see  Paradise,  p.  156). 
In  alarmed  expectation  of  the  evening,  Hasisadra  went  into 

1  So  must  Col.   i.   21,  as  Haupt  subsequently  acknowledged  he  read  and 
understood. 


CUNEIFORM  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  FLOOD.  241 

the  ship  and  closed  the  door.  Buzurkurgal,  the  pilot,  was 
entrusted  by  him  with  the  direction  of  the  great  vessel. 
Then  followed  a  dark  and  stormy  night,  a  fearful  strife  of 
the  subject  powers  of  nature,  incessant  floods  of  rain  come 
from  above,  and  at  the  same  time,  while  the  earth  quakes, 
floods  of  subterranean  waters  come  from  beneath,  and  the 
billowy  mass  rises  as  high  as  the  heavens.  Among  men 
each  has  regard  only  to  his  own  preservation.  The  very 
gods  (the  subordinate  ones)  are  afraid,  and  cower  together  at 
the  lattice  of  heaven  (ina  kamdti),  they  lament  with  Istar 
the  destruction  of  mankind.  Flood  (abubu)  and  storm  (melm) 
raged  for  six  days  and  seven  nights  in  a  continual  tempest 
(sdru  =  "W).  At  the  dawn  of  the  seventh  day  however  the 
storm  abated,  the  flood  was  assuaged,  the  waters  fell.  Hasisadra 
sadly  navigated  the  sea  (tdmatci),  with  the  dwelling-places  of 
men  filled  with  mud,  and  their  corpses  driven  hither  and 
thither.  At  last  a  tract  of  land  twelve  measures  (tdti)  high 
rose  high  above  the  fearful  watery  mass.  The  vessel  was 
steering  towards  the  land  of  Nisir  (i¥J),  the  mountain  there 
held  it  fast,  and  did  not  again  let  it  go.  On  the  seventh 
day  after  being  stranded  he  let  the  dove  (summatu]  fly  out, 
which  because  it  found  no  resting  -  place  returned ;  the 
swallow  (sinuntu)  also  came  back,  but  the  raven  (dribu) 
though  still  wading  in  the  water  stayed  away.  Then  he 
gradually  sent  forth  everything  towards  the  four  winds, 
erected  an  altar  upon  the  summit  of  the  mountain  and 
offered  a  sacrifice,  the  sweet  savour  of  which  the  gods 
imbibed  with  avidity.  Only  Bel  was  enraged  because  his 
resolution  to  destroy  men  one  and  all  remained  unaccom 
plished.  He  was  however  appeased  by  the  other  gods,  who 
represented  to  him  that  it  was  unjust  to  let  the  innocent 
suffer  with  the  guilty,  and  that  there  were  yet  other  means 
of  punishment,  such  as  wild  beasts,  famine  and  pestilence. 
Then  he  took  counsel  with  himself,  went  up  into  the 
vessel,  blessed  Hasisadra  and  his  wife,  and  declared  that 
both  should  be  forthwith  together  raised  to  the  gods.  Then 

Q 


242  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  NOAH. 

they  took  me — says  Hasisadra  to  Izdubar — and  placed  me 
at  the  mouth  of  the  stream  a  long  way  off  (ina  pi  ndrdti). 

The  clay  tablets  containing  the  epic  of  Izdubar  are  from 
the  great  library  of  Asurbanipal,  668-626  (see  Miirdter, 
G-esch.  Babyloniens  und  Assyrians,  p.  228),  and  hence  of  the 
epoch  when  the  Assyrian  universal  empire  was  approaching 
its  close ;  the  poem  is  self-evidently  older  by  far  than  this  its 
record,  and  the  legend  of  the  Flood,  which  is  woven  into  it, 
older  by  far  than  the  poet  who  met  with  it.  Much  in  the 
description  of  the  judgment  of  the  Flood  may  be  his  own 
addition,  but  the  narrative  of  Berosus  is  a  pledge  that  he 
reproduces  the  tradition  in  all  essential  particulars.  At  the 
same  time  it  must  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  this  episode 
of  the  Deluge  shows  no  acquaintance  with  the  hiding  and 
recovery  of  the  sacred  books,  that  tradition  gives  to  this  ancient 
event  a  testimony  of  many  voices,  though  these  do  not  always 
agree  in  all  particulars.  And  this  is  confirmed  by  the  Scrip 
ture  narrative,  in  which  we  have,  in  spite  of  all  discrepancies, 
the  legend  of  the  Flood  in  its  original  form.  Arid  the 
Israelitish  nation  being  conscious  of  having  come  in  the 
persons  of  its  ancestors  from  beyond  the  Euphrates,  the 
district  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris  will  have  to  be  regarded 
as  the  home  of  the  legend  of  the  Flood,  and  also  indeed  as 
the  scene  of  the  event  itself.  Wherever  we  meet  among 
ancient  nations  with  a  legend  of  the  Deluge  homogeneous  in 
its  chief  features,  it  will  have  to  be  admitted  that  it  has  arisen, 
if  not  directly,  yet  through  some  kind  of  medium  either  more 
ancient  or  more  recent,  from  the  source  of  legends  found  in 
Mesopotamia. 

It  must  be  assumed  that  the  legend  of  the  Deluge,  in  its 
wanderings  from  nation  to  nation,  would  experience  national 
transformations  in  accordance  with  the  religions  and  dwelling- 
places  of  these  nations,  and  this  circumstance  must  not  be 
abused,  as  by  Diestel  in  his  Lecture  on  the  Deluge  and  the 
ancient  legend  of  the  Deluge,  1871,  to  cut  through  undeniable 
connections. 


INDIAN  AND  GREEK  LEGENDS  OF  THE  FLOOD.  243 

The  characteristic  feature  of  the  Indian  legend  is  the  incar 
nation  (avatdra)  of  Brahma  or  Vishnu  as  a  fish  (matsja)  ;  Maim 
fastens  the  cable  of  the  ship  in  which  he  finds  himself  together 
with  seven  Kishis  (sacred  minstrels)  to  the  horn  of  the  fish  ; 
the  Himavat  where  the  ship  lands  has  since  been  called  "  the 
Descent  of  Manu  "  or  "  the  ship's  mooring  "  (naubandhanani). 
After  his  deliverance  he  sacrifices,  and  in  virtue  of  the  bless 
ing  produced  by  his  offering  a  new  race  of  men  arises.  Such 
are  the  main  features  of  the  Indian  legend.  It  is  not  as  yet 
found  in  the  Rigveda,  and  there  are  only  uncertain  traces  of 
it  in  the  Atharvan.  It  appears  however  only  the  more 
developed  in  Catapatha  Brdhmana  (Weber,  Indisclie  Studien, 
1850,  2),  then  in  Mahdbharata  (Bopp,  Diluvium,  1829;  comp. 
Ad.  Holtzmann  in  DMZ.  xxxviii.  181  sq.),  and  in  the  Puranas, 
especially  the  Matsja-Purana,  which  is  specially  devoted  to 
this  Vishnu-  Avatara  (v.  Bohlen,  Altes  Indien,  i.  214  sqq.)  ; 
its  most  recent  form  is  exhibited  in  Bhagavata-Purana  (ed. 
Burnouf),  a  very  modern  performance  (Felix  Neve,  La  Tradi 
tion  Indienne  du  Deluge,  1851).  This  Deluge  is  identical  in 
the  main  matter  and  also  in  several  details  with  the  event  of  the 
Babylonian  and  scriptural  accounts  ;  like  Noah,  Manu  becomes 
the  medium  of  a  new  and  purified  world,  being  preserved 
through  the  Flood  in  a  vessel  which  is  stranded  on  a  mountain. 

The  Greek  legend  of  the  Ogygian  Deluge  makes  Attica 
its  scene  of  action.  This  is  not  in  itself  opposed  to  its  con 
nection  with  the  legend  originating  in  the  district  of  the 
Euphrates  and  Tigris;  it  tells  us  however  that  the  destruction 
of  mankind  by  this  Deluge  was  not  universal.  It  is  Nonnus 
who  in  his  Dionysiaka  first  gives  Ogygos  (Ogyges)  a  vessel  :  — 

ifidroit  V  v^mro;  xiflipot  ripvuv, 


Few  facts  of  this  kind  can  however  be  (as  Phil.  Buttmann 
expresses  it)  as  certain,  as  that  the  Deucalion  Deluge  is  con 
nected  with  the  legend  of  the  Flood.  The  legend  is  only 
sketched  in  Pindar's  9th  Olympic  ode:  The  surface  of  the 
earth  was  flooded  by  the  billowy  mass  until  the  interposition 


244  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  NOAH. 

of  Zeus  caused  it  to  appear,  Deucalion  and  Pyrrlia  then 
descended  from  Parnassus  to  found  the  first  city  and  to  beget 
a  new  race  (the  stone  race  after  the  bronze  race).  Then,  as 
farther  described  in  Apollodor.  Bill.  i.  7,  Deucalion  saved  him 
self  and  his  wife  in  a  chest,  journeyed  nine  days  and  nine 
nights  upon  the  waters  of  the  flood,  and  landed  on  Parnassus, 
hie  ubi  Deucalion,  as  Ovid  (Metam.  i.  317  sq.)  says,  nam  ccetera, 
texerat  cequor,  Cum  consorte  tori  parva  rate  tectus  adhcesit.  In 
Syria  the  legend  was,  as  Lucian  (de  Dea  Syra,  c.  12)  relates, 
connected  with  a  temple  in  Hierapolis,  which  was  said  to 
have  been  erected  by  Deucalion  the  Scythian  (AevicaKiwva 
TOV  ^KvOea),  because  the  Flood  had  abated  there  in  Syria,  and 
the  waters  had  subsided  into  the  chasm  over  which  the  temple 
was  built.  Phil.  Buttmann  corrects  %Kv9ea  for  ^iavOea. 
The  surname  seems  really  to  have  arisen  from  a  misunder 
standing  of  ^Lcndpos,  ^laovOpos,  'EicrovOpo^.  At  all  events 
Deucalion  is  the  Hellenized  Xisuthros-Noah,  and  the  Deucalion 
Deluge  the  Nbachian  as  adopted  in  the  circle  of  Hellenic 
legends,  in  saying  which  the  possibility  of  the  self-experience 
of  a  devastating  flood  being  blended  with  reminiscences  of  the 
premundane  Flood1  must  be  admitted.  Many  features  may 
have  been  first  added,  after  the  scriptural  account  had  become 
accessible  through  the  LXX.,  and  thence  through  the  Sibyl- 
lines  (i.  120  sqq.)  to  Hellenic  circles.  Thus  e.g.  the  dove  as 
Deucalion's  reconnoitrer  of  the  weather  in  Plutarch,  de  sollertia 
animalium,  §  13.  And  the  inscription  Nfl  on  coins  of  the 
city  of  Apamea  of  the  epoch  of  the  Emperors  Septimus 
Severus,  Macrinus  and  Philip  (known  since  Falconieri,  1688), 
with  the  representation  of  the  floating  ark,  from  which  Apamea 
itself  bears  the  name  of  Ki/Bcoros  as  its  landing-place.2  Such 
embellishments  at  least  presuppose  the  existence  of  a  national 

1  This  indeed  applies  also  to  the  Chinese  description  of  the  great  flood  under  the 
Emperor  Jao,  which,  though  in  the  first  place  referable  to  a  native  flood,  yet 
exhibits  points  of  contact  with  the  legend  of  the  Deluge  which  Jones,  Klaproth, 
Windschmann,  Giitzlaff  think  not  accidental. 

2  According  to  Josephus,  Ant.  xx.  2.  3,  the  remains  of  the  Noachian  ark 
were  shown  also  in  Kdpfai  (pn). 


SPURIOUS  LEGENDS  OF  THE  FLOOD.  245 

Phrygian  legend  of  the  Flood  as  their  foundation.  It  can 
hardly  be  decided  whether  King  '  Avvaicos  (NavvaKos)  of 
Iconium,  who  lived  more  than  three  hundred  years,  predicted 
the  Flood  and  lamented  and  prayed  for  his  people,  belongs  to 
its  original  form.  He  is  evidently  identical  with  Enoch ;  but 
comp.  Bottcher,  de  inferis,  242,  251. 

The  circuit  within  which  the  legend  of  the  Flood  was  dissemi 
nated  in  the  ancient  world  is,  when  rightly  regarded,  of  no  great 
extent.  Starting  from  the  region  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates, 
it  spread  westwards  over  Anterior  Asia  and  thence  to  Greece, 
and  eastwards  to  the  Indians,  after  they  had  advanced  from 
Hindukuh  along  the  Indus  as  far  as  the  sea,  acquiring  every 
where  fresh  national  colouring  and  attaching  itself  to  different 
localities.  We  have  no  longer  the  means  of  checking  what 
Josephus,  Ant.  i.  3.  6,  says,  viz.  that  Hieronymus,  the 
Egyptian,  in  his  history  of  the  Phoenicians,  and  Mnaseas  also 
bear  testimony  to  the  Deluge.  The  victory  of  Pontus  over 
Demarus  in  the  Phoenician  mythology  (in  Sanchuniathon)  is 
a  cosmogonic  myth.  Such  also,  in  the  Bundehesh,  one  of 
the  most  recent  sacred  books  of  the  Persians,  is  the  thirty 
days'  rain,  which  purifies  the  earth  from  the  unclean  demoniacal 
beings  with  which  Ahriman  had  filled  it,  the  water  being,  after 
the  Flood  had  done  this  service,  carried  up  by  a  heavenly 
wind  to  the  clouds,  and  the  salt  ocean  formed  from  the  re 
mainder  by  Ormuzd.  As  here  in  the  case  of  the  Persians,  so 
too  in  the  Scandinavian  and  German  mythologies,  do  we 
find  the  legends  of  the  Deluge  and  the  Creation  entangled 

o  O  o 

with  each  other.  The  legend  of  the  Flood  in  the  Welsh 
Triads,  which  is  connected  with  the  outbreak  of  the  lake  of 
Llion,  is  however  under  the  influence  of  the  scriptural 
account,  the  Noah  of  the  bards  being  called  Neivion. 

The  fact  that  the  legend  of  the  Flood  did  not  take  root  in 
Egypt  is  accounted  for  by  the  circumstance,  that  the  inunda 
tion  of  the  land  is,  in  Egyptian  notions,  not  a  calamity,  but  a 
benefit.  Nevertheless  Brugsch's  work,  Die  neue  Wcltordmmg 
nach  Vernichtung  dcs  siindigcn  Mcnscliengcschkclits,  1881,  has 


246  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  NOAH. 

made  us  acquainted  with  an  ancient  tradition,  according  to 
which  Ea  decreed  the  destruction  of  the  sin-corrupted  world, 
and  Hathor,  as  the  goddess  of  vengeance,  carried  the  decree 
into  execution ;  just  as  in  the  Babylonian  legend  Bel  decrees 
the  judgment  and  Ea  brings  it  to  pass.  The  means  of  punish 
ment  is  however,  not  a  flood,  but  a  slaughter.  Nevertheless 
the  narrative,  inscribed  by  Bibdn  el  Muluk  on  the  wall  of  a 
chamber  of  the  Seti-catacomb  in  the  Theban  valley  of  the 
dead,  sounds  like  a  transformation  of  the  Izdubar  episode  into 
Egyptian. 

It  is  surprising  to  find  traditions  of  the  Flood  strikingly 
like  the  ancient  ones  in  their  details  among  many  more  modern 
nations,  with  whom  we  have  but  recently  become  acquainted. 
The  Mexicans,  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  of  Cuba,  the 
Peruvians,  the  Tamauaki,  and  almost  all  the  tribes  of  the 
Upper  Orinoco  (Humboldt,  Reise  in  den  Aquinocticdgegenden 
dcs  alien  Continents,  pt.  iii.  p.  416  sqq.),  the  Tahitians,  and 
other  islanders  of  the  Society  Archipelago  (Wegener,  GescJi.  i. 
153-155),  have  a  legend  of  a  flood  by  which  mankind  was 
exterminated.  According  to  a  legend  of  the  Macusi  Indians 
in  South  America,  the  only  man  who  survived  the  Elood  re- 
peopled  the  earth  by  changing  stones  into  men.  According  to 
the  legend  of  the  Tamaniki  on  the  Orinoco,  it  was  a  married 
pair,  who  threw  behind  them  the  fruit  of  the  Miriti-fan-palm 
(Mauritia  flcxuosci),  which  lasts  under  water,  and  men  and 
women  sprang  up  from  its  kernels.  That  it  is  not  the  mere 
transformation  of  what  has  been  heard  from  the  bearers  of  ad 
vancing  civilisation,  especially  missionaries,  into  these  fantastic 
images,  is  witnessed  by  two  trustworthy  testimonies :  1.  That 
of  the  missionary  Batsch  from  Eandshi,  of  June  24,  1875,  for 
the  legends  of  the  Kolhs,  who  speak  the  Munda  language. 
The  Munda-kolhs  relate  that  men  became  wicked  after  sing- 
longa  (the  sun-god)  had  created  them ;  that  they  would  neither 
wash  themselves  nor  work,  but  only  dance  and  drink.  Then 
carne  a  flood  from  sengel-daa  (i.e.  fire-water)  and  drowned  them 
all.  Only  a  brother  and  a  sister  hid  themselves  in  a  tiril 


THE  FLOOD  NOT  UNIVERSAL.  247 

(ebony)  tree,  and  so  were  saved.  From  these  two  human 
beings,  they  say,  came  all  men,  who  were  afterwards  divided 
into  different  castes,  according  to  their  different  employments. 
2.  That  of  the  missionary  superintendent  C.  Hugo  Halm  for 
the  legend  of  the  south-west  African  Herero  or  Damara.  He 
himself  communicated  to  me  this  legend,  with  the  assurance 
that  it  was  original,  for  that  no  white  man  and  no  Christian 
had  come  in  contact  with  the  Herero  before  himself.  These 
people  relate  that  an  inconceivably  long  time  ago  the  great 
ancients  (ovakuru  ovanene)  up  in  heaven  were  angry  with 
men,  and  therefore  caused  heaven  to  fall,  i.e.  a  flood  of  rain  to 
rush  down  upon  them  (for  the  heaven  fell,  eyuru  ra  u,  is  the 
same  as  it  rained  terribly),  while  moderate  rain  is  expressed  by 
onibura  mai  roko  (a  storm  rained).  Almost  every  man  was 
killed.  The  few  who  were  preserved  killed  a  black  sheep  as 
an  atoning  sacrifice,  whereupon  the  great  ones  of  heaven 
returned  to  heaven,  i.e.  caused  the  flood  of  rain  to  cease. 
They  are  still  there  above,  and  are  keeping  firm  the  vault  of 
heaven.  Beforo  the  falling  of  heaven,  men  were  able  to  enter 
it  where  earth  and  sky  meet,  but  since  then  this  has  been 
impossible.  At  the  boundary  there  now  dwell  giants  with 
one  eye  and  one  ear,  a  jointless  arm  and  leg,  who  pull  down 
by  the  leg  every  one  who  attempts  to  get  up  into  heaven. 

To  find  in  such  echoes  of  the  legend  of  the  Flood  in  the 
most  distant  parts  of  the  earth,  a  confirmation  of  the  notion 
that  the  whole  world  was  overflowed  by  the  waters  of  the 
Deluge  is  out  of  question  (see  Zockler's  article  on  the  rela 
tion  of  the  ancient  legends  of  a  flood  to  the  scriptural  account 
in  the  Jahrl.  fur  deutsche  Theologie,  xv.  1870).  Dillmann,  on 
the  other  hand,  justly  remarks,  that  these  various  nations  were 
at  the  time  of  the  Deluge  certainly  not  yet  in  possession  of 
their  subsequent  abodes,  and  that  they  did  not  grow  out  of 
the  earth,  but  immigrated  from  elsewhere.  We  may  however 
regard  this  consentient  narrative  of  a  Flood  sent  as  a  judg 
ment  upon  sinful  mankind  as  a  confirmation  of  the  historical 
unity  of  the  human  race. 


248  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  NOAH. 

A  universal  Deluge,  covering  at  the  same  time  the  whole 
earth  to  its  highest  mountain  peaks,  is  physically  and  geologi 
cally  inconceivable,  —  inconceivable  an  atmospheric  deposit 
taking  place  simultaneously  upon  both  hemispheres,  incon 
ceivable  the  creation  of  the  mass  of  water  needed  for  such  a 
watery  covering  of  the  whole  globe,  inconceivable  the  continued 
existence  of  the  world  of  water  animals  in  the  intermingling 
of  salt  and  fresh  water  by  the  Flood.  For  the  accomplishment 
of  these  inconceivabilities,  recourse  must  be  had  to  miracles  of 
omnipotence,  concerning  which  the  narrative  is  entirely  silent, 
and  which  would  be  not  merely  unprecedented  in  Scripture 
history,  but  also  in  direct  opposition  to  the  scriptural  notion 
of  a  miracle.  For  the  credible  miracle  invariably  subserves 
some  great  object  in  the  history  of  redemption ;  but  what 
could  have  been  the  object  of  flooding  those  parts  of  the 
world  which  were  as  yet  untrodden,  by  the  foot  of  man,  and 
moreover  of  flooding  even  the  summit  of  the  Himalayas  and 
Cordilleras,  while  shoreless  water  the  height,  or  something 
above  the  height,  of  a  man  would  certainly  suffice  to  kill  men 
and  land  animals  ?  We  shall  see  in  the  course  of  our  exposi 
tion  that  it  is  not  at  all  the  meaning  of  the  narrator,  that  the 
earth  was  thus  plunged  back  into  the  condition  of  the  Dinn,  i.  2, 
in  which  it  had  been  enveloped  as  it  were — but  as  yet  with 
out  its  subsequent  relief  of  hills  and  valleys — by  the  primaeval 
waters.  The  Deluge  was  no  correction  of  the  creation,  but 
of  the  world  created  once  for  all,  especially  of  the  world  of 
men,  and  of  the  animals  associated  with  him  for  his  service 
and  pleasure.  The  object  of  the  Flood  was  the  establishment 
of  a  new  and  better  race  of  men  by  means  of  the  extermination 
of  the  incorrigible  old  race.  It  was  sufficient  for  the  effecting 
of  a  radical  cure  that  the  district  in  which  the  race  had  then 
spread  should  be  placed  under  water.  This  district  of  the 
dissemination  of  men  was  also  their  geographical  horizon,  it 
was  for  them  "  the  whole  earth."  The  narrator  is  reproducing 
an  ancient  tradition,  which  must  be  understood  in  the  spirit 
of  those  from  whom  it  proceeded.  The  circumstances  of  the 


THE  TWO  INTERWOVEN  ACCOUNTS  OF  THE  FLOOD.         249 

Deluge  have  as  yet  been  better  represented  by  no  one  than  by 
Edward  Suess  in  a  geological  study  of  them  which  forms  a 
portion  of  his  great  work,  Das  Antlitz  der  Erde  (printed 
separately,  1883).  By  combining  the  scriptural  and  Baby 
lonian  accounts,  he  obtains  the  following  results:  1.  That  the 
event  began  at  the  Lower  Euphrates,  and  was  combined  with 
an  extensive  and  devastating  overflooding  of  the  Mesopotamian 
lowlands.  2.  That  a  considerable  earthquake  in  the  region  of 
the  Persian  Gulf,  or  running  laterally  from  it,  and  preceded  by 
several  slighter  shocks,  was  the  chief  occasion.  3.  That  prob 
ably  during  the  period  of  the  most  violent  shocks  from  the 
Persian  Gulf,  a  cyclone  (a  whirlwind)  set  in  from  the  south. 
A  flood  caused  merely  by  rain  would  have  carried  the  ark 
from  the  Lower  Euphrates  into  the  sea ;  the  earthquake  and 
cyclone  were  the  reason  that  it  was  driven  from  the  sea  land 
wards  towards  the  falls  of  the  river,  until  (i.e.  according  to  the 
Babylonian  account)  it  was  stranded  on  those  miocene  (mid- 
tertiary)  hills  which  form  the  northern  and  north-eastern 
boundary  of  the  lowlands  of  the  Tigris  beyond  the  mouth  of 
the  lesser  Zab. 

That  the  history  of  the  Flood  in  its  present  form  is  com 
posed  of  two  closely  interwoven  accounts,  is  evident  to  even  a 
superficial  observation,  from  the  entrance  of  Noah  with  his 
family  and  the  animals  into  the  ark  being  related,  vii.  7-9,  and 
then  a  second  time,  vii.  13-16a.  The  tone  of  the  language,  in 
which  the  entrance  is  this  second  time  related,  is  the  same 
as  that  of  the  Elohistic  account  of  the  Creation :  as  is  shown 
by  t^r6x,  the  classification,  beasts,  cattle,  creeping  things  with' 
msc6  and  in^ri>,  just  like  i.  2  5  sq. ;  rpD,  winged  fowl,  like  i.  2  1 ; 
T,  like  i.  27.  In  the  first  passage  it  is  not  said 
ton,  but  ntnxrrfe  ton ;  this  is  however  of  but  slight 
importance.  It  is  of  incomparably  greater,  that  we  here  have 
the  distinction  of  clean  and  unclean  animals,  which  is  not 
found  in  the  other  passage.  Moreover,  the  tone  of  speech  is 
a  mixed  one,  the  redactor  having  interposed  and  approximated 
the  first  passage  to  the  second.  From  his  not  having  however 


250  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  NOAH. 

left  out  the  Jahvistic  passage,  and  introduced  the  distinction 
of  clean  and  unclean  animals  peculiar  to  it  into  the  Elohistic 
one,  it  is  evident  that  he  has  proceeded  with  conservative 
scrupulosity,  and  has  refrained  from  hannonistic  interferences 
which  would  obscure  the  peculiarities  of  the  two  different 
narratives. 

Indubitable  portions  of  Q's  narrative,  by  which  all  that  has 
any  other  origin  is  supported  and  surrounded,  are  vi.  9-22, 
vii.  6,  11,  13-16a,  18-21,  24,  viii.  1-5,  with  perhaps  the 
exception  of  26  (7  ?),  13a-19,  ix.  1-17.  Characteristic  of  the 
style  of  this  author,  besides  what  has  been  already  noted  from 
vii.  13-16a,  are  ">^?"^?  and  iBarrta,  vi.  12  sq.,  17,  19,  vii. 
15  sq.,  21,  viii.  17,  ix.  11,  15-17;  vrni,  vi.  9,  comp.  ix.  12  ; 
ns»  nJttp,  vii.  19,  like  xvii.  2,  6,  20  ;  DOT,  eoipso  (die),  vii.  13, 
like  xvii.  23,  26;  n:rn  rna,  viii.  17,  ix.  1,  7,  like  i.  28; 
JYna  D»j?n,  vi.  18,  ix.  9,  11,  17,  like  xvii.  7,  21.  But  of  equal 
weight  with  these  favourite  expressions,  as  characteristic  of 
this  writer,  are  the  title  rnpifi  rfrtf,  vi.  9,  the  preciseness  every 
where  shown  in  statements  of  numbers  and  measures,  and 
especially  the  dating  of  the  beginning  and  ending  of  the 
Deluge  according  to  the  years  of  Noah's  life,  the  legislation 
for  the  sons  of  Noah,  with  the  retrospect  of  man's  being  made 
in  God's  image,  and  of  his  diet  having  been  originally  only  of  a 
vegetable  kind,  the  sympathetic  prominence  given  to  the  token 
of  the  Nbachian,  as  subsequently  to  that  of  the  patriarchal 
covenant  (ch.  xvii.),  the  preference  for  stereotyped  expressions, 
and  the  almost  strophic  arrangement  and  movement. 

Indubitable  portions  of  the  narrative  of  JE  are  vii.  1-5, 
7-9  (with  interpositions  of  R),  10,  12,  166,  17,  22  sq.  (not 
perhaps  without  exception),  viii.  (26  f)  6-12  (perhaps  not  7), 
136,  20-22.  Characteristic  of  this  writer  are  besides  the 
Divine  name  niiT,  the  designation  of  the  sexes  by  ta?w  W**t 
vii.  2,  and  of  human  subjectiveness  by  "W,  viii.  21,  comp. 
vi.  5  ;  the  noun  t$\>\  (that  which  exists  or  consists),  and  with 
it  nnD,  as  the  expression  of  extermination,  vii.  4,  23,  comp. 
vi.  7;  the  declaration  of  the  respite  with  ?,  vii.  4,  10;  and 


THE  TWO  INTERWOVEN  ACCOUNTS  OF  THE  FLOOD.         251 

as  to  matter  :  the  accentuation  of  inherited  sinfulness,  viii. 
21,  comp.  vi.  5;  the  distinction  between  clean  and  unclean 
animals,  the  prominence  given  to  Noah's  sacrificial  altar  (the 
first  of  a  series,  continued  xii.  8).  The  boldness  too  of  his 
anthropomorphic  language  concerning  God  is  characteristic  of 
this  author. 

The  analysis  is  in  the  main  established,  but  here  and  there 
raises  questions,  the  answers  to  which  will  fluctuate  according 
to  individual  opinion  (compare  the  appendix  on  the  examina 
tion  of  the  state  of  analysis  in  my  earlier  editions  of  Genesis). 
The  observation  however  that  we  have  in  the  two  accounts 
different  statements,  not  only  concerning  the  origin,  but  also 
the  duration  of  the  Flood,  is  unaffected  by  this  fluctuation. 
In  the  Jahvistic  account,  which  is  composed  of  extracts,  the 
catastrophe  takes  place  in  forty  days  and  passes  away  in 
7  +  7  +  7.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  unabbreviated  Elohistic 
account,  the  time  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  is  incompar 
ably  longer.  The  Flood  begins  on  the  17th  day  of  the 
second  month,  and  the  earth  is  again  dry  on  the  27th  day  of 
the  second  month,  thus  making  the  catastrophe  last  during 
its  increase  and  abatement  one  year  and  eleven  days.  At  how 
many  days  the  year  is  reckoned  cannot  be  certainly  said,  as 
there  is  within  this  account  but  one  statement  of  the  number 
of  the  clays,  viz.  150  days  of  continuous  increase  (vii.  24, 
viii.  3).  This  is  not  yet  the  place  to  enter  into  the  computa 
tion  of  the  year  in  the  Elohistic  account — suffice  it  to  say 
that  in  one  account  the  duration  amounts  to  61,  or  at  most, 
if  we  reckon  a  four- times  repeated  respite  of  7  days,  to  68 
days,  in  the  other  to  above  a  year,  hence  at  all  events  to 
more  than  a  lunar  year  of  354  days.  Still  shorter  is  the 
duration  of  the  catastrophe  in  the  Babylonian  account.  This 
brevity  is  already  announced  in  the  yevopevov  rov  KaraKkvcr^ov 
KOI  evOews  \ijj;avTos  of  Berosus.  It  is  corroborated  by  the 
cuneiform  episode  of  the  Izdubar  epic,  where  seven  days  are 
reckoned  for  the  increase  of  the  Flood,  and  seven  more  for  the 
resting  of  the  vessel  upon  the  mountain  Nisir. 


252  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  NOAH. 

There  were  therefore  three  different  traditions  concerning 
the  duration  of  the  Flood  :  Q  follows  a  different  tradition  from 
JE,  unless  we  insist  on  branding  Q  here  as  well  as  within  the 
Mosaic  legislature  as  an  inventor  of  history.  No  tendency, 
which  would  have  disposed  him  to  remodel  the  traditional 
account,  is  here  discernible.  Besides,  his  narrative  has  the 
advantage  over  the  other,  which  makes  the  Flood  simply  a 
deluge  of  rain,  that  he  makes  it  take  place,  not  merely  through 
descents  from  above,  but  also  through  the  rising  of  the  waters 
of  the  deep  in  consequence  of  commotions  of  the  earth.  To 
this  must  be  added,  that  the  points  of  contact  with  the  Baby 
lonian  account,  which  itself  is  not  harmonious  in  all  its 
details,  are  divided  between  Q  and  JE.  Hence  both  accounts 
have  the  primitive  legend  of  the  Flood  for  their  root.  And 
Ur  Casdim,  or  at  all  events  Harran,  having  been  the  dwelling- 
place  of  Israel's  ancestors,  we  need  not  assume  that  the 
Israelites  owe  their  knowledge  of  the  Flood  to  the  Babylonians, 
but  may  refer  the  legend,  both  in  its  Israelite  and  its  Baby 
lonian  form,  to  a  common  root.  The  view  that  "  both  the 
scriptural  accounts  of  the  Deluge  were  first  composed  during 
the  captivity,  with  knowledge  of  the  Babylonian  legend " 
(Paul  Haupt,  Sintfluibericht,  1881,  p.  20),  in  its  defective 
acquaintance  with  Pentateuch  criticism  persuades  itself  of  the 
impossible.  That  the  Jahvistic  book  is  pre-exilian  and  pre- 
Deuteronomic  is  immoveably  established.  And  even  supposing 
that  Q  were  not  pre-exilian,  and  did  not  antedate  the  prophet 
Ezekiel,  it  must  still  be  granted  that  he  does  not  catch  his 
pictures  of  ancient  times  from  the  air,  but  derives  them  from 
ancient  sources. 

Kb'hler  in  his  Biblische  Geschiclite,  i.  59,  thinks  that  the 
Jahvistic  fragments  give  no  sufficient  support  for  ascribing  to 
this  narrator  a  duration  of  the  Flood  of  only  sixty-one  or  a  few 
more  days.  But  if  we  compare  the  still  shorter  duration  in 
the  Babylonian  narrative,  this  is  certainly  his  meaning.  The 
historian,  whose  work  Genesis  in  its  present  form  is,  did  not 
share  this  opinion,  but  made  the  selections  of  JE  a  component 


GENESIS  VI.  9. 


253 


part  of  Q's  narrative,  so  that  the  forty  days'  rain  appears  as 
only  a  co-operating  cause  of  the  height,  which  the  Flood 
attained  in  the  first  140  days  of  the  year  in  which  it  took 
place. 

TABLE  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  FLOOD. 
The  various  Succession  of  Months. 


The  Sacred  Year. 

The 
Civil 

Compared  with  the  Solar  Year.  3 

The  Mosaic 
legal  Succession 
of  Months. 

Later 
Names  of 
Months. 

Year 
enumer 
ation 
of 
Months. 

The  Macedonian 
Months  as 
Lunar  Mouths.2 

The  Syro- 
Macedonian 
Months. 

The  Roman 
Months. 

1st  Month 

Kodesh  ha- 

Xanthikos  6 

Nisan          7 

April             4 

abib  or 

Nlsan 

7 

2nd  Month 
3rd  Month 

Ziv(Ijjar)1      8 
Sivan                9 

Artemisios  7 
Daesios        8 

Ijjar            8 
Hasivan      9 

May             5 
June            6 

4th  Month 

(Tammuz)      10 

Panemos     9 

Tammuz    10 

July             7 

5th  Month 

(Ab) 

11 

Loos           10 

Ab              11 

August        8 

6th  Month 

Elul 

12 

Gorpiaeos  11 

Elul           12 

September  9 

7th  Month 

Jcrach  ha- 

Hyper- 

Tishri  I.      1 

October     10 

ethanim 

beretseos  12 

(Tishri) 

1 

8th  Month 

Bui  (Mar- 

Dios            1 

Tishri  II.    2 

November  11 

cheshvan)      2 

9th  Month 

Kislev 

3 

Apellaeos    2 

Kaimn  I.     3 

December  12 

10th  Month 

Tebeth 

4 

Audynaeos  3 

Kanun  II.   4 

January       1 

llth  Month 

Schebat 

5 

Peritios       4 

Shebat         5 

February     2 

12th  Month 

Adar 

6 

Dystros       5 

Adar            6 

March          3 

NOAH  AND  HIS  AGE,  CH.  VI.  9-12. 

The  tenth  generation  of  the  genealogical  table  of  ch.  v.  is 
resumed  with  the  title,  9  a  :  These  are  the  Toledoth  of  Noah, 
and  the  genealogical  conclusion,  ix.  28  sq.,  corresponds  with 
the  genealogical  title  according  to  its  most  obvious  sense. 
Noah  is  on  the  one  hand  the  last  member  of  the  ante-diluvian 
Sethitic  race,  and  on  the  other  the  first  of  a  new  three-stemmed 

1  The  bracketed  names  do  not  occur  in  the  Bible. 

2  The  same  names  for  the  months  are  retained  in  the  transition  to  the  Solar 
year. 

3  The    succession   of  months   in   the   solar   year  of  course   corresponds   but 
approximately  to  the  position  of  the  lunar  months. 


254  GENESIS  VI.  9,  10. 

race  of  mankind,  the  Adam,  so  to  speak,  of  post-diluvian 
humanity,  on  which  account  the  hero  of  the  Flood  and  the 
first  man  are  frequently  confounded.  It  was,  according  to 
vi.  8,  Jahv.,  a  proof  of  God's  favour  that  Noah  survived  the 
Flood;  here  the  correlative  side,  his  godly  life,  is  brought 
forward,  9&  :  Noah  was  a  righteous  man,  a  perfect  man  among 
his  contemporaries.  Noah  walked  with  God.  The  name  ni  is 
repeated  three  times  in  ver.  9,  as  t&nfe*  is  five  times,  Num.  viii. 
1 9  ;  the  Elohistic  style  delights  in  such  repetitions  :  it  is  plain, 
circumstantial,  monumental.  Following  the  accentuation,  we 
should  not  translate  :  Noah,  a  righteous  man,  was  perfect  .  .  . 
for  then  the  accentuation  would  be  vrn"D  rrn  D^n  pHtf  t^K  ro ; 
but  p^S  has  Tebir,  which  is  a  lesser  separative  than  the  Tifcha 
following,  hence  DVon  pH¥  must  be  taken  together,  like  Job 
xii.  4  (comp.  xv.  1 2b,  and  Heidenheim  in  his  Pentateuch,  ru:in 
*npDn,  on  Num.  xix.  2) :  a  righteous  or  properly  upright  man, 
conforming  strictly  to  the  will  of  God,  perfect,  i.e.  wholly  and 

entirely  devoted  to  God  (comp.  *v,  to  be  whole ;  *b',  to  be 
entirely  devoted ;  whence  *jJ,  one  devoted  =  servant).  He 

was  not  merely  relatively  upright  in  comparison  with  his 
contemporaries  (Jerome  from  Jewish  sources),  but  entirely  so 
in  contrast  to  them.  The  plur.  rrn,  preferred  in  the  priestly 
Thorah  style  (comp.  on  the  contrary  in,  vii.  1,  Jahv.),  means 

o 

properly  circles  ("in  =j^\  periods,  intervals  of  time,  here  the 

generation  contemporary  with  Noah,  the  Nestor  of  his  age. 
It  is  further  said  of  Noah,  that  he  walked  with  God — he  was 
not  merely  a  servant,  but  a  friend  of  God,  like  Enoch,  v.  22, 
24 — a  rare  pattern  of  piety  (Ezek.  xiv.  14,  20  ;  comp.  Heb. 
xi.  7).  What  was  already  said,  v.  32,  but  there  only  antici- 
patively,  is  now  repeated,  ver.  1 0  :  And  Noah  "begat  three  sons, 
Shem,  Ham,  and  Jephcth.  Surrounded  by  these  three  sons,  he 
is  the  hero  of  the  following  history.  The  reason  for  the 
judgment  of  the  Flood  is  also  restated.  The  picture  of  Noah, 
according  to  Q,  is  followed  by  the  picture  of  his  age,  according 


GENESIS  VI.  11-13.  255 

to  the  same  authority,  ver.  11  :  And  the  earth  was  corrupt 
before  God,  and  the  earth  was  full  of  violence.  The  earth  is 
here  used  of  its  inhabitants,  men,  at  least  chiefly  of  them. 
The  imperf.  consec.  fln^rn  is  not  reflective,  corruperat  se  (for  this 
the  author  expresses  by  ID-H-JIN  nwn,  12&),  but  corrupta  cst. 
It  was  corrupt  DTfrNn  *3B?,  i.e.  so  as  to  become  an  abomination 
to  God,  and  to  call  forth  His  judicial  interposition  (comp. 
1  Chron.  xiii.  10).  DEH  (ace.  according  to  Ges.  §  138.  3)  is 
a&iKia,  injustice  and  injury  to  the  weaker,  action  which  sub 
stitutes  might  for  right  and  cares  for  no  higher  rule.  The 
judicial  result,  ver.  12  :  And  Elohim  saw  the  earth,  and,  behold, 
it  had  become  corrupt,  for  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon 
earth.  Perhaps  in  n^J^  ""^'"^  the  narrator  may  have  in  his 
mind  the  nxE>  niLrruni  of  i.  31,  the  contrast  between  the  earth  as 


it  was  at  the  beginning  and  as  it  had  now  become.  Notice 
that  nnnsw  is  3rd  praet.,  and  that  the  reflective  sense  of  the 
Niphal  is  excluded  by  the  confirmation  which  follows,  "^jrfe 
is  the  human  race  and  the  animal  world.  The  natural  way 
of  life,  according  to  the  limits  and  rules  imposed  at  creation, 
is  here  called  TH.  A  mediaeval  rhymed  poem  on  the  Deluge 
says  :  — 

Omnis  caro  peccaverat 

Viam  (Vitam)  suam  corruperat^ 

Homo  Deum  reliquerat, 

Lex  naturae  perierat. 


JUDGMENT  DECREED,  AND  THE  ARK  ORDERED  AS  A  MEANS  OF 
PRESERVATION,  VI.  13-22. 

Announcement  of  judgment,  ver.  13  :  Then  Elohim  said  to 
Noah  :  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me  ;  for  the  earth  is 
become  full  of  violence  from  them,  and,  behold,  I  destroy  them 
(eos)  with  the  earth.  ^  KH  here,  and  also  Esth.  ix.  11, 
means,  like  btf  K3,  xviii.  21,  Ex.  iii.  9,  to  come  to  the  know 
ledge  of  some  one  ;  here  it  is  the  judgment,  which  presents 
itself  before  God  as  unalterably  incurred  for  the  purpose  of 
being  carried  into  execution  by  His  resolve.  Pi?,  is  not  the 


256  GENESIS  VI.  14. 

extremity  of  self-corruption  (comp.  TP  1%  Ezek.  xxi.  30),  but 
the  judgment  which  is  to  put  an  end  to  corruption.  B^SD 
means  from  them,  these  beings  living  in  the  flesh,  as  the 
effective  cause  (Ex.  viii.  20).  The  suffix  of  DJVnpiD  ^n,  en  me 
perditurum  eos,  refers  to  these  beings,  and  the  ntf  which  follows 
is  a  prep.  There  is  no  need  of  either  the  alteration  tjflo  (Olsh. 
Stade),  nor  of  the  much  more  violent  DH  DTJWID  "o  (Budde), 
the  text  as  it  stands  is  more  intelligible :  the  penal  de 
struction  falls  not  only  upon  the  beings  who  have  corrupted 
their  way,  but  also  upon  the  earth  as  the  desecrated  scene  of 
the  moral  corruption.  The  order  for  the  building  of  the  ark 
as  the  place  of  reffige,  ver.  14  :  Make  thee  an  ark  of  gopher- 
wood,  tJwu  sJialt  make  the  ark  consisting  of  cells  and  pitch  it 
within  and  without,  with  pitch.  The  noun  nrirn  (perhaps  from 
mn,  a  secondary  formation  from  niN,  to  be  convex  without 
and  hollow  within,  comp.  DNfi  and  DDK,  n^n  and  m«,  nin  and 
mx)  is  a  hollow  concave  receptacle  in  various  forms,  so  named 
also  in  ancient  Egyptian  and  Koptic  (compare  Oifiis,  Olffij, 
0»7#7,  Ex.  ii.  3,  5,  LXX.),  Targums  «rn:w?,  in  the  Koran  tdlmt ; 
LXX.  (in  the  history  of  the  Elood)  and  Syr.  tciftwros  (Heb. 
xi.  7),  which  according  to  Fleischer  arose  from  rvaT)  by  the 
exchange  of  the  initial  explosive  *  (but  comp.  Aug.  Miiller  in 
Bezzenberger's  Beitrdgen,  i.  289);  Samar.  n^ao,  Vulg.  area 
(archa).  The  book  of  Wisdom  xiv.  6  has  for  it  o-^eBta, 
Berosus  and  Nicolaus  Damasc.  in  Josephus  rjr\o'lov  and 
\dpval;  (Lucian,  de  Dea  Syra,  c.  12,  also  the  latter),  the 
Sibyllines  Sovpdreov  Bcofjua  or  oZ/co?  (with  /a/rtaro?),  the  Arme 
nian  legend  fiapis  (ferry  vessel,  Kopt.  bari),  the  Babylonio- 
Assyrian  elippu,  ship  (Aram.  N37K).  This  chest  (Kasteri),  as 
Luther  translates,  or  ark,  which  after  the  Vulgate  is  already 
used  in  Gothic,  old  high  German,  and  Anglo  -  Saxon  for 
Noah's  vessel,  is  to  be  made  by  Noah  of  "iSJ"1^ ;  D^JJ  is  in 
ancient  Hebrew  the  plural  of  the  product,  and  signifies,  in 

1  "Explosive,", the  German  scientific  term  for  the  letters  produced  by  the 
loosing  of  the  closed  mouth  accompanied  by  a  slight  explosion,  such  as  t,  v,  and 
the  like 


GENESIS  VI.  15.  237 


distinction  from  ftf,  wood,  in  its  use.  123  (related  to 
sulphur,  as  according  to  Lagarde  the  Persian  yvyird,  sulphur, 
arose  from  the  old  Bactrian  whukereti}  denotes  a  resinous  iir- 
tree  (Com/era),  and  is  perhaps  the  stem-wood  of  rcvTrapLaaos, 
cuprcssus;  the  cypress  (afterwards  3^3,  nnn)  was  from  the 
lightness  of  its  wood  and  its  resistance  to  corruption  used  by 
the  Phoenicians  (as  also  by  Alexander  the  Great,  Arriaii, 
vii.  19)  for  ship-building,  and  by  the  Egyptians  for  mummy- 
coffins  (ancient  Egyptian,  teb,  chest,  sarcophagus).  He  was 
further  to  make  the  ark  O^i?  (originally,  according  to  Olsh. 
Lagarde,  Budde,  probably  D^p  D^p;  Philo  Armen.  loculos  loculos)  , 
i.e.  (Ges.  §  139.  2)  so  as  to  consist  of  separate  nests  =  rooms, 
cells,  and  to  be  divided  into  such.  And  he  is  to  pitch  it, 
iB33  (see  on  the  art.  as  comprising  the  species,  Ges.  §  109, 
note  16),  i.e.  pitch,  and  that  not  properly  vegetable  pitch,  which 

G-" 

is  called  HBT  NriEi,  but  mineral  pitch  or  asphalt,  Arab.     j£   (also 

.£•),  Aram.  N^s  (Lagarde,  Onomastica,  ii.  95),  Assyr.  kupru 
or  iddu,  elsewhere  "ion,  xiv.  10.  Dillmann  regards  the  verb 
-i£3  as  derived  from  the  noun  "133  (comp.  Mishna  n_J  fromnsT)  ; 
but  as  the  verb  ~iD3  means  to  cover,  "1S3  seems  on  the  con 
trary  to  have  come  from  ISD,  in  the  meaning  covering,  means 
of  covering  (comp.  Deckfarlen,  covering-colour).  Appointed 
measurements,  ver.  15:  And  this  is  how  thou  shalt  make  it: 
three  hundred  dibits  the  length  of  the  ark,  fifty  dibits  its  breadth, 
and  thirty  dibits  its  height.  The  style  is  the  same  as  at  the 
preparation  of  the  sacred  vessels,  Ex.  xxv.  10  and  onwards. 
The  cubits  are  ordinary  cubits,  i.e.  (according  to  Mishnic 
tradition),  six  handbreadths  long;  n^s,  Assyr.  ammatu,  /Egypt. 
mahe,  is  the  length  from  the  elbow  to  the  tip  of  the  middle 

ringer,  Dent.  iii.  11,  properly  the  fore-arm,  from  cos,  J;  hut 

\ 
this  is  denied  by  Fried.  Delitzsch,  who  awards  to  the  stem- 

word  the  meaning,  to  be  broad,  spacious.  That  the  cubit  is 
here  reckoned  at  six  handbreadths  (not  at  seven,  as  in 
Ezekiel's  closing  visions)  is  shown  by  Lepsius'  investigations 
concerning  the  Babylonio-  Assyrian  measures  of  length  (1877), 


258  GENESIS  vr.  IG. 

according  to  which  the  ancient  Sumerian  cubit  was  divided 
into  6  0  parts,  the  Babylonio-Semitic  into  6  hands  =6x5 
fingers  =5  2^-  centimetres  —  the  sexagesimal  system  every 
where  prevailing.  Philo  remarks  that  the  measurements  of  the 
ark  were  the  magnified  measurements  of  a  man  lying  down, 
who  is  ten  times  longer  than  he  is  high,  and  six  times  longer 
than  he  is  broad.  It  was  an  enormous  colossus,  /a/3a>ro? 
aXXo/coro?,  as  Celsus  (Origen,  c.  Celsus,  iv.  41)  contemptuously 
calls  it,  five  times  longer  and  more  than  twice  broader  than 
the  temple  of  Solomon,  with  a  surface  of  15,000  square 
cubits,  and  cubic  contents  of  450,000  cubits.  Peter  Jansen, 
a  Dutchman,  built  in  1604  a  ship  of  like  proportions  on  a 
reduced  scale,  which  was  found  to  be  little  adapted  for  pro 
gress,  but  of  extraordinary  carrying  power.  The  ark  is  not 
indeed  called  n*3X  or  "3sap,  nor  elippu,  as  in  the  no  less 
ancient  Babylonian  account,  which  accordingly  gives  it  a  pilot  ; 
it  was  a  travelling  house  closed  at  the  top,  its  floor  a  well- 
compacted  raft;  it  was  not  to  be  rowed,  steered  or  sailed,  but 
only  to  float  without  being  overturned.  The  measurements 
are  illegible  in  the  cuneiform  narrative  ;  according  to  Alex 
ander  Polyhistor's  reproduction  of  the  legend,  the  vessel  of 
Xisuthros  was  fifteen  bowshots  long  and  two  broad,  which  is 
fictitious.  The  opening  for  light  and  internal  arrangement, 
ver.  16  :  A  window  shalt  thou  make  in  the  ark,  and  to  the 
amount  of  a  dibit  shalt  thou  entirely  form  it  from  above;  and 
a  door  of  the  ark  shalt  thou  place  in  its  side  ;  of  a  lower  storey, 
a  second  storey,  and  a  third  storey  thou  shalt  make  it  consisting. 
"ins  (here  used  as  fern,  like  njj)  does  not  mean  the  roof 

(Schult.  Ewald  and  others  after  the  Arab.    A;,  back),  which  is 


called  ficop,  viii.  13,  the  word  means  the  lighting,  here  an  open 
space  for  the  admission  of  light  ;  a  window  that  can  be  closed 
is  called  Ji?n}  viii.  6.  Jahv.  Wellhausen,  with  the  concurrence 
of  Budde  and  Eiehm,  relegates  the  difficult  sentence,  najoxi 
n^pn}  to  the  end  of  the  verse,  so  as  to  make  it  refer  to  the 
ark  as  a  whole.  But  how  did  it  get  thence  into  the  middle 


GENESIS  VI.  17.  251) 

of  the]yerse  ?  The  sense  is  not  that  the  opening  for  light 
was  to'  be  so  contrived,  that  the  space  of  a  cubit  should  be 
left  from  the  roof  (Knobel,  Keil),  for  it  may  be  presumed 
that  nft&OS  is  a  measurement  referring  to  the  opening  for 
light.  Nor  can  a  single  such  opening  of  a  cubit  square  be 
here  intended  (Jerome,  Luth.  Tuch),  for  the  animals  could 
not  be  housed  continually  in  the  dark  while  only  Noah's 
chamber  had  light.  We  must,  with  Dillm.,  conceive  of  the 
window  as  extending  along  every  side  of  the  ark  downwards, 
i.e.  under  the  roof,  and  this  the  expression  w^ri,  "  thou  shalt 
make  it  throughout,  shalt  make  it  entirely,''  seems  chosen  to 
indicate.  Nor  does  notr^K  mean  as  far  as  to  a  cubit,  but  as 
Ges.  in  his  Thesaurus  explains  by  comparison  with  Josh, 
xvii.  4  :  ad  ulnam,  according  to  the  proportion,  i.e.  at  the 
rate  of  a  cubit ;  hence  :  an  opening  for  light  running  round 
and  only  interrupted  by  the  rafters  of  the  roof,  of  the  height 
of  a  cubit.  At  its  side,  i.e.  one  of  its  long  side  walls,  the 
ark  is  to  have  a  door,  arid  to  contain  within  three  storeys 
lying  over  each  other ;  we  need  not  complete  the  three  plurals 
with  D^p,  they  are  neutrally  used  (LXX.  Ka-rd^aia,  §iwpo$a 
/cai  Tpiwpocfia).  What  is  next  to  be  expected  on  the  part  of 
God,  ver.  17  :  And  I,  behold,  I  briny  the  water  flood  upon  the 
earth,  to  destroy  all  flesh,  in  which  is  the  breath  of  life,  from 
lender  heaven ;  everything  which  is  on  the  earth  shall  die.  That 
the  abbreviated  "^  preponderates  in  the  style  of  Q  above  the 
original  '3JK,  is  a  fact  ascertained  by  Driver,1  and  secured  by 
a  statement  of  the  true  proportion  against  exaggeration.  In 
the  combination  nan  ^  however,  the  language  has  always 
(with  the  exception  of  the  peculiarly  formed  sentence,  Jer. 
vii.  11)  preferred  ^K.  The  accentuation  connects  D)O  hasn 
in  one  notion,  so  that  either  this  is  apposition  instead  of 
annexation :  iiood,  waters,  i.e.  the  flood  consisting  of  water, 
or  D'B  {>nD  belong  to  each  other  in  a  genitive  relation, 
and  the  article  applies  to  the  joint  notion.  It  is  however 

1  See  his  article,    "Linguistic   Affinities  of  the  Eloliist "  (vol.    xi.    of  the 
Journal  of  Philoloyy],  p.  224. 


260  GENESIS  VI.  17. 

suggested,  especially  with  regard  to  vii.  6,  to  ac  Sntuate 
differently  and  to  take  pKfrfe  DVD  as  added  in  explanation 
of  the  ancient  ^3D  (Dillm.  Budde  and  others).  The  con 
jecture  that  it  should  be  DJD  instead  of  D?p  (J.  D.  Mich., 
and  recently  Suess)  is  ingenious  ;  the  mention  of  the  sea 
would  be  welcome  ;  still,  to  derive  the  flood  from  a  landward 
overflow  of  the  sea  would  be  to  take  but  a  partial  view,  while 
if  the  sea  were  regarded  as  a  co-operating  cause,  this  would 
not  have  been  expressed  by  a  single  word.  If  however 
we  combine  D'D  Vottn  (like  w  rumn,  "  the  Byssus-coat,"  Ex. 
xxviii.  39,  xxxix.  27,  and  indeed  also  'n  rvnn  jYiKn,  "the 
Jahveh  —  Ark  of  —  the  covenant,"  Josh.  iii.  17;  Ew.  §  290^), 
or  D'D  pxrrby,  then  the  derivation  of  7te£,  which  consequently 
requires  some  nearer  definition  or  gloss,  from  ^33  in  the 
Assyrian  meaning  to  destroy,  whence  noMu,  destruction, 
ncibultu,  corpse  (Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Hebrew  Language,  67,  §  143), 
of  the  same  formation  as  Jfl2O  from  JH^  nvnp  from  rnj,  com 
mends  itself;  especially  since,  even  supposing  the  meanings  to 
wave  =  to  flow  (in11)  and  to  water  (^u,  Hn,  Ps.  xcii.  II),1  suit 
the  root  ^3,  we  do  not  even  then  attain  to  the  meaning  inunda 
tion  for  i»uio  ;  while  on  the  other  hand,  according  to  the  other 
derivation,  buD  denotes  some  natural  calamity  or  catastrophe 
in  general,  which  is  more  nearly  defined  by  D^D  as  a  rcara- 
«Xuo-yLto5.  It  has  become  mamul  in  Syriac,  but  the  supposition 
that  the  Hebrew  ^D  is  formed  from  the  Assyrian  dbubu  (the 
usual  name  of  the  Flood)  is  too  far-fetched  (Haupt  in  the 
excursus  to  Schrader's  KAT.}?  D^.n  mi;  breath  of  life,  com- 


1  The  meaning  to  water  seems  to  pass  over  into  the  meaning  to  fertilize. 
According  to  "Wetzstein,  p^Q  is  the  month  in  which  the  young  progenies  of  the 
flock  is  Lorn,  from  pU=XPi  to  fertilize,  whence  also  72^  designates  the  ram 

as  jjj  '*)'  does  the  rain  as  the  fertilizing  agent  ;  *A«Ji    L^^ij*A«jl  means  the 
sheep  desire  the  ram. 

2  The  existence   of  a  7H"1,  jjj«,  to  flow,  to  wave,  is  disputed  by  Friedr. 
Delitzsch,  Proleg.  pp.  122-125.     The  different  views  concerning  the  origin  and 
meaning  of  the  Assyrian  name  for  the  Flood,  abtibu,  are  discussed  by  Haupt  in 
Suess,  p.  70  sq.,  and  he  confirms  his  own  views  in  Hebraica,  i.  3  (Chicago 
1885),  p.  180. 


GENESIS   VI.   18-20.  261 

prises,  like  vii.  15,  human  and  animal  life  ;  comp.  on  the  other 
hand,  vii.   22,  where  it  is  used  specially  of  men.     y\*,  root 

13,  means  the  collapse  of  death   (like  cU-,  the  collapse  of  the 


stomach).  pS3  has  the  same  meaning  as  nmm,  vii.  22  ; 
the  animal  world  of  the  waters  is  excluded.  The  covenant 
and  its  obligation,  ver.  18  :  And  I  will  establish  my  covenant 
with  thce  :  and  tlwu  shall  go  into  the  ark,  llwu  and  thy  children 
and  thy  wife  and  the  wives  of  thy  children  with  thee.  The 
reading  J"P"}21  Dspn  is  in  the  Elohistic  style  of  the  same  meaning 
as  nnn  ma  in  the  Jahvistic;  the  former  however  comprises  the 
maintenance  as  well  as  the  institution  of  the  covenant,  the 
latter  only  the  initiative.  On  the  origin  of  rma,  see  rem.  on 
ch.  xv.  It  is  the  name  given  to  the  mutual  relation  entered 
into  by  two  equals,  or  to  one  in  which  the  higher  makes  the 
advance  to  the  lower.  Into  such  a  covenant  relation  does 
God  now  enter  with  Noah,  a  relation  based  upon  the  gracious 
condescension  which,  since  sin  entered  the  world,  has  aimed 
at  raising  mankind  from  the  fall.  The  covenant  consists  in 
God  on  the  one  hand  preserving  Noah  through  the  Flood,  and 
on  the  other  expecting  obedience  to  His  orders.  The  covenant 
will  also  profit  Noah's  belongings,  and  he  becomes  to  them  a 
mediator  of  the  preservation  for  the  effecting  of  which  God 
as  a  party  to  the  covenant  makes  Himself  responsible.  We 
see  from  ^ft&M  that  Noah  had  only  one  wife,  and  had  thus 
remained  faithful  in  marriage  also  to  the  will  of  its  institutor. 
Preservation  of  the  animals,  vv.  19,  20  :  And  of  every 
living  thing  of  all  flesh,  two  of  ever?/  sort  shalt  tltou  briny 
into  the  ark,  to  keep  (them)  alive  with  thee  ;  a  male  and  a 
female  shall  they  le.  Of  the  fowl  each  after  its  hind,  and 
of  the  cattle  after  its  kind,  of  every  creeping  thing  of  the 
earth  after  its  kind,  two  of  every  kind  shall  come  in  unto 
thee,  to  keep  (them)  alive.  Only  here  is  ''nn  so  pointed 
and  not  '•nn,  as  e.g.  Ex.  xxi.  35,  according  to  Ileidenheim  to 
distinguish  snrt  as  a  substantive  from  ™  as  an  adjective. 
The  nb'rrbsD  (without  an  article)  following  upon  Tirr^oi  shows 


262  GENESIS  VI.  21. 

itself  to  be  a  subordinate  partition,  and  therefore  equivalent 
to  a  classifying  genitive.  The  self-evident  object  is  both 
times  absent  after  n*nr6 ;  comp.  on  xxxvii.  15,  17,  and  out 
side  the  Pentateuch,  e.g.  Jer.  vii.  29.  The  provisioning,  ver.  21 : 
And  thou,  take  unto  thce  of  all  kinds  of  food  that  is  eaten,  and 
(father  it  to  thce ;  and  it  shall  be  for  food  for  thee  and  for 
them.  The  inf.  "??#  always  occurs  only  combined  with  h  of 
the  purpose,  and  except  Jer.  xii.  9,  always  also  with  the  dative 
of  that  to  which  the  thing  named  is  given  to  eat  (comp.  ?bK7, 
"  to  eat,"  and  ^f?-3,  "  for  food  ") :  "  a  thing  is  given  fe^  on  a 
particular  occasion,  it  is  given  ™??  for  a  continuance " 
(Driver).  Since  the  scriptural  account  of  the  Creation 
excludes  all  subsequent  creation  (which  must  be  firmly 
maintained  in  opposition  to  Eeusch,  Bibel  und  Natur,  1876, 
p.  322),  the  question,  how  the  numerous  animals  and 
their  food  for  a  whole  year  could  find  room  in  the  ark,  is 
simply  unanswerable,  if  the  Flood  is  regarded  as  absolutely 
universal  and  not  as  only  so  far  universal  as  to  have  carried 
off  the  whole  of  the  then  existing  race  of  mankind,  as  Isaac 
Voss,  so  early  as  1659,  judges,  diluvio  quidem  totum  genus 
humanum  periisse,  non  tamen  aquis  cataclysmi  universum  terrce 
alobum  fuisse  dbrutum.  It  is  now  acknowledged  that  the 
Flood  in  this  latter  kind  of  universality  cannot  be  proved  by 
fossil  remains,  these  all  belonging  to  the  prehistoric  epochs 
of  the  earth's  formation.  The  Flood  buried  only  men  and  a 
portion  of  the  animal  world,  nor  can  we  hope  to  discover 
bones  of  the  creatures  who  then  perished,  such  bones 
having  in  the  course  of  centuries  undergone  in  the  upper 
soil  the  process  of  decomposition.  Besides,  the  region  of  the 
dissemination  of  the  human  race  was  then  still  a  limited  one, 
and  consequently  the  destruction  of  the  animal  world  was  also 
a  limited  one.  ]^"oah  preserved  in  the  ark  the  animal  world 
by  which  he  was  surrounded,  and  indeed,  since  fish  and  the 
smaller  creeping  animals  p.P  are  not  spoken  of,  those  animals 
which  were,  by  means  of  some  nearer  relation,  within  the 
range  of  his  own  knowledge.  Even  if  the  Flood  were 


GENESIS  VII.  1-3.  263 

regarded,  as  by  Keerl,  Keil  and  others,  as  absolutely  uni 
versal,  we  could  nevertheless  only  understand  this  universality 
so  to  mean,  that  no  part  of  the  earth  was  entirely  spared,  and 
not  that  the  whole  surface  of  the  earth  was  so  inundated  that 
its  entire  animal  world  was  drowned.  For  nothing  is  said  after 
the  Flood  of  completion  by  a  subsequent  creation,  nor  of  any 
preservation  of  the  animals  by  a  miracle.  Besides,  a  miracle 
does  indeed  effect  what  is  naturally  impossible,  but  still 
always  by  making  the  laws  of  nature  subservient  by  force, 
not  by  capriciously  abolishing  them.  The  command  carried 
into  effect,  ver.  22  :  And  Noah  did  (it),  according  to  all  that 
Elohim  commanded,  so  did  he.  In  the  Elohistic  style,  and 
literally  the  same  as  Ex.  xl.  1C  ;  comp.  Num.  i.  54,  v.  4,  and 
elsewhere,  with  only  the  change  of  the  Divine  name. 


THE  DIRECTION  TO  ENTER,  AND  THE  ENTRANCE  INTO  THE  ARK, 

VII.  1-9. 

Now  follows  a  Jahvistic  extract,  which  is  however  inter 
rupted  by  the  Elohistic  ver.  6,  and  is  thence  to  ver.  9  of  a 
mixed  character.  The  summons  to  enter,  ver.  1  :  And  Jahveh 
said  to  Noah :  Go  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark}  for  thcc 
have  I  seen  righteous  before  me  in  this  generation.  This 
narrator  does  not  care,  like  the  other,  to  mention  the  three 
sons  of  Noah  by  name,  nor  does  he  use  the  plur.  of  iH  Here 
also  Noah  appears  as  the  righteous  one,  whom  God  has 
distinguished  above  all  his  contemporaries,  He  who  sees  the 
heart  recognising  in  him  a  righteousness  valid  before  Himself. 
P^V  is  an  accusative  predicate.  The  preservation  of  the 
animals,  vv.  2,  3  :  Of  every  clean  least  thou  shalt  take  to  thee 
seven  each,  the  male  and  his  female :  and  of  cattle  that  is  not 
clean  two,  the  male  and  his  female.  Also  of  the  fowl  of  heaven 
seven  each,  male  and  female,  to  keep  seed  alive  upon  the  face  of 
the  whole  earth.  It  is  the  Jalivist  himself,  who  in  the  case  of 
the  birds,  between  whom  we  are  not  accustomed  to  make 
distinctions  of  sex  as  in  the  case  of  four-footed  beasts,  e.g. 


264  GENESIS  VII.  4,  5. 


cow  and  ox,  uses  nr^  "9J  instead  of  taEW  C^tf.  The  distinc 
tion  of  clean  and  unclean  animals  is  brought  forward  with  an 
eye  to  the  thank-offering  to  be  subsequently  related.  Instead 
of  nxptpn  (which  is  purposely  avoided,  because  the  question 
here  is  not  of  fitness  for  eating,  but  of  fitness  or  unfitness  for 
sacrifice)  it  is  said  with  syntactical  correctness  rn'ntp  *O  ")£:N 
Nin,  with  xin  last,  like  Deut.  xx.  15  ;  1  Kings  ix.  20  ;  only 
in  a  positive  relative  clause  does  Kin  precede,  as  ix,  3. 
Whether  njn^  nsn&;  means  seven  individuals  or  seven  pairs 
(Ivnobel,  Schrader,  Dillinann)  is  an  old  matter  of  dispute, 
nw  njnc>  of  itself  means  by  sevens,  as  DTt?  D^B>,  9  a,  means 
by  twos.  And  for  what  purpose  should  Noah  have  had  to 
crowd  the  ark  with  seven  pairs  of  clean  (i.e.  sacrificial) 
animals  ?  It  is  more  probable  that  seven  heads,  and  so 
three  pairs  with  one  head  over,  and  meant  for  sacrifice,  are 
intended.  For  the  chief  purpose  of  their  preservation  was 
y"].!  ^T1?}  i-r-  to  secure  the  continuance  and  dissemination  of 
the  animals  (here  the  1'iel,  as  at  vi.  19  sq.  the  Hiph.). 
Announcement  of  the  imminence  of  the  judgment,  ver.  4  : 
For  in  yet  seven  days,  I  cause  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth  forty 
days  and  forty  nights,  and  I  l>lot  out  everything  existing,  that 
I  have  made,  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  The  temporal  i?  is 
here,  as  at  Ex.  viii.  19,  that  of  direction,  to  the  stated 
time  of  a  future  limit.  Seven  days  are  a  week,  VlW,  xxix. 
27  sq.  The  noun  Dip1.  (with  the  preformative  ja,  which  is 
also  the  pref.  of  the  imperf.  Qip}  =ja-Jcvum)  means  continuance, 
subsistence,  and  concretely  anything  subsisting  (comp.  Syr 
&WOP,  hypostasis,  person,  perhaps  transposed  from  NDlpj),  always 
in  the  combination  Dlp?rrp3  (besides  here,  vii.  23  ;  Deut.  xi.  6, 
hence  Jahvistico-Deuteronomic).  The  preservation  effected, 
ver.  5  :  And  Noah  did  according  to  all  that  Jahveh  commanded 
him.  This  Jahvistic  counterpart  to  vi.  22  is  followed  by  ver.  6, 
pointing  back  to  the  round  numbers  of  v.  32  :  And  Noah  was 
six  hundred  years  old  and  the  flood  legan,  waters  over  the  earth. 
In  the  500th  year  of  his  life  Noah  first  became  a  father,  in 
the  GO  Oth  he  entered  the  ark  with  his  sons.  The  verb  rrn  has 


GENESIS  VII.  7-11.  265 

here  as  at  ver.  10  its  original  meaning,  accidit,  cxstitit.  The 
suffix  stands  first  in  both  members  of  the  sentence  :  it  is  as  at 
1  Kings  xiv.  17,  the  syntactic  scheme  for  the  expression  of 
the  contemporaneous,  Ew.  §  314c^.  H??"^  DVP  appears  here, 
contrary  to  vi.  17,  more  decidedly  as  an  explanatory  apposi 
tion  to  hl»n.  The  entrance  accomplished,  vv.  7-9  :  And 
Noah  went  in,  and  his  sons  and  Ids  wife,  and  the  wives  of 
Ids  sons  with  him,  into  the  ark  lefore  the  u'atcrs  of  the  flood. 
Of  clean  cattle  and  of  cattle  that  is  not  clean  and  of  fowl  and 
of  everything  that  creeps  upon  the  earth. — Two  each  went  in 
unto  Noah  in  the  ark,  male  and  female,  as  Elohim  had 
commanded  Noah.  These  are  the  three  verses  of  mixed 
origin  ;  D*JB>  D^B>  is  related  harmonistically  to  both  vi.  1 9  sq. 
and  vii.  2  sq. ;  the  animals  were  admitted  by  pairs  without 
regard  to  the  number  of  heads. 


THE  FLOOD  AND  THE  PRESERVATION  OF  NOAH  AND  HIS  FAMILY, 
VII.  10-VIIL  14. 

A  purely  Jahvistic  section  begins  with  ver.  10:  And  it 
came  to  2iass  after  the  seven  days,  and  the  waters  of  the  flood 
were  upon  the  earth ;  more  accurately :  about  the  seventh  of 
the  days,  when  this  respite  that  had  been  granted  had  elapsed. 
Here  too  (comp.  Josh.  iii.  3)  the  two  members  of  the  sentence 
stand  in  co-ordination,  which  declares  that  the  second  coincides 
with  the  first.  The  precise  Elohistic  date  of  the  beginning  of  the 
Flood  follows  in  ver.  11  :  In  the  sixth  hundredth  year  of  Noahs 
life,  in  the  second  month,  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month,  on 
this  day  all  the  foundations  of  the  or  eat  deep  were  broken  and 
the  sluices  of  heaven  were  opened.  It  is  a  question  whether  the 
enumeration  of  the  months  begins  from  Nisan,  the  month  of 
the  ecclesiastical  year  nearest  to  the  vernal  equinox  (Ideler, 
Tuch,  Lepsius,  Friedr.  Delitzsch),  or  from  Tishri,  the  month  of 
the  agricultural  or  civil  year  nearest  to  the  autumnal  equinox 
(Kn.  Ew.  Dillm.).  This  latter  might  also  be  called  the  natural 
year,  because  seed-time,  which  begins  in  Tishri,  is  a  more 


2G6  GENESIS  VII.  11. 

natural  commencement  of  the  year  than  harvest,  which  begins 
with  Nisan.  The  answer  will  vary  accordingly  as  the  spring 
area  is  regarded  as  a  Mosaic  institution  (in  virtue  of  Ex.  xii.  2) 
or  considered  (in  opposition  to  the  testimony  of  the  PC)  as  one 
subsequently  adopted  under  the  influence  of  the  Babylonians 
(Wellhausen,  Prolegomena,  3rd  ed.  p.  110).  If  the  spring 
jera  is  an  institution  of  Moses  with  regard  to  the  ecclesiastical 
year,  according  to  which  the  spring  month  S'Qsn  cnh  (Ex. 
xiii.  4,  xxiii.  15)  is  the  first  month  after  the  sera  of  the  exodus, 
it  is  an  obvious  assumption  that  in  the  history  of  the  Flood  the 
months  were  not  yet  reckoned  according  to  the  period  of  the 
departure  from  Egypt,  but  according  to  the  more  ancient 
autumnal  tera.1  And  it  is  for  this  that  we  decide  with  Josephus 
and  the  Talmud.  In  the  legislation  too  we  here  and  there 
perceive  that  the  national  year  began  with  Tishri ;  for  according 
to  Ex.  xxiii.  16,  xxxiv.  22,  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  or  of  the 
close  of  harvest,  is  to  be  celebrated  at  the  turn  or  end  of  the 
year.  And  if  the  second  month  is  not  the  second  from  Nisan 
(Babyl.  Nisdnu,  according  to  Friedr.  Delitzsch  from  nim  =  yoj, 
to  break  up,  to  depart,  to  begin),  and  so  Ijjar,  but  the  second 
from  Tishri  (which,  according  to  Fr.  Delitzsch,  bears  this  name 
as  the  beginning  of  the  second  half  of  the  year),  and  so  Mar- 
cheshvan  (distorted  from  the  Babyl.  arali  samna,  the  eighth 
month,  i.e.  from  Nisan),  the  commencement  of  the  Flood  will 
fall  in  the  month  hn,  which  is  the  old  Hebrew  name  of 
Marcheshvan,  1  Kings  vi.  38.  This  latter  month  offers,  as 
its  name  already  declares,  a  natural  starting-point  for  the 
commencement  of  the  Flood,  for  the  second  half  of  October 
till  about  the  middle  of  November  is  the  period  of  the  begin 
ning  of  the  early  rain  (n~ns  or  i"nto),  which  fell  near  the  time 
of  the  autumnal  equinox,  and  which  by  moistening  the  soil 
(^n-Wa,  Ps.  xcii.  11)  made  the  retailing  of  the  fields  practicable. 
These  reasons  are  not  outweighed  by  the  statement  of  Alex- 

1  In  the  history  of  the  creation  also  the  definition  of  the  days  by  morning  and 
morning  (not  evening  and  evening)  differs  from  the  subsequent  ecclesiastical 
calendar. 


GENESIS  VII.  11.  267 

ander  Polyhistor,  that  according  to  the  announcement  made 
to  Xisuthros,  the  Flood  was  to  begin  on  the  loth  Daesios 
(Eusebii  Chron.  col.  1 9,  eel.  Schoene).  Daesios  is  the  Macedonian 
month  corresponding  with  the  Babyl.  Sivan  (simdnu),  the  third 
from  Xisan,  about  our  June,  in  which  the  overflowing  of  the 
Euphrates  reaches  its  greatest  height  (see  Piiehm,  HW.  p.  414), 
while  the  Tigris  also  overflows  its  banks  somewhat  later.  But 
this  periodical  overflowing  of  the  two  rivers,  in  consequence  of 
the  rush  of  water  from  the  Armenian  high  land,  is  nowhere 
brought  forth  in  the  accounts  of  the  Flood  as  a  co-operating 
factor.  The  Flood  was,  according  to  J,  the  effect  of  rain,  and 
was  according  to  Q,  besides  the  rain,  accompanied  by  the 
breaking  up  of  the  ground  and  the  rushing  of  water  from  the 
deep — a  phenomenon  which  characteristically  accompanies 
convulsions  of  the  earth  in  the  alluvial  districts  of  great  rivers 
(Suess).  nin  Dinn  is  especially  used  of  the  sea,  Isa.  li.  10, 
lying  below  the  level  of  the  land,  Ex.  xx.  4,  Deut.  iv.  18, 
v.  8,  including  however  all  the  waters  that  irrigate  and 
fertilize  the  earth  from  beneath,  xlix.  25,  Deut.  xxxiii.  13, 
Amos  vii.  4,  in  which  passages  the  Dinn,  upon  which  the 
earth  is  founded,  Ps.  xxiv.  2,  cxxxvi.  6,  appears  separately. 
The  rri^yrp  of  the  great  deep  (comp.  Prov.  viii.  28  ;  Job 
xxxviii.  1G)  are  its  assumed  subterraneous  centres,  whence 
the  sea  and  all  visible  bodies  of  water  are  fed.  These  subter 
ranean  stores  of  water  broke  forth  through  the  rent  ground, 

O  O 

while  at  the  same  time  the  DWn  ri-HK  were  opened.  The 
noun  rant*  means  something  closed  by  means  of  another  fitting 
firmly  into  it  (mx  V  m)  :  in  the  first  place,  a  window  consisting 
of  a  wooden  lattice  ;  here,  where  masses  of  water  are  kept  back 
by  it,  and  pour  forth  when  it  is  opened  (comp.  "  the  doors  of 
heaven,"  Ps.  Ixxviii.  23),  it  is  used  of  sluices  that  can  be 
closed.  The  LXX.  has  KarappdicTai,  a  word  which  combines 
the  meanings  of  waterfalls,  trap-doors,  and  sluices.  It  was  by 
a  co-operation  of  subterranean  and  celestial  forces,  which 
broke  through  the  restraints  placed  upon  the  waters  on  the 
second  and  third  days  of  creation,  that  the  Deluge  was  brought 


GENESIS  VII.   12-lfi. 

to  pass.  The  Jahvistic  statement  of  the  duration  of  the  rain, 
ver.  12  :  And  the  rainfall  came  down  upon  the  earth  forty  days 
and  forty  nights.  According  to  this,  the  sluices  were  closed 
after  forty  days  ;  but  comp.  on  the  other  hand  ver.  24,  viii.  2. 
In  the  context  however,  as  we  have  it,  we  must  understand  the 
rainfall  with  which  the  catastrophe  began.  Entrance  into  the 
ark,  according  to  Q,  ver.  13:  On  this  same  day  did  Noah 
(jo,  and  Shcm  and  flam  and  Ja.pheth,  the  sons  of  Noah, 
and  Noalis  wife,  and  his  sons  wives  with  them,  into  the  ark. 
According  to  J,  the  entrance  took  place  during  the  seven  days' 
respite.  In  the  present  connection  N2  must  be  understood  in 
a  pluperfect  sense :  hoc  ipso  die,  viz.  on  the  first  day  of  the 
forty  after  the  seven  had  elapsed,  vii.  4.  Instead  of 
(with  their  husbands),  the  LXX.  has  the  more  significant 
avrov.  The  animals  who  went  in  with  Noah,  according  to  Q, 
vv.  14— 16ft:  They,  and  every  beast  after  its  kind,  and  all 
cattle  after  their  kind,  and  every  creeping  thing  that  crcepctli 
upon  the  earth  after  its  kind,  and  every  fowl  after  its  ki)idt 
every  kind  of  bird,  every  kind  of  winged  creature.  And  went 
in  unto  Noah  into  the  ark  two  each  of  all  flesh,  in  which  is 
the  breath  of  life.  And  they  that  went  in,  went  in  male  and 
female  of  every  kind  of  flesh,  as  Elohim  had  commanded  him. 
The  history  is  not  tired  of  repeating  that  the  animals  were 
not  forgotten ;  the  Divine  forbearance  in  the  midst  of  wrath 
was  manifested  upon  them  also.  Here  for  the  first  time  in 
the  account  of  the  Flood  are  the  wild  beasts  (njn)  also  named, 
which  hitherto  (as  in  Deut.  xxviii.  26,  xxxii.  24,  and  fre 
quently  outside  the  Pentateuch)  W7ere  included  in  npv??. 
Winged  animals  too  are  carefully  specialized :  every  kind  of 
"iisy  (from  nav,  Palest.  "lay,  ^i^,  to  pipe,  V  ejv,  whence  *)>*£¥,  to 
chirp),  every  kind  of  ^55  (a  combination  borrowed  in  Ezek. 
xxxix.  4),  which  will  also  comprise  e.g.  locusts,  in  which  sense 
the  Samar.  here  and  elsewhere  translates  cpy  and  iiav  by 
kamas  (kamasa  =  fcttl&p,  locusts).  It  is  significantly  added 
from  J,  16&:  And  Jahveh  shut  behind  him.  It  is  certainly 
with  intention  that  the  mrv  of  the  original  document  is  left 


GENESIS  VII.  17-20.  269 

unaltered.  This  shutting  in  was  an  act  of  condescending 
kindness,  fyiKavOponria,  a  proof  of  love  on  the  part  of  God, 
who  is  thus  interested  in  the  matter,  ftya,  in  its  first  meanin, 


behind  him  (gone,  like  &&,  $)ost),  so  that  he  was  secure  behind 

the  closed  door. 

An  interweaving  of  the  two  documents  now  describes  how 
the  ark  floated,  kept  up  in  safety  upon  the  waters,  while  all 
around  every  living  creature  on  the  solid  earth  was  destroyed. 
We  dispense  with  the  attempt  to  disentangle  the  web  ;  it 
is  certain  that  what  is  said  17&  is  Elohistically  repeated 
ver.  18,  and  that  it  proceeds  Elohistically  as  far  as  ver.  21. 
1*7  a  and  ver.  22  are  doubtful.  But  ver.  23  is  certainly  J's, 
and  ver.  24  Q's.  The  description  is  a  model  of  majestic 
simplicity  and  sublime  beauty  without  any  artificial  means, 
v  v.  1  7-2  0  :  And  the  flood  was  forty  days  upon  the  earth,  and 
the  waters  increased  and  lifted  up  the  ark,  and  it  floated  high 
above  the  earth.  And  the  waters  'prevailed,  and  increased 
greatly  upon  the  earth,  and  the  ark  went  upon  the  face  of  the 
waters.  And  the  waters  prevailed  exceedingly  upon  the  earth, 
and  all  the  higli  mountains  that  were  under  the  wlwle  heaven 
were  covered.  Fifteen  cubits  upwards  did,  the  waters  prevail,  and 
the  mountains  were  covered.  The  tautologies  of  the  account 
as  it  lies  before  us  portray  the  fearful  monotony  of  the  un 
bounded  expanse  of  waters,  and  the  place  of  refuge  floating 
safely  upon  it,  though  surrounded  by  the  horrors  of  death. 
The  forty  days  are  the  above-named  forty  days  of  rain,  IND  *1N'E> 
is  an  ancient  superlative,  which  beside  xvii.  2,  6,  20,  Ex.  i.  7, 
Num.  xiv.  7,  only  occurs  twice  in  Ezekiel  and  twice  in  Kings. 
If  we  isolate  the  statement,  ver.  19,  of  the  height  to  which 
the  Flood  rose  from  its  context,  we  must,  it  seems,  conceive  of 
Chimborazo,  Davalagiri  and  all  the  highest  summits  of  the  earth 
as  submerged.  But  the  statement  is  to  be  understood  in  the 
same  manner  as  when  it  is  said,  Deut.  ii.  25,  that  God  is  shortly 
about  to  spread  terror  among  all  the  peoples  that  are  under 
the  whole  heavens  (comp.  with  the  expression,  Deut.  iv.  1  9  ; 


270  GENESIS  VII.  2L-23. 

Acts  ii.  5),  or  when,  according  to  xli.  57,  "the  whole  earth  " 
(as  we  should  say  all  the  world)  came  to  Egypt  to  buy  corn, 
or  according  to  1  Kings  x.  24,  to  Jerusalem  to  hear  the 
wisdom  of  Solomon,  or  as  when  St.  Paul  says,  Rom.  x.  18, 
that  the  gospel  has  sounded  et?  iraa-av  rrjv  yrjv,  and  i.  8,  that 
the  faith  of  the  Roman  Church  is  spoken  of  ev  o\w  ru>  AJOCT/^W. 
The  statement  here  made  is  limited  in  accordance  with  its 
date  by  the  fact,  that  it  must  be  understood  according  to  the 
extent  of  the  ancient  geographical  horizon,  and  in  accordance 
with  the  context  by  ver.  20,  in  which  the  fifteen  cubits  can 
only  be  an  average  statement  from  a  certain  standpoint.  The 
ju-k  drew  about  fifteen  cubits  of  water,  hence  at  the  time  of 
its  stranding  the  waters  which  were  then  beginning  to  fall  still 
covered  the  mountain,  on  which  it  stranded,  to  the  height  of 
about  fifteen  cubits.  It  has  been  asserted  that  a  partial  flood, 
rising  fifteen  cubits  above  only  moderately  high  mountains,  is 
nonsense.  But  the  Flood  was  not  caused  only  by  rain  from 
above,  but  at  the  same  time  by  the  influx  from  beneath  ;  con 
sequently  the  waters  could,  just  where  the  extermination  of 
the  numerous  population  who  would  have  fled  to  the  moun 
tains  was  to  be  effected,  stand  at  such  a  height,  without 
reaching  a  similar  height  elsewhere  or  uniformly  covering  the 
whole  earth.  The  narrator  has  with  increasing  effect  described 
the  Flood  as  ascending  higher  and  higher,  we  now  hear  how 
everything  living  was  buried  beneath  it,  vv.  21-23  :  And  all 
flesh  that  moved  upon  the  earth  died,  of  birds  and  of  cattle  and 
of  least  and  of  all  small  animals  that  swarm  upon  the  earth, 
and  all  men :  all  in  ivhose  nostrils  was  the  breath  of  the 
inspiration  of  life,  all  whatever  lives  on  the  dry  land,  died. 
And  He  destroyed,  everything  existing  upon  the  face  of  the  earth, 
from  man  to  cattle,  to  creeping  thing  and  to  the  fowl  of  the 
heaven  ;  and  they  were  destroyed  from  the  earth,  and  Noah  only 
was  left,  and  they  that  were  with  him  in  the  ark.  While  the 
expression  "  all  that  was  under  the  whole  heaven "  is  not 
Elohistic,  but  Deuteronomic  and  therefore  Jahvistic  (Deut.  ii. 
25,  iv.  19),  the  Elohistic  style  is  distinguished  in  ver.  21  by 


GENESIS  VIII.   1.  271 

the  2,  which  specializes  the  whole  according  to  its  several 
contents,  comp.  viii.  17,  ix.  2  ;  Num.  iv.  16  (and  indeed  also 
IIos.  iv.  3).  On  the  other  hand,  2s*n  nn  n?pE;3,  ver.  22,  points 
back  to  ii.  7,  from  which  place  onwards  HDBO  is  the  usual 
word  for  the  self-conscious  human  spirit,  n:nn  too  (a  synonym 
of  n^_),  like  Ex.  xiv.  21,  harmonizes  with  the  Jahvistic  tone, 
while  the  partitive  ?2£,  quodcungue,  is,  as  shown  by  vi.  2,  at 
least  not  opposed  to  it.  In  ver.  23  the  reading  is  not, 
according  to  the  Masorah,  nw],  impf.  apoc.  Niph.  (passive 
with  an  accus.  of  the  object),  but  HD*I,  impf.  apoc.  Kal,  whence 
the  form  is  accentuated  as  Mild,  not  like  the  Niph.,  Ps.  cix. 
13,  comp.  Isa.  xlvii.  3,  as  Milra.  "^B'n,  to  be  left  over, 
especially  in  catastrophes,  xiv.  10,  Ex.  xiv.  23,  Dan.  x.  8, 
has  here  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  subsequent  national  ">St? 
or  nnst:;  (parall.  ">{V,  Zeph.  ii.  9,  from  "info,  Isa.  iv.  3  ;  comp.  i.  8). 
Duration  of  the  increase  of  the  Flood,  according  to  Q,  ver.  24  : 
And  the  untcrs  prevailed  upon  the  earth  a  hundred  and  fifty 
days. 

Cli.  viii.  1-5  now  relates  the  turn  of  the  Flood  from 
increasing  to  abating  till  the  tops  of  the  mountains  were  seen. 
It  is  beyond  doubt  that  viii.  la,  2a,  35-5,  belong  to  Q ;  nor  is 
there  any  adequate  reason  for  denying  him  the  authorship  of 
Ib,  but  2b  reads  like  a  continuation  of  vii.  12,  and  oa  also 
seems  to  be  a  statement  of  the  gradual  abatement  entered 
from  J.  The  turning-point,  viii.  1  :  Then  Elohim  remembered 
Noah,  and  all  the  beasts  and  all  the  cattle  that  were  with  him  in 
the  ark,  and  Elohim  made  a  wind  to  pass  over  the  earth,  and  the 
waters  abated.  God  remembered  Noah,  i.e.  (like  xix.  29,  xxx. 
22,  Ex.  ii.  24,  everywhere  with  the  Divine  name  DTita)  He 
showed  that  He  did  not  forget  him  (and  his),  and  the  animals 
confined  with  him.  When  the  wrath  of  the  Judge  prevailed 
the  waters  rose;  now  grace  and  faithfulness  to  promise  began 
to  effect  their  work  of  deliverance,  and  the  waters  abated,  *pL*', 
related  to  nnt?,  "pn.  The  wind,  which  everywhere  in  Scripture 
appears  as  the  first  elementary  appearance  of  that  creative 
power  which  pervades  the  world  of  nature,  stands  first 


272  GENESIS  VIII.  2-4. 

as   an   intermediate    cause.      Simultaneous    cessation    of    the 
influxes  from  beneath  and  above,  ver.  2  :  And  the  foundation  of 
the  deep,  and  the  sluices  of  heaven,  were  closed,  and  the  rain 
from  heaven  was  restrained.      Contrasts  to  vii.  lib,  12,  and  in 
the  same  order.      Continuance  of  the  decrease,  ver.  3  :  And  the 
waters  retreated  from  the  earth  in  a  continual  retreat, and  decreased 
after  the  lapse  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  days.      The  gerund  :JvH, 
cundo,  designates  the  continuance  of  the  retreat,  as  at  ver.  5 
that  of   abatement,   and    xxvi.    13  that   of   increase.       nxjp» 
(always  with  an  undageshed  p)  means  from  the  end  of  a  period 
onwards,  hence  after  its  lapse ;  it  is  of  like  meaning  with  pgp, 
ver.   6,  iv.   3.       After  the  lapse  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  days, 
during  which  the  water  had,  according  to  vii.  24,  increased,  it 
abated.      The  hundred  and  fifty  days  extend  from  the  seven 
teenth  day  of  the  second  month,  on  which  the  Flood  commenced, 
to  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  on  which  the  ark 
stranded,  ver.  4  :  And  the  ark  rested  in  the  seventh  month,  on 
the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month,  on  the  mountains  of  Ararat. 
The  name  BTIK  is   the  name   of  a   country,  like  the  Assyr. 
Urartu.      It  is  the  name  of  the  country  to  which  the  sons  of 
Sennacherib  fled  after  the  murder  of  their   father,   2   Kings 
xix.    37,   and    is    mentioned,   Jer.    li.    27,  together  with   ^Q 
(Armenia) ;  it  is  undoubtedly  the  East- Armenian  province  of 
Araratia  in  the  plain  of  the  Araxes  at  the  foot  of  Taurus  (Jer. 
on  Isa.  xxxvii.  38),  Armenian  Airarat.     The  Targums  on  the 
contrary  translate  ims,  the  land  of  the  mp,  i.e.  Korduene 
(Karduchia),  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Upper  Tigris  as  far  as  to  the 
Zab ;  so  do  the  Syrians  (Pesh.  on  viii.  4,  Isa.  xxxvii.  38,  and 
Ephrern)  and  the  Moslems,  who  designate  'Gebel  fGudi  south 
west  of  Van-See  as  the  landing-place  of  Noah.     Berosus  too, 
in  Joseph.  Ant.  i.   3.  6,  Eusebius  and  Epiphanius  name  the 
Gordyaian  mountains.     The  Babylonian  legend  again  speaks 
differently.      According   to  this,  Hasisadra's  vessel   stranded 
upon  the  mountain  Nisir,  which,  like  IDTIK  nn,  is  the  same 
as  mountain  in  the  land  of  Nisir ;  and  this,  according  to  an 
inscription  of  Asurnasirpal,  must  be  sought  east  of  the  Tigris 


GENESIS  VIII.  4.  2/3 

beyond  the  lower  Zab.  Both  these  statements  of  locality 
are  interesting,  the  former  of  the  land  of  Kardu,  nearly 
the  present  Boktan  (see  Noldeke,  Untersucliungen  zur  Kritik 
dcs  A.  T.  p.  150);  the  latter,  which  regards  the  mountain 
Xisir  (according  to  Suess,  p.  27,  one  of  the  spurs  of  the 
Tigris  lowland)  as  the  mountain  where  the  ark  landed.1  The 
Scripture  tradition  leads  to  Eastern  Armenia.  "  Upon  the 
mountains  of  Ararat "  is,  according  to  a  similar  use  of  the 
plural,  xix.  29,  Judg.  xii.  7,  the  same  as  upon  one  of  the 
mountains  of  this  country.  It  is  not  necessary,  but  still  very 
obvious,  to  think  of  the  Ararat  chain  rising  in  two  high  peaks 
above  the  plain  of  the  Araxes.  Tradition  also  adheres  to 
this  chain,  for  the  place  of  descent  from  the  ark  was  called, 
according  to  Joseph.  Ant.  i.  3.  5,  aTroftarripiov ;  and  this,  viz. 
primus  dcscensus,  is  the  signification  of  .Nachitshevan  (in 
Ptolema3us  Naxuana),  the  ancient  city  on  the  east  side  of 
Ararat,  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Araxes.  We  are  however 
by  no  means  led  to  suppose  that  the  ark  rested  upon  the 
small  plateau  covered  with  perpetual  snow  of  the  so-called 
Great  Ararat,  16,000  feet  high.  For  this  plateau  has  from  all 
sides  of  its  brink  so  precipitous  a  declivity,  that  the  descent 
would  have  been  impossible  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  ark. 
Not  till  recent  times,  and  very  seldom,  has  this  summit  been 
reached  (1829  by  Parrot,  1876  by  Bryce),  over  a  field  of 
snow  extending  3000  feet  downwards.  The  other  peak  is 
called  Little  Ararat,  this  being  4000  feet  lower;  its  snow 
melts  in  the  middle  of  summer,  but  it  rises  all  the  more 
steeply  in  the  form  of  a  cone.  From  this  nevertheless 
gigantic  mountain -cone  a  smaller  comb -like  range  of  heights 
extends  towards  the  eastern  declivity  of  Great  Ararat  with  its 

1  The  Phrygian  legend,  which  makes  a  mountain  in  Celiina,  in  the  neighbour 
hood  of  the  subsequent  Aparnea-Kibotos,  the  landing-place  of  the  ark  (xipuro;}, 
and  the  translation  of  BVIX  by  2H31D,  »•€.  Ceylon  in  the  Samar.  Targum,  are 
left  out  of  consideration.  n"n3~lD  seems  however  to  be  a  recent  gloss  instead 
of  the  original  tmn,  which  Petermann  and  Heidenheim  have  accepted  in 
opposition  to  Briill,  whose  text  is  that  of  the  London  Polyglot.  The  Book  of 
Jubilees,  Epiphanius  and  others  call  the  mountain  where  the  ark  landed 


274  GENESIS  VIII.  5-7. 

silvery  head.1  The  ark  may  have  rested  somewhere  on  this 
range  of  heights ;  the  account  does  not  oblige  us  to  think  of  a 
high  summit  as  its  place  of  landing,  nay,  a  comparatively  low 
one  results  from  the  circumstance  that  in  scarcely  2-J  months 
after  the  stranding  the  tops  of  the  mountains  were  visible, 
the  water  having  hence  sunk  about  20  feet,  and  that  the 
account  puts  down  only  about  five  months  for  the  remaining 
period  of  drying  up.  Appearance  of  the  mountain -tops, 
ver.  5  :  And  the  waters  were  in  continual  decrease  until  the 
tenth  month ;  in  the  tenth  month,  on  the  first  of  the  month, 
the  tops  of  the  mountains  lucre  visible.  Instead  of  B11?^  ^ 
D'nph'l  (tcmpus  durans)  we  have  vn  with  two  inf.  abs.  :  they 
were  found  in  a  condition  of  continuous  decrease,  E\v. 
§  2805. 

A  Jahvistic  section  follows  ;  intelligence  sought  by  des 
patching  birds.  The  first  outlook,  ver.  6  :  And  it  came  to 
pass  after  the  lapse  of  forty  days,  that  Noah  opened  the  window 
of  the  ark  which  he  had  made.  Though,  analytically  regarded, 
this  cannot  point  back  to  vi.  16,  yet  it  is  more  probable  that 
">£;K  refers  to  p?n  (from  ^n,  to  bore,  to  break  through)  than  to 
nnnn.  The  raven,  ver.  7  :  And  he  sent  forth  the  raven,  and 
it  'went  forth,  going  forth,  and  returning)  till  the  drying  up  of 
the  waters  from  the  earth.  Perhaps  a  fragment  of  Q's  account 
of  the  sending  forth  of  the  birds  (Paradies,  p.  157  sq.)  ; 
but  then  "iiy  and  D'nnx  must  have  been  an  editorial  insertion. 
In  the  Babylonian  account  Hasisadra  sends  forth  at  the  dawn 
of  the  seventh  day,  first  a  dove  (summata),  then  a  swallow 
(sinuntcc),  both  of  which  return,  and  thirdly  a  raven  (driba), 
which,  wading  in  the  water  near  the  ship,  does  not  however 
come  into  it  again.  The  article  of  ^'yn  is  comprehensive  of 

1  The  Armenians  call  Little  Ararat  sis  and  Great  Ararat  masis,  whence  it 
seems  that  great,  the  meaning  of  meds,  is  contained  in  ma.  Both  mountains 
have  acquired  the  name  Ararat  simply  by  the  transference  to  them  of  the  name 
of  the  country  (LXX.  Gen.  viii.  4,  TO.  op*  TO.  'Apocpur  ;  less  ambiguously  Jer.  : 
monies  Armenia).  Moses  v.  Chorene,  i.  15,  explains  Airarat  =  Arajieraf, 
"  Plain  of  King  Ara,"  as  at  i.  7  he  brings  Masis  into  improbable  combination 
with  one  King  Amasia. 


GKNESIS  VIII.  8-11.  275 

the  species,  like  1  Sam.  xvii.  34,  1  Kings  xx.  36,  the 
individual  being  distinguished  as  the  representative  of  the 
species,  not  from  other  individuals  of  the  same,  but  from 
animals  of  other  species.  By  3im  tfi^r  (not  understood  and 
therefore  disfigured  by  an  inserted  OVK  by  LXX.  Syr.  Jer.  : 
etjrediclatur  d  non  revertelatur}  is  meant,  that  it  was  now 
lost  in  the  distance  and  now  returned  to  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  ark,  without  however  re-entering  it,  till  the  drying  up  was 
complete  (J"it?^  after  the  formation  rfa'1) ;  for  the  solid  ground, 
always  drying  to  a  greater  distance  down  from  the  mountain- 
tops,  afforded  it  a  resting  -  place,  and  it  found  abundant 
nourishment  from  the  corpses  floating  upon  the  waters.  Noah 
had  purposely  sent  forth  the  neither  delicate  nor  fastidious 
bird ;  its  remaining  away  was  a  good  sign.  First  trial  with 
the  dove,  vv.  8,  9  :  And  he  sent  fortli  the  dove  from  him, 
to  see  if  the  waters  had  run  off  from  the  face  of  the  ground. 
And  the  dove  found  no  resting-place  for  the  sole  of  her 
foot,  and  she  returned  to  the  ark,  for  the  water  was  still 
upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  and  Noah  stretched  fortli  Ids 
hand,  and  caught  her,  and  took  her  to  him  into  the  ark.  The 
description  is  tender,  and  speaks  in  human  fashion  of  the 
dove  (Josh.  iii.  13).  This  is  a  bird  of  the  valleys,  Ezek. 
vii.  16,  which  were  not  as  yet  dry,  and  one  that  makes  its 
nest  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  Song  Sol.  ii.  14,  which  as  yet 
offered  no  place  of  refuge  that  was  snug  and  dry.  It  is  told 
with  sympathetic  observation  of  every  movement,  how  Noah 
took  in  the  timid  bird  when  she  sought  for  refuge.  He  then 
waited  another  seven  days  (hence  the  first  sending  forth  of 
the  dove  took  place  seven  days  after  the  sending  forth  of  the 
raven),  and  let  the  dove  out  a  second  time,  vv.  10,  11  :  And 
lie  waited  yet  seven  other  days,  and  continued  to  send  forth 
the  dove  out  of  the  ark.  And  the  dove  came  to  him  at  eventide, 
and,  lo,  a  newly  plucked  leaf  of  an  olive  tree  in  her  mouth. 
Then  Noah  knew  that  the  w-aters  had  subsided  from  the  earth. 
To  wait  is  elsewhere  called  ?n'pj  ^nin,  i>rnJ3  here  once  ^nn  (from 
^n  bin,  JU-,  to  writhe),  to  suffer  pain,  to  wait  painfully ; 


276  GENESIS  VIII.  12-14. 

Olsb.  Dillm.  correct,  PfH ;  it  is  certainly  more  probable  that 
the  twice  occurring  Niphal  in  ver.  12  should  exchange  with 
the  preceding  customary  Piel,  than  with  the  elsewhere  uncor 
roborated  Hiph.  Not  at  once,  but  late  in  the  evening,  did 
the  dove  return  with  an  olive  leaf  in  her  mouth,  not  one 
floating  about  on  the  waters,  but  one  just  plucked,  and  there 
fore  fresh ;  *)"}?,  dcccrptus,  passes  over  into  the  meaning  recens, 
Arab,  tarif,  fresh,  piquant,  fine  (from  tarufa,  to  be  fresh, 
properly  fresh  plucked).  The  olive-tree  has  this  in  common 
with  the  laurel,  that  it  grows  even  under  water,  hence  an  olive 
leaf  is  the  first  sign  of  life  from  the  earth  which  is  rising  again 
from  her  watery  grave.  The  dove  returned,  and  that  as  an 
evangelist ;  an  olive  leaf  and  an  olive  branch  have  since  been 
the  emblems  of  peace  and  salvation,  and  her  bringing  back  an 
olive  leaf,  2?.Sf  nyb,  has  perhaps  been  already  interpreted  by 
the  prophet  Zechariah,  xiv.  7,  as  an  eschatological  image. 
Sicut  circa  vesperam,  says  John  Gerhard,  columla  venit  cum 
raino  olivce  (so  the  Vulgate  translates)  ad  arcam :  sic  Spiritus 
Sanctus  circa  mundi  vesperam  doctrinam  evangdii  detulit  ad 
ecclesiam.  Third  trial  with  the  dove,  ver.  1 2  :  And  lie  waited 
yet  seven  other  days,  and  sent  forth  the  dove,  and  she  did  not 
continue  to  return  to  him  again.  The  form  3fW  is  the  impf. 
of  the  Niplud  bnfo,  Ezek.  xix.  5,  from  bn\  The  Kal  *]D;  is 
more  fitting  to  the  animal  than  the  Hiph.  pp?in,  10&,  which 
expresses  a  deliberate  voluntary  act.  The  dove  returns  no 
more.  This  too  is  good  news,  valleys  as  well  as  mountains 
are  now  free  from  water. 

Date  of  the  end  of  the  Flood  from  Q,  vv.  13  (13&  ex- 
cepted)  and  14:  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  six  hundred  and 
first  year,  in  the  first  month,  on  the  first  of  the  month,  the 
waters  were  dried  up  from  the  earth,  then  Noah  removed  the 
covering  of  the  ark  and  looked,  and,  behold,  the  face  of  the 
ground  was  dried.  And  in  the  second  month,  on  the  twenty- 
seventh  day  of  the  month,  the  earth  was  quite  dry.  The  verb  3}n 
here  means  dried,  K^J,  quite  dried  up :  the  latter  appears  as 
the  consequence  of  the  former,  Jer.  1.  38  and  Job  xiv.  11, 


GENESIS  VIII.  13,  14.  277 

with  the  borrowed  passage,  Isa.  xix.  5.  On  the  first  day  of 
the  first  month  the  earth  was  free  from  water,  and  on  the 
twenty-seventh  day  of  the  second  month  quite  dry.  The 
Flood  began  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  second  month, 
hence  a  full  year  and  ten  days  had  elapsed.  But  what  kind 
of  a  year  ?  An  actual  solar  year  of  365  days  (in  round 
numbers),  or  an  approximative  solar  year  of  360  days,  or  a 
lunar  year  of  354  days  (in  round  numbers)?  If  it  were  a 
lunar  year,  the  months  would  be  of  29  and  30  days  alter 
nately  ;  if  an  approximative  solar  year,  they  would  be  of  3  0 
days  throughout;  if  it  were  an  actual  solar  year,  the  compu 
tation  of  the  months  is  questionable,  but  the  case  is  the  same 
as  in  the  year  of  360  days;  some  way  of  reconciling  the 
amount  of  the  twelve  months  determined  by  the  phases  of 
the  moon  with  the  actual  solar  year  must  have  taken  place. 
These  questions,  and  many  more  (see  Ideler,  Chronol.  i.  479), 
are  susceptible  of  different  answers,  because  though  the  com 
mencement  and  termination  of  the  full  year  are  indeed  named 
(the  second  month  of  the  one  and  the  second  month  of  the 
next  year),  the  number  of  the  days  of  which  this  full  year 
consisted  is  not  stated ;  for,  leaving  out  of  account  the 
Jahvistic  numbers  40  +  7  +  7  +  7,  only  150  of  the  days  are 
expressly  enumerated.  From  a  harmonistic  standpoint  we 
may,  with  Silberschlag  (Chronologic  der  Wdt,  p.  11  sqq.), 
count  150  +  73  +  40  +  21  +  34  +  57  =  375  days,  and  thence 
conclude  that  the  year  of  the  Flood  was  an  actual  solar  year. 
This  was  already  the  view  of  the  Syrians,  e.g.  Ephrem.  But 
from  an  analytical  standpoint  we  have  to  deal  with  Q  with 
out  regard  to  the  numbers  of  J.  It  is  safest  to  start  from  the 
determining  meaning  of  the  150  days  (viii.  24)  =  5  months. 
The  beginning  and  ending  of  this  number  of  days  being 
expressly  stated,  vii.  11,  viii.  4,  150  will  be  no  merely  round 
number,  whence  it  results  that  the  year  of  the  Flood  was  an 
approximative  solar  year  of  360  days.  So  cjj.  des  Vignoles 
in  his  Chronologic  de  Vhistoire  saintc,  and  Court  de  Gebelin  in 
his  Monde  primitif.  The  ancient  Indian  (according  to  the 


278  GENESIS  vnr.  is,  u. 

Eigveda),  the  ancient  Persian  and  ancient  Egyptian  year  was 
such  a  year  of  360  days.  The  Parsi-Calendar  equalizes  it 
with  the  actual  solar  year  by  five  intercalary  days  at  the  end 
of  the  year,  and  an  intercalary  month  at  the  end  of  every 
1  24  years  (DMZ.  xxxvi.  59,  xxxiv.  710).  In  Egypt  too  the 
agreement  was  restored  by  five  supplementary  days  (ejrayo- 
fjLevai),  but  so  that  after  a  long  period  there  was  a  moveable 
year,  the  New-year's  day  (1  Thot)  of  which  did  not  again 
happen  on  the  same  day — July  20,  as  that  of  the  rising  of 
the  Sothis  or  day-star — till  after  a  period  of  1461  years.  In 
Babylon  also  computation  was  made  by  months  of  30  days: 
the  month  arlm  being  ideogrammatically  written  with  the 
number  30  in  the  middle.  Nothing  however  is  said  of  inter 
calary  days  (iTraryopevai),  but  we  are  told  of  an  intercalary 
month,  which  was  from  time  to  time  inserted  (comp.  Lotz, 
Historia  Sdbbati,  p.  38)  after  Adar  (Aduru\  or  also  after  Elul 
(Uliiln),  as  a  compensation,  whether  for  the  360  days  or  for 
the  354  of  the  lunar  year.  In  the  computation  of  the  year 
of  the  Flood  we  must  have  no  regard  to  such  intercalary  com 
pensation.  If  we  leave  out  of  consideration  the  identity  of 
150  days  with  5  months,  it  might  appear  as  a  lunar  year, 
raised  by  the  addition  of  10/11  days  to  a  solar  year 
(354-f-  11  =  365).  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  make  the  com 
putation  150  days  =  5  months  the  rule,  the  360  days  are 
increased  by  the  addition  of  10  to  the  indifferent  and  purely 
historical  number  370.  Ew.  Schrader,  Dillm.  see  in  the  150 
days  the  remnant  of  a  discrepant  tradition,  according  to  which 
the  Flood  lasted  150  +  150  =  4  x  75  days,  of  which  another 
trace  is  also  shown  in  the  date  of  the  first  stage  of  the  abate 
ment,  viz.  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  (the 
stranding)  and  the  first  day  of  the  tenth  month  (emergence  of 
the  mountain- tops),  which  seems  to  be  reckoned  as  a  period  of 
3  x  30  —  15  =  75  days. 


GENESIS  VIII.  15-10.  2*79 

THE  GOING  OUT  OF  THE  ARK,  XOAH'S  SACRIFICE,  AXD  THE 
PROMISE  OF  JAIIVEH,  VIII.  15  SQQ. 

Noah  having  landed  on  one  of  the  mountains  of  Ararat, 
receives  directions  to  leave  the  place  of  refuge,  vv.  15-17: 
Then  Elohim  spoke  to  Noah,  saying :  Go  forth  out  of  the  ark, 
thou  and  thy  wife  and  thy  sons  and  sons'  wives  with  thee. 
Ei'ery  living  thing  that  is  with  thee,  of  all  flesh  of  birds  and  of 
cattle  and  of  every  creeping  thing  that  crcepeth  upon  the  earth, 
bring  forth  with  thee  ;  and  they  may  swarm  upon  earth,  and  be 
fruitful  and  multiply  upon  the  earth.  $X  corresponds  with 
ns^i,  yi-  IS,  and  still  more  in  the  present  connection  with  K3, 
vii.  1.  How  extensive  is  the  notion  of  njn  has  been  already 
shown,  i.  24,  28,  30  ;  here  it  stands  first  as  a  general  term 
lor  the  animal  world.  The  prep,  a  is,  as  at  vii.  21,  ix.  2, 
x.  15,  16,  subdividing,  though  only  in  a  rhetorical,  not  a 
strictly  logical  manner.  At  the  close  it  is  said  xsin,  all  these 
animals  with  thee.  The  Chethiv  is  to  be  read  KVin,  like 
xix.  12  ;  the  Keri,  although  the  verb  in  Ethiopia  originally 
presents  1,  substitutes  for  reasons  unknown  to  us  N>*?n,  like  l^n 
for  "i^'in,  Ps.  v.  9,  comp.  the  similar  forms  with  audible  Jod, 
Prov.  iv.  25  ;  Hos.  vii.  12  ;  1  Chron.  xii.  2.  God  at  once 
renews  with  words  mighty  to  bless,  to  the  animals  who  are 
to  be  brought  out  of  the  ark,  their  creative  destination,  and 
then  the  exit  is  related  with  glad  fulness  of  words,  vv.  18,  19: 
Then  went  forth  Noah  and  his  sons  and  his  wife  and  his  sons 
wives  with  him.  Every  living  thing,  every  creeping  tiling,  and 
every  bird,  everything  that  movclh  upon  the  earth,  after  their 
families,  went  forth  out  of  the  ark.  Everything  in  vv.  17-19 
bears  the  mark  of  Q,  to  which  also  belongs  the  comprehensive 
ness  of  the  notions  of  both  wcr\  and  rpn.  His  classifications 
are  barely  translateable.  Instead  of  EHp.W,  i.  21,  he  here 
once  uses  the  more  select  and  solemn  DrwinBtpp^.  Ancient 
translators  have  no  feeling  for  this  change.  The  narrative 
goes  on  in  the  words  of  J.  The  Jahvist,  who  related  the 
sacrifices  of  the  first  pair  of  brothers,  here  tells  of  the  begin- 


280  GENESIS  VIII.  20-22. 

ning  of  post-diluvian  sacrifice,  ver.  20:  And  Noah  built  an 
altar  to  Jahveh,  and  took  of  all  clean  cattle  and  of  all  clean 
birds  and  offered  up  burnt  -  offerings  upon  the  altar.  This 
is  the  first  time  that  an  altar  is  mentioned  in  Holy 
Scripture,  and  that  the  offering  is  called  rfry ;  instead  of  fcOnn 
nru»,  iv.  3,  we  here  read  r6y  rhyr\  (from  rf?y,  to  be  consumed 
in  fire,  that  is,  to  be  reduced  to  ascending  vapour,  Judg. 
xx.  40;  Jer.  xxxviii.  35;  comp.  Amos  iv.  10).  The  altar, 
though  not  named  like  altaria  from  the  height,  but  as  a 
place  where  an  offering  was  slain,  is  to  be  thought  of  as  an 
elevated  place :  Ezekiel  calls  it  symbolically  ?*pj!?,  God's 
height,  as  the  sacrificial  hearth  /W~}$t  the  burning-place  of  God, 
from  mx,  to  burn  (see  Ges.  Lex.  10th  ed.).  The  Mesha  inscrip 
tion  has  for  it  btriN,  plur.  ^>&OX,  which  Smend-Socin  translates 
"  Altaraufsatz"  (place  of  fire  ?).  The  reason  why  the  sacrifice 
is  now  sent  up  upon  one  of  the  high  places  of  earth  in  flame 
and  vapour  towards  heaven  is,  as  Hofmann  has  shown,  that 
the  visible  presence  of  Jahveh  has  forsaken  the  world.  The 
look  of  one  who  prays  and  sacrifices  is  no  longer  directed 
towards  the  west,  where  the  cherubic  presence  of  God  marked 
the  place  of  the  lost  Paradise,  but  towards  heaven ;  there 
is  the  throne  of  Jahveh,  whence,  according  to  Ps.  xxix.  10, 
He  inflicted  the  judgment  of  the  Flood.1  The  clean  animals 
are  here  eatable,  though  all  were  not  so  according  to  subse 
quent  laws  concerning  food ;  nor  must  those  used  on  this 
occasion  be  limited  to  such  as  were,  according  to  later  laws, 
sacrificial.  Acceptance  of  Noah's  sacrifice,  vv.  21,  22:  And 
Jahveh  smelt  the  odour  of  pacification,  and  Jahveh  said  to  his 
heart:  I  will  not  proceed  to  inflict  again  a  curse  upon  the 
f/round  for  man's  sake  ;  for  the  imagination  of  the  human  heart 
is  evil  from  youth,  and  I  will  not  proceed  to  smite  again  every 
living  thing,  as  I  have  done.  During  all  the  days  of  the  earth, 
seed-time  and  harvest,  cold  and  heat,  summer  and  winter,  day 
and  night,  shall  not  cease.  What  is  called  in  Greek  /cvio-aa,  is 
in  the  Bible  called  odour  (scent)  of  pacification,  nrro,  after  the 

1  See  ray  essay,  "  Der  Blick  gen  Himmel,"  in  the  New  Christoterpe,  1882. 


GENESIS  VIII.  21,  22.  281 


formation  P~^,  from  nnfo,  to  pacify,  to  appease  wrath  and  turn  it 
to  favour.  In  the  cuneiform  account  of  the  Flood  the  parallel 
passage  runs  :  "  The  gods  sucked  in  the  scent,  the  gods  sucked 
in  the  well-  smelling  scent  (irisa  taba)\  the  gods  gathered  like 
flies  over  the  sacrificer."  The  scriptural  expression  also  is 
anthropomorphic,  but  more  worthy  of  God.  Jahveh  accepted 
with  favour  the  thankfulness  and  desires  of  the  rescued  mani 
fested  in  the  heavenward  streaming  sacrifices,  saying  to  His 
heart,  i.e.  (like  xxiv.  45,  comp.  xxvii.  41)  to  or  in  Himself 
(Targums,  FP'WDa),  that  He  was  graciously  resolved  never 
again  to  inflict  so  universal  a  judgment  upon  mankind.1 
Human  sinfulness  which  had  incurred  it,  vi.  5,  is  henceforth 
to  have  no  similar  consequence,  because  it  is  now  the  common 
inheritance  of  mankind,  and  decidedly  influences  the  individual 
even  before  his  entrance  upon  the  riper  age  of  fully  conscious 
self-determination,  —  a  time  of  patience,  d,vo%q,  is  now  to  begin, 
liom.  iii.  16,  God  taking  pleasure  in  the  desire  for  salvation 
manifested  in  the  sacrifice  of  those  who  had  been  preserved  from 
the  Flood.  "  All  the  days  of  the  earth,"  i.e.  during  the  whole 
further  course  of  time,  hence  to  the  end  of  earthly  history,  the 
regular  interchange  of  seasons  and  times  is  to  suffer  no  such 
interruption  as  had  taken  place  through  the  Flood.  The 
first  three  pairs  of  words,  i"^]  JHT,  Dhj  np,  *ph;  p.p.,  do  not 
signify,  as  Jewish  expositors  insist  (see  Eashi),  six  seasons  of 
two  months  each  (a  division  of  the  year  which  is  found  in  the 
Vedas),  but  divide  the  year  into  two  halves,  as  among  the 
ancient  Greeks  into  Qepos  and  ^eL/jicov,  in  Hesiod,  a/^ro?  and 
:  The  rainy  wintry  season,  *ph  with  its  cold  "ip  (Jer. 


1  According  to  Buckle  (art.  on  Gen.  iii.  17,  v.  29,  viii.  21,  in  Static's  Zdtsclir. 
1886,  p.  30sqq.),  it  is  J2  who  fashioned  viii.  21  after  iii.  17,  excluding  the 
history  of  Paradise  related  by  J\  and  replacing  his  history  of  the  Fall  by^iis 
own  history  of  the  Flood,  although  regarding  the  Flood  as  nolXnVIK  t>i?j? 
is  quite  inappropriate,  because  a  curse  always  implies  some  spiritual  power 
which  permanently  influences  the  nature  and  conditions  of  that  which  is 
affected.  It  is  however  an  exaggerated  acuteness  which  recognises  no  n^p 
in  the  decree  of  punishment,  vi.  13,  and  its  execution.  On  the  other  hand, 
Budde  is  in  the  right  when  he  says  that  Riehm  in  Stud.  u.  Kritil;  18S5,  p.  780, 
is  mistaken  in  referring  C|pK  fr6  back  to  iii.  17. 


282  GENESIS  IX.  1,  2. 

xxxvi.  22)  and  its  field  tillage,  Jnj  (or  tt^n,  Ex.  xxxiv.  21  ; 
Prov.  xx.  4),  made  possible  by  the  early  rain  (T"]?,  <*- MJ^  = 
n"}i\  Neh.  vii.  24  ;  Ezra  ii.  18),  and  the  dry  season  of  summer, 

jJ  from  kli',  to  be  burning  hot),  with  its  heat,  Dh  (Isa. 


xviii.  4),  and  its  harvest,  "^i?  (Jer.  viii.  20).  The  year  is 
halved,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxiv.  17  ;  Amos  iii.  15  ;  Zech.  xiv.  8.  The 
LXX.  translates  spm,  KOI  eap ;  *ph  means  indeed  the  first  half 
of  the  agricultural  year  (see  on  Job  xxix.  4),  on  which  account 
the  notion  of  the  premature  is  combined  with  it  (Talm.  tpn, 
opposed  to  bas,  to  be  late),  but  spring  is  called  ^?K  (comp. 
Himyar.  fpn,  harvest,  Km,  spring,  DMZ.  xxx.  324).  The  fourth 
pair  promises  the  regular  succession  of  day  and  night,  for  this 
too  had  been  disturbed  during  the  Flood,  the  earth  being 
enveloped  in  cloudy  darkness.  The  order  of  nature  thus 
ratified  anew  is  a  subject  of  praise  for  prophecy  and  lyric 
poetry,  Jer.  xxxi.  35  sq.,  xxxiii.  20,  25  sq. ;  Ps.  Ixxxiv. 
16  sq.  The  double  ^DS  SO  has,  according  to  Isa.  liv.  9,  the 
force  of  an  oath. 

THE  FOUNDATION  OF  A  NEW  ORDER  OF  THINGS,  IX.  1-7. 

Natural  relations  being  now  secured  by  promise  against 
such  a  catastrophe  as  that  experienced  by  means  of  the 
Flood,  new  physical,  ethical  and  judicial  foundations  are 
given  to  human  life.  The  fundamental  conditions  of  the 
increase  and  preservation  of  the  human  race  are  however 
first  renewed,  and  first  of  all  the  creative  blessing  of  propaga 
tion,  ix.  1  :  And  Elohim  Messed  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  said 
unto  them :  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  fill  the  earth. 
A  repetition  of  i.  28.  Next,  man's  vocation  of  power  over 
the  animals  is  renewed  :  And  let  the  fear  of  you  and  the 
terror  of  you  go  forth  upon  every  least  of  the  earth  and  every 
foid  of  heaven,  of  all  that  moves  on  the  (/round  and  of  all  fish 
of  the  sea ;  to  your  hand  they  are  given.  The  suffixes  of 
Djpnrn  D3S^D  are  obj. :  fear  and  terror  before  you  (comp.  xvi.  5, 


GENESIS  IX.  3,  4.  283 


xxvii.  13,  1.  4;  Mai.  i.  6),  0??n  from  nn,  Job  xli.  25  (comp. 
the  comparative  form,  Eccles.  xii.  5),  with  i  instead  of  a  in  a 
doubly  closed  syllable.  The  dominion  of  man  over  the 
animals  has  no  longer  its  original  and  inoffensive  character, 
i.  28,  ii.  19  sq.  :  he  must  now  bring  them  into  subjection  by 
exerting  himself  to  make  them  serviceable.  Budde  takes  the  2 
of  i>33  as  that  which  is  usual  after  notions  of  dominion,  it  is  how 
ever  the  specifying  3,  see  on  vii.  21  ;  the  remaining  animals 
are  ranged  under  the  two  main  divisions  of  the  animal 
world  rvn  and  tpy,  the  language  disregarding  the  actual  state 
of  circumstances.  All  are  given  into  the  hand  of  man,  who 
is  to  have  and  to  maintain  the  upper  hand  in  the  now  un 
avoidable  conflict.  And  because  the  Paradisaic  fertility  of 
the  earth  and  the  childlike  inoffensiveness  of  the  former  quiet 
life  have  now  ceased,  the  eating  of  flesh  is  also  permitted, 
ver.  3  :  Ecery  moving  thing  that  liveth,  let  it  be  to  you  for  food, 
as  the  green  herb  I  have  given  you  all.  Certainly  men  had 
already  eaten  not  merely  vegetable  food  and  milk,  but  flesh 
also  ;  this  they  had  done  however  arbitrarily,  they  are  now 
authorized  to  do  it  by  Divine  announcement,  ob  refers  back 
to  the  original  authorization,!.  29.  On  WJ  and  ^3"HS  (every 
thing  whatever),  see  there  also.  On  riror  herbce,  see  on  i.  30. 
The  ^]K  which  follows  (originally  affirmative,  then  frequently,  as 
at  vii.  23,  restrictive,  sometimes  also,  as  here,  comp.  Lev.  xi.  4, 
Ps.  Ixviii.  7,  Zech.  i.  6,  exceptive  or  contrastive,  as  more 
frequently  pN)  introduces  a  limitation  of  that  participation 
of  flesh  which  is  now  permitted,  ver.  4  :  But  flesh  in  its  life, 
its  blood,  shall  ye  not  eat.  The  3  is  the  Beth  of  association, 
and  ten  is  in  apposition  to  te'333.  Flesh  while  combined  with 
its  life,  i.e.  its  blood,  is  still  forbidden,  according  to  the  word 
ing  of  the  prohibition  the  flesh  of  a  still  living  unslaughtered 
and  consequently  a  not  yet  bloodless  animal  (viz.  pieces  cut 
off,  *nn~p?  iris,  according  to  the  synagogal  expression),  as  the 
Abyssinians  e.g.  will  under  circumstances  cut  out  a  piece  from 
the  hind  quarter  of  the  cow  they  are  driving,  and  esteem  fresh 
raw  flesh  with  the  muscular  contortions  still  visible  as  the 


284  GENESIS  IX.  4. 

greatest  of  dainties  (com p.  the  article  "  Abessinische  Bcafsteaks 
aus  lebenden  Ochsen  geschnitten,"  in  Ausland,  1868,  p. 
406  sq.).  Every  partaking  of  blood,  and  therefore  of  the  still 
bleeding  flesh  of  a  slaughtered  animal,  is  however  at  the  same 
time  forbidden,1  for  the  reason  IDI  itPBDl  gives  the  command, 
of  universal  application  to  every  kind  of  eating  with  the  blood  : 
flesh  in  which  there  is  still  blood  is  not  to  be  eaten,  because 
the  blood  is  the  life,  Deut.  xii.  23,  or,  as  may  be  also  said, 
because  the  life  of  all  flesh  is  the  blood,  Lev.  xvii.  14,  or  more 
accurately,  is  in  the  blood,  Lev.  xvii.  11.  Blood  and  life 
are  one,  inasmuch  as  they  are  in  one  another  in  a  relation  of 
intercalation ;  the  blood  is  not  the  same  as  the  life,  but  it  is 
before  all  other  constituents  of  the  animal  corporeality  the 
manifestation,  material  and  vehicle  of  that  life,  which  per 
vades,  fashions  and  continuously  regenerates  the  corporeality. 
This  relation  of  the  life  to  the  blood,  a  far  more  direct  one 
than  to  the  flesh  (for  the  blood  is  the  medium  of  life  to  the 
latter),  is  indicated  by  the  juxtaposition  of  it?aj  and  icn,  which 
at  the  same  time  suggests  the  reason  for  this  prohibition  of 
the  blood,  viz.  a  sacred  reverence  for  that  principle  of  life 
flowing  in  the  blood,  which  even  as  that  of  the  animal  is 
derived  from  God,  who  bestows  a  participation  in  His  all- 
animating  life.  This  respect,  which  is  due  to  the  life  of 
even  a  beast,  and  not  the  prevention  of  a  brutalization  of 
human  life,  which  might  be  feared  by  its  too  near  contact 
with  brute  life,  is  the  ground  of  the  prohibition.  For  the 
latter  motive  finds  no  expression  in  the  Old  Testament,  and 
is  in  contradiction  with  the  use  of  animal  blood  in  Divine 
worship.  This  prohibition  of  blood  is  repeated  seven  times 
in  the  Mosaic  legislation  besides  Lev.  xix.  26,  viz.  Lev. 
iii.  17,  vii.  25-27,  xvii.  10-14,  Deut.  xii.  16,  23,  24, 
xv.  23,  and  gives  as  a  further  reason,  Lev.  xvii.  11,  that  the 
blood  is  an  atonement,  ^'233,  by  reason  of  the  life  that  is  in 

1  Jewish  tradition  does  not  hold  this  view  :  it  enumerates  seven  Noachian 
commandments,  of  which  six  had  been  binding  from  Adam  onwards.  After 
the  Flood  the  prohibition  of  the  membrum  de  vivo  was  added  ;  see  Gust.  Marx, 
Totung  Unglaulnger  nach  talm.  ralb.  Reclit  (1885),  pp.  28-30. 


GENESIS  IX.  5.  285 

it.  This  motive  for  the  prohibition  fell  away  with  the  types 
and  shadows  of  the  law  of  sacrifice,  but  the  other  continues, 
though  it  is  not  binding  with  the  legal  force  of  the  Old 
Testament.  In  the  four  apostolical  prohibitions,  Acts  xv.  20, 
29,  xxi.  25  (comp.  Const,  apost.  vi.  13),  that  of  blood  is 
split  in  two,  both  the  blood  of  slaughtered  animals  and  every 
thing  strangled,  and  therefore  its  blood  not  shed  (n?"!9  and 
nf>33)  being  in  conformity  with  the  Mosaic  law  forbidden. 
With  ?]K1  a  second  exception  appears  beside  the  ^  of  4a. 
The  killing  of  beasts  for  food  is  freely  granted,  yet  blood  is  to 
be  avoided,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  life  of  man  is  inviol 
able,  ver.  5  :  And  yet  your  Hood  according  to  each  of  your  souh 
will  I  require,  from  the  hand  of  every  least  will  I  require  it,  and 
from  the  hand  of  man,  from  the  hand  of  every  ones  brother  will 

1  require  the  life  of  man.      If    the  b    of   D37lt$M7   were  dat. 
commodi,  like  Deut.  iv.  15  :  for  defence  to  your  souls  (Tucli, 
Kn.),  it  would  stand  after  &*?}$.     If  it  were  the  b  of  posses 
sion  (LXX.  Syr.  Jer.  and  most  interpreters),  we  should  expect 
DSWS^  "ii?;N.     And  if  a  pregnant  expression  of  "  your  blood, 
your  own  blood,"   were  intended   (Buckle),  D3WSJ  DT  would 
have    been    said.       It    best   corresponds   with    the   Elohistic 
diction  to  take  n  in  a  distributive  sense :  your  blood,  to  whose 
soever  life  it  may  belong.     The  verb  em  in   a  judicial  sense 
means :   to  require  again  from    any  one   something  which  he 
has  destroyed,  and  so  to   demand   compensation,  satisfaction 
for   it    (whence    exactly:    to    avenge,  Ps.  ix.   13  ;    2    Chron. 
xxiv.  22),  with  TO,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  G,  xxxiv.  10  (synon.  T&  W$z, 

2  Sam.  iv.  11;  WV  tm,  Deut.  xviii.  19),  comp.  W  of  animals, 
Ps.  xxii.  21.      God  will  avenge  the  death  of  man  (1)  on  the 
animal,  which  has  thus  broken  through  the  bounds  of  its  God- 
ordained  relation  to  man.    Man  naturally  extirpates  such  beasts 
as  are  dangerous  to  human  life,  the  destruction  of  every  animal 
guilty  of  the  death  of  a  man  here  receives  Divine  sanction  as 
a  judicial  procedure  (comp.  Ex.  xxi.   28  sq.).      (2)   God  will 
avenge   the    death    of  man    on    the    man,  who   has  thereby 
criminally  broken  the  brotherly  relation  existing  between  all 


286  GENESIS  IX.  6. 

men.  tt"S  is  followed  by  an  appositional  Vnx,  after  the  same 
fashion  as  xv.  10,  xli.  12,  xlii.  35  ;  Num.  xvii.  17.  The  noun 
standing  in  the  case  of  genitive  annexation  in  the  second  place 
stands  emphatically  first,  and  that  which  in  such  a  relation 
occupies  the  first  place  follows  with  a  suffix  referring  to  the 
word  before :  from  the  hand  of  every  man,  of  his  brother,  is 
the  same  as  from  the  hand  of  the  brother  of  every  man  ;  the 
same  state  of  things  occurs  Zech.  vii.  10.1  (Imagine  not  evil 
against  one  who  stands  in  brotherly  relation  to  any  of  you.) 
Transference  of  vengeance  on  the  murderer  to  men  themselves, 
ver.  6  :  Whoso  sheds  man's  Hood,  ~by  men  shall  his  Uood  be  shed: 
for  in  the  image  of  Eloliim  made  He  man.  We  have  here  the 
first  trace  of  the  appointment  of  a  magistracy  as  the  executor 
of  the  requirements  of  the  moral  government  of  the  world,  and 
hence  as  the  representative  of  God  (see  on  Ps.  Ixxxii.  6) ;  and 
it  is  very  important  to  note  that  as  in  the  Old  Testament  the 
rights  of  the  priesthood  are  in  the  first  place  the  attributes 
of  all  Israel,  and  as  in  the  New  Testament  the  rights  of  the 
spiritual  office  are  in  the  first  place  the  attributes  of  the 
entire  Church,  so  here  too  the  attributes  of  political  authority 
appear  in  the  first  place  as  the  attributes  of  mankind ;  nnxn 
(found  non-Hebraic  by  over-hasty  criticism)  means  through 
men,  as  elsewhere  also  the  personal  causa  efficiens  is  expressed 
by  the  passive  with  3,  Num.  xxxvi.  2;  Job  xxvii.  15;  Ho?. 
xiv.  4  ;  comp.  ib.  i.  7.  Men  themselves  are  thus  placed, 
as  a  holy  Yehm,  against  deeds  of  bloody  violence,  so  far  as 
these  come  to  their  knowledge  and  not  merely  to  the  know 
ledge  of  the  Omniscient.  As  punishment  by  death  is  not  here 
transferred  to  the  nearest  relative  of  a  murdered  man  as  ?N3 
Q^n,  Num.  xxxv.  19  (for  vns  t^tf  does  not  mean  a  man  his 
brother  =  his  relative),  it  is  not  the  so-called  blood-vengeance 
which  is  here  instituted,  though  this,  especially  within  the 
rules  and  limits  sanctioned  by  the  Mosaic  law,  has  its  legal 
title  in  this  Noachian  command.  The  form  in  which  the 

1  Comp.    the   investigation   of  this  mode   of   speech   in   Budde,    Urgesch. 

283-289. 


GENESIS  IX.  7-11.  287 

punishment  is  to  be  carried  out  is  as  yet  left  undefined  by 
the  command,  which  merely  places  it  generally  in  the  hand 
of  men  and  requires  it  from  them,  without  allowing  of  a 
money  fine,  as  compensation.  The  murderer  is  to  suffer  that 
which  he  has  inflicted  ;  for  murder  is  not  only  the  extreme 
of  unbrotherliness,  but  also  a  crime  against  the  inviolable 
majesty  of  the  Divine  image,  which  even  after  the  Fall  is 
fundamentally  the  character  indelelilis  of  mankind  and  of  each 
individual.  In  the  sentence  which  gives  the  reason,  6&,  the 
main  notion  is  genitive  by  attraction,  like  xiv.  1  sq. ;  Ps.  Ixv. 
12,  Ixxxv.  14;  comp.  on  the  other  hand,  Hos.  i.  2.  R.  Akiba 
in  Abotli  iii.  14  takes  D^SU  by  itself:  in  the  image  Elohirn 
made  man.  Conclusion  of  the  Noachian  Thorah,  v.  7:  And 
you,  be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  swarm  upon  earth,  and  multiply 
upon  it.  The  foundations  of  the  new  beginning  of  history 
being  now  laid,  the  Divine  blessing  with  which  the  whole 
is  rounded  off  is  repeated. 

THE  TOKEN  OF  THE  COVENANT  IN  THE  CLOUDS,  IX.  8-17. 

The  Elohistic  passage,  ix.  1-7,  is  here  continued  without 
interruption  in  a  second  Elohistic  passage,  beginning  with  "OKI, 
which  corresponds  with  the  E^l  of  7«.  The  covenant-promise 
and  covenant-pledge  of  God  accompany  the  precepts  to  the 
newly  blessed  human  race.  Elohiin  will  establish  His  covenant 
with  mankind  whom  He  has  preserved,  and  with  the  animal 
world,  vv.  8-1 1 :  And  Elohim  spake  to  Noah,  and  to  his  sons  with, 
him,  saying:  And  I,  "behold,  I  establish  my  covenant  with  you,  and 
with  your  seed  after  you  ;  and  with  every  living  soul  that  is  with 
you,  of  fowl,  of  cattle,  and  of  every  least  of  the  earth  with  you, 
of  all  that  go  out  of  the  ark,  according  to  every  least  (je  nacli 
allem  Getier)  of  the  earth.  And  1  will  establish  my  covenant 
with  you,  and  all  flesh  shall  not  le  any  more  cut  off  ly  the 
waters  of  the  flood,  and  there  shall  not  le  any  more  a  flood  to 
destroy  the  earth.  In  vi.  18  the  establishment  of  the  covenant 
was  valid  for  the  preservation  of  life  in  the  midst  of  the 


288  GENESIS  IX.  12-16. 

Flood,  here  for  the  prosperous  continuance  of  the  preserved 
races  of  men  and  animals.  On  ""jun  \JNI_  (with  a  particip. 
following  as  an  expression  of  the  fut.  instans},  see  vi.  17.  The 
covenant  relation,  of  which  Paul  preached  at  Lystra,  includes 
the  animal  world  also,  which  sympathetically  shares  in  the  joy 
and  sorrow  of  man,  who  is,  as  it  were,  the  heart  of  the  world. 
In  ver.  10  the  classifying  prepositions  are  again  heaped  up 
(which  alone  is  a  certain  sign  of  Q)  in  an  almost  untranslateable 
manner :  first  3,  of  the  parts  of  which  the  whole  consists,  then 
p,  of  the  genus  ex  quo,  i.e.  of  the  general  under  which  the 
particular  is  summed  up,  and  thereupon  ?  of  the  whole  notion, 
according  to  which  the  particular  comprehended  therein  is 
determined  (comp.  ver.  5,  xxiii.  10  ;  Ex.  xxvii.  3,  19  ;  Ezek 
xliv.  9  ;  Ezra  i.  5).  No  animated  being  living  in  a  body  of 
flesh,  neither  man  nor  animal,  shall  henceforth  be  cut  off  ^p 
ten,  by  the  water  of  the  (recurring)  Flood.  The  LXX. 
rightly  translate  the  p  by  airo,  for  with  the  passive  it  does 
not  designate  the  subject,  as  VTTO  does,  as  self-active,  but  as 
that  from  which  the  action  proceeds  (comp.  Obad.  ver.  9,  ?gj30 
in  consequence  of  the  slaughter,  but  also  Ps.  xxxvii.  23,  '."!£' 
from  Jahveh) ;  in  the  Latin  ab  (from  avro)  the  distinction  is 
given  up,  nor  is  it  carefully  observed  in  the  more  recent  style  of 
the  Semitic  languages.  The  token  of  the  covenant,  vv.  12-16  : 
And  Eloldm  said  :  This  is  the  token  of  the  covenant  wliicli  I 
am  about  to  make  between  me  and  you  and  every  living  creature 
which  is  with  you,  to  eternal  generations.  My  low  have  I  set  in 
the  cloud,  and  it  shall  serve  for  a  token  of  the  covenant  betiveen 
me  and  the  earth.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  I  briny  a 
cloud  upon  the  earth,  the  low  shall  le  seen  in  the  cloud.  And 
I  will  remember  my  covenant,  which  is  between  me  and  you  and 
every  living  soul  of  all  flesh,  and  the  waters  shall  not  henceforth 
become  a  flood  to  destroy  all  flesh.  And  the  bow  shall  be  in  the 
cloud,  and  I  will  look  upon  it,  to  remember  an  eternal  covenant 
between  Mohim  and  every  living  soul  of  all  flesh  which  is  upon 
the  earth.  With  riNf  God  points  to  the  rainbow  which  was 
then  visible  or  just  becoming  so  (comp.  on  Job  xxxvii.  1). 


GENESIS  IX.  17.  289 

A  sign,  especially  such  an  one  as  becomes  a  sensible  pledge 
of  what  is  invisible  or  future,  is  called  nix  =  aiuajat, djat  (tJ\}> 
from  mx,  to  mark,  Num.  xxxiv.  10.  What  follows,  |nb  'J&pB>K, 
shows  that  n^x  must  be  referred  to  the  covenant,  not  to  the 
token  (comp.  xvii.  2) ;  D?ty  flVl  is  a  period  of  time  extending 
over  generation  after  generation  into  the  immeasurable.  The 
bow  is  called  ntPp,  with  a  feminine  termination,  as  the  Arab. 
kaiis  shows  (from  (jwljs,  fut.  o.,  to  bend,  to  curve),  and  the 
cloud  in  which  God  sets  the  bow  C^nj,  of  the  just  now 
fundamentally  accomplished  fact)  is  called  Jjy,  as  that  which 
meets  the  eye  of  him  who  looks  up  (comp.  ancient  Arab,  'anan, 
object,  and  njy,  to  reply),  from  which  |3y,  14a,  is  denominated 
ve(f)e\as  dyelpeiv.  The  apodosis  begins  with  nnx-ipl,  14&,  and 
is  continued  in  ^"pjl.  "|3PJ  166,  defines  the  purpose:  God 
will  see  the  bow,  an  intentional  looking  is  meant,  that 
He  may  remember  the  eternal  covenant  between  God  and 
earthly  beings,  viz.  those  remaining  after  the  Flood.  This 
passage  is  rounded  off  in  ver.  17,  just  as  the  former  one  was  in 
ver.  7  :  And  Elohim  said  unto  Noah :  This  is  the  token  of  the 
covenant,  which  I  have  established  between  me  and  all  flesh  which 
is  upon  the  earth.  "^5~?3  is  here  repeated  for  the  twelfth,  or 
including  "iparrte,  vii.  15,  for  the  thirteenth  time  since  vi.  12, 
and  always  in  Q.  "  The  bow  that  is  in  the  cloud  in  the  day 
of  rain"  is  mentioned  again  within  the  Old  Testament  only 
at  Ezek.  i.  28  (comp.  Apoc.  iv.  3,  x.  1).  It  is  beautifully 
described,  Ecclus.  xliii.  12,  comp.  1.  7.  It  is  indeed  a 
phenomenon  that  may  be  accounted  for  by  natural  laws ; 
but  the  laws  of  nature  are  truly  the  appointment  of  God, 
Ecclus.  xliii.  11  sq.,  and  it  is  just  in  its  conformity  to  natural 
law  that  the  rainbow  is  a  pledge  that  the  order  of  nature 
shall  continue.  And  is  there  not  to  every  law  of  nature  a 
background  pointing  to  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  nature 
and  will  ?  The  label  of  the  rainbow  is  sufficiently  legible. 
Shining  upon  a  dark  ground  which  just  before  broke  forth  in 
lightning,  it  represents  the  victory  of  the  light  of  love  over 
the  fiery  darkness  of  wrath.  Originating  from  the  effect  of 

T 


290  GENESIS  IX.  18. 

the  sun  upon  a  dark  cloud,  it  typifies  the  willingness  of  the 
heavenly  to  pervade  the  earthly.  Stretched  between  heaven 
and  earth,  it  is  as  a  bond  of  peace  between  both,  and,  spanning 
the  horizon,  it  points  to  the  all-embracing  universality  of  the 
Divine  mercy.  Involuntarily  —  says  Tuch  —  the  idea  0f 
the  interposition  of  the  two  worlds  attaches  itself  to  the 
coloured  bow  resting  at  both  ends  firmly  on  the  earth. 

NOAH'S  BLESSING  AND  CURSE,  WITH  THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THE 
TOLEDOTH,  IX.  18-27. 

The  two  Elohistic  sections  of  legal  tenor,  ix.  1-7,  8-17, 
are  now  followed  by  a  Jahvistic  section  of  prophetic  tenor, 
ix.  18-27.  The  time  immediately  succeeding  the  Flood  is, 
like  that  immediately  succeeding  the  Creation,  a  time  of 
decision  entailing  momentous  results.  Then  was  decided  the 
fate  of  mankind,  now  the  fate  of  nations ;  and  both,  as  is  else 
where  the  case  in  primitive  times,  by  apparently  trivial  and 
commonplace  occurrences.  Hitherto  J,  so  far  as  his  history 
of  Noah  and  the  Flood  has  come  down  to  us,  has  not  men 
tioned  the  sons  of  Noah  by  name.  Hence  we  need  be  the 
less  astonished  at  the  repetition,  18a:  And  the  sons  of 
Noah,  who  went  forth  out  of  the  ark,  were  Shem,  Ham  and 
Jcpheth.  The  three  are  named  in  the  same  order,  v.  32,  and 
farther  on ;  this  does  not  correspond  with  their  succession  in 
age,  for  Shem  is,  according  to  x.  21  (see  there),  the  eldest, 
and  Ham,  according  to  the  narrative  here  following,  the 
youngest.  Ed.  Konig  in  his  Latin  dissertations  on  the 
linguistic  proof  of  Biblical  Criticism,  1879,  p.  20,  finds  the 
reason  for  the  transposition  to  be,  that  Ham  stood  in  closer 
relation  than  Japheth  to  the  first-born ;  but  perhaps  Japheth 
stands  last  only  because  his  name  formed  a  more  rhythmical 
conclusion  to  the  triumvirate  which  had  become  proverbial. 
At  185  it  is  remarked  in  preparation  for  the  intelligibility  of 
what  follows  :  And  Ham  is  the  father  of  Canaan.  This  is 
now  mostly  regarded  as  an  addition  of  the  redactor,  the 


GENESIS  IX.  19.  291 

inference  being  drawn  from  the  fact  of  the  curse  falling  upon 
Canaan,  that  in  the  original  version  of  the  narrative  it  was 
Canaan  who  transgressed  against  Noah  (Dillm.  and  others). 
Some  go  farther,  and  maintain  that,  according  to  the  original 
wording,  not  Shern,  Ham  and  Japheth,  but  Shem,  Japheth  and 
Canaan  were  the  three  sons  of  Noah  (Wellh.) ;  whence  Budde, 
by  means  of  critical  operations  which  go  beyond  our  horizon, 
obtains  the  result,  that  the  narrative  here  following  stood 
originally  after  xi.  9,  and  began  :  "  And  there  went  out  also  from 
Babel,  Noah  the  son  of  Jabal,  he,  and  his  wife,  and  his  three 
sons,  Shem,  Japheth  and  Canaan,  and  he  went  to  the  Syrian 
Mesopotamia,  and  remained  there."  Thus — he  thinks — wrote 
J1,  who,  as  Wellh.  and  Kuen.  also  assume,  knew  nothing  of  a 
flood.  We  see  here  a  specimen  of  what  analysis,  competitively 
carried  out,  can  effect.  On  the  other  hand  the  suspicion  is 
suggested,  that  R,  when  assigning  its  present  position  to  the 
narrative,  made  Ham  the  transgressor  instead  of  Canaan,  for 
the  sake  of  placing  the  narrative  in  still  more  varied  relation 
to  the  genealogy  of  the  nations  which  follows.  This  sus 
picion  is  however  without  justification :  the  relation  of  the 
narrative  to  ch.  x.  is,  even  if  Canaan  were  the  offender,  close 
enough,  and  such  distortion  of  the  tradition  would  be  purely 
arbitrary.  Besides,  we  cannot  imagine  E  so  thoughtless  as  not 
to  have  taken  into  account  the  reason  why  Noah,  because  of 
the  offender  Ham,  inflicted  a  curse  on  Canaan  his  son.  What 
is  related  happened  a  considerable  time  after  the  Flood,  and 
affords  no  superficial  view  of  the  moral  state  of  that  tripartite 
world  of  nations  which  descended  from  the  three  sons  of  Noah  ; 
for,  as  ver.  19  says  :  These  three  are  the  sons  of  Noah  ;  and  from 
these  was  dispersed  the  whole  earth,  i.e.  the  whole  population  of 
the  earth,  like  x.  25,  xi.  1,  and  as  elsewhere,  e.g.  Judg.  xviii.  30, 
the  population  of  the  country.  The  formation  nyaj  is  lightened 
from  nyw,  as  rcaj  is  from  WS3,  Isa.  xxxiii.  3,  a  metaplastic 
formation  from  psa=pa  (Kal,  xi.  4,  Niph.  x.  18,  Hiph.  xi.  9), 
not  from  paa,  for  T?J  also,  1  Sam.  xiii.  11,  is  the  Niph.  of 
pfB,  Ges.  §  67,  note  11.  External  occasion  of  the  decisive 


292  GENESIS  IX.  20,  21. 

occurrence,  ver.  20  :  And  Noah  the  husbandman  began  and 
planted  a  vineyard.  Hengst.  Kn.  Tuch  (comp.  Hitz.  on  Ps. 
cxiii.  9)  translate :  Noah  began  to  be  a  husbandman  (an 
agriculturist),  which  is  incorrect  as  to  matter,  since  it  is  not  the 
cultivation  of  the  field,  but  that  of  the  vine,  which  is  spoken  of 
as  a  novelty ;  Ew.  compares  1  Sam.  iii.  2  (comp.  also  the 
subsequent  usual  expression  D^nrnip  ^CT^,  they  began  to  be 
angry).  But  though  ?nn  with  a  predicate  following  (without 
Wr6)  is  possible,  yet  this  explanation  is  already  doubtful, 
because  only  in  rare  instances  of  the  st.  constr.  does  the  defini 
tion  by  the  article  attach  exclusively  to  the  second  member 
of  the  phrase,  xvi.  7,  xlviii.  19  ;  Judg.  xiii.  6  ;  2  Sam.  xii.  30  ; 
Ps.  cxiii.  9.  Hence  we  have  to  take  together  VB»I  .  .  .  prw, 
which  is  the  same  as  $M?  ^rP1f  Ges.  §  142.  3.  According  to 
this  narrative  the  cultivation  of  the  vine  comes  from  Armenia  j1 
and  truly  this  and  the  whole  of  the  eastern  part  of  Pontus  is 
the  native  place  of  the  vine,  for  which,  in  regard  of  its  stem 
and  curling  tendrils,  there  could  be  no  name  more  graphic 
than  j?f!,  from  VB!i=ED,  to  curve,  while  &"]3,  on  the  other 
hand,  means  in  itself  only  the  hill  and  then  the  vine  hill, 
vineyard  (see  on  Isa.  v.  1).  Tradition  designates  the  hill 
in  the  north-west,  which  leans  on  Great  Ararat  and  facili 
tates  its  ascent,  as  the  place  of  Noah's  vine  planting. 
Egyptian  mythology  refers  the  cultivation  of  the  vine  to 
Osiris,  Greek  to  Dionysos,  Persian  to  Dshemshid ;  the 
statement  of  the  Jahvist,  in  which  is  continued  the  series  of 
the  beginnings  of  civilisation  given  in  ch.  iv.,  is  of  a  purely 
historical  nature.  Noah's  transgression,  ver.  21  :  And  he 
drank  of  the  wine,  and  was  drunk,  and  uncovered  himself 
in  the  midst  of  his  tent.  Wine,  which  was  subsequently  used 
for  the  purpose  of  public  worship,  had  as  wall  as  other 
inventions  a  beginning  defiled  with  sin.  He  who  kept  his 
ground  against  the  waters  of  the  great  Flood  succumbs  to 

1  The  village  Arguri  (i.e.  plantatio  vitis,  from  uri,  the  vine  plant),  destroyed 
1840  by  an  eruption  of  Ararat,  commonly  pronounced  Agurri,  stood  upon  the 
spot  stated  by  tradition  to  be  that  of  the  Noachian  D"G- 


GENESIS  IX.  22-24.  293 

wine.  He  lies  half-naked,  not  indeed  outside  of,  but  within 
his  tent  (n^"}^,  another  writing,  as  at  xii.  8,  xiii.  3,  xxxv.  21, 
for  itaff).  The  insulting  behaviour  of  Ham,  ver.  22  :  And 
Ham,  the  father  of  Canaan,  saw  the  nakedness  of  his  father 
and  told  it  to  his  two  brothers  without.  He  not  only  looks  in 
without  instantly  drawing  back,  but  tries  without  delicacy 
and  without  the  piety  due  to  his  father,  to  induce  others  to 
join  in  his  scornful  merriment.  It  is  a  carnal  and  animal 
feeling  which  is  here  manifested,  similar  to  that  upon  which 
a  woe  is  pronounced  by  Habakkuk,  ch.  ii.  15.  Contrary 
behaviour  of  Japheth  and  Shem,  ver.  23  :  And  Shem  and 
Jepheth  took  the  upper  garment,  and  laid  it  upon  loth  their 
shoulders  and  went  backwards  and  covered  the  nakedness  of 
their  father,  and  their  faces  were  backwards,  and  they  did  not 
see  the  nakedness  of  their  father.  nj5»1  is  purposely  said,  and 
not  *nj?>!  :  Shem  was  the  chief  personage,  as  Noah  was  at 
vii.  7,  and  the  impulse  and  direction  proceeded  from  him. 
But  Japheth  was  in  accordance  with  him;  the  narrative 
emphasizes  as  strongly  as  possible  the  common  act  of  the 
two  brothers,  in  which  reverence,  modesty  and  wisdom  vied 
with  each  other  in  putting  an  end  to  the  scandal.  *""$?  is 
the  upper  garment  which  the  father  had  thrown  off  instead 
of  using  it  for  a  covering,  Ex.  xxii.  26  ;  Deut.  xxiv.  13  (n9:<^). 
D3^  forms  no  plural.  n^T1*?  js  a  ii^e  formation  with 
^THP,  Mai.  iii.  14.  Noah's  recovery  from  intoxication, 
ver.  24  :  And  Noah  awaked  from  his  wine,  and  knew  what  his 
youngest  son  had  done  to  him.  The  accented  a  of  Y\?\  (impf. 
of  pp11)  is  shortened  in  fi?.^  into  an  unaccented  £  Wine  is 
here  equivalent  to  the  effect  of  wine  taken  =  drunkenness,  as 
1  Sam.  i.  14,  xxv.  37.  |Bj3n  foa  (not  fbjsn,  because  |t?ij  is  the 
usual  form  with  separative  accents,  and  especially  with  pausal 
ones)  means,  according  to  1  Sam.  xvii.  14,  xvi.  11,  his 
youngest  son,  for  it  is  a  fallacy  to  assert  that  it  is  the 
"  unanswerable  "  result  of  the  succession,  Japheth,  Ham  and 
Shem  in  ch.  x.,  that  Ham  is  the  middle  of  the  three,  because, 
as  Dillra.  himself  states  in  the  introduction  to  ch.  x.,  this 


294  GENESIS  IX.  25. 

order  was  required  by  the  method  adopted  in  Genesis  of  pro 
ceeding  from  the  most  remote  to  the  nearer  and  nearest.  When 
two  are  spoken  of,  fDpn  (rutopn)  may  be  just  as  well  translated 
the  younger  as  the  youngest,  xxvii.  15,  xxix.  16,  18,  comp. 
i.  1 6  ;  but  where  several  are  spoken  of,  it  means  the  minor 
natu  in  relation  to  all  the  rest.  If  this  is  correct,  and  if  we 
may  take  x.  6,  where  Canaan  appears  as  the  youngest  son 
of  Ham,  as  an  illustration,  the  sin  committed  against  his 
venerable  and  grey-headed  father  by  Noah's  youngest  son 
was  visited  upon  the  youngest  son  of  the  latter.  It  is 
however  questionable  whether  the  descendants  of  Ham  are 
there  mentioned  according  to  their  ages ;  moreover  the 
genealogy  in  ch.  x.  is  one  not  of  families  but  of  nations. 
It  is  sufficient  for  the  law  of  retribution  that  Canaan  was  a 
son  of  Ham,  and  that  according  to  the  glance  into  the  future 
which  was  granted  to  Noah,  the  low  and  mean  disposition 
which  Ham,  in  contradistinction  to  his  two  brothers,  mani 
fested  towards  his  father,  was  visited  in  the  relation  of  his 
son  to  the  descendants  of  his  brother,  ver.  25  :  And  Tie  said, 
Cursed  be  Canaan,  a  servant  of  servants  shall  he  be  to  his 
brethren,  i.e.  the  most  conspicuous  and  lowest  of  servants 
(comp.  "prince  of  princes,"  Num.  iii.  32),  deeply  humbled  in 
conformity  with  his  ominous  name  (comp.  y^D,  Judg.  iv.  23  ; 
Deut.  ix.  3  ;  Neh.  ix.  24).  With  regard  to  the  fulfilment,  he 
became  the  servant  of  Shem  when  Israel  extirpated  some  of 
the  Phoenicians  of  the  interior  and  subdued  others,  and  sub 
jected  them  to  the  lowest  menial  services,  Josh.  ix.  23, 
1  Kings  ix.  20  sq.;  and  the  servant  of  Japheth,  when  the 
Greeks  and  Komans  overthrew  Tyre  and  Carthage,  after  the 
Phoenician  coast  and  colonial  power  had  already  been  broken 
by  the  Assyrians,  Chaldseans  and  Persians.  Hannibal  came 
to  feel  this  curse  when  he  beheld  the  head  of  Asdrubal 
thrown  over  the  Punic  intrenchments  by  the  Eomans,  and 
exclaimed  :  Agnosco  fortunam  Carthaginis.  The  third  Punic 
War  (149-146)  ended  in  the  total  demolition  of  Carthage 
and  the  infliction  of  the  curse  upon  its  site.  In  439  it 


GENESIS  IX.  26,  -27.  295 

became  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Vandals,  and  the 
Phoenician  people  utterly  disappeared  from  the  roll  of  nations. 
The  curse  did  not  however  fall  upon  Ham  in  all  his  posterity, 
and  thus  afford  a  semblance  of  right  to  the  pro  -  slavery 
advocates.  It  did  not  fall  e.g.  upon  Mizraim,  a  land  ex 
tremely  prosperous  for  a  thousand  years  and  a  model  of 
Hamitic  civilisation.  And  even  to  the  posterity  of  Canaan 
the  curse  only  applied  in  the  foreknowledge  that  the  sin  of 
their  ancestor  would  be  the  type  of  their  own  moral  condition 
(comp.  ch.  xix. ;  Lev.  xviii.  and  xx. ;  Deut.  xii.  31).  The 
saying  is  no  sentence  of  condemnation  excluding  the  posterity 
of  Canaan  from  salvation  ;  the  blessing  of  all  nations  in  the 
seed  of  the  patriarch  includes  the  Hamites  also,  and  especially 
Canaan  ;  and  though  vassalage  is  indeed  a  national  misfortune, 
it  may  become  a  means  of  blessing  to  a  people,  at  least  to  those 
who,  like  Eahab  and  the  Canaanite  woman  in  the  New  Testa 
ment,  do  not  participate  in  the  national  sin. — Punishment  in 
its  proper  sense  is,  according  to  the  teaching  of  Scripture 
(Deut.  xxiv.  16  ;  comp.  2  Kings  xiv.  6  ;  Ezek.  xviii.),  suffered 
by  each  individual  only  on  account  of  his  own  sin. 

After  the  curse  upon  Canaan,  the  two  declarations  of  bless 
ing  begin  with  a  fresh "iDfcOl,  vv.  26,  27  :  And  he  said:  Blessed 
be  Jahveh  the  God  of  Shem,  and  let  Canaan  be  their  servant. 
Elohim  give  large  extension  to  Jepheth,  and  let  him  dwell  in  the 
tents  of  Shem,  and  let  Canaan  be  their  servant.  In  both  instances 
is  the  curse  of  Canaan  repeated  as  a  kind  of  refrain,  like  a 
ceterum  censeo ;  it  is  the  dark  foil  to  the  blessing  of  Shern  and 
Japheth,  to  whom  the  two  to?  refer,  to?  occurs  indeed  some 
times  (e.g.  Isa.  xliv.  15)  as  an  imitated  h  (lahu)  (Ges.  §  103.  2), 
here  however  it  has  the  presumption  of  being  of  like  meaning 
with  l^sp.  The  Berachah  of  Shem  becomes  a  Berachah  of 
Jahveh.  In  view  of  the  blessing  of  which  Shem  is  to  partake, 
Noah  praises  Jahveh,  from  whom  this  blessing  proceeds,  nay, 
who  is  Himself  this  blessing.  Does  a  mutual  relation  between 
the  blessing  and  the  name  of  the  person  blessed  take  place  here 
also  ?  Perhaps  so,  for  God  in  the  sphere  of  His  manifesta- 


296  GENESIS  IX.  26,  27. 

tion  in  act  is  called  :  He  who  makes  Himself  a  name,  and  so 
close  is  the  connection  of  God  and  His  name,  that  God  in 
His  historical  self-testimony  is  called  (Isa.  xxx.  27)  'n  DB>. 
Jahveh  makes  Himself  a  name  in  becoming  the  God  of 
Shem,  and  thus  entwines  His  name  with  that  of  Shem, 
which  means  the  name.  In  the  blessing  of  Japheth  the 
Distich  swells  to  a  Tristich.  The  blessing  is  here  clearly 
connected  with  both  the  sound  and  meaning  of  the  name. 
The  Hipli.  nrian,  from  nna,  to  be  wide,  to  be  open,  may  mean, 
like  ^rnn,  Targ.  "n?*?,  introduction  into  an  unrestrained  posi 
tion,  but  here,  where  the  status  quo  is  not  restraint  and  loss  of 
liberty,  but  isolation  and  limitation,  it  has  the  meaning  of 
spacious  extension  (LXX.  TrKa-rvvai,  Jer.  dilatet),  like 
also  construed  with  ?,  Job  xii.  23.  The  proper  name 
traced  back  to  nna,  is  like  the  proper  names  T]N  and 
from  rn~i  and  nnio,  and  the  nom.  appell.  segol.  D^fy  a  reduction 
from  HDpn  (impf.  cons.  D»ni).  The  name  of  God  is  here 
changed  ;  He  is  called  mrr,  as  the  God  of  salvation,  the  God 
of  positive  revelation,  and  as  such  He  is  the  God  of  Shem. 
On  the  other  hand  He  is  called,  with  reference  to  Japheth, 
&*P$,  which  is  the  more  general  name  of  God,  especially  as 
the  Creator  of  the  world.  For  Japheth  stands  in  a  relation  to 
God  chiefly  brought  about  by  the  light  of  nature,  and  delights 
in  the  exercise  of  the  natural  powers  with  which  man  is 
endowed.1  His  tendency  is  an  outward  one,  because  the 
natural  powers  find  their  sphere  of  action  and  their  material  in 
the  outer  world.  The  blessing  of  Japheth  consists  (1)  in  his 
extension  over  a  wide  region  of  lands,  and  (2)  in  his  coming  to 
dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem.  For  DDS,  not  DTlbfet,  is  the  subject 
of  |3^..  Philo  (Opp.  i.  402)  makes  God  the  subject,  though 
hesitatingly :  IVw?  /mevToi,  ra  TTJ?  eu^r)9  ical  ITT!  rov  'IctfaO 
ava(f>epeT(U.  The  Fathers  unanimously  explain,  like  Irenaeus 
(iii.  5.  3)  :  dilatans  laplwt  et  constituens  eum  in  domo  Sem. 
The  reference  to  God  has  this  in  its  favour,  that  p&?  is  the 

1  The  Midrash  (BeresTiith  rabba,  c.  36)  expresses  this  in  the  formula  :  Shem 
for  the  Tallith  (the  covering  for  prayer),  Japheth  for  the  Pallium. 


GENESIS  IX.  26,  27.  297 

special  word  for  God's  gracious  presence  in  Israel  (Onkelos: 
n^n^a^  ^^1;  comp.  ecncrjvwcre,  John  i.  14),  and  that  thus  the 
blessing  of  Shem  reaches  its  climax  in  God's  taking  up  His 
dwelling  with  him.  Against  this  reference  however,  whose 
latest  advocate  is  Briggs  in  his  Messianic  Prophecy  (1886), 
p.  82  sq.,  may  be  adduced  the  following  reasons:  (1)  that  as 
Shem  is  the  subject  of  the  blessing,  ver.  26,  so  also  will  Japheth 
be  the  subject  of  the  blessing,  ver.  27  ;  (2)  that  God's  gracious 
presence  with  Shem  is  already  contained  in  D^"  TOK  'n  Tjna ; 
(3)  that  the  God  of  Shem,  as  distinguished  from  the  God  of 
Japheth,  is  called,  not  DTi;>tf,  but  m.T ;  (4)  that  the  plural 
^n&jsi  leads  us  to  infer  a  collective  idea  as  the  subject, 
and  the  more  so,  that  the  statement  that  God  would  dwell 
in  the  ^Sns  (ni33B>D)  of  Israel  is  elsewhere  unconfirmed, 
because  at  variance  with  the  unity  of  the  place  of  worship ; 
(5)  that  just  in  the  circumstance  that  Japheth  will  have 
free  hospitable  access  to  Shem,  whose  God  is  Jahveh,  and 
will  dwell  with  him  in  brotherly  fashion  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  1) 
in  common  tents,  will  the  delicate  filial  action  jointly  per 
formed  by  Shem  and  Japheth  find  its  corresponding  final 
blessing  (Hengst.  Tuch,  Ew.  Baur,  Keil  and  others).  For 
the  same  reason  we  cannot  explain :  let  him  dwell  in  the 
tents  of  renown  (Ges.  de  Wette,  Kn.  Anger,  Schrader),  for 
the  contemplated  mutual  reference  of  the  blessing  of  Japheth 
and  Shem  is  thereby  destroyed,  and  it  is  besides  improbable 
that  DB*  should  be  at  the  one  time  a  proper  and  the  other  a 
common  noun.  Xor  for  the  same  reasons  can  this  dwelling 
be  referred,  as  by  Justin,  dial.  c.  Tryph.  c.  83,  to  the  subju 
gation  of  Palestine  by  the  Romans  —  the  statement  that 
Japheth  was  to  settle  as  a  conqueror  in  the  tents  of  Shem 
(comp.  1  Chron.  v.  10)  would  cast  a  gloom  entirely  without 
a  cause  upon  the  blessing  of  Shem.  Dillm.  finds  in  it  a  pro 
phecy  of  the  reception  of  Japhethic  nations  into  the  alliance 
of  the  old  Semitic  kingdoms,  a  reception  which  has  become  of 
great  importance  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  aim  however 
of  the  prophecy  is  Israel,  and  it  must  hence  be  understood 


298  GENESIS  IX.  28. 

according  to  such  subsequent  prophecies  as  Isa.  xix.  24  sq., 
Ps.  xlvii.  10,  of  the  entrance  of  Japheth  into  the  kingdom  of 
God,  which  is  with  Shein  (Targ.  Jer.).  To  dwell  thus  with 
Shem  is  the  honour  and  blessing  of  Japheth.  The  fulfilment 
is  palpable :  the  language  of  the  New  Testament  is  the 
speech  of  Javan  dwelling  in  the  tents  of  Shem,  the  gospel  is 
the  proclamation  of  salvation  translated  from  Semitic  into 
Japhethic,  and  Gentile  Christians  are  for  the  most  part 
Japhethites  dwelling  in  the  tents  of  Shem.  The  Talmud  also 
takes  Japheth  as  the  subject  of  pB",  for  it  deduces  from 
this  blessing  (Megilla,  Qb  ;  Jer.  Megilla,  i.  9)  the  justifica 
tion  of  the  use  of  the  Greek  tongue  in  public  worship, 
which  tongue  it  calls  na*"^  iniQSS  "  the  most  beautiful  pos 
session  of  Japheth"  (comp.  n^&J,  Bereshith  raUba,  c.  39, 
applied  to  Aquila  as  the  translator),  which  presupposes  that  na.1 
is  formed  from  ns>,  as  riTJ,  riD3?  n\w  are  from  stems  fc.  Thus 
Shem  is  the  most  blessed.  Canaan  has  the  curse  of  servitude 
three  times  pronounced  upon  him.  Shem  receives  a  spiritual, 
Japheth  a  temporal  blessing,  and  with  it  the  prospect  of  par 
ticipation  in  the  spiritual  blessing  of  Shem.  The  rest  of 
Ham's  descendants  are  left  out  of  consideration,  the  subse 
quent  promise  of  blessing  to  the  nations  in  the  seed  of  the 
patriarch  including  them  also.  Shem  is  henceforth  the  centre 
of  sacred  history.  If  God  hereafter  provides  Himself  with 
a  family  of  salvation,  and  out  of  these  with  a  people  of  salva 
tion,  this  will  take  place  among  the  posterity  of  Shem. 

Now  follows,  ver.  28  sq.,  an  Elohistic  conclusion  corre 
sponding  with  the  title,  vi.  9  :  And  Noah  lived  after  the  flood 
three  hundred  and  fifty  years.  And  the  sum  of  all  the  days  of 
Noah  amounted  to  nine  hundred  and  fifty  years,  and  he  died. 
The  sing,  of  the  predicate  here  stands  with  ^3,  as  at  v.  23,  31 ; 
comp.  Isa.  Ixiv.  10  ;  Prov.  xvi.  2.  With  the  death  of  Noah, 
the  tenth  generation  of  the  genealogical  table,  ch.  v.,  is  com 
pleted,  and  at  the  same  time  his  history  and  that  of  his 
nearest  descendants  from  vi.  9.  Separate  nnWl  are  now 
devoted  to  the  posterity  of  his  sons. 


IV. 


THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  THE   SONS  OF  NOAH, 
X.  1-XL  9. 

THESE  Toledoth  give  a  survey  of  the  population  of  the  post 
diluvian  world  by  the  descendants  of  the  sons  of  Noah.  They 
relate  not  so  much  to  families  as  to  nations,  are  less  genea 
logical  than  ethnological,  give  not  a  family  but  a  national 
pedigree,  a  catalogue  of  the  nations  descending  from  the  three 
primitive  ancestors  of  post-diluvian  mankind.  This  is  so  com 
posed,  that  sons  and  grandsons  of  these  three  are  entered  as 
the  ancestors  of  homogeneous  nations,  but  frequently  also  the 
nations  themselves  as  the  descendants  of  the  three.  It  is  self- 
evident  that  where  the  names  are  plurals,  like  B'ns,  nations 
and  not  individuals  are  intended.  But  also  where  the  names 
are  singular,  like  "1E3,  it  is  questionable  whether  they  are  used 
in  a  collective  or  an  individual  sense.  Apart  from  "n&J,  and 
perhaps  those  direct  descendants  of  Shem,  ver.  24  sq.,  whose 
names  are  marked  as  personal  names  by  the  Toledoth  of  Shem, 
xi.  1 0  sqq.,  it  is  in  the  case  of  this  table  of  nations  a  matter  of 
indifference  whether  the  names  were  the  proper  names  of  the 
actual  ancestors,  or  whether  the  nations  in  question  regarded 
themselves  as  proceeding  from  ancestors  so  called,  as  the  Greeks 
e.g.  did  from  Pelasgos,  Hellen,  etc.,  or  whether  it  is  only  the 
composer  of  this  table  who  thus  gives  names  in  the  singular 
to  nations,  for  the  purpose  of  organically  arranging  them  as 
stocks  from  the  same  root,  in  this  sketch  of  the  history  of 
their  origin.  For  he  is  following  the  notions  and  procedure 
of  antiquity,  which  does  not  distinguish  between  the  ideal  and 
historical  units  from  which  nations  are  developed,  between 
actual  and  so-called  eponymous  ancestors. 


300  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  THE  SONS  OF  NOAH. 

There  are  found  elsewhere  also  among  the  civilised  nations 
of  Hither  and  Farther  Asia,  registers  of  nations  and  countries. 
The  knowledge  of  countries  and  nations  obtained  by  the 
Egyptians  was  in  consequence  of  both  their  commercial  and 
military  expeditions  of  large  extent,  and  already  began  to  be 
fixed  in  cartographic  attempts.1  The  cuneiform  memorials, 
in  which  the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  monarchs  relate  their 
campaigns,  are  copious  mines  of  the  oldest  chorographical  and 
ethnological  knowledge,  and  among  the  brick  tablets  are  found 
also  independent  beginnings  of  both  topography  and  geography. 
But  these  surveys  subserve  national  and  mostly  political  in 
terests,  and  are  nowhere  the  result  of  a  hearty  interest  in 
mankind  beyond  the  nation  and  region  that  produced  them. 
Besides,  w^here  they  purpose  to  be  universal,  they  either  lose 
themselves  in  the  fabulous,  like  the  sections  descriptive  of  the 
earth  in  the  epic  poems  and  certain  Puranas  of  the  Indians, 
or  notwithstanding  their  start,  they  return  directly  to  their 
own  people  and  the  neighbouring  lands,  like  the  Eranian 
heroic  legend,  which  after  relating  that  Thraetona  divided 
the  world  among  his  three  sons,  keeps  to  the  fate  of  the 
Eranians,  the  descendants  of  Erag,  one  of  the  three.  Nowhere 
is  found  a  survey  of  the  connection  of  nations  that  can  be  com 
pared  with  the  ethnological  table  of  the  Bible,  nowhere  one  so 
universal  in  proportion  to  its  horizon,  and  so  all-comprising,  at 
least  with  regard  to  its  purpose.  Eor  the  idea  of  the  people 
of  God  implies  that  they  have  to  regard  all  nations  as  future 
partakers  with  them  of  the  same  salvation,  and  to  embrace 
them  with  an  interest  of  hopeful  love  unheard  of  elsewhere  in 
the  ancient  world.  The  invisible  foliage  of  hope  is  entwined 
round  the  dry  branches  of  this  register  of  nations,  the  hope 
that  the  widely  diverging  paths  of  the  nations  will  at  last 
meet  at  a  goal  appointed  by  the  God  of  revelation.  It  is  just 
here,  where  the  history  of  redemption  is,  in  consequence  of  the 

1  See  Dliinichen,  Flotte  einer  cegyptischen  Konigin  aus  dem  17  Jahrh.  vor 
unserer  Zeitrechnung,  1868  ;  and  H.  Brandos,  Ueber  die  geographischen  Kennt- 
nisse  der  alien  ^Egypter,  1870. 


THE  GENEALOGICAL  TREE  OF  THE  NATIONS.  301 

blessing  promised  to  Shem,  on  the  road  to  the  origin  of  that 
nation  to  which  it  is  specially  devoted,  that  this  universal 
survey  serves  as  a  significant  finger-post  to  direct  attention  to 
the  fact  that  the  limitation  of  salvation  is  but  a  means  to  its 
future  unlimited  freedom. 

The  survey  is  not  indeed  absolutely  universal ;  the  purpose 
and  the  execution  do  not  quite  coincide,  the  latter  finding  its 
limitation  in  the  very  limited  state  of  the  geographical  know 
ledge  of  the  period.  If,  with  Blumenbach,  we  reckon  five 
races,  the  Caucasian,  Mongolian,  Malayan,  American,  and 
Ethiopian,  the  nations  in  this  genealogy  do  not  extend  beyond 
the  Caucasian  race,  the  inhabitants  of  the  coasts  of  the 
Mediterranean  Sea  and  as  far  eastwards  as  Central  Asia.  The 
vnn,  Indians  (Esth.  i.  1),  and  &TP,  Chinese  (Isa.  xlix.  12),  are 
omitted,  Ethiopia  (Vi3,  also  Egyptian  Teas)  is  brought  forward, 
but  the  Negroes  (^Egypt.  nehesu)  are  left  out  of  consideration. 
Nor  do  we  get  any  information  considering  the  origin  of  the 
Amalekites,  nor  of  the  Kephaim,  Emim,  Zuzim  and  the  original 
inhabitants  of  Palestine  in  general,  although  they  did  not  lie 
beyond  the  horizon  of  the  author ;  for  it  is  not  the  manner  of 
the  spirit  of  revelation  to  advance  one  whom  it  makes  its  instru 
ment  to  a  knowledge  of  things  natural  beyond  the  measure  of 
what  was  at  the  time  possible.  The  silence  of  the  document 
concerning  the  descent  of  these  nations,  and  especially  of  the 
Palestinian  aborigines,  might  seem  to  favour  the  polygenistic 
theory.  But  the  tendency  of  the  document  is  decidedly 
opposed  to  it.  It  starts  from  the  assumption  of  the  single 
origin  of  the  human  race,  and  seeks  to  show  how,  after  the 
Deluge  had  almost  entirely  extirpated  mankind,  the  new 
population  of  the  earth  proceeded  entirely  from  the  one 
family  of  Noah.  The  races  of  man  are  in  fact  not  different 
species  of  one  genus,  but  different  varieties  of  one  species,  as 
testified  by  the  congruence  of  physiological  and  pathological 
phenomena  in  all  men,  by  identity  of  anatomical  structure, 
mental  powers  and  features,  by  the  same  duration  of  life,  by 
equal  liability  to  sicknesses,  by  the  same  normal  temperature 


302  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  THE  SONS  OF  NOAH. 

of  body  and  the  same  average  pulse,  the  same  form  of  sper 
matozoa,  the  same  period  of  gestation,  and  by  unlimited 
fertility  in  the  intermixture  of  all  races.  But  this  specific 
identity  of  natural  constitution  does  not  suffice  to  prove 
historic  unity  of  origin.  We  believe  in  this  historic  unity  on 
the  ground  of  Scripture  testimony,  but  are  not  in  a  condition 
to  prove  it.  The  formation  of  races  lies  absolutely  beyond 
the  power  of  our  historic  knowledge.  We  can  point  to  the 
intermingling  of  existing  races,  but  not  to  the  origin  of  these 
races  themselves,  whose  characteristic  distinctions  extend 
beyond  colour  and  hair  to  even  the  formation  of  the  skeleton, 
especially  of  the  skull.  But  polygenism  puts  no  solution  in 
the  place  of  the  enigma.  The  descent  of  man  from  the 
anthropoid  apes  is  and  remains  a  fantastic  salto  mortale,  and 
the  assumption  that  this  development  has  been  repeated  in 
parts  of  the  earth  most  remote  from  each  other,  demands  from 
us  belief  in  a  miracle  of  chance  which  is  without  parallel. 

In  this  ethnological  table  the  three  sons  of  Noah  follow 
each  other,  not  according  to  their  births :  Shem,  Japheth, 
Ham,  nor  according  to  the  usual  formula :  Shem,  Ham, 
Japheth,  but  Japheth  and  Ham  precede,  and  Shem  comes 
last.  The  reason  for  this  is  not,  that  of  the  two  sons  who 
received  a  blessing,  one  might  begin,  the  other  close  the 
register,  but  that  it  is  the  method  pursued  in  Genesis,  first  to 
get  rid  of  the  collateral  lines,  in  order  afterwards  to  go  on 
with  the  main  line  without  interruption.  Ham  comes  after 
Japheth  not  merely  because  he  is  the  younger,  but  because 
through  Canaan,  Mizraim  and  Gush  he  borders  more  closely 
on  Israel  than  Japheth  does, — for  even  within  the  three 
groups  of  nations  the  influence  of  this  favourite  progress 
from  the  more  distant  to  the  nearer  prevails. 

The  view  that  the  three  sons  of  Noah  represent  three 
groups  of  nations  distinguished  by  the  colour  of  the  skin, 
as  the  Egyptians  divide  the  nations  into  copper -coloured, 
yellow,  black  and  light-coloured  (see  Geo.  Ebers.  in  DMZ. 
xxxi.  449),  obtains  a  support  only  in  the  name  on.  Ham  is 


ANALYSIS  OF  THE  ETHNOGRAPHICAL  TABLE.  303 

the  ancestor  of  the  nations  of  the  southern  zone,  and  his 
name  might  thus  designate  the  dark-coloured,  though,  accord 
ing  to  the  usage  of  the  language,  on  means  hot  and  Din  black 
(according  to  Eupolemus,  %ov^  =  Greek  acr/3oA,o9,  soot,  which 
cannot  be  proved).  But  if  we  go  on  and  explain  naj  (from 
ns11)  as  the  white,  and  QK>,  by  comparing  *}&,  deep  red,  as  the 
red  (Hitzig  in  DMZ.  ix.  748),  we  shall  only  lose  our  way  in 
barren  hypotheses.  But  neither  are  languages  the  grounds  of 
division  in  this  register  of  nations.  How  inadmissible  it  is  to 
divide  languages,  according  to  the  three  groups  of  nations,  into 
Japhethic,  Hamitic  and  Semitic,  has  been  already  shown  by 
Joh.  Geo.  Mliller  in  his  works:  Who  are  the  Semites?  1860, 
and  The  Semites  in  their  Relation  to  Hamites  and  Japhethites, 
1872.  In  fact  the  Hebrew  is,  as  jjtta  naj?  (Isa.  xix.  18),  a 
Hamitic  language.  "  The  dissemination  and  intermixture  of 
nations,"  says  Lepsius  in  his  Nubian  Grammar  (comp.  also 
Ebers  in  DMZ.  xxxv.  209),  "goes  its  way,  and  that  of  lan 
guages,  though  continually  conditioned  by  the  former,  its  often 
quite  different  way.  Languages  are  not  the  individual 
production  of  nations  and  the  direct  expressions  of  their  spirit ; 
they  often  dissociate  themselves  from  their  originators,  pass 
over  to  foreign  nations  and  races,  or  die  out,  while  their 
former  vehicles  live  on,  speaking  quite  other  languages — in 
short,  they  live  a  more  or  less  independent  life,  which  there 
fore  may  and  should  be  investigated  independently  of  the 
ethnological  substratum  to  which  it  has  adhered."  Hence  we 
cannot  without  further  proof  infer  similar  or  kindred  lan 
guages  from  kindred  genealogies.  The  author  of  the  ethno 
logical  table  is  fully  conscious  of  variety  of  languages  within 
the  three  groups,  and  brings  this  forward  in  the  case  of  each, 
vv.  5,  20,  31.  Hence  the  three  groups  are  not  formed 
according  to  community  of  language,  but  rather  according  to 
community  of  geographical  position.  Certainly  the  geo 
graphical  point  of  view  has  a  determining  influence  within 
the  three  groups,  but  it  is  only  the  case  in  a  general  manner 
that  Japheth  comprises  the  northern,  Ham  the  southern,  and 


304        THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  THE  SONS  OF  NOAH. 

Shem  the  central  countries ;  Canaan  the  Hamite  e.g.  dwells 
in  the  central,  not  the  southern  region.  The  historical  point 
of  view  must  therefore  be  added  to  the  geographical — the 
external  and  internal  arrangement  of  the  groups  reproduces 
traditional  racial  relations,  and  has  already  received  such 
brilliant  confirmation  from  continued  historical  and  monu 
mental  investigations,  that  H.  Eawlinson  is  fully  justified  in 
regarding  this  table  as  "  the  most  authentic  record  that  we 
possess  for  the  affiliation  of  nations." 

These  remarks  apply  to  the  ethnological  table  on  the  whole, 
without  analysis  making  any  difference.  It  has  hitherto  been 
agreed,  that  from  the  Elohistic  table,  introduced  by  the  title 
n:~'J3  rn^in  ntal,  the  passage  about  Nimrod  and  the  Babylonio- 
Assyrian  kingdom,  x.  8—12,  must  be  separated  as  Jahvistic. 
Proceeding  on  this  basis,  it  has  been  further  shown  that  the 
entire  Elohistic  table  is  interwoven  with  extracts  from  a 
Jahvistic  one,  amongst  whose  characteristics  of  style  are 
1^  (instead  of  T^in),  paj  (instead  of  "H*??),  nssl-i  as  a  statement 
of  direction,  and  the  opening  1?)  DBTO,  1?J  "13JJ7I  (instead  of 
Dl?  'OS,  etc.),  and  whose  manner  of  introduction  may  be  per 
ceived  from  ix.  18a,  19.  The  severance  of  the  two  constituent 
parts,  as  carried  out  by  Wellhausen  (Jdhrb.  xxi.  (1876) 
pp.  395-397)  and  Dillmann,  with  the  concurrence  of  Kuenen, 
is  convincing,  except  in  certain  unimportant  particulars,  con 
cerning  which  opinion  is  but  conjecture.  The  Elohistic 
ethnological  table  is  complete,  and  is  composed  of  the  following 
portions,  vv.  1-5  (Japheth),  6-7,  20  (Ham),  22-23,  31 
(Shem),  32  (conclusion).  The  Jahvistic  extracts  furnish 
nothing  concerning  Japheth ;  they  contained  nothing  that 
commended  itself  to  the  redactor  of  Genesis  for  independent 
insertion;  vv.  8-19  (Hamites  without  the  original  commence 
ment),  21,  25—30  (Shemites  apparently  complete),  are  certainly 
from  JE.  Ver.  24  is  a  parenthesis  of  the  redactor  (from  xi. 
12,  14);  so,  according  to  Dillmann,  but  with  questionable 
correctness,  is  ver.  9.  Whether  the  relative  clause  in  ver.  14, 
,  is  original  or  of  subsequent  insertion,  is 


ANALYSIS  OF  THE  ETHNOGEAPHICAL  TABLE.  305 

questionable.  The  discrepant  statements  concerning  the 
descent  of  nfyn  and  KW,  ver.  7  (Eloh.),  and  ver.  28  sq.  (Jahv.), 
were  allowed  to  remain  by  the  redactor  without  his  finding 
in  them  any  irreconcilable  contradiction. 

The  catalogue  contains  in  its  Elohistic  portion  thirty-four 
names,  and  in  its  Jahvistic  thirty-six  in  addition  to  these,  if 
Nirnrod  is  left  out  of  account,  and  the  Cushite  and  Joktanite, 
S3E>  and  n^in,  counted  as  each  two,  hence  seventy  in  all.  If 
the  Elohistic  catalogue  gave  this  number,  we  might  regard  it 
as  designed.  But  whether  the  whole  in  its  final  form  was 
fashioned  with  such  an  end  in  view  is  uncertain.  The  Jewish 
notion  that  the  nations  of  the  world  were  divided  into  D11^^ 
niElN,1  is  hardly  as  old  as  the  composition  of  Genesis.  For 
even  supposing  that  this  took  place  at  the  time  of  the  exile  or 
the  restoration,  this  would  be  an  ancient  time,  to  which  the 
Haggadah  in  the  Talmud,  Midrash  and  Targum  does  not 
reach  back. 

The  traditions  themselves  which-  are  interwoven  in  the 
table  from  at  least  two  sources  certify  their  hoar  antiquity. 
Da  Goeje,  who  in  a  Dutch  article  on  the  tenth  chapter 
of  Genesis  (1870)  sought  to  prove  that  it  was  an  ethno 
graphic  reflection  of  the  last  years  of  Cyrus  or  the  first  of 
Cambyses,  comes  a  great  deal  too  far  down.  If  it  had  not 
been  drawn  up  till  so  late  a  date,  we  should  find  Tyre,  iV, 
which  after  the  times  of  David  and  Solomon  began  to  surpass 
Sidon,  and  Persia  (ens,  ^ona),  which  after  Cyrus  attained 
to  world -wide  importance,  mentioned.  It  is  also  worthy 
of  remark  that  the  Arabian  name  (^,  D-nny,  D'Winj^  and 
'3D,  mentioned  Jer.  li.  27,  between  Ararat  and  Ashkenaz,  do 
not  occur.  The  fact  that  Amalek  and  the  aborigines  of 
Palestine,  who  had  at  the  time  vacated  the  stage  of  history,  are 
left  out  of  account,  does  not  lead  down  later  than  the  earlier 
kings.  If  we  compare  such  tableaux  of  the  nations  as  are 

1  It  is  found  in  the  Targ.  Jer.  on  Gen.  xi.  8  (^*O?pV  pj/^t^)  an(l  elsewhere. 

The  seventy  languages  in  the  Talmudic  Halachah,  Sanhedrin  17a,  Sota  vii.  5, 
correspond  with  it. 

U 


306        THE  TOLEDOTII  OF  THE  SONS  OF  NO  ATI. 

given,  Jer.  xxv.,  Ezek.  xxvii.  and  xxxii.  17  sqq.,  Gen.  x.  gives 
us  an  impression  of  independence  and  high  antiquity.  From 
Ezek.  xxvii.  however  (the  mart  of  Tyre)  it  is  far  more  probable 
that  the  Phoenicians  (Ew.  Tuch,  Kn.  Kiepert,  Dillmann) 
rather  than  the  Egyptians  (so  e.g.  Eitter  in  his  G-esch.  der 
Erdkunde,  1861)  were  the  medium  of  the  ethnology  here 
preserved.  Egyptian  ethnology  did  not  extend  so  far  north 
nor  so  near  to  Arabia  as  Dillm.,  after  Chabas,  remarks. 

The  first  expositor  of  the  ethnological  table  is  Josephus, 
Ant.  i.  6.     He  is  the  authority  of  Jerome  in  his  Qucestiones 
Hebraicce,  which  in  their  turn  have  been  copied  by  Isidorus, 
Etym.  ix.  2.  1—39.     Other  ancient  Greek  and  Latin  surveys 
of  nations  and  countries  fall  back,  with  reference  to  the  ethno 
logical  table,  partly  upon  Hippolytus  of  Portus,  partly  upon 
the  Chronicle  of  Julius  Africanus.     The  knowledge  of  countries 
in  all  these  labours,  from  Josephus  onwards,  is,  as  Mlillenhoff 
has  shown  in  his  work  on  the  map  of  the  world  and  choro- 
graphy  of  the  Emperor  Augustus,  1856,  derived  from  the  wall- 
map   of    the    orlis    terrarum,    prepared    by    Agrippa   at   the 
command  of  this  emperor,   exposed  to  view  in  the   Portico 
of  the  Polla  and  multiplied  in  various  manners,  and  which 
also  shows  itself  to  be  the  original  and  model  of  the  rough 
and  scanty  maps   of  the   Middle  Ages.     Samuel  Bochart's1 
Phaleg    et    Canaan,    1646,    is    a    repertorium    of    Scripture 
geography  not   yet   quite  antiquated ;   the  first  four  vols.   of 
this  work   (Phaleg)    treat   de   divisione  gentium,  and  explain 
the    ethnographical   table   from   the    narratives  of   antiquity. 
Further  stages  of  continued  investigation  are  marked  by  J.  D. 
Michaelis'  Spicilegium  geograpliice  Hebrceorum  exterce  (2   pts. 
1*769,1780,4);  Knobel's  work,  Die    Tolkertafel  der  Genesis, 
1850  ;  Kiepert's  article  on  the  geographical  position  of  the 
northern   countries  in   the    phonikisch  -  hebraischen    Urkunde, 
1859  ;  de  Lagarde's  discussion  of   the  names  in   the  ethno 
graphical  table  in   Ges.  Abhandlungen,  1866;  that  of  Friedr. 
Delitzsch  in   Wo  lag  das  Paradies?   1881,  p.  244  sqq.;  Dill- 
1  See  his  biography  by  Ed.  Reuss  in  the  Revue  theologique,  1854,  pp.  129-156. 


GENESIS  X.  1-5.  307 

mann's  exposition  of  the  ethnographical  table  in  his  new 
edition  of  Knobel's  revised  Commentary  on  Genesis,  1882,  86  ; 
that  of  Schrader  in  the  2nd  ed.  of  his  Die  Keilinschriften 
und  der  A.  T.  1883  ;  Ed.  Meyer's  Gesch.  des  Altertums,  vol.  i. 
(containing  the  history  of  the  East  down  to  the  foundation  of 
the  Persian  monarchy)  1884,  and  also  the  ethnographic  articles 
in  Kiehm's  Handworterluch  des  libl.  Altertums,  and  the  Calwer 
Bibellexikon,  edited  by  P.  Zeller. 

THE  ETHNOGRAPHICAL  TABLE,  OR  THE  THREE  GROUPS  OF  THE 

NOACHID.E,  CH.  X. 
(Parallel  with  1  Chron.  i.  4-28.) 

Title  and  connection,  ver.  1  :  And  these  are  the  Toledoth  of 
the  sons  of  Noah;  Shem,  Ham  and  Jepheth :  and  to  them  were 
sons  born  after  the  flood.  The  connection  by  a  consecutive 
impf.  is  striking ;  it  cannot  be  denied  that  la  has  the 
appearance  of  having  originally  stood  after  ix.  19#. 

First  part :  the  Japhethites,  v.  2-5  :  Sons  of  Jepheth  are 
Gomer  and  Magog  and  Madai  and  Javan  and  Tubed  and 
Mesech  and  Tiras.  And  sons  of  Gomer  are  AsJcenaz  and 
Eiphath  and  Togarmah.  And  sons  of  Javan;  Elisah  and 
Tarsis,  Kittim  and  Dodanim.  From  these  the  islands  of  the 
nations  separated  themselves  in  their  lands ;  each  according 
to  his  language,  according  to  their  families,  after  each  of  their 
nations.  The  enumeration  of  the  Japhethites  begins  from  the  far 
north.  For  by  Japheth's  first  son,  "i£3,  is  meant  the  Kipnepioi 
(Kifjiepioi),  who,  according  to  Homer,  Od.  xi.  14,  dwell  in 
sunless  obscurity.  The  north  was  esteemed  by  the  ancients 
as  the  region  without  light  or  warmth,  hence  Cimmerian 
tenelrce  has  ever  been  a  proverbial  expression  for  profound 
darkness.  The  ethnology  of  the  ancients  did  not  reach  very 
far  northwards  ;  the  Kimmerians  lay  north  of  the  Pontus 
Euxinus  and  the  Mseotis  (sea  of  Azov),  and  west  of  the 
Tanais  (Don) ;  the  name  Krim  (*.]>),  which  was  afterwards 
given  to  the  Tauiic  Chersonesus,  is  a  "  memorial  of  the 


308  GENESIS  X.  2-5. 

Kimmerians  in  the  subsequent  Scythia"  (Herod,  iv.  12), 
which  has  remained  to  the  present  day.  For  the  Kimmerians 
were  driven  from  these  their  settlements  on  the  northern  coast 
of  the  Black  Sea  by  the  Scythians,  they  then  passed  over  the 
Tyras  (Dnjestr),  and  farther  over  the  Danube  into  Thrace. 
Thence  about  700  B.C.,  in  conjunction  with  the  Thracians,  they 
invaded  Asia  Minor,  overran  Lydia  about  650,  and  then 
attacked  the  Greek  cities  of  the  coast  until  the  Lydian  king 
Alyattes  succeeded  in  driving  them  out  of  Asia  (Herod,  i.  16). 
It  was  with  the  Kimmerians,  who  had  returned  from  Thrace, 
that  Asarhaddon  came  in  collision  about  675  and  gained,  in 
alliance  with  Asurbanipal,  a  great  victory  over  the  Gyges  of 
Lydia  about  662  (see  Ed.  Meyer,  Gescli.  i.  546) — the  "i»3 
mentioned  by  Ezek.  xxviii.  6  as  confederates  of  Gog,  Assyr. 
Gimir  with  the  gentil.  Gimarda  (according  to  another  reading 
Gimirai).  The  Armenians  call  the  Cappadocians  Gamirkh 
(Moses  Chor.  ii.  8  0,  where  Caesarea  of  Cappadocia  is  designated 
as  situate  in  the  land  of  Gamirkh),  and  Josephus  thinks  that 
Tofjiapels  is  the  ancient  name  of  the  Galatians — both  asser 
tions  being  occasioned  by  the  victorious  Asiatic  expeditions  of 
the  Kimmerians.  Nothing  certain  can  be  said  respecting  their 
national  character  and  language.  Ed.  Meyer  regards  the  latter 
as  well  as  that  of  the  Scythians  as  Iranian.  Greek  authors 
already  identified  the  Kimmerians  with  the  Cimbri  (Diod.  Sic. 
v.  32  ;  Strabo,  vii.  2.  2  sq.),  after  whom  the  British  district 
Wales  is  called  Cambria.  But  the  Cimbri  are  a  Celtic  race, 
which  has  not  yet  died  out,1  while  the  Kimmerians  have 
disappeared  and  left  no  trace  behind  except  a  few  geographical 
names.2  We  now  proceed  to  the  three  sons  of  Gomer.  The 

1  See  Battler's  introduction  to  his  Grammar  of  the  Kymrseg  (Kel to-Welsh), 
1886,  in  which  the  1EJ  of  the  table  is  explained  as  by  us  ;  and  it  is  at  the  same 
time  remarked,  that  the  Kymry  themselves  like  to  designate  their  language  as 
Gomerseg.     Hence  Sattler  gives  his  Grammar  the  title,  y  Gomerydd  (Gomeric 
Tutor). 

2  The  spreading  of  the  Kimmerians   as  far  as  Thesprotia   (in  Epirus)  and 
Campania  is   in  itself  uncertain  ;   see  de  Belloguet,   Ethnogtnie,  gauloise,  ed. 
Maury,  1875,  and  at  the  end  of  this  commentary  the  Excursus  on  an  enigmatical 
monument  in  the  catacombs  of  Naples. 


GENESIS  X.  2-5.  309 

first  is  133^8,  the  ancestor  of  the  population,  settled  ou  the 
Propontis,  of  Phrygia  (where  is  the  Ascanian  lake  near 
Kelana),  Bithynia  (where  is  the  Ascanian  lake  near  NicaBa, 
and  an  Ascanium  /lumen,  Pliny,  H.  N.  v.  40)  and  Mysia. 
Ascanios  is  in  Homer  the  name  of  a  Phrygian,  and  elsewhere 
of  a  Mysian  hero  (see  Strabo,  xii.  4.  5  ;  comp.  xiv.  5. 
29).  We  also  meet  with  the  Ascanian  name  as  that  of  a 
Phrygian  district  (Plin.  v.  40),  as  the  name  of  islands  (ib. 
v.  38,  iv.  23),  as  the  name  of  a  harbour  in  ^Eolian  Moesia 
(ib.  v.  3  2).  We  are  not  able  to  say  :  the  Ascanians  are  the 
Phrygians  (Ed.  Meyer,  p.  300)  ;  still  their  being  named  after 
®T$  and  ^£,  Jer.  lii.  27,  certainly  leads  from  Western 
Armenia  to  Phrygia  rather  than  to  Bithynia  and  Mysia.1 
Lagarde  (Gesammelte  Abli.  p.  254)  calls  attention  to  the 
fact,  that  Asken  is  an  Armenian  proper  name,  and  az  an 
Armenian  patronymic  termination.  The  Talmud  and  Targurns 
vaguely  explain  T33GPK  by  JODN.  Medieval  Jewish  tradition 
however  gives  this  name  to  Germany.  Knobel  really  thinks 
that  the  German  tribe  that  came  from  Asia  is  so  called  as  an 
Ask-race,  in  opposition  to  which  Jak.  Grimm  (Gesch.  der 
deutschen  Sprache,  p.  572,  2nd  ed.)  compares  the  German  tribal 
legend  of  Mannus  and  his  three  sons,  Iscus  (Ask,  ' 
Inus  and  Hermino.  —  The  second  son  of  Gomer  is 


(LXX.  Sixt.  picfraO,  AB  epeifyaO).  The  most  obvious  com 
parison  is  with  the  PITTCUOI  (PtTrate??),  the  inhabitants  of  the 
PiTrala  (PiTraia)  oprj  ;  but  what  mountain  chain  it  was  that 
was  transposed  by  the  ancients  to  the  shore  of  the  northern 
ocean,  the  ancient  geographers  themselves  are  unable  to  tell 
us  with  any  certainty.  According  to  Pliny,  //.  N.  iv.  24,  the 
Tanaics  (Don)  comes  down  thence  ;  the  Carpathians  are  by  no 
means  so  called  (Kn.),  we  have  rather  to  think  of  the  Ural 
(Schafarik)  —  thus  the  situation  is  left  in  obscurity.  Lagarde 
and  Dillm.  therefore  prefer  to  compare  the  Bithynian  district 
PijjSavria  on  the  Thracian  Bosphorus  (Straits  of  Constanti- 
1  Asarhaddon  names  among  the  allies  of  the  land  of  Mannda  (i3Jp),  the  land 
of  ASyiha;  see  Friedr.  Delitzsch  on  Baer's  Daniel,  p.  ix. 


310  GENESIS  X.  2-5. 

nople,  which  unite  the  Propontis  and  Pontus) ;  but  this 
derives  its  name  from  the  little  river  Pfjfias  (Prjcro?)  on  which 
it  lies,  and  not  from  a  tribe  who  settled  in  it.  The  Masoretic 
reading,  1  Chron.  i.  6,  is  ria*^  which  gives  us  no  further 
assistance. — The  third  son  of  Gomer  is  HDiJn  •  the  people 
descending  from  him  is  called  nrruin  iva,  Ezek.  xxvii.  14, 
where  they  are  named  after  Javan,  Tubal  and  Meshech  as 
bringing  horses  and  mules  to  the  mart  of  Tyre;  and  xxxviii.  6, 
where  it  appears  after  Gomer  as  a  component  of  the  army  of 
Gog.  The  Armenians  regarded  Thorgom,  the  father  of  Haik, 
as  their  ancestor ; l  and  even  granting  that  the  form  of  the 
name  Thorgom  was  occasioned  by  ©opjafjud  (with  Ooyappd) 
of  the  LXX.  (Lagarde  and  Noldeke  in  DMZ.  xxxiii.  324),  still 
the  Armenian  tradition  is  confirmed  by  Tilgarimmu  being  in 
the  cuneiform  inscriptions  the  name  of  a  fortified  town  in  the 
subsequent  district  of  Melitene,  on  the  south-western  boundary 
of  Armenia  (Pamdies,  p.  246).  Apart  from  this,  we  are  led 
to  Western  Armenia  for  nurun  in  distinction  from  ^p  and 
^73*?.  Whether  the  form  Tilgarimmu  instead  of  Togorimmu 
depends  upon  Assyrian  assimilation,  or  is  the  original  one, 
must  be  left  unsettled,  as  must  also  the  question  whether  the 
name  of  the  Thessalian  "Appevos  (Arm.  Armenak,  son  of  Haik),2 
which,  according  to  Strabo,  xi.  4.  8,  gave  its  name  to  the  land 
of  Armenia,  is  concealed  in  the  Armah  of  Togarmah.  Armenos 
is  the  name  of  a  town  in  Thessaly,  and  also  of  one  in  Phrygia  ; 
and  the  modern  Pindusvlachi,  the  descendants  of  the  Macedono- 
Thracian  tribes,  still  call  themselves  Armeng — the  Armenians, 
like  the  Phrygians,  having  really  settled  in  Europe  before  they 
did  so  in  Asia. 

The  second  son  of  Japheth  is  Jfao.  The  name,  besides  here 
and  1  Chron.  i.  5,  occurs  only  Ezek.  xxxviii.  2  and  xxxix.  6. 
The  land  of  Gog,  the  ruler  over  Eosh,  Meshech  and  Tubal,  in 

1  But  the  Armenian  says  :  I  am  Hai  (a  descendant  of  Hailc],  we  are  Haikh 
(plur. ) ;  the  country  is  called  Haiastan.     They  do  not  call  themselves   after 
Thorgom. 

2  The  pedigree  is  :  Japheth,  Gamer,  Tiras,  Thorgom,  Haik,  Armenak  (Moses 
v.  Chorene,  i.  5.) 


GENESIS  X.  2-5.  311 

whose  army,  with  which  he  invades  the  Holy  Land,  are  found 
among  other  nations,  Gomer  and  Beth-Togarmah,  is  there  called 
by  this  name  (xxxviii.  6).  How  the  prefix  ma  in  JMO  is 
related  to  ju  (comp.  the  name  Pvyrjs  and  Gagu  of  the  cunei 
form  inscriptions,  Paradies,  p.  247)  is  as  hard  to  say  as  how 
Masis  (Great  Ararat)  is  related  to  Sis  (Little  Ararat),  MaKeria 
to  DTD  (1  Mace.  i.  1,  viii.  5),  Maaorayerai,  to  Terat,  and  the 
like.  Mordtmann,  in  his  attempt  to  decipher  the  Armenian 
cuneiform  inscriptions,  thinks  he  there  finds  the  meaning 
country  for  ma  (DMZ.  xxvi.  661).  But  however  this  may 
be,  MQ  shows  itself  to  be,  as  already  stated  by  Josephus  and 
Jerome,  and  as  since  Bochart  universally  accepted,1  a  Hebrew 
common  noun  for  that  many-branched  nomadic  nation  of 
northern  Asia,  called  by  the  Persians  Saka  (2a/cai),  and  by 
the  Greeks  Scythians.  Their  irruption  into  Hither  Asia,  in 
which  they  also  made  inroads  into  Palestine  and  threatened 
Egypt,  is  related  by  Herodotus,  i.  103-106,  and  was  very 
probably  the  model  of  that  picture  of  the  future  sketched  by 
Ezekiel  in  chs.  xxxviii.  and  xxxix.  (Dillm.,  Ed.  Meyer,  §  464). 
Whether  the  name  Gog  is  connected  with  the  dialectic  form 
of  the  Persian  kuh,  mountain-chain,  which  in  the  mouth  of 
Caucasian  races  is  of  like  pronunciation,  must  be  left  unsettled. 
Bergmann  (Les  Scythes,  1858)  remarks  that  the  Caucasian 
population  of  Thiulet  call  the  high  northern  mountain  chain 
ma-ghov  (yna-gogli),  and  the  nearer  and  lower  gov  (gogJi).  The 
table  does  not  enter  into  the  genealogical  ramification  of 
Magog. 

The  third  son  of  Japhet  is  H?.  This  is  the  name  of  the 
people,  and  then  of  the  land  of  the  Medes,  in  the  cuneiform 
inscriptions  mat  Maddda,  with  the  settled  epithet  of  the  distant 
(rufcuti),  Paradies,  p.  247,  according  to  which  the  name  seems 
to  have  originally  adhered  to  the  north-eastern  country  with 
the  capital  Ehaga  (Rhagae).  In  extra-Pentateuchal  literature, 
•n»  first  appears  in  the  book  of  Kings,  in  Jeremiah,  and  in 

1  Nordtmann,  above,  forms  an  exception.     By  J1JD  he  understands  Armenia, 
and  by  nD")jn,  Thorgenland= country  of  the  Turks,  DMZ.  xxvi.  622. 


312  GENESIS  X.  2-5. 


2  Isaiah,  and  D^S,  Persia,  first  in  Ezekiel  ;  Esther  and  Daniel 
name  ^TO  on  a  together. 

The  fourth  son  of  Japheth  is  |£,  the  people  and  land  of  the 
lonians  (Idoves,  'laFoves'),  on  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor  west  of 
Karia  and  Lydia.  They  were  the  earliest  developed  portion 
of  the  Greek  nation  (Ernst  Curtius,  Ueber  die  lonier  vor  der 
ionisclun  Wanderung,  1885).  In  these  lonians,  who  were 
pirates,  and  carried  on  a  slave  trade  (Annalen  Sargons,  xxi.  ; 
Joel  iii.  6  ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  13),  the  Greek  people  first  entered 
within  the  horizon  of  the  Phoenicians,  Assyrians,  and  Israelites. 
Subsequently  (Zech.  ix.  1  3  and  in  the  book  of  Daniel)  Javan 
became  throughout  the  East,  as  far  as  India,  the  collective 
name  per  synecdochen  of  the  Greeks  (see  Stade,  De  populo 
Javan,  1880). 

The  fifth  and  sixth  sons  of  Japheth  are  W&i  i>?n  (LXX. 
6&)/3eX  /cal  MOO-OX),  the  Moschi  and  Tibareni,  as  settled  since 
Bochart.  They  are  also  paired  in  Herodotus  (iii.  94,  vii.  78), 
and  four  times  in  Ezekiel.  The  Tibareni  dwelt  east  of  Ther- 
niodon  in  Pontus,  the  Moschi  between  the  sources  of  the 
Phasis  and  Cyrus.  The  cuneiform  histories  of  the  wars  show 
however  that  both  peoples  originally  settled  farther  south 
wards,  in  about  an  even  line  with  Cilicia  (see  Schrader, 
KAT\  82-84,  and  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Parodies,  250  sq.). 

The  seventh  son  of  Japheth  is  ETFI.  It  would  be  very 
convenient  to  understand  by  this  the  Thracians,  whom 
Herodotus  (v.  3)  calls  the  greatest  nation  after  the  Indians  ; 
but  the  name  is  phonetically  too  far  removed  from  DTD.  The 
name  of  the  Tyrseni  (Tyrrheni),  which  Nold.  and  Dillm. 
here  understand,  corresponds  in  sound.  This  is  the  name  of 
the  Etrurians,  who  are  regarded  as  Pelasgi,  but  their  immigra 
tion  from  Lydia  (Strabo,  v.  219)  is  only  a  legend  without 
foundation.  It  seems  to  me  more  probable  that  the  people 
of  the  country  north-west  of  the  Pontus  Euxinus,  through 
which  the  Tyras  (Dnjestr)  flows,  i.e.  the  Tyragetse  or 
Scythians  dwelling  on  the  Tyras,  are  intended.  It  was 
among  those  Scythians  of  the  district  of  the  Tyras  that 


GENESIS  X.  2-5.  313 

Herodotus  found  customs  similar  to  those  of  the  Thracians 
(iv.  104),  the  remains  of  whose  language,  e.g.  Ppl£a,  plant, 
Sanscrit  miki,  point  to  an  Aryan  origin  (Fliegier,  Beitrage  zur 
Ethnographic  Kleinasiens,  1875,  pp.  5-12). 

We  have  taken  the  sons  of  Gomer  together  with  himself, 

the   sons   of    Javan    follow    in   ver.    4.     The   first  is 


Eleusis  ('.EXeuo-/?)  is  out  of  question,  being  no  country  or  race, 
but  a  town.  Hellas  ('EXXa?)  would  be  welcome  in  this 
enumeration,  if  it  might  be  understood  of  rj  ^eya^  rE\\as, 
Magna  Grsecia,  i.e.  Lower  Italy.  The  west  Peloponnesian  land 
of  Elis  ('HXt?)  is  nearer  in  sound,  and  it  is  a  curious  chance 
that  a  river  *E\ia-a  ("EXtcrcra)  should  flow  through  it. 
According  to  this,  the  purple  brought  to  the  market  of  Tyre 
(Ezek.  xxvii.  7)  would  be  Peloponnesio  -  Laconian  (Herzog- 
Plitts,  EE.  iv.  490).  But  the  purple  with  which  Tyre 
adorned  herself  came  from  n^V*?  \8N£,  and  hence  the  ancient 
view  (Joseph.  Jer.),  that  n^'ta  means  the  JEolians  (AldKeu?)  ; 
and  the  Elisa-islands,  al  Alo\i$6<s  (1/770-01),  remains  the  most 
probable,  although  this  Hebraiziag  of  the  name,  with  the 
inclusion  of  the  nominative  termination  —  eZ?,  is  abnormal. 


Javan's  second  son  is  t^cnn.  As  abnormal  as  w  — 
would  be  t^Bnn  =  Tvpa^voL  (Tvpprjvoi),  the  name  of  the 
Etruscans,  who  according  to  Dionys.  Halic.  i.  30  and  inscrip 
tions,  called  themselves  Paaevai.  This  is  the  opinion  of 
Knobel,  though  he  does  not  deny  that  B*Khn  is  elsewhere 
Tartessus,  the  capital  of  Tartessis  or  Tartessia  on  the  Tar- 
tessus  —  Baetis  =  Guadalquivir,  a  Spanish  province  abounding 
in  tin  and  silver.  Here  however,  where  Tarshish  is  called  a 
son  of  Javan,  we  must  remember  that  before  the  Phoenicians 
took  advantage  of  the  mines  of  Tartessus,  Phokoeans  from  the 
Hellenic  land  of  Phokis  had  settled  there  (Herod,  i.  168). 
Tarsus  in  Cilicia  is  out  of  question  ;  it  arose  long  after  the 
period  which  the  table  represents,  and  is  written  pn  upon 
coins  and  inscriptions.1  D'ria  is  named  in  the  third  place 

1  That  Tarshish  lies  far  westward  is  shown  by  the  flight  of  Jonah  when  he 
had  been  directed  to  go  to  Nineveh  (Jonah   i.   3)  ;  and  that  the  journey  to 


314  GENESIS  X.  2-5. 

among  the  descendants  of  Javan.  These  are  the  Cypriotes, 
the  inhabitants  of  the  island  of  Cyprus,  situated  near  the 
Palestine-Syrian  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  with  KLTLOV  its 
chief  town.  This  island  is  called  prv  (pnx)  in  Assyrian  and 
native  inscriptions.  It  is  by  no  means  Cyprus  as  colonized 
by  the  Phoenicians  that  is  here  intended  by  the  genealogist, 
but  whether  Hellenic  or  Carian  pre-Hellenic  Cyprus  cannot 
be  decided.  In  the  fourth  place  are  mentioned  as  descendants 
of  Javan  &?i\  The  reading  ^"p,  1  Chron.  i.  7,  in  accord 
ance  with  which  Dillm.  understands  the  inhabitants  of  Ehodes 
and  of  the  islands  of  the  JEgean  Sea  generally,  is  as  little  to 
be  relied  on  as  Ha**!  for  nan,  which  we  noticed  at  ver.  3. 
Following  the  Targ.  Jer.  we  regard  D^p/i  as  softened  from 
D^TH>  the  name  of  the  race,  Illyrian  according  to  Strabo  and 
Appian,  Thracian  according  to  Dio  Cassius,  inhabiting  the 
Trojan  district  of  Aapbavia — not  Dodoni,  for  though  Awbavr) 
or  Ao&btovia  occurs  in  JEschylus,  Prom.  828,  and  Skylax,  as 
the  name  of  the  province  in  which  lay  upon  a  projecting  hill 
of  the  valley  of  Tsharakovista  an  ancient  oracle  discovered 
by  Carapanos,  it  has  not  given  a  name  to  any  race  of  people. 
The  text  of  the  concluding  formula  requires  some  insertion 
which  is  missing  (Ew.  Dillm.),  since  what  ver.  5  says  partly 
of  the  JV  \n,  is  partly  meant  of  all  the  r\&  ^:n :  From  these  the 
isles  of  the  nations  separated  themselves.  [This  did  the  sons  of 
Jcpheth]  after  their  lands,  each  according  to  his  language, 
according  to  their  families,  after  their  nations.  The  separa 
tion  TIBD  is  meant  of  severance  from  the  common  stock  for 
the  formation  of  independent  powers,  and  indeed  of  maritime 
powers,  D^sn  V.^  being  everywhere  in  the  Old  Testament  the 
European  insular  world.  Hence  npxp  can  only  refer  to  the 
jv  SJ2 ;  while  on  the  other  hand  everything  from  DfiinKa 
onwards  refers  to  all  the  Japhethites,  as  ver.  20  does  to  all 
the  Hamites,  and  ver.  31  to  all  the  Semites. 

Second  part:  the  Hamites,  vv.  6-20.     If  the  name  EH  has 

Tarshish  was  regarded  as  a  voyage  on  the  open  sea,  is  shown  in  the  translation 
of  SWlD  JTWK  by  v-kola.  IcttMffrns,  by  LXX.  and  Jerome. 


GENESIS  X.  6,  7.  315 

a  meaning  alluding  to  the  Hamitic  nations,  it  points  to  the 
south  tropical  zone  of  which  they  are  natives.  Chemi,  the 
ancient  name  by  which  the  Egyptians  called  their  country 
(the  mother  country  of  chemistry,  i.e.  the  art  of  discovering 
the  philosopher's  stone  Jcimija,  DMZ.  xxx.  11,  xxxvi.  534sqq.), 
a  name  which,  according  to  Plutarch  (de  Iside  et  Osir.  c.  33), 
means  the  pupil  of  the  eye  as  well  as  the  land  of  the  Nile, 
so  called  because  of  the  strikingly  dark  ashy  colour  given 
it  by  the  deposition  of  the  mud  of  the  Nile,  is  entirely 
out  of  question.  The  appellation  &n  p.?,  Ps.  cv.  23,  27, 
cvi.  22,  may  be  an  allusion  to  it.  The  Hamites,  registered 
by  Q,  form  the  commencement  in  vv.  6  and  7  :  And  sons 
of  If  am :  Cus  and  Mizraim  and  Phut  and  Canaan.  And 
sons  of  Cus :  Seba  and  Havilah  and  Sabtah  and  Ra'mah 
and  Sabteca.  And  sons  of  Ramah  :  vScbah  and  Deddn. 

Ham's  first  son  is  c^3.  This  is  the  name  of  the  people 
dwelling  south  of  Egypt,  in  Nubia  towards  Abyssinia,  and 
called  Ethiopians  in  the  narrower  sense ;  for  AWioires  in 
general  are  all  sun-burnt,  i.e.  dark-skinned  people.  They  are 
the  nation  to  whom  belonged  the  priest-state  Meroe,  the  Nuba 
kingdom  in  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies,  and  also  the  Axumitic 
kingdom  with  its  capital  Axum  in  Tigre  (see  Dillmann, 
Anfange  dcs  axum.  Reiches,  1879).  In  Egyptian  Kas  or  Kd 
(often  with  the  epithet  ^estt  the  miserable)  is  from  the  monu 
ments  of  the  12th  Dynasty  onwards  the  name  of  all  dark 
southern  nations ;  this  frequently  interchanges  with  Nehesu,  the 
special  name  of  the  negroes.  The  vocalization  Kus  is  also 
usual  in  the  Achaemenidean  inscriptions.  It  must  not  be 
assumed  that  the  Asiatic  Cosssei,  on  cuneiform  inscriptions 
Kassu,  a  people  dwelling  in  the  Zagros  mountains  between 
Babylonia  and  Media,  who  for  a  long  period  maintained 
a  supremacy  over  Babylon,  stand  in  a  secondary  relation 
to  the  African  Cushites.  The  view  that  at  ii.  13,  x.  8, 
the  Asiatic  Cosssea  is  to  be  understood,  and  that  this  is 
mistakenly  confounded  with  the  African  Gush  (Schr.  Homm. ; 
comp.  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  Die  Sprache  der  Kossaer,  1884, 


316  GENESIS  X.  6,  7. 

p.  61),  imputes  to  the  Bible,  without  adducing  any  proof,  a 
most  improbable  confusion. 


Ham's  second  son  is  D^V?,  the  name  of  the  country  which 
reaches,  according  to  Ezek.  xxix.  10,  xxx.  6,  from  the  north 
eastern  fort  of  Migdol  to  the  cataract  and  border  town  Syene 
(Asudn),  near  the  Cushite  boundary.  The  dual  does  not 
refer  to  the  two  mountain  chains  (the  Arabian  and  Libyan) 
which  bound  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  but  to  the  two  halves 
into  which  the  country  was  not  only  politically,  but  also 
physically  divided,  to  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  whence  the 
Pharaonic  kings  were  called  lords  of  the  upper  and  lower 
countries,  or  of  the  two  countries.  The  dual  is  based  upon  a 
chief  form  "">¥£  (for  which  we  have  ito,  Isa.  xix.  6,  xxxvii. 
2  5  ;  Micah  vii.  1  2)  ;  this  cannot  be  the  native  name  of  Egypt, 
for  "IS£  or  "ito  (corresponding  with  the  two  Assyrian  names 
Misir  and  Musur  of  the  cuneiform  inscription,  Paradies, 
p.  308  sqq.)  is  a  Semitic  word  for  enclosure  or  fortification; 
and  we  still  favour  Ebers'  view,  that  first  of  all  it  was  Lower 
Egypt  that  was  so  called,  as  a  country  protected  on  the  east 
by  a  long  girdle  of  fortresses  from  Pelusium  to  the  Klysma. 
This  name  was  subsequently  dualized  with  an  obliteration 
of  its  fundamental  meaning,  yet  with  so  strong  an  after 
effect  of  its  original  impress  of  Lower  Egypt,  that  Upper 
Egypt  is  specially  named  along  with  D'nsio,  Isa.  xi.  11  ;  Jer. 
xliv.  15. 

Ham's  third  son,  BIS,  gives  a  name  to  the  people  who 
beside  here  and  the  parallel  passage  in  Chronicles  are  also 
mentioned  by  Nahum  (iii.  9),  Jeremiah  (xlvi.  9)  and  Ezekiel 
(xxvii.  10,  xxx.  5,  xxxviii.  5).  The  name  has  no  reference 
to  the  ancient  Egyptian  word  for  a  bow,  pltet  (pet),  and  the 
group  of  nine  tribes  denoted  by  nine  bows  (Zeitschr.  fiir  ceg. 
Sprache  u.  AltertumsJcunde,  1865,  p.  25).  Nor  does  the 
Egyptian  name  Punt,  as  a  name  of  Arabia  (Ebers),  answer  ; 
for  that  Arabia  furnished  mercenary  troops  to  the  Egyptian 
army,  Nah.  iii.  9,  Jer.  xlvi.  9,  Ezek.  xxx.  5,  is  unknown 
arid  improbable  ;  besides,  Punt,  whither  the  naval  expedition, 


GENESIS  X.  6,  7.  31*7 

with  which  Dumichen  has  made  us  acquainted,  steered,  is  the 
land  of  frankincense  lying  east  of  Egypt  (the  Somali  coast, 
with  the  south  coast  of  Arabia  opposite  it).  &OVTIJS  is, 
according  to  Joseph.  Ant.  i.  6.  2,  the  founder  of  Libya,  whose 
inhabitants,  he  tells  us,  are  called  &OVTOL  ;  he  further  remarks, 
as  Jerome  copies  from  him  :  Mauritania  fluvius  usque  in  prce- 
sens  Phut  dicitur  omnisque  circa  cum  regio  Phutensis.  This 
river  is  also  witnessed  to  by  Ptolemy  (iv.  1,  3  :  $6ov6)  and 
Pliny  (v.  1,  §  13  :  Fut),  and  it  agrees  with  the  statements  of 
Josephus,  that  Phaiat  (interchanging  with  Lube)  is  the  Coptic 
name  of  Libya,  and  that  the  LXX.  always  reproduce  Dis  out 
side  the  ethnological  table  by  Ai fives.  Nevertheless  Nah. 
iii.  9  shows  that  DID  is  not  equivalent  with  DW  ;  DID  is  a 
district  situated  in  Libya,  and  its  name  was  used  synecdochi- 
cally  for  the  whole  of  Libya. 

The  name  of  Ham's  fourth  son,  |W3,  sounds  as  though  it 
denoted  a  people  of  the  low  country,  and  a  people  inhabiting 
the  low  land  on  the  Mediterranean  coast  between  Bhinokolura 
and  Berytus  are  actually  so  called,  then  also  those  in  the 
low  land  on  western  Jordan,  as  far  up  as  the  lake  of  Genne- 
saret,  and  hence  in  a  wider  sense  the  land  west  of  Jordan 
and  its  Phoenician  population.  The  Phoenicians  themselves 
called  their  eponymous  hero,  who  was  regarded  as  the 
brother  of  "Oo-^t?  (^Ta-ipis)  (Sanchoniathon  in  Eus.  Prcep. 
i.  10.  26),  Xva,  and  themselves  Xvaoi,  or,  as  Augustine 
heard  it  from  the  mouths  of  Punic  peasants,  Chanani.  Here 
in  the  table  Canaan  is  the  brother  of  Mizraim.  Eupolemus  too 
(in  Eus.  Prccp.  ix.  17)  brings,  according  to  a  supposed  Baby 
lonian  legend,  Xou/i.,  Mea-paeljj,  and  Xavadv  into  genealogical 
connection.  The  people  did  not  give  themselves  the  name  of 
Phoenicians,  they  were  called  Qoivuces,  as  dwelling  in  a  land 
of  palm  trees,  for  Europe  received  dates  from  Phoenicia 
(Hermipp  in  Athen.  i.  49  :  QoivUrj  Trape^eu  KapTrov  <£otWo?)  ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  Pceni  (Puni)  may  be  connected 
with  0ou/tf,  redness,  and  fotvos,  red,  and  refer  to  the  colour 
of  the  skin.  The  immigration  of  the  Canaan ites  from  the 


318  GENESIS  X.  6,  7. 

Erythraean  Sea  1  (i.e.  the  Indian  Ocean,  and  especially  the 
Persian  Gulf),  that  home  of  the  Hamitic  nations,  is  testified 
to  by  Herodotus  (i.  1,  vii.  89),  Strabo  and  Dionysius  Perieg  ; 
Justin  (xviii.  3)  adds  that  after  leaving  their  native  place 
they  first  inhabited  Assyrium  stagnum  (perhaps  the  marsh  land 
on  the  Lower  Euphrates)  before  turning  towards  the  Mediter 
ranean  coasts  and  founding  Sidon.  The  credibility  of  this 
testimony  is  acknowledged  by  Bertheau,  Ew.  Kn.  Lassen,  v. 
Gutschmid,  Dillm.  Konig  (Lehrgeb.  §  4).  In  vain  has  Movers 
(Phcen.  ii.  38-60)  cast  a  doubt  upon  it;  Lepsius,  in  his 
Nubian  Grammar,  has  shown  the  important  connection  with 
the  history  of  civilisation  in  which  this  credibly  attested  fact 
stands  (comp.  DMZ.  xxxv.  213-216).  During  their  progress 
from  east  to  west  the  Canaanites  would  find  time  and  oppor 
tunity  for  appropriating  the  Semitic  language.  We  have  no 
right  to  charge  the  genealogical  statements  of  the  table  witli 
falsehood,  and  perhaps  even  to  say,  with  Sprenger,  in  his 
Geography  of  Arabia,  that  it  is  the  calumny  of  the  compiler  of 
this  table  which  ascribed  the  Canaanites  to  the  Hamitic  race. 
In  ver.  7  follow  the  sons  of  Gush,  and  first  Kjp,  LXX. 
2a{3a,  Jerome,  Sdba.  With  Josephus  the  equation  :  Saba  = 
Meroe  (the  name  of  which  he  dates  from  the  time  of  Cam- 
byses),  is  a  self-evident  matter  (comp.  Ant.  i.  6.  2  with  ii.  10.  2). 
Meroe  is  the  capital  of  the  ancient  priest-state,  which  was 
temporarily  governed  by  queens,  upon  the  island  enclosed  by 
the  Nile  and  its  two  branches,  the  Astapus  (Blue  Nile)  and 
Astaboras  (Atbara-Takazze),  Diod.  i.  33.  Under  Tirhakah,  a 

1  The  question  whence  the  Indian  Sea,  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  the  Arabian 
Gulf,  which  Herodotus  treats  as  a  part  of  the  great  Red  Sea,  derive  the  name  of 
'Epufyii  6a\uffff<ty  is  not  yet  decided.  According  to  Ebers  (DMZ.  xxxv.  215),  it 
is  from  the  red-  skinned  Puna  (the  ancestral  nation  of  the  Phoenicians),  who 

as  'EpvtpuTot  gave  the  name  to  the  sea.     Wetzstein  once  told  me  that  ' 

•>•  s- 
6a.\a.irftx,  was  a  translation  resting  upon  a  misunderstanding  of 


for  so  was  properly  called  that  part  of  the  Indian  Ocean  which  washes  the 
southern  coast  of  Arabia.  There,  probably  in  the  mountain  -land  of  Hadramaut, 
where  there  are  two  harvests  in  the  year,  was  the  proper  starting-  place  of  the 
nations  of  Semitic  speech.  Perhaps  the  Ehkili  represents  the  relatively  oldest 
form  of  the  Semitic; 


GENESIS  X.  6,  7.  319 

king  of  the  Ethiopian  (xxvi.)  dynasty,  Napata  (inscr.  Nep!)  on 
the  hill  of  Baikal  became  the  centre  of  the  Ethiopian  ruling- 
house,  and  near  to  this  lay  another  Meroe  (inscr.  Merua\  which 
Tirhakah  had  royally  endowed.  It  is  this  Meroe,  not  the  one 
situated  to  the  south-east  of  it,  which  Herodotus  means,  ii.  29; 
he  heard  it  called  "the  metropolis  of  the  rest  of  the  Ethiopians." 
That  either  one  or  the  other  Meroe  bore  the  native  name  of 
Saba  we  are  not  indeed  able  to  confirm.  Hence  it  is  possible 
that  some  other  N2D  in  Nubia,  lying  farther  eastward,  received 
the  name  of  the  branch  of  the  Ethiopian  people  here  intended. 
Strabo,  xvi.  8,  names  a  Sabaitic  ostiary  and  a  port  of  Saba, 
and,  xvi.  10,  a  considerable  town,  2aj3a£,  which  is  however 
called  2a{3aT  by  Ptolemy,  situated  near  Berenice.  —  Among 

the  sons  of  Gush  iy^n  takes  the  second  place.  Having  with 
N3D  arrived  at  about  Massaua,  the  tribe  of  the  'AftaXlTat, 
(Ava\lrai\  on  the  AvaXlrr)?  /coX-Tro?  (sinus  Abcditu,  Plin. 
vi.  34),  in  the  town  Abala  (according  to  Juba  in  Plin.  vi.  35), 
south  of  the  straits  of  Bab-el-mandeb,  offers  itself  for  n^in  in 
close  geographical  sequence.  It  is  an  acknowledged  fact 
(DMZ.  xxxv.  213)  that  migrations  and  returns  of  Cushites  and 
Arabians  took  place  there  and  over  the  Arabian  Gulf.  Pliny  (vi. 
3  4)  relates  of  Juba  :  adcolas  Nili  a  Syene  non  JEthiopum  populos, 
sed  Arabum  esse  dicit  usqiie  ad  Meroen.  Thus  the  genealogical 
statement,  ver.  29,  does  not  stand  in  exclusive  contradiction  to 
the  Elohistic  statement  here.  —  The  third  son  of  Gush  : 


This  name  leads  us  from  the  African  coast  to  the  south  coast 
of  Arabia,  where  the  Chatromotitae  (Atramitae),  whose  capital 
was  Zdftfiada  (SdpftaTa,  2d{3ara,  Sabota),  had  settled  far  to 
the  east  of  the  Homeritaa.  It  lay  according  to  Ptolemy  east 
ward  of  the  Sabseans  (Himjarites),  according  to  the  Periplus, 
northward  of  the  coast  town  Kane  ;  Pliny  says  that  it  had 
sixty  temples,  and  was  a  mart  for  frankincense.  According 

to  DMZ.  xix.  252-255,  it  is  the  j\jjb,  of  Arabian  geographers, 
the  mn^  of  the  Himjaritic  inscriptions  situate  on  the  road 
from  Hadramaut  to  Higaz.  —  The  fourth  son  of  Gush  : 


320  GENESIS  X.  6, 


named  together  with  &o^  by  Ezekiel  (xxvii.  22)  as  bringing 
spices,  precious  stones  and  gold  to  the  mart  of  Tyre,  LXX. 
(in  Gen.  and  Chron.)  Pe^/pa.  Such  is  the  name  of  a  seaport 
town  on  the  Arabian  shore  of  the  Persian  Gulf;  in  Ptol. 
vi.  7.  14,  Pey/jia,  Peya/jia  ;  in  Steph.  Byz.  PTJ^/JLO,.  The 
Hellenizing  accords  with  nojn,  and  the  reason  that  the  town 

at   the  boundary  of  Oman  and  Bahrein  is  now  called  f^;> 

may  be  that  this  is  the  Arabianized  Hhegma.  Dillm.  however 
calls  attention  to  a  Sabaaan  nttsn  authenticated  on  inscriptions 
by  Hale'vy  (DMZ.  xxx.  122),  with  the  situation  of  which,  north 
of  Marib,  the  'Pa^avliai  named  by  Strabo,  xvi.  4.  24,  agree. 
Unfortunately  Strabo  is  the  only  witness  to  these  Eammanitse. 


—The  fifth  son  of  Gush  :  Jornp.  To  the  present  time  there 
is  nothing  further  known  than  what  is  said  by  Bochart,  that 
the  Ichthyophagi  of  the  coast  town  Sa^vBaKr]  in  Caramania, 
dwelling  eastward  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  are  intended.  There 
now  follow  two  sons  of  Eaf  ma  :  JTTC  NJB*.  In  ver.  2  7  and 
xxv.  3,  Arabian  tribes  of  Semitic  descent  are  so  called  ;  but 
there  is  no  reason  for  denying  a  more  ancient  Cushite 
stock  of  one  as  of  another  Arabian  commercial  people. 
Wetzstein  acknowledges  the  historical  nature  and  consistency 
of  both  genealogical  statements,  and  has  even  tried  to  show 
in  Ex.  c.  i.  to  the  2nd  ed.  of  my  Isaiah,  that  the  Sheba  and 
Dedan  who  conducted  the  caravan  transport  between  Egypt 
arid  Ethiopia  on  the  one  side,  and  the  lands  of  Tigris  and 
Euphrates  on  the  other,  were  the  Cushites,  who  as  he  thinks 
dwelt  within  the  Troglodytice  southwards  from  Berenice.  We 
cannot  indeed  infer  from  the  fact  alone  that  the  wares  with 
which,  according  to  Ezek.  xxvii.  15,  20,  comp.  xxxviii.  13, 
they  traded  are  especially  Ethiopian  articles  of  export,  that 
they  belonged  to  the  Cushite  race,  but  this  fact  does  not 
exhaust  the  proof  there  furnished.  Since  however  the  ex 
planation  of  Ka'ma  by  no  means  leads  over  Arabia  back 
wards  towards  north-eastern  Africa,  it  is  improbable  that  the 
genealogist  conceived  of  the  two  nations  that  sprung  from 


GENESIS  X.  8-10.  321 

him  as  north-east  African.  The  view  of  a  Cushite  foun 
dation  of  their  racial  peculiarity  seemed  to  him  justified 
without  such  localization.  The  right  place  however  to 
discuss  these  two  peoples  as  Arabian  will  occur  at  ver.  28, 
xxv.  3. 

The  Elohistic  register  of  the  Hamites  now  receives  its 
continuation  in  a  Jahvistic  extract,  which  even  at  the  first 
glance  is  characterized  as  such  by  the  Divine  name  nirv 
being  used  just  where  we  expect  DTi^N.  The  names  of  the 
Hamites  so  far  have  been  names  of  nations;  the  Hamite  of 
the  extract,  vv.  8-12,  is  a  person  of  world-wide  importance, 
vv.  8-10  :  And  Gush  begat  Nimrod,  he  began  to  be  a  mighty 
one  on  earth.  He  was  a  mighty  hunter  before  Jahveh,  there 
fore  it  is  said :  Like  Nimrod  a  mighty  hunter  before  Jahveh. 
And  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  Babel  and  Erech  and 
Accad  and  Calneh  in  the  land  of  Shinar.  The  Jahvistic  pen 
is  also  manifested  by  1^,  instead  of  the  more  definite  T^n 
(DMZ.  xxiii.  622  sq.).  The  name  *no?,  besides  here,  occurs 
only  Micah  v.  5,  where  Assyria  is  called  "  the  Land  of  Nimrod." 
The  view  of  Oppert,  that  Nimrodki  (i.e.  Nimrod  with  the 
local  determinative  ki)  was  an  ancient  name  of  Elam,  does  not 
commend  itself.  Neither  is  Nimrod  (LXX.  NeftpooS)  the  per 
sonification  of  a  country  towards  the  sun  (Sayce),  but  a  hero 
in  the  flesh,  though  one  encompassed  with  legends ;  the  name, 
found  apparently  with  the  preformative  na,  has  not  yet  been 
discovered  in  inscriptions.  The  name  of  the  hero  of  the 
Baby lonio- Assyrian  national  epos,  who  undoubtedly  answers 
to  the  scriptural  Nimrod,  is  commonly  though  not  certainly 
read  Izdubar.  The  conjecture  that  YIBJ  =  Nu- Marad,  the 
man  (hero),  from  Marad,  because  the  god  whom  Izdubar 
invokes  above  all  others  as  his,  is  the  god  of  the  mid- 
Babylonian  town  Marad  (Paradies,  p.  220  ;  KAT.  92  sq.),  is 
interesting.1  Nimrod's  insertion  here  in  the  table  rests, 

1  Another  conjecture  has  been  advanced  by  P.  ITaupt  in  his  English  notice 
of  Friedr.  Delitzsch's  "  Kossaer,"  viz.  that  in  T~IEO  is  involved  the  name  of  the 
Cossaean  god  of  war  and  hunting,  Maraddas.  The  Arabians  explain  the  name 

X 


322  GENESIS  X.  8-10. 

according  to  Schrader  and  others,  upon  the  confusion  of  the 
Egypto-Nubian  Kes,  tro,  with  the  Babylonian  Kal  (Kassu}. 
But  still  more  ancient  than  the  Nubian  t^'lD  is  the  ^'13  settled 
on  the  Erythrsean  Sea,  and  especially  the  Persian  Gulf, 
which  thence  peopled  Southern  Arabia  and  North-Eastern 
Africa,  and  everywhere  disseminated  a  culture  resembling  the 
Egyptian,  with  which  it  also,  as  the  Cannes  -  myth  says, 
enriched  Babylonia  (see  Lepsius'  Nubian  Grammar,  and  Geo. 
Ebers  in  DMZ.  xxxv.  213-216).  Hitherto  it  was  even 
thought  that  the  Ethiopian  type  could  be  recognised  in  the 
features  of  Izdubar  (Paradies,  note  22),  while  now  he  is  placed 
as  a  Cossaean  out  of  all  connection  with  the  Hamitic  Gush. 
But  there  are  circumstances  enough,  to  warn  us  against  any  pre 
mature  judgment,  such  e.g.  as  that  it  has  not  yet  been  possible 
to  assign  their  ethnological  place  to  the  Cossaei,  their  language 
being  neither  Surnerian  nor  Elamite  or  Median  (Friedr. 
Delitzsch,  Kossaer,  1884)  ;  that  two  Babylonian  provinces  are 
called  Meluclia  and  MaJcan,  which  are  elsewhere  the  names 
of  -Ethiopia  and  Egypt  (Paradies,  pp.  56,  129-131)  ;  that 
the  Greek  legend  of  Cepheus  and  Memnon  brings  into  mani 
fold  mutual  relations  Africano-Ethiopian  and  Central-Asian 
matters.1  Till  further  notice  we  adhere,  with  Ideler, 
Letronne,  Lepsius,  Brugsch,  to  the  view  that  a  connection 
exists  between  the  oldest  Babylonian  and  the  oldest  Egyptian 
civilisation.  The  authors  of  new  industries  are  also  intro 
duced,  iv.  20  sq.,  with  iTn  Kin,  and  ^nn  Kin  recalls  the  new 
beginnings  related  iv.  26,  ix.  20.  The  new  tendency  which 
arose  with  Nimrod  was  that  of  a  ~>i23,  i.e.  of  a  man  in  power,  who 
by  courage,  energy  and  terror  keeps  the  surrounding  country 
in  subjection.  He  was  in  the  first  place  a  Ttf""ii3ji,  mighty  in 
hunting  (comp.  T>*  SH\  xxv.  27),  a  great  hunter  (1JV  is  a  word 
which  first  appears  Jer.  xvi.  1  6).  As  the  added  'n  "ODp  is  taken 

by  43.  U)  |,  the  powerful,  the  bold,  the  stedfast  ;  the  noun-form  would  be  like 
and 


. 

1  See    Hellanikos    in    Steph.    Byz.    s.v.   x.a)3u,7oi,   and  J.    Lowenherz,    die 
der  altUassischen  Kunst,  1861. 


GENESIS  X.  8-10. 

from  the  popular  mouth — for  anything  proverbial  is  intro 
duced  by  i»£  ja-fy,  like  1  Sam.  x.  12  ;  comp.  Num.  xxi.  27 — - 
it  does  not  mean  contra  Dominum,  as  the  Latin  versions 
understand  the  evavriov  of  the  LXX. :  in  a  manner  hostile  to 
and  defiant  of  Jehovah,  for  which  *JB"?JJ  (Isa.  Ixv.  3)  would 
be  expected  rather  than  '3Bp  (Luke  xv.  18,  evd>Tnov\  nor, 
according  to  Jehovah's  will  and  pleasure,  which  neither 
'pfifc  nor  W3  can  by  themselves  signify,  but  it  is  an 
adjunct  to  Txnnj,  which  raises  this  to  ideality  (comp. 
D*rfo6,  Jonah  iii.  3,  and  TO>  @eo>,  Acts  vii.  20),  or, 
like  e.g.  1  Chron.  xii.  22,  makes  it  superlative  (Perizon. 
Bocliart,  Eosenm.  Kn.  Dillm.).  Jahveh  Himself,  the  chief 
and  infallible  appraiser  of  all  things,  regarded  him  as  a  hunt 
ing  hero,  and  did  not  know  his  equal  on  earth.  It  is  not  the 
hunting  of  men,  but  of  beasts,  the  opposite  of  the  peaceful 
shepherd  life,  that  is  intended.  The  constellation  Orion  (in 
the  Bible  ^D3)  is  by  astrologers  called  Algebar  (Algebra)  in 
the  same  sense.  And  because  the  hunting  of  animals  is 
intended,  the  continuation  toppp  JW&O  snni  seems  extra 
ordinary,  and  suggests  the  view  that  ver.  9  is  an  insertion 
which  destroys  the  connection  existing  when  vv.  8  and  10 
are  combined,  as  by  Dillmann.  But  it  is  just  in  the  union  of 
the  passions  for  the  chase  and  for  war  that  Mmrod  is  the 
prototype  of  the  Babylonio- Assyrian  kings, — the  native  legend 
of  Izdubar,  the  mighty  hero  of  the  chase  and  of  war,  who 
subdued  the  country  from  the  Persian  Gulf  to  the  Armenian 
mountains,  and  raised  himself  so  highly  in  the  estimation  of 
the  gods,  that  Istar  the  sovereign  of  Warka  desired,  but  in  vain, 
to  have  him  for  her  husband,  is  here  divested  of  its  mytho 
logical  accessories  and  brought  down  to  the  plain  prose  of 
simple  facts.  What  the  narrative  has  in  view  is  not  the 
greatness  of  Nimrod  as  a  hunter,  but  his  importance  as  the 
founder  of  a  state.  The  hunter  without  an  equal  was  also  the 
first  monarch.  Four  towns,  of  which  Babel  is  the  first,  were 
the  JT^frO  of  his  kingdom,  which  does  not  here,  as  in  Jer. 
xxvi.  1,  signify  so  much  the  temporal  commencement  as  the 


324  GENESIS  X.  8-10. 

first  component  part,  the  primitive  condition.  The  name  of 
the  country,  "1W,  occurs,  besides  Gen.  x.  xi.  xiv.,  only  Josh, 
vii.  2 1  (mantle  from  Shinar) ;  Isa.  xi.  11  (as  a  land  of  the 
dispersion) ;  Zech.  v.  1 1  (as  a  land  of  traders)  ;  Dan.  i.  2  (as 
the  land  of  Nebuchadnezzar).  It  is  the  same  word  as  sumSr  in 
the  self-appellation  of  the  Babylonian  and  also  of  the  Assyrian 
kings,  as  "  Kings  of  Sumer  and  Accad,"  in  which  combination 
Sumer  means  North  and  Accad  South  Babylonia.  The  form 
"i]Wt?  answers  to  the  native  form  hunger,  which  interchanges 
with  sumSr,  as  dingdr,  god,  does  with  dimer  (Parodies,  198). 
In  its  biblical  use  *)yw  has  been  generalized  into  the  collective 
name  of  Babylonia  (of  the  'Irak  el-* arabi,  exclusive  of  Meso 
potamia).1  The  first  of  the  four  towns,  ^3,  will  be  spoken  of 
when  we  come  to  the  separation  of  languages  and  nations. 
The  situation  of  ?pK,  Gr.  'Op'^orj,  is  shown  by  the  South 
Babylonian  ruins,  Warka,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Euphrates. 
This  Erech  or  Uruk  (whence  K^SHN,  Ezra  iv.  9,  those  of 
Erech,  like  Assurb.  Sm.  2500:  arkaiti,  she  of  Erech,  i.e. 
the  Goddess  Nana),  Sumerian  Unug,  was  in  the  Persian 
period  the  sacred  necropolis  of  Chaldea.  "f?K  has  till  now 
been  authenticated  by  the  inscriptions  only  as  the  name  of  a 
province ;  as  a  town  however  it  has  been  identified  with 
Agade,  which  together  with  Sipar  formed  the  double  town  of 
Sepharvaim,  north  of  Babel,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Euphrates 
(Paradies,  198).  Dr.  Herm.  Hilprecht  has  now  discovered 
Accad  as  also  the  name  of  a  town  in  an  inscription  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  I.,  first  published  by  him  in  1883.  It  is 
there  said,  Col.  ii.  z.  50  :  Sin  u  Belit  alu  Ak-ka-di  ildni  sa 
lit  Haitian,  i.e.  Sin  and  the  mistress  of  the  town  Accad  (i.e. 
the  Goddess  Anunitum,  i.e.  Istar  as  the  morning  star),  the 
goddess  of  the  house  of  Habbari.2  fwpa  here  and  Amos  vi.  2 

1  Perhaps  however  this  is  the   original  geographical  meaning.     See  Tiele, 
Babylonisch-assyr.  Gesch.  (1886)  i.  72  sq. 

9  •? 

2  The  Syriac  wrongly  reads  j^D  |  >  in  accordance  with  which  Ephrem  regards 

this  second  town  of  Nimrod  as  Achar  =  Nisibis  :  the  Nisibian  dialect  is  also 
called  the  Acharian. 


GENESIS  X.  11,  12.  325 

is  not  yet  made  certain  by  inscriptions  (see  on  the  writing, 
Baer's  Genesis,  p.  79,  note,  and  Duodecim,  p.  70) ;  h/>?,  Isa.  x.  9, 
"33,  Ezek.  xxvii.  23,  according  to  Targums  ii.  iii.  Euseb.  Jer. 
is  Ktesiphon,  north-east  of  Babylon  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
Tigris,  which,  according  to  Pliny,  vi.  30,  was  founded  by  the 
Parthians  in  Chalonitis  (XdXcovlris  with  the  town  XaXa, 
Isid.  mans.  Parth.  3),  perhaps  Kulunu  on  inscriptions  (Paradies, 
225).  These  four  towns  formed  the  foundation  of  Nimrod's 
kingdom,  which  did  not  however  continue  limited  to  Babylonia, 
but  extended  over  Assyria,  vv.  11,  12  :  From  the  same  land 
he  went  out  towards  Assur  and  built  Nineveh  and  Rehoboth 
'Ir  and  Kelach.  And  Resen  between  Nineveh  and  Kelach — 
this  the  great  city.  Whether  "WK,  lla,  is  the  subject  (LXX. 
Jos.  Onk.  Syr.  Jer.  Saad.  Ven.  Luth.)  or  a  locative  (Targ.  ii.) 
is  at  present  scarcely  a  question :  it  is  equal  to  fnMSte  (Tuch, 
By.  Kn.  Hofm.  Dillm.  and  the  Assyriologists),  for  nwi 
VD!>»»,  10a,  points  in  anticipation  to  the  extension  of  the 
kingdom,  and  requires  a  single  ruler;  sufficient  force  is  not 
given  to  the  nwi,  if  the  four  cities  mean  the  fundamental 
commencement  of  the  kingdom  of  Nimrod,  as  distinguished 
from  another,  not  Nimrod's.  Besides,  tradition  knows  of 
Assur  as  the  name  of  a  nation,  and  not  of  a  founder  of 
a  kingdom,  and  mythology  knows  it  as  the  name  of  a 
specially  Assyrian  national  deity  foreign  to  the  Baby 
lonians  (Paradies,  pp.  252-254).  To  this  must  be  added, 
that  Micah  calls  Assyria  TIJM  pK  (v.  5).  Babylon  is  indeed 
the  motherland  of  Assyria,  Babylonian  culture  and  power 
having  advanced  northwards  towards  Assyria,  the  country  on 
the  upper  course  of  the  Tigris.  Assur  was  at  first  an  offshoot 
of  Babel,  and  did  not  till  afterwards  become  an  independent 
kingdom.  It  is  intentionally  that  the  narrator  does  not 
continue  with  N.V.^,  he  means  to  bring  forward  what  he 
is  relating  as  a  fresh  start  in  which  the  Shinar  foundation 
was  carried  on.  In  Hos.  vii.  11  likewise  we  find  "fi$K 
for  rryitste,  and,  Deut.  xxviii.  68,  D^yp  for  n^l?1? ;  the  ace. 
of  direction  without  all  is  still  more  frequent  than  with  ah. 


326  GENESIS  X.  11,  12. 

The  first  of  Mmrod's  cities  upon  Assyrian  soil  is  n^a  with 
6,  like  ruip  (comp.  Dillm.  jEth.  Gramm.  §  127c),  but  with 
out  the  cause  of  this  final  sound  being  evident;  LXX. 
writes  Nivevi  (for  which  we  have  classically  r\  Ntz/o?), 
and  on  inscriptions  the  name  reads  as  Nina  or  Ninua,  com 
pounded  (if  Sumerian)  from  Ni  and  ndt  w7hich  seems  to  mean 
place  of  rest  (Paradies,  260),  so  that  rro'o  might  have  been 
Hebraized  with  reference  to  HJ3,  mj.  It  is  etymologically 
devoid  of  significance,  that  the  name  is  written  with  the 
ideogram  of  the  dwelling  and  therein  the  ideogram  of  the  fish 
(Assyr.  nun)  —  this  is  writing  after  the  manner  of  the  rebus  or 
logogriph.1  The  ruins  of  Nineveh  are  marked  by  the  village 
Kujundshik  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tigris,  opposite  Mosul, 
north  of  the  Chausar,  which  there  empties  itself  into  the  Tigris, 
and  by  the  hill  Nebi  Junus,  situate  south  of  the  Chausar. 
Hence  the  town  was  cut  through  by  the  Chausar,  the  royal 
palaces  lying  on  both  its  banks.  The  name  of  the  second 
town,  "^y  nmrp,  means  the  broad  place  of  a  town  in  which  it 
issues,  i.e.  the  suburb  of  the  city  proper,  probably  (Parad. 
261)  the  north-eastern  suburb  of  Nineveh,  the  rebit  Nina 
lying  towards  the  mountains  (Asarh.  i.  53).  We  have  more 
accurate  information  concerning  the  third  city,  rfe,  according 
to  the  inscriptions  Calhu,  built  by  Shalmanassar  I.,  and  restored 
from  its  ruins  by  Asurnasirpal,  situate  in  the  sharp  angle  be 
tween  the  Tigris  and  the  great  Zab  which  flows  into  the  Tigris, 
where  now  are  found  the  village  and  hill  of  Nimrud.  It  differs 
from  npn,  2  Kings  xvii.  6  and  1  Chron.  v.  26,  the  Assyrian 
settlement  of  Israelite  exiles,  and  from  ^n  =  Cilicia  (DMZ. 
1861,  p.  626  sq.).  Whether  KaXa^vrj,  the  Assyrian  pro 
vince  mentioned  by  Strabo,  xvi.  1.  1,  KaXaKivrj  in  Ptol.  vi. 
1.  2,  is  to  be  connected  with  rfe)  or  with  r6n,  must  be  left  un 
determined.  On  the  situation  of  the  fourth  city,  jcn,  the  text 
gives  direct  information.  It  lay  between  Nineveh  and  Kelach, 


1  HaleVy's  comparison  of  the  Rabbinic  Htt^H  {1&,  as  e.g.  pDD  110,  Mil  of 
the  poor-  ^11  n  (mustard),  is  here  in  place  ;  see  Wisse.nc.haft,  Kunst,  Judentlium 
(1838),  pp.  237-240. 


GENESIS  X.  13,  1-1.  327 

therefore  on  the  east  side  of  the  Tigris  between  Nimrud  and 
Kujundschik,  and  the  name  (mistaken  by  LXX.  Ven.  for  pi) 

s. 

seems  to  be  distorted  from  rSs-eni  (  =    *^\   ^^);  monumental 

literature  however  leaves  us  still  in  the  lurch  concerning  this 
town.  All  the  less  can  the  statement  •"frian  "W  *^n  apply 
to  this  forgotten  Kesen.  Nor  is  the  matter  mended  by 
Hitzig's  transposition  (Daniel,  p.  106  sq.),  "and  Nineveh 
between  Kelach  and  Besen,"  for  Nineveh  already  stands,  11&, 
just  where  it  is  expected.  It  may  now  be  regarded  as  proved 
that  the  closing  remark  refers  to  the  four  cities  taken  together  ; 
the  four  by  reason  of  their  wide  extension  lay  near  to  each 
other  and  gave  the  impression  of  a  great  district,  a  combined 
Tetrapolis.  The  narrator  was  writing  at  a  time  when  this 
great  district  of  towers  and  palaces  was  not  yet  called  per 
synecdochen  Nineveh  as  it  was  after  Sanherib,  and  on  the  other 
hand  at  a  time  when  Asshur,  which  preceded  the  capitals 
Nineveh  and  Kelach,  and  was  the  oldest  capital  of  the 
kingdom  situated  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Trigis  southward  of 
the  triangle  of  the  Tigris-Zab,  was  entirely  in  the  background. 
It  is  also  worthy  of  remark  that  the  northern  town  Dur 
Sarruken,  which  together  with  the  four  forms  a  Pentapolis, 
is  left  unmentioned  ;  it  bears  the  name  of  its  builder  Sargon  I. 
(KAT.  405),  whose  accession  to  the  government  falls  in  the 
year  722. 

Nimrod  represents,  not  a  single  people,  but  a  great  empire  ; 
now  follow,  vv.  13,  14,  the  descendants  of  Mizraim,  who 
already  by  the  plural  form  of  their  names  announce  themselves 
as  nations  :  And  Mizraim  begat  the  Ludim  and  the  *Anamim 
and  the  Lehabim  and  the  Naphtuchim  and  the  Pathrusim 
and  the  Casluchim,  whence  went  forth  the  Philistines  and  the 


Caphtorim.  The  D*l  (Chr.  Chethib  :  D"1"6)  are  mentioned 
(Ezek.  xxvii.  10)  as  an  element  of  the  army  of  Tyre,  and 
(Ezek.  xxx.  5  ;  Jer.  xlvi.  9)  of  the  army  of  Egypt  ;  they  were 
evidently  a  warlike  people  whose  chief  weapon  was  the  bow, 
Jer.  ibid.  ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  19.  We  do  not  however  know  what  people 


328  GENESIS  X.  13,  14. 

is  intended ;  according  to  Movers,  the  old  Berber  stock  of  the 
Lewata  settled  on  the  Syrtes ;  according  to  Kn.,  the  Egyp- 
tianized  portion  of  the  Semitic  Lud  settled  in  North-Eastern 
Egypt  (225);  according  to  Ebers,  the  original  stock  of  the 
Egyptians  who  were  called  Hutu  (Lutu\  which  means  men  in 
general  (see  Jesaia,  3rd  ed.  p.  690),  all  unsatisfactory  conjec 
tures.  The  &®W  also  are  still  undiscovered.  LXX.  transposes 
the  word  into  'Eve/jLerieifj,,  which  accords  in  sound  with  the 
Egyptian  emhit,  north,  whence  Kn.  understands  the  inhabit 
ants  of  the  Delta.  Ebers  on  the  contrary  explains  the  name 
according  to  the  Egyptian  an-aamu,  wandering  neat-herds,  and 
understands  them  as  a  portion  of  an  Asiatic  nomadic  people 
who  settled  in  the  marshes  on  the  bucolic  arm  of  the  Nile  and 


elsewhere.  The  name  DUPl?  occurs  only  in  the  ethnographic 
table,  but  is  certainly  only  another  form  for  D^IP,  Nan.  iii.  9, 
2  Chron.  xii.  3,  xvi.  8  ;  Dan.  xi.  43  =  Libyans,  who  are  called 
in  Egyptian  Temliu  (Tehennu),  but  also  Lcbu  (Lulu),  perhaps 
as  inhabitants  of  a  dry  land  (com p.  Kopt.  libe,  thirst,  and 


the  name  of  the  stony  deserts  &$  =  $  ^).      The   ^nnsj    are, 

according  to  the  interesting  explanation  of  Kn.  and  Eb., 
the  inhabitants  of  middle  (Memphitic)  Egypt,  as  ol  (no)  TOV 
<&6a  of  Ptali  or  Hephaestos,  whose  Egyptian  name  is  also 
paraphrased  in  Phoenician  nna.  With  these  are  fitly  joined 


D^p-ins,  the  inhabitants  of  D'ina  =pet-r£s,  the  land  of  the  south, 
i.e.  of  Upper  Egypt  (Isa.  xi.  11,  and  twice  in  both  Jeremiah 
and  Ezekiel).  The  explanation  pa-Hathor  (DMZ.  xxx.  404), 
which  leaves  the  D  unexplained,  is  mistaken  ;  rSs  means  the 
south,  and  na  is  equivalent  to  LDD  in  the  name  Potiphar.  The 


rp3  are  the  sixth  Misraite  tribe.  The  LXX.  transposes 
this  into  Xaapodvieifj,  (Complut.  Xao-X&we/yu,),  with  which 
nothing  can  be  done.  Since  Bochart  the  Casluchim  have 
been  regarded  as  the  Colchians  on  the  eastern  coast  of  the 
Euxine,  but  whence  the  D  in  the  name  ?  Stark,  Ebers,  Kn. 
reply  by  the  expedient  that  the  Colchians  originally  settled  on 


GENESIS  X.  13,  14.  329 

mons  Casius,  the  name  of  which  may  be  explained  in  Coptic 
by  Kas-Ukh,  Hill  of  drought,  and  that  thus  the  D^nbos  are  the 
inhabitants  of  Kacnwris,  the  dry  salt  region  of  the  Egyptian 
Mediterranean  coast,  from  the  eastern  limit  of  the  overflow  of 
the  Nile  to  the  southern  boundary  of  Palestine,  who  subse 
quently  migrated  to  the  Black  Sea.  Certainly  the  Colchians 
were,  according  to  the  unanimous  testimony  of  the  ancients, 
esteemed  as  JEgyptiorum  antiqua  sdboles  (Ammian,  xxii.  8  ; 
comp.  Avienus,  v.  8*73  sq. :  Colchus  feraci  Exid  ab  jtSSgypto). 
It  is  not  quite  probable  that  they  originally  inhabited  Casiotis 
(see  Alfred  von  Gutschmied  in  the  Lit.  Centralttatt,  1869,  Col. 
107  sq.) ;  but  Targ.  Jer.  ii.  also  translates  DTitaa  by  \siDD^D, 
i.e.  TlevTacr^oimTai,  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Pentaschoinos(ri), 
in  the  extreme  north-east  of  Egypt,  distant  five  G-^OLVOL  from 
Casius ;  in  opposition  to  which  Targ,  Jer.  i.  has  »B^1B!MB,  i-e. 
TLevTairoKlraL,  inhabitants  of  the  five  town  land,  i.e.  of  Cyren- 
aica.  Hyde  Clark  thinks  he  has  discovered  that  a  Caucasian 
language,  the  Ude,  strikingly  resembles  the  Basmurian  dialect 
of  the  Coptic.  The  Dnnaa  also  are  by  some  transposed  to 
Egypt,  because  they  are  called  descendants  of  Misraim. 
Saadia  understands  it  of  the  inhabitants  of  Dimjati  (Damietta), 
Dietrich  (Merx'  Archiv,  iii.  313  sqq.)  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
region  of  Buto  and  the  island  Chemmis,  not  far  from  the 
Sebennytic  mouth  of  the  Nile,  explaining  the  name  kah-pet-Hdr, 
i.e.  the  district  belonging  to  Hor  (Apollo) ;  but  then  the 
initial  n  of  the  god's  name  would  have  disappeared,  which 
is  not  a  recommendation.  Still  less  are  the  Cappadocians 
intended,  as  was  inconsiderately  inferred  by  the  ancients 
(LXX.  Deut.  ii.  23  ;  Amos  ix.  7  ;  Targums,  Syr.  Jerome),  from 
the  similarity  of  sound  of  the  SD  ;  besides,  Cappadocia  is  in 
Hebrew  always  written  with  p.  The  consonants  of  "iinso  are 
found  together,  though  in  a  different  order,  in  Capreatce,  comp. 
by  Kriicke  (VolJcertafel,  1837);  but  this  is,  according  to 
Plin.  v.  33,  the  name  of  an  otherwise  absolutely  unknown 
Asiatic  tribe.  The  most  probable  conjecture  still  is  that 
are  the  Cretes  (Kpfjres,  anciently  KovpTJres) ;  for  (1)  ac- 


330  GENESIS  X.  15-19. 

cording  to  Deut.  ii.  23,  Amos  ix.  4,  Jer.  xlvii.  4,  the  Philistines 
migrated  from  "tfnM  ^  and  these  are  called,  1  Sam.  xxx.  14, 
Zeph.  ii.  5,  Ezek.  xxv.  16,  BW?,  which  surely  means  Cretes. 
(2)  Extra-biblical  information  also  connects  Egypt,  Crete  and 
Philistia  :  a  myth  in  Diodor.  Sic.  Ixvii.  70  says  that  Ammon, 
being  attacked  by  Saturn  and  the  Titans,  fled  to  Crete  ;  Mivwa 
is,  according  to  Steph.  Byz.,  an  ancient  name  of  Gaza,  and 
was,  according  to  Strabo,  Ptolem.  Plin.,  also  the  name  of  a 
Cretan  town.  So  too  is  QciXdcrapva,  the  name  of  a  seaport 
town  011  the  north-west  coast  of  Crete,  which  has  a  similarity 
of  sound  with  the  name  of  the  Philistines.  It  is  also  worthy 
of  notice  that  Tacitus,  Hist.  v.  2,  confusing  the  Jews  with 
the  Palestinians  =  Philistines,  makes  the  former  immigrate 
from  Crete.  According  to  what  has  been  said,  the  relative 
clause,  DW^a  D^D  m's  "iE\s%,  seems  to  have  been  removed  from 
its  right  place  after  D*nnS3.  The  chronicler  and  the  ancient 
translators,  however,  already  read  it  in  its  present  position, 
and  it  must  be  esteemed  possible  that  the  Philistines  were 
as  to  their  origin  an  Egypto-Casluchian  colony,  who  occupied 
the  southern  coastland  below  Gaza,  subsequently  received 
additions  from  Crete,  and  then,  according  to  Deut.  ii.  23,  en 
larged  their  district  by  destroying  the  'Avvim  (though  not 
entirely,  Josh.  xiii.  3)  who  had  settled  in  the  plain  west  of 
the  hill  country  of  Judah.  It  may  be  a  reminiscence  of  this 
twofold  descent  which  has  been  preserved  in  the  distinction 
of  D^nt^S  or  WS  on  the  one  side,  and  '•rna  or  "HS  on  the  other. 
The  relative  clause  in  itself  declares  only  the  local,  not  the 
genealogical  origin  (comp.  ver.  11;  Nah.  i.  11).  The  latter 
however,  and  hence  the  Hamitico-Egyptian  descent  of  the 
Philistines,  seems  to  be  also  intended,  for  we  cannot  assume 
that  the  ethnographical  table  would  leave  the  Philistines  as 


Now  follow  the  descendants  of  Canaan,  the  last  named, 
ver.  6,  of  the  sons  of  Ham,  vv.  15-19:  And  Canaan  begat 
Sidon  and  Cheth.  And  the  Jebusite  and  the  Emorite  and  the 
Giryashite.  And  the  Chivite  and  the  ArJcite  and  the  Slnitc. 


GENESIS  X.  15-19.  331 

And  the  Arvaditc  and  the  Semarite,  and  the  Hamdthite :  and 
afterwards,  were  the  families,  of  the  Canaanite  spread  abroad. 
And  the  border  of  the  Canaanite  extended  from  Sidon  towards 
Gcrdr  as  far  as  'Azza,  towards  Sodom  and  *  Amor  a  and  Admah 
and  Seboim  as  far  as  Lesd '.  At  the  head  of  the  names  of 
the  eleven  stands  PV  as  the  first-born.  According  to  Justin, 
xviii.  3,  Sidon  was  the  first  city  built  by  the  Phoenicians,  who 
had  extended  to  the  Mediterranean,  and  named,  as  he  tells 
us,  a  piscium  ubertate,  rather  a  piscatu,  TV.  The  Phoenicians 
called  themselves,  from  this  their  mother  town,  Q'OITX. 
Whether  the  additional  name  nsn  which  it  bears,  Josh.  xix.  28, 
xi.  8,  is  a  distinguishing  attribute  is  questionable,  since  in 
Sank.  ii.  38  a  Great  Sidon  (Sidunu  rdbu),  an  epithet  denoting 
superiority,  and  a  Little  Sidon  (Sidunu  sihni),  are  distinguished 
(KAT.  103).  Homer,  in  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey,  knows  only 
one  ^isScov,  and  not  yet  Tyre,1  which  in  the  time  of  David 
already  begins  to  obscure  the  splendour  of  Sidon.  Tyre  is  left 
out  of  the  table,  because  it  was  of  only  secondary  importance 
with  respect  to  Sidon.  Merx  (BL.  art.  "  Volkertafel  "),  follow 
ing  de  Goeje,  regards  the  names  nn  to  ^.nn,  with  the  whole  of 
ver.  19,  as  a  later  insertion,  because  the  geographical  order  of 
the  Canaanites  is  interrupted  by  the  five  names,  and  no  ft'bj, 
i.e.  extension  by  means  of  colonization,  is  told  of  these  Pales 
tinian  stocks.  But  rin  at  least  should  not  be  absent  by  the 
side  of  I'TV.  For  as  Sidon  gives  its  name  to  the  entire 
Phoenician  nation,  so  too  does  rin  to  the  whole  land  west  of 
Jordan,  which  is  called  (Josh.  i.  4  ;  comp.  Judg.  i.  26)  DW1H  px. 
In  Egyptian  literature  the  Cheta  appear  as  a  powerful  and 
warlike  people,  dwelling  as  far  up  as  the  Orontes,  and  in 
Assyrian  mat  HattS  (Haiti)  is  the  country  and  kingdom  whose 
capital  is  Carchemish,  but  the  name  extends  thence  to  all 
the  countries  on  the  other  side  of  the  Euphrates,  between 
the  wilderness  and  the  Mediterranean  (Paradies ,  269-273). 

1  Prolms  indeed  remarks  on  Virgil's  Georgics,  ii.  115 :  Tyrum  Sarram  appella- 
tam  esse  Homerus  docet,  quern  etiam  Ennius  sequitur  cum  dicit  Pcenos  Sarra 
oriundos.  Sarra  is  the  old  form  of  name  for  Tyrus  in  Ennius  and  Plautus,  but 
where  did  it  occur  in  Homer  ? 


332  GENESIS  X.  15-19. 

Hence  we  see  that  the  Hethites  were  a  great  and  mighty 
people  which  had  branched  off  as  far  as  to  the  west  of 
Jordan,  while  the  root  and  stem  of  their  power  lay  between 
the  Euphrates  and  Orontes.  The  book  of  Kings  knows 
of  D^nn  *ate  beside  kings  of  Aram,  1  Kings  x.  29  (2  Chron. 
i.  17),  and  kings  of  Mizraim,  2  Kings  vii.  6,  and  in 
the  patriarchal  history  Hebron  appears  in  the  possession  of 
the  nn  "03  (Gen.  xxiii.).  There  is  no  perceptible  reason  for 
denying  the  historical  truth  of  the  settlement  of  Hethites  in 
Palestine  (Ed.  Meyer,  §  176,  note),  since  wherever,  as  in  Gen. 
xv.  19-21,  ten,  or  Deut.  vii.  1,  seven,  or  as  in  Ex.  iii.  8,  17, 
xxiii.  33,  Deut.  xx.  17,  six  nations  of  Canaan  are  enumerated, 
^inn  are  always  mentioned  first  of  all,  or  in  the  second  or 
fourth  place,  all  sources  agreeing  that  the  Canaanite  popula 
tion  of  the  West  Jordan  country  was  partly  Hethite.  The 
enumeration  of  the  eleven  }y:s  ^:3  here  in  the  table  is  so 
peculiar  with  respect  to  xv.  19-21  and  the  other  enumera 
tions,  that  it  is  an  unjustifiable  violence  to  reject  all  the  other 
names  except  p^  and  nn  (Ed.  Meyer),  or  even  only  the  five 
from  nn  to  ''vnn  (Merx)  as  interpolated,  nn  is  followed  by  a 
third  branch  of  Canaan,  'p^n,  the  Canaanite  clan  settled  in 
and  about  Jebus,  the  ancient  name  of  Jerusalem,  1  Chron. 
xi.  4,  to  which  belonged  Aravna  (Oman),  as  well  as  Uriah 
the  Hethite,  the  husband  of  Bathsheba.  Fourthly, 


neither  Jebusites  nor  Emorites  are  missing  in  any  of  the 
three  registers  of  the  Canaanite  tribes.  The  Emorites,  whose 
name  may  signify  the  dwellers  on  the  mountain-top  (see  on 
Isa.  xvii.  9),  were  the  most  warlike  and  powerful  of  the 
Canaanite  tribes,  and  not  only  established  themselves  on  this 
side  of  the  Jordan,  from  Mount  Ephraim  southwards,  but 
founded  in  Mosaic  times  two  new  kingdoms  beyond  Jordan 
whose  capitals  were  Ashtaroth  and  Heshbon.  Their  language, 
according  to  Deut.  iii.  9,  differed  dialectically  from  that  of  the 


Sidonians.  Fifthly,  *$JW,  left  out  when  only  six  nations  are 
enumerated,  were,  according  to  Josh.  xxiv.  11,  apparently  on  the 
west  side  of  Jordan,  while  according  to  the  reading  of  Origen, 


GENESIS  X.  15-19.  333 

Matt.  viii.  28  (repyea-yv&v),  they  were,  on  the  contrary,  on  the 
east  side.  Sixthly,  ^nri,  according  to  Ew.  the  inland  Canaanites 
living  (riin)  in  town  communities,  who,  ch.  xxxiv.,  formed  a 
principality  in  Sichem,  and  according  to  Josh.  ix.  11,  xi.  19, 
a  republic  in  Gibeon,  and  dwelt  also  (Josh.  xi.  3  ;  Judg.  iii.  3) 
in  Hermon  and  Lebanon.  That  V$n,  ^ipn,  ^bnjpn,  D'Kfin, 
enumerated  among  the  tribes  at  xv.  19-21,  should  here, 
where  the  genealogy  of  Canaan  is  given,  be  omitted  is  not 
surprising,  though  it  certainly  is  so  that  T)Bn,  who  there  and 
everywhere  else  are  numbered  with  them,  are  missing.  Perhaps 
it  is  because  the  name  is  less  that  of  a  tribe  than  of  the  rural 
dwellers  in  country  towns  (comp.  TT?>  Deut.  iii.  5).  Seventhly, 


^i?"!^,  the  inhabitants  of  "Ap/cr)  (^Apicai,  "Ap/ca),  Assyr.  Arkd 
(Paradies,  282),  Aram.  ItoSn  NJTIN  (Beresliitli  Babba7itc.  xxxvii. 
and  elsewhere),  the  birthplace  of  the  Emperor  Alexander 
Sever  us,  and  a  strong  fortress  first  conquered  by  the  Crusaders 
1138,  now  Tell  'Arka  (see  Robinson  Smith's  second  journey, 
1852).  Eighthly,  Wri,  the  inhabitants  of  the  strong  town  of 
Sin  in  the  neighbourhood  of  'Arka,  of  which  Marino  Sanuto 
says:  de  castro  Arachas  ad  dimidiam  leucam  est  oppidum  Sin,  the 
"Dorf  Syn"  of  Breydenbach  (1483),  perhaps  identical  with  the 
Assyrian  "  Sianu  on  the  sea-coast"  (Paradies,  282),  LXX.  rov 
^Aaevvalov,  compare  the  hill  fortress  ^ivva  in  Lebanon,  Strabo, 
xvi.  2.  18.  In  the  prediction  of  the  return  of  the  dispersed  of 
Israel,  Isa.  xlix.  12,  these  Smites  are  too  near  to  be  intended. 


Ninthly,  nnNii,  LXX.  TOV  'ApdSiov,  the  people  of  *ApaBo<s, 
"1V1K,  Assyrian  Arvada,  Aruada,  according  to  Ezek.  xxvii.,  in 
demand  as  seamen  and  soldiers.  Tiglath  Pileser  I.,  according 
to  1  E.  28,  2  a,  enters  Aradian  ships  and  sails  out  into  the 
great  sea.  Arados  lay  upon  a  small  rocky  island  (now  Eudd) 
on  the  Syrian  coast  opposite  to  Antarados  (Antartus,  Tortosa). 
Strabo,  xvi.  2.  12,  calls  this  maritime  town  of  Arados 
Kdpvos  (Kapvrf),  and  describes  this  island  of  Arados,  xvi.  2. 
13  sq.  It  was  taken  by  Tutmes  III.,  and  again  by  Ramses 
II.  Strabo's  notification,  "  Fugitives  from  Sidon  built,  it  is 
said,  the  town,"  does  not  testify  against  its  great  antiquity. 


334  GENESIS  X.  15-19. 


Tenthly,  t|")9^»  LXX.  TOV  ^afjbapaiov,  inhabiters  of  the  strong 
town  of  Simyra,  south  of  Arados,  north  of  Tripolis,  Assyrian 
Simirra,  chiefly  remarkable  as  the  northern  boundary  of  the 


Lebanon.  Eleventhly,  ™n?,  the  inhabitants  of  Hamdth 
(*U>-),  Assyr.  Amattu  (Paradies,  2*75—  279),  Egyptian  Hemtu, 
who  formed  an  independent  monarchy,  extending  over  the 
middle  and  upper  valley  of  the  Orontes  and  a  portion  of  the 
Mediterranean  coast.  In  the  Seleucidsean  era  it  received  the 
name  of  'ETntydveia,  but  has  maintained  its  ancient  name, 
transposed  into  'A/iaOr)  by  Josephus,  to  the  present  time.  Of 
those  descendants  of  Canaan  we  are  told,  18&,  that  they  were 
afterwards  spread  abroad  ft'SJ,  meaning  they  extended  over 
Canaan,  i.e.  the  land  west  of  Jordan.  The  author  leaves  out 
of  consideration  the  Amorite  kingdoms  upon  Bataneean  and 
Ammonito-Moabite  soil,  and  fixing  the  limits  of  the  district 
of  extension  in  ver.  19,  takes  Sidon  as  the  extreme  northern 
point,  although  Arka,  Arados,  Hamath  lie  beyond  Sidon 
farther  and  farther  northwards.  He  confines  himself  to 
stating  that  the  subsequent  Holy  Land,  of  which  Lebanon 
formed  the  northern  boundary,  was  peopled  by  the  descendants 
of  Canaan.  He  first  draws  a  line  from  north-west  to  south 
west,  and  thence  crosses  over  to  the  south-east.  The  boundary 
points  are  Sidon  (N.W.),  Gaza  (S.W.),  Lesha  (S.E.),  and  between, 
to  serve  as  marks  of  direction,  Gerar  lying  farther  south  than 
Gaza  (see  xx.  1),  and  the  four  cities  Sodom,  Gomorrah, 
Adrnah  and  Zeboiin  lying  towards  the  south-east  (see  xiv.  2). 
1^3  is  an  adverbial  accusative  :  in  the  direction  of  thy 
coming,  like  ver.  30,  xiii.  10,  xxv.  18,  elsewhere  also  IKl-ny, 
xix.  22,  2  Sam.  v.  25,  1  Kings  xviii.  46,  and  $&,  Num. 
xiii.  2  1  .  The  author  transports  himself  back  to  the  time  when 
those  four  cities  of  the  Pentapolis  had  not  yet  been  swallowed 
up,  they  together  represent  the  plain  of  the  Salt  Sea.  As  the 
extreme  south-eastern  point  however  he  names  (here  only) 
Jfi??,  lying  still  farther  south-east  of  the  Salt  Sea,  which 
according  to  undoubted  tradition  (Targ.  Jer.  <l|7^'£,  and  Jerome 
in  Qucestiones,  p.  17,  ed.  Lagarde)  is  that  Ka\\i>ppoij 


GENESIS  X.  20,  21.  335 

(Ka\\iporj)  in  the  Wadi  Zerka  Ma'in,  where  at  the  foot 
of  a  barren  hill  small  streams  of  sulphuretted  water  of  the 
temperature  of  70°  E.  pour  forth  from  a  hundred  rents  and 
fissures  (this  was  the  bath  which  Herod  visited  without 
result,  shortly  before  his  death,  Joseph,  bell.  jud.  i.  33.  5). 
Wellhausen  requires  for  W^,  as  designating  the  north-eastern 
boundary,  H|6  or  E^!?,  to  Laiish  (Dan).  But  the  preceding 
1«n  bids  us  seek  for  yvh  in  a  south-eastern  direction,  and 
besides,  ^  forms  the  locative  n^T,  Judg.  xviii.  7. 

Close  of  the  Elohistic  catalogue  of  the  Hamites,  ver.  20  : 
These  are  the  sons  of  Ham  according  to  families,  according  to 
their  tongues,  after  their  countries,  after  their  nations.  The 
conclusion  to  ver.  6  sq.  (comp.  the  close,  ver.  5),  including,  as 
the  text  now  exists,  the  Jahvistic  extracts,  vv.  8-19. 

Third  part:  the  Shemites,  vv.  21—31.  Jahvistic  transi 
tion,  ver.  2  1  :  And  to  Shem  was  born,  to  him  also,  the 
father  of  all  the  sons  of  Eber,  the  elder  brother  of  Jepheth. 
NirrDS  stands  here  quite  regularly  for  ^~B3,  as  at  iv.  26.  Shem 
bears  the  honourable  addition  to  his  name,  father  of  all  the 
"ny  ^3,  i.e.  not  merely  of  the  ^"!?y  in  the  narrower  sense, 
xl.  15,  but  of  the  whole  Hebrew  stratum  of  peoples,  Num. 
xx  iv.  24.1  The  second  more  particular  designation,  snx 
^inart  nai,  is  certainly  occasioned  by  the  fact  that  the  genealogy 
of  Shem  here  takes  the  last  place  after  that  of  Japheth  and 
Ham,  thus  giving  Shem  the  appearance  of  being  the  younger 
in  respect  of  Japheth.  LXX.  Symrn.  Ven.  Luth.,  the  accentua 
tion  and  both  ancient  and  modern  expositors  (most  recently 
Kohler)  actually  construe  :  brother  of  Japheth  the  great,  i.e. 
the  elder.  This  is  however  contrary  to  the  prevailing  syntax 
(see  Nestle  in  DMZ.  xxxviii.  486  sq.),  according  to  which 

1  .According  to  Wetzstein,  "Oy  was  a  collective  word  of  colour,  denoting  the 
dark-  coloured  ;  for  the  Arabian  of  Aden,  Hadramaut  and  other  places  in  the 
extreme  south,  diii'ers  from  the  negro  in  very  little  else  than  his  nobler  counte 


nance.       A    Syrian   proverb    says: 

i.e.  the  dark-faced,  if  they  arc  not  ill-uoed,  ill-use  you. 


GENESIS  X.  22. 

belongs  to  the  leading  idea  (and  not  like  Tp,  Jer.  xxxii.  *7, 
to  the  genitive);  besides  which  ivun  cannot  perse  mean  major 
natu  (maximus),  and  Japheth  as  the  elder  brother  must 
have  been  Designated  Pnjn  ro~£i  (comp.  on  the  other  hand, 
xliv.  12;  1  Sam.  xvii.  14).  Shem  is  to  both  the  Jahvist 
and  the  Elohist,  ver.  32,  the  first-born  of  Noah,  the  round 
number  five  hundred  in  the  latter  passage  being  more 
particularly  fixed  by  xi.  10  as  502.  The  Elohistic  catalogue 
of  the  Shemites,  ver.  22  sq.  Sons  of  Shem,  ver.  22  :  Sons 
of  Shem  are  'Mam  and  Aslur  and  Arpaclisad  and  Lud  and 
Aram.  These  five,  as  descended  from  Shem,  are  considered 
as  a  group  of  nations  similar  in  origin,  and  hence,  though  not 
necessarily,  similar  in  language.  The  enumeration  proceeds 
from  east  to  west,  from  the  geographically  and  historically 

more  remote  to  the  nearer.  In  the  first  place  stands  D?s#, 
Accad.  elama  (high-lying,  highland),  Assyr.  elamtu  (perhaps 
conceived  of  together  with  oby,  to  be  high,  remarkable,  Arab. 

Ac,  to  perceive,  to  know) ;  the  name  of  Susiana,1  i.e.  of  the 

great  plain  and  mountainous  district  enclosing  it  on  the  north 
and  east,  bounded  on  the  north  by  Persia,  in  ancient  Persian 
uvaga,  whence  Chuzistan,  or  airjama,  arjama,  whence  Iran, 
the  opposite  of  Turan ;  the  kings  of  Susiana  call  themselves 
kings  of  Ansan,  which  is  translated  by  elamtu  (Paradies, 
321).  The  Kossaeans,  whose  language  was  at  the  time  still 
indefinable,  were  natives  of  the  mountainous  districts ;  in  the 
plain  however,  which  is  watered  by  the  Choaspes  (Kerkha) 
and  Eulaos  (Karun),  Shemites  had  settled  from  ancient  times. 
Elam  is  followed  by  "i}$tf  lying  north-west  of  it,  and  signifying 
here  the  people,  as  at  lla  the  country.  The  extent  of  the 
Assyrian  kingdom  varied  under  different  rulers  and  at  dif 
ferent  times.  Assyria  proper,  within  the  more  comprehensive 
and  varying  political  limits  (Strabo  xvi.  1.  1),  is  the  district 
about  twenty-five  miles  long  between  the  southern  spurs  of 

1  See  Nbldeke's  article,   "  Greek  names  of  Susiana,"  in  the  Report  of  the 
Gottingen  Scientific  Society,  1874,  No.  8. 


GENESIS  X.  22.  337 

the  Armenio-Median  mountains  (the  Zagros)  and  the  Tigris  ; 
'Arovpta,  with  the  capital  Nlvo?  and  'A&iafirjvrj  between 
Lykos  and  Kapros  (great  and  little  Zab),  are  parts  of  the  old 
Assyrian  mother  -country,  which  was  called  non  -  Semitically 
A-usar  and  Seiniticized  Asshur,  while  Ashur  is  the  name  of  the 
national  god,  and  as  such  signifies  the  dispenser  of  blessing,  the 
all-beneficent.  Whether  Asshur,  the  oldest  city  of  the  kingdom, 
derived  its  name  from  the  god  (Schrader),  or  whether  the  god 
had  his  name  from  the  city  as  its  personification  or  genius,  is 


doubtful.  Shem's  third  son  is  T^btns,  the  people  of  the  north 
Assyrian  ^AppaTra^lr^,  as  Bochart  already  discerned,  without 
anything  better  having  been  placed  in  its  stead.  The  situa- 
tioxi  answers  to  the  place  in  the  catalogue,  and  the  names 
concur,  *JB>,  fara,  being  an  Armenian  termination  (Lagarde, 
Symmicta,  i.  54  ;  comp.  Noldeke  in  the  DMZ.  xxxiii.  149)  ;  the 
cuneiform  Arrapha  (according  perhaps  to  a  more  etymological 
writing  Arablici),  the  Kurdish  Alldk,  the  old  Armenians  Albacli 
(Paradies,  125)  correspond  with  it.  The  second  half  indeed 
of  the  word  looks  like  the  name  of  the  Chaldees,  whence  it 
has  since  Schlozer  been  explained  leo-aiK,  boundary  (after  the 
Arab.  uJ/»  to  bound)  of  the  Chaldees,  or  otherwise  as  =  i^D"is, 
highland  of  the  Chaldees.  But  the  people  dwelling  in  the  Zagros 
mountain-chain  have  indeed  as  such  been  called  Kossaeans 
(Kassu),  but  never  DShi£O  ;  this  name  adhering  always  to  the 
people  of  the  low  land,  who  certainly  were  sometimes  subjugated 
and  ruled  by  the  people  of  the  mountains.  The  fourth  place 

among  the  sons  of  Shern  is  occupied  by  li.      It  is  unnecessary 

o- 

to  follow  with  Kn.  the  Arabian  legend,  which  makes  JjJ  or 

j^j!  the   ancient   Arabian   stock    (so    that    'Amlik   is    son    or 

brother  of  this  Laud)  —  T&  are  the  Lydians,  though  not  yet 
in  the  subsequent  limitation  of  the  country  of  that  name  in 
Asia  Minor.  They  are  named  here  with  good  cause,  for  a 
well  -  testified  connection  existed  between  the  Lydian  and 
Assyrian  royal  houses  and  the  Lydian  and  Assyrian  worship 


338  GENESIS  X.  23. 

of  the  sun  (see  Baer  on  Herod,  i.  7).  The  Semitic  origin  cannot 
seem  surprising,  for  the  West,  southward  of  Mount  Taurus,  is 
as  especially  Semitic  as  the  East  is  Japhethic  (Aryan).  The 
Lydian  language  was  not  indeed  a  so-called  Semitic  one,  but 
this  does  not  speak  against  the  Semitic  origin  of  the  people 
(see  Wilh.  Hupfeld,  JExerc.  Herodotece,  iii.  p.  9).  Lassen  also 
(DMZ.  x.  382  sqq.)  numbers  the  Lydians  among  the  Shemites, 
but  incorrectly  infers  this  from  remains  of  the  language 
(e.g.  d{3arc\,r)s,  priest  =  Jjb  ^A  father  of  the  understanding !), 
which  on  the  contrary  sound  Aryan  (e.g.  Trapa^vrj  = 
fjLoipa,  Sanscr.  prdmana,  a  measure ;  old  Persian  farmana,  law). 
Lagarde  (in  Ges.  AbJi.}  distinguishes  an  Iranian  and  a  Semitic 
element  in  the  Lydio-Maeonian  people.  The  last  of  the  sons 
of  Shem  is  D^x,  the  far-stretching  people  of  the  Aramaeans, 
who  dwelt  in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia  as  far  as  to  Armenia,  and, 
according  to  Strabo,  xiii.  4.  6,  originally  settled  in  Cilicia  also. 
According  to  Amos  ix.  7,  comp.  i.  5,  they  migrated  from  the 
district  of  the  river  Kur  (Cyrus)  in  North  Armenia  to  their  more 
southerly  abodes.  In  the  cuneiform  monuments  the  Arumu, 
Arimu,  Aramu  reach  to  the  borders  of  Elam,  the  name  of  which 
signifies  highland.  D"iN  too  (with  only  a  tone-long  a)  comes, 
though  not  from  Dn,  yet  from  D"iK,  whence  |i£"!N,  and  might 
mean  highland  (Paradies,  258) ;  the  name  would  then  designate 
the  people  according  to  this  original  North- Armenian  dwelling- 
place.1  With  D"JN  ^,  ver.  23,  the  Elohist  now  gives  the 
nations  that  branched  off  from  Aram.  And  first  py.2  That 
this  is  an  Aramaean  stock  is  corroborated  also  by  xxii.  2 1  ;  while 
on  the  other  hand  it  remains  uncertain  whether  from  the  Horite 
py,  xxxvi.  38,  an  old  blending  of  Seirites  (Edomites)  with  the 
Aramaean  py,  which  certainly  must,  according  to  Lam.  iv.  21, 

1  Comp.  Noldeke,  "  On  the  Names  of  the  Aramaean  Nation  and  Language,"  in 
DMZ.  xxv.  113  sqq. 

2  Not  =  i^  *£.  (which  signifies  exchange,  compensation  for  one  who  has  died 

away  ;  see  Jellinek  in  Konteres  hamaggid,  1878,  p.  28),  but  .  -e^e.    An  'A us 

ibn-Aram  figures  among  the  ancestors  of  Damascus  (in  Joseph.  Ant.  L  6.  4  : 
Ouros  xri^ti  <rriv  Txav7TJV  xcti 


GENESIS  X.  24.  339 

have  subsequently  taken  place,  is  to  be  inferred.  Wetzstein 
in  his  Commentary  on  Job  has  shown  it  to  be  probable  that 
pv  is  the  old  name  of  the  Damascenian  Aram,  which  extended 
far  southwards  towards  the  East  Jordan  land,  and  northwards 
in  the  direction  of  the  Euphrates,  about  half-way  to  Tadmor 
(see  on  this  point  Friedr.  Delitzsch,  in  vol.  iL,  No.  1,  of  the 
Zeitschrift  fur  Keilschriftforsclmng}.  The  prophecy  p^mb,  Jer. 
xlix.  23-27,  coincides  with  the  handing  of  the  cup  of  fury  to 
pyn  pK  ^£-^3,  xxv.  20.  The  tradition  which  transposes  the 
scene  of  the  book  of  Job  to  ancient  Batansean  soil  in  the  Nukra, 
the  most  fertile  part  of  the  Hauran  plain,  seems  to  be  really 

well  founded.  By  ^n,  the  second  son  of  Aram,  has  been 
hitherto  for  the  most  part  understood  the  Hylatce  of  Pliri. 
v.  19,  i.e.  the  inhabitants  of  the  Hule  valley  (Ov\d6a  in 
Joseph.  Ant.  xv.  10.  3),  between  Palestine  and  Ccelesyria  (in 
the  narrower  sense) ;  but  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  more 
frequently  name  a  country  Hull  a  (perhaps  so  called  as  a 
district  of  sandhills)  in  connection  with  the  mountainous  land 
Kasjar.  This  is  however  TO  Maaiov  0/009,  the  south-eastern 
part  of  the  Taurus  chain  lying  on  the  Upper  Tigris  above 
Nisibis ;  the  Mygdonius  at  Nisibis  is  called  after  it  in  Syrian 
the  Mas  river,  Arab.  ^wU^  (DMZ.  xxxiii.  328).  Un 
doubtedly  by  Pb  (wrongly  written  :]£>»  in  Chron.),  here  named 
in  the  fourth  place  among  the  descendants  of  Aram,  is  meant 
the  people  of  this  Mount  Mash,  and  hence  by  inn  the  popu 
lation  of  the  adjacent  Hulia.  Concerning  ina  nothing  that 
commends  itself,  not  to  say  satisfies,  can  be  said.  Josephus 
explains  it  according  to  its  sound  of  the  BatcrpLavoi ;  Kn. 
compares  the  J\±.  of  the  Arabic  legend,  the  ancestor  of  the 

races  j^j  and  jjyujjc*-.  The  descendants  of  Shem  through 
Arpachshad,  ver.  24:  And  Arpachsad  begat  vSelah,  and  ^Sdah 
begat  'Eber.  Jahvistic  in  form,  and  though  a  parenthesis 
derived  from  the  Toledoth  of  Shem  in  ch.  xi.,  yet  a  well- 
considered  one,  since  ver.  21  leaves  the  relation  of  descent 
between  Eber  and  Shem  uncertain.  For  the  rest,  Peleg  is 


340  GENESIS  X.  26. 

the  son  of  Eber  according  to  both  sources,  ver.  2  5  :  And 
to  Eler  were  two  sons  born,  the  name  of  the  one  was  Peleg, 
for  in  his  days  the  earth  was  divided,  and  the  name  of  his 
brother  was  Joktdn.  On  the  construction  of  the  Passive  with 
the  Ace.  of  the  object,  comp.  iv.  18.  T^  nj^??  is  said, 
according  to  Keerl,  of  the  division  of  the  earth  into  several 
continents  ;  according  to  Ewald,  of  the  division  of  the  earth  by 
Eber,  as  chief  over  existing  mankind,  among  those  living  on 
it.  We  would  rather  think,  with  Wetzstein,  of  a  separation 
by  migration  in  different  directions  ;  but  that  leads  to  the 
dispersion  according  to  languages,  related  xi.  1—9,  for  which 
the  appropriate  word  is  J^aa,  comp.  Ps.  Iv.  9,  and  the  usual 
post-Biblical  appellation  of  that  generation,  and  thus  of  the 
contemporaries  of  Peleg,  as  ^ann  "in.  Hence  ptfn  is,  as  at 
ix.  19,  xi.  1,  the  population  of  the  earth.  The  explanation 
given  of  the  name  stamps  3?a  as  the  name  of  a  person. 
ftpi?J  also  is  a  personal  name  ;  he  is  the  same  person  as  ^Iks^Jf, 
who  is  esteemed  the  ancestor  of  all  the  primitive  Arabian  tribes, 
from  which  the  extinct  and  subsequent,  i.e.  the  most  ancient 
and  the  more  recent  Abrahamidic  population  of  Arabia,  are 
distinguished,  "ny  might  rather  be  a  personification  of  the 
land  beyond,  i.e.  the  trans-Euphratic  region  (Konig,  Lehrgeb. 
§  5.  3).  Now  follows  the  enumeration  of  thirteen  sons  of 
Joktan,  vv.  26-29,  of  which  some  may  be  names  of  tribes, 
some  of  countries  ;  at  least  some  may  be  pointed  out  as 


such.  The  first  syllable  in  "nfo  seems  to  be  the  Arabic 
article,  as  in  E'ippK  (levy,  men  in  arms)  ;  the  article  *?$  how 
ever  is  North  Arabian,  not  Sabsean  ;  ta  may  also  be  the  Divine 

name  (DMZ.  xxxvii.  18  ;  Ges.  §  35,  note  1).  ^  is  Selef 
of  the  Arab,  genealogies,  the  grandson  of  Himjar  (DMZ. 
xi.  153—155)  ;  michldf  Selef  is  also  the  name  of  a  district  of 
Jemen,  perhaps  the  abode  of  the  ZaXaTrijvoi,  Ptolem.  vi.  7.  23, 


whom  Bochart   already  compares.     rviD"isn  is   known   as  the 
name  of  a  district  (Himyar.  niD"i£n,  in  written  Arabic  ^*.*  ^^ 


GENESIS  X.  27.  341 

1^).       The    valley,  forty -five    miles   long,   which 

~      ^v 

stretches  between  the  tracts  of  Mareb  and  Mahra  beyond 
the  desert  el-Abkaf  towards  the  hilly  sand  -  coast  of  the 
Indian  Ocean,  with  the  capitals  'Sibam  and  Terim  and  the 

ancient   seaport  J^o   (different    from    the    inland   jUk  near 

San'a  in  Jemen,  the  capital  of  the  Himyaritic  kingdom,  the 
Saphar  of  Ptolemy).  The  name  Hadramaut  means  fore 
court  of  death,  certainly  not  by  reason  of  its  unhealthy 
climate,  but  because  a  hot  sulphur  spring  of  the  Wadi  called 
Bir  Barhut  was  regarded  as  flowing  from  the  realm  of  the 
dead ;  Fresnel  combines  with  it  the  Stygis  aquoe  fons  in 

Ptolemy.     The  inhabitants  of  Hadramaut  are  called   <£ 


probably  the  Xarpa/jiwrLrai,  one  of  the  four  chief  tribes  of 
Southern  Arabia,  according  to  Strabo,  xvi.  4.  2.1  The  tribal 
name  n^  is  of  the  same  meaning  as  wark,  the  old  South 
Arabic  and  old  Ethiopian  name  of  the  moon ;  several  Arab 

tribes  take  their  name  from  the  moon  ;  the  tribe  _^Jill  upon 
the  mountains  of  Zafar,  and  the  tribes  J1&  and  ,jj  in 
Higaz.  Dnnn  sounds  like  'ASpaiu-rai  ('ATpapiTai)  in  Ptolem. 
Uranios  Plin.  (Juba),  unless  on  the  other  hand  this  name 
coincides  with  that  of  the  inhabitants  of  Hadramaut  (comp. 
Blau,  DMZ.  xxii.  658,  and  Sprenger,  §  95).  D.  H.  Mliller 
(Burgen-  uncl  Schlosser  Siidarabicns,  i.  360  sq.)  compares  the 

fortress  »j*£  west  of  San'a.  2J1K  (LXX.  Al£tj\  according  to 
which  Samar.  ^PN)  is  the  Himyaritic  royal  town  in  the  west 
of  South  Arabia  (comp.  Ezek.  xxvii.  19,  where  .we  should 
probably  read  ^P),  which  since  the  Abyssinian  occupation 

in  the  sixth  century  after  Christ  obtained  the  name  UJu>. 
Dillm.  remarks  that  in  the  sixth  century  Auzalians  were  still 
mentioned  as  a  people  in  Arabia  Felix  in  Assem.  i.  360  sq. 

1  See  Maqrizii  de  valle  Hadhramaut   Lildlus   arabice   ed.    et  illustr.  by 
Noskowyj,  Bonn  18G6. 


342  GENESIS  X.  28,  29. 

The  name  i"6?n  points  to  the  date-palm  and  its  fruit.     Equally 

unknown   is   bty  (Chron.   faty   LXX.  Eud\   Taipak]  ;  'Abil 
is  the  name  of  one  of  the  oldest  tribes  among  the  Arabians, 

the  old  Arabic  verb  Jj<£.  means  to  be   corpulent.      Equally 


enigmatical  is  D^K,  a  name  to  be  analysed  into  Abi-ma-el 
(see  DMZ.  xxxi.  86),  and  formed  like  the  "inymtt  of  the 
inscriptions  (DMZ.  xxxvii.  18);  if  ^o  were  to  be  taken 
together,  the  tribal  name  d)JU  ^j\  (JT)  in  Hadramaut 
might  be  compared.  K1W  means  here  (comp.  ver.  7)  the 
South  Arabian  Sabaeans  (Arab,  ^bwj,  inscriptions  &OE>  and 
once  &axp),  with  the  town  Saba,  the  capital  of  the  Sabsean 
ruler  (the  so-called  Tubba',  written  jnn),  the  identity  of  which 

•i  , 
with   Mareb   (c—  ^U,    the    Mapia^a   of  Ptolem.,  Mapia/Sa  or 

Mapi€j3a  of  Strabo,  in  Plin.  in  the  Monum.  Ancyr.  Mariba, 
on  inscriptions  mio,  Marjab,  DMZ.  xxx.  320—323,  or  also 
rwiD,  ib.  689)  is  testified  by  Arabic  geographers.  The 
Sabseans  were  a  powerful  and  civilised  people,  natives  equally 
of  South-eastern  Africa  and  Southern  Arabia.  It  is  evident 
that  a  Cushitic  (x.  7),  a  Joktanidic  (here)  and  an  Abrahainidic 
(xxv.  3)  Sheba  are  known  to  Genesis.  Next  follows  "iBis,  the 
gold  of  which  is  so  proverbial  in  the  Old  Testament,  that  the 
word  itself  even  without  2iiT  means  the  very  finest  gold.  It 
was  the  eastern  goal  of  the  fleet  of  Hiram  and  Solomon,  which 
brought  thence  after  a  three  years'  voyage  (1  Kings  x.  22)  gold, 
sandal  wood  (1  Kings  x.  11)  arid  other  rarities.  What  is  the 
use  of  insisting,  with  Dillm.,  that  this  Ophir  must  be  a  district 
of  the  southern  or  south-eastern  coast  of  South  Arabia  ? 
Antiquity  knows  nothing  of  an  Arabian  Ophir,  neither  can  a 
trace  of  the  name  be  discovered  in  South  Arabia  ;  for  the 
South  Arabic  designation  of  red  gold  by  qfir  (qfir),  whence 
was  Hellenized  ajrvpov,  accepted  by  Sprenger,  cannot  be 
proved,  and  the  el-Ofir  in  Oman  compared  by  Seetzen  is 


GENESIS  X.  29.  M3 

written  .£*!!.  On  the  otlier  hand,  Sofala,  on  the  south-east 
coast  of  Africa,  opposite  Madagascar,  must  really  come  under 
consideration.  Its  inhabitants,  as  related  by  Lopez  in  his 
journey  to  India,  boasted  that  the  Israelites  formerly  fetched 
gold  from  them  every  third  year.  Not  much  weight  must 
however  be  attached  to  this,  as  they  probably  had  it  by 
hearsay  from  the  Portuguese  ;  but  that  gold  is  obtained  in  large 
quantities  in  Sofala  and  Manica  we  know  from  Livingstone 
(Missionary  Journey,  ii.  297).  Karl  Mauch  found  there  in 
1871,  in  North  Caffreland  in  Zimbabye  (Portug.  Zimbaboe), 
upon  a  granite  hill  150  feet  high,  and  at  its  foot,  extensive 
ruins,  which  seemed  to  indicate  some  kind  of  factory  erected 
there  by  a  foreign  people.  The  combination  with  Sofala  is 
strikingly  favoured  by  the  transcription  of  T»BIK  by  the  LXX. 
In  our  passage  it  has  Ovfaip  (Joseph.  Ant.  i.  6.  4,  '0(f 6/^179) ; 
elsewhere  it  writes  the  name  2a)(f)ip,  or  otherwise  with  a 
before  w.  But  2w<j)a\d  for  T>BIS  does  not  occur  in  the  LXX., 
and  its  Sa><f>ip  (perhaps  with  a  prefixed  Egyptian  sa, 
district  =  sa-oftr)  is  referred  by  the  ancients,  not  to  Africa 
but  to  India.  The  South  African  Sofala  is  absolutely  un 
known  *  to  the  ancients,  and  even  to  the  Arabic  geographers 
of  the  thirteenth  century.  It  is  India  that  is  called  in  Coptic 
Sophir.  Hence  the  Arab,  translates  Ophir  by  el- Hind ;  and 
Abulfeda  says  that  India  as  well  as  Nigritia  has  its  <2U~.- 
(the  Arabic  Sophira),  and  that  this  (more  accurately  ar^lL*)  is 
the  name  of  an  emporium  on  the  Indian  coast  (see  Ges.  Tlies.^. 
And  indeed  Ptolemy,  vii.  1.  6,  mentions  a  2ov7rdpa  on  the 
western  coast  of  India  which  is  one  and  the  same  with 
2ov7T7rapa  (OvTnrapa)  of  the  Periplus  maris  Erytlir.  52. 

1  Lieblein  (Handel  u.  Schiffahrt  aufdem  rothen  Meer  in  alien  Zeiten,  1886, 
p.  142  sqq.)  seeks  for  Ophir  far  to  the  north  upon  the  Abyssinian  coast,  com 
bining  Ophir  with  Afer,  as  the  people  called  in  Abyssinian  Adal  ('ASoz/xrVa/),  in 
Arabic  Daniktt,  call  themselves.  Merensky,  too  (Beitrdge  zur  Kenntniss  Sud- 
Afrikas,  1875,  and  "Das  Ophir  Salomo's  und  die  Entdeckung  von  Goldfeldern 
in  Sadost-Afrika,"  in  the  Sonntags-Beilaye  of  the  Kreuz-Zeitung,  1887,  Nos.  5, 6), 
combines  in  this  manner  Ophir  and  Africa,  and  is  inclined  to  explain  many 
Jewish  peculiarities  of  the  Caffres,  among  whom  he  lived  fifteen  years,  by  the 
intercourse  of  Solomon's  people  with  the  native  women. 


344  GENESIS  X.  29. 

V.  Baer  (Historische  Fragen  mit  Hulfe  der  Natnrwissenschaften 
beantwortet,  Petersburg  1873)  finally  arrives  at  the  result 
that  Ophir  is  the  Xpvaij  Xepaovrjaos  of  the  ancients,  the 
island  of  Malakka  (Chryse)  forming  a  partition  between  the 
Indian  and  Chinese  seas,  as  Cameron  in  the  Transactions,  1873, 
p.  267  sq.,  that  Ophir  is  Taprobane  (Ceylon) ;  Josephus  how 
ever,  Ant.  viii.  6.  4,  says,  Safaipa  is  the  Xpvcrij  <y>)  of  India, 
the  Xpvaf)  xwpa  of  Ptol.  viii.  2.  17,  the  Indian  gold  land 
situated  westward  of  the  Ganges  in  the  territory  watered 
by  the  Xaxfirjv  (Ant.  i.  6.  4),  and  therefore  by  the  Indus. 
Hence  Lassen's  and  Eitter's  view,  that  Ophir  is  the  coast  land 
at  the  mouths  of  the  Indus,  the  nearest  Indian  coast  for  the 
Phoenicians,  is  still  that  which  commends  itself.  Here  dwelt 
the  people  of  Abliira,  who  were  proverbial  for  their  disregard  of 
what  was  most  precious,  and  of  whom  Pantschatantra,  ver.  88, 
says :  "  In  the  land  of  Abhira,  the  shepherds  sell  moon- 
crystal  for  three  cowrie  shells.1  The  fact  that  in  later  and 
post  -  biblical  times  Abyssinia  and  Southern  Arabia  were 
summed  up  under  the  general  name  of  India  (DMZ.  xxxiv. 
743)  is  not  to  the  purpose.  Here  the  western  coast  of  India 
is  really  meant,  and  hence  we  must,  with  Josephus,  assume  a 
dissemination  of  the  Joktanites  as  far  as  India,  although  in 
ver.  30  this  passing  beyond  Arabia  is  as  much  left  out  of 
notice  as,  in  ver.  19,  are  the  passing  beyond  Sidon  in  the 
north  and  Jordan  in  the  west,  when  the  Canaanite  district 

of  diffusion  is  defined.  Ophir  is  followed  by  nj*inf  which 
already  occurred  at  ver.  7,  and  was  there  referred  to  BTO. 
We  do  not  believe  that  this  name  is  a  corruption  of  Kampila, 
the  name  of  the  Darada  country  in  North- Western  India, 
where  gold  is  more  abundant  than  in  India  and  Iran.  On  the 
one  side  however  it  is  certain  that  an  Arabian  n^in  is  proved 
by  xxv.  18;  1  Sam.  xv.  7.  Mebuhr  (Arabien,  p.  342)  mentions 
a  Huweila  lying  on  the  coast  in  Bahrein,  which  corresponds  in 

1  On  the  many  hypotheses  concerning  Ophir,  which  it  would  be  useless  here 
to  record,  see  the  abstract,  "  Ophir  und  Tarsus,"  by  Zockler  in  the  Beweis  des 
Glaubens,  1874,  p.  557  sqq[. 


GENESIS  X.  30.  345 

sound,  while  Sprenger's  combination  with  the  Yamanic  ^^ 
is  phonetically  forbidden.  On  the  other  side  an  Indian 
<Dj^,  situate  in  the  region  of  the  Indus,  is  made  probable  by 
ii.  11,  if  PB»Q  there  is  the  Indus.  The  Xav\oTaloL,  whom 
Eratosthenes  in  Strabo,  xvi.  4.  2,  calls  the  neighbours  of  the 
Nabataeans,  dwell  too  far  to  the  north-west  above  the  Arabian 
Gulf  for  the  Arabian  Havilah.  Concerning  ini1*  nothing  is  yet 
ascertained.  Eange  of  the  dissemination  of  the  Joktanites, 
ver.  30:  And  their  diuelling  -place  readied  from  Mesa  towards 
SepJiar,  towards  the  mountains  of  the  east.  B>0,  23&,  and  K£;D 
must  be  distinguished.  Josephus  confuses  them  with  each 
other  when  he  says,  Ant.  i.  6.  4  :  Mrjo-as  Se  (KTI&I) 
Mijcravaiovs'  "Srrao-Lvov  Xdpa£  ev  T06?  vvv  fcakelrcu.  For 
^Tracrlvov  (TIacrivov)  Xdpaj;  is  the  present  Moammera  on  the 
Schatt  el-  Arab  (the  united  Euphrates  and  Tigris),  where  the 
Karum  falls  into  it  ;  and  this  would  make  Nfto  the  South 
Babylonian  district  Medjvrj,  in  which  lay  also  an  Apamea.1 
The  north  -  west  corner  of  the  Persian  Gulf  forms  a  more 
appropriate  starting-point  for  the  demarcation  of  the  abode  of 
the  Joktanites  than  the  Syro-Arabian  desert,  which  is  called 
in  Assyrian  mat  Mas  (Paradies,  242  sq.),  and  which  certainly 
better  corresponds  with  the  name  &n  than  with  NBJo.  Hence 

0  7 

we  identify  Kt$?  with  v  •  •  V>,  ^wx*  ;  and  if  lap  were  the 
same  as  'Sdirfyapa,  2a(j)dp  of  Ptol.  Plin.  and  the  Periplus, 
the  "  capital  of  the  Homeritic  and  Sabcean  people,"  this  would 
give  a  fitting  south-west  point.  But  this  name  is  in  Arab. 

j\&,  which  cannot  be  rendered  in  Hebrew  by  lap,  a  word  which 
perhaps  means  coast  or  boundary  (DMZ.  xxiii.  638);  in  Greek 
also  Tdfapov  would  be  more  suitable.  It  is  nevertheless 
probable  that  lap  is  a  south  -  west  point  whence  a  line  is 
drawn  towards  the  south  -  east  ;  for  nnpn  "in  js  certainly  the 
mountain  of  frankincense  rWD^n  "in  in  Aben  Ezra  on  Gen.  i. 


1  Mesene  and  Apamea  often  occur  in  the  Talmud  ;  see  Neubauer,  Gtographie 
du  Talmud,  pp.  325,  329,  382,  and  Gratz,  Mesene  und  seine  judischeBev&lkerung, 
1879. 


346  GENESIS  X.  31-XI. 

11),  more  strictly,  the  imposing  promontory  of  the  south 
eastern  coast  of  Arabia,  the  Has  Sagar,  on  the  other  side  of 
which  lies  the  region  of  frankincense  so  famed  by  the  ancients 
(Sprenger,  §  128,  comp.  111). 

Here  follows  the  Elohistic  conclusion  of  the  list  of  the 
Shemites,  ver.  3 1  :  These  are  the  sons  of  Slum  according  to  their 
families,  according  to  their  tongues,  after  their  lands,  according 
to  their  nations.  Then  the  Elohistic  conclusion  of  the  whole 
genealogical  trilogy,  ver.  32  :  These  are  the  families  of  the  sons 
of  Noah  according  to  their  generations,  after  their  nations  ;  and  of 
these  were  the  nations  divided  upon  the  earth  after  the  flood. 


THE  CONFUSION  OF  TONGUES  AND  THE  SEPARATION  OF 
NATIONS,  XI.  1-9. 

Nothing  in  this  section  points  to  Q,  while  ver.  6  sq.  is  in  all 
respects  so  similar  to  iii.  22  sq.,  that  this  already  indicates  J 
as  the  narrator  (comp.  besides  pxrrta  la,  p^,  4fr,  and  ps*l,  Sa, 
with  ix.  19,  x.  18).  But  both  narrators  having  in  ch.  x., 
comp.  ix.  19,  explained  the  ramification  of  the  post-diluvian 
human  family  into  three  groups  of  nations  in  a  purely 
genealogical  manner,  and  carried  them  back  to  their  descent 
from  the  three  sons  of  Noah,  the  question  arises,  whether  and 
how  the  explanation  which  here  follows,  and  according  to 
which  a  judicial  interposition  of  God  gave  the  impulse  to  the 
origination  of  nations,  is  compatible  with  the  former  explana 
tion  of  their  origin.  The  answer  lies  in  x.  25,  according  to 
which  the  dispersion  of  the  population  of  the  earth  had  its 
beginning  in  the  days  of  Peleg  (i.e.  according  to  xi.  10,  12, 
14,  16,  in  the  fifth  generation  after  the  Flood).  This  disper 
sion,  from  which  this  generation  is  called  by  the  Jews 
i"1?^?  "'"'"i,  is  more  than  an  allusion  to  various  abodes  remote 
from  each  other.  Even  supposing  that  the  Noachidse  had  from 
the  time  of  Peleg  all  divided  from  each  other,  the  separate 
groups  would  not  thereby  have  become  different  nations. 


GENESIS  XI.  1.  347 

They  would  by  mecans  of  their  oneness  of  language,  and  of  the 
opinion  and  feeling  which  is  impressed  on  language,  have 
continued  to  be  one  united  human  family.  For  the  root  of 
nationalities  is,  in  the  view  of  Scripture,  that  common 
characteristic  of  internal,  and  thence  resulting  external 
definiteness  which  finds  its  special  expression  in  language. 
Schilling  calls  the  question,  how  nations  originated,  a  great 
enigma,  an  enigma  supposed  to  be  solved  by  saying, 
that  as  natural  affection  is  the  bond  of  union  to  the 
family,  so  is  law  the  bond  of  union  to  the  nation ;  and 
that  unity  of  law,  i.e.  the  form  of  government  and  legislation, 
constitutes  a  nation.  But  this  is  only  to  explain  the  origin 
of  the  nation,  not  that  of  the  nations,  not  what  it  was  that 
split  the  human  family  into  nations  instead  of  their  becoming 
a  single  nation.  It  was,  as  the  account  here  following  ch.  x. 
teaches,  by  a  Divine  interposition  that  the  one  human  family 
ceased  to  be  one,  and  was  more  and  more  separated  in  thought 
and  aspirations  in  different  directions,  both  linguistically 
and  locally.  Thus  the  Divine  impulse  to  the  origination  of 
the  nations,  related  xi.  1-9,  is  not  opposed  to  the  preceding 
genealogic  deduction,  and  it  is  not  even  necessary  to  assume 
that  the  extracts  from  J  in  x.  8,  10-12,  must  originally 
have  stood  after  xi.  1  —  9  (Dillm.).  It  is  not  necessary, 
because  J  might  first  give  a  survey  of  the  world  of  nations 
derived  from  the  three  sons  of  Noah,  in  order  thus  to  relate 
by  way  of  supplement  how  it  came  to  pass  that  genealogical 
became  ethnological  distinctions.  It  was  by  the  abolition  of 
unity  of  language,  that  the  unity  of  the  family  became  the 
multiplicity  of  the  nations.  That  the  narrative  which  follows 
has  in  view  such  a  completion  of  the  ethnographical  table  is 
at  once  shown,  ver.  1 :  And  the  whole  earth  was  one  language, 
and  one  and  the  same  words.  Kaulen  (Die  Sprachverwirrung 
zu  Bald,  1861)  rightly  refers  nsb  to  the  grammatical,  and 
c<n.?1  to  the  lexical  element :  language  in  general  (word- 
formation,  syntax,  pronunciation)  and  in  particular  (the  names 
of  things)  was  the  same.  The  form  of  sentence  :  the  whole 


348  GENESIS  XL  2,  3. 

earth  was  one  language,  is  similar  to  Isa.  v.  1 2  :  their  feast  is 
lute  and  harp  ;  that  in  which  the  subject  gains  appearance  is 
made  its  predicate.  Migration  of  certain  ISToachidae,  ver.  2  : 
And  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  journeyed  eastwards,  that  they 
found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  Sinar,  and  settled  there.  The 
verb  JJD3  means  to  go  forth  (Assyr.  nisu),  to  go  on,  to  go 
farther.  The  place  of  departure  is  left  unmentioned,  for 
DnjSB  does  not  mean  in  the  usage  of  the  language  from  the 
east  (Kaul),  but  eastwards,  ii.  8,  xiii.  11,  and  indeed  so  that, 
as  in  D*ij5  "03,  xxix.  1,  the  east  from  a  Palestinian  standpoint  is 
intended.  It  is  moreover  probable  from  J  also  (see  on  ix.  20) 
that  the  land  of  Ararat  was  the  first  post-diluvian  dwelling- 
place  of  men.  Then  as  subsequently  the  migration  of  nations 
was  wont  to  follow  the  valleys  of  great  rivers ;  hence  these 
Noachidse,  following  the  course  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates 
from  the  high  land  of  Armenia,  arrived  in  the  nyjps,  the  plain 
westward  of  the  spurs  of  the  Median  mountains  watered  by 
the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  which  approach  each  other  more 
and  more  nearly.  "W?^,  Sumer,  is  in  the  title  of  the 
Babylonian  kings  South  Babylon  (as  distinguished  from 
Accad  =  North  Babylon),  here  as  well  as  at  x.  10  the 
whole  of  Babylon  is  so  called.  Herodotus  (i.  178,  193) 
says  of  Babylon :  fceerai  Iv  7reS/w  /LteyaXw ;  and  in  the  Talmud 
and  Midrash  (see  Aruch  under  Dt  I.)  it  is  called  D^iy  fe  1D1T, 
the  valley  of  the  world.  In  this  well-watered  paradisaically 
fertile  vale  they  settled,  and  here  they  made  preparations  for 
the  erection  of  buildings,  ver.  3  :  And  they  said  one  to  another : 
Come  on,  we  will  make  l>ricks,  and  l)urn  to  burning.  And  ~brick 
served  them  for  stone,  and  asphalt  served  them  for  mortar.  The 
imperat.  of  nrp  is  2n,  give,  allow,  and  with  the  intentional  ah 
answers  to  the  encouraging  up  !  come  on  !  (comp.  Latin  cedo  = 
ce-dato,  cette  =  cedate) ;  njn  has  the  tone  on  the  penult.,  ton  on 
the  ult. ;  nevertheless  the  tone  of  nnn  can  under  some  circum 
stances  (before  N,  xxix.  21)  move  to  the  ult.,  and  that  of 
ton  to  the  penult,  (before  words  of  one  syllable,  Job  vi.  22). 
Brick  is  called  nja?,  Assyr.  libittu  —  libintu,  as  bleached  in  the 


GENESIS  XI.  4.  349 

sun,  but  perhaps  as  formed  of  clay  by  flat  pressing,  since  the 
Babylonio- Assyrian  does  not  know  the  colour- word  pp  to  be 
white,  but  has  for  it  the  meaning  to  press  flat  (Paradies,  145). 
They  did  not   however   use   brick   in  this    rough    state,  but 
burned    it   to    a    burning    (cpj?    is    here    not    comburere   but 
adurere},  i.e.  they  burned  the  shapen  clay  to  irKivQoi  oirral, 
bricks  in  the  proper  sense,  the  opposite  to  the  so-called  air- 
dried  bricks  of  mingled  clay  and  straw,  Ex.  i.  14  and  v.  7  ; 
these  burned  bricks  served  them  in  the  reckless  but  all  the 
more  clayey  alluvial  land  in  the   place  of  quarried   stones. 
And   for   mortar   or    cement   they  used,  not   "ifch,  clay,   but 
"rtpn^  asphalt,  Assyr.  amar  =  hamar.       The    building   was,  as 
Diodor.  ii.    9    says  :  o\vj    ef  ao-(f)d\rov  KCU   Tr\iv6ov  7re</>tXo- 
re-^rjfjievrj.      Hccc,  says  Trojus   Pompejus   in  Justin,  i.   2,  of 
Semiramis,  Babylona  condidit  murumque  urbi  cocto  later e  cir- 
cumdedit,  arence  vice  (instead  of  lime,  Kovias)  bitumine  inter- 
strata,  quce  materia  in  illis   locis  passim  invenitur  et  e   terra 
exaestuat.     The  scriptural  statement  does  not  exclude  the  use 
of  air-dried  bricks  and  ordinary  mortar,  it  only  gives  special 
prominence  to  the  new  manner  of  building  as  calculated  to 
last  for  ever.     For,  ver.  4 :   They  said,  Come  on,  we  will  build 
us  a  city  and  a  tower  with  its  top  in  the  heavens,  and  we  will 
make  us  a  name,  that  we  be  not  scattered  over  the  face  of  the 
whole  earth.     The  imperf.  ftna  and  npjw  are  as  much  cohorta- 
tive  (see  Ges.  §  75.  6)  as  that  with  ah  in  ver.  3.     In  general 
only  the  building  of  the  tower  of  Babel  is  spoken  of,  but  it 
is  a  city  with  a  tower  that  is  here  in  question.     The  words 
DWn  t$Nifl  may  be  directly  governed  by  n32J :  we  will  build 
its  (the  tower's)  top   up  to  heaven;  but  perhaps  we  are  to 
conceive  of  them  as  a  nominal  sentence  :  et  fastigium  ejus  sit 
ad  cesium ;   the  3  is  that  of  contact,  as  in  2  Jtt3.      They  fear 
that  unless  they  create  for  themselves  some   strong  point  for 
a  centre   and  support,  they  shall   be  scattered    on  all  sides ; 
pa  (properly  diffundi}  has  here  the  pregnant  sense  of  a  local 
separation  combined  with  loss  of  all  connection.      The  usual 
meaning  of  DP  6  nb>y,  to  make  oneself  renowned,  famous,  does 


350  GENESIS  XL  5,  6. 

not  well  suit  the  negative  object  sentence  with  }S, — QtJ*  seems 
to  require  here  a  more  concrete  sense,  /and  the  word  has 
originally  such  an  one,  meaning  some  thing  lofty  (see  on 
Ps.  viii.  1),  visible  from  a  distance,  especially  a  monument 
(2  Sam.  viii.  13  ;  Isa.  Iv.  13,  Ivi.  5).  Hence  the  reading 
Dt^  "6  i"TO  means  here,  according  to  its  original  full  value 
(Isa.  Ixiii.  1 2  ;  Jer.  xxxii.  2  0 ;  Neh.  ix.  10;  comp.  DIP, 
2  Sam.  vii.  23),  to  set  up  a  monument  in  one's  honour,  and 
then,  to  acquire  an  honourable  name.  In  this  passage  it  is  the 
tower  itself  as  high  as  heaven  in  which  the  builders  desire  to 
find  a  unifying  support,  a  name  comprising  them  all,  that 
they  may  not  be  lost  in  opposite  directions  (comp.  Eedslob  in 
DMZ.  xxvi.  754).  The  town  with  this  magnificent  tower  is  to 
be  a  centre  which  shall  do  honour  to  them  all,  and  secure  them 
against  the  dissolution  of  their  unity.  The  unity  which 
heretofore  had  bound  together  the  human  family  had  been 
the  acknowledgment  and  worship  of  one  God,  one  and  the 
same  religion,  and  the  mode  of  thought  and  action  resulting 
therefrom.  This  unity  does  not  suffice  them,  they  exchange 
it  for  an  external  self-made  and  therefore  ungodly  unity, 
from  which  the  dispersion,  which  it  was  to  prevent,  pro 
ceeds  as  a  punishment.  Cognition  of  the  state  of  affairs 
on  the  part  of  God,  ver.  5  :  Then  Jahveh  came  down  to 
see  the  city  and  the  tower  which  the  children  of  men  had 
built.  The  coming  down  of  Jahveh  (TV,  as  at  Ex.  xix.  20, 
xxxiv.  5;  Num.  xi.  25,  xii.  5;  comp.  also  the  going  up  of 
Elohim,  xvii.  22,  xxxv.  13)  means  the  self  -  manifestation 
of  the  Omnipresent  for  and  in  acts  of  power,  which  break 
through  the  course  of  nature  and  history.1  The  Perf.  wa  is 
meant,  according  to  86,  of  the  commenced  and  in  part 
already  executed  building.  Eesult  of  the  judicial  inquiry, 
ver.  6  :  And  Jahveh  said :  Behold,  one  people,  and  they  have 

1  "  Holy  Scripture  knows  of  ten  niT")11  of  God, — says  the  Midrash  Pirlce  of  R. 
Eliezer,  c.  14, — one  in  Paradise,  one  at  the  time  of  the  confusion  of  tongues,  one 
at  Sodom,  one  in  the  bush,  one  on  Sinai,  two  at  the  cleaving  of  the  rock,  two 
in  the  tabernacle,  and  one  in  the  last  day."  The  Theophany  in  Paradise  is 
purposely  not  designated  a  PITT- 


GENESIS  XL  6-8.  351 

all  one  speech,  and  this  is  their  beginning  to  do  (the  beginning 
of  their  doing  or  undertaking),  then  there  will  not  be  with- 
holden  from  them  (unattainable  by  them)  all  that  they  purpose 
to  undertake.  In  the  en  populus  unus  et  oratio  una  omnibus 
cy  has  as  supra-national  a  sense  as  at  Isa.  xl.  7,  xlii.  5,  where 
it  means  all  mankind  (Acts  xvii.  26).  HT  refers  to  the  building 
of  the  city  and  tower.  D;pnn  has,  like  pftnn,  n  instead  of  n 
in  the  second  syllable  before  the  tone  of  the  stem  beginning 
with  a  strong  guttural  ;  so  too  do  we  say  and  write  "•fti"^, 
TiiTyn.  An  inference  is  drawn  by  nnjn  (like  xx.  7,  xxvii.  8, 
xlv.  8).  W  is  lightened  from  'Er,  like  nbj,  7 a,  from  n^hj,  and 
nyaj,  ix.  19,  from  nsaj,  Ges.  §  67,  note  11.  The  partly 
finished  building  shows  what  association  can  do.  Sin  has 
taken  possession  of  this  association,  it  must  therefore  be 
destroyed.  This  destruction  is  not  merely  the  demand  of 
righteous  retribution,  but  at  the  same  time  a  wise  educational 
arrangement  designed  to  check  the  fearful  generality  and 
depth  of  the  apostasy,  to  which  such  spurious  unity  would 
lead.  Judicial  resolve,  ver.  7 :  Come  on,  we  will  go  down, 
and  there  confound  their  language,  so  that  they  do  not  under 
stand  one  the  language  of  the  other.  In  ver.  5  it  was  said  Ti»l, 
here  nni^  Jahveh  comprising  the  angels  with  Himself,  as  at 
iii.  22  and  i.  26,  but  here  as  ministers  of  His  penal  justice.1 
t)^  points  to  the  self-made  point  of  unity.  "1G?&$  is  equivalent 
to  ita  ut,  like  xiii.  16;  Deut.  iv.  40;  Ges.  §  127.  3a. 
Execution  of  the  judicial  resolve,  ver.  8  :  Then  Jahveh  scattered 
them  from  thence  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  and  they 
left  off  to  build  the  city.  Instead  of  continuing  :  Then  Jahveh 
confounded  their  language,  the  narrator  declares  at  once  the 
result  of  the  confusion  of  tongues.  This  was  brought  to  pass 
by  the  discord  of  minds  which,  because  their  thoughts  and 
aspirations  were  parted  asunder  in  the  most  opposite  directions, 
were  unable  any  longer  to  understand  or  make  themselves 

1  LXX.  translates  "Start  xa,}  Ka.ra.$u.v<ris  ffvyfciwfx.w  —  the  Jewish  statement 
(Bereshith  ralba,  c.  38,  and  elsewhere)  that  LXX.  changed  the  plural  into  the 
singular  is  not  confirmed.  The  Midrash  Lekach  tab  (ed.  Buber,  1880)  takes 
the  plural  as  plur.  majestatis. 


352  GENESIS  XI.  9. 

understood  by  one  another,  such  disharmony  of  thought  and 
speech  resulting  in  local  separation  and  cessation  from  the 
common  undertaking.  It  cannot  however  be  meant  that  the 
confusion  of  languages  attacked  individuals  in  their  relations 
to  each  other.  For  in  this  way  a  formation  of  different 
national  languages  would  not  have  been  arrived  at.  The 
human  family  was  shattered  into  single  hostile  groups,  which 
in  consequence  of  their  internal  separation  now  separated 
externally.  Memorial  character  of  the  name  Babel,  ver.  9  : 
Therefore  its  name  was  called  Babel,  for  there  Jahveh  confounded 
the  language  of  the  whole  earth,  and  thence  did  Jahveh  scatter 
them  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  The  verb  N^iJ  is  con 
ceived  with  the  most  general  subject,  like  xvi.  14  ;  Deut. 
xv.  2;  Josh.  vii.  26;  Isa.  ix.  5;  Ges.  §  137.  3.  The  city 
was  called  ?3?>  confusion,  from  ^3  V  ta,  with  the  fundamental 
notion  of  the  loosening  of  the  coherence  of  a  thing,  so  that 
b3  =  W>3,  as  Mte  =  MM,  nlBBte  ==  nlBBBB,  eta,  Ew.  §  158c. 
The  name  Babel  was  a  significant  retrospect  of  the  Divine 
judgment  interwoven  in  the  origin  of  the  world-city,  and  of 
that  tendency  to  anti-godly  unity  peculiar  to  it.  It  is  not 
opposed  to  this  that  the  name  meant  something  else  in  the 
mind  of  the  world-city.  The  EtymoL  magnum  derives  it 
CLTTO  rov  Br]\ov,  and  so,  according  to  Mas'udi,  do  Persian  and 
Nabatasan  scholars.  The  writing  of  the  inscriptions  however 
shows  that  the  name  is  composed,  not  of  32  and  ^3,  but  of  m 
and  ?$,  ilu,  the  general  Divine  name.  It  is  correctly  written  (as 
always  in  the  Acheemenidean  inscriptions)  Bdbilu  =  Bdbi-ilu, 
old  Persian  Babirus  (Bdbairus),1  Accadian  KA-DINGIRA,  gate 
of  God  (Paradies,  p.  213) ;  23  (shortened  to  3)  is  an  appella 
tion  of  the  seat  of  government  reaching  from  the  hoariest 
antiquity  to  the  present  day  (DMZ.  xxxiii.  114  sq.). 

God's    judicial    interposition    consisted,    according    to   the 
scriptural  account,  in  the  destruction  of  unity  of   language, 

1  In  the  Indian  Pali  legend  the  name  is  BaWru.  The  legend  says  that  a 
crow  was  there  worshipped,  and  that  when  a  peacock  was  brought  thither  it  was 
set  in  the  ylace  of  the  crow. 


GENESIS  XL  9.  353 

not  in  the  destruction  of  the  buildings.  Hence  it  is  not 
impossible  that  ruins  of  the  building,  or  at  least  traces  of 
the  site,  should  have  been  preserved.  And  in  effect  there  is 
among  the  ruins  of  Babylon,  and  indeed  of  Borsippa,1  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  a  pyramidal  mound  of  ruins, 
consisting  of  a  far-reaching  base  of  about  60  feet  high  and 
above  2000  in  circumference,  a  cone-shaped  mass  200  feet 
high  piled  upon  it,  and  a  tower-like  top  of  35  feet  high 
entirely  formed  of  bricks,  which  admit  no  kind  of  vegetation, 
with  the  exception  of  dry  lichens.  This  pyramid  of  ruins  is 
called  BITS  Nimrud  (Nimrod's  Tower).  The  Arabs  regard  it 
as  the  Babylonian  tower  destroyed  by  fire  from  heaven.  And 
the  black  scorified  and  vitrified  masses  which  have  fallen 
down  from  the  height  and  lie  about  in  heaps  at  the  foot 
favour  the  notion.  So  much  may  at  least  be  true,  that  this 
is  the  locality  of  the  tower  of  Babel.  This  pyramid  of  ruins 
is  the  temple  of  Bel,  described  Herod,  i.  181.  It  is  ancient 
Babylonian,  for  it  was  not  built,  but  restored,  by  Nebuchad 
nezzar,  who  placed  upon  it  the  tower-like  top  of  the  upper 
most  storey.  He  calls  it  in  the  inscription,  in  which  he 
boasts  of  it,  the  "  Temple  of  the  Foundation  of  the  Earth," 
and  the  "  Temple  of  the  Seven  Lamps  of  the  Earth  "  (Schrader, 
KAT.  121-127).  With  this  agrees  the  discovery  by  Henry 
Eawlinson  of  a  brick  building  of  seven  storeys  with  the 
seven  planetary  colours.  The  first  storey  blackened  with 
pitch  =  Saturn,  the  second  of  orange  -  coloured  bricks  = 
Jupiter,  the  third  storey  red  =  Mars,  the  fourth  certainly 
originally  gilt  =  the  Sun,  the  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  storeys 
had  the  colour  of  Venus,  Mercury  and  the  Moon  (apparently 
light-yellow,  blue  and  silver),  but  so  fallen  to  ruins  that 
neither  size  nor  colour  could  any  longer  be  discerned  (see 
Smith's  Chald.  Genesis,  ch.  x.).  From  Herod,  i.  98  we  learn 
that  the  ramparts  of  Ecbatana  showed  the  same  seven  colours. 
There  is  yet  another  mound  of  ruins  upon  the  soil  and  site 

1  In  Ber&sUth  rabba,  c.  38,  S)l'Dlp'Q  is  explained  with  reference  to  the  con 
fusion  of  tongues  as  =  PjID^U  ;  elsewhere  differently. 

Z 


354  GENESIS  XI.  9. 

of  ancient  Babylon,  viz.  that  which  is  called  Babil ;  this  is 
the  most  northerly,  and  situate  within  the  circuit  of  the 
ancient  city.  Eassam  conjectures  that  these  are  the  ruins  of 
the  hanging  gardens  constructed  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (Miirdter, 
p.  250). 

Independent  non-Israelite  reminiscences  of  the  confusion  of 
tongues  are  up  to  the  present  time  not  yet  pointed  out.  For 
the  Sibyl-myth,  communicated  by  Joseph.  Ant.  i.  4.  3,  known 
as  such  also  by  Alex.  Polyhistor  (Euseb.  Chron.  i.  4  and 
elsewhere),  is  certainly  a  recast  of  the  scriptural  narrative. 
Moses  Chorenazi  indeed  relates  (i.  6)  matters  connected 
with  it,  e  delect  a  meet  ceterisque  ver  adore  Sibylla  Berosiana. 
Richter  has  admitted  the  narrative  into  his  Berosi  guce  super- 
sunt,  pp.  21-23,  and  cuneiform  fragments  are  in  existence 
from  which  we  infer,  though  only  conjecturally,  a  Babylonio- 
Assyrian  counterpart  of  the  scriptural  narrative.  The 
national  languages  themselves  are,  assuming  its  historical 
nature,  incomparably  more  important  remains  of  the  occur 
rence.  Each  of  these  languages  is  indeed  the  product  and 
expression  of  the  mental  arid  physical  nature  of  the  people 
to  which  it  originally  belonged.  But  as  Divine  creative 
words  commence  and  cause  the  possibility  of  the  natural 
developments  of  all  things  within  and  beyond  the  six  days* 
work  of  creation,  so  too,  according  to  the  Scripture  narrative, 
was  a  judicial  act  of  Divine  power,  the  momentary  and  mighty 
impulse  of  the  natural  development  of  languages.  An  act 
which  did  not  indeed  shatter  the  one  primitive  language  into 
many  complete  separate  languages,  but  into  the  beginnings  of 
many,  which  from  that  time  forth  continued  to  advance 
towards  completeness.  The  one  primitive  language  would 
not  indeed  have  remained  in  a  state  of  stagnating  immobility 
even  if  this  miraculous  Divine  interposition  had  not  taken 
place.  In  virtue  of  the  abundance  of  human  gifts  and 
powers,  it  would  have  passed  through  a  process  of  continuous 
self-enrichment,  refinement  and  diversification.  But  when 
the  linguistic  unity  of  mankind  was  lost,  together  with  the 


GENESIS  XI.  9.  355 

unity  of  tlieir  religious  consciousness,  a  splitting  up  devoid  of 
unity  and  a  falling  into  fragments  devoid  of  combination,  took 
the  place  of  diversity  in  unity.      The  primitive  language  left 
behind  it  a  stronger  or  weaker  effect  in  the  languages,  which 
arose  together  with  the  nations  and  national  religions ;  but  as 
for  itself,  it  died  the  death  from  which  comparative  philology 
is   incapable    of   awakening    it.       Whether    anything   of    its 
concrete  form  may  still  be  discerned   in   the  background  of 
the   most  ancient  languages  or  not,  is  a  question  which  may 
be  answered  in  the  negative  or  affirmative  without  detracting 
from  the  historical  nature  of  what  is  related  Gen.  xi.   1-9. 
If  it  must  be  answered  in  the  negative,  this  is  conceivable 
from   the  circumstance,  that   according  to   xi.   7   divergency 
preponderated    in    the    separate    languages    now   originating, 
and  that  the  common  element  which  the  developing  nations 
took  with  them  into  other  lands  was  either  so  overgrown,  as 
civilisation  advanced,  as  to  be  quite  undiscernible,  or  entirely 
disappeared.     And  if  kindred  elements  are  found  in  groups 
of    languages    otherwise    fundamentally  differing,  this    must 
not  without   further    investigation  be   referred   to   an  actual 
primitive  unity.     All  languages  are  indeed  the  work  of  the 
human  mind,  the  works  and  acts  of  which  with  an  essentially 
equal  organ  of  speech  are  everywhere  analogous.      Much  that 
is  of  kindred  nature  may  be  explained  by  the  fact,  that  there 
are  languages  which  in   the   absence    of    mutual  association 
stand  at  the  same  stage  of  development  and  are  allied  to  each 
other   by   unity   of  character,   while    other   kindred  features 
are  imparted  by  the  intercourse    and    commerce   of  nations. 
Chance  too  produces  similarities  of  sound  by  which  superficial 
knowledge   is   misled  to  combine  what   is    unconnected  and 
fundamentally  different.      The   one  original  language  is  dead, 
but  not  without  hope  of  resurrection  in  the  one  final  language. 
A  prelude  to  this  was  the   fy\wo-(rais  \a\eiv  of   the  Pente 
costal    Church.       The   unity   of   the    original  beginning    lies 
outside  the  science  of  language,  and  all  the  experiments  of 
Pasilalia   (Volapuk)  in  anticipation  of  the  unity  of  the  end 


356  GENESIS  XI.  9. 

are  but  labour  lost.  It  is  in  another  manner  that  the  science 
of  language  serves  to  prepare  the  way  for  that  end.  Since 
philology  has,  under  the  sway  of  Christianity,  which  embraces 
all  nations  in  love,  become  a  scientific  task  taken  up  by 
loving  hands,  the  walls  of  partition  erected  by  the  Babylonian 
confusion  of  tongues  have  lost  their  impenetrability  and 
ruggedness,  and  a  foreign  language  has  gained  a  power  of 
attraction  great  in  proportion  to  its  former  repulsion  —  a 
repulsion  which  placed  the  people  who  spoke  it  among 
barbarians,  as  rather  stammering  and  lisping  than  speaking 
like  human  beings. 


Y. 
THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  SHEM,  XI.  10-26. 

(Parallel  passage,  1  Chron.  i.  24-27.) 

THE  Jahvistic  section,  xi.  1-9,  giving  more  detailed  infor 
mation  of  the  fact  noted  at  x.  25,  is  now  followed  by  an 
Elohistic  one,  belonging  to  the  scaffolding  of  Genesis  and 
forming  its  fifth  main  division.  The  tenth  member  (Noah) 
of  the  genealogical  main  line,  ch.  v.,  was  concluded  ix.  28  sq., 
the  lines  collaterally  descending  from  Shem  and  his  brothers 
were  treated  of  in  ch.  x.,  as  we  were  led  to  expect  by  the 
previous  remarks,  v.  32,  ix.  18  sq.  Now  follows,  in  accord 
ance  with  the  constant  historiographic  method  of  Genesis,  the 
continuation  of  the  main  line  which  has  in  view  Abraham, 
and  in  him  Israel.  The  genealogy,  xi.  10-26,  has  this  in 
common  with  ch.  v.,  that  it  ends  in  Terah  as  the  father  of 
three  sons,  as  the  former  ends  in  Noah  as  the  father  of 
three  sons.  Both  also  compute  the  years  to  and  from  the 
birth  of  the  first-born;  but  there  is  not  in  xi.  10-26,  as  in 
ch.  v.,  a  summing  up  of  the  whole  duration  of  the  life  of  the 
fathers  by  adding  together  the  years  before  this  birth  and 
the  remaining  years,  which  also  is  by  no  means  necessary  for 
continuing  the  thread  of  the  chronology.  The  Samaritan 
version  nevertheless  makes  the  two  tables  uniform  in  this 
addition  also.  And  because  this  reckoning  up  of  the 
duration  of  life  is  omitted,  the  eight  times  repeated  stereo 
type  nbjl  of  ch.  v.  is  also  left  out,  the  several  members  of 
the  table  each  ending  with  the  formula,  repeated  also  ch.  v., 
rimi  D^a  •ftfa.  This  is  here  repeated  eight  times,  for  the 
concluding  member  (Terah)  is  left  here  as  there  (Noah) 


358  THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  SHEM. 

uncompleted.     Here  however  we  have,  not  ten  members,  but 
only  nine. 

If  indeed  the  LXX.  had  the  original  text  when  it  inserted 
after  Arpachshad,  both  here  and  at  x.  22,  24,  a  Kalvav  (=  IJ11!?. 
in  ch.  v.,  the  son  of  Enosh,  the  father  of  Mahalalel)  with  the 
year  of  birth  130,  this  genealogy  of  Sheni  would,  like  that  of 
Adam,  consist  of  ten  members.  Demetrius  in  Euseb.  Prcep. 
ix.  21,  the  Book  of  Jubilees  and  Luke  iii.  16  herein  follow  the 
LXX.,  and  Berth.  Ew.  Dillra.  and  others  believe  in  the  genuine 
ness  of  this  Kenan.  But  (1)  since  he  is  here  the  fourth  from 
Noah,  as  v.  12  the  fourth  from  Adam,  his  transference  thence 
may  be  suspected ;  and  (2)  there  is  significance  in  Abram  but 
not  in  Terah  being  the  tenth  from  Shem,  as  Noah  is  the  tenth 
from  Adam ;  for  in  Abram  as  in  Noah  a  new  beginning  is 
matured,  and  there  is  a  decided  separation  between  the  old  and 
the  new.  The  abstract  of  the  chronicler,  1  Chron.  i.  24-27, 
knows  nothing  of  Kenan  and  counts  Abram  as  the  tenth. 
Mera  TOV  KaraK\vo-/jLov — says  also  Berosus  (in  Joseph.  Ant. 
i.  7.  2) — SefcaTr)  yevea  Trapa  Xa\Saioi$  rt?  TJV  Siicaios  avrjp 
Kol  fieyas  /cal  ra  ovpdvia  euTreipos.  This  suits  the  Abraham 
of  the  Bible  and  the  legend.  Hence  the  acute  Sextus  Julius 
Africanus  (see  Gelzer's  Monograph,  p.  89)  already  rejects 
Kawav,  and  even  a  Calovius,  notwithstanding  Luke  iii.  36, 
passes  upon  him  the  sentence  expimyendus  est.  He  was 
invented  for  the  sake  of  making  the  tables  in  chs.  v.  and  xi. 
uniform,  and  not  for  the  sake  of  the  130  years  which  he  con 
tributes  to  the  enlargement  of  the  chronological  network ;  for 
in  the  LXX.  the  365  years,  which  according  to  the  Hebrew 
text  elapsed  from  the  Flood,  or  more  strictly  from  the  birth 
of  Arpachshad,  to  the  migration  of  Abram,  are  raised  to 
1245  ;  the  Book  of  Jubilees,  which  reckons  642  years,  and  the 
Samaritan,  which  reckons  1015  (see  the  following  table),  stand 
midway.  Bertheau,  who  in  ch.  v.  decided  for  the  text  of  the 
Samaritan,  here  in  ch.  xi.  regards  that  of  the  Hebrew  as  original, 
and  at  least  the  age  70  of  Terah  at  Abram's  birth  and  the  age 
75  of  Abram  at  the  migration  as  traditional.  It  cannot  be 


GENESIS  XL  10,  11.  359 

denied  that  here,  as  at  ch.  v.,  different  calculations  are  before 
us,  which  remain  irreconcilable,  so  that  a  settled  primeval 
chronology,  which  can  claim  belief  on  the  ground  of  authority, 
is  out  of  question.  We  however  give  the  preference,  both 
here  and  ch.  v.,  to  the  Hebrew  text,  for  in  it  ch.  xi.,  with  its 
365  years,  forms  an  integral  member  of  the  2666  years 
reckoned  from  Adam  to  the  exodus,  which  represent  §  of  an 
assumed  duration  of  the  world  of  4000  years.  If  we  take  a 
survey  of  the  striking  synchronistic  relations  which  result 
from  the  long  duration  of  the  lives  of  Noah,  Sbem  and 
Arpachshad,  e.g.  that  Shem  lived  to  witness  the  birth  of  all 
the  following  eight  patriarchs,  the  birth  of  Abraham,  the  birth 
of  Isaac,  nay,  even  of  Esau  and  Jacob,  and  that  'Eber  also 
survived  the  birth  of  Abraham  some  years ;  the  question  arises, 
whether  the  dates  were  really  set  down  with  a  consciousness 
of  these  consequences,  and  the  conjecture  is  forced  upon  us, 
that  the  whole  sum  computed  for  the  post-diluvian  period 
down  to  Abram  is  divided  among  the  individual  patriarchs  as 
representatives  of  the  epochs  of  this  period,  in  which  case 
indeed  the  points  of  view  and  reasons  of  this  manner  of 
division  are  not  fully  perceptible.  In  general,  it  is  assumed 
that  the  duration  of  life  from  Shem  to  Terah  diminished,  and 
that  in  proportion  as  this  took  place  marriage  was  hastened: 
it  is  also  explicable  that  just  at  Peleg  (cornp.  x.  25)  the 
length  of  life  had  fallen  to  about  two  hundred  years.  But 
these  points  of  view  do  not  suffice  for  comprehending  the 
motley  jumble  of  numbers,  which  for  the  most  part  betray 
no  kind  of  purpose  or  design. 

Shem's  son  Arpachshad,  vv.  10,  11  :  These  are  the  generations 
of  Shem  :  Shem  ivas  one  hundred  years  old,  and  he  begat  Arpach- 
sad  two  years  after  the  flood.  And  Shem  lived  after  he  begat 
Arpachsad  five  hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  If 
Noah  begat  Shem,  as  v.  32  says,  in  his  500th  year,  Shem  as 
his  first-born  was  in  the  second  year  after  the  Flood  (which 
the  Talmud  and  Midrash,  misled  by  x.  21,  mistake),  not  one 
hundred,  but  one  hundred  and  two  years  old,  since  the  Flood 


360  GENESIS  XI.  12-15. 

took  place  (vii.  11)  in  Noah's  600th  year.  Hence  500  is  at 
v.  32  a  round  number  for  502  (see  on  x.  21),  or  -j^l  there  is 
to  be  strictly  understood  of  beginning  of  origin,  not  of  birth. 
If  Noah,  when  he  begat  Shem,  had  completed  the  500th  year 
of  his  life,  and  Shem  was  born  towards  the  close  of  his  501st 
year,  it  is  also  comprehensible  that  the  latter  had,  two  years 
after  the  commencement,  not  cessation,  of  the  Flood,  passed  the 
6  0  Oth  year  of  his  life  (Bengel,  Kn.  Dillm.).  It  is  self-intelligible 
that  ""rn  could  not  be  at  once  continued  with  after  the  title. 
At  v.  1-5  also,  before  the  imperfects  consecutive  appear,  a 
circumstantial  perfect  is  started  with.  That  Arpachshad  is 
here  designated  as  Shem's  first-born  is  not  in  contradiction 
with  x.  22,  where  the  descendants  of  Shem  are  introduced, 
not  according  to  succession  of  birth,  but  from  a  geographieo- 
historical  point  of  view.  Shelah  the  son  of  Arpachshad, 
vv.  12,  13  :  And  Arpaclisad  lived  thirty-five  years,  and  begat 
"Sclah.  And  Arpaclisad  lived  after  he  begat  "Selahfour  hundred 
and  three  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  In  ver.  12,  and 
again  also  in  ver.  14,  a  circumstantial  perfect  is  begun  with 
in  the  tone  set  at  ver.  10  ;  it  is  not  till  ver.  16  onwards  that 
the  beginning  with  W,  according  to  the  scheme  usual  from 
ch.  v.,  is  resumed.  The  name  nrty  means,  with  reference  to  its 
fundamental  notion :  a  departure  in  consequence  of  a  given 
impulse,  and  applied  to  water:  a  flowing  forth  (Neh.  iii.  15), 
to  plants  :  a  sprouting,  to  implements  :  a  shooting  ;  applied  to 
persons,  it  would  signify  a  sending  away.  'Eber  the  son  of 
Shelah,  vv.  14-15:  And  "Selah  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  *Eber. 
And  "Selah  lived  after  he  begat  *Eber  four  hundred  and  three 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  Arpachshad  having  given 
a  name  to  a  country  at  the  southern  extremity  of  the  high 
land  of  Armenia  (x.  20),  and  fEber  to  a  whole  group  of  nations 
(x.  21,  comp.  Num.  xxiv.  24),  Shelah  too  seems  to  have  a 
more  than  individual  signification.  Still  no  tribe  or  locality 
can  be  pointed  out  to  which  the  name  rw  adheres.  Hence 
Buttmann,  Ewald,  Bunsen  take  this  proper  name  as  a  figure 
of  national  facts.  So  too  Knobel  (Volkertafel,  p.  169) :  "  The 


GENESIS  XI.  10-19.  361 

name  rf>G?  contains  the  allusion  to  the  fact  that  in  the  earliest 
times  people  migrated  from  iBbaiK,  the  Chaldoean  ancestral 
seat,  and  the  name  "iny  states  the  region  in  which  they 
settled,  viz.  Mesopotamia,  for  "inan  -ay  is  a  frequent  designation 
of  the  country  on  the  other  side  of  the  Euphrates  (e.g.  Josh. 
xxiv.  2  sq.,  14  sq.)."  Mesopotamia  is  so  called  from  a  Pales 
tinian  standpoint,  while  "OJJ  in  ^s  earliest  historical  sense 
would  designate  the  passing  over  the  Tigris.  The  general 
sense  :  "advance  migration"  (Paradies,  p.  262),  is  here,  where 
IBbBiN  transports  us  close  to  the  great  net  of  the  two  rivers, 
probable.  Nor  does  ^"]?V  (niT^V)  signify  in  general  those 
who  migrate,  but  those  who  transmigrate.  The  name  B^V 
however  as  an  ethnographic  name  of  Israel,  which  would  accord 
ing  to  the  original  meaning  of  the  name  of  their  ancestor,  "uy, 
signify  those  who  came  over  the  Tigris,  has  in  the  subsequent 
usage  of  the  language  evidently  the  meaning  :  those  who  came 
over  the  river,  i.e.  the  Euphrates,1  not  (see  on  xiv.  13)  those 
who  came  over  Jordan  (Wellh.  Reuss,  Stade).  Peleg  the  son  of 
'Eber,  vv.  16,  17  :  And  'Eber  lived  thirty-four  years,  and  begat 
Pelcg.  And  'JEbcr  lived  after  he  begat  Peleg  four  hundred  and 
thirty  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  The  name  J^a 
means  division,  and  is  explained  in  this  sense  by  the  Jahvist, 
x.  25.  Whether  the  name  of  the  Mesopotamia!!  town  $d\ya 
($d\iy(i),  situated  where  the  Chaboras  flows  into  the  Euphrates, 
has  any  kind  of  connection  with  it  is  uncertain.  Eeu  the  son 
of  Peleg,  vv.  18,  19  :  And  Pelcg  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat 
P^H.  And  Pelcg  lived  after  he  begat  Reu  two  hundred  and 
nine  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  The  name  Urhoi 
(Edessa)  has  nothing  to  do  with  W  (LXX.  'Pajav,  comp. 
'Payovfa  =  ^IJH,  friendship  of  God,  friend  of  God)  ;  Edessa 
has  been  so  called  from  the  time  when  it  was  the  capital  of 
'Ocrporjvrj,  or,  which  is  more  probable,  the  name  arose  from 
Ka\\-Lpp6rj,  for  Edessa  is  also  called  ^Avno^eta  77  eVl 
Ka\tppoy  (afonte  nominata,  Plin.  v.  24).  Sprenger  strays  even 


1  Comp.    Bereshith    rabla,    c.    xlii.  : 

J16J92  rPKp,  i-e.  as  it  is  correctly  glossed  :  "inun  "131?  ^3 


362  GENESIS  XL  20-26. 

/  G.* 

as  far  as  y*s.j  on  the  Shammar.  Serug  the  son  of  Re'u, 
vv.  20,  21  :  And  Re  ft  lived  thirty -two  years,  and  begat  Serug. 
And  Reu  lived  after  he  begat  Serug  two  hundred  and  seven 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  The  name  JVii?  (comp. 
Arab,  sirdg,  lamp)  has  adhered  to  the  Mesopotamian  province 
and  town  of  Sarug,  a  day's  journey  north  of  Harran  ;  the  town 
of  Sarug  is,  according  to  its  Greek  name,  BaTvai,  of  Osroene. 
Nahor  the  son  of  Serug,  vv.  22,  23  :  And  Serug  lived  thirty 
years,  and  begat  Nahor.  And  Serug  lived  after  he  begat  Nahor 
two  hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  The  nations 
of  whom  Nahor  is  the  ancestor  are  registered  xxii.  2  0  sqq. ; 
but  no  people,  country,  or  place  carrying  on  his  name  can  be 
pointed  out.  Terah  the  son  of  Nahor,  vv.  24,  25  :  And 
Nahor  lived  twenty  -  nine  years,  and  begat  Terah.  And 
Nahor  lived  after  he  begat  Terah  one  hundred  and  nineteen 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  The  name  rnn  is  perhaps 
the  same  word  with  the  Babylonio- Assyrian  name  of  the 
antelope,  turdhu,  Syr.  taruha,  Arab,  arh,  urhi.  Kn.  combines 
with  it  (LXX.  Sap  pa)  the  town  Tharrana  southwards  of 
Edessa  upon  Tabula  Pentingeriana,  xi.  d.  Friedr.  Delitzsch 
notes  a  Mesopotamian  name  of  a  town  Til-sa-turhi.  The 
sons  of  Terah,  ver.  26  :  And  Terah  lived  seventy  years,  and 
begat  Abram,  Nahor  and  Haran.  The  genealogy  consisting 
of  nine  members  closes  with  Terah  ;  it  points  to  Abram,  just 
as  v.  32  does  to  Shem.  The  date  here,  as  there,  designates 
the  first-named  as  the  first-born.  The  birth  years  of  Nahor 
and  Haran  are,  like  those  of  Ham  and  Japheth,  without  import 
ance  for  the  chronological  progress  of  the  history.  This 
genealogy  closes  with  the  ninth  member,  because  the  following 
nnhn  were  not  to  be  entitled  D"DK  rm^in,  but  mn  nnhn ;  for  the 
chief  personage  of  the  section  is  Abram,  the  descendant  of  Terah, 
whose  historical  importance  consists  in  his  being  the  father  of 
Abraham.  If  the  section  had  had  for  its  title,  not  mn  rni>in, 
but  D"QK  rr6in,  we  should  expect  the  history  of  Abraham  in 
his  descendants,  while  the  history  of  Abraham  is  on  the 
contrary  essentially  his  own. 


GENESIS  XL  10  SQQ. 


363 


TABLE  TO  GENESIS  XL  10  SQQ.  (comp.  xii.  4). 
The  Post-diluvian  Patriarchs  to  the  Ancestor  of  Israel. 

The  bracketed  figures  in  the  LXX.  are  the  readings  of  the  Cod.  Alexandrinus. 
Only  the  Samarit.  text  sums  up  the  durations  of  life. 


Heb.  Text. 

Samar.  Text. 

Septuag. 

o 

o 

£   0 

£  0 

If 

II 

2 

<2 

® 

c5 

2 

c5 

a;  ^ 

o>  "^ 

:Ji 

3 

s 

3 

5 

a 

^  8-g 

o 

<£ 

•g 

o 

gj 

o 

0 

_JS  rt  H 

Nan:  es  of  the  Ten. 

5g 

3 

p 

5  a 

o 

.^     Q 

| 

o 

|^ 

0  "to 

o 

"H 

£  -t^ 

o 

CH 

1 

«•? 
(D  •+•* 

"o 

"H 

tlja 

•§|w 

d 

p 

Tl 

3 

P 

"g 

p 

S    (0 

iP  2 

"S 

*cS 

r2 

rt 

'3 

® 

"rt 

'5 

o 

O  +J 

o  •+•* 

1 

1 

O 

g 

a 

1 

a 

1 

o 

r 

1° 

Shem,      .     . 

100 

500 

600 

100 

500 

600 

100 

500 

600 

1558 

2158 

Arpachshad, 

35 

403 

438 

135 

303 

438 

135 

400 
(430) 

535 

(565) 

1658 

2096 

(KaJVay),  .       . 

vacat 

vacat 

varat 

vacat 

vacat 

vacat 

130 

330 

460 

Shelah,  .     . 

30 

403 

433 

130 

303 

433 

130 

330 

460 

1693 

2126 

'Eber,      .     . 

34 

430 

464 

134 

270 

404 

134 

270 

404 

1723 

2187 

(370) 

(504) 

Peleg,      .     . 

30 

209 

239 

130 

109 

239 

130 

209 

339 

1757 

1996 

Re'ii,  .     .     . 

32 

207 

239 

132 

107 

239 

132 

207 

339 

1787 

2026 

Serilg,     .     . 

30 

200 

230 

130 

100 

230 

130 

200 

330 

1819 

2049 

Nahor,    .     . 

29 

119 

148 

79 

69 

148 

179 

125 

304 

1849 

1997 

(79) 

(129) 

(-208) 

Terah,     .     . 

70 

135 

205 

70 

,75 

145 

70 

135 

205 

1878 

2083 

At      Abram's 

migration,    , 

75 

75 

75 

(1948 

2123) 

From         the 

Flood  (more 

strictly  from 
the   birth  of 

Arpachshad 

in  the  second 

year        after 

the  Flood)  to 

Abram's  mi 

gration,  .     . 

365 

1015 

12451 

1  The  Book  of  Jubilees  offers  at  chs.  viii.-xi.  a  fourth  computation.  It 
reckons  from  the  birth  of  Arpachshad  to  Abram's  migration  642  years,  by 
ascribing  to  Arpachshad  66  years  at  the  birth  of  his  first  son,  to  Cainan  (whom 
he  inserts  with  LXX.)  57,  to  Shelah  67,  to  'Eber  68,  to  Peleg  61,  to  Re'u  59,  to 
Serug  57,  to  ISTahor  62,  to  Terah  70,  and  counting  thence  to  Abram's  migration 
to  Canaan  75  years. 


VI. 

THE  TOLEDOTH  OF  TEEAH,  XL  27-XXV.  11. 

THERE  is  nothing  omitted  between  xi.  26  and  xi.  27. 
Hence  the  general  anticipatory  statement  of  xi.  26  and  the 
details  of  what  is  there  alluded  to,  beginning  xi.  27,  join 
closely  with  each  other.  This  shows  us  that  the  previous 
history  of  Israel  in  Q  consisted  entirely  of  a  series  of  nnhn, 
rounded  off  and  yet  trenching  upon  each  other.  Within  this 
framework  however  the  genealogy  passed  into  historical  narra 
tive  wherever  material  was  at  hand  and  the  scope  of  the 
work  induced  it.  Now  that  the  author  has  arrived  at  Abram, 
this  material  begins  to  be  more  abundant.  The  title  n£«l 
nl^  nT>to  belongs  to  the  whole  following  history  of  Abraham, 
down  to  the  new  sections  of  the  Toledoth  of  Ishrnael  and 
Isaac.  Hence  a  good  portion  of  the  historical  matter  in  these 
Toledoth  certainly  belongs  to  Q,  but  as  certainly  not  the 
whole,  for  extracts  from  all  sources,  of  which  Genesis  consists, 
are  inlaid  in  the  panelling  of  the  Toledoth.  It  was  however 
regarded  as  settled  that  not  only  the  verse,  with  the  title, 
xi.  27,  and  xi.  32,  which  finishes  off  Terah  as  a  member  of 
the  genealogy,  belong  to  him,  but  also  that  all  between  these 
two  verses  is  Elohistic  (e.g.  by  Kayser,  Urgesch.  p.  12),  until 
Wellh.  and  Dillm.  here  also  carried  on  the  unravelling  process 
to  such  an  extent  as  to  leave  only  vv.  27,  31,  32  to  Q  as  his 
certain  property,  with  some  hesitation  as  to  D^IBO  ")1N£  in 
ver.  31.  For  the  view  that  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  as  Abram's 
starting-point  does  not  belong  to  the  oldest  form  of  tradition, 
and  was  first  inserted  by  E  (the  redactor)  both  here  in 
Elohistic  and,  xv.  7  and  indeed  xi.  2S&,  in  Jahvistic  con 
nection,  is  more  and  more  gaining  ground.  There  are  however, 

364 


GENESIS  XI.  27,  28.  365 

as  we  shall  see,  no  valid  grounds  for  thus  expunging  a  funda 
mental  assumption  of  the  previous  history  of  Israel.  In 
ver.  2  7  we  again  find  ourselves  on  the  soil  of  purely  domestic 
history,  and  learn  what  happened  in  the  family  of  Terah, 
Abram's  father,  down  to  the  migration  to  Harran  in  Mesopo 
tamia.  The  three  sons  of  Terah,  ver.  27  :  And  these  are  the 
generations  of  Terali:  Terah  begat  Air  am,  Nalior  and  Haran,  and 
Haran  legat  Lot.  Each  of  the  three  is  important  to  the  sacred 
history :  Abram  as  the  ancestor  of  Israel,  Nahor  by  reason  of 
his  female  descendants,  who  enter  into  the  line  of  the  promise, 
Haran  as  the  father  of  Lot.  The  name  D"QN  appears  also 
elsewhere  in  the  Babylouio- Assyrian  form  Abu  rainu  (see 
Schrader,  art.  "  Ur,"  in  Eiehm's  HW.).  We  know  as  little 
why  Terah  gave  his  first-born  this  name,  as  why  he  gave  the 
second  that  of  "rtnj,  the  snorter,  and  the  third  that  of  fjn,  the 
miner.  The  in  contained  in  this  third  name  does  not  justify 
the  inference  that  it  was  originally  meant  of  a  tribe  or  country. 
prn,  with  which  Wellh.  (GescJi.  325,  Proleg.  330)  arbitrarily  con 
founds  it,  is  an  etymologically  different  word.  The  tie  which 
united  Terah  and  his  family  to  their  home  was  loosened  by  an 
early  death,  ver.  2  8  :  And  Haran  died  in  the  lifetime  of  Terah 
his  father  in  the  land  of  his  birth,  in  Ur  Casdim.  He  died  *JB"^ 
of  his  father,  so  that  the  latter  could  and  must  behold  it,  hence 
while  he  was  yet  alive  (comp.  Num.  iii.  4;  Deut.  xxi.  16). 
That  Haran  died  in  the  land  of  his  birth  was  the  more  worthy 
of  note,  because  Terah  his  father  afterwards  died  in  Harran.  The 
land  of  Haran's  birth,  and  consequently  of  Terah's  dwelling,  is 
designated  as  D*ii5>3  nix.  It  is  not  surprising  that  LXX.  trans 
lates  x<apa  T&v  XaXSalwv,1  since  it  occurs  nowhere  else  than 
in  the  history  of  Abrarn  as  the  name  of  a  city.  The  synagogal 
and  ecclesiastical  legend  (see  Beer,  Das  Lebcn  Abrahams  nach 
An/assung  der  jud.  Sage,  1859)  read  out  of  the  TIN,  that 
Abraham  was,  as  a  confessor  of  the  one  true  God  and  a  denier 

1  According  to  this,  Nicolaus  Dainasc.  says,  in  Joseph.  Ant.  i.  7.  2,  that 
Abraham  came  »«  T?,-  yvs  vvip  EafivXuvo;  x«/.Sa/w»  *.t<yop.ivnS}  i.e.  from  the  land 
of  the  Chaldees,  reaching  from  and  around  Babylon.  Comp.  the  designation 
of  Ethiopia  as  n  lv\p  AlyvxTovin  Thucydides,  ii.  48. 


366  GENESIS  XI.  28. 

of  the  gods  of  Mmrod,  cast  into  the  fire,  and  miraculously 
preserved  by  God;  and  in  accordance  with  this,  Jerome 
translated,  Neh.  ix.  7,  eduxisti  eum  de  igne  Chaldceorum. 

Since  J.  D.  Michaelis  and  Schlozer  the  TIN  of  Terah  has  been 

-^ 
supposed  to  be  discovered  in  the  castle  of  Ur  (Persian  U^, 

castle)  lying  within  the  Persian  boundaries,  six  days'  journey 
north  of  Hatra,  mentioned  by  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  xxv.  8. 
But  this  castle,  mentioned  nowhere  else,  was  first  built  by  the 
Persians  or  Parthians,  and  is  hence  already  out  of  question. 
The  Syrian  Church  flattered  itself  that  Edessa  was  the  native 
place  of  Abraham,  but  Urfa,  UrJwi  (Arab.  er-Ruha)  have  as 
names  of  Edessa  nothing  to  do  with  TIN  (see  on  xi.  1 8),  and 
as  little  with  Uruk  or  Warka  (Vaux  after  H.  Ptawlinson's 
former  view),  for  this  is  T}^,  *Op%ov.  This  last  combination 
is  however  correct,  so  far  at  least  as  the  appellation,  since  it 
seeks  for  Ur  in  the  Chaldsean  land,  i.e.  here  as  elsewhere  (e.g. 
also  Ezek.  i.  8)  Babylonia,  situate  southward  from  Assyria 
towards  the  Persian  Gulf.1  That  the  ancestral  home  of  the 
patriarchs  was  in  Babylon  can  the  less  surprise  us,  since  the 
primitive  histories  which  we  read  in  Genesis  are  in  nearer 
and  more  manifold  contact  with  the  traditions  of  the 
Babylonians  and  Assyrians  than  with  those  of  any  other 
nation.  And  if  indeed  a  city  Ur  can  be  pointed  out  in 
Babylonia  proper  (Sumer  or  TjttG?),  and  one  which  had  also 
been  famous  as  a  seat  of  government  and  civilisation,  we 
should  rejoice  at  so  brilliant  a  confirmation  of  the  scriptural 
narrative.  We  attach  credit  indeed  to  the  extra  -  biblical 
information,  that  the  Canaanites  migrated  from  the  Persian 
Gulf  to  the  land  of  the  Jordan ;  and  yet  this  lacks  such  con 
firmation  as  is  afforded  by  the  discovery  of  the  site  of  the  city 
of  Ur,  together  with  many  remains  dating  from  the  time  of  its 
existence  (from.  Nabonid  538  B.C.  downwards),  in  the  mound 

1  This  applies  to  the  Talmud,  though  it  mistakenly  transposes  Ur  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  Cuthah  (u^ij  ifl}  )»  north-eastwards  of  Babylon,  Bathra 
91a:  "The  small  side  (not  the  small  ford,  DMZ.  xxxix.  6)  of  TTD  is  Ur 
Casdim." 


GENESIS  XI.  28.  367 

of  ruins,  el-MugTieir*  upon  the  right  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  a 
little  southwards  of  the  31st  degree  of  latitude.  Here  resided 
the  most  ancient  Babylonian  kings  ;  here  existed  a  very  ancient 
temple  of  the  moon  -  god,  restored  by  the  last  Babylonian 
king;2  here  was  a  double  water-way  to  north  and  south  at 
the  disposal  of  traffic,  viz.  the  Euphrates  and  the  great 
canal  Pallakopas,  which  united  North  Babylonia  directly  with 
the  sea.3  It  is  not  yet  determined  what  Ur  signifies  ;  perhaps 
it  is  South  Babylonian,  and  equal  to  the  North  Babylonian 
Vru  (Heb.  "W).  The  genitival  definition  D^.f  3  is  intended  to 
designate  the  city  as  Babylonian,  and  is  also  sensu  strictiori 
appropriate,  since  the  Assyr.  mat  Kaldi,  where  it  is  dis 
tinguished  from  Rardunids,  is  a  name  of  South  Babylonia 
(chief  district  Bit-JaMn).  Dillmann  alleges  as  a  reason  for 
suspecting  the  antiquity  and  historical  nature  of  the  D^KO  "iis, 
that  the  Chaldseans  D'Hbo  first  occur  in  the  Bible  "  after 
Jeremiah's  time."  But  as  Habakkuk  mentions  and  describes 
them,  why  should  riot  the  Jahvist,  who  elsewhere  shows  him 
self  well  acquainted  with  what  is  Babylonian,  know  of  them  ? 
Already  in  inscriptions  of  Eammannirari  III.,  810-781,  and 
therefore  long  before  the  complication  of  Israel  arid  Judah 
with  Assyria,  Babylonia  as  a  whole  is  called  mat  Kaldi 

o  / 

1  This  writing  suggests  the  thought  of   £JL<>     red  chalk,  but  it  is  now 


written    .JA4J  i,   i.e.  built  with  pitch  (asphalt)  (Paradies,  p.  227),  "the  asphalt 

city"  (Schrader). 

2  It  is  in  striking  agreement  with  this,  that  according  to   Eupolemus  (in 
Euseb.  Prwp.  ix.  17),  who  wrote  after  150  B.C.,  Qlpln  X«x^a/«v  was  also  called 

Kafixpivn  ;  j*£  (comp.  j*!>\>  to  be  hoary)  is   the  Arabic  name  of  the  moon. 

Comp.  however  Schrader,  KAT.  130.  Boscawen  in  his  article,  "Historical 
Evidences  of  the  Migration  of  Abraham,"  1886,  shows  that  a  very  ancient 
mutual  intercourse  existed  between  Ur  and  Harran  as  the  chief  seats  of  the 
worship  of  the  moon. 

3  Hommel,  in  a  German  essay  published  in  London,  Aug.  1886,  remarks  that 
"  Hebrew  nomads  could  easily  make  a  temporary  settlement  just  in  or  near  Ur, 
the  only  ancient  Babylonian  city  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  on  the 
borders  of  the  Arabian  desert  inhabited  by  nomnds.     In  the  cities  east  of  the 
Euphrates,  on  the  contrary,  they  would  soon  have  been  identified  with  the 
stationary  population  of  Babylonia." 


368  GENESIS  XI.  29. 

(Paradies,  200,  KAT.  131) ;  Kasdi  is  the  Babylonian  form  of 
the  name,  and  Kaldi  (by  a  similar  change  of  sound,  as  in 
altur  for  astur,  I  wrote)  is  the  Assyrian.  If  the  older 
historical  work  of  J  (JE)  testifies,  xv.  7,  that  Abram  came 
out  of  DHfco  ")1N,  the  like  statement  in  the  more  recent  one  of 
Q  cannot  be  surprising.  Dillmann  feels  the  want  of  any 
reconciliation  in  the  preceding  accounts  for  the  statement  in 
both,  and  thinks  that  J  dates  the  migration  of  Abram  into 
Canaan  from  Harran  as  the  dwelling-place  of  his  family.  But 
this  is  the  case  only  if  we  deny  to  him  DHbD  "ilKD,  xv.  7,  and 
do  away  with  the  lines  of  connection  given  xi.  26  sqq. 
Schrader  rightly  regards  (KAT.  133)  the  departure  of  Abram 
from  Ur  of  South  Babylonia  as  historically  accredited  by  the 
concurrence  of  Q  and  J  (comp.  Neh.  ix.  7) ;  and  Kittel  ("  Die 
Herkunft  der  Hebraer  nach  dem  A.  T.,"  in  the  Stud,  aus  Wurt- 
tenib.  Jahrg.  vii.  1886),  though  he  finds  the  equation:  Ur 
Casdirn  =  Uru  =  Mugheir  "  worthless  "  for  the  connection 
and  comprehension  of  the  biblical  sources,  revolts  against  the 
assumption  that  D^ba  TIN  is  in  the  text  of  both  narratives  a 
voluntary  interpolation  of  JK,  and  prefers  to  persuade  himself 
that  J  and  Q  thought  of  this  Chaldsean  Ur  as  situated  north 
or  north  -  west  of  Charran.1  Hence  it  is  agreed  that  the 
ancestral  home  of  the  patriarchal  family  lay  not  in  north 
western  Mesopotamia,  but  in  Chaldsea  proper.  Marriages  in 
the  family  of  Terah,  ver.  29  :  And  Abram  and  Nahor  took 
themselves  wives ;  the  name  of  Abr arris  wife  was  Sarai,  and  the 
name  of  Nahor  s  wife  was  Milcah,  the  daughter  of  Haran,  the 
father  of  Milcah  and  of  Iscah.  We  do  not  learn  that  Sarai 
was  the  daughter  of  Terah  till  we  are  subsequently  told 
so,  3 la;  perhaps  tons  originally  stood  after  "H^,  and  R 
expunged  it  because  it  was  not  properly  intelligible  without 
xx.  12.  She  was  Abram's  half-sister,  of  the  same  father,  but 
not  of  the  same  mother.2  Nahor  married  in  Milcah  his 

1  V.  Baudissin  also  transfers  it  to  Northern  Mesopotamia  (Theol  LZ.  1880, 
Col.  379). 

2  In  such  marriages  with  sisters  among  the  Shemites  are  still  to  be  seen, 
according  to  the  researches  of  the  Dutchman  -Wilken  and  the  Scotchman  Rob. 


GENESIS  XI.  30,  31.  369 

brother's  daughter,  both  marriages  being  according  to  sub 
sequent  Jewish  law,  but  not  according  to  contemporary 
opinion,  incestuous.  It  is  evident  that  Milcah  is  mentioned 
because  Eebecca  the  wife  of  Isaac  was  descended  from  her. 
Hence  it  is  needless  to  show  (Wellh.  Dillm.)  that  ver.  29 
and  xxii.  20-24  are  from  the  same  peri.  The  verse  indeed 
prepares  also  for  xvii.  15,  while  to  Iscah  there  is  no  further 
reference.1  Was  she  Lot's  sister  and  perhaps  his  wife  (so 
Ew.),  and  hence  the  ancestress  of  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites? 
Sarai's  childlessness  is  already  expressly  dwelt  on,  ver.  30  : 
And  Sarai  was  barren ;  she  had  no  child.  Wellh.  Dillm.  think 
this  statement  premature  in  this  place,  but  it  is  not  so ;  for  it 
states  that  Abram  was  childless  when  he  migrated  from  Ur 
by  way  of  Harran  to  Canaan.  1PJ  is  awa^  yeyp.,  for  in  2  Sam. 
vi.  23  the  reading  vacillates  between  "PJT  and  1PJ,  (from 
lifl  =  ^J).  The  call  of  God  to  Abram  had  not  yet  gone  forth 
when  his  transference  from  Chaldaea  to  Canaan  was  already 
being  prepared  for  by  God's  providence,  ver.  31  :  And 
Terah  took  Abram  his  son,  and  Lot  the  son  of  Haran,  his 
grandson,  and  Sarai  his  daughter-in-law,  Abram  s  wife,  and 
they  went  with  them  from  Ur  Casdim,  to  go  to  the  land  of 
Canaan,  and  they  came  to  Harran,  and  settled  there.  There 
is  no  way  of  satisfactorily  dealing  with  the  QflN  W?.s.l.  To 
translate,  with  Knobel :  they  went  with  each  other,  is  for 
bidden  by  the  fact  that  the  suffix  may  indeed  have  a 
reflexive,  but  not  a  reciprocal  meaning.  If  it  is  explained : 
Terah  and  Abram  with  Lot  and  Sarai  (Eashi),  or  vice  versa : 
Lot  and  Sarai  with  Terah  and  Abram  (Keil),  it  cannot  be  per 
ceived  why  they  who  departed  are  thus  halved.  And  if  the 

Smith  (see  Noldeke  in  DMZ.  xl.  148  sqq.),  traces  of  the  matriarch  ate  once 
prevailing  among  them,  and  according  to  which  only  descent  from  the  same 
mother  was,  as  blood-relationship  proper,  valid  for  matrimonial  and  hereditary 
rights. 

1  We  dispense  with  determining  the  meaning  of  the  two  names,  but  this 
much  is  certain,  that  iisbo  decidedly  comes  from  "]^D  =  to  counsel  (whence 
the  king  as  counsellor  and  decider,  J*jj}%  has  his  name),  HSD11  from  H3D  or 
>,  to  behold. 

2  A 


370  GENESIS  XI.  31. 


DriK  is  referred  to  the  unmentioned  members  of  the  family,  or 
to  the  bond-servants  (xii.  5)  of  those  mentioned,  or  if  on  the 
other  hand  these  are  made  the  subject,  and  DHN  referred  to 
the  four,  no  cause  is  stated  and  therefore  no  justification 
afforded  for  so  doing.  The  text  is  probably  corrupt  (Olsh. 
Schrad.  Dillrn.),  and  originally  was  DJRS  K¥*l  :  and  he,  Terah, 
went  with  them  (Syr.),  or  cmx  x$*\:  he,  Terah,  led  them 
forth  (LXX.  Sam.  Jer.),  which  is  the  more  suitable,  since 
the  1  of  IN^I,  which  has  got  into  the  wrong  place,  is  thus 
also  explained.  Then  too  is  the  question  set  at  rest  as 
to  whether  Nahor  (whose  name  the  Samar.  inserts)  went 
with  them.  He  did  not  go  with  them,  but  started  after 
wards,  for  the  extreme  point  of  this  journey  was  Harran, 
and  there  we  afterwards  find  (comp.  xxvii.  43  with  xxiv. 
10)  Bethuel  and  Laban,  the  son  and  grandson  of  Nahor. 
The  migration  of  the  Terahites  may  be  connected  with  that 
northward  tending  movement  of  nations  from  the  Persian  Sea 
(DMZ.  xxvii.  419),  to  which  belongs  also  the  emigration  of 
the  Canaanites  (see  on  x.  6).  The  narrative  however  mani 
fests  here  no  interest  in  the  history  of  the  nations,  but  only 
an  interest  in  individuals  concerned  in  the  history  of  redemp 
tion.  Harran  (Heb.  with  compensatory  lengthening  pjn,  Arab. 

•3^ 

/oUs-j  Xappav  Trjs  Meo-oTroTajjilas  in  Joseph.  ;  Har-ra-nu  on 

inscriptions)  is  the  place  where  the  great  roads  divide,  con 
veniently  situated  for  trade  (pn,  from  V  "in,  to  be  narrow, 
like  the  English  strait)  in  North-western  Mesopotamia.  It 
was  praised  by  Josh.  (Ant.  xx.  2.  3)  as  fertile,  especially 
in  Amomum,  and  its  site  is  still  marked  by  ruins  south 
east  of  Edessa  (Orfa).  It  is  the  Kdppai,  Carrce,  in  whose 
neighbourhood  Crassus  and  Caracalla  met  with  their  ruin  in 
their  expeditions  against  the  Parthians,  and  it  subsequently 
formed  the  border-town  of  the  Grseco-Byzantine  kingdom, 
the  walls  of  which  were  rebuilt  by  Justinian.  It  was  the  chief 
seat  of  the  Sabians  or  Harranians  (described  by  Chwolson, 
1856),  who  possessed  there  a  sanctuary  dedicated  to  the  moon- 


GENESIS  XI.  32.  371 

god,  which  they  traced  back  to  Abraham.  Here  Terah  died, 
ver.  32  :  And  the  days  of  Terah  were  two  hundred  and  five  years, 
and  Terah  died  in  Harran.  When  the  direction  subsequently 
went  forth  to  Abram,  xii.  1,  to  go  to  the  land  that  God  would 
show  him,  the  death  of  Terah  appears  to  have  meanwhile 
taken  place.  The  Samar.  changes  this  appearance  into  reality 
by  diminishing  the  duration  of  Terah's  life  to  145  years.  In 
the  Hebrew  text  however  it  is  200  years  ;  and  if  Terah  was 
70  when  he  begat  Abram  (xi.  26),  and  the  latter  left  Harran 
at  the  age  of  75  (xii.  4),  Terah  was  then  145  years  old,  and 
if  he  lived  to  be  205,  survived  the  separation  60  years. 
Jerome  tries  to  make  use  of  the  expedient  of  dating  the  75 
years  of  Abram,  not  from  his  birth,  but  from  his  preservation 
from  the  furnace,  this  being,  as  it  were,  his  new  birth.  Others 
(e.g.  Meusel's  Kirchliches  HL.),  by  making  Abram,  in  opposi 
tion  to  ver.  26,  the  youngest  son  of  Terah,  and  born  in  his 
130th  year.  But  the  difficulty  so  violently  got  rid  of  does 
not,  on  due  consideration,  exist  at  all.  The  reason  that 
Terah's  death  is  related  before  Abram's  call,  is  to  be  found  in 
the  custom  observed  in  Genesis,  of  entirely  setting  aside 
secondary  individuals  and  matters  for  the  sake  of  being  able 
to  devote  uninterrupted  attention  to  the  chief  person  and 
chief  matter.  For  Terah's  importance  with  respect  to  the 
history  of  redemption  is  absorbed  in  his  being  the  father  of 
Abram,  and  dies  out  from  the  time  that  the  new  beginning, 
to  which  Abraham  is  appointed,  comes  upon  the  scene.  In 
the  speech  of  Stephen,  Acts  vii.  4  (as  also  in  Philo,  i.  461, 
Mang.),  the  succession  of  the  narrative  is  taken  for  the  succes 
sion  of  events. 

The  patriarchal  history  begins  with  ch.  xii.  The  result  of 
the  separation  of  languages  was  the  origin  of  nations,  and  at 
the  same  time  the  origin  of  heathenism.  Idolatry  took 
possession  of  the  line  of  Sheni  also,  and  especially  of  the 
Terahites,  Josh.  xxiv.  2,  14.  It  was  shown  that  neither 
the  remembrance  of  the  primitive  revelation  which  they  took 
with  them  at  the  dispersion,  nor  the  law  written  in  their  hearts, 


372  GENESIS  XI.  32. 

was  capable  of  securing  the  continuance  of  the  true  know 
ledge  of  God.  If  grace  would  prevent  mankind  from  becoming 
entirely  a  massa  perdita,  it  must  separate  one  man,  who  has 
preserved  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God,  and  make  him  and  his 
race  the  depositaries  of  the  pure  knowledge  of  God  and  of  His 
redemptive  revelation.  This  one  was  Abraham,  the  "inN  of 
Isa.  li.  2,  Mai.  ii.  15,  who  is  called  to  be  the  pi£a  ayia  of 
Israel,  the  mediator  nation  for  mankind.  What  was  needed 
on  the  part  of  Abraham,  if  he  was  to  receive  into  himself 
the  fundamental  new  beginning,  and  to  be  serviceable  to  it, 
was  above  all  things  faith,  and  he  became  in  effect  the  man 
of  world-conquering  faith,  as  Isaac  was  the  man  of  quietly 
enduring  faith,  and  Jacob  the  man  of  wrestling  faith.  He 
stands  typically  at  the  head  of  the  patriarchal  triad,  for  in 
Isaac  Abraham's  loving  endurance,  and  in  Jacob  Abraham's 
hopeful  wrestling,  are  but  repeated.  In  Abraham  faith  shows 
itself  in  the  whole  plenipotence  of  its  individual  elements, 
and  he  is  hence  Trar^p  TTOLVTWV  TWV  Trio-revovTwv,  the  ancestor 
of  Israel  and  the  model  of  all  believers. 

The  life  of  Abraham  is  comprised  under  the  title  nta 
mn  rvnbin,  and  reaches  from  xi.  22  to  xxv.  18.  When  Ewald, 
not  recognising  the  decadal  plan  of  Genesis,  asserts  (Jahrb. 
iv.  p.  40)  that  a  title  concerning  Abraham  corresponding  to 
the  titles  concerning  Isaac,  xxv.  19,  and  Jacob,  xxxvii.  2,  is 
missing  after  ch.  xi.,  and  when  Hupfeld  (Quellen,  p.  18)  thinks 
there  is  no  other  answer  to  the  question,  why  there  is  no 
title  DrrQK  nr6in  nta,  than  that  "  this  deficiency  may  at  all 
events  be  explained,"  this  rests  upon  a  misconception  of  the 
true  sense  of  the  formula.  The  nrtan  of  Terah  intend  to  give 
the  history  of  Abraham,  and  they  make  us  expect  it,  because 
the  importance  of  Terah  in  the  history  of  redemption  consists 
in  his  being  the  father  of  Abraham,  and  because  the  impulse, 
given  according  to  God's  providence  (xi.  31)  by  him,  goes  on 
in  Abraham.  The  history  which  commences  from  him  is 
concentrated  in  Abraham.  The  experiences  of  Abraham  form 
the  essential  and  central  contents  of  the  Toledoth  of  Terah, 


GENESIS  XL  32.  373 

which  close  as  genealogically  at  xxv.  1-10  as  they  begin 
genealogically  at  xi.  27-32. 

It  is  between  this  commencement  and  close  that  the  history 
of  Abraham  advances  in  four  periods,  the  commencements  of 
which  form  the  most  prominent  events  in  the  life  of  Abraham, 
and  are  very  important  occurrences  in  the  history  of  redemp 
tion.  The  first  period,  chs.  xii.-xiv.,  begins  with  the  call  of 
Abraham  and  his  departure  for  the  land  of  promise ;  the 
second,  chs.  xv.-xvi.,  with  the  promise  of  an  heir  and  the  sealing 
of  Abraham's  faith  by  a  covenant ;  the  third,  chs.  xvii.-xxi., 
with  the  change  of  his  name  and  the  institution  of  the  sign 
of  the  covenant;  the  fourth,  chs.  xxii.-xxv.  11,  with  the  great 
trial  of  Abraham's  faith  and  the  confirmation  of  the  promises 
to  him  after  he  had  proved  faithful.  The  grounds  of  this 
division  are  furnished  by  the  facts  of  the  history ;  the  first 
and  fourth  parts  are  also  marked  off,  for  the  purpose  of 
calling  attention  to  them,  by  externally  similar  commence 
ments,  xv.  1,  xxii.  1. 

The  Toledoth  frame  is  by  Q  (A).  Chs.  xvii.  and  xxii.  are 
whole  and  larger  sections  by  this  writer,  xix.  29  is  an 
example  of  a  certainly  recognisable  fragment  from  this  source. 
The  redactor  (fi)  had  Q  and  had  JE  before  him,  and  these 
two  last,  as  it  seems,  already  combined  into  a  single  whole. 
The  main  portion  of  the  history  of  Abraham,  which  is  worked 
into  the  Elohistic  frame,  is  derived  from  J  (C),  at  least  the 
sections  xii.  1—8,  9-20,  chs.  xviii.— xix.,  ch.  xxiv.,  certainly  are 
so.  Since  Hupf.  (Qudlen,  p.  168),  ch.  xx.  (Abraham  in 
Gerar),  together  with  xxi.  22  sqq.  (the  treaty  with  Abimelech), 
has  been  regarded  as  the  first  certainly  recognisable  portion 
of  the  second  Elohist.  For  the  rest,  the  analysis  into  J,  E, 
and  R  must  be  content  witli  not  going  beyond  bare  pro 
bability. 

The  history  of  Abraham  and  of  the  patriarchs  in  general 
gives  an  impression  of  being  an  account  of  actual  persons  with 
distinct  individuality  who  lived  on  in  the  national  tradition, 
and  of  personal  experiences  consistent  with  the  circumstances 


374  GENESIS  XL  32. 

of  the  times,  and  never  appearing  by  their  incredibility  and 
want  of  moderation  to  be  a  poetic  recasting  of  perceptions  and 
thoughts  into  histories.  According  to  Goldziher  (Der  Mythos 
bei  den  Hebraern,  1876),  Abram  is  the  starry  heavens,  and  "  the 
smiling  one  (pny)  whom  the  exalted  father  intended  to  slay, 
or  as  it  may  have  originally  run,  actually  slew,  is  the  smiling 
day,  or  more  precisely,  the  smiling  evening  sky,  which  in 
its  struggle  with  the  night  sky  comes  off  the  loser  and  is 
defeated."  The  utterly  unfounded  expedient  of  an  actual 
slaying,  which  alone  makes  this  explanation  by  a  nature-myth 
possible,  should  be  taken  into  consideration.  A  pendant  is 
furnished  by  Grill's  (Die  Erzvater  der  Menschheit,  1875) 
explanation  of  the  death  of  the  other  spies  while  Joshua  and 
Caleb  remained  alive.  "  In  this  history,"  he  says,  "  the 
original  myth  seems  to  have  described  the  speedy  disappear 
ance  of  the  stars  at  the  break  of  day  and  the  contempora 
neous  and  certain  rising  of  the  cool  morning  breeze ;  Caleb 
is  one  of  the  two  dogs  comprising  the  duality  of  the  morning 
and  evening  breezes."  Grill  is  distinguished  from  Goldziher 
by  his  ascribing  Sanscrit  as  their  mother  tongue  to  the  primi 
tive  Hebrew  people,  and  seeing  in  the  histories  of  the 
patriarchs,  nay,  even  in  those  of  the  Judges  also,  transformed 
Sanscrit  myths.  Jul.  Popper  (Der  Ur sprung  des  Monotlieismus, 
1879)  treads  another  path  in  an  essentially  similar  spirit. 
Abram  is  to  him  Heaven,  which  was  reverenced  by  the  most 
ancient  Semites,  their  oldest  deity  like  Djaus-pitar,  the 
heaven -father  of  the  ancient  Indians.  Dozy  (Israeliten  zu 
Mekka,  1864)  moreover  turns  to  account  Isa.  li.  1  sq.  to 
prove  that  Abram  was  originally  an  object  of  worship  and 
indeed  a  stone  fetish  like  the  Ka'ba,  the  black  stone  of  Mecca, 
and  Sara  consequently  the  cave  in  which  it  lay.  Hitzig 
(Gescli.  i.  41  sq.)  thinks  that  because  Abram  sojourned  in 
Egypt  his  name  ought  to  be  explained  from  the  Koptic  ape, 
head,  top,  Latin  apex,  and  the  Kopt.  romi,  man :  he  is  the 
man  who  was  invented  for  the  purpose  of  having  a  beginning 
for  a  new  development.  All  these  are  wild  imaginations,  on 


GENESIS  XI.  32.  375 

whose  adornment  much  learning  has  been  squandered,  but 
which  are  utterly  devoid  of  any  exact  scientific  proof. 

It  is  indeed  possible  that  the  history  of  the  patriarchs  in 
its  present  form  may  be  in  part  the  product  of  some  legendary 
or  even  mythic  formation.  But  before  we  can  acknowledge 
the  possible  as  the  actual,  we  require  proofs  that  legend  has 
here  as  there  independently  given  shape  to  originally  historical 
material,  or  that  myth  has  historically  incorporated  certain 
ideas  or  abstractions.  Many  names  of  tribal  ancestors  in  the 
genealogies  in  Genesis  being  without  doubt  only  ideal  and  not 
real  unities,  it  must  be  allowed  to  be  possible  that  Abraham 
should  also  be  such  an  eponymous  hero.  In  this  sense  it  is 
that  Stade  asserts  (Gesch.  127  sq.)  that  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Jacob  and  Joseph  are  tribal  heroes,  Jacob  and  Joseph  also 
names  of  tribes ;  and  further,  that  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob 
were  worshipped  at  renowned  sanctuaries,  among  which  that 
of  Abraham  was  the  least  famous.  Also,  that  the  Israelites 
either  derived  from  the  Canaanites  the  heroic  figure  honoured 
and  celebrated  in  these  places,  or  localized  a  Hebrew  one 
there ;  but  in  either  case  a  pre-Egyptian  sojourn  of  Israelite 
families  in  the  land  west  of  Jordan  is  out  of  question,  and  a 
sojourn  of  Israel  in  Egypt  previous  to  their  migration  in  the 
first  place  to  the  country  east  of  Jordan  cannot  be  admitted. 
To  prove  the  share  which  the  myth  has  in  the  history  which 
has  come  down  to  us,  he  himself  constructs  a  mythic  history  of 
most  peculiar  invention,  built  up  upon  the  most  daring  denials. 
For  him  the  patriarchal  preliminary  stage  of  the  Mosaic  religion 
has  no  existence.  The  epoch-making  act  of  Moses  was  the 
introduction  of  the  worship  of  Jahveh  as  a  tribal  god,  and  this 
he  derived  from  the  Arabian  Kenites.  A  fancy  picture  upon 
such  a  tabula  rasa  is  not  history  saved  but  history  ruined. 

How  much  more  moderate,  and  therefore  much  more 
interesting,  are  the  results  at  which  Dillmann  arrives,  though 
he  starts  from  the  "  now  self-intelligible  premiss,"  that  the 
narratives  concerning  the  patriarchs  belong  not  to  history 
strictly  so  called,  but  to  the  region  of  legend.  For — and 


376  GENESIS  XII.  1-9. 

this  he  places  foremost  among  the  tokens  of  the  legendary — 
there  is  no  single  nation  on  earth  to  whom  their  true  ancestor 
can  be  historically  assigned,  and  nations  in  general  are  not 
formed  after  the  manner  of  a  family,  but  grow  together  from 
all  sorts  of  materials  (comp.  also  Popper,  ibid.  p.  110,  and 
elsewhere).  This  must  be  conceded,  but  the  nation  appointed 
to  be  the  vehicle  and  mediator  of  the  revealed  religion  is,  as 
is  emphasized  throughout  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures 
(e.g.  Deut.  xxxii.  6),  no  mere  formation  of  nature,  and  the 
unique  is  just  what  might  be  expected  in  the  manner  in 
which  this  nation  originated,  assuming  indeed  that  a  sphere 
of  grace  above  that  of  nature,  and  therefore  a  sphere  of  the 
supernatural  government  of  God  above  that  of  natural  law,  is 
acknowledged.  Besides,  the  migration  of  the  Terahites  is 
already  more  than  a  mere  fact  of  family  history  (see  on  xi.  31). 
And  a  shepherd-prince  like  Abraham,  who  can  bring  into  the 
field  hundreds  of  bondmen  regarded  as  incorporated  into  his 
family,  is  even  on  that  account  developing  into  a  tribe. 
It  is  in  this  manner  at  least  that  many  prominent  tribes 
among  the  South-African  Bantus  have  originated  from  some 
chief,  and  in  conjunction  with  him.  And  the  family  of  Jacob 
which  settled  in  Egypt,  which  as  a  consanguineous  kindred 
numbered  only  seventy  souls,  grew  there  into  a  nation,  not 
merely  from  itself  alone,  but  by  the  reception  of  all  sorts  of 
foreign  materials.  Nature  and  grace  co-operated.  If  the  factor 
of  grace  is  deducted,  Israel  is,  according  to  Amos  ix.  7,  Ezek. 
xvi.  3,  in  its  origin  and  composition  a  nation  like  any  other. 


THE  CALL  OF  ABRAHAM,  AND  HIS  ENTRANCE  INTO  THE  LAND  OF 
PROMISE,  XII.  1-9. 

This  first  portion  of  the  first  section  of  Abraham's  life 
relates  the  event  which  gave  a  new  direction  to  his  life  when 
well-stricken  in  years,  and  began  to  make  it  a  fundamental 
component  in  the  history  of  redemption.  It  is  derived  from 


GENESIS  XII.  1.  377 

J,  but  completed  in  4£,  5,  from  Q.  Abram  hears  the  voice  of 
God,  ver.  1  :  And  Jahveh  said  to  Abram  :  Get  thee  out  from 
thy  country  and  thy  home  and  thy  father  s  house,  into  the  land 
that  I  will  show  thee.  We  must  not  conceive  of  this  speaking 
of  God  to  Abraham  as  external ;  he  heard  the  voice  of  God 
within  him,  in  the  inmost  depth  of  his  soul,  which  the 
New  Testament  calls  Trvev/jia  rov  voos,  and  to  which  man 
must  ever  retire  if  he  would  hear  the  voice  of  God.  The 
scene  of  this  chiefly  internal  occurrence  was,  according  to  the 
meaning  of  the  Toledoth  of  Terah,  as  we  now  have  them, 
Harran  (4&,  xi.  316)  ;  but  the  speech  of  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  2), 
and  many  expositors  who  are  not  influenced  by  it  (e.y. 
Kirnchi),  assume  that  the  narrative  reaches  back  to  the  time 
when  the  family  of  Abram  still  dwelt  in  Ur  Casdim,  and 
according  to  the  prevailing  view  (xv.  7 ;  Neh.  ix.  7)  the 
Divine  intervention  certainly  dates  thence.  On  the  other 
hand  there  is  of  late  an  inclination  to  entirely  expunge  nix 
DHBO  from  the  previous  history  of  Israel.1  This  is  apparently 
favoured  by  the  circumstance  that  Abram,  who  is  here 
enjoined  to  leave  pK  and  rr6l£,  in  ch.  xxiv.  designates 
Mesopotamia  (Harran)  not  only  as  Wl^lDI  1¥"iN,  ver.  4,  but 
also  as  irni?1D  ptf,  ver.  7,  which  is,  according  also  to  xxxi. 
3,  13,  one  and  the  same.  If  the  words  are  pressed,  Abraham 
really  states  himself,  xxiv.  7,  to  have  been  born  in  Harran ; 
Reggio  harmonizes  the  apparently  discrepant  statements  by 
assuming  that  the  family  of  Terah  made  only  a  temporary 
sojourn  in  Ur  Casdim,  but  that  their  proper  dwelling-place, 
D^iyo,  Josh.  xxiv.  2,  was  Mesopotamia.  Perhaps  the  follow 
ing  is  a  better  expedient,  viz.  that  while  im^lD  px  in  its 
strict  sense  means  the  land  of  a  man's  birth,  as  undoubtedly, 
xi.  28,  im^iEl  i!HN  does  a  man's  country  and  birthplace,  like 
xxxii.  9,  but  that  both  expressions  then  denote  in  a  general 
way  the  native  land  and  home,  i.e.  the  country  and  place, 

1  Ed.  Meyer  however  says  in  the  Deutschen  Rundscliau,  1887,  4,  p.  35  : 
"  Babylonia  is  esteemed  by  the  Hebrews  as  the  home  from  which  their  ancestors 
migrated." 


378  GENESIS  XII.  2,  3. 

where  dwell  the  father  and  dependants  of  the  speaker,  and 
where  he  has  himself  taken  root,  though  his  cradle  may  not 
have  stood  there.  Harran  was  a  second  home  to  Abram  by 
reason  of  the  settlement  of  his  family  there,  though  he  was 
not  himself  born  in  the  place.  LXX.  (Acts  vii.  2)  translate 
^rnpifttt^  real  €K  T?}?  avyyeveias  &ov ;  but  though  m^IlD,  blood- 
relationship,  Esth.  viii.  6,  may  mean,  as  at  Esth.  ii.  10,  20, 
descent,  and  Gen.  xlviii.  6,  posterity,  it  yet  has  in  com 
bination  with  *]V)KD  a  local  sense  (birth-place,  home).  The 
land  which  Jahveh  has  in  mind  for  Abram  is  as  yet  left 
indefinite.  The  pilgrimage  which  he  is  to  enter  upon  is  a 
work  of  faith,  which,  renouncing  self  and  every  creature,  obeys 
the  Divine  impulse  and  direction.  With  this  obedience  is 
combined  the  fulfilment  of  great  promises,  ver.  2  :  And  I  will 
make  of  thee  a  great  nation  and  bless  thee  and  make  thy  name 
great,  and  be  tJwu  a  blessing.  The  Divine  address  advances 
from  simple  futures  through  the  cohortative  to  the  imperative, 
as  the  strongest  expression  of  the  Divine  purpose  of  grace — 
vehjeh  berachah  is  a  recapitulatory  inference  from  the  preceding 
promises :  he  becomes  a  blessing  in  himself  and  to  others,  in 
that  God  blesses  him  and  makes  his  name  great,  so  that  he 
is  universally  acknowledged  and  esteemed  as  blessed  (Zech. 
viii.  13  ;  comp.  Isa.  xix.  24).  The  verse  divider  stands  in 
the  right  place.  Abram  becomes  a  source  of  blessing,  from 
whom  the  blessing  with  which  he  is  himself  filled  flows 
onwards.  The  personal  blessing  imparted  to  him  has  a 
universal  purpose.  How  it  is  to  go  forth  from  Abram  to 
others  is  told,  ver.  3  :  And  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee, 
and  curse  him  that  despiseth  thee,  and  in  thee  shall  all  families 
of  the  earth  bless  themselves.  The  Targums  falsely  translate 
13,  propter  te ;  it  means  in  te  =per  te,  not  merely  secondary 
cause,  but  mediatorship.  Abram  becomes  a  mediator  of 
blessings  for  those  in  his  neighbourhood,  in  that  they,  while 
acknowledging  him  as  blessed  of  God,  are  themselves  blessed, 
and  for  those  remote  in  time  or  place,  in  that  the  report  of 
Abram's  blessing  impels  them  to  desire  to  share  it.  ??j? 


GENESIS  XII.  3.  379 

(prop,  vilipendere)  was  the  more  appropriate  word  for  the 
blasphemous  cursing  of  men,  TIK  (on  which  see  rem.  on  iii.  14) 
for  the  judicial  infliction  of  a  curse  on  the  part  of  God.  And 
how  significant  is  it,  that  they  who  bless  are  spoken  of  in  the 
plural,  and  they  who  curse  only  in  the  singular !  They  who 
curse  are  only  individuals  who  isolate  themselves  from  that 
humanity  which  is  destined  to  inherit  the  blessing.  In  3& 
the  development  of  the  mediatorship  of  blessing  awarded  to 
the  patriarch  is  continued.  The  thought  here  expressed  being 
however,  the  Nipli.  is  understood,  already  intimated  in  ver.  2, 
we  cannot  agree  with  Kautzsch  and  Kohler,  that  the  reflexive 
meaning :  they  shall  bless  themselves  in  (with)  thee,  produces 
a  tautology.  The  series  of  these  promises  which  is  Jahvistic 
throughout  is:  xii.  3,  xviii.  18,  xxii.  18,  xxvi.  4,  xxviii.  14. 
In  these  parallels  to  our  passage  we  have  in  the  place  of  ^, 
now  *I_Jf]!3,  now  ^"j^i  ^  and  in  the  place  of  the  thrice 
repeated  Niphal  ^"!^1,  the  Hithpael  tt^nrn  twice,  xxii.  18, 
xxvi.  4.  The  change  shows  that  the  Niphal  is  meant  to  be 
taken  in  a  reflexive  sense,  though  Kimchi  (and  also  Aben  Ezra) 
thinks  he  must  take  the  Hithpa.  reflexively  and  the  Niph. 
passively,  but  only  because,  as  Efodi  (1403)  justly  points  out, 
he  misconceives  the  originally  reflexive  nature  of  the  Nipli. 
Since  the  language  possesses  in  "Jpja  an  unambiguous  passive 
of  ^2,  e.g.  Num.  xxii.  6,  Ps.  xxxvii.  22,  the  Niph.  occurring 
only  in  this  promise  will  be  the  synonym  of  the  Hitlipa.  with 
which  it  is  exchanged.  The  evevko^drjaovrai  of  the  LXX. 
adopted  in  the  New  Testament  (comp.  Wisd.  xliv.  21)  does 
not  decide  the  question.  The  Hithpa.  has  the  meaning  of  an 
operation  of  the  subject  upon  itself.  It  means  to  wish 
oneself  a  blessing,  Deut.  xxix.  19,  with  3,  to  wish  oneself 
the  blessing  which  proceeds  from  any  one :  mrra,  Isa. 
Ixv.  16,  Jer.  iv.  2,  or  which  any  one  possesses,  xlviii.  20,  or 
both  at  once ;  viz.  which  any  one  possesses  and  causes,  Ps. 
Ixxii.  17  (compare  the  passages  in  an  opposite  sense,  Ps. 
cii.  9  ;  Isa.  Ixv.  15  ;  Jer.  xxix.  22).  We  accordingly  explain 
the  Niph.  also :  God  will  bless  those  whom  Abraham  blesses, 


380  GENESIS  XII.  4,  5. 

and  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  at  last  all  the  families  of  the 
earth  shall  wish  and  seek  to  participate  in  the  blessing  of 
which  he  is  the  vehicle,  which  is  the  same  as  to  say  that 
they  shall  be  actually  blessed  in  him.  For  that  God  will 
bless  those  who  recognise  Abram  as  blessed  and  rejoice  in 
his  blessing,  immediately  precedes,  and  the  lenedictio  voti  et 
desiderii  and  the  lenedictio  rei  et  effectus  are  always  according 
to  the  order  of  salvation  involved  in  each  other.  The  seed 
of  the  patriarchs  is  Israel  (Ps.  cv.  6),  which  according  to  Isa. 
xix.  24,  Zech.  viii.  13,  comp.  Jer.  iv.  2,  is  to  be  a  blessing 
for  the  whole  earth,  but  it  reaches  its  climax  in  Messiah  the 
King,  Ps.  Ixxii.  17  —  Jesus  the  Christ  is  the  aim  of  both  the 
seed  of  the  patriarch,  Gal.  iii.  16,  and  of  the  woman,  iii.  15. 

The  first  act  of  Abram's  obedient  faith,  ver.  4  :  And  Abram 
went,  as  JaJiveh  commanded  him,  and  Lot  went  with  him,  and 
Abram  was  seventy  -five  years  old  when  he  departed  from 
Harran.  Here  is  at  once  seen  the  true  nature  of  Abram, 
which  makes  him  the  father  of  all  believers.  Jahveh  has 
commanded,  he  replies  by  the  obedience  of  faith,  he  acts 
blindly  according  to  God's  directions,  commending  himself  to 
His  guidance.  His  age  is  so  exactly  stated,  because  of  the 
new  period  in  the  history  of  salvation  which  dates  from  this 
point.  A  more  exact  statement  of  those  who  went  with  him, 
ver.  5  :  And  Abram  took  Sarai  his  wife  and  Lot  his  brother's 
son,  and  all  their  property  which  they  had  made  their  own 
and  the  souls  they  had  gotten  in  Harran,  and  they  departed  to 
go  to  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  came  to  the  land  of  Canaan. 
The  mode  of  expression  is  quite  like  xlvi.  6,  and  especially 
like  xxxvi.  6  (comp.  n^jj,  xxxi.  1).  The  living  and  personal 
are  distinguished  from  the  dead  and  material  possessions  by 
K'B3  and  &W,1  the  denominative  sjbn  (to  acquire)  is  found  in 
the  Old  Testament  exclusively  in  Q.  $B3  means  the  persons 
of  the  slaves  (comp.  Lev.  xxii.  11  ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  13)  ;  the  slave 

1  Paul  Haupt  combines  this  word,  Ass.  rukusu,  with  £V]i  (X$3")),  in  the 


assumed  original  meaning  riding  animal,  and  in  property  consisting  of  such 
(Hebraka,  1887,  p.  110). 


GENESIS  XII.  6.  381 

is  in  the  Israelite  view  more  than  res,  the  Ulpianic  servus  vcl 
animal  aliud  could  not  be  said,  for  the  slave  too  is  D"JK,  Num. 
xvi.  32.  Abram  and  those  who  followed  him  went  to  Canaan, 
while  Terah,  who  at  first  also  intended  to  accompany  them, 
remained  behind  in  Harran.  Entrance  into  Canaan,  ver.  6  : 
And  Abram  went  through  the  land  as  far  as  the  place  of  Sichem, 
as  far  as  the  Terebinth  of  Moreh,  and  the  Canaanite  -was  then 
in  the  land.  Without  knowing  that  Canaan  was  the  land 
intended  by  Jahveh,  he  passed  through  it  to  the  quarter  of 
the  subsequent  Sichem  (xxxiv.  2)  (C3K>  Dipp,  like  Ex.  iii.  8,  J, 
therefore  not  like  the  Arab,  makdm,  holy  place),  on  which 
account  Eupolemus  says  (in  Eus.  ix.  17),  %evio-07JvaL  avrov 
IITTO  TToXeco?  lepov  'Apyapifyv,  and  indeed  as  far  as  to  the  tere 
binth,  or  according  to  Deut.  xi.  30,  the  terebinths,  of  Moreh, 
where  he  rested.  The  LXX.  has  for  ^N,  xiv.  6,  n^K,  xxxv.  4, 
and  i^N,  Josh.  xxiv.  26,  repefiwOo? ',  and  for  pta  (without 
difference  of  vocalization),  Spvs,  oak  (like  Syr.  Saad.),  for  which 
may  be  cited  that  Josh.  xix.  33,  Judg.  iv.  11,  interchange  l^K 
and  P^,  but  against  it,  that  |vK,  Judg.  ix.  6,  certainly  denotes 
the  same  tree  as,  xxxv.  4,  n?K,  and  Josh.  xxiv.  26,  r&K.  Now 
the  meaning  oak  being  secured  to  Ji?K  by  IjJfr  TOK,  and  also 
the  meaning  terebinth  to  n?N  by  Isa.  vi.  13,  we  range  |vK  and 
^'K  with  nta  as  three  names  of  the  terebinth,  and  n?N  with 
$>*?  as  two  names  of  the  oak  ;  hence  the  vocalization  in  one  of 
each  of  the  two  passages,  Josh.  xxiv.  26,  Judg.  ix.  6,  and 
Josh.  xix.  33,  Judg.  iv.  11,  is  inaccurate.  Perhaps  the 
appellation  itself  vacillated  (like  that  of  lead  and  tin,  of 
basalt  and  iron),  for  the  native  evergreen  oak  species  of  Asia 
and  North  Africa  and  the  terebinths  resemble  each  other  in 
the  greyish  green  of  their  foliage  and  in  their  furrowed  dark 
grey  barks,  and  the  appellations  r6x,  pta  V  bx,  JT  (comp. 
J^.)  suit  both  trees  in  respect  of  their  strong  trunks  and 
hard  wood.  In  Aramaic  IJ^K  has  become  the  word  for  a  tree 
in  general,  as  Spvs  also  is  said  to  have  originally  designated 
TTCLV  £v\ov  Kal  SevSpov,  and  has  returned  to  this  general 
meaning  in  the  Gothic,  Anglo  -  Saxon,  Old  Northern  and 


382  GENESIS  XII.  7,  8. 

English  (tree)?  The  remark,  6&,  means  to  say,  that  the 
country,  and  indeed  the  inland  part,  was  not  without  owners 
and  inhabitants.  Hence  Abram  was  wandering  about  in  it 
as  a  stranger,  and  could  not  as  yet  call  a  foot's-breadth  of  it 
his  own.  The  W  points  to  a  subsequent  alteration  of  this 
state  of  things.  That  it  had  come  to  pass  in  the  time  of  the 
narrator  does  not,  though  probable,  necessarily  result  from 
the  TN ;  this  probability  however  becomes  a  certainty  through 
the  fact  that  all  the  three  sources  from  which  the  Pentateuch 
is  compiled  belong  to  the  period  after  the  taking  possession 
of  the  land.  The  land  was  in  the  possession  of  the  Canaanites, 
but  Abram  was  in  spirit  to  see  in  it  his  inheritance,  ver.  7  : 
And  Jahveh  appeared  to  Abram,  and  said:  To  thy  seed  will 
I  give  this  land ;  and  there  he  built  an  altar  to  Jahveh,  who 
appeared  unto  him.  This  is,  apart  from  iii.  8,  the  first 
Theophany  related  in  Holy  Scripture.  Here  for  the  first 
time  is  the  revelation  of  God  accompanied  by  His  rendering 
Himself  visible.  This  word  of  God  at  the  terebinth  of 
Moreh  is  the  first  foundation  of  Israel's  legal  right  to  Canaan. 
From  that  time  forth  Abram  knew  that  Canaan  was  the 
Promised  Land,  and  he  erected  upon  the  soil,  hallowed  by  the 
appearing  and  promise  of  God,  an  altar  as  a  memorial  con 
secrated  to  him  (see  the  art.  "  Altar  "  in  Biehm's  HW.\  He 
could  not  however  remain  at  this  place  of  revelation  ;  the  great 
household  and  quantity  of  cattle  for  which  the  nomadic  chief 
had  to  provide  required  change  of  settlement,  ver.  8 :  And 
he  went  forth  from  thence  to  the  mountain  east  of  Bethel  and 
pitched  his  tent,  Bethel  on  the  west  and  Ai  on  the  east,  and  built 
there  an  altar  to  Jahveh  and  preached  the  name  of  Jahveh. 
The  expression  P£V?1,  he  made  a  start,  started  again,  occurs 
with  JJB?1  only  here  and  xxvi.  22.  r6nK  for  i^nx  is  the  much 
older  manner  of  writing  the  suffix  contracted  from  ahu.  He 

1  In  the  Targums  (Samar.  Jer.)  jl^tf  (^»N,  xiv.  6)  is,  like  ^jD  in  names  of 
places,  translated  by  "i^JO  (plain);  see  Dillmann,  "  On  Baal  with  the  feminine 
article  (n  B«aX),"  p.  19  of  the  separate  impression  of  this  Academical  Discourse 
taken  from,  the  collection  of  the  Discourses  of  the  Royal  Prussian  Academy  of 
Sciences. 


GENESIS  XII.  9-20.  383 


pitched  so  that  Bethel  (the  subsequently  so-called  ?$W3  every 
where,  according  to  the  Masorah,  as  e.g.  in  the  ancient  French 
Codex  in  the  Leipsic  town  library,  to  be  written  as  one  word) 
lay  on  the  west  and  'Ai  on  the  east,  for  Bethel  and  'Ai  are 
neighbouring  places,  Ezra  ii.  28  ;  the  former,  the  present  Betin, 
lay  east  of  fAi,  the  latter  therefore  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  present  large  village  of  Der  Diwdn  (Badeker,  p.  216). 
Having  hallowed  this  resting-place  also  by  the  erection  of  an 
altar,  and  by  here  in  the  silence  of  the  mountain  solemnly 
calling  upon  and  proclaiming  the  name  of  Jahveh,  i.e.  (see  on 
iv.  26)  performing  Divine  worship,  he  continued  his  wander 
ings,  ver.  9  :  And  Abram  departed,  going  farther  and  farther 
towards  the  south.  He  continued  to  go  southward,  viz.  to  the 
south  of  Canaan  lying  towards  Arabia  Petrsea  (see  xx.  1). 
"The  employment  of  the  word  3£>  (dryness,  drought)  for 
south  is,  like  that  of  DJ  for  west,  a  purely  Palestinian  usage 
of  language"  (Dillin.  ;  comp.  Vatke,  Einl.  387). 


SARAI S  PRESERVATION  IN  EGYPT,  XII.  10-20. 

The  call  of  Abraham  is  now  followed  by  a  matter  redounding 
to  God's  honour  but  to  Abram's  dishonour.  Genesis  contains 
three  narratives  of  the  kind.  Sarai  was  twice  (chs.  xii.,  xx.) 
and  Eebecca  once  (ch.  xxvi.)  compromised  by  the  patriarchs, 
conscious  of  the  attraction  which  the  charms  of  their  wives 
would  exercise  upon  the  heathen  sovereigns,  letting  them  pass 
for  their  sisters.  God  however  interposed,  and  did  not  suffer 
the  degradation,  by  which  these  women  would  have  forfeited 
their  destination  to  become  the  ancestresses  of  the  chosen 
race,  to  take  place.  The  narrator  in  xii.  and  xxvi.  is  J,  who  is 
thus  convinced  that  an  occurrence  similar  to  that  with  Abram 
and  Sarai  took  place  in  the  case  of  Isaac  and  Eebecca.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  style  of  statement  in  ch.  xx.  is  unmistake- 
ably  that  of  the  older  Elohist  (E\  and  the  supposition  is 
suggested  that  the  two  preservations  of  Sarai  are  two  different 


384  GENESIS  XII.  10-13. 

forms  of  tradition  of  one  and  the  same  occurrence.  Here  in 
ch.  xii.  Sarai  is  still  of  an  age  at  which  her  abduction  would 
be  indeed  strange  but  not  inconceivable ;  but  in  ch.  xx.  she 
had  reached,  according  to  the  connection  in  which  the  story 
stands,  her  90th  year,  and  exceeded  the  period  of  suscepti 
bility  for  sexual  affection.  Hence  ch.  xx.  may  originally  have 
occupied  a  different  position  in  the  life  of  Abram.  On  the 
contrary,  it  cannot  be  inferred,  at  least  with  certainty,  that 
ch.  xii.  originally  stood  after  the  departure  of  Lot  related  in 
ch.  xiii.,  from  the  fact  that  the  latter  is  not  mentioned,  xii.  10  sq., 
as  the  companion  of  Abram,  and  that  in  both  xii.  8  and 
xiii.  3  the  scene  is  the  district  of  Bethel,  for  not  before  ch.  xiii. 
was  it  necessary  to  say  that  he  was  D"j:i&rnK  !ji?il.  It  is  enough 
for  us  to  know,  that  the  three  stories  are  three  traditions  fur 
nished  by  ancient  sources,  that  the  redactor  deserves  our  thanks 
for  not  suppressing  one  in  favour  of  another,  and  that  all 
three  display  the  Divine  grace  and  faithfulness,  which  renders 
the  disturbance  of  its  plan  of  salvation  by  human  weakness 
and  sin  harmless,  nay,  even  serviceable  to  its  accomplishment. 
The  faith  which  Abram  evinced  by  obeying  the  injunction 
of  God  is  quickly  put  to  the  test.  God  seems  to  take  away 
again  what  He  had  just  given,  ver.  10  :  And  there  was  a  famine 
in  the  land,  and  Abram  went  down  to  Egypt  to  sojourn  there, 
for  the  famine  was  sore  in  the  land.  A  famine  (2JH,  so  called 
from  extent  and  emptiness,  the  opposite  of  the  plenus  venter 
related  with  am),  the  first  occurring  in  the  patriarchal  history, 
xxvi.  1,  constrains  him  immediately  to  leave  the  land  promised 
to  him  and  to  go  down  to  Egypt  for  fear  of  starvation  (T]J,  the 
standing  word  for  the  journey  from  the  hilly  district  of  Canaan 
to  Egypt,  the  land  of  the  Nile  valley,  as  n?y  is  of  the  journey 
back  to  Canaan),  to  tarry  there  for  a  time  (113,  to  sojourn  as  a 
guest,  or  a  resident  under  protection  of  government).  Previous 
agreement  with  Sarai,  vv.  11—13  :  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  he 
was  near  to  enter  Egypt,  he  said  to  Sarai  his  wife :  Behold  now, 
I  'know  that  thou  art  a  woman  fair  to  look  upon :  and  it  shall 
come  to  pass  when  the  Egyptians  see  ihee,  and  shall  think :  this  is 


GENESIS  XII.  11—13.  385 

his  wife,  they  will  kill  me  and  leave  tliee  alive.     Say,  I  pray  tkce, 
that  tliou  art  my  sister,  that  it  may  be  well  with  me  for  thy 
sake,  and  that  my  sold  may  live  because  of  thce.     The  combina 
tion  NU7  I'npn  must  be  judged  of  according  to  Ges.  §  142.  2. 
Abram,  about  to  enter  Egypt,  settles  with  Sarai,  as  had  been, 
according  to  xx.  13,  agreed  upon  between  them  before  their 
departure  for  Canaan,  that  she,  who  was  his  half-sister  (see  ou 
xi.  29),  should  say  she  was  his  sister   (or.  obliqua  without  ^ 
Ges.  §  155.  4c),  lest  he  should  be  killed  for  the  sake  of  the 
more  easily  seizing  upon  her,  his  wife,  who  was  fair  to  look 
upon.     The  style  of  J  is  here  recognisable  by  the  Jahvistico- 
Deuteronomic  <vJ2  and  the  exclusively  Jahvistic  N3~n3n,  111, 
with  which  the  premiss  of  the   request  urged  by  a  twofold  S3 
opens,  ver.  13.      The  pcrf.  conscc.  njrn  is  the  first  stroke  of  the 
apodosis,  which  begins  with  i^ni,  ]ike  xxx.  41,  xxxviii.   9  ; 
1    Sam.    xvi.    23 ;    Amos   vii.    2.      Sarai,    as    appears    from 
xvii.   17,  comp.  xii.   4,  was  then   65  years  old;  but  as  she 
lived  to  be  127,  xiii.  1,  she  was  still  in  middle  life,  and  not 
having  been  weakened  by  child-bearing,  her  beauty  had  not 
yet  faded   away ;   moreover   the   Egyptian   women,   although 
the  monumental  paintings  give  them   a   paler  red  than  the 
men,  were  by  no  means  of  so  fair  a  complexion  as  the  Asiatic 
Shemitess.       The   moral   corruption  which  Abram,   ver.    12, 
assumes  in  Egypt  is  also  acknowledged  elsewhere.      He  hopes 
not  only  for  safety,  but  for  prosperity,  from  Sarai's  saying 
that  she  is  his  sister.      Hence  he  is  inclined  to  sacrifice  his 
wife's   conjugal   honour   and  fidelity   to   his   self-preservation 
and  maintenance,  at  all  events  he  prepares  himself  for  being- 
obliged  to  do  so.      On  this  account  Faustus  the  Manichrean 
calls  him  famosissimus  nundinator.     Augustine   (c.  Faustum, 
xxii.  3)  replies :  Indicavit  sororcm,  non  neyavit  uxorem  ;  tacuit 
aliquid   vcri,    non   dixit   aliquid  falsi.      But  it  is  no   excuse 
for  him  that  he  is  able,  not  untruly,  to  call  Sarai  his  ninj  ;  he 
acts  shrewdly,  but  through  weakness  of  faith  immorally.     We 
now  further  learn  that  the  Egyptians  were  really  captivated 
by   Sarai's  beauty,   for   she    went    unveiled,  as  did   also  the 


386  GENESIS  XII.  H— 16. 

Egyptian  women  down  to  the  time  of  the  Persian  dominion, 
and  that  she  was  taken  to  Pharaoh's  harem,  vv.  14,  15  :  And 
it  came  to  pass  when  Abram  was  come  into  Egypt,  that  the 
Egyptians  saw  the  woman  that  she  was  very  fair.  And  the 
princes  of  Pharaoh  saw  her  and  praised  her  to  Pharaoh,  and 
the  woman  was  taken  into  Pharaoh's  house.  Such  pandering 
on  the  part  of  courtiers  is  old  and  universal ;  Ebers  relates 
tin  example  from  the  Papyrus  d'Orbeney.  The  royal  name 
njns  is,  since  de  Eouge,  explained  as  the  great  house  =pher-do 
(pcr-tio) ;  and  according  to  Horapollo,  i.  62,  6'^>t9  tcai  oZ/co? 
avrov,  is  actually  the  hieroglyph  of  the 

,  which  has  been  confirmed.      But  Josephus  and 
Eusebius  are  not  wrong  when  they  say  that  the  name  means 
o   ffacri'Xevs.       Ouro   really   means  the  king,  then  the   king- 
serpent  (o  /SacrtXiWo?),  the  inseparable  royal  attribute ;  and  in 
51  more  recent  period  of    the  language  the  Pharaonic   name 
seems  (comp.   Schwartze,  Koptische  Gramm.  p.   240)  to  have 
been  understood  exactly  as  the  name  of  the  king  —  pi-ouro 
(ph-ouro),    according    to    which    it    is    also    Hebraized    with 
reference  to  JHja  (Judg.  v.  2  :   duke,  or  he  who  stands  at  the 
head  of  the  people).     Josephus  calls  the  Pharaoh  of  Abram 
<£>apaa)07]$,    Artapanos    in    Euseb.    Prcep.    ix.    18,   (frapeOcovys. 
That  which  Abram  aimed  at  now  takes  place,  ver.  16  :  And  he 
treated  Abram  well  for  her  sake,  and  he  had  sheep  and  oxen 
and  asses,  and  male  slaves  and  female  slaves,  and  she-asses  and 
camels.      Pdch    presents   are    made    him,  which   he   receives 
without  objection,  thereby  increasing  his  fault.      The  male  and 
female   slaves  do  not  stand  in  the   place   suitable  to  them. 
Horses  are  not  mentioned,  nor  do  they  appear  on  monuments 
till   the   time  of  the  Hyksos.     The  camel  however  (ancient 
Egyp.  Immdar,  kamaal,   Coptic  camoul,   camaul),  is  nowhere 
represented  upon  Egyptian  monuments,  nor  even  mentioned  in 
ancient  records  (see  JBg.  Zeitschr.   1864,  p.  21),  so  that  the 
mention  of  camels  in  this  passage  is  surprising.1     Sheep  on 

1  On   horses   and   camels   in  Egypt  and  on  the  monuments,    see  Brugsch, 
Wande.rungnachdenNatronkldstern,  1855,  p.  43  sq.  ;  Dietirj.  Graberwelt,  1868, 


GENESIS  XII.  17—20.  387 

the  contrary  are  already  found  on  the  monuments  of  the 
twelfth  dynasty,  and  asses  were  still  earlier  bred  in  herds. 
The  asses  of  Egypt  were  proverbially  the  largest,  finest  and 
strongest.  It  was  a  rich  and  costly  present  that  was  thus 
bestowed  upon  the  brother  of  the  fair  Asiatic.  Jahveh  now 
interposes  and  saves  the  woman  thus  compromised,  who  was 
destined  to  become  the  mother  of  the  son  of  promise, 
vv.  17-19  :  And  Jahveh  plagued  Pharaoh  and  his  house  with 
(/real  plagues  because  of  Sarai,  Alram's  wife.  And  Pharaoh 
called  Al  ram  and  said:  What  hast  thou  done  unto  me?  Why 
didst  thou  not  tell  vie  that  she  icas  thy  wife  ?  Why  saiclst 
thou  to  me :  She  is  my  sister  ?  and  I  took  her  to  me  to  wife — 
now  then  behold  thy  loife,  take  her  and  go.  The  verb  J?3i 
appears  here,  where  it  is  construed  according  to  the  schema 
etymologicum,  as  denominative,  but  according  to  2  Kings  xv.  5 
such  is  not  the  case.  Antiquity  was  religious,  hence  Pharaoh 
sees  in  the  scourges  inflicted  on  him  and  his,  the  consequences 
of  the  last  increase  of  his  female  court.  He  may  have  ques 
tioned  Sarai  herself,  and  she  have  been  no  longer  able  to 
deceive  him  as  to  the  fact  of  her  being  Abram/s  wife.  He 
gives  her  back  to  him  with  reproaches,  and  has  him  conveyed 
to  a  distance,  ver.  20  :  And  Pharaoh  charged  men  concerning 
him,  and  tltcy  escorted  him  and  his  wife  and  all  that  belonged  to 
him.  No  insulting  transport  is  here  intended  by  rife, 
irpoTrefATrew  ;  Pharaoh  desired  indeed  to  appease  the  wrath  of 
God,  but  certainly  to  send  at  the  same  time  the  cause  of  it 
out  of  his  sight.  Abram  might  have  excused  himself,  but  is 
silent,  and  thereby  with  shame  and  penitence  condemns 
himself.  The  story  itself  thus  carries  into  effect  the  strictest 
moral  verdict.  Prophecy  shows  no  anxiety  in  acknowledging 
such  transgressions  on  the  part  of  the  patriarchs,  Isa.  xliii.  27, 
xlviii.  8.  The  fact  however  is  related  to  us,  not  so  much  for 
Abram's  dishonour  as  for  God's  glory,  who,  as  he  called  the 

p.  14,  and  Ebevs'  art.  "yKgypten"  in  Richm's  JIW.,  according  to  \vhicli  the 
camel  was  liardly  introduced  into  Egypt  before  the  close  of  the  third  century 
before  Christ.  Pietschmann,  in  opposition  to  Wiedemann,  accuses  the  author 
of  Oen.  xii.  16  and  Ex.  ix.  3  of  ignorance. 


388  GENESIS  XIII.  1-4. 

ancestor  of  Israel  out  of  heathenism,  so  also  protected  the 
ancestress  of  Israel  in  the  hands  of  the  heathen  from  the 
desecration  of  that  body,  from  which  the  sacred  nation  was 
to  proceed  (Ps.  cv.  13-15).  Thus  this  second  portion  stands 
side  by  side  with  the  first ;  the  same  grace  which  there 
prevents  Abraham  here  protects  Sarai. 

ABRAM'S  SEPARATION  FROM  LOT,  GIL  xm. 

Ch.  xiii.,  the  third  portion  of  the  first  section,  relates 
Abram's  self-denying,  peaceable  behaviour  towards  Lot,  and 
the  more  definite  and  repeated  promise  made  him  of  the 
future  possession  of  the  land.  The  narrator  is  J,  he  is  to 
be  recognised  by  the  reference  to  the  Paradisaic  history, 
10&,  by  the  promise  of  descendants  as  innumerable  as  the 
dust  of  the  earth,  vv.  14-17,  comp.  xxviii.  14,  and  by  the 
notification  of  a  solemn  act  of  worship  at  the  resting-place  of 
the  journey,  45.  We  could  not  agree  to  the  inference  that 
the  history  of  Sarai's  preservation  originally  stood  after  that 
of  the  separation  of  Abraham  and  Lot,  and  hence  the  close 
connection  of  ch.  xiii.  with  xii.  10  sqq.  also  speaks  for  its 
belonging  to  J.  The  mention  of  Lot,  which  there  would  have 
been  useless,  was  here,  xiii.  1  and  farther  on,  necessary.  But 
that  vv.  6,  lib,  12  are  passages  inserted  from  Q  may  be 
regarded  as  proved  since  Hupfeld  (Quellen,  pp.  21-24);  this 
is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  comparing  xxxvi.  7  and  xix.  9. 
These  two  verses  and  a  half  might  be  removed  without  damage 
to  the  connection.  WD^  "ife  also  is  in  the  style  of  Q,  comp. 
Ex.  xvii.  1;  Num.  x.  2,  12;  this  expression,  so  very  appro 
priate  after  ver.  2,  may  have  been  inserted  from  Q  in  the  text 
of  J.  Abram  leaves  Egypt,  vv.  1-4 :  And  Air  am  went  up 
out  of  Egypt,  lie  and  his  wife  and  all  that  was  his,  and  Lot 
with  him,  to  the  south  land.  And  Abram  ivas  very  rich  in 
cattle,  silver  and  gold.  And  he  went  in  journeys  from  the  south 
land  even  to  Bethel,  to  the  place  where  his  tent  had  stood  at  the 
beginning  between  Bethel  and  'A  i.  To  the  place  of  the  altar, 


GENESIS  XIII.  1-7.  0»y 

which  he  built  there  at  first.  And  Abram  preached  there  the 
name  of  Jahvch.  Accompanied  as  formerly  by  Lot  (xii.  5), 
he  goes  up  again  from  the  Nile  valley  to  the  neighbouring 
south  of  Canaan,  much  encumbered,  rich  in  cattle  (the  article 
is  comprehensive  of  the  species,  Ges.  §  109,  note  1),  silver 
and  gold  (pccus  and  pecunia,  though  not  yet  coined),  and  from 
the  Negeb  he  went  on  VjHMDp,  "  according  to  (in)  his  settings 
out,"  i.e.  by  stations  (halting-places  in  military  diction),  as  he 
was  able  and  saw  fit  as  far  as  Bethel  ("W  with  the  i  drawing 
a  line  of  connection  from  the  point  of  departure  to  that  at 
which  he  aimed),  and  indeed  as  far  as  the  district  between 
Bethel  and  fAi,  where  he  had  built  an  altar  (the  second), 
.xii.  4,  at  his  first  sojourn.  Here  in  the  mountain  solitude, 
which  had  become  clear  to  him,  he  again  performed  as 
formerly  a  solemn  act  of  family  worship.  The  relative 
sentence  is  not  continued  with  N"J?*->  but  the-  repetition  of 
the  subject  calls  attention  to  the  beginning  of  a  new  sentence  ; 
the  series,  iv.  26,  xii.  8,  is  here  continued.  The  reason  and 
occasion  of  Lot's  separation,  vv.  5-7:  And  Lot  also,  who  was 
travelling  u'ith  Abraham,  had  sheep  and  oxen  and  tents.  And  the 
land  could  not  bear  them  that  they  should  dwell  together,  for  their 
'property  was  become  great,  and  they  could  not  dwell  together.  And 
there  was  strife  between  the  herdmcn  of  Abram' s  cattle  and  the 
herd-men  of  Lot's  cattle.  And  the  Canaanite  and  the  Pherizzite 
dwelt  then  in  the  land.  In  D'bnfc  (for  D^ng,  according  to  Ges. 
§  93.  6.  3)  are  included  also  the  people  dwelling  in  the  tents 

(Arab.  J^).      The  land  did   not  afford  sufficient  nourishment 

for  so  much  cattle,  nor  space  for  the  free  movement  of  the 
people.  N^J,  ver.  6,  is  masculine  in  form  before  P.??,  like 
Isa.  ix.  18,  Ixvi.  8;  Zech.  xiv.  10;  Ps.  cv.  30.  Ver.  6  is 
recurrently  constructed  like  ii.  2,  vi.  9,  xxxv.  12  ;  the  expres 
sion  is  like  xxxvi.  7.  Hence  there  arose  a  strife  between  the 
herdmen  of  Abram  and  Lot ;  for  they  not  only  straitened  each 
other,  but  were  also  straitened  by  the  Canaanite  and  Perizzite 
then  possessing  the  land — a  remark  needed  for  illustrating  the 


390  GENESIS  XIII.  8-12. 


state  of  affairs.  *W.fin  sufficed  for  the  mention  of  the  popula 
tion  of  the  country  at  xii.  6,  here  as  well  as  at  xxxiv.  30  T)?'!? 
(see  on  x.  16  sq.)  is  added.  Abram's  proposals  for  peace, 
vv.  8,  9:  And  Air  am  said  to  Lot:  I  pray  thee  let  there  be  no  strife 
between  me  and  thee,  and  between  my  herdmen  and  thy  herdmen, 
for  we  are  brother  men.  Is  not  the  whole  land  open  to  thee  ? 
Separate  thyself,  I  pray  thee,  from  me  :  if  to  the  left,  I  will  turn 
to  the  right  ;  and  if  to  the  rigid,  I  will  turn  to  the  left.  The 
combination  E^ns  D'twx  is  appositional,  like  Num.  xxii.  14. 
Not  only  a  brother,  but  a  brother's  son,  a  cousin  (a  child  of 
brothers)  and  any  near  relative  is  called  ntf.  Abram  and 
Lot  were  really  as  the  son  and  grandson  of  Terah  in  brotherly 
relationship.  Since  then  strife  between  them  was  unbecoming, 
Abram,  according  to  the  unpleasant  but  well  -proved  rule, 
divide  ut  maneat  amicitia  (Ambrose),  proposes  to  his  nephew 
:i  peaceful  solution  of  the  inconvenient  circumstances  (yVP, 
like  Ex.  x.  28),  and  in  an  unselfish  and  peaceable  spirit  offers 
him  that  priority  of  choice  which  was  clue  to  himself,  the 
elder,  the  uncle,  and  the  leader.  "  Is  not  the  whole  land 
*p3B?,"  means:  is  it  not  at  thy  disposal,  xx.  15,  xlvii.  0; 
2  Chron.  xiv.  6;  Cant.  viii.  12.  fobfcn  and  iW  are  ace. 
of  direction,  like  x.  11,  xii.  15.  p?'i?  and  ^NOtrn,  like  Isa. 
xxx.  21,  elsewhere  T'XO^n,  TD&71  are  iust  such  local  deno- 

.    -     .  j  .    .     .  j  j 


initiatives  as  the  originally  equivalent  in  meaning  ^?\  to  go 

,-s.^-s. 

to  Jem  en  ;    *lil,  to  go  to  Syria. 

Lot  immediately  agrees  to  the  separation  and  chooses  for 
himself  the  best  part  of  the  country,  but  does  so  to  his 
great  and  almost  utter  ruin,  vv.  10-12  :  And  Lot  lifted  up 
his  eyes  and  beheld  the  whole  circuit  of  the  Jordan,  that  it  was 
well  watered  land  throughout,  before  Jahvch  destroyed  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  resembling  the  garden  of  Jahveh,  the  land  of  Egypt, 
as  far  as  to  Zoar.  And  Lot  chose  for  himself  the  whole  circuit 
of  the  Jordan,  and  Lot  departed  eastwards,  and  they  separated 
one  from  the  other.  Abram  occupied  the  land  of  Canaan,  and 


GENESIS  XIII.  10-13.  391 

Lot  occupied  the  cities  of  the  district  of  Jordan  and  pitched  hi* 
tent  toward  Sodom.  The  name  ft^n  n??  (1  Kings  vii.  46,  LXX. 
Matt.  iii.  5,  77  Trepl^wpo^  rov  'lopSdvov),  or  more  frequently 
"13311  (12&,  like  xix.  29),  was  borne  by  the  territory  lying  on 
both  sides  of  the  Jordan,  the  valley  several  leagues  broad  of 
Kinnereth  or  of  the  lake  of  Gennesaret  down  to  the  valley  then 
known  as  the  valley  of  Siddim,  in  which  is  set  the  bed  of  the 
Jordan  (now  jjd\,  depression,  lowland,  and  which  as  n?"J^ 
comprises  its  continuation  as  far  as  the  ^Elanitic  Gulf).  This 
valley,  which  with  its  bare  plains,  its  heights  like  sand-hills, 
and  the  rankly  luxuriant  shrubs  which  hide  the  Jordan,  now 
gives  a  melancholy  and  sombre  impression,  was  then,  at  least 
so  far  as  its  southern  part  reaching  down  to  Zoar  (""9^3,  versus, 
like  x.  19)  is  concerned,  by  reason  of  its  almost  tropical 
climate  and  still  existing  abundance  of  water,  as  pleasant 
and  fertile,  'n  ]^}  LXX.  &><?  6  TrapdSeLcros  TOV  Seov.  In  Isa. 
li.  3,  the  garden  of  Jahveh,  once  situate  in  Eden,  and  in 
Ezek.  xxxi.  sq.,  D>!vN  |3,  is,  as  is.  evident  from  xxviii.  13,  the 
garden  of  God  in  Eden,  and  hence  the  Paradise  of  the  primaeval 
world.  The  ideal  comparison  thence  derived  is  followed  by  one 
more  perceptible  derived  from  the  present,  just  as  the  reverse 
order  is  observed  Ezek.  xiv.  14,  where  a  hero  of  the  past  and 
one  of  the  present  is  followed  by  a  legendary  one.  The 
accentuation  nicely  inclines  the  definition  of  time  towards 
both  comparisons,  it  hovers  in  the  midst  and  shows  itself 
to  be  a  more  recent  explanation.  The  expression  is  .similar 
to  xix.  29ft).  The  statement  of  direction,  "1J&  rDtfa,  fixes 
the  southern  boundary  of  the  famous  district.  The  Syriac 
reads  $¥  (Tanis),  and  Trmnbull  (Quarterly  Statement,  1880, 
p.  251)  conjectures  that  -ij;s  is  the  name  of  the  eastern 
border-land  of  Lower  Egypt ;  but  comp.  x.  19.  In  vv.  11,  12 
from  vn3»i  to  ">23n  ny  (comp.  xix.  29«)  is  from  Q.  The  text 
in  J  only  furnished :  Lot  departed  eastwards  (^p®,  like 
xi.  2),  and  pitched  his  tent  (now  here,  now  there)  as  far  as 
Sodom.  And  now  to  prepare  for  the  history  of  the  destruc 
tion  of  Sodom  which  is  to  follow,  it  is  remarked,  ver.  13: 


392  GENESIS  XIII.  13-18. 

And  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom  were  wicked,  and  sinners  against 
Jahveh  exceedingly.  Not  to  Jahveh,  i.e.  in  His  eyes,  but  ?,  like 
xx.  6,  xxxix.  9  ;  Ps.  li.  6.  Ezekiel  enumerates,  xvi.  49,  four 
radical  sins  of  Sodom,  and  among  them  is  luxury ;  the  occur 
rence,  ch.  xix.,  shows  that  sins  of  the  flesh  were  especially 
current  among  them,  the  heat  of  the  climate,  the  luxuriant 
fertility  (shown  by  ch.  xiv.)  and  the  numerous  population  of 
the  country  all  favouring  moral  degeneration.  While  Lot 
exposes  himself  to  the  danger  of  dwelling  in  such  cities,  the 
inland  country  of  Canaan  proper  between  Jordan  and  the 
Mediterranean  is  left  to  Abram  without  his  interference.  Lot 
now  forms  of  his  own  choice  a  lateral  branch  separated  from 
the  race  of  the  promise.  Abram  is  alone,  and  it  is  to  him,  the 
one  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  24),  that  the  promise  applies.  This  is  now 
renewed,  vv.  14-18:  And  Jahveh  said  to  Abram,  after  Lot's 
separation  from  him:  Lift  up  now  thine  eyes  and  look  from  the 
place  wliere  thou  art  northward  and  southward  and  eastward 
and  westward.  For  the  whole  land  which  tlwu  seest,  to  thee  will 
I  give  it  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever.  And  1  will  make  thy  seed 
like  the  dust  of  the  earth,  so  that  if  a  man  can  number  the  dust 
of  the  earth,  thy  seed  also  may  be  numbered.  Up,  go  through 
the  land,  long  and  broad  as  it  is,  for  I  will  give  it  thee.  We 
expect  D~QK"ta  'n  "IE^I  or  'n  IDS  D^3N  tal,  the  existing  order 
places  the  determining  subjects  opposite  each  other :  Lot 
chooses  for  himself,  Jahveh  chooses  for  Abram  (comp.  Ps. 
xlvii.  5).  By  Divine  dispensation  he  has  won  Canaan  anew, 
its  possession  is  now  anew  confirmed  to  him — this  is  the 
third  among  the  eight  revelations  of  God  in  the  life  of  Abram 
(xii.  1,  7,  xiii.  14,  xv.  1,  xvii.  1,  xviii.  1,  xxi.  22,  xxii.  2), 
and  one  of  the  four  revelations  in  word  without  an  appearance 
of  God.  To  him  and  to  his  posterity,  which  as  yet  has 
neither  present  nor  prospective  existence,  will  God  give  for  an 
everlasting  possession  this  land  lying  round  about  the  heights 
of  Bethel  in  its  whole  extent,  northwards  and  southwards, 
eastwards  (n?1P..,  always  with  Tsere,  as  only  besides  H^l^ 
Judg.  iv.  9,  with  n^!i?,  ver.  10,  like  finnan,  xix.  6)  and  west- 


(IKNESIS  XIII.   111.  393 

wards  (like  xxviii.  14).  He  will  make  his  seed  like  the  dust 
of  the  earth  (like  xxviii.  14  ;  comp.  with  these  two  Jalivistic 
passages,  Num.  xxiii.  10,  the  thing  promised  as  it  were  in 
miniature)  as  little  to  be  counted  (ut  si  quis  pulvcrem  tcrrco 
cct.t  "IPS,  like  xi.  7,  xxii.  14,  xxiv.  3,  not:  quern  pulverem,  in 
which  case  irtoi?  would  follow  without  pxn  naynx).  He  is 
to  walk  through  the  land  at  his  will,  joyful  through  faith, 
in  the  consciousness  of  the  claim  awarded  him.  The  promise 
already  sounds  fuller,  more  developed,  and  more  capable  of 
appropriation  than  in  the  first  portion.  A  brain's  settlement, 
ver.  19  :  And  Abram  moved  his  tent,  and  came  and  dwelt 
under  the  Mamre -Terebinths  in  Hebron,  and  built  there  an 
altar  in  honour  of  Jahveh.  In  conformity  with  the  invitation, 
ver.  17,  he  pitched  his  tent  here  and  there  in  the  land,  ever 
drawing  nearer  to  his  provisional  goal  (as  Nhjl  seems  to  state), 
until  he  settled  more  permanently  in  the  grove  of  Terebinths 
at  Mamre  (xiv.  13,  xviii.  1,  comp.  xiv.  24),  in  the  district  of 
the  ancient  Hebron  (Num.  xiii.  22),  where  he  built  an  altar 
to  the  Lord,  the  third  since  his  entrance  into  Canaan  (xii. 
7,  8),  and  proclaimed  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  God 
who  had  anew  acknowledged  him.  Altar  and  sacrifice  nowhere 
appear  in  combination  except  at  xxii.  9  in  the  patriarchal 
history,  the  period  ante  Icgein.  This  consecrated  place  became 
the  firm  point  whence  the  promise  of  the  possession  of  the 
land  was  realized.  Here  did  the  patriarchal  family  dwell 
longest  and  most  willingly,  and  here  did  they  bury  their  dead. 
For  the  cave  of  Machpelah,  of  which  we  shall  hear  ch.  xxiii., 
lay  opposite  the  «?»»  "J^K  (for  which  Q,  xxiii.  17,  xxxv.  27 
and  elsewhere  has  simply  fcOEp),  and  both  belonged  to  Hebron 
itself,  which  in  ancient  times  extended  farther  than  now,  and 
was  indeed  no  hill-city  properly  so  called,  but  stretched  at 
least  to  the  Eumeidi-mount.  Tradition  has  transposed  Mamre 
to  the  height  of  Edmet  el-Chalil  There  stood  an  ancient 
terebinth,  which  was,  under  Constantine,  enclosed  within  the 
walls  of  a  splendid  Basilica.  The  ruins  of  this  Basilica  are  to 
be  distinguished  from  the  foundation  walls  of  a  more  ancient 


394  GENESIS  XIV. 

heathen  temple  visible  on  the  north-west,  for  these  enormous 
indestructible  walls  and  masses  of  hewn  stone  are  devoid  of 
any  token  of  ecclesiastical  architecture  (see  Eosen,  "  The  Vale 
and  nearest  Surroundings  of  Hebron/'  DMZ.  xii.  477  sqq.). 
Tradition  designates  the  ruins  of  the  Basilica  as  "  the  house 
of  Abraham."  But  Karnet  el-Chalil  lies  some  miles  north 
of  Hebron  itself,  which  is  incompatible  with  the  statements 
concerning  the  situation  of  Mamre  and  the  cave  of  Machpelah. 


ABKAM  AS  A  HERO  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  PHILANTHROPY  AND  HIS 
MEETING  WITH  MELCHIZEDEK,  CH.  XIV. 

The  peaceful  history  of  ch.  xiii.,  which  made  us  acquainted 
with  the  pacific  disposition  of  Abram,  is  now  followed  by  the 
history  of  a  war,  the  first  met  with  in  Holy  Scripture.  This 
first  war  is  a  war  of  conquest,  waged  for  the  subjugation  of 
foreign  nations  and  States ;  the  world  -  empire,  which  sub 
sequently  made  Israel  also  the  aim  of  its  conquering  power,  is 
here  already  in  course  of  development.  So  far  as  we  have 
already  become  acquainted  with  Abram,  he  has  shown  himself 
obedient,  thankful,  unselfish,  submitting  to  Divine  guidance, 
and,  when  he  has  offended  by  acting  independently,  penitently 
returning  to  his  former  attitude.  We  here  see  his  faith,  in 
virtue  of  which  he  obtains  the  victory  over  self,  gathering  itself 
up  in  God  and  breaking  forth  in  an  act  of  love  that  overcomes 
the  world.  The  leader  of  flocks  appears  as  a  leader  of  war 
appears,  while  aiding  kings  against  kings,  in  a  greatness 
surpassing  them  all ;  for  the  three  dignities,  the  prophetic, 
priestly  and  royal,  which  are  separated  in  the  times  of  the 
law,  are  still  united  in  the  patriarchs.  It  is  by  means  of 
the  progress  of  Abram's  biography  that  one  typical  image  is 
connected  with  another,  for  ch.  xiv.  presupposes  the  separation 
of  Lot  from  Abram,  stands  in  a  connection  of  sequence  with 
it,  and  is  thus  not  merely  its  ethical  counterpart,  but  also  its 
historical  continuation. 


GENESIS  XIV.  395 

This  fourteenth  chapter,  with  its  abundance  of  else  un 
known  historical  and  geographical  detail,  is  as  unique  in  the 
connection  in  which  it  is  found,  as  Judg.  ix.  (on  the  kingdom 
of  Abimelech)  is  in  the  history  of  the  Judges.  But  even 
apart  from  particulars  related  only  here,  this  ch.  xiv. 
furnishes  a  completion  of  a  special  kind  to  the  picture 
afforded  of  the  patriarch  by  what  else  is  related  of  him. 
This  leads  to  some  special  source  for  what  is  here  related, 
and  we  can  understand  how  Knobel  at  this  fourteenth 
chapter  hit  upon  the  conjecture,  that  the  'n  niftrte  "SD  (the 
war-book  as  he  briefly  calls  it)  of  Num.  xxi.  14  was  the 
document  from  which  the  narrator  derived  this  history.  He 
esteems  the  Jahvist  to  be  the  narrator,  and  we  regard  this  as 
more  correct  than  to  say  that  it  is  the  older  Elohist,  who 
reproduces  this  history  from  an  ancient  source.  For  this 
latter  opinion,  advocated  by  Dillmann,  proceeds  from  the 
arbitrary  assumption,  that  the  meeting  with  Melchizedek, 
vv.  17-20,  is  a  more  recent  addition  worked  into  the  history. 
For  it  bears  the  stamp  of  equal  antiquity,  forms  the  climax 
and  focus  of  the  whole,  and  contains  nothing  that  tells  against 
its  being  an  essential  element  of  it.  When  Dillmann  infers 
from  the  glorification  of  Salem,  i.e.  Jerusalem,  as  the  scene 
of  the  interview  between  Abrain  and  the  venerable  priest, 
that  the  narrator  must  have  been  a  Judcean,  it  may  be  replied, 
that  according  to  his  view  C  (>/)  as  distinguished  from  B  (E) 
is  shown  to  be  a  Juchean  book  of  history.  But  if  vv.  17-20 
are  not  to  be  lopped  off,  then  the  Divine  name  nirp,  which  in 
ver.  22  is  in  relation  to  19  sq.  too  characteristic  to  pass  for 
an  insertion,  excludes  B.1  In  favour  of  C's  authorship  is 
also  the  close  connection  of  this  history  with  the  preceding, 
especially  with  the  Jahvistic  fundamental  component,  xiii. 
12  sq.  It  is  also  C  who  calls  Abram's  dwelling-place  in 

1  Sufficient  proofs  of  any  kind  of  extract  from  E  (B}  previous  to  ch.  xx.  are 
indeed  lacking  (Kuenen,  Einl.  §  8,  note  8).  Uut  ch.  xx.  showing  itself  to  be, 
not  a  commencement,  but  a  continuation,  it  is  a  priori  probable  that  previous  to 
ch.  xx.  is  to  be  found  matter  derived  from  E  and  perhaps  entered  in  /,  like 
e.ff.  xv.  2. 


GENESIS  XIV. 


396 


Heliron  K-IBD  ^bx  (not  simply  K-IDB,  like  Q),  xiv.  13,  comp. 
xiii.  18,  xviii.  1,  and  who  like  the  Deuteronomist  knows  of 
nDIK  and  Dsnv  as  towns  belonging  to  the  Pentapolis,  xiv. 
2,  8,  comp.  x.  19;  Dent.  xxix.  22,  comp.  Hos.  xi.  8.  He 
may  also  be  recognised  by  ''I^Vn  as  a  surname  of  Abram 
(comp.  xxxix.  17  ;  Deut.  xv.  12  and  elsewhere),  and  by  his 
naming  the  border  town  pj  without  addition  (like  Deut. 
xxxiv.  1).  Nor  does  '1^3,  xiv.  24,  comp.  xli.  16,  safely 
lead  to  B;  see  the  Introd.  to  ch.  xli.  B"0"[  too,  which  A  (Q), 
like  all  the  works  of  the  most  recent  period  of  the  language, 
is  certainly  fond  of  using,  is  no  specific  token  of  a  source, 
but  is  found  also  in  the  promise,  xv.  14,  recorded  by  C  or  2>, 
but  by  no  means  by  A,  expressing  as  it  does  a  notion  (move- 
able  property,  substance,  post-biblical  D^tptaft)  for  which 
biblical  language  has  no  other  word ;  it  is  only  the  verb  ca~i 
that  is  exclusively  A's.  The  explanations  of  names,  vv.  2,  7, 
8,  17,  show  that  the  original  passage  has  been  gone  through 
by  a  more  recent  hand,  wrho  may  here  and  there  have  also 
adjusted  the  language  to  what  was  subsequently  common  usage. 
Among  critics  of  the  old  school,  ch.  xiv.  won  so  much  respect 
from  Ewald,  that  he  was  inclined  to  regard  it  as  a  fragment 
of  an  ancient  Canaanite  historical  work.  Tuch's  classical 
article  also  on  this  history  in  DMZ.i.  161  sqq.,  is  pervaded  by 
the  conviction,  that  we  have  here  a  historical  memoir  which 
speaks  for  itself  ;  he,  like  Ewald,  regards  Salem  as  the  Salumias 
of  the  Jordan  valley  lying  beyond  Scythopolis.  Hupfeld, 
without  entering  into  any  criticism  on  what  is  related,  con 
siders  ch.  xiv.  as  an  indivisible  whole  taken  from  the  Jahvistic 
work.  Hitzig  however  goes  to  the  extreme  of  depreciation 
when  he  sees  in  the  expedition  of  Chedorlaomer,  which 
takes  place  in  a  fourteenth  year,  an  adumbration  of  2  Kings 
xviii.  13,  thrown  back  into  past  times,  and  explains  ch.  xiv.  in 
general  as  a  more  recent  legend,  which  could  not  have  been 
fashioned  into  its  present  form  till  after  Salem  was  hallowed 
by  the  presence  of  Jahveh  (G-escli.  i.  44  sq.).  There  is  but 
a  fluctuating  boundary  between  a  legend  of  this  kind  and 


GENESIS  XIV.  397 

literary  fiction   with   a   tendency.      Noldeke   (Uhtersuchungen, 
1869)    arrives    at   the   result,  that   the    history,   ch.  xiv.,  is 
throughout  the  spontaneous  creation  of  its  narrator,  and  the 
person  of  Melchizedek  a  magnificent  invention.     Ed.  Meyer 
(Gesch.  §  136)  is  of  the  same  opinion,  only  he  expresses  him 
self  in  a  far  more  depreciatory  manner.      Eeuss  receives  from 
the  whole  the  impression   d'un  enseignement  sous  la  forme  dc 
paralole.     Modern   Pentateuch   criticism,  which  received   its 
first  impulse  from  Eeuss,   considers  ch.    xiv.    as    one    of  the 
most   recent   portions   of  Genesis,  not  inserted  till  its  latest 
edition,  and  to  which  may  be  applied  the  epithets  awarded 
to    Melchizedek,  aTrdrwp   a^rjiwp  ayev€a\.oyrjro^    (Wellhausen, 
Composition  dc   Hexatcuchs,  i.   415;   Gesckichte  Israels,   1878, 
p.  362).     Ed.   Meyer  draws  from  it  the  further    conclusion, 
that   the  particulars   of  the  narrative  are  utterly  unhistorical, 
but  also  that  the  names  of  some  of  the  kings  being  authen 
ticated  by  cuneiform  inscriptions,  the   author  had  acquired  in 
Babylon   accurate   knowledge    of    the   most    ancient    history 
of   the    country,  and  induced    by  some   unknown  motive  has 
interwoven  Abram  into  the  history  of   Kudurlagamar  (GcscJi. 
des  Altertums,  i.  1884,  §  136)  ;  while  Hommel  in  an  essay,  Die 
ctltbcibyl.  Schrifldenkmdler  als  Zeugen  fur  die  liblische  WaJirJieit, 
finds  the  political  situation  into  which  ch.  xiv.  transposes  us, 
as  " aus  dem  Leib  geschnitten"  with  regard  to  Babylonian  cir 
cumstances  after  the  Elamite  conquest.     As  Diestel  already  in 
the  deutschen  Jahrb.  xiv.  p.  345,  so  too  is  Dillmann  in  favour 
of  the  historical  character  of  the  expedition  and  the  power  of 
the  ancient  Elamite  kingdom  which  extended  to  the  Arabali. 
The  central  point  of  the  question  is  the  person  of  Abraham. 
Dillmann,  because  he  does  not  agree  with  the  dissolution  of 
the  patriarchal  legend  into  cloud  and  vapour,  also  judges  more 
justly  and  moderately  concerning  what  is  related   in   ch.  xiv. 
J3ut  when,  as  by  Wellhausen  (Prolegomena,  1883,  p.  337  sq.), 
the  historical  nature  of  the  person  of  Abraham  is  denied,  and 
an   inclination    shown    to    regard    him    as    the    spontaneous 
creation  of  arbitrary  invention,  the  historical  nature  of  the 


398  GENESIS  XIV.  l,  2. 

scenery  in  which  ch.  xiv.  places  him  is  of  no  further  con 
sequence.  The  cuneiform  authentication  proves  indeed  that 
the  proper  names  "JTHN,  "iota  and  loy^na,  that  the  figures  and 
colouring  of  the  scenery,  are  not  caught  at  random ;  but  the 
verification  of  such  particulars  is  without  any  religious  interest, 
if  Abraham  the  ancestor  of  Israel,  who  migrated  from  Ur  of 
Chaldea  to  Canaan,  is  a  mere  phantom  and  not  flesh  and 
blood. 

And  it  came  to  'pass  in  the  days  of  AmrapJiel  king  of  Sinar, 
Ariodi  king  of  Ellasar,  Chedorlaomcr  king  of  Elam,  and  Tid'al 
king  of  Goiim. — thus  begins  the  narrator,  ver.  1 ;  and  then  taking 
the  four  thus  mentioned  genitivally,  as  also  the  nominative 
subjects  to  the  following  verb  (see  on  ix.  6&,  comp.  Acts 
xiv.  2),  continues,  ver.  2  :  They  made  war  with  Bcra  king  of 
Sodom,  and  with  Birsa  king  of  Gomorrah,  ^ Sin  ah  king  of 
Admah,  and  vSem6ber  king  of  Zelo'im,  and  the  king  of  Bela, 
which  is  Zoar.  l|rn  is  followed  by  the  fact  aimed  at  in  the 
perfect,  like  Ex.  xii.  41,  51,  xvi.  27,  Dent.  i.  3,  without  the 
perfect  being  followed,  as  at  xl.  1,  by  the  historical  tense,  and 
thereby  reduced  to  the  expression  of  an  accessory  fact 
(Driver,  §  78).  On  ">>Tv',  Sumcr,  see  xi.  2  ;  Lenormant  (La 
lang uc  primitive  de  la  Clialdee,  1875)  explains  the  name  ^STBN 
(with  an  accented  ultima,  like  P335  %")?)  as  Sumerian,  but  it  is 
contracted  from  Amarmiiballit,  i.e.  Amar  =  Sin  (the  moon- 
god),  preserves  alive ;  he  was  at  that  time  the  town-king  of 
Babel  (Honiniel).  "P11"!**  is  also  shown  by  inscriptions  to  be 
cri-aku,  i.e.  servant  of  the  moon-god ;  a  son  of  the  Elamite 
king  Kudur-Mabuk  (softened  in  Hebrew  into  a  segolate  form), 
whom  his  father  made  viceroy  of  Larsam  (Friedr.  Delitzsch  on 
Baer's  Daniel,  p.  9  ;  Kosscier,  p.  09).  This  Larsam  (Paradies, 
p.  223),  whose  town  divinity  was  vSamas,  the  present  Senkara, 
a  short  distance  north-westward  of  Ur,  seems  to  be  meant 
by  "!p^,  D"6tf  having,  as  Eawlinson  first  perceived  and  George 
Smith  further  confirmed,  shifted  into  iota.  The  name  ^frm 
(written,  according  to  Chullin  64&,  as  two  words, 

1  See  my  preface  to  Baer's  ed.  of  the  five  Megilloth  (1886),  p.  o. 


GENESIS  XIV.  3. 

by    Orientals)    contains,    as    has    been   settled  since   Oppert, 
the   name   of    the   Susianian  deity  LagFimar ;    Kudur-Mabuk 
and  Kudur-Lagamara  are  Elymaic  kings,  who  in  very  ancient 
times    reigned    also    over    subjugated    Babylonia    (Schrader, 
KAT.  2nd  ed.  p.  316&).      Eri-Aku,  king  of  Larsam,  is  called 
on  inscriptions  sou  of  Kudur-Mabuk,  and  the  latter  is  called 
"  Lord  of  the  Western  land,"  which  especially  means  Palestine. 
Instead  of  ^nn,  the  LXX.  has  i>jnn,  &apjd\  explained  by 
Lenormant  as  tur-gal  (great  son).     D?i3  is  singular,  as  the  name 
of  a  country ;  Lenormant  understands  by  it  the  Semitic  races 
of  Northern  Mesopotamia,  and  thinks  that  this  B'ia  has  been 
corrupted  from  the  national  appellation  Guti  with  the  country- 
determinative  KI  found  on  inscriptions  (see  on  the  other  hand 
Paradics,  p.  233  sq.).      The  four  names  of  the   kings   of  the 
Pentapolis  mean,  according  to   Hitzig,    "  blasphemer,    rogue, 
serpent's  tooth,  and  scorpion's  poison ; "  but  this  has  only  the 
value   of  a  poor  witticism.      That  the  names  jns  and  V^ns 
accord  in  sound  with  jn  and  yvh  might,  instead  of  being  used 
against  their  historical  nature,  be  explained,  if  it  were  neces 
sary,  as  a  phonetic  variation  (comp.  •>K3B>  Isa.  vii.  G).      The 
fact  that  the  narrator  leaves  the  fifth  king,  the  king  of  Bela, 
unnamed,  shows  that  what  he   does  not  know   he  will  not 
invent.     fcOn  in  the  comparison,  ^3=1^^  is  one  of  the  eleven 
KTi  occurring  as  Chethib  in  the  Pentateuch.      It  is  not  strange 
to  find  five  kings  in  so  limited  a  space.     Each  more  important 
Canaanitish  town  had,  as  the  book  of  Joshua  shows,  its  king ; 
the  Phoenicians  were  fond  of  organizing  themselves  into  small 
independent  kingdoms,  united  only  by  alliance.     Thus  four, 
and  indeed  incomparably  more  powerful  kings,  took  the  field 
against  five  at  the  Lower  Jordan,  ver.  3  :  All  these  marched 
together    towards    the   valley  of  Siddim,  this  is   the   Salt  Sea. 
The  verb  -on  means  elsewhere  also,  e.g.  Ex.  xxvi.  3,  "  to  enter 
into  alliance,"  and  acquires  here,  by  means  of  ^  (adversus, 
like  Josh.  x.  6),  the  meaning  of  combined  hostile  movement 
towards  an   object  of   attack.     This  is   D^frn   ppj^   which  is 
glossed  id  est  mare  salsum,  more  accurately :  the  fertile  valley 


400  GENESIS  XIV.  4. 

in  which  the  plain  of  the  Jordan  is  continued,  and  which 
subsequently  became   the   Salt   Sea.      Onk.    Sam.   Aq.   Saad. 
translate:     field-valley,    Symm.    Theod.    Jer. :    forest  -  valley 
(akawv,  not  a\&v),  Targ.    Jer.  :    garden  -valley,    LXX.      rrjv 
(pdpayya  TTJV  dXvKijv  (perhaps   confusing  TB>,  lime  and  salt). 
In  Assyr.  siddS  means  a  district,  and  especially  a  district  on  a 
river's  bank   (Assyr.  LesestucJce,   3rd  ed.  p.   146),  whence  we 
may  explain   it   as  "Valley   of   the  river's  bank."      Occasion 
of  the  expedition,  ver.   4 :   Twelve  years  had  they   (the   five) 
served  Chedoiiaomcr,  and  in   the  thirteenth  year  they  rebelled. 
In  ver.  1  the  kings  are  named  in  alphabetical  order ;  we  see 
here  however  that  it  was  Kurdurlagamar  who  was  properly  the 
ruler,  Jndg.  iii.  8,  of  the  "Western  Land"  (Schrader,  KAT.  136), 
and  who  undertook  the  war.    As  Israel  had  in  the  early  period 
of  the  Judges  been  subject  for  eight  years  to  a  Mesopotamian 
ruler,  Judg.  iii.  8,  so  was  the  Pentapolis  twelve  years  under  the 
dominion  of  an  Elamite  sovereign,  who  had  taken  possession 
of  the  district  of  the  five  towns,  here  placed  in  the  foreground 
because  of  Lot's  captivity,  and  of  the  surrounding  countries.  The 
possession  of  the  Arabah,  i.e.  of  the  great  deep-sunken  valley 
to  the  north  and  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  was  of  great  value  to 
a  conqueror  of  Upper  Asia,  because  "  this  was  the  road  traced 
out  by  nature  itself,  which,  starting  from  the  Elanitic  Gulf, 
and  cutting  through  the  great  wilderness  watered  by  the  Mle 
and  Euphrates,  was  the  means  of  intercourse  between  Arabia 
and  Damascus,  and  because  at   no  great  distance  from  the 
south-west  border  of  Canaan,  and  near  to  the  Idumean  moun 
tains,  is  found  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  roads  that  lead 
from  the   coast  of  the  Mediterranean   to   Arabia,  and   from 
Middle   Egypt  to    Canaan "   (Tuch).     After  a    twelve   years' 
subjection,   the   five    kings   revolted   in   the   thirteenth    year 
from  their  oppressor ;  ^M  rnfeT'BW  is  the  ace.  of  time,  gene 
rally  of  the  duration  of  time,  here  of  the  point  of  time  for 
njp  rntejrB$B>:n,  as  the  Samar.  reading  is,  or  rroy-fi^  rura. 
The  army  of  the  four  kings  marched  along  the  great  road  from 
Damascus  and  rapidly  advanced  to  the  banks  of  the  Jordan, 


GENESIS  XIV.  5,  G.  401 

ver.  5  :  And  in  the  fourteenth  year  Chedorlaomer  came,  and 
the  kings  that  were  with  him,  and  smote  the  Repliaim  in 
Asteroth-Karnaini,  and  the  Zuzim  in  Ham,  and  the  Emim  in 
the  plain  of  Kiriathaiim.  Ashteroth-Karnaim,  the  ancient 
city  of  the  Eephaites  (so  called  according  to  Schrader  from 
*-'j,  to  be  high),  was  first  smitten.  It  was  named  after  the 
nnrCT,  worshipped  under  the  image  of  a  horned  bull's  head, 
and  therefore  even  then  not  as  the  morning  star,  but  as  the 
moon-goddess,  and  was  subsequently  the  capital  of  Og.  It  is 
mistakenly  identified  by  Wetzstein  with  Bostra  as  =  n~irTO3, 
Josh.  xxi.  27,  whose  ruins,  Tell  'Astera",  have  been  discovered 
in  Han  ran,  If  leagues  from  the  ancient  Edrei.1  The 
next  to  fall  was  the  town  of  the  Zuzim,  called  Ham  (for 
which  Jer.  in  the  Qucestiones  has  an,  per  heth*),  perhaps  the 
later  Eabbah  of  the  Ammonites,  and  thence  B'W  =  D^TOT, 
Deut.  ii.  20,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Jabbok;  then 
the  Emim  (^P*^,  elsewhere  ^DN)  in  the  plain  (niB>  with  a 
firm  Kametz,  and  as  ver.  17  shows,  also  a  firm  e  instead  of 
a  =  ai)  of  Kirjathaiim,  discovered  according  to  Eus.  and  Jer. 
four  leagues  west  of  Medeba,  under  the  name  Kurejdt.  The 
Pentapolis  was  now  first  of  all  compassed,  and  the  eastern 
border  of  the  mountain  followed,  where  the  army  encountered 
the  Horites,  ver.  G  :  And  (they  smote)  the  Horites  in  their 
Mount  Seir  unto  El  Pdran,  which  is  by  the  wilderness.  Ed. 
Meyer  (Gcsch.  §  130)  asserts  that  the  tribes  of  the  Eephaites, 
Zuzirn  and  Emim  never  existed.  But  what  of  the  Horites  ? 
For  the  existence  of  these  primitive  inhabitants  of  the  land 
of  Edom  being  incontestably  witnessed  to  (xxxvi.  2  0  sqq. ;  Deut. 
ii.  12,  22),  the  three  others  will  be  no  merely  airy  forms, 
especially  as  they  are  so  accurately  defined  according  to  their 
dwelling-places.  The  termination  of  E"nnii  is  a  suffix ;  the 
interrupted  genitive  combination,  "  their  mountain  of  Seir,"  fol 
lows  the  scheme  npy  Tp-Q,  Lev.  xxvi.  42  (see  Psalmen,  4th  ed. 

1  On  rnifitt'y  (plur.  cminentke)  and   J-prCT    Assyr.  i&lar,  istaritu,  sec  DMZ. 

xxiv.  650,  and  Zimmern,  BalyL  Busspsalmen  (1885),  p]\  38-40.  wlio  approves 
of  Schlottmann's  derivation  from  "i^'y,  to  unite  (foi>ulare). 

2  c 


402  GENESIS  XIV.  7. 

p.  203).  These  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  Arabah,  with  their 
eastern  mountains  and  western  desert,  seem  to  have  stood  in  the 
same  relation  as  the  Pentapolis  to  the  Upper  Asiatic  oppressor. 
The  object  of  the  expedition  is  perceived  by  its  farthest 
point,  la'ian-^  "i^K  j"iK3  ^N,  i.e.  El-  (Ail-  )  Pdran,  situate 
in  front  of  the  wilderness,  viz.  at  the  eastern  entrance  of 
the  wilderness  of  Pharan  (see  on  xxi.  21).  Such  is  the 
name  here  given  to  Ailat  on  the  northern  bend  of  the  so- 
called  Ailanitic  Gulf,  and  regarded  down  to  the  Middle  Ages 
as  of  strategic  and  commercial  importance  (see  Quatremere's 
history  of  this  town  in  the  Journal  Asiatique,  1835,  pp. 
44-53).  The  Targums,  Sam.  Jer.  the  Arabic  translators, 
Luth.  translate  i^N,  plain  (see  the  note  on  xii.  6),  in  opposition 
to  which  Syr.  Aq.  Symm.  Theod.  take  ^K  as  the  name  of  a  tree; 
and  certainly  the  changing  Hebrew  and  Greek  forms  of  the 
name  :  njXj  fl?1^,  Hv^  :  Al\cov,  Al\ava,"E\ava,  Al\avov,  speak 
for  the  meaning  terebinth  or  (as  collective  sing,  to  tJy*N,  Isa. 
i.  20  and  elsewhere)  terebinth  wood.  Arabian  geographers 
indeed,  as  well  as  modern  travellers,  speak  only  of  palm-woods 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ailat ;  perhaps  &*?$  (D^*?)  was  in 
connection  with  the  ancient  cultivation  of  trees  an  ancient 
name  of  the  ^"Jlpn,  palm  (see  Ex.  xv.  27).1  Having  now 
arrived  at  the  extreme  southern  point  of  the  plan  of  their 
campaign,  the  confederates  turned  round,  ver.  7  :  And  they 
turned  and  came  to  *  En  Mispat,  ivhich  is  Kades,  and  smote  all 
the  country  of  the  Amalekites,  and  also  the  Emorites  that  dwelt 
in  Hazazon  Tamar.  The  name  BS^'p  fy,  well  of  decision, 
which  as  we  here  learn  was  formerly  borne  by  the  Kadesh  of 
the  Mosaic  history,  shows  that  the  sanctity  of  an  ancient 
oracle  adhered  to  it.  Robinson  identified  Kadesh  with  Ain 
el-  Weibe,  the  chief  watering-place  of  the  Arabs  in  the  Edomite 
mountains  lying  west  of  the  Arabah.  Ain  Kudeis,  on  the 
western  declivity  of  the  Azazime  plateau,  seems  preferable. 
See  Trumbull,  "A  visit  to  'Ain  Qadis,  the  supposed  site  of 

1  See  A.  Halimann,  The  Date-palm,  its  Name  and  its  Veneration  by  the 
Ancient  World.     An  essay  in  the  Bonptandia,  1859,  Nos.  15,  16. 


GENESIS  XIV.  8,  <J.  403 

Kadesh-Barnea,"  in  the  Quarterly  Statement,   1881,  and  his 
illustrated  work,  Kadesh-Barnea :  its  Importance  and  Probable 
Site,  New  York,  1884.     Wetzstein  thinks  he  has  discovered 
it  in  Kddus,  a  day's  journey  south  of  Hebron  within  the  wilder 
ness,  which  terminates  at  the  Sin-Walle  ;  hut  this  Kadus,  testi 
fied  by  Makdisi,  would  be  too  near  to  the  southern  border  of  the 
Holy  Land,  not  to  mention  other  objections  (see  Kohler,  Gescli. 
i.  117  sq_.).      Arrived  at  Kadesh  through  the  wilderness,  the 
confederates  "  smote  all  the  country  of  the  Amalekites,"  i.e. 
the  portion  of  this  wild  and  dangerous  primitive  people  (see 
on  xxxvi.  12)  settled  in  the  northern   part  of  the  Till  west 
ward    of  Kadesh,  whose   subjugation   was    demanded   by  the 
object   of    the    undertaking,    and    likewise    the    Emorites    in 
Hazdzon  -  Tamar.      This    "ilpfi  P&'n    is,  according  to   2   Chron. 
xx.    2,    'Engedi    on    the    western    side    of    the    Dead    Sea ; 
Engaddum — says  Pliny,  H.  N.  v.  17  — oppidum  fuit  secun- 
dum  al>  Hicrosolymisfertilitate  palmetorumque  nemoribus.     fiwn, 
aniputatio,  is  the  name   for  the    artificial   fertilization  of  the 
female  date-palm  by  the  insertion  of  a  cut-off  stalk  laden  with 
male  flowers  into  the  flower  sheath  of  the  female.      Hence  the 
name  is  the  equivalent  for  palm  cultivation.1     Knobel  com 
bines  Hazazon   Tamar,  not  with  Engedi,  but  with  ">&n,  Ezek 
xlvii.    19,  xlviii.   28,   Thamaro,   Thamara,  on  the  road  from 
Hebron  to  Aila,  because,  he  says,  Engedi  was  too  far  north 
But  this    reason    does   not    outweigh    the    testimony    of  the 
chronicler.       The     confederates     having     also     smitten    the 
Amorites,  who  awaited  their  attack  in  the  impassable  rocky 
district   still    called    'Ain    '  Gedi,   turned    thence    to   'Gor    to 
chastise  the  revolted  Pentapolis,  vv.  8,  9  :  And  there  went  out 
the  king  of  Sodom  and  the  king  of  Gomorrah  and  the  king  of 
Admah  and  the  king  of  Zebo'im  and  the  king  of  Bcla ',  which 
is  Zoar,  and  set  the  battle  in  array  against  them  in  the  valley 
of  Siddim.      Against  Chedorlaomer  king  of  Elam   and  Tid'al 
king  of  Goiim  and  Amraphel  king  of  Shinar  and  Arivcli  king 

1  See  Theob.  Fisclicr,  Die  Dattdpalme,  1881,  and  Nuldeke  on  this  work  in 
the  GGA.  1881,  p.  1222  sqq. 


404  GENESIS  XIV.  10-12. 

of  Ellasar — four  kings  against  the  fixe.  The  names  of  the 
four  kings  are  here  given  in  like  copulation  as  at  ver.  1 ,  but  in 
reverse  order.  The  closing  words  are  intended  to  call  atten 
tion,  by  way  of  an  exclamation  (comp.  John  vi.  71),  to  the 
unequal  and  decisive  battle.  Overthrow  of  the  Pentapolitans, 
ver.  10  :  And  the  valley  of  Siddim  was  full  of  bitumen  springs, 
and  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  fled  and  fell  into  them, 
and  the  rest  fled  to  the  mountains.  Originally  ^D1  DID  "jta 
m»y  (LXX.  Samar.)  certainly  stood  instead  of  mw  DID  "|ta. 
The  king  of  Sodom  being  still  alive  at  ver.  17,  it  is  not  so 
much  the  persons  of  the  kings  themselves  as  their  followers 
who  are  intended.  The  two  kings  were  the  most  important. 
With  their  flight  the  overthrow  was  decisive.  The  troops  for 
the  most  part  sank  in  the  numerous  excavations  which,  at  the 
time  when  the  Siddim  valley  was  not  yet  swallowed  up  by 
the  Salt  Sea,  were  still  to  be  seen,  and  from  which  naphtha  or 
earth-oil,  i.e.  fluid  asphalt  or  bitumen,  flowed.  These  asphalt 
pits  are  now  covered  by  the  waters  of  the  Salt  Sea;  but  on  the 
occasion  of  earthquakes  enormous  pieces  of  pure  asphalt  (the 
"  Jews'-pitch,"  so  highly  appreciated  in  the  Middle  Ages)  make 
their  appearance  on  the  surface  torn  from  the  bed  of  the  sea ; 
elsewhere  they  would  sink,  but  here  the  salt  and  even 
bituminous  water,  by  reason  of  its  greater  specific  gravity, 
bears  them  up  (Furrer  in  Sclienkel's  BL.}.  The  custom  of 
the  language  distinguishes  ">N3,  well-spring,  from  -is'3,  nte,  pit, 
and  especially  rain-water  pit  (see  Hitzig  on  Jer.  vi.  7).  The 
combination  (ftpeara  $peara  (aafyaXrov),  as  the  LXX.  may 
originally  have  run,  is  a  co-ordination  like  Deut.  xvi.  20  ; 
Joel  iv.  1 4  ;  comp.  the  genitival  subordination,  Job  xx.  1 7  ; 
Ps.  Ixviii.  34.  Those  Pentapolitans  who  escaped  death 
by  the  sword  or  by  sinking,  escaped  rnn,  towards  the 
mountain  (—  harrah  instead  of  the  more  usual  n"[^),  i.e.  to 
the  defiles  of  the  Moabite  mountains.  The  victorious  army 
returned  laden  with  prey,  vv.  11,  12  :  And  they  took  all  the 
yoods  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  all  their  store  of  provision, 
and  departed.  And  they  took  Lot  and  Ids  yoods,  Abrams 


GENESIS  XIV.  13,  14.  405 

brother*  son,  and  departed,  and  he  dwelt  in  Sodom.  The 
victors,  for  the  sake  of  chastising  and  weakening  the  re- 
subjugated  kings,  plundered  the  two  most  important  towns, 
and  Abram's  nephew  who  dwelt  in  Sodom  was  thus  taken 
captive.  The  text  of  ver.  12  has  fallen  into  disorder. 
The  apposition  should  come  after  E^,  and  the  explana 
tory  sentence  before  13^1.  With  this  booty  they  retired 
along  the  valley  of  the  Jordan/  vv.  13,  14  :  And  there 
came  one  that  had  escaped,  and  told  it  to  Abram  the  'Ibri; 
and  he  dwelt  under  the  terebinths  of  Mamre  the  Emorite, 
the  brother  of  Eskol  and  the  brother  of  'Ancr,  and  these  lucre 
confederates  of  Abram.  Abram  heard  that  his  brother  was 
taken  captive,  and  he  led  forth  his  men  trained  to  arms,  who 
were  born  in  his  house,  three  hundred  and  eighteen,  and  pursued 
as  far  as  Dan.  Abram  is  called  "'"TO?,  not  as  the  man  from 
Jordan  (Stade,  Ed.  Meyer),  but  as  one  who  migrated  "^n  *n>*£), 
from  the  other  side  of  the  Euphrates,  LXX.  o  Trepdrrj^,  Aq. 
Trepairrjs,  Jer.  Transeuphratensis  (see  on  xi.  6).  07211  (comp. 
Ezek.  xxiv.  2G  sq.,  xxxiii.  21  sq.)  answers  to  the  Arabic 

'2  ' 
\±f    which    also    signifies    him,    or     collectively    those    who 

escaped.  The  expression,  rvnn  v_p,  means  the  confederates 
(comp.  rp'B  7^3,  Baal  of  the  covenant,  Judg.  ix.  4 ;  Baal  as  the 
god  of  the  covenant,  ibid.  ix.  46),  different  from  mn  "03  (Acts 
iii.  25),  which  means  those  standing  in  similar  covenant 
relation.  HN  has  here,  as  the  repetition  l|nNl_  shows,  the  vague 
sense  of  a  near  relative.  bn\  refers,  as  ver.  24  shows,  to  all 
three.  To  save  Lot,  Abram  drew  forth  (like  the  sword  from 
its  scabbard,  Ex.  xv.  9  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  33,  or  the  spear  from  the 
Sovpo^otcr),  Ps.  xxxv.  3)  318  P^D,  of  his  men  dedicated  or 
trained  (to  the  profession  of  arms),  viz.  irpn  ST^5  (slaves)  born 
in  his  house,  i.e.  not  first  purchased  (xii.  5,  xvii.  12,  23).  The 
LXX.  translates  rjpt0p,r]cre  after  the  reading  P^l  (Samar.),  he 

1  Comp.  on  the  contrary  the  Excursus  on  Zoar  in  Gene-six,  p.  565:  "The 
eastern  coast  of  the  Dead  Sea  has  never  had  a  road  ;  on  Seetzen's  caprice  : 
.scrambling  forwards  to  come  there,  see  Burckhardt's  Syrien,  p.  661." 


406  GENESIS  XIV.  15,  16. 

carefully  mustered.  (Black)  slaves  bom  within  the  tribe 
itself  are  still  regarded  for  their  attachment  and  bravery  as 

•a       /  / 

the  stay  and  prop  of  the  tribe,  and  are  called   <u^Jo,    they 

who  surrender  their  lives  as  a  ransom  (frl?).  With  these 
troops  he  surprised  the  army  which  had  already  reached  Dan 
at  the  north  -  eastern  border  of  Canaan,  ver.  1 5  :  And  lie 
divided  himself  against  them  l>y  night,  he  and  his  servants,  and 
smote  them  and  pursued  them  to  Hobah,  ivhich  is  on  the  north  of 
Damascus.  He  surprised  the  army,  intoxicated  with  success 
and  expecting  no  enemy  on  its  rear,  by  night,  and  in  separate 
detachments,  and  pursued  it  to  Hobah,  which  lies  very 
near,  and  northward  of  Damascus.  Recovery  of  the  booty, 
ver.  16  :  And  he  brought  back  all  the  goods,  and  also  Lot  his 
brother  and  his  goods  brought  he  back,  and  the  women  also,  and 
the  people.  That  a  large  army,  suddenly  surprised  by  a  small 
band,  can  be  put  to  flight  is  shown,  e.g.,  by  the  history  of 
Gideon  (Judg.  vii.) ;  besides,  the  host  encamped  at  Dan  need 
not  be  regarded  as  the  entire  army.  The  reason  why  pj, 
which  was  formerly  called  t?v  or  DKv,  and  did  not  receive  this 
name  till  after  its  conquest  by  the  Danites  (Josh.  xix.  47  ; 
Judg.  xviii.  29),  is  thus  named  without  further  comment  in  a 
narrative  elsewhere  so  free  from  anticipations,  must  certainly 
be  that  the  gloss  has  in  this  instance  supplanted  the  name 
glossed.  For  what  other  Dan  could  here  be  intended  than 
this  north-eastern  border  city?  When  Joseph.  Ant.  i.  10.  1, 
says :  ovrws  77  erepa  TOV  'lopSdvov  Trpoaajopeverat  Tnyyij, 
thus  much  is  true,  that  one  of  the  three  sources  of  the  Jordan 
is  actually  at  Dan,  now  Tell  el-Kadi  (which^is  the  same  as 
rjL1  ?*?),  another  at  Paneas  (Ban/ids)*  a  third  at  Hasbeia ;  and 
the  first  is  now  called  el-Lcdddn,  and  regarded  as  the  main 
source  of  the  Jordan  (Socin  -  Bddeker,  p.  279).  The  most 
ancient  Jewish  glosses  also  point  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the 

1  Here  springs  forth  from  a  cave  now  almost  filled  up  with  rubbish  the 
source  of  the  Jordan,  as  the  Sebene-Suh,  a  source  of  the  Tigris  (Assyr.  r$s  eni 
sa  ndr  Diklat],  does  from  a  grotto  on  the  road  to  Erzeroum  (see  Schrader  on  the 
Cuneiform  inscriptions  of  this  grotto,  1885). 


GENESIS  XIV.  17.  407 

sources  of  the  Jordan,  by  explaining  PT  by  D"E3  (Paneas)  or 
|ynD|TT  p  (CcTsarea  Philippi) ;  comp.  Btirchardus,  de  Monte  Sion, 
xi.  12  :  Dan  qucc  nunc  Belenas  (i.e.  Banias)  dicitur  sive 
Occsarea  Philippi.  There  was  also  somewhere  a  jJP  fi,  2  Sam. 
xxiv.  6  ;  but  to  understand  it  as  this  when  the  addition  fjr  is 
absent,  and  to  place  it  accordingly,  is  both  unnecessary  and  un 
justified.  Nor  can  a  second  more  north-westerly  Ccelesyrian 
Dan-Laiish-Leshem  (Keggio,  Schultz  and  others)  be  admitted,  for 
the  valley  Beth-Rehol,  named  from  the  well  'En  rahub,  the  most 
important  in  the  land  of  Suet,  refers,  Judg.  xviii.  28,  not  to  the 
whole  of  Ccelesyria,  but  to  the  most  southerly  portion  of  this 

vale-land  («Uu!l)   beyond  the  Leontes.      There  lay  Eehob,  not 

far  from  the  road  to  Hamath,  Num.  xiii.  21.  But  the 
fugitives  purposing  to  go,  not  to  Hamath,  but  to  Mesopo 
tamia,  would  therefore  so  round  the  southern  base  of  Hermon 

O 

to  come  eastward  from  the  Antilibanus  and  past  Damascus 
to  the  great  Syrian  desert. 

Salutation  of  the  victors  by  the  king  of  Sodom,  ver.  1 7 : 
Then  went  out  the  king  of  Sodom  to  meet  him  after  his  return 
from  the  conquest  of  Chedorla*  omcr  and  of  the  Idnys  that  were  with 
him,  in  the  valley  of  \Sdwch,  which  is  the  king's  vale.  Certainly 
the  king's  vale  where  Absalom  erected  a  pillar  for  himself, 
2  Sam.  xviii.  18.  According  to  Joseph.  Ant.  vii.  10.  3,  this 
marble  pillar  was  two  stadia  from  Jerusalem,  which  would 
apparently  make  the  lung's  vale  the  same  as  the  vale  of 
Kedron.  The  pyramidal  -  shaped  monument  at  the  lower 
bridge  of  the  Kidron,  which  is  called  Absalom's,  does  not 
indeed  look  like  an  ancient  Israelite  one,  and  it  might  be 
thought  that  Absalom  erected  his  pillar  on  his  own  estate  in 
Baal  Hazor,  which  seems  to  be  designated  (2  Sam.  xiii.  23) 
by  D^DX'Dy,  as  near  to  the  Ephraimitic  border,  and  therefore 
as  a  Benjamite  locality.  The  circumstance  however  that  the 
incident  with  Melchizedek  king  of  Salem  falls  between  the 
encounter,  ver.  17,  and  Abram's  transaction,  ver.  21  sqq., 
with  the  king  of  Sodom,  speaks  in  favour  of  the  situation  of 


408  GENESIS  XIV.  17. 

the  king's  vale  "being  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem.1 
It  is  indeed  questionable,  whether  the  Salem  of  Melchizedek  is 
Jerusalem  ;  there  is  a  village  of  Salim,  which  may  be  observed 
on  the  road  from  Mlbulus  (Sichem)  to  Beisan  after  a  ride  of 
50  German  miles  (Badeker,  p.  231),  a  Salim  in  the  plain  of 
Jezreel,  between  which  village  and  the  village  of  Selafe 
stretches  a  small  valley  (ibid.  241),  probably  the  av\&v 
^!a\r]iui}  Judith  iv.  4,  and  according  to  the  Onom.  of  Eusebius 
revised  by  Jer.  a  Salumias,  lying  8  Roman  miles  south 
of  Scythopolis  (comp.  Dlb^,  DMZ.  xxviii.  146),  which 
Jerome  mistakenly  identifies  (see  Miihlau,  art.  "  Aenon," 
in  Eiehm's  HW^)  with  the  ^aXe///,  of  John  the  Baptist,  and 
where  in  his  days  were  shown  the  ruins  of  the  supposed  palace 
of  Melchizedek.  Overwhelming  reasons  decide  for  the 
opinion  of  Josephus,  that  Salem  was  Jerusalem.  We  may 
conceive  with  Eupolemus  in  Eusebius,  Prcep.  ix.  1 7  (who  how 
ever,  following  perhaps  the  Samaritan  view,  transposes  the 
meeting  with  Melchizedek  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
'Ap<yapL%tv^,  that  Abram  had  gone  through  Samaria  on  his 
way  home  to  Hebron,  intending  to  dismiss  at  some  convenient 
place  the  captives  with  the  booty  to  their  south-eastern  home, 
or  that  he  was  following  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  towards 
Sodom,  to  take  back  the  captives  and  the  booty  himself  (Tuch). 
In  either  case  Jerusalem  was  not  too  far  out  of  the  road  for 
the  king  of  Sodom  to  go  to  meet  him  from  the  south-east,  and 
Melchizedek  on  hearing  the  report  which  would  precede  him 
of  Abram's  return  as  conqueror,  to  hasten  to  salute  him  from 
Jerusalem  on  the  opposite  side.  In  that  case  D^,  Ps.  Ixxvi.  3, 
would  not  have  become  the  poetical  name  of  the  city  when 
it  had  not  been  its  more  ancient  one.  The  reference  too  to 
Melchizedek  in  Ps.  ex.  is  explained  by  the  city  of  the  king 
dom  of  promise  and  the  city  of  Melchizedek  being  one  and 
the  same.  It  is  just  because  the  existence  of  Jerusalem 
reaches  back  to  such  hoar  antiquity  that  the  gates  of  the 

1  See  Ginsburg's  article  on  the  monument  of  Absalom  in  the  journal 
1872,  p.  256. 


GENESIS  XIV.  18-20.  409 


fortress  of  Zion  are  called  .  QiJJ  snn?,  Ps.  xxiv.  7.  Extant 
Jewish  tradition  in  the  Targums,  the  Midrash,  the  Scpher 
hojashar,  esteems  the  Salem  of  Melchizedek  as  indisputably 
identical  with  Jerusalem.  Finally,  the  name  pwapo,  as 
similar  in  sound  with  the  name  of  pl^pi'lK,  "king  of 
Jerusalem,"  Josh,  x,  1,  favours  this  view. 

The  meeting  with  the  priest-king  of  Salem,  ver.  18  :  And 
Melchizedek  king  of  Salem  brought  forth  bread  and  wine,  and 
lie  was  the  priest  of  the  Most  High  God.  J^Jf  ?&?  as  a  proper 
name  has  no  article  ;  but  i^Sy  in  other  usage  also  rejects  the 
article.  According  to  Sanchuniathon  in  Euseb.  Prcep.  i.  10, 
the  Phoenicians  called  God  the  progenitor  of  Uranus  and 
Gaia  *E\iovv  —  v^icrTos\  while,  on  the  other  hand,  Elonim 
ve-Elonoth  of  Hanno  the  Carthaginian  in  the  Pcenulus  of 
Plautus  has  nothing  to  do  with  jv^y,  but  means,  as  the  epitaph 
of  Eshmunazar  shows,  "  gods  and  goddesses."  jvby  as  used 
here  by  Melchizedek,  if  it  does  not  mean  the  absolutely  One,  is 
yet  no  mere  comparative  for  Him  who  is  higher  than  others, 
but  the  Highest,  therefore  the  God  of  gods.  He  brings  forth 
bread  and  wine  from  his  capital  to  refresh  and  honour  the 
returning  and  courageous  deliverer.  Those  who  were  delivered 
were  indeed  his  fellow  -  countrymen.  With  gratitude  to 
Abraham  he  combines  thankfulness  to  God,  who  had  made 
him  the  instrument  of  such  mercy,  vv.  19,  20«  :  And  he 
blessed  him,  and  said  : 

Messed  be  Abraham  of  the  Mod  Iliali  God, 

The  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth  ; 
And  blessed  be  the  Most  High  God, 

Who  hath  delivered  thine  oppressor  into  thy  hand  ! 

The  form  of  this  double  berachah  is  throughout  poetic  :  in  it 
we  have  iiyV  ?N,  at  least  for  Israelites,  a  poetic  sound,  Ps. 
Ixxviii.  35,  Ivii.  3;  nip,  used  here  only  for  ^"}.^  or  nbfy,  is  more 
significant  than  either,  denoting  Him  whose  $i?,  creature  and 
property,  the  world  is  ;  Tiy  for  T^.K,  and  $p  an  exclusively 
poetical  word  (to  give,  here  :  to  deliver  up,  Hos.  xi.  8,  in  a 
connection  referring  back  to  Gen.  xiv.  or  Deut.  xxix.  22  :  to 


410  GENESIS  XIV.  21-24. 

give  up ;  Prov.  iv.  9  :  to  present).     The  language  of  Canaan 
(Isa.  xix.  18),  which  is  appointed  to  be  the  sacred  language, 
is  in  these  STTWIKIQI  ev^aL  (Philo,  Opp.  i.  533)  already  being 
transformed  into  a  vessel  of  honour.     The  language  of  him 
on  whom  a  curse  was  inflicted  appears  here  as  the  language 
of  the  blessing  of  him  who  was  blessed.     Abram  thus  blessed 
by  Melchizedek  in  his  turn  does  him  homage,  ver.  205  :  And 
Tie  gave   him   the    tenth   of  all.      In  acknowledgment    of    his 
priesthood  he  gives  him  the  tenth  of  all,  i.e.  the  tenth  of  all 
the  goods  recovered  from  the  enemy,  which  as  separated  from 
the  whole  is  as  representing  the  whole  God's  portion  in  the 
person  of  His  priest.      On  the  other  hand,  he  refuses  for  him 
self   any   share  in   the  booty,    vv.   21-24:  And  the  king  of 
Sodom    said   to  Abram :   Give  me  the  souls  (the  persons),  and 
keep  the  goods  for  thyself.     But  Abram  said  to  the  king   of 
Sodom  :  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  to  Jahveh,  the  Most  High 
God,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth  :  If  I  from  a  thread  to  a 
shoe  latchct,  if  I  take  anything  that  is  thine — lest  thou  shoiddest 
say  :  I  have  made  Abram  rich.     Nothing  for  me  !  only  ivhat  the 
servants  have  eaten,  and  the  portion  of  the  men  that  went  with 
me  —  Ancr,  Eskol,  and  Mamre,  let  them  take  their  portions. 
He  swears  with  uplifted  hand  (T  D'nn,  while  on  the  contrary 
it    is    always   T  K^J   when   it   is   God  who    swears),   a  very 
ancient   gesture  of  the  so-called  corporal  oath.     This  is  the 
first    mention    of    an  oath   by    God ;   oaths    have    become  a 
necessity    since.       Sin    has    destroyed     the     interchange     of 
absolutely  unshaken  confidence  between  man  and  man  and 
between  God  and  man.     The  negative  oath  begins  with  DK,. 
with    an   ellipsis   of  the   supplementary  sentence :  may  such 
and  such  a  thing  happen  to  me,  Ges.  §  155.  2/.     To  jv6y  b« 
he  adds  mrp,  designating  Him  who  had  revealed  Himself  to 
him  as  the  God  of  salvation,  as  the  Most  High  God.     Neither 
a  thread  nor  a  shoe-latchet  ("W  ...  IP,  both  .  .  .  and  also, 
Deut.  xxix.  10  ;  Isa.  xxii.  24  ;  comp.  Ecclus.  xlvi.  17  ;  here,  by 
reason  of  the  negative  oath  implied  in  &** :  neither  .  .  .  nor), 
i.e.  he  will  not  accept  even  the  most  worthless  fragment  of 


GENESIS  XIV.  21-24.  411 

the  booty,  nor  let  himself  be  enriched  in  this  manner.  No, 
he  will  take  nothing  (^ifa  from  5>3=f'3,  and  %  like  xli.  16, 
as  an  adv.  whereby  we  reject  anything,  properly  let  it  not 
come,  or :  if  it  comes  to  me) ;  he  only  requests  that  the  three 
companions  who  have  marched  with  him  may  be  remembered. 
We  here  first  learn  of  the  accession  of  these  men,  and  perhaps 
of  their  people,  to  the  318  born  in  Abram's  house.  The 
narrative  adheres  to  Abram  and  to  what  is  to  his  honour. 
That  he  will  take  nothing  on  this  occasion,  while  he  allowed 
himself  to  be  so  abundantly  gifted  by  Pharaoh,  shows  him,  as 
Hasse  remarks,  "  inwardly  more  elevated  and  advanced  than 
in  the  days  of  his  self-incurred  humiliation  in  Egypt." 

What  has  just  occurred  is  both  a  prelude  and  prefiguration 
of  the  fact,  that  the  seed  of  Abraham  will  come  forth  victorious 
from  the  conflict  with  the  world-power  for  their  own  salva 
tion  and  that  of  others.  It  is  just  now,  when  Abram  has 
shown  himself  as  much  raised  above  men  as  helpful  to  them, 
that  the  mysterious  figure  of  Melchizedek  comes  forth  from 
a  hidden  background  without  any  intervention,  as  without  it 
he  again  disappears — a  figure  seen  for  a  moment  significant 
for  ever.  This  Melchizedek,  of  whom  we  know  neither  the 
whence  nor  the  whither,  is  in  the  midst  of  heathen  surround 
ings  a  vehicle  of  the  pre-heathen  faith,  a  servant  of  the  Most 
High  God,  a  king  who  exercises  the  priestly  office  not 
merely  as  a  king,  or  as  a  father  of  a  family  does  as  such, 
for  in  this  sense  Abram  too  was  N^'J  and  priest,  but  who 
according  to  ancient  Phoenician  custom  unites  in  himself  the 
office  of  king  with  that  of  priest,  and  is  hence  expressly 
called,  as  Abram  never  is,  |nb.  By  this  priest-king,  who  has  no 
authority  to  point  to  from  descent  and  law,  the  ancestor  of 
Israel,  of  Levi  and  of  Aaron,  the  father  of  the  nation  of  the 
promise,  of  the  priesthood  and  of  the  Law,  allows  himself  to  be 
blessed.  And  not  only  so,  but  Abram,  in  whom  is  comprised 
that  priestly  race  which  is  to  receive  the  tenth,  gives  to  this 
priest-king  the  tenth  of  all  the  spoil.  There  is  a  royal  priest 
hood  outside  the  law — predicted  by  this  typical  history,  as 


412  (1ENESIS  XIV.  21-24. 

the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  explains — to  which  even  Abram 
and  his  seed  must  bow,  to  whom  even  the  Levitical  priest 
hood  must  do  homage  ;  for  just  where  Abraham  appears  at 
the  most  ideal  elevation,  Melchizedek  stands  beside  and 
towers  above  him.  Melchizedek  is  like  the  setting  sun  of 
the  primitive  revelation  made  to  men  before  their  separation 
into  nations,  the  last  rays  of  which  shine  upon  the  patriarch, 
from  whom  the  true  light  of  the  world  is  in  process  of  coming. 
This  sun  sets  to  rise  again  in  antitype  in  Jesus  Christ,1  when 
the  preparatory  epoch  of  Israel  shall  have  passed.  In  the 
light  of  this  antitype  the  gifts  of  Melchizedek  acquire  a 
typical  significance.  They  foreshadow  the  gifts  which  the 
exalted  heavenly  Priest-King  brings  in  love  for  the  refresh 
ment  of  those  who  are  of  the  faith  of  Abraham. 

1  The  Zend  religion  also  expects  a  future  ruler,  who  as  the  antitype  of 
Zarathustra  shall  unite  in  himself  the  royal  and  priestly  ofiiccs  (DMZ. 
xl.  109). 


END  OF  VOLUME  I. 


MOHKISOX  AXD  ClBt!,    EDINBURGH, 
'RIXTERS   TO    HER   MAJESTY'S   STATIONERY    OFFICE. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Just  published,  in  demy  8tv>,  price  10.*.  6c/., 

THE  JEWISH 

AND 

THE    CHRISTIAN    MESSIAH. 

A   STUDY   IN  THE  EARLIEST   HISTORY  OF   CHRISTIANITY. 
BY  VINCENT  HENRY  STANTON,  M.A., 

FKLLOW,  TUT01!,  AND  DIVINITY  LECTURER  OP  TRINITY  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE; 
LATE  HULSEAN  LECTURER. 

k  Mr.  Stanton's  book  answers  a  real  want,  and  will  be  indispensable  to  students  of  the 
origin  of  Christianity.  We  hope  that  Mr.  Stauton  will  be  able  to  continue  his  labours 
iu  that  most  obscure  and  most  important  period,  of  his  competency  to  deal  with  which 
lie  lias  given  such  good  proof  in  this  book.' — Guardian. 

'  "We  welcome  this  book  as  a  valuable  addition  to  the  literature  of  a  most  important 
subject.  .  .  .  The  book  is  remarkable  for  the  clearness  of  its  style.  Mr.  Stanton  is  never 
obscure  from  beginning  to  end,  and  we  think  that  no  reader  of  average  attainments  will 
be  able  to  put  the  book  down  without  having  learnt  much  from  his  lucid  and  scholarly 
exposition.' — Ecclesiastical  Gazette. 

Noiv  ready,  Second  Division,  in  Three   IW,s>.,  8ro,  price  10*.  6d.  each, 

HISTORY  OF  THE  JEWISH  PEOPLE  IN  THE 
TIME  OF  OUR  LORD. 

BY  DR.  EMIL  SOHUEEE, 

PROFESSOR  OF  THEOLOGY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  GI ESSEN. 

TRANSLATED    FROM   THE    SECOND    EDITION   (BEVIS-.D    THROUGHOUT,    AND 
GREATLY  ENLARGKi))  OF  'HISTORY  OF  THE  NEW  TEST AMENT  TIME: 
The  First  Division,  which  will  probably  be  in  a  single  volume,  is  undergoing  revision 
by  the  Author.    (The  Second  Division  is  complete  in  itself.) 

'  Under  Professor  Schiirer's  guidance,  we  are  enabled  to  a  large  extent  to  construct  a 
social  and  political  framework  for  the  Gospel  History,  and  to  set  it  iu  such  a  light  as  to 
see  new  evidences  of  the  truthfulness  of  that  history  and  of  its  contemporaneousness.  .  . 
The  length  of  our  notice  shows  our  estimate  of  the  value  of  his  work.' — English 
Churchman. 

'We  gladly  welcome  the  publication  of  this  most  valuable  work.' — DvUin  Review. 

'Most  heartily  do  we  commeud  this  work  as  an  invaluable  aid  in  the  intelligent  study 
of  the  New  Testament.' — Nonconformist. 

'As  a  handbook  for  the  study  of  the  New  Testament,  the  work  is  invaluable  and 
unique.' — Britixli  Quarterly  Rc/vieir. 

Just  published,  in  demy  8ro,  price  10,s\  ()d., 

AN     EXPLANATORY     COMMENTARY     ON 

ESTHER. 

SHitij  Jour  gppcntuces, 

CONSIST  I  X(;    OF 

THE  SECOND    TARGUM   TRANSLATED  FROM  TILE  ARAMAIC 
WITH  NOTES,   MITHRA,    THE    WINGED   BULLS 

OF  PERSEPOLIS,   AND  ZOROASTER. 
BY-  PROFESSOR  PAULUS   CASSEL,   D.D.,  BERLIX. 

'A  specially  remarkable  exposition,  which  will  .secure  for  itself  a  commanding 
position  in  Biblical  literature.  It  has  great  charms  from  a  literary  and  historical  point 
of  view.' — Sword  and  Trowel. 

'  A  perfect  mine  of  information.' — Record. 

'  It  is  manifestly  the  ready  expression  of  a  full  and  richly  stored  mind,  dispensing  the 
treasures  accumulated  by  years  of  labour  and  research.  .  ." .  No  one  whose  fortune  it  is 
to  secure  this  commentary  will  rise  from  its  study  without  a  new  and  lively  realization 
of  the  life,  trials,  and  triumphs  of  Esther  and  Mordecai.' — Ecclesiastical  Gazette. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


WORKS    BY   PROFESSOR    I.    A.    DORNER. 

Just  published,  in  demy  8t'o,  price  14s., 

SYSTEM  OF  CHRISTIAN   ETHICS. 

BY  DR.  I.  A.  DORNEE, 

PROFESSOR  OF  THEOLOGY,  BERLIN. 

EDITED  BY  DR.  A.  DORNER. 

TRANSLATED   BY 

PROFESSOR  C.  M.  MEAD,  D.D.,  AND  REV.  R.  T.  CUNNINGHAM,  M.A. 

'This  noble  book  is  the  crown  of  tho  Systematic  Theology  of  the  author.  ...  It  is 
a  masterpiece.  It  is  the  fruit  of  a  lifetime  of  profound  investigation  in  the  philo 
sophical,  biblical,  and  historical  sources  of  theology.  The  system  of  Dorner  is 
comprehensive,  profound,  evangelical,  and  catholic.  It  rises  into  the  clear  heaven  of 
Christian  thought  above  the  strifes  of  Scholasticism,  Rationalism,  and  Mysticism.  It 
is,  indeed,  comprehensive  of  all  that  is  valuable  in  these  three  types  of  human  thought.' 
—Professor  C.  A.  BRIGGS,  D.D. 

'  There  rested  on  his  whole  being  a  consecration  such  as  is  lent  only  by  the  nobility 
of  a  thorough  sanctification.  of  the  inmost  nature,  and  by  the  dignity  of  a  matured 
wisdom.' — Professor  WEISS. 

'  This  is  the  last  work  we  shall  obtaiu  from  the  able  pen  of  the  late  Dr.  Dorner,  and 
it  may  be  said  that  it  fitly  crowns  the  edifice  of  his  manifold  labours.' — Spectator. 

In  Four  Volumes,  8yo,  price  £2,  2s., 

A    SYSTEM    OF   CHRISTIAN    DOCTRINE. 

'  In  all  investigations  the  author  is  fair,  clear,  and  moderate  ;  ...  he  has  shown  that 
his  work  is  one  to  be  valued,  for  its  real  ability,  as  an  important  contribution  to  the  litera 
ture  of  theology.' — Scotsman. 

'  Had  it  been  the  work  of  an  entire  lifetime,  it  would  have  been  a  monument  of 
marvellous  industry  and  rare  scholarship.  It  is  a  tribute  alike  to  the  genius,  the  learn 
ing,  and  the  untiring  perseverance  of  its  author.' — Baptist  Magazine. 

'  The  work  has  many  and  great  excellences,  and  is  really  indispensable  to  all  who 
would  obtain  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  great  problems  of  theology.  It  is  a 
great  benefit  to  English  students  that  it  should  be  made  accessible  to  them  in  their  own 
language,  and  in  a  form  so  elegant  and  convenient.' — Literary  Churchman. 

In  Five  Volumes,  8t>o,  price  £2,  12s.  6c?., 

HISTORY  OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE 
DOCTRINE  OF  THE  PERSON  OF  CHRIST. 

'  So  great  a  mass  of  learning  and  thought  so  ably  set  forth  has  never  before  been 
presented  to  English  readers,  at  least  on  this  subject.' — Journal  of  Sacred  Literature. 

In  crown  8fo,  -price  4«s-.  Qd., 

THE    BIBLE 

AN     OUTGROWTH     OF     THEOCRATIC     LIFE. 
BY  D.   W.    SIMON, 

PRINCIPAL   OF   THE   CONGREGATIONAL   COLLEGE,    EDINBURGH. 

'A  more  valuable  and  suggestive  book  has  not  recently  come  into  our  hands.' — 
British  Quarterly  Review. 

'  This  book  will  well  repay  perusal.  It  contains  a  great  deal  of  learning  as  well  as 
ingenuity,  and  the  style  is  clear.' — Guardian. 

1 A  book  of  absorbing  interest,  and  well  worthy  of  study.' — Methodist  New  Connexion 
Magazine. 

4  Dr.  Simon's  little  book  is  worthy  of  the  most  careful  attention.' — Baptist. 

'  We  have  read  the  book  with  much  appreciation,  and  heartily  commend  it  to  all 
interested  in  the  subject  with  which  it  deals.' — Scottish  Congregationalist. 


T.  and  T.  Clark s  Publications. 


PROFESSOR    GODET'S    WORKS, 

(Copyright,  by  arrangement  with  the  Author.) 


Just  published,  in  Two  Volumes,  demy  Sao,  price  21,s\, 
A      COMMENTARY      ON 

ST.    PAUL'S    FIRST    EPISTLE    TO    THE 
CORINTHIANS. 

BY  F.  GODET,  D.D., 

PROFESSOR   OF  THEOLOGY,   NEUCHATEL. 

'We  do  not  know  any  better  commentary  to  put  into  the  hands  of  theological 
students.' — Guardian. 

'  We  heartily  commend  this  work  to  our  readers  as  a  valuable  and  substantial 
addition  to  the  literature  of  this  noble  Epistle.' — Homiletic  Magazine. 

'A  perfect  masterpiece  of  theological  toil  and  thought.  .  .  .  Scholarly,  evangelical, 
exhaustive,  and  able.' — Evangelical  Review. 

In  Three  Volumes,  Svo,  price  31s.  Qd. 
(A  Xew  Edition,  revised  throughout  by  the  Author.) 

A      COMMENTARY      ON 

THE     GOSPEL    OF    ST.    JOHN. 

'  This  work  forms  one  of  the  battle-fields  of  modern  inquiry,  and  is  itself  so  rich  in 
spiritual  truth  that  it  is  impossible  to  examine  it  too  closely;  and  we  welcome  this  treatise 
from  the  pen  of  Dr.  Godet.  We  have  no  more  competent  exegete,  and  this  new  volume 
shows  all  the  learning  and  vivacity  for  which  the  author  is  distinguished.' — Freeman. 


In  Two  Volumes,  Svo,  price  21,9., 
A      COMMENTARY      ON 

THE     GOSPEL    OF    ST.     LUKE. 

'Marked  by  clearness  and  good  sense,  it  will  be  found  to  possess  value  and  interest  as 
one  of  the  most  recent  and  copious  works  specially  designed  to  illustrate  this  Gospel' — 
Guardian.  

In  Two  Volumes,  Svo,  price  21s., 
A      COMMENTARY      ON 

ST.   PAUL'S   EPISTLE   TO   THE   ROMANS. 

'We  prefer  this  commentary  to  any  other  we  have  seen  on  the  subject.  .  .  .  We 
have  great  pleasure  in  recommending  it  as  not  only  rendering  invaluable  aid  in  the 
critical  study  of  the  text,  but  affording  practical  and  deeply  suggestive  assistance  in  the 
exposition  of  the  doctrine.' — British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

In  crown  Svo,  Second  Edition,  price  6s., 

DEFENCE    OF   THE    CHRISTIAN    FAITH. 

TRANSLATED   BY  THE 

HON.  AND  KEY.  CANON  LYTTELTON,  M.A., 

RECTOR  OF  HAGLEY. 

'There  is  trenchant  argument  and  resistless  logic  in  these  lectures  ;  but  withal,  there 
is  cultured  imagination  and  felicitous  eloquence,  which  carry  home  the  appeals  to  the 
heart  as  well  as  the  head.' — Sword  and  Trowel. 


T.  and  T.  Claris  Publications. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN    CHURCH. 

BY    PHILIP    SCHAFF,    D.D.,    LL.D. 

New  Edition,  Re-written  and  Enlarged. 

APOSTOLIC  CHRISTIANITY,  A. D.  1-100.     In  Two  Divisions.     Ex.  demy  8vo,  price  21s. 

ANTE-NICENE  CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.  100-325.      In  Two  Divisions.      Ex.  demy  8vo, 
price  21s. 

NICENE  and  POST-NICENE  CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.  325-600.     In  Two  Divisions.    Ex. 
demy  8vo,  price  21s. 

MEDIEVAL   CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.   590-1073.      In    Two   Divisions.      Ex.  demy  8vo, 
price  21s.     (Completion  of  this  Period,  1073-1517,  in  preparation.) 

MODERN   CHRISTIANITY.      The  German  Reformation,  A.D.  1517-1530.      In   Two 

Divisions.     Ex.  demy  8vo,  price  21s. 


'Dr.  Schaffs  "History  of  the  Christian  Church  "  is  the  most  valuable  contribution  to  Ecclesias 
tical  History  that  has  ever  been  published  in  this  country.  When  completed  it  will  have  no  rival 
in  point  of  comprehensiveness,  and  in  presenting  the  results  of  the  most  advanced  scholarship 
and  the  latest  discoveries.  Each  division  covers  a  separate  and  distinct  epoch,  and  is  complete  in 
itself.' 

'No  student,  and  indeed  no  critic, can  with  fairness  overlook  a  work  like  the  present, 
written  with  such  evident  candour,  and,  at  the  same  time,  with  so  thorough  a  knowledge 
of  the  sources  of  early  Christian  history.' — Scotsman. 

'In  no  other  work  of  its  kind  with  which  I  am  acquainted  will  students  and  general 
readers  find  so  much  to  instruct  and  interest  them.' — Rev.  Prof.  HITCHCOCK,  D.D. 

'A  work  of  the  freshest  and  most  conscientious  research.' — Dr.  JOSEPH  COOK,  in 
Boston  Monday  Lectures. 

'  Dr.  Schaff  presents  a  connected  history  of  all  the  great  movements  of  thought  and 
action  in  a  pleasant  and  memorable  stylo.  His  discrimination  is  keen,  his  courage 
undaunted,  his  candour  transparent,  and  for  general  readers  he  has  produced  what  we 
have  no  hesitation  in  pronouncing  the  History  of  the  Church.' — Freeman. 


Just  published  in  ex.  8ro,  Second  Edition,  price  9s., 

THE    OLDEST    CHURCH    MANUAL 


CALLKD   THE 


Ueacbina  of  tbe  Uwelpe  Hpostles. 

The  Didache  and  Kindred  Documents  in  the  Original,  with  Translations  and  Discussions  of 

Post-Apostolic  Teaching,  Baptism,   Worship,  and  Discipline,  and  with 

Illustrations  and  Fac-Similes  of  the  Jerusalem  Manuscript. 

BY  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D.,  LL.D., 

PROFESSOR  IN  UNION  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY,   NEW  YORK. 

'  The  best  work  on  the  Didache  which  has  yet  appeared.'  —  Churchman. 

'Dr.  Schaff  's  "Oldest  Church  Manual  "is  by  a  long  way  the  ablest,  most  complete, 
and  in  every  way  valuable  edition  of  the  recently-discovered  "  Teaching  of  the  Apostles  " 
which  has  been  or  is  likely  to  be  published.  .  .  .  Dr.  S  chaff's  Prolegomena  will  hence 
forth  be  regarded  as  indispensable.  .  .  .  We  have  nothing  but  praise  for  this  most 
scholarly  and  valuable  edition  of  the  Didache.  We  ought  to  add  that  it  is  enriched  by 
a  striking  portrait  of  Bryennios  and  many  other  useful  illustrations.'  —  Baptist  Magazine. 


T.  and  T.   Claries  Publications. 


GRIMM'S     LEXICON. 

Just  published,  in  demy  4fo,  price  36s., 

GREEK-ENGLISH    LEXICON    OF    THE 
NEW    TESTAMENT, 

BEING 

(Krfmm'a  TOtllu's  Ciafcis  Nofci 


TRANSLATED,    REVISED,    AND  ENLARGED 

BY 

JOSEPH     HENEY    THAYEE,    D.D., 

BUSSEY   PROFESSOR   OF  NEW  TESTAMENT   CRITICISM  AND  INTERPRETATION   IN  THE 
DIVINITY   SCHOOL   OF   HARVARD    UNIVERSITY. 


EXTRACT  FROM.  PREFACE. 

the  close  of  the  year  1862,  the  "  Arnoldische  Buchhandlung  " 
I  in  Leipzig  published  the  First  Part  of  a  Greek-Latin  Lexicon  of  the 
New  Testament,  prepared,  upon  the  basis  of  the  "  Clavis  Novi  Testamenti 
Philologica  "  of  C.  G.  Wilke  (second  edition,  2  vols.  1851),  by  Professor  C.  L. 
WILIBALD  GRIMM  of  Jena.  In  his  Prospectus  Professor  Grimm  announced  it 
as  his  purpose  not  only  (in  accordance  with  the  improvements  in  classical  lexico 
graphy  embodied  in  the  Paris  edition  of  Stephen's  Thesaurus  and  in  the  fifth 
edition  of  Passow's  Dictionary  edited  by  Rost  and  his  coadjutors)  to  exhibit  the 
historical  growth  of  a  word's  significations,  and  accordingly  in  selecting  his 
vouchers  for  New  Testament  usage  to  show  at  what  time  and  in  what  class  of 
writers  a  given  word  became  current,  but  also  duly  to  notice  the  usage  of  the 
Septuagint  and  of  the  Old  Testament  Apocrypha,  and  especially  to  produce  a 
Lexicon  which  should  correspond  to  the  present  condition  of  textual  criticism, 
of  exegesis,  and  of  biblical  theology.  He  devoted  more  than  seven  years  to  his 
task.  The  successive  Parts  of  his  work  received,  as  they  appeared,  the  out 
spoken  commendation  of  scholars  diverging  as  widely  in  their  views  as  Hupfeld 
and  Hengstenberg ;  and  since  its  completion  in  1868  it  has  been  generally 
acknowledged  to  be  by  far  the  best  Lexicon  of  the  New  Testament  extant.' 

'  I  regard  it  as  a  work  of  the  greatest  importance.  ...  It  seems  to  me  a  work  show 
ing  the  most  patient  diligence,  and  the  most  carefully  arranged  collection  of  useful  and 
helpful  references.' — THE  BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL. 

4  The  use  of  Professor  Grimm's  book  for  years  has  convinced  me  that  it  is  not  only 
unquestionably  the  best  among  existing  New  Testament  Lexicons,  but  that,  apart  from 
all  comparisons,  it  is  a  work  of  the  highest  intrinsic  merit,  and  one  which  is  admirably 
adapted  to  initiate  a  learner  into  an  acquaintance  with  the  language  of  the  New  Testa 
ment.  It  ought  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  first  and  most  necessary  requisites  for  the 
study  of  the  New  Testament,  and  consequently  for  the  study  of  theology  in  general.' — 
Professor  EMIL  SCHURER. 

'  This  is  indeed  a  noble  volume,  and  satisfies  in  these  days  of  advancing  scholarship 
a  very  great  want.  It  is  certainly  unequalled  in  its  lexicography,  and  invaluable  in  its 
literary  perfectucss.  ...  It  should,  will,  must  make  for  itself  a  place  in  the  library  of 
all  those  students  who  want  to  be  thoroughly  furnished  for  the  work  of  understanding, 
expounding,  and  applying  the  Word  of  God.' — Evangelical  Magazine. 

^Undoubtedly  the  best  of  its  kind.  Beautifully  printed  and  well  translated,  with 
some  corrections  and  improvements  of  the  original,  it  will  be  prized  by  students  of  the 
Christian  Scriptures.' — Athenaeum. 


T.  and  T.  Clark 's  Publications. 


LOTZE'S  MICROCOSMUS. 

Just  published,  in  Two  Vols.,  8vo  (1450  pages'),  SECOND  EDITION,  price  365., 

MICROCOSMUS: 

Concerning  Man  and  his  relation  to  the   World. 
BY    HERMANN    LOTZE. 


^Translate*!  from  tfje 
BY  ELIZABETH  HAMILTON  AND  E.  E.  CONSTANCE  JONES. 

'  The  English  public  have  now  before  them  the  greatest  philosophic  work  produced 
in  Germany  by  the  generation  just  past.  The  translation  comes  at  an  opportune  time, 
for  the  circumstances  of  English  thought,  just  at  the  present  moment,  are  peculiarly 
those  with  which  Lotze  attempted  to  deal  when  he  Avrote  his  "  Microcosmus,"  a  quarter 
of  a  century  ago.  .  .  .  Few  philosophic  books  of  the  century  are  so  attractive  both  in 
style  and  m&tteT.'—Athenceum. 

'  These  are  indeed  two  masterly  volumes,  vigorous  in  intellectual  power,  and  trans 
lated  with  rare  ability.  .  .  .  This  work  will  doubtless  find  a  place  on  the  shelves  of  all 
the  foremost  thinkers  and  students  of  modern  times.'  —  Evangelical  Magazine. 

'  Lotze  is  the  ablest,  the  most  brilliant,  and  most  renowned  of  the  German  philosophers 
of  to-day.  ...  He  has  rendered  invaluable  and  splendid  service  to  Christian  thinkers, 
and  has  given  them  a  work  which  cannot  fail  to  equip  them  for  the  sturdiest  intellectual 
conflicts  and  to  ensure  their  victory.'  —  Baptist  Magazine. 

'  The  reputation  of  Lotze  both  as  a  scientist  and  a  philosopher,  no  less  than  the  merits 
of  the  work  itself,  will  not  fail  to  secure  the  attention  of  thoughtful  readers.'  —  Scotsman. 

'  The  translation  of  Lotze's  Microcosmus  is  the  most  important  of  recent  events  in  our 
philosophical  literature.  .  .  .  The  discussion  is  carried  on  on  the  basis  of  an  almost 
encyclopedic  knowledge,  and  with  the  profoundest  and  subtlest  critical  insight.  We 
know  of  no  other  work  containing  so  much  of  speculative  suggestion,  of  keen  criticism, 
and  of  sober  judgment  on  these  topics.'  —  Andover  Review. 

In  Tivo  Vols.,  8vo,  price  21s., 

NATURE    AND    THE    BIBLE: 

LECTURES  ON  THE  MOSAIC  HISTORY  OF  CREATION  IN  ITS 
RELATION  TO  NATURAL  SCIENCE. 

BY  DR.  FR.  H.  REUSCH. 

EEVISED  AND  OOEEECTED  BY  THE  AUTHOR 
TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  FOURTH  EDITION  BY  KATHLEEN  LYTTELTON. 

'  Other  champions  much  more  competent  and  learned  than  myself  might  have  been 
placed  in  the  field  ;  I  will  only  name  one  of  the  most  recent,  Dr.  Eeusch,  author  of 
"  Nature  and  the  Bible."  '—The  Eight  Hon.  W.  E.  GLADSTONE. 

'  The  work,  we  need  hardly  say,  is  of  profound  and  perennial  interest,  and  it  can 
scarcely  be  too  highly  commended  as,in  many  respects,  a  very  successful  attempt  to  settle 
one  of  the  most  perplexing  questions  of  the  day.  It  is  impossible  to  read  it  without 
obtaining  larger  views  of  theology,  and  more  accurate  opinions  respecting  its  relations 
to  science,  and  no  one  will  rise  from  its  perusal  without  feeling  a  deep  sense  of  gratitude 
to  its  author.'  —  Scottish  Review. 

'  This  graceful  and  accurate  translation  of  Dr.  Eeusch's  well-known  treatise  on  the 
identity  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  and  the  revelations  of  Nature  is  a  valuable  addition 
to  English  literature.'  —  Whitehall  Review. 

'  We  owe  to  Dr.  Eeusch,  a  Catholic  theologian,  one  of  the  most  valuable  treatises  on 
the  relation  of  Eeligion  and  Natural  Science  that  has  appeared  for  many  years.  Its  fine 
impartial  tone,  its  absolute  freedom  from  passion,  its  glow  of  sympathy  with  all  sound 
science,  and  its  liberality  of  religious  views,  are  likely  to  surprise  all  readers  who  are 
unacquainted  with  the  fact  that,  whatever  may  be  the  errors  of  the  Eomish  Church,  its 
more  enlightened  members  are,  as  a  rule,  free  from  that  idolatry  of  the  letter  of  Scrip 
ture  which  is  one  of  the  most  dangerous  faults  of  ultra-Protestantism.'—  Literary  World. 


T.  and  T.   Clark's  Publications. 


WORKS    BY    PROFESSOR    HEINRICH    EWALD. 

Just  published,  in  demy  Svo,  price  10s.  Qd., 

OLD  AND    NEW    TESTAMENT    THEOLOGY. 

BY    HEINRICH    EWALD, 

LATE  PKOFESSOE,  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  GOTTINGEN ; 

AUTHOR  OP 
'THE  HISTORY  OF  ISRAEL,'  'REVELATION,  ITS  NATURE  AND  RECORD,'  ETC. 

GTranslateti  from  tfje  (Jierman 
BY  PROFESSOR  THOMAS   GOADBY,  B.A.,  NOTTINGHAM. 

'  Leading;  principles  which  can  never  be  out  of  date  enforced  with  the  energy  of 
genius.  '—Spectator. 

'Suggestive  on  every  page,  and  therefore  essential  to  every  student  of  theology.' — 
Record. 

4  We  have  no  scruple  in  characterizing  it  as  a  noble  and  useful  work,  full  of  luminous 
and  suggestive  teaching.  ...  No  thoughtful  or  intelligent  man  can  study  it  as  it  deserves 
to  be  studied  without  receiving  from  it  both  mental  and  spiritual  stinmlus,  and  being 
confirmed  in  the  belief  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.' — Baptist  Magazine. 

In  demy  Svo,  price  10s.  Qd., 

REVELATION; 

ITS     NATURE     AND     RECORD. 

TRANSLATED  BY  REV.  PROF.  THOS.  GOADBY,  B.A. 
CONTENTS.— Introductory :     The  Doctrine  of  the  Word  of  God.— PART  I.  The 
Nature  of  the  Revelation  of  the  Word  of  God. — PART  II.  Revelation  in 
Heathenism  and  in  Israel. — PART  III.  Revelation  in  the  Bible. 

NOTE. — This  first  volume  of  Ewald's  great  and  important  work,  'Die  Lehre  der 
Bibel  von  Gott,1  is  offered  to  the  English  public  as  an  attempt  to  read  Revelation, 
Religion,  and  Scripture  in  the  light  of  universal  history  and  the  common  experience  of 
man,  and  with  constant  reference  to  all  the  great  religious  systems  of  the  world.  The 
task  is  as  bold  and  arduous  as  it  is  timely  and  necessary,  and  Ewald  was  well  fitted  to 

accomplish  it The  work  has  not  simply  a  theological,  but  a  high  and  significant 

apologetic  value,  which  those  who  are  called  upon  to  deal  with  the  various  forms 
of  modern  scepticism  will  not  be  slow  to  recognise. — Extract  from  Translator's  Preface. 

'This  volume  is  full  of  nervous  force,  eloquent  style,  and  intense  moral  earnestness. 
There  is  poetry  of  feeling  in  it  also ;  and,  whilst  it  manifests  an  original  mind,  it  is 
accompanied  by  that  spirit  of  reverence  which  ought  always  to  be  brought  to  the  study 
of  the  Holy  Scripture.  A  masterly  intellect  is  associated  in  Ewald  with  the  humility  of 
a  child.' — Evangelical  Magazine. 

'  Ewald  is  one  of  the  most  suggestive  and  helpful  writers  of  this  century.  This  is 
certainly  a  noble  book,  and  will  be  appreciated  not  less  than  his  other  and  larger 
works.  .  .  .  There  is  a  rich  poetic  glow  in  his  writing  which  gives  to  it  a  singular 
charm.' — Baptist  Magazine. 

In  demy  Svo,  price  8s.  6d. , 

SYNTAX  OF  THE  HEBREW  LANGUAGE 
OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

TRANSLATED    FROM    THE    EIGHTH    GERMAN    EDITION 
BY  JAMES  KENNEDY,  B.D. 

1  The  work  stands  unique  as  regards  a  patient  investigation  of  facts,  written  with  a 
profound  analysis  of  the  laws  of  thought,  of  which  language  is  the  reflection.  Another 
striking  feature  of  the  work  is  the  regularly  progressive  order  which  pervades  the 
whole.  The  Author  proceeds  by  a  natural  gradation  from  the  simplest  elements  to  the 
most  complex  forms.' — British  Quarterly  Review. 

'It  is  well  known  that  Ewald  was  the  first  to  exhibit  the  Hebrew  Syntax  in  a 
philosophical  form,  and  his  Grammar  is  the  most  important  of  his  numerous  works.' — 
Athenseum. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


In  One  Volume,  8yo,  640  pp.,  price  15s., 

HISTORY   OF   THE   SACRED   SCRIPTURES 
OF  THE   NEW  TESTAMENT. 

BY  PROFESSOR  E.  EEUSS,  D.D. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  FIFTH  REVISED  AND  ENLARGED  EDITION. 

CONTENTS.— Introduction.  BOOK  I.— History  of  the  Origin  of  the  New  Testa 
ment  Writings — History  of  the  Literature.  BOOK  II. — History  of  the 
Collection  of  the  New  Testament  Writings— History  of  the  Canon.  BOOK 
III. — History  of  the  Preservation  of  the  New  Testament  Writings— History 
of  the  Text.  BOOK  IV. — History  of  the  Circulation  of  the  New  Testament 
Writings — History  of  the  Versions.  BOOK  V. — History  of  the  Theological 
Use  of  the  New  Testament  Writings — History  of  Exegesis. 

'  It  would  be  hard  to  name  any  single  volume  which  contains  so  much  that  is  helpful 
to  the  student  of  the  New  Testament.  .  .  .  Considering  that  so  much  ground  is  covered, 
the  fulness  and  accuracy  of  the  information  given  are  remarkable.  Professor  Keuss's 
work  is  not  that  of  a  compiler,  but  of  an  original  thinker,  who  throughout  this  encyclo- 
pasdic  volume  depends  much  more  on  his  own  research  than  on  the  labours  of  his 
predecessors.  .  .  .  The  translation  is  thoroughly  well  done,  accurate,  and  full  of  life.' — 
Expositor. 

'  One  of  the  most  valuable  volumes  of  Messrs.  Clark's  valuable  publications.  ...  Its 
usefulness  is  attested  by  undiminished  vitality.  .  .  .  His  method  is  admirable,  and  he 
unites  German  exhaustiveness  with  French  lucidity  and  brilliancy  of  expression.  .  .  . 
The  sketch  of  the  great  exegetic  epochs,  their  chief  characteristics,  and  the  critical 
estimates  of  the  most  eminent  writers,  is  given  by  the  author  with  a  compression  and 
a  mastery  that  have  never  been  surpassed.' — Archdeacon  FARRAR. 

In  demy  8uo,  price  10s.  6(/., 

THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  PROPHECY  OF  THE 
CONSUMMATION  OF  GOD'S  KINGDOM. 

Traced  in  its  Historical  Development 
BY    C.    VON    OKELLI, 

PROFESSOR  OF  THEOLOGY,  BASEL. 

TRANSLATED  BY  REV.  J.  S.  BANKS,  Headingley  College,  Leeds. 

'A  valuable  contribution  to  the  methodology  of  Scripture  interpretation.' — British 
Quarterly  Review. 

'  Cannot  fail  to  be  regarded  as  a  standard  work  upon  the  subject  of  Old  Testament 
prophecy.' — Sword  and  Trowel. 

In  crown  8vo,  price  3s.  6J., 

THE    RELIGIOUS    HISTORY    OF    ISRAEL. 

A  Discussion  of  the  Chief  Problems  in  Old  Testament  History, 

as  opposed  to  the  Development  Theorists. 
BY  DR.  FRIEDRICH  EDUARD  KONIG, 

THE   UNIVERSITY,    LEIPZIG. 

TRANSLATED  BY  REV.  ALEXANDER  J.  CAMPBELL,  M.A. 

'  An  admirable  little  volume.  ...  By  sincere  and  earnest-minded  students  it  will  be 
cordially  welcomed.'  Freeman. — '  Every  page  of  the  book  deserves  study.'  Church  Bells. 

In   crown   8wo,  price  5s.    6e?., 

CREATION; 

OR,  THE  BIBLICAL  COSMOGONY  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  MODERN  SCIENCE. 

WITH  ILLUSTRATIONS. 
BY  PROFESSOR  ARNOLD  GUYOT,  LL.D. 

'  Written  with  much  knowledge  and  tact,  .  .  .  suggestive  and  stimulating.' — British 
Quarterly  Review. 

'  The  issue  of  this  book  is  a  fitting  conclusion  to  a  beautiful  career.  .  .  .  This,  his  last 
book,  coming  from  the  author's  deathbed,  will  serve  two  causes  ;  it  will  aid  science  by 
showing  that  it  is  a  friend  of  the  faith,  and  it  will  aid  Christianity  by  showing  that  it 
need  not  fear  the  test  of  the  latest  scientific  research.' — Presbyterian  Review. 


T.  and  T.  Claris  Publications. 


Now  complete,  in  Four  Volumes,  imperial  8vo,  price  1 2s.  Qd.  each, 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

WITH    ILLUSTRATIONS   AND    MAPS. 

EDITED  BY  PHILIP   SCHAFF,   D.D.,   LL.D. 

CONTRIBUTORS. 

The  Very  Eev.  Dean  HOWSON;  The  Very  Kev.  Dean  PLUMPTRE;  Principal  DAVID 
BROWN,  D.D.;  J.  RAWSON  LUMBY.  D.D. ;  W.  MILLIGAN,  D.D.;  W.  F.  MOULTON, 
D.D.;  Eev.  Canon  SPENCE  ;  MARCUS  DODS,  D.D. ;  J.  OSWALD  DYKES,  D.D. ;  JOSEPH 
ANGUS,  D.D. ;  PATON  J.  GLOAG,  D.D. ;  S.  D.  F.  SALMOND,  D.D. ;  WILLIAM  B.  POPE, 
D.D. ;  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D.;  MATTHEW  B.  EIDDLE,  D.D. 

Maps  and  Plans — Professor  ARNOLD  GUYOT. 
Illustrations— W.  M.  THOMSON,  D.D.,  Author  of  '  The  Land  and  the  Book.' 


Volume  I.  Volume  II. 

THE  SYNOPTICAL  GOSPELS.  ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL,  and 

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

Volume  III.  Volume  IV. 

ROMANS  TO  PHILEMON.  HEBREWS  TO  REVELATION. 


'A  useful,  valuable,  and  instructive  commentary.  The  interpretation  is  set  forth  with 
clearness  and  cogency,  and  in  a  manner  calculated  to  commend  the  volumes  to  the 
thoughtful  reader.  The  book  is  beautifully  got  up,  and  reflects  great  credit  on  the 
publishers  as  well  as  the  writers.' — The  Bishop  of  Gloucester. 

'  I  have  looked  into  this  volume,  and  read  several  of  the  notes  on  crucial  passages. 
They  seem  to  me  very  well  done,  with  great  fairness,  and  with  evident  knowledge  of 
the  controversies  concerning  them.  The  illustrations  are  very  good.  I  cannot  doubt 
that  the  book  will  prove  very  valuable.' — The  Bishop  of  Winchester. 

'We  have  already  spoken  of  this  commentary  with  warm  praise,  and  we  can  certainly 
assert  that  the  enterprise  has  now  been  brought  to  a  close  with  really  admirable  work.' 
— English  Churchman. 

4  We  congratulate  Dr.  S  chaff  on  the  completion  of  this  useful  work,  which  we  are  now 
able  to  commend,  in  its  complete  form,  to  English  readers  of  the  Scriptures.  ...  It  will 
be  seen  that  we  have  a  high  opinion  of  this  commentary,  of  the  present  volume,  and  also 
of  the  whole  work.  In  this  last  respect  it  is  perhaps  of  more  uniform  excellence  than 
any  of  its  rivals,  and  in  beauty  of  appearance  it  excels  them  all.' — Church  Bells. 

'External  beauty  and  intrinsic  worth  combine  in  the  work  here  completed.  Good 
paper,  good  type,  good  illustrations,  good  binding,  please  the  eye,  as  accuracy  and 
thoroughness  in  matter  of  treatment  satisfy  the  judgment.  Everywhere  the  workman 
ship  is  careful,  solid,  harmonious.' — Methodist  Recorder. 

'  There  are  few  better  commentaries  having  a  similar  scope  and  object;  indeed,  within 
the  same  limits,  we  do  not  know  of  one  so  good  upon  the  whole  of  the  New  Testament.' 
— Literary  World. 

'  We  predict  that  this  work  will  take  its  place  among  the  most  popular  of  the  century. 
.  .  .  The  publishers  have  spared  no  pains  to  secure  volumes  that  shall  be  worthy  of  the 
theme,  and  of  the  scholarship  of  the  age.' — Freeman. 

Just  published^  in  crown  8vo,  price  2s.  6c?., 

THE    IGNATIAN    EPISTLES 

ENTIRELY    SPURIOUS. 

A  Reply  to  the  Right  Rev.  Dr.  Lightfoot,  Bishop  of  Durham. 
BY  W.  D.  KILLEN,  D.D., 

PRINCIPAL   OF   THE   PRESBYTERIAN   THEOLOGICAL   FACULTY,    IRELAND. 

'  Strictly  logical,  dispassionate,  and  courteous,  and  altogether  a  very  fine  piece  of 
criticism.' — Literary  World. 

BY    THE    SAME    AUTHOR. 

In  demy  8ro,  price  9,s\, 

THE    OLD    CATHOLIC    CHURCH. 


T.  and  T.  Claris  Publications. 


In  demy  8vo,  Second  Edition,  price  10s.  6d., 

THE     HUMILIATION     OF     CHRIST 

IN  ITS  PHYSICAL,  ETHICAL,  AND  OFFICIAL  ASPECTS. 
BY    A.    B.    BRUCE,    D.D., 

PROFESSOR  OF  DIVINITY,  FREE  CHURCH  COLLEGE,  GLASGOW. 

1  Dr.  Bruce's  style  is  uniformly  clear  and  vigorous,  and  this  book  of  his,  as  a  whole, 
has  the  rare  advantage  of  being  at  once  stimulating  and  satisfying  to  the  mind  in  a  high 
degree.' — British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

'  This  work  stands  forth  at  once  as  an  original,  thoughtful,  thorough  piece  of  work  in 
the  branch  of  scientific  theology,  such  as  we  do  not  often  meet  in  our  language.  ...  It 
is  really  a  work  of  exceptional  value ;  and  no  one  can  read  it  without  perceptible  gain  in 
theological  knowledge.' — English  Churchman. 

'  We  have  not  for  a  long  time  met  with  a  work  so  fresh  and  suggestive  as  this  of  Pro 
fessor  Bruce.  .  .  .  We  do  not  know  where  to  look  at  our  English  Universities  for  a 
treatise  so  calm,  logical,  and  scholarly.' — English  Independent. 


By  the  same  Author. 

In  demy  8vo,  Third  Edition,  price  10s.  6d., 

THE    TRAINING    OF    THE    TWELVE; 

OR, 

EXPOSITION  OF  PASSAGES  IN  THE  GOSPELS 

EXHIBITING  THE  TWELVE  DISCIPLES  OF  JESUS  UNDER 

DISCIPLINE  FOR  THE  APOSTLESHIP. 

'  Here  we  have  a  really  great  book  on  an  important,  large,  and  attractive  subject — a 
book  full  of  loving,  wholesome,  profound  thoughts  about  the  fundamentals  of  Christian 
faith  and  practice.' — British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

'  It  is  some  five  or  six  years  since  this  work  first  made  its  appearance,  and  now  that  a 
second  edition  has  been  called  for,  the  Author  has  taken  the  opportunity  to  make  some 
alterations  which  are  likely  to  render  it  still  more  acceptable.  Substantially,  however, 
the  book  remains  the  same,  and  the  hearty  commendation  with  which  we  noted  its  first 
issue  applies  to  it  at  least  as  much  now. ' — Rock. 

'The  value,  the  beauty  of  this  volume  is  that  it  is  a  unique  contribution  to, because  a 
loving  and  cultured  study  of,  the  life  of  Christ,  in  the  relation  of  the  Master  of  the 
Twelve.' — Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 

In  demy  8vo,  price  10s.  6d., 

DELIVERY  AND    DEVELOPMENT   OF 
CHRISTIAN   DOCTRINE. 

BY    ROBERT    RAINY,    D.D., 

PRINCIPAL,  AND  PROFESSOR  OF  DIVINITY  AND  CHURCH  HISTORY,  NEW  COLLEGE,  EDIN. 

'  We  gladly  acknowledge  the  high  excellence  and  the  extensive  learning  which  these 
lectures  display.  They  are  able  to  the  last  degree,  and  the  author  has,  in  an  unusual 
measure,  the  power  of  acute  and  brilliant  generalization.' — Literary  Churchman. 

'  It  is  a  rich  and  nutritious  book  throughout,  and  in  temper  and  spirit  beyond  all 
praise.' — British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

'  The  subject  is  treated  with  a  comprehensive  grasp,  keen  logical  power,  clear  analysis 
and  learning,  and  in  devout  spirit.' — Evangelical  Magazine. 


T.  and  T.  Clark '  s  Publications. 


BISHOP      MARTENSEW'S      WORKS. 

'  The  greatest  Scandinavian,  perhaps  the  greatest  Lutheran,  divine  of  our  century. 
The  famous  "  Dogmatics,"  the  eloquent  and  varied  pages  of  which  contain  intellectual  food 
for  the  laity  no  less  than  for  the  clergy.  .  .  .  His  u Christian  Dogmatics"  has  exercised 
as  wide  an  influence  on  Protestant  thought  as  any  volume  of  our  century.' — Expositor. 

In  Three  Volumes,  Svo,  price  10s.  Gd.  each, 

CHRISTIAN     ETHICS. 

Volume  I.  GENERAL  ETHICS.— II.  INDIVIDUAL  ETHICS.— III.  SOCIAL  ETHICS. 

'  As  man  is  a  member  of  two  societies,  a  temporal  and  a  spiritual,  it  is  clear  that  his 
ethical  development  only  can  go  on  when  these  two  are  treated  side  by  side.  _  This 
Bishop  Martensen  has  done  with  rare  skill.  We  do  not  know  where  the  conflicting 
claims  of  Church  and  State  are  more  equitably  adjusted.  .  .  .  We  can  read  these 
volumes  through  with  unflagging  interest.' — Literary  World. 

4  Dr.  Martensen's  work  on  Christian  Dogmatics  reveals  the  strength  of  thought  as  well 
as  the  fine  literary  grace  of  its  author.  .  .  .  His  chief  ethical  writings  comprise  a  system 
of  Chi-istian  Ethics,  general  and  special,  in  three  volumes.  Each  of  these  volumes  has 
great  and  singular  excellence,  and  it  might  be  generally  felt  that  in  them  the  author  has 
surpassed  his  own  work  on  "  Christian  Dogmatics." ' — Kev.  Principal  CAIKNS. 

In  One  Volume,  Svo,  price  10s.  6(1., 

CHRISTIAN    DOGMATICS. 

'  To  students  this  volume  will  be  helpful  and  welcome.' — Freeman. 

'  We  feel  much  indebted  to  Messrs.  Clark  for  their  introduction  of  this  important 
compendium  of  orthodox  theology  from  the  pen  of  the  learned  Danish  Bishop.  .  .  . 
Every  reader  must  rise  from  its  perusal  stronger,  calmer,  and  more  hopeful,  not  only 
for  the  fortunes  of  Christianity,  but  of  dogmatic  theology.' — Quarterly  Review. 

'  Such  a  book  is  a  library  in  itself,  and  a  monument  of  pious  labour  in  the  cause  of 
true  religion. ' — Irish  Ecclesiastical  Gazette. 

Just  published,  in  demy  Svo,  price  9s., 

A   POPULAE   INTRODUCTION   TO   THE 

HISTORY    OF    CHRISTIAN    DOCTRINE. 

BY  KEY.  T.  G.  CRIPPEN. 

'A  clear  and  intelligible  account  of  the  course  of  religions  from  the  earliest  times  to 
our  own ;  .  .  .  .  indeed,  the  student  who  masters  this  volume  only  will  have  no 
mere  acquaintance  with  this  department  of  theological  work.' — Freeman. 

'  Mr.  Crippen  is  studiously,  on  some  points  startlingly,  and  enviably  fair.  His  book 
shows  wide  reading  and  honest  thinking.  It  abounds  in  acute  distinctions ;  its  state 
ment  of  varying  views  of  doctrine  is  sometimes  very  happy,  and  it  sufficiently  illustrates 
the  pathology  of  theological  speculation.' — Wesleyan  Methodist  Magazine. 

In  Three  Volumes,  8vo,  price  31s.  Gd., 

A    HISTORY    OF    CHRISTIAN    DOCTRINES. 

BY  THE  LATE  DR.  K.  R.  HAGENBACH. 

SEransIateti  from  tjje  jFiftjj  antr  East  German  (Stutfott-  fcoitfj 

$tooition0  from  otijer  Sources.. 
WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY  THE  VERY  REV.  DEAN  PLUMPTRE. 

'  This  scholarly  and  elaborate  history.'— Dickinson's  Theological  Quarterly. 

'  There  is  no  work  which  deals  with  this  subject  in  a  manner  so  scientific  and  so 
thorough  as  Hagenbach's.  Moreover,  there  is  no  edition  of  this  work,  either  in  German 
or  in  English,  which  approaches  the  present  as  to  completeness  and  accuracy.' — Church 
Bells. 

'  No  work  will  be  more  welcome  or  useful  than  the  present  one.  We  have  a  whole 
system  of  theology  from  the  hand  of  the  greatest  living  theologian  of  Germany.' — 
Methodist  Recorder. 


A  * 

c  U  .4 


K  9 

o  6 
FOREIGN    THEOLOGICAL    LIBRARY. 


The  following  are  the  Works  from  which  a  selection  of  EIGHT  VOLUMES  for  £2,  2s.  (or  more  at  the 
same  ratio)  may  be  made  (Non-subscription  Price  within  brackets) : — 

Alexander— Commentary  on  Isaiah.    Two  Vols.    (17s.) 

Auberlen— The  Divine  Revelation.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Baumgarten— The  History  of  the  Church  in  the  Apostolic  Age.    Three  Vols.    (27s.) 

Bleek— Introduction  to  the  New  Testament.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Christlieb— Modern  Doubt  and  Christian  Belief.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Delitzsch— Commentary  on  Job.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Commentary  on  the  Psalms.    Three  Vols.    (31s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Commentary  on  Song  of  Solomon  and  Ecclesiastes.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  the  Prophecies  of  Isaiah.    Two  Vols.    (f 


(21s.) 

Commentary  on  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 
A  System  of  Biblical  Psychology.    One  Vol.    (12s.) 


Dollinger— Hippolytus  and  Callistus;  or,  The  Church  of  Rome  in  the  First  Half  of  the  Third 

Century.     One  Vol.     (7s.  6d.) 
Dorner— A  System  of  Christian  Doctrine.    Four  Vols.    (42s.) 

History  of  the  Development  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Person  of  Christ.    Five  Vols.    (52s.  6d.) 

Ebrard— Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  St.  John.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

The  Gospel  History.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Gebhardt— Doctrine  of  the  Apocalypse.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 
Gerlach— Commentary  on  the  Pentateuch.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 
Gieseler— Compendium  of  Ecclesiastical  History.     Four  Vols.    (42s.) 
Godet— Commentary  on  St.  Luke's  Gospel.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Commentary  on  St.  John's  Gospel.    Three  Vols.    (31s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Goebel— On  the  Parables.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Hagenbach— History  of  the  Reformation.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

History  of  Christian  Doctrines.    Three  Vols.    (31s.  6d.) 

Harless— A  System  of  Christian  Ethics.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 
Haupt— Commentary  on  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  John.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 
Havernick— General  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 
Hengstenberg— Christology  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  a  Commentary  on  the  Messianic  Predictions. 
Four  Vols.     (42s.) 

Commentary  on  the  Psalms.    Three  Vols.    (33s.) 

On  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.    Etc.  etc.    One  Vol.    (9s.) 

Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Commentary  on  Ezekiel.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Dissertations  on  the  Genuineness  of  Daniel,  etc.    One  Vol.    (12s.) 

The  Kingdom  of  God  under  the  Old  Covenant.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Keil — Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Commentary  on  the  Pentateuch.    Three  Vols.    (31s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  Joshua,  Judges,  and  Ruth.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Samuel.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Kings.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Chronicles.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  Esther.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  Jeremiah  and  Lamentations.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Commentary  on  Ezekiel.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Daniel.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

—  Commentary  on  the  Minor  Prophets.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Kurtz— History  of  the  Old  Covenant ;  or,  Old  Testament  Dispensation.    Three  Vols.    (31s.  6d.) 
Lange— Commentary  on  the  Gospels  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark.    Three  Vols.    (31s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke.    Two  Vols.    (18s.) 

Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Luthardt— Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.    Three  Vols.    (31s.  6d.) 
Macdonald — Introduction  to  the  Pentateuch.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 
Martensen— Christian  Dogmatics.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Christian  Ethics.    General— Social— Individual.    Three  Vols.    (31s.  6d.) 

Muller— The  Christian  Doctrine  of  Sin.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Murphy— Commentary  on  the  Psalms.     To  count  as  Two  Volumes.    One  Vol.    (12s.) 
Neander— General  History  of  the  Christian  Religion  and  Church.    Nine  Vols.    (67s.  6d.) 
Oehler— Biblical  Theology  of  the  Old  Testament.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 
Olshausen — Commentary  on  the  Gospels  and  Acts.    Four  Vols.    (42s.) 

Commentary  on  Epistle  to  the  Romans.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Commentary  on  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians.    One  Vol.    (9s.) 

—  Commentary  on  Philippians,  Titus,  and  1st  Timothy.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 
Philippi— Commentary  on  Epistle  to  Romans.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Ritter— Comparative  Geography  of  Palestine.    Four  Vols.    (26s.) 

Shedd— History  of  Christian  Doctrine.    Two  Vols.    (21s.) 

Steinmeyer — History  of  the  Passion  and  Resurrection  of  our  Lord.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

The  Miracles  of  our  Lord  in  relation  to  Modern  Criticism.    One  Vol.    (7s.  6d.) 

Stier— The  Words  of  the  Lord  Jesus.    Eight  Vols.    (84s.) 

The  Words  of  the  Risen  Saviour,  and  Commentary  on  Epistle  of  St.  James.  One  Vol.  (10s.  6d, 

The  Words  of  the  Apostles  Expounded.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 

Tholuck— Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.  One  Vol.  (9s.) 
Ullmann— Reformers  before  the  Reformation.  Two  Vols.  (21s.) 
Weiss— Biblical  Theology  of  the  New  Testament.  Two  Vols.  (21s.) 

The  Life  of  Christ.    Vols.  I.  and  II.    (10s.  6d.  each.) 

Winer— Collection  of  the  Confessions  of  Christendom.    One  Vol.    (10s.  6d.) 


