Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



-B^v « 32 S.&C/'j 



HARVARD COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 




THE BEQUEST OF 
EVERT JANSEN WENDELL 

ICLASS OF 1682) 

OF NEW YORK 



/ / i 

A SKETCH ' 



/ 



4>F TiBB 



LIFE AND LABOBS 



or 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 



RRV. J. C. Btl^I^K, B.A., 

4attior of " A CiiUto rrarar," •« Lhrioff or 3I«<** "WIiMt and Chaff," " The Crm,*' ftc. 



NEW-YORK: 

▲ VflON D. F RANDOLPH, 68S BR^OADWAY 

1854. 



^BJAi^i— ^MM^<A^^^^M-.ry^^^**w»«— *■■ »» - ■ I* "' ■ * — t-^^mtmtiam 



' ^-> V7 >^> r- 



I 3 . (^C^ ]J 



fRUM 

1H£ BEQUEST OF 

KVKRT lANSKN WCNOftU 

\9\9 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 



There are some men in the pages of history, whose 
greatness no person of common sense thinks of dis- 
puting. They tower above the herd of mankind, like 
the Pyramids, the Parthenon, and the Colosseum, 
among buildings. Such men were Luther and Augus- 
tine, Gustavus Adolphus and George Washington, Co- 
lumbus and Sir Isaac Newton. He who questions their 
greatness must be content to be thought very ignorant, 
very prejudiced, or very eccentric. Public opinion has 
come to a conclusion about them — ^they were great men. 

But there are also great men whose reputation lies 
buried under a heap of contemporary ill-will and mis- 
representation. The world does not appreciate them, 
because the world does not know their real worth. Their 
characters have come down to us through poisoned chan- 
nels. Their portraits have been drawn by the ill-natured 
hand of enemies. Their faults have been Exaggerated. 
Their excellences have been maliciously kept back and 
suppressed. Like the famous sculptures of Nineveh, 
they need the hand of some literary Layard to clear 
away the rubbish that has accumulated round their 
names, and show them to the world in their fair propor- 
tions. Such men were Vigilantius and Wickliffe. Such 



4 GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

men were Oliver Cromwell and many of the Puritans. 
And such a man was George Whitefield. 

There are few men whose characters have suffered so 
much from ignorance and misrepresentation of the truth 
as Whitefield's. 

That he was a famous Methodist, and ally of John 
Wesley, in the last century; that he was much run 
after by ignorant people, for his preaching ; that many 
thought him an enthusiast and fanatic ; all this is about 
as much as most Englishmen know. 

But that he was one of the principal champions of 
evangelical religion in the eighteenth centuiy in our own 
country; that he was one of the most powerful and 
eflfective preachers that ever lived ; that he was a man 
of extraordinary singleness of eye, and devotedness to 
the interests of true religion ; that he was a regularly 
ordained clergyman of the Church of England, and 
would always have worked in. the Church, if the Church 
had not, most unwisely, shut him out ; all these are things, 
of which few people seem aware. And yet, after calm 
examination of his life and writings, I am satisfied this 
is the true account that ought to be given of George 
Whitefield. 

My chief desire is to assist in forming a just estimate 
of Whitefield's worth. I wish to lend a helping hand 
towards raising his name from the undeservedly low place 
which is commonly assigned to it. I wish to place him 
before your eyes as a noble specimen of what the grace 
of God can enable one man to do. I want you to trea- 
sure up his name in your memories, as one of the bright- 
est in that company of departed saints who were, in 
their day, patterns of good works, and of whom th<4 
world was not worthy. 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 6 

I propose, therefore, without further preface, to give 
you a hasty sketch of Whitefield's times, Whitefield's 
life, Whitefield's religion, Whitefield's preaching, and 
Whitefield's actual work on earth, 

1. The story of Whitefield's times is one that should 
often be told. Without it, no body is qualified to form 
an opinion either as to the man or his acts. Conduct 
that in one kind of times may seem rash, extravagant, 
and indiscreet, in another may be wise, prudent, and 
even absolutely necessary. In forming your opinion of 
the comparative merits of Christian men, never forget 
the old rule : " Distinguish between times." Place your- 
self in each man's position. Do not judge what was a 
right course of action in other times, by what seems a 
right course of action in your own. 

Now, the times when Whitefield lived were, unques- 
tionably, the worst times that have ever been known in 
this country, since the Protestant Reformation. There 
never was a greater mistake than to talk of " the good 
old times." The times of the eighteenth century, at any 
rate, were " bad old times," unmistakably. Whitefield 
was bom in 1714. He died in 17 70. It is not saying 
too much to assert, that this was precisely the darkest 
age that England has passed through in the last three 
hundred years. Any thing more deplorable than the 
condition of the country, as to religion, morality, and 
high principle, from 1700 to about the era of the French 
Revolution, it is very diflScult to conceive. 

The state of religion in the Established Church can 
only be compared to that of a frozen or palsied carcass. 
There were the time-honored formularies which the wis- 
dom of the Reformers had provided. There were the 



6 GEORGE WHITEflBLD. 

services and lessons from Scripture, just in the same order 
as we have them now. But, as to preaching the gospel 
in the Established Church, there was almost none. The 
distinguishing doctrines of Christianity — the atonement, 
the work and office of Christ and the Spirit — were com- 
paratively lost sight of. The vast majority of sermons were 
miserable moral essays, utterly devoid of any thing cal- 
culated to awaken, convert, save, or sanctify souls. The 
curse of black Bartholomew-day seemed to rest upon our 
Church. For at least a century after casting out two 
thousand of the best ministers in England, our Establish- 
ment never prospered. 

There were some learned and conscientious bishops at 
this era, beyond question. Such men were Seeker, and 
Gibsoti, and Lowth, and Warburton, and Butler, and 
Home. But even the best of them sadly misunderstood 
the requirements of the day they lived in. They spent 
their strength in writing apologies for Christianity, and 
contending against infidels. They could not see that, 
without the direct preaching of the essential doctrines 
of Christ's gospel, their labors were all in vain. And, as 
to the majority of the bishops, they were potent for nega- 
tive evil, but impotent for positive good ; giants at stopping 
what they thought disorder, but infants at devising any 
thing to promote real order ; mighty to repress over- 
zealous attempts at evangelization, but weak to put in 
action any remedy for the evils of the age ; eagle-eyed 
at detecting any imhappy wight who trod on the toes of 
a rubric or canon, but blind as bats to the flood of indo- 
lence and false doctrine with which their dioceses were 
every where deluged. 

That there were many well-read, respectable and 
honorable men among the parochial clergy at this period, 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 7 

it would be wrong to deny. But few, it is to be feared, 
out of the whole number, preached Christ crucified in sim- 
plicity and sincerity. Many whose lives were decent and 
moral, were notoriously Arians, if not Socinians. Many 
were totally engrossed in secular pursuits; they neither did 
good themselves, nor liked any one else to do it for them. 
They hunted; they shot; they drank; they swore; they 
fiddled ; they farmed ; they toasted Church and King, 
and thought little or nothing about saving souls. And 
as for the man who dared to preach the doctrine of the 
Bible, the Articles, and the Homilies, he was sure to be 
set down as an enthusiast and fanatic. 

The state of religion among the Dissenters was only 
a few degrees better than the state of the Church. The 
toleration which they enjoyed from William the Third's 
ime was certainly productive of a very bad spiritual 
ffect on them as a body. As soon as they ceased to be 
♦ ersecuted, they appear to have gone to sleep. The 
Daptist and Independent could still point to Gill, and 
Guyse, and Doddridge, and Watts, and a few more like- 
minded men. But the English Presbyterians were fast 
apsing into Socinianism. And as to the great majority of 
fionconformists, it is vain to deny that they were very dif- 
ferent men from Baxter, and Flavel, and Gumall, and 
Traill. A generation of preachers arose who were very 
orthodox, but painfully cold ; very conscientious, but very 
wanting in spirituality ; very constant in their objections 
k) the Established Church, but very careless about spread- 
uig vita! Christianity. 

I deeply feel the diflSculty of conveying a correct im- 
pression of the times when Whitefield lived. I dislike 
over-statement as much as any one, but I am thoroughly 
persuaded it is not easy to make an over-fitatement on this 
branch of my subject. 



8 GfiORGK WHITlTFrELfl. 

These were the times when the highest personages in 
the realm lived openly in ways which were flatly contrary 
to the law of God, and no man rebuked them. No courts, 
I suppose, can be imagined more diametrically unlike 
than. the, courts of George I. and George 11., and the 
court of Queen Victoria. 

These were the times when profligacy and irreligion 
were reptftable and respectable things. Judging from 
the description we have of men and manners in those 
days, a gentleman might have been defined as a creature 
who got drunk, gambled, swore, fought duels, and broke 
the seventh commandment incessantly. And for all this, 
no one thought the worse of him. 

These were the days when the men whom kings de- 
lighted to honor were Bolingbroke, Chesterfield, Walpole, 
and Newcastle. To be an infidel or a skeptic, to obtain 
power by intrigue, and to retain power by the grossest 
and most notorious bribery, were considered no disquali- 
fications at this era. Such was the utter want of religion, 
morality, and high principle in the land, that men such 
as these were not only tolerated, but praised. 

These were the days when Hume, the historian, put 
forth his work, became famous, and got a pension. He 
was notoriously an infidel. These were the days when 
Sterne and Swift wrote their clever, but most indecent 
productions. Both were clergymen, and high in the 
Church ; but the public saw no harm. These were the 
daya when Fielding and SmoUet were the popular au- 
thors, and the literary taste of high and low was suited 
by Roderick Random, Peregrine Pickle, Joseph Andrews, 
and Tom Jones. 

These were the days when Knox says, in his history 
of Christian Philosophy : " Some of the most learned 



6E0RGB WHITEFIELD. 9 

men — the most voluminous writers on theological sub- 
jects — were totally ignorant of Christianity, They were 
ingenious heathen philosophers, assuming the name of 
Christians, and forcibly paganizing Christianity, for the 
sake of pleasing the world." These were the days whea 
Archbishop Drummond (1760) could talk of "intricate 
and senseless questions, about the influence of the Spirit 
the power of grace, predestination, imputed righteous 
uess, justification without works, and other opinions which 
have from the beginning perplexed and perverted, debased 
defiled, and wounded Christianity." These were the dayi 
when Bishop Warburton considered the teaching oflSc* 
of the Holy Ghost to be completed in the Holy Scrip- 
tures, and that his sanctifying and comforting offices are 
chiefly confined to charity. Such were the leading 
ministers. What must the mass of teachers have been ! 
Such were the priests of Whitefield's time. What must 
have been the people ! 

These were the days when there was an utter dearth 
of sound theological writing. The doctrines of the Re- 
formers were trampled under foot by men who sat in 
their chairs. The bread of the Church was eaten by 
men who flatly contradicted her Articles. The appetite 
of rehgious people was satisfied with ** Tillotson's Ser- 
mons," and the " Whole Duty of Man." A pension of 
two hundred pounds a year was actually given to Blair, 
of Edinburgh, for writing his most unchristian sermons. 
Ask any theological bookseller, and he will tell you that, 
generally speaking, no divinity is so worthless as that of 
t,he eighteenth century. 

In fine, these were the days when there was no Society 
for promoting the increase of true religion, but the 
Christian Kno^^^ledge Society, and the Society for the 



10 GBOaOB WHITBFIELD. 

Propagation of the Gospel. And even their work was 
comparatively trifling. Nothing was done for the Jew. 
Nothing was done for the heathen. Nothing, almost, 
was done for the colonies. Nothing was done for the 
destitute parts of our own country. Nothing was done 
for education. The Church slept. The dissenters slept 
The pulpit slept. The religious press slept. The gate* 
were left wide open. The walls were left unguarded* 
Infidelity stalked in. The Devil sowed tares broadcast^ 
and walked to and fro. The gentry gloried in their 
shame, and no man pointed out their wickedness. The 
people sinned with a high hand, and no man taught them 
better. Ignorance, profligacy, irrehgion, and supersti- 
tion, were to be seen everv where. Such were the times 
when Whitefield was raised up. 

I know that this is a dreadful picture. I marvel God 
did not sweep away the Church altogether. But I be- 
lieve that the picture is not one whit too highly colored. 
It is painful to expose such a state of things. But, for 
Whitefield's sake, the truth ought to be known. Justice 
has not been done to him, because the condition of the 
times he lived in is not considered. The times he lived 
iri were extraordinary times, and required extraordinary 
means to be used. And whatever quiet men, sitting by 
'their fireside ' in our day, may say to the contrary, I am 
^^ktisfied that ^hitefield was i^6t the man for his times. 

2. The story of Whitefield's life,w^hich forpas the next 
part of 6ur subject, is one that is soon tol^. The facts 
and incidents of that life are few and simple, and I ^bia)} 
not dwell upon them ai any length. 

^ Whit^e)l4 W^^ ^prp i^ '}^H' P^® V^^^J P^^^r &^^ 
men, he wa§ gi r^iy ti»i»W Wg?^. P||s ^^t kdJ^ 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 11 

mother kept the Bell Inn, in the city of Gloucester. 
Whether there is such an inn now, I do not know. 
But, judging from Whitefield's account of his circum- 
stances, it must formerly have heen a very small concern. 

"Whitefield's early life seems io have been any thing 
but religious, though he had occasional fits of devout 
feeling. He speaks of himself as having been addicted 
to lying, filthy talking, and foolish jesting. He confesses 
that he was a Sabbath-breaker, a theatre-goer, a card- 
player, and a romance-reader. All this went on till he 
was twelve or fifteen years old. 

At the age of twelve he was placed at a grammar- 
school in Gloucester. Little is known of his progress 
there, excepting the curious fact that even then he was 
remarkable for his good elocution and memory, and was 
selected to make speeches before the corporation, at their 
annual visitations. 

At the age of fifteen he appears to have become tired 
of Latin and Greek, and to have given up all hopes of 
ever becoming more than a tradesman. He ceased to 
take lessons in any thing but writing. He began to 
assist his mother in the public-house that she kept. "At 
length," he says, " I put on my blue apron, washed mops, 
cleaned rooms, and, in one word, became a professed 
common drawer for nigh a year and a half." 

But God, who ordereth all things in heaven and earth, 
and called David from keeping sheep to be a king, had 
provided some better thing for Whitefield than the oflSce 
of a pot-boy. Family disagreements interfered vnth his 
prospects at the Bell Inn. An old schoolfellow stirred 
up again within him the desire of going to the Univer- 
sity. And at length, after several providential circum- 
stances had smoothed the way, he was launched, at tho 



12 GEORGE WHITEFIFLD. 

age of eighteen, at Oxford, in a position at thai time 
much more humbling than it is now, as a servitor at 
Pembroke College. 

Whitefield's Oxford career se^ms to have been the 
turning-point in his life. According to his own journal, 
he had not been without religious convictions for two or 
three years before he went to Oxford. From the time 
of his entering Pembroke College, these convictions 
rapidly ripened into decided Christianity. He becanie 
marked for his attendance on all means of grace within 
his reach. He spent his leisure time in visiting the city 
piisons and doing good. He formed an acquaintance 
with the famous John Wesley and his brother Charles, 
which gave a color to the whole of his subsequent life. 
At one time he seems to have had a narrow escape from 
becoming a semi-papist, an ascetic, or a mystic. From 
this he seems to have been delivered; partly by the advice 
of wiser and more experienced Christians, and partly by 
reading such books as ScougaFs " Life of God in the 
Soul of Man," Law's* Serious Call," Baxter's "Call to 
the Unconverted," and Alleine's "Alarm to Unconverted 
Sinners." At length, in 1736, at the early age of twen- 
ty-two, ho was ordained deacon by Bishop Benson, of 
Gloucester, and began to run that ministerial race in 
which he never drew breath till he was laid in the grave. 

His first sermon was preached in St. Mary-le-Crypt, 
Gloucester. It was said U) have driven fifteen persons 
mad. Bishop Benson remarked, that he only hoped the 
madness might continue. He next accepted temporary 
duty at the Tower Chapel, London. While engaged 
there, he preached continually in many of the London 
churches, and among others, in the parish churches of Is- 
lington, Bishopsgate, St. Dunstan's, St. Margaret, West- 



GBORGS WHITEFISLD. 13 

• 

minster, and Bow, Cheapside. From the very beginning 
he attained a degree of popularity such as no preacher, 
probably, before or since, has ever reached. To say that 
the churches were crowded when he preached, would be 
saying little. They were literally crammed to suffocation 
An eye-witness said, " You might have walked on the 
people's beads." 

From London he removed for a few months to Dum- 
mer, a little rural parish in Bfeimpshire, near Basingstoke. 
From Dummer he sailed for the colony of Georgia, in 
North America, after visiting Gloucester and Bristol, and 
preaching in crowded churches in each place. The ob- 
ject of his voyage was to assist the Wesleys in the care of 
an Orphan House which they had established in Georgia 
for the children of colonists who aied there. The man- 
agement of this Orphan House ultimately devolved 
entirely on Whitefield, and entailed on him a world of 
responsibility and anxiety all his life long. Though well 
meant, it seems to have been a design of very question- 
able wisdom.* 

Whitefield returned from Georgia after about two 
years' absence, partly to obtain priest's orders, which 
were conferred on him by Bishop Benson, and parUy on 
business connected with the Orphan House. And now 
we reach the era in his life when he was obliged, by 
circumstances, to take up a line of conduct as a minister 
which he probably at one time never contemplated, but 
which was made absolutely necessary by the treatment 
he received. 

It appears that, on arriving in London after his first 



* This Orphan House at Sayamiab is now in a flourishing oon 
ditioD, aud of great usefulness. 



14 GEORGE WMITBFI&LD. 

visit to G^rgia, he found the countenances of niany of 
the clergy no longer towards him as they were before. 
They had taken fright at some expressions in his pub- 
lished letters, and some reports of his conduct in America. 
They were scandalized at his preaching the doctrine of 
regeneration in the way that he did, as a thing which 
many of their parishioners needed. The pulpits of many 
churches were flatly refused to hiuL Churchwardens, 
who had no eyes for heresy and drunkenness, were filled 
with virtuous indignation abou£ what they called breach- 
es of order. Bishops who could tolerate Arianism and 
Socinianism, got into a state of excitement about a man 
who simply preached the gospel, and put forth warnings 
against fanaticism an^ enthusiasm. In short, White- 
field's field of usefulness within the Church was rapidly 
narrowed on everv side. 

The step which seems to have decided Whitefield's 
course of action at this period of his Ufe, was his adoption 
of open-air preaching. He had gone to Islington, on a 
Sunday in April, 1739, to preach for the vicar, his 
friend, Mr. Stonehouse. In the midst of the prayers, the 
churchwarden came to him, and demanded his license 
for preaching in the London diocese. This Whitefield, 
of course, had not got, any more than any clergyman not 
regularly officiating in the diocese has at this day. The 
upshot of the matter was, that being forbidden to preach 
in the pulpit, he went outside, after the service, and 
preached in the churchyard. Prom that day, he regularly 
took up the practice of open-air preaching. Wherever 
there were large open fields around London ; wherever 
there were large bands of idle, church-despising, Sabbath- 
breaking people gathered together — there went White- 
field and lifted up his voice. The gospel so proclaimed 



GEORGE WHTTlSFIELD. 15 

was listened to, and greedily received by hundreds who 
had never dreamed of visiting a place of worship. In 
Moorfields, in Hackney Fields, in Mary-le-bone Fields, 
in May Fair, in Smithfield, on Kennington Common, on 
Blackheath, Sunday after Sunday, Whitefield preached to 
admiring masses. Ten thousand, fifteen thousand, twenty 
thousand, thirty thousand, were computed sometimes to 
have heard him at once. The cause of pure religion, 
beyond doubt, was advanced. Souls were plucked from 
the hand of Satan, as brands from the burning. But it 
was going much too fast for th© Church of those days. 
The clergy, with very few exceptions, would have no- 
thing to do with this strange preacher. In short, the 
ministrations of "Whitefield in the pulpits of the Estab- 
lishment, with an occasional exception, from this time 
ceased. He loved the Church. He gloried in her 
Articles and Formularies. He used her Prayer Book 
with delight But the Church did not love him, and 
BO lost the use of his services. The plain truth is, the 
Church of England. of that day was not ready for a man 
like Whitefield, The Church was too much asleep to 
understand him. 

From this date to the day of his death, a period of 
thirty-one years, Whitefield's life was one uniform em- 
ployment From Sunday morning to Saturday night — 
from the 1st of January to the 31st of December — 
excepting when laid aside by illness, he was almost in- 
cessantly preaching. There was hardly a considerable 
town in England, Scotland, and Wales, that he did not 
visit. When churches were opened to him, he gladly 
preached in churches. When chapels only were offered, 
he cheerfully preached in chapels. When church and 
chapel alike were closed, he was ready and willing 



16 GXORaS WBITSFISLD. 

to preach in the open air. For thirty-four years he 
labored in this way, always proclaiming the same glori- 
ous gospel, and always, as far as a man^s eye can judge, 
with unmense effect In one single Whitsuntide week, 
after he had been preaching in Moorfields, he received 
one thousand letters from people under spiritual con- 
cern, and admitted to the Lord's table three hundred and 
fifty persons. In the thirty-four years of his ministry, it 
is reckoned that he preached publicly eighteen thousand 
times. 

'His joumeyings were prodigious, when the roads and 
conveyances of his times are considered. Fourteen times 
did he visit Scotland. Seven times did he cross the 
Atlantic, backward and forward. Twice he went over to 
Ireland. As to England and Wales, he traversed every 
county in them, from the Isle of Wight to Berwick-on- 
Tweed, and from the Land's End to the North Foreland. 

His regular ministerial worie in London, when he was 
not journeying, was prodigious. His weekly engage- 
ments at the Tabernacle in Tottenham-court Road, 
which was built for him when the pulpits of the Estab- 
lished Church were closed, were as follows : — Every 
Sunday morning he administered the Lord's Supper to 
several hundred conamunicants, at half-past six. After 
this he read prayers, and preached, both morning and 
afternoon ; preached again in the evening at half-past five ; 
and concluded, by addressing a large society of widows, 
married people, young men and spinsters, all sitting 
separately in the area of the Tabernacle, with exhortations 
suitable to their respective stations. On Monday, Tues- 
day, Wednesday, and Thursday mornings, he preached 
regularly at six. On Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, 
Thursday, and Saturday evenings, he delivered lectures. 



rtCORGE WBITECmLO. 17 

This you will observe made thirteen sermons a week. 
And 1^1 this time he was canying on a correspondence 
with people in almost every part of the world. 

That any human frame could so long endure the labor 
he went through, does indeed seem wonderful. That 
his life was not shortened by violence, is no less wonder- 
ful. Once he was nearly stoned to death by a Popish 
mob in Dublin. Once he was nearly murdered in bed by 
an angry lieutenant of the navy at Plymouth. Once he 
narrowly escaped being stabbed by the sword of a rakish 
young gentleman in Moorfields ; but he was immortal till 
his work was done. He died at last at Newburyport, 
in North America, from a fit of asthma, at the age 
of fifty-six. His last sermon was preached only twenty- 
four hours before his death. It was an open-air discourse 
two hours long. Like Bishop Jewell, he almost died 
preaching. He left no children. He was once married, 
and the marriage does ndt seem to have contributed 
much to his happiness. But he left a name far better 
than that of sons and daughters. Never, I believe, Vas 
there a man of whom it could be so truly said, that he 
spent and was spent for God. 

3. The story of WTiitefielcPs religion is the next part 
of the subject that I proposed to take up, and unquestion- 
ably it is one of no little interest. 

What sort of doctrine did this wonderful man preach ? 
an inquirer may reasonably ask. What were the stand- 
ards of faith to which he adhered under the Bible ? 
What were the peculiar essentials of this religious teach- 
ing of his, which was so universally spoken against in his 
day? 

The answer to all these questions is short and simple. 



18 GEOBGB WHirjEFISLD. 

Whitefield was a real, genuine son of the Church of 
England. As such he was brought up in early youth. 
As such he was educated at Oxford. As such he preach- 
ed as long as he was allowed to preach within the 
Establishment. As such he preached when he was 
outside. References to the Prayer Book, Articles, and 
Homilies, abound in all his writings and sermons. His 
constant reply to his numerous opponents was, that hs 
at any rate was consistent with the formularies of his own 
Church, and that they were not It is not at all too much 
to say, that when practically cast out of the Establish- 
ment, Whitefield was an infinitely better churchman than 
ten thousand of the men who received the tithes of the 
Church of England, and remained comfortably behind. 

Whitefield no doubt was not a churchman of the 
stamp of Archbishop Laud and his school. He was not 
the man to put a Romish interpretation on our excel- 
lent Formularies, and to place Church and sacraments 
before Christ He was not a churchman of the stamp 
of Tillotson and the school that followed him. He did 
not lay aside justification by faith, and the need of grace» 
for semi-heathen disquisitions about morality and duty) 
rirtue and vice. And he was quite right. Laud and his 
followers went infinitely beyond the doctrines of our 
Church. Tillotson and his school fell infinitely below. 

But if a churchman is a man who reads the Articles, 
and Liturgy, and Homilies, in the sense of the men who 
compiled them — ^if a churchman is a man who sym- 
pathizes with Cranmer, and Latimer, and Hooper, and 
Jewell — if a churchman is a man who honors doctrines 
and ordinances in the order and prop'^rtion that the 
Thirty-nine Articles honor them — if this be the true 
definition of a churchman, then Whitefield was the highest 



0£ORGB WHITEFIELD. 19 

style of churchman — as true a churchman as ever breath- 
ed. And as for Whitefield^s adversaries, they were little 
better than shams and impostors. They had place and 
power on their side, but they scarcely deserve to be call- 
ed churchmen at all. 

Perhaps no better test of "Whitefield's religious opin- 
ions can be supplied, than the list of authors in divinity 
which he wrote out for the use of a college connected 
with his Orphan House in Georgia. Of churchmen, this 
list includes the names of Archbishop Leighton, Bishop 
Hall, and Burkitt ; of Puritans, Pool, Owen, and Bun- 
yan ; of Dissenters, Matthew Henry and Doddridge ; of 
Scotch Presbyterians, Wilson and Boston. All these are 
men whose praise is even now in all the churches. These, 
let us understand, were the kind of men with whom he 
was of one mind in doctrine. 

As to the substance of Whitefield'^ theological teach- 
ing, the simplest account I can give of it is, that it was 
purely, evangelieal. There were four main things that 
he never lost sight of in his sermons. These four were : 
man's complete ruin by sin, and consequent natural cor- 
ruption of heart; man's complete redemption by Christ, 
and complete justification before God by faith in Christ ; 
man's need of regeneration by the Spirit, and entire re- 
newal of heart and life ; and man's utter want of any 
title to be considered a living Christian, unless he is dead 
to sin and lives a holy life. 

Whitefield had no notion of flattering men, and speak- 
ing smooth things to them, merely because they were 
baptized and called Christians, and sometimes came to 
church. He only looked at one prominent feature in the 
thousands he saw around him ; and that was, the general 
character of their lives. He saw the lives of these 



20 GEORGE WHITfiFIELD. 

multitudea were utterly contradictory to the Bible, and 
utterly at variance with the principles of the Church to 
which they professed to belong. He waited for nothing 
more. He looked for no further evidence. He judged 
of trees by their fruits. • He told these thousands at once 
that they were in danger of being lost for ever — that 
they were in the broad way that leads to destruction — 
that they were dead, and must be made alive again — 
that they were lost, and must be found. He told them 
that if they loved Ufe, they must immediately repent — 
they must become new creatures — they must be con- 
verted, they must be horn dgain. And I believe the 
apostles would have done just the same. 

But Whitefield was just as full and explicit in setting 
forth the way to heaven as he was in setting forth the 
way to hell. When he saw that men's consciences were 
pricked and their fears aroused, he would open the trea- 
sure-house of gospel mercy, and spread forth before a 
congregation its unsearchable stores. He would unfold 
to them the amazing love of God the Father to a fallen 
world — that love from which he gave his only-begotten 
Son, and on account of which, while we were yet sin- 
ners, Christ died for us. He would show them the 
amazing love of God the Son in taking our nature on 
him, and suffering for us, the just for the unjust. He 
would tell them of Jesus able to save to the uttermost all 
that would come to God by him — Jesus and his ever- 
lasting righteousness, in which the vilest sinners might 
stand complete and perfect before the throne of God — 
Jesus and the blood of sprinkling, which could wash the 
blackest sins away — Jesus, the High Priest, waiting to 
receive all who would come to him, and not only mighty, 
but ready to save. And all this glorious salvation, he 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 21 

would tell men, was close to them. It was not far above 
them, like heaven. It was not deep beneath them, like 
hell. It was near at hand. It was within their reach. 
He would urge them at once to accept it The man that 
feli his sins and desired deliverance had only to believe 
and be saved, to ask and receive, to wash and be clean. 
And was he not right to say so ? I believe the apostles 
would have said much the same. 

But while Whitefield addressed the careless and un- 
godly masses in this style, he never failed to urge on 
those ^o made a high profession of religion their re- 
sponsibility, and to stir them up to walk worthy of their 
high calling. He never tolerated men who talked well 
about religion, but lived inconsistent lives. Such men, 
no doubt^ there were about him, but it is pretty certain 
they got no quarter from him. On the contrary, one of 
his biographers tells us that he was especially careful to 
impress on all the members of his congregation the ab- 
solute necessity of adorning the doctrine of Grod in all 
the relations of life. Masters and servants, rich people and 
poor, old and young, married and single, each and all were 
plainly exhorted to glorify God in their respective posi- 
tions. One day he would tell the young men of his 
congregation to beware of being like one he heard of, 
whose uncle described him as such a jumble of religion 
and business, that he was fit for neither. Another day 
he would hold up the example of a widow, remarkable 
for her confidence in God. Another day he would say 
to them, *%God convert you more and more every hour 
of the day ; God convert you from lying in bed in the 
morning ; God convert you fi-om lukewarmness ; God 
convert you from conformity to the world!" An- 
other day he would warn young men against leaving 



22 GEORGE WHITBFIELD. 

their religion behind them as they rose in the world. 
" Beware," he would say, " of being golden appren- 
tices, silrer journeymen, and copper masters." In 
short, there never was a greater mistake than to suppose 
there was any thing Antinomian or licentious in White- 
field's teaching. It was discriminating, unquestionably. 
Sinners had their portion ; but saints had their portion 
too. And what was this but walking in the very steps 
of the apostle Paul ? 

The crowning excellence of Whitefield's teaching was, 
that he just spoke of men, things, and doctrinei) in the 
way that the Bible speaks of them, and the place that 
the Bible assigns to them. God, Christ, and the Spirit — 
sin, justification, conversion, and sanctification — impeni- 
tent sinners the most miserable of people — ^believing 
saints the most privileged of people — the world a vain 
and empty thing — heaven the only rest for an immortal 
soul — the Devil a tremendous and ever-watchful foe- 
holiness the only true happiness — ^hell a real and certain 
portion for the unconverted ; these were the kind of sub- 
jects which filled Whitefield's mind, and formed the staple 
of his ministry. To say that he undervalued the sacra- 
ments would be simply false. His weekly communions 
at the Tabernacle are an answer that speaks for itself. 
But he never put the first things in Christianity second, 
and the second first. He never put doctrine below sacra- 
ments, and sacraments above doctrine. And who shall 
dare to blame him for this ? He only followed the pro-> 
portion of the Bible. * 

It is only fair to add, that Whitefield exemplified in 
his practice the religion that he preached. He had 
faults, unquestionably. I have not come here to make 
him out a perfect being. He often erred in judgmmt. 



GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 23 

He was often hasty, both with his tongue and with his 
pen. He had no business to say that Archbishop Til- 
lotson knew no more of religion than Mahomet. He 
was wrong to set down some people as the Lord's ene- 
mies, and others as the Lord's friends, so precipitately as 
he sometimes did. He was to blame for styling many 
of the clergy letter-learned Pharisees, because they could 
not receive the doctrine of the new birth. But still, after 
all this has been said, there can be no doubt that, in tho 
main, he was a holy, self-denying, and consistent man. 
Even his worst enemies can say nothing to the contrary. 

He was, to the very end, a man of eminent self-denial. 
His style of living was most simple. He refused money 
when it was pressed upon him, and once to the amount 
of £7000. He amassed no fortune. He founded no 
wealthy family. The little money he left behind him at 
his death was entirely from the legacies of friends. 

He was a man of remarkable disinterestedness and 
singleness of eye. He seemed to live for only two ob- 
jects — ^the glory of God, and the salvation of immortal 
souls. He raised no pdrty of followers who took his 
name. He established no system, like "Wesley, of which 
his own writings should be cardinal elements. A fre- 
quent expression of his is most characteristic of the man : 
"Let the name of George Whitefield perish, so long as 
Christ only is exalted." 

Last, but not Jeast, he was a man of extraordinary 
catholicity and liberality in his religion. He knew nothing 
of that narrow-minded policy which prompts a man to 
fancy that every thing must be barren outside his own 
camp, and that his party has got a monopoly of truth 
and heaven. He loved all who loved the Lord Jesus 
Christ in sincerity. He measured all by the measu>^ 



24 GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

which the angels of God use — "did they possess re- 
pentance towards God, faith towards the Lord Jesus 
Christ, holiness of conversation ?" K they did, they were 
as his brethren. His soul was with such men, by what- 
ever name they were called. Minor differences were 
wood, hay, and stubble to him. The marks of the Lord 
Jesus were the only marks he cared for. This catholicity 
is the more remarkable, when the spirit of the times he 
lived in is considered. Even the Erskines, in Scotland, 
wanted him to preach for no other denomination but their 
own, viz., the Secession Church. He asked them, why 
only for them ; and received the notable answer, that 
they were the Lord's people. This was more than 
Whitefield could stand. He asked if there were no other 
Lord's people but themselves. He told them, if all others 
were the Devil's people, they certainly had more need to 
be preached to. And he wound up by informing them, 
that if the Pope himself would lend him his pulpit, he 
would gladly proclaim the righteousness of Christ in it. 
To this catholicity of spirit he adhered all his days. 
And nothing could be a more weighty testimony against 
all narrowness of spirit among believers, than his request 
shortly before his death, that when he did die, John 
Wesley might be asked to preach his funeral sermon. 
Wesley and he had long ceased to see eye to eye on 
Calvinistic points. But as Calvin said of Luther, so 
Whitefield was resolved to think of Wesley. He was 
determined to sink minor differences, alid to know him 
only as a good servant of Jesus Christ. 

Such was George Whitefield's religion. Comment, I 
hope, is needless upon it. Time, at any rate, forbids me 
to dwell on it a moment longer. But surely I think I 
have shown enough to justify me in expressing a wish 



GEORGE WHnSFIELD. 25 

that we had many liying ministers in the Church of Eng- 
land like George Whitefield. 

4. The next part of the subject is one which I fed 
some difficulty in handling, — ^I allude to WTiitefield^s 
preaching. 

I find that this point is one on which much difference 
of opinion prevails. I find many are disposed to think 
tiiat part of WhitefieMh success is attributable to the 
novelty of gospel doctrines at the time when he preached, 
and part to the extraordinary gifts of voice and delivery 
with which he was endowed, and that the matter and 
style of his sermons were in no wise remarkable. £Vom 
this opinion I am inclined to dissent altogether. After 
calm examination, I have come to Uie conclusion that 
Whitefield was one of the most powerful and extraordi- 
nary preachers the world has ever seen. My belief is, 
that hitherto he has never be^ too highly estimated, and 
that, on the contrary, he does not receive the credit he 
deserves. 

One thing is abundantly clear and beyond dispute, and 
that is, that his sermons were Wonderfully efiective. No 
preacher has ever succeeded in arresting the attention 
of such enormous crowds of people as those he addressed 
continually in the neighborhood of London. No preacher 
has ever been so universally popular in every country he 
visited, England, Scotland and America, as he was. No 
preacher has ever retained his hold on his bearers so 
entirely as he did for thirty-four years. His popu- 
larity never waned. It was as great at the end of his 
days as it was at the beginning. This of itself is a 
great &ct To command the ear of people for thirty-four 
long years, and be preaching incessantly the whole time. 

2' 



26 GSOROS WHITEFISLD. 

is something that the novelty of the gospel alone wiH 
not account for. The theory that his preaching was 
popular, because new, to my mind is utterly unsatia- 
fectory. 

Another thing is no less indisputable about his preach 
ing, and that is, that it produced a powerful effect on 
people in every rank of life. He won the suffi'ages of 
high as well as low, of rich as well as poor, of learned as 
well as unlearned. If his preaching had been popular 
with none but the uneducated masses, we might have 
thought it possible there was little in it except a striking 
delivery and a loud voice. But facts are, imfortunately, 
against this theory too ; and, under the pressure of these 
facts, it will be found to break down. 

It is a fact, that numbers of the nobility and gentry of 
Whitefield's day were warm admirers of his preaching. 
The Marquis of Lothian, the Earl of Leven, the Earl of 
Buchan, Lord Rae, Lort Dartmouth, Lord James A. Gor- 
don, might be named, among others, besides Lady 
Huntingdon and a host of ladies. 

It is a fact, that eminent statesmen, like Bolingbroke 
and Chesterfield, were frequently his delighted hearers. 
Even the artificial Chesterfield was known to warm 
under Whitefield's eloquence. Bolingbroke has placed on 
record his opinion, and said, " He is the most extraordi- 
nary man in our times. He has the most commanding 
eloquence I ever heard in any person." 

It is a fact, that cool-headed men, like Hume the his- 
torian, and Franklin the philosopher, spoke in no mea- 
sured terms of his preaching powers. Franklin has 
written a long account of the effect his sermons pro- 
duced at Philadelphia. Hume declared that it was 
worth going twenty miles to hear him. 



GEORGE WHITBFnBLD. 2T 

Now these are facts — simple, historical, and well-au- 
thenticated facts. What shall we say to them ? I say 
that these facts are quite enough to prove that White- 
field's effectiveness was not owing entirely to delivery 
and voice, as some men would have us believe. Boling- 
broke and Chesterfield, and Hume and Franklin, were 
not such weak men as to allow their judgments to be 
biased by any mere external endowments. They were 
no mean judges of eloquence. They were, probably, 
among the best qualified critics of the day. And I say 
confidently, that their opinion can only be explained by 
the fact, that Whitefield was indeed a most powerful and 
extraordinary preacher. 

But still, after all, the question remains to be answered, 
What was the secret of Whitefield's unparalleled success 
as a preacher ? How are we to account for his sermons 
producing effects Vhich no sermons, before or after his 
time, have ever yet done? These are questions you have 
a right to ask. But they are questions I find it very 
hard to answer. That his sermons were not mere voice 
and rant, I think we have pretty clearly proved. That 
he was a man of conmianding intellect and grasp of 
mind, no one has ever pretended to say. How then are 
we to account for the effectiveness of his preaching ? 

The reader who turns for a solution of this question to 
the seventy-five sermons published under his name, will 
probably be much disappointed. He will not find in 
them many striking thoughts. He will not discover in 
them any new exhibitions of gospel doctrine. The plain 
truth is, that by far the greater part of them were taken 
down in short-hand by repoiters, without Whitefield's 
knowledge, and published without correction. No in- 
telligent reader, I think, can help discovering that these 



28 eEOEOE WHITSFIELD. 

reporters were, moet unhappily, ignorant alike of stopping 
and paragraphing, of grammar and of gospel. The ccm- 
sequence is, that many passages in these sermons are 
what Latimer would call a " mingle-mangle,'' or what 
we should call in this day *' a complete mess." 

Nevertheless, I am bold to say, that with all their 
faults, Whitefield's printed sermons will repay a candid 
perusal. Let the reader only remember what I have just 
said, that most of them are miserably reported, para- 
graphed and stopped, and make allowance accordingly. 
Let him remember also, that English for speaking and 
English for reading are two different languages; and 
that sermons which preach well, always read ill. Re- 
member these two things, I say, and I do believe you 
will find very much to admire in some of Whitefield's 
sermons. For myself, I can only say, I believe I have 
learned much from them, and, however great a heresy 
against taste it may appear, I should be ungrateful if I 
did not praise them. 

And now let me try to point out to you what seem to 
me to have been the characteristic features of White- 
field's sermons. I may be wrong, but they appear to 
me to present just such a combination of excellences as 
is most likely to make an effective preacher. 

First and foremost, you must remember, Whitefield 
preached a singularly pure gospel. Few men ever gave 
their hearers so much wheat and so little chaff. He did 
not get into his pulpit to talk about his party, his cause, 
his interest, or his office. He was perpetually teUing you 
about your sins, your heart, and Jesus Christ, in the way 
that the Bible speaks of them. *' Oh ! the righteousness 
of Jesus Christ !" he would frequently say : " I must bo 
excused if I mention it in almost all my sermons." This, 
you may be^ure, is the corner-stone of all preaching that 



GEORGE WHn'EFIBlD. 29 

God honors. It must be preeminently a manifestation 
of truth. 

For another thing, Whitefield*s preaching was singu- 
larly lucid and simple. You might not like his doctrine, 
perhaps ; but at any rate you could not fail to under- 
stand what he meant. His style was easy, plain, and 
conversational. He seemed to abhor long and inyolved 
sentenced. He aly^ays saw his mark, and went direct at 
it He seldom or never troubled his hearers with long 
arguments and intricate reasonings. Simple Bible state- 
ments, pertinent anecdotes, and apt illustrati^s, were 
the more common weapons that he used. The conse- 
quence was, that his hearers always understood him. He 
never shot above their heads. Never did man seem to 
enter so thoroughly into the wisdom of Archbishop 
Ushei^s saying, ^'To make easy things seem hard is 
easy, but to make hard things easy is the office of a 
great preacher." 

For another thing, Whitefield was a singularly hold 
and direct preacher. He never used that indefinite ex- 
pression, ^^ we," which seems so peculiar to English pulpit 
oratory, and which leaves a hearer^s mind in a state of 
misty confusion as to the preacher^s meaning. He met 
men &ce to face, like one who had a message from God 
to them — ^like an ambassador with tidings from heaven ; 
" I have come here to speak to you about your soul." He 
never ndnced matters, and beat about the bush in attack- 
ing prevailing sins. His great object seemed to be to dis- 
cover the dangers his hearers were most liable to, and 
then fire right at their hearts. The result was, that hun- 
dreds of his hearers used always to think that the sermons 
w^e specially addressed to themselves. He was not con- 
tsnft, like many, with sticking on a tailpiece of application 



30 OEORQB WHITEFISLD. 

at the end of a long discourse. A constant vein of ap- 
plication run through all his sermons. *^ This is for you : 
this is for you : and this is for you." His hearers were 
never let alone. Nothing, however, was more striking 
than his direct appeals to all classes of his congregation, 
as he drew towards a conclusion. With all the fault of 
his printed sermons, the conclusions of some of them are, 
to my mind, the most stirring and heart-searching ad- 
dresses to souls that are to be found in the English 
language. 

Another striking feature in Whitefield's preaching was 
his thundering earnestness. One poor, uneducated man 
said of him that he *' preached like a lion." Never, 
perhaps, did any preacher so thoroughly succeed in show- 
ing people that he, at least, believed all he was saying, 
and that his whole heart, and soul, and strength, were 
bent on making them believe it too. No man could say 
that his sermons were like the morning and evening gun 
at Portsmouth, 'a formal discharge, fired off as a matter 
of course, that disturbs no body. They were all life. 
They were all fire. There was no getting away from 
under them. Sleep was next to impossible. You must 
listen, whether you liked it or not. There was a holy 
violence about him. Your attention was taken by storm. 
You were fairly carried off your legs by his energy, be- 
fore you had time to consider what you would do. An 
American gentleman once went to hear him, for the first 
time, in consequence of the report he heard of his preach- 
ing powers. The day was rainy, the congregation com- 
paratively thin, and the beginning of the sermon rather 
heavy. Our American friend began to say to himself, 
'^ This man is no great wonder, after all." He looked 
round, and saw the congregation as little interested a« 



GBOROE WHITSFIELD. 31 

himsel£ One old man, in front of the pulpit, had fallen 
asleep. But all at once Whitefield stopped short. His 
countenance changed. And then he suddenly broke 
forth in an altered tone : " If I had come to speak to you 
in my own name, you might well rest your elbows on 
your knees, and your heads on your hands, and sleep ; 
and once in a while look up and say. What is this bab- 
bler talking of? But I have not come to you in my own 
name. No! I have come to you in the name of the 
Lord of Hosts," (here he brought down his hand and 
foot with a force that made the building ring,) '^ and I 
must and wiU be heard." The congregation started. 
The old man woke up at once. "Ay, ay !" cried White- 
field, fiixing his eyes on him, " I have waked you up, 
have I? I meant to do it. I am not come here to 
preach to stocks and stones: I have come to you in 
the name of the Lord God of Hosts, and I must and 
will have an audience." The hearers were stripped of 
their apathy at once. Every word of the sermon was 
attended to. And the American gentleman never 
forgot it. 

Another striking feature in Whitefield's preaching was 
his singular power of description. The Arabians have 
a proverb which says, " He is the best orator who can 
turn men's ears into eyes." If ever there was a speaker 
who succeeded in doing this, it was Whitefield. He 
drew such vivid pictures of the things he was dwelling 
upon, that his hearers could believe they actually saw 
them all with their own eyes, and heard them with their 
own ears. " On one occasion," says one of his biogra- 
phers, " Lord Chesterfield was among his hearers. The ' 
preacher, in describing the miserable condition of a poor, 
benighted sinner, illustrated the subject by describing a 



82 GXOROB WHITXraLD. 

blind b^gar. The night was dark ^ the road dangerous 
and full of snares. The poor sightless mendicant is 
deserted bj his dog near the edge of a precipice, and 
has nothing to grope his waj with but his staff. But 
Whitefield so warmed with his snbject, and unfolded H 
with such graphic power, that the whole auctitory was 
kept in breathless sileuce orer the moirements of the poor 
old man ;" and, at length, when the beggar was about to 
take that fatal step which would have hnrled him down 
the precipice to certain destmction. Lord Chesterfield 
actually made a rush forward to save him, exclaiming 
aloud, '^ He is gone I he is gone I" The noUe l<xrd had 
been so entirely carried away by the preacher, that he 
^rgot the whole was a picture. 

One more feature in Whitefield's preaching desenrea 
especial notice, and that is, the immense amount of 
pathos and feeling which it always contained. It was 
no uncommon thing with him to weep profusely in the 
pulpit. Cornelius Winter goes so far as to say that he 
hardly ever knew him get through a sermon without 
tears. There seems to have been nothing whatever of 
affectation in this. He kit intensely for the souls before 
him, and his feeling found a vent in tears. Of all the 
ingredients of his preaching, nothing, I suspect, was so 
powerful as this. It awakened sympathies, and touched 
secret springs in men, which no amount of intellect 
could have moved. It melted down the prejudices which 
many had conceived against him. They could not hate 
the man who wept so much over their souls. They were 
often so affected as to shed floods of tears themselves. 
" I came to hear you," said one man, " intending to break 
your head ; but your sermon got the better of me — ^il 
broke my heart." Once become satisfied that a man 



CAORGB WHITBFISLD. 88 

ores you, and yon will listen gladly to any thing lie haa 
•ff&L to say. An4 this was just one grand secret of 
Whitefield's sucoc'ss. 

And now I will only ask you to add to this feeble 
sketch, Uiat White&eld's action was perfect — so perfect 
that Garrick, thd &mous actor, gave it unqualified 
praise — ^that his tfoUe was as wonderful as his action — 
so powerful, that he could make thirty thousand people 
hear him at once ; so musical and well-attuned, that men 
said he could raise tears by his pronunciation of the 
word ^ Mesopotamia f that his fluency and command of 
extemporaneous language were of the highest ord^r, 
prompting him always to use the right word and to put 
it in the right place. Add, I say, these gifts to those 
already mendoned, and then judge for yourselves whether 
there is not sufficient, and more than sufficient, in our 
hands, to account for his power as a preacher. 

For my part, I say, unhesitatingly, that I beliere no 
living preacher ever possessed such a combination of ex 
cellences as Whitefield. Some, no doubt, have surpassed 
him in some of his gifts ; others, perhaps, have been hii^ 
equals in others. But, for a combination of pure doc 
trine, simple and lucid style, boldness and directness, 
earnestness and fervor, descriptiveness and picture-draw- 
ing, pathos and feeUng — ^united with a perfect voice, 
perfect delivery, and perfect command of words, White- 
field, I repeat, stands alone. No man, dead or alive, 1 
believe, ever came alongside of him. And I believe you 
will always find, that just in proportion as preachers have 
approached that curious combination of excellences 
which Whitefield possessed, just in that very proportion 
have they attained what Clarendon defines true eloquencf 

2* 

' t — 



84 GBORGB WHITKFZBLD. 

to be, viz., ''a strange power of making themselireB 
believed." 



5. And now, there only remains one more point con- 
nected with Whitefield to which I wish to advert I 
fear that I shall have exhausted your attention already 
But the point is one of such importance, that it cannot 
be passed over in silence. The point I mean is, the 
actual amount of real good that Whitefield did. - 

You will, I hope, understand me, when I say, that the 
materials for forming an opinion on this point in a history 
tike his, must necessarily be scanty. He founded no 
denomination among whom his name was embalmed, 
and his every act recorded, as did John Wesley. He 
headed no mighty movement against a Church which 
openly professed false doctrines, as Luther di4 against 
Rome. He wrote no books which were to be the 
religious classics of the million, like John Bunyan. He 
was a simple, guileless man, who lived for one thing 
only, and that was to preach Christ. If he succeeded in 
doing that effectually, he cared for nothing else. He 
did nothing to preserve the memory of his usefulness. 
He left his work with the Lord. 

Of course, there are many people who can see in 
Whitefield nothing but a fanatic and enthusiast There 
IS a generation that loathes every thing like zeal in 
religion. There are never wanting men of a cautious, 
cold-blooded, Erasmus-like temper, who pass through 
the world doing no good, because they are so dreadfully 
afraid of doing harm. I do not expect such men to 
admire Whitefield, or allow he did any good. I fear, if 
they had lived eighteen hundred years ago, they would 
have had no sympathy with St. Paul. 



GBORGB WBITBFIBLD. 85 

Again, there are other people who count schism a 
far greater crime than either heresy or false doctrine. 
There is a generation of men who under no circum- 
stances will worship God out of their own parish : and 
as to separation from the Church, they seem to think 
that nothing whatever can justify it. I do not, of 
course, expect such men to admire Whitefield or his 
work. His principle evidently was, that it was far bet- 
ter for men to be uncanonically saved than canonically 
damned. 

Whether by any other line of action Whitefield could 
have remained in the Church, and retained his useful- 
ness, is a question which, at this distance of time, we are 
very incompetent to answer. That he erred in temper 
and judgment in his dealings with the bishops and 
clergy, in many instances, I have no doubt That he 
raised up fresh bodies of separatists from the Church of 
England, and made breaches which probably will never 
be repaired, I have no doubt also. But still it must 
never be forgotten, that the state of the Church was bad 
enough to provoke a holy indignation. The old principle 
is most true, that ''he is the schismatic who causes the 
separation, and not he who separates." If Whitefield did 
harra^ the harm ought to be laid on the Church which 
compelled him to act as he did, quite as much as on him. 
And when we come to strike the balance, I believe the 
harm he may have done is outweighed by the good a 
thousand-fold. 

The truth, I believe, is, that the direct good Whitefield 
did to immortal souls was enormous. I will go farther. 
I believe it is incalculable. In Scotland, in England, in 
America, credible witnesses have recorded their testi- 
mony that he was the means of converting thousands of 
souls. 



9$ OKORGB'WHITBFIXLD. 

Franklin, the philosopher, was a cold, calculating man, 
and not likely to speak too highly of any minister's work. 
Yet even he confessed that it ^^ was wonderful to see the 
change soon made by his preaching in the manners of 
the inhabitants of Philadelphia. From being thought- 
less or indifferent about religion, it seemed as if all the 
world were growing religious." 

Maelaurin and Willison were Scotch ministers, whose 
names are well-known to theolc^cal readers, and stand 
deservedly high. Both of them have testified that 
Whitefield did an amazing work in Scotland. Willison, 
in particular, says : ^ That Grod honored him with sur- 
prising success among sinners of all ranks and per- 
suasions." 

Old Venn, in our own Church, was a man of strong 
common sense, as well as great grace. His opinion was, 
that " if the greatness, extent, success, and disinterested- 
ness of a man's labors caii give him distinction among 
the children of Christ, then we are warranted to affirm, 
that scarce any one has equalled Mr. Whitefield." 
Again, he says, ^ It is a well-known iact^ that the con- 
version of men's souls has been the fruit of a single 
sermon from his lips, so eminently was he made a fisher 
of men." And again, *' Though we are allowed to sor- 
row that we shall never see or hear him again, we must 
still rejoice that millions have heard him so long, so 
often, and to such good effect ; and that out of this mass 
of people, multitudes are gone before him to hail his 
entrance into the world of glory." 

John Newton was a shrewd man, as well as an emi- 
nent minister of the gospel. His testimony is, ^ I am 
not backward to say, that I have not read or heard of 
any person, since the apostles' days, of whom it may 



oioBGs wmTEFisun 99 

more emphaticallj be said, he was a burning and a 
ahining Bght^ than the late Mr. Whitefield, whether we 
consider the warmth of hie seal, the greatness of his 
ministerial talents, or the extensive usefidness with which 
the Lord honored him." 

These are not solitary testimonies. I might add 
many more if time permitted. Romalne did not agree 
with him in many ^ings, yet what does he say of him < 
^ We hare none left to succeed him ; none, of his gifts ; 
none, any thing like him in usefulness." Toplady was a 
tremendously high Calvinist, and not disposed to over- 
estimate the number of saved souls. Yet he says, 
Whitefield's ministry was " attended with spiritual bene^ 
fit to tens of thousands;" and he styles him ''the 
apostle of the ^tish empire, and the prince of preluih^ 
ers." Hervey was a quiet, lit^ary man, whose health 
seldom allowed him to quit the redr^nent of Weston 
Favell. But he says of Whitefield^ ** I never beheld so 
fair a copy of our Lord, such a Hving image of the 
Saviour. I cannot forbear applying 1^ wise man^ 
encomiums of an illustrious woman to this eminent 
minister of the everlasting go^l: *MMiy sons have 
done virtuously, but thou excellest them alk' " 

But if the amount of direct good that Whitefield did 
in Uie world was great, who shall tell us the «nount of 
good that he did indirectly f I believe it nev^ can be 
reckoned up. I sui^>ect it will never be f^lly known 
until the last day. 

Whitefield was among the first who siirted up a need 
for ike pure gospd anumg the clergy and laity of our 
own Church. His constant assertion of pure Reformation 
principles — his repeated references to the Artides, 
Prayer Book, and Homilies-^ his nevef^imswered dial- 



38 OSORGE WHITEFISLD. 

lenges to his opponents to confute him out of the Fonnu- 
laries of their own communion — all this must hare pro- 
duced an effect, and set many thinking. I have no doubt 
whatever, that many a faithful minister, who became a 
shining light in those days within the Church of England, 
first lighted his candle at the iamp of a man outside. 

Whitefield, again, was among the first to s^ow the 
right way to meet infideU and skeptics. He saw clearly 
that the most powerful weapon against such men is not 
metaphysical reasoning and critical disquisition; but 
preaching the whole gospel, living the whole gospel, 
and spreading the whole gospel. It was not the writings 
of Leland, and the younger Sherlock, and Waterland, and 
Leslie, that rolled back the fiood of infidelity one half so 
much as the preaching of Whitefield, and Wesley, and 
Fletcher, and Romaine, and Berridge, and Venn. Had 
it not been for them, I firmly believe we might have had 
a counterpart of the French Revolution in our own 
land. They were the men who were the true champions 
of Christianity. Infidels are seldom shaken by mere 
abstract reasoning. The surest arguments against them 
are gospel truth and gospel life. 

To crown all, Whitefield was the very first who seems 
thoroughly to have understood what Chalmers has called 
the aggressive system. He did not wait for souls to 
come to him, but he went after souls. He did not sit 
tamely by his fireside, mourning over the wickedness of 
the land. He went forth to beard the Devil in his high 
places. He attacked sin and wickedness face to face, and 
gave them no peace. He dived into holes and comers 
after sinners. He hunted up ignorance and vice, wher- 
ever it could be found. He showed that he thoroughly 
realized the nature of the ministerial office. Like a fisher- 



GEORaS WBITKFISLD. SO 

man, he did not wfdt for the fish to come to hun. like 
a fisherman, he used every kmd of means to catch souls. 
Men know a little more of this now than they did former- 
ly. City Missions and District Visiting Societies are evi- 
dences of clearer views. But let us remember this was 
all comparatively new in Whitefield's time, and let us 
give him the credit he deserves. 

In short, I come to the conclusion that no man has 
ever done more good in his day and generation than the 
man who is the subject of this lecture. He was a true 
hero, and that in its highest and best sense. He did a 
work that will stand the fire, and glorify God, when 
many other works are forgotten. And for that work I 
believe that England owes a debt to his character which 
England has never yet paid. 

And now, I hasten to a conclusion. I have set before 
you, to the best of my ability, Whitefield's time, and life, 
and religion, and preaching, and actual work. I have 
not extenuated his faults, to the best of my knowledge. 
I have not exaggerated his good qualities, so far as I am 
aware. It only remains for me to point out to you two 
great practical lessons which the subject appears to me to 
teach. 

Learn then, I beseech you, for one lesson, the amazing 
patDer that one single man possesses, when he is determined 
to work for God, and has got truth on his side. 

Here is a man who starts in life with every thing, to 
all appearance, against him. He has neither £unily, nor 
place, nor money, nor high connections on his side. His 
views are flatly opposed to the customs and prejudices of 
his time. He stands in direct opposition to the stream 
pf pi^blic taste, and the religion of the vast bulk of min- 



49 QBOBeS WHITBFDEU). 

isters around him. He is as muck isolated and alone, to 
all appearance, as Martin Luther opposing the Fope, as 
Athanasius resisting the Arians, as Paul on Mars' Hill. 
And yet this man stands his ground. He arrests public 
attention. He gathers crowds around him who receive 
his teaching. He is made a blessing to tens of thousands. 
He turns the world upside down. How striking these 
facts are I 

Here is your encauroffement, if you stand alone. You 
have no reason to be cast down and £Eiint-hearted. You 
are not weak, though few, if God is with you. There is 
nothing too great to be done by a little company, if only 
they have Christ on their side. Away with the idea 
that numbers alone have power I Oast away the old 
vulgar error that majorities alone have strength. Gel 
firm hold of the great truth that minorities always move 
the world. Think of the little flock that our Lord left 
behind him, and the one hundred and twenty names in 
that upper chamber in Jerusalem, who went forth to 
assault the heathen world ! Think of George Whitefield 
assailing boldly the ungodliness which deluged all around 
him, and winning victory after victory 1 Think of all 
this. Cast fear away. Lay out your talents heartily and 
confidently for God. 

Here also is your example^ if yoii desire to do good to 
souls. Whether you become ministers or missionaries or 
teachers, never forget you must %ht widi Whitefield's * 
weapons, if you wish to have any portion of Whitefield's 
success. Never forget what John Wesley said was White- 
field's theology — ^ Give God all the glory of whatever is 
good in man : set Christ as high and man as low as 
possible, in the business of salvation. All merit is in Uie 
blood of Christ, and all power is from the Spirit of Christ" 



OSOROS WltlTEFZ]EL0. 41 

TMok not for a moment that eameatnesB alone will 
insure success. This is a huge delusion. It will do 
nothing of the kind. All the earnestness in the world 
will never enable a teacher of Chrman theology to show 
you one Tinnevelly, or a teacher of semi-Popery one 
Sierra Leone. Oh, no I it must be the simple, pure, una- 
dulterated gospel that you must carry with you, if yott 
are to do good. You must sow as WhiteMd sowed, or 
you will never reap as he reaped. 

Learn, in the last place, what abundant reasons %oe 
have for thankfulness in the present condition of the 
Church of England. 

We are £ur too apt to look at the gloomy side of 
things around us, and at that only. We are all prone to 
dwell on the faults of our condition, and to f(»get to 
bless God for <nir mercies. There are many things we 
could wish otherwise in our beloved Ohurch, beyond all 
question. There are defects we could wish to see reme- 
died, and wounds we should gladly see healed. But 
still, let us look behind us, and compare the Church of 
our day with the Church of Whitefield's times. Look 
on this picture, and on that, and I am sure, if you do so 
honestly and fairly, you will agree with me that we have 
leason to be thankful. 

We have bishops on the bench now, who love the 
fimple truth as it is in Jesus, and are ready lo help for- 
ward good works — ^bishops who are not ashamed to 
come forward in Eseter Hall, and lend their aid to the 
extension of Christ's gospel — ^bishops who would have 
welcomed a man like Whitefield, and found full occupa- 
tion for his marvellous gifts. Let us thank God for this. 
It was not so a hundred years ago. 



4^ GEORGE WHITEFIELD. 

We have hundreds of clergymen in our parishes 
DOW, who preach as full a gospel as Whitefield did, 
though they may not do it with the same power — 
dergjmien who are not ashamed of the doctrine of 
regeneration, and do not pronounce a minister a heretic, 
because he sap to ungodly people, " Ye must be bom 
again." Let us thank God for this. A man need not 
travel many miles now in order to find parishes where 
the gospel is preached. When driven out of one parish 
church, he can find truth in another. It was not so a 
hundred years ago. 

We have thousands of laymen now, who are fully 
alive to the duties and responsibities of members of a 
Protestant Church — ^laymen who rejoice in holding up 
the hands of evangelical ministers, and are righteously 
jealous for the maintenance and extension of evangelical 
truth. Let us thank God for this. It was not so a 
hundred years ago. 

We have societies and agencies for evangelizing every 
dark comer of the earth in connection with our Church. 
We have wide and effectual doors of usefulness for all 
who are willing to labor in the Lord's vineyard. The 
diflficulty now is, not so much to find openings for doing 
good, as to find men. Let us thank God for this. It 
was not 80 a hundred years ago. 

Young men of the Church of England, I ask you 
to gather up these facts, and treasure them in your 
memories. They are facts. They cannot be gainsaid. 
Treasure them up, I repeat. Look back a century, and 
then look around you, and then judge for yourselves 
whether you ought not to be thankful. 

Beware, I beseech you, of that tribe of men who would 



GEORGE WHITEFISLD. 4& 

fain persuade you to forsake the Churcli of England, and 
separate from her communion. There is a generation 
of murmurers and complainers in the present day, who 
seem to revel in picking holes — a generation that seems 
to forget that fault-finding is the easiest task in all the 
world — a generation that has no eyes to see the healthy 
parts in our body ecclesiastic, but has a wonderfully 
quick and morbid scent for detecting its sores — a gen- 
eration that is mighty to scatter, but impotent to build — 
a generation that would persuade churchmen to strain 
at gnats, but finds no difficulty itself in swallowing 
camels — a generation that would have you pull the 
old hous» down, but cannot offer you so much as a tent 
in its place : of all such men, I say solemnly and affec- 
tionately — of all such men, I warn you to beware. 
Listen not to them. Have no friendship with them. 
Avoid them. Turn from them. Pass away. 

Let us not leave the good old ship, the Church of 
England, until we have some better reason than can at 
ppesent be seen* What though she be old and weather- 
beaten ! What though, in some respects, she may want 
repair ! What though some of the crew be not to be 
depended on I Still, with all her faults, the old ship is 
in far better trim than she was a century ago. Let us 
acknowledge her faults, and hope they may yet be 
amended. But still, with all her faults, let us stick by 
the ship I 

When the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of Eng- 
land are repealed, and the Prayer Book and Homilies 
so altered as to be unprotestantized — when regeneration 
and justification by faith are forbidden to be preached in 
her pulpits — when the Queen, Lords and Commons, 
and laity, have assented to these changes — in short, 



€ttOItOB WRnsnSLD. 



when the Gospel k driven out <^ the EBtablishment — 
then, and not till then^ it will be time for yon and me to 
go out; but, till theti, I say, Lbt us 0txok bt thb 
Church I 




miMP 



The bomwer must return this item on or before 
the last date stamped below. If another user 
places a recall for this item, the borrower will 
be notified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 
the borrower from overdue fines. 



Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-2413 




Please handle with care. 

Thank you for helping to preserve 
Ubrary collections at Harvard. 



