Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation


httos://archive.org/details/textbookonpropheO000gray


G. M. ELLIOTT LIBRARY
CINCINNATI BIBLE SEMINARY
2700 GLENWAY AVE.

P. O. BOX 043200
CINCINNATI, OHIO 45204-3200


ur,


‘ | ; nA a4 Ace
Roars : 7


hip iF)
1c ehiey 7s ®


Tea
ay alii yi ae 1) ae a, (Oe 7
ip aa / abe whip) ri 0) DM, hao Z Mt _


Po ESE CUM NTC Ars COUN GlLes


IS VOLUME
82


OF THE
Twentieth Century Encyclopedia of Catholicism


UNDER SECTION


Vil
THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH


LD tS ALSO TEE


7TH


VOLUME IN ORDER OF PUBLICATION


Edited by HENRI DANIEL-ROPS of the Académie Frangaise


THE ECUMENICAL
COUNCILS


By FRANCIS DVORNIK


HAWTHORN BOOKS - PUBLISHERS - New York


GEORGE MARK ELLIOTT LIBRARY


The Cincinnati Bible Seminary


Copyright © 1961 by Hawthorn Books, Inc., 70 Fifth Avenue, New
York 11, N. Y. Copyright under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions. Philippines Copyright 1961 by Hawthorn
Books, Inc. All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this
book, or portions thereof, in any form except for the inclusion of
brief quotations in a review. This book was manufactured in the
United States of America and published simultaneously in Canada
by McClelland & Stewart, Ltd., 25 Hollinger Road, Toronto 16. The
Library of Congress has catalogued The Twentieth Century Encyclo-
pedia of Catholicism under card number 58-14327. Library of Con-
gress Catalogue Card Number for this volume: 61-9455. The Cath-
olic University of America Library has catalogued this volume based
on the Lynn-Peterson Alternative Classification for Catholic Books:
BQT184T9v.82/BQT403. Dewey Decimal Classification: 282.


First Edition, January, 1961


NIHIL OBSTAT


Joannes M. T. Barton, S.T.D., L.S.S.


Censor Deputatus


IMPRIMATUR
E. Morrogh Bernard
Vicarius Generalis


Westmonasterii, die V NOVEMBRIS MCMLX


The Nihil obstat and Imprimatur are a declaration that a book or pamphlet is
considered to be free from doctrinal or moral error. It is not implied that those
who have granted the Nihil obstat and Imprimatur agree with the contents, opin-
ions or statements expressed.


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION


I. THE First ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


Origin of the Councils

The Council of Nicaea (325): the Réle of the
Emperor and the Rights of Bishops

The Aftermath of Nicaea and the Second Ecu-
menical Council

Rivalry between Alexandria, Constantinople
and Antioch: the Third Ecumenical Coun-
cil (431)

The Triumphs of Monophysitism at the “Robber
Synod” (449)

The Council of Chalcedon (451)

Attempts at Compromise with the Monophysites

Emperor Justinian and the Fifth Ecumenical
Council (553)

The Sixth Ecumenical Council (680)

Image Worship and the Seventh Ecumenical
Council (787)

The Photian Controversy and the Synods of 869
and 879


Il. THe MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN


CHURCH

The Reformers and Roman Synods

The Four Councils of the Lateran (1123, 1139,
1179, 1215) and the First Council of Lyons
(1245)


The Abortive Union at the Second Council of


Lyons 57
The General Council of Vienne and the Sup-
pression of the Templars (1311, 1312) 62
Ill. THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY 67
Western Schism, Origins of the Conciliar Theory 67
The Council of Constance (1414-18) 71
The Councils of Basle-Ferrara-Florence (1431-—
7), Union and Its Failure 74
Survivals of the Conciliar Theory, the Fifth
Lateran Council (1512-17) 80
IV. THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 83
Beginning of the Reformation 83
The Council of Trent (1545-65) 85
From Trent to the Vatican Council 92
The Vatican Council (1869, 1870) 95
The Vatican Council and Orthodox Belief in
Church Infallibility 101


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 111


INTRODUCTION


The decision of the Holy Father, John XXIII, to convoke an
Ecumenical Council has been greeted with joy and satisfaction
by all Catholics who see in this initiative new evidence of the
Church’s vitality. It met with a favourable reception also among
the Eastern Churches not united with Rome and among other
Christian bodies. The need for closer collaboration of all Chris- ‘
tians against new and dangerous movements hostile not only to.
Christianity but to any kind of religion, is increasingly felt, and
any reaffirmation of religious strength and determination to face
these dangers is welcomed.

The Fathers, gathered around the supreme head of the Catholic
Church, will, above all, have to solve problems facing their own
Church in doctrinal and disciplinary matters. Many of these
problems, however, are the concern of all Christians, and it is
hoped that the discussions will prepare the way for a rapproche-
ment between the Christian Churches.

The Holy Father, in convoking this new General Council, is
reviving an ancient tradition originating from the early days of
the Church, as is shown in the first chapter of this study. This
tradition was fully developed by the Eastern Church during the
first seven Ecumenical Councils. In these Councils, the Eastern
Fathers, united with Rome, defined the fundamental dogmas on
the Holy Trinity and on our Saviour, doctrines which are com-
mon to all Christians. These Councils form the bond which ties
Eastern Christianity to that of the West, and it is for this reason
that J have drawn attention to their history.

The Councils of the ninth century which deal with the Photian
Schism are controversial both in the East and the West. Because
of the difficulties which this problem still presents to the Church
historian, I have tried to explain how it came about that Western
canonists added to the seven General Councils, an eighth


8 INTRODUCTION


Council (869-70) which the Eastern Church does not hold as
ecumenical.

The conciliar tradition was continued by the Western Church
during the Middle Ages and up until the nineteenth century, but
differed in many ways from that of the first General Councils.
This can best be understood when studied within the framework
of European history, which accounts for the several short his-
torical sketches in this book, broadly outlining the often stormy
and violent atmosphere in which the Fathers of the Western
General Councils, gathered around the popes, endeavoured to
solve the new doctrinal and disciplinary problems facing them.

The definition of papal infallibility pronounced by the last
Western General Synod, the Vatican Council, was the culmina-
tion of the work of Western theologians and canonists who, in
the past, had continually stressed the need for a central authority
in the Church embodied in the pope who, in his final decisions
on matters of faith and morals, by the will of Christ, cannot err.

Because this definition is looked upon as the main obstacle to
a rapprochement between the Churches, I have added a short
chapter in which I have tried to make clear how very close this
definition is to the belief of Orthodox Christians in the infal-
libility of the Church.

I hope that this brief study will contribute to a greater under-
standing and appreciation of the conciliar tradition in the
Church.


Dumbarton Oaks, Washington
June 24th, 1960


CoH VAL PrIee Ret


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL
COUNCILS


ORIGIN OF THE COUNCILS


Discussion of the origin of the Councils recalls the assembly of
the apostles in Jerusalem in 52 and the letter starting with the
words (Acts 15. 28): “It has seemed good to the Holy Spirit
and to us...’’. This document announced to the faithful the
decision of the assembly not to impose on the pagan converts
all the prescriptions of the Old Testament. These words were
often recalled in the gatherings of bishops during the first
centuries when urgent matters brought them together to make
decisions in accordance with the principles outlined by our Lord
and by the apostles.

Such meetings took place in the capitals or major cities of
Roman provinces where the apostles had found important Jewish
communities which had become centres from which Christianity
spread through the rest of the provinces. This explains why the
letters of Peter and Paul were addressed to the Christians of
Eastern and Western provinces of the Roman Empire or of their
capitals—Rome (Italy), Ephesus (Asia), Corinth (Achaea),
Thessalonica (Macedonia)—and why the decision of the
apostolic assembly was made known to the Christians of Antioch,
capital of Syria, and of the province of Cilicia. This practice
influenced the organization of the primitive Church along the
lines of the political divisions of the Roman Empire. It was thus
natural that to the bishops residing in the capitals of the provinces


10 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


were left the initiative of convoking the councils and the
privilege of presiding over their debates. This gave them a kind of
superiority over other bishops of the districts. They were called
metropolitans because they resided in the capitals (metro-
polis) and this status of superiority over other bishops of the
provinces was sanctioned by the first Ecumenical Council, that o
We have little information on such assemblies in the eastern
part of the Empire. It is St Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, the
main city of Roman Africa, who gives us, however, the most
complete information on how such assemblies were organized.
fe was convinced, as were the apostles, that the deliberations of
the bishops were guided by the Holy Spirit. He announced the
decision of the African Council of 252 with the words: “It has
seemed good to us on the suggestion of the Holy Ghost.” On the
other hand, however, from his letters we can be certain that such
gatherings of bishops gradually modelled themselves on the
rules under which the sessions of the Roman Senate were held.
The presiding bishop assumed the réle of the Emperor or of his
representative in the Senate. He used the same words for the
convocation of the Council as were used in the imperial summons
for the meeting of the Senate; and the conduct of debate, the
interrogations of the bishops, and their responses also imitated
the procedure of the Senate. The same rules were observed at the
Roman council held in 313, in the house of Fausta. There was
nothing unusual in this development. The meetings of the local
senates or municipal councils in the provincial capitals were also
modelled on the procedure followed by the Roman Senate, and
this procedure was thus familiar to the bishops, who were Roman
citizens.

It is important to state that the conciliar or synodal practice
was already fully developed in the Church before the conversion
of Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor. Contrary
to what has been often thought, Constantine was neither an
agnostic nor a sceptical despot, exploiting religion for reasons of
State. His conversion was sincere, and he was a firm believer in
the spiritual and divine. Of course, he knew only one political


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS ital


system, that of the autocratic monarchy into which the Roman
Republic had been transformed under the influence of the
Hellenistic political philosophy. This philosophy had deified the
ruler and had given him absolute power over the material and
spiritual interests of his subjects. The first Christian political
philosophers, especially the Church historian Eusebius of
Caesarea, adapted this political system to Christian teaching.
The Emperor was thus deprived of his divine character, but made
to be the representative of God on earth, who had been given
by God supreme power in things material and spiritual. He was
told that, as a representative of the Eternal King—Jesus Christ—
his foremost duty was to lead men to God.

Constantine accepted this transformation of Hellenistic and
Roman political thought and took his duties in religious matters
very seriously. We find in his official decrees many declarations
which reveal his sincerity and zealous interest in the purity of
the Christian faith and the unity of the Church. This he showed,
for example, when, on the invitation of bishops, he intervened
in the quarrels provoked by the African Donatists. These
rigorists refused to accept bishops and priests who, during the
persecutions, had been guilty of some weakness, but had per-
formed penance for their lapses.

In the letter he sent in 314 to Aelafus, his representative in
Africa, who was also a Christian, Constantine declared why he
regarded it as his duty to stop this agitation:

[These quarrels] might well rouse God not only against the human
race, but also against me, to whose rule and care his holy will has
committed all earthly things, and provoke other measures. I shall
never rest content or expect prosperity and happiness from the
Almighty’s merciful power until I feel that all men offer to the All
Holy the right worship of the Catholic religion in a common
brotherhood.


These words express very clearly not only Constantine’s
political creed, but also his sincerity in promoting the true wor-
ship of God and peace within the Church. In order to end
the African schism, Constantine appointed five bishops from
Gaul (modern France) as judges, including the Bishop of Rome.


12 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


He was apparently not yet acquainted with ecclesiastical practice,
and when this first case was submitted to him by the contending
bishops, he applied the Roman judicial procedure to its solution
by setting up a court of investigation and judgement. The pope,
Sylvester I, accepted the Emperor’s invitation, but followed
Church practice by transforming the court into a council to
which he invited fourteen Italian bishops.

Once Constantine had learned of the Church method—
decision of religious affairs by bishops meeting in synods—he
adopted it, and when the Donatists repudiated the decision of
the Roman synod presided over by the pope, he decided to
summon another council at Arles in Gaul.

The letter which Constantine sent to the assembly of Arles
reveals the true sentiments of the Emperor and refutes the often
expressed opinion that Constantine treated the bishops only as
his counsellors in ecclesiastical affairs, reserving the final decision
to himself. He expresses his indignation over the refusal of the
Donatists to accept the decision of the Roman synod and their
new appeal to his judgement. “‘They claim judgement from me,
who am awaiting the judgement of Christ; for I declare, as is
the truth, that the judgement of bishops ought to be looked
upon as if the Lord himself were sitting in judgement. . . . What
is to be said of these defamers of the law who, after rejecting the
judgement of Heaven, have thought that they should demand
judgement from me?”

It seems evident from these words that Constantine accepted
the current ecclesiastical practice regarding the decision of the
bishops in a council as final. On the other hand, he also thought
that it was his imperial duty to support the decision, as he said in
another letter in which he deplored the stubbornness of the
Donatists: “I believe that I can in no way escape the heaviest
guilt, save by bringing wickedness to light. Is there anything
more consonant with my fixed resolve and my imperial duty
that I can do than to destroy errors, extirpate all vain opinions
and to cause men to offer to the Almighty a genuine religion, a
sincere concord and a worship that is his due?” He finally con-
firmed the decision of the Council of Arles against the Donatists.


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 13


THE ECUMENICAL COUNCIL OF NICAEA (325);
HE ROLE OF THE EMPEROR AND THE RIGHTS OF
BISHOPS ;


This investigation of the origin of the councils helps us to
understand better the rdle of the Emperors in the first Ecumenical
ouncils. Here too the initiative must be ascribed to Constanti
who convoked the first Ecumenical Council, that of Nicaea, i

ond:

The Donatist movement was limited locally to the African
Christian community which had suffered greatly for a con-
siderable time from the troubles caused by this first major schism.
Far more dangerous for the Church was another movement
which had originated also in Africa, and was of a much more
serious character because it attacked the traditional teaching on
the Holy Trinity.

The first task of theological speculation among the Christians
was a clearer definition of the relation of Father, Son and the
Holy Ghost to each other with regard to their common divine

ature. This was not an easy task for the first Christian thinkers
and apologists living in a_pagan atmosphere, permeated with
belief in the plurality of divine beings. When trying to stress the
oneness (singleness) of God, some of the Christian thinkers of
the second and third century fell into error by subordinating the
Second Person in the Holy Trinity to the First, explaining this
subordination in different ways, minimizing the divine character
of the Son, or admitting only three non-simultaneous manifes-
tations of the one God. Rome was most active in the rejection
of such errors, but only local synods or councils were assembled
in order to condemn them.
These methods, however, proved ineffective when Arius, a
earned priest of Alexandria, had developed this teaching into a
dialectical system, subordinating the Son to the Father in the
most outspoken way, calling him the Father’s creature, who at
one time had not existed and who can be called God only in an
indirect way because through his will he was united with Go
e Father. Arius’ teaching was condemned first by Bish


14 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


Alexander of Alexandria and then by an Egyptian council of one
hundred bishops in 318. Arius defended his doctrine very stub-
bornly, composing a popular apology in verses called Thalia or
“Spiritual Bouquet”, which appealed to the simple people, and
he won some influential bishops to his teaching.

In the meantime, Constantine had defeated his opponent
Licinius, the ruler of the eastern part of the Roman Empire, and
had become master of East and West. Alexandria was the most
important city in the Empire after Rome, and Egypt was the
granary of Italy. Therefore the troubles provoked by Arius’
agitation attracted the attention of the Emperor who sent to
Alexandria his counsellor Hosius, Bishop of Cordoba in Spain,
with the task of establishing harmony. His mission did not suc-
ceed and he therefore took steps to convoke a synod in Antioch,

hich condemned Arius’ teachings (325). However, because the
agitation had spread and some other religious problems claimed
attention, Constantine decided to convoke a council of bishops
from the whole Empire, and so the first Ecumenical Council
gathered in 325 in Nicaea in Asia Minor.

The acts of this first Ecumenical Council are not preserved,
but Eusebius of Caesarea has left us a minute description of the
conciliar p proceedings in his “Life of Constantine”. We gather
from his report that the procedure of the Council was the senator-
ial procedure which the Church in Africa and in Rome had also

dopted. The Emperor convoked the bishops to the Council as

e used to summon the senators to their meetings. The bishops
obtained the senatorial privilege of travelling at public expense
and using the official stage post, which was well organized in the
Roman Empire. As in the Senate, the problems to be decide

ere first debated by the most prominent bishops and the
Emperor, in private meetings, and it was concluded that the
Council should define the identity of th
ith the ; reek word homoousios (of the same
ature) was proposed as explaining best the Catholic doctrine
on the relation of the Son to the Father.
The Emperor himself presided over sessions of the Council.
In the place of the statue of Victory, which stood in the front of


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 15


the presidential tribune in the Roman Senate, the Bible was
placed between the bishops and the Emperor. As in the Senate,
the Emperor explained why he had convoked the Council and
the subject the bishops had to discuss before making their defini-
tion. Then followed the individual interrogation of the bishops,
who made known their views.

The 318 prelates declared that the formula, proposed by the
Emperor, expressed the true belief of the Church. Then the
Creed, including the accepted formula, was read and signed by
the bishops. It is one of the most treasured symbols of the
whole of Christianity and forms part of the eucharistic liturgy.

After this dogmatic decision, the Fathers deliberated on cer-
tain disciplinary problems. It was decided that Easter, the date

f the celebration of which was in dispute, would always be on
Sunday, but not at the same time as the feast of the Jews. In
wenty canons, clerical discipline was regulated, the consecration
of bishops was ordered to be performed by three bishops, and it
was approved that Church organization should follow the civil
divisions of the Empire. Thus, the privileged position of the
metropolitans—in the West they were also called archbishops—
over the bishops of the civil provinces was confirmed and the
foundation laid for what were later called patriarchates. The
bishops of the capitals of civil dioceses, which included several
provinces, were to be called exarchs with special privileges over
the bishops in each exarchate. Specially singled out were Rome
(diocese of Italy), which was given first place, Alexandria
(diocese of Egypt), which came second and Antioch (diocese
of the Orient), which was third. Jerusalem was given only an
honorary precedence over its metropolis Caesarea.

It is evident from the accounts of the first Ecumenical Counci
hat the Emperor had played a prominent réle in its convocatio

d procedure. This appears dangerous and contrary to the
_ autonomy of the ‘Church in religious affairs, It was the result of

‘the adaptation of the primitive Church to the only political
philosophy accepted at that time and to the political organiza-
tion of the Empire, for practical reasons. Providence, however,
watched over the Church and her sacred rights. There was one


16 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


item which providentially saved the autonomy of the bishops in
doctrinal matters: the Emperor never had the right to vote in
the Senate. This was the privilege of the senators, a survival
of their independence and supreme legislative function in the
Roman Republic. The position of the senators suffered a setback
after the transformation of the Republic into a principality, a
disguised monarchy, but not even the most autocratic emperors
dared to discard the Senate or to deprive the senators of their
privilege of voting. There is no indication in the accounts of the
Council of Nicaea that Constantine voted with the bishops. So
a compromise was achieved between the imperial and episcopal
rights. The compromise saved the privileged position of the
bishops, and proved unobjectionable to the Emperor, since he
was respecting a historical precedent—the privilege of the sena-
tors, whom the bishops in the councils in many ways resembled.

But what about the supreme position of the Roman See?
Even here, Providence had provided a precedent which guaran-
teed to the representatives of the Roman See the first place in
conciliar proceedings. The most influential position in the Roman
Senate was occupied by the first senator, called in Latin princeps
sSenatus. He enjoyed in high degree the respect and trust of the
Emperor and of the other senators. He was the first whose
opinion on the subjects discussed was asked, he voted first and,
through his declarations and votes, exercised a profound in-
fluence on the other senators, most of whom simply followed
his lead in their judgement and voting.

This principle appears to have been observed also in the
Council of Nicaea, although not as clearly as in the following
Ecumenical Councils; This is due, probably, to the fact that Pope
Sylvester I was too old to undertake the long journey to Asia
Minor and delegated as his representatives not bishops but two
priests. The western part of the Empire was represented by only
four bishops, the most prominent among them being Hosius of
Cordoba in Spain. He was the Emperor’s trusted counsellor and
confidant and probably the principal agent in the formulation
of the Creed. Because of that, he was asked to sign the Creed
first, before the two priests who represented the Bishop of Rome.


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS ii


Later, from the fifth century onwards, he was classed together
in the lists of signatories with the Roman legates as being one of
them. We can thus see that the principle of the preeminence of
the Roman See in an Ecumenical Council was laid down and
safeguarded as early as 325. Ss
The letter in which Constantine informed the bishops who
could not attend the Council of the decisions made by the
assembled bishops, shows that he was well aware of the function
of the bishops in ecclesiastical matters and that he respected it,
although watching jealously his own imperial prerogatives. H
ade there the following declaration: “Be willing to accept this
eavenly favour and an order so manifestly from God. For
whatever is decided in the holy councils of the bishops must be
ttributed to the divine will.”


THE AFTERMATH OF NICAEA AND THE SECOND
ECUMENICAL COUNCIL


We can understand why the early Church had accepted the
Emperotr’s leadership even in spiritual things. The notion of the
Hellenistic kingship was widely held among the first Christians
and its adaptation to the teaching of the Church seemed a good
barrier against imperial abuses.

In spite of that, the Hellenistic political philosophy, even in
its Christian adaptation, soon proved most dangerous to the
Christian faith. It is known that Constantine, although he had
contributed so much to the definition of the true faith and had
signed the condemnation of Arius, later abandoned his unequi-
vocal attitude and tried to compromise between the Catholics

nd the Arians. In pursuit of this policy, he exiled to Trier the
intrepid defender of the Nicaenum, St Athanasius, Bishop of
Alexandria, who had been condemned by the synod of Tyre,
and supported the “‘Semi-Arians”’, who claimed that the Son was
only similar (homoiousios) to the Father. The reason for this
change seemed more political than religious. The followers of
“Arius did not give up after Nicaea, and Egypt continued to be
the field of fierce antagonism between the two factions. The
Emperor was naturally anxious to pacify Egypt, then the most


18 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


important province of the Empire, and was inclined to favour a
watering down of the unequivocal definition made at Nicaea.

There may be also another reason for his hesitant attitude,
which was rooted in the political philosophy then generally
accepted. The Arians very cleverly exploited its main notions for
themselves. Declaring that the Empire was a mirror of the
heavenly Empire governed by the Eternal King, God the Father
himself, they claimed that in accepting the divine nature of the
Son, the Christians were endangering the existence of the terres-
trial monarchy, image of the Heavenly One, which should be
ruled only by one emperor, representing God on earth.

It is possible that already Constantine was influenced by this
reasoning. His son Constantius was almost completely under its
spell. Owing to his sympathy with the Arians, the heresy spread
more and more over the East. When Constantius II became the
sole ruler over the whole Empire (350-61) after the tragic death
of his brothers, the agitation of the heretics spread to the West
also. In spite of his desire to make Arianism the official religion
of the Empire, Constantius did not dare to impose his creed on
his subjects. The principle that the definition of faith was the
prerogative of the bishops gathered in synod was already ton
deeply imbedded in the mind of the Christians, and Constantius
had to respect it.

On his initiative many synods were convoked, often dominated
by heretical bishops; Constantius, respecting the principle of the
rdle of synods, which he used for the promotion of a heretical
doctrine, pretended to be enforcing the will and decision of
ecclesiastical synods rather than his own. The principle was right;
unfortunately the synods were wrong. The synods convoked by
the Emperor were so numerous—Antioch in 341, Sardica
(modern Sofia in Bulgaria) in 343, Sirmium in 351, Arles in 353,
Milan in 355, the second and third synods of Sirmium in 357 and
358, Rimini and Seleucia in 359—that the pagan writer Am-
mianus Marcellinus complained that the bishops, by moving
from one synod to another and by using the public transport
service too freely, disorganized it and made themselves a burden
to the exchequer.


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 19


During this troublesome period, Pope Julius I made an
important declaration which marks another stage in the history
of the Councils. When the Arians objected to the Roman synod
which had rescinded the decision of the Synod of Tyre (335),
condemning Athanasius, although this synod had been convoked
by the Emperor Constantine and thus should be regarded as a
General Council, Julius argued that it was not the Emperor’s
convocation, but the recognition of the synodal decisions by the
whole Church, that gave the Council its general and binding
character. Such was the case only with the synod of Nicaea.

The most important of these local synods was that of Sardica
of 343. It was convoked by the Western Emperor Constans with
the consent of his brother Constantius. It did not succeed in
winning over the heretical opposition, which held a meeting in
the town. But the orthodox prelates, mostly from the West,
voted some important canons, which became laws in the Western
Church. Among them were the third and fifth canons, recogniz-
ing the See of Rome as the highest tribunal in disciplinary matters
for the whole Church, to which any bishop deposed by a council
could appeal.

In their efforts to find a formula compromising with the clear-
cut definition of Nicaea, the Arians split into several sects
which, naturally, weakened their position. Deprived of imperial
support after the death of Constantius (361) and of the Eastern
Emperor Valens (378), {hey shrank to a minor community. The _
great Greek Fathers—Basil, Gregory of Nazianzus and Gregory
of Nyssa—with St Athanasi


defeating the heresy in their theological writings
the formula ‘‘one divine substance i dae
These Fathers contributed also to the defeat of another heresy
which originated during the struggle with Arianism and which
degraded the Holy Ghost to a creature of the Second Person in
the Trinity. The main propagator of this heresy was Macedonius,
1 Arianism survived among Germanic tribes, especially the Goths, Vandals
and Langobards, thanks to their missionary Bishop Ulphilas, translator of
the Bible and liturgy into Gothic (} 383). During their migration Arianism
became their national religion. The remnants of these tribes became Catholic
in the sixth and seventh centuries.


20 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


bishop of Constantinople. After several local synods of Alex-
ndria and Rome had condemned this false doctrine, the
Emperor Theodosius the Great (379-95) decided to convoke a
Council of all the bishops from the Eastern part of the Empire
in order to manifest the triumph of the Church over Arius and
his followers, and to condemn the new heresy that denied the,
ivine nature of the Holy Ghost. Because this doctrine was
spreading mainly in the East, the Western bishops were not
invited to the Council, which gathered in Constantinople in 38

ne hundred and fifty bishops, present at the Council, solemnly
condemned the new heresy and added to the Creed of Nicaea
the words defining the divine nature of the Holy Ghost which
are today recited in the Creed (often called the Niceno-Constan
inopolitan Creed).

The Council of 381 was thus originally not an ecumenical
synod. It obtained its ecumenical character only because of it
ogmatic decision concerning the Holy Ghost, and because of
its addition to the Nicene Creed. The ecumenical character of
this Council was recognized by the Council of Chalcedon (451)
and, at the beginning of the sixth century, Rome and the whole
est accepted it as the Second General Council.
The canons voted by this Council were also meant only for the
Eastern Church. The most important of these was canon #bree
which confirmed to Rome the first place in the Church, but
stipulated that the second place should be occupied, not by
Alexandria, but by Constantinople, the city in which the Emperor
resided. Because the principle of accommodation to the political
status was generally accepted in the East, the bishops of Alex-
andria and of Antioch accepted this canon, although they had
to occupy lower places in Church organization.

It should be stressed that this measure was not directed against
Rome. On the contrary, the first place in the Church was once
more assigned to Rome and there was no hostile intention in
the promotion of Constantinople. The measure was rather
directed against Alexandria, because the bishops of this city
during the Arian struggles had tried to impose their heretical
teaching on the rest of the Church and gave the impression that


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 21


they desired to obtain primacy over the whole East. It seems, more-
over, that, at the beginning, Constantinople had only honorary pre-
cedence, without an increase of jurisdiction over other Churches.
Rome was not even informed of these measures because they
only concerned the situation in the Eastern Church. Pope Dam-
asus apparently was aware of the results of this Council, but there
is no evidence of a protest by Rome against this elevation of
Constantinople in the Catholic hierarchical order because the
principle of accommodation to the political status was recog-
nized also in Rome, although not as in the East, and because this
elevation was regarded as involving only a precedence of honour.


ONSTANTINOPLE AND ANTIOCH: THE THIRD


RIVALRY BETWEEN ALEXANDRIA,
Ci
ECUMENICAL COUNCIL (431)


Alexandria’s pretensions to the leading position in the
Eastern Church became especially manifest under the Patriarch
Theophilus. (385-412), who came into conflict with St Joh

hrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople. Chrysostom had offered

efuge to some Egyptian monks, persecuted by Theophilus
because they disagreed with Theophilus’ hasty condemnation of
Origen, who was one of the greatest theologians of the thir

entury. When Chrysostom, the most eloquent preacher of his
time, offended the Empress Eudoxia by his criticism of her
worldly manner of life, Theophilus made an alliance with
Chrysostom’s enemies, convoked a synod and deposed him. The
Emperor confirmed the deposition and exiled the intrepid re-
former (403). A popular upheaval induced the Emperor to rescind
his judgement, but a further conflict with the Empress brought
about a new condemnation and Chrysostom died on the way to
his second exile (407).

Although Chrysostom was an innocent victim the unjust
condemnation of a bishop of the residential city was a degradi
humiliation for the See of Constantinople. This tragic incident

ade it clear that there was open rivalry between the two most
prominent sees in the Eastern Church. The rivalry continued;


2H) THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


owever, under Theophilus’ successor, his nephew Cyril (412-
44), and became even more embittered, because it was aggra-
vated by tr ctrinal nature.
‘he doctrine that all three Persons were of the same one divine
ature had triumphed by 381. But there was another doctrinal
question which engaged the attention of theologians. How
should the union of the second divine Person with human nature
be understood ?The problem had already been raised by the Arians,
who denied not only the divine character of the Son, but also
taught that the created Logos or Son assumed a soulless body.
The soul in Christ was the Logos. This doctrine was condemned
by the Council of 381 and by Pope Damasus in the following
year at a Roman synod. It was, however, partly revived by the
Syrian Bishop Apollinaris. Following the Greek philosopher
Plato, Apollinaris distinguished between the animal and rational
soul in man, and taught that the Logos or the Son of God was to
be identified with the rational soul (or mind) in Christ.

This doctrine did not have much success, but it spurred the
theologians to a clearer definition of the union of the divine and
human natures in Christ. At that time, the Eastern Church could
boast two theological schools of prominent thinkers and teachers.

he school of Alexandria was anxious to stress the divine nature
in Christ and its theologians spoke on the intimate union of both
natures after the incarnation of the Son. The school of Antioch
saw a danger in the wording used by the Alexandrines in their
definition, for in the Alexandrian formula the human nature in
'\Christ seemed to be absorbed by the divine nature. Some of the
theologians of Antioch, namely Diodorus of Tarsus and Theo-
dore of Mopsuestia were accused of having gone too far in
stressing Christ’s human nature, and of postulating the existence

f two persons in the incarnate Word or Logos. The logical con
| fsequence of this teaching was that Christ’s virginal Mother
/ \could not be called Mother of God, but only Mother of Christ
_ » The ordinary faithful were perhaps unable to follow the learned
arguments of the Antiochene theologians, who claimed to be
influenced by Aristotle’s philosophy, but they instinctively
reacted sharply against those preachers who denied to Mary the


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 23


tytle of Mother of God. A tumultuous protest arose in Constan
inople against one preacher from Antioch who had dared ey
make such a declaration publicly. The indignation increase

hen Nestorius, Bishop of Constantinople, a monk educated
at the school of Antioch, began to defend the preacher and,
in doing so, used expressions which to some indicated that he
was a follower of this new heresy.

Cyril of Alexandria reacted very sharply, for he saw in Nes-
torius’ teaching not only an attack on the true Catholic faith,
but also an opportunity to humiliate the See of Constantinople
once more, and to increase the prestige of Alexandria in the
Church. This explains why he manifested so much zeal in seek-
ing the condemnation of the bishop of the capital. When Pope
Celestine I, to whose judgement both bishops appealed, rejected
Nestorius’ teaching, Cyril, pretending to act in the name of the
pope, presented to his rival a list of errors which Nestorius had
to abjure under threat of excommunication. Nestorius’ sup-
orters protested, and, in order to clarify the situation, t
mperor Theodosius II convoked a General Council to Ephesus
in 431.

“/ The sessions of the Council were turbulent because of the>
ivalry between Alexandria and Constantinople. John, Bishop of
ntioch, sympathized rather with Constantinople, although not
sharing Nestorius’ interpretation. With a desire to hasten the
condemnation of Nestorius, Cyril refused to wait for the arrival
of the Antiochenes and of the papal legates, and opened the
ouncil of 153 bishops, acting as representative of the pope.
‘he Fathers defined the Catholic faith of two natures and on
person in Christ, and condemned and deposed Nestorius. When
the papal legates reached Ephesus, they sided with Cyril an
onfirmed the condemnation.

Offended by the hasty opening of the Council, convened in his
absence, John, Bishop of Antioch, refused to join the bishops
assembled by Cyril and, in a conclave of his own, condemned
Cyril. Both parties having censured each other, the Emperor was
in an unpleasant dilemma and, after confirming the decision of
both assemblies, tried to mediate between Cyril, John and


24 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


Nestorius. Cyril used all his diplomatic skill in order to convince
the Emperor and his court that his followers were defending
the true doctrine of the Church. He was aided to a large extent
by the wealth of his see, and did not hesitate to send expensive
presents to courtiers close to the Emperor, but mainly by
the Emperor’s older sister, the pious Pulcheria. Nestorius was

eposed and sent to his monastery in Antioch. He died in exile

451. Cyril and John of Antioch came to an agreement in 433/
These events, however, left bitterness on both sides, because the
Antiochenes saw in the condemnation of Nestorius a defeat by
the school of Alexandria. This rivalry between the two schools
of Antioch and of Alexandria, and between the two most impor-
tant sees of the Eastern Church, explains not only the heated
debates at and after Ephesus, but also, as we shall see, the further
evolution of the theological definitions concerning the nature of
Christ.

The case of Nestorius, who expounded his doctrine in a
learned treatise which is preserved in a Syriac translation, is still
debated by theologians. There are many who think that Nes-
torius’ teaching was basically orthodox but that, in explaining
his views, he used words which could easily be explained in a
heretical way.

The doctrine called that of Nestorius soon disappeared in the
territory of the Roman Empire. Many Nestorians, however,
migrated into Persia, where they founded a new theological
school at Nisibis and their own Nestorian Church Patriarchate
with its see at Seleucia-Ktesiphon. There they were favoured by
the Persian kings, rivals of the Roman emperors, and developed


a zealous missionary activity and penetrated as far as India and
China.


2 The Christians of St Thomas in India, now mostly united with Rome, are
an interesting survival of Nestorian missions. The invasion of Persia by the
Mongols in the thirteenth century caused, however, a rapid decline of the
Nestorian Church. Owing to other persecutions, only a small number of
the Nestorians still exists in Syria and in Cyprus. More numerous are the
so-called Chaldaean Christians, former Nestorians united now with Rome,
with their own patriarch residing in Baghdad.


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS D5


THE TRIUMPH OF MONOPHYSITISM AT THE
“ROBBER SYNOD”


The Council of Ephesus was the triumph of Alexandria over)
Constantinople and Antioch, and the prestige of the Egyptian
atriarch in the East rose considerably. In fighting the false doc-
trine of the school of Antioch, however, the theologians of the
Alexandrine school went too far in stressing the divine nature of
the incarnate Son. They taught that the divine nature absorbed
the human nature in Christ so that, after his incarnation, the
Son of God possessed only one nature, the divine. Christ’s body
was deified. This doctrine of one nature in Christ, called Mono-
physitism, became very popular in Egypt.

It appealed to Alexandrine theologians, who were far more
influenced by Greek philosophy than were the scholars of
Antioch. Plato’s concept of the deification of man through his
own effort of strict moral discipline, taught also by the last great
Alexandrian philosopher, Plotinus, the founder of Neo-platon-
ism, impressed many Christian thinkers also. They pointed out
to their pagan confréres, however, that this deification was
possible because of the love and condescension of God himself,
who had assumed human form and thus had deified it. The in-
carnate Word is therefore the source of true life, and the man
who is in Christ will be re-elevated into and commingled with
the Divine. This explains why the doctrine of absorption of
human nature by the divine in the incarnate Word appealed to
Alexandrine and other theologians.

The simple Egyptian people might still have been under the
spell of the old pagan belief in the divine character of their kings.
Even this crude concept expressed the human desire to come as
close to the divine as it is possible for man. This might help to
explain why the Alexandrine approach to the problem of man’s
deification, based on Greek notions, appealed also to the native
non-Greek population, the Copts, and why the Coptic monks
became such fanatic defenders of Monophysitism.

The first clash of Monophysitism with orthodoxy took place
in Constantinople when the Patriarch Flavian condemned the


26 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


archimandrite (abbot) Eutyches, an exponent of Mono-
physitism, as a heretic. Flavian communicated his condemnation
to other bishops, especially to Pope Leo I. Unfortunately, the
Monophysite doctrine had a great following in Constantinople
also, and Eutyches with his friends succeeded in finding sym-
pathy at court. The Patriarch of Alexandria, Dioscorus, an
ambitious and unscrupulous man, did not hesitate to use the
great resources of his patriarchate, and, after winning the support
of the Emperor’s principal advisers, he obtained from Theodosius
II the convocation of a new Ecumenical Council. It gathered in
449, again in Ephesus. Pope Leo I sent a long dogmatic letter to
the Patriarch of Constantinople in which he attacked Mono-
physitism, and strongly defended the doctrine that Christ had
two natures. Dioscorus, however, accompanied by a great num-
ber of fanatical Egyptian monks, took control of the Council.
Supported by his monks and the imperial police, he terrorized
the assembled bishops. The papal legates were denied the
position of prominence they claimed, the dogmatic letter of the
pope was not even read; and Flavian, with other prominent
supporters of the Orthodox doctrine, was deposed. They all
turned to Pope Leo I with touching appeals. Flavian, who
suffered injuries from Dioscorus’ men, died on his way to exile.


Gz COUNCIL OF CHALCEDON (451)


But this triumph of Monophysitism was of short duration.

eo I protested against the sentences of deposition, pronounced
the synod of Ephesus a “‘Robber Synod’’, and asked the Emperor
for the convocation of a new Council to confirm the true doctrine.
Theodosius refused to accede to this request, and the new
Council was not convoked until after Theodosius’ death when
the latter’s sister Pulcheria married Marcian (450-7), and thu
had him elevated to the throne. Nevertheless the new Emperor
rejected Leo’s plea for a Council in Italy or in Gaul, and sum-
moned the bishops to Nicaea and then to Chalcedon, near
Constantinople.

How profoundly the whole Christian East was perturbed by
the Monophysite struggles is illustrated by the large number of


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 27.


bishops—about 600—who took part in this Council. The
Western part of the Empire was represented by only five bishops,
two of whom—with two priests—represented the pope, one was
from Spain, and two were from the African provinces. The
Fathers examined the Acts of the Robber Synod, which they
condemned, and then deposed Dioscorus. The dogmatic letter
sent by Leo I to Flavian was read and unanimously approved as
expressing the true Catholic doctrine. Although the papal
legates opposed the composition of a new dogmatic formula, a
committee of bishops was appointed to prepare one, and this
was solemnly accepted during the sixth session: “‘We all confess
unanimously one and the same Christ, Son, Lord, Only-
begotten, made known in two natures [which are] without
confusion, change, separation or division and which both meet
in one person.”

The acts of the Council of Chalcedon are very important, sinc
they show how the General Councils functioned and how they
were organized. The actual direction of debates and the pres#

ency belonged to the eighteen imperial officials delegated by the
Emperor. The sixth, most solemn session was even presided
over by Marcian and Pulcheria. It is evident from the acts that
the sort of presidency at the councils which popes and legates
claimed was the function once exercised by the princeps senatus
of the Roman Senate, who may be compared to the Speaker of
the House. The Gospel was set in the centre of the council as the
altar of Victory used to be set in the Senate, and the members who
attended were placed in the same order as the senators, the metro-
politans corresponding to the praetors, the bishops to senators
of aedile rank, the abbots—who stood and had no right to vote—
to the knights.

The bishops adopted also the senatorial practice of acclaiming
the Emperors. The acclamations which greeted the imperial pair
at the end of the sixth session are particularly significant because
they manifest the main ideas of the christianized hellenistic
political philosophy, as then understood by the Church: “To
Marcian, the new Constantine, the new Paul, the new David...
You have the faith of the apostles .. . You are the light of the


28 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


orthodox faith ... Lord, protect the light of peace... Many
years to the priest-emperor. You . . . have set the Churches right,
... doctor of the faith . . . Be your empire eternal.”

In spite of the priestly character which the Fathers and also
Leo I seemed to attribute to the Emperor, Marcian respected
the exclusive right of the bishops in proclaiming the true faith.
This is clear from his announcement of the conciliar decisions to
the people of the capital: “Saintly priests came from various
provinces to Chalcedon by our command and accurately de-
fined what should be preserved. So let there be an end to all vain
controversy... .”

After the doctrinal definition, the Fathers dealt with disci-
plinary questions, rehabilitated the two leaders of the Antio-
chene school, Theodoret of Cyrus and Ibas of Edessa, and
promoted Jerusalem to patriarchal rank. In the sixteenth session,
in the absence of the papal legates, they voted the so-called
twenty-eighth canon, which confirmed to Constantinople the
second place in the Church and conferred on its bishops direct
jurisdiction over the dioceses of Thrace, Pontus and Asia. The
papal legates protested against this vote at the last session, and
Leo I rejected this canon with sharp criticism, stressing the
principle of apostolic and Petrine origin of the position in
ecclesiastical organization enjoyed by Rome, Alexandria and
Antioch, but not by Constantinople.

The fears of the pope are quite understandable. Rome could
accord Constantinople an honorary precedence over the other
Eastern patriarchs, but the submission of all Asia Minor and
of European Thrace to the direct jurisdiction of the Patriarch
of Constantinople was another matter. Rome had lost her great
prerogative as the centre of the Empire and the residential city
of the emperors, and had retained, as justification for her claim
to the primacy in the Church, only her apostolic character and
her successorship to St Peter. Leo the Great feared that the new
status of the See of Constantinople might endanger in the future
the rightful claims of Rome.

In reality, however, the Fathers of Chalcedon had no intention
of denying the primacy of the Roman bishop. When the apostolic


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 29


legates quoted the Latin version of canon six of Nicaea—‘‘The
Roman Church always possessed the primacy’’—the Fathers did
not protest, although the Roman version did not correspond to
the Greek version voted at Nicaea. Moreover, the Fathers, the
Patriarch of Constantinople and the Emperor, asked the pope
to sign the canon, indicating that they saw in its wording no
offence against Rome. They had still in mind the principle of the
adaptation of the Church to the political division of the Empire
and were determined to deprive Alexandria of its leading posi-
tion in the Eastern Church, because this see had become again
the hotbed of heresy.

Since the Easterners did not understand the principle of
apostolicity, they overlooked the apostolic and Petrine character
of the Roman See, although they respected it as the first see with
primatial rights in the Church, and even called Rome an imperial
city. Had they respected the apostolic and Petrine character of
Rome in the drawing up of the contested canon, the pope might
have been induced to accept it.

To give the pope satisfaction, the contested canon was not
included in the collection of Eastern canon law. It appeared
there only in the ninth century. Constantinople continued, how-
ever, de facto to use the rights of jurisdiction accorded her
bishops by the Council.


ATTEMPTS AT COMPROMISE WITH THE
: MONOPH YSITES


In spite of the imperial support of the Chalcedonian decision
and the deposition of Dioscorus with his followers, the agitation
of the Monophysites continued unabated in Egypt. National
and political antagonism added more fuel to the fire. The native
Copts, always jealous of the Greeks and resenting the leader-
ship of Constantinople in the Empire and in the Eastern Church,
began to regard Monophysitism as their national religion and
called the adherents of Chalcedon “‘the imperials” (Melchites).
For a short time even the patriarchal sees of Alexandria,
Antioch and Jerusalem were occupied by Monophysite prelates.


30 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


Marcian’s successor, Leo I (457-74) put an end to this. But,
although he was a supporter of the faith as defined at Chalcedon,
the Emperor Leo considered summoning a new council to make
some concessions to the Monophysites. Pope Leo dissuaded him
from making such a move, and the Emperor adopted instead the
new practice of the referendum. He asked the bishops to send
him their opinion on Chalcedon in writing. The answers of the
pope and of the bishops represent an imposing manifestation of
the Christian hierarchy in the East and in the West, in favour of
the true faith as defined by Chalcedon. Although their declara-
tions show clearly that the bishops were well aware of their right
and duty in doctrinal definitions, they disclose also that all the
hierarchy, not excepting the pope, recognized the Emperor’s
right to assist them in defining the faith, legalizing their defini-
tions, removing reluctant bishops from their sees, and checking
heresy.

In spite of Emperor Leo’s intervention, Monophysitism per-
sisted, and when the usurper Basiliscus (475-6), anxious to get
the support of the Monophysites, condemned Chalcedon and
Pope Leo’s doctrinal letter, 500 Eastern bishops signed his circu-
lar letter. The Emperor Zeno (474-91) defeated the usurper and
restored the Creed of Chalcedon. However, because the defec-
tion of Egypt from Chalcedon threatened to have political
repercussions also, Zeno favoured the compromise concluded
by the Patriarch of Constantinople Acacius and the Mono-
physite Patriarch of Alexandria Peter Mongo, expressed in a
Creed, which declared only the Niceno-Constantinopolitan
profession of faith and the decisions of the Council of Ephesus
as binding. Hoping to unite the Orthodox and the Monophysites
through this compromise, Zeno issued it as an imperial law,
which he called the Henoticon—band of union. ;

The imperial decree was accepted in Egypt only by the moder-
ate Monophysites called Severians, followers of Severus of
Antioch. But it was rejected by the diehards who seceded from
Peter Mongo. Pope Felix HI declared the formula to be a vio-
lation of the decision of Chalcedon, and very outspokenly
defended the exclusive right of the bishops to define the true


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 31


doctrine. He excommunicated Acacius and Peter. The result
was the so-called Acacian schism, which lasted from 484 to 519.
Because Zeno’s successor Anastasius I sympathized with the
Monophysites, the reconciliation was not effected until the
reign of Justin I (518-27) on the initiative of his nephew Justinian
and Pope Hormisdas (519-23). The letter of reconciliation which
the pope sent to the Eastern prelates and which they all had to
sign, not only proclaimed the definitions of Chalcedon as binding
on all Christians, but also stressed very clearly the prominent
position of the Roman See in matters of faith, based on the
promise given by our Lord to St Peter (Matt. 16. 18).

Justinian’s efforts to win over the Monophysites for ortho-
doxy were hampered by the sympathies of the Empress Theodora
in their regard. Her attempt to place in the see of Con-
stantinople a prelate who favoured Monophysitism was frus-
trated by the intervention of Pope Agapitus, who himself
appeared in the capital. The Empress, undiscouraged by this
setback, obtained from the Emperor the promotion of Vigilius,
papal nuncio in the capital, to the See of Rome, in the hope that
the ambitious young prelate would show favour to the Mono-
physites. Agapitus’ successor, Silverius, was deposed. But after
his death, the next pope, Vigilius, refused to yield to the Empress’
wishes and sent to Mennas, patriarch of Constantinople, a letter
approving the dogmatic decisions of Chalcedon.


(eurenon JUSTINIAN AND THE FIFTH ECUMENICAL
COUNCIL


Justinian (527-65) took his role as defender and propagator
of the true faith very seriously. He was himself well versed in
theology, and liked to discuss theological problems with bishops.
He initiated a discussion with the Severians, the moderate
Monophysites, and, hoping to induce them to a union with the
orthodox, he approved the formula, introduced by some monks,
“One of the Blessed Trinity has been crucified’? (533). Pope
John II found that his action was “‘true to apostolic teaching”
and confirmed it with his authority.


32 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


As his hope for winning over the Monophysites had remained
fruitless, Justinian accepted the suggestion that the Mono-
physites could be won over if he condemned the writings of ~
certain theologians of the Antiochene school to which the
Alexandrines principally objected. The Emperor published an
edict condemning the Three Chapters, namely: the person and
the writings of Theodore of Mopsuestia, Nestorius’ teacher,
the writings of Theodoret of Cyrus against St Cyril and the
Council of Ephesus and thirdly, a letter of Ibas of Edessa, in
which Theodore was defended, and St Cyril’s objections zefuted.
Although these writings, in their partly falsified versions, de-
served to be condemned, this most glaring intrusion into theology
on the part of Justinian provoked a storm of opposition. More-
over, Theodoret of Cyrus and Ibas had been rehabilitated at
Chalcedon. The real reason for this was that the Emperor issued
the condemnation without convoking a synod and without a
referendum to the bishops. It was a break with the traditional
practice, and the African theologians were most outspoken in
condemning the edict. Even Pope Vigilius, who was brought to
the capital, was induced to side with the opposition.

In the end, Justinian had to yield and convoked a council in
Constantinople. The pope was in a very difficult position. The
Africans were going too far in their opposition and were writing
treatises in defence of the Three Chapters, and the Emperor in-
sisted on absolute submission. Vigilius saw himself forced to seek
asylum in the Church of Chalcedon and refused to appear at the
synod. The Council was opened in May 553 without the pope.

n the fifth and sixth sessions, the 165 Fathers condemned the
Three Chapters and threatened their defenders with deposition
and anathema.

Impressed by the opposition to the condemnation, manifested
by many Western prelates, the pope first forbade the condemna-
tion, but later on, under heavy pressure from the side of the
Emperor, accepted (December 8th, 553) the decisions of the

uncil. The next year (February 23rd), after a more thorou
study, convinced that the condemnation did no prejudice to the
decisions of the Council of Chalcedon, Vigilius confirmed the


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 33


Council of 553.as the Fifth Ecumenical. Broken in health, he
ied on his way back to Rome.

Although his former secretary and successor Pelagius I
(556-61) also confirmed the ecumenical and binding character
of the Council of 553, the African bishops did so only after some
years. The bishops of the metropolis of Milan abandoned their
opposition only after 570. The ecclesiastical province of Aquileia-
Grado remained in open schism until 607. The metropolitan of
Old Aquileia, however, refused to join his colleague of Grado
and, in order to show his independence, assumed the title of
patriarch. In recognition of his submission, the pope granted the
same title to the Bishop of Grado also.


THE SIXTH ECUMENICAL COUNCIL (680)

The Persian invasion of Syria and Palestine revealed to the
Emperor Heraclius (610-41) the danger that the Syrian and
Egyptian Monophysites might on future occasions side with the
enemies of the Empire. This spurred him and Sergius, Patriarch
of Constantinople, to new attempts to reconcile the heretics with
orthodoxy. This could be achieved only bya compromise, in-
volving a concession to Monophysitism. Sergius came forward
in 619 with a doctrine that, after the Incarnation, Christ had not
two wills and energies—the divine and the human—but only
one will and energy. This doctrine, an evident concession to
Monophysitism, appealed to the Severians, the moderate Mono-
physites, who concluded a union with the Church of Constan-
tinople.

In order to stifle the opposition of some orthodox prelates,
Sergius sent Pope Honorius a letter explaining his theological
ideas with great subtlety. Although he himself believed in two
wills in Christ, Honorius failed to see the astuteness of the
Patriarch’s exposition and, in two letters, expressed his general
consent, declaring that one should abstain from speaking of one
or two energies in Christ.

3 The patriarchal title of Grado was transferred in 1451 to the see of


Venice, that of Old Aquileia was transferred, after the destruction of the
city by an earthquake in 1348, to Udine. It was cancelled in 1751.


ondemnation of the Three Chapters, thus recognizing |


34 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


This sounded like a rejection of Monoenergism, but seemed
to open the way to the belief in one will—Monothelitism. In
638, anxious to give more satisfaction to the Monophysites,
Heraclius published his Ekthesis, a creed composed by Sergius,
which expressed the view that the Incarnate Word had only one
will. It found general acceptance in the East.

The expected political benefit from this innovation in the
orthodox Creed did not, however, materialize. The Islamic
Arabs invaded the Eastern provinces and the split among the
Eastern Christians, on account of the christological controversies,
facilitated the Arab advance. The Patriarchate of Antioch came
under Arab domination in 637, Jerusalem in the following year,
and in 642 the Egyptian Monophysites greeted the Arabs in
Alexandria as liberators from the imperial yoke.*

The bitterness which recent imperial interference with religious
teaching had created in the West—all successors of Honorius
rejected the Ekthesis—provoked the threat of even Italy being
alienated from the Empire. Constans II therefore revoked the
Ekthesis and, in a new declaration, called the Typos, forbade
any discussion of the question as to whether there were one or
two wills in Christ (648). Pope Martin I protested against this,
clearly defined the orthodox doctrine on the two wills and two
energies in a Lateran synod and excommunicated all authors of
the heretical teaching. He was arrested by the Emperor’s police,
brought to Constantinople, maltreated and condemned to exile
in the Crimea, where he died (655). A similar fate befell other
defenders of orthodoxy like the abbot Maximus, who died a
martyr’s death.


4 In spite of many attempts at winning the heretics over to the Creed of
Chalcedon, Monophysitism, organized in National Churches, continues to
exist in our days in Egypt, Syria, Armenia, Mesopotamia and Abyssinia. A
group of Egyptian Copts (60,000) united with Rome, but the great majority
(over a million) still professes Monophysitism. The Orthodox Melchites,
mostly Greeks in Egypt, Syria and Palestine, are still in majority schismatics
(about 320,000); only about 150,000 of them accepted the union with Rome.
The Syrian and Mesopotamian Monophysites are called Jacobites after
Jacob, Bishop of Edessa, who did much for the organization of their
Church, in the second half of the sixth century.


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 35


This naturally increased the discontent in Italy, and the
Emperor, Constantine IV, saw the danger. The Eastern pro-
vinces were definitely lost, and it seemed necessary to pacify th
West and the Church. This could be achieved only by the con-

ocation of a new Ecumenical Council, which Pope Agatho
greeted with joy.

The Sixth Ecumenical Council, the eee

with its 170 bishops, met from November 680 to September 68
in the Cupola hall (in Greek, Trudlos) of the imperial palace. It fs
refore called also the Trullan Council, Concilium Trullanum.
Il the defenders of Monothelitism, including Pope Honorius,
ere condemned and the creed accepted at Chalcedon was
completed by the words: “‘We profess, according to the teaching
of the holy Fathers, two natural wills and two natural energies
Gn Christ), undivided, unseparated and unmixed, two wills...
such a way that the human follows the divine (will) and is
subordinate to it.”
Honorius’ letters to the Patriarch of Constantinople cannot be
regarded as an authoritative decision on matters of faith.
Agatho’s successor, Leo II, when confirming the decision of the
Sixth Ecumenical Council, was well aware of this and, in his
letter to the Emperor, blamed Honorius only for neglect of his
duty to prevent the spread of heretical teaching. Honorius was
blamed for this neglect of duty also in the profession of faith
which, until the eleventh century, the Roman pontiffs had to
recite and sign before their enthronement.

Because the Fifth and Sixth Ecumenical Councils had not
voted any disciplinary regulations, Justinian II decided to con-
voke another council, which met in 692 in the same hall as the
Sixth Council. This synod is called the Second Trullan Council
or, because it was meant to supplement the Fifth and Sixth
General Councils, the Quinisext Synod (Synodus Quinisexta).
Although convoked as a General Council, the synod was pre-
occupied exclusively with disciplinary affairs of the Eastern
Church. Many of the 102 canons voted by the Fathers were
directed against some practices in use in the Western Church,
and canon twenty-eight of Chalcedon was again approved.


36 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


Therefore, Pope Sergius refused to accept the decrees and the
Emperor’s attempt at forcing him to obedience was frustrated by
the militia of Rome and Ravenna, which rescued the pope from
the hands of the Emperor’s envoys. The Easterners still con-
sider this synod as a complement of the Fifth and Sixth
Ecumenical Councils and so does the Western canonist Gratian,
who quotes it.


MAGE WORSHIP AND THE SEVENTH ECUMENICAL
COUNCIL (787)


The estrangement between the two Churches was even more
accentuated during the so-called iconoclastic struggle, provoked
by the direct intervention of the Emperor, Leo III (717-41),
into the doctrinal field. His edict of 726, in which he warned the
faithful against the veneration of images of saints, is believed by
many to reflect the situation of the Empire after the appearance
of the Arabs in world history and after the spread of Islam over
the former Eastern provinces of the Empire. Leo III succeeded
in stopping the advance of the Arabs at the gates of Constan-
tinople, but the Empire faced a mighty political and religious
enemy in Asia Minor, which now, after the loss of Egypt and
Syria, became the granary of the reduced Empire. This region
had always been under the influence of Semitic ideas coming
from Palestine and Syria. Many shared the abhorrence of the
Jews for pictorial representation and this attitude may have been
strengthened by the adherence of the Mohammedans to the same
principles. Leo III grew up in Isauria, a province permeated by
this spirit, and his opposition to images as idols was undoubtedly
influenced by the environment of his youth.

In spite of the excitement provoked by his first edict, Leo III
published in 730 another forbidding all pictorial representation
of the Lord and saints, and the veneration of images.

In order to vindicate this intrusion into the doctrinal field, the
Emperor, when announcing his decision to the pope (Gregory
II), stressed the priestly character of the imperial dignity. Also
in the introduction to his new law book, the Ecloga (in 740),
Leo III made a similar claim, declaring that the Lord bade him


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS S¥i


“as he bade Peter, the supreme Head of the apostles, to feed
his most faithful flock”’.

In his answer, the pope did not deny this imperial claim, but
pointed out that such a title could rightly be given only to the
emperors who, in perfect accord with the priests, had convoked
councils in order that the true faith be defined. ‘“Dogmas,”
the pope wrote, “do not concern the Emperors but the priests

... The priest has no right to supervise the affairs of the palace
and to propose the distribution of imperial dignities, so also the
emperor has no right to supervise the Church and to judge the
clergy, or to consecrate and to handle the symbols of the holy
sacraments ... We admonish you to become a true emperor
and priest.”

The Emperor, however, appointed an iconoclastic patriarch,
replacing Germanus, the orthodox defender of image worship,
and in answer to the excommunication of the iconoclasts by
Gregory HI (731-41), confiscated the revenues of papal patri-
monies in Calabria and Sicily, then under Byzantine sovereignty,
and detached from Rome not only these provinces, but also the
province of Illyricum, comprising the whole of Greece together
with the papal vicariate of Thessalonica, submitting them to the
jurisdiction of the patriarch of Constantinople.

This latter measure had most serious consequences because it
enforced the isolation of the West from the East, strengthened the
position of Constantinople in the Church, and destroyed the
last arches of the bridge between East and West in Illyricum.
Illyricum became, for two centuries to come, a territory where
Constantinople and Rome were to meet in passionate conflict.

Leo III’s successor, Constantine V Copronymus (741-75),
‘went even further. He convoked a council (in 754) in Constan-
tinople and allowed the 338 assembled bishops, mostly from the
eastern parts of the Empire, to excommunicate anti-iconoclasts,
especially John of Damascus, the most outspoken of them, and
to sanction the decrees against pictorial representation of saint

nd against image worship. Although no patriarch was present
at the synod—the see of Constantinople was vacant and other
patriarchs declared themselves for image worship—the synod


38 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


as called the Seventh Ecumenical. Prelates opposing these
decrees were deposed, monks were persecuted, and some of them
became Marta)

Only when the Empress Irene, the widow of Constantine V’s
successor Leo IV, became regent in the name of her minor son
(780-90), could the orthodox faith triumph. Supported by the
patriarch Tarasius and with the consent of Pope Hadrian I, the
Empress convoked a council to meet in Constantinople. The
assembly was disbanded by the iconoclastic guard, but the
Empress transferred it in the next year (787) to Nicaea. After
eight sessions the 350 Fathers, mostly from the western part of
the Empire, condemned the decisions of the iconoclastic assem-
bly and ruled that through the_yeneration of holy images the
persons represented by them were honoured. Adoration was due
only to God.

The decrees of the Seventh Ecumenical Council, the Second
of Nicaea, were confirmed by the pope and accepted in the East.
The acceptance of the Council in the West was, however, post-
poned. Charlemagne, the founder of a mighty Empire that in-
cluded modern Germany and France with a part of Spain, was
not willing to accept the decisions of a Council at which he
himself and his prelates had not participated. Unfortunately,
the inaccurate translation of the conciliar Acts suggested a false
interpretation as if the Fathers were speaking of the adoration of
images. Charlemagne’s theologians subjected the Acts to very
sharp criticism in the official publication called Libri Carolini,
rejecting both councils, and stressing only the educational
importance of pictorial representations. The pope defended the
Council of 787, but abstained from any measures against the
Frankish hierarchy, which rejected its Acts at the synod of Frank-
furt (794). It was not until the ninth century, when a better
translation of the Acts was made, that the Western distrust of
this Council disappeared.

In spite of the orthodox victory, the iconoclasts did not sur-
render. The Emperor Leo V, of Armenian origin, renewed the
decrees against the veneration of images, and his initiative was
welcomed by the superstitious iconoclasts, who attributed the


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 39


military defeats suffered by Leo’s two orthodox predecessors in
the wars with the Bulgars, to God’s punishment for image wor-
ship. Many monks were again persecuted. The traditional teach-
ing of image worship was vigorously defended by the deposed
patriarch, Nicephorus, and Theodore, Abbot of Studios, who
directed eloquent appeals to the pope.

The iconoclasts ruled in the Eastern Church for over thirty
years. Only when the pious Theodora, the widow of the Emperor
Theophilus, had taken over the regency in the name of her minor
son Michael III (842), could the orthodox teaching on image
worship triumph once more. Theodora did not dare, however,
to convoke a new council after replacing the iconoclastic
patriarch with the orthodox Methodius. Image worship was
restored only by a local synod confirmed by an imperial decree
(843). This victory is still commemorated by the Eastern Church
every year by the feast of Orthodoxy, on the first Sunday of
Lent.

The iconoclastic controversy has left profound vestiges in
the evolution of Byzantine art. No Byzantine artist dared to
represent God the Father, because, as the iconoclasts had taught

ivinity cannot be circumscribed. Also, from the eighth century
onwards, there was no sculpture in the round (statues) in
Byzantium, and sculptors produced only reliefs. The defeat of
iconoclasm promoted the production of icons, representations
of Christ and his Saints, and these became a characteristic
feature of Byzantine art. The victory over this last important
heresy is expressed today in every Orthodox church by the
iconostasis, a panel decorated with pictures of saints, which
separates the altar from the rest of the church.

The final liquidation of iconoclasm did not take place at once.
Because the mistrust of image worship was still felt in influential
circles of Byzantine society, the Empress’ advisers recommended
moderation in the restoration of images and in dealing with
former iconoclasts. This restrained attitude was sharply criti-
cized by intransigent monks who had suffered most during the
persecutions, and who advocated severer treatment of the re-
maining iconoclasts and of the more or less sincere converts.


40 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


The Patriarch Methodius, a partisan of moderation, was obliged
to excommunicate the monks of the Studios monastery, the
most outspoken critics of his ecclesiastical policy.

This accentuated the tension between the moderates and the
intransigents in ecclesiastical circles, so that, when Methodius
died, Theodora thought it necessary to discard the traditional
procedure, and instead of giving the synod the opportunity of
presenting to her the chosen candidate, she appointed the pious
monk Ignatius as Patriarch of Constantinople.


THE PHOTIAN CONTROVERSY AND THE SYNODS
OF 869 AND 879


The hopes that the new patriarch, who had not been involved
in the rivalry of the contesting parties, would act as a peacemaker
were not realized. He sided with the intransigents and suspended
the bishops who criticized him for abandoning Methodius’ policy
of moderation. The bishops he disciplined appealed to Rome.
This is the first appeal to the pope in disciplinary matters made
by Eastern prelates.

Each party was invited to present its case, but before Rome
could come to a definite decision, the situation in Byzantium
underwent a radical change. Theodora’s brother, the ambitious,
but able, Bardas, with the connivance of his nephew Michael III,
first got rid of the Empress’ prime minister Theoctistus and, sup-
ported by the moderates, deprived Theodora of the regency.
The attempts of the intransigents to change this political situation
were in vain. However, Ignatius, believing the ill-founded accusa-
tions of Bardas’ immoral private life, spread by his enemies,
publicly refused to give Holy Communion to the regent. Soon
afterwards when the patriarch intervened in favour of a leader
of the rebels, he was banished to an island on suspicion of
treason.

In order to save his Church from further complications,
Ignatius accepted the advice of his bishops and resigned the
patriarchal dignity. On the insistence of the bishops, a synod was
assembled to elect a new patriarch. After rehabilitating the


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 4]


bishops censured by Ignatius, who had appealed to Rome, the
Fathers elected Photius, a layman, the learned professor of
philosophy at the imperial university and head of the
chancellery. Even the most intransigent bishops recognized
him as a legitimate patriarch, after Photius had given them
assurances regarding the person of Ignatius. Photius was con-
secrated by the rehabilitated Bishop Asbestas, leader of the
moderates, and two Ignatian bishops chosen by the synod.

Peace lasted only two months. The reasons for the revolt of
the intransigents against the new patriarch are unknown. It was
engineered by extremists. Political complications must have been
involved, because the synod convoked by Photius in order to
settle the dispute ended in an uproar, and was followed with a
demonstration that had to be disbanded by the imperial police.
Photius protested against the persecution of his opponents but,
in order to prevent them from using Ignatius’ patriarchal status
to widen the schism, another synod pronounced Ignatius’
patriarchate and his ordinations illegitimate because he had not
been canonically elected.

There are indications that the policy of intransigence, which
Ignatius followed, hardened the opposition of the remaining
iconoclasts and led many to fear a revival of iconoclasm.
Because the re-introduction of image worship had not been so far
confirmed by a synod, the Emperor Michael decided to convoke
a new synod in Constantinople for a renewed condemnation of
iconoclasm, and asked Pope Nicholas I (858-67) to send
legates to participate therein. The envoys also presented to the
pope a letter of Photius announcing his election to the patriarchal
see after Ignatius’ resignation.

The pope sent to Constantinople two bishops, Radoald and
Zacharias, ordering them to investigate the circumstances of
Ignatius’ resignation and reserving to himself the decision as to
the legitimacy of Photius’ promotion. Fearing new agitation from
the intransigents before the pope’s definite decision should reach
Constantinople, the Byzantine authorities were willing to re-
open the case of Ignatius, if the legates would pronounce judge-
ment at the synod, although they regarded it as an internal affair


42 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


which had already been settled. Thinking that such an action
would strengthen the position of the Roman See in the East, the
legates consented, and after examining the case in the synod,
confirmed the decision made previously concerning Ignatius’
status. Ignatius declared that he did not appeal to Rome and had
no intention of doing so. Then the synod condemned iconoclasm
and voted canons on monastic and Church reform.

The Acts of the synod of 861 are preserved only partially in a
canonical collection of the eleventh century, and have remained
unnoticed by specialists. They are, however, very important
because the declarations of the legates and of the Byzantine
bishops should be interpreted as a recognition of the right of
appeal to the pope, voted by the Council of Sardica (343) but
not accepted in the East.

Nicholas I was misled by a refugee monk who gave him a
biased report of the events, falsely pretending to have been
charged by Ignatius to appeal to the pope. Offended by a refusal
of the patriarch to present more evidence for his legitimacy, and
annoyed because Byzantium ignored his demand for the return
of jurisdiction over Illyricum, which he had requested in his
letter to the Emperor, Nicholas I declared Photius’ promotion
uncanonical, excommunicated him, condemned his legates, and
proclaimed Ignatius as legitimate patriarch (in 863). Michael II
protested violently in 865.

Photius made no reply until 867, when he had learned of the
activity of papal missionaries in Bulgaria, which had been con-
verted by Byzantium in 864, but had turned to Rome. He invited
the Eastern patriarchs to a synod, complained about Rome’s
intrusion into Bulgaria, and accused the Latin missionaries of
condemning Greek practices and preaching the procession of
the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son (Filioque). The
synod, presided over by the Emperor Michael and the co-
Emperor Basil, condemned these practices and Nicholas I. An
embassy was dispatched to the Western Emperor Louis II
promising him the recognition of his imperial title if he deposed
Nicholas I.

The offer of the imperial title to Louis II, the third successor


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 43


to Charlemagne, is very important because it reveals that the
Byzantines still believed in the possibility of saving the unity
of the Christian world in one commonwealth, ruled by the Ro-
man Emperor residing in Constantinople and a co-Emperor in
the West.

In addition this fact disproves the general belief that this
synod of 867 made decisions against the Western Church and
against the papal primacy as such. As long as the Byzantines
regarded themselves as Romans, they could not deny the primacy
to the Bishop of Rome. Such negotiations with Louis II would
have been senseless if the Acts of the synod which were sent to
him had contained attacks against the Western Church and the
primacy of Rome.

The envoys, however, were intercepted on their way, when
Basil I, soon after the synod, murdered the Emperor Michael III
and, needing support from the intransigents and from Rome,
reinstalled Ignatius on the patriarchal throne, and asked Pope
Hadrian II for legates to a new Council. The pope confirmed
in a Roman synod all the decisions of his predecessor against
Photius and sent three legates to the new Council with the instruc-
tion that the Fathers of the synod, the Fourth of Constantinople
(869-70), had only to sign the decision of the Roman synod
which, among other things, contained a very outspoken affirma-
tion of papal primacy.

This alienated the Emperor and also the bishops. The first
session of the Council, which called itself the Eighth Ecumenical,
was attended by only twelve prelates (October 5th, 869) and at
the last session, the tenth (February 28th, 870), no more than
102 prelates were present. On the Emperor’s insistence Photius
was given the opportunity of defending himself. Although he
very courageously proclaimed his innocence, and denied the
legates the right to judge him, he was excommunicated with
many of his adherents.

Because the great majority of the clergy had remained faithful
to Photius, Ignatius encountered great difficulties in the adminis-
tration of his patriarchate. Moreover, he came into further con-
flict with Pope John VIII because he defended his rights in
Bulgaria, whose ruler Boris had defected from Rome, rights


44 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


which were also confirmed by the Eastern patriarchs at the
Council of 870, in spite of the protest of the papal legates.

When Photius was recalled from exile by the Emperor,
Ignatius was reconciled with him, and asked Rome to send legates
for a new council, which would confirm the pacification of the
Byzantine Church. The legates arrived in Constantinople only
after Ignatius’ death (October 23rd, 877), and found Photius
on the patriarchal throne. The pope sent them new instructions,
which contained the recognition of Photius’ elevation, under the
condition that he should ask pardon for his former behaviour.

But Photius convinced the legates that he had been canonically
elected and that he deserved an unconditional rehabilitation.
Therefore, the papal letters were read at the council in a new
version, which omitted the pope’s condition. It should, however,
be stressed that in the Greek version Photius left the quotation
of the famous passage of Matt. 16. 19, on which Pope John VIII
in the Latin original had based the papal “power to bind and
loose, and in the words of Jeremias, to uproot and to plant’.
This is the more significant when we consider that, at the
Seventh Ecumenical Council, when papal letters were also
changed, the argument for the papal primacy was left out in the
Greek version of the papal latter to the Empress Irene, though
it was retained in the papal letter to the Patriarch Tarasius. In
the latter, however, the primacy was not expressed as categori-
cally as in the passage suppressed in the letter to Irene.

The Council of 869-70 was cancelled, and is not counted by
the Eastern Churches in their list of Ecumenical Councils.
However, not even the Photian Council of 879-80, called
Council of Union, is regarded as ecumenical, because it did not
make any dogmatic decision. The Eastern Churches count only
seven Ecumenical Councils.

John VIII expressed his astonishment at the changes made in
the text of his letters, but he confirmed the rehabilitation of
Photius. Contrary to what has been believed, the peace between
the two Churches was not disturbed after this reconciliation.
The Emperor Basil I gave the pope important concessions, and
Photius surrendered jurisdiction over Bulgaria to Rome. Boris


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 45


of Bulgaria, however, profited by this jurisdictional quarrel
between East and West, and established the first national Church
in the Balkans. Photius had to resign on the request of the
Emperor Leo VI, but he died in communion with Rome
(February 6th, 891).

By an interesting coincidence, it happened that the Acts of the
councils of the ninth century, so far overlooked in the West, were
discovered during the reign of Gregory VII, and their inter-
pretation began to exert a profound influence over Western
canonists and theologians. In order to find more cogent docu-
mentary evidence for his definition of papal primacy, Gregory
opened the pontifical archives to the canonists charged with the
compilation of new collections of canon law. What the canonists
needed most was a conciliar decision which could be used
against the interference of laymen with the appointment of
bishops. They discovered such a canon (the twenty-second) in
the Ignatian council of 869-70, which called itself ecumenical.
Overlooking the fact that this council had been cancelled by
another—the Acts of which were also kept in the pontifical
archives—they set up the council of 869-70 as one of the most
important General Councils. This council was designated by
canonists in their collections as the Eighth Ecumenical. But
previously, as is clear from declarations by the Popes Marinus II
and Leo IX, of St Peter Damian and Cardinal Humbertus, the
Romans, like the Greeks, counted only seven Ecumenical
Councils.

Together with the Acts, the canonists discovered the letters of
Nicholas I relating to the Photian affair. Impressed by the pope’s
courageous attitude against the Emperor Michael III and by his
excommunication of a patriarch, from these documents they
constructed a firm basis for the defence of all claims set forth
in the Dictatus Papae. Some went even so far as to conclude from
them that Nicholas I had excommunicated an Emperor, Michael
II—which was untrue—and saw in this, a justification for
Gregory’s excommunication and deposition of the Emperor
Henry IV. Only one of the Gregorian canonists, Cardinal
Deusdedit, preserved some extracts from the councils of 861


46 THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


and 879-80, because he deemed them useful for the justification
of certain papal claims. His collection, however, was not dis-
seminated so widely as the other collections, and so it happened
that the Photian legend was born and became a new obstacle to
the rapprochement of the two Churches.


CHAP TER «hl


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS
OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


THE REFORMISTS AND THE ROMAN SYNODS


The Photianist Council of 879-80 was the last synod held in the
East to which the Roman See sent legates. In order to guarantee
peace between the Western and Eastern Churches, the same
synod voted a canon confirming to each Church her own
usages, and this seemed to be favourable ground on which good
relations between the two Churches could develop. In reality,
the peace between Constantinople and Rome was not disturbed
in the following period and the right of appeal to Rome, as the
highest tribunal in disciplinary matters, was recognized in
Byzantium also in the tenth century. The Emperor Leo VI’s
appeal to the pope on Patriarch Nicholas Mysticus’ refusal to
allow his fourth marriage should be interpreted in this sense,
and possibly the request of the Emperor Romanus Lecapenus
for papal confirmation of the election of his young son
Theophylactus to patriarchal dignity.

In spite of this, however, the two Churches were growing
further apart. The restoration of the Western Roman Empire
by the Saxon King Otto I (962) and his successors, who
appointed their own popes, brought to a definite end Byzantine
influence in Rome and increased the estrangement. At that time,
also, the unwelcome effects of the introduction of Germanic
features into Church organization were becoming increasingly
apparent in the West. The Germanic tribes had a different


48 THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


concept of ownership from the Romans and the Greeks, and
being unable to conceive of any property being vested in a
society or organization, they continued to regard the churches
as the property of the founders, who also claimed the pre-
rogative of appointing the priests. This system of proprietary
churches extended to abbeys and bishoprics, and the abuses
which accompanied this practice—simony, investiture by lay-
men, married priests—were responsible for the sad decadence
of the Western Church in the tenth century.

Moreover, the idea of priest-king found its way from the
East to the West and the combination of Germanic ideology
and Romano-Byzantine theocracy gave the Western princes
almost absolute control over the Churches and the hierarchy in
their realms. This also influenced the development of conciliar
practice in the West. The synods of the bishops were trans-
formed into national assemblies presided over by the kings.
Not only bishops, but also the lords participated, and not only
Church affairs, but also measures serving the interests of the
State were debated. In the Frankish Kingdom the decisions of
the assemblies were published as “orders of the ruler”
(capitularia). Besides the Frankish assemblies, the eighteen
Spanish synods of Toledo convoked from 589 to 702 by the
Visigothic kings who had been converted from Arianism to
Catholicism, are the most important.

National interest superseded that of the universal Church, and

(i explains why neither the pope nor the Emperor succeeded
in summoning a general synod.

In order to save Western Christianity from becoming a
conglomerate of national Churches ruled by kings and princes,
zealous reformers from Lorraine and Burgundy advocated
strengthening the power of the papacy and gave the fullest
definition to the idea of the Roman primacy. During the reign
of Leo IX (1049-54) the reform movement also reached Rome,
and it was from among the reformers that the pope chose his
envoys to Constantinople in an effort to reach an understanding
with the Emperor against their common enemy, the Normans,
who had occupied southern Italy.


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH 49


Unfortunately, instead of achieving a rapprochement between
Rome and Constantinople, the negotiations, conducted by the
papal legates in Constantinople, ended in a rupture. The
responsibility for this should be attributed, not only to the
haughty and ambitious Patriarch Michael Cerularius and his
dislike of the Latins, but also to political complications with the
Normans, and to the impetuous leader of the papal legates,
Cardinal Humbertus. In his missives and in the excommunica-
tion bull placed on the altar in St Sophia in 1054, the over-
zealous cardinal disclosed to the Byzantines all the ideas of the
reformists. He placed all the bishops directly and immediately
under the only supreme head, the pope, accused the Greeks of
heresy because they allowed their priests to marry, and also
because they left the Filioque out of the Creed, thus showing
poor knowledge of Byzantine customs and of Church history.
The Easterners were shocked by these accusations that
implied the denial of their autonomous position, and so it
happened that the action of 1054, although directed only
against the person of the patriarch, became a landmark
indicating the separation of the Eastern Churches from the
Western.

On the other hand, the activity of the reformists had a most
salutary effect on the development of Western Christianity.
The growth of the prestige of the papacy affected the conciliar
idea. From the third century onwards, the popes were accus-
tomed to gather their Roman clergy and Italian bishops in
synods whenever there was an important matter to be discussed.
The popes were the instigators and masters of these assemblies
and the decisions of such synods deeply influenced Church
life in the whole of the West. However, when the papacy had
concluded its alliance with the Franks, the representatives of
the Frankish kings appeared at these synods with the Frankish
bishops. The decadence of the Carolingian Empire gave back
to the popes their freedom and this is particularly evident in
the synods convoked by Nicholas I. The influence of German
emperors at the Roman synods was strengthened after the
restoration of the Western Roman Empire by Otto I (962), and


50 THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


was particularly marked during the reign of Henry III, who put
an end to the schism in Rome (1046) and installed one of the
reformists, Leo IX, in the Roman see. The reformists, although
enhancing the importance of the Roman synods in which they
proclaimed their ideas on the liberation of the Church from
lay interference, were opposed to any influence of the emperors
on these synods and on ecclesiastical affairs.

They succeeded in eliminating this interference under Gregory
VII (1073-85), who, in his determination to break the dangerous
Germanic system of proprietary churches and to end the
influence of monarchs and lords on ecclesiastical affairs, entered
into a violent conflict with the Emperor Henry IV. Thus started
the so-called Investiture contest about the rights of the Church
to appoint bishops and abbots and on the feudal claims of the
princes who conferred lands and privileges on the appointed
hierarchs.

In his Dictatus Papae, Gregory VII set out his programme of
reform, claiming the right to depose the emperors and to
absolve his subjects from obedience to bad rulers. Among these
claims, which amounted to a proclamation of the superiority
of spiritual power over the temporal, is the declaration that the
pope alone has the right to convoke a General Council. This was
directed against Henry IV and his supporters who, basing their
claim on the theory of the priestly character of the kingship,
reserved to the Emperor the right of convoking a General
Council.

Gregory’s zeal for Church reform prompted him to invite to
his Roman synods bishops and also abbots, not only from
Italy, but from France, Germany, and Spain, from Poland and
Bohemia, and other countries. Many of them participated in
his synods which were gradually acquiring a more universal
character. The invited princes and lords, however, had no
influence on synodal decisions, but their presence enhanced the
growing prestige of the papacy. No wonder that Gregory was
the first pope who planned, for the year 1083, a General Council
of all Western Christianity, but the occupation of Rome by
Henry IV’s army shattered his plan.


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH ||


THE COUNCILS OF THE LATERAN (1123, 1139, 1179, 1215)
AND THE FIRST COUNCIL OF LYONS (1245)

During the reign of Gregory’s successors, the papal synods
continued to be held outside Rome, as the city was occupied
by the imperial anti-pope, Clement VI. This contributed to the
popularity of synodal practice in Italy and in France. The most
famous of these synods were those of Piacenza and of Clermont,
held in 1095. Although the latter is called a general synod, it
was really only a synod of Gaul under papal presidency. The
response of the French knights to Urban II’s call to a Crusade
to liberate the Holy Land proved that the reformed papacy
was the uncontested leader of Western Christianity. The pope’s
invitation to help the Greeks against the Turks makes clear,
at the same time, that the idea of reunion with the East was his
foremost consideration.

The Lateran synod of 1112, at which Pope Paschal II, at the
demand of the bishops, was forced to cancel the privilege of
investiture with ring and crozier before the candidates’ con-
secration, conceded by him to the Emperor Henry V the year
before, manifested how much support the popes had gained
outside Germany, and especially in France. This was even more
apparent at the Lateran synod of 1116, when 427 participants—
bishops, abbots and noble laymen—excommunicated Henry V.

This presaged the final victory of the papacy in the Investiture
Contest. It was sealed by the conclusion of the Concordat of
Worms in 1122, at which the Emperor Henry V renounced his
claims to investiture with ring and crozier, contenting himself
with the presentation of the sceptre, symbolizing the acceptance
by the candidate of feudal obligations connected with the lands
and privileges conferred on him by the Emperor. In order to
express the relief felt by Western Christianity, now that the long
struggle with temporal power was ended, the pope assembled a
General Council to confirm the agreement. The Council met
in the Lateran in 1123, probably between March 18th and
April 6th. Over 300 bishops and many abbots are said to have
come to the synod from all parts of the West.

Unfortunately, no Acts of the synod were preserved. Some of


GEORGE MARK ELLIOTT LIBRARY


The Cincinnati Bihle Saminoarv


Sy THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


the twenty-five canons prohibited simony and extended
privileges and protection to the crusaders and their families.
Pope Paschal II had only intended to convoke a major synod
of the West, but because this synod marked the beginning of a
new era in the relations between Church and State and because
of the great number of participants from the West, in later
tradition it was given an ecumenical character and is called by
Western canonists the Ninth Ecumenical Council.

The end of the schism in Rome resulting from a double
election in 1130 gave Pope Innocent II the idea of convoking
another “plenary” synod at the Lateran in 1139, after the
death of the anti-pope Anacletus IJ. The great number of
prelates from all the West—the chroniclers speak of 500 and
even 1,000 participants—shows how popular the practice of
General Councils had become. Besides bishops, many abbots
and noble laymen were present.

The Council, opened on April 4th, lasted to the end of the

month and the Fathers deposed all supporters of the anti-pope.
Most of the thirty canons voted by the Council were inspired
by the ideas of the Gregorian reform. Canon seven declared
that the marriage of a monk or of a clergyman, after reception
of the subdiaconate, and hitherto regarded as illicit, was invalid.
Canon 28 which confirmed to the members of the cathedral
chapters the privilege of episcopal elections, enhanced the
importance of these chapters in the medieval Church. For the
first time, a Western General Council found it necessary to
condemn certain heretical movements. Unfortunately, only the
canons voted by the council are preserved.
- In spite of the hopes which the confirmation of the Concordat
of Worms by the First Lateran Council had evoked, the struggle:
between the spiritual and temporal power was reopened by the
Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa. Frederick revived the
tradition of royal theocracy initiated by Charlemagne and
defended passionately the divine origin of secular power and
its ascendancy over the spiritual. He succeeded in gaining a
complete hold over the German Church and in securing his royal
rights against the German princes.


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH 53


His attempts to re-establish imperial authority in Lombardy
and the rest of Italy were thwarted by the resistance of the
papacy and the expanding Lombard cities. Frederick tried in
vain to break the opposition of Pope Alexander III (1159-81)
by establishing three successive anti-popes. At last, defeated by
the Lombard League, Frederick renounced his imperial pre-
tensions over Italy, abandoned his last anti-pope and returned
all confiscated Church property. The peace, concluded at
Venice in 1177, was to be confirmed by a new General Council
of the Western Church, the Third Lateran, counted as the
Eleventh Ecumenical Council. ae

For the first time, an incomplete official list of the bishops
present at a Western General Council is preserved. It contains
291 names, mostly from Italy, but also from France, Germany,
Spain, England, Scotland, Ireland and the Latin Near East.
Besides many abbots, the representatives of many rulers were
also present.

Again, no Acts of the three sessions, held from March Sth
to 19th, 1179, are preserved. Several of the twenty-seven canons
accepted by the Fathers are still valid. In order to avoid another
double election, the Council completed the rule decreed by
Nicholas II at the Roman synod of 1059, which gave the
electoral rights to the college of cardinals, with the stipulation
that a two-thirds majority of votes was required for a valid
election. Another canon, which declares that no person should
be consecrated bishop who had not reached thirty years of age,
is also still valid. Besides numerous disciplinary canons, some
measures were voted for the protection of the Crusaders. The
Albigensian and other heresies were condemned and armed
interventions against them were given the character of Crusades.

The Third Lateran Council marks a certain progress in the
development of the conciliar idea. It was better prepared and,
for the first time, the example of the “‘ Fathers of old”’ is stressed.
The disappearance of the regular Roman synods—their func-
tions having been taken over by the papal consistory—enhanced
the importance of general synods convoked by the popes.
However, although the three Lateran Councils are called


54 THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


General Synods in the papal letters of convocation, they
represent only the first step towards a true General Council, the
Fourth Lateran, convoked by Innocent HI in 1215 “‘according
to the ancient custom of the ancient Fathers”’.

These words express the intention of the pope to convoke a
truly Ecumenical Council of equal rank to the first Eastern
Ecumenical Councils. In reality, Innocent III not only ordered
all the Western bishops to attend or to send a representative, he
addressed himself also to the Latin prelates of the Near East,
to the Armenians, Maronites and to the schismatic Greeks.
Heads of major Orders were invited and representatives of the
Christian laity. The objects of the deliberations were also of
general interest to Christianity—the purity of faith and morals
and a new Crusade.

The number of the participants at the Council was imposing.
Among the 404 bishops were prelates from Bohemia, Poland,
Hungary, Livonia and Estonia, countries which had, so far,
never been represented at a council. Besides the abbots, about
800 representatives of Chapters were also present, invited for
the first time to participate. The Emperor Frederick II, kings
and many cities were represented by envoys.

In spite of his efforts, Innocent III did not succeed in per-
suading the Greeks to attend. Only the Latin patriarchs of the
East were represented. However, two of the seventy canons
prepared by the pope and accepted by the Council, dealt with
Greek affairs. Canon four forbade the rebaptism of Latins by
the Greeks and canon five confirmed the decrees of the Second
and Fourth Ecumenical Councils which gave second place,
after the pope, to the patriarch of Constantinople. From 1204,
after the capture of Constantinople by the Latin crusaders, the
patriarchal see of that city was in the hands of the Latins.1

Canon 21, obliging every Catholic to yearly confession and


1 However, already canon twenty-one of the Ignatian Council of 869-70
gave precedence to the Patriarch of Constantinople before Eastern Patriarchs,
and Hadrian IJ did not repudiate it. Also some Italian collections of canon
law from the tenth and eleventh centuries give to the Patriarch of Constan-
tinople the second rank.


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH 55


Holy Communion during Easter time, is still valid. Other canons
laid down the procedure to be followed during the vacancy of
bishoprics, stressed the appointment of preachers and teachers
to metropolitan churches and restricted the obstacles to a valid
marriage. Decisions regulating the political development of
Europe were made, illustrating the height of the prestige the
papacy had reached during the reign of Innocent III. Frederick II
was confirmed in the imperial dignity, and the Magna Charta,
“extorted by force and dread” by the nobles, was condemned
at the request of John of England, and Toulouse, infected with
Albigenses (Cathars), was made over to Simon de Montfort.

In one way, the Council followed the example of the first
ecumenical synods. Its first canon is a profession of faith
directed against the heresies of the Albigenses (Cathars) and the
Waldenses, emphasizing the Church’s doctrine on the Trinity
and the Sacraments, and giving, for the first time, ecclesiastical
sanction to the term “transubstantiation”’ of bread and wine
into the body and blood of Christ. Unfortunately, no Acts of
the three meetings, held on November 11th, 20th and 30th, are
preserved.

The Crusade directed against Egypt, which was to be financed
by a levy of twenty per cent. on the income of the clergy for
three years, though well-prepared, ended in disaster.

Frederick II’s father, Henry VI, had planned to rebuild the
Mediterranean Empire of ancient Rome, based on Sicily—
which he had inherited from the Normans—embracing Italy,
Syria, Palestine and even Constantinople. His sudden death
gave Innocent III a welcome opportunity as supreme head of
Christianity and ‘“‘ Vicar of Christ” to dispose of the imperial
crown. The claim that the papacy was supreme over all things,
spiritual and temporal, was however soon challenged by
Frederick Ii, who began to follow in the steps of his father.

His attempts to unite Italy with Sicily and Germany and to
introduce an absolutist régime in Italy again endangered the .
existence of the papal state. Pope Gregory X made an alliance
with the Lombard cities and, using his spiritual powers, ex-
communicated Frederick, thus releasing his subjects from


56 THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


allegiance to the Emperor. The anti-imperial campaign in
Germany failed, and only an appeal to Western Christianity
made in a General Council seemed to promise success. But the
General Council convoked in 1240 was frustrated by the
emperor, who forbade the Germans to attend, gave instructions
to stop all those on their way to the Council and ordered his
fleet to capture the Genoese vessels which were carrying over
one hundred bishops to it. The Emperor’s army was standing at
the gates of Rome when Gregory IX died in 1241.

Frederick II was the last Western Emperor to come under the
spell of the old Roman and Byzantine ideas of kingship. In this
spirit he allowed himself to be called “‘ Vicar of Christ,” “‘image
of God,” “saviour,” “divine,” and “holy,” and also claimed
the right, once exercised by Byzantine emperors, to convoke an
Ecumenical Council. This was the last echo of such claims to
sound in the West.

However, it was a General Council convoked by the pope
which broke the backbone of Frederick’s pretensions. When the
Emperor learned that Innocent IV intended to follow the
determined policy of Gregory IX, he kept the pope in isolation,
and surrounded his residence with troops. The pope succeeded
in escaping to his native city of Genoa and convoked a General
Council in Lyons. In spite of the Emperor’s effort to deter the
bishops from attending, about 150 of them, mainly from France
and Spain, and a few from England, Italy and Germany,
gathered in Lyons on June 28th, 1245. In his inaugural address,
the pope spoke of the five sorrows which afflicted him, com-
paring them to the five wounds of our Lord. These were the
signs of demoralization amongst the clergy, the growing Moham-
medan danger after the loss of Jerusalem (1244), the threat to
the Latin Empire by the Greek advance towards Constanti-
nople, the Mongolian invasion which had destroyed Hungary,
and the persecutions of the Church by Frederick II, who was
accused of heresy and sacrilege.

Frederick II sent the Sicilian Thaddaeus of Suessa to the
Council, who defended his lord against the papal accusations,
but was unable to find an excuse for the Emperor’s high-handed


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH 57


action against the bishops on their way to the Council in 1240.
The case against the Emperor was continued on July 5th and
Frederick’s advocate secured a delay of twelve days in order to
collect evidence in favour of his client.

In the following session, the Fathers deliberated on purely
ecclesiastical matters. They confirmed the reform of the
ecclesiastical lawsuit in which the pope, himself an experienced
canonist, was particularly interested. Other canons contained
recommendations for better defence against further Mongol
invasions, for the recapture of the Holy Places, aid to the Latin
Empire, and certain disciplinary statutes against current abuses.

At the third session of July 17th, the Council sanctioned all
the measures proposed in the twenty-two canons or “‘chapters”’
and continued the case against the Emperor. Frederick was
accused of perjury, suspicion of heresy, sacrilege, and cruelty
towards both clergy and laymen alike. The pope proposed to
excommunicate him afresh and to depose him. The majority
of the bishops signed the decree of deposition. Frederick’s _
subjects were released from their allegiance to him and the
Prince-Electors were invited to choose a new king and Emperor.
This severe measure inaugurated the final downfall of the Hohen-
staufen dynasty. It is one of the greatest triumphs of the medieval
papacy.

The First Council of Lyons, the Thirteenth Ecumenical
Council on the conciliar list of Western canonists, also has a
certain importance in the history of Western canon law.
Innocent IV, a former professor of canon law at Bologna,
recommended the canons of this council to the professors of
canon law at the universities. He added eleven of his own decrees
and incorporated them all into his collection of canon law,
published in 1253.


THE ABORTIVE UNION AT THE SECOND COUNCIL
OF LYONS (1274)
The decadence of the Hohenstaufen dynasty enabled the
Church to pass through a dangerous crisis without great harm.
The long vacancy of the Roman See lasted from November 29th,


58 THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


1268, the death of Pope Clement IV, to September, 1271,
when the quarrelling cardinals, forced by public opinion, had at
last elected Tedaldo Visconti. The new pope, Gregory X, was
well acquainted with the situation in the Near East. The news
of his elevation reached him in Akkon, the last fortress in
Palestine still in Latin hands. It was to be expected that the
intelligent, zealous and pious pope would direct his efforts to
the improvement of Church interests in the East.

The union of Churches had always been one of the foremost
preoccupations of the papacy. This was intimately connected
in Urban II’s mind with the idea of a Crusade, which he
initiated. Unfortunately, the regrettable incidents which took
place during this and other Crusades further alienated the
Greeks from the Latins. The Fourth Crusade ended with the
conquest of Constantinople (1204) and the foundation of the
Latin Empire. The atrocities perpetrated by the Latins in the
conquered city and the desecration of Greek sanctuaries further
widened the gap between Latins and Greeks.

It was in 1204 that the schism—so far latent—was definitely
consummated, which explains why all the attempts at reunion
previously made by Innocent III and his successors had failed.
Gregory X, undismayed by these failures, was determined to
make a new attempt and the political situation seemed more
favourable. The Greeks, having recovered from the blow,
started an offensive against the Latins from their base at
Nicaea in Asia Minor, and in 1261 Emperor Michael VIII
Palaeologus reconquered Constantinople. Although successful
in the extension of his empire, he was well aware of the dangers
threatening him from the new ruler of Sicily and Southern Italy,
Charles of Anjou, brother of the French king, St Louis IX.
In order to frustrate Charles’ plans for a reconquest of Con-
stantinople, he began to negotiate with Rome, promising union
and help in the recapture of the Holy Places, two of the main
preoccupations of the papacy.

But not content with promises, Gregory X made it clear to
the Emperor that he could not restrain Charles and his allies
in their hostile policy towards the Greeks, unless the Emperor


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH 59


made a decisive step towards reunion. Faced with no alternative,
Michael Paleologus promised to send a delegation to the
Council and was able to persuade some of his hierarchy to accept
the union.

The pope again chose Lyons as the most appropriate place,
as he could expect the much needed help for the reconquest
of Jerusalem only from lands on the western side of the Alps.
Letters of invitation were sent to the Western hierarchy in
April 1273, to chapters, abbots and princes. Besides the
Emperor Michael and his patriarch, the leader (Catholicos) of
the Armenians and the Mongolian Khan were invited.

Over two hundred bishops responded to the invitation, and the
number present, including abbots and procurators, is evaluated
by contemporary chronicles at over one thousand. It was the
most imposing assembly since that of the Fourth Lateran
Council. Unfortunately, St Thomas Aquinas, asked by the pope
to bring with him his treatise in which he rejected the errors of
the Greeks, died on his way to Lyons.

In his opening address on May 7th, 1274, the pope disclosed
that the main objects of conciliar deliberations would be “the
organization of of a new Crusade, reunion with the Greeks, _and
the reform of the Church. The pope presided, but he entrusted
the mode moderatorship of the debates to St Bonaventure of the
Friars Minor, recently made a-cardinal. He, however, died in
Lyons on July 15th. The first and second sessions were devoted
to the planning of a new Crusade. The pope succeeded in obtain-
ing the consent of the prelates to contribute a tenth of their
income to the enterprise for six years.

On June 24th the representatives of the Byzantine Emperor
arrived—the former patriarch Germanus, Theophanes, metro-
politan of Nicaea, the chancellor George Acropolites and two
other dignitaries. On the feast of SS. Peter and Paul, during
the Mass celebrated by the pope, the Nicene Creed was sung
‘with the Filioque in Latin and in Greek. In this way, the Greeks
accepted the Filioque, but were permitted to continue using
their own text of the Creed without this addition. The union was
proclaimed rather hastily, without long discussions, at the fourth


60 THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


session, on July 6th. The imperial representatives signed a creed
expressing recognition of the primacy, the Filioque, belief in
purgatory, and in seven Sacraments. The pope intoned the Te
Deum in thanksgiving to God and in a discourse stressed the
importance of this achievement.

The fifth and sixth sessions on July 16th and 17th were devoted
to debates on Church reform. One of the most important canons
is the second, regulating the procedure concerning papal
elections. In order to prevent long vacancies, such as happened
before the election of Gregory X, it was stated that within ten
days of the death of the pope, the cardinals must convene and
proceed to the election in strict isolation from outside (conclave).
If the election was not made in three days, their food supply
should be curtailed and five days after that, they should be given
only bread and water. During the conclave, the electors should
not touch any income from ecclesiastical benefices. These
regulations, with some modification, are still observed in papal
elections.

Gregory X, a saintly man who has been beatified, took the
problem of Church reform very seriously. Before convoking the
Council, he asked the bishops for their recommendations in
this respect. Only three of these proposals are preserved, one
by the famous General of the Dominicans, Humbert de
Romanis, another by the Bishop of Olomouc (Olmiitz) in
Moravia, and a third by an unknown author. Thirty-one dis-
ciplinary canons were voted to prevent current abuses. Canon 23
touched on a delicate problem, namely, the jealousy in cities
between the Mendicant Orders and the secular clergy.

As at the Fourth Lateran Council, some political problems
were solved at Lyons, illustrating once more the prestige of the
papacy in the thirteenth century. The pope again intervened
in the struggle for the imperial crown, proclaiming himself as a
supporter of Rudolf of Habsburg thus inducing his rival,
Alfonso of Castile, to abandon his claim. The King of Aragon,
James I, the only monarch present at the Council, was not given
the honour of being crowned by the pope, as he refused to
become a vassal of the Holy See, a condition required of him


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH 61


by the pope. Among other political affairs, the proposal of the
Mongol Khan to form an alliance against the Egyptian Mam-
luks who were on good terms with the Byzantine Emperor, was
rejected, although the pope was eager to keep up his friendly
relationship with the Khan, as he was believed to be favourable
to the Christians. It should be stressed that the canons voted
by the Council were approved by the pope only after he made
some additions and changes.

It was not Gregory’s responsibility that the achievements of
the Council, regarded as gigantic by his contemporaries, did
not last. The Crusade, so well prepared by him, could not be
organized in time. Before help could come, Akkon, in 1291,
the last place in Christian hands in the Near East, fell into the
hands of the Turks.

The union with the Greeks, concluded for political reasons,
was accepted by only a minority of the Greek clergy. Never-
theless, it had some chance of survival for it found staunch
supporters in the new patriarch John Veccos and his followers.
Unfortunately, memories of the Latin occupation were still too
fresh in Greek minds, and the Emperor himself compromised
the union by his harshness towards its adversaries. Moreover,
the intemperate demands of Gregory X’s successors injured
Greek national feeling. Martin IV (1281-5) completely aban-
doned Gregory’s policy and supported the plans for the con-
quest of Byzantium prepared by Charles of Anjou and his
allies, broke with Michael VIII, declared him schismatic and
deposed him. Michael VIII thwarted the disaster which
menaced him by inducing Peter HI of Aragon to invade Sicily,
and raised a revolt which ended in the bloodbath of Charles’
supporters in the famous Sicilian Vespers.

The reaction in Greece against Michael VIII’s religious
policy was so violent that he was denied a decent burial. His
successor, Andronicus II (1282-1328), in order to curry favour
with his subjects, became the leader of the anti-Latin movement,
and was excommunicated in 1307 by Clement V.

The Council of Lyons failed also to win back to Rome the
Serbians and the Bulgarians. Their rulers had asked Innocent


62 THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


III for royal crowns and both countries, in spite of some
reverses, continued to maintain relations with Rome. But as
these countries were supporting Charles of Anjou, the astute
Michael VIII proposed to suppress the patriarchate of Bulgaria
and the autonomous archbishopric of Serbia, and their
submission to the patriarchate of Constantinople. He argued
shrewdly that both were created without the pope’s consent.
The erection of these autonomous bodies curtailed the rights of
Ochrida, heir of Justiniana Prima, founded by the Emperor
Justinian with the consent of Pope Vigilius. The Latins were
completely deceived by this astute move and the pope lost
any possibility of a renewal of the union with Serbia and
Bulgaria.


THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF VIENNE AND THE
SUPPRESSION OF THE TEMPLARS (1311, 1312)


The downfall of the Hohenstaufen dynasty in Germany and
in Sicily, followed by a long interregnum, made the lofty
imperial title almost meaningless. It seemed that only the papacy
was capable of realizing the idea of political universality which
had been so intimately connected with the Roman Empire.
Very soon, however, papal theocratic claims were challenged
by another secular ruler, the king of France. During the
struggles of the papacy with the emperors, the French kings
had consolidated their monarchy and laid a solid basis for a
well-organized state. Thus, France reached its medieval golden
age under St Louis IX (1226-70), whose brother Charles, after
accepting the crown of Sicily from the pope, was bold enough
to conceive the grandiose plan of a revival of the Latin Empire
in the East.

France’s leading position in the West became manifest under
Philip IV the Fair (1285-1314). The latter had the highest
conception of his royal power. His ideas on the absolute
authority of a ruler and on an autonomous state, independent of
spiritual power, were elaborated by his legists on the basis of
Roman law and successfully propagated in France. So it
happened that when Philip IV defied Boniface VIII’s pro-


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH 63


hibition against taxation of the clergy, he found support in
French public opinion. When, however, Boniface published his
famous Bull Unam Sanctam (1302) in which he set out, quite
uncompromisingly, his claim to superiority over all national
states and rulers, Philip protested vehemently, launched the
most absurd accusations against the pope, ordered his arrest,
and threatened him with judgement by a council in France.
Death saved Boniface from further humiliations.

Not satisfied with the concessions granted by Boniface’s
successor, Benedict XI (1303-4), Philip obtained, after the latter’s
death, the election of a Frenchman, Clement V (1305-14), but
he continued to threaten the pope with the opening of a process
against the memory of Boniface VIII. As the new pope pre-
ferred to stay in France, finally choosing Avignon for his
residence, he and his successors were strongly influenced by
the French kings, during this so-called Babylonian captivity
(up to the year 1376).

The threat of opening a process against Boniface prompted
Clement V to grant the king a very costly concession, namely,
the suppression of the Knights Templars, a most important
military Order. Philip probably saw in the Templars a possible
danger to his position in France, where the Order disposed of
great wealth and could muster fifteen thousand knights in case
of emergency. During the king’s controversy with Boniface
VIII, the Templars appeared to be on the side of the pope.
Moreover, the confiscation of the Order’s property seemed to
be the most satisfactory answer to Philip’s constant need of
money.

As a pretext for his action against the Templars Philip used
the rumours common among the people, of pagan and immoral
practices in the Order, probably caused by the extreme secrecy
observed by the Templars in their meetings and proceedings.
The rumours were mostly untrue, though some members may
have given grounds for suspicion because of their immoral
behaviour. Philip allowed his informers to disclose the accusa-
tions to the inquisitor and, on the latter’s demand, he gave the
order to arrest all French Templars. He then presented to the


64 THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


pope their confessions, extorted by torture, requesting the
suppression of the Order. The pope, placed in jeopardy, decreed
the arrest of all Templars, and appointed a special tribunal to
examine the accusations. At last, in order to avert the threat |
of a process against the memory of Boniface VIII, he con-
sented to the convocation of a council at Vienne, after having
heard the confessions of some of the Templars at Poitiers,
where he had met the king in 1308.

Because of the procrastination of the investigations in-
augurated by the tribunal, the pope postponed the council till
October Ist, 1311. Among the 132 bishops, mostly French and
Italian, were prelates from Spain, England, Ireland and Ger-
many, which gave the council an ecumenical character. Besides
the 38 abbots present, many bishops and abbots sent their
procurators as representatives.

The pope announced as the main objects of the discussions
the affair of the Knights Templars, dogmatic questions, Church
reform and the reconquest of Palestine. Adopting a new pro-
cedure, he created several committees which were ordered to
prepare material for the plenary sessions in which the final
decisions would be made. The examination of the affair of the
Templars met with difficulties. In the December session, the
majority of the bishops voted against the abolition as they
found the evidence of the Order’s guilt insufficient. Under
pressure from the king, Clement V chose a middle way, issuing
a Bull in which he declared the suppression of the Order, not
by penal sentence, but as a “‘provision’’, ordered by the Supreme
Pontiff, solicitous for the general good of the Church. The Bull
was read and officially accepted by the Council during the second
session on April 3rd, 1312. The rich properties of the Order
were to be transferred to the Order of St John or other military
Orders still to be founded. In spite of this decision, the king
kept a great part of the property for himself.

The organization of a new Crusade was confined to the private
negotiations of the pope with secular rulers. Although certain
rulers had made vague promises, and although a tithe for six
years was imposed on all churches, it was evident that the idea


THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH 65


of a Crusade had lost its attraction. No practical result was
achieved.

Among the questions concerning Church reform, the most
important was the ending of the bitter controversy dividing
the Order of Friars Minor into two hostile camps. The radical
minority of the Friars, called Spirituals (later Fraticelli), was
giving the strictest interpretation to their vow of poverty,
accusing the majority of having abandoned the ideals of St
Francis. The controversy was longstanding and called for
immediate consideration, the more so as certain ideas in the
writings of John Peter Olivis, one of the leaders of the Spirituals,
were regarded as heretical by their opponents.

The pope entrusted the examination of the controversy to a
special committee, and confirmed its decision, which was read
at the third and last session, on May 6th. The interpretation of
the vow of poverty, given in the decision, coincided with that
of the majority. However, a more rigorous observation of the
rule was recommended in practice. Three doctrines attributed
to Olivis were condemned without mentioning his name.

In the same session, other disciplinary canons were approved.
Following the example of Gregory X, Clement V, when con-
voking the council, had invited the bishops to send him their
observations. In their replies and in some of the canons pre-
pared by the committee and read during the third session, one
already observes a criticism of the abuses which were later to
become the chief causes of the decadence of the Church. This
was caused by the growing self-consciousness of the national
states—denial of clerical immunity, restriction of other privileges
—and by the papal policy of centralization. Already at the
First Council of Lyons, the English barons had protested against
the appointment of Italian prelates to English benefices. This
practice of the papal curia in appointing to ecclesiastical offices
continued in spite of complaints.

Of special interest is the eleventh canon directing that chairs
for teaching Hebrew, Greek, Arabic and Chaldean should be
created at the main universities. The suggestion was Raymond
Lull’s, who advocated learning Arabic as the best means for the


66 THE MEDIEVAL COUNCILS OF THE WESTERN CHURCH


conversion of the Arabs. Although the canon remained almost
without effect as there were few teachers of Oriental languages,
its acceptance indicates the growth of the missionary idea in
the West. Gregory X had already hoped for the conversion of
the Mongols, and Franciscan friars had penetrated into the
depths of Asia in their missionary zeal. Although these hopes
were not fulfilled, the missionary spirit continued to develop.

It is impossible to say with precision how many canons were
accepted at the Council, as several measures proposed by the
pope or by the committees were not finally drafted. Therefore,
the pope established a special commission for postconciliar
work on them, reserving to himself the right to give to them
definite form. The work was unfinished at Clement’s death,
and Pope John XXII, probably after further revision, published
them in 1317 under the name of Clementines. They were sent to
the universities and became an integral part of ecclesiastical
legislation.


C HCASP TE Ro 1 bt


THE SHADOW OF THE
CONCILIAR THEORY


WESTERN SCHISM: ORIGINS OF THE CONCILIAR
THEORY

The alarming consequences on Church life of the growing curial
policy of centralization were vividly described by a keen ob-
server, Durandus, Bishop of Mende, in his Treatise on the
General Councils. He proposed radical reforms consisting mainly
of restrictions on papal centralization, respect of the rights
of the bishops, revival of the old synodal practices and better
education of the clergy. None of his proposals were seriously
considered at Vienne, although he had written his treatise for
that Council.

During the reign of Clement V’s successor John XXII (1316-
34), the harmful effects of the curial practice on Church life
became even more evident. He completed the centralizing
system, and extended to all Western lands the curial practice of
conferring ecclesiastical benefices. Thus he created a kind of
absolutist state, to which all Christians were subject, through the
government of a hierarchy completely subordinate to the judicial
power and fiscal rights of its head. He is to be credited with
having been among the first to realize the importance of sound
finances for any political power in a world rapidly changing
over to a money economy.

All this, however, resulted in the debasement of the spiritual
forces which the papacy was bound to protect and provoked
fanatical opposition, particularly in the ranks of the Spirituals,


68 THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY


who, in spite of the decision of the Council of Vienne, continued
to demand the absolute poverty of monastic institutions.
William of Occam, a famous English Franciscan philosopher,
was one of the fiercest opponents of John XXII.

The pope’s plans in Italy where, with the help of the Angevin
kings of Naples, he hoped to restore papal political authority
in Lombardy and Central Italy, and thus make possible his
return to Rome, brought him into violent conflict with the
German king Louis IV. When threatened with excommunica-
tion, Louis accused the pontiff of usurping the rights of German
Prince Electors, launched against him the charge of heresy,
because he had rejected the doctrine of the Spirituals and
finally appealed to a future General Council.

The change in the political and ideological atmosphere of
Western Christianity is illustrated in Rome by the elevation of
Louis to the imperial dignity, not by the representative of the
pope, but in the name of the rebellious people of Rome. All this
echoed the revolutionary ideas which Marsilius of Padua had
expressed in his Defensor Pacis, a most daring treatise of medieval
political thought. He stressed the sovereignty of the people
against papal theocratic principles as the foundation on which
the’State is built. The authority of the hierarchy was limited,
according to him, to providing for spiritual needs under the
surveillance of the State, and the pope’s actions should be con-
trolled by General Councils in which laymen and States would be
represented.

These were dangerous ideas, hitherto unheard of, but if
Marsilius and his associate John of Jandun hoped that the
excommunicated Emperor would accept them, they were mis-
taken. With the help of France, the papacy once more won the
struggle against the emperors. It was John’s second successor
Clement VI, who chose Charles IV, future king of Bohemia, to
supplant the rebellious Emperor, Louis IV.

It was the Emperor Charles IV who prepared the way for
Urban V to return to Rome, at least temporarily. However, the
Emperor died that same year (1378), when the Great Schism of
the West had begun. Some of the cardinals, offended by the


THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY 69


haughty attitude of Urban VI, declared invalid his election,
made under pressure from the people of Rome, and elected a
new pope, Clement VII, who established himself in Avignon.

It was during this period of the Western Schism which lasted
until 1415, that the so-called conciliar theory, proclaiming the
superiority of the council over the pope, was formulated. Al-

~ though similar ideas had been put forward by William of Occam
and Marsilius of Padua, the canonists of the fourteenth and
fifteenth century, who had developed this theory, do not seem to
have been inspired by these radical writings. The canonical basis
of the conciliar theory was the medieval concept of a corporation,
according to which the head of a corporation is the executive of
a power residing in all members of the corporation and which
has been delegated to him by them. Should the head of the
corporation cease to exist or when it failed to promote the
interest of the body corporate, the delegated power reverted
to its members.

It should be stressed that even the staunchest defenders of the
superiority of spiritual power over the temporal, which is em-
bodied in the pope, accepted the medieval principles governing
a corporation and did not hesitate to apply them to the Church.
For example, Hugaccio, teacher of Innocent III, in the spirit of
these ideas, taught that a pope can personally fall into error,

_but the Church cannot, meaning not only the Roman Church,
but also the universal Church. The Church, thus represented ina
council, is empowered to state the error of a pope who, at that
same moment, ceases to be pope. From these premises also
originated the thesis that a council with a pope is superior to the
pope alone.

From such reasoning it was not difficult to conceive the prin-
ciple—this was done by John of Paris who died in 1306—that
the plenitude of power is given by God to the Church com-
posed of all the faithful. The community of the faithful trans-
ferred this power to the pope through his election by the
cardinals. The community can, however, take back this trans-
fer should the pope fall into error, or if he uses his power to the
detriment of the Church. Once this principle had been accepted,


710 THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY


there remained only the controversial question as to whether
this recall of the power given to the pope should be effected by
the cardinals alone, or by a council representing all the faithful.

The first denials of the plenitude of power invested in the
pope, the appeals to a council made by the cardinals of the
House of Colonna, and by King Philip the Fair against Boniface
VIII, and by Louis IV against John XXII, were based on this
reasoning of the canonists. The idea of the superiority of the
council would, however, hardly have been fully formulated and
so widely accepted had the schism not occurred in 1378. The
situation appeared more serious as the schism was not caused
by a secular ruler, but by the cardinals themselves. In the
opinion of many, schism was tantamount to heresy.

The fact that the schism originated from a double election
deprived the cardinals of their judicial réle over the pope, and
the responsibility for the removal of the scandal returned to the
faithful, as represented by a General Council. This was pro-
pounded in 1379 by two German theologians from the Uni-
versity of Paris, Henry of Langenstein and Conrad of Geln-
hausen. However, such a thesis was still too new. It was only
when all hope of any other solution had vanished and when the
disorders created by two rival curias, in Rome and in Avignon,
became too glaring, that the conciliar idea was accepted generally
as the only possible remedy. So it happened that in 1409 thir-
teen cardinals withdrew their obedience to both Benedict XIII
of Avignon and Gregory XII of Rome, and convoked a Council
in Pisa.

Although the convocation was based on very slender authority,
the general desire for an ending of the schism was so great that
the Council promised to be a success. Nearly 100 bishops and
abbots were present. Moreover, following the practice intro-
duced at the Council of Vienne, 100 bishops, 200 abbots, many
chapters and thirteen universities sent their procurators or
representatives.

The two popes, having refused to appear, answered the chal-
lenge by convoking their own councils. They were deposed and
the council empowered the cardinals to elect a new pontiff. The


THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY TAL


new pope, Alexander V, died the following year and the un-
scrupulous and ambitious Baldassare Cossa was elected and took
the name of John XXIII. Since the two previous popes refused
to resign, Western Christianity thus became even further divided.
The new pope, elected in Pisa, had the largest following, although
Benedict XIII was recognized in Spain and Scotland, Gregory
XII by Germany, Naples, Venice and the Duke of Rimini.


THE COUNCIL OF CONSTANCE (1414-18)


Thus, the first attempt to suppress the schism, through the
application of the conciliar theory by the cardinals, miscarried.
There remained one last possibility, the intervention of the
Emperor-Elect, King Sigismund (1410-37), Protector of the
Church. The times when an Emperor could intervene with
armed forces to pacify the Church had gone long ago, and
Sigismund could attempt pacification only by resorting to the
conciliar idea. He offered obedience to John XXIII on the con-
dition that the latter would agree to the convocation of a Council
of Union at Constance. Sigismund announced the convocation
in 1413 and was followed in this by John XXIII.

The latter regarded the new Council as the continuation of that
of Pisa, expecting to be reconfirmed by the Italian bishops who
held a majority at the Council. The Council was opened on
November 5th, 1414. The non-Italian prelates demanded that the
voting should be carried out not according to the number of
prelates present, but according to the system adopted by medieval
universities. All present were divided into four nations—the
Germans, comprising prelates from the whole of central and
eastern Europe together with Scandinavia; the French and
English with the Irish and Scots; and the Italians. Later, when
Spain had joined the Council, she obtained the fifth vote.

Seeing that his hopes for reconfirmation had vanished (his
private life was not without blame) John XXIII escaped to
his friend, the Duke of Tyrol. But again, the expectation that
his disappearance would wreck the Council was frustrated by
the energetic intervention of King Sigismund, who forbade the
members of the Council to leave Constance. This treacherous


2 THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY


action of Pope John’s resulted in the conciliar theory being

officially accepted and applied by the members of the Council

in its fullest sense. Gerson, Chancellor of the University of Paris,

took the initiative in his speech on March 23rd and the Council

made it a law in the famous decree Sacrosancta, voted on April
6th. In this decree, the Council declared itself an ecumenical
assembly with full jurisdiction given it by Christ. Therefore, all

Christians, even the pope, must obey its decisions in matters of
faith, of union, and of Church reform.

The cardinals saw in this decree a curtailment of their own
rights, but they protested in vain against its acceptance. In
execution of the powers which the Council gave itself, an order
was issued to arrest the fugitive pope. He was taken prisoner,
incarcerated and deposed.

It was during this period when the Council, now without a
pope, pretended to function as the supreme authority in all
ecclesiastical matters, that the assembled Fathers, anxious to
show their solicitude for the pure Catholic faith, hastened their
condemnation of the heretical doctrines of the English reformer
Wyclif and of his Czech follower John Huss. In his zeal for
Church reform, Wyclif overstepped himself, demanding the ab-
solute poverty of the Church, whose wealth should be taken over
by the State. He regarded the Church as an invisible society,
composed of souls predestined for salvation. Its head was Christ
and the papacy was instituted by Antichrist. He rejected all
those religious practices which gave occasion to the abuses he
criticized, declaring the Bible to be the sole source of faith.

These doctrines were condemned by the Council (on May 4th,
1415) which then devoted all its attention to the doctrine and
person of John Huss. The latter, a pious and virtuous man, was
a zealous reformer in Bohemia, but he incurred the displeasure
of the Archbishop of Prague by criticizing abuses too sharply. It
is the irony of fate that it was the least legitimate pope, John
XXIII, who provoked Huss’ most violent criticism. When John
promised indulgences to all who would contribute to his Crusade
against the King of Naples, who refused to accept his obedience,
Huss protested against the preaching and “‘sale” of indulgences.


THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY 73


It was after this incident that he put into writing his teaching on
the Church inspired by Wyclif’s ideas.

Huss had a large following among the Czech people and the
nobility. Excommunicated and suspended, he was willing to
appear at Constance after Sigismund promised to provide him
with a letter of safe conduct. Although still under suspension, he
began preaching in Constance and was imprisoned. It is ques-
tionable how far Huss believed all the thirty theses extracted
from his works, often regardless of the context, in face of his
frequent protests that he was unjustly accused of heretical
teaching. He stubbornly refused to recant the heretical doctrines
of which he was accused, and was condemned as an obstinate
heretic. Sigismund made no attempt to save him from extradition
by the Council and from burning at the stake on July 6th, 1415.
A similar fate befell Huss’ friend, Jerome of Prague, in 1416. By
condemning heretical teachings, the Council gained respect, but
the execution of John Huss provoked a new storm in Central
Europe which disturbed the peace in the Church for many years
to come.

After the deposition of John XXIII, the way for the liquida-
tion of the schism was made easier by the voluntary abdication
of Gregory XII (July, 1415), after he had published a Bull
formally legitimizing the Council. Benedict XIII of Avignon,
although abandoned by France, refused to abdicate and took
refuge in Peniscola in Spain. Even though both Spain and
Portugal abandoned his obedience, he refused to resign and was
deposed by the Council on July 26th, 1417.

The German and English nations insisted on postponing the
election of the new pope until after the vote of all the decrees on
Church reform. After protracted negotiations, a compromise
was reached. The most important of the five decrees, called
Frequens, promulgated on October 9th, 1417, transformed the
conciliar organization into a permanent institution, which would
exercise a certain control over the papacy. The next council
was to be convoked in five years, to be followed by another after
seven years. Thereafter, a council should convene every ten
years. Then, the collegium of fifty-six voters, cardinals and six


74 THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY


representatives of each nation, assembled in conclave and elected
Pope Martin V on November 11th, 1417.1

Unfortunately, the much desired reform of the Church was
not seriously attempted. The seven decrees voted at the forty-
third session in March, 1418, only tried to remedy certain con-
sequences of the schism and curtailed certain fiscal prerogatives
of the curia. The pope himself concluded individual concordats
with each nation, giving them certain concessions as to the
choice of cardinals and also in fiscal and administrative matters.
Martin V, whose authority had grown considerably in spite of
the anti-papal atmosphere created by the conciliar theory, closed
the Council on April 22nd, 1418, after its last and forty-fifth
session. He did not officially approve the decisions made and in
forbidding appeals from the pope to a council he indirectly
condemned the conciliar idea. Only in 1446 did his successor
Eugenius IV declare that he accepted the decrees of Constance
in so far as they did not curtail the authority and primacy of the


papacy.


THE COUNCIL OF BASLE-FERRARA-
FLORENCE (1431-45)


Although the papacy continued to recover its rightful position
in the Church, the conciliar theory did not die without a struggle.
Martin V, respecting the decisions of the Council of Constance,
after five years convoked a new council in Pavia. The assembly
was transferred to Siena, but, as only a few bishops had arrived,
he dissolved it. In spite of this failure, the bishops insisted on the
convocation of a new synod after seven years, as had been
decreed at Constance. Martin V was therefore forced to sum-
mon a new synod at Basle (1431), appointing Cardinal Julian
Cesarini as director of its debates.

It seemed likely that the Council of Basle would end in the
same way as had the synod of Pavia-Siena. Cesarini, confirmed

1 The Council prescribed a special profession of faith for the newly-
elected pope. In the formula of the profession only one Lateran Council—
probably the Fourth—and the Councils of Lyons and Vienne were added to


the eight Ecumenical Councils enumerated in Gratian’s collection of canon
law. The practice was soon abandoned.


THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY i


in his presidential function by Martin’s successor Eugenius IV,
thought that it was more important as papal legate to direct the
Crusade against the Hussites, and so sent only his representatives
to Basle, who opened the Council on July 23rd, though not one
bishop had yet appeared. The Crusade against the Hussites
ended in disaster, and Cesarini, who had barely escaped being
taken prisoner, appeared in Basle in September. Because the
number of delegates increased very slowly and because Martin
V had already reached agreement with the Greeks to hold a
Council of union in Italy, the pope, discouraged by exaggerated
reports of the situation in Basle, dissolved the Council.

Before the papal decision had reached Basle Cesarini, after
his sad experience with the last Crusade against the Hussites,
had invited their representatives to appear in Basle for peaceful
negotiations. The papal Bull of dissolution was greeted with dis-
may. The Fathers refused to obey and renewed the decree
Sacrosancta of Constance, defining the superiority of the
Council over the pope.

Because Sigismund was interested in pacifying the Hussites,
who refused to recognize him as King of Bohemia, the Council
continued its negotiations with the moderate party of the Hussites
and induced them to accept, on November 30th, 1433, the so-
called Compacts of Prague, which gave them the privilege of
Communion under both species and other concessions concern-
ing free preaching, punishment of public sinners and limitation
of Church property.

This was a great success for the Council of Basle and it was
greeted with relief, especially in Germany, whose crusading
expeditions had all ended in defeat and whose lands, bordering
on Bohemia, had been plundered by the victorious Hussites.
The pope, already in a difficult position in Rome, was himself
forced to revoke the Bull of dissolution and to legitimize the
Council of Basle.

The pope’s decision came too late, for in the meantime the
Council had put into practice the conciliar principles. The Council
was divided into four nations—French, Italian, German and
Spanish—and any procurator or doctor, accepted as a member,


76 THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY


had full voting rights on a par with the cardinals and bishops
who were in a hopeless minority. In spite of this, the Council
endeavoured to act as the supreme authority in the Church.

Apart from the reconciliation with the Hussites, Church re-
form was the main preoccupation. Many useful decrees were
voted, especially in matters of clerical life, organization of local
synods, and the celebration of the liturgy. In other decrees, how-
ever, the anti-papal tendency predominated. Right of appeal to
the pope was curtailed and all taxes demanded by the curia
suppressed. This would have deprived the popes of most of their
incomes, thus putting the papacy at the mercy of a Council whose
composition did not correspond with Church tradition. Eugenius
IV protested against such decrees, but without success.

The Council of Basle was also interested in promoting union
with the Greeks. This was in the interest of Sigismund, who was
wearied of the progress of the Turks against Byzantium, in
Serbia and Bulgaria, in the vicinity of Hungary. The defeat which
he suffered at Nicopolis (1396) showed him the magnitude of
the Turkish danger. He therefore encouraged negotiations with
the Greeks, which had been begun already by Martin V and
which Eugenius IV had successfully concluded. The Emperor
John VIII Palaeologus, menaced on all sides by the Ottoman
Turks, saw clearly that without the help of the West he could
not save the remnants of his empire or even the city itself. From
past experience it was evident that the Greeks could be led to
union only by a decision made in an Ecumenical Council. If the
council could not be held in Constantinople, a possibility which
was discussed, the Greeks favoured an Italian city more acces-
sible to them.

It was over this question about the location of such a council
that Basle made a definite break with Eugenius IV. The majority
of the conciliar members—Basle had sent her own delegates to
Constantinople—favoured Avignon or Basle. Cesarini and the
minority sided with Eugenius IV who, according to the wishes
of the Greeks, preferred an Italian city. Encouraged by the split
at Basle, Eugenius IV dispatched a hired fleet to Constantinople
to transport the Emperor, the patriarch and the delegation of


THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY Ui


700 Greeks to Italy. Although Basle also sent boats to Constan-
tinople for the same purpose, the Emperor sided with the pope
who had proposed Ferrara as the seat of the Council. On
September 18th, 1437, the pope transferred the Council from
Basle to Ferrara, but the majority of the members revolted, re-
fusing to obey the papal order.

The Council for the union with the Greeks was opened at
Ferrara on January 8th and is regarded as the legitimate continu-
ation of the Council of Basle. The Greek delegation, headed by
the Emperor John VIII Palaeologus (1425-48) and the ecumeni-
cal patriarch Joseph, with delegates from the three other
Eastern patriarchates arrived in March. The Emperor asked for
postponement of the debates hoping in the meantime that the
envoys of European princes, from whom he expected military
help, would appear. Only few princes sent representatives.
Others still favoured the Council of Basle or declared their
neutrality in the controversy between the pope and Basle.

The discussions on purgatory began in June, but were fruitless,
and they revealed that the Greek theologians had no clear ideas
on this subject. After the arrival of Isidor, Metropolitan of Kiev,
the addition of the Filioque to the Creed was debated, but no
agreement was reached.

The pope, finding himself unable to entertain the large Greek
delegation and the many Latin theologians, was obliged to
accept the offer of the city of Florence which was willing to bear
the financial burden. Because the plague was raging in Ferrara,
he transferred the Council to Florence on January 10th, 1439.
The dogmatic discussions on the procession of the Holy Ghost
—the main obstacle to union—began in February and lasted till
June. Bishop Mark Eugenicus of Ephesus stubbornly refused to
accept the Latin explanation, but owing to the intervention of
the learned Bessarion, Metropolitan of Nicaea, and other
Greek prelates, the Greeks finally accepted the formula that the
Holy Ghost derives in essence and in being at the same time
from the Father and the Son and that he proceeds eternally
from both, as from one principle and through a single spiration.

This accord was reached two days before the death of the


78 THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY


patriarch (June 10th). The discussions on purgatory, the Eucharist
and the Roman primacy were long and interspersed with .
dangerous crises, but at last common agreement on the teaching
of purgatory and the Eucharist—with leavened or unleavened
bread—was reached. Finally it was defined that “the holy
apostolic See of Rome had (spiritual) primacy over the whole
world. The Roman Pontiff himself, as the successor of St Peter,
the Prince of the Apostles, is the true Vicar of Christ, the head of
the whole Church and the Father and teacher of all Christians.
To him—in the person of Peter—has been given by our Lord
Jesus Christ, full power to feed, rule and govern the Church
universal, as it is also expressed in the Acts of the Ecumenical
Councils and in the holy canons.” The decree of union was signed
by all the Greeks present with two exceptions, and by the pope
and the Latin prelates on July 6th, 1439.2

The conclusion of union with the Greeks was a great success
for Eugenius IV and helped him, not only to vanquish the Council
of Basle, but also to stop any further development of the con-
ciliar movement which was trying to introduce radical changes
into the constitution of the Church. In vain had the rebellious
members of Basle declared the superiority of the Council
over the pope as dogma. Not even the deposition of Eugenius IV
and the election of the Duke of Savoy (Felix V) as anti-pope
made the desired impression. Eugenius IV answered by an
excommunication of the rebels and continued his work for
union with the other Churches. On November 22nd, 1439, the
Armenian Church concluded a union and the Copts from Egypt
followed on February 4th, 1442. After the transfer of the Council
to Rome, in September 1443, union with the Syriac Church was
concluded, and in August, 1445, some Chaldaeans and Maron-
ites from Cyprus joined the Church of Rome. The date of the
final closing of the Council is not known.

2 The translator of the Greek Acts of the Council, the Uniate Bishop
Abraham of Crete, with the permission of the Curia called the Council of
Florence the Eighth Ecumenical, following the Greek tradition. His con-
temporaries . Cardinals Reginald Pole and Contarini, also regarded this


Council as the Eighth Ecumenical. This “error” was ‘‘corrected”, in the
collections of councils in the seventeenth century.


THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY 719


In the meantime, Eugenius IV continued to win over to his
obedience those princes still hesitating between the papacy and
the rebels in Basle. Through the conclusion of concordats he
won over Aragon, Scotland, the German princes and the
Emperor Frederick III. Frederick evicted the conciliar members
from Basle in 1448. They moved to Lausanne, and after their
pope had resigned in 1449, the Council met its inglorious end.
The victory of the papacy over the dangerous and erroneous
doctrine was achieved finally with the help of the Greeks.

The disunity among the European princes was one of the
many reasons why the union with the Greeks and other Churches
concluded at Florence and Rome did not last. Eugenius IV did
not forget his promise to bring military help to the Greeks for
the defence of their city. He himself entertained a small con-
tingent of bowmen in Constantinople during the absence of the
Emperor and, in 1442, he sent Cesarini to Central Europe to
help Ladislas, King of Poland and Hungary, to organize a
Crusade against the Turks, with the help of John Hunyadi of
Transylvania, Serbia, Venice and Genoa. The crusaders had
some success, and penetrated into Bulgaria. The battle of Varna,
however, on November 10th, 1444, in which the Christian army
was defeated, King Ladislas and the legate Cesarini killed, sealed
the fate of Constantinople and the Union in Greece.

The Greek Uniats had a dangerous antagonist in Mark
Eugenicus who arrived in Constantinople before the Emperor
and began to spread his anti-unionist ideas among the monks
and the common people. But the Emperor did not intervene, and
this encouraged Mark and his friends. Distrust of the men who
had concluded the union grew. As no substantial help was forth-
coming from the West, the cause of the union was weakened. The
pope sent Isidore, now a cardinal, who had been expelled from
Moscow, and who had failed to enforce the union in the Russian
lands under Poland—Lithuania—the leading Polish bishops
favoured the rebel Council of Basle—to the Greek islands and to
Constantinople to help the Uniats. His reports contain interest-
ing details showing that the union had some chance of survival.
Yet, although John VIII’s successor Constantine XI remained


80 THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY


faithful to the union and encouraged the Uniats, dislike of the
Latins was so deeply rooted in the Greek populace that his
efforts were vain. Almost no help came from the West and the
last Emperor of Constantinople died heroically on May 29th,
1453, defending his city which became the capital of the Otto-
man Empire. A new patriarch, Gernadius Scholarius, once in
favour of the union, later its fiercest enemy, was installed in
Constantinople by the victorious Mohammed, and in 1484 the
union of the Council of Florence was officially repudiated in a
synod held in Constantinople.


SURVIVALS OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY: THE FIFTH
LATERAN COUNCIL (1512-17)


There was, however, one enduring result of the Union Council
from which the Western Church profited immensely, namely the
growth of the prestige of the papacy. The Greeks had kept the
traditional concept of a council opposed to the Western conci-
liar idea. According to this concept, a council was ecumenical
only when all five patriarchs were represented. The Roman
patriarch, the first, was not represented at Basle. Moreover, the
composition of this Council did not correspond to the old ortho-
dox teaching that only bishops had the right to vote. These
considerations, among others, influenced the decision of the
Greeks, although Basle offered important concessions.

The réle of the papacy in the Church, further enhanced by its
victory at Basle, was stressed by many canonists, in particular by
Cardinal Torquemada. Unfortunately, the popes neglected the
clamour for reform of the Church in her head and members.
The ideas of the Renaissance had penetrated the college of
cardinals and the papal court. The discovery of classical trea-
sures stimulated enormously the cultural development of Europe, |
but the re-emphasis on the rights of individual thought and
action, expressed in literary and artistic classical works, created
a wave of hedonism which led to acute moral decadence, |
especially in Church life. Serious reform could not be expected
from the Renaissance popes, cardinals and bishops, and be- {


THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY 81


cause of this, claims for the convocation of a new council of re-
form were repeated.

The attempts to revive the Council of Basle in 1482 ended in
fiasco, but many princes used the conciliar idea as a weapon
with which to threaten the popes. On the other hand, the
popes whose authority had increased, were reluctant to con-
voke a council which might degenerate into another schism.
In opposition to this possible danger, Julius II was forced to
convoke the Fifth Lateran Council (1512-17). Its main goal was
to defeat the revolutionary attempts made by Louis XII, the
French king, to convoke an antipapal synod at Pisa in 1511,
transferred in 1512 to Milan. The renewed threat of the theore-
tical superiority of a Council over the pope was, however, quickly
dispelled by Julius’ successor Leo X who, in 1516, concluded a
concordat with Louis XII’s successor, Francis I, advantageous
to both, and approved by the Council of the Lateran.

Although many suggestions on how to reform the Church
were presented to the pope by zealous reformers, the Council of
the Lateran failed to attack the most crying abuses, namely,
pluralism (the accumulation of benefices in the hands of one
person), non-residence of incumbents of benefices and others.
The decrees, voted in the four sessions before the twelfth and
final meeting (March Sth, 1517), and published in pontifical
Bulls, were well-meant attempts to amend the taxation practice
of the curia, to recommend the choice of worthy bishops, to
insist on religious instruction and preaching, to approve the
pawnshops (montes pietatis) and the censorship of religious
works. They were, however, not enforced. Leo X, with his
worldly curia, was far from becoming a reforming pope. The
splendour of the papal court, with its many great artists and
newly-acquired cultural treasures, gave the impression that the
old days of superiority of the spiritual power had returned.

So it happened that the warnings given by the radical teach-
ings of Wyclif and John Huss, followed by social and religious


strife in England and Bohemia, stayed unheeded, although all |
this was provoked by decadence in Church life and by a mis-


guided desire for reform. Victory over these revolutionary


-


82 THE SHADOW OF THE CONCILIAR THEORY


attempts appeared so decisive that the popes refused to confirm
the concessions called Compacts, given by the Fathers of the
Council of Basle to the moderate Hussites. The latter, although ~
fundamentally Catholic, were refused the consecration of their
elected archbishop. King George Podebrad was excommuni-
cated by Paul II and threatened with new Crusades. These
failed to attain their religious aim and increased the bitterness
against the papacy in Central Europe.


CHvAsP ER hv


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT
AND OF THE VATICAN


BEGINNING OF THE REFORMATION


In spite of appearances, the papacy was shaken in the eyes of
many because no serious effort was being made to check the
decadence. The evil was so deeply imbedded in Church life that
only a radical shock could arouse the conscience of the authori-
ties and spur them to action. The shock proved to be more
radical and dangerous than could have been expected and it was
provided by one man, a friar and professor at the University of
Wittenberg, Martin Luther (1483-1546).

The close connection between Luther’s revolutionary action
and previous manifestations of the sort was revealed by the fact
that he was impelled into open conflict by an incident similar to
that which had spurred John Huss, namely by abuses in the
preaching of indulgences for the construction of St Peter’s
Church in Rome. It is characteristic that the first printed edition
of Huss’ treatise on the Church was made on Luther’s initiative.
And it was Luther also who declared in his disputation with Eck
that Huss’ condemnation at Constance was unjust. Wyclif’s
declaration that the Bible is the only authority for Christian
teaching was repeated by the German reformer.

The example given by the two condemned reformers was not,
however, the main incentive in Luther’s revolution. Sharing with
many of his pious contemporaries the anxiety of how it is
possible to save one’s soul in view of the immensity of the
Absolute, as revealed in the writings of Christian Humanists,


84 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


and because of the sinfulness of human nature, Luther found his
answer in St Paul’s Epistle to the Romans (1. 17): “It reveals
God’s way of justifying us, faith first and last; as the scripture ©
says, It is faith that brings life to the just man.” In his inter-
pretation, only a firm faith in God’s promises assured man’s
salvation. Thus, it seemed logical to him that there was no need
for good works and for those ritual and sacramental means—
Mass, sacraments, indulgences—which the Church recom-
mended as helpful or necessary for salvation. The means were
compromised in the eyes of many by flagrant abuses. The media-
tion of the clergy, necessary for the administration of these means,
was rendered vain by Luther’s teaching of the priesthood of all
believers. His doctrine that human nature is wholly corrupt as a
consequence of original sin, and destitute of free will, justified
his conviction that man can be saved by faith alone. This, how-
ever, provoked the protest of many Humanists, who were in
favour of reform and sympathetic to Luther’s efforts, and the
greatest of them, Erasmus of Rotterdam, spoke out in glowing
defence of man’s freedom.

But in spite of these protests, Luther’s revolutionary doctrine
continued to spread, helped by social disorders, national senti-
ments against the curia’s intervention in German political and
religious life, by the desire of the nobility to control the riches of
the Church, and by the general feeling of the necessity for radical
reforms. Voices were heard on all sides calling for the convo-
cation of a new council. Luther himself appealed against con-
demnation by a legate, to a better informed pope, and to a
General Council in 1518, and again in 1520.

Although Pope Leo X condemned the forty-one theses,
extracted from Luther’s writings, as heretical or false (June 15th,
1520), many regarded this condemnation as not final, as long as
it was unconfirmed by a Council. The Protestant Estates in
Germany claimed the convocation of a free council in German
lands. Pope Clement VII (1523-34) was opposed to the idea,
fearing a new Basle, the more so as the German Estates imposed
conditions on its convocation which he could not accept.

The situation was also complicated by political entanglements.


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 85


The Emperor Charles V (1519-66), master of Spain, the Low
Countries and Germany, was laying the foundations of a uni-
versal Empire governed by the House of Habsburg of which he
was the head. France, fearing encirclement by the Habsburgs,
tried to take hold in Italy, but Francis I was defeated and captured
at Pavia in 1525. Charles’ success provoked, however, a reaction
on the part of the papacy, which feared a Spanish encirclement
in Italy, and of England, which also aspired to maritime ex-
pansion. France saw herself forced to conclude an alliance with
the Turks, a fact which buried for ever the principle of the unity
of Christendom and of Europe.

It was, of course, in the interest of France that Germany
should not be pacified, as this would increase the power of the
dangerous Habsburg rival. On the other hand, the pope was
afraid of imperial predominance at any council held in Germany.
So it happened that many years were lost and Luther’s revolu-
tionary reform spread from Germany to Scandinavia and
Bohemia. The Protestant Estates formed the League of Schmal-
kalden for their defence against the Emperor.


THE COUNCIL OF TRENT (1545-63)

A change came when Paul II was elected pope (1534-49),
Ceding to the pressure exercised by the Emperor and by public
opinion, he convoked a General Council in 1537 in Mantua. It
was transferred the same year to Vicenza but, on account of the
opposition manifested by France, the Protestant Estates and,
finally, also by the Emperor, the Council was suspended in 1539
without having accomplished anything.

The Emperor hoped to come to an understanding with the
Protestants in public discussions but they were fruitless. The
mission of Cardinal Contarini in Germany failed, and there was
left only one last resort, namely, the renewal of a conciliar con-
vocation. This was done in 1542, and the pope accepted Trent
as its seat. However, new political complications suspended its
opening for three years. The Emperor, again at war with France,
was forced to grant certain concessions to the Protestant Estates,
in spite of papal protest, and only after the conclusion of the


86 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


peace of Crespy (1544), could the Council be reconvoked in
November 1544 for March of the next year. Having overcome
further complications, it started its work in December.

The Emperor insisted on the deferment of dogmatic discus-
sions until after the voting of reforms. The pope, of course,
regarded the condemnation of heretical teaching and the defini-
tion of Catholic dogmas as the first duty of the assembled
Fathers. Although he himself was guilty of nepotism and in-
dulged in worldly pleasures, he was well aware of the necessity
for more thorough reforms, and the Reform Committee,
created by him and composed of learned and highly respected
prelates, and led by Cardinals Contarini and Carafa, prepared a
well-designed programme aimed in the first place at the reform
of the papal Curia.

In mutual agreement, it was decided to treat dogmatic prob-
lems and Church reforms together. The principles adopted at
Constance and Basle on the composition of the Council and its
agenda were rejected. Only cardinals, bishops and heads of
religious Orders were given the right to vote. All questions were
first studied in committees composed of theologians, and their
recommendations were then discussed in general congregations
by the prelates entitled to vote. They elected deputies charged
with the wording of the decrees and canons which were then
approved in solemn assembly. The sessions were presided over
by papal legates, Cardinals del Monte, Cervini and Reginald
Pole.

It was logical to concentrate first on the basic teachings re-
jected by the Protestants. In the fourth solemn session, there-
fore, it was defined that not only the Bible, but also tradition is
the source of Catholic faith. The canon of the inspired writings
was established, the Latin translation of the Bible, the Vulgate,
declared as authentic, and norms for the interpretation of
Scripture were given. Then followed the Catholic definition of
original sin and, in the seventh session, the dogma of the justi-
fication of man was formulated. Against Luther’s doctrine of
faith in Christ’s merits as the only means of justification, the
importance of man’s free will in cooperation with God’s grace


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 87


was stressed, the result being the interior sanctification of the
soul through sanctifying grace. Then, the Catholic doctrine on
the sacraments was studied, and in the seventh solemn session
was defined with special emphasis on baptism and confirmation.

At the fifth, sixth and seventh sessions, a number of reform
decrees were published concerning theological studies with
emphasis on scriptural exegesis. Others stressed the duty of
residence by incumbents of benefices, and on the need for
preaching. The number of prelates—mostly from Italy—in-
creased from thirty-one to sixty-four together with seven heads
of religious Orders.

The pope gave his consent to a council being held on imperial
territory very unwillingly, and his legates and bishops resented
the interference of the Emperor exerted through the prelates from
Spain. When, in the spring of 1547, an epidemic broke out,
during the eighth session, the legates took advantage of this
opportunity to transfer the Council to Bologna. The Emperor
took offence at this decision and ordered thirteen of his prelates
to stay at Trent.

The transfer of the Council appeared to be premature. The
emperor, at war with the Schmalkaldic League, won the battle
of Miihlberg (April 24th, 1547), and, having a free hand in
Germany, insisted on the return of the Fathers from Bologna to
Trent, since the participation of Protestants in a Council held
on papal territory was out of the question. He secured the con-
cession that the decisions arrived at during the ninth and
tenth sessions at Bologna would not be published.

Exploiting his military victory, Charles V endeavoured to
reach a kind of modus vivendi with the Protestants, granting
them certain concessions in the so-called Interim of Augsburg.
These were the granting of the chalice to the laity and the non-
celibacy of the clergy, both of which should be binding till the
council should restart its work. Paul III, dissatisfied with this,
suspended the Council on September 13th, 1549. He died two
months later and the new pope, Julius HI (1550-55), who as
Cardinal Del Monte had been the former president of the con-
ciliar assemblies, was more agreeable to the Emperor’s demand,
and recalled the Council (November 14th, 1550).


88 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


The six sessions of this second period of the Council of Trent
(from May Ist, 1551, to April 28th, 1552), were of quite a different
character to the previous sessions. Because of further warlike
complications with the Emperor, no French prelates were pre-
sent, and the Spanish bishops maintained their independent
attitude. The three German archbishops, Prince Electors of
Mainz, Trier and Cologne, arrived, followed by ten other bishops,
and the Emperor insisted on the presence of the Protestant repre-
sentatives. Before they arrived, the Fathers continued the dis-
cussions on the sacraments, elaborated at the two sessions at
Bologna, and published in the thirteenth session the decrees on
the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist. They defined the
Catholic doctrine on the sacraments of penance and of extreme
unction. The reform decrees, accepted in these sessions, con-
cerned the discipline of the clergy and their appointments to
ecclesiastical benefices. They did not include, however, certain
demands made by some of the bishops, the legates being anxious
to prevent curtailment of some practices of the curia.

The discussions with the Protestant delegates lasted from
October 1551 to March 1552, but were fruitless. The Protestants
presented conditions unacceptable to the conciliar Fathers, such
as fresh discussions of all controversial matters already defined
by the Council; declaration of the superiority of the Council
over the pope; and absolute freedom of the conciliar members
from obedience to the pope. Again, political developments put
an end to the debates. The Prince Elector of Saxony, formerly
on the side of the Emperor, changed his allegiance and, in alli-
ance with France, declared war, marching towards the Tyrol.
The Emperor, unprepared for this change of events, barely
escaped from Innsbruck, and the Council, without the guidance
of its president, the Cardinal-legate Crescenzio, now on his
death-bed, adjourned for two years.

Not two, but ten years passed before the Council could
assemble in Trent for the third time. Charles VI was forced to
come to terms with the Protestants, and the Peace of Augsburg
(1555) established equality between the Protestant and Catholic
Estates, making definite the acceptance of the unchristian prin-


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 89


ciple, Cuius regio illius et religio, which meant that subjects must
follow the religion of their sovereigns. Disillusioned and con-
vinced of the fruitlessness of his efforts to restore religious unity
in Germany, Charles V abdicated (1556) in Germany in favour
of his brother Ferdinand I of Austria, and in Spain, Italy and the
Netherlands, of his son Philip II (1556-98). Paul IV (1555-9),
fully convinced of the plenitude of his power over men and
kingdoms, turned a deaf ear to all requests for the convocation
of a synod. Although energetic in carrying out reform of the
Church, especially by means of the Inquisition, he was guilty of
nepotism and came into conflict with Philip II and Ferdinand I.

His successor Pius IV (1559-65) changed his attitude towards
the Habsburgs, although he followed apprehensively Philip’s
pretensions to the rdéle of protector of the Catholic Church and
the papacy. Assisted by his nephew, Charles Borromeo, whom
he made cardinal and Archbishop of Milan—a case of papal
nepotism for which the Church should be thankful—he was not
opposed to true reform. Moreover, the rapid progress of Cal-
vinism in France—Calvin’s doctrine spread also from Switzer-
land to Hungary and Poland—made imperative the reopening of
the Council as the only way to save Catholicism in France. In
his bull of November 29th, 1560, Pius IV thus reopened the
third period of the Council of Trent (from January 18th, 1562
to December 4th, 1563, sessions seventeen to twenty-five). Delay
in the opening was caused by more complications. Although the
Protestants refused the invitation to be present, Ferdinand I
hoped that they might change their attitude if the assembly was
declared to be a new Council and was convoked in another
German city. The French king also preferred to call the Council
a new one, but wanted it to meet in Trent. The pope left this
question open in the convocation, although he was in favour of
regarding it as the continuation of the two previous assemblies.
This difficulty was solved by the fact that the German bishops
stayed away, fearing to be accused of not respecting the Peace of
Augsburg.

The pope appointed Cardinal Gonzaga as president, assisted
by four other cardinals. There were new difficulties to overcome.


90 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


Ferdinand I, fearing more defections to Protestantism, asked for
the legalization of priestly marriages and the granting of the
chalice to the laity. The Spanish and French bishops, wishing
to be more independent of the papacy, asked for a definition
stating that episcopacy was of divine right. These requests came
to the forefront after the twenty-first and twenty-second sessions,
in which the Catholic teaching on the sacrificial character of the
Mass was defined. Ferdinand’s request for the “‘lay chalice’’ was
left to the decision of the pope, who granted it for some German
and Habsburg lands. The concession failed, however, to pro-
duce the desired effect, and was soon withdrawn.

The situation was saved after the death of Cardinal Gonzaga
by the new president of the Council, Cardinal Morone. He
succeeded in pacifying the Emperor, came to an understanding
with the French and Spanish bishops, and opened the twenty-
third session on July 14th, 1563. The Catholic doctrine on the
sacrament of Orders and of the hierarchy was proclaimed, the
obligation of residence was more strictly decreed, and the erec-
tion of seminaries for the education of the clergy was ordered.

Morone succeeded also in coordinating the many proposals
for Church reform, submitted by the Emperor and other princes,
by the French episcopate, Italian bishops and prelates, and pre-
sented forty-two reform articles to the Council for approval.
The last two sessions were devoted to the debates on these pro-
posals. They regulated the appointment of bishops, designating
their duties, especially the visitation of their dioceses, ordered
yearly diocesan synods and every third year, provincial synods,
reformed the cathedral chapters and gave prescriptions for the
appointment of rectors of parishes, emphasizing the duty of
preaching. Some decrees were also voted concerning monastic
life.

In the twenty-fourth session, the sacramental character of
marriage was emphasized, and the decree Tametsi defined that
only a marriage concluded in the presence of the parish priest
and at least two witnesses was valid. In the last session, the
Catholic doctrine on purgatory, indulgences and the veneration
of saints, their relics and images, was proclaimed. The decrees


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 91


were signed by 199 bishops, and fourteen abbots and generals
of Orders. All the conciliar decrees were confirmed by the pope
on January 28th, 1564.1

In order to guarantee the authentic interpretation of these
decrees Pius IV instituted a special congregation of cardinals
which still functions today. His successor Pius V sent the decrees
to all the bishops and published the Roman catechism sum-
marizing the conciliar dogmatic decrees, for the use of the parish
priests. A reformed Breviary and Missal were published at the
same time.

The Council of Trent did not succeed in abolishing the reli-
gious differences provoked by Luther, Calvin and other Refor-


mers. It proved, however, that the Church was still able to re-
form herself and her spiritual life life was unimpaired. It is the most
important council of the Western Church. It gave clear defini-
tions of Catholic truths and, with the decrees for Church reform,
adapted ecclesiastical life to the exigencies of the new age, so
different from the life of the Middle Ages. The renewed confi-
dence of the hierarchy and the faithful in the future of the
Catholic Church was manifested in the Counter-Reformation
and in zealous missionary activity in the new lands, organized
mainly by the Jesuits. The last echoes of the conciliar theory
were silenced by the pronouncements of the Fathers on the
position of the papacy in the Church. The fact that all decisions
were presented to the pope for confirmation indicated that the
pope was indeed supreme over a Council.


1 During the debates the French and the Spanish bishops refused to
recognize the Fifth Lateran Synod as an Ecumenical Council. Two specialists
in conciliar matters of the sixteenth century, Jacobazzi and Ugoni, omitted
the First and Second Councils of the Lateran and that of Basle in their list of
Ecumenical Councils. In the seventeenth century, Cardinal Bellarmine
introduced the practice which is followed by modern canonists, counting
the Council of Trent as the Nineteenth Ecumenical, to which the Vatican
Council was added at the present day as the Twentieth Ecumenical. It should
be stressed that this number was not fixed by any papal decree. As already
mentioned, the designation of a Council as ecumenical has not yet been
thoroughly investigated. It should be noted that the editors of the Acts of
Councils generally stop giving a number to a General Council after the
Synod of 869-70, called by them the Eighth Ecumenical.


92 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


FROM TRENT TO THE VATICAN COUNCIL


This strengthening of the supreme position of the pope in the
Church was revealed also by the fact that almost three hundred
years went by before a new Ecumenical Council was convoked.
In the meantime, after the conclusion of the Thirty Years’ War
(1648), it was clear that the division of Western Christianity
into two separate bodies was to remain. The Counter-Reforma-
tion stopped the progress of Protestantism in Austria, Hungary,
Germany and Poland, and the influence of Luther’s and Calvin’s
teaching on Catholic doctrine as it was manifested in Jansenism
was limited to a small circle of dévots in France and Holland.
Religious tension diminished, minds became increasingly
tolerant, but also increasingly indifferent to religious problems.

The seventeenth and eighteenth centuries are characterized by
the growth of absolutism in all European realms and by the secu-
larization of the idea of the State. This new utilitarian trend in
political philosophy was inclined _to regard the Church as useful
only in_ in helping the citizens to- fulfil their_duties to the State.
The consequence of this was the tendency to set up established
Churches and to limit interference by Rome in them. French
Gallicanism, German Febronianism and Austrian Josephism
furnish striking illustrations of this development.

These new tendencies became the more dangerous as they
were supported by ideas of enlightenment which had spread
from England over the whole of Europe and which deepened the
gulf between reason and faith, opened up by the Renaissance


and the Reformation. Progress in philosophy and material


a


sciences accentuated this evolution which reached its peak in
France in the second half of the eighteenth century, sowing the
seeds from which grew the French Revolution, which convulsed
the world.

The French Church paid a heavy price for the mistakes of
the absolutist era, and the secularization of ecclesiastical princi-
palities (1803) definitely shattered the traditional constitution of
the German Church. The new ideas of democratic and con-


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 93


stitutional governments, which led to the revolution of 1848,


gave more freedom to the Church in many countries, but new |
progress in science and increase in material welfare had for its


consequence the origin of new doctrines dangerous to religious |


life, such as liberalism, positivism and materialism. Social prob-
lems created by the progress of industry gave birth to socialism
and communism, both hostile to the Church.

In spite of this, the Church, although unable to stop the flood
of new and dangerous ideas, stood firm throughout these
storms. A new hierarchy was established in England, Holland and
America. On the other hand the Church suffered serious reverses.
Clement XIV had to sacrifice the Jesuit Order (1773), Pius
VI (1782) and Pius VII (1804) had to humiliate themselves before
Joseph II and Napoleon I, but the supranational position and
authority of the papacy was recognized more and more as the
most important factor in Church life. A renaissance of Catholic
scholarship in France and Germany in the nineteenth century
strengthened this tendency.

Pope Pius IX (1846-78) was well aware of the danger which the
new doctrines presented to the purity of the Catholic faith. He
was also conscious of the supreme position of the papacy in
doctrinal affairs. He made use of this prerogative in 1854 when,
after consulting all bishops in communion with him, he pro-
claimed as revealed dogma the Immaculate Conception of
Mary. At the same time, a committee established by him was
classifying the principal erroneous doctrines of the time, the
so-called Syllabus, which was sent with an Encyclical to all the
bishops on December 8th, 1864. Eighty of the most important
erroneous doctrines were condemned, among them rationalism,
pantheism, indifferentism, naturalism, false views on moral
matters, especially matrimony, communistic ideas and false
conceptions of the relations between Church and State. The
Syllabus was received with bitter criticism by the liberals, who
quite wrongly looked upon it as a threat to modern culture. It
was in reality a defensive effort to prevent the spreading of false
doctrines among Christians.

When publishing the Syllabus, the pope was already pre-


94 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


occupied with the idea of assembling a new Ecumenical Council.
After considering the opinions of some of his cardinals and
bishops, he announced his intention publicly to 500 bishops
present in Rome, in June 1867, for the celebration of the anni-
versary of St Peter’s and St Paul’s martyrdom, and convoked the
Council in his Bull of June 29th, 1868 for December 8th of the
next year, in St Peter’s Basilica in Rome. His intention to make
it a union council was thwarted, however, by the refusal of the
Orthodox patriarchs to attend. Also his open letter to Protes-
tants and non-Catholics to return to the Church found no
favourable echo.

In order to prepare the way for the smooth working of the
Council, the pope formed a special central commission of car-
dinals in 1865, under whose control six subcommissions worked
on such subjects as dogma, Church discipline, religious Orders,
Oriental Churches and missions, politico-ecclesiastical affairs,
and the ceremonial to be observed during the Council. Prominent
theologians were invited to participate in the preparatory work
in the subcommissions. The pope appointed five cardinals as
presidents, headed by Cardinal Reisach, who fell ill and was
replaced by Cardinal De Angelis, a secretary (Bishop J. Fessler of
St Pélten), and other officials. All members of the Council could
propose motions which had, however, to be examined by the
Congregation of Petititions and to be approved by the pope be-
fore being included in the schema (draft). The printed drafts sub-
mitted to the Synod were to be examined by general congre-
gations of all conciliar members presided over by a cardinal.

If the drafts were not approved, special subcommittees, called
deputations—on matters of faith, Church discipline, religious


_ Orders, Oriental Churches—elected by the Council had to


.,


examine the objections and propose amendments to the original
drafts to the general congregations. The final votes were then
made in public conciliar sessions, presided over by the pope.
Only cardinals, bishops, including titular bishops, abbots
nullius, i.e. exempt from diocesan jurisdiction, abbots, heads of
Congregations and generals of Orders were authorized to vote.
No special invitations were addressed to Catholic rulers.


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 95


THE VATICAN COUNCIL (1869-70)

When advising the pope to convoke a new Council, many
bishops voiced their hope that the Council would proclaim the
doctrine of the infallibility of the pope as dogma. Although this
was not mentioned in the Bull of convocation, it was known
that many so-called “ultramontane” bishops (mostly from Italy
and Spain) desired it. An anonymous article published on Feb-
ruary 6th, 1869, in the Jesuit review Civilta Cattolica disclosed
that the main object of the Council would be the condemnation
of the doctrines indicated in the Syllabus and the proclamation
of papal infallibility by acclamation.

The revelation provoked vehement protests on the part of
liberal Catholics, and the leading German Church historian,
Déllinger, answered with a violent attack against ultramon-
tanism. The dean of the Sorbonne in Paris, Mgr Maret, was also
apprehensive, but the opposite view was defended by the French
writer Louis Veuillot, Archbishops Manning of Westminster and
Déchamps of Malines. The Bavarian Prime Minister Hohenlohe
in a circular note even invited the secular powers to common
action against the proclamation of papal infallibility, but none
of the European powers was willing to be involved in a step that
would provoke sharp conflict with the Church.

Two French prelates, Archbishop Darboy of Paris and
Bishop Dupanloup of Orleans, without denying papal infalli-
bility, voiced their concern about the consequences of such a
definition among Orthodox and Protestants. The majority of
German and Austrian bishops expressed similar concern, re-
garding such a definition as “less opportune”’.

The Council was opened on the date announced by the pope
in St Peter’s Basilica.2 Altogether, 774 bishops attended the


2 The ceremonial opening of the Vatican Council revived some traditional
customs introduced at similar occasions in the past. After the solemn Mass
at which the pope and all bishops assisted, the secretary placed the open
Gospel on the altar. This reminded them of the ceremonial observed at the
First Ecumenical Council, when the Scriptures were set in the place of the
statue of Victory, which stood in the front of the presidential tribune
in the Roman Senate. After the official sermon pronounced by one
of the bishops, all present rendered homage to the pope, presiding at the


96 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


meetings. The proposed draft “On the Catholic Faith’ had
already encountered sharp criticism when first discussed in the
general congregation on December 28th. It was completely
revised by the subcommission in the following months, and the
new version was accepted during the third session on April 24th,
1870, by 667 votes.3 This first dogma decree was divided into
four chapters with eighteen canons, which dealt with the
existence of a personal God, the necessity of divine revelation, the
substance of the faith and the relation between faith and science.

In the meantime, the Fathers devoted their time to debates
on Church reform. Many proposals were presented and dis-
cussed. Criticisms of the curia and the college of cardinals were
voiced, complaints about the excessive centralization of Church
affairs in Rome were heard, certain bishops pointing out that
the drafts spoke only of their duties but not of their rights; the
Oriental bishops asked that their privileges and traditions be
respected, and a reform of the Breviary was proposed‘; and the


session. Then followed a prayer to the Holy Ghost and the Litany of
the Saints. This was observed already at the Council of Vienne. Then
the Gospel on the sending of the seventy disciples (Luke 10. 1-16) was
read as was done already at the Second Council of Lyons, at the Councils
of Vienne and Trent. After his allocution in which he announced the aims
of the Council, the pope intoned the hymn to the Holy Ghost—the same
was done at Vienne—and recited the prayer invoking the help of the Holy
Spirit. Similar ceremonial will be followed at future councils.

3 During the sixth general congregation (January 3rd), Vérot, Bishop of
Savannah, then of Florida, regarded as the enfant terrible of the Council,
when discussing the schema on man’s origin proposed an addition declaring
that Negroes also had a soul, being equal to the white man. This sounded
like an echo of the American Civil War.

4 During the seventeenth general congregation (January 27th), Bishop
Vérot asked that all legendary accounts should be removed from the lessons
in the Breviary, quoting as an example the story of Constantine the Great’s
baptism by Silvester I. He also recommended a wiser selection from the
writings of the Holy Fathers, and was rebuked by the Chairman, who asked
him to speak with more reverence of the holy Fathers. The most turbulent
meeting was the thirty-first general congregation, on March 22nd, when
Bishop Strossmayer asked for the removal of a phrase in the schema attribut-
ing the origin of all modern heresies to Protestantism, declaring that many
Protestants love Christ sincerely and err “in good faith’. When he tried
to bring in the matter of ‘moral unanimity’’, at the Council, he had to
leave the ambo under protest. Voices were heard: ‘“‘He is another Luther,
let him be cast out.’ This was the only turbulent “‘scene”’ which occurred at
the Council.


ae =


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 97


problem of drawing up a short catechism for all Christians was
debated. The drafts were returned to the subcommittees, were
rewritten and discussed again in May. Unfortunately, none of
them was regarded as ready for the vote or for publication.
Some of the drafts and the results of the debates were, however,
used by the canonists charged with compiling the new Canon
Law.

Even during the debates “On the Catholic Faith’’, the conciliar
Fathers were mainly preoccupied with the question of papal
infallibility, which was to be decided during discussions of the


| second dogmatic theme or schema, “On Christ’s Church’’. Very


few bishops denied the truth of papal infallibility, but one fifth
of them felt that its proclamation as dogma would be inop-


| portune, fearing the apostasy of many liberal Catholics, a
| widening of the gulf between Catholics, Orthodox and Protes-
| tants, and, remembering the step taken by the Bavarian Prime


_ Minister, a worsening of the relations between governments


' and the Church. The leaders of the minority were prominent


and learned prelates, bishops of large dioceses. In France, the
Archbishops of Paris and Lyons, Darboy and Ginoulhiac;
Bishops Dupanloup of Orleans and David of St Brieuc; in
Germany, Bishops Hefele of Rottenburg, Ketteler of Mainz;
in Austria-Hungary, Cardinals archbishops Rauscher of Vienna
and Schwartzenberg of Prague, Archbishop Haynald of
Kalocza and the high-spirited Croat bishop, Strossmayer of
Diakovo; in the United States, Archbishops Kenrick of St
Louis, Purcell of Cincinnati and Bishop Vérot of Savannah, later
of Florida; in Canada, Archbishop Connolly of Halifax; in
England Bishop Clifford of Clifton; and in Ireland, Archbishop
MacHale of Tuam. In general, most of the German and Austro-
Hungarian prelates were opposed to the definition, as were also
one third of the French conciliar members; about one half of
the American Fathers, three from Canada, and about seven
Italian prelates, among them the Archbishop of Milan. When
those prelates in favour of the definition, led by Cardinal
Manning and the Belgian Archbishop Déchamps, started agitat-
ing among the conciliar members, they collected 380 signatures


98 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


to their petition. The opposing minority was able to rally only
140 prelates.

The debates on the first dogmatic draft and on the disciplinary
proposals had shown that the rules for the debates needed alter-
ing in the interests of the better progress of the proceedings.
Therefore, on February 22nd, a new conciliar procedure was
issued by the pope. It specified that proposals for amendments
to the drafts were to be presented to the subcommittees before
the debates in the general congregations. When at least ten
of the Fathers had petitioned for the closing of the debates, the
chairman of the congregation should submit the petition to a
vote and close the debates, if the majority prevailed. The
minority protested, fearing a considerable shortening of the
debates, but in vain.

Although the proceedings at the Council were held in secret,
news of the intentions of the majority of the Fathers to proclaim
papal infallibility as a dogma reached the public outside Italy.
The stormy protests which it provoked seemed to justify the
fears of the minority. Even Newman of England voiced his
apprehensions in a letter to Ullathorne, Bishop of Birmingham;
in France, the dying Catholic leader Montalembert published
a passionate warning, but the sharpest criticism was again
voiced in Germany by F. Ddllinger. Protests were heard from
many governments, and Austria sent a warning to Rome,
threatening that the projected definition would alter the relations
between Church and State in the Empire.

The pope and the majority of the Fathers remained firm,
however, and the debates “On Christ’s Church’’, after the pre-
paratory work in the subcommission, started on May 13th.
They lasted until June 3rd. The main subject of the debate was,
naturally, the question of primacy and infallibility. Altogether,
thirty-nine speakers recommended the definition, and twenty-
six spoke against it. Forty more prelates were about to take the
rostrum. But 150 Fathers having proposed the closure of the
debate, the majority voted in its favour, ignoring the protests of
the minority. Among the most prominent speakers were the
bishops Vérot and Connolly of the United States and Canada,


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 99


who spoke against definition, and Spalding of Baltimore, who
pleaded for definition, but tried to find a wording more accept-
able to the minority. Archbishop Kenrick of St Louis, one of
the forty who could not speak, published his prepared plaidoyer
in a pamphlet.

After the debates on the draft as a whole, there followed
special debates in a general congregation on the wording of the
different chapters. The wording of the definition of papal
primacy, in the three first chapters of the draft, which was
debated from June 6th to June 14th, was accepted without
difficulty. It was based on the definition already accepted by the
Greeks at the Council of Florence, even with the ending of the
canon, inserted at that time on the insistence of the Greeks: ‘“‘as
it is also expressed in the Acts of the General Councils and in the
holy canons.”> The many amendments presented to the sub-
commission were concerned mostly with the relationship between
plenitude of papal power and jurisdiction of the bishops. In
order to give satisfaction to some of the bishops, it was defined
that “this power of the supreme pontiff far from being any
prejudice to that ordinary and immediate power of episcopal
jurisdiction by which bishops, who have been set by the Holy
Ghost to succeed and hold the place of the Apostles, feed and
govern each his own flock, as true pastors, is really asserted and
protected by the universal Pastor’.

More closely debated was the question of infallibility, con-
tained in the fourth chapter of the draft. For the amendments in
the sense of the minority twenty-two prelates spoke, and against
them thirty-five. The subcommission rejected 144 proposals for
changes. On July 13th, the fateful vote in the General Congrega-
tion disclosed that 451 Fathers voted for the definition (placet),
eighty-eight against it (non placet) and sixty-two for it, under
certain conditions (placet iuxta modum).

The minority was anxious to insert in the definition a state-
ment making it clear that the pope’s infallibility was conditioned
by the infallibility of the Church. As the pope refused to propose
to the Council any new wording, fifty-five prelates decided to


5 See above, p. 78.


100 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


abstain from further voting and left Rome. So it came about
that the definite wording of chapter four was accepted in the
last general congregation on July 16th, by almost all of the
552 Fathers present.

The fourth public conciliar session was held in the presence
of the pope on July 18th. The constitution starting with the words
Pastor aeternus, which contained the definition of infallibility,
was accepted by 533 votes. Only bishops Fitzgerald of Little
Rock and Riccio of Cajazzo voted against, but submitted to the
decision of the majority. The pope confirmed the decision of the
Council.

With this definition, the work of the Council was not yet
finished. Unfortunately, political events made the continuation
of the debates impossible. On the day after the fourth session of
the Council war between France and Germany broke out, and
many prelates left Rome. Because the French army protecting
the papal state had to leave Italy, the Piedmontese troops in-
vaded the Papal States and on September 20th occupied Rome.
The pope became a prisoner in the Vatican, and issued a Bulla
month later proroguing the Council indefinitely. Archbishop
Spalding’s and Cardinal Manning’s proposal to continue the
Council at Malines in Belgium could not be carried out.

The bishops of the minority, who considered the definition as
inopportune, accepted it, bowing to the decision of the Council,
as confirmed by the pope. Bishop Strossmayer was the last to
submit. Thus the unity of faith in the Catholic hierarchy was
clearly manifested.

The decisions of the Council were accepted everywhere by the
clergy and the faithful with the exception of some circles in
Germany. Professor F. Ddollinger refused to accept them and,
supported by some of his colleagues, denied the ecumenical
character of the Council, declaring that the bishops had been
deprived of freedom of action. He was excommunicated, and his
followers founded the Old Catholic Church, whose first bishop
was consecrated by a Dutch Jansenist prelate.

In spite of the support which the Old Catholics were given by
the Prussian government during the anti Catholic Kulturkampf,


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 101


the new Church did not spread as much as was expected by its
supporters. Their number had diminished to about 80,000 in
1957. A similar movement in Switzerland—the Christian-
Catholic Church—found support in the Protestant government
of the Canton of Berne, which also erected an Old Catholic
theological faculty at the University, which still exists today.
The Church has about 30,000 followers and a bishop.

The fears of the minority at the Council that the definition
would alienate certain governments from the Church were not
unfounded, but they were exaggerated. Bavaria declared the
definition as hostile to the State, and Prussia used it as an excuse
for launching the Kulturkampf, which, however, could not break
the solidarity of the German Catholics. Austria found this
a welcome opportunity to denounce the Concordat concluded
in 1855, but no State forbade the proclamation of the conciliar
decrees in its territory.


THE VATICAN DEFINITION AND ORTHODOX
BELIEF IN CHURCH INFALLIBILIT Y


The hesitation of the minority at the Vatican Council to vote
for the definition of the pope’s infallibility was caused mostly
by the fear that it would alienate the Orthodox Christians and be
an obstacle to reunion. In order to understand the Vatican
atmosphere, we should bear in mind that the conciliar Fathers
were in a dilemma, as they had to deal with two extremes. On_
one side were the Neo-Ultramontanes, who wanted the defini--
tion to be interpreted i in its widest sense. The protagonist of this
attitude, in England, was W. C. Ward, editor of the Dublin
Review. Although intransigent in this matter, Ward, being a
theologian, did not go as far as the French Neo-Ultramontane
Louis Veuillot, editor of the Univers, who wanted to see in the
proclamation an affirmation of the quasi-omnipotence of the
pope who should be looked upon as the source of all authority,
both spiritual and temporal. In this spirit, the Univers spoke of
the pope in a manner which was regarded by more theologically-
minded Catholics as almost bordering on blasphemy. Similar
utterances could be read in the Italian review Civilta Cattolica.


102 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


On the other hand, there were in France survivals of Galli-
canism, although few bishops were still under its spell. The
Gallicans wanted to limit papal infallibility, making it conditional
upon the consent of the Church, after the pronouncement of a
doctrine by the pope.

! The Fathers wisely avoided both extremes when, approving
‘at last, the following form of the canon: “The Roman Pontiff,
when he speaks ex cathedra, namely when exercising the office
of pastor and teacher of all Christians, by virtue of his supreme
apostolic authority, he defines a doctrine concerning faith or
morals to be held by the universal Church, is, through the divine
assistance promised to him in St Peter, possessed of that infal-
libility with which the divine Redeemer willed his Church
should be endowed in defining doctrine regarding faith or morals;
and that, therefore, such definitions of the Roman Pontiff are
of themselves, and not from the consent of the Church, irrefor-
mable.”

The minority at the Council did not oppose the doctrine, but
' was anxious to link the pope more closely with the Church in the
canon to make it quite clear that the pope, when making a
definition, was acting not only as the head of the Church, but
' also as its mouthpiece, embodying the infallibility of the Church.
_ They proposed several amendments in this sense, which were
‘ rejected by the subcommission as vague and unnecessary.

Their effort was not, however, in vain. Although refusing any
addition to the canon, the delegation added an historical intro-
duction to it which satisfied, at least, some of the irresolute
Fathers. This is the main passage of the introduction:


—


SS


The Roman Pontiffs have as times and circumstances warranted
sometimes by summoning Ecumenical Councils, or by asking for
the opinion of the Church throughout the world, sometimes by
particular synods, sometimes using other means which divine
Providence supplied, defined that those things should be held which,
with the help of God, they had recognized as conformable with the
Holy Scriptures and apostolic traditions. For the Holy Spirit was
not promised to the successors of Peter, that by his revelation they
might make known new doctrines, but that by his assistance they


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 103.


might inviolably guard and faithfully expound the revelation of the
deposition of the faith delivered to the apostles.


The secretary of the deputation, Mgr V. Gasser, Bishop of
Brixen, one of the first theologians of the Council, in his report
to the General Congregation on July 11th, offered proposals as
to how the canon should be interpreted.© When replying to the
objection that the definition of papal infallibility would make
future councils unnecessary, he said:


They will be as necessary in the future as in the past. . . . When-
ever errors were so widespread that the Christian world was in
danger, the Catholic Church opposed to them her most solemn
judgement in a General Council. But the most solemn judgement of
the Church in matters of faith and morals is, and always will be, the
judgement of an Ecumenical Council, in which the pope pro-
nounces judgement, the bishops of the Catholic world sitting and
judging along with him.

[While justifying the wording of the canon, he linked the infal-
libility of the Church to the Pope:] It is certain that the infallibility
promised by God, be it in the universal teaching Church defining
truths in Councils, or be it in the supreme Pontiff, reaches to
absolutely the same range of truths, those namely which belong to
the deposit of faith. . . . Almost all Catholic theologians agree that
the Church in her authentic propounding and defining of such
truths (which do not belong to the deposit of faith, but safeguard
it), is infallible, so that to deny this infallibility would be a most
grave error. ... The Roman Pontiff in defining ex cathedra is
possessed of that infallibility with which Christ wished his Church
to be endowed.


In this part of his exposé, Mgr Gasser made it clear that
theological questions concerning truths not belonging to the
deposit of faith, but safeguarding it, were not affected by the
definition: ‘In those things in which it is theologically certain,
though not yet certain by faith, that the Church is infallible, by
this decree of the Council the pope’s infallibility similarly is not
defined to be believed of faith.”


6 His speech is published in Mansi’s Collection of Councils, Vol. 52, col.
1209-30 and our quotation occurs in cols. 1211, 1226. English analysis and
excerpts in C. Butler’s The Vatican Council (London, 1936), pp. 134 ff.


104 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


Another authority, the conciliar secretary, Bishop J. Fessler,
stressed very clearly that the Vatican definition of the pope’s
infallibility should not be extended, but interpreted in the

strictest legal sense. The German scholars, attacking the dogma,
extended its application to all papal legislation and all public
official actions of the popes in the past and in the future. The
famous canonist J. F. Schulte, professor at the German Uni-
versity of Prague, in his anti-conciliar tracts included in the
definition the depositions of kings and the disposing of territories
of condemned rulers in the Bulls of the medieval papacy.
Provoked by these assertions, Bishop Fessler published a special
treatise,’ rejecting Schulte’s absurd interpretation and giving the
proper meaning to the conciliar definition.

First, he limited the dogmatic definition of the Vatican only to
the words following the formula Definimus—we define. All which
precedes must be regarded as a very important introduction to
the definition, but is not part of the dogma (pp. 38, 44). Then he
specified clearly that the subject-matter of the definition must be
only the doctrine of faith and morals. Moreover, the ‘“‘pope must
express his intention ... to declare this particular doctrine on
faith and morals to be an integral part of the truth necessary for
salvation revealed by God . . ., he must publish it, and so give a
formal definition in the matter’’ (p. 57). Thus ‘‘the pope has the
gift of infallibility . . . only as supreme teacher of truth, necessary
for salvation revealed by God, not as supreme priest, not as
supreme legislator in matters of discipline, not as supreme judge
in ecclesiastical questions, not in respect of any other questions
over which his highest governing power in the Church may still
in other respects extend” (p. 43). And in such a definition, “only
that portion of it is to be looked upon and accepted as an ex
cathedra utterance which is expressly designated as ‘the Defini-
tion’; and nothing whatever is to be so regarded which is only
mentioned as accessory matter’’ (p. 65). Schulte pretended that
the Council wished to extend papal infallibility to social and
political matters as well. Fessler, however, declared authorita-


1 The True and The False Infallibility of the Popes, English edition,
London, 1875.


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 105


tively: “The pope cannot according to his own will and fancy
extend his infallible definition to matters relating to the jus
publicum, to which divine revelation does not extend” (p. 53).

Fessler’s treatise was approved by Pius IX who ordered it to
be translated into Italian. This is important, the more so as
Fessler’s explanations do not favour the interpretations which
strong infallibilists, particularly Ward and Cardinal Manning,
were giving to the decree. The latter extended it to all dogmatic
declarations and censures of not strictly heretical doctrines, and
to all papal legislation and judicial acts. This does not reflect
the ideas which the two great conciliar authorities, Bishops
Gasser and Fessler, had expressed in their explanations; be-
cause of their functions, they were in a position to know the
minds of the great majority of the Fathers.

Bishop Ullathorne set forth in his pastoral letter on the Council
the same ideas as Bishop Fessler. Important in this respect also
is the pastoral letter of the Swiss bishops. They expressed their
view in a more popular manner and limited papal infallibility
in the following way:

It in no way depends upon the caprice of the pope or upon his
good pleasure to make this or that doctrine the object of a dogmatic
definition. He is bound by and limited to the divine revelation, and
to the truths which that revelation contains; he is bound and
limited by the divine law and by the constitution of the Church;
lastly, he is bound and limited by that doctrine, divinely revealed,
which affirms that alongside the ecclesiastical hierarchy there is the
power of temporal magistrates, invested in their own domain with
a full sovereignty and to whom we owe in conscience obedience
and respect in all things morally permitted, and which belong to
the domain of civil society.


The last sentence excludes papal infallibility from the matters
of jus publicum as Fessler has it, that is, from purely social and
political subjects. Pius IX congratulated the Swiss bishops on
their clear explanation of the limits of the infallibility.

It has been already said that the canonists who prepared the
composition of the new canon law used the material in matters


8 Quoted in Fessler’s book, p. 63.


106 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


of Church life collected by the Vatican Fathers, but not re-
garded as ready for definition. Also in the section dealing with
the magisterium of the Church (canons 1322-9) they were
inspired by the dogmatic decision of the Council and defined it
in a very clear, legal way:


Christ the Lord committed to the Church the deposit of faith,
that she, by the constant assistance of the Holy Ghost, might
inviolably preserve and faithfully expound revealed doctrine.

All those things are to be believed by divine and Catholic faith
which are contained in the word of God, written or handed down
by tradition, and are proposed by the Church, either by solemn
judgement or by her ordinary and universal magisterium, to be
believed as having been divinely revealed. Such solemn judgement
is pronounced either by an Ecumenical Council or by the Roman
Pontiff, speaking ex cathedra.

Nothing is taken as declared or defined dogmatically, unless this
fact is manifestly certain (Canon 1323).


Fessler, in his treatise against Schulte’s extension of infalli-
bility, declared (p. 53) that he knew of only a few papal declara-
tions corresponding to the Vatican definition of infallibility.
Some modern theologians find only twelve such declarations, of
which six concern Catholic doctrine—the first, Leo I’s letter to
the Patriarch Flavian before the Council of Chalcedon, and the
sixth, Pius IX’s definition of the Immaculate Conception. The
remaining six condemn heretical doctrines (that of Luther,
Jansenism, Molinos, Fénelon, Quesnel and of the Council of
Pistoia in 1799). The only infallible definition pronounced after
the Vatican Council is that by Pius XII on the Assumption of
our Lady. Papal encyclicals and Bulls—even that on the validity
of Anglican Orders by Leo XIII—are to be accepted as right
and expressing Catholic truth, but are not definitions ex
cathedra. This judgement is extended generally also to Pius IX’s
Syllabus and to Pius X’s Bulls on Modernism.

As concerns the relations between the infallibility of the
Church and that of the pope, Bishop Gasser had already de-
clared as unacceptable the view expressed by some strong
infallibilists that infallibility resided primarily in the pope from


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 107


whom it is communicated to the Church. This relationship be-
tween the infallibility of the Church and that of the pope was
very plainly stated by a prominent English theologian, the
Dominican Fr Vincent McNabb. In his treatise, Infallibility
(London, 2nd ed., 1927), he says (on p. 52):


It should be noted that infallibility is primarily given for the
Church, and in some sense resides primarily in the Church. Neither
the pope nor General Councils are ends in themselves: they look
towards the Church. ...So may it be said in a very true sense
that the gift of infallibility resides primarily in the Church rather
than in the popes or General Councils. ... Though popes and
General Councils may be looked upon as the proximate principles
or organs of the Church’s infallibility, yet it is true to say that in a
certain sense infallibility resides primarily not so much in popes or
General Councils as in the Church. When, then, it is recognized that
Faith demands objective infallibility, and that conciliar and papal
infallibility, though not subordinate to the infallibility of the Church,
are yet referred on to it, matters are seen in their true light.


Dom Cuthbert Butler comments on Father McNabb’s
interpretation in the following way in his History of the Vatican
Council (Vol. II, p. 231):


This seems to be sound interpretation. The infallibility of the
Church is taken as the basic idea, the thing known and accepted by
all Catholics as of Catholic faith, a charisma or gift that Christ
willed His Church to be possessed of and promised to her: “Go
teach all nations . . . and behold I am with you all days to the end
of the world.”’ Then it is said that the pope teaching ex cathedra is
possessed of this same infallibility; as a General Council with the
pope is a recognized organ whereby the infallible teaching of the
Church is brought to authentic declaration, so the pope alone ex
cathedra is another organ whereby the infallible teaching of the
Church is authoritatively declared.


But even when the pope alone should proclaim a doctrine ex
cathedra he can do so only after having examined the mind of
the Church in this matter. After declaring that “‘infallibility is a
divine assistance enabling the teaching Church to declare or
expound the deposit of faith possessed by her,” Fr McNabb


108 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


(p. 92) compares such a declaration of the pope, the head of the
Teaching Church, with a judge sitting in the judgement seat.
Before making his declaration ex cathedra on the case in process,
the judge is bound to hear all the witnesses. His judgement is
binding only after he has examined all the witnesses. “In the
same way, the ex cathedra judgement of the pope (or Council)
needs the mind of the Church as its necessary preliminary
material.”

These interpretations of the Vatican decree come very near to
the Orthodox belief in the infallibility of the Church. Even the
stipulation that a declaration ex cathedra does not need con-
firmation by the Church should not be irreconcilable with Ortho-
dox belief. The comparison with the judge’s definition after
hearing the witnesses again helps. “It would be false to say that
the official ex cathedra judgement of the judge’s,” says Fr
McNabb, “‘needs the consent of the witnesses to make it binding.
The evidence of witnesses gives the necessary material for the
official judgement, but does not give the necessary sanction.” In
the case of the pope’s definition, the witnesses are Scripture and
tradition guarded by the infallible Church which have to be
examined to find out what is the mind of the Church. The best
and most natural means to do so should be an assembly of
bishops in a Council, but even the Orthodox tradition accepts,
instead of a convocation of a Council, the practice of a referen-
dum, a consultation of the bishops by writing. It was done by
Byzantine emperors because they were regarded as guardians of
the Orthodoxy. The place of the emperors is now taken by the
First Patriarch, the Bishop of Rome. In the two instances in
modern times when such a definition was made, namely the
dogmas of the Immaculate Conception and the Assumption, a
referendum to bishops in communion with Rome was chosen
in preference to a Council.

On the other hand, none will deny that heresies may result
not only from the denial or the excessive restriction of the mean-
ing of a dogmatic definition, but also from too wide a connota-
tion. Church history supplies many instances of this kind and
the same principles must be applied to the Vatican definition.


THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN 109


The Neo-Ultramontane opinions and suggestions found no
official support, but the tendency to attribute all sorts of things
to the vague formula “‘the spirit of the Vatican Council’’ still
exists and may, if pushed to extremes, prove as dangerous as
the opposite excess.


In conclusion of this short review of the Ecumenical Councils
of the Church, we add a short evaluation of what both the Eas-
tern and Western Churches have accomplished for the definition
and clarification of the deposit of the Christian faith. We should
not forget that every principle and every truth had its own growth
and was clearly valued and defined only after centuries of evolu-
tion. This is applicable to the principle of supreme leadership
in the Church as well. The Roman Church developed this
principle more effectively than did the Eastern Church, not only
because, from apostolic times, the successor of St Peter in Rome
has been held in special veneration by the Church, but also as a
result of special political and ideological developments, dif-
ferent from those in the East, which made the emphasis on a
central authority as easy as it was necessary.

To the Eastern Church fell the task of substantially helping
to define the revealed truths bearing on the Blessed Trinity and
to build up the dogmatic system of Christology. This was done
by the Eastern Fathers in the first Seven Ecumenical Councils,
with the assistance of the popes, represented by their legates.
The Western Church, always more interested in practical matters
and having benefited from the Roman genius for organization
and administration, concentrated on another field of Christian
thought and considered it her special mission to develop the
principle of universality, of supreme and central leadership.
Events in the nineteenth century accelerated this development,
with the definition of infallibility by the Vatican Council as its
final stage. This natural growth should be taken into considera-
tion by those Churches and bodies which did not experience the
same evolution.

In many ways, though not in all, the Christian world finds
itself in a position similar to that which characterized the Trini-


110 THE COUNCILS OF TRENT AND OF THE VATICAN


tarian and Christological struggles, when a General Council
proclaimed a doctrine and all Churches were invited to accept
the decision. This acceptance was rarely achieved without a
good deal of preliminary explanation and much display of
firmness on the part of the Church which had done most for the
final definition of a revealed doctrine. The Seventh Ecumenical
Council is a case in point, since it was finally listed among the
Ecumenical Councils of the Western Church many decades after
its convocation. This does not apply precisely to the Vatican
Council, so far the last in the series of councils, but the fact
should be noted.

It will be the Church historian’s work to bring into the lime-
light the historical background of this century-old development
and facilitate the theologian’s explanatory work on the definition.
The decision of the Holy Father, John XXIII, to convoke a new
Vatican Council confirms Bishop Gasser’s categorical affirma-
tion that, even after the definition of papal infallibility, Ecumeni-
cal Councils will be as necessary and profitable to the Church
as before. With the guidance of the Holy Ghost, the Fathers of
the new Council will find ways which will lead to a better under-
standing with other Christian Churches and bodies.


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY


In this series: CRISTIANI, Léon: Heresies and Heretics; d’ORMESSON,
Wladimir: The Papacy; GUILLEMAIN, Bernard: The Early Middle
Ages and The Later Middle Ages; PALANQUE, Jean-Rémy: The
es of the Middle Ages (English edn, The Church and the Dark

ges).


BETTENSEN, H.: Documents of the Christian Church, London and New
York, Oxford Univ. Press, 1943.


Binp_ey, T. H.: The GEecumenical Documents of the Faith, 4th edn,
London, S.P.C.K., 1950.


Butter, E. Cuthbert, O.S.B.: The Vatican Council, two volumes,
London and New York, Longmans, 1930; The Life and Times of
Bishop Ullathorne, London, Burns & Oates, 1926.


DEANESLY, Margaret: History of Europe, 476-911, London, Methuen,
and New York, Barnes and Noble, 1956; History of the Medieval
Church, 590-1500, London, Methuen, and Nashville, Tenn.,
British Book Centre, 1954.


Dvornik, F.: The Photian Schism, History and Legend, Cambridge
and New York, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1948; The Patriarch
Photius in the Light of Recent Research; ‘““Emperors, Popes and
General Councils,” Dumbarton Oaks Papers, vol. 6 (1951), pp.
1-23.


Gu, J., S.J.: The Council of Florence, Cambridge and New York,
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1959.


HEFELE, Ch. J.: A History of the Councils of the Church, translated
W. R. Clark, H. N. Oxenham, E. H. Plumptre, five volumes,
Edinburgh, Clark, and New York, Scribners, 1882-96.


Huaues, Philip: A History of the Church, three volumes, London and
New York, Sheed and Ward, 1934-47; A Popular History of the
Catholic Church, London, Burns & Oates, and New York,
Macmillan, 1939; The Church in Crisis, London, Burns & Oates,
and New York, Doubleday, 1961.


Jacos, E. F.: Essays in the Conciliar Epoch, 2nd edn, Manchester,
Manchester Univ. Press, 1953.


JALLAND, T.: Life and Times of St Leo the Great, London, S.P.C.K.,
and New York, Macmillan, 1940.


112 SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY


JeDIn, H.: A Short History of the Councils, London and New York,
Nelson, 1960.


Kety, J. N. D.: Early Christian Creeds, London and New York,
Longmans, 1950.


McNass, Vincent, O.P.: Infallibility, London and New York, Sheed
and Ward, 1927.


Mann, H. K., and HoLLNsTEINER, J.: The Lives of the Popes in the
Middle Ages, eighteen volumes, London, Kegan Paul, and St
Louis, Herder, 1928-32.


Meer, F. van der, and MOHRMANN, Christine: Atlas of the Early
Christian World, London and New York, Nelson, 1958.


Mourpny, F. X.: Peter Speaks through Leo, The Council of Chalcedon,
Washington, Catholic Univ. Press, 1952.


Pastor, Ludwig von: The History of the Popes from the Close of the
Middle Ages, forty volumes, London, Kegan Paul, and St Louis,
Herder, 1927-40.


SCHROEDER, H. J.: Disciplinary Decrees of the General Councils (to
the Council of Trent), St Louis and London, Herder, 1937.


SELLERS, R. V.: The Council of Chalcedon, London, S.P.C.K., 1953.


TIERNEY, B.: Foundations of the Conciliar Theory, Cambridge and
New York, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1955.


c


| ene ty |
_ itis vy ii.
we ee | |


mY.
| -
.


-
;


DATE DUE


per = POUT? T70s


Wy 7


‘MPR D1 200k


282 D9S9. BIBLE COLLEGE & SEM. agg


THT


ms PT 3 tl 2 = o
|
Tivearnik»


Ai « #1907%
Francis


i mie -~i1s
The acumenical councd


GEORGE MARK ELLIOTT LIBRARY
The Cincinnati Bible Seminary


Me eke
Aci- 44d ¥O7s-
Iiverniks Francis


The ecumenical councils
