Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



A TREATISE 



ON THB 



PEEPAEATION AND DELIVERY 



OF 



SEEMONS. 



BT 



JOHN A. BEOADUS, D.D., LL.D., 

PBOrES&OR IN THE S0X7THERN BAPTIST THEOLOGICAL 8EMIKART, 

O&EENVILLB, S. 0. 




LONDON : 
HAMILTON, ADAMS, & Co., PATERNOS 

LEEDS: H. W. WALKER, BRIGGATE, 
1874. 






/A/ 



/■ 



2-52 



PEEFACE. 



This work is designed, on the one hand to be a text-book for 
classes, and on the other to be read by such ministers, younger 
or older, as may wish to study the subjects discussed. 

As a teacher of Homiletics for ten years, the author had felt 
the need of a more complete text-book, since a course made up 
from parts of several diflferent works would still omit certain 
important subjects, and furnish but a meagre treatment of 
others, leaving the class to a great extent dependent entirely 
upon the lectures. The desire thus arose to prepare, whenever 
possible, a work which should bo full in its range of topics, and 
should also attempt to combine the thorough discussion of 
principles with an abundance of practical rules and suggestions. 
When the labour involved in teaching this and at the same 
time another branch of Theology became excessive, and it was 
necessary to relinquish Homiletics — ^though always a favourite 
branch — the author determined, before the subject should fade 
from his mind, to undertake the work he had contemplated. 

The treatise is therefore a result of practical instruction, but 
it is not simply a printed course of lectures. The materials 
existing in the form of brief notes have been everywhere re- 
wrought, the literature of the subject carefully re-examined, 
and the place which had been occupied by text-books, filled by 
an independent discussion. 

Those who may think of employing the work as a text-book 
are requested to note, that it is divided into independent Parts, 
which, while arranged in the order indicated by t\i^ Ti»X.\rc^ oil 



IV PRBPACB. 

the subject, may be taken up in any other order required by 
the exigencies of instruction. Some would prefer to begin 
with Arrangement, in order that students may at once have 
the benefit of this in preparing sermons or sketches. Others 
might begin with Style, in order to general exercises in com- 
position; and possibly others with Delivery. The author 
would himself prefer, if using the book, to take, after the 
Introduction, the first three chapters of Part I., and then Part 
II. and perhaps other portions before completing Part I. The 
cross references from one part to another will be found some- 
what numerous. In the plan of the work, a few instances 
occur of departure from a strict technical distribution of the 
topics, for the sake of practical convenience. Thus the matters 
embraced under Illustration, Expository Preaching, or Imagina- 
tion, would strictly belong to several different parts of the 
work, but it is practically better to discuss all at the same 
time. 

It may be necessary to explain the introduction of copious 
chapters on the Interpretation of a Text, and on Argument. 
The former subject is discussed in treatises on Hermeneutics. 
But besides the fact that not a few of those who use this book 
will not have previously studied Hermeneutics, those who have 
done so may be interested and profited by a discussion bearing 
more directly on the work of preaching ; and such students 
will be able to read the chapter rapidly. Much improvement 
has been made during the past century in respect to pulpit 
interpretation, but it is a point as to which our young ministei-s 
still need to be very carefully guarded. The subject of Argu- 
ment is thought by some to be out of place in a treatise on 
Homiletics or on Rhetoric in general. But preaching and all 
public speaking ought to be largely composed of argument, for 
even the most ignorant people constantly practise it them- 



PREFACE. y 

selves, and always feel its force when properly presented ; and 
yet in many pulpits the place of argument is mainly filled by 
mere assertion and exhortation, and the arguments employed 
are often carelessly stated, or even gravely erroneous. Treatises 
on Logic teach the critical inspection, rather than the construc- 
tion of argument, and so the latter must be discussed in works 
on Rhetoric, if anywhere. The well-known chapters of Whately 
have been here freely employed, but with very large additions, 
and with the attempt to correct some important errors. The 
examples of argument given are nearly all drawn from reli- 
gious truth. With these explanations it is left to instructors 
to use or omit these portions of the work at their pleasure. 

But the great mass of young ministers, particularly in some 
denominations, never study Homiletics under a teacher, 
whether they have or have not enjoyed a Collegiate education. 
The attempt has been everywhere made to adapt the present 
work to the wants of these students, as well as the purposes 
of a text-book. They will choose for themselves what portions 
to take up first, but such as have had no College education 
may be urged not to abandon the book without reading the 
discussion of Arrangement and Style, as well as of Interpreta- 
tion, Subjects of Preaching, and Argument. For the sake of 
those who have enjoyed few advantages, occasional explana- 
tions have been introduced which other readers would hardly 
need. 

Those who have had much experience in preaching often 
find it interesting and useful to examine a treatise on the pre- 
paration and delivery of sermons. New topics and new 
methods may be suggested, things forgotten or hitherto 
neglected are recalled, ideas gradually formed in the course of 
experience are made clearer and more definite, and where the 
views advanced are not deemed just, renewed xe^^'^cXAOitL ^x^. 



TUl PREFACE. 

No one could prepare a work on this subject without feeling, 
and sometimes deeply feeling, the responsibility he incurred. 
It is a solemn thing to preach the gospel, and therefore a very 
solemn thing to attempt instruction or even suggestion as to the 
means of preaching weU. 

July, 1870. 

Note. — There are seyeral classes of persons besides ministers, to whom 
portions of this work may perhaps prove acceptable and usof ul. 

The treatises on Bhetoric now studied, in schools and College, are nearly 
all designed to prepare the student for writing, rather than distinctively for 
speaking ; and speakers upon whatsoever subject, may really find more of 
what they need in a book on preaching. The ablest lawyers and statesmen 
have often studied sermons, as specimens of eloquence ; why not learn some- 
thing from treatises on the preparation and delivery of sermons ? The por- 
tions which might be recommended to this class are after the Introduction, 
Part I., chapter, iv.-^dii. ; Part II., chapters i. and ii. ; Part III. ; and Part 
IV., and these may be taken in any order. 

Lay preachers, and persons desirous of speaking in public on religious sub- 
jects, might be not a little helped by the first three chapters of Part I , by 
Part v., and by such other portions of the work as they may find time to 
read. 

To Sunday-School teachers are recommended Part I., chapters ii. vii, and 
viii., with the close of chapter iii. ; and Part V. 

Intelligent Christians, of both sexes, must be often grieved at the' false esti- 
mate of preaching, the wrong notions of what it is, and what it ought to be, 
which are so prevalent. By readiug something practical on the subject, they 
would be better prepared to sustain those who preach properly, and to im. 
prove the tone of social conversation in regard to this matter. They might 
also become more sympathising and appreciative hearers ; and good listeners 
are, in proportion, quite as rare as good preachers. To these are recom- 
mended the Introduction ; Part I., chapters i. iv., vii. and viii. ; Part II., 
chapter iii. ; Part IV. ; and Part V. 



EDITOR'S PREFACE. 



An American edition of the following work was published in 
1870, with a commendatory Preface by Dr. Angus, President of 
the Regent's Park College, London. For some time past, how- 
ever, this edition has been inaccessible in this country, and a 
re-issue of the work has become necessary. The urgency of 
the case has recently been increased, the Wesleyan Methodist 
Conference having placed Dr. Broadus's work on the list of 
books to be read by Junior Preachers during their ministerial 
probation. Whilst this mark of approval does not, of course, 
commit the Wesleyan Conference to the acceptance of all that 
the book contains, yet it may fairly be inferred that, in the 
judgment of this influential body of ministers, no other treatise 
on Homiletics has stronger claims on the attention of those 
who are seeking fully to prepare themselves for the work of the 
Christian ministry. 

In the present edition there have been introduced into the 
text a few very slight verbal changes, which do not in any way 
affect the sense, and the Editor has added a few notes, distin- 
guished from the Author's by the addition " Ed,'* 

Some of the statements and allusions in the following pages 
will strike the reader as more appropriate in an American than 
in an English work. But these are comparatively rare, they 
incidentally impart useful information, and they can create no 
difficulty when the transatlantic standpoint of the author is 
borne in mind. 

The work may be studied with advantage by all preachers. 
Beginners may learn much from its pages, and those who have 
attained excellence by long experience may here find hints by 
attention to which good preaching may be made still better. Dr. 
Broadus teaches by example as well as by precept. His perspi- 
cuity and energy of style, and his earnest religious tone per- 
petually suggest to the reader some of the highest and most 
necessary qualities of all good preaching. 

HsADlNaLEY^ Januury, 187i. 



GOI^rTENTS. 



INTRODUCTIOK 

FAGS 

1, Importance of Preaching , 1 

Difficulty of preaching well 2 

2. JNTat'ire of Eloquence 3 

8. Requisites of effective preaching, tiz., pi^ty, natural gifts, knowledge, 

skill , ,.- 5 

4. Origin of the Rules of Rhetoric 7 

5. Dangers of rhetorical studies 8 

6. Relation of Homiletics to Rhetoric 11 

7. Literature of Homiletics 12 



PART I. 

MATERIALS OF PREACHING. 

CHAPTER I. 

THE TEXT-T^BLECTIO^. 

1. Meaning of the term Text 18 

2. Adyantages of haying a Text 19 

8. ]^ules (eight) ^or the selection of Texts 21 

CHAPTER II. 

THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

i. Obligation to interpret carefully and strictly 29 

2. Chief sources of error in the interpretation of texts 30 

Mis^inderstanding the text itself 30 

Disregarding the connection of tbe text 36 

Improper spiritualizing... 40 

8. Examples (nineteen) of texts often misapplied 44 

4. Rides (six) for interpreting a text , 52 

CHAPTER III. 

SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

1, Doctrinal subjects ; 69 

Evidences of Christianity 68 

Controversy with other professed Christians 65 



CONTENTS. Xi 

F41M 

2. Subjects of morality 67 

Political preaching 69 

Temperance Amusements^ &c 72 

3. Historical subjects 74 

4. !E}xperimental subjects 76 

5. Occasional sermons 78 

JP'uneral sermons 78 

Academic sermons 79 

Sermons to children 80 



CHAPTER IV. 

GENERAL MATBPIALS OF PREACHING OEIGINALITT AND 

PLAGIARISM. 

1. Materials possessed beforehand 84 

The Scriptures a preacher's chief study 86 

Systematic Theology 87 

Other reading 88 

2. Materials provided at the* time 90 

8. Original materials 91 

Absolute and relative originality 91 

Why originality is so desirable 93 

Obstacles to originality 95 

4. Borrowed materials and Plagiarism 97 

Proper use of ideas derived from others 98 

Proper acknowledgment of having borrowed 102 



CHAPTER V. 

SPECIAL MATERIALS — EXPLANATION. 

Frequent need of explanation in preaching 104 

1. Explanation of Texts 106 

Pulpit Exegesis 106 

[Narration 107 

Description 110 

2. Explanation of subjects 112 

Definition 112 

Division, Exemplification, Comparison 113 



CHAPTER VL 

ARGUMENT. 

Importance of argument in preaching 116 

1. Preliminaries to argument 119 

Burden of proof— discussion of Whately's theory 120 

2. Principal varieties of argument 128 

A. Alignments a priori ^*^ 

B. From testimony "VS^ 



Xii CONTENTS. 

PAGE. 

C. Induction 138 

D. From Analogy 140 

E. Deduction from established truth 144 

F. Certain /orwi« of argument 145 

3. Refutation 147 

4. Order of Arguments 164 

5. General suggestions as to Argument 157 



CHAPTER VII. 

ILLUSTRATION. 

1. Various uses of Illustration 160 

2. Sources of Illustration 163 

Observation of nature 163 

Of human life 163 

Our Lord's illustrations 164 

Pure invention 165 

Science 166 

History, news, anecdotes 167 

Literature and art / 169 

Scripture 171 

3. Cautions as to the employment of Illustration 171 



CHAPTER VIII. 

APPLICATION. 

Importance of the Application 173 

Persuasion, and three classes of motives 174 

Exciting emotion 176 



PART II. 

ARRANGEMENT OF A SERMON. 

CHAPTER I. 

IMPORTANCE OF ARRANGEMENT. 181 

CHAPTER II. 

THE SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 

1. The Introduction 187 

Sources of introduction 189 

Qualities of a good introduction 191 

2. Plan and Divisions ,. 194 

No discourse without apian 194 



CONTENTS. XllI 

PAOB 

Always seek the best plan 195 

The Proposition 196 

Divisions 198 

Are divisions necessary? 199 

Number of divisions .'. 200 

Character of the divisions 202 

Order of the divisions 205 

Statement of the divisions 206 

Shall they be announced beforehand ? 206 

Transitions 207 

3. Conclusion 209 

Should be carefully prepared 210 

BecapituLation '. 211 

Application, of different kinds 211 

Concluding exhortation 215 

Preparation of the conclusion 217 



CHAPTER III. 

DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 

Three species distinguished 219 

1. Subject-sermons 220 

2. Text-sermons 222 

3. Expository Sermons 227 

Advantages and disadvantages 227 

Suggestions as to construction and management 230 

list of good specimens 240 



PART III. 

STYLE. 

CHAPTER I. 

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 

1. Nature and importance of style 243 

2. Means of improving style 247 

Study of language 247 

Study of literature 251 

Practice, in writing and speaking 254 

CHAPTER II. 

PERSPICUITY OF STYLE. 

Importance of perspicuity 259 

Perspicuity as depending on terms 262 

On the coustruction of sentences and paragraphs ^^^ 

On genexal brevity and diffusenoss ^^^ 



XIV CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER HI. 

ENERGY OF STYLE. 

PAGE. 

Nature of energy, and requisites thereto 274 

Ejnergy in terms 275 

ijnergyin construction 278 

Conciseness in order to energy 283 

Figures which promote energy ' 286 

CHAPTER IV. 

ELBQANOB OP STYLE. 

Eleganco in different species of composition 292 

„ in use of terms 297 

„ in arrangement of words 298 

„ in use of figures 300 

Simplicity conducive to elegance 301 



CHAPTER v.* 

IMAGINATION IN ITS RELATION TO ELOQUBNCR 

1, (Jses of imagination to the orator 279 

2. Means of cultivating the imagination 283 



PART IV. 

DELIVERY OP SERMONS. 

CHAT^TER I. 

THE THREE METHODS OP PREPARATION AND DELIVERY. 

General Remarks <m Delivery 288 

1. Reading sermons 289 

2. Recitation— to write and repeat from memory 298 

Free speaking 301. 

S. Extemporaneous speaking 302 

4. Brief History of tlie three methods 311 

5. General and special preparation for ez temporaneous preaching 31 3 

CHAPTER II. 

ON DELIVERY AS REGARDS VOICE. 

1. General remarks on Delivery 318 

2. The voice — ^its distinct powers 323 

3. General improvement of voice 324 

4. Management of voice when actually preaching 329 

Note on Minister's Sore Throat 381 

* See Index, p. 365. 



CONTENTS. XV 

CHAPTER III. 

ON DELIYEBY AS REOABDS ACTION. 

PAOB. 

Action as expressing thought 834 

Expression of countenance 836 

Posture in speaking , 887 

Gresture— use of hands 889 

Rules with regard to action 841 



PART Y. 

CONDUCT OF PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

Worship proper often neglected 343 

1. Beading Scripture 844 

2. Reading Hymns 349 

3. Public Prayer 866 

4. Jwength of Services *. 361 

6. Pulpit Decorum 363 

6. Concluding Remarks 364 



J 

I 



THE PREPARATION AND DELIVERY OF SERMONS. 



INTRODUCTION. 



1. Importance of Preaching and Difficulty op Preaching 
WELL. 2. Nature of Eloquence. 3. Kequisites to Effec- 
tive Preaching. 4. Origin of the Rules of Rhbtoric. 
5. Dangers of Rhetorical Studies. 6. Relation of 
homilbtics to rhetoric. 7. literature op !b[omiletics. 

Preaching is characteristic of Christianity. No false religion 
has ever provided for the regular and frequent assembling of 
the masses of men to hear religious instruction and exhorta- 
tion.* Judaism had something like it in the prophets, and 
afterwards in the readers and speakers oi the synagogue; but^ 
Judaism was a true religion, designed to be developed into ^ 
Christianity. ' ^ 

The great appointed means of spreading the good tidings of 
salvatioa through Christ is preaching— words spoken, whether' 
to the individual or to the assembly. And this nothing can 
supersede. Printing has become a mighty agency for good 
and for evil, and Christians should employ it with the utmost 
diligence, and in every possible way, for the spread of truth. 
But printing can never take. the place of the living word. 
When a man who is apt in teaching, whose soul is on fire 
with the truth which he trusts has saved him and hopes will 
save others, speaks to his fellow men face to face, eye to eye^ 
and electric sympathies flash to and fro between him and his 
hearers, till they lift each other up, higher and higher, into 
the intensest thought and the most impassioned emotion,— r- 
higher and yet higher, till they are borne as on chariots of 

* Comp, Vinet, p. 21. 
B 



->*. 



2 INTRODUCTION. 

fire above the world, — ^there is a power to move men, to 
influence character, life, destiny, such as no printed page can 
ever possess. Pastoral work is of immense importance, and 
all preachers should be diligent in performing it. But it 
cannot take the place of preaching, nor fully compensate for 
lack of power in the pulpit. The two help each other, and 
neither of them is able, unless supported by the other, to 
achieve the largest and most blessed results. When he who 
preaches is the sympathizing pastor, the trusted counsellor, 
the kindly and honoured friend of young and old, of rich and 
poor, then " truths divine come mended from his lips," and 
the door to men's hearts, by the magical power of sympathy, 
will fly open at his word. But on the other hand, when he 
who visits is the preacher, whose thorough knowledge of 
Scripture and elevated views of life, whose able and impas- 
sioned discourses have carried conviction and commanded 
admiration, and melted into one the hearts of the multitude, 
who is accustomed to stand before them as the ambassador 
of God, and is associated in their minds with the authority 
and the sacredness of God's Word,' — when he comes to speak 
with the sufiering, the sorrowing, the tempted, his visit has 
a meaning and a power of which otherwise it must be desti- 
tute. If a minister feels himself specially drawn towards 
either of these departments of effort, let him also constrain 
himself to diligence in the other. 

Eeligious eeremonies may be instructive and impressive. 
The older dispensation made much use of these, as we employ 
pictures in teaching children. Even Christianity, which has 
the minimum of ceremony, illustrates its fundamental facts, 
and often makes deep religious impressions, by its two simple 
but expressive ordinances. But these are merely pictures to 
illustrate, merely helps to that great work of teaching and 
convincing, of winning and holding men, which preaching, 
made mighty by God's Spirit, has to perform. 

It follows that preaching must always be a necessity, and 
good preaching a mighty power. In every age of Christianity, 
since John the Baptist drew crowds into the desert, there has 
been no great religious movement, no restoration of Scripture 
truth, and reanimation of genuine piety, without new power 
in preaching, both as cause and as effect. 

But, alas ! how difficult we find it to preach well. How 
small a proportion of the sermons heard weekly throughout 



INTRODUCTION. 6 

the world are really good. The dilettanti men of letters who 
every now and then fill the periodicals with sneers at preach- 
ing, no doubt judge most unkindly and unjustly, for they 
purposely compare ordinary examples of preaching with the 
finest specimens of literature, and they forget their own utter 
lawk, in the one case, of that sympathetic appreciation with- 
out which all literary and artistic judgment is necessarily at 
fault ; but we who love preaching and who try to preach, are 
better aware than they are of the deficiencies which mar our 
efforts, and the difficulties which attend our work. A vener- 
able and eminently useful minister once remarked, as he rose 
from the couch on which he had been resting, " Well, I must 
get ready to preach to-night. But I can't preach — I never 
did preach — 0, I never Iieard anybody preach." 

And yet in this work of ours, so awful and so attractive, 
so difficult and solemnly responsible and yet so blessed, we 
ought to aspire after the highest excellence. If in other 
varieties of public speaking, then most of all in this, may we 
adopt Cicero*s words with reference to the young orator, " I 
will not only exhort, but will even beseech him, to labour."* 

2. Nature of Eloquence. 

"What is good preaching ? Or, more generally, what is 
eloquence 1 This is not a merely speculative inquiry, for our 
fundamental views on the subject will influence, to a greater 
extent than we may be aware, our practical efllbrts. Without 
reviewing the copious discussions of the question, the follow- 
ing statement may be offered : Eloquence is so speaking as 
not merely to convince the judgment, kindle the imagination, 
and move the feelings, but to give a powerful impulse to the 
will. All of these are necessary elements of eloquence, but 
that which is most characteristic is the last. There may 
be instruction and conviction without eloquence. The fancy 
may be charmed, as by a poem or novel, when you would not 
think of calling it eloquence. The feelings may be deeply 
stirred, by a pathetic tale or a harrowing description, but no 
corresponding action being proposed we do not speak of it as 
eloquence. On the other hand, it is not strictly correct to 
say that " eloquence is so speaking as to carry your point,'* 
for there may be an invincible prejudice, or other insuperable 

* Cic. de Or. II, 85. 



4 INTRODUCTION. 

obstacle ; as, for example, a preacher may be truly eloquent 
without actually inducing his hearers to repent. There must 
be a powerful impulse upon the will ; the hearers must feel 
smitten, stirred, moved to, or at least moved towards, some 
action or determination to act. Words that by carrying con- 
viction, kindling imagination, and arousing emotion, produce 
such an effect as this upon the will, are rightly called elo- 
quent words. Augustine says, Veritas pateat, Veritas placeat^ 
Veritas moveat, " Make the truth plain, make it pleasing, 
make it moving." 

Eloquence, then, is a practical thing. Unless it aims at 
real and practical results, it is spurious. Mere holiday 
eloquence does not deserve the name. And the preacher 
who kindles the fancy of his hearers merely for their delec- 
tation, who stirs their passions merely to give them the luxury 
of emotion, is not eloquent. There is too much preaching of 
just this sort. Besides vain pretenders who care only to 
please, there are good men, who, if they can say very hand- 
some things, and can make the people feely imagine that they 
are preaching well, without inquiring wh]/ the people feel, 
and to what truly religious ends the feeling is directed. It 
is a shame to see what vapid and worthless stuff is often 
called eloquence in newspaper puffs, and in the talk of half- 
educated younglings returning from church. 

Eloquence is a serious thing. You cannot say that a dis- 
course, or a paragraph, is very amusing and very eloquent. 
The speaker, who is to deserve this high name, must have 
moral earnestness. He may sometimes indulge, where it is 
appropriate, in the light play of delicate humour, or give forth 
sparks of wit, but these must be entirely incidental and subor- 
dinate to a thorough seriousness and earnestness. Theremin, 
in his useful little treatise, " Eloquence a Virtue," insists that 
eloquence belongs to the ethical sciences, the character and 
spirit of the speaker being the main thing. The theory is 
an exaggeration, but contains an important element of truth, 
as Quintilian already had partly observed.* 

" What is the true ground of eloquence," says Vinet, " if 
it is not commonplace ? When eloquence is combined with 

* Quint. Int. XII, 1, "An orator is a good man, skilled in speaking." 
This, he says, was Gate's definition. Professor Shedd's Introduction to 
Theremin gives some very good thoughts on the nature of eloquence. 



INTRODUCTION. 

high philosophical considerations, as in many modem ex- 
amples, we are at first tempted to attribute to philosophy 
the impression we receive from it : but eloquence is some- 
thing more popular ; it is the power of making the primitive 
chords of the soul (its purely human elements) vibrate within 
us — it is in this, and nothing else, that we acknowledge the 
orator.'** It is impossible to be eloquent on any subject, 
save by associating it with such ideas as that of mother, 
child, friends, home, country, heaven, and the like; all 
of them familiar, and, in themselves commonplace. The 
speaker's task is, by his grouping, illustration, etc., and by 
his own contagious emotion, to invest these familiar ideas 
with fresh interest, so that they may reassert their power 
over the hearts of his hearers. He who runs after material 
of discourse that shall be absolutely new, may get credit 
for originality, and be amply admired, but he will not exert 
the living power which belongs to eloquence. The preacJtsr 
can be really eloquent only when he speaks of those vital, 
gospel truths which have necessarily become familiar. A just 
rhetoric, if there were no higher consideration, would require 
that a preacher shall preach the gospel — shall hold on to 
the old truths, and labour to clothe them with new interest 
and power. 

3. Requisites to Effective Preaching. 

They may be stated as four, viz., piety, natural gifts, 
knowledge, skill. 

(1.) Piety. Men sometimes do good by preaching who 
turn out to have been destitute of piety. It is one of the 
many wonderful ways in which God brings good out of evil. 
But such cases are exceptional, and as a rule, the prime 
requisite to efficiency in preaching is earnest piety. This 
inspires the preacher himself with ardent zeal, and keeps 
the flame alive amid all the icy indifference by which he will 
so often be encompassed. This gains for him the good-will 
and sympathy of his hearers, the most ungodly of whom will 
feel that devout earnestness on his part is becoming, and 
entitles him to respect. And this is authorized to hope for 
the blessing of God upon the labours which it prompts. 
Much false theory and bad practice in preaching is connected 

* Vinet, Horn. p. 176, note. 



b INTRODUCTION. 

with a failure to apprehend the fundamental importance of 
piety in the preacher. As was said above on a kindred 
topic, just rhetorical principles, as well as other and far 
higher considerations, imperatively require that a preacher 
of the gospel shall cultivate personal piety. It is had rhetoric 
to neglect it. 

(2.) Natural gifts. The preacher needs the capacity for 
clear thinking, with strong feelings, and a vigorous imagi- 
nation ; also capacity for expression, and the power of forci- 
ble utterance. Many other gifts help his usefulness, these 
are well-nigh indispensable to any high degree of efficiency. 
Each of these can be improved almost indefinitely, some of 
them developed in one who had not been conscious of pos- 
sessing them ; but all must exist as natural gifts. 

(3.) Knowledge. There must be knowledge of religious 
truth, and of such things as throw light upon it; knowledge 
of human nature in its relations to religious truth, and of 
human life in its actual conditions around us. It was a 
favourite idea of Cicero that the orator ought to know every- 
thing. There is of course no knowledge which a preacher 
might not make usefuL We may thankfully recognize the 
fact that some men do good who have very slender attain- 
ments, and yet may insist that it should be the preacher's 
lowest standard to surpass, in respect of knowledge, the great 
majority of those who hear him, and should be his saored 
ambition to know all that he can learn by life-long and 
prayerful endeavour. 

Piety furnishes motive power ; natural gifts, cultivated as 
far as possible, furnish means ; knowledge gives material ; 
and there remains 

(4.) Skill. This does not refer merely to style and 
delivery, but also to the collection, choice, and arrangement 
of materials. All who preach eminently well — and the same 
thing is true of secular speakers — will be found, with scarcely 
an exception, to have laboured much to acquire skilL Heniy 
Clay, in an address to some law-students at Albany towards 
the close of his life, mentioned that during his early life 
in Kentucky, he "commenced and continued for years, the 
practice of daily reading and speaking upon the contents of 
some historical or scientific book. These off-hand efforts 
were made sometimes in a cornfield, at others in the forest, 
and not unfrequently in some distant bam, with the horse 



INTRODUCTION. 7 

and the ox for my auditors." We are told that the Indian 
orators of the Six Nations were known to practise their 
speeches beside a clear pool. " Patrick Henry, the most 
illustrious example of natural oratory, so far as there is any 
such, went through a course of trainiog in his daily studies 
of human nature as drawn out by himself in his little shop, 
his every-day trials on his lingering customers of the power 
of words, his deep and enthusiastic investigations into history, 
and particularly his patient and continued study of the 
harangues of Livy and the elaborate translations he made of 
them, which, to say the least, is very uncommon."* Any one 
whose good fortune it has been to be intimate with some of 
those noble Baptist preachers, who beginning with hardly 
any education have worked their way upito the highest ex- 
cellence in their calling, will have seen ample proofs, particu- 
larly in their unrestrained private conversation, that their 
power of clear and precise expression, and of forcible and 
attractive delivery, is the result of sharp, critical attention, 
of earnest and long-continued labour. The difference between 
skill, and the lack of it in speaking, is almost as great as in 
handling tools; those, for example, of the carpenter or the 
blacksmith. And while no real skill can be acquired without 
practice — according to the true saying, " The only way to 
learn to preach is to preach'' — yet mere practice will never 
bring the highest skill; it must be heedful, thoughtful prac- 
tice, with close observation of others and sharp watching of 
ourselves, and controlled by good sense and good taste. 

Now in respect of skill, preaching is an art; and while 
art cannot create the requisite powers of mind or body, nor 
supply their place if really absent, it can develop and im- 
prove them, and aid in using them to the best advantage. 
To gain skill, then, is the object of rhetorical studies, skill 
in the construction and in the delivery of discourse. 

4. Origin of the Rules op Rhetoric. 

(1.) The rules of Rhetoric are properly the result of in- 
duction. They are sometimes spoken of as if they had been 
drawn up by would-be wise men, who undertook to tell, on 
general principles, how one ought to speak. But they simply 
result from much thoughtful observation of the way in which 

* Day's Art of Discourse, p. 18. 



8 INTRODUCTION. 

men do speak, when they speak really well. Every one will 
sometimes see occasion to depart from these rules ; but he 
ought to understand that in disregarding the " rules of 
Rhetoric," he is not nobly spuming artificial fetters and 
barriers, but simply turning aside for the time, and for good 
reason, from the path in which it is usually found best to 
walk. And to do this will be wise or not wise, according as 
there is real occasion for it, and it is well managed. So too, 
we notice, men of sense often exactly conform to these rules, 
without knowing anything about them; for this is only say- 
ing that they speak exactly as men of sense usually do.* 

(2.) What we call rules are but the convenient expression 
of a principle. They put the principle into a compact form, 
so as to be easily remembered and readily applied. But the 
rule, however judiciously framed, can never be as flexible as 
the principle it represents. There will therefore be cases, 
and as regards some rules many cases, in which one may 
violate the rule and yet he really conforming to the principle^ 
these being cases in which the principle would bend, and 
adapt itself to peculiar conditions, while the rule cannot bend. 
This consideration explains many of the instances in which a 
speaker produces a powerful effect though utterly violating 
the rules of rhetoric. Other such instances are explained by 
the sort of shock produced by a departure from what is usual, 
as the sleeping miller will wake when the mill stops. And in 
still other cases the effect is produced by a man's power in 
other respects, in spite of the particular violation of rule. 

5. Dangers of Rhetorical Studies. 

(1.) Thinking more of the form than the matter. Rhetoric 
has to do with the use we make of material, the choice, adap- 
tation, arrangement, expression. But after all, the material 
itself is more important. We hold that Demosthenes did 
not mean to contradict this, when he said (if he ever did in 
fact say it), that the first thing, second thing, third thing 
in speaking is delivery. He took the other for granted. No 
man has ever surpassed Demosthenes, in thorough mastery of 
the subjects upon which he spoke. But delivery had been 
with him a matter of peculiar difficulty, his deficiencies in 
that respect had defeated his early attempts, and his sub- 

• Comp. Whately's Rhetoric, p. 33 ff. 



INTRODUCTION. U 

sequent excellence had been gained only by enormous labour ; 
it was natural that he should lay stress upon its importance, 
supposing that no man of sense could overlook the necessity 
of being fully acquainted with his subject. Now the things 
which ought most to be thought of by the preacher, are piety 
and knowledge, and the blessing of God. Skill, however 
valuable, is far less important than the^e ; and there is danger 
that rhetorical studies will .cause men to forget that such is 
the case. It is lamentable to see how often the remarks upon 
preaching made by preachers themselves, in conversation and 
in newspaper critiques, are confined to a discussion of the 
performance and the performers. Unsympathizing listeners or 
readers have, in such cases, too much ground for concluding 
that preachers are anxious only to display skill, and gain 
oratorical reputation. 

(2.) Imitation. All are aware that there is both a con- 
scious and an unconscious imitation. That which is uncon- 
scious is of course not so blameworthy, but it cannot fail to 
be injurious, and is a subtle evil which should be guarded 
against with the sharpest self-inspection. Every one ob- 
serves, too, that imitators are especially apt to imitate a 
man's faults. The reason is easily seen. The excellencies 
of a good speaker are apt to be symmetrical, while his 
faults are salient, prominent. The latter, therefore, will most 
readily attract unconscious imitation. As to the conscious 
imitator, he is sure to be a superficial observer, who will think- 
that what he notices most in some admired speaker is the 
secret of his power, and will imitate that. Besides, it is easier 
to ape the single, salient fault, than the symmetrical combi- 
nation of many excellencies. 

Is the danger of imitation increased by attendance upon 
institutions of learning] Hardly. He who is so susceptible 
on the one hand, or on the other hand so silly, as to fall 
readily into it, will find some one to imitate, wherever he 
may be. Every country district has some favourite preacher, 
whom others around may be seen to imitate. When many 
of these imitators are gathered at a public institution, the 
men they imitate are fewer and more generally known, and 
therefore the fact attracts more attention. On the other 
hand, they are more likely to have pointed out to them the 
danger and the evils of imitation, so as utterly to eschew 
that which is conscious, and promptly to correct the uncon- 



10 INTRODUCTION. 

scious, when made aware of it. Nor is there any greater 
danger of such imitation at a theological institution than at 
a college or university. Still, some men are very liable to 
this fault, and when about to hear the same speaker several 
times a week for many months, all ought to be on their guard 
against imitating his peculiarities.* 

(3.) Artificiality. There is much artificiality which ought 
not to be called by the odious, name of affectation. The 
speaker's motives are good; he merely errs in judgment and 
taste. But a great error it is. In all speaking, especially in 
preaching, naturalness, genuineness, even though awkward, 
is really more effective for all the highest ends, than the most 
elegant artificiality. " But it is the highest art to conceal 
art." Nay, no art can conceal art. We may not perceive 
it, but we dimly, instinctively feel that there is something 
the matter, and perhaps wonder what it is ; somehow, the 
preacher's well-meant efforts are failing to reach their aim. 
The danger of artificiality in speaking is very great. When 
one begins, he is apt to feel awkward in the new and 
strange situation. As one unaccustomed to riding on horse- 
back must learn to sit naturally, and feel at ease in the 
saddle, so very many speakers, perhaps all, have to learn to 
he natural. They must not only reject all intentional artifi- 
ciality, but must carefully guard against that which is un- 
designed and unconscious. To forget self, because full of 
living desire to do men good, is the great means of being 
natural. It follows that a preacher ought never to preach 
merely for practice ; this will inevitably tend to encourage 
artificiality. The first few efforts of a young man — which 
will go much farther than he is at the time aware to form 
his habits for life — ought to be genuine, bona fide preaching. 
If he ever preaches in the presence of none but his fellow- 
students and instructors, it ought to be only upon a subject 

* " Melancbthon carried one shoulder higher than the other, and the 
pupils believed themselves Melaachthons if they imitated his posture." 
Hagenbach, Homiletik, s. 142. Spurgeon's students are constantly accused 
of imitating him. Those who are anxious on this subject ought to be 
apprised of another danger, which they may not have thought of. A year 
or two ago, a certain professor heard one of his students preach several 
times at a protracted meeting, and then preached himself. In the midst 
of the sermon, he caught himself distinctly imitating certain peculiar 
tones of his esteemed young brother. Think of that ! The professors may 
imitate the students ! 



INTRODUCTION. 11 

thoroughly suited to their religious wants, and with a most 
earnest and prayerful eflFort to do them good.* 

As regards all that pertains to preaching, and especially 
delivery, our efforts at rhetorical improvement must be mainly 
negative. We endeavour to gain correct general principles, 
and some idea of the errors and faults to which speakers are 
generally liable. We then speak, aiming to be guided by 
these principles, and to correct our faults as they may arise. 
It is unwise to set up at the outset some standard of excel- 
lence, and aim to conform to that. If one should take a 
fancy that cedar trees are more beautiful than oaks, and 
attempt to trim his oaks into the shape, and colour them 
into the hue, of cedars, the result could only be ridiculous. 
Let the young cedar grow as a cedar, and the young oak as 
an oak, but straighten, prune, improve each of them into 
the best possible tree of its kind. And so as to speaking, 
be always yourself, your actual, natural self, but yourself 
developed, corrected, improved into the very best you are 
by naturi capable of becoming. 

6. Relation of Homilbtics to Rhetoric. 

The Greek word homilia signifies conversation, mutual talk, 
and so familiar discourse. The Greek writer Photius (9th 
cent.) says of Chrysostom's expository sermons on Genesis, 
that he finds the book bearing the name of discourses, but 
that they are much more like homilies (talks), because he so 
often speaks as if seeing the hearers before him, asks ques- 
tions, and answers, and makes promises, etc., and because 
they have not the formal arrangement of discourses. f The 
Latin word sermo (from which we get sermon) has the same 
sense, of conversation, talk, discussion, etc. It is instructive 
to observe that the early Christians did not apply to their 
public teachings the names given to the orations of Demos- 
thenes and Cicero, but called them talks, familiar discourses. 
From this word homily has been derived the term homiletics. 
as denoting the science or art of Christian discourse, or a 

*It is believed that the plan of causing students to preach before the 
class results, upon the whole, in more harm than good, and that it ought 
to be avoided. Let them preach where it can be real preaching, or not at 
aU. Even the debating society proposes a present end to be gained, and 
awakens some living interest. 

•j* See Suicer's Thesaurus, II, p. 474. 



12 INTRODUCTION. 

treatise on that subject, embracing all that pertains to the 
preparation and delivery of sermons. Homiletics may be 
called a branch of rhetoric, or a kindred art. Those funda- 
mental principles, which have their basis in human nature, 
are of course the same in both cases, and this being so, it 
seems clear that we must regard homiletics as rhetoric applied 
to this particular kind of speaking. Still, preaching is pro- 
perly very different from secular discourse, as to the primary 
source of its materials, as to the directness and simplicity of 
style which become the preacher, and the unworldly motives 
by which he ought to be influenced. And while these and 
other peculiarities do not render it proper to treat homiletics 
as entirely distinct from rhetoric,* they ought to be con- 
stantly borne in mind by the student of homiletics and by 
the working preacher, t 

7. Literature op Homiletics. 

It is proposed to mention the works which are believed to 
be most worthy of the student's attention. 

I. General Works on Rhetoric. 

Aristotle's Rhetoric ought by all means to be studied, in a 
translation (as that of Bohn's Library), if it cannot be read 
in the original. Longinus on the Sublime is celebrated and 
interesting. The other extant works of Greek rhetoricians 
are not of the highest value. 

Cicero's treatises on Oratory (de Oratore, Orator, and 
Brutus) are quite unsystematic and incomplete, but are full 
of striking thoughts and useful suggestions. Quintilian's 
" Instruction of the Orator" is a systematic treasure on gram- 
mar and rhetoric, abounding in good sense, and more valuable 
than those of Cicero. Horace's Ars Poetica is well known 
to contain many capital precepts as to composition of every 
kind. The Dialogue on Orators, usually printed with the 
works of Tacitus, is now believed not to have been written 
by him, but was written in his age, and is in certain res- 
pects valuable. 

These great Greek and Roman works are not superseded 

* As proposed by Kidder, p. 19 ff. 
+ Nothing would really be gained by substituting, as some German 
writers propose, the term keryktik, from the Greek keirax, a herald, and 
in the N. T. a preacher. 



INTRODUCTION. 13 

by the modem books which have drawn from them so largely, 
and they ought to be carefully studied by all who desire to 
be well acquainted with Rhetoric. It is too common to 
eulogize famous books, and yet never read them. 

Campbell's Philosophy of Rhetoric contains much thorough 
discussion and judicious suggestion, and is of permanent 
value. Whateiys Rhetoric is believed to be the best trea- 
tise for practical use that has appeared. Especially valuable 
are the portions on Argument and on Style. Theremin's 
Eloquence a Virtue, translated by Shedd, with a good Intro- 
duction, is a small volume which may be read with great 
profit. Quackenbos* Composition and Rhetoric is a good 
school-book, and may also be used with great advantage in 
self-training by those who wish to supply deficiencies of early 
education. Bain's Composition and Rhetoric (1866) treats 
with great fulness the nature and use of rhetorical figures, 
and the subject of style in general ; and appears to contem- 
plate mainly the composition of scientific works, history, and 
poetry. Haven's Rhetoric (1869) is almost entirely confined to 
style, including words and figures. Day's Art of Discourse 
(2nd ed. 1868) gives unusual attention to the Invention of 
Materials, and presents much that is valuable. 

Goodrich's British Eloquence is an admirable collection of 
speeches, with introductions and notes enabling one to un- 
derstand them, and very useful to the student of eloquence. 
And after all, nothing in respect of secular oratory is so 
valuable as the thorough study of Demosthenes, even in a 
translation. It should be preceded and accompanied by Vol. 
XT. of Grote's Greece. 

II. Works on Homiletics. 

Chrysostom on the Priesthood is a charming little work, 
and contains several excellent remarks on Preaching. (Some 
of these are quoted by Kidder, p. 76.) The original may be 
had in a separate volume, and it has been newly translated 
into English by B. H. Cowper. Augustine was a teacher of 
Rhetoric before his conversion, and in his treatise De Doc- 
trina Christicma, " On Christian Teaching," he devotes Book 
IV. to instruction in the "setting forth" of Christian truth, 
giving many interesting and useful thoughts. This book is 
translated in the Biblical Repository, Vol. Ill, p. 569, «jvd 
a good analysis of ita contenta given by M.o\1l\q, ^. 'V^'^ ^^ 
hehw). 



14 INTRODUCTION. 

Frekch Writers. Fenelon's Dialogues on Eloquence are 
very readable, and excellent on some points. They are given 
in the good collection entitled " The Preacher and Pastor," 
New York, 1849, and in many other forms. Claude's Essay 
on the Composition of a Sermon is very valuable, and has 
exerted a wide influence. The author was a great Protestant 
preacher in the age of Louis XIV. The best of the many 
editions in English of his brief essay, is that of the famous 
Robert Robinson, with copious notes, crammed with curious 
learning. Vinet's Homiletics is a posthumous and incomplete 
work, but on some subjects is the best treatise on Homiletics 
in existence, particularly on the selection and interpretation 
of Texts, and on subjedts of Pulpit Discourse. Monod*s Lec- 
ture on the Delivery of Sermons is singularly good. Adolphe 
Monod was one of the first pulpit orators of the present 
century, and delivered this lecture when Professor in the 
French Protestant Theological School at Montauban. It is 
published as an Appendix in Fish's Select Discourses from the 
French and German. The little work of Coquerel, Observa- 
tions sur la Predication (Observations on Preaching,) Paris, 
1860, has not been translated, but ought to be. It is a 
spirited treatise, pungent, suggestive, and very useful. 

German. It is proper to mention the most recent and 
valuable treatises. Palmer's Homiletik is by a popular 
Lutheran writer; the 5th edition (1869) is considerably en- 
larged. Hagenbach, the celebrated writer on Church History, 
and belonging to the ''Reformed," or Calvinistio party in 
Germany, has a small volume, Liturgik und Homiletik, con- 
taining much that is good. The Germans usually discuss 
Homiletics in treatises on " Practical Theology " in general. 
The most recent. Otto's Evangelische Praktische Theologie 
(1869) is unusually full on this subject, and on several 
branches of it is decidedly able. The Praktische Theologie 
of Ebrard (1854) is comparatively meager on Homiletics, but 
has spirited remarks and suggestions.* 

English and American. 

Campbell's Lectures on Pulpit Eloquence are not unworthy 
of the author of the Philosophy of Rhetoric, being judicious 
and useful, while quite brief. They are given in " The 

* That of Nitzsch is frequently commended, but the present writer 
cannot speak of it from personal knowledge. 



INTBODUOTION. 15 

Preacher and Pastor" (see above under Fenelon). Porter's 
Lectures on Homiletics are very sensible and valuable, but 
not a complete treatise, many important topics being entirely 
omitted. The author was Professor at Andover, and the first 
American who prepared a systematic work on Homiletics. 
It is out of print in this country, but an English republica- 
tion can still be had. Gresley's Treatise on Preaching has 
been reprinted in this country. The author was a clergyman 
of the Church of England, and his volume (a series of Letters) 
is specially adapted to the wants of the English clergy, but 
is decidedly valuable to all, and written in an agreeable style. 
John Angell James' " Earnest Ministry," a widely-circulated 
and useful book, discusses several questions of Homiletics. 

Kipley's Sacred Rhetoric, with Ware's Hints on Extem- 
poraneous Preaching, is a useful little volume, giving many 
excellent practical rules and suggestions, but limited in its 
range of topics, and frequently too brief in the treatment of 
them. The author is Professor at Newton, and well known 
for his practical commentaries. Thoughts on Preaching, by 
James W. Alexander, is a posthumous volume, consisting of 
Review articles, Letters, and a series of detached observa- 
tions which the author was collecting for a proposed treatise 
on Homiletics. It contains a number of highly valuable 
thoughts. Henry Rogers has an Essay on the British Pulpit, 
in his volume entitled " Reason and Faith, and other Essays," 
which make some excellent points. Papers on Preaching and 
Public Speaking, by a Wykehamist, (London, 1861,) is a 
small but excellent work, unsystematic, but sensible and 
sprightly. 

Of the most recent works,. Wayland's Letters on the 
Ministry of the Gospel, 1864, is an admirable little volume. 
There are also good thoughts on Preaching in his Principles 
and Practices of the Baptists. Kidder's Homiletics, 1864, 
is by a Professor in the (Methodist) Biblical Institution at 
Evansville, Illinois. It is more complete in its range of 
topics than any other treatise on Homiletics, is for the most 
part well arranged, and contains much that is useful; but it 
is very unequal in its discussions, and the views presented of 
some subjects are regarded as objectionable. There is an 
excellent Appendix on the Literature, and many interesting 
and valuable extracts are given in another Appendix, or 
scattered throughout the book. Potter's Sacted 1^oq^^\i^^, 
Dublin, 1866, is a Roman Catholic work, and eoii\.avci^ ^oxa^ 



16 INTRODUCTION. 

good remarks, with various striking quotations from Catholic 
writers. Shedd's Homiletics and Pastoral Duties, 1867, dis- 
cusses certain topics with the author's well-known power of 
analysis and vigour of statement. It is an excellent book to 
be read by those who are acquainted with the subject in 
* general, or to be studied in connection with some systematic 
treatise. Lamps, Pitchers, and Trumpets, by E. P. Hood, 
London, 1868, is the whimsical title given to Lectures before 
the students of Spurgeon's College. It is not at all a com- 
plete or systematic treatise, nor anywhere strikingly able; 
but it is highly entertaining, and full of quaint extracts, from 
all manner of sources. It has been republished in America. 
Discussions in Theology, by Thomas H. Skinner, (New York, 
1368,) contains two papers on Preaching which are very 
instructive, and unusually devotional in their tone. The 
author is the translator of Vinet, and Professor in the Union 
Theological Seminary, New York. Hoppin's Office and Work 
of the Christian Ministry (New York, 1869) is divided be- 
tween Preaching and the Pastoral Office. The treatise on 
Preaching is in its arrangement very faulty and inconvenient, 
but the particular topics are discussed with marked ability 
and SQund judgment, and show a good acquaintance with the 
literature of the subject. The author is Professor in the 
Theological Department of Yale College, and designs his work 
especially to be a text-book for classes. The portion on Pas- 
toral Duties is well arranged, and probably the best treatise 
in existence on that subject. 

The following works ought also to be mentioned, because 
they are at present frequently met with in this country. 
Russell's Pulpit Elocution is perhaps the best treatise on its 
subject, but that is not saying very much. Sturtevant's 
Preacher's Manual is a large volume, of but little value. 
Bautain on Extemporaneous Speaking has some good sugges- 
tions. MuUois' The Clergy and the Pulpit is entertaining, 
but not particularly instructive. Zincke's Duty and Discip- 
line of Extemporary Speaking is useful to persons who have 
the established habit of reading sermons, and wish now to 
adopt extemporizing. 

Of works on the History of Preaching, there may be named : 
Moule's Christian Oratory during the First Five Centuries, 
Cambridge and London, 1859, an excellent little volimie ; 
Neale's Mediaeval Preachers and Preaching, London, 1856, 
which IB Jess valuable ; and Fish's Masterpieces of Pulpit 



INTRODUCTION. 17 

Eloquence, 2 vols. 8vo, New York, 1856, (new edition in one 
volume, 1869,) which contains excellent specimens of sermons 
from all ages, with brief biographical sketches of the several 
preachers, and good essays on the Pulpit of different periods 
and countries, and is a very useful work. More complete^ 
treatises on the History of Preaching are found in (Jerman, 
as those of Paniel, Lentz and Nesselmann.'*^ 

Besides treatises on Preaching, the chief sources of instruc- 
tion in Homiletics are as follows: (1.) The Preaching that 
we hear, when heard with fraternal sympathy and prayerful 
desire for spiritual benefit, and yet with critical attention. 
(2.) Published Sermons, the value of which is readily ac- 
knowledged. (3.) Biographies of Preachers, which to one 
having a general knowledge of Homiletics, are often surpass- 
ingly instructive. (4.) The criticism of instructors or judicious 
hearers upon our own preaching. (5.) Careful observation of 
our faults, as developed in actual practice, with resolute and 
patient effort to correct them. 



♦ A much more copious list of works on Homiletics may be found in 
Kidder's Homiletics, Appendix. The present list was derigned, as in- 
timated at the outset, to include only those which for some reason are 
thought specially worthy of notice, with brief statements as to their value 
founded on personal examination. It is believed to omit very few works 
which now possess other than a mere curious interest. Various treatises, 
and essays on particular branches of Homiletics are mentioned below under 
the appropriate heads. 



PART I. 
MAtERIALS OF PRtlA'CHINl^. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE TEXT— SELECTION. 

1. ifajANING OF TBRMi 2. ADVANTAGite OF HAVING A TeXT. 
3. RULBS FOB THB SbLBOTION oI* A TfiXT. 

1. Thb word text is from the Latin teoctus or textum, some- 
thing woven, thus denoting the web of discourse.* It came 
to be used, as it still is, for the connected discourse upon 
which >6o^Ameiitary is written, Buooessive portions 6f this con- 
nected ^^^Mb Mng Bepmitely takett a»d remttrfted upoiit. 
Thus W& qfeak b!r %e t^Sct of S6riJ)turte, tb6 Ote^i: text, th6 
sacred text, lus opposed to comihehte, ti^n^tations, knd othe^t 
modes of using it So as to oral exposition, comment, etc. 
And in any such case the text whic!h one treats, in a written 
or an oral exposition or discussion, might be not necessaj*ily 
the whole text of Scripture, but the text of a particular book, 
paragraph, or sentence. There is always the same contrast 
between the text treated and our treatment of it.t The 
history of the word, like that of homileticSf points back to the 
fact, which is also well known otherwise, that preaching was 
originally expository. 

The early Christian preachers commonly spoke upon passages 
of considerable length, and occupied themselves largely with 
exposition. Frequently, however, as was natural, they would 
find a brief passage so fruitful as to confine themselves to it. 
Usage tended more and more toward the preference of short 

* Comp. texture, context, etc. 
f Hagenbach has explained the word correctly (Horn. s. 96). Shedd 
(Horn, p. 159) has clearly mistaken it. 



THE TEXT — SELBOTION. 19 

texts. In Englahd in the 17th century, it was not uncommon 
to make many sermons on some brief passage. Thus John 
HowiB has fourteen sermons on a part of Eom. viii. 24, "We 
are saved by hope ;'' seventeen on 1 John iv. 20 ; and eighteen 
on John iii. 6. The object was to make a complete discussion 
of some great topic, and to bind all the discourses into a 
whole by connecting all with the same text. JBut this practice 
conflicted with the natural love of variety. It is usually much 
better to make a series appear such by the manifest relation 
of the subjects, and to choose fo): each discourse a separate 
text, which presents the particular sulyect or view there 
discussed. This is at present the common practice, it being 
a somewhat rare thing now to preach more than one sermon 
on the same brief text. There is also a tendency at present 
to return to the more frequent Use of loi^ texts.* 

2. Advantages of ha^i^g a ^msxn. 

It 16 inanifebt that to take a text givd^ a certain air of 
sacredness to the discourse. But more than this is true. 
The prtinarjr ideft is that the discourse is a development of 
the text, ih explanatioh, illustration, application of itd teach- 
ings. Ovar business is to teach God's word. And although 
^ may often diiscUSis objects, and aspects of sul:|jects, which 
&te hdt presented in precisely that form by any passage of 
ScHpture, yet the fundamental conception should be habitually 
riBtained, that Ve are about to set forth what the text contains. 
When cu*cum6tanceb determine the subject to be tinted, and 
we have to look for a text, one can almost al\^ays be found 
which wttl have some real, though it be a general relation to 
thie subject. If there be ture cases in which it is otherwise, 
it will then be better to have no text than one with which 
the subject has only a fanciful or forced connection. There 
are seviBral advantages in regularly taking a text. (1.) It 
constantly recalls the fact just mentioned, that our undertaking 
is not to guide the people by our own wisdom, but to impart 
to them the teachings of God in his Word. This fact enables 
us tb speak with coniBdence, and leads the people to recognize 
the authority of what we say. (2.) If the text is well chosen, 
it awakens interest at the outset. (3.) It often aids the hearer 
in rbmiembering the train of thought, having this eflfect wher- 

* Compare b&low. Fart II, chapter iii., 3, on Exposv^^orj ^«tia.wi%. 



20 THE TEXT — SELECTION. 

ever the sermon is really evolved from the text. (4.) It 
aflfords opportunity of explaining and impressing some passage 
of Scripture. (5.) It tends to prevent our wandering utterly 
away from Scriptural topics and views. (6.) Greater variety 
will be gained than if the mind were left altogether to the 
suggestion of circumstances, for then it will often fall back 
into its old ruts ; and this variety is attained just in pro- 
portion as one restricts himself to the specific thought of 
each particular text. 

. Objections to the use of texts have commonly arisen from 
one of two or three causes. The grievous laxity in the inter- 
pretation of texts which has so widely prevailed, leads some 
men to regard the employment of them as wrong or useless. 
This is the old story — the abuse of a thing causing men to 
question the propriety of its use. Again, persons who have 
little or no true reverence for Scripture, or appreciation of 
its riches, speak of the text as a restriction upon freedom of 
thought and flow of eloquence. Thus Voltaire : "It were to 
be wished that Bourdaloue in banishing from the pulpit the 
bad taste which disgraced ifc, had also banished the custom of 
preaching on a text. Indeed, to speak long on a quotation 
of a line or two, to exhaust one's self in subjecting a whole 
discourse to the control of this line, seems a trifling labour, 
little worthy of the dignity of the ministry. The text 
becomes a sort of motto, or rather enigma, which the discourse 
develops." * It seems plain that this sneer arose partly from 
the torturing interpretation so often witnessed, and chiefly from 
the critic's want of reverence for the Bible, and ignorance of 
the preacher's true relation to the Bible. And perhaps, as a 
third ground of objection to texts, some able and devout 
preachers, disliking expository and even textual preaching, 
and wishing that every sermon should be a philosophical 
discussion or an elaborate discourse upon a definite topic, 
incline to regard the custom of always taking a text as an 
inconvenient restriction. Such appears to have been the 
feeling of Vinet. 

It is sometimes not imsuitable to have two texts, or even 
more. Thus with Heb. ix. 22, "And without shedding of 
blood is no remission," there might be united 1 John i. 7, 
"The blood of Jesus Christ his Son deanseth us from all 
sin." Or with Isa. vi. 3, "The whole earth is full of his 

* Voltaire, Age of Louis XIV. Quoted by Vinet, Horn. p. 99. 



THE TEXT — SELECTION. 21 

glory," may be taken Psa. Ixxii. 19, "And let the whole earth 
be filled with his glory ;" to angelic eyes it is so — ^the human 
mind can only pray that it may be so. (Comp. Hab. ii. 14.) 
Spurgeon has a sermon on the words, " I have sinned," as 
occurring seven times in the Bible, and gives interesting views 
of the different circumstances and states of mind in which 
they were uttered.* 

3. Rules for the Selection of Texts. 

The proper selection of a text is a matter of great im- 
portance. A felicitous choice will animate the preacher 
throughout the preparation and the delivery of his sermon, 
and will help him to gain at once the attention of his hearers. 
There are few points as to which preachers differ more widely 
in talent and skill than the selection of texts, and few in 
which diligent and systematic effort will be more richly re- 
warded. The minister, or student for the ministry, should 
keep a blank book for lists of texts. In reading the Scriptures 
and books of Theology, in reading collections of sermons, 
biographies, and newspaper notices, in casual reflection and 
in the preparation of other sermons, passages will be con- 
stantly occurring upon which it strikes one that he could 
make a sermon. Let these be at once written down in the 
list. Let the preacher constrain himself to do so, until it 
becomes a habit And he should by all means put down at 
the same time, however briefly, the proposed outline of the 
discourse, or any specially valuable view or illustration of it, 
which he is not sure will return to his mind whenever the 
text is looked at. Otherwise he will afterward find many 
passages in the list that it will seem strange he should ever 
have noted, because the association will have been broken, 
the point of view will have disappeared. At some times the 
mind is in a highly creative mood, and plans of sermons or 
suggestive texts or topics will rapidly succeed one another, as 
the preacher reads, reflects, or visits from house to house. 
These firuitful germs should be carefully husbanded, and the 
lines of development indicated. And often when one is cold 
and lifeless, and could at the moment produce nothing, some 
good thought which was struck out in a happier mood will 
fall into his mind like a spark, and presently set it all on 

♦ Amer. ed. oi Spui^g^eon's Sermons. Tbird Senie^, ■^. *iAt\.» 



22 THE TEXT — SELECTION. 

fire. Many an admirable text, and many a golden thought, 
given to men in their better moments, are lost for ever, when 
a brief record, or even some little eflFort to associate them in 
mind with other things, might have made them a permanent 
possession.* 

To aid in the selection of Texts, there are offered the 
following rules : 

1. The text should not be obscure. It ought, as a rule, 
to exhibit its meawing readily. Otherwise, the people will 
either be repelled by what they see no sense in, or will be 
apt to feel a merely idle curiosity to know what in the world 
the preacher will make of that. Still, there are important 
exceptions Ipiere. If the preacher is satisfied he can explain 
an obscure passage, and can show that it teaches valuable 
truth, he may take it. If the passage is one about which 
many are known to feel interested, and he is really able to 
make its meaning clear, and bring out useful lessons, it may 
be very wise to employ it. But observe the stress that is 
laid on the practicability of making the passage instructive 
and useful. To explain merely for the sake of explaining, 
is a task for which the preacher scarcely has time. It is his 
business to teach the people lessons of real utility, either as 
regards doctrine or practice.t 

2. One must be careful as to employing texts "marked 
by grandeur of expression. They seem to promise a great 
effort."J And if great expectations are excited at the out- 
set, it is of course very difficult to meet them. Yet no one 
would say as a rule that such texts must be (woided. Many 
of the noblest and most impressive passages of Scripture rise 
into a natural grandeur of expression, and there would be 
S€a*ious loss in habitually avoiding these. Sometimes we may 
find a simpler text that presents the same subject, and the 
grander passage can be introduced somewhere in the course 
of the sermon. But when such a passage is made the text, 
we may preve^it any undesirable effect by announcing it with 
unaffected modesty, and by the general tone of the introduc- 
tion; perhaps even saying — not as an apology but a quiet 
remark — something to the effect that of course none of us 

* For numerous striking^ specimens, not of texts but of thoughts thus 
recorded, see Life of John Foster, YoL I., p. 108-156. Compare Alexander, 
Thoughts on Preaching, p. 513. 
f See further in what is said on Expository Preaching, Part II, chapter iii. 

:|: Ripley. 



THE %^T — S^ILBOTIOK. 23 

can rise to the hei^t of this great passage, and yet it may 
do us good to meditate upon its teachings. We must care- 
fullj a.v6id whatever course would savour of display, hut must 
not fastidiously shrink from treating any passage which we 
mSfy hope to ii;iake useful. 

3. It is scarcely ever proper to choose a text that will 
seem odd. When humour is employed in preaching it ought 
to be an incidental thing, and manifestly unstudied. It is 
so natun^l for some men to indulge in quaint, and even in 
yerj odd sayings, they so promptly and easily fall back into 
their prevailing seriousness, that the humorous remarks are 
unobjectionable, and sometimes, through the well-known rela- 
tion between humour and pathos, they heighten the eflFect. 
Bi,it 2^ effort to be amusing, anything odd that appears to 
have been calculated, is felt to be incompatible with a genuine 
seriousness and solemnity. Now the text has of course been 
deliberately * chosen, and an odd text must therefore have a 
bad effect. Yet there are sayings of Scripture that seem 
quaint, which an earnest man may employ to good purpose. 
For example, WiUiam Jay has a good sermon upon Hos. vii. 8, 
^^Ephraim is Sk cake not turned." 

Some instances of ludicrous texts and subjects may be 
given, as a matter of curious interest. It is told in Virginia 
tbat a preacher of a belligerent and unpopular denomination 
weii^t to a village where there were but two churches. The 
Presbyterian minister, Mr. Sparrow, and the Baptist, Mr. Fox, 
both refused him the use of their houses of worship. So he 
preached in a school-room, and took as his text, ''The foxes 
have hole?, and the bird^ of the air have nests, but the Son 
of man hath not where to lay his head." A good hit, no 
doubt, but rendering it near!(y impossible that the sermon 
should make any true religious impression. An ignorant 
Methodist preacher in the same State chose as his text, 
''Enoch walked with God, and he was not," and occupied 
himself with various things that Enoch was not — he was not 
a drunkard, he was not a liar, he was not a profane swearer, 
etc. The words "Let him that is on the house top not 
come down," quoted in the form, "Top-not, come down," 
and used for a sermon against a certain style of head dress 
called a "top-knot," would seem to be the very climax of 
absurdity; and yet many a passage has been mutilated and 
applied in a way fully as unwarrantable, though less ridicu- 
lous. Some one has fairly satirized a cer^am &Ij\q oi VvaX^xv^ 



\ 



24 THE TEXT — SELECTION. 

sermons by proposing such subjects as the following : Adam 
the grandfather of us all, and the duties of grandparents. 
Noah the first Sea-captain. Nebuchadnezzar the first pure 
Vegetarian. Felix the free-lover, etc. William Jay, who 
was sometimes inclined to carry this sort of thing quite too 
far, once announced his intention to preach on the words, 
"Take it by the tail," said to Moses with reference to the 
serpent. (Exod. iv. 4.) Not even his ingenuity and devoted- 
ness could have saved this from being intolerable. Coquerel* 
tells of a Reformed pastor at Amsterdam a century ago, who 
was famous for boldness and humour, and being once at the 
Hague, was greatly importuned by the wits about the court 
of the Stadtholder to preach the next Sunday. He finally 
consented, on condition that they should aU attend and take 
no offence ; and giving as his text the account of Philip and 
the ofl&cer of Queen Candace, he announced the following 
plan of discourse : " I find in this narrative four subjects of 
astonishment which go on increasing the one upon the other. 
1. A courtier who reads the Scriptures, which is already 
surprising. 2. A courtier who acknowledges his ignorance, 
which is more surprising still. 3. A courtier who asks his 
inferior to instruct him, which must cause a redoubled sur- 
prise. 4. And that this surprise may reach its climax, a 
courtier who is converted." Admirable wit, but hardly suit- 
able as a sermon. Sheddt tells of a preacher in the reign 
of Charles II, who selected " Seek first the kingdom of Gk)d," 
and urged that as it is not the parliament of God, but the 
kingdom, therefore kingly government is most in accordance 
with the divine wilL Also of a sermon to a newly-married 
couple on Psa. Ixxii. 7, " And abundance of peace so long as 
the moon endureth." It is said that the celebrated Wetstein, 
when under trial at Basel, had among his opponents a copper- 
smith, and that he preached on 2 Tim. iv. 4, "Alexander, 
the copper-smith, did me much evil : the Lord reward him 
according to his works. "J Such stories are more numerous 
than useful, and there is only added the mention of a fashion 
of cdphahetical preaching, which has been sometimes practised. 
Thus the word "grace" is made the text, and the letters of 
the word give the divisions — ^great grace, rich grace, almighty, 
covenant, eternal grace. A venerable minister states that he 

• Obs. sur la Pr^. p. 96. f Horn. p. 170. 

;J: Hagenbach, Horn. s. 105. 



THE TEXT — SELECTION. 25 

once heard an ignorant Baptist preacher treat in this fashion 
the word " salvation " — 8 is safe salvation ; a, almighty sal- 
vation ; and so with long, vast, almighty (as before), and at 
length t, 'tamal salvation ; i, infinite salvation ; " and the 
last two letters, to be brief, we will take together — o n, 
'onorable salvation." 

In respect to all such cases, we must judge others leniently, 
and ourselves strictly. The allowableness of oddity depends 
greatly upon diflferenoes of taste and circumstances. But the 
man who is tempted, in our time and country, to deal in 
deliberate oddities in order to t^rike, would do well to recall 
Cowper's words, 

"'Tis pitiful 
To court a grin when you should woo a soul." 

One sees the attention that is excited, and is apt to hear of any 
good done, by sermons disfigured by oddity or other impro- 
prieties; but he seldom hears of the persons, perhaps many 
persons, who were repelled, shocked, driven away from him, 
and in some cases driven away from the gospel. 

4. Do not avoid a text because it is familiar. "What has 
made some texts familiar to all, but the fact that they are so 
manifestly good texts ? It is a very mistaken desire for novelty 
which leads a man to shrink from such rich and fruitful 
passages as " God so loved the world," etc. ; " This is a faithful 
saying," etc., which Luther used to call " little Bibles," as if 
including in their narrow compass the whole Bible.* He who 
will turn away from the tradition of the pulpit as to the mean- 
ing and application of such passages, and make personal and 
earnest study of them, will often find much that is new to him 
and his hearers, as the skilful gold-hunter in California will 
sometimes follow in the very track of many searchers, and gain 
there his richest harvest. Besides, what we need is not abso- 
lute novelty, but simply freshness. If we can manage, by 
prayerful reflection, to obtain such views and provide such 
illustrations of a familiar text as will give it a fresh interest to 
ourselves and the hearers, then all the riches of the passage 
are made available for good. Alexandert calls attention to the 
fact that of the great sculptors and painters many took the 
same themes ; and so with the Greek tragedians. He remarks : 
" Some, anxious to avoid hackneyed topics, omit the greatest ; 

♦ See Hood, Lamps, Pitchers, Ac, p. 591. 
t Thoi^ghts on Preaching, p. 10-12. 



26 TfflS TBXT — SBBLEOTIOIJ. 

just as if we should describe Switzerland and omit the A}ps/^ 
In point of fact, the great preachers, all the best preachers, do 
preach ^luch upon the great texts and the great subjects. 
How is a feebler man ever to develop his own strength, unless 
he grapples with great themes 1 One may show skill, and add 
somewhat to the harvest, by cultivating out-of-the-way comers 
and unpromising ledges of rock ; but the bulk of the crop, by 
which the family are fed, must come from the broad, open 
field. 

6. Do not habitually neglect any portion of Scripture. 
Some neglect the Old Testament, thus losing all its rich un- 
folding of God's character and the methods of his Providence, 
all its unnumbered illustrations of human life and duty, and 
its many types and predictions of the coming Saviour. Others 
preach on the Old Testament almost exclusively. These are 
either men who take no delight in the " doctrines of grace," in 
the spirituality of the Grospel ; or men devoted to fanciful 
allegorizing, who do not enjoy the straightforward teaching of 
Christ and his apostles, so much as their own wild " spiritualiz- 
ing " of everything in the Old Testament history, prophecies 
and proverbs.* 

Let us not neglect either of these great divisions of God's 
own Word. And so as to particular books. In the course of a 
good many years a preacher ought to have taken some texts 
from every portion of Scripture, though he will of course 
choose most frequently from those books to which attention is 
directed by his peculiar mental constitution and tastes, or 
by their comparative richness in evangelical and practical 
matter. 

6. Do not take spurious passages. A favourite text with 
many is Acts ix. 6, *' Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? " 
This is unquestionably spurious, and these words should never 
be quoted as Scripture ; yet essentially the same thought is 
expressed in Acts xxii. 10, "What shall I do. Lord?" as 
uttered on the occasion of Paul's conversion. The famous 
passage in 1 John v. 7, " There are three that bear record in 
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost : and these 
three are one," is also spurious beyond question. The passage 
in Acts viii. 37, " And Philip said : If thou believest with 
a4 thy heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said, I 
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God," has the evidence 

* Oomp. Hagenbach, 8. 102. 



TBJ^ T£XT — 8SLE0TI0K. 27 

sp overwhaliaing]^ against Hs gemiineness that it ought not to 
he used aisi a tex^."*^ 

7. The sayii^gs of uninspired men, recorded in Scripture, 
oug^t not to he i:^se4 as texts unless we know from other teach- 
ings of Scripture that they are true, or uidess we propose to 
find instir^Q^ion i^ the lact that those men made the state- 
mentci giyexu Many such sayings found in th3 Bible are in 
theoG^ehres utterly untrue, inspiration being responsible only 
for tl^ fftct that tl^ey were actually spoken. No one would 
think of trec^ting as true the vaunting speech of Rabshakeh 
(2 ^ings, xviiL) The question of the scribes (Mark ii. 7,) 
"Who oaf^ fqrgiye sins but God onlyl" we know to be a 
j^st qu^tion, a.nd as such we might make; it a text. In John 
vii ^% "l^eyer man spake like this man," we likewise 
r^<sog^^^ze a truth, and at the saipae time find Eiig^ificance in the 
fact th^t the officer sent- to apprehend Christ were thus im- 
I^resse^. The ty^U known words of Gamaliel (Acts v. 38, 39) 
are very instructive as. his saying under the circums^i^c^s, but 
the principle laid down is not true without qualification. In 
the book of Job, many of the things said by those friends are 
quite erroneous, and a few of Job's own utterances are tinged 
with error, as is shown in the latter part of the book. These 
ought not to be treated as unqusdified truth, while as a pari of 
the discussion they are highly interesting and instructive. So 
with some particular sayings in Ecclesiastes, which are not the 
present afl&rmations of the inspired writer, but only a record of 
things which he had said in some former wrong mood, and 
which the argument of the whole book serves to correct. Yet 
texts from both these books are sometimes preached upon, 
which, regarded in themselves, present erroneous and morbid 
views of life. Let all sayings of uninspired men be scrutinized, 
in the light of their connection and " of Scripture in general, 
before they are used as texts, t 

* There is no more occasion for uneasiness at the fact that errors are found 
in the common text of Soripture, than in the current translationt. Men who 
are well aware of the latter fact, and not disturbed by it, are sometimes 
shocked at the former, because it is new to them. But neither in text nor 
in translation do our common Bibles present any such errors or uncertainties 
as would alter or modify any doctrine of Scripture. Still, that we ought not 
to employ as Scripture what is known to be spurious, is a proposition which 
would seem to need no proof. 

t See some examples in Yinet, Horn. p. lOd. 



28 THE TEXT — SELECTION. 

8. In the course of pastoral labour, several considerations 
should be borne in mind when selecting texts. One is, the 
present condition of the congregation. A second, the character 
of the texts recently discussed. We have to guard against 
monotony, in the subjects chosen, as well as in the mode of 
treating them, and to seek after such a relation between the 
successive sermons as will cause them to help each other's 
effect. It is sometimes well to look forward and mark out a 
series of sermons in advance ; but it is always well to glance 
backward, at each new step, and keep in suitable relation to 
what has preceded. For this purpose, as well as on other 
accounts, a preacher should from the outset keep a list of ser- 
mons preached, including date, place, and text. A third and 
very important consideration is, to select that in which we can 
at the time take interest, as otherwise we shall not deeply 
interest others. These three considerations will sometimes 
more or less conflict; we must endeavour to maintain the 
balance among them as judiciously as possible. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE TEXT— INTERPRETATION. 

1. Obligation to Interpret Carefully and Strictly. 2. 
Chief Sources of Error in the Interpretation of a 
Text. 3. Examples op Texts which are often Mis- 
applied. 4. Brief Rules for Interpreting. 

1. To interpret and apply his text in accordance with its 
real meaning, is one of the preacher's most sacred duties. 
He stands before the people for the very purpose of teaching 
and exhorting them out of the Word of God. He announces 
a particular passage of God's Word as his text with the dis- 
tinctly implied imderstanding that from this his sermon will 
be drawn — if not always its various thoughts, yet certainly 
its general subject. If he is not willing to be bound by this 
understanding, he ought to reject the practice which commits 
him to it, and preach without any text. But using a text, 
and imdertaking to develop and apply its teachings, we are 
solemnly bound to represent the text as meaning precisely 
what it does mean. 

This would seem to be a truism. But it is often and 
grievously violated. Not only is there much contented igno- 
rance as to interpretation, and much careless neglect on the 
part of persons well able to interpret correctly, and much 
wild spiritualizing of plain words, but, upon the wretched 
principle of " accommodation," Scripture sentences or phrases 
are employed as signifying what it is well known, and perhaps 
even declared at the time, that the sacred writer did not 
mean to say and has not at all said. '' The original meaning 
of these words, as used by the inspired writer, is — so and so ; 
but I propose on the present occasion to employ them in the 
following sense." That is to say — ^honoured brother, see 
what you are doing — ^you stand up to teach men from a 
passage of God's blessed word, and coolly declare that you 
propose to make the passage mean what it does not mean. 
"But the words might have that sense." They might, but 
as a part of the Bible, as a text of Soriptiixe, ^\i<^^ do 'oaI. 



30 THE TEXT — INTBBPRBTATION. 

If we take the passage in a sense entirely foreign to what 
the sacred writer designed, as indicated by his connection, 
then, as we use it, the phrase is no longer a passage of 
Scripture at alL It is merely wordt of Scripture, used with- 
out authority to coAvey a different meaning ; just as truly 
as if we had picked out words from a concordance, and framed 
them into a ienlence. " Bat I use the J)^dd^ merely as a 
motto." Well, if a preacher has the right to take no text 
but bhly a mbttb — ^whibh is qtifeslioitoble — ^he certaiiily has 
not the Hght io make a Scriptural ihotto signify what he 
knowfe it ddeS not signify; " Biit thfe knguajge of Scripture 
is so rich, its pregnant s&^ng^ often ineaii so thUbh, that 
I think perhaps this expression may convey, among other 
thingis, tiiB teeilBe ^hi6h I Jpiiopose;" If it rfeisdly dofeSj there 
is lio olbjection irhsA^i^ to tisihg it so. B&t a tnere vagUB 
" p6A'ap6 ^' lis A Blbnder and tottering exoUse for a preachfek*, 
Who i6 looked jvp to by the pietopte ^ ail ttuthosrity in this 
ihatler, Vho ii^ stip|)obed to haVe studied hii9 te^ and to kmw 
its ine^tiiiig, tod Whosis s)^t^ments Will) f6t that I'eaBoti, be 
aocetyti^ \!ff toiBsaj wiihtcmt qiiestibn. Siich ft hian is Verily 
guil^ bbtbi'e Gbd if his dobs not h(Mibsldy stHte to nnderstand 
tnat Which he idteirj^rets, aiid giVe fofth ib reiol tn^BbUmg 
and ho bther. 

Now Bupposiilg itt the ^r^ftchar fcih i^iriafest dissite to inter- 
pret hife te^ correiBtly, hfe MH ddt iilWays find it an e^ tdsk. 
Apart from the loose notions, bad exampfefe, and previous 
wi^oujg J^i-abtice, Which dfteh bebloiid the mitid tWth refenence 
to inte^fetation, it has s6nie liitrinMb and seriotife difl&culties 
whibh can be over6ome only by thbughtful bflfbrt. While, 
therefore, the whole great subject of Biblical Hermeneutics or 
tnteirpi'etation does not belong to a treatise on Homiletics, 
it seems proper and necessary to give some account of the 
errors to be avoided, and the methods to be adopted, by a 
preacher in interpreting his telt. 

2. Chief Sotiilotes op Error in thibs IntjjrIpretation of 

A Text. 

* 

1. Erironeous intferprbtdtions often ari^e from misunder- 
standmgi the phraseology of the ikct itsdf. Language can never 
do more than appt'olimatb to perfect prebisioh of expression, 
with freedom from the possibility bf being misubderstood ; aiid 
an eaisy, bbllbqUial Style is especidly aj)t to involve a number 



Mffl T»X1!^-^mTfiRraMATI0ir. 31 

of ellipses, broken coustructibnB, words of various and not 
well-defihed meaning, and other causes of ambiguity. If, then^ 
a revelation was to be given in human language, and to be 
expressed for the most part in that familiar style which would 
make it '^coine home to men's business and bosoms,'^ would 
make it a book for men and women, and bo3rs and girls, for 
cultivated and uncultivated people, it must be an inevitable 
condition of such a revelation that questions might often arise 
as to the exact meaning of its details. The general drift of a 
narrative, ai^itnent, or exhortation may be obvious enough, 
and its practical impression upon a docile and susceptible mind 
may be very distinct, and yet those who come to criticise the 
details, especially If they come with prepossessions and pre- 
judices, may find numerous egressions cc^able of being 
variously iiiterpreted, and perhaps some whose exact sense is 
reidly doubtful. Far better this, it is evident, than the idea of 
a revelation presented in a uniformly didacths and .rigorously 
sciehtifib 8tyle> which must at last fail of absolute precision, 
wh^ it wx)Uld be thoroughly devoid of interest for the or- 
dinary human mind. Let ns, theiiofore, dieeirfiilfy aioeept the 
necessity of exeroking gtMt care wbsn we interpret the 
ktnguage of Scriptnre, as we are compiled to do with all other 
language. 

Moreover, thete are in our task some peculiar conditions. 
Mahy ^ tiss have to interpret a translation. Now the best 
translations are necessarily imperfect. It is rarely, if ev^, the 
caste that two wtords in different languages will contain precisely 
the sikttve bulk of meanii^ in the same form, aind carry with 
theni the same atmosphere of assb^iation and suggestion. 
Idiomatic differences of construction, too, will sometimes in- 
trodttcto amt^guity where the original was precise, or make too 
definite what in the original was only general. Especially 
frequent are the cases in which our language fails to indicate 
the emi^'asis, which in the Hebrew or thie Greek tnay be 
distinctly marked. And then the translation which we 
employ, though its general style is so admirable, and though 
no other popular translation has ever equalled it in correctnesSj 
is disfigured by not a few errors, and contains various words 
and ph^es which have become obsolete, or have changed their 
meaning. "fet with all this, there is nothing to discourage or 
to excuse the preacher from earnest efforts to ascertain the true 
meaning of his text. By working himself, through extensive, 
constant and devout reading of the Bible, into thorough 



32 THE TBXT-^INTBRPRBTATION. 

sympathy with its characteristic modes of thought and forms 
of expression, by throwing himself upon the current of the 
general connection of his text, so as to be borne over any 
particular difficulties, by comparing it with various other 
passages in which the same or a kindred subject is 
treated, and by consulting works of learned and really ju- 
dicious expositors, the intelligent preacher who uses only our 
English Version will have great success in the interpretation of 
Scripture. Witness the sermons and the writings of hosts of 
Baptist ministers, and also of Methodists and others. Witness 
Andrew Fuller, who had practically no knowledge of the 
original languages, and yet whose interpretations of Scripture 
are clear and safe in a degree very rarely surpassed.* 

K on the other hand one uses the original languages in his 
interpretations, there is the danger of being misled by super- 
ficial knowledge or hasty examination. To ascertain the eocact 
meaning of words and phrases in those languages, a thorough 
acquaintance with them is obviously necessary. It is often 
fiaid that one needs a knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek in 
order that he may imderstand the difficult passages ; it would 
be more nearly correct, though paradoxical, to say that such 
knowledge will help him to understand the easy passages, the 
great mass of Scripture. As to the difficult places, an 
acquaintance with the original language will enable us to 
judge, with greater confidence and correctness, among the 
various interpretations, though it be not likely that we shall 
strike out anything new, without a profounder knowledge than 
is often attained. Such an acquaintance will also sometimes 
save us from the disheartening notion that scholarship would 
make it all plain, in cases which have at last to be decided by 
reference to the connection and the general teachings of 
Scripture. But as to the great bulk of Scripture, even the 
slightest knowledge of the originals is of service, in helping us 
to enter into inteUectual sympathy with the sacred writers. 

For the language of the Bible is pervaded by a Hebraistic 
spirit, marked by Oriental modes of conception, which are in 
many respects quite different from those of our own people. 

* Dr. Chaliners, in urging his favourite counsel that students and ministers 
who know the original ought also to make regular and extended study of the 
English Version, somewhere refers to Andrew Fuller as a striking example of 
the extent to which a man may carry his knowledge of Scripture by the use 
of the English Version alone. Some brief and good suggestions on exposition 
are given by Fuller, Works (ed. Am. Bapt. Pub. S. c.,) Vol. I., p. 712. 



THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. .. 33 

This is most clearly seen in the Old Testament, though the 
New Testament Greek shows more or less of the same tinge. 
To read but a few pages of Hebrew, even though one should 
never become capable of exact ^exegesis, cannot fail to aid a 
susceptible mind in the sympathetic comprehension of Scrip- 
ture ways of thinking and peculiarities of expression ; and of 
course a thorough study of the Hebrew and Greek will carry 
this benefit st^ further. The effect is analogous to that of 
travelling in Palestine. Still, if a man cannot study these 
languages, he must earnestly strive to catch the tone of Scrip- 
ture, and even the peculiar tone of its several writers. All 
persons among us have unconsciously attained something of 
this, from general reading of the Bible, and from the extent to 
which Scriptural modes of thought and expression pervade our 
preaching and our religious literature. But strenuous and 
sustained effort in this direction is demanded of those who 
would be good interpreters of Scripture. 

" In the language of the Bible there is a certain number of 
words which we may call capital, the meaning of which exactly 
seized, become the key of the Bible. If we confine ourselves 
purely and simply to the usual signification of the terms which 
the translator uses in rendering such words into our language, 
we are in great danger of committing serious errors. Thus, as 
to the words Jleshf soul, heart, fecur, faith, underatamding, foolish, 
light, darkness, jitst, righteousness, salvation, grace, good man, 
wicked. The translator has translated for you the words ; you 
must translate the ideas for yourself."* The technical sense in 
Scripture of such leading terms, we partly learn jfrom general 
observation in reading, but may more precisely ascertain 
through a comparison, by help of the Concordance, of many 
passages in which they are employed. 

Further, it is to be observed that the language of Scripture 
is, as a general thing, not philosophical but popular, not 
scientific but poetic, not so much an analytical language, 
fond of sharp discriminations and exact statements, as a 
synthetic£tl language, abounding in concrete terms, the repre- 
sentatives not of abstractions but of facts of actu£tl existence 
and experience, and which in their meaning gradually shade 
into each other, without any definite line of distinction. This 
character leads to some peculiar forms of expression, which 
abound in the Bible, and are importamt for the interpretation 
of many texts. 

* Vinet, Horn. p. 111. 
D 



34 THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

"A poetic language, a language I mean of a poetic people, 
delights alternately to diminish and augment, that the imagi> 
nation of the hearer or reader may be exercised in adding or 
retrenching." E. g. " Whosoever is bom of God, doth not 
commit sin." (1 John iii. 9.) " That which is highly esteemed 
among men is an abomination in the sight of God" (Luke 
xvi. 15.) ''If mj man come to me and hate not his father 
and mother, . . he cannot be my disciple." (Luke xiv. 26.) 
And, as an example of a diminished expression, " The imfruit- 
ful works of darkness." (Eph. v. 11.) 

" It delights by turns to make absolute that which is relar 
tive, and relative that which is absolute." Examples of the 
former : '' When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not 
thy firiends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy 
rich neighbours^ . . but call the poor, the maimed," etc 
(Luke xiv. 12). This is stated as an absolute prohibition of 
inviting friends, kindred, rich neighbours, and a command to 
invite exclusively the other class. We know very well that 
our Lord did not mean to be thus understood, nor does any 
one ever thus interpret. NcLturally, and as a matter of couxse, 
men will invite kindred, the rich, etc., and for this, which is 
done because of miere natural affection or social reciprocity) 
they will get no religious reward. But it is so much more 
ibiportani^ on religious grounds and in hope of a Divine 
reward, to invite the poor and sufiBsring, that our Lord speaks 
as if, compared with this, the former must not be don^ at 
all. In Prov. viii. 10, we have first the absolute form of 
statement, and then in the parallel clause the relative form, 
'' Receive niy instruction, and not silver ; and knowledge rathbr 
than choice gold.'* Here the former clause was not meant to 
be understood as really making an absolute prohibition of 
receiving silver ; it is simply a highly emphatic way of urging 
the same thought that is presented in the latter clause. In 
Gen. xlv. 8, Joseph says, " So now it was not you that sent 
me hither, but God." In Jer. y'lL 22, 23, God declares, '*I 
spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them, in the 
day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concern- 
ing burtit offerings or sacrifices ; but this thing commanded 
I them, saying. Obey my voice, and I will be your Grod, and 
ye shall be my people." It was well known that God had 
spoken to their fathers very extensively concerning sacrificeis^ 
but the command to obedience is held to be so much moire 
important, that the other is pronounced nothing in the com- 



THB TBXT — ^INTBRPRBTAIION. 35 

paridon. So with Matt. ix. 13 (Hosea vi. 6), '' I desire mercy, 
and not saciifioe." All this seems obvious. But does not 
the same principle apply to 1 Peter iii. 3, ''Whose adorning 
let it not be tlmt outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and 
of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel ; but let it 
be the hidden man of the heart, . . the ornament of a 
meek and quiet spirit," etc. ) (Comp. 1 Tim. ii. 9.) The 
apostle .does not mean to be understood as really prohibiting 
idl outward adornment, any more than the other passages 
prohibit inviting kindred, receiving silver, or offering sacri- 
fices; he means to say emphatically that the most beautiM 
outward adorning, such as women so highly prize, is as 
nothing in comparison with -that imperishable adorning of 
the spirit which, in the sight of God, is of grdat price. It is 
an absolute statement, designed to be understood relatively, 
but calculated by its absolute form to be very emphatic and 
impresmre. If this view of the passage be correct, then 
thotisandB of well-meaning Christians, and more than one 
orgaaiaed body, have vainly striven to eradicate the natural 
love of ormtment, merely because they did not consider that 
ifae energetic language pf Scripture frequently puts absolute 
for rdativ^ ; and at the same time thousands of others, 
ihitmgh the same mistake, have failed to appreciate the 
uvgent and vehement exhortation to care less for outward, 
and more for inward adornment. On the other hand, the 
fbUowing is an example of relative for absolute : " This man 
went down to his house justified rather than the other.'' 
(Luke xviii. 14) We understand, as it was intended we 
i^ould, that the publican was justified, while the Pharisee, 
eontrary to all popular expectation, really was not justified. 

" It generalizes that which is particular, and particularizes 
that which is general; takes duty sometimes at its summit, 
sometimes at its base. E. g. 'Thou shalt not bear false 
witness against thy neighbour.' (Exodus xx. 16.) It some- 
times does not distinguish nicely the notions which are closely 
rioted to each other, such as wicked axid foolish. It delights 
in synonyms and parallelisms, in advancing in couples or 
pahrs of ideas. E. g. ' Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, 
ttid a light unto my path.' (Psalm cxix. 105.) It classifies 
without scientific purpose ; as, ' Create in me a clean heart, 
and rfenew a right spirit within me.' (Psalm li. 12.) The Old 
and the New Testament abound in similar examples. We 
frequently find in the prophets and apostles series of substan 



36 THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

tives or adjectives, which have been taken very improperly 
as the base of divisions in discourses/ Thus in 1 Peter iv. 18, 
' If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly 
and the sinner appear?' it is quite common to take the 
ungodly and the sinner as representing two distinct classes, 
which is not justified by the mere use of both terms, and is 
in fact forbidden by the construction of the Greek. So as to 
the several terms in 2 Peter i. 5-7, distinctions are sometimes 
very unwisely pressed. 

" Such is the language of the Bible ; and further, each of 
the epochs which are represented in it, each of the authors 
who contributed to it, has a peculiar style."* 

2. Erroneous interpretations arise from disrega/rding the 
eownection of the text. In some cases, a sentence taken apart 
from its connection would give a positively wrong sense. 
E. g. "Nevertheless, being crafty, I caught you with guile." 
(2 Cor. xii. 16.) In others, it would be hopelessly ambiguous, 
or utterly vague. In nearly all cases, a thorough understand- 
ing will require that we examine the connection. Even in 
those portions of Proverbs, where the several sentences appear 
wholly disconnected, one may sometimes derive help from 
observing what seems to be the general class of topics which 
the writer or collector has here in mind. In the Psalms, 
even Psalm cxix., there is always a general drift by which 
we may be guided. In the narratives, poetical treatises, 
discourses, epistolatory arguments, etc., which make up almost 
the entire Bible, the connection is obviously important. It 
might in fact seem needless to insist on this. No man of 
sense, in dealing with any other book, would think of inter- 
preting a single sentence here or there, in entire disregard 
of its connection. If an agriculturist or engineer, a physician 
or lawyer, should thus interpret detached sentences in the 
works which he consults for instruction and practical guidance, 
he would be voted a simpleton. 

Why in the world, then, do men of sense so often neglect, 
or even knowingly violate, the connection of a Scripture text ? 
Partly from the long-continued and wide-spread practice of 
allegorizing — to be discussed below — which is often most easily 
managed by cutting loose from the context, and which has 

* These extracts, with some of the passages of Scripture quoted in illus- 
tration, are from Vinet, Hom. p. 113-14. The sentences extracted are 
sometimes slightly altered. 



THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 37 

encouraged men to think that the language of Scripture is so 
very diflferent from all other language, as to be independent of 
the principles which ordinarily govern interpretation. It is a 
mournful fact that Universalists, Romanists, Mormons, can find 
an apparent support for their heresies in Scripture, without 
interpreting more loosely, without doing greater violence to the 
meaning and connection of the sacred text than is sometimes 
done by orthodox, devout and even intelligent men. A second 
cause is the exclusive use of short texts. Men of ordinary 
powers cannot always find short passages which, interpreted in 
the light of the connection, will furnish them material enough 
for a sermon ; and they are tempted to make some additional 
application of the words which the connection does not admit, 
or even to break a sentence away from its connection, and give 
it an entirely new application, which would make it a striking 
text.* Under such pressure, and encouraged by the example 
of good and honoured brethren, they interpret as suits them ; 
and the habit thus formed is perhaps confirmed by indolence, 
seeing that it is often troublesome to study the context. 

And there is yet another cause. Some six centuries ago 
there began the present division of the Bible into chapters, 
and some three centuries ago the subdivision into verses. Both 
were made for convenience in reference, just as somewhat 
similar divisions and subdivisions have from time to time been 
made in the text of many Greek and Latin authors. In the 
classics, however, only the larger divisions, the chapters, have 
been printed as separate, the subdivisions being put together 
according to the sense, and merely noted on the margin or 
within the text. Unfortunately, a different course has been 
pursued in printing the Bible ; beginning with the Genevan 
Version, it has become common to print each verse as a sepa- 
rate paragraph. This mode of printing was probably introduced 
partly because of the peculiar structure of the Psalms, in 
which the successive sentences are frequently distinct ; it was 
also calculated to save trouble in finding verses, and the 
practice at one time existed of printing " references " not as 
we do in the margin, but at the end of each verse. Whatever 
causes established the custon, it has long been a custom, and 
some persons even defend it because it makes the Bible look 
different jfrom other books. Now the division into verses, as 
weU as that into chapters, was very carelessly made, and often 
sadly disregards the connection and obscures the sense. And 

• See on Expository Preaching, Part II. chap. iii. 



■■i 



38 THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

even if the verses were better divided, the separate printing of 
brief sentences and parts of sentences mast of necessity make 
it more difficult to keep up the general connection, particularly 
as we are accustomed, in all other books, to a division into 
paragraphs, which mark the connection clearly. The result 
has been to lead both preachers and hearers to think of every 
chapter and every verse as a sort of separate whole. It is 
curious to observe how rarely we hear read in public the latter 
part of one chapter and the earlier part of the next, though the 
slighest care for the real connection oi narrative or argument 
would often require this ; and how awkward it would seem to 
take the last words of one verse and the first words oi another 
as a text. To dispel this illusion, which makes every verse a 
paragraph, and every chapter almost a distinct book, is a 
matter of serious importance for all persons, ministers or 
others, who wish really to understand the Bible. Much ad- 
vantage may be derived from habitually reading a Paragraph 
Bible.* No other mode of printing is now tolerated in the 
the Greek, and in Hebrew the paragraphs marked by the early 
Jewish scholars have always been retained. 

It would seem plain from what has been said, that the 
preacher who wishes to deal fairly with his own mind and with 
Grod's Word, must determine that he will never interpret a text 
without careful regard to its connection. t The considerations 
presented may explain how it is that many devout and some- 
times able brethren have been led to do otherwise, and censure 
of their course is not proposed ; but when a man's attention 
has been distinctly called to the matter, he is solemnly bound 
to give heed to it in practice. How shall one reconcile it with 
the responsibility of his position, to stand before men in God's 
name, and say that a passage of the blessed Bible means any- 
thing else than what he is satisfied, from the phraseology and 
the connection, that it really does mean 1 

In one direction, however, the idea of strict interpretation 
may be carried too far. It is certainly best, as a general rule, 
to confine our sermon to the precise subject, and aspect of a 

* Bagster has published Paragraph Bibles, in various styles. The Aimo- 
t^kted Paragraph Bible of the London Religious Tract Sociey is well arranged, 
and has also very valuable notes. The American Baptist Publication Society 
has a Bible, and a New Testament, printed in paragraphs, and sufficiently 
cheap. The Revised New Testament and other publications of the American 
!Bible Union have the advantage of being printed in the same way. 

t See below, § 4. Rule 2. 



THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 39 

subject, which the text iu its connection sets forth. * But we 
are not necessarily restricted to this. Some principle may be 
presented by the text in one application, and we may with 
perfect propriety make other applications of it. That is not 
violating the connection, for the text really teaches the princi- 
ple, and the new applications are avowedly made by ourselves, 
guided by the general teachings of Scripture. The apostle 
Paul quite frequently states a broad principle as bearing on 
some particular question of truth or duty. E. g. Gal, vi. 7, 
" Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap,'' is said 
with special reference to the duty of contributing to the 
support of religious teachers, but it is given as a general truth , 
and admits of many apphcations. In Eom. xiv. 12, the 
special thought is that " every one of us will give account of 
himself, " and so we must not judge one another ; but there is 
of course involved in this the general fact that every one will 
give account, and thus the passage really presents the subject 
ot accountability. Many similar examples might be found 
tl^oughout the Bible. In other cases, we may start from the 
precise point given by the text and advance to related truths. 
We thus extend the application of the text, but in a direction 
not foreign but akin to the sacred writer's specific design. 
Thiui in Amos iv. 12, "Prepare to meet thy God," the prophet 
gives warning of impending temporal judgments upon the 
nation, and calls upon them to prepare to meet God in these. 
Now it is lawful for us, after pointing out this, to show that if 
we continue in sin we must all meet God, not only in temporal 
judgments but in the vengeance of the great day, and thus 
call on our hearers to prepare for eternity. This is not dis- 
regarding the connection, not misinterpreting the text, it is 
sunply carrying the idea farther in the same direction ; carry- 
ing it farther on our own responsibility, with no assertion or 
implication that the sacred writer referred to all the topics 
which our discourse includes. It thus appears that one may 
preach from a text on any matter which it presents to the 
mind, whether directly or indirectly, by statement, presupposi- 
tion or inference, provided that in some way it really does mean 
what is claimed ; and where this is something only indirectly 
presented, it will be best to point out, in some simple way, 
that such is the case, so as not t6 encourage the people in loose 
notions on the subject of interpretation. How diflferent is 
such a course from that of a preacher who gave a Missionary 

* Comp. on Subject-sermons, Part II. chap. iii. 



40 THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

sermon from the words of the young ruler, " What lack I yet ?" 
inquiring what we lack for greater success in the missionary 
enterprise. This is an extreme case ; but thousands of 
sermons are preached in which the connection and real mean- 
ing of the text is just as completely, though not often so 
manifestly, disregarded and violated. 

The remark may be here added, that where a text in its 
connection admits of more than one meaning, we shall do well 
either to avoid it as too ambiguous for our purpose, or to 
indicate that we take the more probable sense, and confine 
attention to its lessons as thus understood. The plan of 
taking up in succession several different senses and making a 
practical application of each, cannot be approved. We must 
bring to bear upon men's minds as a part of God's Word, 
only what the text really means, as best we can ascertain it. 

3. A third source of error in the interpretation of texts is 
improper spiritualizing. 

We have no other means of representing spiritual things 
than by metaphors derived from things temporal; and our 
very conceptions of the unseen world depend upon images 
furnished by the world in which we now live. Swedenborg 
taught, in the " doctrine of correspondences " upon which he 
asserts the Scriptures to have been written, that every object 
and relation in the material sphere has something correspond- 
ing to it in the spiritual sphere. As a universal fact, we 
may well ask for some better proof of this than the Sweedish 
Baron's visions ; but it is going to the opposite extreme if we 
imagine that the relation between things temporal and spiritual 
is simply an affair of metaphors. The Scriptures appear to 
teach that there really is much of intimate connection and 
much of close correspondence between these two great spheres 
of existence. All the false religions present perversions and 
distortions of this conception. And the allegorical, in the 
broad sense of that term, is very widely and variously em- 
ployed in the Scriptures of truth. The numerous sacrifices 
and purifications enjoined in the law, represented the work of 
Christ and of his Spirit. The prophets frequently employed 
objects or events near at hand to picture realities belonging 
to the Messianic age. The history of Israel had a typical 
relation, on the one hand to the life of Christ, on the other 
to the fortunes of his Church ; and Zion, the capital city and 
representative of Israel, furnished a favourite prophetic image 
in depicting the future of the spiritual Israel. Individual 



THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 41 

personages of history, as Melohizedek, Moses, Joshua, David, 
Cyrus, undoubtedly bore a divinely-designed resemblanoe, in 
some respects, to the coming Messiah. The relation between 
husband and wife afforded an oft-recurring image of the rela- 
tion between God and the chosen nation, between Christ and 
his Church. Even the enmity of Sarah and Hagar pictured 
the opposition between bondage under the law and liberty 
in the gospel. 

With such a foimdation in the nature of things, and with 
so much support in the actual usage of the Bible, it is not 
strange that there has always been on the part of some men 
a tendency to spiritualize, widely and wildly, the language of 
Scripture. It is common to speak of Origen (3rd cent.) as the 
father of Christian allegorizing; but it abounds already in 
some writers of the 2nd cent., and Origen learned much of it, 
as regards the Old Testament, from Philo the Jew, a con- 
temporary of our Lord, the Alexandrian Jews having long^been 
engaged in this sort of speculation. Origen's transcendent 
ability, learning, and power of creative imagination contributed 
much to make fanciful allegorizing popular among Christians. 
Most of the great Fathers, who have ever since exerted so 
powerful an influence, are greviously infected with this evil. 
At the present day, not a few of the most learned and devout 
preachers in the Church of England and among the German 
Lutherans run wild with their imitations of Patristic allegoriz- 
ing ; while many very ignorant men, of various denominations, 
following only the methods caught from *older preachers in 
their locality, bring out the " spiritual sense " of the plainest 
narratives and precepts in a fashion wholly unwarranted and 
often painfully absurd. In the denominations not controlled 
by " the Fathers," better views of interpretation have for some 
time prevailed. Among Baptists, for instance, the influence 
of FuHer and Hall, and the wider diffusion of ministerial 
education, have wrought a gratifying change. But there is 
stiU much ignorance to overcome, and too many able and 
honoured ministers continue sometimes to sanction the old- 
fashioned spiritualizing by their potent example. It is so easy 
and pleasant, for men of fertile fancy, to break away from 
laborious study of phraseology and connection, to cease 
plodding along the rough and homely paths of earth, and 
sport, free and rejoicing, in the open heaven ; the people are 
SO charmed by ingenious novelties, so carried away with im- 
aginative flights, so delighted to find everywhere types of 



42 THE TEXT — INTERPRBTATION. 

Christ and likenesses to the spiritual life ; it is so common 
to think that whatever kindles the imagination and touches 
the heart must be good preaching, and so easy to insist that 
the doctrines of the sermon are in themselves true and Scrip- 
tural, though they be not actually taught in the text, — that 
preachers often loose sight of their fundamental and inex- 
cusable error, of saymg thai a passage of God's Word means 
what it does not mean. So independent, too, one may feel; 
so original he may think himself. Commentaries, he can 
sneer at them, all; other preachers, he has little need of 
compairing views with them. No need of anything but the 
resources of his own imagination, for such preaching is too 
often only building castles in the air. 

The tendency to error in this direction is also increased by 
the fact, that it is impossible, in respect to spiritualizing, to 
draw a line of unquestionable distinction between what is and 
what is not allowable. Whatever in the Old Testament is used 
by New Testament writers as having a spiritual sense, is of 
course beyond question. Many insist that we must stop at 
this ; that nothing whatever is to be understood allegorically, 
save by distinct New Testament authority. Theoretically, this 
appears to be too strict a rule ; for in the case of other objects 
or events precisely similar to those which are used spiritually 
in the New Testament, it would be unwise to deny that these 
also may have such a sense. But practically as to teosts, we 
can never feel safe in going beyond this rule ; anything not 
thus used in the New Testament can only be spoken of as 
possibly, or at most as probably, having an allegorical mean- 
ing ; and while possible or probable interpretations, when 
distinctly stated to be such, may be properly used as part 
of the argument or illustration of a sermon, the text, which 
is the foundation or source of the whole sermon, ought in 
the preacher's judgment really to have, beyond peradventure, 
the meaning assigned to it. It should be added, that portions 
of Scripture which cannot be interpreted as having a spiritual 
meaning, may yet be employed in various ways for teaching 
spirituaJ truth. They may embody principles, capable of an 
application to spiritual things, though such an application 
must be made by the preacher on his own responsibility, and 
received by the people on their own judgment, not as a part 
oi the teachings of Scripture. Or they may furnish illustra- 
tions of spiritual truth, just as we may derive illustration from 
everything in nature, history and common life.* 

* Comp., Vinet, p. 120, 



THE TBXT — ^INTHRPRKTATIOK. 43 

And observe : In the case of figunUive passagesy whioh 
really have a spiritual meaning, there is danger of pressing the 
%ure too far, of fancying a spiritual sense in aspects or details 
of the figure which are not really within the scope of the 
inspired writer. When our Lord says, " Take my yoke upon 
you," we have no right to hunt up all manner of details as to 
yokes and oxen, and run a fanciful parallel as to each par- 
ticular ; the general meaning is plain enough, and that is 
all. When he says, "Be ye wise as serpents," or, "I will 
make you fishers of men," and in ten thousand passages of 
Scripture, the same jwinciple holds. We must inquire what 
the sacred speaker or writer designed by the figure ; so much 
it means, but beyond that, as a part of Scripture, it means 
nothing.f Especially common are errors of this kind in the 
interpretation of our Lord's Pcvrahles. The stories which were 
told by the Great Teacher are illustrations of unrivalled beauty 
and impressiveness, but still they are illustrations. Like the 
illustrative comparisons and incidents which we employ, some 
of them are founded upon a closer, and others upon a more 
remote, resemblance or analogy ; some run parallel for a long 
distance to the subject compared with them, others barely 
touch it at a single point. When Christ's coming is said to be 
as a thief in the night, the resemblance extends only to un- 
expectedness ; as to the character and objects of the parties, 
and almost everything else that is involved, the illustration 
and the thing illustrated are utterly unlike. And when it is 
said, " The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman 
took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was 
leavened " (Matthew xiii. 33,) what sense is there in looking 
for some spiritual truth illustrated by the number three, or 
in saying that the woman represents the Church, when as 
a matter of course a woman and not a man would be in- 
troduced m a story as making bread ? In undertaking to 
interpret a parable, we must learn from the connection what 
subject our Lord used it to illustrate — must then notice what 
light the parable as a whole throws on that subject, what 
aspects of the subject it brings to our view — and finally inquire 
how far we may fairly regard the several details of the story as 
separately significant. In this last respect we must avoid 
extremes, exercise sound judgment, and constantly keep in 
mind that the parable is an illustration, and founded on some 

i* There is good instruction on this subject in Fairbaim's Hermeneutioal 
Manual, p. 157-173. 



44 THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

resemblance or analogy which is at best only partial. After 
thus studying one of the parables of Christ, we are prepared 
to preach upon it, with some prospect of bringing out its real 
meaning and legitimate applications. 

3. Examples of Texts Often Misapplied. 

There has been during the present century considerable im- 
provement in various quarters as regards strict interpretation 
in the pulpit. But to show how much laxity on the subject 
still prevails, it is proposed to mention a few examples of 
passages which we have all heard preached upon, or used by 
preachers in argument, and whose meaning is beyond question 
very different from that commonly attached to them. It is 
strange how powerful is the tradition of the pulpit ; how often 
able and thoughtful men will go all their lives taking for 
granted that an important passage has that meaning which 
in youth they heard ascribed to it, when the slighest examina- 
tion would show them that it is far otherwise. The examples 
here given are arranged in the order of the three sources of 
error as to interpretation which have been discussed in the 
foregoing section, though of course these will sometimes be 
combined in the same passage. 

1. Misunderstanding the phraseology of the text itself. 
Jeremiah iii. 4, " My father, thou art the guide of my youth." 
This is very often used in preaching to the young, and given as 
a' motto on the title page of books for the young, the idea being 
that young people should seek the guidance of our Heavenly 
Father. But this is to miss the Scripture use of the phrase, 
" guide of my youth,*' as well as to disregard the connection 
of the passage. In Proverbs ii. 17 it is plain that "guide of 
her youth " (more exactly, companion, associate of her youth) 
denotes the husband. Here in Jeremiah it is the same Hebrew 
word. The whole connection of chapters ii. and iii. shows that 
€rod through the prophet is reproaching the nation as an 
adulterous spouse, who deserves to be utterly cast off; but 
Still he invites her to return to him. " Wilt thou not from 
this time cry unto me. My father, thou art the guide of my 
youth ? " Thou art my early husband, the companion of my 
youth (comp. Jeremiah ii. 2 ; Hosea ii. 15,) and I return unto 
thee. And the term " father " is just a respectful form of 
address used by the wife to her husband, as Naaman's servants 
called him " my father " (2 Kings v. 13). Thus the common 
application of the passage is utterly erroneous. 



THB TEXT^— INTEBFBBTATION. 45 

EocL xii. 1, " Remember now thy Creator in the days of 
thy youth." Here the word "now" is often much insisted on. 
But the Hebrew is simply " and remember," etc. Our trans- 
lators, not perceiving the propriety of the connection indicated 
by "and," and finding it entirely omitted by theiir favourite 
authorities, the Vulgate and Luther, used, as a sort of com- 
promise, the particle of transition "now." The connection is 
really very fine. " Rejoice, young man, in thy youth . . 
and walk in the ways of thine heart . . and know that 
for all these things God will bring thee into judgment And 
remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy 
flesh; for childhood and youth are a breath. And remember 
thy Creator in the days of thy youth," etc. 

Prov. viii. 17, " They that seek me early shall find me." 
This does not at all mean early i^ life, as it is so constantly 
taken. Our translators, following the Vulgate, understood 
the Hebrew to signify early in the morning, there being 
a cognate word which denotes morning ; and the idea they 
intended to convey was similar to that of Jer. viii. 13, " And 
I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard 
not." Their phrase thus gives substantially the same sense 
with the view of recent scholars, who suppose that there is 
no connection with the idea of morning, and explain the word 
as signifying to seek (so the Septuagint), or to seek zealously, 
earnestly. (Comp. Proverbs i. 28 ; Psalm Ixiii. 1 ; Hosea 
V. 15.) Thus the passage has no specific, much less exclu- 
sive reference to the young. 

Psalm xxiii. 4, "Yea, though I walk through the valley of 
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil." To many it would 
seem almost sacrilege to say that this passage has no direct 
reference to the time when one is drawing near to death. 
The shadow of death, the dark place where the dead are, 
is an image frequently employed in the Old Testament to 
denote the densest darkness. Thus in Amos v. 8, God is 
described as "He that maketh the seven stars and Orion, 
and tumeth the shadow of death into the morning, and 
maketh the day dark with night." Here it means the dark- 
ness of night. In Psalm cvii. 10, "Such as sat in darkness 
and the shadow of death, bound in affliction and iron," the 
reference is to the darkness of a dungeon. In Jer. ii. 7, 
" Where is the Lord that brought us up out of the land of 
Egypt,, that led us through the wilderness . . through a 
land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land 



46 *flfi tBXt — ^INTBRPMITATION. 

that no man passed through," the darkness of a gloomy 
desert is meant. In Isaiah ix. 2, " The people that walked in 
darkness have seen a great light ; they that dwell in the land 
of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined," 
it is the darkness of destitution, ignorance, and af9iction. 
(Comp. Matt. iv. 16.) The phrase is used in various other 
passages, but always meaning dense darkness, literal or figu- 
rative, and nowhere having any reference to dying. Now in 
Psalm xxiii. 4, the image is that of a flock led through a deep, 
narrow, very dark valley, such as abound in Judea, with wild 
beasts lurking in the thickets on either hand, where the 
timid sheep would fear hurt, unless protected by the shep- 
herd; the Psalmist says that though walking in the darkest 
valley, dark as the grave,* he wiU fear no evil, etc. And 
the image will naturally suggest any season or experience of 
life in which the believer would naturally feel alarm arid 
distress, but may be safe in his Shepherd's presence and pro- 
tection.t Such are temptation, sickness, bereavement, and 
death too, not because the word d^ath is employed, but 
because the image of passing through a valley dark as t&e 
grave naturally applies to death, and not as the single appli- 
cation, but as one of many. Thus a correct understanding of 
the passage does not destroy, but widens, its significance. 

Romans xii. 1, " Pt^sent your bodies a living sacrifice;" 
Here many will begin to speak of making sacrifices, in our 
derivative sens^ of that term. Biit the ttiought of the teit 
is, that as men presented at the altar the bodies of beasts 
as sacrifices, so we must consecrate owrselveB unto Grod ; and 
this is a "reasonable service," a worship of the rational or 
spiritual nature, and not a mere bodily worship, made up of 
outward acts and offerings. 

1 Tim. ii. 8, " I will that men pray everywhere," etc. The 
Greek gives 'the men,' and has the peculiar word which 
signifies man as opposed to woman. The apostle is giving 

* The Hebrew word, Which in Psalm xxih*. 4, is rendered " shadow of 
death," is yery commonly regarded as compounded of two distinct words 
meaning "|hadow" and "death"; but this derivation is very doubtful; 
and it is held by some of our best Hebraists that it means simply "dark- 
ness." Thus the right rendering is : " Though I walk through a valley of 
darkness," i, e., a. dark valley. Ed. 

t Bunyan in the Pilgrim's Progress uses the image correctly, making 
his pilgrim pass through the valley of the shadow of death some time be- 
fore he reached the river. 



THB TBXT — IHTERPBBTATieir. 47 

<lirections for the conduct of public worship, and says that 
the men must pray in every place, lifting up holy hands, 
without wrath and disputing. These phrases embody the 
special dangers with reference to men, when engaging in 
public worship ; and in the next verse he says that women, 
for their part, must not dress too fine, but be adorned with 
good works. 

2 Tim. ii. 1&, " Study to show thyself approved unto God," 
«tc. This is often quoted, and sometimes made a text, as 
teadiing that a mini&ter must study, viz., study books, espe- 
•cially the Bible — study nature, human nature, etc. The real 
meaning of our version, as of the original, is endeavour, 
studiously endeavour to present thyself approved unto Grod. 

Hebrews vii. 25, "Wherefore he is able to save them to 
the uttercbost that come to Grod by him," is a favourite text, 
as showing that Christ is able to save the worst sinners. The 
real meaning of the phrase — as the connection also might 
show — is, save to the utmost, to the full extent of saving. 
As our High Priest does not transmit his office to successors, 
and leave to others the work he has begun, but ever lives 
to intercede for those who come to Grod through him, he is 
able to save them completely — not merely to begin their 
salvation, but to carry it forward in life and death till in 
eternity H is complete. 

2. Disregarding the connection. 

ObkesiBatts M. 81, " Touch not, taste not, handle not." 
These words hare been a thousand times blazoned on banners, 
and quoted by iniptesioned orators^ as a {M*ecept of Holy Writ 
against the use of intoxioating ddnks. The slightest atten- 
tion to the connection would show, that in the first place 
they tee not spoken with any reference to that subject^ and 
in the secobd place that they are given by the Apostle as 
an example of ascetic precepts to which we ought not to 
conform. "If ye died with Christ from the rudiments of 
the world, why, as though living in the world, are ye subject 
to ordinances, ' Handle not, taste not, touch not,' . . after 
the commandments and teachings of men ?" There are many 
passages of Scripture which enjoin temperance, but this is 
certainly not one of them. 

Heb. ti. 1, " Let us go on unto perfection," is a favourite 
text with some of those who maintain the possibility of sin- 
less perfection in this life. But the sacred writer is speaking 
of knowledge^ and urges progress toward maturity of know- 



48 THE TEXT — INTBRPRBTATION. 

ledge. The word in the preceding verse (v. 14) rendered " of 
full age " is literally " perfect ;" so that the two verses have 
a close verbal connection, besides the general connection in 
sense. 

1 Cor. ii. 9, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
have entered into the heart of man, the things which Grod 
hath prepared for them that love him," is constantly quoted 
as referring to the glory and blessedness of heaven ; but the 
connection leaves no doubt that the apostle refers to the 
profound wisdom of the plan of salvation, which no human 
mind could have perceived or imagined, but which " Grod has 
revealed unto us by his Sphit." 

Mark ix. 8, "Jesus only." To make these words a text, 
and discourse upon Jesus only as Prophet, Jesus only as 
Priest, Jesus only as King, etc., is an extreme instance of 
disregarding the context. At the close of the transfigura- 
tion, "suddenly, when they had looked round about, they 
saw no man any more, save Jesus only with themselves." 
Now it is very true that we must have Jesus only as Prophet, 
Priest, and King, but who will say that this passage teaches 
that, or even fairly suggests it? And the mere words, taken 
entirely apart from what the sacred writer meant by them, 
are no more a saying of Scripture than if " Jesus" had been 
taken from Mark, and "only" from Romans, and the two 
combined as a text. 

Isaiah i. 5-6, " The whole head is sick, and the whole heart 
faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head there 
is no soundness in it ; but wounds, and bruises, and putri- 
fying sores," etc. This is sometimes used as a text, and 
perpetually cited as a proof-text, to show the total depravity 
of man. But look at the connection. The nation of Israel 
had been stricken with the Divine jvdgmenta, till it was like 
a man beaten with the terrible Oriental scourging, from head 
to foot, and with wounds and stripes unhealed ; the country 
was desolate, the cities burned, and Jerusalem stood alone in 
a wilderness. And the prophet asks. Why should ye be 
stricken any more ? If it is done, you will revolt still more. 
Already you are beate from hesid to foot, but punishment 
makes you no better, it even seems to make you worse. 
Now this would be an excellent text for showing how often 
nations, communities, individuals, refuse to be subdued by 
afflictions, and go on in their wickedness, and there is in 
this respect a proof here of the depravity of man. But the 



THE TEXT — JNT£BPRBTATION. 49 

image, the whole head is sick, etc., is clearly not at all 
designed to set forth depravity, but severe chastisement. 

Isaiah Ixiii. 1-3, '^ Who is this that cometh from Edom, with 

bright-red garments from Bozrah 1 I that speak in 

righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in 

thine apparell I have trodden the wine-press alone.'' 

How often this is held to denote our Saviour as shedding 
his blood, and suffering alone, for our salvation. And yet what 
can be plainer than that this is a conqueror, stained with his 
enemies' blood, and fighting alone ? In the same sentence he 
says, " For I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them 
in my fury ; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my 
garments." (Comp. also ver. 4-6.) Here the speaker is the 
conqueror of Edom, and deliverer of Israel. If understood as 
applying to Messiah, it must be to him as conquering his 
people's enemies, and mighty to save in this sense. In Revela- 
tion xix. 11-16, the same imagery is employed in describing 
the Word of God ; yet there too it is not a sufferer but a 
conqueror. 

1 Kings xviii. 21, "How long halt ye between two opinions?" 
The favourite use of this text is to reproach men with indeci- 
sion and hesitation as to becoming Christians. But the Israel- 
ites were not undecided as to whether they would serve 
Jehovah or Baal, they were trying to serve both, to conform to 
the fashionable court-religion, and yet retain the religion of 
their fathers. Elijah reproaches them with this effort to do 
both. Serve Jehovah, or else Baal, not first one and then the 
other. (Comp. " Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.'') 

3. Improper spiritualizing, etc. 

Amos vi. 1, " Woe to them that are at ease in Zion." Here 
Zion is the Church, those at ease in Zion are the slothful, 
worthless members of the Church, and away we go. But the 
prophet adds, " and trust in the mountain of Samaria ; " what 
is the " spiritual sense " of that ? The chiefs of Judah trusted 
in the strong fortifications of Jerusalem, and those of the 
northern kingdom in Samaria, and so they were not alarmed by 
the prophetic warnings that enemies would come and destroy 
those capitals, as other great cities had been destroyed. Woe 
to them, if quietly confiding in Jerusalem and Samaria, they 
did not repent of their wickedness, and trust in God. The 
application of this in time of war is manifest and important. 
The principle might also be applied to any reliance upon 
human instrumentalities, or outward agencies, instead of rely- 

E 



50 THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

ing on God. The do-nothing members of a church deserve 
scourging, but this text does not touch them. 

Exodus ii. 9, " Take this child away, and nurse it for me, 
and I will give thee thy wages.'* And some able men actually 
make this a text in preaching to parents, or to Sunday School 
teachers. " God says to you, Take this child," etc. But He 
says no such thing. He simply tells us that the daughter of 
Pharaoh said this to the mother of Moses. God does not 
address these words to anybody. To find here a spiritual 
meaning, is so wholly unwarranted, so utterly arbitrary, as to 
be beyond the reach of argument. If the preacher says that 
he takes the words in the sense proposed, then they are not 
Scripture at all, — not God's saying, but his saying, — and ought 
not to be called a text, for that means Scripture. It would be 
just as appropriate to take Proverbs xxiii. 30, " Tarry long at 
the wine," as a Divine precept, or Psalm xiv. 1, " There is no 
God," as a declaration of Scripture. Whether as allegorizing 
or as " accommodation," such an application of the text is 
indefensible, and when once a man's attention has been called 
to the matter, it would be inexcusable. 

Jonah i. 6, " What meanest thou, sleeper ? " How cem a 
preacher tell us that these words refer to sinners as spiritually 
asleep ? Jonah, worn out with his hasty and anxioXis journey 
to Joppa, and now safe aboard, was soundly sleeping : and the 
ship-captain, alarmed and impatient, shouts at him, ** What are 
you about, fast asleep ? arise, call upon thy God," as all the 
rest are doing. A minister can utter these words to sleep- 
ing sinners, but he may not say that God addresses this 
question to them, or to anyone. God's Word simply narrates 
the fact that the ship-captain thus spoke ; he does not himself 
speak the words at all. As merely the minister's words, they 
would not be a part of Scripture. As to any properly alle- 
gorical meaning hidden in the words, it is a sheer figment, and 
must be proven, not recklessly assumed. 

Proverbs xviii. 24, " There is a friend that sticketh closer 
than a brother." It is commonly held that in the viii. chapter 
of Proverbs there is some allusion to Christ — which is not at 
all certain — and hence any passage in Proverbs at will is taken 
as referring to Christ. But at chapter x. there begins a mani- 
festly distinct collection, containing a number of detached 
proverbs, exceedingly instructive and useful for our practical 
guidance in life, but having not the slightest appearance of a 
mystical character. The proverbs which here immediately pre- 



THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 51 

cede and follow, and the other half of this proverb, are about 
common matters. Verse 21, power of the tongue ; verse 22, 
blessing of finding a wife ; verse 23, the poor entreats, the 
rich answers roughly; and as to the succeeding proverbs, 
verse 1 (next chapter,) the poor who walks in his integrity, 
and the perverse fool, etc. Verse 24 is rendered, " A man 
that hath friends must show himself friendly : and there is a 
friend that sticketh closer than a brother." The first half is in 
the Hebrew obscure, but most probably means *a man of 
[many] associates will ruin himself, ' by misplaced confidence, 
or * will prove bad,' cannot be faithful to thepa all. However 
that may be, the general subject is plainly the common friend- 
ships of life ; and there is no hint of allusion to Christ. And 
then it is added that there are some close and permanent 
friendships, there is a friend (literally, * lover ') that sticketh 
closer than a brother; not referring to any particular in- 
dividual, but meaning that such a thing does exist. We need 
not condemn the poet's use of this expression, 

''One there is above all others 
Well deserves the name of friend : 
His is love beyond a brother's/' etc. 

but the license of poetical adaptation is a very different thing 
from interpretation One might take this proverb as a text, 
and speak of the friendships that are close and faithful, and 
then pass by analogy, on his own responsibility, to speak of 
Christ as a friend ; but that is not saying that this passage 
refers to Christ. 

It has seemed necessary to discuss the above passages with 
some care, because the inexperienced reader might naturally be 
slow to believe that so many favourite texts have been utterly 
misunderstood, by himself and by many preachers around him. 
The particular interpretations here given may be rejected, if 
thorough examination shows them to be incorrect. What is 
particularly urged is to form the habit of carefully studying 
every text, even the most familiar and apparently obvious, to 
see if it really does mean what the preacher has hitherto 
supposed. This practice will rob him of many texts, but will 
enrich him with many others. Most of those above cansidered, 
when the common application has been set aside, are found to 
have a sense that may be made interesting and useful. And 
by careful examination many another passage will develop 
unsuspected riches. If strict interpretation of texts brought 



52 THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

unmitigated loss of material, we ought still to practice it, for 
the sake of dealing honestly with our own minds, and with 
Grod's Word ; but the habit of strict interpretation will give far 
more than it takes away. If one knows the Hebrew or the 
Greek, let him never preach upon a text without carefully 
studying it and its context in the original Otherwise, let him 
search the best translations, and good explanatory Notes, de- 
termined that he will never say a passage of God's holy and 
precious Word means so and so, without personal, honest, 
patient effort to ascertain the fact. 

4. Brief Eules for Interpreting a Text. 

Though we have discussed at length the chief sources of 
error in the interpretation of texts, and illustrated them by 
many examples, it seems best to give, positively, some account 
of the principles upon which one must proceed if he would 
interpret correctly. Grood treatises on Interpretation are 
accessible,* and it is sufficient here to give several brief 
rules. 

1. Interpret grammatically. Endeavour to ascertain the 
precise meaning of the words and phrases used in the text. 
Inquire whether any of them have a peculiar sense in Scripture, 
and whether such peculiar sense holds in this passage. If 
there are key-words in the text, or words of special importance, 
examine, by the help of a Concordance, other passages in which 
such word is employed. This is best done in the original, 
because our version will often have the same word where the 
Hebrew or Greek is different, and the same Greek or Hebrew 
word will be used in important passages where our version 
renders differently. There are admirable Concordances of the 
Hebrew and Greek, and where these are not in possession, the 
Lexicons of those languages will give many references, fre- 
quently all.t In cases of special importance, able men not 
acquainted with the original have found it useful to employ the 

* Such as Fairbaim's Hermeneutical Manual (for the New Testament), 
Davidson's Biblical Hermeneutics (particularly full on the History of Inter- 
pretation), Angus' Bible Hand-Book, Barrows' Companion to the Bible (new, 
cheap, and on this subject very good), Home's Introduction. 

■f Students of the Greek Testament will find an invaluable aid to their 
studies in C. L. W. Grimm's Lexicon GrsBco-Latinum in libros Noyi 
Testamenti. Lipsise mdccclxviii. For most of the words in the New 
Testament it serves the purpose of a Concordance. — Ed. 



THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 53 

Englishman's Greek Concordance of the N. T., and the English- 
man's Hebrew Concordance of the 0. T. In the New Testa- 
ment, the Index to Winer's Grammar wiU show whether he 
has explained any grammatical constructions in the text. The 
best translations into our own or other languages will often 
throw light on the text, or raise questions as to its meaning 
which we may find it useful to pursue. Familiar passages often 
assume great freshness, and suggest new trains of thought, 
when looked at in a new English Version,* or a translation 
into Latin, French, German, etc. Even those who can use the 
original languages find this true, because one is so apt when 
looking at the Hebrew or Greek to be really looking through it 
at the familiar English version, as if written underneath. And 
then by all means examine the best accessible Commentaries, 
not such as remark on the text, and enlarge upon its teachings, 
but such as carefully explain the exact meaning. 

This grammatical study of the text can scarcely be made too 
minute or protracted. Whately used to say, " Before writing 
your sermon, look at your text with a microscope,"t and Shedd 
justly remarks : " Every particle of care in first obtaining an 
excellent text and then getting at, and getting out, its real 
meaning and scope, goes to render the actual construction and 
composition of the sermon, more easy and successful. Labour 
at this point saves labour at all after points, j: 

2. Interpret logically. The connection of thought in which 
a text stands will of course throw light upon its meaning, and is 
usually indispensable to understanding it. This logical connec- 
tion will sometimes really be the entire book to which the text 
belongs. There are very few sentences in Hebrews, or in the 
first eleven chapters of Romans, which can be fully understood 
without having in mind the entire argument of the Epistle. 
Of course this is not so strikingly true in most of the books, 
but each of them has its own distinctive contents, connection 
and character. Few things are to be so earnestly urged upon 
the student of Scripture, as that he shall habitually study its 
books with reference to their whole connection. 1 1 Then he can 



* The Revised New Testament of the American Bible Union, though it 
has a few serious blemishes, is in the main very correct, fairly represent- 
ing the best scholarship of the day, and though it be not recommended as 
a popular version, is certainly a valuable help for the interpretation of 
texts. 

t life dnd Remains of Whately, p. 402. J Shedd, Hom. p. 176. 

II Compare on Expository Preaching, Part II, chap. 3. 



54 THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

minutely examine any particular text with a connect knowledge 
of its general position and surroundings. But in a narrower 
sense there is a context, which will embrace from a few verses 
to a few chapters, before and after the text, and of which the 
preacher should have not only a general knowledge, but should 
make special examination, when examining his text ; and we 
must resist the common tendency to imagine that this context 
begins or ends in the chapter in which the text stands. The 
extent to which such study of the context should be carried, 
will of course be very different in different cases ; but there 
are scarcely any texts with reference to which it can with pro- 
priety be entirely neglected. Wherever it is practicable, the 
context as well as the text, should by all means be read in the 
original languages, or with such other helps as are recommended 
under the foregoing rule. In a great number of cases there is 
an interesting verbal connection between the text and some 
sentence a little before or after it, which is obscured by the 
. necessary conditions of translation, or by the extreme fondness 
of our English Version for varying the translation where the 
original has the same word. It should be remarked that be- 
sides the importance of studying the logical connection in order 
to a thorough understanding of the text, an exposition of the 
context often forms a good, and sometimes a necessary, iutro- 
duction to the sermon. 

3. Interpret historically. Apart from the logical connection 
of discourse in which a text is found, there is often important 
aid to be derived from general historical knowledge. In the 
narratives, which make up the larger part of Scripture, we 
have constant need of observing facts of Geography, which 
would throw light on the text. So as to the Manners and 
Customs of the Jews, and other nations who appear in the 
sacred story. Thus much is obvious, though these helps for 
understanding texts are seldom used as dilligently as they 
should be. But there is also much to be learned by taking 
account of the opinions and state of mind of the persons 
addressed in a text. We need to remember the relations 
between the spreaker or writer and those whom he has specially 
in view. In order to this, we must not merely know the pre- 
vious relations of the parties, as in the case of Paul's Epistles, 
but must endeavour to ascertain what errors or evils existed 
among them which the inspired teacher is here aiming to cor- 
rect. This can often be gathered from the book itself. No 
trouble need ever have been felt as to the supposed contradic- 



THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 55 

tion between Paul and James with regard to justification, if 
attention had been paid to the theoretical and practical errors 
at which they are respectively aiming. In the case of our 
Lord's teachings, much may be learned from the Gospels, and 
also from the Jewish writings, and the modern works founded 
on them, concerning the wrong: notions and evil practices ex- 
isting among the Jews, and to which his sayings have often a 
very direct and specific refer snce. With respect, for example, 
to divorce, to oaths, to the Sabbath, or to the duty of paying 
tribute, his teachings will be imperfectly apprehended unless 
we understand the practical abuses and vehement controversies 
which existed among his hearers as to those subjects. On such 
points the best Commentaries give some information. Or, to 
take a different kind of example, the words "No man can come 
to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him,'* (John 
vi. 44), were not spoken as a mere general, didactic utterance, 
much less were they addressed to humble and anxious in- 
quirers, but were aimed at an utterly unspiritual rabble, who 
were following 'him not for any elevated motives, but from 
mere fanatical excitement, and in the hope of continuing to be 
fed without working for it — who called themselves his disciples, 
and talked about forcing him to set up for king. The recollec- 
tion of all this does not weaken the force of what he said, but 
it helps us to appreciate his specific aim at the moment, and 
gives us an important example as to the adaptation of doctrine. 
The more one attends to the subject the more he is likely to 
become convinced, that almost everything in the New Testa- 
ment, as well as much in the Old, is really controversial in its 
specific design, and that we must constantly inquire what errors 
or evil practices are aimed at, in order to appreciate the precise 
bearing given, in any text, to the principles it may contain, 
and the modifications of statement which may be neccessary 
(nutatis mutcmdis) in turning these principles towards new 
applications. 

4. Interpret figuratively, where there is sufficient reason. 
Wherever it is clear, from the nature of the case, from* the 
connection, or from precisely similar expressions in other pas- 
sages, that the literal sense is not designed, then we must 
understand figuratively. In the language of Scripture, as in 
all other language, the presumption is in favour of the literal 
sense. To explain away as figurative whatever seems to 
conflict with doctrinal prejudices, or with fanciful notions and 
morbid feelings as to ethics or aesthetics, or with hasty in- 



66 THB TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

ferences from imperfectly established scientific facts, is to trifle 
with that which we acknowledge as an authoritative revela- 
tion. Still, there is very much in Scripture that is clearly 
figurative ; and very much more which might so readily be 
thus understood, in the light of other Scripture usage, that 
we ought to be careful about building important theories 
upon its literal sense. This is especially true as regards 
prophecies of things yet to come, in which it is of necessity 
very difficult to distinguish beforehand between literal and 
figurative, though the fulfilment will some day make it plain. 
And remember that language may be highly figurative with- 
out being fictitious. Only ascertain what the figures of Scrip- 
ture were designed to mean, and that meaning is as certainly 
true as if stated in plain words. Thus the " fire that cannot 
be quenched" may be called a figure, if you choose ; yet it 
assuredly means that in hell there will be something as bad 
as fire, something as torturing as fire is to the earthly body — 
nay, the reality of hell, as well as of heaven, does no doubt 
greatly transcend the most impressive imagery that earthly 
things can afford.* 

5. Interpret allegorically, where that is clearly proper. We 
cannot take it for granted that any passage has an allegorical, 
or ao-called " spiritual" sense, merely because the notion suits 
our fancy, or would promote our convenience. There must 
be good reason to think so. Whatever the New Testament 
so uses, is certainly allegorical ; whatever else is precisely 
similar to matters so used in the New Testament, is very 
probably allegorical. Further than this we have surely no 
right to go. We may derive illustration, our own illustra- 
tion, of spiritual things from perhaps everything in Scripture 
history, prophecies, and proverbs, as we may from profane 
history and from nature ; but we have no more right to 
present the former as interpretation^ than the latter. Joseph 
furnishes a good illustration, in certain respects, of Christ • 
and so does the Athenian, who held up his mutilated arm 
before the people to plead for his brother. Why then, merely 
because we can draw illustration from the case of Joseph, 
shall we call him a "type" of Christ? Moreover, because 
some things in the Levitical rites, the history of Joshua, 
David, or Cyrus, the Proverbs of Solomon, or the book of 
Isaiah, have in addition to their natural sense, an allegorical 
reference to Christ, it does not follow that everything com- 

* Comp. Barrows, Companion to the Bible, chap. S5 ; Lord, Laws of 
Fi£^mtiye Language. 



THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 67 

prised therein has such a reference. As to the whole subject, 
we must avoid extremes ; and it would seem to be a good 
rule as to preaching, that while probably allegorical meanings 
may be adduced, as probable, in the progress of a discourse, 
no allegorical meaning shall be taken as a text, which does 
not result from an interpretation having clear warrant in 
Scripture usage. And two things deserve to be carefully 
borne in mind. The rage for " spiritualizing " causes many 
to overlook, or practically neglect, the exceedingly varied and 
valuable lessons as to Divine Providence and human duty 
which are afforded by passages in their natural sense. Those 
who insist on making Joseph a type of Christ, are apt never 
to hold up before their hearers his interesting and impressive 
example, of steadfast faith in God amid crushing adversity 
and sudden prosperity, of resistance to powerful temptation 
because yielding would be to " sin against God," of wise 
affection in dealing with his kindred, and the like. So in a 
thousand instances. And there is here one way in which 
compensation may be found for the loss arising from the 
abandonment of wild spiritualizing. The other consideration 
is, that many passages which can be interpreted only, so far 
as we have warrant to go, in a natural sense, may yield 
copious instruction as to properly spiritual things, in that 
the principle they contain, or the analogy they present, may 
be by us applied or extended to something spiritual — this 
being done on our own responsibility, yet sustained by mani- 
fest propriety, and by other passages. 

6. Interpret in accordance with, and not contrary to, the 
general teachings of Scripture.* These teachings are harmo- 
nious, and can be combined into a symmetrical whole. If a 
passage may have two senses, owing to the ambiguity of some 
word or construction, to the doubt whether some expression 
is figurative, etc., then we must choose one which accords 
with what the Bible in general plainly teaches, rather than 
one which would make the Bible contradict itself. It is a 
gross abuse of this principle — though one often practised — 
to force upon a passage some meaning which its words and 
constructions do not grammatically admit of, in order that 
it may give the sense required by our system. But between 

* The phrase, "accordiDg to the analogy of faith/' comifionly used in 
this connectioD, was deriyed from a misunderstanding of the Greek in 
Rom. xii. 6, and ought to be abandoned, eren if there be no technical 
phrase to substitute. 



58 THE TEXT — INTERPRETATION. 

possible grammatical meanings we are compelled to choose 
upon some principle, and certainly one important principle 
to be considered is that the teachings of Scripture must be 
consistent. Where the grammatical probabilities are pretty 
evenly balanced, a comparatively slight preference in the 
respect mentioned must turn the scale; and even a much 
less probable sense — provided it be grammatically possible, 
and sustained by some corresponding usage of language — 
may be preferred to a more probable and common sense, if 
the former would peifectly accord, and the latter would 
grossly conflict, with the acknowledged general teachings of 
Scripture. In order to apply this principle with propriety 
and safety, it is manifestly necessary that we should bring to 
bear no narrow and hasty views of Scripture teaching, but 
the results of a wide, thoughtful, and devout study of 
Biblical Theology. 

The careful examination of Scripture "references" in study- 
ing a text, is a matter of great importance. These will often 
help in the grammatical part of interpretation, by showing 
how the same words and phrases are elsewhere employed ; 
and in the historical, by showing how the same subject was 
presented under different circumstances, or what was the 
peculiar state of things in which the text was uttered. 
They may also assist us, by presenting parallel or analo- 
gous Scripture usage, in determining whether expressions of 
the text ought to be taken as figurative, or as allegorical ; 
and there are cases in which even a few other passages 
will so far set forth the general teachings of Scripture on 
the subject involved in the text, as to be of service in 
choosing among the possible meanings of its language. More- 
over, the "reference" passages will very often furnish useful 
material for the body of the sermon, sugijesting to us new 
aspects, proofs, illustrations, or applications of the subject 
treated. The young preacher should make it a fixed rule to 
consult the references to his text ; and many men and women 
have become " mighty in the Scriptures,'* by the diligent use 
of references in their daily reading."* 

* Moody's New Testament is very convenient, as it prints the reference 
passages in full on the same page. One can thus readily note those which 
strike him as impori^nt, and then hunt them up to examine their connection. 
Many persons become discouraged in the use of references by the fact that 
they have an over-copious and ill-chosen collection. The Annotated Para* 
graph Bible of the London Religious Tract Society is in this respect, as in 
others, an exceedingly good edition. 



CHAPTER III. 

SUBJECTS— CL A SSIFIED. 

1. Doctrinal Subjects. 2. Subjects op Morality. 
3. Historical Subjects. 4. Experimental Subjects. 
5. Occasional Sermons. 

Whether the subject or the text of a sermon is first chosen, 
will of course depend upon circumstances. In considering 
the condition of the congregation, or looking back over the 
sermons recently preached, one will be more likely to decide 
upon a subject, for which he must then find a text. In 
reading the Bible, or running over his growing list of texts, 
he wiU be more apt to light upon some text which interests 
him, and from which he will proceed to evolve a subject. 
Each of these plans ought to be frequently pursued; one or 
the other will be more frequently adopted, according to the 
preacher's turn of mind. It has been thought best to discuss 
the text first, because the primary conception of preaching 
is to bring forth the teachings of some passage of Scripture. 
But the points to be insisted on are these; when the subject 
is first selected, then carefully look for a text which will 
fairly, and if possible exactly, present that subject ; if the 
text comes first, then seek to work out from it some definite 
subject — not necessarily expressed in a single proposition, but 
really one subject. Even in text-sermons and expository 
sermors, as we shall see below, it is important to have unity 
of subject. The subjects treated in the pulpit may be classi- 
fied into doctrinal, moral, historical, experimental, and occa- 
sional.* Any such classification is necessarily imperfect, as 
the classes will in certain cases overlap, and difierent persons 
might classify, each according to a difierent basis. But the 
habit of referring every subject to a class will be found useful, 
as contributing to unity aud consistency of treatment, and to 
variety of topics ; and the discussion of these classes furnishes 
occasion for practical suggestions, upon matters of no little 
importance. 

* Comp. the cUussifications of Vinet, p. 75 ; Kidder, p. 268. 



60 subjects — classified. 

1. Doctrinal Subjects. 

The phrase " doctrinal sermon " is constantly used by some 
to denote sermons on points of denominational peculiarity or 
controversy. Such a limitation, implying that these are the 
only doctrines, or that we cannot discuss doctrine otherwise 
than polemically, is a really grave error, and should be care- 
• fully avoided and corrected. 

Doctrine, i. e. teaching, is the preacher's chief business. 
Truth is the life-blood of piety, without which we cannot 
maintain its vitality or support its activity. And to teach 
men truth, or to qliicken what they already know into fresh- 
ness and power, is the preacher's great means of doing good. 
The facts and truths which belong to the Scripture account 
of Sin, Providence, and Redemption, form the staple of all 
Scriptural preaching. But these truths ought not simply to 
have place, after a desultory and miscellaneous fashion, in our 
preaching. The entire body of Scripture teaching upon any 
particular subject, when collected and systematically arranged, 
has come to be called the doctrine of Scripture on that subject, 
as the doctrine of Sin, of Atonement, of Regeneration, etc. ; 
and in this sense we ought to preach much on the doctrines of 
the Bible. We all regard it as important that the preacher 
should himself have sound views of doctrine ; is it not also 
important that he should lead his congregation to have just 
views] In our restless nation and agitated times, in these 
days of somewhat bustling religious activity, there has come 
to be too little of real doctrinal preaching. " The day was 
when churches were much more concerned than we, about 
the truths conveyed, and much less about the garb of the 
truths. Doctrine, rather than speaking, was what drew the 
audience."* To a certain extent it is proper that we should 
conform to the tastes of the age, for they frequently indicate 
its real wants, and always affect its reception of truth ; but 
when those tastes are manifestly faulty, we should earnestly 
endeavour to correct them. The preacher who can make 
doctrinal truth interesting as well as intelligible to his con- 
gregation, and gradually, bring them to a good acquaintance 
with the doctrines of the Bible, is rendering them an inesti- 
mable service. 

And let us preach especially on the great doctrines. True, 

* Alexander, Thoughts on Preaching, p. 50 ; he repeatedly and earnestly 
insists on doctrinal preaching, see p. 10-12, 42, 43, 51, 234-6, 249-52. 



SUBJECTS— OLASSIFIID. 61 

they are familiar, but sermons upon them need not be common- 
place. The sunlight is as fresh every morning as when it 
shone upon our first parents in their Paradise ; young love is 
still as sweet, and parental grief as heartrending, as was theirs. 
And so the great doctrines of the Gospel, to him who has eyes 
to see and a heart to feel them, are for ever new. Our task is, 
loving these truths ourselves, to make others love them. Many 
a preacher could tell, how in the early months or years of his 
untutored ministry, he was sometimes driven, from sheer lack 
of a novel topic, to fall back upon Repentance, Regeneration, 
or the like, and make what he felt to be a poor sermon ; and 
how, long afterwards, he heard of fruit from those sermons 
rather than from others which he at the time considered much 
more striking and impressive.* Of course one should not 
make a hobby of a particular doctrine, as some men do with 
the doctrine of Election, or of Baptism ; and some others with 
Perfection, the Witness of the Spirit, etc. 

While, however, we ought to preach much upon the great 
doctrines, it is not often advisable, especially for a settled 
pastor, to embrace the whole of such a doctrine in a single 
sermon. This would contain the mere generalities of the 
subject', and be very difficult to the hearer, or, more frequently, 
quite commonplace. It is a common delusion of inexperienced 
speakers or writers, to think that they had best take a 
very broad subject, so as to be sure of finding enough to say. 
But to choose some one aspect of a great subject is usually far 
better, as there is thus much better opportunity for the speaker 
to work out something fresh, and much better prospect of 
making the hearers take a lively interest in the subject as 
a whole. Alexander, writing to a son at college, says : " The 
more special the subject, the more you will find to say on it. 
Boys think just the reverse. They write of Virtue, Honour, 
Liberty, etc. ; it would be easier to write on the pleasures of 
Virtue, the Honour of Knighthood, or the difference between 
true and false Liberty — which are more special. Take it as a 
general rule, the more you narrow the subject, the more 
thoughts you will have. And for this there is a philosophical 
reason, which I wish you to observe. In acquiring knowledge, 
the mind proceeds from pa/rticulara to genm'oU. Thus Newton 
proceeded from the falling of an apple to the general principle 
of gravity. A great many particular observations were to be 
made on animals, before a naturalist could lay down the 
* Comp. on Familiar Texts, above, cbap. i. 3. 



62 SUBJEOTB — CLASSIFIED. 

general law, that all creatures with cleft hoofs and horns, are 
graminivorous. . . . This process is called generalization. 
It is one of the last to be developed. Hence it requires vast 
knowledge and a mature mind to treat a general subject, such 
as Virtue, or Honour, and it is much better to begin with 
particular instances."* 'And this applies not merely to the 
preacher's power of treatment, but to the hearer's power of 
comprehension. When he becomes fully able to discuss large 
subjects in a single discourse, the great mass of his hearers 
will still be unable to follow him, unless the discourse be so 
long as to include copious details. And besides all this, the 
settled pastor cannot often afford to consume so much material 
in a single sermon. The exceptional cases, as a series of 
sermons on several great doctrines, the existence of special 
interest in some one doctrine, etc., will of course be treated as 
exceptions. 

The specific aspects of a great doctrine may sometimes be 
chosen according to the natural divisions of the subject itself. 
In this matter, and in all that pertains to preaching upon doc- 
trinal subjects, we must carefully bear in mind the distinction 
between a theological treatise or lecture and a popular sermon. 
The scientific analysis and elaborate logic of the one is seldom 
appropriate to the other. The parts of a subject which require 
most attention, and excite most interest, on the part of a 
systematic student, may be least suitable to preaching, and 
vice versa. The knowledge presupposed by the theological 
teacher, cannot usually be taken for granted as existing in 
a congregation. Young ministers often help to make doctrinal 
subjects unpopular, by the fact that their sermons too closely 
resemble the treatises they have been studying, or the lectures 
they have heard. We must assume a different point of view ; 
must consider which aspects of a doctrine will awaken interest 
in the popular mind, and at the same time help to give just 
views of the whole. Besides the important differences between 
the merely didactic and the oratorical mode of treatmenty there 
is here a previous difference as to the choice of subjects and 
parts of subjects to be treated. 

Or instead of selecting according to the logical divisions of 
the doctrine, we may take the aspect of it presented by some 
one text. Thus on Repentance, one might preach upon its 
nature, its results, the obligations to it, etc., hunting up a text 
for each ; or, he might begin by selecting among the texts 

* Thoughts on Preaching, p. 512. 



SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 63 

which treat of repentance. For example, Mark vi. 12, "And 
they went out and preached that men should repent," would 
suggest a general view of repentance, or an inquiry into its 
obligation. Acts v. 31, " Him hath God exalted a Prince and 
a Saviour, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins," 
presents repentance as a gift of Christ. Acts xx. 21, " Testi- 
fying . . . repentance toward God, and faith toward our 
Lord Jesus Christ," brings up the relation between repentance 
and fiiith; and Matthew iii. 11, " I indeed baptize you with 
water unto repentance," that between repentance and baptism. 
Various distinct and impressive motives to repentance are 
exhibited by Romans ii. 4, " The goodness of God leadeth thee 
to repentance;" Acts iii. 16, "Repent . . . that your sins 
may be blotted out ;" Luke xiii. 3, " Except ye repent, ye 
shall all likewise perish;" Acts xvii. 30, 31, "God 
now commandeth all men everywhere to repent, because he 
hath appointed a day in which he will judge the world in 
righteousness ;" Luke xv. 10, " There is joy in the presence of 
the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth." And 
Matthew iii. 8, " Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repent- 
ance," would lead one to speak of the appropriate effects of 
repentance.* A person well acquainted with the whole doctrine 
of Repentance could treat the view presented by any one of 
these texts as a part of the whole, so as gradually to give 
a complete knowledge of the entire subject, while each sermon 
would have the freshness and force belonging to a specific 
topic. 

Besides the properly doctrinal, i.e. didactic, there are apolo- 
getical and polemical subjects. 

Apologetics,^ that is, the Evidences of Christianity, and its 
defence against assailants, is a class of subjects not often requir- 
ing, in our ordinary preaching, to be formally treated. 

" We suspect that this great cause has been not a little 
injured by the injudicious conduct of a certain class of preachers 
and writers, who, in just despair of being able to handle a 
single topic of religion to advantage, for want of having paid 
a devout attention to the Scriptures, fly like harpies to the 
evidences of Christianity, on which they are certain of meeting 
with something prepared to their hands, which they can tear, 

* Comp. fUpley, Sac. Rhet. p. 32. 

■•• The word " apology " originally signified a defence, without any acknow- 
edgment of wrong. 



64 SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

and soil, and mangle at their pleasure. . . . The folly we 
are adverting to did not escape the observation nor the ridicule of 
Swift, who remarked in his days that the practice of mooting 
on every occasion the' question of the origin of Christianity 
was much more likely to unsettle the faith of the simple 
than to counteract the progress of infidelity. It is dangerous 
to familiarize every promiscuous audience to look upon religion 
as a thing which yet remains to be proved, to acquaint them 
with every sophism and cavil which a perverse and petulant 
ingenuity has found out, unaccompanied, as is too often the 
case, with a satisfactory answer; thus leaving the poison to 
operate, without the antidote, in minds which ought to be 
strongly imbued with the principles and awed by the sanctions 
of the gospel. It is degrading to the dignity of a revelation 
established through a succession of ages by indubitable proofs, 
to be adverting every moment to the hypothesis of its being an 
imposture, and to be inviting every insolent sophist to wrangle 
with us about the title, when we should be cultivating the 
possession. The practice we are now censuring is productive 
of another inconvenience. The argument of the truth of 
Christianity being an argument of accumulation, or, in other 
words, of that nature that the force of it results less from any 
separate consideration than from an almost infinite variety of 
circumst|tnces, conspiring towards one point and terminating in 
one conclusion; this concentration of evidence is broken to 
pieces when an attempt is made to present it in superficial 
descants; than which nothing can be conceived better calcu- 
lated to make what is great appear little, and what is ponderous, 
light."* 

But informally, incidentally, we may all make veiy frequent 
and profitable use of Christian Evidences. Without at all 
treating the question of the truth of Christianity as an open 
one, and without undertaking any full and regular discussion of 
its claims, or refutation of objections to it, we may introduce 
into ordinary sermons some subordinate division, or passing 
remark, that will vividly exhibit one of the evidences, or strik- 
ingly refute some particular objection. This course meets any 
rising doubts in one mind or another, and precisely suits the 
mental wants and habits of most men, and is thus the fairest 
way of bringing the subject before them. Even if one sees 
cause for an expressly apologetical sermon or series of sermons, 
he had better select some part of the great subject, and barely 
* Robert Hall, Review of Gregory's Eyidences, Works, II. p. 299. 



SUBJECTS CLASSIFIED. 65 

allude to, or rapidly touch, the others. Whatever matters are 
distinctly brought forward, ought to be thoroughly discussed. 
Let us beware how we merely mention some striking form of 
error, or plausible objection to truth, without meeting it very 
squarely, if not at aU points. Every one has observed, what 
A&. Hall intimates, that the error often remains in the mind, 
while the imperfect refutation is forgotten ; and the reason for 
this is not far to seek. Errors often find their chief power in 
the faet that they consist of truth torn away &om its connec- 
tion, and held up in an excessive prominence, or without the 
limitation and modification which would be given by its related 
truths. A fragment of truth thus held up may make its delu- 
sive impression in a single moment. The apologist must care- 
fully replace the truth, and bring the hearers to look closely at 
all the surrounding truths, and consider their relation to that 
which has been dislocated. But this is often a work of time, 
requiring wider knowledge than the audience possess, or he can 
readily impart, and more reflection than the heedless many are 
willing to bestow. It is unfair to the truth if we neglect this 
fact, and expect a brief statement of some novel and seductive 
error to be sufficiently met by an equally brief reply. 

The internal, and experimental evidences may be very 
readily preached upon with advantage. The beautiful harmony 
of the sacred books, with all their rich diversity, the effects of 
Christianity upon civilization, the adaptation of the gospel to 
the wants of an awakened conscience, the believer's testimony 
on the ground of experience, the blessed results of piety, and 
the powerful example of the truly pious, are topics which may 
be widely and freely used. 

Polemics, or controversy with other professed Christians, 
presents subjects which demand faithful and careful handling. 
The spurious charity, now so much talked of, which requires 
that we shall not assail error in our fellow-Christians, the indif- 
ference to truth so widely prevailing, which prates of the 
" good in everything," and urges that a man's belief is of little 
importance if he is intellectual, or amiable, or moral and 
devout, these make some men unwilling to preach upon 
polemical topics, especially to discuss the errors of other evan- 
gelical denominations. The natural love of conflict, which 
even in preachers is sometimes so strong, the lively interest 
which the ungodly will take in a fight among Christians, the 
hearty support and laudation which a man's own party will 
^ve him, often precisely in proportion as he flatters their self- 

F 



66 SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

conceit and bitterly assails their opponents, — such causes as 
these contribute to make another class of men excessively fond 
of controversy. And then the two classes really stimulate and 
encourage each other. The former being greatly disgusted at 
what they reckon bad taste and a wrong spirit, are thus all the 
more disposed to shrink from such topics ; and the latter, being 
fired by what appears to them cowardice or worldly policy, are 
all the more bitter against the common foe, and inclined to 
assail their friends to boot. In this way two tendencies often 
arise in a denomination, each toward a very hurtful extreme. 
Is there not a golden mean 1 It would seem to be a just prin- 
ciple, that a preacher should never go out of his way to 
find controversial matter, nor go out of his way to avoid 
it. He who continually shrinks from conflict should stir him- 
self up to faithfulness ; he who is by nature belligerent, should 
cultivate forbearance and courtesy. When the text or topic 
naturally leads us to remark upon some matter of controversy, 
we should not avoid it, save in exceptional cases, because 
esteemed Christians are present who difier with us on that 
point. We should of course be mainly occupied with the 
advocacy of positive truth ; but the idea that a man can always 
" talk about what he himself believes, and let other people's 
opinions alone," is impracticable, if it were not improper. In 
many cases we cannot clearly define truth, save by contrasting 
it with error. And since errors held and taught by good men 
are only the more likely to be. huVtful to others, we are surely 
not less hound to refute them in such cases than when advo- 
cated by bad men. Paul employs terms of terrible severity, as 
his master had done, in speaking of some who taught utterly 
ruinous error and from bad motives.* Paul also withstood to 
the face, all the brethren, his beloved but now erring fellow;- 
apostle, using against him hard arguments, but soft words-t 
Afterwards, in speaking of the matter, he charges Peter with 
dissimulation, a charge justifiable because he knew with cer- 
tainty that it was true. We, who are so liable to err in judg- 
ing, ought to be very slow to impugn the motives of those 
whom we believe to be lovers of Jesus. No doubt Satan 
rejoices, as we know that wicked men do, to see Christians 
adding abuse to argument. While faithfully and earnestly 
opposing error, e^en as held by Christian brethren, let us avoid 
needlessly wounding the cause of our conunon Christianity. 

•PhU.iiL2; Gal. vL 12 j 1 Tim. iv. 1,2; 2Tiin. iv. U. Comp. MaiMv 

mii. 33; 3 John, 10. 

+ Gal. il 11-21. • 



SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 67 

It is not Tinfrequently the wisest policy as regards certain 
forms of error, to leave them unnoticed. In the excitement 
about Bomanism, which its boldness and boasting has recently 
awakened in our country, there is reason to fear that many wiU 
fan to preaching against the Romanists where they are little 
known, and thus only help to bring them into notice. While 
well assured that their grievous errors can be refuted, we ought 
to remember that those errors are subtle and to some minds 
seductive, and that here, just as in the case of infidel theories 
and objections, slight and hasty refutation is often worse than 
none. So too, there are some minor religious denominations, 
whose vital breath is controversy, and who will most surely die 
when they are most severely let alone. 

2. Subjects op Morality. 

We sometimes hear pious men speak with severe reprobation 
of " moral sermons." It has often been the case, for example, 
in the Ghurch of England during the 1 8th century, and among 
American Unitarians at the present time, that morality was 
preached with little or no reference to the Atonement and the 
work of the Spirit, a mere morality taking the place of the real 
goi^el. This has established an association, in many minds, 
bejbween moral discourses and^ opposition to the ^* doctrines of 
graoe.'* But our Lord's personal teachings consist mainly of 
morality; and Paul and Peter, while unfolding and dwelling 
on the salvation which is by grace through faith, have not 
merely urged in general a holy life, but have given many 
precepts with reference to particular, and sometimes miDor 
duties. No one among us will question, that we ought con- 
stiantly to exhort believers to show their faith by their works, 
and to be holy in all their deportment, seeing that theirs is a 
holy Crod. But there is in many quarters a reluctance, for 
the reason just mentioned, to preach much upon particular 
questions of moral duty. A preacher of the gospel has cer- 
tainly no business to preach morality apart from the gospel. 
He may present other than strictly evangelical motives, but 
these must be manifestly subordinate to the great motive of 
grateful love to Christ, and consecration to His service. We 
shoTild exhort men to keep the law of God, for thus they may 
be brought to Christ ; but to incite unregenerate people to 
a so-called moral life, on the ground merely of interest, of 
regard for the well-being of society, and even of love for their 
children, etc., is for the preacher unsuitable, save in very 



68 SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

peculiar cases. He must first call men, as an ambassador 
for Christ, to be reconciled to Gkxi, must insist upon the 
indispensable need of regeneration through the Holy Spirit. 
Then, speaking to those who are looked upon as regenerate, 
he must, with all his might, urge them to true and high 
morality, not only on all other grounds, but as a solemn 
duty to God their Saviour. The only question is, how far 
he ought to go into details. As above intimated, our Lord 
and his apostles did go into details, very freely. And our 
preaching often suffers from the fact that, while inculcating 
Christian morality in general, we do not bring the matter 
home to the hearts and daily lives of our brethren, do not 
so delineate their practical experiences, and indicate their 
duty in practical questions, as to make them feel stimulated 
and encouraged in the actual pursuit of holiness.* At the 
same time, these questions are innumerable and often compli- 
cated and difficult, and we are compelled to select. 

Now certain limitations, 'as to the preaching of particular 
morality, appear to be important. We must not maie formal 
discussion of very minute topics. " Represent to yourself, 
for example, sermons on neatness, on politeness, etc. Some 
topics of this sort, doubtless, may be approached, but it must 
be done incidentally; they should never furnish the subject 
of a sermon. Particular morality is not to be excluded, but 
such details of it may have their place in more general 
matters, or in historical subjects." t It is one of the advan- 
tages of expository preaching, whether doctrinal or historical, 
that it gives occasion for many useful incidental remarks upon 
minor morals, for which we might never find a place in formal 
subject-sermons. A second limitation is, that the inculcation 
of morality must not consume the greater part of our time, 
for it is our chief business to entreat men to be reconciled to 
God, and the " doctrines of grace " are the great means of 
making believers " careful to maintain good works."J And it 
is a third limitation, that we must not so enter into particular 
questions of morality as to make the preaching of the gospel 
merely tributary to secular interests, and apparently to sink 
the preacher in the partisan. 

* There are good obseryations on this subject in Robert Hall's Works, 
II., p. 290 flf. 

+ Vinet, Horn. p. 83. 

t See Titus iii. 3-8, an important passage on this subject. 



SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 69 

PoUticcU preaching has long been a subject of vehement 
discussion in America, and presents questions of great impor- 
tance. In Europe, the almost universal connection of Church 
and State has embarrassed the subject with complications 
from which we are free. Government here does not interfere 
with religion, to support some, or to persecute others ; and 
we have in this respect no occasion to discuss governmental 
affairs. Still, political measures often involve, and are some- 
times almost identical with, great questions of right and 
wrong. The notion that political decisions are to be regularly 
made on grounds of mere expediency, is dishonouring to the 
religion which many of us profess, and would ultimately ruin 
any nation. That truly pious men shall carry their religion 
into politics, shall keep religious principle uppermost in all 
political questions which have a moral character, is an un- 
questionable and solemn duty. Of course it is right that 
the preacher should urge them to do so ; and should urge 
it with special earnestness in times of great political excite- 
ment, when good men are often carried away. Now we have 
observed above that in other matters it is well not merely 
to insist upon morality in general, but to go somewhat into 
details, thus illustrating general truth, and offering hints for 
practical guidance. Why then, it may be asked, shall we 
not do likewise in reference to political matters, where it is 
often as difficult as it is important for a good man to decide 
upon his duty ? Why shall not the preacher go somewhat 
into details here? The great difficulty is, that it is almost 
impossible for a preacher to do this without taking sides. 
In a country where party feeling runs so high, the great 
mass of the people, too, being still ungodly, to take sides 
at all, in public discourse, will cause the preacher to be at 
once swept away by the rushing tide. He ceases to sustain 
an impartial relation to all the people over whom he is 
shepherd, and becomes, in a matter which with many is more 
important than religion, the friend of some, the foe of others. 
The irreligious, and many of the brethren, forget all about 
the religious aims of his preaching, in the one absorbing 
inquiry how much he will help or harm their party. Thus 
has many a good man, who was honestly striving to bring 
politics under the control of religious principle, been brought, 
before he knew it, into the position of a recognized political 
partisan. Upon perceiving such a result, some preachers at 
once draw back, wiser from their experience ; but others, 



70 SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

proud of consistency, resolved to conquer opposition, or un- 
able to see just what their mistake is, and how to correct it, 
persevere, with deplorable results. The association which 
once connected them in the popular mind with unworldly 
feehngs and eternal interests, is broken. Their power of 
turning men's eyes away from the things which are seen to 
the things which are not seen, is seriously diminished. They 
become comparatively unable to accomplish the great object 
which a good man in the ministry must cherish, the object 
of saving sovls. Besides, the temporal benefits of Christianity 
are greatest just in proportion as there is most of true spiri- 
tuality. Preachers do men most good as to this world in 
proportion as they bring them to care most for the world to 
come. In losing this higher power, then, one has likewise 
actually lost the most effectual means of advancing those 
lower ends at which he was aiming. While striving to bring 
some of the motive power to bear upon our subordinate work, 
he has left the boiler to burst, and now can do neither the 
greater nor the less. 

" To the Christian, everything becomes Christian .... 
Nothing except sin is profane : life is not divided ; there is no 
point at which Christianity stops abruptly .... This is 
not saying that because everything is regarded by a Christian 
in a Christian manner, everything may become a subject for a 
sermon. The pulpit has not been erected to treat all things in 
a Christian manner ; it has a special purpose, which is to intro- 
duce the Christian idea into life. ... In its principles, and 
in its particular applications, it is properly Christianity which 
it teaches : Christianity is uppermost ; Christianity is its ob- 
ject ; all else is but example, illustration, etc 

Whatever aims to advance society without doing this through 
the individual, (through the individual's Christian advance- 
ment,) is external to the object of preaching As 

to patriotic and political sermons, they are rather to be avoided, 
and yet in certain grave circumstances, we may be obliged to 
touch upon such subjects in the pulpit. On one hand, the 
human character of Christianity puts it into contact with all 
the interests, of life, gives it a word to speak in all circum- 
stances ; on the other hand, it never surrenders its liberty to 
place and time, and with extreme reserve, mixes itself with 

everything that does not bear the stamp of eternity 

I believe, indeed, that we cannot wholly avoid discoursing to 
the public on that which preoccupies and absorbs it ; but we 



SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 7 1 

must discourse to it only in order to calm or moderate it. 
Control worldly afiairs without touching them ; have to do 
with them only to impress a character upon them ; show them 
to your hearers from the heights of heaven. See the Lord and 

his apostles It is remarkable that loving their 

nation as they did, they should have approached political 
subjects with so much reserve." * 

" The Christian preacher can do more towards promoting the 
earthly and temporal interests of mankind, by indirection, 
than by direct efforts. That minister who limits himself, in 
his Sabbath discourses, to the exhibition and enforcement of 
the doctrines of sin and grace, and whose preaching results in 
the actual conversion of human beings, contributes far more, 
in the long run, to the progress of society, literature, art, 
science, and civilization, than he does, who, neglecting these 
themes of sin and grace, makes a direct effort from the pulpit 
to " elevate society." In respect to the secular and temporal 
benefits of the Christian religion, it is eminently true, that he 
that finds his life shall lose it. When the ministry sink all 
other themes in the one theme of the Cross, they are rewarded 
in a twofold manner : they see the soul of man born into the 
kingdom of God : and then, as an inevitable consequence, with 
which they had little to do directly but which is taken care of 
by the providence of God, and the laws by which He admin- 
isters his government in the earth, they also see arts, science, 
trade, commerce, and political prosperity, flowing in of them- 
selves. They are willing to seek first the kingdom of God and 
his righteousness, and find all these minor things, — infinitely 
minor things, when compared with the eternal destiny of 
man, — added to them by the operation, not of the pulpit, or of 
the ministry, but of Divine laws and of Divine providence. But, 
whenever the ministry sinks the Cross, whoUy or in part, in 
semi-religious themes, they are rewarded with nothing. They 
see, as the fruit of their labours, neither the conversion of the 
individual nor the prosperity of society. That unearthly 
sermonizing of Baxter, and Howe, so abstracted from all the 
temporal and secular interests of man, so rigorously confined to 
human gilt and human redemption, — that preaUiing, which, 
upon the face of it, does not seem even to recogiiize that man 
has any relations to this little ball of earth ; which takes him 
off the planet entirely, and contemplates him simply as a 

• Vinet, Horn. p. 71-4, and 86, 87. 



72 SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

sinner in the presence of God, — that preaching, so destitute of 
all literary, scientific, economical, and political elements and 
allusions, — ^was, nevertheless, by indirection, one of the most 
fertile causes of the progress of England and America." * 

Many persons insist that the minister must have nothing to 
do with politics, not even to the extent of voting, or of the 
formation and private expression of political opinions. Some 
take this ground from false notions of the " clergyman's " 
position ; but a Christian minister is no more a priest than a 
Christian layman, and nothing is intrinsically wrong to the one 
which is not to the other. Some urge as follows : "A minister 
may well be absolved from preaching, or even forming opinions 
on politics. He has the common right of all citizens so to do ; 
but his proper work is enough for all his time and powers. 
The great themes of religious truth are enough to occupy more 
time than he can get." f But there is too much disposition 
among scholarly and refined men to leave voting to the masses 
and the demagogues. A well-informed man, in this country, 
cannot avoid the formation of opinions upon politics ; and by 
voluntary ignorance of current affairs, more is lost by the 
working pastor than gained. The minister ought to have his 
opinions, and ought to vote ; and he may state his views in 
private conversation, with more or less reserve according to 
circumstances. He should in the pulpit urge and conjure his 
Christian hearers to be controlled in their political action by 
Christian principle. To go into details, and suggest how they 
ought to vote in a particular issue, is lawful, but in general 
highly inexpedient ; the little good done will almost certainly 
be over balanced by the harm that in various ways must result. 
If a preacher ever takes such a course at all, it should be in 
very peculiar and extraordinary cases, and even then his dis- 
cussion should be brief, well-considered, and temperate, and 
gladly abandoned for other themes. If ever the great majority 
of controlling politicians should be truly pious men, it might 
be not inexpedient for the preacher to offer suggestions upon 
current political questions — but then it would be hardly worth 
while. 

There are other very important and diflBcult topics of 
particular morality, such as Temperance, and the question of 
Amtisements ; but a few remarks upon these must suffice. The 
preacher should by all means avoid vXtraism, Some things 

* Shedd, Horn. p. 248, 249. 

f Alexander, Thoughts on preaching, p. 47. 



SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 73 

not sinfiil in themselves, it is yet best to abstain from because 
they so readily and widely lead to sin. But here there is at 
once seen to be room for difference of opinion. Not everything 
should be avoided which is often grossly abused ; and however 
clear it may seem to us that some particular thing should be, 
another man may perhaps judge otherwise. Even though 
vehement in condemnation, we must not be indiscriminate. 
And if in the natural desire to take strong ground we 
represent the use of intoxicating beverages, dancing, and 
games of amusement, as in themselves sinful, and under all 
circumstances wrong, we assume an extreme and false position, 
which must eventually weaken our cause. If discriminating 
and considerate views, leading to a regard for their example 
and influence, and a recognition of possible danger to them- 
selves and their families, will not restrain men in these 
respects, then extravagance and violence, even if controlling a 
few, will in general but repel and provoke, stimulating the 
wrong practices in question, and driving many away from the 
gospel. The world is full of great and dreadful evils, which 
may well excite both grief and indignation, and which call 
loudly for correction ; but one evil is not to be cured by 
another. Again, we must not merely condemn the wrong, but 
exhort to the right. Preaching on these subjects too often 
consists in vehement assaults. Much more may be accom- 
plished if we also encourage the right-minded to a proper 
oourse, and affectionately point out to then the beginnings of 
evil against which they must guard. The latter course may 
not afford so much occasion for impassioned and boisterous 
' eloquence," but it will hardly be on that account the less 
usefiiL Severe censure is sometimes necessary, but encourage- 
ment to do right is always in place, and often most potent. 
" Reprove, rebuke, exhort, with aU long-suffering " and teach- 
ing.* And finally, it is usually better to treat these subjects 
in the course of our ordinary preachimgy than to make set 
sermons upon them. These may draw a crowd, if that is all, 
but the formal discussion invites criticism and awakens 
oppositson, and even if really convincing, finds the persons 
most concerned particularly hard to convince. Arguments and 
appeals firom time to time, as suggested by the subject or the 
occasion, will make no unfavourable impression, and steady 
perseverance will gradually call back and win over all whom 
it is possible to influence. Only, let not the preacher make 

♦ 2 Tim. iv. 2. 



74 SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

any particular vicious practice or social usage his hobby ; for 
then folks will but smile at all he can say. 

3. Historical Subjects. 

It would be unnecessary to urge that history is attractive 
for all who read, and full of varied instruction for all who read 
thoughtfully. And the most instructive history is that of the 
Bible. A leading writer on the philosophy of history has 
declared that no such philosophy can be constructed, save by 
the recognition of a providential purpose which pervades all 
events and links them into unity. In the Bible the designs of 
Providence are not left to be judged of by our sagacity, but 
are often clearly revealed, so as to show us the meaning of 
things obscure, and the real co-working of things appai'ently 
antagonistic. Thus the Bible histories act like the problems 
worked out in a treatise of Algebra, teaching us how to 
approach the other problems presented by the general history 
of the world. The oft-quoted saying of an ancient writer that 
" history is philosophy teaching by example," applies nowhere 
so truly as to the inspired records, which are God himself 
teaching by example. 

Moreover, nothing so interests us all as a person. No inani- 
mate object, or general proposition, will make much impression 
upon mankind at large, unless it is personified or impersonated, 
or invested with some personal interest. The poet, delighting 
in nature, instinctively feels as if communing with a person. 
Even so abstract a thing as a system of philosophy, is usually 
remembered in connection with a personal teacher. A benevo- 
lent enterprise seldom takes much hold on the popular mind, 
unless it is associated with some honoured man, its embodiment 
and representative. A celebrated lecturer on history once 
stated in conversation that he found it difi&cult to interest 
a popular audience, if he presented merely historical events, 
periods, or lessons ; these must be associated with some pereon. 
Now the Bible not only consists -f ery largely of history, but 
the greater part of its history is really biography, the story of 
individual lives, exhibiting the most various and instructive 
examples of character, both good and bad, of both sexes, aud 
of every condition in life. And this great historical picture 
groups all its figures aroimd one Person, to whom some look 
forward with longing and others look back with love, and 
whose very enemies unwillingly stand connected with him. 

All this being true, it would seem that historical subjects of 



SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 75 

preaching ought to be much more frequently employed than is 
actually the case. Several reasons for the comparative neglect 
of them may be suggested. The greater part of devout min- 
isteis unwisely overlook the human elements in Scripture 
history. If not carried away by the passion for finding " types 
of Christ," so as to care little for the persons and events that 
cannot possibly be thus regarded, they still fail to study these 
histories as history. They do not trace the progress of evehts. 
in the history of Israel as in that of any other nation, allowing 
for the occasional miraculous interferences, and searching amid 
the mingled web of Israel's affairs for the golden thread of 
Providential purpose. They do not analyze the character and 
motives of inspired men, as " men of like passions" with our- 
selves, men who struggled as we have to do, with their . own 
infirmities and the thronging temptations of life. They shrink 
firom contemplating the genuine but sinless humanity of the 
glorious central Person, which makes him so real and so un- 
speakably valuable an example for us, at the same time that he 
is our Divine Redeemer. As another reason, few ministers 
gain that minute and familiar acquaintance with Scripture 
Geography, with the manners and customs of the Jews and 
related nations, and with the profane history which comes into 
connection with Biblical events, which would enable them to 
realize the scenes and reproduce them with vivid colouring, so. 
as to kindle the imagination of their hearers ; nor do they 
cultivate, as all preachers should do, the power of description.* 
On the other hand some make historical subjects simply the 
occasion for displaying their descriptive powers, or exhibiting 
their archeeological learning, without teaching any useful 
lessons, and thus establish an association in the minds of many 
hearers between historical sermons and mere " word-painting." 
And further, preachers who know or suppose themselves to 
have little talent for description are apt to forget that one of 
the chief benefits of historical preaching is derived from the 
analysis of character and motive. We all find it so hard to 
understand our fellow-men, or ourselves, that it is a great 
blessing to have in some Scripture examples the veil taken off*, 
and the real motives and true character of men laid bare to 
our inspection ; and in many other cases, to have suggestive 
and reliable indications to provoke and encourage enquiry, 

* See on Imagination, Part III. chap. 5, and comp. on Expos. Preaching, 
Part II. chap. 3. 



76 SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

Living instances could be mentioned of very able men, who 
had rarely attempted historical subjects, because conscious of 
possessing little talent for description; but when the simple 
suggestion was made that they could bring to bear their 
analytical powers upon the character of some Scripture per- 
sonage or the motives of the actors in some Scripture scene, 
they soon found themselves much interested in historical dis- 
. courses, and found, too, that they could throw in excellent 
touches of description by the way. 

The history of Christianity outside of the Bible, from the 
earliest times to our own, furnishes much instructive and inte- 
resting material for preaching ; but to draw the subject of a 
sermon from this source would be unwise. A sermon upon the 
life and character of Augustine, Calvin, Wesley, Fuller, Hall or 
Judson might be really useful, but the tendency would be 
towards one of the abuses of Romanism; substituting pane- 
gyrics of the saints for Biblical preaching. 

4. Experimental Subjects. 

Historical subjects manifestly include doctrinal and moral 
elements ; and yet those subiects have really a distinct cha- 
racter. In likeVanner expeiimental ^^ecl partake of the 
doctrinal, the moral, and the historical, but are so distinct, and 
of such importance, as to deserve separate classification and 
notice. The actual experiences of men in receiving the gospel 
and living according to it ought to be delineated ; always under 
the guidance of Scripture doctrine, precept, and examples, but 
still delineated as we find them to be. Such matters will 
enter largely into the substance of many discourses whose 
subject is doctrinal, moral, or historical ; but the chief phases 
of religious experience deserve to be somewhat frequently made 
the subject of special and careful discussion. Material for this 
purpose is to be drawn from the Bible, from treatises bearing 
on the subject, and biographies, from the preacher's own experi- 
ence, and with particular advantage from frequent conversation 
with richly experienced Christians, making allowance foF their 
peculiarities of temperament and theological * opinion, and for 
their degrees of culture. The preacher, like the physician, 
ought in addition to what is learned from books, to " study 
cases," as they arise in his practical labours. 

It would surely be very useful sometimes to depict the life 
of an irreligious man, as it is now going forward on week- 
days and Sundays, in business and in society and at home; 



SUBJECTS— OLASSIFIBD. 77 

to do this without exaggerating in order to make a striking 
picture, without ignoring the man's better impulses, good 
intentions, kindly affections, etc. — to make him out, so far 
as possible, just what he is. After pondering the matter, 
and asking a good many thoughtful questions of some intelli- 
gent brethren as to their personal recollections, a preacher 
might be able, modestly and with good success, to treat such 
a subject. It is not uncommon to describe Conviction of Sin, 
the various methods in which it is wrought, and the causes 
by which it is often weakened and brought to nothing. So 
with Conversion. Accounts of conversion in persons differing 
in temperament, religious education, etc., carefully analysed, 
so as to distinguish the general from the peculiar, are always 
interesting, and may be made exceedingly profitable. The 
early Baptist preachers who travelled from New England to 
Georgia, preaching depravity, atonement, and regeneration to 
an ignorant and gainsaying people, often made a great im- 
pression and gave most important instruction, by telling their 
own experience. And then the varieties of experience in the 
Christian life — what subjects they afford for preaching. The 
Christian's Conflicts ; Backsliding and Progress ; Despondency 
and Assurance ; Sickness and Bereavement, — these are often 
discussed in every evangelical pulpit.* 

To speak at all of our own experience is a task to be 
performed with special prayer for humility and delicacy, lest 
we injure our own character, and repel hearers of fastidious 
tastes. But most of us shrink too readily from this duty. 
The apostle Paul has spoken frequently, and sometimes at 
great length, of his conversion, the trials, conflicts and con- 
solations of his subsequent life, and of his present purposes 
and hopes ; and the Psalms consist almost entirely of recorded 
experiences. One thing, however, is to be specially guarded 
against, in all attempts at depicting religious experience, and 
especially in allusions to our own ; we are so apt to imagine, 
or at least to speak as if we imagined, that all experiences 
will be like ours. A preacher or other Christian whose con- 
version was consciously sudden will almost always speak of 
conversion as sudden ; one in whom the work was gradual 
and slow, will give a corresponding description. So with the 
hopeful and the desponding, the fully assured and the often 
doubting, etc. We are prone to forget that Christian ex- 
perience, like the human countenance, will in no two persons 
* See some good remarks in Wayland's Ministry of the Gk)spel, p. 86-96 



78 SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

be precisely aUke, and often presents many and striking differ- 
ences, though the great characteristic features are always the 
same. 

5. Occasional Sermons. 

It is convenient to offer at this point a few suggestions as 
to sermons on particular occasions, or addressed to particul^ 
classes. 

Fvaieral Sermone are demanded by so powerful a sentiment 
and sustained by so general usage, that ^e attempts of some 
to abolish the custom, inevitably fail. Those who clearly see 
and vehemently condemn the faults which disfi^re many 
funeral discourses, are very apt, when themsel'ves bereaved, 
to find their hearts demanding such a service, and will not 
unfrequently prefer the very preacher whose course had often 
seemed to them most objectionable. Sorrowing and softened, 
we feel then a special need of God's mercy and grace, and 
the preacher should gladly seize the opportunity to recom- 
mend the gosp^ of consolation, and to impress the need of 
personal piety, that we may be ready to live and ready to 
die. And not only will some habitual hearers be then bettet 
prepared to receive the Word, but persons wilt be present who 
seldom attend the place of worship. It is highly important, 
therefore, that funeral sermons should clearly point out the 
way of life, and tenderly .invite to the Saviour; Moiteovear, 
in the freshness of our grief we instinctively desire to utter, 
or at least to hear, some eulogy upon the departed ; and all 
nations have had; some method, by speech or song or broken 
lament, of indulging the desire. That among us Christiau 
ministers are expected to perform this function, while it some- 
times places them in a difficult position, is yet a sign of th^r 
influence, and a means of using that influence to good pur- 
pose. But the preacher must remember that he is not a 
mere eulogist of the dead, but only adds this task to his 
work of preaching tiie gospel. Accordingly, his utterances 
as to the departed must be only a part of what he says, 
usually but a small part, and must be scrupvlbusly true. 
No promptings of his own sorrow, nor regard for the feelings 
of others, must lead him to the exaggerated praises whidi 
are so natural. When the departed was a Christian^, he 
should speak chiefly of that fact, bringing out- anything in 
the> cjbareicter or course of life which he knows, and others 
will recognize^ to be worthy o£ imitation^ When, it was not 



SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 79 

a Christian, he may sometimes lawfully speak a few soothing 
words as to anything which specially endeared the deceased 
to his friends. But this must be done, if done at all, with- 
out exaggeration, and it is a solemn duty to avoid saying 
one word which suggests that these good points of character 
afford any ground of hope for eternity. Some preachers will 
on such occasions give the lie to all their ordinary preaching, 
by leaving room to suppose that without being bom again a 
very excellent person may perhaps see the kingdom of God. 
" He did not make any profession of religion, but he was, etc., 
and we leave him to the mercy of Grod.'* Or, " he had never 
professed to be a Christian, but he was perfectly willing to 
die"^ — as if that proved anything. Nay, if the deceased did 
not give evidence of being regenerate, a believer in Christ, 
let UB say nothing about his eternal future, nothing whatever. 
Any such suggestions encourage the ignorant or unthinking in 
Mae hopes, and to right-minded mourners are but a mockery 
of their woe. Pains should be taken not to make much of 
death-bed conversions, which are proverbially uncertain, and 
the hope of which, as a last resort^ is so often taken by the 
living' afi an encouragement to delay. In general, the preacher 
ought to exercise reserve in what he says of the departed ; 
and in the case of wicked people, it is frequently in the best 
taste, and shows- the most veal kindness^ to say nothing. 
Young preachers sometimes allow themselves, in their first 
sermons of this sort, to indulge in copious eulogies with no 
great foundation, and then afterwards seem compelled to do 
likewise in cases where they feel it to be a great trial, and 
know that they are liable to do serious harm to the cause of 
truth. It will save much embarrassment to begin right. 

The services on such occasions, and especially the sermon, 
are often made too long. " A prevailing f^fiult of funeral dis- 
courses is the occupation of too much time with generalities or 
truths that have no special application to the existing circum- 
stances. It is far better to confine such discourses to narrower 
limits, and to that particular range of thought which all will 
recognize to be pertinent."* The tendency to ostentatious 
parade in funerals, which is in some communities a great evil, 
ought in eyery judicious way to be discouraged. 

Academic Sermons, i.e. sermons at institutions of learning, 
or on occasions of literary interest, are often managed in a very 
mistaken fashion. The preacher imagines that be must not 
* Kidder's Horn., p. 280, where there are other good remarks. 



80 SUBJECTS — OLASSIFIBD. 

give a regular gospel sermon, but must betake himself to 
matters highly erudite or metaphysical. It is really desirable 
on such occasions to preach upon eminently evangelical topics, 
the very heart of the gospeL Science and erudition are the 
every-day work of these professors and students ; from you, to- 
day, they had much rather hear something else. Even those 
who care nothing for religion will feel, as persons of taste, that 
it is congruous, becoming, for a preacher to preach the gospel ; 
while the truly pious, yearning over their unconverted asso- 
ciates, will long to have the preacher urge saving truth upon 
them in the most practical way, and with whole souled earnest- 
ness. Of course the sermon should have point, force, fresh- 
ness; and the associations of the occasions may sometimes 
slight peculiarities of allusion, illustration, and style ; but it 
ought to be a sermon full of Christ, full of prayerful zeal to 
save souls. Ah ! as one looks over those hundreds of intel- 
ligent young faces, and his heart goes out to them in sympathy 
and love, — as he thinks what a power they will be in the world 
for good or for evil, and how they are all there present before 
Grod, to hear his message, he must surely feel an imwonted 
emotion, a solemn sense of privilege and responsibility ; and if 
never before, there ought to be true of him then, those words 
of Baxter, 

'' I preached as never sure to preach ag^ain. 
And as a dying man to dying men." 

In like manner. Convention Sermons, all sermons at the 
opening of any general religious assembly, are never so accept- 
able to devout hearts, and never so helpful to the objects 
of such an assembly, as when they are filled with the very 
essence of the gospel. 

Of discourses addressed to particular classes, it is proposed 
to mention only Sermons to Children, Suggestions on this 
subject will of course also bear upon less formal addresses, in 
the Sunday School, etc. Every one notices how few persons 
succeed decidedly well in speaking to children. But many 
preachers possess greater power in this respect than they have 
ever exercised, because they have never devoted to the subject 
much either of reflection, observation, or heedful practice. 
Examples may be found of men who for years considered that 
they had no talent for speaking to children, and whose attempts 
were always comparative failures, and yet who afterwards 
became very popular and useful in this important department 



SUBJECTS — CLAS8IFIIBD. 81 

of preaching. Can any help he given towards the development 
of tfaiis power 1 

It has been frequently remarked that in the young child 
imagination is predominant; in the child of ten or twelve 
years, memory ; and not until they are nearly grown, do the 
powers of abstraction and reasoning become active. It is to 
the two former classes that we commonly speak, whatever is 
aimed at older people being also addressed to the children. We 
see at once that it is necessary to avoid abstract terms, and 
formal processes of reasoning. Many preachers find this diffi- 
cult because they are too much accustomed, even for the wants 
of the ordinary adult mind, to discourse upon gospel doctrine 
in an abstract and purely argumentative way ; and learning 
how to preach to children may make them better preachers in 
general. Merely to refrain from using long words is not the 
thing needed. Children understand polysyllables just as well as 
monosyllables, when they represent concrete, and familiar, or 
easily intelligible conceptions. Besides, those of a dozen years 
are not pleased at the appearance of excessive effort to use 
short words to them, as tf they had no sense. Eschew, then, 
all abstract terms. And instead of argumentation, give them 
facts and truths, confidently stated, with the quiet air of 
authority to which children naturally bow. Let these facts 
and truths be so stated, described, or illustrated, as to awaken 
the imagination. The illustrations should generally be in the 
form of narrative, (as the Great Teacher's were,) and the stories 
and descriptions should be pictorial — not minutely finished 
pictures, for children weary of those, but with broad outlines, 
prominent features, and vivid touches of suggestive detail. 
Thus telling them what they will receive as interesting facts or 
important truth, and in such a way as to charm the imagina- 
tion, we are able to reach the child's affections and conscience. 
Only through what appeals to the imagination can this be 
readily done.* 

The children must feel that they are learning something, and 
must see that we are trying to do them good. However 
thoughtless, changeable, passionate, a child may be, its con- 
science is active. Every child quickly recognizes the propriety 
of our seeking: to win it to love and serve the Lord, and feels 
that something is lacking where this is not the case. However 
great the external attractions of a Sunday School, it will soon 
grow dull to the little ones if they do not learn, especially 

* On the proyinoe and power of Imagination, see Part III, chapter y. 

G 



82 SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 

learn the Bible, and breathe there an atmosphere of genuine 
piety. The spasmodic efforts to keep up the interest which are 
sometimes observed in S. S. ofl&cers and speakers must only 
become more and more vehement and extravagant, if they 
are neglecting religious instruction and devotional impressive- 
ness. 

In dealing with such restless beings, variety is of course 
indispensable. If the same man speaks to them long, he must 
have great variety of manner, feeling, and utterance. Nothing 
pathetic, or even solemn, can long engage their attention, save 
under extraordinarj? circumstances ; and it is therefore proper 
to make free use of the natural reaction between pathos and 
humour. The childish mind readily passes " from grave to 
gay," and almost as readily back again to what is grave. Few 
men can succeed well in speeches or sermons to children, unless 
they are able to employ at least a few touches of humour. 
But if some speakers through uniform gravity fail to maintain 
the interest, a still greater number at the present day indulge 
in such an excess and predominance of humour, as to fail of 
doing real good, and by degrees to lose the power even of 
holding the children's attention. The humoul* employed had 
best be delicate ; it may be broad and grotesque, but never 
coarse or silly. It must be manifestly subordinate to a serious 
purpose. Children fsel that you have no business to seek on 
that occasion, merely to amuse them ; and the funniest story, 
the oddest saying, the wittiest allusion must by analogy or by 
contrast give impressiveness to something useful and serious, 
or else it is out of place, and ought to have been omitted. 
And a perpetual succession of merely funny things, will soon 
utterly pall upon the children's taste. The little ones that 
hear much speaking, grow to be keen critics ; and it were 
well if some speakers could often hear their talk at home.* 

Speak then, of interesting and instructive facts and truths, 
in concrete and familiar terms, without formal argument, 
analytical processes, or abstract ideas. Speak to the child's 

* ''He kept trying to make us laugh all the time, and I got mighty 
tired of that." *' He told us about a little boy, and wound up like they 
always do, you know, 'And children, that little boy is here to-day.'" "He 
tried very hard to be funny, but I didn't feel like laughing." " pa, do 
you think anybody ought to be saying so many foolish things, when he's 
talking about our Saviour ? '^ "0 me, I used to think that story was 
right funny, but I've heard it so often." Parents sometimes have difficulty 
in correcting the evil effects which are indicated by such sayings. 



SUBJECTS — CLASSIFIED. 83 

imagination, heart, and conscience. Speak with a prevailing 
seriousness, with an earnest desire to do them good. And if 
you would learn their range of ideas and their vocabulary, 
would find the door to their hearts, talk much with children, 
and allure them into talking freely to you. 

There is at present usually too broad a difference in style 
and tone between sermons to children and speeches to them. 
If the sermons could be a little more familiar, and the 
speeches a good deal more serious, than is commonly the case, 
then suggestions for the one could without any appearance of 
incongruity apply to the other. 

The remark may be added, as of great importance, that 
children are not to be addressed as pious, but as needing to 
become so ; and that they have to become Christians in 
essentially the same way as adults, by repentance and faith, 
through the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Great mischief 
results from the fact that so many who speak to children seem 
not to perceive clearly, or to keep distinctly in mind this 
unquestionable truth. 



CHAPTEE IV. 

MATEKIALS POSSESSED BEFOREHAND. 

General Materials of Preaohinq — Originality, Borrowing^ 
AND Plagiarism. 1. Materials Possessed Beforehand, 

2. Materlals Provided at the Time of Preparation. 

3. Original Materials. 4. Borrowed Materials anq 
Plagl^ism. 

The chief materials of a sermon are in the great mass of cases 
not really invented at the time of preparation ; they are the 
results of previous acquisition and reflection. This is true evei^ 
of much that seems to the preacher himself to have then for 
the first time a place in his mind ; it is in fact the revival of 
something forgotten, or the development of something already 
known. In this respect inexperienced and comparatively un- 
cultivated young preachers are often greatly deceived. Their 
early sermons are made with ease. Ardent, zealous, excited, 
they find that thought springs spontaneous in the mind, and 
feeling flows like a torrent. They imagine that it will always 
be easy to find something to say that will interest themselves 
and their hearers. But they are like men who have inherited 
a fortune in cash, and who spend their principal as if it were 
but income. Rejoicing in his facility of speech, the young 
preacher is not aware that he is drawing upon all that he has 
thought, felt, and seen, all that he has read and heard, since 
his childhood. And not a few go on for some months or years, 
consuming all their store, and evoking all that their minds are 
so constituted as readily to produce, and presently begin to 
wonder and lament that they find it so much harder than 
formerly to make a sermon. In like manner, preachei's who 
are growing old sometimes complain that i)eople will not listen 
to them as in other days, when the difficulty is that they have 
ceased to maintain activity of mind and good store of fresh 
thought ; and unable to interest themselves, they of course 
cannot interest others. These somewhat frequent and very 
painful experiences only illustrate the proposition — we draw 



cnssnsRAZi materials of preaohino. 85 

our sermons mainly from what we have wrought out or learned 
beforehand. And when the preacher speaks from great fulness 
of thought, then what he says borrows power from what is in 
reserve, as the head of water gives force to that which strikes 
upon the wheel. It follows that, next to the cultivation of 
personal piety, there is nothing for which the preacher should 
80 earnestly labour, from his first call to the close of his 
life, as the acquisition of abundant general materials for 
preaching. 

" The preacher ought to acquire and cultivate a homi- 
letjcal habitude. Preaching is his business. For this he has 
educated himself, and to this he has consecrated his whole 
life. It should, therefore, obtain undisputed possession of his 
mind and his culture. He ought not, save in peculiar cases, 
to pursue any other intellectual calling than that of sermon- 
izing. He may, therefore, properly allow this species of 
authorship to monopolize all his discipline and acquisitions. 
It is as fitting that the preacher should be characterized by 
a horailetical tendency, as that the poet should be charac- 
terized by a poetical tendency. If it is proper that the poet 
should transmute every thing that he touches, into poetry, 
it is proper that the preacher should transmute every thing 
that he touches, into sermon. 

" This homiletical habit will appear in a disposition to 
skeletonize, to construct plans, to examine and criticize dis- 
courses with respect to their logical structure. The preacher's 
mind becomes habitually organific. It is inclined to build. 
Whenever leading thoughts are brought into the mind, they 
are straightway disposed and arranged into the unity of a 
plan, instead of being allowed to lie here and there, like 
scattered boulders on a field of drift. This homiletic habit 
. will appear, again, in a disposition to render all the argu- 
mentative and illustrative materials which pour in upon the 
educated man, from the various fields of science, literature, 
and art, subservient to the purposes of preaching. The 
sermonizer is, or should be, a student, and an industrious 
one ; a reader, and a thoughtful one. He will, consequently, 
in the course of his studies, meet with a great variety of 
information that may be advantageously employed in sermon- 
izing, either as proof or illustration, provided he possesses 
the proper power to elaborate it, and work it up. Now, if he 
has acquired this homiletic mental habit, this tendency to 
sermonize, all this material, whidbi would pass through another 



86 GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREACHING. 

mind without assimilation, will be instantaneously and con- 
stantly taken up, and wrought into the substance and form 
of sermons.* 

" The possession of such an intellectual habitude as this, 
greatly facilitates immediate preparation for the pulpit. It 
is, virtually, a primary preparation, from which the secondary 
and more direct preparation derives its precision, thorough- 
ness, rapidity, and eflfectiveness. Without it, the preacher 
must be continually forced up to an unwelcome and ungenial 
task in the preparation of discourses, instead of finding in 
this process of composition a grateful vent for the outflow 
and overflow of his resources."t 

These materials will of course be drawn from every source. 
No kind of knowledge can be utterly useless to a preacher, 
and reflection, upon whatever subjects, will always leave him 
something which may hereafter b^ turned to account. But 
it may be well to remark upon the principal sources from 
which materials for preaching are derived. 

The Scriptures themselves should at every period of his life 
be a preacher's chief study. When we meet a young brother 
who has just become convinced that it is his duty to preach, 
and who is inquiring about preparation for the work, our first 
word ought to be, the Bible — not so much, at the outset, 
the profound study of doctrinal epistles or prophetical books, 
as the familiar and accurate knowledge of historical factS; 
the analysis of Biblical characters, the memorizing of devo- 
tional passages and of precepts, the acquisition of a general 
familiarity with the contents of particular books and of the 
entire sacred collection. Young ministers, even graduates of 
colleges, are often found sadly deficient as to this general 
knowledge of the Bible ; while the best Sunday schools, as 
well as the most admirable family instruction, have usually 
but laid the foundation for such knowledge as the preacher 
should make haste to gain. And every stage of culture and 
experience, as life goes on, presents fresh occasion and new 
facilities for studying the Bible. In the originals, if possible, 
in the English version at any rate ;} by the rapid reading of 
large portions, by the thorough study of a given book, by 

* These materials will readily overflow, in the form of skeletons, meta- 
phors, illustrations, etc., into the preacher's Commonplace Book. (Shedd's 
note.) 

t Shedd, Hom. p. 108. 

4:Comp. al^ye, chap, ii., 2. 



.GENEBAL MATERIALS OF PBEA0HIN6. 87 

the minnte examination of particular passages, and some- 
times even by looking at sentences here and there as we 
turn over the leaves; by reading in company with others, 
for discussion or for sympathy, by reading when alone with 
our beating hearts and our God; by adopting new methods 
for variety, and by steadily maintaining old methods till they 
become habitual ; by reading when we enjoy it, as a pleasure, 
and when at the beginning we do not enjoy it, as a duty, — 
every way, and continually, let us keep up, freshen, extend 
our acquaintance with the precious Word of God. The study 
of Systematic Divinity will but prepare us better to appreciate 
the separate teachings of Scripture as they stand in their 
own connection. Every kind of knowledge we gain should 
lead to further examination of that which is for us the centre 
of all knowledge, and the various experiences of life should 
be constantly bringing us back to find new meaning, strength, 
and consolation in God's Word. And we must constantly 
beware lest we fall into the habit of reading the Bible only 
as a perfunctory matter, a professional duty. In the spirit of 
personal devoutness, with a desire for personal benefit, and 
with the constant prayer that God would bless us in learning 
and in teaching, let us study the Bible, that we may " both 
save ourselves, and them that hear us."* 

Stfstematic Theology is of unspeakable importance to the 
preacher, indispensable if he would be in the best sense in- 
structive, and exert an abiding influence over his hearers. 
This enables him to speak with the boldness of assured con- 
viction, giving him a confidence in the great system of inspired 
truth which no minute criticism can shake. t This prepares 
him to urge one doctrine, or to unfold and apply one text, 
without the fear of offending against another — a fault into 
which many ministers are grieved to remember how often 
their early sermons fell. This renders it practicable to dis- 
cuss particular aspects of a doctrine in different sermons, in 
such a way as by degrees to impart a good knowledge of the 
doctrine as a whole. And the manifest possession of a syste- 

* Alexander has some admirable thoughts and suggestions on the study 
of the Bible, especially for ministers of middle age, and of considerable 
attainments, in Thoughts on Preaching, p. 66-60, and p. 464-6. 

i* An eminent English Bishop, and leading writer on Exegesis, states in a 
private letter his persuasion that the study of Systematic Theology would 
have prevented much of that semi-scepticism which is now painfully common 
among the clex^ of the Church of England. 



86 GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREAOHIN&. 

matic acquaintance with revealed truth gives him 'authority 
with the people. They readily listen to one who has defi- 
nite, positive, and well-considered opinions ; aud no uninspired 
man, even of the highest genius, has a right to be so authori- 
tative in his utterances upon moral and spiritual truth, as a 
preacher of humble powers, who speaks from a thorough and 
systematic study of God's Word.* Exegesis and Systematic 
Theology properly go hand in hand. Neither is complete, 
neither is really safe, without the other. And while a man 
will be apt to feel himself specially attracted towards one of 
them, according to his mental constitution and training, and 
will naturally work extensively at that one, he ought also 
diligently, regularly, and through life, to pursue the other. 
A preacher ought almost always to have on hand some able 
treatise of Theology, new or old, which he. is regularly study- 
ing, or some particular topic of Divinity, which he makes the 
subject of much reading and reflection. 

Of other reading, regarded as an important source of mate- 
rials for preaching, there can be only brief mention. Church 
History does not usually receive from working ministers the 
attention it deserves. Especially does the history of Doctrines 
assist one in understanding the truth, and in comprehending 
those objections and erroneous tendencies which under diflferent 
forms reproduce themselves in every age. Every religious 
denomination has certain characteristic or favourite doctrines, 
which its standard w^orks bring out with clearness and pro- 
minence ; so* that apart from the necessary provision for 
polemical preaching, and fix)m the common stock of Christian 
Theology, there is much to be learned by studying the pecu- 
liar opinions of different denominations. Ethical Philosophy 
furnishes a rich store of materials for those who can really 
master its discussions, and adapt their results to the con- 
ditions of practical preaching; and there are some works, 
such as Butler s Analogy and McCosh on the Divine Govern- 
ment, occupying a sort of border ground between Ethics and 
Theology, which are unsurpassed in value. Some ministers 
are **too metaphysical" in their preaching, but many are not 
metaphysical enough in their studies.f The study of Sermons 
is not only very useful with reference to the art of sermon- 
izing, but affords much valuable material, provided it be not 

* Comp. Shedd, Horn. p. 26 ff. 
t "Read Butler, and pfeach to the negroes," was the advice given to a 
joung preacher, twenty years ago, by a judicious senior. 



OESMEtAL MATEBIALS OF PBEAOHING. 89 

borrowed directly, but assimilated by reflection and made part 
of one's own thinking. The careful analysis and thorough and 
repeated examination of a few rich and impressive sermons, 
is much better, in every respect, than the cursory reading of 
many. 

And so as to all our reading. Young men who have enjoyed 
but limited opportunities of culture, and have never looked 
out with eager eyes upon the great world of books, sometimes 
need to be urged to read more widely ; but in the immense 
majority of cases, very different advice is required. He who 
would become really a man must abandon as early as possible 
the childish dream of reading everything. Except what is 
done for recreation — and excessive recreation is destruction — 
he must have a limited field of study, and must cultivate 
that field with the utmost possible thoroughness. And upon 
every subject studied, he must find out the best books, and 
restrict himself almost entirely to those. If the men of true 
scholarship and real power were called on to give one counsel 
to young students, in this age of multiplied books, they would 
probably all unite in saying, Read only the best works of the 
great authors, and so read these as to make them thoroughly 
and permanently your own.* 

Whether it is better to make extracts, summaries, and 
references in a Commonplace Book, or to rely mainly on 
JDaemory in reading, will depend on a man's turn of mind 
and general habits, and on the kind of reading in question. 
Even a man of extraordinary memory can hardly dispense 
vith memoranda in reading books of information ; while 
books of thought, though they may be profitably analyzed 
in writing, should be thought over, thought through and 
through, and then all that is cognate to our own thinking 
will be retained without difficulty. As regards whatever is 
Hot matter of pure thought, an important part of the benefit 
derived from reading is this, that one will always know 
where to look for what he wants ; and this can be best 
accomplished by a system of references, etc., unless the power 
of local memory is found, upon fair trial, to suffice for the 
purpose. Whichever method one adopts, he must strive to 
make the best of it, guarding carefully against its disad- 
vantages and dangers. 

But there are other sources of materials for preaching, 

* Comp. Shedd, Horn. p. 121-i. 



90 GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREACHINQ. 

besides books.* A preacher's knowledge of human nature, 
and knowledge of the world, his experience of life, and espe- 
cially of the religious life, his conversation with those around 
hiu> upon religious and upon general themes, his perpetual 
reflection upon everything felt, observed, or heard — these 
aftbrd a large part of his most valuable materials. And all 
his previous preaching, if rightly managed, has but enriched 
the mind to meet further demands. If one merely scrapes 
together thoughts around a subject, so as to make a sermon, 
then every sermon consumes part of his material, and leaves 
him poorer. But if he habitually penetrates into a subject 
and masters it, every sermon leaves him richer ; not that he 
can shortly preach again upon the same topic or text, but 
that he is better prepared for treating others akin to it. 
There is a fertilising production. In this sense too, " there 
is that scattereth, and yet increaseth." 

2. Materials Provided at the Time. 

These embrace the interpretation of the text, and the 
choice of a subject, which we have already considered. The 
precise mode of stating a subject can in many cases not be 
fixed until after wo have wrought out much of the general 
materials for the treatment of it. Besides interpreting the 
text, in the strict sense of the phrase, much may be derived 
from reflecting on it, and on its connection. If the treat- 
ment be textual or expository, a large part of the materials 
will be derived from this study of the text ; if it be a 
subject-sermon, still the text and its context may furnish 
much that will be useful in the discussion of the topic. 
Then fixing the mind upon the subject, or in succession upoa 
the several related subjects furnished by the textual or ex- 
pository method, the preacher must attempt the complete 
analysis and copious development* of the matters involved, 
and the collection of all associated matters which are likely 
to be useful. 

Kidder gives some good "practical suggestions in reference 
to invention, in the form of rules : 

" 1. Address your mind to the invention of thoughts, not 
words. Words may be employed, but only as auxiliaries. 

" 2. Note down or otherwise make sure of whatever rele- 
vant thoughts your mind can call to its aid, irrespective of 
order or mainly so. 

* Upon sources of Illustration, see remarks below, chap. vii. 



GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREACHING. 91 

" 3. At first be not too scrupulous on the subject of rele- 
vancy. Entertain whatever seemingly good thoughts come at 
your call. Try them, push them out to conclusions. Perhaps 
if not available themselves they will lead to others that are. 

" 4. Pursue invention in every variety of circumstance, in 
the study and out of it. Make it the subject of special and 
protracted occupation, and also of occasional attention when 
-walking or riding, when taking exercise or rest. One's very 
dreams at night may often be made serviceable for this object. 

" 5. Make an early selection of subjects in order to secure 
the advantages of the repeated and incidental action of the 
inventive powers. (He means, early in the week. This course 
"was pursued and recommended by Robert Hall.) 

" 6. Use former studies and preparations as helps to inven- 
tion rather than as substitutes for it. 

" Invention as thus practised will always strengthen but 
never exhaust itself. It will become a most delightful exercise, 
causing the mind to glow with rapture at its new creations and 
combinations." * 

The important part which Imagination plays in the inven- 
tion of materials will be noticed in a subsequent chapter ; t 
and the reaction of arrangement upon invention will attract 
our attention in discussing that subject. J The question how 
far and in what wajs we may properly employ commentaries, 
sermons upon the same text, etc., in preparing a sermon, will 
be examined presently. § 

3. Original Materials. 

Whether the materials are possessed beforehand, or provided 
at the time of preparation, it is obvious that they may be 
original, or borrowed. Under this latter division they will now 
be considered. 

1 . Originality may be absolute^ or relative. By the former is 
meant bringing into existence thoughts which the world never 
knew before, which had never arisen in any human mind. Of 
course this must be very rare. In the physical world, new 
facts are now constantly ascertained, and new mechanical con- 
trivances invented. But in the world of ideas, it is very 

* Kidder, Horn. p. 152. X Part II, chap. i. 

f Part III, chap. ▼. § See 4 of the present chapter. 



92 OBNBRAL MATERIALS OF PBEAOHmO. 

difficalt to be absolutely original.* " The ancients have stolen 
all our best ideas," is one of the sayings of the great Edinburgh 
Reviewer which cannot soon be forgotten. And not in modefti 
times alone has this been felt. Hear Chaucer : 

" For out of the old fieldes, as men saithe, 
Cometh al this new come fro yere to yere, 
And out of old bookes, in good faithe, 
Cometh al this new science that men lere." 

And Confucius, six centuries before our era, proclaimed himself 
only a student of antiquity. Yet even in this absolute sense, 
originality is possible, and we should not despair. Progress 
in some directions the world's thought does slowly make. 
Among all the uncounted millions of men, patient thinkers are 
far from numerous ; and he who will patiently think, why may. 
he not light upon some thought unknown to those who have 
gone before him 1 

But relatively y any man may be original, and to some extent 
every man is so. We produce thoughts which were not by us 
derived from any other mind, though other minds, at the time 
unknown to us, have also produced them. The same phases 
of nature and experiences of life awaken in us the same reflec- 
tions they have awakened in many others ; and seed-thoughts 
attain in us the same developments. Here there is everything 
to encourage. Much of the mental quickening, the conscious 
vigour, and buoyant self-reliance, which result from absolute 
originality, may also be wrought in us by thoughts relatively 
original. Of course the mental elation will not be so great, 
where we know that others must have had the same thought. 
In fact, some of the most marvellous self-conceit is to be 
observed in certain very ignorant men, who mistake their rela- 
tive originality for absolute ; thoughts having occured to them 
which neither they nor their ignorant neighbours had heard of, 
are supposed to be equally new to all the world. 

Now the basis of preaching cannot be original, because it 
must come from Scripture. But the preacher may be original, 
in several ways. He may have original views of the meaning 
of Scripture. It is entirely possible that any one of us should 
attain more just conceptions of the meaning of some passage, 
or certain aspects of a doctrine, than have ever before been gained. 

* Shedd, Horn. p. 8, makes it impossible, but he uses the word absolute 
. in a different sense. 



GENISAL HATBRIALS OF PBEAOHINO. 93 

And to interpret and ponder for ourselves, in the sense of rela- 
tive originality, is the privilege and the duty of all. We have 
no right to take for granted that eommentators and theologians 
are correct in their opinions ; and in fact theological discords 
and conflicts, with all their evils, have this advantage, that 
they compel the most trusting and the most slothful of us some- 
what to feel the necessity of thinking for ourselves. What 
freshness, what power there is, in truths which the preacher 
has himself wrought out from Scripture, drawing with his own 
bucket, as Lord Bacon says, " immediately where it springeth." 
The student of physical science must observe nature for him- 
self; and so in Theology, we must open our own eyes to behold 
and contemplate the teachings of God's Word. There is no 
limit to the relative originality which may in this respect be 
achieved. Again, the combination of Scripture teachings with 
the facts and truths which- we derive from nature, providence, 
human nature, life, affords large room for originality. Here in 
every direction the mind may expatiate, bringiug all things 
into relation to the Word of God And then in the choice of 
topics, the construction of discourse, the illustration and 
application of truth, a preacher may perpetually devise what 
shall be in some respects fresh, and relatively to him, 
originaL 

Originality is sometimes aimed at in unworthy ways, or 
made matter of affectation. Men of a certain character will 
take up with some heresy^ merely to display independence, to 
show that they, forsooth, are not tied down to the old opinions. 
Fcuradox may be properly employed, as it is by some able 
teachers and preachers, as it was by our Lord himself, to 
awaken attention to truth; but there are those who deal in the 
paradoxical as showing originality. OddUy, in ideas, expres- 
sions, or manner, is a mere caricature of originality. To say 
that such and such a preacher is '' an original,'' is to use the 
term in a very degraded sense. Young men and even older 
ones, sometimes pretend not to read, lest it should impair their 
originality. " We have seen the works of a painter, who would 
see no Raffaelles or Van Dycks, lest he should spoil his native 
manner. He has certainly succeeded in avoiding all that one 
beholds in these great masters/' ""^ 

2. Why is originality so desirable 1 We may answer, first, 
that independent thinking, more than anything else, will deve- 
lop, discipline, and strengthen the mind. In the matter of 

* Alexander, Thoughts on Preaching, p. 862L 



94 GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREAOHING. 

mental development, it must never be forgotten, the hardest 
way is the easiest way, the slow way the swiftest. So far as a 
man's health and vigour is concerned, a week's quiet walking is 
worth much more than a week's travel on the cars, though the 
latter should carry him thousands of miles. If it be possible, 
let us persuade ourselves to much of independent and patient 
thinking; otherwise we shall never be men. 

Again, remember that originality renders discourse greatly 
more attractive and impressive. On the one band, an original 
thought interests the speaker more. It is his offspring; it 
awakens in him a parental affection, and perhaps a thrill of 
parental pride. It is his possession ; he is no dispenser now of 
other men'b bounty, but gives of his own ; and in knowledge as 
elsewhere, " to give is haj)pier than to receive.'* But no ana- 
logies will do justice to the feeling — the pleasure, the confi- 
dence, the hopefulness and earnestness, with which a man 
utters what is even relatively original. On the other hand, it 
interests the audience more. As simply new, it gratifies their 
natural love of novelty. If they consider the thought original 
with the speaker, there arises a heightened admiration of him, 
and a higher regard for all that he says. And then they sym- 
pathize with the speaker's own feeling. Whatever makes his 
mind glow will warm theirs. In general, no man can interest 
others, save by that which exceedingly interests himself. Thus 
the two causes combine. And no doubt there are other causes. 
Analysis cannot fully reach the secret of that delight with 
which we regard what comes as a new creation, a fresh exist- 
ence. But even a little reflection should make us feel more 
deeply the importance of original thinking. 

It is an obvious inference that we ought to think out for 
ourselves the most familiar topics, and exhibit them in our own 
manner. In discoursing upon matters so common-place as the 
pleasures of piety, or the danger of delay, one should strive, 
by long and earnest reflection, to gain views of the subject, or 
a method of presenting it, which will be his own. Happy the 
preacher who can thus give to momentous but too familiar 
themes some heightened interest, some new impressiveness. 
Yet the warning must here be repeated : mere oddity is a very 
different thing from originality, and it is better to be common- 
place but in earnest, than to be manifestly straining after 
novelty. 

Another inference is, that even ideas which have been bor- 
rowed, ought to be so thoroughly thought over as to become a 



GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREiOHING. 95 

part of our own thinking. Otherwise they will commonly fail 
to take a firm hold of ourselves or of the hearers. As a 
government often takes foreign coins and passes them through 
its own mint, so the thoughts derived from others should 
receive the stamp of our own minds, which will give them 
newness of aspect, full value, and ready acceptance. 

3. Obstacles to originality. These are numerous and power- 
ful, as might be taken for granted when we remember how 
desirable it is, and yet how rarely it is found in any high 
degree. 

Erroneous views of the nature of originality prevent many 
persons from attaining it. Some imagine that there can be 
nothing worth the name, unless it be absolutely original, new to 
the human race ; and as this can of course be very seldom 
achieved, they despair, and content themselves too commonly 
-with taking ideas at second hand. But, as we have seen, rela- 
tive originality of a very high order may exist, where there is 
little or nothing of absolute addition to the stock of human 
knowledge, and may greatly augment a man's power. Some 
refrain from reading as a mjans of promoting originality, and 
thus condemn themselves to great mental barrenness. It would 
be as wise to avoid conversation. Who does not know tKe 
quickening, fructifying power of talk with an intelligent friend 
upon a subject we have been studying ] Though nothing be 
directly borrowed, yet new thoughts are often svygtistedj and we 
are led to see more clearly what we had but dimly perceived. 
The same eflfect may be produced by reading. In general, we 
ought vigorously and patiently to think upon the subject before 
either reading or conversing upon it ; otherwise, the mind Ib in 
danger of merely following tlie track which others have marked 
out, instead of approaching the subject in its own manner. 
But after such personal reflection, then reading and couversa- .. 
tion may be found highly stimulating and suggestive, lead- 
ing to much that is really our own, but which but for this 
contact with other minds would not have occured to us. A 
third class, by mistaking oddity or eccentricity for originality, 
misdirect and pervert their aspirations and powers, and not 
only fail to accomplish what tliey might have done, but pre- 
judice many, who make the same mistake, against the idea of 
trying to be original. And still another error is seen in the 
fact that credit for originality is so often wrongly assigned. 
Some men really think profoundly, and develop views tho- 
roughly their own, but as they state them with great clearness 



96 GENERAL MATERIALS OF PRBAOHINO. 

a^d simplicity, the masses think that anybody might have said 
that, and that they themselves always kuew it. Others, by 
holding up dim, formless phantoms of thought, by using ob- 
scure, but high wrought, peculiar, and impassioned language, 
are regarded as wonderfully original, when if their ideas were 
brought out in a clear light they would appear to be either 
nothing at all, or something familiar. Thus it happens that 
aspiring young minds, setting out in pursuit of originality, are 
sometimes led to seek it in affectations of style, rather than in 
genuine, clear thinking.* 

It may be said that no persons capable of such originality 
would fall into such errors as these ; but not only do they 
diminish the amount of original thinking in multitudes, but 
they have also much effect upon some men of considerable 
powers. 

A second hindrance is found in native indolence. Original 
thinking is difficult, laborious, and usually slow, the hardest 
work that men ever attempt. Who can wonder that easy bor- 
rowing, or even shameless stealing, is so often substituted 1 

A third obstacle, especially at the present day, is the vast 
extensiion of literature, and the attractive forms which new 
books and periodicals assume, seducing us by their charm, or 
imposing on us unreal claims to our acquaintance. Reading 
accompanied by honest thinking, is promotive of originality ; 
but we are tempted to waste ourselves upon a species of 
reading which does not demand reflection, nor leave time for 
it. One who is inclined to free indulgence in light literature, 
must curb himself with very steady hand, or he will never 
achieve much as a thinker, nor be in any respect worth 
much to the world. Even of books upon religious subjects, 
very many of the most attractive that appear, are by no 
means so stimulating, so provocative of good thinking, as the 
older books from which they were mainly drawn. 

And the character of the age is in many respects unfavour- 
able to profound thought The demand is for quick processes, 
and so-called " practical " results. " Knowledge maide easy " 
is the rage. The inevitable result is a grievous tendency to 
superficiality among the people, and in their instructors to 

* Archbishop Whately was fond of comparing this would-be original style 
to tile case of Dean Swift's antiquary, who had found a Roman shield with 
some very curious and almost illegible inscriptions, which he invited a party 
of friends to help him decipher ; but the cook having taken a notion to 
scour off the rust, it turned out to be an old pot-lifl. 



GENERAL. MATERIALS OF PRBAOHING. 97 

the display of prodigiously extensive and varied superficial 
attainments. Teachers are tempted to substitute readiness, 
variety, boundless surface-knowledge, with brilliancy, and point 
and paradox, for deep tl^inking, and thorough acquaintance 
with a few subjects. We must constantly remind ourselves 
that real knowledge has three dimensions, length, breadth, 
and depth. Our acquisitions in that noble domain should 
not be confined to the surface of things, but should corres- 
pond to the old law as to the tenure of land, by which pos- 
session extends up to the sky and down to the centre of 
the earth. Such knowledge is the handmaid, nay, the sister 
of original thought.* 

Two remarks may be made here in conclusion. One is, 
that the preacher should not desire to originate any part of 
the fundamental material of his preaching. He should not 
only submit, but rejoice, to take this from the Word of God. 
Too many preachers are in these days seeking after origi- 
nality, and other novelty, by forsaking the Scriptures. The 
other remark is, that we must not aspire after originality in 
the spirit of pride or selfish ambition, but as a means of 
doing more to benefit men, and to glorify the Redeemer. 

4. Borrowed Materials and Plagiarism. 

A plagiary, among the Romans, was a kidnapper, one who 
stole free men and made slaves of them. A late Roman 
writer, by a natural analogy, applies the odious name to one 
guilty of literary theft, stealing a man's ideas ; and the lan- 
guages (derived from Latin retain the word in this sense. 
Plagiarism has from the earliest times been censured and 
satirized, and no man defends it, any more than other 
stealing would be defended.t But then what is plagiarism, 
and what is lawful borrowing] Some practise the former 
who design only the latter, and some, through morbid dread 
of that which is disgraceful, shrink from what is innocent 
and helpful. There are two questions to be considered, the 
proper use of other men's thoughts, and the proper acknow- 
ledgment of such use. 

* Some of these obstacles are mentioned in the Christian Review for 
1842, p. 142 flf. 

f Chrysostom, in his beautiful treatise on the Priesthood (451), makes 
a slightly humorous complaint as to the charges of plagiarism made against 
preachers, sometimes eyen for repeating something of their own. 

H 



98 GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREACHING. 

1. What vss is it proper to make, in preparing a sermon, 
of ideas derived from others? The question is in principle 
the same, as regards what we have read, and what we have 
heard ; though many persons use with great freedom what 
they have heard, in the pulpit, the lecture-room, or in con- 
versation, who are much more strict as to the fruits of 
reading. But in another respect the inquiry, as a practical 
one for him who is about to prepare a sermon, divides 
again. 

(1.) What use shall be made of that which we have 
previously learned? 

Never appropriate an entire discourse, whether with or 
without acknowledgment. It might be lawful, under peculiar 
circumstances, to read to an audience some choice sermon, 
avowedly as reading; as an occasional exercise, by a good 
reader, and with a congregation who fancy it, this might do 
good. Such was in fact the idea which Addison recommended 
in the oft-quoted humorous account of Sir Roger de Coverley's 
chaplain — just reading a sermon as one might read a poem; 
and enjoying it in much the same way. 

" * At his first settling with me, I made him a present of 
all the good sermons which have been printed in English, 
and only begged of him that every Sunday he would pro- 
nounce one of them in the pulpit. Accordingly, be has 
digested them into such a series, and they follow one another 
naturally, and make a continued system of practical divinity.* 

" As Sir Roger was going on in his story, the gentleman 
we were talking of came up to us ; and upon the knight's 
asking him who preached to-morrow (for it was Saturday 
night) told us, the Bishop of St. Asaph in the morning, and 
Dr. South in the afternoon. He then showed us his list 
of preachers for the whole year; where I saw with a great 
deal of pleasure Archbishop Tillotson, Bishop Sanderson, Dr. 
Barrow, Dr. Calamy, with several Hving authors who haye 
published discourses of practical divinity. I no sooner saw 
this venerable man in the pulpit, but I very much approved 
of my friend's insisting upon the qualifications of a good 
aspect and a clear voice ; for I was so charmed with the 
gracefulness of his figure and delivery, as well as with the 
discourses he pronounced, that I think I never passed any 
time more to my satisfaction. A sermon repeated after this 
manner is like the composition of a poet in the m(»ith of a 
graceful actor."* 

•Spectator, No. 106. 



GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREACHING. 99 

But to preach, as preaching, a discourse which we acknow- 
ledge to have been borrowed from others, is so incongruous 
and unpleasing a thing as to be very rarely done. The real 
practice, with some preachers, is still worse. They shrink 
from acknowledging what they do, but still allow themselves 
to do it. In England, this is well known to be very common. 
It is wonderful how those who boast of being gentlemen can 
practise an appropriation which is condemned by the guilty 
pains they take to hide it. And such a usage on the part 
of those who profess to be Christians, could never have arisen 
save in connection with radically wrong ideas as to the very 
nature of preaching. 

Never appropriate the complete outline of a discourse. 
Many persons in our country appear to think this perfectly 
lawful. Ludicrous stories are often told of sermons pursuing 
the same train of thought with one shortly before preached 
at the same place ; and sometimes the real author incurs 
the blame. But one rebukes himself for being amused at 
such stories, for they have a grave side, which is humiliating. 
I>oes the evil of stealing depend on whether one is caught 
at it, as the Spartans taught their boys? Shall a Christian 
minister, in the very performance of his solemn duties, delibe- 
rately do what he woul^ be ashamed to confess % Let any 
one try the experiment, if he likes, of acknowledging that 
the plan of his sermon is derived from so and so, and see to 
what an extent, save in very peculiar cases, it will diminish 
the interest. The people do not merely come to hear a dis- 
<sourse — ^they come to hear a living man, communicating to 
them his earnest thought and feeling ; and if the principal 
ideas of the sermon are from another preacher, they regard 
themselves as only hearing a dead man. If then it would 
be bad policy to proclaim -the borrowing, how can it be 
honesty to conceal it ? The power of custom, including the 
known practice of some good men, the seductions of sloth, 
and the overwork to which ministers are often subjected, 
have wrought in many minds a confusion of ideas on this 
subject, which can alone account for the frequent cases of 
unacknowledged appropriation. 

The books of "Sketches and Skeletons," which are so often 
published and so widely bought, are an unmitigated evil, and 
a disgrace to the ministry of the gospel. If it be said that 
they may be profitably studied as specimens of sermonizing, 
there is the obvious answer that it would be much more 



100 GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREACHING. 

profitable to analyze 'for ourselves the full sermons of really 
great men. There is no excuse for such books, and no 
minister should suflFer one of them to remain in his library. 
But they are deplorably common in this country, and still 
more so in Germany.* Nor is the practice of recent origin. 
As early as 1517, there appeared in Paris a Latin volume of 
this character, entitled " The Preacher's Gem," and styling 
itself " a most excellent and divine work." And at Amsterdam 
in 1642, appeared, " Dormi secure: vel Cynoaura professorum 
ac studioBorum eloqu&ntiod^ etc, (Sleep without anxiety : or, 
The Cynosure of professors and students of eloquence, etc.) 
The idea appears to be that one who possesses this book need 
not have his sleep disturbed by anxiety about next Sunday's 
sermon. Coquerel, who mentions these two works, remarks 
that it may be doubted whether persons would awake from 
this sleep to be eloquent ;t and we may add that one who 
has determined to borrow a plan from such a book should be 
too much ashamed of himself to sleep at all. J 

But while refusing to appropriate a discourse, or the out- 
line of one, we may with perfect propriety employ among the 
general materials of a discourse thoughts previously read or 
heard, provided we use them in a proper manner, and with 
suitable acknowledgment ; and th^se conditions will be dis- 
cussed presently. 

(2.) After selecting the text and subject, shall we read 
about it ? 

If the text is not perfectly plain, in itself and the context, 
one certainly ought, at an early period of his preparation, 
to consult the best eocplanatory commentaries, for help in un- 
derstanding it. 

Other books, such as theological treatises, sermons on the 
same text or on similar topics, commentaries in the strict sense 
(those which do not so much explain a text, as enlarge upon 
its teachings, e. g. Matthew Henry,) etc., may be read with 

* The " Homiletical " Notes in the good Commentaries of Lange, are too 
much of this character, and should be used only with great reserve and 
caution. 

+ Coquerel, Observ. sur la Pr^ication, p. 2C4. On the subject of 
" Skeletons," see vigorous remarks in Shcdd, Hom. p. 116-122. 

:{: It is by no means designed to cast unmerited reproach upon some 
excellent ministers who have used these books from the force ef example, 
without ever sufficiently reflecting upon the general impropriety of the 
practice 



GENERAL MATERIALS OF PRBAOHIKG. 101 

great profit, though we do not borrow anything from them, 
because they will help to fix the mind on the subject, and often 
suggest thoughts, which will be truly our own, and yet would 
not have occurred to us but for the reading.* 

But may we borrow % Certainly, we may, and sometimes 
ought to borrow. There are two extremes. On the one hand, 
a mistaken desire for originality and independence, causes 
some able men to abstain from reading anything on the text or 
subject. Such a man deceives himself, for many of the 
thoughts which his own mind now furnishes were originally de- 
rived from reading or hearing. True, these are more likely to 
have been digested and assimilated than what is read just at 
the time of preparation. But this difference does not neces- 
sarily hold, for many thoughts are long retained by the memory 
in a perfectly crude state, and what results from reading at the 
time should not be used until after thoroughly working it over 
in our own mind. And besides this self-deception, he deprives 
himself of what would often prove valuable help in contem- 
plating the subject on every side, and presenting it in the most 
effective manner. The other extreme is that of reading instead 
of thinking, just cramming the mind with a medley of other 
men's thoughts, and constructing a discourse out of these. 
Such a method of preparation, though often adopted, is exceed- 
ingly objectionable. But can we avoid the latter extreme only 
by rushing to the former ? 

There is surely a middle course. We may both think and 
read. On most texts and subjects, think long and laboriously 
before reading at all (except it be the commentaries as to the 
meaning of the text). Put down in writing some statement of 
your principal thoughts, and make out the plan of the dis- 
course. Afterwards read whatever bears upon the subject, as 
far as you have time, or see occasion, and in reading, think for 
yourself still, not only weighing carefully what the author says, 
but following out any train of thought which he may suggest 
to your own mind. On some subjects, concerning which we 
lack inforrnation, it may be well to read widely before construct- 
ing the plan of the sermon. But one will not often determine 
to preach upon a subject, until he has gained some general 
knowledge of it. And now if we have found an idea, or 
remember one formerly met with, which can be easily wrought 
into our plan of discourse, and which would make the sermon 
more instructive, interesting or impressive, why, let us use it — 

* Comp, above 3. 



102 GENERAL MATERIALS OF PREACHING. 

of course with proper acknowledgment. Not only may minor 
ideas, illustrations, etc., be borrowed, but in rare cases even 
one head of the discourse, the other heads being our own. The 
question is, which will be best, on the one hand for your 
general improvement as a preacher, and on the other for the 
eflfectiveness of the present sermon, that you should use this 
idea, or should omit it. 

Everything thus borrowed must have been fully compre- 
hended, and must take its place naturally as a part of the dis- 
course. A discourse is a structure, and extraneous matters 
which do not fit into it and subserve its objects, will, however 
admirable in themselves, be oflfensive and hurtfdl, as would be 
such additions to a dwelling-house or a steam engine. 

2. In what cases, and in what ways, shall one make acknow- 
ledgment of having borrowed ] 

When the remark is obvious, or belongs to the common stock 
of religious ideas, so that it might have occurred to ourselves, 
although it happens to have been drawn from another, then it 
is often unnecessary to make aiiy acknowledgment. When the 
idea is at all striking, so that hearers would give any special 
credit for it as a good thing, then we must not take a credit 
which is undeserved, but must in some way indicate that the 
thought was derived from another. 

In what cases shall we mention the precise source] When 
the author's name would give greater weight to the idea, or in 
some way attach interest to it ; e. g. Bacon or Bunyan, White- 
field or Spurgeon. Again, when we may hope thereby to lead 
some hearer to read the book mentioned. Or generaUy, when 
to name the source would do any good. It is well to be sure 
that one can pronounce the author's name correctly, or else to 
omit it. Many French and German names occur in our re- 
ligious literature, and many hearers know enough of those 
languages to make the efiect very bad, if the preacher 
ludicrously mispronounces them. 

Otherwise it is enough merely to indicate that the thought 
was derived from some source. Avoid a parade of honesty 
about acknowledging. Avoid, too, an ostentatious display of 
wide reading. Let the acknowledgment interrupt as little as 
possible the flow of thought — detract as little as possible fipom 
the interest which the idea is calculated to awaken. If it 
would decidedly interrupt or detract, then omit the acknow- 
ledgment, — and the thing borrowed. In general, the method 
of acknowledging calls for the exercise of judgment, and good 



QENEOIL UATEiUALS OF PBEAOHIHQ. 103 

taste. Without formality or set phrases, and with graceful 
simplicity, state, indicate, or even merely iatimate, that the 
idea was derived from some other person. 

It is certainly important that on the whole subject of bor- 
rowing, one should have jnat principles ; and that he ahould 
early in life establish such principles, and form correct habits 
from the beginning. Otherwise, there will either be a wrong 
practice continued through life, with very iujurjous results to a 
man's character and influence, or when he comes to see more 
clearly, there will be much to regret in bis past course. 



CHAPTER V. 

SPECIAL MATERIALS— EXPLANATION. 

1. Explanation op Texts, Including Exegesis, Narration, 
AND Description. 2. Explanation of Subjects, In- 
cluding Definition, Division, Exemplification, Com- 
parison. 

The materials of preaching are obviously boundless. To 
collect in general, by observation, reading and reflection, and 
then to select and adapt to the design of each particular dis- 
course, is the preacher's great task. And not only the character 
of the materials, but the method of handling them, must vary 
indefinitely, according to the design of the sermon. But 
certain special classes of materials are of such importance, and 
their proper treatment of such difficulty, as to justify a separate 
discussion. The classes here selected for that purpose, and 
treated in successive chapters, are the materials of Explanation, 
of Proof, of Illustration, and of Application. This is not pre- 
sented as a scientific classification of materials. It by no 
means embraces all, and its departments sometimes overlap. 
Thus illustration may be employed to explain, to prove, or to 
impress; application may embrace explanation, proof, and 
persuasion ; and certain processes which are always classed 
under explanation, as narration and description, are often used 
at the same time, and even mainly, for other than explanatory 
ends. But it is thought that a scientific classification would 
here be less useful than the practical discussion of certain 
leading objects according to which the preacher must invent 
and handle his materials.''^ 

There is in preaching very frequent need of Explanation. 

* A full and in general valuable discussion of Invention may be found in 
Day's Art of Discourse, p. 42-207. He classifies materials according to the 
four objects of explanatian, 'conjirmatum, e^scitation, and persuasion. His 
treatment of Explanation is the most elaborate in existence (p. 57-111,) and 
although too formal in some respects, it will be found instructiTe and sugges- 
tive. See also Vinet, p. 153-169. 



EXPLANATION. 105 

Numerous passages of Scripture are not understood, or are 
even misunderstood, by our hearers ; and many have become 
so accustomed to passing over these, as to be no longer aware 
that they present any diflBculty. Some of the most important 
doctrines of the Bible are in general very imperfectly under- 
stood ; those who receive them need clearer views of what they 
profess to believe, and those who object to them are often in 
fact objecting to something very different from the real doc- 
trine. The plan of salvation is seldom comprehended till one 
is really willing to conform to it, so that there is constantly 
arising new occasion for answering the great question, " What 
must I do to be saved ? " And a thousand questions as to what 
is true and what is right in the practical conduct of life, perplex 
devout minds, and call for explanation. Preaching ought to be 
not merely convincing and persuasive, but eminently instruc- 
tive. We often belabour men with arguments and appeals, 
when they are much more in need of practical and simple 
explanations, as regards what to do, and how to do it. And 
while some persons present may have repeatedly heard us 
explain certain important matters, we must not forget there 
are others, children growing up, strangers moving in, converts 
entering the church, to whom such explanations will be new, 
and are in the highest degree necessary. 

But just here the inexperienced minister may profit by 
several homely cautions. Do not attempt to explain what is 
not assuredly true. One sometimes finds great difficulty in 
working out an explanation of a supposed fact or principle, 
because it is really not true. Do not undertake to explain 
what you do not understand. Oh the inmifferable weariness of 
listening to a man who does this ! And in preaching as well as 
elsewhere, it happens so often as to be ridiculous, if it were 
not mournful. How can the house-wife cook what has never 
been caught 1 How can the preacher explain what he does not 
understand 1 Never try to explain what cannot be explained. 
Some things taught in the Bible are in their essence incompre- 
hensible ; . as, for example, the nature of the Trinity, or the 
coexistence of absolute Divine predestination with human 
freedom and accountability. In such a case it is very impor- 
tant to explain just what the Scriptures really do teach, so as 
to remove misapprehension ; and it may sometimes be worth 
while to present any remote analogies in other spheres of 
existence, so as perhaps to diminish the hearer's unwillingness 
to receive the doctrine ; but attempts to explain the essential 



106 EXPLANATION. 

difficulty must nceessarily fail, and the failure will react so as 
only to strengthen doubt and opposition. Do not waste time 
in explaining whoU does not need eocplanqtion,* A conspicuous 
instance is the nature of faith. Men frequently complain that 
they do not understand what it really is to believe, and preach- 
ers are constantly labouring to explain. But the complaint is 
in many cases a mere excuse for rejection or delay, and the 
real difficulty is in all cases a lack of disposition to believe. 
Elaborate explanations do not lessen this indisposition, do but 
strengthen the supposed excuse, and may even embarrass the 
anxious enquirer with the notion that there is something very 
mysterious about faith, when it is in fact so simple as not to 
admit of being explained. Our main duty is to tell the people 
what to believe, and why they should believe it. 

Explanation op Texts. 

To explain the Scriptures would seem to be among the 
primary functions of the preacher. t And there will often be 
occasion to explain, not merely the text of the sermon, but 
various other passages of Scripture which may be introduced 
into the discussion. The power of making such explanations 
attractive as well as clear, will of course depend largely upon 
the preacher's turn of mind. But the most gifted in respect 
of this important task should seek constant improvement, and 
they who have great difficulty must put forth diligent and 
hopeful eflforts to overcome it. What nobler work than that 
of "opening" the Scriptures, as Paul did at Thessalonica t 
(Acts xvii. 3.) 

The Exegesis of texts, as the process by which the prefacher 
himself comes to understand them, has already received our 
attention. J Pulpit exegesis, or exposition, is in certain respectd 
a different thing. "We have here, save in exceptional cases, to 
present results and not processes. We must omit various 
matters, which have perhaps greatly interested ourselves, be- 
cause they would not interest the people, or do not pertain to 
the object of the present discourse. Preachers sometimes 
allow themselves, in the introduction to the sermon or as a 
digression, to give long explanations of something in a passage 

* Comp. Vinet, Horn. p. 166. 

f Comp. on Expos. Sermons, Part II, chapter iii. 

X Above, chapter ii. 



EXPLANATION. 107 

or its connection, which has no bearing on their subject, and 
thus impairs unity, and distracts attention. There must of 
course be no parade of acquaintance with the original lan- 
guages, and there should be no morbid fear of being charged 
with such parade. Commentaries may be mentioned if the 
people know something of them, and would be thereby more 
readily satisfied, or if it is desirable to bring good popular 
authors to their notice. To repeat lists of strange and high- 
sounding names in favour of this or that interpretation, is 
always useless, and is in general a very pitiful display of cheap 
erudition, which with the help of certain books may all be 
gotten up at second hand in a few minutes. One may very 
easily indicate, without any array of authorities, that this is 
the view of the best writers, of some good commentaries, etc. 
The great matter is, to take the results of the most careful 
investigation in our power, select from them such points as are 
appropriate, and present these clearly, briefly, and if possible 
in such a way as to be interesting. Sometimes the text, or 
another passage introduced, may be amply and admirably ex- 
plained by a few words ; but such words do not come of them- 
selves — they result from close thinking, and careful choice of 
expressions. Sometimes passages may be introduced in such a 
connection, as without a word of explanation to give them new 
meaning and preciousness. It is a fault in many able ministers, 
that they comparatively neglect to bring in and explain the 
apposite sayings of Scripture which would both give and 
borrow light. And however congregations may shrink from 
elaborate exegesis or bungling and tedious attempts to explain, 
they will always welcome the felicitous introduction, and quick, 
vivid elucidation of passages from God's Word. 

Narration has in preaching a peculiar character. Recent 
works ou Rhetoric treat of it almost exclusively as practised 
in historical writing and the like.* Ancient writers treat of 
oratorical narration, and are therefore more valuable for our 
purpose, t though relating chiefly to the narrative in judicial 
oratory. The preacher of course narrates as a speaker, and 
deals mainly with Scripture history. A speaker must always 
subordinate narration to the object of his discourse, the con- 

* Thus Day's Art of Discourse, and Bain's Rhetoric, each of w^dch con- 
tains a good discussion from that point of view. 

t Particularly Artist, Rhet. Ill, 16, and Quintil. IV, 2, which will be found 
Teiy suggeatiye. 



108 EXPLANATIONS. 

viction or persuasion which he wishes to effect.* He must not 
elaborate or enlarge upon some narrative merely because in 
itself interesting, nor follow the story step by step, according 
to its own laws. " In demonstrative speeches the narration is 
not continuous, but given in scattered portions ; for one must 
go over the actions out of which the speech arises ; for a speech 
is a kind of compound, having one portion, indeed, independent 
of art, and another portion originating in art." That is, the 
facts are independent of the speaker, but he breaks them up 
and presents them according to his object. " Owing to this, 
there are times when one ought not to narrate every fact 
successively ; because this mode of exposition is difficult to 
remember. The one style of narration is too simple ; the 
other has the grace of variety, and is not so void of elegance. 
But what you have to do is to awaken the recollection of facts 
well known ; on which account many subjects will stand in no 
need of narration— supposing, for instance, you would praise 
Achilles, because all are acquainted with his actions — but you 
must simply use the actions without narration. If, on the 
other hand, one wishes to praise Critias, it is necessary to nar- 
rate ; for not many are acquainted with his exploits, "t 

And so when we preach with reference to the minor and 
less familiar personages of Scripture, it is proper enough to 
narrate all the facts concerning them. But when it is one 
of the great characters we must choose between two courses. 
We may select the salient or characteristic points of his 
history, and so narrate these as to exhibit the chief lessons 
of that history, introducing such details as are to the pur- 
pose, and rigorously omitting all others. Thus the history 
of Joseph, of Job, of John the Baptist, may be conveniently 
treated. In such a case, every speaker will mention or en- 
large upon different parts of the history, according to his 
particular object ; as Stephen's speech, and that of Paul at 
Antioch in Pisidia, sketch very differently the history of 
Israel; and as Paul in the two speeches which tell the story 
of his conversion, expands in each of them certain matters 
which in the other are but slightly touched, adapting the 
narration to the character and wants of his audience. J But 
it is generally better to choose some one event of the man's 
history, or some one trait of his character, and narrate only 

* Narratio est rei factae utilu ad pei'suadendum expositio. 

Quintil. IV. ii. 31. f Arist. Khet. Ill, 16, 1-3. 

X Comp. Acts chap. vii. with chap, xiii, aud chap. xxii. with chap, zzvL 



EXPLANATION. 109 

T^hat bears upon that. In preaching upon the meekness of 
Moses, there would be occasion to state briefly those circum- 
stances of his training and career which were particularly- 
unfa vourable to the development of meekness, and then to 
narrate, with vivid touches, the leading instances in which 
his meekness was exhibited, as well as those in which it 
temporarily failed ; and the discourse would properly close 
with a somewhat extended application of the whole matter 
to ourselves. In this way the history of Moses would be 
much more impressively reproduced, than if one should 
attempt an outline of the whole. 

Narration is usually given in the introduction to the 
sermon. In so doing special pains should be taken not to 
have it too long, not to wander into parts of the story 
which have no bearing upon the design of the discourse, and 
not to pause, except in very rare cases, for remarks upon 
outside topics which the narrative may suggest. There is 
especial danger here of violating the laws of unity and pro- 
portion. 

Besides the instances in which some history in the Bible 
is our theme, there will be constant occasion to derive UIils- 
tration from Scripture history, and great demand for skill in 
the brief and interesting narration of events thus employed. 
Happy the preacher who can in this way keep ever fresh 
in the minds of his hearers those beautiful and sacred 
stories, which are not only sweet to the heart of childhood 
and full of instruction to youth, but which, when rightly 
contemplated, assume new interest and meaning at every 
stage of life. 

It is a rather common fault in the pulpit to narrate in a 
declamatory way. The preacher has become excited, and he 
states a plain fact, or tells a simple story, with such vehe- 
mence and boisteroiisness as to be extremely incongruous. 
Quintilian keenly satirizes those who think it beneath their 
dignity to set forth facts iti every-day language, who do not 
seem to themselves eloquent, unless they have thrown every- 
thing into agitation by boisterous vociferation, and instead of 
simply narrating, imagine that they have here a field for 
showing ofi^, and "inflect the voice, set back the neck, and 
fling the arm against the side, and riot in every variety of 
ideas, words, and style."* Let us learn the lesson.+ 

• Quintil. TV, 2, 37-9. 

-f* As to narration in preaching, comp. on Historical Subjects, chap. 8, 
3, and on Expository Sermons, Part II, chap. 3. 



110 EXPLANATION. 

Description is usually a necessary part of narration, sepa- 
rate scenes of the narrative being to some extent described. 
There is also frequent occasion to describe Scripture scenes 
apart from their connection in the narrative, as in the intro- 
duction to a sermon, in the employment of historical illus- 
trations from Scripture, etc. And while we speak here of 
narration and description only as regards the events and 
scenes of the Bible history, it is obvious that the same skill 
may be applied to that great variety of illustrative matter 
from every other source, which must be vividly narrated 
or described in order to make any impression. A leading 
American preacher has said that " he who would hold the ear 
of the people, must either tell stories or paint pictures." 

Power of description is of course partly a natural gift ; but 
many intelligent men will marvel and lament that they can- 
not describe, when they have never fairly tried — never given 
themselves any general training in that respect, nor ever 
really studied any one scene or object which they attempted 
to describe. Such men are aware that they cannot work out 
an argument without much previous thought, but seem not 
aware that corresponding effort is necessary in order to 
achieve a good description. 

He who would describe anything, must have seen it ; not 
necessarily with bodily vision, but with the mind's eye. He 
must begin, then, with gaining correct informatioi^L about the 
scene or object ; and this information must extend, if possible, 
to details. As regards Scripture scenes, there is often need 
of a familiar acquaintance with Biblical Geography, and with 
the manners and customs of the Jews. While gathering such 
information, and after doing so, he must fasten his mind 
upon the scene, so that the imagination may realize it ; he 
must look at it as he would at a landscape or a painting, 
first surveying the whole, then inspecting the most interest- 
ing details, and afterwards comprising all in a general view. 
This should be kept up, with the point of view vmed, and 
repeated effort to imagine, till the whole scene stands out 
clear and vivid before the eye of the mind ; only then is he 
prepared to describe it. 

Remember now that a speaker is not to describe as the 
writer of a poem, a romance, or a book of travels might do, 
but is to make the description brief, and subordinate to the 
objects of his discourse ; we may thus perceive, in a general 
way, how the description should be managed. The outlines 
of the picture should be rapidly drawn, and may be rude, 



EXPLANATION. Ill 

provided they are distinct. Then certain prominent or cha- 
racteristic points of the scene must be presented. And with 
some of these there should be given a few of the most sug- 
gestive details, which will arouse the hearer's imagination to 
fill up the picture. In this lies the great art of description, 
especially for speakers — to stimulate the hearer's imagination 
into seeing for himself Sometimes there are a few details 
80 characteristic, that they need only the slightest indication 
of outline to make a picture ; as in a caricature, one or two 
peculiar features, somewhat exaggerated, and a few rude lines 
beside, will be more amusing than a finished picture, because 
more suggestive. And even where no remarkably striking 
details present themselves, one may contrive shght touches 
here and there, which will give life to the whole. If these 
are not afforded by our knowledge of the facts, they may be 
avowedly imagined, care being taken to have them suggest 
only what will harmonize with the facts. Thus in that 
remarkable home-scene at Bethany, after deseribing Mary 
seated at Jesus' feet, and hearing his word, one might 
imagine Martha as coming to the door of the room, her 
face heated with excitement and vexation, and after vainly 
striving to catch Mary's eye and call her forth, at length 
stepping straight to the Master himself, with her complaining 
request; and this slight glance at her before she enters will 
help to realize the scene. 

Avoid elaborate description. The preacher is expected always 
to cherish so practical a design, and feel such absorbing 
earnestness, as not to have time for painting finished pictures. 
Hearers of good taste will always feel them to be out of place. 
As regards the temptation to give high-wrought descriptions, 
because it will show one's talent in that respect, this must of 
course be resisted, like all other temptations to display. But 
we cannot turn to the best account the historical portions of 
Scripture, nor use to advantage other narrative and pictorial 
illustration, without cultivating our powers of narration and 
description ; and he who will patiently strive, under the guidance 
of correct principles, first to see clearly, and then to describe sug- 
gestively, may ere long surprise himself by the facility and 
pleasure with which he can bring out, in not many words, some 
story or scene from the Bible.* 

•CpfoPf on Expos. Preaching, Part II. chap. 3, and on Elegance of Style, 
Part III. chap. 4. Some good suggestions as to Description, are found in 
£ain'8 Bhetoric, p. 153 ff. 



112 explanation. 

2. Explanation op Subjects. 

< 

Here again there will be included, not merely the general 
subject of a discourse, but any other ideas which enter into the 
discussion. Both the former and the latter must often require 
explanation. Many matters, of truth and duty, are obscure 
and, without help, practically unintelligible to the popular 
mind ; many questions are sadly perplexing. To answer such 
inquiries, to clear up difficulties, and make as plain as possible 
the way of truth and the path of duty, is, as well as the 
explanation of Scripture, an important part of the preacher's 
work. 

One means of explaining subjects is by Definition " De- 
finition is defined by the etymology of the word. It marks the 
limits of an idea. To define definition positively, we say that 
it teaches of what elements an idea, as a whole, is composed. 
It consists in bringing together - many general ideas, of which 
one is limited by the others. When the idea, so to speak, is 
fortified, entrenched, so that on all sides it repels ideas which 
would mix themselves with it, the object is defined. We must 
not confound definition and judgment. Definition does but 
verify identity ; judgment expresses a relation. . . Defini- 
tion aims to make us know ; judgment, to appreciate. Very 
often, however, definition appreciates, and involves judgment ; 
and judgment is equivalent to a partial definition. We must 
not, however, confound with definition, those judgments which 
give force to a characteristic of an object, and are only designed 
to excite toward it such or such a sentiment. Examples : 

" * Rivers are roads that move and carry us whither we 
would go.' 

" * Hypocrisy is a homage which vice pays to virtue.' 

" ' Time is the treasure of the poor.* 

" * A tomb is a monument placed on the boundary between 
two worlds.' 

" ' Love is the fulfilling of the law.' " 

" When the notion of the attribute does not exhaust that of 
the subject, and one cannot be put indifferently for the other, 
we have not a definition, we have a judgment. . . A defini- 
tion is indeed a judgment, but a judgment which contains or 
begets all the judgments which at any time may be pronounced 
on an object, we have a definition."* 

Vinet proceeds to give examples of definition, including one 
which is very often called a definition, but surely without pro- 

* Vinet, Horn. p. 161-3. 



BXPIiANATIOK. 113^ 

priety : " Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evi- 
dence of things not seen." (Heb. xi. 1.) Other judgments may 
be pronounced upon faith, besides this. Faith is the substance 
of things hoped for, etc., just as love is the fulfilling of the 
law. It. may be said that faith is the means of union with 
Christ, but that is not defining faith. In fact, as we have 
before observed, it scarcely needs definition, or admits of it. 

We may sometimes most readily define an idea by connecting 
it with another idea, either in the way of distinction, or of 
comparison.* And instead of, or in addition to definition, it is 
often well to employ exempHfication, for which see below. 

" Definition is not only a mean« of perspicuity, an element 
of instruction, the basis of argumentation ; it is often the 
beginning of proof. Demonstration, at least, is firm and sure 
in proportion to the exactness and clearness of the definition." 
Everyone has observed how important it is in beginning a con- 
troversial discussion, public or private, that the question should 
be exactly defined ; otherwise oonftision of ideas is inevitable. 
Now it is equally, though not so obviously important, in con- 
ducting a discussion alone, that one should clearly define to 
himself the subject in hand. In fact it is more important itu 
this case, because controversy will sooner or later force the 
parrties to perceive that they have not clearly understood the 
question, or understood it in the same way, while the solitary 
thinker, or the unanswered speaker may remain permanently 
involved in the confusion or error produced by his lack of well-- 
defined conceptions at the outset. And the same thing appliei* 
to the definition of leading terms. But while we must always- 
define to ourselves, it is not always necessary that we should 
define to the audience. The proposition of the subject, if 
felicitous, may often be sufficiently perspicuous and precise ; or 
we may see that the discussion itself will most eflfectually give 
clear and definite views of the subject. In all definitions 
stated, we should eschew formality, and * avoid too subtle dis- 
trnctions and classifications, which assume a great habit of 
ai^straotion, and an exact knowledge of language on the part of 
i^e hearer.t 

A second means of explaining ideas is by Division. But^ 
the methods of dividing a subject, and of stating divisions, can 
be most conveniently examined when we come to discuss the 
arrangement of discourse. I 

♦See Vinet, p. 165. 
f Vinet, p. 164, 5. t Part 11> chapter ii. 

I 



114 EXPLANATION. 

Exemplification is often necessary, and almost always 
useful, in the work of explanation. The common mind does 
not readily apprehend general definitions, expressed in abstract 
terms ; and even to the most cultivated thinkers an idea will 
become more vivid and interesting, when there is added to a 
precise definition some apposite example. It would be difficult 
to present to a popular audience a clear distinction between 
pride and vanity, in the way of definition ; but by supposing 
certain circumstances, and showing how the proud man would 
act, and how the vain man, in such a case, or by taking up 
some particular action of a well-known character, and inquiring 
whether the motive here was pride or vanity, we may speedily 
make the difference plain. So instead of undertaking to ex- 
plain faith, one may describe a believer; or in addition to 
stating in general terms what will make a Christian happy, 
may give an ideal portraiture of a Christian who was happy.* 
And still more useful are exanjples from real life. Every 
preacher turns to account in this way his observation of life, 
and some do so with very great effectiveness. But besides 
what we have personally observed, we have the wide fields of 
history, and especially of Scripture history, from which to 
derive examples. In selecting those to be used, the preacher 
must enquire not only what is most apposite, but what will be 
most intelligible and interesting to the particular audience, and 
what he himself can most effectually handle. Historical ex- 
amples which would thrill one congregation, will make but 
little impression on another, not being familiar to them, or not 
linked to them by any ties of sympathy. In this, as in most 
respects, examples from Bible history are the best. They are 
more generally familiar than most others, and if any time be 
consumed in bringing the example vividly before the hearers, it 
is time well spent, because it promotes general acquaintance 
with the Scripture8.t 

Among the commonest and most useful means of explana- 
tion, is Comparison. With this may be classed Contrast, and 
also Analogy, which depends on a resemblance, not in objects 
themselves, but in their respective relations to certain other 
objects. Analogy, however, is more frequently employed for 

* Intoresting and instructive examples of ibis kind may be found in 
Jeter's "Christian Mirror." New York, Sheldon & Co. 

■f Comp. Vinet, p. 167, and see below on Illustration, chapter vii. 



EXPLANATION. 115 

the purpose of proof, and will be considered in the next 
chapter. Contrast needs no special remark.* 

The great mass of our Lord's Parables are comparisons. 
" The kingdom of heaven is like,^^ etc. " Unto what shall we 
liken this generation ? " Some of them are thrown into the 
form of narrative ; but others are mere statements of com- 
parison, and he uses many striking comparisons which are never 
called parables. The comparison of his coming to that of a 
thief (Matthew xxiv. 43,44) is an instructive example of the fact 
that comparison is all the more striking where we have one 
point of resemblance between objects or events in other res- 
pects very different. Several of the parables are rather cases 
of Exemplification than of Comparison ; as, for instance, the 
Rich Man preparing to take his ease, the Pharisee and the 
Publican, the Good Samaritan. Many of them are introduced 
for other purposes in addition to that of explanation. But 
they are chiefly comparisons, and are mainly used to explain. 
They thus impressively exhibit to us the importance of ex- 
planation, and the value of comparison as a means of effecting 
it. The same high example reminds us how desirable it is to 
derive our comparisons from matters famihar to our hearers.t 

* See Day's Art of Discourse, p. 104-9, 
f See further on Illustration, chapter vii. 



CHAPTER VI. 

ARGUMENT. 

Importance op Abgumbnt in PREAOHiNa 1. Preliminaries 
TO Argument — Burden op Proop, etc. 2. Principal 
Varieties op Argument. A. A Priori. B. From Tesi- 
. timony. C. Induction. D. From Analogy. E. De- 
duction prom Established Truths. F. Certain pobmS' 
OP Argument. 3. Reputation. 4. Order op Argu- 
ments. 5. General Suggestions as to Argument. 

Argument, in the logical, and at the same time popular, sense 
of the term, forms^a very large and very important dopartmenjt 
of the materials of preaching. There are prea^hers^ it is true^ 
who seem to consider that tbey have no occasion for reasonings 
that everything is to be accomplished by authoritative asser- 
tion and impassioned appeal* And this notion is not new ; for 
we find Aristotle complaining that previous writers on Rhetoric 
had concerned themselves only with the means of persuasion 
by appeals to feeling and prejudice. But preachers really have 
great use for argument. There are many gainsayers and 
doubters to be convinced, both as regards the truth of Christi- 
anity, and the truth of what we represent to be its teachings. 
There are many who in both respects believe, but whose 
religious affections and activity might be not a little quick- 
ened by jconvincing and impressive proofs that these things 
are so. " Even in the cases in which reasoning seems 
superfluous, it may be greatly useful, since its object is not 
so much to prove what is not yet believed, as to fill the mind 
with the evidence, and if we may so speak, to multiply the 
brightness of truth."* And besides, there is in Christian count- 
ries a multitude of people who say they believe, because they 
do not disbelieve or question, whose minds remain in a negative 
state towards the gospel, which is often the most fatal form 
of unbelief. Argument, as to the truth and value and claims 
of the gospel, as to the peril and guilt of their position, is one 

• Vinet, p. 176. 



ABGUMBIIT. IIV 

<rf the means by which we must strive to bring them, through 
the special blessing of the Spirit, into some real, some opera- 
tive belief. "Argument is also often useful in arousing the 
feelings. The mind becomes interested in a truth which is 
capable of clear proof. . . . The most successful preachers, 
as instruments of producing immediate conversion, the most 
successful revival preachers, are often at first severely argu- 
mentative. They thus gain power to bear down upon the 
conscience and heart."* 

Men delight in argument — not in its forms, but in its reality. 
Tou will see a light in the faces of unlettered rustics, when an 
argument drawn from matters within their range of thought or 
suited to their taste, is presented in terms so plain, so vigorous, 
so interesting, that they take hold of it with ease, and feel all 
its force and impressiveness. Some forms of error, which 
exalt the intellectual at the expense of the spiritual, gain much 
acceptance, particularly with a certain class of minds, by the 
argumentative garb in which they appear. The teachers of 
these errors come to men accustomed to a sleepy acquiescence 
in truths which they have never heard vigorously discussed, 
bring their powers of argument into agreeable exercise, and 
they are won. Even those who maintain sound doctrine, 
sometimes support it by very unsound reasoning, and thereby 
leave the way open for some shrewd opponent to overthrow 
their arguments, and thus appear to overthrow their doctrine. 

Every preacher, then, ought to develop and discipline his 
powerH in respect to argument. If averse to reasoning, he 
should constrain himself to practise it ; if by nature strongly 
inclined that way, he must remember the serious dauger of 
deceiving himself and others by false arguments. One who 
has not carefully studied some good treatise on Logic, should 
take the earliest opportunity to do so. It will render his mind 
sharper to detect fallacy, in others or in himself, and will help 
to establish him in the habit of reasoning soundly. The fact 
that, as so often sneeringly remarked, " preachers are never 
replied to," should make it a point of honour with preachers 
not to mislead their hearers by bad logic, and should render 
them exceedingly solicitous to avoid those self-deceptions> 
which they have no keen opponent to reveal Well-conducted 
debating-societies, prolonged argument with a friend in private 
conversation, and sometimes newspaper discussions, are found 
by various preachers to be a valuable discipline in this respect. 

* Hoppin, p. 166. 



118 ARGUMENT. 

But one must constantly remind himself to argue for truth 
rather than for victory, and as a rule never to maintain a 
proposition which he does not really believe. The delicate 
perception of truth, and the enthusiastic love for it, will in- 
evitably be impaired by a contrary course. 

Yet in preaching we need not act as if everything had to be 
proved. Some things cannot be proved ; some do not need to 
be, and others have been sufficiently proved before, and should 
now be taken for granted. Elaborate argument which is not 
called for, will only awaken doubt, or lead to weariness and 
disgust. We may usually assume the truth of Scripture.* 
And as to whatever the Scriptures plainly teach, while we must 
sometimes argue, it is often true, as Spurgeon has said, that 
the preacher should " dogmatize." " The accent of true 
authority is welcome to almost everyone. We are prepossessed 
in favour of men who, in this worid of uncertainty Ind per- 
plexity, express themselves on a grave subject with confidence 

and command The person of preachers is nothing, 

their message is the whole ; and not for their person, but for 
their message, do they claim respect ; but they would be as 
culpable not to demand this respect for the divine thought of 
which they are the depositories, as they would be foolish and 
ridiculous to demand it for their own thoughts." t But the 
right to speak with such authority will be acknowledged, among 
Protestants, only where the preacher shows himself able to 
prove, whenever it is appropriate, all that he maintains. 

Argument in preaching has one peculiarity. There is a 
great authority, the Word of God, whose plain utterances upon 
any question must be held by the preacher as decisive and 
find. This is proof without arguing in the narrow sense. 
Somewhat simularly do all men prove by the direct appeal to 
consciousness ; " you know that so and so is true," will in some 
cases settle the question. So, too, we frequently appeal to 
common sense ; though it should be noticed that men often 
put forward as a judgment of common sense what is only some 
opinion of their own, some conclusion reached by a process of 
reasoning, but so obscure as to escape -their consciousness and 
thus hide its fallacies from their view. But the Scriptures 
furnish a standard of final appeal having a far more frequent 
and extensive application. This does not at all enable us to 
dispense with argument. We have sometimes to prove that 

* Comp. chap, iii., 1, Doctrinal Subject, 
t Vinet, p. 228,229. 



ARGUMENT. 119 

the Scriptures are such a standard ; and to show what the 
Tarious passaiges of Script are teach on a subject, often requires 
not merely exposition but argument. Many truths have to be 
established partly by argument on other grounds, reinforced 
and confirmed by indirect teachings of the Bible ; and it is 
gratifying to believers, and demanded by unbelievers, that we 
should, wherever it is possible, exhibit the concurrence 
of reason and experience with the teachings of revelation. 
Thus we have constant need of argument. But in all our 
reajoning, care should be taken to treat the authority of Scrip- 
ture as paramount, and wherever its utterances are distinct 
and unquestionable, as decisive.* 

1. Preliminaries to Argument. t 

There are several questions which require to be considered, 
if at all, at the outset of an argument, and which are here 
thrown together under the head of preliminaries. 

1. Shall the proposition be stated at the beginning] It 
should certainly be very clear to the speaker's own mind. 
To argue about one does not exactly know what, is idle, and in 
many ways hurtful. As a general thing, it should be distinctly 
stated to the audience. If the subject be one very difficult for 
the common mind to grasp, it may be better to present it iu 
parts, to give first the several arguments which will elucidate 
as well as establish the proposition, and then state it in con- 
clusion. Or if there be a known unwillingness to hear the 
subject discussed, or a strong prejudice against the proposition 
to be established, it may be best to withhold the enunciation 
of the proposition. Even here, however, it will often be better 
to speak out frankly and boldly. Men always dislike to be 
caught unawares, and are especially intolerant of this on the 
part of a preacher, in whom logical strategy can be so readily 
stigmatized as uncandid. And the preacher must always avoid 

* See below, 2, B. E, and also 4, Order of ArgumeDts. 

f In this chapter much use is made of Whately, whose discussion of 
Arguments is the most valuable part of his work on Rhetoric, and un- 
equalled by other treatises. Some things have also been drawn directly 
from Aristotle, and from a variety of writers, as acknowledged in detail. 
The chapter contains a good deal which is not found in Whately, or which 
differs widely from his views. The attempt is made to arrange the sub- 
ject in a simpler and more practical way than has been met with in 
existmg works. 



120 AfiQxnassT. 

' ■ » 

as far as possible the appearance of being the antagonist of his 
hearers ; his designs are friendly and he wishes no conceal- 
ment. Only therefore in case of violent repugnance or extreme 
prejudice, or for some other special reason, will it be judicious 
for a preacher to keep back the statement of his proposition.* 

In stating the proposition, or any division of it, and in the 
whole conduct of an argument, great pains should be taken 
to avoid ambiguous terms, or if such must be empL)yed, to 
limit their meaning by the connection, or distinctly define 
them. Every one has observed how important it is, in public 
or private discussion between two paities, that they shall 
understand the leading terms of the question alike; every 
one has seen some long dispute turn out to have been merely 
a dispute about words. But though less obvious, the danger 
of this is just as great where a man is to argue without 
reply ; nay greater, because conflict is apt to develop, sooner 
or later, the difference as to the meaning of terms, while the 
unanswered reasoner may continue to the end confused and 
misled by obscure, indefinite, or ambiguous words, or utterly 
misapprehended by hearers who understand those words dif- 
ferently. The following terms, for example, frequently occur 
in religious argument, and very often embarrass and mislead 
by their ambiguity, viz., necessary, possible and impossible, 
reason, right and righteousness, good and evil, law, nature, 
person, church.t 

2. Burden of proof. On this subject, certain very erro- 
neous views have lately obtained currency, from a confusion 
of two different senses of an ambiguous term. 

It is obviously very important, at the outset of any discus- 
sion, to perceive clearly, and make clear to the hearers, on 
which side lies the oniis proband^ i. e., burden of proof. 
Now it is a principle generally acknowledged, and evidently 
correct, that no man is under obligation to prove a negative. 
The reasons for this are manifest. Any proposition which 
depends on proof, is true only when it is proven, for until 
then it depends on nothing : has no support. Why require 
a man to knock down what has not yet been set up? And 
then to prove a negative would often require impossible 
knowledge. John Foster has pointed out that the atheist 

* Comp. Day's Art of Discourse, p. 117 ; Vinet, p. 180. 

i* Most of tiiese are explained in the Appendix to Whately's Logie, 
tho^jgh not all in a satiBfactory manner. 



wbo Bot merely denies that there is .ft God, but asserts that 
there is no God, must have infinite knowledge in order to 
make sure of his assertion, for otherwise, somewhere beyond 
the bounds of his knowledge might be proof that there is 
a God ; that is to say, in respect of knowledge he must him- 
self be God. Something similar would be true in most cases 
of the attempt to prove a negative. It would demand more 
than finite knowledge; more than human powers. To prove 
a negative, then, is often impossible, and never fairly required. 
" He who alleges must prove . . And the stress is to be 
laid on the fact of alleging or affirming, not on the form of 
the proposition itself as affirmative or negative. ... If 
the allegation be in the negative form, it does not shift the 
burden of proof. . . He who makes an allegation puts 
into being a statement that did not exist before. He is 
properly called upon to account for it — ^prove it and thus 
make it a truth."* 

The burden of proving, then, rests on him who alleges : 
his allegation is nothing until proven, and until some prbof 
be adduced by him, the opponent has nothing to do. When 
proof is adduced, the opponent examines how far it is valid 
and conclusive, still acting only on the defensive. If in 
addition he presents an objectiwi, he must (unless it be per- 
fectly evident) prove the objection to be real, and applicable ; 
he alleges here, and he must prove. So the principle stands 
unaltered, and appears to be unalterable and universal — he 
who alleges must prove ; no man is under obligation to prove 
a negative. 

But Whately and some others introduce the word preswmp- 
tiorif and assert that the burden of proof always lies on the 
side opposite to that which has the presumption in its favour.f 
In order to maintain this to be true, presumption is defined 
as follows: "According to the most correct use. of the term, 
a * Presumption * in favour of any supposition means, not (as 
has been sometimes erroniously imagined) a preponderance 
of probability in its favour, but such a preoccupation of the 
ground as implies that it must stand good till some sufficient 
reason is adduced against it ; in short, that the Burden 0/ 
Proof lies on the side of him who would dispute it." By 
this definition, Whately assumes what he ought to have 

• Day, p. 158. 
t Whately, p. 189 ; Day, p. 156. 



122 ARGUMENT. 

proven ; and in every question in which we should in any 
sense say that the presumption is in favour of one side, he 
assumes that the burden of proof rests on the other side. 
If presumption ever denotes such a preoccupation of the 
ground, it certainly does not always, nor commonly. A pre- 
sumption in favour of any proposition is, in the most general 
statement, something which inclines us to believe it true 
before examining the proof, or independently of the proof. 
This presumption may be slight, or it may be strong. There 
may be a strong presumption in favour of some accusation, 
as that Nero burnt Rome, growing out of the known character 
of the person accused ; yet this does not shift the burden of 
proof to him ; it remains on the accuser as much as ever, 
though this presumption reinforces his proof, in fact would 
be made a part of his proof. The presumption may be on 
either side, or on neither, without altering the burden of proof 
at all. Thus it becomes clear that Whately's definition is at 
least not universally correct ; indeed, he himself does not 
claim that it applies to the general use, but only to "the 
most correct use of the term." And so it assuredly is not 
true as a general proposition, that " the burden of proof 
always rests on the side opposite to that in favour of which 
the presumption exists."* 

But there are some uses of the term presumption in which 
at first sight this correlation appears to exist. " Thus, it is 
a well-known principle of the Law, that every man (including 
a prisoner brought up for trial) is to be presumed innocent 
till his guilt is established. This does not, of course, mean 
that we are to take /or granted he is innocent ; for if that 
were the case, he would be entitled to immediate liberation ; 
nor does it mean that it is antecedently more likely than not 
that he is innocent ; or, that the majority of those brought 
to trial are so. It evidently means only that the * burden of 
proof* lies with the accusers ; — that he is not to be called 
to prove his innocence, or to be dealt with as a criminal till 
he has done so."f Now it is a peculiarity of Law, that it 
confines its view to things proven. The judge and the jury 
may be well satisfied in their own minds that the accused is 
guilty, but they cannot convict unless the guilt be proven. 
They must confine themselves to the evidence. They must 
approach the examination of the evidence without prejudg- 

* Day. t Whately, p. 139. 



ARGUMENT. 123 

merit, and Tvithout being affected by any presumption (in 
the ordinary sense of the term), whether for or against 
the prisoner, without considerinjr whether his guilt or mno- 
cence is " antecedently more likely ;" accordingly, the effort 
is made to obtain a jury who have not formed any opinion 
on the question. Since, then, all presumption on other 
grounds is in law excluded, and everything but proof is to 
be ignored, it follows that law admits but one presumption, 
viz, that the man is innocent, so far as the law has to do 
with him, until proof be brought of his guilt. Autecedent 
to proof, or independent of proof, there can be but the one 
view of the question. So the fact that in this legal usage 
the presumption and the burden of proof lie on opposite 
sides, does not spring from any general relation to that effect 
between the two, but grows out of the restriction of legal 
decisions to proof, and the consequent exclusion of every pre- 
sumption but that of innocence. And even in this very 
peculiar and restricted sense, to say " that every man is to 
be presumed innocent until his guilt is established," does not 
" mean only," or m strictness of speech mean at all, " that 
the burden of proof lies with the accusers ;" it means that 
every other, presumption must be excluded, and this one 
alone admitted, because nothing but proof is to be taken 
into account. 

A somewhat similar technical restriction has place when 
we say that there is in law a "presumption" in favour of 
those who hold property in possession. This means, we are 
told, "that no man is to be disturbed in his possessions till 
some claim against him shall be established."* The burden 
of proof lies on the other claimant. Now apart from legal 
provisions, possession does in most cases afford a logical pre- 
sumption, antecedent to proof, in favour of the possessor's 
right; though not in all cases. But the law, as a measure 
of expediency, to promote order and security, declares that 
the legcU presumption shall always be in favour of the pos- 
sessor. This is usually in accordance with right, and as the 
law must have general rules, this is the best general rule. 
The logical presumption may sometimes be in favour of the 
new claimant, on whom the burden of proof lies, but the legal 
presumption is made to be always against him. Indeed tl3e 
law sometimes goes farther, and provides that possession for 

♦ Whately, p. 140. 



124 ASGUMENT. 

a certain number of yean shall be held to establish right, 
and cannot afterwards be disturbed ; this also being best as 
a general rule, though sometimes working great injustice. In 
the second case, then, as well as in the former, the " pre- 
sumption" is made to fall on the opposite side to that on 
which the " burden of proof" lies, not by any natural and 
general relation between them, but by the peculiar character 
and provisions of law. 

Again. " There is a Presumption in favour of every ex- 
isting institution. Many of these (we will suppose, the 
majority) may be susceptible of alteration for the better; 
but still the * Burden of Proof lies with him who proposes 
.an alteration ; simply on the ground that since a change 
is not a good in itself, he who demands a change should 
show cause for it. No one is called on (though he may find 
it advisable) to defend an existing institution, till some argu- 
ment is adduced against it ; and that argument ought in 
fairness to prove, not merely an actual inconvenience, but 
the possibility of a change for the better."* 

As in the former cases the general logical and the legal 
presumption were confounded, so here there is a confusion of 
logical with what might be called practical presumption. It 
is practically best to retain existing institutions until they 
are proven to be inconvenient, and until there is also shown 
the possibility of a change for the better. But this aversion 
to change, and practical preference for things as they are, 
even to the extent of bearing known ills until we see 
clearly how to do better, is a very different matter from 
a logical presumption that existing arrangements are right 
and good. 

There are really two questions, if we begin to argue about 
an existing institution. First, is this institution right and 
good % Here the presumption may be either way ; the 
burden of proof is on him who alleges that it is right and 
good. There is commonly one ground of presumption in 
favour of any existing, and especially any long-continued in- 
stitution, namely, that men are likely to have good reasons 
for establishing and maintaining it. But this is often greatly 
weakened by the well-known selfishness and folly of mankind, 
and sometimes is completely destroyed, or thrown on the 
other side, by the obvious fact that here men have only 
been submitting to what they were hitherto unable to pre- 

♦ Wbately, p. 141. 



ARGUMENT. 125 

vent. Various other grounds of presumption there may be, 
for or against the institution, but whatever and wherever the 
presumption, the burden of proof, in discussing the excel- 
lence of the institution, is on him who affirms its excellence. 
He may declare himself content, and refuse to argue the 
question, submitting to the inevitable charge that he is afraid 
of the light. But if he consents to argue at all, the burden, 
of proof is on him. 

And this applies to the question of the truth of Chris- 
tianity. Whately says that the burden of proof was at first 
on the advocates of Christianity, but is now on its opponents, 
because there is a presumption in favour of it as an existing 
institution.* Such a presumption there is in ftivour of 
Christianity, although there is in this respect an equal, if 
not greater presumption in favour of several other religions; 
but the moment a man consents to discuss the truth o^ 
Christianity, the burden of proof is still on him who alleges 
it to be true. The other side cannot be required to prove 
a negative. 

The second question is. Should this existing institution be 
maintained? If the former question has been clearly decided 
in the affirmative, there will still be room to inquire whether 
something else would not be equally right, and be^r in its 
results* And if the institution (for example, a form of govern^ 
ment, benevolent organization, op usage of society) is not alto- 
gether good, or even not certainly right, it may still be best to 
retain it, at least for the present, until we see our way to 
something more satisfactory. The two questions, then, are 
entirely distinct, and should not be oonfbunded. And what 
was called above a practical presumption, is thus seen to be 
really a logical presumption, but with reference to a distinct 
and directly practical question. 

These considerations will explain another case. ^' It should 
be also' remarked under this head, that in any one question the 
Presumption will often be found to lie on different sides, in 
respect of different parties; E. g. In the questions between ai 
member of the Church of England, and a Presbyterian, or 
member of any other Church, on which side does the Presump- 
tion lie ? Evidently, to each, in favour of the religious com- 
munity to which he at present belongs. He is not to separate 
&om. the Churoh of which he is a member, without having 
some sufficient reason to allege."t According to tVi^ voi^^'^^^ 

• Wbately, p. 143. + 'Wbsv.\»Vj, p. \^S. 



126 ARGUMENT. 

view, the burden of proof would then be properly thrown by 
each upon the other, and there could be no discussion. But 
two questions are confounded. In the practical question 
whether a man shall leave his church, the presumption is in 
favour of remaining, till sufficient reason for leaving be pre- 
sented by others, or ascertained by himself. Meantime, it is a 
mau's duty to examine the grounds of his opinion and practice, 
m this and in other important matters, as rapidly and tho- 
roughly as his opportunities will permit. But in the other 
question, which church is in the right, if the two consent 
to argue it, the burden of proof is on each in behalf of his 
own. He who in the argument alleges a particular church to 
be in the right must bring proof that it is. If the other 
adduces objections to this church, he must bring prot)f that 
his objections are well-founded, but this does not shift the 
burden of proof as regards the question. 

Whately also applies his theory that there is a presumption 
in favour of existing institutions (without distinguishing the 
questions involved), and that a presumption in favour of one 
side throws the burden of proof on the other, to Episcopacy 
and to Infant-baptism. The latter, for example, as an existing 
practice, was merely retained by the Church of England, " con- 
sidering the burden to lie on those who denied its existence in 
the primitive church, to show when it did arise." Of course 
one will continue to practise as he has done, till he sees cause 
to do otherwise. If he refuses to discuss or examine the pro- 
priety of the practice, taking it for granted that all the opinions 
and usages in which he has been reared are correct, unless 
some one will assume the task of proving that they are not 
(proving a negative), then upon that principle all mankind may 
remain in all respects stationary. If he consents to argue, or 
personally to examine, its propriety, then the burden of proof 
is upon him who alleges that it is proper, and upon the objector 
only as regards his oVyections. So the presumption in favour of 
retaining at present, differs from a presumption that the prac- 
tice is right ; and the latter exists here only so far as we- may 
believe that men have introduced no changes of Christian usage 
since the apostolic day. As to this slender presumption, those 
who deny the existence of infant-baptism in the primitive 
church, have no need, in order to meet the presumption, to 
"show when it did arise," but only, as the author says just 
before on a similar question, to "point out some conceivaV)le 
way in which it might have arisen." Besides, infant-baptism 
does not present itself as a human institution, which it might 



ARGUMENT. 127 

be presumed men had good reasons for establishing, but as a 
divine institution, of which, as Whately says just after on 
another question, " the fair presumption is, that we shall find 
all such distinctly declared in Scripture." The absence of such 
a distinct declaration of Scripture in favour of infant-baptism, 
creates a presumption against it as a divine institution.* But 
none of the presumptions alter the burden of proof In the 
question whether it is right for a man to continue the practice 
to which he has been reared until he gains more light, the pre- 
sumption is in favour; in the question whether something 
not distinctly taught in Scripture be a divine institution, the 
presumption is against j in both questions alike, the burden of 
proof is on him who alleges. The other side is not bound to 
prove a negative. The argument as to Episcopacy is very much 
the same. 

Is it not now plain that there is no such correlation between 
presumption and burden of proof as some have imagined 1 A 
presumption in favour of one side does not throw the burden 
of proof on the other. The cases supposed to establish that it 
does, are either cases in which the presumption is restricted by 
the character and provisions of law, or in which two questions 
are confounded, the burden of proof standing opposed to the 
presumption in one of the questions, and being therefore 
assumed as doing so in the other. The presumption as to a 
question may be on either side, according to the nature of 
things or the circumstances of the case ; there may be, on 
different grounds, presumption on both sides ; but the burden 
of proof is always ou him who alleges.f 

An instructive example as to the burden of proof is afforded 
by the argument with Komanists. They say, Christ promised 
to his Church continuous existence ; the Church of Rome has 
had continuous existence ; therefore it is Christ's Church. 
Here the burden of proof is upon the Romanist to show that 
no other Church has had continuous existence ; he must prove 
that the Greek Church, the Church of England, the Reformed 

* For argiincents in favour of Infant-baptism derived from Scripture, see 
Jackson's Institutions of Christianity, p. 323-344. — Ed. 

"t In this discussion some help has been derived from the able work of 
Carson on Baptism, chap. 1, in which there is a review of Whately ou this 
subject. If it be said that Carson and the present writer are biased in their 
views of the general question by its bearings upon Episcopacy, Infant-baptism, 
there is equal reason to suspect the same thing in the case of Archbishop 
Whately. 



X28 ARGUMENT. 

Churches of the continent, the Baptists, etc., have not eaisted 
oontinuouslj from the beginning. We are not thus demanding 
of a man that he shall prove a negative, but only pointing out 
that the Romanist's own argument requires him to do soj and 
is worthless if he does not. The others say to him. Well, 
prove that we have not had continuity. But if either of these 
others maintains, whether for the purpose of a like argument 
or for any other purpose, that it has had continuous existence, 
then on it rests the burden of proof. 

3. Indirect proof. 

Instead of direct proof that the proposition is true, we some- 
times adopt the indirect method, viz. by showing that the con- 
trary supposition would lead to something known to be untruey 
<Hr in itself absurd (reductio ad abaurdumj. This plan is very 
often pursued in Geometry, where only one or two other suppo- 
sitions would be possible. But in moral reasoning this does 
not often happen, and hence the redtictio ad absurdum is for us* 
chiefly important in Refutation.''^ 

2. Principal Varieties op Argument; 

It is not proposed to begin with a formal analysis and classi- 
fication of arguments^ but to explain the nature and use of the 
leading varieties ; it wiU afterwards be easy tO' show the plaoe^ 
which these hoid in a complete classification. 

A. Arguments a priori. 

The phrase a priori has come to be so variously applied and) 
loosely used, that some propose to abandon it. Yet it is of 
constant occurrence, particularly in theological and philo- 
sophical discussions, and no fit substitute has been suggested^ 
It seems desirable, therefore, to state distinctly the different 
senses in which the phrase is employed, showing which are 
legitimate and which unwarrantable, and in what cases there is 
special necessity for care. 

To argue a priori is literally to argue from something prior 
to something posterior ; a movement in the opposite direction 
being denoted by a posteriori. 

1. It was originally used by logical writers, and is still chiefly 
used, to denote an argument /^om cause to ejffect. It is thus,, 
of course, applicable to any case of proper physical causes, but 
is chiefly applied to argument from a necessary principle, such, 
as ex nihilo nihil Jit (out of nothing nothing is made). This 

♦See below, 2, F. 



ARGUMENT. 129 

species of argumeut was employed on a very large scale for the 
aspertainment of physical phenomena and laws. Some prin- 
ciple was laid down, regarded as necessary and universal, and 
from this it was argued that the facts of existence must be so 
and so. But modern science, founded on observation, has 
shown that some of the supposed necessary principles are not 
true, or not universal. K g. Two centuries 6igo it was a maxim 
universally admitted that " a body cannot act where it is not." 
This was used in an a priori argument against the theory of 
gravitation ; the sun cannot possibly act upon the earth, be- 
cause it is not there. Newton himself admitted the force of 
this, saying in a letter, " That one body should act on another 
at a distance, through a vacuum, without the mediation of 
anything else by and through which their action and force may 
be conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity, 
that I believe no man who in philosophical matters has a com- 
petent faculty of thinking, can ever fall into it." Accordingly 
he imagined a subtle ether filling the space between the sun 
and earth, and by its contact with both, rendering it possible 
that one should act on the other.* At the present day all this 
occasions no difficulty, and the language of the great philo- 
sopher provokes a smile. Such facts should not lead us, as 
some have been led, to reject all arguments from necessary 
principles, but should make us very careful in using them. 

The conclusion from an a priori argument (supposing it 
logically conducted) will be certain, if on the one hand the 
supposed cause is a real one, and on the other hand, there 
is nothing to interfere with its operation ; but if the reality 
of the cause (or necessary principle) be subject to question, 
or its operations be liable to interference, then the conclusion 
is only more or less probable. There is an a priori argument 
for the existence of God,f which begins thus : "Positive exis- 
tence is possible, for it involves no contradiction.'* Here the 
" first pnnciple" assumed is, that whatever involves no con- 
tradiction is possible, and this is repeatedly appealed to, in 
the course of the argument. Then after pointing out that 
possible existence must be either necessary or contingent, the 
position is taken that some existence is necessary, for other- 
wise all existence would be impossible. And then by a series 
of abstract arguments the conclusion is reached, that thero 

* See Mill's Logic, Book V. chap, iii, 3. 

f See Pye Smith's Theology, p. 99. 

K 



130 ABGUMBNT. 

is one necessarily existent Being, the cause of all other exis- 
tence besides himself, and that he is eternal, infiuite, etc. 
Now supposing the successive steps of this argument to be 
logical, the conclusion will be certain if the principle started 
from is certain. When in proving that we have a Revelation, 
it is first argued a pyioH from the character of God and the 
condition of man that a revelation was to be expected, this is 
only a probable argument, for we do not, apart from revela- 
tion, sufficiently understand the chanvcter of God to infer with 
certainty that it would lead him to give a revelation to crea- 
tures in such a condition. 

The name a priori is inaccurately applied to some argu- 
ments which really begin with facts of observation (and are 
so far a posteriori), but which afterwards pursue a chain of 
abstract reasoning upon what these necessarily involve. Such 
was Samuel Clarke's argument for the existence of God, which 
is constantly called an a priorj, argument because it intro- 
duces certaiu supposed necessary principles, and reasons for 
the most part abstractly, and yet (as Hamilton has remarked''^) 
in fact begins with a matter of observation, viz., "we are sure 
that something does exist. ''t 

2. The use of the phrase has been gradually extended to 
include argument from what appears to us a general prin- 
ciple — not asserted as a necessajry principle, but one which 
IB believed to hold true in ajl cases. Unless such a supposed 
general principle necessitates a certain result, that result can- 
not be inferred from it as an argument a priori. The principle 
is in that case only a generalized fact, like the generalizations 
of Natural History, informing us what regiilarly is, not in 
any sense causing it to be so. But in this unwarraiited direc- 
tion the use of the phrase is sometimes, carried very far> 
Men attempt to dignify as an argument a priori^ or, a£» they 
sometimes call it, an argument froq^i general principles, wbat 
is really an ai'gument from some i^bitraa?y preconception^ pre- 
judice, fanciful theory, or mere opinion, of their own^ And 
some appear to think that any argui^ent which looks general^ 
or abstiiact^^ may be qalled an argumeifii^ ci^. priori, We. must 
then look out for loose applications, of ^he phrase on the 
part of others, and carefully confiQ0 qi^^lye^ to the legirti- 
naate use. 

* Hamilton, ed. of Beid, p. 762 : FkmiDg^ Vocab. of Philosophy, p. 42. 
t See the btatement of the argument in Pye Smith's Theology, p. 101. 



3. The attempt has been made to give to argument a priori 
another distinct sense, viz., the argument from a substance 
to its attributes.* Thus, John is a man, therefore he pos- 
sesses intelligence, will, conscience, a bodily organization, etc. 
But this is called an argument a priori only by overlooking 
a distinction. John is a man, therefore he will act con- 
scientiously, is an argument a priori, because it means that 
there is something in the constitution of man which leads 
him to act conscientiously ; it is really an argument from 
cause to effect — with only a probable conclusion, because other 
causes so often interfere with the operation of man's con- 
science. But to say, John is a man, therefore he has a con- 
science, is only an argument from general to particular, only 
bringing out one of the particulars which go to make up the 
general. This is not in any sense an argument from some- 
thing priory for being a man is not prior to having a con- 
science, but includes it. The argument, John is mortal, for 
he is a man,t is somewhat ambiguous. Taken strictly, it 
infers the attribute mortality, and is thus simply a common 
deduction of particular from general. But understand it to 
mean, John will die, for he is a man, and you have an argu- 
ment a priori, which, again, is really from cause to effect — 
there is that in a man which will cause him to die. So if 
the term law is employed. When law denotes " merely a 
general fact," as. It is the law of material bodies that they 
gravitate, and we deduce any particular fact from the general 
one, the deduction is by no means an argument a priori. 
If it were laeant that material bodies have that in their 
<ionstitution which causes them to gravitate, then you could 
take the case of any particular material body, and infer, 
a priori^ that it will gravitate. This confusion of law as 
the statement of a general fact, with law as denoting that 
which causes, or somehow necessitates facts, has led to much 
false reasoning in recent works, particularly in discussions of 
Divine Providence. J 

So then, to infer the attribute from the substance is rhot an 
u priori argument. In the cases which seem to be such it 
is really an inference of the result from the constitution, 
which is the eflPect from the cause. This is what Vinet is 
evidently thinking of when he says, " Proof a priori, which 

• Day, p. 128-83. t Day, p. 129. 

t&QQ M'Cosh on the Divine GovenunenL 



132 ARGUMENT. 

proves the fact from its cause or its nocture. . . I prove 
a priori^ that lying is offensive to God, because he is a God 
of truth."* The argument is, that there is that in God'a 
nature, as a God of truth, which must render lying offensive 
to him ; and this is really an argument from cause to effect. 
The remark may be added, that a priori argument from the 
Nature of God, must be employed with great care. God will 
always act consistently with his nature, and so conclusions 
might here be drawn with certainty, but for the fact that 
w^e so imperfectly understand the Divine Nature, and the 
relations thereto of particular lines of conduct. " God is 
just, therefore he will give all men an equal chance of salva- 
tion," " God is good, therefore he will finally save all men," 
are conclusions which the angel Gabriel would feel himself 
too ignorant to draw. 

4. Theie is a peculiar use of a priori in some modem 
philosophical works. Kant applied the phrase ** knowledge 
a priori" to denote knowledge possessed by the mind prior 
to all that it derives from experience ; and then knowledge 
which is derived from, comes after experience, is called know- 
ledge a poateriori.f A pair of antithetical phrases will of 
course admit of being turned towards different points of the 
compass, provided they are kept opposite to each other. J 
Kant*s use of these two phrases, which he distinctly defined, 
has been followed by some subsequent writers. Let it be 
understood, then, by the student, that the expressions, a 
priori knowledge, a priori truths, etc., mean something en- 
tirely different from an a priori argument. We may indeed 
argue a priori from what these writers would call an a priori 
truth (e. g. every effect must have a cause), and here there 
is a point of apparent contact between the two senses of the 
phrase, but they are altogether different. 

An argument a priori has been thus -shown to be, in all 
legitimate uses of the phrase, an argument from cause to 

* Vinet, p. ISO. The expression (perhaps due to the student whose 
notes are followed), *Us nature/ tends to confuse ; but the examples show 
what is meant. 

f See Fleming, Vocabulary of Philosophy, p. 42-3, a useful book. 

i For example, the terms analytic and synthetic are employed by Vinei 
(p. 180), and Potter (Sacred Eloquence, p. 149), in diametrically opposite 
ways with reference to the same things ; and each use can be justified, 
according to the way in wliich the matter is regarded. Day (p. 122) has 
a third use, quite different from either, on a kindred topic. 



ARGUMENT. 133 

effect ; whether it be from a proper physical cause, or from 
ttomething in the general nature of things which necessitates 
a certain result, or from some thing in the nature of a par- 
ticular object or person which tends to produce a certain 
result. 

With reference to the employment of arguments, whether 
a priori or not, bearing upon the relations of cause and effect, 
there are ambiguities in the familiar use of language, which 
render liecessary two distinctions. First, we must distinguish 
between logical and physical sequence. E. g. " With many 
of them God was not well-pleased ; for they were overthrown 
in the wilderness." The fact that God was not well-pleased 
with them is the logical consequent of their overthrow, being 
proved from it ; but is, so to speak, the physical antecedent, 
being the cause of it. These two kinds of sequence are 
very often confoimded, and very liable to be, from the fact 
that we use the same terms, " for," " because,*' " therefore," 
" consequently," etc., to denote both ; yet they may coincide, 
or be opposed to each other, or may exist separately. Par- 
ticularly frequent is the error of presenting that as the carise 
of something, which is only the proof of it.* Se'iondly, it is 
important to distinguish between cause and occasion. The 
inebriate says to the liquor-seller, or to his boon companion, 
"You are the cause of my getting drunk," when these were 
but the occasion, and the cause was his appetite. To remove 
some of the occasions for any kind of vicious indulgence, 
will be likely to lessen the evil, but we must not imagine 
that this is removing the cause. 

B. Arguments from testimony. 

It would be convenient if the words testimony and authority 
could be kept entirely distinct, the former applied only to mat- 
ters of fact, and the latter only to matters of judgment and 
opinion.t Yet common usage sometimes confounds these terms, 
even as men are so apt not to distinguish facts from their own 
judgments concerning them. J In the alleged "spiritual mani- 
festations " of which we now hear so much, there is unques- 
tionable testimony that tables rise and move, without the 
application of any apparent and adequate physical force, that 
certain peculiar rapping sounds are heard, etc , and upon the 
testimony these matters of fact should be without hesitation 

♦ See more in Whately, p. 75 ff. 

•Y Day, p. 138, asserts such a disUnotion as if it were absolute. 

t See Whately, p. 79-83. 



IB4 ABGUIIENT. 

admitted. But what causes these movements and sounds, 
whether some unknown physical force, or some unknown 
spiritual agency, is purely matter of opinion. Those who have 
most frequently witnessed the phenomena, are not thereby the 
best prepared to judge of their cause ; while the supposed 
interpretation of the rapping noises, and the correspondence 
of such interpretations with facts otherwise known, are matters 
which open a wide door for all matter of self-delusions and 
impostures. We mu^t accustom ourselves, and educate the 
people, to distinguish more carefully than is common between 
testimony as to matters of fact, and mere judgments, opinions, 
and hypotheses as to their explanation. 

It is not appropriate here to discuss the general subject of 
testimony, as bearing upon the administration of justice. And 
yet a minister does well to consider carefully the rules of evi- 
dence in the courts of justice, endeavouring, in every case, to 
find the principle involved, that he may apply it, with the 
Becessary adaptations, to -the matters with which he is con- 
cerned. Those parts of the subject with which the preacher 
frequently has to deal, will be briefly treated. 

(1.) In testimony as to matters of fact, the points to be 
considered are, on the one hand, the character and number 
of the witnesses, and on the other, the character of the things 
attested. 

As to the ^hovtacter of the witnesses, we of course consider 
mainly their veracity, but also their intelligence, and opportu- 
nities of knowing the facts. A large number of witnesses will 
obviously make the evidence stronger, provided they speak 
each from his own knowledge, and not from what others have 
told him. When there are several such independent witnesses, 
their testimony will differ as to some points of detail. Where 
ihe details are numerous, no man will be expected to remember 
itod state them all; and each will select according to what he 
happened to observe, what specially commended itself to his 
mind, or he has had frequent occasion since to recall, or what 
fklls in with the general design and drift of his statement, or 
is Buggested, point after point, by the natural association of 
M^8. K all were to agree in the details of an extended state- 
iiient, we should feel sure that they had in some way learned 
frbm each other, or had all drawn from a common source. 
These principles are familiar to the Epglish and American 
mind. Had the Oermans been accustomed to trial by jury, we 
ahould not have found able scholars denying the trustworthi- 



AB0Uia!NT. 135 

z^ss of the gospel narratives because of the *' discrepancies " 
they present. These discrepancies, nowhere involving real 
contradiction, only show that the witnesses are independent, 
and thus immensely strengthen their combined testimony to 
the substantial facts. The evidence is also strengthened by 
manifestly undesigned coincidences. A great number of such 
coincidences, clearly undesigned, between minor statements in 
the Epistles of Paul and in the Acts, have been exhibited 
by Paley, in his celebrated " Hores PaulinsB ** (" Hours with 
Paul,**) a work which admirably fortifies the Christian Evid- 
ences, and presents the most useful lessons as to the value of 
testimony. And the less important in itself is the subject- 
matter of such coincidences, the more certain will it be that 
they are undesigned. In such a case, the lightest matters are 
often the weightiest. 

The unintentional testimony of adversaries is frequently of 
great value. Thus the opposers of Christianity in the early 
centuries, both Heathen and Jewish, in endeavouring to account 
for the miracles of our Loird as wrought by magic, have 
shown that they felt it impossible to deny the reality of the 
occurrences. 

On the other hand, there is to be considered the character of 
the things attested. Things in themselves improbable ^111 of 
course 'require more testimony in order to gain our credence. 
Such is the case with miraolds. Those who take the ground 
that miracles are impossible, beg the question, and must be 
omniscient in order to make sure that their position is correct. 
But miracles are in themselves highly improbable. That some 
spiritual force should so counteract the operation of great 
physical forces as for a time to prevent their otherwise uniform 
results, is a thing which we are naturally slow to believe. 
This improbability, however, is greatly diminished "where we 
see important occasion for such interference, as where miracles 
are wrought to authenticate a revelation. The (christian 
miracles have not only this, but another advantage. The 
character and teachings of Christ are inseparably associated 
"with miracles. He who denies the miracles denies the super- 
natural origin of the character and teachings, and must then 
account for these as merely human and natural, which the 
ablest and most ingenious infidels, after a great variety of 
attempts, have utterly failed to do. Thus the a priori questiOti, 
the question of antecedent probability, is here reduced to tMs 
— which is more improbable, that miracles should have been 



136 ARGUMBNT. 

wrought, upon such occasion as the introduction of Christi- 
anity, or that the character and teachings of Christ should be 
merely human and of natural origin. 

Thus the general improbability of miracles is here much 
lessened by the adequate occasion, and then is more than 
counterbalanced by a yet greater improbability. 

Moreover, the testimony of others to our Lord's miracles is 
not only stiong and unquestionable in itself, but has the unique 
and invincible reinforcement of our Lord's own testimony. 
Jesus professed to work miracles ; he cannot by possibility have 
been deceived on the subject; and so, either he did work 
miracles, or he was a bad man. Against his character all the 
objections to miracles must shatter, like suif against the rock. 
And this is not arguing in a circle ; not proving the miracles 
by Christ, and Christ hy the miracles. The concurrenco of the 
two makes it easy to account for both ; the aenial of the 
miracles necessitates conclusions more improbable than the 
miraculous. 

The testimony to our Lord's resurrection has been often and 
thoroughly discussed,* and shown to be irrefragable. 

It is especially strengthened by the great slowness of belief 
exhibited by the disciples. " They doubted, that we might 
not doubt." t 

The evidence of Christian experience ought never to be over- 
looked. The believer finds a change wrought in him which 
testifies to the reality and power of Christianity, and he in turn 
bears witness to others that the change, which they observe in 
him was wrought in connection with believing. 

(2.) Matters of opinion, as distinguished from matters of fact, 
might, as above remarked, be conveniently designated by the 
term authority. But this term is sometimes applied to testi- 
mony as to matters of fact, especially where it is particularly 
strong and convincing testimony, and is also frequently used to 
denote combination of testimony as to fact, and reliable judg- 
ment or opinion. 

The so-called authority of the Fathers, must be differently 
regaided in diflPerent cases. As to the question which books 
were of apostolic origin, they afford us testimony, — though in 

* Mention may be made of that piquant little work, Sherlock's " Trial 
•f the Witnesses/' in which the evidence of the resurrection is examined 
acQording to the forms of law. 

f Some of the views here presented as to testimony, and some others, 
will be found in Whately, p. 78-104. 



ARGUMENT. 137 

the case of all but the earliest it is not original but transmitted 
testimony, — and also the authority of their judgment as to the 
"weight of the entire evidence known to them, only a part of 
"which do they hand down to us. In respect to such questions 
they are known to have been very critical, and we may well 
attach great value both to their tertimony and their authority. 
But as to the interpretation of the sacred books, the question 
"what Scripture teaches, we have only their authority, their 
judgment. Most of them were loose interpreters, and they 
were all greatly influenced by philosophical opinions, pre- 
judices of various kinds, and especially, with rare exceptions, 
by an extreme fondness for allegory. Except, then, the cases 
in which familiarity with Greek, with ancient customs, and the 
like, gives special weight to the opinions of a Father, their 
authority as to the meaning of Scripture is not great, and in 
fact not justly equal to that of some later writers. 

The Scriptures themselves are an authority indeed. All that 
they testify to be fact is thereby fully proven, all that they 
teach as true and right is thereby established and made obliga- 
tory. There are some subjects on which the Bible is our sole 
authority, such as the Trinity, justification by faith, the con- 
ditions of the future life, and the positive ordinances of 
Christianity, viz., baptism and the Lord's supper.* The Chris- 
tian reasoner should seek fully to appreciate this unparalleled 
authority, and should heedfuUy observe its proper relation to 
all other means of proof.t 

The generally received opinions of mankind, and the pro- 
verbs and maxims which express the collective judgment of 
many, have a greater or less authority according lo the nature 
of the case. Those, for example, which are readily attributable 
to human superstitions or selfishness, can claim but little 
weight. Proverbs, or what the common people call " old 
sayings,'' are very often, as it has been remarked, but the 
striking expression of some half truth, or the result of some 
hasty generalization, and in many cases they can be matched 
by other sayings of precisely the opposite elGFect. J 

In respect to the whole matter of evidence and belief it is 
important to bear in mind the relation between belief and 
disbelief. As regards many truths of Christianity, he who 
disbelieves them, is thereby compelled to believe something 

• Coznp. Porter's Horn. Lect. XI. 

■f Conip. below, E, and also 4, Order of Ar^ments. 

t Comp. on ^^ources of Illustration, chap, vii., 2, (5.) 



138 ARGUMENT. 

whioh shall take their place. He who staggers at the difficul- 
ties, real or alleged, which attach to the Christian evidences, 
must not forget the difficulties of infidelity. We must believe 
something, believe something tis to the problems of religion, 
and if we go away from Christ " to whom do we go 1 '* * 

C. Induction. 

Induction has been very simply defined as " the process of 
drawing a general rule from a sufficient number of particular, 
oases. "t Finding something to be true of certain individual 
objects, we conclude that the same thing is true of the whole 
class tcr which those individuals belong, and afterwards prove 
it to be true of any new object, siaiply by showing that that 
object belongs to the same class. Induction is, in popular 
usage, the commonest form of argument, and that which 
oftenest involves error. Men in general do not argue from 
general principles or previously established truths, nearly so 
often as from examples. These examples they indolently 
observe, and without extensive comparison or careful scrutiny, 
they hastily infer that what a certain person did is right for 
them, that what is true of certain individuals, or of all they 
happen to have noticed, is true of all the class. When they 
are strongly impelled to wish it so, as by r.ppetite, interest, or 
prejudice, and thus some powerful feeling combines with indo- 
lence, it is not wonderful, however deplorable, that a " hasty 
induction" is the result. In agriculture, or in domestic medi- 
cine, all manner of rules are upheld and followed among the 
masses of men, on the ground of imperfect observation and 
hasty induction. In books of travel, universal statements are 
constantly made as to the opinions, usages, and character of a 
people, which are founded on a very hasty induction, stimulated 
by prejudice; notable examples appearing in English books 
about America, in many of our Eastern journals when speak- 
ing of the West, and many Northern jonmah when speaking 
of the South ; j: also in the reports of Foreign Missions made 
by some infidel or irreligious travellers. From the fact that 
negroes have n^ver been highly civilized, it is confidently 
inferred by some that they never can be ; others observe the 
gratifying progress in knowledge made in a short time by 
a few coloured people, and at once proclaim that they 'are 
natilrally a highly intelligent race. CeHain choice specimens 

• Comp. Whately, p. 102. 
+ Flemibg, Vocab. of Phil. p. 252. t And no doubt, vice vm'sa. 



ABOUMBNT. 199 

of what are called " uneducated" minister^, surpass some very 
poor specimens of the " educated," and this is thought to 
prove that ministerial education is unnecessary ; a half-educated 
y(»ung preacher makes a foolish display of something he learned 
at college, and this shows that education is injurious. But who 
could catalogue, or even broadly classify, the instances of hasty 
or otherwise unwarranted induction, which make up so sadly 
large a portion of human reasoning] Let us eanaestly strive, 
as a duty to our own minds and to our oflBce as teachers of 
truth, to guard against this fruitful source of error. 

The question what is " a suflBcieut number of cases" to war- 
rant our dmwing a general rule, depends upon the nature 
of the Eubject-matter. In regard to physical facts, a single 
example will sometimes suffice. "A chemitit who had ascer- 
tained, in a single specimen of gold, its capability of combining 
with mercury, would not think it necessary to try the experi- 
ment with several other specimens, but would draw the conclu- 
sion concerning those metals universally and with certainty.*'* 
But nothing like this applies to social facts, or to moral and 
religious truth. The observation of a man*s whole life, of a 
neighbourhood through many years, or of the entire civilized 
world for centuries, has often led to false conclusions as to 
physical phenomena, or as to questions of good government or 
social welfare. In order to a safe induction, one must not 
merely aggregate a number of instances ; he must analyze and 
compare them, so as to eliminate what is merely incidental, and 
ascertain the " material circumstances" in each case.t The 
more clearly we can discern a causal relation, accounting for 
the common element, the smaller the number of instances 
necessary to estaV>li8h a rule. But the cause must be a real 
oau«e, not a mere hypothesis, not a matter having no real con- 
nection with the result in question, nor an incidental circum- 
stance. As an example of the last, it is frequently inferred 
that something found true in several cases of conversion, will 
be true in all cases ; but the question is, whether this is some- 
thing founded in the essential principles of human nature, or 
merely the result of peculiar temperament education, etc. 

Aristotle sayp, " Induction, except in few instances, is not 
proper to rhetoric."t As the people so commonly reas6n in 
this 'way, it is natural and proper that they who 6peak to the 

f Wfaately, p. 111. i* Comp. Mill'i Logic, Book V., chap, v., 4. 

t Ar. Bhet. II, 20-9. 



140 ARGUMENT. 

people should wish to do likewise, and especially that sophis- 
tical or inconsiderate spaakers should very often introduce 
hasty inductions, which may be readily and agreeably pre- 
sented, and will be easily accepted by hearers to whose preju- 
dices they conform. Where a safe induction can be briefly 
stated, it is eminently proper to rhetoric ; yet this will happen 
in comparatively "few instances." Sometimes an induction 
fully and even formally stated, will be appropriate ; such occa- 
sions, however are rare. But in addition to proving by argu- 
ments of other kinds, we may very frequently present examples, 
cases in p(>int, which will not merely illustrate what we mean, 
but reinforce the proof by at least a probable induction. And 
it is in the highest degree important that we should know 
how to correct those ten thousand erroneous inductions, whether 
in the arguments of other public speakers, in newspapers and 
conversation, or in their own thinking, by which the minds of 
our hearers are so apt to be misled. 

D. Arguments from Analogy. 

Analogy is still too often confounded with resemblance, not- 
withstanding the earnest efforts of Whately and some other 
writers to confine the term to its original and proper sense. 
The primary meaning of the word is ptoportwrif and in this 
sense only is it employed in mathematics. It denotes not a 
resemblance between objects themselves, but a correspondence 
between their ratios or relations to other objects. The leg of a 
table does not much resemble the leg of an animal, but they 
are analogous, because the former sustains ii? several respects 
the same relation to a table, that the leg sustains to an animal. 
The foot of a mountain is analogous to that of a man, though 
scarcely at all similar. " An egg and a seed are not in them- 
selves alike, but bear a like relation, to the parent bird and 
to her future nestling on the one hand, and to the old and 
young plant on the other."* But analogous objects will fre- 
quently be similar also, and this fact has helped to obscure to 
men's minds the distinction, that being sometimes carelessly 
ascribed to the resemblance which is really due to the analogy. 
Further, an analogy is often all the more striking from the fact 
that it exists between objects which in some other respects are 
utterly unlike. First, then, failing to see clearly the difference 
between analogy and resemblance, and observing, besides, that 
the former term was often employed where there is in some 
respects a great dissimilarity, many persons have fallen into the 

• Whately, p. 115. 



ARGUMENT. 141 

habit of calling objects analogous which are similar in some 
respects, but have a recognized difference in others. Mill, in 
his Logic, puts forward this common use of the term as if it 
were legitimate, and unfairly employs it for the purpose of 
throwing discredit upon all argunents from analogy.* Of 
course an argument from a mere partial resemblance between 
objects can be worth but little. But very different may be the 
case where there is a resemblance (sometimes even an identity) 
in the relation which two objects bear to a third, or to two 
others, respectively. Understand analogy in this strict sense, 
and the argument from analogy may have great force. It is 
exceedingly desirable that good usage should restrict the 
term to its proper meaning. The point to be guarded is, never 
to say there is an analogy between objects, unless there is a 
correspondence (identity or similarity) in their relations to 
something else, however like or however unlike the objects 
themselves may be. Men are the slaves of words ; and unless 
the thoughtful can discern, avoid and correct such confusions in 
the popular use of important terms, reasoning to a popular 
audience will constantly become increasingly difficult. 

It follows that we must carefully avoid the "error of con- 
cluding the things in question to be (dike, because they are 
analogous ;" and that it is very unjust, when a man has argued 
from the analogy between two objects, to charge him with 
having represented them as similar. Moreover, the correspon- 
dence between the relations of objects which are seen to be 
analogous, must not be presumed to extend to all their relations. 
Thus, because a just analogy has been discerned between the 
metropolis of a country, and the heart of the animal body, it 
has been sometimes contended that its increased size is a disease, 
— that it may impede some of its most important functions, cr 
even be the cause of its dissolution. t The question is, in what 
respects are the relations between the objects similar 1 

A large proportion of the metaphors we employ, rest, not 
upon resemblance, but upon analogy. E. g. " He is the pillar 
of the State ; '* " Paris is the heart of France." All mental 
and spiritual states and operations are expressed by terms 
borrowed, by analogy, from the physical ; all that we know of 
the future life, by terms derived from analogous objects or 
relations in this life. The sense of such metaphorical expres- 

* Mill's Logic, Book III. chap, zz., and Book V. chap. y. 6. 
t Bishop Copleston, in Whately, p. 116, and p. 492 ff. 



142 ABGUMEINT. 

sions have been in many cases fixed and defined by usage, so 
that, as commonly employed, they will not mislead ; but 
"whenever we begin to reason upon them, great care must be 
taken lest we extend i|^he analogy to matters which it does not 
really embrace. So with the terms used to describe the attri- 
butes of God, and his relations to his creatures. Thus we call 
God a Father, and in certain respects Christ reasons from 
earthly fathers to Him. Yet if we infer from a father's forgiv- 
ing his child upon repentance, without satisfaction, that our 
Heavenly Father will and must forgive us upon repentance, 
without need of Atonement, we extend the analogy more 
widely than is warranted. God is a Father, but is also a King ; 
and his government is not a system of imperfect expedients, 
but must consult the requirements of absolute justice. 

Has the argument from analogy any positive force 1 It may 
certainly aflford a probable proof of positive truth. When two 
objects are observed to be analogous in many important res- 
pects, it is assuredly more or less probable that they are also 
analogous in some other respect not observed. But it is very 
doubtful whether this can in any case be an absolute proof. 
Many results of induction, as we have seen above, are simply 
in a high degree probable ; and they become certain only when, 
besides observing that the instances examined are all similar in 
a certain respect, we can also discern some catise of that simi- 
larity, which will operate also in the instances not examined. 
Now the same thing must hold in the case of analogy. If two 
objects should correspond in all their relations to certain other 
objects so far as we can examine, and if we were able to discern 
some cause of the correspondence, such as must produce a like 
correspondence in other relations not examined, then we might 
infer with certainty that in any of these other relations they 
do correspond. In many cases of induction, a cause, or at 
least an explanation, of the common element can be found. 
We leave it a question whether the same can ever be done in 
cases of Analogy. Still, an argument from analogy will often 
add its force to that of other proofs, and will make a result 
more or less probable, even where no other proof exists. 

But chiefly for negative purposes, in the refutation of ob- 
jections, is the argument from analogy of frequent and high 
utility, " like those weapons, which though they cannot kill 
the enemy, will ward his blows."* Butler, in his immortal 
work, has with great power refuted objections to natural 

* Campbell, Phil, of Rhet. p. 76. 



ARGUMENT. 143 

religion by the analogy of nature, and objections to revealed 
religion by the analogy of Providence. If men say it would 
be unjust in Grod to punish them for violating his law when 
they did not believe, or did not certainly know, that it was 
his law, we point them to the fact that this holds of physical 
laws — that he who takes poison will be killed, even though 
he did not know, or did not believe, that it was poison. If 
they object that God could not with propriety make salvation 
dependent upon belief of the gospel, when there may be 
some doubt as to whether the gospel is true, we remind 
them that bodily life is often dependent upon sending for 
the physician, though there may be very great doubt as to 
whether he will understaud and remedy the disease ; we have 
to risk life upon a probability, or take the consequences. If 
they object to the doctrine of Original Sin, as incompatible 
with God's goodness, we point to inherited disease, inherited 
proclivities to vice, inherited dishonour. And so as to the 
doctrine of Election. From the great inequalities which exist 
among men as to native physical powers, intellect, moral 
character, and the influences which have surrounded their 
childhood as well as their age, we could not with anything 
more than probability infer, as a positive proposition, that 
<j[od would elect some men to be saved, and omit others. 
As a positive argument it would be weakened by the fact 
that we cannot be certain of a universal analogy between 
God's operations in the sphere of creation and providence, 
and his operations in the sphere of grace ; and also by the 
fact that the widest inequalities of earthly life are slight 
compared with the difference between salvation and damna- 
tion. But when to the doctrine of Election as taught in 
Scripture men offer the objection that it is inconsistent with 
the Divine justice to make such a distinction^ we refute the 
objection by pointing to the immense distinctions which he 
certainly does make in this life.* 

When examples are invented to furnish argument (and not 
merely explanation, ornament, etc.) it must always be the argu- 

* In ordpT to establiah an analogy in favour of Unconditional Election^ 
derived froqi the inequalities of men's earthly lot, it would be necessary 
to shn^ tb^t nxen are dealt with judicially and punithed on account of such 
inequalities, and that <ntr sense of justice approves of this. If any one were 
to propose that Parliament should ena<:t th^t every householder convicted 
of having an income of less than i:200 a year should be sent to prison 
what man io his sensos would support such a proposal ? Bd. 



144 ABGUMBNT. 

ment from analogy. It is only necessary that the supposed 
case should be^'»ro6a5fo. Induction from unreal examples would 
of course be worthless ; but merely probable cases may afford 
an analogy to the matter in hand, which will be in a high degree 
convincing.* 

The analogy of real and of invented examples is sometimes 
employed not to prove, but merely to explain, or to render 
interesting.t 

Of the four great Varieties of Argument which have now 
been discussed, the first, argument a priori, stands apart as 
distinct from the rest. All other arguments are divided by 
Aristotle (followed by Whately, and others) into arguments 
from sign, and arguments from example. The most important 
class of arguments from siga are those from Testimony \ and 
nearly all arguments from example fall either under the head of 
Induction or of Analogy. 

E. Deduction from ebtablished truth. 

Every species of argument involves a deduction. But there 
are many deductions which do not belong to any of the varieties 
we have been considering — deductions not from sign nor example, 
not from a cause or necessary truth, but from a genei-al truth, 
which has been in some way established. What we then do 
is to show that this truth includes some other, or by its 
combination with similar established truths leads to some 
other ; and these processes may be repeated, so as to produce 
a series. Much of our reasoning is obviously of this character. 
We do not stop with the truth furnished by cause, sign, or 
example, but procsed to develop its contents, or combine it 
with other truths and show the result. And besides what 
is common to all men, the reasoning of preachers possesses 
a large element of this kind, in its constant deductions or 
"inferences'* from the teachings of Scripture. 

Now such deductions must be made with great care. The 
reply often heard in conversational discussion, " Ah, but that is 
only an inference of yours,*' shows the common feeling as to 
the danger that our inferences will be far less certain than the 
truths from which we infer. There is obviously need for great 
care that the deduction shall be strictly logical. But another 
thing is important. In Political Economy, it is found that the 
results deduced by abstract reasoning from general principles 

• See Whately, p. 129 ff. 
t As to the objectionable phrase, the analogy of Faith, see note to chap. ii. 4. 



ARGUMENT. 145 

must at every step be compared with facts, or they will at 
length be found to have gone astray from actual truth. And 
similarly in religious reasoning. We can very seldom take a 
general truth and make a series of deductions from it as is 
done in Geometry, and feel safe as to the results. We must 
constantly compare with the facts of existence, and with the 
teachings of Scripture. The love of purely abstract reason- 
ing leads many minds astray as to religious truth. The idea 
of establishing some truth of religion by "a perfect demon- 
stration** is commonly delusive. Human life is not really 
controlled by demonstrated truth, as to this world or the 
next. We must be content with those practical certainties 
which the conditions of existence allow us to attain ; and 
while constantly drawing inferences, as it is right we should 
do, must be content to compare them with fact and Scrip- 
ture, to make sure that they are correct. 

''Pure reasoning handles ideas and not facts. It is a sort 
of geometry of intellectual space. This geometry, however, 
is less certain than the other, the import of signs here being 
less invariable. Hence the necessity of not coursing entirely 
through the void, and of descending often to the earth, to 
set our feet on facts. Otherwise, we run the risk of proving 
too much, and losing, at length, the sense of reality. At the 
end of the most sound reasonings, when the reason of the 
hearer seems to be overcome, something more intimate than 
logic rises up within him, and protests against your conclu- 
sions.*** 

F. Cei tain forms of Argument. 

We have hitherto considered the principal varieties of argu- 
ment as to their essential nature. But several of the forms 
which arguments, whatever be their material and character, 
often assume, would seem to call for mention and explana- 
tion. 

The argument a fortiori (from stronger grounds), shows 
that something is true in a less probable case, real or sup- 
posed, and then insists that much more certainly must it be 
true in a more probable case. This form of argument is a 
favourite one with orators, and is very often found in the 
teachings of our Lord and the apostles. " If ye, then, being 
evil, know how to give good things to your children, how 
much more will your Heavenly Father,** etc. " If God so 

•Vinet, p. 174, 176. 
L 



146 AIIGUMENT. 

clothe the gr^ss of the field, which to-day is, and to-rporrow 
is cast into ttiQ oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O 
ye of little faith ! " " If they do these things in the green 
tree, what |5|hall be done in the dry ? ' (Luke xxiii. 31.) ** He 
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him \ip for us all, 
how shall he ^ot with him also freely give us all things 1 " 
(Rom. viii. 32.) " For if the word spoken by angels was 
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received 
fk just recompense of reward ; how shall we escape, if we 
neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be 
spoken by the Lord (i. e. the Lord Jesus), and was confirmed 
unto us," etc. (Heb. ii. 2-4.) " For the time is come that 
judgment must begin at the house of God : and if it first 
begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not 
the gospel of God ! And if the righteous scarcely be saved, 
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?" (1 Peter iv. 
17, 18.)* These are but a few examples out of many. They 
should impress us with the suitableness of such arguments in 
94dr99sing the popular mind. 

The argument Jrom Progressive Approach has been pointed 
out and well illustrated by Whately. In arguing the being 
of 0- Gpd from the general consent of manl^ind, we observe 
that in pfoportion as men have become cultivated and civilized, 
their ide^s of the unity and moral excellence of the Deity 
haye ri^en higher ; that there is a progressive tendency towards 
the most exalted Monotheism, which is hence inferred to be 
true. Or as regards religious tolerance : " In every age and 
country, as a general rule, tolerq.nt principles have (however 
imperfectly) gained ground wherever scriptural knowledge has 
gained around. And a presumption is thus a,ftbrded that a 
still further advance of the one would lead to a corresponding 
adv9,pce i|i the other, "t 

The dilemma presents two assumptions, of such a character 
that one or the other must be true, and yet whichever is con- 
sidered true, there will follow the result proposed. Such was 
GamftUpl's argument (Acts v. 38, 39), " If this counsel or this 
wor^ be of men, it will come to pought : but if it be of 
God, ye cannot overthrow it." It must be either from men 
or from God, and in either case the conclusion would be, 
" Refrain from these men, and let them alone." J The 

* See Vinet, p. 193-6. + Whately, p. 104-9. 

t We are not here inquiring whether Gamaliel's assumptions are 

correct. 



ARGUltENT. .147 

dilemma is most commonly, but not exclusively employed for 
the purpose of refutation. 

In like manner, the reductio ctd absurd^jtm (reduction to an 
absurdity) is most frequently, but not always used for refu- 
tation.* When it is argued that we ought not to send the 
gospel to the heathen, because if they reject it, their guilt 
and doom will be so much aggravated, we answer tbat upon 
that principle tbe gospel ought not to be preached to the 
destitute at home, nor to any one, and it is a pity there 
ever was a gospel. The principle which necessarily leads 
to such an absurdity, must be in itself erroneous. 

The argument ex concesso, from something conceded by the 
opponent, or known to be admitted by the persons addressed, 
may be employed not only for refutation, but also to establish 
positive truth, when we are satisfied that the thing admitted 
is really true. 

The argument ad hominem is hgitimatdtf employed only in 
refutation, and will be explained under that head.t 

Arguments of different kinds, as to nature or form, will 
often be combined in one complex argument. 

Different speakers will prefer one or another species of 
argument according to their mental constitution and other 
circumstances, and a man will be apt to manage best that 
which he prefers. But this preference should never become 
exclusive, or it will make the mind one-sided. Besides, it 
is necessary to consider what species of argument will best 
suit the mental constitution, intelligence, and tastes of the 
audience. We should therefore habituallj seek to draw argu- 
ments from a variety of sources, and throw them into various 
forms. 

3. Reputation. 

(1.) It is frequently a sufficient refutation of error to prove 
the opposite truth ; and this is then greatly to be preferred. 
The error, without mention, just falls away, and is thought 
of no more. But such a course will not always suffice. The 
arguments of adversaries must often be met, and objections 
to the truth must still oftener be removed. In controversial 
sermons, though the preacher may have no actual antagonist, 
yet there are arguments well known to be used in favour of 
a different view, and which he must refute ; " that he may 
be able, with the sound teaching, both to exhort and to refute 

* Comp. aboye, 1, 3. t See below, 3. 



148 ABOUMENT. 

the gainsayers. For there are many unruly and vain talkers 
and deceivers . . whose mouths must be stopped."* Eighi 
feelings towards those who are in error will render this neces 
sary task a painful one. But naturally, all men take pleasure 
in conflict. "We are more inclined to refute than to prove, 
to destroy than to build up. It is more easy, more flattering 
to self-love, more in accordance with our natural passions. 
Every one is eloquent in anger ; love and peace seldom make 
men eloquent."+ The audience, too, are thus readily aroused. 
Everybody will run to see a fight. And he who assnmefi 
the character of a fearless defender of unpopular doctrines, fl 
martyr-spirit, readily gains from the unthinking a species oi 
sympathy and admiration. These things being so, we must 
carefully guard against the temptation to assail others where 
it is not really necessary. We must keep uppermost in oui 
minds the desire to establish truth, and let refutation be 
strictly and manifestly subordinate. J 

But apart from controversy, and where we have no real 
antagonist, there will be, in preaching, very frequent occasion 
for refuting objections to the truth we advocate. It is better, 
whenever consistent with the known facts, to treat these as 
the objections, not of a caviller, but of an honest inquirer. 
Instead of assailing the supposed objector and attempting to 
conquer him, let us approach him kindly and seek to win 
him to the truth. 

(2.) In moral reasoning one cannot always, as in Geometry, 
give a complete refutation of all objections. Sometimes they 
are too weak to be refuted. He who does not at once see 
their absurdity or nothingness, can scarcely be made to see 
it at alL You pierce the phantom through and through 
with your sword, but there it stands. Or you perceive that 
the objection is really a pretence or a delusion on the part 
of men who are opposed to the truth ou grounds they do 
not state — perhaps the last refuge of one determined not to 
yield. Alas ! for the frequency with which we are reminded 
that 

''A man convinced against his will 

Is of the same opinion still." 
» 

Besides, there are objections to everything. Whately was 
fond of quoting a saying of Dr. Johnson, " There are objec- 

* Titus i. 9-11. t Vinet, p. 177. 

t Comp. on Polemical Subjects, chap, iii., 2. 



ABOUMENT. 149 

tioQS to a plenum and objections to a vacuum; yet one or 
the other must be true." The reason for believing any pro- 
position in moral truth consists of the arguments in favour 
of it, minus the objections, refuted as far as practicable. 
" The objection perhaps may be unanswerable, and yet may 
safely be allowed, if it can be shown that more and weightier 
objections lie against every other supposition. This is a most 
important caution for those who are studying the Evidences 
of Eeligion. Let the opposer of them be called on, instead 
of confining himself to detached cavils, and saying * how do 
you answer this 1 ' and * how do you explain that % * to frame 
some consistent hypothesis to account for the introduction of 
Christianity by human means ; and then to consider whether 
there are more or fewer difl&culties in his hypothesis than in 
the other."* 

It follows that we must not waste time in the refutation 
of trifling objections ; nor mention objections which would 
never trouble the minds of the hearers, and which furnish 
no sufficient ground for doubting the truth ; nor attempt to 
refute objections unless we can do so satisfactorily. It is 
sometimes better to say, " Well, that is an objection to my 
proposition, I grant; but then the proposition must be true, 
as the arguments in favour of it show." If the objections, 
or the arguments for a contradictory proposition, are really 
convincing, it is the manifest duty of one who loves truth, 
and would seem especially incumbent on a preacher, to ac- 
knowledge himself convinced, and as far as this matter goes, 
to change his ground. 

(3.) When objections are discussed, they should be stated 
in full force. This is simply just, and is also obviously 
good policy. " Express it precisely as you believe it to be 
in the hearer's mind, so that, listening to your exposition of 
it, he may say to himself, * That is exactly my objection ; 
that is precisely my difficulty, and I should wish very much 
to hear how the preacher will clear it up.'"t 

(4.) Refutation, whether of an erroneous proposition, or of 
an objection to the truth, will be accomplished by showing 
either that the terms are ambiguous, the premises false, the 
reasoning unsound, or the conclusion irrelevant. Sometimes 
that which is presented as an objection may be very true, 



• 



Whately, p. 188. Comp. above, on Testimony, 2, B. 
f Potter's Sacred Eloquence, p. 179. 



150 ABGUMBNT. 

but may not really conflict with the proposition under con-- 
sideration. 

" In all casCH" in- which it seems necessary, we must divide 
the difl&culby. Refiitation ordinarily gains by a division of 
the objection. It is seldom that one reply alone can demolish 
directly with a single stroke, all parts of the error. . . . 
The hearer sees you conquer many times in succession ; he 
perceives that there are many errors on the other side, and 
many truths on yours."* 

" We must know how to take the offensive, and, if possible, 
turn the objection into a proof. Prolonging the defensive, 
enfeebles us ; and to defend ourselves to advantage, we must 
make the attack. Great preachers have always observed this 
rule. In the error which we decompose or attack, we should 
find the very germs of truth.t The lamented Addison Alex- 
ander, in his sermons and commentaries, exhibits remarkable 
skill in thus turning objections into proof. 

(5;) Refutation of an error is sometimes strengthened by 
showing how the error may have originated. Thus an opposer 
of Infant Baptism^ after disposing of such passages from the 
New Testament as may have been presented in proof of it, 
breaks the force of any argument derived from its present 
and long-continUed existence, by pointing out how it may 
have arisen in the second or third century. 

(6.) It is often advantageous to have recourse to indirect 
refutation. The principal species of this, reductio ad absur- 
dum, has been already discussed, j: The argument ad hominem, 
(to the man,) can scarcely ever be properly employed to es- 
tablish positive truth. An appeal to the hearer's peculiar 
opinions, position, or mode of reasoning, in order to make 
him believe something, is almost necessarily improper. But 
in refutation, in dealing with those unreasonable objectors 
"•whose mouths must be stopped,'* it is perfectly appropriate 
and* may be highly effective. Such is our Lord's argument 
in Matt. xii. 27, " If I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom 
do your children cast them outT' He is not saying that the 
dteeiples of the Pharisees really do cast out demons, but 
sknply shutting their mouths by an argument ad hominem, 
S^ likewise in 1 Cor. xv. 29, " Else what shall they do which 
ar^ baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all ? why 
are they then baptized for them !" the apostle silences certain 

* Vinet, p. 179. f lb. 
t Sde above, 2, P. 



ARbUMENT. 151 

ohjl3Ctorg to the resuri*ection of tlie dead by pointiiig td' the 
superstitious practice encouraged by them, of liii,ptizitig living 
p^sons in behalf of those who had died unbajHized, — a prac- 
tice known to have existed in the next century. Efe does 
not present this as an argurtient to prove the doctrine of the 
r6gut*i ection true, but simply as- an ad hominefni argument to 
stJop the mouths of unreasonable opponents. Atid his Own 
condemnation of the superstitious practice need not be stated, 
fof at Corinth it would be well understood. This is one of 
the points to be guarded in using the form of argumeilt in 
question ; we miist not seem to approve the position or prac- 
tice to which we appeal. We must also take pains to use 
thle argument fairly. " Tt does not follow from a mail's 
having been of a different opinion ft)rmerly, that he is Throng 
in thinking as he now does. A man is often reproached for 
making progress, when reproached with inconsistency." 

It is sometimes convenient to show that an opponent's pre- 
mise is wrong, by showing that it "proves too much," i. e. "that 
it proves, besides the conclusion drawn, another, which is 
miftiifestly inadmissible."* 

Iroiiy^ as a means of making an opponent or ati error ridicu- 
lous, is certainly allowahle in serious discourse, for we have a 
famous example in Elijah's address to the priests of Baal.f It 
is" employed with great effect against certain modem forms of 
in6delity, in Roo:ers' Eclipse of Faith. Though it be not true 
that ** ridicule is the test of truth," it is certainly a very effec- 
tive means of refuting pretentious falsehood. If a serious 
subject is involved, the persons refuted by means of irony will 
of course complain loudly that it is irreverent, and some good 
people may think likewise; but this only makes it proper to 
be careful that we do not say anything which really does make 
a serious subject ridiculous. It is obvious that an ironicar 
passage in a sermon ought, save in very peculiar cases, to be 
quite brief. J 

Akin to the indirect method of refutation, is a certain 
sophistical method, " consisting in counter-objections urged 
against something else which is taken for granted to be, though 

it' is not, the only alternative It is thus that a 

man commonly replies to the censure passed on any vice he is 
addicted to, by representing some other vice as worse ; e. g. if 

* Whately, p. 182. + 1 Kings xviii. 27. 

+ Conip. Whately, p. 183-7. 



152 ARGUMENT. 

he is blamed for being a sot, he dilates on the greater enormity 
of being a thief; as if there was any need he should be 
either."* So likewise when we object to the popular dancing, 
there are those who reply that it would be greatly worse to 
spend the time in talking scandal. 

(7.) Too elaborate and vehement refutation may sometimes 
defeat its own design. Not only because it arouses deep-seated 
prejudices, but because, by overwhelming and utterly crashing 
an error, we may make persons unwilling to acknowledge that 
an opinion they have entertained is so preposterous, and therefore 
unwilling to admit that the refutation is just.t Thus iu con- 
demning the "accommodation*' of texts, if one grows indignant, 
and declares the practice to be inexpressibly foolish and wicked, 
some of those who have indulged in it are repelled, and refuse 
to acknowledge that it is wrong at all. 

(8.) A successful refutation is apt to carry the sympathies 
of the hearers, as men usually sympathise with the victorious. 
And influenced by this feeling, they often over estimate the 
extent of the refutation. All the arguments advanced in favour of 
a proposition may have been refuted, and yet the proposition 
may be true, on grounds not mentioned. Still, if the advocates 
of a view are able men, it is natural to suppose that they have 
not omitted the only convincing arguments on their side, and 
so there is not here any great danger of error. But in another 
way there is very great danger. When the opponent readily 
and overwhelmingly refutes some of the arguments presented, 
and then with a lofty carelessness remarks that in like manner 
all the rest could be refuted if it were worth while, the great 
mass of men will believe it to be even so, and regard him as 
triumphant. Hence it is of great importance not to employ 
doubtful proofs, and in presenting those which afford only a 
probability or a presumption to point out distinctly that such is 
the case. Otherwise the sophistical adversary will refute the 
weak proofs, or show that the merely probable ones establish 
nothing, and then if he does not assert, will leave it to be taken 
for granted, that our other proofs are of the same character. 

This has often happened with reference to the doctrine of the 
Divinity of Christ. Every passage which at all appears to 
teach the doctrine being adduced, the Socinian can sho«v that 
many of them are exceedingly doubtful, and many others can 
be differently understood, until unthinking persons would suppose 

* Whately, p. 188, 189. 

♦ Comp. Whately, p. 193-8. 



ARGUMENT. 153 

that he had completely destroyed the argument, or reduced it 
to but a few passages. Now if one wishes a climax, he may 
begin by showing that a great number of passages seem to 
involve the doctrine, and that many others make it extremely 
probable, and then produce some that are conclusive. But it 
is often better, especially in a sermon, to present a few strong 
proofs, and then point out in general that this doctrine lies 
everywhere on the surface of the New Testament, so that the 
common reader naturally gets the idea ; nay, that it pervades 
the whole warp and woof of New Testament teaching, which 
would be torn to fragments in removing it.* So in all other 
discourses upon topics involving much controversy. Take no 
gi'ound which you cannot hold. It may look very brave to 
assume an advanced position, but if you are flanked out of it 
there will be a great shout of triumph. And distinguish care- 
fully between proofs which yield a presumption — for that 
purpose they are very useful — and those which are regarded as 
conclusive. Even where there is no controversy, duty to one's own 
mind and to the mind of his hearers, and devotion to the truth, 
require that no greater stress should ever seem to be laid on 
any argument than it deserves. " One false or foolish proof 
lays the whole discourse open to suspicion ; it inspires our 
hearers with a contempt for ourselves and our doctrine, and 
it is frequently the only part which they retain and of which 
they speak."t 

In consequence of the ignorance, the slothfulness, the pre- 
judices, and the frequent deceitfuluess of men, human reasoning 
greatly abounds in Fallacies. We must learn to avoid these 
ourselves, and to detect and expose them in others. For this 
purpose it is especially important to study systems of Logic, as 
training the mind to distinguish between sound and fallacious 
reasoning. It is painful when one feels that there is something 
wrong in an argument, but cannot see what ; or when he sees 
it himself, but cannot explain the fallacy to others. This ex- 
planation, it may be remarked, is often best made by construct- 
ing a similar argument out of matter more familiar to the 
common mind. J 

* With reference to this important doctrine the suggestion may be re- 
peated, that the mode of discussion proper to a theological treatise often 
requires great modification in a popular discourse. 

t Porter, Sac. Eloq. p. 151. 

X Mill's discussion of Fallacies, Logic, Book V., contains much that is 
very valuable. He thinks that the commonest of all fallacies is petiti^ 
principii (begging the question.) 



IB4 ABGH7HEI7T. 

4. Order of Aroumbnts. 

The order of arguments is scarcely less important than their 
individual force. The superiority of an army to a mob is 
hardly greater than the advantage of a well-arranged discourse 
over a mere mass of scattered thoughts. The question what 
ai*rangement is to be preferred in any particular case, must 
depend upon a variety of circumstances. Here, as everywhere 
in Rhetoric, we can only lay down rules as to what is generally 
best.* 

It is obvious that the several distinct arguments should be 
kept separate. But in the practice of inexperienced reasoners 
it is not uncommon to see portions of two different arguments 
combined, and two parts of the same argument separated by 
the interposition of other matter. 

The consideration which must principally determine the 
order of arguments is their natural relation to each other. 
" Some proofs are explained by others, which must be pre- 
viously exhibited in order to the full effect of the reasoning. 
Some proofs presuppose others. Some, once more, have great 
weight if preceded by certain others, and are of little moment 
unless preceded by them."t 

Proofs which spring from the very nature of the proposition 
should commonly come first, because the exhibition of these 
will involve a full explanation of the proposition, and " after 
such an explanation the relevancy and force of every other 
proof will be more clearly seen." J 

Arguments a priori generally precede others, as they prepare 
the mind more readily to receive the a posteriori proofs. Thus 
after presenting the a prion probability that a revelation would be 
given to man, and further, that such a revelation would be accom- 
panied by miracles, we may gain a hearing for the testimony 
that miracles have been wrought, and in connection with them 
a revelation has been given. Here the testimony falls in with 
an antecedent probability. But if we first bring forward the 
testimony that miracles have taken place, " as insulated occur- 
rences, without any known or conceivable purpose," it has to 
encounter a powerful antecedent probability against miracles. || 
There are cases, however, in which it is better to present first 

* The larger topic or the Arraugement of a Sermon will be discussed 
below, in Part II. 

t Day, p. 158. t Day, p. IW. || Boe Whately, p. 169,170. 



ARGUMENT. 155 

some more tangible and popular proof of a proposition, aa 
from testimony or from example, and then show that this 
need not surprise us when we look at certain a priori con- 
siderations. 

It is usually best, where nothing forbids, tc begin with the 
weakest arguments used, and end with the strongest, thus 
forming a climax, the power of which is well understood. 

But we must sometimes depart from the order which would 
be fixed by the natural dependence of the arguments upon each 
otlier, because of the known disposition of the hearers. If 
they are unfriendly to our views, it is well to begin with one or 
more strong arguments, well suited to their minds, so as to 
command respect and secure attention. We may next, accord- 
in«: to the precept of the ancient rhetoricians, throw in the less 
important matter, and close with the strongest of all, for the 
sake of the final impression ; or, beginning wiJh the strongest 
arguments, and adding less important but confirmatory consid- 
erations, we may at the close recapitulate in the reverse order, 
and thus gain the effect of a climax.* 

What position shall be occupied by arguments from ScApture, 
relatively to those drawn from reason, e^erience, etc. 1 To 
begin, as is not unfrequently done, with plain proofs from 
Scripture, and then add further proofs from reason, history, 
common experience, and the like, seems derogatory to the 
authority of God's Word. When a thing has been proven by 
that Word, then for the preacher the question is settled ; he 
cannot admit, he must not seem to admit, that there is any 
need of further argument. So far, then, it would appear that 
Scripture proofs should regularly follow others. But there will 
be cases in which this is awkward ; and besides, to some of 
the hearers proofs from reason may be more convincing, or 
proofs from experience more impressive, than the plainest 
declarations of the Bible. To meet these conditions we may 
begin with the Scripture teachings, and then observe that here, 
a» in fact everywhere, reason and experience are in harmony 
with the Bible, and so proceed to the arguments from those 
sources. In this way we conform to the hearer's mode of 
thinking and feeling, and end with that which will make the 
strongest impression on him, without abandoning our own 
position as to the supremacy of Scripture — a position which 
even infidels will feel that the preacher himself ought to 

* Comp. Whately, p. 201. 



156 ABOUMBNT. 

maintain.* To hold firmly our own ground, and yet put our- 
selves as far as possible in sympathy with the persons we would 
win, is a thing often demanded in preaching, and an achieve- 
ment worthy of much thoughtful effort. 

In what part of a discourse shall the refutation of objections 
be placed 1 ** When an objection lies against the view advanced 
in a certain part of the sermon, it should obviously, for the 
efficiency of that part, be disposed of, though as briefly as 
possible, before passing to another poiut."t If objections lie 
against the general sentiment of the sermon, and they can be 
refuted independently of the discussion, and briefly, it is advan- 
tageous to clear them out of the way before entering upon our 
line of argument. Where the refutation depends upon our 
argument, or would occupy much time, it must be postponed 
to the f.lose ; and in that case, if some of the objections would 
be likely to occur at once to the hearer's mind, and interfere, 
as we proceed, with the effect of our arguments, it is well to 
intimate at the outset that we propose, before concluding, to 
notice some objections. 

'* The hint may here be of some utility, that when a contro- 
verted position is to be defended, an advantage may be gained 
by stating, previously to entering on the proof, one or two of 
the most weighty objections against the opposite views. Objec- 
tors may thus become sensible of difficulties which they had 
not contemplated, and many may be induced to hear with 
greater candour arguments in favour of the position ; those who 
admit the point under discussion may receive additional con- 
firmation ; and those who are indifferent may be led to regard 
the subject as more important than they had supposed." { 

In a formal public discussion, it is a very common artifice for 
the person who speaks first to insist that his antagonist shall 
follow the order of topics which he has laid down. In the 
famous contest as to the crown, JSschines attempted this; and so 
important did Demosthenes regard the matter, that he begins 
his speech with a solemn appeal to the judges that they shall, as 
really required by their oath of impartiality, allow each of the 
disputants to pursue the order he may choose. IF 

* Comp. one of the opening paragraphs of this chapter. 
+ Ripley, Sac. Khet., p. 81. t Ripley, p. 82. 

H As to the general conduct of refutation, see above, 3. 



aroumbnt. 157 

5. General Sugofstions as to Argument. 

In concluding the subject of Arguments, it is proper to 
throw together a few practical hints, though somo of them are 
indirectly involved in statements heretofore made.* 

(1.) Do not undertake to prove anything unless you are sure 
it is true, and satisfied that you can prove it. 

(2.) Let your argument start from something which the 
persons addressed will fully acknowledge. This is obviously 
important, but is often neglected. 

(3.) Use arguments intelligible to your hearers, and likely to 
make an impression on their minds. This must be the rule, 
though individual hearers may have so low a grade of intelli- 
gence that we cannot uniformly keep within their reach, and 
though particular arguments not intelligible even to the majority 
may sometimes be used, if with the few they would be very 
effective, and if they take up but little time. But it is a not 
an uncommon thing to see preachers present whole trains of 
abstract or otherwise unfamiliar argument, which the great 
mass of their hearers cannot at all comprehend, and but very 
few can follow throughout. The preacher, of all men, should 
study the common mind, and seek fully to understand, not only 
its forms of expression, but, what is still more important, its 
ways of thinking. He should strive to put himself in the 
position of his hearers, and consider how this or that argument 
will appear from their point of view.f " For this is the reason 
why uneducated men have morj power of persuasion among 
the rabble than the educated have, just as the poets say 
(Euripides has such a saying) that the uneducated are in the 
estimation of the rabble finer speakers. For the one class say 
what is matter of common knowledge and of a general char- 
acter ; but the others speak from their own knowledge, and say 
the things which lie close to their hearers."J How true it is 
now of many able and learned preachers that they can speak only 
of generalities, belonging to the common stock of human know- 
ledge, and know not how to fall in with the modes of thought 
which are familiar and agreeable to the masses. That this last 
can be done without the sacrifice of truly profound thought or 
the violation of refined taste, has been shown by some ministers 

* Com. particularly the introductory paragraphs of this chapter. 

f In these respects a good deal may be learned from the critical observa- 
tion of able " stump-speakers/' and jury-lawyers. 

:i: Aristotle, Bhet. II. 22, 23. 



lt'8 A«QUMBNT. 

of every age and country, and moat conspioiiously by that Great 
Teaqber of wboin it was said — exalted eulogium ! — "tbe 
common people heard him gladly." 

(4.) In general, rely mainly on Scripture arguments, and prefer 
those which are plain and unquestionable. When we engfige in 
religious controversy before a popular audience, we shall usually 
do well to say but little concerning th it great mass of learned 
matter about which the people cannot personally judge, and rely 
mainly on common-sense views of the plain tetichings of Scrip- 
ture. But if we are superior to the petty vanity of displaying 
a cheap erudition, we often find it too hard to work out a com- 
mon-sense view, and too easy to appropriate the piles of material 
which the learned have left us. It is to be feared that but a 
small proportion of controversial sermons are in this respect 
well suited to the popular mind. And apart from controversy, 
let us use chiefly arguments from Scripture. This is common 
ground between us and our hearers. In general, no other 
arguments can come so appropriately from us, or be so effective 
with the people. And in general principles, the many special 
precepts, and the immense number of examples, good and evil, 
to be found in the Bible, we have a boundless store of material 
for argument.* 

(5.) Do not try to say everything, but select a suitable 
number of the most available arguments. It is true that 
sometimes the judicious combination of many comparatively 
slight arguments may have a great effect. " Singly they are 
light," says Quintilian, " but taken together they do hurt, 
though not as by a thunderbolt, yet aa by hail."t Still, it is 
a very common fault to multiply arguments to excess. With 
sore travail of the mind the preacher has brought all these 
into existence, and surveying them with parental affection, he 
thinks each of them too good to be abandoned. But how 
many thousand men was it that Gideon dismissed that he 
might conquer with three hundred 1 Where there are so many 
arguments, eithei the discourse must be excessively long, or 
they must be too hurriedly presented. " A plain hearer who 
listens to a rapid succession of various proofs, especially if 
they are novel and incongruous, is much in the condition of a 
rustic stranger, who is hurried through the streets of a crowded 
city, where a thousand objects strike his eye, not one of which 
leaves any distinct and permanent impression on his mind."{ 

* Uomp. Gresley on Preaching, Letter VIII. 
f Quint, v., 12, 5. t Porter's Horn. Lect. XIII. 



ABQUMENT. 159 

Where it is really necessary to present many arguments, let 
them be skilfully grouped, and let the most obvious be briefly 
stated, in order to pause and dwell upon those which de- 
mand special attention. 

(6.) Avoid formality. Have the reality of argument, but 
as little as possible of its merely technical forms and phrases. 
• (7.) As to the style of Argument, the chief requisites are of 
course clearness, precision, and force. But a simple elegance 
is usually compatible with these. And where the subject is 
exalted and inspiring, and the speaker's whole soul is on fire, 
some ^eat thunderbolt of argument may blaae with an over- 
powering splendour.* 

• Comp. Quin. V., 14, 38. 



CHAPTER VTI. 

ILLUSTRATION. 

1. Various Uses op Illustration. 2. Sources op Illustra- 
tion, VIZ., Observation, Pure Invention, Science, His- 
tory, Literature and Art, Scripture. 3. Cautions as 
TO the Employment of Illustration^, 

L Various uses op Illustration. 

To illustrate, according to the etymology, is to throw light 
(or lustre) upon a subject ; and hence illustration would strictly 
include only explanation and ornament. But that which ex- 
plains may also contain a proof by analogy ; or that which 
adorns a subject may at the same time connect with it pathetic 
associations. Accordingly, what we call illustrations are used 
to explain, to prove, to adorn, and to render impressive. 

Strictly speaking, one would not call illustration a distinct 
class of the materials of diacouree. As a means of explaining, 
proving, or awakening emotion, it would fall under the heads 
of Explanation, Argument and Application;* as a means of 
adornment, it would belong to Elegance of Style.f But as the 
same illustration often subserves different ends, and as the 
proper handling of illustrations is a matter of great practical 
importance, it seems best to give the subject a separate dis- 
cussion. 

(1.) Perhaps the principal use of illustrations is to explain. 
This they do either by presentmg an example of the matter in 
hand, a case in point (Exemplification,)} or by presenting 
something similar or analogous to it, which will make the 
matter plain. 

(2.) But illustrations are also very frequently employed to 
prove. This is done in some rare cases by presenting an 
example which warrants an Induction ; § commonly, it is an 

* Discussed in chapters v., yi., and viii. ; comp. at the beginning of 
thap. y. -t Part III, chap. iv. 

X Comp. chap, v., 2. § Comp. chap, vi., 2, C. 



ILLUSTRATION. 161 

argument from Analogy.* In Romans, chapter vi. and viL, 
the apostle introduces three illustrations, as showing the ab- 
surdity of supposing that justification by faith will encourage 
to sin : believers are dead to sin, and risen to another life ; 
they have ceased to be the slaves of sin, and become the 
slaves (so to speak) of holiness, of God ; they have ceased 
to be married to the law, and are married to a new husband, 
Christ, to whom they must now bear fruit. Each of these 
is not merely explanatory of the believer's position, but in- 
volves an argument from analogy. So with the olive-tree in 
chap. xi. We have heretofore seen that arguments from analogy 
are most frequently and most safely employed in refutation; 
and that when used to establish positive truth, they demand 
very great care, lest we deceive ourselves and others. 

The fact that an illustration may furnish proof at the same 
ii/me that it serves for explanation, ornament, etc., calls for 
special attention. Some analogy may be so ornamental, so 
amusing, or pathetic, as to make us overlook the fact that 
it has of right an argumentative force also ; and some com- 
parison may be so beautiful an ornament as to be allowed 
force in the way of proof when in reality it is a mere simile 
founded on resemblance, and presents no true analogy, and 
thus no argument.t We should look closely at illustrations 
employed for other purposes, and see whether they also 
contain an argument. 

(3.) Illustrations are valuable as an ornament. Their use 
for this purpose, as to kind and amount, must be governed 
by the general principles which pertain to Elegance of Style. J 
Those who find themselves much inclined to the use of or- 
namental illustration, should exercise a rigorous self-control, 
and so cultivate their taste that it will discard all but the 
genuinely beautiful. Those whose style is barren of such 
ornament should seek after it, not by tying on worn and 
faded artificial flowers, but by encouraging the subject to 
blossom, if that be at all its nature. 

(4.) Finally, they frequently serve to render a subject im- 
pressive, by exciting some kindred or preparatory emotion. ' 
Thus in the parable of the Prodigal Son, the natural pathos 
of the story itself touches the heart, and prepares it to be 
all the more impressed by the thought of God's readiness to 
welcome the returning sinner. Most preachers use illustra- 

* Comp. chap. vi. 2, D. 

+ Comp. Wbately, p. 164-166. J See part III, chap, iv, 

M 



162 ILLUSTRATION. 

tions very freely for this purpose. The story or description 
may have some vahie for explanation, proof, or ornament, 
but their chief object in employing it is to excite the feelings. 
This is lawful and useful, provided the occasion be seized to 
plant in the softened soil the seeds of divine truth. But we 
sometimes hear stories told, and at great length, which pur- 
port to be illustrations of sacred truth, and yet have no 
other effect, and to all appearance no other design, than to 
excite a transient and aimless emotion.* 

The importance of illustration in preaching is beyond ex- 
pression. In numerous cases it is our best means of explain- 
ing religious truth, and often to the popular mind our only 
means of proving it. Ornament, too, has its legitimate place 
in preaching, and whatever will help us to move the hard 
hearts of men is unspeakably valuable. Besides, for what- 
ever purpose illustration may be specially employed, it often 
causes the truth to be remembered. Sometimes, indeed, 
even where its force as an explanation or proof was not at 
first fully apprehended, the illustration, particularly if it be 
a narrative, is retained in the mind until subsequent in- 
struction or experience brings out the meaning. Such was 
frequently the case with the first hearers of our Lord's 
Parables. In preaching to children, and to the great mass 
of adults, illustration is simply indispensable, if we would 
either interest, instruct, or impress them ; while good illus- 
tration is always acceptable and useful to hearers of the 
highest talent and culture. The example of our Lord decides 
the whole question ; and the illustrations which so abound 
in the records of his preaching ought to be heedfully studied 
by every preacher, as to their source, their aim, their style, 
and their relation to the other elements of his teaching. 
Among the Christian preachers of different ages who have 
been most remarkable for affluence and felicity of illustration, 
there may be mentioned Chrysostom, Jeremy Taylor, Chris- 
mas Evans, Chalmers, Spurgeon, and Beecher.t 

* Comp. OD Application, in the next chapter. 

+ Of works discussing tbe subject of Illustration, see Dowling's Power 
of Illustration, New York, Sheldon & Co. In Trumbull's Children in the 
Temple, 1869, there are good remarks on the subject (p. 263-70), with the 
mention of Groser's Illustrative Teaching, London S. S. Union, and Free- 
man's Use of Illustration in S. S. Teaching, New York, Carlton, & Porter. 
Good thoughts may be found in Papers on Preaching, by a Wykehamist, 
London, 1861, chap. vi. and vii. Gresley (Letter X) and Hood (lieotiire VIII) 
present some things that are valuable. 



ItilATStRAt'ION. 163 

2. Sources of Illustration. 

Illustration of religious truth may be drawn from the whole 
realm of existence and of conception. It might seem idle to 
make any classification of the sources, but there are two 
reasons for doing so. The preacher may thereby be stimulated 
to seek such materials in directions which he has comparatively 
neglected, and the attempt at classification will furnish the 
occasion for some practical remarks in passing. 

(1.) Observation. It is pre-eminently important that the 
teacher of religion should be a close observer ; partly that he 
may know how to adapt religious instruction to the real 
character of his hearers, and the actual conditions of their 
life, but also that he may be able to draw from that inexhaust- 
ible store of illustration which lies everywhere open to the man 
who has eyes to see and ears to hear. 

Nature teems with analogies to moral truth ; and we should 
not merely accept those which force themselves on our atten- 
tion, but should be constantly searching for them. Besides 
those analogies which are embodied iii our familiar metaphors, 
and those which belong to the common stock of illustration, 
there are others, almost without number, which every thought- 
ful observer may perceive for himself ; and here, as elsewhere, 
what is even relatively original has thereby an augmented 
power. The writings of John Foster are particularly rich in 
such analogies, and his Memoirs show that he habitually sought 
for them, and systematically recorded all that he found. 
Several of our Lord's most impressive illustrations are drawn 
from his own close observation of nature ; as, for example, the 
lily, the mustard-seed, the birds. And notice that although 
these are all so stated as to be very beautiful, he employs them 
for higher ends, for explanation or for argument. There is 
here an important lesson; for preachers who derive illustration 
from nature are too apt to follow the poets in making it chiefly 
ornamental.* 

A still richer field, if possible, is human life, with all its 
social relations and varied callings and pursuits, its business 
usages, mechanical processes, etc., and with all its changing 
experiences. Here a man's personal experience will blend with 
his observation of others. And he who really and thoughtfully 
observes life, spreading in its immense variety all around, and 
embracing, too, the world within us, can surely never be at a 

* Comp. on Imagination Part III. chap. v. 



164: ILLUSTRATION. 

loss for illustration. Chrysostom, though somewhat ascetical 
in his views, and though a diligent student, overflows with 
allusions to real life. Beecher, who has lived for years in the 
midst of a continent and a nation condensed within a few 
square miles, shows that he has diligently carried out the 
lesson which he declares himself to have learned from Kuskin, 
to " keep his eyes and ears open." He has been watching the 
ships and the sailors, has acquainted himself with the customs, 
good and bad, of commercial life, has curiously inspected a 
great variety of mechanical processes, has often visited his farm 
and closely observed agricultural operations and the various 
phases of rural life, has been constantly seeing and hearing 
what occurred in his home and in other homes he visited, has 
supplemented his own observation by inquiring of others as to 
all the manifold good and evil of the great world that surges 
around him, and everywhere and always has been asking him- 
self, till that has become the fixed habit of his mind, what is 
this like? what will this illustrate? Hence the boundless 
variety, and the sparkling freshness, of his illustrations, and 
these form the chief element of his power as a preacher. 
Spurgeon, though not equal to Beecher in this respect, and 
though accustomed to draw much from his reading, has been a 
close observer too, in many and various directions. 

It should not be forgotten that much of the choicest illus- 
tration is derived from the commonest pursuits and the most 
familiar experiences of life, and a man may excel in this respect 
without living in New York or London. The great mass of 
our Lord's illustrations are drawn from ordinary human life. 
Of agricultural operations, we find reference to sowing wheat 
and various circumstances which help or hinder its growth, to 
harvesting, winnowing and putting in bams, to the manage- 
ment of fig-trees and vineyards, and to bottling the wine. In 
domestic affairs, he speaks of building houses, various duties 
of servants and stewards, leavening bread, baking, and borrow- 
ing loaves late at night, of dogs under the table, patching 
clothes, and their exposure to moth, lighting lamps, and 
sweeping the house. As to trade, etc., he mentions the pur- 
chase of costly pearls, finding hid treasure, money intrusted to 
servants as capital, lending on interest, creditors and debtors, 
imprisonment for debt, and tax-gatherers. Among social rela- 
tions, he tells of feasts, weddings and bridal processions, the 
judge and the widow who had been wronged, the rich man and 
the beggar, the good Samaritan. Of political affairs, he alludes 



ILLUSTRATION. 166 

to kings going to war, and the parable of the ten pounds (Luke 
xix. 11 ff.) corresponds in every particular to the history of 
Archelaus in our Lord's childhood. The Prodigal Son is a series 
of the most beautiful pictures of real life. And who can 
think without emotion of Jesus standing in some market- 
place, and watching children at their sports, from which he 
afterwards drew a striking illustration ? All these form but a 
part of the illustrative material which, in our brief records of 
his teaching, we find him deriving from the observation of 
human life, and in nearly every case from matters familiar 
to all. The lesson is obvious, but it should be pondered long. 

The observation of children is particularly profitable to a 
religious teacher. They reveal much of human nature, and 
their words and ways are usually interesting to adults. But 
let us never repeat a child's striking sayings in its own 
presence, nor in any wise flatter children as preachers some- 
times do. The recollections of one's own childhood grow 
increasingly interesting as life advances ; but we must be care- 
ful not to exaggerate and glorify those recollections in employ- 
ing them, not to fall into egotism, nor to imagine that these 
perhaps trifling matters will be sure to interest others as much 
as ourselves. 

Narrations of actual experience of the religious life, whether 
our own or that of others known to us, are apt to be generally 
interesting, and will often, as cases in point, furnish admirable 
illustration. The great revival preachers usually have a multi- 
tude of such narratives, drawn from their observation at other 
places, and they often use them with great effect. This is one 
secret of the power possessed by some comparatively ignorant 
preachers in secluded districts. They tell their own experience 
freely, and do not shrink from mentioning persons even in an 
adjoining neighbourhood, whose case they can make instructive. 
And in general, from their very ignorance, they must find all 
their illustration in matters which their hearers are well ac- 
quainted with, and can fully appreciate. Spurgeon is very fond 
of deriving illustration from cases met with in his pastoral 
labours.* 

(2.) Pure invention. It is perfectly lawful to invent an 
illustration, even in the form of a story, provided that it pos- 
sesses verisimilitude, and provided that we either show it to be 
imaginary, or let nothing depend upon the idea that it is real. 
It seems almost certain that some of our Lord's Parables are in 

* Comp. on Experimental Subjects, cbap. iii. 4. 



166 ILLUSTRATION. 

this sense fictitious. It is shown, in one case, by the very form 
of the expression, " The sower went forth to sow." When we 
use imagined illustration as affording an a/rgument, great care 
must be taken to make it fair. It is very common for contro- 
versial speakers or writers to " suppose a case," and suppose it 
of such a kind as just to suit their purpose, without due regard 
to fairness. " If lions were the sculptors, the lion would be 
uppermost." Imagined illustrations for explanation or orna- 
ment are frequently too formal or elaborate. " As when some 

giant," etc. etc. " Suppose there were a man and 

suppose .... and suppose," etc. We all know how 
such things are done. 

(3.) Science. Besides what is derived from our own observa- 
tion of nature and of human life, there is an immense fund of 
illustration in Science, which, collecting the results of a far 
wider observation, classifies and seeks to explain them. With 
the vast growth of Physical Science in our day, and the 
extensive diffusion of some knowledge of its leading depart- 
ments, it becomes increasingly appropriate that preachers 
should^ draw illustration from that source. In this way, too, 
tkey will most effectually counteract the efforts of some infidel 
men of science, and some unwise teachers of religion, to bring 
Christianity and Science into an appearance of hostility. It is 
much better, both for this purpose and for others, that a 
preacher should strive to be well acquainted with one or a few 
departments of Physical Science, than that he shoold dip 
lightly into many. 

Two especial difficulties beset the use of scientific illustrsr 
tion. It has been so common to make Astronomy, Geology, 
etc the occasion for marvellous flights of would-be eloquence, 
that many persons shrink from all allusion to such subjects, as 
savouring of mere declamation. But one highly objectionable 
extreme should not drive us to the other. It is surely possible 
to use such illustrations in a direct and quiet fashion ; and if 
now and then they really kindle the imagination and excite 
emotion, in such cases it will be natural, and the effect will be 
good. But beware of borrowing from Chalmers' Astronomical 
Sermons; it is wearing Saul's armour. The other difficulty is^ 
t^at much of the finest scientific illustration demands more 
knowledge of science than the great mass of hearers really 
possess. Now an illustration which would be particularly 
acceptable and profitable to a few, may sometimes be employed, 
provided we injbroduc^ it with some quiet remark, not saying 



ILLUSTBATIOIJ. 167 

that most persons are unacquainted with this subject, but that 
suph persons as happen to have paid attention to such or such 
Ok maiter will remember, etc. Then no one will complain of 
our alluding to a topic of which he is ignorant. Or it may be 
proper to give the information necessary in order to appreciate 
flie illustration, provided we can do so in few words, and with- 
out anything that looks like display. It is certainly lawful to 
^end as much time upon describing a phenomenon or explain- 
ing a principle of nature which will afford good illustration, as 
we should spend upon telling an anecdote for the same purpose, 
if only the description or explanation be made intelligible and 
interesting to alL Some sermons are but scientific lectures, 
with a religious application. 

Besides Astronomy and Geology, Physics and Chemistry, 
other branches of science are coming to be freely used, 
Whately was very fond of illustrations from Zoology, and 
James Hamilton from Botany. The various departments of 
Medical Science have always been thus employed. There is an 
obvious and always interesting analogy between bodily disease 
or healing and that of the soul ; and Bacon has noticed that 
the figuiative language of Scripture is drawn with especial fre- 
quency from Agriculture and Medicine. Psychology, in its 
several departments, is often itself the theme of pulpit discus- 
sion,* but is also rich in illustration of distinct ivialy religious 
themes. Social Science will add much to what is furnished by 
our own observation of life; and the science of Law is of 
great value, not only from its connection with the revealed 
Law, but as illustrating the doctrines of atonement and, justifi- 
cation. 

(4.) History. Preachers have always made much use of 
illustration from history. The field is in itself boundless^ but 
is in practice greatly limited by the popular lack of extensive 
acquaintance with it. Here, as in the case of Science, we may 
sometimes skilfully introduce what is familiar to but a few, 
and may often, give briefly, without ostentation, and in an 
interesting manner, the requisite information. Great as is the 
value for our puposes of Science, and the attention now be- 
stowed upon it, we must not forget that History, from its 
narrative and descriptive character and its human interest, has 
a peculiar and almost unrivalled charm. And in some respects 
this is especially true of Biogra/phy, both general and religious. 

* Comp. chap. iv. 1. 



168 ILLUSTRATION. 

Here there is the interest which always attaches to a person, to 
an individual human life. And biographical facts can often be 
more readily stated than those of general history. Early 
preachers drew nearly all their historical and biographical 
illustration from ancient history. Jeremy Taylor, for example, 
greatly abounds with this. In our day more modem sources 
are of course chiefly in request, and ancient writers are now 
comparatively a fresh field, particularly if one will take them at 
first hand, and not simply borrow from other preachers, or from 
recent works on ancient history. Thus Herodotus and 
Pleutarch, even in a translation, may be used with greafr 
advantage ; and so as to Josephus, whose works are now by 
most preachers unwisely neglected. Spurgeon is very fond of 
illustrations from the lives of devout men ; and Kichard Fuller 
employs all manner of historical and biographical incident, both 
secular and religious, with rare felicity and power. 

All preachers derive illustration from the news of the day. 
Some carry this too far, warranting the reproach that they 
" get the text from the Bible, and the sermon from the news- 
papers." But it is a grave mistake if any are thereby repelled 
into avoiding a source of illustration so fresh in its interest, 
and so much more generally familiar to the audience than 
either science or history. By judiciously alluding to all suitable 
matters of recent occurrence, whether recorded in the news- 
papers, or happening in our own community, we may render 
the sermon more interesting, and may at the same time have 
opportunity to throw in useful practical remarks about many 
questions of right and wrong.* The danger is, that we shall 
set the people's minds agoing upon the matters which occupy 
them every day, to the neglect of our sacred theme. This may 
be avoided if on the one hand we take care not to intermingle 
an excessive amount of such allusion, and on the other hand to 
keep it strictly subordinate, in our own feelings and in the 
method of introduction, to the religious aim of the discourse. 
If not thus subordinate, then the most interesting allusion will 
be the worst illustration. 

Anecdotes, literally things unpublished, originally denoted 
interesting matters, chiefly historical and biographical incidents, 
gathered from unpublished manuscripts of ancient authors, and 
thrown into a miscellaneous collection. Though now more 
widely used, the term is still most properly applied to stories 
of what one has himself observed, or has drawn from oral 

* Comp. as to preaching on Politics, chap, iii., 2 



ILLUSTRATION. 169 

sources. Understood, however, in the wider sense, so as to 
include published narratives of detached incidents, anecdotes 
are a valuable means of illustration, which some preachers 
employ excessively or in bad taste, but which others ought to 
employ much more largely than they do. He who feels that 
his style would be degraded by introducing an anecdote, may 
profitably inquire whether his style be not too stilted, or at any 
rate too monotonous in its sustained elevation, for popular 
discourse. Let anecdotes be certainly true, if we present them 
as true, and let them be told without exaggeration or " em- 
bellishment." Let them not be ludicrous — though a slight 
tiuge of delicate humour is sometimes lawful — not trivial, and 
especially not tedious. And as illustration *is in general a 
subordinate thing in preaching, and that which is subordinate 
should rarely be allowed to become prominent, a preacher 
should avoid such a multiplication of anecdotes in the same 
sermon, or in successive sermons, as would attract very special 
attention. A greater freedom, both as to amount and kind, is 
admissible in platform-speaking, than in those more grave dis- 
courses which are usually called sermons.* 

(5.) Literature and Art. Even when science and history 
have been excluded, literature, ancient and modern, in prose 
and in verse, covers an immense field, and offers a vast store of 
illustrative material. Suggestive, pleasing, or impressive sen- 
timents, and striking expressions may be quoted, and allusion 
made to well known literary works and characters, whenever it 
will really help to render the discourse interesting and useful. 
Quotations of poetry, though made by some men in offensive 
excess, are employed bj' very many with admirable effect ; and 
while a few need to check their exuberance in this respect, 
the great mass of ministers should stimulate themselves to 
observe and retain more largely, and to use more freely, any 
appropriate poetical quotations. No one can have failed to 
notice how often quotations from hymns, particularly when 
they are familiar, add greatly to the interest and irapressiveness 
of a sermon. Spurgeon often uses these very effectively. The 
Pilgrim's Progress, with its strong sense and homely simplicity, 
its poetic charm and devotional sweetuess, is so rich in the 
choicest illustration that every preacher ought to make himself 
thoroughly familiar with it, and to refresh his knowledge again 
and again through life. Fables are so often alluded to in com- 

* Arvine's Cyclopaedia of Anecdotes is of but little value. Bible Illustra- 
tions, New York, Sheldon & Co., 12mo, is better. 



IfTQ IIiLUST&ATION. 

Daon conversation that we scarcely notice it, and the occasions 
are very numerous in which they might be usefully employed 
i» preaching. An author of distinction, and of wide attain- 
ments and experience of life, remarked som^ years ago that, in 
his judgment, next to the Bible and Shakespeare, the most 
instructive book in the world was iEsop's Fables. Even nursery 
rhymes, though not frequently appropriate in regular sermons^ 
have been employed to good purpose in speaking to children. 

Proverbs are a singularly valuable means of stating truth 
forcibly and impressively. True, they usually represent an 
imperfect generalization, and are one-sided, so that almost any 
proverb can be matched by an opposite one. Yet in exhibitipg 
particular aspects of truth, in impressing particular .points, 
they have great power, especially with the popular mind. 
"Any one who, by after investigation, has sought to discover 
how much our rustic hearers carry away, even from the ser- 
m/ons to which they have attentively listened, will find that it 
is hardly ever the course and tenor of the argument, supposing 
the discourse to have contained such ; but if anything has 
been uttered, as it used so often to be by the best Puritan 
preachers, tersely, pointedly, epigrammatically, this will have 
stS/yed by them, while all the rest has passed away." " Great 
preachers for the people, such as have found their way to the 
universal heart of their fellows, have been ever great employers 
of proverbs"* Our Lord once expressly employs a proverb, 
and repeatedly uses expressions which appear to have been 
pnoverbiaL This was one of the various ways in which he 
sought to strike the common mind, and impress the popular 
hea^t. The proverbs of our own country and language have of 
course peculiar force with us ; but those of other countries 
will have freshness, and if readily intelligible as well as striking, 
they may be very effective. All nations have numerous 
proverbs; and besides the peoples more nearly related to 
ourselves, they especially abound among the Hindoos, the 
Chinese and some African tribes. It would sometimes be 
profitable to read slowly over lists of proverbs, considering what 
religious truth this and this will illustrate, and collecting such, 
oc making reference to them on the margin, and associating 
tlmm in our mind with the particular truths to which they 
relate. t Proverbs are often humorous ; and while the coarse 

♦ Trench on tbe Lessons in Proverbs, quoted in Papers on Preaching, by a 
Wykehamist, p. 9Q. Compare, in this latter work, p. 64-105. 

+ Bohn's "Handbook of Proverbs^" and "Polyglot of Foreiga Proyerbs *^ 
are excellent collections, and not costly. 



ILIiUSTBATIOJSf. 171 

or ridiculous should be avoided, we need not be too sensitive in 
ttat respect. "A thousand beauties are sn^atched from the 
very verge of propriety — while many humdrum, commonplace 
men deseiTe the rebuke of Quintilian : * His excellence was 
that he had no fault, and his fault that he had no excellence/ 
A sermon had better have too much salt in it than too little."* 
Besides proverbs proper, there are many sage maxims which 
are often repeated in conversation,t and ms*ny stiriking sayings 
which may be quoted from the Fathers, the Old English 
divines, etc. 

Illustration is also frequently drawn from works of Art, 
especially from pictures. These are coipstantly used in books 
under the name of " illustrations " of the narrative or treatise, 
and never fail, when good, to interest every class of readers; 
and in like manner the description of pictures may be very 
effectively used in a sermon. Such a description should of 
course be brief, and free from any appearance of display. 

(6i) Scripture. The Scriptures present materials of illus- 
tiation suited to every legitimate subject of preaching, and 
belonging to almost every one of the above-mentioned classes, 
especially history and biography, poetry and proverbs, and 
all manner of pointed sayings. Several causes combine to 
n^ke this the best of all the sources of illustration. The 
material is to some extent familiar to all, and thus the illustra- 
tijOix will be readily intelligible. Again, this material will be 
much more impressive than any other, because of its sacred- 
njess, and its known and felt relation to ourselves. Besides, 
the frequent use of Scripture illustration serves to revive 
apd extend the knowledge of Scripture among the hearers. 

Every preacher should most diligently draw from this source. 
And to this end, besides keeping on hand some book or other 
particular portion of the Bible for thorough study, preachers 
should continue through life the rapid but attentive reading 
of the whole Bible, that its facts and sayings may be kept 
fresh in their minds, and readily present themselves for use. 
Among the elements of Spurgeon's power is his copious, and 
c^en very felicitous use of ScHpture illustration. 

3, Cautipms) as 10 THE Emfloymbnt or Illustration. 

(1.) Do not use every illustration that occurs to you, nor 
seek after them for their own sake. The question is, whether 
this or that will really conduce to the objects of the discourse, 

* Papers on Preaching, p. 99. f Comp. Aristotle's Rhet. II., 21. 



172 ILLUSTRATION. 

will really explain or prove what is under discussion, or make 
it more interesting and impressive. Some men get a general 
notion that illustration is a good thing, and that it is their 
duty to employ it, and they laboriously bring forward so-called 
illustrations which really effect nothing, and are therefore but 
useless lumber. Others, who have a fertile fancy or a well- 
stocked memory, while wanting in genuine culture and good 
taste, will excessively multiply or expand their illustrations. 
They forget that command of illustration, like command of 
words, involves not only copious production, but judicious 
selection and felicitous adaptation. 

(2.) As a general rule, it is not well to talk about illus- 
trating, but just to illustrate. If you can throw the light 
vividly on your subject, it will seldom be necessary to give 
notice beforehand that you are about to do so. 

(3.) Carefully avoid turning attention away from the sub- 
ject illustrated to the illustration itself. This is obviously 
a very grave fault, but is often committed. Illustrations 
stated at great length, with high-wrought imagery and polished 
phrase, such as Guthrie frequently employs, will almost in- 
evitably have this effect ; though sometimes, as in the case 
of Chalmers, they may be so felicitous, and applied with such 
passionate earnestness, that we at last forget everything in 
the subject illustrated. So many hearers are caring mainly 
for entertainment, that is a sad thing if we divert their minds 
from some subject they ought to consider to the curious or 
admiring examination of the mere apparatus by which we 
throw light on it.* 

From this whole discussion it will be evident that a 
preacher should be constantly accumulating the materials of 
illustration. Whether he had better jot down all that occur 
to him, keep a scrap-book, etc., or rely mainly on his 
memory, will depend on his mental constitution and habits ; 
but neither method should be employed to the total neglect 
of the other.t 

* This fault occurs very frequently in speaking to children. There is 
a mere succession of stories or pictures, which teach nothing, impress 
nothing, and, save as idle entertainment, are nothing. Comp. Children in 
the Temple, p. 266, 267. 

+ Comp. chap. iv. 1. 



CHAPTER VIII 

APPLICATION. 

The application in a sermon is not merely an appendage to 
the discussion, or a subordinate part of it, but is the main 
thing to be done. Spurgeon says, "Where the application 
begins, there the sermon begins.'' We are not to speak before 
the people, but to them, and must earnestly strive to make 
them take what we say to themselves. Daniel Webster once 
said, and repeated it with emphasis, "When a man preaches 
to me, I want him to make it a personal matter, a personal 
matter, a personal matter !" And it is our solemn duty thus 
to address all men, whether they wish it or not. 

The sermons of Jonathan Edwards, with all their power, 
show the evil of having always a regular "application," for- 
mally announced or indicated. Often a brief and informal 
application is best. Often, too, it is bettsr not to reserve the 
application for the latter part of the discourse, but to apply 
each thought as it is presented, provided they all conspire 
towards a common result. 

The term application is in general somewhat loosely em- 
ployed in regard to preaching, for it includes two or three 
distinct things. Besides the application proper, in which we 
show the hearer how the truths of the sermon apply to him, 
and besides the frequent practical suggestions as to the best 
mode and means of performing the duty urged, there is also 
commonly included all that we denote by the terms " persua- 
sion" and " exhortation.'* But if the ideas conveyed are kept 
distinct, it is probably better to retain the term, with which 
all preachers and hearers are so familiar. 

The application proper is often effected by means of " in- 
ferences" or "remarks." The former must not be theoretical 
or general deductions from the truths presented, but must 
really give to those truths a practical bearing. And the 
remarks must not diverge in various directions, and become 
like the untwisted cracker of a whip, but should have a 
common aim and make a combined impression. In sermons 
upon historical subjects, it is lawful to bring out several 



174 APPLICATION. 

distinct lessons, but these had better be pretty closely related.* 
It is obvious that while some subjects may be applied to the 
congregation as a whole, others will be applicable only to 
particular classes, or will have to be applied to distinct classes 
separately, as converted and unconverted, old and young, etc. 
But it is not necessary, as some preachers seem to imagine, 
always to make some kind of application to the unconverted, 
or some remark to them in conclusion. A sermon addressed 
throughout to pious people will often specially instruct and 
impress the unconverted. What men apply to themselvete, 
without feeling that it was aimed at them, is apt to produce 
the greatest effect. It is never judicious to make an appli- 
cation to any particular individual, and very rarely to a 
small and well-defined class. What is popularly called " hit- 
ting at" some person or some few persons will almost always 
do more harm than good. 

To give good practical suggestions is a task often calling 
for experience and the fruits of thoughtful observation, and 
sometimes demanding delicate tact, but is certainly, when 
well managed, a most important part of the preacher's work. 
When one has argued some general duty, as that of family 
or private prayer, of reading the Bible, or of relieving the 
needy and distressed, it is exceedingly useful to add hints as 
to the actual doing of the particular duty, so as to make it 
seem a practical and a practicable thing, so as to aVaken 
hope of doing better, and thus stimulate effort. 

But the chief part of what we commonly call application 
is persuasion. It is not enough to convince men of truth, 
nor enough to make them see how it applies to themselves, 
and how it might be practicable for them to act it out; but 
we must " persuade men." A distinguished minister once 
said that he could never exhort ; he could explain and prove 
what was truth and duty, but then he must leave people to 
themselves. The apostle Paul, however, could not only argue, 
but could say, "We pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye recon- 
ciled to God." Do we not well know, from observation and 
from experience, that a man may see his duty and still neglect 
it? Have we not often bden led by persuasion to do some- 
thing, good or bad, from which we were shrinking ? It is 
proper, then, to persuade, to exhort, even to entreat. 

Persuasion is not generally best accomplished by a mere 
appeal to the feelings, but by urging, in the first place, some 

• Comp. Hoppin's Chr. Min. p. 181-5. 



A"PI»LICAT10W. 178 

motive or motives' for acting/or determining to act, as we 
propose. This is not properly called a process of argament. 
The motive presented may require previous proof that it is 
sometlmig true, or right, or good, but this proving is distinct 
from the act- of presenting it as a motive ; and if when bring- 
ing a motive to bear we have to prove anything concerning 
it, the proof ought to have great brevity and directness, or 
it will delay and binder the designed e&ct. 

•A preacher must of course appeal to none but worthy 
motive. The prhacipal motives he is at liberty to use may 
be classed under three heads, viz., happiness, holiness, love. 

We may lawfully appeal to the desire for happiness. Those 
philosophers who insist that man ought always to do right 
simply and alone because it is right, are no philosophers at all, 
fbr they are either grossly ignorant of human nature, or else 
are indulging in mere fanciful speculation. No doubt some 
preachers err in that they treat happiness as the almost 
exclusive, at any rate as the chief motive. Certainly this 
sliould always be subordinated to duty and aflfection ; but when 
thus subordinated, it is a legitimate and a powerful motive. 
^The Scriptures appeal not only to our feelings of moral obliga- 
tion, but to our hopes and fears, for time and for eternity. " It 
is profitable for thee," is a consideration which the Grea:t 
Teacher repeatedly employs in encouraging to self-denial. A 
desire for the pleasures of piety in this life, or even for the 
happiness of heaven, would never, of itself alone, lead men to 
become Christians, or strengthen them to live as such ; but 
combined with other motives, it does a great and useful work. 
And there is here included not only the pleasure to be derived 
from gratification of appetite and passion, but of taste, and of 
ambition. 

All men desire holiness, at least in one sense of the term, 
though they often wish it united with sinful grati 6 cations. 
The most abandoned man sometimes wishes to be good, nay, 
persuades himself that in certain respects he is good ; and the 
great mass of mankind fully intend, after indulging a little 
longer in sinful pleasure, to become thoroughly good before 
they die. Here then is a great motive to which the preacher 
may appeal. The thorough depravity of human nature should 
not make us forget that goodness can always touch at least a 
faintly responsive chord in the human breast. We ought to 
hald up before men the beauty of holiness, to educate the 
regenerate into doing right for its own sake, and not merely for 



176 APPLICATION. 

the sake of its rewards. We ought to stimulate, and at the 
same time coutrol, that hatred of evil, which is the natural and 
necessary counterpart to the love of holiness. And as regards 
the future life, we should habitually point men, not only to its 
happiness, but still more earnestly to its purity, ^nd strive by 
God's blessing to make them long after its freedom from all sin 
and frcm all fear of sinning. Such noble and ennobling aspi- 
rations it is the preacher's high duty and privilege to cherish in 
his hearers, by the very fact of appealing to them. 

And the mightiest of all motives is love. In the relations of 
the present life, love is the great antagonist of selfishness. 
They who " have none to love," by any natural ties, must 
always interest their hearts in the needy and the afflicted, or 
they will grow more and more narrow and selfish. Accordingly, 
we may constantly appeal to men*s love of their fellow-men, 
as a motive for doing right. Parents may be urged to seek 
personal piety, and higher degrees of it, for the sake of their 
growing children ; and so with the husband or wife, the brother 
or sister or friend. Now to this motive the gospel appeals in a 
very peculiar manner. We oiight to love God supremely, and 
such supreme love would be our chief motive to do right and 
to do good. But sin has alienated us from God, so that we 
do not love him. And Christ presents himself, the Godraan, 
the Redeemer, to win our love to him and thus to God. 
" Whosoever shall lose his life for my sake,*^ are words which 
reveal the new and mighty gospel motive, love to Christ. 
To this, above all other motives, the preacher should appeal. 
Far from excluding others, it intensifies while it subordinates 
them.* 

But our task is not merelv the calm exhibition of motives, 
that men may coolly act according to them. Many truths of 
religion are eminently adapted to stir the feelings, and to speak 
of such truths without feeling and awakening emotion, is un- 
natural and wrong. And so mighty is the opposition which the 
gospel encounters in human nature, so averse is the natural 
heart to the obedience of faith, so powerful are the temptations 
of life, that we must arouse men to intense earnestness and 
often to impassioned emotion, if we would bring them to sur- 
mount all obstacles, and to conquer the world, the flesh and the 
devil. Who expects to make soldiers charge a battery or storm 
a fortress without excitement ? Many persons shrink from the 

* Oa the subject of Motives, see much profound and suggestive remark 
la Vinet, p. 203-22. Comp, Arist. UYiet. 1, 10, T ff. 



APFLIOATION. 177 

idea of exciting the feelings. *^ It seems to be commonly taken 
for granted, that whenever the feelings are excited, they are 
over-excited.''* But while ignorant people often value too highly, 
or rather too exclusively, the appeal to their feelings, cultivated 
people are apt to shrink from such appeals quite too much. 
Our feelings as to religion are habitually too cold — who can 
deny it ? And any genuine excitement is greatly to be desired. 
Inspired teachers have evidently acted on this principle. The 
prophets made the most impassioned appeals. Our Lord and 
the apostles manifestly strovo not merely to convince their 
hearers, but to incite them to earnest corresponding action, 
and their language is often surcharged with emotion. 

Yet we should never wish to excite feeling for its own sake, 
but as a means of persuasion to the corresponding course of 
action. In this respect many preachers err ; some from not 
clearly perceiving that emotion is little worth unless it excites 
to action, and others, it is to be feared, from an excessive desire 
for popular applause. These last give their hearers the luxury 
of idle emotion, as a pathetic novel or a tragedy might do, and 
hearers and preacher go away well pleased with themselves 
and each other.f Bishop Butler, in a celebrated passage, has 
pointed out ** that practical habits are formed and strengthened 
by repeated acts, and that passive impressions grow weaker by 

being repeated upon us Passive impressions made 

upon our minds by admonition, experience, example, though 
they may have a remote efficacy, and a very great one, towards 
forming active habits, yet can have this efficacy no otherwise 
than by inducing us to such a course of action ; and it is not 
being aflFected so and so, but acting, which forms those habits ; 
only it must be always remembered, that real endeavours to 
enforce good impressions upon ourselves are a species of virtu- 
ous action.*'} No wonder some preachers find that their 
pathetic descriptions and passionate appeals now make but 
little impression upon persons who were once powerfully 
effected by them. The emotion was treated as an end, not 
as a means, and was habitually allowed to subside without any 

* Whately, p. 215. 

t The remarks of Pay on excitation (Art of Disc. p. 171,) insisting that it 
is distinct from persuasion, and that "a considerable part of pulpit oratory" 
aims at excitation alone, are to be regretted, as tending to encounuire a 
•ommon error. 

t Butler's Analogy, Part I., chapter v., II. 

N • 



178 APPLICATION. 

effect upon the hearer's active habits ; and a steady diminution 
of the emotion itself was the inevitable result. Surely 
that is not good preaching, — whatever the unthinking may 
suppose, — which excites a mere transient and unproductive 
emotion. 

It is matter of universal observation that a speaker who 
would excite deep feeling must feel deeply himself. Demos- 
thenes sometimes spoke with such passionate earnestness that 
his enemies said he was deranged. Cicero says that it is only 
passion that makes the orator a king ; that, though he himselif 
had tried every means of moving men, yet his successes were 
due, not to talent or skill, but to a mighty fire in his soul so 
that he could not contain himself; and that the hearer 
would never be kindled, unless the speech came to him 
burning.* It is said of Ignatius Loyoda, the founder of the 
Jesuits, that he preached ** with such an unction and emo- 
tion, that even those amongst his audience who did not 
understand the language in which he spoke, were, nevertheless, 
moved to tears by the very tones of his voice — ^the earnestness 
and burning zeal whieh appeared in his every gesture and 
look."t 

Alas ! it is often our chief difficulty in preaching to feel 
ourselves as we ought to feel. And a genuine fervour e<annot 
biB produced to order by an effort of will. Wo must cultivate 
our religious sensibilities, must keep our souls habitually in 
contact with gospel truth, and maintain, by the union of 
abundant prayer and self-denying activity, that ardent love to 
Grod and that tender love to man which will give us, without 
an effort, true pathos and passion. The famous John Henry 
Newman, in his " University Preaching," speaks as follows : 
" Talent, logic, learning, words, manner, voice, action, all are 
required for the perfection of a preacher ; but * one thing is 
necessary,* — an intense perception and appreciation of the end 
for which he preaches, and that is, to be the minister of some 
definite spiritual good to those who hear him. . . . I dp 
not mean that a preacher must aim at earnestness, but that he 
must aim at his object, which is to do some spiritual good to his 
hearers, and which will at once make him earnest.''^ 

When the preacher does feel very deeply, his mere exhorta- 
tion will have some power to move, especially where he has 

♦ Cio. Orator, 128-188."' f Potter, Sac. El. p. 211. 

:J: Quoted by Potter, p. 213. 



APPLICATION. 179 

personal influence as a devout man, or for any reason has the 
sympathies of his audience. There is then the inexplicable 
contagion of sympathy. But he must avoid getting clear away 
from the hearers in his passionate feeling, for then sympathy 
will give place to iti opposite. 

Apart from sympathy with our own emotion, we can excite 
emotion in others only by indirect means, not by urging theih 
to feel, though we should urge with the greatest vehemence. 
We must hold up before the mind considerations calculated to 
awaken emotion, and let them do their work.*' For this 
purpose the preacher may of course learn from the contempla- 
tion of the leading human passions, as to their nature, and the 
best means of exciting them.t And we need not only to know 
human nature in general, but in most cases also need to under- 
stand the peculiar circumstances, prejudices, tastes, etc., of 
those whom we address. This is plainly demanded in the case 
of a missionary to the heathen, but is hardly less necessary at 
home. One reason why unlearned preachers often have such 
power with the masses is, that they understand, and fully 
sympathize with, the persons whom they address, while learned 
men sometimes do not. 

In order to excite any of the passions by speech, we have to 
operate chiefly through the imagination. " A passion is most 
strongly excited by sensation. The sight of danger, immediate 
or near, instantly rouseth fear ; the feeling of an injury, and 
the presence of the injurer, in a moment kindle anger. Next 
to the influence of sense is that of memory, the effect of which 
upon passion, if the fact be recent, and remembered distinctly 
and circumstantially, is almost equal. Next to the influence of 
memory is that of imagination. "J In proportion as the 
hearer's imagination is kindled, he seems to see that which we 
present, and the efiect upon his feelings approximates to the 
effect of sight. § 

In presenting an object so that it may awaken imagination 
and impress the feelings, we usually need to give well-chosen 
details. Without this, as we have before seen, it is impossible 

* Comp. Whately, p. 216-19. 

+ Aristotle's discui»8ion of certain passioos (Rhet. II., chap. i.-xYii.) is not 
exactly what we might hope to find, but contains much that is curious and 
soggestiye. 

t Campbell, Phil, of Rhet. p. 103. 

§ See below on Imagination, Pari; III, chap. v. 



M 

irf 



180 APPUOATION. 

to make a narration or description impressive.* But preachers 
sometimes so multiply details as to weary the hearer, offend 
his taste, or betray a lack of right feeling on their own part. 
It may be gravely doubted whether a mfo can carry through 
a minute description of the crucifixion, who is at the time 
cherishing an intense faith and love towards Christ. A few 
vivid details, presented very briefly, and with genuine emo- 
tion, will usually make a far deeper impression. And so 
with elaborate descriptions of the day of judgment, and the 
agonies of perdition. One who truly realized the scene, and 
tenderly loved his fellow-men, could hardly endure to dwell 
so long on the most harrowing details, and the preacher who 
does this is apt to be for the time (though unconscious of it) 
mainly alive to the artistic interest in his picture. 

Comparison is often very effective in awakening emotion. 
Thus we make men feel more deeply how shameful is in- 
gratitude to God, by first presenting some affecting case of 
ingratitude to a human benefactor. The emotion excited by 
something as regards which men feel readily and deeply, is 
transferred to the object compared. E. g. " Like as a father 
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him." 
The effect of climax, gradually working the feelings up to the 
highest pitch, may also be very great, as every one has ob- 
served. 

We must not try to be highly impassioned on all subjects, 
on all occasions, or in all parts of a discourse. Appeals to 
the feelings will usually be made only at the conclusion ; 
sometimes, after the discussion of each successive topic, but 
then we must be sure that the interest first excited can be 
renewed and gradually increased. It is a common fault with 
inexperienced preachers to make vehement appeals in the 
early part, even in the very beginning, of a sermon ; in such 
oases there will almost inevitably be a reaction, and a decay 
of interest before the close. If several impassioned passages 
are to occur, those which come first should be compara- 
tively brief, and followed by something calm or familiar. It 
is also important to avoid exhausting our physical force, before 
reaching that portion, of the sermon which calls foi* the most 
passionate earnestness. He who is exhausted not only cannot 
speak forcibly, but cannot feel deeply. And a concluding 
exhortation should never be prolonged beyond the point at 
which the preacher is still in full vigour, and the hearers 
feel a sustained interest. 

* See a\)ove, c\ia.p. ^7. \. 



PART II. 
AERANGEMENT OF A SERMON. 



CHAPTER I. 

IMPORTANCE OF ARRANGEMENT. 

The effective arrangement of the materials in a discourse is 
scarcely less important than their intrinsic interest and force. 
This is a distinct part of the speaker's work, and should be 
contemplated and handled as something apart from invention 
on the one hand and from style on the other, albeit closely 
connected with both. In fact, the task calls for a specific 
talent. Some men exhibit from the very outset a power of 
constructing discourses which is quite out of proportion to 
their general abilities ; and other men find nothing so 
difficult to acquire or exercise as skill in arrangement. And 
here, as in everything else that demands specific talent, there 
is need of special training and practice. 

In this respect the speaker is an architect. Out of gathered 
materials he is to build a structure, and a structure suited to 
its specific design. The same, or nearly the same materials 
may be made into a dwelling, a jail, a factory, a church. 
But how different the plan of the building according to its 
design, and how important that it be built with special 
reference to the design. In like manner, substantially the 
same materials may be wrought into a story, a dialogue, an 
essay, or a speech ; and several speeches on the same subject, 
and embodying much the same thoughts, may make a very 
different impression according to the plan. 

Or the speaker's task may be compared to the organization 
of an army, and then the concentration of its several divisions 
upon one objective point. 

" We know not how to name a composition ^witViOviX. cst^^x. 
It is disposition^ it is order which constitutor d\!a^iQiv>i^^. ^W^^ 



182 IMPORTANCE OF ARRANGEMENT. 



between a common orator and an eloquent man is 
often nothing but a di£ference in respect to disposition. Dis- 
position may be eloquent in itself, and on close examination 
we shall often see, that invention taken by itself, and viewed 
as far as it can be apart from disposition, is a comparatively 
feeble intellectual force. ' Good thoughts,' says Pascal, * are 
abundant' The art of organizing them is not so common. . . 
I will not go so far as to say that a discourse without order 
can produce no e£fect, for I cannot say that an undisciplined 
force is an absolute nullity. We have known discourses very 
defective in this respect, to produce very great effects. But 
we may afi&rm in general, that other things being equal, the 
power of discourse is proportional to the order which reigns 
in it, and that a discourse without order (order, be it remem- 
bered, is of more than one kind) is comparatively feeble. A 
discourse has all the power of which it is susceptible, only 
when the parts proceeding from the same design are inti- 
Irately united, exactly adjusted, when they mutually aid and 
sustain one another like the stones of an arch. . . This 
is so true, so felt, that complete disorder is almost impossible, 
even to the most negligent mind. In proportion to the im- 
portance of the object we wish to attain, or the difficulty of 
attaining it, is our sense of the necessity of order."* 

(1.) Arrangement is of great importance to the speaker 
hvmself. It reacts upon invention. One has not really studied 
a subject when he has simply thought it over in a desultory 
&shion, however long-continued and vigorous the thinking may 
l^ave been. The attempt to arrange his thoughts upon if, 
suggests other thoughts, and can alone give him just views of 
the subject as a whole. Good arrangement assists in working 
put the details, whether this be done mentally or in writing. 
Each particular thought, when looked at in its proper place, 
develops acconjiing to the situation, grows to its surroundings. 
If one speaks without manuscript, an oiderly arrangement of 
the discourse greatly helps him in remembering it. One reason 
why some preachers find extemporaneous speaking so difficuljb 
is, that they do not arrange their sermons well. And not ovfLj 
to invention and memory, but to emotion also, is arrangement 
important. Whether in preparation or in delivery, a. man's 
feelings will flow naturally and freely, only when he has tibis 
sjbixnulus, support and satisfaction which comes from conscious 
order. 

♦ Vinet, p. 264-6. 



IMPORTANCE OF ABRAITQEIIENT. 183 

The speaker who neglects arrangement will rapidly lose, 
instead of improving, his power of constructing, oi^anizing, a 
discourse ; * and he will have to rely, for the effect of his 
sermons, entirely on the impression made by striking particular 
thoughts, or on the possibility that high emotional excitement 
may produce something of order. For passion does sometimes 
strike out an order of its own. " I know that nothing is as 
logical, after its own manner, as passion ; and that we may 
depend upon it for the direction of a discourse of which it is 
the principal inspiration. The beginning we may be sure will 
be good, and the beginning will produce all the rest. It will 
be repetitious, it will retrace its steps, it will digress, but it 
will do everything with the grace and felicity which always 
accompany it ; and it would be less true and consequently less 
eloquent if it were more logical in the ordinary sense of the 
wori. It naturally finds the order which suits it, and it finds 
this precisely because it does not seek after it. The rapid 
propagation of ideas, their concatenation by means of thorough- 
ly vital transitions, which themselves constitute the movement 
of the discourse, suffice for the eloquence of passion."f This 
sort of thing is not unfrequently observed in the best effi>rts of 
some uncultivated but gifted men, and many a pastor has had 
occasional experience of it when forced to preach with inade- 
quate preparation, and unusually helped by passionate emotion. 
It is very proper that a preacher should sometimes give himself 
lip, for a small portion of a discourse, to the suggestions of 
passion, should throw himself upon the current of feeling; 
and in social meetings he may sometimes speak without any 
immediate preparation, and yet if he becomes deeply stirred, 
and gains the sympathies of his audience, may speak with 
spontaneous order, and with powerful effect. But to rely on 
this habitually is surpassingly unwise. 

(2.) Still more important is good arrangement as regards the 
effect upon the avdience. It is necessary, first, in order to make 
the discourse intelligible. " Hearers generally, when the 
preacher has a poor plan, /eel the difficulty, though they may 
not be able to trace it to its real source ; and one of the 
reasons why a man of truly philosophical mind is able ' to make 
things plain' even to illiterate hearers, is, that he presents clear 
thoughts in a proper order. "J Many persons appear to think 
that intelligibility is altogether an affair of style ; when in fact 

* Comp. Sbedd, p. 214. 
t Yinet, p. 271. t Biple7# Sao. Rhet. p. 85. 



184 nCFOBTANOB OF ARRANOBMENT. 

it depends quite as much on clear thinking and on good ar- 
rangement as on perspicuous expression. It is melancholy to 
think how large a portion of the people, even in favoured com- 
munities, really do not understand most of the preaching they 
hear. Not a few would say, like Tennyson's " Northern 
Farmer," if they spoke with equal frankness, that they had 
often heard " parson a bummin' awaay," 

'An' I niver knaw'd whot a meSn'd, but I thowt a 'ad summut to 
saSy, 

An' I thowt a said whot a owt to 'a said, an' I corned awaay." 

And not merely is this true of the comparatively ignorant and 
stolidly inattentive, but many sermons are not understood by 
the better class. "The audience keep nothing of the discourse; 
they carry away, in retiring, an indistinct mass of remarks, of 
assertions of appeals, which nothing co-ordinates in their 
memory, and the impressions received are summed up in the 
saddest criticism that can be made by a devout person who 
came to hear with attention : I do not know exactly what the 
preacher preached about." * Besides, something worse may 
happen than that the discourse should not be understood ; it 
may be misunderstood, utterly, and with deplorable results. We 
must strive not merely to render it possible that the people 
should understand us, but impossible that they should mis- 
understand f 

Again, it greatly contributes to make the discourse pleasing, 
"Order is heaven's first law." Even those phenomena in 
nature which seem most irregular, and those scenes which 
appear to be marked by the wildest variety, are pervaded by a 
subtle order, without which they would not please. Chaos 
might be terrible, but could never be beautiful. And dis- 
courses, which are pleasing but appear to have no plan, will be 
found really to possess an order of their own, however unob- 
trusive or peculiar. An ill-arranged sermon may of course 
contain particular passages that are pleasing, but even these 
would appear to still greater advantage as part of an orderly 
whole, and the general effect of that whole must be incom- 
parably better. Let it be added that a well-arranged discourse 
will much more surely keep the attention of the audience. 
And this not merely because it is more intelligible and more 

• Coquerel, Obserr. sur la Pred. p. 160. 
f Comp. on Perspicuity of Style, Part 111, c\uBi'<^tAT ii. 



lUFORTANOB OF ARRANGBMBSfT. 185 

pleasing, but also because, being conformed to the natural laws 
of human thinking, it will more readily carry the hearer's 
thoughts along with it. 

Further, good arrangement makes a discourse more /?er- 
iuasive. Both in presenting motives and in appeals to feeling, 
order is of great importance. He who wishes to break a hard 
rock with his sledge, does not hammer miscellaneously over 
the surface, but multiplies his blows upon a certain point or 
along a certain line. They who lift up huge buildings apply 
their motive power systematically, at carefully chosen points. 
So when motives are brought to bear upon the will.* And the 
hearer's feelings will be much more powerfully and permanently 
excited, when appeals are made in some natural order. " We 
may, by a word or an isolated act, give a movement to the soul, 
inclining it immediately to a certain object, to perform an act 
of will ; but this movement is only a shock. By the same 

means we may repeat, multiply these shocks 

Eloquence consists in maintaining movement by the develop- 
ment of a thought or proof, in perpetuating it, according to the 
expression of Cicero, 'What is eloquence but a continuous 
movement of the soul ? ' " f 

And finally, it causes the discourse to be more easily 
rem^.mbered. 

The importance of arrangement may be further seen by 
observing what are the principal elements of good arrangement t 
They appear to be unity, order, and proportion. It might seem 
quite unnecessary to urge the importance of unity in a discourse 
but it is very often neglected in practice, particularly in text- 
sermons and expository sermons, which are frequently made up 
of two or three little sermons in succession. Whether the 
unity be that of a doctrinal proposition, of an historical person, 
or of a practical design, in some way there must be unity. 
And not only this, but order. All that io said might be upon 
the same subject, while the several thoughts by no means 
follow one another according to their natural relations, or ac- 
cording to the design of the discourse. But further, there 
must be proportion. This involves two things. The several 
parts of the discourse, whether they are distinctly indicated or 
not, must be so treated as to make up a symmetrical whole. 
Kot that they are to be all discussed at the same length, but 

* As to the order of ArgwnentSf see above, Part I, chapter vi., 4 
t Vinet, p. 289. 



186 IMPOBTANOB OF ASBANOEICENT. 

at. a length proportioned to their relations to each other and 
to the entire discourse. And besides this proportion of natural 
figrmmetry^ there is that of specific design. One majr tieiEtt 
substantiaJlj the same topic, in essentially the same manner, 
and yet greatly vary the length of particular parts, and the 
stress laid upon them, according to the object then and there 
had in view ; just as two animals are often found constructed 
according to the same plan, and with equal symmetry, while 
yet certain bones are of exceedingly different size, being adapted 
to special functions. 

Coquerel says that the lack of method is the most common 
fault of preaching, and the most inexcusable, because usually 
the result of insuf&cient labour. '^ A man cannot give himself 
all the qualities of the oiator ; but by taking the necessary 
pains, he can connect his ideas, and proceed with order in the 
composition of a discourse." * Without specific talent for 
building discourse, one will not find it an easy task, and may 
never become able to strike out plans that will be rema^rkably 
felicitous-; but a fair degree of success in arrangement is 
certainly within the reach of all, provided they are willing to 
work. 

* Coquerel, p. 163. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 
1. Introduotion. 2. Plan and Divisions. 3. Conolusion, 

TfliB analysis of a discourse which some writers have proposed 
is too artificial. Some, of the parts which they distinguish are 
very often blended with other parts. The eocpositian, for in- • 
^hce, will often constitute the introduction, and in many 
dases no formal exposition is necessary or appropriate. The 
proposition of the subject scarcely needs to be treated as a 
distinct part of the discourse. The simplest and most natural 
analysis would seem to be that which gives three parts, viz. the 
introduction, the plan, (Including divisions, when these are 
made,) and the conclusion. 

1. The Introduction.* 

.1. It can scarcely be necessary to argue at length to the 
effect that sermons ought generally to have an introduction. 
Men have a natural aversion to abruptness, and delight in a 
somewhat gradual approach. A building is rarely pleasing in 
appearance, without a porch, or something corresponding to 
a porch. The shining light of dawn, which shineth more 
and more till the perfect day, teaches us a lesson. And so any 
composition or address which has no introduction, is apt to look 
incomplote. An elaborate piece of music will always' have a 
prelude, or at least a few introductory notes ; and in poems, 
histories, etc., there is usually some introduction. The same 
thing is true as to very many books of the Bible. 

The introduction has two chief objects, to interest our hearers 
m the subject, and to prepare them for understanding it. As 
to the former, a preacher may usually, it is true, count on a 
pertain willingness to hear. Not many come who are hostile 
to the truth, but very many, alas ! who are sadly careless 
about it. And a much more lively attention may be secured 
by an interesting introduction. "We all know how much 

• This topic is veiy fully and oar efuWy. treated Vj ^^\vAS!aa.\i, "^S .-I'v-* 
iDd bjr Claude, See also Vinet and Hoppin. 



188 THB SEVERAL PABT8 OF A SERMON. 

depends in the ordinary affairs of life upon first impressions. 
The success of his sermon often depends upon the first impres- 
sions which a preacher makes upon his hearers in his exordium. 
If these impressions be favourable, his audience will listen to 
the remaining part of his discourse with pleasure and attention ; 
and consequently, with profit."* Our aim should be to excite 
not merely an intellectual interest, but, so far as possible at the 
outset, a spiritual and practical interest — to bring them into 
sympathy with our own feeling, and attune their minds into 
harmony with the subject we design to present. One may 
sometimes expressly request attention, as did Moses (Deut. iv. 
1), Isaiah (xxviii. 14), Stephen (Acts vii. 2), and our Lord 
(Matt. XV. 10), but such a request, if often repeated, would 
lose its force, and it is usually best to aim at saying something 
which will at once interest the hearer's mind. " What is the 
best way," asked a young preacher of au older one, " to get the 
attention of the congregation?" "Give 'em something to 
attend to," was the gruflF reply. 

The other object, to prepare the audience for understanding 
the subject, is obviously very important, and to some extent 
can often be effected. But our efforts in this respect must be 
carefully guarded against the danger of anticipating something 
which properly belongs to the body of the discourse. 

The German preachers veiy often give an introduction before 
announcing the text. This fashion appears to have originated 
in the fact that most of them are required to take their text 
from the perhope, or lesson appointed for the day, so that it 
may be assumed as to some extent known already, before it is 
announced. The habitual practice of thus beginning with an 
introduction is apt to make it too general, or pointless, or far- 
fetched — faults not unfrequently seen in the German dis- 
courses ; but some introductions of this sort are extremely 
felicitous, and the practice is well worthy of occasional adoption 
amono; ourselves. 

There are cases in which it is best to dispense with introduc- 
tion, and plunge at once into the discussion ; for example, when 
the sermon must needs be long, or when nothing has been 
struck out that would make a really good introduction. In 
familiar addresses, as at prayer-meetings, Sunday School meet- 
ings, etc., this coui*se is often preferable. In all preaching, let 
there be a good introduction, or none at all. " Well begun is 
half done." And ill begun is apt to be wholly ruined. 

• Potter, Sao. ELoqu^xice, p. ^7. 



THE SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 189 

2. The sources from which the preacher may draw introduc- 
tions are extremely numerous and various. There may, how- 
ever, be some advantage in classifying them as follows : 

(1.) The text. Wherever the meaning of the text requires 
explanation, this explanation may of course form the introduc- 
tion. So, too, when an explanation of the context would throw 
light on the meaning of the text.* These seem to be very 
natural sources ; and Robert Hall, with his severe taste, com- 
monly began with some explanation of the text or the context, 
preferring this to more ambitious introductions. And if not 
for explanation proper, there may be occasion for illustration of 
the text, by means of historical and geographical knowledge, 
such as will make its meaning, though not more clear, yet more 
vivid and interesting. In other cases, some account of the 
writer of the text, or of the condition of any particular per- 
sons whom he addressed (as in the case of St. Paul), may serve 
to interest hearers in the text, or to prepare them for under- 
standing it. 

(2.) The subject to be discussed, if obvious from the mere 
statement of the text, or if announced at the outset, may then 
furnish an introduction in various ways. We may remark on 
its relation to some other subject, e. g., " to the genus, of which 
the subject is a species," or to some opposed or similar subject, 
or one related to it as cause, or consequence, or case in point. 
Where the sermon is designed to be explanatory or practical, 
an introduction on the importance of the subject will often be 
appropriate ; where the sermon is to establish the truth of a 
proposition, or to exhibit its importance, the introduction will 
frequently explain the nature of the subject involved. The 
preacher " may state the inteUect^ial advantages to be derived 
from discussing such a theme. The subject may be the doc- 
trine of moral evil, or that of divine sovereignty ; it may be 
stated at the beginning, that these are the greatest problems of 
the human mind meeting the philosopher as well as the theo- 
logian ; that they have called forth the strength of the best 
intellects of the race ; that no problems are more diflficult, and 
therefore none more deserving of the attention of thinking 
minds. He ma}^ state the connections of the subject with other 
more practical spiritual truths. He may remove the prejudice 
that the doctrine has no immediate practical bearing or utility, 
even as depravity, for instance, or the doctrine of sin, lies in 

* As to the method of pulpit exposition, seo a\)0\ft, '?m^i\, Oajw^. ^ , \\. 



190 THB SBVERAL PABT8 OF A SERMON. 

one sense, .at the base of the whole Christian system, of the 
atonement, regeneration, holiness, and the Christian life. He 
may make some historical allusion naturally connected with the 
theme, which always forms an attractive introduction."* And 
so in many other ways.f 

(3.) The occasion. If the sermon has reference to some 
particular season of the year, or is preached at some special 
religious meeting, in connection with the administration of an 
ordinance, or the like, we may begin by remarking upon the 
occasion. So with allusions to the character of the times in 
which we live, or to recent events or existing circumstances, as 
showing why the particular text or subject has been chosen, or 
as tending to awaken a livelier interest in it.}; Or we may 
speak of doubts known to exist as to the question involved, or 
hostility to the truth in this respect, or of some common mis- 
take, or some prevailing or growing error, or evil practice, with 
reference to this 8ubject.§ In other cases allusion is made to 
the religious condition of the church or congregation, or cheer- 
ing news from some other church or section of country. 
Sometimes one may refer to a subject or subjects heretofore 
discussed, as furnishing occasion for presenting to-day the 
present subject ; and the hymn which has just been sung, or a 
paissage of Scripture (not containing the text) which has. been 
read, will occasionally afiford an interesting introduction. In 
rare cases, the preacher may begin by speaking of himself, 
whether it be of his feelings as a preacher, of his interest as a 
pastor, of some particular epoch in his connection with this 
church, or of something belonging to his personal experience as 
a Christian.|| Only let the preacher beware of apologies. 
These often create the suspicion of insincerity, where it is 
undeserved, because they are sometimes in fact insincere, and 
because the preacher who feels at the outset oppressed by ill 
health or unfavourable circumstances, may, quite unexpectedly 
to himself, rise to the subject, and succeed remarkably well. 
Let a preacher never say he feels unusually embarrassed on the 
present occasion, etc., as we hear it so often. Apologies 
are like public rebukes for disorder in the congregation, in that 

*Hoppin, p. 124« f Comp. Vinet, p. 302. 

t E. g. Wesley's Sermon on The Great Assize. 
§ Comp. Otto, Prak. Theol. s. 308. 

II To this class belongs an exceedingly felicitous introduction of Spur- 
geon's, First Series, Sermon I. 



TBS SEVERAL PARTS OF A 8BBM0N. 191 

one will very seldom regret having omitted them, however 
strongly inclined at the moment to speak. When there is any 
real occasion, whether in beginning or ending the sermon, for 
what might be called apology, let it never proceed, or seem to 
proceed, from anxiety as to the preacher's reputation ; let it be 
brief, quiet, and, as it were, incidental. 

The question will often require to be decided whether any 
of these remarks- upon the occasion shall be made in the in- 
troduction, or in the conclusion. We must consider whether 
a particular remark of this kind is better suited to awaken 
interest in the diicussion, or to deepen the impression made 
by the application. Affecting personal allusions, in which the 
preacher might be interrupted by his emotions, are in general, 
better reserved to the conclusion. 

(4.) There is an immense variety of other sources, which do 
not admit of classification, and can only be set down as mis- 
cellaneous. The preacher's inventive genius should be freely 
and widely exercised, in seeking for every particular sermon 
be most thoroughly appropriate introduction.* 

3. Let us turn to consider the qualities of a good Intro- 
duction. 

The introduction must present some thought closely related 
to the theme of discourse, so as to lead to the theme with 
naturalness and ease, and yet a thought quite distinct from 
the discussion. Inexperienced preachers very frequently err 
by anticipating in the introduction something which belongs 
to the body of the discourse; and the danger of doing this 
should receive their special attention. 

As a rule, the introduction should not aim to give instruc- 
tion separate and apart from the lessons of the discourse. Its 
design is altogether preparatory. The preacher will often find 
himself tempted, especially in introductions drawn from the 
text or context, to remark in passing upon interesting matters 
which are somehow suggested, but are foreign to his purpose 
on that occasion. This temptation should be resisted, except 
in very peculiar cases. You have determined to carry the 
audience along a certain line of thought, hoping to arrive at 

• The student may consult, as a few examples cf very striking in- 
troductions, Bossuet's Funeral Sermon for the Duchess of Orleans, though 
this has some obyious faults ; Monod's Sermon on '' God is Love f Robert 
Robinson on "If ye love me, keep my commandments ;"and Richard Fuller 
on The Three Hebrews in the Furnace— where some would think it better 
to omit the first words. 



192 THB SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 

a definite and important conclusion. Do not first wander 
about and stray awhile into other paths, but lead on towardi 
the route selected, and enter it. 

The introduction should generally consist of a single thought: 
we do not want a porch to a porch. But it is frequently appro- 
priate to present some introductory thought, and afterwards 
give an exposition, which in such cases becomes a part of the 
body of the discourse, or else constitutes a sort of halt, while 
we clear the way for the discussion. 

It is desirable to avoid the practice of beginning with some 
very broad and commonplace generality, as with reference to 
human nature or life, to the universe or the Divine Being. 
Of course there is sometimes real occasion for this, but many 
preachers practice it as an habitual method, and it is apt to 
sound like an opening promise of duluess — a platitude to 
start on. 

On the other hand, the introduction must not seem to pro- 
mise too much, in its thoughts, style, or delivery. Let it be 
such as to excite interest and awaken expectation, provided 
the expectation can be fairly met by the body of the dis- 
course. It should not be highly argumentative, nor highly 
impassioned. As to the latter, it must be remembered that 
even if the preacher is greatly excited at the outset, the 
audience usually are not, and he had better restrain himself, 
so as not to get beyond the range of their sympathies. 
When Cicero broke out with his opening words against Cati- 
hne, the Senate was already much excited ; and so with Mas- 
sillon at the funeral of Louis the Great.* Such exceptional 
cases must be decided as they arise. " It is the privilege of 
talent and the fruit of study and experience, to know when 
to venture and when to abstain. It cannot be allowed to 
teaching, strictly so called, to set aside talent or anticipate 
the dictates of experience."t Moreover, while earnestly seek- 
ing to make the introduction interesting and engaging, we 
must shun the sensational, and the pretentious. Whatever 
savours of display is exceedingly objectionable in a prerxher, 
and particularly at the outset. And he should not merely 
begin with personal modesty, but also with ofl&cial modesty, 
reserving for some later period of the sermon anything which 
it may be proper to state with the authority belonging to hii 
ofifice. 

* " My brethren, God only is great," were his first words. 

t Vinet, p. 106. 



THE SEVERAL PARTS OF A SBRMOIT. 193 

A good introduction would, in general, be exclusively adapted 
to the particular discourse. In some cases, a certain general 
thought might with equal propriety introduce several different 
subjects. Thus some account of Paul might form the intro- 
duction to sermons on various passages of his writings ; yet 
the account must in almost every case be at least slightly 
varied, if it is to be exactly adapted to the design. So with 
the description of a Scripture locality ; and so, to some ex- 
tent, with introductions personal to the speaker. Lawyers 
make many speeches on very similar subjects or occasions ; 
and this fact partly explains Cicero's istatement that he kept 
some introductions on hand, for any speech they might suit — 
as was also done by Demosthenes.* We should beware of 
set phrases and stereotyped forms of introduction ; the people 
very soon begin to recognize them, and the effect is then 
anything else than to awaken interest and excite curiosity. 
Nowhere is it more important to have the stimulus and charm 
of variety, and this is best attained by habitually seeking to 
give the introduction a specific and exact adaptation. 

The introduction must not be too long. An eminent 
preacher, much inclined to this fault, was one day accosted 
by a plain old man as follows ; " Well, you kept us so long 
in the porch this morning that we hardly got into the house 
at all." Of course it may sometimes be much longer than 
would be generally proper; and the attempt of some writers 
to tell how many sentences an introduction should contain, 
is exceedingly unwise. But " where one sermon is faulty 
from being too abruptly introduced, one hundred are faulty 
from a long and "tiresome preface."t 

The introduction, though simple and inelaborate, should be 
carefully prepared. Quint ilian remarks that a faulty proem 
may look like a scarred face ; and that he will certainly be 
thought a very bad helmsman who lets the ship strike in going 
out of the harbour, j: The extemporaneous speaker should 
know quite exactly what he is to say in the introduction. Bui 
it is very doubtful whether he ought, as is frequently recom- 
mended and practised, to have the introduction vrritten, when 
the remainder of the discourse is unwritten. It is too apt to 
seem formal, and the transition to the unwritten to be abrupt 
and precipitous, something like stapping from a wharf into 
deep water, as compared with quietly wading out from the 

* Com|>. Vinet p. 301. f Shedd, p. 182. 

X Quint. IV. I. 61. 
O 



194 THB SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 

shore. It will sometimes happen that at an early stage of 
the preparation, an introduction will occur to the mind ; more 
commonly, it has to be struck out or selected after the prin- 
cipal materials have been gathered. But as to the composition 
of the sermon in detail, (whether it be written or unwritten 
composition,) the introduction should be composed before the 
body of the discourse. This is the natural order, and the 
finished introduction will assist the preacher in composing 
the remainder, somewhat as it will help the hearers. An 
introduction to a discourse is quite different from a preface 
to a book. 

The discussion of this subject may close with a useful 
remark from Vinet : "Among experienced preachers we find 
few examples of exordiums altogether defective ; we find few 
good ones among preachers at their beginning. We hence 
naturally infer, that there is in this part of the discourse 
something of special delicacy, but nothing which demands 
peculiar faculties."* 

2. Plan and Divisions. 

1. The body of the discourse must be constructed on some 
plan, or it is not a discourse at all. Though there be no 
divisions, and no formal arrangement of any kind, yet the 
thoughts must follow each other according to the natural 
laws of thought. Men who rely on their powers of absolute 
extemporizing, or who imagine themselves to possess a quasi- 
inspiration, usually stagger and stray in every direction, follow- 
ing no definite line, and accomplishing very little, save where 
passion comes in and strikes out an order of its own.t 

The plan of a discourse in the broadest sense includes the 
introduction and the conclusion, but as these are here dis- 
cussed separately, we may, for convenience, speak of the plan 
apart from them. 

It is not well to call the body of the discourse the proofs 
as a general name, though some able writers have done so. 
The treatment frequently consists of proof, in whole or in 
part, but frequently also of explanation, or the impressive 
exhibition of a theme, without any process of proof. In hor- 
tatory sermons there is a series of motives, but to bring 
these to bear on the will is a very different thing from 
proving, though often confounded with it. J After excluding 

* Vinet, p. 297. + Comp. chap. I, on the importance of arrangement. 

:j!: Comp. Part I, cWp. Ylll. on kvfii\i<ia.tion. 



THE SBVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 195 

-the introduction and conclusion, the remainder is perhaps best 
called the treatment of the subject, or simply the body of the 
discourse. But our present concern with this is to consider 
the fact that it must have a plan. 

Sometimes a plan will occur to us with the subject, or on 
very little reflection. In other cases we only get a variety of 
separate thoughts. It is well then to jot them down as they 
occur, to make the thoughts objective, so that we may draw 
off and look at them, and sooner or later a plan of treatment 
will present itself. This eiforb to make out an arrangement 
will often suggest to us new thoughts which otherwise we 
should never have gained.* 

One ought to seek not merely for some plan, but for the best. 
" There are plans energetic and rich, which, applying the lever 
as deeply as possible, raise the entire mass of the subject ; there 
are others which escape the deepest divisions of the matter, and 
which raise, so to speak, only one layer of the subject. I [ere it 
is, especially here, in the conception of the plans, that we dis- 
tinguish those orators who are capable of the good, from those who 
are capable of the better — of that better, to say the truth, which 
is the decisive evidence of talent or of labour . . . Every 
one should strive, as far as possible, for this better, and not be 
content with the first plan which may present itself to his thought, 
unless, after having fathomed it, he finds it sufficient for his 
purpose, suited to exhaust his subject, to draw forth its powers 
— unless, in a word, he can see nothing beyond it.''t The plan 
ought to be drnplSf not only free from obscurity, but free from 
all straining after effect, and yet ought, so far as possible, to be 
fresh and striking. So many sermons follow the beaten track, 
in which we can soon foresee all that is coming, as to make it ^ 
weary task even for devout hearers to listen attentively. One 
feels inclined to utter a plaintive cry, " Worthy brother, excel- 
lent brother, if you could only manage to drive us sometimes 
over a different road, even if much less smooth, even if you do 
not know it very well — I am so tired of this ! " And it is only 
a plan that strikes, that has any chance of being remembered. 
Still, we must carefully avoid mere sensational, odd, or " smart" 
plans. A sermon might excite much interest, and be remem- 
bered long, by reason of. such qualities, without doing half as 
much real good as another that was heard quietly and soon for- 
gotten, but made, so far as it went, a salutary impression. J We 
must also avoid great formality of plan. 

* Comp. chap. I. f Vinet, p. 276, 277. "t Comp. «ia\ft «i^^^:J<asst^^it 

Texts, Part I. chap. 1. 



196 THB 8BYBRAL PABTB OF ▲ SERMON. 

'^ May I be permitted to remark, though it seems a digression, 
that in the mode of conducting our public ministrations, we are 
perhaps too formal and mechanical ; that in the distribution of 
the matter of our sermons we indulge too little variety, and 
exposing all our plan in all its parts, abate the edge of curiosity 
by enabling the hearer to anticipate what we intend to advance. 
Why should that force which surprise gives to every emotion 
derived from just and effecting sentiments be banished from the 
pulpit, when it is found of such moment in every other kind of 
public address 1 I cannot but imagine the first preachers of the 
gospel appeared before their audience with a more free and unfet- 
tered air than is consistent with the narrow trammels to which, 
in these latter ages, discourses from the pulpit are confined. 
The sublime emotions with which they were fraught would have 
rendered them impatient of such restrictions ; nor could they 
suffer the impetuous stream of argument, expostulation, and 
pathos to be weakened, by diverting it into the artificial reser- 
voirs prepared in the heads and particulars of a modem sermon. 
Method, we are aware, is an essential ingredient in every dis- 
course designed for the instruction of mankind, but it ought 
never to force itself on the attention as an object apart ; never 
appear to be an end, instead of an instrument ; or beget a sus- 
picion of the sentiments being introduced for the sake of the 
method, not the method for the sentiments. Let the experi- 
ment be tried on some of the best specimens of ancient elo- 
quence ; let an oration of Cicero or Demosthenes be stretched 
upon a Procrustes' bed of this sort, and, if I am not greatly 
mistaken, the flame and enthusiasm which have excited admira- 
tion in all ages will instantly evaporate ; yet no man perceives 
9, want of method in these immortal compositions, nor can any- 
thing be conceived more remote from incoherent rhapsody." * 

As regards formality, there has been much improvment during 
the present century, but many preachers are still stiff, uniform 
and monotonous in their plans, t 

2. The plan of discourse will usually embrace a state- 

* Robert Hall, Sermon on the Discouragements and Supports of a Christian 
Minister, Works, Vol. 1, p. 140. 

f Examples of strikingly felicitous plans may be frequently met with in the 
•elmons of Saurin, William Jay, and Spurgeon ; see also R. Hall on the Glory 
of God in Concealing, and J. M. Mason on Messiah's Throne, the latter haying 
a considerable multiplication of divisions and subdivisions, but admirably 
managed. The plans of Spuiigson incline to formality, those of Beeoher ars 
perbapa too diBcursiva and unsymmetrioal. 



THB SBTERAL PABT8 OF ▲ SBKMON. 197 

ment of the subject, what is technically called the PropotUion, 
There is frequently no need of this, the subject being obvious 
from the text, or suflficiently indicated by the introduction, la 
most cases, however, the subject should be distinctly stated, 
even in many text-sermons and expository sermons, and some- 
times the proposition requires great care.* As to its form, the 
proposition may be logical or rhetorical, " Religion produces 
happiness" would be a logical, "The pleasures of piety** a 
rhetorical proposition. The former conduces to unity, consecu- 
tive thinkiuo:, argumentative force ; the latter to freedom and 
variety of treatment, giving room for proof, impressive exhibi- 
tion, application, or whatever mode of treatment may be 
desired. A preacher will be likely to prefer one or the other 
according to his turn of mind and training. Whichever he 
prefers, he ought frequently to employ the other, for the sake 
of his own improvement and of variety in his discourses. 
Sometimes the two forms may both be used in the same dis- 
course ; thus a man might announce as his subject, " Religion 
produces happiness, or the pleasures of piety." A variety of 
the logical is the interrogative form. This sometimes awakens 
attention by seeming to leave it an open question, to be decided 
on the present occasion, whether the proposition involved is 
true or false, or by stimulating curiosity as to the precise 
answer to the question which the preacher will give. In some 
cases it is more consistent with modesty to propose an inquiry 
than a process of proof And where the subject requires to be 
discussed both negatively and affirmatively, the interrogative 
form of proposition is particularly convenient. " Should the 
preacher's subject be, for instance. Evidences of personal piety, 
it would be more congruous, instead of exposing under this 
statement, in several items, insufficient or false evidences, and 
then mentioning in the same series the satisfactory evidences, 
to raise the inquiry, ' What are genuine evidences of 
piety?' In answering this inquiry, he might either in a 
didactic manner deny the sufficiency of certain supposed evi- 
dences, or propose various questions, such as Is such a quality, 
or course of conduct, a genuine evidence 1 Is such another f 
etc. . . . and then exhibit the true evidence8."t 

The proposition, or statement of the subject, should be com- 
plete (i. e. including all that it is proposed to treat), simple and 

* As to the propriety of withholding the proposition through polioy* M* 
Part I, chap. vi. 1. 
f Bipley, p. 54. Gomp. p. tQ, 54. 



198 THB SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 

clear, brief and attractive.* It may sometimes be repeated^ 
whether in different forms, or in other bat equivalent terms , 
and occasionally the hearers are gradually brought up to it by 
a series of statements, the last of which is definite and precise, 
seeming to strike the very heart of the matter. 

3. It is a question of much practical importance whether the 
plan of a discourse ought to include Divisions, and if so, what 
should be their number, character, •rder, and general manage- 
ment, t 

(1.) Two things are obviously necessary to an effective dis- 
course ; that there shall be a plan, as we have seen, and that 
there shall be movement, progress. These requisites must be 
harmonized. The movement must not be wild and irregular^ 
like undisciplined cavalry, and the orderly plan must not 
involve such interruptions and pauses as would retard move- 
ment. Furthermore, as a work of art, a discourse ought not 
to have its joints obtrusively prominent, nor its several mem- 
bers attracting too much of separate attention, but all should 
stand forth as one symmetrical whole. The Greek and Roman 
orators, greatly concerned to make the speech a finished work 
of art, and often anxious to hide the labour bestowed upon the 
preparation, made no clearly marked divisions. Yet in all 
cases they followed a definite plan, and advanced in an orderly 
manner, even as Horace says, J speaking of poetry, that the 
power and the beauty of order consists in saying just now what 
just now ought to be said, and postponing for the present all 
the rest. In much the same manner the Christian Fathers 
preached. But the great Schoolmen of the middle ages, apply- 
ing the most minute logical analysis to all subjects of philo- 
sophy and religion, established a fashion which was soon fol- 
lowed in preaching also. The young preachers, being trained 
by the books they read and by the oral teaching at the Uni- 
versities to nothing else than this minute analytical discussion, 
made the mistake so often made still, of carrying lecture-room 
methods into the pulpit. Analysis became the rage. Scarcely 
anything was thought of but clear division and logical con- 
catenation, and to this was to a great extent sacrificed all ora- 
torical movement and artistic harmony. Too much of the 

• Comp. Otto, Prak. Theol. s. 332. 

t The term "heads* w practically synonymous with "divisions." The 

distinction between division and partition is too refined for our present pur 

pose. 

t Ars Poetica^ 42. 



THE SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 199 

preaching of all the modem centuries has been marred by this 
fault. Analytical exposition of topics, and elaborate argumen- 
tation, have been the great concern, to the comparative neglect 
of simplicity and naturalness, of animated movement and 
practical power. Preachers, especially the educated, have 
too often regarded instruction and conviction as the aim 
of their labours, when they are but means of leading men 
to the corresponding feeling, determination, and action. And 
the custom being thus established, it has been followed, 
simply because it was the custom, by many practical and 
deeply earnest preachers, who limited and overcame the evils 
of the method as best they could. 

Two centuries ago, when the excessive multiplication of 
formal divisions and equally formal subdivisions was almost 
umiversal in France as well as in England, Fenelon inveighed 
vehemently against the whole fashion, urging a return to the 
methods of the ancient orators,* and on this question almost all 
subsequent writers have taken sides. Yet a certain formality 
of division and of general order has continued to be common 
in France and Germany, and for the most part in England 
and America. Dr. Arnold of Rugby set the example, and 
urged it upon others, of avoiding divisions, and making the 
sermon a very informal address, and since his time many 
preachers in the Church of England, such as Trench and 
Kingsley, have followed that course, t But it is worthy of 
special notice that the two ablest and most generally admired 
preachers the Church of England has recently produced, 
Robertson and Liddon, both regularly make divisions, and 
commonly indicate them in passing, while the former frequently 
states his divisions beforehand, and also marks numerous 
subdivisions. 

From these principles and facts, what are we to conclude ? 
Distinctly marked divisions are not necessary^ and need not 
be made where the plan of the discourse can be easily followed 
without them ; only the preacher must remember in judging 
on this point, that the plan is of course familiar to him, 
and his hearers may not note the transitions which are obvious 
to his eye, unless attention be somehow called to them. But 
while not necessary, distinctly marked divisions will usually 

* Fenelou, Dialogues on Eloq., Dial. II. 

f There is said to be of late a similar movement on the part of some 
preachers in Germany. 



200 THB SKVERAL PABTS OF A SKBMOM. 

be of service, not only in making the train of thought plain 
to the hearers, but also of service to the preacher himself, 
both as compelling to logical correctness and completeness 
of preparation, and as helping him to remember, in extem- 
poraneous delivery. In every particular sermon or class of 
sermons, we must decide the case upon its own merits; but 
it will commonly be best to make divisions. Whether they 
shall be slightly or broadly marked, and how carefully the 
entrance upon a new division should be indicated, must also be 
decided according to the merits of the case. Where the subject 
specially requires explanation and argument, it will commonly 
be advantageous to have clearly stated divisions, and fre- 
quently subdivisions also ; but these must not be so multiplied, 
nor so stated, as to prevent the discourse from standing out 
as a living whole, or to interrupt its progressive movement 
towards the practical end in view. 

Alexander says * that " as much as a discourse gains in method 
and articulation by composing it according to a logical analysis or 
programme, so much it loses in rapidity, richness and animation;" 
and so he inclines to favour Fenelon's view. But it is to be 
observed that Alexander formed this judgment from his experi- 
ence in middle age, with a thoroughly disciplined mind, accus- 
tomed to compose in logical order. In such circumstances a 
man is apt to grow weary of all regulating methods, so as to feel 
relief in disregarding them, and he may often allow himself to 
do so, because his mind may be relied on to achieve a spon- 
taneous order. But for most men, especially the young, the case 
is otherwise, and such remarks were probably never designed 
for them. 

It is frequently said that secular orators at the present day 
make no formal divisions. But they often do, particularly in 
elaborate addresses to a great popular audience, sometimes even 
announcing beforehand the series of topics they mean to discuss. 
In most of the speeches made by lawyers and statesmen, the 
history of the case or the nature of the question determines the 
order of discussion, and leaves no occasion for dividing the sub- 
ject on any other principle. 

(2.) As to the number of divisions, we must consult simplicity, 
and at the same time, vividness and variety. It is of course 
more simple to have but few, and in many cases two divisions 
will be most natural and pleasing. Viuet says of Bossuet that 
"he delights, like Fenelon, in dichotomy; and in my judgment, 
* Thoughts on Preaching, p. 52. Comp. p. 32. 



THB SEVERAL PARTS OF A 8BRM0K. > SOJ 

divisions into two parts are ordinarily the most tasteful." * 
But as a uniform method, the twofold arrangement scarcelj 
presents the requisite variety. It is also highly desirable that 
the divisions, as stated, Khould be interesting, having the vivid- 
ness which belongs to concrete or speciOc thoughts, and this 
can often be attained only by having several divisions, since 
the reduction to a smaller number would render them ab- 
stract or general. " Take the topic. In wJiat consists the 
glory of gospel preaching ? In that (1) is appointed by the 
Son of God ; (2) makes known the will of God ;• (3) promises 
the Grace of God ; (4) is performed in the strength of God ; 
(5) is attended by the blessing of Grod, and (6) leads souls 
to the presence of God. The division might be simplified : 
(1) in its establishment; (2) in its subject; (3) in its operation 
and effects. But the former is to be preferred because more 
striking, f Yet when the heads become as many as five or 
six, they must follow each other in a very natural order, 
or the average hearer will not easily retain them in mind. 
Accordingly, judicious and skilful preachers seldom have more 
than four heads. 

We are thus prepared to understand why it is that sermons 
oftener have three divisions than any other number. This 
is a fact long observed, and made the subject of small wit — 
" three heads, like a sermon." J No doubt many preachers 
have tried to make out three divisions, even where nothing 
calJed for it, simply from habit, or from blindly following 
a custom. But the custom itself must have had some natural 
origin. Now a principal reason for it is seen from the con- 
siderations stated above ; three divisions will give a goodly 
variety, without distracting attention, or burdening the memory. 
And in many directions we meet with similar or analogous 
facts. Thus one of the commonest schemes of discourse will 
naturally be. What? Why? What then] i. e. explain, prove, 
apply. A syllogism, when fully stated, furnishes three pro- 
positions. There cannot be a climax without at least three 
steps. Three gives the idea of completeness — beginning, mid- 
dle, end. When men start in a race, the signal is always 
" One, two, three," neither more nor less. The Scriptures 
often use a threefold repetition as the most emphatic and 

* Vinet p. 334. t Otto, Prak. Theol. s. 355. 

t Coquerel p. 149, quotes ridioule of it by La Bniy^re, in the rei^ <3^ 
Loiiis XIV. 



. 202 THE SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 

impressive ; Holy, holy, holy. Ask, seek, knock, etc. Often 
• logical and rhetorical reasons combine to fix three as the^ 
number. Thus, the resurrection of the body is (1) possible,. 
(2) probable, (3) certain. To carry religion into daily life is 
(1) possible, (2) desirable, (3) obligatory. Piety is for every 
young man (1) a thing to be respected, (2) a thing to be 
desired, (3) a thing to be sought* These considerations 
go to show that it is not accidental, and not strange, that 
elaborate discourses so often have three divisions. The fact 
that this is the commonest number may incline us to avoid it^ 
unless required by the natural arrangement of the subject ; 
but when it is so required, as must very frequently be the 
case, let us employ it without hesitation. In general, then, 
one should make the most natural division, considering the 
subject and the practical design of the discourse, but not 
often allowing the number of heads to exceed four. That 
in so doing the number most frequently occurring will be 
three, and next to that two, is what he may expect. 

(3.) The Character of the divisions must be determined by 
their relation to the subject proposed and to each other. As 
to the former, it is obvious that no one division should be 
coextensive with the subject ; and yet inexperienced sermon- 
izers sometimes unconsciously have it so. More important 
is the inquiry, whether the divisions should exhaust the subject. 
This depends upon what we mean by the subject. The 
general subject treated will very seldom be exhaustively divid- 
ed in a sermon ; but the view of it proposed in the discourse 
ought to be exhausted by the division. That is to say, 
they ought to exhaust the proposition, or we might say, the 
subject proposed. Yet even in this narrower sense, the ora- 
torical division and subdivision of a subject will not com- 
monly exhaust it as a logical analysis would do. The 
latter must rigorously set forth " all and singular" the contents 
of the proposition. The former requires that its divisions 
shall with a certain general completeness cover the whole 
ground of the proposition, so as to make the discourse a 
structure, but does not always demand scientific accuracy in 
that respect ; and as to subdivisions, it is very easy to carry 
analysis farther than conduces to practical effect in speaking. 

* So Cicero, in the oration for the Manilian Law, argues, " You must 
choose a general ; you must choose an able general ; you must choose Cneius 
Pompeius/' Hoppin. p. 155. 



THE SEVERAL PABTS OF A SERMON. 203 



■/ 



Barrow, whose sermons are remarkable specimens of com* 
pleteness, in treating the subject proposed, whom Charles II 
called " an unfair preacher, because he exhausted every subject, . 
and left nothing for others to say after him," has sometimes 
carried his analytical discussion so far as to make it weari- 
some to any ordinary congregation. The complete logical 
analysis of a subject, dividing and subdividing, will some- 
times be useful as a part of the preparation for the preaching 
on it; but the oratorical division is distinct from this, and 
often very different, especially as to subdivisions.* 

As reg^irds the relation of the divisions to each other, they 
must be distinct and symmetrical. It is not uncommon for 
unpractised speakers to have one division that really includes 
another, t and very common to see one that includes some 
part of what also comes under another. We are sometimes 
greatly tempted, in treating one branch of a subject, to go on 
with some closely related matter which yet properly belongs 
to another branch. The incongruity is not always obvious, 
and requires attention. Sometimes, in fact, it is difficult to 
decide where such or such an idea more properly belongs ; 
but it must be confined to one head, or fairly divided between 
the two, so that, in whatever way, the heads shall be kept 
distinct. Furthermore, ideas are frequently set forth as dis- 
tinct divisions which are not sufficientlv distinct to be divided 
at all ; and ideas which are distinct, will be so stated as to 
glide into each other, without any clear line of demarkation. 
" Words the most different, do not always convey essentially 
different ideas, as in this division : * It is characteristic of 
Christian faith, that it eccdtes, guides, supports* Tq prove 
successively that a thing is contrary to good sense and 
contrary to our own interests, is to condemn ourselves to be 
in presence of nothing after finishing the first part."J Be- 

* The author once received, as a homiletical exercise, the sketch of a 
sermon containing four divisions, but with subdivisions and divisions of these 
again and again, till the whole numbered more than a hundred and twenty. 
The analysis was almost faultless, but it would have made an intolerable 
sermon. 

+ Thus Cicero (De Inventione, I, 23) points out how improper it would 
be to undertake to show that from the opposite party's cupidity, and 
audacity, and avarice, many ills had befallen the state ; because avarice is 
really one kind of cupidity. 

t Vinet, p. 282. 



204 THE 8BVERAL tABTfi OF A SBBHOV. 

sides being distinct, the divisions should be symmetrioal. It 
is little to say that they must not be incongruous, though 
preachers of some ability do at times throw together matters 
which have as little incongruity as the human head, a horse's 
neck, a body composed of parts brought from all directions 
and covered with many kinds of feathers, and the whole 
ending in a fish's tail — according to the well-known warning 
of Horace.* But the important precept is, that the divisions 
must all sustain the same kind of relation to the subject 
proposed. Nothing is more common, among the faults of in- 
experienced preachers, than to see three divisions, one of 
which is not co-ordinate with the other two, but only with 
some other proposition of which those two are really sub- 
divisions ; some of the divisions are branches of the tree, 
and others are but branches of branches. This fault should 
be carefully guarded against. In some respects, the idea of 
symmetry is often pushed too far. Of course the subdivisions 
of any one division should all sustain to it the same relation. 
But pains are often taken to give each division the same 
number of subdivisions, in order to make the plan symmetrical. 
Even when this is natural, it is very apt to appear artificial, 
particularly if the number of divisions and subdivisions be con- 
siderable ; and when it is really artificial, the effect is not good. 
Pascal compares such matters inserted merely for the sake of 
symmetry to false windows in a building, a poor attempt to 
hide internal lack of symmetry, and which offend as soon 
as we know what they are. Another mistaken notion of 
symmetry requires that each division and sometimes even each 
subdivision should be discussed at about the same length. 
When natural, this is pleasing. But it will not often be 
natural. A mere external symmetry is far less important 
than proportion to the internal relation of the topics, and to 
the specific design of the discourse.t 

The different principles on which subjects may be divided 
are very numerous, and no brief discussion or enumeration of 
them would be of much utility, f One may learn much as to 
the practical management of division, from the careful analysis 

* Ars Poetica, 1. 

t Comp. above, at the close of chap. i. The peculiarities as to divisioxkf, 
of subject-sermons, text-sermons, and expository sermons, will be discussed 
below in chap. iii. 

t Some good remarks may be found in Hoppin, p. 151 ; Kidder, p. 201. 
Comp. below on subject-sermons, chap, iii., 1. 



TRB SEYSaUIi FABfS 09 A SIBRMOir. 205 

of published sermons. The inexperienced preacher will find 
great advantage in having his plans critically examined by an 
instructor, or by some judicious friend. In this manner a man 
will soon learn more from having pointed out to him the faults 
which he himself has- committed, than it is possible to teach 
in general terras. The study of Logic, in any really good 
treatise, will also be of good service, in this as in many other 
respects. 

(4.) The order of the divisions will be controlled not merely 
by logical, but also by practical considerations. Even where 
instruction and conviction are especially aimed at, there is 
always in preaching a practical effect proposed ; and usually, 
instruction and conviction are quite subordinate to the object 
of impressing the feelings and determining the will. As to 
instruction, it is obviously proper that those divisions should 
precede, which will help to understand the succeeding ones ; 
ttnd it is commonly convenient that negative considerations 
^ould precede the positive. So far as conviction is concerned, 
a sermon should arrange arguments according to the general 
principles which regulate the order of arguments, and whici 
apply here not less than in the essay or treatise.* And in 
respect to practical effect, we must endeavour clearly to discern 
the particular end proposed, and then must consider what 
selection and arrangement of topics will be most likely, by 
kindling the imagination and warming the passions, to induce 
the hearers to resolve and to act as we desire. For this pur- 
pose the abstract must precede the concrete, the general pre- 
cede the specific or particular, and in general, instruction and 
conviction must precede appeal. The appeal, however, may 
either come in mass after the whole body of instruction and 
argument, or it may immediately follow each leading thought 
as presented. This last course, to apply as we go, has some- 
times considerable advantages. The successive waves of 
emotion may thus rise higher and higher to the end. And 
besides, while thought produces emotion, it is also true that 
emotion reacts upon and quickens thought, so that the impres- 
sive application of one division may secure for the next a closer 
attention. Yet the interest must steadily grow as we advance, 
or the effect will be bad ; and where we cannot feel sure that 
it will thus grow, point by point, then application had better be 
postponed till towards the close, t 

* See on order of ailments, Part I., chap, vi., 4. 
f Comp. on Application, Part I., chap. viii. 

4 



206 THB SEVEBAL PABTS OF A SERMON. 

The young preacher who repeats a sermon ought to consider 
whether he cannot advantageously rearrange it, or at any rate 
improve the plan. 

(5.) The statement of the divisions and subdivisions, like 
that of the proposition, ought to be exact, concise, and as far 
as possible, suggestive and attractive. Without straining after 
effect, one may often state a division in terms so brief and 
striking, that the hearer's attention will be at once awakened. 
It is well that the several divisions (and so with the several 
subdivisions of each) should be stated in similar forms of 
expression, where this can be done without artificiality. Such 
similarity of statement brings out the symmetry of the divi- 
sions, rendering them clearer and also more pleasing. Some 
German preachers occasionally throw their divisions into metre 
and rhyme, or adopt for the purpose some couplet or stanza 
from a familiar hymn. 

(6) Shall the divisons be announced beforehand 1 This was 
once almost universal, and is still the regular practice of 
many preachers. At one time in some parts of Germany, 
the plan of the sermon was printed, and either published 
in the newspaper of the previous week, or handed in slips 
to the congregation as they entered the church.* To make 
a minute announcement of divisions and subdivisions, and 
repeatedly recall them in passing, is very appropriate when 
lecturing to a class on a very difficult subject, where the 
object is not persuasion, but only instruction and conviction. 
But in preaching, rightly regarded, these are commonly subor- 
dinate to persuasion. Now three cases may be noted, in 
which it is desirable to announce the divisions at the outset, 
(a) When the train of thought is difficult, and the announce- 
ment, may aid in following it. Sometimes this would but 
increase the difficulty, the hearer finding it easier to compre- 
hend each division by itself, as it is presented. But in other 
cases the divisions when placed side by side will throw light 
on each other, (b) When it is particularly desirable that 
not merely the practical impressions should be permanent, 
but that the successive steps in the exposition or argument 
should be remembered, (c) When we judge that the announce- 
ment would awaken interest and atention, rather than abate 
them; and here every case must be decided upon its own 
merits. Unless one of these three conditions exist, no previous 
announcement should be made. It must be remembered that 

* Hagenbach, Horn. s. 123. 



THB SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 207 

there are many different methods of announcing, beginning 
with the formal statement of numbered divisions (and some- 
times of subdivisions also), and extending through numerous 
gradations to the perfectly informal, and perhaps very slight 
mention of the divisions as the points it is proposed to consider. 
Between these limits there m^-y be devised a great variety of 
methods, and by the exercise of power of invention, and of judg- 
ment and good taste. Shedd thinks * that, as a general 
thing, recapitulation is better than pre-announcement, as being 
more intelligible, more expressive, and more easily remem- 
bered. In many cases, this is true. In many others, the 
pre-announcement is best. Sometimes, it is even well to 
employ both. 

To announce at the outset the subdivisions also, would be 
desirable only in very peculiar cases, where the train of 
thought was in itself very important. It is, however, more 
frequently proper, after stating a particular division, then 
to announce its subdivisions, or rather to mention them in 
an easy and informal way. 

4. The tromsitiona from one part of a discourse to the next 
are most felicitous when least noticeable. The ideal of 
excellence would be that the parts should fit perfectly to- 
gether, "like well cut stones, needing no cement," to use 
Cicero's image, or that each should grow out of the preceding, 
by a process of natural development. This ideal can seldom 
be realized; but in all cases transition will be easy in pro- 
portion as the subject proposed has been thoroughly studied, 
and the thoughts to be presented have been well arranged. 
No good transition can be made between topics that have not 
a real and natural relation, such as to make it appropriate 
that they should stand in immediate succession. When there- 
fore we find the transition difficult, it is well to inquire whether 
the arrangement is not defective. Often, indeed, the difficulty 
arises from the fact that we are attempting to work in some 
idea or passage which has no natural place in the train of 
thought. Bufibn has remarked "Those who fear to lose 
isolated thoughts, and who write detached passages at different 
times, never combine them without forced tran8itions."t And 
the difficulty is even greater with the scraps gathered from 
reading. These should be introduced only when they can be 

♦ Horn. p. 195. 

t Quoted by Viijet, p. 285. See also Skinner, Discussion in Theol., p. 1^1, 



208 TAB BS?EltAL PARTS OF A SBRMON. 

thoroughly incorporated into the discburse. Otherwise, no 
matter how sensible, striking or pleasing, they had better be 
omitted; if really so good, they will soon find their place 
somewhere else. A discourse is not a mere conglomeration or 
accretion of foreign matters. From whatever source its materials 
may have been derived, they must be made to unite and grow 
together. Like sap in the plant or blood in the body, the 
vital current of thought must flow through the whole discourse, 
giving it animation, flexibility, strength. 

Still, it will frequently happen that the practical design of 
a sermon, or the exigencies of preparation, will require us to 
bring together thoughts between which there is not a perfect 
fit, or a spontaneous vital connection. It may then be neces- 
sary to interpose some third idea, related to both, and forming 
an easy transition.* Such an idea must not have any separate 
prominence, nor in fact attract to itself any attention from 
the persons addressed, though a critical observer would per- 
ceive that it is appropriate and properly introduced. In most 
cases the transition can be effected by a single brief sentence. 
To manage this with simplicity, grace and variety, is a task 
of some delicacy, but due attention and practice will enable 
any one to perform it with tolerable success. One of the most 
distinguished preachers of America is known to have remarked, 
that the transitions, the articulations, of a discourse, give the 
highest proof of oratorical skill. If under articulation we com- 
prise the adjustment of successive thoughts to each other, 
this would naturally include arrangement, and taken with this 
breadth of meaning, the remark is unquestionably correct. 

But whether the transition be in itself mediate or immediate, 
it is often desirable to employ some form of expression which, 
in conjunction with the natural change of tone and manner, 
shall cause the hearer to observe that we are here passing to 
another thought. This is sometimes done by numbering the 
divisions and subdivisions, and then introducing each by a 
mention of the number, which besides the formal statement, 
can be made in a variety of informal ways. And without num- 
bering, or witiiout stating the numbers, we may use any of 
those numerous expressions which indicate progress from point 
to point. Among the most common are again^ in additum, 
besides, furtliermorey still further^ moreover, another pointy in 
the next place, and not ovdy this, but eto,j on the other hand, once 

* OoDipw ViD«t, p. 317. 



THE SEYEBAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 209 

mare, finally , etc.* But let not the inexperienced preacher 
imagine that there are any set phrases which propriety requires 
him to adopt. Let him notice what relation exists between 
the foregoing, and following thoughts, and indicate the tran- 
sition by any appropriate and simple expression, without 
hunting after novelty, and without neglecting variety. 

If the sermon is unusually long, the transition to one of 
its later divisions may in some simple and quiet way acknow- 
ledge the fact, perhaps oflFer some apology for it ; if any particular 
portion, from its difficulty or its importance, requires special 
attention, this also may be indicated in the transition ; and 
in rare cases a word may be thrown in to arouse flagging 
attention, t The propriety of all such passing remarks, and 
the method of making them, must be determined by good 
sense and good taste. If not well managed, they are much 
worse than nothing. 

As to this whole matter of the plan of discourse, we 
may rejoice that in the present age, and especially in our 
country, there is no established and dominant custom, but a 
good degree of freedom. The preacher, particularly in his 
youth, had better not make haste to conclude that he is 
superior to general experience, but should study and practice 
different methods, following mainly those which he finds best 
suited to his powers, but frequently exercising himself in 
others, so as to let no one method become a necessity to him, 
80 as to broaden and vary his cultivation, and to adapt himself 
to differences of taste among his hearers. On the other hand 
he need not be always following the fashions of his time, but 
taking due account of the nature and design of pulpit discourse, 
should give free scope to his individuality, and sometimjQs 
strike out methods of his own, observing how they effect him 
and his hearers. He should be neither solicitous to appear 
independent and original, nor afraid to try experiments, under 
the control of good taste and devout feeling. :{: 

3. Conclusion. 

Preachers seldom neglect to prepare some introduction to a 
sermon, but very often neglect the conclusion ; and yet the 

* Comp. Ripley, Sac. Rhet. p. 102. 

+ Comp. Ripley, p. 103. 

X Upon the different methods of constructing sttbject-sermons, text-sermons^ 
and eipository sermons, see below, chap. iii. 

P 



210 THE SBVERAL PARTS OF A 81BRM0H. 

latter is even more important than the former. John Bright, 
one of the foremost political orators of the present age, has 
stated that however little preparation he may make for the rest 
of a speech, he alv^ays carefully prepares the conclusion. 
Lord Brougham said that the conclusion to his celebrated 
speech before the House of Lords in defence of Queen Caroluie 
was composed twenty times over, at least. The great orators 
of Greece and Borne paid much attention to their perorationSi 
seeming to feel that this was the final struggle which must 
decide the conflict, and gathering up all their powers for one 
supreme eflbrt. But how often we find it otherwise, especially 
on the part of preachers who extemporize. The beginning 
and earlier progress of the sermon show good preparation, aud 
do welL But towards the close the preacher no longer kjiQvni 
the way ; here he wanders with a bewildered look, there be 
struggles and flounders. Another, feeling excited at the doso^ 
launches into general exhortation, and proceeding: tiU body mid 
mind are exhausted, ends with what is scattering, feeble, flat. 
The conclusion ought to have moved like a river, growing, ii^ 
Tolume and power, but instead of that, the disco^ir^e loses 
itself in some great marsh, or ends like the emptying of a 
pitcher, with a few poor drops and dregs. 

Let us lay down the rule, then, that the conclusion should: be 
carefully prepared. If it is to comprise any impasQipufd 
personal appeal, we shall often find occasion to laodify it in 
deliveiy, according to the state of feeling which has then 
been reached by ourselves and the hearers. But one can 
usually determine, when preparing, precisely the thoughts 
with which t^e sermon ought to conclude, though he mi^ 
leave the mode of stating them to be controlled by the feelings 
of the moment. He ought in every case to have ready, >a^ 
well prepared, something that will make an appropriate aod 
effective conclusion, even though leaving himself free, if ihfi 
moment should so prompt, to strike out in a different directigsa, 
or rise to a higher level. Where the subject will naturally 
lead to passionate exhortation, we can almost always foresee 
a certain range within which such exhortation must be re- 
stricted, if it is to be kept in relation to the subject, and 
can commonly fix some point beyond, towards which this 
emotional expatiation shall tend, and where we may close with 
some comprehensive statement or final appeal. The difficulty 
thus encountered as to the conclusion is only a higher degree 
of that which everywhere presents itself in the best forms of 



TfiB SJEVERAL PARTS OF A S1SRM0K. 211 

speaking, and which we must learn to overcome, viz., how 
we shall combine the most thorough possible preparation with 
the largest liberty in delivery.* 

One element in the conclusion of a sermon wiH often be 
recapittUation If the discourse has consisted chiefly of careful 
explanation or laboured argument, and if it is important that 
its several divisions should be remembered, and doubtful whether 
they will be, then the divisions, and occasionally even certain 
subdivisions, may be distinctly re-stated. But this must be 
so managed, to use a phrase of Cicero's, "that the recol- 
lection may be revived, not the speech repeated." Though 
pierhaps anxious at the moment to enlarge anew upon some 
favourite point, we must confine recapitulation to its proper 
office^ In most sermons, however, we do not care to reproduce 
the several thoughts and fix them separately in 'the hearer's 
mind, but rather to gather them all together, and concen- 
trate their force upon one final efiPort of conviction or persua- 
sion. In such cases it is not well to make any formal 
recapitulation, but in a freer way to recall the train of thought^ 
or the principal points of it, sometimes using very different 
forms of statement. This appears to be what Vinet would 
call resumS as distinct from recapitulation.t For properly 
oratorical purposes, it is commonly much to be preferred. 
The recapitulation, or the re»imiS, especially the latter^ may 
sometimes form the entire conclusion; but in most cases 
it only leads to the conclusion proper. It is often better, 
particulad?ly where the discourse includes maay points, to give 
fiome recapitulation before reaching the conclusion, usually 
when passing to the last division. 

The conclusion will, for the most part, consist of application. 
This term, as we have already seen, is popularly used to 
embrace a variety of materials^ J including application proper, 
suggestions for practical guidance, and persuasive appeal. 

(1.) Application, in the strict sense, is that in which we 
show how the subject applies to the persons addressed, what 

• Comp. on the different methods of preparation and deKvery, Part IV 
«hap. i 

t Vinet, p. 323. 

$ See above, Part I, chap. viii. As application is often made elsewhere 
than in the conclusion, sometimes, indeed, forming a large portion of the 
sermon, and as some of the topics usually embraced under it demanded con- 
siderable explanation the subject was considered under the head of Materials, 
and that chapter should be here com}:ared. 



212 THE SEVERAL FABTS OF A SERMON. 

practical instructions it offers them, what practical demands it 
makes upon them. Sometimes this is effected by means of what 
are called remarks, meaning certain noticeable matters belonging 
to or connected with the subject, to which attention is now 
especially directed. Remarks in concluding a sermon, ought 
always to be of a very practical character. Whatever truth 
a sermon may present to the mind, it should not end without 
aiming to bring about some practical result, some correspond- 
ing determination of the will, state of the affections, or course 
of action. If this be true, many of the remarks we hear 
in the conclusion of sermons are inappropriate, or at least 
scarcely desirable, for they often consist of certain thoughts 
loosely connected with the subject discussed, for which no 
place was found in the discussion. Such conclusions would 
seem to be among the most unfortunate that can be contrived, 
for they scatter where there ought to be concentration, and 
they lead the hearer carelessly to survey the subject from a 
distance, when he ought to be drawn into close personal con- 
tact with it.* If such disjointed observations are really im- 
portant, and yet the plan of the discourse was not fortunate 
enough to embrace them, it would be better to throw them 
in just at the close of the discussion and give afterwards 
an appropriate conclusion. When however, remarks are of 
a practical character, and have a sufficiently close relation 
to the subject and to each other, they constitute a good 
conclusion to the sermon. 

This application more frequently takes the form of inferences. 
In England two centuries ago, from the passion for logical 
analysis in preaching,t it was common to make a great num- 
ber of inferences in concluding, " sometimes twelve, sometimes 
twenty, and sometimes fifty. They were called usesy (1) of 
information — (2) of instruction — (3) of eaxmimatio7i — (4) of 
reproof- — (5) of encouragement — (6) (f comfort — (7) of ex- ^ 
hortation, and so on."f This was of course ruinous to all 
proper oratorical effect. But even at the present day, 
the same tendency to think more of instruction in preaching 
than of practical impression, which leads many stiU to em- 

* ELidder appears to justify this sort of thing, when he says (Horn. p. 223), 
''Another desicfn of a conclusion is to express thoughts which do not belong 
to any other part of the discourse. In the elaboration of a plan, disposition 
usually distributes to the conclusion pertinent and important matter that has 
no place in either the exordium or the argument." 

f Comp, above, 2. X Robinson's ed. of CJlaude, II, 457. 



THE SEVERAL FARTS OF A SERMON. 213 

ploy much formal division and subdivision, likewise leads, 
in some quarters, to a great fondness for closing with "in- 
ferences." This form of making application of the subject 
ought to be in two directions carefully limited. Nothing 
should be presented as an inference which does not logically 
and directly follow from the subject discussed. The former 
practice of greatly multiplying so-called inferences has led 
to a certain looseness in the homiletical application of the 
term, which ought to be avoided. * The other limit is, 
that no inferences should be drawn in concluding a sermon 
which are not of practical importance. It is not the preacher's 
business to exhibit all the matters which may be inferred from 
his discussion, as if he were attempting an exercisie in logic, but 
to draw out such as are of real importance. And observe, that 
this should be a practical importance. The body of the dis- 
course has furnished the intellect with instruction and argument; 
what we want in concluding is, as remarked above, something 
which appeals to the aflFections and the wilLt In the body of 
the discourse there may, of course, be inference of truth not 
in this sense . practical, but forming a part of the argument. 
The* conclusion, except in rare cases, ought to deal only in 
truths having a directly practical bearing. Shedd points out 
that inferences forming a conclusion ought to be hoTtiogeneous 
and cumfiulative. The several inferences, that is to say, ought 
to sustain a similar relation to the subject, so as to blend 
into one eflFect; and the successive inferences ought to in- 
crease in weight, heat and life, so as to make the greatest 
impression at the close. They should generally be brief. 
Yet sometimes it is proper to make a short statement of 
some doctrinal principle or abstract truth, and then occupy 
the discourse mainly with practical inferences from it; but 
in such cases they belong to the body of the discourse, 
which ends either with the last inference, or with some separate 
conclusion. « 

Again, this application is often best presented in the form 
of lessons. This term implies that the practical teachings 
of the subject are more thoroughly brought out and more 
fully applied than would be indicated by mere "remarks," 
while it does not restrict the application to those teachings 
which appear as logical " inferences " from the propositions 

* Coirp. above, Fart I, Chap. yi. 2, On deduction from established truths. 
4* Comp. Shedd^ p. 198-204, a Tery instmoVi've ^c\^\QrDk. 



214 THB SEYEBAL PABTS OF A 8SBM0N. 

established. It would thus seem to have considerable ad- 
vantages over the other forms. Such "lessons" must, of 
course, be thoroughly practical, and must not be too fOTmal, 
nor have a magisterial air. The preacher is not a digniteuy, 
speaking ex caJ^edra to his inferiors. He had better speak, 
in general, of lessons which we may learn. 

Of course there are applications which it would not be 
proper to designate by any one of these terms, remarks, 
inferences, or lessons. And of course it is by no means necessary, 
and frequently not advisable to use these somewhat formal 
phrases, even where they are appropriate. The preacher must, 
in the mode of presenting applications, study naturalness, 
simplicity, and variety. 

(2.) Ajiother subdivision of what is popularly called applica- 
tion, consists of suggestions as to the best means and methods 
of praxjtically performing some duty which the body of the 
discourse has enjoined. After urging the obligation to such 
duties as family or secret prayer, or reading the Scriptures, 
private efforts for the conversion of individuals, kindness to 
the poor, etc., it is extremely appropriate tb end with practical 
suggestions as to the way in which the work may be actuUly 
done, by people having nothing extraordinary in then- character 
or circumstances — done regularly, habitually, and with good, 
results. Many a Christian duty seems to most people im- 
practicable for them ; and the most effective application in such 
cases is to show that it is practicable. Usually this should not 
be done in the way of objurgation, as if wishing simply to 
take away their excuses for neglect, but with a sympathizing 
recognition of real difficulties which are "common to man." 
Here again we see that explanations and suggestions, which 
are to form a conclusion^ must be comparatively brief K it is 
deemed proper to make them copious, they ought commonly to 
be thrown into the body of the discourse. 

(3.) Application includes not merely a statement of the 
practical bearings of the discourse upon the hearers, and in- 
struction as to the actual performance of duties enjoined, 
but it also includes, and often especially denotes, persuasive 
appeal. The nature and means of persuasion and hortatoiy 
appeal we have perhaps sufficiently considered in a previous 
chapter. "^ It is very natural that conclusions should d^ten 
consist of persuasion and entreaty. Unless the whole discourse 
is of this character, such matter must, if given anywhere,. 

* Part 1, o\i&p. "TOi. 



THB SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERlfON. 215 

be most commonly put at the close. And such is human 
aature, that in treating the great majority of subjects we 
find it desirable, not merely to enlighten and convince, but 
afaso to urge and beseech. 

But it is quite wrong to suppose, as some preachers appear 
to do, that every sermon must end with a very pathetic or over- 
whelming appeal It is not unfrequently best to end quietly 
yet still so as to impress. And whatever the subject might 
require, let a man not speak in an emotional manner unless 
he really feels it. An effort to work one's self up into feeling, 
because it is desirable at this point, will usually fail ; and if 
it succeeds as to the preacher himself, wiU be apt to make 
anything else than a good impression on the hearers. If an 
impassioned conclusion was prepared, and the speaker now 
finds his own feelings and those of the audieuce have 
slowly subsided till there is no good prospect of exciting 
them, let him omit the prepared conclusion, or modify its 
tone so as to attempt nothing but what can be achieved. Few 
things are so painful or so injurious as the reaction produced 
by passionate words which are not felt by the hearers, nor 
even by the speaker. And let it never be forgotten that we 
must not aim to excite emotion merely for its own sake, as if 
that were the end in view, but to make it a means of deter- 
mining the will and stimulating to corresponding action. Even 
love to God will not subsist as a mere feeling. 

A concluding exhortation ought, as a rule, to be specific, 
keeping itself in relation to the subject which has been treated. 
There is great danger that a fluent and fervid speaker will 
wander into mere general appeals, equally appropriate to al- 
most any other subject or occasion. This may be sometimes 
allowed, but a more specific exhortation would almost always 
be more effective. It was once very common, among Baptists, 
Methodists, and some others, for a sermon to be followed 
by an exhortation from some other minister, or from some 
private Christian. The practice is now generally disused, 
except in " protracted meetings," but if properly managed, 
may be, upon occasion, quite appropriate and really useful. 
It would be an excellent thing to startle some of our con- 
gregations out of their decorous dulness, by an unexpected and 
rousing exhortation. But such addresses should not break 
away from the sermon, nor lose themselves in vague general- 
ities. They should in general carry the subject, or soma 
branch of it, farther in the same dixeolioTL, "^ \iq \x^^ ^'t 



216 THB SEVERAL PARTS OF A SERMON. 

thought presents itself which would be of this character, then 
let the speaker take some thought which, though not included 
in the sermon, will harmonize with it in general eflFect — so 
that the whole service may impel the hearers in the same 
direction. One who undertakes such exhortation ought not 
merely to feel moved to speak, but by all means to have some- 
thing definite in his mind which he wishes to say, and ought 
especially to be aware of wearying the audience. 

When the sermon has been one of warning or of invitation, 
it is sometimes natural and impressive to conclude with some- 
thing of the opposite tendency. The preacher must judge 
in every case, whether this combination will deepen the general 
impression, or whether the two will neutralize each other in the 
hearer's mind, and leave him unafiTected by either. It may be 
added that warnings, and all that is alarming in gospel truth, 
should be uttered not as if we delighted in depunciation, 
but with especial tenderness, showing that we speak in the 
faithfulness of love. 

The length of the conclusion, like that of the introduction, 
is dependent on circumstances, and no rule can be laid down. 
But there is great danger of making it too long, especially 
in hortatory appeals. The feeling of the speaker inclines 
him to continue, but the feelings of the hearers cannot be 
long kept up to a high point. If the sermon has been long 
the conclusion should certainly be brief, save in very peculiar 
cases. Sometimes the close of the last division really brings 
the whole train of thought to an end, and gives it a practical 
turn : any separate conclusion is then unnecessary, and com- 
monly undesirable. Sometimes an abrupt conclusion is very 
effective, when well managed, with good taste and unaffected 
solemnity. " Excessive length is a common fault of the con- 
clusion of extemporaneous preachers and writers; in fact, of 
all who do not govern themselves both in the preparation and 
delivery of sermons by well defined plans. New thoughts occur 
to them, and these are hitched on to what has gone before. 
What is worse, sometimes the preacher becomes conscious 
that he has failed to accomplish the object of his discourse, 
or to awaken the degree of interest he ought to have excited, 
and he struggles on in the vain endeavour to compensate the 
fault, until at last he is forced to terminate further from his 
object than when his conclusion began."* Most of all it is 

• Kidder, p. 229, 230. 



THE SEVERAL FARTS OF A SERMON. 217 

unwise to give indication that one is about to conclude, and 
then start again, or keep dragging on. 

The general character of the conclusion ought to be deter- 
mined before the detailed composition (whether written or 
unwritten) of the discourse is begun. Then the development 
of the details may be suitably limited and directed by the 
use which it is proposed to make of the whole in concluding. 
If the other materials have been provided and arranged, and 
no conclusion has yet suggested itself — a thing which will 
not often happen — we may look again over the train of thought 
drawn out, asking ourselves distinctly the question what will 
be the most suitable conclusion to all this. Or perhaps a 
renewed examination of the text, or of its connection, or 
of parallel passages, wiil furnish something suitable. The 
problem is not to find some conclusion, but that which will be 
most appropriate and effective. It is plain that the conclusion 
cannot be composed in detail, till we reach it in composing the 
discourse. In fact, some better conclusion than was originally 
contemplated may have presented itself in the course of com- 
position, which it is proper to substitute. And the same 
thing may happen in the course of delivery. The great 
requisite is that the body of the discourse and the conclusion 
shall each be adapted to the other ; and this may be accom- 
plished by fixing the general contents and design of the con- 
clusion when laying out the plan of the discourse ; and then 
allowing the style and tone of the conclusion to be modified, 
or its very character changed, in any way that may have been 
suggested in the progress of composition, or of delivery. 

The Jmal words of the conclusion may sometimes consist of 
a comprehensive and impressive restatement of the subject 
which has been discussed. " It is very eflfective when, in our 
final appeal, we can strongly and vividly reproduce the leading 
idea of the whole discourse. It has a very great effect upon 
our hearers, after so many solid proofs and so many skilful 
strokes of oratory have been devoted to it, to see the great 
leading truth, the parent idea, appear once more at this 
crowning moment in all the force of its beautiful simplicity, 
in aU the strength of its unity." * Or the text itself may 
be the last words. When the discourse has been developed 
out of the text, and has exhibited all its wealth of meaning, 
then the emphatic repetition of the text in closing wiU impres- 

♦ Potter, p. 228. 



216 THB SEVERAL FABTB OF A SERMON. 

sively sum up all that has been said. Or we may end witb 
another passage of Scripture, or with part of a hjrL, or With 
an invooation of the divine blessing. This last is sometimes 
natural and impressive, but should never become a regular 
form. Very often, however, the general contents or design 
of the conclusion will require that we close with some particular 
thought. The last sentence, of whatever it may consist, ought 
to be appropriate and impressive, but its style ought not to 
be elaborate and ambitious. It is a very solemn moment. Do 
not be thinking of your reputation, good brother, but of your 
responsibility, and of your hearers' salvation.* 



* Besides Should, already referred to, the ConolusioD is treated at unusual 
leugth and in an instructive manner by Hoppin, p. 178-190. 



CHAPTER III. 

DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 

1. Subject-Sermons. 2. Text-Sermons. 3. Expository- 
Sermons. 

There has already been frequent occasion to mention subject- 
sermons, text-sermons, and expository-sermons. It is con- 
venient to give at this point an account of their respective 
peculiarites, with practical suggestions as to their management. 
The distinction between subject-sermons and text-sermons 
has to do simply with the plan of the discourse, especially 
with the source of its divisions. It is only in this respect 
that they constitute different species, and yet the difference 
is one of considerable practical importance. The phrases in 
question — for which some subititute topical and textual sermons, 
or topical and textual division of sermons — ^have not been gener- 
ally employed with great precision or uniformity. A very obvious 
application of them, and one which can be consistently carried 
through, would be as follows : Subject-sermons are those in 
which the divisions are derived from the subject, independently 
of the text ; while in text-sermons, the divisions are taken 
from the tdxt. In the latter case as well as in the former, 
i^ere may be a definite subject, distinctly and even formally 
stated j but this subject is not divided according to its own 
nature, but only such divisions are made as are presented 
by the text. Sometimes the two plans may coincide. Begin- 
ning with a subject, one may find so appropriate a text, 
that the logical divisions of the subject will all be contained 
in the text ; or beginning with a text, he may state its subject 
in so felicitous a form of proposition, that the several divisions 
presented in the text wiU also constitute a complete logical 
envision of the proposition. But they will not often thus coin- 
cide, and the fact that they sometimes do, will not make them 
less distinct in principle. 



220 different species of sermons. 

1. Subject Sermons. 

In subject-sermons, then, we draw from the text a certain 
subject, usually stating it distinctly in the form of a proposi- 
tion,* and then the text has no further part in the sermon, but 
the subject is divided and treated according to its own nature, 
just as it would be if not derived from a text. 

This form of treatment has important advantages. It better 
insures unity, which is indispensable to the best effects of dis- 
course. It trains the preacher's mind to logical analysis, and 
few kinds of power are so valuable to him. It is more convinc- 
ing and pleasing to a certain order of minds in the audience, 
especially among cultivated people ; such a treatment having 
a more logical character, and also a more manifest complete- 
ness. Besides, there wiU often be practical occasion for thus 
thoroughly discussing a subject. The wants of the congrega- 
tion will make the preacher wish to present a full view of some 
doctrine, or some topic of general or particular morality, and 
not merely the special aspects of it Which one text or another 
may exhibit. The Scriptures do not present truth in a succes- 
sion of logical propositions, any more than the objects of nature 
are found grouped according to scientific classification. This 
suits the design of the Bible, as a book to be read, and also 
leads to a rich variety in textual preaching. But it is fre- 
quently instructive and satisfactory to discuss some collective 
subject. 

It is usually better that the subject should be not general, 
but specific. This, as we have heretofore seen,* not only pro- 
motes variety in successive sermons, but really makes each sub- 
ject more fruitful. And if in addition to being a theme specific 
in its logical character, it be the specific theme of the text from 
which it is drawn, this removes, in part, one of the objections 
to subject-sermons, viz., that in them the text does not perform 
so important a part as it ought to do in preaching. Too often 
the text is only a starting-point, with which the sermon after- 
wards maintains, not only no formal, but no vital connection. 
Sometimes, indeed, it is made simply a motto, a practice of ex- 
tremely doubtful propriety. Of course a text which presents a 
specific aspect of some subject may be lawfully used as suggest- 
ing the general subject, or we may draw from a general text its 
general subject, and then avowedly confine ourselves to one 

* Comp. above, chap, ii., 2. 
t Paxt I., c\iap. m. 1, 



DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 22 L 

department of it. But, as a rule, it is greatly better that the 
subject should be precisely that which the text most naturally 
presents, and which most thoroughly exhausts its meaning, A 
good example of such specific subjects is found in Robert Hallos 
three sermons. Reasons for a judgment to come. Character of 
the judgment to come. Remembrance in youth of judgment to 
come.''^ And a text is in each case taken which is supposed to 
present the specific topic. The first is Acts xxiv. 25, " As 
Paul reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to 
come," though this is probably an unwarranted interpreta- 
tion, as the word properly signifies " discoursed ; " the 
second is Heb. vi. 2, "Eternal judgment;" and the third, 
Keel. xi. 9, " Rejoice, young man, in thy youth . . . . 
but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee 
into judgment." Mr. Hall's biographer states that he was fond 
of thus confining himself to one aspect of a subject. In like 
manner, South has a number of distinct sermons on Deliver- 
ance from Temptation. 

The subject will be divided according to its own nature, and 
to our practical design in treating it.t This design will usually 
lead us either to explanation (whether by analysis or by com- 
parison), to proof, or to application of the subject, and in many 
cases will require some combination of these. The practically 
different methods of dividing are extremely numerous and 
various, and here the analytical and imaginative powers of the 
preacher may be freely exercised. The formal and cumbrous 
methods given in the " Topics " of ancient writers, and applied 
to preaching by Claude, are now generally disregarded. In- 
deed, Cicero himself, who abridged Aristotle^s treatise on Topics, 
has elsewhere,} after giving a few practical hints as to the 
divisions of a discourse, spoken as follows : " There are also 
other precepts for division, which are of but little use in ora- 
tory ; they are employed in philosophy, and I have transferred 
such of them as seemed to be suitable. This distinction be- 
tween logical analysis and oratorical division cannot be too 
earnestly insisted on. Little can be taught with respect to 
dividing a subject save by examples, and these can be most 
profitably studied by a critical analysis of published sermons, 

♦ Works, IV., 304. 

f The character, number, order, etc., of divisions have been discussed 
above, chap. ii. 2, 3. 
+ De Inven. I., 23. 



222 DIFFERENT SPEOIES OF SEBHONS. 

and a repeated and careful inspection of the plans we ha.Ye 
ourselves devised.* 

Sometimes no complete discussion of the subject is attempted^ 
but we have only a series of remarks upon it. Of course thift 
is not often to be commended, t 

2. Text-Sermons. 

These ought to be governed by the same general principles 
as subject- sermons. They must always have a plan, and com- 
monly divisions ; and the principles laid down as to divisions 
in the foregoing chapter apply, in general, to text-sermons as 
well as others. Text-sermons include two distinct varieties, 
those which present a single subject, and those which discuss 
several subjects. 

1. A single subject is drawn from the text, and stated 
whether formally or informally, and then is discussed under 

* For this purpose^ the best of the old English Divines are Barrow and 
South. Ti]lotson's plans appear more simple, and thus preferable, but they 
are often quite def ective. Of the great Frendi preachers, Saurin is better im 
this respect than even Massillon. Subject-sermons in a strict sense are 
especiaUy frequent among Presbyterian preachers ; and probably no sermons 
in existence present a larger number of excellent models of this kind, than 
those of Samuel Davies. If the study of one of these older preachers should 
be tending to make one too formal for the taste of the present age, he cam 
oorreot the tendency by reading liddon's University Sermons, or R Fulkir^ 
Sermons, where he will find plans, both topical and textual, which are dis- 
tinct and clear without being obtrusive or minute. But let it not be im^t 
gined that the greatest preachers are faultless in their plans, or even uniforpip 
ly good. They often prepared hastily, or their minds became possessed 
by a certain scheme of thought, so that they did not perceive its faults, or 
could not see how to correct them. Andrew Fuller usually divides naturally 
and well. But his famous sermon on Walking by Faith (Works, Vol. I), 
though the leading division is simple enough'-the nature and the importance 
of walking by faith— is in its details grievously loose-jointed and awkward. 
In fact, it was suggested by an incident during his ride to the place ai 
preaching. A rush of good thoughts may come suddenly, as in that case, 
but very seldom in a good arrangement. It has been already remarked 
that Spurgeon qften gives excellent plans ; and he has already many subject- 
sermons, especially in his earlier volumes. 

+ It is not deemed neccessary to say more upon subject-sermons, because 
all that is said in chap. ii. of divisions applies directly to them. A preacher 
who shrinks from preaching sermons of this sort should constrain himself to 
make them, at least somewhat frequently, for sake of his mental discipline, 
and of due variety. 



DIFFBRBNT SPB0IB8 OF SEBia)B8. 223 

fiucjii divisions as the text furnishes. We have seen that this 
may sometimes coincide with a complete logical division of the 
subject itself, but in those rare cases it would still be called a 
text-sermon, if the divisions were actually derived from a conr 
templation of the text. In general, such plans are quite 
different from those which a logical analysis of the subject 
would suggest. Text-sermons of this sort are by some writers 
quite confounded with subject-sermons, because in both case^ 
there is a definite sul\ject. Others call them textual-topical. 

The divisions thus drawn firom the text, while not commonly 
forxning a complete analysis of the subject in itself considered, 
mus^ yet be so related to the subject and to each other, that 
they together form a structure, a symmetrical whole. Othe^ 
wise the discourse is felt to be incomplete and fragmentary. 

A well-constructed text-sermon of this kind has most of the 
advantages possessed by subject-sermons, and the great addi- 
tional advantage that it is much more intimately in contact 
with the text, drawing from it not only the subject treated but 
all the leading thoughts of the treatment. This me4iio4, 
AOGOrdiu^y, is very largely adopted. It gives ample oppor- 
tunity for variety, freshness, originality. " A tact is needed in 
the preacher, to discover the hidden skeleton. This tact will 
be acquired gradually and surely, by every one who carefully 
<»ultiv84;es himself in all homiletic respects. Like all nice 
discernment, it comes imperceptibly in the course of training and 
discipline, and therefore no singular and particular rule for its 
acquisition can be laid down. It must be acquired, howev^, 
or the ftmdamental talent for textual sermonising will be want- 
ing. Moreover, this tact should be judicious. It is possible to 
find more meaning in a text than it really contains. .... 
This talent for detecting the significance of Scripture, must be 
confined to the gist of it — ^to the evident and complete sub- 
stance of it."* The German preachers, who have to preach 
many times in successive years upon the same passage, often 
'show great ingenuity in striking out new plans for the sao^ 
text, plans which shall make a complete section of the whole 
passage, but in a new direction. " Take, for example, the his- 
tory of Peter's denial. I can set out either from the fact of 
the denial itself, considering it as to its causes, its consequences, 
etc. ; or from the danger into which one gets who warms him- 
self with the world ; or from the thought that in this world 
everything helps when a disciple is to be brought to fall ; or 

* Shedd, p. 152. 



224 DIFFERENT 8PE0IES OF SERMONS. 

from the repentance of Peter, which presupposes as well love, 
as weakness of love ; or I can set forth the power of the love 
of Jesus in his look at Peter, (a) how it humbles him, better 
than law and penalty could do, (b) how it makes a new man of 
him. In all five sermons the whole of the text would have 
place, but every time in a diflferent light."* " One of our 
Lord's miracles of healing may be considered either from the 
point of view of the Divine grace glorifying itself in this his- 
tory, in which case Christ's mode of action is made to illustrate 
that of Grod (for example, he delays, indeed, with his help, but 
at last he does help) ; or the history may be chiefly considered 
from the ethical stand-point, and then Christ is the example 
according to which we are to act in similar cases ; or finally, we 
consider the conduct of the persons themselves on whom the 
healing is performed, who are set before us as an example ot 
faith (for example, the centurion of Capemaum).t Among 
English preachers, Melvill is famous for the ingenuity with 
which he develops a rich meaning from passages which to most 
persons would suggest nothing. 

Here, as in the case of subject-sermons, we hear sometimes 
merely a series of "observations" or "remarks" upon the sub- 
ject, which could hardly be called divisions of it. The following 
example is from Beddome : Acts ix. 4, " Saul, Saul, why perse- 
cutest thou me ]" 1. It is the general character of unconverted 
men to be of a persecuting spirit. 2. Christ has his eye upon perse- 
cutors. 3. The injury done to Christ's people, Christ considers 
as done to himself, 4, The calls of Christ are particular, f 
The fourth might be omitted. Such remarks suggested by the 
text would seem a more satisfactory treatment than topical 
remarks, but one should not very often allow himself to con- 
struct sermons in so loose a fashion. 

The preacher must exercise his judgment with reference to 
every particular discourse, as to whether it is better to make a 
textual division of the subject, or to treat the subject inde- 
pendently, according to its own nature.§ 

♦ Palmer, Horn. s. 378. 

f Hagenbach, s. 120. Comp. the plans of Erummaoher, in his David, and 
the sermons on the Temptation of Christ by Erummacher and by Monod, in 
Fish's " Select Discourses from the French and German." 

J Quoted by Shedd, p. 150. 

§ Some preachers, for example South, are very fond of sermons which diaw 
some divisions directly from the text, but others from the nature of the sub- 
ject. This might seem an incongruous mixture, but is often well-managed 
MBd effective. 



DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 225 

2. In other text-serraons, there is not one definite and com- 
prehensive subject, but several topics presented by the text are 
successively treated. These, though they do not admit of 
being combined into one, ought to have such a mutual relation 
as to give the discourse unity. The same sentence of Scripture 
might suggest several entirely distinct topics, and a sermon 
upon these would be really several sermons in succession. A 
discourse that has not unity, both oflFends taste and lacks 
power — in fact, is not a discourse at alL The unity, however, 
may be that of subject or of person or of place, provided in 
the latter cases there be also some internal connection, so that 
all may blend in the general effect of the discourse. Thus 
topics apparently so diverse as suicide, ingratitude, avarice and 
remorse, might all be treated in a sermon upon Judas, because 
they not only pertain to the one person, but were in his case 
intimately connected, as will be apparent from stating them in 
a different order, avarice, ingratitude, remorse, suicide. After 
pointing out that in him they were thus connected, one might 
even treat of them in some other order, if oratorically more 
convenient, and the topics, though separate, would at least 
seem tied together into a kind of unity. Such an example shows 
that it is allowable to go quite far in this direction ; but as a 
rule, we ought to have as close an internal relation among the 
topics of the discourse as possible. It is the great fault of this 
variety of text-sermons that they are apt to be desultory and 
rambling, to resemble the scattering fire of irregular soldiers, 
rather than the systematic and concentrated discharge of a 
disciplined body. We avoid this fault by refusing to include 
in the sermon any topic suggested by the text which will not 
take its place in a connected series, though the topic in itself 
might be interesting and instructive. 

In both these varieties, especially in the second, the divisions 
may sometimes be stated in the very words of the text. Thus, 
The young convert commended to God, Jude 24. 1. That is 
able to keep you from falling; 2. And to present you, (1) 
faultless, (2) before the presence of his glory, (3) with exceeding 
joy. Gal. V. 6, What it is that in Christ Jesus avails, 1. Neither 
circumcision nor uncircumcision. 2. But (1) faith, (2) which 
worketh, (3) by love. The order of the clause may be 
varied, if deemed oratorically more suitable. Luke xxiv. 43. 
1. Thou shalt be in Paradise, 2. Thou shalt be with vm 
in Paradise. 3. To-day thou shalt be with me in Pa.r«r 

Q 



226 DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 

dise.* When one thus takes up the successive words or clauses 
of a text, and "enlarges" upon them, the process closely 
resembles musical " variations " upon a familiar tune, pos- 
sessing similar advantages, and being liable to the same faults. 
It is often so managed as to be wearisome, what Schleiermacher 
<;alled spelling the text ; sometimes it is offensive, as when 
a passage is so dissected as to destroy the very life of it. But 
when the text is happily chosen, and the treatment, while 
natural, is fresh, instructive and animated, with a manifest 
connection in the topics, and a sustained oratorical progress 
to the end, such a sermon may be highly eflFective. The people 
love to have their minds kept in cluse contact with the text, 
if it is done in an interesting and impressive way. 

Or the divisions may be stated in diflFerent terms, though 
following the order of the text ; or both in different terms 
and in a diflFerent order, if this would give a more oratorical 
arrangement The statement must commonly be thus varied, 
in text-sermons upon a single definite subject ; and much 
will depend upon the skill with which the divisions are drawn 
from the text and enunciated. Ezekiel xi. 19, 20, "And I 
will give them one heart," etc. Ge?iuine Rdigion, developed 
in four particulars. I. Its author. II. The disposition it pro- 
duces. III. The obedience it demands. IV. The blessedness it 
insures, t Psalm Ixxiii. 24, 26. God is the pious marHs all in aU. 
I. His guide through life. II. His support in death. III. His 
portion for ever. Sometimes very little departure from the 
words of the text is necessary. Romans ^. 1, 2. The believer' s 
happy state, I. He has peace with God. II. He stands 
(i. e. stands fast) in the grace of God. III. He exults in 
hope of the glory of God. 

It often happens that the thoughts of a text, can be very 
thoroughly and neatly drawn out by a series of questions, 
the answers to these forming the divisions of the sermon. 
Examples of this are familiar. 

In treating the details of a text-sermon, it is not necessary 
to confine ourselves strictly to views presented by the text. 

* The plan often pursued with the words, " Why will yo die ? " viz. t« 
emphasize each ivord in successioi:, is forbidden by the fact that in the original 
neither "will'' nor "ye "is separately ezpresBed, so that they cannot be takes 
as in any sense emphatic. 

f Jay, quoted by Kidder, p. 206. Jay is particularly fond of this species of 
Mormons, and often felicitous in his plans. 



DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 227 

Any one of the topics may be developed and applied according 
to its own nature', or according to the specific design of the 
sermon. Yet it is always pleasing, when eflFected without 
artificiality, to see all the lines of development kept within 
the limits of the text. 

3. Expository Sermons. 

The name of this species of sermons is derived from a 
peculiarity in their materials, viz. the fact that they are mainly 
occupied with exposition. But their homiletical peculiarities 
belong to the matter of construction, to that oratorical arrange- 
ment and adaptation which should distinguish an expository 
sermon from a commentary or an exegetical essay. The present, 
therefore, seems to be the appropriate place for discussing this 
important variety of sermons.* 

Almost every preacher one meets, if asked whether he often 
makes expository discourses, will answer, " No ; I have long 
believed there ought to be more preaching of that kind, but 
the attempts I formerly made in that direction were un- 
successful, and it seems I have no talent for it." But how 
few have ever fairly tried to develop such a talent. Men labour 
for years to acquire the power of producing a good topical 
sermon. All their rhetorical training, and all their practice, is 
directed to thUt end. Then they try the experiment of exposi- 
tory preaching, which requires a diflFerent kind of practice, and 
perhaps even a different method of studying the Scriptures, 
and wonder that their first attempts prove a comparative 
failure. This is as unreasonable as the course of those who, 
after training themselves to read sermons, make a timid and 
ill-prepared effort to preach without writing, and infer from 
the almost inevitable failure that they have no talent for 
extemporizing. 

I. It is not thought necessary to discuss at any length the 
advantages and disadvantages of expository preaching. The 
former are to some extent obvious and generally recognized, 
and they have been admirably presented by Alexander, in 

* This discussion is in the main identical with an article in .the Baptist 
Quarterly for Jan. 1869. It may be allowed to embrace the opportunity for 
remarking, that every minister ought to take at least one religious Quarterly, 
and if but one, of course that of his own denomination. To read regularly for 
several years the fresh, vigorous and instructive articles of such a Review as 
that mentioned, will greatly aid the minister in getting into the current of 
contemporary thought, and in the meantime will supply not a little ot ^qk;^ 
material for preaching. 



228 DIFFERENT 8PE0IES OF SERMONS. 

his Thoughts on Preaching.* As stated by him, they are as 
follows : 

(1.) This method better corresponds with the very idea and 
design of preaching. (2.) It is the primitive and ancient 
method. (3.) It insures a better knowledge of the Scriptures, 
on the part of preacher and hearers — and of the Scriptures in 
their connection. (4.) It causes sermons to contain more of 
pure Scripture truths, and scriptural modes of viewing things. 
(5.) It gives occasion for remarking on many passages of the 
Bible which otherwise might never enter into one's sermons ; 
and for giving important practical hints and admonitions which 
might seem to some hearers offensively personal if introduced 
into a topical discussion, but which are here naturally suggested 
by passage in hand. (6.) And it greatly diminishes the 
temptation to misinterpret texts by excessive allegorizing, by 
" accomodation,'' etc. ; for men are often driven into such 
misinterpretation by the difficulty of finding for every sermon 
a short passage which will legitimately afford the requisite 
amount of materials, t 

It might be more desirable to discuss the objections to this 
method, for these often appear more serious than they really 
are. There is, in many quarters, a popular prejudice against 
expository preaching, arising from the fact that it is so often 
badly managed, and from the notion that it is a labour-saving 
contrivance. On rainy Sundays, or on week- nights, the 
preacher who has no sermon prepared, or wishes to save his 
elaborate preparation for a more auspicious occasion, will 
firequently undertake to " read a passage of Scripture, and 
make a few remarks ; " feeling that this enterprise is attended 
by no risk, because, as some quaint old preacher expressed it, 
if he is, "persecuted in one verse, he can fly to another.*' 
Hence the people rather naturally conclude that whenever one 
takes a long text, it is an expedient to dispense with labour. 
Besides this prejudice against the method, which a judicious 
and laborious preacher can soon overcome, it has inherent 
disadvantages. Our people, it is to be regretted, seldom follow 
that excellent Scottish fashion, of keeping a Bible in hand 
during the sermon ; and so they find it hard to remember 
the general drift and connection of the long text, as they are 

♦ Page 272-313. 

t On the advantages of expository preaching, compare Wayland, Ministry 
of the Gospel, p. 83-86. 



DIFFEBENT SFEOIBS OF SEBMONS. 229 

accustomed to do with a short one. This difl&culty one must bear 
in mind, seeking to overcome it as far as possible. Some 
persons, too, in our extremely restless age, object to contimwus 
exposition on the ground that it lacks variety ; they grow tired 
of hearing the preacher, Sunday after Sunday, announce the 
same book and perhaps the same chapter. Others really care 
so little about the Bible that they take no interest in explana- 
tions of it ; they wish the preacher to make his text merely a 
point of departure, and to give them "something fresh." 
Others object that the expository sermon cannot present those 
connected arguments in which the human mind so greatly 
delights ; but it may trace and unfold the argument of an 
inspired writer, which ought to be more interesting than one 
constructed by the preacher himself. If it be still further 
objected that a discourse which is mainly or largely occupied 
with explanation of the text, can leave but little room for 
application, we may answer that the impressiveness of an 
application depends very largely upon the interest which the 
hearers have been previously brought to feel in the subject 
applied ; and that a brief, and even unexpected application or 
appeal is often more impressive than one which gives notice, 
and throws men on the defensive. . 

Shedd takes the ground * that " there is somewhat less call 
for expository preaching than there was before the establish- 
ment of Sabbath schools and Bible classes." He adds, however, 
that " it is the duty of the preacher, occasionally, to lay out 
his best strength in the production of an elaborate expository 
sermon, which shall not only do the ordinary work of a sermon, 
which shall not only instruct, awaken, and move, but which 
shall also serve as a sort of guide and model for the teacher of 
the Sabbath school and the Bible class." But it is worthy of 
inquiry whether the Sunday-school teaching does not actually 
prepare people to receive expository preaching with higher 
appreciation and profit. The great difl&culty in the way of 
making it eflFective is not knowledge of Scripture but ignorance 
of it. One sometimes fancies he could point out, after 
preaching to a congregation of strangers, those who are en- 
gaged in the regular study of the Bible, from the greater 
interest with which they listened to any explanations of Scrip- 
ture that may have occurred in the sermon. Robert Hall 
found his regular Sunday morning expository sermon very 
acceptable at Cambridge ; but at Leicester he lamented to a 

♦ Horn. p. 157. 



230 DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 

friend that the congregation, being generally less intelligent, 
could not be brought to like this method, and he was annoyed 
at having to change his habit, and hunt up two separate texts 
for every Sunday. 

2. But the thing here specially proposed is to offer practical 
suggestions as to the proper management of expository preach- 
ing. It is in several respects a peculiar variety of discourse, 
requiring peculiar treatment ; and yet the treatises of Homi- 
letics, while never failing to urge that this method has great 
advantages, seldom furnish the student with any directions for 
his guidance in attempting it. The hints which follow are 
derived from some experience and observations, from conversa- 
tion with other ministers, and from the study of the best 
specimens within reach. 

An expository discourse may be defined as one which is 
occupied mainly, or at any rate very largely, with the ex- 
position of Scripture. It by no means excludes argument 
and exhortation as to the doctrines or lessons which this 
exposition develops. It may be devoted to a long passage, 
or to a very short one, even a part of a sentence. It may 
be one of a series, or may stand by itself We at once per- 
ceive that there is no broad line of division between expository 
preaching and the common methods, but that one may pass 
by almost insensible gradation from textual to expository 
sermons.* We see, too, that men often preach expository 
sermons which they would not call by that name. Moreover 
it is common to apply the term only to discourses upon 
the doctrinal, preceptive, and devotional portions of the Bible, 
and not to those which treat of the narrative portions. Now 
the methods of exposition appropriate to Scripture history 
are of course quite difiFerent from those applied to the other 
portions. But whenever the discourse is not merely a discussion 
of certain thoughts suggested by a Scripture story or scene, but 
in the first place spends much time in bringing out clearly and 
vividly the scene or story itself, that is real historical exposition. 
And this is surely a highly important class of expository dis- 
courses. A very large portion of the Bible consists of narrative, 
and in this as in other respects the Bible is adapted to its 
purpose ; for narrative possesses an unfailing interest, for 
old and young, cultivated and ignorant, converted and un- 
converted. But sermons on historical passages are very apt 

* Nearly all that as been said above, 2, upon text sermons, applies directly 
to expository preaching. See also 1, 2, pl&n. of discourse. 



DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 231 

to err, in one of two directions. In the one case the preacher 
makes haste to deduce from the narrative before him a sub- 
ject, or certain doctrines or lessons, and proceeds to discuss 
these precisely as if he had drawn them from some verse in 
Romans or the Psalms ; thus sinking the narrative, w^ith all 
its charm completely out of sight. In the other case, he 
indulges in a vast amount of the often ridiculous thing called 
** word-painting," overlaying the simple and beautiful Scripture 
story with his elaborate descriptions, and showing no desire, 
or having no time, to give us any glimpse of the lessons which 
the narrative teaches. There is certainly a middle course. 
Without consuming time in exhibiting any overwrought 
pictures of his own, the preacher may seek to throw light on 
the Bible picture, so as to make us see it plainly and vividly, 
and may either indicate the lessons as he advances from point 
to point or group them in the latter part of his discussion. 
What we insist on is, that there ought to be such a method of 
preaching the narrative portion of the Scripture as should be 
distinctively appropriate to narrative, while yet it is preaching.* 
(1). What now is the prime requisite to the eflFectiveness of 
an expository sermon] Our answer must be, unity. Unity 
in a discourse is necessary to instruction, to conviction, and 
to persuasion. Without it, the taste of enlightened hearers 
cannot be satisfied, and even the uncultivated, though they 
may not know why, will be far less deeply impressed. But 
unity in an expository discourse is by many preachers never 
aimed at. They conceive of it as a mere series of disjointed 
remarks upon the successive verses. It was to this kind of 
*' homilies" that Schleiermacher referred, when he said that 
they are composed of little sermons of the common form 
tacked together. t But it is not at all necessary that an ex- 
pository sermon should exhibit this fault. " The difficulty as 
to unity, presented by this kind of discourse, never amounts 
to impossibility. We do not at random cut from the general 
text of the sacred book, the particular text of a homily. The 
selection is not arbitrary. The limit of the text is predeter- 
mined by reference to unity, which, therefore, we shall be at 
no loss to discover in it.''f In making a single, detached 

* Ck>mp. ou historical subjects, Part I, chap, iii, 3, and on description Part I, 
ehap. V, 1. 

+ Palmer, Horn. s. 380. 

t Vinet, p. 148 ; conip. Shedd, p. 153. 



232 DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SBBMC^S. 

expository discourse, one can easily see to it that the passage 
selected shall have unity. In continuous exposition of the 
same book, it may sometimes be necessary to take a passage 
in which this is not the CEise ; but even then, we may gather 
from it such thoughts as can be framed into one plan, and 
pass over the remainder, or notice them very briefly. Let 
there be unity at whatever cost. And not only this, but 
structure. Thanks to the influence of the schoolmen, the 
modem mind greatly delights in analysis, and in the regular 
construction of the materials which analysis has furnished, 
and hence the great preference of many for topical discourses. 
The homilies left us by the fathers are frequently very defi- 
cient in respect of orderly structure, and sometimes even 
destitute of uuity. And some persons appear to imagine that 
we can have no " homilies" except upon the model of the 
fathers, and with a total disregard of modern taste and modes 
of thought. But a discourse upon an extended passage of 
Scripture w-ell chosen and well handled, may have a definite 
topic, and a distinct and orderly plan, and yet not fail to be 
an expository discourse, dealing largely in explanation of the 
text. Let us carefully observe, then, that an expository 
sermon may 'have, and must have, both unity and an orderly 
structure ; for the frequent practical neglect of these requisites 
is one principal cause of those failures to which allusion was 
. made at the outset. 

(2.) When an inexperienced preacher begins to think of 
attempting expository preaching, his mind is very apt to turn 
at once toward the idea of continuous exposition. He must 
get up a series.* But why should not the. preacher first dis- 
cipline himself in this kind of preaching, and accustom his 
congregation to it, by the exposition, every now and then, of 
detached passages ? It will be time enough for a series when 
he has gained a little more practice, yea, and has made re- 
peated and very mature study of the book to be handled. 
And let it be urged that first attempts shall not be made 
upon a Psalm, as is very. generally the case ; for which occa- 
sional exceptions, the Psalms are comparatively lacking in 
manifest unity, and in distinct connection and regular progress, 
so that it requires practice to handle them successfully. It 
will also sometimes be well to take an extended passage and 

* The author has recollections, more vivid than pleasing, of a first 
attempt, which consisted in a series upon Colossians, and which was declared 
by a preacher's best adviser to have been on the whole a decided failure. 



DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 233 

merely make a text-sermon on a long text, gathering several 
thoughts from it and handling them as in the ordinary tAct- 
seiinon upon a short text. Or a brief text may be announced, 
and the sermon be occupied with a discussion of the entire 
paragraph in which it stands. This indeed is often done by 
men who have no thought that they are preaching expository 
sermons. By such means the people cease to imagine that 
expository preaching is entirely different from other methods, 
and become accustomed and attached to all alike. Then, 
whenever a series is attempted, there will be little feeling of 
strangeness about it, and much less difiBculty in sustaining 
the interest. 

(3.) We turn now to the case of continuous exposition. 
Here, as has been intimated, the first thing to be done is to 
make a careful study beforehand of the entire book, or other 
portion of Scripture to which the series is to be devoted. To 
view every book as a whole, to grasp its entire contents, and 
then trace in detail the progress of its narrative or argument, 
is a method of Scripture study far too little practised. It is 
one of the benefits of expository preaching that it compels the 
preacher to study in this way. We may say in general, that 
no man will succeed in expository preaching unless he delights 
in exegetical study of the Bible, unless he loves to search out 
the exact meaning of its sentences, phrases, words. In order 
to this, a knowledge of the original languages of Scripture is 
, of course exceedingly desirable, but it is by no means indis- 
pensable. Andrew Fuller, who dealt largely and successfully 
in this method of preaching, had substantially no knowledge 
of Hebrew and Greek, and his writings were devoted not to 
commentary, but to didactic and polemic theology. Yet he 
loved to study the very words of Scripture. In all his works 
it is manifest that he did not content himself with gathering 
the generar meaning of a passage, but was exceedingly anxious 
to know its exact meaning. One of the most eloquent Baptist 
ministers of America, who died twenty years agOj was never 
so happy, so charming, as in expository sermons. He too 
was unacquainted with Greek and Hebrew, and was not liber- 
ally suppHed with commentaries ; but he loved, above all 
things, to ponder and to talk about the meaning of God's 
word. There appears to have been a change in this respect 
which is to be lamented. We have a great multiplication of 
commentaries, and an immense amount of more or less real 
study of the Scriptures in Sunday schools, we have many 



234 DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 

more ministers than formerly who know something of th* 
original languages, bat there is reason to fear that the close, 
thoughtful, lovingly patient study of the Bible is less common 
among the ministry now than it once was. As to conver- 
sation about the meaning of this or that passage, such as 
once abounded when preachers were thrown together, it has 
gone out of fashion. A man who should raise such a question 
now among a group of ministers, sojourning together during 
the session of some association or convention, would be almost 
stared at. It will not do to say that we manage these ques- 
tions better at home among our books. He who most zealously 
uses his books, at the same time thinking for himself as every 
man that is a man will do, finds the largest number of points 
arising, upon which the books utterly disagree or are unsatis- 
factory, and concerning which he would like to compare views 
with intelligent brethren. But not to dwell further upon this 
opinion, it is proper earnestly to insist that one great reason 
why many ministers find expository preaching difficult is, that 
they have not been sufficiently accustomed to study the Bible. 
Our rapid general reading is very useful, our devotional read- 
ing of brief portions is indispensable to personal piety, but 
the downright study of Scripture is too often confined to the 
texts for next Suaday, and their immediate context. The fii^gt 
thing to do, then, after determining to give a series of exposi- 
tory sermons upon a book, or other portion of Scripture, is to 
study it all over in advance, with some of the best exptanatory- 
commentaries, and with especial attention to the general con- 
tents and connection. To commit the book to memory would 
be no bad idea, but at any rate one should get the whole train 
of thought or series of facts, from beginning to end, firmly 
fixed in his mind. 

Next, it would be well to mark out a scheme of sermons 
covering the whole ground. Previous experience in the ex- 
position of detached passages will enable one to do this with- 
out any great difficulty, and of course there can be alterations, 
if occasion for them should arise in the progress of the series. 
The great advantage of making out the scheme in advance is, 
that we can thus distribute most judiciously the several topics 
of the book. In Romans, for example, various subjects are 
alluded to in the first three chapters, which are afterwards 
treated at some length. It would be awkward if one should 
go into any general discussion of these topics at the point rf 
their £rst occurrence. They ought to be briefly handled there, 



DIFFERENT 8FE0IES OF SERMONS. 235 

and reserved for more extensive remark where they are intro- 
duced again. It would very rarely be advisable, however, to 
promise at the outset a definite number of discourses. In- 
deed, it is not always best to announce a series at all. It 
may be added that one must beware of goiug too slowly. 
Let there be manifest progress, such as the restless spirit of 
our generation requires. But we may pause upon any specially 
interesting sentence or phrase, even to the extent, in some 
cases, of devoting a whole sermon to it. Thus there will be 
variety as well as progress; and hearers will be gratified to 
perceive that the preacher marks out passages, not according 
to their mere external dimensions, but according to the rich- 
ness of their available contents. 

(4.) But now the particular discourse is to be constructed. 
The passage before us has unity, and we note the heads which 
it presents, as we should do in a textual sermon. Thus we 
shall have a structure, a discourse, and not a scattering talk. 
But one of the principal difficulties in the entire task now 
presents itself, the proper handling of the details. If we sim- 
ply take the topic and the heads which the passage aflFords, 
and proceed to discuss them in our own way, that is not an 
expository sermon but a text-sermon. The exposition of some 
passages, particularly in the hands of some men, will con- 
stantly tend towards this form, and often with advantage. 
But what we are supposed to be aiming at, is a strictly ex- 
pository sermon, in which not only the leading ideas of the 
passage are brought out, but its details are suitably explained, 
and made to furnish the chief material of the discourse. In 
order to manage this, we need to study the details thoroughly, 
80 as to master them, instead of being oppressed by them. 
We thus, too, enter more fully into the spirit of the passage, 
as the musician must who makes variations on a theme. Then 
we must select and group. Here the inexperienced preacher 
often errs. Having minutely studied the details of the passage, 
and become interested in them, he desires to remark upon a 
greater number of points than the limits of his discourse will 
allow. Thus it becomes so crowded that the hearer follows 
with annoying difficulty, and none of the numerous points 
presented have time to impress themselves upon his mind. 
It is indispensable to select. Of course one will aim to choose 
such details as especially require explanation, and such as will 
at the same time yield important or interesting matter. Oft^xi. 
points of no great intrinsic importance, aW^^ \x^\\.^ m "Oaa 



236 DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SEBMONS. 

narrative, or minor links in the argument, will add greatly to 
the vivacity and vigour of the discourse. Every one knows 
that in oratorical description we must seek the kind of excel- 
lence which is seen in certain descriptions by Demosthenes and 
Tacitus, or in Retzsch's Outlines — a few lines and touches, 
but those few eminently suggestive and stimulating to the 
imagination. Is there not something similar in the oratorical 
exposition of an argument 1 Must we not labour, besides 
exhibiting the outlines, the prominent thoughts of our passage, 
to choose out tho^e details which will cause the whole argu- 
ment to stand forth in its completeness ? Remember, we are 
not preparing a commentary, nor a dogmatic treatise, but an 
expository sermon, and the whole treatment must be, in the 
good sense of that word, oratorical. In this respect, as in 
everything else pertaining to the art of discourse, practical 
effort, controlled by just principles, will not fail to bring 
skill. 

A mistake sometimes made consists in the unduly multiplied 
and extended quotation of parallel passages. Thus the details 
of the text, too numerous themselves perhaps for oratorical 
purposes, are each surrounded by a mass of other passages, and 
the discourse is so loaded down as to be past endurance. The 
Lectures of M'Ghee on Ephesians, which are in some respects 
good, err in this direction very sadly. It is a fault sometimes 
observed in other than expository sermons, though in these the 
temptation to it is particularly great. It is so easy for a 
preacher to persuade himself that he is putting honour upon 
Scripture, by quoting thus largely, when sometimes he is only 
putting honour upon his own indolence.* Of course, judidoua 
quotation from other parts of Scripture is highly appropriate 
and often exceedingly valuable, and we. need not sympathise 
with the fastidiousness of Foster, any more than with the 
' opposite extreme 

There is also danger of error as to the treatment of difficvU 
passa^ges occurring in the text. The preacher will, of course, 
study these with great care, for he cannot afford, as regards his 
personal habits, to slide over difficulties. But having thus 
become much interested in this difficult portion of his text, 
having become familiar with the different views which have 
been suggested, and the arguments for one view and against 
another, he very naturally feels disposed to use the matter so 
laboriously wrought out, to discuss the question which appears 

* The practice is well satirised by Coquerel, p. 69. 



DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 237 

80 interesting. In this way many an expository sermon has 
been ruined. True, wherever the preacher is really able to 
clear up the difficulty, and to do this by a comparatively brief 
and evidently satisfactory explanation, people will be glad to 
hear it. If he can show that the passage, as thus explained, 
presents some interesting and valuable truth, they will be 
delighted. If it is a passage which has been made prominent 
in religious controversies, or has, on any account attracted 
extraordinary attention, they might even like to hear some- 
thing of the process by which this satisfactory explanation has 
been reached. But such cases are comparatively rare ; and in 
general, men grow weary of a long discussion of some quaestio 
vexatissima or locus difftcillirmLa, If the preacher, by long 
study and a b^ef statement of the results, can throw any light 
on such a passage, very well ; but the long study is his affair, 
not theirs. This is only one of many directions in which 
preachers are apt to err, in thinking the people will be interested 
by everything that interests them. And then, where the result 
of his researches is not satisfactory, where he does not feel that 
he can make the matter plain, let the preacher merely notice 
that there is a difficulty here, and pass on to speak of truths 
which the passage certainly does teach, to handle what he is 
confident he understands.* It is a complaint often made 
against the commentaries, that they say much about the easy 
places, and little about the hard ones. Now where the book is 
designed, not so much for explanation as for comment, in the 
strict sense of that term — and this is the case with most of the 
older works — it is obviously proper for the writer to spend his 
time in developing and applying the teachings of those pas- 
sages which he understands. He has no right to develop and 
apply what he is not confident is the true meaning. Quite 
similar is the case of the expository preacher. To state at 
great length several different views as to the meaning of a 
passage, without being able to show cause why any one of 
them should be accepted or preferred, and then leave the 
matter in that unsatisfactory position is tiresome in a book, and 
m a sermon intolerable. 

* A. celebrated Professor of Greek in one of our American Universities had 
a youthful assistant, who was one day unexpectedly called on to meet a class, 
without having read over the lesson. When asked afterwards how he got 
through, he said, " I just talked about what I understood, and let alone what 
I didu^t." ** Pretty good plan," said the old gentleman ; " I suspect you had 
better continue to do that as long as you live." 



238 DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SEBMOHS. 

In the progress of an expository discourse, it is often desi- 
rable to keep the connection of tJte text before the minds of 
the audience, by somewhat frequently glancing back, as we 
proceed, upon the ground already traversed. Chrysostom sets 
us the example of managing this with skill. He also fraquently 
throws in some lively question as to what comes next, calcu- 
lated to arouse the hearers, and make them notice it when 
stated. Our audiences, like his, do not commonly have the 
sacred text before them, and we must strive to supply the 
deficiency. By making the leading thoughts of the text quite 
distinct, by skilfully selecting and grouping the details, and 
by glancing backward and pointing forward as we proceed, 
this serious practical difficulty can be to a great extent over- 
come. • 

Much pains should be taken to point out and apply the 
lessons which the text may afford. The people need, and 
desire, to have these distinctly stated, unless the application 
is exceedingly obvious. It will somewhat frequently be more 
convenient, particularly in historical exposition, to apply each 
division of the discourse as it is presented. But in many 
cases we can do as is common in other sermons, reserve the 
chief practical lessons for the conclusion. Of course such 
lessons must, in general, be briefly indicated, as so much time 
is needed for exposition. But where there is a subject of 
special practical importance, it may be discussed and urged at 
length, even if some portions of the text have to be left un- 
explained. And if current events, or the religious condition 
of the congregation, should make it particularly desirable to 
discuss some practical topic which the text does not naturally 
suggest, it may be introduced in the way of remark, or of 
remote application of some general truth or duty. Here 
again, Chrysostom presents us an example. Much as he 
delighted in explaining Scripture, he yet felt that, in preach- 
ing, the practical interest is paramount ; and he not only 
points out many lessons by the way, but is almost sure to 
find some practical subject for the conclusion, and this is not 
unfrequently treated at great length. Nor does he trouble 
himself much as to the association cf ideas by which he shall 
reach any such important practical matter, but often uses a 
freedom which critics with strict notions of what we call 
" sermonizing '* would be likely to condemn. In his sermon 
on the Transfiguration, for example, he wants to bear down 
on the money-lenders there at Antioch, and reaches them as 



DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 



239 



follows : The three disciples were happy in seeing Christ's 
glory on the mount — we may hope to behold him in a more 
splendid glory — but if we wish to do so we must take heed 
what manner of lives we are leading — we must not do this and 
that, must not oppress the poor — and so he comes to the 
matter of charging enormous interest, which is then discussed 
for some time, with vehement denunciation and entreaty. By 
a still more roundabout process he passes from the feeding of 
the five thousand to an earnest attack upon the elaborately em- 
broidered and curiously fashioned sandals which were then the 
rage. And he can frequently return to the same subject, if it 
seems to require renewed censure or exhortation, managing to 
bring it in somehow. In one long series of discourses he rarely 
fails to inveigh against profanity; and his favourite topic of 
alms-giving may be expected to recur almost anywhere, upon 
the slightest provocation. Now in all this his example is not 
faultless, certainly, but it is extremely instructive. We have 
seen that there is to be desired a much greater unity, and much 
more of orderly structure and regular process than is exhibited 
in Chrysostom's homilies. But the strictest notions in this 
direction must not prevent us from frequently and freely intro- 
ducing matters of practical interest. In this way the people 
will be led to listen much more attentively to our explanations, 
being constantly on the look out for some practical application 
to themselves ; and they will also be constantly reminded of 
what men are so prone to forget, the intimate relation between 
Scripture truth aud daily lifu.* Pastors sometimes shrink 

* " Expository preaching should aim at direct moral effect. A cold and 
formal delineation of the course of thought in a portion of the sacred 
writings, a heartless dissection of its words and phrases without the glow, and 
feeling, and high religious sensibility of the inspired penman, without ardent 
love for the souls of men and an earnest desire to bring them to a knowledge 
of the truth, can answer none of the purposes of expository preaching. It ii 
holding up a cold and mangled corj^ ^^ instead of the warm and living body. 
Expository preaching should be re&rulated by a knowledge of the depths of 
human nature, and should touch the secret springs of the human soul. The 
Bible itself is remarkable fur these characteristics, and it is the greatest of 
mistakes to imagine that the Bible can be interpreted by a knowledge of 
words alone. No book has ever gone so deeply into all the windings and 
corners of the soul and touched so many of the vibrating chords of the heart. 
To think of spreading out the hidden glories of inspiration by the mere study 
of languages without the study of man, is like attempting to bring music from 
tte organ by blowing the bellows without touching the keys. It is the lament- 
able mistake so frequently made on this point, that has often brought exposi- 
tory preaching into disrepute and disuse." Prof. C. E. Stowe, Art. in Bibli- 
cal Bepos., vol. v., p. 888. 



240 DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 

from undertaking a series of expository discourses, from the 
fear that they will not be able to adapt themselves to the pre- 
cise condition and wants, week after week, of their people ; but 
if the suggestions just made be acted upon, there will in this 
respect be no difficulty. Besides, where one preaches twice 
every Sunday, according to the common if not commendable 
fashion of the present day, he may of course have one sermon 
free for as much variety of specific adaptation as he pleases. 

(5.) One who wishes to cultivate himself as an expository 
preacher, will of course be disposed to search the literatui'c of 
the pulpit for good examples of that species of sermons. It 
may therefore be worth while to mention some specimens 
which it would be instructive to study, selecting such as are 
easily accessible. 

First, a few good expository sermons on detached passages. 
Monod on the " Woman of Cannan" (Fish's " Select Discourses 
from the French and German"), is good. Dr. J. Addison Alexan- 
der on Titus ii. 11-15 (Sermons vol. I.) is an admirable specimen 
of doctrinal and practical exposition. Dr. R. Fuller's dis- 
courses on the " Walk to Emmaus," and on the " Three Hebrews 
in the Furnace" (Sermons), are very fine. Dr. Wayland's 
"Day in the life of Jesus of Nazareth," and "Fall of Peter" 
(Sermons on Salvation by Christ), are of remarkable excellence. 
Spurgeon on the " Blind Beggar" (Sermons, voL VI), is more 
distinctly expository than is common in his sermons. 

Passing to specimens of continuous or connected exposition, 
we mention the following as chiefly historical. Krummacher's 
" Elijah the Tishbite" is hardly equalled by any of his later 
volumes, except his "David." The "Friends of Christ," by 
Dr. N. Adams, is a capital volume, Blunt's " Lectures on the 
history of our Saviour" form a good example for most of us, 
because they are interesting and profitable, while not exhibiting . 
remarkable abilities. Monod's " Five Sermons on the Apostle 
Paul" ought by all means to be studied. More distinctly ex- 
pository than these, and among the most instructive and 
charming specimens of their class in our recent literature, 
are Hanna's six small volumes of Lectures on the life of Christ 
(republished in this country). 

And the following are chiefly doctrinal or preceptive. Chal- 
mers on Romans is eminently worthy of study, and is most 
instructive to those who are best acquainted with his other 
sermons, and his peculiar cast of mind. Leighton on 1 Peter 
is famous, and of a beautiful spirit. Luther on Gralatians is 



DIFFERENT SPECIES OF SERMONS. 241 

highly intereoting and instructive, and is perhaps the best 
specimen remaining of those powerful expository sermons by 
which he wrought so great a work. Cummiug's volumes, as 
on Revelation, on Daniel, on the Parables, etc., are, whatever 
one may think of tis peculiar opinions, excellent models of 
easy, agreeable, and attractive popular exposition. Some of 
the sermons of F. W. Robertson, as well as his volume on 
Corinthians, are admirable specimens of a certain kind of ex- 
position ; though one cannot be too careful, in reading any of 
his works, to guard against his grievous errors as to inspira- 
tion and atonement. Ryle's " Expository Thoughts on the 
Gospels" (several volumes), contain only the substance of 
sermons, not written out in full, but they are very useful for 
our purpose. The most instructive example, however, of ex- 
pository discourse, both doctrinal and historical, is the Homilies 
ot Chrysostom. While no man of sense would think of making 
discourses now precisely on the model of his, it is remarkable 
how much may be learned from them as to the skilful, spirited, 
and effective management of expository preaching. Those who 
have not access to, or cannot read his works in the original, 
would find it desirable to procure a translation, such as is 
contained in the Oxford Library of the Fathers. Profound 
students of his works consider the best of his Homilies to ba 
those on the Psalms and on Matthew. In the former there is 
necessarily much erroneous interpretation, since he knew no 
Hebrew, and had to rely on the Septuagint, which in the 
Psalms is full of errors. The volumes on Matthew are there- 
fore probably the most valuable for our purpose, and these 
can be obtained at no great cost. One who knows how much 
interest Andrew Fuller and Robert Hall took in expository 
preaching, would expect to find profitable examples in their 
works. But he would be disappointed. Fuller's published 
expositions on Genesis and on Revelation contain the substance 
of sermons, and comprise much judicious interpretation and 
sound thinking ; but they give us very little information as to 
the form of his discourses, and none at all as to his manage- 
ment of details. Still less to the purpose is the report of 
Hall's sermons on Philippians. The copious " Homiletical and 
Practical" notes in Lange's Commentaries may be found profit- 
able in expository preaching by those who take pains to use 
them wisely. 

Some of the works in this brief list might not be regarded 
as expository sermons, according to the common use of that 

B 



242 DIFFERED! T SPECIES OF SERMONS. 

phrase. But we are here claiming for it a wider range than is 
common, and have insisted that this method of preaching often 
approximates closely to the other methods. 

If the suggestions which have been offered are well founded, 
it will be obvious that expository preaching is a difficult task. 
It requires much close study of Scripture in general, and much 
special study of the particular passage to be treated. To make 
a discourse which shall be explanatory and yet truly oratorical, 
bearing a rich mass of details but not burdened with them, 
full of Scripture and abounding in practical applications, to 
bring even dull, uninformed and unspiritual minds into inte- 
rested and profitable contact with an extended portion of the 
Bible — of course this must be difficult. One cannot say then, 
as is often said, try expository preaching first on week-nights, 
till you and the people become accustomed to it. Nay, try it 
now and then for your principal sermon on Sunday, without 
mentioning that you are about to do anything unusual, and lay 
out your best strength upon an earnest effort to make it at 
once instructive, interesting, and impressive. Then you and 
the people will gradually become accustomed to expository 
preaching as it should be. After repeating, more or less fre- 
quently, such occasional efforts, you will know how to prepare 
for an expository series. He who begins it as an easy thing, 
will find expository preaching surpassingly difficult ; but 
he who manifestly takes hold of it as difficult, will find 
it grow easier and more pleasant, with every year of his 
experience. Not every man will find the expository method 
best suited to his mental endowments. But every one ought 
to acquire the power of employing it with skill and success. 
Then, though it be better for this or that man to preach for the 
most part in other ways, he may continue to introduce exposi- 
tory sermons now and then, and may also infuse a larger exposi- 
tory element into many of his textual and topical sermons. 
And it may be confidently asserted that many a one who now 
thinks this method of preaching unsuited to him, needs nothing 
but diligent study and practice, upon some such principles as 
have been indicated, to make his expository sermons very 
profitable to his hearers, and singularly delightful to himself 



PAKT III. 



STYLE. 



CHAPTER I. 

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE.* 

1. Nature and Importance of Style. 

We frequently say of a writer, that he wields a ready, an 
elegant, or a caustic pen. In like manner the stylus^ the 
pointed iron instrument with which the Romans wrote upon 
their tablets covered with wax, is often employed by Cicero to 
denote the manner of writing, the manner of expressing one's 
thoughts in writing, and at a later period was very naturally 
extended to speaking. In modern times the use has been 
still further extended, by analogy, to the fine arts, to dress, 
and a great variety of matters. A man's style, then, is his 
characteristic manner of expressing his thoughts, whether in 
writing or in speech. 

Every one has his own handwriting, if he writes at all 
easily and well. Any early imitation of a "copy" will soon 
be merged in his own individual style of writing, — as in this 
sense also we still call it. And so in the higher sense, every 
one has his own style. The most slavish imitation could not 
be perfect ; the man's own character will sometimes, in spite 
of him, modify his style. No writer on the subject fails to 

* Besides the general treatises on Rhetoric and Homiletics, on Compo- 
rition, on Grammar, and on the science of Language, the student will find 
valuable observations in the Essays on Style by De Quincey, Bulwer (Cax- 
toniana), and Herbert Spencer (Essays, New York, Appleton^, «l\v\ \t^ '^ewci 
Rogers on Sacred Eloquence (" Reason and Eaith, oodi oVJaax "^^aa.!^*-? 
originally in Edinburgh Review, October, 1840 



244 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STTLE. 

quote the saying of Buffon, "The style is the man." This 
saying Buffon himself curiously illustrated, for his style is 
marked by a stately and elaborate elegance, and it is stated 
that he could not write well unless he was in full dress. To 
the same effect Landor said, ** Language is a part of a man's 
character ;* and Lessing, " Every man should have his own 
style as he has his own nose."+ But here, as everywhere else, 
that which is most characteristic in a man may be disciplined 
and indefinitely improved, without losing individuality. 

It is not surprising that the term style, as figuratively 
denoting one's manner of expressing his thoughts, should be 
used in different cases with a very different extent of meanmg. 
It is sometimes taken to include arrangement, even that of 
an entire treatise or discourse ; and there can certainly be 
no absolute distinction made between the arrangement of 
sentences and paragraphs, and that of the discourse. Com- 
monly, however, the general arrangement is not included in 
the term. On the other hand, style is sometimes distinguished 
from diction, the latter then denoting one's vocabulary, the 
character of the words and particular phrases which he em- 
ploys, while the former would include everything else belong- 
ing to his mode of expressing thought. But it is best, 
according to the usual practice, to include diction as a part 
of style. 

Thus understood, style is obviously a matter of very great 
importance. A man's style cannot be separated from his 
modes of thought, from his whole mental character. The 
natural and common image by which we call it the dress of 
thought, is very apt to mislead ; for Rtyle, as Wordsworth 
forcibly says, is not the mere dress, it is the incarnation of 
thought. We know another's thoughts, only as thus revealed, 
thus incarnate. J Aristotle, it is true, speaks slightingly of 
style, as a subject recently introduced into treatises of 
rhetoric, which it is to some little extent necessary to consider 
in every system of instruction, though the proof is the main 
thing.§ His practice accords with this opinion, for his own 
style is not only careless and harsh, but often vexatiously 
obscure. And yet there were already in his language many 
noble specimens of style, in poetry, history, oratory, which 
have never been surpassed ; so true is it in Rhetoric that just 

* Hoppin, p. 230. t Haven's Rhet. p. 241. 

t See also Day, p. 213. ^ kna\.. Rb.et. Til. 1. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 245 

theory follows excellent practice.* It is only a few men 
whose matter is so surpassingly valuable as to be highly 
prized, like Aristotle's, notwithstanding great faults of style. 
The speakers and writers who have been widely and per- 
manently influential, have usually accomplished it by good 
thoughts, well expressed. Often, indeed, excellence of style 
has given works a wide and lasting popularity which had little 
other merit. Goldsmith's Histories still hold their place in 
many schools, because so charmingly written, though they 
are not only behind the age, but very poorly represented the 
historical attainments of their own age. The wide-spread, 
though short-lived popularity gained by Kenan's fanciful Life 
of Jesus, was due not merely to the sensational character of 
its contents, but very largely also to the extreme beauty of 
the style, particularly in the original French. When a student 
at a Jesuit College, Kenan paid great attention to the cultiva- 
tion of his style, and he has devoted himself mainly to the 
study of language and literature. In like manner science has 
in many cases gained a just appreciation only when recom- 
mended by a pleasing style. This was what BufFon did for 
Natural History. The popularity of Geology was immensely 
increased among the English-speaking peoples by Hugh Miller, 
through his marvellous powers of description and the general 
freshness and animation of his stj'le. And so now with 
Agassiz. Such facts go to show that style is not a thing of 
mere ornament. Style is the glitter and polish of the warrior's 
sword, but is also its keen edge. It can render mediocrity 
acceptable and even attractive, can make power more power- 
ful still. It can make error seductive, and truth may lie 
unnoticed for want of its aid. Shall religious teachers neglect 
so powerful a means of usefulness? True, Paul says, "My 
speech and my preaching were not with persuasive words of 
man's wisdom."t He refused to deal in the would-be philo- 
sophy and the sensational and meretricious rhetoric which 
were so popular in that rapidly-growing commercial city; 
but his style is a model of passionate energy, and rises, upon 
occasion, into an inartificial and exquisite beauty. J. 

* Cicero says (Orator, 16) that " when one has found oat what to say 
and in what order, there still remains &// far tice yrecUest thing , viz., how to 
say it ;'' but in this he includes style and delivery. 

^ 1 Cor. ii. i. 

X Witness in this same Epistle, cha^. x\\\. avsA. <^«u^. "x^?. 



246 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STTLE. 

Yet style is in this country much neglected. The French 
surpass all other modern nations, in respect of perspicuity, 
elegance, and animation, if not energy. The cultivated 
English come next to them in finish of style, and surpass 
them in power. The English University training, with all 
its defects, has in this respect produced noble results, as may 
be seen not only in the great Parliamentary orators and the 
admirable newspaper writing which England boasts, but also 
in preachers. The famous Oxford Tracts would not have been 
so influential but for their admirable style. The sermons of 
J. H. Newman, Robertson, Liddon, and Bishop . Wilberforce 
are in this respect greatly to be admired. And the England 
of this century has credit for Robert Hall. The style of 
German prose, with a few grand exceptions,* has generally 
been very bad, particularly among religious writers. They 
have apparently recognized no obligation to compel the hearer 
or reader to understand them, or even to help him in doing 
so, but have aimed merely to express the thought in a form 
intelligible to themselves, without considering how it would 
be with others.t That is to say, they have sought subjective 
excellence of style, and not objective. But there seems to be 
at present a rapidly increasing number of German speakers 
and writers whose style is marked by perspicuity and grace, 
without sacrificing Teutonic profundity and strength. In 
America we have some writers and speakers, both secular and 
religious, who can be held up as models. But in general we 
fall seriously below the English. An extreme negligence and 
looseness of style very generally prevails. And the great 
American fault, in speaking and writing, is an excessive vehe- 
mence, a constant effort to be striking. Our style, as well 
as our delivery, too often lacks the calmness of conscious 
strength, the repose of simple sincerity, the quiet earnestness 
which only now and then becomes impassioned. " He will 
be an eloquent man who shall be able to speak of small 
matters in lowly phrase, of ordinary topics temperately, of 
great subjects with passion and power."J 

One cause of this neglect of style among us, and to some 
extent in England also, is the failure to understand its in- 
separable connection with the thought conveyed. De Quincey 
says, " Here our quarrel is coextensive with that general 

* Goethe's prose style is scarcely surpassed in any language, 
f Comp. Quintilian, yJII. 2-19. J Cicero, Orator, 29. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 247 

principle in England, which tends in all things to set the 
matter above the manner, the substance above the external 
show; a principle noble in itself, but inevitably wrong where- 
ever the manner blends inseparably with the substance."* 
The best style attracts least attention to itself, and none but 
the critical observer is apt to appreciate its excellence, most 
men giving credit solely to the matter, and having no idea 
how much the manner has contributed to attract and impress 
them. The thought is certainly the main thing; but the 
style also is important. " The experience of all times, and 
the testimony of all teachers, present to us as inseparable, 
these two propositions : 1. That we must not flatter ourselves 
that we shall have a good style, without an interesting fund 
of ideas. 2. That even with an interesting and substantial 
supply of ideas, we must not flatter ourselves that style will 
come of itself. "t 

It follows from all this that every writer and speaker should 
pay great attention to the improvement of his style. High 
excellence in style is necessarily rare ; for a discourse, a para- 
graph, even a sentence, is really a work of art, fashioned by 
constructive imagination — and artist gifts of every kind are 
rare. But any man who will try, long enough and hard 
enough, can learn to say what he means, to say forcibly what 
he deeply feels, and to clothe his thoughts in a garb at least 
of homely neatness. Some of the best writers and speakers 
have had peculiar difficulty in acquiring a good style, e. g. 
John Foster ; and their success affords encouragement to us 
all. 

2. Means of Improving Style. 

Oratorical style is but one out of many species of style, and 
one variety of the oratorical style is that* of the pulpit. Yet 
a man's characteristic style will be essentially the same, in all 
kinds of writing and speaking ; and mental cultivation should 
never be confined to the sphere of one's chief mental activity. 
We are therefore to consider the means of improvement, not 
merely as regards that which is peculiar to oratory, but as 
regards style in general. 

1. The study of language, particularly of our own language, 
is in this respect exceedingly profitable. The science of lan- 
guage, which in the last forty years has accomplished so muchy 
and which is now making such rapid progress, cannot be cbn- 

♦ On Style, p. 66. t Vv\ift^, ^. ^^^. 



248 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 

sidered inferior in point of interest and instructiveness, to any 
other of the sciences. But the study of the science as such, 
has only an indirect bearing on style ; it is the practical acqui- 
sition of languages that is here the great source of beneiit. 
This, when pursued with system, and on sound principles, com- 
pels close attention to the nature of language in general, to the 
history, changes and capacities of words, and the relation of 
syntactical construction to the different forms and processes of 
thought. It also attracts to the peculiarities of our own lan- 
guage a keener and more intelligent notice, than most persons 
would otherwise bestow. These benefits are more or less derived 
from the study of any language whatsoever. There is peculiar 
advantage in choosing French or German, because they cor- 
respond to the two great elements of which our own language 
is chiefly composed. But the time-honoured study of Latin 
and Greek is more advantageous still. In their inflections, 
their syntax, their prose rhythm, these languages exhibit the 
full and instructive development of excellencies which English, 
French, German possess only in part. We have recourse to 
them as geologists explain outlying rocks or scattered fossils, 
by comparing them with beds in which similar specimens lie 
side by side with others to which they are related. This careful 
study of other languages is not only useful as a part of the 
speaker's early training, but ought, so far as possible, to be 
kept up through life. It has been thus kept up by a very large 
proportion of those who have attained great excellence of style. 
But whether acquainted or not with other languages, a man 
must earnestly study his own. It is very encouraging to 
observe the now rapidly increasing attention to the English 
Language in our best High Schools, Colleges and Universities. 
Apart from its incomparable practical importance to us, the 
English is in itself a worthy study, a most noble tongue. 
Foreigners naturally complain much of those irregularities in 
spelling and pronunciation, which have been almost necessarily 
produced by the union of two diverse languages into one. 
Critics at home can easily point out its weakness, and compare 
it unfavourably, in this or that respect, with some other idiom. 
But set against all this the words of a great German scholar, 
the foremost among all students of the Gothic family of lan- 
guages. " The English language, which by no mere accident 
has produced and upborne the greatest and most predominant 
poet of modern times, may with all right be called a world- 
language ; and like the English people, appears destined here- , 
nfter to prevail with a sway more ex^tensive even than its present 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STTLB. 249 

over all portions of the globe. For in wealth, good sense, and 
closeness of structure, no other of the languages at this day 
spoken deserves to be compared with it — not even our German, 
which is torn, even as we are torn, and must first rid itself of 
many defects, before it can enter boldly into the lists, as a com- 
petitor with the English.'-* It is not like Italian for music, nor 
like French for conversation, nor like German as to facility in 
forming new compounds, but taken all in all, for history, poetry, 
philosophy, oratory, for society and for business, it is at present 
unequalled. .A popular writer has recently called it " the 
grammarless tongue" ; but English has a grammar, a very 
regular syntax, and one that is often and flagrantly violated, 
even by able ani cultivated men. De Qnincey declares : " It 
makes us blush to add, that even grammar is so little of a per- 
fect attainment amongst us, that with two or threo exceptions 
(one being Shakspeare, whom some affect to consider as belong- 
ing to a semi-barbarous age), we have never seen the writer, 
through a circuit of prodigious reading, who has not sometimes 
violated the accidence or the syntax of English Grammar. "t 

The most scientific works on English Grammar have to 
be sought in German — a reproach to the English-speaking 
people which ought to cease. J Persons who have been 
carefully drilled in Greek and Latin, especially by written 
translations from English into those languages and from 
them into English, usually feel that they have no use for 
the common treatises on English Grammar. Yet we have 
many books which even scholars may examine with profit, and 
which students in general would find very useful § It is true 
that books on grammar are not everything in acquiring com- 
mand of the language, nor the main thing. There are men 
among us who have studied no such books, nor any other lan- 

* Jacob Grimm, quoted by Trench and Angus. 

+ De Quincey on Style, p. 105. 

J A Professor in one of oiir leading American Universities, though a man 
of vast acquirements, had nevei- studied German. In history, in general 
literature, even in metaphysical philosophy, he was content with what could 
be found in Greek and Latin, in French and English. J3ut at length deter, 
luining to make a thorough study of English Gramfiiar, he was compelled to 
learn German. 

§ For example, Angus's Hand-Book of the English Tongue is excellent. 
Add to it Trench on the Study of Words, and his " English, Past and 
I*resent." And by all means read Campbell's Philosophy of Rhetoric, l^ook 
ll. chap. 1-4, and Book III. chap. 4-5, in which he treats of gvaxaxu^jc. '^Nerj 
student ought to keep constantly within reach, and \eTy ixefeVy \iO c-ot^svAX., *Oaft 



250 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 

guage, and yet who speak and write English with correctness, 
and even with force and beauty. The great works of Greek 
poetry and history were written before any treatises on grammar 
existed. These facts remind us that we must find elsewhere 
the principal means of improvement in style, but they by no 
means prove that grammars are useless. We have to learn the 
usage of the language, and grammars undertake to present this 
usage in a systematic and convenient form. They show us our 
faults, and warn us where there is danger; they set us to 
observing language, and reflecting upon it. Tl^e rules of gram- 
mar have most effectually done their work w;hen conformity to 
them has become habitual, and we need the rules no longer- 
yea, when we have so fully entered into the principles involved, 
that upon occasion we may even violate a rule.* Connect habits 
may be formed, and right principles comprehended, without 
books of grammar, but more rapidly and surely with them, pro- 
vided we use them only as helps, and aim to go deeper than 
they can carry us. As to this whole matter of studying 
English Grammar, two practical errors widely prevail, and 
greatly need to be corrected. Men who have been to College 
are apt to think they have no need to study their own language 
at all, and especially no need of consulting books on the sub- 
ject — the latter part of this opinion being a mistake, and the 
former a very great mistake. On the other hand, men who 
have had fewer educational advantages are in danger of sup- 
posing that without systematic instruction they can do nothing 
to improve their style, or else that after studying a book or two 
on English Grammar, they have nothing more to do.t 

It may be remarked in general that a preacher ought to 
employ pure English, according to current use ; not quickly 
catching up the novelties of the street or the daily paper, and 
not introducing those archaisms with which he is familiar from 

latest edition of Webster's Dictionary, unabridged^ the definitions in which 
are exceedingly instructive, while the orthography is less objectionable thtfi 
in former editions. One who wishes to get some knowledge of the loodeW 
science of language in its bearings on English, should read Whitney's"!^' 
guage, and the Study of Language," and Max Muller's two volumes on w* 
Science of Language, and then take Marsh's Lectures on the English Ijaugnag®* 
Alford's " The Queen's English,'* and the other books and numerous Magazio* 
articles to which it has given rise, are usually entertaining and suggestive, hw 
tend to hyper-criticism, often magnifying trifles and dogmatising about doubt- 
ful questions^ to the neglect of broad views and fixed principles. 

* Comp. as to the rules of Rhetoric, above. Introduction, 4. 

*/• On the importanco ot Btud^mg Ai\^\o-Swloh, see below, chap. ii. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 251 

commerce with old books, but which his hearers would not 
readily understand. He should speak the English of general 
use, not employing local peculiarities of phrase except for 
special reasons; but he should retain general English idiom, 
even where superficial critics attempt to displace it. The 
prea<-/her must never invent words. Madame de Stael says, 
" There is in general no surer symptom of barrenness of ideas 
than the invention of words," — a remark which may at least 
be set over against the notion that such invention is a symptom 
of originality. And he should not, save in very peculiar 
cases, employ words or phrases from foreign languages. It was 
once very common, and thought to be very appropriate, for a 
minister to quote much Latin and Greek in his sermons. Even 
Wesley's sermons abound in such quotations, though he 
preached mainly to the common people. It is a sign of im- 
proved taste that this is no longer the practice. A speaker 
must now use his knowledge of other languages only as giving 
him increased power over his own language. Even where one 
refers to the original Scriptures, it is very rarely proper to men- 
tion the Greek or Hebrew word. 

2. The study of literature perhaps contributes still more to 
the improvement of style, than the direct study of language. 
From reading we gain much in the knowledge of language, 
especially as to richness of vocabulary, fulness of expression.* 
But more. It is chiefly by reading that we form our literary 
taste — a matter of unspeakable importance. Cicero makes one 
of his characters say, referring to Greek literature, "As, when 
I walk in the sun, even though I walk for another reason, my 
complexion is yet coloured ; so, when I have read these books, 
I feel that my style of speaking is as it were coloured by their 
influeuce."t And what Shakspeare mournfully says, is true in 
this better sense also, 

" My nature is subdued 
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand." 

To bathe our minds in choice literature till they become im- 
bued with correct principles of style, to nourish them with good 
learning till our taste grows healthy, so as to discern quickly 
and surely between good and bad, is a process surpassingly 
profitable in its results, and in itself delightful. 

* Kossuth derived his wonderful knowledge of English from the study of 
Shakspeare, while in prison. 

. t DeOrat. II., 15, 16. 



252 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 

And not only do wo need to cultivate good literafeare for its 
positive benefits, but also to counteract certain evil influences 
of great power. Few among us have learned from childhood 
to speak graceful and forcible English, few iudeed to speak it 
with bare correctness. Mother-tongue is often to a great extent 
nurse's tongue; and in this country that usually means the 
broken and rude English of the negroes, or the brogue of the 
most ignorant Irish. From our childish associates we Beldom 
gained much in the way of grammatical correctness or good taste. 
And as men grow up and go On in life, so large a part of what 
they read in newspapers, and of what they hear in conversation 
and even in public speaking, is in a vicious style, that they 
inevitably feel the effect. Besides the more obvious errors, as 
to pronunciation and syntax, which are too often committed by 
cultivated speakers, there results from these influences a more 
subtle and serious injury to taste, which only a continued appli- 
cation to the best literature can remedy and prevent. De 
Quincey points out that the immense multiplication of news- 
papers has injured our style of conversation. Everybody reads 
them constantly, and their writers too often use the most 
bookish and inflated language in treating of common things. 
One who wishes to form a good style would do well to sel«Jt 
his newspapers, secular and religious, with reference to this, as 
well as to other considerations. The style of preaching will 
always naturally, and to a great extent properly, share the 
peculiarities which mark the literature of the day. When this 
exhibits bad taste, as is so often true now of newspaper writing 
and public speaking, we must correct the evil by intimacy with 
the truly great authors, of our own and of former times. 

It is delightful to think how many good authors there are, 
in English and in other languages. Our religious literature, 
both sermons and other works, presents noble specimens of 
style, in which one may at the same time nourish the intellect, 
warin the heart, and' refine the taste, and among which he 
may select such*as will exert the kind of influence he par- 
ticularly needs. The great French preachers, from Bossaet 
to Monod, with such Americans as J. M. Mason and R. Fuller, 
form admirable examples of passion combined with elegance. 
Baxter is remarkable for directness and pungency, Bunyan for 
homely and charming simplicity. If one's style is dry and 
barren, he may read Ohrysostom, Jeremy Taylor, Chalmers, 
or Melville. For a grand model of style, which, like some 
joung Grecian athlete, stands glorious in disciplined strength 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 253 

and manly beauty, we must go to Robert Hall, his writings 
as well as his sermons. And if the influence of Hall should 
tend to produce monotonous elevation, never coming down to 
common phrases, nor coming close with personal applications, 
the exact remedy is to be found in familiarity with Spurgeon. 
But aiiy such indication of specimens must be unjust, if not 
misleading, as regards the many that are omitted. The im- 
portant matter is, that one should not read at hap-hazard ; 
that taking account of his mental constitution, his previous 
training and present stage of development, the particular tend- 
encies, as to thinking and style of which he is now conscious, 
he should select, according to the best accessible information, 
such works as will best meet his actual wants. 

Preachers ought to derive very great benefit in point of 
style, from their constant reading and minute study of the 
English Bible. The Scriptures embrace almost every species 
of style, and each with many varieties. And the current 
English translation, though som.e of its phrases have become 
nearly obsolete, presents the English language in its most 
admirable form. It dates from the golden age of English 
literature, and deserves, in an eminent degree, the eulosjy 
which Spenser passed upon Chaucer, as a " well of English 
undefyled." 

Besides the common ground of general literature, which 
no one, of whatever special calling, can afford to neglect, 
preachers may learn much from the great secular orators, 
even as lawyers and statesmen often diligently study the 
great preachers. And this is true, not merely for the be- 
ginner, but even more for the practised speaker. To see the 
same principles carried out in material and for purposes quite 
different from his own, will illustrate those principles afresh, 
and will prevent his becoming formal in arrangement and 
monotonous in style. In oratory and in general literature, 
the Greek language and our own English are rich beyond 
rivalry. To these let the preacher mainly address himself, in 
youth and in age, and literature will shed on his intellectual 
and sesthetical culture its "selectest influence." But let not 
the young student submit himself to the authority of any 
writer as a perfect standard, nor be repelled from some of 
the' greatest by their manifest blemishes. " There is no 
writer who has not some faults, and faults of taste are 
perhaps those the most common to the highest and tV^a 
lowest order of writers. The taste of Shakspeax^ ^xA ^^^\^ 



254 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 

is not always unimpeachable. But it is to the greatest 
writers that Adam Smith's exclamation applies — * How many 
great qualities must that writer possess who can thus render 
his very faults agreeable ! ' If we desire to find a writer 
without fault, we must not look for him among the greatest 
writers."* Augustine had been in his youth a teacher of 
rhetoric. He knew the folly of that artificial instruction in 
style and delivery which there have always been teachers to 
recommend, and he knew that even a just rhetorical system 
is but a help to something higher. He says : " Moreover, I 
enjoin it upon him who would combine eloquence with wisdom, 
by which he will certainly become more effective, to read and 
listen to the eloquent, and imitate them in exercises, rather 
than apply to the teachers of the rhetorical art ; provided 
those whom he hears and reads were, or are now, justly 
celebrated, not merely for their eloquence, but also for their 
wisdom."t 

It should be added that conversation, especially that of 
intelligent women, may also furnish admirable and influential 
examples of clear, sprightly, varied, and every way attractive 
style. So too with Letters. ** Would you desire at this day 
to read our noble language in its native beauty, picturesque 
from idiomatic propriety, racy in its phraseology, delicate yet 
sinewy in its composition— steal the mail-bags, and break 
open all the letters in female handwriting.''^ Cicero's Epistles 
are for most men far better examples of style than Cicero's 
Orations. And if to an acquaintance with Bacon, Milton's 
prose, Barrow and Burke, one should add a familiarity with 
some of the finest Letters, he would see the English languege 
in all its most prodigal strength and splendour, and in all its 
most flexible grace and delicate beauty.§ 

3. But the chief means of improvement in style is careful 
practice in writing and speaking. Not mere practice without 
care, for this will develop and confirm what is faulty as well as 
what is good. 

In written composition, it is very unwise, although very com- 

♦ Bulwer, On Style, Caxtoniaiia, I, 131. 

t De Doct. Christ. IV. 

$ De Quincey on Style, p. 77. 

§ Holccombe's Literature in Letters (New York, Appleton,) is a delight 
ful volume, containing a choice collection of English and American Letters, 
olassitied and with all necessary anwolaUon. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 255 

ion to negleot details. If a man spells badlj, he should set hini- 
jlfvigorously to correct the fault, which usually requires nothing 
lit a little system and perseverance.* To take son.e pains in this 
irection is worth while, not only for the sake of removing a lite- 
Liy blemish, but because accuracy in detail is apt to react profit- 
:>lyupon our mental habits, and also to increase our love for 
le work of composition. Some one has said that there never 
as a great sculptor who did not love to chip the marble, 
ud if spelling be worth attention, so is punctuation^ though 
lis is still more commonly neglected. Punctuation indicates 
le relation of the parts of a sentence to each other. The 
ily real diflBculty in punctuating properly is the difficulty 
determining the true relation of clauses, and he who does 
>t mark the points is apt to neglect, more than he is aware, 
ie structure of his sentences. Aristotle urges that we should 
Hto in a style easy to point,t and it is certainly very desi- 
^ble to make the sense unmistakable, apart from punctuation. 
ut the inferior flexibility of construction, and the compara- 
^ve lack of particles, make this much more difficult in 
i'Dglish than in Greek and many other languages ; so that 
"^ith us punctuation is particularly important. It will be 
•vident, too, that every man's punctuation must be to some 
'Xtent his own, as it indicates his mode of constructing sen- 
-ences. Of this, Chalmers is a good example, in his infrequent 
ise of the comma. The dash, which has of late become so 
lommcm, is convenient to indicate a break in the sentence, 
whether an interruption, so as to insert something akin to a 
•arenthesis, or an abrupt transition to something related to 
^hat precedes, but not joined to it by strict grammatical 
otinection. It is thus an affectation to abjure the dash alto- 
ether, as some propose to do, but it should be used only 
)r a distinct and positive reason. Many good writers now 

* Let him have whatever he writes examined by some accurate speller, 
id make lists of the words correcte'l, putting them down as they ought 
) be, an«l frequeutly running over the growing list, with the resolve, at 
irery step, that this error, and this, shall occur no more ; further, let him 
abitually consult a dictionary when doubtful as to the spelling of a word ; 
nd moreover, he must begin to notice spelling in the books and periodi- 
als he reads, and to take interest in disputed questions. We often find 
' harder to correct confirmed habits about trities than about more impor- 
ant mattei-s, because the former do not awaken an interested and watchful 
tteution. The plan proposed will meet this diflSculty. 

fKhet. III. 5,6. 



256 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 

• 

use it to save the trouble of deciding what more definite 
pointing is appropriate, — certainly a very slothful fashion; 
and some of the best writers, as Brougham and Bulwer, in- 
troduce the dash so often as to break many of their sentences 
into disjointed fragments. In practical attention to punctua- 
tion, we must endeavour to master the principles involved, 
the fundamental significance which usage has assigned to 
the several points, and then use them according to our own 
meaning, and not according to the stiff and unbending rules 
which are so often laid down. And it should be noticed 
that although forbidden by many of the books, punctuation 
may be sometimes employed, apart from grammatical rela- 
tions, to indicate the rhythmical movement of the successive 
parts of a sentence.* 

And so as to all the details of grammar. Campbell tells of 
a preacher who was consulted by a friend that had a mind to 
publish, " whether he thought it befitting a writer on religion 
to attend to such little matters as grammatical correctness," 
and who answered, " By all means. It is much better to write 
so as to make a critic turn Christian, than so as to make a 
Christian turn critic."t 

There can be no question that grammatical accuracy is an 
object worthy of earnest pursuit. The young preacher who 
finds himself particularly deficient in this respect, ought, 
besides such study of treatises on grammar as we have already 
urged, to go through some good work on Composition, labori- 
ously writing the exercises. If nothing else were gained, it is 
much to be relieved from all fear of committing blunders that 
would be ridiculed. 

But while attentive to the details of composition, one must 
be chiefly occupied with the thought ; and in order to this, 
composition as a mere exercise must more and more give place 
to writing with a real interest, with some practical aim. In all 
such writing, one should become possessed with the subject, and 
then write as rapidly as is consistent with perspicuous and 
forcible expression, leaving minute corrections to be made after- 
ward. But he must be sure to make the corrections. Thought 

* A good practical discussion of punctuation may be found in Angus's 
Hand-Book of the English Tongue, and also, with copious exercises, in 
Quackenbos's Composition and Rhetoric. Let no man think it beneath his 
diguity to use good school-books for such a purpose. 

+ On Pulpit Eloquence, Lect. III. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 257 

once cast into a mould is apt to harden very soon, and any 
considerable alteration is then a difficult and laborious task. 
Sometimes a whole paragraph must be thrown back into the 
furnace of the mind, and fused anew, in order to remove a single 
flaw in one sentence. Think of John Foster, toiling over a 
sentence for two hours, determined to have it right. 

. A most valuable means of improvement in command of lan- 
guage and style in general, is written translation into English 
from other languages. This tests and develops, in a peculiar 
manner, our knowledge of English. When attempting to 
express our own thoughts, we have the idea at first only in a 
dim, shifting, nebulous form ; and in struggling to find the 
exact impression, we may unconsciously change the idea into 
something else for which fit expression presents itself. But in 
translating, — not merely putting word for word, like a school 
boy, but getting the exact idea conveyed by a sentence, and 
then seeking the exact impression for that idea in EngUsh, — no 
such substitution or shifting can take place. The thought 
stands fixed in the other language, with the peculiar shape and 
colour which that language gives it, and we must find English 
to express it, or must know that our effort to do so has failed. 
Thus careful translation is in one respect a better exercise than 
original composition. It is obvious that a similar benefit will 
be derived, though in a less degree, from oral translation. It 
is well known that William Pitt was carefully trained by his 
father to off'-hand translation from Greek and other languages, 
and that he believed himself to have derived immense advan- 
tage from it. 

In addition to writing, one must studiously practice speaking ^ 
in order to form his speaking style. A man skilled in both, 
may closely imitate in writing the style of speaking, but the 
two are really distinct, and in some respects quite different. 
Let one speak much that has been carefully prepared, though 
not written ; and speak sometimes, as in social meetings, upon 
the strong impulse of the moment. Let him always have a 
practical purpose, and throw himself into an effort, not to make 
a discourse, but to accomplish his object. Let him closely 
observe his hearers, and learn to perceive when they understand 
and are impressed. He will thus become able to judge when 
to be diff'use, and when rapid, and will acquire the directness 
of address, the power of constant movement towards a fixed 
point, the passionate energy and unstudied grace, the flexibility 

s 



258 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON STYLE. 

and variety which characterise the speaking style.* And he 
who aims at skill in extemporaneous speaking, must give special 
attention to his style in conversation, so that the difference 
between his more elevated and his more familiar style may be 
a difference in degree and not in kind. 

It may be added that every writer or speaker should cultivate 
variety of style. A model of excellence in this respect may be 
seen in the correspondence and the sermons of J. Addison 
Alexander. 

After all that has been said or that can be said as to style 
no one should imagine that he need only seek to acquire power 
of expression, and may give little attention to thoiufht Some 
young men fall into this error, and it is simply fatal. " Let 
there be care about words," says Quintilian, " but solicitude 
About things." 



Comp. on the style of extemporaueous speaking, Part lY., chap, i., 3, 2. 



CHAPTER II. 



PERSPICUITY OF STYLE.* 

The most important property of style is perspicuity. Style is 
excellent when, like the atmosphere, it shows the thought, but 
itself is not seen. Yet this comparison, and the" term perspi- 
cuity which was derived from it, are both inadequate, for good 
style is like stereoscopic glasses, which, transparent themselves, 
give form and body and distinct outline to that which they 
exhibit, t 

A certain grand-looking obscurity is often pleasing to some 
hearers and readers, who suppose that it shows vast learning, 
or great originality, J or immense profundity. To treat subjects 
in this fashion is no new thing. Quintilian says it was not new 
in his day, for that he found mention in Livy of a teacher who 
used to direct his pupils to darken the idea. He adds a witti- 
cism of some one whose hearers complained that they did not 
understand, and who replied, " So much the better ; I did not 
even understand it myself,''|| and elsewhere speaks of men who 
think themselves talented because it requires talent to under- 
stand them. M. Hue says that in the Lama Convents, where 
the Buddhist professors lecture to their pupils, the more obscure 
and unintelligible their sayings, the more sublime they are 
reckoned. Alas ! that preachers of the gospel are not always 
proof against this pitiful temptation. 

* The best classification of the leading properties of style is that adopted 
from Campbell by Whately and others, viz., perspicuity, energy, and elegance. 
Shedd substitutes plainness, force, and beauty, and Day uses clearness, energy, 
and beauty ; but in both cases more is lost by the change than is gained. 
Blair (following Quintilian) treats only of perspicuity and ornament, and his 
own style is clear and neat, but nerveless. 

On perspicuity, consult especially Campbell, and Herbert Spencer's Essay 
on Style. 

+ Comp. Shedd, p. 69. 

+ Comp. on Originality, Part I., chap, iv., 3. 

II Quint. VIII., 2, 18. 



260 PERSPICUITY OP STYLE. 

A preacher is more solemnly bound than any other to make 
his language perspicuous. This is very important in wording a 
law, in writing a title deed, or a physician's prescription, but 
still more important in proclaiming the Word of God, words of 
eternal life. 

" The thoughts which the religious teacher presents to the 
common mind should go straight to the understanding. Every- 
thing that covers up and envelops the truth should be stripped 
off from it, so that the bare reality may be seen. There is 
prodigious power in this plainness of presentation. It is the 
power of actual contact. A plain writer, or speaker, makes the 
truth and the mind impinge upon each other. When the style 
is plain, the mind of the hearer experiences the sensation of 
being touched ; and this sensation is always impressive, for a 
man starts when he is touched. . . . The preacher should 
toil after this property of style, as he would toil after virtue 
itself. He should constantly strive, first of all, to exhibit his 
thoughts plainly. Whether he shall add force to plainness, and 
beauty to force, are matters to be considered afterwards. . . 
The public is, at the present time, too eager after striking 
externals, for its own good. It demands brilliancy before plain- 
ness, without suflBcient regard for that basis of strong sense 
which must ever support this quality, in order that it may have 
true value. The preacher is consequently tempted to yield to 
this false taste of the ill-educated, and to become like the 
public. ... In the midst of all this clamour for fine 
writing and florid style, he should be a resolute man, and dare 
to be a plain writer. . . . The preacher whose head is 
rjght, and whose conscience is right, will soon come to possess 
a love for this plainness."* 

It is also true that a preacher has greater diflBculty than any 
other class of speakers in making his style perspicuous to cJl 
his hearers, for no others speak to so heterogeneous an audience, 
including persons of both sexes, of every age from early child- 
hood, and of every grade of intellect and culture. But this 
difficulty, when most deeply felt, should but stimulate to dili- 
fijent and painstaking effort. For what is the use of preaching, 
unless we may hope to do good ? And what good can be done, 
save in proportion as we are understood? Pretentious ol> 
scurity may excite a poor admiration, unmeaning prettiness 
may give a certain pleasure, mere vociferation, — like Bottom's 
j^art, " nothing but roaring," — may affect some people's nerves, 



PERSPICUITY OF STYLE. 261 

but only truth, and truth that is understood, can bring real 
benefit. Moreover, something worse may happen than the 
failure to do good ; we may do harm. Some hearers are re- 
pelled and disgusted by obscurity. Others are misled. It is a 
mournful thing to think of, but one of not infrequent occur- 
rence, that men should so misunderstand us, as to take what 
we meant for medicine and convert it into poison. As we love 
men's souls we must strive to prevent so dreadful a result. 
One cannot expect, as Quintilian already remarks, "that the 
hearer will be so intent upon understanding as to cast upon the 
darkness of the speech a light from his own intelligence. What 
we say must be made so clear that it will pour into his mind as 
the sun pours into the eyes, even when they are not directed 
toward it. We must take care, not that it shall be possible for 
him to understand, but that it shall be utterly impossible for 
him not to understand."* The German philosopher Fichte 
wrote a treatise with this title, "An account clear as the sun, 
of the real nature of my philosophy ; an attempt to compel the 
reader to understand, "t None but a very self-confident man 
would put forth such a title ; but it indicates what every teacher 
of men ought to aim at, not arrogantly, but resolutely, — to 
compel the reader or hearer to understand. 

Two general remarks as to perspicuity may be here made. 
The style may be not lacking in perspicuity, and yet the dis- 
course may seem hard to comprehend, because the subject is 
difficult, or what is taught about it is unacceptable. It is very 
common to speak of the Epistle to the Romans as obscure; how 
far is this opinion due to a desire to understand more upon some 
subjects than it teaches, or a reluctance to receive as true what 
it does teach ? The more plainly a discourse presents its truths, 
the more obscure it will seem when we are striving to make it 
mean something else. The other remark is, that perspicuity of 
style is closely allied to perspicuity of thought. It is true, as 
Whately says, J that men sometimes speak obscurely on a sub- 
ject for the simple reason that they are familiar with it, and 
forget that others are not so ; — a practical mistake which 
preachers are in no small danger of making. If any one should 
assert that clear ideas of a subject will always lead to clear 
statements, this common experience would set aside the asser- 
tion. The statement of clear ideas will be subjectively clear, but 

* Quint. VIII. 2,23. t Quoted by Shedd, p. 72. 

t Rhetoric, p. ^07. 



262 PERSPICUITY OP STYLE. 

is by no means sure to be objectively clear ; it will be plain to 
him who makes it, but may be very obscure to other people. 
But all this has nothing to do with that other proposition, that 
there can be no clearness of expression vnilwut clear thinking. 
The effort to gain a clear conception and to work out a per- 
spicuous expression of it, will usually go on together ; and the 
habit of perspicuous expression reacts powerfully on habits of 
thought.* 

Perspicuity of style depends mainly on three things, viz., 
the choice of terms, the construction of sentences and para- 
graphs, and the proper management of brevity and diffaseness, 

1. So far as perspicuity depends on the terms employed, it 
requires the combination of two elements. 

(1.) We must use, as far as possible, words and phrases that 
will be intelligible to our audience. Where the audience com- 
prises many who are comparativsly illiterate, — and that is 
generally the case, — we must strive to make the terms intelli- 
gible to them. *.* Speak,'' said a sensible farmer to his brother 
who was a preacher, " speak so that the women and children 
can understand you, and the men will be sure to."t Dean 
Swift, in his famous Letter to a Young Clergyman, puts the 
matter as follows ; " I have been curious enough to take a list 
of several hundred words in a sermon of a new beginner, which 
not one of his hearers among a hundred could possibly under- 
stand ; neither can I easily call to mind any clergyman of my 
own acquaintance, who is wholly exempt from this error, al- 
though many of them agree with me in the dislike of the thing. 
But I am apt to put myself in the place of the vulgar, and 
think many words, difficult or |obscure, which the preacher 
will not allow to be so, because these words are obvious to 
scholars." 

Whether the preacher be what is called a linguist or not, he 
ought to know at least two languages, the language of books 
and the language of common life. When one learns a thing in 
Latin or German, and undertakes to state it to his people, he 
must of course translate. And so, what we study in learned 
works, using, as is there convenient and necessary, the technical 
language of science, we must in preaching translate into popular 
language, the language of common life. Many a young gradu- 

* As to the effect of an'angement ou perspicuity, see Part II., chap i. 2. 

f In some places the women are better educated than the men ; and they 
are usually quicker and more attentive ; but that does not affect the principle 
of the farmer's sa3ring. 



PERSPICUITY OP STYLE. 263 

ate, from College or Theological Seminary, errs not merely in 
treating subjects not suited to the popular mind, but in using 
many terms which have grown familiar to him, but which the 
people in general cannot at ail understand. Most persons 
afterwards learn to correct this, at least in some measure ; but 
occasionally we see a man of mature years and of great ability, 
who seems wholly unacquainted with popular modes of thought 
and forms of expression, and wholly unaware that such is the 
case. The few who understand and sympathize with him speak 
with delight of his sermons, but for the many they might as 
well be delivered in German.* Even those technical terms in 
theology with which the people are very familiar, do not always 
represent to them any distinct conception. Yet such terms 
as regeneration, depravity, etc., it is necessary to use in 
preaching, or much time will be lost in tedious circumlocutions. 
Besides taking frequent occasion distinctly to explain these 
terms, we may often prefix or add to them some words of a 
more popular character, or may introduce them in such con- 
nections as will throw light on them.t That even the com- 
monest words of Scripture may be employed in an utterly un 
scriptural sense, is shown by the frequent use of them on the 
part of modem Pantheistic infidels. 

It is often remarked that Anglo-Saxon words are generally 
more perspicuous to the people at large, than words of Latin 
origin. The latter are frequently more precise, being restricted 
in usage to a certain specific sense, while the Anglo-Saxon word 
is the general term. Thus the phrase, perspicuity of style, is a 
more precise expression than plainness or clearness of style, and 
is therefore preferable in a treatise, or in conversation with a 
cultivated person. But in speaking to a general audience it 
would be better to use the term plainness, notwithstanding its 
ambiguity, because the people so much more readily and vividly 
see its meaning. And if there should be danger of their con- 
fusing the two senses, of plainness as opposed to obscurity, and 
plainness as opposed to ornament, we may guard against this 
by adding some other simple phrase which will show what is 
meant. In general, the Anglo-Saxon element of our language 
deserves great attention, for its terms are not only perspicuous 
to all, but are apt to be singularly suggestive, through life-long 
association of ideas ; besides the bulk of meaning contained, 

* See a striking passage in Vinet, pp. 373, 374. 

t As to Foster's objection to the use of such terms, compare below on 
Elegance, chap. iv. 



264 PERSPICUITY OF STYLE. 

they carry with them an atmosphere of suggestion, often sur- 
passingly attractive and stimulating. Those who have studied 
Latin and French ought to study Anglo-Saxon also ; and 
whether a student of language or not, every preacher should 
practically master the homely " household words " of our own 
English.. Let it not be taken for granted that we know these 
already ; for the discriminating use of them ' is by no means 
universal, even among educated men.* 

(2.) We must use words and phrases that exactly eocpress our 
thought. Terms may be intelligible to the audience, and yet 
not certainly represent to them our meaning. They may be 
ambiguous, so that while the hearer understands both senses, 
he does not readily see which is here intended. Even the 
sacred writers, employing an easy, colloquial style, have some- 
times left us ambiguous expressions. For example, the love of 
God, in Greek as in English, may denote our love to God, or 
his love to us. Which it means in any case must be determined 
from the connection, or perhaps from the usage of the writer. 
John uses it in both senses, Paul almost invariably in the latter. 
A style absolutely free from such ambiguities would not be 
natural, and yet they ought of course to be avoided as far as 
possible. Or, terms may be used in different senses in the 
same connection, and thus, although not in themselves ambigu- 
ous, may leave the meaning doubtful. Or they may be general 
terms, and fail to indicate what specific idea was meant. Or 
they may be indefinite, and leave it uncertain what extent of 
meaning was designed. In general, the terms ought to be 
precise^ as it were cut dawn to fit the meaning, so that the ex- 
pression and the idea exactly correspond, neither of them con- 
taining anything which the other does not contain.t Such 
terms may almost always be found, and we should habitually 
constrain ourselves to seek for them. Besides the advantage 
of perspicuity to others, this habit will greatly benefit our own 

* On the general subject of studying English, see above, chap, i., 2. Of 
course it would be great folly to prefer an Anglo-Saxon word merely because 
it is such, when a word of Latin or other origin would be equally intelligible, 
or much more appropriate. But the effort to use the most perspicuous and 
expressive terms will be promoted by habitual attention to the Anglo-Saxon 
part of our language. 

+ It should be remarked that Vinet's discussion of precision, and of what 
he calls propriety, is apt to confuse the student, because those terms do not 
mean precisely the same thing in French as in English. This difficulty also 
exists with reference to some otlaer pottiotis ol\i\& ^^vvaJcA^^ork. 



PERSPICUITY OP STYLE. 



265 



minds, for our thoughts attain a definite form and distinct out- 
lines only in proportion as we find the precise terms to express 
them. It will also give freshness. No two men think exactly 
alike, even as all countenances are different ; and he who thinks 
at all upon a subject and then says just what he thinks, cannot 
fail of being to some extent original. 

One important means of securing precision, is accurate di^ 
crimination between so-called synonyms. Even the English 
language, which in so many cases retains both an Anglo-Saxon 
and a Latin word of much the same original meaning, has, 
strictly speaking, no synonyms. Our usage has assigned to the 
words different departments of the field once common to both, 
or at least a different extent of application. The more culti- 
vated a language becomes, as De Quincey has remarked, the 
more it distinguishes between apparent synonyms. To take a 
familiar example, the Greek word sympathy, the Latin compas- 
sion, and the compound of Anglo-Saxon, fellow-feeling, are in 
origin substantially the same ; but how distinct they now are 
as English words. Yet there are very many cases in which 
different words will coincide, to a greater or less extent, so that 
the careless observer would regard them as in all respects 
equivalent, and between these it is highly important to dis- 
criminate. Our own language, for the reason just indicated, 
greatly abounds in these synonyms, and the preacher cannot 
be too earnestly urged to give them his constant and pains- 
taking attention.* 

Skill in the choice of terms comes to no man as a matter 
of course. All who succeed in this respect, however gifted 
or however unlettered, have attained it by observation, reflec- 
tion, practice. He who thinks words unimportant, will never 
be perspicuous in expression, nor clear in thinking, t 

* "Whately's Synonyms (a) is our best book, so far as it goes. The latest 
editions of Webster's and Worcester's Dictionaries (unabridged), treat all the 
more important Synonyms, and many of them in a very instructive manner. 
Roget's Thesanrus of English Words is also useful^ for this and kindred pur 
poses. Crabb's Synonyms, which became famous because we had nothing 
else, is deficient in clearness, and often inaccurate. 

(a) The following work on Synonyms, published since this note was 
written, is greatly superior to both Crabbers and Whately's : " Synonyms 
Discriminated," by C. J. Smith, M.A.. Bell and Daldy, London. 1871. — Ed. 

f A talented and highly-educated young man who was made Professor 
of Natural Sciences in an American University, rarely met a partiGiilai 
friend of his without speaking of words. «\S^t. ^^ ^^^ ^JJdmJsk. S& 'OaRi 



266 PERSPICUITY OF STTLB. 

2. Perspicuity also depends on the construction of sen- 
tences and paragraphs. This important subject will not here 
be discussed at length, because it requires to be illustrated bj 
numerous examples, and can be thorolighly mastered only by 
means of written exercises. 

It is obvious that a short sentence will be more perspicuous 
than a long one. Yet a succession of very short sentences 
must not only be deficient in respect of harmony, and of the 
energy which belongs to climax, but is really unfavourable to 
perspicuity. Sentences aggregate the thoughts which are to 
be comprehended and retained ; and if these bundles, so to 
speak, are of considerable dimensions, the whole mass of 
thought will be more readily grasped and more easily borne 
with us. In order to variety, there should be a combination 
of short and long sentences. Even one that is very long 
may be quite perspicuous, provided the sense be not sus- 
pended till the close, as is done in periodic sentences.* In 
general it is better that the qualifying clauses of a sentence 
should precede those qualified; in order that when we do 
reach a concrete conception, it may be the complete concep- 
tion proposed, needing no subsequent addition or correction. 
But, "as carrying forward each qualifying clause costs some 
mental effort, it follows that when the number of them and 
the time they are carried becomes great, we reach a limit 
beyond which more is lost than is gained.^t This limit is 
much sooner reached in what is to be heard than in what is 
to be read. And the diflSculty is greater for uneducated 
minds than cultivated people can well imagine. " Aim at a • 
certain simplicity in the structure of your sentences, avoiding 
long, intricate, and complex periods. Kemember always that 
the bulk of the people are unused to reading and study. 
They lose sight of the connection in very long sentences, 
and they are quite bewildered when, for the sake of rounding 
a period, and suspending the sense till the concluding clause, 

difference between this word and this ? It is so hard to find the precise 
word for describing physical forces and phenomena." A few years later ft 
gentleman who had heard the Professor lecture said to the same friend, 
*' He is thoroughly master of the subject, and he has an eztraordiaaiy 
readiness and felicity in the use of words. What a wonderful gift ! He 
wants a word, and there it is." Fluency is a gift, but precision is the 
fruit of labour. 

* See below, chap. ill. t Herbert Spencer, on Style, p. 25. 



PERSPICUITY OP 8TTLB. 267 

• 

you transgress the customary arrangement of the words. 
The nearer therefore your diction comes to the language of 
conversation, the more familiar will it be to them, and so 
the more easily apprehended. In this the style of Scripture 
is an excellent model."* It may be added that sentences 
should be so framed as to leave no obscurity or ambiguity 
in respect to the relation of diflferent clauses. Special care 
in this respect is needed in our language, because our pro- 
nouns present very imperfect means of distinction as to gender, 
number, and case. It is grievously common to find diflficulty 
in perceiving, to which of two preceding nouns some it or 
thcU, some they or those, is designed to refer, t 

However great may be the practical diflSculty of learning 
to construct sentences well, every one can see that this is 
important. Inexperienced writers and speakers are seldom 
equally impressed with the importance of the paragraph. 
It is not uncommon to find a man of considerable ability 
writing an extended discourse or essay without any indica- 
tion of paragraphs at all ; though there will have been, in 
spite of his inattention, some natural connection of the 
thoughts, and a critic or compositor may succeed in break- 
ing up the whole into rude blocks. Others do still worse, 
for they indicate paragraphs at hap-hazard, often separating 
tnatters which should be united. Now in some respects the 
proper construction of paragraphs is more important than 
bhat of sentences. If a sentence is badly arranged, the reader 
>r hearer will at any rate have the matter of it before his 
nind, and can usually perceive, with more or less effort, 
Rrhat relation of ideas was meant to be expressed. But 
i^hen paragraphs are neglected, it requires a very broad view 
>f the whole connection of discourse to supply the defect, 
[n reading, there may be opportunity, if it is thought worth 
^hile, to look back, and carefully scan the whole, so as to 
[)erceive the grouping of thoughts ; and besides, in reading 
[>rint the compositor has helped us. But in hearing we have 
ao help, and no time to study out the connection. It is thus 
plain, that, especially in discourse which has to be heard, the 
proper management of paragraphs is indispensable to perspi- 
cuity. 

The prime requisite in a paragraph is unity. There must 

* Campbell on Pulpit Eloq., Lect. III. 
+ See this matter well discussed in Campbell's P\n\. oi "^3afi\i. ^^^ *iX>V^^. 



268 ( PEBSFIOUITT OF STTLB. 

be some one thought, or group of related tkoughts, occupying 
the whole. Digressions, when made at all, must constitate 
separate paragraphs. This one thought may commonly 1m 
presented in the opening sentence; or it may so present th« 
first of a series or group of thoughts, as to indicate tbi 
character and purpose common to them alL Sometime, how- 
ever, the opening sentence will be manifestly preparatory, 
perhaps repeating what has preceded, in order to facilitate 
the transition. Another requisite is, that the successive 
sentences should so grow out of each other, or be so joined 
together by particles, as to make the paragraph a wholfl. 
As to the length of paragraphs, there is of course no rul^ 
and the main thing to be sought is an easy and natural 
Tariety.* 

In the formation of paragraphs, and also of sentences, caiO' 
ful attention should be given to the conjunctions, and other 
connectives. What grammarians call the particles, or little 
parts of speech, are not less important than the greater partS) 
for they establish a relation between these, converting crad^ 
matter into a structure, an operative organization — ^like the 
joifits in a body. The felicitous choice of a preposition or 
conjunction, or the proper handling of a relative pronoun, 
will often contribute immensely to the perspicuity of a sen- 
tence or a paragraph.t 

In unwritten composition, or what is called extemporaneous 
speaking, it is practically better, though amounting to the . 
same thing, to fix the mind on points, rather than on parar 
graphs. Do not be thinking. how you would distribute this on 
pages if you were writing, but arrange a succession of points to 
be treated. Then taking up each of these in order, remember 
the homely saying, and " stick to your point." One may thas 
gain the unity and consecutiveness which belong to a written 
paragraph. Yet there is probably no one particular in which a 
speaker so much needs the discipline of written composition, as 
in respect to this matter of conseciUiveness in developing a 
single thought. A man who never writes anything may some- 
times learn to frame sentences well, and to arrange discouises 
welL He may have distinct points corresponding to pai»r 

* The subject of paragraphs is treated at length, and with some good 
examples, by Bain, p. 142-52. Most treatises neglect it. 

+ See, on the connectives, CampbelFs Phil, of Rhet., Part III, chap, i^- 
and V. See also Bain, as above.* 



PBBSPIOUITT OF STYLE. 269 

graphs, and each constituting a unit. But to develop these 
points in an orderly manner, so that each sentence may grow 
out of the preceding, or have a well-indicated connection with 
it, so that the developed unit may become a structure, an 
harmonious organization, this is what few men learn to achieve 
without practice in writing paragraphs. Nor does the hurried 
writing so common among those who read sermons at all mend 
the matter. What De Quincey says on a kindred subject is 
here emphatically true. "Every man who has had any ex- 
perience in writing, knows how natural it is for hurry and 
fulness of matter to discharge itself by vast sentences, in- 
volving clause within clause ad in^nitu/m — how diflScult it is, 
and how much a work of art, to break up this huge fasciculus 
of cycle and epicycle into a graceful succession of sentences, 
long intermingled with short, each modifying the other, and 
arising musically by links of spontaneous connexion. Now the 
plethoric form of period, this monster model of sentence, 
bloated with decomplex intercalations .... is the pre- 
vailing model in newspaper eloquence. Crude undigested 
masses of suggestion, furnishing rather raw materials for com- 
position and jottings for the memory, than any formal develop- 
ments of the ideas, describe the quality of writing which must 
prevail in journalism : not from defect of talents .... 
but from the necessities of hurry, and of instant compliance 
with an instant emergency, granting no possibility for revision, 
or opening for amended thought."* Nay, it requires careful 
writing, not hurried, even though sometimes rapid, and not 
put forth without critical revision, to give the kind of training 
which is here needed. Such careful writing, though not of 
what he is about to speak, an extemporaneous preacher ought 
frequently to practise, t 

3. Perspicuity depends not only on the choice of terms, and 
the proper construction of sentences and paragraphs, but also 
on the general brevity or diflfuseness of the style. 

It is a mistake to suppose that the briefest statement of an 
idea is sure to be the clearest. If it be really made clear to 
the person addressed, then of course the briefer the better. 
But " extreme conciseness is ill-suited to hearers or readers 
whose intellectual powers and cultivation are but small. .... 
It is remarked by anatomists, that the nutritive quality is not 
the only requisite in food ; — ^that a certain degree of distention 
bf the stomach is required, to enable it to act with its full 

♦ On style, p. 82. + Comp. below, T?wrt.iN. ^'d.v* ^- 



270 PBEISPICUITT OF STYLE. 

powers ; and that it is for this reason hay or straw must be 
given to horses, as well as well as com, in order to supply the 
necessary bulk. Something analagous to this takes place with 
respect to the generality of minds ; which are incapable of 
thoroughly digesting and assimilating what is presented to them, 

however clearly, in a very small compass It is 

necessary that the attention should be detained for a certain 
time on the subject; and persons of unphilosophical mind, 
though they can attend to what they read or hear, are unapt to 
dwell upon it in the way of subsequent meditation." 

" The usual expedient, however, of employing a prolix style 
by way of accommodation to such minds, is seldom successful 
Most of those who could have comprehended the meaning, if 
more briefly expressed, and many of those who could not do so, 
are likely to be bewildered by tedious expansion ; and being 
unable to maintain a steady attention to what is said, they fo^ 
get part of what they have heard, before the whole is completed. 
Add to which, that the feebleness produced by excessive dilu- 
tion, (if such an expression may be allowed,) will occasion the 
attention to languish ; and what is imperfectly attended to, 
however clear in itself, will usually be but imperfectly under- 
stood. Let not an author, therefore, satisfy himself by finding 
that he has expressed his meaning so that if attended to, he 
cannot fail to be understood ; he must consider also what atten- 
tion is likely to be paid to it. If, on the one hand, much 
matter is expressed in a very few words to an unreflecting 
audience, or if, on the other hand, there is a wearisome 
prolixity, the requisite attention may very probably not be 
bestowed.*'* 

Prolixity, then, is worse than extreme conciseness. The 
latter, though imperfectly understood, may stimulate attention 
and reflection, and lead to subsequent examination of the sub- 
ject. The former does but weary and disgust. It must be 
granted that prolixity is very common in the pulpit. Preach- 
ers often have to prepare and preach when tlieir minds are not 
in a creative mood. It seems their duty to say something, and 
custom requires that, however unfruitful the subject, and how- 
ever unfavourable their own state of mind, they shail continue 
for at least a certain number of minutes.f Under such circum- 
stances, a man's ideas are not clear, and in the feeble struggle 
to express them, he inevitably becomes prolix. 

There are several means by which we may avoid too greai 
* Whately, p. SOI, Z'^% vComp, Whatelj, p. 315. 



PERSPICUITY OP STYLE. 271 

conciseness without failing into prolixity. One o? these is repe- 
tition. In some cases it is well to repeat the statement, in the 
same words. More commonly, we may " repeat the same senti- 
ment and argument in many dififerent forms of expression; each 
in itself brief, but all together aflfording such an expansion 
of the sense to be conveyed, and so detaining the mind upon it, 
as the sense may require." This repetition must of course not 
be mere tautology. The thought must be presented in some 
other view or some new relation. " What has been expressed 
in appropriate terms may be repeated in metaphorical; the 
antecedent and consequent of an argument, or the parts of an 
antithesis may be transposed ; or several dififerent points that 
have been enumerated, presented in a varied order, etc."* Ano- 
ther means is by varied illustration. After stating the thought 
as clearly as can be done within a moderate compass, we may 
present various illustrations of it, or of its dififerent aspects. 
These interest the hearer, and detain his attention on the matter 
in hand, until he becomes perfectly familiar with it and yet not 
weary of it. There is no more remarkable example of this than 
Chalmers. His sermons often consist of a single idea, which is 
held up in dififerent lights, turned over aAd over, and round and 
round, until we have seen every facet it possesses ; and yet each 
of these aspects is made so bright with fresh illustrations, 
so brilliant with hues of fancy, that wecannot grow weary, t 
In this, as in some other respects, Chalmers is one of the 
worst models to be imitated, but one of the most profitable 
examples to be studied. And a third means of gaining the 
requisite expansion without prolixity, is division. The matter 
presented, however minute, may often be divided into several 
points, just as we divide larger topics; and these points being 
successively stated, the whole is clearly seen. 

And here let us dwell upon the fact, which the preacher 
cannot too faithfully consider, that as in several other res- 
pects, so particularly in respect to expansion, the proper style 
of public speaking is widely dififerent from that appropriate 
to an essay, or to anything designed to be deliberately read. 
This has been often stated, and in the strongest terms. 

" That is good rhetoric for the hustings which is bad for a 
book. Even for the highest forms of peculiar eloquence, the 
laws of style vary much from the general standard. In the 

♦ Whately, p. 302, 303. 

f Robert Hall said of his sermons that their moyement wa& oTk.\^w%^ii^^ 
not on wheels. 



272 PERSPICUITY OP STYLE. 

senate, and for the same reason in a newspaper, it is a virtue 
to reiterate your meaning : . . . variation of the words, 
with a substantial identity of the sense and dilution of the 
truth, is oftentimes a necessity. . . . It is the advantage 
of a book that you can return to the past page if anything 
in the present depends upon it. But return being impos- 
sible in the case of a spoken harangue, where each sentence 
perishes as it is born, both the speaker and the hearer be- 
come aware of a mutual interest in a much looser style. It 
is for the benefit of both, that the weightier propositions 
should be detained before the eye a good deal longer than 
the chastity of taste or the austerity of logic would tolerate 
in a book."* 

" Another predominant cause of the different impression 
which a speech produces in the closet from what it does 
when heard, is found in the nature of the oratorical style. 
When Dr. Johnson furnished Boswell with the materials for 
an address to a committee of the House of Commons on an 
election petition, he added, 'This you must enlarge on. You 
must not argue there as if you were arguing in the schools. 
You must say the same thing over and over again in different 
words. If you say it but once, they miss it in a moment 
of inattention.' The masters of eloquence have enforced the 
rule. Fox advised Sir Samuel Roniilly, when about to sum 
up the evidence in Lord Melville's trial, 'not to be afraid of 
repeating observations which were material, since it were 
better that some of the audience should observe it than that 
any should not understand.' Though he himself was censured 
for the practice, he declared it to be his conviction, from long 
experience, that the system was right. Pitt urged a similar 
defence for the amplification which was thought by some to 
be a defect in his style. ' Every person/ he said, * who ad- 
dressed a public assembly, and was anxious to make an im- 
pression upon particular points, must either be copious upon 
those points or repeat them, and that he preferred copious- 
ness to repetition.' Lord Brougham gives his testimony on 
the same side. The orator, he remarks, often feels that he 
could add strength to his composition by compression, but 
his hearers would then be unable to keep pace with him, 
and he is compelled to sacrifice conciseness to clearness. 
Cicero objects to the Greeks that they sometimes carried 
brevity to the point of obscurity. The expansion which is 

* De Q,\Mxicey on Style, p. 69. 



PERSPICUITY OF STYLE. 273 

a merit at the moment of delivery is turned to a defect when 
a speech is printed. What before was impressive seems now 
to be 'verbose, and the effect is diminished in much the same 
proportion that it was originally increased. It was for some 
such reason that Fox asserted that if a speech read well it 
was not a good speech."* 

Aristotle has distinctly declared the same thing. 

"And when they are compared, the speeches of the writers 
appear compressed and crampecj if delivered in debate ; but 
those of the orators, after being spoken with success, are 
commonplace when read in private ; and the reason is, that 
in debate these things are appropriate. Wherefore also com- 
positions prepared to be delivered, when the delivery is want- 
ing, do not produce their effect, and appear ridiculous. Thus 
the omission of connectives, and frequent repetitions, are in 
the written style rightly rejected ; but in the style of debate 
even the orators use them, for they are adapted to delivery. 
Yet it is necessary in repeating the same thing to vary the 
expression ; which indeed opens a way, as it were, to the 
delivery : ' This is he who robbed you ; this is he who cheated 
you; this is he who at last endeavoured to betray you.'/'+ 

In conclusion, let us remember that efforts to be perspicuous 
may be carried too far. It is wretchedly tiresome to hear a 
man carefully explaining what every one present understands 
beforehand, or continuing to repeat and open and illustrate 
what he has already made sufficiently plain. And the ora- 
torical diffuseness just spoken of, is a very different thing 
from that torrent of useless words which we are so often 
compelled to endure. 

♦Lontl. Quart. Rev., 1858, p. 272. The late Earl of Derby was re- 
markably diffuse. 

t Rhet. III. 12. 



CHAPTEE III 

ENERGY OF STYLE. 

• 

The term energy, as applied to style, includes all that we 
mean by such separate terms as animation, force, and passion. 
Animation^ or liveliness,* serves to stimulate attention ; it 
is not enough for a speaker to say what the hearer may 
understand if he attends ; the point is to arouse him, to put 
life into him, to make attention easy and pleasant, and in- 
attention difficult. For this the freshness of the thought, 
and the magnetic power of delivery are the chief agents; 
but much may also be accomplished by animation of style.t 
The term force is used especially with reference to argu- 
ments, and the kindred word power is applied both to argu- 
ments, and to motives. Passion — which in its milder and 
more tender forms we call pathos, and in its highest form 
the sublime — has its efifect upon the feelings, often by means 
of the imagination; and both force and passion aim at last 
to influence the will. It is thus plain, according to the view 
we have taken of eloquence, f that the characteristic property 
of an eloquent style is energy. Perspicuity it needs in 
common with the philosophical or didactic style ; elegance it 
may possess in common wdth the poetic style; but energy, 
i. e. animation, force or passion, is its characteristic. 

The chief requisite to an energetic style is an energetic 
nature. There must be vigorous thinking, earnest if not 
passionate feeling, and the determined purpose to accomplish 
Rome object, or the man's style will have no true, exalted 
energy. It is in this sense emphatically true that an orator 
is born, not made. Without these qualities one may give 

• Campbell's term, "vivacity," is now restricted to conversation, and the 
lic'liter kinds of writing. 

f There is a homely story of a preacher who suggested to a sleepy hearer 
that snuff might keep him awake, and was asked in return, " Couldn't you 
put a little more snuff into your sermons.'' 






Sco Introduction, 2. 



ENERGY OP STYLE. 275 

valuable instruction ; without them one might preach what 
silly admirers call "beautiful" sermons; but if a man has 
not force of character, a passionate soul, he will never be 
really eloquent. There are, however, timid and sensitive men 
who, when practice has given them confidence and occasion 
calls out their powers, exhibit far more of this masterful 
nature than they had ever imagined themselves tq possess. 

The next requisite is something to say, and something re- 
garded as exceedingly important. The mind must be full of 
thought, if there is to be forcible expression. That which is 
said must be what the speaker heartily believes to be true, 
deeply feels to be important, and earnestly desires to im- 
press upon others. The preacher has peculiar advantages in 
respect of materials conducive to energy, if he has a familiar, 
profound, and ever-freshened acquaintance with the Bible, 
No temporal interests are so momentous as those of eternity. 
No other topics can impart to the mind such vigour and 
authority as truths which we personally know to be taught 
in God's Word. "A truly mighty sacred orator is 'mighty 
in the Scriptures.' "* 

Energy of style must be considered under four heads; the 
ohoice of terms, the construction of sentences, conciseness, and 
the use of Figures, f ' 

1. As to the choice of terms, one point is, that so far as the 
subject may admit we should prefer concrete to abstract terms, 
and particular or specific to general terms. In philosophical 
discussion, or in comprehensive statements, there is of course 
need for abstract or for general terms, but these are very un- 
favourable to energy of style. " The more general the terms 
are, the picture is the fainter ; the more special they are, it is 
the brighter. The same sentiments may be expressed with 
equal justness, and even perspicuity, in the former way as in 
the latter; but as the colouring will in that case be more 
languid, it cannot give equal pleasure to the fancy, and by con- 
sequence will not contribute so much either to fix the attention 

• Shedd, p. 78. Corrp. p. 73-32. On the propriety <5f appealing to the 
passions, compare above, Part I. chap. viii. 

+ Some figures, as metaphor and synecdoche, would of course fall under 
the head of choice of terms, but many others would not. The division made 
by Campbell (followed by Whately), viz., choice of words, number of words, 
and arrangement of words, is simple and pleasing, but does not cover the 
ground. The divisions here suggested have the fault of not being mutually 
exclusive, but are yet practically CDnvenient. 



276 ENERGY OF STYLE. 

or to impress the memory." Campbell proceeds to illustrate 
this by striking examples from Scripture. 

" In the song of Moses, occasioned by the miraculous pas- 
sage of the Israelites through the Red Sea, the inspired poet, 
speaking of the Egyptians, says, * They sank as lead in the 
mighty waters.' Make but a small alteration in the ex- 
pression, and say, * They Jell as metal in the mighty waters, 
and the difference in the effect will be quite astonishing. 
Yet the sentiment will be equally just, and in either way 
the meaning of the author can hardly be mistaken." And 
the difference is wholly due to the change fiom specific to 
general terms. " * Consider the lilies how they grow ; they 
toil not, they spin not ; and yet I say unto you that Solomon 
in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. If, then, 
God so clothe the grass which to-day is in the field and to-mor- 
row is cast into the oven, how much more will he clothe you.* 
Let us here adopt a little of the tasteless manner of modem 
paraphrasts, by the substitution of more general terms. . . . 
and observe the effect produced by this change. * Consider the 
flowers how they gradually increase in their size; they do no man 
ner of work, and yet I declare to you that no king whatever, 
in his most splendid ha\)it, is dressed up like them. If, then, 
God in his providence doth so adorn the vegetable productions 
which continue but a little time on the land, and are afterward 
put into the tire, how much more will he provide clothing for 
you V How spiritless is the same sentiment rendered by these 
small variations !"* 

In order to give animation and passion to style, there 
must be an appeal to the imagination. Now we can form 
images only of individual objects, and the image of some 
individual belonging to a species, as a lily, will be far more 
easily formed and far more vivid than that of an individual 
belonging to a genus, as a flower.t 

♦ Campbell, Phil, of Rbet., p. 307,308. Comp. p. 309-15. See below in this 
chapter, under the head of Synecdoche. 

:J: Peculiar point is often given to personal application by the use of "thou** 
instead of "you." In the Sermon on the Mount, there are numerous and 
striking instances of the transition from general to particular by this means. 
Let one compare Matt. v. 21 and 23 ; 27 and 29 ; 33 and 36 ; 38 and 39 ; vi. 
1 and 2 ; 5 (correct text) and 6 ; 16 and 17 ; 19 and 22 ; vii. 1 and 3. The 
lesson is first stated in general form, and then pointed at an individual 
hearer. But observe that this is not kept up throughout the discourse. That 
would look formal, and become wearisome. There are preachers who fre- 

queutly employ " thou" in a daiii\i7, a6rk-t\m«u\a.\ taahion, which is a very dif- 

f erect thing. 



ENERGY OP STYLE. 277 

Whately points out that we are seldom shut up by the nature 
of the subject, but can usually choose between generic and 
specific terms. Thus the terms can be made more general than 
the subject requires, and this is appropriate " when we wish to 
avoid giving a vivid impression, — when our object is to soften 
what is ofifensive, disgusting, or shocking ; as when we speak of 
an ' execution,' for the infliction of the sentence of death on a 
criminal. . . . Many, especially unpractised writers, fall 
into a feeble style by resorting unnecessarily to this substitu- 
tion of the general for the specific, or of the specific for the 
singular ; either because they imagine there is more appearance 
of refinement or of profundity, in the employment of such 
terms as are in less common use among the vulgar, or, in some 
cases, with a view to give greater comprehensiveness to their 
reasonings, and to increase the utility of what they say, by 
enlarging the field of its application. Inexperienced preachers fre- 
quently err in this way, by dwelling on Virtue and Vice, — Piety 
and Irreligion, — in the abstract, without particularising ; for- 
getting that while they include much, they impress little or 
nothing."* 

Epithets will seldom contribute to energy. An epithet is an 
adjective added to a noun, or an adverb added to a verb, which 
does not add anything to the sense conveyed by the noun or 
verb, but simply brings into prominence something contained 
in it. Now as commonly managed by third-rate novelists 
and orators, epithets never render the expression foroible. Even 
when really ornamental, they are appropriate only to poetry 
and poetical prose. If you cut a bough from an apple-tree in 
spring to please your friends with its beauty, you would retain 
the twigs and leaves and blossoms ; but if you wish to knock 
down a man with it, alT these must be trimmed away. Yet 
when i)roperly introduced, epithets may add force. For in- 
stance, they may bring to notice properties of an object which 
would otherwise have escaped attention, or cause the mind to 
dwell on the characteristic thus brought out, until it gets the 
full impression. Or they may be " so many abridged arguments, 
the force of which is sufficiently conveyed by a mere hint ; e. g., 
if any one says, * we ought to take warning from the bloody 
revolution of France,' the Epithet suggests one of the reasons 
for our being warned ; and that not less clearly, and more 
forcibly, than if the argument had been stated at length.^'t It 

* Whately, p. 221, 222. Comp. above, Part I., chap. iii. 2, as to ^<i\veit^^xA 
particular morality. 
f Wimtely, p. 332 ff. 



278 ENERGY OF STYLE. 

is, however, a matter with reference to which the young writer 
or speaker, particularly if he is highly imaginative, has more 
need to restrain than to encourage himself. 

Words in which the sound resembles the sense (onomatopoeia) 
will sometimes promote energy, but in oratory they must come 
unsought, if used at all. 

Unusual words and phrases may also be energetic, because 
they contrast with the common and homely, so as to awaken 
peculiar interest, like a visitor or a foreigner.* Yet if the 
visitor be a reserved stranger, or the foreigner be ridiculous, the 
effect is not good ; and so the uncommon expressions must not 
be unintelligible, nor grotesque. 

Anglo-Saxon words are often more forcible than the cor- 
responding words of Latin origin. In some cases they are 
more specific, the Latin having furnished the general term. In 
other cases they have the power of association, having been 
connected in our minds from childhood with real objects and 
actions, while the Latin term represents only ideas. Others are 
more forcible because shorter, so as to strike a quicker blow, 
while on the contrary some long Latin words are energetic, 
because so ponderous and sonorous.f 

2. Much depends, as to energy, upon the construction of 
sentences. J 

The periodic structure of sentences requires special attention. 
The word " period " signifies a going round, a circuit, revolu- 
tion, etc., and strictly speaking, a sentence would be called a 
period when it returns at the close to the matter with which it 
began. It was very common in Greek and Latin, particularly 
the latter, to begin with a noun in the nominative case, then 
make a long sentence, consisting first qf adjuncts to the noun, 
and afterwards of adjuncts to the verb, and as the closing word 
to give the verb. This would be strictly a period ; the sentence 
circles round, and the last word is in close grammatical con- 
nection with the first. In English we seldom give precisely 
this form to long sentences, except in the inverted style of 
blank verse. 

" The blest in heaven; above the starry sphere, 
Their happy hours in joy and hymning spend.*' 

* Comp. Aristotle, Rhet. III., 2. 

t Comp. Herbert Spencer on Style, p. 12,14. His theory is inadeqmite, but 
the facts are well stated. 

X Comp. a\)0"v©, c\i«i.^. ii., '2. 



BNBRGY OP STYLE. 279 

But more generally, any sentence is called a period, when the 
sense is so suspended as to be nowhere complete till we reach 
the last clause. Campbell gives an excellent example : "At 
last, after much fatigue, through deep roads, and bad weather, 
-we came, with no small diflficulty, to our journey's end." Con- 
trast this with what is called the loose arrangement : " We 
came to our journey's end at last, with no small difficulty, after 
much fatigue, through deep roads, and bad weather."* Here 
the sense would be complete, and the sentence might end, at 
any one of the five points indicated by italicized words. If, on the 
other hand, the first form were made purely periodic, by putting 
the verb nearer the end, the effect would not be so good. Thus, 
" At last, with no small diflSculty, after much fatigue, through 
deep roads, and bad weather, we came to our journey's end." 
Here so many particular adjuncts are strung together before 
we reach the verb, as to become wearisome, if not confusing. 
The first form is better. And in fact, yet a fourth form would 
make it in this respect better still. Thus : " At last, with eo 
small diflficulty, and after much fatigue, we came, through deep 
roads and bad weather, to our journey's end."t This, however, 
differs from the first form as to the adjuncts which are first 
stated, and thereby made most prominent ; and this difference 
must slightly aflfect the resulting sense. 

"Periods, or sentences nearly approaching to periods, have 
certainly, when other things are equal, the advantage in point 
of Energy. An unexpected continuation of a sentence which 
the reader had suppoSed to be concluded, especially if, in read- 
ing aloud, he had, under that supposition, dropped his 
voice, is apt to produce a sensation in the mind of being dis- 
agreeably balked: analagous to the unpleasant jar which is 
felt,. when in ascending or descending stairs, we meet with a 
step more than we had expected : and if this be often repeated, 
as in a very loose sentence, a kind of weary impatience results 
from the uncertainty when the sentence is to close. J 

In speaking, " the periodic style is much less necessary, and 
therefore much less suitable, than in compositions designed for 
the closet. The speaker ma,j, in most instances, by the . skilful 
suspension of his voice, give to a loose sentence the eflfect of a 
Period : and though, in both species of composition the display 
of art is to be guarded against, a more unstudied air is looked 

* Phil, of Rhet., p. 389. 
f Herbert Spencer on Style, p. 26, 27. 

Z Whately, p. 365. 



280 ENERGY OP STYLE. 

for in such as are spoken.*'* In fact, very long periodic sen- 
tences are, in speaking, to be avoided. Tlie hearer must retain 
the whole period in mind, and cannot fully understand any part 
of it^until he reaches the end; and undisciplined minds will 
find this very difficult.t A period concentrates its whole force 
into one blow ; but we must not gain this energy by the sacri- 
fice either of perspicuity or of naturalness and ease. It is some- 
times advanta<?eous to make a long sentence partly loose and 
partly j)eriodical. 

The emphatic arrangement of sentences, is confirled to much 
narrower limits in English than in many other languages. In 
the familiar sentence, " Will you ride to town to-day T the 
sense will be different according as the emphasis is laid on "will," 
or on " you," or on " ride,'* etc. Now in Greek or Latin, where 
the order of words in a sentence can be very freely varied, the 
emphatic word in each of these cases might be indicated by 
its position. But English idiom does not permit this ; and the 
emphasis has to be determined from the connection, or must be 
marked by italic letters. So far as our idiom does allow inver- 
sion, we ought to employ it, and dispense with italics. In 
speaking, one will indicate the emphasis by the manner of 
utterance ; but much is gained if it can at the same time be 
indicated by the position of the w^ords. 

The most prominent position in a sentence is the beginning, 
and next to this, the end. If now a word which, according to 
the common grammatical order, would come elsewhere, be 
placed at the beginning or the end, it will attract special atten- 
tion ; it will become one of the important, the emphatic words 
of the sentence. And in general, to put a word out of its 
ordinary place, will cause it to be specially noticed. Such in- 
versions of order, by giving particular prominence to the most 
important word or clause, will often render a sentence far more 
energetic. Coicipare "Great is Diana of the Ephesians," and 
" Diana of the Ephesians is great." J In the saying of Peter, 
" Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have, give I thee,*' 
take the common grammatical order, " I have no gold and 

* Whately, p. 371. 
f" Comp. above, on Perspicuity, chap, ii., 2. 

X The French cannot here invert, as the Greek and English do ; and Camp- 
bell has very well remarked : " How weak in comparison is the French version 
of Le Clerc, La Diane des Ephesiens est une grande deesse / How deficient that 
of Beausobre, La grande Diane des EpJi^siens 1 How ridiculous that of Saci, 
Vive la grand Diane des Epheaiem I" 



ENERGY OF STYLE. 281 

silver,'* etc., and how feeble ! Observe too, that here our ver- 
sion increases the energy by separating the adjective none from 
its substantives, and putting it at the end of the clause, the 
other most emphatic position.* And not only may the predicate 
thus come first, for emphasis, but many other inversions are 
possible. ^^ Not every one that saith unto me. Lord, Lord, 
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven." ^^Now is the accepted 
time." 

Sometimes an emphatic word or phrase is put first, though 
it must afterwards be represented in its proper grammatical 
place by a pronoun. " Your fathers, where are they ? and the 
prophets, do they live for ever?" How cold and languid, com- 
pared with this, would be, "Where are your fathers? and do 
the prophets live for ever'?"t So also, ** To be or not to be, 
that is the question." In other cases, an emphatic word which 
could not stand at the head of a sentence, is introduced by 
some pronominal phrase. We could not say, *'Came forth two 
bears out of the wood," but we can say, " There came forth," 
etc. J " The word *it' is frequently very serviceable in enabling 
us to alter the arrangement : thus, the sentence, * Cicero praised 
CsBsar,' which admits of at least two modifications of sense, 
may be altered so as to express eitlier of them by thus varying 
the order : * It was Cicero that praised Csesar,' or, * It was 
Csesar that Cicero praised.' "§ There are also numerous cases 
in which a convenient inversion may be ejffected by changing 
from the active to the passive construction. Thus: " There is 
a yet more signal instance of ingratitude. One of his chosen 
twelve disciples denied Jesus Christ, and another betrayed 
him." Here " Jesus Christ " is most emphatic, and ought to 
come first. This could be managed, but with some awkward- 
ness, as follows : " Jesus Christ, one of his chosen twelve 
disciples denied, and another betrayed." All becomes easy, as 
well as forcible, by making it passive : " There is a yet more 
signal instance of ingratitude. Jesus Christ was denied by 
one of his chosen twelve disciples, and by another he was 
betrayed." 

No sentence ought to end in a large number of unaccented 
syllables, as "comparable," "exquisitely," ** agreeable n ess." It 
is best to end with a word which accents the last syllable, or at 

* Campbell, p. 378. 
t Most of these examples are from Campbell. 
t 2 Kings ii. 24. | VSliately, i^. ^^^. 



282 BNERGY OP STYLE. 

any rate to have the accent only one syllable from the end. In 
like manner, we must not close the sentence with a large num- 
ber of unemphatic words. Thus : " I will give my own atten- 
tion to the matter," is much feebler than " I will give the 
matter my own attention." 

Antithesis often adds greatly to energy. E. g. "The Sabbath 
was made for man, not man for the Sabbath." " Thou art 
anxious and troubled about many things, but one thing is need- 
ful." "The memory of the just is blessed : but the name of 
the wicked shall rot." Such antithetical expressions abound 
in the Proverbs of Solomon, as they do in the uninspired pro- 
verbs of all nations, their terseness and force contributing to 
give them popularity. How vigorous is the saying quoted 
by Quintilian : " I do not live to eat, I eat to live." In all 
such cases, each of the two contrasted clauses throws light upon 
the other, so that without losing perspicuity the expressions 
may be made very brief, and thus more pointed and forcible ; 
while at the same time the contrast makes the whole statement 
more striking. So much does antithesis contribute to energy 
and brilliancy of style, that many writers and speakers employ 
it in great excess. This disfigures the style of Macaulay, which 
is in many respects so admirable. In preaching, a manifest and 
especially a frequent effort to strike^ is particularly unbecoming. 
And besides the violation of taste in the excessive use of anti- 
thesis, there is danger, in any single case, of violating truth. 
In order strikingly to contrast two things, we may unconsciously 
exaggerate the difference. Thus Lord Bacon, who was very 
fond of antitheses, and has left a remarkable collection of them,* 
says in the Essay on Adversity, that " prosperity is the blessing 
of the Old Testament, adversity is the blessing of the New." 
But the real difference in this respect between the two Testa- 
ments is relative, and not absolute. The Old Testament 
repeatedly teaches the blessings of adversity, the New several 
times promises temporal prosperity. The former speaks mainly 
of prosperity, the latter mainly of adversity. But this difference 
in degree. Bacon converts, for the sake of his antithesis, into a . 
difference in kind. The danger of such exaggeration is very 
great, and it is a sad thing to gain force at the expense of 
truth. 

One who speaks under the influence of strong feeling is very apt 
sometimes to use broken consl/ructions. He will be so absorbed 

* De Augm. Scient. Lib. vi. Whately has extracted a number of these, 
in the Appendix [A] to his B-Vietoiic. 



ENERGY OF STYLE. 283 

as not to notice the syntax, or after beginning the sentence in 
one way, a sadden impulse will cause him to break off, and end 
it in a different way. The most impassioned speakers and 
writers naturally employ such expressions most frequently ; for 
example, they are very common in the writings of the Apostle 
Paul. Whenever actually prompted by real feeling, broken 
constructions are admissible, and forcible. But they must 
never be used from calculation, and must not be allowed, even 
when perfectly natural, to recur too often. 

Akin to this is what grammarians call aposiopesiSf where 
part of a sentence is suppressed through emotion. E. g. Luke 
xix. 42, " If even thou hadst known . . . the things tnat 
belong to thy peace !'' How much better would have been her 
destiny, it is left for silence to suggest. Luke xxii, 42, "Father, 
if thou art willing to remove this cup from me !" He does not 
go on to ask that it be removed ; but, after a pause, he adds, 
" Yet, not my will but thine be done." Acts xxiii. 9, "We find 
no evil in this man; but if a spirit spoke to him, or an 
angel — ]" How expressive was this silence, from a Pharisee 
speaking in the Sanhedrim, in presence of the Sadducees. The 
words, " let us not fight against God," were added by some 
critic or copyist, who understood grammar bettei: than rhetoric. 

As regards the whole matter of energy in the construction of 
sentences, one may find great benefit in the exercise of recasting 
sentences. This would also conduce, it is obvious, to perspicuity 
and to elegance, but it is stjll more important as to energy.* 

3. Energy is greatly promoted by Conciseness " It may be 
established as a maxim that admits no exception, that the 
fewer the words are, provided neither propriety nor perspicuity 
be violated, the expression is always the more vivid. * Brevity,' 
says Shakspeare, * is the soul of wit.' Thus much is certain, 
that of whatever kind the sentiment be, witty, humorous, 
grave, animated, or sublime, the more briefly it is expressed, 
the energy is the greater, or the sentiment is the more en- 
livened. ... As when the rays of the sun are collected 
into the focus of a burning-glass, the smaller the spot is which 
receives them, compared with the surface of the glass, the 
greater is the splendour. ... so, in exhibiting our senti- 
ments by speech, the narrower the compass of words is wherein 

* Practical Exercises of this kind may be found in Blair's Rhetoric, Lect. 
XX-XXIV. ; also in Day's Art of Discourse, and in all the best works on com- 
position, such as Quackenbos, Day, and Bain. Care should be tQik!^\!L \!L<2k\> \a 
become fastidious about trifles. 



284 ENERGY OF STYLE. 

the thought is expressed, the more energetic ia the expres- 
sion. . . . The very same sentiment, expressed diffusely, 
will be admitted barely to be just; expressed concisely, it will 
be admired as spirited."* 

There is no more remarkable example of energetic concise- 
ness than the famous saying of Caesar, Veni vidi vid, ** I came, 
saw, conquered.'* The studied brevity ot Lacedaemonian speech 
has given us the word laconic. The orators among the 
American Indians have often been remarkable for brief, pithy, 
pointed sayings. All men, cultivated and uncultivated, appre- 
ciate brevity. 

Opposed to conciseness are tautology, pleonasm, and ver- 
bosity. Sheer tautology is perhaps not a very common fault. 
Pleonasm, the use of w^ords or phrases which add nothing ta 
the sense, is quite common, and often greatly detracts from 
energy. And verbosity, the introduction of expressions which 
add something, but nothing of any real importance, is surpass- 
ingly frequent and hurtful. t 

A certain high-sounding verbosity is apt to be greatly admired 
by very ignorant or half-educated people. But this admiration 
does not argue any real benefit to them, nor any real power in 
the speaker. " It is not uncommon to hear a writer or speaker 
of this class mentioned as having *a veiy fine command of 
language,' when perhaps it might be said with more correctness 
that * his language has a command of him ;' that is, that he 
follows a train of words rather than of thought, and strings 
together all the striking expressions that occur to him on the 
subject, instead of first forming a clear notion of the sense he 
wishes to convey, and then seeking for the most appropriate 
vehicle in which to convey it. He has but the same * com- 
mand of language' that the rider has of a horse which runs 
away with him."J 

The Hebrew narrative style is peculiarly diffuse and circum- 
stantial ; and the parallelism of Hebrew poetry leads to much 
repetition. As used in the Bible, tiiese are not blemishes, but 
positive excellences ; but in our own speaking and writing we 
must remember that in these respects modern taste demands 
a different style, and that in such matters the tsiste of our 
hearers ought to be consulted. 

* Campball, Phil, of Rhet., p. 353. 

f These faults are very fully treated by Campbell, p. 358-72. 
t WhsLtQ]y, p. 347. 



ENERGY OF STYLE. 285 

Tautology and pleonasm may be corrected by merely striking 
oat the superfluous words ; and this should be carefully and 
vigorously donp. To correct verbosity it is often necessary to 
recast sentences, and substitute other terms. 

It is to be remembered that in seeking conciseness we must 
not sacrifice perspicuity. Sometimes a terse, pointed phrase 
that would not be readily intelligible to all, may yet be em- 
ployed by prefixing some more diffuse statement. " The 
hearers will be struck by the forcibleness of the sentence 
which they will have been prepared to comprehend ; they will 
understand the longer expression, and remember the shorter."* 
Interesting examples of tliis may be seen in our Lord's teach- 
ing, and in the Epistle of James. t In other cases a brief 
statement may be of such a nature as to snggrst more than is 
expressed ; either the intellect is set to pursuing a train of 
thought, or the imagination is stimulated to fill up an outlhie. 
Such exercise of the intellect and imagination, if not made 
too difficult, is highly agreeable to all ; and the mind being 
thus aroused to grasp the subject actively, will hold it much 
more firmly than if it had been passively received. It is the 
highest type of style to be terse, and suggestive.^ 

The great majority of young speakers and writers need 
with especial care to cultivate conciseness. Most of those 
who feel moved to write or speak are naturally fluent. They 
find volubility and verbosity to be easy to themselves, and 
acceptable to many of their hearers. An excessive luxuriance 
of style is much more promising than extreme barrenness ; 
but, as Cicero remarked, it needs, like an overgrowth of grain 
in spring, to be pastured down with the pen.lF The task 
often requires rigorous self-control. The lad who is thinning 
corn longs to leave three stalks yonder in one hill, because 
they all seem so large and fine. But he must remember. 
Three will make no more than two ; nay, will make less. 
Some persons, on the other hand, should stimulate them- 
selves to greater fertility in respect to style, which may be 
effected by improving the imagination, by familiarity with 
good writers whose style tends to luxuriance, and by en- 
deavouring to speak and write under the influence of a more 
stirring passion, or a more tender sentiment. 

* Whately, p. 351. 

t E. g. Matt. xix. 30 arid xx. 16 ; xxii. 14 ; xxiii. 12. James i. 12, 17, 
27; ii. 33, 26; iii. 18; iv. 17; v. 6. 

X Comp. Whately, p. 356. -^ D© Or. W, ^\-^^. 



286 ENERGY OF STYLE. 

And it must not be forgotten, that while diffuseness is un- 
favourable to energy, there may be a profusenesSy as in Cicero, 
Chalmers, De Quincey, Gladstone, which is highly energetic. 
The former spreads sluggishly over a wide expanse, the latter 
pours onward in a rushing torrent. Longinus compares the 
impassioned style of Demosthenes to 'a storm, or a thunder- 
bolt, that of Cicero to a conflagration, wide-spreading, all- 
devouring, long-continuing. Even repetition, which is often 
necessary in order to perspicuity, and which many preachers 
make distressingly feeble and tedious, may be so managed by 
a man deeply in earnest as to be but strong blows in quick 
succession. 

4. Perhaps the chief element of energy in style is the use 
Q>i figures of speech,^ Passionate feeling, whether anger, fear, 
love, or the emotion of the sublime, naturally expresses itself 
by means of bold imagery, — bold, though never elaborate or 
far-fetched. 

Figures are sometimes to be considered rather as belonging to 
the material of discourse than to style. Thus, apart from the 
expression of an idea, some comparison may be introduced 
by way of proof or elucidation. Usually, however, figures 
are employed as a means of expressing the thought, although 
they may add something to the expression, and are thus 
properly regarded as a part of style. 

Metaphor is more conducive to energy than comparison. 
The latter is useful in order to perspicuity or to elegance, 
but is apt to be avoided in impassioned or otherwise ener- 
getic discourse. It has been often remarked that in Demos- 
thenes' great oration on the Crown, where he had so much 
at stake, and speaks with such directness and force and 
vehemence, there is but a single comparison, and that couched 
in two words. Yet comparison may sometimes, from the 
nature of the subject-matter, be exceedingly impressive. "His 
eyes were as a flame of fire, and his voice as the sound of 
many waters." "As the lightning cometh out of the east, 
and shineth even unto the west, so shall the coming of the 

* This topic may be found copiously treated in any of the familiar 
works on Rhetoric, particularly in some recent works, as those of Day, Bain, 
Haven, and Hart. Lord on Figurative Language has an excellent collec- 
tion of examples from Scripture, some of which are cited below. Usage 
has not made a well-established distinction between the terms figure and 
trope, but the latter is commonly applie<l only to certain figures, particu- 
larly metaphor, metonymy, and sjnecdocitiQ. 



ENERGY OP STYLE. 287 

Son of man be." "The ungodly . . are like the chaflf 
which the wind driveth away." 

The metaphor assumes or implies a resemblance or an 
analogy, without stating it as in the comparison, and is thus 
more condensed and terse. Where a metaphor would not be 
readily intelligible, it may be combined with a comparison, 
or made plain by some additional term. A great multitude 
of metaphors have become so familiar, that they no longer 
possess any special force ; but in the many that never wear 
out, and in the unlimited range of new invention and com- 
bination, metaphors present to the orator an inexhaustible 
source of energetic expression. It is imagination that must 
produce them, and good taste that must regulate their use. 
Inexperienced speakers often employ metaphors that are in- 
congruous in themselves, or carried out into ridiculous or 
wearisome detail. But much will depend on subject, occa- 
sion, and feeling. Even Shakspeare's often-condemned ex- 
ample of a mixed metaphor, " To take arms against a sea 
of troubles," is allowable and natural* in Hamlet, when fren- 
zied and meditating suicide, and speaking to himself alone.* 

Synecdoche is also favourable to energy. When a 
part of a thing is taken for the whole, or the species for 
the genus, the expression is apt to be more animated and 
suggestive ; just as we have already seen that particular or 
specific terms are more energetic than general terms. " They 
shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears 
into pruning-hooks," is immensely more forcible than to say 
in general that they will convert their weapons of war into 
implements of agriculture. 

Hyperbole, or saying more than is meant, is very natural 
to a person so absorbed in the contemplation of a particular 
object or subject as to exaggerate its comparative importance, 
or to one so intensely excited that all ordinary expression 
seems to him tame. It is also allowable in any case where 
one knows that the exaggerated language need not be mis- 
understood, and desires to make a deep impression as to an 
important fact. " And there are also many other things 
which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every 
one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain 
the books that should be written." (John xxi. 25.) Such 
expressions are particularly natural to the fervid Oriental 
mind, and they have great power with the masses of men. 
The Apostle Paul is remarkable for \iy^et\>cAa%, ^\A ^ort 

* Comp. Haven's Rhet. p. 111. 



288 ENERGY OF STYLE. 

strong language of every kind. His impassioned expression, 
" I could wish tliat myself were accursed from Christ for my 
brethren '' (Rom. ix. 3), is best understood as an instance of 
hyperbolical language, and can be appreciated only in pro- 
portion as we sympathize with his patriotic and pious ardour 
and devotion. Our Lord's teaching has a singular and very 
striking peculiarity in the use of extreme cases to set forth 
a principle. " Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right 
cheek, turn to him the other also." When he himself was 
smitten on the cheek, we do not read that he turned the 
other. It was an extreme, hyperbolical way of stating the 
injunction not to strike back ; and though sometimes mis- 
understood and misrepresented, the statement is one which 
no man ever forgets. Compare the expressions, " Let not 
thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth," " If any 
man come to me, and hate not his father and mother,'* etc. 
(Matt. vi. 3 ; Luke xiv. 26.) As a teacher of men, our 
Lord used a great variety of expedients for stimulating their 
languid attention, for compelling them to remember and 
reflect. Many a phrase of his fails to be understood unless 
we bear this in mind, and his example shows that such efforts 
may be made in a spirit and tone wholly unlike that of 
" sensation " preachers.* 

Personification, representing or addressing an inanimate 
object as if it had life, sometimes imparts to discourse great 
animation and beauty, and even passionate energy. Examples 
of it abound in the Scriptures, as well as in all poetry and 
oratory. The personification of Wisdom in the Proverbs of 
Solomon is very striking, and has been generally supposed 
to contain an allusion to a real person, the Word of God. 
Personifications of the Church are often carried further in 
preaching than is wise. Our language presents unusual 
facilities for this figure, from its unique peculiarity of treat- 
ing all names of things as of the neuter gender, so that to 
call an inanimate object "he" or "she" will at once make 
a personification. We must be careful not to abuse this 
advantage. All high- wrought imagery must be sparingly 
employed.t 

Apostrophe consists in "turning away" from our audience, 
and addressing some person or thing, usually one of which we 

* As to the danger of our falling into extravagance, see near the end 
of this cliapter. 



ENERGY OP STYLE. 289 

bad been speaking. If it be a thing that is thus addressed, 
there is also a personification. " It cannot be that a prophet 
perish out of Jerusalem. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which 
killest the prophets," etc. (Luke xiii. 33.) But there may 
be apostrophe to a real person, and there is often personifi- 
cation when we only speak of the object personified, without 
addressing it. Apostrophe properly belongs to the language of 
passion, and even as such, it must not occur too frequently, 
nor be too long continued. A preacher standing with upturned 
eyes, and addressing some Scripture character, departed friend, 
or personified virtue, cannot go on through many sentences. 

Exclamation is sometimes akin to apostrophe, but properly 
distinct. Impassioned preachers are somewhat apt to use it 
too freely. Some say oh ! ah ! or alas ! so often that it loses 
all power. On the other hand, we must not be fastidious in 
avoiding exclamation, where it is naturally prompted by actual 
feeling. 

Interrogation is with all orators a frequent means of giving 
animation to discourse. Not only may an antagonist, real or 
imaginary, be questioned, in such a manner as to awaken hvely 
interest on the part of the hearers, but questions are con- 
stantly addressed to the hearers themselves. Their minds are 
thus aroused somewhat as if called on actually to answer. It 
should be observed that one is liable sometimes to fall as it 
were into an interrogative mood, and throw so much of his 
discourse into the form of questions, as to produce the most 
disagreeable species of monotony. It is important to be on 
our guard against this, and when upon any occasion conscious 
of it, to break away by a resolute effort. 

Dramatism gives to discourse a life and vigour and charm 
that can in scarcely any other way be equalled. To personate 
some character and speak his sentiments, to introduce an 
objector stating his objections, and answer them point by point, 
to sustain a dialogue between two supposed persons, to repro- 
duce some scene by dramatic description, are methods which 
all effective speakers more or less employ, and examples of 
which abound in Demosthenes, Chrysostom, Spurgeon. In the 
pulpit, dramatism must usually be kept within somewhat 
narrow limits, and must always be regulated by good taste and 
sobriety of feeling. Especially do imitations of action and 
tone require to be carefully guarded, lest they become ridicu- 
lous, or at any rate unsuitable to devout discourse.* 

♦ Comp. Vinet, p. 45tf-65. 
U 



290 ENBROY OF STYLE. 

As to the whole matter of energy of style, grave mistake 
are often committed. Some speakers imagine that they mu^ 
be energetic in style and manner even when it does not suit tbd 
subject, or does not accord with their actual feelings. Now il 
is only strong feeling that prompts impassioned or in any wiw 
energetic expression. To gain the latter we must cultivate our 
sensibilities, and must keep the mind in contact with the sub- 
ject to be treated until the corresponding emotions are excited.* 
If little or no emotion really exists, the langua^ of passioB 
produces no effect, or even a contrary effect to that desired. 
It is one of the most important lessons a preach^ can leAiV; 
not to assume earnestness hf style or delivery, when h& has 
not earnestness of feeliii^. 

Another serious and very common mistake is in the eOxi 
to maintain uniform energy throughout a discourse. ''An 
author should guard against the vain ambition of expressing 
everything in an equally high-wrought, brilliant, and forisiblia 
style. The neglect of this caution often occasions thiB iwta- 
tion of the best models to prove detrimental. When ik^ 
admiration of some fine and animated passages leads a you^g 
writer to take these passages for his general model, and to 
endeavour to make every senten<^e he composes equally fiine^ he 
will, on the contrary, give a flatness to the whole, and destp?py 
thQ effect of those portions which would have been forciUe H 
they had been allowed to stand prommerU, To brighten tii# 
dark parts of a picture, produce? much the sajsie res^U as H 
one had darkened the bright parts ; in either case there is ^ 
want of relief and contrast; and Composition, as well «fl 
Painting, has its lights and shades, which must be distributed 
with no less skill, if we would produce the desired effect."t 

In highly passionate speaking there must be variety, altemar 
tion. In any intense physicsd exertion, one needs frequent 
change of posture, so as to bring different muscles into play, 
and let them relieve each other. The same thing is true as to 
mental excitement. J Neither the hearers, nor even the speaker 
himself, can keep up a very high excitement for more than a 
brief period, certainly not in a natural and healthy way. Now 
the most complete alternation here would be from pathos or 
passion to humour. The humorous writera and speakers almost 
always introduce pathetic passages merely for relief, and via 

* Comp. above on Application, Part I., chap. viii. 
t Whately, p. 334. • . % Oom^. Spencer on Style, p. 36. 



ENERGY OP STYLE. 291 

versa the principle applies equally welL But the preacher 
caunot relieve the minds of his hearers by any but rare and 
delicate touches of humour. He may, however, again and 
again descend from the impassioned to the quiet and easy, may 
cause passion to swell by successive waves, receding in order to 
advance farther ; and he must in other ways vary the emo- 
tions excited, just so far as will be compatible with his specific 
design. 

And great mistakes are also made as to what constitutes 
energy of style. There is a jerky, convulsive energy, like that 
of Carlyle, which is by no means worthy of imitation. There 
is an over-wrought, exaggerated energy, which Longinus de- 
scribes as " not sublime, but sky-scraping," and a turgid^ 
inflated, would-be energy, which is nothing but bombast. And in 
this stirring age, especially among our American people, there 
is a tendency to be prodigiously excited upon small occasion, 
to use superlatives, exaggerated epithets, and impassioned 
imagery, where they are unnecessary, and therefore inappro- 
priate.* 

• Comp. above, Part III., chap. i. 1. In the Dialogue de Oratoribus 
{printed with the works of Tacitus), chap, xx., xxii., there may be found a 
remarkable account of the false taste prevailing about a.d. 75, which was 
constantly esa&ymg to strike or to dazzle, and which reckoned Cicero tame 
an<}.dull. 



CHAPTER IV. 

ELEGANCE OF STYLE. 

Elegance of style is the product of imagination, alone or in 
combination with passion, and operating under the control of 
good taste. Any exercise of taste comprises an emotion and a 
judgment. The emotion excited by beauty or by its opposite, 
is involuntary ; but the judgment that a certain object, idea, 
or expression is beautiful or the contrary, can be controlled 
and corrected, and the internal standard by which we judge, 
admits of indefinite improvement. He who would attain 
elegance of style, then, must on the one hand cultivate imagi- 
nation and sensibility, and on the other must seek, by thought- 
ful contemplation of the truly beautiful, to improve his taste.* 

Elegance, in speaking, is less important than perspicuity or 
energy, but it greatly contributes to the objects of even the 
most serious discourse. Real elegance will of course be widely 
modified by subject, occasion and design ; and thus modified^ 
it is free from all just objection, and worthy of very earnest 
pursuit. 

Aristotle remarks : " The first style of rhetoric was formed 
on that of poetry, witness the style of Georgias ; and even at 
the present time the majority of ignorant people fancy that 
such orators speak most delightfully ; this however is not the 
case, but the style of poetry and that of prose is distinct."t 
The principal object of the poet is to give pleasure ; that of 
the orator is to convince, impress, persuade. For the former, 
beauty is the most important element of style ; for the latter, 
it is thoroughly subordinate to perspicuity and force. There 
is a similar, though not equal difference between a history and 
a romance. In holiday speeches, and all set orations, to please 
becomes a more prominent object, and here the style of poetry 
is more nearly approached. 

Comp. abovo, Part III., uhap. i. 2, on ImproyemeDt in Style. 

\ Eliet III. 1 



ELEGANOB OF STTLE. 293 

This important difference between oratory and poetry is 
strikingly illustrated by Adam Smith, who contrasts dancing 
'with walking, and singing with speaking. 

"Were I to attempt to discriminate between dancing and any 
other kind of movement, I should observe, that though in per- 
forming any ordinary action, — in walking, for example, across 
the room, a person may manifest both grace and agility, yet if 
he betrays the least intention of showing either, he is sure of 
offending more or less, and we never fail to accuse him of some 
degree of vanity and affectation. In the performance of any 
such ordinary action, every one wishes to appear to be solely 
occupied about the proper purpose of the action ; if he means 
to show either grace or agility, he is careful to conceal that 
meaning, and in proportion as he betrays it, which he almost 
always does, he offends. In Dancing, on the contrary, every 
one professes and avows, as it were, the intention of displaying 
some degree of either grace or agility, or of both. The display 
of one or other, or both of these qualities, is, in reality, the 
proper purpose of the action ; and there can never be any dis- 
agreeable vanity or affectation in following out the proper pur- 
pose of any action. When we say of any particular person, 
that he gives himself many affected airs and graces in Dancing, 
we mean either that he exhibits airs and graces unsuitable to 
the nature of the Dance, or that he exaggerates those which 
are suitable. Every Dance is, in reality, a succession of airs 
and graces of some kind or other, which, if I may say so, profess 
themselves to be such. The steps, gestures, and motions 
which, as it were, avow the intention of exhibiting a succession 
of such airs and graces, are the steps, gestures, and motions 
which are peculiar to Dancing. . . • The distinction 
between the sounds or tones of Singing, and those of Speaking, 
seems to be of the same kind with that between the steps, etc., 
of Dancing, and those of any other ordinary action. Though 
in Speaking a person may show a very agreeable tone of voice, 
yet lif he seems to intend to show it, — if he appears to listen t« 
the sound of his own voice, and as it were to tune it into a 
pleasing modulation, he never fails to offend, as guilty of a 
most disagreeable affectation. In Speaking, as in every other 
ordinary action, we expect and require that the speaker should 
attend only to the proper purpose of the action, — the clear and 
distinct expression of what he has to say. In Singing, on the 
contrary, every one professes the intention to please b^ tJx^ 
tone and cadence of his voice ; and "he Tio\i OTi\:^ w^^^^ax^ ^»<5> \i^ 
gulltjr of no disagreeable affectation in domg ^o,\i\SL\» ^^ exj^i'^sR^* 



294 ElilBIGANOE OF STTLB. 

and require that he should do so. To please by the Choice and 
Arrangement of agreeable sounds, is the proper purpose of all 
music, vocal as well as instrumental ; and we always expect 
that every one should attend to the proper purpose of what- 
ever action he is performing. A person may appear to sing, as 
well as to dance, affectedly ; he may endeavour to please by 
sounds and tones which are unsuitable to the nature of ihe 
song, or he may dwell too much on those which *are suitable to 
it. The disagreeable affectation appears to consist always, not 
in attempting to please by a proper, but by some improper 
modulation of the voice."* 

So in poetrv the " proper purpose" is to give pleasure ; and 
we simply require that it be skilfully adapted to that purpose. 
If poetry also instructs, or moves to action, that is something 
incidental, or subordinate to its main design. The same thing 
is true of novels, and all other prose writings belonging to what 
is called " light literature." But in oratory, as we have s66ii, 
the proper purpose is very different, and entertainment, the 
gratification of taste, has place only as subsidiary to cohviction 
and persuasion. Especially is this true of the preacher, who is 
supposed to have everywhere a practical and thoroughly serious, 
if not a uniformly solemn purpose. And to preaching, beyond 
almost every other variety of public speaking, applies the fol- 
lowing instructive and convincing passage from Henry Rogers : 
^'If a speaker is in earnest, he never employs his imagina- 
tion as the poet does, merely to delight us, nor indeed to delight 
us at all — except as appropriate imagery, though used for 
another object, necessarily imparts pleasure. For this rfeaSbn, 
illustrations are selected always with reference to their folrce 
rather than their b6auty ; and are very generally marked more 
by their homely propriety than by their grace and elegance. 
. . Everything marks the man intent upon serious business, 
whose sole anxiety is to convey his meaning with as much pre- 
cision and energy as possible to the minds of his auditors. Bat 
with the poet, whose very object is to delight us, or even with 
the prose writer, in those species of prose which have the same 
object, the case is widely different. He may employ two ot 
. more images, if they are but appropriate and elegant, where the 
orator, would employ but one, and that perhaps the siipaplest 
and homeliest ; he may throw in an epithet merely to suggest 
some picturesque circumstance, or to give greater minuteness 
and vivacity to description , lie may sometimes indulge in ft 
more flowing and graceixiV ex^Te^«vo\i \)ci^\i 'Oci^ <5ita.tor would 

♦ Adam Smit\i, qvio\ft^ \>1 ^\i».\ft\i; ^. ^. 



ELEGANOB OF STYLE. 295 

Venture upon ; that is, whenever harmony will better answer 
his object than energy, What does it matter to him who is 
^^king for Walking's sake, how long he lingers amidst the beau- 
tiful, or how often he pauses to drink in at leisure the melody 
and the fragrance of nature 1 But the man who is pressing on 
to his journey's end cannot afford time for such luxurious 
loitering. The utmost he can do is to snatch here and there a 
homely floweret from the dusty hedge-row, and eagerly pursue 
his way. So delicate is the perception attained by a highly 
cultivated taste of the proprieties of all grave and earnest com- 
position, that it not only feels at enmity with the meretricious 
or viciously ornate, but immediately perceives that the greatest 
beauties of certain species of prose composition would become 
little better than downright bombast, if transplanted into any 
composition the object of which was serious. We may illus- 
trate this by referring to a passage of acknowledged beauty, — 
the description, in the 'Antiquary,' of the sunset preceding the 
Storm tTiere so grandly delineated. * The sun was now resting 
his httge disc upon the edge of the level ocean, and gilded the 
accumulation of towering clouds through which he had travelled 
the livelong day, and which now assembled on all sides, like 
misfortunes and disasters around a sinking empire and falling 
monarch. Still, however, his dying splendour gave a sombre 
magnificence to the massive congregation of vapours, forming 
out of their unsubstantial gloom the show of pyramids and 
towers, some touched with gold, some with purple, some with a 
hue of deep and dark red. The distant sea, stretched beneath 
this varied and gorgeous canopy, lay almost portentously still, 
reflecting back the dazzling and level beams of the descending 
luminary, and the splendid colouring of the clouds amidst 
which he was setting.' No one in reading this passage can 
help admiring its graphic beauty : the numerous epithets, con- 
sidering the purpose for which they are employed, — that of 
detaining the mind upon every picturesque circumstance, and 
giving vividness and fidelity to the whole picture, — appear no 
more frequent than they ought to be. But suppose some naval 
historian, who has occasion to narrate the movements of two 
hostile fleets (separated on the eve of battle by a storm), should 
suddenly pause to introduce a similar description ; — would not 
<3ie effect be so ridiculous, that no one could read to the end of 
the passage without bursting into laughter?'** 

* Henry Bogers on Sacred Eloquence, in '' Reason and Faith, and other 
Essays," p. 213. 



296 ELEGANCE OP STYLE. 

We can now easily understand why some preachers care too 
much for embellishment. They take a wrong view of their 
office, or at any rate are influenced by a wrong motive. They 
aim too much at entertaining , at gratifying the audience. 
They do not feel the seriousness of their work, the solemnity 
of their position. While perhaps really desiring to do goo^ 
they dwell too much on the necessity of pleasing the people in 
order to profit them. And aware that many hearers care only, 
or chiefly, to be entertained, aware that they talk in going home 
not of the truth, but of the performance and the performer, 
such preachers too readily yield to this apparent demand, and 
set it before their minds as a distinct if not a principal object 
to please. But if the earnest desire to do men good quite 
swallows up the wish to please them, if the sense of responsi- 
bility to God rises superior to concern for men's criticism, then 
the preacher's style will have only such modest beauty as is 
easily kept in its proper place. And when he is tempted to 
yield to the false taste of many, it may help him to remember 
that the desire to please is veiy apt to defeat itself. His elabo- 
rate prettinesses will not only grieve the devout and disgust the 
really intelligent, but will soon pall upon the taste of those he 
sought to win, who will have all the while in their hearts a 
vague feeling that this sort of thing is unworthy of him, and will 
presently begin tofind it rather tiresome to themselves.* 

On the other hand, some preachers very unwisely take pains 
to avoid the beautiful. There are thoughts which naturally 
incline to blossom into beauty ; why sternly repress them ? 
There are grand conceptions which spontaneously clothe them- 
selves in robes of majesty, and march forth in a stately but 
native dignity. And besides subjects that naturally shine and 
blaze, there are many very commonplace topics which the 
preacher must be constantly bringing to view, and which will 
gain a much more interested attention, from even the most 
devout hearers, if delicately touched with some hues of fancy. 
It is a noble thing thus to take important truths which have 
grown dull by use, and give them new brightness. This must 
not go so far that the attention of the speaker, and so that of 
the hearers, is drawn to the beauteous garb rather than to the 
truth itself. Far better leave the truth unadorned, to win 
such notice as it can.t But this excess will be readily 

* Comp. Vinet, p. 349. 
-f Comp. as to IllvistraUons, Paxt I., chap. vii. 3. 



MiEGANOE OF STTLE. 297 

avoided, if one has good taste and a serious purpose. Vinet 
has well said that the really beautiful excludes the pretty. 

They who are so afraid of elegance, forget that a native 
beauty, and even some ornament of style, is not of necessity 
imfavourable to perspicuity.* They forget that the beautiful 
and the useful are in nature often closely connected 3 that the 
blossoms of the apple-tree, and the silks of the com, are 
remarkable for their rich and varied, but delicate beauty. The 
fanciful style of some preachers is as little appropriate as 
if one called to build the family a home, should build a garden 
bower; but a family mansion may be thoroughly suited to 
convenience and comfort, and yet have a pleasing form, and 
even a certain moderate ornamentation. 

True energy of style is often at the same time elegant. 
Impassioned feeling often cannot express itself otherwise than 
by bold images, and these, though chosen for their strength, 
may also have an unstudied beauty. A painted cheek is an 
abomination; but let there be high health, and animated 
feeling, and without an effort or a thought the cheek takes to 
itself a colour most bright and fair. The Creator meant that 
it should be so ; are you wiser than the Creator? 

It should be added that quotations, whether of verse or 
prose, which are made merely or even chiefly for their beauty, 
can never be appropriate in preaching. The flowers suitable in 
serious discourse are never artificial flowers. Especially unbe- 
coming is the introduction of ornamental passages from poets 
well known to be grossly irreligious. Some preachers make 
themselves worse than ridiculous by " spouting" Byron. 

Elegance of style depends especially upon terms, arrange- 
jnerU, and imo/gery; and there is much true elegance in that 
simplicity of style which is, on every account, so much to be 
desired. 

1. The most energetic terms are often at the same time the 
most elegant; so that we gain the latter excellence while seek- 
ing the former, t But this is not always the case. Some 
highly forcible expressions have to be avoided because they are 
indecent or vulgar. And if ever slang phrases are employed 
by a preacher, it ought to be under very peculiar circum- 
stances. Ideas which are too painful must not be expressed in 
the most forcible terms, but softened. The use of words too 

• Comp. Whately, p. 306. 
t Comp. the discussion of energetic terms in the ioTegoSii^ Oca.^\at. 



^98 ELEa^NOE OF fftYlM. 

grand for the sabject, is a very common offence iogftblst 
elegance. Whether an energetic expression shall be rejected 
because inelegant is a question 6n which no general rule can be 
given; each case must be decided on its own metits. Bttt 
words which really weaken the expression or do not at aH 
strengthen it, must scarcely ever be employed becatrse of their 
supposed elegance. 

John Foster, in one of his celebrated Essays, urges "vhty 
earnestly that one reason for the aversion of men of taste to 
evangelical religion, is the too frequent employment in preach- 
ing of the technical terms of theology, and th« language at 
Scripture. He himself took great pains to avoid both. No 
doubt there is sometimes an excessive multiplication of docli 
terms, giving the sermon a dialect quite different from the 
language of ordinary life, and this error good taste mftfst 
correct. But the aversion of men c^ taste to evangelical reli- 
gion is much more largely the ^use than the effect of this dis- 
like to theological and scriptural terms. They wish us to tone 
down and refine away the characteristic ideas of Scripture.* 

2. As to the arrangement of words,t we must of course 
avoid harsh or disagreeable combinations, unless they are 
necessary in order to energy. The English language is specially 
liable to the frequent recurrence of hissing sounds, 8, «, shy ch^ 
etc.:]: Thus the phrase, " in Jesus's name," has an unpleasant 
souiid. 

It is also of some importance to avoid the too frequent repe- 
tition of a word in the same sentence or paragraph. Modem 
taste is more fastidious about this than was that of the ancients. 
We tnust not, through mere desire for variety, sacrifice imy- 
thing important to the sense, a fault into which our comtfictt 
English version has very often fallen. Thus in Bomans^ 
chap, iv., the word "reckon" occurs very often, being the lead- 
ing term of the argument, and our version renders by three 
different words, *' count," " reckon," and " impute," thus seri- 
ously obscuring the verbal connection, with no gain but that of 
variety. Where, however, the connection of our discourse does 

* On the adrontages of a " Scriptural tone " in sermons, see Yinet^ 
p. 420. 

f The number is here a matter of subordinate importance ; there may be 
an elegant conciseness or an elegant diffuseness, though the former is best 
for energy and often best for perspicuity. 



ELEGANCE OF STTLE. 299 

not really require the repetition of the same word, it should 
be suitably varied. There is in English special danger that 
cefrtain pronouns, particularly tt, that, and which, and the 
preposition of, will be too often repeated in quick succession. 

Antithesis will frequently contribute to elegance, as well as 
to energy ; ♦ but if used too freely, it tends to stiffness, or to , 
monotony. 

Alliteration was a leading peculiarity of Anglo-Saxon poetry, 
and is still somewhat frequently employed in poetry and even 
in prose. Chalmers was very fond of it. In prose, especially 
in preaching, it should be used but rarely, and in an easy, un- 
studied fashion. 

Sentences are of course most elegant when smooth and flow- 
ing. But better harsh strength than smooth weakness. " You 
may break grammar, if you break hearts." And a constant 
succession of smooth and graceful sentences will inevitably 
become monotonous. Gibbon wearies by his uniform stateli- 
ness. Even Prescott*s style would be improved by the occa- 
sional introduction of sentences quite different in pattern. 

The parts of a sentence are often so proportioned as to give 
it a rhythmical movement. Excited feeling naturally tends to 
rhythmical expression, as is sometimes seen even in voice and 
gesture. The metre of poetry is one species of rhythm. The 
perfectly regular recurrence of the same movement is, how- 
ever, too laboured and deliberate a thing to be natural in 
speaking. Accordingly, as Aristotle remarks, the rhythm of 
oratory must never become metre. The only exception, if 
there be one, is in funeral orations and the like, where there is 
high-wrought but somewhat artificial feeling, and where, as in 
poetry, the principal object is to please. + It is not proper, in 
Gtder to rhythm in prose, to throw in clauses simply for that 
purpose, as is often done by Johnson and his imitators ;% but 
the expression may be so chosen and so co-ordinated as to give 
the whole a rhythmical movement. This had best be sppn- 
taneous, but need by no means be unconscious ; one may law- 
fully give, even in extemporaneous speech, a certain occasional 
and subordinate attention to the proportion of clauses, the 

* Comp. in the preceding chapter. 

i* In some pathetic passages of Dickens, a whole paragraph might be cut 
up into blank verse, without changing a word. But this would be intolerable 
m an appeal to a jury, or in a sermon. 

Ij: Comp. Whately, p. S5Z-5, 



300 ELEGANCE OF STYLE. 

harmonious flow of the sentence. It is obvious that the 
cadence, or concluding strain of a sentence, is in this respect 
most important. Here, as was seen with regard to energy, we 
must avoid ending with a number of unemphatic words or 
unaccented syllables. This requires special care in English. 
^We have not only a great number of such terminations as 
-osity, -ility, etc., but many words like occupancy, profitable- 
ness, in which, according to the Gothic tendency, the accent 
remains on the first or leading syllable, no matter how many 
syllables may be added, and which are exceedingly ill-suited to 
close a sentence. Moreover, it does not sound well if a sen- 
tence containing one or more long clauses, should end with a 
short one. Many points of this sort might be noted ; but after 
all, rhythm in prose scarcely requires particular rules, being 
sufficiently regulated by the ear, if once a man has learned to 
give it some attention, in his own speaking and writing, and in 
the books he most carefully reads. It is highly important that 
the rhythm of successive sentences should frequently vart/, as 
is eminently the case in Burke. Milton's prose has great 
majesty of movement, but with hardly sufficient variety, and 
with some sacrifice of practical directness. Robert Hall's style 
is in this as in most respects very admirable ; yet even ^ he 
would have more power with a miscellaneous audience if now 
and then a sentence were in its ending more abrupt — some 
quick, sharp saying that would crack like a whip. The sermons 
of Addison Alexander have in some impassioned passages 'a 
magnificent rhythm.* 

3. Most of the figures which give energy to style, will also 
impart elegance. Those which especially conduce to elegance 
are simile, metaphor, and personification. A comparison, or 
simile, which has any considerable value in the way of elucida- 
tion or proof, becomes much more valuable if also beautiful, 
because then it gains a pleased and sympathizing attention. 
That which does not contribute to perspicuity or force, most 
never be introduced merely as an ornament, for this, as we 
have seen, belongs to poetry, but not to practical and serious 

* The subject of melody and harmony of style is discussed at length by 
Day, p. 218-46. See also Hoppin, p. 293-7. The ancients were much more 
attentive to this matter than the modems. Besides Aristotle (Rhet. VIIL 
8), Cicero treats of rhythm at great length, and boasts that no one has ever 
before discussed it so thoroughly (Orator, cap. 50-71). Quintilian is more 
hiiet (IX. 4, 45-120), and cautions against overdoing the thing. With this 
caution, Cicero's observations mW \)© io\3Lii^ c^\a VMfccwfiUve. 



ELEGANCE OP STYLE. 301 

discourse. Every one is familiar with the use of comparisons 
and metaphors to elevate or to degrade. No better example 
can be found than that often quoted from Aristotle.* The poet 
Simonides was requested by the victor in a mule-race to write 
a triumphal ode ; and offended at the small present offered, 
said he would not write about half-asses, which was the common 
Greek name for mules. But a larger present being offered, he 
addressed them in an ode as "daughters of storm-footed 
steeds." It is much to know which side of a subject to selectf 

4. No quality of style is more frequently urged as an object 
of pursuit than Simplicity, Every one feels that simplicity is 
a great excellence. But when we attempt to analyse simplicity, 
and show how it may be attained, we are apt to find unex- 
pected diflBculty. The opposite of a simple style would seem 
to be one that is involved, or that is too elaborate, or that i^ 
overloaded with ornament. In the first case we might say that 
a simple style does not roll up an idea in manifold clauses and 
sentences, which we must painfully unroll in order to perceive 
it, but spreads out the idea at once to our view ; that it is direct / 
and easy to understand. Then usage extends the term to 
denote a style that is not excessively laboured, or in any respect 
artificial, that does not appear to be produced 'with great effort. 
And 'in a particular variety of this use we mean by it a style 
that has no elaborate ornamentation. 

A simple style, then, as it unfolds the thought at once, wUl 
be perspicuous, though there may be a certain kind of perspi- 
cuity where, strictly speaking, there is not simplicity. You 
may make an idea plain by repeated and varied statement and 
illustration; a simple style makes it plain at once. In this 
respect simplicity demands both the conditions of perspicuity 
we have heretofore noticed ; the language must be such as the 
hearers will easily understand, and it must exactly express the 
idea. A man is not certainly " simplifying" a thought when 
he is hammering it by prolonged and tedious explanation. He 
must find the least complicated, the most direct and readily 
intelligible expression, which at the same time exactly hits his 
meaning. Men often use familiar words, but do not so choose 
and connect them as to make their style simple. 

♦ Rhet. III. 2. 

t Compare what is said of figures above in chap. iii. 4 ; also on Illustra- 
tion, above, Part I. chap. vii. 



302 ELEGANCE OF STYLE. 

In the other ceise a simple style means a style which is not 
laboure(} or artificial, which flows freely, and seems to be 
natural. K it is at the same time really perspicuous, this easy, 
inelaborate style is always the result of careful self-disciplin^ 
and the expression of ideas patiently reflected on and clearly 
conceived. There are peculiarities of natural tendency in this 
as in all respects, but it is a great mistake to regard true sim- 
plicity of style as a mere gift of nature. One must habitualij 
think his thoughts into clearness, and must acquire wide aii4 
easy command of the best resources of language, if he would 
be able to speak simply, and yet really say something. 

And when by simplicity we mean the absence of excessiTe 
ornamentation, let us beware of going to the opposite extreme. 
South has sharply satirised his great contemporary Jeremy 
Taylor, by extracting from his writings some specimens of over- 
wrought, fanciful ornament. " * I speak the words of sober- 
ness,' said St. Paul, and I preach the Gospel not with the 
' enticing words of man's wisdom.' This was the way of the 
Apostle's discoursing of things sacred. Nothing here of ' the 
fringes of the north star !' nothing of nature's becoming un- 
natural ;' nothing of * the down of angels' wings, or the beautir 
ful locks of cherubims;' no starched similitudes introduced 
with a ' Thus have I seen a cloud rolling in its airy mansion, 
and the like. No, — these were sublimities above the rise of 
the Apostolic spirit. For the Apostles, poor mortals, were 
content to take lower steps, and to tell the world in plain terms 
that he who believed should be saved, and that he who believed, 
not should be damned. And this was the dialect which pierced 
the conscience, and made the hearers cry out. Men and brethren, 
what shall we do 1 . . . In a word, the Apostles' preaching 
was therefore mighty and successful, because plain, natural aud 
familiar, and by no means above the capacity of their hearers ; 
nothing being more preposterous, than for those who were pro- 
fessedly aiming at men's hearts, to miss the mark by shooting 
over thteir heads.* The expressions quoted by South are, a' 
least as they here stand, supremely ridiculous for a sermon ; a^d 
unfortunately they are sometime paralleled in our own doy- 
But simplicity by no means excludes all ornament in all cases. 
Many a thought, no doubt, is "when unadorned, adorned the 
most," because, like a statue without drapery, its own form ^ 

* Quoted by Henry Rogers, p. 219. 



ELBGANOB OF STYLE. 303 

beautifuL But, as we have heretofore obsierved, there are 
thoughts which naturally so stimulate the imagination that 9f 
it9 ow^ accord it clothes them in a garb of beauty. And there 
is many a truth which must have some touches of fancy, or it 
is not fsiirlv presented. The maiden on a summer evening, 
l^rayed in simplest white, yet knows how, by the bit of ribbon 
skilfully placed or the rosobud in her hair, to give the whole 
^ modest charix^ Shall the simple garb of truth be depied a 
Jike advantage 1 Wherever simplicity is to have its full attract- 
iveness, and to exert its true power, it must not be bald sim- 
plicity ; there is sure to be now and then some little quaint- 
ness of phrase or delicate tinge of fancy, some slight felicity of 
expression, which lifts it above the vulgar or the commonplace". 
In using colloquial phrases, those homely English idioms which 
have such power, it is curious to observe how Elunyan, or 
Spurgeon, will divest them of vulgarity and give them an air 
almost of refinement, by this light play of fancy. 

Two things ought to be here borne in mind. The worst of 
all affectations in style is the affectation of simplicity. It is 
like affected modesty in an immodest woman. And a style 
may have real beauty and real power that is not simple. The 
processional pomp of Milton's grand sentences, the revolving 
splendours of Chalmers, the lightnings and auroras of Chrysos- 
tom and Jeremy Taylor, may remind us that simplicity is not 
everything. These men, however, are often simple ; they have 
too much good taste and natural feeling to employ inflated dic- 
tion when speaking of common things. And so those who 
seek to be habitually simple must let their style vary according 
to subject and feeling. While usually confining themselves to 
those medium tones which suit the common thought and expe- 
rience of mankind, let them be willing, and be able, to range 
the whole gamut of expression, to rise and fall as occasion 
demands or passion prompts. 

" The constant employment of one species of phraseology, 
which all have now to strive against, implies an undeveloped 
faculty of language. To have a specific style is to be poor in 
speech. . . . As in a fine nature, the play of the features, 
the tones of the voice and its cadences, vary in harmony with 
every thought uttered ; so in one possessed of a fully- developed 
power of speech, the mould in which each combination oj 
words is cast will simply vary with, and be appropriate to the 
sentiment. . . ; The perfect writer will express himself as 



304 ELEOANOE OF STYLE. 

Junius, when in the Junius frame of mind ; when he feels as 
Lamb felt, will use a like familiar speech ; and will fall into 
the ruggedness of Carljle when in a Carlylean mood. Now he 
will be rhythmical, and now irregular ; here his language wiU 
be plain and there ornate j sometimes his sentences will be 
balanced and at other times unsymmetrical ; for a while there 
will be considerable sameness, and then again great variety."* 
From all this it will appear that true simplicity of style, 
which is at once intelligible, which has an easy movement, a 
natural beauty and a natural variety, requires patient thought, 
disciplined imagination, and thorough mastery of language.t 



* Spencer, Essay on Style, p. 46. 

f In the way of caution against mistakes as to simplicity, see a good dis- 
cuBsion in Moore's Thoughts on Preaching (London, 1869). chap. tL 



CHAPTER V. 

IMAGINATION, IN ITS RELATION TO ELOQUENCE. 

Imagination, as we have already seen, is among the leading 
characteristics of eloquence.* It plays a highly important 
J)art in the construction of discourse and style, and it has 
Inuch to do even with the invention of materials. Thouofh 
repeatedly referred to, under these several heads, it is thought 
to require at this point some more particular discussion, as 
to its office in oratory, and the means of its cultivation. 

1. Uses op Imagination to the Orator. 

The popular conception of imapfination still is, that it assists 
the orator only in the way of producing high- wrought imagery, 
in letting off such fire-works of fancy as sophomores affect, 
and half-educated people admire. But modern psychology 
tends more and more to assign imagination a high position 
and a wide and varied domain. It is coming to be recog- 
nized as giving indispensable aid in scientific research and 
philosophical abstraction, in the formation of geometrical and 
ethical, as well as of artistic ideals, in the varied tasks of 
practical invention, and even in the comprehension and con- 
duct of practical life. When entering some strange country, 
or when brought by great social convulsions into a new state 
of things, most men are unable, through deficiency of imagi- 
nation, fully to realize the new situation, and promptly to 
seize upon the central -and controlling force. Accordingly 
Napoleon said, "The men of imagination rule the world." 

This noble fiiculty is possessed in a high degree by every 
true orator. Without it, a man may be instructive and con- 
vincing, may influence others by his practical energy, his 
resolution and determination, but he can never exert the 
peculiar power of eloquence. ^ preacher, without imagina- 
tion, may be respected for his sound sense, may be loved for 
his homely goodness, but he will not move a congregation, 

* Comp. Introduction, 2. 
X 



280 IMAGINATION, IN ITS 

he will not be a power in the community. If on the other 
hand he have a perverted or an undisciplined imagination, 
it may ruin his usefulness. It is a matter on which preachers 
seldom bestow any thoughtful attention ; and yet few things 
are so important to their real success, as the possession, the 
culture, the control, of imagination. 

The terms imagination and fancy were once practically 
equivalent. The latter, as shown by the old spelling phcLntsyy 
is a corruption of the Greek term phantasyy which was after- 
wards reintroduced in its longer form, and assigned by usagg;^ 
to special senses. (Compare palsy and paralysis, and sevcKri^ 
other cases.) Addison said that he used the words imagiczBa*' 
tion and fancy indiscriminately.* At the present time soi 
writers, particularly Ruskin, are disposed to claim that thi 
are two distinct faculties of the mind, which they wol 
denote by these two terms. The more common, and ap" 
rently the more correct opinion is, that what we call imt 

nation and fancy are but dijQferent forms and modes of exerc ^ise 

of the same faculty. We call it fancy when playing on ^^e 
mere surface of things, imagination when penetrating to ^he 
heart, the essence ; fancy when sportive or cold, imaginat- ^^^ 
when passionate, or at least serious. Imagination " cannot ^ 
but serious ; she sees too far, too darkly, too solemnly, '^oo 
earnestly, ever to smile. There is something in the hearts of 
everything, if we can reach it, that we shall not be incli*^®^ 
to laugh at. The 'innumerable laughter* of the sea is ^^ 
its surface, not in the deep."t 

1. Imagination is employed by the orator in the constrr' ac- 
tion of discourse. To give familiar materials any fresh interest, 

* Fleming, Vocab. of Phil., p. 194. 

•ml 

+ Kuskin, Modern Painters, Vol. II., p. 166. On imagination in gen^^-"*^' 
Bee especially Hamilton's Metaphysics, and, still better as to this "sub^ ^^ 
Porter on the Human Intellect. Kuskin, as just quoted, has an extec*-^ 
discussion, of great value to public speakers. See also Wordsworth's 'J^H^' 
face to his Poems. A good lecture by McCosh, on the Imagination, its ^^ 
and Abuse, has been^ republished as a tract by the Amer. Tr. Soc. -* ® 
practical uses of imagination are pleasantly discussed in the Contempo^'^'^f' 
Review, Sept., 1869. Very little is known to have been written on ^® 
relations of imagination to eloquen9e. There is an address by Haver* ^ 
"the Province of Imagination in Sacred Oratory," in Bibl. Sacra, Jan. ^^ !' 
or in his Studies in Philosophy and Theology, 1869. The subject w^^ 
reward thorough study, and admits of much interesting and sugge^^^ 
illustration. 



RELATION TO BLOQUBNOB. 281 

they must be brought into new combinations ; and to form a 
discou/rse at all, the materials must be made into a complete 
and symmetrical structure. Piles of bricks and lumber and 
sand are as much a house, as the mere piling up of thoughts 
will constitute a discourse. The builder, of palace or of cabin, 
works by constructive imagination ; and it is the same faculty 
that builds a speech. In fact imagination, the wonder-worker, 
does much more than this. It is only a lower imagination 
that takes fragments of material, and builds them, each frag- 
ment preserving its individuality, into a new structure ; high, 
intense imagination fuses the materials, reduces them to their 
natural elements, and forms of them a structure possessing 
complete unity. The one process is a new composition of 
frfiigmentsj the other a new organization of elements. The 
one cements the materials together, or at best welds them 
together ; the other makes them grow together, by furnishing 
a principle of vitality which takes up the analyzed material 
and organizes it according to new laws. Imagination does not 
create thought ; but it organizes thought into forms as new 
as the equestrian statue of bronze is unlike the metallic ores 
when they lay in the mine. This constructing, fashioning, 
organizing function of the imagination is exercised in forming 
a poem, or a story, but still more in forming a discourse, 
where there is far greater need of unity, symmetry, and adap- 
tation to a spepific design. 

And not only is it needed in constructing discourses, but 
every paragraph, yea every sentence, is properly a work of 
imagination, a work of art. The painter, sculptor, architect, 
does not fashion merely the general outline of his work, and 
leave the. details to chance. The whole is but the parts 
taken together. Each part must have a certain complete- 
ness in itself, and yet must be in itself incomplete, being but 
a fragment of one whole. So must it be in the construction 
of discourse. 

2. If, as Porter says, "to invent or discover, is always to 
recombine, to adjust in new positions objects or parts of ob- 
jects which have never been so connected before,"* then 
imagination has no little to do with the invention of thought. 
What are its precise functions in this respect, students of 
psychology have not yet settled. There can be no doubt 
that it does somehow aid us in penetrating to the heart of a 

* On the Human Intellect, 364. 





282 IMAGINATION, IN ITS 

subject, and developing it from within ; that it thus assi 
the work of original analysis, as well as that of expositi( 
though Ruskin's theory of " the penetrative imagination " 
as he virtually confesses, uncertain and obscure.* 

3. The orator uses imagination in the production of imag 

Often the idea he wishes to present can itself be converi^ ^^^ 
into an image. Imagination thus gives the masses of thou^^^o^*' 
a definite shape, a clear-cut outline, and sometimes mal 
them stand out as in a stereoscopic picture. This exci 
the imagination of another, and thus affects his feelin 
Objects of sense affect the feelings most powerfully, 
images more closely resemble objects of sense than do m^ 
ideas. Thus if, instead of dwelling upon the idea of bene 
lence, we bring forward tlie image of a benevolent man oi 
benevolent action, it is much more affecting.t 

And whether the particular idea can or cannot be conveii 
into an image, we may associate with it, may group aroi 
it, by resemblance or analogy, or by contrast, some other i( 
or ideas which can be formed into images, and which 
reflect their light and splendour upon the thought in hai 
This is Illustration, with all its power not only to gratify 
taste, but to assist comprehension, to carry conviction, 
to awaken emotion. 

It is thus mainly through imagination that we touch 
feelings, and thereby bring truth powerfully to bear upon 
will, which is the end and the very essence of eloquen 
And on the other hand passion kindles imagination. Love, : 
instance, will cause the dullest mind to give forth some spai 
of imagination. Anger, overwhelming grief, passionate sup] 
cation, will often struggle to express itself by means of 
boldest images. Thus imagination and passion continm 
act and react, causing the one to glow more brightly and 
other to grow fiercer in its blaze. 

4. Another use of imagination, though not wholly disti^^^^^ 
from the last, is in realizing and depicting what the Scriptn '^^^ 
reveal. We have already noticed how much of the Bi "^^® 
consists of narrative, and how important it is that the preacK^^^ 
should be able vividly to describe its scenes and event- ^--f 
'* Historical imagination," in reproducing the past, i» one ^^ 

• Modern Painters, Vol. II, p. 160 ff. 
+ Comp. Part I, chap', viii. on Applicatioo 
X See Part I. chap. v. 1. 





RELATION TO ELOQUENCE. 283 

bhe favourite ideas of onr day. In the exercise of it great 
3are must be taken that it shall be directed and controlled by 
thorough knowledge of the times reproduced, and true sym- 
pathy with their spirit, or we shall carry back our own ex- 
periences and our modern conceptions, and make, as historical 
description often has made, an utterly erroneous representa- 
tion. But with this caution, historical imagination may be 
declared indispensable, not only to description of Scripture 
history, but to the just comprehension of the whole system 
of doctrine and dut}', for all rests upon a basis of fact. Con- 
troversialists, for example, often greatly err, from failing to 
realize the circumstances of the primitive age, and thus mis- 
conceiving the precise aim of many a lesson or observance. 

And not only as to the past. Imagination is requisite if 
we are justly to conceive and vividly to realize the Scripture 
revelations concerning the unseen world and the eternal future. 
Faith believes these revelations, and imagination, aroused by 
faith and called into its service, makes the things unseen and 
eternal a reality to the mind, so that they afifect the feelings 
almost like objects of sense, and become a power in our earthly 
life. It may also to some extent fill out the Bible pictures 
of the unseen world, by following the analogies of this world ; 
but there is here demanded a moderation and reserve, a care 
in distinguishing between the revealed and the supposed, which 
in some books and many sermons are sadly wanting. 

2. Means op Cultivating the Imagination. 

If this faculty has so much to do with the construction 
and style, and even with inventing the materials of discourse, 
it becomes a matter of very high importance that preachers 
should employ the best means of giving it thorough culti- 
vation, and bringing it under complete control, 

1. Certain 7noral qualities and habits greatly promote the 
noblest uses of imagination. We have seen that the highest 
imagination is essentially serious. Habitual frivolity, in an 
individual or a people, will prevent the appreciation and the 
exercise of this exalted faculty. " I suppose the chief bar to 
the action of imagination, and stop to all greatness in this pre- 
sent age of ours, is its mean and shallow love of jest and jeer, 
so that if there be in any good and lofty work a flaw or failing, 
or undipped vulnerable part where sarcasm may stick or stay, 
it is caught at, and pointed at, and buzzed about, and ftxad 



284 ' IMAGINATION, IN ITS 

upon, and stung into, as a recent wound is by flies, and nothing 
is ever taken serionsly nor as it was meant, but always, if it 
may be, turned the wrong way, and misunderstood ; and while 
this is so, there is not, nor cannot be any hope of achievement 
of high things ; men dare not open their hearts to us, if we are 
to broil them on a thorn fire. . . . We have seen that imagin- 
ation is in no small degree dependent on acuteness of moral 
emotion — in fact, all moral truth can only thus be apprehended; 
and it is observable, generally, that all true emotion is imagin- 
ative, both in conception and expression ; and that the mental 
sight becomes sharper with every full beat of the heart ; and 
therefore all egotism, and selfish care, or regard, are, in propor- 
tion to their constancy, destructive of imagination ; whose play 
and power depend altogether on our being able to forget our- 
selves and enter like possessing spirits into the bodies of things 
about us." 

Besides, as " the life of imagination is in the discovering of 
truth," it will be independent, superior to praise or blame. 
" Sympathy it desires — but can do without ; of opinions it is 
regardless, not in pride, but because it has no vanity, and is 
conscious of a rule of action and object of aim in which it can- 
not be mistaken ; partly, also, in pure energy of desire and 
longing to do and to invent more and more, which suffer it not 
to suck the sweetness of praise — unless a little, with the end of 
the rod in its hand, and without pausing in its march. 

These earnest utterances of Ruskin* relate originally to 
painting ; but they require very slight modification to apply to 
oratory, and especially to preaching, where passionate love 
of truth, and lofty earnestness of soul, are so eminently 
appropriate. 

2. Imagination is awakened and invigorated by commimion 
with nature. A certain indefinable sympathy exists, by a law 
of our being, between external nature and ourselves. Its forms 
and hues have a meaning for us more subtle than language 
conveys, and excite in us strange longings and kindlings of 
soul, till we idealize all we behold. And our thoughtful obser- 
vation of nature may be quickened and exalted by science. The 
systematic study of minerals, vegetables, animals, reveals to us 
new and wonderful things, teaches us to read, where we had 
not seen it before, the handwriting of our God. Geology ac- 
quaints us with the earth's mighty past, Astronomy introduces 

* Modem "PainleTs, YoV. \i. p. 4.66,186. 



RELATION TO EliOQUENCB. 285 

US to the ever widening and brightening glories of the wonder- 
crowded universe, till " the music of the spheres " attains for 
us a sublime, orchestral grandeur, an unearthly sweetness, a 
wealth of precious meaning, which the wise Greek never knew. 
We need not now to people all natural objects with unseen, 
half-human creatures, nor need we lose ourselves in the vague- 
ness of pantheism; our personality may everywhere indulge 
its longing for communion with a person, we may find in all 
nature the personal God. — But words are here vain. If we wish 
for power of imagination, let us observe, contemplate, commune 
with nature. 

3. Art and Literature may greatly aid us. Nature is by 
most of us very imperfectly understood and appreciated till 
interpreted to us by the poet or the artist. Perhaps we grewr 
up amid glorious mountains, or beside the many-sounding sea, 
and yet little knew their meaning, little felt their inspiration, 
till some high-priest of nature had taught us, by the pen or the 
pencil, how to behold, and comprehend, and sympathize. 

Sculpture, painting, architecture, have a strange power to 
develop the imagination in general, and sometimes to stimulate 
it for particular eiGForts, and they can be devoid of interest to 
none who possess this faculty in even a moderate degree. When 
Andrew Fuller stopped suddenly amid the architectural glories 
of Cambridge, and proposed to his guide to go home and discuss 
with him the doctrine of justification, he betrayed that de- 
ficiency of imagination which is conspicuous in the structure 
and the style of his otherwise admirable sermons. There is 
many a preacher who could tell how some picture, perhaps 
casually looked at, has helped him in making a sermon ; there 
is many a one utterly unable to tell how much the general 
study of works of art has contributed to develop his imagin- 
ation.* 

In our country few have any considerable opportunity for 
beholding the most inspiring works of art.t But the poets are 
accessible to all, and they are here our chief teachers. They 
see the analogies of external nature to moral and religious truth 
as most of us cannot ; and they open up to us unknown depths 
in our own nature. From them we may learn how to observe 



♦ « 



See some good thoughts in McCosh's Lecture, p. 39 fit. 

+ Many suggestive ideas of art may be derived from Buskin's various works, 
and much useful information on the subject from Samson's Elements of Art- 
Criticism (Philadelphia, Lippiucott). 



286 IMAGINATION, IN ITS 

and compare, how to depict and interpret ; though we must not 
forget that they aim mainly to please, while we must subordin- 
ate everything to spiritual profit, and that such difference of 
aim should lead to great difference of method. And it is not 
of necessity those poets who seem to the general reader to show 
most imagination, but those who most kindle our imagination, 
that will in this respect be most useful. Thus Wordsworth and 
the Brownings are much more profitable than Tom Moore and 
the poems of Scott. We must seek by effort of our own imag- 
ination to conceive the poet's image, if we are to have not mere 
entertainment but improvement ; and he is for us the best 
poet who awakens our imagination, gives it general direction, 
stimulates it by some of the most suggestive details, and leaves 
it to do all the rest for itself. That is to say, in order to the 
benefit here proposed, we must study poetry. 

There is much highly imaginative prose which has a similar 
value. Novel-reading, while well known to injure man}^ would 
if properly managed, be to some preachers exceedingly profit- 
able, in respect to imagination and literary taste. As a rule, 
one should read only the very best works of the very best 
novelists ; and he should never read two novels in succession, 
but always put between them several works of a very different 
kind. And there is often more to be learned from a novel, if 
at an early period we turn over and find out how the story will 
end, or if we deliberately examine one previously read. Goethe, 
Edgar Poe, and many others, have given us imaginative writ- 
ings not properly called tales, which may in like manner be 
profitable. Some of the historians powerfully a])peal to and 
exercise the imagination of their readers; for example, Macaulay 
and Motley. And the great orators and preachers present to 
us imagination operating in precisely those methods with which 
we are most concerned. If one wishes to stimulate in himself 
the desire for affluence of imaginative diction, let him read 
Plato, Cicero, Chrysostom, Jeremy Taylor, Milton, Burke, 
Chalmers ; if he wishes to chasten himself into a more sober 
and regulated use of imagination, so that it shall be duly sub- 
ordinated to other faculties, let him read Demosthenes, Tacitus, 
Daniel Webster, Robert Hall. In general it must be remem- 
bered that here, as elsewhere, appetite is not always a sure 
guide. 

4. After all, the great means of cultivating imagination, as 
IB the case with all our faculties, is actual exercise. The q^- 
ceasive display of second-rate iT^i'sx^xu-aXXoTL^kicK some men make 



RELATION TO ELOQUENCE. . 287 

SO offensive, drives other men to the opposite extreme, so that 
they shrink from illustration and imagery where they are really 
needful, and never stop to consider how numerous and varied 
and surpassingly important are the functions of this much- 
abused faculty. Let a man freely exercise imagination, in 
constructing and inventing, in picturing and illustrating, in 
reproducing the past and giving vivid reality to the unseen 
"world ; but let him everywhere exercise it under the control of 
soimd judgment and good taste, and above all of devout feeling 
and a solemn sense of responsibility to God. 



i 



PAET IV. 



DELIVERY OF SEEMONS. 



CHAPTEE I. 

THE THREE METHODS OF PREPARA.TION AND 

DELIVERY.* 

1. Reading. 2. Recitation. 3. Extemporaneous Speaking. 
4. History op the Three Methods. General and Spb- 
ciAL Preparation for Extemporising. 

Reading, reciting, extemporaneous speaking, — which is the 
best method of preaching ? Though so often discussed, this 
question constantly recurs, not merely for the young preachers 
whom every year brings forward, but for many of maturer age, 
who are not satisfied that they have been pursuing the wisest 
course. It is a question affecting not only one's manner of 
delivery, but his whole method of preparation, and m fact all 
his habits of thought and expression. While not so indis- 
pensable a condition of usefulness as that a man shall hold the 
truth, or that he shall love his work, or that he shall be a bom 
speaker it is surely a matter of very great importance to one 
whose best energies through life are devoted to preaching, that 
he should study and speak in the most effective way. 

We can only inquire which method is generally best. No 
one of the three can be properly set forth as exclusive. For a 
process so complex as that of preparing and delivering * 
sermon, a process embracing such a multitude of diverse and 
variable elements, it ought to be manifest beforehand that 
only general rules can be determined. And in such an inquiry 
particular cases will commonly prove nothing. Some men 

* Among the numerous discussions of this subject, attention is directed to 
those of Ware (in Ripley), Fenelon, Palmer, Coquerel, Kidder, Skinner, and 
Hoppin. See above, IntToduc\.\oii, 7 , on thd Literature of Homiletios. 



THE THREE METHODS, ETC. 289 

We spoken with great power who could not write a word. 
Even now, when the art of writing is so generally diflFused, we 
naay hear preachers, both white and coloured, who are, in some 
iDiportant respects, highly effective, while* quite unequal to the 
Daerely mechanical task of writing a discourse. Among those 
^^0 handle the pen with ease, there are men, self-educated, 
^bo have become popular and really powerful preachers, who 
fiod written composition very difficult, because they have never 
practised it, nor in any wise trained themselves to it. Spur- 
Seon speaks very strongly, in the preface to his first book, of 
the drudgery and difficulty of composition, as compared with 
the ease and rapture of free speech. The one had become 
familiar to him, the other was new and irksome. What 
bonder, if on the other hand, we find many whose whole 
training and practice has been in writing, and for whom it is 
^cult and apparently impossible to speak what has not been 
'bitten. Moreover, men of high talent can speak effectively 
^ any way. Luther laid on his back, bound hand and foot, 
^ould have preached impressively. The rude drayman refuses 
<) believe that it lessens a horse's power of draught to rein him 
ightly, because he has a very strong horse which can pull im- 
mense loads when reined. We call him foolish, and in regard 
> other questions reason in the same fashion. Each of the 
lethods of preaching has been and is now employed by some 
len with admirable eflFect. Something in the subject or the 
rcumstances may at times render it advisable to adopt a 
ifferent method from that generally employed. Some minis- 
irs may be compelled to pursue one or another by their very 
^culiar coiistitution, or by the confirmed habits of a long life, 
ut which is generally best ? 

Great extravagance is frequently to be observed in the dis- 
ission of this question, on all sides. For example, some will 
.y that reading a sermon is not preaching at all. Those who 
•gue against extemporaneous preaching very often speak as if 

meant preaching without any preparation. Of course the 
roper thing to be done is calmly to consider the advantages 
id disadvantages, so far as they can be exhibited, of each 
.ethod, and thus decide which is to be preferred. 

1. Reading. 

1. To write sermons and read them, is a method which has 
3viously some important advantages. These exist both with 
jference to preparation, to delivery, and to the i^te«dti^x*^ \\!Sfe- 
ilness in other respects. 



290 THE THREE METHODS OP 

(1.) Writing greatly assists the work of preparation, by ren- 
dering it easier to fix the mind upon the subject. Mental 
application is fjxcilitated by any appropriate bodily action, and 
men who do not write nften find it necessary to walk the floor, 
or, as was the habit of Schleiermacher, to lean out of a window 
for hourj?, or in general to assu'^ae some constrained posture or 
perform some regularly recurring act. Now writing involves a 
higii deo;ree of that control of body which so contributes to 
control of the mind, and has at the same time the advantage 
of possessing a closer natural relation to thought than any 
other act except speaking itself Indeed every one knows how 
greatly writing tends to keep the thoughts from wandering. 

(2 ) Besides, writing a sermon compels to greater compkU- 
ness of preparation. He who prepares without writing, may, 
and as a rule ought to, follow out all the developments and 
expansions of his thoughts as far as the discourse is to canry 
them ; but he who writes must do this, is compelled to it. 

(3.) Still further, writing serves to secure, in several respects, 
greater excellence of ati/le. As a general thing, unwritten 
speech cannot equal that which is written, in grammatical cor- 
rectness, in precision, conciseness, smoothness, and rhetorical 
finish. These are highly important properties of style, and 
particularly with respect to the demands of some audiences, 
occasions, or subjects. Thus, if one is discussing a contro- 
verted point of doctrine, in the presence of persons ready to 
misunderstand or misrepresent him, it is even more than usn- 
ally desirable that his language should be precise and unmis- 
takeable. Some hearers are very fastidious as to the preachers 
finish of style. His language, as well as his manner of 
delivery and his dress, must be comme Ufauty or they will have 
nothing to do with him. Such fastidiousness may not deserve, 
any high respect, but of course it should not be needlessly dis- 
regarded. And sermons on an occasion of academic or other 
specially literary interest, are commonly and naturally expected 
to possess an unusual degree of flowing smoothness and elegant 
finish. The preacher himself, too, especially the young 
preacher of fine literary cultivation, is apt to be sensitive as to 
the minute ftiults of style ; and writing enables him better to 
meet the demands of his own taste. 

(4.) As regards the delivery of the sermon, this method has 
the advantage of placing the preacher more at his ease, both 
before and during the delivery. Having the sermon written, 
he will be preserved, and knows that he will be, from any utter 



PREPARATION. AND DELIVERY. 291 

and mortifying fiiilure. It is a great relief to escape the tremu- 

WU8 and often distressing anxiety which one is apt otherwise to 

*6el. The preacher who means to read, has a far better chance 

to sleep soundly on Saturday night. It is also an advantage to 

be collected and confident while delivering the sermon, rather* 

than oppressed by nervous solicitude, or driven wild by uncon- 

^I'ollable excitement. Some preachers find that reading saves 

them from an excessive volubility, or an extreme vehemence 

^hich otherwise they find it hard to control ; and very many 

^ear that without the manuscript they would be utterly crusiaed 

by the dread of breaking down. 

Besides, writing sermons tends to promote the preacher's 
Usefulness in several other respects. 

(5.) The written discourse can be used on subsequent occa- 
sions without the necessity of renewed preparation, and thus 
frequently saves a good deal of time and labour. 

(6.) The sermons remain for publication, if ever that should 
be desirable. Many a truly great preacher, and widely useful 
in his day, has left but a fading, vanishing name, while some 
contemporary of perhaps no greater ability, but who wrote his 
discourses, is still known and still useful. For example, com- 
pare Fenelon with Bourdaloue. 

(7.) And then the practice gives facility in writing, which in 
our day is a highly important means of usefulness. The suc- 
cessful preacher has now many opportunities to publish, and it 
is apt to become a sort of reproach to him, diminishing Lis 
infiuence, if he is not sometimes heard from through the press. 

2. To write and read has thus a number of advantages, 
some of them decidedly important. What, now, are its disad- 
vantages ? 

(1.) If writing aids in thinking, it is apt to render one 
largely dependent on such assistance. Especially objectionable 
is the fact that this practice accustoms the preacher to think 
connectedly only as fast as he can write, when it is more 
natural and more convenient that a man should think as fast 
as he can talk. 

(2.) And if writing compels the preacher to go over the 
ground more completely, it is not always done more thoroughly. 
The thinking is more extensive, l3ut may be legs inten- 
sive. Being obliged to run over the surface everywhere, 
the preacher may go beneath it nowhere. If many sermons 
are spoken with very superficial preparation, so with very 
superficial preparation are many sermons written. . There 



292 THE THREE METHODS OF 

is an immense amount of strictly extemporaneous writin^^ 
People are apt to think that what is written and read mu^i^ 
have been carefully prepared, but they are often egregious'ff 
mistaken. A highly popular preacher once said, — of course 
half as a jest, — that he was so frequently compelled to get up 
his sermons hastily, as to make it indispensable that he should 
write, in order to give them at least the appearance of careful 
preparation. 

(3.) Akin to this last is the disadvantage of consuming so 
much tiine in the merely mechanical effort of writing,— time 
which might often be more profitably spent upon the thoughts 
of the discourse, or upon the preacher's general improvement 
True, the extemporaneous speaker, in his earlier eflForts, needs 
to spend no less time, but rather more in preparation; but if 
laborious at the outset, his power of working out the details 
will rapidly increase, and the time necessary for this become 
much less, while the writer must as long as he lives spend a 
number of hours in the task of writing. Now the pastors of 
large churches in this country are often, indeed commonly, 
expected to do the work of several different men. Their whole 
time Haight be usefully spent in pastoral visiting, and some 
folks would complain of them after all. Their work on com- 
mittees and boards, in attending public meetings, and help- 
ing to push forward all manner of benevolent enterprises, 
together with the exercise of hospitality to visiting brethren, 
makes heavy drafts upon their time. The wide and varied 
knowledge which many churches expect their pastors to ex- 
hibit, the supply of fresh material for argument, illustration, 
and application, so as to meet the constant demands of their 
position without becoming exhausted and commonplace, can be 
obtained only by giving much time to reading and reflection. 
And now, with all this upon them, here are two, frequently 
three sermons a week to provide, when if elaborate discourses 
are wanted, it would be much more reasonable to give two 
weeks to one sermon, than to expect two sermons in one week. 
How in the world preachers get through all this, is a mystery 
even to most of those who accomplish it. Generally, indeed, 
they do not get through it all. They do those things which 
their circumstances, opinions, or habits lead them to think 
most important or most pressing, and the remaining depart- 
ments of the expected work are, except in the case of very 
remarkable men, inevitably more or less neglected. Among all 
the causes of those frequent ministerial changes which are so 



PREPARATION AND DELIVERY. 293 

generally observed and deplored, perhaps none are so potent 
1,8 the fact that pastors are expected to do more than they find 
>racticable. Harassed, disappointed, after many new schemes 
md efforts, and finally despairing, because he cannot study and 
mprove himself, or cannot compass the needful pastoral work, 
»r cannot avoid serious damage to his health, the preacher 
•eceives a call to a new field, and hoping that by a judicious 
ISO of former preparations, he may there find time for the 
luties he has seemed to himself to be so sadly neglecting, he 
roes. These changes often show faults of many kinds to exist 
n various quarters. But most of all they show that our 
jastors are overburdened. In such a state of things it becomes 
i very serious matter that a preacher should condemn himself, 
'or life, to spend every week six, eight, twelve hours in merely 
jmting out each of two sermons, and that when by far the 
most important and difficult portion of his preparation, the 
selection of text and subject, interpretation, invention of mate- 
rials, and arrangement of the discourse, ought to have been 
ompleted before he begins to write. 

(4.) Again, this method compels the preacher to follow out 
that plan of the discourse which he originally adopted, though 
in the course of preparation it may become evident that another 
plan would be much better. This must be a very frequent 
experience, especially when the writing begins before the plan 
has been very well matured. Who has not found, when more 
than half through his preparation, that thirdly ought to be 
firstly, or even that there had better be a different- mode of 
stating the subject, with a corresponding modification of the 
whole treatment? How often will tired and hurried human 
nature endure to throw away all that has been written, and 
begin anew? Moreover, If haste or negligence in the prepara- 
tion has produced faults of detail, most readers find it very 
difficult to correct these in the course of delivery, however 
clearly they may then be perceived. 

(5.) This method also deprives the preacher's thinking of the 
benefit of all that mental quickening which is produced by the 
presence of the congregation. As to thoughts which are then 
for the first time struck out, it is true that men of rare flexi- 
bility, tact and grace can often introduce them effectively in 
connection with their reading. But such men establish no 
general rule, and the great mass of those who read have to lose 
such thoughts altogether, or to introduce them awkwardly and 
with comparatively poor effect. And besides tha dia»\jeM^ 



294 THE THREE METHODS OP 

thoughts which occur only in the act of delivery, there is some- 
thing much more important in the warmer colour which the 
now kindled and glowing mind would give to the whole body 
of thought, in those differences of hue and tone which change 
the mass of prepared material into living, breathing, burning 
speech. Yonder stand the autumn trees, with their many 
colours all dull and tame beneath the ashen sky; but presently 
the evening sun bursts through the clouds, and lights up the 
forest with an almost unearthly glory. Not less great is the 
difference between preparation and speech, for every one who 
was born to be a speaker. Now whatever of this concerns the 
mere mode of utterance, the reader may to some extent achieve. 
But all that belongs to the transfigured conception, to the 
changed colour and heightened tone of expression, which in 
free speaking would show itself with ease and completeness, all 
this he can but partially feel, and is powerless to manifest. It 
is true, as we are sometimes told, that by an effort of imagina- 
tion when composing, one may to some extent bring before his 
mind the congregation, and feel by anticipation the quickening 
of its presence ; but there are few respects in which imaginar 
tion falls so far below the actual experience. 

(6.) As to delivery itself, reading is of necessity less effective, 
and in most cases immensely less effective, for all the great 
purposes of oratory, than speaking. Greater coldness of iraa- 
ner is almost inevitable. If one attempts to be very animated 
or pathetic, it will look unnatural. The tones of voice are 
monotonous, or have a forced variety. The gestures are nearly 
always unnatural, because it is not natural to gesticulate mucli 
in reading; and they scarcely ever raise us higher than to feel 
that really this man reads almost like speaking. The mere 
turning of the pages, however skilfully done, breaks the con- 
tinuity of delivery. In the midst, perhaps, of some impas- 
sioned passage, while the preacher's face glows, his action bas 
become varied and passionate, and he has wrought us up to a 
high degree of sympathy with him, presently his right hand 
descends and flings over a leaf, and the spell is broken ; we are 
made to remember what we are doing, are reminded that, after 
all, this is not living speech, but only splendid reading, — that 
we are not, as a moment ago we seemed to feel, in immediate 
and fully sympathising contact with the burning soul of the 
speaker, but " that paper there" is between us. Consider, too, 
that the most potent element in the delivery of a real orator 
18 often the expressiveness of the eye. No man can describe 



PREPARATION AND DBLIVERT. 296 

"fcliis ; he cannot fully recall it afterwards, and at the moment 

iie is too completely under its influence to think of analysing 

and explaining it. But every man has felt it, — ^*he marvellous, 

^nagical, at times almost superhuman power of an orator's eye. 

That look, how it pierces our inmost soul, now kindling us to 

^passion, now melting us into tenderness. And all the better 

^Chat it is not felt as a thing apart from speech, but blends with 

it more thoroughly than gesture can, more completely than 

:aniisic blends with poetry, and reinforces, with all its mysterious 

jpoteuoj, the power of thought and sentiment and sound. Now 

an reading, this wonderful expressiveness of the eye is ioter- 

xupted, grievously diminished in power, reduced to be nothing 

1)etter than occasional sunbeams, breaking out for a moment 

among wintry clouds, 

In a word, reading is an essentially dififerent thing from 
^)6aking. When well executed, reading has a power of its 
own, but it is unnatural to substitute it for speaking, and it 
can at best only approximate, never fully attain, the same effect. 
(7.) It should be added, that reading is more injurious to 
the voice. Any one who is so unfortunate as to have become 
subject to laryngitis, will soon find that he can speak with 
much less fatigue than he can read. This shows a natural dif- 
fidence, though persons whose vocal organs are not diseased 
may not notice it. There are several causes which combine to 
produce the " minister's sore-throat," which is so common.* 
The practice of reading sermons is by no means the principal 
one, but there can be no doubt that it has some effect. 

(8.) That the habit of reading should make one afraid to 
attempt speaking without a manuscript, is not a necessary 
consequence. Every enlightened defepder of reading would 
urge that the preacher ought to practice himself in unwritten 
speech also, and thus be able to speak when suddenly called 
on ; and certainly there are men who habitually read, and yet 
. upon occasion can extemporise very effiectively. Yet the mani- 
fest tendency, and the common result of habitual reading, is to 
make one dependent and timid ; and such preachers often miss 
opportunities of doing good, and are sometimes made ridicu- 
lous by their mability to preach from not having " brought 
along any sermons." Such a slavish and helpless dependence 
upon manuscript is almost universally felt to be pai^ful, if not 
pitifuL For this and other reasons, uniform reading is very 
seldom advocated, though still often practised in some quarters* 

* See below, che^, ii. 
T 



296 . THE THREE METHODS OF 

3. The advantages and disadvantages of reading sermons 
having been considered, a few suggestions may now be offered 
to those who adopt this method. 

If you read, do not try to disguise the fact. Coquerel 
remarks that all the artifices practised for this purpose, 
" have bad grace and little success. If one reads in the 
pulpit, it is better to read openly and boldly, taking no 
other pains than to have a manuscript easily legible and 
properly smoothed down on the front of the pulpit ; then, 
to turn the leaves without affecting a disguise, which is use- 
less and unbecoming. We may be certain that the hearers 
are not deceived in this respect ; they always know when 
an orator is reading."* 

But more. Do not attempt to convert the reading into 
speaking. The two are, as already said,' essentially different. 
Is it possible for a man to speak as if he were reading ? Let 
it be tried, and he who comes nearest to success will most 
effectually spoil his speaking. But on the other hand, is it 
really possible to read as if you were speaking ? Schoolmasters 
often tell their boys, "Read it just as if you were talking;" 
and the effort to do this may help to cure the school-boy sing- 
song, by making the reading more like talking. But in fact, 
no one can read precisely as he talks, and no one ought to. 
As regards private reading and private conversation, probably 
no considerate person will deny this essential difference. Is it 
not similarly and equally true as regards public reading and 
public speaking ? Reading before a large audience will, of 
course, differ from quiet reading to a few persons ; and where 
the matter read is preceptive or hortatory, something which 
we personally desire to impress upon the hearers, this also will 
give a peculiar character to the reading. But still it is read- 
ing. The attempt to convert it into speaking is against nature, 
must fail, and ought to fail. '* It seems to us that when a 
preacher, for whatever reason, reads his sermon, then instead 
of wishing to produce the appearance of free speaking, which 
is always in some measure an attempt at deception, he should 
make it his aim to read well; somewhat as when one with 
warmth and interest reads to his family a printed discourse." 
To this view of the German writer, Palmer, we should say. 
Yes, "somewhat ;" but with the difference naturally produced by 
the fact that you are reading to a large assembly, and reading 
what intensely interests yourself. Palmer proceeds : 

* C(jqv3L«e>\, ^. 177. 



PREPARATION AND DELIVERY. 297 

" To hear a good thing well read, is always a pleasure. But 
instead of this, one man gives himself no trouble with his 
reading, but drawls out the contents of his manuscript with 
monotonous indiflFerence and tediousness. This is revolting. 
But another falls into the opposite extreme. Feeling that 
reading is a fault, he wishes to make amends by declaiming his 
sermon with a powerful pathos. This makes a contrary im- 
pression, for the more exaggerated the declamation and action 
in the case, the more glaring the contrast produced by the 
extremely prosaic act of looking into the manuscript. He who 
is so terribly in earnest with what he is saying, ought also, 
people think, to know what he wants to say ; liis zeal ought, as 
is everywhere else the case, to put words into his mouth. A 
modest, quiet, but expressive reading, would be more appro- 
priate." * 

We add again, that the reading may sometimes become very 
earnest, even if not impassioned, but it must still be reading. 
Let not the reader try to assume postures, gestures, or looks, 
such as he thinks would be appropriate to one speaking these 
words. To do so is not natural, it is to be an actor ; and acting, 
however skilful and however much admired, is in the pulpit a 
crime, — and, as the diplomatists say, not only a crime, but worse, 
a blunder. Nay, let the reader know that he is reading ; let 
him mean to read, and mean to have everybody understand 
that he is reading; and then let him try to read well, 
80 as to impress the truth upon his hearers, and do them 
good. The observance of this distinction may also solve 
the much discussed question, whether it is well for one 
who reads to interpolate unwritten passages. If he attempts 
to do this without having the difference observed, it will fail. 
Alexander says : " The whole train of operations is different in 
reading or reciting a discourse and in pronouncing it extempore. 
If I may borrow a figure from engines, the mind is gewred 
differently. No man goes from one track to the other without 
a painful jog at the * switch.' And this is, I suppose, the 
reason why Dr. Chalmers .... cautions his students 
against eveiy attempt to mingle reading with free speaking. 
. . . It requires the practice of years to dovetail an extem- 
poraneous paragraph gracefully into a written sermon."t This 
is true where one wishes the two to sound alike. But if hia 

♦ Palmer, Horn. p. 526, 527. 
f Thoughts on Preaching, p. VitL 



298 THE THREE METHODS OF 

reading does not profess nor attempt to be speaking, but 
simply reading, tben he may, wherever there is occasion, intro- 
duce something unwritten, either in the familiar tone appro- 
priate to some additional illustration or remark, or even in the 
outburst of some impassioned appeal. It will be distinct from 
the reading, but this may give variety; and the reading need 
not seem flat when he returns to it, because it did not profess 
to be speaking. This is in fact the practice of many skilful 
readers of sermons, though it may not be their theory ; nature 
often triumphs over wrong theory, and leads men to read 
simply as earnest reading, and then to diverge, when they see 
proper, into speaking as a distinct thing. If those who read 
sermons would settle it weU in their minds that reading is not 
speaking, and cannot be converted into it, and would giye 
nature free play in their reading, the advantages of this 
method would remain intact, and its disadvantages would be 
considerably diminished. Whether, even then, reading can be 
made as impressive, in general, as well-prepared spei^king, is 
another question. The remark may be added, that wh^ 
defective vision, or bad light, or a low pulpit makes the readipS 
difficult, it would be better just quietly to hold up the manu- 
script, BO that it can be seen. If the pages are separate, and 
not too large, this can be done without awkwardnes.s ; and if 
the people see that the preacher does not pretend to be spr- 
ing, but reads with a straightforward simplicity, they will 
irather like his openness, and at any rate will in a few minut^ 
grow used to what at first looked odd. 

If any one objects to all this, and hisists that it is necessaij^) 
whether from the nature of the cas^ or from the notions anjil 
feelings of the people, to keep the manuscript out of sigbi 
and make the reading look as much as possible like speakings 
then he is in fact saying what has not been said in this discu9- 
Efion, that a preacher ought never to read sermons at alL 

2. Rboitation, — TO Write and Repeat from M^obt. 

1. This has all the advantages of the first method, as regards 
more complete and finished preparation, practice in writing; 
and possession of the sermon for subsequent use and for pubH* 
cation. There is here, however, no preservation froni utter 
failiure, and from the dread of failure, but quite the contraij* 
It has two advantages which the former method does not pos- 
sess. To recite one's own composition is really one kind of 
speaking, — and we T;iave ^^^xl ^;)a»i.\. x^^m^ is not. To recite is 



PREPARATION AND DELIVERT, 299 

Speaking under difficulties and disadvantages, but it is speak- 
hg. It is not against nature to treat it as such, nor impos- 
{nble to make it approximate somewhat closely to the excellence 
and power of well-prepared free speech. The other advantage 
is, that recitation cultivates the memory. Any real improve- 
ment of the memory is certainly a matter of great value ; men 
who habitually recite must always gain benefit in this respect, 
and with some, the results are remarkable. It must not be 
forgotten, however, that while recitation is in this superior to 
reading, it is not superior to extemporaneous speaking ; for the 
power of verbal memorizing is really less valuable than the 
ability to retain ideas with only such of the words as are essen- 
tial to their precise expression. , 

2. As to disadvantages, recitation labours under many of 
tihose which attend upon reading. There is here still less 
opportunity for correcting errors observed at the moment of 
delivery, for interpolating thoughts which then for the first 
time occur, or for giving new shape and colour to the thoughts, 
and new force to the expressions, under the excitement of 
stctual speaking. The mind is apt to be all in shackles, having 
fittle use for any of its faculties except memory. In the exer- 
cise of this, there is often a confusion of local with what might 
be called logical memory ; the recollection of what comes next 
on the page, and that of the connection of thought, though 
Sometimes aiding each other, will at other times become con- 
fused and distracting. There is also with this method a still 
greater consumption of time in preparation. He who adopts it 
has not only to prepare the materials and form the plan of the 
discourse, as must be done upon any method, and not only to 
spend many hours in writing it out in full, as the reader also 
tnust do, but to give other hours, and with most men not a 
few, to the task of memorizing. For one who preaches two or 
liiree times a week to write and memorize all his sermons, is, 
if not impossible, certainly incompatible with patient and pro- 
found thinking in preparation, with wide general improvement, 
and with the proper performance of a pastor's other duties. 
The painful dread of failure is also a very serious objection to 
recitation, a dread from which the preacher can for no moment 
be free till the delivery begins, and which is then only height- 
ened. For the extemporaneous speaker, anxiety as to failure 
may cause a helpful excitement ; but to him who recites it 
brings no benefit, but only distress. We are told that Bouf- 
daloue would often keep his eyes shut throughout the aQrmaw\ 



300 THE THREE METHODS OF 

and upon being asked the reason, explained that he was afraid 
he might see some occurrence which would distract his atten- 
tion, and cause him to forget. In so great a man this is 
.•lamentable, pitiable, — of course it is an extreme case. Further- 
more, the delivery of what is recited must always be more or 
less artificial. Whatever may be done with occasional brief 
passages, such as Lord Brougham boasted his ability to intro- 
duce into an extemporaneous discourse without its being pos- 
sible for the auditor to distinguish between thenj, we question 
whether any man could so recite an entire and extended dis- 
course, — verbatim recitation, — as to prevent the audience from 
detecting, especially from feeling the difference. Certainly 
very few can do it, and we are discussing general questions. 
It is all very well to say that art must conceal art. We ask 
earnestly, can art conceal art? Who ever heard Edward 
Everett in one of his orations, without uneasily feeling that it 
was a splendid unreality, — only the finished declamation of a 
magnificent composition. This was all well enough in a great 
oration, such as that on Washington, because then one expects 
a work of art, and is satisfied and delighted if the art be con- 
summate. We readily yielded ourselves to the spell, and were 
deeply moved, as we might be by a drama. But when a man 
is pleading for the life of his client, or the salvation of his 
country, and still more when as an ambassador on behalf of 
Christ, he prays men to be reconciled to God, we feel that all 
conscious art is out of place. 

This method, then, may answer very well, if skilfully 
managed, for college addresses, for extraordinary orations, for 
any speaking in which art properly forms an important ele- 
ment. It is to be noticed, moreover, that to make the delivery 
as free and unconstrained as is possible for recitation, a man 
needs — unless he be one of the few who possess a wonderful 
memory — to have ample time for becoming thoroughly familiar 
with the discourse. Now the great French and German 
preachers who have adopted this method, usually preached 
much less frequently than an American pastor, and could 
afford to spend all necessary time in making perfectly sure that 
they had memorized it. Beside, Louis the Fourteenth's 
preachers were expected to produce a work of art, so that 
artificiality was not objectionable ; and in the case of a fervent 
evangelical preacher, like Adolphe Monod, it was seldom a real 
recitation, but again and again would become free speech from 
written preparation. Wherever preachers and hearers are 



PREPARATION AND DELIVERY. 301 

^^tisfied with the habitual practice of verbatim recitation, it 
lay be questioned whether either party deeply feels the reality 
preaching. Sidney Smith's inquiry, " What can be more 
ludicrous than an orator delivering stale indignation, and 
jrvour of a week old 1 " is not only a keen sarcasm, but con- 
tains an unanswerable argument. He who recites must either 
»e devoid of indignation and fervour, or else the delivery of 
"fchese must be more or less artificial ; and we repeat that con- 
scious art cannot be tolerated by a preacher, nor manifest art 
\yy a congregation, if they justly appreciate and deeply feel the 
:«:eality of preaching and hearing. Of course there may be so 
much of genuine earnestness in a really great preacher, as in 
spite of the inevitable artificiality of manner to make a deep 
impression ; yet even then, the mode of delivery is a draw- 
l)ack, a serious one, and most serious precisely where the dis- 
course ought to be most impressive. 

3. But may not a man write out his sermon, and then speak 
freely from this written preparation ? Certainly ; some emi- 
nent preachers do this, and with the most admirable effect ; 
but that is not recitation. Some of these men tell us that 
they do not memorise the discourse at all, in the sense of 
making a distinct efibrt to remember the words, and yet that 
they reproduce all the thoughts, and to a great extent in the 
same words, that they had written down. And as already re- 
markedj some of those who memorise, learn by degrees to 
break away from recitation, and express substantially the same 
thought in very difierent language. Now this is a wholly dis- 
tinct thing from recitation. When one makes no eflFort to 
remember the words, and recalls them at all only by their 
association with the ideas he is seeking to express, the process 
lacks the essential character of recitation. What then is it 1 
The answer must be that free speaking from written prepara- 
tion is only one of the varieties of what we call extemporaneous 
speaking. It may at first appear absurd to maintain that one 
may write out a sermon in full, then preach extemporaneously, 
and yet say very much what he had written, and often in the 
same words. Accordingly, Dr. Skinner, to judge from a single 
expression in passing, recognises a fourth distinct method of 
speaking, and calls it a reproduction from manuscript.* But 
what essential difference is there between this free speaking 
from complete written preparation, and speaking from complete 

* Discussions in Theology, p. 144. In another paper, p. 185, he speaks of 
this as the best form of recitation. 



302 THE THREE METHODS OF 

unwritten preparation 1 Robert Hall would pursue long trains 
of thought without writing, and reproduce them to a great 
extent in the same words; Cicero mentions that Hortensius 
had this power ; in fact, many a man of comparatively humble 
abilities has sometimes done likewise. If he were making an 
effort to repeat the words, this would be recitation, though without 
writing. If he makes no such effort, it is not recitation, whether 
the preparation were written or unwritten. Now such speaking 
from unwritten preparation must, as every one would agree, be 
classed as extemporaneous preaching ; why not assign to the 
same class all free speaking, even where the preparation was in 
writing ? Nor does this leave any shadowy boundary between 
the two methods. Though they may sometimes approach very 
closely, though a practised speaker may, like Brougham, pass 
freely from one to the other, yet they are separated by a very 
definite and distinct line. "When one endeavours to repeat the 
words used in preparation, that is reciting, whether he wrote 
them down or did not ; and when there is no effort to repeat the 
words, that is extemporizing, whether the preparation was par- 
tial or complete, purely mental, or written in full. 

It may be doubted whether many persons can successfully 
manage this peculiar variety of extemporaneous speaking. It 
would seem that only a mind peculiarly constituted would be 
capable of freely reproducing what had been fully written, 
without falling into mere recitation. But if we are to attain 
just views a& to the methods of preaching, it is a matter of no 
small importance to have it understood where the practice in 
question really belongs. 

3. Extemporaneous Speaking. 

The technical meaning of this expression requires to be 
defined. Primarily, of course, it denotes speaking without 
preparation, simply from the promptings of the moment. The 
colloquial expression for this is speaking " off hand," the image 
being that of shooting without a rest ; and the Germans have 
a corresponding phrase, speaking " from the stirrup," as when 
one shoots on horseback, without dismounting. This popular 
phraseology is suggestive. By a natural extension, the phrase 
"extemporaneous speaking" is applied to cases in which there has 
been preparation cf the thought, however thorough, but the 
language is left to be suggested at the moment. Still further, 
when notes are made, as a help to preparation, when the plan 
of the discourse is drawn. ow\* on ^k^^t, ^iid all the principal 



PREPARATION AND DELIVERY. 303 

points ariB stated or suggested, we call it extemporaneous speak- 
ing, because all this is regarded only as a means of arranging 
and recalling the thoughts, and the language is extemporised. 
If one to any great extent relies on these notes for his language, 
then it is so far a recitation, where the notes are left at home, 
and reading, where they are kept before him in the pulpit ; as 
a general thing, however, this is not true, and preaching from 
notes is fairly called extemporaneous. And one step further we 
go, when, as already stated, we insist that free speaking, after 
the discourse has been written in fuU as preparation, but with- 
out any effort to repeat the language of the manuscript, shall 
be called extemporaneous speaking. We think it has been 
satisfactorily shown that this last extension of the phrase is 
proper and necessary. And if so, then many eminent men, for 
example, Whitfield, who have usually been spoken of as recit- 
ing, were really, in part or in whole, extemporaneous preachers. 

No intelligent man would now propose that preachers should 
habitually speak extempore as regards the matter. It is true 
that occasions not unfrequently arise which make it important 
that they should be able to speak without any special immedi- 
ate preparation ; but this will be done most fitly and effectively 
by those whose habit it is to do otherwise. In truth, the 
fanatical or slothful men who say that they never make an^ 
preparation, deceive themselves. Most of what they say has 
been prepared by saying it many times before, and its substance 
was originally borrowed, whether from books, or from the 
pi'eaching of others and from coi^versation. Except as to 
single thoughts suggested at the moment, their minds are led 
by association of ideas, even though it be unconsciously, into 
what they have previously worked out. Really to extemporise 
the matter of preaching is as impracticable as it is improper. 
And it is utterly unfair to represent the advocates of extempo- 
raneous preaching as meaning that men shall preach without 
preparation. 

In presenting the advantages and disadvantages of this 
method, there must be some repetition of ideas already ad- 
vanced. This is obviously necessary to completeness, and such 
matters will now be regarded from a different point of view. 

1. Consider then, the advantages. 

(1.) As regards preparation, this method accustoms one to 
think more rapidly, and with less dependence on external helps, 
than if he habitually wrote in fulL 

(2.) It also enables a man to spend \i\!& ^\x«vi^^ ^^^"^^ 



304 THE THREE METHODS OF 

upon the more difl&cult or more important parts of the subject. 
When pressed for time, as must so often be the case with a 
pastor, he can get more thought into the sermon than if all 
the time must be spent in hun*iedly writing down what comes 
uppermost. The choice is in such cases between extempo- 
rizing the language where the thought has been elaborated, 
and taking the thought extempora in order to prepare the 
language. This really important consideration has been forci- 
bly stated by Way land : " A large proportion of our written 
discourses is prepared in a driving hurry, late on Saturday 
night, and sometimes between the services on the Sabbath; 
and the thoughts are huddled together with little arrange- 
ment, and less meditation. . . .If the same time had 
been spent in earnest thought, would not the discourse have 
been more carefully prepared than by the simple process of 
writing 1"* 

(3.) In general, this method saves time, for general im- 
provement, and for other pastoral work. Not at first, to be 
sure, for the inexperienced preacher often needs more time 
to make thorough preparation for preaching extempore, than 
he would use in writing ; but after he has gained facility and 
self reliance, much time may be saved. 

.(4.) In the act of delivery, the extemporaneous speaker has 
immense advantages. With far greater ease and effectiveness 
than if reading or reciting, he can turn to account ideas 
which occur at the time. Southey says : " The salient points 
of Whitfield's oratory were not prepared passages ; they were 
bursts of passion, like the jets of a geyser when the spring 
is in full play."t Any man who possesses, even in an humble 
degree, the fervid oratorical nature, will find that after careful 
preparation, some of the noblest and most inspiring thoughts 
he ever gains will come while he is engaged in speaking. If, 
full of his theme and impressed with its importance, he pre- 
sently secures the interested and sympathizing attention of- 
even a few good listeners, and the fire of his eyes comes 
reflected back from theirs, till electric flashes pass to and fro 
between them, and his very soul glows and blazes and flames, 
— he cannot fail sometimes to strike out thoughts more 
splendid and more precious than ever visit his mind in soli- 
tary musing. 

* Ministry of the Gospel, p. 120. 

■f Quoted by Skinner, p. 146. 



PREPARATION AND DELIVERY. 305 

(5.) And, as we have before seen, there is a more important 
gain than the new thoughts elicited. The whole mass of pre- 
pared material becomes brightened, warmed, sometimes trans- 
figured, by this inspiration of delivery. The preacher's language 
rises, without conscious effort, to suit the heightened grandeur 
and beauty of his conceptions ; and, as Everett has expressed it 
in speaking of Webster, "the discourse instinctively transposes 
itself into a higher key." This exaltation of soul, rising at 
times to rapture, can never be fitly described ; but the speaker 
who does not in some measure know what it means, was not 
bom to be a speaker. And great stress should be laid upon the 
fact that besides the thoughts which then first occur to the 
mind, — a matter constantly remarked, — there is this effect of 
far greater importance produced by delivery, in changing the 
forci and colour, and incalculably augmenting the power of the 
thoughts previously prepared. 

(6.) Moreover, the preacher can watch the effect as he pro- 
ceeds, and purposely alter the forms of expression, as well as 
the manner of delivery, according to his own feeling, and that of 
the audience. Especially in the hortatory i»arts of a sermon, 
which are often the most important parts, will this adaptation 
be desirable. If preacher and hearers have been wrought up to 
intense excitement, then it will be proper to use strong figures, 
impassioned exclamations, and in general to speak the language 
of passion. Nothing else would then be natural, and if in such 
a case one's language be unfigurative and quiet, it is felt by the 
disappointed hearers to be flat and tame, and no vehemence of 
mere delivery can supply the deficiency. Still worse is the 
effect if feeling has not risen high, and the preacher comes to 
language previously prepared which is figurative and passionate. 
If now his manner accords, as it ought always to do, with the 
actual feeling of himself and his hearers, there vf\\\ be a pain- 
ful incongruity between the delivery and the style; if he strives 
to rise to his prepared language, any partial success in so doing 
will but put him out of harmony with the feelings of the 
audience. Surely no one can question that this consideration 
is one of immense importance. What preacher has not often 
found in repeating a sermon to another audience, that there was 
a difference, and sometimes a very great difference, in the 
feeling with which he and his hearers approached the closing 
exhortation] A few sentences then, which in conception, style, 
and delivery strike precisely the right key, will wonderfully 
enhance the effect of the whole discourse. What the right key 



306 THE THBBB METHODS OF 

■will be, no man of oratorical nature can always foretell. Here, 
then, ths reader or reciter must inevitably fail, "while the culti- 
vated extemporaneous speaker easily and naturally rises or falls 
to suit the feeling of the moment. But some one might reply, 
" I do not aim at high oratorical effects. I am content with 
more modest efforts." That of which we speak is constantly 
practised by some humble men in prayer-meeting addresses. It 
is the simple rhetoric of nature. 

(7.) And here let it be tisked. What of dependence upon the 
Holy Spirit, and prayer for his help in preaching *? How can a 
man pray that God will guide him through a forest, when he 
has already blazed the entire path, and committed himself to 
follow it ? Of course one should seek help in preparing his 
discourse, and if he reads, should pray that he might be enabled 
to feel aright in reading. But how much more natural is such 
prayer, how much more real the dependence upon Divine 
assistance, how much freer the opening for the Spirit really to 
help, if the sermon is not already cast in moulds, but the 
material which has been gathered, is now molten in the mind, 
and the ultimate process remains to be performed. 

(8.) As to the delivery itself, it is only in extemporaneous 
speaking, of one or another variety, that this can ever be per- 
fectly natural, and achieve the highest effect. The ideal of 
speaking, it has been justly said, cannot be reached in any other 
way. Only thus will the voice, the action, the eye, be just 
what nature dictates, and attain their full power. And while 
painstaking culture vainly strives to read or recite precisely 
like speaking, the extemporaneous speaker may with compara- 
tive ease, rise to the best delivery of which he is capable. Iti 
this way, too, as before remarked, we most readily gain the sym- 
pathy of our hearers ; they are sympathising with a man, not si 
composition, — a man all alive with thoughts he is now thinking, 
and fervours he is now feeling, and not simply reviving, as far 
as possible, the thought and feeling of some former time. 

(9.) It is also an advantage of this method that it gives 
facility in speaking without immediate preparation. The 
preacher who cannot do this upon occasion misses many oppor- 
tunities of usefulness, and loses influence with the people by an 
incapacity which they consider a reproach. 

(10.) This leads to what is really among the most important 
advantages of extemporaneous preaching. With the masses of 
the people, it is the popular method. Where principle is in- 
volved, one ought to wit\iStacLd tVi'a xvotions of the people ; but 



PREPARATION AND DELIVERT. 307 

when it is a mere question of expediency, — and the present 
question is nothing more, — ^then a general and very decided 
popular preference is an exceedingly important consideration. 
It does not mend the matter to sneer at the folly of the masses, 
in so often preferring ignorant preachers who thoroughly sym- 
pathise with them, and speak in the way they like. There is 
real and grave danger that we shall ** educate away from the 
people." Here, now, is one respect in which educated preach- 
ers have it in their power to suit the popular taste, and gain 
the popular sympathy. If some obstacles to such sympathy 
can be but partially removed, there need be no difficulty with 
this obstacle. Those denominations, in particular, whose 
strength has always been with the masses, ought to make . 
almost everything bend to retain their hold upon the people. 
No doubt some congregations have been educated into a tolera- 
tion of reading, but it is almost always an unwilling acqui- 
escence, or a high regard for some man's preaching in spite of 
the fact that he reads. No doubt there are half-educated and 
fastidious people who greatly prefer reading or recitation. But 
tbe thoroughly educated fully agree with the masses as to what 
is generally the best method. And instead of striving to edu- 
cate the people into enduring what they will never like, and 
^hat can never so (Jeeply move them, let the preacher educate 
himself into preaching in such a way that he can reach and 
hold the masses, and leave the fastidious few to think what they 
please. 

2. But we must turn to the disadvantages of extemporane- 
ous speaking, some of which require not onij careful considera- 
tion in argument, but very watchful attention in practice. 

(1.) Perhaps the gravest of them all consists in the ten- 
dency to neglect of preparation, after one has gained facility in 
unaided thinking and extemporised expression. Men are prone 
to abuse all their privileges ; but it is a superficial philosophy 
which thence concludes that privileges should be avoided. And 
if many extemporisers grow indolent, and rely too much upoii 
the suggestions of the moment, at least they must at the 
moment have some mental activity ; whereas the same indolent 
men, if accustomed to read or recite, would repeat sermonis 
long ago prepared, with their minds no longer active, nor their 
hearts truly warm. This tendency to neglect of preparation is 
real and powerful, but it may be resisted, and many extempo- 
ns^rs do resist it, continuing through life to prepare their ser- 
mons with care ; and as just intimated, it ia oul^ Toaxi:^ t^;^<«c^^ 
and bj no me&na all, that do likewi&e. 



308 THE THBEB KSTHODS OF 

(2.) There is difficulty in fixing the mind upon the work 
of preparation without writing in full This may be removed 
by practice. At the outset, it can be overcome either by 
making copious notes, or by speaking the subject over in 
private. 

(3.) The extemporizer cannot quote so largely as the reader, 
from Scripture, or from the writings of others. But he is 
likely to quote only what is really important to the subject, 
and thus easily remembered. Facility of quotation is not 
an unmitigated blessing. Those who read often quote long 
passages which do not increase, which sometimes positively 
diminish, the interest and impressiveness of the sermon. 
What fits exactly, we repeat, can be easily remembered. Be- 
sides, it is often much better to borrow (with some sort of 
acknowledgment) the ideas of others, but state them in our 
own language. People are almost always more interested in 
this than in extended quotations. Where the quotation of 
the language itself is really important, and the passage long, 
one may read it from his Bible, or if from some other source, 
may write it off and read it, expressly as an important quota- 
tion. Perhaps a man who commonly speaks in an easy and 
familiar manner might carry with him the Pilgrim's Progress, 
Paradise Lost, or a volume of Spurgeon, and just take it up 
as the lawyers do, and read an extract. Something like this 
is frequently done in controversional sermons and public dis- 
cussions. 

(4.) The style of an extemporaneous sermon is apt to be 
less condensed and less finished, than if it were written out 
and read or recited. But this is not necessarily a fault 
The style may be all the better adapted to speaking, as dis- 
tinguished from the essay -style. That there is a real and 
broad difference between these, has been strongly asserted 
by such masters of effective speaking as Fox and Pitt and 
Brougham. Copiousness, amplification, even the frequent re- 
petition of a thought under new forms or with other illustra- 
tions, are often absolutely necessary in addressing a popular 
audience, even if it be as cultivated as the House of Commons. 
Paragraphs of this sort may be preceded or followed by terse, 
pithy statements, such as those which occur so strikingly in 
the Epistle of James. Now w^e learn the writing style by 
writing, and we must form the speaking style in the process 
of actual speaking.* In the case of definitions, or other 

• Comp. Part III. chap. i. 2. 



PRBPARATION AND DELIVERY. 309 

brief passages in which the language becomes especially im- 
portant, one may fix beforehand, whether with or without 
writing, the precise terms to be employed. While, however, 
a condensed and highly-finished style is not generally to be 
sought after in speaking which aims to make any practical 
impression, there is danger of a wearisome repetition of "linked 
didness long drawn out," especially of what some one calls 
"** conclusions which never conclude." This danger can be 
obviated by care in preparation and in speaking, and by the 
constant practice of careful writing for other purposes. 

(5.) The success of an extemporaneous sermon is largely 
dependent upon the preacher's feelings at the time of delivery, 
and upon the circumstances; so that he is liable to decided 
failure. It is by this, more than anything else, that many 
men are restrained from attempting to extemporize. And yet 
this is a condition by which preachers will much oftener gain 
than lose. A man not capable of failing, can never be eloquent. 
K he has not so excitable a nature, so sensitive a sympathy 
with his surroundings, as to be greatly depressed by very un- 
favourable circumstances, then the most favourable conditions 
will not greatly exalt and inspire him. In like manner a 
method of preaching which renders failure impossible, also 
renders the greatest impressiveness impossible. Preserved 
from falling below a certain level, the preacher will also be 
hindered from soaring as high above it as would otherwise be 
in his power. Nay, let a man commit himself to the occasion 
and the subject, — let him take heart and strike out boldly, 
sink or swim. 

(6.) If the sermon is to be used again, and has not been 
written out in full, it requires some renewed preparation. 
But this, too, is rather a gain than a loss; for thus the dis- 
course can be more easily and exactly adopted to the new 
circumstances. A sermon precisely suited to one audience 
and occasion would usually be, at least in many of its details, 
quite unsuited to any other ; and it is only the extemporaneous 
speaker that can readily make the requisite changes, which 
are often slight and delicate, but surpassingly important to 
the practical result. Besides, while the times change we are 
changing in them. A sermon prepared years ago will often 
need no little modification in order to suit the altered opinions, 
tastes, and feelings of the preacher himself. And then the 
necessity for reworking the preparation makes it all fresh to 
the preacher's mind, and warm again to his heart. So the ex- 



310 THE THRBE METHODS OF 

temporaneous method does make the repeated use of the sanL^ 
sermon more laborious, but it also serves to make it much mocr- 
eflfective. 

(7.) Still another, and a serious disadvantage of this method 
is in its tendency to prevent one's forming the habit of writiagT' 
As fluency increases, the contrast between winged, gloriow^ 
speech, and slow, toilsome writing, becomes to many men too 
great for their patience, and there grows upon them what some 
one felicitously calls a calamophobia, a dread of the pen. And 
not only does this cut them off from many important means of 
usefulness, — especially in our day, the era of the printipg-f .wes, 
— but it reacts disastrously upon their power of spwinft 
Both the beginner in oratory and the experienced, ready sp&akwti 
must constrain themselves to write, mitch and carefvUy, Not, 
indeed, to write out what they are about to speak, unless 1|hej 
belong to the class who can speak freely after fully written 
preparation, but to write for other purposes, — essays and exe- 
geses, by way of thoroughly studying a passage or subject, 
articles for publication, sermons after preaching them, and the 
like. Thus their habits of writing and of speaking will maio^ 
tain an equilibrium in their methods of thinking and style of 
expression, while yet each is practised according to its own 
essential and distinctive character.* 

Let it now be carefully observed that all the disadvantagea 
of extemporaneous speaking are such as can be com,pleteIy 
obviated by resolute and judicious effort, while reading ^ 
recitation have many inherent disadvantages, which may, of 
course, be more or less diminished, but can never be removed. 
Let this be noticed. The born speaker will be able to ove^ 
come the difl&culties of extemporaneous speaking, and will find 
here, and here alone, free play for his powers. We are not 
referring to the few great orators, but to all who have really a 
native talent for speaking, including some in whom this long 
remains undeveloped, through lack of exercise or wrong 
niethods. Some men^ not born speakers, but anxious to do 
good, and zealous pastors, may be able to write and read toler- 
ably instructive and acceptable discourses, while they could 
never preach extemporaneously. But certainly what is best for 
them, is not thereby shown to be beat in general. Methods <rf 
speaking ought to be chosen according to the wants a,nd the 
powers of those who have some gift. ^ sp(?akers. Yery few, if. 
ag.y others, ought to make spe^i-king their business. 



trb thbeb mbthods of 311 

4. Brief Histobt ov the Three Methods. 

No doubt men spoke in public before writing was invented, 
^ often now among savage tribes ; and from the beginning, 
^ome of these speeches must have been thought out before- 
^^nd, and even their language to some extent fixed. When 
^ting became common, it was natural that sometimes the 
^reparation should be made in writing. We find the great 
Sreek and Roman orators either extemporizing or reciting ; and 
nuch ia their practice that is commonly spoken of as recita- 
;ion, appears to have been really free speech from written pre- 
paration. Lord Brougham, who was a most devoted and appro- 
native student of Demosthenes, has unhesitatingly asserted 
Jiat *^ no Athenian audience could have followed Demosthenes 
n the condensed form in which his speeches are printed." 
Burke and Fenelon express themselves to the same effect. If 
reading speeches were ever practised among the Greeks and 
^mans, or reading sermons among the early Christians, it was 
i rare and exceptional thing. " The sermons," says Neander, 
ipeaking of the age of Chrysostom and Augustine, " were 
lometimes, though rarely, read off entirely from notes, or com- 
3Utted to memory ; sometimes they were freely delivered, after 
% plan prepared beforehand ; and sometimes they were alto- 
gether extemporary. The last we learn incidentally, from being 
.nformed that Augustine was occasionally directed to the choice 
Df a subject by the passage which the * preelector ' had selected 
?or reading; when, he tells us, he was sometimes urged by 
some impression of the moment, to give his sermon a different 
bum from what he had originally proposed. We are also in- 
Ebrmed by Chrysostom, that his subject was frequently sug- 
gested to him by something he met with on his way to church, 
or wliich suddenly occurred during divine service."* 

The practice of reading sermons, as a frequent thing, is 
generally believed to have originated in the reign of Henry 
VTII. " Those who were licensed to preach," says Burnet, in 
his History of the Reformation, " being often accused for their 



* Church Hist. II, 317. He cites no authority for the statement that 
sermons were sometimes read, nor does Bingham. Paniel, in his copious 
History of Preaching (in German), makes no such statement. It is perhaps 
only an infereno from the fact that it was common to preach other men's 
sermons ; yet this would hare been done by committing them to memory, 
or appropriating their trains of thought. Scholars who make a specialty of 
Church History might settle the question for us. 

Z 





312 THE THREE METHODS 07 

•ermons, and complaints being made to the King by hot mei 
on both sides, they came generally to write and read theii 
sermons, and thence the reading of sermons grew into a pra( 
tice in this church ; in which if there was not that heat of fii 
which the friars had shown in their declamations, so that the 
passions of the hearers were not so much wrought on by it, ye* 
it has produced the greatest treasure of weighty, grave, am 
solid sermons that ever the Church of God had ; which does h 
a great measure compensate that seeming flatness to vulgar 
ears, that is in the delivery of them." * The practice increi 
in consequence of the civil wars, especially through strong dii^ 
like to the impassioned preaching of the Independents. Charlc 
II., not accustomed, on the Continent, to this tamer methodL- ^ 
vainly attempted to correct it, as shown by the following curiou^^ 
letter, extracted by Gresley from the statute-book of the Uni — 
versity of Cambridge : 

Vice-Chancellor and Gentlemen : Whereas his Majesty is in ^ 

formed that the practice of reading eermons is generally taken^^:^ 
up by the preachers before the university, and therefore coi 
tinues even before himself; his Majesty hath commanded me t« 
signify to you his pleasure, that the said practice, which tool 
its beginning from the disorders of the late times, be wholl] 
laid aside, and that the said preachers deliver their sermoi 
both in Latin and English, by memory, without books ; as beu 
a way of preaching which his Majesty judgeth most agreeabL 
to the use of foreign churches, to the custom of the university 
heretofore, and to the nature of that holy exercise : and tha 
his Majesty's command in these premises be duly regarded an.^ 
observed, his further pleasure is, that the names of all su<?l3 
ecclesiastical persons as shall continue the present supine wkd 
slothful way of preaching be, from time to time, signified to 
him by the Vice-Chancellor for the time being, on pain of hi^ 
Majesty's displeasure. 

Oct. 8th, 1674. Monmouth. 

The effort failed, and reading was frequently practised in the 
Church of England. To this day, however, it is quite rare on^ 
the Continent, and among Romanists everywhere, and is com- 
mon only among certain Protestants of England and America. 
The few Episcopal ministers in this country who extemporize, 
are surpassingly popular, even among their own brethren, 






• Quoted by Gresley on Preaching, p. 391. 



^ 



\ 



PREPARATION AND DELIVERY. 313 

^^here they manage it effectively. Many leading Presbyterian 
"^ninisters, and some of their ecclesiastical authorities, have dis- 
^Jouraged reading, and even vehemently condemned it. 

Most of the eminent examples of reading admit of some 
-explanation. Jonathan Edwards, late in life, regretted the 
practice, and believed that it was better to preach memoriter 
:ioT the most part, sometimes extemporizing.* Dr Chalmers, so 
-often adduced, as if the example of a very peculiar man could 
establish a rule, declared himself unable to extemporize. But 
look at his style. He was extremely, in fact excessively fond of 
long sentences, formed of nicely balanced clauses, with the 
<5orresponding terms in each clause often indicated by allitera- 
tion, and he had an exceeding desire to achieve quaint felicities of 
phraseology. His images are frequently drawn on a grand and 
elaborate scale, and he was fastidious as to their colour and 
finish. These well-known peculiarities go far to account for his 
persuasion that he could not extemporize. It would be almost 
as difficult to improvise a choral ode, as some of those elaborate 
passages in which he delighted. And after all. Dr. Wayland 
8tates,t " A gentleman who was in the habit of hearing him, 
has assured me that his extempore discourses, delivered to 
operatives in the outskirts of Glasgow, were far more effective, 
and more truly eloquent, than the sermons which he delivered 
with so much applause in the Tron church of that city ; " — 
and there is other testimony to the same effect. 

5. General and Special Preparation for Extemporaneous 

Preaching. 

The preacher should be careful of his health, not only on 
other accounts, but because speaking, real speaking, demands a 
high degree of nervous energy and power of endurance. Many 
a noble sermon is spoiled by the fact, that the preacher begins 
to flag physically toward the close, and can neither feel high- 
wrought emotion, nor speak with passion and power. 

He should cultivate accuracy and rapidity of thinking, and 
should discipline himself to pursue trains of thought without 
interruption, and as fai as possible without dependence on out- 
ward helps. He must get his knowledge of Scripture, and all 
his knowledge (as far as may be) at his tongue's end. The habit 

• Hopi in, p. 71. 

f Ministry of the Gospel, p. 126. See also the account of Chalmers' 
ipeeches iu the General Assembly, in Hanna's Memoir, vol. iv. 114, 199, 438. 



314 THE THREi: METHODS OF 

of keeping one*s knowledge fit for service, so that he can s^t 
once state what he knows or thinks on subjects he has studi&^^ 
will preserve from the danger of breaking down, and will enabie 
him to prepare sermons with equal thoroughness in a shorter 
time. 

Great attention ought to be given to the use of language in 
ordinary writing and conversation. There should be the habit 
of seeking the most exact terms, and of constructing sentences 
which shall be grammatical, and yet simple and easy. The most 
familiar conversation should not degenerate into slang, nor the 
most dignified into pedantry. There should be no such marked 
difference as is often seen, between a man's style in public- 
speaking, and in conversation. These should not be different 
instruments, but simply a higher or lower range on the same 
instrument. Children are taught that to make sure of being 
polite when visiting, they must be polite every day at home. 
So Coquerel says, " In order to speak well sometimes, it is 
necessary to speak well always." Certainly this is necessary 
in order that one may feel sure of being able to speak well at 
any time. And the man who forms such habits need not be 
uneasy, for his use of language can never be excessively bad. 

A young preacher who wishes to extemporize ought to begia 
it at once. Mr. Zincke's method* may do very well for otie 
who has been reading till middle age, and then sets himself to 
speak extempore, but it is by no means best for the young. 
Probably the greatest and most common of blunders about this 
whole matter lies just here. Authors, professors, pastors, often 
say to the young minister : " Certainly, extemporaneous preach- 
ing is best, if properly practised, and I hope you will learn te 
extemporize. But do not think of attempting it at first 
Begin by reading, — or preaching meTnoriter, — and gradually use 
yourself to extemporizing." So he begins, forms all his habits 
of thinking, of constructing discourse, his mastery of expres- 
sion, style, delivery, everything, to suit the other method, — and 
a speaker's habits for life are very soon formed, — and after a 
few years, occasionally attempts to preach in a way for which he 
has not trained himself, and which is in many respects quite 
different. Who can wonder that he fails, grows discouraged, 
and falls back upon the continued practice of the other method, 
as somehow the best for him 1 Nay, let a man begin at once 
what he intends to make the habit of his life. 

* The Duty and the Disciplixio oi Extemporary Preaching, by F. B. Zinoke. 



PREPARATION AND DELIVERY. 315 

Lord Brougham insists that one must first learn to speak 
casilj and fluently, sacrificing everything to this as the prime 
^quisite : and afterwards learn to " convert this kind of easy 
speaking into chaste eloquence." In saying this, he supposes 
limself to " differ from all other doctors of rhetoric." And in 
fact the advice usually given follows the saying of Quintilian : 
*' It is not by writing fast that we come to write well, but by 
mriting well that we learn to write fast:" Probably different 
classes of minds are thought of in the two cases. If a young 
man finds himself not fluent, but slow and hesitating in speech, 
then let him follow Brougham's advice, and learn, at all 
hazards, to speak with ease, though he should at first violate 
all the rules of rhetoric and even of grammar. But if, as is 
more commonly the case, he is ready and fluent, then he must 
rigorously discipline himself to precision of expression. ^* The 
old and finished speaker always uses fewer and choicer words, 
than the young orator."* Command of language does not 
consist in what Huet disrespectfully called une flvace de houc?ie, 
in a mere gush of words, but in the ability to bring forward 
precisely the right word at the moment it is wanted. 

The extemporaneous preacher must carefully arrange his 
sermon, according to the natural order of the thoughts, and 
then he will have no difficulty in remembering. The sermon 
must not wander at will over the subject, but have its distinct 
and well-marked points, and advance steadily from one to 
another. In both these respects, what helps him will also 
greatly help the hearer. Whether it has any formal division or 
not, a popular address should always have points. And it is 
one advantage of extemporaneous speaking, that it compels to 
Buch an arrangement. If now one has stretching before him a 
well-defined track of thought, divided by natural landmarks 
into distinct sections, he can diverge from it upon occasion and 
return without difficulty. t 

If a preacher makes notes in preparing, as it is usually best 
to do, he ought, in general, not to carry them into the pulpit. 
Particular subjects or modes of treatment will sometimes make 
this desirable. But in general, one should take time enough 

♦ Shedd, p. 238. 

*)* '* My earnest advice to you is that you never make the attempt to extem- 
porize without being sure of your matter. Of all the defects of utterance I 
have ever known the most serious is having nothing to uttyer" kWuMx^<»^ 
Thoughts on Preaching'^ p. liZ 



316 THE THREE METHODS OP 

beforehand to get the matter of the sermon in solution in hir^^ 
mind, so that it can flow freely ; or, to resume the other figun 
to get the track he is to follow so clear to his mental visioi 
that he can flash a single glance from beginning to end of it 
This is not memorizing words, and with a little practice it car 
be quickly done. In other respects, too, great benefit will 





derived from this necessity of going thoroughly over the pr 
pared matter shortly before preaching, for thus the mind 
heart become kindled, and brought into sympathy with tb^ e 
particular subject to be treated. Sometimes the very wor(3L8 
ought to be fixed beforehand. This applies generally to defiim_:i- 
tions, frequently to transitions, and sometimes to images, su(^^ 
as must be presented with precision and elegance, or they wL^ 
be worse than nothing. Such preparation of particular se 
tences may be made in writing and memorized, or may be alt 
gether mental. The advice is often given, to memorize tfc:»-e 
introduction, and extemporise the language of the remainder ^^f 
the discourse. This is of questionable propriety. It gives a 
formal air at the outset, and is apt to make the transition prr^- 
cipitous. Passages of Scripture which are to be quoted, <^r 
other proposed quotations, should be gone over in the mii3-d 
during the immediate preparation, that there may be no blii-'*^" 
dering or hesitation. 

We now see how the inexperienced young preacher m^J 
speak extemporaneously without any great danger of utfcer 
failure. Let him arrange the discourse with great care, aO« 
again and again think through the whole, making no effort to 
retain the words he lights upon (save as to definitions, etc.}, 
but getting the thoughts, and their succession, perfectly 
familiar. Speaking it over in his room or in the forest is not 
wrong, and some find it in their early preparations very useful- 
Then let him pray for help and go forward, — he can remember 
better than he supposes, — and facility will rapidly increase. 

In familiar conversation with such a young brother, one 
might add such hints as the following, with reference to tb^ 
actual preaching. If you forget what you meant to say next, 
do not stop. Nothing is so awkward as a dead pause ; and the 
awkwardness increases in geometrical ratio to the seconds of 
time. Say something, repeat, recapitulate, talk at random even,^ 
anything rather than stop. If you become embarassed with ft 
tangled sentence, do not turn back, but burst through. If you 
jbave made a mistake oi gra.mx![iviT,^To\i\inciation, or the like, 
do not stop to correct it, \m\^^^\\.\& ^^Tvwsa. ktL ^^^isional 



\ 



PRBPARATION AND DELIVERY. 317 

inadvertence is readily pardoned, if the general style be good. 
And if you greatly blunder in style, forget half your best 
thoughts, or utterly break down, it will not kill you. Other 
great men have failed. Remember young Robert Hall. 

Public speaking is one of the noblest exercises of the human 
powers ; preaching is its highest form : and if extemporaneous 
speaking be the best method of preaching, it is surely worth 
labour to attain excellence in this, — diligent and faithful self- 
cultivation, resolute determination always to do our best, as 
long as we live. 



CHAPTER II. 

ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOICE. 

1. General Remarks on Delivery. 2. The Voice— Its . 
Distinct Powers. 3. General Improvement of tHB 
Voice. 4. Management op Voice when Actually SpiSAK' 
iNG — Note on Minister's Sore-Throat. 

♦ 1. General Remarks on Delivery.* 

It can never be necessary to urge the importance of delivery 
upon persons who correctly understand its nature, andTvho 
appreciate the objects of public speaking. 

The famous saying of Demosthenes, repeatedly mentioned 
by Cicero, is sometimes utterly misrepresented. He did not 
say that the first thing, second thing, third thing in oratory is 
action, in the English sense of that term, bat delivery, for this 
is what the Latin dcUo signifies. And delivery does not con- 
sist merely, or even chiefly, in vocalization and gesticulation, 
but it implies that one is possessed with the subject, that he is 
completely in sympathy with it and fully alive to its importance ; 
that he is not repeating remembered words, but bringing forth 
the living offspring of his mind. Even acting is good only in 
proportion as the actor identifies himself with the person repre- 
sented — ^really thinks and really feels what he is saying. In 
the speaker this ought to be perfect ; he is not undertaking to 
represent another person, to appropriate another's thoughts and 

* Of the works mentioned above, Introd. 7, the most valimble on this 
subject are those of Cicero and Quintilian, Whately (one-sided, but instruc* 
tiTe) and Monod. Since the Introduction was stereotyped, two works on 
ISociition have appeared. Mcllvaine on Elocution, New York, 1870, is by 
far the best treatise on the subject in existence, containing much thorough 
discussion of principle and many useful suggestions, with but little that is 
liable to serious objection. It will be frequently referred to in this and the 
following chapter. Plumptre's "King's College Lectures on Elocution,'' 
London, 1870, is worth examining, though ill-arranged, and often feeble. The 
two chapters on Action in Dabney's Sacred Rhetoric, Richmond, 1870, present 
A brief, but vigorous aiid\iBei\i\^c\]L&&\oTi. 



ON DELIVBBY, AS BEOABDS VOIOE. 319 

feelings, but aims, or should aim, simply to be himself, to utter 
what his own mind has produced. 

Why then do speakers so often and so sadly fail in respect to 
this chief element of delivery 1 Partly because many of the 
thoughts they present are borrowed, and have never been 
digested by reflection, and incorporated into the substance of 
their own thinking. Partly because they so frequently say not 
what they really feel, but what they think they ought to feel, 
and are, it may be earnestly, but yet unsuccessfully, trying to 
feel. And still more because they are uttering the product of 
a former mental activity, viz., at the time of preparation ; and 
even if the thought and feeling were then perfectly real and 
genuine, yet the mental states which produced them do now 
but imperfectly return. In each of these respects it is seen 
that the speaker is liable to be to some extent an actor ; and 
we can easily understand how a gifted and laborious actor may 
become much more thoroughly possessed with thought and 
sentiment which are wholly another's, than a speaker wanting 
in gifts and labour, with such as are at the moment not wholly 
his own. Besides, we do not expect of the actor perfect success 
in this respect, and wo wonder and admire that he sometimes 
80 nearly approaches perfection ; while of the speaker we natu- 
rally do expect perfection, and are offended that he obviously 
comes short of it.* For a speaker, then, and above all for a 
preacher, it is a matter of the highest importance that he 
should resist the tendency to become in part an actor, should 
strive most earnestly to say nothing but what he now really 
thinks and now truly feels. It may sometimes be that while a 
preacher is chagrined at having forgotten a choice expression or 
a treasured thought, the omission of what his mind's present 
activity failed to produce may in fact have been a gain, for it 
would have come in only as a dead thing, detracting from the 
vitality, and retarding the movement, of the discourse as a 
whole. At any rate it seems to be clear that a preacher should 
seek to form mental habits quite diflferent from those of an 
actor. And while men who wish to be orators are found ex- 
pecting to profit by taking lessons from actors, it is all the 
while true that the actor is but attempting to imitate the 
orator. It is surely better to strike at the heart of the matter, 
and tiy to be the real thing one is called to be, than to copy an 

* Compare above, Part III. chap iv, on the difference between poetry 
and eloquence. 



320 ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOICE. 

imperfect copy — better to practice ourselves in saying what ^^ 
really do thiuk and feel, than to learn from an actor how to s^^». 
tyhat we do not, almost as if we did. 

These views receive confirmation from the strong words c/ 
one who has rarely been equalled in his appreciation and ^2.23 
mastery of true art. 

Wagner. I've often heard them boast, a preacher 
Might profit with a player for his teacher. 

Faust. Yes, when the preacher is a player, granted : 
As often happens in our modern ways. 

Warner. Ah ! when one with such love of study's haunted, 
And scarcely sees the world on holidays. 
And takes a spy-glass, as it were, to read it, 
How can one by persuasion hope to lead it. 

Faust. What you don't feel, you'll never catch by hunting, 
It must gush out spontaneous from the soul, 
And, with a fresh delight enchanting. 
The hearts of all that hear control. 
Sit there forever ! Thaw your glue-pot, — 
Blow up your ash-heap to a flame, and brew, — 
With a dull fire, in your stew-pot. 
Of other men's leavings a ragout ! 
Children and apes will gaze delighted, 
If their critiques can pleasure impart ; 
But never a heart will be ignited. 
Comes not the spark from the speaker's heart. 

Wagner. Delivery makes the orator's success ; 
Though I'm still far behindhand, I confess. 

Faust. Seek honest gains, without pretence ! 
Be not a cymbal-tinklino; fool ! 
Sound understanding and good sense 
Speak out with little art or rule ; 
And when you've something earnest to utter, 
Why hunt for words in such a flutter? 
Yes, your discourses, that are so refined. 
In which humanity's poor shreds you frizzle, 
Are unrefreshing as the mist and wind 
That through the withered leaves of autumn whistle." * 



ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOIOB. 321 

A speech, in the strict sense of the term, exists only in the 
«tct of speaking. All that precedes is preparation for a speech ; 
a,ll that remains afterwards is report of what was spoken. 
Whatever may be necessary for convenience in our rhetorical 
treatises, it is yet exceedingly important not to think of the 
speech and the delivery as things existing apart. Whatever be 
our method of preparing, we should habitually regard all as 
but preparation ; it must be cherished and kept alive in the 
mind, must be vitally a part of itself, and then as living, 
breathing thought it will be delivered. 

And as the preparation is not a speech till it is spoken, so 
the mere manner of speaking should not at the time receive 
separate attention. It should be the spontaneous product of 
the speaker's peculi.;r constitution, as acted on by the subject 
which now fills his mind and heart. The idea of becoming 
eloquent merely by the study of voice and gesture, though 
sometimes entertained, is essentially absurd. No one would 
expect to become agreeable in conversation by such means. The 
Athenians set a far greater value than we do, upon what has 
"been called " the statuary and the music of oratory." They 
listened to political and judicial speeches with much of the 
same critical spirit with which we hear a professional musician 
or a literary lecture. Yet they were very far from giving their 
chief attention to the mere use of voice and gesture. And 
even taking delivery in its broadest sense, we find that Demos- 
thenes, as heretofore remarked,* by no means treated delivery 
as the great thing. He took it for granted that an orator 
would be careful about materials, arrangement, style, and his 
orations show that he himself was thus careful in the very 
highest degree. But delivery, peculiarly important in Athens, 
had been for him a peculiarly difficult task. Hence his strik- 
ing, hyperbolical statement — delivery is everything. 

The things requisite to eflFective delivery may be briefly stated 
as follows : 

Have something to say which you are confident is worth 
saying ; scarcely anything will contribute so much as this con- 
fidence, to give dignity, directness, ease and power to delivery. 
Have the treatment well arranged, not after the fashion of an 
essay, but with the orderly and rapid movement proper to a 
discourse. Be thoroughly familiar with all that you propose 
to say, so that you may feel no uneasiness ; for the dread of 

• See aboye, IntroducUoii, &. 



322 ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOIOB. 

failure sadly interrupts the flow of thought and feeling.* 
Think it all over within a short time of the hour for speaking, 
so that you may be sure of the ground, and so that your feel- 
ings may be brought into lively sympathy with the subject ; it 
is however best immediately before speaking to have the mind 
free from active thought, maintaining only a quiet, devotional 
fiume. Let the physical condition be as vigorous as possible. 
In order to this seek good health in general ; take abundant 
sleep the night before speaking ; at the meal before speaking, 
eat moderately, of food easily digested, and if you are to speak 
immediately, eat very little ; and do not, if it can possibly be 
avoided, exhaust your vitality during the day by exciting con- 
versation. A healthy condition of the nervous system is 
surpassingly important ; not a morbid excitability such as is 
produced by studying very late the night before, but a healthy 
condition, so that feeling may quickly respond to thought, so 
that there may be sympathetic emotion, and at the same time 
complete self-control. t 

Above all, be yourself. Speak out with freedom and earnest- 
ness what you think and feel. Better a thousand faults, than 
through dread of faults to be tame. Some of the most useful 
preachers, men in a true and high sense eloquent, have had 
grave defects of manner. Habitually correct faults as far as 
possible, but whether the voice and the action be good or bad, 
]f there is something in you to say, speak it out. And by all 
means let there be no affectation, or even artificiality. J 

" In man or woman, but far most in man, 
And most of all in man that ministers 
And serves the altar, in my soul I loathe 
All affectation. 'Tis my perfect scorn ; 
Object of my implacable disgust. 
What ! will a man play tricks, will he indulge 
A silly fond conceit of his fair form 
And just proportion, fashionable mien. 
And pretty face, in presence of his God ? 
Or will he seek to dazzle me with tropes 
As with the diamond on his lily hand, 
And play his brilliant parts before my eyes 
When I am hungry for the bread of life ? 

* Comp. McIlvaiAe on Elocution, p. 120. 
t Comp. Mcllvaine, p. 103 ff., 165 ff. ; Monod, p. 399 f. 
X Comp. aboTQ, Tntrod. 5. 



ON DELIVERT, AS REGARDS VOIOE. 323 

He mocks his Maker, prostitutes and shames 
His noble office, and, instead of truth. 
Displaying his own beauty, starves his flock ! 
Therefore, avaunt all attitude, and stare, 
And start theatric, practised at the glass."* 

2. The Voice — Its Distinct Powers. 

The voice is the speaker's great instrument. Nothing else 
in a man's physical condition is nearly so important. " For an 
eflFective and admirable delivery," says Cicero, " the voice, be- 
yond doubt, holds the highest place."f Not every eminent 
orator has possessed a commanding person, but every one of 
great eminence has had an attractive voice. The faults which 
come from natural organization, such as drawling, fineness, 
feebleness, defective articulation, may often be partially 
remedied by judicious and patient eflfort ; witness Demosthenes. 
And a voice extremely faulty in some respects, may yet in other 
respects have great power, and be precisely suited to the mental 
character of the man ; witness John Randolph. It is said of 
Burke that " his voice, which he never attempted to discipline, 
was harsh when he was calm, and when he was excited he often 
became so hoarse as to be hardly intelligible." This, along 
with the essay style of his otherwise magnificent speeches, will 
account for the fact that he was commonly listened to with 
weariness; yet on some occasions, when expressing certain 
varieties of thought and feeling, his delivery was very forcible. J 
Robert Hall had a comparatively weak voice ; but he gave it 
effect by rapidity of utterance, and when he was excited it 
would swell into power. The vocal gifts of Chrysostom, Whit- 
field, Spurgeon, are well known. From all this it appears that 
while one cannot be an orator of the highest class without un- 
usual powers of voice, he may yet be a; highly effective speaker 
notwithstanding grave defects ; so that every one should be' 
encouraged to make the best of such vocal powers as he 
possesses. 

A minute acquaintance with the anatomy and physiology of 
the organs of speech is not necessary to the orator. Even a 
general knowledge of them is more useful in the way of avoid- 
ing disease than of positively improving delivery.§ 

♦ Cowper. t De Or. III. 60. 

t See Bulwer on Style, in Caztonia. 
§ A good and sufficient account of these oi^gans is giyen by Mcllyaine, 
p. 183, 198. 



324 ON DELVBRY, AS REGARDS VOICE. 

But there are certain powers of voice which, with reference 
to public speaking, it is important to distinguish. 

(1.) Compass, the range of pitch over which the voice ex- 
tends. The difiFerence between voices in this respect is very 
obvious in the case of singers, but it is not less real in speaking, 
and is a matter of great consequence in expressing the immense 
variety of sentiments which a speaker will feel, even in the 
progress of the same discourse. 

(2.) Volume, the quantity of sound produced is entirely dis- 
tinct from pitch, though frequently confounded with it in the 
popular use of such terms as loud and strong. Ample volume, 
properly regulated, will render the voice audible to a greater 
distance, and will make it more commanding. 

(3.) Penetrating power. The distance to which one can be 
heard, does not depend simply on volume and pitch, nor on 
distinct articulation ; there is a diflference between voices as to 
their power of penetration. A similar difference exists in the 
case of many other sounds, natural and artificial. The philoso- 
phy of it has not been satisfactorily explained, and the fact is 
scarcely noticed in treatises on elocution, but a very little ob- 
servation will convince one that the difference is real Indeed, 
penetrating power is sometimes clearly hereditary,* which 
proves that it is A natural property of voice. 

(4.) Melody. This depends on both sweetness and flexibility 
of voice. The single sounds must be sweet, and the constant 
transitions in pitch, required by variations of sentiment, must 
be made with promptness, precision, and smoothness. A voice 
is not melodious if in either respect deficient. 

3. General Improvement of Voice. 

Cicero tells us that Cains Gracchus, when speaking, kept a 
servant near him and out of sight, having a flute, the note of 
which would now and then bring up the orator's voice when 
flagging, or recall it when overstrained; and he judiciously adds 
that it were better to leave the flute-player at home, and carry 
to the forum the habit acquired. t This holds good as to all 
vocal improvement, in fact as to all that pertains to delivery. 
We must seek by general exercise and care to form such luibitt 
of speech and of bearing, that there may be little need to giv« 
them attention when actually engaged in public speaking. 

* The author is familiar with a manifest instance, 
t De Or. III. 60 f. 



ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOICE. 325 

Whatever improves the general health will improve the voice, 
especially muscular exercise, and particularly such as develops 
the chest, and promotes an easy correctness of position. Sing- 
ing cultivates the voice in almost every respect, and probably 
to a greater extent than anything else except actual speaking. 
It is on many other accounts also very desirable that a min- 
ister should be able to sing, and to sing by note ; and young 
ministera, and those preparing for the ministry, should take 
much pains to learn to sing. If it should require as much time 
and effort to gain the power of singing church music at sight as 
to learn a modern language or a branch of science, it would be 
fully as profitable ; and almost any man who is still young can 
learn to sing moderately well, by judicious and persevering 
ejfifort. Reading aloud is also of good service in cultivating the 
voice. It is, however, more laborious than speaking, and 
should be promptly suspended when it becomes decidedly 
fatiguing. A proper management of the voice in all ordinary 
conversation, is a matter of the very highest importance. As 
in politeness, and as in style, so in the use of the voice (and 
also in action), it is impossible for one to do really well on 
special occasions who is habitually careless and slovenly. We 
have already urged this as regards style, and extemporaneous 
preaching, but it deserves to be repeated and reiterated. Take 
care that your utterance in conversation shall always be audible, 
agreeable, and at the same time easy and natural ; and tlieu in 
public speaking your utterance will almost take care of itself. 
Vocal eocercises may be quite useful for certain purposes and to 
some extent. If excessive, or of an improper character, they 
may seriously injure the organs ; and there is still greater 
danger that they will produce artificiality. When conducted 
in private, under the direction of a really judicious teacher 
of elocution, they might be of great service in correcting special 
faults ; but teachers of elocution, the most intelligent, appear 
singularly prone to attempt too much, to be dissatisfied with 
the humble task of correcting faults, and undertake to super- 
induce some positive, and of necessity artificial excellence. 
After all, practice in actual speaking is, next to care in con- 
versation, the main thing. But it must ba heedful practice, 
with observation of the faults developed, and effort afterwards 
to avoid them, or it will but confirm and render incurable one's 
natural or accidental defects. Some one has said, " Practice 
makes perfect ; and bad practice makes perfectly bad." 

Care must constantly be taken not to destroy individuality 



326 ' ON DELIVERY, AS BEQABDS VOICE. 

of voice. A man's voice is a part of himself, a part of his 
power ; he must keep it essentially unaltered, while improved 
as far as possible. 

A few points may be noticed, as to the means of improving 
particular powers of voice. 

(1.) Compass will be improved by nothing so much as by 
singing. Something may be gained by taking a short sentence, 
and repeating it (in the open air) on a key successively elevated 
or lowered, to the full limit of our range of voice ; taking care 
that the utterance shall at every pitch be speaking, £lnd not 
become half singing. In such exercises it is necessary to re- 
member that on a low key it is best to speak slowly, and 
swiftly on a high key. The difference is clearly seen in com- 
paring the lower and upper tones of a piano or violin, and the 
human voice is also a stringed instrument. In actual speaking, 
nature at once prompts the swifter or slower utterance, if only 
we let nature have liberty. 

(2.) As to volume, we gain mainly by such habitual carriage 
and such physical exercise as may expand and strengthen the 
lungs. Riding horseback, cutting wood, and in a remarkable 
degree certain gymnastical exercises, will have this effect, as 
soon appears from increased breadth of chest. Taking a series 
of long breaths, every morning before breakfast, or at any time 
of day when the stomach is not full, will act upon the lungs, 
and if regularly practised, accomplish much more than might 
be supposed. The habit of talking with the mouth well opened 
so as to give full and free utterance (of course without mouth- 
ing), is here quite important. Occasional loud singing (not oil 
a high pitch) will be of service, and actual speaking, unlesd 
very badly managed, will steadily augment the volume of one^s 
voice, through all his earlier years. 

(3.) Penetrating power may be increased by giving the 
matter distinct attention, in vocal exercises, and sometimes in 
speaking. The effort should be to project the voice, to make it 
reach farther, without elevating the pitch or increasing the 
quantity of sound. By calling to a friend on an opposite hiH 
or by fixing the eye on a distant person in a large audience, 
and endeavouring to make him hear, we naturally develop this 
power; but great care must be taken not to substitute an 
alteration of pitch or tone. It is found by physical expiBriments 
of different kinds, that ©wre tones, those not mixed with irregti- 
Jar noises, tones full, clear, steady,* are heard at a greslter &- 

* Comp. IJLoONwxia, p. 296. 



ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOICE. 327 

tance than others ; and this is even a more important reason 
for cultivating purity of tone than its effect in the way of 
melody. 

Purity of tone applies chiefly to the utterance of vowel sounds. 
But penetrating power of voice is also greatly assisted by the 
distinct articulation of consonants. Nothing is more common 
than in approaching a speakei^ to hear sound, even loud sound, 
before we hear words. This is chiefly due to the fact that the 
speaker swells his vowel sounds, but does not bring out the 
consonants. Yet it is mainly these that determine the word, in 
speech as well as in stenography. 

Now as to distinctness of articulation, great faults are very 
common, and there is ample room for cultivation, by simple 
means. In conversation, reading, speaking, especially in sing- 
ing, (because there it is most difficult,) let pains be constantly 
taken to articulate every letter according to its true sound, and 
particularly every consonant. Special exercises may be used, 
containing consonants often neglected, such as the strong r and 
the nasal sound of ing ; or difficult combinations of two or 
three consonants, as shrink, expects, fifth and sixth verses. It 
is on various accounts important that preachers should learn to 
utter with ease the forms of the second person singular of verbs 
such as wouldst, blessedst, etc., which constantly occur in 
prayer, and sometimes in exhortation. Where a consonant, or 
combination of consonants, ends one word and begins the next, 
there is often special difficulty. E.g. " take care," " sit down." 
Not one in five of educated ministers will correctly articulate 
the words " In the evening it is cut down and withereth." An 
excellent example is the saying, "It is the first step that 
costs."* 

Distinctness of articulation is everywhere much neglected by 
the masses of men : it is especially so in this country, and 
particularly at the South. American English is feebler in 
sound than the language in England ; and at the South there 
is already to some extent seen the general tendency of people 
living in a warm climate, to prolong and make musical tho 
vowel sounds, but to drop, alter, or slur over the strong com- 
binations of. consonants. This is a grave fault in public 
speaking. Italian is admirable for music, but for oratory, 

♦ Useful collections of examples for this purpose may be found in the 
highest School Readers, and in some workfl on Elocution. Mcllvaine has 
good remarks on articulation, p. 218, 226, and a long and instructiye chapter 
on pronunciation, p. 239, 293. 

AA 



328 ON DELIVERY^ AS BEGABDS TOIOB. 

genuine English is far better. At the same time, let us bewi 
of extremes. The rolling English r, for instance, is contrary 

the established usage of America, and should not be imitated J 

And in general, we must not show an effort at distinctness 
even mumbling is hardly so bad as this. A man need nc — 
speak — a German writer suggests — like one who is teaching th- 
deaf and dumb to talk. When one who grew up with carel( 
habits as to articulation first attempts to correct them, he wi^ 
for a while betray the effort ; but this can be soon overcome 



by practising exercises in private, and especially by care 1 i 

conversation. 

He who washes to be heard at a great distance, must spesK^~i 
rather slowly. There is thus a clear interval between ttzMe 
sound-waves, and even when they have come a long way arai^d 
are growing faint, they will still be distinct. 

This penetrating power of voice, with the distinct articulati-on 
which aids it, is believed to deserve the special attention of &J1 
public speakers. 

(4.) As regards melody , we have seen that it depends on 
sweetness and flexibility of voice. The former is chiefly a 
natural quality, but it may be improved by singing ; also in 
conversation by attention to purity of tone, avoiding huskinesfl^ 
and all mingling of mere noise with the vocal utterance ; and 
in general, by keeping the organs of speech in a healthy con- 
dition. The vowel sounds are here most important, the pro- 
longation of these making the sweet tones. The consonants, 
while distinctly articulated for other purposes, must in order to 
melody be uttered with smoothness and ease. There is a 
marked tendency in this country, particularly at the North, to 
omit or disguise many unaccented vowel sounds, thereby greatly 
impairing the melody of the words, and sometimes making tbefli 
indistinct. Take, for example, the shortened utterance we so 
often hear, of absolute, tolerable, immensity* This tendency 
ought to be studiously avoided by all who desire to speak 
agreeably, and should be resisted and corrected by all who visl 
well to our language. But not a few preachers go to the opIK 
site extreme, and exhibit an affected precision. ' Thus in di^ 
the vowel of the second syllable should have its proper sou* 
(though vulgarly sounded like short u), but in audible, sensi^ 
this would be an affectation, for the disguised sound is est 
lished by the best usage. 

Flexibility is necessary for the exact expression of var 

* Comp. Dabney*s Sac. Ehet. p. 305. 



ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOIOB. 329 

aentiment, as well as for melody. It will improve by practice, 
if one speaks with earnest feeling, and it may be cultivated by 
iny exercises involving quick transitions from one pitch to a 
[nuch higher or lower one. " Probably the best exercise is that 
jf reading aloud . ... dialogues, in which the reader repre- 
jents alternately a number of interlocutors. The animation 
pyhich is characteristic of this species of . discourse, and the 
5:equent and rapid changes of the voice which are requisite to 
maintain the distinction of persons and characters, afford the 
Qiost effective aids to the development of this power. Humor- 
3US selections also are good for this purpose."* 

Melody is exceedingly desirable, but without possessing it in 
EL high degree a speaker's voice may be, on other accounts, 
very effective. And it is a grave fault to play tunes on the 
voice, to give a sort of musical accompaniment, distinct from 
the sentiments uttered, as appears to be quite common in 
England, and is sometimes seen in America, in the pulpit-tone 
of even educated men. 

4. Management of Voice when -\ctually Preaching. 

A few simple hints may be profitably borne in mind. 

(1.) Do not begin on too high a key. One is particularly apt 
to do this in the open air, or in a large and unfamiliar church 
lOr when much excited. It is wonderful how diflBcult a speaker 
finds it to lower the main key on which he has once fairly 
started. He may become aware of it in three minutes, and 
make repeated efforts to correct the mistake, but in most cases 
he will fail ; and when impassioned passages come, in which the 
voice must rise, it will rise to a scream. Every one has often 
witnessed this process. It is of course not impossible to change 
the key, and this should be carefully attempted when necessary. 
But the great matter is to avoid beginning wrong. Tenor 
voices, it is obvious, are especially apt to begin too high. If 
one becomes impassioned in the early part of the discourse, he 
ought not then to let out his voice in its full force, but reserve 
its highest power for some later and culminating point, as is 
done with the more powerful instruments in a a oratorio.^ In 
fact, the voice should very rarely go to it highest pitch, or to 

♦ Mcllvaine, p. 320. His chapters on the qualities and powers of the 
voice, and their improvement, p. 294, 820/ contain a good deal that is 
useful. 

+ Palmer, Homiletik, s. 538. 



330 ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOICE. 

its fullest volume ; there ought always to be a reserve force, 
unless it be in some moment of the most exalted passion. 
Long passages of bawling, relieved only by occasional bursts 
into a harrowing scream, are in every senso hurtful to all con- 
cerned. 

It was speaking long on a high key in the open air, with 
unrestrained passion, that led riany of the early Baptist 
preachers of this country into that sing-song, or " holy whine,*' 
which is still heard in some parts of the country. The voice, 
strained and fatigued, instinctively sought relief in a rhyth- 
mical rise and fall, as is also the case in the loud cries of street 
pedlers. They were commonly zealous, and sometimes great 
men who fell into this fault, and it was often imitated by those 
who came after them, after the usual superficial fashion of 
imitators, mistaking the obvious fault for the hidden power. 
To some of the ignorant people, this peculiar whine is con- 
nected by a life-long association with the most impressive 
truths and the most solemn occasions ; and so it touches their 
feelings, independently of what is said, and sometimes when 
the preacher's words are not heard — like the revival tunes, or 
those familiar to us from childhood. 

We must not begin on a high key, and yet the text should 
be distinctly heard. The difficulty thus arising when the 
audience is large, may be overcome by stating the text slowly, 
distinctly, and if necessary, a second time ; and by projecting 
the voice, instead of elevating it. 

(2.) Do not suffer the voice to drop in the last words of a 
sentence. Though it must often sink, returning to the general 
pitch of the discourse, yet it must not fall too suddenly, nor 
too low. It is not uncommon for the last words to be quite 
inaudible. 

(3.) Never fail to take breath before the lungs are entirely 
exhausted ; and usually keep them well filled. This will 
generally be done without effort in extemporaneous speaking; 
but in recitation and reading it requires special attention. 
Monod says : " For this purpose, it is necessary to breathe 
quite often, and to take advantage of little rests in the 
delivery."* A speaker must not gasp in his breath through 
the mouth, but breathe through the nostrils, regularly and 
steadily. He must keep the head and neck in an upright 
posture, for the sake of breathing freely, as well as for other 
reasons; and there must be nothing tight around his throat 

* On t\iO "D©\y^«r^ oi Sermons, p. 402. 



ON DELIYERT, AS REGARDS VOICE. 331 

(4.) Look frequently at the remotest hearers, and see to it 
that they hear you. If particular persons anywhere in the 
room have grown inattentive, they may often be aroused by 
quietly aiming the voice at them for a moment. 

(5.) Let there be variety ; of pitch, of force, and of speed.* 
Monotony is utterly destructive of eloquence. But variety of 
utterance must be gained, not by assuming it from without, 
but by taking care to have a real and marked variety of senti- 
ment, and then simply uttering each particular sentiment in 
the most natural manner. t 

For the rest let rules alone, and think not about your voice 
but your subject, and those on whom you wish to impress it. 
Except that when some marked fault has attracted attention, 
or been pointed out by a friend, care must be taken to avoid 
it hereafter. 

Note on Minister's Sore-throat. 

There is a peculiar disease, produced by excessive or ill- 
managed use of the organs of speech, which occurs so much 
oftener with preachers than with other public speakers or 
with singers, that it is commonly called clergyman's or minis- 
ter's sore-throat. It is by no means confined to them, being 
found in lawyers, professors, public singers, and private persons. 
A statement of the principal causes which produce the disease 
will perhaps explain why it is more common with ministers. 

It is desirable first to explain briefly the nature of this 

disease. The windpipe, upon leaving the throat, divides into 

two branches, one for each lung, and each of these branches 

subdivides into several small tubes, called bronchial tubes. A 

disease which consumes the substance of the lung itself is 

called consumption ; an inflammation of the lining membrane 

of the bronchial tubes is called bronchitis. The disease we 

are at present considering is laryngitis, an inflammation of the 

larynx, just at the upper end of the windpipe, where it opens 

into the mouth. The ulcers it often forms can be seen by 

another person with the unaided eye, by pressing down the 

tongue with a spoon. It is obviously a far less serious disease 

than bronchitis, and is perhaps never fatal, except when it 

passes into bronchitis. 

* See Mcllvaine, on Time and Pause, p. 346 ff. 

')' Emphasis requires much attention in reading^ ^and will be discussed 
below io Part V. In speaking, a correct emphasis will be spontanoouA^ 
whenever one is fully in sympathy with bis sMb^ee\i. 



332 ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOICE. 

The causes of this laryngitis are apparently several. (1.) 
Feeble health in general, especially of the alimentary system. 
This is apt to take effect upon that part of the body which 
is most severely exercised ; as in a silversmith, upon the eyes, 
in a speaker, upon the throat, &c. Now ministers are particu- 
larly subject to feebleness in the alimentary organs, because 
their life is anxious aud apt to be too sedentary, and because 
they are often tempted to eat too freely. (2.) Speaking much 
when under the influence of depressing emotions. These natu- 
rally cause the throat to contract,* and render speaking more 
fatiguing ; whereas exciting emotions, such as anger or joy, 
will expand the throat. It is obvious that ministers are 
peculiarly exposed to such depressing feelings while they 
speak. (3.) Speaking when hoarse. Preachers, having fixed 
and very frequent occasions for speaking, are more likely 
than even lawyers to think themselves bound to speak when 
hoarse. (4.) Singing, when the organs are fatigued. Those 
who suffer from laryngitis usually find singing much more 
injurious than speaking, and this shows it to be particularly 
tryiner to the larynx. No\^ ministers very often sing when 

•greatly fatigued by a long and impassioned sermon — and there 
id no corresponding experience in the case of others. (5.) 
Speaking from an elevated stand, looking down uponi the 
hearers, causes a bending and contraction of the vocal tube 
just at the point where this disease arises. High pulpits are 
not now universal, as they once were, but are still unhappily 
common, though for other reasons also objectionable. Besides, 
in some parts of the country it is usual for one who is praying 
to stand with upturned face, which throwing the head batck, 
produces a like constriction of the larynx ; and various cases 
of laryngitis are said to have been promptly relieved by ceas- 
ing to adopt this very unnecessary posture. (6.) Reading j* 
much more injurious to these organs than speaking. This 
also is conclusively shown by the experience of persons suffer- 
ing from laryngitis, and the reasons for it can be easily per- 
ceived. The fact is noticed by a clergyman of the Church 
of England : " The song-note and speech-note are essentially 
different, yet each may be produced in their respective work 
of singing and speaking for several hours daily without injury 
to the throat. It is only the speech-note as produced for 
reading, that induces this condition."t Public reading instead 
* Compare the etymology of the word anxiotis, 
f Cull, Lecture on Beading Aloud, quoted in Plumptre on Elocution, p. 

199. 



ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS VOICE. 333 

of speaking is, it is well known, very rarely practised by any 
other persons than ministers. 

It thus appears that several causes conspire to render 
preachers more liable to this disease than others, but that 
most of the causes can be removed, or counteracted. The 
symptom which especially demands care, is a feeling of great 
fatigue and feebleness in the organs, so that speaking, while 
not yet painful, seems burdensome and laborious. A£ any 
time, and particularly when the general health is feeble, this 
symptom ioiperatively calls for rest. One should for a while 
refrain from preaching, as far as practicable, and from singing, 
and protracted and excited conversation ; and should carefully 
avoid taking cold, for this will almost certainly pz'oduce ulcers. 
It is highly injurious in such a case to stimulate the jaded 
organs by means of ginger, pepper, etc., in order to strain 
them a little longer. Let it be observed that an ordinary 
hoarseness, or sore-throat, without the tired and enfeebled 
fueling just mentioned, is not to be confounded with the 
disease in question. 

If laryngitis has actually occurred, it is certainly a serious 
calamity, but by no means hopeless. The disease is often 
cured, wholly or in great part, and men who continue subject, 
to it are not unfrequently able, by proper care, to do much^ 
preaching. The chief remedies are temporary rest, and espe- 
cially improvement of the general health. Horseback exercise, 
travel, or some active and enlivening employment, with in- 
creased attention to the ordinary conditions of health, will 
often work a cure in a few weeks. If ulcers are formed, and 
the physician proposes cauterizing, let it be done without hesi- 
tation; the dread of it commonly felt is without cause. After 
a few weeks of rest, if there has been partial though not entire 
recovery, and especially if the general health has improved, it 
is best to resuma preaching to some extent. To find oneself 
aide to do this, even with some difficulty, will promote cheer- 
fulness. And moderate exercise of the organs of speech is 
beneficial to them, precisely as with other organs. Even con- 
sumptives frequently derive unquestionable benefit from sing- 
ing or speaking. 

It is very apt to injure even a healthy voice, if it be much 
strained in very cold or very hot air. When one has grown 
quite warm in preaching, and goes out into cold air, it is 
extremely important to guard against taking cold, not so much 
by wrapping the throat as by protecting the whole body. 
Neglect of this often produces worse diseases than laryngitis. 



CHAPTER III. 

ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS ACTION.* 

The term action is now commonly restricted to what Cicero 
calls the sermo corporis, or speech of the body, including 
expression of countenance, posture and gesture, but not includ-* 
ing the use of the voice. 

The freedom and variety of action exhibited by children 
when talking to each other, shows that it is perfectly natural 
Its wonderful expressiveness, ever apart from language, is some- 
times displayed by the deaf and dumb, and by others skilled in 
pantomime. There is a familiar story of a dispute between 
Cicero and Roscius, an actor famous for pantomime, as to 
which could express a thought more eloquently, the one by 
words, or the other by signs. In many cases a gesture is much 
more expressive than any number of words. " How truly lan- 
guage must be regarded as a hindrance to thought, though the 
necessary instrument of it, we shall clearly perceive on remem- 
bering the comparative force with which simple ideas are com- 
municated by signs. To say, * Leave the room,' is less expres- 
sive than to point to the door. Placing a finger on the lips is 
more forcible than whispering, *Do not speak.* A beck of the 
of the hand is better than * Come here.* No phrase can convey 
the idea of surprise so vividly as opening the eyes and raising 
the eyebrows. A shrug of the shoulders would lose much by 
translation into words. "t "He who is master of this sign- 
language has, indeed, an almost magic power. When the orator 
can combine it with the spoken language, he acquires thereby 
exceeding vivacity of expression. Not only his mouth, but his 
eyes, his features, his fingers, speak. The hearers read the 
coming sentiment upon his countenance and limbs almost before 

* On this subject profitable use has been made of the notes of lectures by 
the author's esteemed coUeogue, Rev. B. Manly, Jr., D.D. Among the 
treatises, Russell is here best, Pulpit Elocution, p. 346-68. 

+ Herbert Spencer on Style, p. 11. Quintilian (XI. 3) compares also the 
impression made on us by pictures. 



ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS ACTION. 335 

his voice reaches their ears : they are both spectators and list- 
eners ; every sense is absorbed in charmed attention."* 

How happens it that the man has so often lost this wonderful 
power, which the child possessed 1 In some cases he has been 
hardened, even in early manhood, by the too fierce struggle of 
life, and has lost the fresh and lively feeling of childhood. In 
most cases he has become constrained and self conscious, no 
longer forgetting himself, as the child did, in the subject he 
speaks of, and whether he be timid or vain, his manner is of 
necessity unnatural and awkward. Action is true only when it 
is spontaneous, and for the moment almost unconscious. Even 
the child becomes constrained as soon as it is aware of being 
observed ; and on the other hand, the shyest or most conceited 
man, if his whole soul be absorbed in his subject, and himself 
for the time forgotten, again grows free and expressive in 
action, — so far, at least, as bad habits will now permit. And 
besides all this, there has sometimes been the influence of 
wrong notions about action, learned from unwise teachers or 
from casual talk. 

How then shall the preacher, in this respect also, " be as the 
little children?" He must cultivate his religious sensibilities, 
and a realizing faith. He must prayerfully seek to care more 
for his sacred themes, and less for himself — to keep the thought 
of self habitually and thoroughly subordinate to the thought 
of saving souls, and glorifying the Redeemer. He must remem- 
ber that he himself, as the Creator made him, is called to preach 
the gospel ; and that with his individuality unimpaired, while 
faculties are developed and faults corrected, he is to do the 
work to him appointed. Then, thoroughly possessed with his 
subject, lifted above the fear of man, and kindled into zeal for 
usefulness, let him speak out what he thinks and feels. No 
doubt he will make some blunders ; but what of that ! A 
child can never learn to walk, without sometimes falling. But 
the child will not keep on falling the same way ; and so the 
speaker's blunders may teach him something. Though prob- 
ably not aware of them at the time, because too busy with 
higher things, he may recall afterwards his faults of action, or 
may be told of them by some kindly, or perhaps some unkind 
critic, — and next time he will notice a little, and correct or 
avoid. 

Some men have naturally much more action than others. 
And so with races, and men of the same race in diflferent 

* Dabney's Sac. lUist. p. 323. 



336 ON DELIYERT, AS REGARDS ACTION. 

regions. The more excitable nations, as the French gesticulate 
alnaost constantly ; the Englijih comparatively little. On this 
subject English writers should not bo heeded by us. ;* for 
Americans are naturally more ardent and excitable, njore in- 
clined to free and varied gesture, than the English. And the 
same man will have more or less action, according to his physi- 
cal condition and the mood he is in, as well as according to the 
subject and the circumstances. Trust, then, to spontaneous 
impulse. Do not repress nature, save where particular faults 
present themselves. And never force nature ; for action is not 
indispensable, whQe unnatural action would be injurious. 
Robert Hall had usually not much gesture, though his expres- 
sion of countenance was remarkable. Spurgeon has nothing 
very striking in his action, but an extraordinary voice. On the 
other hand, " there is an oaken desk shown at Eisenach, which 
Luther broke with his fist in preaching ;"t and ths Apostle, 
Paul appears to have had a peculiar and impressive manner of 
stretching forth his hand. Do, then, what is natural with you, 
and at the time. Have much or little action, df this sort or 
of that. And always remember that you are not engaged in a, 
tournament, but in a battle — that your great concern is not to 
keep within rules, but to conquer. 

It has been remarked above that action, the " speech of the 
body," includes several distinct things. 

1. Expression of countenance has great power. "But espe- 
cially dominant is the countenance. With this we sui)plicate, 
threaten, or soothe, with this we are sad or joyous, elated or 
dejected ; on this the people hang, this they look at and study, 
even before we speak. . . . this is often superior to sJH 
words."J With the exception, however, of one feature, expres- 
sion of countenance is almost involuntary, and little can be 
done in the way of improvement beyond the correction of 
faults. When a man is possessed with his subject, and tho- 
roughly subordinates all thoughts of self, his countenance will 
spontaneously assume every appropriate expression. 

But the exception is notable. Cicero says : " In delivery, 
next to the voice in effectiveness is the countenance, and this 
is ruled over by the eyes." || " The expressive power of the 
human eye is so great that it determines, in a manner, the 
expression of the whole countenance. It is almost impossible 

* E. g. Whately, p. 443, says: "Action is hardly to b^ reckoned as any 
part of the orator's art.'* 

t Hoppin, p. ^5S. -5; (^>3Mi\..^l. ^,1*^^. \^<i Or. III. 59. 



ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS ACTION. 337 

to disguise it. It is said that gamblers rely more upon the 
study of the eye, to discover the state of their opponents' game, 
than upon any other means. Even animals are susceptible of 
its power. The dog watclies the eyes of his master, and dis- 
covers from them, before a word is spoken, whether he is to 
expect a caress, or apprehend chastisement. It is said that the 
lion cannot attack a man so long as the man looks him steadily 
in the eyes. . . . All the passions and emotions of the 
human heart, in all their degrees and interworkings with each 
other, express themselves, with the utmost fulness and power 
in the eyes."* Now the eyes we can in some respects control. 
We cannot by a volition make them blaze, or glisten, or melt ; 
but we can always look at the hearers. And the importance of 
this it would be difficult to overstate. Besides the direct power 
which the speaker's eye has over the audience, penetrating their 
very soul with its glance, it is by looking that he catches their 
expression of countenance, and enters into living sympathy with 
them. We have before remarked upon the sustaining and 
stimulating power of sympathy in the audience.t He who does 
not feel helped by this, and does not greatly miss it when 
wanting, was not born to be a public speaker, or has strangely 
perverted his nature by wrong notions and bad methods. And 
in addition to the involuntary eflfect upon the speaker of seeing 
the countenances of his hearers, he can watch the effect pro- 
duced, and purposely adapt his thoughts, style, and manner, to 
their condition at the moment. 

If a man feels as he should, his look at the outset will be 
respectful without timidity, independent without defiance or 
conceit, and solemn without sanctimoniousness, and then will 
spontaneously change its character with every variation of 
feeling. 

2. Posture. In walking, standing, sitting, riding, one 
should take pains to acquire habitual uprightness and ease ; 
and then in public speaking there will be little danger of his 
assuming any other than an appropriate posture. But there 
are various faults which, through lack of such habits, or from 
mistaken views of oi*atory or wrong feelings at the time of 
speaking, many persons exhibit. Quintilian and later writers 

* Mc.Ilvaine, p. 400. 

+ Introd. 1. Comp. also Part IV. chap. i. upon the great advantage which 
an extemporaneous speaker has in the freedom of the ^'^^. MA\^::^%scs^^^ 
p.l03 flf.^ states yery strohgly the value oi s^Ta.pfiA^i'j 'va. "^viJikJ^^ 5s^Qsii2fia%. 



338 ON DELIVEBT, AS RE6ABDS ACTION. 

give warning as to these, and some of them ought to be 
mentioned. 

Among the commonest faults of preachers is leaning on the 
pulpit. All inexperienced speakers are apt, feeling ill at ease, 
to have a tottering equilibrium, and to look for something with 
which they may prop themselves. The pulpit is so convenient 
for this purpose, that we need not wonder if a habit of leaning 
on it is often formed. When a young preacher finds himself 
inclined to this, he should not only resist the tendency while in 
the pulpit, but should take pains in social meetings, Sunday- 
school speaking, etc., to stand out with nothing before him. A 
few early experiences will rapidly form a habit, good or bad. 

The body should be simply erect. A slight inclination of the 
head at the opening is with most men a natural expression of 
deference for the audience, but it must be very slight, and will 
disappear as the preacher grows more animated. An habitual 
stoop is a grave fault, both because unsightly, and because hurt- 
ful to the organs of speecli, and should be corrected if possible; 
with a few men it is natural and invincible. To " rear back," 
as some do, suggests, though it be unjustly, the idea of arro- 
gance or conceit. 

The arms should hang quietly by the side. To fold them on 
the breast is a gesture expressive of peculiar sentiments, and to 
*be rarely used. To place the hands on the hips, if with the fingers 
forward, seems to indicate a sort of pert defiance ; if with the 
fingers backward, it suggests weakness in the back. To clasp 
the hands over the abdomen is offensive, and to clasp the hands 
behind the back, though not offensive, is scarcely graceful, 
particularly if they are placed under the coat-skirts. To put 
them in the coat pockets is inelegant, and in the breeches pocket 
is vulgar. To stand, as many do, with one hand in the bosom, 
or to occupy one hand in playing with a watch key or guard, 
or with coat buttons, etc., (Andrew Fuller's practice,) is in a 
greater or less degree undesirable. It is natural that the arms 
should at first hang easily by the side, (with the palm towards 
the body,) until there is occasion to move one or both in gesticu- 
lation, and that after any gesture they should tend back to the 
same position, though in many cases they remain for a while in 
some intermediate position of comparative repose. 

The feet should neither be far apart, like a sailor's, nor in 

immediate contact. Their precise position will be determined 

by the man's form and habits, and rules laying down one par- 

ticular posture should be tg^gc^.^^. ^\i^^Q\as>.\i. orator commonly 



ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS ACTION. 339 

stood with the left foot forward, because he bore up the toga on 
his left arm, and the ancient soldier advanced the left foot, 
because his left arm carried the shield. No similar causes now 
exist for regularly advancing the left foot.* The only ground 
of choice would seem to be, that if one hand is at any time 
actively used in gesticulating, it seems natural and easier to 
have the corresponding foot thrown somewhat forward. How 
often a speaker is to change posture will depend on his tempera- 
ment and his excitement at the time ; one need scarcely give 
himself any concern on that point, unless he happens to be 
inclined to a restless, fidgety movement, which is of course to 
be avoided. We must beware of " striking an attitude," like 
Corporal Prim, and many an other would-be orator. 

He who finds himself inclined to any of these faults, ought 
resolutely to correct them, carefully to guard against them. 
The only real difficulty about correcting such comparatively 
trifiing faults is that men will not think them worth the trouble. 
But nothing that at all affects a preacher's usefulness is really 
trfling. The young need have but little trouble in curing these 
bad habits ; and for those of middle age it is still entirely 
possible. Resolute determination, with perseverance, and especi- 
ally care to form counter habits when out of the pulpit, will 
commonly triumph. If such defects really cannot be remedied, 
one must try not to be worried about them, but to do his best 
notwithstanding. 

'3. Gesture — when we have excluded posture — denotes move- 
ment, whether of the whole person, the feet, the body, the head, 
or the hands. It is not natural for a speaker, if at all animated, 
to stand perfectly still, and it is important not to fidget about, 
nor to walk the platform like a tiger in his cage. Between these 
extremes, a man will change place more or less freely according 
to temperament, circumstances, and taste. To stamp with the 
foot, may sometimes naturally express indignation or certain 
other vehement feelings, but it is apt to suggest an impotent 
rage ; and at any rate it is scarcely ever becoming in a preacher. 
Movements of the body, such as rocking to and fro, or swaying 
from side to side, are almost always to be avoided, and bending 
far forward is very rarely proper. The head has a variety of 
appropriate and expressive movements, but one must beware of 
awkwardness, extreme vehemence, and monotony. 

The arms and hands have to be considered together, because 
in public speaking there can be scarcely any gesture with the 

* Russell's Pulpit I locution, p. 357. 



340 OK DELIVERT, AS REGARDS ACTION. 

baud that is not naturally accompanied by some movement oF 
the arna. Thus either may be taken as representing both. Tb^ 
Greeks comprehended the whole art of elocution under the tertx^. 
chironomy, or management of the hands.* Certainly the handai 
and arms are in gesture of unequalled importance. QumtiliaE3 

says : " As to the hands, without which delivery would be muti 

lated and feeble, it can scarcely be said how many movement^a 
they have, when they almost equal the number of words. Fc^ 
other parts of the person help the speaker, these, I might almo^= 
Bay, speak themselves.^t But many speakers are greatly at 
loss what to do with their hands, J and a similar difficulty. ^ 
often betrayed in the parlour and on the street. Gresley hesE 
points out an advantage of reading sermons : " The extemj^c 
raneous preacher . . . must find employment for his han(X:5 
But when you have your sermon written before you, your haix<j£ 
are occasionally used in turning over the leaves of the maQiz- 
script," I and so the reader, fortunate man, is not compelled do 
gesticulate. 

It would be tedious to catalogue the faults which may be 
observed in gesture with the band and arm. Among the com- 
monest are a fluttering of the hands, which with some persons 
becomes a marked habit ; a shoving motion, which is appropriate 
to express abhorrence, or any repulsion, but not otherwise ; and 
a sort of boxing movement. Some work the arm up and down, 
like a pump handle, and others flap the fore-arm only, like a 
penguin's wings, instead of moving the arm from the shoulder, 
with the free action which public speaking naturally prompts. 
Angular movements are appropriate to certain sentiments, but 
as habitual, are very awkward. The palm of the hand, as it? 
most expressive part, should in general be turned towards tb 
audience, and somewhat expanded. " Yet how often we see t) 
hand of the speaker held out flat and close, like a piece of boa' 
or edgewise, like a chopping knife, or feebly hollowed, like t 
of a beggar, receiving aims. Sometimes, on the contrary, 
see it clinched in a style which calls up the association 
smiting with the fist of wickedness."1[ The clenched banc' 
pointed fore-finger, etc., are very eff*ective when their pe 
meaning is wanted, and otherwise are proportionally in 

priate and damaging. It is also a common fault to bring 

• Russell, p. 360. 

f Qnint. XI. 3, 85. % Comp. above, as to pos 

II Gresley on Preaching, p. 282. IF Russell, p. f 



ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS ACTION. 341 

the hand with a slap on the thigh, a movement necessarily un- 
graceful, or to slap the hands frequently together, which is very 
rarely appropriate; and some preachers have quite a trick of 
banging the Bible. 

In all the employments and circumstances of life, let the 
speaker see to it that his bearing shall be free, unconstrained, 
and not ungraceful. Then in speaking he will have little occasion 
to think of posture or gesture, and may follow, without fear, the 
promptings of nature. In general, one should never repress a 
movement to which he is inclined, because afraid it may not be 
graceful. After all, life and power are far more important than 
grace ; and, in fact; timid self-repression destroys grace itself. 
On the other hand, never make any gesture from calculation. It 
must be the spontaneous product of present feeling, or it is un- 
natural, and has but a galvanized life. He who declaims or even 
thinks over his address beforehand, and arranges that here or 
there he will make such or such a gesture, will inevitably mar 
bis delivery at that point by a fault, were he Edward Everett 
himself. It is inexpressibly foolish, though actually done by 
some teachers of elocution, to be determining how many sen- 
tences may be uttered before the first gesture. It is utterly 
unwise to begin gesticulating at any point from the notion that 
it is now time to begin. The time to begin is when one feels 
like beginning, neither sooner nor later. A sermon or other 
speech ought usually to open quietly, and therefore there will 
usually be no gestures just at the outset. 

A few simple rules may be added, with regard to action of 
every kind. 

(1.) Action should be suggestive rather than imitative. 
Closely imitative gestures, except in the case of certain dig- 
nified actions, are unsuitable to grave discourse, and belong 
rather to comedy. In saying, " he stabbed him to the heart," 
one will make some vehement movement of the hand, suggest- 
ive of the mortal blow ; a movement imitating it would be 
ridiculous, comic. A really good man, in preaching at a Uni- 
versity, once said : " You shut your eyes to the beauty of piety; 
you stop your ears to the call of the gospel ; you turn your 
back," etc., and in saying it, shut his eyes, stopped his ears 
with his fingers, and whirled his broad back into view. Alas ! 
for the good done to the students by his well-meant sermon.- 
In "suiting the action to the word," he "o'erstepped the 
modesty of nature." Even lifting the eyes toward heaven, or 
pointing the finger toward it, or pressing the hqnd upon the 



342 ON DELIVERY, AS REGARDS ACTION. 

heart, etc., though allowable, are sometimes carried too far, or 
too often repeated. 

(2.) Gesture must never follow, and comnonly must slightly 
precede, the emphatic word of the sentence.* It seems to be 
natural that excited feeling should find a more prompt expres- 
sion in the instinctive movement, than in speech, which is the 
product of reflection. 

(3.) Action must not be excessive, in frequency or in vehe- 
mence. To some subjects, occasions, or states of feeling in the 
speaker, it is natural that the action should be rare and slight. 
Too frequent gesture, like italics in writing and emphasis in 
speaking, gradually weakens its own effect. Extreme vehe- 
mence produces a revulsion of feeling in the hearer, a tendency 
to just the opposite of what the speaker desires. Hamlet says 
to the players : " Do not saw the air too much with your hand 
thus, but use all gently : for in the very torrent, tempest, and 
(as I may say) whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire 
and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness." 

(4.) Avoid monotony. A certain unvarying round of pos- 
tures and gestures, again and again repeated, is a somewhat 
common, and most grievous fault. Akin to it, though not yet 
so offbusive, is the use, from mere habit, of some favourite 
gesture, when the emotion felt would be better expressed by 
some other. The noticeably frequent recurrence of a word, a 
tone, or a gesture, is always a fault, and as soon as one 
becomes aware of it, should be carefully avoided.t 

In conclusion, it is proper to repeat that at all hazards there 
must be life, freedom, power. Do not repress nature, though 
it must be governed ; and do not force nature. Aim not at 
positive improvement in action, but negative — the correction 
of faults as they appear. Look out for such faults. Now and 
then ask some true and very judicious friend to apprise you of 
such as may have struck him. No one can be in this respect 
so helpful as an intelligent wife. Speak out freely and boldly 
what you feel. A man can never learn to perform any 
movement gracefully save by performing it frequently, and 
with great freedom. The vine must grow, or you cannot prune 
it. And let us not forget that even some of a man*s faults, in 
action and in voice, may be a part of himself. Correct them 
wherever possible; but better let them remain, than be suc- 
ceeded either by tameness or by artificiality. 

* Whately p. 445. 
f Comp. as to variety oi e^^ves&\Qti, "^w^ III,, chap, iv., end. 



PART V. 
CONDUCT OF PUBLIC WORSHIP. 



IMPORTANCE OF PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

1. Reading Scripture. 2. Hymns. 3. Public Prayer. 
•i. Length op Services. 5. Pulpit Decorum. 6. Con- 
cluding Remarks. 

• 

A tendency may often be observed in our religious assemblies 
to neglect the worship, and think only of the preaching. In- 
deed, we frequently hear good men speak of the preliminary 
exercises. The devout reading of God's Word, sweet hymns of 
praise, and "prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving," — 
these, we must understand, are of no great importance, only 
the porch, the threshold ! Straws show which way the wind 
blows, and the very form of public notices is here instructive. 
" Divine service will be held at St. Mark's Church, on next," 
etc. "The Rev. will preach at the Baptist (Presby- 
terian, Methodist, etc.) Church on next," etc. The Episcopal 
notice mentions only the service. The others mention only 
the preaching, and rarely fail to say who is to preach. Accord- 
ingly, Highchurchmen usually care little for the sermon, being 
mainly concerned that it should be suitably short ; though 
evangelical Episcopalians lay much greater stress On preaching, 
and are often anxious for some liberty of omission in the ser- 
vice. The other denominations mentioned too generally think . 
little of the service, the worship. Some persons among them, 
dissatisfied with the felt lack of interest, imagine that there is 
no remedy save in having a " form of worship," or some ap- 
proach to it j and accordingly one meets now and them with a 
Sunday-school or congregation reading alternate verses, or 
engaged in choral responses, etc., — some "entering wedge*' 
for other things. 

But the remedy lies elsewhere. The freedom, spontaneity, 
simplicity, spirituality, of New Testament ^ox^v^ tsiaaX. \i!<!i 

"R "R 



344 CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

maintained at all costs. The natural tendency of the human 
heart to make much of externals while devoid of spirituality, 
must by all means be resisted. So far as it is lack of devo- 
tional feeling on their part that makes men weary of informal 
modes of worship, so far we must beware of yielding. But 
the dissatisfaction is often caused, at least in part, by the 
coldness, lack of animation, want of connection, and general 
slovenliness which in so many cases mark our worship. We 
must pay far more attention to this than is common, both in 
the way of general cultivation and of preparation for each 
particular occasion. This is less necessary for those who have 
only to go through a form of service prepared by others, than 
for him who, on every separate occasion, is required to produce 
a service for himself and for the congregation. Thoroughly 
simple in form, so as not to encourage the people to rest in 
externals, but full of. interest, animation, de'^'outness, solemn 
sweetness, and with a specific but inelaborate adaptation to 
the occasion, — such should be our worship. That which is 
not interesting and impressive cannot be the full expression 
of warm devotion, and then the expression, by a general law, 
reacts upon the feeling. Externals, however they may appeal 
to aesthetic sentiment, can never create devotion ; but ani- 
mated and earnest expression will strengthen devotion, and 
this may be achieved while carefully avoiding the danger of 
formalism. 

' It is therefore deemed important to speak of the preacher's 
part in the conduct of public worship. This can only be 
done very briefly here, though the subject deserves minute 
discussion, and, in fact, a separate treatise.* 

1. Reading Scripture. 

1. In selecting the portion or portions of Scripture to be 
read, we should prefer such as are in a high degree devotional ; 
e. g. many of the Psalms, passages from Isaiah and other 
Prophets, from the Gospels, Epistles, and Revelation. These 
will not only instruct, but will awaken devout feeling. The 
reading of them will naturally precede the principal prayer, 

•The pastor's management as to the whole ordering of public worship, 
belongs only to works on Pastoral Duties ; but the part which he himself 
performs, stands in immediate and almost inseparable connection with his 
work as a preacher, and may be regarded either as pertaining to Homi 
letias, or to the pastoral work in general. The best discussions are those 
of fioppin, Sbedd, and t\ie Gennan writers. See below for works on 
Hymns, and on Public Vta^et. 



CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WOBSHIP. 345 

whether immediately or with the intervention of a hymn. 
The particular kind of devotional passages selected, and the 
general tone of the sermon, should harmonize. To read a 
mournful passage, and afterward preach a joyful sermon, or 
vice versa, would be inappropriate. Still, a general harmony 
is sufficient ; great effort to find an exact correspondence is 
unnecessary, if not unbecoming. 

But there are many cases in which the preacher wishes to 
read the connection of his text. If this connection is highly 
devotional in tone, it may be read at the usual point, as a 
part of. the worship. If not, it should be read after the 
principal prayer, either before the second hymn or when an- 
nouncing the text. In this case it is often well to read before 
the prayer some brief devotional passage, as a few verses from 
a Psalm. Sometimes two different passages may be read in 
immediate succession. In all these details there is large 
liberty, and one need be no more bound by custom than by 
rubric. Good taste and devout feeling should govern, and 
there may be an interesting variety, without hunting after 
novelty. A good effect is sometimes produced by reading the 
connection of the text when just closing the sermon. In very 
many cases it is best not to read the connection at all, but to 
make a summary statement of it in opening the discourse. 

The passages selected need not begin or end with a chapter. 
Some preachers seem to feel bound to i-ead a whole chapter, 
however long ; and only a chapter, however short. We have 
heretofore seen* that the current division into chapters is 
awkwardly made, often uniting matters which are wholly dis- 
tinct, and dividing where there is a close connection. By 
quietly disregarding them whenever the sense requires, a 
preacher will help the effect of the service, and will accustom 
his hearers to look out for the real connection, in their own 
reading. 

If the passage proposed contains expressions which now 
and to us seem indelicate, it may be either exchanged for 
another or the portions in question omitted, where that can 
be done without attracting attention, and without material 
loss. In general such expressions should be read, and if so, . 
then without the slightest hesitation, reserve, or manifestation 
of feeling. The beautiful air of unconsciousness seen in a 
refined woman, when she is led to hear or see something in- 
delicate, is in all such cases the best model. 

• Comp. Part I, chap. ii. 2. 



346 CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

2. To read well is a rare accomplishment. It is much more 
common to excel in singing, or in public speaking. Good 
preachers are numerous, compared with good readers. The 
reqifisites to good reading are several. One must have great 
quickness of apprehension, seizing the meaning of whole sen- 
tences at a glance ; for one of the commonest faults is to 
begin reading a sentence with an expression which does not 
accord with its close ; and in fact, the reader must through- 
out keep clearly in mind the entire connection, and read every 
sentence as part of a greater whole. This also shows the 
need of a familiar acquaintance with what is read, and if not 
with the language of the passage, at any rate with its subject- 
matter. A second requisite is sensibility, so as not only to 
understand, but promptly and thoroughly to sympathize with 
the sentiment. Probably this is oftener wanting than the 
former. There must also be great flexibility of voice, so as 
at once and exactly to express every varying shade of feeling. 
And finally, it requires ample and careful practice. But very 
few persons practise reading much at the critical period of 
life. In childhood, knowledge is too limited ; the voice has 
too little power, and the details of pronunciation, etc., require 
too much attention to admit of thoroughly good reading. 
Just at the time of opening maturity, when the mind is 
developed in strength and quick in its grasp, when the sym- 
pathies are wide and still sensitive, when the voice has 
reached nearly its full power and lost nothing of its flexi- 
bility, ought there to be thorough training, whether with 
or without instruction, in the noble art of reading. Careful 
exercise in reading ought to close the course of College study. 
If at College commencements, instead of the inevitable speech 
we could hear some graduates read — not with elocutionary 
display, and half-acting tricks, but simple, manly, genuine 
reading — it would be a pleasure and a profit to all concerned. 
A Reading Club in a village, especially if it includes both 
sexes,* will often be more profitable than a debating society. 
Instruction in reading is less hazardous than in public speak- 
ing, because the former is to some extent necessarily an arti- 
ficial thing, and in reading there is somewhat less danger of 
corrupting nature and falling into wretched affectations. 

* Women, of equal culture and practice, will ofteuer read well than meoj 
and this is not surprising when we note that women are usually quicker ii^ 
apprehension, more sensitive in feeling and sympathy, and haye greater 
flexibility of voice. 



CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 347 

He who reads well, must of course be a master of correct 
pronunciation,* and must have acquired a distinct and easy 
articulation. Beyond these, everything is included in what 
we call expression; and power of expression, so far as it is 
not a natural gift, must be acquired by well-ordered practice. 
The practice ought usually to be in reading that with which 
he is well acquainted, and in full sympathy with. Besides 
such reading for practice, one should embrace every fit occa- 
sion of reading for the pleasure and profit of those who hear — 
selecting something full of interest, so that he may forget 
himself in the sentiment. And preachers inclined to be 
lugubrious ought by all means to read in private some humor- 
ous selections, in order to maintain the equilibrium. 

Among the different elements of expression in reading, two 
or three must be briefly mentioned. The first thing thought of 
is apt to be emphasis ; and the first result of effort in this 
direction is usually a great amount of false emphasis. Besides 
the obvious fault of placing it on the wrong word, there is a 
subtler and very serious fault, which consists in failing properly 
to distribute the emphasis. Many men of ability and cultiva- 
sion will throw the whole weight of emphasis upon a single 
word of the sentence or clause, when it ought to be divided, in 
different proportions, between two, or three, or several words. 
This point deserves special attention and practice, with mutual 
criticism on the part of friends. After all, the real difficulty 
about emphasis is in thoroughly comprehending the thought 
and feeling the sentiment of what we read ; as is shown by the 
fact that we very rarely hear false emphasis in unrestrained 
conversation. It may be remarked that the Book of Proverbs 
presents numerous admirable examples for exercise in emphasis. 
Very many persons read all interrogative sentences with the 
peculiar expression at the close which is appropriate to ques- 
tions expecting the answer yes or no! Thus : Did he say he 
would come ? But there is a second class of questions which 
expect an answer, but not in the form of yes or no. Thus : 
Who said he would come 1 And in a third class no answer is 
expected : as, " Will any one ever come and help me 1 The 
distinction is here very obvious, and never overlooked in con- 
versation, but frequently in reading. — There should very rarely 
be any gesture in reading, beyond some natural movement of 
the head, together with expression of countenance. — The in- 

• Mcllvaine's Elocution, p. 239-93, has a full discussion of this subject, 
with many useful examples of common errors. 



348 CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

junction often given by teachers " read precisely as if you were 
talking," is not strictly correct. A sort of oratorical reading is 
strongly to be condemned, and it may be convenient to say, 
" read more as if you were talking," but the essential distinction 
between talking and reading should not, and in fact cannot, be 
destroyed.* 

It is particularly important that the Scriptures should be 
well read. A comparatively small, and rapidly diminishing 
number of persons in our congregations are now necessarily 
dependent on public reading for their entire knowledge of 
Scripture, as was so common at first, when it was said, " Blessed 
is he that readeth, and they that hear, the words of this 
prophecy."t But as a matter of fact, many persons do not 
read the Bible themselves, and their minds are brought in 
direct contact with it only by the public reading. On the 
other hand, those who read the Bible most at home, are often 
most pleased to hear it read in public worship. And in general, 
whatever reasons there are for reading anything well, apply pre- 
eminently to the book of all books, the Word of God. Good 
reading has an exegetical value, helping to make plain the 
sense. It also brings out the full interest, and impressiveness, 
of the passage read. There are passages which have had anew 
meaning for us, and an added sweetness, ever since we once 
heard them read, it may be long ago, by a good reader. J 

But to read the Bible really well, is a difficult task. The 
common mode of printing the verses, often seriously obscures 
the connection. The proper names require attention, that we 
may pronounce them readily, correctly, and yet without 
pedantry. 1 1 Far more important is the lack of full intellectual 
and spiritual sympathy with Scripture, which so often prevents 
our entering fully into the sense. There is a common tendency 
to be subdued by mistaken reverence into a uniform tone, 
devoid of real expression. The Bible should never be read 
precisely as we read other books. It is all sacred, and in read- 
ing even its less strikingly devotional parts there should be a 
prevailing solemnity ; but this solemnity does not forbid a rich 
variety of expression, as many readers appear to imagine. 

* Comp. Part IV. chap, i., 3. f Rev. i. 3. 

X See in Russell, p, 291-4, some good remarks on the importance of reading 
the Scriptures well. 

II Never depart from the pronunciation of them which is common among 
educated people, unless there is something really to be gained by it. 



CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 349 

Different parts of the Bible also differ very widely ih subject 
and style, and there must be a corresponding difference in the 
reading. There are narrative portions, varying from simple 
stories through many grades to the surpassingly pathetic or 
impassioned ; didactic portions, of many kinds, as seen in our 
Lord's various discourses, in the precepts which everywhere 
abound, and in the elaborate and often passionate arguments 
of certain Epistles of Paul ; and poetical portions, comprising 
the elevated imagery of prophetic description, both in the Old 
and in the New Testament, the poetical argument of Job and 
precepts of Proverbs, and the immanse variety of lyrical pas- 
sages, in the Psalms and elsewhere, presenting many phases of 
feeling, and often passing, in the same brief Psalm, from peni- 
tence to rejoicing and praise.* In fact, the Bible is not so 
much a single book as a library, containing almost every species 
of composition, and requiring to be read in almost every variety 
of manner. 

One ought never to read a passage in public worship, without 
being thoroiighly acquainted with it, and this will usually re- 
quire that it be carefully gone over but a short time before. 

3. It was once a very common practice, and is still wisely 
retained in some quarters, to make in connection with the read- 
ing, explanatory and other remarks. These should not be so 
numerous or extensive as to usurp the attention due to the 
passage itself. They should aim to explain it, to awaken inte- 
rest in it, occasionally to indicate some of its practical bearings, 
and especially to give it effect in exciting devotional feeling. 
If there has been thorough study of the passage, and if the 
preacher has taken pains to acquire skill in this respect, there 
may be brief, lively, and yet devout remarks that will make 
this part of our public worship far more interesting and profit- 
able. But random remarks, made without study and without 
skill, do but interrupt the reading, and are sometimes a sore 
drag upon its movement. 

2.* Hymns. 

1. It is strange that some ministers should care so little 
for the proper selection of hymns. They surely do not consider 
the blessed power of sacred song, nor the fact that inappropriate 

* Russell, Pulpit Elocution, p. 295, has a partially similar classification, 
with some remarks upon the several classes, and some good specimens of each 
variety. 



360 CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

and unimpressive hymns not only fail of doing good, but are 
positively chilling and painful. Some take their hymns at the 
first opening of the book, with no care to make them suit the 
general tone of the service. Others are solicitous that every 
hymn shall be upon precisely the subject discussed in the 
sermon, forgetting that hymns are designed not for instruction, 
but to express and quicken devotional feeling. 

To succeed well in selecting, and also in reading hymns, one 
must understand the nature, and sympathize with the spirit d 
lyrical poetry — that is, of poetry suitable to be sung. Some 
men are so constituted as to do this with ease, but all will be 
benefited by making, as they may find opportunity, special 
study of the chief lyric poets, such as Pindar and Horace, 
Goethe and Beranger, Burns and the Old English Ballads,* as 
well as good lyrics from many other sources. This will not 
only develop and refine the general taste for poetry, but the 
special taste for lyrics, which, besides their importance for our 
purpose, are among the highest and most potent forms that 
poetry can assume. t 

The devout study of the Psalms, while pursued chiefly for 
higher purposes, will also give one a better comprehension of 
the spirit of Scripture poetry. And Christian hymns, of difiFer- 
ent ages and nations, exist in rich abundance, suited to advance 
personal piety, and at the same time to improve the critical 
appreciation of sacred lyrics, so that we may become able to 
select wisely. The most valuable of these are the Patristic and 
MediflBval Latin Hymns, the German and the English Hymns. 
The first are often disfigured by more or less of unsound teach- 
ing, many of them being addressed to the Virgin Mary or the 
Saints ; yet even these have much that is of great value, while 
others, including some of the very finest, are almost entirely 
free from objectionable matter, and full of the noblest poetical 
and devout inspiration, f The German Hymns began to be 
composed at an earlier period, and are now more numerous 
than our own ; and many of them are unsurpassed for rhythm- 
ical movement and devotional sweetness. § English Hymns 

* The best collection easily accessible in Percy's Reliques, which may be had 
in cheap editions. 

t Compare Shedd, p. 301, 304. 

* There are convenient collections by Daniel and by Mone, and Trench has 
an entertaining little volume entitled Sacred Latin Poetry. 

§ Dr. P. Sohaff has issued a German Hymn Book, copious, and no doubt 
the result of careful selection. 



CONDUCT OF PUBLIC WORSHIP. 351 

were very few before the time of Dr. Watts, early in the last 
century ; but to the great number produced by him, and after- 
wards by Charles Wesley, copious additions have ever since 
continued to be made, till now we have a goodly heritage. All 
the recent hymn books, particularly those issued by Consjrega- 
tionalists and by Baptists, are rich with beautiful and blessed 
hymns, though usually containing some that could be spared. 
The minister ought by all means, whatever time and pains it 
may require, to make himself thoroughly familiar with his 
Hymn-book, in order to prepare him for prompt and judicious 
selection, to make him ready in that timely quotation from 
hymns, which adds more in preaching than quotation from any 
other source except the Bible, and to increase his personal piety. 
A delightful hour may sometimes be spent by friends in dis- 
cussing the Hymn-book, comparing favourite hymns, reading 
specimens, and thus gaining critical knowledge, at the same 
time with devotional enjoymerit and profit. It is also important 
to examine other collections than our own, to look out the 
original form of hymns from the older writers which have been 
altered, and others which modern works omit, as seen in Watts 
and K-ippon, in the com])lete Poetical Works of Charles Wesley, 
etc. And there are inferior collections, containing some homely 
pieces which would be at once rejected by the critics, but 
which have such power with the people as to provoke inquiry, 
and often to reward it. One may also find it interesting to 
classify the principal writers of English hymns, according to 
the number and excellence of the hymns they have left us. 
The first class would doubtless contain Watts and Charles 
Wesley ; the second probably Cowper, Montgomery, and Miss 
Steel ; the third, John Newton, Doddridge, and Beddome ; and 
then there would be a numerous class of those who have written 
one or a few hymns of the highest excellence.* The circumstances 
connected with the original production of a hymn are some- 
times very interesting, and while it is seldom desirable to 
mention them when the hymn is about to be sung, they may 
sometimes be stated, with good effect, when it is quoted in a 
sermon. 

The properties of a good hymn may be briefly stated as fol- 
lows ; (1) Correct in sentiment. Its general doctrine should be 
sound, which is not quite true of some popular hymns and 

* Works on English Hymns, accessible and cheap, are those of Belcher, 
and Christopher, and an entertaining work entitled Evenings with the Sacred 
Poets. 



352 CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

Bongs and choruses,* and all its particular sentiments should be 
just. (2) Devotional in its spirit. Some, even of Beddome*s 
hymns, are purely didactic, and not warm or moving. A good 
many hymns as to affliction, and as to heaven, present morbid 
or merely fanciful sentiment, altogether wanting in true de- 
votional feeling. (3) Poetical in imagery and diction. Many 
hymns are only metrical prose, without any touch of genuine 
imagination, and sometimes employing words that are alien to 
the very genius of poetry. But a song which is not really 
poetical, lacks a vital element of power. Even when we chant 
unmetrical sentences, they must always be poetical in senti- 
ment, the language of imagination and passion. (4) Rhythmical, 
being correct as to metre, animated and varied in movement, 
and yet not rugged or halting, but truly melodious.+ (5) Sym- 
metrical, the verses exhibiting a regular progress in thought, 
and forming a complete and harmonious whole. In a thoroughly 
good hymn it would not be possible to omit any verse, without 
destroying the sense. Still, there are many useful and even 
delightful hymns in which this is not the case, and when the 
exigencies of our worship require the omission of some verse or 
verses, much greater care should be taken than is sometimes 
observed, so to manage the omission as to leave the hymn still 
coherent and harmonious. J 

It is better that the first hymn sung should not relate to the 
precise subject of the sermon, but be emphatically a hymn of 
worship. Especially when the sermon is to the unconverted, 
must it be out of place to begin the solemn worship of God by 
a mere metrical exhortation to impenitent men. Of course this 
opening hymn, as well as every other part of the worship, should 
have a general harmony of tone with all that is to follow. The 
hymn immediately preceding the sermon will naturally be 
preparatory. The last hymn will apply to the sermon, or ex- 
press the sentiments which the subject presented ought to 
excite, or form a general conclusion to the services. And it 
should be constantly borne in mind that specific appropriate- 
ness to the subject of the sermon is far less important in a 

* E. g. "I want to be an angel." Saved human beings are entirely 

distinct from angels, and occupy, in some respects, a position of higher 

dignity. 

f See belovr as to rhythmical pauses. 

:J: Numerous examples of faulty hymns which it would be instructive to 
examine^ (as well as many of great excellence,). are found in the Olney Hymns 
(John Newton's Works). 



CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 353 

hymn than that it should be a truly good hymn, eminently 
pleasing, impressive, warm. As in the case of texts, it is very 
unwise to avoid the familiar hymns, for they have become 
familiar because they are singularly good. 

2 Why should we read hymns at all, when they are about to 
be sung ? Not only because many present, particularly in some 
parts of the country, will have no hymn-book,* but because the 
previous reading brings the mind into a certain sympathy with 
the sentiment, so that we enter into it more fully when it is 
sung, — somewhat for the same reason that makes us so apt to 
ask that a good song may be repeated. It follows that the 
reading ought to be animated and sympathetic. If a .man 
cannot, or will not read otherwise than in a dull, languid, mono- 
tonous fashion, he had probably better omit the reading alto- 
gether. True, the overdone, oratorical manner of reading hymns 
is extremely objectionable. There should be no effort, nothing 
but natural feeling. But then if the hymn is a good one, worthy 
to be read and sung at all, and if the man knows it well, from 
general acquaintance or from thoughtful reading not long before, 
it will not be natural to read it otherwise than with life and 
warmth. To read in a calm and perfectly quiet manner, the 
words 

"Jesus ! I love thy charming name, 
'Tis music to mine ear." 

would be, for a truly devout man, well-nigh impossible. In 
fact, as to all expression of feeling, cultivated people are more 
apt fastidiously to shrink back, than to transcend the limits of 
propriety. 

Similar considerations will show that the rhythm of hymns 
must never be disregarded. The sing-song fashion of reading 
verse, often observed in ignorant men, and the monotonous in- 
flections, regularly reproduced at the end of the first, second, 
third and fourth lines by many educated men, are one evil ; but 
it is going grievously to the other extreme if a man attempts, as 
some actually avow, to read verse as if it were prose. The sense 
is predominant ; but to neglect the rhythm is both to lose part 
of the beauty and impressiveness of the hymn, and to offend by 

* For the same reason it is still proper, in some places, as it was once very 
common, to " give out " the hymn, two lines at a time. Alas ! there are not 
a few localities in which many white as well as coloured people cannot read, 
and giving out is a great comfort to them. Better annoy the chief singers a 
little, than despise o^or weak brethren, and rob them of a share in this delight- 
ful part of the worship. 



354 CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WOItfiHIP. 

the conspicuous absence of what is naturally expected and de- 
manded. Especially must we observe the rhythmical pause at 
the end of every line ; not letting the voice drop, nor take the 
falling inflection, unless the sense so requires ; but even where 
the sense goes right on, we should make a slight pause, with the 
voice suspended, in recognition of the rhythmical close. In all 
lines of any considerable length, there is also an equally impor- 
tant pause somewhere about the middle of the line, the varied 
position of which greatly contributes to the rhythmical eflfect. 
Those who have not studied the classic caesura, may, without 
embarrassing themselves with technicalites, easily learn to per- 
ceive^ the position of this pause, by privately reading many lines 
with a view to it, especially by exaggerating, at first, the rhythmi- 
cal movement, making even a sing-song. Sometimes there are 
two such pauses, one near the beginning, the other towards the 
end, of the line. These rhythmical pauses are too often neglec- 
ted, though a man of good ear for music will frequently observe 
them unconsciously. And yet they may be mastered with 
comparative ease.* 

Not a little may also be gained from the study of English 
metres, particularly those common in hymns. A man's ear may 
for the most part carry him through, but it must often fail 
There are exceedingly few persons who read verse without 
frequent faults, unless they have attended to its metrical struc- 
ture. The task of learning the metres of our hymns is not 
difficult,t and to classify them into the somewhat numerous 
varieties Iambic, Trochaic, (with combinations of the two,) 
Anapaestic, and (in a few specimens) Dactylic verse, will be to 
some, persons a pleasant amusement, by no means devoid of 
profit. It is in reading Anapaestic hymns, many of which are 
extremely beautiful, that faults are most frequently observed. 

It will of course greatly increase a man's skill in reading 
hymns, and will especially serve to correct a tendency to be 
dolorous or monotonous, if he will often read aloud from secular 
verse. It would help many a preacher with his Common Metre 
hymns, now and then to read to some friends, with full life and 
spirit, Cowper's John Gilpin. 

* Many good examples are g^ven in the Appendix to Lord's Laws of 
Figurative Language, and in Russell's Pulpit Elocution. There is also a 
good discussion, chiefly with reference to heroic verse, in Karnes's Elements of 
Criticism. 

t They may be studied with advantage in Angus' Hand-book of the English 
Tongue, Quackenbos's Composition and Rhetoric, and to some extent in almost 
any treatise on Composition or on Grammar. There is also a book on English 
Metres, (or some such title,) by Everett. 



CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 355 

It is curious to see how old customs are maintained, after the 
occasion for them has ceased to exist. When even the leader 
of the singing had no bymn-book, it was necessary to announce 
beforehand the metre of the hymn ; and this is still regularly 
and most formally done by many Baptist and Methodist minis- 
ters, where there is no possible need for it. So in ** giving out," 
the minister would, after reading over the hymn, then read the 
first two lines, to be sung ; and where giving out has long been 
abandoned, often still the minister will repeat the first two lines 
in the same way. If it is desired to revive the impression of 
the opening words, this is lawful, but will frequently be better 
accomplished by reading again simply the first line, or in other 
cases the whole verse. 

3. With reference to the music of hymns, it is proper here to 
make only a brief remark. The superiority of congregational 
singing is beyond question. Yet it seems generally necessary 
to have a choir, whose proper function is to lead the singing of 
the congregation, but whose well-known tendency is to usurp 
the whole. Hence result great evils, sadly familiar to us all. 
Now the preacher is the proper mediator between choir and 
congregation. If a lover of music, especially if able to sing well 
by note, he may keep the sympathies of the choir, and may 
induce them, not by public but private requests, to sing for the 
most part familiar tunes ; and then an occasional public and 
private exhortation to the people, to take part in the singing, 
will effect the best arrangement that is usually practicable. 
Friendly conference with the leader of the singing might also 
secure a better adaptation of tune to hymn than is often observed, 

3. Public Prayer,* 

The prayers form the most important part of public worship. 
He who leads a great congregation in prayer, who undertakes 
to express what they feel, or ought to feel, before God, to give 
utterance to their adoration, confession, supplication, assumes a 
very heavy responsibility. We all readily agree, and sometimes 
partially realize, that it is a solemn thing to speak to the people 
for God ; is it less so when we speak to God for the people ? 
Whatever preparation is possible for performing this duty, ought 
surely to be most carefully made. And yet, while very few now 
question the propriety of preparation, both general and special, 

* See on this subject, besides the German writers and Hoppin, Porter's Homi- 
letics, Dabney's Sac. Khet. (Richmond, 1870), and Miller's Volume on Public 
Prayer. 



356 CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

for the work of preaching, it is feared the great majority still 
utterly neglect to prepare themselves for the conduct of public 
prayers. 

The general preparation for leading in public prayer consists 
chiefly in the following things j (1.) Fervent piety. This will 
include the habit of praying in private, and in social meetings. 
If it be true that **the only way to learn to preach is to 
preach," it is still more emphatically true that the only way 
to learn to pray is to pray. And while some do tolerate 
preaching for practice, all will utterly condemn praying for 
practice. It is thus plain that no one will regularly pray 
well in public, who does not pray much and devoutly in 
private. Along with this it may be observed, that in every 
attempt to pray, under whatever circumstances, one should 
earnestly endeavour to realize what he is doing, (2.) Famili- 
arity with Scripture, both as furnishing topics of prayer, and 
supplying the most appropriate and affecting language of 
prayer. The minister should be constantly storing in his 
memory the more directly devotional expressions found every- 
where in the Bible, and especially in the Psalms and Prophets, 
the Gospels, Epistles and Revelation. Perhaps a few men err, 
in making their prayers consist of an almost uninterrupted 
succession of long quotations; but this is uncommon, and 
most of us greatly need in our prayers a large and more varied 
infusion of Scripture language. (3.) Study of instructive 
specimens of prayer. In the Bible there are found, besides 
the numerous single devotional expressions, various striking 
examples of connected and complete prayers, and very many 
instances in which the substance of a prayer is given though 
not the form. These ought to be carefully studied, for instruc- 
tion in the matter and the manner of praying. Some of the 
long-established liturgies are also very instructive. However 
earnestly we may oppose the imposition of any form of prayer, 
there is certainly much to be learned from studying forms 
prepared with the greatest care, and in most cases by very 
able and very devout men. More modem works, as collections 
of prayers, and those recorded in diaries, will also repay occa- 
sional examination. In all such study of prayers, great pains 
must be taken not to lose the devotional in the merely critical 
spirit. 

The special preparation which ought to be made for prayer 
on any given occasion, may be best understood by considering 



CONDUCT OF PUBLIC WORSHIP. 357 

public prayer as to its matter, arrangement^ hmgua/gey and 
utterance.^ 

1. As to the matter y prayers will be very general and com- 
prehensive, or very specific, according to circumstances. The 
simple and wonderfully comprehensive prayer given by our 
Lord as a model in the Sermon on the Mount, and afterwards 
repeated in a much shortened form,t which is commonly called 
the Lord's Prayer, is a specimen of the former kind, while to 
the latter belongs the prayer in John xvii. In both di- 
rections we often witness grave errors. Some prayers are 
so general as to include almost everything, and thus to 
have no point. A prayer ought never to be indefinite and 
straggling, but should always have certain well-defined topics ; 
and these should, when practicable, be determined beforehand. 
Other persons enter into such minute details as to be inconsistent 
with the character of a prayer suited to a whole assembly, and 
sometimes to be indecorous. 

Too many persons wholly .omit, in public prayer, or mention 
only in a few conventional phrases before closing, those great 
subjects of supplication which lie apart from their own im- 
mediate concerns. Yet in the " Lord*s Prayer " these subjects 
occupy half the space, and the first half. Prayer for missions, 
at home and abroad, for the increase of labourers, for Sunday- 
schools, and other such objects, ought frequently to occur — 
sometimes one of them being dwelt on, and sometimes another. 

It is often and justly urged that we must not, in praying, 
undertake to instruct God. Yet this idea must not be carried 
too far. Our Lord, in the prayer of John xvii., states what he 
has been doing, and explains how eternal life is attained. It is 
therefore proper sometimes to recite occurrences, or make state- 
ments, provided they become the occasion of thanksgiving or 
petition. Again, prayer must not be used as a medium for 
exhorting the people, as is often half unconsciously done. Nor 
must it contain complimentary allusions. To pray for another 

• It will be seen that these divisions correspond to the four leading parts 
of the present work, as a treatise on Preaching. A friend suggests* that an 
Essay might be appropriately written on what should be styled " The Homi- 
letics of Public Prayer." 

+ See any of the recently revised texts, in Greek or English. The omis- 
sion of several important clauses on this second occasion (Luke xi. 2, 4,) 
and the alteration of some expressions, prove conclusively that this was 
not meant by our Lord as a f(yrm. of prayer, for on that supposition we 
should have him failing to repeat the form correctly. Notice how much is 
omitted in the corrected text of Lake* 



358 CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

minister present, with elaborate compliment, is a sadly frequent, 
and grossly improper practice. Robert Hall erred in praying 
too often for distinguished persons present. So with allusions 
to "this large and intelligent congregation." Of course 
there may be prayer for particular classes of persons, and some- 
times for individuals ; but no compliments. Allusions to politi- 
cal questions, or any matters which are occasioning strife in the 
community, can be justified only by peculiar circumstances and 
mode of handling. 

Special pains should be taken to give to public prayer the 
requisite variety — in topics, as well as in order. Many preachers 
pray uniformly for the same objects, and where they also follow 
a fixed order, and use many stereotyped phrases, it becomes 
pretty much a form of prayer, without the advantage of having 
been eminently well prepared. Much may be done towards 
securing variety by inquiring beforehand what petitions would 
be suggested by the occasion, or by the subject of the sermon, 
or by the passage of Scripture just read, or the hymn which has 
been sung. Of the topics which must of necessity be frequently 
introduced, some may be elaborated on one occasion, and some 
on another. In these, and many such ways, variety may be 
gained. Of course there should be no straining after it, nor any 
elaborateness in the prayer, of whatsoever kind. 

Any attempt to catalogue or classify the materials of prayer 
would be here inappropriate. 

2. Tlie arrangement of prayer must not be formal, but there 
should always be a real order. It is not necessary, if desirable, 
that this should descend to details. The leading topics must 
not only be chosen, as we have seen, but arranged in the mind 
beforehand. All the arguments we have urged in favour of 
arrangement in preaching, apply, more or less, to order in 
prayer."* 

The order which seems to be usually thought most appro- 
priate, may be* stated as follows : (1) Invocation, adoration, 
thanksgiving. (2) Confession, and prayer for forgiveness. 
(3) Renewed dedication, and prayer for help. (4) Intercession, 
for all general or special objects. Beginning with the thoupfht 
of God's character and mercies, we are naturally led to think 
next of our own sins ; and hence the order named. But ador- 
ation may also naturally be followed by prayer that God may 
be known and adored over all the earth, (see the Lord's Prayer) 
and reference to ourselves, whether thanksgiving or supplica- 

* See Part? II., chap. i. 



CONDUCT OP PUBLIC MK)BSHIP. 359i , 

tion, be introduced afterwards. Or the very first words, after 
addressing God, may be a confession of sin, and a cry for 
mercy. Moreover, something peculiar in the occasion, some- 
thing known to be pressing upon the hearts of the worshippers, 
may demand a great departure from the usual order, as well as 
the usual selection, of topics. We must avoid the two extremes," 
of wandering hither and thither, and of stiff, formal, unchange- 
able order. Within these limits, one may be guided by judgment 
and taste, by feeling and the occasion.* 

3. The language of prayer must, of course, be grammatical, 
and free from all vulgarisms and oddities. It should be 
thoroughly simple, — not low and coarse, but not learned or 
inflated. We must avoid elaborateness, and prettiness, which is 
extremely offensive to good taste and painful to truly devout 
feeling, but must not avoid, when deeply affected, the natural 
language of emotion, which is apt to be figurative, and some- 
times very highly figurative. ' Where this is really natural, it 
will never strike one as finery. It is one of the poorest compli- 
ments that can be paid a man to say, that he made an "eloquent " 
prayer 3 earnest, fervent, solemn, deeply impressive — such are 
the terms to be desired, if indeed a prayer is complimented at all. 

Almost all who lead in prayer come to have pet phrases, 
whether they were originally imitated, or have only growu 
habitual. It is very well that the prayer of another should 
suggest to us topics or sentiments we bad never introduced, but 
to borrow phrases in prayer is in wretched taste, and even un- 
conscious borrowing should by every possible m^ans be avoided. 
Yet one hears certain favourite phrases all over the country, 
which must have been adopted by imitation. Sometimes they 
involve an image, as, " Stop them in their mad career;" or an 
alliteration, as, " Choose all our changes for us," *< Touch and 
tender their hearts " (which is bad English) ; or a big word, 
instead of homely Saxon, as, ** And ultimately save us," where 
" at last " would be simpler and better. Examples cannot be 
multiplied, though the evil is extremely common, and. very 
hurtful. The use of such phrases «eems to show that the mind 
is occupied with the mere externals of prayer, instead of being 
engrossed with devout feeling. > Even where expressions are 
not borrowed, but have merely become habitual, their too 
frequent occurrence is still more objectionable in prayer than 
in preaching. 

* As to the length of prayers, see below, 4. 

OC 



360 CONDUCT* OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

Many are coustantly repeating Oh ! and Ah ! or Lord ! or 
" We pray thee," " We beseech thee," and the like. 

Familiar language, such as the mystics use, " my Jesus," 
" sweet Lord," had better be avoided. 

The phrases used in addressing God will naturally be chosen 
with some reference to the connection. Thus our Lord says, 
" I thank thee, father. Lord of heaven and earthy that thou 
hast hid these things," etc. It is an act of sovereignty. " Shall 
not the Judge of all the earth do right]" is natural, rather than 
" Shall not the Almighty (the All-wise, or the merciful God) do 
right 1 " 

In employing the language of Scripture, as already recom- 
mended, it is quite important to quote correctly ; and it is 
curious to observe the incorrect quotati(ins which are heard in 
widely distant States, showing that they have been learned by 
oral tradition. "Where two or three. . . . there am I in 
the midst of them, and that to bless thern^ The words in italics 
are an addition. " Thou canst not look upon sin with tJie least 
degree of aUowance^'* spoils a forcible and beautiful image. 
" That the word of the Lord may have free course, run, and be 
glorified," adds from the margin the word " run," there sug- 
gested as a possible substitute for " have free course." " The 
Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world," is a 
curious change from " sin." 

4. The utterance of prayer "should be softer, more level 
. . . less vehement, more subdued. Every tone should 
breathe tenderness and supplication. . . . It is difficult to 
say which is most unsuitable to this sacred exercise — a hurried, 
perfunctory utterance, as of one who reads some tiresome or 
trivial matter, a violent and declamatory manner, as though 
one had ventured upon objurgation of his Maker, or a headlong 
and confused enunciation." * 

The utterance must by all means be distinct — not boisterous, 
but perfectly audible throughout the room. It is very painful, 
and somewhat common, to be unable to hear. As to the pre- 
cise tones to be employed, let one strive to realize what he is 
doing, and then speak simply as he feels, unless he becomes 
conscious of special faults. Some men are given to the use of 
a lugubrious tone, which does not belong to the natural lan- 
guage of penitence and love, and is sometimes ridiculous. The 
tone should, of course, be solemn and reverential, rather than 
familiar, but that does not require it to be " mournful." 

* Dabney, Sac. Rhetoric, p. 358. 



CONDUCT OP PUBLIC WORSHIP. 361 

We must also avoid contortions of countenance, and tricks 
of posture and gesture, which there will always be some per- 
sons to notice. 

4. Length of the Services. 

The proper length will depend very much upon circumstances. 
Two centuries ago it was not uncommon, both in the Church of 
England and am )ng Dissenters, to occupy from three to six 
hours. At present there is in many quarters a great impatience 
of long services, which should be neither yielded to nor disre- 
garded. In the country, where people ride or walk some dis- 
tance, and have but one service a day, it may be much longer 
than in town. When some particular occasion demands un- 
usual length, and will make the services interesting throughout, 
they may be prolonged beyond the usual time. In ganeral, 
while the customs of the place and the known preferences of 
the congregation are to be consulted, we must not allow them 
to bind us with iron fetters. There should be freedom, and 
some variety, so as to withstand the perpetual tendency to gravi- 
tate into formalism. Many persons regard custom as a sort of 
common law, more binding than an authoritative form of wor- 
ship. Against this the minister may practically protest by 
such occasional variations as seem appropriate, taking care not 
to shock by abrupt or singular changes. There can be little of 
free, spontaneous life, where it is cramped by unvarying forms, 
whether they be fixed by statute or custom. But innovation 
merely for the sake of novelty, is worse than useless. 

As to the length of a sermon, it would be well for a pastor to 
get it understood that he may sometimes make the sermon very 
short, and sometimes quite long. There are subjects which can 
be made very interesting and instructive for twenty minutes, 
but to occupy thirty or forty minutes it would be necessary to 
introduce matter really foreign and calculated to lessen the 
effect, or so to hammer out the style as to make it less impres- 
sive. Many a preacher has thought of subjects or texts of pre- 
cisely this description, and has been compelled either to aban- 
don them, or to spoil them in one of the ways indicated. Why 
not occasionally preach a very short sermon, of twenty, or even 
of fifteen minutes 1 In that case, if circumstances warrant, 
the other services might, without remark, be made longer than 
usual, pains being taken to render them interesting and impres- 
sive. On the other hand, there are subjects which imperatively 
demand an extended treatment, and cannot well be divided ; 



362 CONDUCT OF PU6LIC WORSHIP. 

and the preacher, especially when at home, ought to feel at 
liberty to occupy a full hour, or in rare cases even more, pro- 
vided he is sure the sermon will have such a variety of distinct 
points, such stirring movement from beginning to end, and such 
sustained energy of delivery, as will keep the people interested 
in a high degree. Within these limits, the proper average in 
towns, will probably be from thirty to forty five minutes, the 
former being best where the habitual mode of treating a subject 
is condensed and coucebtrated, the latter where it is more dis- 
cursive and varied. It is obvious that much depends on the 
mode of treatment. A long sermon may seem short, a short 
one may be " tedious-brief," like the scene of Pyramus and 
Thisbe. 

The prayers are very commonly made too long. The people 
cannot avoid becoming weary. It would be better to have a 
greater number of prayers during the service, and have them 
shorter. In general, there may be three prayers, but varying 
in length according to circumstances. The invocation, which 
opens the services — following the voluntary anthem from the 
choir or voluntary hymn from the congregation — is usually and 
properly short, but might sometimes be made longer upon occa- 
flion. The principal prayer, which is followed by the sermon, 
is especially liable to become too long. The last prayer, fefter 
the sermon, ought to vary widely in length. If the preacher, 
or some other who is called on, feels deeply moved, and if the 
services have not beeti unusually long, this prayer may be con- 
siderably extended. If not, it should be short, sometimes very 
short. Even where the sermon haS made a great impression, 
the particular character of that impression and of the stibjeot 
must determine whether it had. better be followed by a long 
prayer or a short one. It is sometimes well to let a hymn fol- 
low the sermon, and then close with a benediction. .Or, with- 
out a hymn, the benediction may follow at onc^. In either 
caSe the benediction, which is nothing but a short prayer, may 
be preceded by a few sentences of other prayer, appfropriate to 
the subject which has been presented. 

In general, as has been intimated, the different parts of the 
service, reading Sripture, singing, preaching, prayer, should 
vary in length according to circumstances, one part being made 
longer when another is shorter, with no straining after sensa- 
tional novelty, but with the variety which imrestricted feeling 
naturally prompts. 



conduct of public worship. 363 

5. Pulpit Decorum. 

It is wonderful how much harm is sometimes done by trifling 
acts of indecorum in the pulpit. If the preacher, especially a 
young man, is seen arranging his hair or his neck-tie, it will 
utterly prejudice some persons against his sermon. If his dress 
is slovenly, or showy, it will have a similar effecit. If he is seen 
or heard taking a chew of tobacco, or even a glass of waiter, 
while another prays after his sermon, or hunting up hymns 
while another prays before it, we can hardly wonder that 
people are offended. Two ministers should not talk together 
during the singing, unless there is peculiar occasion for it. To 
look about carelessly before beginning the services, betokens a 
mind little occupied with sacred things. Yet it is far from 
desirable to substitute an elaborate solemnity of air. And the 
practice of kneeling upon entering the pulpit, is of very doubtr 
ful propriety. The preacher ought to pray before beginning his 
solemn duties, but had he not better offer his prayer in private 
than in public?* 

The following picture has become famous : 

" Would I describe a preacher, such as Paul, 
Were he on earth, would hear, approve, and own — 
Paul should himself direct me. I would trace 
His master strokes, and draw from his design. 
I would express him simple, grave, sincere : 
In doctrine uncorrupt : in language plain, 
And plain in manner ; decent, solemn, chaste. 
And natural in gesture; much impressed 
Himself, as conscious of his awful charge. 
And anxious mainly that the flock he feeds 
May feel it too ; affectionate in look 
And tender in address, as well becomes 
A messenger of grace to guilty men. 
Behold the picture. Is it like ] Like whom ? 
The things that mount the rostrum with a skip 
And then skip down again : pronounce a text ; 
Cry — hem ; and reading what they never wrote. 
Just fifteen minutes, huddle up their work. 
And with a well-bred whisper close the scene ! " t 

^ In England the practice here objected to is so very general, that most 
hearers would be surprised and offended if it were omitted. The act is cer- 
tainly not wrong in itself, ami, if we may trust the testimony of experience, 
has proved to many a preacher very advantageous. — Ed. 

+ Cowpcr on Pulpit Proprieties. Comp. Kidder, Horn. p. 378 ff. 



364 CONDUCT OF PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

A preacher should never exhibit irritation at inattention, or 
even at misconduct, in the audience. When it is really neces- 
sary to rebuke, and to rebuke sharply, it ought to be manifest 
that he is not resenting a personal slight, but affected by higher 
motives. And in the great majority of cases, public rebukes 
are better omitted. They often give offence, and the good they 
do might usually be reached in some other way. A kind, but 
decided word in private is comcionly much better. Few 
preachers have ever had occasion to regret that they had been 
silent, when moved to public rebuke ; many have regretted that 
they spoke. 

There should be nothing self-important, or formal, in the 
preacher's manner. It is generally better to say " I** than to 
use the royal "we," the plural of majesty. There may be 
more egotism in the latter case than the former. To avoid the 
too frequent recurrence of the first person singular, the 
preacher may often associate himself with the hearers, and then 
say " we." 

After great excitement, in the pulpit or elsewhere, there is 
apt to be a corresponding reaction. But many persons fail to 
understand how a man who was so solemn during the sermon, is 
now so light. Men of excitable nature should avoid exhibiting 
the effect of this reaction. How foolish soever people may ^;e 
in criticising trifles, we must not leave them, as to such minor 
matters, an excuse for finding fault. 

6. Concluding Remarks. 

After all our preparation, general and special, for the conduct 
of public worship and for preaching, our dependence for real 
success is on the Spirit of Gf>d. And where one preaches the 
gospel, in reliance on God's blessing, he never preaches in vain. 
The sermon meant for the unconverted may greatly benefit 
believers, and vice versa. Without the slightest manifest result 
at present, a sermon may be heard from long afterwards ; per- 
haps only in eternity. And the most wretched failure, seeming 
utterly useless, may benefit the preacher himself, and through 
him, all who afterwards hear him. Thus we partially see how 
it is that God's Word always does good, always prospers in the 
thing whereto he sent it. 

Nor must we ever forget the power of character and life to 

reinforce speech. What a preacher is, goes far to deteruiine 

the effect of what he says. There is a mediaeval proverb, 

Giijus vita fulgor, ejus verh% tonitrua. If a man's life be 

ji^htning, his words are thunders. 



INDEX. 



N.B.—Th4 figures to which b is attached refer to 'pp, 279 Jf of chap. v. 

Action, in delivery, 334 ; in children, 335 ; in men of different nations, 335 ; 

niles of, 341. 
Affectation, to be avoided, 322. 
Alexander, J. W., Thoughts on Preaching, 5, 15 ; striking remark of, 25 ; 

on speciality in subject, 60 ; pointed saying of, 93 ; on divisions, 200 ; 

on expository preaching, 315, note. 
Amusements, how to preach on, 72. 
Analogy defined, 140 ; metaphors rest on, 141 ; aigument from, 142 ; use 

of, 142. 
Analogy of faith, 57, note. 
Analysis, a tremendous, 203, note. 
Anecdotes, use of, in preaching, 168. 

Anglo-Saxon words, observations on, 263 ; relative force of, 278. 
Announcements peculiarities, in making, 343. 
Antithesis, use of, 282. 
Apologetics, definition of, 63. 
Apologies, 190. 
Apostrophe, 288. 

Application, 173 ; persuasion a chief part of, 174 ; part of conclusion, 211. 
A Priori, definition of, 128 ; Kant's use of, 132. 
Arguments, use of, 116 ; men fond of, 117 ; preliminaries to, 119 ; varietiei 

of, 128, 147 ; order of, 154 ; general suggestions as to, 157-159 ; not 

to be multiplied, 158. 
Ai^mentum adhominem, 147, 150. 

Aristotle, on induction, 139 ; quoted, 157 ; on style, 244, 273, 292. 
Art and literature, study of, 285 b. 
Artificiality, 10 ; danger of, 2. 
Athenians, their estimate of oratory, 321. 
Augustine quoted, 4 ; on study of models, 254. 
Authority and testimony distinguished, 133 ; of the Fathers, 136 ; of the 

Scriptures, 137. 



Barrow, his analysis, 203. 

Beecher, H. W.,- source of his illustrations, 164. 



366 INDEX. 

Belief and disbelief, 137. 

Bible, division of, into chapters and rersps, 37 ; paragraph, 38 ; history, 74 ; 

pieacher's chief study, 86 ; standard of appeal, 118 ; model cf style, 

253. 
Biography, 167, 

Bourdaloux'f, manner of preaching, 299 b. 
Brevity, or conciseness of style, 269, 283, 285. 
Bright, John, allusion to, 210. 
Brougham, Lord, allusion to, 210. 
Buffon on style, 244. 
Burden of proof, 120. 
Butler, Bishop, quoted on habit, 177. 



Campbell, George, on style, 363, 266, 276, 279, 

Cause and occasion, 133. 

Chalmers, Dr., use of English version, 32, note ; on Bomans, 240 ; sermons 

of, 271 ; read his sermons, 313. 
Changes, a cause of pastoral, 292 b. 
Chaplain, Roger de Coverley's, 98, 
Charity, spurious, 65. 
Chaucer, quoted, 92. 

Children, sermons, 80 ; critics, 82 ; observation, 165. 
Choirs, use of, 355. 

Christ, teachings of, 55 ; types of, 56 ; teacher of morals, 68. 
Chrysostom, his manner of exposition, 238 ; preaching of, 239 ; HomiHes 

of, 241. 
Cicero, advice to young orator, 3 ; striking remark of, 246 ; familiar letten 

of, 254 ; and Roscius, 334. 
Clarke, Dr. Samuel, referred to, 130. 
Clay, Henry, early training of, 6. 
Commonplace Book, use uf, 21, 89. 
Commonplace, ground of eloquence, 4. 
Comparisou, use of, 114, 180. 

Conclusion of sermon, 209 ; length of, 216 ; impassioned, 215. 
Concordance, Greek and Hebrew, use of, 52. 
Coquerel, on arrangement, 186. 
Countenance, expression of, in delivery, 336. 
Cowper, on afifectation, 322 ; description of preacher, 363. 



» 

Dabnet, Dr., referred to, 355 ; quoted, 360. 
Decorum, pulpit, 363. 
Deduction, defined, 144 ; use of, 144. 

Definition, meaning of term, 112 ; examples of, 112 ; importance of, 113. 
Delivery of sermons, general remarks on, 288 b ; importance of, 318 ; causes 
of failure in, 319 ; requisites to efifective, 321. 



INDSZ. 397 

Demosthenes, notice of, 8 ; saying of, " Action,-' fiio^ 819L 

De Quincey, on style, 246^ 269, 272 ; on fiagltsh <kammar, 2l9« 

Description, preacher's nse of, 110 ; power of. 111. 

Dilemma, 146. 

Divisions, of sermon, 198 ; historical allusions to, 199^ numbei^ a^ IKIO.; 

adrantagets of three, 201 ; character of, 202.; relation to eachotiisz^ 

203 ; order of, 205 ; statement of, 206 ; axmouucemeut of, 206^ 

transition from one tto another, 207. 
Doctrines, staple of preaching, 60 ; great, to be preached on, <60 ; i^^edfie 

aspects of, 62 ; examples, 68 ; history of, 88. 
Dramatism, 289. 



Edwards, Jonathan, allusion to, 313. 

Elegance of style, general characteristics of ; in different kinds of 49ompo- 

sition, 293 ; preacher not to aim at exclusively^ 296, not to avoid, 

296 ; elements of, 297-304. 
Eloquence, definition of, 3, 185 ; a practical tbipg, 4 ; a serious 'ttii^ 21 ; 

commonplace the ground of, 4. 
Emphasis, in reading, 347. 

Energy of style, 274 ; chief requisites to, 274-291 ; xnistakes as to, 291. 
English language, 248 ; works on, 249. 
English version, use of, 81. 
Epithets, use of, 277. 

Errors, chief power of, 65 ; often -to bo unnoticed, 67. 
Ethical philosophy, 88. 
Exclamation, 289. 
Ex concesso, argumemt, 147. 
Exegesis, use of, 106. 
Exemplification, 114. 
Everett, Edward, speaking of, 300 b. 
Evidences of Christianity, Bobt. Hall on, 63 ; how treated, -64 ; ixitemitl aaA 

experimental, 65. 
Exhortation, concluding, 215. 
Experience, subject of sermons, 76; religious, 165. 
Explanation, often needed, 104 ; cautions in reference to, 105 ; of snbjedlB, 

112. 
Exposition, continuous, 233 ; Chrysostom's manner of, 288. 
Expository preaching, advantages of, 227 ; objections, 226 ; management dt, 

230 ; unity necessary to, 231 ; details in^ 235 ; parallel passages in^ 

236 ; difficult passages, 236 ; examples, 240. 
Expressian, in reading, 848. 
EixtemporaneouB speaking, definition of, 802 b ; .advantages cf, 803 b-310, 

disadvantages of, 307 ; difficulties of, 310 ; general and specific pre. 

paration for, 813. 
Sye, power of oratoi^s, 295 b, 886. 



368 INDEX. 

Fables, use of, in preaching, 170. 

Failures, how to speak exteroporaneously without, 815, 816. 
Fancy and imagination, 2S0 b. 
Fathers, authority of the, 136. 
Feelings, to be excited, 176. 

Figures of speech, works on 286. note ; conduciye to elegance, 800. 
Foster, John, referred to, 120, 257 ; on \\ae of Scripture phrases, 298. 
Free speaking, from written preparation, 301 b. 

Fuller, Audrevr, his interpretation of Scripture, 32 ; influence of, 41 ; as an 
expositor, 233 ; exposition of Genesis, 2ll ; insensibility to art, 285b. 
Fuller, Richard, his use of incidents, 168. 



Obstube, in speaking, 339, 841 ; in reading, 847. 
Gkethe, quoted, on actor and orator, 820. 
Gospels, discrepancies in the, 135. 
Gracchus, Caios, anecdote of, 324. 
Grammars, English, 249 ; use of, 250. 
Grimm, Jacob, on English language, 248. 



Hall, Robert, on Evidences of Christianity, 63 ; on plan of sermon, 196 ; 

fond of specific subjects, 221 ; style of, 258. 
Hands, use of, in speaking, 340. 
Happiness, desire of, a proper motive, 175. 
Hell, reference to, 56. 
Henry, Patrick, early training of, 7. 
History, use of, in interpretation, 54 ; examples of use, 55 ; Bible, 75 ; source 

of illustration, 171. 
Holiness, desire of, a motive, 175. 
Homiletical habit, 85. 

Homiletics, meaning and origin of term, 11 ; works on, 12-17. 
Hoppin, Prof., Office and Work of Christian Ministry, 16 ; on aigument^ 117 ; 

on Introduction, 189. 
Howe, John, his use of texts, 19. 
Hymns, importance of selecting good, 849 ; supply of, 850 ; best writers d, 

351 ; the properties of a good, 351 ; connection of, with sermon, 352 ; 

the rhythm of, 353 ; music of, 855. 
Hyperbole, 287 ; examples of, 288. 



ILLUSTBATION, defined, 160 ; uses of, 160 ; works on, 162, note ; importance 

of, 162 ; sources of, 163-171 ; may be invented, 165 ; cautions as to 

employing, 171. 
Imagination, use in exciting passions, 179 ; uses to orator, 279 b ; works on, 

280 b note ; historical, 282 b ; means of cultivating, 288 b. ; modeb 

of, 286 b. 
Imitation, conscious and uuconsdous, 9 ; instances of, 10, note. 



INDEX. 369 

Indolence, a foe to originality, 96. 

Induction, defined, 138 ; hasty, 138 ; safe, 189 ; Aristotle on, 189. 

Inferences, part of conclusion, 212. 

Interrogation, 289. 

Interpretation, sources of error in, 30-44 ; treatises on, 52, note ; rules of, 

38, 62. 
Invention, lawful, 165 ; a source of illustration, 165. 
Irony, allowable, 161. 
Introduction, propriety of, 187 ; sources of, 189 ; examples of, 190, note, 191 ; 

qualities of a good, 191 ; Vinet on, 192. 

Judas, sermon on, 225. 

Kant, his use of a priori, 132. 

Knowledge, requisite to good preaching, 6 ; all kinds useful, 86 ; has three 
dimensions, 97. 



Language, imperfection of, 30 ; Scripture, 83 ; Study of affects style, 247 ; 

books on English, 249, note. 
Letters, familiar, style of, 264 ; Cicero's, 254. 

Life, human, source of illustration, 163 ; our Lord's references to, 164. 
Literature a source of illustration, 169 ; study of, affects style, 251. 
Logic, study of, recommended, 117, 153. 
Love, the strongest motive, 176. 
Loyola, Ignatius, preaching of, 178. 



Materials of sermon, prepared beforehand, 84 ; from every source, 86 ; 

provided at the time, 90 ; original, 91-97 ; 'borrowed, special, 105. 
Melody of voice, 328. 
Metaphor, 287. 

Methods of preaching, historical notices of the three, 311. 
Metres, books on, note 354. 
Mill on Fallacies, 153. 
Minister's sore throat, note on, 331. 
Miracles, proof of, 135. 
Misapplied texts, examples of, 44-51. 



Narration, preacher's use of, 107. 

Narratives of the Bible, 230. 

Natural gifts, 6. 

Nature, source of illustration, 163 ; communion with, 284 b ; energetic, 

necessary to energy of style, 274. 
Negative, not required to prove, 120. 
Newman, John Henry, on earnestness, 178. 



370 ISTDiBZ. 

News of the day, how used, 168. 

Newspapers, 252. 

New Testament, Revised, 53 ; Moody's, 58, note. 

Newton, Sir Isaac, reference to, 129. 

Novels, the reading of, 286 b. 

Objections, refutation of, 156. ' 

Obscurity, often pleasing, 259. 

Oddity, 93. 

Old Testament, not to be neglected, 26. 

Orator and actor, 318. 

Orators, Indian, 7 ; great secular, 253. 

Origen, his spiritualizing, 41. 

Originality, 91 ; affectation of, 93 ; desirable, 93 ; obstacles to, 95. 

Original Scriptures, advantage of using, 32 ; in expository preaching, 233. 



Palmer, on reading sermons, 297. 

Parables, interpretation of our Lord's, 43. 

Paradox, sometimes lawful, 93. 

Paragraph, importance of, 26^ ; requisites to a, 267, 268. 

Parallel passages, quotation of, 236. 
. Particles,' use of, 268. 

Paul, style of the Apostle, 245 ; language of, 288. 

Personification, 288. 

Perspicuity of style, 259 ; necessary, 260 ; fizplanation, as to, 26; requisite^ 
to, 262, 273. 

Persuasion, use of, 174 ; motives used in, 175, 176. 

Peter's denial, sermons on. 223. 

Piety, a requisite to effective preaching, 6. 

Pilgrim's Progress specially commended, 169. 

Plagiarism, defined, 97 ; ludicrous and serious effects of, ^. 

Plan of sermon, 194 ; simple and fresh, 197. 

Poetry and Preaching, 2i^8. 
• Poets, study of, 285 b. 

Points, speaker to fix his mind on, 268. 

Polemics, references to, 65, 67. 

Posture in speaking, 337. 

Practice, chief means of improvement, 254. 

Prayer (public), general preparation for, 858 ; special preparation for, 356 ; 
matter of, 357 ; improprieties in, 357 ; arrangement of, 358 ; language 
of, 385 ; pet phrases in, 359 ; the utterance of, 860 ; remai^ <ki 
Lord's, 357, note. 

Preacher, when eloquent, 5 ; to preach on doctrines, 60 ; relattion to oocriro- 
versies, 65 ; to morality, 67 ; to politics, 69 ; to avoid ultraism, 72 ; 
etparience of young, 80 ; " homiletioal habit" of, 85 ; Bible, chief 
study of, 86 ; why old fails, 84 ; how original, 92 ; how to uae 
thoughts of others, 101 ; when make acknowledgment, 102.; explain- 



INDEX. 371 

iug teti, 106 ; to study common mind, 157 ; to be a dose observer, 
163 ; to excite feeling, 177 ; be subject of feeling, 178 ; not uniformly 
vehement, 180 ; to cultivate variety, 208 ; to avoid forced feeling, 
215 ; to be perspicuous, 260 ; to have variety of style, 290 ; not to 
aim at prettinea<i, 3. 

Praachiug, characteristic of Cbristiamty, 1 ; relation to printing, I ; to pas- 
toral work, etc., 2 ; difficulty of, 2 ; requiHites to effective, 5 ; an art, 
7 ; doctrinal, 59 ; political, 69 ; historical, 74 ; expository, 227. 

Presumption, logical, defined, 121. 

Profuseness, 286. 

Progressive approach, ailment from, 146. 

Prolixity, 270. 

Proposition, logical and rhetorioal^ 197. 

Proverbs, value of, 170. 

Punctuation, 225. 



QniNTiLiAN, on slight arguments, 158 : sharp saying of, 171 ; on introduction, 

193 ; on clearness of style, 261. 
Quotations, use of foreign, 251. 

Reading, remarks on, 89 ; public, of Scriptures, 344 ; good, a rare accom- 
plishment, 346 ; club recommended, 347 ; emphasis in, 347 ; exprech 
sion in, 347. 

Reading sermons, advantages of, 289 b-291 b ; disadvantages of, 291 b, 295 b ; 
suggestions as to, 296 b, 298 b ; origin of practice^ 311 ; where cus- 
tom prevails, 312. 

Beeapitulation, 211. 

Reciting sermons from memory, advantages of, 29^ ; disadvantages of, 299. 

Reductio ad absurdum, 147. 

References, use of, 58. 

Refutation, 147 ; men fond of, 1^ ; often not complete, 149 ; indirect, 150 ; 
not too vehement, 152 ; effect of successful, 152. 

Betian, reference to, 245". 

Repentance, texts on, 69. 

Rhythm, in prose, 299 ; books on, 3QP, note. 

Rogfers, Henry, quoted, 294. 

Romanist, difficulties of,- 127. 

Raskin, od imagination, 280 b ; on preVailfaig frivolity, 284 b. 

Ryle, J. C, Expository Thoughts 6f, 241. 



Sacred eloquence, Henry Rogers on, 294. 
Schleiermacher, quoted, 231. 
Science, a source of illustration, 166. 

Scriptures, a source of iUustra^tion, 171 ; study o^ fornijerly and naw, 283. 
Sentences, short and long, 266 ; periodic, 278 ; emphatic arrangement of, 
280 ; broken, 282. 



372 INDEX. 

SeqneDce, logical and physical, 133. 

SermoD, several parts of a, 187 ; introduction of, 187 ; plan of, 194 ; divi- 
sions of, 198 ; conclusion of, 209 ; length of, 361. 

Sennons, subject or text of, 59 ; classified according to matter, 59 ; doc- 
trinal, 60 ; not treatises, 62 ; moral, 67 ; political, 69 ; historical, 74 
experimental, 76 ; funeral, 78 ; academic, 79 ; to children, 80 
different species of, 219 ; subject, 220 ; models of subject, 222, note , 
text, 222 ; examples of text, 224-226 ; expository, 227 ; scheme of 
series of expository, 234. 

Services, length of, 361. 

Shedd, on getting meaning of text, 53 ; on preacher's duty to society, 72 ; 
on " bomiletical habit," 85 ; on discovering hidden skeleton, 223 ; on 
expository preaching, 230 ; on plainness of style, 260. 

Simplicity in style, 301, 302 

Singing, a means of cultivating the voice, 325. 

Skeletons and sketches, 99. 

Smith, Adam, quoted on style, 293. 

Speaking, in relation to style, 257. 

Spencer, Herbert, on style, 303. 

Spiritualizing, founded in nature of things, 41 ; in the Bible, 41 ; practised by 
the Fathers, 41 ; evil efifects of, 57. 

Spiritual manifestations, 133. 

Spurious passages, not to be used as texts ; examplelb of, 26. 

Stowe, C. E., on expository preaching, 239, note. 

Style, general observations on, 243 ; treatises on, 243, note ; Buffon on, 244 ; 
importance of, 244 ; English, French, German, and American, 246 ; 
means of improving, 247 ; models of, 252 ; properties of, 251 ; per- 
spicuity of, 259-*273 ; spoken and written, 271 ; energy of, 274-291; 
elegance of, 290-304. 

Swedenborg, reference to, 40. 

Swift, letter to a young clergyman, 262, 

Talks, on meaning of passages, 234. 

Terms, ambiguous, to be avoided, 120 ; to be intelligible, 262 ; exact, 264 ; 
specific, more energetic, 275; elegant use of, 297. 

Testimony, argument from, 130. 

Text, meaning of the term, 18 ; originally long, 18 ; advantages of having, 
19 ; objections to use of, 20 ; selection of a, 21 ; rules for selection of, 
21-28 ; ludicrous, 23 ; familiar, 25 ; spurious passages not to be used 
as, 2S ; sayings of uninspired men as, 27 ; accommodation of, 29 
diflRculty of interpreting, 30 ; sources of error in interpreting, 30-43 
examples of texts misapplied, 44-52 ; grammatical study of, 52 
explanation of, 106. 

Theology, systematic, value of, 87-88. 

Transitional words, 208. 

Translation, disadvantages of a, 31 ; uses of a, 53. 

Translations, making a means of improving style, 257. 



INDEX. 373 



Unity, importance of, 225-231. 
University (English) training, effect of, 246. 



Verbosity, 284. 

Vinet, on eloquence, 4 ; on use of texts, 20 ; on interpretation, 83 ; on poli- 
tical preaching, 70 ; on a priori, 131 ; on arrangement, 182 ; on 
BosBuety 200. 

Voice, importance of a good, 323 ; powers of, 324 ; improvement of, 324 ; 
penetrating power of, 326 ; rules for management of, 329. 

Voltaire, on texts, 20. 



Whately, pointed sajdngs of, 63 ;*anecdote of, 96, note ; Rhetoric, 119, note ; 

Logic, 120, note ; definition of presumption, 121 ; on conciseness, 

269. 
Whitfield's oratory, 304, b. 



H. W. WALKER, PRINTER, BRIGQATE, LEEDS. 



ERRATA.. 

Page 15, line 26, fw make read makes. 
,, 40, ff 26, joT Sweedish read Swedish. 
„ 55, „ 83, far nutatis rtad mutatis. 
„ 168, „ 11, for Pleutaroh rtad Plutaroh. 
» 178, „ 14^ fur Loyoda read Loyola. 



