BX  6333  .S6  A44 
ipurgeon,  C.  H.  1834-1892 
According  to  promise 


According  to  Promise 


According 
to  Promise 


or 


The  Lord's  Method  of  Dealing 
with  His  Chosen  People 


by 
Charles  H.  Spurgeon 


^NHV  OF  PRmir^^ 
OCT   19   1999 


A 


The  Gospel  Hour,  Inc.,  Oliver  B.  Greene,  Director 
P.O.  Box  2024,  Greenville,  South  Carolina 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


Contents 

A  Sieve  Needed  3 

The  Two  Seeds  5 

The  Two  Lives  12 

Differing  Hopes  18 

Persecution  consequent  on  the  Promise  23 

The  Parting  28 

Whose  Are  the  Promises?  34 

The  Promise  a  Free  Gift  39 

The  Promise  of  God  a  Rf^ality  43 

The  Peculiar  Treasure  of  Believers  49 

The  Valuation  of  the  Promises  61 

The  Lord's  Promise  —  the  Rule  of  His  Giving  71 

The  Rule  without  Exception  78 

Taking  Possession  of  the  Promise  89 

Endorsing  the  Promise  94 

The  Promise  Used  for  This  Life  98 

Searching  Out  the  Promise  105 

The  Time  of  the  Promise  113 

The  Promises  in  Possession  throu(;h 

THE  Spirit  1 19 

Jesus  and  the  Promises  124 


A  Sieve  Needed 

IT  is  very  important  to  be  able  to  dis- 
tinguish between  things  that  differ,  for 
appearances  are  not  to  be  relied  upon. 
Things  which  seem  to  be  alike  may 
yet  be  the  opposite  of  each  other.  A  scorpion  may 
be  like  an  egg,  and  a  stone  like  a  piece  of  bread  ; 
but  they  are  far  from  being  the  same.  Like  may 
be  very  unlike.  Especially  is  this  the  case  in 
spiritual  things,  and  therefore  it  behoves  us  to  be  on 
our  guard. 

It  would  be  very  difficult  to  say  how  far  a  man 
may  go  in  religion,  and  yet  die  in  his  sins ;  how 
much  he  may  look  like  an  heir  of  heaven,  and  yet 
be  a  child  of  wrath.  Many  unconverted  men  have 
a  belief  which  is  similar  to  faith,  and  yet  it  is  not 
true  faith.  Certain  persons  exhibit  pious  affec- 
tions which  have  the  warmth  of  spiritual  love,  but 
are  quite  destitute  of  gracious  life.  Every  grace 
can  be  counterfeited,  even  as  jewels  can  be  imitated. 
As  paste  gems  are  wonderfully  like  the  real 
stones,  so  sham  graces  are  marvellously  like  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  soul  matters  a  man 
v/ill  need  to  have  all  his  wits  about  him,  or  he  will 
soon  deceive  his  own  heart.  It  is  to  be  feared  that 
many  are  already  mistaken,  and  will  never  discover 
their  delusion  till   they  lift  up  their  eyes  in  the 


4  According  to  Promise 

world  of  woe,  where  their  disappointment  will  be 
terrible  indeed. 

The  dead  child  of  nature  may  be  carefully 
washed  by  its  mother,  but  this  will  not  make 
it  the  living  child  of  grace.  The  life  of  God  within 
the  soul  creates  an  infinite  difference  between  the 
man  who  has  it  and  the  man  who  has  it  not ;  and 
the  point  is,  to  make  sure  that  we  have  this  life. 
Are  YOU  sure  that  you  have  it? 

It  will  be  an  awful  thing  to  cry,  "  Peace,  peace," 
where  there  is  no  peace,  and  to  prophesy  smooth 
things  for  yourself,  and  make  your  heart  easy,  and 
lull  your  conscience  to  slumber,  and  never  to 
wake  out  of  the  sleep  till  a  clap  of  the  thunder  of 
judgment  shall  startle  you  out  of  presumption 
into  endless  horror. 

I  desire  to  help  my  reader  in  the  business  of 
self-examination.  I  would  have  him  go  further 
than  examination,  and  attain  to  such  abundance  of 
grace,  that  his  holy  and  happy  state  shall  become 
a  witness  to  himself. 

The  first  part  of  this  little  book  is  meant  to  be  a 
sieve  to  separate  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.  Let 
my  friend  use  it  upon  himself;  it  may  be  the  best 
day's  work  he  has  ever  done.  He  who  looked  into 
his  accounts  and  found  that  his  business  was  a 
losing  one  was  saved  from  bankruptcy.  This  may 
happen  also  to  my  reader.  Should  he,  however, 
discover  that  his  heavenly  trade  is  prospering,  it 
will  be  a  great  comfort  to  him.  No  man  can  lose  by 
honestly  searching  his  own  heart. 

Friend,  try  it  at  once. 


The  Two  Seeds 

"  It  is  written,  that  Abraham  had  two  sons,  the  one  by  a  bond- 
maid, the  other  by  a  freewoman.  But  he  who  was  of  the  bondwoman 
was  born  after  the  flesh  ;  but  he  of  the  freewoman  was  by  promise." — 
Galatians  iv.  22,  23. 

ABRAHAM  had  two  sons.  Ishmael  and 
Isaac  were  beyond  all  dispute  veritable 
sons  of  Abraham.  Yet,  one  of  them 
inherited  the  covenant  blessing,  and  the 
other  was  simply  a  prosperous  man  of 
the  world.  See  hcnv  close  these  two  were  together  ! 
They  were  born  in  the  same  society,  called  the  same 
great  patriarch  "father,"  and  sojourned  in  the  same 
encampment  with  him.  Yet,  Ishmael  was  a  stranger 
to  the  covenant,  while  Isaac  was  the  heir  of  the 
promise.     How  little  is  there  in  blood  and  birth ! 

A  more  remarkable  instance  than  this  happened 
a  little  afterwards ;  for  Esau  and  Jacob  were  born 
of  the  same  mother,  at  the  same  birth,  yet  is  it 
written,  "  Jacob  have  I  loved,  and  Esau  have  I  hated." 
One  became  gracious,  and  the  other  profane.  So 
closely  may  two  come  together,  and  yet  so  widely 
may  they  be  separated  !  Verily,  it  is  not  only  that 
two  shall  be  in  one  bed,  and  the  one  shall  be  taken, 
and  the  other  left ;  but,  two  shall  come  into  the 
world  at  the  same  moment,  and  yet  one  of  them  will 
take  up  his  inheritance  with  God,  and  the  other  will 
for  a  morsel  of  meat  sell  his  birthright.  We  may 
be  in  the  same  church,  baptized  in  the  same  water, 


6  According  to  Promise 

seated  at  the  same  communion  table,  singing  the 
same  psalm,  and  offering  the  same  prayer  ;  and  yet 
we  may  be  of  two  races  as  opposed  as  the  seed  of 
the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent. 

Abraham's  two  sons  are  declared  by  Paul  to  be 
the  types  of  two  races  of  men,  who  are  much  alike, 
and  yet  widely  differ.  They  are  unlike  in  their  origin. 
They  were  both  sons  of  Abraham  ;  but  Ishmael, 
the  child  of  Hagar,  was  the  offspring  of  Abraham 
upon  ordinary  conditions :  he  was  born  after  the 
flesh.  Isaac,  the  son  of  Sarah,  was  not  born  by 
the  strength  of  nature  ;  for  his  father  was  more  than 
a  hundred  years  old,  and  his  mother  was  long  past 
age.  He  was  given  to  his  parents  by  the  Lord,  and 
was  born  according  to  the  promise  through  faith. 
This  is  a  grave  distinction,  and  it  marks  off  the  true 
child  of  God  from  him  who  is  only  so  by  pro- 
fession. The  promise  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the 
distinction,  and  the  power  which  goes  to  accomplish 
the  promise  creates  and  maintains  the  difference. 
Hence  the  promise^  which  is  our  inheritance,  is  also 
our  test  and  touchstone. 

Let  us  use  the  test  at  once  by  seeing  whether  we 
have  been  wrought  upon  by  the  power  which  fulfils 
the  promise.  Let  me  ask  a  few  questions, — How 
were  you  converted  ?  Was  it  by  yourself,  by  the 
persuasion  of  men,  by  carnal  excitement ;  or  was  it 
by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  You  profess 
to  have  been  born  again.  Whence  came  that  new 
birth  ?  Did  it  come  from  God  in  consequence  of  his 
eternal  purpose  and  promise,  or  did  it  come  out  of 
yourself?   Was  it  your  old  nature  trying  to  do  better. 


The  Two  Seeds  7 

and  working  itself  up  to  its  best  form  ?  If  so,  you 
are  Ishmael.  Or  was  it  that  you,  being  spiritually 
dead,  and  having  no  strength  whatever  to  rise  out 
of  your  lost  estate,  were  visited  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
who  put  forth  his  divine  energy,  and  caused  life 
from  heaven  to  enter  into  you  ?  Then  you  are 
Isaac.  All  will  depend  upon  the  commencement 
of  your  spiritual  life,  and  the  source  from  which  that 
life  at  first  proceeded.  If  you  began  in  the  flesh, 
you  have  gone  on  in  the  flesh,  and  in  the  flesh  you 
will  die. 

Have  you  never  read,  "  That  which  is  born  of  the 
flesh  is  flesh  "  ?  Before  long  the  flesh  will  perish, 
and  from  it  you  will  reap  corruption.  Only  "  that 
which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit "  ;  the  joy  is 
that  the  spirit  will  live,  and  of  it  you  will  reap  life 
everlasting.  Whether  you  are  a  professor  of  religion 
or  not,  I  beseech  you,  ask  yourself — Have  I  felt  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  of  God? 

Is  the  life  that  is  within  you  the  result  of  the  fer- 
mentation of  your  own  natural  desires  ?  Or  is  it 
a  new  element,  infused,  imparted,  implanted  from 
above  ?  Is  your  spiritual  life  a  heavenly  creation  ? 
Have  you  been  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus } 
Have  you  been  born  again  by  divine  power  ? 

Ordinary  religion  is  nature  gilded  over  with  a  thin 
layer  of  what  is  thought  to  be  grace.  Sinners  have 
polished  themselves  up,  and  brushed  off  the  worst 
of  the  rust  and  the  filth,  and  they  think  their  old 
nature  is  as  good  as  new.  This  touching-up  and 
repairing  of  the  old  man  is  all  very  well ;  but  it 
falls,  short  of  what  is  needed.     You  may  wash  the 


8  According  to  Promise 

face  and  hands  of  Ishmael  as  much  as  you  please, 
but  you  cannot  make  him  into  Isaac.  You  may 
improve  nature,  and  the  more  you  do  so  the  better 
for  certain  temporary  purposes ;  but  you  cannot 
raise  it  into  grace.  There  is  a  distinction  at  the 
very  fountain-head  between  the  stream  which  rises 
in  the  bog  of  fallen  humanity,  and  the  river  which 
proceeds  from  the  throne  of  God. 

Do  not  forget  that  our  Lord  himself  said,  "  Ve 
must  be  bom  aoain."  If  you  have  not  been  born 
again  from  above,  all  your  church-going,  or  your 
chapel-going,  stands  for  nothing.  Your  prayers  and 
your  tears,  your  Bible-readings  and  all  that  have 
come  from  yourself  only,  can  only  lead  to  yourself. 
Water  will  naturally  rise  as  high  as  its  source,  but 
no  higher :  that  which  begins  with  human  nature 
will  rise  to  human  nature  ;  but  to  the  divine  nature 
it  cannot  reach.  Was  your  new  birth  natural  or 
supernatural  ?  Was  it  of  the  will  of  man  or  of 
God  ?  Much  will  depend  upon  your  answer  to  that 
question. 

Between  the  child  of  God  and  the  mere  professor 
there  is  a  distinction  as  to  origin  of  the  most  serious 
sort,  lsd.3iC  was  horn  according  to  promise.  Ishmael 
was  not  of  promise,  but  of  the  course  of  nature, 
Where  nature's  strength  suffices  there  is  no  promise; 
but  when  human  energy  fails,  the  word  of  the  Lord 
comes  in.  God  had  said  that  Abraham  should 
have  a  son  of  Sarah ;  Abraham  believed  it,  and 
rejoiced  therein,  and  Isaac  was  born  as  the  result 
of  the  divine  promise,  by  the  power  of  God.  There 
could  have  been  no   Isaac  if  there  had  been   no 


The  Two  Seeds  9 

promise,  and  there  can  be  no  true  believer  apart 
from  the  promise  of  grace,  and  tlie  grace  of  the 
promise. 

Gentle  reader,  here  let  me  enquire  as  to  your  sal- 
vation. Are  you  saved  by  what  you  have  done  ? 
Is  your  religion  the  product  of  your  own  natural 
strength  ?  Do  you  feel  equal  to  all  that  salvation 
may  require  ?  Do  you  conclude  yourself  to  be  in  a 
safe  and  happy  condition  because  of  your  natural 
excellence  and  moral  ability  ?  Then  you  are  after 
the  manner  of  Ishmael,  and  to  you  the  inheritance 
will  not  come;  for  it  is  not  an  inheritance  according 
to  the  flesh,  but  according  to  promise. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  say, — "My  hope  lies  only 
in  the  promise  of  God.  He  has  set  forth  that  promise 
in  the  person  of  his  Son  festis  to  every  sinner  that 
believeth  in  him;  and  I  do  believe  in  him,  therefore  1 
trust  and  believe  that  the  Lord  zvil I  fulfil  his  promise 
and  bless  me.  I  look  for  heavenly  blessedness,  not  as 
the  result  of  my  own  efforts,  but  as  the  gift  of  God's 
free  favour.  My  hope  is  fixed  alone  upon  the  free 
and  gratuitous  love  of  God  to  giulty  men,  by  the 
which  he  has  given  his  Son  fesus  Christ  to  put  away 
sin,  and  to  bring  in  everlasting  rigJiteousness  for 
those  who  deserve  it  not'' — then  this  is  another  sort 
of  language  from  that  of  the  Ishmaelites,  who  say 
"  We  have  Abraham  to  our  father,"  You  have  now 
learned  to  speak  as  Isaac  speaks.  The  difference 
may  seem  small  to  the  careless,  but  it  is  great  in- 
deed, Hagar,  the  slave-mother,  is  a  very  different 
person  from  Sarah,  the  princess.  To  the  one  there 
is  no  covenant  promise,  to  the  other  the  blessing 


10  According  to  Promise 

belongs  for  evermore.  Salvation  by  works  is  one 
thing ;  salvation  by  grace  is  another.  Salvation  by 
human  strength  is  far  removed  from  salvation  by 
divine  power :  and  salvation  by  our  own  resolve  is 
the  opposite  of  salvation  by  the  promise  of  God. 

Put  yourself  under  this  enquiry,  and  see  to  which 
family  you  belong.    Are  you  of  Ishmael  or  of  Isaac  ? 

If  you  find  that  you  are  like  Isaac,  born  according 
to  the  promise,  remember  that  your  name  is 
"  Laughter " ;  for  that  is  the  interpretation  of  the 
Hebrew  name  Isaac.  Take  care  that  you  rejoice 
with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  Your  new 
birth  is  a  wonderful  thing.  If  both  Abraham  and 
Sarah  laughed  at  the  thought  of  Isaac,  you  may 
certainly  do  so  concerning  yourself  There  are 
times  when,  if  I  sit  alone  and  think  of  the  grace  of 
God  to  me,  the  most  undeserving  of  all  his  creatures, 
I  am  ready  to  laugh  and  cry  at  the  same  time  for  joy 
that  ever  the  Lord  should  have  looked  in  love  and 
favour  upon  me.  Yes,  and  every  child  of  God 
must  have  felt  the  working  of  that  Isaac  nature 
within  his  soul,  filling  his  mouth  with  laughter, 
because  the  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  him. 

Mark  well  the  difference  between  the  two  seeds, 
from  their  very  beginning. 

Ishmael  comes  of  man,  and  by  man.  Isaac 
comes  by  God's  promise.  Ishmael  is  the  child  of 
Abraham's  flesh.  Isaac  is  Abraham's  child,  too ; 
out  then  the  power  of  God  comes  in,  and  from  the 
weakness  of  his  parents  it  is  made  clear  that  he  is 
of  the  Lord, — a  gift  according  to  promise.  True 
faith  is  assuredly  the  act  of  the  man  who  believes  ; 


The  Two  Seeds  11 

true  repentance  is  the  act  of  the  man  who  repents ; 
yet  both  faith  and  repentance  may  with  unquestion- 
able correctness  be  described  as  the  work  of  God, 
even  as  Isaac  is  the  son  of  Abraham  and  Sarah, 
and  yet  he  is  still  more  the  gift  of  God.  The  Lord 
our  God,  who  bids  us  believe,  also  enables  us  to 
believe.  All  that  we  do  acceptably  the  Lord  worketh 
in  us  ;  yea,  the  very  will  to  do  it  is  of  his  working. 
No  religion  is  worth  a  farthing  which  is  not  essen- 
tially the  outflow  of  the  man's  own  heart;  and  yet 
it  must  beyond  question  be  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  who  dwells  within  him. 

O  friend,  if  what  you  have  within  you  is  natural, 
and  only  natural,  it  will  not  save  you  1  The  inward 
work  must  be  supernatural ;  it  must  come  of  God, 
or  it  will  miss  the  covenant  blessing.  A  gracious 
life  will  be  your  own,  even  as  Isaac  was  truly  the 
child  of  Abraham ;  but  still  more  it  will  be  of  God  ; 
for  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord,"  We  must  be  born 
from  above.  Concerning  all  our  religious  feelings 
and  actions,  we  must  be  able  to  say,  "  Lord,  thou 
hast  wrought  all  our  works  in  us." 


The  Two  Lives 

"  Neither,  because  they  are  the  seed  of  Abraham,  are  they  all 
children  :  but.  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called.  That  is,  They  which 
are  the  children  of  the  flesh,  these  are  not  the  children  of  God  :  but 
the  children  of  the  promise  are  counted  for  the  seed.  For  this  is  the 
word  of  promise,  At  this  time  will  I  come,  and  Sarah  shall  have  a 
son." — Romans  ix.  7,  8,  9. 

ISHMAEL  and  Isaac  differed  as  to  origin, 
and  hence  there  was  a  difference  in 
their  nature  which  showed  itself  in  their 
lives,  and  was  chiefly  seen  in  their 
relation  to  the  promise. 
According  to  the  birth  so  will  be  the  life  which 
comes  of  it.  In  the  case  of  the  man  who  is  only 
what  he  made  himself  to  be,  there  will  be  only 
what  nature  gives  him  ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  man 
who  is  created  anew  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  there 
will  be  signs  following.  "  Of  him  are  ye  in  Christ 
Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and 
righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption  : 
as  it  is  written,  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in 
the  Lord."  There  will  be  in  the  new-born  man  that 
which  the  new  life  brings  with  it :  in  the  natural 
man  there  will  be  nothing  of  the  kind. 

Ishmael  exhibited  certain  of  the  natural  character- 
istics of  Abraham  joined  with  those  of  his  slave 
mother.  He  was  a  princely  man  like  his  father,  and 
inherited  the  patriarch's  noble  bearing ;  but  Isaac 
had  the  faith  of  his  father,  and  was  in  the  succession 
as  to  holy  inward   spiritual  life.      As  the  heir  of 


The  Two  Lives  13 

the  promise,  Isaac  remains  with  his  father  Abraham, 
while  Ishmael  is  forming  camps  of  his  own  in  the 
wilderness.  Isaac  seeks  alliance  with  the  olden 
stock  in  Mesopotamia  ;  but  Ishmael's  mother  takes 
him  a  wife  out  of  Egypt,  which  was  very  natural, 
since  she  came  from  Egypt  herself  Like  will  to 
like.  Isaac  meditated  in  the  field  at  eventide,  for 
his  conversation  was  with  sacred  things  ;  but 
Ishmael  contended  with  all  comers,  for  he  minded 
earthly  things.  Meditation  is  not  for  the  wild  man, 
whose  hand  is  against  every  man,  and  every  man's 
hand  against  him.  Isaac  surrendered  himself  as  a 
sacrifice  to  God  ;  but  you  see  nothing  of  that  kind 
in  Ishmael.  Self-sacrifice  is  not  for  Ishmael ;  he  is 
rather  a  killer  and  a  slayer  than  a  lamb  that  presents 
itselt  to  God.  So  you  shall  find,  that  if  you  are 
religiously  trained  and  tutored,  and  become  "pious," 
as  they  call  it,  and  yet  are  not  renewed  in  heart,  nor 
visited  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  you  will  not  live  the 
secret  life  of  the  child  of  God.  You  may  show 
many  of  the  outward  marks  of  a  Christian ;  you 
may  be  able  to  sing,  and  to  pray,  and  to  quote 
Scripture,  and  perhaps  to  tell  some  little  bits  of 
imaginary  experience  ;  but  you  must  be  born  again 
to  know  in  very  deed  and  truth  the  fellowship  of 
the  saints,  communion  in  secret  with  the  living  God, 
and  the  yielding  of  yourself  to  him  as  your  reason- 
able service.  The  child  of  the  promise  abides  with 
God's  people,  and  counts  it  his  privilege  to  be 
numbered  with  them.  The  child  of  the  promise  feels 
that  he  is  in  the  best  company  when  no  man  can 
see  or  be  seen,  but  when  the  Great  Invisible  draws 


14  According  to  Promise 

near  to  him  and  holds  converse  with  him.  The 
child  of  the  promise,  and  he  only,  is  able  to  go  up 
to  the  top  of  Moriah,  there  to  be  bound  upon  the 
altar,  and  to  yield  himself  up  to  God.  I  mean  by 
this  last,  that  only  he  who  is  born  of  the  Spirit  will 
yield  himself  wholly  to  God,  and  love  the  Lord 
better  than  life  itself.  Your  nature  and  conduct 
will  be  according  to  your  origin  ;  and  therefore  I 
pray  that  you  may  begin  aright,  so  that  as  you 
profess  to  be  a  child  of  the  kingdom,  you  may 
prove  to  be  a  true-born  heir, 

Ishmael,  who  was  born  after  the  flesh,  the  child 
of  the  bondwoman,  must  always  bear  the  servile 
taint.  The  child  of  a  slave  is  not  free-born. 
Ishmael  is  not,  cannot  be,  what  Isaac  is — the  child 
of  the  free  woman.  Now  mark  :  I  do  not  say  that 
Ishmael  ever  desired  to  be  like  Isaac  ;  I  do  not  say 
that  he  felt  himself  to  be  a  loser  by  differing  from 
Isaac  ;  but,  indeed,  he  was  so.  The  man  who  is 
labouring  for  self-salvation  by  his  own  doings, 
feelings,  and  self-denials,  may  be  proudly  ignorant 
of  his  servile  state ;  he  may  even  boast  that  he  was 
born  free,  and  was  never  in  bondage  to  any ;  and 
yet  he  spends  his  whole  life  in  servitude.  He  never 
knows  what  liberty  means,  what  content  means, 
what  delight  in  God  means.  He  wonders  when  men 
talk  about  "full  assurance  of  faith."  He  judges  that 
they  must  be  presumptuous.  He  has  scarcely  time 
to  breathe  between  the  cracks  of  the  whip.  He  has 
done  so  much,  but  he  must  do  so  much  more;  he  has 
suffered  so  much,  but  he  must  suffer  so  much  more. 
He  has  never  come  into  "the  rest  which  remaineth 


The  Two  Lives  15 

for  the  people  of  God ; "  for  he  is  born  of  the  bond- 
woman, and  his  spirit  is  ever  in  bondage.  On  the 
other  hand,  he  that  is  born  of  the  free  woman,  and 
understands  that  salvation  is  of  the  grace  of  God 
from  first  to  last,  and  that  where  God  has  given  his 
grace  he  does  not  take  it  back,  for  "  the  gifts  and 
calling  of  God  are  without  repentance" — such  a  man 
accepting  the  finished  work  of  Christ,  and  knowing 
his  acceptance  in  the  Beloved,  rests  in  the  Lord,  and 
rejoices  exceedingly.  His  life  and  his  spirit  are 
filled  with  joy  and  peace,  for  he  was  born  free,  and 
he  is  free,  yea,  free  indeed. 

Does  my  reader  understand  the  freedom  of  the 
child  of  God  ?  or  is  he  still  in  servitude  under  the 
law,  afraid  of  punishment,  afraid  of  being  sent  away 
into  the  wilderness?  If  you  are  in  this  latter  case, 
you  have  not  received  the  pronisc^  or  you  would 
know  that  such  a  thing  could  not  be.  To  Isaac, 
the  child  of  the  promise,  the  heritage  belongs,  and 
he  abides  for  ever,  without  fear  of  being  cast  out. 

Those  that  are  born  as  Ishmael  was,  according 
to  the  flesh,  and  whose  religion  is  a  matter  of  their 
own  power  and  strength,  mind  earthly  things,  as 
Ishmael  did.  Only  those  that  are  born  from  above 
through  the  promise  according  to  faith  will,  like 
Isaac,  mind  heavenly  things.  See  how  the  naturally 
religious  man  minds  earthly  things.  He  is  very 
regular  at  his  place  of  worship ;  but  while  he  is 
there  he  thinks  of  his  business,  his  house,  or  his 
farm.  Does  he  enjoy  the  worship  of  God  ?  Not 
he  !  There  is  a  sermon.  Does  he  receive  with  meek- 
ness the  engrafted  word  which  is  able  to  save  his 


16  According  to  Promise 

soul  ?  Not  he  !  He  criticizes  it  as  if  it  were  a 
political  harangue.  He  gives  his  money  to  the 
cause  of  God  as  others  do.  Of  course  he  does  ;  for 
he  feels  that  he  has  to  quiet  his  conscience,  and 
to  keep  up  his  good  repute :  but  does  he  care  for 
the  glory  of  God  ?  By  no  means.  If  he  did  he 
would  give  more  than  money.  His  heart's  prayers 
would  go  up  for  the  progress  of  the  kingdom.  Does 
he  sigh  and  cry  because  of  the  sins  of  the  times  ? 
Do  you  find  him  alone  with  God  pouring  out  his 
heart  in  anguish  because  even  in  his  own  family 
there  are  those  that  are  not  converted  to  God  ?  Did 
you  ever  see  in  him  a  high  and  holy  joy  when  sinners 
are  converted — an  exultation  because  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  is  coming }  Oh  no,  he  never  rises  to  that. 
All  the  service  of  God  is  outward  to  him  :  into  the 
core  and  heart  of  spiritual  things  he  has  never 
entered,  and  he  never  can.  The  carnal  mind,  even 
when  it  is  religious,  is  still  enmity  against  God,  and 
it  is  not  reconciled  to  God,  neither  indeed  can  it  be. 
There  must  be  a  spiritual  mind  created  in  the  man, 
he  must  become  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus, 
before  he  can  appreciate,  understand,  and  enjoy 
spiritual  things. 

To  come  back  to  where  we  started  :  "  Ye  must  be 
born  again."  We  must  be  born  of  the  Spirit :  we 
must  receive  a  supernatural  life  by  being  quickened 
from  our  death  in  sin.  We  cannot  bear  the  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  till  we  have  the  inner  life  of  the  Spirit. 
Ishmael  will  be  Ishmael;  and  Isaac  will  be  Isaac. 
As  the  man  is,  such  will  his  conduct  be.  The  man 
of  sight,  and  reason,  and  human  power,  may  do  his 


The  Two  Lives  17 

best  as  Ishmael  did  ;  but  only  the  child  of  the 
promise  will  rise  to  the  life  and  walk  of  faith  as 
Isaac  did. 

" Hard  lines"  says  one.  Sometimes  it  is  a  great 
blessing  to  have  those  hard  lines  drawn,  and  drawn 
very  straight,  too.  By  this  means  we  may  be  set 
on  the  right  track  for  eternity.  One  said  the  other 
day  to  a  friend  of  mine,  "  I  once  went  to  hear  Mr. 
Spurgeon,  and  when  I  went  into  the  Tabernacle 
if  you  had  asked  me  about  myself  I  should  have 
judged  that  I  was  as  religious  a  man  as  ever  lived 
in  Newington,  and  as  good  a  man,  certainly,  as 
ever  made  part  of  a  congregation  ;  but  all  this  was 
reversed  when  I  heard  the  gospel  that  day.  I  came 
out  of  the  place  with  every  feather  plucked  out  of 
me.  I  felt  myself  the  most  wretched  sinner  that 
could  be  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  I  said  I  will 
never  go  to  hear  that  man  again,  for  he  has  spoiled 
me  altogether."  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  but  that  was  the 
best  thing  that  could  have  happened  to  me.  I 
was  made  to  look  away  from  myself,  and  all  that 
I  could  do,  to  God  and  to  his  omnipotent  grace, 
and  to  understand  that  I  must  pass  under  my 
Creator's  hand  again,  or  I  could  never  see  his  face 
with  joy."  I  hope  my  reader  knows  this  trutli 
for  himself:  a  solemn  truth  it  is.  Even  as  first  of 
all  God  made  Adam,  so  must  he  make  us  over 
again,  or  else  we  can  never  bear  his  image,  nor 
behold  his  glory.  We  must  come  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  promise^  and  live  upon  the  promise, 
or  our  lives  will  never  be  guided  by  right  prin- 
ciples, nor  directed  to  right  ends. 


Differing  Hopes 


"And  as  for  Ishmael,  I  have  heard  thee  :  Behold,  I  have  blessed 
him,  and  will  make  him  fruitful,  and  will  multiply  him  exceedingly  ; 
twelve  princes  shall  he  beget,  and  I  will  make  him  a  great  nation. 
But  my  covenant  will  I  establish  with  Isaac,  which  Sarah  shall  bear 
unto  thee  at  this  set  time  in  the  next  year." — Genesis  xvii.  20,  21. 

IT  is  not  at  all  wonderful  that  two  persons, 
so  different  in  their  birth  and  nature  as 
Ishmael  and  Isaac  were,  became  very 
different  in  t/ieir  Jiopcs.  To  Isaac  the 
covenant  promise  became  the  pole-star  of  his  being; 
but  for  Ishmael  no  such  light  had  arisen.  Ishmael 
aimed  at  large  things,  for  he  was  the  natural  son  of 
one  of  the  greatest  of  men  ;  but  Isaac  looked  for 
still  higher  objects,  because  he  was  the  child  of  the 
promise,  and  the  inheritor  of  the  covenant  of  grace 
which  the  Lord  had  made  with  Abraham. 

Ishmael,  with  his  high  and  daring  spirit,  looked 
to  found  a  nation  which  should  never  be  subdued, 
a  race  untamable  as  the  wild  ass  of  the  desert ; 
and  his  desire  has  been  abundantly  granted : 
the  Bedaween  Arabs  are  to  this  day  true  copies  of 
their  great  ancestor.  Ishmael  in  life  and  death 
realized  the  narrow,  earthly  hopes  for  which  he 
looked  ;  but  on  the  roll  of  those  who  saw  the  day 
of  Christ,  and  died  in  hope  of  the  glory,  his  name  is 
not  entered.  Isaac,  on  the  other  hand,  saw  far 
ahead,  even  to  the  day  of  Christ.  He  looked  for  a 
city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  Builder  and 
Maker  is  God. 


Differing  Hopes  19 

Ishmael,  like  Passion,  in  "Pilgrim's  Progress,"  had 
his  best  things  here  below  ;  but  Isaac,  like  Patience, 
waited  for  his  best  things  for  the  future.  His 
treasures  were  not  in  the  tent  and  in  the  field,  but 
in  the  "things  not  seen  as  yet."  He  had  received 
the  great  covenant  promise,  and  there  he  found 
greater  riches  than  all  the  flocks  of  Nebaioth  could 
minister  to  him.  Upon  his  eye  the  day-star  of 
promise  had  shone,  and  he  expected  a  full  noon 
of  blessing  in  the  fulness  of  the  appointed  time. 
The  promise  so  operated  upon  him  as  to  direct  the 
current  of  his  thoughts  and  expectations.  Is  it  so 
with  you,  my  reader?  Have  yon  received  and 
embraced  the  promise  of  eternal  life?  Are  you, 
therefore,  hoping  for  things  not  seen  as  yet }  Have 
you  an  eye  to  that  which  none  can  behold  except 
believers  in  the  faithfulness  of  God  .■'  Have  you 
left  the  rut  of  present  sensual  perception  for  the  way 
of  faith  in  the  unseen  and  eternal  .-• 

No  doubt  the  reception  of  the  promise,  and  the 
enjoyment  of  its  hopes,  influenced  the  mind  and 
temper  of  Isaac,  so  that  he  was  of  a  restful  spirit. 
For  him  there  were  no  wars  and  fightings.  He 
yielded  the  present,  and  waited  for  the  future.  Isaac 
felt  that  as  he  was  born  after  the  promise  it  was  for 
God  to  bless  him,  and  to  fulfil  the  promise  that  he 
had  made  concerning  him  ;  and  so  he  remained 
with  Abraham  and  kept  himself  aloof  from  the  out- 
side world.  He  both  quietly  hoped  and  patiently 
waited  for  the  blessing  of  God.  His  eye  was  on 
the  future,  on  the  great  nation  yet  to  come,  the 
promised  land,  and  the  yet  more  glorious  promised 


20  According  to  Promise 

seed  in  whom  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  would  be 
blessed.  For  all  this  he  looked  to  God  alone,  wisely- 
judging  that  he  who  gave  the  promise  would  him- 
self see  to  its  fulfilment.  Because  of  this  faith  he 
was  none  the  less  active ;  yet  he  manifested  none 
of  the  proud  self-reliance  which  was  so  apparent  in 
Ishmael.  He  was  energetic  in  his  own  way,  with  a 
calm  confidence  in  God,  and  a  quiet  submission  to 
his  supreme  will.  Year  after  year  he  held  on  in  the 
separated  life,  and  braved  unarmed  the  danger 
which  arose  from  his  heathen  neighbours — dangers 
which  Ishmael  confronted  with  his  sword  and  with 
his  bow.  His  trust  was  in  that  voice  which  said, 
"  Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do  my  prophets  no 
harm."  He  was  a  man  of  peace,  and  yet  he  lived 
as  securely  as  his  warlike  brother.  His  faith  in  the 
promise  gave  him  hope  of  security,  yea,  gave  him 
security  itself,  though  the  Canaanite  was  still  in  the 
land. 

Thus  does  the  promise  operate  upon  our  present 
life  by  creating  in  us  an  elevation  of  spirit,  a  life 
above  visible  surroundings,  a  calm  and  heavenly 
frame  of  mind,  Isaac  finds  his  bow  and  his  spear 
in  his  God,  Jehovah  is  his  shield  and  his  exceeding 
great  reward.  Without  a  foot  of  land  to  call  his 
own,  dwelling  as  a  sojourner  and  a  stranger  in  the 
land  which  God  had  given  him  by  promise,  Isaac 
was  content  to  live  upon  the  promise  and  count 
himself  rich  in  joys  to  come.  His  remarkably 
quiet  and  equable  spirit,  while  leading  the  strange 
unearthly  life  of  one  of  the  great  pilgrim  fathers, 
sprang  out  of  his  simple  faith  in  the  promise  of  the 


Differing  Hopes  21 

unchanging  God.  Hope,  kindled  by  a  divine 
promise,  affects  the  entire  life  of  a  man  in  his  inmost 
thoughts,  ways,  and  feelings  :  it  may  seem  to  be  of 
less  importance  than  correct  moral  deportment,  but 
in  truth  it  is  of  vital  moment,  not  only  in  itself,  but 
in  that  which  it  produces  upon  the  mind,  heart,  and 
life.  The  secret  hope  of  a  man  is  a  truer  test  of  his 
condition  before  God  than  the  acts  of  any  one  day, 
or  even  the  public  devotions  of  a  year.  Isaac 
pursues  his  quiet  holy  way  till  he  grows  old  and 
blind,  and  gently  falls  asleep  trusting  in  his  God, 
who  had  revealed  himself  to  him,  and  had  called 
him  to  be  his  friend,  and  had  said,  "  Sojourn  in 
this  land,  and  I  will  be  with  thee  and  bless  thee, 
and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
be  blessed." 

As  a  man's  hopes  arc,  such  is  he.  If  his  hope  is 
in  the  promise  of  God,  it  is,  it  must  be,  well  with 
him. 

Reader,  what  are  your  hopes }  "  Why,"  says 
one,  "  I  am  waiting  till  a  relative  dies,  and  then  I 
shall  be  rich.  I  have  great  expectations."  Another 
hopes  in  his  steadily  growing  trade ;  and  a  third 
expects  much  from  a  promising  speculation.  Hopes 
which  can  be  realized  in  a  dying  world  are  mere 
mockeries.  Hopes  which  have  no  outlook  beyond 
the  grave  are  dim  windows  for  a  soul  to  look 
through.  Happy  he  who  believes  the  promise,  and 
feels  assured  of  its  fulfilment  to  himself  in  due  time, 
and  leaves  all  else  in  the  hands  of  infinite  wisdom 
and  love.  Such  hope  will  endure  trials,  conquer 
temptations,  and  enjoy  heaven  below. 


22  According  to  Promise 

When  Christ  died  on  the  cross  our  hopes  began, 
when  he  rose  they  were  confirmed,  when  he  went 
up  on  high  they  began  to  be  fulfilled,  when  he 
comes  a  second  time  they  will  be  realized.  In  this 
»vorld  we  shall  have  pilgrim's  fare,  and  a  table 
spread  in  the  presence  of  our  enemies  ;  and  in  the 
world  to  come  we  shall  possess  the  land  which 
floweth  with  milk  and  honey,  a  land  of  peace  and 
joy,  where  the  sun  shall  no  more  go  down,  neither 
shall  the  moon  withdraw  herself.  Till  then  we 
hope,  and  our  hope  layeth  hold  upon  the  promise. 


Persecution  Consequent  on  the 
Promise 

"  Now  we,  brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  are  the  children  of  promise. 
But  as  then  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted  him  that  was 
born  after  the  Spirit,  even  so  it  is  now." — Gal.  iv.  28,  29. 

WHEN  brothers  differ  so  fi^reatly  as  Ish- 
mael  and  Isaac,  it  is  not  surprising  if 
they  fall  out,  and  indulge  unkind  feel- 
ings. Ishmael  was  older  than  Isaac, 
and  when  the  time  came  for  Isaac  to  be  weaned, 
his  mother,  Sarah,  saw  the  son  of  the  bond- 
woman mocking  her  child :  so  early  had  the 
difference  of  birth  and  condition  begun  to  display 
itself  This  may  serve  us  as  an  indication  of  what 
we  may  expect  if  we  possess  the  God-given  life, 
and  are  heirs  according  to  the  promise.  Those 
who  are  under  the  bondage  of  the  law  cannot  love 
those  who  are  free-born  by  the  gospel,  and  in  some 
way  or  other  they  soon  display  their  enmity. 

We  are  not  now  thinking  of  the  hostility  between 
the  wicked  world  and  the  church,  but  of  that  which 
exists  between  men  of  a  merely  natural  religion, 
and  those  who  are  born  of  God.  VVe  speak  not  of 
the  Philistines  opposing  Isaac,  but  of  his  brother 
Ishmael  mocking  him.  Keenest  of  all  is  this 
opposition  of  the  externally  religious,  to  those  who 
are  born  from  above  and  worship  God  in  spirit  and 
in   truth.      Many  precious  children  of  God  have 


24  According  to  Promise 

suffered  bitterly  from  the  cruel  hatred  of  those  who 
professed  to  be  their  brethren. 

Probably  the  motive  of  Ishmael  was  envy ;  he 
could  not  endure  that  the  little  one  should  have 
preeminence  over  himself.  He  seemed  to  say, 
*'  This  is  the  heir,  and  therefore  I  hate  him."  Perhaps 
he  mocked  Isaac's  heir-ship,  and  boasted  that  he 
had  as  good  a  right  to  the  estate  as  ever  the  child 
of  the  promise  could  have.  Thus  do  mere  professors 
envy  the  condition  of  believers,  and  reckon  them- 
selves to  be  quite  as  good  as  the  best  of  those  who 
hope  to  be  saved  by  the  grace  of  God.  They  do 
not  desire  the  grace  of  God  themselves,  and  yet, 
like  the  dog  in  the  manger,  they  cannot  bear  that 
others  should  have  it :  they  envy  the  saints  their 
hope,  their  peace  of  mind,  and  their  enjoyment  of 
the  favour  of  God.  If  any  of  you  find  it  so,  be  not 
in  the  least  surprised. 

The  envy  of  Ishmael  displayed  itself  most  at  the 
great  feast  which  had  been  made  at  his  brother's 
weaning  ;  and  even  thus  do  formalists,  like  the 
elder  brother  in  the  parable,  become  most  provoked 
when  there  is  most  occasion  for  rejoicing  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Father's  beloved  child.  The  music 
and  dancing  of  the  true  family  are  gall  and  worm- 
wood to  proud  base-born  professors.  When  full 
assurance  is  weaned  from  doubt,  and  holy  delight 
is  weaned  from  the  world,  then  the  carnal  religion- 
ist puts  on  a  sneer,  and  calls  the  godly  mad,  or 
fanatical,  or  murmurs  with  sullen  sarcasm,  "  Poor 
fools  !  let  them  alone  ;  they  are  a  sadly  deluded 
crew."      People  who   are  religious  but   not  truly 


Persecution  Consequent  on  the  Promise  25 

regenerated,  who  are  working  and  hoping  to  be 
saved  by  their  own  merits,  usually  exhibit  a  bitter 
hatred  towards  those  who  are  born  of  the  promise. 

Sometimes  they  mock  their  feebleness.  May  be 
Ishmael  called  Isaac  a  mere  baby,  just  weaned.  So 
are  believers  a  feeble  folk,  and  exceedingly  likely 
to  excite  the  derision  of  those  who  think  themselves 
strong-minded.  Isaac  could  not  deny  that  he  was 
weak,  neither  can  believers  deny  that  they  are  faulty, 
and  are  subject  to  infirmities  which  may  put  them 
under  just  censure:  but  the  world  makes  more  of  this 
than  justice  will  allow,  and  mocks  at  saints  for  weak- 
nesses which  in  others  would  be  overlooked.  We 
must  not  think  it  a  strange  thing  if  our  insignificance 
and  imperfection  should  set  proud  and  self-righteous 
Pharisees  jeering  at  us  and  our  Gospel. 

Frequently  the  sport  is  raised  by  the  believer's 
pretensions.  Isaac  was  called  "the  heir,"  and 
Ishmael  could  not  bear  to  hear  it.  "  Look,"  says 
the  legalist,  "  yonder  man  was  not  long  ago  a  known 
sinner;  now  he  says  he  has  believed  in  Jesus  Christ, 
and  therefore  he  declares  that  he  knows  himself  to 
be  saved  and  accepted,  and  sure  of  heaven.  Did 
you  ever  hear  of  such  presumption?"  He  who  hugs 
his  chains  hates  the  presence  of  a  free  man.  He 
who  refuses  the  mercy  of  God  because  he  proudly 
trusts  his  own  merits,  is  angry  with  the  man  who 
rejoices  to  be  saved  by  grace. 

Perhaps  the  little  Isaac,  the  child  of  such  aged 
parents,  seemed  odd  and  strange  to  the  young  half- 
bred  Egyptian.  No  person  is  so  much  a  foreigner 
to  his  fellow-men  as  a  man  born  from  above.    To  live 


26  According  to  Promise 

by  faith  upon  the  promise  of  God  ought  to  seem  the 
most  proper  and  natural  thing  in  the  world  ;  but  it  is 
not  so  esteemed :  on  the  contrary,  men  count  those 
to  be  strange  beings  who  believe  in  God,  and  act 
upon  such  a  belief.  Wretched  boys  in  the  streets 
still  hoot  at  foreigners,  and  men  of  the  world  still 
jest  at  true  believers,  because  of  their  unworldly 
spirit  and  conduct.  To  us  this  is  a  testimony  for 
good,  for  our  Lord  said,  "  If  ye  were  of  the  world, 
the  world  would  love  his  own  ;  but  because  ye  are 
not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the 
world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you." 

In  a  thousand  ways,  many  of  them  so  petty  as  to 
be  unworthy  of  mention,  the  believer  can  be  made 
to  bear  "  trials  of  cruel  mockings,"  and  he  ought  to 
be  prepared  so  to  do.  After  all,  it  is  but  a  small 
matter  to  be  persecuted  nowadays  ;  for  the  fires  of 
Smithfield  are  quenched,  the  Lollards*  tower  con- 
tains no  prisoners,  and  not  even  a  thumb-screw 
remains  in  use.  Courage,  good  brother!  Even  should 
you  be  ridiculed,  no  bones  will  be  broken  ;  and  if 
you  are  brave  enough  to  despise  contempt,  even 
your  sleep  will  not  be  disturbed. 

Ishmael's  mocking  Isaac  is  only  one  among  ten 
thousand  proofs  of  the  enmity  which  exists  between 
the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent. 
The  mixture  of  these  two  in  Abraham's  household 
came  about  through  his  going  down  into  Egypt  and 
acting  in  an  unbelieving  manner  towards  Pharaoh. 
Then  the  Egyptian  bondwoman  was  given  to  Sarah, 
and  the  evil  element  came  into  the  camp.  Sarah, 
in  an  evil  hour,  gave  the  bondwoman  to  her  husband ; 


Persecution  Consequent  on    ihe  Promise  27 

hence  ten  thousand  tears.  No  association  of  the 
unregenerate  with  the  Church  of  God  will  avail  to 
alter  their  nature :  an  Ishmael  in  Abraham's  en- 
campment is  Ishmael  still.  To-day,  the  fiercest 
enemies  of  the  truth  of  God  are  the  aliens  in  our 
communion.  These  are  they  who  make  believers 
in  sound  evangelical  teaching  look  like  strangers 
in  the  Churches  which  were  founded  on  the  basis 
of  scriptural  doctrine.  They  make  us  foreigners  in 
our  own  land.  They  are  lenient  to  all  manner  of 
heresy ;  but  the  believer  in  the  doctrines  of  grace 
they  sneer  at  as  old-fashioned  and  bigoted — a  be- 
lated mortal  who  ought  studiously  to  seek  out  a 
grave  and  bury  himself.  Yet  will  the  man  who 
trusts  his  God  and  believes  in  his  covenant,  be  able 
to  survive  all  mockeries;  for  he  counts  the  reproach 
of  Christ  greater  riches  than  all  the  treasures  of 
Egypt.  It  is  by  no  means  shameful  to  trust  God  : 
on  the  contrary  it  is  a  point  of  honour  with  good 
men  to  trust  in  Him  who  is  faithful  and  true;  and 
if  they  have  to  suffer  for  it  they  do  so  joyfully. 
Gird  yourselves,  therefore,  with  a  holy  courage, 
you  who  are  learning  through  grace  to  live  upon 
the  promise  of  God  by  faith.  Was  not  the  great 
Head  of  the  family  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ? 
Must  not  the  rest  of  the  brotherhood  be  conformed 
to  the  First-born  ?  If  we  are  made  partakers  of 
Christ's  sufferings,  we  shall  be  partakers  of  his 
glory ;  wherefore,  let  us  take  part  and  lot  with  the 
Crucified  heir  of  all  thinsrs. 


The  Parting 

"  Nevertheless  what  saith  the  scripture  ?  Cast  out  the  bondwoman 
and  her  sen  :  for  the  son  of  the  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with 
tbe  son  of  the  freewoman." — Gal.  iv,  30, 

ISAAC  and  Ishmael  lived  together  for  a 
time.  The  self-religionist  and  the 
believer  in  the  promise  may  be  mem- 
bers of  the  same  church  for  years,  but 
they  are  not  agreed,  and  cannot  be  happy  together, 
for  their  principles  are  essentially  opposed.  As  the 
believer  grows  in  grace  and  enters  upon  his  spiritual 
manhood,  he  will  be  more  and  more  disagreeable  to 
the  legalist,  and  it  will  ultimately  be  seen  that  the 
two  have  no  fellowship  with  one  another.  They  must 
separate,  and  this  is  the  word  that  will  be  fulfilled  to 
the  Ishmaclitc  :  "  Cast  out  this  bondwoman  and 
her  son  :  for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  shall  not 
be  heir  with  my  son,  even  with  Isaac."  Grievous 
as  the  parting  may  be,  it  will  be  according  to  the 
divine  will,  and  according  to  the  necessities  of 
the  case.  Oil  and  water  will  not  mingle,  neither 
will  the  natural  man's  religion  agree  with  that 
which  is  born  of  ^Ae  promise,  and  sustained  by  the 
promise.  Their  parting  will  be  only  the  outward 
result  of  a  serious  difference  which  always  existed. 
Ishmael  was  sent  away,  but  he  soon  ceased  to 
regret  it ;  for  he  found  greater  freedom  with  the 
wild  tribes  of  the  country,  among  whom  he  soon 
became  a  great  man.     He  prospered  much,  and 


The  Parting  29 

became  the  father  of  princes.  He  was  in  his  proper 
sphere  in  the  wide  world  ;  there  he  had  honour  and 
gained  a  name  among  its  great  ones.  Often  it 
happens  that  the  carnally  religious  man  has  many 
excellent  habits  and  ways  about  him  ;  and  having 
a  desire  to  shine,  he  goes  into  society,  ar\d  is  ap- 
preciated and  becomes  notable.  The  world  is  sure 
to  love  its  own.  The  aspiring  religionist  usually 
forsakes  his  first  friends,  and  openly  declares,  "  I 
have  given  up  the  old-fashioned  style  of  religion. 
The  saints  were  all  very  well  while  I  was  poor,  but 
now  I  have  made  a  fortune  I  feel  that  I  must  mix 
with  a  more  fashionable  set  of  people."  He  does 
so,  and  has  his  reward.  Ishmael  had  his  portion  in 
this  life,  and  never  expressed  a  desire  to  share  in 
the  heavenly  covenant  and  its  mysterious  blessings. 
If  my  reader  would  feel  freer  and  more  at  home  in 
society  than  in  the  church  of  God,  let  him  know 
assuredly  that  he  belongs  to  the  world,  and  let  him 
not  deceive  himself  As  his  heart  is,  such  is  he. 
No  measure  of  force-work  can  turn  Ishmael  into 
Isaac,  or  a  worldling  into  an  heir  of  heaven. 

Outwardly,  and  in  this  present  life,  the  heir  of 
the  promise  did  not  appear  to  have  the  best  of  it. 
Nor,  indeed,  should  this  be  expected,  since  they 
who  choose  their  heritage  in  the  future  have,  in  fact, 
agreed  to  accept  trial  in  the  present. 

Isaac  experienced  certain  afiflictionswhich  Ishmael 
never  knew :  he  was  mocked,  and  he  was  at  last 
laid  on  the  altar ;  but  nothing  of  the  sort  happened 
to  Ishmael.  You,  who  like  Isaac  are  the  children 
of  the  promise,  must  not  envy  those  who  are  the 


30  According  to  Promise 

heirs  of  this  present  life,  though  their  lot  seems 
easier  than  your  own.  Your  temptation  is  to  do  so  ; 
even  as  the  Psalmist  did  when  he  was  grieved 
because  of  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  There  is 
in  this  fretting  a  measure  of  running  back  from  our 
spiritual  choice :  have  we  not  agreed  to  take  our 
part  in  the  future  rather  than  in  the  present  ?  Do 
we  rue  the  bargain  ?  Moreover,  how  absurd  it  is  to 
envy  those  who  are  themselves  so  much  to  be  pitied  ! 
To  lose  the  promise  is  practically  to  lose  everything ; 
and  the  self-righteous  have  lost  it.  These  worldly 
professors  have  no  spiritual  light  or  life,  and  they 
desire  none.  What  a  loss,  to  be  in  the  dark  and 
not  to  know  it !  They  have  enough  religion  to 
make  them  respectable  among  men,  and  comfortable 
in  their  own  consciences ;  but  this  is  a  sorry  gain 
if  they  are  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God.  They 
feel  no  inward  fightings  and  wrestlings  ;  they  find 
no  contention  of  the  old  man  against  the  new ; 
and  so  they  go  through  life  with  a  jaunty  air, 
knowing  nothing  till  their  end  come.  What  wretch- 
edness to  be  so  besotted !  Again,  I  say,  do  not 
envy  them.  Better  far  is  the  life  of  Isaac  with  its 
sacrifice,  than  that  of  Ishmael  with  its  sovereignty 
and  wild  freedom  ;  for  all  the  worldling's  greatness 
will  soon  be  ended  and  leave  nothing  behind  it 
but  that  which  will  make  the  eternal  world  to  be 
the  more  miserable. 

Yet  dream  not  that  believers  are  unhappy.  If 
in  this  life  only  we  had  hope  we  should  be  miserable 
indeed  ;  but  the  promise  lights  up  our  whole  career, 
and  makes  us  truly  blessed.    God's  smile  beheld  by 


The  Parting  31 

faith  gives  us  fulness  of  joy.  Put  the  believer's 
life  at  the  greatest  possible  disadvantage,  paint  it 
in  the  darkest  colours,  take  away  from  it  not  only 
comforts  but  necessaries,  and  even  then  the  Christian 
at  his  worst  is  better  than  the  worldling  at  his  best. 
Let  Ishmacl  have  the  whole  world  ;  ay,  give  him 
as  many  worlds  as  there  are  stars  in  the  midnight 
sk)'',  and  we  will  not  envy  him.  It  is  ours  still  to 
take  up  our  cross,  and  to  be  strangers  and  foreigners 
with  God  in  this  land,  as  all  our  fathers  were  ;  for 
the  promise,  though  it  seems  far  off  to  others,  we 
do,  by  faith,  realize,  and  embrace,  and  in  it  we  find 
a  heaven  below.  Abiding  with  God,  and  with  his 
people,  we  count  our  lot  far  better  than  that  of  the 
greatest  and  most  honoured  of  the  children  of  this 
world.  The  prospect  of  our  Lord's  second  coming, 
and  of  our  own  eternal  glory  in  fellowship  with  him, 
suffices  to  fill  us  with  content  while  we  wait  for  his 
appearing. 

This  difference  on  earth  will  lead  to  a  sad  division 
in  death.  The  child  of  the  bondwoman  must  be 
cast  out  in  eternity  as  well  as  in  time.  None  can 
enter  heaven  who  claim  it  by  their  own  doings,  or 
boast  that  they  have  won  it  by  their  own  strength. 
Glory  is  reserved  for  those  who  are  saved  by  grace, 
and  none  who  trust  in  self  can  enter  there.  What 
a  terrible  thing  it  will  be  when  those  who  laboured 
to  establish  their  own  righteousness,  and  would  not 
submit  to  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  shall  be  driven 
out !  How  will  they  then  envy  those  lowly  ones 
who  were  fain  to  accept  pardon  through  the  blood 
of  Jesus  !     How  will  they  discover  their  folly  and 


32  According  to  Promise 

wickedness  in  having  despised  the  gift  of  God  by 
preferring  their  own  righteousness  to  that  of  the 
Son  of  God ! 

As  the  persons  who  are  represented  by  Ishmael 
and  Isaac  are  ultimately  parted,  so  the  principles 
upon  which  they  rest  must  never  be  mingled,  for 
they  can  by  no  means  be  made  to  agree.  We 
cannot  be  saved  in  part  by  self,  and  in  part  by  the 
promise  of  God.  The  principle  and  notion  of 
earning  salvation  must  be  expelled  from  the  mind. 
Every  degree  and  form  of  it  must  be  "  cast  out." 
If  we  are  so  unwise  as  to  place  our  dependence 
partly  on  grace  and  partly  on  merit,  we  shall  be 
resting  one  foot  on  a  rock  and  the  other  on  the  sea, 
and  our  fall  will  be  certain.  There  can  be  no 
dividing  of  the  work  or  of  the  glory  of  salvation. 
It  must  be  all  of  grace  or  all  of  works,  all  of  God 
or  all  of  man ;  but  it  cannot  be  half  of  one  and  half 
of  the  other.  Cease  from  the  vain  attempt  to  unite 
two  principles  which  are  as  adverse  as  fire  and 
water.  The  promise,  and  the  promise  alone,  must 
be  the  foundation  of  our  hope,  and  all  legal  notions 
must  be  sternly  dismissed  as  irreconcilable  with 
salvation  by  grace.  We  must  not  begin  in  the 
spirit,  and  hope  to  be  made  perfect  in  the  flesh. 
Our  religion  must  be  all  of  a  piece.  To  sow  with 
mingled  seed,  or  to  wear  a  garment  of  linen  and 
woollen  mixed,  was  forbidden  to  the  Lord's  ancient 
people ;  and  to  us  it  is  unlawful  to  mingle  mercy 
and  merit,  grace  and  debt.  Whenever  the  notion 
of  salvation    by   merit,  or   feeling,  or  ceremonies 


The  Parting  33 

comes  in,  we  must  cast  it  out  without  delay,  though 
it  be  as  dear  to  us  as  Ishmael  was  to  Abraham. 
Faith  is  not  sight ;  the  spirit  is  not  the  flesh ; 
grace  is  not  merit ;  and  we  must  never  forget  the 
distinction,  lest  we  fall  into  grievous  error  and  miss 
the  heritage  which  belongs  only  to  the  heirs  accord- 
ing to  promise. 

Here  is  our  confession  of  faith  : — 

"  Knowing  that  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the 
works  of  the  law,  but  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ, 
even  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  might 
be  Justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  not  by  the 
works  of  the  law :  for  by  the  works  of  the  law  shall 
no  flesh  be  Justified. — Gal.  ii.  i6. 

Here  also  is  the  clear  line  of  distinction  as  to  the 
method  of  our  salvation,  and  we  desire  to  keep  it 
plain  and  manifest : — 

"  Even  so  then  at  this  present  time  also  there  is  a 
remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace.  Ajid  if 
by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more  of  works:  otherwise  grace 
is  no  more  grace.  But  if  it  be  of  works,  theti  is  it  no 
more  grace:  otherzvise  ivork  is  no  more  work." — 
Rom,  xi.  5,  6. 

Reader,  do  you  see  this  ? 


whose  Are  the  Promises? 

THE  Lord  is  ever  just  and  good  towards 
his  creatures  :  it  is  his  nature  so  to  be. 
But  there  was  no  necessity  either  in 
his  justice  or  in  his  goodness  that  he 
should  make  promises  of  grace  to  those  who  had 
rebelled  against  him.  Man  has  forfeited  every  form 
of  claim  upon  his  Maker,  which  he  may  have  thought 
he  had  ;  for  he  has  broken  the  pure  and  holy  law 
which  he  was  under  bond  to  have  obeyed.  Nothing 
is  now  due  to  man  but  the  reward  of  his  sins.  If 
God  should  now  deal  with  man  upon  the  ground  of 
strict  justice  he  must  condemn  and  punish  him. 
Anything  in  the  way  of  favour  to  a  guilty  creature 
must  proceed  only  from  the  undeserved  mercy  and 
sovereign  goodness  of  God  :  it  must  spring  spon- 
taneously from  the  goodwill  and  pleasure  of  the 
Most  High.  TJie  promises  oS.  grace  flow  from  the 
boundless  love  of  God,  and  from  that  alone.  They 
could  not  have  proceeded  from  any  other  source. 
No  single  one  of  the  race  of  man  has  any  natural 
right  to  promises  of  blessing,  nor  can  the  whole 
world  of  men  deserve  them.  God  has  made  promises 
to  men  of  his  own  free  will  and  good  pleasure,  from 
no  motive  but  that  love  which  lies  within  himself. 

He  has  chosen  to  make  his  promises  to  elect 
persons,  who  in  process  of  time  are  discovered  by 
their  exercising  faith  in  him.     Those  whom  God  has 


Whose  Ark  thf.  Promisf.s?  35 

chosen  are  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  choose  God 
and  his  way  of  salvation  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Those  of  the  elect  that  come  to  years  of  discretion 
are  led  to  faith  in  Jesus ;  and  all  who  have  faith 
in  him  may  conclude  beyond  doubt  that  they  are 
of  the  chosen  number  to  whom  the  promises  are 
given.  To  those  who  live  and  die  in  unbelief  there 
is  no  absolute  and  personal  promise  of  God  :  they 
are  not  under  grace  but  under  law,  and  to  them 
belong  the  threatenings  and  not  the  promises.  These 
prefer  another  method  of  dealing  to  that  of  gracious 
promise,  and  in  the  end  they  perish  as  the  result  of 
their  foolish  preference.  The  chosen  of  the  Lord 
are  led  to  relinquish  the  proud  way  of  self  and 
merit :  they  take  to  the  road  of  faith,  and  so 
find  rest  unto  their  souls.  To  believe  the  word  of 
God,  and  to  trust  in  him  whom  God  has  sent  to  be 
our  Saviour  may  seem  a  small  thing ;  but  indeed  it 
is  not  so :  it  is  the  sign  of  election,  the  token  of 
regeneration,  the  mark  of  coming  glory.  So  to 
believe  that  God  is  true  as  to  rest  one's  eternal 
interests  upon  his  promise,  bespeaks  a  heart 
reconciled  to  God,  a  spirit  in  which  the  germ  of 
perfect  holiness  is  present. 

When  we  believe  God  as  he  is  revealed  in  Christ 
Jesus,  we  believe  all  Iiis  promises.  Confidence  in 
the  Person  involves  confidence  in  all  that  he  speaks  : 
hence  we  accept  all  the  promises  of  God  as  being 
sure  and  certain.  We  do  not  trust  one  promise  and 
doubt  another,  but  we  rely  upon  each  one  as  true, 
and  we  believe  it  to  be  true  to  us  so  far  as  it  has 
respect  to  our  condition  and  circumstances.     We 


36  According  to  Promise 

argue  from  general  statements  to  particular  applica- 
tions. He  who  has  said  that  he  will  save  those 
who  believe  in  him  will  save  me  since  I  believe  in 
him  ;  and  every  blessing  which  he  has  engaged  to 
bestow  upon  believers  he  will  bestow  upon  me  as  a 
believer.  This  is  sound  reasoning,  and  by  it  we 
justify  the  faith  by  which  we  live  and  are  comforted. 
Not  because  /  deserve  anything,  but  because  God 
has  freely  promised  it  to  me  in  Christ  Jesus,  there- 
fore I  shall  receive  it :  this  is  the  reason  and  ground 
of  our  hope. 

One  wonders  at  first  sight  that  all  men  do  not 
believe  God.  It  would  seem  as  if  this  mark  of 
divine  election  would  be  universally  present;  for 
God  cannot  He,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suspect 
him  of  change,  or  failure  of  ability  to  keep  his  word. 
Yet,  so  false  is  the  heart  of  man,  that  man  doubts 
his  Maker.  He  hates  his  God,  and  therefore 
disbelieves  him.  It  is  the  surest  proof  of  man's 
natural  enmity  against  God  that  he  dares  to  impute 
falsehood  to  one  who  is  truth  itself.  "  He  that 
believeth  not  God  hath  made  him  a  liar;  because  he 
believeth  not  the  record  that  God  gave,  of  his  Son" 
(i  John  v.  id). 

Real,  practical  trust  in  the  living  God,  easy  as  it 
seems  to  be,  is  a  virtue  which  was  never  practised  by 
an  unrenewed  heart.  The  glorious  atonement  made 
by  the  incarnate  Son  of  God  is  worthy  of  the 
reliance  of  all  mankind.  One  would  have  imagined 
that  every  sinner  would  have  washed  at  once  in 
this  cleansing  fountain,  and  without  hesitation 
would  have  believed  in  the  divine  Redeemer :  but 


Whose  Are  the  Promises?  37 

it  is  very  far  from  being  so.  Men  will  not  come 
unto  Christ  that  they  may  have  life.  They  would 
rather  trust  in  anything  than  in  the  sacrifice  of 
Jesus.  Until  the  Holy  Ghost  works  a  miracle  upon 
a  man,  he  will  not  confide  in  the  great  sacrifice 
which  God  has  provided  and  accepted  for  the 
putting  away  of  guilt.  Hence  it  is  that  this  simple, 
common-place  matter  of  faith,  yet  becomes  the 
distinguishing  mark  of  the  chosen  of  the  Lord.  No 
other  token  is  so  infallible  :  "  He  that  believeth  on 
him  hath  everlasting  life."  Feelings  and  actions 
may  all  serve  as  evidences  ;  but  the  master  evidence 
of  an  interest  in  the  promise  of  God  is  faith  in  him. 
"Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  to 
him  for  righteousness " :  there  were  many  other 
good  points  in  the  patriarch's  character,  but  this 
was  the  decisive  one, — he  believed  God  ;  indeed, 
this  was  the  root  of  all  else  that  was  commendable 
in  him. 

Worldly-wise  men  despise  faith,  and  set  it  in 
contrast  with  virtuous  action  ;  but  this  contrast  is 
not  fair  :  one  might  as  well  contrast  a  fountain  with 
its  stream,  or  the  sun  with  its  own  heat.  If  true 
faith  be  the  mother  of  holiness,  let  the  mother  grace 
have  praise  because  of  its  offspring,  and  let  it  not 
be  contrasted  therewith.  Such  unfair  reasoning 
comes  of  wanton  malice  :  if  men  loved  good  works 
as  much  as  they  pretend  to  do,  they  would  love 
the  faith  which  produces  them. 

God  loves  faith  because  it  honours  him,  and  also 
because  it  leads  to  acts  of  obedience  to  him,  which 
obedience  includes  love  to  our  fellow-men.     There 


38  According  to  Promise 

is  more  in  faith  than  meets  the  eye.  It  is  in  one 
aspect  the  greatest  of  all  good  works,  even  as  our 
Lord  Jesus  teaches  us.  The  Jews  said  to  him 
(John  vi.  28,  29),  "  What  shall  we  do,  that  we  might 
work  the  works  of  God  ?  "  They  would  fain  per- 
form godlike  works,  works  above  all  others  approved 
of  the  Lord.  Jesus  answered  them,  "  This  is  the 
work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath 
sent."  As  much  as  to  say — the  most  divinely 
approved  work  possible  to  you,  is  to  believe  in  the 
Messiah.  To  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  climax 
of  virtue.  Proud  men  may  sneer,  but  thif,  statement 
is  true.  "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please 
God;"  but  "he  that  believeth  in  him  is  not  con- 
demned." The  promise  is  made  to  him  that 
believes  the  promise,  and  to  him  it  shall  be  fulfilled. 
He  who  embraces  the  promise  is  embraced  by  the 
promise.  He  who  accepts  Christ  is  accepted  in 
Christ     He  who  truly  believes  is  surely  saved. 

Reader,  do  you  believe  your  God? 


The  Promise  a  Free  Gift 

"Whereby  are  given    unto  us  exceeding   great    and    precious 
promises." — 2  Peter  i.  4. 

OBSERVE  that  word  "given."  Peter  says, 
"  Whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promises."  We  are 
beholden  for  everything  to  the  gift  of 
God,  We  Hve  upon  divine  charity.  All  that  we 
have  we  have  received  as  a  gift,  and  all  we  are  to 
have  must  come  in  the  same  way.  "  The  wages  of 
sin  is  death,  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life." 
We  are  unable  to  earn  anything,  but  God  is  able  to 
give  all  things.  Salvation  must  be  all  a  gift,  a  free 
gift,  an  undeserved  gift,  a  spontaneous  gift  of  divine 
love.  The projnise  of  salvation  is  of  the  same  nature. 
"  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  "  ;  and 
he  that  is  most  blest  of  all,  the  ever-blessed  God, 
delights  to  give.  It  is  as  much  his  nature  to  give 
as  it  is  the  nature  of  the  sun  to  shine,  or  of  a  river 
to  flow.  How  blessed  we  are  in  being  receivers ! 
This  is  emphasized  greatly,  when  we  reflect  how 
necessary  it  is  that  we  should  receive  ;  for  the  things 
that  we  need  are  such  that  if  we  do  not  obtain  them 
we  are  lost  now,  and  lost  for  ever.  We  are  without 
life,  without  light,  without  hope,  and  without  peace, 
if  we  are  without  God.  If  God  does  not  give  to  us 
according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace,  we  are  then 
worse  than  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable ;  we  are 


40  According  to  Promise 

utterly  and  altogether  undone.  It  is  not  possible 
that  we  should  deserve  such  rich  gifts.  Even  if  we 
could  deserve  anything,  these  must  come  to  us 
without  money  and  without  price.  A  promise  from 
God  must  be  a  boon  of  grace  :  we  cannot  claim  that 
God  should  promise  us  his  favour,  and  the  priceless 
boons  which  are  wrapped  up  in  it. 

This  teaches  us  what  posture  to  take  up.  Pride 
ill  becomes  dependants.  He  who  lives  upon  gifts 
should  be  humble  and  grateful.  We  are  beggars  at 
the  door  of  mercy.  At  the  beautiful  gate  of  the 
temple  we  sit  down  every  day  to  ask  an  alms,  not 
of  the  worshippers,  but  of  him  whom  angels  worship. 
As  often  as  our  Lord  passes  by,  we  ask  and  he  gives  ; 
nor  are  we  surprised  that  we  receive  from  his  love  ; 
for  he  has  promised  to  bestow  great  mercies.  He 
taught  us  to  say,  "Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread," 
and  therefore  we  are  neither  ashamed  nor  afraid 
to  ask  all  things  from  him.  Ours  is  a  life  of 
dependence,  and  we  delight  to  have  it  so.  It  is 
sweet  to  take  all  things  from  the  hands  of  our 
crucified  Lord.  Happy  is  the  poverty  which  leads 
us  to  be  rich  in  Christ.  We  earn  nothing,  and  yet 
receive  everything,  thrice  blest  in  being  hourly 
partakers  of  the  gift  of  God.  "  Whereby  d^rc  given 
unto  us  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises." 

Beloved,  this  teaching  as  to  the  promise  coming 
of  pure  gift  should  be  exceedingly  encouraging  to 
all  who  feel  their  lost  estate,  and  own  that  they  are 
spiritually  bankrupt.  To  such  it  is  a  word  of  jjood 
cheer,  that  everything  is  freely  given  to  us  of  God  : 
why  should  he  not  give  to  them  as  well  as  to  other 


The  Promise  a  Free  Gift  41 

needy  ones  ?  Those  of  us  who  rejoice  in  God  have 
received  all  things  as  a  free  gift ;  why  should  not 
others  receive  the  like?  They  say,  "  There  is  nothing 
freer  than  a  gift " :  why  should  not  my  reader 
recefVe  as  well  as  myself?  To  one  who  is  willing 
to  give,  poverty,  on  the  part  of  the  receiver,  is  a 
recommendation  instead  of  an  obstacle.  Come, 
then,  you  who  are  without  merit,  Christ  will  be 
your  merit.  Come,  you  that  have  no  righteousness, 
he  will  be  your  righteousness.  Come,  you  who  are 
as  full  of  sin  as  an  egg  is  full  of  meat,  and  the 
pardoning  Lord  will  put  away  your  sin.  Come, 
you  who  are  utterly  forlorn,  and  be  made  rich  in 
Jesus.  The  trade  of  a  mendicant  will  suit  you,  and 
you  will  prosper  in  it  ;  for  I  see  you  have  a  cruel 
hunger,  and  an  empty  wallet.  He  that  cannot  dig 
should  not  be  ashamed  to  beg.  A  beggar  needs 
no  stock-in-trade.  "  Old  shoes  and  clouted,"  rags 
worn  and  foul — these  form  a  fit  livery  for  a  beggar. 
Are  you  not  dressed  in  this  fashion  spiritually  ? 
The  poorer  the  wretch,  the  more  welcome  is  he  at 
the  door  of  divine  charity.  The  less  you  have  of 
your  own,  the  more  welcome  you  are  to  him  who 
giveth  freely  and  upbraideth  not. 

"  Come,  ye  needy,  come  and  welcome, 
God's  free  bounty  glorify  ; 
True  belief,  and  true  repentance, 
Every  grace  that  brings  us  nigh. 

Without  money, 
Come  to  Jesus  Christ  and  buy." 

Yes,  it  is  all  a  gift.     This  is  the  gospel  that  we 
are  sent  to  preach  to  you — "  God  so  loved  the  world 


42  According  to  Promise 

that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  ever- 
lasting life."  "  This  is  the  record,  that  God  hath 
given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his 
Son  "  (i  John  v.  ii).  On  God's  part  it  is  all  giving  ; 
on  our  part  it  is  all  receiving.  The  promise  is 
already  made,  and  freely  made  :  it  will  be  fulfilled, 
and  freely  fulfilled.  God  does  not  begin  with  giving, 
and  then  go  on  to  charging  a  price.  No  com- 
mission is  payable  upon  receipt  of  his  grace.  He 
does  not  ask  or  receive  a  farthing ;  his  love  is 
altogether  a  gift.  As  a  gift  you  may  accept  his 
promise :  he  will  not  degrade  himself  by  listening 
to  any  other  terms. 

The  word  given  in  the  text  is  a  plain  invitation 
to  the  poorest  of  the  poor.  Oh  that  they  would 
make  bold  to  avail  themselves  of  it !  The  great 
bell  is  ringing,  ringing  that  all  who  will  to 
come  to  the  great  table  of  infinite  liberality  may 
hear  it  and  draw  near.  Freely,  according  to  the 
riches  of  his  grace,  doth  God  promise  salvation 
and  eternal  life  to  all  who  believe  on  his  Son,  Jesus 
Christ.  His  promise  is  firm  and  sure,  why  is  it  that 
men  do  not  believe  it.-' 

Reader,  what  say  you  to  the  promise  so  freely 
given  to  all  believers?  Will  you  believe  it  and  live 
thereby  ? 


The  Fromise  of  God  a  Reality 


SURELY  it  is  a  wonderful  thing  that  the 
eternal  God  should  make  promises  to 
his  own  creatures.  Before  he  pledged 
his  word  he  was  free  to  do  as  it  pleased 
him ;  but  after  he  has  made  a  promise,  his  truth 
and  honour  bind  him  to  do  as  he  has  said.  To 
him,  indeed,  this  is  no  limiting  of  his  liberty;  for  the 
promise  is  always  the  declaration  of  his  sovereign 
will  and  good  pleasure,  and  it  is  ever  his  delight  to 
act  according  to  his  word  :  yet  is  it  marvellous  con- 
descension for  the  free  spirit  of  the  Lord  to  form 
for  itself  covenant  bonds.  Yet  he  hath  done  so. 
The  Lord  has  made  a  covenant  of  grace  with  men, 
in  which  he  has  confirmed  his  promises',  not  only 
by  pledging  his  word,  but  by  giving  his  oath ; 
"  that  by  two  immutable  things  in  which  it  was 
impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  strong 
consolation  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold 
upon  the  hope  set  before  us." 

In  that  covenant  there  are  promises  many 
and  precious,  all  confirmed  in  Christ  Jesus,  and 
established  for  ever  upon  the  foundation  of  divine 
truthfulness.  This  is  our  hope,  even  as  Paul  wrote 
to  Titus  :  "  In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that 
cannot    lie,   promised    before    the   world    began." 


44  According  to  Promise 

God  has  promised,  and  on  the  faithfulness  of 
that  promise  we  build  our  confidence  for  time  and 
for  eternity.  We  think  it  no  imprudent  thing  to 
rest  our  soul's  salvation  upon  the  promise  of  our 
faithful  Creator.  To  help  us  so  to  trust,  the  pro- 
mises were  not  only  spoken  but  written.  Men  say 
they  like  to  have  an  agreement  in  black  and  white, 
and  we  have  it  so  in  this  case.  "  In  the  volume 
of  the  book  it  is  written."  In  the  page  of  in- 
spiration the  record  stands  ;  and  as  we  believe  our 
Bibles,  we  are  bound  to  rely  upon  the  promises 
contained  therein. 

It  is  a  cause  of  much  weakness  to  many  that 
they  do  not  treat  tJie  promises  of  God  as  realities. 
If  a  friend  makes  them  a  promise,  they  regard  it 
as  a  substantial  thing,  and  look  for  that  which 
it  secures ;  but  the  declarations  of  God  are  often 
viewed  as  so  many  words  which  mean  very  little. 
This  is  most  dishonouring  to  the  Lord,  and  very 
injurious  to  ourselves.  Rest  assured  that  the  Lord 
never  trifles  with  words :  "  Hath  he  said,  and  will 
he  not  do  it  ?  "  His  engagements  are  always  kept. 
David  said  of  the  Lord's  promises  to  him,  "  Yet 
hast  thou  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant, 
ordered  in  all  things  and  sure."  God  speaks 
deliberately,  in  due  order  and  determination,  and 
we  may  depend  upon  it  that  his  words  are  sure,  and 
will  be  fulfilled  as  certainly  as  they  are  uttered. 
Have  any  who  have  trusted  in  the  Lord  been 
confounded  ?  Can  an  instance  be  found  in  which 
our  God  has  been  false  to  his  word  .-'  The  ages 
cannot  produce  a  single  proof  that  the  promise- 


The  Promise  of  God  a  Reality  45 

making  Jehovah  has  run  back  from  that  which  he 
has  spoken. 

We  admire  fidelity  in  men,  and  we  cannot 
imagine  it  to  be  absent  from  the  character  of  Godj 
and  therefore  we  may  safely  reckon  upon  his  being 
as  good  as  his  word.  It  is  said  of  Bliicher,  that 
when  he  was  marching  to  help  Wellington  at 
Waterloo,  his  troops  faltered.  "It  can't  be  done," 
said  they.  "  It  must  be  done,"  was  his  answer.  "  I 
have  promised  to  be  there — promised,  do  you  hear? 
You  would  not  have  me  break  my  word."  He 
was  at  Waterloo  to  good  purpose :  he  would  not 
be  hindered,  for  his  promise  was  given.  We  praise 
such  faithfulness;  we  should  think  little  of  one  who 
did  not  exhibit  it.  Shall  the  Lord  God  Almighty 
fail  in  his  promise?  No,  he  will  move  heaven  and 
earth,  and  shake  the  universe,  rather  than  be 
behind-hand  with  his  word.  He  seems  to  say — "It 
must  be  done.  I  have  promised — promised,  do 
you  hear?"  Sooner  than  his  promise  should  fail, 
he  spared  not  his  own  Son.  Better  Jesus  die  than 
the  word  of  the  Lord  be  broken.  I  say  again, — 
depend  upon  it,  the  Lord  means  what  he  says,  and 
will  make  good  every  syllable.  Yet  none  but  the 
chosen  seed  will  believe  him.     Reader,  will  you } 

God  must  be  true,  whoever  else  may  deceive. 
If  all  the  truth  in  the  whole  world  could  be 
gathered  together,  it  would  be  but  as  a  drop  in  the 
bucket  compared  with  the  truthfulness  of  God. 
The  veracity  of  the  most  just  of  men  is  vanity  itself 
compared  with  the  sure  truth  of  God.  The  faith- 
fulness of  the  most  upright  of  men  is  as  a  vapour, 


46  According  to  Promise 

but  the  faithfulness  of  God  is  as  a  rock.  If  we 
trust  in  good  men  \vc  ought  infinitely  more  to  trust 
in  the  good  God.  Why  does  it  seem  a  singular 
thing  to  rest  on  the  promise  of  God  ?  Somehow  it 
looks  to  many  to  be  a  dreamy,  sentimental,  mystical 
business  ;  and  yet  if  we  view  it  calmly  it  is  the 
most  matter  of  fact  transaction  that  can  be.  God 
is  real :  all  else  is  shadowy.  He  is  certain  :  all  else 
is  questionable.  He  must  keep  his  word,  this  is  an 
absolute  necessity  :  how  else  could  he  be  God  ?  To 
believe  God  should  be  an  act  of  the  mind  which 
needs  no  effort.  Even  if  difficulties  could  be 
suggested,  the  simple  and  pure  in  heart  should 
spontaneously  say,  "  Let  God  be  true  and  every 
man  a  liar,"  To  give  God  less  than  an  implicit 
faith  is  to  rob  him  of  an  honour  justly  due  to  his 
spotless  holiness. 

Our  duty  to  God  demands  that  we  accept  his 
promise,  and  act  upon  it.  Every  honest  man  has  a 
right  to  credence,  and  much  more  does  the  God  of 
truth  deserve  it.  We  ought  to  treat  the  promise  as 
in  itself  the  substance  of  the  thing  promised,  just 
as  we  look  upon  a  man's  cheque  or  note  of  hand  as 
an  actual  payment.  Promises  to  pay  are  passed 
from  hand  to  hand  in  daily  business,  as  if  they 
were  current  money  of  the  merchant ;  and  God's 
promises  should  be  regarded  in  the  same  light. 
Let  us  believe  that  we  have  the  petitions  which 
we  have  asked  of  him.  He  warrants  our  so  doing, 
and  promises  to  reward  such  faith. 

Let  us  regard  the  promise  as  a  thing  so  sure  and 
certain  that  v/e  act  upon  it,  and  make  it  to  be  a 


The  Promise  of  God  a  Reality  47 

chief  figure  in  all  our  calculations.  The  Lord 
promises  eternal  life  to  those  who  believe  in  Jesus ; 
therefore,  if  we  really  believe  in  Jesus,  let  us 
conclude  that  we  have  eternal  life,  and  rejoice  in 
the  great  privilege.  The  promise  of  God  is  our 
best  ground  of  assurance  ;  it  is  far  more  sure  than 
dreams  and  visions,  and  fancied  revelations ;  and 
it  is  far  more  to  be  trusted  than  feelings,  either  of 
joy  or  sorrow.  It  is  written,  "  He  that  believeth  in 
him  is  not  condemned."  I  believe  in  Jesus,  there- 
fore I  am  not  condemned.  This  is  good  reasoning, 
and  the  conclusion  is  certain.  If  God  has  said  so, 
it  is  so,  beyond  all  doubt.  Nothing  can  be  more 
certain  than  that  which  is  declared  by  God  him- 
self; nothing  more  sure  to  happen,  than  that  which 
he  has  guaranteed  by  his  own  hand  and  seal. 

When  a  soul  is  under  conviction,  it  perceives  the 
thrcatenings  of  the  Lord  with  an  intensity  of  belief 
which  is  very  noticeable,  since  its  awe-stricken  faith 
breeds  within  the  heart  overwhelming  terror  and 
dismay.  Why  should  not  tlie  promises  be  accepted 
with  a  similar  realization  ?  Why  not  accepted  with 
the  same  certainty .-'  If  it  be  made  true  in  the 
conscience  that  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be 
damned,  it  may  be  accepted  with  equal  assurance, 
that  he  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved,  since  the  latter  is  as  much  the  word  of  God 
as  the  former.  The  tendency  of  the  awakened 
mind,  is  to  dwell  upon  the  dark  side  of  God's 
word,  and  feel  the  full  force  of  it ;  and  at  the  same 
time  to  neglect  the  brighter  portion  of  the  record, 
and  cast  a  doubt  upon  it,  as  though  it  were  too 


48  According  to  Promise 

good  to  be  true.  This  is  folly.  Every  blessing  is 
too  good  for  us  to  receive  if  we  measure  it  by  our 
unworthiness ;  but  no  blessing  is  too  good  for 
God  to  give,  if  we  judge  of  it  by  his  surpassing 
excellence.  It  is  after  the  nature  of  a  God  of  love 
to  give  boundless  blessing.  If  Alexander  gave 
like  a  king,  shall  not  Jehovah  give  like  a  God  ? 

We  have  sometimes  heard  persons  say,  "As  sure 
as  death  " ;  we  suggest  that  we  might  as  fitly  say, 
"As  sure  as  life."  Gracious  things  are  as  sure  as 
"terrible  things  in  righteousness."  "Whosoever 
believeth  in  Jesus  shall  not  perish,  but  have  ever- 
lasting life."  It  must  be  so,  for  God's  word  hath 
said  it,  and  there  can  be  no  mistake  about  it. 

Yes,  the  Lord  means  what  he  says.  He  never 
mocks  men  with  barren  words  and  empty  soupds. 
Why  should  he  deceive  his  creatures,  and  ask  from 
them  a  barren  confidence  .-*  The  Lord  may  go 
beyond  his  word  in  giving  more  than  it  might  be 
thought  to  mean  ;  but  he  can  never  fall  short  of  it. 
We  may  interpret  his  promises  upon  the  most 
liberal  scale.  He  never  falls  below  the  largest 
rendering  which  expectation  can  give  to  the 
promise.  Faith  never  yet  outstripped  the  bounty 
of  the  Lord.  Let  us  embrace  the  promise,  and 
rejoice  that  it  is  substance  and  not  shadow.  Let 
us  even  now  rejoice  in  it  as  being  the  reality  of 
that  for  which  we  are  hoping. 


The  Peculiar  Treasure  of  Believers 

GOD'S  promises  are  the  peculiar  treasure 
of  believers :  the  substance  of  faith's 
heritage  lies  in  them.  All  the  promises 
of  our  covenant  God  are  ours  to  have 
and  to  hold  as  our  personal  possession.  By  faith 
we  receive  and  embrace  them,  and  they  constitute 
our  true  riches.  We  have  certain  most  precious 
things  in  actual  enjoyment  at  this  present ;  but 
the  capital  of  our  wealth,  the  bulk  of  our  estate 
lies  in  tAe  proynise  of  our  God.  That  which  we 
have  in  hand  is  only  the  earnest  penny  of  the 
immeasurable  wage  of  grace  which  is  to  be  paid 
to  us  in  due  time. 

The  Lord  graciously  gives  us  even  now  all 
things  necessary  for  this  life  and  godliness ;  but 
his  choicest  blessings  are  held  in  reserve  for  time 
to  come.  Grace  given  to  us  from  day  to  day  is 
our  spending  money  for  travelling  expenses  on  the 
road  home ;  but  it  is  not  our  estate.  Providential 
supplies  are  rations  on  the  march,  but  not  the 
ultimate  feast  of  love.  We  may  miss  these  way- 
side meals,  but  we  are  bound  for  The  Supper  of 
The  Lamb.  Thieves  may  rob  us  of  our  ready  cash ; 
but  our  peculiar  treasure  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God 
beyond  all  fear  of  loss.  The  hand  which  bled  to 
make  this  treasure  ours  is  keeping  it  for  us. 


50  According  to  Promise 

It  is  a  great  joy  to  have  a  full  assurance  of  our 
interest  in  the  promises  :  but  this  joyful  feeling  we 
may  lose,  and  we  may  find  it  hard  to  get  it  again, 
and  yet  the  eternal  inheritance  will  be  quite  as 
truly  ours.  It  is  as  though  a  man  should  have  in 
his  hand  a  fair  copy  of  his  title-deeds,  and  should 
much  delight  himself  in  reading  it  until  by  some 
mischance  his  copy  is  stolen  or  mislaid.  The  loss 
of  his  writings  is  not  the  loss  of  his  rights.  His 
comfortable  reading  of  the  title-deed  is  suspended, 
but  his  claim  to  his  property  is  not  shaken.  The 
covenant  promise  is  entailed  upon  every  joint-heir 
with  Christ,  and  there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  break- 
ing of  this  entail.  Many  an  event  may  tend  to  shake 
the  believer's  sense  of  security,  but  "  the  promise 
is  sure  to  all  the  seed."  Our  greatest  possession 
lies  not  in  any  present  comfort  or  confidence  which 
we  receive  from  the  promise,  but  in  tJie  promise 
itself,  and  in  the  glorious  heritage  which  it  secures 
to  us.  Our  inheritance  lies  not  on  this  side  Jordan. 
Our  city  of  habitation  is  not  within  the  borders  of 
the  present :  we  sec  it  from  afar,  but  we  wait  for  its 
full  enjoyment  in  that  illustrious  day  when  our 
covenant  Head  shall  be  revealed  in  his  glory,  and 
all  his  people  with  him.  God's  providence  is  our 
eaithly  pension  ;  but  QoCiS,  promise  is  our  heavenly 
heritage. 

Did  it  ever  occur  to  you  to  enquire  why  the  way  of 
God's  dealing  ivith  his  chosen  should  be  by  promises  ? 
He  could  have  bestowed  his  blessings  at  once,  and 
without  giving  us  notice  of  his  intention.  In  this 
way  he  would  have   obviated  the  necessity  of  a 


The  Peculiar  Treasure  of  Believers       51 

covenant  concerning  them.  There  was  no  necessity 
in  the  nature  of  things  for  this  plan  of  promising. 
The  Lord  might  have  given  us  all  the  mercies  we 
needed,  without  pledging  himself  to  do  so.  God, 
with  his  great  strength  of  will,  and  firmness  of 
purpose,  could  have  secretly  resolved  in  himself  to 
do  all  that  he  does  unto  believers  without  having 
made  them  the  confidants  of  his  divine  counsels. 
Many  a  decree  hath  he  kept  secret  from  the  founda- 
tions of  the  world  ;  why,  then,  hath  he  revealed 
his  purposes  of  blessing?  Why  is  it  that  his 
dealings  with  his  people  from  the  gate  of  Eden 
till  now  have  been  upon  the  footing  of  publicly 
expressed  promises  ? 

Does  not  the  question  answer  itself?  In  the 
first  place,  we  could  not  have  been  believers  if  there 
had  not  been  a  promise  in  which  to  believe.  If  the 
system  of  salvation  is  to  be  by  faith,  a  promise 
must  be  made  upon  which  faith  can  exercise 
itself.  The  plan  of  salvation  by  faith  is  selected 
because  it  is  most  suitable  to  the  principle  of 
grace ;  and  this  involves  the  giving  of  promises, 
that  faith  may  have  both  food  and  foundation. 
Faith  without  a  promise  would  be  a  foot  without 
ground  to  stand  upon  ;  and  such  a  faith,  if  faith  it 
could  be  called,  would  be  unworthy  of  the  plan  of 
grace.  Faith  being  chosen  as  the  great  evangelical 
command,  the  promise  becomes  an  essential  part  of 
the  gospel  dispensation. 

Moreover,  it  is  a  charming  thought  that  ottr 
good  God  designedly  gives  us  promises  of  good  things 
that  zve  may  efijoy  them  twice ;  first  by  faith,  and 


52  According  to  Promise 

then  by  fruition.  He  gives  twice  by  giving  by 
promise ;  and  we  also  receive  twice  in  embracing 
the  promise  by  faith.  The  time  for  the  fulfilment 
of  many  a  promise  is  not  by-and-by ;  but  by 
faith  we  realize  the  promise,  and  the  foreshadow- 
ing of  the  expected  blessing  fills  our  souls  with 
the  benefit  long  before  it  actually  comes.  We 
have  an  instance  of  this  upon  a  large  scale  in 
Old  Testament  saints.  The  great  promise  of  the 
seed  in  whom  the  nations  should  be  blessed  was 
the  ground  of  faith,  the  foundation  of  hope,  and 
the  cause  of  salvation  to  thousands  of  believers 
before  the  Son  of  God  actually  appeared  among 
men.  Did  not  our  Lord  say,  "  Abraham  saw  my 
day  :  he  saw  it,  and  was  glad  "  ?  The  great  father 
of  the  faithful  saw  the  day  of  Christ  through  the 
telescope  of  God's  promise,  by  the  eye  of  faith  ; 
and  though  Abraham  did  not  obtain  the  fulfilment 
of  that  promise,  but  fell  asleep  before  the  coming 
of  the  Lord,  as  did  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  many 
others  of  the  saints,  yet  he  had  Christ  to  trust 
in,  Christ  to  rejoice  in,  and  Christ  to  love  and  serve. 
Before  he  was  born  in  Bethlehem,  or  offered  upon 
Calvary,  Jesus  was  so  seen  of  the  faithful  as  to 
make  them  glad.  The  promise  gave  them  a  Saviour 
before  the  Saviour  actually  appeared.  So  is  it  with 
us  at  this  time  :  by  means  of  the  promise  we  enter 
into  possession  of  things  not  seen  as  yet.  By 
anticipation  we  make  the  coming  blessing  present 
to  us.  Faith  obliterates  time,  annihilates  distance, 
and  brings  future  things  at  once  into  its  posses- 
sion,   The  Lord  has  not  as  yet  given  us  to  join  th^ 


The  Peculiar  Treasure  of  Believers       53 

hallelujahs  of  heaven  :  we  have  not  yet  passed 
through  the  gates  of  pearl,  nor  have  we  trodden  the 
streets  of  transparent  gold  ;  but  the  promise  of 
such  felicity  lights  up  the  gloom  of  our  affliction, 
and  yields  us  immediate  foretastes  of  glory.  We 
triumph  by  faith  before  our  hands  actually  grasp 
the  palm.  We  reign  with  Christ  by  faith  before 
our  heads  are  encircled  with  our  unfading  coronets. 
Many  and  many  a  time  we  have  seen  the  dawn  of 
heaven  while  we  have  beheld  light  breaking  from 
the  promise.  When  faith  has  been  vigorous  we 
have  climbed  where  Moses  stood  and  gazed  upon 
the  land  which  floweth  with  milk  and  honey  ;  and 
then,  when  Atheist  has  declared  that  there  is 
no  Celestial  City,  we  have  answered,  "  Did  we  not 
see  it  from  the  Delectable  Mountains  ? "  We  have 
seen  enough  by  means  of  the  promise  to  make 
us  quite  sure  of  the  glory  which  the  Lord  hath 
prepared  for  them  that  love  him  ;  and  thus  we 
have  obtained  our  first  draught  of  the  promised 
bliss,  and  found  therein  a  sure  pledge  of  our 
full  and  final  enjoyment  of  it. 

Do  you  not  think  that  the  promise  also  is  in- 
tended to  lead  us  constantly  away  from  the  things 
that  are  seen,  onward  atid  upward  to  the  spiritual 
and  the  unseen  ?  The  man  who  lives  on  the 
promise  of  God  has  risen  into  quite  another  atmos- 
phere than  that  which  oppresses  us  in  these  low- 
lying  vales  of  daily  life.  "  It  is  better,!'  says  one, 
"  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put  confidence  in 
men.  It  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put 
confidence  in  princes."     And  so,  indeed,  it  is ;  for 


54  According  to  Promise 

it  is  more  spiritual,  more  noble,  more  inspiring. 
We  need  to  be  raised  to  this  elevated  trust  by  divine 
power ;  for  our  soul  naturally  cleaveth  unto  the 
dust.  Alas  !  we  are  hampered  by  our  idolatrous 
desire  to  see,  and  touch,  and  handle :  we  trust  our 
senses,  but  have  not  sense  enough  to  trust  our  God. 
The  same  spirit  which  led  Israel  to  cry  in  the 
wilderness,  "  Make  us  gods  to  go  before  us,"  leads 
us  to  sigh  for  something  tangible  by  flesh  and  blood, 
whereon  our  confidence  may  take  hold.  We  hun- 
ger for  proofs,  tokens,  and  evidences,  and  will  not 
accept  the  divine  promise  as  better  and  surer  than 
all  visible  signs.  Thus  we  pine  away  in  hungering 
for  tokens  and  evidences  which  are  visible,  till  we 
are  driven  to  try  the  better  and  surer  things  which 
are  invisible.  Oh,  it  is  a  blessed  thing  for  a  child 
of  God  to  be  made  to  quit  the  sand  of  things  tem- 
poral for  the  rock  of  things  eternal,  by  being  called 
upon  to  walk  by  the  rule  of  the  promise ! 

Furthermore,  the  promises  are  to  our  hearts  a 
help  to  the  realization  of  the  Lord  himself.  The 
child  of  God,  when  he  believes  the  promise,  is 
brought  to  feel  that  God  is,  and  that  he  is  the 
rewarder  of  them  tliat  diligently  seek  him.  Our 
tendency  is  to  get  away  from  a  real  God.  We 
live  and  move  in  the  region  of  materialism,  and  we 
are  apt  to  be  enthralled  by  its  influences.  We  feel 
these  bodies  to  be  real  when  we  have  pain  in 
them,  and  this  world  to  be  real  when  we  are 
weighted  with  its  crosses  :  yet  the  body  is  a  poor 
tent,  and  the  world  a  mere  bubble.  These  visible 
things   are   unsubstantial,  but   they  appear   sadly 


The  Peculiar  Treasure  of  Believers       55 

solid  to  us :  what  we  need  is  to  know  the  invisible 
to  be  quite  as  real  as  that  which  is  seen,  and  even 
more  so.  We  need  a  living  God  in  this  dying 
world,  and  we  must  have  him  truly  near  us,  or 
we  shall  fail.  The  Lord  is  training  his  people  to 
perceive  himself:  the  promise  is  part  of  this  educa- 
tional process. 

When  the  Lord  gives  us  faith,  and  we  rest  on  his 
promise,  then  are  we  brought  face  to  face  with  him. 
We  ask,  "  Who  gave  this  promise  }  Who  is  to 
fulfil  this  promise  ?  "  and  our  thoughts  are  thus  led 
into  the  presence  of  the  glorious  Jehovah.  We 
feel  how  necessary  he  is  to  the  whole  system  of  our 
spiritual  life ;  and  how  truly  he  enters  into  it,  so 
that  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being. 
If  the  promise  cheers  us,  it  is  only  because  there  is 
God  at  the  back  of  it ;  for  the  mere  words  of  the 
promise  are  nothing  to  us  except  as  they  come 
from  the  lips  of  God  who  cannot  lie,  and  except 
as  they  are  wrought  out  by  that  hand  which  cannot 
fail.  The  promise  is  the  forecast  of  the  divine 
purpose,  the  shadow  of  the  coming  blessing  ;  in 
fact,  it  is  the  token  of  God's  own  nearness  to  us. 
We  are  cast  upon  God  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  en- 
gagements, and  that  is  one  of  his  reasons  for  dealing 
with  us  after  the  method  of  promise.  Perhaps  if 
the  Lord  had  dropped  our  mercies  at  our  door 
without  a  previous  hint  of  their  coming,  we  should 
not  have  cared  to  know  whence  they  came.  If 
he  had  sent  them  with  unbroken  regularity,  even  as 
he  makes  his  sun  to  rise  every  morning,  we  might 
have  slighted  them  as  common  results  of  natural 


56  According  to  Promise 

laws,  and  so  have  forgotten  God  because  of  the 
punctuality  of  his  providence.  Certainly  we  should 
have  lacked  that  grand  test  of  the  being  and  loving- 
kindness  of  God  which  we  now  receive  as  we  read 
the  promise,  accept  it  by  faith,  plead  it  in  prayer, 
and  in  due  season  see  it  fulfilled. 

That  regularity  of  divine  bounty  which  ought 
to  sustain  and  increase  faith  is  often  the  means  of 
weakening  it.  He  whose  bread  comes  to  him  by  a 
government  annuity  or  a  quarterly  rent,  is  tempted 
to  forget  that  God  has  any  hand  in  it.  It  ought 
not  to  be  so ;  but  through  the  hardness  of  our 
hearts  such  an  ill  result  does  frequently  follow  from 
the  constancy  of  a  gracious  providence. 

I  should  not  wonder  if  those  Israelites  who  were 
born  in  the  wilderness,  and  had  gathered  manna 
every  morning  for  years,  had  also  ceased  to  wonder 
at  it,  or  to  see  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  it.  Shameful 
stupidity  !  but,  ah,  how  common  !  Many  a  person 
has  lived  from  hand  to  mouth,  and  seen  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  in  the  gift  of  every  morsel  of  bread  : 
at  last  by  God's  goodness  he  has  prospered  in  this 
world,  and  obtained  a  regular  income,  which  he  has 
received  without  care  and  trouble,  and  shortly  he 
has  come  to  look  at  it  as  the  natural  result  of  his 
own  industry,  and  has  no  longer  praised  the  loving- 
kindness  of  the  Lord.  To  be  living  without  the 
conscious  presence  of  the  Lord  is  a  horrible  state 
of  affairs.  Supplied,  but  not  by  God!  Sustained 
without  the  hand  of  God  !  It  were  better  to  be 
poor,  or  sick,  or  exiled,  and  thus  to  be  driven  to 
approach    our   heavenly    Father.      To    avoid    our 


The  Peculiar  Treasure  of  Believers       57 

coming  under  the  curse  of  forgetting  God,  the  Lord 
is  pleased  to  put  his  choicest  blessings  into  connec- 
tion with  his  own  promises,  and  to  call  forth  our 
faith  in  reference  to  them.  He  will  not  allow  his 
mercies  to  become  veils  to  hide  his  face  from  the 
eyes  of  our  love;  but  he  makes  them  windows 
through  which  he  looks  upon  us.  The  Promiser  is 
seen  in  the  promise,  and  we  watch  to  see  his  hand 
in  the  performance  ;  thus  are  we  saved  from  that 
natural  atheism  which  lurks  within  the  heart  of 
man. 

I  think  it  well  to  repeat  that  we  are  put  under 
the  regime  of  promise  in  order  that  we  may  grow  in 
faith.  How  could  there  be  faith  without  a  promise  ? 
How  growing  faith  without  grasping  more  and 
more  of  the  promise  ?  We  are  made  to  remember 
in  the  hour  of  need,  that  God  has  said,  "  Call  upon 
me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  I  will  deliver  thee." 
Faith  believes  this  word,  calls  upon  God,  and  finds 
herself  delivered :  thus  she  is  strengthened,  and 
made  to  glorify  the  Lord. 

Sometimes  faith  does  not  find  the  promise  ful- 
filled at  the  moment ;  but  she  has  to  wait  a  while. 
This  is  fine  exercise  for  her,  and  serves  to  test  her 
sincerity  and  force :  this  test  brings  assurance  to 
the  believer,  and  fills  him  with  comfort.  By-and- 
by  the  answer  is  given  to  prayer,  the  promised 
boon  is  bestowed,  faith  is  crowned  with  victory,  and 
glory  is  given  to  God  ;  but  meanwhile  the  delay 
has  produced  the  patience  of  hope,  and  made 
every  mercy  to  wear  a  double  value.  Promises 
afford  training-ground   for  faith :    these  are  poles 


58  According  to  Promise 

and  leaping-bars  for  the  athletic  exercise  of  our 
young  faith,  by  the  use  of  which  it  grows  to  be  so 
strong  that  it  can  break  through  a  troop,  or  leap 
over  a  wall.  When  our  confidence  in  God  is  firm 
we  laugh  at  impossibility,  and  cry,  "  It  shall  be 
done  " ;  but  this  could  not  be  if  there  were  not  an 
infallible  promise  wherewith  faith  could  gird  itself 

Those  promises  wJiich  as  yet  are  jn/fnljil/ed  are 
precious  helps  to  our  advance  in  the  spiritual  life. 
We  are  encouraged  by  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises  to  aspire  to  higher  things.  The  prospect 
of  good  things  to  come  strengthens  us  to  endure, 
and  to  press  forward.  You  and  I  are  like  little 
children  who  are  learning  to  walk,  and  are  induced 
to  take  step  after  step  by  an  apple  being  held  out 
to  them.  We  are  persuaded  to  try  the  trembling 
legs  of  our  faith  by  the  sight  of  a  promise.  Thus  we 
are  drawn  to  go  a  step  nearer  to  our  God.  The 
little  one  is  very  apt  to  cling  to  a  chair,  it  is  hard 
to  get  it  to  quit  all  hold,  and  venture  upon  its  feet ; 
but  at  last  it  becomes  daring  enough  for  a  tiny  trip, 
which  it  ends  at  its  mother's  knees.  This  little 
venture  leads  to  another  and  another,  till  it  runs 
alone.  The  apple  plays  a  great  part  in  the 
training  of  the  babe,  and  so  does  the  promise  in  the 
education  of  faith.  Promise  after  promise  have 
we  received,  till  now,  I  trust,  we  can  give  up 
crawling  on  the  earth,  and  clinging  to  the  things 
which  rest  upon  it,  and  can  commit  ourselves  to 
the  walk  of  faith. 

The  promise  is  a  needful  instrument  in  the  educa- 
tion of  our  souls  in  all  manner  of  spiritual  graces 


The  Peculiar  Treasure  of  Believers       59 

and  actions.  How  often  have  I  said,  "  My  Lord, 
I  have  received  much  from  thee,  blessed  be  thy 
name  for  it ;  but  there  is  yet  a  promise  more 
Avhich  I  have  not  enjoyed ;  therefore  I  will  go 
forward  till  I  attain  its  fulfilment !  The  future  is 
an  unknown  country,  but  I  enter  it  with  thy 
promise,  and  expect  to  find  in  it  the  same  goodness 
and  mercy  which  have  followed  me  hitherto ;  yea, 
I  look  for  greater  things  than  these." 

Nor  must  I  forget  to  remind  you,  that  the 
promise  is  part  of  the  economy  of  our  spiritual 
condition  here  below  because  it  excites  prayer. 
What  is  prayer  but  the  promise  pleaded  ?  A 
promise  is,  so  to  speak,  the  raw  material  of  prayer. 
Prayer  irrigates  the  fields  of  life  with  the  waters 
which  are  stored  up  in  the  reservoirs  of  promise. 
The  promise  is  the  power  of  prayer.  We  go  to 
God,  and  we  say  to  him,  "  Do  as  thou  hast  said. 

0  Lord,  here  is  thy  word  ;  we  beseech  thee  fulfil 
it."  Thus  the  promise  is  the  bow  by  which  we 
shoot  the  arrows  of  supplication.  I  like  in  my 
time  of  trouble  to  find  a  promise  which  exactly  fits 
my  need,  and  then  to  put  my  finger  on  it,  and 
say,  "  Lord,  this  is  thy  word  ;  I  beseech  thee  to 
prove   that  it  is  so,  by  carrying  it  out  in  my  case. 

1  believe  that  this  is  thine  own  writing ;  and  I 
pray  thee  make  it  good  to  my  faith."  I  believe  in 
plenary  inspiration,  and  I  humbly  look  to  the  Lord 
for  a  plenary  fulfilment  of  every  sentence  that  he 
has  put  on  record.  I  delight  to  hold  the  Lord  to 
the  very  words  that  he  has  used,  and  to  expect  him 
to  do  as  he  has  said,  because  he  has  said  it.     It  is 


60  According  to  Promise 

a  great  thing  to  be  driven  to  prayer  by  necessity ; 
but  it  is  a  better  thing  to  be  drawn  to  it  by  the 
expectation  which  the  promise  arouses.  Should 
we  pray  at  all  if  God  did  not  find  us  an  occasion 
for  praying,  and  then  encourage  us  with  gracious 
promises  of  an  answer?  As  it  is,  in  the  order  of 
providence  we  are  tried,  and  then  we  try  the 
promises ;  we  are  brought  to  spiritual  hunger,  and 
then  we  are  fed  on  the  word  which  proceedeth  out 
of  the  mouth  of  God.  By  the  system  which  the 
Lord  follows  with  his  chosen  we  are  kept  in 
constant  intercourse  with  him,  and  are  not  allowed 
to  forget  our  heavenly  Father  :  we  are  often  at  the 
throne  of  grace,  blessing  God  for  promises  fulfilled, 
and  pleading  promises  on  which  we  rely.  We 
pay  innumerable  visits  to  the  divine  dwelling- 
place,  because  there  is  a  promise  to  picad,  and  ^ 
God  waiting  to  be  gracious.  Is  not  this  an  order 
of  things  for  which  to  be  grateful  ?  Ought  we  not 
to  magnify  the  Lord  that  he  doth  not  pour  upon 
us  showers  of  unpromised  blessings,  but  he  en- 
hances the  value  of  his  benefits  by  making  them 
the  subjects  of  his  promises  and  the  objects  of 
our  faith  ? 


The  Valuation  of  the  Promises 

"Whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises." — 2  Peter  i.  4. 

WE  have  thought  upon  t/ie  promises  as 
our  treasure :  it  is  time  that  we  should 
take  a  survey  of  them,  and  calculate 
their  value.  Since  the  promises  are 
our  estate,  let  us  form  a  correct  estimate  of  our 
wealth :  possibly  we  may  not  fully  know  how  rich 
we  are.  It  will  be  a  pity  to  pine  in  poverty  from 
ignorance  of  our  large  property.  May  the  Holy 
Spirit  help  us  to  form  a  due  valuation  of  the 
riches  of  grace  and  glory  reserved  for  us  in  the 
covenant  of  promise ! 

The  apostle  Peter  speaks  of  the  promises  as 
^*  exceeding  great  and  precious."  They  do  indeed 
exceed  all  things  with  which  they  can  be  com- 
pared. None  ever  promised  as  God  has  done. 
Kings  have  promised  even  to  the  half  of  their  king- 
doms ;  but  what  of  that  ?  God  promised  to  give 
his  own  Son,  and  even  his  own  Self,  to  his  people ; 
and  he  did  it.  Princes  draw  a  line  somewhere,  but 
the  Lord  sets  no  bounds  to  the  gifts  which  he 
:)rdains  for  his  chosen. 

The  promises  of  God  not  only  exceed  all  pre- 
cedent, but  they  also  exceed  all  imitation.  Even 
with  God  himself  for  an  example,  none  have  been 


62  According  to  Promise 

able  to  vie  with  him  in  the  language  of  liberality. 
The  promises  of  Jehovah  are  as  much  above  all 
other  promises  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth. 

They  also  exceed  all  expectation.  He  does  for 
us  "exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or 
even  think."  Nobody  could  have  imagined  that  the 
Lord  would  have  made  such  promises  as  he  has 
made  :  they  surpass  the  dreams  of  romance.  Even 
the  most  sanguine  hopes  are  left  far  behind,  and 
the  loftiest  conceptions  are  outdone.  The  Bible 
must  be  true,  for  it  could  not  have  been  invented  : 
the  promises  contained  in  it  are  greater  for  quantity 
and  better  for  quality  than  the  most  expectant 
could  have  looked  for.  God  surprises  us  with  the 
surpassing  fulness  of  his  cheering  words :  he  over- 
whelms us  with  favours  till,  like  David,  we  sit  down 
in  wonder,  and  cry,  "  Whence  is  this  to  me  ?  " 

The  promises  exceed  all  measurement :  there  is 
an  abyss  of  depth  in  them  as  to  meaning,  a  heaven 
of  height  in  them  as  to  excellence,  and  an  ocean  ol 
breadth  in  them  as  to  duration.  We  might  say  of 
every  promise,  "  It  is  high  :  I  cannot  attain  to  it." 
As  a  whole,  the  promises  exhibit  the  fulness  and 
all-sufficiency  of  God  :  like  God  himself  they  fill 
all  things.  Unbounded  in  their  range,  they  are 
everywhere  about  us,  whether  we  wake  or  sleep, 
go  forth  or  return.  They  cover  the  whole  of  life 
from  the  cradle  to  the  tomb.  A  sort  of  omni- 
presence may  be  ascribed  to  them  ;  for  they  sur- 
round us  in  all  places,  and  at  all  times.  They  are 
our  pillow  when  we  fall  asleep,  and  when  we 
awake  they  are  still  with  us.     "  How  precious  also 


The  Valuation  of  the  Promises  63 

are  thy  thoughts  unto  me,  O  God !  How  great  is 
the  sum  of  them  ! "  "  Exceeding  "  all  conception 
and  calculation  ;  we  admire  them  and  adore  their 
Giver,  but  we  can  never  measure  them. 

The  promises  even  exceed  all  experience.  Those 
men  of  God  who  have  known  the  Lord  for  fifty 
or  sixty  years  have  never  yet  extracted  the  whole 
of  the  marrow  from  his  promise.  Still  it  might  be 
said,  "  the  arrow  is  beyond  thee."  Somewhat  better 
and  deeper  yet  remains  to  be  searched  out  in  the 
future.  He  who  dives  deepest  by  experience  into 
the  depths  of  the  divine  promises  is  fully  aware  that 
there  is  yet  a  lower  depth  of  grace  and  love  un- 
fathomable. The  promise  is  longer  than  life, 
broader  than  sin,  deeper  than  the  grave,  and  higher 
than  the  clouds.  He  that  is  most  acquainted  with 
the  golden  book  of  promise  is  still  a  new  beginner 
in  its  study :  even  the  ancients  of  Israel  find  that 
this  volume  passeth  knowledge. 

Certainly  I  need  not  say  that  the  promises 
exceed  all  expression.  If  all  the  tongues  of  men 
and  of  angels  were  given  me,  I  could  not  tell  you 
how  great  are  the  promises  of  God.  They  exceed 
not  only  one  language,  but  all  languages :  they 
surpass  the  glowing  praises  of  all  the  enthusiasts 
that  have  ever  spoken.  Even  angels  before  the 
throne  still  desire  to  look  into  these  marvels,  for 
they  cannot  yet  reach  the  mystery — the  length,  and 
breadth,  and  height.  In  Christ  Jesus  everything 
exceeds  description  ;  and  the  promises  in  him  ex- 
haust the  force  of  all  speech,  human  or  divine. 
Vain  is  it  for  me  to  attempt  the  impossible. 


64  According  to  Promise 

Exceeding  "great "  Peter  says  they  are ;  and  he 
knew  right  well.  They  come  from  a  great  God, 
they  assure  us  of  great  love,  they  come  to  great 
sinners,  they  work  for  us  great  results,  and  deal 
with  great  matters.  They  are  as  great  as  greatness 
itself;  they  bring  us  the  great  God,  to  be  our  God 
for  ever  and  ever.  God's  first  promise  was  that 
in  which  he  engaged  to  give  us  his  Son.  We  are 
wont  to  say,  "Thanks  be  unto  God  for  his  un- 
speakable gift,"  but  let  not  the  words  glide  too 
easily  over  the  tongue.  For  God  to  give  his  Only- 
begotten  Son  is  beyond  all  conception  a  great  deed 
of  love :  indeed,  "  great "  seems  too  little  a  word 
to  describe  such  a  miracle  of  love.  When  the 
Lord  had  given  his  Son,  freely  delivering  him  up 
for  us  all — what  then  }  He  promised  to  give  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  Comforter,  to  abide  with  us  for 
ever.  Can  we  measure  the  value  of  that  great 
promise  ?  The  Holy  Ghost  came  down  at  Pentecost, 
in  fulfilment  of  that  ancient  prophecy :  was  not  that 
marvellous  descent  an  exceeding  great  and  precious 
gift  ?  Remember  that  the  Holy  Spirit  works  in 
us  all  those  graces  which  prepare  us  for  the  society 
of  heaven.  Glory  be  to  God  for  this  visitation  of 
boundless  grace ! 

What  next  ?  Our  Lord  has  given  us  now  the 
promise  that  he  will  "come  again  a  second  time 
without  a  sin  offering  unto  salvation."  Can  all  the 
saints  put  together  fully  measure  the  greatness  of 
the  promise  of  the  Second  Advent  ?  This  means 
infinite  felicity  for  saints.  What  else  has  he 
promised?    Why,  that  because  he  lives  we  shall 


The  Valuation  ok  thk  Promisks  65 

live  also.  We  shall  possess  an  immortality  of  bliss 
for  our  souls ;  we  shall  enjoy  also  a  resurrection 
for  our  bodies ;  we  shall  reign  with  Christ ;  we 
shall  be  glorified  at  his  right  hand.  Promises 
fulfilled  and  promises  unfulfilled,  promises  for  time 
and  promises  for  eternity — they  are  indeed  so 
great  that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  of  their 
being  greater. 

"  What  more  can  he  say  than  to  you  he  hath  said  ? 
You  who  unto  Jesus  for  refuge  have  fled." 

O  ye  whose  minds  are  trained  to  lofty  thought, 
tell  me  your  estimate  of  the  faithful  promises !  I 
perceive  a  promise  of  the  pardon  of  sin.  O  ye  for- 
given ones,  declare  the  greatness  of  this  boon ! 
There  is  the  promise  of  adoption.  Children  of 
God,  you  begin  to  know  what  manner  of  love  the 
Father  hath  bestowed  on  you  in  this  ;  tell  out 
your  joy  I  There  is  the  promise  of  help  in  every 
time  of  need.  Tried  ones,  you  know  how  the  Lord 
sustains  and  delivers  his  chosen ;  proclaim  the 
largeness  of  his  grace  !  There  is  the  promise  that 
as  your  day  your  strength  shall  be.  You  that  are 
working  hard  for  Christ,  or  bearing  his  cross  from 
day  to  day,  you  feel  how  exceeding  great  is  that 
promise  of  sure  support.  What  a  word  is  this  : 
"  No  good  thing  will  he  withhold  from  them  that 
walk  uprightly  "  I  What  a  sentence  is  this  :  "  All 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God,  to  them  who  are  the  called  according  to  his 
purpose " !  Who  can  estimate  the  breadth  of 
such  a  gracious  assurance?     No, you  need  not  take 


66  According  to  Promise 

that  foot-rule  from  your  pocket :  it  will  not  serve 
you  here.  If  you  could  take  the  distance  of  a 
fixed  star  as  your  base,  all  reckoning  would  still  be 
impossible.  All  the  chains  that  ever  measured  the 
acres  of  the  wealthy  are  useless  here.  A  certain 
millionaire  glories  that  his  estate  reaches  from  sea 
to  sea  ;  but  no  ocean  can  bound  the  possessions 
secured  to  us  by  the  promise  of  our  faithful  God 
The  theme  is  so  exceeding  great  that  it  exceeds 
my  power  of  expression,  and  therefore  I  forbear. 

The  verse,  upon  which  we  are  now  thinking, 
speaks  of  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises!* 
Greatness  and  preciousness  seldom  go  together ; 
but  in  this  instance  they  are  united  in  an  exceeding 
degree.  When  the  Lord  opens  his  mouth  to  make 
a  promise,  it  is  sure  to  be  worthy  of  him  :  he  speaks 
words  of  exceeding  power  and  richness.  Instead 
of  trying  to  speak  of  the  preciousness  of  the 
promises  doctrinally,  I  will  fall  back  upon  the 
experience  of  those  who  have  tried  and  proved 
them. 

Beloved,  how  precious  the  promises,  are  to  the 
poor  and  needy !  They  that  know  their  spiritual 
poverty  discern  the  value  of  the  promise  which 
meets  their  case.  How  precious,  also,  are  the 
promises,  to  those  who  have  enjoyed  the  fulfilment 
of  them  !  We  can  go  back  in  memory  to  times 
and  seasons  when  we  were  brought  low,  and  the 
Lord  helped  us  according  to  his  word.  Even  before 
he  brought  us  up  out  of  the  horrible  pit,  we  were 
kept  from  sinking  in  the  deep  mire  by  looking 
forward  to  the  time  when  he  would  appear  for  our 


The  Valuation  of  thf.  Promises  67 

rescue.  His  promise  kept  us  from  dying  of  hunger 
long  before  we  reached  the  feast  of  love.  In  the 
expectation  of  future  trial  our  confidence  is  in  the 
promise.  Thus  it  is  very  precious  to  us  even  before 
it  is  actually  fulfilled.  The  more  we  believe  the 
promise,  the  more  we  find  in  it  to  believe.  So 
precious  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  us,  that  we 
could  part  with  everything  we  have  rather  than 
throw  away  a  single  sentence  of  it.  We  cannot  tell 
which  promise  of  the  Lord  we  may  next  need  :  that 
which  we  have  hardly  noticed  may  yet  turn  out  at 
a  certain  moment  to  be  essential  to  our  life.  Thank 
God,  we  are  not  called  to  part  with  any  one  of  the 
jewels  from  the  breastplate  of  Holy  Scripture : 
they  are  all  yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus  to  the 
glory  of  God  by  us  ! 

How  precious  are  the  promises  when  we  lie  sick, 
gazing  into  eternity  by  the  month  together,  sorely 
tried  and  tempted  through  pain  and  weariness ! 
All  depressing  circumstances  lose  their  power  for 
evil  when  our  faith  takes  firm  hold  upon  the 
promises  of  God.  How  sweet  to  feel  I  have  my 
head  on  the  promise,  and  my  heart  on  the  promise  : 
I  rest  on  the  truth  of  the  Most  High !  Not 
on  earthly  vanity,  but  on  heavenly  verity,  do  I 
repose.  There  is  nothing  to  be  found  elsewhere 
comparable  to  this  perfect  rest.  The  pearl  of  peace 
is  found  among  the  precious  promises.  That  is 
precious  indeed  which  can  support  dying  men,  and 
cause  them  to  pass  into  eternity  with  as  much 
delight  as  if  they  were  going  to  a  marriage-feast. 
That  which  lasts  for  ever,  and  lasts  good  for  ever, 


68  According  to  Promise 

is  most  precious.  That  which  brings  all  things 
with  it,  and  hath  all  things  in  it, — that  is  precious 
indeed  ;  and  such  is  the  promise  of  God. 

If  such  be  the  greatness  and  preciousness  of  the 
promises,  let  us  joyfully  accept  and  believe  them. 
Shall  I  urge  the  child  of  God  to  do  this  ?  No,  I 
will  not  so  dishonour  him  ;  surely  he  will  believe 
his  own  Father !  Surely,  surely,  it  ought  to  be  the 
easiest  thing  in  the  world  for  the  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  Most  High  to  believe  in  him  who  has  given 
them  power  to  become  the  children  of  God  !  My 
brethren,  let  us  not  stagger  at  the  promise  through 
unbelief,  but  believe  up  to  the  hilt  I 

Furthermore,  let  us  know  the  promises.  Should 
we  not  carry  them  at  our  fingers'  ends?  Should 
we  not  know  them  better  than  anything  else  ?  The 
promises  should  be  the  classics  of  believers.  If 
you  have  not  read  the  last  new  book,  and  have  not 
heard  the  last  Act  of  the  Government,  yet  know 
right  well  what  God  the  Lord  hath  said,  and  look 
to  see  his  word  made  good.  We  ought  to  be  so 
versed  in  Scripture  as  always  to  have  at  the  tip  of 
our  tongue  the  promise  which  most  exactly  meets 
our  case.  We  ought  to  be  transcripts  of  Scripture: 
the  divine  promise  should  be  as  much  written  upon 
our  hearts  as  upon  the  pages  of  the  Book.  It  is  a 
sad  pity  that  any  child  of  God  should  be  unaware 
of  the  existence  of  the  royal  promise  which  would 
enrich  him.  It  is  pitiful  for  any  one  of  us  to  be 
like  the  poor  man,  who  had  a  fortune  left  him,  of 
which  he  knew  nothing,  and  therefore  he  went  on 
sweeping  a  crossing,  and  begging  for  pence.    What 


The  Valuation  of  thf.  Promisfs  69 

is  the  use  of  having  an  anchor  at  home  when  your 
ship  is  in  a  storm  at  sea  ?  What  avails  a  promise 
which  you  cannot  remember  so  as  to  plead  it  in 
prayer  ?  Whatever  else  you  do  not  know,  do  en- 
deavour to  be  familiar  with  those  words  of  the  Lord 
which  are  more  needful  to  our  souls  than  bread  to 
our  bodies. 

Let  us  also  make  use  of  tJie  promises.  A  little 
while  ago,  a  friend  gave  me  a  cheque  for  certain 
charities,  and  he  said  to  me,  "  Be  sure  that  you  pay 
it  into  the  bank  to-day."  You  may  rest  assured 
that  this  was  done.  I  do  not  keep  cheques  to  look 
at,  and  play  with  :  they  go  to  the  banker's,  and 
the  cash  is  received  and  expended. 

The  precious  promises  of  our  great  God  are  ex- 
pressly intended  to  be  taken  to  him,  and  exchanged 
for  the  blessings  which  they  guarantee.  Prayer 
takes  the  promise  to  the  Bank  of  Faith,  and  obtains 
the  golden  blessing.  Mind  how  you  pray.  Make 
real  business  of  it.  Let  it  never  be  a  dead  formality. 
Some  people  pray  a  long  time,  but  do  not  get 
what  they  are  supposed  to  ask  for,  because  they 
do  not  plead  the  promise  in  a  truthful,  business- 
like way.  If  you  were  to  go  into  a  bank,  and 
stand  an  hour  talking  to  the  clerk,  and  then  come 
out  again  without  your  cash,  what  would  be  the 
good  of  it?  If  I  go  to  a  bank,  I  pass  my  cheque 
across  the  counter,  take  up  my  money,  and  go  about 
my  business :  that  is  the  best  way  of  praying. 
Ask  for  what  you  want,  because  the  Lord  has 
promised  it.  Believe  that  you  have  the  blessing, 
and  go  forth  to  your  work   in    full  assurance  of 


70  According  to  Promise 

it.  Go  from  your  knees  singing,  because  the 
promise  is  fulfilled :  thus  will  your  prayer  be 
answered.  It  is  not  the  length  of  your  prayer,  but 
the  strength  of  your  prayer  which  wins  with  God  ; 
and  the  strength  of  prayer  lies  in  your  faith  in  the 
promise  which  you  have  pleaded  before  the  Lord. 

Lastly,  talk  about  the  promises.  Tell  the  King's 
household  what  the  King  has  said.  Never  keep 
God's  lamps  under  bushels.  Promises  are  pro- 
clamations ;  exhibit  them  on  the  wall ;  read  them 
aloud  at  the  market-cross.  Oh,  that  our  con- 
versation were  more  often  sweetened  with  the 
precious  promises  of  God  !  After  dinner  we  often 
sit  for  half-an-hour,  and  pull  our  ministers  to 
pieces,  or  scandalize  our  neighbours.  How  often 
is  this  the  Sunday's  amusement !  It  would  be  far 
better  if  we  said,  "  Now,  friend,  quote  a  promise," 
and  if  the  other  replied,  "And  you  mention  a 
promise  too."  Then  let  each  one  speak  according 
to  his  own  personal  knowledge  concerning  the 
Lord's  fulfilment  of  those  promises,  and  let  every 
one  present  tell  the  story  of  the  Lord's  faithfulness 
to  him.  By  such  holy  converse  we  should  warm 
our  own  hearts,  and  gladden  one  another's  spirits, 
and  the  Sabbath  would  thus  be  rightly  spent. 

Business  men  speak  of  their  trade,  travellers  of 
their  adventures,  and  farmers  of  their  crops;  should 
not  we  abundantly  utter  the  memory  of  the  Lord's 
goodness,  and  talk  of  his  faithfulness?  If  we  did 
so,  we  should  all  endorse  Peter's  statement,  that 
our  God  has  given  unto  us  "exceeding  great  and 
precious  promises" 


The  Lord's  Promise  —  the  Rule  of 
His  Giving 

"And  the  LoRD  gave  Solomon  wisdom,  as  he  promised  him." — 

I  Kings  V.  12. 

HOW  the  Lord  wrought  wisdom  In  Solo- 
mon I  do  not  know  ;  but  he  promised 
that  he  would  give  him  wisdom,  and 
he  kept  his  word.  The  more  you 
think  of  this  the  more  remarkable  will  the  fact 
appear.  Solomon  was  not  born  under  the  most 
hopeful  circumstances  for  wisdom.  As  the  darling 
child  of  a  somewhat  aged  father,  he  was  highly 
likely  to  be  spoiled.  As  a  young  man  who  came 
to  a  throne  before  he  was  at  all  fitted  for  it  in 
the  course  of  nature,  he  was  very  likely  to  have 
made  great  blunders  and  mistakes.  As  a  man  of 
strong  animal  passions,  which  in  the  end  over- 
powered him,  he  seemed  more  likely  to  prove  a 
profligate  than  a  philosopher.  As  a  person  possess- 
ing great  wealth,  unlimited  power,  and  unvarying 
prosperity,  he  had  little  of  that  trying  experience  by 
which  men  acquire  wisdom.  Who  were  his  teachers? 
Who  taught  him  to  be  wise  ?  His  penitent  mother 
may  have  set  before  him  much  of  sound  morality 
and  religion,  but  she  could  never  have  imparted  to 
him  the  eminent  degree  of  wisdom  which  raised 
him  above  all  other  men  and  set  him  upon  the 
pinnacle  of  renown.     He  knew  more  than  others, 


72  According  to  Promise 

and  therefore  could  not  have  borrowed  his  wisdom 
from  them.  Sages  sat  at  his  feet,  and  his  fame 
brought  pilgrims  from  the  ends  of  the  earth:  none 
could  have  been  his  tutors,  since  he  surpassed 
them  all.  How  did  this  man  rise  to  absolute  pre- 
eminence in  wisdom,  so  as  to  make  his  name 
throughout  all  time  the  synonym  for  a  wise  man  ? 

It  is  a  very  mysterious  process  this  creation  of 
a  master  mind.  Who  shall  give  a  young  man 
wisdom  ?  You  can  impart  knowledge  to  him,  but 
not  wisdom.  No  tutor,  no  master,  no  divine,  can 
give  another  man  wisdom  :  he  has  much  ado  to  get 
a  little  of  it  for  himself.  Yet  God  gave  Solomon 
largeness  of  heart  as  the  sands  of  the  sea,  and 
wisdom  unrivalled  ;  for  God  can  do  all  things.  By 
operations  known  only  to  himself,  the  Lord  pro- 
duced in  the  young  king  a  capacity  for  observa- 
tion, reasoning,  and  prudent  action,  seldom  if  ever 
equalled.  We  have  often  admired  the  wisdom  of 
Solomon  ;  I  invite  you  still  more  to  admire  the 
wisdom  of  Jehovah,  by  whom  Solomon's  marvellous 
genius  was  produced. 

The  reason  why  the  Lord  wrought  this  wonder 
upon  Solomon  was  because  he  had  promised  to  do 
it,  and  he  is  sure  to  keep  his  word.  Many  another 
text  would  serve  my  turn  as  well  as  this  one,  for 
all  I  desire  to  bring  out  of  it  is  this — that  whatever 
God  has  promised  to  anyone,  he  will  surely  give  it 
to  him.  Whether  it  be  wisdom  to  Solomon,  or  grace 
to  my  reader,  if  the  Lord  has  made  the  promise, 
he  will  not  allow  it  to  be  a  dead  letter.  The  God 
who  performed  his  word  in  this  very  remarkable 


The  Rule  of   God's   Giving  73 

instance,  where  the  matter  was  so  entirely  beyond 
human  power,  and  was  surrounded  with  such  dis- 
advantageous circumstances,  will  accomplish  his 
promise  in  other  cases,  however  difficult  and 
mysterious  the  process  of  performance  may  be. 
God  will  always  keep  his  word  to  the  letter ;  yea, 
and  he  will  usually  go  beyond  what  the  letter  seems 
to  mean.  In  this  instance,  while  he  gave  Solomon 
wisdom,  he  also  added  to  him  riches,  and  a 
thousand  other  things  which  did  not  appear  in  the 
compact.  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
his  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be 
added  unto  you."  He  who  makes  promises  about 
infinite  blessings,  will  throw  in  every-day  things  as 
if  they  were  of  small  account,  and  were  given  in 
as  a  matter  of  course,  like  the  grocer's  paper  and 
string  with  which  he  packs  up  our  purchases. 

From  the  case  of  Solomon,  and  thousands  of  a 
similar  kind,  we  learn  first  that  the  rule  of  God's 
giving  is — as  he  has  promised. 

The  page  of  history  sparkles  with  instances. 
The  Lord  promised  to  our  fallen  parents  that  the 
seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head  : 
behold,  that  wondrous  Seed  of  the  woman  has 
appeared,  and  has  gotten  for  himself,  and  for  us, 
the  glorious  victory  of  our  redemption  !  In  the 
fulfilment  of  that  one  promise  we  have  security  for 
the  keeping  of  all  the  rest.  When  God  promised 
to  Noah  that  entering  into  the  ark  he  would  be 
safe,  he  found  it  so.  Not  one  of  those  innumerable 
waves  which  destroyed  the  antediluvian  world, 
could  break  into  his  place  of  safety.    When  God 


74  According  to  Promise 

said  to  Abraham  that  he  would  give  him  a  seed, 
and  a  land  which  should  be  the  possession  of  that 
seed,  it  seemed  impossible ;  but  Abraham  believed 
God,  and  in  due  time  rejoiced  to  behold  Isaac,  and 
to  see  in  him  the  promised  heir.  When  the  Lord 
promised  to  Jacob  that  he  would  be  with  him  and 
do  him  good,  he  kept  his  word,  and  gave  him  the 
deliverance  for  which  he  wrestled  at  the  brook 
Jabbok.  That  long-slumbering  promise,  that  the 
seed  of  Israel  should  possess  the  land  which  flowed 
with  milk  and  honey;  it  did  seem  as  if  it  would 
never  be  accomplished,  when  the  tribes  were  reduced 
to  slavery  in  Egypt,  and  Pharaoh  held  them  with 
iron  grip,  and  would  not  let  them  go.  But  God, 
who  undertook  for  his  people,  brought  them  out 
with  a  high  hand,  and  with  an  outstretched  arm,  on 
the  very  day  in  which  he  promised  to  rescue  them. 
He  divided  the  Red  Sea  also,  and  he  led  his  people 
through  the  wilderness,  for  he  assured  them  that  he 
would  do  so.  He  clave  the  Jordan  in  twain,  and 
he  drove  out  the  Canaanites  before  his  people,  and 
gave  to  Israel  the  land  for  their  inheritance,  even  as 
he  had  promised.  The  histories  of  the  Lord's  faith- 
fulness are  so  many,  that  time  would  fail  us  to  repeat 
them  all.  God's  words  have  always  in  due  time  been 
justified  by  God's  acts.  God  has  dealt  with  men 
according  to  his  promise.  Whenever  they  have  taken 
hold  upon  the  promise,  and  said,  "Do  as  thou  hast 
said,"  God  has  responded  to  the  plea,  and  proved 
that  it  is  no  vain  thing  to  trust  him.  Throughout 
all  time  it  has  been  God's  unvarying  rule  to  keep 
his  word  to  the  letter,  and  to  the  moment. 


Thk  Rule  of   God's   Giving  75 

"  This  is  big  talk "  says  one ;  then  we  will 
descend  to  smaller  talk.  It  is  God's  way  to  keep 
his  premise  to  each  individual.  We  ourselves  are 
living  witnesses  that  God  forgets  not  his  word. 
Tens  of  thousands  of  us  can  testify  that  we  have 
trusted  in  him  and  have  never  been  confounded.  I 
was  once  a  broken-hearted  sinner,  cowering  down 
beneath  the  black  cloud  of  almighty  wrath,  guilty 
and  self-condemned,  and  I  felt  that  if  I  were 
banished  for  ever  from  Jehovah's  presence,  I  could 
not  say  a  word  against  the  justice  of  the  sentence. 
When  I  read  in  his  word,  "  If  we  confess  our  sins, 
he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,"  I 
went  to  him.  Tremblingly  I  resolved  to  test  his 
promise.  I  acknowledged  my  transgressions  unto 
the  Lord,  and  he  forgave  the  iniquity  of  my  sin. 
I  am  telling  no  idle  tale,  for  the  deep,  restful  peace 
which  came  to  my  heart  in  the  moment  of  forgive- 
ness was  such  that  it  seemed  as  if  I  had  begun 
a  new  life  ;  as,  indeed,  I  had. 

This  is  how  it  came  about :  I  heard,  one  Sabbath 
day,  a  poor  man  speak  upon  that  promise,  "  Look 
unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth." 
I  could  not  understand  how  a  mere  look  to  Christ 
could  save  me.  It  seemed  too  simple  an  act  to 
effect  so  great  a  result ;  but,  as  I  was  ready  to  try 
anything,  I  LOOKED — I  looked  to  Jesus. 

It  was  all  I  did.  It  was  all  I  could  do.  I  looked 
unto  him  who  is  set  forth  as  a  propitiation  for 
sin  ;  and  in  a  moment  I  saw  that  I  was  reconciled 
to  God.  I  saw  that  if  Jesus  suffered  in  my  stead, 
I  could  not  suffer  too  ;  and  that  if  he  bore  all  my 


76  According  to  Promise 

isin,  I  had  no  more  sin  to  bear.  My  iniquity  must 
be  blotted  out  if  Jesus  bore  it  in  my  stead,  and 
suffered  all  its  penalty.  With  that  thought  there 
came  into  my  spirit  a  sweet  sense  of  peace  with 
God  through  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord.  The  promise 
was  true,  and  I  found  it  to  be  so.  It  happened 
some  six-and-thirty  years  ago,  but  I  have  never 
lost  the  sense  of  that  complete  salvation  which  I 
then  found,  nor  have  I  lost  that  peace  which  so 
sweetly  dawned  upon  my  spirit.  Since  then  I  have 
never  relied  in  vain  npon  a  promise  of  God.  I  have 
been  placed  in  positions  of  great  peril,  have  known 
great  need,  have  felt  sharp  pain,  and  have  been 
weighted  with  incessant  anxieties  ;  bnt  the  Lord  has 
been  true  to  every  line  of  his  ivord,  and  when  I  have 
trusted  him  lie  has  carried  me  through  everytJnng 
without  a  failure.  I  am  bound  to  speak  well  of  him, 
and  I  do  so.  To  THIS  I  SET  MY  HAND  AND  SEAL, 
without  hesitation  or  reserve. 

The  experience  of  all  believers  is  to  much  the 
same  effect  :  we  began  our  new  lives  of  joy  and 
peace  by  believing  the  promise-making  God,  and 
we  continue  to  live  in  the  same  manner.  A  long 
list  of  fulfilled  promises  is  present  to  our  happy 
memories,  awakening  our  gratitude  and  confirming 
our  confidence.  We  have  tested  the  faithfulness  of 
our  God  year  after  year,  in  a  great  many  ways,  but 
always  with  the  same  result.  We  have  gone  to 
him  with  promises  of  the  common  things  of  life, 
relating  to  daily  bread,  and  raiment,  and  children, 
and  home  ;  and  the  Lord  has  dealt  graciously  with 
US.     We  have  resorted  to  him  concerning  sickness, 


The   Rule  of   God's   Giving  77 

and  slander,  and  doubt,  and  temptation  ;  and  never 
has  he  failed  us.  In  little  things  he  has  been 
mindful  of  us  :  even  the  hairs  of  our  head  have  been 
numbered.  When  it  appeared  very  unlikely  that 
the  promise  could  be  kept,  it  has  been  fulfilled  with 
remarkable  exactness.  We  have  been  broken 
down  by  the  falseness  of  man,  but  we  have  exulted 
and  do  exult  in  the  truthfulness  of  God.  It  brings 
the  tears  into  our  eyes  to  think  of  the  startling 
ways  in  which  Jehovah,  our  God,  has  wrought  to 
carry  out  his  gracious  promises. 

"  Thus  far  we  prove  that  promise  good, 
Which  Jesus  ratified  with  blood  : 
Still  he  is  faithful,  wise,  and  just, 
And  still  in  him  believers  trust." 

Let  me  freely  speak  lo  all  who  trust  in  the  Lord. 
Children  of  God,  has  not  your  heavenly  Father 
been  true  to  you  ?  Is  not  this  your  constant  ex- 
perience, that  you  are  always  failing,  but  he  never 
fails  ?  Well  said  our  apostle,  "  Though  we  believe 
not,  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself." 
We  may  interpret  divine  language  in  its  broadest 
sense,  and  we  shall  find  that  the  Lord's  promise  is 
kept  to  the  utmost  of  its  meaning.  The  rule  of  his 
giving  is  large  and  liberal :  the  promise  is  a  great 
vessel,  and  the  Lord  fills  it  to  overflowing.  As  the 
Lord  in  Solomon's  case  gave  him  ^*  as  he  promised 
him"  so  will  he  in  every  instance  so  long  as  the 
world  standeth.  O  reader  !  believe  the  promise,  and 
thus  prove  yourself  to  be  an  inheritor  of  it.  May 
the  Holy  Spirit  lead  you  thus  to  do,  for  Jesus'  sake ! 


The  Rule  without  Exception 


"  Blessed  be  Ihe  Lord,  that  hath  given  rest  unto  his  people  Israel, 
according  to  all  that  he  promised  :  there  hath  not  failed  one  word 
of  all  his  good  promise,  which  he  promised  by  the  hand  of  Moses  his 
servant." — i  Kings  viil  56. 


GOD  £tves  good  things  to  men  according  to 
his  promise. 
This  is  a  matter  of  fact,  and  not  a 
mere  opinion.    We  declare  it,  and  defy- 
all   the  world  to  bring  any  evidence  to  disprove 
the  statement. 

Upon  this  point  the  writer  is  a  personal  witness. 
My  experience  has  been  long,  and  my  observation 
has  been  wide ;  but  I  have  never  yet  met  with 
a  person  who  trusted  God,  and  found  the  Lord's 
promise  fail  him.  I  have  seen  many  living  men 
sustained  under  heavy  trials  by  resting  in  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  and  I  have  also  seen  many 
dying  persons  made  triumphant  in  death  by  the 
same  means  ;  but  I  have  never  met  with  a  believer 
who  has  been  made  ashamed  of  his  hope  because 
of  his  temporal  afflictions,  nor  with  one  who  on 
his  deathbed  has  repented  of  trusting  in  the  Lord. 
All  my  observation  points  the  other  way,  and  con- 
firms me  in  the  persuasion  that  the  Lord  is  faithful 
to  all  who  rely  upon  him.     About  this  matter  I 


The  Rule  without  Exception  79 

should  be  prepared  to  make  solemn  affirmation  in 
a  court  of  justice.  I  would  not  utter  a  falsehood 
under  the  pretext  of  a  pious  fraud,  but  I  would 
testify  upon  this  important  subject  as  an  honest 
witness  without  reserve  or  equivocation.  I  never 
knew  a  man  in  the  pangs  of  death  lament  that  he 
trusted  the  Saviour.  Nay,  what  is  more,  I  have 
never  heard  that  such  a  thing  has  happened  any- 
where at  any  time.  If  there  had  been  such  a  case,  the 
haters  of  the  gospel  would  have  advertised  it  high 
and  low ;  every  street  would  have  heard  the  evil 
news ;  every  preacher  would  have  been  confronted 
with  it.  We  should  have  been  met  with  pamphlets 
at  the  door  of  every  church  and  chapel,  reporting 
that  such  an  one,  who  had  lived  a  saintly  life,  and 
relied  on  the  Redeemer's  merits,  had  discovered  in 
his  last  hours  that  he  had  been  duped,  and  that  the 
doctrine  of  the  cross  was  all  delusion.  We  challenge 
opponents  to  discover  such  an  instance.  Let  them 
find  it  among  rich  or  poor,  old  or  young.  Let  the 
very  fiend  himself,  if  he  can,  bear  witness  to  the 
failure  of  a  single  promise  of  the  Living  God.  But 
it  has  not  been  said  that  Jehovah  has  deceived  one 
of  his  people,  and  it  never  shall  be  said  ;  for  God  is 
true  to  every  word  that  he  has  ever  spoken. 

God  never  stoops  to  a  lie.  The  mere  supposition 
is  blasphemous.  Why  should  he  be  false  ?  What 
is  there  about  him  that  could  cause  him  to  break 
his  word  ?  It  would  be  contrary  to  his  nature. 
How  could  he  be  God  and  not  be  just  and  true  ? 
He  cannot  therefore  violate  his  promise  through  any 
want  of  faithfulness. 


80  According  to  Promise 

Furthermore,  the  Omnipotent  God  never  promises 
beyond  his  power.  We  frequently  intend  to  act 
according  to  our  word,  but  we  find  ourselves 
mastered  by  overwhelming  circumstances,  and  our 
promise  falls  to  the  ground  because  we  are  unable 
to  perform  it.  It  can  never  be  so  with  the 
Almighty  God,  for  his  ability  is  without  limit. 
All  things  are  possible  with  him. 

Our  promise  may  have  been  made  in  error,  and 
we  may  afterwards  discover  that  it  would  be  wrong 
to  do  as  we  have  said  ;  but  God  is  infallible,  and 
therefore  his  word  will  never  be  withdrawn  upon 
the  ground  of  a  mistake.  Infinite  wisdom  has 
set  its  imprimatur  upon  every  promise  ;  each  word 
of  the  Lord  is  registered  by  unerring  judgment, 
and  ratified  by  eternal  truth. 

Nor  can  the  promise  fail  because  of  an  alteration 
in  the  Divine  Promiser.  We  change ;  poor,  frail 
things  that  we  are !  But  the  Lord  knows  no 
variableness,  neither  shadow  of  a  turning;  hence 
his  word  abideth  for  ever  the  same.  Because  he 
changes  not,  his  promises  stand  fast  like  the  great 
mountains.  "  Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do 
it  ? "  Our  strong  consolation  rests  upon  the  im- 
mutable things  of  God. 

Nor  can  the  word  of  the  Lord  fall  to  the  ground 
through  forgetfulness  on  his  part.  With  our 
tongues  we  outrun  our  hands  ;  for,  although  we 
are  willing,  we  fail  in  the  performing  because  other 
things  come  in,  and  distract  our  attention.  We 
forget,  or  we  grow  cold;  but  never  is  it  so  with 
the  Faithful  Promiser.     His  most  ancient  promise 


The  Rule  without  Exception  81 

is  still  fresh  in  his  mind,  and  he  means  it  now  as 
he  did  when  he  first  uttered  it.  He  is,  in  fact, 
always  giving  the  promise,  since  there  is  no  time 
with  him.  The  old  promises  of  Scripture  are  new 
promises  to  faith  ;  for  every  word  still  proceedeth 
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,  to  be  bread  for  men. 
Because  of  all  this,  the  word  of  the  Lord  deserves 
all  faith,  both  implicit  and  explicit.  We  can  trust 
men  too  much,  but  we  can  never  do  so  towards 
God.  It  is  the  surest  thing  that  has  been,  or  that 
can  ever  be.  To  believe  his  word  is  to  believe  what 
none  can  fairly  question.  Has  God  said  it  ?  Then 
so  it  must  be.  Heaven  and  earth  will  pass  away, 
but  God's  word  will  never  pass  away.  The  laws  of 
nature  may  be  suspended  :  fire  may  cease  to  burn, 
and  water  to  drown,  for  this  would  involve  no  un- 
faithfulness in  God  ;  but  for  his  word  to  fail  would 
involve  a  dishonouring  variableness  in  the  character 
and  nature  of  the  Godhead,  and  this  can  never 
be.  Let  us  set  to  our  seal  that  God  is  true,  and 
never  suffer  a  suspicion  of  his  veracity  to  cross  our 
minds. 

The  immutable  word  of  promise  is,  and  ever 
must  be,  the  rule  of  God's  giving.  Consider  a 
little,  while  I  make  a  further  observation,  namely, 
that  against  this  no  other  ride  can  stand.  With 
the  rule  of  God's  promise  no  other  law,  supposed 
or  real,  can  ever  come  into  conflict. 

The  law  of  deserving  is  sometimes  set  up  against 
it,  but  it  cannot  prevail.  "Oh,"  says  one,  "I  cannot 
think  that  God  can  or  will  save  me,  for  there  is 
no  good  thing  in  me ! "     You   speak  rightly,  and 


82  According  to  Promise 

your  fear  cannot  be  removed  if  God  is  to  act 
towards  you  upon  the  rule  of  deserving.  But  if 
you  believe  on  his  Son  Jesus,  that  rule  will  not 
operate,  for  the  Lord  will  act  towards  you  according 
to  the  rule  of  his  promise.  The  promise  was  not 
founded  upon  your  merits  ;  it  was  freely  made,  and 
it  will  be  as  freely  kept.  If  you  enquire  how  your 
ill-deservings  can  be  met,  let  me  remind  you  of 
Jesus  who  came  to  save  you  from  your  sins.  The 
boundless  deservings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  arc  set 
to  your  account,  and  your  terrible  demerits  are 
thereby  neutralized  once  for  all.  The  law  of 
merit  would  sentence  you  to  destruction  as  you  stand 
in  your  own  proper  person;  but  he  that  believeth 
is  not  under  law,  but  under  grace;  and  under  grace 
the  great  Lord  deals  with  men  according  to  pure 
mercy  as  revealed  in  his  promise.  Choose  not  to 
be  self-righteous,  or  justice  must  condemn  you  ;  be 
willing  to  accept  salvation  as  a  free  gift  bestowed 
through  the  exercise  of  the  sovereign  prerogative 
of  God,  who  says,  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I 
will  have  mercy."  Be  humbly  trustful  in  the  grace 
of  God  which  is  revealed  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  the 
promise  shall  be  richly  fulfilled  to  you. 

Neither  doth  the  Lord  deal  with  men  according 
to  tJie  measure  of  their  moral  ability.  "  Oh,"  says  the 
seeker,  "  I  think  I  might  be  saved  if  I  could  make 
myself  better,  or  become  more  religious,  or  exercise 
greater  faith ;  but  I  am  without  strength.  I 
cannot  believe ;  I  cannot  repent ;  I  cannot  do 
anything  aright!"  Remember,  then,  that  the 
Gracious    God    has    not    promised   to   bless  yoii 


The  Rule  without  Exception  83 

according  to  the  measure  of  your  ability  to  serve 
him,  but  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace  as 
declared  in  his  word.  If  his  gifts  were  bestowed 
according  to  your  spiritual  strength,  you  would  get 
nothing ;  for  you  can  do  nothing  without  the  Lord. 
But  as  the  promise  is  kept  according  to  the  infinity 
of  divine  grace,  there  can  be  no  question  cast  upon 
it.  You  need  not  stagger  at  the  promise  through 
unbelief,  but  reckon  that  he  who  has  promised  is 
able  also  to  perform.  Do  not  limit  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel  by  dreaming  that  his  love  is  bounded  by 
your  capacity.  The  volume  of  the  river  is  not  to 
be  computed  by  the  dryness  of  the  desert  through 
which  it  flows :  there  is  no  logical  proportion 
between  the  two.  With  half  an  eye  one  can  see 
that  there  is  no  calculating  the  extent  of  infinite  love 
by  measuring  human  weakness.  The  operations  of 
almighty  grace  are  not  limited  by  mortal  strength, 
or  want  of  strength.  God's  power  will  keep  God's 
promise.  It  is  not  your  weakness  that  can  defeat 
God's  promise,  nor  your  strength  that  can  fulfil  the 
promise  :  he  that  spoke  the  word  will  himself  make 
it  good.  It  is  neither  your  business  nor  mine  to 
keep  God's  promises :  that  is  his  office,  and  not 
ours.  Poor  helpless  one,  attach  your  heavy  waggon 
of  incapacity  to  the  great  engine  of  the  promise, 
and  you  will  be  drawn  along  the  lines  of  duty 
and  blessing!  Though  you  are  more  dead  than 
alive,  though  you  have  more  weakness  than 
strength,  this  shall  not  affect  the  certainty  of  the 
divine  engagement.  The  power  of  the  promise  lies 
in  him  who  made  the  promise.     Look  therefore 


84  According  to  Promise 

away  from  self  to  God.  If  you  are  faint,  swoon 
away  upon  the  bosom  of  the  divine  promise;  if  you 
count  yourself  dead,  be  buried  in  the  grave  where 
lie  the  bones  of  a  promise,  and  you  shall  be  made 
alive  as  soon  as  you  touch  them.  What  we  can 
or  cannot  do  is  not  the  question ;  but  every- 
thing hinges  upon  what  the  Lord  can  do.  It  is 
enough  for  us  to  keep  our  own  contracts  without 
attempting  to  keep  God's  promises.  I  should  not 
like  my  fcUow-man  to  doubt  my  solvency  because 
a  beggar  who  lives  in  the  next  street  cannot  pay 
his  debts.  Why,  then,  should  I  suspect  the  Lord 
because  I  have  grave  cause  to  distrust  myself? 
Aly  ability  is  quite  another  question  from  the 
faithfulness  of  God,  and  it  is  a  pity  to  mix  the 
two  things.  Let  us  not  dishonour  our  God  by 
dreaming  that  his  arm  has  waxed  short  because 
our  arm  has  grown  weak  or  weary. 

Neither  must  we  measure  God  by  the  rule  of  our 
feelings.  Often  do  we  hear  the  lamentation — "  I 
do  not  feel  that  I  can  be  saved.  I  do  not  feel  that 
such  sin  as  mine  can  be  forgiven.  I  do  not  feel  it 
possible  that  my  hard  heart  can  ever  be  softened 
and  renewed."  This  is  poor,  foolish  talk.  In  what 
way  can  our  feelings  guide  us  in  such  matters  ?  Do 
you  feel  that  the  dead  in  their  graves  can  be  raised 
again  ?  Do  you  even  feel  that  the  cold  of  winter 
will  be  followed  by  the  heat  of  summer  ?  How  can 
you  feel  these  things  ?  You  believe  them.  To  talk 
of  feeling  in  the  matter  is  absurd.  Does  the 
fainting  man  feel  that  he  will  revive  ?  Is  it  not  the 
nature  oi  such  a  state  to  suggest  death  ?     Do  dead 


The  Rule  without  Exception  85 

bodies   feel    that   they   will    have   a   resurrection  ? 
Feeling  is  out  of  the  question. 

God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  as  he  had  promised 
him,  and  he  will  give  you  what  he  has  promised, 
whatever  your  feelings  may  be.  If  you  look  through 
the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  you  will  see  how  often 
Moses  uses  the  expression  "as  he  promised^  He 
says  (Deut.  i.  ii),  "The  Lord  bless  you  as  he  hath 
promised  you  " :  he  cannot  pronounce  on  Israel  a 
larger  benediction.  That  holy  man  viewed  the 
dealings  of  the  Lord  with  constant  admiration, 
because  they  were  "as  he  promised."  In  our  case, 
also,  the  rule  of  the  Lord's  dealings  will  be  "  as  he 
promised."  Our  experience  of  divine  grace  will 
not  be  "  as  we  now  feel,"  but  "  as  he  promised." 

While  writing  thus  for  the  comfort  of  others,  I 
feel  bound  to  confess  that,  personally,  I  am  the 
subject  of  very  changeful  feelings ;  but  I  have 
learned  to  set  very  small  store  by  them,  either  one 
way  or  the  other :  above  all,  I  have  ceased  to  esti- 
mate the  truth  of  the  promise  by  my  condition  of 
mind.  To-day  I  feel  so  joyful  that  I  could  dance 
to  the  tune  of  Miriam's  timbrel ;  but  perhaps  when 
I  wake  to-morrow  morning  I  shall  only  be  able 
to  sigh  in  harmony  with  Jeremiah's  lamentations. 
Has  my  salvation  changed  according  to  these 
feelings  ?  Then  it  must  have  had  a  very  movable 
foundation.  Feelings  are  more  fickle  than  the 
winds,  more  unsubstantial  than  bubbles :  are  these 
to  be  the  gauge  of  the  divine  fidelity  ?  States  of 
mind  more  or  less  depend  upon  the  condition  of 
the  liver  or  the  stomach :    are  we   to  judge  the 


86  According  to  Promise 

Lord  by  these  ?  Certainly  not.  The  state  of  the 
barometer  may  send  our  feehngs  up  or  down : 
can  there  be  much  dependence  upon  things  so 
changeable  ?  God  does  not  suspend  his  eternal 
love  upon  our  emotions  that  were  to  build  a 
temple  on  a  wave.  We  are  saved  according  to 
facts,  not  according  to  fancies.  Certain  eternal 
verities  prove  us  saved  or  lost  ;  and  those  verities 
are  not  affected  by  our  exhilarations  or  depressions. 
O  my  reader,  do  not  set  up  your  feelings  as  a  test 
by  which  to  try  the  truthfulness  of  the  Lord ! 
Such  conduct  is  a  sort  of  mingled  insanity  and 
wickedness.  If  the  Lord  has  said  the  word,  he  will 
make  it  good,  whether  you  feel  triumphant  or 
despondent. 

Again,  God  will  not  give  to  us  according  to  the 
rule  of  probabilities.  It  does  seem  very  im- 
probable that  you,  my  friend,  should  be  blessed  of 
the  Lord  that  made  heaven  and  earth  :  but  if  you 
trust  th©  Lord,  you  are  favoured  as  surely  as  the 
Blessed  Virgin  herself,  of  whom  it  is  said  that  all 
generations  shall  call  her  blessed  ;  for  it  is  written, 
"  Blessed  is  she  that  believeth  :  for  there  shall  be  a 
performance  of  those  things  which  were  told  her 
from  the  Lord."  "  O  Lord  of  hosts,  blessed  is  the 
man  that  trusteth  in  thee ! "  It  may  seem  im- 
probable that  an  old  sinner,  steeped  in  vice,  should, 
by  believing  in  Jesus,  at  once  begin  a  new  life ; 
and  yet  it  shall  be  so.  It  may  seem  very  unlikely 
that  a  woman  living  in  sin  should  hear  that  word, 
"  He  that  believeth  on  him  hath  everlasting  life," 
should  immediately  lay  hold  upon  it,  and  at  once 


The  Rule  without  Exception  87 

receive  everlasting  life  ;  yet  it  is  true,  for  all  that ; 
and  I  have  seen  it  so.  Our  God  is  a  God  of  wonders. 
Things  improbable,  yea,  impossible,  with  us,  are 
cvery-day  things  with  him.  He  causes  the  camel, 
despite  its  hump,  to  go  through  the  needle's  eye. 
He  calleth  the  things  which  are  not  as  though  they 
were.  Do  you  laugh  at  the  very  idea  of  your  being 
saved  ?  Let  it  not  be  the  distrustful  laugh  of  Sarai, 
but  the  joyous  expectancy  of  Abraham.  Believe  on 
Jesus,  and  you  shall  laugh  all  over,  inwardly  and 
outwardly,  not  from  incredulity,  but  for  quite 
another  reason.  When  we  know  God  we  do  not 
cease  to  wonder,  but  we  begin  to  be  at  home  with 
wonders.  Believe  the  promise  of  God's  grace,  and 
believing,  you  shall  live  in  a  new  world  which  shall 
be  always  wonder-land  to  you.  It  is  a  happy  thing 
to  have  such  faith  in  God  as  to  expect  as  certain 
that  which  to  mere  human  judgment  is  most 
unlikely.  "With  God  all  things  are  possible":  it 
is  therefore  possible  that  he  should  save  every  soul 
that  believeth  in  Jesus.  The  law  of  gravitation 
acts  in  all  cases,  and  so  docs  the  law  of  divine 
faithfulness :  there  are  no  exceptions  to  the  rule 
that  God  will  keep  his  covenant.  Extreme  cases, 
difficult  cases,  yea,  impossible  cases,  are  included 
within  the  circle  of  the  Lord's  word,  and  therefore 
none  need  despair,  or  even  doubt.  God's  opportunit} 
has  com.e  when  man's  extremity  is  reached.  The 
worse  the  case,  the  more  sure  is  it  to  be  helped  of 
the  Lord.  Oh,  that  my  hopeless,  helpless  reader 
would  do  the  Lord  the  honour  to  believe  him,  and 
leave  all  in  his  hands  1 


88  According  to  Promise 

How  long  will  it  be  ere  men  will  trust  their  God  ? 
"O  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt  ?" 
Oh,  that  we  would  settle  it  in  our  minds  that  we 
would  never  again  distrust  the  Faithful  One ! 

"  Let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar."  The 
Lord  himself  saith,  "  Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed 
short  ?  Thou  shalt  see  now  whether  my  word  shall 
come  to  pass  unto  thee  or  not "  (Numbers  xi.  23). 
Let  not  the  Lord  speak  thus  to  us  in  anger,  but 
let  us  believe  and  be  sure  that  the  solemn  declara- 
tions of  the  Lord  must  be  fulfilled.  Speak  no 
longer  one  to  another,  saying, "  What  is  truth?"  but 
know  infallibly  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  sure, 
and  endureth  for  ever. 

Here  is  a  promise  for  the  reader  to  begin  with  : 
let  him  test  it,  and  see  if  it  be  not  true  : — "  CALL 
UPON  ME  IN  THE  DAY  OF  TROUBLE:  I  WILL 
DELIVER  THEE,  AND  THOU   SHALT  GLORIFY  ME" 

(Ps.  1.  15). 


Taking,  Possession  of  the  Promise 

"  I  am  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the  God  of 
Isaac  :  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it." 

Genesis  xxviii.  13. 

TIMOROUS  souls  find  much  difficulty 
in  laying  hold  upon  the  promises  of 
God  as  being  made  to  themselves  : 
they  fear  that  it  would  be  presumption 
to  grasp  things  so  good  and  precious.  As  a  general 
rule,  we  may  consider  that  if  we  have  faith  to 
grasp  a  promise,  that  promise  is  ours.  He  who 
gives  us  the  key  which  will  fit  the  lock  of  his  door 
intends  that  we  should  open  the  door  and  enter. 
There  can  never  be  presumption  in  humbly  believ- 
ing God  ;  there  may  be  a  great  deal  of  it  in  daring 
to  question  his  word.  We  are  not  likely  to  err  in 
trusting  the  promise  too  far.  Our  failure  lies  in 
want  of  faith,  not  in  excess  of  it.  It  would  be 
hard  to  believe  God  too  much  :  it  is  dreadfully 
common  to  believe  him  too  little.  "According  to 
your  faith  be  it  unto  you,"  is  a  benediction  from 
which  the  Lord  will  never  draw  back.  "If  thou 
canst  believe,  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that 
believeth."  It  is  written,  "  they  could  not  enter  in 
because  of  unbelief;"  but  it  is  never  said  that  one 
who  entered  in  by  faith  was  censured  for  his 
impertinence,  and  driven  out  again. 

Jacob,  according  to   the    text   with   which   we 


90  According  to  Promise 

have  headed  this  chapter,  took  possession  of  the 
promised  land  by  stretching  himself  upon  it,  and 
going  to  sleep.  There  is  no  surer  way  of  taking 
possession  of  a  promise  than  by  placing  your  whole 
weight  upon  it,  and  then  enjoying  a  hearty  rest. 
"  The  land  zvhereon  tJiou  liest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it." 

How  often  have  I  found  the  promise  true  to  my 
own  self  when  I  have  accepted  it  as  truth,  and  acted 
upon  it !  I  have  stretched  myself  upon  it  as  upon 
a  couch,  and  left  myself  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord  ; 
and  a  sweet  repose  has  crept  over  my  spirit.  Con- 
fidence in  God  realizes  its  own  desires.  The 
promise  which  our  Lord  made  to  those  who  seek 
favours  in  prayer  runs  thus, — "  Believe  that  ye 
receive  them,  and  ye  shall  have  them."  This 
sounds  strange,  but  it  is  true ;  it  is  according  to  the 
philosophy  of  faith.  Say,  by  a  realizing  faith,  "this 
promise  is  mine,"  and  straightway  it  is  yours.  It  is 
by  faith  that  we  "receive  promises",  and  not  by 
sight  and  sense. 

The  promises  of  God  are  not  enclosures  to  be 
the  private  property  of  this  saint  or  that,  but  they 
are  an  open  common  for  all  the  dwellers  in  the 
parish  of  Holy  Faith.  No  doubt  there  are  persons 
who  would,  if  they  could,  make  a  freehold  of  the 
stars,  and  a  personal  estate  out  of  the  sun  and 
moon.  The  same  greed  might  put  a  ring-fence 
around  the  promises  ;  but  this  cannot  be  done.  As 
well  might  misers  hedge  in  the  song-birds,  and 
claim  the  music  of  lark  and  thrush  as  their  own 
sole  inheritance,  as  propose  to  keep  promises  all  to 
themselves.     No,  not  the  best  of  the  saints  can, 


Taking  Possession  of  the  Promise  91 

even  if  they  wished  to  do  so,  put  a  single  word  of 
the  God  of  grace  under  lock  and  key.  The 
promise  is  not  only  "  unto  you,  and  to  your  chil- 
dren," but  also  "  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as 
many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call."  What  a  com- 
fort is  this  !  Let  us  take  up  our  common-rights, 
and  possess  by  faith  what  the  Lord  has  made  ours 
by  a  covenant  of  salt. 

Words  spoken  to  Jacob  belong  equally  to  all 
believers.  Hosea  says  of  him,  "  Yea,  he  had  power 
over  the  angel,  and  prevailed  :  he  wept,  and  made 
supplication  unto  him  :  he  found  him  in  Bethel, 
and  there  he  spake  with  us."  So  that  Jehovah 
spake  with  us  when  he  spake  with  the  patriarch. 
The  wonders  which  God  displayed  at  the  Red  Sea 
were  wrought  for  all  his  people,  for  we  read,  "  there 
did  we  rejoice  in  him^  (See  Psalm  Ixvi.  6.)  It  is 
true  we  were  not  there,  and  yet  the  joy  of  Israel's 
victory  is  ours.  The  apostle  quotes  the  word  of 
the  Lord  to  Joshua  as  if  it  were  spoken  to  any 
and  every  child  of  God, — "  He  hath  said,  I  will 
never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  tJiee"  (Heb.  xiii.  5), 
the  fact  being  that  no  word  of  the  Lord  ends  with 
the  occasion  which  called  it  foith,  or  spends  itself 
in  blessing  the  individual  to  whom  it  was  first  ad- 
dressed. All  the  promises  are  to  believers  who  have 
faith  enough  to  embrace  them,  and  plead  them  at 
the  throne  of  grace.  What  God  is  to  one  who 
trusts  him,  he  will  be  to  all  such  according  to  their 
circumstances  and  necessities. 

The  Bible  has  its  eye  upon  each  one  of  us  as  it 
utters  its  words   of  grace.      A  Bampton  lecturer 


92  According  to  Promise 

has  well  said,  "  We,  ourselves,  and  such  as  we  are, 
are  the  very  persons  whom  Scripture  speaks  of; 
and  to  whom,  as  men,  in  every  variety  of  persuasive 
form,  it  makes  its  condescending,  though  celestial, 
appeal.  The  point  worthy  of  observation  is,  to 
note  how  a  book  of  its  description  and  its  compass 
should  possess  this  versatility  of  power,  this  eye, 
like  that  of  a  portrait  uniformly  fixed  upon  us,  turn 
where  we  will." 

"  Eye  of  God's  word  !  where'er  we  turn, 

Ever  upon  us  thy  kind  gaze 
Doth  all  our  depths  of  woe  discern. 

Unravel  every  bosom's  maze." 

•'What  word  is  this?  whence  know'st  thou  me? 

All  wondering  cries  the  humbled  heart, 
To  hear  thee  that  deep  mystery, 

The  knowledge  of  itself,  impart." 

This  singular  personality  of  the  word  to  each 
one  of  a  thousand  generations  of  believers  is  one  of 
its  greatest  charms,  and  one  of  the  surest  proofs  of 
its  divine  inspiration.  We  treat  our  Bibles,  not  as 
old  almanacks,  but  as  books  for  the  present,  new, 
fresh,  adapted  for  the  hour.  Abiding  sweetness 
dwells  in  undiminished  freshness  in  the  ancient 
words  upon  which  our  fathers  fed  in  their  day. 
Glory  be  to  God,  we  are  feasting  on  them  still ;  or 
if  not,  we  ought  to  be ;  and  can  only  blame  our- 
selves if  we  do  not ! 

The  wells  of  Abraham  served  for  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  and  a  thousand  generations.  Come,  let  us 
let  down  our  buckets,  and  with  joy  draw  water  out 
of  the  old  wells  of  salvation,  digged  in  the  far-off 


Taking  Possession  of  the  Promise  93 

days  when  our  fathers  trusted  in  the  Lord,  and  he 
deHvered  them !  We  need  not  fear  that  we  shall 
be  superstitious  or  credulous.  The  promises  of  the 
Lord  are  made  to  all  who  will  believe  them  :  faith 
is  itself  a  warrant  for  trusting.  If  thou  canst  trust, 
thou  mayest  trust.  After  being  fulfilled  hundreds 
of  times,  the  words  of  promise  still  stand  to  be  yet 
further  made  good.  Many  a  time  and  oft  have  we 
stooped  down  to  the  spring-head  in  the  meadow, 
and  quaffed  a  cooling  draught ;  it  is  just  as  full 
and  free,  and  we  may  drink  to-day  with  as  much 
confidence  as  if  we  now  stooped  for  the  first  time. 
Men  do  not  keep  their  promises  over  and  over 
again  :  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  it  of 
them.  They  are  cisterns,  but  thou,  O  Lord,  art  a 
fountain !     All  my  fresh  springs  are  in  thee. 

Come,  reader,  imitate  Jacob !  As  he  laid  him 
down  in  a  certain  place,  and  took  of  the  stones  of 
the  place  for  his  pillows,  so  do  thou.  Here  is  the 
whole  Bible  for  a  couch,  and  here  are  certain 
promises  to  serve  as  pillows  ;  lay  down  thy  burdens, 
and  thyself  also,  and  take  thy  rest.  Behold,  this 
Scripture  and  its  promises  are  henceforth  thine, — 
"  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee  ivill  I  give  it" 


Endorsing  the  Promise 

"I  believe  God,  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me." 

Acts  xxvii.  25. 

PAUL  had  received  a  special  promise,  and 
he  openly  avowed  his  faith  in  it.  He 
believed  that  God  would  fulfil  every 
detail  of  that  promise.  In  this  way 
he  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true.  We  are  each 
one  of  us  bound  to  do  this  with  those  words 
of  the  Lord  which  are  suitable  to  our  case.  This 
is  what  I  mean  by  the  head-line — etidorsing  the 
promise. 

A  friend  gives  me  for  the  Orphanage  a  cheque, 
which  runs  thus,  "  Pay  to  the  order  of  C.  H.  Spur- 
geon,  the  sum  of  ^10."  His  name  is  good,  and  his 
bank  is  good,  but  I  get  nothing  from  his  kindness 
till  I  put  my  own  name  at  the  back  of  his  cheque 
or  draft.  It  is  a  very  simple  act :  I  merely  sign 
my  name,  and  the  banker  pays  me :  but  the 
signature  cannot  be  dispensed  with. 

There  are  many  nobler  names  than  mine,  but 
none  of  these  can  be  used  instead  of  my  own.  If 
I  wrote  the  Queen's  name,  it  would  not  avail  me. 
If  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  placed  his 
signature  on  the  back  of  the  document,  it  would 
be  in  vain.  I  must  myself  affix  my  own  name. 
Even  so  each  one  must  personally  accept,  adopt, 


Endorsing  the  Promise  95 

and  endorse  the  promise  of  God  by  his  own  in- 
dividual faith,  or  he  will  derive  no  benefit  from  it. 

If  you  were  to  write  Miltonic  lines  in  honour  of 
the  bank,  or  exceed  Tennyson  in  verses  in  praise  of 
the  generous  benefactor  of  the  orphans,  it  would 
avail  nothing.  The  choicest  language  of  men  and 
of  angels  would  count  for  nothing ;  what  is 
absolutely  requisite  is  the  personal  signature  of  the 
party  who  is  named  as  the  receiver.  However  fine 
might  be  the  sketch  which  an  artistic  pencil  might 
draw  upon  the  back  of  the  draft,  that  also  would 
be  of  no  sort  of  service:  the  simple,  self-written 
name  is  demanded,  and  nothing  will  be  accepted 
instead  of  it.  We  must  believe  the  promise,  each 
one  for  himself,  and  declare  that  we  know  it  to  be 
true,  or  it  will  bring  us  no  blessing.  No  good 
works,  or  ceremonial  performances,  or  rapturous 
feelings,  can  supply  the  place  of  a  simple  confidence. 
"  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is, 
and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently 
seek  him."  Some  things  may  be  or  may  not  be, 
but  this  must  be. 

The  promise  may  be  said  to  run  thus,  "  I  promise 
to  pay  to  the  order  of  any  sinner  who  will  believe 
on  me  the  blessing  of  eternal  life."  The  sinnei 
must  write  his  name  on  the  back  of  the  draft ;  but 
nothing  else  is  asked  of  him.  He  believes  the 
promise,  he  goes  to  the  throne  of  grace  with  it,  and 
he  looks  to  receive  the  mercy  which  it  guaranteed 
to  him.  He  shall  have  that  mercy  :  he  cannot  fail 
to  do  so.  It  is  written,  "  He  that  believeth  on  the 
Son  hath  everlasting  life";  and  so  it  is. 


96  According  to  Promise 

Paul  believed  that  all  in  the  ship  with  him  would 
escape  because  God  had  promised  it.  He  accepted 
the  promise  as  ample  security  for  the  fact,  and  acted 
accordingly.  He  was  calm  amid  the  storm  ;  he 
gave  his  comrades  sage  and  sensible  advice  as  to 
breaking  their  fast ;  and,  in  general,  he  managed 
matters  as  a  man  would  do  who  was  sure  of  a  happy 
escape  from  the  tempest.  Thus  he  treated  God  as 
he  should  be  treated,  namely,  with  unquestioning 
confidence.  An  upright  man  likes  to  be  trusted;  it 
would  grieve  him  if  he  saw  that  he  was  regarded 
with  suspicion.  Our  faithful  God  is  jealous  of  his 
honour,  and  cannot  endure  that  men  should  treat 
him  as  if  he  could  be  false.  Unbelief  provokes  the 
Lord  above  any  other  sin  :  it  touches  the  apple  of 
his  eye,  and  cuts  him  to  the  quick.  Far  be  it  from 
us  to  perpetrate  so  infamous  a  wrong  towards  our 
heavenly  Father ;  let  us  believe  him  up  to  the  hilt, 
placing  no  bounds  to  our  hearty  reliance  upon  his 
word. 

Paul  openly  avowed  his  confidence  in  the  promise. 
It  is  well  that  we  should  do  the  same.  Just  at 
this  time,  bold,  outspoken  testimonies  to  the  truth 
of  God  are  greatly  needed,  and  may  prove  to  be  of 
seven-fold  value.  The  air  is  full  of  doubt ;  indeed, 
few  really  and  substantially  believe.  Such  a  man 
as  George  Miiller,  vi^ho  believes  in  God  for  the 
maintenance  of  two  thousand  children,  is  a  rare 
personage.  "  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall 
he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  "  Therefore  let  us  speak 
out.  Infidelity  has  defied  us  ;  let  no  man's  heart 
fail  him,  but  let  us  meet  the  giant  with  the  sling 


Endorsing  the  Promise  97 

and  stone  of  actual  experience,  and  unflinching 
witness.  God  does  keep  his  promise,  and  we  know 
it.  We  dare  endorse  every  one  of  his  promises. 
Ay,  we  would  do  it  with  our  blood  if  it  were  need- 
ful !  The  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever,  and 
of  this  we  are  undaunted  witnesses,  even  all  of  us 
who  are  called  by  his  name. 


The  Promise  Used  for  This  Life 


"  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  promise  of  the 
life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come." — i  Tim.  iv.  8. 


A  SORT  of  affectation  prevents  some 
Christians  from  treating  religion  as  if 
its  sphere  lay  among  the  common 
places  of  daily  life.  It  is  to  them 
transcendental  and  dreamy ;  rather  a  creation  of 
pious  fiction  than  a  matter  of  fact.  They  believe 
in  God,  after  a  fashion,  for  things  spiritual,  and  for 
the  life  which  is  to  be  ;  but  they  totally  forget  that 
true  godliness  hath  the  promise  of  the  life  which 
now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come.  To  them 
it  would  seem  almost  a  profanation  to  pray  about 
the  small  matters  of  which  daily  life  is  made  up. 
Perhaps  they  will  be  startled  if  I  venture  to 
suggest  that  this  should  make  them  question  the 
reality  of  their  faith.  If  it  cannot  bring  them 
help  in  little  troubles  of  life,  will  it  support  them 
in  the  greater  trials  of  death  ?  If  it  cannot  profit 
them  as  to  food  and  raiment,  what  can  it  do  for 
them  as  to  the  immortal  spirit  ? 

In  the  life  of  Abraham  we  perceive  that  his  faith 
had  to  do  with  all  the  events  of  his  earthly  pilgrim- 
age ;  it  was  connected  with  his  removals  from  one 
country  to  another,  with  the  separation  of  a  nephew 


The  Promisi.   Usf.d  for  This  Liff.         99 

from  his  camp,  with  fighting  against  invaders,  and 
specially  with  the  birth  of  the  long-promised  son. 
No  part  of  the  patriarch's  life  was  outside  the  circle 
of  his  faith  in  God.  Towards  the  close  of  his  life  it 
is  said,  "and  the  Lord  had  blessed  Abraham  in 
all  things,"  which  includes  temporals  as  well  as 
spirituals.  In  Jacob's  case  the  Lord  promised  him 
bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on,  and  the  bring- 
ing of  him  to  his  father's  house  in  peace  ;  and  all 
these  things  are  of  a  temporal  and  earthly  character. 
Assuredly  these  first  believers  did  not  spirit  away 
the  present  blessings  of  the  covenant,  or  regard  it 
as  an  airy,  mystical  matter  to  believe  in  God.  One 
is  struck  with  the  want  of  any  line  of  demarcation 
between  secular  and  sacred  in  their  lives ;  they 
journeyed  as  pilgrims,  fought  like  Crusaders,  ate 
and  drank  like  saints,  lived  as  priests,  and  spake  as 
prophets.  Their  life  was  their  religion,  and  their 
religion  was  their  life.  They  trusted  God,  not 
merely  about  certain  things  of  higher  import,  but 
about  everything,  and  hence,  even  a  servant  from 
one  of  their  houses,  when  he  was  sent  on  an  errand, 
prayed,  "  O  Lord  God  of  my  master,  prosper  the 
way  which  I  go ! "  This  was  genuine  faith,  and  it 
is  ours  to  imitate  it,  and  no  longer  to  allow  the 
substance  of  the  promise,  and  the  life  of  faith,  to 
evaporate  in  mere  sentimental  and  visionary  fancies. 
If  trust  in  God  is  good  for  anything,  it  is  good  for 
everything  within  the  line  of  the  promise,  and  it  is 
certain  that  the  life  which  now  is  lies  within  that 
region. 

Let  my  reader  observe  and  practically  use  such 


100  According  to  Promise 

words  of  God  as  these, — '*  Ye  shall  serve  the  Lord 
your  God,  and  he  shall  bless  thy  bread,  .and  thy 
water  ;  and  I  will  take  sickness  away  from  the 
midst  of  thee  "  (Ex.  xxiii.  25).  "Trust  in  the  Lord, 
and  do  good  ;  so  shalt  thou  dwell  in  the  land,  and 
verily  thou  shalt  be  fed  "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  3).  "  Surely 
he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler, 
and  from  the  noisome  pestilence.  He  shall  cover 
thee  with  his  feathers,  and  under  his  wings  shalt 
thou  trust :  his  truth  shall  be  thy  shield  and  buckler. 
Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  terror  by  night ; 
nor  for  the  arrow  that  flieth  by  day  ;  nor  for  the 
pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness  ;  nor  for  the 
destruction  that  wasteth  at  noonday.  A  thousand 
shall  fall  at  thy  side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right 
hand  ;  but  it  shall  not  come  nigh  thee  "  (Ps.  xci. 
3 — 7).  "  He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six  troubles  : 
yea,  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee " 
(Job  V.  19).  "  He  that  walketh  righteously,  and 
speaketh  uprightly ;  he  that  despiseth  the  gain  of 
oppressions,  that  shaketh  his  hands  from  holding  of 
bribes,  that  stoppeth  his  ears  from  hearing  of  blood, 
and  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil ;  he  shall 
dwell  on  high  :  his  place  of  defence  shall  be  the 
munitions  of  rocks  :  bread  shall  be  given  him  ;  his 
waters  shall  be  sure"  (Is.  xxxiii.  15,  16).  "For  the 
Lord  God  is  a  sun  and  shield  :  the  Lord  will  give 
grace  and  glory :  no  good  thing  will  he  withhold 
from  them  that  walk  uprightly"  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11). 
"  No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee  shall 
prosper ;  and  every  tongue  that  shall  rise  against 
thee  in  judgment  thou  shalt  condemn.     This  is  the 


The  Promise   Used  for  This  Life       101 

heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  their 
righteousness  is  of  me,  saith  the  Lord  "  (Is.  liv.  17). 

Our  Saviour  intended  faith  to  be  our  quietus 
concerning  daily  cares,  or  he  would  not  have  said, 
"  Therefore  I  say  unto  you,  take  no  thought  for 
your  life,  what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink  ; 
nor  yet  for  your  body,  what  ye  shall  put  on.  Is 
not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and  the  body  than 
raiment  "i  Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air :  for  they 
sow  not,  neither  do  they  reap,  nor  gather  into 
barns ;  yet  your  heavenly  Father  feedeth  them. 
Are  ye  not  much  better  than  they.?"  (Matt.  vi.  25, 
26.)  What  else  but  the  exercise  of  faith  concern- 
ing temporal  things  could  he  have  meant  when  he 
used  the  following  language  ? — "  And  seek  not  ye 
what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink,  neither 
be  ye  of  doubtful  mind.  For  ail  these  things  do 
the  nations  of  the  world  seek  after  :  and  your 
Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  these 
things  "  (Luke  xii.  29,  30). 

Paul  meant  the  same  when  he  wrote,  "  Be  careful 
for  nothing  ;  but  in  every  thing  by  prayer  and 
supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be 
made  known  unto  God.  And  the  peace  of  God, 
which  passeth  all  understanding,  shall  keep  your 
hearts  and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus "  (Phil. 
iv.  6,  7). 

He  who  is  gone  to  prepare  heaven  for  us  will  not 
leave  us  without  provision  for  the  journey  thither. 
God  does  not  give  us  heaven  as  the  Pope  gave 
England  to  the  Spanish  King— z/  he  could  get  it : 
but  he  makes  the  road  sure,  as  well  as  the  end. 


102  According  to  Promise 

Now,  our  earthly  necessities  are  as  real  as  our 
spiritual  ones,  and  we  may  rest  sure  that  the  Lord 
will  supply  them.  He  will  send  us  those  supplies 
in  the  way  of  promise,  prayer,  and  faith,  and  so 
make  them  a  means  of  education  for  us.  He 
will  fit  us  for  Canaan  by  the  experience  of  the 
wilderness. 

To  suppose  that  temporal  things  are  too  little 
for  our  condescending  God,  is  to  forget  that  he 
observes  the  flight  of  sparrows,  and  counts  the 
hairs  of  his  people's  heads.  Besides,  everything  is 
so  little  to  him,  that,  if  he  does  not  care  for  the 
little,  he  cares  for  nothing.  Who  is  to  divide  affairs 
by  size  or  weight  ?  The  turning-point  of  history 
may  be  a  minute  circumstance.  Blessed  is  the 
man  to  whom  nothing  is  too  small  for  God;  for 
certainly  nothing  is  too  small  to  cause  us  sorrow, 
or  to  involve  us  in  peril.  A  man  of  God  once  lost 
a  key  :  he  prayed  about  it,  and  found  it.  It  was 
reported  of  him  as  a  strange  circumstance.  Indeed, 
it  was  nothing  unusual :  some  of  us  pray  about 
everything,  and  tremble  lest  the  infinitesimal  things 
should  not  be  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and 
prayer.  It  is  not  the  including  of  trifles  which  is 
any  trouble  to  our  consciences,  but  the  omission  of 
them.  We  are  assured  that,  when  our  Lord  gave 
his  angels  charge  to  guard  our  feet  from  stones 
in  the  way,  he  placed  all  the  details  of  our  life 
under  heavenly  care,  and  we  are  glad  to  commit 
all  things  to  his  keeping. 

It  is  one  of  the  abiding  miracles  of  the  present 
dispensation    that  in    Christ  we    have    continual 


The   Promise   Used  for  This   Life        103 

peace  under  all  trials,  and  through  him  we  have 
power  in  prayer  to  obtain  from  the  Lord  all  things 
necessary  for  this  life  and  godliness.  It  has  been 
the  writer's  lot  to  test  the  Lord  hundreds  of  times 
about  temporal  needs,  being  driven  thereto  by  the 
care  of  orphans  and  students.  Prayer  has  many, 
many  times  brought  opportune  supplies,  and  cleared 
away  serious  difficulties.  I  know  that  faith  can  fill 
a  purse,  provide  a  meal,  change  a  hard  heart, 
procure  a  site  for  a  building,  heal  sickness,  quiet 
insubordination,  and  stay  an  epidemic.  Like 
money  in  the  worldling's  hand,  faith  in  the  hand  of 
the  man  of  God  "answereth  all  things."  All  things 
in  heaven,  and  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  answer 
to  the  command  of  prayer.  Faith  is  not  to  be 
imitated  by  a  quack,  nor  simulated  by  a  hypocrite  ; 
but  where  it  is  real,  and  can  grasp  a  divine  promise 
with  firm  grip,  it  is  a  great  wonder-worker.  How 
I  wish  that  my  reader  would  so  believe  in  God 
as  to  lean  upon  him  in  all  the  concerns  of  his  life  ! 
This  would  lead  him  into  a  new  world,  and  bring  to 
him  such  confirmatory  evidence  as  to  the  truth  cf 
our  holy  faith  that  he  would  laugh  sceptics  to  scorn. 
Child-like  faith  in  God  provides  sincere  hearts  with 
a  practical  prudence,  which  I  am  inclined  to  call — 
sanctified  common-sense.  The  simple-minded  be- 
liever, though  laughed  at  as  an  idiot,  has  a  wisdom 
about  him  which  cometh  from  above,  and  effectually 
baffles  the  cunning  of  the  wicked.  Nothing  puzzles 
a  malicious  enemy  like  the  straightforward  un- 
guardedness  of  an  out-and-out  believer. 

He  that  believes  his  God  is  not  afraid  of  evil 


104  According  to  Promise 

tidings,  for  his  heart  has  found  a  calm  fixity  in 
trusting  in  the  Lord.  In  a  thousand  ways  this 
faith  sweetens,  enlarges,  and  enriches  life.  Try  it, 
dear  reader,  and  see  if  it  does  not  yield  you  an 
immeasurable  wealth  of  blessedness  !  It  will  not 
save  you  from  trouble,  for  the  promise  is,  "  These 
things  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  that  in  me  ye  might 
have  peace.  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  : 
but  be  of  good  cheer ;  I  have  overcome  the  world  " 
(John  xvi.  33)  :  but  it  will  cause  you  to  glory  in 
tribulations  also,  "  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh 
patience;  and  patience,  experience ;  and  experience, 
hope  :  and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed  ;  because  the 
love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us  "  (Rom.  v.  3-5). 

My  faith  not  only  flies  to  heaven, 

But  walks  with  God  below  ; 
To  me  are  all  things  daily  given, 

While  passing  to  and  fro. 

The  promise  speaks  of  worlds  above, 

But  not  of  these  alone  ; 
It  feeds  and  clothes  me  now  with  love, 

And  makes  this  world  my  own. 

I  trust  the  Lord,  and  he  replies, 

In  things  both  great  and  small. 
He  honours  faith  with  prompt  supplies  $ 

Faith  honours  him  in  all. 


Searching,  Out  the  Promise 


'  Thou  hast  promised  this  goodness  unto  thy  servant." — 

2  Samuel  vii.  28. 


KING  David  knew  what  the  Lord  had 
engaged  to  give  him,  and  he  referred 
to  it  specially  in  his  prayer  as  "  this 
good  thing."  (Revised  Version.)  We 
greatly  need  to  be  more  definite  in  our  suppli- 
cations than  we  usually  are  :  we  pray  for  everything 
in  such  a  way  that  we  practically  pray  for  nothing. 
It  is  well  to  know  what  we  want.  Hence  our 
Lord  said  to  the  blind  man,  "What  wilt  thou  that 
I  should  do  unto  thee  .'' "  He  wished  him  to  be 
aware  of  his  own  needs,  and  to  be  filled  with  earnest 
desires  concerning  those  needs  :  these  are  valuable 
ingredients  in  the  composition  of  prayer. 

Knowing  what  we  need,  the  next  business  is  to 
find  that  the  Lord  has  promised  us  this  particular 
blessing,  for  then  we  can  go  to  God  with  the 
utmost  confidence,  and  look  for  the  fulfilment  of 
his  word.  To  this  end  we  should  diligently 
search  the  Scriptures,  looking  much  to  the  cases  of 
other  believers  which  are  like  our  own,  and  en- 
deavouring to  light  upon  that  particular  utterance 
of  divine  grace  which  is  suitable  to  ourselves  in 
our  present  circumstances.  The  more  exact  the 
agreement  of  the  promise  to  the  case,  the  greater 


106  According  to  Promise 

the  comfort  which  it  will  yield.  In  this  school  the 
believer  will  learn  the  value  of  plenary,  ay,  of 
verbal  inspiration  ;  for  in  his  own  instance  he  may 
have  to  dwell  upon  so  slight  a  matter  as  the 
number  of  a  noun,  as  Paul  did  when  quoting  the 
promise  made  to  Abraham  he  remarks,  "  Now  to 
Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  promises  made. 
He  saith  not,  And  to  seeds,  as  of  many ;  but  as  of 
one.  And  to  thy  seed,  which  is  Christ"  (Gal.  iii.  i6). 

We  may  rest  assured  that  somewhere  in  the 
inspired  page  there  is  a  promise  fitting  the  occasion. 
The  infinite  wisdom  of  God  is  seen  in  his  having 
given  us  a  revelation  which  meets  the  innumerable 
varieties  of  his  people's  conditions.  Not  a  single 
trial  is  overlooked,  however  peculiar  it  may  be. 
As  there  is  food  specially  adapted  for  every  living 
thing  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  so  there  is  suitable 
support  for  every  child  of  God  in  the  volume  of 
inspiration.  If  we  do  not  find  a  fitting  promise,  it 
is  because  we  do  not  look  for  it ;  or  having  found 
it,  have  not  yet  perceived  its  full  meaning. 

A  homely  comparison  may  be  useful  here.  You 
have  lost  the  key  of  a  chest,  and  after  trying  all 
the  keys  you  possess,  you  are  obliged  to  send  out 
for  a  smith.  The  tradesman  comes  with  a  huge 
bunch  of  keys  of  all  sorts  and  sizes.  To  you  they 
appear  to  be  a  singular  collection  of  rusty  instru- 
ments. He  looks  at  the  lock,  and  then  he  tries  first 
one  key  and  then  another.  He  has  not  touched  it 
yet ;  and  your  treasures  are  still  out  of  your  reach. 
Look,  he  has  found  a  likely  key :  it  almost  touches 
the  bolt,  but  not  quite.     He  is  evidently  on  the 


Searching   Out  thk  Promisf,  107 

right  track  now.  At  last  the  chest  is  opened,  for 
the  right  key  has  been  found.  This  is  a  correct 
representation  of  many  a  perplexity.  You  cannot 
get  at  the  difficulty  so  as  to  deal  with  it  aright,  and 
find  your  way  to  a  happy  result.  You  pray,  but 
have  not  the  liberty  in  prayer  which  you  desire.  A 
definite  promise  is  what  you  want.  You  try  one 
and  another  of  the  inspired  words,  but  they  do  not 
fit.  The  troubled  heart  sees  reasons  to  suspect 
that  they  are  not  strictly  applicable  to  the  case  in 
hand,  and  so  they  are  left  in  the  old  Book  for  use 
another  day  ;  for  they  are  not  available  in  the 
present  emergency.  You  try  again,  and  in  due 
season  a  promise  presents  itself,  which  seems  to 
have  been  made  for  the  occasion  ;  it  fits  as  exactly 
as  a  well-made  key  fits  the  wards  of  the  lock  for 
which  it  was  originally  prepared.  Having  found 
the  identical  word  of  the  living  God,  you  hasten  to 
plead  it  at  the  throne  of  grace,  saying,  "  O  my 
Lord,  thou  hast  promised  this  good  thing  unto 
thy  servant ;  be  pleased  to  grant  it ! "  The  matter 
is  ended  ;  sorrow  is  turned  to  joy  ;  prayer  is  heard. 
Frequently  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  to  our  remem- 
brance with  life  and  power  words  of  the  Lord  which 
else  we  might  have  forgotten.  He  also  sheds  a  new 
light  upon  well-remembered  passages,  and  so  reveals 
a  fulness  in  them  which  we  had  little  suspected. 
In  cases  known  to  me,  the  texts  have  been  singular, 
and  for  a  while  the  person  upon  whose  mind  they 
were  impressed  could  hardly  see  their  bearing. 
For  years  one  heart  was  comforted  with  the  words 
"His  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease;  and  his  seed  shall 


108  According  to  Promise 

inherit  the  earth."  This  passage  was  seldom  out 
of  nis  mind  ;  indeed,  it  seemed  to  him  to  be  per- 
petually whispered  in  his  ear.  The  special  relation 
of  the  promise  to  his  experience  was  made  known  by 
the  event.  A  child  of  God,  who  mourned  his  years 
of  barrenness,  was  lifted  at  once  into  joy  and  peace 
by  that  seldom-quoted  word,  "  I  will  restore  to  you 
the  years  that  the  locust  hath  eaten."  The  bitter 
experiences  of  David  as  to  slander  and  malice  led 
to  the  utterance  of  consoling  promises,  which  have 
been  a  thousand  times  appropriated  by  obscure  and 
broken-hearted  Christians  when  afflicted  with  "  trials 
of  cruel  mockings."  Before  this  dispensation  shall 
close,  we  doubt  not  that  every  sentence  of  Scripture 
will  have  been  illustrated  by  the  life  of  one  or  other 
of  the  saints.  Perhaps  some  obscure  and  little- 
understood  promise  is  still  lying  by  until  he  shall 
come  for  whom  it  was  specially  written.  If  we 
may  so  say,  there  is  one  rusty  key  on  the  bunch 
which  has  not  yet  found  its  lock  ;  but  it  will  find 
it  before  the  history  of  the  church  is  finished :  we 
may  be  sure  of  that. 

The  word  of  the  Lord  which  would  remove  our 
present  discomfort  may  be  close  at  haiid,  and  yet 
we  may  not  be  aivare  of  it.  With  singular  know- 
ledge of  human  experience,  John  Bunyan  represents 
the  prisoner  of  Doubting  Castle  as  finding  in  his 
own  bosom  the  key  called  Promise,  which  opened 
every  door  in  that  gloomy  prison-house.  We  often 
lie  in  durance  vile  when  the  means  of  obtaining 
fullest  liberty  proffers  itself  to  us.  If  we  would 
but  open  our  eyes,  we  should,  like  Hagar,  see  a 


Skarching  Out  thf-:  Promise  109 

well  of  water  close  at  hand,  and  wonder  why  we 
thought  of  dying  of  thirst.  At  this  moment,  O 
tempted  brother,  there  is  a  word  of  the  Lord 
awaiting  thee !  As  the  manna  fell  early  in  the 
morning,  and  lay  ready  for  the  Israelites  to  gather 
it  as  soon  as  ever  they  left  their  beds,  so  does  the 
promise  of  the  Lord  wait  for  thy  coming.  The 
oxen  and  the  fatlings  of  grace  are  killed,  and  all 
things  arc  ready  for  thine  immediate  comfort.  The 
mountain  is  full  of  chariots  of  fire,  and  horses  of 
fire,  prepared  for  thy  deliverance ;  the  prophet  of 
the  Lord  can  see  them,  and  if  thine  eyes  were 
opened  thou  wouldst  see  them  too.  Like  the 
lepers  at  the  gate  of  Samaria,  it  would  be  foolish 
for  thee  to  sit  where  thou  art,  and  die.  Bestir 
thyself,  for  close  at  hand  lavish  mercy  is  poured 
forth,  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  thou 
dost  ask,  or  even  think.  Only  believe,  and  enter 
into  rest. 

For  the  poor,  the  sick,  the  faint,  the  erring,  there 
are  words  of  good  cheer  which  they  alone  can  enjoy. 
For  the  fallen,  the  desponding,  the  (despairing,  the 
dying,  there  are  cordials  which  are  compounded 
with  an  eye  to  their  peculiar  maladies.  The  widow 
and  the  fatherless  have  their  promises,  and  so  have 
captives,  travellers,  shipwrecked  mariners,  aged 
persons,  and  those  in  the  article  of  death.  No  one 
ever  wanders  where  a  prom.ise  does  not  follow  him. 
An  atmosphere  of  promise  surrounds  believers  as 
the  air  surrounds  the  globe.  I  might  almost  call  it 
omnipresent,  and  say  of  it,  "  Thou  hast  beset  me 
behind  and  before,  and  laid  thine  hand  upon  me. 


110  According  to  Promisf. 

Such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me  ;  it  is  high, 
I  cannot  attain  unto  it.  Whither  shall  I  go  from 
thy  spirit  ?  Or  whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy 
presence  ?  "  (Psalm  cxxxix.  5,  6,  7.)  No  depth  of 
darkness  can  hide  us  from  the  covenant  of  promise; 
say,  rather,  in  its  presence  the  night  shineth  as  the 
day.  Wherefore,  let  us  take  courage,  and  by  faith 
and  patience  wait  in  the  land  of  our  exile  till  the 
day  of  our  home-bringing.  So  shall  we,  like  the 
rest  of  the  heirs  of  salvation,  "  inherit  the  promise." 
Certain  covenant  engagements,  made  with  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  to  his  elect  and  redeemed 
ones,  are  altogether  without  condition  so  far  as  we 
are  concerned  ;  but  many  other  wealthy  words  of 
the  Lord  contain  stipulations  which  must  be  care- 
fully regarded,  or  we  shall  not  obtain  the  blessing. 
One  part  of  my  reader's  diligent  search  must  be 
directed  towards  this  most  important  point.  God 
will  keep  his  promise  to  thee  ;  only  see  thou  to  it 
that  the  way  in  which  he  conditions  his  engagement 
is  carefully  observed  of  thee.  Only  when  we  fulfil 
the  requirement  of  a  conditional  promise  can  we 
expect  that  promise  to  be  fulfilled  to  us.  He  hath 
said,  "  He  that  believeth  in  Jesus  shall  be  saved." 
If  thou  believest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  cer- 
tain that  thou  shalt  be  saved  ;  but  not  else.  In  the 
same  way,  if  the  promise  is  made  to  prayer,  to 
holiness,  to  reading  the  word,  to  abiding  in  Christ, 
or  whatever  else  it  may  be,  give  thy  heart  and  soul 
to  the  thing  commanded,  that  the  blessing  may 
become  thine.  In  some  cases,  great  blessedness  is 
not  realized  because  known  duties  are  neglected 


Skarchinc;   Out  thf:   Pkomisf.  1 1 1 

The  promise  cannot  enter  because  "sin  lieth  at  the 
door."  Even  an  unknown  duty  may  whip  us  with 
"  a  few  stripes,"  and  a  few  strokes  may  greatly  mar 
our  happiness.  Let  us  -endeavour  to  know  the 
Lord's  will  in  all  things,  and  then  let  us  obey  it 
without  a  trace  of  hesitation.  It  is  not  of  the  way 
of  our  wilfulness,  but  of  the  tracks  of  divine  wisdom 
that  we  read,  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness, 
and  all  her  paths  are  peace." 

Do  not  undervalue  the  grace  of  the  promise 
because  it  has  a  condition  appended  to  it ;  for,  as  a 
rule,  it  is  in  this  way  made  doubly  valuable, — the 
condition  being  in  itself  another  blessing,  which  the 
Lord  has  purposely  made  inseparable  from  that 
which  thou  desirest,  that  thou  mayest  gain  two 
mercies  while  seeking  only  one.  Moreover,  remember 
that  the  condition  is  grievous  to  those  only  who  are 
not  heirs  of  the  promise :  to  them  it  is  as  a  thorn 
hedge,  keeping  them  off  from  the  comfort  to  which 
they  have  no  right ;  but  to  thee  it  is  not  grievous, 
but  pleasant,  and  it  is  therefore  no  hindrance  to 
thine  access  to  the  blessing.  Those  requirements, 
which  show  a  black  cloud  and  darkness  to  the 
Egyptians,  have  a  bright  side  for  the  Israelites,  and 
give  light  by  night  to  them.  To  us  the  Lord's  yoke 
is  easy,  and  in  taking  it  upon  us  we  find  rest  unto 
our  souls.  See  then  that  thou  note  the  wording  of 
the  promise,  and  carry  out  all  its  precepts,  that  all 
good  things  may  come  to  thee. 

If  thou  art  a  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  all  the 
promises  are  thine  ;  and  among  them  is  one  for  this 
very  day  of  the  month,  and  for  this  particular  place 


112  According  to  Promise 

wherein  thou  art  now  encamped :  wherefore  search 
the  roll  of  thy  Magna  Charta,  and  find  out  thy  portion 
for  this  hour.  Of  all  the  promises  which  the  Lord 
hath  given  in  his  Book,  he  hath  said,  "  No  one  of 
these  shall  fail,  none  shall  want  its  mate,  for  my 
mouth  hath  commanded  them."  Therefore  trust, 
and  be  not  afraid.  Whatever  else  may  prove  a 
failure,  the  promise  of  God  never  will.  Treasure 
laid  up  in  this  Bank  is  beyond  all  hazard.  "It  is 
better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put  confidence 
in  princes."  Let  us  sing  at  every  remembrance  of 
the  God  of  truth  and  grace. 

•'Tell  of  his  wondrous  faithfulness, 
And  sound  his  power  abroad  ; 
Sing  the  sweet  promise  of  his  grace, 
And  the  performing  God. 

He  that  can  dash  whole  worlds  to  death, 

And  make  them  when  he  please  ; 
He  speaks,  and  that  almighty  breath 

Fulfils  his  great  decrees. 

His  very  word  of  grace  is  strong 

As  that  which  built  the  skies  ; 
The  voice  that  rolls  the  stars  along 

Speaks  all  the  promises." 


The  Time  of  the  Promise 

*'  The  time  of  the  promise  drew  nigh." — Acts  vii.  17. 

THOMAS  BROOKS  reminds  us  that  the 
mercies  of  God  are  not  styled  the 
swiff,  but  "  the  sure  mercies  of  David." 
There  is  nothing  of  hurry  about  the 
procedure  of  the  Lord  :  it  may  even  seem  that  the 
chariots  of  his  grace  are  long  in  coming.  It  is  by 
no  means  an  unusual  circumstance  for  the  saints  to 
be  heard  crying,  "O  Lord,  how  long?"  It  is 
written  "the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thy 
rereward  "  (Is.  Iviii.  8).  Now  the  guard  of  the  rear 
comes  up  last,  but  it  does  come.  God  may  some- 
times make  us  wait ;  but  we  shall  see  in  the  end 
that  he  is  as  surely  the  Omega  as  the  Alpha  of  his 
people's  salvation.  Let  us  never  distrust  him,  but 
though  the  vision  tarry,  let  us  wait  for  it ;  because 
it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry  (Hab.  ii.  3). 

There  once  sailed  from  the  port  of  London  a 
vessel,  which  the  owner  called  the  Swift-sure, 
because  he  hoped  it  would  prove  both  safe  and 
speedy.  Truly  this  is  a  fit  name  for  the  Lord's 
mercy:  it  is  both  swift  and  sure.  David  may  not 
have  said  so  in  the  text  which  Brooks  quotes,  but 
he  often  said  as  much  and  even  more  in  others. 
Did  he  not  say  "  He  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did 
fly  :  yea,  he  did  fly  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind  "  ? 


114  According  to  Promise 

The  Lord  is  not  slow  to  hear  the  cries  of  his  people. 
He  has  a  set  time  to  favour  Zion,  and  when  that 
set  time  is  come  there  will  be  no  delay. 

The  date  for  its  fulfilment  is  an  important  part 
of  a  promise  ;  indeed,  it  enters  into  the  essence  of 
it.  It  would  be  unjust  to  delay  the  payment  of  a 
debt ;  and  the  obligation  to  keep  one's  word  is  of 
the  same  nature.  The  Lord  is  prompt  to  the 
moment  in  carrying  out  his  gracious  engagements. 
The  Lord  had  threatened  to  destroy  the  world 
with  a  flood,  but  he  waited  the  full  time  of  respite 
until  Noah  had  entered  the  ark ;  and  then,  on  the 
selfsame  day,  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  were 
broken  up.  He  had  declared  that  Israel  should 
come  out  of  Egypt,  and  it  was  so  :  "And  it  came 
to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  four  hundred  and  thirty 
years,  even  the  selfsame  day  it  came  to  pass,  that 
all  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  went  out  from  the  land 
of  Egypt"  (Exodus  xii.  41).  According  to 
Daniel,  the  Lord  numbers  the  years  of  his  promise, 
and  counts  the  weeks  of  his  waiting.  As  for 
the  greatest  promise  of  all,  namely,  the  sending 
of  his  Son  from  heaven,  the  Lord  was  not  behind- 
hand in  that  great  gift,  "  but  when  the  fulness  of 
the  time  v/as  come,  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made 
of  a  woman."  Beyond  all  question,  the  Lord  our 
God  keeps  his  word  to  the  moment. 

When  we  are  in  need,  we  may  be  urgent  with 
the  Lord  to  come  quickly  to  our  rescue,  even  as 
David  pleaded  in  the  seventieth  Psalm, — "  Make 
haste,  O  God,  to  deliver  me  ;  make  haste  to  help 
me,  O  Lord."  (Verse  i.)     "I  am  poor  and  needy  : 


The  Timf.  of  thf  Promise  115 

rricike  haste  unto  me,  O  God :  thou  art  my  help  and 
my  deliverer  ;  O  Lord,  make  no  tarrying."  (Verse 
5.)  The  Lord  even  condescends  to  describe  him- 
self as  making  speed  to  carry  out  his  gracious 
engagements,  saying,  "  I  the  Lord  will  hasten  it  in 
his  time"  (Isaiah  Ix.  22).  But  we  must  not  pray 
in  this  fashion  as  though  we  had  the  slightest  fear 
that  the  Lord  could  or  would  be  dilatory,  or  that 
he  needed  us  to  quicken  his  diligence.  No.  "  The 
Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  promise,  as  some 
men  count  slackness  "  (2  Peter  iii.  9).  Our  God  is 
slow  to  anger,  but  in  deeds  of  grace  "  his  word 
runneth  very  swiftly"  (Psalm  cxlvii.  15).  Some- 
times his  speed  to  bless  his  people  outstrips  time 
and  thought  :  as,  for  instance,  when  he  fulfils  that 
ancient  declaration,  "  It  shall  come  to  pass,  that 
before  they  call,  I  will  answer  ;  and  while  they  are 
yet  speaking,  I  will  hear  "     (Isaiah  Ixv.  24). 

Yet  there  are  delays  in  the  answers  to  our  prayers. 
As  the  husbandman  does  not  reap  to-day  that 
which  he  sowed  yesterday,  so  neither  do  we  always 
at  once  obtain  from  the  Lord  that  which  we  seek 
of  him.  The  door  of  grace  does  open,  but  not 
to  our  first  knocks.  Why  is  this  ?  It  is  because 
the  mercy  will  be  all  the  greater  for  being  longer 
on  the  road.  There  is  a  time  for  every  purpose 
under  heaven,  and  everything  is  best  in  its  time. 
Fruit  ripens  in  its  season  ;  and  the  more  seasonable 
it  is  the  better  it  is.  Untimely  mercies  would  be 
only  half  mercies  ;  therefore  the  Lord  withholds 
them  till  they  have  come  to  their  perfection.  Even 
heaven  itself  will  be  all  the  better  because  it  will 


116  According  to  Promise 

not  be  ours  till  it  is  prepared  for  us,  and  we  are 
prepared  for  it. 

Love  presides  over  the  arrangements  of  grace, 
and  strikes  upon  the  bell  when  the  best  moment 
has  arrived.  God  blesses  us  by  his  temporary 
delays,  as  well  as  by  his  prompt  replies.  We  are 
not  to  doubt  the  Lord  because  his  time  has  not  yet 
come  :  that  would  be  to  act  like  petulant  children, 
who  must  have  a  thing  at  the  instant,  or  else  they 
think  they  shall  never  have  it.  A  waiting  God  is 
the  true  object  of  confidence  to  his  waiting  people. 
"  Therefore  will  the  Lord  wait,  that  he  may  be 
gracious  unto  you  "  (Is.  xxx.  i8).  His  compassions 
fail  not  even  when  his  gracious  operations  appear 
to  be  suspended,  and  our  griefs  are  deepened. 
Yea,  it  is  because  he  loves  us  so  much  that  he  tries 
us  by  delaying  his  answers  of  peace.  It  is  with 
our  Father  in  heaven  even  as  it  was  with  our  Lord 
on  earth :  "  Now  Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her  sister, 
and  Lazarus.  When  he  had  heard  therefore  that 
he  was  sick,  he  abode  two  days  still  in  the  same 
place  where  he  was  "  (John  xi.  5,  6).  Love  closes 
the  hand  of  divine  bounty,  and  restrains  the  outflow 
of  favour,  when  it  sees  that  a  solid  gain  will  ensue 
from  a  period  of  trial. 

Perhaps  the  time  of  the  promise  has  not  yet 
come,  because  our  trial  has  not  yet  fulfilled  its 
design.  The  chastening  must  answer  its  purpose, 
or  it  cannot  be  brought  to  an  end.  Who  would 
desire  to  see  the  gold  taken  out  of  the  fire  before 
its  dross  is  consumed  ?  Wait,  O  precious  thing,  till 
thou  hast  gained    the   utmost    of   purity!     These 


The  Time  of  the  Promise  117 

furnace  moments  are  profitable.  It  would  be  unwise 
to  shorten  such  golden  hours.  The  time  of  the 
promise  corresponds  with  the  time  most  enriching 
to  heart  and  soul. 

Perhaps,  moreover,  we  have  not  yet  displayed 
sufficient  submission  to  the  divine  will.  Patience 
has  not  yet  had  her  perfect  work.  The  weaning 
process  is  not  accomplished  :  we  are  still  hankering 
after  the  comforts  which  the  Lord  intends  us  for 
ever  to  outgrow.  Abraham  made  a  great  feast 
when  his  son  Isaac  was  weaned  ;  and,  peradventure, 
our  heavenly  Father  will  do  the  same  with  us. 
Lie  down,  proud  heart  I  Quit  thine  idols  ;  forsake 
thy  fond  dotings  ;  and  the  promised  peace  will 
come  unto  thee. 

Possibly,  also,  we  have  not  yet  performed  a  duty 
which  will  become  the  turning-point  of  our  condition. 
The  Lord  turned  again  the  captivity  of  Job  when 
he  prayed  for  his  friends.  It  may  be  that  the  Lord 
will  make  us  useful  to  a  relative  or  other  friend 
before  he  will  favour  us  with  personal  consolations : 
we  are  not  to  see  the  face  of  our  Joseph  except 
our  brother  be  with  us.  Some  ordinance  of  the 
Lord's  house  may  lie  neglected,  or  some  holy  work 
may  be  left  undone ;  and  this  may  hinder  the 
promise.  Is  it  so  ?  "  Are  the  consolations  of  God 
small  with  thee?  Is  there  any  secret  thing  with 
thee  } "  Peradventure  we  are  yet  to  vow  unto  the 
Lord,  and  make  a  notable  sacrifice  unto  him,  and 
then  will  he  bring  his  covenant  to  mind.  Let  him 
not  have  to  complain,  "  Thou  hast  bought  me  no 
sweet  cane  with  money."     Rather  let  us  accept  his 


118  According  to  Promise 

challenge,  "  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  store- 
house, and  prove  me  now  herewith,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  if  I  will  not  open  you  the  windows  of 
heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing"  (Mai.  iii.  lo). 

God's  promises  are  so  dated  as  to  secure  his  glory 
in  their  fulfilment,  and  this  must  be  enough  for  us 
when  we  can  see  no  other  reason  for  delay.  It  may 
be  necessary  for  us  to  be  made  more  fully  aware  of 
our  need,  and  the  great  value  of  the  blessings  which 
we  crave.  That  which  too  lightly  comes  may  be 
too  lightly  prized.  Perhaps  our  ungrateful  spirits 
need  tutoring  to  thankfulness  by  an  education  of 
waiting.  We  might  not  loudly  sing  if  we  did  not 
deeply  sigh.  Wanting  and  waiting  lead  to  panting 
and  pleading ;  and  these  in  due  time  lead  to  joying 
and  rejoicing. 

If  all  things  could  be  known  to  us  as  they  are 
known  to  God,  we  should  bless  him  with  all  our 
hearts  for  keeping  us  under  the  smarting  rod,  and 
not  sparing  us  for  our  crying.  If  we  could  know 
the  end  as  well  as  the  beginning,  we  should  praise 
the  Lord  for  closed  doors,  and  frowning  looks,  and 
unanswered  petitions.  Surely,  if  we  knew  that  the 
Lord's  great  purposes  were  answered  by  our  con- 
tinuing without  the  pleasures  we  desire,  and  bearing 
the  evils  which  we  dread,  we  should  cry  aloud  to  be 
left  in  our  poverty,  and  to  be  shut  up  in  our  pain. 
If  we  can  glorify  God  by  being  denied  what  we 
seek,  we  desire  to  be  denied.  Greatest  of  all  our 
prayers,  and  sum  of  all  the  rest,  is  this  one, 
''^Nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 


The  Promises  in  Possession 
through  the  Spirit 

"That  holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  in- 
heritance until  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  possession,  unto 
the  praise  of  his  glory." — Eph.  i.  13,  14. 

IN  a  very  true  and  real  sense  the  things 
promised  in  the  covenant  are  already 
the  property  of  beHevers.  "All  things 
are  yours."  The  great  Father  might 
truly  say  to  each  one  of  the  sons  who  abide  in  his 
house,  "All  that  I  have  is  thine."  The  inheritance 
is  already  ours,  say  the  old  divines,  t'n  promisso,  in 
pretio,  in  principiis ;  that  is  to  say,  in  the  promise 
of  God,  in  the  price  paid  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  in 
its  first  principles  which  are  infused  into  us  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  In  his  sure  promise  the  Father  has 
already  "blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ":  he  has  not  only  re- 
solved to  enrich  us  in  the  future,  but  even  now  he 
has  endowed  us  with  the  treasures  of  his  love.  The 
Lord  Jesus  has  not  merely  made  us  heirs  of  an 
infinite  estate  in  the  ages  to  come,  but  he  has 
brought  us  into  immediate  enjoyment  of  a  present 
portion  ;  as  saith  the  Scripture,  "  In  whom  also  we 
have  obtained  an  inheritance." 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  in  many  ways  the  means  of 
making  the  promised  heritage  ours  even  now.     By 


120  According  to  Promise 

him  we  are  '*  sea/ed."     We  know  of  a  surety  that 
the  inheritance  is  ours,  and  that  we  ourselves  belong 
to  the  great  Heir  of  all  things.     The  operations  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  upon  us  in  our  regeneration,  and 
his  abiding  in  us  by  sanctification,  are  certificates 
of  our  being  in  grace,  and  of  our  being  inheritors  of 
qlory.      Beyond  all  other  testimonies  of  our  being 
saved,  there  stands  this  sure  and  certain  evidence, 
namely,  that  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  rests  upon 
us.      Repentance,  faith,  spiritual  life,  holy  desires, 
upward  breathings,  and  even  "groanings  which  can- 
not be  uttered,"  are  all  proofs  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  working  upon  us  ;  and  working  in  a  way  peculiar 
to  the  heirs  of  salvation.     Life  breathed  into  us  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  great  seal  of  the  kingdom  of 
God  to  our  souls.    We  need  no  dreams,  nor  visions, 
nor   mystic   voices,   nor    rapturous    feelings :     the 
quickening  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are 
better  seals  than  these.      The   Spirit   of  promise 
does  not  prepare  men  for  a  blessedness  which  shall 
never  be  theirs.     He  who  hath  wrought  us  to  the 
self-same  thing  will  secure  that  blessing  to  us  for 
which  he  hath  prepared  us.     The  faintest  impress 
of  the  seal  of  the  Spirit  is  a  better  attestation  of 
our  part  and  lot  with  the  people  of  God  than  all 
the  presumptuous  inferences  which  self-conceit  can 
draw  from  its  heated  fancies. 

Nor  is  the  Holy  Spirit  only  the  seal  of  the 
inheritance,  /le  is  also  the  earnest  of  it.  Now  an 
earnest  is  a  part  of  the  thing  itself,  given  as  a 
guarantee  that  the  remainder  will  be  forthcoming 
in  due  season.     If  a  man  is  paid  a  part  of  his  six- 


The  Promtsf.s  in  Possession  121 

days'  wage  in  the  middle  of  the  week,  it  is  earnest- 
money.  In  this  an  earnest  differs  from  a  pledge, 
for  a  pledge  is  returned  when  we  receive  that  which 
it  secured  ;  but  an  earnest  is  not  returned,  for  it  is  a 
part  of  that  which  is  promised.  Even  so  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  himself  a  great  portion  of  the  inheritance 
of  the  saints ;  and  in  having  him  we  have  the  be- 
ginning of  perfectness,  of  heaven,  of  eternal  glory. 
He  is  everlasting  life,  and  his  gifts,  graces,  and 
workings  are  the  first  principles  of  endless  felicity. 
In  having  the  Holy  Ghost  we  have  the  kingdom 
which  it  is  our  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  to 
his  chosen. 

This  will  be  made  clear  by  a  few  moments'  re- 
flection. Heaven  will  much  consist  in  holiness; 
and  it  is  clear  that,  as  far  as  the  Holy  Ghost  makes 
us  holy  here,  he  has  implanted  the  beginnings  of 
heaven.  Heaven  is  victory  ;  and  each  time  that  we 
overcome  sin,  Satan,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  we 
have  foretastes  of  the  unfading  triumph  which 
causes  the  waving  of  palms  in  the  New  Jerusalem. 
Heaven  is  an  endless  Sabbath  ;  and  how  can  we 
have  better  antepasts  of  the  perfect  rest  than  by 
that  joy  and  peace  which  are  shed  abroad  in  us  by 
the  Holy  Ghost?  Communion  with  God  is  a  chief 
ingredient  in  the  bliss  of  the  glorified  ;  and  here 
below,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  we  are  enabled  to 
delight  ourselves  in  the  Lord,  and  rejoice  in  the 
God  of  our  salvation.  Fellowship  with  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  all  his  gracious  designs  and  purposes,  and 
likeness  to  him  in  love  to  God  and  man,  are  also 
chief  constituents  in  our  perfected  condition  before 


122  According  to  Promise 

the  throne ;  and  these  the  Spirit  of  holiness  is 
working  in  us  from  day  to  day.  To  be  pure  in 
heart  so  as  to  see  God,  to  be  established  in  character 
so  as  to  be  fixed  in  righteousness,  to  be  strong  in 
good  so  as  to  overcome  all  evil,  and  to  be  cleansed 
from  self  so  as  to  find  our  all  in  God  ;  are  not 
these,  when  carried  to  the  full,  among  the  central 
benedictions  of  the  beatific  vision?  And  are  they 
not  already  bestowed  upon  us  by  that  Spirit  of 
glory  and  of  power  which  even  now  rests  upon  us? 
It  is  so.  In  the  Holy  Spirit  we  have  the  things  we 
seek  after.  In  him  the  flower  of  heaven  has  come 
to  us  in  the  bud,  the  dawn  of  the  day  of  glory  has 
smiled  upon  us. 

We  are  not,  then,  such  strangers  to  the  promised 
blessings  as  common  talk  would  make  us  out  to  be. 
Many  repeat,  like  parrots,  the  word,  "  Eye  hath 
not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into 
the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath 
prepared  for  them  that  love  him"  (i  Cor.  ii.  9)  ; 
but  they  fail  to  add  the  words  which  follow  in  the 
same  Scripture,  "  but  God  hath  revealed  them  unto 
us  by  his  Spirit."  What  cruelty  thus  to  cut  the 
living  child  of  Scripture  in  halves!  The  Holy 
Spirit  has  revealed  to  us  what  neither  eye  nor  ear 
has  perceived  :  he  has  drawn  back  the  curtains, 
and  bidden  us  see  the  secrets  hidden  from  ages 
and  from  generations.  Behold,  in  the  life  of  God 
within  your  soul,  the  everlasting  life  which  is  pro- 
mised to  them  that  love  God.  The  life  of  glory 
is  but  the  continuance  and  the  outgrowth  of  the 
life  of  grace.     Behold,  in   reconciliation   through 


Thf,  Promisfs  in  Possession  123 

the  atoning  blood,  that  celestial  peace  which  is  the 
groundwork  of  eternal  rest.  See,  in  the  love  of 
God  shed  abroad  in  the  believing  soul,  a  foretaste 
of  the  fragrance  of  felicity.  Mark,  in  the  immovable 
security  and  hallowed  serenity  of  full  assurance, 
a  forecast  of  the  infinite  repose  of  Paradise. 
When  our  inward  joys  swell  high,  and  burst  into 
a  song,  then  we  hear  preludes  of  the  heavenly 
hallelujahs.  If  we  would  knov/  the  clusters  of 
Canaan,  lo,  they  are  brought  to  us  by  those  emotions 
and  anticipations,  which,  under  the  guidance  of  the 
Spirit,  have  gone,  like  spies,  into  the  good  land,  and 
brought  us  hence  its  choicest  fruits ! 

It  is  not  only  that  we  sJiall  have  an  inheritance  : 
but  WE  HAVE  IT.  In  having  the  Holy  Spirit,  we 
are  already  put  in  possession  of  the  land  which 
floweth  with  milk  and  honey.  "  We  which  have 
believed  do  enter  into  rest  "  (Heb.  iv.  3).  "  Ye  are 
come  unto  mount  Sion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the 
living  God,  and  to  an  innumerable  company  of 
angels  "  (Heb.  xii.  22). 

What  remains  for  such  persons,  thus  made  par- 
takers of  a  divine  inheritance  in  the  Son  of  God, 
but  that  they  walk  worthy  of  their  high,  holy, 
heavenly  calling  ?  "  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ, 
seek  those  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ 
sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God  "  (Col.  iii.  i). 


Jesus  and  the  Promises 

"  For  all  the  promises  of  God  in  him  are  yea,  and  in  him  Amen, 
unto  the  glory  of  God  by  us." — 2  Cor.  i.  20. 

JESUS,  our  Lord,  stands  for  ever  con- 
nected with  the  way  of  the  promise. 
Indeed,  he  is  "  the  way,  the  truth,  and 
the  Hfe."  No  man  comes  to  the  Faith- 
ful Promiser  but  by  Jesus  Christ.  We  could  not 
close  this  Httle  book  without  a  short  chapter  upon 
HIM.  Our  hope  is  that  the  reader  will  not  attempt 
to  obtain  any  comfort  from  a  word  that  we  have 
written,  or  even  from  the  Word  of  God  itself, 
except  as  he  receives  it  through  Jesus  Christ. 
Apart  from  him  the  Scripture  itself  contains 
nothing  which  the  soul  of  man  may  live  upon. 
This,  indeed,  is  the  great  fault  of  many — they 
search  the  Scriptures,  for  in  them  they  think  they 
have  eternal  life,  but  they  will  not  come  unto 
Christ,  that  they  might  have  life.  Let  us  not  be 
of  this  foolish  company ;  but  let  us  come  to  Jesus 
day  by  day,  knowing  that  it  pleased  the  Fathe- 
that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell.  Only  as  we 
know  him  do  we  know  the  light,  life,  and  liberty 
of  the  heirs  of  promise ;  and,  as  surely  as  we 
wander  from  him  we  roam  into  bondage.  Oh,  for 
grace  to  abide  in  him,  that  we  may  possess  all 
the  good  things  of  the  covenant  made  with  us  in 
him  I 


Jesus  and  the  Promises  125 

Jesus  is  the  Gate  of  the  promises.  Througli  him 
the  Lord  is  able  to  enter  into  gracious  engagements 
with  guilty  men.  Until  "  the  seed  of  the  woman  " 
had  been  appointed  to  be  the  Mediator  between 
God  and  man,  no  messages  of  comfort  could  be 
sent  to  the  offending  race.  God  had  no  word  for 
sinners  till  the  Word  of  God  undertook  to  be  made 
flesh,  and  to  dwell  among  us.  God  could  not 
communicate  his  mind  of  love  to  men  except 
through  Jesus,  the  Word.  As  God  could  not  come 
to  us  apart  from  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant,  so 
we  could  not  approach  to  him  except  through  the 
Mediator.  Our  fears  drive  us  away  from  the  Holy 
One  till  we  see  in  the  Son  of  God  a  Brother  full  of 
tender  sympathy.  The  glory  of  the  divine  Trinity 
overawes  us  until  we  behold  the  milder  radiance  of 
the  Incarnate  God.  We  come  to  God  through  the 
humanity  of  his  Son,  and  especially  through  that 
humanity  suffering  and  dying  on  our  behalf. 

Jesus  is  the  Sum  of  all  the  promises.  When  God 
promised  his  Son  to  be  ours,  he  gave  us  in  him  all 
things  necessary  for  our  salvation.  Every  good  gift 
and  every  perfect  gift  will  be  found  within  the  per- 
son, offices,  and  work  of  our  Redeemer.  All  the 
promises  are  "in  him."  If  you  would  add  them  up, 
or  make  a  long  catalogue  of  all  the  blessings  which 
they  secure  to  us,  you  may  save  yourself  the  pains, 
and  be  happy  to  know  that  this  is  the  full  total — 
the  Lord  has  given  us  his  Son  Jesus.  As  all 
the  stars  are  in  the  sky,  and  all  the  waves  are  in 
the  sea,  so  are  all  covenant  blessings  in  Christ.  We 
cannot  think  of  a  real  blessing  outside  of  our  Lord: 


126  According  to  Promise 

He  is  all  in  all.  On  this  thread  all  pearls  are  strung: 
in  this  casket  all  gems  are  contained. 

Jesus  is  the  Guarantee  of  the  promises.  He  that 
spared  not  his  own  Son  will  deny  nothing  to  his 
people.  If  he  had  ever  thought  of  drawing  back,  he 
would  have  done  so  before  he  had  made  the  infinite 
sacrifice  of  his  Only-begotten  Son.  Never  can 
there  be  a  suspicion  that  the  Lord  will  revoke  any 
one  of  the  promises  since  he  has  already  fulfilled 
the  greatest  and  most  costly  of  them  all.  "  How 
shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things?" 

Jesus  is  the  Conjiymer  of  the  promises.  They  are 
"  in  him  yea,  and  in  him  Amen."  His  coming  into 
our  nature,  his  standing  as  our  federal  Head,  and 
his  fulfilling  of  all  the  stipulations  of  the  covenant, 
have  made  all  the  articles  of  the  divine  compact  firm 
and  enduring.  Now  is  it  not  only  kind  but  just 
with  God  to  keep  his  promises  to  men.  Since 
Jesus  has  rendered,  on  man's  behalf,  a  full  recom- 
pense to  the  divine  honour  which  sin  has  assailed, 
the  justice  of  God  unites  with  his  love  in  securing 
the  carrying  out  of  every  word  of  promise.  As  the 
rainbow  is  our  assurance  that  the  world  shall  never 
be  destroyed  by  a  flood,  so  is  Jesus  our  assurance 
that  the  floods  of  human  sin  shall  never  drown  the 
faithful  kindness  of  the  Lord.  He  has  magnified 
the  law,  and  made  it  honourable ;  he  must  be 
rewarded  for  his  soul-travail,  and  therefore  all 
good  things  must  come  to  those  for  whom  he  died. 
It  would  be  an  unhinging  and  dislocation  of  all 
things  if  the  promises  were  now  to  become  of  none 


Jesus  and  thf.  Promises  127 

effect  after  our  Lord  has  done  all  that  was  required 
to  make  them  sure.  If  we  are  indeed  one  with 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  promises  are  as  sure  to 
us  as  the  love  of  his  Father  is  to  him. 

Jesus  is  the  Remembrancer  of  the  promises.  He 
pleads  with  God  on  our  behalf,  and  his  plea  is  the 
divine  promise.  "  He  made  intercession  for  the 
transgressors."  For  the  good  things  which  he  has 
promised  the  Lord  will  be  enquired  of  by  us  that 
he  may  do  them  for  us  ;  and  that  this  enquiry  may 
be  carried  out  under  the  most  encouraging  circum- 
stances, behold,  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  becomes 
the  Intercessor  for  us:  for  Zion's  sake  he  doth  not 
hold  his  peace,  but  day  and  night  he  makes 
remembrance  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  and  of 
the  blood  whereby  it  was  sealed  and  ratified.  At 
the  back  of  every  promise  stands  the  living,  pleading, 
and  prevailing  High-priest  of  our  profession.  We 
may  forget  the  faithful  promise,  but  he  will  not : 
he  will  present  the  incense  of  his  merit,  and  the 
engagements  of  God  on  our  behalf,  in  that  place 
within  the  veil  where  he  exercises  omnipotent 
intercession. 

Jesus  is  the  Fidjiller  of  the  promises.  His  first 
Advent  brought  us  the  major  part  of  the  blessings 
which  the  Lord  has  foreordained  for  his  own,  and 
his  second  Advent  is  to  bring  us  the  rest.  Our 
spiritual  riches  are  linked  with  his  ever-adorable 
person.  Because  he  lives,  we  live ;  because  he 
reigns,  we  reign  ;  because  he  is  accepted,  we  are 
accepted.  Soon,  at  his  manifestation,  we  shall  be 
manifested  ;  in  his  triumph,  we  shall  triumph  ;  in 


128  According  to  Promise 

his  glory,  we  shall  be  glorified.  He  is  himself  the 
Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  the  promises  of  God  :  in 
him  we  have  found  life  as  sinners,  in  him  we  shall 
find  glory  as  saints.  If  he  be  not  risen,  our  faith  is 
vain  ;  and  if  he  come  not  a  second  time,  our  hope 
is  a  delusion  ;  but,  since  he  has  risen  from  the  dead, 
we  are  justified  ;  since  he  will  come  in  the  glory  of 
the  Father,  we  also  shall  be  glorified. 

Reader,  what  hast  thou  to  do  with 
Christ? 

All  will  depend  upon  thine  answer  to  this  ques- 
tion. Dost  thou  rest  alone  in  Him  ?  Then  the 
Lord  has  promised  to  bless  thee,  and  do  thee  good; 
and  he  will  surprise  thee  with  the  amazing  manner 
in  which  he  will  do  this  unto  thee.  Nothing-  is  too 
good  for  the  Father  to  give  to  the  man  who  delights 
in  his  Son  Jesus. 

On  the  other  hand,  art  thou  trusting  to  thine 
own  doings,  feelings,  prayings,  and  ceremonials? 
Then  thou  art  of  the  works  of  the  law,  and  thou 
art  under  the  curse.  See  what  we  said  of  the  seed 
of  Hagar,  the  bondwoman;  and- guess  what  thy 
portion  will  be.  Oh,  that  thou  wouldst  quit  the 
house  of  bondage,  and  flee  to  the  home  of  free 
grace,  and  become  one  whom  God  will  bless 

According  to  the  Promise  ! 

God  grant  this  great  favour  unto  thee  for  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake !     Amen. 


Princeton  Theological  Seminary  Libraries 


1    1012   01186  3208 


