6^ 


^/ 


aT**^! 


*i  \jr<S^ 


'11 


/'J 


/s. 


■^^ 


j,f  tUe  ®ltw%%|  ^ 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


'H 


\, 


Purchased   by  the   Hamill   Missionary   Fund. 


BV  3505 

.S33 

U5  1884 

\ 

Underhi 

11,  Edward  Bean, 

181 

-1901. 

Alfred 

Saker 

missionary 

to 

Af  rLij-;q 

-^^A*' 


ore  1 
ALFRED    SAKER, 

A      BIOGRAPHY. 


EDWARD    BEAN     UNDERHILL,    LL.D., 

Ilonorarij  Sccrctavij  of  Uie  Baptist  Missionary  Society. 


PUBLISHED     BY     THE     BAPTIST     MISSIONARY     SOCIETY, 
10,  CASTLE   STREET,    HOLBORN,   E.G., 

AND 

ALEXANDER  &  SHEPHEARD,  LONDON, 

ISSl. 


LONDON : 

PHIIfTBB     BY     ALBXANDBB      AND     8  H  B  P  H  E  A  B  Bv 

L0N3DALB   BCtLDINGS,   CHAJfCKBT    LIIIK. 


Paul's  love  oF  Christ,  and  steadiness  unbribed, 
Were  copied  close  in  him,  and  well  transcribed. 
He  folloAved  Paul :  his  zeal  a  kindred  flame, 
His  apostolic  charity  the  same. 
Like  him,  oioss'd  cheerfully  tempestuous  seas, 
ForsakiuL;  country,  kindred,  friends,  and  ease  : 
Like  him,  he  laboured,  and,  like  him,  content 
To  bear  it,  .suft'er'd  shame  where'er  he  went, 

COWPF.R. 


PREFACE. 


Alfred    Sakeh  wisliod  to  be   known  under  no   other 
■designation  than  a  "  Missionary  to  Africa " ;  and  it  is 
under  that  aspect  of  his  character  that  the  following 
pages  have   been  compiled.     All  the   energies  of   his 
nature  were  concentrated  on  that  one   object,  and  its 
fulfilment  he  held  to  constitute  his  one   claim  to  our 
regard.     But  in  otl^er  respects  he  was  a  man  worthy  of 
admiration   and   of  the  deepest  affection;  and  in   the 
pursuit  of  his  aim  he  never  ibrgot  the  claims  ..f  family 
love,  of  Christian  dut}^  or  of  the  Master  to  whom  with 
great  joy  he  gave  the  life  he  had  received  at  His  liands. 
Tor  the  purposes  of  this  biography,  I  have  been  much 
indebted  to  Mrs.  Saker  for  many  details  of  her  hus- 
band's early  life;   and  the  (Jommittee  of  the   Baptist 
Missionary  Society,  whose   honoured  servant   he   was, 
have  freely  placed  at  my  command  the  correspondence 
in  their  hands.     A  comparison  \\ith  some  pages  of  the 
Misdonary  Herald  will  show  that  I  have  freely  used 
many  statements  recorded  there;  Imt  as  tliey  wore  the 


X  PREFACE. 

production  of  my  own  pen,  and  often  derived  from  my 
own  personal  knowledge,  I  have  not  thouglit  it  neces- 
sary to  make  any  distinct  reference  to  the  paragraphs 
I  have  quoted  or  used. 

I  trust  that,  under  the  Divine  Blessing,  this  sketch  of 
a  noble  and  useful  life  will  contribute  to  deepen  the 
interest  of  the  Christian  Church  in  Foreign  Missions,, 
and  more  particularly  in  the  salvation  of  that  great 
Continent  which  still  so  lamentably  needs  the  utmost 
devotion  of  the  people  of  the  Lord. 

EDWARD  B.  UNDEPvHILL. 


Hami'STEAD,  Feb.  5th,  188.1^. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

VAGK. 

Early  Life  and  Consecration— 184M842      1 

Birthplace — Childhood — Youth  —  Conversion  —  Devotion  to 
Christ— In  Devonport  Dockyard  —  Marriage — Desire  for  a 
missionary  life. 

CHAPTER  II. 

Departure  for  Africa— 1843       8- 

Origin  of  the  African  Mission — The  exploration — Commence- 
ment at  Clarence — Objections  to  the  Mission — Explorers  diiven 
to  Jamaica — The  Chilmark  engaged — Departure  of  ]Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Saker — Voyage  to  Jamaica — Voyage  to  Fernando  Po — 
Sufferings  on  the  voyage — Arrival. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Commencement  of  Missionary  Labour— 1844-1845 20 

Reception  at  Clarence— First  trials— Personal  toil— First 
attempt.s  at  printing — Death  of  infant — Visit  to  Binibia  and 
the  Cameroons — Description  of  the  river — Warm  reception 
by  the  Dualla  chiefs— The  first  week. 

CHAPTER  IV, 
Pkkils  AiioNG  THE  Heathen— 1845-1846  2* 

The  A'kwa  towns — Barbarous  practices— Witchcraft— Mr. 
Saker's  residence — Its  purchase— Quarrels  of  the  chiefs- 
Learning  the  language— Review  of  the  first  year's  work. 


Xn  '  COXTE^'TS. 

CHArXEK  V. 

TAGE 

PekseveeaxjC'E  in  Laeove— 1846-1847      36 

Listless  attention  of  the  people — Sufferings — Mr.  Saker's  first 
visit  to  England — His  return  to  Africa — A  busy  life — Desire 
for  books — Begins  to  translate  the  Scriptures — Visit  to 
Clarence — Ba^itism  of  converts — Return  to  Cameroons— 
Cruelties  of  the  heathen — Building  of  a  school-house — Need  of 
better  dwellings. 

CHAPTER  VI. 
Anxious  Days— 1848-1850 44 

Residence  at  Clarence — Illness  and  de[iarture  of  missionaries 
— Appeal  for  help — Work  in  Clarence — Arri%al  of  the  Dove — 
A  day  of  joy — Shadows  retnm^ — Death  of  Mr.  Merrick — The 
work  at  Bethel — First  marriage  and  baptism — Formation  of 
a  church — Health,  and  voyage  to  England. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

The  Dawn  of  Bkighter  Days— 1850-1852       56 

Dr.  jSTewbegin's  death — Appeal  to  the  Committee — Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Saker's  return  to  Africa — Joyful  reception — Visit  to 
Bethel — Baptisms — Persecution  of  converts — ]\Ir.  Saker  again 
resides  at  Bethel — ^Manufacture  of  bricks — How  accomplished 
— Advance  of  the  Gospel — Destruction  of  chapel  at  Clarence 
—  Mr.  "Wheeler's  departure — Heavy  toil — Triumph  of  truth. 

CHAPTER  VI  n. 

The  MissioxAiiT  at  his  Wokk— 1853-1S56        69 

Bimbia  station — Causes  of  its  decay — The  work  at  Cameroons 
— The  church — The  sick  missionary — A'isit  to  England — 
Return  to  Africa — Persecution  of  convei-ts — Acquisition  of 
Dualla  langTiage — Books  prepared  and  printed^The  standard 
Alphabet. 


CONTENTS.  Xlll 

CHAPTER  IX. 

I'.VOK 

The  Home  of  Freedom— 1858      80 

Claim  of  Spain  to  Fernando  Po — The  missionaries  driven 
away — The  Mission  abandoned — -Exploration  of  Amboises  Bay 
— Description — Colony  of  Victoria  founded — Its  advantages 
— The  exiles —Laws  of  the  colony — The  home  of  freedom—- 
Grateful  retrospect. 

CHAPTER  X. 

Days  of  Hope-1S59-1861 97 

Progress  of  the  work — Composition  of  hymns  and  tunes — 
Visit  of  Mr.  DiboU  and  Mr.  Saker  to  England— Approval  of 
the  Committee — Return  voyage — Trials  of  the  Slission — 
Intense  activity  of  Jlr.  Saker — Completion  of  New  Testament 
— Classes  for  reading — Native  i|uarrels — The  Dualla  language 
and  people. 

CHAPTER  XL 
Ascent  of  the  Camerooxs  ]\Iouxtaix— 1861-1862      110 

The  start— The  native  population — The  ascent — Encampment 
— Traces  of  volcanic  action — The  summit— Final  ascent  by 
Captain  Burton — Return  to  Victoria. 

CHAPTER  XII. 
In  Peril  on  eveky  Side— 1862-1863       117 

Slow  growth  of  Victoria — Description  of  it — Departure  of  hia 
family  for  England — Interruptions  from  native  quarrels — 
Savage  life — Attempts  to  revive  tlie  slave  trade — Additions  to 
the  church — Failuie  of  health — Another  visit  to  England. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 
Perseveking  Toil— 1864-1869        125- 

Eeturn  voyage  to  Africa — State  of  Mission — Death  of  Mrs. 
Smith — Perseverance  in  manifold  labours — Death  of  Johnson 
— Obstruction  from  wars — Progress  in  translation — Danger  of 
drowning — Growth  of  the  work — Translation  of  Bible  com- 
pleted— Baptisms — Visit  to  England. 


XIV  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

PAGE 

Visit  of  the  Deputation— 1869-1870     133 

First  steps  of  the  Mission — Obstacles  and  difficulties — 
Diversity  of  judgment  among  the  missionaries — The  Deputa- 
tion— The  voyage — Causes  of  difference — Formation  of  local 
Committee — Secession  of  Mr.  Saker — Secular  work — Its 
necessity — Charges  of  extravagance  and  waste — Not  sustained 
— Visit  to  Victoria — Growth  of  the  colony — Mrs.  Underhill's 
decease — Report  of  Deputation. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

The  Last  Days  in  Africa— 1870-1876 145 

His  great  task  completed — Study  of  the  prophets — The  steam- 
launch — Voyages  up  the  rivers — Ravages  of  small-pox — 
Arrangements  for  the  Mission — A  retrospect — Mr.  Grenfellon 
effect  of  his  labours^Leaves  Africa. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

<Jlosing  Days— 1877-1880 156 

Arrival  in  England — Health  of  ]\Ir.  Saker — The  Congo 
Jlission — Speech  at  Cannon  Street — Reception  at  Glasgow — 
His  address — His  daughter's  consecration  to  the  work — Mr. 
Gust's  testimony — Decline  in  health — Approach  of  death- 
Closing  scene — Mr.  Raynes  on  Mr.  Saker's  life  and  death — 
The  funeral — Reception  of  the  news  at  Cameroons — Character 
of  Alfred  Saker — Dr.  Livingstone's  and  other  testimony. 


APPENDIX 


No.  PAGE 

I. — Regulations  for  the  Colony  of  Victoria,  Amboisks  B.vy  169 

II. — Resolution  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society  on  the 

Death  of  the  Rev.  Alfred  Saker 172 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


FROXTIsI'IKiK— POJITH.UT   OF   TtEV,    ALFRED   SaKEU. 

1. — Arrival  of  the  "Chilmark"  at  Clarence 

2. — a  a'lllage  on  the  cameroon's      

3. — KiNf;  A'kava'.s  House  axd  Street 

4.— Bethel  Chapel,  Cameroox.s  

o. — Bird's-eye  View  of  Victoria 

6.— Mission-house  and  School,  Amboises  Bay 

7. — Cameroons  Mountain',  kiiom  A'ictoria    ... 

8.— Victoria  Charel,  Amboises  Bay 

9-— CH.A,rEL  AT  Hickory,  or  Mortonville   ... 

10. — New  .Mission-house,  Victoria      

11. — On  the  Mungo  River         

12.— Map  of  Cameroons  River,  &c.,  &c. 


PAGE 

20 
28 
30 
G4 
92 
96 

no 
lis 

12S 
144 
143 
16S 


ALFEED    SAKEE. 

A  BIOGEAPHY. 


CHAPTER    I. 

EAKLY  LIFE  AXD  CONSECRATION,  1814-1842. 

HE  small  hamlet  of  Borough  Green,  in  the 
parish  of  Wrotham,  Kent,  was  the 
birthplace  of  Alfred  Saker.  It  lies  in 
a  richly  cultivated  district,  below  the 
chalk  cliffs  that  rise  to  the  north,  from 
whence  may  be  seen,  looking  over  the  (|uiet  village  of 
Wrotham,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  of  the  many  lovely 
landscapes  that  the  weald  of  Kent  offers  to  the  lovers 
■of  scenery.  It  is  a  district  of  meadows,  cornfields,  and 
hop-gardens,  interspersed  with  shaws  and  orchards. 
Near  at  ha  ad  are  the  fine  plantations  and  woods  sur- 
rounding Mereworth  Castle.  Still  nearer  to  the  little 
Green,  on  the  north-west,  is  Addington,  with  its  numer- 
ous memorials  of  Druidical  times  in  circles,  broken 
cromlechs,  and  the  remains  of  a  great  stone  avenue  that 
remind  the  traveller  of  the  monumental  lines  of  Carnac 
in  Brittany. 

Not  far  from  Borough  Green,  to  the  west,  is  the  con- 
siderable village  of  Ightham,  with  its  interesting  relics 

1 


2  ALFRED   SAKER. 

of  the  Eoman  occupation,  consisting  of  a  large  intrench- 
ment  and  traces  of  a  Eoman  road,  which  appears  to 
have  run  through  Borough  Green  itself. 

Here  Alfred  Saker  was  born  on  the  21st  July,  1814, 
and  amid  these  scenes  he  spent  the  years  of  his  child- 
hood. His  father  was  a  millwright  and  engineer,  and 
the  parent  of  a  large  family  of  children,  many  of  whom 
died  in  infanc}'.  Alfred  was  a  weakly  babe,  and,  m  the 
opinion  of  the  old  nurse,  "  was  not  worth  rearing."  He 
grew  an  exceedingly  sensitive  child,  a  gentle,  retiring 
boy,  feeble  in  frame  and  caring  little  for  the  boisterous 
games  of  the  children  that  gave  life  to  the  quiet 
village.  The  only  school  his  parents  could  afford  to 
send  him  to  was  the  National  School  of  the  place.  He 
early  showed  a  great  love  for  books,  and  preferred  their 
society  to  that  of  his  playmates  on  the  Green.  At  ten 
years  of  age  he  had  mastered  all  the  lessons  of  the 
school,  and  had  made  besides  good  progress  in  arith- 
metic and  in  the  geometry  of  Euclid.  He  therefore  left, 
and  soon  after  entered  his  father's  workshop,  carrying 
with  him  an  eager  thirst  for  knowledge,  filling  every 
leisure  hour  with  study,  and  spending  every  spare  penny 
in  acquiring  the  books  and  instruments  he  longed  to 
possess. 

Among  other  acquisitions,  he  learnt  to  sing.  He  had 
a  sweet  voice,  which  he  generally  exercised  in  the  choir 
of  Ightham  church;  but  he  often  accompanied  his 
choral  companions  to  Wrotham,  where  the  father  of  his 
future  wife  was  the  leader  of  the  church's  song.  Before 
he  was  fifteen  years  of  age,  he  had  purchased  a  large 
pair  of  globes,  which,  at  a  later  period,  he  gave  to  the 
Society  of  which  he  became  an  honoured  missionary ; 
they  are   now  preserved  in   the   library  of  the   Mis- 


EARLY   LIFE   AND   COXSECKATION.  'f 

sion  House.  A  telescope  was  also  among  the  scientitic 
treasures  he  dearly  loved,  and  with  which  he  spent 
hours  in  the  fields  behind  his  father's  house  till  lona" 
after  midnight,  watching  the  stars.  Before  he  was  six- 
teen, he  had  constructed  a  small  steam-engine,  which 
remained  in  his  possession  till  he  sold  it  on  the  eve  of 
his  departure  for  Africa. 

All  these  incidents  of  Alfred  Saker's  youth  are 
eminently  characteristic  of  the  man  he  became,  and  in 
the  Providence  of  God  his  self-chosen  pursuits  were  the 
most  useful  preparation  that  could  have  been  devised 
for  his  future  career. 

Up  to  this  time  Alfred  Saker's  mind  does  not  appear 
to  have  been  awake  to  the  claims  of  the  Gospel  on  his 
faith  and  love.  They  had  probably  never  been  pressed 
on  his  attention.  There  was,  indeed,  a  small  Baptist 
chapel  in  the  hamlet,  which,  however,  it  is  likely  he 
had  never  entered.  The  people  attending  it  were  poor 
and  despised,  and  the  good  old  minister,  the  Eev.  John 
Morris,  was  much  persecuted.  The  small  community 
over  which  Mr.  Morris  watched  had  been  formed  in 
1809,  and  for  twenty-one  years  he  held  the  office  of  its 
Pastor.  In  1830  he  was  removed  by  death,  and  was 
followed  in  his  ministry  by  tlie  Rev.  Wm.  Bolton,  Mr. 
Bolton  was  a  man  of  much  energy  and  singular  zeal, 
and  his  coming  was  followed  by  a  revival  in  the  con- 
gregation. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  Mr.  Saker  was  "  lent "  by 
his  father  to  assist  in  a  millwright's  business  in  Seven- 
oaks.  One  Sabbath  evening  he  was  strolling  alone 
through  the  street,  when  the  singing  in  a  chapel  that  he 
passed  drew  his  attention.  He  entered.  The  excellent 
pastor,  the  Ptev.  Thos.  Shirley,  was  not,  however,  the 

1* 


4:  ALFRED   SAKER. 

preacher,  but  some  stranger.  The  words  to  which  the 
youth  listened  fastened  on  his  susceptible  mind,  and 
the  quiet  hours  of  the  night  that  followed  witnessed  the 
consecration  of  his  life  to  the  service  and  the  kingdom 
of  his  Saviour.  The  preacher's  name  he  never  knew, 
nor  probably  was  the  fact  of  Mr.  Saker's  conversion, 
through  his  sermon,  ever  made  known  to  him ;  but,  in 
after-years,  Mr.  Saker  often  referred  to  the  incident  as 
an  encouragement  to  earnest  labourers  in  Christ's  vine- 
yard, who  yet  may  remain  ever  ignorant  of  the  effect 
that  their  work,  under  God's  blessing,  may  have 
wrought.  He  soon  returned  home,  and  at  once  became  a 
teacher  in  Mr.  Bolton's  Sunday-school,  and  shortly  after 
its  superintendent.  He  assisted  in  the  choir,  and  as  his 
gifts  drew  attention,  he  was  prompt  to  exercise  them  in 
the  cottages  and  hamlets  around.  He  took  an  active 
part  in  every  good  work.  Though  modest  and  unas- 
suming in  manner,  he  did  not  fail  to  exhibit  that 
firmness  and  persistency  of  character  which,  in  later 
years,  shone  out  so  fully.  In  a  recent  reminiscence  of 
these  days,  a  life-long  friend  says  of  him  :  "  What  is 
most  memorable  to  me  now,  was  the  earnestness  of  his 
devotion,  and  of  his  pleadings  with  God  at  the  prayer- 
meetings.  So  much  was  this  the  case  that  I  seem  to 
hear,  even  now,  his  earnest  tones,  although  more  than 
forty  years  have  passed  away."  On  the  4th  January, 
1834,  when  nearly  twenty  years  of  age,  he  was  baptized 
by  Mr.  Fremling,  of  Footscray,  and  became  a  member  of 
the  church  in  the  village  of  his  nativity. 

With  the  public  devotion  of  himself  to  Christ,  he 
be«jan  to  extend  his  labours  in  every  direction.  His 
evenings  were  either  given  to  self-improvement  or  he 
would  go  to  some  member's  house,  where  a  few  lowly 


EARLY  LIFE  AND   CONSECRATION.  5 

people  were  gathered  for  converse  and  prayer.  His  fit- 
ness for  evangelistic  service  became  more  and  more 
apparent.  Not  a  village  or  hamlet  in  the  neighbour- 
hood was  left  untouched  by  his  zealous  ministrations. 
"  The  first  time,"  says  the  friend  already  referred  to,  "that 
I  remember  going  with  him  was  to  Wrotham  Common. 
This,  perhaps,  may  be  regarded  as  the  beginning  of  liis 
ministry.  It  was  a  voluntary  movement  on  his  part, 
but  most  cordially  approved  by  his  brethren.  At  Piatt, 
Ightham,  among,  the  huts  of  the  sand  diggers  on 
Wrotham  Commoni,  and  at  other  places  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood, he  sought  and  found  opportunities  to  carry 
on  the  good  work."  The  church  soon  called  him  to 
exercise  his  ministry  in  a  more  formal  way,  and  for 
some  time,  at  their  request,  he  occupied  every  other 
Sabbath  the  little  chapel  at  Plaxtol. 

The  death  of  his  father,  in  1838,  led  Mr.  Saker  to 
decide  on  seeking  employment  elsewhere.  He  accord- 
ingly applied  at  various  dockyards,  and,  after  passing 
his  examination  at  Woolwich,  he  was  appointed  to  a 
situation  in  Devonport.  In  his  studies  for  the 
examination  he  obtained  valuable  assistance  from  the 
late  Eev.  Jno.  Cox,  of  Woolwich,  His  work  at  the 
Devonport  yard  chiefly  consisted  in  the  preparation  of 
drawings  for  the  Admiralty.  They  were  of  suflicient 
excellence  to  secure  his  promotion  on  the  first  vacancy. 
In  October,  1839,  he  was  sent  for  nine  months  to  the 
dockyard  at  Deptford,  to  superintend  the  erection  of 
machinery. 

In  the  following  month  of  February,  he  was  married 
to  Miss  Helen  Jessup,  and  at  the  close  of  his  engage- 
ment at  Deptford,  he  returned  to  Devonport. 

In    the    early    days   of    his   Christian  life,  he   had 


6  '  ALFRED   SAKER. 

formed  tlie  desire  to  consecrate  his  powers  to  the 
service  of  Christ  in  Africa,  but  he  was  more  espe- 
cially stirred  at  this  period  to  offer  himself  for  this 
work  by  the  striking  narratives  of  the  Kev.  John 
Clarke  and  Dr.  Prince,  on  their  return  from  a  visit 
of  exploration  to  the  West  Coast,  in  the  year  1842, 
In  this  wish  he  was  encouraged  by  his  devoted 
wife.  The  counsel  and  opinion  of  his  highly  esteemed 
pastor,  the  Eev.  Thos.  Horton,  brought  decision  to  the 
yearnings  of  his  heart,  and,  after  some  delay,  he  was 
accepted  by  the  Committee  of  the  Baptist  Missionary 
Society.  He  owed  much  to  the  ministry  of  Mr. 
Horton.  "Writing  many  years  after  to  Mrs.  Horton,  on 
the  decease  of  her  husband,  Mr.  Saker  thus  speaks  of 
the  benefit  that  he  received  during  the  years  of  his 
connection  with  him: — "  I  shall  ever  remember  the 
debt  I  owe  to  the  departed.  In  my  early  days  he 
showed  me  the  beauty  of  holiness  in  a  devoted  human 
life,  and  also  by  his  teaching  and  counsel  incited  all 
my  affections  and  faculties  in  earnest  efforts  to  promote 
the  present  and  future  happiness  of  the  human  family. 
And  in  whatever  respect  my  life  in  Africa  has  been  a 
blessing,  it  has  resulted  greatly  from  the  teaching  of 
those  early  days,  even  as  the  harvest  from  the  seed 
sown.  Oft  I  meditated  writing  to  him  while  yet 
among  us  on  earth — my  attempts  were  failures.  I 
wanted  to  give  him  a  brief  account  of  tlie  result,  through 
his  help,  of  my  life's  toil, — in  a  written  language,  a 
completed  Bible,  the  conversion  of  hundreds,  the  training 
of  young  men  to  teach  and  to  preach,  and  the  gathering 
together  of  churches  to  maintain  the  ordinances  of 
divine  service  ;  thus  securing,  as  far  as  human  eye  can 
see,  the  dissemination  of  the  word  of  God  with  all  its 


EARLY  LIFE  AND   CONSECRATION.  7 

benign  influences.  Such  lines  have  never  been 
written ;  the  pleasure  to  me  to  tell,  and  the  departed 
to  hear,  was  denied.  I  could  neitlier  write  nor  travel. 
May  the  mercies  of  God  be  long  continued  to  you  and 
yours  in  tliis  life,  and,  finally,  the  joy  of  endless  life 
with  the  holy  above." 

Mr.  Saker's  residence  in  Devonport  w^as  a  period  of 
useful  preparation  for  his  missionary  career,  and  he 
found  in  his  connection  with  the  church  in  Morrice 
Square,  a  fitting  sphere  for  the  exercise  of  his  gifts. 
Old  scholars  still  living,  tell  of  his  labours  in  tlie 
Sunday-school  with  devout  thankfulness,  and  speak 
with  tears  of  gratitude  of  his  strenuous  exertions  for 
tlieir  highest  welfare. 


CHAPTER    II. 

Depaetuee  foe  Afeica,  1843. 

MOISrCTST  the  earliest  results  in  Jamaica 
of  the  great  Act  of  Emancipation,  was 
the  earnest  desire  of  numbers  of  the 
freed  Africans  to  convey  the  Gospel  to 
the  land  of  their  fathers.  Many  still 
remembered  the  homes  from  which  they  had  been  torn,, 
and  longed  to  revisit  the  j^lf^ce  of  their  l)irth  to  com- 
municate the  "  riches  of  mercy,"  of  which  they  had 
become  the  grateful  recipients  in  the  house  of  their 
bondage.  Encouraged  by  numerous  offers  of  personal 
service,  and  by  the  abounding  liberality  of  the  Jamaica 
churches,  the  Committee  of  the  Baptist  Missionary 
Society,  mindful  of  the  Divine  blessing  that  had 
crowned  its  labours  with  such  large  success  in  the 
chief  island  of  the  Antilles,  felt  itself  compelled,  in  its 
year  of  Jubilee,  to  undertake  this  arduous  enterprise.. 
The  time  was  auspicious,  and  the  triumph  of  freedom 
over  slavery  could  not  more  signally  or  gratefully  be 
commemorated  than  by  an  effort  to  give  the  light  of  life 
to  that  "  Dark  Continent,"  and  to  atone  for  the  crimes- 
that  English  greed  had  for  centuries  committed,  by 
proclaiming  in  Africa  itself  the  glad  tidings  of  a  Divine 
liberty  from  on  high. 

It  was  at  once  seen  to  be  indispensable  that  fuller 
information  than  was  then  accessible  should  be  obtained,. 


DEPARTUEE   FOR   AFRICA.  9 

both  as  to  the  feasibility  of  a  mission  on  the  western 
coast  of  Africa,  and  as  to  the  spot  most  suitable  for  its 
commencement.  For  this  purpose  the  Eev.  John 
Clarke,  of  Jericho,  Jamaica,  and  Dr,  G.  K.  I'rince,  who 
had  practised  the  healing  art  there  with  reputation  and 
success,  were  invited  by  the  Committee  to  proceed  on 
this  necessary  errand.  Their  long  residence  in  the 
tropics,  and  their  knowledge  of  the  negro  character,, 
gave  them  special  fitness  for  the  work  of  exploration. 
They  embarked  on  board  a  trading  vessel  proceeding  to> 
Africa  on  the  13th  October,  1840,  and  after  sailing 
leisurely  along  the  western  coast,  calling  at  Cape 
Palmas  and  Cape  Coast  Castle  on  the  way,  they  reached 
the  island  of  Fernando  Po  on  the  following  New  Year's 
Day.  Every  opportunity  of  procuring  information  was 
eagerly  embraced.  Intercourse  with  the  natives  was. 
everywhere  sought,  and  minute  intpiiries  were  made  as 
to  the  probable  reception  of  the  messengers  of  the  Cross. 
At  Clarence,  Fernando  Po,  many  of  the  inhabitants 
were  found  to  possess  some  acquaintance  with  English ; 
while  from  the  situation  of  the  island,  nearly  opposite 
the  important  river  Cameroons,  ready  access  could  be 
had  to  the  interior  of  the  continent,  which  lay  only 
twenty  miles  away,  presenting  a  coast-Kne  of  moun- 
tain and  valley  unrivalled  for  grandeur  and  salubrity 
on  tlie  sea-board  of  the  western  coast.  From  Clarence 
the  travellers  passed  over  to  the  mainland,  visited  the 
chiefs,  and  met  everywhere  with  a  cordial  welcome. 
They,  therefore,  resolved,  while  awaiting  the  resolution 
of  the  Committee  on  their  report,  to  commence  their 
labours  in  Fernando  Po,  and  to  watch  for  the  open- 
ings that  Providence  might  offer  to  the  great  region 
beyond. 


10  ALFRED   SAKEK. 

On  reference  to  a  map,  it  will  be  seen  that  Fernando 
Po  lies  in  the  Gulf  of  Biafra,  near  to  the  coast  of  Guinea. 
The  island  is  about  forty  miles  in  length  by  twenty  in 
breadth.  It  is  nearly  120  miles  in  circumference,  and, 
like  the  adjacent  part  of  the  mainland,  is  very  moun- 
tainous ;  Clarence  Peak,  the  most  elevated  point,  attain- 
ing the  height  of  10,700  feet.  The  southern  extremity 
is  intersected  by  several  steep  mountains,  varying  from 
1,000  to  3,000  feet  in  height,  which,  with  the  interven- 
ing valleys,  are  covered  with  dense  forests  of  large  and 
valual)le  timber,  and  watered  by  numerous  rivulets. 
The  wet  season  commences  at  the  latter  end  of  May, 
and  continues  till  the  end  of  November.  The  sea 
breeze  is  regular,  but  the  land  breeze  is  often  inter- 
cepted by  the  high  range  of  mountains  on  the  main- 
land. 

Clarence,  the  principal  settlement,  is  on  the  north 
side  of  the  island,  in  latitude  3^  53'  N.,  and  longitude 
7°  40 '  E.,  and  is  built  close  to  the  sea  upon  an  elevated 
plain,  embracing  two  small  peninsulas,  Point  William 
and  Point  Adelaide,  with  a  semi-circular  space  extend- 
ing about  a  mile  in  length,  and  forming  a  cove  well 
adapted  for  shipping.  The  spot  is  fertile,  and  the  water 
of  the  best  quality.  The  tribes  inhabiting  the  interior 
were  in  a  state  of  nature — wild,  savage,  and  without 
culture.  But  the  people  of  Clarence  were,  for  the  most 
part,  liberated  slaves,  brought  there  by  the  British 
cruisers,  finding  a  sufficient  livelihood  in  supplying  the 
wants  of  the  vessels  frequenting  the  coast. 

The  labour  of  the  missionaries  among  these  people 
soon  met  with  an  abundant  reward.  By  the  begin- 
ning of  the  year  1842  five  persons  had  been  baptized, 
numerous  inquirers  gathered  into  a  catechumen  class, 


DEPARTURE   FOR   AFRICA.  11 

and  a  school  of  seventy  cliildren  formed.  The  wikl 
Adeeyahs  of  the  mountainous  interior  had  been  visited, 
and  the  foundations  laid  for  future  labour  amongst 
them.  So  encouraging  were  the  reports  sent  home, 
that  the  Committee  lost  no  time  in  announcing  their 
decision,  and  in  sending  out  the  liev.  Thos.  Sturgion 
and  his  wife,  permanently  to  occupy  the  fertile  held 
that  the  Island  of  Fernando  Po  seemed  to  present. 

Now  that  forty  years  have  elapsed  since  the  resolution 
was  taken  to  establish  the  mission  on  the  West  Coast 
of  Africa,  it  may  be  useful  to  recall  the  objections  and 
prejudices  which  had  to  be  overcome.  The  resolutions 
of  the  general  meeting  of  the  Society  open  with  the 
remark,  that  the  obstacles  to  such  an  enterprise  had 
hitherto  been  deemed  insuperable.  The  inquiries  of  the 
deputation,  however,  removed  this  objection.  But  there 
were  excellent  persons  who  thought  that  the  attempt  to 
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  children  of  Ham  was  a  profane 
interference  with  a  Divine  decree.  The  African  natives, 
they  said,  were  suffering  from  "  the  judicial  sentence  of 
God  against  them ; "  but,  af&rnis  the  resolution  in  reply, 
"  the  Gospel  which  repeals  every  national  malediction, 
and  addresses  itself  to  every  creature,"  had  rendered  this 
sentence  of  none  effect.  The  asserted  mental  inferiority 
of  the  negro  race  was  next  dealt  with ;  this,  if  true,  it  was 
replied,  had  doubtless  been  intensified,  if  not  caused,  by 
the  horrid  cruelties  of  slavery,  and  by  the  demoralising 
vices  that  it  encouraged.  But  slavery,  and  the  slave  trade, 
had  received  an  irrecoverable  blow  by  the  action  of  the 
British  Parliament,  and  missionary  culture  elsewhere 
sufficiently  proved  that  the  negro  mind  was  fully  capable 
of  instruction.  With  regard  to  the  deadly  nature  of  the 
clhnate,  it  was  hoped  that  its  perils  might,  in  great  mea- 


12 


ALFEED   SAKEK. 


sure,  be  overcome  by  the  employment  of  men  acclima- 
tised in  the  tropical  regions  of  the  West  Indies,  and 
fitted,  by  natural  constitution,  to  encounter  its  dangers. 
The  agency  offered  by  the  Jamaica  churches  would,  it 
was  thought,  meet  tlie  difficulty,  and  the  new  army  of 
the  Lord  could  be  ofdcered  by  a  few  trained  men  that 
England  would  supply.  Thus  the  churches  of  Britain 
might  fitly  celebrate  the  fiftieth  year  of  the  Society's 
existence,  and  hope  to  find,  even  in  Africa,  "  a  place 
for  the  Lord,  a  habitation  for  the  mighty  God  of 
Jacob."  "  ISTo  field,"  adds  the  committee,  "  is  more 
worthy  of  cultivation  than  this,  nor  is  any  more  likely 
to  repay  the  toils  of  the  husbandman."* 

In  order  to  facilitate  the  proposed  arrangements,  ]\Ir. 
Clarke  and  Dr.  Prince  early  in  the  year  (1842)  took 
ship  to  return  to  England.     By  a  "  signal  providence  " 
their  vessel,  struck  by  lightning  and  dismasted,  was  left 
to  the  kindly  influences  of  the  trade  winds,  and  drifted 
across  the  Atlantic  to  the  West  Indies.     Some  days 
were  spent  among  the  Windward  islands,  but  at  length 
the   voyagers    reached    Jamaica.       Their    unexpected 
coming  aroused  the  enthusiasm  and  touched  the  sym- 
pathies of  the  congregations.    Tlie  hand  of  the  Lord  was 
in  it.     Numerous  candidates  for  service  in  Africa  came 
forward,  some  of  whom  were  examined  and  approved. 
The  stay  of  the  two  explorers,  however,  was  brief,  and,, 
again  taking  ship,  in  company  with  the  Eev.  Josepli 
Merrick,  who  resigned  the  charge  of  a  large  church  at. 
Jericho   for   the   mission  work,  the  voyagers  reached 
England   on   the   8th   September.     Their   presence  in 
numerous  meetings  served  to   deepen  the  interest  of 

•  Keport  for  1842,  resolutions  of  the  fiftieth  annual  meeting. 


DEPARTURE   FOR  AFRICA.  13 

British  Christians  in  the  evangelisation  of  Africa,  and, 
in  the  course  of  a  few  months,  the  services  of  four 
brethren,  with  their  wives,  were  accepted.  One  of  the 
four  was  Alfred  Saker. 

For  the  transport  of  the  West  Indian  contingent,  a 
sailing  vessel,  the  Chilmark,  of  only  179  tons  mea- 
surement, was  engaged.  It  was  resolved,  that  Mr. 
Clarke  and  Mr.  Saker,  with  their  families,  should  pro- 
ceed in  her  to  Jamaica,  and  accompany  the  chosen 
band.  The  rest  of  the  missionaries,  led  by  Dr.  Prince, 
sailed  direct  for  Fernando  Po. 

The  sorrows  of  parting  with  many  beloved  friends, 
both  in  Kent  and  in  Devonshire,  were  deeply  felt  by 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Saker ;  but  on  the  16th  August,  1843, 
tlie  last  words  were  spoken,  and,  with  their  little 
daughter  Eliza,  they  left  London  for  Portsea,  there  to 
embark.  The  same  evening  a  farewell  service  was  held 
in  the  chapel  of  the  Pev.  C.  Poom,  in  which  ]\Ir.  Saker, 
with  his  companions  Mr.  Clarke  and  Mr.  Hume  (a 
Baptist  missionary,  likewise  bound  for  Jamaica),  took 
part.  The  ship  did  not  arrive  at  Portsmouth  till  the 
18th.  Early  on  the  19th  they  went  on  board  the 
Chilmarh,  and  by  ten  o'clock  were  passing  through 
the  Solent.  "  We  had,"  says  Mr.  Saker,  "  a  lovely  view 
of  the  garden  of  England,  the  Isle  of  Wight.  Its  glens, 
hills,  parks,  and  towns  appeared  in  beauteous  prospect. 
Towards  night  we  passed  The  Needles,  and  ere 
morning  anchored  at  Poole."  The  voyage  connnenced 
auspiciously ;  but  in  a  day  or  two  the  weather  changed, 
baffling  winds  hindered  their  progress,  calms  delayed 
them,  and  sea-sickness  aftlicted  all  the  party.  The 
smallness  of  the  vessel,  the  scanty  accommodation 
provided    by    the    owners    of    the    vessel,    and    bad 


14  ALFRED    SAKER. 

provisions  added  to  their  misery.  Mr.  Saker  was 
compelled  to  sleep  on  the  floor  of  the  saloon,  and 
the  eight  weeks  that  the  voyage  to  Jamaica  lasted 
were  passed  iu  great  discomfort,  and  ofttimes  distress. 
Still  the  days  were  utilised  by  much  reading.  An 
Adeeyah  vocabulary  prepared  by  Mr.  Clarke  was 
copied,  and  the  elements  of  the  Houssa  grammar  were 
studied.  In  his  remarks  on  their  pursuits,  Mr.  Saker, 
in  his  diary,  thus  early  betrays  the  purpose  he  had 
formed  : — "  May  the  Lord  assist  me,"  he  says,  "  to  study 
these  languages  until  we  shall  be  able  to  give  to  the 
millions  of  Africa  the  word  of  God  in  their  own  tongue." 
The  Sabbaths  too  were  days  of  delight,  and,  in  holy 
worship  of  the  Master  they  served,  the  little  band 
found  consolation  and  peace. 

On  the  forty-eighth  day  of  the  voyage,  at  dawn,  the 
welcome  cry  was  heard  of  "land  ahead,"  "After 
giving  utterance  to  my  gTateful  feelings,"  says  IMr. 
Saker,  "I  hastened  on  deck  to  see  the  long-desired 
object.  The  head-land  of  Deseda  was  clearly  descried 
in  the  distant  gloom.  I  ascended  the  rigging,  and,  after 
half-an-hour's  search,  just  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  dark 
outline  of  Antigua,  rising  like  three  majestic  rocks  on 
the  distant  horizon.  Oh  !  it  was  a  pleasant  sight,  after 
forty-eight  days'  imprisonment  to  the  narrow  limits  of  a 
vessel,  and  the  monotonous  scenes  of  a  long  passage." 
During  the  day  Guadaloupe,  and  nearer  at  hand  the 
romantic  islands  of  Montserrat,  Nevis,  and  St.  Kitts,  were 
passed ;  but  contrary  winds  delayed  their  approach  to 
Jamaica.  On  the  afternoon  of  Friday,  the  13th  of 
October,  the  grand  outlines  of  the  Blue  Mountains  came 
in  sight,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  voyagers.  The  morning 
of    the   day   was    squally,   and    at    midday    thunder, 


DEPARTURE   FOR   AFRICA.  15 

lightning,  and  rain  stayed  their  course.  Some  of  the 
sails  of  the  vessel  were  torn  in  pieces  by  the  violence 
of  the  storm.  The  next  day,  Saturday,  was  calm,  and 
before  noon  the  ship  was  safely  anchored  in  the  harbour 
of  Port  Eoyal.  In  the  evening  the  party  was  heartily 
welcomed  by  the  brethren  and  friends  in  Kingston. 

Mr.  Saker  conducted  the  services  of  the  Lord's-day 
at  Spanish  Town,  and  returning  on  Monday  to  the 
Chilmarh,  sailed  with  his  family  to  Black  Eiver, 
where  they  spent  three  weeks  of  grateful  rest  and 
enjoyment  with  the  esteemed  missionary,  the  JXq\. 
Thos.  May,  whom  they  had  known  at  Saltash,  in 
Devonshire.  Most  gratifying  visits  were  also  paid  to 
the  venerable  missionary,  the  Eev.  Thos.  Burchell,  at 
Mount  Carey,  and  to  the  home  of  the  Eev.  Thos. 
Cornford  at  Montego  Bay,  with  whom  also  they  had 
been  previously  acquainted  in  England;  thence  they 
proceeded  to  Falmouth  to  embark  for  Africa. 

The  six  weeks  thus  spent  were  occupied  by  the 
brethren,  aided  by  the  pastors  of  the  churches,  in 
collecting  the  negro  converts  who  were  to  assist  in  the 
mission,  some  as  missionaries  and  others  as  settlers. 
In  all,  forty-two  persons,  including  children,  entered 
on  the  generous  enterprise  of  civilising  the  savage 
tribes  of  Africa,  and  of  giving  to  its  perishing  myriads  the 
bread  of  life.  Tlie  deepest  interest  was  manifested  by 
all  classes.  Valedictory  services  were  held  in  every 
part  of  the  island.  The  closing  service  took  place  on 
Tuesday  evening,  November  28th,  when  a  crowded 
assembly  gathered  in  the  Baptist  chapel  in  Falmouth, 
at  which  numerous  addresses  were  delivered  and  much 
prayer  was  made.  Fifteen  hundred  persons  remained 
at  the  close  to  celebrate  the  dying  love  of  the  Saviour, 


11  ALFRED    SAKEE. 

looking  forward  to  the  day  when  He  shall  come  in 
His  kingdom,  and  gather  all  the  redeemed  from  among 
every  people  and  nation  to  His  feet. 

At  length  the  preparations  were  complete,  and  the 
iJhihnarh  sailed  from  Falmouth  on  the  1st  December. 
Writing  the  next  day,  the  devoted  Knibb  said,  "  The 
Chilmark  sailed  yesterday,  and  is  now  in  sight  of 
Kettering.  She  carries  a  noble  band  of  missionaries. 
If  ever  I  wished  to  have  my  likeness  taken,  it  was 
■when  I  requested  and  obtained  permission  to  steer  her 
-out  of  harbour,  which  under  the  directions  of  the  captain 
I  accomplished.  Oh,  it  was  an  interesting,  it  was  a 
noble  sight ! " 

Contrary  winds,  adverse  currents,  and  calms  delayed 
the  vessel  for  many  days  in  sight  of  Jamaica.  On  the 
11th  she  was  still  opposite  the  east  end  of  the  island, 
and  it  was  not  till  the  13th  that  tlie  voyagers  lost  sight 
of  the  "Queen  of  the  Antilles."  On  the  22nd  they 
passed  Watling's  Island  not  expecting  to  see  land 
ao-ain  until  the  Cape  de  Verde  Islands  should  come 
into  view. 

Mr.  Saker  cheerfully  shared  the  labour  of  instructing 
the  various  classes  that  were  formed  for  the  study  of 
subjects  likely  to  be  useful  to  the  Jamaica  brethren  in 
the  work  before  them.  Di\ine  service  was  held  every 
day,  as  well  as  on  Lord's-days,  both  in  the  cabins  and 
the  steerage,  where  most  of  the  emigrants  were  lodged. 
The  monotony  of  the  x^^ssage  was  also  dispelled  by 
light  occupations  and  amusements,  such  as  the  weather 
and  the  sea  allowed.  A  voyage,  however,  that  might 
have  been  agreeable  and  profitable  in  every  respect, 
was  often  made  miserable  to  all  by  the  violence  of  the 
captain,  the  drunkenness  and  blasphemies  of  the  crew. 


DEPARTUEE   FOR   AFRICA.  17 

the  scarcity  and  bad  quality  of  the  food,  and  the 
wretched  accommodation  provided  for  the  passengers 
and  their  families.  The  captain  set  an  example  of 
rudeness,  contempt,  and  injustice  towards  the  coloured 
people,  which  the  sailors  were  not  slow  to  follow.  The 
pain  suffered  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Saker  from  his  harshness, 
amounting  at  times  to  inhumanity,  was  aggravated  by 
anxiety  on  account  of  Mrs.  Saker's  delicate  condition. 
In  other  respects  the  voyage  was  not  without  its 
intervals  of  pleasantness.  After  leaving  the  West 
Indies,  favourable  winds  were  enjoyed,  and  no  very 
heavy  storm  was  encountered.  Harmony  prevailed  in 
the  missionary  band,  and  diligent  advantage  was  taken 
of  quiet  hours  to  study  the  languages  of  Africa,  and  to 
prepare  for  the  task  that  lay  before  them.  On  the 
whole,  notwithstanding  the  crowded  state  of  the  ship, 
the  health  of  the  entire  crew  and  passengers  was  good. 

A  few  extracts  from  Mr.  Saker's  journal  will  suffice 
to  indicate  the  character  of  the  voyage  : — 

"  Dccemhcr  13th. — A  favourable  wind  sprang  ui> 
during  the  night,  which,  by  the  morning,  at  eight 
o'clock,  carried  us  out  to  sea,  so  that  we  lost  sight  of 
the  Blue  Mountains.  Very  thankful  to  get  away,  after 
so  many  days  of  vain  effort  against  the  wind.  The 
distance  from  Falmouth  to  the  east  end  of  Jamaica  is  not 
more  than  fifty  miles  ;  yet  it  has  taken  us  twelve  days 
to  make  it,  and  we  hoped  to  get  through  the  Windward 
passage  in  eight  days.  Toward  evening  St.  Domingo 
came  in  sight,  and  we  have  hope  of  passing  the  island 
soon." 

"  December  IQtJi. — About  noon  a  vessel  was  discovered 
bearing  on  our  course  ;  the  wind  being  very  liglit,  she 
made  but  little    progress.      Towards    sunsetting    she 


18  ALFRED   SAKER. 

approached  sufficiently  near  to  show  the  number,  when 
we  distinctly  read,  HopeioeM.  Intense  was  the  feeling 
of  all  on  board,  as  the  vessel  came  near,  to  speak ; '  Was 
all  well  ? '  '  Have  you  anything  from  England  ? '  A 
pleasant  interchauge  of  question  and  answer  followed  ; 
but  night  had  so  far  advanced  that  the  vessel  was  only 
distinguished  by  her  liglits.  On  separating,  we  burnt  a 
blue  light,  and  sang,  '  Jesus  shall  reign  where'er  the 
sun,'  &c.  In  return  our  friends  gave  three  cheers.  I 
sent  off  two  rockets.  We  closed  the  day  in  public 
prayer  on  deck.  The  vessel  had  on  board  Mrs.  Knibb 
and  child,  Mr.  Button,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Abbot,  missionary 
friends  bound  for  Jamaica." 

"  Vlth,  Sahhath  Day. — I  have  preached  to-day  on  the 
authority  of  Scripture  from  2  Peter  i.  16.  The  seamen 
seemed  much  impressed.  Mr.  Clarke  preached  in  the 
evening  from  Genesis  xv.  1." 

"  December  22nd. — Yesterday  we  passed  Inagua,  a 
low  barren  island,  and  we  have  to-day  left  behind  us 
Acklin's  and  Crooked  Islands,  thus  bringing  us  once 
more  on  the  bosom  of  the  mighty  Atlantic.  We  have 
safely  passed  the  dangers  of  the  Windward  passage. 
We  are  all  in  health,  and  peace  reigns  among  our  little 
band,  though  they  have  cause  to  complain.  The  captain 
annoys  us  in  every  possible  manner." 

"  Decemher  27th. — A  good  wind  and  straight  course. 
Much  seaweed  and  many  fish.  My  dear  wife  and  child 
continue  well.  May  my  heart  rise  in  gratitude  for  such 
favours." 

Glad  indeed  were  the  voyagers  when  the  mountains 
of  Fernando  Po  came  in  sight  on  the  1 5  th  February.  But 
a  calm  delayed  their  approach,  and  was  the  forerunner 
of  a  fearful  tornado,  that  threatened  them  with  destruc- 


DEPARTURE   FOR   AFRICA.  10 

tiun,  when  just  at  their  "  desired  haven."  Through  the 
goodness  of  God  the  storm  passed  away,  and  a  gentle 
"breeze  bore  them  into  Clarence  Cove,  where,  about  noon, 
they  dropped  anchor.  Mr.  Merrick  and  Mr.  Christian 
met  them  on  the  shore,  and  gave  them  a  warm  welcome 
to  the  sphere  of  their  future  toil.  "  In  the  enjoyment 
of  untold  mercies,  after  a  passage  of  eleven  weeks,  we 
are  privileged,"  says  Mr.  Saker,  writing  to  Mr.  Angus 
on  the  20th  February,  1844,  "  to  tread  these  shores,  and 
mingle  with  the  dear  brethren  here  in  thanksgiving  and 
prayer.  You,  my  dear  Sir,  and  the  thousands  of  British 
friends,  who  have  offered  up  earnest,  fervent,  constant 
prayer  for  us,  will  know  how  to  appreciate  these  tokens 
of  Divine  love,  and  unite  with  us  in  gratitude  to  God. 
They  seem  to  me  as  evidences  of  His  favour,  cheering 
us  in  the  mighty  work  in  which  our  hearts  are  engaged, 
and  saying,  '  My  word  shall  not  return  unto  Me  void,' 
and  bidding  us  look  with  sanguine  hope,  yea,  pious 
assurance,  of  a  great  and  glorious  success." 

Such  was  the  buoyant  spirit  and  bright  expectation 
with  which  Mr.  Saker  entered  on  the  arduous  career 
now  opened  before  him. 


2» 


CHAPTER    III. 

Commencement  of  Missionary  Labour;  1844 — 1845, 

N  landing,  tlie  voyagers  found  that  Mr. 
Sturmon  and  Dr.  Prince  were  on  a  visit 
to  the  interior  ;  but  they  hastened  home 
on  receiving  a  message  from  Clarence 
announcing  the  Chilmark's  arrival.  Dr. 
Prince  and  his  party  had  reached  the  island  in  the 
previous  September.  They  now  gave  the  new  comers 
a  most  affectionate  reception.  "  We  have  been  received 
here,"  writes  Mr.  Saker,  "  with  every  demonstration  of 
joy  which  the  friends  could  show,  in  a  way  suitable  to 
the  occasion,  agreeable  to  our  wishes,  and  honourable  to 
the  Gospel.  We  landed  about  noon  on  Friday,  the  16th 
February,  1844.  Before  night  every  arrangement  was 
made  for  the  present  location  of  all  our  company.  The 
friends  have  cheerfully  offered  their  homes  to  receive 
us,  and  supj)ly  us,  accordiug  to  their  ability,  with  pious 
pleasure.  In  the  evening,  at  seven  o'clock,  we  assembled 
at  the  mission-house  for  thanksgiving  and  prayer.  It 
was  cheering  to  our  spirit  to  meet  such  a  company,  and 
hear  their  simple,  touching,  expressions  before  God. 
After  a  hymn  of  praise  we  united  in  those  sweet  lines- 
of  Doddridge — 

'  Look  down,  0  Lord,  with  pitying  eye, 
And  view  the  desolation  round  ; 
See  what  wide  realms  in  darkness  lie, 
And  hurl  their  idols  to  the  ground. 


iii^fll;ii:;i!iil:i::l'^rH;!ii!ill|||!i|:^ 


COMMENCEMENT  OF  MISSIONARY  LABOUR.  21 

•  Lord,  let  the  Gospel  trumpet  blow, 
And  call  the  nations  from  afar  ; 
Let  all  the  isles  their  Saviour  know, 
And  earth's  remotest  ends  draw  near.' 

•Surely  the  poet  must  have  stood  on  the  shore  of 
Fernando  Po,  so  expressive,  so  appropriate  are  these 
lines.  The  welcome  was  heartfelt  and  joyous.  On 
Sabbath  morning  a  large  company  assembled  at  six 
■o'clock,  when  I  preached  from  John  iii.  16.*  In  the 
evening  Mr.  Clarke  preached  an  interesting  sermon, 
which  was  listened  to  with  much  attention;  I  hope 
profit.  But  what  a  scene!  A  house  crowded  with 
thoughtful,  attentive,  and  now  respectably  clothed, 
hearers,  listening  with  joy  to  the  words  of  '  this  life.' 
Who  can  forget  that,  three  years  since,  they  were  all 
given  up  to  work  all  wickedness  greedily;  but  now, 
'  What  hath  God  wrought  ? '  To  Him  be  all  the  praise.' 
The  vessel  is  now  leaving,  and  I  only  add,  I  feel  it  in 
my  heart  to  live  and  die  for  the  delightful  work.  I 
bless  God  that  I  am  permitted  to  see  and  hear,  and 
work  in  tliis  heavenly  field." 

Mr.  Saker  soon  began  to  experience  some  of  the  trials 
which  the  missionary  in  Africa  has  to  bear.  The  wood- 
ants  invaded  and  destroyed  the  contents  of  his  clothes 
chest.  A  tornado  tore  off  the  thatch  of  his  house  and 
deluged  it  and  all  its  contents  with  rain.  Four  times 
in  twenty  days  he  was  laid  down  by  fever.  His  labours 
at  the  printing  press  were  constantly  hindered  by  the 
want  of  some  necessary  material.  But  these  trials  were 
cheerfully    encountered.      "Individually   and    in   my 


"  It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  under  this  first  sermon  of  I\Ir. 
Saker's,  Thomas  Horton  Johnson  was  converted,  who  afterwards 
became  a  most  useful  fellow- worker  and  friend. 


22  ALFRED    SAKEE. 

family,"  he  says,  "  numerous  mercies  are  daily  accorded 
to  us  by  our  heavenly  Father — so  numerous  that  I 
cannot  attempt  an  enumeration."  Of  these,  not  the 
least  was  the  safe  delivery  of  Mrs.  Saker  of  a  little  girl, 
on  the  25tli  February,  the  expectation  of  which  event 
had  been  a  source  of  great  anxiety  and  suffering  on 
board  the  Chilmarl: 

The  moments  were  too  precious  to  be  lost  in  merely 
curious  investigation  of  the  strange  scenes  around 
him.  "From  my  landing  till  now,"  he  says,  writing 
a  little  later,  "I  have  been  constantly  engaged  in 
what  we  may  call  the  outworks  of  our  enterprise." 
For  already  Mr.  Saker  began  to  display  that  remark- 
able eagerness  for  "  work "  which  characterised  him 
to  the  close  of  life.  To  the  remonstrances  of  hi* 
brethren  that  he  was  "  doing  too  much  " — "  Too  much 
exposure,  brother,  will  not  do,"— his  only  response  was, 
"  Tfieir  kindness  in  this  respect  I  feel,  and  am  desirous 
of  doing  all  I  can  to  preserve  the  precious  boon  given 
to  us — health.  I  know  that  European  life  is  valuable 
here  ;  but  I  must  work  while  I  have  life,  and  I  hope 
the  Lord  will  bless  our  efforts." 

The  acconnnodation  provided  for  his  family  was 
necessarily  of  tlie  rudest  kind,  and  much  time  was 
occupied  in  making  provision  for  it.  From  the  first, 
Mr.  Saker's  skill  as  an  artisan  was  put  into  requisition, 
and  building  and  furniture  of  every  kind  were 
constructed  under  his  direction,  as  well  as  by  his 
own  personal  toil.  "I  have  no  less  than  five  houses 
building  for  the  missionaries  and  teachers,"  he  says,  a 
few  weeks  after  his  arrival,  "  besides  my  teaching,  which 
I  have  daily  to  attend  to."  As  the  year  wore  on 
severer  sorrows  came  to  him,  fever  frequently  laid  him 


COMMENCEMENT  OF  MISSIONARY  LABOUR.  23 

prostrate  ;  Mrs.  Saker  also  was  often  ill,  and  tlieir 
new-born  babe  was  taken  from  them  to  the  enjoyment 
of  an  immortal  life.  On  the  31st  July  he  writes  to  the 
Secretary  of  the  Society : — 

"  We  have  still  to  enumerate  afflictions  and  mercies. 
I  would  rather  leave  out  the  former,  but  I  must  tell 
you  briefly.  I  recovered  very  slowly  from  my  late 
attack  of  dysentery,  and  it  was  not  till  last  Monday  I 
felt  able  to  assist  brother  Merrick  in  attempting  to  cast 
some  quadrates  for  the  printing-ofiice.  Such  was  the 
deficiency  that  we  felt  we  must  wait  a  supply  from  you, 
unless  I  could  succeed.  Impelled  by  such  considera- 
tion, I  made  my  moulds  from  some  old  lead,  and 
borrowed  a  ladle.  Thus  equipped,  I  set  about  casting, 
and  by  Wednesday  noon  had  finished  nearly  a  thousand, 
quite  to  my  satisfaction,  and  the  joy  of  my  dear 
brother.  But  the  labour  was  too  much  for  me,  and,  ere 
I  had  accomplished  all  I  wished,  my  strength  failed,  and 
four  hours  of  fever  every  night  since  still  keeps  me  low. 
Sabbath-day  a  fit  of  vomiting  of  four  hours  laid  me 
prostrate,  and  I  feel  exceedingly  weak  now.  Still  the 
Lord  is  gracious  to  us." 

"  Since  my  dear  wife's  fever,  the  infant  babe  has 
passed  through  much  suffering ;  but  now  those  sufier- 
ings  are  closed  for  ever.  Parental  feelings  have  been 
stretched  on  this  severe  loss  ;  but  all  is  well.  We 
would  not  call  her  back  again  to  earth.  Yes,  dear 
brother,  while  prostrate  on  the  bed  through  weakness, 
and  maternal  tenderness  watching  and  nursing  the 
suffering  one,  her  spirit  fled  !  Before  our  Sabbath  lamp 
had  ceased  to  burn,  she  fled  to  the  glorious  regions  of 
light  and  joy,  to  enjoy  an  eternal  Sabbath  of  happiness 
with  the  adorable  Eedeemer." 


24  ALFRED    SAKEK. 

"  On  Monday,  brethren  Clarke,  Prince,  and  Merrick 
came  to  confer  on  a  place  of  interment.  This  was  soon 
decided,  and  at  12  o'clock  a  lovely  spot  in  the  Mission 
House  garden  was  consecrated  by  the  reception  of  this 
innocent,  this  first  of  the  Mission  families  that  has 
fallen  here."  f 

Other  trials  could  be  more  lightly  borne.  At  the 
close  of  the  year  he  tells  us  that  all  the  missionaries 
were  suffering  from  destitution  of  some  of  the  neces- 
saries and  many  of  the  conveniences  of  life.  "  No 
biscuit,  no  flour,  no  sugar,  no  butter,  no  meat  of  any 
kind,  except  sometimes  a  fowl,  a  squirrel,  or  piece  of 
good  mutton.  Yarn,  our  chief  dependence,  is  now 
getting  scarce.  But  I  do  not  complain,  Tlie  host  of 
self-denying  men  in  ancient  and  modern  days  would  at 
once  reprove  my  carnal  heart.  Oh !  for  the  zeal  of  an 
apostle,  to  spend  my  days  in  cheerful  laljour  to  spread 
the  knowledge  of  the  great  salvation  !  "  It  was  enough 
for  Alfred  Saker  to  be  engaged  at  any  cost  in  any  de- 
partment of  this  noble  task.  To  promote  the  kingdom 
of  righteousness  and  peace  he  desired  to  labour  night 
and  day ;  for  this  end  he  wished  to  live,  and  in  this 
work  to  die. 

Early  in  the  year  (1845)  Mr.  Saker  paid  a  visit  to 
Mr.  Merrick  at  Bimbia,  and  with  him  traversed  several 
of  the  neighbouring  towns.  While  thus  engaged  fever 
again  assailed  him,  and  by  the  advice  of  Dr.  Prince, 
who  hurried  from  Clarence  to  his  help,  Mr.  Saker  re- 
turned thither.  The  arrival  of  the  Bove,  from  England 
on  the  22nd  March,  with  her  band  of  new  missionaries, 
the  Thompsons  and  Newbegins,  and  Miss  Vitou,  not 
only  relieved  the  many  pressing  wants  of  the  mis- 
sionaries, but    enabled   Mr.   Saker   to   commence   the 


COMMENCEMENT  OF  MISSIONAKY  LABOUR.  25 

•achievement  of  a  desire  he  had  from  the  first  cherished, 
— that  of  opening  a  new  station  on  the  Cameroons  river. 
When  first  built,  the  Dove  was  intended  to  sail  as  a 
steamer,  and  her  engines  and  machinery  were  to  have 
been  jolaced  in  the  charge  of  Mr.  Saker.  But  certain 
defects  in  her  construction  led  to  her  being  employed 
as  a  sailing  vessel  only,  and  thus  Mr.  Saker  became  free 
to  enter  on  the  sole  duties  of  the  missionary  life.  He 
says,  "I  cannot  express  the  high  satisfaction  I  feel  when 
■looking  at  the  Dove ;  I  have  not  been  without  my  dis- 
appointment at  the  '  minus  engines,'  but  I  am  sure  that 
all  is  well.  It  will  not  be  possible  to  ascend  any  one  of 
the  rivers  without  a  '  power '  superior  in  strength  to  the 
current,  and  it  will  be  equally  futile  to  attempt  it  before 
our  hands  are  strengthened  by  aid  from  home.  We 
need  fifty  brethren  now  for  the  great  work.  If  the 
Lord  has  need  He  will  soon  send  them.  May  we  Ije 
strengthened  to  persevere.  The  gentleness  of  the  Dove 
seems  to  destroy  the  thought  of  the  sufferings  we  have 
-endured  for  the  want  of  it ;  and  I  am  confident  that 
■Ood  will  bless  His  servants  in  the  use  of  it  to  His 
glory.  Soon,  soon  may  its  wings  be  stretched,  till  all 
the  nations  far  and  near  be  converted  to  the  heavenly 
Kingdom  of  Jesus  and  His  Spirit." 

In  the  month  of  April  a  brief  visit,  chiefiy  for  health, 
was  paid  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Saker,  in  company  with  Dr. 
Prince,  to  a  district  already  marked  out,  about  twenty 
miles  up  the  broad  estuary  of  the  Cameroons,  as  suit- 
able for  a  missionary  station. 

After  passing  the  mangrove  swamps  which  lie  on 
both  sides  of  the  river's  mouth,  and  whose  poisonous 
reaches  are  pierced  by  many  tortuous  channels  leading  to 
the  interior,  the  eastern    shore   changes  its  character, 


26  ALFRED   SAKER. 

and  from  the  sandy  beach  begin  to  rise  low  cliffs 
of  rich  red-brown  earth,  generally  covered  to  the 
base  with  various  shrubs  and  trees,  interspersed  at  the 
top  with  cocoa  and  oil  nut-palms.  The  first  native 
settlement  that  is  reached  is  the  town  of  King  Bell, 
and  is  marked  by  the  canoes  and  traders'  sheds  that  line 
the  river's  brink.  Beyond  this  another  beach,  with  its 
numerous  canoes,  points  out  the  landing  place  of  a  still 
larger  town,  the  residence  of  the  chief.  King  A'kwa,  the 
head  of  the  most  powerful  of  the  tribes  on  the  river. 
A  little  farther  on,  and  on  the  same  side  of  the  stream, 
is  situated  Dido  Town,  lately  founded  by  a  branch  of 
the  A'kwa  family.  The  chief  occupation  of  the  people 
is  the  collection  of  palm-oil  and  ivory  from  the  natives 
of  the  interior,  with  which  they  barter  with  the  traders, 
whose  store-hulks  lie  oif  the  town,  for  the  cloth  and 
tobacco,  the  beads  and  trinkets,  that  form  the  bulk  of 
their  trade. 

Assured  of  a  welcome  by  the  chiefs,  Mr.  Saker,  on 
his  return  to  Clarence,  at  once  made  preparation  to 
occupy  one  or  other  of  these  native  settlements  as  his 
permanent  residence. 

The  Dove  being  otherwise  employed,  Mr.  Saker 
engaged  a  small  schooner,  the  Wasp,  and  with  Horton 
Johnson,  on  the  10th  June,  proceeded  to  commence  his 
work  in  the  Cameroons  river.  In  thirty  hours  they 
reached  King  A'kwa's  town.  The  next  day  they  landed 
a  portion  of  their  boxes  at  Dido  Town,  taking  a  house 
offered  them  by  the  chief  on  their  former  visit.  At 
this  King  A'kwa  was  indignant.  Was  he  not  king  ? 
Was  not  Dido  his  inferior  ?  He  was  old,  too,  and  would 
not  live  long.  So  he  sent  to  demand  the  immediate 
surrender  of  the  missionary.     As  Chief  Dido  replied 


COMMENCEMENT  OF   MISSIONAKV   LABOUE.  27 

with  defiance,  the  war-canoes  were  ordered  out,  and 
next  morning  it  seemed  as  if  a  furious  onslaught  on 
Dido  Town  would  alone  avenge  the  injured  honour  of 
the  King.  Mr.  Saker,  however,  immediately  interposed. 
A  palaver  ensued,  and,  after  twenty-four  hours'  negotia- 
tion, the  King  triumphantly  Ijore  away  the  missionaries 
with  all  their  belongings. 

The  house  hired  of  King  A'kwa  was  built  of  wood,  and 
consisted  of  one  room  only — twenty-one  feet  by  fifteen. 
It  had  been  erected  a  few  months  before  by  a  trader 
for  the  King's  own  use.  Here,  on  the  16th  June,  1845,. 
Mr.  Saker,  with  his  companion,  took  up  his  abode,  and 
began  his  ministry  as  a  messenger  of  Christ  to  the 
Duallas.  A  few  extracts  from  his  letter  to  Mr.  Angus 
will  best  describe  his  first  movements  : — 

"  Txiesday,  Vjth. — Sliglit  fever,  and  much  weakness 
all  day." 

"  Wednesdaj/,  IStJi. — Much  l)etter,  rested  all  day. 
Dreadful  storm  at  night,  the  rain  Ijreaking  in  so  as  U> 
cover  tlie  floor." 

"  19 fh  and  20^7i.— Much  better.  Began  the  addition 
of  two  rooms  to  the  present,  in  hopes  of  being  complete 
before  my  family  arrives.  These  rooms  will  be  con- 
structed by  tlie  natives,  and  made  of  tlie  same  material 
as  their  own  huts — bamboo  mats  and  rods." 

"  '21st. — Sat  nearly  all  day  at  the  language  with  in- 
terpreter. Enjoyed  much  communion  with  God.  One 
of  my  happiest  seasons  in  prayer  this  morning.  Felt 
nmch  enlargement  of  heart  when  praying  for  the 
heathen,  my  brethren,  and  the  Society.  I  am  con- 
strained to  say, '  0  Lord,  renew  the  visits  of  Thy  love.' " 

"  Sahbath  Day,  22nd. — Eose  early  and  met  the  chiefs 
and  people  of  A'kwa  town  soon  after  six.     We  liad  a 


"28  ALFKED   SAKEIl. 

good  meeting,  and  tliey  sat  patiently  (nearly  two  hours) 
to  hear  the  word  of  God.  At  nine  the  children  with  a 
few  adults  came  to  our  little  house.  Johnson  and  my- 
self sat  with  different  companies  till  twelve  o'clock.  At 
half-past  twelve  I  went  to  King  Bell's  town  to  have 
my  first  meeting.  Was  a  little  disappointed  ;  could  not 
collect  more  than  about  twelve,  who  sat  with  the  king 
for  about  half-an-hour.  I  tried  to  engage  their  atten- 
tion, but  they  had  drunk  too  much,  so  I  left  them,  and 
walked  on  to  Joss's  town.  After  waiting  a  little  we 
had  a  large  but  noisy  company.  I  do  hope  God  will 
answer  the  many  prayers  of  His  people  on  their  behalf. 

"  After  returning  and  refreshment,  we  visited  a  town 
lying  back  in  the  bush  between  A'kwa's  and  Bell's  town. 
Here  we  had  a  meeting  which  I  tliink  I  shall  never 
forget.  As  I  explained  the  design  of  Christ's  mission 
into  our  world,  and  illustrated  His  Divine  power  by  His 
miracles,  and  His  love  by  His  freely  giving  Himself  to 
death  for  us,  the  astonishment  and  manifested  surprise 
of  these  people  is  past  my  power  of  utterance.  About 
105,  old  and  young,  sat  in  a  circle  before  me,  with  an 
•attention  surpassed  by  no  congregation  at  home.  To 
me  it  was  an  hour  of  hallowed  feeling.  We  left  witli 
fervent  prayer  that  God  would  bless  His  word,  fulfil 
His  promise,  and  make  the  heathen  His  own." 

Thus  passed  the  first  week  of  the  laborious  life  that 
Mr.  Saker  now  commenced  among  the  tribes  of  the 
Cameroons. 

On  the  28th  Mrs.  Saker  with  her  little  daughter 
arrived  in  the  Dove,  in  company  with  Miss  Stewart, 
Mr.  Clarke,  and  Mr.  Merrick. 


A  VILLAGE  ON  THE  CAMEE00N3. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

Perils  among  the  Heathen,  1845—1840. 

K.   SAKEE  was  now  fairly  launched  ou- 
his  life's  work.     He  was  surrounded  by 
a    multitude   of    heathens,  without    a 
head  or  leader,  for   with  King  A'kwa's 
mortal  illness  his  authority  was  set  at 
naught.    Every  one  did  that  which  suited  his  disposition 
best,  under  no  control,  and  delighting  in  cruelty  and 
revenge.     The  better  informed  among  the  people  were- 
traders,  and  a  few  of  them  were  thoughtful  and  serious. 
These  endeavoured  to  maintain  some  degree  of  order. 
They  showed  Mr.  Saker  and  his  family  much  kindness,. 
and,  what  in  his  estimation  was  far  Ijetter,  they  were 
desirous  to  hear  the  Word.     They  did  all  they  could  to- 
protect  the  missionaries  and  their  property  from  the 
hands  of  violence.     "  I  cannot,"  said  Mr.  Saker  some 
years    afterwards,  "  describe  to  you  the  condition  in 
which  I  found  this  whole  people.     A  ])Ook  they  had 
not  seen  ;  the  commonest  implements  of  liusbandry  and 
tools  of  all  kinds  were  unknown.     I  brought  with  me 
tools   to  make  my  own  dwelling.      My  circumstances 
were  for  a  long  time  on  a  level  with  the  natives' ;  our 
food   was  nearly  the  same,  but  we  were  clothed  and 
they  were  not." 

The  station  Mr.  Saker  formed  at  King  Akwa's  town, 

and  which  he  now  named  Bethel — the  house  of  God — 

I 


30  ALFKED    SAKEK. 

is  situated  about  twenty  miles  from  the  sea,  on  a  liigli 
bluff  on  the  eastern  or  left  bank  of  the  river  Cameroons, 
which  disembogues  its  waters  about  four  degrees  north 
of  the  Equator,  nearly  opposite  the  northern  end  of  the 
island  of  Fernando  To.  The  space  of  about  a  mile 
separates  the  town  of  King  Bell  from  that  of  King 
A'kwa.  The  territories  of  the  two  chiefs  are  conter- 
minous for  some  distance  into  the  interior,  and,  as  a 
•consequence,  the  two  tribes  were  often  at  variance  and 
war.  Although  the  river  somewhat  winds  in  its  course 
to  the  sea,  the  sea-breezes  have  almost  direct  access  to 
these  two  towns,  and,  l)eing  clear  of  the  dense  mangrove 
swamps  which  line  the  sea-shore  and  spread  on  either 
side  of  the  river's  mouth,  the  mission  premises  on  the 
Cameroons  are  more  healthy  than  Bimbia  and  other 
spots  on  the  coast.  The  cottages  of  the  people  lie  along 
the  river  and  spread  for  some  distance  inland,  shrouded 
by  trees  and  bananas,  the  paths  encumbered  by  bush. 
Tlie  food  plantations  of  the  natives  are  still  farther 
inland,  and  are  cultivated  almost  entirely  by  the  wives 
of  the  people,  of  whom  the  chiefs  have  many  and  the 
ranks  below  them  as  they  can  afford  to  buy. 

Higher  on  the  same  side  of  the  river  is  Dido  town, 
and  farther  still  is  John  A'kwa's  town,  the  chiefs  of 
which  recognise  King  A'kwa  as  their  superior  lord. 
These  towns  are  a  mile  or  two  apart.  Crossing  the 
river  obliquely  from  John  A'kwa's  town,  but  higher  up, 
we  come  to  Preso  Bell's  town,  or  Hickory,  inhabited  by 
a  branch  of  the  family  of  King  Bell.  The  river  here  is 
about  a  mile  broad.  All  the  triljes  dwelling  in  these 
towns  speak  the  Dualla  language.  At  the  time  the 
mission  began  they  were  in  a  state  of  unfriendliness,  if 
not  actual  warfare. 


KDfG  A'kWA's  house  XSB  STEEET. 


PERILS  a:\ioxg  the  heathen.  31. 

They  were,  in  fact,  utterly  l)arl)aroiis,  practising  the 
wildest  and  most  debasing  superstitions,  and  given  up 
to  the  practice  of  every  vice  that  degrades  humanity. 
The  work  to  be  accomplished,  and  the  condition  of  these 
savage  tribes,  can  only  be  understood  by  a  few  illustra- 
tions. One  day,  on  visiting  Bell  Town,  the  missionaries 
passed  by  the  side  of  the  river  a  corpse  lying  unburied, 
and  mangled  by  dogs.  It  was  the  body  of  a  man  from 
Wuri,  drowned  by  the  upset  of  a  canoe.  No  persuasion 
coiild  induce  the  king  to  order  its  interment.  Tlieir 
entreaties  were  laughed  at.  "  The  man,"  said  they,  "  is 
not  a  Dualla  man."  Another  day  the  brethren  were 
shocked  to  learn  that  the  chief,  Dido,  had  cruelly  killed 
one  of  his  wives  and  a  slave.  Another  slave  was  thrown 
into  the  river,  bound ;  but,  getting  loose,  he  swaui 
ashore,  and  fled  into  the  bush. 

Mrs.  Saker  mentions  tlie  following  instance  of 
barbarity : — 

"  One  of  our  first  converts,  a  woman  called  Anna, 
was  on  the  way  to  chapel  one  Sabbath  morning.  On 
passing  the  Egbo  house  (where  the  men  practise  their 
superstitious  rites),  she  heard  the  cries  of  women.  On 
]3ushing  the  door  open,  she  saw  two  women  hanging  by 
their  wrists  from  the  roof  of  the  house,  and  beinsj; 
rubbed  all  over  with  a  kind  of  herb  that  produces  a 
fearful  irritation.  The  cries  of  the  poor  creatures  were 
most  distressing.  Anna  begged  they  would  untie  them. 
They  instantly  seized  her,  and  tied  her  in  the  same 
way,  rubbing  the  same  herb  on  her.  We  did  not  hear 
of  it  for  nearly  six  hours.  Some  of  our  young  men, 
with  Mr.  H.  Johnson,  immediately  went  to  the  rescue. 
They  had  to  fight  their  way  in,  but  at  length  succeeded 
in  bringing  Anna  away.     She  had  been  one  of  our 


32  ALFRED   SAKER. 

brightest  women,  but  from  that  day  she  was  an 
idiot." 

Nothing  among  these  people  is  more  fatal  than  a 
charge  of  witchcraft;  one  that  is  often  made  on  the 
occurrence  of  any  accident  or  natural  death.  A  slave 
of  King  A'kwa's  was  thus  accused.  To  try  the  truth  of 
the  accusation,  she  was  first  tested  with  poison.  She 
was  made  to  drink  an  infusion  of  a  poisonous  nut ; 
but,  although  she  speedily  vomited  the  poison,  which  is 
usually  regarded  as  a  sign  of  innocence,  .she  was  tied 
hands  and  feet,  and  cast  into  the  river.  Another  slave 
was  savagely  mutilated  by  her  enraged  master,  and  left 
in  a  miserable  condition  to  perish. 

Soon  after  Mr.  Saker's  arrival,  in  the  month  of  July, 
King  A'kwa  died.  Mr.  Saker  was  at  the  time  busily 
employed  in  making  the  doors  and  shutters  of  his  new 
apartments.  With  a  few  boards  and  joists,  and  a  little 
contrivance,  by  the  end  of  August  the  walls  of  the  new 
structure  were  finished,  and  the  two  rooms  floored. 
But,  on  the  death  of  A'kwa,  indescribable  scenes  of  dis- 
order, confusion,  and  wrong  ensued.  The  two  elder 
brothers  quarrelled  and  intrigued  for  the  succession. 
The  houses  of  the  dead  chief  were  ransacked.  Even 
the  box  (or  coffin)  containing  his  remains  was  broken 
open,  and  rifled  of  everything  of  value.  His  wives  and 
slaves  destroyed  the  dwelling  that  he  had  occupied. 
The  town  was  given  up  to  plunder.  In  October  the 
mission  premises  were  invaded;  the  knives,  books, 
spoons,  and  table  linen,  and,  worst  of  all,  the  flour,  on 
which  life  itself  depended,  together  with  the  goats  and 
fowls,  were  carried  off.  These  disorders  and  plunder- 
ings  continued  till  December,  when  the  elder  son  was 
declared  king  through  the  intervention  of  her  Majesty's 


PEIIILS   AMONG   THE   HEATHEN".  33 

naval  officers  on  tlie  coast.     A  better  state  of  tilings 
then  began  to  prevail. 

It  was  in  the  midst  of  these  disputes  that  A'kwa's 
"fifty  sons,  with  the  chiefs  of  the  tribe,  assembled  at  Mr. 
Saker's  cottage  to  sell  it  to  him,  together  with  the  plot 
■of  ground  on  whicli  it  stood.  The  price  was  soon  settled, 
'but  the  purchase  was  followed  by  incessant  bickerings 
among  the  vendors  respecting  their  shares,  and  con- 
stant attempts  were  made  to  force  more  cloth  and 
goods  from  tlie  buyer.  Three  days  after  the  purchase 
was  completed,  a  large  body  of  A'kwa's  sons  and 
slaves  collected  together,  armed  with  firebrands,  guns, 
sticks,  and  swords,  and  with  wild  noise  and  shouting 
<lemanded  possession  of  the  house.  Eeasoning  was  in 
vain.  One  son,  in  his  rage,  with  his  axe  split  the  door 
of  the  house  into  three  pieces.  Eight  days  after  another 
assault  took  place,  which  brought  on  the  serious  illness 
of  Mrs.  Saker  and  her  child.  On  this  occasion,  how- 
ever, other  chiefs  interfered ;  a  goat  was  offered  in 
compensation  for  the  injury  done,  and,  although  the 
sense  of  insecurity  was  not  removed,  the  missionary 
and  his  family  were  kept  in  peace,  finding  their  refuge 
and  safety  in  the  Lord  their  God. 

His  house-building  accomplished,  Mr.  Saker  next 
gave  his  attention  to  the  language.  Altliough  a  toler- 
ably large  vocabulary  had  by  this  time  been  secured,  it 
was  not  till  the  end  of  the  year  that  Mr.  Saker  felt 
himself  able  to  read,  write,  and  converse  with  some 
iluency  in  the  Dualla  tongue.  "  About  January  1, 
1846,"  he  says,  "  I  completed  a  draft  of  my  first  class- 
book,  and,  if  I  had  had  nmch  confidence  in  it,  should 
have  sent  it  home  at  that  time  to  be  printed  for  the  use 
of  the  Dualla  schools.     I  have  made  the  study  of  the 

3 


34  ALFRED    SAKER. 

language  iny  special  work,  and  although  I  cannot  say 
much  as  to  the  advance  which  I  have  made,  yet  I  hope 
it  is  something ;  and  I  hope  more,  that  I  shall  live  to 
translate  the  whole  Bible  into  the  Dualla  tongue. 
With  Divine  assistance  I  have  a  settled  purpose  so 
to  do,  and  I  hope  not  to  relinquish  my  work  till  it  is 
done." 

Later  on  we  shall  see  how  this  nohle  purpose  was 
achieved,  Eeviewing  his  first  year's  work  in  May, 
1846,  in  a  letter  to  his  sister,*  he  says,  "  When  I  re- 
member that  twelve  months  since  I  did  not  understand 
anything  about  the  language,  that  we  had  no  house  at 
Cameroons  to  contain  us  beyond  the  single  room,  that 
during  the  time  we  have  been  not  less  than  two  months 
absent  on  account  of  health,  that  while  at  labour  often 
afflicted  and  hindered  in  a  variety  of  ways ;  but  that 
now  we  can  look  upon  things  around  us,  and  know  that 
we  have  a  substantial  store-house  for  boxes,  barrels, 
and  provisions,  which  has  occupied  me  one  month  this 
year  in  erecting,  and  that  now  we  are  in  health,  better 
health  than  when  we  commenced  the  year,  surely  I 
ought  to  be  grateful !  If  we  cease  to  speak  of  His 
mercy,  the  stones  and  trees  around  would  reprove  us. 
May  our  hearts  be  ever  alive  to  His  mercy,  and  that 
mercy  assist  us  to  go  on  with  our  work,  till  we  shall 
rejoice  over  sinners  converted  to  God.  This  is  the  result 
for  which  we  hope  and  pray,  and  it  will  be  with  un- 
speakable pleasure  that  we  inform  you  of  such  success  ; 
but  we  need  your  prayers  and  the  prayers  of  all  our 
friends.     You   must  not  forget  that  nothing   short  of 

•  In  which,  however,  he  omits  to  notice  a  visit  paid  to  the 
Bassa  towns  in  the  interior. 


PERILS   AMONG   THE    HEATHEN.  35 

Divine  power  is  sufficient  to  eftect  so  great  a  change* 
If  this  is  necessary  in  England,  how  much  more  so- 
with  tlie  heatlien  tribes,  whose  character  is  so  accu- 
rately drawn  in  the  first  chapter  of  Eonians !  Forget 
not  that  it  is  among  such  we  live  and  labour,  and 
cease  not  to  pray  for  us,  and  the  success  of  the  Word 
amons  us." 


3* 


CHAPTER    V. 

Perseverance  ix  Laboue,  1846 — 1847. 

UPtING  tlie  next  two  years  Mr.  Saker 
clilip,ently  and  laboriously  pursued  his 
arduous  laliours  amono;  the  ungoverned 
and  ungovernable  race  around  him. 
Sometimes  not  one  individual  would 
come  to  the  worship,  which  was  regularly  maintained 
with  the  two  or  three  assistants  Mr.  Saker  had  secured. 
Occasionally  King  A'kwa,  with  a  few  of  his  chiefs  and 
attendants,  would  be  present  and  give  him  a  listless  and 
uninterested  attention.  Or  he  would  meet  them  at 
their  frequent  palavers,  and  endeavour  to  awaken  their 
minds  to  some  desire  for  the  comforts  and  advantages 
of  civilised  life.  A  few  children  would  fitfully  attend 
the  daily  school,  and  repeat  the  little  Dualla  hymns 
and  prayers  their  anxious  teacher  had  prepared. 
Superstitious  practices  were  employed  to  frighten  him 
away.  His  path  would  be  laid  with  the  leaves  of 
poisonous  trees,  with  the  hope  that  the  touch  of  the 
missionary's  foot  would  stimulate  their  fatal  properties 
and  destroy  his  life.  From  robbery  the  mission  goods 
were  never  safe. 

Besides  these  trials,  necessarily  incident  to  the  work, 
others  bore  hardly  upon  the  energies  and  spirit  of  the 
missionary  and  his  little  family.  The  pestilential 
climate  would  for  days  together  lay  him  aside,  while 


PERSEVERANCE   L\   LABOUR.  37 

liis  beloved  partner  often  sank  Ijeneatli  the  fatigues, 
the  privations,  the  anxieties,  and  the  perils  of  their  lot. 
The  irregular  communication  with  England  frequently 
entailed  severe  sufiering.  There  were  no  mail  steamers 
in  those  days.  Their  stores  failed,  their  supplies  were 
long  delayed,  when  some  unexpected  relief  drew  from 
their  eyes  tears  of  thankfulness,  and  from  their  hearts 
songs  of  grateful  joy.  In  February,  1847,  Mrs.  Saker's 
health  was  so  far  impaired,  and  their  little  girl  seemed 
so  hopelessly  ill,  that  the  husband  and  father  was 
constrained  to  send  them  to  England.  It  was  a  bitter 
trial  to  be  left  alone  in  that  land  of  "  suffering,  danger, 
and  death."  He  feared,  so  ill  were  they,  that  they 
might  never  reach  their  native  land,  or  that  he  himself 
might  not  live  to  welcome  their  return.  His  tender 
anxiety  expressed  itself  in  a  letter  to  his  wife,  written 
on  the  3rd  April,  to  reach  her  soon  after  her  arrival  in 
England,  when,  among  other  words  of  affectionate 
thoughtfulness,  he  says,  "  I  am  very  anxious  to  hear 
that  all  is  well.  How  does  the  sea  air  and  change  of 
diet  affect  you  ?  Is  there  any  sign  of  a  return  of  last 
June's  del  )ility  and  danger  ?  Is  there  any  change  for 
the  better  ?  Then  the  dear  child  I  is  the  spleen 
reduced  ?  Is  it  still  the  same  ?  May  we  hope  that 
she  wiU  live  ?  Ah !  my  dear  H.,  let  us  mingle  our 
prayers  and  trust  in  the  Lord.  For  the  present, 
farewell."  Yet,  a  few  days  later,  in  the  midst  of  all  his 
afflictions,  he  could  say,  "Hope  buoys  my  mind.  I 
have  many  seasons  in  my  solitude  that  words  will 
not  express.  I  have  withal  great  reason  for  gratitude 
that  I  am  kept  so  hopeful  and  quiet.  My  constant 
duties  tend  much  to  keep  me  in  peace.  If  I  had  naught 
to  do  I  should  soon  die  with  grief ;  so  that  my  earnest 


0»  ALFEED   SAKER. 

cry  every  day  is  for  an  energy  of  spirit,  strength  of 
body,  and  a  heart  devoted  to  the  glory  of  God  in  the 
translation  of  the  Scriptures  and  the  publication  of  the 
Word  of  Life." 

To  a  large  extent  the  prayerful  desire  of  his  heart 
was  fulfilled.  Nothing  could  repress  the  ardour  witli 
which  he  pursued  his  toil.  To  his  sister  he  writes : — 
"  I  rise  every  morning  between  four  and  five,  and  witli 
brief  intermissions  for  meals,  &c.,  I  am  busy — the  word 
is  not  expressi^'e — I  am  more  than  busy ;  I  am  over- 
wlielmed  with  cares  and  duties  till  eight,  sometimes 
nine,  at  night ;  and  what  I  am  at  this  time  most  engaged 
in,  I  am  trying  my  utmost  to  complete,  the  translation 
of  the  Gospels,  and  speedily,  lest  my  health  should  fail 
before  it  is  done.  If  my  health  fail  again,  I  feel  there 
will  be  no  hope  in  any  change  short  of  Europe.  And 
lest  it  should  fail,  I  wish  to  have  the  work  ready  for 
the  press,  that  it  may  be  printed  in  England  under  my 
own  care." 

Six  months  later,  to  the  same  correspondent,  he 
says : — "  During  the  day  I  have  not  time  to  sit  down  to 
eat  bread,  except  a  few  minutes  at  nine,  and  again  at 
five.  I  sit  at  my  books,  teach  boys,  labour  with  my 
tools.  (Jne  day  a  carpenter,  another  a  blacksmith, 
another  a  joiner,  another  a  shipwright,  or  whatever  is 
necessary.  But  my  chief  and  all-important  work  at 
present  is  the  study  of  the  Dualla  language,  the  pre- 
X3aration  of  elementary  books,  the  translation  of  the 
Gospels,  &c.  This  comes  every  day,  and  all  other 
things,  either  as  necessary  repairs  or  needful  occupa- 
tions, are  attended  to  for  recreation." 

It  is  most  interesting  to  note  liow  this  study  of  the 
Dualla  language,  and  tlie  preparation  of  a  dictionary. 


PERSEVERANCE   IN    LABOUR.  30 

grammar,  Scriptures,  and  school-books  are  tlie  theme  of 
ahnost  every  letter.  He  cannot  obtain  the  means  of 
printing  so  soon  as  he  desires,  so  he  makes  many  shifts 
to  supply  the  want.  His  invention,  aided  by  his  know- 
ledge of  iron  work  and  engineering,  enables  him  to  cut 
ii  matrix,  and  to  construct  a^rude  press  ;  but  he  is  soon 
at  a  standstill  for  lead  for  the  type,  and  he  waits 
wearily  for  the  chance  of  obtaining  it  from  some  passing 
sliip.  The  books  he  needs  are  not  at  hand.  "  I  wisli," 
he  writes  to  Mr.  Angus,  "  some  good-natured  friend, 
who  ]ias  the  ability,  could  give  me  the  volumes  of  the 
'  Penny  Cyclopa'dia.'  Do  you  know,  my  dear  brother,  I 
am  sure  I  should  be  very  thankful."  Again,  writing  in 
January,  1848,  to  the  Committee  of  the  Society,  he  begs 
them  to  devote  £10  or  £15  of  the  surplus  of  his  salary 
to  the  purchase  of  works  on  Biblical  criticism,  the 
Septuagint,  and  elementary  works  in  Hebrew.  "  These 
books,"  he  says,  "  I  most  want,  and  I  beg  of  you,  dear 
brethren,  to  let  me  want  no  longer.  Look  and  see  if 
you  are  not  wrong  in  withholding  books  so  long,  and 
after  repeated  requests  for  tliem.  Think  of  the  position 
you  have  placed  me  in,  In  the  midst  of  a  heathen 
people — a  people  speaking  their  own  language — a  lan- 
guage I  have  been  obliged  to  acquire,  Tliis  heathen 
people  I  have  to  instruct,  and  open  to  them  the  way  of 
life.  But  how  shall  1  do  this  ?  I  must  read  and 
<3X[)lain  the  Word  of  Life  in  their  own  language,  and  I 
nuist  translate  that  Word  of  Life,  or  how  shall  I 
succeed  ? "  He  then  points  out  that  his  translation 
should  be  drawn  from  the  Divine  originals  ;  l)ut  liow 
can  this  be  done,  if  lie  is  not  assisted  by  the  solid 
learning  of  liis  predecessors  in  this  task  ?  Therefore,  lie 
pleads  for  tlie  aid  that  learned  works  can  supply ;  but, 


40  ALFEED    SAKEE. 

while  using  every  appliance  within  his  reach,  he,  never- 
theless, declares  that  he  maintains  "a  constant,  unwaver- 
ing dependence  on  Divine  aid."  Anticipating  the 
objection  that  the  early  training  of  his  youth  could  not 
have  fitted  him  for  the  achievement  of  the  grand  work 
at  which  he  aimed,  he  goes  on  to  say  that  it  was  true 
his  early  life  was  passed  in  occupations  of  another  kind, 
but  he  is  now  free  to  give  his  whole  heart  and  mind  tO' 
the  great  task  of  Bible  translation,  and  to  make  himself 
competent  for  its  execution ;  and,  for  the  sal^  of  this 
'•'  noble  cause,"  he  earnestly  entreats  the  Committee  to 
grant  him  the  requisite  aid.  That  aid  was  not  with- 
held, and  in  "  due  time  "  the  devoted  herald  of  the  Gross 
reaped  the  harvest  of  his  desires. 

But  while  the  work  of  conversion  was  necessarily 
slow  among  the  tribes  of  ilie  Cameroons,  the  Gospel 
continued  to  make  good  progress  at  the  seat  of  the 
mission  in  Ternando  Po.  After  the  lamented  decease 
of  Mr.  Sturgion,  on  the  13th  August,  1846,*  the  station 
was  placed  in  the  charge  of  Dr.  Prince,  whose  labours,, 
l)oth  as  a  medical  man  and  a  missionary,  were  of  in- 
valuable service  in  the  early  years  of  the  Mission.  In 
December,  1847,  Dr.  Prince  paid  a  l)rief  visit  to  Mr. 
Saker,  at  Cameroons,  and  at  his  urgent  persuasion  Mr. 
Saker  laid  aside  his  studies  for  a  short  visit  to  Clarence,, 
the  special  inducement  being  the  services  intended  for 
observance  on  the  baptism  of  several  converts  on  New 
Year's  Day.     Before  leaving  home  he  thus  reports  to 

•  Mr.  Sturgion  died  of  an  illness  contracted  at  Bimbia  on  a 
visit  to  Mr.  Merrick,  in  the  niontli  of  July.  He  landed  in  Afiica 
on  the  7th  February,  1842,  and  was  elected  pastor  of  the  Clarence. 
Mission  Church  on  the  3Ist  March,  1844.  It  then  consisted  of 
forty-two  members  ;  and  of  sixty-three  at  his  decease. 


PERSEVEEANCE   IX   LABOUR.  41 

llr.  Angus  the  progress  of  his  hibours :  "'  You  will 
receive  a  parcel  by  the  Ecqyicl,  containing  a  few  copies  of 
our  books.  My  Class  Book,  1  and  2,  is  through  the 
press.  I  have  borrowed  a  page  of  type  of  l)rother 
Merrick,  with  wliich  I  have  printed  four  pages,  one 
page  only  at  a  time,  of  my  "\'ocal)uIary,  which  extends 
to  400  pages  of  letter  paper  (4to)  in  manuscript,  twelve 
pages  of  hymns,  and  twenty  of  jNIatthew's  (lospel.. 
Tliese  I  use  in  the  Dualla  services,  and  hope  in  the 
beginning  of  the  year  to  add  the  whole  of  Matthew,, 
and  increase  my  hymns  to  about  a  hundred.  These 
will  all  be  printed  in  the  same  size,  page  after  page. 
But  I  hope  the  day  is  not  distant  when  I  shall  receive 
a  press  and  type,  to  enable  me  to  print  in  a  better 
manner.  The  whole  of  Matthew  and  Mark  are  waiting 
for  the  press ;  but  printing  in  the  way  I  have  begun 
enables  me  to  correct  as  I  go  on,  and  when  complete  a 
revised  copy  will  be  a  proof  sheet  for  an  edition,  whether 
it  be  printed  in  England  or  Africa.  I  sliall  be  out  of 
paper  by  the  end  of  i'ebruary,  so  nmst  wait  the  supply 
which  our  brother  Merrick  expects." 

The  happiness  and  the  rest  were  well  earned  which 
Mr.  Saker  now  enjoyed  at  Clarence.  He  thus  describes 
the  scene  of  that  New  Year's  Day  morrdng  : — "  At  six, 
o'clock  we  all  met  at  Waterfall.  Three  sides  of  a  square 
were  occupied  by  a  devoted  band  of  men  and  women,  all 
in  white.  In  the  centre  a  desk.  In  the  background  a 
tent,  and  around  tlie  square  not  less  than  200  inquirers 
and  spectators.  In  front  the  Howing  brook,  winding  in 
a  delightful  curve,  and  then  seeking  its  way  among  the 
massive  rocks,  till  at  last  it  rushes  over  the  precipitous . 
fall.  This,  with  the  lovely  bank,  heavy  foliage,  and 
towering  trees   backing   the  stream,  presented  an  en- 


42  ALFRED    SAKER. 

•chanting  scene.  I  read  the  3rd  of  Matthew  and  prayed. 
Mr. Merrick  preached  from  Philippians  iii.  8,  'Yea, doubt- 
less, and  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency 
of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord,'  &c.,  &c. 
Dr.  Prince  then  led  nine  candidates  to  the  water  side, 
^nd,  after  a  solemn  address,  immersed  them  in  the  stream, 
in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit.  This  done,  we  sang  another  hymn,  and  returned 
to  breakfast.  But  first,  Dr.  Prince  and  I  walked  through 
the  town  to  see  the  sick,  and  it  was  ten  when  we  ate 
our  meal.  At  half-past  three  we  began  our  missionary 
meeting,  and  it  was  a  delightful  happy  meeting  too. 
A  collection  was  made  amounting  to  £11.  Yesterday 
morning  I  had  to  preach  to  the  people.  The  text  was 
a  suitable  one — "  Grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge 
of  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord  and  Saviour."  It  was  a  very 
.solemn  sermon,  and  I  felt  the  hallowing  influence  of 
the  truth,  I  spoke  with  much  freedom.  At  eleven  I 
went  into  the  school;  a  cheering  sight:  260  scholars 
iissembled,  with  not  less  than  thirty  teachers.  At 
half-past  three  we  met  again  for  public  service.  Dr. 
Prince  preached  to  a  crowded  house  a  baptismal 
sermon,  argumentative  and  clear,  and  after  an  address 
to  the  newly  baptized,  he  received  them  into  the  church, 
and  we  all  communed  togetlier.  At  seven  we  dined, 
and  spent  the  evening  in  cheerful  song." 

Eefreshed  by  the  fraternal  and  spiritual  intercourse 
he  had  enjoyed,  Mr.  Saker,  early  in  January,  returned 
to  Cameroons,  visiting  on  the  way  the  station  of  Bimbia, 
where,  since  his  arrival  in  Africa,  Mr.  Merrick  had 
laboured  with  great  zeal  and  efiiciency.  In  the  few 
<lays  of  his  sojourn  with  Mr.  Merrick  an  incident 
happened  which  will  well  illustrate  the  evil  customs  of 


PERSEVERANCE   IN   LABOUR.  43 

the  people.  A  young  man,  wliile  liatliing.  was  seized 
by  a  shark,  and  in  a  few  minutes  his  spine  was  torn 
out  by  the  ravenous  beast.  Three  men,  two  of  them 
slaves,  were  accused  of  liaving  bewitched  the  sufferer. 
They  were  seized,  carried  to  the  town,  and  put  into 
chains.  It  was  the  Lord's-day,  but  after  service  ]\Ir. 
Merrick  and  Mr.  Saker  went  to  the  town  and  found  a 
council  sitting,  consisting  chiefly  of  slaves,  debating 
with  King  William  the  doom  of  the  accused  men.  The 
result  was  that,  instead  of  being  murdered  on  the  spot, 
the  trembling  wretches  were  condemned  to  exile.  One 
]^00Y  fellow  was,  however,  allowed  to  accompany 
the  missionaries  to  their  settlement.  A  second  escaped 
to  the  home  of  Mr.  Christian,  one  of  the  Jamaica 
assistants  ;  it  was  soon  surrounded  by  a  violent  crowd, 
and  with  difficulty  the  man  was  rescued.  Ultimately 
he  was  sent  away  for  safety  to  Clarence.  The  third 
man  was  not  permitted  to  escape  the  doom  intended  f<)r 
tliem  all. 

On  reaching  Bethel,  the  erection  of  a  school-house 
at  Bell's  Town  engaged  Mr.  Saker's  attention,  and 
another,  to  be  used  also  for  public  worship,  was  begun 
at  Bethel.  The  foundations  of  a  house  for  ]\Ir. 
Johnson,  who  had  now  resided  with  Mr.  Saker  fifteen 
montlis,  were  also  laid.  In  these  structures,  progress 
was  very  slow,  owing  to  the  want  of  men  who  knew  the 
use  of  tools.  Then  the  mission-liouse  itself  was 
beginning  to  show  signs  of  rapid  decay.  Tlie  wood  of 
which  it  had  been  constructed  was  eaten  into  by  ants, 
and  tlireatened  by  its  fall  to  entomb  (African  fashion) 
its  inmates.  This  experience  of  the  fragility  of  African 
structures  gave  Mr.  Saker  tlie  greatest  anxiety. 
Writing  Mr.  Angus,  he    says,   "  I    do   want  to   make 


44  ALFEED   SAKEE. 

myself  a  house  as  strong  as  the  Lest  wood  and  nails 
will  admit,  and  I  cannot  patch  np  these  mud  walls 
many  weeks  longer.     What  to  do  I  know  not." 

But,  fired  by  zeal,  and  strengthened  in  his  weakness 
by  Divine  grace,  Mr.  Saker  pressed  onward,  cheered  by 
the  hope  that  ere  long  the  light  would  dawn  on  the 
blinded  eyes  of  the  people  around  him.  "  Dualla  is 
dark,"  he  said ;  "  grossly  dark — dark  as  death ;  but,, 
blessed  be  God,  the  Gospel  which  we  bear  is  able  to 
dispel  it,  dark  as  it  may  be." 


CHAPTER    VI. 

Anxious  Days,  1848—1850. 

N"  tlie  month  of  June,  1848,  the  general 
state  of  the  mission  constrained  Mr. 
Saker,  till  relief  should  come,  to  take 
up  his  residence  at  Clarence.  Of  the 
band  by  which  the  mission  had  been 
■commenced,  only  Dr.  Prince,  ]\Ir.  Merrick,  and  Mr. 
8aker  remained.  Mr.  Sturgion  and  Mr.  Thompson 
were  dead.  Mr.  Clarke  had  returned  to  Jamaica  with 
?.  party  of  the  Jamaica  immigrants,  some  of  whom  were 
driven  from  Africa  by  failure  of  health,  and  others  were 
found,  from  various  causes,  unfit  for  the  work.  A  few 
of  them  had  died.  Two  or  three  only,  men  of  tried 
courage  and  ability,  remained.  Dr.  Xewbegin's  healtli 
had  also  broken  down,  and  he  had  left  for  England. 
And  now  Dr.  Prince  and  his  wife  were  compelled  Ijy 
the  deadly  climate  to  hasten  away,  and  to  relinquisli 
an  enterprise  in  which  they  had  borne  so  distinguished 
and  useful  a  part.  Writing  to  the  Committee  on  the 
.^th  July,  Mr.  Saker  thus  explains  the  reasons  for  his 
provisional  settlement  at  Clarence  :  "  In  time  past,  we 
have  had  to  mourn  over  the  dead  again  and  again.  We 
have  been  called  to  bid  adieu  to  the  bereaved  widow, 
and  tlie  afflicted  wife  and  children.  Our  Jamaica  band 
liave  almost  disappeared,  some  by  death — we  hope  now 
in  glory — some  by  the  disgraceful  end  of  '  having  loved 
this  world.'     In  February,  1847,  we  were  compelled  to 


46  ALFEED   SAKER. 

part  with  afflicted  sisters,  one  a  wife  [Mrs.  Saker],  and 
a  dear  child ;  in  May,  with  Mr,  Clarke  and  his  sickly 
band  ;  in  September  with  brother  Newbegin,  and  now 
a  severer  stroke  has  come  in  the  removal  of  our  beloved 
brother  and  sister,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Prince.  We  have  been 
weakened,  chastened,  and  subdued,  yet  still  our 
Heavenly  Father  removes  not  His  hand.  Sorrow 
comes  on  sorrow,  and  we  are  distressed.  Oh,  that  we 
may  ever  bow  with  submissive  love  to  all  His  will ! " 

"  This  is  a  trial !  to  send  away  those,  the  most  useful, 
and  without  whom  we  know  not  how  to  go  on,  and  we 
exclaim.  What  shall  we  do  ?  This  is  the  conclusion : 
Clarence  is  of  more  importance  than  Cameroons. 
Cameroons  is  less  important  than  Bimbia.  Then, 
Cameroons  must  be  laid  aside.  I  offer  to  take  charge 
of  Clarence  till  another  shall  relieve  me.  The  doctor 
and  his  church  thankfully  accept  it.  It  is  decided, 
and  I  am  your  missionary  resident  at  Clarence  ;  and  as 
to  Cameroons,  Johnson,  aided  by  James  Frazer  at  pre- 
sent, will  do  what  he  can  while  I  am  away."  Under 
such  circumstances,  we  cannot  wonder  at  the  bitter  cry, 
the  sorrowful  moan  which  his  loneliness  forced  from 
him  in  his  letter  to  the  Secretary,  of  the  14th  June. 
"  Oh  I  that  our  God  may  send  us  help  speedily  !  Dear 
Sir, — Are  the  churches  so  destitute  of  young  men,  that 
labourers  cannot  be  found  for  Africa  ?  Are  there  none 
who  can  place  their  lives  at  the  disposal  of  the  Saviour 
in  this  sickly  land  ?  Do  our  pious  youths  forget  that 
ours  is  a  God  near  and  far  off?  Oh  !  that  the  blessed 
Spirit  may  send  you  the  men  and  the  means,  as  well  as 
the  heart  to  send  them  here !  We  must  have  them 
speedily.  Africa  groans  to  be  delivered  from  the  bond- 
use  of  sin." 


ANXIOUS  DAYS.  4T 

Hai^pily,  in  this  sad  state  of  things,  Mr.  Saker'* 
health  had  gradually  improved  since  the  serious  attack 
of  illness  that  he  passed  through  in  the  early  months 
of  the  year.  Aided  by  Miss  Yitou,  whose  services  in 
the  schools  were  invaluable,  he  was  al)le  to  meet  the- 
emergency,  and  with  unconquerable  energy  to  give- 
every  moment  of  time  and  every  faculty  of  heart  and 
mind  to  the  duties  that  devolved  upon  him.  The  press 
he  had  with  rapture  received,  through  the  liberality  of 
friends  at  home,  was  set  up  in  Clarence,  and,  with  the 
help  of  some  lads  he  had  trained,  he  soon  threw  ofT 
many  pages  of  school  books  and  of  Scripture  for  the 
use  of  the  people  at  Cameroons.  The  services  of  the 
sanctuary  in  Clarence  were  usually  crowded,  both  on 
the  Sabbath  and  in  the  week.  The  prayer-meetings  were- 
filled  with  earnest  worshippers,  whose  supplications  for 
a  Divine  blessing  on  the  Word  received  large  and  gracious 
answers  from  on  high.  Here  is  a  sketch  of  his  daily 
toil : — "  I  preach  twice  on  Sabbath  days,  once  in  the 
week,  attend  the  prayer-meeting  on  Tuesday  evenings 
Monday  evening  being  devoted  to  teachers'  meeting, 
maternal  meeting,  and  missionary  meeting  (in  order), 
Wednesday  evening,  all  the  classes  (and  everybody 
connected  with  the  church  is  in  class)  assemble  in  the 
chapel.  Thursday  evening  a  Bible-class  meets  at  my 
house.  Friday  evening,  public  lecture.  Saturday 
evening,  to  myself.  Monday,  Tuesday,  and  Wednesday 
mornings  from  ten  to  one  o'clock,  I  instruct  classes  of 
inquirers  (in  which  there  are  at  present  fifty).  Monday 
evening,  from  five  to  six,  another  class  who  cannot 
attend  earlier.  My  other  hours  are  filled  up  in  visiting 
the  people,  or  in  study,  and  even  at  my  table  I  can- 
not sit  without  some  one  calling  on  some  business."    To 


48  ALFEED    SAKER. 

^hese  constant  and  severe  labours  lie  added  the  super- 
intendence of  the  "  boys  "  whom  he  had  taught  to  act  as 
compositors  and  pressmen,  and  the  supply  of  manuscript 
daily  for  the  press.  In  his  last  letter  of  the  year 
(December  18th),  it  is  no  wonder  that  he  should  say  to 
the  Secretary,  "  My  legs  fail,  my  knees  tremble,  and  I 
hnow  not  what  I  shall  do.  Yet,  hitherto,  I  am  mercifully 
lielped,  and,  with  the  exception  of  weakness  in  my 
joints,  my  health  is  good.  Pray  for  me,  dear  brotlier  ; 
and  send  help  as  soon  as  you  can." 

But  while  Mr.  Saker  was  thus  toiling  and  \vriting, 
the  help  he  longed  and  prayed  for  was  on  the  way.  On 
the  8tli  December  the  Dov&  once  more  left  Gravesend, 
having  on  board  Captain  and  Mrs.  ]\Iilbourne,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Newbegin,  Mrs.  Saker,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Yarnold, 
the  latter  to  assist  as  a  teacher  in  Fernando  Po.  Tlie 
ship  was  also  laden  with  a  valuable  printing  press  for 
Bimljia,  the  gift  of  friends  in  Scotland  and  Xorfolk ;  a. 
•sugar  mill,  the  gift  of  Mr.  Peto  ;  and  with  a  large  quan- 
tity of  stores  and  provisions  for  the  sorely  tried  workers. 
By  these  arrivals  the  missionary  band  was  increased 
-to  eleven  European  agents  (including  the  wives  of  the 
missionaries),  and  eight  native  preachers  and  teachers. 
A  brief  sunmiary  of  the  work  accomplished  in  the 
Mission  up  to  this  point  is  given  in  the  Society's  annual 
reports.  "  Since  1841,  the  year  of  the  opening  of  the 
Mission,  the  bread-fruit  tree,  the  pomegranate,  the 
mango,  the  avocado  pear,  and  the  mammee,  fruits  of 
■great  value,  and  all  suitable  to  the  climate,  have  been 
introduced  by  our  brethren ;  garments  sufficient  to 
■  clothe  not  less  than  20,000  persons  have  been  distri- 
buted ;  many  hundreds  of  the  natives,  it  may  be  said 
■thousands,    have    received    medical    assistance ;    tln-ee 


ANXIOUS   DAYS.  49 

principal  stations  (Clarence,  Bimlna,  Cameroons),  have 
been  established ;  and  about  eighty  persons  have  been 
baptized.  An  '  Introduction  to  the  Fernandian  tongue  ' 
has  been  written  by  Mr.  Clarke,  and,  with  specimens 
of  translation,  has  been  publislied  by  liini  at  Berwick. 
The  gospel  of  Matthew,  the  book  of  Genesis,  and  Scrip- 
ture extracts  in  Isu])u  have  been  published  by  Mr. 
Merrick  at  Bimbia ;  and  Mr.  Saker  is  engaged  v/ith 
tlie  Dualla  at  Cameroons.  Judging  from  these  results, 
and  comparing  them  with  those  of  tlie  first  seven  years 
of  missionary  labour  in  India,  or  other  fields,  we  can- 
not but  regard  the  labours  of  our  brethren  in  Africa 
as  very  encouraging  and  important." 

Anxious  hearts,  both  on  board  the  Dove  and  in  Fer- 
nando Po,  were  awaiting  the  vessel's  arrival,  which 
took  place  on  the  IStli  Feljruary,  1849.  The  voyage 
had  its  perils,  for  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  on  the  23rd 
December,  she  encountered  a  storm,  v/hich  on  the 
following  day  increased  in  violence,  and  continued  to 
rage  for  several  days.  A  sail  was  torn  into  shreds,  the 
tiller  was  broken,  the  aft  light  was  sto^'e  in,  and  the 
ship  was  nearly  eugiilphed.  The  passengers,  especially 
the  females,  suffered  much  from  the  incursions  of  the 
sea,  as  well  as  from  the  violence  of  tlie  rain.  At  length, 
on  the  6th  January,  they  reached  Madeira,  and  after  re- 
fitting, proceeded  on  their  way.  The  rest  of  the  voyage 
though  tedious,  was  pleasant.  "  It  was  Sabbath  morning," 
writes  Mrs.  Saker,  "at  daylight,  that  we  could  trace 
land  in  the  distance.  No  sea  breeze  until  ten  o'clock. 
But  we  were  not  seen  hj  our  friends  on  shore  until  one 
o'clock.  I  cannot  describe  how  anxious  I  felt  for  many 
days  before,  but  especially  as  we  approached  the  island. 
I  could  not  tell  what  lay  before  me ;  whether  my  dear 


50  ALFEED    SAKER. 

husband  was  living  or  dead,  sick  or  in  liealtli."  Not 
less  anxious  was  the  husband,  who,  for  days,  had  been 
watching  from  the  shore  for  the  arrival  of  the  "  large 
mercy "  for  which  he  had  longed  and  prayed.  The 
Sabbath-school  had  just  closed,  when  tidings  came  that 
the  Dove  was  in  sight.  The  fogs,  called  "  smokes," 
which  so  often  prevail  on  the  coast  at  this  season,  had 
for  many  weeks  been  exceedingly  heavy,  so  that  any 
object  three  miles  off  covild  scarcely  be  discerned.  A 
small  glass  gave  evidence  that  something  was  approach- 
ing. "  The  news,"  says  Mr.  Saker,  "  tied  through  the 
town  so  quickly,  that  I  had  not  time  to  prepare  myself 
ere  five  or  six  of  our  people  came  up  to  tell  me.  Others 
ran  to  the  beach  to  procure  a  boat,  and  soon  a  dozen 
friends  were  ready,  seated  in  Mr.  Lynslager's  boat,  to 
convey  us  to  great  joy,  or  heavy  tidings.  Eapidly  the 
boat  glided  over  the  waves,  and  all  doubt  as  to  the 
identity  of  the  vessel  was  removed ;  yet,  no  one  was 
to  be  seen  on  deck,  owing  to  the  thick  haze.  We  soon 
neared  the  Dove,  and  one  by  one  I  saw  Captain  Mil- 
bourne,  brother  Newbegin,  a  stranger,  another,  and 
another,  but  no  Mrs.  Saker.  Another  moment  and  a 
voice  came  pealing  over  the  water,  '  All  right,  brother.' 
A  happy  greeting  followed.  My  dear  wife  had  been 
obliged  to  go  below  from  over-excitement.  In  a  few 
minutes  all  our  minds  were  calm,  and,  after  reading  the 
103rd  Psalm,  we  prostrated  ourselves  before  God  in 
adoring  gratitude." 

As  the  ship's  dingy  neared  the  shore,  canoes  and  boats 
filled  with  people  crowded  about  the  new-comers ;  the 
whole  town  was  moved,  and  every  one,  young  and  old, 
came  out  to  show  their  welcome.  Smiling  and  happy 
faces  greeted   them.     After   a   slight   repast,  the   bell 


ANXIOUS   DAYS.  51 

sounded  for  worship,  and  a  crowded  assembly  united  in 
thanksgiving.  Again,  in  the  evening  at  seven,  the 
church  met  to  express  in  song  and  prayer  the  gratitiule 
so  strongly  felt.  Not  less  animating  was  the  meeting 
held  on  the  following  day.  It  was  a  joyous  gathering, 
for  it  spoke  of  hope  and  blessing  for  Africa ;  while  it 
was  an  unspeakable  relief  to  the  heart  of  the  burdened 
missionary.  To  use  his  own  expressive  words :  "  To  me 
it  has  been  an  exliilarating  time.  It  has  had  a  happy 
efiect  on  my  spirit.  But  I  feel  unable  to  bear  the  joy, 
and  I  shall  soon  need  a  f[uiet,  retired  hour  to  moderate 
my  feelings.  The  hour  will  soon  come,  foi'  on  Tuesday 
next  the  Dove  will  move  on  to  Bimbia.  Brother  Xew- 
begin  and  wife,  Yarnold  and  wife,  will  take  passage  in 
her;  and  on  its  return  it  is  probable  I  shall  visit 
Cameroons  with  ]\Irs.  Saker." 

"  The  18th  Feljruary,"  he  continues,  "  came,  and  was 
a  day  of  joy.  Our  hearts  beat  more  freely  as  we  looked 
around  on  our  brethren,  blooming  in  health,  and  ready 
for  the  work.  We  hoped  for  large  success."  It  was 
the  expectation  of  j\Ir.  Saker  that  the  arrival  of  this 
band  of  helpers,  radiant  with  health  and  hope,  would 
set  him  free  to  return  to  Cameroons.  But  this  desire 
soon  received  a  check.  Light  sicknesses  came  as  warn- 
ings of  danger  ahead.  "  I:^ot  to  destroy  hope,"  he  said, 
"  but  they  hindered  labour,  and  became  the  precursors 
of  heavier  calamities."  The  first  of  these  omens  was 
the  decision  of  Captain  ]\Iilbourne  to  return  to  Europe. 
Then  tlie  health  of  Mr.  Yarnold  began  to  decline,  and 
before  the  end  of  the  year  he  felt  constrained  to  aban- 
don the  work  altogetlier.  ]iut  the  illness  of  ]\lr. 
Merrick,  his  departure  from  Africa,  and  death  at  sea  in 


4* 


52  ALFRED   SAKER. 

the  month  of  October,*  was  the  most  painful  and  fata! 
blow  of  all.  These  distressing  events  compelled  Mr. 
Saker  to  reconsider  his  decision  to  return  to  Cameroons. 
He  ever  thought  of  it  as  the  true  field  of  his  missionary 
labours.  Not  that  his  efforts  at  Clarence  were  without 
reward.  Many  conversions  testified  to  the  power  of  his 
ministry.  The  people  were  attached  to  him.  His 
medical  knowledge  added  both  to  his  influence  and  use- 
fulness. An  occasional  visit  to  the  Adeeyah  tribes  of 
the  interior  encouraged  him  to  make  some  efforts  for 
th^r  benefit.  His  printing  operations  also  went  steadily 
forward.  But,  under  these  circmnstances,  he  felt  it  liis 
duty  thus  to  write  to  the  Committee :  "  I  know  the 
mind  of  my  brethren  and  the  wish  of  the  church.  But 
I  do  not  feel  willing  to  remain  at  Clarence.  I  shall,  I 
hope,  yield  to  whatever  may,  in  the  judgment  of  the- 
Committee  and  brethren  here,  be  my  duty.  The  church 
and  the  brethren  write  in  one  voice,  and  if  the 
Committee  recommend  it,  I  shall  comply  with  the  re- 
quest of  tlieir  letter.  But  my  feelings  are  against  it ;: 
my  heart  is  at  Cameroons." 

But  there  was  no  alternative,  and  Clarence  became' 
for  a  time  the  headquarters  of  his  work.    An  occasional 


*  The  Kev.  Joseph  Merrick  was  a  native  of  Jamaica,  and  of 
African  descent.  He  was  educated  in  the  Society's  schools,  and 
as  a  yoiith  began  in  1837  to  preach.  He  was  soon  after  asso- 
ciated with  his  father  in  the  pastorate  of  the  church  at  Jericho. 
He  entered  on  mission  work  in  Africa  in  1843,  and  laboured  most 
diligently  among  the  Isubu  tril^e  on  the  Bimbia  river.  He- 
quickly  learned  to  speak  their  language  with  great  readiness  and 
precision,  and  translated  a  portion  of  the  New  Testament  inta 
the  Isubu  tongue.  It  was  partially  printed  by  himself,  but  was- 
completed  at  press  by  Mr.  Saker.  He  died  on  the  22nd  October,. 
184D,  on  his  passage  to  England. 


ANXIOUS   DAYS.  o'j 

visit  to  Bethel  was  all  that  he  cmikl  do.  Tlie  voya<^e 
-across  the  strait  and  up  the  Caineroons  river  was  often 
perilous,  often  delayed  for  days  together  by  baffling 
winds  and  currents.  These  he  willingly  encountered, 
frequently  in  an  open  boat,  to  assist  and  encourage  the 
coloured  brethren,  Johnson  and  Fuller,  whom  he  had 
left  there.  Under  their  industrious  hands  the  seed  iMr. 
Saker  had  sown  began  slowly  to  appear.  He  visited 
them  in  the  mouth  of  April,  and,  writing  to  the  Secretary 
a  few  days  after  his  return,  he  says  :  "  I  heard  from 
Johnson  yesterday.  The  schools  and  meetings  are  still 
well  attended.  King  Bell  grieves  his  heart  that  I  do 
not  come  back  again.  His  entreaty  is  that  I  would 
send  some  one  to  teach  his  children.  And,  dear  sir, 
what  am  I  to  do  ?  At  Cameroons,  where  I  hoped  to 
spend  my  days,  they  are  not  half  provided  for.  Hun- 
dreds of  children  there  are  clinging  around  my  heart, 
and  I  feel  deeply  distressed  that  I  cannot  go  to  them. 
What  can  be  done  ?  Entreat  the  Committee  to  let  me 
have  another  native  teacher." 

Encountering  a  very  stormy  passage,  another  brief 
visit  was  paid  to  Bethel  in  the  month  of  August,  when 
Mr.  Saker  had  the  pleasure  of  marrying  the  first  of  the 
Duallas  wlio  submitted  to  tliat  sacred  and  social  rite. 
Three  paonths  after,  the  marriage  was  followed  by  the 
husband's  baptism.  To  celebrate  this  joyful  service, 
Mr.  Saker  left  Clarence  on  Monday,  the  5th  Xovember, 
having  Mrs.  Saker  and  Miss  Yitcu  in  company.  At 
Bimbia  they  were  joined  by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Newbegin. 
Tuesday  and  Wednesday  passed  in  the  endeavour  to 
reach  their  destination  in  the  face  of  a  fearful  tornado, 
and  with  disabled  rigging,  about  six  o'clock  in  the  even- 
ing of  the  second  day,  they  landed  at  Bethel.  The  fatigues 


54  ALFRED   .SAKER. 

of  the  voyage  could  not  repress  his  anxious  desire  to- 
gather  in  the  first-fruits  of  his  labours  at  King  A'kwa's- 
town.  "  At  eight  o'clock,"  continues  Mr.  Saker,  "  we  held 
a  prayer-meeting  with  our  brethren,  and  a  goodly  com- 
pany of  Duallas.  At  four  next  morning  we  met  a  large- 
number  of  Duallas  for  prayer.  This  meeting  continued  till 
six.  On  account  of  the  tide  we  deferred  our  next  service- 
till  eleven  o'clock,  when  we  met  again  in  the  chapel. 
Sang  and  read  in  Dualla.  Mr.  Newbegin  then  explained,, 
through  an  interpreter,  the  chapter  I  had  read,  after 
which  I  addressed  the  congregation  in  Dualla,  showed 
from  the  Scriptures  the  command  of  Jesus  to  discij)le 
all  nations  and  then  baptize  them,  and  exhorted  the 
inquirers  to  a  steadfast  adherence  to  the  words  of  our 
Lord,  and  the  path  of  righteousness.  We  closed  with 
singing  and  prayer,  and  then  went  down  to  the  beach. 
Another  Dualla  hymn  was  followed  by  an  address  to- 
the  candidate.  I  then  baptized  this,  our  first  convert,. 
in  the  waters  of  Cameroons.  Oh,  that  this  small  be- 
ginning may  be  speedily  succeeded  by  the  ingathering  of 
a  mighty  host  to  the  Lord  our  God !  The  spectators  of 
this  (to  them)  novel  scene  were  very  attentive  ;  silence 
and  order  were  observed  by  all.  Deep  seriousness  and 
anxiety  were  on  the  faces  of  many.  Dr.  Newbegin 
closed  with  prayer." 

The  afternoon  was  devoted  to  the  formation  of  a 
church,  consisting  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Saker,  Horton 
Johnson  and  his  wife,  and  Smith,  the  convert  just 
baptised.  The  services  w^ere  closed  by  the  celebration  of 
the  Supper  of  the  Lord.  "  Thus,"  concludes  Mr.  Saker,. 
"  I  have  lived  to  witness  what  I  have  long  desired 
intensely,  the  beginning  of  a  good  work  at  Cameroons,, 
and  the  formation  of  a  Christian  church.     Oh,  that  I 


ANXIOUS   DAYS.  5;> 

may  see  it  increased  to  a  thousand  souls  !  And  I 
do  hope,  for  the  Spirit  of  God  is  doing  a  large  work 
there.  More  than  twenty  inquirers  are  hanging  on 
my  heart  and  lips  with  marks  of  deepest  solicitude. 
The  ferocious,  demoniacal  features  are  assuming  the 
softness  of  children,  and  those  who  a  little  time  since 
sought  my  life  are  saying  to  me,  '  What  shall  I  do  to 
be  saved  ? '  I  cannot  describe  my  feelings  when  I  see 
and  hear  what  I  would  record  if  I  had  but  time.  Dear 
sir,  pray  for  us,  and  rejoice  with  us  too." 

The  regret  of  ]\Ir.  Saker  that  he  could  not  himself 
minister  to  these  eager  souls  was  the  more  intense, 
because  the  chapel,  built  to  hold  200  persons,  was 
now  crowded  with  interested  hearers,  and  that  during 
these  visits  hundreds  more  gathered  to  listen  to  the 
words  of  grace  which  fell  from  his  lips. 

By  this  time,  however,  the  tropical  heats  and  fevers 
were  making  their  mark  on  the  sinewy  and  spare 
frame  of  Mr.  Saker,  and  notwithstanding  a  run  to  the 
river  Gaboon  in  August,  from  which  he  returned 
"  much  bettered,"  he  yet  felt  it  his  duty  to  avail  him- 
self of  the  offer  of  a  free  passage,  in  the  Mission  vessel 
of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  Mission  at  Calabar, 
to  make  a  brief  visit  to  England.  After  seven  years 
of  unceasing  and  exhausting  toil,  and  many  attacks  of 
illness,  this  change  of  climate  was  as  necessary  as  it  was 
welcome.  On  the  12th  of  March,  1850,  with  his  wife 
and  Miss  Yitou,  he  left  Clarence.  The  voyage  was 
tedious,  but  the  tedium  was  more  than  compensated  by 
the  improved  health  with  which  the  party  landed  at 
Liverpool  on  the  ensuing  28  th  of  May. 


CHAPTER    VII. 

The  Dawn  of  Bkighter  Days,  1850 — 1852. 

N"  Mr.  Saker's  arrival  in  England,  he  found 
that  the  condition  of  the  African  Mission 
had  for  some  time  occupied  the  anxious 
attention  of  the  Committee  of  the  Society. 
But  scarcely  was  he  landed  when  the 
lecessity  of  immediate  steps  being  taken  for  its  re- 
inforcement was  solemnly  impressed  upon  them  by  the 
unexpected  tidings  of  the  decease  of  Dr.  Newhegin, 
which  took  place  shortly  after  Mr.  Saker's  departure 
from  Clarence.  This  sorrowful  event  occurred  near 
midnight,  on  the  17tli  April,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Calabar  river,  whither  Dr.  Newbegin  had  sailed  in  the 
Dove  to  obtain  medical  advice.  Words  cannot  express 
the  consternation  with  which  the  news  was  received. 
Not  one  of  the  English  brethren  sent  out  from  England 
was  left  in  Africa.  The  hearts  of  many  of  the  sup- 
porters of  the  Mission  failed. 

It  was  at  this  moment  of  dee^)  depression  that  IMr. 
Saker  addressed  the  following  remarkable  letter  to  tlie 
Committee : — 

"  I  have  a  fear  that  some  of  you  who  wish  well  to 
Africa  will  be  discouraged,  and  I  think  you  ought  not 
to  be.  Let  us  re\aew  some  of  the  facts.  Ten  years 
since  you  commenced  the  work.  You  sent  many 
labourers  and  expended  much  treasure.     Of  those  sent 


THE   DAWN   OF   BMGIITEIl   DAYS.  57 

out,  God  has  gathered  to  himself  Thompson,  Sturgion, 
A.  Fuller,  Merrick,  and  Newbegin.  Prince  and  Clarke 
have  been  driven  from  the  field,  and  a  small  company 
of  West  Indians  have  tied,  terrified  by  the  toil  and 
suffering.  This  suffering  and  loss  of  life  show  that  the 
sacrifice  you  have  made  is  large.  But  ought  we  to  have 
expected  less  ?  Bloodless  victories  are  not  common. 
Sometimes  we  have  to  wait  long  for  the  results  we  seek; 
but  in  this  Mission  God,  in  His  Providence,  permits  us 
to  look  at  something  accomplislied  before  this  last  afflic- 
tion fell  on  us.  Let  me  refer  to  these  results.  There 
are  now  living  in  Africa  about  one  hundred  souls  hope- 
fully converted  to  God.  In  nine  years  past,  forty  may 
have  died  leaving  the  pleasing  testimony  that  they  are 
gone  to  a  better  land.  They  are  saved,  instrumentally 
through  you  and  your  agents. 

"  There  are  now  eight  native  teachers  engaged,  more 
or  less,  in  efforts  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  They  are 
not  all  supported  by  you,  but  they  are  what  they  arc 
through  you.  The  education  imparted  is  an  immense 
benefit.  In  the  colony  of  Clarence  you  have  effected  a 
transformation  unspeakably  valuable,  and  almost  unpre- 
cedented. Among  the  natives  of  this  island,  impressions 
have  been  made  that  only  need  fostering  to  result  in  the 
glorious  and  happy  cliange  you  long  to  behold.  On  the 
continent  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  has  been  done. 
Souls  have  been  brought  to  God,  churches  formed,  and 
actually  the  wilderness  is  now  being  transformed  into 
the  garden  of  the  Lord. 

"  All  this  stands  against  so  much  suffering,  and  so 
many  deaths ;  and  will  any  say  that  the  sacrifice  equals 
the  results  ? 

"  And  w^e  must  not  forget  that  all  who  die  are  self- 


58  ALFEED    SA.KER. 

de\'oted,  and  God  has  accepted  this  offering,  and  by  it 
wrought  all  that  we  see  accomplished. 

"  Brethren,  I  think  you  will  feel  with  me,  that  we 
must  not  be  discouraged.  God  afflicts  us  ;  let  us  humble 
ourselves  before  Him,  and  try  to  bring  to  His  service 
purer  and  more  devoted  sacrifices. 

"  You  will  doubtless  conclude,  that  I  ought  to  return 
to  Africa  immediately ;   I  can  only  say,  I  am  ready." 

This  trumpet  call  to  "  Come  up  to  the  help  of  the 
Lord,  against  the  mighty,"  roused  every  heart. 

The  history  of  the  Mission  was  passed  in  review. 
The  proofs  of  God's  working  in  the  conversion  of  souls 
by  the  preaching  of  the  Word  were  patent,  and  destroyed 
every  doubt  in  the  minds  of  the  Committee  as  to  their 
duty.  Fidelity  to  the  great  cause  committed  to  their 
charge  required  the  continuance  of  their  efforts  to  win 
Africa  for  Christ.  No  past  suffering,  no  prospective 
peril,  could  daunt  the  firm,  calm  resolve  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Saker  However  fearful  others  might  be,  their  lives 
were  the  Lord's,  and  to  be  spent  in  Africa  for  Him. 

Arrangements  for  their  return  were  made  as  speedily 
as  possible,  and  on  the  25th  October  they  sailed  from 
Liverpool,  Owing  to  light  winds  and  frequent  calms, 
the  passage  was  longer  than  had  been  anticipated ;  but 
it  was  on  the  whole  a  pleasant  one,  and  was  crowned 
with  a  warm  welcome,  when,  on  the  29th  December,  on 
a  Sabbath  day,  they  entered  Clarence  Cove.  "  Truly," 
says  Mr.  Saker,  "  it  was  a  day  of  joy  to  me  and  our 
people."  Many  wept  for  gladness,  and  within  an  hour 
and  a  half  some  five  hundred  persons  gathered  in  the 
chapel,  to  rejoice  in  hymn  and  prayer  that  the  Lord  had 
not  forsaken  His  heritage.  The  gratitude  of  the 
travellers  was  not  a  little  increased  by  the  fact  they 


THE   DAWN   OF    ilKIGHTEK   DAYS.  50 

learnt  on  landing,  that  two  vessels,  in  wliicli  they  had 
endeavoured  to  secure  a  passage  from  England,  had  been 
wrecked  on  their  way.  Twelve  days  afterwards  Mr. 
Saker  was  joined  by  the  Eev.  John  Wheeler,  who  had 
been  the  pastor  of  the  church  in  Windmill  Street,. 
Finsbury,  London,  and  had  nobly  offered  himself  to  share 
with  him  the  perils  of  the  Mission.  He  was  immediately 
chosen  to  fill  the  office  of  pastor  in  the  church  at 
Clarence,  and  Mr.  Saker  was  once  more  free  to  give  him- 
self to  the  work  on  the  great  continent  so  near. 

Having  set  "  in  order  the  tilings  wanting  in  the 
church  "  at  Clarence,  Mr.  Saker  paid  a  brief  visit  to 
Bimbia,  where  he  collected  the  manuscripts  and  Isubu 
translations  of  the  lamented  Merrick.  Leaving  directions 
for  their  j)rinting  with  Joseph  Fuller,  he  hastened  tO' 
Bethel,  where  he  found  a  state  of  things  that  filled  his 
heart  with  joy.  He  received  "  a  truly  Christian  wel- 
come," and  became  immediately  busy  with  the  ex- 
amination of  inquirers,  and  in  listening  to  an  account  of 
the  trials  and  persecutions  through  whicli  the  infant 
community  liad  passed.  Twenty  persons  were  examined  ^ 
fifteen  belonged  to  the  number  of  those  who,  in  October, 
1849,  had  given  him  reason  to  hope  that  a  work  of 
grace  had  been  begun  in  their  souls  ;  but  only  five  were 
for  tlie  present  accepted  for  baptism ;  one,  a  slave  ; 
another,  a  prince  belonging  to  a  neighbouring  tribe ;  and 
three  females,  each  in  years.  "  On  Sabbath  morning, 
the  2nd  February,  1851,"  writes  Mr.  Saker,  "  we 
assembled  at  six  o'clock  in  our  chapel,  which  was  soon 
filled.  I  read  and  explained  to  the  multitude  some  of 
the  Scriptures  respecting  the  institution  and  design  of 
baptism.  I  then  addressed  the  candidates,  and  exhorted 
them  to  steadfastness.     After  prayer  we  left  the  chapel 


■60  ALFRED   SAKER. 

for  tlie  river.  The  candidates  and  a  large  company  of 
inquirers  followed  nie  down  the  hill,  while  nearly  200 
spectators  took  their  station  on  the  high  bank  over- 
vlooking  us.  We  prayed  again,  and  then  baptized.  Then 
.it  was  proved  that  the  Dualla  is  changed.  Usually  they 
express  their  joys  and  sorrows  with  heathen  noise.  Yet 
here  was  no  noise,  save  the  sobbing  of  those  whose  dee]) 
■feelings  could  not  otherwise  lie  expressed.  The  tears 
rolled  down  many  cheeks  that  day  that  have  not  Ijeen 
•accustomed  to  weeping.  Many  said,  '  Baptize  me  too.' 
We  once  more  expressed  our  thankfulness  to  God,  and 
then  returned  to  the  chapel  yard,  singing  a  sweet  song 
as  we  ascended  the  hill.  In  the  afternoon  we  received 
the  newly  baptized  into  our  little  church,  rejoicing  in 
these,  and  hopeful  for  yet  greater  numbers." 

The  converts  had,  through  much  tribulation,  entered 
the  kingdom  of  God.  The  congregation  had  been 
severely  tried.  The  evident  changes  wrought  by  the 
Gospel  stirred  up  the  hatred  of  not  a  few  enemies  of 
±lie  Cross,  and  efforts  were  made  to  prevent  the  access 
•of  the  people  to  the  chapel ;  these  failed,  and  at  last 
the  chiefs  privately  met  to  deliberate  on  the  course  to 
be  pursued.  It  was  resolved  to  destroy  the  mission 
.station  entirely,  and  to  kill  every  native,  male  or  female, 
who  persisted  in  attending  the  ministrations  of  grace. 
A  plan  was  secretly  prepared ;  but  the  principal  chief 
was  uneasy.  To  kill  the  young  prince  was  certain  to 
fcring  on  a  war  with  the  tribe  to  which  he  belonged. 
Persuasion  was  therefore  employed  to  detach  him  from 
Mr.  Johnson.  A  special  messenger  was  also  despatched 
to  Bimbia  to  fetch  his  sister,  that  her  entreaties  might 
he  added  to  those  of  others.  He  listened,  but  declined 
io  yield.     In  his  turn,  he  spoke  of  Christ,  and  pleaded 


THE   DAWN   OF    r.RIGHTKU   DAYS.  GT 

witli  her  to  forsake  the  workl.  One  argument  she' 
urgently  pressed.  She  said  he  woidd  be  killed,  and' 
in  saying  this  revealed  the  plot  that  had  lieen  laid' 
for  the  destruction  of  all  who  cleaved  to  the  Word' 
of  the  Lord.  This  at  once  opened  his  eyes  to  the- 
danger ;  but  he  nobly  replied :  "  Well,  if  they  wish 
to  destroy  the  Gospel,  they  cannot,  and  they  shall' 
not  kill  the  missionaries  till  they  have  first  killed 
me.  We  will  die  together.  I  now  see  why  you  are- 
brought  here.  Go  to  the  chiefs,  and  say  to  them, 
I  will  not  leave  the  Gospel  of  God."  The  prin- 
cipal chief's  heart  failed.  To  kill  the  prince  was- 
perilous  ;  so  the  word  M^ent  forth  :  "  Let  the  white  men 
live."  Still,  many  of  the  converts  were  put  in  chains- 
and  cruelly  beaten.  Twice  Mr.  Johnson  rescued  one- 
woman  from  death.  But  at  the  time  of  Mr.  Saker's 
arrival  this  season  of  trial  had  nearly  passed  away,  and 
his  heart  was  filled  with  joy  "  that  God  was  making 
His  own  Word  thus  to  grow." 

It  was  not  till  the  month  of  September  that  Mr.  Saker 
was  able  to  take  up  his  abode  again  at  Bethel,  to  begin, 
as  he  said,  "  a  long  and  solemn  work."  For  the  few 
months  during  which  Mr.  Wheeler  was  passing  through 
the  fevers  which  usually  attack  a  new-comer,  Mr.  Saker 
continued  to  assist  him  in  the  work  of  the  church  in 
Clarence.  In  April  he  visited  the  mountain  people, 
and  in  June  Imptized  nine  persons  below  the  well- 
known  waterfall.  Writing  on  the  28th  August,  he  tluis 
anticipates  tlie  labours  before  him  at  Bethel :  "  I  now 
go  to  my  loved  work  again.  How  soon  I  shall  be  al)le 
to  write  you  from  my  deep  mine  of  toil  I  cannot  tell. 
Next  Aveek  I  iiiust  baptize  many  at  Cameroons,  marry 
some  others,  and  then  assemble  all  the  children   for 


62  ALFBED    SAKER. 

examination  and  reward.  Remember  us  in  your  daily 
•supplications,  and  may  the  cheering  presence  of  the 
Father  of  mercies  be  with  you." 

Almost  his  first  task  on  arriving  at  Cameroons  was 
to  provide  suitable  dwellings  for  the  Alission  families. 
The  frail  and  perishable  character  of  the  materials  of 
■which  houses  were  usually  built,  and  the  destruction 
-caused  by  the  invasion  of  white  ants,  had  early  led 
Mr.  Saker  to  devise  some  means  for  securing  more 
■durable  structures.  At  first  he  tried  the  harder  woods 
•of  the  forests,  but  at  length  discovered  that  clay  suitable 
for  bricks  and  tiles  existed  on  the  spot.  He  first  set 
up  his  brick-making  shed  and  kiln  at  Clarence  ;  but  it 
was  soon  evident  that  the  clay  of  Cameroons  offered  a 
far  better  material.  Writing  on  the  3rd  January,  1852, 
he  reports :  "  I  am  happy  to  say  that  in  this  I  have  a 
■complete  success  (both  building  brick  and  paving  tiles), 
and  for  some  weeks  past  my  brickyard  has  been  in 
active  operation.  I  suppose  that  10,000  are  now  ready, 
-and  we  are  making  2,000  a-week."  The  entire  cost,  he 
thought,  would  average  about  twenty  shillings  a  thou- 
sand. To  accomplish  this  great  task  he  had  himself  to 
labour  with  his  own  hands,  and  to  train  the  lads  who 
were  willing  to  submit  to  his  tuition. 

In  a  letter  written  a  few  days  later,  Mr.  Saker  enters 
into  somewhat  fuller  detail  of  the  way  in  which  he 
attained  his  end.  "  In  settling  myself,  seven  years  since, 
..at  Cameroons,  I  resolved  to  make  bricks,  if  for  no  otlier 
purpose,  yet  for  a  good  cottage  for  myself.  Tor  many 
months  I  tried,  but  in  the  end  gave  it  up  in  despair. 
No  persuasion  or  offer  of  payment  would  induce  the 
men  to  labour.  They  laughed  at  us,  and  regarded  us  as 
slaves  or  fools.     We  could  not  get  bricks,   so  built  a 


THE    DAWN    OF    lUHGHTER    DAYS.  G3 

cliapel  of  wood,  and  the  people  filled  it.  They  heard, 
and  in  time  felt,  the  importance  of  preparing  for  the 
solemnities  of  another  world.  The  truth  made  impres- 
sions on  their  hearts,  and  they  were  changed.  Eight 
principles  began  to  have  place,  and  when  they  went  to 
trade  in  the  country,  they  could  no  longer  succeed  ))y 
fraud  or  lies.  As  soon  as  this  was  seen,  persecution 
came;  and  with  the  loss  of  all  their  property,  and  with 
personal  suffering,  they  barely  returned  to  tell  their  com- 
panions. And  so  it  has  happened  that,  as  soon  as  a  man 
decides  for  God,  his  own  townsmen  drive  him  from  the 
markets,  lest  he  should  spoil  their  trade.  In  their 
sufferings  they  came  to  me  to  know  what  they  were  to 
do.  I  have  replied,  '  Cultivate  more  ground,  .raise  and 
sell  provisions,  plant  cotton,  and  open  a  new  source  of 
trade.'  Latterly,  I  have  said,  '  3Iake  bricks  and  I  icill 
pay  you:  N'o\<^  see  the  answer.  '  We  will  do  anything, 
if  you  will  teach  us  ? '  I  have  taught  tliem,  and  my 
brickyard  maintains  five  families,  and  in  return  I  <Tet 
2,000  bricks  every  week.  This,  my  dear  sir,  is  a 
triumph— a  triumph  which  we  owe  to  God,  and  the 
influence  of  His  holy  Word.  WitJiouf  the  Gospel,  I  could 
get  no  work  done;  with  it,  I  can  build  a  bridge  across  our 
wide  river,  or  convert  the  wilderness  into  a  fruitful 
garden ;  and,  had  I  a  sufficient  sum  of  money  to  main- 
tain a  few  families  through  two  years  of  labour,  T  could 
open  a  new  source  of  profit  and  dependence  for  our 
people.  Even  without  money,  I  hope  eventually  to 
succeed  in  planting  a  few  acres  with  cotton,  even  as  we 
have  with  sugar  cane." 

But  the  possession  of  bricks  was  of  little  avail  without 
mortar  to  cement  them  together.  We,  therefore,  soon 
read :  "  In  my  travels,  I  am  now  searching  high  and  low 


G4  ALFRED    SAKER. 

for  a  material  witli  wliicli  to  make  lime  or  cement.  I 
hope  to  succeed,  and  I  purpose  sending  out  my  canoe  to 
collect  oyster-sliells.  If  I  can  obtain  sufficient,  we  shall 
soon  have  lime.  And  then,  brethren,  what  can  hinder 
our  work  ?  If  the  Lord  gives  me  health,  we  shall  do 
well."  And  he  did  well,  for  the  Lord  was  with  him. 
In  a  few  years  the  mission-houses,  the  chapel,  the  school- 
houses,  were  all  transformed,  and  they  remain  durable 
monuments  of  the  practical  knowledge,  skill,  and  far- 
seeing  sagacity  of  this  wise  worker  in  the  kingdom 
of  God.  King  A'kwa's  town  itself  has  changed  its 
aspect.  The  brickmakers,  the  smiths,  the  carpenters, 
and  the  builders  that  Mr.  Saker  trained  have  in  many 
instances  exerted  their  newly-acquired  skill  in  raising 
structures  of  brick,  and  improved  habitable  dwellings 
for  themselves  and  others,  instead  of  the  frail  bamboo' 

t 

and  mud  huts  of  their  savage  ancestors.  Christianity 
and  civilisation  have  gone  hand  in  hand,  scattering  on 
every  side  the  fruits  and  flowers  of  a  higher  and  better 
life. 

But  Mr.  Saker  further  describes  for  us,  in  his  own 
striking  way,  the  advances  made  in  the  evangelisation 
of  the  people : — 

"  A  month  since  we  baptized  eleven  more  converts, 
and  still  we  have  several  whom  we  approve.  The  con- 
gregation is  numerous,  and  the  devout  attention  tO' 
the  Word  by  a  large  number  is  exceedingly  pleasing. 
At  four  and  five  o'clock  every  morning  the  schoolroom 
is  crowded  to  hear  the  Word  of  God,  and  in  the  evening 
the  ]Deople  will  only  retire  when  bidden.  Numbers  use 
every  effort  to  learn  to  read.  Many  have  succeeded ; 
and  then  the  joy,  the  astonishment,  of  their  hearts  at 
any  fresh  discovery  of  Divine  Love  as  revealed  in  the 


BETHEL  CHAPEL,   CA3IEE00NS. 


THE   DAWN   OF    BRIGHTEIi   DAYS.  05 

Scriptures !  They  hold  their  lips,  or  beat  their  heads, 
as  the  expressions  they  read  are  explained  to  them,  and 
are  utterly  unable  to  describe  the  emotions  of  their 
hearts.  Sometimes  they  seem  afraid  to  breathe,  lest  the 
wonderful  idea  should  be  disturbed  and  flit  away  from 
them  ;  and  they  wait  for  minutes,  unable  to  grasp  tlie 
tliought  which  comes  upon  them.  The  parables  of 
Jesus  are  a  continual  feast  for  them.  One  thing  may 
be  recorded.  Concern  for  instruction  succeeds  con- 
version ;  ignorance  is  not  deplored  till  guilt  is  a  burden. 
Our  church  now  numbers  twenty  members ;  inquirers, 
twenty-five  ;  a  congregation  which  fills  our  little  temple; 
school  not  large,  Ijut,  I  hope,  efficient."  He  closes  this 
deeply  interesting  narrative  with  the  intunation  that 
he  had  begun  to  attempt  the  same  gracious  work  at  the 
town  of  King  Bell. 

Scarcely,  however,  was  Mr.  Saker  settled  at  Bethel 
than  he  was  called  away  to  Clarence,  by  the  destruction 
of  the  chapel  in  a  fearful  tornado ;  and  in  the  month  of 
May  the  care  of  the  entire  Mission  again  fell  into  his 
hands,  by  the  departure  of  his  valued  friend  and  col- 
league, Mr.  Wheeler.  It  was  hoped  that  a  brief  sojourn 
in  England  would  enable  jMr.  Wheeler  to  return  in- 
vigorated and  restored,  but  tliis  hope  was  disappointed. 
Mr.  Wheeler  failed  to  return,  and  for  two  years  and 
a-half  Mr.  Saker  was  compelled  to  meet — alone  and 
unassisted  by  any  European — the  many  cares  and 
anxieties  of  the  entire  Mission.  But  his  indomitable 
courage  never  gave  way.  With  his  native  helpers  he 
laboured  night  and  day.  "  In  journeyings  often,  in 
perils  of  waters,  in  perils  of  robbers,  in  perils  by  the 
heathen,  in  perils  in  the  wilderness,  in  perils  in  the  sea, 
in  weariness  and  paiufuluess,"  he   pursued  tlie   great 


66  ALFEED    SAKER. 

object  of  his  life,  never  happier  than  when,  as  the  fruit 
of  his  self-sacrifice  and  zeal,  he  gathered  a  few  sheep 
from  the  wilderness  into  the  fold  of  God.  Writinof  on 
the  28th  of  September,  1852,  he  says : — 

"  The  work  of  Missions,  as  ^ue  see  it  and  feci  it,  loses 
none  of  its  interest.  "We  have  two  scenes  ever  before 
us,  and  painted  in  unmistakeable  colours.  Here  is 
wickedness  in  its  most  degraded  and  deadly  form ; 
misery,  discord,  and  death  float  around  us — a  corrupting 
mass,  a  sea  of  death,  subjects  for  deepest  compassion, 
work  for  the  purest  benevolence. 

"  We  have  also  a  pleasant  enclosure  apart  from  this 
fearful  scene ;  an  enclosure  where  the  voice  of  prayer 
and  praise  happily  continue,  where  the  lovely  plants  of 
a  better  clime  are  springing  up  and  bearing  fruit  to 
God.  All  glory  to  Him  who  plants  and  waters  the 
precious  seed ! 

"  In  our  churches  we  liave  enough  to  make  us  thank- 
ful in  the  steadfastness  and  piety  of  our  members. 
That  many  endure  so  much  and  so  well  is  a  marvel.. 
This  is  especially  the  case  at  Cameroons.  That  some 
are  wavering,  or  worse,  cannot  be  surprising.  Since 
Mr.  Wheeler  left  us  we  have  buried  four  honourable 
members.  The  continued  rainy  season  alone  prevents 
us  from  baptizing  some,  and  the  number  of  inquirers  is 
increasing." 

"  But  there  is  one  thing  almost  disheartening.  We 
have  three  churches  in  as  many  different  places.  We 
have  two  other  places  where  the  Word  is  regularly 
preached ;  yet,  what  is  the  whole  of  this  to  the  mass  of 
men  living  in  darkness  around  us  ?  What  proportion 
is  a  hundred  members  of  churches  to  the  tens  of  thou- 
sands treading  the  same  soil,  dancing  before  our  eyes. 


THE   DAWN   OF   BRIGHTER   DAY.S.  67 

alike  careless  of  God  and  themselves  ?  What  do  we 
among  so  many  ?  Where  one  regards  the  voice  of 
mercy,  thousands  turn  a  deaf  ear ;  and  yet  death  goes 
on  with  his  work  ;  war,  disease,  and  witchcraft  are  in- 
satiable ;  and  a  generation  is  almost  gone  since  I  first 
saw  this  dreary  land.  This  fearful  woe  is  unmitigated, 
except  we  feel  the  value  of  one  soul  saved  from  ruin ; 
and  it  is  not  of  one  only  we  rejoice  ;  so  our  joy  is  great. 
Thus  ours  is  a  mingled  lot — highest  pleasure  with  dis- 
heartening sorrow.  In  such  a  land,  what  manner  of 
men  ought  we  to  be  ?  " 

In  another  letter  of  this  year  he  expresses  regret 
that  the  cares  which  daily  press  upon  him  hinder  his 
communicating  the  incidents  that  continually  arise. 
How  much  could  he  say  of  the  converts,  of  his  assistants, 
of  the  condition  of  the  people  '  What  touching  tales  ! 
What  thrilling  emotions  their  persecutions  and  deliver- 
ances excite  !  Then  there  are  new  converts,  awakening 
hope  and  filling  the  heart  with  joy  !  "  Then  come  the 
roarings  of  the  adversary,"  for  the  "  prey  is  taken  from 
the  mighty,  and  the  enemy  brings  his  host  in  the  shape 
of  a  hundred  slaves,  armed  with  staves,  guns,  and  swords, 
as  on  Monday  last,  surrounding  the  houses  and  threat- 
ening to  drive  us  all  away,  and  finally  decamping  with 
our  cow  and  all  the  goods  that  can  bo  seen.  But  all  is 
useless.  They  see  and  feel  that  the  cause  is  God's , 
superstition  fails  to  hold  them  in  chains  as  heretofore ; 
and  although  Satan  would  excite  them  because  thei]' 
religion  and  the  hope  of  their  gain  are  going,  yet,  when 
left  to  think  and  remember  all  that  they  see  and  heai 
from  us,  their  heart§  fail,  and  thus,  as  last  evening,  the}) 
restore  all  that  they  took  away  on  Monday.     Such  a 

thing  was  never  known  before.     That  an  animal  could 

.=1* 


^68  ALFRED    SAKEE. 

live  in  their  hands  an  hour  is  marvellous,  especially 
■when  hungry  and  excited  to  madness.  But  all  things 
— how  can  you  know  them  if  I  fail  to  write  ?  And  yet 
I  could  fill  a  very  long  sheet  every  week  had  I  time  or 
determination  equal  to  the  task." 

Indeed,  but  a  small  portion  of  Alfred  Saker's  life- 
work  can  he  described  in  the  few  pages  allotted  to  this 
biography.  All  that  can  be  done  is  briefly  to  indicate 
the  nature  of  the  toil,  and  the  breadth  of  the  labours, 
which  filled  a  life  of  unsparing  devotion  and  relentless 
self-sacrifice. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  Missioxauy  at  his  Work,  1853 — 185G. 

HATEVElt  might  be  the  difficulties  auc^. 
discouragements  of  the  work,  Mr.  Saker 
found  at  Clarence  and  Cameroons 
abundant  joy  and  gratification  in  the 
manifest  growth  of  the  kingdom  of  God,. 
in  its  "righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost."  Not  so  among  the  Isubu  people  of  Bimljia. 
This  station  was  founded  by  the  lamented  Merrick  on 
his  arrival  in  Africa,  and  on  a  spot  that  was  deemed 
the  most  healthy  of  any  that  could  be  found  at  the- 
mouth  of  the  Cameroons.  A  high  promontory  of  Ijasalt 
stands  boldly  out  from  tlie  main  land,  breasting  the 
waves  of  the  Atlantic,  and  apparently  free  from  the 
lialeful  miasma  which  ever  lurks  in  the  swamps  and 
mangrove  forests  of  the  low-lymg  shores  around.  It  has, 
however,  proved  to  be  the  most  deadly  of  any  of  the 
settlements  on  the  coast,  and  every  European  missionary 
who  has  made  it  his  residence,  even  for  a  temporary 
sojourn,  has  retired  from  it  either  sick  unto  death  or 
smitten  with  malarial  fever  of  long  continuance. 

Tor  the  first  two  or  three  years  there  were  signs  of  pro- 
gress, but  it  soon  became  manifest  that  the  coming  of 
the  Gospel  was  too  late  to  stem  the  torrent  of  iniquity  anJL 
degradation  that  was  hurrying  the  Isubu  tribes  to  their- 
destruction.     The  efforts  of  Dr.  Newbegin,  his  successor. 


70  ALFKED    SAKER. 

were  alike  unavailing,  and  the  wretchedness  of  the 
population  rapidly  culminated  in  irrevocable  decay. 
Mr.  Saker,  too,  found  that  the  miseries  occasioned  by 
internal  discords,  by  the  curse  of  witchcraft,  by  con- 
tinual murders,  by  the  unceasing  wars  with  neighbour- 
ing tribes,  were  on  the  increase.  As  the  natural  conse- 
quence, the  people  were  rapidly  declining  in  numbers. 
The  means  of  existence  were  failing ;  the  land  ceased  to 
oe  cultivated  ;  fishermen  no  longer  plied  their  calling  ; 
incessantly  harassed  with  trials  for  witchcraft,  they  tied 
to  other  spots.  The  endless  fighting  cut  off  the  supply 
of  yams,  maize,  and  plantains  from  the  interior.  If  one 
man  toiled  and  planted  to  feed  his  family,  his  canoe  was 
burnt  and  his  field  and  home  were  invaded  until  the 
devastation  was  complete,  and,  to  use  the  forcible 
language  of  Mr.  Saker,  "  hunger  pined  in  every  corner." 
The  few  converts,  though  cared  for  by  the  missionary, 
were  in  constant  peril.  This  disastrous  state  of  things 
determined  Mr.  Saker  to  remove  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fuller  to 
Cameroons,  and  with  them  the  printing  materials  and 
such  of  the  remaining  buildings  as  would  be  useful,  and 
to  confine  the  mission  to  one  native  schoolmaster.  His 
own  visits  would  for  the  future  be  of  a  purely  evangel- 
istic character.  If  any  other  consideration  weighed 
with  hmi  in  coming  to  this  decision,  it  was  the  unhealthy 
character  •  of  the  place,  which  was  constantly  on  the 
increase  from  the  growth  of  bush  and  swamp  following 
the  decay  of  cultivation  and  the  rooting  out  of  the 
population. 

A  short  extract  from  a  letter  of  Mr.  Fuller  (July, 
1853)  will  vividly  depict  for  us  the  horrors  of  the 
savage  life  by  which  he  was  encompassed  : — "  In  June, 
on  the  third  Sabbath  day,  the  noise  of  drums  was  heard, 


THE  .AIISSIONAKY  AT   lUS   WORK.  71 

a  canoe  made  its  appearance  at  the  point,  and  what  was 
this  noise  ?  The  drum  was  telling  (tlie  natives  can 
make  their  drums  speak)  the  horrible  tale  of  their  cruel 
deed.  It  was  too  awful  a  sight  for  me  to  witness;  but 
those  who  saw  it  said  that  a  man's  head,  newly  cut  of!", 
was  at  the  bow  of  the  canoe.  It  was  the  head  of  a  poor 
innocent  creature  taken  by  a  man  by  name  Ngganda,  or 
Dick  Bumbi,  and  for  no  just  cause,  but  simply  for  what 
they  call  '  a  hero.'  This  was  soon  followed  by  a  grand 
festival,  the  particulars  of  which  I  am  unable  to  give." 

As  there  was  no  prospect  of  any  reversal  of  this  state 
■of  things,  the  Committee,  in  1870,  resolved  to  withdraw 
their  single  agent  at  Bimbia,  and  it  has  ceased  to  be 
•occupied  as  a  station.  It  is,  however,  occasionally  visited 
by  the  missionaries  in  their  passages  to  and  from  Vic- 
toria, and  the  knowledge  of  the  "  way  of  life "  is  not 
allowed  utterly  to  die  out  in  the  land. 

At  Cameroons  how  different  was  the  scene.  Here  sub- 
stantial buildings  were  gradually  spriuging  up — a  mis- 
sion-house to  last  for  years  to  come,  and  to  be  a  fixed  base 
for  future  operations,  and  a  liouse  wliich,  when  finished, 
would  accommodate  a  family  and  all  the  visitors  it  might 
have  to  welcome.  With  it  were  a  school-room,  a  printing 
office,  a  safe  store,  an  artificer's  shop,  and  a  chapel,  also 
lesser  structures  for  printers  and  servants  attached  to 
the  Mission.  "  Stand  witli  me  now,  dear  brother,  a 
minute,"  says  Mr.  Saker,  writing  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Society  (November,  1854) ;  "  we  are  in  the  school-room, 
at  present  appropriated  to  printing.  The  press  is  just 
put  up,  the  type  is  in  cases,  and  here  stands  Fuller  at 
my  right  hand.  Next  liim  is  Songe  ;  near  him  is 
Dikundu.  At  my  left  hand  is  Dumbe.  Coming  in  at 
.the  door  is  N'kwe.     Behind  him  is  Carra.     Excepting 


<2  ALFRED    SAKER. 

Tuller,  all  these  are  native  converts  *  Few  of  tliem  are 
preachers.  Johnson  is  elsewhere  at  this  minute  re- 
pairing my  boat,  and  with  him  a  company  of  pious 
labouring  lads.  Those  named  are  all  young,  from  eleven 
to  twenty-eight — young  men  "of  approved  piety,  full  of 
zeal,  only  waiting  a  command  to  do  anything,  to  bear 
the  lamp  of  truth  into  the  darkest  dens.  Here,  to-day, 
they  have  each  their  employment ;  on  the  coming 
Sabbath  they  will  be  scattered,  all  at  work." 

Kow  let  us  pass  from  this  graphic  and  interest- 
ing picture  to  another  drawn  by  the  same  vivid 
pen :  "  It  is  evening.  I  am  sick,  but  writing  you. 
Fuller  and  Johnson  both  are  near.  They  are  examin- 
ing candidates  for  baptism.  This  final  examination  is 
on  Fuller's  account,  that  he  may  know  the  value  to  be 
attached  to  profession,  and  Ije  gladdened  to  trace  the 
leadings  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  now  they  come  in 
with  a  list  of  eight  approved.  Their  names  are  read. 
I  know  them  all,  and  on  Sabbath  they  are  to  be  baptized 
by  Johnson,  Fuller  to  preach.  Then  a  second  list  of 
names  is  noted,  all  hopeful  ones,  but  they  are  to  wait 
yet  longer.  Then  comes  the  solitary  case  of  discipline 
during  their  first  years  of  church-life.  This  is  painful, 
because  it  is  the  first,  but  one  wherein  only  the  temper 
has  failed.  To-night,  after  three  months  of  separation, 
the  breach  is  healed.  Now  comes  a  talk  of  the  future. 
The  missionary  is  failing ;  he  feels  his  growing  weak- 
ness.    Johnson  is  shown  how  he  must  be  the  pastor, 


*  Josepli  Fuller  is  a  son  of  Alexander  Fuller,  one  of  the  Januiicif, 
immigrants,  ■who  died  shortly  after  his  arrival.  This  son  is  still 
living  at  Hickory  or  Mortonville,  and  serving  the  Lord  with 
successful  diliojence  and  ardent  zeal. 


THE   MISSIONARY   AT    HIS   WORK.  7o 

that  he  must  begin  the  work  now  ;  buckle  on  the  armour 
more  firmly  and  stand,  if  the  teacher  falls. 

"  We  change  this  scene  again,  and  it  is  myself,  wearied 
and  faint  and  full  of  pain.  This  is  not  worth  looking  at. 
A  poor  faltering  worm.  But  before  I  close  to-night,  let 
me  ask,  Will  it  be  lawful  for  me  to  come  home  for  a 
change  at  no  distant  day  ?  I  ask  now  because  I  know 
the  time  will  soon  come  when  I  must  take  a  change  or 
die,  and  wlien  tlie  time  comes  I  cannot  wait  f(jr  an 
answer.  I  hope  to  labour  on  a  few  months  yet  before  I 
am  broken  down  ;  and  be  assured  of  tliis,  I  cannot  leave 
till  stern  duty  drives  me." 

The  needed  relief  was  not  only  promptly  granted  by 
the  Committee  of  the  Society,  but  by  the  arrival  of  the 
Eev.  Jno.  Diboll,  of  Holt,  Norfolk,  towards  the  close 
of  the  year,  as  pastor  of  the  church  at  Clarence,  Mr. 
Saker  was  able  in  July,  1855,  to  obtain  the  change  he- 
so  much  required.  Mrs.  Saker,  whose  health  had  utterly 
broken  down,  as  well  as  that  of  their  little  boy,  had  pre- 
ceded him  homewards  in  the  February  of  the  previous 
year.  It  was  none  too  soon.  For  several  days  prior  to 
his  embarkation,  he  was  so  ill  that  his  life  was  thought 
to  be  fast  drawing  to  a  close.  It  pleased  God,  during 
the  voyage,  to  restore  him  in  some  measure  to  his  usual 
health,  so  that  on  his  arrival  he  was  able  to  communi- 
cate to  many  friends  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  in 
some  detail,  the  progress  and  character  of  his  work,  and 
to  deepen  in  the  minds  of  the  churches  their  interest  in 
the  salvation  of  Africa. 

His  stay  in  his  native  land  was  not  a  prolonged 
one.  Ever  anxious  to  be  at  the  post  of  duty,  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Saker,  after  an  interesting  inters^iew  with 
the  Comnnttee,  in  which  plans  were  arranged  for  the- 


74  ALFRED    SAKEll. 

welfare  of  the  Mission,  sailed  from  Plymouth  on  the 
24th  of  December  (1855).  The  voyage,  till  their  arrival 
at  Madeira,  was  a  tempestuous  one  ;  but  on  the  2nd  of 
February  (1856)  they  landed  at  Clarence,  having  enjoyed 
a  passage  which  strengthened  their  health.  A  welcome 
was  given  scarcely  inferior  in  the  rapture  of  the  greeting 
to  that  which  met  them  on  their  return  in  1850,  when 
the  converts  had  been  bereaved  of  all  their  teachers. 
They  found  Mr.  Diboll  in  good  health,  and  with  much 
to  cheer  him  in  his  labour  among  the  people  of  Fernando 
Po.  At  Cameroons  the  native  brethren  were  persever- 
ingly  carrying  on  the  Lord's  work.  Writing  on  the  6th  of 
February,  Mr.  Saker  says, "  This  evening,  at  eight  o'clock, 
we  were  permitted  to  arrive  at  our  peaceful  home,  and 
to  bow  with  Johnson  and  our  young  friends  in  thankful 
prayer,  all  of  whom  the  Lord  has  mercifviUy  preserved. 
Fuller  is  away  at  Bimbia,  but  I  hear  he  is  quite  well." 

Mr.  Saker  at  once  plunged  into  the  full  stream  of 
active  labour.  With  slight  exception  he  found  every- 
thing proceeding  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  The  state 
of  the  church  was  gratifying;  Johnson's  labours  had 
been  blessed.  Seven  persons  had  been  admitted  to  the 
fellowship  of  the  church,  and  there  were  many  hopeful 
inquirers.  As  to  Johnson,  he  says,  "  I  need  only  say  he 
is  as  he  was,  perhaps  more  humble ;  I  cannot  express 
my  thankful  feelings  on  finding  him  so  well."  "  The 
name  of  N'kwe  I  note  with  much  satisfaction.  A.  letter 
written  years  since  informed  you  of  the  baptism  of 
several ;  one  was  specified  as  a  prince,  another  as  a  slave. 
The  former,  under  the  honourable  name  of  Thomas 
Horton,  has  been  known  in  our  books  for  some  time ;  the 
other  has  trodden  a  very  lowly  path,  but  equally  useful, 
till  at  last  we  have  separated  him  for  the  work  of  an  evan- 


THE  MISSIONARY   AT   HIS   AVOr.K.  tO 

gelist.  The  whole  country  is  at  present  his  field  of  labour." 
Mr.  Saker  was  also  happy  to  welcome  a  trained  teacher 
from  Sierra  Leone  for  the  school,  a  young  woman  of 
earnest  piety  and  affectionate  character,  whom  he  had 
sent  thither  some  months  before  for  education. 

At  Bell  Town,  in  September,  the  house  of  the  native 
missionary  was  invaded  by  a  ral)l)le,  incited  by  super- 
stition. His  wife  was  dragged  out,  her  clothing  torn  off, 
and  she  was  taken  with  another  woman  into  the  bush. 
Johnson,  accompanied  by  some  of  his  friends,  pleaded 
with  the  king  till  midnight  for  their  liberation,  and  so 
far  succeeded  as  to  have  them  placed  in  the  house  of  his 
nephew,  who,  with  his  wife,  was  a  member  of  the  church. 
The  next  day  superstitious  rites  were  resumed,  and  pay- 
ments were  demanded  to  free  the  women  from  annoy- 
ance. Ulthnately,  through  Mr.  Saker's  intervention 
and  firmness,  the  women  were  released,  and  the  aggres- 
sors consented  to  pay  a  fine  to  recompense  them  for 
their  sufferings.  "  Thus  we  are  permitted,"  says  ]\Ir. 
Saker,  after  recounting  the  incident,  "  to  enjoy  a  moral 
triumph,  a  feeble  and  unprotected  worm  in  the  midst  of 
five  thousand  heathens  contending  and  triumphing  over 
them.  Why  is  this  ?  Verily  it  is  that  the  conscience 
of  the  multitude  is  on  our  side.  God  constrains  them 
to  bow  to  the  work  of  a  solitary  teacher  ;  and  great  is 
tlie  rejoicing  in  the  town  to-day  that  I  have  promised 
to  be  their  friend  still.  Yesterday  w^as  gloom  and 
sorrow  ;  to-day,  one  of  joy.  Well  it  is  for  us  when  our 
triumph  is  gladness  for  the  multitude.  This  evening  I 
attend  to  receive  the  acknowledgment  of  the  offending 
chief." 

It  will  already  have  become  apparent  with  what  deep 
interest  Mr.    Saker   studied   the   native    tongue,    and 


•6 


ALFRED   SAKER. 


laboured  night  and  day  to  embody  in  a  i^rinted  shape, 
for  permanent  use,  the  knowledge  he  had  acquired.  It 
was  no  slight  task  to  acquire  a  barbarous  language, 
having  no  written  letter  or  character,  without  books  to 
guide,  or  competent  interpreters  to  translate.  The 
patience,  toil,  and  incessant  correction  needful  for  its 
successful  prosecution  few  can  estimate.  It  is  only  due, 
even  at  some  length,  to  give  in  his  own  words  a  descrip- 
tion of  Mr.  Saker's  methods  and  their  results.  His 
letter  is  dated  December  22nd,  185G  : — 

"  In  my  various  translations  and  printing  in  the 
language  which  I  have  most  to  do  with,  I  have  made 
some  considerable  progress.  The  printing  has  conduced 
very  much  to  give  to  my  knowledge  of  the  language  such 
solidity  as  I  think  will  now  enable  me  to  give  it  gram- 
matical form  and  order.  Through  years  of  labour,  not 
devoted  wholly  to  this  one  thing,  I  have  sought  to  lay 
hold  of  all  the  forms  of  speecli  as  they  fall  from  native 
lips,  then  to  compare  and  separate  those  forms,  and 
bring  out  classes  of  words  and  syllables. 

"  A  mental  structure  at  last  arose  from  this  chaos, 
and  I  wished  to  give  the  language  that  form  in  print  it 
had  assumed  in  my  notes  and  books.  I  made  a  begin- 
ning, and  printed  eight  pages ;  but  a  multitude  of 
la])ours  prevented  my  prosecuting  it,  until  after  many 
months  my  health  failed  so  much  as  to  compel  me  to 
prepare  for  visiting  Europe.  The  uncertainty  of  life, 
and  the  consciousness  that  all  my  knowledge  of  the 
language  would  be  lost  to  the  mission,  should  I  not 
survive  my  voyage,  determined  me  to  complete  the 
grammar  in  as  condensed  a  form  as  possible. 

"In  great  weakness  and  oft  in  fever,  the  copy  was 
written  and  the  proofs  corrected.     The  day  before  the 


THE   MISSIONARY   AT   HIS   WORK.  77 

mail  was  due,  the.  last  sheet  was  printed.  The  lew  lines 
of  introduction  were  then  written,  and  given  to  the 
printer  at  six  in  the  evening ;  at  midnight  I  arose  and 
corrected  the  proof ;  at  ten  next  morning  a  sufficient 
number  of  copies  were  stitched  for  me  to  carry  to  Europe. 
The  mail  did  not  come,  and  I  had  then  to  lie  and  suffer 
another  month.  How  nnich  weaker  I  became  by  tliat 
month's  unmitigated  fever,  or  how  near  to  the  grave 
when  I  at  last  left,  it  is  not  needful  to  think  about.  It 
is  enough  to  know  that  the  voyage  home,  the  kind 
attentions  of  friends,  and  the  innumerable  mercies  that 
God  granted  me  through  them,  resulted  in  restoring  me 
to  health,  and  eventually  to  my  labour  in  this  land. 

"  Now  that  I  am  thus  restored,  and  have  been  enabled 
to  conquer  some  difficulties  that  have  arisen  in  conse- 
quence of  my  absence,  I  am  very  desirous  of  completing 
the  work  which  was  then  so  imperfectly  and  so  feel)ly 
attempted  in  weakness  and  pain. 

"  While  in  England  I  read  through  this  small  gram- 
mar, and  although  I  saw  many  things  imperfectly 
explained,  and  many  not  ex] dained  at  all,  I  was  satislied 
with  the  general  distinctness  with  which  the  leading 
facts  of  the  language  were  exhibited.  With  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  verb  I  was  not  satisfied,  and  could  see  that 
the  whole  needed  revision.  I  rememlier  but  too  dis- 
tinctly the  suffering  in  which  it  was  put  together,  and  I 
almost  wished  it  had  not  been  printed. 

"  A  larger  grammar  I  have  now  begun,  and  hope  for 
health  to  finish  it.  It  must  have  my  undivided  atten- 
tion only  occasionally,  but  T  hope  to  complete  it  durinfr 
the  coming  year. 

"  I  have  tried  these  first  sixteen  pages  in  some  old 
type,  and  by  picking  the  best  of  the  letters  it  is  read- 


78  ALFEED    SAKEE. 

able ;  but  I  fear  I  shall  be  obliged  to  take  my  Scripture 
type,  and  ns^e  this  old  fount  for  school  purposes  as 
heretofore. 

"  You  will  remember  the  attention  that  was  devoted 
to  African  philology  in  1850,  and  the  rules  that  were 
sent  out,  recommending  missionaries  to  adopt  one 
uniform  orthography.  As  these  rules  made  no  change 
of  consequence  in  my  work,  beyond  the  introduction  of 
two  new  characters  for  previous  diphthongs,  I  adopted 
them  without  difficulty.  The  attention  given  to  this 
subject  in  the  aljove  year  and  since  has,  it  seems, 
resulted  in  the  publication  of  a  standard  alpluibet.  This 
alphabet  I  received  about  three  months  since,  and  have 
given  it  all  the  attention  it  needed ;  most  of  its  state- 
ments will  be  generally  approved. 

"  I  have  printed  ten  copies  for  correction,  on  writing 
paper,  with  a  large  margin ;  and  if  you  will  kindly  make 
remarks  on  it,  or  propose  any  questionings  to  direct  my 
attention  to  anything  that  may  not  be  plain,  I  shall  be 
grateful  for  the  aid,  and  it  may  conduce  much  to  the 
perspicuity  of  the  grammar  when  done.  This,  of  course,, 
applies  to  the  following  sheets  as  much  as  this,  for  I 
intend  to  send  you  each  sheet  as  it  is  prepared,  if  you 
can  find  time  for  its  reading. 

"  I  enclose  four  copies.  If  you  think  of  any  friends 
who  are  competent  to  offer  an  opinion,  and  at  the 
same  time  can  command  leisure  for  the  examination, 
I  hope  you  will  not  hesitate  to  put  one  in  their  hands, 
and  maybe  their  remarks  will  be  of  ser\'ice." 

The  allusion  here  made  by  Mr.  Saker  to  a  "  standard 
alphabet "  refers  to  the  result  of  a  conference  which 
met  at  the  Prussian  Embassy  in  the  year  1850.  It  was 
summoned  by  the  late  Chevalier  Bunsen,  and  consisted 


THE   MISSIONARY   AT    IIIS   WORK.  70 

of  sucli  eminent  men  as  Professors  Lepsius  and  Max 
Mliller,  Professor  Owen,  and  Sir  Charles  Trevelyan, 
together  with  the  Secretaries  of  the  leading  Missionary- 
Societies.  Its  object  was  to  attain  uniformity  in  the 
use  of  Eoman  letters  when,  for  the  first  time,  any 
African  language  is  reduced  to  writing.  By  the 
employment  of  this  alphabet,  which  was  based  on 
scientific  and  physiological  principles,  great  progress 
has  been  made  in  identifying  and  classifying  tlie 
languages  of  the  African  continent,  and  in  the  recog- 
nition of  racial  and  linguistic  affinities  between  the 
innumerable  tribes  scattered  over  its  vast  surface.  The 
Dualla  has  been  found  to  be  only  one  dialect  of  a 
tongue  which,  in  its  root  forms,  is  known  across  the 
entire  continent,  and  from  the  banks  of  the  Cameroons 
to  the  borders  of  Zululand.*  It  is  matter  for  reo-ret 
that  this  "  standard  alphabet "  is  not  in  every  case 
employed  by  those  who  are  interested  in  Africa's 
civilisation  and  evangelisation. 

It  is  only  necessary  to  add  to  the  above  striking 
account  of  persistent  and  noble  endeavour,  that  early  in 
the  following  year  (1859)  Mr.  Saker  had  succeeded  in 
putting  to  press  the  Book  of  Psalms  and  the  Epistle  to 
the  Eomans,  and  a  few  copies  as  specimens  had  been 
struck  off.  He  only  awaited  a  supply  of  accents  from 
England  to  place  these  precious  documents  of  God's 
Word  in  the  hands  of  the  Dualla  people. 

*  See  on  this  interestinfr  subject  an  important  work  just 
published,  entitled  :  "  A  Sketch  of  the  Modern  Languages  of 
Africa."  By  E.  N.  Gust,  of  H.M.  Indian  Civil  Service.  In  2 
vols.     London :  Triibner.     1883. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

The  Home  of  Theedom,  1858. 

HE  island  of  rernando  Po  was  originally 
discovered  in  1471  by  a  Portuguese 
navigator,  who  gave  it  his  name,  and 
claimed  it  as  an  appanage  of  the  Crown 
of  King  Alphonso  V.  of  Portugal.  It 
was  ceded  to  Spain  in  1778,  and,  after  a  short  occu- 
pation, it  was  abandoned  by  the  Spanish  Government 
in  1782.  In  1827,  the  English  Government  formed 
a  settlement  on  the  north  side  of  the  island,  naming  it 
after  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  who  was  then  at  the  head 
of  the  Admiralty.  The  situation  of  the  island  furnished 
the  English  fleet  with  a  convenient  harbour  from  whicli 
to  watch  the  coast,  and  to  carry  on  the  suppression  of  the 
slave  traffic,  in  which  beneficent  work  Great  Britain  was 
then  actively  engaged.  The  colonists  consisted  of  two 
classes,  those  brought  from  Sierra  Leone  as  artisans  or 
labourers,  for  the  most  part  employed  in  the  service  of 
the  fleet,  and  others  liberated  from  slave  vessels  by  Her 
Majesty's  cruisers ;  but  all  of  them  were  British  subjects 
and  under  English  rule.  Although,  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  Baptist  ]\Iission  in  1841,  it  was  known  tliat 
the  Spanish  Crown  had  revived  the  claim  to  the  sove- 
reignty of  the  island,  its  representative,  the  Commander 
of  the  brig  Nervion,  Captain  de  Lerena,  respected  the 
British  character  of  the  colonists,  and  specially  decreed, 


THE   HOME   OF   FREEDOM.  81 

on  the  part  of  Her  Catholic  Majesty's  Government,  that 
"  personal  liberty,  property,  and  religion  should  be  secure 
to  every  inhabitant."  Under  this  liberal  law  the  INIission 
was  founded,  and  it  was  not  until  the  year  1845  that 
any  interference  was  attempted. 

On  Christmas  Day  of  that  year,  the  Spanisli  Consul- 
General  arrived  at  Clarence.  He  was  instructed  to 
send  the  missionaries  away,  unless  they  would  con- 
sent to  reside  "  in  a  private  capacity  only."'  With 
this  condition  they  declined  to  comply ;  but  as  the 
Consul  regarded  their  labours  as  of  great  benefit  to 
the  people,  he  was  willing  to  give  them  a  year's  grace 
in  which  to  prepare  for  their  departure.  Meanwhile 
they  might  continue  to  preach,  and  to  carry  on  their 
schools.  Ultimately  it  was  arranged  that  for  an  in- 
definite time  there  might  always  remain  in  Clarence  one 
missionary  and  two  teachers,  but  that  the  interior  tribes 
should  not  be  evangelised.  With  the  Consul  also  came 
a  bishop  and  a  priest.  Their  efforts  to  attract  the 
people  by  the  "  scenic  display"  of  Roman  Catholic  rites 
utterly  failed,  and  before  tlie  end  of  the  year  18-i6  they 
returned  to  Spain.  It  is  due  to  the  bishop  to  say  that 
he  acknowledged  in  the  warmest  terms  the  benefits 
resulting  from  the  labours  of  the  missionaries,  and  pub- 
lished in  Spain  a  grateful  recognition  of  the  advantages 
he  had  personally  enjoyed  from  the  medical  attendance 
and  advice  of  Dr.  Prince.  "Inspite  of  all  my  endeavours," 
lie  says,  "  to  recompense  in  a  slender  degree  the  gene- 
rosity and  watchfulness  of  Dr.  Prince,  I  never  could 
succeed  in  making  him  receive  the  smallest  remunera- 
tion for  his  valuable  services." 

Contrary  to  the  expectation  of  the  missionaries,  they 

were    left   with    little   molestation   till   the  month  of 

6 


82  ALFRED    SAKER. 

September,  1856,  when  another  bishop  with  several 
priests  landed,  with  the  avowed  object  of  extinguishing 
the  Mission  and  expelling  the  missionaries  from  the 
island.  As  they  were  not,  however,  armed  with  suffi- 
cient authority  to  set  aside  the  arrangements  made  in 
1845,  the  bishop  soon  left,  and  shortly  afterwards  the 
priests  also,  with  the  intention  of  obtaining  enlarged 
powers  from  the  Spanish  Government. 

At  length,  in  the  evening  of  Saturday,  May  the  22nd, 
1858,  the  Spanish  steam  vessel  Balboa  anchored  in 
Clarence  Cove,  having  on  board  Don  Carlos  Chacon, 
Commander  of  the  Spanish  squadron,  and  Governor- 
General  of  all  the  islands  belonging  to  Spain  on  the 
coast.  With  six  Jesuits,  he  had  come  to  give  effect  to 
the  orders  of  the  Spanish  Crown.  He  proclaimed  the 
religion  of  the  Eoman  Catholic  Church  to  be  the  sole 
religion  of  Fernando  Po,  as  it  was  that  of  the  kingdom 
of  Spain,  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other.  No  other 
religious  profession  could  be  "  tolerated  or  allowed." 
Professors  of  alien  religions  must  confine  their  worship 
to  their  private  houses,  and  limit  it  to  the  members  of 
their  families.  The  edict  was  read  in  a  scanty  audience 
of  the  people,  with  the  firing  of  cannon,  and  amidst 
torrents  of  rain,  the  lightning  and  thunder  of  a  tropical 
tornado  giving  a  strange  awfulness  to  the  scene.  That 
evening,  the  evening  of  the  27th  of  May,  the  people 
met  for  the  last  time  in  open  worship  to  call  upon  God 
their  Saviour. 

That  the  measure  was  due  in  large  degree  to  the 
restless  activity  and  intrigues  of  the  Society  of  Jesus 
there  can  be  little  doubt.  But,  besides  this,  the  rapid 
"rowth  of  commerce  in  the  Gulf  of  Guinea,  and  the 
opening  of  the  great  river  Niger  to  European  enterprise. 


THE   HOME   OF   FKEEDOM.  83 

had  given  increased  value  to  the  island  of  Fernando  Po, 
holding  as  it  does  the  key  to  the  embouchure  of  tlie 
Niger  and  the  command  of  the  entire  coast  of  the  Gulf, 
with  its  tributary  rivers,  the  Calabar  and  the  Cameroons. 
The  arrival  of  the  Spaniards  having  thus  put  a  stop  to 
the  public  services  _of  the  sanctuary,  on  the  Lord's-day 
afternoon,  May  30th,  ]\Ir.  Saker  gathered  a  few  of  his 
flock  in  the  wilderness  behind  Clarence,  and,  under  the 
overhanging  branches  of  the  forest,  conducted  the 
worship  of  God.  The  w^eather  was  not  propitious. 
Torrents  of  rain  descended,  and  many  were  prevented 
from  joining  the  assembly  by  the  Komish  priests,  who 
paraded  the  streets  of  the  town  throughout  the  day. 
Many  armed  sailors  also  moved  about,  Governor  Chacon 
having  been  informed  by  some  adversary  that  the  people 
were  being  urged  to  mutiny  and  insurrection.  It  was 
said  that  they  would  fight  for  their  worship.  Neverthe- 
less, the  day  passed  without  disturbance ;  the  voice  of 
prayer  and  praise  was  heard  in  nearly  every  cottage, 
the  proclamation  forbidding  public  worship  only  in  the 
chapel. 

In  repeated  interviews,  as  well  as  by  correspondence, 
Mr.  Saker  endeavoured  to  shake  the  resolution  of  the 
•Commander.  His  reply  to  the  request  for  permission 
to  remain,  reports  Mr.  Saker,  was,  in  plain  English,  "  I 
•cannot ;  I  will  not  grant  it.  Do  not  ask  me  again." 
The  final  answer  of  the  Governor  was  read  to  the  in- 
habitants in  a  public  meeting  called  to  receive  it.  Fear- 
ing interruption,  there  was  not  any  open  act  of  worship 
performed.  At  Mr.  Saker's  request,  the  assembly  sat 
for  a  few  minutes  in  silent  prayer,  and  then,  with 
deep  solemnity  of  feeling,  the  resolve  was  taken  to 
leave    the    island    as    soon    as    provision    could    be 


84  ALFEED   SAKER. 

made  for  a  new  settlement,  in  a  land  where  freedom 
of  conscience  and  civil  liberty  could  be  enjoyed. 

As  the  entire  abandonment  of  the  Mission  in  Clarence 
was  imperative,  a  new  home  had  now  to  be  sought  for 
all  who  valued  liberty  and  truth.     No  better  pioneer  in 
the  search  could  have  been  found  than  Alfred  Saker, 
and  he  was  not  slow  to  comprehend  and  to  meet  the 
necessities  of  the  case.     After  narrating  the  events  that 
had  transpired,  Mr.  Saker  writes  to  the  Committee  : — 
"  Now,  as  to  the  future,  Jesus  shall  be  our  guide.  There 
are  a  few  general  ideas  which  I  can  put  on  paper.  Pray 
for  us  that  we  may  be  directed  aright.     Cameroons  is 
ours — a  fine  station,  an  open  door  to  the  interior  of  the 
land.     Bimbia  is  ours — room   enough  for  a  town,  and 
large  trade.     But  a  port  is  wanted,  where  there  can  be 
British  protection,  British  capital  and   laws  ;  a  depot 
for  coals  for  the  navy,  a  safe  harbour  for  our  merchant 
vessels,  a  free  port  for  the  commerce  of  these  rivers, 
and  a  refuge  for  the  oppressed  and  the  slave.     These 
are  all  essential  points  to  be  secured,  and  I  think  are 
all  attainable,  if  the  British  Government  can  be  so  far 
interested   as   to  put  their  hands  to  the  work.     Then 
there  are  matters  specially  missionary  ;  these  will  have 
our  careful  attention.     There  is  now  no  idea  of  reraain- 
ino-  here.     The  long-endured  oppression,  the  expected 
threats   of  banishment,  and  the  general  decay  of  all 
business,  had  determined  many  to  leave   before  this. 
Now  our  course  must  be,  first,  to  provide  a  home  for  aU, 
if  possible,  where  freedom  to  worship  God  must  be  the 
first  requirement ;  and  then,  next,  for  employment,  and, 
if  possible,  prosperity." 

His  resolve  was  taken.     Two  days  after  penning  this 
letter,  Mr.  Saker  set  f  ortli  to  explore  the  mountain  region 


THE   HOME   OF   FREEDOM.  85 

of  the  Camerooiis,  which,  with  its  rocky  sliores,  bays, 
and  islands,  lay  opposite,  some  twenty  miles  distant  from 
Fernando  I'o. 

Wednesday  morning,  the  l^id  of  June,  was  wet  and 
gloomy ;  but,  in  company  with  Mr.  Fuller,  a  native 
brother,  five  boys  and  two  women,  at  eight  o'clock  Mr. 
Saker  sailed  in  a  small  native  craft  for  Bimbia.  Heavy 
rain,  chopping  winds,  with  intervals  of  dead  calm,  delayed 
the  vessel's  progress.  Worst  of  all,  in  the  confusion 
occasioned  by  taking  on  board  a  large  number  of  pack- 
ages, the  basket  of  provisions  was  left  behind.  The  little 
tea  and  sugar  they  found  had  got  mixed  with  pepper. 
Hungry,  wet,  and  sick,  the  voyagers  at  length  reached 
Bimbia  on  the  following  Sabbath.  Four  days  and  a-half 
had  been  spent  in  a  voyage  usually  of  twelve  hours' 
duration. 

King  William,  the  Bimbia  chief,  had  now  to  be  seen, 
and  his  consent  gained  to  the  occupation  of  such  a  part 
of  the  coast  as  might  be  found  suital)le  for  a  settlement. 
Previous  journeys  and  voyages  pointed  out  the  Bay  of 
Amboises  as  a  favourable  spot;  and,  at  Mr.  Saker's 
formal  request,  the  chief  willingly  agreed  to  sell  such  a 
tract  of  land  as  might  be  wanted.  He  also  promised  a 
guide  when  the  missionary  was  ready  to  start  on  his 
exploring  expedition.  The  weather  being  very  stormy, 
Mr.  Saker  proceeded  to  his  station  at  Cameroons,  where 
arrangements  were  rerpiisite  for  the  reception  of  some 
of  the  children  from  Clarence.  The  boat  being  pro- 
visioned, Mr.  Saker  left,  on  jNlonday,  the  14th  of  June, 
for  Bimbia.  By  nightfall  tlie  bar  of  the  river  was 
reached,  where  he  anchored  till  next  morning.  A  night 
of  storms  and  of  rolling  seas,  with  great  discomfort, 
followed.    A  small  canoe  that  Mr.  Saker  had  taken  with 


86  ALFKED    SAKER. 

him  was  lost ;  but  Bimbia  was  at  length  reached  in  the- 
afternoon.  After  a  hurried  dinner,  Mr.  Saker,  with  Mr. 
Fuller  and  a  guide,  set  out  to  explore  the  bay,  where  he 
hoped  to  find  a  suitable  refuge  for  his  flock.  With  rapid 
steps  they  penetrated  the  wilderness,  and  soon,  at  War 
Bay,  came  upon  the  sea,  under  the  towering  cliffs  which 
skirt  its  shores.  Tlie  track  round  the  bay  was  exceed- 
ingly difficult ;  they  had  to  traverse  broken  rocks  and 
boulders  innumerable,  loose,  rolling,  with  slippery  surface 
and  jagged  edge,  the  debris  of  mighty  volcanic  action. 
Turning  again  into  the  wilderness,  the  path  led  them 
across  ravines  and  through  rivers,  over  cliffs,  and  along 
the  base  of  the  mountains,  which  here  approach  the  sea. 
The  thick  bush  of  the  forest  was  dark  as  night ;  but  the 
level  and  open  land  exhibited  a  rich  soil,  well  timbered 
and  watered. 

The  Bay  of  Amboises  reached,  it  was  too  late  to 
explore  it.  The  sun  Avas  setting,  so  the  return  journey 
was  begun.  The  dark  wilderness  was  darker  by  night. 
The  guide  lost  his  way.  Then  came  the  necessity  of 
forcing  a  path  through  the  thick  underwood.  The  rocks 
had  to  be  scrambled  over  by  the  light  of  the  stars, 
precipices  avoided,  and  deep  ravines  crossed.  Amid 
these  arduous  exertions  the  night  wore  away.  For  six  or 
seven  hours  the  weary  wandering  lasted.  At  length 
the  roar  of  the  sea  was  heard.  Trembling  and  thankful, 
the  perplexed  travellers  reached  War  Bay,  but  their 
labours  were  far  from  done.  "  To  walk  over  these 
stones  by  the  faint  light  of  the  stars,"  says  Mr. 
Saker,  "  was  impossible,  yet  go  we  must.  Weary 
and  sore  we  began.  On  my  knees,  my  toes,  and 
with  my  hands,  I  laboured  for  two  hours  over 
that  dreadful  road."     The  cliff  reached,  it  was  too  dark 


THE   HOME   OF   FKEEDOM.  87 

to  find  the  path  to  ascend  it ;  so,  being  safe  from  the 
tide,  the  travellers  lay  down,  under  God's  protection,  on 
the  stones,  and  tried  to  sleep.  "  The  cold  was  too  great; 
Puller  and  I  lay  close,  to  be  warm;  but  we  could  not 
sleep.  In  about  an  liour  and  a  half  the  first  faint  streak 
of  morning  aroused  us.  Soon,  very  soon,  we  found  the 
track,  and  then  we  ascended.  By  half-past  six  we  had 
reached  Fuller's  house  at  Bimbia."  Shoes,  trowsers,  hat, 
umbrellas :  all  were  torn  or  battered  to  pieces  ;  their 
hands  were  pierced  with  thorns,  and  gashed  by  the  sharp 
edges  of  the  rocks. 

The  morning  light  also  showed  them  that  a  few  feet 
beyond  the  spot  where  they  lay  down  there  was  a  steep 
precipice.  Surely  the  hand  of  God  preserved  them  from 
taking  in  the  darkness  the  few  steps  by  which  their 
lives  would  have  been  sacrificed. 

Such  was  the  first  attempt  to  find  in  the  wilderness  a 
lodge  for  the  people  of  God.  But,  undismayed  by  this 
perilous  adventure,  the  indefatigable  explorers  took  boat 
after  breakfast,  and  set  out  for  Amboises  Bay  by  sea. 
In  the  Niger  expedition  of  1841,  this  bay  was  visited  by 
Captain  W.  Allen,  its  commander.  On  several  occasions 
his  ships  had  anchored  within  the  islands  which  shelter 
the  entrance  from  the  mighty  swell  of  the  great  Atlantic  ; 
but  the  officers  of  the  survey  received  the  impression 
that,  while  the  anchorage  was  safe,  the  climate  salu- 
brious, and  the  proximity  of  the  mountains  favourable 
to  health,  the  bay  did  not  contain  a  safe  landing-place. 
Naught  but  a  heavy  surf  w"as  visible  from  the  steamer's 
deck.  "  But  now,"  says  Mr.  Saker,  "  that  I  need  a  home 
for  our  people,  where  a  trade  may  be  created,  and  to 
which  commerce  may  be  drawn,  I  search  for  a  landing 
only;  and,  behold  !  God  hath  hidden,  up  a  deep  interior 


88  ALFEED    SAKER. 

bay,  for  ages — a  "bay  with  nearly  two  miles  of  beacli — 
without  a  stone,  and  almost  without  a  wave,  large  enough 
to  contain  a  thousand  boats  and  small  vessels ;  while 
the  Amboises  Bay  will  contain  a  navy.  Into  this  bay 
the  sea-breeze  blows  in  all  its  purity,  and  the  mountain 
wind  at  night  is  all  freshness.  Here,  if  Her  Majesty's 
Government  sanction  and  sustain  our  efforts,  can  be  put 
up  coal  stores,  provision  stores,  building-yards,  and  every 
other  essential  for  commerce.  Here,  too,  a  highway  may  be 
made  into  the  interior,  and  the  native  produce  be  shipped 
in  smooth  water  for  Europe.  It  will  be  a  centre  of 
civilisation,  freedom,  and  light.  It  will  be  essentially  a 
religious,  enlightened  colony.  And  here,  also,  under 
British  protection,  the  Lord's  people  may  worship  God 
without  molestation." 

During  a  lovely  day  the  exploration  of  this  beautiful 
retreat  was  completed.  The  toil  of  the  previous  days 
was  forgotten  in  the  success  which  had  been  achieved ; 
and  the  missionary  returned  to  Clarence  with  a  glad  and 
grateful  heart  to  report  to  his  brethren  how  the  good 
hand  of  God  had  led  him  and  prospered  his  way.  On 
his  arrival  in  Clarence,  Mr.  Saker  found  in  the  little 
harbour  three  more  Spanish  men-of-war. 

Ambas,  or  Amboises  Bay,  is  situated  to  the  north- 
east of  Fernando  Po,  and  is  shadowed  by  the  volcanic 
mountains  of  the  Cameroons,  the  highest  peak  of  which 
rises,  within  ten  or  twelve  miles  of  the  sea,  to  the  height 
of  13,760  feet.  Three  islands  occupy  its  entrance;  Abobbi 
or  Pirate  Island,  Dameh  or  Ambas  Island,  and  Men- 
doleh.  Of  these,  the  last  is  the  largest,  and  is  covered 
with  forest  trees  to  its  highest  point.  All  are  inhabited  by 
a  race  evidently  derived  from  Binibia,  and  they  speak  a 
modification  of  the  Dualla  language.     They  claim  to  be 


THE    HOME    OF    FREEDOM.  89 

independent  of  the  chiefs  of  the  continent,  and  their 
independence  is  secured  by  the  rocky  fastnesses  in 
which  tliey  dwell 

Somewhat  nunierous  tribes,  known  as  the  Bakwili 
people,  dwell  among  the  mountains,  and  bring  the 
produce  of  their  cultivation  for  exchange  with  the  Isul)U 
and  other  triljes  dwelling  in  the  lowlands  (jf  the  ]3indjia 
country,  and  with  the  islanders  of  the  Bay. 

Once  within  the  shelter  of  the  islands,  the  voyager 
sees  before  him  a  bay  some  fifteen  to  twenty  miles 
in  circuit,  with  a  rocky  shore,  and  the  surf  perpetually 
breaking  upon  it.  An  opening  in  the  rocky  ridge  to 
the  eastward  admits  boats  and  small  vessels  into  a 
cove,  revealing  an  open  space,  with  a  fine  sandy  beach, 
nearly  two  miles  in  length,  by  a  mile  and  a  half 
in  breadth,  watered  by  a  deep  and  copious  mountain 
stream.  Mr.  Saker  fixed  on  this  spot  for  the  new 
settlement  and  mission  station,  which  he  named 
Victoria.  The  outer  bay  has  a  safe  anchorage  for  ships 
of  a  large  size  at  all  seasons,  and  is  open  only  to  the 
south-west  wind,  blowing  cool  and  refreshing  from  the 
broad  Atlantic.  The  first  eminence  on  the  way  to  the 
great  Cameroons  mountain  rises  within  three  or  four 
miles  of  the  cove,  and  reaches  to  the  height  of  5,820 
feet.  Its  sides  are  clothed  with  forest.  Old  men  relate 
that  fire  was  seen  years  ago  to  issue  from  the  main 
peak.  They  felt  the  earth  "  shake  like  a  steamboat." 
This,  coupled  with  the  local  name  of  the  mountain, 
Mongo-ma-lobah,  or  God's  mountain,  lends  probability 
to  the  supposition  that  it  may  be  the  chariot  of  the  gods 
spoken  of  by  Hanno  the  Carthaginian.* 

•  Capt.  W.  Allen's  "  Niger  Expedition,"  vol.  i.,  p.  273. 


90  ALFRED    SAKEE. 

Here  Mr.  Saker  resolved  to  found  a  colony  of  African 
Pilgrim  Fathers,  where  the  true  worship  of  God  might 
freely  and  uninterruptedly  be  observed,  the  rights  of 
conscience  be  secured  from  the  intrusion  of  Eomish 
intolerance,  and  a  new  pharos  of  spiritual  light  be  erected 
for  the  illumination  of  the  surrounding  tribes. 

Mr,  Saker  and  his  companions  soon  tested  the  salu- 
brity of  the  spot,  and  the  excellence  of  the  water,  which,^ 
in  an  abundant  stream,  flows  into  the  sea  at  the  western 
end  of  the  cove.  "  I  went  there,"  he  says,  "  with  my 
company  in  my  usual  health,  or  rather  ill-health,  strong 
enough  for  work,  but  with  little  energy ;  a  ceaseless  crav- 
ing for  food,  yet  no  appetite ;  eating  just  enough  to  live. 
This  is  constant.  In  that  state  I  went  to  Victoria,  and 
I  began  to  feel  the  effects  of  its  air  the  first  day.  My 
appetite  returned  and  increased.  At  night  I  slept  with 
my  whole  heart,  equally  as  with  my  whole  heart  I  da 
my  daily  working.  Eest  was  sweet,  food  was  sweet; 
life  was  life,  and  not  a  dying  death." 

The  property  in  the  soil  having  already  been  secured,* 
Mr.  Saker  at  once  commenced  his  preparations  to 
colonise  it.  Eeturning  to  Cameroons,  he  quickly 
brought  together  the  materials  for  a  small  hut,  and, 
accompanied  by  a  band  of  men  and  boys  drawn  from 

*  "  District  of  land  commencing  at  War  Bay,  and  by  coast  line- 
embracing  the  beadland  Mananga,  Foo  Bay,  Ambas  Bay,  to  the 
point  of  land  called  Kokki,  including  the  islands  Mondovi, 
N'Aami,  and  Bobu  ;  thence  inland  towards  the  Great  Mountain 
five  miles  ;  thence  by  line  to  the  towTi  of  Bosambo  ;  thence 
to  ]\rjanji  on  the  Bimbia  River  till  parallel  with  the  Albert  Hills  ;. 
and  thence  embracing  these  hills  the  line  shall  enter  a  rivulet 
running  to  War  Bay."  The  above  description  is  copied  from 
King  William's  grant.  The  original  is  in  possession  of  the 
Societv. 


THE   HOME   OF   FllEEDOM.  91 

the  stations  on  the  river,  he  proceeded  to  erect  it  on 
the  selected  site.  "  On  the  9th  of  June,"  he  says,  "  we 
went  on  shore  at  Aniboises  Bay.  Of  this  land  we  took 
possession  with  prayer.  By  seven  in  the  evening  we 
had  a  tenantable  abode,  nine  feet  by  eighteen.  There 
we  then  assembled  for  united  worship;  and  there 
nineteen  of  our  company  laid  down  to  sleep  that  night, 
while  I,  and  three  of  my  boys,  retired  to  the  boat." 

In  constant  wind  and  rain,  with  short  intermissions 
of  fine  weather,  the  labour  of  clearing  the  ground  went 
on.  The  two  first  trees  were  felled  by  Mr.  Saker's  own 
hands.  '"'  In  one  day,"  he  says,  "  there  fell  twenty- 
seven  trees  of  the  dense  forest,  and  very  much  of  the 
impenetrable  underwood."  Slowly  the  rude  hut  on  the 
beach  was  enlarged,  other  buildings  for  stores  were  put 
up,  and  sections  of  them  were  divided  into  apartments 
for  families  as  they  might  arrive  from  Clarence.  "  On 
Friday,  the  13th,"  he  says,  "we  began  our  public 
worship,  with  very  fervent  prayers  that  the  worship 
might  be  contmued,  and  be  pure  through  coming- 
generations,  and  that  the  Gospel  there  might  be  the 
light  of  life  to  thousands.  Then,  again,  on  the  Sabbath 
we  had  our  three  services,  as  at  Clarence  in  former  days. 
A  prayer  meeting  on  Monday  evening,  and  class  on 
Wednesday  and  preaching  on  Friday.  Thus  the  public 
worship  of  the  tabernacle  is  begun,  and  I  hope  never 
to  cease  till  the  angel  announces  the  '  C7ul  of  time!  " 

As  the  W(jrk  proceeded  the  situation  was  found  to 
surpass  their  expectations.  The  harbour  was  well  i)ro- 
tected  from  seaward  by  lines  of  rock,  and  afforded 
abundant  space  for  wharves,  docks,  and  landing  piers. 
The  land  was  everywhere  raised  above  the  highest 
tides.     The  river  gave  an  unfailing  supply  of  the  purest 


52  ALFllED    SAKER. 

water.  Willi  characteristic  skill  and  energy  Mr.  Saker 
.satisfied  himself  of  its  abundance.  "I  measured  it," 
he  says,  "  and  found  27,000  cubic  feet  of  water  flow- 
ing into  the  ocean  every  minute.  Its  clear  stream  shows 
,two  things — first,  that  its  course  is  over  a  rocky  bed ; 
second,  that  land  floods,  which  would  be  muddy,  do 
not  swell  the  volume  into  a  turbid  bounding  torrent. 
The  land  floods  evidently  find  an  outlet  in  another 
river  I  visited."  The  first  road  laid  out  ran  from 
]\Iorton  Bay  to  this  ever-flowing  stream.  It  consti- 
tuted the  first  street,  and  was  5,480ft.  long.  In  the 
centre  of  it  a  plot  was  measured  off  for  the  chapel,  and 
.1  )uilding  lots,  each  one  hundred  feet  in  depth  by  fifty  in 
breadth,  were  staked  out  on  either  side.  A  fence  was 
planted  to  protect  the  township  from  the  dense  forest 
behind,  and  from  tlie  wild  animals  which  have  their 
home  beneath  its  gigantic  trees.  Names  were  given  to 
the  various  points  around.  Morton  Bay  was  named 
.after  Sir  Morton  Peto.  A  mount,  800ft.  high,  about  a 
mile  from  the  landing-place,  with  a  rocky  face  towards 
the  Bay,  was  named  Helena,  after  his  absent  but  beloved 
wife.  Another  elevation,  east  of  the  town,  2,000ft. 
high,  clothed  with  richest  foliage  to  the  summit,  acquired 
,the  name  of  Mount  Henry,  after  his  excellent  friend, 
the  late  Henry  Kelsall,  Esq. 

In  addition  to  the  general  salubrity  of  the  spot,  it  was 
found  that  the  natives  of  the  mountain  came  every 
third  day  to  a  market  that  was  held  on  the  level 
beach.  It  was  a  provision  market.  Here  the  plantains, 
palm  nuts,  and  yams  of  the  interior  were  exchanged  for 
^alt,  tobacco,  and  for  the  fish  caught  and  cured  and 
.dried  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands.  The  new  settlers 
were  spared  those  privatitjns  which  Mr.  Saker  and  his 


ii!   !i 


:l 

rK,, 

^  aHmH 

:i!!li 

,\,i|i|,; 

ii'lii 

'£\m.£ 

.!|ii  1  I'l 

^*Wi>iiidr_ 

THE    HOME   OF   FREEDOM.  9o 

family  endured  on  their  first  arrival  in  the  Cameroons 
river,  "  There  is,"  he  remarks,  "  abundance  on  the 
mountain,  and  the  fish -fit  our  command  will  cause  the 
mountain  produce  to  come  down  to  us.  And  as  to  price, 
a  small  fish  is  demanded  for  a  yam  or  a  bunch  of 
plaintains,  for  which  at  Cameroons  I  must  pay  a 
shilling."  The  great  advantages  the  settlement  pos- 
sessed may  be  summed  up  in  Mr.  Saker's  own  words : 
"  The  vast  importance  to  us  of  a  sanatorium  I  need 
not  speak  of  to  you ;  I  entertain  hopes  the  most 
sanguine.  This  comes  unexpectedly  to  me.  I  have 
mentally  seen  it — Victoria — a  centre  of  freedom,  of 
light,  of  education,  and  commerce.  It  is  also  a  highway 
into  the  interior.  This  has  been  its  highest  glory  in 
my  eyes.  If  in  addition  to  this  it  shall  be  a  refresh- 
ing, reviving  locality,  how  great  will  be  the  advantage  ! 
how  large  our  mercy  '  " 

The  township  planned  l)y  Mr.  Saker  for  the  exiles- 
from  Clarence  lay  wholly  on  the  eastern  side  of  the' 
stream ;  the  western  side  he  reserved  with  the  hope  that 
here  might  be  built  the  store-houses  and  wharves  which 
would  be  required  should  the  British  Government  make 
Amboises  Bay  the  centre  of  their  operations  on  the  coast. 

The  arrival  of  the  settlers  from  Clarence  rendered  neces- 
sary some  regulations  by  which  the  infant  colony  should  be 
governed,  and  which  might  afford  a  firm  foundation  for 
its  growth  and  prosperity.  Perhaps  in  nothing  was  the 
sagacity  and  wisdom  of  Mr.  Saker  more  prominent  than 
in  the  laws  which  he  laid  down  for  their  guidance  and 
control.  The  document  that  he  prepared  will  be  found 
in  the  Appendix,  but  some  of  its  chief  features  must  be 
noticed  here.  After  stating  that  the  township  of  Victoria 
had  been  purchased  from  tlie  King  of  Bimbia,  and  the 


94  ALFRED   SAKEK. 

right  and  title  thereto  ceded  to  its  present  possessors,  he 
declares  that  the  township  had  been  formed  "  as  a  refuge 
and  a  home  for  those  who  cannot  continue  where  liberty 
of  worship  is  denied,  and  for  all  others  who  may  be 
desirous  of  living  peacefully  with  us."  Following  this 
; statement  are  directions  as  to  the  purchase  and  possession 
of  the  plots  marked  out  in  the  town,  and  then  "laws" 
are  enacted  for  the  government  of  the  colony.  The 
government  is  to  be  carried  on  Ijy  a  Governor  and 
Council,  who  will  have  power  oxev  all  roads  and 
tlioroughfares,  and  enforce,  under  certain  penalties, 
the  regulations  that  may  be  agreed  upon.  The  follow- 
ing important  constitutional  principle  is  affirmed : — 
"  There  shall  be  entire  freedom  in  all  that  relates  to  the 
worship  of  the  true  God,  and  the  Word  of  God  is  hereby 
acknowledged  to  be  the  foundation  of  all  our  laws,  and 
claims  the  obedience  of  our  lives.  Although  w^e  are 
now  all  of  one  mind  in  the  essentials  of  Christian  wor- 
ship, yet  should  there  come  among  us  persons  of  differ- 
ing opinions  as  to  Christian  worship  and  duty,  all  shall 
equally  share  in  the  freedom  of  worship,  as  well  as  in 
our  protection."  The  Sabbath  is  declared  to  be  a  day 
of  rest,  and  all  business  must  be  suspended  to  allow  of 
its  enjoyment,  and  the  uninterrupted  worship  of  God. 
Freedom  of  trade  is  secured,  and  a  free  importation  per- 
mitted of  all  articles  of  commerce,  excepting  spirits  of 
every  kind.  These  articles  can  only  be  permitted  to 
enter  for  medicinal  purposes,  or,  if  for  any  other  object, 
under  a  duty  of  ten  per  cent.  But  their  sale  or  barter 
is  not  permitted  at  all.  Other  regulations  follow,  one 
especially  reserving  power  to  institute  and  ordain  laws 
iis  occasion  may  require. 

Under  these   wise,   simple,   but   efficient   rules,  the 


THE   HOME   OF   FREEDOM.  05 

colony  has  grown  to  its  present  condition  of  prosperity. 
Not  that  it  has  realised  yet  all  that  its  founder  antici- 
pated. To  use  his  own  trustful  words,  "  For  it  I  toiled 
day  and  niglit ;  I  have  worn  my  spirits  down  to  a  wafer's 
weight;  my  eyes  and  hands  too."  This  was  literally 
true.  With  his  own  hands  he  showed  the  exiles  how  to 
build  their  houses.  He  planned  the  structures  that 
slowly  rose  from  the  midst  of  the  bush,  which  he  was 
amongst  the  first  to  clear  away.  He  was  resolved  that 
on  that  spot  God  should  be  freely  worshipped,  and  the 
servants  of  the  Lord  have  a  secure  home.  As  the  result, 
some  hundreds  of  Africa's  children  now  enjoy  perfect 
freedom  of  body  and  mind.  The  voice  of  praise  and 
prayer  rises  unceasingly  on  the  mountain  air,  and  the 
schools  are  ever  training  their  children  to  enjoy  the 
blessings  that  a  Christian  civilisation  can  impart.  Slowly 
the  tribes  of  the  hills  around  are  coming  under  Christian 
influence,  and  important  steps  have  been  taken  to  reach 
the  far  interior.  Commerce  is  gradually  spreading  its 
beneficent  interchanges  among  the  people  under  the 
protection  of  the  British  flag,  which,  from  time  to  time, 
floats  in  the  convenient  bay.  If  the  promise  of  Colonel 
Nichols  has  not  yet  been  fulfilled,  it  is  nevertheless 
probable  that  at  no  distant  date  the  Imperial  Crown  of 
England  will  exercise  the  sovereignty  which  the  inha- 
bitants of  Victoria  would  gladly  recognise  and  obey.* 

*  Years  ago  the  Bimbia  chief,  William,  surrendered  the  sove- 
reignty of  his  country  to  Colonel  Nichols,  as  the  representative 
•of  the  British  Crown,  and  received  from  him  the  empty  title  of 
King,  in  which  his  son  still  rejoices.  The  act  of  Col .  Nichols  has, 
however,  never  been  formally  acknowledged  by  the  Government 
of  Great  Britain,  although  its  cruisers  and  men-of-war  frequently 
visit  the  coast,  and  arbitrate  among  the  tribes  in  cases  of  difficulty 
and  war. 


96  ALFRED    SAKER. 

Looking  back  at  the  close  of  this  eventful  year,  Mr 
Saker  could  gratefully  say :  "  A  year  of  change  and  of 
toil.  Storms  have  beat  on  us,  yet  He  has  preserved  us. 
Nor  sun  nor  moon  has  been  permitted  to  smite.  In 
doubt  or  perplexity,  if  it  has  once  crossed  our  patlnvay. 
He  speedily  removed  it,  and,  in  the  labours  of  each  suc- 
ceeding hoiir,  He  has  more  than  supported  and  sustained 
our  powers.  God  has  opened  for  us  a  wide  door  at  Vic- 
toria, Amboises  Bay.  This  is  now  our  refuge,  and  already 
the  wilderness  begins  to  rejoice.  Its  swelling  hills  and 
noble  mountain  range  tell  of  freedom,  fertility,  and 
health.  No  Jesuitical  craft  nor  Spanish  intolerance  will 
darken  its  increasing  brightness.  There,  through  the 
mercy  of  our  redeeming  Lord,  we  shall  worship  and 
adore  till  this  mortal  sinks  and  the  immortal  spirit  soars 
beyond  the  mountain  to  the  Throne  of  God." 

In  view  of  the  work  achieved  by  this  devoted  mis- 
sionary of  the  Cross,  the  language  of  the  Society's 
Eeport,  in  1860,  is  not  a  whit  too  strong: — "It  is 
difficiilt  suitably  to  describe  Mr.  Saker  in  his  varied 
labours;  and  when  his  early  circumstances  are  con- 
sidered, and  his  present  extraordinary  attainments, 
some  of  them  reaching  to  the  higlier  departments  of 
science,  he  seems  to  be  not  only  eminently  fitted  for 
his  post,  but  to  be  one  of  the  remarkable  men  of 
the  a2;e." 


CHAPTER    X. 

Days  of  Hope,  1859— ISO  1. 

UEING  the  sixteen  montlis  which  followed 
the  close  of  the  year  1858,  the  necessities 
of  the  Mission  required  Mr.  Saker  to 
be  constantly  on  the  move  from  one 
station  to  another.  The  arrival  of  the 
Eev.  J.  Diboll  at  Victoria  in  April,  1859,  enabled  him, 
however,  to  relinc|uish  the  charge  of  the  congregation 
and  schools  there,  and  personally  to  superintend  the 
removal  and  settlement  of  a  portion  of  the  Clarence 
people  in  their  new  home.  The  return  of  Mrs.  Saker 
and  his  daughter  Eliza  from  England  secured  the  pro- 
gress of  his  work  on  the  Canieroons,  and  the  appointment 
of  the  Eev.  J.  Pinnock,  of  Jamaica,  to  a  new  station  at 
Abo,  higher  up  the  river,  gave  hope  of  the  extension  of 
the  Gospel  to  the  inner  parts  of  the  country.  The 
printing  of  the  Scriptures  was  diligently  carried  on,  and 
the  indefatigable  missionary  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
through  the  press  his  translation  of  the  Book  of  Psalms, 
and  a  small  collection  of  hymns,  in  the  Dualla  language. 
He  records  that  he  "  had  so  far  impressed  his  ideas  of 
work  on  others  that  all  the  sheets  have  been  printed 
while  he  Avas  visiting  or  preaching  at  other  places."  The 
binding  also  was  the  work  of  native  lads,  who  only  a 
few  years  before  had  been  rescued  from  liarbarism, 
Pespecting  the  composition  of  the  hymns,  and  also  of 

7 


98  ALFRED   SAKER. 

many  of  tlie  tunes  sung  to  them,  Mr.  Saker  gives  the 
following  interesting  account  in  a  letter  to  the  Eev.  F. 
Trestrail,  February  29th,  I860:— "I  am  no  poet.  In 
early  life,  like  some  others,  I  wrote  doggerel ;  but,  for  the 
Africans,  we  are  obliged  to  do  our  best  in  everything, 
and  then  fear  no  censor.  I  have  written  what  is 
literally  thus — 

"  '  0  Son  of  God,  to  Thee, 
To  Thee  Thyself  we  come  ; 
With  prayer  we  bend  to  Thee, 
With  praises,  too,  we  bend.' 

«  3rd  ver.     '  Through  Thee,  Thyself  alone, 
We  live  ;  in  peace  we  live. 
Through  Thee,  Thyself  alone. 
We  tread  our  weary  way.' 

"  As  to  the  greater  number  of  the  hymns,  they  are  rude 
renderings  of  our  own  hymns.  But,  in  the  attempt,  my 
own  feelings  have  dictated  something  more  free,  so  that 
the  translations  are  not  really  such,  but  may  rather  be 
called  imitations. 

"  I  will  try  to  get  Eliza  to  send  you  one  or  more  of 
my  tunes.  Do  not  let  this  surprise  you,  for  I  am  a  lover 
of  music.  And  although  I  have  never  allowed  my 
compositions  to  go  out  of  the  house,  I  get  more  careless 
as  I  get  into  years,  and  the  praise  or  blame  of  men  will 
be  alike  indifferent  to  me  now.  Some  of  my  best  tunes 
are  in  daily  use  in  our  congregations  in  Africa ;  but  it  is 
not  generally  known  that  they  are  mine.  On  my  way 
to  Amboises  Bay — my  first  visit — after  a  terrible  day 
at  sea,  we  reached  Bimbia ;  and  at  night,  while  lying 
restless  in  my  bed,  I  found  myself  singing  one  of  our 
solemn  but  sweet  hymns,  but  to  a  strange  tune  in  my 
own  fashion,  and  the  thought  came,  perhaps  it  was  the 


DAYS   OF   HOPE.  99 

whisper  of  sleepless  spirits :  '  Yes,  tliou  art  a  sweet 
melody  for  such  solemn  words ' — so  I  rose  up  and  put  it 
•on  paper.  The  next  day  being  Sabbath  day,  I  sang  it 
with  that  same  hymn  in  our  morning  worship.  The 
natives  are  fond  of  singing,  and  they  follow  readily  in 
•everything  like  natural  music.  A  few  days  later  I 
called  this  tune  '  Victoria,'  because  it  v/as  the  first  time 
we  sang  it  at  the  new  home.  The  same  day,  and  the 
■same  midnight  hour,  gave  birth  to  another  more  solemn. 
It  is  called  '  Helena.'  Both  were  sung  at  Bimbia  at 
the  same  service." 

The  decease  of  Mrs.  DiboU  on  the  16  th  j\Iarch 
■(I860),  combined  with  his  entire  loss  of  strength,  con- 
strained the  bereaved  husband  to  take  a  voyage  to 
Teneriffe,  and  subsequently  to  his  native  land.  In 
reference  to  these  events  Mr.  Saker  wrote  :  "  I  am  again 
alone  with  (}od.  He  will  not  fail  me."  Not  a  European 
helper  was  left  in  the  field  to  share  with  him  the  toils 
and  the  anxieties  of  the  work.  His  own  health  also 
was  in  a  shattered,  if  not  perilous,  state,  and  the  thought 
often  passed  through  his  mind,  should  he  be  taken 
away,  how  could  he  best  provide  for  the  great  interests 
in  his  charge  ?  Other  circumstances,  moreover,  urged 
him  to  make  a  brief  visit  to  England,  in  order  to  confer 
with  the  Committee,  and  by  personal  explanations 
assist  in  the  decision  to  which  it  was  necessary  that  the 
Committee  should  come.  The  Spanish  Government 
still  delayed  the  settlement  of  the  claims  of  the  Society 
for  compensation  for  the  property  confiscated  at 
Fernando  Po.  Her  Majesty's  Plenipotentiary  to  the 
Court  of  Spain  was  then  most  opportunely  in  England, 
imd  the  case  could  fully,  in  all  its  aspects,  be  brought 
before  him.     At  the  same  time,  Mr.  Saker  would  be  able 


100  ALFRED   SAKER. 

to  remove  certain  unfavourable  impressions  that  had  been 
made  on  the  minds  of  some  vahied  friends  in  England, 
with  regard  to  the  methods  he  had  pursued  in  carrying 
forv/ard  the  evangelisation  and  civilisation  of  the  savage 
tribes  among  whom  his  lot  was  cast.  On  the  30th  of 
April  he  therefore  took  his  passage  in  the  mail  for 
England,  and  much  refreshed  by  this  A'oyage,  he  landed 
at  Liverpool  on  the  19th  of  June,  with  the  Eev.  J. 
Diboll,  whom  lie  had  overtaken  at  Teneriffe. 

Without  delay  the  two  brethren  laid  before  the  Com- 
mittee, in  the  fullest  detail,  every  department  of  the 
Mission,  and  the  transactions  incident  to  the  formation 
of  the  settlement  in  Amboises  Bay.  In  tlie  resolutions 
which  were  adopted  on  the  18th  of  July,  the  past  and 
future  were  referred  to.  It  was  resolved — 1.  "  That  this 
Committee  desire  to  express  to  the  Eev.  A.  Saker,  and 
the  brethren  associated  with  him  in  the  African  Mission, 
and  who  have  so  effectually  assisted  him,  their  gratitude 
for  his  strenuous  and  able  efforts  to  meet  the  difficulties 
arising  out  of  the  Spanish  seizure  of  the  Society's 
property  at  Eernando  Po."*  2.  "  That  this  Committee 
deem  it  of  the  highest  importance  to  secure  one  or  more 
additional  missionaries  for  the  African  Mission,  and  that 
it  be  referred  to  the  African  Sub-Conmiittee  to  take 
immediate  steps  to  effect  that  object." 


•  It  was  not  till  the  23rd  April,  1861,  tliat  Sir  IMorton  Peto  was 
informed  by  the  Foreign  Office  that  the  Spanish  Government  had 
consented  to  pay  ^'1,500  as  a  final  settlement  of  the  Society'.^ 
claims,  "  on  account  of  the  expnlsion  of  the  missionaries  from 
Fernando  Po  in  1858."  A  few  months  afterwards  the  money 
reached  the  hands  of  the  Treasurer.  The  cost,  however,  of  the 
removal  of  the  buildings,  and  the  purchase  of  the  land  on 
Amboises  Bay,  exceeded  i;2,000.  / 


DAYS   OF   HOPE.  101 

Tlius,  iu  fall  view  of  the  losses  the  Mission  had  sus- 
tained, the  perils  necessarily  incident  to  the  work,  the 
costliness  of  the  endeavours  to  introduce  the  Gospel  and 
its  attendant  blessings  among  uncultured  and  savage 
people,  Mr.  Saker's  heart  was  cheered  by  the  confidence 
placed  in  him  by  the  Committee,  and  1:)y  the  resolve  to 
continue  the  conflict  with  superstition  and  sin  among 
the  fierce  and  degraded  tribes  of  Africa.  The  clouds 
lifted,  and  a  bright  hope  sprang  up  in  his  mind  of  suc- 
cessful enterprise  and  Divine  success. 

By  the  end  of  (October,  the  health  of  Mr.  Saker  and 
Mr.  Diboll  was  so  much  improved  as  to  justify  their 
return.  They  were  joined  by  the  Iicv.  liobert  Smith, 
a  member  of  the  congregation  in  Eegent  Street,  Lambeth, 
and  by  Captain  Milbourne,  who  took  charge  of  the 
schooner  the  Committee  had  purchased  to  convey  the 
missionaries,  and  to  aid  them  in  their  work  on  the 
waters  of  the  Cameroons  and  Aniboises  Bay. 

On  the  31st  of  October,  the  Wanderer  left  her 
moorings  in  the  Bay  of  Dublin,  and,  after  eleven  days  of 
various  weather,  the  voyagers  safely  reached  the  island 
of  Madeira.  The  entire  passage  to  their  destination 
occupied  fifty-two  days.  In  the  evening  of  the  19th  of 
December,  the  party,,  vigorous  and  hopeful,  landed  at 
Cameroons.  "  The  voyage,"  says  Mr.  Saker,  "  has  not 
been  a  long  one,  nor  has  it  been  unpleasant.  We  were 
able  to  continue  our  worship  twice  and  thrice  a  day 
with  very  few  exceptions.  Our  health,  too,  was  unin- 
terrupted, and  in  health  and  in  peace,  in  strong  hope, 
we  land  at  this  our  home."  He  found  Mrs.  Saker  and  his 
family  also  well,  and,  after  five  busy  days  at  Bethel,  he 
started  for  Victoria.  In  a  few  brief,  vigorous  sentences, 
he  sums  up  the  result  of  his  observations  and  inquiries. 


102  ALFRED    SAKER, 

"A  brief  investigation  of  all  these  places  has  given  me 
mingled  feelings  of  grief  and  gladness.  Sin  reigns 
where  we  hoped  for  righteousness.  Oh,  maj  the  power 
of  sin  be  broken  soon  ■  Faithful  labour  has  been 
rewarded  and  accepted,  and  in  this  we  rejoice.  The 
schools,  where  established,  are  succeeding.  Our  brethren, 
Fuller,  Pinnock,  Johnson,  and  N'Kwe  have  laboured 
with  much  diligence  and  zeal ;  and  our  teachers, 
During,  Decker,  and  my  daughter,  have  succeeded  well." 
The  little  band  of  workers  had  had  a  trying  time 
during  his  absence.  Mr.  Pinnock  had  been  driven  from 
Abo  by  the  violence  of  the  people,  and  all  his  pos- 
sessions seized  and  distributed  among  them.  War  had 
broken  out  among  the  tribes  on  the  river,  and  the 
mission  family  at  Bethel  had  been  horrified  by  the 
slaughter  of  a  native,  and  the  parading  of  his  head  and 
arms,  dripping  with  blood,  through  the  settlement. 
Women  and  girls  had  been  kidnapped  by  traders  in  the 
river,  and  the  renewal  of  the  horrid  abominations  of 
the  slave  trade  were  only  checked  Ijy  the  timely  arrival 
of  Her  Majesty's  Consul  with  a  man-of-war.  "  One 
day,"  writes  Mrs.  Saker,  "  our  native  teacher  N'Kwe 
brought  home  a  poor  creature  from  the  town  where  he 
preaches  on  the  Sabbath,  to  whom  the  people  had  given 
the  poison  drink.  A  chiefs  child  had  died,  and,  as  two 
or  three  of  her  own  children  had  also  died,  she  was 
accused  of  witchcraft.  These  things  do  not  occur  so 
frequently  as  a  few  years  ago,  but  they  are  very  sad. 
I  gave  her  medicine,  and  she  recovered.  This  is  the 
third  we  have  been  enabled  to  save  from  death  since 
I  came  from  England  last  year."  A  little  later  Mrs. 
Saker  continues  :  "  A  day  or  two  after,  the  mothers 
from    the    town   were    running  to  me  begging  me  to. 


DAYS  OF  iiorE.  103 

take  their  little  girls,  and  to  rescue  their  chief,  who  was  in 
irons.  The  people  had  sent  slaves  for  his  redemption, 
but  the  trader  refused  to  take  any  but  girls.  I  cannot 
tell  you,  dear  sir,  the  grief  of  my  heart  to  see  the  poor 
creatures,  and  to  remember  that  a  white  man,  an  English- 
man, was  causing  all  this  sorrow.  I  rescued  three  chil- 
dren. Two  are  still  with  me ;  one  I  was  obliged  to  give 
up  to  the  woman  who  Ijrought  her,  for  men  surrounded 
the  house  in  search  for  her.  Mr.  Fuller  told  them 
they  must  remove  him  by  force  before  any  one  else 
should  he  taken  from  the  JMission  ground."  The 
missionaries,  true  to  their  vocation,  were  the  protectors 
of  the  poor,  the  defence  of  the  oppressed,  and  the  refuge 
of  those  that  had  no  helper. 

The  reinforcements  that  Mr.  Saker  had  brought  with 
him,  and  the  further  addition  of  the  Eev,  J.  Peacock 
later  on  in  the  year,  enabled  him  to  arrange  both  for 
the  conduct  of  the  stations  already  formed,  and  for 
the  preaching  of  the  Word  in  several  neighbouring 
towns.  But  to  Mr.  Saker  these  accessions  of  strength 
Ijrought  no  diminution  of  toil,  but  rather  an  increase  of 
it,  from  the  superintendence  everywhere  necessary.  Mr. 
Peacock,  shortly  after  his  arrival,  in  a  few  graphic 
sentences,  permits  us  to  see  this  heroic  man  at  work  : 
"  Amidst  bodily  infirmities  and  pain  he  does  not  stop. 
He  moves  like  machinery,  day  by  day,  in  the  great 
cause  of  our  gracious  Master.  I  will  just  give  an  out- 
line of  his  movements.  In  the  day,  early,  you  will  find 
him  translating.  You  may  look  for  him  :  he  is  at  the 
forge,  like  a  blacksmith.  Then  you  may  see  him  at  the 
cases  in  the  printing-office,  composing.  Then  it  may  be 
he  is  drawing  plans  of  some  work  he  wishes  to  be  done  ; 
then  searching  the  Hebrew  to  translate  some  important 


104  ALFRED    SAKEE. 

text ;  then  preacliing  in  Dualla  to  the  natives.  Indeed, 
I  could  not  tell  the  varied  duties  he  performs  daily. 
How  can  I  but  esteem — yea,  love — such  a  one,  whose 
heart  is  so  engaged  in  the  work  to  promote  the  glory  of 
Ood  in  this  place.  Truly  he  was  raised  up  for  a  great 
work,  and,  amidst  all  the  difficulties  that  surround  him, 
he  accomplishes  his  work  as  a  workman  that  needeth 
not  to  be  ashamed." 

It  is  obvious  that  missionary  life,  under  such  circum- 
stances as  have  been  detailed,  cannot  be  carried  on  as  in 
more  favoured  climes.  "  I  do  not  "wish,"  says  Mr.  Pea- 
cock again,  "  to  undervalue  pulpit  duties  and  good 
preaching  ;  but  a  man  that  could  do  no  more  would  be 
a  sorry  workman  on  the  "West  Coast  of  Africa."  The 
ripe  fruits  of  civilisation  cannot  be  gathered  without 
arduous  and  continuous  toil.  In  these  regions  all  trade 
is  barter,  and  it  is  only  by  gifts  of  beads,  cloth,  tobacco, 
and  the  like  that  the  missionaries  can  obtain  the  fruits 
of  the  earth  for  food.  If  they  want  a  house,  they  must 
build  it.  They  must  be  both  workmen  and  the  instruc- 
tors of  workmen.  In  other  lands  the  missionary,  if  he 
only  has  money,  can  have  all  his  wants  supplied.  In 
Africa  he  must  be  his  own  purveyor,  his  own  carpenter 
and  brickmaker,  and  money  is  of  no  use.  Inevitably 
his  day  is  occupied  with  manifold  so-called  secular  pur- 
suits, as  well  as  with  exertions  for  the  attainment  of  his 
great  object — the  evangelisation  of  the  people.  In  these 
regions  the  Gospel  must  go  hand  in  hand  with  the  arts 
of  civilised  life,  and  the  missionary  must  become  the 
pioneer  of  both. 

In  the  month  of  June  (1862)  Mr.  Saker  was  able  to 
report  the  completion  at  press  of  his  version  of  the  New 
Testament  into  the  Dualla  tongue.     "  You  will  rejoice 


DAYS   OF   HOPE.  105 

with  me,"  lie  says,  writing  to  the  Secretary  on  the  oOth, 
"  that  God  has  enal»led  me  to  hring  the  last  sheet  of  the 
New  Testament  through  the  press.  The  deluging  rains, 
which  confine  one  so  much  at  home,  have  contributed 
to  this  result  sooner  than  I  expected;  hut  other  work 
which  I  hoped  to  complete  before  the  1st  of  August  has 
been  impeded  to  the  same  extent.  I  shall  entrust  a  copy 
of  the  Epistles,  with  the  Eevelation,  to  the  captain 
of  the  mail  vessel,  if  he  will  deliver  it  in  Liverpool 
without  charge.  You  w^ill  rejoice,  too,  that  my  health 
is  so  much  better.  During  the  last  month,  I  have 
been  jjcrmitted  to  work  at  least  five  days  in  the 
week,  and  am  now  better  than  at  the  beginning.  At 
the  end  of  the  Eevelation  I  have  appended  '  weights, 
measures,  and  coins,'  and  remarks.  I  enclose  a  first- 
proof  from  the  printer's  case  as  far  as  composed. 
The  additions  to  be  made  to-morrow  go  to  show  that  the 
ancient  cubit  w^as  only  18  inches.  To  this  will  be  added 
the  Dualla  measures,  which  in  this  respect  do  not  differ 
much  from  the  Hebrew." 

In  a  letter  to  Sir  Morton  Peto,  dated  a  month  later, 
Mr.  Saker  gives  some  additional  information  relative  to 
the  use  of  the  translation  : — "  About  the  middle  of  June, 
cur  merciful  Lord  enabled  me  to  complete  the  transla- 
tion and  printing  of  the  New  Testament.  Since  then  I 
have  had  about  200  copies  bound,  and  these  are  now  in 
the  hands  of  our  rising  reading  population.  To  bring 
these  pages  to  the  ears  of  the  people,  we  have  appointed 
an  hour,  four  evenings  in  the  week,  for  reading,  with 
such  explanations  as  may  be  needed.  On  the  Sabbath, 
in  the  intervals  of  worship,  we  have  two  other  meetings 
in  the  town,  with  crowded  houses,  simply  for  reading  and 
prayer.     My  daughter  conducts  one,  and  our  Mr.  Smith 


lOG  ALFEED    SAKER. 

the  other.  It  will  be  gratifying  to  you  to  learn  that 
Mr.  Smith  is  all  that  I  could  hope  of  him.  He  assists 
me  nobly  and  well.  Some  recent  visits  he  paid  to  the 
interior  towns  fill  him  with  hope  of  success,  while  pain- 
ful experience  is  gradually  teaching  him  that  that  success 
must  only  be  looked  for  as  the  result  of  soul-trying 
labour." 

Eeference  is  here  made  to  some  terrible  scenes  of 
cruelty  and  degradation  of  which  Mr.  Smith  was  witness, 
and  in  which  he  was  compelled  to  interfere,  not  without 
peril  of  his  life.  On  reaching  a  town  a  mile  up  the 
river,  the  firing  of  guns  was  heard.  The  people  of  the 
town  were  shooting  the  wives  and  slaves  of  the  subject 
people  working  on  their  farms.  A  fight  ensued  with  the 
husbands  of  the  assaulted  women.  Mr.  Smith,  under  a 
burning  sun,  amidst  the  dropping  shots  of  the  musketry, 
hastened,  at  the  desire  of  the  chief,  with  a  messenger  to 
stay  the  shedding  of  blood.  Two  men  only  were  killed, 
but  many  were  wounded.  After  some  days,  with 
efficient  help  from  Mr.  Saker,  peace  was  restored.  A 
little  later  two  innocent  men  were  seized  and  brought  to 
the  landing  place  near  the  Mission  house,  to  be  drowned 
or  murdered,  and,  as  Mr.  Smith  was  endeavouring  to 
arrest  the  cruel  purpose  of  their  captors,  he  received  a 
blow  from  behind,  which  made  him  stagger  to  the 
ground ;  l)ut  several  of  the  native  converts  caught  and 
supported  him.  Happily  his  liurt  proved  but  of  tem- 
porary inconvenience.  Other  like  incidents  sorely  tried 
the  courage  of  the  young  missionary,  but  the  true  spirit 
of  self-sacrifice  animated  him.  "  My  love  for  the  work 
and  the  people  increases  the  more  I  come  in  contact 
with  them ;  and  they,  on  the  other  hand,  know  how  to 
love  and  trust  those  that  sympathise  with  them  in  their 


DAYS  OF  iiorE.  107 

various  treubles.  Notwithstanding'  their  deep  degrada- 
tion, and  dark  heathen  practices,  they  appear  keenly  to 
feel  a  wrong,  and  to  appreciate  an  act  of  kindness,  and 
this  opens  the  way  for  making  known  to  them  the  ever- 
lasting Gospel.'' 

The  completion  of  the  New  Testament,  and  in  a  few 
months  that  of  a  vocabulary,  affords  a  favourable  oppor- 
tunity to  give  the  results  of  Mr.  Saker's  investigations 
into  the  origin  of  the  Dualla  language  and  people. 

The  language  is  spoken  by  a  population  variously  esti- 
mated as  consisting  of  30,000  to  80,000  persons,  living 
about  the  mouth  of  the  Cameroons  river  and  the  base  of 
the  great  mountain  which  dominates  the  entire  region. 
The  people  are  thought  to  be  a  small  part  of  a  large 
family  that  at  an  early  period  migrated  southward  from 
Abyssinia,  and  spread  themselves  over  five  or  six  degrees 
of  country  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  equator.  Their 
original  language  has  been  broken  up  into  many  dialects, 
and  with  many  of  their  tribes  the  traces  of  their  origin 
have  entirely  disappeared.  Among  rude  and  UDlettered 
})eople  language  undergoes  rapid  mutations,  and  attains 
forms  that  battle  all  investigation.  Still  there  exists 
evidence  that  the  Dualla  has  many  and  close  affinities 
with  the  languages  of  Eastern  Africa,  and  with  that  of 
the  tribes  on  the  Gaboon. 

Dualla  is  the  name  both  of  the  people  and  of  the 
tongue  they  speak.  Their  traditions  are  but  few,  and  of 
no  remote  date.  They  refer  their  origin  to  one  of  the  two 
sons  of  a  man  who  settled  on  the  western  side  of  the 
Cameroons  mountain.  One,  named  Koli,  remained  in 
the  parental  seat ;  but  the  other,  Dualla,  crossed  the 
region  now  known  as  Victoria  and  r>imbia,  and  expelled 
the  Basas  from  their  dwellings  on  the  Cameroons  river. 


108  ALFllED    SAKER. 

Marks  of  the  contest  are  still  seen  in  some  embank- 
ments near  the  Mission  station  at  Bethel.  The  river  is 
said  to  have  been  narrower  than  at  present,  having 
within  the  last  forty  years  made  great  encroachments 
on  the  land. 

The  Duallas  are  divided  into  tribes,  nnder  inde- 
pendent chiefs.  Feuds  are  frequent,  and  property  is 
very  insecure.  The  slave  trade  was  once  the  calling  of 
the  entire  people,  and  to  the  rapine,  oppression,  and 
bloodshed  of  that  fearful  time,  together  with  the  diminu- 
tion in  the  number  of  people  consequent  upon  it,  may 
he  traced  the  ferocity  so  frequently  witnessed  by  Mr. 
Saker  and  his  companions.  Since  the  cessation  of  the 
foreign  slave  trade,  there  has  been  a  great  improvement, 
and  many  wasted  spots  are  recovering  the'  population 
ihey  had  lost.  Slaves  are,  however,  still  held  among 
the  people.  They  are  usually  the  fruit  of  war,  some- 
times of  puichase,  and  the  labour  of  the  field  is  usually 
carried  on  by  them,  as  well  as  by  the  wives  of  the  free 
portion  of  the  population.  In  most  Dualla  towns  the 
slaves  are  two  to  one  in  excess  of  the  freemen.  They 
are,  in  fact,  from  their  numl^er,  which  is  continually 
increasing  by  bii'ths,  treated  rather  as  serfs  than  slaves, 
xmd  the  chiefs  are  in  constant  dread  of  an  uprising 
among  them. 

The  Dualla  tongue  has  many  affinities  with  the  Isulju, 
spoken  at  Bimbia.  Northward,  and  on  the  sides  of  the 
mountain,  the  lano-uaQ-es  differ  from  the  Dualla,  and  the 
population  has  a  different  origin ;  but  nearness  and 
intercourse  are  fast  breaking  down  the  distinction.  The 
Dualla  vocabulary  is  very  scanty  as  compared  with 
more  cultivated  tongues.  It  contains  about  2,400 
root    forms.      It    is,    however,    notwithstanding     the 


DAYS   OF  HOPE.  lOO 

efforts  of  the  missionaries,  veiy  imperfectly  known. 
"  Ever  and  anon,"  says  Mr.  Saker,  "  we  come  npon 
words  which  lie  like  griiins  of  gold  in  the  bed  of  the 
stream,  and,  like  grains,  are  revealed  only  by  the  dis- 
turbance of  storms  and  floods.  While  the  daily  con- 
cerns of  man  run  smoothly  on,  in  a  few  words  he 
expresses  his  wants,  his  thoughts  and  emotions  ;  but 
let  his  heart  be  moved  by  strong  passion,  by  deep  dis- 
tress, by  mental  conflicts,  and  words  none  suspected  to- 
l)e  in  his  memory,  or  even  in  existence,  are  found 
welling  up  from  the  deeps  of  his  heart,  and  in  a  moment 
we  see  that  they  are  the  true  words — such  words  that  a 
less  exciting  cause  would  not  have  revealed."  Often, 
too,  on  some  distant  journey,  and  among  some  offshoot 
of  the  same  stem,  he  has  picked  up  words  for  his  voca- 
bulary which  were  unused  or  unknown  among  the 
tribes  immediately  around  him. 

The  elementary  sounds  in  Dualla  are  thirty-three  in 
number,  which  English  letters,  with  some  orthographical 
additions,  have  been  employed  to  express ;  excepting 
c,  h,  q,  and  z,  the  sounds  of  which  letters  are  unknown. 

To  this  may  be  added  the  interesting  fact,  that  all  the 
books  hitherto  printed  in  the  Dualla  tongue,  with  the 
exception  of  the  last  edition  (1882)  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, liave  all  Ijeen  printed  on  the  spot,  and  chiefly  by 
lads  trained  in  the  jMission,  the  fruit  of  missionary 
labour.  The  new  edition  of  the  New  Testament  just 
referred  to  has  been  carried  through  tlie  press 
by  Miss  Emily  Saker,  Mr.  Saker's  youngest  and  highly 
estimable  daughter,  now  labouring  with  the  devotion 
and  perseverance  of  her  father  at  the  station,  and  among 
the  people,  so  dear  to  his  heart. 


CHAPTEE   XL 

Ascent  of  the  Camekoons  Mountain,  1861 — 1862. 

N"  the  last  days  of  the  year  and  the  first 
weeks  of  1862,  Mr.  Saker  enjoyed  a 
pleasant  interlude  in  his  work  by  the 
ascent  of  the  great  Cameroons  moun- 
tain, having  for  his  companions  Captain 
Burton,  H.M.'s  Consul,  ]\I.  Gustavo  Mann,  a  well-known 
Hanoverian  and  botanist,  in  the  employment  of  the 
English  Government,  and  Sefior  Calvo,  the  Spanish 
Judge  of  Fernando  To.  Mr.  Mann  left  Victoria  on  the 
13th  of  December  (1861)  for  the  last  town  on  the  moun- 
tain, and  on  the  arrival  of  the  Consul  with  Sehor  Calvo 
on  the  19th,  Mr.  Saker  commenced  the  ascent  with  them, 
taking  Mr.  Johnson  as  interpreter,  and  several  Kroomen 
to  carry  the  luggage.  The  distance  of  the  summit  from 
Amboises  Bay,  on  its  southern  side,  is  reckoned  at 
14  miles,  but  the  mountain  in  its  entire  extent  covers  an 
area  of  about  400  square  miles,  between  the  Binibia  and 
Piumby  rivers,  which  bound  it  on  the  east  and  west, 
and  the  hilly  region  that  embraces  it  on  the  north.  This 
was  not  the  first  attempt  to  climb  the  peak.  Mr.  Mer- 
rick assailed  it  in  1847,  and  succeeded  so  far  as  to  reach 
the  open  grassy  plain  above  the  forest  that  covers  the 
lower  slopes  of  the  mountain.  Here  water  failed  him  ; 
his  companions  suffered  from  cold  and  thirst,  and  he 
was  compelled  to  return.     In  1860,  Mr.  Mann  ascended 


ASCENT  OF  THE  CAMEROOXS  MOUNTAIX.     Ill 

-a  short  distance,  but  time  would  not  then  allow  further 
progress,  and  the  mountain  "  whose  glorious  pinnacle 
never  yet  felt  the  foot  of  man  "  remained  for  the  present 
party  to  climb  its  steeps,  and  to  secure  the  long-coveted 
honour  of  being  the  first  to  tread  this  virgin  peak. 

The  route  from  Victoria  lay  through  a  noble  forest  of 
palms,  acacias,  African  oak,  and  other  fine  timber- 
trees,  from  100  to  150  feet  high,  across  a  country 
admirably  adapted  for  the  growth  of  maize,  cocoa,  sugar, 
and  coffee.  Twice  the  party  forded  the  "  bright  little 
mountain  stream  which  supplies  Victoria  with  the 
purest  water,"  passing  west  of  Mount  Henry,  "  a  site," 
says  Captain  Burton,  "  which  I  at  once  fixed  upon  as  a 
provisional  sanatorium."  After  four  hours'  walking, 
they  halted  for  breakfast  at  Bosumba,  a  village  of  the 
■chief  Myombi,  1,000  feet  above  the  sea  and  four  miles 
and  a-half  from  Victoria. 

The  path  now  led  through  dense  bush  and  grass.  The 
district  was  populous.  The  people  are  known  as  the 
Bakwili,  and  are  allied  by  language  and  race  to  the 
tribes  of  the  lowlands.  Mr.  Saker  found  that  they 
understood  the  Isubu  when  he  addressed  them  in  that 
tongue.  As  usual,  their  dress  was  the  scantiest  possible, 
a  kilt  of  plantain  leaves  sufficing  for  every  need.  A  few 
possessed  slips  or  rags  of  stuff  or  cloth,  and  a  handker- 
chief for  the  head.  Their  ornaments,  more  abundant 
than  their  dress,  were  of  beads  of  many  colours,  porcu- 
pine's teeth,  and  armlets  of  copper  or  brass,  and  occa- 
sionally of  ivory.  The  head  was  bare,  shaved,  or,  when 
otherwise,  the  hair  was  dressed  in  fantastic  modes.  A 
kind  of  axe,  called  a  matchet,  was  carried  by  the  men, 
and  in  a  few  cases  a  rusty  old  matchlock  was  the  weapon 
of  protection  or  offence.   The  women,  as  among  all  these 


112  ALFRED   SAKER. 

tribes,  performed  not  only  every  hoiiseliold  duty,  but 
carried  on  the  cultivation  of  the  ground,  and  were  often 
tattooed  in  a  fashion  the  most  grotesque. 

At  half-past  four  they  reached  Maponya,  in  the 
country  of  the  chief  Botani,  and  the  highest  village  in 
this  part  of  tlie  mountain.  Here  they  met  Mr.  Mann. 
The  chief  received  them  with  great  ceremony.  Habited 
in  his  royal  garb,  a  tall  black  hat,  an  old  scarlet  and 
gamboge  coatee  of  the  Eoyal  Marines,  and  a  pocket  hand- 
kerchief, "  he  performed  a  lively  dance,  apparently  bor- 
rowed from  tlie  movements  of  excited  poultry.  In 
Africa,  when  the  king  dances,  you  have  to  pay  for  the 
honour." 

Disputes  arising  with  the  natives,  the  party  soon 
launched  themselves  on  the  wilderness.  They  bivou- 
acked in  the  forest,  on  a  steep  and  narrow  spot,  at  a 
place  afterwards  called  Eidge  Camp.  Proceeding  at 
eight  o'clock  next  day,  they  found  that  the  plantain  and 
the  palm  had  disappeared,  and  were  replaced  by  the 
graceful  tree-fern.  Ferns  everywhere  in  most  graceful 
forms  covered  the  ground,  or  ran,  creeper-like,  up  the 
trunks  of  the  trees.  It  was  "  a  beautiful  fernery,  set 
off  by  the  huge  tropical  growth  around  it." 

Passing  under  a  natural  arch  of  fallen  trees,  which 
they  called  Pern  Gate,  they  emerged  on  a  region  of  tall 
grass.  Then  came  a  broad  green  slope  of  small  ferns 
and  moss,  resting  on  a  rugged  bed  of  old,  decayed  lava, 
half-a-mile  wide,  the  banks  on  either  side  girt  with 
giant  trees.  Here  they  breakfasted,  and  feasted  on 
blackberries.  A  hunter's  path  now  led  them  up  the 
side  of  the  lava  river,  among  huge  blocks  whicli  endan- 
gered their  ancles.  Salvias  scented  the  air,  and  the 
surface  was  spangled  with  the  blossoms  of  an  unknow^n 


ASCENT  OF  THE  CAMEROOXS  MOUNTAIX.     113 

'fldwer.     Bees  settled  upon  tlieni,  l)ut  did  not  stini; ;  and 
the  heat  of  the  svni  became  intense. 

Tlie  last  part  of  the  day's  journey  was  the  most  ruf^ged 
of  all.     The  lava,  as  it  approached  the  place  of  its  issue, 
became  more  broken,   lying   al)out   in   most  irregular 
heajis.     ])efore  attempting  it,  Captain  Burton  lay  down 
to  sleep,  the  rest  of  the  party  going  on.     The  Black 
Crater,  from  which  the  lava  had  Howed,  was  at  length 
reached.  It  was  about  100  yards  in  diameter,  with  a  lip  of 
some  200  feet  above  the  level  of  the  platform  below.    On 
]ilacing  his  compass  l)etvveen  the  rocks,  Mr.  Saker  found 
that,  in  an  unaccountable  manner,  the  north  pole  of  the 
needle  dipped  to  the  south.     Water  was  obtained  near 
nt  hand,  and  here  the  travellers  encamped.     It  was  a 
bad  camping-place  ;  a  high  north-east  wind  roared  round 
them  all  night,  and  the  thermometer  fell  to  40°  Falir. 
Next   day   brought  them   a   lovely   morning,    and,   at 
two  p.m.,  they  set  out  for  the  spring,  to  which,  as  he 
w^as  the  discoverer,  Mr.  ]\Iann's  name  was  given.     They 
found  a  little  runnel  of  pure  cold  water,  issuing  from 
peaty  earth,  embowered  in  l>lue  flowers,  and  surrounded 
by  nettles.     Here   the   camp  was    fixed,  and  for  five 
weeks  it  became  the  base  of  their  researches   and  the 
centre  of  their  excursions.     It  was  7,000  feet  above  the 
sea,  and  was  held  by  common  consent  to  1  )e  an  admirable 
ppot  for  a  sanatorium  or  a  colony.     ]\Iaterials  for  roads 
or  for  house-liuilding  lay  around  in  abundance,  and,  in 
his  enthusiasm,  Captain  Burton  exclaimed,  "  Where  can 
a  Lebanon  be  found  cfjual  to  the  beautiful,  the  majestic 
Cameroons  ?  "     "  Here,"  says  ]\Ir.  Saker,  in  a  lower  key, 
'"  we  had  a  glorious  sky,  a  dry  air,  in  fact  an  English 
,home,  and  no  great  obstacles  in  the  ascent  but  what  a 
little  patient  toil  will  overcome." 

8 


114  ALFRED   SAKEE. 

Christmas-eve    and    Christmas-day   were    spent    in 
takino-  bearinos,  ramblin"  about  the  hills,  and  in  naming 
places.     The  main  peak  they  discovered  to  be  divided 
into  a  pair  of  distinct  heads,  which  they  christened  Vic- 
toria and  Albert.     "  Little  did  we  think,"  remarks  Mr. 
Saker,  "  that  the  nation  and  our  beloved  Sovereign  were- 
then   being   plunged  into  irreparable  grief  by  Prince 
Albert's  death."     Another  summit  was  named  Earth- 
work Crater,  and  the  elevation  near  which  they  were 
encamped.  Mount  Helen,  after  Mrs.  Saker,  who  had  sup- 
plied the  Christmas  pudding.     From  its  cone  there  was 
a  wonderful  prospect  of  wild  scenery  and  of  perplexing 
confusion.     Twenty-eight  deep  crevasses  were  counted, 
with  numberless  thick  lava  beds  and  ribs  of  scoriaceous 
rock.     The  morning  of  Christmas-day  was  spent  by  ]\Ir. 
Saker,  in  company  with  Captain  Burton,  in  a  climb  to 
the  summit  of  Earthwork  Crater,  about  thirteen  miles 
from  Victoria,  and  five  from  the  main  peak  of  the  moun- 
tain.    The  volcano  had  apparently  long  burnt  itself  out, 
and  the  pools  of  water  formed  during  the  rains  at  the 
bottom  of  the  crater  were  the  resort  of  the  small  birds  that 
abound  in  its  vicinity.     Returning  from  this  excursion,, 
and  breakfast  despatched,  Mr.  Saker  left  the  party,  and 
descended  the  mountain  for  Cameroons,  where  some  im- 
portant duties  required  his  attention.  Early  in  January, 
however,  in  company  with  his  colleague  in  the  Mission,. 
Mr.   Smith,  he  rejoined  the  mountaineers.     They  had 
passed  the  time  in  exploring  a  portion  of  the  higher 
regions,  but  were  suffering  from  exposure  and  fatigue. 
Mr.  Smith  being   too  unwell  to  go  farther,  Mr.  Saker,. 
with  some  Kroo  boys,  on  the  13th,  left  the  camp  to 
climb   Victoria,  the  highest  of  the  twin  peaks.     The 
ascent  was  made  on  the  south  side. 


ASCENT  OF  THE  CAMEKOONS  MOUNTAIN.     115 

"  During  my  absence,"  writes  Mr.  Saker,  "  Mr.  Maun 
had  ascended  the  north  side,  while  Consul  Burton 
attempted  the  south  face.  After  a  day's  weary  toil  over 
beds  of  lava,  we  reached  the  foot  of  a  small  mount 
somewhat  sheltering  to  weary  travellers.  There  I  spread 
my  blanket  and  passed  the  night.  It  was  a  glorious 
evening,  but  somewhat  cold.  At  early  dawn  I  found 
the  glass  at  31  "^  Fahr.  But  the  sun  rose,  a  cloudless 
morning,  and  it  soon  grew  warm.  At  six  I  began 
the  ascent,  and  at  ten  reached  the  southern  summit 
or  ridge.  By  this  time  it  was  very  warm,  and  the  wind 
that  sweeps  so  fearfully  in  these  regions  seemed  hushed. 
Light  fleecy  clouds  ever  and  anon  shut  in  the  sur- 
rounding scenery.  Towards  the  east  I  saw  a  range  of 
mountains  that  I  had  never  before  observed,  and  took 
its  bearings;  but  the  attempt  to  secure  the  angles  of 
summits  towards  the  west  was  not  so  successful.  Ere 
I  could  bring  two  points  together,  one  would  Ije  ob- 
scured. 

"At  this  highest  point  I  found  the  water  boil  at 
188°,  thermometer  58".  This  gives  an  elevation  nearly 
the  same  as  our  charts,  the  result  of  trigonometrical 
survey  below.  My  attempt  to  explore  the  Crater  was 
a  failure.  The  whole  was  enshrouded  in  cloud.  The 
Crater  must  be  of  enormous  extent.  Its  two  peaks 
present  a  large  angle  at  seven  miles  distance.  After  a 
long  delay,  I  began  the  descent,  and  at  two  reached 
my  last  night's  resting-place.  After  rest  and  refreshment, 
we  set  out  on  return  to  our  camp.  Here  I  found  the 
Consul  a  little  better,  but  still  unable  to  walk  much. 
As  I  had  stayed  on  this  second  run  up  the  mountain 
ten  days,  I  was  now  compelled  to  leave  for  Mctoria  and 

Cameroons.     We  have  ascertained  that  there  are  native 

8* 


n.6  ALFRED    SAKEE. 

towns  at  about  3,500  feet  elevation,  that  cultivation 
extends  but  little  farther,  and  that  beyond  these  heights 
there  is  every  inducement  to  seek  a  temporary  home 
for  invalids  and  wearied  missionaries." 

A  final  ascent  was  made  by  Captain  Burton  and  his 
companions  on  the  27th  of  January.  In  this  Mr.  Saker 
did  not  participate,  as  he  had  returned  to  Amboises 
Bay.  The  investigators  encountered  intense  cold.  Their 
waterproof  coats  were  wliite  with  hoar-frost,  and  the 
summit  was  powdered  with  frozen  dew.  Before  leaving 
the  peak,  Captain  Burton  was  able  to  discover  a  com- 
plete solfaterra,  lying  to  the  north-east  of  Albert  Crater. 
Smoke  arose  in  puffy  volumes  from  long  lines  of  white 
marl  and  sulphur.  This  discovery  accounts  for  the 
many  detached  reports  of  flames  seen  issuing  from  the 
mountain  by  the  merchants  of  Cameroons  and  the  people 
of  Fernando  Po.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the 
great  volcanic  mountain  of  Cameroons  is  not  yet  an 
extinct  volcano.  A  hailstorm  signalised  the  descent. 
"Finally,"  adds  Consul  Burton,  "on  the  2nd  of  February, 
1862,  I  once  more  saw  the  scattered  bungalows  of  Vic- 
toria, where  the  kindly  Mrs.  Saker,  who  would  not  leave 
the  place  till  our  safe  return,  received  me  with  all 
hospitality."* 

*  For  th.e  materials  of  this  chapter,  besides  Mr.  Saker's  letters, 
I  am  indebted  to  the  Report  presented  to  the  Foreign  Office  l>y 
Consul  Burton,  and  kindly  forwarded  to  the  Mission  House  by 
Lord  Russell.  It  is  also  printed  in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Royal 
Geographical  Society,"  vol.  vi.,  p.  238. 


CHAPTER    XII. 

Ix  Perils  ox  Every  Side,  18G2— 18G3. 

HE  next  eighteen  months  of  Mr.  Saker's 
missionary  life  were  months  of  unceas- 
ing  toil   and   constant    anxiety.      His 
expectations  with  regard  to   the  early 
colonising  of  Amboises  Bay  were  only 
partially  fulfilled.     The  English  Government  hesitated 
to  avail  themselves  of  the  advantages  which  it  presented 
as  a  coaling  station,  and  a  healthful  resort  for  the  sick 
crews  of  the  men-of-war  on  the  coast.     Clarence  Cove 
continued  to  be  the  head-quarters  of  the  squadron,  and 
trade  naturally  remained  in  its  former  channels.     The 
people  were,  therefore,  disinclined  to  leavg  the  place  where 
their  property  and  livelihood  were  secure.     There  were, 
however,  some  compensations  for  the  slow  development 
of  the  colony.     The  government  of  it  could  be  more 
easily  controlled ;  time  was  allowed  for  the  foundation 
of  the  town,  and  its  due  supply  with  the  necessaries 
and   conveniences   of  life.     At   the  commencement  of 
1862,  eighty-two  persons  had  settled  there,  of  whom 
one-half  were  children  connected  with  the  families  of 
the  converts,  and  a  portion  of  wliom  came  from  Fernando 
Po  to  be  educated  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Pinnock,  the 
resident  pastor   of  the   church.      Some   fifty   or   sixty 
persons  habitually  attended  public  worship,  a  few  of 
them   natives   from   the   mountains.     Mr.    Saker   thus 


118  ALFRED    SAKER. 

refers  to  them  in  a  letter  to  Lady  Peto  : — "  You  will  be 
pleased  to  hear  that  some  of  the  poor  dark  natives  near 
this  place  are  not  only  listening  to  the  Gospel  when 
taken  to  their  towns,  but  are  attending  the  services  in 
our  little  chapel.  Many  who  never  heard  the  name  of 
Jesus  are  listening  to  the  offers  of  salvation  through  a 
crucified  Saviour.  It  is  not  unusual  to  hear  them 
exclaim  aloud  or  talk  to  each  other  on  the  subject  to 
which  they  are  listening." 

The  Eev.  E.  Smith,  on  visiting  Victoria,  thus  describes 
his  impressions  of  the  place: — "It  is  a  delightsome 
spot,  very  beautiful  for  situation.  The  little  town 
appears  to  be  rising  very  slowly.  There  are  several 
good  houses  already  built  on  the  estate,  and  a  vast 
number  of  people  live  on  the  mountains  around.  I 
made  a  journey  to  one  of  the  fishing  towns  some 
distance  off,  in  company  with  our  esteemed  and  loved 
brother  Johnson.  After  we  had  climbed  over  the 
rocks,  and  journeyed  through  the  bush  three  parts 
of  the  way,  a  light  tornado  overtook  us,  and  wetted 
us  a  little.  We  pressed  on  to  the  town  close  by, 
and  were  well  repaid  for  anything  we  suffered.  We 
had  a  good  meeting  in  King  George's  house,  the 
people  listening  attentively  to  the  good  news.  The 
King's  '  palace'  consisted  of  one  large  room,  with  a  few 
feet  partitioned  off  for  a  bed-room,  a  mud  floor,  three  or 
four  stands  for  drying  fish,  with  wood  fires  underneath. 
There  were  as  many  drying  tables  as  the  King  has  wives. 
A  number  of  black  earthen  pots  for  cooking  completed 
the  utensils  in  the  room.  I  counted  seven  goats  that 
live  and  sleep  in  the  house,  and  a  pig  is  no  uncommon 
member  of  the  family  circle.  Three  wives  and  a  number 
of  children  made  up  the  household  present  on  our  visit." 


VICTOEIA  CHAPEL,   AiEBOISES  BAY. 


IN   PERILS   ON   EVERY   SIDE.  119 

■Such  is  a  fair  specimen  of  the  best  of  the  liouses  of  the 
Bakwili,  among  whom  the  missionaries  were  labouring 
to  introduce  the  Gospel  with  its  elevating  tendencies 
and  hopes. 

At  Cameroons,  Mr.  Saker  was  made  intensely  sorrow- 
ful by  the  increasing  ill-health  of  his  wife  and  daughter. 
In  August  he  was  obliged  to  part  with  them.  The  loss 
this  was  to  his  work  the  following  extracts  from  his 
letter  of  August  29th  (18G2)  will  show  :— "  To-day,  I 
send  away  to  England  my  wife,  daughter,  and  servant. 
These,  one  and  all,  are  worn  down  to  a  low,  low  condition 
physically,  but  their  flow  of  spirits  seems  unconquerable. 
Of  Mrs.  S.  I  say  not  a  word  here  ;  but  it  seems  right  that 
I  give  a  line  of  information  of  the  others,  but  chiefly  of 
my  daughter.  Soon  after  her  arrival  here,  I  pointed  out 
a  line  of  labour  which  I  wished  her  to  undertake,  but, 
after  looking  round,  she  saw  so  much  work  to  be  done 
in  other  ways  that  she  decided  for  herself  what  to 
do.  Of  course,  in  the  presence  of  so  much  work,  I 
could  only  consent ;  yet  did  I  mwardlysay,  'The  novelty 
will  soon  wear  off",  and  then  she  will  weary  of  it.'  But 
it  has  not  been  so.  She  has  maintained  her  plans  till 
now.  She  chose  the  day-school,  and  has  continued  it 
with  much  diligence  till  a  week  since.  She  found  the 
women  of  the  church  in  much  ignorance  and  wishing 
for  help.  She  attempted  their  improvement  by  opening 
a  service  in  the  town,  at  the  house  of  one  of  the  members, 
for  women  only,  devoting  the  afternoon  of  one  day  in 
the  week  to  this,  and  meeting  the  same  body  of  women 
on  the  Sabbath-day,  instead  of  attending  the  Sabbath- 
school.  Although  these  meetini^fs  have  all  been  more  or 
less  religious  services,  reading  and  expounding  Scripture 
and  prayer,  at  first  using  our  excellent  friend  the  owner 


120  ALFEED    SAKER 

of  the  house  as  interxDreter,  but  latterly  doing  withoiit 
liiin,  often  have  I  detected  her  composing  sermons 
for  the  Sabbath.  Tims  has  she  done  much  to  gladden 
and  instruct  these  poor  women,  and  they  grieve  for  her 
leaving.  She  has  also  devoted  one  afternoon  in  the 
week  to  teaching  them  needlework.  Of  Maria,  I  can 
only  say  she  has  been  a  riglit  hand  to  Mrs.  Saker,  and 
heart  and  soul  one  with  her.  To  her  and  Eliza  I  am 
indebted  for  stitching  all  our  books  as  the  first  step  in 
binding.     This  has  mostly  been  the  work  of  evenings." 

Pleasant,  indeed,  is  this  sight  of  the  entire  family  of 
our  missionary  brother  giving  itself  to  the  work  of  God  ; 
comljining  together,  each  in  their  measure,  to  impart  the 
knowledge  of  both  temporal  and  spiritual  things  to  the 
ignorant  and  degraded  children  of  Africa. 

The  task  was  no  easy  one.  Often  was  it  interrupted 
by  bad  health ;  by  violent  disputes  among  the  j)eople  ; 
by  the  outbreak  of  war ;  and  Ijy  the  vile  attempts  of 
white  men  to  revive  the  abolished  trade  in  slaves.  Thus, 
under  date  of  September  20tli  (1862),  Mr.  Saker  writes : 
"  After  Mrs.  S.  left  me  on  the  30th  ultimo,  I  came 
home  only  to  lie  down  and  sicken,  and  suffered  a  sharp 
attack  for  five  days.  I  then  recovered.  During  that 
same  time  Smith,  too,  was  suffering  daily  from  repeated 
fevers."  Again,  in  the  same  letter  :  "  Just  now  we  are 
living  in  perpetual  and  daily  quarrelling.  There  seems 
but  little  business  going  on  at  present,  and  the  natives 
take  advantage  of  the  leisure  to  exhaust  themselves 
in  wrangling  and  fierce  disputes.  Three  times  this 
month  have  I  been  called  home  to  prevent  open 
war.  To-day — nearly  half  a  day  spent  in  quelling  an 
enraged  multitude.  The  steam  is  blown  off  now;  but 
only  to  be  renewed  on  Monday."     Nature,  too,  seemed 


IN   PEKILS   OX   EVERY   SIDE.  121 

often  unpropitious.  "  A  fearful  storm  of  rain  came  on 
us  on  Wednesday  night  last.  It  commenced  just  a  little 
before  eight,  while  our  classes  were  still  in  chapel,  and 
abated  not  till  after  twehe.  Tlien  again  at  three  in  the 
morning,  and  lasted  for  half  an  hour,  accompanied  with 
wind,  lightning,  and  thunder.  Our  people  could  not  go 
home  from  meeting  till  past  midnight."  In  seven  hours, 
by  his  rain  gauge,  Mr.  Saker  found  that  seven  and  a- 
half  inches  of  rain  had  fallen.  The  damage  done  to  the- 
Mission  buildings  was  great,  and  required  many  weeks  to- 
repair. 

Here  is  another  scene  of  savage  life,  and  of  the  part 
played  in  it  1  )y  the  missionary  : — "  Saturday  night,  late, 
the  principal  chief  of  A'kwa  town  came  home,  and 
heard  all  one  side  of  the  dispute.  He  allowed  himself 
to  he  excited  to  madness.  At  four  in  the  morning  he- 
beat  his  drum,  calling  all  out  to  war.  At  five  our  yard 
and  outbuildings  were  filled  with  women  and  children 
of  the  weaker  party.  At  six  the  small  town  close  to  us 
was  invaded  l)y  a  hostile  multitude.  We  counselled 
quietness,  and  took  resistance  into  our  own  hands.  By 
this  means  we  prevented  miicli  l)loodshed,  and  saved 
most  of  the  property.  Smith  and  Fuller  resisted  these 
demoniacal  men  manfully,  and  by  nine  we  had  so  far 
succeeded  in  quieting  the  rabble  tliat  we  saw  the  last  of 
them  out  of  the  town.  The  destruction  of  hundreds  of 
plantain  and  fruit  trees  makes  a  desolate  show  ;  but 
this,  and  the  breaking  down  of  four  or  five  houses,  is 
the  chief  damage.  So  our  Sabbath  was  broken  up ;  but 
we  had  a  good  and  quiet  meeting  in  the  afternoon  and 
evening." 

The  resistance  alluded  to  above  was  that  of  earnest 
and  fearless  remonstrance.     From  the  first  Mr.  Saker- 


122  ALFRED   SAKER. 

rejected  the  use  of  any  weapon  for  self-defence.  Amidst 
all  the  perils  he  encountered  in  the  wilderness  from  the 
rage  of  man  he  never  resorted  to  violence  or  retalia- 
tion for  his  protection.  He  was  strong  in  meekness,  in 
patience,  and  in  imperturbable  quietness  of  spirit,  and 
in  his  calm  trust  in  God. 

Later  in  the  year,  two  slaves  belonging  to  Portuguese 
owners  on  the  coast,  having  escaped,  found  their  way 
to  the  Cameroons  river.  They  were  claimed  by  a 
trader,  who  sold  the  man  and  kept  the  woman  for  a 
worse  purpose.  Escaping  again,  they  were  befriended 
by  Mr.  Saker.  From  this  arose  another  attack  on  the 
mission-house  by  the  trader's  slaves,  and  for  some  days 
the  lives  of  the  missionaries  were  in  serious  danger. 
The  poor  refugees  at  length  found  a  place  of  security 
at  Victoria. 

But,  in  spite  of  all  these  agitations  and  sore  beset- 
ments,  the  Word  of  God  was  not  bound.  Writing  at  the 
close  of  the  year  (December  27, 18G2)  this  unresting  toiler 
reports  : — "  God  has  graciously  given  us  an  increase  to 
our  church.  You  will  remember  that  our  last  increase 
was  in  August,  the  last  Sabbath  in  the  month,  that  Mrs. 
S.  and  Eliza  might  participate  in  our  joy.  On  that 
occasion  our  brother  Smith  baptized ;  and  now  to-day 
five  others  are  given  to  us,  and  to-morrow,  being  the 
last  Sabbath  of  the  year,  they  are  to  be  baptized.  Mr. 
Fuller  will  have  the  pleasure  of  leading  these  lowly 
ones  into  our  river.  Very  many  things  conspire  to  make 
this  increase  joyous  to  me,  and  not  the  least  of  these 
that  one  more  from  out  of  our  own  family  is  called  to 
(jod,  and  is  honoured  by  His  grace.  It  is  a  sj)ecial 
mercy  to  us,  that  our  hearts  be  not  too  much  oppressed 
nor  cast  down." 


IN   PERILS   ON   EVERY   SIDE.  123 

The  severe  strain  of  these  events  on  Mr.  Saker's 
health  again  raised  the  question  of  the  necessity  of  his 
seeking  an  invigorating  chnie.  For  more  than  twenty 
years  he  had  borne,  with  a  resolution  of  mind  and 
will  that  few  men  could  he  found  to  exercise,  the 
debilitating  diseases  of  this  pestilential  coast  He  had 
seen  one  after  another  of  his  colleagues  and  companions 
yield  to  their  deadly  assaults.  Himself  with  an 
■emaciated  frame  and  a  shaken  constitution,  he  yet 
persisted  in  his  work.  "  I  cannot  hope,"  he  writes  on  the 
.31st  of  March,  1863,  "  to  live  much  longer  in  Africa. 
The  weakness  and  suffering  of  the  past  month  have 
convinced  me  that  if  my  life  is  to  be  preserved  I  must 
journey  to  you."  Although  he  sometimes  regarded  his 
life  as  useless — for  his  preaching,  he  said,  was  curtailed 
to  the  lowest  point — he  could  not  contemplate  an  aban- 
donment of  the  work  without  the  deepest  repugnance 
and  sorrow.  But  from  the  opening  of  the  year  it 
seemed  his  imperative  duty  to  leave.  Circumstances 
at  home  had  also  rendered  it  important  that  he  should 
again  see  the  Committee.  The  attacks  on  his  methods 
of  operation,  alluded  to  in  a  previous  chapter,  had  been 
renewed,  and  unfortunately  received  a  certam  measure 
of  support  from  some  who  were  not  wholly  unacquainted 
with  the  exigencies  of  an  African  clime,  and  the  perils  of 
a  pioneering  life  among  savage  races  of  men.  A  request, 
therefore,  came  from  head-quarters  that  he  would  revisit 
his  native  land.  In  his  uncertainty  of  the  future,  he 
replied  to  the  Secretary's  letter  conveying  the  wdsh  of 
the  Committee  :  "  I  shall  obey  your  summons  as  soon 
as  I  can.  Certainly  I  cannot  leave  before  the  28tli 
Feb.  (1863),  and  then  my  foolish  heart  asks,  Who  is  to 
care  for  this  land  ?     But  this  is  weakness,  if  not  worse 


124  ALFRED   SAKEE. 

The  cause  is  God's,  and  if  He  calls  me  away  He  can 
take  care  of  it,  either  by  me  or  by  some  other  means. 
Only  let  me  see  my  duty  in  the  matter,  and  then  reason 
and  command  both  say,  '  Go  forward.'  The  God  of  all 
grace  comfort  your  heart  with  strong  hope  and  faith." 

He  felt  it,  however,  necessary  that  he  should  remain, 
if  possible,  till  the  return  of  the  Eev.  E.  Smith,  who 
was  then  on  a  brief  visit  to  England.  This  took  place 
on  the  29th  of  May,  and  early  in  July  Mr.  Saker  once 
more  left  his  work.  It  is  needless  to  encumber  these 
pages  with  controversies  which  are  now  forgotten,  but 
which  at  the  time  were  productive  of  much  personal 
distress.  He  was  heartily  welcomed  by  all  who  knew 
his  v/orth  and  the  nobleness  of  his  character,  and  not 
less  cordially  did  the  Committee,  after  "  full'  investiga- 
tion," give  expression  to  their  satisfaction  "at  the 
diligence,  the  zeal,  the  self-denial,  and  the  success  "  with 
which  he  had  planted  the  Christian  faith  in  new  fields, 
on  a  barbarous  coast,  amidst  wild  uncultured  tribes,  and 
founded  "  a  Christian  colony  whence  civilisation  and  the 
Gospel  may  spread ; "  and  all  achieved  "  in  the  midst  of 
perils  b)''  sea  and  land,  among  savages  thirsting  for  his 
blood,  or  by  their  spells  hoping  to  destroy  his  life." 


CHAPTER    XIII. 

Tersevering  Toil,  18G4— 18G9. 

It.  SAKER  was  much  refreshed  and 
invigorated  by  his  year's  sojourn  in 
England,  and  l)y  the  Christian  inter- 
course he  enjoyed  in  the  numerous 
deputation  visits  he  paid  to  the 
churches.  On  the  21st  of  September,  1SG4,  a  deeply  in- 
teresting farewell  service  was  held  in  Bloomsbury 
Chapel,  at  which  the  Rev.  Q.  W.  Thomson  was  also  set 
apart  for  the  service  of  Christ  in  Africa.  With  Mrs. 
Saker  and  her  three  daughters,  the  two  missionaries 
went  on  board  the  mail  steamer  at  Liverpool  on  the 
following  Saturday.  On  the  1st  of  October  Mr.  Saker 
writes  from  Madeira  to  the  Rev.  F.  Trestrail : — "  We 
arc  quietly  at  anchor  here.  Our  passage  has  been  one 
of  some  discomfort,  but  of  much  mercy,  and  we  are  all 
in  health  and  looking  forward  to  our  future  run  as  one 
of  peace  and  pleasure.  We  left  Liverpool  with  fine 
weather,  which  continued  all  the  Sabbath,  and  we 
enjoyed  an  hour's  public  worship  in  the  saloon.  On 
Monday  the  wind  increased,  making  it  difficult  t<j  move 
about.  It  was  worse  on  Tuesday.  On  Wednesday  it 
increased  to  a  strong  gale.  Thursday  morning  it  mode- 
rated, and  continued  improving  to  last  evening,  when 
we  all  assembled  on  deck.  At  midnight  we  made  the 
island,  and  came  to  anchor  at  daylight.     We  are  now 


12G  ALFRED   SAKEE. 

anticipating  a  day's  enjoyment  on  shore  witli  our  friends. 
Affectionate  remembrances  from  Mrs.  S.  and  our  girls  ; 
also  from  Mr.  Thomson."  From  this  j)oint  to  Sierra 
Leone  the  voyage  was  most  pleasant,  and,  calling  at 
several  ports  on  the  way,  intercourse  was  enjoyed  with 
jnauy  Christian  friends.  Writing  on  the  13th  of  October 
from  Sierra  Leone,  Mr.  Saker  says  : — "  The  few  hours  at 
that  lovely  place,  Madeira,  will  not  soon  be  forgotten. 
AVe  had  a  short  run  on  shore  at  Teneriffe,  but  the  rain 
made  it  unpleasant.  At  Gambia  we  spent  a  few  hours 
with  the  good  Wesleyan  brother  who  is  there  labouring 
faithfully,  but  whose  health  is  fast  failing.  And  now 
here  also  are  we  tasting  the  joy  of  Christian  society. 
At  Madeira  it  was  with  the  Presbyterians ;  at  Gambia, 
with  Wesleyans ;  and  here,  with  Episcopalians.  And 
yet,  in  all,  spiritual  life  is  the  same,  and,  but  for  some 
external  manifestations  that  are  apart  from  Christian 
life,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  point  to  differences. 
How  glorious,  how  precious,  is  this  onenesa  of  life  in 
Christ.  May  the  day  soon  dawn  when  the  Saviour's 
prayer  may  be  fulfilled — '  that  they  all  may  be  one.'  " 

The  last  fourteen  days  of  the  voyage  were  not  so 
X^leasant  as  the  earlier  portion  of  it.  Many  days  were 
wet,  and  the  rains  continued  for  some  days  after  their 
arrival  at  Cameroons,  which  took  place  on  the  29th 
of  October.  "  I  am  very  thankful,"  says  Mr.  Saker,  in 
conclusion,  "  that  we  are  all  preserved  and  brought 
safely  to  our  distant  home,  and  that  we  meet  our 
brethren,  our  friends,  and  our  (school)  children  in  so 
much  health  and  comfort.  May  this,  our  re-union,  be 
greatly  promotive  of  good  to  this  country,  to  each  other, 
and  also  glorifying  to  our  God." 

There  was  no  delay  in  recommencing  his  interrupted 


PERSEVERIXC!    TOIL.  127 

labours,  and  in  a  few  weeks  we  find  Mr.  Saker  report- 
ing that  lie  had  laid  tlie  foundation  of  a  new  brick 
chapel  at  Bethel,  that  his  translation  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment had  been  resumed,  and  Ruth,  jSTalium,  Habakkuk, 
and  Zephaniah,  for  school  purposes,  were  in  the  press. 
The  ser\'ices  at  all  the  stations  were  revived  with  fresh 
vigour.  His  new  iron  boat  had  been  put  together,  and 
was  already  employed  in  communicating  witli  Victoria 
and  in  visiting  the  outlying  trilies  among  which  evan- 
gelistic etlbrts  had  been  or  were  about  to  be  commenced. 
BrieHy,  he  announces  that  Mr.  Pinnock  had  had  the 
joy  of  baptizing  two  converts.  "  The  attendance  at 
Hickory  is  excellent.  At  John  A'kwa's  Town,  JMr. 
Fuller's  new  home,  very  bad.  Here  at  Bethel  we  are 
crowded.  At  Mr.  Pinnock's  place  we  can  sometimes 
get  a  few.  At  Bell's  Town  a  good  company.  We  wish 
for,  we  pray  for,  and  expect  a  large  increase.  Pray  for 
us  that  the  blessing  may  come." 

Sickness  and  death  soon,  however,  began  to  enter 
the  small  circle  of  devoted  labourers.  The  wife  of  Mr. 
Smith  fell  a  prey  to  disease  on  the  27th  of  January  (1865), 
after  a  brief  life  of  Christian  toil ;  while  Mr.  Thomson 
and  the  younger  members  of  Mr.  Saker's  family  were 
often  down  with  constantly  recurring  fevers.  Death 
also  bore  away  some  of  the  best  of  the  early  converts, 
who  died  witnessing  in  death,  as  in  life,  the  power  of 
the  Gospel  to  win  the  most  debased  of  mankind  to 
holiness,  and  fit  them  for  the  bliss  of  a  better  land. 

Thus,  under  sunshine  and  cloud,  in  weariness  often, 
disease  ever  haunting  his  steps,  in  the  midst  of  dangers 
that  no  human  foresight  could  avert,  this  heroic 
man  pursued  the  one  great  aim  of  his  life.  It  were 
a    repetition     of    the     like     actions    and    the    same 


128  ALFRED    SAKEK. 

xlevotedness,  to  follow  Mr.  Saker  througli  the  next 
four  years  in  which  he  was  permitted  to  pursue 
his  course.  Frequent  spells  of  bodily  sufiering  did 
not  prevent  the  achievement  of  the  oljjects  on  which 
his  heart  was  set.  War  for  a  time  might  disturb 
the  quiet  progress  of  his  work ;  his  helpers  might  fail, 
or  the  necessary  material  for  the  needed  buildings  might 
be  long  in  coming  to  hand ;  still,  with  unremitting  vigour, 
the  work  was  carried  on.  Chapels  and  school-houses 
and  mission-houses,  at_ Bethel,  at  Victoria,  at  Hickory, 
.and  at  Bell  Town,  were  planned  and  made;  repairs  of 
buildings,  falling  into  constant  decay  from  the  ravages 
of  insects  or  of  storms,  were  made ;  and,  above  all, 
the  care  of  the  churches,  the  training  of  the  young, 
the  translation  of  tlie  Scriptures,  the  preparation  of 
vocabularies  and  school  books,  and  the  exercise  of  an 
influence  deservedl}'  won  in  the  counsels  of  the  tribes, 
and  which  was  ever  used  for  the  preservation  of  peace, 
.civilisation,  and  good  government; — all,  and  every 
one  of  these  various  departments  of  missionary  labour 
received  ]\Ir.  Saker's  incessant  attention,  and  called 
forth  the  energies  of  his  ever  active  mind.  Exhausting 
and  depressing  as  is  the  climate  of  this  region  of  Africa, 
Mr.  Saker  filled  every  hour  with  some  needed  work. 

In  his  letters,  ]\Ir.  Saker  seldom  enters  into  much 
■detail.  For  the  most  part  he  describes  his  employ- 
ments in  a  few  short,  pithy  sentences.  He  was  too  busy 
to  give  the  time  to  composition,  or  to  dwell  on  the 
special  features  of  his  work.  A  few  excerpts  from  his 
papers  will  sufficiently  exhibit  the  variety  of  his  aims, 
and  his  mode  of  working. 

Thus,  on  the  31st  of  March  (1866)  he  says  :—"  The 
month  closes  heavily  on  us.     For  two  weeks  we  have 


CHAPEL  AT  HICKOEY  TOWN,   CAMEEOONS. 


PERSEVERING   TOIL.  129 

been  in  the  midst  of  war  and  its  consequences,  and  no 
hope  of  peace  yet.  Our  work,  our  journeys,  our  meet- 
ings are  all  more  or  less  impeded.  We  have  to-day  our 
usual  service,  and  to-morrow  we  hope  to  have  meetings 
in  all  the  hostile  towns.  Isaiah  is  finished.  This  week 
I  l>egin  a  new  work.  Our  chapel  will  have  been  quite 
silent  this  month.  The  men  have  been  compelled  to 
take  the  musket  and  sword  instead  of  the  trowel.  Our 
friend  Johnson  has  gone  at  last,  and  his  family  are  in 
deep  sorrow." 

Mr.  Horton  Johnson  was  Mr.  Saker's  first  convert, 
and  became,  under  his  instruction,  one  of  the  most 
useful  and  efficient  servants  of  the  Mission.  His  piety 
and  zeal  were  conspicuous,  and  his  loss  was  most 
se^'erely  felt  by  Mr.  Saker  and  the  native  church. 

Another  month  Mr.  Saker  writes :  "  Our  brethren 
have  taken  advantage  of  the  fine  weather,  and  have  been 
journeying.  This  has  left  me  all  the  work  of  the  station, 
besides  much  translation,  printing,  and  building  ;  six- 
teen hours  daily,  with  scarcely  time  to  eat.  It  will  be 
pleasant  for  you  to  know  that  I  have  gone  on  all  the 
month  without  suffering  from  it,  and  am  now  strong  for 
another  month  of  toil.  Our  war  here  is  not  at  an  end, 
but  may  break  out  at  any  moment.  The  madness  and 
savagery  of  both  sides  are  a  sad  interruption  to  us. 
But  what  are  our  disputes,  and  hatred,  and  slaughter 
to  that  of  the  European  Continent  [the  Franco-German 
War]  !  True,  both  are  alike  desperate,  both  are  the 
result  of  ambition  ;  but  there  they  separate — they  only 
unite  in  the  character  of  the  misery  it  entails.  Oh  I 
when  will  the  Kingdom  of  Peace  be  set  up  ?  " 

Again  he  writes  in  July,  18GG  :  "As  to  our  success 
in  our  toils  I  cannot  say  much.     I  have  just  finished 

9 


130  ALFRED    SAKER. 

Matthew,  almost  a  new  translation,  as  eveiy  verse  and 
every  word  has  been  revised,  and  the  best  possible 
representation  given  to  the  Greek  as  far  as  I  can  do  it. 
Indeed,  the  present  edition  is  doubtless  my  final  attempt 
to  give  the  people  the  true  Word  of  Life.  Some  ten 
years  liave  passed  since  the  Matthew  we  use  was  printed; 
during  that  time  my  knowledge  of  the  language  has 
been  steadily  increasing.  I  can  give  a  better  rendering 
now  than  I  could  then.  Some  five  chapters  of  Mark 
are  now  in  the  press,  and  I  shall  this  month  print  as 
far  as  my  paper  will  allow.  While  this  new  revision 
of  the  Gospels  is  going  through  the  press,  other  parts 
of  the  Old  Testament  are  to  keep  pace  with  it.  I  am 
busy  now  with  the  Book  of  Job.  While  I  await  paper 
from  you  I  must  attend  to  Mr.  Thomson's  dwelling. 
Certain  buildings  must  be  had.  For  instance,  all  the 
cooking  must  be  done  out  of  the  house.  Then  there 
are  sheds  for  goats,  fowls,  &c. ;  all  adds  to  the  expense. 
We  are  looking  forward  to  a  small  addition  to  our 
church  next  month ;  it  may  be  six  weeks.  There  are 
only  two  accepted  at  present." 

Mr.  Saker's  frequent  journeys  to  Victoria  often  ex- 
posed him  to  great  danger.  On  one  occasion  he  had  a 
narrow  escape  from  being  drowned.  A  sudden  rush  of 
wind  swayed  the  boom  of  his  little  schooner,  and  he  was 
swept  into  tHe  sea.  By  the  help  of  the  boatmen  he  was 
quickly  rescued,  but  had  to  sit  for  eight  hours  in  his  wet 
clothes. 

The  steady  and  continuous  growth  of  his  work 
more  than  compensated  him  for  all  his  toil  and  suffer- 
ings. The  work  of  the  Lord  prospered  under  his  hand. 
In  his  last  letter  of  the  year  1868  he  had  the  joy  to 
announce  the  virtual  completion  of  the  version  of  the 


PERSEVERINCJ  TOIL.  131 

Old  Testament  scriptures.  "The  year's  toil  is  over," 
he  writes.  "Tlirough  God's  manifold  mercy  I  have 
completed  the  translation  of  the  entire  Bible,  with  the 
■exception  of  a  few  chapters  of  Chronicles,  which  are  so 
nearly  like  parts  of  the  Books  of  Kings  that  I  omitted 
them  till  other  books  were  finished.  Those  chapters  I 
shall  not  write  till  next  rains,  as  in  the  months  of 
January  and  February  I  must  be  out  in  the  country 
and  towns  adjacent.  You  are  aware  tliat,  after  my  re- 
covery in  February  last,  I  sought  to  print  the  revised 
'  Acts  of  the  Apostles,'  and  then  the  Psalms.  This  done, 
my  health  emboldened  me  to  resolve  on  the  translation 
■of  all  the  remaining  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  I 
am  exceedingly  thankful  that  God  has  helped  me  to  go 
through  it,  althougii  I  have  suspended  nearly  every- 
thing else,  except  the  preaching,  for  this  one  work 
Some  books  have  given  me  great  trouble.  There  are 
•constructions  in  Ezekiel  which  T  cannot  even  now 
understand  sufficiently  to  render  into  intelligible  sen- 
tences ;  even  the  English  rendering  I  do  not  understand. 
If  a  few  things  in  the  '  Acts '  wearied  my  brain  for 
.hours,  Ezekiel  has  held  me  for  days.  Some  of  his  words 
I  must  read  and  read  again  ere  I  can  print. 

"Our  church  increases  slowly.  We  baptized  six; 
three  others  are  accepted,  and  two  from  Dido  Town,  the 
reward  of  the  faithful  toil  of  N'Kwe,  and  where  also  Mr. 
Smith  has  often  visited.  These  will  be  baptized  in  a 
few  days.  Our  congregation  increases  slowly  too. 
Sometimes  we  feel  oppressed  at  the  few  who  will  hear ; 
at  other  times  nearly  a  full  house  of  earnest  hearers  fills 
•one  with  joy  and  hope." 

Early  in  the  year  1869  Mr.  Saker  again  resolved  on  a 

visit  to  England.    His  colleagues  had  all  of  them,  in  the 

9* 


132  ALFEED    SAKE!;. 

three  or  four  years  previous,  been  compelled  to  return 
home  for  invigoration  and  health  ;  and  Mrs.  Saker  and 
her  children  had  been  absent  for  many  months.  Events 
to  be  presently  referred  to  also  rendered  it  expedient 
that  he  should  confer  with  the  Committee.  For  twenty- 
five  years  he  had  laboured  in  the  tropics,  and,  although 
his  indomitable  spirit  forbade  him  to  relinquish  the 
task,  it  was  yet  doubtful  whether  his  strength  would 
permit  or  justify  a  prolongation  of  that  intense  de- 
votion which  had  so  wonderfully  and  so  long  sustained 
him.  Leaving,  therefore,  his  colleagues,  now  well  inured 
to  the  work,  he  tore  himself  away,  and  in  the  month 
of  May  once  more  reached  his  native  land,  emaciated, 
pale,  feeble,  and  deeply  suffering,  yet  ready  at  a  moment's 
call  to  risk  all  for  Christ  and   or  the  souls  of  men. 


CHAPTER    XIV. 

Visit  of  the  Deputation,  1869 — 1870. 

WEXTY-FOUE    years    had    more  than 
elapsed  since  Mr.  Saker  commenced  bis 
missionary  life  among  the  Dualla  towns 
on  the  riiverCameroons.  Brief  visits  had 
been  paid  to  them  by  Dr.  Prince   and 
Mr.  Clarke  in  the  early  years  of  the  IMission ;  but  Mr. 
^aker  was  the  lirst  missionary  to  settle  there.     His  first 
dwelling,  as  we  have  seen,  was  a  native  hut,  without 
windows  or  outlet,  except  the  door,  raised  on  a  mound 
of  earth,  the  walls  formed  of  split  bamboo,  and  plaited 
palm  leaves   for  the  roof     The   peojjle   were   utterly 
barbarous,   without    knowledge    or  written    language, 
without  clothing  except  of  the  rudest  and  most  meagre 
kind,   unacquainted   Avith   the   arts  of    social    life,   oi 
with   the   customs  of  civilised     society,    except   sucii 
as    ministered    rather  to    their   degradation,   and  the 
indulgence    of     vicious     inclinations.      Food    fit    for 
Europeans  was  nearly  unattainable,  and  the  cultivation 
practised  by  the  people  was  so  scanty  and  wretched 
as  to  leave  them  for  a  large  part  of  the  year  dependent 
on  the  spontaneous  fruiis  of  the  ground.     Communica- 
tion with  England  was  unfrequent,  and  Mr.  Saker  and 
his  family  were  more  than  once  on  the  verge  of  starva- 
tion. 

Unaided,  except  by  his  devoted  wife  and   a  native 


134:  ALFRED   SAKEE. 

convert  or  two  from  Clarence,  Mr.  Saker  had  alone,  hv 
the  first  instance,  to  grapple  with  these  difficulties.  A 
better  house,  if  only  for  health's  sake,  had  to  be  erected. 
The  first  buildings  were  necessarily  of  wood,  and  it 
was  the  perishable  nature  of  this  material  that  led  Mr. 
Saker  subsequently  to  attempt  the  manufacture  of 
bricks.  By  degrees,  the  converts  and  others  of  the 
people  were  taught  the  use  of  the  hammer,  the  chisel, 
and  the  plane  ;  the  moulded  clay  was  burnt,  and  a 
house  of  enduring  materials  was  built.  Gradually  and 
slowly  the  permanent  buildings  in  which  the  work  of 
the  Mission  was  carried  on  were  constructed  from  Mr.. 
Saker's  designs,  and  erected  under  his_incessant  super- 
vision. 

But  this  went  on  not  at  one  station  only.  At  Dido's 
Town,  at  Bell  Town,  at  John  A'kwa's  Town,  at  Hickory 
or  Morton ville,  more  or  less  of  this  beneficent  work 
was  accomplished ;  and,  last  of  all,  a  permanent  town- 
ship with  its  laws  and  regulations  was  established 
on  Amboises  Bay ;  a  mission  chapel  and  residence 
for  the  missionary  were  erected,  and  assistance  was 
given  to  the  colonists  to  establish  themselves  in  their 
new  home,  where  freedom  to  worship  God  and  perfect 
liberty  were  to  the  fullest  extent  secured  and  enjoyed. 

But  if  the  achievement  of  these  varied  results 
absorbed  a  great  deal  of  time,  we  have  seen  that  the 
more  direct  duties  of  a  missionary's  life  were  not 
neglected.  Every  available  moment  was  consecrated  to 
the  acquisition  of  the  language, in  reducing  it  to  a  written 
form,  and  in  the  employment  of  the  press  to  furnish  the 
people  with  the  Scriptures  and  other  useful  books. 
Many  days  and  weeks  were  spent  in  itineracy,  in  order 
that  the  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  might  be  given  to  the 


VISIT   OF   THE   DEPUTATION.  135 

tribes  dwelling  on  the  hi'jjher  reaches  of  the  river,  and 
yet  farther  into  the  interior ;  while  the  fruits  of  his 
earnest  ministry  at  the  stations  were  gathered  into 
schools  and  congregations.  All  had  to  be  effected  in 
spite  of  frequent  sickness  and  necessary  absences,  the 
hostility  of  some  of  the  tribes,  and  the  wearing  away 
of  both  physical  and  mental  energies  in  the  miasmatic 
atmosphere  of  the  deadly  Western  Coast  of  Africa.  One 
missionary  after  another  had  come  and  gone,  some  to 
the  rest  of  G-od,  others  driven  away  by  the  latalities 
that  await  all  who  sojourn  there. 

At  the  time  of  which  we  now  write  (18G9)  there  re- 
mained, of  all  the  devoted  men  who  had  consecrated  their 
lives  to  the  Mission  besides  Mr.  Saker,  only  the  two  young 
brethren,  Mr.  Robert  Smith  and  Mr.  Q.  W.  Thomson 
from  England,  and  Mr.  Joseph  FiOler  and  Mr.  Pinnock 
from  Jamaica.  To  the  deep  distress  of  Mr.  Saker,  there 
had  arisen  during  the  last  few  years  much  diversity  of 
judgment  between  him  and  them,  and  which  for  a  sliort 
time  seemed  to  threaten  the  existence  of  the  Mission 
itself.  Correspondence  and  forbearance  had  alike  failed 
to  restore  harmony.  At  length,  the  Committee  of  the 
Society  deemed  it  necessary,  once  for  all,  to  make  an 
investigation  upon  the  spot  into  the  alleged  grounds  of 
complaint.  For  this  purpose,  in  the  autumn  of  the 
year,  the  Committee  requested  me  to  accompany  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Saker  on  their  return. 

Accordingly,  with  my  beloved  wife,  and  in  the  com- 
pany of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Saker  and  their  daughter  Emily, 
I  sailed  from  Liverpool  in  the  steamship  Athenian. 
The  first  two  days  of  tlie  voyage  were  stormy,  but  the 
clouds  dispersed,  and  the  rest  of  the  way  the  sea  was 
calm  and  the  journey  uneventful.     Vv'e  landed  at  Bethel 


136  ALFRED   SAKER. 

Station,  King  A'kwa's  town,  on  the  7th  of  December,  in 
Jiealth  and  safety.  Daring  the  month  that  I  was  per- 
mitted to  remain,  my  time  was  wholly  occupied  with 
the  questions  that  had  brought  me  to  Cameroons,  and  I 
had  but  few  opportunities  for  journeying  beyond  the 
area  occupied  by  the  brethren  in  their  daily  toil.  I  was 
very  soon  convinced  that  the  alienation  of  feeling  and 
contrariety  of  action,  which  were  soon  made  painfull}' 
apparent  to  me,  sprang  chiefly,  if  not  altogether,  from  a 
diversity  of  judgment  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  Mission. 
The  younger  brethren  were  of  opinion  that,  while  a 
certain  amount  of  secular  work  in  putting  np  buildings 
and  keeping  them  in  repair  was  requisite,  too  much 
time  and  attention  had  been  given  to  them  by  Mr. 
Saker,  to  the  detriment  of  the  more  spiritual  part  of  tlie 
work.  By  an  unfortunate  concurrence  of  circumstances, 
these  differences  had  acquired  an  importance  altogether 
unanticipated.  In  1863  the  home  Committee  had  given 
power  to  a  local  Committee  of  all  the  missionaries  on 
the  spot  to  meet,  as  often  as  might  seem  desirable,  to 
discuss  and  decide,  subject  to  their  approval,  all  questions 
of  interest,  both  secular  aud  relig  iou?,  affecting  the  wel- 
fare of  the  Mission.  This  arrangement  came  into  opera- 
tion iu  186-4,  but,  before  the  end  of  that  year,  the 
removal  of  all  the  senior  brethren  by  death,  or  from  othsr 
causes,  had  left  the  management  of  these  matters  in  the 
hands  of  the  younger  men  mentioned  above.* 

Mr.  Saker  soon  found  himself  alone  and  unsupported 
hi  the  councils  of  this  Committee.  It  is  unnecessary  to 
enter  into  any  minute  detail  of  the  events  that  followed. 

*  Mr.  Thomson  only  arrived  in  Africa  at  the  end  of  the  year 


VISIT   OF   THE   DEPUTATION.  137 

It  was,  to  say  the  least,  unfortunate.  The  discussions  that 
arose,  and  the  resistance  he  met  with,  gave  intense  pain  to 
the  senior  member  of  the  Committee,  and  after  a  short  time 
he  withdrew  from  its  deliberations,  continuing  to  pursue 
the  course  which  the  home  Committee,  on  a  previous 
occasion,  had  declared  to  be  "  necessary  to  the  well- 
being  of  the  Mission."  It  can  surprise  no  one  that  'Sh- 
Haker  should  decline  to  allow  his  actions  to  be  judged, 
and  his  views  of  what  was  necessary  for  '''the  well-being 
of  the  Mission"  to  be  canvassed,  in  an  adverse  sense,  by 
brethren  who  were  so  much  his  juniors  in  age,  in  experi- 
ence, in  knowledge  of  missionary  atfairs,  and  in  acquaint- 
iince  with  the  people.  They  were  zealous, assiduous  in  the 
discharge  of  the  duties  they  had  undertaken,  but  had 
only  a  limited  acquaintance  with  the  severe  toil  which 
had  secured  the  advantages  they  now  enjoyed.  Mr. 
Saker,  too,  was  by  natural  constitution  reserved  in 
speech,  apt  to  be  silent  when  resisted,  and  to  retire  into 
himself  when  no  readiness  was  shown  to  accept  his 
conclusions,  or  to  act  with  him  in  furtherance  of  his 
plans.  Nor  could  he  tolerate  any  lack  of  industry  or 
zeal.  Ever  himself  fighting  against  the  debilitating 
<itfects  of  the  climate,  he  did  not,  perhaps,  make  sufficient 
allowance  for  weaker  natures  that,  as  he  thought,  too 
easily  succumbed  to  their  power. 

It  is  due  to  Mr.  Saker  that  his  views  on  the  subject 
referred  to  should  be  given.  Writing  to  me  in  June, 
1870,  he  says : — "  As  to  secular  work,  what  is  it  if 
rightly  looked  at  ?  That  which  I  have  done  I  look  at 
as  a  portion  of  my  higliest  honour.  In  all  mechanical 
knowledge,  I  have  not  had  to  give  a  moment's  study  ; 
and  what  is  it  to  me  if  I  find  a  nation  in  utter  ignorance 
of  all  common  arts  ?     I  point  out  to  them  a  better  way 


138  ALFRED   SAKER. 

of  labour,  a  word  here,  a  five  minutes'  handling  of  tool 
there — all  this  is  far  less  than  what  others  have  given 
to  idle  gossip.  Then,  on  buildings  for  the  Mission ; 
where  would  we  all  have  been  if  still  confined  to  the 
frail,  sickly  huts  of  the  heathen  ?  Deaths  among  us 
have  diminished  in  proportion  to  a  better  housing,  and 
how  can  we  get  better  houses  but  by  personal  labour  ? 
persevering  labour,  and  with  a  double  object — to  secure 
a  healthy  dwelling,  with  instruction  to  the  natives, 
young  and  old,  to  go  and  do  likewise.  This,  it  is  said,, 
is  all  very  well,  but  it  has  been  to  the  neglect  of  the 
work  of  a  missionary.  That  means  spiritual  work,  as 
they  would  express  it.  "With  such,  the  true  work  of  the 
missionary  is,  it  seems,  to  go,  book  in  hand,  under  a  tree 
here  and  a  shed  there,  and  preach  to  the  people.  With 
me  the  work  has  ever  appeared  in  a  different  light.  It  is 
to  go  to  the  man  in  his  house,  to  sympathise  in  his 
sorrows  and  cares,  to  aid  him  to  think  of  a  better 
condition  and  of  the  means  to  attain  it.  Then,  when 
liis  attention  has  been  gained,  to  speak  of  that  higher 
life  which  we  have  lost,  and  which  the  loving  hand  of 
God  will  give  us  again,  if  we  will  hear  Him. 

"  Who,  my  dear  brother,  is  to  measure  the  value  of 
such  a  simple  lesson  given  from  one  heart  to  another 
lieart,  from  a  soul  in  light  to  a  soul  in  darkness  ?  And 
what  if  such  a  lesson  be  given  by  showing  a  better  way 
of  planting  and  building  ?  I  know  that  this  method 
has  no  Mat :  there  is  no  noise,  but  I  know  there  are 
great  results.  In  all  places  where  God  has  permitted 
me  to  labour,  the  first  efforts  have  in  part  passed  away, 
but  now  we  can  get  a  settled  congregation.  Yet,  while 
there  are  heathen  around  us,  the  work  must  go  on  from 
house  to  house,  and  from  heart  to   heart,  if  it  is  to- 


VISIT   OF  THE  DEPUTATION.  139' 

succeed.  To  me  it  has  ever  been  that  the  spiritual 
work  is  to  get  at  the  heart  of  the  individual  man.  How 
it  is  done  I  don't  care  a  pin.  The  Master  wrought  so ;  the 
apostles  in  their  various  modes  so  worked,  but  still  using 
the  public  assemblies  when  they  could,  as  on  the  Mount, 
in  an  upper  room,  on  Mar's  Hill,  or  by  the  waterbrook, 
where  prayer  was  often  offered." 

All  must  feel  that  is  a  sutticient  and  forcible  vindica- 
tion of  Mr.  Saker's  methods  of  operation.  It  needs  no 
comment.  It  is  complete,  and  requires  no  further 
explanation. 

But,  in  connection  with  Mr.  Saker's  secular  labours,  it 
was  also  affirmed  that  there  had  been  much  Avaste.  and 
even  extravagance.  With  regard  to  this  point,  I  may 
be  permitted  to  quote  the  observations  I  addressed  to 
the  Committee  : — "  Doubtless  some  mistakes  have  been 
made,  as  was  inevitable  through  the  novelty  of  the  cir- 
cumstances. Experiments  were  tried  which  could  not 
have  been  done  without  expense.  Some  instances  were 
mentioned  to  me  which  were  evidently  nothing  more 
than  diflerences  of  judgment  between  Mr.  ISaker  and 
the  local  board ;  the  latter  judging  that  to  be  wasteful 
which  did  not  meet  witli  their  approval.  But  it  must 
be  remembered  that  Mr.  Saker  found  nothing  to  his 
hand ;  he  had  to  plan,  to  conceive,  to  construct  every- 
thing, with  few  or  no  resources  on  the  spot.  After  the 
fullest  consideration  I  could  give  to  these  adverse  state- 
ments, and  after  inspecting  the  presumed  evidences  of 
this  waste,  it  is  my  deliberate  judgment  that,  while  in 
some  cases  the  statements  have  been  exaggerations,  in 
others,  when  the  destructive  effects  of  climate  are  con- 
sidered, the  interruptions  occasioned  by  illness,  the 
thefts  of  the  native  population,  the  slow  and  inadequate 


i40  ALFKED   SAKER. 

workmanship  of  the  men  Mr.  Saker  has  had  to  instruct, 
the  delay  arising  from  want  of  materials  to  finish  the 
work,  and  for  which  resort  must  be  had  to  the  stores  and 
workshops  of  England,  Mr.  Saker  has  done  his  best,  has 
never  wilfully  wasted  the  Society's  property,  and  has 
not  been  guilty  of  extravagance.  On  the  contrary,  I 
marvel  at  the  amount  of  work,  both  secular  and  religious, 
accomplished  in  the  twenty-four  years  of  Mr.  Saker's 
toil.  He  has  exhibited  an  endurance,  a  devotedness  in 
the  ]\Iaster's  service,  an  heroic  struggle  with  perils  and 
difficulties  on  every  hand,  which  few  missionaries  arc 
called  to  exercise,  and  which  his  successors  will  not 
have  to  encounter.  I  should  be  unfaithful  to  my  con- 
victions if  I  were  not  -anew  to  commend  Mr.  Saker  to 
the  fullest  confidence  of  the  Committee,  or  to  speak  of 
him  as  among  the  greatest  of  modern  missionaries  of 
the  Cross." 

During  my  stay  I  was  able  to  visit  all  the  stations 
occupied  by  the  brethren.  My  last  visit,  in  the  com- 
pany of  my  dear  wife  and  Mi*.  Saker,  was  to  Victoria. 
Two  days  were  occupied  in  the  voyage  there  and  back, 
in  an  open  boat,  protected  l3y  an  awning  from  the 
scorching  sun.  The  crew  consisted  of  four  Cameroons 
men  ^  (Christians)  and  four  Kroo  boys.  It  was 
■early  morning  when  we  started,  and,  the  moon  being 
near  her  full,  it  was  very  light.  Partly  rowing  and 
partly  under  sail,  about  eight  o'clock  we  entered  one  of 
the  creeks  which  unite  the  Cameroons  and  Bimbia 
rivers.  It  was  a  beautiful  pull  among  the  mangrove- 
trees  which  grew  in  profusion  at  the  water's  edge,  while 
the  Bimbia  mountains,  which  constitute  the  lower  ranges 
of  the  great  Cameroons  mountain,  added  grandeur  to  the 
scene.     The  necessity  of  reaching  Amboises  Bay   by 


VISIT   OF   THE   DErUTATK)X.  141 

daylight  would  not  allow  us  when  passing  Bimbia  t&- 
seek  an  interview  with  King  William,  whose  house 
stands  on  an  eminence  a  short  distance  from  the  river. 
Leaving  the  river  for  the  sea,  we  weathered  two  or 
throe  promontories,  and  crossed  the  mouth  of  Man-of- 
War  Bay.  The  coast  scenery  was  very  line.  It  was 
rocky,  consisting  of  masses  of  basalt  and  trap,  covered 
with  fine  timber  to  the  water's  edge,  where  the  sea 
broke  in  wild  surf.  The  shore-hills  were  backed  by 
lofty  mountains,  and  could  we  have  seen  the  great  peak^ 
wiiioh  obstinately  clothed  itself  with  clouds  and  fog 
during  nearly  the  whole  time  of  our  stay,  the  scenery 
would  have  exhibited  its  grandest  and  noblest  forms. 
We  caught  the  faintest  glimmer  of  the  mountain's  shape 
and  magnitude,  only  sufficient  to  intensify  our  disap- 
pointment. About  four  o'clock  we  rounded  the  island 
of  Mandoleh,  at  the  entrance  of  Amboises  Bay,  and 
Victoria  lay  before  us  on  its  little  clearing,  and  its  few 
houses  scattered  along  the  shore.  Mr.  Saker  pointed 
out  to  us  the  chapel,  Mr.  Pinnock's  house,  Mr.  Wilson's, 
and  other  cottages  erected  by  the  people.  These  friends 
came  down  to  the  beach  to  receive  us,  as  the  surf  drove 
our  boat  on  shore  amidst  the  sprinkling  of  the  spray. 

Mr.  Pinnock's  house  became  our  home  during  our 
brief  stay.  We  found  the  colony  to  consist  of  some 
200  persons,  all  of  whom  were  under  the  efficient  in- 
struction of  Mr.  Pinnock  ;  either  in  the  day-school, 
which  he  personally  taught,  or  in  his  Bible-class 
and  Sunday-school,  or  in  the  sanctuary.  A  few 
of  the  mountain  people  had  lately  settled  in  the 
town,  and  a  village  had  been  formed,  about  a  mile 
from  Victoria,  of  the  fishing  population  inhabiting  the 
islands  of  the  bay.   Here  a  school-house  had  been  built 


142  ALFRED   SAKER. 

and  the  village  was  regularly  visited  by  the  pastor  or 
some  of  his  members.  Most  of  the  houses  of  the  nascent 
colony  were  well-built  of  timber,  and  some  progress  had 
been  made  in  boat-building.  I  saw  a  schooner  of  con- 
siderable size  on  the  stocks,  nearly  ready  for  launcliing. 
Frequent  intercourse  was  kept  up  with  Fernando  Po, 
where  the  produce  of  the  colonists  found  a  ready 
market,  and  from  whence  children  of  former  members 
of  the  church  came  to  the  school  under  Mr.  Pinnock's 
care.  I  was  greatly  pleased  with  the  neatness  of  the 
people,  their  industry,  their  love  for  their  minister  and 
for  the  house  of  God.  Two  days  were  passed  in  pleasant 
intercourse  with  the  people,  and  we  left  with  regret  this 
fair  scene  of  hopeful  toil. 

On  the  morning  of  the  day  following  our  return  to 
Bethel,  my  dear  wife  was  suddenly  called  away  to  her 
heavenly  home.  The  exposure  of  the  previous  days 
and  the  great  heat  brought  on  an  apoplectic  attack, 
which,  without  any  warning,  robbed  me  of  her  sweet 
companionship.  The  prostration  which  followed  her 
decease,  and  the  fever  which  seized  me  during  the  first 
days  of  January,  prevented  the  fulfilment  of  my  inten- 
tion to  make  several  excursions  into  the  interior.  But 
the  main  object  of  my  visit  was  accomplished,  and  I 
had  the  pleasure  of  sesing  relations  of  friendship  and 
co-operation  re-established  and  harmony  restored. 

This  chapter  will  be  best  closed  with  a  few  extracts 
from  the  report  which  I  presented  to  the  Committee, 
"  It  is  with  more  than  pleasure  that  I  state 
that  all  the  brethren  sustain  cheerfully  the  hardships 
which  this  work  entails,  and  endure  with  manly  and 
Christian  patience  personal  sufferings  which  fall  to  the 
lot  of  few  missionaries  in  any  part  of  the  mission  field. 


VISIT   OF   THE  DEPUTATION.  14.'> 

For  the  Lord's  sake,  for  the  sake  of  the  salvation  of  these 
savage  and  barbarous  tribes,  they  gladly  encounter 
numerous  perils,  and  fearlessly  meet  the  dangers  which 
a  residence  among  uncivilised  people  involves,  Tliey 
are  worthy  of  the  churches  that  sent  them  fortli,  and 
of  the  support  rendered  them  by  the  Society  wliose 
missionaiies  they  are. 

"  The  effect  of  these  various  labours  in  King  A'kwa'.s 
town  is  very  visible,  not  only  in  the  improved  dwellings 
which  are  springing  up,  and  in  the  introduction  of  the 
customs  of  civilised  life  among  the  people,  but  in  the 
abolition  of  the  sanguinary  practices  which  formerly 
prevailed  ;  in  the  evident  decay  of  superstition  ;  in  the 
influence  of  the  missionary  in  the  counsels  of  the  chiefs ; 
in  the  numbers  wlio  attend  the  house  of  God ;  in  the 
estimation  in  which  the  missionary  and  the  converts  are 
generally  held ;  and  in  the  desire  of  the  people  for 
instruction. 

"  The  tribes  living  on  the  higher  reaches  of  the  river, 
as  well  as  others  nearer  to  the  sea,  are  <|uite  ready  to 
welcome  a  missionary  to  reside  among  them.  The  only 
thing  that  hinders  is  the  miserable  jealousy  of  the  tribes 
among  whom  our  brethren  now  labour,  who  fear  that 
the  residence  of  a  missionary  in  these  inner  regions 
would  in  some  way  injure  their  monopoly  of  the  trade, 
which  is  every  day  increasing  in  importance ;  and  in 
these  foolish  ideas  they  are  encouraged,  I  am  sorry  to 
say,  by  some  of  the  European  traders  who  frequent  the 
river.  On  more  than  one  occasion  force  has  been  used 
by  the  natives  to  prevent  the  missionary  from  settling 
among  other  tribes;  but  it  may  be  hoped  that  their 
prejudices  will  ere  long  be  removed,  or  that  our  brethren 
may  be  able  to  seize  some  favourable  opportunity  to 


144  ALFRED    SAKER. 

fulfil  the  wishes  of  these  more  distant  people,  though  it 
may  for  a  time  involve  an  entire  separation  from  the 
.stations  now  occupied. 

'•  It  now  only  remains  that  I  should  record  in  the 
warmest  terms  my  thankfulness  for  the  welcome  wkicli 
my  l)eloved  wife  and  myself  received  from  the  brethren 
and  their  partners,  their  readiness  to  supply  me  with 
the  information  I  required,  the  solicitude  displayed  by 
all,  and  especially  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Saker,  with  whom  I 
took  up  my  residence,  for  our  comfort  and  health,  and, 
above  all,  for  the  tender  sympathy  shown  me  by  the 
lirethrcn  in  the  great  sorrow  that  befell  me.  If  I  left 
in  Africa  with  irrepressible  grief  the  remains  of  one 
most  dear  to  me,  my  companion  and  helper  in  all  my 
travels  in  the  service  of  the  Society,  I  have  nevertheless 
come  away  with  feelings  of  gratitude  to  God  for  the 
work  which  His  servants  have  wrought,  and  for  the 
success  which  He  has  graciously  given  them.  The 
African  ^Mission  abundantly  deserves  the  support  of  the 
friends  of  the  Society,  and  is  one  that,  with  God's 
blessing,  will  largely  repay  the  toil  expended  upon  it." 


NEW  MISSION-  HOUSE,   VICTOEIA,   CALLED   "  BROOK  MOUNT." 


CHAPTER    XV. 

The  Last  Days  in  Africa,  1870— 187G. 

HE  last  seven  years  of  Mr.  Saker's  mis- 
sionary life  in  Africa  were  years  of 
steady  and  nnceasing  toil,  often  inter- 
rupted by  sickness,  and  only  varied  by  a 
short  visit  to  England  in  1874.  The  details  of  his  daily 
•work  difier  little  [from  those  already  given,  and  it  will 
suffice  to  select  a  few  incidents  that  have  some  fresh- 
ness or  special  interest. 

Notwithstanding  frequent  exhaustion  and  growing 
weakness,  he  still  pressed  on  his  translations  and  labours 
at  the  press.  On  the  23rd  of  February,  1872,  he  announces 
the  completion  of  the  task  he  had  set  himself  in  the 
earliest  days  of  his  career.  "  I  write  you  a  line  to-day 
with  sensations  of  great  joy.  The  great  work  of  years 
is  now  completed,  and  I  feel  as  a  bird  long  iuiprisoned, 
liberated  at  last,  with  permission  to  fly  and  enjoy  the 
glories  of  an  open  sky.  I  feel  too  much  joy  to  express 
it  in  a  few  words.  While  I  write  this,  do  not  think 
that  the  labour  is  all  over  and  gone.  There  is  yet 
much  labour  before  us.  Nevertheless,  the  victory  is 
gained.  The  great  work  of  getting  into  type  this  price- 
less boDu  to  this  country  is  now  completed.  The  last 
sheet  of  the  Sacred  Volume,  in  good  and  readable  type, 
is  before  me.  There  yet  remains  the  task  of  reprinting 
euch  books  as  are  much  needed,  and  then  binding  the 

10 


146  ALFEED    SAKEFv. 

whole  in  one  volume.  Our  Bible  will  then  be  in  three- 
volumes —  the  Pentateuch,  this  volume,  Joshua  to 
Malachi,  and  the  New  Testament.  This  is  mechanical 
toil,  and  will  be  done  by  my  worthy  helpers.  Having 
thus  prepared  a  tool,  my  own  work  henceforth  will 
consist  chiefly  in  preparing  a  body  of  young  men  and 
women  to  use  it  well.  Four  young  men  are  now 
reading  with  me ;  two  are  already  preachers,  o.nd  the  two 
others  will,  I  hope,  begin  very  soon.  Then  there  are 
four  others,  younger,  who  are  studious,  working  both  at 
the  type  and  their  books.  I  have  hope  that  God  will 
call  them  also  into  His  vineyard.  These  are  in  hand  here. 
There  are,  beside  the  young  men  in  the  town,  members 
of  the  church  who  have  long  been  waiting  for  me  to 
give  them  lessons,  and  my  joy  is  not  small  that  hence- 
forth I  shall  have  time  to  help  them.  On  next  Sabbath- 
Day,  we  have  the  work  of  baptizing  again.  We  hope 
our  God  has  drawn  seven  others  to  Himself,  and  these- 
we  shall  baptize  and  receive  into  the  church." 

But,  although  the  translation  of  the  whole  Bible  into 
Dualla  was  finished,  he  gave  every  spare  moment  to  its 
revision.  Often  lying  on  his  bed,  strewed  with  his  books, 
unable  to  rise,  he  pursued  the  study  of  the  Divine 
records  in  the  originals,  noting  the  conclusions  that 
his  investigation  led  him  to  embrace.  Eeferring  to 
his  studies  in  one  of  his  letters,  he  says  (April  25th, 
1870),  "  I  have  been  deeply  interested  for  some  weeks 
past  in  the  writings  of  the  old  prophets.  "Would  that 
I  had  more  of  their  spirit.  The  more  I  look  at 
those  old  Hebrew  writings,  the  more  majestic  and 
amazing  they  appear ;  that  so  much  should  be  said  in 
such  few  words,  that  so  much  has  been  left  unsaid 
such  discrimination  can  only  be  Divine.    While  trans- 


THE   LAST   DAYS    IX    Al'lIICA.  147 

lilting,  I  have  often  had  to  pause,  heing  overwhehnecl 
with  the  revelation ;  and  now,  in  printing,  I  feel  again 
my  littleness,  and  am  but  a  babe." 

It  was  an  additional  cause  of  joy  to  Mr.  Saker  that  an 
American  missionary  from  the  Gaboon,  visiting  Came- 
roons  in  1875,  informed  him  that  his  Dualla  version 
of  the  Scriptures  was  perfectly  understood  l)y  the 
natives  of  that  part  of  the  coast, 

Tlie  continual  quarrels  and  wars  among  the  tribes, 
though  often  bringing  the  Mission  families  into  great 
peril,  stimulated  Mr.  Saker's  desire  to  spread  among 
them  the  gospel  of  peace.  "The  war,"  he  says  (writing 
in  November,  1872),  "  is  not  yet  over.  In  fact,  we 
know  not  what  will  be  spared  to-morrow.  Eifle  balls 
are  flying  about  us,  but  at  present  our  mission-house 
and  chapel  are  mercifully  spared."  Fearless  amidst 
every  danger,  he  busied  himself  in  repairing  the  damage 
thus  occasioned,  in  seeking  to  reconcile  the  combatants, 
and  in  devising  plans  for  the  extension  of  the  Gospel  in 
their  midst. 

The  gift  of  a  small  steam  launch,  by  a  valued  friend,  on 
his  visit  to  England  in  1874,  gave  hope  to  Mr.  Saker  that 
he  might  be  able  to  carry  out  the  wish  he  had  long 
cherished  of  visiting  the  towns  lying  in  the  various 
rivers  that  deliver  their  waters  to  the  Cameroons. 
Unexpected  delays  took  place  in  its  arrival.  "  I  have 
been  strongly  hoping,"  he  says  (July  17th,  1875),  "  that 
this  July  mail  would  have  brought  my  little  boat.  But 
I  must  wait  a  little  longer.  I  have  no  information 
respecting  it.  From  the  time  of  my  return  till  to-day, 
I  have  given  much  attention  to  evangelistic  labour 
around  us,  as  well  as  to  printing.  I  am  happy  to  say 
that  the  work  has  been  resumed  at  Bell  Town,  and  the 

10* 


148  ALFRED   SAKER. 

school  established.  At  Malimba  a  school  lias  been 
begun,  and  children  already  read  in  the  first-class  book, 
while  one  man  evidences  a  change  of  heart.  Others 
«,re  seeking  instruction.  The  more  distant  regions  are 
still  before  me,  like  the  land  of  Israel  to  ]\Ioses  when  on 
the  mountains  of  Moab.  Shall  I,  like  him,  be  forbidden 
to  enter  the  land  ?  I  have  waited  in  perfect  quiet, 
having  my  hands  full,  and  shall  find  employment  here 
if  detained.  But  I  long  to  do  something  more  before  I 
die.  My  general  health  is  good,  but  I  have  to  take  all 
possible  care,  for  the  foe  is  ever  on  the  watch  to  cast 
me  down.  Not  a  day  passes  but  I  hear  the  warning 
voice." 

As  the  letter  announcing  the  arrival  of  the  long-desired 
boat  is  very  characteristic,  showing  that  the  engineer 
of  Devonport  Dockyard  had  lost  none  of  his  early 
tastes  or  skill,  it  is  given  in  full.  The  date  is  November 
10th,  1875,  from  "  Old  Calabar"  :— "  Before  this  reaches 
you,  you  will  have  learnt  that  the  little  steam  yacht 
was  left  for  me  at  this  place,  and  that  one  of  the  traders 
kindly  lent  me  the  use  of  his  boat  to  visit  and  take 
•charge  of  it.  I  arrived  here  late  on  Friday  night,  the 
5th  inst.  Since  then  I  have  been  cleaning  and  finishing, 
for  the  engineers  of  the  mail  could  not  complete  all 
they  wished  on  account  of  time.  I  have  put  the  little 
vessel  on  the  beach,  and,  while  the  tide  was  out,  accom- 
plished all  that  was  needful  to  be  done  except  some 
rivetting  in  the  paddle  boxes,  for  which  I  need  a  forge. 
Last  evening  we  again  floated  her  into  deep  water,  and 
to-day  I  have  tested  the  engines.  At  high  water  I  shall 
begin  my  homeward  journey,  but  anchor  at  the  mouth 
of  the  river  all  night. 

"  It  is  a  small  thing  to  say  that  I  am  very  thankful 


THE   LAST  DAYS  IN   AFRICA.  141> 

to  receive  this  vessel  after  so  long  a  delay.  May  it  be 
a  consecrated  instrument  to  God's  glorious  work.  I 
feel  that  its  mission  is  one  and  simple — to  bear  the 
messenger  safely  and  speedily  to  his  distant  work." 

Between  tliis  date  and  the  10th  of  March  (187G),  Mr. 
Saker  made  three  journeys  in  his  little  steamer  ;  the  third 
was  one  of  intense  pain  and  grief.     Writing  under  date 
of  February  28th,  he  says  :  "  I  left  here  (Cameroons)  on 
the    17th.     The   next  morning  we    sought    to    enter 
our  eastern   river  for  Lungarsi,  but   a  tornado  debarred 
us.      Yetj    as    soon   as  possible,  we  steamed   on,   and 
managed  to  make  some  forty  miles  with  comfort.     The 
next  day  we  went  on  again,  but  were  soon  detained  by 
shallow  water.     We  waited  an  hour,  and  then  cleared 
the  bank.     Not  more  than  thirty  miles  of  progress  all 
day.     The  next  day  was  the  Sabbath.     Tried   in   the 
morning  to  reach  the  first  village  ;  found  the  water  too 
shallow,  so  took  the  small  boat  to  communicate  with 
the  people.     Judge  of  my  disappointment  in  finding 
the  village  to  contain  only  five  small  huts,  representing 
one  family,  and  that  a  recent  immigration  from  a  higher 
settlement.     The  former  people  all  cut  off  by  the  small- 
pox while  I  was  in  England. 

"By  the  night  tide  we  passed  the  bank  which  was  our 
hindrance  in  the  morning,  and  came  again  to  deep 
water.  Thence  onward,  and  at  nine  in  the  morning 
made  the  Butu  landing-place.  We  visited  the  people,, 
examined  the  school-house  ;  *  it  is  now  a  ruin.  It  was. 
abandoned  on  account  of  the  plague,  and  has  not  been 
used  since.  Here  1  found  all  the  old  families  gone. 
Two  young  men,  sons  of  the  former  chief,  welcomed  us, 

*  At  Malimba  ;  see  before,  p.  148. 


]50  ALFRED   SAKER. 

and  led  us  over  the  town,  sucli  as  it  is.  I  counted 
fifteen  bouses,  including  the  chief's  three.  At  a  later 
hour  I  walked  three-quarters  of  an  hour  through  the 
one-time  town  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  In  that  walk 
I  counted  five  huts,  with  two  new  ones  building.  I 
heard  of  yet  other  huts  if  I  would  walk  a  luile 
farther  on.  In  all  this  walk  the  spoor  of  the  hippo- 
potamus and  the  elephant  were  everywhere.  I  cannot 
describe  the  spiritless  life  of  these  few  poor  people. 
The  fearful  visitation,  cutting  off  such  multitudes,  is  so 
recent ;  stupefaction  and  powerlessness  seem  upon  all. 
We  found  some  of  the  children  alive  who  had  read  the 
first  class-book. 

"After  staying  with  these  people  four  hours,  we 
passed  a  mile  into  '  Kotto.'  It  was  here  at  Kotto  that 
my  heart  failed  me  ;  the  desolation  so  great,  so  recent ; 
I  met  a  man  of  years — the  chief.  With  him  I  walked 
over  the  ruins.  The  chief's  street  consists  now  of  nine 
separate  buildings.  Beyond,  street  after  street,  with 
houses  cast  to  the  ground.  In  many  streets  not  a  house 
left ;  the  whole  choked  with  dehris,  not  a  way  to  pass 
through.  Then  we  came  to  a  house — solitary.  It  was 
the  house  of  a  slave,  the  sole  representative  of  a  once 
powerful  clan.  Then  onward,  and  another  house — the 
home  of  a  woman,  the  only  survivor  of  a  large  family 
which  filled  three  streets.  Then  on  and  on,  a  lieart- 
rending  sight.  The  one-time  multitude  to  whom  I 
preached  the  good  news  of  the  Kingdom — where  are 
they? 

"  Sadly  I  walked  the  length  and  breadth  of  that  town. 
The  plantain  and  cocoa  in  luxuriant  growth,  and  no 
living  owner  ;  a  land  full  of  food,  and  the  eater  gone. 

"  I  met  in  my  walk  seven  men  beside  the  chief,  some 


THE   LAST   DAYS   IX   AFRICA.  151 

twenty  women  and  grown  girls,  perhaps  twenty-five 
•children.  Those  I  saw  and  those  I  heard  of  will  give  a 
popnlation  of  about  eighty  souls.  My  estimate  of  the 
population  on  my  former  visit  was  four  thousand  ! 

"  To  these  few  grown-up  yet  1  broken  men  and  women, 
what  could  I  say  ?  My  own  heart  was  dumb ;  an 
indescribable  awe  was  upon  me  ;  I  could  do  but  little 
beyond  commending  them  to  God  in  prayer. 

"  After  doing  what  we  could  at  Butu  and  Kotto  the 
IMonday  and  Tuesday,  we  took  the  high  water  in  the 
night,  and  passed  safely  over  the  banks  on  our  return. 
Daylight  came,  and  with  tide  and  steam  we  went  onward 
with  speed,  and  that  night  anchored  at  the  bar  of  the  river 
in  a  terrible  storm.  It  drifted  us  with  our  anchor  and  all 
our  chain  on  to  a  large  sand-bank,  and  nearly  over  it, 
and  left  us  so  high  that  we  could  only  float  off  at  nearly 
high  water.  Then  an  hour  and  fifteen  minutes  brought 
us  home,  thankful,  yet  sad.  The  w^ords  are  constantly 
welling  up  within  me,  '  I  was  dumb,  for  Thou  didst  it.' " 

Such  are  the  terrible  ravages  of  small-pox  when  it 
finds  a  nidus  among  an  uncivilised  people,  far  removed 
from  all  the  remedies  which  civilisation  can  supply. 
Many  a  town  on  the  coast  of  Africa  has  thus  l^een 
wasted  by  this  fatal  and  frightful  disease. 

From  this  time,  the  health  of  Mr.  Saker  steadily 
declined,  and  it  became  evident,  towards  the  close  of 
the  year,  that  his  shattered  condition  could  no  longer 
endure  the  fervid  heats  of  the  Torrid  zone.  One  more 
visit  to  the  interior,  to  the  south  of  Bethel,  was  paid  in 
the  month  of  June,  where  he  reports  that  he  met  with 
overflowing  hearers.  But  he  was  compelled  to  say, 
"  There  is  a  general  weakening  going  on.  Daily  I  feel 
that  the  tabernacle  is  dissolving  ;  hence  1  try  to  secure 


152  ALFRED   SAKER. 

every  hour  for  such  work  as  seems  imperatively 
demanded  of  me."  Thirty-two  years  of  labour  in  a 
deadly  climate,  and  the  unresting  toil  in  which  he  had 
exhausted  the  energies  of  a  frame  always  frail,  left  no 
alternative  if  his  life  were  to  be  prolonged  for  a  single 
day. 

After  his  visit  home  in  1874,  he  had  returned  to 
Africa  with  the  Eev.  J,  Grenfell,  a  young  man  of 
a  congenial  spirit  and  of  youthful  energy,  to  whom  he 
could  confide  the  well-being  of  his  beloved  people  at 
Bethel ;  while  at  Victoria  and  on  the  mountain  side,  Mr. 
Pinnock,  and  his  son-in-law,  Mr.  Thomson,  could  watch 
over  his  work  and  sustain  the  growing  colony  so  dear 
to  his  heart.  Mr.  Smith  had  died  in  the  month  of 
August,  in  the  prime  of  life  ;  but  Mr.  Joseph  Fuller  was 
admiraljly  fitted  to  supply  his  place  at  Hickory  and 
Dido  Town.  In  his  last  letter  to  the  Mission  House 
from  Africa,  dated  September  28th,  1876,  after  saying 
that  his  "health  has  been  failing  very  seriously,"  he 
adds  with  joy,  "  I  have  good  news  from  the  interior ; 
the  work  of  God  is  progressing  there.  Two  other  young 
men  will  leave  here  in  about  three  weeks  for  another 
place  where  they  are  needed.  Pray  excuse  more ;  my 
head  refuses  to  direct  my  pen."  The  end  of  this  heroic 
man's  career  in  Africa  had  come,  and  it  closed,  as  it  had 
begun,  with  the  one  absorbing  thought  and  effort  to 
gi^e  to  Africa  the  great  salvation. 

We  cannot  more  appropriately  bring  this  record  of 
an  earnest  missionary  life  to  a  close  than  by  giving 
Mr.  Saker's  own  account  of  the  work  in  which  he 
had  been  engaged,  as  narrated  in  a  private  letter  to  a 
friend : — 

"  I  cannot  describe  to  you  the  condition  in  which  I 


THE   LAST   DAYS    IX    AFKICA.  ISS*- 

fuund  this  whole  people.  A  book  they  had  not  seen ; 
the  commonest  implements  of  husbandry  and  tools  of 
all  kinds  were  unknown ;  civilisation,  with  all  its- 
appliances,  was  entirely  absent.  The  hut  for  dwelling, 
and  its  separate  shed  for  working,  were  in  some  respects 
objects  beautiful  to  sight,  and  in  their  formation  showed 
taste  and  ingenuity^.  Crockery,  too,  had  just  beere 
introduced  by  traders,  and  bartered  for  oil.  But  these 
formed  only  objects  for  inspection  and  admiration  to  those 
who  could  not  obtain  them ;  they  were  the  coveted 
possession  of  the  chiefs. 

"  I  brought  with  me  tools  to  make  my  own  dwelling. 
These  attracted  immediate  attention,  and  soon  several 
youths  learned  to  use  the  saw,  the  plane,  and  the  adze. 
The  want  of  tools  was  felt  by  numbers,  and  I  gave- 
away  much  to  meet  that  want.  Implements  of  hus- 
bandry, the  spade  and  the  hoe,  were  introduced.  Then  I 
taught  them  to  cut  the  large  timber  trees,  and  supplied 
the  cross-cut  and  the  pit  saw,  and  aided  them  in  sawing, 
till  they  could  do  it  alone.  I  taught  them  better  modes 
of  culture,  and  planted  ground  as  an  example.  I 
introduced  seeds  from  other  parts  of  the  coast  at  a' 
considerable  charge,  until  the  country  was  stocked  with 
the  sweet  potato.  And  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  a 
gradual  extension  of  cultivation,  and  much  less- 
suffering  from  want.  At  our  first  settlement  here,  the 
total  produce  from  the  land  did  not  exceed  three  months* 
consumption  for  the  year,  and  tliere  followed  months  of 
semi-starvation,  and  a  running  to  distant  places  to 
purchase  food  at  great  expense.  In  the  course  of  years- 
we  so  improved  that  in  some  things  there  is  now  a 
redundance. 

"In  teachiniT   these    men   A'arious   handicrafts    and 


154  ALFRED   SAKEE, 

Imsbandiy,  many  wants  were  created,  and,  except  from 
me,  there  was  no  means  of  meeting  those  wants.  Hence 
I  had  to  lend  tliem  tools,  and  nails,  hinges,  screws,  locks, 
■&c.,  &c.,  and  this  lending  was,  for  a  long  time,  no  better 
than  giving.  In  the  course  of  time,  and  when  the 
people  were  able  to  do  it,  I  demanded  a  payment  in 
produce,  and  accepted  such  a  price  as  each  was  able  to 
render.  This  also  passed  away,  and  now  for  a  long 
time  past  I  have  (except  in  needy  cases)  exacted  the 
full  value  of  tools  and  other  goods  supplied ;  and,  as  we 
live  chiefly  by  barter,  we  oft  maintain  our  large  family 
of  native  children  by  the  exchange  of  nails,  screws, 
hinges,  &c. 

"  For  all  such  expenditure  you  will  readily  sec  that 
the  Mission  funds  are  not  available,  and  the  attempt  to 
supply  the  want  was  a  heavy  drain  for  years ;  indeed, 
my  circumstances  were  for  years  on  a  level  with  the 
natives;  our  food  was  nearly  the  same;  but  we  were 
clothed  and  they  were  not. 

"  liecalling  thus  the  past,  my  heart  again  utters  its 
glad  thanks  to  those  friends  who  aided  me  in  the  heavy 
expenses  of  those  early  years.  Never  shall  I  forget  tlie 
relief  I  felt  when  a  friend  sent  me  £10  to  buy  seeds,  or 
in  any  other  way  helped  me  on — in  books,  too,  for  those 
who  learned  to  read  and  write,  and  in  class  and  copy- 
books. I  may  also  safely  say  that  the  many  reams  of 
note-paper  I  have  consumed  in  translations,  vocabu- 
laries, and  grammars,  friends  have  supplied  the  whole. 

"  Lest  I  weary  you,  I  will  now  cease  this  reference  to 
the  past." 

That  these  labours  bore  ample  fruit  in  conversions, 
iind  in  laying  broad  and  deep  the  foundations  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God  on  this  part  of  the  coast  of  Africa,  we 


THE    LAST   DAYS   IN   AFRICA.  loo 

have  abuiidaiitly  seen.  Mr.  Grenfell  has  assured  us 
that,  on  the  general  population  also,  Mr.  Saker's  exertions 
were  not  without  ample  reward.  When  a  palaver,  or 
native  council,  he  tells  us,  is  held  in  the  town,  "  the 
individual  against  whom  a  decision  is  given  often  refuses 
to  accept  the  verdict,  unless  the  native  pastor  or  one  of 
the  deacons  is  in  the  majority.  The  knowledge  that  an 
adverse  decision,  if  not  endorsed  by  some  of  the  Christian 
people,  will  be  appealed  against,  renders  the  palaver 
especially  attentive  to  their  opinions.  Culprits  have 
great  faith  in  the  uprightness  of  the  officers  of  the  church, 
and  feel  sure  that  their  judgment  will  be  tempered  by 
mercy.  Such  a  fact  speaks  volumes  for  the  power  for 
good  that  the  church  possesses.  Although  the  strife 
between  the  natives  and  the  traders  continues,  the 
Mission  premises  are  held  to  be  neutral  ground,  and  on 
Lord's-day  both  parties  assemble  in  that  home  of  peace, 
the  house  of  prayer." 

Thus,  step  by  step,  Christianity  and  civilisation  have 
l)een  planted,  and  the  severe  sufferings  of  Mr.  Saker's 
early  years  have  been  abundantly  repaid  in  the  improved 
condition  of  the  people  and  in  the  spread  of  Gospel  light. 
Much  yet  remains  to  be  done  to  banish  the  superstitions 
and  bad  habits  that  ages  of  ignorance  have  nurtured ; 
but  the  successors  of  Mr.  Saker  will  find  ready  to 
theii  hand  appliances  wdiich  were  vainly  sought  in  the 
early  stages  of  the  work.  The  gains  of  the  past  are 
proofs  that  the  Divine  blessing  has  not  been  withheld, 
and  are  moreover  pledges  that  greater  things  are  in  store 
to  reward  patient  well-doing  in  the  time  to  come. 

Mr.  Saker  finally  left  the  scene  of  his  conflicts  and 
successes  by  the  mail  of  November,  and  reached  his 
native  land  on  the  12th  of  December,  187G. 


CHAPTER   XVI. 

Closing  Days,   1877—1880. 

LETTER  dated  the  12th  of  December, 
1876,  and  written  as  the  ship  neared 
Liverpool,  announced  the  arrival  of  Mr. 
Saker.  "  Dear  brother,"  he  said,  "  Thus 
far  God  has  graciously  brought  us.  In 
an  hour  I  hope  to  land.  The  voyage  home  has  been 
the  renewal  of  my  life.  T  shall  land  with  much  of  ray 
past  health.  This  is  a  great  mercy.  Our  voyage,  though 
long  (40  days),  has  been  exceedingly  pleasant.  I  have 
received  every  kindness  and  attention  from  the  com- 
mander and  officers,  and  much  of  my  restoration  is  due  to 
the  comforts  which  have  surrounded  me."  Although  Mr. 
Saker  wrote  thus  hopefully  of  his  health,  there  awaited 
him  many  months  of  severe  suffering.  "  The  Shadow," 
as  the  natives  of  Cameroons  had  of  late  years  been 
wont  to  designate  him,  as  in  weakness  he  moved  about 
among  them,  landed,  worn  to  skin  and  bone,  emaciated 
to  a  degree  scarcely  conceivable,  and  with  a  constitution, 
never  strong,  now  utterly  broken.  His  indomitable 
spirit  alone  kept  him  alive.  As  the  spring  advanced, 
some  degree  of  improvement  began  to  appear,  and  in 
the  early  months  of  the  following  year  he  was  able  to 
visit,  as  a  deputation,  a  few  of  the  more  important 
churches  in  various  parts  of  the  country. 

The  Mission  to  the  Congo,  which  at  this  time  was  in 


CLOSING   DAYS.  157 

contemplation,  excited  his  deepest  interest,  and  in  every 
possible  way  he  rendered  the  aid  that  was  in  his  power. 
His  long  acquaintance  with  equatorial  Africa,  its  people 
and  its  languages,  was  of  great  service  to  the  Coniniittec, 
and  made  his  counsel  invaluable.  Joyfully  would 
he  again  have  gone  forth  as  the  pioneer  of  this  great 
enterprise.  In  a  speech  of  rare  merit  that  he  delivered 
at  Cannon  Street  Hotel,  at  the  breakfast  meeting  held 
to  expound  the  course  taken  by  the  Committee  of  the 
Society  to  inaugurate  this  Mission,  after  recounting 
some  of  the  labours  and  successes  of  his  life  in  Africa 
as  grounds  for  encouragement,  he  added,  with  an  "accent 
of  conviction"  that  thrilled  the  assembly,  "Though the 
years  past  have  been  years  of  suffering  and  years  of 
toil,  there  is  nothing  in  this  country  that  could  tempt 
me  to  stop — tempt  me  to  exchange  a  life  of  labour  and 
suffering  there,  if  so  be  I  can  have  but  a  repetition  of 

the  joy  that  has  been  given  to  me  in  that  land 

God  hath  accepted  our  past  labours  and  blessed  them. 
Let  us  in  faith  and  in  faithful  labour  trust  Him  for  all 
the  future." 

In  the  year  following,  at  the  meeting  held  in  Cannon 
Street  Hotel  to  bid  farewell  to  the  four  youi.-g  brethren, 
Messrs.  Comber,  Crudgington,  Bentley,  and  Hartland, 
who  were  about  to  enter  on  the  Congo  Mission,  Mr. 
Saker  met  with  a  most  enthusiastic  reception,  tlic 
whole  audience  rising  to  their  feet  to  do  him  honour. 
In  the  following  wise  and  devout  language  he  gathered 
up  the  experience  of  his  missionary  life  : — "  While  I 
congratulate  you  to-night,  and  the  Committee  also,  in 
the  establishment,  so  far,  of  this  Mission,  I  should  like, 
to  utter  just  this  word — that  the  enthusiasm  of  this 
hour  will  not  suffice.     AVe  are  but  beginnin";  a  work 


158  ALFEED   SAKER, 

which  will  test  our  fidelity,  our  faith,  our  zeal,  and  it 
will  test  our  hope  also.  Yet  we  may  go  forth  with 
confidence,  because  He  that  commandeth  that  we  bear 
the  Grospel  to  the  heathen  hath  Himself  promised  that 
He  will  be  with  us.  It  is  not  prospective  ;  but  He  is 
Avith  us.  '  Lo  !  I  am  with  you  always,  even  to  the  end 
of  the  world.'  And  in  the  presence  of  the  Master,  and 
armed  with  His  power,  your  brethren,  young  as  they 
are,  may  go  forth  in  confidence.  You  may  send  them 
with  confidence,  and  they  will  labour  on  faithfully  and 
successfully  while  they  live  near  their  Master,  lowly, 
trusting  in  Him,  holding  fast  to  His  hand,  and  walking 
as  ever  in  His  sight.  But  they  may  be  called  upon  to 
suffer.  We  know  that  they  must  labour,  it  may  be  long, 
long  years  without  much  success,  and  in  all  the  labour, 
in  all  the  suffering,  in  all  the  toil  of  the  future,  in  all 
the  waiting,  they  Avill  want  your  sympathy,  your 
prayers,  your  help  ;  not  the  sympathy  of  this  hour  alone, 
but  the  continuous  sympathy  of  your  hearts.  These 
brethren  now  going  forth  are  but  few,  and  they  are 
weak  as  we  are;  yet  in  the  hand  of  the  Master  they 
can  be  strong.  Pray,  then,  that  the  Master  may  not  fail 
them,  that  they  may  not  fail  their  Master ;  but  that 
they  may  live  near  unto  Him,  and  that  they  work  for 
Him.  And,  then,  while  they  are  down  in  that  deep 
dungeon,  you  cannot  know  the  sorrow,  the  suffering,  the 
toil,  they  may  have.  Keep  hold  of  that  rope,  friends,  on 
which  they  depend.  Let  them  have  the  consciousness 
that  the  whole  Christian  heart  of  this  country  is  beating 
in  sympathy  with  them,  and  that  your  prayers  ascend 
to  the  Master  on  His  Throne  that  He  may  sustain  them." 
Once  more,  in  the  autumn  of  1879,  Mr.  Saker 
appeared  before  the  delegates  of  the  churches  assembled 


CLOSING   DAYS.  159' 

ill  Glasgow,  and  boro  his  testimony  to  the  -wondrous 
p;race  that  had  aided  his  labours,  and  prospered  him  in 
the  work  of  the  Lord.  It  was  a  wonderful  sight  to  see 
that  enfeebled  man,  that  spare  frame,  that  fadiiig  form, 
in  tender,  quiet,  and  yet  thrilling  words  call  fortli  the 
deep  emotions  of  the  vast  throng  gathered  in  St. 
Andrew's  Hall.  For  several  minutes  he  stood  trembling 
with  awe,  as  the  assembly  testified  its  regard  and  respect 
for  the  hero  of  the  Cross.  His  last  words  were  the 
breathing  out  of  his  life.  "  If,"  he  said,  "  the  African  is 
a  brother,  should  we  not  give  him  some  of  our  bread 
and  a  draught  of  our  water  ?  Oh  1"  he  exclaimed,  with 
a  glow  of  passionate  feeling  that  touched  and  awoke 
into  voiceful  expression  the  chords  of  every  heart  in 
his  audience,  "  that  I  had  another  life  to  go  out  there. 
The  field  is  white  there,  the  multitudes  are  in  darkness 
still.  It  is  the  Son  of  (Jod  calling  on  us  to  go  forth  and 
preach  the  Gospel  to  this  creature,  and  we  have  the 
promise  that  He  will  l)e  with  us  unto  the  end.  ]\Iay 
His  blessing  be  on  you  and  on  them." 

Thus  closed  the  public  life  of  Alfred  Saker.  His 
few  last  months  were  cheered  by  tlie  promise  that  his 
work  at  Cameroons  would  not  be  overlooked  in  the  more 
exciting  interest  of  the  movement  on  the  Congo.  Mr. 
Comber  and  Mr,  Grenfell  had  been  taken  away  to  devote 
their  energies  and  their  experience  to  tlie  exigencies  of 
the  new  field,  but  ]\Ir.  and  Mrs.  Lyall  were  accepted 
for  King  A'kwa's  Town  ;  and  his  son-in-law,  Mr. 
Thomson,  would  not  fail  to  watch  with  deep  and  anxious 
solicitude  over  the  best  interests  of  the  colony  of 
Victoria.  Above  all,  his  joy  was  full  when  the  Committee 
accepted  the  services  of  his  youngest  daughter,  Emily, 
tliat  she  might  enter  upon  that  portion  of  her  father's 


160  ALFEED    SAKER. 

work  which  more  especially  concerned  the  training  of 
the  young.  From  her  childhood  she  had  aided  her 
parents,  and  given,  as  the  years  went  on,  the  most 
efficient  help  to  her  father  in  his  translations  and  print- 
ing work.  Her  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  Dualhi 
language  was  of  great  value  to  the  Mission,  and  all 
hearts  were  glad  that  the  name  of  Saker  would  not  be 
lost  or  forgotten  among  the  people  he  had  lived  to  save. 
I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting  the  following  testimony 
to  the  value  of  the  labours  of  both  father  and  child, 
.given  by  that  eminent  scholar,  E.  N.  Oust,  Esq.,  of  the 
Indian  Civil  Service,  in  his  important  and  valuable 
work  (just  published)  on  the  Languages  of  Africa.  "  I 
think  also,"  he  says,  "  of  the  patient,  enthusiastic  scholar, 
often  tried  l)y  fever  and  dysentery,  and  warned  to  fly, 
yet  lingering  on  until  his  work  was  stopped  by  death, 
bearing  hardships  and  discomforts  of  which  we  can 
form  no  conception.  And  it  is  not  every  missionary 
.scholar  who,  like  Saker,  has  left  a  young  daughter 
willing  and  able  to  take  up  the  skein  of  an  African 
language  dropped  by  her  father,  and  carry  through  to 
completion  a  revised  edition  of  her  fatlier's  translation 
of  the  New  Testament."  *  The  mantle  of  the  father 
has  fallen  on  his  beloved  child.  Her  parents,  droop- 
ing under  the  weakness  and  exliaustion  consequent  on 
their  long  life  in  Africa,  cheerfully  relinquished  "  the 
light  of  the  house  "  for  the  cause  of  Christ  in  the  Dark 
Continent. 

*  "A  Sketch  of  the  Modern  Languages  of  Africa,"'  by  R.  N.  Oust, 
Esq.,  vol.  i.,  p.  71.  This  edition  of  two  thousand  copies  of  the 
Dualla  New  Testament  was  printed  at  the  cost  of  the  Bible 
Translation  Society.  Though  Miss  Saker  made  many  emenda- 
tions of  the  text,  it  is  rather  a  reprint  than  a  revision. 


CLOSING   DAYS.  161 

IXiring  the  last  few  months  of  his  life,  aiuid  iii- 
•creasing  sufl'ering  borne  with  singular  patience  witli 
unabated  mental  clearness  Mr.  Saker  would  often  return 
to  his  favourite  (jccupations,  and  take  up  liis  Dualla 
vocabulary  and  grammar  with  the  desire  to  render  them 
more  complete,  oi'  busy  himself  witli  liis  tools.  But  a 
single  half-hour  was  sufticient  to  tire  his  worn-out 
powers,  and  for  weeks  he  would  be  compelled  to  lay 
books  and  tools  aside,  sorrowfully  sighing  out  the  words, 
"'  Oh !  what  have  I  come  to,  that  I  cannot  even  do 
that  ^ "  He  came  home  ill  from  Glasgow,  and  from  that 
time  the  disease  which  he  had  so  long  manfully  braved 
gained  increasing  strength.  Eeluctantly  he  was  driven 
to  decline  the  requests  which  reached  him  to  visit 
various  congregations  where  his  presence  would  have 
been  highly  valued.  With  the  cold  winds  of  March 
(1880)  he  daily  became  more  low.  On  the  8tli  of  that 
month  he  had  a  very  bad  night,  but  in  the  morning 
slept  a  little.  To  his  wife,  who  entered  his  room  soon 
-after  he  awoke,  gazing  at  her  with  a  far-off"  look,  he 
said,  "  My  dear,  cannot  we  have  a  few  words  of  prayer 
together  ?  "  Her  heart  sank  ;  she  felt  that  the  hand  of 
death  was  gently  drawing  him  away.  "  He  prayed," 
.says  the  beloved  partner  of  all  his  labours,  "  such  a 
prayer  as  I  had  never  heard.  I  often  wish  I  could 
recall  some  of  it,  but  I  cannot.  I  felt,  'Truly  God 
is  here.'"  He  then  slowly  dressed,  and  descended 
to  his  room  below,  where  he  remained  till  the  end 
came. 

Nevertheless,  he  spoke  hopefully  to  the  doctor  in 
iittendance,  and  expressed  the  opinion  that  his  work 
was  not  yet  done.  "  No,  my  dear  friend,"  was  the  reply, 
""  it  is  not  done,  for  I  believe  we  shall  have  glorious 

11 


162  ALFKED    SAKER. 

work  to  do  yonder.'"'  "  Yes,"  he  answered ;  "  but  I  do' 
not  think  my  work  for  Africa  is  done  yet."  Nor  is  it 
done  ;  his  works  "  do  follow  him,"  and  the  leaves- 
of  the  tree  of  life  he  has  planted  on  the  Dark  Con- 
tinent remain  still,  and  flourish  for  the  healing  of  its 
people. 

It  was  evident,  however,  to  those  who  watched  him 
with  tender  solicitude,  that  the  shades  of  the  dark  valley 
were  gathering  over  his  head ;  yet  was  the  path  before 
him  lit  up  with  the  presence  of  Him  who  is  the  Light 
of  Life  and  the  Giver  of  Victory  over  Death.  Calmly 
he  comforted  his  wife  with  words  of  cheer  and  hope. 
"  When  God  takes  me,"  he  said,  "  He  will  provide  for 
you.  Itemember  the  past,  through  how  many  dangers 
and  trials  you  have  been  l)rought.  He  will  raise  up 
friends  for  you." 

As  the  evening  of  final  rest  drew  near,  he  seemed 
at  times  scarcely  conscious,  and  when  he  spoke  it  was 
with  difficulty  that  he  could  be  understood.  Among 
his  last  distinct  utterances  was  one  addressed  to 
his  grandson  Alfred.  Seeing  iiim  entering  the  room 
to  say  "  Good  night,"  he  watched  the  boy  that  he 
dearly  loved  to  tlie  foot  of  the  bed,  and  then  said^ 
"  God  bless  you,  my  boy."  All  day  on  Friday  (the 
12th)  he  was  evidently  yielding  to  the  disease ;  but 
it  was  not  till  about  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  that 
he  fully  realised  that  the  end  had  come.  He  opened 
his  eyes,  and,  looking  earnestly  at  his  wife,  put  out 
his  hand  for  hers.  She  said,  "  Are  you  conscious  that 
you  are  going  to  leave  me  ?  "  He  nodded  assent.  "  Are 
you  quite  happy  ?  "  And  again  he  gave  the  like  token. 
Then  closing  his  eyes,  amidst  much  difliculty  of  breath- 
ing, gently  and  quietly,  about  one  o'clock,  he  crossed 


CLOSIXG    DAYS.  163 

the  river  of  deatli.  A  sweet  smile  passed  over  the 
pallid,  worn  fae(^  as  the  ministering  angels  Lore  his 
spirit  to  the  presence  of  his  Lord. 

In  bringing  to  a  conclusion  this  brief  sketch  of  the 
life  of  Alfred  Saker,  I  am  happy  to  add  the  following 
additional  particulars  of  the  closing  scene  from  the  pen  of 
my  dear  friend  and  successor,  Mr,  Alfred  Henry  Baynes, 
the  present  Secretary  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society: — 

"  Dear  Dr.  Uxi)Ekiiill, — You  have  been  good  enough 
to  ask  me  to  give  you  a  few  particulars  relating  to  the 
closing  days  of  Alfred  Saker's  life.  You  know  how 
our  heroic  friend  disliked  all  titles ;  he  often  used  to 
say  to  me,  '  I  will  have  neither  prefix  nor  affix  to  my 
name — let  it  always  stand,  Alfred  Saker,  Missionary  to 
Africa!  There  was,  as  you  so  well  know,  a  grand  sim- 
plicity about  our  friend.  He  had  an  utter  contempt  for 
what  the  world  calls '  fame.'  I  had  the  privilege  of  seeing 
him  frequently  during  his  closing  days,  and  I  regard  those 
fre<xuent  pilgrimages  of  mine  to  Peckham  as  amongst  the 
happiest  memories  of  my  life.  Only  a  few  days  before  he 
passed  away,  we  were  talking  together  of  the  probable 
opening  up  of  Africa  by  the  great  Congo  water-way.  He 
was  then  lying  in  bed,  seemingly  little  more  than  '  a 
bundle  of  bones,'  and  with  scarcely  enough  skin  to 
decently  cover  them,  when  he  started  up,  and,  looking 
at  me  with  fixed  eye,  said,  with  intensest  energy, '  Would 
I  were  a  young  man  again,  or  had  a  second  life  to  live, 
I  would  be  off  to  Congo  to-morrow.'  He  has  told  me 
more  than  once  of  how  thoroughly  Africa  possessed 
his  thoughts  when  he  was  quite  a  young  man,  and,  when 
he  was  at  work  in  the  dockyard,  with  almost  every 
stroke  of  the  hammer  on  the  rivet  he  fancied  lie  heard 

11* 


164  ALFRED    SAKEE. 

the  word  '  Africa  '  ring  forth.  At  last  he  would  become 
wrought  up  to  such  a  pitch  that  lie  could  scarcely  remain 
at  his  Avork,  in  his  passionate  longing  to  be  off'.  His  one 
master  passion  all  through  life  was  to  live  and  labour  for 
the  good  of  the  Dark  Continent. 

"The  last  time  I  saw  him  alive — only  a  few  hours 
before  his  death — he  was  greatly  exhausted,  and  I  felt 
sure  the  end  was  rapidly  approaching.  I  can  never 
forget  what  took  place  then.  He  was  speaking  of  how 
manifestly  Christ  had  been  with  him  through  the 
night  when,  in  great  suffering,  he  thought  his  end 
had  come,  and,  turning  to  me  with  eyes  full  of 
brightness,  and  with  a  voice  unfaltering,  he  quoted  the 
words — 

'  Jesus,  the  very  thouglit  of  Thee 
With  sweetness  fiffs  iny  breast ; 
But  sweeter  far  Thy  face  to  see, 
And  in  Thy  presence  rest.' 

And,  apart  from  a  '  Farewell,'  and  '  God  bless  you,  my 
dear  friend,'  these  were  his  last  words  as  I  left  the 
house.  A  few  more  hours,  and  a  final  struggle,  and 
he  passed  through  the  gates  into  the  city,  and  was  for 
ever  at  rest.  Two  days  afterwards  I  stood  by  his  cofhn, 
and  looked  upon  his  thin,  pale,  worn  face — very  peace- 
ful and  very  calm ;  it  had  lost  much  of  its  painful  look, 
the  result  of  intense  suffering,  and  there  seemed  resting 
upon  it  a  peace  which  was  reposeful  and  beautiful.  I 
reverently  bent  my  head  down,  and  kissed  his  cold  fore- 
head, and  said '  Farewell,'  until  the  everlasting  day  dawn  and 
the  shadows  flee  away,  to  one  of  the  noblest  grandest  men 
I  ever  expect  to  meet  on  earth,  and  1  cannot  recall  that 
moment  without  the  deepest  feeling  of  devout  thanks- 


CLOSING   DAYS.  165 

giving  that  I  was  privileged  to  know  him,  and  to  call 
him  my  friend. 

"  Mrs.  Saker  will  tell  you  that  his  last  words  were  : 
*  For  Thou  art  with  uie ' ;  and  surely  these  words  tell 
out  the  whole  story,  and  explain  the  entire  life. 
A  '  good  soldier '  of  Jesus  Christ,  '  faithful  unto 
death.' 

"  Oh,  for  grace,  that  we  may  be  enabled  to  follow 
him,  who  now,  through  faith  and  patience,  inherits  the 
promises ! " 

On  Friday  morning,  March  19th,  at  Nunhead 
Cemetery,  amid  sunshine  and  tears,  the  wasted  frame 
of  Alfred  Saker  was  committed  to  the  tomb,  until  the 
glad  morning  of  resurrection.  In  the  cemetery  chapel, 
the  Eev.  C.  M.  Birrell  read  suitable  portions  of  Scripture 
and  offered  prayer,  and,  after  an  address  by  myself, 
the  liev.  J.  P.  Chown  conducted  the  service  at  the  grave. 
Many  who  loved  him  stood  around  the  sepulchre,  and 
sang,  with  devout  and  tender,  yet  grateful,  sorrow,  the 
singularly  appropriate  hymn — 

"  Captain  and  Saviour  of  the  host 
Of  Christian  chivalry  ! 
We  bless  Thee  for  our  comrade  true, 
Now  summoned  up  to  Thee. 

"  We  bless  Thee  for  his  every  step 
In  faithful  following  Thee  ; 
And  for  his  good  fight  fought  so  well, 
And  crowned  with  victory. 

"  We  thank  Thee  that  tlie  wayworn  sleeps 
The  sleep  in  Jesus  blest :  • 
The  purified  and  ransomed  soul 
Hath  entered  into  rest. 


166  ALFEED    SAKEK. 

"  We  bless  Thee  that  His  humble  love 
Hath  met  with  such  regard  ; 
We  bless  Thee  for  his  blessedness, 
And  for  his  rich  reward." 

The  sorrow  felt  in  England  had  a  touching  and 
characteristic  response  in  Africa.  His  native  helper, 
Dibundu,  writing  to  Mrs.  Saker  on  hearing  of  the 
tidings  of  her  beloved  husband's  departure,  says : — 
"  King  A'kwa  was  up  country  when  he  heard  of  dear 
Mr.  Saker' s  death.  He  was  bitterly  sorry,  and  all  his 
people  too ;  because  they  cannot  forget  all  the  good 
work  Mr.  Saker  did  in  Cameroons  river,  and  all  round 
about.  So  the  King  made  a  law  for  his  town,  all  of  his 
own  accord,  in  remembrance  of  Mr.  Saker,  that  no  w^ork 
should  be  done  on  Sundays,  but  all  ought  to  go  to 
worship.  So  on  Sunday,  May  8th,  all  the  people  with 
one  accord  came  to  our  chapel,  which  was  over-full,  and 
many  more  outside  could  not  get  in.  You  will  remember 
us,  please,  in  your  prayers,  that  the  good  work  may  go 
on,  and  many  be  converted  to  Jesus." 

Little  more  need  be  said  respecting  this  true  hero 
and  faithful  missionary  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  The 
narrative  of  his  labours  and  the  story  of  his  life 
sufftciently  express  the  spirit  that  animated  him,  and 
show  the  devotedness  with  which  he  wrought  to  fulfil 
his  appointed  service.  He  believed,  with  profound 
conviction,  that  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  had  summoned 
him  to  this  task.  Somewdiat  austere  in  manner,  reticent 
in  speech,  untiring  and  indefatigable  in  the  pursuit 
of  the  object  he  had  set  his  heart  upon  accomplishing, 
he  was,  nevertheless,  truly  tender  and  affectionate  in 
spirit.  If  he  was  hard  to  please  by  those  who  were 
laggards  in  the  vineyard,  or  if  his  plans  surpassed  tlie 


CLOSING   DAYS.  167 

■apprehensions  of  those  who  were  about  him,  he  was 
■ever  the  foremost  in  labour  and  the  last  to  leave  the 
field.  He  was  the  pioneer  in  a  region  in  wliich  lie  had 
no  compeer,  and  to  his  hands  fell  the  severe  toil 
necessary  to  lay  the  foundations  of  the  work  he  achieved. 
'  Take  it  all  in  all,"  is  the  testimony  of  that  great  man, 
Dr.  Livingstone ;  "  take  it  all  in  all,  specially  having 
regard  to  its  many-sided  character,  the  work  of  Alfred 
Saker  at  Cameroons  and  Victoria  is,  in  my  judgment, 
the  most  remarkable  on  the  African  coast." 

Xot  less  striking  is  the  testimony  of  one  of  the  most 
noted  of  modern  African  travellers,  who  visited  the  coast 
only  a  few  years  ago,  with  no  sympathy  for  mission  work, 
and  no  personal  regard  for  Christianity :  "  I  do  not  at  all 
understand  how  the  changes  at  Cameroons  and  Victoria 
liave  been  brought  about.  Old  sanguinary  customs  liave, 
to  a  large  extent,  Ijeen  abolished  ;  witchcraft  liides  itself 
in  the  forest;  the  fetish  superstition  of  the  people  is 
derided  l)y  old  and  young,  and  well-built  houses  are 
springing  up  on  every  liand.  It  is  really  marvellous  to 
mark  the  change  that  has  taken  place  in  the  natives  in 
a  few  years  oidy.  From  actual  cannibals  many  have 
become  honest,  intelligent,  well-skilled  artisans.  An 
elementary  literature  has  been  established,  and  the 
whole  Bible  translated  into  their  own  tongue,  hitherto 
an  unwritten  one.  There  must  surely  l)e  something 
'  abnormal'  in  this."  * 

Yes  ;  but  the  "  abnormal  "  character  of  Alfred  Saker's 
labours  lies  in  this :  that,  sustained  l)y  faith,  with  a 
heart  quickened  l)y  the  love  of  Christ,  and  inspired  by 
the  H(jly  Spirit  of  God,  he  wrought  with  full  purpose 


•  Mis<ionari)  Herald  for  1880,  p.  lO'i 


168  ALFKED    SAKER. 

of  heart  for  the  salvation  of  Africa,  and  Uod  gave  him 
the  success  that  will  ever  attend  the  faithful  servant  of 
the  Lord.  His  last  words,  "  For  Thou  art  with  me," 
tell  out  and  explain  the  story  of  his  life.  He  was. 
a  gootl  soldier  of  Jesus  ('hrist,  and,  faithful  unto- 
death,  and  therefore  he  has  won  the  crown  of  an. 
enduring  and  immortal  life. 

Reader :  Go,  and  do  thou  likewise. 


APPENDIX. 

Xo.  1. 

EEGULATIONS    FOR    THE    COLONY    OF    VICTORIA, 
AMBOISES    BAY. 


Agency  Office,  (ktohei;  1858, 
Victoria,  West  Afkica. 

This  district,  with  its  township  now  named  Victoria,  having  Victoria. 
been  purchased  from  the  King  of  Bimbia,  and  the  right  and  title 
thereto  having  been  ced»Ml  to  its  present  possessors  ;  and  this 
township  having  Ijeen  formed  as  a  refuge  and  a  home  for  those 
who  cannot  continue  where  liberty  of  worship  is  denied,  and  for 
all  others  who  may  be  desirous  of  living  peacefully  with  us,  we 
do  heieby  arrange  and  decree  as  follows : 

There  shall  be  additional  streets  formed,  as  the  wants  of  the 
township  shall  need  them,  according  to  the  plan  suspended  in 
this  ottice. 

The  spaces  between  the   roads  or  streets  shall  be   divided  in   Lots. 
building  lots,  and  numbered.     Each  separate  lot  shall  be  a  front- 
age of  50  feet  and  depth  100  feet. 

These  lots  can  be  obtained,  at  this  office,  by  expressed  adhesion    How  obtained, 
to  the   regulations  or  bye-laws   herein  decreed  and    established 
among  us  this  day  ;  and  on  the  following  terms  : — 

Firstly, — By  turchase,  when  a  title  iov  a  secure  possession 
will  be  given  as  a  receipt  of  payment  made,  and  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  transfer. 

Secondly, — By  an   agreement,  for  a  nominal  ground-rest, 

and  which  agreement  is  to  expire  at  the  end  of  a  term  of ■ 

years  from  date,  with  the  option  then  of  purchase  at  the  market 
price,  or  a  new  agreement. 


170 


ALFRED    SAKER. 


Possession, 


Ci.ardcn  ground. 


Thirdly,— By  a  free  grant,  to  continue  during  the  life  of  the 
recipients,  man  or  wife,  with  then  the  option  of  purchase  by  the 
heir,  at  the  market  price,  or  a  new  grant  to  the  children. 

Any  lot  of  ground  in  the  township  must  be  cleared  of  its  bush 
and  trees  in  six  months,  and  a  building— being  a  temporary  or 
]3ermanent  house— must  be  erected  thereon  within  the  twelve 
months,  and  the  roadways,  measured  by  the  fr.mtage,  kept 
cleaned.  FaiHng  in  these  preliminary  steps,  the  right  of 
])ossession  lapses  to  this  office,  and  the  purchase  money,  if  any, 
will  be  returned,  but  any  expense  incurred  in  a  first  clearing  will 
be  lost. 

(4arden  ground  in  the  neighbourhood  granted  to  any  settlers 
free  for  seven  years. 

For^  the  sake  of  good  order,  health,  and  quiet,  there  must  be 
cleanliness,  sobriety,  and  a  strict  observance  of  the  laws  and 
regulations  established  among  us,  and  which  are  as  follows  : 


Officers 


C  juncil 


Duties 


Freedom  of  ^ 
ship. 


Laws. 

For  the  better  secimty  of  the  settlers,  and  for  the  suppression 
of  disorderly  conduct  and  crime,  there  shall  be  a  Governor  and  a 
Council— the  Governor  being  the  owner  of  the  estate  or  the 
representative  of  the  owners. 

The  Council  to  be  composed  of  men  of  good  character,  and,  if 
possible,  of  substance.  This  Council  is  not  to  exceed  twelve 
persons  ;  half  to  be  chosen  by  the  Governor,  and  half  by  the 
householders. 

This  Council  shall  have  charge  of  all  public  roads  and 
thoroughfares,  of  the  beach  and  bays,  and  shall  enforce  cleaning 
of  the  roads  and  removal  of  all  nuisances,  summoning  to  their 
meeting  all  who  infringe  the  laws  in  any  way ;  and  shall  have 
power  to  inflict  penalties  not  exceeding  twenty  shillings,  or 
confinement  with  labour  not  exceeding  one  month. 

There  shall  be  entire  freedom  in  all  that  relates  to  the  worship 
of  the  true  God  ;  and  the  word  of  God  is  hereby  acknowledged 
to  be  the  foundation  of  all  our  laws,  and  claims  the  obedience  o^" 
our  lives. 

That  although  we  are  now  all  of  one  mind  in  the  essentials  of 
Cliristian  worship,  yet  should  there  come  among  us  persons  of 


AITENDIX. 


171 


differing  opinions  as  to  Christian  worsliip  or  duty,  all  shall 
equally  share  in  our  freedom  of  worship,  as  well  as  in  our 
protection. 

That  the  worship  of  God  be  not  interrupted,  the  Sabbath  sliaU  Subbuth. 
be    regarded  ;   all  business  shall  be   suspended,   and  the    day 
esteemed  sacred  to  worship  and  rest. 

There  shall  be  entire  freedom  in  all  that  relates  to  trade  and   Fxcc  u-ii.io 
barter  in.  the  township  and  with  tlie  natives  around. 

There  shall  be  free  importations  of  all  goods,  of  provisions,  of 
clothing,  of  trading  goods,  and  machinery,  of  all  and  every 
article  ;  except  the  following  : 

Kum,  or  other  spirits,  as  articles  of  barter  or  sale,  are  tor  ever  proiubitio 

prohibited. 

Brandj',  gin,  and  wine,  admitted  free  for  medicinal  pui-poses, 
but  for  other  purposes,  not  for  sale  or  barter,  only  with  a  duty  of 
ten  per  cent,  paid  on  the  value  thereof. 

Porter  or  ale,  not  for  barter  or  sale,  admitted 

Any  infringement  on  the  above  clauses  will  involve,  in  all 
cases,  confiscation  of  the  property,  and  a  fine  of  £5  sterling  for 
the  first  oftence ;  a  fine  of  £10  sterling  for  the  i<ccond  offence  ; 
and  expulsion  for  the  third  offence. 

There  shall  he  free  exportation  of  all  produce,  live  stock,  or 
manufacture. 

That  the  amount  of  imports  and  exports  may  be  known,  there 
shall  be  a  registry  kept  at  this  office,  and  a  true  account  must  be 
delivered  here  specifying  the  amount  or  quantity  of  such  imports 
or  exports. 

Power  to  institute  and  ordain  laws  against  specific  crimes  and   Future  la^ 
misdemeanours  is  reserved  till  occasion  shall  call  for  them. 

All  trees  on  this  estate  are  the  property  of  the  owners  ;  and  Property, 
while  every  facility  will  be  afforded  to  settlers  to  obtain  materials 
for  building  purposes  in  the  township,  no  person  shall  be  per- 
mitted to  cut  down  or  remove  any  tree  for  purposes  of  manu- 
facture or  exportation,  except  by  written  permission  from  this 
office,  on  payment  of  the  assigned  value,  which  will  always  be 
most  liberal  to  settlers. 


APPENDIX. 


No.  2. 


KESOLUTION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  OF  THE  BAPTIST 
MISSIOXAEY  SOCIETY  OX  THE  DEATH  OF  THE. 
REV.  ALFRED  SAKER. 

At  the  quarterly  meeting  of  tlie  Committee  in  April,  the 
following  resolution  with  regard  to  the  decease-  of  the 
Eev.  Alfred  Saker  was  unanimously  adopted,  and 
ordered  t(j  be  recorded  on  the  minutes  of  the  Com- 
mittee : — 

"That  the  Committee  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society 
cannot  record  the  departure  to  his  rest  of  the  Rev.  Alfred  Saker 
without  expressing  in  the  warmest  and  most  affectionate  terms- 
their  high  appreciation  of  his  character  and  labours.  For  thirty- 
seven  years  Mr.  Saker  fulfilled  his  course  as  a  missionary  of  the 
Ooss  in  tlie  exhausting  climate  of  Western  Africa,  throughout 
suffering  much  from  the  diseases  incident  to  a  residence  on  that 
fever-stricken  coast,  yet  never  abating  his  toil  nor  intermitting  his 
labours,  though  often  physically  unecpial  to  the  achievement  of 
the  task  to  which  his  life  was  given.  He  spared  not  his 
attenuated  frame,  nor  did  he  retire  from  his  post  until  utterly 
prostrate,  and  it  was  apparent  to  all  that  a  further  continuance 
was  impossible.  Under  circumstances  of  great  difficulty  he 
planted  the  mission  on  the  Continent,  on  the  River  Cameroons, 
induced  the  natives  to  abandon  many  of  their  sanguinary  and 
degrading  customs,  and,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  established  a 
churcli  of  Jesus  Christ  in  their  midst,    ever  to  testify  to  the- 


APPENDIX. 


173 


grace  and  redeeming  mercy  of  tlie  Lord.  Willi  his  own  liands 
he  laboured  to  teach,  and,  encouraged  l.y  his  example,  he  led  the 
people  to  aciiuire,  the  arts  of  civilised  life  ;  he  mastered,  and  for 
the  first  time  reduced  to  WTiting,  their  language  ;  prepared 
school-books  and  grammar  for  their  use,  and  crowned  his 
arduous  labours  by  translating  and  printing  the  entire  volume 
■of  the  Word  of  the  living  God.  AVhen  the  mission  was  driven 
by  the  llotnan  Catholic  Church  from  Fernando  Po,  he  explored 
the  neighbouring  coast,  and  founded  the  colony  of  Victoria  in 
Amboises  Bay,  where  the  converts  gathered  at  Clarence  might 
find  a  refuge  and  a  place  to  worship  C!od  without  molestation,  in 
freedom  of  conscience,  and  exempt  from  further  interference  witli 
their  personal  rights  and  liberties.  In  every  trial  his  resource 
was  the  Mercy  Seat,  and,  amid  great  provocations,  he  possessed 
his  soul  in  patience.  He  endured  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of 
Jesus  Christ.  He  was  faithful  unto  death.  His  whole  life  bore 
record  to  the  Psalmist's  declaration,  repeated  in  his  last  moments, 
'For  Thou  art  with  me.'  What  he  was  (4od  made  him ;  and 
for  his  noble  life,  his  heroic  consecration,  and  blessed  example, 
the  Committee  adore  the  Divine  Hand  whose  workmanship  he 
was. 

•'To  his  beloved  widow  and  life-long  companion  in  all  his 
labours  and  distresses,  and  the  members  of  his  family,  especially 
those  who  were  his  helpers  in  the  work,  the  Committee  tender 
their  earnest  sympathy,  and  trust  they  may  be  sustained  to  the 
end  by  the  same  Divine  love,  and  cheered  by  the  gracious  conso- 
lation, which  the  Father  of  the  fatherless  and  Husband  of  the 
widow  can  impart  to  them  in  their  sorrow\" 


LONDON  : 
PRINTED     BY    ALEXANDER    AND     SHEPHEAED, 
LONSDALE    BUILDINGS,    CHANCERY    LANE. 


Zbc  Baptist  riDissionav^  Societ>2. 


OBJECT. 

T/ie  great  object  of  this  Society  is  the  diffusion  of  the 
kiiowledgc  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  throughout  the 
zvhole  world,  beyond  the  British  Isles,  by  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel,  the  translation  and  publication  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  and  the  establishment  of  Schools. 


OFFICERS    OF    THE    SOCIETY. 

treasurer- 
Joseph  Tritton,  Esq. 

•ffDon.  Sccrctanj. 
Edward  Bean  Underhill,  Esq.,  LL.D. 

©cncral  Sccretar\2. 
Alfred  Henry  BaYxNtes,  Esq.,  F.R.A.S. 

Bssociation  Secretary. 
Rev.    J.    B.    Myers. 

asankers. 
Messrs.  Barclay,  Bevan,  Tritton,  &  Co. 


Mission  House,   19,  Castle  Street,  Holborn, 
London,  E.C. 


It  is  requested  that  all  cojitributions  he  sent  to  the  General  Secretary , 
Alfred  Henry  Baynes,  Mission  House,  19,  Castle  Street, 
Holhorn,  London,  E.C,  and  payable  to  his  order. 


PUBLICATIONS. 


JOHN  CHAMBERLAIN  :    a  Missionary's  Biography. 

By    Rev.    C.    B.    Lewis. 

Price  One  Shilling. 

JOHN     THOMAS, 

Surgeon  of  the  "  Earl  of  Oxford  "  East  Indiaman,  and  first  Baptist  Missionary 

to  Bengal. 

By  Rev.  C.  B.  Lewis. 

Price  Ten  Shillings  &  Six  Petice. 


CHRISTIAN    MISSIONS     IN    THE     EAST    AND 

WEST 

In  connection  with  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society. 

By  Edward  Bean  Underhill,  LL.D.,  F.R.G.S. 

Price  One  Shilling  &f  Sixpence. 


MEMORIALS  OF  BAPTIST    MISSIONARIES    IN 
JAMAICA, 

Including  Sketch  of  the  Labours  of  the  Moravians,  "Wesleyans,  and  early 
American  Teachers  in  Jamaica,  Bahamas,  Hayti,  and  Trinidad. 

By  John  Clarke, 

Corresponding  Member  of  the  Ethnological  Society,  and  late  Missionary  in 
Western  Africa. 

Price  Pour  Shillings. 


LIFE    OF   JAMES    MURSELL   PHILLIPPO, 

Missionary  in  Jamaica. 

By  Edward  Bean  Underbill,  LL.D.,  F.R.G.S. 

Wi/h  Portrait,  price  Six  Shillings  &•  Six  Pence. 

"  We  thank  Dr.  Underhill  for  this  remarkably  cheap,  but  remarkably  rich,  contribu- 
tion to  our  missionary  biography." — The  Freeman. 

"  Dr.  Underhill  has  given  us  in  this  work  one  of  the  best  biographies  of  one  of  the 
best  and  most  honoured  of  modern  missionaries." — Nonconformist  and  Independent. 

"One  of  tlie  most  fascinating  biographies  it  has  ever  been  our  privilege  to  read.  It 
is  certain  to  be  popular." — Saptist  Magazine. 

"Dr.  Underbill's  book  is  one  which  the  friends  of  missions  will  be  delighted  to 
read." — Christian  World. 

"We  commend  the  book  to  young  men  and  to  all  workers  in  the  Kingdom  of 
Christ." — Christian. 


Alexander  &  Shepheard,  21,  Castle  Street,  Holborn. 


DATE  DUE 

-  .,• ^^-- 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U    S    A. 

Princeton  Theolog'cal  S«"""'7,',^?m' 


1   1012  01034  2527 


