see 


A Sjkkth’ji 

RrRMA.N  EM  PIKE. 

Jfkm  A MAT  of 

INDIA  extra  C1ANJKM 


V 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016 


https://archive.org/details/accountofamericaOOjuds 


OF  THE 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


TO 


THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE: 


IN  A SERIES  OF  LETTERS,  ADDRESSED  TO  A GENTLEMAN 
IN  LONDON. 


y 

By  ANN  H.  JUDSON. 


LONDON: 


PRINTED  FOR 

J.  BUTTERWORTH  & SON,  43,  FLEET  - STREET  ; 

AND 

T.  CLARK,  8,  PARLIAMENT  SQUARE,  EDINBURGH. 


MDCCCXXIII. 


B.  BENSLEY, 


BOLT  COURT,  FLEET  STREET 


\ 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


It  may  not  hitherto  have  been  generally 
known  in  England,  that  in  the  year  1812,  the 
Rev.  Adoniram  Judson  engaged  in  a Mission 
to  the  Burman  Empire,  under  the  direction 
of  the  American  Board  of  Baptist  Missions  ; 
and  settled  at  Rangoon,  on  the  eastern  coast 
of  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  After  encountering 
many  difficulties  and  privations,  during  the 
first  six  years  of  his  residence  in  that  country, 
he  acquired  a thorough  knowledge  of  the 
language;  translated  a considerable  part  of 
the  New  Testament;  and  composed  tracts, 
which  were  circulated  among  the  natives  of 
Burmah.  Much  inquiry  on  the  subject  of 
religion  was  thus  excited,  and  several  genuine 
converts  were  formed  into  a Christian  So- 


A 2 


IV 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


ciety,  conducting  themselves  in  every  respect 
consistently  with  their  Christian  profession. 

Mrs.  Judson’s  health  having  suffered  greatly 
from  the  effects  of  the  climate,  her  removal 
to  a colder  latitude  became  necessary,  which 
occasioned  her  to  visit  England  on  her  way  to 
America,  in  the  summer  of  1822.  The  par- 
ticulars she  communicated  concerning  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Burman  Empire,  and  the 
rise  and  progress  of  the  Burman  Mission, 
were  in  this  country  new  and  highly  interest- 
ing. She  was,  therefore,  earnestly  requested 
to  write  a detailed  account  of  the  Mission, 
which  might  be  printed  for  general  informa- 
tion. In  compliance  with  this  request,  on  her 
voyage  to  America  she  commenced,  and 
during  her  residence  there  completed,  the 
series  of  letters  which  are  contained  in  the 
present  volume. 

It  appears  that  female  education  forms  no 
part  of  the  Burman  system  : on  the  contrary, 
national  prejudice  is  strongly  opposed  to  the 
principle.  Slavery  is  carried  on,  similar,  in 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


V 


many  respects,  to  that  which  prevailed  under 
the  Mosaic  dispensation.  When  the  father 
of  a family  is  overwhelmed  with  debt,  he  has 
recourse  to  the  sale  of  his  wife  and  children ; 
and  if  the  sum  he  receives  for  them  be  not 
sufficient,  he  offers  himself  in  order  to  ba- 
lance the  account.  Not  unfrequently,  under 
the  despotic  government  of  the  Empire,  a 
tax  is  levied  on  an  individual  far  beyond  his 
ability  to  pay,  and  he  is  put  to  the  torture 
until  he  has  entered  into  an  engagement  to 
produce  the  sum  required : the  sale  of  his 
wife  and  children  takes  place  for  this  purpose. 
Hence  there  are  multitudes  of  slaves  in  the 
Burman  Empire.  But  those  slaves  whose 
situation  is  peculiarly  calculated  to  excite 
compassion,  are  children  whose  parents  die 
involved  in  debt.  The  creditor  immediately 
lays  claim  to  the  helpless  orphans,  and  either 
retains  them  for  his  debt,  whatever  may 
be  its  amount,  or  sells  them  for  an  equiva- 
lent sum.  To  redeem  a few  female  orphan 
slaves  of  this  description,  is  an  object 


Vi  ADVERTISEMENT. 

which  Mrs.  Judson  proposes  to  herself,  on 
her  return  to  Rangoon,  in  order  to  commence 
with  them  a system  of  instruction ; hoping 
that,  should  her  labours  succeed,  their  con- 
duct in  after  life  may  convince  the  Burmans 
of  the  utility  of  female  education. 

The  profits  from  this  publication,  if  any 
should  arise,  will  be  appropriated  to  the 
redemption  from  slavery  and  education,  of 
female  children  on  Mrs.  Judson’s  approach- 
ing return  to  Burmah. 


London,  July  1,  1823. 


PREFACE. 


A connected  account  of  the  origin,  pro- 
gress, and  success,  of  the  American  Baptist 
Mission  to  the  Burman  Empire,  was  first  sug- 
gested by  friends  in  Bengal,  who  were  desir- 
ous of  a better  acquaintance  with  particular 
circumstances,  than  could  be  obtained  from 
any  publication  extant. 

On  embarking  for  Europe,  I indulged  the 
hope  of  being  able  to  commence  a work  of 
this  kind,  during  the  passage ; but  my  ill 
state  of  health,  together  with  the  scanty  ma- 
terials then  in  my  possession,  induced  me  to 
defer  it  until  a more  favourable  period. 

In  England  and  Scotland,  I found  a high 
degree  of  interest,  relative  to  the  Burman 


Vlll 


PREFACE. 


Mission ; excited,  principally,  by  a few  arti- 
cles of  intelligence  which  had  found  their 
way  from  these  shores  across  the  Atlantic, 
and  which  continually  prompted  the  inquiry, 
“ How  shall  we  obtain  all  the  information 
which  has  been  transmitted  to  your  American 
Board  ?”  Frequently  was  the  request  reiter- 
ated, to  make  a compilation  of  documents,  in 
such  a form  as  to  give  a history  of  events, 
from  the  commencement  of  the  mission  to 
the  present  time. 

From  no  one  was  this  request  more  forcibly 
and  constantly  made,  than  from  that  esteemed 
friend  to  whom  these  letters  are  addressed ; 
who,  from  my  first  arrival  in  England,  until 
my  departure  for  my  native  shores,  manifested 
the  affectionate  concern  of  a father,  and 
spared  no  exertions  to  increase  my  comfort, 
improve  my  health,  and  enhance  my  useful- 
ness. He  entered  warmly  into  our  mission- 
ary views,  and  endeavoured  to  cherish  the 
flame,  already  kindled,  in  his  circle ; and  his 
last  request,  received  at  the  very  moment  of 


PREFACE. 


IX 


my  embarkation  at  Liverpool,  had  no  incon- 
siderable influence  in  prevailing  on  me  to 
commence  the  present  compilation. 

Since  my  arrival  in  this  country,  my  health 
has  so  far  declined  as  to  prevent  my  imparting 
to  my  beloved  friends  that  oral  information 
which  I had  so  fondly  expected  and  ardently 
desired.  This  circumstance  has  been  an  ad- 
ditional inducement  to  devote  every  moment 
of  leisure,  and  respite  from  pain,  to  the 
compilation  of  this  work  ; and  it  is  to  me 
no  small  source  of  consolation,  that,  while 
endeavouring  to  obtain  my  health,  in  my 
secluded  and  retired  situation,  I have  been 
able  to  prepare  and  present  to  my  Christian 
friends,  a concise  view  of  the  faithfulness  and 
mercy  of  God,  as  exhibited  in  the  formation 
of  a little  church,  in  one  of  the  largest  heathen 
empires  in  the  world. 

While  I consider  the  following  letters  as  a 
substitute  for  verbal  communications,  I cannot 
refrain  from  bespeaking  the  candour  of  my 
friends  in  perusing  them. 


X 


PREFACE. 


Much  additional  interesting  matter  would 
have  been  communicated,  more  attention  to 
style  and  elegance  of  expression  would  have 
been  given,  and  more  particularity  in  selec- 
tion and  arrangement  would  have  appeared, 
had  my  health  allowed.  This  must  be  my 
apology  for  omissions  and  errors  of  every 
kind.  But,  poor  as  is  the  garb  in  which  these 
letters  are  attired,  a full  conviction  that  the 
providential  circumstances  therein  detailed, 
will  have  a tendency  to  excite  grateful  emo- 
tions in  the  hearts  of  many  of  God’s  dear 
children,  induces  me  to  make  an  immediate 
and  joyful  offer  of  this  little  work. 

M 

I gladly  embrace  the  present  opportunity 
to  express  my  thanks,  and  sense  of  obligation, 
for  the  continued  and  innumerable  proofs  of 
Christian  affection,  which  have  been  mani- 
fested by  the  Board  of  Managers  of  the 
General  Convention ; by  the  female  societies ; 
and  by  many  individuals,  in  their  endeavours 
to  add  to  my  comfort  and  aid  me  in  my 
designs,  since  my  arrival  in  this  country. 


PREFACE. 


XI 


That  the  blessings  of  thousands,  ready  to 
perish,  may  descend  upon  all  interested  in 
the  missionary  cause,  and  that  every  indivi- 
dual who  shall  peruse  these  letters  may  raise 
his  heart  to  God,  in  prayer  for  the  conversion 
of  the  heathen,  is  the  sincere  and  constant 
desire  of 

A.  H.  J. 

Washington  City, 

March,  1823. 


: • i.  . 


CONTENTS 


LETTER  I. 

Introduction. — Sketch  of  the  Burman  Empire. — Extent. — Soil. — 
Climate.  — Inhabitants.  — Government. — Religion. — Character. 
— Literature. — Education page  1 

LETTER  II. 

Cause  of  Mr.  Judson’s  engaging  in  Missions. — Formation  of  Ame- 
rican Board  of  Missions. — Visit  to  England. — Embarkation  of 
Missionaries  for  India  in  1812. — Arrival,  Difficulties,  and  Trials 
at  Calcutta. — Departure  for  the  Isle  of  France. — Death  of  Mrs. 
Newell. — Return  to  India page  6 

LETTER  III. 

Voyage  to  Rangoon. — Arrival. — Study  of  the  Burman  Language. 
— Extracts  from  Letters  and  Journals. — Description  of  the  Vice- 
roy and  his  Wife. — Unsettled  State  of  Affairs. — Burman  Punish- 
ments  page  18 

LETTER  IV. 

Extracts  from  Letters  and  Journals  continued. — Review  of  Pro- 
ceedings during  the  first  two  Years  of  the  Mission. — Formation  of 
the  American  Baptist  Board  of  Missions. — Visit  of  an  Armenian. 
— Conversation  of  Mr.  Judson  and  his  Teacher. — Difficulties  of 
the  Burman  Language. — Death  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Judson’s  only 
Child page  41 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 


LETTER  V. 

Visit  of  the  Vice-reine. — Arrival  of  a Printing  Press. — Qualifica 
tions  requisite  in  Missionaries. — Arrival  of  Mr.  Hough. — Funeral 
of  a Burman  Priest. — Execution  of  Criminals page  61 

LETTER  VI. 

Conversation  with  an  Inquirer. — Publication  of  Tracts. — Descrip- 
tion of  the  Female  Meeting  for  Instruction. — Great  Festival  of 
Gaudama page  88 

LETTER  VII. 

Publication  of  Burman  Translation  of  St.  Matthew’s  Gospel. — 
Voyage  to  Sea. — Protracted  Detention. — Difficulties  with  the 
Burman  Government. — Prevalence  of  Disease,  and  Burman 
Mode  of  expelling  it. — Preparations  for  general  Departure. — Mr. 
Judson’s  return page  103 

LETTER  VIII. 

Mr.  Judson’s  Account  of  his  Voyage. — Arrival  of  Messrs.  Colman 
and  Wheelock. — Their  Missionary  Characters, — Poem  on  their 
quitting  America page  125 

LETTER  IX. 

Erection  of  the  Zayat. — Burman  preaching. — Remarks  on  the  Bur- 
man Language. — Inquirers. — First  Burman  Convert. — Baptism 
of  Moung  Nau. — Death  of  the  Burman  Emperor  ....  page  144 

LETTER  X. 

Departure  of  Mr.  Wheelock. — Visit  of  the  Teacher,  Moung  Shway- 
gnong. — Of  Moung  Ing. — Baptism  of  Moung  Byaay  and  Moung 
Thahlah. — Death  of  Mr.  Wheelock page  178 

LETTER  XI. 

Burman  School. — Closing  of  the  Zayat.— Voyage  to  Ava.— Au- 
dience of  the  Emperor. — Instance  of  Persecution. — Return  to 
Rangoon. — New  Inquirers — Departure  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Col- 
man  page  210 


CONTENTS. 


XV 


LETTER  XII. 

Death  of  Mr.  Colman — Baptism  of  Moung  Shway-bay,  Moung 
Gway,  and  Moung  Nyo-dway. — Moung  Shway-gnong  and  Mah 
Men-lay. — Departure  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Judson  for  Bengal. — 
Return  to  Rangoon. — Tolerant  Spirit  of  the  Viceroy. — Baptism 
of  Moung  Ing page  258 

LETTER  XIII. 

Re-opening  of  the  Zayat. — Curious  metaphysical  Character. — 
Baptism  of  Mah  Myat-lay.  — First  Christian  Burman  Mar- 
riage   page  299 


LETTER  XIV. 

Mrs.  Judson’s  Departure  for  America. — Death  of  Moung  Thahlah. 
Arrival  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Price. — Baptism  of  Moung  Thah-ay, 
Men- oo,  and  May-Mee. — Departure  of  Mr.  Judson  and  Dr. 
Price  for  Ava. — Conclusion page  312. 


MISSION 


. • i > 


. 


, 

— noli 


MISSION 


TO  THE 

BURMAN  EMPIRE. 

&• 


LETTER  I. 

Ship  Amity,  August,  1822. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

After  such  continued  proofs  of  your  affectionate 
regard,  and  kind  concern  in  my  welfare,  it  would, 
indeed,  be  the  height  of  ingratitude,  should  I 
longer  delay  to  comply  with  the  request,  so  often 
made,  to  write  you  a particular  and  connected 
account  of  the  origin,  progress,  and  success  of  the 
American  Baptist  mission  to  the  Burman  Empire. 

My  present  state  of  convalescence,  together 
with  freedom  from  interruptions  during  my  pas- 
sage to  America,  I am  happy  to  say,  allow  the 
gratification  of  my  feelings  in  complying  with 
your  wishes  ; and,  though  an  employment  of  this 
nature  will  have  a tendency  to  refresh  my  mind 
with  scenes  of  trial,  the  very  recital  of  which  is 
appalling  to  human  nature,  it  will,  at  the  same 
time,  recal  to  my  recollection  the  tender  mercies 

B 


2 AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

of  our  heavenly  Father,  whose  unseen  hand  has 
supported,  sustained,  and  delivered,  when  no 
created  arm  could  succour,  and  whose  loving- 
kindness has  been  richly  experienced  in  the  very 
storms  of  adversity.  To  the  honour  of  Divine 
grace  would  I record,  that  we  have  never  encoun- 
tered trials  greater  than  we  have  been  enabled  to 
bear,  and  a way  for  escape  from  imminent  danger 
and  peril  has  always  been  provided. 

Previously  to  a personal  relation,  a slight 
sketch  of  the  Burman  Empire,  its  geographical 
situation,  government,  and  some  of  the  principal 
traits  in  the  character  of  its  inhabitants,  may  not 
be  uninteresting. 

This  empire  comprises  the  former  kingdoms  of 
Arracan,  Ava,  and  Pegue,  whose  sovereigns  were 
displaced  by  the  celebrated  Alompra,  the  founder 
of  the  present  dynasty,  or  by  his  successors. 
This,  and  some  adjacent  countries,  have  some- 
times been  termed  Indo-Chinese  nations,  as  si- 
tuated between  India  Proper  and  China.  The 
empire  of  Burmah,  in  its  present  state,  is  about 
1200  miles  in  length,  and  8 or  900  in  the 
broadest  part.  It  extends  from  the  9th  to  the 
28th  degree  North  latitude,  and  from  the  91st 
to  the  108th  East  longitude ; and  contains  a 
population  estimated  at  about  nineteen  millions. 
The  northern  part  of  the  country  is  barren  and 
mountainous ; but  the  plains  and  valleys,  situated 
more  southerly,  are  very  fertile.  The  climate  is 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


3 


considered  salubrious,  and  the  natives  are  remark- 
ably healthy  and  vigorous.  The  government  is 
strictly  monarchical.  The  emperor  is  an  absolute 
sovereign,  and  is  regarded  as  the  sole  lord  and 
proprietor  of  life  and  property  in  his  dominions  ; 
and,  without  the  concurrence  of  any,  his  word  is 
irresistible  law.  Four  private  ministers  of  state, 
(called  Atwenwoon)  and  four  public  ministers  of 
state,  (Woongyee)  are  the  organs  of  administra- 
tion. The  latter  compose  the  supreme  court  of 
the  empire,  (Tlowtdau)  in  the  name  of  which  all 
imperial  edicts  are  issued. 

The  Burman  empire  is  divided  into  districts, 
each  of  which  is  governed  by  a viceroy,  (Myoo- 
woon)  and  a court,  (Yongdau).  The  district 
courts  are  composed  of  a president,  (Yawoon) — 
chief  magistrate,  (Sit-kai) — collectors  of  the  port, 
(Akoukwoon) — auditors,  (Narkandau) — and  se- 
cretaries, (Saragyee). 

The  members  of  the  district  courts,  and  the 
wives,  relations,  and  favourites  of  viceroys,  have 
also  the  privilege  of  holding  private  courts,  and 
of  deciding  petty  causes,  subject  to  appeal  to 
higher  authority. 

The  Burmans  are  Boodhists  or  a nation  of 
atheists.  They  believe  that  existence  involves  in 
itself  the  principles  of  misery  and  destruction  : 
consequently,  there  is  no  eternal  God.  The 
whole  universe,  say  they,  is  only  destruction  and 
re-production.  It  therefore  becomes  a wise  man 


4 AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

to  raise  his  desires  above  all  things  that  exist,  and 
aspire  to  Nigban,  the  -state  in  which  there  is  no 
existence.  Rewards  and  punishments  follow  me- 
ritorious and  sinful  acts,  agreeably  to  the  nature 
of  things.  Gaudama,  their  last  Boodh,  or  deity, 
in  consequence  of  meritorious  acts,  arrived  at  that 
state  of  perfection,  which  made  him  deserving  of 
annihilation, — the  supreme  good.  His  instructions 
are  still  in  force,  and  will  continue  till  the  appear- 
ance of  the  next  deity,  who  is  supposed  now  to 
exist  somewhere  in  embryo,  and  who,  when  he 
appears,  as  the  most  perfect  of  all  beings,  will 
introduce  a new  dispensation.  The  Boodhist  sys- 
tem of  morality  is  pure,  though  it  is  destitute  of 
power  to  produce  purity  of  life  in  those  who  pro- 
fess it. 

The  Burmans  are  a lively,  industrious,  and 
energetic  race  of  people,  and  farther  advanced 
in  civilization  than  most  of  the  Eastern  nations. 
They  are  frank  and  candid,  and  destitute  of  that 
pusillanimity  which  characterizes  the  Hindoos ; 
and  of  that  revengeful  malignity  which  is  a lead- 
ing trait  in  the  Malay  character.  Some  of  their 
men  are  powerful  logicians,  and  take  delight  in 
investigating  new  subjects.  Their  books  are 
numerous ; some  of  them  written  in  the  most 
flowing,  beautiful  style : and  much  ingenuity  is 
manifested  in  the  construction  of  their  stories. 

All  the  boys  in  the  empire  are  taught  by  the 
priests,  who  are  dependent  for  their  support  on 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


5 


the  contributions  of  the  people  ; but  no  attention 
is  given  to  female  education,  excepting  in  a few 
instances  in  the  higher  classes  of  society. 

From  the  above  observations,  my  dear  Sir,  you 
may  form  some  idea  of  the  Burmans  ; but,  on  the 
sanguinary  nature  of  their  government,  prudential 
reasons  urge  my  silence. 

Still  hoping  for  an  interest  in  your  prayers, 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 


A.  H.  J 


6 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


LETTER  II. 


Ship  Amity,  August,  1822. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

I now  commence  a relation  of  those  views  and 
feelings,  which  first  induced  Mr.  Judson  to  engage 
in  missions. 

Soon  after  he  had  graduated,  at  one  of  our 
American  universities,  he  commenced  making  the 
tour  of  the  United  States.  Some  providential  oc- 
currences, while  on  his  journey,  led  him  to  doubt 
the  truth  of  those  deistical  sentiments  which  he 
had  recently  adopted.  His  mind  became  so  deeply 
impressed  with  the  probability  of  the  Divine 
authenticity  of  the  Scriptures,  that  he  could  no 
longer  continue  his  journey,  but  returned  to  his 
father’s  house,  for  the  express  purpose  of  ex- 
amining thoroughly  the  foundation  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion.  After  continuing  his  investigations 
for  some  time,  he  became  convinced  that  the 
Scriptures  were  of  Divine  origin,  and  that  he 
himself  was  in  a lost  situation  by  nature,  and 
needed  renovation  previous  to  an  admittance  into 
heaven.  It  now  became  his  sole  inquiry,  “ What 
shall  I do  to  be  saved  ? ” 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


7 


A theological  seminary  at  Andover,  Massachu- 
setts, was  about  this  time  established ; but  the 
rules  of  the  institution  required  evidence  of  evan- 
gelical piety  in  all  who  were  admitted.  Mr. 
Judson  was  desirous  of  entering  this  college,  for 
the  purpose  of  being  benefited  by  the  theological 
lectures;  but  hardly  ventured  to  make  applica- 
tion, conscious  that  he  was  destitute  of  the  proper 
qualifications.  His  ardent  desire,  however,  of 
becoming  acquainted  with  the  religious  students, 
and  of  being  in  a situation  to  gain  religious  in- 
struction, overcame  every  obstacle,’  and  he  ap- 
plied for  admittance ; at  the  same  time  assuring 
the  professors  of  his  having  no  hope  that  he  had 
been  a subject  of  regenerating  grace.  He  was, 
notwithstanding,  admitted  ; and,  in  the  course  of 
a few  weeks,  gained  satisfactory  evidence  of  hav- 
ing obtained  an  interest  in  Christ,  and  turned  his 
attention  to  those  studies  which  were  most  calcu- 
lated to  make  him  useful  in  the  ministry. 

Some  time  in  the  last  year  of  his  residence  in 
this  theological  seminary,  he  met  with  Dr.  Bu- 
chanan’s “ Star  in  the  East.”  This  first  led  his 
thoughts  to  an  Eastern  mission.  The  subject  ha- 
rassed his  mind  from  day  to  day,  and  he  felt 
deeply  impressed  with  the  importance  of  making 
some  attempt  to  rescue  the  perishing  millions  of 
the  East.  He  communicated  these  impressions 
to  the  professors  and  students,  but  they  all  dis- 
couraged him.  He  then  wrote  to  the  Directors 


8 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


of  the  London  Missionary  Society,  explained  his 
views,  and  requested  information  on  the  subject 
of  missions.  He  received  a most  encouraging- 
reply,  and  an  invitation  to  visit  England,  to  ob- 
tain in  person  the  necessary  information. 

Soon  after  this,  Messrs.  Nott,  Newell  and  Hall 
joined  him,  all  of  them  resolving  to  leave  their 
native  land,  and  engage  in  the  arduous  work  of 
missionaries,  as  soon  as  Providence  should  open  a 
way.  At  a meeting  of  the  Massachusetts  Asso- 
ciation, Mr.  Judson  and  his  associates  presented 
a paper,  which  first  made  known  to  the  public 
their  missionary  designs.  This,  together  with 
further  representations  and  conversations,  origin- 
ated the  “ American  Board  of  Commissioners  for 
Foreign  Missions.” 

Shortly  after  the  formation  of  this  Board,  Mr. 
Judson  was  authorized  by  its  members  to  go  on  a 
mission  of  inquiry  to  England,  and  to  ascertain 
what  degree  of  assistance  could  be  obtained,  in 
case  our  own  funds  should  be  inadequate  to  the 
undertaking.  On  his  voyage  thither,  the  ship 
was  taken  by  a French  privateer ; and,  as  if  to 
try  the  purity  of  his  missionary  zeal,  Mr.  Judson 
was  put  on  board,  and,  after  being  detained  as 
a prisoner  for  several  weeks,  was  safely  conveyed 
to  the  dungeon  of  a French  prison  in  Bayonne. 
Through  the  assistance,  however,  of  an  American 
gentleman,  who  saw  Mr.  J.  conveyed  through  the 
streets,  he  procured  his  release,  and,  after  a most 


TO  THE  BUK1IAN  EMPIRE.  9 

difficult  struggle  to  obtain  official  passports  from 
Napoleon,  (it  was  in  1811,)  he  was  allowed  to 
proceed  through  the  country,  and  to  pass  the 
Channel  to  England.  In  that  highly  favoured 
land,  he  obtained  all  the  assistance,  encourage- 
ment, and  information  he  desired,  and  returned 
again  to  America,  after  an  absence  of  nearly  a year. 

A few  months  after  his  return,  the  Board  came 
to  a resolution  of  sending  the  missionaries  in  the 
first  ship  ready  to  sail  for  the  East. 

Mr.  Rice,  another  student  at  Andover,  whose 
mind  had  long  been  impressed  with  the  melan- 
choly situation  of  the  heathen,  but  who,  hitherto, 
had  been  undetermined,  now  offered  himself  to 
the  Board,  and  begged  to  be  allowed  the  privi- 
lege of  accompanying  his  brethren. 

In  the  winter  of  1812,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newell, 
Mr.  Judson,  and  myself,  embarked  from  Salem, 
on  board  the  Caravan  ; at  the  same  time  the  other 
three  missionaries  sailed  from  Philadelphia. 

We  arrived  in  Calcutta,  in  May,  after  a plea- 
sant passage  of  four  months.  But  our  heavenly 
Father  saw  our  unfitness  to  engage  in  his  service, 
previously  to  our  entering  a disciplinary  school. 
In  our  native  country  we  had  never  known  trials, 
or  adversity  ; and  though  we  had,  I trust,  endea- 
voured to  count  the  cost,  and  expected  a frequent 
cloudy  sky  in  our  missionary  atmosphere,  it  was 
our  prevailing  hope,  that  our  sun  would  still  shine 
bright. 


10  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

And  now,  my  dear  Sir,  I need  make  no  apology 
for  detailing  circumstances  relating  to  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Honourable  East  India  Company. 
You  well  know  the  prejudices  which  existed,  rela- 
tive to  this  subject,  before  the  renewal  of  the  char- 
ter in  1813.  We  arrived  in  Calcutta  during  the 
administration  of  Lord  Minto.  A few  days  after 
our  landing,  we  received  orders  to  return  imme- 
diately to  America,  in  the  same  ship  in  which  we 
came ; and  our  captain  was  refused  a port-clear- 
ance, unless  he  would  enter  into  an  engagement 
to  take  us  back.  This  was  an  occurrence  we  did 
not  expect,  and  was  aimed  at  the  foundation  of 
our  dearest  hopes.  Our  friends  in  Calcutta  in- 
formed us  that  there  was  no  method  of  evading 
this  order,  unless  we  could  obtain  permission  to 
go  to  some  place  not  under  the  Honourable  Com- 
pany’s government.  It  was  then  our  wish  to  go 
to  the  Burman  empire ; but  the  existing  difficul- 
ties between  the  English  and  Burman  govern- 
ments, rendered  the  attempt  presumptuous.  We 
accordingly  made  application  for  permission  to 
go  to  the  Isle  of  France,  which  was  readily 
granted.  One  vessel  only  was  on  the  point  of 
sailing,  and  she  could  accommodate  but  two 
passengers.  The  situation  of  my  friend,  Mrs. 
Newell,  rendered  it  necessary  that  she  should  ar- 
rive at  some  home  as  early  as  possible.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Newell,  therefore,  embraced  the  opportunity 
this  ship  presented. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  II 

We  were  detained  in  Calcutta  two  months 
longer.  The  government  noticing  our  continu- 
ance, supposed,  probably,  that  we  intended  re- 
maining in  Bengal,  and  issued  a most  peremptory 
order  for  our  being  sent  immediately  on  board 
one  of  the  Honourable  Company’s  vessels,  bound 
to  England.  Mr.  Rice  had,  in  the  mean  time, 
joined  us.  A petty  officer  accompanied  Messrs. 
Rice  and  Judson  to  their  place  of  residence,  and 
requested  them  not  to  leave  it  without  permis- 
sion. We  saw  our  names  inserted  in  the  public 
papers,  as  passengers  on  board  a certain  ship,  and 
now  there  appeared  very  little  hope  of  our  escape. 
Mr.  Rice  and  Mr.  Judson,  however,  soon  ascer- 
tained that  a ship  would  sail  for  the  Isle  of 
France  in  two  days.  They  applied  for  a pass 
from  the  chief  magistrate,  but  were  refused. — 
They  communicated  to  the  captain  of  the  ship 
their  circumstances,  and  asked  if  he  would  ven- 
ture to  take  them  on  board  without  a pass  ? He 
replied  that  he  would  be  neutral ; that  there  was 
his  ship,  and  that  they  might  do  as  they  pleased. 

With  the  assistance  of  the  gentleman  in  whose 
house  we  were  residing,  we  obtained  coolies 
(porters)  to  convey  our  baggage,  and,  at  twelve 
o’clock  at  night,  we  embarked,  though  the  gates 
of  the  dock-yards  were  closed,  and  the  opening 
of  them,  at  that  time  of  the  night,  was  quite  con- 
trary to  the  regulations  of  the  Company.  The 
next  morning  the  ship  sailed.  She  had  pro- 


12  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

ceeded  down  the  river,  for  two  days,  when  a go- 
vernment despatch  arrived,  forbidding  the  pilot 
to  go  farther,  as  passengers  were  on  board  who 
had  been  ordered  to  England.  It  was  one  o’clock 
in  the  morning  when  this  prohibition  was  re- 
ceived, and  as  the  vessel  had,  providentially,  an- 
chored near  the  only  English  dwelling  within  seve- 
ral miles,  we  immediately  went  on  shore. 

The  next  morning,  the  captain,  though  very  kind 
and  obliging,  informed  us,  that  his  duty  to  his 
employers  and  government,  required  that  our  bag- 
gage should  be  removed ; and  that  we  could  pro- 
ceed no  farther.  We  were  successful  in  procuring 
boats  for  our  conveyance,  word  was  returned  to 
the  governor  that  no  such  persons  were  on  board, 
and  the  ship  was  allowed  to  go  on  her  way. 

We  knew  not  what  course  to  take,  feeling  as- 
sured that,  should  we  return  to  Calcutta,  we 
should  be  sent  to  England,  and,  if  we  continued 
at  the  place  in  which  we  then  were,  we  should 
certainly  be  discovered.  We  therefore  went  down 
the  river  as  far  as  Fultah,  about  fifty  miles  from 
Calcutta,  where  we  procured  lodgings.  Here  we 
partook,  in  some  measure,  of  the  feelings  of  those 
who  are  every  moment  expecting  a discovery ; 
and,  though  we  were  conscious  of  having  done 
our  duty,  in  thus  refusing  to  comply  with  the 
orders  of  government,  we  could  not  help  feeling 
somewhat  alarmed  at  the  arrival  of  every  boat  at 
the  Ghaut,  and  the  appearance  of  every  new  face. 


TO  THE  BIRMAN  EMPIRE.  13 

We  had  continued  in  this  situation  four  days, 
anxiously  applying  to  every  ship  passing  down 
the  river,  for  admittance,  to  whatever  port  bound. 
We  had  given  up  all  hope  of  escape,  and  thought 
we  must  return  again  to  Calcutta,  when  a letter 
was  handed  to  Mr.  Judson,  containing  a pass  to 
go  on  board  the  ship  we  had  so  lately  left.  We 
knew  not  who  procured  it,  but  our  hearts  were 
rejoiced,  we  thanked  God,  and  took  courage. 
The  ship  had  been  gone  down  the  river  four  days, 
and  was  probably  out  at  sea.  It  was  then  dark, 
and  we  were  about  seventy  miles  from  Saugar, 
the  place  where  the  ship  lay,  if  not  gone  to  sea. 
But  there  was  no  alternative.  We  went  on  board 
our  boats,  the  boatmen  rowed  hard  all  night  and 
all  the  next  day,  at  the  close  of  which  we  had 
the  inexpressible  pleasure  of  discovering  the  ship 
safely  anchored  in  Saugar  roads,  having  been 
detained  much  longer  than  was  expected,  from 
the  circumstance  that  some  of  the  Lascars  had 
not  arrived. 

These  providential  occurrences,  my  dear  Sir, 
had  such  a tendency  to  strengthen  our  trust  and 
confidence  in  God,  that  we  now  felt  assured  he 
had  something  for  us  to  do,  and  that  he  would,  in 
his  own  time  and  way,  mark  out  our  path  before 
us.  The  precious  moments  we  enjoyed,  in  sweet 
communion  with  God,  more,  far  more,  than  com- 
pensated for  our  unexpected  trials. 

We  seriously  thought  of  making  an  effort  to 


14  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

establish  a mission  on  the  island  of  Madagascar, 
thinking  it  was,  perhaps,  the  design  of  Providence 
in  sending  us  to  the  Isle  of  France,  for  that  pur- 
pose. With  these  views  we  immediately  com- 
menced studying  the  French  language,  continued 
it  during  our  passage,  and  for  some  time  after  our 
arrival. 

The  intelligence  of  the  death  of  our  beloved 
friend,  Mrs.  Newell,  was  a shock  we  were  not 
prepared  to  expect.  On  our  voyage  we  had  con- 
stantly anticipated  the  pleasure  of  again  meeting 
our  dear  friends  and  early  associates,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Newell.  It  had  scarcely  entered  our  thoughts 
that  either  of  them  would  be  no  more.  But  we 
were,  by  this  solemn  providence,  taught  a lesson 
we  had  been  backward  in  learning,  that  our 
dearest  plans  might  be  defeated  by  the  call  of 
death. 

After  our  feelings  had,  in  some  measure,  sub- 
sided, we  made  inquiries  respecting  Madagascar, 
but,  finding  it  impossible  there  to  establish  a 
mission,  our  attention  was  again  turned  to  the 
East.  Governor  Farquhar  had  received  orders 
from  the  supreme  government  in  Bengal,  to 
“ have  an  eye  on  those  American  missionaries.” 
He,  however,  very  kindly  and  politely  informed 
us  that  we  were  at  liberty  to  go  where  we  wished, 
so  far  as  he  was  concerned,  and  we  accordingly 
embraced  the  first  opportunity  which  presented 
itself  for  our  return  to  India. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  15 

While  at  the  Isle  of  France  it  was  thought  ad- 
visable, both  by  Mr.  Rice  and  Mr.  Judson,  that 
the  former  should  return  to  America,  and  attempt 
establishing  Foreign  missionary  societies  among 
the  Baptists. 

After  three  months’  residence  at  the  Isle  of 
France,  we  embarked  for  Madras,  at  which  place 
we  arrived  in  June,  1813.  Here,  again,  we  were 
assured  of  the  hostile  disposition  of  the  Honour- 
able Company’s  government  towards  missionary 
exertions,  as  manifested  in  a late  attempt  to  send 
to  England  our  former  missionary  associates,  the 
Rev.  Messrs.  Nott  and  Hall,  who  had  proceeded 
to  Bombay.* 

Mr.  Judson’s  first  object,  therefore,  was  to 
ascertain  what  ships  were  lying  in  the  Madras 
roads,  and  he  found  the  only  one  which  would 
sail,  previously  to  information  being  given  to  the 
Supreme  government  in  Beng-al  of  our  return  to 
India,  was  bound  to  Rangoon.  A mission  to  the 
Burman  empire,  desirable  as  it  was,  we  had  been 
in  the  habit  of  viewing  with  a kind  of  horror, 
and,  though  dissuaded  from  the  attempt  by  our 
friends  at  Madras,  we  now  saw  the  hand  of  Pro- 
vidence pointing  to  that  region,  as  the  scene  of 
our  future  labours. 


* Our  excellent  friend,  Mr.  M.,  was,  probably,  the  instrument  in 
the  hands  of  God,  of  their  continuance  in  Bombay. 


1G  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

As  I shall  frequently  be  obliged  to  have  re- 
course to  letters  and  documents,  long  since  pub- 
lished in  America,  allow  me,  in  this  place,  to  insert 
a few  extracts  from  a letter  written  at  this  time, 
as  descriptive  of  our  state  of  feeling  when  about 
to  embark. 

“ My  heart  often  sinks  within  me,  when  I think 
of  living  among  a people  whose  tender  mercies 
are  cruel.  But,  when  I reflect  upon  their  mise- 
rable state,  as  destitute  of  the  Gospel,  and  that  it 
is  easy  for  our  heavenly  Father  to  protect  us  in 
the  midst  of  danger,  I feel  willing  to  go,  and  live 
and  die  among  them ; and  it  is  our  daily  prayer 
that  it  may  please  God  to  enable  us  to  continue 
in  that  savage  country.  Farewell  to  the  privi- 
leges and  conveniences  of  civilized  life  ! Fare- 
well to  refined  Christian  society  ! We  shall  enjoy 
these  comforts  no  more ; but  Burmah  will  be  a 
good  place  to  grow  in  grace,  to  live  near  to  God, 
and  be  prepared  to  die.  O,  my  dear  parents  and 
sisters,  how  little  you  know  how  to  estimate  your 
enjoyments,  in  your  quiet  homes,  with  all  the 
comforts  of  life ! How  little  you  know  how  to 
prize  dear  Christian  society,  as  you  have  never 
been  deprived  of  it ! How  little  you  can  realize 
the  toils  and  perplexities  of  traversing  the  ocean  ; 
and  how  little  you  can  know  of  the  solid  comfort 
of  trusting  in  God,  when  dangers  stand  threaten- 
ing to  devour  ! But  these  privations,  these  dan- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


17 


gers  and  toils,  and  these  comforts,  are  ours,  and 
we  rejoice  in  them,  and  think  it  an  inestimable 
privilege  that  our  heavenly  Father  has  given  us,  in 
allowing  us  to  suffer  for  his  cause.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 

A.  H.  J. 


c 


18 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


LETTER  III. 


Ship  Amity,  September,  1822. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

o ur  residence  in  Madras  was  very  short.  When 
our  dear  friends,*  at  that  settlement,  saw  we 
were  determined  on  going  to  Burmah,  they  did 
all  in  their  power  to  smooth  the  way  before  us, 
by  preparing  those  articles  which  they  considered 
necessary  on  our  first  arrival.  Among  other 
things,  a valuable  European  woman  servant  was 
provided.  We  sent  her  on  board  two  days  before 
we  went  ourselves.  On  the  22d  of  June  we  em- 
barked for  Rangoon.  The  ship  was  just  getting 
under  way,  when  the  servant,  above  mentioned, 
fell  on  the  floor,  apparently  in  a fit,  but  all  our 
endeavours  to  recover  her  were  ineffectual,  for  she 
never  breathed  more.  It  was  then  too  late  to 
supply  her  place,  and  we  were  obliged  to  pro- 
ceed without  an  attendant.  I was  immediately 
taken  dangerously  ill,  and  thought,  indeed,  that 
the  time  of  my  departure  was  at  hand,  and  that 


* Among  these  kind  friends,  who  were  solicitous  for  our  welfare, 
I would  mention  the  Rev.  Mr.  M.  Thomson,  with  whom  you  are 
well  acquainted,  and  Mr.  Strachan. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  19 

all  my  toils  and  perplexities  were  at  an  end. 
But  a particular  account  of  our  dangerous  voyage, 
and  the  gloomy  prospects  on  our  first  arrival  in 
Burmah,  is  given  in  a letter  from  Mr.  Judson  to 
the  Board  of  Missions. — “ We  commended  our- 
selves to  the  care  of  God,  and  embarked  in  a 
crazy  old  vessel,  manned  entirely  by  native  sailors, 
the  captain  being  the  only  person  on  board  that 
could  speak  our  language,  and  we  had  no  other 
apartment  than  what  was  made  by  canvass.  Our 
passage  was  very  tedious.  Mrs.  Judson  was  taken 
dangerously  ill,  and  continued  so,  until,  at  one 
period,  I came  to  experience  the  awful  sensation, 
which  necessarily  resulted  from  the  expectation 
of  an  immediate  separation  from  her,  who  was 
the  only  remaining  companion  of  my  wanderings. 
About  the  same  time,  the  captain  being  unable 
to  make  the  Carnicobar  island,  where  he  intended 
taking  a cargo  of  cocoa  nuts,  we  were  driven 
into  a dangerous  strait,  between  the  Little  and 
Great  Andamans,  two  savage  coasts,  where  the 
captain  had  never  been  before,  and  where,  if  we 
had  been  cast  on  shore,  we  should  (according  to 
all  accounts)  have  been  killed  and  eaten  by  the 
natives.  But,  as  one  evil  is  sometimes  an  anti- 
dote to  another,  so  it  happened  with  us.  Our 
being  driven  into  this  dangerous,  but  quiet  chan- 
nel, brought  immediate  relief  to  the  agitated  and 
exhausted  frame  of  Mrs.  Judson,  and  conduced 
essentially  to  her  recovery.  And,  in  the  event, 


20  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

we  were  safely  conducted  over  the  black  rocks, 
which  we  sometimes  saw  in  the  gulf  below ; and, 
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  island,  found  favour- 
able winds,  which  gently  wafted  us  forward  to 
Rangoon.  But,  on  our  arrival  here,  other  trials 
awaited  us. 

“We  had  never  before  seen  a place  where  Eu- 
ropean influence  had  not  contributed  to  smooth 
and  soften  the  rough  features  of  uncultivated 
nature.  The  prospect  of  Rangoon,  as  we  ap- 
proached, was  quite  disheartening.  I went  on 
shore,  just  at  night,  to  take  a view  of  the  place, 
and  the  mission  house  ; but  so  dark,  and  cheer- 
less, and  unpromising  did  all  things  appear,  that 
the  evening  of  that  day,  after  my  return  to  the 
ship,  we  have  marked  as  the  most  gloomy  and 
distressing  that  we  ever  passed.  Such  were  our 
t weaknesses,  that  we  felt  we  had  no  portion  here 
below,  and  found  consolation  only  in  looking 
beyond  our  pilgrimage,  which  we  tried  to  flatter 
ourselves  would  be  short,  to  that  peaceful  region, 
where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the 
weary  are  at  rest.  But  if  ever  we  commended 
ourselves,  sincerely  and  without  reserve,  to  the 
disposal  of  our  heavenly  Father,  it  was  on  this 
evening.  And,  after  some  recollections  and  prayer, 
we  experienced  something  of  the  presence  of 
Him  who  cleaveth  closer  than  a brother ; some- 
thing of  that  peace  which  our  Saviour  bequeathed 
to  his  followers — a legacy  which  we  know,  from 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  21 

this  experience,  endures  when  the  fleeting  plea- 
sures and  unsubstantial  riches  of  the  world  are 
passed  away.  The  next  day  Mrs.  Judson  was 
carried  into  the  town,  being  unable  to  walk,  and 
we  found  a home  at  the  mission  house  erected 
by  Mr.  Chater.  We  soon  began  to  find  that  it 
was  in  our  hearts  to  live  and  die  with  the  Bur- 
mans.  We  gradually  became  reconciled  to  the 
place,  and  from  a conviction  of  the  superior  im- 
portance of  this  to  any  unoccupied  station,  and 
a hope  that,  notwithstanding  the  frightful  ac- 
counts we  had  received,  we  should  find  it  prac- 
ticable to  remain,  we  were  induced  to  pitch  our 
tent.  We  applied  very  soon  to  the  study  of  the 
language,  and  in  this  we  have  been  closely  en- 
gaged to  the  present  time,  so  far  as  Mrs.  Jud- 
son’s  health,  and  my  numerous  interruptions  have 
permitted.” 

We  now,  my  dear  Sir,  felt  ourselves,  in  every 
sense  of  the  word,  on  heathen  ground.  Not  an 
individual  of  any  description  with  whom  we 
could  unite  in  social  prayer.  We  were  sur- 
rounded by  despotism,  avarice,  and  cruelty ; and 
the  darkness,  the  dreadful  moral  darkness,  of 
heathen  idolatry,  was  evident,  wherever  we 
turned  our  eyes'.  Our  tongues  could  not  per- 
form their  office,  for  the  language  of  the  Burmans 
was  then  to  us  a perfect  jargon,  and  no  ani- 
mating prospect  of  speedily  overcoming  this  dif- 
ficulty, cheered  the  gloomy  scene.  Yet  our 


22  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

heavenly  Father  suffered  us  not  to  despond.  He 
compelled  us  to  feel  the  full  force  of  those  pre- 
cious promises,  relative  to  the  conversion  of  the 
heathen,  which  encouraged  us  to  look  forward 
with  a degree  of  hope,  which  has  since  asto- 
nished ourselves.  We  found  the  language  ex- 
tremely difficult,  and  we  had  no  teacher  who  un- 
derstood both  the  English  and  Burman  languages. 
Our  only  mode  of  ascertaining  the  names  of  the 
objects  which  met  our  eye,  was  by  pointing  to 
them,  in  the  presence  of  our  teacher,  who  would 
immediately  speak  the  names  in  Burman ; we  then 
expressed  them  as  nearly  as  possible  by  the  Roman 
character,  till  we  had  sufficiently  acquired  the 
power  of  the  Burman. 

As  the  state  of  the  mission,  from  the  period 
above  mentioned  to  the  present  time,  has  been 
transmitted  to  the  American  Board,  a selection 
and  compilation  of  those  statements,  will  prin- 
cipally constitute  my  future  narrative  : — From 
a journal,  commenced  July,  1813,  and  continued 
until  September,  1815,  the  following  extracts  are 
taken. 

“ We  feel  disappointed  in  not  finding  Mr. 
Carey  in  Rangoon,  as  he  would  be  able  to  afford 
us  some  assistance  in  the  acquisition  of  the  lan- 
guage. He  has  gone  to  Ava,  having  received 
an  order  to  vaccinate  some  of  the  members  of 
the  royal  family.  Mrs.  Carey  is  a native  of  the 
country,  though  of  European  extraction.  She 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  23 

has  the  entire  charge  of  the  family,  being  fami- 
liar with  the  language,  which  enables  her  to  give 
directions  to  the  servants.  This  circumstance 
relieves  me  from  every  concern  of  this  nature, 
so  that  I devote  my  whole  time  to  the  study  of 
the  language,  which  we  find  very  difficult ; but, 
with  diligence  and  perseverance,  I doubt  not  we 
shall  be  able  to  read,  write,  and  speak  it,  in  a few 
years,  with  ease. 

“ Our  teacher  is  a good-natured,  intelligent 
man.  Although  it  is  contrary  to  the  cast  of  a 
Hindoo,  he  sits  in  a chair  by  us,  and  will  eat 
with  us.  When  he  first  came,  he  was  not  very 
willing  to  instruct  me,  appearing  to  feel  that  it 
was  rather  beneath  him  to  instruct  a female,  as 
the  females  here  are  held  in  the  lowest  estima- 
tion. But  when  he  saw  I was  determined  to  per- 
severe, and  that  Mr.  Judson  was  as  desirous  that 
he  should  instruct  me  as  himself,  he  was  more 
attentive. 

“As  it  respects  our  food,  we  get  along  much 
better  than  we  expected.  We  have  no  bread, 
butter,  cheese,  potatoes,  or  scarcely  any  thing 
to  which  we  have  been  accustomed.  Our  prin- 
cipal food  is  rice  and  curried  fowl,  and  fowls 
stewed  with  cucumbers.  But,  instead  of  mur- 
muring that  we  have  no  more  of  the  comforts  of 
life,  we  have  great  reason  to  be  thankful  that  we 
have  so  many. 

“ There  are  no  English  families  in  Rangoon, 


24  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

and  there  is  not  a female  in  all  Burmah  with 
whom  I can  converse.  The  country  presents  a 
rich  and  beautiful  appearance,  every  where  co- 
vered with  vegetation,  and,  if  cultivated,  would 
be  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world.  But  the  poor 
natives  have  little  inducement  to  labour,  or  to 
accumulate  property,  as  it  would,  probably,  be 
taken  from  them  by  their  oppressive  rulers. — 
Many  of  them  live  on  leaves  and  vegetables, 
which  grow  spontaneously,  and  some  actually  die 
with  hunger.  At  the  present  time  there  is  quite 
a famine.  Every  article  of  provision  is  extremely 
high  ; therefore  many  are  induced  to  steal  what- 
ever comes  in  their  way.  There  are  constant 
robberies  and  murders  committed.  Scarcely  a 
night  passes,  but  houses  are  broken  open,  and 
things  stolen  ; but  our  trust  and  confidence  are 
in  our  heavenly  Father,  who  can  easily  preserve 
and  protect  us,  though  a host  should  encamp 
about  us.  I think  God  has  taught  us,  by  expe- 
rience, what  it  is  to  trust  in  him,  and  to  find  com- 
fort and  peace  in  feeling  that  he  is  every  where 
present.  O,  for  more  ardent,  supreme  love  to  him, 
and  greater  willingness  to  suffer  in  his  cause  ! 

“ Rangoon , August  8th. — I again  take  my  pen, 
though  I have  nothing  new  to  communicate ; yet 
I feel  a pleasure  and  satisfaction,  too  great  to  be 
neglected,  in  writing  to  those  dear  friends,  whom 
I never  expect  to  see  again,  till  I meet  them  in 
the  eternal  world. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  25 

“ We  are  still  going  on  in  the  language, 
though  our  progress  is  so  slow  that  it  is  hardly 
perceptible.  You  can  form  no  idea  of  the  dif- 
ficulties of  acquiring  a language,  like  this,  with- 
out a dictionary,  grammar,  or  even  teacher, 
who  understands  both  the  English  and  Burman. 
We  should  be  quite  discouraged,  were  we  not 
convinced  that  the  acquisition  of  this  is  the  only 
means  by  which  we  can  communicate  religious 
truths  to  this  perishing  people. 

“ From  our  first  embarking  for  India,  we 
have  had  our  eye  on  this  empire,  as  a final  re- 
sidence ; but  we  have  been  repeatedly  discou- 
raged by  the  dreadful  accounts  we  have  had  of 
the  ferocity  and  barbarity  of  the  natives,  toge- 
ther with  the  many  privations  we  must  suffer 
among  entire  heathens.  Several  missionaries 
have  made  an  attempt  to  reside  here,  but  have 
been  discouraged,  and  left  the  place,  without 
effecting  any  thing.  And  some  of  these  mis- 
sionaries, we  had  reason  to  think,  possessed 
much  more  piety  and  devotedness  to  missions 
than  ourselves.  No  wonder,  then,  that  we  were 
discouraged.  But,  after  our  heavenly  Father 
had  severely  tried  us,  in  causing  us  to  be  driven 
from  place  to  place  ; he  shut  up  every  door,  and 
made  us  feel  willing  ‘ to  take  our  lives  in  our 
hands,’  and  to  come  to  this  heathen  land,  to  spend 
the  remainder  of  our  days. 

“ But,  will  you  believe  me,  when  I say  we  are 


26  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

cheerful  and  happy  ; though  we  find  the  govern- 
ment'and  people  just  as  we  expected;  though 
we  find  ourselves  almost  destitute  of  all  those 
sources  of  enjoyment,  to  which  we  have  been  ac- 
customed, and  are  in  the  midst  of  a people,  who, 
at  present,  are  almost  desperate,  on  account  of 
the  scarcity  of  provisions ; though  we  are  exposed 
to  robbers  by  night,  and  invaders  by  day,  yet  we 
both  unite  in  saying  we  never  were  happier,  never 
more  contented  in  any  situation,  than  the  present. 
We  feel  that  this  is  the  post  to  which  God  hath 
appointed  us ; that  we  are  in  the  path  of  duty ; 
and  in  a situation,  which,  of  all  others,  presents 
the  most  extensive  field  for  usefulness.  And, 
though  we  are  surrounded  with  danger  and  death, 
we  feel  that  God  can,  with  infinite  ease,  preserve 
and  support  us  under  the  most  heavy  sufferings. 
But,  for  these  feelings,  we  are  indebted  wholly  to 
the  free,  rich,  and  sovereign  grace  of  our  Re- 
deemer, and  are  still  dependent  on  him  for  a con- 
tinuance of  them  ; for  it  is  not  three  months  since 
we  looked  at  this  situation,  with  all  that  dread 
and  horror  which  you  can  imagine.  It  is  our 
daily  prayer,  that  we  may  be  continued  here,  and 
be  made  a blessing  to  the  poor  Burmans,  who  are 
perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge. 

“ But  we  mourn  our  unfitness  to  be  engaged  in 
the  great  work  of  communicating  religious  know- 
ledge to  the  dark  and  benighted  mind  of  a hea- 
then. Our  only  hope  is  in  God.  We  know  that 


TO  THE  fiUKMAN  EMPIRE.  27 

he  can  bless  his  own  truth  to  the  salvation  of  sin- 
ners, though  it  may  be  communicated  in  ever  so 
broken  a manner,  and  by  the  meanest  of  his  crea- 
tures. We  rejoice  that  this  great,  this  powerful 
God,  is  our  father  and  our  friend,  and  has  opened 
a way  of  access  for  us  sinners,  and  has  com- 
manded us  to  open  our  mouths  wide,  with  the 
promise  that  he  will  fill  them.  He  hath  also  said, 
he  ‘ will  give  the  heathen  to  his  Son,  for  an  inhe- 
ritance, and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for 
his  possession.’ 

“We  cannot  but  hope  the  glorious  day  is  draw- 
ing near,  when  the  promise  will  be  fulfilled ; and 
that,  among  other  heathen  nations,  Burmah, 
cruel,  avaricious,  idolatrous  Burmah,  will  say  to 
Jesus,  ‘What  have  I any  more  to  do  with  idols? 
Come  thou,  and  reign  over  us.’ 

“ O my  dear  parents  and  sisters,  pray  for  us, 
that  we  may  be  humble,  prayerful,  and  entirely 
devoted  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  Pray  for  these 
poor  people,  who  have  altars  and  temples  in  high 
places,  for  the  worship  of  the  prince  of  darkness. 
They  are  immortal  like  ourselves,  they  are  bound 
to  the  same  eternity,  and,  like  us,  they  are  ca- 
pable of  enjoying  or  suffering  endless  happiness 
or  eternal  misery. 

“ September , 1814. — Not  more  refreshing  to  the 
thirsty  sons  of  Afric  is  the  cooling  stream;  or 
more  luxurious  to  the  meagre,  half-starved  native 


28 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


Andaman,  is  a morsel  of  food,  than  your  letters, 
my  dear  sisters,  to  our  weary  and  almost  famished 
feelings.  Two  long  years  and  a half  had  elapsed 
sii\ce  we  left  our  native  country,  without  our 
hearing  one  word  from  any  of  our  American 
friends.  Thirteen  months  of  this  time  have  been 
spent  in  the  cruel,  avaricious,  benighted  country 
of  Burmah,  without  a single  Christian  friend,  or 
female  companion  of  any  kind. 

“ Our  home  is  in  the  mission  house,  built  by 
the  English  Baptist  Society,  on  the  first  arrival  of 
Messrs.  Chater  and  Carey  in  this  country.  It  is 
large  and  convenient,  situated  in  a rural  place, 
about  half  a mile  from  the  walls  of  the  town.  We 
have  gardens  enclosed,  containing  about  two 
acres  of  ground,  full  of  fruit  trees  of  various  kinds. 
In  the  dry  season  our  situation  is  very  agreeable. 
We  often  enjoy  a pleasant  walk,  within  our  own 
enclosure,  or  in  some  of  the  adjoining  villages. 

“ September  28th.-—' This  is  the  first  Sabbath 
that  we  have  united  in  commemorating  the  dying 
love  of  Christ  at  his  table.  Though  but  two  in 
number,  we  feel  the  command  as  binding,  and  the 
privilege  as  great,  as  though  there  were  more; 
and  we  have  indeed  found  it  refreshing  to  our 
souls. 

“ December  1 1th. — To-day,  for  the  first  time,  I 
have  visited  the  wife  of  the  viceroy.  I was  in- 
troduced to  her  by  a French  lady  who  has  fre- 
quently visited  her.  When  we  first  arrived  at  the 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  29 

government-house,  she  was  not  up,  consequently 
we  had  to  wait  some  time.  But  the  inferior 
wives  of  the  viceroy  diverted  us  much  by  their 
curiosity,  in  minutely  examining  every  thing  we 
had  on,  and  by  trying  on  our  gloves  and  bonnets, 
&c.  At  last  her  highness  made  her  appearance, 
dressed  richly  in  the  Burman  fashion,  with  a long- 
silver  pipe  in  her  mouth,  smoking.  At  her  ap- 
pearance, all  the  other  wives  took  their  seats  at  a 
respectful  distance,  and  sat  in  a crouching  pos- 
ture, without  speaking.  She  received  me  very 
politely,  took  me  by  the  hand,  seated  me  upon  a 
mat,  and  herself  by  me.  She  excused  herself  for 
not  coming  in  sooner,  saying  she  was  unwell. 
One  of  the  women  brought  her  a bunch  of  flowers, 
of  which  she  took  several  and  ornamented  my 
cap.  She  was  very  inquisitive  whether  I had  a 
husband  and  children,  whether  I was  my  hus- 
band’s first  wife — meaning  by  this,  whether  I was 
the  highest  among  them,  supposing  that  Mr.  Jud- 
son,  like  the  Burmans,  had  many  wives — and 
whether  I intended  tarrying  long  in  the  country. 

“ When  the  viceroy  came  in  I really  trembled  ; 
for  I never  before  beheld  such  a savage  looking- 
creature.  His  long  robe  and  enormous  spear  not 
a little  increased  my  dread.  He  spoke  to  me, 
however,  very  condescendingly,  and  asked  if  1 
would  drink  some  rum  or  wine.  When  I arose 
to  go,  her  highness  again  took  my  hand,  told  me 
she  was  happy  to  see  me,  that  I must  come  to 


30 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


see  her  every  day.  She  led  me  to  the  door ; I 
made  my  salaam,  and  departed.  My  only  object 
in  visiting  her  was,  that  if  we  should  get  into  any 
difficulty  with  the  Burmans,  I could  have  access 
to  her,  when  perhaps  it  would  not  be  possible  for 
Mr.  Judson  to  have  an  audience  with  the  viceroy. 

“We  intend  to  have  as  little  to  do  with  the 

*• 

government  people  as  possible,  as  our  usefulness 
will,  probably,  be  among  the  common  people. 
Mr.  Judson  lately  visited  the  viceroy,  when  he 
scarcely  deigned  to  look  at  him,  as  Englishmen 
are  no  uncommon  sight  in  this  country ; but  an 
English  female  is  quite  a curiosity. 

“ January  Wth,  1815. — Yesterday  we  left  the 
mission  house,  and  moved  into  one  in  town, 
partly  through  fear  of  robbers,  and  partly  for  the 
sake  of  being  more  with  the  natives,  and  learning 
more  of  their  habits  and  manners.  We  shall  also 
be  in  a way  of  getting  the  language  much  sooner, 
as  we  shall  hear  it  spoken  more  frequently  here, 
than  we  could  in  the  house  we  have  left. 

“ January  \&th.— Our  ears  are  continually  filled 
with  the  intelligence  of  robberies  and  murders. 
Last  night  a band  of  fifteen  or  twenty  attacked  a 
house  very  near  the  one  we  had  just  left ; and, 
after  stabbing  the  owner,  robbed  the  house  of 
every  thing  they  could  find.  The  robbers  were 
armed  with  large  knives,  spears,  and  guns,  which 
put  all  the  people  around  in  such  fear,  that  none 
dared  to  go  to  the  assistance  of  the  sufferers. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


31 


“ This  evening  Mr.  Judson  and  myself  went  to 
see  the  person  who  was  stabbed.  We  found  him 
lying  on  his  bed,  in  great  distress,  surrounded 
by  his  Burman  friends,  who  appeared  to  sympa- 
thize with  him  in  his  affliction.  The  poor  man 
was  anxious  to  know  if  Mr.  Judson  could  tell 
whether  he  would  live,  by  feeling  his  pulse ; but 
Mr.  Judson  told  him  he  was  not  a physician. 

“ The  viceroy  is  very  much  enraged  at  this 
daring  attempt,  and  has  sent  one  of  his  principal 
officers,  with  three  hundred  men,  in  search  of  the 
perpetrators. 

“ All  these  things  teach  us  the  great  need  of 
the  gospel  among  this  poor  people.  They  also 
teach  us  the  need  of  being  constantly  prepared 
for  a sudden,  violent  death.  O,  that  the  time 
may  soon  come,  when  this  people  will  be  able  to 
read  the  Scriptures  of  truth  in  their  own  language, 
and  believe  in  that  Saviour,  who  is  not  only  able 
to  save  them  from  such  dreadful  crimes,  but  to 
save  their  immortal  souls  from  eternal  misery. 

“ January  ‘10th. — In  consequence  of  the  rob- 
bery committed  a few  days  ago,  the  viceroy  or- 
dered seven  thieves  to  be  executed.  It  was  dark 
when  they  arrived  at  the  place  of  execution. 
They  were  tied  up  by  the  hands  and  feet,  and 
then  cut  open,  and  left  with  their  bowels  hanging- 
out.  They  are  to  remain  a spectacle  to  others 
for  three  days,  and  then  be  buried.  Their  im- 
mortal souls  entered  the  eternal  world  without 


32  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

ever  having  heard  of  Him,  who  was  put  to  death 
as  a malefactor,  to  save  the  guilty. 

“ A native  of  respectability  came  to  our  house, 
soon  after  the  execution,  and  Mr.  Judson  asked 
him  where  the  souls  of  the  robbers  had  gone  ? 
He  said  he  did  not  know  ; and  asked  if  the  souls 
of  wicked  men  did  not  enter  into  other  bodies, 
and  live  in  this  world  again  ? Mr.  Judson  told 
him  no,  but  they  were  fixed,  immoveably,  in 
another  state  of  existence. 

“ January  22d. — To-day  we  have  witnessed  the 
Burman  ceremonies  of  burying  a person  of  rank 
and  respectability.  He  was  nephew  to  the  pre- 
sent viceroy,  and  son  of  a neighbouring  governor. 
He  was  killed  in  Rangoon,  accidentally,  by  the 
discharge  of  his  gun.  The  procession  commenced 
by  a number  of  Burmans,  armed  with  spears  and 
bamboos,  to  keep  the  crowd  in  order.  Some  of 
the  inferior  members  of  government  succeeded, 
then  all  the  articles  of  use  and  wearing  apparel  of 
the  deceased,  such  as  his  beetle  box,  drinking 
cup,  looking-glass,  &c.  The  father  and  train  pre- 
ceded, the  wife,  mother,  and  sisters  followed  the 
corpse  in  palanquins.  The  viceroy,  his  wife,  and 
family,  on  large  elephants,  concluded  the  proces- 
sion. The  crowd,  which  was  very  great,  followed 
promiscuously.  All  the  petty  governors  and 
principal  inhabitants  of  Rangoon  were  present ; 
yet  there  was  as  perfect  order  and  regularity  as 
could  have  been  observed  in  a Christian  country. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  33 

“ The  corpse  was  carried  some  way  out  of 
town,  to  a large  pagoda,  and  burnt,  when  the 
bones  were  collected  to  be  buried.  At  the  place 
of  burning  great  quantities  of  fruit,  cloth,  and 
money,  were  distributed  among  the  poor,  by 
the  parents  of  the  deceased  youth. 

“ January  21th. — On  the  opposite  side  of  the 
river,  there  is  a province  of  the  Burman  Empire, 
governed  by  one  who  is  not  under  the  control  of 
the  viceroy  of  Rangoon.  This  governor  was  re- 
turning from  the  great  funeral  above  mentioned, 
and  had  nearly  reached  his  house,  when  a man  on 
a sudden  started  up,  and,  with  one  stroke,  severed 
his  head  from  his  body.  In  the  bustle  and  con- 
fusion of  his  attendants,  the  murderer  escaped. 
He  was,  however,  found,  and  the  plot  discovered. 
It  had  its  origin  with  the  head  steward  of  the  go- 
vernor, who  intended,  after  the  execution  of  his 
master,  to  seize  on  his  property,  go  up  to  the 
king,  and  buy  the  office  which  his  master  had 
lately  occupied.  He  was  put  to  the  torture,  and 
the  above  confession  extorted  from  him.  He  was 
afterwards  treated  in  the  most  cruel  manner, 
having  most  of  his  bones  broken,  and  left  to  lan- 
guish out  his  miserable  existence  in  a prison,  in 
chains.  He  lived  five  or  six  days  in  this  terrible 
condition.  All  who  were  concerned  with  him 
were  punished  in  various  ways.  The  immense 
property  of  this  governor  goes  to  the  king,  as  he 
left  no  children,  though  several  wives  remain. 


34  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ Sabbath-day,  March  20th. — To-day,  as  usual, 
we  came  out  to  the  mission  house,  that  we  might 
enjoy  the  Sabbath  in  a more  quiet  way.  We  had 
but  just  arrived,  when  one  of  the  servants  in- 
formed us  that  there  was  a fire  near  the  town. 
We  hastened  to  the  place  whence  the  fire  pro- 
ceeded, and  beheld  several  houses  in  flames,  in  a 
range  which  led  directly  to  the  city  ; and  as  we 
saw  no  exertions  to  extinguish  it,  we  concluded 
the  whole  place  would  be  destroyed.  We  set  off" 
immediately  for  our  house  in  town,  that  we  might 
remove  our  furniture  and  things  that  were  there ; 
but  when  we  came  to  the  town  gate,  it  was 
shut.  The  poor  people,  in  their  fright,  had  shut 
the  gate,  ignorantly  imagining  they  could  shut 
the  fire  out,  though  the  walls  and  gates  were 
made  entirely  of  wood.  After  waiting,  however, 
for  some  time,  the  gate  was  opened,  and  we  re- 
moved in  safety  all  our  things  into  the  mission 
house.  The  fire  continued  to  rage  all  day,  and 
swept  away  almost  all  the  houses,  walls,  gates, 
&c.  We  felt  grateful  to  God  that  not  a hair  of 
our  heads  was  injured  ; and  that,  while  thousands 
of  families  were  deprived  of  a shelter  from  the 
burning  sun,  we  had  a comfortable  house,  and  the 
necessaries  of  life. 

“ Though  we  are  here  exposed  to  thieves  and 
robbers,  yet  He  who  has  preserved  us  in  every 
emergency,  is  still  our  trust  and  confidence,  and 
is  still  able  to  protect  us.  We  feel  that  our  pri- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  35 

vileges  and  enjoyments  are  so  far  superior  to  all 
around  us,  that,  instead  of  complaining  of  our 
privations  in  this  heathen  land,  we  ought  to  be 
very  thankful  for  the  many  and  great  mercies 
we  enjoy. 

“ April  1 6th. — Mr.  F.  Carey  has  lately  returned 
from  Calcutta,  and  much  refreshed  our  minds 
with  letters  and  intelligence  from  our  friends. — 
We  are  so  much  debarred  from  all  social  inter- 
course with  the  rest  of  the  Christian  world,  that 
the  least  intelligence  we  receive  from  our  friends 
is  a great  luxury. 

“We  feel  more  and  more  convinced  that  the 
gospel  must  be  introduced  into  this  country, 
through  many  trials  and  difficulties ; through 
much  self-denial  and  earnest  prayer.  The  strong 
prejudices  of  the  Burmans  ; their  foolish  conceit 
of  superiority  over  other  nations  ; the  wickedness 
of  their  lives,  together  with  the  plausibility  of 
their  own  religious  tenets,  make  a formidable  ap- 
pearance in  the  way  of  their  receiving  the  strict 
requirements  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus.  But  all 
things  are  possible  with  God,  and  he  is  our 
only  hope  and  confidence.  He  can  make  moun- 
tains become  valleys,  and  dry  places  streams 
of  water. 

“ August  20th. — To-day,  Mr.  F.  Carey,  his  wife, 
and  family,  left  us  for  Ava,  where  they  expect  to 
live.  We  are  now  alone  in  this  great  house,  and 


36 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


almost  alone  as  it  respects  the  world.  If  it  were 
not  that  Burmah  presents  such  an  unbounded 
field  for  missionary  exertions,  we  could  not  be 
contented  to  stay  in  this  miserable  land.  But  we 
are  convinced  that  we  are  in  the  very  situation 
in  which  our  heavenly  Father  would  have  us  to 
be,  and  if  we  were  to  leave  it,  for  the  sake  of 
enjoying  a few  more  temporal  comforts,  we 
should  have  no  reason  to  expect  his  blessing  on 
our  exertions. 

“ We  frequently  receive  letters  from  our  Chris- 
tian friends  in  this  part  of  the  world,  begging  us 
to  leave  a field  so  entirely  rough  and  unculti- 
vated, the  soil  of  which  is  so  unpromising,  and 
enter  one  which  presents  the  prospect  of  a more 
plentiful  harvest.  God  grant  that  we  may  live 
and  die  among  the  Burmans,  though  we  should 
never  do  any  thing  more  than  smooth  the  way 
for  others. 

“ September  3d. — Heard  the  dreadful  intelli- 
gence of  the  loss  of  Mr.  F.  Carey's  vessel,  wife  and 
children,  and  all  his  property ! He  barely  es- 
caped with  his  life.  How  soon  are  all  his  hopes 
blasted ! He  set  out  for  Ava  in  a brig,  which 
belonged  to  the  Burman  government,  having  his 
furniture,  medicine,  wearing  apparel,  &c.  on 
board.  The  brig  had  been  in  the  river  about 
ten  days,  when  she  upset,  and  immediately  went 
down.  Mrs.  Carey,  two  children,  all  the  women 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  37 

servants,  and  some  of  the  men  servants,  who 
could  not  swim,  were  lost.  Mr.  Carey  endea- 
voured to  save  his  little  boy  (three  years  old),  but 
finding  himself  going  down,  was  obliged  to  give 
up  the  child. 

“ As  it  respects  ourselves,  we  are  busily  em- 
ployed all  day  long.  I can  assure  you  that  we 
find  much  pleasure  in  our  employment.  Could 
you  look  into  a large  open  room,  which  we  call  a 
verandah,  you  would  see  Mr.  Judson  bent  over 
his  table,  covered  with  Burman  books,  with  his 
teacher  at  his  side,  a venerable  looking  man,  in 
his  sixtieth  year,  with  a cloth  wrapped  round 
his  middle,  and  a handkerchief  on  his  head. — 
They  talk  and  chatter  all  day  long,  with  hardly 
any  cessation. 

“ My  mornings  are  busily  employed  in  giving- 
directions  to  the  servants,  providing  food  for  the 
family,  & c.  At  ten,  my  teacher  comes,  when, 
were  you  present,  you  might  see  me  in  an  inner 
room,  at  one  side  of  my  study  table,  and  my 
teacher  the  other,  reading  Burman,  writing,  talk- 
ing, &c.  I have  many  more  interruptions  than 
Mr.  Judson,  as  I have  the  entire  management  of 
the  family.  This  I took  on  myself,  for  the  sake 
of  Mr.  Judson’s  attending  more  closely  to  the 
study  of  the  language  ; yet  I have  found,  by  a 
year’s  experience,  that  it  is  the  most  direct  way 
I could  have  taken  to  acquire  the  language ; as  I 


38  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

am  frequently  obliged  to  speak  Burman  all  day. 

I can  talk  and  understand  others  better  than  Mr. 
Judson,  though  he  knows  more  about  the  nature 
and  construction  of  the  language. 

“ A new  viceroy  has  lately  arrived,  who  is  much 
beloved  and  respected  by  the  people.  He  visited 
us  soon  after  his  arrival,  and  told  us  that  we  must 
come  to  the  government-house  very  often.  We 
have  been  once  or  twice  since,  and  have  been 
treated  with  much  more  familiarity  and  respect 
than  the  natives  of  the  country. 

“ After  he  had  moved  into  his  new  house,  he 
gave  an  invitation  to  all  the  English  and  French- 
men to  dinner.  The  viceroy  and  his  wife  did 
every  thing  in  their  power  to  amuse  the  com- 
pany. Among  other  things  were  music  and 
dancing.  The  wife  of  the  viceroy  asked  me  if  I 
knew  how  to  dance  in  the  English  way  ? I told 
her  that  it  was  not  proper  for  the  wives  of  priests 
to  dance.  She  immediately  assented,  and  thought 
that  a sufficient  reason  for  my  declining.  She 
then  asked  what  kind  of  a teacher  Mr.  Judson  was  ? 
I told  her,  speaking  in  their  idiom,  that  he  was  a 
sacred  teacher,  that  is,  a teacher  of  the  will  of 
the  true  God. 

“ The  Burmans  have  a very  great  regard  for 
their  priests.  They  consider  them  a higher  order 
of  beings  than  other  men.  This  was  the  cause 
of  the  marked  attention  we  received  from  her 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  39 

ladyship.  I wish  I could  write  you  something 
about  the  conversion  of  the  Burmans,  or  their 
eagerness  to  hear  the  word  of  God. 

“No  missionary  has  ever  attempted  to  preach 
among  the  natives,  so  that  we  are  hardly  able  to 
judge  how  the  gospel  would  be  received,  if  pub- 
licly preached.  Yet  their  firm  belief  of  the  divine 
origin  of  their  religion,  renders  it  improbable,  to 
human  appearance,  that  they  would  willingly 
receive  the  gospel. 

“ We  often  converse  with  our  teachers  and 
servants  on  the  subject  of  our  coming  to  this 
country,  and  tell  them,  if  they  die  in  their  pre- 
sent state,  they  will  surely  be  lost.  But  they 
say,  ‘ Our  religion  is  good  for  us,  yours  for  you.’ 
But  we  are  far  from  being  discouraged.  We  are 
sensible  that  the  hearts  of  the  heathen,  as  well  as 
those  of  Christians,  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and 
in  his  own  time  he  will  turn  them  unto  himself. 

“ Much  wisdom  and  precaution  are  necessary 
in  our  present  situation.  A little  departure  from 
prudence  might  at  once  destroy  the  mission. 
We  still  feel  happy  and  thankful  that  God  has 
made  it  our  duty  to  live  among  the  heathen. 
Though  we  have  met,  and  continue  to  meet,  with 
many  trials  and  discouragements,  yet  we  have 
never,  for  a moment,  regretted  that  we  undertook 
this  mission. 

“ This  climate  is  one  of  the  most  healthy  in  the 
world.  There  are  only  two  months  in  the  year 


40 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


when  it  is  severely  hot.  We  doubt  not  but  you 
pray  much  for  us,  in  this  miserable  land,  deprived 
of  all  Christian  society.  We  need  much,  very 
much  grace,  that  we  may  persevere,  and  bear  a 
faithful  testimony  to  the  religion  of  Jesus. 

“ Adieu,  my  sisters.  May  God  be  with  you, 
and  grant  you  much  of  his  presence,  is  the  sincere 
and  ardent  prayer  of  your  still  affectionate  sister.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully. 


A.  H.  J. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


41 


LETTER  IV. 


Bradford,  Massachusetts,  October,  1822. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

M y only  excuse  for  the  length  of  the  preceding 
letter,  is  the  continued  connexion  of  those  events 
which  I could  not  well  separate.  I have  thus  far 
introduced  in  my  relation  many  more  extracts 
from  my  own,  than  from  Mr.  Judson’s  letters. — 
During  the  first  years  of  our  residence  in  Burmah, 
I was  in  the  habit  of  noting  little  occurrences 
much  more  frequently  than  Mr.  Judson,  as  his 
whole  time  and  thoughts  were  exclusively  devoted 
to  the  acquisition  of  the  language. 

I ought,  under  some  circumstances,  to  make 
an  apology  for  saying  so  much  about  our  personal 
concerns  ; but,  when  I recollect  how  frequently 
you  urged  me  to  be  particular  in  my  relation, 
and  to  send  you  every  thing  that  had  ever  been 
printed,  I feel  that  an  excuse  of  any  kind  is 
unnecessary. 

A letter  written  about  this  time  to  Mr.  Newell, 
our  former  associate,  is  a continued  description 
of  our  plans  and  prospects. 


42 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


“ A few  days  since  we  welcomed  yours  of 
December  18th,  the  only  one  we  have  received 
since  you  left  us,  at  Port  Louis.  It  brought 
fresh  to  my  mind  a recollection  of  scenes  formerly 
enjoyed  in  our  dear  native  country.  Well  do  I 
remember  our  first  interesting  conversations  on 
missions,  and  on  the  probable  events  that  awaited 
us  in  India.  Those  were  happy  days.  Newell 
and  Judson,  Harriet  and  Ann,  then  were  united  in 
the  strictest  friendship — then  anticipated  spend- 
ing their  lives  together,  in  sharing  the  trials  and 
toils,  the  pleasures  and  enjoyments,  of  a mis- 
sionary life.  But,  alas  ! behold  us  now  ! In  the 
Isle  of  France,  solitary  and  alone,  lies  all  that 
was  once  visible  of  the  lovely  Harriet.  A melan- 
choly wanderer,  in  the  Island  of  Ceylon,  is  bro- 
ther Newell ; and  the  savage,  heathen  empire  of 
Burmah,  is  destined  to  be  the  future  residence  of 
Judson  and  Ann.  But  is  this  separation  to  be 
for  ever  ? shall  we  four  never  again  enjoy  social, 
happy  intercourse  ? Yes,  my  dear  brother,  our 
separation  is  of  short  duration.  There  is  a rest, 
a peaceful  happy  rest,  where  Jesus  reigns,  where 
we  four  shall  soon  meet,  to  part  no  more. 

“ As  Mr.  Judson  will  not  have  time  to  write  to 
you  by  this  opportunity,  I will  endeavour  to  give 
you  some  idea  of  our  situation  here,  and  of  our 
plans  and  prospects.  We  have  found  the  country, 
as  we  expected,  in  a most  deplorable  state,  full 
of  darkness,  idolatry,  and  cruelty, — full  of  com- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  43 

motion  and  uncertainty.  We  daily  feel  that  the 
existence  and  perpetuity  of  this  mission,  still  in 
an  infant  state,  depend  in  a peculiar  manner  on 
the  interposing  hand  of  Providence,  and,  from 
this  impression  alone,  we  are  encouraged  still  to 
remain.  As  it  respects  our  temporal  privations, 
use  has  made  them  familiar,  and  easy  to  be  borne ; 
they  are  of  short  duration,  and,  when  brought  in 
competition  with  the  worth  of  immortal  souls, 
sink  into  nothing.  We  have  no  society,  no  dear 
Christian  friends  ; and,  with  the  exception  of  two 
or  three  sea  captains,  who  now  and  then  call  on 
us,  we  never  see  a European  face.  When  we 
feel  a disposition  to  sigh  for  the  enjoyments  of 
our  native  country,  we  turn  our  eyes  on  the  mise- 
rable objects  around.  We  behold  some  of  them 
labouring  hard  for  a scanty  subsistence,  op- 
pressed by  an  avaricious  government,  which  is 
ever  ready  to  seize  what  industry  has  hardly 
earned ; we  behold  others  sick  and  diseased, 
daily  begging  the  few  grains  of  rice,  which,  when 
obtained,  are  scarcely  sufficient  to  protract  their 
wretched  existence,  and  with  no  other  habitation 
to  cover  them  from  the  burning  sun  or  chilly 
rains,  than  that  which  a small  piece  of  cloth, 
raised  on  four  bamboos,  under  the  shade  of  a 
tree,  can  afford.  While  we  behold  these  scenes, 
we  feel  that  we  have  all  the  comforts,  and,  in 
comparison,  even  the  luxuries  of  life.  We  feel 
that  our  temporal  cup  of  blessings  is  full,  and 


44 


AMERICAN1  BAPTIST  MISSION1 


runneth  over.  But  is  our  temporal  lot  so  much 
superior  to  theirs  ; O,  how  infinitely  superior  our 
spiritual  blessings  ! While  they  vainly  imagine 
to  purchase  promotion,  in  another  state  of  exist- 
ence, by  strictly  worshipping  their  idols,  and 
building  pagodas  ; our  hopes  of  future  happiness 
are  fixed  on  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world.  When  we  have  a realizing 
sense  of  these  things,  my  dear  brother,  we  forget 
our  native  country  and  former  enjoyments,  and 
feel  contented  and  happy  with  our  lot,  with  but 
one  wish  remaining,  that  of  being  instrumental 
in  leading  these  Burmans  to  partake  of  the  same 
source  of  happiness  with  ourselves. 

“ Our  progress  in  the  language  is  slow,  as  it  is 
peculiarly  hard  of  acquisition.  We  can,  however, 
read,  write,  and  converse  with  tolerable  ease  ; 
and  frequently  spend  whole  evenings  very  plea- 
santly in  conversing  with  our  Burman  friends. — 
We  have  been  very  fortunate  in  procuring  good 
instructors.  Mr.  Judson’s  teacher  is-  a very 
learned  man,  was  formerly  a priest,  and  resided 
at  court.  He  has  a thorough  knowledge  of  the 
grammatical  construction  of  the  language,  like- 
wise of  the  Pali,  the  learned  language  of  the 
Burmans.^ 

“We  are  very  anxious  to  hear  from  our  dear 
brethren,  Nott  and  Hall.  We  firmly  believe  they 
will  yet  be  permitted  to  stay  in  India,  notwith- 
standing their  repeated  difficulties.  They  have. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  E5ITIRE.  45 

indeed,  had  a trying  time  ; but,  perhaps,  it  is  to 
prepare  them  for  further  usefulness. 

“We  have  not  yet  received  our  letters  from 
America,  or  had  the  least  intelligence  what  were 
the  contents  of  yours.  Ours  were  sent  to  the  Isle 
of  France  about  the  time  we  arrived  at  Madras, 
and  the  vessel  which  carried  them  has  not  been 
heard  of  since.  You  may  easily  judge  of  our 
feelings  at  this  disappointment.  You  can  hardly 
form  an  idea  with  what  eagerness  we  receive 
every  scrap  of  intelligence  from  any  part  of  the 
Christian  world.  Write  us  long  and  frequent  let- 
ters. Any  thing  respecting  yourself  or  the  other 
brethren,  will  be  interesting  to  us.  I do  not  ask 
you  to  excuse  this  long  letter,  for  I doubt  not 
your  interest  in  our  concerns.” 

The  above  extracts  will  give  you  some  idea  of 
the  state  of  the  country,  and  of  our  mode  of 
living,  during  the  two  first  years  of  our  residence 
in  that  heathen  land.  Yet  we  never  felt  a de- 
sponding sensation.  Those  providential  occur- 
rences, which  directed  us  thither,  were  referred 
to,  as  a kind  of  assurance  that  we  were  in  the 
path  of  duty ; we  were  convinced  that  we  had 
followed  the  leadings  of  Providence,  and  doubted 
not,  that  by  the  time  we  were  qualified  to  com- 
municate religious  truth,  the  present  appa- 
rently insurmountable  obstacles  would  be  re- 
moved, and  that  some  way  would  be  opened 
for  the  establishment  of  the  mission.  A disci- 


46 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


plinary  school,  however,  was  still  open  for  our 
benefit. 

After  the  first  six  months  of  our  residence  in 
Rangoon,  my  health  had  been  on  the  decline,  and 
as  there  was  no  medical  aid  in  the  country,  Mr.  J. 
felt  the  necessity  of  my  going  to  some  foreign 
port  for  its  restoration.  Such  was  the  state  of 
our  infant  mission,  that  I could  not  consent  that 
Mr.  J.  should  accompany  me.  I therefore  em- 
barked in  January,  1814,  for  Madras,  at  which 
place  I entirely  recovered,  and  returned  in  the 
April  following.  During  my  absence,  Mr.  Judson 
had  no  individual  Christian  with  whom  he  could 
converse,  or  unite  in  prayer.  He,  however,  pur- 
sued his  great  object,  the  acquiring  of  the  lan- 
guage; and,  during  this  interval,  was  much  en- 
couraged by  accounts  from  our  dear  native 
country,  of  the  rapid  increase  of  a missionary 
spirit. 

It  would  perhaps  be  unnecessary  for  me  to 
mention  the  circumstance  of  our  becoming  Bap- 
tists on  our  passage  out  to  India,  were  it  not  in 
connexion  with  the  formation  of  the  present  Bap- 
tist Board  of  Missions.  A missionary  impulse, 
before  unknown,  was  given  to  the  Baptist  deno- 
mination throughout  the  United  States,  by  the 
indefatigable  exertions  of  Mr.  Rice,  and  by  the 
circumstance  of  there  being  a missionary  on  hea- 
then ground,  of  their  own  order,  looking  to  them 
for  encouragement  and  co-operation. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  47 

On  the  18th  of  May,  1814,  a meeting  of  Baptist 
ministers,  from  most  of  the  States,  took  place  in 
Philadelphia,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a General 
Convention,  in  order  to  concentrate  the  energies, 
and  direct  the  efforts  of  the  whole  denomination, 
in  sending  the  gospel  to  the  heathen. 

“ Perhaps  no  event  (remarks  one  who  was  pre- 
sent) has  ever  taken  place  among  the  Baptist  de- 
nomination in  America,  which  has  excited  more 
lively  interest,  than  the  late  missionary  conven- 
tion. It  was,  indeed,  a sight  no  less  novel  than 
interesting,  to  behold  brethren  who  had  hitherto 
been  personally  unknown  to  each  other,  collect- 
ing from  north  to  south,  from  Massachusetts  to 
Georgia,  a distance  of  more  than  a thousand  miles, 
for  the  important  purpose  of  forming  a General 
Convention.'’ 

How  much  encouragement  Mr.  Judson,  in  his 
solitary  situation,  derived  from  the  above-men- 
tioned event,  may  be  seen  from  the  following 
extracts  from  his  journal,  which  also  narrate  his 
first  attempt  to  communicate  religious  instruction 
to  his  teacher. 

“ Rangoon,  September  5th,  1815. — Received  a 
copy  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Baptist  Conven- 
tion in  the  United  States,  and  letters  from  the 
Secretary  of  their  Board  of  Foreign  Missions. 

“ These  accounts  from  my  dear  native  land 
were  so  interesting,  as  to  banish  from  my  mind 
all  thoughts  of  study.  This  general  movement 


48  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

among  the  Baptist  churches  in  America,  is  par- 
ticularly encouraging,  as  it  affords  an  additional 
indication  of  God’s  merciful  designs  in  favour  of 
the  poor  heathen.  It  unites  with  all  the  Bible 
Societies  in  Europe  and  America,  during  the  last 
twenty  years,  in  furnishing  abundant  reason  to 
hope,  that  the  dreadful  darkness  which  has  so 
long  enveloped  the  earth,  is  about  to  flee  away 
before  the  rising  Sun. — Do  not  the  successes 
which  have  crowned  some  missionary  exertions, 
seem  like  the  dawn  of  morning  in  the  East  ? Oh ! 
that  this  region  of  Egyptian  darkness,  may  ere 
long  participate  in  the  vivifying  beams  of  light! 

“ None  but  one  who  has  had  the  experience, 
can  tell  what  feelings  comfort  the  heart  of  a soli- 
tary missionary,  when,  though  all  the  scenes 
around  him  present  no  friend,  he  remembers,  and 
has  proofs  that  there  are  spots  on  this  wide  earth, 
where  Christian  brethren  feel  that  his  cause  is 
their  own,  and  pray  to  the  same  God  and  Saviour, 
for  his  welfare  and  success.  Thanks  be  to  God, 
not  only  for  ‘rivers  of  endless  joys  above,’  but 
for  ‘rills  of  comfort  here  below.’ 

“ September  9th. — Called  on  the  viceroy  to  pay 
my  respects,  on  his  return  from  an  expedition  to 
Martaban.  He  and  his  family  have  always  treated 
me  with  civility,  on  learning  that  I was  a minister 
of  religion. 

“ On  my  return,  was  visited  by  Mr.  Babasheen, 
an  aged  Armenian,  in  high  office  under  govern- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  49 

ment.  The  ideas  of  the  Armenian  on  the  subject 
of  practical  religion,  are  very  similar  to  those  of 
the  Roman  Catholics.  This  gentleman  supposes, 
that  having  been  christened  in  infancy,  having 
confessed  to  his  priest  at  stated  times,  &c.  he 
shall  certainly  be  saved.  I told  him,  except  a 
man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  enter  into  heaven. 
He  inquired  how  a man  could  be  born  again.  I 
related  to  him  the  conversation  of  our  Lord  and 
Nicodemus,  which  was  all  new  to  him.  He  called 
for  his  Armenian  Bible,  which  was  kept  carefully 
wrapped  up  in  a cloth,  and  having  read  the  chap- 
ter, said  that  I was  right,  and  that  our  Bibles 
were  the  same.  Then  holding  out  his  hand, 
‘ here,’  said  he,  pointing  to  his  wrist,  ‘ is  the  root 
of  the  religion.  This  finger  is  the  Armenian 
church,  this  the  Roman  Catholic,  this  the  Eng- 
lish, & c.  All  are  the  same.’  I told  him  that  the 
Bible  was  indeed  the  same,  but  those  only  who 
adhered  to  it  would  be  saved.  ‘ Ah,’  said  he, 
‘ you  cannot  speak  the  language  fluently.  I find 
it  difficult  to  understand  you.  When  you  can  talk 
better,  come  and  see  me  often,  and  I shall  get 
wisdom.’  I was  ready  to  reply,  poor  man,  ere 
that  time  comes  you  will  probably  be  in  the  grave ; 
but  contented  myself  with  lifting  up  my  heart 
unto  God. 

“ September  3C )th. — Had  the  following  conversa- 
tion with  my  teacher.  This  man  has  been  with 
me  about  three  months,  and  is  the  most  sensible. 


50  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

learned,  and  candid  man,  that  I have  ever  found 
among  the  Burmans.  He  is  forty-seven  years  of 
age,  and  his  name  is  Oo  Oungmeng.  I began  by 

saying,  Mr.  J is  dead.  Oo. — I have  heard  so. 

J. — His  soul  is  lost,  I think.  Oo. — Why  so  ? 
J. — He  was  not  a disciple  of  Christ.  Oo. — How 
do  you  know  that?  You  could  not  see  his  soul. 
J. — How  do  you  know  whether  the  root  of  the 
mango  tree  is  good?  You  cannot  see  it ; but  you 
can  judge  by  the  fruit  on  its  branches.  Thus  I 
know  that  Mr.  J — - — was  not  a disciple  of  Christ, 
because  his  words  and  actions  were  not  such  as 
indicate  the  disciple.  Oo. — And  so  all  who  are 
not  disciples  of  Christ  are  lost!  J. — Yes,  all, 
whether  Burmans  or  foreigners.  Oo. — This  is 
hard.  J. — Yes,  it  is  hard,  indeed;  otherwise  I 
should  not  have  come  all  this  way,  and  left  pa- 
rents and  all,  to  tell  you  of  Christ.  [He  seemed 
to  feel  the  force  of  this,  and  after  stopping  a little, 
he  said,]  How  is  it  that  the  disciples  of  Christ 
are  so  fortunate  above  all  men  ? J. — Are  not  all 
men  sinners,  and  deserving  of  punishment  in  a 
future  state  ? Oo. — Yes ; all  must  suffer,  in  some 
future  state,  for  the  sins  they  commit.  The  pu- 
nishment follows  the  crime,  as  surely  as  the 
wheel  of  the  cart  follows  the  footsteps  of  the  ox. 
J. — Now,  according  to  the  Burman  system,  there 
is  no  escape.  According  to  the  Christian  system 
there  is.  Jesus  Christ  has  died  in  the  place  of 
sinners ; has  borne  their  sins,  and  now  those  who 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  51 

believe  on  him,  and  become  his  disciples,  are  re- 
leased from  the  punishment  they  deserve.  At 
death  they  are  received  into  heaven,  and  are 
happy  for  ever.  Oo. — That  I will  never  believe. 
My  mind  is  very  stiff  on  this  one  point,  namely, 
that  all  existence  involves  in  itself  principles  of 
misery  and  destruction.  J. — Teacher,  there  are 
two  evil  futurities,  and  one  good.  A miserable 
future  existence  is  evil,  and  annihilation  or  nigban 
is  an  evil,  a fearful  evil.  A happy  future  exist- 
ence is  alone  good.  Oo. — I admit  that  it  is  best,  if 
it  could  be  perpetual ; but  it  cannot  be.  What- 
ever is,  is  liable  to  change,  and  misery,  and  de- 
struction. Nigban  is  the  only  permanent  good, 
and  that  good  has  been  attained  by  Gaudama, 
the  last  deity.  J.— If  there  be  no  eternal  Being, 
you  cannot  account  for  any  thing.  Whence  this 
world,  and  all  that  we  see  ? Oo. — Fate.  J. — 
Fate ! the  cause  must  always  be  equal  to  the 
effect.  See,  I raise  this  table ; see,  also,  that  ant 
under  it : suppose  I were  invisible  ; would  a wise 
man  say  the  ant  raised  it  ? Now  fate  is  not  even 
an  ant.  Fate  is  a word,  that  is  all.  It  is  not  an 
agent,  not  a thing.  What  is  fate  ? Oo. — The  fate 
of  creatures,  is  the  influence  which  their  good  or 
bad  deeds  have  on  their  future  existence.  J. — If 
influence  be  exerted,  there  must  be  an  exerter. 
If  there  be  a determination,  there  must  be  a de- 
terminer. Oo. — No;  there  is  no  determiner. 
There  cannot  be  an  eternal  Being.  J. — Consider 

E 2 


52  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

this  point.  It  is  a main  point  of  true  wisdom. 
Whenever  there  is  an  execution  of  a purpose, 
there  must  be  an  agent.  Oo. — [After  a little 
thought]  I must  say  that  my  mind  is  very  decided 
and  hard,  and  unless  you  tell  me  something  more 
to  the  purpose,  I shall  never  believe.  J. — Well, 
teacher,  I wish  you  to  believe,  not  for  my  profit, 
but  for  yours.  I daily  pray  the  true  God  to  give 
you  light,  that  you  may  believe.  Whether  you 
will  ever  believe  in  this  world  I don't  know,  but 
when  you  die  I know  you  will  believe  what  I now 
say.  You  will  then  appear  before  the  God  you 
now  deny.  Oo.— I don’t  know  that. 

“ October  4 th. — Was  called  to  attend  the  fu- 
neral of  captain  C . At  the  grave,  saw  several 

persons  present  who  could  understand  me  in 
English,  and  accordingly  gave  them  an  exhorta- 
tion before  prayer.  May  the  Lord  grant  his  bless- 
ing. 

“ October  1 6th. — An  opportunity  of  sending  to 
Bengal  occurs,  by  which  I shall  forward  this — I 
know  not  whether  to  call  it  letter  or  journal.  But 
something  of  this  sort,  I propose  continuing,  to 
be  addressed  to  the  Corresponding  Secretary  ; 
though  it  be  not  a journal  in  the  strict  acceptation 
of  the  word,  that  is,  an  account  of  every  day.  If 
a missionary,  during  his  first  years,  should  at- 
tempt keeping  such  a narrative,  he  might  find 
little  to  insert  under  most  of  the  dates,  but  the 
number  of  pages  read,  new  words  acquired,  and 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  53 

idle  conversation  with  the  natives — idle,  indeed, 
in  substance,  but  not  in  purpose,  being  indispen- 
sable to  his  thoroughly  attaining  the  phraseology 
and  pronunciation  of  the  language. 

“ I am  sometimes  a little  dispirited,  when  I re- 
flect, that  for  two  or  three  years  past,  I have  been 
drilling  at  A,  B,  C,  and  grammar.  But  I consi- 
der again,  that  the  gift  of  tongues  is  not  granted 
in  these  times  ; and  that  some  one  must  acquire 
this  language,  by  dint  of  application ; must  trans- 
late the  Scriptures,  and  must  preach  the  gospel 
to  the  people  in  their  own  tongue,  or  how  can 
they  be  saved  ? My  views  of  the  missionary  ob- 
ject are,  indeed,  different  from  what  they  were 
when  I was  first  set  on  fire  by  Buchanan’s  “ Star 
in  the  East,”  six  years  ago.  But  it  does  not  al- 
ways happen  that  a closer  acquaintance  with  an 
object  diminishes  our  attachment  and  preference. 
We  sometimes  discover  beauties  as* well  as  defor- 
mities, which  are  overlooked  in  a superficial  view; 
when  some  attractions  lose  their  force,  others 
more  permanent  are  exerted ; and  when  the  glit- 
ter, in  which  novelty  invested  the  object,  has 
passed  away,  more  substantial  excellencies  have 
room  to  disclose  their  influence : and  so  it  has 
been  with  me,  I hope,  in  regard  to  the  work  of 
missions.  I remain,  Rev.  ajid  dear  Sir,  yours 
affectionately  in  the  Lord.” 

Some  of  the  principal  difficulties  in  obtaining  a 
thorough  knowledge^  of  the  Burman  language. 


54  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

are  enumerated  in  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  J. 
to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bolles,  in  Salem : 

“ Rangoon,  January  1 6th,  1816. — Your  letter 
of  March,  1815,  I lately  received,  and  read  with 
real  satisfaction.  Neither  brother  Rice,  nor  any 
of  the  others  that  you  mention,  have  been  heard 
of  in  these  parts.  May  they  not  be  far  distant. 

“ Whenever  they  shall  arrive,  I hope  to  be  of 
some  real  service  to  them  in  their  preparatory 
studies,  and  to  be  able,  in  a short  time,  to  give 
them  information  on  many  points,  which  it  has 
cost  me  months  to  acquire.  I just  now  begin  to 
see  my  way  forward  in  this  language,  and  hope 
that  two  or  three  years  more  will  make  it  some- 
what familiar;  but  I have  met  with  difficulties 
that  I had  no  idea  of  before  I entered  on  the  work. 
For  a European  or  American  to  acquire  a living 
oriental  language,  root  and  branch,  and  make  it 
his  own,  is  quite  a different  thing  from  his  acquir- 
ing a cognate  language  of  the  west,  or  any  of  the 
dead  languages,  as  they  are  studied  in  the  schools. 
One  circumstance  may  serve  to  illustrate  this.  I 
once  had  occasion  to  devote  a few  months  to  the 
study  of  the  French.  I have  now  been  above 
two  years  engaged  in  the  Burman.  But  if  I were 
to  choose  between  a Burman  and  a French  book, 
to  be  examined  in,  without  previous  study,  I 
should,  without  the  least  hesitation,  choose  the 
French.  When  we  take  up  a western  language, 
the  similarity  in  the  characters,  in  very  many 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  55 

terms,  in  many  modes  of  expression,  and  in  the 
general  structure  of  the  sentences,  its  being  in 
fair  print,  (a  circumstance  we  hardly  think  of,) 
and  the  assistance  of  grammars,  dictionaries,  and 
instructors,  render  the  work  comparatively  easy. 
But  when  we  take  up  a language  spoken  by  a 
people  on  the  other  side  of  the  earth,  whose  very 
thoughts  run  in  channels  diverse  from  ours,  and 
whose  modes  of  expression  are  consequently  all 
new  and  uncouth  ; when  we  find  the  letters  and 
words  all  totally  destitute  of  the  l£hst  resem- 
blance to  any  language  we  have  ever  met  with, 
and  these  words  not  fairly  divided,  and  distin- 
guished, as  in  western  writing,  by  breaks,  and 
points,  and  capitals,  but  run  together  in  one  con- 
tinuous line,  a sentence  or  paragraph  seeming  to 
the  eye  but  one  long  word ; when,  instead  of 
clear  characters  on  paper,  we  find  only  obscure 
scratches  on  dried  palm  leaves  strung  together, 
and  called  a book  ; when  we  have  no  dictionary, 
and  no  interpreter  to  explain  a single  word,  and 
must  get  something  of  the  language,  before  we 
can  avail  ourselves  of  the  assistance  of  a native 
teacher, — 

“ Hoc  opus,  hie  labor  est.” 

I had  hoped,  before  I came  here,  that  it  would 
not  be  my  lot  to  have  to  go  alone,  without  any 
guide,  in  an  unexplored  path,  especially  as  mis- 
sionaries had  been  here  before.  But  Mr.  Chater 


56  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

had  left  the  country,  and  Mr.  F.  Carey  was  with 
me  very  little,  before  he  left  the  mission  and  the 
missionary  work  altogether. 

“ I long  to  write  something  more  interesting 
and  encouraging  to  the  friends  of  the  mission ; 
but  it  must  not  yet  be  expected.  It  unavoidably 
takes  several  years  to  acquire  such  a language, 
in  order  to  converse,  and  write  intelligibly  on  the 
great  truths  of  the  gospel.  Dr.  Carey  once  told 
me,  that  after  he  had  been  some  years  in  Bengal, 
and  thought  he  was  doing  very  well,  in  convers- 
ing and  preaching  with  the  natives,  they  (as  he 
was  afterwards  convinced)  knew  not  what  he  was 
about.  A young  missionary,  who  expects  to  pick 
up  the  language  in  a year  or  two,  will  probably 
find  that  he  has  not  counted  the  cost.  If  he 
should  be  so  fortunate  as  to  obtain  a good  inter- 
preter, he  may  be  useful  by  that  means.  But  he 
will  learn,  especially  if  he  is  in  a new  place, 
where  the  way  is  not  prepared,  and  no  previous 
ideas  communicated,  that  to  qualify  himself  to 
communicate  divine  truth  intelligibly,  by  his  voice 
or  pen,  is  not  the  work  of  a year.  However, 
notwithstanding  my  present  great  incompetency, 
I am  beginning  to  translate  the  New  Testament, 
being  extremely  anxious  to  get  some  parts  of 
Scripture,  at  least,  into  an  intelligible  shape,  if  for 
no  other  purpose  than  to  read,  as  occasion  offers, 
to  the  Burmans  with  whom  I meet. 

“ My  paper  allows  me  to  add  nothing  more, 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


57 


but  to  beg  your  prayers,  that,  while  I am  much 
occupied  in  words  and  phrases,  and  destitute  of 
those  gospel  privileges  you  so  richly  enjoy,  in  the 
midst  of  your  dear  church  and  people,  I may  not 
lose  the  life  of  religion  in  my  soul.” 

Thus  were  we  situated,  when  an  event  occur- 
red, which  wrung  our  hearts  with  anguish ; the 
mention  of  which  I cannot  prevail  on  myself  to 
omit,  though  not  strictly  connected  with  my  mis- 
sionary relation.  I allude  to  the  death  of  our 
first-born,  our  only  son.  Deprived,  as  we  were, 
of  every  source  of  enjoyment  of  a temporal  na- 
ture, our  every  affection  was  entangled  by  this 
darling  object.  When  our  heavenly  Father  saw 
we  had  converted  the  precious  gift  into  an  idol, 
he  removed  it  from  us,  and  thereby  taught  us  the 
necessity  of  placing  our  supreme  affections  on 
Him.  A letter,  written  soon  after  this  severe 
affliction,  to  a friend  in  America,  describes,  in 
some  measure,  our  state  of  feeling. 

“ May  10 th,  1816. — The  sun  of  another  holy 
Sabbath  has  arisen  upon  us,  and  though  no  chim- 
ing of  bells  has  called  us  to  the  house  of  God,  yet 
we,  two  in  number,  have  bowed  the  knee  to  our 
Father  in  heaven;  have  invoked  his  holy  name  ; 
have  offered  him  our  feeble  praise ; have  medi- 
tated on  his  sacred  word ; and  commemorated 
the  dying  love  of  a Saviour  to  a perishing  world. 
Inestimable  privileges  ! not  denied  even  in  a land 
where  the  prince  of  darkness  reigns  ! 


58  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ Since  worship,  I have  stolen  away  to  a much- 
loved spot,  where  I love  to  sit  and  pay  the  tri- 
bute of  affection  to  my  lost,  darling  child.  It  is 
a little  enclosure  of  mango  trees,  in  the  centre  of 
which  is  erected  a small  bamboo  house,  on  a 
rising  spot  of  ground,  which  looks  down  on  the 
new  made  grave  of  our  infant  boy.  Here  I now 
sit ; and,  though  all  nature  around  wears  a most 
romantic,  delightful  appearance,  yet  my  heart  is 
sad,  and  my  tears  frequently  stop  my  pen.  You, 
my  dear  Mrs.  L.,  who  are  a mother,  may  imagine 
my  sensations  ; but,  if  you  have  never  lost  a first- 
born, an  only  son,  you  cannot  know  my  pain. 
Had  you  even  buried  your  little  boy,  you  are  in 
a Christian  country,  surrounded  by  friends  and 
relatives,  who  could  sooth  your  anguish,  and  di- 
rect your  attention  to  other  objects.  But,  behold 
us,  solitary  and  alone,  with  this  one  source  of 
recreation!  Yet  this  is  denied  us — this  must  be 
removed,  to  show  us  that  we  need  no  other 
source  of  enjoyment  but  God  himself.  Do  not 
think,  though  I write  thus,  that  I repine  at  the 
dealings  of  Providence,  or  would  wish  them  to 
be  otherwise  than  they  are.  No:  ‘though  he 
slay  me,  I will  trust  in  him,’  is  the  language  I 
would  adopt.  Though  I say  with  the  prophet, 

‘ Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like 
unto  my  sorrow,’  yet  I would  also  say  with  him, 

‘ It  is  of  the  Lord’s  mercies  that  we  are  not  con- 
sumed, because  his  compassions  fail  not.’  God 


TO  THE  BUR11AN  EMPIRE. 


59 


is  the  same  when  he  afflicts,  as  when  he  is  merci- 
ful : just  as  worthy  of  our  entire  trust  and  con- 
fidence now,  as  when  he  intrusted  us  with  the 
precious  little  gift.  There  is  a bright  side,  even 
in  this  heavy  affliction.  Our  little  Roger  is  not 
lost ; the  little  bud,  which  began  to  open  into  a 
beautiful  flower,  is  now  rapidly  expanding  in  a 
more  propitious  clime,  and  reared  by  a more  un- 
erring hand.  He  is  now,  I doubt  not,  in  the  im- 
mediate presence  of  that  Saviour,  of  whom  he 
was  ignorant  in  this  world,  and 

“ Adores  the  grace  that  brought  him  there, 

Without  a wish,  without  a care  ; 

That  washed  his  soul  in  Calvary’s  stream. 

That  shortened  life’s  distressing  dream. 

Short  pain,  short  grief,  dear  babe,  was  thine, 

Now  joys  eternal  and  divine!” 

Who  would  not,  from  motives  of  gratitude,  love  a 
Being  who  has  made  such  provision  for  a perish- 
ing world  ? Who  can,  on  account  of  the  merits 
of  the  Redeemer,  consistently  with  his  own  per- 
fections, raise  polluted  sinners  from  the  lowest 
state  of  degradation,  and  make  them  fit  for  the 
enjoyment  of  himself!  ‘ They  who  know  thy 
name  will  put  their  trust  in  thee.'  ” 

The  following  elegant  effusion  was  written  and 
presented  on  the  occasion,  by  the  Rev.  J.  Lawson, 
Calcutta. 

“ Hush’d  be  the  murmuring  thought ! Thy  will  be  done, 

O Arbiter  of  life  and  death.  I bow 


60 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


To  thy  command.  I yield  the  precious  gift, 

So  late  bestowed,  and  to  the  silent  grave 
Move  sorrowing,  yet  submissive.  O,  sweet  babe  ! 

I lay  thee  down  to  rest.  The  cold,  cold  earth, 

A pillow  for  thy  little  head.  Sleep  on, 

Serene  in  death.  No  care  shall  trouble  thee. 

All  undisturbed  thou  slumberest ; far  more  still, 

Than  when  I lull’d  thee  in  my  lap,  and  sooth’d 

Thy  little  sorrows  till  they  ceas’d. 

Then  felt  thy  mother  peace ; her  heart  was  light, 

As  the  sweet  sigh  that  ’scap’d  thy  placid  lips, 

And  joyous  as  the  dimpled  smile  that  play’d 

Across  thy  countenance. O,  I must  weep 

To  think  of  thee,  dear  infant,  on  my  knees, 

Untroubled,  sleeping.  Bending  o’er  thy  form, 

I watch’d  with  eager  hope  to  catch  the  laugh, 

First  waking  from  thy  sparkling  eye,  a beam 
Lovely  to  me,  as  the  blue  light  of  heaven. 

Dimm’d  in  the  agony  of  death,  it  beams  no  more  ! 

O,  yet  once  more  I kiss  thy  marble  lips, 

Sweet  babe ! and  press  with  mine  thy  whiten’d  cheeks. 

Farewell,  a long  farewell ! Yet  visit  me 

In  dreams,  my  darling  ! Though  the  vision’d  joy 
Wake  bitter  pangs  ; still  be  thou  in  my  thoughts, 

And  I will  cherish  the  dear  dream,  and  think 

I still  possess  thee.  Peace,  my  bursting  heart ! 

O,  I submit.  Again  I lay  thee  down, 

Dear  relic  of  a mother’s  hope.  Thy  spirit, 

Now  mingled  with  cherubic  hosts,  adores 
The  grace  that  ransom’d  it,  and  lodg’d  it  safe 
Above  the  stormy  scene.” 

I remain,  my  dear  sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 

A.  H.  J. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


61 


LETTER  V. 


Baltimore,  December,  1822. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

From  our  first  embarking  in  the  missionary  en- 
terprise, afflictions  and  trials  had  ever  been  inter- 
mixed with  our  most  prosperous  circumstances. 
But  on  this  we  had  calculated;  though  we  often 
found  ourselves  unprepared  to  meet  trials  in  that 
way,  which  an  unerring  Providence  saw  neces- 
sary. Our  hopes,  relative  to  the  gradual  progress 
and  final  success  of  the  mission,  were,  until  now, 
very  sanguine ; and  we  fondly  trusted  that  what- 
ever trials  would  have  a tendency  to  retard  or 
impede  its  advancement,  would  be  averted.  But 
not  so.  The  gradual  decline  of  Mr.  Judson’s 
health,  began  to  effect  a revolution  in  our  mis- 
sionary plans,  hopes,  and  prospects.  His  anxiety 
to  preach  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  to  the 
Burmans,  had  induced  him  to  apply  more  closely 
to  the  study  of  the  language  than  an  eastern  cli- 
mate would  allow.  This  circumstance,  together 
with  the  want  of  exercise  and  proper  diet,  reduced 
him  to  an  alarming  state  of  debility  and  nervous 
affection.  The  following  letters  will  give  you 
some  idea  of  our  situation  at  this  time. 


62  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ August  18 th,  1816. — I again,  my  dear  parents, 
take  my  pen  to  address  you— must  again  tell  you 
of  trials  and  afflictions,  which  have,  more  or  less, 
been  our  lot  from  our  first  engaging  in  the  mission. 
Mr.  Judson,  in  consequence  of  too  close  applica- 
tion to  study,  during  the  hot  season,  has  so  far 
injured  his  head  and  nerves,  that  he  is  entirely 
unable  to  study,  or  attend  to  any  thing.  His 
illness  has  been  gradually  increasing  for  four 
months,  and  it  is  now  three,  since  he  laid  aside 
study  altogether.  For  some  time  after  his  eyes 
were  affected,  I read  to  him  in  Burman,  and  in 
this  way  he  was  enabled  to  continue  his  studies. 
But  now  the  state  of  his  nerves  is  such,  that  he 
cannot  even  hear  me  read.  His  digestive  powers 
are  so  weak,  that  he  is  unable  to  take  any 
nourishment,  except  rice  and  vegetables.  We 
are  seriously  contemplating  a voyage  to  Bengal, 
hoping  that  the  sea  air,  or  some  medical  assist- 
ance, may  be  beneficial.  We  cannot  comprehend 
the  design  of  Providence  in  these  things.  If  we 
go  to  Bengal,  the  mission  must,  at  least,  fora  time, 
be  given  up,  as  there  is  no  one  to  continue  here. 
Whether  we  shall  ever  be  able  to  return,  or  not, 
is  uncertain.  We  had  fondly  hoped  that,  by  the 
time  the  language  was  acquired,  a wide  and  ef- 
fectual door  would  be  opened  for  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel.  But  our  hopes  are  blasted,  and 
our  brightest  prospects  darkened.  And  now,  my 
dear  parents,  I think  I hear  you  say,  ‘ Are  you 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  63 

not  discouraged  yet  ? Is  it  not  best  entirely  to 
abandon  your  object,  and  come  home  to  America, 
and  settle  down  in  peace  and  quiet  ?’  No!  by  no 
means.  We  will  still  intercede  with  our  heavenly 
Father,  not  only  to  return  us  to  this  mission,  but 
to  make  this  affliction  tend  greatly  to  its  ad- 
vancement. Or,  if  we  may  not  be  permitted  to 
return,  we  will  beg  and  plead  with  others  to  come, 
and  go  on  with  the  mission.  We  will  tell  them 
that  it  is  possible  for  missionary  families  to  live 
in  Burmah  without  molestation.  We  will  tell 
them  what  our  eyes  have  seen,  and  what  our  ears 
have  heard,  of  the  dreadful  delusions  of  this 
people,  and  how  much  they  need  the  commise- 
ration of  the  Christian  world.  We  will  do  more. 
We  will  return  to  Burmah  with  them,  and  spend 
the  remainder  of  our  days,  though  deprived  of 
health  and  strength,  in  assisting  them  to  acquire 
the  language,  and  encouraging  them  in  their 
arduous  work.  No,  my  dear  parents,  our  hearts 
are  fixed  on  this  mission  ; and,  with  grace  as- 
sisting us,  we  shall  relinquish  it  only  with  our 
lives. 

“ A few  days  after  the  death  of  our  little  boy, 
her  highness,  the  viceroy’s  wife,  visited  us,  with 
a numerous  retinue.  She  really  appeared  to 
sympathize  with  us  in  our  affliction,  and  re- 
quested Mr.  Judson  not  to  let  it  too  much  affect 
his  health,  which  was  already  very  feeble.  Some 
time  after  her  visit,  she  invited  us  to  go  out  into 


64 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


the  country  with  her,  for  the  benefit  of  our  health, 
and  that  our  minds,  as  she  expressed  it,  might 
become  cool.  We  consented  ; and  she  sent  us 
an  elephant,  with  a howdah  upon  it,  for  our  con- 
veyance. We  went  three  or  four  miles  through 
the  woods.  Sometimes  the  small  trees  were  so 
near  together,  that  our  way  was  impassable,  but 
by  the  elephant’s  breaking  them  down,  which  he 
did  with  the  greatest  ease,  at  the  word  of  the 
driver.  The  scene  was  truly  interesting.  Picture 
to  yourselves,  my  dear  parents,  thirty  men  with 
spears  and  guns,  and  red  caps  on  their  heads, 
which  partly  covered  their  shoulders,  then  a huge 
elephant  caparisoned  with  a gilt  howdah,  which 
contained  a tall,  genteel  female,  richly  dressed  in 
red  and  white  silk.  We  had  the  honour  of 
riding  next  to  her  ladyship  ; after  us,  three  or 
four  elephants,  with  her  son  and  some  of  the 
members  of  government.  Two  or  three  hundred 
followers,  male  and  female,  concluded  the  pro- 
cession. Our  ride  terminated  in  the  centre  of  a 
beautiful  garden  of  the  viceroy’s.  I say  beautiful, 
because  it  was  entirely  the  work  of  nature — art 
had  no  hand  in  it.  It  was  full  of  a variety  of 
fruit  trees,  growing  wild  and  luxuriant.  The 
noble  banyan  formed  a delightful  shade,  under 
which  our  mats  were  spread,  and  we  seated  our- 
selves to  enjoy  the  scenery  around  us.  Nothing 
could  exceed  the  endeavours  of  the  vice-reine 
to  make  our  excursion  agreeable.  She  gathered 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  65 

fruit,  and  pared  it;  culled  flowers,  and  knotted 
them,  and  presented  them  with  her  own  hands  ; 
which  was  a mark  of  her  condescension.  At 
dinner  she  had  her  cloth  spread  by  ours,  nor  did 
she  refuse  to  partake  of  whatever  we  presented 
her.  We  returned  in  the  evening,  fatigued  with 
riding  on  the  elephant,  delighted  with  the  coun- 
try and  the  hospitality  of  the  Burmans,  and  de- 
jected and  depressed  with  their  superstition  and 
idolatry — their  darkness,  and  ignorance  of  the 
true  God. 

“ Though  we  have  never  said  any  thing  to  the 
viceroy’s  family  on  the  subject  of  religion,  yet 
they  perceive  a great  difference  between  us  and 
the  other  foreigners  who  occasionally  visit  them. 
Mr.  Judson  seldom  goes  to  the  government-house, 
as  it  is  easier  for  me  to  have  access  to  her  lady- 
ship, than  for  him  to  do  business  with  the  viceroy. 
She  treats  me  with  great  familiarity ; but  I am 
generally  reserved  and  serious  in  her  presence, 
yet  manifest  a tender  concern  for  her  welfare, 
with  which  she  is  much  pleased.  I do  not  yet 
despair  of  finding  some  opportunity  to  introduce 
the  subject  of  religion  to  her,  in  such  a way  as 
may  not  appear  intrusive  or  disgusting.  Were  I 
to  appear  before  her  in  the  character  of  a teacher, 
she  would  think  me  far  beneath  her  notice,  and 
perhaps  forbid  my  approaching  her  again : there- 
fore, I think  it  most  judicious  to  convince  her, 
by  my  conduct,  that  I am  really  different  from 


66  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

other  females  who  surround  her,  and  so  far  to 
gain  her  confidence  and  affection,  that  I can  gra- 
dually introduce  the  subject,  without  her  per- 
ceiving my  object. 

“ September  14 th. — ‘ Sorrow  may  endure  for  a 
night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning.’  Yes,  my 
dear  parents,  I can  write  of  mercies,  as  well  as 
afflictions.  The  dark  cloud,  which  hung  over  us, 
when  I last  wrote,  is  dispersed  ; and  the  sun  of 
prosperity,  made  more  brilliant  by  contrast,  once 
more  shines  upon  us.  We  are  still  in  Rangoon, 
and  our  prospects  brighter  than  ever.  A few 
days  after  my  last  date,  a pious  captain  from 
Bengal  offered  us  a passage  to  Calcutta.  This 
circumstance  determined  us  on  going,  as  Mr. 
Judson's  health  continued  to  decline ; and  we 
made  preparations  accordingly.  The  captain,  who 
resided  with  us,  during  his  stay  in  Rangoon,  sug- 
gested the  idea  of  Mr.  Judson’s  taking  exercise 
on  horseback  every  morning  with  him,  and  for 
this  purpose  procured  a horse.  This  exercise 
was  at  first  painful  ; but,  by  persevering  in  it, 
and  adopting  a more  generous  diet,  he  found  he 
was  not  growing  worse,  as  he  had  been  for  the 
three  last  months.  Still,  however,  his  disorder 
appeared  obstinate,  and  urged  the  necessity  of  a 
voyage  to  sea.  We  had  got  every  thing  in  readi- 
ness, even  an  order  from  the  viceroy,  without 
which  no  female  can  leave  the  country,  when  we 
received  the  joyful  intelligence  that  Mr.  Hough 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  67 

and  his  family  had  arrived  in  Bengal,  and  would 
soon  join  us  at  Rangoon.  I immediately  gave 
up  the  idea  of  going,  though  we  still  thought  a 
voyage  necessary  for  Mr.  Judson.  The  vessel, 
however,  in  which  we  were  to  sail,  was  detained 
much  longer  than  we  expected.  During  this 
time,  the  distressing  pain  in  Mr.  Judson’s  head 
was  less  frequent,  and,  by  persevering  in  his 
course  of  exercise  and  change  of  diet,  we  began 
to  hope  that  he  might  be  restored  to  health, 
without  going  to  sea,  and  we  therefore  relin- 
quished the  voyage  altogether.  His  health  is 
now  much  better,  though  he  is  not  able  to  study 
so  closely  as  formerly. 

“ The  vice-reine  has  lately  been  called  to  Ava  ; 
but  the  viceroy  still  remains.  I regretted  her 
going,  on  several  accounts.  She  had  evidently 
become  much  attached  to  me,  I had  an  op- 
portunity of  trying  the  sincerity  of  her  friendship 
at  the  time  we  procured  our  order  for  going  to 
Bengal.  I went  to  her  with  a petition,  which 
Mr.  Judson  had  written,  and,  contrary  to  Burman 
custom,  appeared  without  a present.  She  was 
in  an  inner  room,  with  the  viceroy,  when  I pre- 
sented the  petition;  and,  after  hearing  it  read,  she 
said  it  should  be  granted.  She  called  her  secre- 
tary, and  directed  him  to  write  an  official  order, 
have  it  regularly  passed  through  all  the  offices, 
and  impressed  with  the  royal  stamp.  I was 
determined  not  to  leave  her  until  I received  the 


68  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

order,  as  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  obtain  it, 
unless  delivered  in  her  presence.  It  was  not  long 
after  the  order  was  sent  from  the  government- 
house,  before  one  of  her  under  officers  came  in, 
and  told  me  it  would  be  a long  time  before  my 
order  would  pass  through  the  several  offices,  and 
that  I had  better  return  to  my  house,  and  he 
would  bring  it  me.  The  viceroy’s  wife  asked 
me  if  that  would  answer  my  purpose  ? Being 
perfectly  acquainted  with  the  object  of  the  man, 
I replied,  that  I had  had  much  anxiety  on  account 
of  this  order,  and,  if  it  was  her  pleasure,  I prefer- 
red waiting  for  it.  She  said  it  should  be  as  I 
wished,  and  ordered  the  man  to  expedite  the 
business.  Being  ill,  she  did  not  leave  her  room 
through  the  day,  and  I had  an  opportunity  of 
conversing  much  with  her.  Among  other  things, 
she  asked  what  was  Mr.  Judson’s  object  in 
coming  to  this  country  ? Before  I had  time  to 
answer,  an  elderly  woman  present,  with  whom  I 
had  had  considerable  conversation  on  the  subject 
of  religion,  replied,  that  * Mr.  Judson  had  come 
to  tell  the  Burmans  of  the  true  God,’  &c. ; and 
went  on,  and  related  all  that  I had  ever  said  to 
her.  The  viceroy’s  wife  then  asked  me  what  was 
the  difference  between  the  God  I worshipped, 
and  Gaudama.  I had  begun  to  tell  her,  when 
one  of  her  people  brought  in  a bag  of  silver. 
After  she  had  given  orders  respecting  the  money, 
she  wished  me  to  proceed.  I had  but  just  begun 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  69 

the  second  time,  when  two  or  three  members  of 
government  came  in,  and  there  it  ended.  My 
order  was  delivered  me  towards  evening  ; and 
then  I made  her  a present,  expressed  the  obliga- 
tions I was  under,  and  bid  her  good  evening.  When 
an  order  of  this  kind  is  procured  by  the  under 
officers,  it  costs  about  twenty-five  dollars,  besides 
much  trouble  and  perplexity. 

“ My  health  is  tolerably  good,  my  time  was 
never  so  completely  occupied  as  at  present,  and 
I would  not  change  situations  with  any  person 
on  earth.  For  a month  or  two  past,  I have  been 
employed  in  writing  a little  Catechism  for  children, 
in  the  Burman  language.  It  is  just  completed, 
and  I am  teaching  it  to  a few  children  under  my 
care,  who  are  learning  to  read. 

“ Thus,  my  dear  parents,  I have  given  you  a 
general  account  of  our  circumstances  for  several 
months.  I must  now  conclude,  and  prepare  my 
letters  to  send  to  Calcutta,  by  the  present  oppor- 
tunity. Rest  assured  that  this  letter  leaves  us  in 
more  comfortable  circumstances  than  we  have 
ever  before  enjoyed  in  this  place.  But  we  need 
more  grace,  more  humility,  and  more  devotedness 
to  the  cause  of  God.  Do  not  let  a day  pass  without 
praying  for  us.” 

From  Mr.  Judson  to  Dr.  Staughton,  still  farther 
particulars  are  communicated. 

“ August  3 d,  1816. — Four  months  have  now 
elapsed  since  I was  seized  with  a nervous  affec- 


70 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


tion  of  my  head  and  eyes,  which  has  prevented 
my  making  any  advance  in  the  language,  and, 
the  greater  part  of  the  time,  has  incapacitated 
me  for  even  writing  a letter.  I had  fully  made 
up  my  mind  to  take  passage  to  Bengal  with 
Captain  Kidd,  a pious  man,  who  has  been  living 
with  us  for  the  last  two  months,  when  the  news 
reached  us  that  brother  Hough  had  arrived  in 
Bengal,  and  might  be  expected  here  in  a few 
weeks.  I consequently  concluded  to  wait,  for 
the  present,  and  take  some  future  opportunity  of 
trying  the  sea  air,  and  getting  some  medical  as- 
sistance, without  which,  I have  for  some  time 
feared,  I should  never  be  able  to  apply  myself 
again  to  my  studies.  Within  a few  days,  how- 
ever, I have  felt  more  relief  from  the  pain  and  dis- 
tressing weakness  of  my  eyes,  than  I have  known 
since  1 was  first  taken  ; and  I begin  to  hope  that 
measures  I am  now  pursuing  will  issue  in  my  reco- 
very, without  a sea  voyage. 

“ Since  the  11th  of  last  April,  I have  not  been 
able  to  read  a page  in  a Burman  book.  During 
this  period  I found  that  I could  attend,  with  less 
pain,  to  the  compilation  of  a Burman  grammar, 
than  to  any  other  study.  And  this  I was  induced 
to  persevere  in,  from  the  hope  that,  if  I was  never 
again  able  to  prosecute  the  study  of  the  lan- 
guage, the  knowledge  I had  hitherto  acquired, 
would  not  be  wholly  lost  to  a successor.  The 
grammar  is  now  completed,  and  I fully  intended 


TO  THE  BU11MAN  EMPIRE. 


71 


to  forward  you  a copy  by  this  conveyance  ; but 
I find  that,  in  my  present  state,  it  is  impossible 
for  me  to  transcribe  it.  All  that  I can  do  at 
present,  is  to  send  you  a copy  of  a Burman  tract, 
which  has  been  chiefly  composed  during  the 
same  period,  and  which  I accompany  with  an 
English  translation.  The  Burman  original  is  pro- 
nounced, by  my  teacher  and  others,  not  only  in- 
telligible, but  perspicuous;  and  to  get  this  printed 
was  one  object  that  I had  in  view,  in  going  to 
Bengal.  Brother  Hough  has,  however,  just  sent 
round  a press  and  types,  which  are  now  in  the 
Rangoon  river ; and  as  he  expects  to  follow  him- 
self, the  first  opportunity,  and,  as  I have  heard, 
he  understands  the  printing  business,  I hope  the 
time  is  not  far  distant  when  we  shall  have  a bit 
of  bread  to  give  to  the  starving,  perishing  Burmans 
around  us. 

“ It  will  probably  be  impossible  to  keep  the 
press  long  in  Rangoon.  It  will  be  ordered  up  to 
Ava,  as  soon  as  the  news  of  such  a curiosity 
reaches  the  king’s  ears.  Nor  is  this  to  be  re- 
gretted; under  the  overruling  providence  of  God, 
it  may  open  a wide  door  to  missionary  exertions. 
Two  of  us  would  remove  to  Ava.  But  we  could 
not  subsist  there,  without  an  intermediate  station 
at  Rangoon.  In  this  view  of  things,  it  would  be 
very  desirable  that  another  man  should  be  found 
to  accompany  brother  Rice.  If  I should  say 
two  men  with  brother  Rice,  as  I wish  to  do. 


72  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

it  might  appear  inconsistent  with  something  I 
wrote  some  time  ago.  However,  the  press  and  a 
station  at  Ava,  quite  alter  the  circumstances.  I 
have  been  led  to  think  and  inquire  more  about 
Ava,  of  late,  by  a report  that  is  in  circulation,  that 
I am  soon  to  be  ordered  up  to  Ava  myself.  And 
the  more  I think  of  it,  the  more  I am  inclined  to 
believe  that  it  is  the  way  in  which  the  gospel  is 
to  be  introduced  into  this  empire. 

“ The  British  Baptists  have  made  a noble  be- 
ginning in  Western  India.  It  remains  for  Ame- 
rican Baptists  to  make  an  attempt  on  the  Eastern 
side.  As  for  myself,  I fear  I shall  prove  only  a 
pioneer,  and  do  a little  in  preparing  the  way  for 
others.  But,  such  as  I am,  I feel  devoted  to  the 
work,  and,  with  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  help 
of  the  Society,  am  resolved  to  persevere  to  the 
end  of  my  life.” 

A letter  of  the  same  date,  to  Mr.  Rice,  will 
show  what  considerations  prevented  discourage- 
ment under  such  circumstances. 

“ If  any  ask  what  success  I meet  with  among 
the  natives  ? — tell  them  to  look  at  Otaheite,  where 
the  missionaries  laboured  nearly  twenty  years, 
and,  not  meeting  with  the  slightest  success, 
began  to  be  neglected  by  all  the  Christian  world, 
and  the  very  name  of  Otaheite  was  considered  a 
shame  to  the  cause  of  missions  ; but  now  the 
blessing  begins  to  descend.  Tell  them  to  look 
at  Bengal  also,  where  Dr.  Thomas  had  been 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


73 


labouring  seventeen  years,  that  is,  from  1783 
to  1800,  before  the  first  convert,  Krishnoo,  was 
baptized.  When  a few  converts  are  once  made, 
things  move  on.  But  it  requires  a much  longer 
time  than  I have  been  here,  to  make  a first  im- 
pression on  a heathen  people.  If  they  ask  again 
what  prospect  of  ultimate  success  is  there  ? — 
tell  them,  as  much  as  that  there  is  an  Almighty 
and  faithful  God,  who  will  perform  his  promises, 
and  no  more.  If  this  does  not  satisfy  them,  beg 
them  to  let  me  stay  and  make  the  attempt,  and 
let  you  come,  and  to  give  us  our  bread ; or,  if 
they  are  unwilling  to  risk  their  bread  on  such  a 
forlorn  hope,  as  has  nothing  but  the  word  of  God 
to  sustain  it,  beg  of  them,  at  least,  not  to  pre- 
vent others  from  giving  us  bread.  And  if  we  live 
some  twenty  or  thirty  years,  they  may  hear  from 
us  again. 

“ I have  already  written  many  things  home 
about  Rangoon.  This  climate  is  good,  better 
than  any  other  part  of  the  East.  But  it  is  a most 
wretched  place.  Missionaries  must  not  calculate 
on  the  least  comfort,  but  what  they  find  in  one 
another,  and  in  their  work.  However,  if  a ship 
was  lying  in  the  river,  ready  to  convey  me  to  any 
part  of  the  world  I should  choose,  and  that  too 
with  the  entire  approbation  of  all  my  Christian 
friends,  I should  not,  for  a moment,  hesitate  on 
remaining.  This  is  an  immense  field  ; and,  since 
the  Serampore  missionaries  have  left  it,  it  seems 


74  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

wholly  thrown  on  the  hands  of  the  Americans.  If 
we  desert  it,  the  blood  of  the  Burmans  will  be 
required  of  us. 

“ In  encouraging  young  men  to  come  out  as 
missionaries,  do  use  the  greatest  caution.  One 
wrong-headed,  conscientiously  obstinate  man, 
would  ruin  us.  Humble,  quiet,  persevering  men; 
men  of  sound,  sterling  talents,  of  decent  accom- 
plishments, and  some  natural  aptitude  to  acquire 
a language  ; men  of  an  amiable,  yielding  tem- 
per, willing  to  take  the  lowest  place,  to  be  the 
least  of  all,  and  the  servant  of  all ; men  who 
enjoy  much  closet  religion,  who  live  near  to  God, 
and  are  willing  to  suffer  all  things  for  Christ’s 
sake,  without  being  proud  of  it ; — these  are  the 
men  we  need.” 

On  the  15th  October,  1816,  we  had  the  happi- 
ness of  welcoming  to  our  lonely  habitation,  our 
friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hough,  who  were  sent  out 
by  the  same  Board  under  whose  patronage  we 
then  were.  After  a seclusion  from  all  society, 
for  three  years,  it  was  no  common  gratification 
to  meet  again  with  Christian  friends,  from  our 
dear  native  country.  Our  missionary  prospects 
also  began  to  brighten,  and  to  wear  a more 
encouraging  aspect  than  ever  before.  Mr. 
Judson’s  health  was  much  improved  ; a grammar 
was  prepared  to  assist  Mr.  Hough  in  the  acquire- 
ment of  the  language;  the  first  tract  ever  written 
in  Burman,  relative  to  the  true  God,  was  ready 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  75 

for  printing,  and  a press,  types,  and  printer  were 
at  hand  to  execute  it.  Mr.  Hough  immediately 
applied  to  the  study  of  the  language,  and,  in  a 
very  short  time,  obtained  such  a knowledge  of 
the  character  as  enabled  him  to  put  in  operation 
the  first  printing  press  ever  set  up  in  the  Burman 
empire. — The  following  joint  letter,  from  Messrs. 
Hough  and  Judson,  was  written  soon  after  the 
arrival  of  the  former. 

“ Rangoon , November  7th,  1816. — It  is  with 
peculiar  satisfaction  that  we  are,  at  length, 
enabled  to  address  a letter  to  the  Board,  in  a 
joint  capacity.  We  had  a joyful  meeting  in  this 
place,  on  the  15th  ult.  Mr.  Hough  has  settled  in 
one  part  of  the  mission  house ; and  we  are  now 
united,  both  as  a church  of  Christ,  and*as  a mis- 
sion society.  Our  regulations,  on  the  latter  point, 
we  here  submit  to  the  Board.  It  will  be  evi- 
dent, at  first  sight,  that  these  regulations  have  a 
prospective  view,  and  are  framed  somewhat  dif- 
ferently from  what  they  would  have  been,  had 
we  not  expected  that  our  number  would  soon 
be  enlarged.  But  we  hope  the  time  is  not  far 
distant,  when  they  will  receive  the  signatures  of 
others  also. 

“ It  is  true  that  one  of  us  remained  about 
three  years  in  this  place,  without  uttering  any 
Macedonian  cries.  But,  we  apprehend,  that  the 
time  is  now  come,  when  it  is  consistent  with  the 


76  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

strictest  prudence  to  lift  up  our  voice,  and  say, 
Come  over  the  ocean  and  help  us. 

“ By  a residence  of  three  years  in  this 
country,  many  doubts,  which  at  first  occurred, 
are  removed  ; and  many  points  concerning  the 
practicability  of  a mission,  and  the  prospect  of 
success,  are  ascertained.  We  cannot  now  enter 
much  into  detail  ; but  we  desire  to  say,  that  we 
see  the  mission  established  in  this  land.  We 
unite  in  opinion,  that  a wide  door  is  set  open  for 
the  introduction  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  into  this 
great  empire.  We  have  at  present  no  govern- 
mental interdict  to  encounter,  and  no  greater 
obstacles  than  such  as  oppose  the  progress  of 
missionaries  in  every  heathen  land.  It  appears 
to  us  (and  may  it  so  appear  to  our  fathers  and 
brethren)  that  God,  in  removing  the  English  mis- 
sion from  this  place,  and  substituting  in  their 
stead  an  American  mission,  is  emphatically  call- 
ing on  the  American  churches  to  compassionate 
the  poor  Burmans,  and  to  send  their  silver,  and 
their  gold,  and  their  young  men,  to  this  eastern 
part  of  the  world,  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against 
the  mighty. 

“ It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  we  announce 
the  valuable  present  of  a press  and  Burman 
types,  made  us  by  the  Serampore  brethren.  We 
are  now  closing  in  a room,  for  a temporary  print- 
ing office ; and  hope,  very  soon,  to  issue  a gospel 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  77 

tract,  which  has  been  in  readiness  some  time ; 
and  which  is  intended  to  give  the  heathen,  around 
us,  some  idea  of  the  way  of  salvation  through  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  we  cannot  move  one 
step  in  the  way  of  printing  without  money.  We 
therefore  beg  an  immediate  appropriation,  not 
only  to  liquidate  the  expenses  already  incurred, 
but  to  enable  us  to  proceed  in  this  all-important 
part  of  our  work.  The  accounts  of  the  mission 
press,  we  propose  to  keep  distinct ; and  they 
shall  be  transmitted,  together  with  the  accounts 
of  the  mission. 

“We  know  not  how  long  the  press  will  be  per- 
mitted to  remain  in  Rangoon ; we  should  not, 
however,  deprecate  its  removal  to  Ava.  Such  a 
measure  would,  doubtless,  tend  to  the  further- 
ance of  the  cause,  and  the  introduction  of  reli- 
gion into  the  very  heart  of  the  empire,  where 
Satan's  seat  is.  But,  in  this  case,  more  men,  and 
more  money,  would  be  imperiously  demanded ; 
and,  we  trust,  that  the  .patronage  of  the  Board 
will  not  fail  in  these  necessary  points.  We 
desire,  humbly,  to  repeat  to  the  Board,  what 
the  first  missionaries  from  the  Baptist  Society  in 
England  said  to  their  friends,  when  on  the  point 
of  embarkation  in  the  great  work,  which  seems 
destined  to  illuminate  Western  India  with  the 
light  of  the  gospel.  ‘ We  are,'  said  they,  ‘ like 
men  going  down  into  a well ; you  stand  at  the 
top,  and  hold  the  ropes.  Do  not  let  us  fall.’ 


78  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

Hold  us  up,  brethren  and  fathers  ; and,  if  health 
and  life  be  spared  us,  we  hope,  through  the  grace 
of  God,  to  see  Eastern  India  also  beginning  to 
participate  in  the  same  glorious  light.  Many 
years  may  intervene  in  the  latter,  as  well  as  the 
former  case  ; many  difficulties  and  disappoint- 
ments may  try  your  faith  and  ours.  But  let 
patience  have  her  perfect  work  ; let  us  not  be 
weary  of  well  doing;  for,  in  due  time  we  shall  reap, 
if  we  faint  not.” 

A letter  written  by  Mr.  Hough,  February  20th, 
1817,  contains  some  interesting  particulars  relative 
to  the  mission ; and  also  describes  the  Burman 
mode  of  burying  the  priests. 

“ I could  not,  before  I came  here,  form  any 
idea  how  my  time  would  be  occupied,  after  I 
should  become  engaged  in  the  work  for  which  I 
came  hither ; and,  therefore,  made  promises  to 
write  more,  and  oftener,  than  I fear  I shall  be  able 
to  do.  I often  think  how  happy  I should  be, 
could  I step  into  your  house,  or  you  into  ours, 
and  spend  a few  hours  in  telling  you  all  my  mind  ; 
how  I feel,  and  what  I want  to  be  done  for  these 
poor  Burmans.  But  while  this  pleasure  is  denied 
me,  there  is  a hope  constantly  administering  to 
my  mind  a sweet  consolation,  that  we  shall  see 
each  other  in  a better  * house,  not  made  with 
hands.’  Such  a hope  as  this,  I would  not  ex- 
change for  any  consideration  ; no,  not  even  for 
the  felicity  of  meeting  all  my  friends  again  in 


TO  THE  BURMAjST  EMPIRE.  79 

this  world.  Since  I have  been  here,  I have  felt, 
in  a good  degree,  assured  that  I am  in  the  path 
of  duty.  I am  in  a work  with  which  my  soul  is 
delighted.  My  spiritual  enjoyments  seem  much 
to  have  increased,  and  I am  enabled  to  look  for- 
ward, with  an  increased  confidence,  to  the  end 
of  this,  and  to  another  existence.  I am  not, 
however,  free  from  a state  of  uncertainty  on  the 
subject  of  my  own  salvation  ; yet,  on  self-exa- 
mination, my  heart  appears  to  have  its  hold  on 
Divine  truth  strengthened ; and,  surrounded  with 
objects  of  human  kind,  in  a most  lamentable 
state  of  religious  debasement,  it  is  impossible 
for  me  not  to  esteem  the  precious  gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God,  as  the  richest  source  of  sacred 
consolation.  I can  say  truly,  I had  no  idea  of 
a state  of  heathenism,  before  I saw  it.  A warm- 
hearted Christian,  in  America,  would  think  that 
a poor  miserable  idolater  would  leap  for  joy 
at  the  message  of  grace.  But  it  is  not  so  in 
Burrnah — 

‘ Here  Satan  binds  their  captive  minds 

Fast  in  his  slavish  chains.’ 

“ The  few  with  whom  brother  Judson  has 
conversed,  since  I have  been  here,  appear  inac- 
cessible to  truth.  They  sit  unaffected,  and  go 
away  unimpressed  with  what  they  have  heard. 
They  are  unconvinced  by  arguments,  and  un- 
moved by  love  ; and  the  conversion  of  a Bur- 


80  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

man,  or  even  the  excitement  of  a thought  to- 
wards the  truth,  must  and  will  be  a sovereign 
act  of  Divine  power.  We  long  to  see  that  act 
of  power  displayed  : even  one  instance  would  fill 
us  with  joy. 

“ Brother  Judson  has  never  yet  been  abroad 
to  preach.  He  has  applied  himself  constantly 
to  the  study  of  the  language,  with  a view  to 
the  translation  of  the  New  Testament.  We  both 
concur  in  the  opinion,  that,  before  preaching 
be  undertaken,  to  any  considerable  degree, 
some  portion  of  the  Scriptures  should  be  in 
circulation. 

“ The  Burmans,  when  any  thing  is  said  to 
them  on  the  subject  of  Divine  truth,  inquire  for 
our  holy  books ; and  it  is  a pleasing  fact,  that 
scarcely  a Burman,  with  the  exception  of  females, 
is  incapable  of  reading.  Besides,  during  the 
progress  of  translation,  many  theological  terms, 
appropriate  to  the  different  branches  of  doctrine, 
may  be  familiarly  acquired,  and  their  use  esta- 
blished ; which,  without  much  consideration, 
might  be  erroneously  employed,  and  thus  wrong 
ideas  conveyed.  Having,  therefore,  press  and 
types  here,  we  cannot,  conscientiously,  withhold 
from  this  people  the  precious  oracles  of  God. 
This  opinion  has  influenced  us  to  issue,  as  soon  as 
preparations  could  possibly  be  made,  two  small 
tracts — one  a Summary  of  Christian  Doctrine,  and 
the  other  a Catechism.  The  one  I was  enabled 


to  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  81 

to  print  the  latter  part  of  the  last,  and  the  other 
the  first  of  the  present  month — a copy  of  each  I 
send  you.  By  them  you  will  see  how  much  we 
need  a new  fount  of  types  ; many  of  the  letters 
are  almost  illegible.  These  two  little  tracts  are 
the  first  printing  ever  done  in  Burmah  ; and  it  is 
a fact,  grateful  to  every  Christian  feeling,  that 
God  has  reserved  the  introduction  of  this  art  here, 
for  his  own  use. 

“ Having  been  hitherto  employed  for  the  most 
part  of  the  time  in  a printing-office,  it  has  been 
impossible  for  me  to  make  those  advances  to- 
wards an  attainment  of  the  language,  that  I have 
desired,  and  that  otherwise  would  have  been  the 
case.  While  my  progress  is  necessarily  slow  in 
acquiring  the  language,  I am  comforted  under 
the  reflection,  that  my  employment  is  of  that 
kind  which  will  rather  assist,  than  retard  my 
advance,  and  that,  without  two  or  three  years’ 
study,  I can  be  instrumental  in  conveying  the 
knowledge  of  everlasting  life  to  the  Burmans.  I 
am  now  thankful  for  that  Divine  direction  of  my 
earlier  years,  which  placed  me  in  my  honoured 
father’s  office,  to  acquire  knowledge  of  a business, 
which  it  was  impossible  for  me  then  to  imagine, 
would  be  applied  to  that  use,  in  which  I hope  it  is, 
on  the  other  side  of  the  globe,  amongst  the  hea- 
then. 

“ A few  extracts  from  my  journal  will  close 
this  letter. 


82  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ When  a priest  dies,  he  has  peculiar  honours 
paid  him.  Several  months  since,  a neighbouring 
priest  died,  or  returned,  for  the  Burmans  think 
it  undignified  to  say  that  a priest  dies ; his  body 
was  immediately  wrapped  up  in  tar  and  wax  ; 
holes  were  perforated  through  the  feet,  and  some 
distance  up  the  legs,  into  which  one  end  of  a 
hollow  bamboo  was  inserted,  and  the  other  fixed 
in  the  ground ; the  body  was  then  pressed  and 
squeezed,  so  that  its  fluids  were  forced  down 
through  the  legs,  and  conveyed  off  by  means  of 
the  bamboos  ; in  this  state  of  preservation  the 
body  has  been  kept.  For  some  days  past,  prepa- 
rations have  been  making  to  burn  this  sacred 
relic,  and  to-day  it  has  passed  off  in  fumigation  ! 
We  all  went  to  see  it,  and  returned  sorry  that  we 
had  spent  our  time  to  so  little  profit.  On  four 
wheels  was  erected  a kind  of  stage,  or  tower, 
about  twelve  or  fifteen  feet  high,  ornamented  with 
paintings  of  different  colours  and  figures,  and 
' small  mirrors.  On  the  top  of  this  was  constructed 
a kind  of  balcony,  in  which  was  situated  the  coffin, 
decorated  with  small  pieces  of  glass,  of  different 
hues,  and  the  corpse,  half  of  which  was  visible 
above  the  edge  of  the  coffin,  entirely  covered  with 
gold  leaf.  Around  the  tower  and  balcony  were 
fixed  several  bamboo  poles,  covered  with  red 
cloth,  displaying  red  flags  at  their  ends,  and  small 
umbrellas,  glittering  with  spangles ; among  which 
was  one  larger  than  the  others,  covered  with  gold 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  83 

leaf,  shading  the  corpse  from  the  sun.  Around 
the  upper  part  of  the  balcony  was  suspended  a 
curtain  of  white  gauze,  about  a cubit  in  width, 
the  lower  edge  of  which  was  hung  round  with 
small  pieces  of  isinglass;  above  the  whole  was 
raised  a lofty  quadrangular  pyramid,  graduating 
into  a spire,  constructed  in  a light  manner,  of 
split  bamboo,  covered  with  small  figures,  cut  out 
of  white  cloth,  and  waving  to  and  fro,  for  some 
distance,  in  the  air.  The  whole,  from  the  ground 
to  the  top  of  the  spire,  might  measure  fifty  feet. 
This  curious  structure,  with  some  living  priests 
upon  it,  was  drawn  half  a mile  by  women  and  boys, 
delighted  with  the  sport,  and  in  the  midst  of  a 
large  concourse  of  shouting  and  joyous  specta- 
tors. On  their  arrival  at  the  place  of  burning, 
ropes  were  attached  to  the  hind  end  of  the  car, 
and  a whimsical  sham  contest,  by  adverse  pulling, 
was  for  some  time  maintained,  one  party  seem- 
ingly indicating  a reluctance  to  have  the  precious 
corpse  burned.  At  length,  the  foremost  party 
prevailed,  and  the  body  must  be  reduced  to  ashes ! 
Amidst  this,  there  were  loud  shoutings,  clapping 
of  hands,  the  sound  of  drums,  of  tinkling  and 
wind  instruments,  and  a most  disgusting  exhibi- 
tion of  female  dancing,  but  no  weeping  or  wail- 
ing. The  vehicle  was  then  taken  to  pieces,  the 
most  valuable  parts  of  which  were  preserved,  and 
the  body  consumed. 

“ Although  the  Burmans  have  every  motive, 

g2 


84  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

according  to  their  system  of  religion,  to  practise 
good  works,  yet  no  people  can  be  worse.  Their 
religious  motives  are  wholly  inadequate  to  the 
production  of  any  good,  or  to  maintain  private 
and  public  morality.  It  may  be  said  of  the  Bur- 
man,  as  of  every  other  pagan  religion,  there  is 
no  power  in  it  to  make  men  better,  and  its  best 
precepts  are  no  criterion,  by  which  to  judge  of 
the  moral  character  of  its  devotees.  The  Bur- 
mans  are  subtle,  thievish,  mercenary,  addicted  to 
robbery  and  fraud  ; truth  and  honesty  are  not 
known  among  them  as  virtues.  They  are  exces- 
sively prone  to  gambling  and  sporting. 

“ The  government  of  the  country  is  in  the  will 
of  the  sovereign,  who  considers  his  subjects  as 
slaves : in  short,  every  person  coming  into  the 
country  reports  himself  ‘ the  king's  most  willing 
slave.’  The  viceroy  of  Rangoon  acts  with  a 
power  limited  only  by  the  king.  He  punishes 
criminals  with  severity.  The  mildest  manner  of 
suffering  death  is  to  have  the  head  taken  off, 
which  is  done  with  a large  knife,  and  at  one 
stroke.  Reprieves  from  extreme  desert,  however, 
are  often  purchased  with  money ; but  when  a 
malefactor  is  destitute  of  friends  and  money,  he 
dies  without  mercy. 

“ January  2 6th. — For  some  time  past,  it  has 
Been  discovered  that  a gang  of  persons  have  been 
digging  under  some  of  the  pagodas,  to  possess 
themselves  of  whatever  treasures  are  deposited 


TO  THE  BURMAN.  EMPIRE.  85 

beneath  them,  and  a few  days  since,  four  persons 
were  apprehended  in  the  act.  They  were  con- 
demned to  death.  One  of  the  servants  came  in 
this  afternoon,  and  informed  me  he  had  been  to 
see  them  executed. 

“ Brother  Judson  and  myself  immediately  has- 
tened to  the  place.  It  was  a most  shocking 
scene!  Four  Burmans  were  fastened  to  a high 
fence,  first  by  the  hair  of  the  head  and  neck,  their 
arms  were  then  extended  horizontally,  as  far  as 
they  could  be  stretched  without  dislocation,  and 
a cord  tied  tight  around  them  ; their  thighs  and 
legs  were  then  tied  in  their  natural  position ; they 
were  ripped  open  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest 
extremity  of  the  stomach,  and  their  vitals  and 
part  of  their  bowels  were  hanging  out;  large 
gashes  were  cut  in  a downward  direction  on  their 
sides  and  thighs,  so  as  to  bare  the  ribs  and  thigh 
bones : one,  who  I suppose  was  more  guilty  than 
the  rest,  had  an  iron  instrument  thrust  side-long 
through  the  breast,  and  part  of  his  vitals  pushed 
out  in  the  opposite  direction.  Thus,  with  the 
under  jaw  fallen,  their  eyes  open  and  fixed,  naked, 
excepting  a small  cloth  round  the  middle,  they 
hung  dead. 

“ February  1th.— This  afternoon  we  heard  that 
seven  men  were  carried  to  the  place  of  execution. 
We  went  to  witness  the  affecting  scene.  On  our 
arrival  there,  we  heard  the  report  of  a gun,  and 
looking  about,  we  saw  a man  tied  to  a tree,  and 


86  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

six  others  sitting  on  the  ground  with  their  hands 
tied  behind  them.  Observing  the  man  at  the 
tree,  we  saw  a circular  figure  painted  upon  his 
stomach,  about  three  inches  in  diameter,  for  a 
mark  to  shoot  at,  for  he  was  to  die  in  this  way. 
At  that  moment,  there  was  another  discharge  of 
a musket ; but  the  shot  again  missed  ; a third 
and  fourth  time  he  was  fired  at,  but  without 
effect.  At  every  shot  there  was  a loud  peal  of 
laughter  from  the  surrounding  spectators.  He 
was  then  loosed  from  the  tree,  and  a messenger 
sent  to  the  governor,  who  returned  with  a re- 
prieve. His  younger  brother,  who  was  one  of 
the  seven,  was  then  tied  to  the  tree.  The  first 
shot  slightly  touched  his  arm  ; the  second  struck 
him  in  the  heart,  and  he  instantly  expired ; at  the 
same  moment,  the  remaining  five,  each  at  one 
blow,  were  beheaded.  We  went  close  to  them, 
and  saw  their  trunks,  and  their  heads,  and  their 
blood.  We  saw  a man  put  his  foot  on  one  of  the 
trunks,  and  press  it  with  as  little  feeling  as  one 
would  tread  upon  a beast.  Their  bodies  were 
then  dragged  along  on  the  ground  a short  dis- 
tance, and  their  heads  taken  up  by  the  hair  and 
removed.  The  two  brothers,  when  condemned 
to  die,  requested  to  be  shot,  asking,  at  the  same 
time,  to  be  pardoned  if  the  fourth  shot  should 
miss.  The  elder  brother  was  therefore  spared, 
while  the  fate  of  the  other  was  more  lamentable. 
The  superstitious  Burrfians  suppose,  from  the  cir- 


I 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  87 

cumstance  of  the  request  of  the  two  brothers,  and 
the  escape  of  the  elder  one,  that  some  charm  pre- 
vented his  death.  The  crimes  of  these  poor  crea- 
tures were  various.  One  had  been  digging  under 
a pagoda,  another  had  stabbed  a woman,  but  had 
not  killed  her ; the  others,  as  nearly  as  we  can 
learn,  were  robbers. 

“ February  8 th. — We  learnt  to-day,  that  the 
man  who  was  yesterday  reprieved,  has  twice  be- 
fore, for  his  evil  conduct,  been  carried  to  the 
place  of  execution  in  other  places,  and  shot  at, 
six  times  each,  without  being  hit.  He  is  now 
considered  to  be  a wonderful  man,  and  that  a 
bullet  cannot  prove  him  mortal.  Being  asked 
how  he  became  a robber  ? he  replied,  because  he 
had  not  been  made  governor,  or  raised  above  the 
grade  of  the  common  people.  He  is  now  raised 
to  a high  rank  among  the  governor’s  attendants. 
Thus,  my  dear  brother,  it  can  be  truly  said,  that 
Burmans  are  politically  and  morally  wretched ; 
but  we  know  the  Lord  is  able  to  bring  to  pass  a 
reformation  among  them.  Surrounded  by  such  a 
people,  we  continually  feel  our  situation  danger- 
ous, and  our  security  is  only  in  the  providence 
of  God.  Who  would  not  pity  the  Burmans,  view- 
ing them  as  described  in  the  above  letter?  We 
feel  assured  of  the  continuation  of  your  prayers 
for  their  conversion,  and  our  success.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 

A.  H.  J. 


88 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


LETTER  VI. 


Baltimore,  December,  1822. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

I trust  you  will  not  be  discouraged,  and  think 
our  letters  tedious,  while  following  us  through 
those  years  of  darkness.  You  perceive  that  our 
prospects  were  gradually  brightening  ; that  a vast 
difference  existed  between  our  circumstances,  in 
the  years  1813  and  1817,  though  there  had  been 
no  real  conversions.  One  dark  cloud,  however, 
was  suffered  to  rise,  so  threatening  in  appearance 
as  nearly  to  annihilate  our  most  cherished  hopes  ; 
yet  it  proved  only  the  harbinger  of  a brighter 
day.  Previously  to  these  gloomy  appearances,  a 
few  letters  were  written,  respecting  our  increas- 
ingly encouraging  prospects,  which  shall  here  be 
inserted.  In  March,  1817,  Mr.  Judson  wrote  the 
following  letter  to  the  Corresponding  Secretary 
of  the  Baptist  Board  of  Missions. 

“ Since  the  beginning  of  this  year,  we  have 
printed  two  tracts  ; the  one  a view  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion — seven  pages,  one  thousand  copies ; 
the  other  a catechism,  of  six  pages,  12mo.  three 
thousand  copies.  After  which,  finding  we  had 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  89 

paper  sufficient  for  an  edition  of  eight  hundred 
copies  of  St.  Matthew,  we  concluded  to  undertake 
this  one  gospel,  by  way  of  trial,  and  as  introduc- 
tory to  a larger  edition  of  the  whole  New  Testa- 
ment. I am  now  translating  the  eleventh  chapter, 
and  in  the  printing  room  the  third  half  sheet  is  set- 
ting up. 

“ Having  premised  thus  much  concerning  the 
present  posture  of  our  affairs,  I proceed  to  mention 
the  circumstances  which  induced  me  to  take  up 
my  pen  at  this  time.  I have  this  day  been  visited 
by  the  jirst  inquirer  after  religion,  that  I have 
seen  in  Burmah.  For,  although  in  the  course  of 
the  last  two  years,  I have  preached  the  gospel  to 
many,  and  though  some  have  visited  me  several 
times,  and  conversed  on  the  subject  of  religion  ; 
yet  I have  never  had  much  reason  to  believe  that 
their  visits  originated  in  a spirit  of  sincere  in- 
quiry. Conversations  on  religion  have  always 
been  of  my  proposing ; and  though  I have  some- 
times been  encouraged  to  hope  that  truth  had 
made  some  impression,  never,  until  to-day,  have 
I met  with  one  who  was  fairly  entitled  to  the  epi- 
thet of  Inquirer. 

As  I was  sitting  with  my  teacher,  as  usual,  a 
Burman  of  respectable  appearance,  and  followed 
by  a servant,  came  up  the  steps,  and  sat  down  by 
me.  I asked  him  the  usual  question,  where  he 
came  from  ? to  which  he  gave  me  no  explicit  reply ; 
and  I began  to  suspect  that  he  had  come  from 


90  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

the  government-house,  to  enforce  a trifling  re- 
quest, which,  in  the  morning,  we  had  declined. 
He  soon,  however,  undeceived  and  astonished  me, 
by  asking,  ‘ How  long  a time  will  it  take  me  to 
learn  the  religion  of  Jesus  ?’  I replied,  that  such 
a question  could  not  be  answered.  If  God  gave 
light  and  wisdom,  the  religion  of  Jesus  was  soon 
learnt ; but  without  God,  a man  might  study  all 
his  life  long,  and  make  no  proficiency.  But  how, 
continued  I,  came  you  to  know  any  thing  of 
Jesus  ? Have  you  been  here  before  ? ‘ No.’ 

Have  you  seen  any  writings  concerning  Jesus  ? 
* I have  seen  two  little  books.’  Who  is  Jesus? 
‘ He  is  the  Son  of  God,  who,  pitying  creatures, 
came  into  this  world,  and  suffered  death  in  their 
stead.’  Who  is  God  ? ‘ He  is  a Being  without 

beginning  or  end,  who  is  not  subject  to  old  age 
or  death,  but  always  is.’  I cannot  tell  how  I felt 
at  this  moment.  This  was  the  first  acknowledg- 
ment of  an  eternal  God,  that  I had  ever  heard 
from  the  lips  of  a Burman.  I handed  him  a tract 
and  catechism,  both  of  which  he  instantly  recog- 
nised, and  read  here  and  there,  making  occasional 
remarks  to  his  follower,  such  as,  ‘ This  is  the  true 
God — this  is  the  right  way,’  &c.  I now  tried  to 
tell  him  some  things  about  God  and  Christ,  and 
himself ; but  he  did  not  listen  with  much  atten- 
tion, and  seemed  anxious  only  to  get  another 
book.  I had  already  told  him  two  or  three  times 
that  I had  finished  no  other  book ; but,  that  in 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  91 

two  or  three  months,  I would  give  him  a larger 
one,  which  I was  now  daily  employed  in  trans- 
lating. ‘ But,’  replied  he,  ‘ have  you  not  a little 
of  that  book  done,  which  you  will  graciously  give 
me  now  V And  I,  beginning  to  think  that  God’s 
time  was  better  than  man’s,  folded  and  gave  him 
the  two  first  half  sheets,  which  contain  the  first 
five  chapters  of  St.  Matthew;  on  which  he  in- 
stantly rose,  as  if  his  business  was  all  done  ; and 
having  received  an  invitation  to  come  again,  took 
leave.  Throughout  his  short  stay,  he  appeared 
different  from  any  Burman  1 have  met  with.  He 
asked  no  questions  about  customs  and  manners, 
with  which  the  Burmans  teaze  us  exceedingly. 
He  had  no  curiosity,  and  no  desire  for  any  thing, 
but  ‘ more  of  this  sort  of  writing.’  In  fine,  his 
conduct  proved  that  he  had  something  on  his  mind, 
and  I cannot  but  hope  that  I shall  have  to  write 
about  him  again. 

**  March  24th. — We  have  not  yet  seen  our  in- 
quirer; but  to-day  we  met  with  one  of  his  ac- 
quaintances, who  says,  that  he  reads  our  books 
all  the  day,  and  shows  them  to  all  who  call  upon 
him.  We  told  him  to  ask  his  friend  to  come  and 
see  us  again. 

“ March  2 6th. — An  opportunity  occurs  of  send- 
ing to  Bengal.  I am  sorry  that  I cannot  send 
home  more  interesting  letters.  But  I am  not  yet 
in  the  way  of  collecting  interesting  matter.  I 
have  found,  that  I could  not  preach  publicly  to 


92  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

any  advantage,  without  being  able,  at  the  same 
time,  to  put  something  into  the  hands  of  the 
hearers.  And,  in  order  to  qualify  myself  to  do 
this,  I have  found  it  absolutely  necessary  to  keep 
at  home,  and  confine  myself  to  close  study,  for 
three  or  four  years.  I hope,  however,  after  St. 
Matthew  is  finished,  to  make  a more  public  en- 
trance on  my  work,  than  has  yet  been  done.  But 
many  difficulties  lie  in  the  way.  Our  present 
house  is  situated  in  the  woods,  away  from  any 
neighbours,  and  at  a distance  from  any  road.  In 
this  situation  we  have  no  visitors,  and  no  passing 
travellers,  whom  we  can  invite  to  stop  and  hear 
of  Christ.  My  attempts  to  go  out  and  find  au- 
ditors, have  always  occasioned  such  a waste  of 
time,  and  interruption  of  study,  as  would  not  often 
be  indulged  in  or  justified.  We  are  very  desirous 
of  building  a small  house  near  town,  on  some  pub- 
lic road.  We  wish  for  further  instructions,  and 
further  explanations  of  the  views  and  intentions 
of  the  Board.  The  approaching  triennial  Con- 
Tention,  also,  we  contemplate  with  the  deepest 
interest.  May  God  give  abundant  wisdom,  and 
zeal,  and  an  out-pouring  of  His  holy  spirit. 

“ Permit  me  to  close  with  a word  in  behalf  of 
Eastern  missions.  Great  Britain  and  the  United 
States  appear  to  be  the  only  countries  which  can, 
at  present,  take  a very  active  part  in  missionary 
concerns.  The  British  are  fully  occupied  with 
India,  Africa,  and  the  South  Sea  Islands.  East 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  93 

of  the  British  possessions  in  India,  are  Burmah, 
Siam,  several  other  Indo-Chinese  nations,  the 
great  empire  of  China,  Japan,  thence  north,  inde- 
finitely, and  southward,  the  numerous  Malayan 
Isles.  With  all  these  countries  the  British  are 
no  more  connected  than  the  Americans.  The 
British  are  under  no  greater  obligations  to  evan- 
gelize them,  than  the  Americans.  They  are  not 
nearer  the  English,  in  point  of  transportation, 
than  the  Americans.  And,  furthermore,  through- 
out all  these  countries,  the  British  are  suspected 
and  feared,  but  not  the  Americans. 

“ The  idea  that  the  Western  continent  belongs 
to  the  Americans,  and  the  Eastern  continent  to 
the  British,  however  plausible  at  first  sight,  cannot 
bear  a moment’s  examination.  I apprehend,  that 
all  the  north-western  Indians,  and  the  inhabitants 
of  those  parts  of  South  America,  which  are  acces- 
sible, will  scarcely  outnumber  the  inhabitants  of 
this  single  Empire  of  Burmah.  And,  on  what 
principle  can  the  Americans,  who  are  perhaps 
half  as  numerous  as  the  British,  be  let  off  with 
one-twentieth,  or  one-thirtieth  part  of  the  work  ? 
But  when  we  apply  the  work  to  the  Baptists,  it 
is  still  more  decisive.  There  are  about  five  hun- 
dred Baptist  churches  in  Great  Britain,  which 
average  about  one  hundred  members  each.  There 
are  two  thousand  in  America,  which  average 
nearly  the  same.  Behold  Ireland,  also,  almost  as 
destitute  as  South  America.  And  suppose  the 


94  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

British  should  say,  This  is  the  proper  province 
of  our  missionary  exertions.  Let  us  leave  Asia 
and  Africa  to  the  Americans,  and  ‘ not  send  our 
young  men  to  the  antipodes.’  ” 

The  following  letter,  dated  August,  1817,  to  a 
young  lady,  a friend  of  mine,  who  had  often  en- 
couraged me  in  my  contemplated  undertaking, 
may  not  be  wholly  destitute  of  interest. 

“ When  I left  my  native  country,  my  dear 
Mary,  my  anguish  was  mitigated,  my  tears  were 
dried,  by  the  consideration  that  I there  left  many 
congenial  souls,  who,  though  prevented  accom- 
panying me,  would  assist  me  by  their  prayers, 
encourage  and  animate  me  by  their  letters,  and 
keep  alive  the  missionary  spark  in  my  soul,  by 
their  constant  assurances,  that  I was  not  alone, 
but  at  all  times  aided  and  supported  by  them. 

“ It  is  now  four  years  that  we  have  resided  in 
this  country  ; and,  though  no  Burman  has  re- 
nounced idolatry  and  embraced  the  religion  of 
Christ,  yet  the  seed  is  beginning  to  be  scattered, 
which  may  spring  up  and  bear  fruit  in  some  fu- 
ture time.  Burmah  presents  a field  for  vast,  un- 
bounded usefulness  ! But  neither  revelation,  nor 
the  experience  of  ages,  warrants  us  to  expect  im- 
mediate success.  What  nation  has  changed  its 
gods  in  a day  ? What  nation,  so  far  advanced  in 
civilization  as  the  Burman,  has  renounced  its  sys- 
tem of  religion  at  the  first  mention  of  a new  one  ? 
We  are  not  to  look  for  miracles;  but  we  are  war- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  95 

ranted  to  expect  the  accomplishment  of  those 
ends,  which  God,  in  his  wise  providence,  has  con- 
nected with  a steady,  persevering  use  of  means. 
We  are  firmly  persuaded  that  the  country  of  Bur- 
man  will  eventually  become  Christian — that  the 
way  is  now  preparing,  the  seed  sowing ; but  how 
long  before  the  harvest  will  be  ripe,  we  leave  for 
God  to  determine. 

“ It  has  been  Mr.  Judson’s  object  to  get  well 
grounded  in  the  language,  and  to  do  some  prepa- 
ratory work,  for  the  benefit  of  future  missionaries, 
before  he  made  a formal  disclosure  of  his  design 
to  the  king.  We  have  not,  by  any  means,  taken 
pains  to  keep  our  object  secret.  On  the  contrary, 
we  have  improved  every  opportunity  to  commu- 
nicate religious  truth  to  those  Burmans  who  have 
visited  at  the  mission  house.  This  we  have  con- 
sidered as  the  path  of  present  duty. 

“ Since  Mr.  Hough's  arrival,  he  has  printed  a 
tract  of  considerable  length,  being  a view  of  the 
Christian  religion,  which  Mr.  Judson  had  pre- 
viously composed  ; and  also  a small  catechism  for 
children,  and  St.  Matthew’s  gospel.  These  are 
in  circulation,  and  are  well  understood  by  those 
who  read  them.  Many  have  called  at  the  mis- 
sion house,  to  inquire  more  particularly  into  the 
new  religion.  But  we  have  frequently  observed, 
in  these  inquirers,  a fear  lest  others  should  dis- 
cover their  inclination  to  inquire.  Sometimes, 
when  two  or  three  intimate  friends  have  been 


90  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

seriously  engaged  in  conversing  on  religious  sub- 
jects, if  others,  with  whom  they  were  not  ac- 
quainted, called  at  the  same  time,  they  would  be 
silent,  and  take  their  leave.  This  makes  us  feel 
the  importance  of  trying  to  obtain  the  patronage 
of  government.  In  a few  months,  Mr.  Judson 
will  complete  a dictionary  of  the  Burman  lan- 
guage ; after  which,  he  will,  perhaps,  go  up  to 
Ava,  the  residence  of  the  king. 

“ If  we  were  convinced  of  the  importance  of 
missions,  before  we  left  our  native  country,  we 
now  see  and  feel  their  importance,  as  well  as  their 
practicability  ! We  could  then  picture  to  our- 
selves the  miserable  situation  of  heathen  nations; 
but  we  now  see  a whole  populous  empire,  rational 
and  immortal  like  ourselves,  sunk  in  the  grossest 
idolatry ; given  up  to  follow  the  wicked  inclina- 
tions of  their  depraved  hearts,  entirely  destitute 
of  any  real  principle,  or  the  least  spark  of  true 
benevolence.  Let  those  who  plead  the  native  in- 
nocence and  purity  of  heathen  nations,  visit  Bur- 
mah.  The  system  of  religion  here  has  no  power 
over  the  heart,  or  restraint  on  the  passions. 
Though  it  forbids,  on  pain  of  many  years’  suffer- 
ing in  hell,  theft  and  falsehood,  yet  I presume  to 
say,  there  is  not  a single  Burman  in  the  country, 
who,  if  he  had  a good  opportunity,  without  dan- 
ger of  detection,  would  hesitate  to  do  either. 
Though  the  religion  inculcates  benevolence,  ten- 
derness, forgiveness  of  injuries,  and  love  of  ene- 


97 


TO  THE  BUSMAN  EMPIRE. 

mies — though  it  forbids  sensuality,  love  of  plea- 
sure, and  attachment  to  worldly  objects,  yet  it  is 
destitute  of  power  to  produce  the  former,  or 
subdue  the  latter,  in  its  votaries.  In  short,  the 
Burman  system  of  religion  is  like  an  alabaster 
image,  perfect  and  beautiful  in  all  its  parts,  but 
destitute  of  life.  Besides  being  destitute  of  life, 
it  provides  no  atonement  for  sin.  Here,  also,  the 
gospel  triumphs  over  this  and  every  other  religion 
in  the  world.  This  is  the  grand  difference — this 
makes  the  gospel  ‘ good  news’  indeed,  to  the 
heavy  laden  and  sin-sick  soul. 

“ My  dear  Mary,  how  precious  does  Christ  ap- 
pear, when  conversing  with  these  Bnrmans,  and 
how  desirous  is  one  to  open  their  blind  eyes,  that 
they  may  behold  his  preciousness ! But  this  is 
the  prerogative  of  God  alone  ; and  if  he  has  any 
dear  children  here,  any  chosen  ones,  whose  names 
are  written  in  the  ‘ Lamb’s  book  of  life,  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world,’  he  will  open  their  eyes, 
he  will  show  them  his  glory,  he  will  compel  them 
to  come  in. 

“ How  interested  you  would  be,  could  you 
meet  with  my  little  society  of  females,  on  the 
Sabbath.  Interested,  I say — yes,  you  would  be 
interested,  if  it  were  only  from  this  circumstance, 
that  these  poor  idolaters  enjoy  the  means  of  grace, 
and  sit  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel.  I have 
generally  fifteen  or  twenty.  They  are  attentive 
while  I read  the  Scriptures,  and  endeavour  to 


a 


98  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

teach  them  about  God.  One  of  them  told  me, 
the  other  day,  that  she  could  not  think  of  giving 
up  a religion  which  her  parents,  grand-parents, 
&c.  &c.  had  embraced,  and  accepting  a new  one 
of  which  they  had  never  heard.  I asked  her  if 
she  wished  to  go  to  hell,  because  her  progenitors 
had  gone  there  ? She  replied,  if,  with  all  her 
offerings  and  good  works  on  her  head,  (speaking 
in  their  idiom,)  she  must  go  to  hell,  then  let  her 
go.  I told  her,  if  she  went  to  hell,  after  having 
heard  of  the  Saviour,  her  very  relations  would 
contribute  to  torment  and  upbraid  her,  for  her 
rejection  of  that  Saviour  of  whom  they  had  never 
heard,  and  that  even  she  herself  would  regret  her 
folly  when  it  was  too  late.  If  I do,  said  she,  I 
will  then  cry  out  to  you  to  be  my  intercessor 
with  your  God,  who  will  certainly  not  refuse  you. 
Another  told  me,  that  she  did  believe  in  Christ, 
and  prayed  to  him  every  day.  I asked  her  if  she 
also  believed  in  Gaudama,  and  prayed  to  him. 
She  replied,  she  worshipped  them  both.  I have 
several  times  had  my  hopes  and  expectations 
raised,  by  the  apparent  seriousness  of  several  fe- 
males, as  Mr.  Judson  has  in  regard  to  several 
men ; but  their  goodness  has  been  like  the  morn- 
ing cloud  and  early  dew,  which  soon  pass  away. 
Four  or  five  children  have  committed  the  cate- 
chism to  memory,  and  often  repeat  it  to  each 
other.” 

The  following  letter  describes  some  of  the  offer- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  99 

ings  made  by  the  Burmans  at  their  festivals,  and 
also  contains  a description  of  the  celebrated  pa- 
goda at  Rangoon. 

“ Five  years  have  passed  away,  since  I took 
the  last  view  of  my  dear  native  land ; since  I bid 
the  last  farewell  to  our  little  Bradford  circle.  But 
the  parting  pangs  are  not  forgotten ; the  wounds 
which  were  then  made,  often,  to  this  day,  open 
and  bleed  afresh.  I now  realize  what  we  so  often 
anticipated,  the  trials  and  privations,  the  pleasures 
and  enjoyments,  incident  to  the  wife  of  amission- 
ary among  the  heathen. 

“ I now  behold  with  my  eyes  that  idolatry,  in- 
fatuation, and  delusion,  the  very  recital  of  which 
has  so  often  affected  the  hearts,  and  excited  the 
fervent  prayers  of  our  little  society,  when  sur- 
rounding the  social  altar  for  prayer  and  praise,  in 
our  native  town.  And  I must  say,  ‘ my  eye 
affecteth  my  heart,’  for  I cannot  but  weep  and 
mourn  over  the  deluded  multitude  who  are  this 
day  collected  in  immense  crowds,  to  offer  that 
homage  and  adoration  to  an  idol,  which  is  due  to 
God  alone. 

“ This  is  the  season  for  the  great  feast  of  Gau- 
dama.  It  commenced  yesterday,  and  is  to  con- 
tinue for  three  days.  It  is  observed  all  over  the 
country  ; but  I presume  the  multitude  collected 
in  this  place  is  much  greater  than  at  any  other, 
excepting  Ava.  Priests  and  people  come  in  boats, 
from  a great  distance,  to  worship  at  the  pagoda  in 


100  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

this  place,  which  is  supposed  to  contain  a relic  of 
Gaudama.  The  viceroy,  on  these  days,  goes  out 
in  all  the  pomp  and  splendour  possible,  dressed 
and  ornamented  with  all  his  insignia  of  office, 
attended  by  the  members  of  government  and  the 
common  people.  After  kneeling  and  worship- 
ping at  the  pagoda,  they  generally  spend  the  day 
in  amusements,  such  as  boxing,  dancing,  singing, 
theatrical  exhibitions,  and  fire-works.  Most  of  the 
older  people  spend  the  night  at  the  pagoda,  and 
listen  to  the  instructions  of  the  priests. 

“ Great  and  expensive  offerings  are  made  at 
this  season.  One  last  year,  presented  by  a mem- 
ber of  government,  cost  three  thousand  ticals,  or 
twelve  hundred  dollars.  It  was  a kind  of  port- 
able pagoda,  made  of  bamboo  and  paper,  richly 
ornamented  with  gold  leaf  and  paintings.  It  was 
a hundred  feet  in  height,  and  the  circumference 
of  its  base  about  fifty.  Half  way  up  its  height, 
was  a man  ludicrously  dressed,  with  a mask  on 
his  face,  white  wings  on  his  shoulders,  and  arti- 
fical  finger  nails,  two  inches  in  length,  in  the  pos- 
ture of  dancing.  This  offering  was  carried  by 
sixty  men,  preceded  by  a band  of  music,  and  fol- 
lowed by  the  officer  who  made  it,  and  his  suite. 
Other  offerings  presented  at  this  festival,  are  va- 
rious kinds  of  artificial  trees,  the  branches  and 
twigs  of  which  are  filled  with  cups,  bowls,  hand- 
kerchiefs, and  garments  of  all  descriptions ; these 
are  given  to  the  slaves  attached  to  the  pagoda. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  101 

who,  the  week  following,  have  something  like  a 
fair  to  dispose  of  their  offerings. 

“ The  pagoda,  to  which  such  multitudes  resort, 
is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  splendid  in  the 
empire.  To  give  an  accurate  description  of  this 
noble  edifice,  requires  an  abler  pen  than  mine  ; 
and  perhaps  a better  one,  of  its  construction  and 
dimensions,  cannot  be  given,  than  that  which  has 
already  been  presented  to  the  public  by  Colonel 
Symes,  of  a similar  pagoda  at  Pegue.  The 
beauty  and  variety  of  its  appendages,  however, 
are  far  superior.  After  having  ascended  the  flight 
of  steps,  a large  gate  opens,  when  a wild,  fairy 
scene  is  abruptly  presented  to  view.  It  resem- 
bles more  the  descriptions  we  sometimes  have  in 
novels,  of  enchanted  castles,  or  ancient  abbeys  in 
ruins,  than  any  thing  we  ever  meet  in  real  life. 
The  ground  is  completely  covered  with  a variety 
of  ludicrous  objects,  which  meet  the  eye  in  every 
direction,  interspersed  with  the  banyan,  cocoa- 
nut,  and  toddy  trees.  Here  and  there  are  large 
open  buildings,  containing  huge  images  of  Gau- 
dama ; some  in  a sitting,  some  in  a sleeping  posi- 
tion, surrounded  by  images  of  priests  and  attend- 
ants, in  the  act  of  worship,  or  listening  to  his  in- 
structions. Before  the  image  of  Gaudama,  are 
erected  small  altars,  on  which  offerings  of  fruit, 
flowers,  & c.  are  laid.  Large  images  of  elephants, 
lions,  angels  and  demons,  together  with  a number 
of  indescribable  objects,  assist  in  filling  the  pic- 
turesque scene. 


102  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ The  ground  on  which  this  pagoda  is  situated, 
commands  a view  of  the  surrounding  country, 
which  presents  one  of  the  most  beautiful  land- 
scapes in  nature.  The  polished  spires  of  the  pa- 
godas, glistening  among  the  trees  at  a distance, 
appear  like  the  steeples  of  meeting-houses  in  our 
American  sea-ports.  The  verdant  appearance  of 
the  country,  the  hills  and  valleys,  ponds  and  ri- 
vers, the  banks  of  which  are  covered  with  cattle, 
and  fields  of  rice ; each,  in  their  turn,  attract  the 
eye,  and  cause  the  beholder  to  exclaim,  ‘ Was 
this  delightful  country  made  to  be  the  residence 
of  idolaters  ? Are  those  glittering  spires,  which, 
in  consequence  of  association  of  ideas,  recal  to 
mind  so  many  animating  sensations,  but  the  mo- 
numents of  idolatry?  ’ O,  my  friend  ! scenes  like 
these,  productive  of  feelings  so  various  and  oppo- 
site, do,  notwithstanding,  fire  the  soul  with  an 
unconquerable  desire  to  make  an  effort  to  rescue 
this  people  from  destruction,  and  lead  them  to  the 
Rock  that  is  higher  than  they.  We  feel  strongly 
encouraged  to  hope,  (though  our  present  prospects 
are  not  very  flattering,)  through  the  prayers  and 
intercessions  of  our  dear  American  friends,  that 
this  rural,  this  delightful  country,  will  one  day  be 
inhabited  by  the  friends  of  Jesus ; and  that  houses 
will  be  raised  for  his  worship,  on  the  ruins  of  these 
idolatrous  monuments.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 

A.  H.  J. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


103 


LETTER  VII. 


Baltimore,  December,  1822. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

Thus  far  had  the  mission  advanced,  thus  encou- 
raging were  our  prospects,  when  the  combination 
of  a variety  of  circumstances  induced  Mr.  Judson 
to  take  a voyage  to  sea.  A tract,  catechism,  and 
St.  Matthew’s  gospel,  were  printed  in  the  Burman 
language,  and  had  begun  to  be  in  circulation. 
Mr.  Judson  was  now  desirous  to  commence  in  a 
more  public  manner  than  ever  before,  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel ; at  the  same  time  he  felt  the 
importance  of  making  a beginning  in  a way  the 
least  calculated  to  excite  the  prejudices  of  the 
natives. 

**  He  had  heard  of  the  conversion  of  several 
Arrakanese,  who  were  residing  in  Chittagong,  a 
port  belonging  to  the  government  of  the  Honour- 
able East  India  Company,  and  which  is  only  ten 
days  sail  from  Rangoon.  To  obtain  one  of  these 
native  converts,  who  spoke  the  Burman  language, 
to  assist  in  his  first  public  communications,  and 
to  improve  his  health,  which  was  evidently  on 
the  decline,  were  two  principal  objects  Mr.  Jud- 


104  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

son  had  in  view,  in  embarking  for  Chittagong,  in 
a vessel  which  was  expected  to  return  imme- 
diately. 

For  the  first  two  months  after  his  departure, 
the  mission  remained  much  in  the  same  state. 
Some  interesting  events  occurred,  as  stated  in 
the  following  letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Baldwin. 

“ January  18 th. — Yours  of  March  28th,  toge- 
ther with  magazines,  &c.  I had  the  pleasure  of 
receiving  a month  ago;  and,  as  Mr.  Judson  is 
absent,  and  a good  opportunity  of  sending  to 
Bengal  offers,  I cannot  deny  myself  the  gratifica- 
tion pf  writing.  Mr.  Judson  embarked  for  Chit- 
tagong, five  weeks  ago,  and  expects  to  be  absent 
three  months  only. 

“ The  mission  is  nearly  in  the  same  state  as 
when  Mr.  Judson  last  wrote.  His  dictionary  was 
nearly  completed,  after  which  he  intended,  either 
to  go  to  Ava,  or  to  commence  preaching  in  a more 
public  manner  than  ever  before.  Our  hopes  have 
frequently  been  raised  by  the  serious  appearance 
of  some  of  the  Burmans,  but  none  have  yet 
heartily  embraced  the  religion  of  Jesus,  and  be- 
come his  disciples.  My  little  female  meeting  is 
still  encouraging  ; between  twenty  and  thirty  at- 
tend every  Sabbath.  They  sometimes  hear  with 
apparent  attention,  sometimes  ask  pertinent  ques- 
tions, and  some  of  them  say  they  worship  the  true 
God  only,  and  have  left  off  going  to  the  pagodas. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  105 

to  worship.  But  how  much  truth  there  is  in  these 
assertions  time  alone  will  determine. 

“ Last  Sabbath,  after  reading  and  conversing 
as  usual,  I told  them  of  the  anxiety  of  Christians 
in  America  for  their  conversion,  of  the  formation 
of  societies,  the  contributions  of  the  poor,  and  the 
earnest  and  fervent  prayers,  which  were  conti- 
nually ascending  on  their  account.  The  tears 
came  into  the  eyes  of  some  of  them,  who  feelingly 
said,  ‘ And  do  they  indeed  do  so  much  for  us  ? ’ 
But  the  Burmans,  in  general,  ‘ are  mad  on  their 
idols  they  are  not  like  professed  Christians  in 
America,  partly  engaged  in  religion,  and  partly 
in  the  world ; but  their  whole  souls  seem  engaged 
in  idolatry ; they  evidence  at  once  that  they  be- 
lieve what  they  assert.  Even  at  this  moment, 
while  writing,  my  ears  are  almost  stunned  with 
the  noise  and  confusion,  occasioned  by  prepara- 
tions for  fire-works,  to  be  exhibited  at  the  ap- 
proaching festival.  Could  you,  my  dear  sir,  wit- 
ness but  once  this  annual  feast ; could  you  behold 
the  crowded  streets,  the  splendid  offerings,  the 
gay  attire,  and  the  enthusiasm  of  their  devotions, 
you  would  readily  admit,  that  nothing  short  of  an 
Almighty  arm,  could  break  down  these  barriers, 
these  strong  barriers,  and  cause  the  introduction 
of  the  gospel.  But  even  these  seasons,  these  mo- 
mentary triumphs  of  Satan,  are  not  destitute  of 
advantages  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  We  have  op- 
portunities, by  these  means,  of  distributing  tracts 


106  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

and  portions  of  Scripture,  among  those  who  come 
from  distant  towns  and  villages,  where  the  name 
of  Christ  is  still  unknown.  The  Spirit  of  God 
may  water  seed  sown  in  this  way,  and  cause  it  to 
spring  up,  to  the  eternal  confusion  of  the  adver- 
sary of  souls,  who  induced  their  attendance  on 
this  festival  with  a different  object. 

“We  still  live  in  a quiet  manner,  unmolested 
by  government,  or  robbers.  The  viceroy’s  family 
treat  us  with  respect  and  affection,  now  and  then 
sending  us  an  elephant,  to  accompany  them  in 
their  excursions.  Her  highness,  the  vicereine, 
professes  a particular  regard  for  me,  and  I,  in  re- 
turn, have  presented  her  with  a translation  of  St. 
Matthew’s  gospel,  a tract,  and  catechism,  and 
have  had  two  or  three  opportunities  of  conversing 
with  her  privately  on  the  subject  of  religion. 
How  much  she  reads  in  the  former,  or  believes  in 
the  latter,  I am  unable  to  say ; but  neither  pro- 
duce any  visible  effect.  She  ordered  the  instruc- 
tress of  one  of  her  daughters,  to  give  the  catechism 
to  her  child  to  commit  to  memory. 

“ January  30 th. — The  Burman,  Mr.  Judson 
mentioned  some  time  ago,  as  being  the  first  seri- 
ous inquirer,  and  the  one  who  has  excited  the 
most  hope,  came  to-day  to  the  mission-house. 

“It  is  now  almost  a year  since  he  first  came, 
and  with  much  apparent  anxiety  inquired,  ‘ How 
long  time  will  it  take  me  to  learn  the  religion  of 
Jesus?’  We  have  since  frequently  inquired,  but 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  107 

obtained  little  information  respecting  him,  until 
to-day.  Soon  after  his  first  visit,  he  was  ap- 
pointed governor  of  a cluster  of  villages,  situated 
on  the  Syriam  river  in  the  country  of  Pegue.  He 
has  been  at  Rangoon  but  once  since,  and  then  on 
business  by  order  of  the  viceroy,  and  obliged  to 
return  immediately. 

**  I asked  him  if  he  had  become  a disciple  of 
Jesus  Christ?  He  replied,  ‘ I have  not  yet,  but  I 
am  thinking  and  reading  in  order  to  become  one. 
I cannot  yet  destroy  my  old  mind  ; for  when  I see 
a handsome  patso,  (a  cloth  the  Burman  men 
wear,)  or  a handsome  gownbown,  (the  handker- 
chief worn  on  the  head,)  I still  desire  it.  Tell  the 
great  teacher,  when  he  returns,  that  I wish  to  see 
him,  though  I am  not  a disciple  of  Christ.’  He 
requested  the  remaining  part  of  St.  Matthew’s 
gospel,  also  catechisms  and  tracts  for  his  follow- 
ers. I gave  all  of  his  attendants  tracts  ; on  which 
he  said  to  them,  ‘ Take  and  read  them  attentively, 
and  when  you  have  embraced  the  doctrines  they 
contain,  come  here  and  converse  with  the  teacher.’ 
I asked  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  the  villages 
he  governed,  and  whether  he  would  collect  them 
together,  to  hear  the  gospel,  should  Mr.  Judson 
make  him  a visit  on  his  return.  He  said  there 
were  about  a thousand  houses,  and  the  inhabit- 
ants were  Talings,  (natives  of  Pegue,  who  speak 
a language  different  from  the  Burmans,)  but  he 
would  receive  a visit  from  Mr.  Judson  as  a great 


108  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

favour,  and  would  call  his  people  together  to  hear 
him  preach.  There  was  something  so  interesting 
and  encouraging  in  the  appearance  of  this  Bur- 
man,  so  meek  and  unassuming,  considering  the 
dignity  of  his  office,  that  hopes  are  again  raised 
concerning  him.  But  whether  he  will  continue 
to  examine  the  Christian  religion,  and  finally  be- 
come a true  disciple,  or  the  reverse,  time  alone 
will  determine.” 

February  18 th. — The  following  letter  was  writ- 
ten to  Mrs.  C. 

“ It  is  now  four  long  years  and  a half,  since  we 
took  up  our  residence  in  this  spiritually  benighted 
land,  and  to  this  day  do  we  offer  our  thanks  to 
God,  for  having  brought  and  continued  us  here. 
To  this  day  can  we  testify  that  God  is  good ; that 
he  is  a faithful,  covenant-keeping  God,  who  is 
worthy  of  the  entire  trust  and  confidence  of  all 
his  creatures.  Never,  for  a moment,  has  he  left 
us  to  feel,  that  our  first  views  of  the  practicability 
of  missions,  were  visionary ; consequently,  we 
have  been  preserved  from  those  distressing,  ago- 
nizing feelings,  resulting  from  regret  and  disap- 
pointment in  a darling  enterprise.  On  the  con- 
trary, we  feel  that  missions  to  the  heathens  are 
not  only  practicable,  but  the  very  blood  of  their 
souls  will  be  required  at  the  hand  of  those  Chris- 
tians, who  neglect  to  make  exertions  to  send  the 
gospel  among  them.  This  is  all  that  is  required 
of  the  Christian  world.  God  will  not  call  us  to 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  109 

an  account  for  not  converting  the  heathen.  This, 
this  is  the  work  he  reserves  for  himself.  But  he 
will  call  us  to  an  account  for  not  using  the  means ; 
this  part  of  the  work  he  has  assigned  to  his  crea- 
tures to  perform.  Neither  have  we  any  reason  to 
be  discouraged,  because  the  first  communications 
of  Divine  truth  have  not  been  efficacious.  It 
would  be  almost  a miracle,  for  these  Burmans  to 
throw  away  a system  of  religion  which  they  have 
been  accustomed  to  consider  sacred,  from  time 
immemorial,  on  the  very  first  intimation  of  its 
being  false,  or  on  the  first  intelligence  that  there 
is  another  and  a better.  They  must  have  time  to 
examine,  to  read  our  sacred  writings,  and  to  see 
the  effect  our  religion  produces  on  its  professors, 
before  they  will  feel  inclined  to  embrace  the  hum- 
bling doctrines  of  the  gospel.  They  do  not  feel 
themselves  in  such  a wretched,  perishing  situation, 
as  we  view  them,  consequently  they  do  not  sec 
the  necessity  of  embracing  the  offers  presented. 

“We  hope  our  friends  and  patrons  will  not  be 
discouraged,  because  no  one  of  the  Burmans  who 
have  heard  the  gospel,  has  embraced  it ; but  con- 
tinue to  strengthen  and  encourage  us  by  their 
prayers  and  communications,  and  in  time,  we 
doubt  'not,  they  with  us  will  reap  an  abundant 
harvest. 

“ We  are  anxiously  looking  for  the  arrival  of 
the  missionaries,  who,  we  hope,  have  long  since 
left  America.  God  grant  that  they  may  prove 


110  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

true  missionaries  of  the  cross,  prepared  and  will- 
ing to  suffer  whatever  may  await  them. 

“We  consider  the  circumstance,  that  other 
missionaries  should  have  their  hearts  turned  to- 
ward the  Burman  Empire,  as  an  indication  of 
God  to  strengthen  and  establish  this  mission,  and 
a prelude  of  his  more  merciful  intentions,  to  turn 
the  Burmans  from  idolatry,  to  serve  the  living 
God. 

“ Mr.  Judson  is  absent,  or  he  would  write  to 
Mr.  C.  You  will  readily  imagine  my  situation  to 
be  very  lonely  in  his  absence.  Nothing  but  a 
sense  of  duty  could  have  induced  me  to  consent 
to  his  departure.  Mr.  Hough,  however,  is  very 
kind,  and  affords  me  every  assistance  in  his 
power.” 

About  the  same  date  as  the  preceding  letter, 
Mr.  Hough,  to  a friend  in  Boston,  wrote  thus : 

“ When  I think  how  dependent  I am  on  God  ; 
how  easy  it  is  for  him  to  withdraw  the  light  of 
his  countenance  from  me,  and  leave  me  cheerless, 
amidst  the  darkness  of  pagan  ignorance ; and 
then,  again,  how  easy  it  is  for  him  to  enable  me 
to  persevere,  and  that  he  will  answer  prayers 
offered  for  blessings ; I cannot  but  receive,  with 
the  liveliest  gratitude,  the  assurance  you  give 
me,  that  I am  remembered  in  the  prayers  of  my 
brethren  at  home ; and  I sometimes  think  their 
prayers  may  be  heard  for  me,  when  my  own  are 
excluded. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  Ill 

“ It  seems  you  have  entertained  some  hopes 
from  a contest,  which  existed  some  time  ago,  be- 
tween the  king  and  priests  of  Burmah.  That  has 
terminated,  not  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  one, 
nor  the  advantage  of  the  other.  The  king  perse- 
cuted them  as  long  as  he  pleased,  and  then  let 
them  alone ; they  now  quietly  perform  their  func- 
tions, which  consist  principally  in  committing  to 
memory  their  religious  books,  and  patrolling  the 
streets  to  receive  the  willing  offerings  of  the 
people,  which  afford  them  subsistence.  They, 
with  the  religion  of  the  country,  appear  to  be  now 
in  a prosperous  state,  though  I believe  the  king  is 
not  very  friendly  to  either.  Should  he  extermi- 
nate the  priesthood,  I have  no  idea  that  the  mi- 
nisters of  the  gospel  would  become  a substitute ; 
or,  should  he  abolish  the  present  system  of  religion, 
that  he  would  do  it  in  favour  of  Christianity.  The 
ears  of  the  poor  old  man  have  never  heard  the 
joyful  news,  and  the  law  of  nature  requires  that  he 
should  soon  pass  into  eternity.  The  heir  apparent 
is,  I understand,  a mild  prince.  His  accession  to 
the  throne,  on  the  king’s  demise,  will  undoubtedly 
be  attended  with  difficulties,  and  perhaps  traced 
with  blood.  Should  he  finally  succeed,  and  the 
country  remain  at  peace  any  length  of  time.  He, 
by  whom  kings  rule,  may  in  his  providence  open 
a wide  door,  which  no  man  can  shut,  for  the  ad- 
mission of  the  word  of  life.  It  is  also  quite  as 
possible,  that  much  affliction  and  trouble  await  us. 


112  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ It  is  more  than  six  months,  since  I finished 
printing  St.  Matthew,  and  more  than  that,  since 
the  tract  was  put  into  circulation.  To  say  that 
none  read,  none  inquire,  would  be  wrong ; many 
do  both;  and,  we  are  entitled  to  hope,  because 
truth  is  in  circulation.  Since  printing  St.  Mat- 
thew, I have  been  studying  the  language,  but 
have  not  yet  been  able  to  penetrate  far  into  it.  I 
have  but  a glimpse  of  its  genius  and  construction. 
The  attainment  of  this  language,  I am  persuaded, 
is  the  labour  of  years;  and  I sometimes  think  it 
folly  for  one  past  thirty  years  of  age,  to  attempt  it. 

“ I was  happy  to  hear,  that  the  missionaries 
who  are  now  coming  here  are  so  young.  I wish 
they  were  five  years  younger : or,  rather,  I wish 
some  pious,  active  boys,  sixteen  or  seventeen 
years  of  age,  of  unquestionable  conversion,  and 
willing  to  give  themselves  up  wholly  to  God, 
would  come  over  here,  and  begin  upon  the  lan- 
guage. You  may  think  this  a strange  wish.  I 
think  so  too  ; but  it  is  not  a hasty  or  inconsiderate 
one.” 

In  the  order  of  events,  I must  now,  my  dear 
sir,  give  you  a particular  description  of  that  dark 
period,  when  the  Burman  mission,  surrounded 
undoubtedly  by  invisible  enemies,  seemed  on  the 
very  verge  of  destruction.  Three  months  of  Mr. 
Judson’s  absence  had  nearly  expired,  and  we  had 
begun  to  look  for  his  return,  when  a native  boat 
arrived,  twelve  days  from  Chittagong,  bringing 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  113 

the  distressing  intelligence  that  neither  Mr.  J.  or 
the  vessel  had  been  heard  of  at  that  port.  I 
should  not  have  given  so  much  credit  to  this  re- 
port, as  to  have  allowed  it  to  harass  my  feelings, 
had  it  not  been  corroborated  by  communications 
from  my  friends  in  Bengal,  which  arrived  just  at 
this  time.  From  the  circumstance  that  the  vessel 
had  not  reached  the  port  of  destination,  I knew 
not  what  conclusion  to  draw.  Hope,  at  times, 
suggested  the  idea  that  the  ship’s  course  might 
have  been  altered,  that  she  might  yet  be  safe ; but 
despondency  more  frequently  strove  to  convince 
that  all  was  lost.  Thus  was  I,  for  four  months, 
in  that  agonizing  state  of  suspense,  which  is  fre- 
quently more  oppressive  than  the  most  dreadful 
certainty. 

Two  or  three  days  after  the  arrival  of  the  above 
intelligence,  Mr.  Hough  received  an  order,  couch- 
ed in  the  most  menacing  language,  to  appear  im- 
mediately at  the  court-house,  to  give  an  account 
of  himself.  This,  so  unlike  any  message  we  had 
ever  before  received  from  government,  spread 
consternation  and  alarm  among  our  teachers,  do- 
mestics, and  adherents  ; some  of  whom  followed 
Mr.  Hough,  at  a distance,  and  heard  the  appalling 
words,  from  some  of  the  petty  officers,  that  a royal 
order  had  arrived,  for  the  banishment  of  all  foreign 
teachers.  As  it  was  late,  when  Mr.  Hough  ar- 
rived at  the  court-house,  he  was  merely  ordered 
to  give  security  for  his  appearance,  at  an  early 


114  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

hour  on  the  approaching  day,  when,  to  use  their 
own  unfeeling  language,  ‘ if  he  did  not  tell  all  the 
truth  relative  to  his  situation  in  the  country,  they 
would  write  with  his  heart’s  blood.’ 

Our  embarrassments,  at  this  period,  were 
greatly  increased,  by  the  circumstance,  that  the 
viceroy  and  his  family,  who  had  always  been  our 
steady  friends,  had  been  recently  recalled  to  Ava ; 
and  the  present  viceroy,  with  whom  we  had  but 
a slight  acquaintance,  had  left  his  family  at  the 
capital.  Mr.  Hough  was  not  sufficiently  ac- 
quainted with  the  language,  to  allow  of  his  appeal- 
ing in  person  to  the  viceroy,  and,  as  it  is  not 
customary  for  females  to  appear  at  his  court,  in 
the  absence  of  the  vicereine,  we  had  nothing  be- 
fore us,  but  the  gloomy  prospect  of  being  obliged 
to  submit  to  all  those  evils,  in  the  power  of  petty 
officers  to  inflict,  upon  those  unprotected  by 
higher  authority. 

The  following  days,  Friday  and  Saturday,  Mr. 
Hough  was  detained  at  the  court-house,  and  un- 
der the  necessity  of  answering  through  an  inter- 
preter, the  most  trivial  questions;  such  as,  what 
were  the  names  of  his  parents,  how  many  suits 
of  clothes  he  had,  &c.  all  which  were  written 
down  in  the  most  formal  manner  imaginable.  The 
court  would  not  allow  him  to  retire  for  any  re- 
freshment ; and  this,  together  with  several  other 
-petty  grievances,  convinced  us  that  it  was  their 
object  to  harass  and  distress  us,  as  much  as  pos- 


TO  THE  BURMA  NT  EMPIRE.  115 

sible;  feeling  safe,  in  the  idea,  that  circumstances 
were  such  that  we  could  not  appeal  to  the  vice- 
roy. Sunday  morning  arrived,  another  message 
was  received  from  the  court-house,  (the  viceroy 
does  not  usually  attend  those  courts,  as  cases  of 
importance  are  submitted,  privately,  for  his  deci- 
sion,) for  Mr.  Hough’s  appearance,  that  the  ex- 
amination might  be  continued.  The  court  had 
now  pushed  the  matter  too  far,  and  we  resolved 
to  ascertain  whether  those  orders,  for  examina- 
tion, emanated  from  the  viceroy,  or  whether  he 
was  entirely  ignorant  of  the  whole  matter.  My 
teacher,  coming  in  just  at  that  time,  drew  up  a 
respectful  petition,  stating  the  grievances  to  which 
Mr.  Hough  had  been  subjected,  and  the  present 
order  for  his  appearing,  in  public,  on  our  sacred 
day — and  requesting  that  it  might  be  the  pleasure 
of  his  highness  that  those  molestations  should 
cease.  Mr.  Hough  readily  accompanied  me  to 
the  government-house ; and,  when  we  had  reached 
the  outer  court,  I caught  the  eye  of  the  viceroy, 
who  sat  surrounded  by  the  officers  of  his  court, 
but  who  recognized  me,  and,  in  a very  conde- 
scending manner,  called  me  “ to  come  in  and 
make  known  my  request.”  I presented  my  peti- 
tion to  one  of  the  secretaries,  who  was  imme- 
diately ordered  to  read  it;  at  the  conclusion  of 
which,  the  viceroy  inquired,  in  an  austere  manner, 
of  the  very  officer  who  had  been  most  forward  in 
making  Mr.  Hough’s  situation  unpleasant  at  the 


116 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


court-house,  and  who  happened  now  to  he  seated 
not  far  from  the  “ voice  which  issues  life  or 
death,"  “Why  the  examination  of  this  foreign 
teacher  had  been  thus  prolonged  ?” — at  the  same 
time  giving  a written  order  that  Mr.  Hough  should 
not  be  called  on  his  “sacred  day,”  and  that  he 
should  be  molested  no  more.  The  petty  officers 
of  government  now  saw  their  plan  defeated,  which 
probably  was,  to  make  Mr.  Hough  feel  himself  in 
their  power,  thinking  he  would  then  offer  them  a 
large  reward  to  be  liberated.  We,  however,  as- 
certained the  fact,  that  a royal  order  had  arrived, 
for  the  banishment  of  all  the  Portuguese  priests 
in  the  country,  (there  were  three  only).  To  as- 
certain who  they  were,  the  viceroy  had  issued  an 
order,  that  all  the  foreign  priests  should  be  sum- 
moned to  the  court-house,  not  intending  that  any 
but  the  Portuguese  should  undergo  an  examina- 
tion, farther  than  to  ascertain  that  they  were  not 
Portuguese. 

About  this  time,  the  cholera  began  to  rage 
among  the  native  population.  This  disorder  had 
never  been  known  in  the  Empire  before,  and  the 
dreadful  ravages  made  in  Rangoon  filled  every 
one  with  terror  and  alarm.  It  was  in  the  midst 
of  the  hottest  season  of  the  year,  and  there  was 
no  prospect  of  the  disorder’s  subsiding,  until  the 
commencement  of  the  rains.  The  beating  of  the 
death  drum,  and  other  instruments  used  at  fune- 
rals, sounded  all  the  day  long,  a melancholy  dirge 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  117 

in  our  ears,  and,  in  emphatic  language,  said,  “Be 
ye  also  ready.”  We  had  no  reason  for  supposing 
that  we  should  escape  this  fatal  disorder,  more 
than  others ; at  the  same  time,  we  knew  ourselves 
to  be  in  the  hands  of  Him  who  had  said,  “ a 
thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  side,  and  ten  thousand 
at  thy  right  hand ; but  it  shall  not  come  nigh 
thee.”  And  thus  it  proved  ; for  not  an  individual 
within  our  enclosure,  suffered  from  the  cholera, 
though  our  neighbours  died  around  us.  The  Bur- 
mans  attempted  to  account  for  the  origin  of  this 
disease,  by  supposing  that  some  evil  spirits  had 
entered  the  city,  and  were  continually  traversing 
the  streets,  and  from  pure  maliciousness,  destroy- 
ing the  inhabitants.  The  natives  resolved  on 
endeavoring  to  dispossess  them,  by  making  a 
most  tremendous  noise,  which,  in  the  opinion  of 
a Burman,  was  sufficient  to  alarm  evil  spirits, 
however  malicious  or  obstinate.  The  signal  for 
commencement  was  given  at  the  court-house,  by 
firing  cannons  ; when  immediately  every  Burman 
in  town  began  beating  on  his  house,  with  clubs,  or 
any  thing  which  would  make  a noise.  No  one 
ventured  to  remain  inactive,  as  it  had  previously 
been  asserted,  that  the  evil  spirits  would  enter 
the  houses  of  those  who  made  no  noise.  This 
was  continued  for  three  successive  nights ; but 
notwithstanding  the  unheard-of  uproar,  the  evil 
spirits  refused  to  move,  and  the  disorder  conti- 
nued to  rage  for  months  afterwards. 


118  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

Our  trials  and  dangers  were  not  a little  in- 
creased, at  this  period,  by  a report  in  circulation, 
that  difficulties  existed  between  the  English  and 
Burman  governments;  and  that  an  attempt  would 
be  soon  made  by  the  English,  to  take  the  country. 
This  report  seemed  confirmed,  by  the  circum- 
stance, that  there  had  been  no  arrivals  from  any 
English  port  for  some  months  past,  and  that  the 
few  remaining  captains  were  making  every  pos- 
sible effort  to  hasten  the  departure  of  their  ships. 
Should  actual  hostilities  commence,  we  were  well 
aware,  the  removal  of  the  mission,  at  least  for  a 
time,  would  be  the  consequence.  The  only  re- 
maining ship  was  now  on  the  eve  of  departure, 
and  unless  we  embraced  this  opportunity  for  leav- 
ing the  country,  there  was  nothing  before  us  but 
dangers  the  most  appalling.  For  a particular  ac- 
count of  the  remaining  part  of  this  distressing 
season,  I must  have  recourse  to  my  journal,  then 
transmitted  to  America. 

“ June  18 th. — I am  still,  my  dear  parents,  in 
the  same  lonely  situation,  as  when  I last  wrote, 
full  of  anxiety  and  suspense.  I know  not  what 
conclusion  to  draw  from  the  circumstance  of  re- 
ceiving no  intelligence  from  Mr.  Judson.  It  is 
now  six  months  since  he  left  me,  and  not  a single 
line  has  ever  been  received  relative  to  the  ship. 
I hardly  know  what  prevents  my  entire  discou- 
ragement under  such  circumstances.  But  I am 
trying  to  bear  this  state  of  uncertainty,  as  a heavy 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  119 

affliction,  a painful  chastisement,  from  my  hea- 
venly Father,  inflicted,  no  doubt,  for  wise  and 
gracious  purposes.  Perhaps  it  is  only  a prelude 
to  greater  afflictions.  Perhaps  this  is  the  school 
in  which  I am  to  be  taught  the  rudiments  of  suf- 
fering, and  to  prepare  for  those  heavy  trials, 
which,  without  these  first  lessons,  crush  as  soon 
as  inflicted.  I feel,  however,  a dreadful  conflict ; 
sometimes  inclined  to  complain  of  these  dark  dis- 
pensations of  Providence,  at  others,  endeavouring 
to  make  this  language  my  own,  ‘ Though  he  slay 
me,  yet  will  I trust  in  Him.’  My  female  meet- 
ings have  been  on  the  decline,  ever  since  Mr. 
Hough’s  examination  at  the  court-house.  For- 
merly, upwards  of  thirty  attended  ; now,  seldom 
more  than  ten  or  twelve.  Thus,  you  see  that 
nothing  but  darkness,  gloom,  and  disappointment 
surround  me.  I endeavour  to  study,  at  least  part 
of  the  day,  for  unless  I do  my  duty,  I fear  I shall 
lose  the  benefit  of  this  affliction. 

“ July  2 d. — Mr.  Hough,  for  some  time  past, 
has  been  desirous  to  have  Mrs.  H.,  myself,  and 
his  children,  go  to  Bengal.  But  I have  ever  felt 
resolved  not  to  make  any  movement  until  I hear 
from  Mr.  Judson.  Within  a few  days,  however, 
some  circumstances  have  occurred,  which  have 
induced  me  to  make  preparations  for  a voyage. 
There  is  but  one  remaining  ship  in  the  river,  and 
if  an  embargo  is  laid  on  English  ships,  it  will  be 
impossible  for  Mr.  J.  (if  he  is  yet  alive,)  to  return 


120  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

to  this  place.  But  the  uncertainty  of  meeting 
him  in  Bengal,  and  the  possibility  of  his  arriving- 
in  my  absence,  cause  me  to  make  preparations 
with  a heavy  heart.  Sometimes  I feel  inclined  to 
remain  here,  alone,  and  hazard  the  consequence. 
I should  certainly  conclude  on  this  step,  if  any 
probability  existed  of  Mr.  Judson’s  return.  This 
mission  has  never  appeared  in  so  low  a state  as 
at  the  present  time.  It  seems  now  entirely  de- 
stroyed, as  we  all  expect  to  embark  for  Bengal 
in  a day  or  two.  Alas  ! alas  ! how  changed  our 
prospects  since  Mr.  J.  left  us.  How  dark,  how 
intricate  the  providence  which  now  surrounds  us  ! 
Yet  it  becomes  us  to  be  still,  and  know  that  He  is 
God  who  has  thus  ordered  our  circumstances. 

“ July  1 4th.- — Alone,  my  dear  friends,  in  this 
great  house,  without  an  individual,  excepting  my 
little  girl  and  Burmans,  I take  my  pen  to  relate 
the  strange  vicissitudes  through  which  I have 
passed,  within  a few  days.  Although  I commence 
my  relation  by  saying  I am  alone,  yet  I am  easy 
and  tranquil,  because  I am  resolved  on  a course 
which  may  appear  to  you  and  others,  rash  and 
presumptuous,  but  to  me  the  path  of  duty,  and 
the  one  I ought  to  pursue. 

“ On  the  5th  of  this  month,  I embarked  with 
Mr.  Hough  and  his  family  for  Bengal,  having  pre- 
viously disposed  of  what  I could  not  take  with 
me.  I had  engaged  Mr.  Judson’s  teacher  to  ac- 
company me,  that  in  case  of  meeting  him  in  Ben- 


TO  TIIE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


121 


gal,  lie  might  go  on  with  his  Burman  studies.  But 
the  teacher,  fearing  the  difficulties  arising  from 
his  being  a Burman,  broke  his  engagement,  and 
refused  to  go.  My  disinclination  to  proceed  in 
the  course  commenced  had  increased  to  such  a 
degree,  that  I was  on  the  point  of  giving  up  the 
voyage  myself ; but  my  passage  was  paid,  my 
baggage  on  board,  and  I knew  not  how  to  sepa- 
rate myself  from  the  rest  of  the  mission  family. 
The  vessel,  however,  was  several  days  in  going- 
down  the  river  ; and  when  on  the  point  of  putting 
out  to  sea,  the  captain  and  officers  ascertained 
that  she  was  in  a dangerous  state,  in  consequence 
of  having  been  improperly  loaded,  and  that  she 
must  be  detained  for  a day  or  two  at  the  place  in 
which  she  then  lay.  I immediately  resolved  on 
giving  up  the  voyage,  and  returning  to  town. 
Accordingly  the  captain  sent  up  a boat  with  me, 
and  engaged  to  forward  my  baggage  the  next 
day,  I reached  town  in  the  evening,  spent  the 
night  at  the  house  of  the  only  remaining  English- 
man in  the  place,  and  to-day  have  come  out  to 
the  mission-house,  to  the  great  joy  of  all  the  Bur- 
mans  left  on  our  premises.  Mr.  Hough  and  his 
family  will  proceed  ; and  they  kindly  and  affec- 
tionately urge  my  return.  I know  I am  sur- 
rounded by  dangers  on  every  hand,  and  expect 
to  feel  much  anxiety  and  distress ; but  at  present 
I am  tranquil,  intend  to  make  an  effort  to  pursue 
my  studies  as  formerly,  and  leave  the  event  with 


122  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

God.  How  distressed,  my  dear  parents,  you 
would  feel,  did  you  know  my  real  situation  in 
Rangoon  ! But,  before  you  receive  this,  there 
will  no  doubt  be  some  change,  I hope  favourable, 
as  but  one  circumstance  could  make  it  more  dis- 
tressing. 

“ July  1 6th. — The  vessel,  in  which  Mr.  Judson 
sailed,  has  this  day  arrived ! I have  been  to  see 
the  captain,  who  informs  me  that  he  was  not  able 
to  make  Chittagong,  and  that,  after  being  tossed 
about  in  the  bay  for  three  months,  he  made  Ma- 
sulipatam,  a port  north  of  Madras,  on  the  coast. 
Mr.  J.  left  the  ship  immediately,  for  Madras, 
hoping  to  find  a passage  thence  to  this  place. 
This  is  all  the  intelligence  I have  obtained,  as  it 
is  four  months  since  an  arrival  either  from  Bengal 
or  Madras.  But  even  this  has  afforded  me  a little 
relief,  as  I have  hitherto  had  reason  to  fear,  that 
the  ship  and  all  were  lost,  though  I am  still  in  a 
state  of  suspense,  relative  to  Mr.  J.’s  return. 
There  is  not,  however,  so  much  reason  to  suppose 
that  hostilities  between  the  English  and  Burman 
governments  will  immediately  commence,  as  this 
ship  came  direct  from  an  English  port.  This 
circumstance  will  render  my  stay  here,  alone, 
much  less  dangerous,  and  perhaps  before  many 
days,  Mr.  J.  will  arrive,  when  I shall  see  very 
clearly  the  hand  of  Providence  in  my  leaving  the 
ship. 

“ July  25 th. — Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hough  have  re- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  123 

turned  to  the  mission-house,  the  ship  not  being 
able  to  proceed  for  some  weeks,  so  that  I shall 
not  be  obliged  to  remain  in  this  place  alone,  as  I 
expected ; and  I am  hoping  and  praying,  that, 
previously  to  their  departure,  Mr.  Judson  may 
arrive,  that  I may  not  be  under  the  necessity  of 
living  in  this  dreadful  country,  and  out  here  in 
the  woods,  without  a friend  and  protector.  I am 
hoping  against  hope,  for  it  is  the  general  opinion 
of  all  foreigners  here,  that  there  will  be  no  arrival 
at  present,  from  any  English  settlement.  There 
is,  however,  a vague  report,  though  I know  not 
its  origin,  that  a ship  left  Madras,  some  time 
since,  for  this  place,  but  was  to  touch  at  the  Ni- 
cobar islands;  on  which  account,  she  has  not  yet 
arrived.  I cling  to  this,  as  my  last  hope,  which 
a little  relieves  my  distressed,  anguished  mind. 
O,  how  it  would  sooth  my  feelings,  how  it  would 
comfort  my  heart,  could  I unite  with  some  of  my 
dear  American  friends  in  social  prayer ! How  it 
would  mitigate  the  gloom  and  loneliness  of  my 
situation,  were  some  of  them  present  to  strengthen 
my  confidence  in  Jehovah  ; to  suggest  motives 
for  my  patiently  bearing  affliction;  and  to  urge 
my  quietly  acquiescing  in  the  wise  dispensations 
of  the  best  of  Beings ! 

I have  again  commenced  my  studies,  and  keep 
myself  closely  engaged  until  two  o’clock.  This 
I find  the  best  method  to  avoid  dejection;  be- 
sides, my  conscience  will  not  permit  me  to  sit  idly 


124  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

down,  and  yield  to  those  desponding  feelings,  in 
which  a Christian  should  not  indulge. 

“ August  2d. — How  will  you  rejoice  with  me, 
my  dear  parents,  when  I tell  you,  that  I have 
this  moment  heard  that  Mr.  Judson  has  arrived  at 
the  mouth  of  the  river!  This  joyful  intelligence 
more  than  compensates  for  the  months  of  dejec- 
tion and  distress  which  his  long  absence  has  oc- 
casioned. Now,  I feel  ashamed  of  my  repinings, 
my  want  of  confidence  in  God,  and  resignation  to 
his  will.  I have  foolishly  thought,  because  my 
trials  were  protracted,  they  would  never  end  ; or 
rather,  that  they  would  terminate  in  some  dread- 
ful event,  which  would  destroy  all  hope  of  the 
final  success  of  the  mission.  But  now,  I trust, 
our  prospects  will  again  brighten,  and  cause  us 
to  forget  this  night  of  affliction,  or  to  remember  it 
as  having  been  the  means  of  preparing  us  for  the 
reception  of  that  greatest  of  blessings — the  con- 
version of  some  of  the  Burmans.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 


A.  H.  J. 


TO  TIIF.  BIRMAN  EMPIRE. 


125 


LETTER  VIII. 

Baltimore,  December,  1822. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

M v last  gave  you  a relation  of  the  trying  scenes 
through  which  we  passed  at  Rangoon,  during  the 
absence  of  Mr.  Judson.  His  trials  were  no  less 
severe,  as  you  will  perceive  from  the  following 
letters  to  the  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the 
Board. 

“ Madras , May  28th,  1818. — In  former  letters 
I have  stated  my  circumstances,  at  the  close  of 
last  year,  and  the  reasons  which  induced  me  to 
leave  Rangoon,  on  a visit  to  Chittagong — parti- 
cularly the  prospect  of  a direct  passage,  and 
speedy  return  in  the  same  ship,  an  opportunity  of 
very  rare  occurrence  in  Rangoon. 

“ Since  that  time,  a series  of  unexpected  pro- 
vidences have  befallen  me,  which,  though  unin- 
teresting in  detail,  must  be  briefly  mentioned,  in 
order  to  account  for  my  present  situation. 

“ When  we  left  Rangoon,  December  25th,  we 
expected  a passage  of  ten  or  twelve  days.  At 
the  expiration  of  a month,  however,  by  reason  of 


126  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

contrary  winds,  and  the  unmanageableness  of  the 
ship,  in  the  difficult  navigation  along  the  coast, 
we  found  ourselves  still  at  a great  distance  from 
port;  and  the  season  being  so  far  advanced,  as 
to  deprive  us  of  the  hope  of  more  favourable 
winds,  the  captain  and  supercargo  agreed  on  a 
change  of  the  ship’s  destination,  and  made  sail 
for  Madras. 

“ Previous  to  leaving  the  coast,  we  put  into 
Cheduba,  a place  under  Burman  government,  for 
a supply  of  provisions.  I was  unable  to  go 
ashore,  but  took  the  opportunity  of  sending  a 
tract  by  the  boat.  It  happened  to  be  conveyed 
directly  to  the  governor,  and  he  ordered  it  to  be 
read  in  his  presence.  Soon  after,  when  our  cap- 
tain had  an  audience,  the  governor  inquired  after 
the  writer  of  the  tract — who  he  was,  and  how 
long  he  had  been  in  the  country.  The  captain 
evaded  some  questions,  for  fear  of  detention,  1 
suppose,  and  merely  stated  that  the  writer  was  a- 
foreigner,  who  had  resided  in  Rangoon  about  four 
years.  ‘No,’ replied  the  governor,  ‘that  is  not 
to  be  credited.  You  cannot  make  me  believe 
that  a foreigner,  in  so  short  a time,  has  learned  to 
write  the  language  so  well.  It  must  have  been 
written  by  some  other  person.’  The  captain  re- 
lated this  to  me  on  his  return.  I felt  particularly 
gratified  by  this  testimony  to  the  perspicuity  of 
the  style,  and  thought  it  not  unworthy  of  men- 
tioning, because  it  could  not  be  suspected,  as 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  127 

others  which  had  been  made  to  me  personally,  of 
having  been  a mere  compliment. 

“ The  ship’s  destination  was  changed  on  the 
26th  of  January.  We  retraced  our  course  for  a 
few  days,  and  then  stood  to  the  westward.  It 
was  with  the  most  bitter  feelings,  that  I witnessed 
the  entire  failure  of  my  undertaking,  and  saw  the 
summits  of  the  mountains  of  Arracan,  the  last 
indexes  of  my  country,  sinking  in  the  horizon, 
and  the  ship  stretching  away  to  a distant  part  of 
India,  which  I had  no  wish  to  visit,  and  where  I 
had  no  object  to  obtain.  It  was,  however,  some 
mitigation  of  my  disappointment,  that  I should, 
in  all  probability,  be  able  to  return  to  Rangoon, 
and  resume  my  missionary  business,  much  earlier 
than  if  I had  visited  Chittagong.  But  even  the 
consolation  of  this  hope  was  not  long  allowed 
me.  We  had,  indeed,  a quick  passage  across 
the  bay  ; but,  on  drawing  near  the  Coromandel 
coast,  the  wind  and  current  combined  to  prevent 
our  further  progress,  and  at  the  expiration  of  an- 
other month,  having  for  a long  time  subsisted  on 
nothing  scarcely  but  rice  and  water,  and  being 
now  reduced  to  very  short  allowance,  we  con- 
cluded to  make  sail  for  Masulipatam,  a port  north 
of  Madras,  which  we  doubted  not  we  should  be 
able  to  reach  in  a very  few  days.  In  this,  again, 
we  were  disappointed,  and  through  the  unma- 
nageableness of  the  ship,  or  the  mismanagement 
of  the  captain,  were  detained  at  sea  nearly  an- 


128 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


other  month.  During  this  period,  we  were  some- 
times in  great  distress,  deeming  ourselves  very 
fortunate  when  able  to  get  a bag  of  rice,  or  a few 
buckets  of  water,  from  any  native  vessel  which 
happened  to  pass.  Once  we  sent  the  long  boat 
to  the  shore,  and  obtained  a considerable  supply 
of  water,  which  was  a great  relief.  But  of  rice 
we  could  obtain  no  sufficient  supply,  and  all 
other  articles  of  provision  were  quite  out  of  the 
question. 

“ The  low  state  to  which  I was  at  length  re- 
duced, occasioned  a partial  return  of  the  disorder 
of  my  head  and  eyes,  to  which  I was  subject  two 
years  ago.  This,  with  other  circumstances  united, 
left  me  no  other  source  of  consolation  but  re- 
signation to  the  will  of  God,  and  an  unreserved 
surrender  of  all  to  his  care  ; and,  praised  be  his 
name,  I found  more  consolation  and  happiness  in 
communion  with  God,  and  in  the  enjoyments  of 
religion,  than  I had  ever  found,  in  more  prosper- 
ous circumstances. 

“ Finally,  we  did  reach  Masulipatam,  and  I 
left  the  ship  on  the  18th  of  March,  twelve  weeks 
after  embarking  at  Rangoon.  I waited  at  Mas- 
suly  a few  days,  until  it  was  ascertained  that  the 
ship  would  unlade  her  cargo,  and  remain  several 
months.  And  as  there  was  no  prospect,  that  sea- 
son, of  reaching  Madras  by  sea,  the  only  port  on 
the  coast  where  I could  hope  to  find  a vessel 
bound  to  Rangoon,  I was  under  the  necessity  of 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  129 

taking  a journey  by  land — distance  about  three 
hundred  miles.  I accordingly  hired  a palanquin 
and  bearers,  and  arrived  here  on  the  8th  of  April. 
My  first  aim  was,  of  course,  the  beach,  and  my 
first  inquiry,  a vessel  bound  to  Rangoon.  But 
my  chapter  of  disappointments  was  not  yet 
finished.  No  vessel  had  sailed  for  Rangoon  this 
year ; and  such,  it  was  understood,  was  the 
unsettled  state  of  the  Burman  country,  that 
none  would  probably  venture  for  some  time  to 
come. 

“ Here  I have  remained  ever  since,  under  very 
trying  circumstances.  I have  scarcely  heard 
from  Rangoon,  since  I left,  or  been  able  to  trans- 
mit any  intelligence  thither,  by  a conveyance  to 
be  depended  on.  The  weakness  of  my  eyes  pre- 
vents my  application  to  study,  or  attempt  at  any 
exertion.  I am  making  no  progress  in  missionary 
work.  I am  distressed  by  the  appalling  recol- 
lection of  the  various  business  which  was  press- 
ing on  me  at  Rangoon,  and  which  made  me  very 
reluctant  to  leave  home  for  the  shortest  time. 
Now,  I have  been  detained  twice  as  long  as  I had 
anticipated,  and  have,  withal,  wholly  failed  in 
my  undertaking.  Where,  my  rebellious  heart  is 
ready  to  cry.  Where  is  the  wisdom  of  all  this  ? 
But  it  is  wise,  though  blindness  cannot  appre- 
hend. It  is  best,  though  unbelief  is  disposed  to 
murmur.  Be  still,  my  soul,  and  know  that  He  is 
Goo.” 


130  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ Rangoon,  October  9th,  1818. — My  last  was 
dated  Madras,  May  28,  1818.  At  that  place  I 
remained  waiting  for  a conveyance  to  Rangoon, 
until  the  20th  of  July,  when  I took  passage  on 
board  an  English  vessel.  During  my  stay  in 
Madras,  I experienced  great  kindness  and  hospi- 
tality in  the  families  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Thompson, 
chaplain,  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Loveless,  missionary ; 
and  received  such  proofs  of  Christian  affection 
from  many  dear  friends,  as  rendered  parting  with 
them  very  painful,  though  my  detention  in  Ma- 
dras had,  in  other  respects,  been  almost  insup- 
portable. We  anchored  at  the  mouth  of  Rangoon 
river,  on  the  20th  of  August.  The  next  morning, 
when  the  pilot  came  on  board,  I was  overwhelmed 
with  the  intelligence,  that,  on  account  of  the  dan- 
gerous situation  of  affairs,  the  mission  had  been 
broken  up,  and  that  Mr.  Hough  and  his  family, 
and  Mrs.  Judson,  had  taken  passage  for  Bengal. 
To  my  great  relief,  however,  it  was  added,  that, 
before  the  ship  left  the  river,  Mrs.  Judson’s  reluc- 
tance to  leave  the  place  had  so  increased,  as  to 
force  her  back  to  the  mission-house  alone,  and 
further,  that  the  ship  being  found  unfit  for  sea, 
was  still  detained. 

“ The  examination  which  brother  Hough  sus- 
tained, during  my  absence,  and  the  persecution 
of  the  Roman  Catholic  padres,  have  made  us  feel 
more  deeply  than  ever,  the  precarious  situation 
of  this  mission,  and  the  necessity  of  proceeding 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  131 

with  the  utmost  caution.  It  was  only  through 
the  favour  of  the  viceroy,  that  the  padres  were 
allowed  to  remain  here,  when  they  arrived  from 
Ava,  under  sentence  of  banishment.  And  it  is 
only  through  his  mediation,  and  the  influence  of 
large  presents  made  to  the  king,  that  the  order  of 
banishment  is  reversed,  if  indeed  it  be  reversed, 
a report  not  yet  confirmed.  One  malicious  inti- 
mation to  the  king  would  occasion  our  banish- 
ment ; and  banishment,  as  the  Bormans  tell  us, 
is  no  small  thing, — being  attended  with  confisca- 
tion of  all  property,  and  such  various  abuses,  as 
would  make  us  deem  ourselves  happy  to  escape 
with  our  lives. 

“ Such  a situation  may  appear  somewhat  alarm- 
ing to  a person  accustomed  to  the  liberty  and 
safety  of  a free  government.  But,  let  us  remem- 
ber, that  it  has  been  the  lot  of  the  greater  part 
of  mankind  to  live  under  a despotic  government, 
devoid  of  all  security  for  life  or  property  a single 
moment.  Let  us  remember,  that  the  Son  of  God 
chose  to  become  incarnate  under  the  most  un- 
principled and  cruel  despot  that  ever  reigned. 
And  shall  any  disciple  of  Christ  refuse  to  do  a 
little  service  for  his  Saviour,  under  a government 
where  his  Saviour  would  not  have  refused  to  live 
and  die  for  his  soul  ? God  forbid.  Yet  faith  is 
sometimes  weak — flesh  and  blood  sometimes  re- 
pine. O,  for  grace  to  strengthen  faith,  to  ani- 
mate hope,  to  elevate  affection,  to  embolden  the 


132 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


soul,  to  enable  us  to  look  danger  and  death  in  the 
face ; still  more,  to  behold,  without  repining, 
those  most  dear  to  us,  suffering  fears  and  pains, 
which  we  would  gladly  have  redoubled  on  our- 
selves, if  it  would  exonerate  them. 

“We  feel  encouraged  by  the  thought,  that 
many  of  the  dear  children  of  God  remember  us 
at  the  mercy  seat.  To  your  prayers  I desire 
once  more  to  commend  myself,  the  weakest,  the 
most  unqualified,  the  most  unworthy,  and  the 
most  unsuccessful  of  all  missionaries.” 

In  four  or  five  weeks,  after  the  arrival  of  Mr. 
Judson,  we  had  another  joyful  meeting  with  mis- 
sionary friends,  sent  from  our  native  country. 
The  Rev.  Messrs.  Colman  and  Wheelock,  for  se- 
veral years  previously  to  their  leaving  America, 
had  thought  and  felt  much  on  the  subject  of  mis- 
sions, and  could  not  rest  contented,  to  sit  down 
as  ministers  of  the  gospel,  in  their  own  country, 
while  “ the  walls  of  Jerusalem  lay  waste,”  in  a 
foreign  land.  They  literally  panted  to  become 
the  heralds  of  salvation,  to  those  who  were  in 
darkness,  and  the  shadow  of  death ; and  though 
their  prospects  of  being  early  and  happily  set- 
tled, over  opulent  congregations,  were  flattering, 
they  relinquished  them  all,  and,  at  an  early  pe- 
riod, made  known  their  views  and  wishes  to  the 
Board  of  Missions.  Extracts  from  their  letters, 
on  this  subject,  to  the  corresponding  Secretary, 
I cannot  omit  transcribing,  as  they  are  so  very 


TO  THE  BUR  MAN  EMPIRE. 


133 


descriptive  of  the  spirit  they  ever  continued  to 
exhibit  until  their  lamented  death. 

Mr.  Colman  wrote  thus — “ Since  I came  to  the 
above  conclusion,  my  mind  has  been  unwavering. 
It  is  true,  mountains,  at  times,  have  arisen  be- 
tween myself  and  the  Eastern  world.  My  way 
has  been  hedged  up  by  difficulties,  which,  to  the 
eye  of  human  reason,  might  appear  insurmount- 
able. But  duty  has  constantly  appeared  the 
same.  Indeed,  I esteem  missionary  work,  not 
only  a duty  for  me  to  perform,  but  a privilege  for 
me  to  enjoy  ; a privilege  which  I value  more  than 
the  riches  of  the  earth.  Only  give  me  the  rich 
satisfaction  of  holding  up  the  torch  of  truth,  in 
the  benighted  regions  of  Burmah  ! This  is  the 
object  which  lies  nearest  my  heart ; for  this  I can 
cheerfully  leave  my  native  land,  and  the  bosom  of 
my  beloved  friends.  I pant  to  proclaim  the  gos- 
pel to  those  who  are  ignorant  of  it ; to  present  to 
their  minds  that  firm  foundation,  on  which  my 
own  hopes  of  eternal  happiness  are  built.  I look 
to  Burmah  as  my  home,  and  as  the  field  of  my 
future  toils.  To  the  wretched  inhabitants  of  that 
empire  I long  to  present  the  Bible,  the  fountain 
of  knowledge,  and  to  direct  their  wandering  steps 
to  the  great  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls.  Nor 
can  I refrain  from  cherishing  the  hope  that  my 
feeble  labours  among  them  will  be  crowned  with 
the  blessing  of  heaven.  Some,  I trust,  will  be 


134 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


induced  to  forsake  the  worship  of  idols,  and  to 
bow  the  knee  to  Him  on  whose  vesture  and  thigh 
is  written  ‘ King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.’ 
Prompted,  as  I believe,  by  a deep  sense  of  the 
worth  of  souls,  and  by  the  command  of  our 
blessed  Saviour,  who  says,  ‘ Go  ye  into  all  the 
world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature 
and  encouraged  by  his  promise  of  constant  assis- 
tance and  direction  to  his  servants,  I,  voluntarily 
and  joyfully,  offer  myself  to  be  your  missionary 
to  the  Burman  empire.  May  the  Lord  preside 
over  your  deliberations,  and  grant  me,  if  it  can 
be  consistent  with  his  holy  will,  the  unspeakable 
happiness  of  proclaiming  the  love  of  Jesus  to  the 
miserable  heathen.” 

Mr.  Wheelock  appears  to  have  been  inspired 
by  the  same  missionary  zeal,  and  closes  his  ap- 
plication to  the  Board  with  the  following  lines  : 
— “ To  you,  honoured  fathers,  is  my  mind  di- 
rected, as  to  those,  who,  under  God,  must  decide 
my  case.  To  you  I offer,  freely  and  joyfully 
offer  myself,  to  become  your  missionary,  to  aid 
those  already  under  your  patronage,  to  turn  the 
poor  Burmans  ‘ from  idols,  to  serve  the  living  and 
true  God.’  And,  O ! if  it  is  consistent,  that  one 
so  unworthy  and  so  unqualified  as  myself,  should 
engage  in  this  glorious  work,  deny  me  not,  I be- 
seech you,  the  unspeakable  privilege ; deny  me 
not  the  fondest,  the  most  ardent  desire  of  my 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


135 


soul,  that  can,  in  this  world,  be  gratified.  To 
deny  me  this,  would  be  to  deprive  me  of  the 
greatest  happiness  which,  in  this  world,  I can 
possibly  enjoy.  I had  rather  be  a missionary  of 
the  cross,  than  a king  on  a throne.  Let  the  men 
of  this  world  possess  its  glittering  toys ; let  the 
miser  grasp  his  cankered  gold  ; let  the  volup- 
tuary enjoy  his  sordid  pleasures ; let  the  ambitious 
ascend  to  the  pinnacle  of  earthly  honour  ; but  let 
me  enjoy  the  sweet  satisfaction  of  directing  the 
poor  pagans  to  the  ‘ Lamb  of  God.’  I court  no 
greater  good  ; I desire  no  greater  joy ; I seek  no 
greater  honour.  To  Burmah  would  I go ; in 
Burmah  would  I live;  in  Burmah  would  I toil; 
in  Burmah  would  I die  ; and  in  Burmah  would 
I be  buried !” 

These  two  young  gentlemen,  the  one  twenty- 
three,  and  the  other  but  twenty  years  of  age,  were 
readily  received  by  the  Board,  and  soon  ordained 
as  missionaries  to  the  East.  In  November,  1817, 
they  embarked  for  Calcutta.  The  scene,  at  their 
departure,  was  very  interesting  and  affecting,  and 
very  pathetically  described,  in  the  following  lines, 
by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Baldwin. 

“ See  that  ship,  her  sails  now  bending, 

Destin’d  far  to  Indian  seas ; 

See  her  canvas  wide  extending, 

Catch  the  ling’ring  wish’d-for  breeze  ; 

Richly  freighted 
With  ambassadors  of  peace. 


136 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


“ See  the  solemn  crowd  assembling, 
Anxious  each  the  scene  to  view ; 

Some  are  weeping,  others  trembling, 
While  a mother  presses  through, 

And,  with  anguish. 
Bids  her  only  son  adieu. 

“ See  a father’s  heart  dissolving. 

While  he  gazes  on  his  son  ; 

Ev’ry  tender  thought  revolving, 

Turns  away,  and  weeps  alone  ; 

Softly  saying, 

‘ Father , let  thy  will  he  done  !* 


“ See  a scene  no  less  distressing, 
Where  a mother’s  anguish’d  heart, 
Fondly  to  her  bosom  pressing, 

Cries,  ‘ My  son,  and  must  we  part  ? 

O,  my  Saviour ! 
Ever  keep  him  near  thy  heart.’ 


“ See  that  maiden’s  arms  entwining, 
Hanging  on  her  brother’s  breast; 
Tears,  and  grief,  and  love  combining, 
Still  she  cries,  though  much  distress’d, 
‘ Go,  my  brother ! 
Go,  and  make  the  Burmans  blest.' 


“ Sisters  too,  with  fond  embraces, 

Stand  o’erwhelm’d  upon  the  shore ; 
Gazing  on  each  other’s  faces, 

Weeping,  part  to  meet  no  more ! 

Griev’d  and  pensive, 
God’s  mysterious  ways  adore. 


TO  THE  BUHMAN  EMPIRE. 


137 


“ While  the  crowd  were  silent  standing, 
Solemn  prayer  devoutly  flow’d  ; 

Clouds  of  incense  like,  ascending 
Up  before  the  throne  of  God  ; 

For  our  brethren, 

While  they’re  sailing  o’er  the  flood. 


“ Go,  ye  heralds  of  salvation, 

Go,  proclaim  ‘ Redeeming  blood 
Publish  to  that  barb’rous  nation, 
Peace  and  pardon  from  our  God  : 

Tell  the  heathen, 
None  but  Christ  can  do  them  good. 


“ While  the  gospel  trump  you’re  sounding, 
May  the  Spirit  seal  the  word  ; 

And  through  sov’reign  grace  abounding, 
Burmans  bow  and  own  the  Lord ; 

Gaud’ma  leaving, 

God  alone  shall  be  ador’d. 


“ Distant  though  our  souls  are  blending, 
Still  our  hearts  are  warm  and  true ; 

In  our  prayers,  to  heav’n  ascending, 
Brethren,  we’ll  remember  you : 

Heaven  preserve  you, 
Safely  all  your  journey  through. 


“ When  your  mission  here  is  finish’d, 
And  your  work,  on  earth  is  done ; 
May  your  souls,  by  grace  replenish’d, 
Find  acceptance  through  the  Son  ; 

Then  admitted, 

Dwell  for  ever  near  his  throne. 


138 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


“ Loud  hosannas  now  resounding, 

Make  the  heav’nly  arches  ring ; 

Grace  to  sinful  men  abounding, 

Ransom’d  millions  sweetly  sing ; 

While,  with  rapture, 

All  adore  their  heavenly  king !” 

Boston,  January,  1818. 

During  their  passage  to  the  East,  these  young 
missionaries  were  remarkably  blessed  in  their 
endeavours  to  instruct  the  sailors.  The  greater 
part  of  the  crew  became  hopefully  pious,  before 
the  completion  of  the  voyage.  They  arrived  at 
Rangoon,  in  September,  1818,  and  greatly  ani- 
mated and  encouraged  us  by  their  interesting 
appearance.  An  account  of  their  first  arrival, 
and  the  meeting  of  the  mission  family,  is  de- 
scribed by  Mr.  Colman  in  the  following  letter. 

“ Rangoon,  February  20 th,  1819. — With  much 
pleasure  I inform  you  of  our  arrival  in  Burmah. 
Five  months  we  were  onboard  the  Independence, 
four  in  Bengal,  and  one  upon  our  passage  from 
Calcutta  to  this  port.  Various  circumstances 
conspired  to  make  the  shores  of  this  heathen 
land  appear  agreeable  to  us.  We  had  long  been 
in  an  unsettled  state,  and  exposed  either  to  the 
dangers  of  the  ocean,  or  to  the  influence  of  a 
sickly  climate.  It  was  delightful  to  find  ourselves 
at  the  end  of  our  tedious  journey,  and  safe  from 
all  the  perils  through  which  we  had  passed.  But 
another  consideration  served  much  to  animate  us 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  139 

— we  had  reached  the  field  in  which  we  were 
destined  to  labour.  Here  we  hoped  to  spend  the 
remainder  of  our  days,  to  scatter  the  good  seed 
of  the  kingdom,  and  to  see  some  plants  of 
righteousness  springing  up,  and  yielding  fruit 
to  the  glory  of  God.  When  we  arrived  at  the 
landing  place,  we  found  our  beloved  brethren 
waiting  to  receive  us.  Our  feelings,  for  a short 
time,  destroyed  the  power  of  utterance.  We 
could  do  no  more  than  take  each  other  by  the 
hand.  In  about  an  hour  the  ladies  came  on  shore, 
when  the  whole  mission  family  met,  and,  by  mu- 
tual expressions  of  joy  and  love,  attracted  uni- 
versal attention.  From  the  shore  we  were  con- 
ducted to  the  king’s  godown,  where  we  were 
strictly  searched.  We  then  proceeded  to  the 
mission  house.  Our  feelings  were  indescribable 
when  we  stepped  beneath  its  roof,  and  found  our- 
selves encircled  by  that  dear  company  which  we 
had  desired,  so  long,  to  enjoy.  That  was  a sea- 
son of  rejoicing.  How  swiftly  and  pleasantly  the 
hours  passed  away  ! How  cheering  and  varied 
was  the  conversation ! How  fervent  were  the 
prayers  and  thanksgivings  to  Almighty  God! 

“ For  more  than  a week  we  were  assiduously 
employed  in  getting  our  things  through  the  cus-~ 
tom-house.  Our  articles  were  strictly  examined. 
The  most  trifling  of  them  did  not  escape  minute 
investigation.  Having  undergone  this  tedious 
operation,  we  were  compelled,  by  the  custom  of 


140  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

the  country,  to  make  several  presents  to  persons 
in  authority.  It  is  admitted  that  the  viceroy 
has  the  first  claim.  Feeling  the  importance  of 
securing  his  favour  by  every  lawful  means,  we 
thought  the  opportunity  good  to  pay  him  a visit, 
and,  in  presenting  our  gift,  to  request  his  pro- 
tection. We  found  him  seated  in  an  open  house, 
situated  in  the  midst  of  a spacious  garden.  Be- 
fore him  were  a number  of  his  officers,  and  a few 
persons  presenting  petitions.  Behind  him,  at  a 
short  distance,  were  a group  of  artisans,  of  dif- 
ferent occupations,  whom  he  constantly  employs. 
His  excellency  received  us  in  a very  gracious 
manner,  appeared  much  pleased  with  our  present, 
and  gave  us  the  assurance  that  we  should  remain 
free  from  molestation  beneath  his  authority. 
Surely  there  is  reason  for  gratitude,  that  we  are 
permitted  to  stay  in  this  heathen  land ! Little 
dependance,  however,  can  be  placed  upon  the 
government.  Things  here  are  continually  chang- 
ing. The  lives  and  property  of  the  people  are 
at  the  arbitrary  disposal  of  a single  individual. 
The  whole  country,  and  all  which  it  contains,  are 
supposed  to  be  his  property.  Hence,  he  gratifies 
his  inclination,  without  the  least  restraint.  While, 
therefore,  we  acknowledge  with  gratitude  the 
protection  of  earthly  rulers,  we  feel  the  necessity 
of  putting  all  our  confidence  in  the  Lord  Jehovah. 
He  can  either  dispose  them  to  favour  us,  or  de- 
fend us  from  their  injustice  and  cruelty.  There 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  14 1 

is,  certainly,  no  reason  to  fear,  while  we  have 
such  a powerful  Friend.  It  is  true  that,  in  con- 
sequence of  several  reports  which  reached  us,  we 
once  entertained  some  serious  apprehensions  re- 
specting our  personal  safety  in  Burmah  ; but,  as 
we  approached  its  shores,  these  apprehensions 
vanished  ; and,  since  that  time,  we  have  felt  as 
secure  amidst  these  habitations  of  cruelty  as 
though  we  were  in  a Christian  land,  and  enjoyed 
the  protection  of  an  equitable  government. 

Sickness  and  the  want  of  a teacher  have 
greatly  impeded  my  progress  in  the  language.  I 
had  studied  but  five  days,  when  I was  suddenly 
taken  with  an  expectoration  of  blood  from  my 
lungs.  The  discharge  was  small,  but  it  greatly 
reduced  my  strength.  My  weakness  was  so  great 
that  I was  compelled  to  relinquish  my  studies, 
and  almost  entirely  to  abstain  from  conversation. 
This  was  a severe  trial.  It  caused  great  search- 
ings of  heart.  It  led  me  seriously  to  examine  the 
motives  which  induced  me  to  come  to  this  hea- 
then land.  For  two  months  I was  extremely  weak. 
But  He  who  took  away  my  health,  has,  to  a con- 
siderable degree,  restored  it  again.  Once  more 
I have  returned  to  my  studies.  By  the  assistance 
of  a teacher  I have  read  the  catechism,  tract,  and 
a few  of  the  first  chapters  of  St.  Matthew.  I have 
copied  brother  Judson’s  grammar,  and  half  of  his 
dictionary.  The  latter  I hope  to  finish  in  two  or 
three  months.  With  real  pleasure  I look  forward 


142  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

to  the  time  when  I shall  obtain  a knowledge  of 
this  difficult  language.  Brother  Judson  has  per- 
formed a mighty  task.  He  has  now  the  great 
satisfaction  of  preaching  to  the  poor  heathen  the 
words  of  eternal  life.  Hitherto  he  has  principally 
confined  his  exertions  to  those  who  visit  him  ; 
but  soon  his  labours  will  be  more  public.  We 
have  recently  purchased  a small  piece  of  land, 
adjoining  the  mission  premises,  on  which  a place 
of  worship  is  now  erecting.  Here  brother  Jud- 
son intends  to  spend  the  principal  part  of  his 
time.  Among  other  considerations,  I will  men- 
tion two  which  induced  us  to  adopt  this  plan. 
We  concluded  that  this  method  of  communicat- 
ing Divine  truth,  would  be  least  calculated  to  of- 
fend the  ‘ powers  which  be.’  And,  as  the  neces- 
sity of  preaching  the  gospel  is  acknowledged,  it 
is  best  also,  if  possible,  to  pursue  that  course 
which  will  not  excite  the  suspicions  of  a cruel 
and  despotic  government.  The  secluded  situa- 
tion of  the  house  which  we  now  occupy,  had  con- 
siderable influence  upon  our  minds.  It  is  situated 
upon  no  public  road,  and  is  almost  entirely  con- 
cealed from  the  view  of  passengers  by  lofty  trees. 
This  we  conceive  to  be  an  important  reason  why 
so  few  inquire  concerning  the  gospel.  The  house 
which  is  now  building  stands  upon  one  of  the 
roads  which  lead  to  the  great  pagoda.  The  pass- 
ing there  is  immense,  especially  on  worship  days. 
We  trust  our  American  friends  will  pray  that 


TO  TIIE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


143 


from  the  house  which  we  devote  to  the  service  of 
God,  streams  of  salvation  may  flow  to  all  the 
surrounding  country.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 


A.H.J. 


144 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


LETTER  IX. 


Baltimore,  January,  1823. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

The  time  has  now  arrived  for  the  relation  of 
those  events  which  constituted  a new  and  highly 
important  era  in  the  mission. 

Hitherto  preparations  only  had  been  making. 
Now,  the  most  essential  part  of  a missionary's 
work  was  actually  commenced  : I mean  the  pub- 
lic preaching  of  the  gospel.  We  had  frequently 
been  cast  down,  but  were  not  destroyed  ; we  had 
been  dejected,  but  not  forsaken ; and  now  we 
saw  the  way  gradually  opening  for  the  promul- 
gation of  the  gospel,  while  a variety  of  circum- 
stances combined  to  convince  us,  that  God  would 
yet  make  it  manifest,  that  he  had  not,  thus  far, 
continued  the  mission  for  nought. 

Our  mission  family,  from  two,  had  been  in- 
creased to  six.  (Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hough  had  em- 
barked for  Bengal.)  An  unusual  spirit  of  prayer 
and  supplication  evidently  existed  among  us,  and 
it  seemed  the  inquiry  of  every  individual,  “ What 
can,  what  shall  we  do,  for  the  conversion  of  the 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  145 

Burmans  ?”  And  though  our  newly  arrived 
friends  could  not  speak  the  language,  they  were 
continually  encouraging  those  of  us  who  could, 
and  spent  much  time  in  prayer  for  them. 

The  Zayat,  the  Burman  name  for  a place  for 
public  worship,  was  erected.  Centuries  had  rolled 
away,  millions  of  Burmans  had  been  ushered  into 
eternity,  and  God,  the  Creator  of  the  universe, 
had  never  before  seen  an  altar  erected  in  Burmah 
for  Himself ; had  never  before  heard  the  voice  of 
prayer  and  praise  ascend  in  the  Burman  lan- 
guage. You,  my  dear  Sir,  who  have  now  be- 
come so  intimately  acquainted  with  the  circum- 
stances of  the  mission,  and  have  so  minutely  fol- 
lowed us  for  the  last  six  years,  can  easily  imagine 
the  impulse  and  excitement  produced  by  the 
preceding  consideration.  From  this  time,  Mr. 
Judson  transmitted  to  the  corresponding  Secre- 
tary, in  the  form  of  a journal,  every  thing  that 
occurred,  of  any  interest;  from  which,  and  a few 
letters,  written  by  different  individuals  of  the 
mission  family,  you  will  perceive  the  origin  and 
progress  of  the  first  Christian  church  ever  esta- 
blished in  the  Burman  empire : and  though,  in 
point  of  numbers,  the  success  has  not  been  splen- 
did, you  will,  I doubt  not,  exclaim  with  us, 
“ What  hath  God  wrought!” 

February  24th,  1819,  Mr.  Judson  wrote  thus: 
— “ Some  months  have  elapsed,  since  I had  an 
opportunity  of  addressing  the  Board.  During 


146  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

this  time,  I have  been  employed  in  reading  Bur- 
man,  holding  conversations  on  religion,  writing 
some  things  preparatory  to  a more  public  com- 
munication of  the  gospel,  and  superintending  the 
erection  of  a Zayat,  a place  of  public  resort. 
Since  brother  Hough  left  Rangoon,  the  remain- 
ing families  are  so  small  as  to  be  able  to  find 
accommodation,  though  rather  crowded,  in  the 
mission-house,  and  we  concluded  to  defer  building 
another,  and  to  appropriate  a small  part  of  the 
sum  remitted  by  you  for  that  purpose  (about  two 
hundred  dollars),  to  the  erection  of  a public 
place,  on  one  of  the  principal  roads  leading  from 
the  city  to  the  great  pagoda.  There  it  is  our  in- 
tention, as  fast  as  we  are  able  to  converse  intelli- 
gibly, to  spend  a considerable  part  of  our  time ; 
and,  if  we  find  the  attempt  practicable  under 
this  government,  to  have  stated  public  worship. 
We  succeeded,  after  much  difficulty  and  delay, 
in  purchasing  a small  piece  of  ground,  adjoining 
the  mission  premises,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
opening  on  the  public  road ; the  building  is 
slowly  going  forward,  and  we  hope  will  be  ready 
to  receive  company  in  about  a month.  The  mea- 
sure seems,  at  present,  very  promising,  though 
it  may  eventuate  in  our  banishment  from  the 
country.  It  will,  at  least,  draw  us  out  of  our 
present  retired  and  almost  invisible  situation, 
bring  us  into  public  view,  and  make  us  accessible 
to  the  multitudes  who  pass  and  repass  on  business 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  147 

and  worship.  O that  it  may  prove  a Bethel,  a 
house  of  prayer  and  praise ! 

“ There  are  several  persons  of  whom  we  che- 
rish some  hope  ; but  our  hopes  have  been  so  fre- 
quently raised  and  depressed,  that  we  know  not 
what  to  say.  There  are  certainly  a considerable 
number,  whose  sentiments  have  been  changed  ; 
and  who  may  be  considered  in  the  state  of  many 
nominal  Christians,  somewhat  enlightened  and 
partially  convinced  ; but  I cannot  say  that  I have 
ever  met  with  a single  person,  on  whose  mind 
were  discoverable  the  special  operations  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  little  number  of  inquirers  is 
frequently  diminished  by  removal  to  other  parts 
of  the  country,  by  death,  or  by  a sudden  alarm 
from  government;  and  again  enlarged  by  new 
acquaintances.  Thus  a little  light  is,  we  hope, 
gradually  spreading  around,  though  so  slowly  and 
so  ineffectually,  as  to  claim  but  little  notice,  and 
to  excite  but  faint  and  wavering  expectations  of 
immediate  success. 

“ It  is  still  a source  of  much  gratification  to 
me,  that  I am  at  length  able  to  converse,  if  not 
fluently  and  acceptably,  at  least  intelligibly,  in 
this  most  difficult  language ; that  I can  sit  down 
in  the  midst  of  several  poor  heathen,  wholly  ig- 
norant of  their  God  and  Saviour,  and,  in  a short 
time,  enrich  their  minds  with  precious  truths, 
which  with  the  Divine  blessing,  are  sufficient  to 
«ave  their  souls.  This  is  a privilege  indeed : a 


148  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

privilege  which  I beg  the  Board  to  allow  me  to 
enjoy  all  my  days,  nor  remove  me  elsewhere, 
while  there  remains  any  rational  prospect  of  suc- 
cess. 

“ I do  indeed  feel  deeply  grateful  for  the  com- 
fortable supply  of  our  necessary  wants,  without 
which  we  could  not  enjoy  the  privilege  of  im- 
parting the  gospel  to  these  heathen.  I should  be 
happy  personally  to  express  my  gratitude  to  all 
who  furnish  this  supply,  and  especially  to  my 
honoured  patrons,  the  Board.  I hope  that  their 
care  and  kindness  will  not  be  in  vain.  I trust 
that  the  blessing  of  many,  ready  to  perish,  will 
ultimately  rest  on  all  who  contribute  to  and  pray 
for  the  Burman  mission.” 

April  Ath,  1819,  Mr.  Judson  again  commenced 
his  journal  as  follows  : — 

“ My  close  application  to  the  Burman  dic- 
tionary, during  the  year  1817,  and  my  subse- 
quent loss  of  nearly  a year,  in  the  unsuccessful 
attempt  to  visit  Chittagong,  have  occasioned  a 
long  interruption  in  my  journal.  Since  my  re- 
turn to  Rangoon,  the  little  I have  had  to  say,  I 
have  communicated  in  letters.  With  this  day,  a 
new  and  I hope  important  era  in  the  mission,  I re- 
sume the  journal. 

“ To-day,  the  building  of  the  Zayat  being  suf- 
ficiently advanced  for  the  purpose,  I called  toge- 
ther a few  people  who  live  around  us,  and  com- 
menced public  worship  in  the  Burman  language. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


149 


1 say  commenced,  for  though  I have  frequently  read 
and  discoursed  to  the  natives,  I have  never  before 
conducted  a course  of  exercises  which  deserved 
the  name  of  public  worship,  according  to  the 
usual  acceptation  of  that  phrase  among  Chris- 
tians ; and  though  I began  to  preach  the  gospel, 
as  soon  as  I could  speak  intelligibly,  I have 
thought  it  hardly  becoming  to  apply  the  term 
preaching  (since  it  has  acquired  an  appropriate 
meaning  in  modern  use),  to  my  imperfect,  desul- 
tory exhortations  and  conversations.  But  I hope, 
though  with  fear  and  trembling,  that  I have  now 
commenced  a course  of  public  worship,  and  regu- 
lar preaching.  This  would  have  taken  place 
just  a year  ago,  had  I returned  to  Rangoon,  as  I 
expected;  and  still  earlier,  had  I not  been  under 
a government,  where  I thought  it  prudent  to  gain 
a considerable  acquaintance  with  the  language, 
before  commencing  public  operations,  lest  I 
should  be  unable  properly  to  vindicate  my  con- 
duct, when  called  to  a judicial  account. 

“ The  congregation  to-day  consisted  of  fifteen 
persons  only,  besides  children.  Much  disorder 
and  inattention  prevailed,  most  of  them  not  hav- 
ing been  accustomed  to  attend  Burman  worship. 
May  the  Lord  grant  his  blessing  on  attempts 
made  in  great  weakness,  and  under  great  disad- 
vantages ; and  all  the  glory  will  be  His ! 

“ April  6th. — This  evening  I went,  for  the  se- 
cond time,  to  hear  a popular  Burman  preacher. 


150  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

On  our  arrival,  we  found  a Zayat,  in  the  precincts 
of  one  of  the  most  celebrated  pagodas,  lighted  up, 
and  the  floor  spread  with  mats.  In  the  centre 
was  a frame  raised  about  eighteen  inches  from 
the  ground,  where  the  preacher,  on  his  arrival, 
seated  himself.  He  appeared  to  be  about  forty- 
five  years  old,  of  very  pleasant  countenance,  and 
harmonious  speech.  He  was  once  a priest,  but 
is  now  a layman.  The  people,  as  they  came  in, 
seated  themselves  on  the  mats,  the  men  on  one 
side  of  the  house,  and  the  women  on  the  other. 
It  was  an  undistinguished  day,  and  the  congrega- 
tion was  very  small,  not' more  than  one  hundred. 
When  we  entered,  some  said,  ‘ There  come  some 
wild  foreigners ; ’ but  when  we  sat  down  properly, 
and  took  off  our  shoes,  they  began  to  say,  ‘ No, 
they  are  not  wild ; they  are  civilized.’  Some 
recognised  me,  and  said  to  one  another,  ‘ It  is 
the  English  teacher;’  a name  by  which  I am 
commonly  known.  The  preacher  soon  took  notice 
of  us,  entered  into  some  conversation,  invited  us 
to  visit  him,  and  so  on ; but  on  learning  that  I 
was  a missionary,  or,  in  their  idiom,  a religion- 
making-teacher, his  countenance  fell,  and  he  said 
no  more.  The  people  being  now  convened,  one, 
appointed  for  the  purpose,  called  three  times,  for 
silence  and  attention.  Each  person  then  took 
the  flowers  and  leaves  which  had  been  previously 
distributed,  and  placing  them  between  his  fingers, 
raised  them  to  his  head,  and  in  that  respectful 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  151 

posture  remained  motionless,  until  the  service 
was  closed.  This  ceremony  we  of  course  de- 
clined. When  all  things  were  properly  adjusted, 
the  preacher  closed  his  eyes,  and  commenced  the 
exercise,  which  consisted  in  repeating  a portion 
from  the  Burman  sacred  writings.  His  subject 
was  the  conversion  of  the  two  prime  disciples  of 
Gaudama,  and  their  subsequent  promotion  and 
glory.  His  oratory  I found  to  be  entirely  dif- 
ferent from  all  that  we  call  oratory.  At  first,  he 
seemed  dull  and  monotonous ; but  presently,  his 
soft  mellifluent  tones  won  their  way  into  the 
heart,  and  lulled  the  soul  into  that  state  of  calm- 
ness and  serenity,  which,  to  a Burman  mind, 
somewhat  resembles  the  boasted  perfection  of 
their  saints  of  old.  His  discourse  continued  about 
half  an  hour ; and  at  the  close,  the  whole  assem- 
bly burst  out  into  a short  prayer,  after  which,  all 
rose  and  retired.  This  man  exhibits  twice  every 
evening,  in  different  places.  Indeed  he  is  the 
only  popular  lay  preacher  in  the  place.  As  for 
the  priests,  they  preach  on  special  occasions  only, 
when  they  are  drawn  from  their  seclusion  and  in- 
activity, by  the  solicitations  of  their  adherents. 

“ April  11  thy  Lord's  day. — There  were  about  as 
many  present  at  Burman  worship  in  the  Zayat, 
as  last  Sunday.  They  behaved  with  rather  more 
order ; but  it  seemed  impossible  to  secure  their 
fixed  attention.  Those  who,  in  the  course  of  the 
week,  engaged  to  attend,  forgot  their  engage- 


152 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


ment;  so  that  the  assembly  consisted  entirely 
of  people  who  live  around  us.  I never  felt  so 
deeply  the  immense  difficulty  of  making  a first 
impression  on  a heathen  people. 

“ April  25th,  Lord's  day. — Yesterday  we  com- 
pleted the  Zayat,  set  up  the  front  stairs,  and  laid 
open  the  entrance  from  the  road.  This  morning 
I took  my  seat  on  the  floor,  in  the  open  porch, 
under  a solemn  impression  of  the  great  responsi- 
bility attached  to  my  new  mode  of  life. 

“ In  the  forenoon  the  members  of  the  mission 
family  came  over  to  have  our  usual  worship, 
having  concluded  to  hold  it  for  a few  Sundays  in 
the  Zayat,  rather  than  in  the  house,  in  order  to 
give  the  Burmans  some  idea  of  the  place. 

“In  the  afternoon  our  people  came  together, 
and  several  came  in  from  the  road,  so  that  we 
had  an  assembly  of  between  twenty-five  and 
thirty,  besides  children.  At  the  close  of  the  ser- 
vice, I distributed  several  tracts  to  the  strangers. 

“ April  2 6th,  Monday. — The  forepart  of  the  day 
quite  barren.  Studied  with  my  teacher,  as  usual. 
Towards  night  had  an  audience  of  about  a dozen, 
several  of  whom  were  from  the  neighbouring  vil- 
lage of  Kambet.  These  paid  particular  attention. 

“ April  21th,  Tuesday. — One  of  the  most  atten- 
tive of  the  hearers  last  night,  came  again,  with  a 
petty  officer  from  another  village.  They  staid 
the  most  of  the  day,  received  a great  deal  of 
instruction,  and  left,  with  a promise  that  they 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  153 

would  come  as  often  as  the  distance  of  their  resi- 
dence would  permit.  Considerably  encouraged 
to-day,  with  the  hope  that  God  is  preparing  a 
people  in  this  benighted  land. 

“ April  28 tli,  Wednesday. — Nothing  interesting 
through  the  day.  At  night,  encountered  a bitter 
opposer ; he  had  visited  Bengal,  and  some  foe  to 
missions  had  poisoned  his  mind  : he  manifested 
a most  virulent  spirit.  I felt  that  he  would  glad- 
ly be  foremost  in  destroying  us.  But  through 
Divine  grace  I was  enabled  to  treat  him  with 
meekness  and  gentleness,  and  he  finally  left  me 
politely.  He  appeared  to  be  rich,  and  had  several 
followers. 

“ In  the  evening  there  were  some  hopeful  ap- 
pearances in  Mrs.  J.’s  female  meeting,  which  she 
has  recommenced  since  public  worship  has  been 
set  up  at  the  Zayat. 

“ April  29 tli,  Thursday. — A young  man  of 
twenty-four,  by  name  Moung  Koo,  happened  to 
stroll  in  last  Sunday,  and  was  present  at  worship. 
He  appeared  to  be  rather  wild  and  noisy,  though 
his  manners  were  respectful.  He  took  a tract 
and  went  away.  This  morning,  he  made  his 
appearance  again,  and  has  been  with  me  about 
two  hours.  I have  been  enabled,  through  Divine 
assistance,  to  impart  much  religious  instruction, 
and  especially  to  expatiate  with  some  feeling,  on 
the  love  and  sufferings  of  the  Saviour.  The  truth 
seems  to  have  taken  hold  of  his  mind,  and  though 


154  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

he  is  quick  and  sensible,  and  has  some  savage 
fire  in  his  eye,  he  is  very  docile,  and  ready  to 
drink  in  the  truth,  without  the  numberless  cavils 
and  objections  which  are  so  common  among  the 
Burmans.  He  engaged  to  come  next  Sunday, 
promised  to  pray  constantly,  and  gave  me  his 
name  to  pray  for  him,  that  he  might  be  a disciple 
of  Christ,  and  be  delivered  from  hell.  I feel  con- 
siderable attachment  to  this  young  man,  and  my 
heart  goes  forth  to  the  mercy  seat,  in  behalf  of 
his  precious  soul. 

“ April  30 thy  Friday. — I was  agreeably  sur- 
prised, in  the  morning,  to  see  the  young  man  of 
yesterday  come  again  so  soon.  He  staid  all  the 
forenoon,  and  seemed  desirous  of  hearing  as  much 
as  possible  about  religion.  Several  others  came 
and  went.  A very  busy  day  ; hardly  time  to  pre- 
pare these  minutes  to  be  forwarded  by  a vessel 
which  leaves  this  port  for  Bengal,  early  to-morrow 
morning.” 

The  following  letter  to  Mrs.  S.  describes  the 
encouraging  appearances,  at  this  time,  among  the 
females  who  attended  my  Wednesday  meetings. 

“ Your  affectionate  letter  of  January  27th,  1818, 
I received  on  the  arrival  of  our  new  missionary 
associates,  and  should  have  answered  it  by  the 
last  ship  which  sailed  for  Bengal,  but  ill  health 
prevented  my  writing  to  any  of  my  American 
friends.  Accept  my  sincere  thanks  for  the  fa- 
vour, and  be  assured  that  your  and  Dr.  S.’s  let- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  155 

ters  often  animate  and  encourage  our  minds.  As 
you  are  particularly  interested  in  this  mission, 
I hesitate  not  to  write  discouraging  as  well  as 
encouraging  circumstances,  to  present  the  dark 
as  well  as  the  bright  side  of  the  case ; and 
although  this  method  will  sometimes  occasion 
painful  feelings,  it  will  excite  to  fervent  and  per- 
severing prayer,  and  prevent  the  severe  disap- 
pointment, which  is  frequently  the  result  of 
false  colouring.  You  have  doubtless,  my  dear 

Mrs.  S , heard  of  the  series  of  trials  through 

which  this  mission  passed  during  the  last  year. 
The  bright  prospect  which  animated  us  just  before 
Mr.  Judson’s  departure  for  Chittagong,  passed 
away  in  a moment,  and  was  succeeded  by  an 
apparently  impenetrable  cloud.  The  arrival  of 
the  brethren  C.  and  W.  greatly  rejoiced  us,  and 
caused  us  to  feel  that  this  mission  was  still  an  ob- 
ject of  the  care  of  Providence.  But  our  rejoicings 
were  quite  checked  by  their  both  being  taken 
with  bleeding  at  the  lungs,  and  other  symptoms 
of  debility.  Brother  Colman  has  been  gradually 
recovering,  and  is  able  to  apply  closely  to  the 
study  of  the  language,  though  he  is  still  so  weak 
at  the  lungs  as  to  be  hardly  heard  when  leading  in 
prayer  : but  brother  Wheelock  has  been  growing 
weaker,  has  a violent  cough,  and  every  symptom 
of  a fixed  consumption.  We  have  now  given  up 
all  hope  of  his  recovery.  We  consider  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Colman  a valuable  acquisition  to  the  mis- 


156  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

sion,  enjoy  much  in  their  society,  and  exceed- 
ingly regret  that  the  present  weak  state  of  his 
lungs  forbids  our  expecting  much  from  his  public 
labours  for  a length  of  time. 

“ Since  Mr.  Judson  has  commenced  public 
preaching  in  the  Zayat,  I have  begun  again  to 
have  my  female  meetings,  which  were  given  up, 
in  consequence  of  the  scattered  state  of  the  Bur- 
mans  around  us,  at  the  time  of  our  government 
difficulties.  I attend  with  them  every  Wednesday 
evening  at  seven  o’clock,  as  they  are  more  at  lei- 
sure in  the  evening  than  any  other  time.  My 
last  meeting  was  very  animating,  and  the  appear- 
ance of  the  females  (thirteen  in  number,  all 
young  married  women)  very  encouraging.  Some 
of  them  were  inquisitive,  and  after  spending  two 
hours  seemed  loth  to  go.  One  said,  she  appear- 
ed to  herself  like  a blind  person  just  beginning 
to  see.  And  another  said,  she  believed  in  Christ, 
prayed  to  him  daily,  and  asked  what  else  was  ne- 
cessary to  make  her  a real  disciple  of  Christ.  I 
told  her  she  must  not  only  say  that  she  believed 
in  Christ,  but  must  believe  with  all  her  heart.  She 
again  asked  what  were  some  of  the  evidences 
of  believing  with  the  heart.  I told  her  the 
manner  of  life  would  be  changed;  but  one  of 
the  best  evidences  she  could  obtain  would  be, 
when  others  came  to  quarrel  with  her  and  use 
abusive  language,  if,  so  far  from  retaliating,  she 
felt  a disposition  to  bear  with,  to  pity,  and  to 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  157 

pray  for  them.  The  Burman  women  are  par- 
ticularly given  to  quarrelling,  and  to  refrain 
from  it  would  be  a most  decided  evidence  of  a 

change  of  heart.  But,  my  dear  Mrs.  S , we 

have  no  reason  to  expect  that  the  adversary  of 
souls  will  let  us  long  go  on  quietly  in  our  exer- 
tions to  undermine  his  kingdom  here.  Will  he 
not  make  every  possible  exertion  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  this  infant  cause?  Yes;  but  though  he 
rage,  he  can  go  no  farther  than  the  length  of  his 
chain,  which  is  held  in  the  right  hand  of  Him, 
who  loves  his  church,  who  keeps  it  as  the  apple  of 
his  eye,  and  who,  if  any  of  his  elect  are  among 
this  idolatrous  people,  will  keep  them  from  the 
destructive  influence  of  inferior  power.  ‘ What 
though  the  heathen  rage,  and  the  people  imagine 
a vain  thing?  What  though  the  kings  of  the 
earth  set  themselves,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel 
together  against  the  Lord  and  his  cause  ? He 
that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh;  the  Lord 
shall  have  them  in  derision.  He  will  set  his  Son 
upon  his  holy  hill,  he  will  give  the  heathen  for 
his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth  for  his  possession.’  These  precious  pro- 
mises, my  dear  Mrs.  S , dissipate  our  despond- 

ing fears,  and  cause  us  at  times  to  feel,  that  ‘ in  the 
Lord  we  have  everlasting  strength,’  that  He 
will  yet  look  on  us  with  a favourable  eye,  and 
crown  our  exertions  with  success.  We  hope  our 
friends  at  home  will  not  be  discouraged,  or  cease 


158  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

to  pray  fervently  for  the  prosperity  of  this  mis- 
sion. If  they  knew  all  the  circumstances  and 
the  difficulties  we  have  to  encounter,  so  far  from 
being  discouraged,  they  would  perceive  the  great- 
est ground  for  encouragement.  Through  the 
kindness  of  the  Board,  our  temporal  wants  are 
comfortably  supplied,  for  which  we  wish  to  ex- 
press our  gratitude. 

“ Accompanying  is  a Siamese  catechism,  which 
I have  just  copied,  that  you  may  see  the  form  and 
manner  of  writing  this  language.  I have  attended 
to  the  Siamese  language  for  about  a year  and  a 
half,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  my  teacher,  have 
translated  the  Burman  catechism,  tract,  and  the 
gospel  of  St.  Matthew  into  that  language.  1 have 
also  translated  one  of  the  Siamese  books  into 
English,  and  would  send  it  to  you  if  it  was  not  so 
bulky  and  so  much  labour  to  copy.  It  is  an  ac- 
count of  the  incarnation  of  one  of  their  deities, 
when  he  existed  in  the  form  of  a great  elephant ! 
The  perusal  of  it,  I dare  say,  would  afford  you 
much  amusement,  as  well  as  excite  your  commi- 
seration for  a people  who  are  so  deluded  as  to 
believe  such  fictitious  stories.” 


Continuation  of  Extracts  from  Mr.  Judsons  Journal. 

“ Rangoon , April  \st,  1819. — I perceive  that 
one  large  parcel,  forwarded  in  the  year  1816, 
never  reached  America.  It  contained,  among 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  159 

other  things,  my  journal  from  October  1815  to 
February  1816.  On  looking  over  the  original 
minutes,  I perceive  one  article  only  that  is  worth 
transcribing.  That  article  will,  at  least,  serve  to 
give  some  account  of  myself,  during  a period 
which  must  appear  to  be  unaccounted  for  in  the 
letters  which  have  reached  the  Board. 

“ January,  1$£,  1816. — The  greater  part  of  my 
time  for  the  last  six  months  has  been  occupied 
in  studying  and  transcribing,  in  alphabetical  ar- 
rangement, the  Pali  Abigdan,  or  dictionary  of  the 
Pali  language,  affixing  to  the  Pali  terms  the  in- 
terpretation in  Burman,  and  again  transferring 
the  Burman  words  to  a dictionary,  Burman  and 
English.  With  the  close  of  the  year  I have 
brought  this  tedious  work  to  a close ; and  find, 
that  the  number  of  Pali  words  collected,  amounts 
to  about  four  thousand.  It  has  grieved  me  to 
spend  so  much  time  on  the  Pali;  but  the  con- 
stant occurrence  of  Pali  terms  in  every  Burman 
book,  made  it  absolutely  necessary. 

The  two  languages  are  entirely  distinct.  The 
Burman  is  a language  sui  generis,  peculiar  to  it- 
self. It  is  true  we  cannot  know  what  affinity  it 
has  to  some  of  the  Indo-Chinese  languages,  that 
are  yet  uninvestigated ; but  it  is  essentially  dif- 
ferent from  the  Sungskrit,  the  parent  of  almost 
all  the  languages  in  India  Proper,  and  indeed 
from  every  language,  that  has  yet  come  under 
the  cognizance  of  Europeans. 


160  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ The  Pali,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a dialect  of  the 
Sungskrit,  and  was  introduced  into  this  country 
with  the  religion  of  Boodh.  This  personage, 
whose  proper  name  is  Gaudama,  appeared  in 
Hindostan,  about  two  thousand  three  hundred 
years  ago,  and  gave  a new  form  and  dress  to  the 
old  transmigration  system,  which,  in  some  shape 
or  other,  has  existed  time  immemorial.  The 
Brahmans,  in  the  mean  time,  dressed  up  the  sys- 
tem after  their  fashion;  and  these  two  modifica- 
tions, Brahmanism  and  Boodhism,  struggled  for 
the  ascendency.  At  length,  the  family  of  Gau- 
dama, which  has  held  the  sovereignty  of  India, 
wras  dethroned,  his  religion  was  denounced,  and 
his  disciples  took  refuge  in  Ceylon,  and  the 
neighbouring  countries.  In  that  island,  about 
five  hundred  years  after  the  decease  and  supposed 
annihilation  of  their  teacher  or  deity,  they  com- 
posed their  sacred  writings,  in  that  dialect  of  the 
Sungskrit,  which  had  obtained  in  Ceylon;  thence, 
they  were  conveyed,  by  sea,  to  the  Indo-Chinese 
nations.  Boodhism,  however,  had  gained  foot- 
ing in  Burmah,  before  the  arrival  of  the  sacred 
books  from  Ceylon.  It  is  commonly  maintained, 
that  it  was  introduced  by  his  emissaries  before 
his  death. 

“ It  is  obvious,  that  the  introduction  of  a new 
religion,  and  new  sacred  writings,  must  have 
great  effect  on  the  language  of  a people.  And, 
accordingly  (not  to  speak  of  the  influence  which 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


161 


the  Pali  has  had  on  the  general  construction  of 
the  Burman  language),  a considerable  number  of 
words  in  common  use,  and  a very  great  propor- 
tion of  theological  terms,  are  of  Pali  origin. 
Thus,  though  the  Pali  is  now  a dead  language, 
cultivated  by  the  learned  only,  some  knowledge 
of  it  is  indispensable  to  one  who  would  acquire  a 
perfect  knowledge  of  the  Burman,  and  especially 
to  a missionary,  who  intends  to  translate  the 
Scriptures,  and  who  ought,  therefore,  above  all 
others,  to  be  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  terms 
he  employs. 

“ With  these  views,  I was  desirous  of  laying  a 
little  foundation  for  such  further  improvements  in 
the  language,  as  necessity  should  require,  and 
leisure  permit.  And  having  done  this — having  a 
vocabulary  for  daily  reference,  correction,  and 
enlargement,  I now  propose  to  devote  my  whole 
time  again  to  the  Burman.” 

“ May  1st,  1819. — Burman  day  of  worship  ; of 
course  many  visitors.  Among  the  rest,  Moung 
Nau,  a man  who  was  with  me  several  hours  yes- 
terday, but  from  his  silence  and  reserve,  excited 
little  attention  or  hope.  To-day,  however,  I be- 
gin to  think  better  of  him.  Moung  Koo  came 
again  at  night,  and  appeared  pretty  well.  These 
two  men,  with  the  two  persons  from  Kambet,  of 
the  27th  of  the  last  month,  I call  the  fruits  of  the 
week.  But  let  us  see  who  of  them  will  remember 
the  day  of  worship. 


M 


162  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ May  2d,  Lord's  day. — About  three  o'clock, 
the  quiet  and  modest  Moung  Nau  came  in,  and 
took  his  usual  place.  For  the  others  we  looked 
in  vain.  About  thirty  present  at  worship.  Very 
few  paid  much  attention,  or  probably  received 
any  benefit. 

“ May  3d. — Among  the  visitors  of  to-day,  was 
a respectable  man,  formerly  an  officer,  now  a 
merchant,  resident  at  Little  Bridge,  a village 
contiguous  to  Kambet.  After  long  and  various 
conversation,  in  which  he  paid  close  and  respect- 
ful attention,  he  said  that  he  was  a person  not  a 
little  versed  in  Burman  literature  ; but  that  he 
now  saw  he  had  erred  in  all ; he  regretted  that  he 
had  lived  two  years  in  the  neighbourhood,  with- 
out knowing  me  ; to-day  was  an  auspicious  day  ; 
he  wished  to  become  my  disciple,  would  read  my 
writings  with  attention,  and  come  as  often  as  pos- 
sible. 

“ May  5th. — Moung  Nau  has  been  with  me 
several  hours.  I begin  to  think  that  the  grace  of 
God  has  reached  his  heart.  He  expresses  senti- 
ments of  repentance  for  his  sins,  and  faith  in  the 
Saviour.  The  substance  of  his  profession  is,  that 
from  all  the  darkness,  and  uncleannesses  and  sins 
of  his  whole  life,  he  has  found  no  other  Saviour 
but  Jesus  Christ;  no  where  else  can  he  look  for 
salvation  ; and  therefore  he  proposes  to  adhere  to 
Christ,  and  worship  him  all  his  life  long. 

“ It  seems  almost  too  much  to  believe,  that 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


1G3 


God  has  begun  to  manifest  his  grace  to  the  Bur- 
mans  ; but  this  day  I could  not  resist  the  delight- 
ful conviction,  that  this  is  really  the  case.  Praise 

AND  GLORY  BE  TO  HIS  NAME  FOR  EVERMORE. 

Amen. 

“ May  6th. — Moung  Nau  was  again  with  me  a 
great  part  of  the  day.  He  appears  to  be  slowly 
growing  in  religious  knowledge,  and  manifests  a 
teachable,  humble  spirit,  ready  to  believe  all  that 
Christ  has  said,  and  obey  all  that  he  has  com- 
manded. 

“ He  is  thirty-five  years  old — no  family — mid- 
dling abilities — quite  poor — obliged  to  work  for 
his  living,  and  therefore  his  coming  day  after  day 
to  hear  the  truth,  affords  stronger  evidence  that 
it  has  taken  hold  of  his  mind.  May  the  Lord 
graciously  lead  his  dark  mind  into  all  the  truth, 
and  cause  him  to  cleave  inviolably  to  the  blessed 
Saviour. 

“May  8th.—  Burman  day  of  worship.  Thronged 
with  visitors  through  the  day.  Had  more  or  less 
company,  without  intermission,  for  about  eight 
hours.  Several  heard  much  of  the  gospel,  and 
engaged  to  come  again.  Moung  Nau  was  with 
me  a great  part  of  the  day,  and  assisted  me  much 
in  explaining  things  to  new  comers.  Towards 
night,  a man  came  in,  by  name  Moung  Shway 
Oo,  whom  I think  it  time  to  mention  particu- 
larly, as  he  has  visited  me  several  times;  and 
though,  like  Moung  Nau,  apparently  backward 


164  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

at  first,  he  appears  to  be  really  thoughtful.  He 
is  a young  man  of  twenty-seven,  of  very  pleasant 
exterior,  and  evidently  in  good  circumstances. 
Poor  Moung  Koo,  who  appeared  so  forward  at 
first,  alas,  too  forward ! has  quite  discontinued 
his  visits.  No  news  yet  from  the  villages  of 
Kambet  and  Little  Bridge. 

“ May  9th,  Lord's  day.  — Moung  Shway  Oo 
came  in  the  morning,  and  staid  through  the  whole 
day.  Only  two  or  three  of  all  I conversed  with 
yesterday  came  again.  Had,  however,  an  assem- 
bly of  thirty.  After  worship  some  warm  dispu- 
tation. I begin  to  feel  that  the  Burmans  cannot 
stand  before  the  truth.  In  the  course  of  the  con- 
versation Moung  Nau  declared  himself  a disciple 
of  Christ,  in  presence  of  a considerable  number ; 
and  even  Moung  Shway  Oo  appeared  to  incline 
the  same  way. 

“ May  \Oth.— Early  in  the  morning  Moung 
Nau  came  to  take  leave,  being  obliged  to  go  to  a 
distance  after  timber — his  usual  occupation.  I 
took  him  alone,  and  prayed  with  him,  and  gave 
him  a written  prayer  to  help  him  in  his  private 
devotion.  He  received  my  parting  instructions 
with  great  attention  and  solemnity  ; said  he  felt 
that  he  was  a disciple  of  Christ — hoped  that  he 
should  be  kept  from  falling — desired  the  prayers 
of  us  all — expressed  a wish  that,  if  he  held  out 
some  time  after  his  return,  we  would  allow  him 
to  profess  Christ  in  baptism,  and  so  he  departed. 


TO  THE  BURMAM  EMPIRE.  165 

The  Lord  Jesus  go  with  him,  and  bless  him.  He 
is  poor.  I felt  a great  desire  to  give  him  some- 
thing ; but  thought  it  safer  to  put  no  temptation 
in  his  way.  If,  on  his  return,  he  still  cleaves  to 
Christ,  his  profession  will  be  more  satisfactory 
than  it  would  be  if  he  had  any  expectations  from 
me. 

“ May  11th.— Had  more  or  less  company  from 
morning  till  night.  Among  the  rest  Moung  Shway 
Oo,  and  two  or  three  others,  who  appear  to  be 
pretty  well  satisfied  that  the  Boodhist  religion 
has  no  foundation.  Conversation  was  very  ani- 
mated, and  somewhat  encouraging;  but  I wanted 
to  see  more  seriousness,  and  more  anxiety  to  be 
saved  from  sin. 

“ Heard  much  to-day  of  the  danger  of  intro- 
ducing a new  religion.  All  agreed  in  opinion, 
that  the  king  would  cut  off  those  who  embraced 
it,  being  a king  who  could  not  bear  that  his  sub- 
jects should  differ  in  sentiment  from  himself,  and 
who  has,  for  a long  time,  persecuted  the  priests 
of  the  established  religion  of  the  empire,  because 
they  would  not  sanction  all  his  innovations.  Those 
who  seemed  most  favourably  disposed,  whispered 
me,  that  I had  better  not  stay  in  Rangoon  and 
talk  to  common  people,  but  go  directly  to  the 
‘ lord  of  life  and  death.1  If  he  approved  of  the  re- 
ligion, it  would  spread  rapidly  ; but,  in  the  pre- 
sent state  of  things,  none  would  dare  to  prose- 
cute their  inquiries,  with  the  fear  of  the  king 


166  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

before  their  eyes.  They  brought  forward,  the 
case  of  the  Kolans,  a sect  of  Burmans,  who  have 
been  proscribed  and  put  to  death  under  several 
reigns.  I tried  to  set  them  right  in  some  points, 
and  encourage  them  to  trust  in  the  care  of  an 
Almighty  Saviour  ; but  they  speak  low,  and  look 
around  fearfully,  when  they  mention  the  name  of 
the  ‘ owner  of  the  sword.' 

“ May  13th. — Had  company  all  day,  without 
intermission.  About  noon  Moung  Nau  came  in, 
having  given  up  his  journey,  on  account  of  the 
unfaithfulness  of  his  employer.  His  behaviour 
and  conversation  were  very  satisfactory.  He  re- 
grets the  want  of  a believing  associate,  but  de- 
clares his  determination  of  adhering  to  Christ, 
though  no  Burman  should  ever  join  him. 

“ Moung  Shway  Doan,  a man  who  has  at- 
tended two  Sundays,  and  made  some  occasional 
visits,  was  with  me  several  hours.  He  professes 
to  have  felt  the  truth  of  this  religion,  ever  since 
he  first  heard  about  it,  and  now  desires  to  be  a 
disciple  of  Christ.  He  has  obtained,  I find,  con- 
siderable knowledge  of  the  Christian  system ; 
but  does  not  appear  to  have  much  sense  of  his 
own  sins.  May  the  Spirit  teach  him  what  man 
cannot. 

“ May  15th. — Moung  Nau  has  been  with  me 
all  day,  as  well  as  yesterday.  He  is  anxious  to  be 
received  into  our  company,  and  thinks  it  a great 
privilege  to  be  the  first  among  the  Burmans  in 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  167 

professing'  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  has 
been  told  plainly,  that  he  has  nothing  to  expect 
in  this  world  but  persecution,  and  perhaps  death  ; 
but  he  thinks  it  better  to  die  for  Christ,  and  be 
happy  hereafter,  than  to  live  a few  days,  and  be 
for  ever  wretched.  All  the  members  of  the  mis- 
sion have,  at  different  times,  conversed  with  him, 
and  are  satisfied  that  a work  of  grace  is  begun  in 
his  heart. 

“ May  16/A,  Lord's  day. — In  the  forenoon,  a 
man  came  in  from  Kyaikasan,  a neighbouring  vil- 
lage, and  listened  with  more  apparent  sincerity 
than  is  commonly  manifested  during  the  first 
visit.  He  had  received  a tract  about  a year  ago, 
and  had  thought  considerably  on  the  subject. 

“ About  the  usual  number  were  present  at 
worship  ; but  a larger  proportion  than  common, 
were  strangers.  A lawyer  belonging  to  the  vice- 
roy, and  some  other  respectable  persons,  were 
present,  and  gave  me  much  trouble,  without,  I 
fear,  receiving  any  benefit.  Moung  Shway  Doan 
was  present,  and  appeared  pretty  well  after  wor- 
ship. Moung  Shway  Oo  has,  I suppose,  returned 
to  Henthadah,  the  next  city  above  Rangoon.  He 
took  no  leave  of  me ; yet  I cannot  give  up  all 
hope  of  him.  At  his  last  visit,  he  said,  he  should 
constantly  read  my  writings,  and  pray  to  the 
eternal  God. 

“ May  nth. — Moung  Nau  has  received  an  ad- 
vantageous offer  to  go  to  Ava,  in  the  employ  of  a 


168  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

boat  owner.  We  were  afraid  to  dissuade  him 
from  accepting  it,  as  he  has  no  way  of  getting  a 
living  ; and  equally  unwilling  to  have  him  absent 
several  months.  At  length  we  advised  him  not  to 
go,  and  he  at  once  acquiesced. 

“ May  20th. — For  several  days  there  have  been 
no  visitors  at  all.  I ascribe  it  partly  to  the  dis- 
tress which  presses  on  all  ranks  of  people,  on  ac- 
count of  the  heavy  tax  which  is  now  raising. 
Yesterday  we  received  an  order  to  pay,  on  ac- 
count of  our  servants,  forty-eight  ticals  of  pure 
silver,  equal  to  thirty  dollars.  To-day,  after 
having  made  every  inquiry,  we  applied  to  the 
viceroy.  He  replied,  that  it  was  an  extraordinary 
tax,  and  must  be  paid  ; but  that  we  might  be  ex- 
cused from  paying  it  to  the  proper  officer,  and 
have  the  privilege  of  paying  it  to  himself!  We 
were,  therefore,  obliged  to  produce  the  money. 

“ May  21  st. — Had  several  attentive  hearers  ; 
among  the  rest  Moung  Ay,  who  says  that  the 
good  news  has  taken  hold  of  his  mind.  I have 
been  so  frequently  disappointed  in  visitors,  who 
appeared  promising  the  first  time,  but  never  came 
again,  that  I have  lost  all  credit  in  early  profes- 
sions ; yet  I cannot  but  hope  well  of  this  man, 
especially  as  Moung  Nau  appeared  to  like  him 
better  than  any  other  inquirer. 

May  22 d. — We  have  taken  Moung  Nau  to  live 
with  us,  intending  to  employ  him  in  copying- 
some  small  things  for  distribution,  which  we  can- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  169 

not  get  printed  at  present,  and  allow  him  ten 
ticals  a month.  Our  principal  object,  however, 
is  to  keep  him  in  the  way  of  instruction,  hoping 
that  he  will  ultimately  be  useful  to  his  country- 
men. 

“ At  night,  Moung  Ay  came  the  second  time, 
and  appeared  anxious  to  know  the  way  of  salva- 
tion. But  I am  grieved  to  find,  that  he  is  going 
away  on  business  to-morrow  morning,  and  will 
be  absent  a long  time. 

“ May  23 d,  Lord's  day. — The  Kyaikasan  vil- 
lager, Moung  Nyo,  mentioned  last  Sunday,  came 
again,  with  three  companions.  He  staid  the 
whole  day,  and  appears  to  be  in  the  same  state 
of  mind  as  Moung  Ay.  Both  say,  they  are  con- 
vinced that  there  is  an  eternal  God  ; that  having 
denied  him  all  their  lives,  and,  of  course,  lived 
contrary  to  his  commands,  their  sins  are  great ; 
and  that  the  news  of  salvation  through  the  death 
of  the  Son  of  God,  is  good  news.  Thus  far  they 
venture.  But  whether  the  Spirit  has  given,  or 
will  give  them  true  love  to  the  Saviour,  and  thus 
enable  them  to  trust  in  him,  we  must  leave  for 
time  to  ascertain. 

“ May  24 th. — A ship,  long  expected  from  Ben- 
gal, came  up  the  river,  but  was  obliged  at  night 
to  anchor  a few  miles  below  the  town. 

“ May  25th. — In  the  afternoon  the  captain  came 
on  shore.  We  received  a few  loose  letters  from 
Bengal.  Had  the  mortification- to  find  that  most 


170  AMERICAN  RAPTIST  MISSION 

of  our  letters  were  in  a parcel  and  box  stowed 
away  in  the  hold. 

“ May  2 6th. — Out  all  day  ; but  unable  to  get 
hold  of  the  precious  articles. 

“ May  21th. — In  the  afternoon  had  news  that 
the  parcel  was  sent  ashore  ; and  at  the  same 
moment  received  peremptory  orders  from  the 
collector  of  the  district,  to  pay  four  hundred  and 
fifty  ticals  of  pure  silver.  The  order  was  com- 
municated through  the  same  medium  as  the  last, 
and  all  the  circumstances  conspire  to  convince 
us,  that  it  is  done  by  the  authority  of  the  vice- 
roy ; and  if  he  succeeds  in  getting  this  money,  it 
will  most  assuredly  be  the  beginning  of  a system 
of  extortion,  which  will  make  it  impossible  for 
us  to  remain  at  Rangoon.  What  shall  we  do? 
We  cannot  expose  the  funds  of  the  Board  to  the 
mercy  of  a government  which  demands  hundreds 
at  once.  We  cannot  go  up  to  Ava  just  now,  and 
seek  redress  of  the  emperor.  The  viceroy  would 
interdict  the  measure,  as  the  object  would  be  ap- 
parent.* The  poor  parcel  lost  its  value.  We 
glanced  at  a few  of  the  most  important  letters ; 
and  hastened  to  lay  our  case  before  two  Euro- 
peans, who  hold  places  under  government.  Both 
promised  to  use  their  influence.  Late  at  night, 
after  the  evening  levee,  we  received  information 


* This  viceroy  had  been  in  office  but  a short  time,  and  we  were 
not  particularly  acquainted  with  him. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  171 

from  them  both,  that  they  had  forgotten  our  case. 
We  have  nothing,  therefore,  to  do,  but  to  commit 
it  to  Him  who  will  not  forget  us,  and  retire  to 
rest  with  aching  hearts. 

“ May  28 th. — Applied  again  to  one  of  the  offi- 
cers, in  whom  I have  most  confidence.  Spent 
the  forenoon  in  drawing  up  a memorial  (to  be 
presented  to  the  viceroy,  as  a last  resort),  stating 
our  object  in  coming  to  the  country,  our  means 
of  support,  and  our  ministerial  character.  At 
noon,  received  news  from  the  officer  applied  to  in 
the  morning,  that  he  had  been  before  the  ray- 
woon,  the  second  in  government,  and  stated  the 
impropriety  of  taxing  ministers  of  religion ; that 
the  raywoon  summoned  the  head  of  the  district, 
and  having  ascertained  that  the  order  did  not 
emanate  from  the  viceroy  himself,  dismissed  him 
with  a reprimand.  O,  what  a relief  to  our  bur- 
dened hearts  ! Thanks  be  to  a gracious  Saviour ! 

“ In  the  afternoon  succeeded  in  getting  the 
box,  in  which  most  of  our  lett3rs  were  deposited. 
Enjoyed  a happy  season,  in  devouring  much  pri- 
vate and  public  intelligence  from  our  dear  friends 
and  native  land . These  are  the  first  letters  that  have 
been  forwarded  from  Bengal  for  eight  months. 

“ Jane  3d. — Have  had  but  little  company  in  the 
Zayat  for  several  days.  In  the  intervals,  have 
been  happy  in  examining  the  magazines  and  other 
publications,  lately  received — a pleasure  peculiar 
to  a missionary  in  a heathen  land. 


172  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ June  6th,  Lord's  day. — Had  two  interesting 
visitors.  They  were  present  ah'  worship,  and 
staid  till  dark — certain  they  should  come  again — 
but  will  they  ? 

“ After  partaking  of  the  Lord's  supper  in  the 
evening,  we  read  and  considered  the  following 
letter  of  Moung  Nau,  which  he  wrote  of  his  own 
accord : 

‘ I,  Moung  Nau,  the  constant  recipient  of  your 
excellent  favour,  approach  your  feet.  Whereas 
my  Lord’s  three  have  come  to  the  country  of 
Burmah,  not  for  the  purpose  of  trade,  but  to 
preach  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 
eternal  God,  I,  having  heard  and  understood,  am, 
with  a joyful  mind,  filled  with  love. 

‘ I believe  that  the  Divine  Son,  Jesus  Christ, 
suffered  death,  in  the  place  of  men,  to  atone  for 
their  sins.  Like  a heavy  laden  man,  I feel  my 
sins  are  very  many.  The  punishment  of  my  sins 
I deserve  to  suffer.  Since  it  is  so,  do  you,  Sirs, 
consider,  that  I,  taking  refuge  in  the  merits  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  receiving  baptism,  in 
order  to  become  his  disciple,  shall  dwell  one  with 
yourselves,  a band  of  brothers,  in  the  happiness 
of  heaven,  and  (therefore)  grant  me  the  ordinance 
of  baptism.* *  It  is  through  the  grace  of  Jesus 

___  ““  r-  ‘ : : r- 

* At  the  time  of  writing  this,  not  having  heard  much  of  baptism, 
he  seems  to  have  ascribed  an  undue  efficacy  to  the  ordinance.  He 
has  since  corrected  his  error ; but  the  translator  thinks  it  most  fair 
and  impartial  to  give  the  letter,  just  as  it  was  written  at  first. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  173 

Christ,  that  you.  Sirs,  have  come  by  ship,  from 
one  country  and  continent  to  another,  and  that 
we  have  met  together.  I pray  my  Lord's  three, 
that  a suitable  day  may  be  appointed,  and  that  I 
may  receive  the  ordinance  of  baptism. 

‘ Moreover,  as  it  is  only  since  I have  met 
with  you,  Sirs,  that  I have  known  about  the  eter- 
nal God,  I venture  to  pray,  that  you  will  still  un- 
fold to  me  the  religion  of  God,  that  my  old  dis- 
position may  be  destroyed,  and  my  new  disposi- 
tion improved.’ 

“We  have  all,  for  some  time,  been  satisfied 
concerning  the  reality  of  his  religion,  and  there- 
fore voted  to  receive  him  into  church  fellowship, 
on  his  being  baptized,  and  proposed  next  Sunday 
for  administering  the  ordinance. 

“ June  20th,  Lord’s  clay. — For  the  last  fortnight, 
have  had  but  little  company  at  the  Zayat,  owing 
probably  to  the  rains  which  have  now  fully  set 
in.  The  town  has  also  been  in  great  confusion,  in 
prospect  of  the  viceroy’s  departure  for  Ava.  We 
have  been  called  on  to  pay  another  tax  of  fifteen 
ticals — got  off  with  paying  half.  Have  had  seve- 
ral other  molestations  from  petty  officers  of  go- 
vernment. Concluded  to  postpone  Moung  Nau’s 
baptism,  till  the  viceroy  be  fairly  off.  He  left 
Rangoon  yesterday,  and  has  arrived  at  the  next 
village,  which  is  a kind  of  rendezvous  to  the  vast 
multitude  of  boats  that  accompany  him. 

“ To-day  Moung  Shway  Doan  appeared  again, 


174  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

after  an  absence  of  several  weeks,  and  a little  re- 
vived our  hopes  concerning  him.  Several  whom 
I have  particularly  mentioned,  have  discontinued 
their  visits,  though  I am  satisfied  that  they  are 
convinced  of  the  falsity  of  the  Burman  religion, 
and  of  the  truth  of  the  Christian.  I cannot  pos- 
sibly penetrate  their  motives.  Whether,  after 
several  visits,  they  meet  with  some  threatening 
suggestion,  that  awakens  their  fears  of  persecu- 
tion, or  whether,  at  a certain  stage  in  their  inqui- 
ries, they  get  such  an  insight  into  the  gospel,  as 
rouses  the  enmity  of  the  carnal  heart,  I am  not 
able  from  my  experience  hitherto  to  ascertain. 

“ June  21  st. — The  town  is  in  the  utmost  anxiety 
and  alarm.  Order  after  order  has  reached  our 
viceroy,  to  hasten  his  return  to  Ava,  with  all 
the  troops  under  arms.  Great  news  is  whispered. 
Some  say  there  is  a rebellion ; some  say  the  king 
is  sick;  some  that  he  is  dead.  But  none  dare  to 
say  this  plainly.  It  would  be  a crime  of  the  first 
magnitude ; for  the  ‘ lord  of  land  and  water ’ is 
called  immortal.  The  eldest  son  of  his  eldest 
son  (his  father  being  dead),  has  long  been  de- 
clared the  heir  of  the  crown : but  he  has  two 
very  powerful  uncles,  who,  it  is  supposed,  will 
contest  his  right;  and,  in  all  probability,  the 
whole  country  will  soon  be  a scene  of  anarchy 
and  civil  war. 

“ June  22 d. — Out  all  the  morning  listening  for 
news,  uncertain  whether  a day  or  an  hour  will 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  175 

not  plunge  us  into  the  greatest  distress.  The 
whole  place  is  sitting  in  sullen  silence,  expecting 
an  explosion.  About  ten  o’clock,  a royal  des- 
patch boat  pulls  up  to  the  shore.  An  imperial 
mandate  is  produced.  The  crowds  make  way 
for  the  sacred  messengers,  and  follow  them  to 
the  high  court,  where  the  authorities  of  the  place 
are  assembled.  Listen  ye— The  immortal  king 
(wearied  it  would  seem  with  the  fatigues  of  roy- 
alty) has  gone  up  to  amuse  himself  in  the  celes- 
tial regions.  His  grandson,  the  heir  apparent, 
is  seated  on  the  throne.  The  young  monarch 
enjoins  on  all  to  remain  quiet,  and  wait  his  impe- 
rial orders. 

“ It  appears  that  the  prince  of  Toung  Oo,  one 
of  his  uncles,  has  been  executed,  with  his  family 
and  adherents,  and  the  prince  of  Pyee  placed  in 
confinement.  There  has  probably  been  bloody 
work ; but  it  seems,  from  what  has  transpired,  that 
the  business  has  been  settled  so  expeditiously, 
that  the  distant  provinces  will  not  feel  the  shock. 

“ June  23</.— Had  some  encouraging  conver- 
sation with  Moung  Thahlah,  a young  man,  who 
has  been  living  in  our  yard  several  months.  He 
has  lately  made  me  -many  visits  at  the  Zayat, 
and  appeared  very  thoughtful  and  teachable. 
To-day,  on  being  asked  the  state  of  his  mind,  he 
replied  with  some  feeling,  that  he  and  all  men 
were  sinners,  and  exposed  to  future  punishment ; 
that,  according  to  the  Boodhist  system,  there  was 


176 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


no  way  of  pardon  ; but  that,  according  to  the  re- 
ligion which  I taught,  there  was  not  only  a way 
of  pardon,  but  a way  of  enjoying  endless  happi- 
ness in  heaven  ; and  that,  therefore,  he  wanted 
to  believe  in  Christ.  I stated  to  him,  as  usual, 
that  he  must  think  much  on  the  love  of  Christ, 
and  pray  to  God  for  an  enlightened  mind  and 
new  heart,  and  then  gave  him  a form  of  prayer 
suited  to  his  case. 

“ In  the  evening  female-meeting,  his  sister, 
Ma  Baik,  whose  husband  also  lives  in  our  yard, 
manifested  considerable  feeling  (especially  when 
Mrs.  Judson  prayed  with  her  alone),  and  ex- 
pressed strong  desire  to  obtain  an  interest  in 
the  Saviour. 

“ June  27th,  Lord’s  day. — There  were  several 
strangers  present  at  worship.  After  the  usual 
course,  I called  Moung  Nau  before  me,  read  and 
commented  on  an  appropriate  portion  of  scrip- 
ture, asked  him  several  questions  concerning  his 
faith,  hope,  and  love,  and  made  the  baptismal 
prayer,  having  concluded  to  have  all  the  prepa- 
ratory exercises  done  in  the  Zayat.  We  then 
proceeded  to  a large  pond,  in  the  vicinity,  the 
bank  of  which  is  graced  with  an  enormous  image 
of  Gaudama,  and  there  administered  baptism  to 
the  first  Burman  convert.  O,  may  it  prove  the 
beginning  of  a series  of  baptisms  in  the  Burman 
empire,  which  shall  continue  in  uninterrupted 
succession  to  the  end  of  time ! 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  177 

“ July  3d. — News  arrived  that  the  prince  of 
Pyee  died  in  prison  of  his  broken  limbs.  The 
emissaries  of  the  new  king  are  searching  in  every 
direction  for  the  adherents  and  proteges  of  his 
deceased  uncles. 

“ July  4th,  Lord's  day. — We  have  had  the  plea- 
sure of  sitting  down,  for  the  first  time,  to  the 
Lord’s  table,  with  a converted  Burman ; and  it 
was  my  privilege, — a privilege  to  which  I have 
been  looking  forward  with  desire  for  many  years, 
— to  administer  the  Lord’s  supper  in  two  lan- 
guages. And  now  let  me,  in  haste,  close  my 
journal  for  transmission  to  the  Board.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 

A.  H.  J. 


a 


178 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


LETTER  X. 


Baltimore,  January,  1823. 

MV  DEAR  SIR, 

You  have  seen  the  power  and  grace  of  God  dis- 
played in  the  conversion  of  one  Burman,  the  first 
probably  who  ever  ventured  publicly  to  profess 
the  religion  of  Christ.  To  discover  in  an  igno- 
rant, heathen  Boodhist,  such  evident  marks  of  a 
new  disposition,  so  soon  after  the  commencement 
of  public  preaching,  far  exceeded  our  most  san- 
guine expectations,  and  excited  that  trust  and 
confidence  in  God,  which,  we  then  thought, 
would  forbid  future  discouragement.  This  con- 
vert became  an  invaluable  assistant  in  the  Zayat, 
often  helping  Mr.  Judson  to  certain  modes  of 
expression,  peculiar  to  a Burman,  and  absolutely 
necessary  to  his  understanding  the  truths  commu- 
nicated. This  child-like  spirit  and  heavenly  tem- 
per is  farther  described  in  the  following  letter  to 
Mrs.  S , dated  Rangoon,  June  3d,  1819. 

“ It  is  only  three  or  four  weeks  since  we  sent  a 
parcel  to  Bengal,  in  which  was  a letter  in  answer 
to  yours  of  January,  1818.  But  your  kindness  in 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  179 

writing  again  before  the  reception  of  that,  is  very 
grateful  to  my  feelings,  and  I take  this  early  op- 
portunity of  commencing  a letter,  which  I shall 
continue  as  events  occur,  until  a vessel  sails  for 
Bengal. 

“ In  my  last,  I mentioned  Mr.  Judson’s  com- 
mencing public  preaching  in  a building  which  we 
had  erected  for  that  purpose,  and  which  you  will 
in  future  know  by  the  name  Zayat.  Little  did  I 
think,  when  I last  wrote,  that  I should  so  soon 
have  the  joyful  intelligence  to  communicate,  that 
one  Burman  has  embraced  the  Christian  religion, 
and  given  good  evidence  of  being  a true  disciple 
of  the  dear  Redeemer.  This  event,  this  single 
trophy  of  victorious  grace,  has  filled  our  hearts 
with  sensations,  hardly  to  be  conceived  by  Chris- 
tians in  Christian  countries.  This  circumstance 
has  convinced  us,  that  God  can  and  does  operate 
on  the  minds  of  the  most  dark  and  ignorant,  and 
that  he  makes  his  own  truths,  his  own  word,  the 
instrument  of  operation.  It  serves  also,  to  encou- 
rage us  to  hope,  that  the  Lord  has  other  chosen 
ones  in  this  place.  As  Mr.  Judson  has  given 
some  account  of  the  first  impressions  of  this  man, 
and  as  I have  had  him  particularly  under  my  in- 
struction since  his  conversion,  I will  give  you 
some  of  his  remarks  in  his  own  words,  with  which 
you  will  be  much  interested.  ‘ Besides  Jesus 
Christ,  I see  no  way  of  salvation.  He  is  the  Son 
of  the  God  who  has  no  beginning,  no  end.  He 


180  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

so  loved  and  pitied  men  that  he  suffered  death  in 
their  stead.  My  mind  is  sore  on  account  of  the 
sins  I have  committed  during  the  whole  of  my 
life,  particularly  in  worshipping  a false  god.  Our 
religion,  pure  as  it  may  be,  does  not  purify  the 
minds  of  those  who  believe  it — it  cannot  restrain 
from  sin.  But  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  makes 
the  mind  pure.  His  disciples  desire  not  to  grieve 
him  by  sinning.  In  our  religion  there  is  no  way 
to  escape  the  punishment  due  to  sin ; but,  accord- 
ing to  the  religion  of  Christ,  he  himself  has  died 
in  order  to  deliver  his  disciples.  I wish  all  the 
Burmans  would  become  his  disciples ; then  we 
should  meet  together  as  you  do  in  your  country; 
then  we  should  all  be  happy  together  in  heaven. 
How  great  are  my  thanks  to  Jesus  Christ  for 
sending  teachers  to  this  country,  and  how  great 
are  my  thanks  to  the  teachers  for  coming ! Had 
they  never  come  and  built  that  Zayat,  I should 
never  have  heard  of  Christ  and  the  true  God.  I 
mourn  that  so  much  of  my  life  passed  away  be- 
fore I heard  of  this  religion.  How  much  I have 
lost!’  It  is  peculiarly  interesting  to  see  with 
what  eagerness  he  drinks  in  the  truths  from  the 
Scriptures.  A few  days  ago  I was  reading  with 
him  Christ's  sermon  on  the  mount.  He  was 
deeply  impressed,  and  unusually  solemn.  ‘ These 
words,  said  he,  take  hold  on  my  very  heart ; they 
make  me  tremble.  Here  God  commands  us  to 
do  every  thing  that  is  good  in  secret,  not  to  be 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  181 

seen  of  men.  How  unlike  our  religion  is  this ! 
When  Burmans  make  offerings  to  the  pagodas, 
they  make  a great  noise  with  drums  and  musical 
instruments,  that  others  may  see  how  good  they 
are.  But  this  religion  makes  the  mind  fear  God, 
it  makes  it  of  its  own  accord  fear  sin.’  When  I 
read  this  passage.  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves 
treasures,  & c.  he  said,  ‘ What  words  are  these ! 
It  does  not  mean  that  we  shall  take  the  silver  and 
gold  from  this  world  and  carry  them  to  heaven ; 
but  that,  by  becoming  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  we 
shall  live  in  such  a manner  as  to  enjoy  heaven 
when  we  die.’  We  have  taken  him  into  our 
employ  for  the  present,  as  a copyist,  though  our 
primary  object  was  to  have  him  near  us,  that  we 
might  have  a better  opportunity  to  know  more  of 
him  before  he  received  baptism,  and  of  imparting 
to  him  more  instruction  than  occasional  visits 
could  afford.  Mornings  and  evening's  he  spends 
in  reading  the  Scriptures,  and  when  we  all  meet 
in  the  hall  for  family  worship,  he  comes  and  sits 
with  us ; though  he  cannot  understand,  he  says 
he  can  think  of  God  in  his  heart. 

“ Wednesday , 4th.— I have  just  had  a very  in- 
teresting meeting  with  the  women,  fifteen  in  num- 
ber. They  appeared  unusually  solemn,  and  I 
could  not  help  hoping  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  ho- 
vering over  us,  and  would  ere  long  descend,  and 
enlighten  their  precious  immortal  souls.  Their 
minds  seem  to  be  already  prepared  to  embrace 


182  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

the  truth,  as  their  prejudices  in  favour  of  the 
Burman  religion  are  apparently  destroyed.  They 
also  appear  to  be  convinced  that  the  atonement 
for  sin  provided  in  the  gospel,  is  suitable  for  per- 
sons in  their  situation.  But  they  frequently  say, 
the  great  difficulty  in  the  way  of  their  becoming 
Christians,  is  the  sinfulness  of  their  hearts,  which 
they  cannot  yet  overcome.  O,  for  the  influences 
of  that  Spirit,  which  can  alone  effect  the  mighty 

change ! Pray  much,  my  dear  Mrs.  S , pray 

particularly  for  these  perishing  females,  who  be- 
gin to  feel  the  power  of  sin,  and  I trust  also  to 
fear  the  consequences.  After  meeting  this  even- 
ing, Moung  Nau,  the  Burman  convert,  came  in, 
and  observed  that  the  truths  were  solemn  which 
had  been  communicated,  and  his  mind  was  un- 
easy. I asked  the  reason.  He  said,  ‘ he  found 
he  had  many  sins  remaining  in  his  heart,  and  he 
knew  not  whether  Christ  would  save  him.’  I 
told  him  Christ  came  to  save  such  lost  helpless 
sinners  as  he  thought  himself ; and  if  he  put  his 
trust  in  Him  he  would  surely  save  him,  though 
his  sins  were  ever  so  numerous.  It  rejoices  our 
hearts  to  see  such  evident  marks  of  the  operations 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  this  man,  and  we  feel,  in 
hearing  his  simple  communications  of  the  exer- 
cises of  his  mind,  that  we  are  more  than  compen- 
sated for  all  the  days  of  darkness  and  discou- 
ragement which  we  have  spent  in  this  heathen 
land. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


183 


“ JuneWth. — I must  now,  my  dear  Mrs.  S , 

finish  my  letter,  as  we  hear  a vessel  is  to  sail  for 
Bengal  in  a few  days,  and  I have  twenty  un- 
answered letters  now  before  me.  The  town  at 
present  is  all  in  confusion,  on  account  of  the 
enormous  taxes  which  have  been  lately  levied, 
and  the  speedy  departure  of  the  present  viceroy 
for  Ava.  He  has  been  here  only  a year  and  a 
half,  and  though  he  has  not  been  recalled  by  the 
king,  he  is  about  to  depart  on  a visit,  as  he  says, 
to  his  family,  who  are  still  at  Ava,  but  it  is  pro- 
bable that  he  will  not  immediately  return.  The 
expenses  of  his  journey  are  defrayed  entirely  by 
the  poor  people,  who  are  at  such  times  exceed- 
ingly oppressed.  In  addition  to  this,  there  has 
been  an  extra  tax  levied  for  the  king,  from  the 
payment  of  which,  not  a single  family  has  been 
exempted,  not  even  slaves  and  foreigners,  who 
have  escaped  on  every  other  occasion.  We  too 
have  had  our  trials  and  perplexities,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  levy  of  this  tax.  The  first  demand 
was  moderate,  not  exceeding  thirty  dollars.  This 
we  did  not  intend  to  pay,  if  we  could  possibly 
avoid  it.  We  accordingly  applied  to  the  viceroy ; 
but  he  said  it  was  a tax  from  which  he  himself 
was  not  exempt — we  must  therefore  pay  it.  We 
had  no  other  appeal.” 

Mr.  Judson’s  Journal  continues  thus  : — 

“ Rangoon,  July  Qth,  1819. — First  day  of  Bur- 
man  Lent.  All  the  members  of  government  went 


184  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

to  the  great  pagoda,  and  took  the  oath  of  alle- 
giance to  the  new  king. 

“ At  night  a large  company  came  in — all  dis- 
posed to  condemn,  and  ridicule,  and  persecute — i 
influenced  by  one  very  virulent  opposer,  who  has 
been  here  before.  When  the  storm  was  gather- 
ing, Moung  Nau  withdrew.  A most  trying  time, 
chiefly  rendered  so,  by  its  being  an  indication  of 
the  spirit  which  generally  prevails  among  this 
people,  though  commonly  restrained  by  polite- 
ness, and  which,  we  fear,  may  issue  in  something 
worse,  and  more  to  be  dreaded,  than  our  own 
personal  inconvenience  and  persecution. 

• ‘ Heard,  at  the  same  time,  that  several  of  the 
people,  who  live  about  us,  and  commonly  attend 
worship,  had  privately  gone  to  the  pagoda,  and 
made  an  offering.  All  these  circumstances  con- 
spire to  make  us  feel  desolate,  and  put  our  trust 
in  God  alone. 

“ July  10 th. — Some  pleasant  conversation  with 
Moung  Thalilah.  Seldom  a day  passes,  in  which 
he  does  not  spend  an  hour  or  two  with  me  or 
Moung  Nau.  This  man  is  rather  superior  to  the 
common  Burmans,  in  point  of  abilities,  and 
though  not  very  learned,  he  has  read  much  more 
than  the  generality.  He  is  much  superior  to  any 
one  resident  on  our  premises  ; and,  if  converted, 
would  be  a valuable  acquisition  to  the  mission. 

“ July  12 th. — Company  all  day.  Moung  E, 
whose  name  I have  not  yet  mentioned,  though  he 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  185 

has  made  several  visits,  broke  through  his  usual 
reserve,  and  acknowledged  his  love  for  this  reli- 
gion, and  thought  he  should  become  a disciple, 
and  not  return  to  Savoy,  whence  he  lately  came 
on  some  government  business. 

“ Moung  Thahlah  appears  to  be  really  earnest 
in  his  desires  to  become  a disciple  of  Christ.  His 
sister,  Ma  Baik,  who  was  lately  drawn  into  a 
high  quarrel  with  a neighbour,  expresses  much 
sorrow,  and  says  that  the  circumstance  has  con- 
vinced her,  more  than  ever,  of  the  evil  of  her 
heart,  and  the  necessity  of  getting  a new  nature, 
before  she  can  be  a disciple. 

“ Much  encouraged  by  the  events  of  the  day. 
The  Lord  can  bless  the  feeblest  means,  the  most 
unworthy  instruments.  Praised  be  his  name. 

“ July  13 th. — The  sixth  anniversary  of  the  com' 
mencement  of  the  mission. 

“ July  18 th.  Lord's  day. — Discoursed  on  Matt, 
vii.  13.  concerning  the  broad  way  to  destruction, 
and  the  narrow  way  to  life  ; the  hearers  consider- 
ably attentive.  To-day  our  viceroy  has  returned 
to  Rangoon,  being  forbidden  to  proceed  to  Ava, 
before  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  new 
king. 

“ July  19 th. — Had  some  particular  conversa- 
tion with  Moung  Thahlah  on  his  spiritual  state. 
He  says,  that  the  more  he  reads  and  hears  of  the 
Christian  religion,  the  more  inclined  he  becomes 
to  believe  and  embrace  it ; but  fears  that  his 


186  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

weakness  and  sinfulness  incapacitate  him  for 
keeping  its  holy  precepts,  as  it  becomes  a pro- 
fessing disciple. 

July  29 th. — Finished  revising  the  tract  for  a 
new  edition.  Have  considerably  enlarged  it,  par- 
ticularly by  adding  several  prayers ; so  that  it 
now  stands,  ‘ A View  of  the  Christian  Religion, 
in  four  parts.  Historical,  Practical,  Preceptive, 
and  Devotional.’  We  intend  sending  the  manu- 
script to  Serampore,  with  a request  to  brother 
Hough,  that  he  will  get  it  printed,  in  a large  edi- 
tion of  five  thousand  copies.  The  first  edition  of 
one  thousand  is  nearly  exhausted.  Such  indeed 
is  the  demand  for  it,  since  the  opening  of  the 
Zayat,  that  we  should  have  given  away  all  the 
copies  long  ago,  had  we  not  been  doubtful  about 
a fresh  supply. 

“ July  “doth—  Had  several  attentive  visitors; 
one  of  them  staid  two  hours,  and  appeared  very 
unwilling  to  leave.  His  mild  manners  and  ap- 
parent openness  of  heart,  tended  to  heighten  my 
desires  and  stimulate  my  prayers,  for  the  salva- 
tion of  his  precious  soul. 

“ August  1st,  Lord's  day. — Several  respectable 
and  wealthy  people  present  at  worship.  One  of 
them  visited  me  several  months  ago,  and  received 
a tract.  Since  then,  he  has  thought  much,  and 
conversed  with  some  of  his  friends  about  the  new 
religion.  Yesterday,  he  sent  word  he  was  coming 
to  worship,  with  several  others.  He  was  rather 


TO  THE  BURMANT  EMPIRE. 


187 


reserved  to-day,  and  said  but  little ; yet  sufficient 
to  show  that  he  has  imbibed  some  new  notions, 
which,  whether  they  issue  in  conversion  or  not, 
will,  I trust,  prevent  his  ever  settling  down  in  his 
old  system.  His  name  is  Oo  Yah. 

“ August  2d. — The  family  of  the  old  gentleman 
of  yesterday,  came  to  see  Mrs.  Judson,  saying, 
that  their  father  had  sent  them  to  listen  to  the 
instructions  of  the  female  teacher.  They  appear 
to  be  one  of  the  most  civilized  families  we  have 
met  with ; behaved  with  much  politeness  and  re- 
spect, and  begged  leave  to  come  again. 

August  3d. — Several  neighbours  of  Oo  Yah 
spent  some  time  at  the  Zayat,  and  listened  atten- 
tively. 

“ August  ltl\. — Brother  Wheelock  embarked 
for  Bengal ; but  in  so  low  a state,  that  we  fear 
the  voyage,  instead  of  being  beneficial,  will  tend 
to  shorten  his  life. 

“ August  8th,  Lord's  day. — Several  strangers 
present  at  worship — a larger  assembly  than  usual. 

“ August  19 th. — Had  more  company  than  for  a 
fortnight  past.  Very  little  intermission  through 
the  day.  Just  at  night,  three  strangers  came  in, 
and  listened  wish  remarkable  attention.  They 
appeared  to  be  particularly  impressed  with  the 
value  of  a happy  immortality,  as  far  superior  to 
any  thing  which  the  Burman  system  can  offer, 
and  also  with  the  love  of  Christ,  as  far  surpassing 
all  other  love. 


188  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ August  20th. — Several  Mahometans  came  in, 
having  heard,  as  they  said,  that  I denounced  all 
religions  but  the  Christian.  We  had  a long  de- 
bate on  the  Divine  Sonship  of  Jesus  Christ.  At 
first  it  was  very  offensive  to  them  ; but  when  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity  was  explained  to  them, 
they  had  no  other  objection  to  make,  but  that  the 
Koran  denied  that  God  had  a Son.  They  ap- 
peared to  be  somewhat  desirous  of  knowing  what 
is  truth  ; said  they  should  come  again,  and  must 
either  convert  me  to  Mahometanism,  or  them- 
selves become  converted  to  Christianity.  I dis- 
covered afterwards,  that  one  of  them  was  a priest ; 
but  he  kept  in  the  back  ground,  and  said  nothing. 

“ August  21s£. — Have  not  lately  mentioned 
Moung  Thahlah,  though  he  has  continued  to  visit 
me  regularly.  To-day  I had  a conversation  with 
him,  which  almost  settled  my  mind  that  he  is 
really  a renewed  man.  He,  however,  thinks  he 
is  not,  because  he  finds  his  heart  so  depraved, 
that  he  cannot  perfectly  keep  the  pure  commands 
of  Christ. 

“ August  22 d,  Lord's  day. — Two  of  the  adherents 
of  the  Mangen  teacher,  the  popular  preacher 
whom  I mentioned  some  time  ago,  were  present 
at  worship.  I had  much  conversation  with  them ; 
in  the  course  of  which,  I so  clearly  refuted  their 
system,  in  two  or  three  instances,  that  they  could 
not  refrain  from  an  involuntary  expression  of 
assent  and  approbation.  They  directly  said,  how- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  189 

ever,  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  think  of 
embracing'  a new  religion.  I never  saw  more 
more  clearly  the  truth  of  our  Saviour's  words, 

‘ Ye  will  not  come  unto  me.’ 

“ After  worship,  had  another  conversation  with 
Moung  Thahlah.  He  hopes  that  he  is  a disciple 
of  Jesus  Christ  in  heart ; but  wants  to  know 
whether  a profession  of  religion  is  indispensable 
to  salvation.  He  fears  the  persecution  that  may 
hereafter  come  on  those  who  forsake  the  esta- 
blished religion  of  the  empire.  I gave  him  such 
explanation  as  I thought  suitable,  and  left  him, 
with  the  solemn  consideration,  that  unless  he 
loved  Christ  above  his  own  life,  he  did  not  love 
him  sincerely,  and  ought  not  to  hope  that  he  is 
interested  in  his  redemption. 

“ His  sister,  Ma  Baik,  is  in  a very  similar  state. 
She  has  been  particularly  attentive  and  solemn  in 
her  appearance  for  some  time  past. 

“ In  such  cases,  it  is  a great  consolation  to  re- 
flect, that  the  tender,  compassionate  Saviour,  will 
not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smok- 
ing taper.  He  will  strengthen  and  restore  the 
one,  and  the  other  he  will  light  up  with  his  own 
celestial  fire. 

“ August  24th. — Another  conversation  with 
Moung  Thahlah,  which  at  length  forces  me  to 
admit  the  conviction  that  he  is  a real  convert; 
and  I venture  to  set  him  down  the  second  dis- 
ciple of  Christ  among  the  Burmans.  He  appears 


190  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

to  have  all  the  characteristics  of  a new-born  soul, 
and  though  rather  timid  in  regard  to  an  open  pro- 
fession, has,  I feel  satisfied,  that  love  to  Christ, 
which  will  increase  and  bring  him  forward  in  due 
time. 

“ August  26th. — Was  visited  by  Moung  Shway- 
gnong,  a teacher  of  considerable  distinction.  He 
appears  to  be  half  deist  and  half  sceptic,  the  first 
of  the  sort  I have  met  with  among  the  Burmans. 
He,  however,  worships  at  the  pagodas,  and  con- 
forms to  all  the  prevailing  customs.  We  had  a 
very  interesting  debate,  in  which  we  cleared  up 
some  preliminaries,  preparatory,  I hope,  to  future 
discussions. 

“ Just  at  night,  the  viceroy,  returning  from  an 
excursion  of  pleasure,  passed  by  our  road,  for  the 
first  time,  since  the  Zayat  was  built.  He  was 
seated  on  a huge  elephant,  attended  by  his  guards 
and  numerous  suite,  and,  as  he  passed,  eyed  us 
very  narrowly.  Several  Burmans  were  sitting 
round  me  and  Mrs.  Judson. 

“ After  he  had  passed  some  time,  two  of  his 
private  secretaries  came  in,  with  a viceregal  or- 
der, signifying  his  highness’s  desire  to  see  the 
manner  in  which  printing  is  executed.  1 replied, 
that  the  teacher  who  understood  printing  had 
gone  to  Bengal,  taking  the  types  with  him,  and 
that  it  was  impossible  to  comply  with  the  order. 
They  departed  with  evident  dissatisfaction. 

“ August  27th. — In  order  to  obviate  the  bad 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  191 

effects  of  the  report  of  the  officers  of  yesterday,  I 
went  to  the  government-house,  intending  to  have 
a personal  interview  with  the  viceroy.  After 
waiting  two  hours  in  the  levee  hall,  he  made  his 
appearance,  and,  on  recognizing  me,  immediately 
inquired  about  the  press  and  types.  I told  him 
my  story,  and  when  he  understood  that  I was 
ignorant  of  the  art  of  printing,  he  appeared  satis- 
fied to  let  the  matter  rest.  In  the  course  of  the 
few  words  which  passed  between  us,  he  said,  that 
he  wished  to  get  several  Burman  books  printed. 
He  seemed  to  be  more  kindly  disposed  towards 
me  than  formerly  ; but  it  seems  impossible  to  in- 
troduce the  subject  of  religion  in  his  presence, 
surrounded,  as  he  always  is,  with  a crowd  of 
courtiers  and  secretaries,  petitioners  and  law- 
yers. 

“ Had  but  just  returned  home,  when  the  teacher, 
Moung  Shway-gnong,  came  again,  and  staid  from 
noon  till  quite  dark.  We  conversed  incessantly 
the  whole  time ; but  I fear  that  no  real  impres- 
sion is  made  on  his  proud  sceptical  heart.  . He, 
however,  promised  to  pray  to  the  eternal  God, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  and  appeared,  at  times,  to 
be  in  deep  thought.  He  is  a man  of  very  superior 
argumentative  powers.  His  conversation  would 
probably  shake  the  faith  of  many. 

“ August  28th. — A great  deal  of  company  all 
day  long.  Quite  worn  out  with  incessant  toil. 

“ At  night,  the  viceroy  again  passed,  as  the 


192  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

day  before  yesterday ; and  the  same  secretaries 
came  in,  saying,  that  it  was  the  viceroy’s  desire, 
that  I should  translate,  and  get  printed,  if  pos- 
sible, some  historical  writings  of  my  country.  I 
told  them  I would  take  the  first  opportunity  of 
calling  on  his  highness. 

“ August  31^. — A man,  by  name  Moung  Ing, 
has  visited  the  Zayat  five  or  six  days  in  succes- 
sion. At  first,  a variety  of  other  company  pre- 
vented my  attending  much  to  him,  and  he  con- 
versed chiefly  with  Moung  Nau,  and  employed 
himself  in  reading  St.  Matthew.  He  once  told 
Moung  Nau,  that  he  had  long  been  looking  after 
the  true  religion,  and  was  ready  to  wish  that  he 
had  been  born  a brute,  rather  than  to  die  in  delu- 
sion, and  go  to  hell.  Sunday,  I conversed  with 
him  largely,  and  his  attention,  during  worship, 
was  very  close  and  solemn.  To-day,  he  has 
made  me  half  inclined  to  believe  that  a work  of 
grace  is  begun  in  his  soul.  He  says,  that  he  for- 
merly had  some  idea  of  an  eternal  God,  from  his 
mother,  who  was  christened  a Roman  Catholic, 
in  consequence  of  her  connexion  with  a foreigner ; 
but  that  the  idea  was  never  rooted  in  his  mind, 
until  he  fell  in  with  the  Zayat.  Within  a few 
days,  he  has  begun  to  pray  to  this  God.  He  is 
quite  sensible  of  his  sins,  and  of  the  utter  ineffi- 
ciency of  the  Boodhist  religion  ; but  is  yet  in  the 
dark  concerning  the  way  of  salvation,  and  says, 
that  he  wants  to  know  more  of  Christ,  that  he 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  193 

may  love  him  more.  Lord  Jesus,  give  him  the 
saving  knowledge  of  thine  adorable  self. 

“ September  latf. — Moung  Thahlah  continues  to 
express  similar  sentiments  to  those  already  noted  ; 
is  still  afraid  of  persecution  and  death ; but  pro- 
fesses to  be  labouring  to  obtain  that  love  to 
Christ,  and  faith  in  him,  which  will  raise  him  above 
the  fear  of  man  ; and  particularly  requests  us  to 
pray  that  he  may  obtain  these  graces. 

“ September  3d. — A great  crowd  of  company 
through  the  whole  day  ; the  teacher,  Moung 
Shway-gnong,  from  ten  o’clock  till  quite  dark, 
with  several  of  his  adherents.  He  is  a complete 
Proteus  in  religion,  and  I never  know  where  to 
find  him.  We  went  over  a vast  deal  of  ground, 
and  ended  where  we  began,  in  apparent  incredu 
lity.  After  his  adherents,  however,  were  all  gone, 
he  conversed  with  some  feeling  ; owned  that  he 
knew  nothing,  and  wished  me  to  instruct  him ; 
and  when  he  departed,  he  prostrated  himself  and 
performed  the  sheeko*  an  act  of  homage  which  a 
Burman  never  performs  but  to  an  acknowledged 
superior. 

“ After  he  was  gone,  Moung  Ing,  who  had  been 
listening  all  the  day,  followed  me  home  to  the 
house,  being  invited  to  stay  with  Moung  Nau, 
through  the  night.  We  conversed  all  the  evening, 


* This  act  gave  rise  to  the  first  gleam  of  hope,  that  Divine  truth 
had  begun  to  operate  on  his  mind. 


o 


194  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

and  his  expressions  have  satisfied  us  all,  that  he 
is  one  of  God’s  chosen  people.  His  exercises 
have  been  of  a much  stronger  character  than 
those  of  the  others,  and  he  expresses  himself  in 
the  most  decided  manner.  He  desires  to  become 
a disciple  in  profession,  as  well  as  in  heart,  and 
declares  his  readiness  to  suffer  persecution  and 
death  for  the  love  of  Christ.  When  I stated  the 
danger  to  which  he  was  exposing  himself,  and 
asked  him  whether  he  l®ved  Christ  better  than 
his  own  life,  he  replied,  very  deliberately  and 
solemnly,  ‘ When  I meditate  on  this  religion,  I 
know  not  what  it  is  to  love  my  own  life.’  Thus 
the  poor  fisherman,  Moung  Ing,  is  taken,  while 
the  learned  teacher,  Moung  Shway-gnong,  is 
left. 

“ September  5th,  Lord's  day. — A very  dull  day 
— not  one  stranger  present  at  worship.  In  the 
evening,  Moung  Thahlah  was  a spectator  of  our 
partaking  of  the  Lord's  supper.  Moung  Ing 
could  not  be  present.  He  lives  at  some  distance, 
and  is  getting  ready  to  go  to  sea,  in  pursuance  of 
his  purpose  before  he  became  acquainted  with  us. 
We  have  endeavoured  to  dissuade  him  from  going, 
and  to  keep  him  near  us  ; but  we  are  afraid  that 
his  circumstances  will  not  allow  him  to  comply 
with  our  advice  and  his  own  inclinations. 

“ September  6th. — Spent  the  evening  in  con- 
versing with  Moung  Byaay,  a man  who,  with  his 
family,  has  lived  near  us  for  some  time,  a regular 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  195 

attendant  on  worship,  an  indefatigable  scholar  in 
the  evening  school,  where  he  has  learned  to  read, 
though  fifty  years  old,  and  a remarkably  moral 
character.  In  my  last  conversation,  some  time 
ago,  he  appeared  to  be  a thorough  legalist,  rely- 
ing solely  on  his  good  works ; but  yet  sincerely 
desirous  of  knowing  and  embracing  the  truth. 
The  greater  part  of  the  evening  was  spent  in  dis- 
cussing his  erroneous  views ; his  mind  seemed  so 
dark  and  dull  of  apprehension,  that  I was  almost 
discouraged.  Towards  the  close,  however,  he 
seemed  to  obtain  some  evangelical  discoveries, 
and  to  receive  the  humbling  truths  of  the  gospel, 
in  a manner  which  encourages  us  to  hope  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  begun  to  teach  him.  The  oc- 
casion of  this  conversation  was  my  hearing  that 
he  said  he  intended  to  become  a Christian,  and  to 
be  baptized  with  Moung  Thahlah.  He  accord- 
ingly professes  a full  belief  in  the  eternal  God, 
and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ. 

“ September  1( )th. — A visit  from  Moung  Ing. 
It  appears  that  he  has  been  confined  at  work,  on 
board  the  vessel  in  which  he  is  engaged,  and  has 
not  been  ashore  for  several  days.  As  the  vessel 
is  certainly  going  to-morrow,  he  got  leave  of  ab- 
sence for  a short  time,  and  improved  it  in  running 
out  to  the  Zayat.  I was  exceedingly  glad,  as  it 
afforded  me  an  opportunity  of  giving  him  some 
parting  instructions,  and  praying  with  him  alone. 
He  appears  very  well  indeed.  He  is  quite  dis- 

o 2 


196  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

tressed,  that  he  has  so  far  engaged  himself ; and 
appears  desirous  of  getting  off,  and  returning  to 
us,  if  possible  ; but  I have  very  little  hope  of  his 
succeeding.  I believe,  however,  that  he  is  a real 
Christian,  and  that,  whenever  he  dies,  his  immor- 
tal soul  will  be  safe,  and  that  he  will  praise  God 
for  ever  for  his  transient  acquaintance  with  us. 
The  Lord  go  with  him  and  keep  him. 

“ September  1 \th. — Moung  Shway-gnong  has 
been  with  me  all  day.  It  appears  that  he  acci- 
dentally obtained  the  idea  of  an  eternal  Being, 
about  eight  years  ago  ; and  it  has  been  floating 
about  in  his  mind,  and  disturbing  his  Boodhist 
ideas,  ever  since.  When  he  heard  of  us,  which 
was  through  one  of  his  adherents,  to  whom  I had 
given  a tract,  this  idea  received  considerable  con- 
firmation; and  to-day  he  has  fully  admitted  the 
truth  of  this  first  grand  principle.  The  latter 
part  of  the  day,  we  were  chiefly  employed  in  dis- 
cussing the  possibility  and  necessity  of  a Divine 
revelation,  and  the  evidence  which  proves  that 
the  writings  of  the  apostles  of  Jesus  contain  that 
revelation ; and  I think  I may  say,  that  he  is  half 
inclined  to  admit  all  this.  His  is  certainly  a 
most  interesting  case.  The  way  seems  to  be  pre- 
pared in  his  mind,  fox  the  special  operation  of 
Divine  grace. 

“ His  conversion  seems  peculiarly  desirable, 
on  account  of  his  superior  talents  and  extensive 
acquaintance  with  Burman  and  Pali  literature. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  197 

He  is  the  most  powerful  reasoner  I have  yet  met 
with  in  this  country,  excepting  my  old  teacher, 

00  Oungmen,  (now  dead,)  and  he  is  not  at  all 
inferior  to  him. 

“ September  1 5th. — Moung  Thahlah  spent  the 
evening  with  me,  in  asking  several  questions  on 
difficult  passages  in  St.  Matthew.  At  the  close, 

1 asked  him  whether  he  yet  loved  Christ  more 
than  his  own  life  ; he  understood  my  meaning, 
and  replied,  that  he  purposed  to  profess  the 
Christian  religion,  and  began  to  think  seriously  of 
being  baptized.  His  sister,  Ma  Baik,  appears  to 
have  lost  her  religious  impressions. 

“ September  1 6th. — After  having  lately  made 
two  unsuccessful  attempts  to  get  an  interview 
with  the  viceroy,  I this  day  succeeded.  He  in- 
quired about  the  historical  writings.  I told  him 
I was  not  so  well  acquainted  with  that  style  of 
writing  in  Burman,  as  with  the  religious  style, 
and  then  presented  him  with  a tract,  as  a speci- 
men of  what  I could  do.  He  delivered  it  to  a 
secretary ; and  on  hearing  the  first  sentence,  re- 
marked, that  it  was  the  same  with  a writing  he 
had  already  beard,  and  that  he  did  not  want  that 
kind  of  writing.  I suppose  that  one  of  the  secre- 
taries, to  whom  I had  formerly  given  a tract,  pre- 
sented it  without  my  knowledge. 

“ September  18th. — Moung  Shway-gnong  has 
been  with  me  a few  hours ; had  spent  the  greater 
part  of  the  day  with  Oo  Yah,  the  merchant  whom 


198  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

I mentioned  some  time  ago,  conversing  on  reli- 
gion. Our  interview  chiefly  passed  in  discussing 
his  metaphysical  cavils. 

“ September  19 th,  Lord's  day. — The  teacher  and 
Oo  Yah  came  to  worship  according  to  their  agree- 
ment of  yesterday,  accompanied  with  part  of  the 
family  of  the  latter,  and  several  respectable  men 
of  their  acquaintance ; so  that  the  assembly  con- 
sisted of  about  fifty.  Some  paid  profound  atten- 
tion, and  some  none  at  all.  After  the  exercises, 
Oo  Yah  seemed  afraid  to  have  it  appear  that  he 
had  any  acquaintance  with  me,  and  kept  at  a 
distance.  They  finally  all  dropt  away  but  the 
teacher,  who  stayed,  as  usual,  till  quite  dark.  He 
is,  in  many  respects,  a perfect  enigma;  but  just 
before  he  left,  a slight  hope  began  to  spring  up  in 
our  minds,  that  his  proud  heart  was  yielding  to 
the  cross.  He  confessed,  that  he  was  constrained 
to  give  up  all  dependance  on  his  own  merits,  and 
his  literary  attainments ; that  he  had  sinned 
against  God  all  his  life  long,  and  that,  therefore, 
he  deserved  to  suffer  hell.  And  then  he  asked, 
with  some  feeling,  how  he  could  obtain  an  in- 
terest in  the  merits  and  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ. 
He  appears  to  have  a considerable  share  of 
that  serious  solemnity,  which  I have  observed 
to  characterize  the  few  who  persevere  in  their 
religious  inquiries,  and  which  has  been  wanting 
in  every  instance  of  mere  temporary  promise. 
O,  that  he  may  be  brought  in,  if  it  is  not  too 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  199 

great  a favour  for  this  infant  mission  to  re- 
ceive ! 

“ September  2 Oth. — One  of  the  three  visitors  of 
the  19th  of  August,  came  again  ; and,  though  a 
long  interval  has  elapsed,  his  appearance  is  quite 
encouraging.  He  says,  feelingly,  that  he  knows 
nothing,  is  distressed  at  the  thought  of  dying,  in 
his  present  ignorance  and  uncertainty,  and  wants 
to  find  some  kind  of  salvation. 

“ September  2 6th,  Lord's  day. — Moung  Shway- 
gnong  came  with  several  adherents.  Some  warm 
conversation  before  worship,  but  nothing  per- 
sonal. During  worship,  discoursed  from  ‘ Fear 
not  them  that  kill  the  body,’  &c.  My  discourse 
was  chiefly  intended  for  Moung  Thahlah  and 
Moung  Byaay,  but  the  latter  was  absent,  on  ac- 
count of  sickness.  After  worship,  the  teacher 
immediately  departed  with  his  people,  without 
even  saying  a word.  Fear  he  has  taken  some 
offence. 

“ October  Qth. — Conversation  with  Moung* 
Thahlah  and  Moung  Byaay,  which  revives  my 
hopes  of  their  coming  forward  before  long.  They 
are  both  growing  in  religious  knowledge,  and 
give  evidence  of  being  in  the  exercise  of  gracious 
feelings. 

October  1th. — Was  rejoiced  in  the  morning,  to 
see  the  teacher,  Moung  Shway-gnong,  come  again 
so  soon.  We  spent  the  whole  day  together,  unin- 
terrupted by  other  company.  In  the  forenoon. 


200  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

he  was  as  crabbed  as  possible — sometimes  a Berk- 
leian — sometimes  a Humite,  or  complete  sceptic. 
But  in  the  afternoon  he  got  to  be  more  reason- 
able, and  before  he  left,  he  obtained  a more  com- 
plete idea  of  the  atonement,  than  I have  com- 
monly been  able  to  communicate  to  a Burman. 
He  exclaimed,  ‘ That  is  suitable — that  is  as  it 
should  be,’  & c.  But  whether  this  conviction  re- 
sulted from  a mere  philosophic  view  of  the  pro- 
priety and  adaptedness  of  the  way  of  salvation, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  or  from  the  gracious  opera- 
tions of  the  Holy  Spirit,  time  must  discover.  I 
hardly  venture  to  hope  the  latter.  O Lord,  the 
work  is  thine. 

“ October  23 d. — Have  for  some  days  been  won- 
dering at  the  long  absence  of  the  teacher.  To- 
day heard  a report  that  he  has  been  summoned 
by  the  viceroy  to  give  an  account  of  his  heretical 
sentiments. 

“ At  night,  Moung  Thahlah  and  Moung  Byaay 
presented  a paper,  professing  their  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,  and  requesting  to  be  baptized — but  in 
private.  We  spent  some  time  with  them.  They 
appear  to  have  experienced  Divine  grace ; but  we 
advised  them,  as  they  had  so  little  love  to  Christ 
as  not  to  dare  to  die  for  his  cause,  to  wait  and 
reconsider  the  matter. 

“ October  29 th. — The  teacher  came  again,  after 
an  interval  of  three  weeks  ; but  he  appears  to  be 
quite  another  man.  He  has  not  been  personally 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  201 

summoned,  as  we  heard;  but  through  the  insti- 
gation of  the  Mangen  teacher,  he  was  mentioned 
before  the  viceroy,  as  having  renounced  the  re- 
ligion of  the  country.  The  viceroy  gave  no  deci- 
sive order ; but  merely  said,  ‘ Inquire  further 
about  him.’  This  reached  the  ears  of  Moung 
Shway-gnong,  and  he  directly  went  to  the  Man- 
gen teacher,  and,  I suppose,  apologized,  and  ex- 
plained, and  flattered.  He  denies  that  he  really 
recanted,  and  I hope  he  did  not.  But  he  is  evi- 
dently falling  off  from  the  investigation  of  the 
Christian  religion.  He  made  but  a short  visit, 
and  took  leave,  as  soon  as  he  could  decently. 

“ November  1^.— One  of  the  greatest  festivals 
in  the  year.  The  crowds  are  truly  immense  and 
overwhelming.  We  vacated  the  Zayat,  as  we 
have  several  days  of  late,  beginning  to  question 
whether  it  is  prudent  to  go  on  boldly,  in  pro- 
claiming a new  religion,  at  the  hazard  of  incens- 
ing the  government,  and  drawing  down  such  per- 
secution, as  may  deter  all  who  know  us  from  any 
inquiry. 

“ November  2 d. — This  is  the  birth-day  and  the 
coronation-day  of  the  new  king.  All  the  gran- 
dees of  the  empire  have  for  some  time  past  been 
assembling  at  Ava,  to  be  present  at  the  august 
celebration. 

“ November  6th. — The  two  candidates  for  bap- 
tism again  presented  their  urgent  petition,  that 
they  might  be  baptized,  not  absolutely  in  private, 


202  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

but  about  sunset,  away  from  public  observation. 
We  spent  some  hours  in  again  discussing  the  sub- 
ject with  them  and  with  one  another.  We  felt 
satisfied,  that  they  were  humble  disciples  of 
Jesus,  and  were  desirous  of  receiving  this  ordi- 
nance purely  out  of  regard  to  his  command,  and 
their  own  spiritual  welfare ; we  felt,  that  we  were 
all  equally  exposed  to  danger,  and  needed  a spirit 
of  mutual  candour  and  forbearance  and  sympa- 
thy ; we  were  convinced,  that  they  were  influ- 
enced rather  by  desires  of  avoiding  unnecessary 
exposure,  than  by  that  sinful  fear,  which  would 
plunge  them  into  apostacy,  in  the  hour  of  trial ; 
and  when  they  assured  us,  that  if  actually  brought 
before  government,  they  could  not  think  of  deny- 
ing their  Saviour,  we  could  not  conscientiously 
refuse  their  request,  and  therefore  agreed  to  have 
them  baptized  to-morrow  at  sunset.  The  follow- 
ing is  a literal  translation  of  the  paper  presented 
this  evening: — 

**  ‘ Moung  Byaay  and  Moung  Thahlah  venture 
to  address  the  two  teachers : — Though  the  coun- 
try of  Burmah  is  very  far  distant  from  the  country 
of  America,  yet  the  teachers  coming  by  ship,  the 
long  way  of  six  months,  have  arrived  at  this  far 
distant  country  of  Burmah,  and  town  of  Rangoon, 
and  proclaimed  the  propitious  news,  by  means 
of  which  we,  having  become  acquainted  with  the 
religion,  know  that  there  is  an  eternal  God  in 
heaven,  and  that  there  is  a Divine  Son,  the  Lord 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


203 


Jesus  Christ,  deserving  of  the  highest  love ; and 
we  know,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Divine 
Son,  endured  on  account  of  all  his  disciples,  suf- 
ferings and  death,  even  severe  sufferings  on  a 
cross,  in  their  stead.  On  account  of  our  sins,  we 
were  like  persons  laden  with  a very  heavy  burden. 
On  account  of  our  many  sins,  we  found  no  de- 
liverance, no  place  of  refuge,  and  our  minds  were 
distressed.  In  this  state  remaining,  the  two 
teachers  produced  the  sacred  system  from  the 
scriptures,  and  we  became  informed  of  the  exist- 
ence of  the  one  God ; and  of  the  facts,  that  the 
Divine  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  redeemed  with 
his  sacred  life  all  who  love  and  trust  in  him,  and 
in  order  to  save  his  disciples  from  hell  suffered 
death  in  their  stead.  Now  we  know,  that  we 
have  sinned  against  the  sacred  One,  and  we 
know,  assuredly,  that  if  we  become  the  disciples 
of  the  Divine  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we 
shall  be  saved  from  the  hell  which  we  deserve. 
We  desire  to  become  disciples,  and  with  the  two 
teachers,  like  children  born  of  the  same  mother, 
to  worship  the  true  God,  and  observe  the  true 
religion. 

“ ‘ On  searching  in  the  scriptures,  for  ancient 
rules  and  customs,  it  does  not  appear  that  John 
and  other  baptizers  administered  baptism  on  any 
particular  time,  or  day,  or  hour.  We,  therefore, 
venture  to  beg  of  the  two  teachers,  that  they  will 
grant,  that  on  the  6th  day  of  the  wane  of  the 


204  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

Tanzoungmong  moon,  (Nov.  7th)  at  6 o’clock  at 
night,  we  may  this  once  receive  baptism  at  their 
hands.’ 

“ November  7th,  Lord's  clay. — We  had  worship 
as  usual,  and  the  people  dispersed.  About  half 
an  hour  before  sunset  the  two  candidates  came  to 
the  Zayat,  accompanied  by  three  or  four  of  their 
friends;  and,  after  a short  prayer,  we  proceeded 
to  the  spot,  where  Moung  Nau  was  formerly  bap- 
tized. The  sun  was  not  allowed  to  look  upon  the 
humble,  timid  profession.  No  wondering  crowd 
crowned  the  overshadowing  hill.  No  hymn  of 
praise  expressed  the  exultant  feelings  of  joyous 
hearts.  Stillness  and  solemnity  pervaded  the 
scene.  We  felt,  on  the  banks  of  the  water,  as  a 
little,  feeble,  solitary  band.  But  perhaps  some 
hovering  angels  took  note  of  the  event,  with  more 
interest  than  they  witnessed  the  late  coronation ; 
perhaps  Jesus  looked  down  on  us,  pitied  and  for- 
gave our  weaknesses,  and  marked  us  for  his  own ; 
perhaps,  if  we  deny  him  not,  he  will  acknowledge 
us  another  day,  more  publicly  than  we  venture  at 
present  to  acknowledge  him. 

“ In  the  evening,  we  all  united  in  commemo- 
rating the  dying  love  of  our  Redeemer ; and  I 
trust  we  enjoyed  a little  of  his  gracious  presence 
in  the  midst  of  us. 

“ November  10 th. — This  evening  is  to  be  marked 
as  the  date  of  the  first  Burman  prayer  meeting 
that  was  ever  held.  None  present  but  myself 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  205 

and  the  three  converts.  Two  of  them  made  a 
little  beginning — such  as  must  be  expected  from 
the  first  essay  of  converted  heathens.  We  agreed 
to  meet  for  this  purpose  every  Tuesday  and  Fri- 
day evening,  immediately  after  family  worship, 
which  in  the  evening  has  for  some  time  been  con- 
ducted in  Burman  and  English,  and  which  these 
people,  and  occasionally  some  others,  have  at- 
tended. 

“ November  14 th,  Lord's  day. — Have  been  much 
gratified  to  find,  that  this  evening  the  three  con- 
verts REPAIRED  TO  THE  ZAYAT,  AND  HELD 
A PRAYER  MEETING  OF  THEIR  OWN  ACCORD. 

“ November  2 6th. — On  taking  our  usual  ride, 
this  morning,  to  bathe  in  the  mineral  tank,  we 
were  accosted  on  one  of  the  pagoda  roads,  by  the 
Mangen  teacher,  and  peremptorily  forbidden  to 
ride  there  in  future  on  pain  of  being  beaten.  On 
our  return  we  inquired  into  the  affair,  and  find 
that  the  viceroy  has  really  issued  an  order,  at  the 
instigation  of  this  teacher,  that  henceforth  no  per- 
son wearing  a hat,  shoes,  or  umbrella,  or  mounted 
on  a horse,  shall  approach  within  the  sacred 
ground  belonging  to  the  great  pagoda,  which 
ground  extends,  on  some  sides,  half  a mile,  and 
comprises  all  the  principal  roads : so  that  in 
future  we  must  take  a circuitous  route  in  the 
woods,  if  we  wish  to  visit  our  usual  place  of 
resort.  This  consideration,  however,  is  very  tri- 
fling, compared  with  another.  The  viceroy’s  or- 


206  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

der  is  quite  unprecedented  in  Rangoon,  and  indi- 
cates a state  of  feeling,  on  the  subject  of  religion, 
very  unfavourable  to  our  missionary  designs. 
Since  the  death  of  the  old  king,  who  was  known 
to  be  in  heart  hostile  to  religion,  people  have  been 
more  engaged  than  ever,  in  building  pagodas, 
making  sacred  offerings,  and  performing  the  pub- 
lic duties  of  their  religion.  They  are  just  now 
engaged  in  new  gilding  the  great  pagoda,  called 
Shwaay  Dagon,  which  is  considered  the  most 
sacred  in  the  country,  on  account  of  its  contain- 
ing six  or  eight  hairs  of  Gaudama. 

“ Ever  since  the  affair  of  Moung  Shway-gnong, 
there  has  been  an  entire  falling  off  at  the  Zayat. 
I sometimes  sit  there  whole  days,  without  a sin- 
gle visitor,  though  it  is  the  finest  part  of  the  year, 
and  many  are  constantly  passing.  We  and  our 
object  are  now  well  known  throughout  Rangoon. 
None  wish  to  call,  as  formerly,  out  of  curiosity; 
and  none  dare  to  call  from  a principle  of  religious 
inquiry.  And  were  not  the  leaders  in  ecclesiasti- 
cal affairs  confident  that  we  shall  never  succeed 
in  making  converts,  I have  no  doubt  we  should 
meet  with  direct  persecution  and  banishment. 

“ Our  business  must  be  fairly  laid  before  the 
emperor.  If  he  frown  upon  us,  all  missionary 
attempts  within  his  dominions  will  be  out  of  the 
question.  If  he  favour  us,  none  of  our  enemies, 
during  the  continuance  of  his  favour,  can  touch 
a hair  of  our  heads.  But  there  is  a greater  than 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  207 

the  emperor,  before  whose  throne  we  desire  daily 
and  constantly  to  lay  the  business.  O,  Lord  Jesus, 
look  upon  us  in  our  low  estate,  and  guide  us  in 
our  dangerous  course ! 

“ November  2\st. — Moung  Shway-gnong  has 
been  with  us  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  and  a 
little  revived  our  hopes  concerning  him. 

“ November  27th. — This  day  brother  Colman 
and  myself  came  to  a final  decision  to  proceed  to 
Ava  without  delay,  and  lay  our  business  before 
the  emperor. 

“ November  29 th.- — Letters  from  Bengal  and 
America;  the  first  for  six  months.  Learnt  the 
particulars  of  the  melancholy  end  of  our  lamented 
brother  Wheelock.  The  news  of  his  death  reached 
us  some  time  ago.  The  tract  which  we  forwarded, 
is  not  yet  printed ; a circumstance  which  occa- 
sions us  much  regret,  as  we  hoped  to  have  ob- 
tained some  copies  to  carry  up  to  Ava. 

“ December  4th. — Another  visit  from  Moung 
Shway-gnong.  After  several  hours  spent  in  me- 
taphysical cavils,  he  owned  that  he  did  not  be- 
lieve any  thing  that  he  had  said,  and  had  only 
been  trying  me  and  the  religion,  being  deter- 
mined to  embrace  nothing,  but  what  he  found  un- 
objectionable and  impregnable.  ‘ What  (said  he), 
do  you  think  that  I would  pay  you  the  least  at- 
tention, if  I found  you  could  not  answer  all  my 
questions,  and  solve  all  my  difficulties  ? ’ He  then 
proceeded  to  say,  that  he  really  believed  in  God, 


208  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  the  atonement,  &c.  Said  I 
(knowing  his  deistical  weakness),  ‘ Do  you  be- 
lieve all  that  is  contained  in  the  book  of  St.  Mat- 
thew, that  I have  given  you?  In  particular,  do 
you  believe  that  the  Son  of  God  died  on  a cross  ? ’ 
‘ Ah  (replied  he),  you  have  caught  me  now.  I 
believe  that  he  suffered  death ; but  I cannot  ad- 
mit that  he  suffered  the  shameful  death  of  the 
cross.’  ‘ Therefore  (said  I),  you  are  not  a dis- 
ciple of  Christ.  A true  disciple  inquires  not 
whether  a fact  is  agreeable  to  his  o\yn  reason,  but 
whether  it  is  in  the  book.  His  pride  has  yielded 
to  the  Divine  testimony.  Teacher,  your  pride  is 
still  unbroken.  Break  down  your  pride,  and 
yield  to  the  word  of  God.’  He  stopt,  and  thought. 
‘ As  you  utter  these  words  (said  he),  I see  my 
error : I have  been  trusting  in  my  own  reason, 
not  in  the  word  of  God.’  Some  interruption 
now  occurred.  When  we  were  again  alone,  he 
said,  ‘ This  day  is  different  from  all  the  days  on 
which  I have  visited  you.  I see  my  error  in 
trusting  in  my  own  reason ; and  I now  believe 
the  crucifixion  of  Christ,  because  it  is  contained 
in  the  Scripture.’  Some  time  after,  speaking 
of  the  uncertainty  of  life,  he  said,  he  thought 
he  should  not  be  lost,  though  he  died  suddenly. 
Why?  ‘ Because  I love  Jesus  Christ.’  Do  you 
really  love  him?  ‘ No  one  that  really  knows  him, 
can  help  loving  him.’  And  so  he  departed. 

“ December  10 th. — A few  days  ago  we  succeed- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


‘209 


ed  in  purchasing  a boat  for  the  journey  to  Ava, 
after  having  spent  a whole  week  in  the  search. 
Have  since  been  employing  workmen  to  cover 
it,  and  put  it  in  order. 

“ Yesterday  we  applied  to  the  viceroy  for  a 
pass  to  go  up  to  the  golden  feet,  and  lift  up  our 
eyes  to  the  golden  face.  He  granted  our  request, 
in  very  polite  terms. 

“ I must  now  close  up  my  journal,  to  be  sent 
on  board  ship  to-morrow  morning.  We  expect 
to  leave  Rangoon  in  about  a week.  My  next 
will  probably  contain  some  account  of  our  jour- 
ney up  the  river,  and  our  reception  at  court.  O 
Lord,  send  now  prosperity ; yet  not  my  will,  but 
thine,  be  done  !” 

\ 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 

A.  H.  J. 


> 


r 


210 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


LETTER  XI. 


Baltimore,  January,  1823. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

Y ou  perceive  that  we  were  not  allowed  to  pro- 
ceed long  in  the  use  of  those  means,  which  pre- 
sented the  fairest  prospect  for  the  rapid  success 
of  the  gospel  in  the  Burman  empire.  Christians, 
living  under  Christian  governments,  cannot  ima- 
gine the  terror  and  alarm  infused  into  the  mind 
of  a Burman,  at  the  idea  of  coming  into  contact 
with  any  person  invested  with  authority.  The 
Zayat  had  been  visited  by  thousands,  many  had 
been  induced  to  examine  seriously  the  Christian 
religion,  and  a universal  spirit  of  inquiry  had  been 
excited ; yet,  when  it  was  rumoured  abroad  that 
this  single  sentence,  ‘ inquire  further,’  had  pro- 
ceeded from  the  lips  of  the  viceroy,  on  the  accu- 
sation of  the  teacher,  all,  with  one  accord,  for- 
sook us,  and  passed  on,  without  venturing  to 
look  at  their  former  place  of  resort.  In  this  situa- 
tion, our  work  had  apparently  come  to  a stand. 
One  course  only  remained  to  be  pursued,  that  of 
presenting  a petition  for  toleration  to  the  emperor. 
The  result  will  be  seen  from  Mr.  Judson’s  jour- 


TO  THE  BURMAV  EMPIRE.  211 

nal,  which  shall  be  continued,  after  the  insertion 
of  a letter,  describing  the  evening  school,  a short 
time  before  established,  and  the  Burman  method 
of  instructing  in  the  first  rudiments  of  reading. 

“ Rangoon,  August  Ath,  1819. — In  school.  I 
have  just  been  round  to  all  the  scholars,  one  by 
one,  to  hear  them  read  their  lessons,  and  am  now 
going  to  spend  the  remaining  hour,  while  the 
Burman  teacher  looks  over  them,  in  writing  to 
you.  How  curious  would  the  sounds,  kwa,  kwaa, 
kwe  kwee,  kwo  kwoo,  & c.  which  are  now  ringing 
in  my  ears,  sound  in  yours.  Yet,  uncouth  as  they 
would  appear  to  you,  or  as  they  did,  at  first,  to 
me,  they  have  now  become  musical,  and  when 
considered  as  introductory  to  an  acquaintance 
with  the  word  of  God,  are  productive  of  most 
pleasant  sensations.  But,  in  order  that  you  may 
see  me,  just  as  I am  situated,  I will  be  a little 
particular  in  describing  the  school.  The  Zayat, 
in  which  it  is  kept,  is  situated  thirty  or  forty 
rods  from  the  mission-house,  and  in  dimensions  is 
twenty-seven  by  eighteen  feet.  It  is  raised  four 
feet  from  the  ground,  and  is  divided  into  three 
parts.  The  first  division  is  laid  entirely  open  to 
the  road,  without  doors,  windows,  or  a partition 
in  the  front  side,  and  takes  up  a third  part  of  the 
whole  building.  It  is  made  of  bamboo  and  thatch, 
and  is  the  place  where  Mr.  Judson  sits  all  the 
day  long,  and  says  to  the  passers  by,  ‘ Ho  ! every 
one  that  thirsteth,’  &c.  The  next,  and  middle 


212  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

division,  is  a large  airy  room,  with  four  doors 
and  four  windows,  opening  in  opposite  directions, 
made  entirely  of  boards,  and  is  white-washed,  to 
distinguish  it  from  the  other  Zayats  around  us. 

“ In  this  room,  we  have  public  worship  in  Bur- 
man  on  the  Sabbath;  and,  in  the  middle  of  it 
I am  now  situated  at  my  writing  table,  while  six 
of  the  male  -scholars  are  at  one  end,  each  with  his 
torch  and  black  board,  over  which  he  is  industri- 
ously bending,  and  emitting  the  sounds  above 
described.  The  third,  and  last  division,  is  only 
an  entry  way,  which  opens  into  the  garden,  lead- 
ing to  the  mission-house. 

“ In  this  apartment,  all  the  women  are  seated, 
with  their  lights  and  black  boards,  much  in  the 
same  position  and  employment  as  the  men.  The 
black  boards,  on  which  all  the  Burmans  learn  to 
read  and  write,  answer  the  same  purpose  as  our 
slates.  They  are  about  a yard  in  length,  made 
black  with  charcoal  and  the  juice  of  a leaf,  and 
letters  are  clearly  imprinted  with  a species  of 
white  stone,  a little  similar  to  our  slate  pencils. 
A lesson  is  written  out  on  this  board  by  an  in- 
structor, and  when  a scholar  is  perfect  master  of 
it,  it  is  erased,  and  a new  one  written.  The 
Burmans  are  truly  systematic  in  their  elementary 
instructions,  and  a scholar  is  not  considered  qua- 
lified to  read  without  spelling,  until  he  has  a 
perfect  knowledge  of  all  the  various  combinations 
of  the  letters. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  213 

“ 29 th. — When  I wrote  the  above,  I intended 
writing  a little  every  evening ; but  my  time  has 
been  so  completely  occupied,  during  this  last 
month,  together  with  the  increasing  weakness  of 
my  eyes,  that  I have  not  found  an  hour’s  leisure, 
until  this  evening.  Our  school  is  getting  on  well, 
though  in  number  it  has  diminished  rather  than 
increased.  Two  of  the  scholars,  who  began  with 
their  letters,  are  now  reading  without  spelling; 
and  it  is  a truth,  which  affords  no  little  satisfac- 
tion, that  their  knowledge  of  letters  is  first  em- 
ployed in  reading  a catechism,  concerning  the 
eternal  God,  and  his  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom 
they  never  heard,  till  they  met  with  us.  Thus 
they  will  insensibly  obtain  ideas  of  their  Creator, 
and  ever,  in  after  life,  associate  the  ideas  of  reli- 
gion and  reading.  We  begin  to  see  the  word  of 
God  taking  effect  around  us.  The  Burmans  now 
believe  that  we  have  come  here  to  do  them  good, 
and  seek  their  advantage.  During  four  or  five 
years,  they  supposed,  notwithstanding  our  asser- 
tions to  the  contrary,  that  we  had  come  here 
merely  to  obtain  their  wisdom,  and  to  return 
to  our  native  country,  to  communicate  it  to 
others.  But  seeing,  after  we  had  acquired  their 
language,  that  instead  of  returning,  we  built  a 
place  for  public  worship,  in  which  Mr.  Judson 
spends  all  his  time  in  preaching  the  new  religion, 
they  changed  their  opinion;  and  some  of  them 
acknowledge  that  it  must  be  a singular  religion, 


214 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


and  one  worthy  of  attention,  to  produce  such 
effects.  Three  Burmans  now  give  good  evidence 
of  being  real  Christians,  though  only  one  has 
been  baptized.  Two  or  three  others  give  us 
much  encouragement,  and  we  hope  will  prove  to 
be  real  Christians.  Moung  Nau,  I mentioned, 
in  my  last  letter,  as  being  the  first  Burman  con- 
vert. Moung  Thahlah  has  been  serious  for  a long 
time,  and  has,  of  late,  given  us  reason  to  hope 
that  he  is  a true  Christian.  He  is  an  amiable 
young  man,  and  considerably  superior  to  the 
common  Burmans.  The  love  of  Christ,  in  dying 
for  sinners,  appears  to  have  deeply  impressed 
his  mind,  and  he  speaks  of  it  with  much  feeling. 
He  says,  * the  love  of  Christ  is  no  common  love. 
Besides  Jesus,  I see  no  way  of  salvation.’  He  has 
a clear  and  distinct  understanding  of  the  way  of 
salvation  by  Christ,  reads  the  Testament  much, 
and  unites  with  us,  daily,  in  family  worship, 
which  is  conducted  both  in  English  and  Burman. 
It  is  very  animating  to  see  the  solemnity  of  these 
two  Burmans,  when  they  come  to  worship ; and 
we  often  feel,  that  if  we  see  no  further  success, 
we  are  amply  recompensed  for  the  years  of  dark- 
ness and  anxiety,  which  we  have  passed  here. 

“ Mr.  and  Mrs.  Colman  are  still  with  us;  the 
only  two,  out  of  the  six,  who  have  joined  us  since 
we  have  lived  in  Rangoon.  We  are  very  happy 
in  their  society.  They  are  entirely  devoted  to  the 
work  of  the  mission,  and  make  every  thing  sub- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  215 

servient  to  its  promotion  and  prosperity.  They 
apply  closely  to  the  study  of  the  language,  in 
which  they  have  made  great  proficiency.  We 
esteem  it  a peculiar  favour  in  Providence,  that 
our  only  remaining  associates,  and,  indeed,  our 
only  society  in  Rangoon,  should,  in  every  re- 
spect, be  of  the  right  stamp.  Our  mission,  on 
the  whole,  is  in  a more  prosperous  state  than  we 
have  hardly  dared  to  hope  it  ever  would  be,  un- 
der this  capricious  government.  We  trust  a little 
vine  is  here  planted,  which  is  so  enclosed  and 
hedged  by  the  protecting  care  of  the  Vinedresser, 
as  to  prevent  its  destruction  by  the  wild  beasts  of 
the  forest. 

“We  have  two  or  three  interesting  inquirers, 
who,  we  hope,  will  finally  be  brought  to  a saving 
knowledge  of  the  truth.  Rut.  we  want  more 
labourers,  who  are  already  qualified  to  enter  on 
this  work.  Mr.  Judson  not  only  finds  his  hands 
full,  but  abundantly  more  employment  than  he  is 
able  to  perform.  His  eyes  and  head,  of  late, 
have  been  considerably  affected,  which  prevents 
his  going  on  with  the  translation  of  the  Scrip- 
tures as  he  had  intended. 

“ November  20th. — We  have  had  the  inexpres- 
sible pleasure  of  witnessing  the  baptism  of  two 
Burmans,  since  my  last  date,  who  gave  good 
evidence  of  being  true  Christians.  One  is  Moung 
Thahlah,  whom  I have  mentioned  above,  and  the 
other  is  the  oldest  member  of  the  school,  by 


216  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

name  Moung  Byaay.  He  has  been  indefatigable 
in  learning  to  read,  though  the  only  spare  time 
he  had  was  in  the  evening,  after  he  had  been 
working  hard  through  the  day.  The  first  thing 
he  began  to  read,  without  spelling,  was  the  cate- 
chism, which  he  committed  to  memory  as  he 
read.  He  soon  began  to  inquire  more  particu- 
larly concerning  the  religion  of  Christ,  and  mani- 
fested an  ardent  desire  to  become  a true  disciple. 
We  trust  his  inquiries  have  issued  in  a saving- 
knowledge  of  the  truth.  The  two  last  men- 
tioned disciples  were  baptized  rather  privately, 
on  account  of  the  general  alarm  which  has  pre- 
vailed of  late  among  our  acquaintance.  But, 
instead  of  wondering  that  they  were  desirous  of 
being  baptized  in  private,  we  felt  that  it  was  a 
strong  evidence  in  their  favour,  that  they  should 
desire  baptism  at  all,  under  existing  circum- 
stances. . , 

“ Our  three  Burman  converts  now  have  a prayer 
meeting  among  themselves,  every  Sabbath  even- 
ing, besides  uniting  with  Mr.  Judson  twice  in  a 
week,  and  with  us  all  every  day  in  family  wor- 
ship. Their  appearance  is  so  different  from  com- 
mon Burmans,  that  we  are  led  to  exclaim,  ‘ What 
hath  God  wrought!’ 

“ Mr.  Judson  has  written  to  the  Board  a parti- 
cular account  of  the  persecuting  spirit,  which  has, 
of  late,  been  manifested.  We  feel  more  for  our 
converts  than  we  do  for  ourselves,  as  they  would 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


217 


be  the  first  to  feel  the  effects  of  a tyrannical,  de- 
spotic government. 

“ Situated  as  we  now  are,  you  will  readily 
imagine  we  feel  the  necessity  of  committing  our- 
selves and  this  infant  church  into  the  hands  of  our 
heavenly  Father,  and  of  waiting  his  guidance  and 
direction.  The  adversary  of  souls  could  not  pa- 
tiently see  us  going  on  prosperously,  without 
making  a struggle  to  overthrow  us.  But  how 
much  he  will  be  able  to  effect,  is  known  only  to 
Him,  who  is  our  guardian  and  protector,  and  who 
will  restrain  the  remainder  of  that  wrath,  which 
will  not  redound  to  his  own  glory. 

“We  have  lately  been  obliged  to  shut  up  the 
Zayat  altogether,  and  all  our  inquirers  have  for- 
saken us,  except  one,  a very  learned  man,  who 
still  visits  us,  though  rather  privately.  A spirit 
of  persecution  has  begun  to  manifest  itself,  and  so 
alarmed  all  our  acquaintance,  that  they  have 
quite  discontinued  their  visits.  This  falling  off 
at  the  Zayat,  has  determined  Mr.  Judson  to  make 
the  only  and  last  attempt,  that  of  presenting  a 
memorial  to  the  young  king.  We  are  now  all 
engaged  in  making  preparations  for  the  journey. 
Brother  Colman  accompanies  Mr.  Judson.  Mrs. 
Colman  and  myself  remain  in  Rangoon.  I felt 
very  desirous  of  going,  as  the  lady  of  the  old 
viceroy,  who  is  my  particular  friend,  is  now  at 
Ava,  and  would  give  me  a very  favourable  recep- 
tion. Her  husband  is  next  in  rank  to  the  king. 


218  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

and  has  the  management  of  all  the  affairs  of  the 
kingdom.  But  Mr.  Judson  thinks  it  too  hazard- 
ous an  undertaking,  as  no  foreign  female  has  ever 
yet  appeared  at  the  Burman  court.  What  will 
be  the  result  of  this  expedition,  we  leave  for  God 
to  determine,  on  whom  alone  we  depend , and  to 
whom  alone  we  look  for  success.  If  he  is  now 
about  to  introduce  the  gospel  into  this  country, 
he  will  incline  the  king  to  give  us  free  toleration  ; 
but  if  he  has  work  to  do  for  us  elsewhere,  we  de- 
sire to  submit,  and  acquiesce  in  his  sovereign 
will.  It  is  now  an  important  crisis  in  the  mis- 
sion. O,  that  Christiansin  America,  would,  with 
one  united  voice,  plead  with  God,  that  these 
perishing  millions  may  not  be  lost,  by  putting  far 
away  from  them  the  words  of  eternal  life.  We 
trust  we  have  some  sense  of  the  greatness  of  this 
undertaking,  and  of  the  importance  of  being  spi- 
ritual, and  heavenly  minded.” 


Extracts  from  Mr.  Jndsoris  Journal. 

“ December  \2th.  Lord's  day. — We  were  much 
gratified  at  seeing  the  teacher,  Moung  Shway- 
gnong,  at  worship,  for  the  first  time  since  he  was 
accused  before  the  viceroy.  The  news  of  our  in- 
tended expedition  to  Ava,  has  probably  embold- 
ened him.  We  proposed  his  accompanying  us, 
but  he  declined. 

“ December  18 th,  Saturday. — Have  spent  all  the 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  219 

past  week  in  making  preparations  for  our  jour- 
ney. 

“ December  19 th.  Lord's  day.- — Had  worship  fer 
the  last  time.  Disappointed  in  not  seeing  the 
teacher;  but  the  disappointment  somewhat  alle- 
viated by  the  attendance  of  one  of  his  acquaint- 
ance, an  elderly  man,  by  name  Oo  Yan,  by  pro- 
fession a doctor,  who  listened  with  the  strictest 
attention,  and,  in  his  subsequent  conversation, 
discovered  a truly  inquisitive  spirit. 

“ December  2\st. — After  having  made  arrange- 
ments for  the  residence  of  our  families  in  town, 
during  our  absence,  brother  Colman  and  myself 
embarked.  Our  boat  is  six  feet  wide  in  the  mid- 
dle, and  forty  feet  long.  A temporary  deck  of 
bamboos  is  laid  throughout,  and  on  the  hinder 
part  of  the  boat,  the  sides  are  raised  with  thin 
boards,  and  a covering  of  thatch  and  mats  tied 
on,  so  as  to  form  two  low  rooms,  in  which  we  can 
just  sit,  and  lie  down.  Our  company  consists  of 
sixteen,  besides  ourselves — ten  rowmen — a steers- 
man— a headman,  whose  name  is  inserted  in  our 
passport,  and  who,  therefore,  derives  a little  au- 
thority from  government — a steward  or  cook  for 
the  company,  which  place  is  filled  by  our  trusty 
Moung  Nau — our  own  cook — a Hindoo  washer- 
man— an  Englishman,  who  has  been  unfortunate 
all  his  life,  and  wishes  to  try  the  service  of  his 
Bunnan  majesty  ; and  this  last  personage  may  be 
called  our  gunner,  he  having  charge  of  several 


220  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

guns  and  blunderbusses,  which  are  indispensable, 
on  account  of  the  robbers  that  infest  the  river. 

“ We  have  been  much  perplexed,  in  fixing  on 
a present  for  the  emperor,  without  which  no  per- 
son unauthorized  can  appear  in  his  presence.  Our 
funds  were  evidently  inadequate  to  the  purchase 
of  articles  which  would  be  valuable  to  him,  in  a 
pecuniary  point  of  view ; when  we  considered 
also,  that  there  ought  to  be  a congruity  between 
the  present  and  our  character,  we  selected  that 
book,  which  we  hope  to  be  allowed  to  translate 
under  his  patronage — the  Bible,  in  six  volumes, 
covered  with  gold  leaf,  in  Burman  style,  and  each 
volume  enclosed  in  a rich  wrapper.  For  presents 
to  other  members  of  government,  we  have  taken 
several  pieces  of  fine  cloth,  and  other  articles. 

“ Thus  manned  and  furnished,  we  pushed  off 
from  the  shores  of  Rangoon.  The  teacher,  Moung 
Shway-gnong,  had  not  been  to  see  us  for  several 
days,  ashamed  probably  of  having  declined  ac- 
companying us;  but  just  as  we  were  pushing  off 
we  saw  his  tall  form  standing  on  the  wharf.  He 
raised  his  hand  to  his  head,  and  bade  us  adieu, 
and  continued  looking  after  the  boat,  until  a pro- 
jecting point  shut  Rangoon  and  all  its  scenes  from 
our  view.  When  shall  we  redouble  this  little 
point?  Through  what  shall  we  pass,  ere  the 
scene  now  snatched  away  be  re-presented  ? The 
expedition  on  which  we  have  entered,  however  it 
may  terminate,  is  unavoidably  fraught  with  con^ 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  221 

sequences  momentous  and  solemn,  beyond  all 
conception.  We  are  penetrating  into  the  heart  of 
one  of  the  great  kingdoms  of  the  world,  to  make  a 
formal  offer  of  the  gospel  to  a despotic  monarch, 
and  through  him,  to  the  millions  of  his  subjects. 
May  the  Lord  accompany  us,  and  crown  our  at- 
tempt with  the  desired  success,  if  it  be  consistent 
with  his  wise  and  holy  will. 

“ At  night,  we  moored  by  the  bank  of  Kyee- 
myen-daing.  It  was  near  this  place  that,  a few 
days  ago,  one  of  the  boats  belonging  to  Mr.  G., 
late  collector  of  Rangoon,  was  attacked  by  rob- 
bers, and  the  steersman  and  another  man  killed 
at  a single  shot.  We  felt  unwilling  to  remain  at 
this  village,  but  found  it  necessary. 

“ December  22 d. — We  set  off  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  at  noon  reached  Kyoon-oo,  a cluster  of 
villages,  near  one  of  which,  about  twenty  miles 
from  Rangoon,  we  remained  the  rest  of  the  day. 

“ December  23 d. — Passed  from  the  Rangoon 
outlet  into  the  great  A-rah-wah-tee  river,  (vul- 
garly called  Irrawaddy,)  and  reached  Ran-gen- 
tsen-yah,  a village  twenty  miles  from  Kyoon-oo. 

“ On  the  24th,  passed  Da-noo-byoo,  and  on  the 
26th,  Hen-thah-dah,  both  large  towns.  Fresh 
reports  of  robbers. 

“ On  the  30th,  reached  Kah-noung,  a consider- 
able town,  about  ninety  miles  from  Rangoon. 
Here  we  met  a special  officer  from  Bassein,  with 
a detachment  of  men,  sent  in  pursuit  of  a band  of 


222  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

robbers,  who  lately  made  a daring  attack  on  a 
large  boat,  wounded  and  beat  off  the  people,  and 
took  plunder  to  the  amount  of  fifteen  hundred 
ticals.  The  commander  offered  us  an  escort  for 
the  journey  of  to-morrow,  which  lies  through  a 
dangerous  tract  of  country ; but  we  declined  ac- 
cepting it,  as  we  should  have  been  obliged  to  give 
the  people  presents,  without  deriving  any  sub- 
stantial assistance  in  the  hour  of  danger.  Strict 
watch  all  night. 

“ January  l$f,  1820. — Passed  a remarkably 
high,  rocky  mountain,  the  side  of  which,  for  a 
considerable  extent,  is  indented  with  numerous 
recesses,  containing  images  of  Gaudama,  all 
carved  out  of  the  solid  rock. 

“ January  2 tl. — Passed  the  large  towns  of 
Shway-doung  and  Pah-doung,  on  opposite  sides 
of  the  river,  and  reached  Pyee  (vulgarly  called 
Prome),  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  from 
Rangoon — a place  of  great  note  in  Eurman  history, 
and  the  seat  of  an  ancient  dynasty  of  kings.  The 
town  itself  is  now  in  a state  of  dilapidation ; but 
the  environs  appear  flourishing. 

“ Confirmed  reports  of  a most  daring  robbery, 
committed  a little  higher  up,  on  the  boat  of  the 
governor  of  Taroke-man,  who  was  going  up  to 
Ava,  with  about  fifty  men  and  seven  thousand 
ticals.  The  robbers  came  down  upon  the  people, 
while  they  were  cooking  on  shore,  shot  the  go- 
vernor through  the  body,  and  carried  off  all  the 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  223 

treasure.  Feel  the  necessity  of  redoubling  our 
precautions  for  several  days.  Agree,  that  part  of 
us  only  leave  the  boat  at  a time — the  rest  to  stand 
by  the  guns. 

“ January  17 th. — Reached  Pah-gan,  a city  ce- 
lebrated in  Burman  history;  being,  like  Pyee, 
the  seat  of  a former  dynasty.  It  is  about  two 
hundred  and  sixty  miles  from  Rangoon. 

“ January  18 th. — Took  a survey  of  the  splen- 
did pagodas,  and  extensive  ruins,  in  the  environs 
of  this  once  famous  city.  Ascended,  as  far  as 
possible,  some  of  the  highest  edifices,  and  at  the 
height  of  one  hundred  feet,  perhaps,  beheld  all 
the  country  round,  covered  with  temples  and 
monuments  of  every  sort  and  size — some  in  utter 
ruin — some  fast  decaying — and  some  exhibiting 
marks  of  recent  attention  and  repair.  The  re- 
mains of  the  ancient  wall  of  the  city  stretched 
beneath  us.  The  pillars  of  the  gates,  and  many 
a grotesque,  decapitated  relic  of  antiquity, 
chequered  the  motley  scene.  All  conspired  to 
suggest  those  elevated  and  mournful  ideas,  which 
are  attendant  on  a view  of  the  decaying  remains  of 
ancient  grandeur ; and  though  not  comparable  to 
such  ruins  as  those  of  Palmyra  and  Balbec  (as 
they  are  represented),  still  deeply  interesting  to 
the  antiquary,  and  more  deeply  interesting  to  the 
Christian  missionary.  Here,  about  eight  hundred 
years  ago,  the  religion  of  Boodh  was  first  publicly 
recognized,  and  established  as  the  religion  of  the 


224  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

empire.  Here  then  Ah-rah-han,  the  first  Bood- 
hist  apostle  of  Burmah,  under  the  patronage  of 
king  Anan-ra-tha-men-zan,  disseminated  the  doc- 
trines of  atheism,  and  taught  his  disciples  to  pant 
after  annihilation,  as  the  supreme  good.  Some 
of  the  ruins  before  our  eyes,  were  probably  the 
remains  of  pagodas  designed  by  himself.  We 
looked  back  on  the  centuries  of  darkness  that  are 
past.  We  looked  forward,  and  Christian  hope 
would  fain  brighten  the  prospect.  Perhaps  we 
stand  on  the  dividing  line  of  the  empires  of  dark- 
ness and  light.  O,  shade  of  Slien  Ah-rah-han ! 
weep  o’er  thy  falling  fanes  ; retire  from  the  scenes 
of  thy  past  greatness.  But  thou  smilest  at  my 
feeble  voice.  Linger  then,  thy  little  remaining 
day.  A voice  mightier  than  mine,  a still  small 
voice,  will  ere  long  sweep  away  every  vestige  of 
thy  dominion.  The  churches  of  Jesus  will  soon 
supplant  these  idolatrous  monuments,  and  the 
chanting  of  the  devotees  of  Boodh  will  die  away 
before  the  Christian  hymn  of  praise. 

“ After  leaving  Pah-gan,  the  river  turns  to  the 
east.  We  walked  across  the  point  of  land  formed 
by  the  curve  of  the  river,  and  rejoined  the  boat 
at  Nyoung-oo.  On  the  20th  we  reached  Gnah- 
hmyah-gnay,  a solitary  and  dangerous  place,  and 
moored  under  a little  point  of  land.  Late  in  the 
evening,  a large  boat,  full  of  men,  suddenly 
turned  the  point,  and  bore  down  upon  us.  Our 
headman  warned  them  off ; but  they  paid  no  at- 


TO  TIIE  BUR1IAN  EMPIRE.  225 

tention,  and  made  no  reply  ; on  which  he  fired  a 
gun  over  them.  They  then  called  out  to  forbear, 
and  sheered  off.  The  adventure  quite  indisposed 
us  for  sleep.  We  planned  anew  the  minutiae  of 
operation,  in  case  of  attack,  and  kept  a strict 
watch  all  night. 

“ January  22 d. — Passed  the  confluence  of  the 
Kyen-dwen  and  the  A-rah-wah-tee,  and  pro- 
ceeded up  the  latter.  The  former  is  the  smaller 
of  the  two,  but  it  is  said  to  be  navigable  for  large 
boats  twenty  days  distance  from  the  confluence. 
It  penetrates  into  the  Cassay  country,  which  lies 
north  of  Burmah,  and  to  which  thirty  thousand 
troops  have  lately  marched  from  Ava,  to  quell  a 
rebellion,  occasioned  by  the  accession  of  the  new 
emperor. 

“ We  are  now  beyond  the  region  of  the  rob- 
bers, and  are  allowed  to  sleep  in  comparative 
quiet. 

“ January  25th. — Passed  Old  Ava,  the  seat  of 
the  dynasty,  immediately  preceding  the  present, 
and  Tsah-gaing,  a place  of  some  note,  distin- 
guished for  its  innumerable  pagodas,  and  the  re- 
sidence of  one  or  two  late  emperors  ; and  about 
noon,  drew  up  to  O-ding-mau,  the  lower  landing- 
place  of  New  Ava,  or  Ahmarapoor,  about  three 
hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  Rangoon.  At  our 
present  distance  of  nearly  four  miles  from  the 
city  (and  we  cannot  get  nearer  this  season),  it 
appears  to  the  worst  advantage.  We  can  hardly 


226  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

distinguish  the  golden  steeple  of  the  palace,  amid 
the  glittering  pagodas,  whose  summits  just  suffice 
to  mark  the  spot  of  our  ultimate  destination. 

“ January  2 6th. — We  set  out  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, called  on  Mr.  G.,  late  collector  of  Rangoon, 
and  on  Mr.  R.,  who  was  formerly  collector,  but 
is  now  out  of  favour.  Thence  we  entered  the 
city,  passed  the  palace,  and  repaired  to  the  house 
of  Mya-day-men,  former  viceroy  of  Rangoon,  now 
one  of  the  public  ministers  of  state  (Woon-gyee). 
We  gave  him  a valuable  present,  and  another  of 
less  value  to  his  wife,  the  lady  who  formerly 
treated  Mrs.  Judson  with  so  much  politeness. 
They  both  received  us  very  kindly,  and  appeared 
to  interest  themselves  in  our  success.  We  however 
did  not  disclose  our  precise  object;  but  only  pe- 
titioned leave  to  behold  the  golden  face.  Upon 
this  his  highness  committed  our  business  to 
Moung  Yo,  one  of  his  favourite  officers,  and  di- 
rected him  to  introduce  us  to  Moung  Zah,  one  of 
the  private  ministers  of  state  (A-twen-woon),  with 
the  necessary  orders.  This  particular  favour  of 
Mya-day-men  prevents  the  necessity  of  our  peti- 
tioning and  feeing  all  the  public  ministers  of  state, 
and  procuring  formal  permission  from  the  high 
court  of  the  empire. 

“ In  the  evening,  Moung  Yo,  who  lives  near 
our  boat,  called  on  us,  to  say  that  he  would  con- 
duct us  to-morrow.  We  lie  down  in  sleepless 
anxiety.  To-morrow’s  dawn  will  usher  in  the 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


227 


most  eventful  day  of  our  lives.  To-morrow’s  eve 
will  close  on  the  bloom  or  the  blight  of  our  fond- 
est hopes.  Yet  it  is  consoling  to  commit  this 
business  into  the  hands  of  our  heavenly  Father, — 
to  feel  that  the  work  is  His,  not  ours  ; that  the 
heart  of  the  monarch,  before  whom  we  are  to 
appear,  is  under  the  control  of  Omnipotence ; and 
that  the  event  will  be  ordered  in  the  manner  most 
conducive  to  the  Divine  glory  and  the  greatest 
good.  God  may,  for  the  wisest  purposes,  suffer 
our  hopes  to  be  disappointed ; and  if  so,  why 
should  short-sighted,  mortal  man  repine  ? Thy 
will,  O God,  be  ever  done ; for  thy  will  is  inevit- 
ably the  wisest  and  the  best. 

“ January  27  th . — We  left  the  boat,  and  put 
ourselves  under  the  conduct  of  Moung  Yo.  He 
carried  us  first  to  Mya-day-men,  as  a matter  of 
form ; and  there  we  learnt,  that  the  emperor  had 
been  privately  apprized  of  our  arrival,  and  said, 
* Let  them  be  introduced.’  We  therefore  pro- 
ceeded to  the  palace.  At  the  outer  gate,  we  were 
detained  a long  time,  until  the  various  officers 
were  satisfied  that  we  had  a right  to  enter ; after 
which  we  deposited  a present  for  the  private  mi- 
nister of  state,  Moung  Zah,  and  were  ushered  into 
his  apartments  in  the  palace-yard.  He  received 
us  very  pleasantly,  and  ordered  us  to  sit  before 
several  governors  and  petty  kings,  who  were  wait- 
ing at  his  levee.  We  here,  for  the  first  time,  dis- 
closed our  character  and  object — told  him  that 


228  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

we  were  missionaries  or  ‘ propagators  of  religion 
that  we  wished  to  appear  before  the  emperor,  and 
present  our  sacred  books,  accompanied  with  a 
petition.  He  took  the  petition  into  his  hand, 
looked  over  about  half  of  it,  and  then  familiarly 
asked  several  questions  about  our  God  and  our 
religion,  to  which  we  replied.  Just  at  this  crisis, 
some  one  announced  that  the  golden  foot  was 
about  to  advance  ; on  which  the  minister  hastily 
rose  up,  and  put  on  his  robes  of  state,  saying, 
that  he  must  seize  the  moment  to  present  us  to 
the  emperor.  We  now  found,  that  we  had  un- 
wittingly fallen  on  an  unpropitious  time,  it  being 
the  day  of  the  celebration  of  the  late  victory  over 
the  Cassays,  and  the  very  hour  when  his  majesty 
was  coming  forth  to  witness  the  display  made  on 
the  occasion.  When  the  minister  was  dressed, 
he  just  said,  ‘ How  can  you  propagate  religion  in 
this  empire  ? But  come  along.’  Our  hearts  sunk 
at  these  inauspicious  words.  He  conducted  us 
through  various  splendour  and  parade,  until  we 
ascended  a flight  of  stairs,  and  entered  a most 
magnificent  hall.  He  directed  us  where  to  sit, 
and  took  his  place  on  one  side  ; the  present  was 
placed  on  the  other,  and  Moung  Yo,  and  another 
officer  of  Mya-day-men,  sat  a little  behind.  The 
scene  to  which  we  were  now  introduced,  really 
surpassed  our  expectation.  The  spacious  extent 
of  the  hall,  the  number  and  magnitude  of  the  pil- 
lars, the  height  of  the  dome,  the  whole  com- 


TO  THE  BURJIAN  EMPIRE.  229 

pletely  covered  with  gold,  presented  a most 
grand  and  imposing  spectacle.  Very  few  were 
present,  and  those  evidently  great  officers  of  state. 
Our  situation  prevented  us  from  seeing  the  further 
avenue  of  the  hall ; but  the  end,  where  we  sat, 
opened  into  the  parade,  which  the  emperor  was 
about  to  inspect.  We  remained  above  five  mi- 
nutes, when  every  one  put  himself  into  the  most 
respectful  attitude,  and  Moung  Yo  whispered, 
that  his  majesty  had  entered.  We  looked  through 
the  hall,  as  far  as  the  pillars  would  allow,  and 
presently  caught  sight  of  this  modern  Ahasuerus. 
He  came  forward,  unattended — in  solitary  gran- 
deur— exhibiting  the  proud  gait  and  majesty  of 
an  eastern  monarch.  His  dress  was  rich,  but  not 
distinctive  ; and  he  carried  in  his  hand,  the  gold- 
sheathed  sword,  which  seems  to  have  taken  the 
place  of  the  sceptre  of  ancient  times.  But  it  was 
his  high  aspect  and  commanding  eye,  that  chiefly 
rivetted  our  attention.  He  strided  on.  Every 
head,  excepting  ours,  was  now  in  the  dust.  We 
remained  kneeling,  our  hands  folded,  our  eyes 
fixed  on  the  monarch.  When  he  drew  near,  we 
caught  his  attention.  He  stopped,  partly  turned 
towards  us — ‘ Who  are  these  ?’  ‘ The  teachers, 

great  king,’  I replied.  ‘ What,  you  'speak  Bur- 
man — the  priests  that  I heard  of  last  night?’ 
‘When  did  you  arrive?’  ‘Are  you  teachers  of 
religion?’  ‘Are you  like  the  Portuguese  priest?’ 

‘ Are  you  married  ? ’ ‘ Why  do  you  dress  so  ? ’ 


230  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

These,  and  some  other  similar  questions,  we  an- 
swered ; when  he  appeared  to  be  pleased  with  us, 
and  sat  down  on  an  elevated  seat — his  hand  rest- 
ing on  the  hilt  of  his  sword,  and  his  eyes  intently 
fixed  on  us.  Moung  Zah  now  began  to  read  the 
petition,  and  it  run  thus : — 

“ ‘ The  American  teachers  present  themselves 
to  receive  the  favour  of  the  excellent  king,  the 
sovereign  of  land  and  sea.  Hearing  that,  on 
account  of  the  greatness  of  the  royal  power,  the 
royal  country  was  in  a quiet  and  prosperous 
state,  we  arrived  at  the  town  of  Rangoon,  within 
the  royal  dominions,  and  having  obtained  leave  of 
the  governor  of  that  town,  to  come  up  and  behold 
the  golden  face,  we  have  ascended,  and  reached 
the  bottom  of  the  golden  feet.  In  the  great  coun- 
try of  America,  we  sustain  the  character  of 
teachers  and  explainers  of  the  contents  of  the 
sacred  Scriptures  of  our  religion.  And  since  it 
is  contained  in  those  Scriptures,  that,  if  we  pass 
to  other  countries,  and  preach  and  propagate  re- 
ligion, great  good  will  result,  and  both  those  who 
teach  and  those  who  receive  the  religion,  will  be 
freed  from  future  punishment,  and  enjoy,  without 
decay  or  death,  the  eternal  felicity  of  heaven, — 
that  royal  permission  be  given,  that  we,  taking- 
refuge  in  the  royal  power,  may  preach  our  reli- 
gion in  these  dominions,  and  that  those  who  are 
pleased  with  our  preaching,  and  wish  to  listen  to. 


TO  x TIE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  231 

and  be  guided  by  it,  whether  foreigners  or  Bur- 
mans,  may  be  exempt  from  government  molesta- 
tion, they  present  themselves  to  receive  the  favour 
of  the  excellent  king,  the  sovereign  of  land  and 
sea.’ 

“ The  emperor  heard  this  petition,  and  stretched 
out  his  hand.  Moung  Zah  crawled  forward  and 
presented  it.  His  majesty  began  at  the  top,  and 
deliberately  read  it  through.  In  the  mean  time, 
I gave  Moung  Zah  an  abridged  copy  of  the  tract, 
in  which  every  offensive  sentence  was  corrected, 
and  the  whole  put  into  the  handsomest  style  and 
dress  possible.  .After  the  emperor  had  perused 
the  petition,  he  handed  it  back,  without  saying  a 
word,  and  took  the  tract.  Our  hearts  now  rose 
to  God  for  a display  of  his  grace.  ‘ O,  have 
mercy  on  Burmah ! Have  mercy  on  her  king !’ 
But,  alas ! the  time  was  not  yet  come.  He  held 
the  tract  long  enough  to  read  the  two  first  sen- 
tences, which  assert  that  there  is  one  eternal 
God,  who  is  independent  of  the  incidents  of  mor- 
tality, and  that,  beside  him,  there  is  no  God ; and 
then,  with  an  air  of  indifference,  perhaps  disdain, 
he  dashed  it  down  to  the  ground  ! Moung  Zah 
stooped  forward,  picked  it  up,  and  handed  it  to 
us.  Moung  Yo  made  a slight  attempt  to  save  us, 
by  unfolding  one  of  the  volumes  which  composed 
our  present,  and  displaying  its  beauty ; but  his 
majesty  took  no  notice.  Our  fate  was  decided. 


232  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

After  a few  moments,  Moung  Zah  interpreted  his 
royal  master’s  will,  in  the  following  terms : “ In 
regard  to  the  objects  of  your  petition,  his  majesty 
gives  no  order.  In  regard  to  your  sacred  books, 
his  majesty  has  no  use  for  them,  take  them  away.’ 

“ Something  was  now  said  about  brother  Col- 
man’s  skill  in  medicine ; upon  which  the  emperor 
once  more  opened  his  mouth,  and  said,  ‘ Let  them 
proceed  to  the  residence  of  my  physician,  the 
Portuguese  priest ; let  him  examine  whether  they 
can  be  useful  to  me  in  that  line,  and  report  ac- 
cordingly.’ He  then  rose  from  his  seat,  strided 
on  to  the  end  of  the  hall,  and  there,  after  having 
dashed  to  the  ground  the  first  intelligence  that  he 
had  ever  received  of  the  eternal  God,  his  Maker, 
his  Preserver,  his  Judge,  he  threw  himself  down 
on  a cushion,  and  lay  listening  to  the  music,  and 
gazing  at  the  parade  spread  out  before  him. 

“ As  for  us  and  our  present,  we  were  hurried 
away,  without  much  ceremony.  We  passed  out 
of  the  palace  gates  with  much  more  facility  than 
we  entered,  and  were  conducted  first  to  the  house 
of  Mya-day-men.  There  his  officer  reported  our 
reception ; but  in  as  favourable  terms  as  possible ; 
and  as  his  highness  was  not  apprized  of  our  pre- 
cise object,  our  repulse  appeared,  probably,  to 
him,  not  so  decisive  as  we  knew  it  to  be.  We 
were  next  conducted  two  miles,  through  the  sun 
and  dust  of  the  streets  of  Ava,  to  the  residence  of 
the  Portuguese  priest.  He  very  speedily  ascer- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  233 

tained  that  we  were  in  possession  of  no  wonder- 
ful secret,  which  would  secure  the  emperor  from 
all  disease,  and  make  him  live  for  ever ; and  we 
were  accordingly  allowed  to  take  leave  of  the 
reverend  Inquisitor,  and  retreat  to  our  boat. 

“ At  this  stage  of  the  business,  notwithstanding 
the  decided  repulse  we  had  received,  we  still 
cherished  some  hope  of  ultimately  gaining  our 
point.  We  regretted,  that  a sudden  interruption 
had  prevented  our  explaining  our  objects  to 
Moung  Zah,  in  that  familiar  and  confidential 
manner  which  we  had  intended ; and  we  deter- 
mined, therefore,  to  make  another  attempt  upon 
him  in  private. 

“ January  28^.— Early  in  the  morning,  we  had 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  our  friend,  Mr.  G.,  coming 
to  our  boat.  It  may  not  be  amiss  to  mention, 
that  he  is  the  collector  who  was  chiefly  instru- 
mental in  relieving  us  from  the  exorbitant  de- 
mand which,  a few  months  ago,  was  made  upon 
us  in  Rangoon.  He  now  told  us  that  he  had 
heard  of  our  repulse,  but  would  not  have  us  give 
up  all  hope;  that  he  was  perfectly  acquainted 
with  Moung  Zah,  and  would  accompany  us  to 
his  house,  a little  before  sunset,  at  an  hour  when 
he  was  accessible.  This  precisely  accorded  with 
our  intentions. 

“ In  the  afternoon,  therefore,  we  called  on  Mr. 
G.,  and  he  went  with  us  into  the  city.  On  the 
way,  we  paid  a visit  to  the  wife  of  the  present 


234  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

viceroy  of  Rangoon,  whose  eldest  son  is  married 
to  the  only  daughter  of  the  present  emperor.  We 
carried  a present,  and  were,  of  course,  kindly  re- 
ceived. 

“ Thence  we  went  to  the  house  of  Moung  Zali, 
some  way  beyond  the  palace.  He  received  us 
with  great  coldness  and  reserve.  The  conversa- 
tion, which  we  carried  on  chiefly  through  Mr.  G., 
it  is  unnecessary  to  detail.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that 
we  ascertained,  beyond  a doubt,  that  the  policy 
of  the  Burman  government,  in  regard  to  the  tole- 
ration of  any  foreign  religion,  is  precisely  the 
same  with  the  Chinese ; that  it  is  quite  out  of  the 
question,  whether  any  of  the  subjects  of  the  empe- 
ror, who  embrace  a religion  different  from  his  own, 
will  be  exempt  from  punishment ; and  that  we,  in 
presenting  a petition  to  that  effect,  had  been  guilty 
of  a most  egregious  blunder,  an  unpardonable 
offence.  Mr.  G.  urged  every  argument  that  we 
suggested,  and  some  others.  He  finally  stated, 
that  if  we  obtained  the  royal  favour,  other  fo- 
reigners would  come  and  settle  in  the  empire, 
and  trade  would  be  greatly  benefited.  This  ar- 
gument alone  seemed  to  have  any  effect  on  the 
mind  of  the  minister ; and  looking  out  from  the 
cloud  which  covered  his  face,  he  vouchsafed  to 
say,  that  if  we  would  wait  some  time,  he  would 
endeavour  to  speak  to  his  majesty  about  us. 
From  this  remark  it  was  impossible  to  derive 
any  encouragement,  and  having  nothing  further 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  235 

to  urge,  we  left  Mr.  G.,  and  bowing  down  to  the 
ground,  took  leave  of  this  great  minister  of  state, 
who,  under  the  emperor,  guides  the  movements 
of  the  whole  empire. 

“ It  was  now  evening.  We  had  four  miles  to 
walk  by  moon  light.  Two  of  our  disciples  only 
followed  us.  They  had  pressed  as  near  as  they 
ventured  to  the  door  of  the  hall  of  audience,  and 
listened  to  words  which  sealed  the  extinction  of 
their  hopes  and  ours.  For  some  time  we  spoke  not. 

“ Some  natural  tears  we  dropt,  but  wiped  them  soon. 

The  world  was  all  before  us,  where  to  choose 

Our  place  of  rest,  and  Providence  our  guide.” 

And,  as  our  first  parents  took  their  solitary  way 
through  Eden,  hand  in  hand,  so  we  took  our  way 
through  this  great  city,  which,  to  our  late  imagi- 
nation, seemed  another  Eden ; but  now,  through 
the  magic  touch  of  disappointment,  seemed  blast- 
ed and  withered,  as  if  smitten  by  the  fatal  influ- 
ence of  the  cherubic  sword. 

“ Arrived  at  the  boat,  we  threw  ourselves  down, 
completely  exhausted  in  body  and  mind.  For 
three  days  we  had  walked  eight  miles  a day, 
most  of  the  way  in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  which, 
even  at  this  season,  in  the  interior  of  these  coun- 
tries, is  exceedingly  oppressive;  and  the  result 
of  our  travels  and  toils  has  been — the  wisest  and 
best  possible — a result,  which  if  we  could  see  the 
end  from  the  beginning,  would  call  forth  our 


236 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


highest  praise.  O,  slow  of  heart  to  believe  and 
trust  in  the  overruling  agency  of  our  own  Al- 
mighty Saviour ! 

January  29 th. — We  again  rose  early,  and  hav- 
ing considered  the  last  words  of  Moung  Zah, 
wrote  down  our  request  in  the  most  concise  and 
moderate  terms,  and  sent  it  to  Mr.  G.,  with  a 
message,  that  he  would  once  more  see  Moung 
Zah,  lay  the  paper  before  him,  and  ascertain,  un- 
equivocally, whether  there  was  any  possibility  of 
gaining  our  point,  by  waiting  several  months. 

“ The  rest  of  the  day,  and  the  next  being 
Lord’s  day,  we  remained  in  the  boat. 

“ January  31^,  Monday. — Mr.  G.  called  upon 
us,  with  our  little  paper  in  his  hand.  I have 
shown  your  paper  to  Moung  Zah,  and  begged 
him  not  to  deceive  you,  but  to  say  distinctly 
what  hopes  you  might  be  allowed  to  entertain ; 
he  replied,  ‘ Tell  them,  that  there  is  not  the  least 
possibility  of  obtaining  the  object  stated  in  this 
paper,  should  they  wait  ever  so  long.’ 

“ I now  thought  of  one  more  expedient;  and 
taking  out  the  manuscript  tract  the  emperor  threw 
down,  I handed  it  to  Mr.  G.  This  is  a brief  view 
of  the  Christian  religion.  Do  you  present  it,  in 
our  name,  to  Moung  Zah,  and  persuade  him  to 
read  it,  or  hear  it  read.  We  have  indeed  no  hope 
of  its  efficacy ; but  it  is  our  last  resort,  and  God 
may  help  us  in  the  extremity.  He  took  it  with 
some  feeling,  and  promised  to  do  his  best. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  237 

“ Before  leaving  us,  he  communicated  the  im- 
portant intelligence,  that  the  emperor,  flushed 
with  his  late  victory  over  the  Cassays,  had  de- 
termined on  war  with  Siam,  and  intended,  next 
fall,  to  march  in  person  to  Pegue,  below  Rangoon, 
and  there  establish  his  head-quarters. 

“ After  Mr.  G.  left  us,  we  went  to  visit  Mr.  R. 
We  were  formerly  acquainted  with  him  in  Ran- 
goon ; and  he  would  now  have  assisted  us,  had 
he  not  been  out  of  the  favour  of  the  new  emperor. 
We  related  all  our  proceedings,  and  the  disap- 
pointment of  our  hopes.  I knew  it  would  be  so, 
replied  he,  when  you  first  called  on  me ; but  I 
was  not  willing  to  discourage  you  from  making 
trial  for  yourselves.  He  then  related  the  follow- 
ing story,  with  the  substance  of  which  we  were 
previously  acquainted. 

“ About  fifteen  years  ago,  the  Roman  Catholic 
priests  converted  to  their  faith  a Burman  teacher 
of  talents  and  distinction.  They  took  great  pains 
to  indoctrinate  him  thoroughly  in  their  religion, 
and  entertained  great  hope  of  his  usefulness  in 
their  cause.  After  his  return  from  Rome,  whither 
they  had  sent  him  to  complete  his  Christian  edu- 
cation, he  was  accused  by  his  nephew,  a clerk  in 
the  high  court  of  the  empire,  of  having  renounced 
the  established  religion.  The  emperor,  who,  it 
must  be  remembered,  was  far  from  approving  the 
religion  of  Boodh,  ordered  that  he  should  be  com- 
pelled to  recant.  The  nephew  seized  his  uncle, 


238  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

cast  him  into  prison  and  fetters,  caused  him  to  be 
beat  and  treated  unmercifully ; and  at  length  had 
recourse  to  the  torture  of  the  iron  mall.  With 
this  instrument  he  was  gradually  beaten,  from 
the  ends  of  his  feet  up  to  his  breast,  until  his 
body  was  little  else  but  one  livid  wound.  Mr.  R. 
was  one  of  those  that  stood  by  and  gave  money  to 
the  executioners,  to  induce  them  to  strike  gently. 
At  every  blow,  the  sufferer  pronounced  the  name 
of  Christ ; and  declared,  afterwards,  that  he  felt 
but  little  or  no  pain.  When  he  was  at  the  point 
of  death,  under  the  hands  of  his  tormentors,  some 
persons,  who  pitied  his  case,  went  to  the  emperor, 
with  a statement,  that  he  was  a madman,  and 
knew  not  what  he  was  about ; on  which  the  em- 
peror gave  orders  for  his  release.  The  Portu- 
guese took  him  away,  concealed  him  until  he  was 
able  to  move,  and  sent  him  privately  in  a boat  to 
Rangoon,  and  thence  by  ship  to  Bengal,  where 
he  finished  his  days.  Since  then,  the  Roman 
priests,  of  whom  there  are  only  four  in  the  coun- 
try, have  done  nothing  in  the  way  of  proselyting, 
but  confined  their  labours  to  their  own  flocks, 
which  are  composed  of  the  descendants  of  foreign- 
ers. The  man  who  accused  his  uncle,  is  now  the 
very  first  of  the  private  ministers  of  state,  taking 
rank  before  Moung  Zah!  Furthermore,  the  pre- 
sent chief  queen,  who  has  great  influence  with 
his  majesty,  is,  and  ever  has  been,  particularly 
attached  to  the  religion  and  the  priests  of  Boodh. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  239 

Mr.  R.  also  confirmed  the  information  we  had  re- 
ceived of  approaching  war  with  Siam. 

“ Our  case  could  not  be  more  desperate.  We 
directly  returned  to  the  boat,  and  ordered  our 
people  to  sell  off  all  unnecessary  articles,  and  be 
ready  to  start,  as  soon  as  our  passport  could  be 
obtained. 

“ February  ls£. — -Went  to  Mya-day-men,  and 
applied  for  a passport  to  Rangoon.  He  appeared 
willing  to  oblige  us ; but  said  we  must  make  for- 
mal application  to  Moung  Zah. 

“ February  2d. — Went  to  various  places,  and 
made  various  inquiries  and  applications  for  a 
passport.  Ascertained  that  it  was  absolutely  ne- 
cessary, in  our  case,  to  procure  a special  one 
from  the  high  court  of  the  empire. 

“ February  3 d. — Sent  our  headman,  and  some 
of  our  people,  with  a petition  to  Moung  Zah. 
After  they  had  gone  off,  we  called  on  Mr.  G. 
He  informed  us  that  the  tract  had  been  presented 
to  Moung  Zah,  and  read  in  his  presence.  After 
listening  to  the  whole  of  it,  instead  of  throwing  it 
down,  or  even  returning  it,  he  committed  it  to  one 
of  his  people  to  keep,  saying  to  Mr.  G.,  ‘ The 
doctrines  and  commands  are  very  good : but  it 
will  be  a long  time  before  Burmans  can  be  con- 
vinced that  there  is  a God  and  Saviour.’  After 
this  interview  with  Moung  Zah,  Mr.  G.  was  sum- 
moned before  the  emperor.  His  majesty,  among 
other  things,  inquired  about  the  foreign  teachers. 


240  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

Mr.  G.  told  him  our  country,  our  character,  and 
our  object.  The  emperor  observed  that  the 
Portuguese  priest  had  told  him  very  different 
things  ; particularly,  that  we  were  a sect  of  Zan- 
dees  (a  race  very  obnoxious  to  former  emperors). 
Mr.  G.  endeavoured  to  vindicate  our  character ; 
but  the  emperor  appeared  quite  averse  to  hearing 
any  thing  in  our  favour.  What,  said  he,  laugh- 
ing, they  have  come,  presuming  to  convert  us  to 
their  religion.  Let  them  leave  our  capital.  We 
have  no  desire  to  receive  their  instructions.  Per- 
haps they  may  find  some  of  their  countrymen  in 
Rangoon,  who  may  be  willing  to  listen  to  them. 

“ Mr.  G.  now  advised  us  to  obtain  a royal  or- 
der, protecting  us  personally  from  molestation, 
while  we  should  remain  in  the  country ; other- 
wise, said  he,  as  it  will  be  notorious  that  you 
have  solicited  royal  patronage,  and  been  refused, 
you  will  lie  at  the  mercy  of  every  ill-disposed 
person. 

“ This  suggestion  of  Mr.  G.  occupied  our 
thoughts  the  rest  of  the  day.  We  finally  con- 
cluded, that,  as  such  an  order  would  cost  several 
hundred  ticals,  we  would  prefer  trusting  in  the 
Lord,  to  keep  us  and  our  poor  disciples. 

“ At  night,  our  people  returned.  They  had 
found  Moung  Zah,  had  presented  the  petition  for 
a passport,  to  which  he  made  no  other  reply,  but 
‘ Come  to-morrow/ 

“ February  Ath. — Sent  the  people,  early  in  the 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


241 


morning,  with  a handsome  present  to  Moung 
Zah.  They  returned  late  at  night.  He  accepted 
the  present,  and  assured  them,  he  would  do  our 
business  to-morrow. 

“ February  5th. — Sent  the  people  as  usual,  our 
trusty  Moung  Nau  accompanying  them,  with  a 
quantity  of  silver.  This  did  the  business.  Late 
in  the  evening,  I had  the  pleasure  of  taking  into 
my  hand  the  pointed  palm-leaf.  It  has  cost  us 
the  value  of  thirty  dollars. 

“ February  6th. — Pushed  off  from  the  beach  of 
O-ding-mau.  I could  moralize  half  an  hour  on 
the  apt  resemblance,  the  beautiful  congruity,  be- 
tween the  desolate  state  of  our  feelings  and  the 
sandy  barren  surface  of  this  miserable  beach. 
But  ‘ ’tis  idle  all.’  Let  the  beach  and  our  sor- 
row go  together.  Something  better  will  turn  up 
to-morrow. 

“ February  12 th. — Reached  Pyee,  230  miles 
from  Ava;  our  descent  on  the  river  being,  of 
course,  much  more  rapid  than  our  ascent.  Here, 
to  our  great  surprise,  we  met  with  the  teacher, 
Moung  Shway-gnong.  He  had  come  up  from 
Rangoon,  a few  days  ago,  to  visit  an  old  acquaint- 
ance, who  was  dangerously  ill ; expects  to  re- 
turn shortly ; would  gladly  go  with  us,  if  we 
could  wait  a day  or  two.  We  stated  to  him  all 
our  adventures  at  court,  the  distressing  result  of 
the  expedition,  and  the  present  danger  of  propa- 
gating or  professing  the  religion  of  Christ,  and 

K 


242  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

wound  off  with  the  story  of  the  iron  mall.  He 
appeared  to  be  less  affected  and  intimidated  by 
the  relation,  than  we  could  have  expected.  In- 
deed, his  language  was  rather  too  high  for  the 
occasion.  I therefore  told  him  that  it  was  not 
for  him  that  we  were  concerned,  but  for  those 
who  had  become  disciples  of  Christ.  When  they 
were  accused  and  persecuted,  they  could  not 
worship  at  the  pagodas,  or  recant  before  the 
Mangen  teacher.  He  felt  the  force  of  the  re- 
flection, and  tried  to  explain  his  past  conduct. 

‘ Say  nothing,’  said  I ; ‘ one  thing  you  know  to  be 
true,  that,  when  formerly  accused,  if  you  had 
not,  in  some  way  or  other,  satisfied  the  mind  of 
the  Mangen  teacher,  your  life  would  not  now  be 
remaining  in  your  body.’  ‘ Then,’  said  he,  ‘ if  I 
must  die,  I shall  die  in  a good  cause.  I know  it 
is  the  cause  of  truth.’  He  then  repeated,  with 
considerable  emphasis,  the  most  prominent  points 
of  his  present  faith,  as  follows : — ‘ I believe  in 
the  Eternal  God,  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  in  the 
atonement  which  Christ  has  made,  and  in  the 
writings  of  the  apostles,  as  the  true  and  only 
word  of  God.’  ‘ Perhaps,’  continued  he,  ‘ you 
may  not  remember,  that  during  one  of  my  last 
visits,  you  told  me,  that  I was  trusting  in  my 
own  understanding,  rather  than  in  the  Divine 
word.  From  that  time  I have  seen  my  error,  and 
endeavour  to  renounce  it.  You  explained  to  me 
also  the  evil  of  worshipping  at  pagodas,  though 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  243 

I told  you,  that  my  heart  did  not  partake  in  the 
worship.  Since  you  left  Rangoon,  I have  not  lifted 
up  my  folded  hands  before  a pagoda.  It  is  true, 
I sometimes  follow  the  crowd,  on  days  of  wor- 
ship, in  order  to  avoid  persecution ; but  I walk  up 
one  side  of  the  pagoda,  and  walk  down  the  other. 
Now,  you  say,  that  I am  not  a disciple.  What 
lack  I yet  ? ’ I was  now  satisfied  that  he  had  made 
a little  advance,  since  our  last  interview,  which 
required  a corresponding  advance  on  my  side. 
I replied,  therefore,  * Teacher,  you  may  be  a dis- 
ciple of  Christ  in  heart,  but  you  are  not  a full 
disciple.  You  have  not  faith  and  resolution 
enough  to  keep  all  the  commands  of  Christ,  par- 
ticularly that  which  requires  you  to  be  baptized, 
though  in  the  face  of  persecution  and  death. 
Consider  the  words  of  Jesus,  just  before  he  re- 
turned to  heaven,  “ He  that  believeth,  and  is 
baptized,  shall  be  saved.’”  He  received  this  com- 
munication in  profound  silence,  and  with  that 
air,  which  I have  observed  to  come  upon  him, 
when  he  takes  a thing  into  serious  consideration. 
Soon  after,  I hinted  our  intention  of  leaving 
Rangoon,  since  the  emperor  had  virtually  pro- 
hibited the  propagation  of  the  Christian  reli- 
gion, and  no  Burman,  under  such  circumstances, 
would  dare  to  investigate,  much  less  to  embrace 
it.  This  intelligence  evidently  roused  him,  and 
showed  us  that  we  had  more  interest  in  his  heart 
than  we  thought.  ‘ Say  not  so,'  said  he,  ‘ there 


244  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION. 

are  some  who  will  investigate,  notwithstanding ; 
and  rather  than  have  you  quit  Rangoon,  I will  go 
myself  to  the  Mangen  teacher,  and  have  a pub- 
lic dispute.  I know  I can  silence  fiim.  I know 
the  truth  is  on  my  side.’  ‘ Ah,’  said  I,  ‘ you  may 
have  a tongue  to  silence  him,  but  he  has  a pair  of 
fetters  and  an  iron  mall  to  subdue  you.  Remember 
that.’  This  was  the  substance  of  our  conversa- 
tion, though  much  more  prolix;  and  he  left  us 
about  nine  o’clock  at  night. 

“ This  interview  furnished  matter  for  conversa- 
tion till  past  midnight,  and  kept  us  awake  much 
of  the  remainder  of  the  night.  Perhaps,  on  ar- 
riving in  Rangoon,  we  shall  find  the  disciples 
firm,  and  some  others  seriously  inquiring.  Per- 
haps we  shall  discover  some  appearances  of  a 
movement  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Perhaps  the 
Lord  Jesus  has  a few  chosen  ones,  whom  he  in- 
tends to  call  in,  under  the  most  unpropitious  and 
forbidding  circumstances.  Perhaps  he  intends 
to  show,  that  it  is  not  by  might,  nor  by  power, 
but  by  his  Spirit.  In  a word,  perhaps,  in  the  last 
extremity,  God  will  help  us.  Ought  we,  then, 
hastily  to  forsake  the  place  ? Ought  we  to  de- 
sert those  of  the  disciples  that  we  cannot  take 
with  us,  and  some  others,  for  whom  Christ 
died,  in  such  an  interesting  crisis  of  their  fate  ? 
Would  it  be  rashness  to  endeavour  to  trust  in 
God,  and  maintain  the  post,  though  disallowed 
by  government,  and  exposed  to  persecution  ? 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  245 

But,  again,  can  we  bear  to  see  our  dear  disciples 
in  prison,  in  fetters,  under  torture  ? Can  we  stand 
by  them,  and  encourage  them  to  bear  patiently 
the  rage  of  their  persecutors  ? Are  we  willing  to 
participate  with  them?  Though  the  spirit  may 
be  sometimes  almost  willing,  is  not  the  flesh  too 
weak  ? 

“ Pondering  on  such  topics  as  these,  a little 
ray  of  hope  seemed  to  shine  out  of  the  darkness 
of  our  despair.  But  it  was  not  like  the  soft  beam 
of  the  moon,  which  kindly  shines  on  the  path  of 
the  benighted  pilgrim,  and  guides  him  to  a place 
of  shelter.  It  was  rather  like  the  angry  gleam  of 
lightning,  which,  while  for  a moment  it  illumines 
the  landscape  around,  discloses  the  black  maga- 
zines of  heaven’s  artillery,  and  threatens  death  to 
the  unwary  gazer. 

“ February  18 th. — Arrived  in  Rangoon. 

“ February  20 th,  Lord's  day. — In  the  evening, 
I called  the  three  disciples  together,  and  gave 
them  a connected  account  of  the  affair  at  Ava, 
that  they  might  have  a full  understanding  of  the 
dangers  of  their  present  condition,  and  the  rea- 
sons of  our  intended  departure  from  Rangoon. 
We  expected,  that  after  being  destitute  of  all 
the  means  of  grace  for  some  time,  and  after  see- 
ing their  teachers  driven  away  from  the  presence 
of  their  monarch  in  disgrace,  they  would  become 
cold  in  their  affections,  and  have  but  little  re- 
maining zeal  for  a cause  thus  proscribed  and  ex- 


246  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

posed  to  persecution.  We  thought,  that  if  one 
out  of  the  three  remained  firm,  it  was  as  much 
as  we  could  reasonably  hope  for.  But  how  de- 
lightfully were  we  disappointed  ! They  all,  to  a 
man,  appeared  immoveably  the  same,  yea,  rather 
advanced  in  zeal  and  energy.  They  vied  with 
each  other,  in  trying  to  explain  away  difficulties, 
and  to  convince  us,  that  the  cause  was  not  yet 
quite  desperate.  ‘ But  whither  are  the  teachers 
going?’  was,  of  course,  an  anxious  inquiry.  We 
told  them,  that  it  was  our  intention  never  to 
desert  Burmah ; but  that  since  the  emperor  had 
refused  to  tolerate  our  religion,  we  thought  it 
necessary  to  leave,  for  a time,  those  parts  of 
the  empire  which  are  immediately  under  his  do- 
minion; that  there  is  a tract  of  country,  lying 
between  Bengal  and  Arrakan,  which,  though  un- 
der the  government  of  Bengal,  is  chiefly  inhabited 
by  Arrakanese,  who  speak  a language  similar  to 
the  Burman,  the  district  being  really  a part  of 
Arrakan,  one  component  part  of  the  present 
Burman  empire ; that  formerly  a teacher  from 
Bengal  (De  Bruyn)  lived  at  Chittagong,  the  prin- 
cipal town  in  that  district,  and  baptized  several 
converts,  who,  at  his  death,  were  left  destitute 
of  all  instruction  to  the  present  time ; and  that, 
in  view  of  these  considerations,  it  was  our  pur- 
pose to  proceed  thither,  in  hope  of  finding  that 
toleration  which  was  denied  us  in  Rangoon.  We 
then  asked  them  severally  what  they  would  do. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  247 

Moung  Nau  had  previously  told  us,  that  he 
would  follow  us  to  any  part  of  the  world.  He 
was  only  afraid  that  he  should  be  a burden  to  us  ; 
for,  not  being  acquainted  with  another  language, 
he  might  not  be  able  to  get  his  living  in  a strange 
land.  ‘ As  for  me,’  said  Moung  Thahlah,  ‘ I go 
where  preaching  is  to  be  had.’  Moung  Byaay 
was  silent  and  thoughtful.  At  last,  he  said,  that 
as  no  Burman  woman  is  allowed  to  leave  the 
country,  he  could  not,  on  account  of  his  wife, 
follow  the  teachers ; but  (continued  he,  with 
some  pathos),  if  I must  be  left  here  alone,  I shall 
remain  performing  the  duties  of  Jesus  Christ’s  re- 
ligion ; no  other  shall  I think  of.  This  interview 
with  the  disciples  rejoiced  our  hearts,  and  caused 
us  to  praise  God  for  the  grace  which  he  has 
manifested  to  them. 

“ February  — We  have  spent  three  or  four 

days  in  inquiring  about  Chittagong,  and  the 
prospect  of  getting  a passage  directly  thither,  or 
by  the  way  of  Bengal. 

“ This  evening,  Moung  Byaay  came  up  with 
his  brother-in-law,  Moung  Myat-yah,  who  has 
lived  in  our  yard  several  months,  and  formerly  at- 
tended worship  in  the  Zayat.  ‘ I have  come,’  said 
Moung  Byaay,  ‘ to  petition  that  you  will  not  leave 
Rangoon  at  present.’  £ I think,’  replied  I,  ‘ that 
it  is  useless  to  remain  under  present  circum- 
stances. We  cannot  open  the  Zayat;  we  cannot 
have  public  worship ; no  Burman  will  dare  to 


248  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

examine  this  religion  ; and  if  none  examine,  none 
can  be  expected  to  embrace  it.’  ‘ Teacher,’  said 
he,  ‘ my  mind  is  distressed ; I can  neither  eat  nor 
sleep,  since  I find  you  are  going  away.  I have 
been  around  among  those  who  live  near  us,  and  I 
find  some  who  are  even  now  examining  the  new 
religion.  Brother  Myat-yah  is  one  of  them,  and 
he  unites  with  me  in  my  petitions.  (Here  Myat- 
yah  assented  that  it  was  so.)  Do  stay  with  us  a 
few  months.  Do  stay  till  there  are  eight  or  ten 
disciples.  Then  appoint  one  to  be  the  teacher  of 
the  rest;  I shall  not  be  concerned  about  the 
event ; though  you  should  leave  the  country,  the 
religion  will  spread  of  itself.  The  emperor  him- 
self cannot  stop  it.  But  if  you  go  now,  and  take 
the  two  disciples  that  can  follow,  I shall  be  left 
alone.  I cannot  baptize  those  who  may  wish  to 
embrace  this  religion.  What  can  I do?’  Moung 
Nau  came  in,  and  expressed  himself  in  a similar 
way.  He  thought,  that  several  would  yet  be- 
come disciples,  notwithstanding  all  opposition, 
and  that  it  was  best  for  us  to  stay  a while.  We 
could  not  restrain  our  tears  at  hearing  all  this ; 
and  we  told  them,  that  as  we  lived  only  for  the 
promotion  of  the  cause  of  Christ,  among  the  Bur- 
mans,  if  there  was  any  prospect  of  success  in 
Rangoon,  we  had  no  desire  to  go  to  another 
place,  and  would,  therefore,  re-consider  the 
matter. 

“ February  2 6th. — Moung  Shway-boo,  a sedate 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  249 

and  pleasant  man,  who  came  to  live  in  our  yard 
just  before  we  went  to  Ava,  accompanied  Moung 
Myat-yah  to  the  usual  evening  worship.  When 
we  were  about  breaking  up,  Moung  Thahlah  be- 
gan conversation,  by  saying,  ‘ Teacher,  your  in- 
tention of  going  away,  has  filled  us  all  with  trou- 
ble. Is  it  good  to  forsake  us  thus  ? Notwith- 
standing present  difficulties  and  dangers,  it  is  to 
be  remembered,  that  this  work  is  not  yours  or 
ours,  but  the  work  of  God.  If  he  give  light,  the 
religion  will  spread.  Nothing  can  impede  it.’ 
After  conversing  some  time,  I found  that  Moung 
Louk,  another  inhabitant  of  the  yard,  had  been 
listening  without.  Accordingly,  he  was  invited  to 
take  his  seat  with  the  inquirers.  Moung  Byaay 
now  began  to  be  in  earnest,  his  arm  was  elevated, 
and  his  eyes  brightened.  ‘ Let  us  all,’  said  he, 
‘ make  an  effort.  As  for  me,  I will  pray.  Only 
leave  a little  church  of  ten,  with  a teacher  set 
over  them,  and  I shall  be  fully  satisfied.’  Moung 
Nau  took  a very  active  part  in  the  conversation. 
The  three  new  ones  said  nothing,  except  that  they 
were  desirous  of  considering  the  religion  of  Christ. 
Neither  of  them,  however,  was  willing  to  admit, 
that,  as  yet,  he  believed  any  thing. 

“We  felt  that  it  was  impossible  for  us  all  to 
leave  these  people,  in  these  interesting  circum- 
stances ; and,  at  the  same  time,  we  felt  it  very 
important  that  Chittagong  should  not  be  neg- 
lected. Under  these  circumstances  we  came 


250  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

to  the  conclusion,  that  brother  Colman  should 
proceed  immediately  to  Chittagong,  collect  the 
Arrakanese  converts,  and  form  a station,  to  which 
new  missionaries  from  the  Board  might  at  first  re- 
pair, and  to  which  I might  ultimately  flee,  with 
those  of  the  disciples  that  could  leave  the  country, 
when  we  found  that  persecution  so  violent,  as  to 
suppress  all  further  inquiry,  and  render  it  useless 
and  rash  to  remain  ; that  I should  remain  in  Ran- 
goon, until  the  state  of  things  became  thus  des- 
perate, and  then  endeavour  to  join  brother  C.  in 
Chittagong  ; but  that  if,  contrary  to  our  expecta- 
tion, the  Rangoon  station  should,  after  a lapse  of 
several  months,  appear  to  be  tenable,  and  that  for 
an  indefinite  time,  and  some  work  be  evidently 
going  on,  brother  C.,  after  settling  one  or  two 
missionaries  in  Chittagong,  to  keep  that  place, 
should  rejoin  me  in  Rangoon. 

“ February  27th,  Lord's  day. — Had  private  wor- 
ship in  the  Zayat — the  front  doors  closed — none 
present  but  the  disciples  and  inquirers. 

“ February  28 th. — A visit  from  Moung  Shway- 
gnong.  He  had  considered  (he  said)  my  last 
words,  that  one  must  believe  and  be  baptized,  in 
order  to  be  a full  disciple  ; it  was  his  desire  to  be 
such;  and  he  wanted  to  know  what  outward 
rules,  in  particular,  he  must  observe,  in  case  he 
should  become  a professor.  I told  him,  that  the 
disciples  of  Christ,  after  baptism,  were  associated 
together ; that  they  assembled  every  Lord's  day 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  951 

for  worship ; and  that,  from  time  to  time,  they 
received  the  sacrament  of  bread  and  wine.  I 
then  warned  him  of  the  danger  of  self-deception, 
and  of  the  persecution  to  which  disciples  were 
exposed  in  this  country,  and  advised  him  to  re- 
consider the  matter  most  thoroughly,  before  he 
made  a definite  request  for  baptism. 

“ After  he  had  gone,  Oo  Yan  (mentioned  Dec. 
19th)  came  in — was  disappointed  in  not  finding 
Moung  Shway-gnong,  having  agreed  to  meet  him 
at  the  mission-house.  We  had  a long  conversa- 
tion on  doctrinal  points,  in  which  he  discovered  a 
very  acute,  discriminating  mind. 

“ March  2d. — Another  visit  from  Oo  Yan.  Ven- 
ture to  indulge  a little  hope,  that  truth  is  begin- 
ning to  operate  on  his  mind. 

“ March  5th,  Lord's  day. — Private  worship,  as 
last  Lord's  day.  In  the  evening,  received  the  sa- 
crament of  bread  and  wine.  Moung  Nau  was  not 
present,  having  gone  on  a visit  to  Bau-lay,  his 
native  place.  Had  a refreshing  and  happy  season, 
with  the  two  other  disciples.  Two  of  the  in- 
quirers were  spectators. 

“ March  8th. — In  the  evening,  had  a very  plea- 
sant and  instructive  conference  with  the  disciples 
and  inquirers.  Moung  Thahlah  appeared  to  great 
advantage ; took  the  lead  in  explaining  truth  to 
the  new  ones,  and  quoted  Scripture  with  singular 
facility  and  aptness.  He  has  most  evidently  very 
correct  views  of  the  doctrines  of  grace.  Moung 


252  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

Myat-yah  appears  to  begin  to  discern  the  excel- 
lence of  the  Christian  system,  and  to  have  some 
right  feelings  towards  the  Saviour. 

“ March  1C )th. — Moung  Shway-gnong  and  Oo 
Yan  have  been  with  me  several  hours;  but  the 
interview  has  afforded  very  little  encouragement. 
The  former  said  but  little  on  his  own  account — 
appearing  chiefly  desirous  of  convincing  and  per- 
suading his  friend,  that  he  might  gain  (as  I se- 
cretly suspected),  some  companion  of  his  own 
rank  in  life,  before  he  embraced  the  new  religion. 
The  latter  acted  on  the  defensive,  and  spent  all 
his  time  in  raising  objections.  He  was  ready  to 
admit,  that  the  atheistic  system  of  the  Boodhists, 
was  not  tenable  ; but  endeavoured  to  fortify  him- 
self on  a middle  system,  between  that  and  the 
Christian ; the  very  system,  in  which  Moung 
Shway-gnong  formerly  rested,  and  which,  for  dis- 
tinction's sake,  may  be  fitly  termed  the  semi- 
atheistic.  Its  fundamental  doctrine  is,  that  Divine 
wisdom,  not  concentrated  in  any  existing  spirit, 
or  embodied  in  any  form,  but  diffused  throughout 
the  universe,  and  partaken  in  different  degrees, 
by  various  intelligences,  and  in  a very  high  de- 
gree by  the  Boodhs,  is  the  true  and  only  God. 
This  poor  system,  which  is  evidently  guilty  of 
suicide,  Oo  Yan  made  every  possible  effort  to 
keep  alive ; but  I really  think,  that,  in  his  own 
mind,  he  felt  the  case  to  be  hopeless.  His  mode 
of  reasoning,  however,  is  soft,  insinuating,  and 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  253 

acute ; and  so  adroitly  did  he  act  his  part,  that 
Moung  Shway-gnong,  with  his  strong  arm,  and  I, 
with  the  strength  of  truth,  were  scarcely  able  to 
keep  him  down. 

“ March  \3th.— The  teacher  and  Oo  Yan,  with 
two  of  their  friends,  came  and  spent  several  hours. 
The  former  stayed  later  than  the  others,  and  at- 
tended evening  worship.  I asked  him,  whether 
there  was  any  point  in  the  Christian  system,  on 
which  he  had  not  obtained  satisfaction.  He  replied 
that  he  was  not  yet  satisfied  as  to  the  propriety 
of  God's  appointing  one  particular  day  in  the 
week,  for  assembling  together,  in  distinction  from 
all  other  days.  I saw,  at  once,  why  he  had  al- 
ways been  so  remiss  in  attending  worship  on  the 
Lord's  day  ; and  I therefore  proceeded  to  state 
the  nature  of  positive  commands,  and  their  pecu- 
liar excellence,  as  the  best  test  of  obedience  ; that 
it  was  evidently  beneficial  for  the  disciples  of 
Christ  to  assemble  sometimes ; that  God,  in  ap- 
pointing that  such  an  assembly  should  be  held  at 
least  one  day  in  seven,  must  be  supposed  to  be 
guided  by  wisdom,  infinitely  transcending  that  of 
man ; that  if  the  disciples  of  Christ  are  to  meet 
once  at  least  in  seven  days,  it  is  evidently  best  to 
have  the  day  of  meeting  designated,  in  order  to 
secure  their  general  union  and  concert ; and  that 
the  first  day  of  the  week  had  at  least  this  claim  to 
preference,  that  it  was  the  day  on  which  our 
Saviour  rose  from  the  dead.  I descanted  on  these 


254  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

points  to  his  apparent  satisfaction ; but  let  us  see 
whether  he  will  come  next  Lord’s  day. 

“ Later  in  the  evening  had  an  instructive 
conference  with  Moung  Myat-yah  and  Moung 
Shway-boo.  They  both  appear  to  have  obtained 
some  of  that  light,  which,  like  the  dawn  of  morn- 
ing, shineth  more  and  more  unto  perfect  day. 

“ March  1 5th. — Another  visit  from  the  teacher, 
accompanied  with  his  wife  and  child.  Again  dis- 
cussed the  necessity  of  assembling  on  the  Lord’s 
day.  Found  that  the  sacraments  of  baptism  and 
the  Lord’s  supper  are,  in  his  mind,  liable  to  similar 
objections.  Forsook,  therefore,  all  human  reason- 
ing, and  rested  the  merits  of  the  case  on  the  bare 
authority  of  Christ : ‘ Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do 
whatsoever  I command  you.’  Notwithstanding 
the  remains  of  his  deistical  spirit,  however,  I ob- 
tained, during  this  visit,  more  satisfactory  evi- 
dence of  his  real  conversion,  than  ever  before. 
He  said,  that  he  knew  nothing  of  an  eternally 
existing  God,  before  he  met  with  me ; that,  on 
hearing  that  doctrine,  he  instantly  believed  it; 
but  that  it  was  a long  time  before  he  closed  with 
Christ.  Can  you  recollect  the  time,  said  I.  Not 
precisely,  he  replied ; but  it  was  during  a visit, 
when  you  discoursed  concerning  the  Trinity,  the 
Divine  Sonship  of  Jesus,  and  the  great  sufferings 
which  he,  though  truly  God,  endured  for  his  dis- 
ciples. He  afterwards  spoke,  with  much  Chris- 
tian feeling,  on  the  preciousness  of  the  last  part 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  255 

of  the  sixth  chapter  of  St.  Matthew,  which  he 
heard  me  read,  the  day  before  yesterday,  at  even- 
ing worship. 

“ March  21  st.  — Moung  Thahlah  introduced 
one  of  his  relations,  by  name  Moung  Shway-bay, 
as  desirous  of  considering  the  Christian  religion. 
Spent  an  hour  or  two  in  conversing  with  him. 
He  was  afterwards  present  at  evening  worship, 
and  stayed  to  converse,  after  the  rest  had  retired. 

“ March  22 d.  — Another  conversation  with 
Moung  Shway-bay.  He  appears  to  be  under 
deep  religious  impressions.  His  language  and 
his  looks  evince  an  uncommon  solemnity  of  spirit, 
an  earnest  desire  to  be  saved  from  the  wrath  to 
come.  After  praying  with  him,  I left  him  in 
company  with  Moung  Thahlah. 

“ March  23^.— In  the  morning,  Moung  Thah- 
lah informed  me  that  he  and  his  friend  had  sat  up 
the  greater  part  of  the  night,  in  the  Zayat,  read- 
ing, and  conversing,  and  praying.  In  the  after- 
noon, Moung  Shway-bay  came  in  himself.  His 
expressions  are  very  strong ; but  I have  no  rea- 
son to  doubt  his  sincerity.  It  only  seems  strange 
to  us,  that  a work  of  grace  should  be  carried  on 
so  rapidly,  in  the  soul  of  an  ignorant  heathen. 
He  presented  a writing,  containing  a statement  of 
his  faith,  and  an  urgent  request  to  be  baptized 
next  Lord's  day. 

“ March  24th. — Spent  all  the  evening  with 
Moung  Shway-bay.  Feel  satisfied  that  he  has 


256 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


experienced  a work  of  Divine  grace ; but  think 
it  advisable  to  defer  his  baptism,  until  Sunday 
after  next,  in  order  to  allow  him  full  time  to  re- 
examine the  religion,  and  the  foundation  of  his 
hopes. 

“ March  2 6th,  Lord's  day. — -Three  women  pre- 
sent at  worship — acquaintances  of  Moung  Shway- 
gnong.  They  have  visited  Mrs.  Judson  once  or 
twice  before.  The  principal  of  them  renounced 
Gaudama,  some  years  ago,  and  adopted  the  semi- 
atheistic  system,  but  without  obtaining  any  real 
satisfaction.  Two  years  ago,  she  met  with  a copy 
of  the  tract,  which  gave  her  an  idea  of  an  eternally 
existing  God ; but  she  knew  not  whence  the  pa- 
per came.  At  length,  Moung  Shway-gnong  told 
her  that  he  had  found  the  true  wisdom,  and  di- 
rected her  to  us.  Her  case  appears  very  hopeful. 

“ In  the  evening,  after  worship,  had  a pro- 
tracted conversation  with  the  disciples  and  in- 
quirers, on  account  of  brother  Colman’s  intended 
departure  to-morrow.  Moung  Shway-bay  ap- 
peared very  well  indeed.  Moung  Myat-yah  said, 

‘ Set  me  down  for  a disciple.  I have  fully  made 
up  my  mind,  in  regard  to  this  religion.  I love 
Jesus  Christ:  but  I am  not  yet  quite  ready  for 
baptism.’  After  we  dismissed  them,  they  went 
over  to  the  Zayat,  of  their  own  accord,  and  held 
a prayer  meeting. 

“ And  here  I must  close  my  journal.  We  have 
spent  the  last  evening  with  our  very  dear  brother 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIIU2.  257 

and  sister  Colman.  They  expect  to  embark  to- 
morrow morning.  Our  parting  is  mournful ; for 
happy,  uncommonly  happy,  has  been  our  past  in- 
tercourse. Nothing  but  a sense  of  duty,  could 
force  the  present  separation.  We  hope  that  it 
will  be  of  short  duration,  and  that  we  shall  soon 
reunite  our  labours  in  Chittagong  or  Rangoon.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully. 


A.  H.  J. 


258 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


LETTER  XII. 

Baltimore,  February,  1823. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

After  the  departure  of  our  beloved  friends,  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Colman,  we  again  found  ourselves  in 
our  former  solitary  situation,  with  this  exception, 
that  our  faithful  and  affectionate  Burmans  re- 
mained with  us,  and  often  comforted  our  hearts, 
by  the  daily  exhibition  of  spiritual  mindedness, 
and  sincerity  in  their  profession. 

The  importance  of  having  a branch  of  the  Bur- 
man  mission  established  at  Chittagong,  was  ob- 
vious, from  the  consideration  that  this  district 
was  under  the  British  government,  and  separated 
from  the  Burman  territory  only  by  a river.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Colman  arrived  at  that  place,  in  June, 
1820,  and  made  a most  encouraging  beginning. 
They  had  erected  a house  in  the  midst  of  the 
native  population,  and  made  rapid  progress  in  the 
acquisition  of  the  language,  which  was  com- 
menced while  in  Rangoon.  Mr.  Colman  had 
begun  to  communicate  the  truths  of  the  gospel 
publicly,  and  had  witnessed  their  effect  on  the 
mind  of  his  teacher,  when  these  animating  pros- 
pects were  blasted  by  the  sudden,  unexpected. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


259 


&nd  lamented  death  of  this  valuable  missionary. 
But  even  this  heavy  affliction  is  attended  with 
circumstances  of  mercy.  Mr.  Colman  was  per- 
mitted to  live,  until  he  had  given  to  the  Christian 
world  one  of  the  most  striking  instances  of 
Christian  decision  and  pure  missionary  zeal,  ever 
exhibited  since  the  commencement  of  modern 
missions. 

In  Chittagong,  he  might  have  lived  comfortably 
in  civilized  Christian  society,  under  the  protec- 
tion of  the  English  government,  and  been  usefully 
employed  in  missionary  avocations.  But  in  imi- 
tation of  the  Redeemer,  and  prompted  by  feel- 
ings of  compassion  for  immortal  souls,  he  chose 
his  residence  in  a native  village,  where  he  was 
surrounded  by  poverty,  ignorance,  and  delusion, 
and  where  too,  he  fell  a martyr  to  his  zeal ! * 


* The  Christian  spirit  of  this  excellent  man,  may  be  discovered 
in  the  following  extract  from  a letter,  which  he  wrote  to  a friend  in 
January,  1821 : — 

“ For  six  months  past,  I have  been  so’ engaged  in  missionary 
work,  that  the  dear  land  of  my  nativity  has  occupied  but  few  of  my 
thoughts.  A short  time  since,  however,  the  ‘ Memoir  of  Henry 
Martyn’  was  put  into  my  hands  ; and  while  reading  the  account  of 
his  departure  from  England,  the  sad  but  joyful  morning  on  which  I 
bade  adieu  to  America,  came  fresh  to  my  remembrance,  and  a 
train  of  sensations  was  excited,  of  which  I have  often  been  the  sub- 
ject. I walked  out  in  the  virandah,  and  the  sun  was  sinking  in  the 
•west ; I fancied  that  I saw  my  far  distant  brethren,  rising  from 
sweet  'repose,  and  engaging  in  the  various  duties  of  life.  Their 
countenances  passed  before  my  mind ; and  while  recollecting  that  I 

s 2 


260  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

Happy  Colman ! The  few  short  years  he  was 
allowed  to  labour  on  mission  ground  were  faith- 
fully improved  ; he  was  early  released  from  a life 
of  toil  and  privation,  and  admitted  into  the  pre- 
sence of  him,  from  whom  he  doubtless  heard  these 
transporting  words  : ‘Well  done,  good  and  faith- 
ful servant,  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord.’ 

A very  interesting  letter,  from  Mrs.  Colman  to 
Mr.  Colman’s  mother,  detailing  the  particulars  of 
his  death,  having  just  been  received,  is  inserted, 
with  a view  of  exhibiting  to  the  world  another 
instance  of  the  power  of  religion  to  support  the 
Christian,  under  the  most  appalling  circumstances. 

“ Chittagong,  Sept.  26,  1822. — Your  letter  of 
August  28th,  1821,  was  duly  received.  While 
reading  the  account  which  it  contains  of  the 
death  of  Mr.  H.  Pearce,  I little  suspected  it  would 
so  speedily  fall  to  my  lot  to  communicate  to  you 
intelligence  of  a similar  nature.  Alas ! it  is  my 
painful  duty  to  mention  a death,  in  which  you  are 
more  deeply  interested  than  in  that  of  the  above, 
and  which,  should  you  not  have  previously  heard 
of  it,  will  awaken  in  your  bosom  the  tenderest 
sorrow.  Your  affectionate  son,  the  amiable  and 
dearly  beloved  companion  of  my  joys  and  sorrows. 


should  enjoy  their  society  no  more  on  earth,  my  thoughts  were 
quickly  transported  to  that  happy  world,  in  which  all  whose  names 
are  written  in  the  Book  of  Life  shall  be  united,  never  again  to  part. 
Reflections  like  these  often  cheer  the  hour  of  solitude,  and  produce 
emotions  indescribably  pleasant.” 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  261 

is  no  more ! How  trying  and  mysterious  are  the 
dispensations  of  Providence  ! On  the  arrival  of 
your  letter,  which  was  the  8th  of  June,  Mr.  C. 
was  well,  and  enjoyed  an  unusual  flow  of  spirits. 
He  was  warmly  engaged  in  the  cause  of  his  Divine 
Master,  and  his  life,  to  human  appearance,  was 
never  more  necessary.  But,  just  at  this  interest- 
ing period.  Infinite  wisdom  saw  fit  to  remove  him. 
On  the  28th  of  June  he  was  attacked  by  an  inter- 
mittent fever.  He  took  such  medicines  as  are 
commonly  used  in  similar  cases.  They  produced 
a good  effect ; and  such  were  the  favourable  symp- 
toms of  his  disease,  and  so  slight  his  sufferings 
during  the  first  five  days,  that  neither  of  us  appre- 
hended the  least  danger.  On  the  sixth  day,  how- 
ever, he  suddenly  grew  worse,  and  early  in  the 
evening  the  fever  came  on  in  a more  alarming 
manner  than  it  had  done  at  any  preceding  time. 
I gave  him  some  medicine,  which  considerably 
abated  its  violence.  He  became  quite  composed, 
and  after  speaking  a few  words  to  me,  fell  into  a 
gentle  sleep.  I remained  by  him  in  a state  of 
great  anxiety,  but  still  thought  there  was  every 
appearance  of  his  having  a comfortable  night, 
and  I determined,  as  I saw  his  disorder  increasing" 
so  fast,  that  should  we  both  be  spared  until  the 
next  day,  I would  remove  with  him  to  Chitta- 
gong, hoping  that  a change  of  air  might  prove 
beneficial.  But,  alas!  he  was  not  permitted  to 
behold  the  light  of  another  sun.  After  remaining 


262  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

composed  for  a short  time,  I had  the  disappoint- 
ment to  perceive  that  he  grew  extremely  restless. 
I awoke  him ; and,  oh ! what  agony  of  mind  I 
felt,  when  I found  that  delirium  had  made  its  ap- 
proach ! It  was  then  about  eleven  o’clock.  After 
this,  the  fever  increased  in  a rapid  and  violent 
manner,  and  rendered  ineffectual  every  effort 
which  I made  to  save  a life  so  dear  to  me.  His 
sufferings  were  very  extreme,  until  towards  the 
close,  when  it  pleased  God  to  lessen  their  severity. 
Although  unable  to  speak,  yet  he  seemed  entirely 
delivered  from  pain,  and  breathed  his  last  without 
a groan  or  struggle. 

“I  am  sensible,  my  dear  mother,  that  this  event 
will  be  peculiarly  trying  to  you.  I am  sure  it 
has  left  me  most  disconsolate  and  afflicted.  It  has 
indeed  been  almost  too  much  for  my  feeble  nature 
to  sustain.  But,  however  severe  our  sufferings, 
let  us  rest  satisfied  that  the  event  has  been  or- 
dered by  unerring  wisdom.  If  God  condescends 
to  number  the  hairs  of  our  head,  and  to  take  notice 
of  even  the  sparrow  which  falleth  to  the  ground, 
certainly  he  is  not  indifferent  to  those  events 
which  relate  to  the  prosperity  of  his  own  king- 
dom. God  knew  perfectly  well  what  would  be 
the  result  of  our  going  to  Cox’s  Bazar.  It  was 
according  to  his  holy  will  that  there  Mr.  C.  should 
be  visited  with  sickness,  and  that  that  sickness 
should  terminate  in  death.  May  we  therefore  be 
enabled  to  exercise  that  submission  which  is, 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  263 

pleasing  in  his  sight,  and  to  say,  with  an  afflicted 
saint  of  old,  * Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I trust 
in  him.’ 

“ Let  it  also  be  our  consolation,  that  the  dear 
subject  of  this  letter  was  fully  prepared  for  hea- 
ven, and  that  his  happy  spirit,  now  released  from 
this  world  of  sin  and  suffering,  is  enjoying  the 
company  of  angels  and  glorified  beings,  and 
drinking  full  draughts  of  bliss  from  that  river  of 
pleasure  which  flows  at  the  right  hand  of  God  and 
the  Lamb.  He  did  not  put  off  the  concerns  of 
eternity  until  confined  to  a sick  bed.  No : while 
blest  with  health,  and  in  the  full  possession  of  his 
rational  powers,  he  made  it  his  business  to  pre- 
pare for  a dying  hour.  During  the  last  eighteen 
months  of  his  life,  his  mind  was  unusually  solemn, 
and  seemed  to  be  under  a strong  presentiment 
that  he  should  be  early  removed  from  this  world. 
Frequently,  when  under  the  influence  of  these  im- 
pressions, he  has  conversed  in  the  most  solemn 
and  impressive  manner  respecting  his  own  dis- 
solution. One  of  these  seasons,  in  particular,  is 
deeply  engraven  on  my  memory.  Coming  one 
day  from  his  place  of  retirement,  he  seated  him- 
self by  me,  and  with  a placid  and  heavenly  air, 
conversed  with  me  concerning  an  early  separa- 
tion, and  entreated  me  to  prepare  my  mind  for 

r 

such  an  event,  as  he  fully  believed  his  time  on 
earth  was  short.  He  remarked,  the  prospect  of 
death  was  animating,  and  that  he  had  not  a desire 


264  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

to  live,  but  for  my  sake,  and  that  of  the  poor 
heathen.  You  may  well  imagine,  my  dear  mo- 
ther, that  the  subject  was  then  painful  to  my  feel- 
ings ; but  it  now  affords  me  great  satisfaction  to 
reflect  on  these  seasons.  I believe  that  God  was 
then  preparing  him  for  exactly  the  sudden  death 
that  awaited  him,  and  for  a state  of  heavenly 
existence. 

“ I rejoice  that  you  are  surrounded  by  Chris- 
tian friends,  who  will  feel  it  their  privilege  to 
sympathize  with  you  on  this  melancholy  occasion. 
And  may  God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  pour  into 
your  bosom  the  balm  of  heavenly  consolation, 
conduct  you  safely  through  this  vale  of  tears,  and 
at  last,  may  we  both  have  a happy  re-union  with 
our  beloved  friend,  in  that  world  where  distract- 
ing sorrows  and  separations  are  unknown.” 

Our  tittle  church  at  Rangoon,  at  this  time, 
February,  1820,  consisted  of  only  five  members, 
two  foreigners  and  three  Burmans.  Its  rapid  and 
encouraging  increase,  together  with  some  domes- 
tic affliction,  is  described  in  Mr.  Judson’s  journal, 
as  follows : 

“ March  21th. — Brother  and  sister  Colman 
took  leave  of  us,  and  embarked  for  Bengal. 

“ March  28 th. — We  have  converted  one  of  the 
rooms,  lately  occupied  by  brother  Colman,  into  a 
sort  of  chapel  for  evening  worship,  and  conversa- 
tion with  those  of  the  disciples  and  inquirers  who 
live  on  the  mission  premises,  and  for  stated  wor- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  265 

ship  on  Lord’s  day  ; thus  finally  abandoning  the 
Zayat,  where,  since  our  return  from  Ava,  we 
have  had  worship  on  Lord’s  day,  with  closed 
doors.  The  little  chapel  we  call  the  new  Zayat. 
May  its  blessings  prevail  above  the  blessings  of 
its  progenitor. 

“ April  l$f.- — In  the  evening  we  had  a final  con- 
versation with  Moung  Shway-bay,  and  became 
fully  satisfied  with  the  evidences  of  his  conver- 
sion. We  therefore  expressed  our  willingness  to 
receive  him  into  church  fellowship,  and  I an- 
nounced to  him  my  intention  of  baptizing  him 
to-morrow,  on  which  he  expressed  his  gratitude 
and  joy. 

“ April  2 d,  Lord’s  day. — -At  night,  after  dark, 
we  went  privately  to  the  accustomed  pond,  and 
baptized  the  new  disciple.  Afterwards,  sat  down 
to  the  table  of  the  Lord — two  foreign  and  four 
native  communicants.  Three  inquirers  were  ad- 
mitted to  be  spectators. 

“ April  1 Ith. — A visit  from  Oo  Yan,  accompa- 
nied by  two  of  his  friends,  who  have  been  before. 
Long  conversation  on  topics  of  the  Christian  re- 
ligion. 

“ April  14 th. — The  women,  mentioned  March 
26th,  spent  most  of  the  day  with  Mrs.  J.  They 
regularly  visit  about  once  a week.  I mention  the 
visit  of  to-day,  because  it  has  afforded  pretty  sa- 
tisfactory evidence,  that  the  principal  one  of  the 
company,  by  name  Mah  Men-lay,  has  experienced 


266  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

Divine  grace.  Her  husband  is  one  of  the  visitors, 
who  came  with  Oo  Yan,  on  the  11th. 

“ April  1 5th. — Moung  Shway-bay,  has,  for 
some  days,  been  talking  of  a visit  to  Shway- 
doung,  his  native  place,  to  communicate  the  trea- 
sure which  he  has  found,  to  his  numerous  rela- 
tions and  friends.  This  evening,  after  expressing 
his  desires,  he  said,  it  had  occurred  to  him,  that 
it  might  be  proper  to  ask  permission  or  licence 
so  to  do.  Not  that  he  aspired  to  set  up  as 
a teacher;  far  from  that;  but  he  wanted  to 
feel,  that,  in  communicating  the  gospel,  he  was 
proceeding  in  a regular,  authorized  manner.  He 
thought,  that  if  two  or  three  disciples  could  be 
raised  in  each  of  the  large  towns,  it  would  much 
facilitate  our  operations.  He  was  sure,  that  at  least 
one  in  ten  of  his  relations  and  friends,  on  hearing 
his  story,  could  not  help  embracing  the  new  reli- 
gion. I secretly  exulted  at  hearing  his  proposal, 
so  evidently  the  result  of  Christian  principle,  and 
exhorted  him  to  constant  self-examination  'and 
prayer,  as  the  means  of  discovering  his  own  duty 
and  the  Divine  will. 

“ April  1 6th,  Lord's  day. — Early  in  the  morn- 
ing, the  teacher  Moung  Shway-gnong  came  in, 
after  an  absence  of  just  a month.  He  was  soon 
followed  by  Oo  Yan  and  his  two  friends.  They 
spent  the  whole  day  with  me;  all  appear  hopeful. 
The  teacher  remained,  as  usual,  after  the  others 
had  left,  and  thereby  afforded  me  an  opportunity 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


267 


for  private  conversation.  He  admitted  that  all 
his  objections  to  positive  commands  were  re- 
moyed;  and  that  it  was  his  desire  to  be  a full 
disciple;  but  when  urged  closely  on  the  subject, 
he  intimated  that  his  wife  and  friends  were  op- 
posed to  his  taking  any  decided  step ; and  that  if 
he  did,  he  was,  moreover,  exposed  to  imminent 
danger  of  persecution  and  death.  He  mentioned 
these  things  with  so  much  feeling,  and  such  evi- 
dent consciousness  of  simple  weakness,  as  com- 
pletely disarmed  me.  My  heart  was  wrung  with 
pity.  I sincerely  sympathized  with  him,  in  his 
evident  mental  trials.  I could  not  deny  the  truth 
of  what  he  said ; but  gently  hinted,  ‘ as  thy  day  is, 
thy  strength  shall  be,’  and  proposed  the  example 
of  the  apostles  and  martyrs,  the  glory  of  suffering 
for  Christ,  &c.  But  the  thought  of  the  iron 
mall,  and  a secret  suspicion,  that  if  I was  in  his 
circumstances,  I should  perhaps  have  no  more 
courage,  restrained  my  tongue.  We  parted  with 
much  solemnity,  understanding  one  another  bet- 
ter than  ever  before.  I shall  not  probably  see 
him  again  very  soon,  as  it  is  too  dangerous  for 
a man  of  his  distinction  to  be  seen  coming  fre- 
quently to  the  mission-house. 

“ April  20th. — Mah  Men-lay  and  her  friends 
have  been  with  Mrs.  J.  all  day.  She  gives  in- 
creasing evidence  of  being  a real  disciple ; but  is 
extremely  timid,  through  fear  of  persecution. 
One  of  her  remarks  deserve  notice,  as  a natural 


268  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

expression  of  true  Christian  feeling.  ‘ I am  sur- 
prised,’ said  she,  ‘ to  find  this  religion  has  such 
an  effect  on  my  mind,  as  to  make  me  love  the 
disciples  of  Christ  more  than  my  dearest  natural 
relations.’  She  is  a woman  of  very  superior  dis- 
cernment and  mental  energy.  One  of  the  women 
who  has  frequently  accompanied  her  in  her  visits, 
met  with  a tract  at  old  Pegue,  about  six  weeks 
ago,  and  came  all  the  way  to  Rangoon,  chiefly, 
she  says,  on  that  account. 

“ This  day  I have  finished  the  translation  of 
the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  begun  before  I went 
to  Ava,  but  intermitted  on  account  of  the  weak- 
ness of  my  eyes.  It  is  with  real  joy  that  I put 
this  precious  writing  into  the  hands  of  the  disci- 
ples. It  is  a great  accession  to  their  scanty  stock 
of  Scripture,  for  they  have  had  nothing  hitherto 
but  St.  Matthew.  Intend  to  give  them  the  Acts, 
as  fast  as  my  eyes  will  allow. 

“ April  30 th,  Lord's  day. — One  of  the  busiest 
days  I have  ever  spent.  Not  a multitude  of  visi- 
tants, as  formerly.  That  we  cannot  expect,  in 
present  circumstances.  But,  beside  the  usual 
evening  assembly,  there  were  eight  or  ten  pre- 
sent at  worship,  some  of  whom  were  with  me 
from  nine  in  the  morning  till  ten  at  night.  Mah 
Men-lay  and  her  company  were  with  Mrs.  J., 
who  has  had  a serious  attack  of  the  liver  com- 
plaint, for  a fortnight  past,  and  is  now  in  a course 
of  salivation. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  269 

tc  Oo  Yan,  after  having  searched  out  all  their 
difficult  points  of  religion,  came  to-day  to  the  ne 
plus  ultra — How  are  sin  and  eternal  misery  re- 
concileable  with  the  character  of  an  infinitely 
holy,  wise,  and  powerful  God  ? He  at  length  ob- 
tained such  satisfaction,  that  he  could  not  restrain 
laughing,  from  pure  mental  delight,  and  kept  re- 
curring to  the  subject,  and  repeating  my  remarks 
to  those  around  him.  He  was  accompanied,  as 
usual,  by  his  two  friends,  Moung  Thah-ay  and 
MoungMyat-lah,  husband  of  MahMen-lay.  With 
these  came  also  one  Moung  Yo,  a disciple  of 
Moung  Shway-gnong,  a poor  man,  but  a sharp 
reasoner.  He  was,  or  pretended  to  be,  on  the 
semi-atheistic  plan.  [See  March  10th.]  After 
ascertaining  his  precise  ground,  I used  an  argu- 
ment, which,  in  a late  combat  with  Oo  Yan,  I 
found  quite  invincible.  It  is  simply  this:  ‘ No 
mind,  no  wisdom — temporary  mind,  temporary 
wisdom — eternal  mind,  eternal  wisdom.’  Now, 
as  all  the  semi-atheists  firmly  believe  in  eternal 
wisdom,  this  concise  statement  sweeps,  with  irre- 
sistible sway,  through  the  very  joints  and  marrow 
of  their  system.  And  though  it  may  to  others 
seem  rather  simple  and  inconclusive ; to  one  ac- 
quainted with  Burman  reasoning,  its  effect  is 
uniformly  decisive.  No  sooner  is  this  short  sen- 
tence uttered,  than  one  significantly  nods  his 
head,  as  if  to  say,  there  you  have  it.  Another 
cries  out  to  the  opponent,  you  are  undone,  de- 


270  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

stroyed.  Another  says,  talk  about  wisdom ; 
where  else  will  you  find  it  ? The  disputant  him- 
self, who  was  perhaps  preparing  a learned  speech 
about  the  excellence  and  efficacy  and  eternity  of 
wisdom,  quite  disconcerted  by  this  unexpected 
onset,  sits  looking  at  the  wreck  of  his  system,  and 
wondering  at  the  simple  means  which  has  spread 
such  ruin  around  him ; presently  he  looks  up 
(for  the  Burmans  are  frequently  candid),  and 
says,  your  words  are  very  appropriate.  And 
perhaps  his  next  question  is.  How  can  I become 
a disciple  of  the  God  you  worship  ? All  the  vi- 
sitors to-day,  and  indeed  all  the  semi-atheists, 
are  despisers  of  Gaudama,  and  the  established 
religion  of  the  land.  Moung  Shway-gnong  has 
disseminated  this  heresy  in  Rangoon,  for  several 
years ; but  since  he  has  become  acquainted  with 
us,  he  frequently  tells  his  adherents,  I know  no- 
thing ; if  you  want  true  wisdom,  go  to  the  foreign 
teacher,  and  there  you  will  find  it.  I have  reason 
to  believe  that  this  heresy  is  not  confined  to  Ran- 
goon, but  is  taking  root  in  various  parts  of  the 
country,  and  preparing  the  way  for  the  Christian 
religion.  O,  for  toleration — a little  toleration. 
We  will  be  content  to  baptize  in  the  night,  and 
hold  worship  in  private ; but  we  do  pray  that  we 
may  not  be  utterly  banished  from  the  land ; that 
we  may  not  be  cut  up  root  and  branch.  O,  that 
these  poor  souls,  who  are  groping  in  the  dark, 
feeling  after  the  truth,  may  have  time  and  oppor- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  271 

tuniti.es  to  find  the  precious  treasure,  which  will 
enrich  them  for  evermore.  We  are  all  looking 
with  anxiety  towards  the  golden  feet.  Our  vice- 
roy, Moung  Shway-thah,  has  gone  thither  on  a 
visit ; and  it  is  doubtful  whether  he  will  return, 
or  his  rival,  Mya-day-men.  If  the  latter,  there  is 
some  reason  to  hope  that  we  shall  keep  footing 
in  Rangoon,  at  least  during  his  administration. 

“ May  5tli. — Another  visit  from  Moung  Myat- 
lah  and  his  wife,  which  has  afforded  us  good  rea- 
son to  hope,  that  he  also  has  become  a true  be- 
liever. His  wife  appears  the  same  as  usual.  They 
are  both  gaining  courage  in  regard  to  an  open 
profession  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  begin 
to  wonder  at  the  backwardness  of  their  former 
oracle,  Moung  Shway-gnong. 

“ May  8th. — Moung  Thah-ay,  the  friend  of 
Moung-Myat-lah,  has  spent  most  of  the  day  with 
me,  and  given  equally  good  evidence  of  being  a 
true  disciple.  He  was  formerly  an  officer  under 
government,  and  amassed  considerable  property, 
which  he  mostly  spent  in  building  pagodas  and 
making  offerings.  But  he  obtained  no  satisfac- 
tion, found  no  resting  place  for  his  soul,  until  he 
became  acquainted  with  the  religion  of  Jesus.  He 
now  rests  in  this  religion,  with  conscious  security 
— believes  and  loves  all  that  he  hears  of  it— and 
prays  that  he  may  become  fully  a true  disciple  of 
the  Saviour. 

“ Both  of  these  men  are  respectable  house- 


272  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

holders,  rather  above  the  middling  class.  They 
live  in  a little  village  called  Nan-dau-gong,  about 
half  a mile  from  the  mission-house.  Moung  Myat- 
lah,  has  a large  family ; but  Moung  Thah-ay  has 
none ; and  were  it  not  for  an  aged  mother  who 
depends  on  him,  he  would  follow  me,  he  says, 
throughout  the  world. 

“ May  12 th. — The  three  visitors  from  Nan-dau- 
gong  have  been  with  us  part  of  the  day.  One 
characteristic  trait  in  these  people  is  a particular 
love  for  the  Scriptures.  They  almost  quarrel 
with  one  another  for  the  only  copy  of  the  Ephe- 
sians, which  I have  given  them,  and  I therefore 
determine  to  spare  them  another,  as  soon  as  it  is 
done.  They  say,  that  the  translation  of  this  epis- 
tle is  plainer  and  more  easily  understood,  than 
that  of  St.  Matthew;  which  is  very  encouraging 
to  me,  as  I executed  it  without  the  assistance  of 
any  person,  not  even  of  a Burman  teacher.  My 
old  teacher  went  to  Ava,  some  months  ago ; and  I 
am  now  afraid  to  employ  another,  lest  he  should 
become  too  well  acquainted  with  the  disciples 
and  inquirers,  and  betray  them  to  government. 

“ May  14 th,  Lord's  day. — A very  busy  day 
with  the  Nan-dau-gong  visitors,  and  the  usual 
evening  assembly. 

“ May  18f/i. — Mali  Myat-lah  and  Mah  Doke, 
who  have  frequently  accompanied  their  relation, 
Mah  Men-lay,  came  to-day  by  themselves.  They 
appear  to  be  under  solemn  religious  impressions, 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


273 


sensible  of  their  sin  and  danger,  and  anxious  to 
obtain  an  interest  in  the  Saviour ; but  are  yet  un- 
enlightened, in  regard  to  the  way.  Mali  Bailc 
also,  sister  of  Moung  Thahlah,  who  formerly  af- 
forded us  some  encouragement,  but  afterwards 
fell  off,  has  recommenced  visiting  us.  We  hope, 
that  during  several  months’  confinement,  she  has 
not  in  vain  meditated  on  the  truths  she  formerly 
heard.  She  says,  that  her  mind  is  changed  ; that 
she  loves  the  Saviour,  and  trusts  in  Him  alone 
for  salvation  from  sin  and  hell,  and  desires  to  be- 
come his  disciple  in  full,  by  receiving  baptism. 
Her  husband,  Moung  Nyo-dway,  and  Moung 
Thah-yah,  another  resident  in  our  yard,  whom, 
I think,  I have  not  yet  mentioned,  are  constant 
attendants  on  evening  worship,  and  seem  to  be 
making  slow  advances  in  the  knowledge  and  love 
of  Divine  truth.  Moung  Shway-bay,  the  last 
baptized,  begins  to  appear  to  great  advantage — 
has  very  correct  ideas  of  the  gospel  system— and 
communicates  truth  to  the  inquirers  with  much 
feeling  and  animation.  In  zeal  for  the  extension 
of  the  Redeemer’s  kingdom,  he  surpasses  the 
older  disciples.  This  is  the  man,  who,  from  not 
knowing  that  there  was  such  a being  in  the  uni- 
verse as  a God,  became  a speculative  believer,  a 
penitent,  a hopeful  recipient  of  grace,  and  a can- 
didate for  baptism,  all  in  the  space  of  three  days. 
Some  of  the  above-mentioned  have,  on  the  con- 
trary, been  several  months  in  making  similar 


274 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


attainments,  and  are  yet  found  wanting.  Thus 
diverse  are  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

“ May  22 d. — Spent  several  pleasant  hours  with 
some  of  the  Nan-dau-gong  people.  Mali  Men- 
lay  ventures  at  last  to  request  baptism,  but  wishes 
to  wait  a little,  to  see  whether  her  husband  and 
some  of  her  friends  will  not  join  her. 

“ May  23 d. — A visit  from  the  doctor,  Oo  Yan, 
after  a long  interval.  He  appears  to  be  fully  con- 
vinced of  the  truth  of  the  Christian  religion,  and 
of  his  own  dark  and  sinful  state.  He  compares 
himself  to  a person  who  rejoices,  at  intervals,  in  the 
light  of  a glow-worm ; but  finds,  alas ! that  it  is 
but  momentary.  He  was  accompanied  by  Moung 
Myat-lah,  who  appears  almost  decided.  Says  he 
is  going  to  visit  his  former  teacher,  Moung  Shway- 
gnong,  and  persuade  him  to  join  the  Nan-dau- 
gong  company,  in  receiving  baptism. 

“ May  2 6th. — A visit  from  Moung  Shway- 
gnong.  He  seems  to  have  made  no  advance,  in 
any  respect,  since  his  last  visit. 

“ May  28 th.  Lord's  day. — A considerable  com- 
pany at  worship.  After  worship  had  a difficult 
discussion  with  Oo  Yan,  on  the  reconcileableness 
of  the  Divine  veracity  with  the  doctrine  of  vica- 
rious atonement. 

“ In  the  evening,  Moung  Myat-yah  (mentioned 
March  26th),  and  Moung  Thah-yah,  requested 
baptism.  The  former  has  given  satisfactory  evi- 
dence for  some  time.  The  latter  has  been  con- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


275 


slant  in  attending  on  the  means,  and  appeared 
somewhat  hopeful ; but  we  did  not  expect  that  he 
would  come  forward  so  soon. 

“ May  29 th. — Moung  Thah-yah  has  been  great- 
ly distressed,  since  he  found  that  we  doubted  the 
reality  of  his  conversion.  He  appears  to  be  really 
in  earnest*  and  his  conversation  this  evening  con- 
strains us  to  believe  that  he  is  the  subject  of  true 
Christian  exercises. 

**  June  3 cl. — Another  visit  from  Moung  Shway- 
gnong,  more  encouraging  than  the  last.  He  was 
accompanied  by  several  of  the  inquirers.  Mah 
Myat-lah  and  Mah  Doke,  gave  some  evidence  of 
being  subjects  of  a work  of  grace.  In  the  even- 
ing, determined  to  receive  Moung  Myat-yah  and 
Moung  Thah-yah  into  church  fellowship. 

“ June  Ath,  Lord's  day . — All  the  visitors  of  yes- 
terday, and  some  others,  present  at  worship.  In 
the  evening,  administered  baptism  to  the  two  new 
disciples. 

“ June  16th . — Received  letters  from  Bengal. 
News  from  Bombay,  that  a Mahomedan  has  pro- 
fessed the  gospel,  and  from  Java,  that  brother 
Robinson  has  baptized  the  first  Chinese  convert. 
Thus  there  seems  to  be  a beginning  in  several  very 
important  stations.  May  the  little  one  become  a 
thousand.  Rejoiced  to  hear  that  brother  Colman 
had  safely  arrived  at  Bengal,  and  embarked  in 
a boat  for  Chittagong,  and  that  thus  far  he  had 
not  met  with  any  molestation  or  interruption 


276  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

from  the  police.  May  he  get  a footing  at  Chitta- 
gong, for  every  thing  here,  in  regard  to  tolera- 
tion, grows  darker. 

“ June  25th,  Lord's  day. — Had  an  interview 
with  the  principal  one  of  the  Nan-dau-gong  visi- 
tors, from  which  I conclude,  that  they  are  far 
from  daring  to  profess  the  Christian  religion, 
though  I feel  satisfied  that  they  have  received  it 
in  their  hearts. 

“ The  Mangen  teacher  has  returned  from  Ava, 
with  fresh  eclat,  and  recommenced  his  ecclesias- 
tical operations.  He  came  down  under  the  spe- 
cial patronage  of  the  new  Ya-woon,  or  vice-go- 
vernor of  the  place.  It  is  the  prevailing  report, 
that  no  viceroy  will  be  sent  down  until  the  em- 
peror is  nearly  ready  to  march,  in  person,  to  con- 
duct the  Siamese  war  ; and  that,  at  any  rate,  the 
old  viceroy,  Mya-day-men,  from  whom  we  hoped 
to  receive  some  protection,  will  be  detained  at 
Ava. 

“ June  21th. — Mrs.  J.,  after  having  been  through 
two  courses  of  salivation  for  the  liver  complaint, 
at  length  despairs  of  recovering,  without  some 
proper  medical  assistance.  For  a few  days,  we 
have  hoped  that  she  would  get  some  relief  from 
the  various  applications  which  have  been  made, 
though  at  the  expense  of  an  almost  total  ex- 
haustion of  strength ; but  this  morning,  to  our 
utter  disappointment,  the  disorder  has  returned 
with  increased  violence ; and  her  constitution 


TO  THE  BUIIMAN  EMPIRE. 


277 


appears  to  be  rapidly  failing.  I have  intended, 
for  some  time  past,  to  send  her  alone  to  Bengal ; 
but  she  has  become  too  weak,  and  the  present 
circumstances  of  the  case  are  too  alarming,  to 
allow  such  a measure;  and  I have,  therefore, 
concluded  to  accompany  her.  We  have  a special 
inducement  to  embrace  the  opportunity  afforded 
us  by  the  ship  which  lately  brought  our  letters, 
since,  if  we  reject  this,  we  shall  have  to  wait 
several  months  for  another  opportunity,  during 
which  time,  Mrs.  J.  will,  in  all  probability,  be 
placed  beyond  the  reach  of  medical  assistance. 

“ July  9 thy  Lord's  day. — Moung  Nyo-dway  and 
Moung  Gway  request  baptism.  We  have  had 
a good  hope  of  the  former  for  some  time.  With 
the  latter  we  are  very  slightly  acquainted,  though 
he  has  been  a constant  attendant  on  evening  wor- 
ship, for  nearly  two  months.  This  application, 
however,  is  approved  by  some  of  the  most  dis- 
cerning in  the  church.  The  Nan-dau-gong  people 
hope  that  they  shall  get  grace  and  courage 
enough  to  profess  the  Christian  religion,  by  the 
time  I return  from  Bengal. 

“ July  1 5th. — Have  been  very  busy  all  the  past 
week  in  getting  ready  for  the  voyage.  In  procur- 
ing a governmental  passport,  received  essential 
assistance  from  Mr.  Lansago  (a  Spaniard),  the 
present  collector  of  the  port,  and  one  of  the  chief 
magistrates  of  the  place  during  the  absence  of 
the  viceroy.  He  has  also  promised  to  protect 


278  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

the  people  whom  we  leave  on  the  mission  pre- 
mises. 

“ July  1 6th,  Lord's  day.— A few  days  ago,  we 
concluded  to  receive  the  two  new  applicants  for 
baptism  ; but  I thought  it  most  prudent  (partly 
by  way  of  trying  their  sincerity),  to  send  them 
a message,  suggesting,  that  since  I was  greatly 
occupied  in  getting  ready  for  sea,  and  since 
one  of  them  was  not  so  well  acquainted  with 
the  doctrines  of  religion  as  was  desirable,  it 
might  be  better  to  defer  their  baptism  till  my 
return. 

“ This  morning  they  came  up  in  much  trouble. 
They  stated,  that  as  they  had  fully  embraced  the 
Christian  religion  in  their  hearts,  they  could  not 
remain  easy  without  being  baptized,  according  to 
the  command  of  Christ ; that  no  man  could  tell 
whether  I should  ever  return  or  not ; and  that  it 
was  their  earnest  petition,  if  I could  possibly  find 
time,  and  thought  them  worthy  of  the  ordinance, 
that  I would  administer  it  to  them  before  I went 
away.  They  did  not  wish  me  to  go  out  to  the 
usual  place,  as  that  was  at  some  distance,  but 
would  be  baptized  in  a small  pond  near  the  mis- 
sion-house. Moung  Gway  said,  that  though  he 
was  very  ignorant,  he  knew  enough  of  this  reli- 
gion to  love  it  sincerely,  and  to  trust  in  Christ 
for  salvation  from  all  his  sins.  I re-examined 
them  both,  stated  to  them  the  great  danger  of 
professing  a foreign  religion,  & c.  and  on  their 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  279 

urging  their  request,  I told  them  I would  baptize 
them  in  the  evening. 

“ Was  obliged  to  be  out  all  the  afternoon,  get- 
ting our  things  aboard  the  ship,  as  we  expect  to 
move  down  the  river  to-morrow  morning.  At  night 
baptized  the  two  new  disciples,  after  which  we  all 
partook  of  the  Lord's  supper  for  the  last  time. 

“ July  \lth. — Ship  to  be  detained  two  days. 
In  the  forenoon,  the  teacher,  Moung  Shway- 
gnong  came  in.-.  I received  him  with  some  re- 
serve ; but  soon  found  that  he  had  not  stayed 
away  so  long  from  choice,  having  been  ill  with  a 
fever  for  some  time,  and  occupied  also  with  the 
illness  of  his  family  and  adherents.  He  gradually 
wore  away  my  reserve  ; and  we  had  not  been  to- 
gether two  hours,  before  I felt  more  satisfied  than 
ever,  from  his  account  of  his  mental  trials,  his 
struggles  with  sin,  his  strivings  to  be  holy,  his 
penitence,  his  faith,  his  exercises  in  secret  prayer, 
that  he  is  a subject  of  the  special  operations  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  that  he  is  indeed  a true  disciple.  He 
stayed  all  day.  In  the  afternoon,  the  five  Nan- 
dau-gong  visitors,  the  doctor  Oo  Yan,  and  several 
others,  came  together,  and  we  had  much  interest- 
ing conversation.  Towards  the  close,  Moung 
Shway-gnong,  as  if  to  bring  things  to  a crisis,  ad- 
dressed me  thus  : ‘ My  lord  teacher,  there  are  now 
several  of  us  present,  who  have  long  considered 
this  religion.  I hope  that  we  are  all  believers  in 
Jesus  Christ.’  I am  afraid,  replied  I,  to  say  that; 


280 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


however,  it  is  easily  ascertained ; and  let  me  be- 
gin with  you,  teacher.  I have  heretofore  thought 
that  you  fully  believed  in  the  eternal  God  ; but  I 
have  had  some  doubt  whether  you  fully  believed 
in  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  atonement  which  he 
has  made.  ‘ I assure  you,’  he  replied,  ‘ that  I am 
as  fully  persuaded  of  the  latter  as  of  the  former.’ 
Do  you  believe  then,  I continued,  that  none  but 
the  disciples  of  Christ  will  be  saved  from  sin  and 
hell  ? ‘ None  but  his  disciples.’  How  then  can 

you  remain,  without  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance 
to  Jesus  Christ,  and  becoming  his  full  disciple, 
in  body  and  soul  ? ‘ It  is  my  earnest  desire  to 

do  so,  by  receiving  baptism  ; and  for  the  very 
purpose  of  expressing  that  desire,  I have  come 
here  to-day.’  You  say,  you  are  desirous  of  re- 
ceiving baptism,  may  I ask,  when  you  desire  to 
receive  it  ? ‘At  any  time  you  will  please  to  give 
it.  Now — this  moment,  if  you  please.’  Do  you 
wish  to  receive  baptism  in  public  or  in  private  ? 
‘ I will  receive  it  at  any  time,  and  in  any  circum- 
stances, that  you  please  to  direct.’  I then  said — 
Teacher,  I am  satisfied,  from  your  conversation 
this  forenoon,  that  you  are  a true  disciple ; and  I 
reply,  therefore,  that  I am  as  desirous  of  giving 
you  baptism,  as  you  are  of  receiving  it.  This 
conversation  had  a great  effect  on  all  present. 
The  disciples  rejoiced  ; the  rest  were  astonished  ; 
for  though  they  have  long  thought  that  he  believed 
the  Christian  religion,  they  could  not  think  that 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  281 

such  a man  could  easily  be  brought  to  profess  it, 
and  suffer  himself  to  be  put  under  the  water  by  a 
foreigner.  I then  turned  to  Moung  Thah-ay,  one 
of  the  Nan-dau-gong  people,  who,  I hope,  is  a 
true  believer — Are  you  willing  to  take  the  oath 
of  allegiance  to  Jesus  Christ  ? ‘ If  the  teacher, 

Moung  Shway-gnong,  consents,’  replied  he,  ‘ why 
should  I hesitate  V And  if  he  does  not  consent, 
what  then  ? ‘ I must  wait  a little  longer.’  Stand 
by,  said  I,  you  trust  in  Moung  Shway-gnong, 
rather  than  in  Jesus  Christ.  You  are  not  worthy 
of  being  baptized.  Moung  Myat-lah,  on  being 
similarly  interrogated,  wished  to  consider  a little 
longer.  Oo  Yan  was  still  further  from  commit- 
ting himself.  Of  the  women  present,  I interro- 
gated Mali  Men-lay  only.  She  had  evidently  a 
considerable  struggle  in  her  mind,  probably  on 
account  of  her  husband’s  having  just  declined. 
At  length,  she  said,  that  if  I thought  it  suitable 
for  her  to  be  baptized,  she  was  desirous  of  receiv- 
ing the  ordinance.  I told  her,  that  her  reply 
was  not  satisfactory.  I could  not  consent  to  bap- 
tize any  one,  who  could  possibly  remain  easy 
without  being  baptized,  and  then  I related  the 
story  of  the  two  last  disciples ; after  which  the 
party  broke  up. 

“ In  the  evening  I laid  the  case  of  Moung 
Shway-gnong  before  the  church,  and  we  joyfully 
agreed  to  receive  him  to  communion,  on  his  being 
baptized. 


282  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ July  18 th. — In  the  morning,  the  teacher  again 
made  his  appearance ; I again  asked  him  whether 
he  preferred  being  baptized  in  the  day  or  in  the 
evening ; and  he  again  left  it  to  my  decision  : on 
which  I advised  him  to  wait  till  night.  He  ap- 
peared very  well  through  the  day — his  deport- 
ment solemn — his  conversation  spiritual.  Just  at 
night,  I called  in  two  or  three  of  the  disciples, 
read  the  account  of  the  baptism  of  the  eunuch, 
made  the  baptismal  prayer,  and  then  proceeded 
with  the  teacher  to  the  accustomed  place,  went 
down  into  the  water,  and  baptized  him. 

“ On  my  return,  I found  that  Mali  Men-lay, 
whom  I had  left  with  Mrs.  Judson,  had  gone 
away.  As  soon  as  she  saw  that  the  teacher  had 
actually  gone  to  be  baptized,  she  exclaimed,  ‘Ah! 
he  has  now  gone  to  obey  the  command  of  Jesus 
Christ,  while  I remain  without  obeying.  I shall 
not  be  able  to  sleep  this  night.  I must  go  home 
and  consult  my  husband,  and  return.’  In  the 
evening,  we  again  partook  of  the  Lord’s  supper, 
in  consequence  of  the  admission  of  the  teacher, 
and  my  expected  departure  on  the  morrow.  We 
had  just  finished,  when,  about  nine  o’clock,  Mah 
Men-lay  returned,  accompanied  by  the  two  other 
women  from  her  village.  She  immediately  re- 
quested to  be  baptized.  The  disciples  present 
assented  without  hesitation.  I told  her  that  I re- 
joiced to  baptize  her,  having  been  long  satisfied 
that  she  had  received  the  grace  of  Christ ; and,  it 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  283 

being  very  late,  I led  her  out  to  the  pond,  near 
the  house,  by  lantern  light,  and  thus  baptized  the 
tenth  Burman  convert,  and  the  first  woman.  Mali 
Men-lay  is  fifty-one  years  old,  of  most  extensive 
acquaintance  through  the  place,  of  much  strength 
of  mind,  decision  of  character,  and  consequent 
influence  over  others.  She  is,  indeed,  among  wo- 
men, what  Moung  Shway-gnong  is  among  men. 

“ On  returning  to  the  house,  she  said,  ‘ Now  1 
have  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  Jesus  Christ, 
and  I have  nothing  to  do  but  to  commit  myself, 
soul  and  body,  into  the  hands  of  my  Lord,  assured 
that  he  will  never  suffer  me  to  fall  away.’  Seve- 
ral of  the  visitors  spent  the  night  at  the  mission 
house. 

“ July  19 th. — In  the  morning  we  all  met  for 
worship.  After  I had  prayed,  Moung  Thahlah 
and  Moung  Shway-bay  both  prayed,  with  much 
propriety  and  feeling.  In  the  course  of  the  fore- 
noon, Mah  Men-lay’s  husband,  and  Moung  Thah- 
ay,  and  the  doctor,  and  several  others,  came  in, 
so  that  we  had  quite  a house  full.  At  noon,  we 
set  out  for  the  river,  followed  by  near  a hundred 
people,  the  women  crying  aloud,  in  the  Burman 
manner,  and  almost  all  deeply  affected.  When 
we  entered  the  boat,  I called  the  teacher  and 
Mah  Men-lay,  and  a few  others,  to  go  with  us  to 
the  ship,  which  lay  at  some  distance  in  the  river. 
The  rest  remained  on  the  wharf,  bidding  us  fare- 
well, telling  us  to  come  back  soon,  &c.  Thus  we 


284  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

left  the  shores  of  Rangoon.  Those  who  accom- 
panied ns  to  the  ship,  stayed  an  hour  or  two,  and 
returned.  We  stood  as  long  on  the  quarter-deck, 
looking  at  them,  as  the  others  had  stood  on  the 
wharf  looking  at  us. 

“ July  20th. — The  ship  having  been  unable  to 
move  yesterday,  on  account  of  the  anchor’s  being 
foul,  the  teacher,  Moung  Shway-gnong,  espied 
the  masts  from  his  village,  and  came  off  in  a boat, 
with  his  wife  and  another  woman.  Soon  after, 
most  of  the  Nan-dau-gong  people  came  to  the 
mission  house,  and  finding  that  the  ship  had  not 
dropped  down,  came  off,  accompanied  by  several 
of  our  own  people.  We  were  much  gratified  by 
this  fresh  proof  of  their  attachment ; but  the  ship 
got  under  weigh  immediately,  and  they  were 
obliged  to  leave  us  for  the  last  time. 

“ July  21  st. — Reached  the  search  village,  and 
passed  the  customary  examination. 

“ July  22 d. — Continued  to  move  down  with  the 
tide.  At  night,  anchored  near  the  Elephant,  in 
full  view  of  the  sea. 

“ July  20th. — We  have  been  obliged  to  wait 
till  this  time,  on  account  of  the  threatening  ap- 
pearance of  the  weather.  This  morning  ventured 
over  the  bar ; the  pilot  soon  after  left  us,  and  we 
find  ourselves  once  more  launched  into  the 
boundless  ocean.  Mrs.  J.’s  disorder  experienced 
a slight  abatement  about  a week  before  we  em- 
barked, in  consequence  of  our  succeeding  in  rais- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  285 

ing  a very  large  blister  on  her  side.  This  tempo- 
rary relief  enabled  her  to  prepare  for  the  voyage, 
and  to  get  on  board  ship  with  more  ease  and  faci- 
lity than  we  had  expected.  Since,  however,  we 
have  been  lying  at  anchor,  the  pain  has  returned 
with  as  much  violence  as  ever.  Yesterday  she 
was  confined  to  her  couch  the  whole  day. 

“ August  18 th. — Early  this  morning  we  arrived 
in  Calcutta,  and  repaired  to  the  house  of  brother 
Lawson. 

“ Mrs.  J.  appeared  rather  better  during  the 
voyage  ; but  we  fear  that  she  has  obtained  no 
essential  benefit. 

“ Serampore,  August  27th. — Induced  by  the 
more  healthful  climate  of  this  place,  we  removed 
hither  to-day,  and  found  a resting  place  in  the 
house  of  brother  Hough,  not  far  from  the  mission 
premises. 

“ September  7th. — I am  happy  to  be  able  to 
state,  at  length,  that  Mrs.  J.  appears  to  be  on  the 
recovery,  particularly  since  our  removal  to  Se- 
rampore. Dr.  Chalmers,  however,  who  now  at- 
tends her,  does  not  allow  her  to  think  of  return- 
ing to  Rangoon  for  the  present.  It  is,  therefore, 
my  prevailing  intention,  to  leave  her  under  his 
care,  and  return  myself  by  the  first  opportunity. 

“ Serampore,  October  24 th. — At  the  last  date, 
Mrs.  Judson  appeared  to  be  on  the  recovery. 
Since  that  time,  our  hopes  have  been  alternately 
raised  and  depressed.  But,  for  a few  days  past, 


286  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

notwithstanding  the  present  cool  season,  and  the 
best  medical  advice,  her  unfavourable  symptoms 
have  all  been  aggravated ; and  this  morning,  we 
received,  in  writing,  the  definitive  opinion  of 
Dr.  Chalmers,  that  her  disorder  is  a chronic  affec- 
tion of  the  liver,  which  cannot  be  removed  but 
by  a voyage  to  America,  or  at  least  a protracted 
stay  in  Bengal,  under  the  care  of  a physician ; 
and  that  a return  to  Rangoon  precludes  all  hope 
of  recovery.  I feel,  therefore,  under  the  distress- 
ing necessity  of  leaving  her  in  Bengal,  and  re- 
turning alone  to  Rangoon,  by  a vessel  which  is 
expected  to  sail  by  the  first  of  next  month. 

“ I wish  here  to  express  our  great  obligation  to 
Dr.  Chalmers,  who  has  frequently  attended  Mrs. 
Judson,  though  he  had  to  cross  the  river  from 
Barrackpore,  for  that  purpose,  and  who,  from 
regard  to  the  cause  in  which  we  are  engaged, 
declined  accepting  any  thing  by  way  of  remune- 
ration. 

“ Calcutta,  October  31  st. — Yesterday  we  took 
leave  of  brother  Hough  and  family,  with  whom 
we  have  spent  a very  quiet  and  happy  sojourn  of 
two  months,  and  came  down  to  this  city,  in  order 
to  my  embarkation.  But  our  views  have  under- 
gone a very  great  change,  in  consequence  of 
meeting  with  Dr.  Macwhirter,  who,  as  well  as 
Dr.  Chalmers,  is  of  the  first  eminence  in  his  pro- 
fession. His  opinion  does  not  indeed  differ  from 
that  of  Dr.  C.  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  Mrs.  J.s 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  287 

disorder,  or  the  course  of  medicine  to  be  adhered 
to  ; but  he  thinks  that  he  can  give  such  general 
prescriptions,  as  will  render  a return  to  Rangoon 
less  dangerous  than  we  expected.  Mrs.  J.  there- 
fore feels  encouraged  to  join  me  in  taking  passage 
in  the  vessel  before  mentioned,  which  is  still  to 
be  detained  a few  days. 

“ November  23 d. — Having  taken  leave  of  our 
dear  and  excellent  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Town- 
ley  (missionaries  from  the  London  Society),  with 
whom  we  have  had  the  happiness  of  living  several 
days — Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lawson,  and  others  of  the 
Baptist  mission — and  Mr.  Ward,  a young  gentle- 
man from  our  own  country,  whose  attachment  to 
us,  and  the  cause  of  Christ,  has  been  manifested 
in  a series  of  the  most  polite  attentions  and  sub- 
stantial kindnesses ; we  are  just  embarking  in  the 
Salamanca,  the  same  vessel  which,  two  years  ago, 
conveyed  Colman  and  Wheelock  to  the  same 
place  to  which  we  are  now  destined. 

“ January  3d,  1821. — A most  tedious  passage 
from  Bengal,  of  nearly  six  weeks,  occasioned  by 
a continued  succession  of  head  winds  and  calms ; 
but  we  hope  the  protracted  voyage  has  been  bene- 
ficial to  Mrs.  J.’s  health.  This  forenoon  we  came 
in  sight  of  the  Elephant  Grove,  so  called  from  its 
fancied  resemblance  to  that  animal.  It  marks  the 
western  limit  of  the  Rangoon  outlet  of  the  A-rah- 
wa-tee  ; and  the  sight  awakened  all  our  feelings 
of  anxiety  and  desire — anxiety  to  hear  of  the  wel- 


288  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

fare  of  the  little  church  which  we  have  so  long 
left  in  yonder  wilderness,  the  progress  of  the  in- 
quirers, and  the  disposition  of  the  present  govern- 
ment of  the  place  towards  the  mission — desire  to 
recommence  our  missionary  labours,  to  proclaim 
the  blessed  gospel,  to  feed  the  sheep  and  lambs  of 
Christ’s  flock. 

“ January  4th. — A pilot  came  on  board. — The 
principal  articles  of  intelligence  we  have  obtained 
from  him,  are,  that  Mya-day-men  is  viceroy  of 
Rangoon  ; that  the  Roman  Catholic  priest,  whose 
name  occurs  in  the  account  of  our  visit  to  Ava, 
is  dead ; and  that  thirty  thousand  troops  have 
marched  through  Rangoon  to  the  frontiers  of 
Siam,  preparatory  to  a war  with  that  country.  At 
night,  came  to  anchor  in  full  sight  of  the  towering 
summit  of  Shway-day-gong. 

“ January  5th. — As  we  drew  near  the  town,  we 
strained  our  eyes  to  distinguish  the  countenances 
of  our  friends,  amid  the  crowd  that  we  saw  as- 
sembled on  the  wharf.  The  first  that  we  recog- 
nised was  the  teacher,  Moung  Shway-gnong,  with 
his  hands  raised  to  his  head,  as  he  discerned  us 
on  the  deck  ; and,  on  landing,  we  met  succes- 
sively with  Mah  Men-lay,  and  Moung  Thahlah, 
and  several  others,  men,  women,  and  children, 
who,  after  our  usual  examination  at  the  custom- 
office,  accompanied  us  to  the  mission  house.  Soon 
after,  Moung  Nau,  and  others,  came  in,  who  had 
not,  at  first,  heard  of  our  arrival.  In  the  evening, 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  289 

I took  my  usual  seat  among  the  disciples ; and 
when  we  bowed  down  in  prayer,  the  hearts  of 
all  flowed  forth  in  gratitude  and  praise. 

“ January  6th.- — In  the  morning  we  went  to 
the  government-house.  The  lady  of  the  viceroy 
received  Mrs.  J.  with  the  familiarity  of  a friend. 
We  sat  some  time  conversing  with  her.  She  in- 
formed us  that  she  was  now  Woon-gyee-gah-dau, 
and  was  allowed  to  ride  in  a wau  ; (a  vehicle  car- 
ried by  forty  or  fifty  men ;)  dignities  which  very 
few  Burman  ladies  attain.  While  we  were  sitting 
with  her,  the  viceroy  just  made  his  appearance, 
stalking  along,  as  usual,  with  his  great  spear.  He 
looked  down  upon  us  a moment,  saying,  f Ah ! 
you  are  come and  then  passed  on.  But  he 
speaks  to  no  one,  and  does  no  business  at  pre- 
sent, being  absorbed  in  grief,  on  account  of  the 
intelligence  which  reached  him  a few  days  ago, 
of  the  death  of  his  favourite  daughter,  one  of  the 
chief  queens  of  the  present  emperor. 

“ January  7th,  Lord's  day. — Had  worship,  and 
administered  the  Lord’s  supper.  Most  of  the 
disciples  present ; but  some  of  them  unavoidably 
detained,  in  consequence  of  the  distress  which 
presses  upon  all  ranks  of  people,  occasioned  by 
the  expedition  to  Siam. 

“ January  13 th. — Have  spent  the  past  week 
in  getting  our  things  in  order,  and  receiving  visits 
from  the  disciples  and  inquirers.  Yesterday, 
Moung  Gway,  the  only  one  of  the  baptized  whom 


u 


290  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

we  had  not  seen,  returned  from  the  woods,  on 
hearing  of  our  arrival ; and  I am  now  able  to  re- 
cord (and  I do  it  with  the  most  heartfelt  satis- 
faction, and  grateful  praise  to  the  preserving 
Saviour),  that,  though  they  have,  for  the  space 
of  six  months,  been  almost  destitute  of  the  means 
of  grace,  and  those  who  lived  in  our  yard  have 
been  dispersed,  and  forced,  through  fear  of  heavy 
extortion  and  oppression  from  petty  officers  of 
government,  to  fly  into  the  woods,  or  take  refuge 
under  some  government  person  who  could  protect 
them ; yet  not  one  of  them  has  dishonoured  his 
profession,  but  all  remain  firm  in  their  faith  and 
attachment  to  the  cause.  I do  not,  however, 
perceive  that  any  of  them  have  made  the  least 
advance  in  any  respect  whatever;  nor  was  this 
to  be  expected,  as  they  have  not  even  enjoyed 
the  privilege  of  meeting  for  worship. 

“ The  same  remarks  are  to  be  made  concerning 
the  four  Nan-dau-gong  people,  companions  of 
Mah  Men-lay,  who  appeared  to  be  hopefully 
pious  before  we  left.  The  doctor,  Oo  Yan,  with 
whom  we  did  not  feel  so  well  satisfied,  has  been 
with  me  repeatedly  ; and,  in  the  last  interview, 
gave  good  reason  to  hope  that  he  also  is  a true 
convert.  He  seems,  at  length,  to  have  obtained 
light  and  satisfaction  on  the  two  difficult  points 
which  have  so  long  perplexed  him ; namely,  the 
doctrine  of  vicarious  atonement,  and  the  possibi- 
lity of  being  a disciple  of  Christ  by  keeping  the 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  291 

two  commands  of  grace — Repent  and  believe ; 
without  perfectly  keeping  the  two  immutable 
commands  of  merit — Love  God  entirely,  and  love 
others  as  yourself.  O,  how  interesting  is  it  to 
see  (you  can  almost  see  it  with  your  eyes)  the 
light  of  truth  dawning  upon  a precious  soul,  hi- 
therto groping  in  darkness  ! If  Oo  Yan  prove  a 
true  convert,  he  will  be  a most  precious  acquisi- 
tion to  our  cause,  next  to  Moung  Shway-gnong. 
He  is  a man  of  talents  and  respectability.  His 
words  are  as  smooth  as  oil,  as  sweet  as  honey, 
and  as  sharp  as  a razor. 

“ In  respect  to  Mah  Bike,  she  has  given  way  to 
her  violent  temper,  and  involved  her  husband  in 
debt ; and  though  she  now  professes  to  repent 
and  desire  baptism,  and  though  we  have  some 
hope  that  she  is  not  destitute  of  grace,  we  feel 
obliged  at  present  to  put  her  away  from  us,  as  a 
‘wicked  person.’ 

“The  most  important  event  (and  that  relates 
of  course  to  Moung  Shway-gnong),  remains  to  be 
mentioned.  It  will  be  remembered  that  he  was 
accused  before  the  former  viceroy,  of  being  a 
heretic,  and  that  the  simple  reply,  ‘ Inquire  fur- 
ther,’ spread  dismay  among  us  all,  and  was  one 
occasion  of  our  visit  to  Ava.  Soon  after  Mya- 
day-men  assumed  the  government  of  this  pro- 
vince, all  the  priests  and  officers  of  the  village 
where  Moung  Shway-gnong  lives,  entered  into  a 
conspiracy  to  destroy  him.  They  held  daily  con- 


292  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

sultations,  and  assumed  a tone  of  triumph ; while 
poor  Moung  Shway-gnong’s  courage  began  to 
flag ; and,  though  he  does  not  like  to  own  it,  he 
thought  he  must  fly  for  his  life.  At  length,  one 
of  the  conspiracy,  a member  of  the  supreme  court, 
went  into  the  presence  of  the  viceroy,  and,  in  or- 
der to  sound  his  disposition,  complained  that  the 
teacher,  Moung  Shway-gnong,  was  making  every 
endeavour  to  turn  the  priest’s  rice-pot  bottom 
upwards.  What  consequence ? said  the  viceroy: 
Let  the  priests  turn  it  back  again.  This  sentence 
was  enough  ; the  hopes  of  the  conspiracy  were 
blasted ; and  all  the  disciples  felt  that  they  were 
sure  of  toleration  under  Mya-day-men.  But  this 
administration  will  not  probably  continue  many 
months. 

“ In  the  course  of  the  week,  I forwarded  a letter 
to  Mr.  Lansago  (who  left  this  place  for  Ava,  above 
a month  ago),  informing  him  of  my  return,  and 
begging  him  to  endeavour  to  efface  the  unfavour- 
able impression  concerning  us,  which  the  late 
Roman  Catholic  priest  made  on  the  mind  of  the 
emperor. 

“ January  ‘IQth. — The  Nan-dau-gong  people 
have  made  us  several  visits  during  the  week. 
They  are  evidently  growing  in  knowledge  and 
grace ; and  will,  I hope,  ere  long,  be  ready  to 
profess  Christ  in  his  appointed  way. 

“ This  afternoon,  Mrs.  J.  went  to  their  village, 
to  fix  on  a spot  for  the  erection  of  a small  school- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  293 

house.  Mah  Men-lay  has,  of  her  own  accord, 
proposed  to  open  a school  in  the  precincts  of  her 
house,  to  teach  the  girls  and  boys  of  the  village 
to  read ; in  consequence  of  which,  the  latter  will 
not  be  under  the  necessity  of  going  to  the  Burman 
priests  for  education,  as  usual.  When  we  found 
that  she  had  really  made  a beginning,  we  told  her 
that  some  of  the  Christian  females  in  America 
would,  doubtless,  defray  the  expenses  of  the  un- 
dertaking, and  make  some  compensation  to  the 
instructress. 

“ On  Tuesday  evening,  we  recommenced  our 
usual  Tuesday  and  Friday  evening  prayer  meet- 
ings ; but  we  expect  to  have  very  few  present, 
as  most  of  the  disciples  who  formerly  lived  around 
us  are  afraid  to  return,  on  account  of  the  present 
general  distress,  from  which  we  are  unable  to 
protect  them. 

“ January  21  st,  Lord's  day. — All  the  disciples, 
but  one,  and  all  the  hopeful  inquirers,  were  pre- 
sent at  worship ; who,  together  with  some  others, 
made  up  an  assembly  of  about  twenty-five  adults, 
all  paying  respectful  and  devout  attention:  the 
most  interesting  assembly,  all  things  considered, 
that  I have  seen  yet.  How  impossible  it  seemed, 
two  years  ago,  that  such  a precious  assembly 
could  ever  be  raised  up  out  of  the  Egyptian  dark- 
ness, the  atheistic  superstition  of  this  heathen 
land.  After  worship,  two  of  the  Nan-dau-gong 
people  had  some  particular  conversation  with 


294  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

Moung  Thahlah,  about  baptism.  Much  encou- 
raged by  the  general  appearance  of  things  this 
day.  Why  art  thou  ever  cast  down,  O my  soul! 
and  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me  ? Hope 
thou  in  God  : the  God  of  the  Burmans,  as  well  as 
David’s  God  : for  I shall  yet  praise  him  for  the 
help  of  his  countenance,  revealed  in  the  salvation 
of  thousands  of  these  immortal  souls. 

“ January  24 th. — Received  a visit  from  Moung 
Yah,  the  man  whom,  some  years  ago,  I designated 
as  the  first  Inquirer.  His  deportment  and  con- 
versation were  not,  indeed,  so  modest  and  encou- 
raging as  formerly;  but  yet  the  burden  of  his 
request  was  still,  ‘ more  of  the  writings  of  Jesus 
Christ.’  After  his  former  visit,  he  was  appointed 
to  the  government  of  a place  at  some  distance ; 
but  he  is  now  in  the  situation  of  justice  of  peace, 
under  the  present  viceroy,  and  is  much  occupied 
in  business.  It  was  under  this  man  that  some  of 
the  disciples,  who  formerly  lived  in  our  yard,  took 
refuge  during  our  absence ; and  they  still  con- 
tinue to  adhere  to  him.  He  professes  to  love  the 
religion  of  Christ ; but  I fear  that  he  has  very 
indistinct  ideas,  and  that  his  mind  is  diverted  by 
the  cares  of  business,  from  a due  attention  to  the 
one  thing  needful. 

“ January  2 5 th.— Received  a visit  from  a young 
priest  and  a novitiate,  who  reside  in  a neighbour- 
ing kyoung  (a  house  inhabited  by  priests).  They 
stayed  with  me  above  an  hour,  and  paid  more 


TO  THE  BORMAN  EMPIRE.  295 

candid  attention  to  Divine  truth  than  I have  ever 
been  able  to  obtain  from  any  gentlemen  of  the 
(yellow)  cloth.  On  pressing  the  question,  whe- 
ther they  did  not  sometimes  doubt  the  correct- 
ness of  their  religion,  they  confessed  in  the  affirm- 
ative, and  finally  condescended  to  accept  a tract ; 
but  it  will  be  torn  to  pieces  as  soon  as  it  reaches 
the  hands  of  their  superiors. 

“ January  31  st. — Received  a visit  from  the 
teacher,  Oo  Oung-det,  of  the  village  of  Kambet. 
He  has  disseminated  the  semi-atheistic  doctrine 
for  several  years,  and  formed  a small  party  among 
his  neighbours,  who  pay  no  respect  to  the  priests 
and  the  religion  of  Gaudama.  We  had  a most 
interesting  conversation  of  about  two  hours,  in 
the  presence  of  a large  company,  most  of  whom 
came  with  him.  He  successively  gave  up  every 
point  that  he  attempted  to  maintain,  and  ap- 
peared to  lay  open  his  mind  to  the  grand  truths 
of  an  eternal  God,  eternal  happiness,  &c.  Moung 
Shway-gnong  seconded  me,  and  discoursed  in  a 
truly  impressive  manner,  until  the  attention  of 
the  old  man  was  so  completely  fixed,  that  his 
friends  with  difficulty  persuaded  him  to  take  leave. 

“ February  \th. — Oo  Oung-det  repeated  his 
visit.  He  acknowledges  himself  convinced  of  the 
existence  of  an  eternal  God,  and  appears  to  be 
desirous  of  knowing  the  whole  truth ; but  busi- 
ness prevented  his  staying  long. 

“ February  12 th. — Had  a long  conversation 


296  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

with  Oo  Oung-det,  in  which  I at  length  endea- 
voured to  unfold  to  his  view  the  whole  mystery 
of  the  gospel,  the  way  of  salvation  through  the 
atonement  of  the  Son  of  God,  to  which  our  pre- 
vious conversations  have  been  little  more  than 
preparatory.  But  his  proud  heart  evidently  re- 
pelled the  humiliating  doctrine.  So  true  it  is  that 
the  cross  of  Christ  is  the  sure  touchstone  of  the 
human  heart.  His  nephew,  however,  Moung 
Oung-hmat,  listened  with  the  air  of  an  awakened 
man.  During  a temporary  suspense  of  conversa- 
tion, I was  much  gratified  by  hearing  him  whisper 
to  his  uncle,  ‘ Ask  him  more  about  Jesus  Christ.’ 
He  received  a form  of  prayer  with  eagerness,  and 
listened  to  my  parting  instruction  with  some 
feeling. 

“ February  1 6th. — Moung  Ing  has  returned. 
He  is  the  second  Burman  whose  heart  was  touched 
by  Divine  grace.  We  rejoiced  to  see  his  face 
again,  notwithstanding  his  rough  and  unprepos- 
sessing appearance,  occasioned  by  the  hardships 
through  which  he  has  passed  since  he  left  us.  On 
his  arrival  at  Bike,  a town  far  below  Rangoon,  he 
shewed  his  copy  of  St.  Matthew  to  the  Roman 
Catholic  priest  stationed  there,  who  directly  com- 
mitted it  to  the  flames ; and  gave,  instead  of  it,  a 
writing  of  his  own  device.  But,,  through  Divine 
grace,  our  poor  friend  retained  his  integrity,  and 
remained  steadfast  in  the  sentiments  which  he  for- 
merly embraced. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


297 


“ February  19 th. — Spent  several  pleasant  hours 
with  Moung  Ing.  During  his  residence  at  Bike 
he  was  not  satisfied  with  being  a solitary  disciple, 
but  undertook  to  dispute  with  both  Portuguese 
and  Burmans ; and  found  two  or  three  who  were 
disposed  to  listen  to  him.  He  is  to  return  thither 
within  a fortnight : but  wishes  to  be  baptized 
previously. 

“ February  20£/?.— 1 This  is  the  second  evening 
in  which  Mrs.  J.  and  myself  have  had  an  inter- 
view with  the  viceroy  and  his  lady  in  their  inner 
apartment.  Her  highness  gave  us  some  very  en- 
couraging hints  on  the  subject  of  religious  tole- 
ration ; and  promised  to  introduce  us  to  the  em- 
peror, on  his  visiting  Rangoon  next  fall,  in  pro- 
secution of  the  war  with  Siam. 

“ February  25 th.  Lord's  day. — Moung  Ing  pre- 
sented his  petition  for  baptism  and  admission 
into  the  church  ; and  we  unhesitatingly  agreed  to 
grant  his  request  next  Lord’s  day.  Not  one  of 
the  disciples  has  given  more  decided  evidence  of 
being  a sincere  and  hearty  believer  in  the  Lord 
Jesus. 

“ March  4 th,  Lord's  day. — Moung  Ing  received 
baptism,  immediately  after  worship  in  the  after- 
noon. Several  of  the  hopeful  inquirers  witnessed 
the  administration. 

“ March  1 1th,  Lord's  day. — We  partook  of  the 
Lord’s  supper  in  the  evening ; pursuant  to  a re- 
solution of  the  church,  to  celebrate  this  ordinance 


298  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

on  the  second  Sunday  after  the  change  of  the 
moon,  in  order  to  avail  ourselves,  uniformly,  of 
light  evenings. 

“ After  the  ordinance,  Moung  Ing  immediately 
took  leave,  for  the  purpose  of  returning  to  Bike. 
He  is  laden  with  various  writings,  in  Burman  and 
Portuguese,  for  distribution  among  the  people  of 
that  place.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 

A.  H.  J. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


290 


LETTER  XIII. 


Baltimore,  February,  1823. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

From  the  preceding  letters,  you  will  learn  much 
of  the  character,  and  perceive  the  evidences  of 
real  conversion,  exhibited  by  those  who  made  a 
public  profession  of  religion. 

From  the  strength  of  intellect  manifested  by 
several  interesting  characters,  in  the  following 
journal  of  Mr.  Judson,  you  will,  I doubt  not, 
form  a high  idea  of  the  natural  capacity  of  the 
Burmans. 

“ April  25th,  1821. — Sometime  previous  to  the 
last  date,  I resolved  on  opening  the  Zayat,  and 
residing  there  as  formerly;  but  soon  relinquished 
the  intention  for  a time,  in  consequence  of  en- 
gaging Moung  Shway-gnong  to  assist  me  in  a 
thorough  revision  of  those  parts  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment which  are  translated,  but  not  yet  printed ; 
namely,  the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  and  the  first 
part  of  the  Acts.  We  have,  at  length,  finished 
the  revision ; and  I this  day  recommence  occu- 
pying the  Zayat. 


300  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ May  At h. — Several  days  have  passed,  without 
any  encouraging  occurrence.  The  Zayat  never 
attracted  less  company,  and  I began  to  fear  that 
the  good  old  times  of  1819  would  never  again  re- 
turn. A case,  however,  has  just  occurred,  which 
reminds  me  of  those  times.  I never  before  met 
with  an  instance  of  such  openness  of  mind,  and 
readiness  to  receive  the  truth,  on  first  communi- 
cation. The  man  is  a regular-bred  Boodhist, 
without  the  least  tincture  of  semi-atheism ; and 
yet,  strange  to  say,  he  listened  to  the  truth  with 
unprecedented  candour,  and  apparent  eagerness, 
for  above  two  hours.  I am  sure  I shall  see  him 
again — but  yet,  what  have  I found  more  fallacious 
than  first  appearances  ? 

“ May  5th. — Mr.  Lansago  arrived  from  Ava 
last  night.  I have  just  had  an  interview  with 
him.  On  receiving  my  letter,  he  mentioned  us 
before  the  emperor,  who  remembered  that  we 
were  * Zandees.’  Mr.  L.  contradicted  the  asper- 
sion— said  we  were  true  men,  &c. ; to  which  his 
majesty  made  no  reply. 

“ Mr.  Ignatius,  the  principal  Roman  catholic 
priest  in  Rangoon,  is  going  to  Ava,  by  order  of 
the  emperor,  to  take  the  place  of  jthe  old  priest, 
in  the  medical  line.  Mr.  L.  thinks  that  the  em- 
peror will  not  come  down  to  Rangoon,  and  that 
the  Siamese  war  will  not  be  continued. 

“ May  6th,  Lord's  day. — From  various  causes, 
there  were  only  three  of  the  baptized  present  at 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  301 

worship,  and  yet  we  had  an  assembly  of  above 
twenty  adults,  in  all  the  various  stages  of  reli- 
gious inquiry ; some  almost  ready  to  profess  re- 
ligion, and  some  just  beginning  to  open  their 
eyes  to  the  wonders  of  redeeming  love.  Among 
the  rest  were  two  aged  men,  devout  worshippers 
of  Gaudama,  and  constant  attendants  on  the  lec- 
tures of  the  Mangen  teacher.  They  listened  with 
fixed  attention  to  a long  discourse,  from  the  pa- 
rable of  the  pharisee  and  publican ; and  one  of 
them  declared  himself  pleased  with  the  doctrine. 
There  was  also  present,  for  the  first  time,  a rela- 
tion of  Moung  Shway-bay,  from  the  upper  part  of 
the  country,  who  has  received  considerable  in- 
formation from  his  cousin.  He  was  so  much  de- 
lighted with  some  things  which  he  heard,  that, 
in  the  midst  of  the  discourse,  he  broke  out  into 
audible  expressions  of  approbation. 

“ May  12 th,  Saturday. — Have  had  several  at- 
tentive listeners,  during  the  past  week.  Some  of 
my  old  visitors  from  Kambet,  and  other  villages, 
begin  to  find  that  the  doors  of  the  Zayat  are 
again  open. 

“ May  14  th. — A succession  of  company  through 
the  day.  A priest  of  some  note  listened  with 
much  apparent  candour,  and  some  expressions  of 
approval. 

“ May  15 th. — Despatched  the  manuscript  of 
Ephesians,  and  the  first  part  of  the  Acts,  to  Se- 
rampore,  requesting  brother  Hough  to  procure  an 


302 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


edition  of  six  hundred  of  each,  at  the  expense  of 
the  Board. 

“ At  night,  received  a visit  from  Moung  Gway, 
brother-in-law  to  Moung  Shway-bay.  He  was 
accompanied  by  one  Moung  Thah-ee,  an  intract-' 
able,  furious  creature,  noted  for  brow-beating  and 
silencing  every  antagonist.  He  professes  to  be  a 
strict  Boodhist,  without  the  least  doubt  on  the 
subject  of  religion;  but  having  heard  of  my  ob- 
ject in  coming  to  this  country,  wishes  to  give  me 
an  opportunity  of  making  him  doubt.  I found 
him  extremely  difficult  to  manage,  and  finally  told 
him,  that  he  must  get  an  humble  mind,  and  pray 
to  the  true  God,  or  he  would  never  attain  tfue 
wisdom.  This  threw  him  into  a passion.  He 
said  he  would  have  me  to  know  that  he  was  no 
common  man.  He  could  dispute  with  governors 
and  kings,  &c.  I then  gave  him  a tract,  which 
he  affected  to  disdain,  but  finally  received,  and 
went  away. 

“ May  \Qth. — Moung  Gway  called  to  apologize 
for  his  companion’s  conduct.  He  said,  that  from 
being  always  victorious  in  disputation,  he  had 
become  insolent  and  overbearing;  but  that  he 
was  really  inquiring  after  the  truth,  and  had  been 
reading  the  tract  attentively.  Moung  Gway  him- 
self seems  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  the  Chris- 
tian religion. 

“ May  nth. — Moung  Thah-ee  spent  the  whole 
evening  with  me.  I find  that  he  has  a strong 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  303 

mind,  capable  of  grasping  the  most  difficult  sub- 
ject. He  listened  to  the  truth  with  much  more 
attention  and  patience  than  at  first. 

“ May  18th. — Moung  Thah-ee  came  again,  ac- 
companied by  several  of  his  admirers.  At  first 
he  behaved  with  some  propriety,  and  allowed 
conversation  to  proceed  in  a regular  manner.  But 
soon  he  descended  into  his  own  native  element, 
and  stormed  and  raged.  When  I found  that  he 
would  be  utterly  unreasonable,  and  not  permit 
me  even  to  finish  a sentence,  I remained  silent, 
and  suffered  him  to  display  himself.  When  he 
was  quite  exhausted,  I took  an  opportunity  to  ex- 
hibit a brief  view  of  the  reasons  which  convinced 
me  that  the  religion  of  Gaudama  was  false,  and 
the  Boodhist  Scriptures  fictitious ; and  then  chal- 
lenged him  to  refute  my  statement.  But  he  de- 
clined, saying  that  we  were  both  tired,  and  he 
would  finish  the  debate  some  other  time. 

“ May  19th. — A succession  of  company  all  the 
day.  At  night,  Moung  Thah-ee  came  alone,  in- 
tending to  have  some  private  conversation;  but 
no  opportunity  offered. 

“ May  20th , Lord's  day. — Encountered  another 
new  character,  one  Moung  Long,  from  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Shway-doung,  a disciple  of  the  great 
Toung-dwen  teacher,  the  acknowledged  head  of 
all  the  semi-atheists  in  the  country.  Like  the 
rest  of  the  sect,  Moung  Long  is,  in  reality,  a com- 
plete sceptic,  scarcely  believing  his  own  exist- 


304  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

ence.  They  say  he  is  always  quarrelling  with 
his  wife,  on  some  metaphysical  point.  For  in- 
stance : if  she  says,  ‘ The  rice  is  ready  he  will 
reply,  ‘ Rice ! What  is  rice  ? Is  it  matter,  or 
spirit?  Is  it  an  idea,  or  is  it  nonentity?’  Per- 
haps she  will  say,  ‘ It  is  matter;’  and  he  will 
reply,  ‘ Well,  wife,  and  what  is  matter?  Are  you 
sure  there  is  such  a thing  in  existence,  or  are 
you  merely  subject  to  a delusion  of  the  senses?’ 

“ When  he  first  came  in,  I thought  him  an  or- 
dinary man.  He  has  only  one  good  eye;  but  I 
soon  discovered,  that  that  one  eye  has  as  ‘ great 
a quantity  of  being,’  as  half  a dozen  common  eyes. 
In  his  manners,  he  is  just  the  reverse  of  Moung 
Thah-ee — all  suavity  and  humility,  and  respect. 
He  professed  to  be  an  inquirer  after  the  truth ; 
and  I accordingly  opened  to  him  some  parts  of 
the  gospel.  He  listened  with  great  seriousness ; 
and,  when  I ceased  speaking,  remained  so  thought- 
ful, and  apparently  impressed  with  the  truth,  that 
I began  to  hope  he  would  come  to  some  good, 
and  therefore  invited  him  to  ask  some  question 
relative  to  what  he  had  heard.  £ Your  servant,’ 
said  he,  ‘ has  not  much  to  inquire  of  your  lord- 
ship.  In  your  lordship’s  sacred  speech,  however, 
there  are  one  or  two  words  which  your  servant 
does  not  understand.  Your  lordship  says,  that 
in  the  beginning  God  created  one  man  and  one 
woman.  I do  not  understand  (I  beg  your  lord- 
ship’s pardon)  what  a man  is,  and  why  he  is 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  305 

called  a man.’  My  eyes  were  now  opened,  in  an 
instant,  to  his  real  character ; and  I had  the  hap- 
piness to  be  enabled,  for  about  twenty  minutes,  to 
lay  blow  after  blow  upon  his  sceptical  head,  with 
such  effect,  that  he  kept  falling  and  falling ; and 
though  he  made  several  desperate  efforts  to  get 
up,  he  found  himself  at  last  prostrate  on  the 
ground,  unable  to  stir.  Moung  Shway-gnong, 
who  had  been  an  attentive  listener,  was  extremely 
delighted  to  see  his  enemy  so  well  punished ; for 
this  Moung  Long  had  sorely  harassed  him  in  time 
past.  The  poor  man  was  not,  however,  in  the 
least  angry  at  his  discomfiture ; but,  in  the  true 
spirit  of  his  school,  said,  that  though  he  had 
heard  much  of  me,  the  reality  far  exceeded  the 
report.  Afterwards  he  joined  us  in  worship,  and 
listened  with  great  attention,  as  did  also  his  wife. 

“ May  21  st. — Moung  Thah-ee  came  again,  with 
several  others;  but  he  was  so  outrageous,  and 
vulgar,  and  abusive,  that  I found  it  impossible  to 
hold  any  rational  conversation  with  him ; and  he 
finally  went  away  in  a great  passion,  saying,  that 
he  had  been  sent  by  some  men  in  authority  to  spy 
us  out,  and  that  by  to-morrow  he  would  bring  us 
into  trouble.  Such  threatenings  tend  to  sink  our 
spirits,  and  make  us  realize  our  truly  helpless, 
destitute  condition,  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of 
wolves  : ‘ Lord,  behold  their  threatenings,’  &c. 

“ May  21th,  Lot'd’s  day. — A very  busy  day. 
Had  scarcely  dismissed  the  few  Europeans,  who 


306 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


attend  English  worship  in  the  morning,  when  the 
Burman  visitors  began  to  come  in;  and  though 
many  of  the  disciples  were  absent,  we  finally  had 
an  assembly  of  thirty  persons,  who  paid  most 
earnest  and  uninterrupted  attention  to  a discourse 
of  about  half  an  hour,  from  the  text — ‘ By  one 
man’s  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners.’  A 
few,  who  visited  the  Zayat  during  the  past  week, 
were  present  for  the  first  time.  One  of  them,  by 
name  Moung  Hlay,  may  be  named  among  the  hope- 
ful inquirers.  Moung  Long  was  again  present,  and 
another  disciple  of  the  Toung-dwen  teacher,  of 
equal  powers  of  mind ; but  these  keen  metaphy- 
sicians are,  I fear,  far  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

“ June  3d,  Lord's  day. — A new  acquaintance  of 
last  week,  of  Siamese  extraction,  and  Moung 
Hlay,  and  Moung  Long,  were  present  with  the 
usual  assembly.  Mah  Myat-lay,  sister  of  Mah 
Men-lay,  appears  to  be  resolved,  at  length,  to 
profess  religion. 

“ June  4th. — Moung  Long  spent  two  or  three 
hours  with  me,  in  which  I endeavoured  to  lay  be- 
fore him  all  the  evidences  of  the  truth  of  the 
Christian  religion.  His  wife  proves  to  be  as 
sharp  as  himself,  and  has  been  harassing  Mrs.  J. 
with  all  sorts  of  questions  about  the  possibility 
of  sin’s  finding  entrance  into  a pure  mind,  or  of 
its  being  permitted  under  the  government  of  a 
holy  sovereign. 

“ I have  this  day  taken  Moung  Shway-bay  into 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  307 

the  service  of  the  mission.  He  bids  fairer  than 
any  other  member  of  the  church  to  be  qualified, 
in  due  time,  for  the  ministry  : for  though  infe- 
rior to  Moung  Thah-lah  in  fluency  of  speech,  and 
to  Moung  Shway-gnong  in  genius  and  address,  he 
is  superior  to  the  former  in  consistency  of  cha- 
racter, and  gravity  of  deportment,  and  to  the  lat- 
ter in  experimental  acquaintance  with  Divine 
things,  and  devotedness  to  the  cause.  But  the 
principal  trait  of  character  which  distinguishes 
him  from  the  rest,  and  affords  considerable  evi- 
dence that  he  is  called  by  higher  authority  than 
that  of  man  to  the  Christian  ministry,  is  his  hum- 
ble and  persevering  desire  for  that  office — a desire 
which  sprung  up  in  his  heart  soon  after  his  con- 
version, and  has  been  growing  ever  since.  I in- 
tend to  employ  him,  at  present,  as  an  assistant  in 
the  Zayat,  on  a small  allowance  of  seven  or  eight 
rupees  a month,  which  I hope  the  Board  will  ap- 
prove of.  In  that  situation,  he  will  have  an 
opportunity  of  improving  in  those  qualifications 
which  are  requisite  to  fit  him  to  be  a teacher  of 
religion  among  his  fellow  countrymen. 

“ June  8th. — The  Siamese  spent  several  hours 
with  me.  His  mind  is  just  on  the  poise  between 
Boodhism  and  Christianity. 

“ June  10 th}  Lord's  day. — Moung  Long  again 
present — all  eye  and  ear.  Mrs.  J.  pronounces  his 
wife  the  most  superior  woman,  in  point  of  intel- 
lect, that  she  has  met  with  in  Burmah. 


308  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ After  evening  worship,  Mah  Myat-lay  pre- 
sented her  petition  for  admission  into  the  church, 
which  was  granted,  and  next  Sunday  appointed 
for  her  baptism.  The  evidences  of  her  piety  are 
of  the  most  satisfactory  kind.  We  esteem  her 
quite  as  highly  as  her  sister  Mah  Men-lay,  though 
she  is  far  inferior  in  external  qualifications. 

“ June  1 \tli. — Moung  Long  and  his  wife  spent 
most  of  the  day  with  us.  Their  minds  are  in  a 
truly  hopeful  state,  though  still  greatly  governed 
by  the  maxims  of  the  Toung-dwen  school.  Their 
main  inquiry  to-day  was — How  they  could  ob- 
tain faith  in  Christ  ? May  the  Holy  Spirit  solve 
their  difficulties,  by  giving  them  an  experimental 
acquaintance  with  that  saving  grace  ! 

“ June  14 tk. — An  intimate  friend  of  the  Woon- 
gyee-gah-dau  told  Mrs.  J.  to-day,  in  the  presence 
of  her  highness,  who,  by  silence,  assented  to  the 
correctness  of  the  remark,  that  when  the  emperor, 
and  others  in  government,  said  that  all  might  be- 
lieve and  worship  as  they  pleased,  the  toleration 
extended  merely  to  foreigners  resident  in  the  em- 
pire, and  by  no  means  to  native  Burmans,  who, 
being  slaves  of  the  emperor,  would  not  be  allowed, 
with  impunity,  to  renounce  the  religion  of  their 
master.  This  remark  accords  with  all  that  we 
heard  at  Ava,  and  may  be  depended  on  (notwith- 
standing some  private  encouragement  we  have 
received  from  the  viceroy  and  his  wife),  as  afford- 
ing a correct  view  of  the  state  of  religious  tolera- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  309 

tion  in  this  country.  It  is  a fact,  that,  except  in 
our  own  private  circle,  it  is  not  known  that  a 
single  individual  has  actually  renounced  Bood- 
hism,  and  been  initiated  into  the  Christian  re- 
ligion. 

“ Mah  Myat-lay  informs  us,  that  the  news  of 
her  intended  baptism  has  been  rumoured  among 
her  neighbours,  and  excited  a great  uproar.  She 
is  not,  however,  disheartened ; but  rather  wishes 
that  her  baptism  may  not  be  deferred  until  Sun- 
day, lest  some  measures  be  taken  to  prevent  it. 
I expect  that  she  will  present  herself  for  baptism 
to-morrow  evening. 

“ June  1 5th. — According  to  the  purpose  men- 
tioned under  the  last  date,  Mah  Myat-lay  re- 
ceived baptism,  about  sunset,  at  the  usual  place. 

“ July  3 d. — Moung  Thahlah  was  married  to  a 
woman  resident  in  our  yard,  a usual  attendant  on 
public  worship, — the  event  somewhat  noticeable, 
as  being  probably  the  first  Christian  marriage 
ever  performed  between  persons  of  pure  Burman 
extraction. 

“ July  14 th. — The  first  day  of  Burman  Lent. 
The  Woon-gyee-gah-dau,  notwithstanding  all  she 
has  heard  from  Mrs.  J.,  set  out,  most  zealously, 
in  her  course  of  religious  performances  ; and  the 
whole  town  seems  to  be  following  her  example. 

“ Many  cases  of  hopeful  inquiry,  and  interest- 
ing religious  conversation,  have  occurred  within 
the  last  month ; but  they  passed  away  without 


310  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

much  'apparent  fruit,  and  are,  therefore,  not 
worthy  of  notice.  Moung  Long  and  his  wife  are 
the  most  promising  at  present ; and  I begin  to 
indulge  some  slight  hope,  that  they  will  obtain 
Divine  grace. 

“ In  the  interval  of  receiving  company,  I have 
lately  been  employed  in  translating ; have  finished 
the  Gospel  and  Epistles  of  St.  John,  those  exqui- 
sitely sweet  and  precious  portions  of  the  New 
Testament,  and  am  now  employed  on  the  latter 
part  of  the  Acts.  I find  Moung  Shway-bay  a 
most  valuable  assistant,  in  all  parts  of  missionary 
work.  Moung  Shway-gnong  also  begins  ‘ to  be 
dissatisfied  with  being  a mere  disciple,  and  hopes 
that  he  shall  some  time  be  thought  worthy  of 
being  a teacher  of  the  Christian  religion.’  These 
two,  with  Mah  Men-lay,  are,  at  present,  the 
flower  of  our  little  church.  I have  no  reason, 
however,  to  complain  of  the  conduct  of  any,  con- 
sidering the  great  disadvantages  under  which  they 
all  labour.  Some  have  grown  comparatively  cold ; 
but  none  have  forgotten  their  first  love.  Praise 
for  ever  be  to  Him, 

“ Who  is  faithful  to  his  promises, 

And  faithful  to  his  Son ! ” 

“ August  \th. — Am  just  recovering  from  the 
second  fit  of  sickness  which  I have  had  this  sea- 
son. The  first  was  the  cholera  morbus  ; the  pre- 
sent has  been  a fever.  The  second  day  after  I 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  311 

was  taken,  Mrs.  J.  was  seized  with  the  same 
disorder ; and,  for  several  days,  we  were  unable 
to  help  one  another.  Through  Divine  mercy, 
however,  we  contrived  to  get  our  medicines  from 
time  to  time,  and  are  now  in  a convalescent  state, 
so  far  as  the  fever  is  concerned.  Mrs.  J.,  how- 
ever, is  suffering  severely  under  the  liver  com- 
plaint, which,  notwithstanding  continual  saliva- 
tions, is  making  such  rapid  and  alarming  ad- 
vances, as  to  preclude  all  hope  of  her  recovery, 
in  this  part  of  the  world. 

■■  August  6th. — Came  to  a final  conclusion  to 
send  Mrs.  Judson  to  America,  for  the  reasons  as- 
signed in  a letter  to  the  corresponding  Secretary, 
accompanying  this  number. 

“ August  21^. — Mrs.  J.  embarked  for  Bengal.” 

I remain,  my  dear  Sir, 

Very  affectionately  and  respectfully, 


A.  H.  J. 


AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 


ai2 


LETTER  XIV. 


Washington,  March,  1823. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 

Thus  far  had  the  mission  proceeded,  when  loss 
of  health  forced  me  from  Rangoon,  and  all  the 
interesting  scenes  which  I had  so  long  witnessed. 
Those  only  who  have  been  through  a variety  of 
toil  and  privation,  to  obtain  a darling  object,  can 
realize  how  entirely  every  fibre  of  the  heart  ad- 
heres to  that  object,  when  secured.  Had  we  en- 
countered no  difficulties,  and  suffered  no  priva- 
tions in  our  attempts  to  form  a church  of  Christ, 
under  the  government  of  a heathen  despot,  we 
should  have  been  warmly  attached  to  the  indivi- 
duals composing  it,  but  should  not  have  felt  that 
tender  solicitude  and  anxious  affection,  which,  in 
the  present  case,  we  experienced. 

Rangoon,  from  having  been  the  theatre  in 
which  so  much  of  the  faithfulness,  power,  and 
mercy  of  God  had  been  exhibited — from  having 
been  considered,  for  ten  years  past,  as  my  home 
for  life — and  from  a thousand  interesting  asso- 
ciations of  ideas,  had  become  the  dearest  spot  on 
earth.  Hence  you  will  readily  imagine  that  no 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  313 

ordinary  consideration  could  have  induced  my 
departure.  With  the  providential  and  merciful 
circumstances  attending  my  voyage  to  England, 
and  with  all  that  transpired,  during  my  residence 
under  your  hospitable  roof,  you  are  well  ac- 
quainted. I hasten,  therefore,  to  communicate 
the  intelligence,  which,  from  time  to  time,  has 
been  received  from  the  mission  in  Rangoon,  since 
my  departure. 

Soon  after  the  last  date  in  Mr.  Judson’s  journal, 
another  attempt,  with  greater  probability  of  suc- 
cess, was  made  to  destroy  the  teacher,  Moung 
Shway-gnong.  The  chief  of  his  village,  in  con- 
nexion with  several  priests,  drew  up,  and  pre- 
sented, a document  to  the  viceroy,  in  which 
Moung  Shway-gnong  was  accused  of  having  em- 
braced sentiments,  which  aimed  at  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Boodhist  religion,  and  prejudicial  to 
the  existing  authorities.  The  viceroy  replied, 
that  if  their  assertions  were  true,  Moung  Shway- 
gnong  was  deserving  of  death.  The  teacher  and 
his  friends  had  closely  watched  the  proceedings 
of  the  accusers,  and  took  measures  accordingly ; 
and,  as  soon  as  he  ascertained  that  the  viceroy 
uttered  an  encouraging  word  to  his  persecutors, 
he  procured  a boat,  embarked  his  family,  secretly 
fled  to  the  mission  house,  to  disclose  to  Mr.  Jud- 
son  his  situation,  and,  after  furnishing  himself 
with  tracts  and  portions  of  Scripture,  proceeded 
up  the  river  to  Shway-doung,  a town  about  a 


314  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

hundred  miles  from  Rangoon.  From  the  last  ac- 
counts, he  was  busily  employed  in  disseminating 
his  heretical  sentiments,  and  had  excited  much 
commotion  among  the  inhabitants  of  that  place. 
Thus  it  was,  as  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  when 
the  disciples  of  Christ  were  persecuted,  “they 
that  were  scattered  abroad  went  every  where 
preaching  the  word.”  Moung  Shway-gnong’s 
easy  and  rapid  escape,  may  appear  almost  incre- 
dible to  one  accustomed  to  a well  regulated  po- 
lice, in  civilized  countries.  But  not  so,  when  it 
is  known  that  government  officers  in  Burmah 
take  cognizance  of  those  cases  only,  under  their 
immediate  control  ; that  there  is  nothing 
throughout  the  empire,  like  a public  newspaper, 
in  which  the  delinquent  may  be  so  described  as 
to  occasion  detection  ; and  that  the  only  mode  of 
travelling  is  in  boats  : consequently,  thousands 
are  at  all  times  on  the  river. 

Moung  Shway-gnong’s  accusation  and  escape, 
however,  produced,  as  formerly,  much  alarm 
among  the  disciples  and  inquirers, — the  former 
attending  public  worship  as  privately  as  possible, 
while  the  latter  almost  entirely  withdrew.  Mr. 
Judson  was  obliged  to  shut  up  the  Zayat  altoge- 
ther, and  confine  his  religious  instructions  to 
those  who  occasionally  called  at  the  mission 
house.  You  will  recollect,  my  dear  Sir,  that  Mr. 
J.,  at  this  time,  was  entirely  alone  ; not  an  indi- 
vidual to  give  him  an  encouraging  word.  Under 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  315 

existing  circumstances,  it  would  not  have  excited 
surprise  to  find  that  he  was  occasionally  de- 
jected and  depressed.  But,  at  this  period,  his 
mind  was  particularly  impressed  with  the  impor- 
tance of  completing  the  translation  of  the  New 
Testament,  and  he  resolved  to  engage  imme- 
diately in  this  great  work,  and  wait  the  farther 
openings  of  Providence,  in  regard  to  preaching. 

An  extract  from  a letter  written  by  Mr.  J.  at 
this  time,  exhibits  his  reasons  for  this  course. 

“ Yesterday,  feeling  myself  wholly  at  a loss,  I 
committed  myself  to  the  guidance  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  with  some  uncommon  feelings  of  faith ; 
and  soon  after,  my  mind  became  more  settled 
on  pursuing  the  translations,  as  being  the  most 
honourable  to  God,  the  most  beneficial  to  my 
own  soul,  and  the  most  conducive  to  the  real  in- 
terest of  the  mission. 

“ November  3d. — The  mission  sustained  a heavy 
loss  in  the  death  of  Moung  Thahlah,  the  second 
convert.  In  a state  of  perfect  health,  he  was  at- 
tacked with  the  cholera,  and  expired  in  less  than 
nineteen  hours.  Mr.  Judson  was  not  apprized  of 
his  illness,  until  he  became  insensible;  conse- 
quently, the  state  of  his  mind,  in  that  trying  hour, 
was  unknown  ; but,  from  the  evidence  previously 
given,  there  is  no  doubt  that  his  glad  spirit  found 
itself  in  the  presence  of  the  Saviour,  on  its  eman- 
cipation from  the  body.  The  death  of  Moung 
Thahlah  was  more  severely  felt,  as  he  was  one  of 


316  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

the  few  Burmans,  in  the  habit  of  leading  in  social 
prayer.  In  this  exercise,  he  very  much  excelled ; 
frequently  expressing  ideas  apt  and  spiritual, 
clothed  in  the  most  appropriate  and  edifying 
language.  He  was  a young  man  of  fine  talents, 
superior  education,  and  had  a peculiarly  interest- 
ing mode  of  communicating  religious  truths.  But 
our  hopes  of  his  future  usefulness  were  early 
blasted  by  his  premature  and  sudden  death,  and 
we  could  only  say  in  this,  as  in  many  other 
cases,  ‘Verily  thou  art  a God  that  hideth  thy- 
self,’ &c.” 

I will  now,  my  dear  Sir,  close  this  series  of 
letters,  with  Mr.  Judson’s  last  journal,  received 
only  a few  days  since,  just  in  time  for  me  to  com- 
municate the  latest  intelligence.  From  this  jour- 
nal, you  will  perceive  what  reason  we  have  for 
rejoicing  and  encouragement,  and  what  renewed 
motives  are  presented  for  future  trust  and  con- 
fidence in  God.  Surely  Burmah,  with  other 
heathen  nations,  will  shortly  become  subject  to 
the  moral  government  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ. 

“ December  9th,  1821,  Lord's  day. — I begin  to 
hope  that  one  more  Burman  has  felt  the  vivifying 
influence  of  Divine  truth.  He  is  an  old  acquaint- 
ance of  Moung  Ing  ; and  received  from  him  his 
first  serious  impressions.  He  has  visited  me 
several  times ; but  it  was  not  till  to-day  that  he 
expressed  his  ‘ determination  to  worship  the  eter- 


TO  THE  BUR1IAN  EMPIRE.  317 

nal  God  all  his  life  long.’  He  is  a man  in  low  life 
— has  no  family — and  his  name  is  Moung  Thah.1 

“-Moung  Yo,  one  of  the  semi-atheists  of  Pah- 
tsooan-doung,  formerly  a disciplfe  of  Moung 
Shway-gnong,  has  recommenced  visiting  me,  ac- 
companied by  one  Moung  Bo,  of  very  similar 
character,  lately  returned  from  Martaban.  They 
are  both  men  of  sterling  sense,  and  considerable 
learning,  and  have  almost  renounced  Boodhism 
in  all  its  forms ; for  1 begin  to  find,  that  the  semi- 
atheism, which  I have  sometimes  mentioned,  is 
nothing  but  a refined  Boodhism,  having  its  found- 
ation in  the  Boodhist  scriptures. 

“ December  lR/i. — Received  a note  from  Dr. 
Price,  communicating  the  animating  intelligence 
of  his  arrival  off  the  mouth  of  the  river. 

“ December  13 th. — Enjoyed  the  great  satisfac- 
tion of  welcoming  brother  and  sister  Price  at  the 
place  of  landing,  and  of  conducting  them  to  the 
mission  house. 

“ January  20 th,  1822. — Another  season  of  re- 
joicing, occasioned  by  the  arrival  of  brother 
Hough  and  his  family. 

“ March  12th. — Have  had  nothing  to  notice 
lately,  except  the  progress  of  the  translation. 
During  a few  months  past,  I have  finished  St. 
Matthew  (a  new  translation),  St.  Mark,  and  St. 
Luke,  and  this  day  pass  into  Romans,  the  inter- 
mediate books  being  previously  done. 

“ June  30 th. — Am  just  recovering  from  severe 


318  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

illness.  A few  weeks  ago,  I was  taken  with  a fever, 
slight  at  first,  but  daily  increasing  in  violence, 
until  the  event  became  very  dubious.  On  reco- 
vering from  the  effects  of  the  fever,  and  j ust  re- 
suming the  translation,  I was  suddenly  seized 
with  the  cholera  morbus,  though  that  disease  is 
not  now  prevalent  in  the  place  ; and  several  hours 
of  suffering  elapsed,  before  medicine  took  effect. 
This,  with  the  quantity  of  opium  and  laudanum 
administered,  deprived  me  of  the  little  remaining 
strength  which  the  fever  left  me,  and  I am  now 
scarcely  able  to  hold  a pen.  It  is  singular,  that 
last  rainy  season  I was  subject  to  these  same 
diseases,  though  in  different  order ; and  I ascribe 
it  to  the  ascendency  which  the  climate  of  Ran- 
goon is  obtaining  over  my  constitution.  If  it  be 
the  will  of  God,  I feel  desirous  of  living  to  finish 
the  New  Testament  in  Burman, — a work  which 
must  otherwise  be  suspended  for  some  time. 

“ July  14 thy  Lord's  day. — For  several  months 
past  I have  been  so  engrossed  in  the  translation, 
that  I have  not  solicited  company  so  much  as  for- 
merly, nor  found  time  to  mention  the  noticeable 
events  of  a missionary  nature,  that  have  occa- 
sionally transpired,  especially  as  they  have  passed 
away  without  much  permanent  result.  Within  a 
few  weeks,  however,  there  have  been  several  cir- 
cumstances of  such  an  encouraging  kind,  as  in- 
duces me  to  mention  them  in  connexion.  The 
first  that  excited  our  attention  was  the  case  of 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  319 

Men-oo,  a blind  girl,  resident  in  our  yard,  under 
the  medical  care  of  brother  Price.  She  received 
her  first  ideas  of  religion  from  Moung  Shway- 
bay,  and  after  attending  evening  worship  a few 
times,  appeared  to  have  her  heart  opened  to  Di- 
vine truth.  About  the  same  time,  Moung  Myat- 
lah  received  some  new  excitement,  that  induced 
him  and  his  neighbour,  Moung  Thah-ay,  to  re- 
commence attending  public  worship,  which  they 
have  not  done  since  Moung  Shway-gnong's  per- 
secution and  flight.  They  are  both,  we  hope, 
true  Christians,  but  have  not  yet  obtained  suffi- 
cient light  and  courage  to  profess  religion.  The 
case  of  May  Mee  is  somewhat  similar.  She  is  an 
old  woman — a disciple  of  Moung  Shway-gnong 
— formerly  acquainted  with  Mrs.  J.,  but  appa- 
rently unsusceptible  of  any  impressions.  It  is 
now  two  or  three  months  since  she  commenced 
visiting  us,  and  listening  with  uncommon  atten- 
tion to  religious  conversation.  At  length  she  be- 
gan to  attend  public  worship  regularly ; and, 
during  the  last  interview,  she  manifested  much  of 
that  deep  solemnity,  which  has  uniformly  charac- 
terized the  newly  converted.  Last  in  order,  but 
not  least  in  interest,  is  the  case  of  Mah  Doke. 
She  is  a relation  and  inmate  of  the  Nan-dau-gong 
sisters,  and  her  name  sometimes  occurs  in  the 
journal  about  two  years  ago,  in  connexion  with 
theirs.  She  was  once  equally  forward  with  Mah 
Myat-lay;  but  subsequently  lost  her  impressions, 


320  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

and  remained  quite  stupid,  till  within  a few  weeks, 
during  which  time  she  has  been  more  frequent  in 
her  visits,  and  more  serious  and  attentive.  Last 
Sunday  she  requested  baptism  ; and  to-day  she 
has  undergone  a particular  examination,  to  the 
great  satisfaction  of  us  all.  Add  to  these  circum- 
stances, that  Moung  Shway-gnong  has  lately  re- 
turned from  the  interior,  on  a visit,  and  concluded 
to  stay  a while  with  us,  partly  as  teacher  to  bro- 
ther Price.  He  has  evidently  grown  in  religious 
experience  ; his  conversation  is  more  spiritual,  and 
he  seems  more  attached  than  ever  to  us  and  the 
cause. 

“ July  1 5th. — Received  a visit  from  Pah  Kyah, 
an  old  disciple  of  Moung  Shway-gnong.  His 
father  was  an  adherent  of  the  celebrated  Kolan, 
who  suffered  under  the  last  king  for  semi-atheism. 
This  man  has  been  an  anti-boodhist  all  his  life : 
but  having,  from  long  opposition  to  all  around 
him,  become  inveterately  attached  to  his  peculiar 
sentiments,  seemed  to  be  the  last  person  to  con- 
sider and  embrace  a new  religion.  He  obtained 
some  ideas  of  God  from  Moung  Shway-gnong, 
but  not  sufficient  to  induce  him  to  visit  us  before 
to-day.  Our  conversation  related  chiefly  to  the 
law  of  God,  and  the  nature  and  evil  of  sin,  points 
on  which  he  was  entirely  ignorant.  He  professed 
to  believe  and  acquiesce  in  what  he  heard ; but 
I fear  that  his  feelings  are  at  variance  with  his 
professions. 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.’  321 

“ July  20 th. — My  hopes  of  finishing  the  New 
Testament,  without  interruption,  all  blasted,  by 
the  arrival  of  an  order  from  the  king,  summoning 
brother  Price  to  Ava,  on  account  of  his  medical 
skill.  I must  of  course  accompany  him,  and  en- 
deavour to  take  advantage  of  the  circumstance,  to 
gain  some  footing  in  the  capital  and  the  palace. 
But  it  is  most  repugnant  to  my  feelings  to  leave 
my  present  pursuits  and  prospects  in  Rangoon. 
May  the  Lord  direct. 

“ July  2\st,  Lord's  day. — Another  visit  from 
Pah  Kyah.  He  has  meditated  deeply  on  what 
he  heard  at  the  last  interview ; and  though  his 
first  appearance  was  rough  and  forbidding,  he 
drinks  in  Divine  truth,  and  yields  to  its  soul-sub- 
duing power. 

“ A larger  assembly  this  day  than  usual,  con- 
sisting of  above  thirty  persons.  After  worship, 
Mah  Doke  was  approved  by  the  church,  and  bap- 
tized. In  the  evening,  had  a particular  conver- 
sation with  Men-oo,  the  blind  girl,  and  rejoiced 
to  learn  the  extent  of  her  religious  knowledge ; 
and  still  more,  to  discover  some  evidences  of  a 
work  of  grace. 

“ July  25 th. — Pah  Kyah  came  again,  accompa- 
nied by  his  sister,  Mah  Thah-oo,  who,  I am  told, 
has  been  reading  the  tract,  day  and  night,  and 
came  prepared  to  believe  all  she  should  hear.  A 
most  interesting  forenoon  with  these  people,  and 
several  others. 


322  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

“ July  27th. — May  Zoo,  at  length,  claims  to  be 
mentioned — an  old  pharisaical  woman,  who  for- 
merly attended  the  Zayat,  for  no  other  purpose, 
apparently,  but  to  make  a display  of  her  wisdom. 
She  had  lately  become  more  quiet  and  humble, 
but  with  so  much  of  the  old  leaven  remaining, 
that  I had  no  hope  of  her.  To-day,  however,  she 
informs  me,  that  three  Sundays  ago,  the  truth 
entered  her  mind,  and  that  she  lay  all  the  ensuing 
night,  without  sleep,  meditating  on  the  wondrous 
character  of  God,  and  the  strange  things  she  had 
heard. 

“ July  28th,  Lord’s  day. — All  the  new  inquirers 
above-mentioned,  have  been  with  me  some  part 
of  the  day.  Mali  Doke,  the  last  baptized,  begins 
to  take  an  active  part  in  conversation,  and  ap- 
pears to  great  advantage.  She  came  accompa- 
nied by  her  friend,  Mah  Ing,  a very  infrequent 
visitor,  on  account  of  the  opposition  of  her  hus- 
band. He  has  lately  gone  on  a journey,  and, 
during  his  absence,  she  ventures  to  attend  wor- 
ship. She  is  a most  attentive  listener ; but  her 
timidity  and  reserve  render  it  difficult  to  ascer- 
tain the  state  of  her  mind.  I understand,  how- 
ever, that  she  occasionally  joins  the  three  Nan- 
dau-gong  sisters  in  their  female  prayer  meeting, 
and  is  highly  esteemed  by  them. 

“ August  4th,  Lords  day. — A crowded  assem- 
bly at  worship,  as  on  the  two  last  Lord’s  days. 
Oo  Nyo,  a former  disciple  of  Moung  Shway- 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  323 

gnong,  and  May  Dway,  an  old  woman,  lately 
cured  of  blindness  by  brother  Price,  deserve  to 
be  classed  among  the  inquirers.  The  latter  is 
more  noticeable,  as  having  been  a professed  de- 
votee of  the  strictest  class,  and  for  a long  time 
quite  unaffected  by  all  she  heard  concerning  our 
religion. 

“ August  5th. — Moung  Shway-gnong  took  his 
departure  for  Shway-doung,  the  residence  of  his 
family,  intending  to  join  us  again,  on  our  way  to 
Ava. 

“ August  Gth. — Moung  Long,  the  one-eyed  me- 
taphysician, and  bosom  disciple  of  the  Tongdwen 
teacher,  arrived  this  day  from  Shway-doung,  with 
his  wife,  May  Wen-yo.  The  latter  listened  with 
the  same  candid  attention  and  good  sense,  which 
formerly  distinguished  her,  while  her  husband  re- 
tains his  characteristic  scepticism,  politeness,  and 
inflexibility. 

“ August  7th. — May  Mee  came  to  request  bap- 
tism. When  I perceived  her  aim,  I endeavoured 
to  impress  her  mind  with  the  solemn  responsibi- 
lity of  a Christian  profession,  and  the  great  dan- 
gers to  which  she  was  exposing  herself  in  this 
world;  enforcing  my  statement,  as  usual,  with 
the  story  of  the  iron  mall ; and  she  went  away  in 
much  distress. 

“ Mah  Ing  sent  her  friend  Mah  Doke  to  in- 
quire, whether  it  was  lawful  for  her  to  procure  a 
divorce  from  her  husband,  previous  to  being  bap- 


324  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION 

tized ; or,  if  not,  whether  she  might  worship  be- 
fore the  great  pagoda,  in  obedience  to  his  com- 
mand. Both  questions  were  answered  in  the  ne- 
gative. A most  difficult,  distressing  case.  Her 
husband  has  threatened  to  accuse  her  to  govern- 
ment, and  cause  her  to  be  put  to  death. 

“ Men-oo  also  requested  baptism;  and  I feel 
satisfied  that  she  has  experienced  divine  grace, 
as  well  as  May  Mee  and  Mah  Ing. 

“ August  17 th. — Have  been  very  busy,  for  se- 
veral days  past,  in  making  preparations  for  our 
journey  to  Ava,  on  which  we  are  ordered  to  set 
out  the  20th,  in  a boat  furnished  by  government. 

“ May  Mee  and  May  Zoo  continue  to  visit  oc- 
casionally, and  both  desire  to  be  baptized ; but 
with  this  difference,  that  the  former  hesitates,  and 
the  latter  is  urgent.  Mah  Ing  has  been  obliged 
to  stay  away,  on  account  of  her  husband.  Pah 
Kyah  professes  that  his  mind  is  completely  set- 
tled, and  wishes  to  comply  with  all  the  commands 
of  Christ. 

“ August  18 th,  Lord’s  day. — Company  all  the 
day.  After  worship,  May  Zoo  and  Men-oo  were 
approved  by  the  church,  and  baptized. 

“ August  19 th. — Early  in  the  morning,' Moung 
Thah-ay,  mentioned  July  14th,  came  in,  and  tak- 
ing me  aside,  knelt  down,  raised  his  folded  hands 
in  the  attitude  of  reverence,  and  made  a very 
pathetic  and  urgent  application  for  immediate 
baptism.  He  stated,  that  he  had  considered  the 


TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE.  325 

Christian  religion  for  above  two  years ; that  his 
mind  was  completely  settled  on  every  point ; and 
that,  though  he  had  been  harassed  with  many 
fears,  he  was  now  resolved  to  enter  the  service 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  remain  faithful  until  death, 
whatever  the  consequences  in  this  world  might  be. 

“ August  20 th. — May  Mee,  finding  herself  un- 
able to  hold  out  any  longer,  presented  herself  for 
baptism,  and  with  Moung  Thah-ay,  was  examined 
before  the  church,  and  approved.  The  latter  re- 
ceived baptism  immediately.  May  Mee  will  come 
to-morrow. 

“ Our  departure  is  delayed  for  two  or  three 
days,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  the  viceroy, 
Mya-day-men,  which  took  place  this  afternoon. 

“ August  21  st. — Early  in  the  morning,  I ad- 
ministered baptism  to  May  Mee,  the  eighteenth 
Burman  convert.  Two  more  still  remain  : Moung 
Myat-lah  and  Mah  Ing  ; the  one  deterred  by  fear 
of  government ; the  other,  by  the  fear  of  her  hus- 
band. Add  to  these  a desirable  number  of  hope- 
ful inquirers ; and  I feel,  that  I am  leaving,  at 
least  for  a time,  one  of  the  most  interesting  fields 
of  labour,  that  was  ever  opened  to  a missionary. 
But  the  path  of  duty  seems  to  lead  to  Ava  ; and 
it  is  infinitely  easy  for  God  to  open  there  a more 
interesting  field. 

“We  are  ordered  to  put  our  baggage  on  board 
the  boats  to-morrow,  and  be  ready  to  start  the 
day  following. 


326  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  MISSION  TO  BURMAH. 

That  your  valuable  life  may  long  be  continued, 
a blessing  to  your  friends,  your  circle,  and  your 
country,  and  that  in  heaven  you  may  meet  an 
innumerable  multitude  of  heathen  souls,  whose 
conversion  was  effected  by  your  unknown  instru- 
mentality, is  the  constant  prayer  of. 

My  dear  Sir, 

Yours,  affectionately  and  respectfully, 

A.  H.  J. 


FINIS. 


B.  Berkley,  Bolt  Court,  Fleet  Street. 


, 


' 


li 


' • IS  r, 


SUPPLEMENT 


TO  MRS.  JUDSON’S  ACCOUNT  OF  TIIR  AMERICAN  BAPTIST 
MISSION  TO  THE  BURMAN  EMPIRE. 


LETTER  XV. 


Mission  House,  Rangoon,  Dec.  11,  1823. 

My  dear  Friend, 

Shai.l  I attempt  to  describe  the  sensations  produced  by 
finding  myself  in  this  much-loved  spot? — Yes,  I am  really  in 
Rangoon,  at  my  own  study  table,  and  surrounded  by  the  same 
scene  I have  so  frequently  described  to  you. 

It  appears  to  me  now  all  a dream  that  I have  been  in  Eng- 
land, in  America,  and  through  all  my  wanderings,  am  at  last 
returned,  and  find  the  same  scene  I left.  Who  has  so  much 
cause  for  gratitude  and  thankfulness  as  myself?  Who  is  under 
so  great  obligations  to  be  entirely  and  exclusively  devoted  to 
God  as  I am  ? Goodness  and  mercy  have  followed  me  all  my 
days,  but  the  kind,  protecting  care  of  God  has  been  most  con- 
spicuously seen  during  my  two  years  absence  from  Rangoon. 

In  my  usual  style  I will  give  you,  my  dear  friend,  an  account 
of  myself  since  I last  wrote,  as  you  are  so  kind  as  to  express 
so  much  pleasure  in  reading  my  little  narratives.  On  the  22nd 
June  last,  with  a joyful  heart,  I left  my  native  shores  for  India, 
followed  by  the  prayers  of  thousands,  who  were  collected  on 
the  wharf  to  witness  our  departure.  In  a fine  new  ship,  a large 
airy  cabin,  with  a kind  obliging  captain,  I found  myself  most 
pleasantly  situated,  and  under  the  direction  of  our  heavenly 
Father,  the  winds  and  waves  were  propitious,  for  we  reached 
the  sand  heads  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal  in  a hundred  and  five  days 
from  Boston.  During  our  voyage,  I had  the  happiness  of  wit- 
nessing a most  decided  change  in  the  captain,  who,  for  two 
months  previously  to  our  arrival  at  Calcutta,  devoted  his  whole 
time  to  the  subject  of  religion,  and  is  resolved,  on  his  return 
passage,  to  conduct  worship  himself  among  his  sailors  on  the 
Sabbath. 

On  my  arrival  in  Bengal,  you  will  readily  imagine  my  first 
inquiries  were  to  ascertain  what  intelligence  had  been  received 
from  Mr.  Judson,  and  what  prospects  of  my  speedy  departure. 
The  information  received  from  the  former  was  animating  and 
encouraging  ; but  respecting  the  latter,  sad  indeed,  as  it  was 
expected  that  no  ship  would  sail  for  several  months,  as  very 

z 


328  Supplement  to  Mrs.  Judson’s  Account 

serious  difficulties  existed  between  the  Burman  and  British 
Governments.  For  several  days  my  mind  was  in  a state  of 
constant  anxiety,  but  was  instantaneously  relieved,  by  noticing 
a paragraph  in  the  paper,  advertising  a ship  for  Rangoon.  I 
immediately  engaged  my  passage,  and  after  a month’s  resi- 
dence in  the  kind  and  hospitable  family  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Tho- 
mason, I embarked  for  Rangoon,  where  I safely  arrived  in 
nineteen  days. 

I dare  not  attempt  to  describe  my  feelings  as  the  ship  ad- 
vanced towards  the  Burman  coast.  It  was  late  in  the  evening 
when  the  vessel  anchored  ; but  the  first  object  which  caught 
my  eye,  as  the  boat  rowed  toward  the  shore,  was  Mr.  Judson. 
From  long  expectation  and  disappointment,  he  had  acquired 
such  an  habitual  sadness  and  dejection  of  spirit,  that  it  required 
all  my  exertion  to  disperse  it,  and  make  him  Mr.  J.  again.  He 
had  not  heard  a word  from  me  for  thirteen  months,  (owing  to 
the  failure  of  my  letters)  and  the  very  day  I arrived,  he  had  in 
despair  yielded  all  hope  of  my  existence  ! I soon  had  the 
happiness  of  meeting  Mah-Men-lay,  Moung-Shay-bav,  and 
others  who  are  still  an  honour  to  their  profession.  Mali  Myat- 
lay,  the  second  female  who  was  baptized,  died  in  the  triumphs 
of  hope  a few  months  ago.  She  longed  for  the  hour  of  her 
release,  and  assured  those  who  stood  around  her  that  she  would 
soon  be  in  the  presence  of  Christ.  Is  not  this  one  instance  of 
the  power  of  divine  grace  more  than  a compensation  for  all 
our  days  of  darkness  and  distress,  formerly  spent  in  preparation 
for  our  work  ? 

Mr.  Judson  has  his  boats  in  readiness  to  proceed  to  Ava, 
and  to-morrow  we  go  on  board.  He  has  obtained  considerable 
favour  from  high  officers  in  Government,  and  thinks  our  pros- 
pects at  Ava  very  encouraging.  The  King’s  own  brother,  a 
very  powerful  prince,  has  his  attention  excited  by  the  Christian 
religion,  and  has  lately  written  a very  kind,  affectionate  letter 
to  Mr.  Judson,  requesting  his  speedy  return  to  Ava,  and  to 
bring  with  him  all  the  sacred  books.*  A foreign  female  has 
never  yet  been  introduced  to  the  Burman  Court,  consequently 
much  curiosity  is  excited  by  the  expectation  of  my  arrival. 
May  the  God  of  Heaven  be  our  protector,  and  give  us  that  wis- 
dom which  is  profitable  to  direct.  I feel,  my  dear  friend,  that 
I am  about  to  begin  anew  my  missionarv  work,  and  need  more 
grace,  more  resolution,  and  more  spirituality  of  feeling  than 
ever  before.  We  shall  be  surrounded  by  despotism  and  idola- 
try, but  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  hope,  and  in  his  hands  we  are 
as  safe  as  in  our  own  loved  America.  He  has  evidently  pointed 

* Sec  pages  231,  2,  of  Mrs.  Judson’s  printed  Letters  on  the  Burman 
Mission. 


Of  the  Baptist  Mission  to  the  Burman  Empire.  329 

out  to  us  the  path  of  duty,  and  shall  we  fear  to  follow  where 
he  leads  ? It  is  easy  for  God  to  open  the  heart  of  the  King  and 
Queen,  and  make  them  a nursing  father  and  mother  to  the 
little  church  in  Burmah.  We  cannot  hope  and  expect  too 
much  from  God.  He  has  commanded  us  to  open  our  mouths 
wide,  and  he  will  fill  them. 

You  shall  hear  from  me  on  my  arrival  at  the  capital,  for  I 
am  resolved  to  keep  you  acquainted  with  all  our  steps.  I write 
this  in  great  haste,  being  surrounded  by  women  and  children, 
who  are  waiting  their  final  instructions.  My  schools  will  com- 
mence at  Ava ; my  hopes  respecting  them  are  very  sanguine. 
I am  much  gratified  by  your  remarks  relative  to  “ The  History 
of  the  Burman  Mission.”  The  first  edition  was  all  sold  before 
I left  America,  though  in  so  poor  a dress.  Please  to  transmit 
to  Mr.  Lawson  (who  is  the  Agent  for  our  Board)  all  the  money 
that  has  been  collected  for  the  school,  with  this  direction  : — 
“ For  Mrs.  Judson’s  Schools  in  the  Burman  Empire.”  I will 
give  a particular  and  faithful  account  of  the  commencement 
and  progress  of  my  darling  plan,  for  the  information  of  those 
who  are  interested  in  the  schools.  Mr.  Judson  would  write, 
but  every  moment  of  his  time  is  employed  in  preparing  and 
arranging  our  baggage.  He  will  write  after  our  arrival 
at  Ava. 

The  translation  of  the  New  Testament  is  finished.  We  will 
send  you  a copy  of  the  whole  when  printed. 

1 know  you  will  excuse  this  hasty,  imperfect  letter;  but, 
could  you  know  all  the  circumstances  under  which  I write,  you 
would  not  be  surprised  at  the  inaccuracies.  I could  not  think 
of  leaving  Rangoon  without  informing  you  of  my  safe  arrival. 
Let  us  assist  each  other  in  our  way  to  heaven.  Your  letters 
will  animate  and  encourage  me  ; mine  may  interest  you,  from 
the  circumstance  of  being  written  in  a heathen  land.  We  shall, 
I trust,  soon  meet  in  heaven ; may  our  hearts,  our  best  affec- 
tions, be  there  long  before  us.  This  life  is  a vapour,  it  will 
soon  pass  away,  and  nothing  will  remain,  excepting  the  ser- 
vices we  now  perform  for  Christ.  Be  pleased  to  present  our 
warmest  affections  to  our  friends  *■*■**  *}  whom  I shall 
never  forget  to  love  and  respect.  May  you  be  blessed,  my  dear 
friend,  and  be  made  increasingly  useful,  is  the  sincere  wish  of 
Your  old  and  most  affectionate  Friend, 

Ann  H.  Judson. 

To 


, London. 


330 


Supplement  to  Mrs.  Judson’s  Account 


LETTER  XVI. 

On  the  Arah-wah-tee,  Dec.  31,  1823. 

Come,  my  dear  friend,  transport  yourself  for  a few  moments 
from  your  retired  home,  and  refresh  your  imagination  with  a 
view  of  our  floating  conveyance  majestically  passing  the  fertile 
banks  of  the  Arah-wah-tee  (Irrawaddy).  And  had  your  eye 
the  same  power  as  imagination,  could  it  rove  with  equal 
rapidity  over  this  widely  extended  globe,  it  would  doubtless  be 
induced  to  rest  on  worthier  and  more  interesting  objects,  but 
could  not  find  two  happier  than  your  friend  Ann  and  her 
beloved  Judson.  It  is  one  of  those  bright  days  peculiar  to  an 
Indian  clime ; the  cool  refreshing  breezes  from  the  mountains 
with  which  we  are  now  encircled,  while  they  unite  with  the 
influence  of  the  sun  to  produce  a most  delightful  temperature 
of  air,  invigorate  our  frames  and  exhilarate  our  spirits ; the 
verdure  and  variety  of  scenery  exhibited  on  the  banks  of  this 
noble  river,  every  where  interspersed  with  native  villages,  and 
peasants’  tents,  all  conspire  to  increase  those  pleasant  sensa- 
tions which  our  peculiar  situation  and  circumstances  are  calcu- 
lated to  excite.  Our  boat  is  so  curiously  constructed,  and  so 
unlike  every  thing  in  your  civilized  part  of  the  world,  that  I 
hardly  know  in  what  language  to  give  a description  so  as  to 
present  it  clearly  to  your  view  : it  is  a rude  uncouth  thing,  and 
could  you  behold  it  floating  down  the  river  Thames,  you  might 
imagine  that  some  ingenious  fisherman  had  attached  a pair  of 
wings  to  his  little  hut,  and  was  conveying  it  on  a boat  to  your 
great  metropolis,  to  gratify  the  curious  gaze  of  the  idle  multi- 
tude. It  is  fifty  feet  in  length  and  seven  in  width.  Our 
rooms  or  cabins,  two  in  number,  are  built  on  the  top,  the  boat 
being  too  shallow  to  admit  any  thing  of  the  kind  within,  and 
constructed  in  the  form  of  a Burman  house,  with  a sloping  roof. 
The  rooms  extend  half  the  length  of  the  boat,  the  one  we 
occupy  is  made  of  rough  boards,  with  a thatched  roof,  the 
other  (occupied  by  the  servants)  of  bamboo  and  mats.  The 
wings  are  formed  by  the  extension  of  the  floor  on  each  side, 
which  makes  a passage  for  the  boatmen,  vvithout  entering  our 
rooms.  This  heavy  unwieldy  thing  is  urged  forward  almost 
entirely  by  manual  force,  and  is  either  drawn  with  ropes  by  the 
boatmen  walking  on  the  banks,  or  pushed  by  long  poles.  But 
so  strong  is  the  current  at  this  season,  and  the  wind  always 
against  us,  that  our  progress  is  slow  indeed.  Yet  in  the  midst 
of  these  inconveniencies  and  privations,  we  are  happy,  because 
the  object  we  have  in  view  will  bear  examination.  Were  we 
thus  penetrating  into  the  heart  of  this  heathen  empire  for  the 


Of  the  Baptist  Mission  to  the  Barman  Empire.  331 

purpose  of  accumulating  property,  or  gaining  honour  or  re- 
nown, from  our  fellow-creatures,  it  would  not  he  an  object  suf- 
ficient to  support  our  minds  under  present  circumstances,  and 
in  anticipation  of  future  evils.  But  we  are  assured  that  we  are 
in  the  service  of  Him  who  governs  the  world,  who  has  said  to 
his  disciples,  “ Go  into  all  the  world,”  &c. ; and  this  is  our 
support,  and  the  reward  of  all  our  exertions,  “ Lo,  1 am  with 
you  always,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world.”  Not  a hair  of  our 
head  can  be  injured,  but  with  the  permission  of  Him  whose 
precious  name  we  would  make  known  to  these  unenlightened 
heathen.  Yes,  my  dear  friend,  the  consideration  of  the  object 
we  have  in  view,  and  the  brightening  prospects  relative  to 
ultimate  success,  fill  us  with  joy,  and  make  us  happy,  though  in 
this  rude  solitary  boat,  far,  far  away  from  all  Christian  society, 
and  no  individual  associate  besides  ourselves.  Our  faithful 
Moung-Ing  is  the  only  native  Christian  with  us,  the  others  being 
at  present  scattered  according  to  circumstances.  Three  are 
already  at  Ava  waiting  our  arrival,  and  Mah-men-lay  and 
others  will  follow,  as  soon  as  their  domestic  concerns  will 
allow.  Moung-Ing,  with  whom  you  are  already  well  acquainted, 
is  a firm,  solid,  and  consistent  Christian.  He  unites  with  us 
daily  in  family  worship,  and  frequently  leads  in  prayer,  in 
our  occasional  religious  conferences,  when  he  exhibits  much 
spiritual  feeling  and  strength  of  intellect.  We  intend  him  for 
the  teacher  of  our  girls’  school,  the  commencement  of  which 
is  I trust  just  at  hand. 

Jan.  20,  1824. 

Again  I take  up  my  pen  to  converse  a little  with  you,  though 
at  this  immense  distance,  and  knowing,  as  I do,  that  you  can 
make  no  response  for  months  and  perhaps  years.  Yet  it  is  a 
precious  privilege  to  communicate  our  thoughts,  feelings,  and 
circumstances,  to  those  we  love,  though  a reply  be  not  the  im- 
mediate result.  Now  I will  suppose  you  sitting  the  other  side 
of  the  trunk  on  which  my  writing-desk  is  placed,  and  go  on 
with  my  relation.  We  are  slowly  progressing  towards  the 
capital  of  this  very  populous  empire,  and  have  thus  far  been 
preserved  from  the  numerous  dangers  with  which  we  are  con- 
tinually surrounded.  No  robbers  have  yet  made  their  appear- 
ance, though  we  are  frequently  cautioned  by  the  villagers  to  be 
on  our  guard.  We  have  our  fire-arms  in  readiness  every  even- 
ing, and  when  we  have  taken  eve,ry  precaution  in  our  power, 
commit  ourselves  to  the  care  of  our  heavenly  Father,  and  lie 
down  and  sleep  as  quietly,  and  feel  as  safe,  as  if  we  were  in 
Bradford  * or  in  London.  As  the  season  is  so  cool  and  dry,  we 


America. 


332  Supplement  to  Mrs.  Judson's  Account 

almost  daily  get  a walk  on  the  banks,  and  through  the  villages ; 
and  at  such  seasons  the  natives  are  extremely  amused  at  our 
strange  appearance,  having  never  before  seen  a foreign  female. 
As  soon  as  we  enter  a village  or  town,  one  calls  to  another  to 
come  quick  and  look,  when  the  women  and  children  run  out  of 
their  houses  and  follow  us  till  we  enter  the  boat.  Some  will 
run  several  rods  before  us,  in  order  to  have  a fair  view  as  we 
approach  them.  If  we  happen  to  stop  under  the  shade  of  a 
banyan,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  all  the  old  men  and  women  in 
the  village  are  called  and  brought  to  see  what  their  eyes  never 
before  beheld.  But  on  such  occasions  we  never  experience  any 
thing  like  insult  or  disrespect ; on  the  contrary,  the  universal 
exclamation  is,  “ Ha-ba-byce,”  how  handsome  they  are,  how 
modest  their  dress,  not  even  their  hands  are  visible.  We  sel- 
dom let  them  know  we  understand  their  language,  as  our  stay 
is  not  sufficiently  long  to  enter  on  religious  subjects.  In  one 
instance,  however,  the  boat  being  a long  time  in  doubling  a 
point  of  land  which  we  had  walked  over,  and  the  multitude 
being  assembled  as  usual,  Mr.  J.  introduced  the  subject  of  reli- 
gion, when  all  were  immediately  silent  and  attentive.  Two  or 
three  white-headed  heathen  who  were  present,  encouraged  it 
by  asking  pertinent  questions.  A decent  looking  man,  who 
appeared  to  he  the  school-master  of  the  village,  coming  into 
the  circle  just  at  this  time,  Mr.  J.  handed  him  a tract,  and  re- 
quested him  to  read  aloud.  The  subject  of  the  tract  was  an 
account  of  the  existence,  perfections,  and  requirements  of  the 
eternal  God,  our  lost  state  by  nature,  and  redemption  through 
Christ.  When  he  had  proceeded  half  way  through,  he  stopped, 
and  exclaimed  to  the  multitude,  that  these  were  great  subjects, 
that  such  a writing  was  worthy  to  be  copied,  and  requested 
Mr.  J.  to  remain  while  he  copied  it.  He  was  informed  that  he 
might  keep  the  tract,  on  condition  that  he  constantly  read  it  to 
his  neighbours.  Many  joined  in  the  petition  that  we  would 
pass  the  remainder  of  the  day  and  night  in  the  village  ; but  our 
boat  coming  up,  we  were  obliged  to  leave  them,  not  however 
until  we  had  sent  up  many  secret  petitions  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
might  bless  that  single  tract  to  the  salvation  of  many  of  their 
dark,  ignorant  souls.  A few  days  ago  we  had  an  especial  cause 
of  gratitude  to  God  for  his  preserving  care,  when  in  imminent 
danger.  In  passing  through  one  of  the  strong  rapids,  with 
which  this  river  abounds,  the  rudder  struck  the  bottom,  which 
turned  the  boat  immediately  across  the  current,  and  laid  her 
on  her  side.  It  being  a cold  morning  our  door  was  shut,  and 
the  boat  being  on  her  side,  it  was  some  moments  before  we 
could  get  it  open,  which  circumstance  for  a short  time  occa- 
sioned us  to  feel  all  the  horrors  of  shipwreck.  Every  thing 


Of  the  Baptist  3Hssion  to  the  Barman  Empire.  333 

outside  of  the  cabins,  such  as  rice,  cooking  utensils,  and  the 
boatmen’s  mats,  were  all  afloat.  The  steersman,  however,  had 
presence  of  mind  enough  to  cut  the  rudder  from  the  boat, 
which  enabled  the  boatmen  to  raise  her  from  her  side,  and 
after  drawing  her  to  the  shore,  and  repairing  her  rudder,  we 
proceeded  on  our  way,  feeling  more  than  ever  our  dependence 
on  God,  and  the  importance  of  having  our  minds  at  all  times 
stayed  on  him.  Our  fears  have  been  considerably  excited  for 
a few  days  past,  on  beholding  the  martial  movements  of  the 
country.  We  understand  that  the  Emperor  is  determined  on 
war  with  the  English,  and  has  ordered  an  army  to  proceed 
with  all  possible  dispatch  to  Arrakan.  Yesterday  we  passed 
the  head-quarters  of  the  troops,  and  war  boats  are  continually 
passing  us-  We  know  not  what  effect  this  war  will  have  upon 
our  mission,  or  how  much  our  own  lives  will  be  endangered 
from  the  suspicion  that  we  are  English.  But  we  always  have 
this  consolation,  that  God  reigns,  and  that  the  greatest,  as  well 
as  the  smallest  events  are  under  his  direction. 

Ava,  Feb.  1C,  1824. 

1 must  now  finish  this  long  letter,  as  a gentleman  is  on  the 
point  of  going  to  Bengal,  and  has  kindlv  offered  to  take  letters. 
We  arrived  in  safety  at  this  city  twenty  days  ago,  after  a plea- 
sant trip  of  six  weeks ; we  had  not  a house  to  cover  our  heads 
on  our  arrival,  nor  could  we  procure  one  which  was  sufficient  to 
shelter  us  from  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun.  We  were  therefore 
obliged  to  remain  in  our  boat  until  we  could  build  : you  will  I 
am  sure  smile,  when  I tell  you  that  we  built  a house,  and  moved 
into  it,  in  just  a fortnight  from  our  arrival ; it  consists  of  three 
rooms  and  a verandah,  delightfully  situated  on  the  bank  of  the 
river.  The  ground  was  given  last  year  to  Mr.  J.  by  the  king, 
and  is  considered  our  own.  The  house  we  now  inhabit  is  de- 
signed for  the  school-house  for  my  girls,  as  soon  as  we  can 
get  another  built  for  our  own  use.  The  school  has  already 
commenced  with  three  little  girls,  whose  shrill  voices  are  now 
ringing  in  my  ears  while  they  read  their  lessons  : they  are  fine 
children,  and  improve  as  fast  in  reading  and  sewing  as  anv 
children  in  the  world.  I doubt  not  the  school  will  rapidly 
increase,  as  soon  as  we  have  time  to  look  around  and  make  a 
selection.  The  Emperor,  on  account  of  the  present  war  with 
the  English,  is  rather  prejudiced  against  foreigners,  conse- 
quently Mr.  J.’s  reception  at  court  was  rather  cool.  I have 
not  yet  been  at  the  palace,  as  the  king  and  all  the  royal  family 
went  to  Umera-poora,  in  a day  after  our  arrival,  where  they 
remain  until  the  completion  of  the  new  palace  in  this  city, 
when  they  will  take  possession  in  usual  form,  and  Ava  will  in 


334  Supplement  to  Mrs.  Judson’s  Account,  fyc. 

future  be  their  residence.  My  old  friend,  the  lady  of  the 
viceroy  of  Rangoon,  came  to  see  me  as  soon  as  she  heard  of 
my  arrival,  and  has  promised  to  introduce  me  at  court  on  the 
return  of  the  royal  family.  Her  husband  died  during  my  ab- 
sence, and  with  his  death  all  her  power  and  distinctions  cease. 
She  is  a well-informed,  sensible  woman,  and  there  is  much 
more  hope  of  her  attending  to  the  subject  of  religion  in  her 
private  situation,  than  when  she  was  in  public  life.  In  a day  or 
two  after  our  arrival,  Mr.  J.  introduced  me  to  Prince  M.  and 
his  Princess  ; they  treated  us  with  the  greatest  kindness.  The 
Princess  took  me  into  her  inner  apartments,  made  me  a hand- 
some present,  and  invited  me  to  visit  her  frequently,  and  ordered 
her  cart  to  be  prepared  to  convey  me  home.  Prince  M.  is  intel- 
ligent, desirous  of  obtaining  foreign  information,  and  has  for 
some  time  been  examining  the  Christian  religion  ! Oh  ! that  a 
merciful  God  would  enlighten  his  mind,  and  make  him  a real 
disciple  of  the  blessed  Redeemer.  I hope  to  gain  some  influence 
over  the  Princess,  and  induce  her  to  read  the  New  Testament, 
which  is  now  in  her  own  language.  She  is  surrounded  at  all  times 
by  twenty  or  thirty  females,  and  who  knows  but  religious  conver- 
sation may  be  blessed  to  them,  though  the  Princess  herself 
should  never  be  benefited.  We  have  here  an  uncommon  field 
for  usefulness,  and  if  we  may  only  be  allowed  to  remain,  there 
is  no  doubt  but  much  good  would  be  done.  My  health  has 
been  much  improved  during  my  voyages,  and  I begin  to  hope 
that  I may  last  yet  some  years ; but  we  are,  in  a literal  sense, 
alone.  W e have  not  half  the  means  of  obtaining  intelligence 
from  our  friends  as  when  in  Rangoon;  and  as  for  society,  it  is 
so  far  out  of  the  question,  that  we  hardly  think  of  mentioning 
it.  Dr.  Price  is  our  ordy  missionary  associate ; but  he  has 
married  a native  wife,  and  lives  the  other  side  of  the  river. 
Mr.  J.  preaches  every  Sabbath  in  the  Doctor’s  house,  where 
he  has  something  of  a congregation.  We  also  have  worship 
in  Burman  every  evening  in  our  own  house,  so  that  a faint  ray 
of  light  is  beginning  to  appear  in  this  dark  city. 

Remember  me  most  affectionately  to , whose  likeness 

is  now  hanging  before  me,  and  is  almost  the  only  ornament  in 
our  little  house.  Pray  kindly  write  a line  to  Miss  H.,  of  Li- 
verpool, and  inform  her  that  the  box  of  articles  she  forwarded 
arrived  just  as  I was  leaving  Calcutta.  They  were  most  ac- 
ceptable, as  we  have  daily  occasions  for  distributing  them.  Say 
also  that  I intend  writing  to  her  very  soon.  Do  not  forget  to 
pray  for 

Your  most  affectionate  Friend, 

A.  H.  Judson. 

To 


•,  London. 


Date  Due 

£>  ’4$ 

1 

MR  2 1 *5. 

r 

nOO 

mu  t 

•83 

" i7inl  A A 

Sf 

St — 

' ;0V  f ^ 79< 

r 

'if 

»R1«W 

"7"i  • 

(f> 

s 

