potters 
etraprerates: 


Trp let eee ceemgeennee~sie 


AN EXPOSITION 


OF 


THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


BAO amie ane 


AN EXPOSITION 


OF 


THE BOOK OF ISAIAH 


BY 


WILLIAM KELLY. 


THIRD EDITION 


LONDON: 
F. E. RACE, 3 & 4, LONDON HOUSE YARD, 
PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C. 
1916, 


CAMPUS CRUSADE FOR CHRIST LIBRARY 
IOl 


PREFACE. 


— oe 


S Lectures on Isaiah had long gone out of print, I declined 
allowing a new edition till I had leisure to prepare a 
correct version and a somewhat fuller commentary. This is 
now entitled an Hxposition of the Book of Isaiah, being rather 
a new book than a re-issue. Nevertheless it is called a new 
edition, as there is no change of any significance which occurs 
to my recollection, though there is a large addition of material 
and a much more minute investigation of the difficulties which 
try the reader. Details of grammar and philology can be 
found by those that seek them in Gesenius’ German work on 
the Prophet, in S. F. C. Rosenmiiller’s Latin Scholia, or in the 
English volumes of Dr. J. A. Alexander edited by Eadie, and 
in Dr. Kay’s contribution to the Speaker's Commentary. My 
aim has been, so far as I could, to clear the sense, especially 
where apt to be misapprehended, to trace the connexion of the 
parts, and to make manifest the plan and unity of the book, 
dwelling at length on debated matters of moment, and saying 
but little on what is plain. The chronology in the historical 
chapters is here received, not the lower dates of modern 
Syrologists who prefer the vainglorious monuments of Assyrian 
monarchs to the sacred text. It is hoped that by the grace of 
God considerably greater help is here rendered to the Christian 
student, and even to the larger circle of those who seek more 
intimate acquaintance with the richest and most comprehensive 
of the prophets. Perhaps none of these classes will be more 


vi PREFACE. 


sensible of its shortcomings than the writer. Nevertheless he 
prays that, as he sought the Lord’s guidance throughout, His 
own that read the inspired Word with this aid, such as it is, 
may have instruction and enjoyment ministered to their souls. 
They will find short but sufficient guard against rationalist 
dreams old or new, and the still more prevalent misapplica- 
tion of tradition, even when comparatively orthodox, 


Lonpon, December, 1896. 


CONTENTS. 


InrRopuUcTION— 
Wart i. PaGes 
$1. Nature of Prophecy . : ee ; . 5-26 
§2. Object of Prophecy . : : : : 26-35 
§ 3. Occasion of Prophecy . : ; : ~ 35-40 
§4. Sphere of Prophecy . ‘ , ‘ 4 40-46 
$5. Language of Prophecy : ‘ 46-54 
§6. Some O. T. Prophecies referred 4 in the N. oe : . 54-69 
Wart HH. 
§1. The character of Isaiah, and his pee as compared with the 
; other prophets ; ; c : 70-77 
§ 2. The structure of the Book of Iexints . cane: 77-84 
§3. Neo-criticism of Isaiah briefly weighed | : ; - 84-89 


AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


First Secrion— Srconp SEcrion— 

CHAPTER PAGES CHAPTER PAGES 
tf A - 90-101 KIT. ; . 181-191 
IP. ‘ . 102-118 hs A . 192-200 
III.-1V. 1 . 119-122 XV. A . 201-203 
IV.2-6 . . 123-126 XVI. , . 204-206 
Ve . 127-132 XVII. é . 207-213 
ovis ; . 133-137 XVIIL. : . 214-220 
VII. “ . 138-149 XIX. b . 221-227 
VIII. ; . 150-154 XX. 4 . 228-230 
IX. A . 155-159 XXI. F . 231-234 
x F . 160-164 XXII. : . 235-238 
XI. Fs . 165-177 XXIII. . 239-243 


XII. ° . 178-180 XXIV. - . 244-248 


vill 


CONTENTS. 


Srconp SxcTion (continued)— 


CHAPTER 
XXV. 
XXXVI. 

XXVIL. . 


Tuirnp Spctrlon— 
XXVIII. 
X XIX. 
XXX. 
XXXII. 
XXXII. 
XXXIII. 
XXXIV. 
XXXYV. 


FourtH SECcTION— 
XXXVI. 
XXXVII. 
XXXVIIL. 
XXXIX. 


Frera Spcrion— 
XL. 
XLL 
XLIT. 
XLII. 
XLIV. : 
XLV. : 


PAGES 


249-259 


. 260-269 


270-273 


274-286 
287-290 
291-303 
304-306 
307-3815 
316-322 
323-330 
331-334 


335-340 
341-344 
345-352 
353-355 


356-367 
368-373 
374-376 
377-379 
380-384 
385-388 


Fiera Section (continued )p— 


CHAPTER 


XLVI. 
XLVII. 
XLVIIT. . 


SixtH SEcTIoN— 
dA D:S 


LVI. 
LVIL 


SEVENTH SECTION— 
LVIII. 
LIX. 
LX. 
LXI. 
LXIL. 
LXITI.1-6 . 
LXIIL 7-19. 
LXIV. 
LXV. A 
LXYVI. ; 


PAGES 
389, 390 
391-392 
398-395 


396-400 
401-405 
406-409 
410, 411 
412-415 
416-424 
425-430 
431-438 
434-437 
438-441 


442-444 
445-448 
449-453 
454-456 
457-459 
460-464 
465-467 
468-470 
471-477 
478-485 


INTRODUCTION. 


—_>——_ 


Part I, 
§1. Nature of Prophecy. 


“THE prophetic word” means the communication of things to 
come which God has been pleased to make in scripture. The 
apostle Peter, in so using the expression, compares it to “a lamp 
that shineth in a squalid place.” It makes manifest man’s 
evil, which God declares He will judge and supersede by His 
kingdom in Christ (2 Peter i.19). Those addressed did well to 
heed it, though he desired for them still better light, and this 
for the heart—“ till day dawn and the day-star arise in your 
hearts.” He had of course this heavenly hope bright in his own 
heart, and he desired it for all of them. But the saints of the 
circumcision were slow in apprehending what was new and 
heavenly: so we see over a larger area in the Epistle to the 
Hebrews. They were content with the elements of the doctrine 
of Christ, and had to be exhorted to go on to perfection, or that 
full age in Christ which is proper to the Christian, based on 
accomplished redemption, and the gift of the Holy Spirit, as 
well as occupied with Christ’s glory on high. Here they were 
dull, as 2 Peter shows them, about the Christian hope. 

But the apostle encouraged them to heed the lamp of prophecy 
till they seized the brighter light that the gospel brings of the 
hope of which Christ Himself is the one personal object— 
Christ about to receive us and present us in the Father's house, 
that where He is, there we also may be. Useful as a lamp is 
for guiding us in darkness or guarding us from the defilements 
around, far better is the light of Christ fully revealed, and 


§ AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


the accompanying hope for our hearts even now, before He 
gives us the Morning Star, that is, association with Himself at 
His coming. It is the coming again of Him whose love we 
know, who suffered once for all for our sins, who will then 
consummate in heaven the love He proved for us on earth. When 
the day of Jehovah comes for the world, according to prophecy, 
it will burn as a furnace for the proud and wicked; but to 
those that fear His name, as Israel thus will here below, shall 
the sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings. 
Our hope is much higher, whether for our hearts now, or when 
it is fulfilled at His coming. It is not associated with judg- 
ment on adversaries, but founded on His own bearing our 
judgment on the cross, and taking us to heaven to be with 
Himself, apart from all thought of the earth or of man upon it. 

Meanwhile, and from the earliest days, God has given 
prophecy in this sin-darkened world; and He took care, when » 
human life was shortened to its present span (Psalm xe. 10), to 
embody it in scripture as “the prophetic word.” In it lay, 
when Adam transgressed, the warrant of faith. -Man fell and | 
paradise was lost through sin. All hope turned on the woman’s 
Seed, who would with bitten heel bruise the Serpent’s head. 
Whatever else might be intimated and learnt from God’s 
sayings and doings in those sad circumstances of ruin, a 
Deliverer was revealed in the future, Himself deeply to suffer} 
but to crush the enemy who had so soon and completely misled 
man. This Deliverer somehow must be man, the woman’s 
Seed, itself a fact absolutely unique, and a phrase of mysterious 
moment and ineffable grace ; yet must He also be immeasurably 
above man, not only to resist and beat off the old Serpent, the 
devil, but to deal him destruction beyond remedy.. 

The word translated “prophet” in the O.T. (823) is derived _ 
from “bubbling or pouring forth,” alluding to God’s action in 
inspiring him; “Seer” (785 or NIM) points to the vision which 
distinguished such. Its scriptural meaning transcends the 
classical usage as the living and true God rises above the 
demons, who acted behind the idols that were adored by the 
heathen and interpreted by their prophets. 

In the New Testament, as well as in the Old, the term Pali) 


INTRODUCTION. 7 


or prophecy is applied when God’s mind was communicated, 
as in Gen. xx. 7, Ps. ev. 15, John iv, 19,1 Cor. xiv. 24,25; 
but its strict and appropriated sense of unveiling the future, 
which belongs to God only, is unquestionable. When idolatry 
prevailed, and God separated Abraham and the line of promise, 
He made known clearly and severally His design to bless the 
chosen family, and in a specified land assured to them. He 
disclosed also a still larger and more wondrous purpose, bound 
up with their Seed, to bless all the families in the earth 
(Genesis xii. 3, xxii, 18, xxvi. 4, xxviii, 14). While prophecy 
thus embraced the laying bare of facts or persons at any 
time (1 Samuel ix. 20, 2 Kings v. 26), so as to put conscience 
in God’s presence, none the less did the revelation of the 
future characterise the prophet, as we see throughout the range 
of scripture. 

Nay, more, while the five books of Moses are distinctly 
called the Law, as in a vague way are the Psalms and the 
Prophets, yet every part of the Pentateuch is brimful of 
prophecy. Adam is authoritatively declared to be figure 
of the Coming One; this in righteousness and life, as that 
in sin and death, Cain presages the way of woe in walk 
and worship, as righteous Abel’s blood witnesses that which 
speaketh better. And if we omit not a few, Noah foreshadows 
Him who will unfailingly govern the world after it is again 
judged as a whole for its iniquities. The Messiah underlies 
every promise and every office of special dignity, Godward 
and manward; covenant, sacrifice, and offering, point to His 
work. Holy and suffering witnesses give glimpses of Him, 
as the wicked manifest their awful antagonism, The past 
public dealings of God typify greater things to come. The 
first battle in Genesis is vividly impressed with signs of the 
last; especially when we read at its close Abram’s meeting the 
royal priest, who blessed the conqueror on the part of God 
Most High, possessor of -heaven and earth, and blessed God 
Most High, who had delivered the enemies into his hand: 
the clear prefiguration of Jehovah's day, with its issue of - 
blessedness, above and below, in righteousness and peace. 

One might dwell ever so long on broad outlines and minute 


8 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIATL 


details alike, each and all telling the same tale of the bright 
future that gilds to the instructed eye the humbling lessons 
of the history, pointing to Christ’s day, which made Abraham 
glad, when the whole earth shall be filled with His glory. But 
one must forbear even as to Genesis, rich as it is in furnishing 
the germs of what is developed now, or what is to be in another 
and more blessed way during days to come. A similar character 
pervades in some form every one of the other books of Moses, 
nay, of every book of the Old Testament. Thus Exodus points 
to a better redemption of God’s people, and by power as well 
as blood; and to His subsequent deigning to dwell in the midst 
of the redeemed, as He will for ever. Leviticus again, and 
Numbers, are no less predictive; and Deuteronomy, besides 
its more veiled intimations in its course and close, has more 
open prophecies of Christ and His coming triumphs than its 
predecessors, As the historical books that follow are said 
by the Jews to be written by “the earlier prophets,” so all 
are stamped inwardly to the intelligent Christian with shadows 
of good things to come, which centre in Him whom in their 
blindness they rejected. So more evidently are the Psalms 
full of Christ, and of the Spirit of Christ in His people. It 
ought to be needless to say this of the “later” avowed prophets. 
But we live in days of rebuke and blasphemy, when in 
Christendom even professing servants of His are eagerly en- 
couraging one another to obliterate from the Old Testament 
Him who, if seen therein, shakes of itself the new critical 
system to atoms, and convicts its adherents of shameless in- 
credulity. - 

The New Testament is the manifestation of the Son of God, 
Jesus the Christ come in flesh; and it declares redemption 
accomplished in Him, rejected by men, notably by the Jews, 
but risen from the dead and glorified Head over all things 
to the church His body. Consequently the kingdom, pledged 
in the Old Testament, assumes, while Christ is on high, a 
character of “mystery” (Matthew xiii. 11, Mark iv. 11), or 
the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens; till He, having 
caught up the risen saints to the Father’s house, returns in 
displayed power to enforce the rights of God, and bring in 


INTRODUCTION. 9 


the long expected times of refreshing for Israel, the nations, 
and all creation. The cross of Christ, being as it was the 
rejection of God in Christ reconciling the world to Himself, 
gave occasion to Christian blessing in the gospel, and in the 
church united to its exalted Head; which is wholly distinct 
from the things to come. Yet the apostle, in Romans xvi. 
26, designates the divine word which reveals this new and 
heavenly secret, “prophetic scriptures.” From everlasting, 
silence had been kept about that mystery; a statement in- 
applicable to “the prophets,’ and yet more evidently to 
their scriptures in the Old Testament. But now it was 
manifested, and by prophetic scriptures, according to the 
eternal God’s commandment, made known for obedience of 
faith unto all the nations. In thus making it known, the 
Epistles to the Ephesians and to the Colossians, with those 
to the Corinthians and others, have a primary place. And | 
thus the saints are built upon the foundation of the apostles 
and prophets, Christ Jesus Himself being the chief corner- 
stone. The instruments of this special teaching are hence 
shown to be exclusively the New Testament apostles and 
prophets, as a joint class for this inspired work. But the 
New Testament in no way lacks the richest testimony on 
things to come, as the Lord promised (John xvi. 13). Witness 
Matt. xxiv., xxv., Mark xiii, Luke xxi, to speak only of the 
fuller predictions in the Synoptic Gospels, and in 2 Peter and 
Jude, but especially 2 Thess. ii, 1 Tim. iv., 2 Tim. iii, with the 
Revelation, the most abundant, systematic, and profound of 
all prophecies. 

In the Old Testament, as in the New, the greatest eveue 
of moral appeal accompanies prediction almost everywhere, 
and in volume commonly exceeds it, as being of the utmost 
importance. But specific predictions are given throughout 
to be fulfilled in due time. Apply this test to Christ’s first 
advent, incomparably the most momentous of all facts here 
below, so declared to be by both the Old and the New Testa- 
ments; and what can be more decisive? From Moses- to 
Malachi the grand testimony was to the coming Messiah. 
Even Genesis narrowed the limits down from the first woman 


10 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


to Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, successively; as the 
Psalms did to One who should be David’s son, yet David's 
Lord, sitting at Jehovah’s right hand before He strike through 
kings in His wrath (Psalm ex.), who is set on the holy hill of 
Zion, and sways the universal sceptre as Son of man over 
all nations (Psalm viii.; Dan. vii). The time was fixed by 
Daniel, the place by Micah, the birth from a virgin by Isaiah, 
even the strange land (where Israel was a bondman) to the 
Messiah a shelter from the Edomite King of Judea, as the 
Spirit showed by Hosea (chap. xi. 1-3). So we have in Isaiah 
and Malachi His herald, “A voice crying in the wilderness, 
Prepare ye the way of Jehovah”; for indeed He was 
Immanuel and Jehovah. By the same prophet His servant 
character, so hateful to man’s pride and rebelliousness, was fully 
made known. It told the tale of the world’s state, His utter 
rejection by man, though Jehovah’s chosen, in whom His soul 
delighted, whom man despised, whom the nation abhorred. 
There, too, the ministry of His life, the atonement of His 
death, are with equal clearness revealed. So, long before, 
David wrote in Psalm xxii. what was immeasurably beyond 
his own sufferings, and any kingly power of his—indeed, what 
He alone of all men knew. He is on the one hand the Holy 
One of God, abandoned by His God, as He must be to make 
expiation of sins, and on the other raised and glorified in 
virtue of it, so as to praise “in the midst of the congrega- 
tion” or church (v. 22) now, as He will ere long “in the 
great congregation,” 7¢. “all Israel” then saved (v. 25); 
when all the ends of the earth shall remember, and all the 
kingdoms of the nations worship. So it is to be, when the 
Kingdom becomes de facto, as it is de jure, Jehovah’s, and 
He is the ruler over the nations. 

When the dread scene of the Cross drew near, was the 
prophetic word in vain? or did it utter generalities, or easy 
guesses, or dubious oracles? Was it only within the space of 
man’s life or observation that one predicted the treachery of a 
disciple (Psalm xli. 9), as another did the goodly price He was 
prized at by them—the thirty pieces of silver (Zechariah xi. 12, 
13)? Was it within the compass of man’s mind to say centuries 


INTRODUCTION, 11 


before that He, over whom Jehovah watched with delight and 
loving care without parallel, should, in His obedience, be 
surrendered to the basest smiting and the cruellest contumely 
(Isaiah 1.), because His vindication was to be by resurrection 
(Psalm xvi.) and heavenly glory (Psalms viii. cx.), that grace 
might reign through righteousness unto life eternal through 
Jesus Christ our Lord? Was it the prognostic of a mortal to 
say of Messiah (for of Him only Psalm xxii. treats), “ They 
pierced my hands and my feet,” and again, “They part my 
garments among them, and upon my vesture they do cast lots”? 
anticipatively to provide the very words the Lord Jesus appro- 
priated when suffering once for all for sins, Just for unjust ? 
Was it a mere conjecture to lay down that not a bone of Him 
should be broken (Exodus xii.; Psalm xxxiv. 20), when the 
legs of the others were? or that only He should be pierced 
(Zech. xii.), whereas they were not? Was it fortuitous that 
even in such circumstances He should be with the rich in His 
death, whilst His grave would naturally be made with the 
wicked ? (Isaiah liii.) 

No good man’s fancy more unreliable than Dr. T. Arnold’s 
(Sermons, i. on the Interpretation of Prophecy, 377) that 
history deals with particular facts, prophecy with general 
principles, so as to make it conditional because of evil in the 
creature. It was blindness to both history and prophecy, as 
God has given them in the scriptures; and outside His word 
we need not concern ourselves. In all the Old Testament, 
avowedly historical, or ostensibly prophetic, there are deep 
moral principles as surely as the facts which embody them or 
draw out the word that conveyed them. In all too one still 
grander Object of faith arose before such as believed. 

This acted with such power that the mass of Jews were found 
as a whole pervaded by it everywhere ; so were the Samaritans 
down to the woman at Sychar. Never was it more general 
than at the time the Lord was in their midst, though their 
unbelief was really at its lowest, as they proved, when to their 
eyes He had no beauty that they should desire Him. Indeed 
their soul loathed Him, because He did not then take His 
world-kingdom, exalt the Jew, and destroy the Roman, Even 


12 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


His own followers had to bear His reproof, “O foolish and 
slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken ! 
Ought not the Christ to suffer these things [their stumbling 
block], and enter into his glory? And beginning from Moses 
he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things con- 
cerning himself” (Luke xxiv. 25-27). 

It may be urged that the minute circumstances, of which 
we have had but a selection as they occurred to one’s memory, 
are peculiar to Christ, but that outside His person prophecy 
takes into account broad maxims, which can only apply in a 
measure, because of the mixed condition of man, and are not 
adequately fulfilled save in Him. But the fact is that the 
theory is true nowhere; and its effect is to destroy the truth, 
as far as men strive to carry it out. Prophecy often launches 
out, even at an early day, into the magnificent and solemn 
display of the Lord coming in judgment of the quick, the 
habitable world, as we read in the Epistle of Jude, who was 
enabled by the inspiring Spirit (whatever the means) to give us 
the testimony of Enoch; not as in the spurious Ethiopic book, 
which betrayed its source by its inability even to make a 
correct use of scripture. Enoch “prophesied, saying, Behold, 
the Lord cometh with myriads of his saints to execute judg- 
ment upon all, and to convict all the ungodly of all their 
works of ungodliness which they have ungodlily wrought, and 
of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken 
against him” (vv. 14, 15). At a later epoch Moses spoke all 
the words of his wondrous song, as given in Deuteronomy xxxii., 
which testify to the same consummation, when Jehovah shall 
judge His people, and repent Himself for His servants; and 
the nations shall rejoice with His people, and He will make 
expiation for His land, for His people. 

Take another instance, which in a brief compass illustrates 
the nature of prophecy in symbol as well as in simple 
language ; as elsewhere figures are employed to give vividness. 
In Hosea iii. (where we are spared the usual insinuations 
against the alleged early date), under the prophet’s purchase of a 
woman beloved yet an adulteress, Jehovah set forth the relation 
of guilty Israel, no longer to be idolatrous, yet not properly 


INTRODUCTION. 13 


wife. The words that follow are plain and terse. “For the 
sons of Israel shall abide many days without king and without 
prince, and without sacrifice, and without pillar, and without 
ephod and teraphim. Afterward shall the sons of Israel return, 
and seek Jehovah their God and David their king, and shall 
come with fear unto Jehovah and unto his goodness at the 
end of the days.” Here we have a description of the most 
surprising facts which no human mind could have divined 
beforehand, and conveyed in the most precise terms: verse 
4 in course of fulfilment to this day; verse 5 awaiting it in 
that auspicious day which all the prophets hailed, and all saints 
of Old Testament or New ought surely to expect. 

Who before Hosea distinctly conceived for Israel’s history a 
state of things “without a king, without a prince”? One, 
if godly, might well have thought of national disaster and 
humiliation; but what of the pledges to David and his 
posterity ? But even if he had discerned the probability and 
danger of royal eclipse in Psalm Ixxxix. 30-32, what more 
opposed to his feelings and stranger to his mind than a religious 
anomaly without parallel among his brethren, and so hard 
for the few to conciliate with a divine ritual from the ever 
living and true God? Alas! he knew already how prone the 
chosen people were to lapse into idolatry, and how grace had as 
often intervened to recall from false gods. But here is 
announced a condition altogether unique, a religion neither 
divine nor idolatrous, but a wretched negation, “without 
sacrifice, and without pillar, and without ephod and teraphim.” 
Even D. Kimchi interprets this justly enough if not fully, 
saying, “ Without sacrifice refers to God, without pillar refers to 
idols, without ephod refers to God who declares the future 
by Urim and Thummim, without teraphim refers to idols 
who declare the future according to the opinions of those who 
believe in them.” 

Sacrifice beyond controversy is and has ever been the founda- 
tion of all true worship since sin came in. It had an 
authoritatively spiritual place in Judaism, Christianity has it 
perfectly and for ever in Christ. And as the ephod points 
to the ministry of the high priest in Israel, so we have now 


14 AN BXPOSITION Of THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


Christ High Priest for ever according to the order of Melchizedek, 
the Son of God passed through the heavens. But the Jew 
has nothing! neither sacrifice to purge sins, nor high priest 
to intercede for them: the astonishing spectacle before all eyes 
and for long centuries of a people that hate the idols they once 
. loved, yet without-the divine worship and service which their 
law demands imperatively. Never did such a state enter 
the imagination of Israel before Hosea, nor did it come to pass 
till long after him. Yet here it is predicted beyond a doubt 
as a lasting state; and so it has been and is. But the last 
verse is equally clear and conclusive to faith that they shall as 
a people return, not to their land merely (though this is certain 
from all scripture), but to Jehovah their God and to David their 
king, who can be none other as the context demonstrates than 
the Messiah. “And so,” says the great apostle, “all Israel 
shall be saved” (Romans xi. 26). None can deny the national 
and unparalleled religious ruin of Israel according to pro- 
phecy: why should any stop there and entirely disbelieve 
their restoration, not only as a nation, but to be the earthly 
centre of all the nations for the word of Jehovah in Zion ? 
But how, we may ask, were either of these stupendous changes, 
in ruin or in blessing, within man’s horizon when Hosea 
wrote with such startling plainness of speech ? 

Psalm xxii. is just as striking as Isaiah liii., for its first half 
sets out prophetically, as if a fact before us, the Messiah 
rejected, suffering, crucified, starting with that most wondrous 
of truths from His own lips to which atonement alone gives 
meaning—His God abandoning Him when in the deepess 
abyss of need and shame. But so it must be when God 
for us, as for the Jew, made sin Him who knew no sin. 
For if sinners are to be forgiven righteously, or justified, it 
must be on the righteous basis of sin judged as it deserves, and 
of God then glorified about it in an adequate sacrifice; so that 
He can be righteous in blotting every sin of the believer 
from before Him. And as the sufferings were unfathomable, so 
is the glory in divine answer to them; as our Lord said in a 
still deeper way looking on to both, “Tf God be glorified 
in Him (the Son of Man), God will glorify Him in Himself, 


The King’s Library 


INTRODUCTION. 15 


and will straightway glorify Him.” Righteousness set the 
risen Christ, the Second man, at God’s right hand on high, 
as He declared His Father’s name to His brethren. Bless- 
ing unbounded flows through His atoning death. In the midst 
of the congregation He praises, as in John xx. 19-22, 
Hebrews ii. 12. By-and-by the “great congregation,’ when 
all Israel is saved, will re-echo His praise. Nor this only, but 
all the ends of the earth follow. For the day will then have 
come, not for gospel testimony as the church is now, but 
the kingdom is Jehovah’s, and He is the ruler of the nations 
as an actual fact. All mortals shall bow before Him, from those 
most at ease to the utterly destitute hitherto, and that not 
of the then generation but of those to be born, to whom it 
shall be declared that Jehovah hath done this—His infinite 
work transcending all before and after. 

Neither David is here, nor any that ever lived or died, but 
only the Messiah who once for all suffered for sins, Just for 
unjust, that He might bring us to God; who is glorified 
on high while the church is being gathered, heirs of God 
and joint-heirs with Christ; and who, after receiving them to 
Himself changed into His glory, will come to make good the 
kingdom according to the prophets, to the joy of heaven and 
earth. Who but God could have conveyed these anticipations, 
wondrous beyond all comparison? It is an eminently feeble 
effort to ascribe such a psalm to the Exile or later, in the 
desire of taking it from the greatest of the Psalmists; but put 
it where you will, you cannot silence the voice of God in 
His word, sounding across the ages, and still witnessing of 
glories to come in Christ the Lord. Fully owning the true and 
sound application of the principle to the gospel (as in Romans 
xv. 10), one is bound to look for the fulfilment at the end 
of the age, when Jehovah will no longer hide His face from 
Israel, and they are not only reduced to the utmost extremity, 
but turn in repentance to Messiah whom they slew, saying, 
“ Blessed be He that cometh in the name of Jehovah.” 

Indeed, it is on this coming age that the prophetic word 
converges ; so much so that 2 Peter i, 20 pronounces, as a thing 
we ought to know, that no prophecy of scripture is of its 


16 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


own interpretation. Far from being thus isolated, as it must 
have been if it emanated from the human mind or will, it forms 
part of the great scheme which, as the Father counselled it for 
the glory of His beloved Son, the Spirit reveals in the 
prophetic word which centres in His coming kingdom. So, in 
contrast with His action in the Christian, and in the church, 
the Holy Spirit in Revelation xix. 10 is designated “the spirit 
of prophecy,” and said to be the “testimony of Jesus.” In the 
Acts and the Epistles He acts as the power of communion 
on the ground of known redemption. The truth is that the 
earliest book of scripture completely refutes the assumption 
of such contemporary interests as blind to the future of God, 
and illustrates what the last book of scripture proves as 
matter of fact, that prophecy exhibits the greatest variety of 
form according to God’s wisdom. 

The first in Genesis iii. 15 is worthy alike of Him who 
spoke, and of Him who was spoken of, as it disclosed the 
end from the beginning, the judgment of the subtle foe, the 
suffering grace and overwhelming power of Him who would 
deign to be the woman’s Seed. It was sovereign grace, Satan’s 
irremediable overthrow and punishment; while it was conveyed 
in terms adapted to an earthly people, and in view of divine 
government with present results, ike the law as a whole. On 
the other hand, in Genesis vi. 7, 13, Noah is divinely warned 
of things not seen as. yet, both on the ground of special 
relationship and on that of His nature; while Gen. vii. 4 
follows up the general intimation with precise details; and as 
it was predicted, so was it punctually fulfilled, as scripture 
expressly affirms. No history could be more precise or circum- 
stantial in few words. Genesis ix. 25-27, is a luminous pro- 
phetic sketch of the world, with both divine names, and each 
in its requisite place as ever: no sketch more opposed to 
appearances for centuries ; none more verified as time rolled on; 
yet to be proved absolutely true in the day of Jehovah, as later 
prophets declared to the ear of faith. This, however, may 
be said to be only a vast outline. But to take only one 
instance more, what of Genesis xv., when “the word of Jehovah 
came unto Abram in a vision”? Can any prediction be con- 


INTRODUCTION, 17 


ceived plainer or surer? Yet it stretched over more than four 
centuries, and defined the relative position of the chosen race 
and of the nation they were to serve in affliction, but at length 
to triumph over by a judgment unequivocally divine. “Nay 
more, it maps out the limits of another land—the land where- 
in the father of the faithful was a pilgrim, which was by 
Jehovah's covenant to be given long after, when the usurpers 
of the inheritance (enumerated in full detail) should be judged, 
as the old oppressor of the heirs had been. Who can say that 
these predictions have been answered only in Christ’s person ? 
Who can deny that they are particular facts, yet accomplished 
to the letter in the Egyptians, in the Amorites, in the Jewish 
people, and in their land ? 

But a more advanced and unscrupulous school of unbelief 
have now the popular ear, who to get rid of God’s inspiration 
plead that the prophets were shrewd politicians that observed 
closely the movements of history, and saw in the rise and fall 
of nations the exhibition of a divine purpose (Canon Driver's Lit, 
Old Testament, 200). Is any man bold enough to think thus 
of Abram, or of Genesis xv.? Is the situation, presupposed by 
this prophecy, that of the patriarch’s age? Is it the fraud of a 
human book or the revealed truth of God? The circumstances 
foreshown are wholly different from Abram’s then, and they 
change from a quasi-exile in sorrowful bondage to a coming out 
with great substance, and a subsequent conquest; not one of 
which conditions were yet existent. Yet here in this brief 
and clear prophecy all beyond dispute is of its essence and 
substance, instead of being alien to its spirit. How did any 
one of these vast changes arise out of the circumstances of the 
time? The system, calmly stated at home, and violently abroad, 
is nothing but a distressing libel on scripture, and rank rebellion 
against God, under the show of a critical investigation of 
the record that leaves untouched the divine inspiration and 
authority of scripture. But he is a simpleton who trusts these 
smiling augurs, who, in their own imagined processes of literary 
composition, lure one another and their followers on to the 
deadly sin of undermining God’s history and denying prophecy 
in any genuine sense, 

B 


18 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


How strong the contrast of His word by Isaiah in his great 
continuous discourse! All flesh is grass. The word of our 
God stands for ever. And He it is who is coming, who is a 
tender Shepherd to His people, though the Maker and the 
Master of all the universe. Who will teach Him? What are 
the nations, or the idols they have made? To Israel He speaks 
who knows the end from the beginning, and He it is who acts 
above the powers He employs to chasten or deliver. “ Produce 
your cause, saith Jehovah ; bring forth your strong reasons, saith 
the King of Jacob. Let them bring them forth, and declare 
unto us what shall happen; let them show the former things 
what they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter 
end of them; or declare unto us things to come. Show the 
things that are to come hereafter that we may know that ye are 
gods; yea, do good or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and 
behold it together. Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work 
of nought: an abomination is he that chooseth you” 
(Isaiah xli, 21-24). “Behold, the former things are come 
to pass, and. new things do I declare; before they spring forth, 
I téll you of them” (chap. xlii, 9). True prophecy is His 
claim; and it is an abiding one. 

“Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer, and He that formed 
thee from the womb, I am Jehovah that maketh all things; 
that alone stretcheth forth the heavens ; that spreadeth abroad 
the earth by myself (or, who is with me?); that frustrateth 
the tokens of the liars (or boasters), and maketh diviners mad; 
that turneth wise men backwards, and maketh their knowledge 
foolish ; that confirmeth the word of his servant, and per- 
formeth the counsel of his messengers; that saith to Jerusa- 
lem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye 
shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof; 
that saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers; that 
saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my 
pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built, and to 
the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid” (chap. xliv, 24-28). 

“Declare ye, and bring it forth; yea, let them take counsel - 
together: who hath showed this from ancient time? Who 
hath declared it of old? Have not I, Jehovah? And there is no 


HUET RODE CHION, 19 


God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none 
beside me” (xlv. 21). “Remember the former things of old: 
for [ am God, and there is none else; I am’ God, and there is 
none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from 
ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My 
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure; calling 
a ravenous bird from the east, the man of my counsel from a 
far country. Yea, I have spoken, I will also bring it to pass; I 
have purposed, I will also do it” (chap. xlvi. 9-11). “I have 
declared the former things from the beginning; and they went 
forth out of my mouth, and I showed them; I did them 
suddenly, and they came to pass. Because I knew that thou 
art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow 
brass, I have even from the beginning declared it to thee ; 
before it came to pass, I showed it thee; lest thou shouldest say, 
Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my 
molten image hath commanded them. Thou hast heard, see all 
this; and will ye not declare it? I have showed thee new 
things from this time, even hidden things; and thou didst not 
know them. They are created now, and not from the begin- 
ning; and before this day thou heardest them not; lest thou 
shouldest say, Behold, I knew them” (xlviii, 3-7). 

These citations from a single prophet suffice to prove what 
stress God lays on that communication of the future which 
modern criticism seeks to belittle or deny; and Christians 
beguiled by its assurance are willing, yea, anxious to throw 
it into the background, so as to render prophecy indistinct and 
powerless. No believer need shrink from the demand of a 
notable sceptic in his Creed of Christendom :—to mark (1) 
What the event was to which the alleged prediction was 
intended to refer; (2) That the prediction was uttered in 
specific, not vague, language before the event; (3) That the 
event took place specifically, not loosely, as predicted ; (4) That 
it could not have been foreseen by human sagacity. Take the 
following predictions of Christ as they are given in the Revised 
Version: “Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, 
and shall call His name Immanuel” (chap. vii. 14). “Bind 
thou up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples. And 

Bay 


20 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


I will wait for the Lorp that hideth his face from the house of 
Jacob, and I will look for him. Behold, I and the children 
whom the Lorp hath given me are for signs and for wonders in 
‘Israel from the Lorp of hosts, which dwelleth in Mount Zion” 
(chap. viii. 16-18). “In the former time he brought into 
contempt the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, but in 
the latter time hath he made it glorious by the way of the sea 
beyond Jordan, Galilee of the nations. The people that 
walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwelt ip 
the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light 
shined” (chap. ix. 1, 2). “And there shall come forth a 
shoot out of the stock of Jesse, and a branch out of his roots 
shall bear fruit; and the Spirit of the Lorp shall rest upon 
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of 
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of 
the Lorp; and his delight shall be in the fear of the Lorp,” 
&e. (x1, 1-3). “Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, 
a tried stone, a precious corner stone of sure foundation: he 
that believeth shall not make haste” (chap. xxviii. 16). 

Let us turn now to the later testimonies briefly. 

“Behold my servant, whom I uphold; my chosen, in whom 
“my soul delighteth; I have put my Spirit upon him; he shall 
bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not ery, nor 
lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. A 
bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall 
he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment in truth. He 
shall not fail nor be discouraged till he have set judgment 
in the earth; and the isles shall wait for his law” (xlii. 1-4), 
“And he said unto me, Thou art my servant; Israel, in whom 
I will be glorified. But I said, I have laboured in vain, I have 
spent my strength for nought and vanity: yet surely my judg- 
ment is with the Lorp, and my recompense with my God. 
And now, saith the Lorp, that formed me from the womb to 
be his servant, to bring Jacob to him, and that Israel be 
gathered with him: (for I am honourable in the eyes of 
the Lorp, and my God is become my strength:) yea, He 
saith, It is too light a thing that thou shouldest be my 
servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the 


INTRODUCTION. ot 


preserved of Israel; I will also give thee for a light to 
the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the ends 
of the earth. Thus saith the Lorp the Redeemer of Israel, [and] 
his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, whom the nation 
abhorreth,” &c. (xlix. 3-7). 

“The Lord Gop hath given me the tongue of them that 
are taught, that I should know how to sustain with words 
him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he 
wakeneth mine ear to hear as they that are taught. The 
Lord Gop hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, 
neither turned away backward. I gave my back to the 
smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I 
hid not my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord 
Gop will help me; therefore have I not been confounded: 
therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that 
I shall not be ashamed. He is near that justifieth me; who 
will contend with me? Let us stand up together: who is mine 
adversary? Let him come near to me. Behold, the Lord Gop 
will help me: who is he that shall condemn me?” (1. 4-9). 

“Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted 
and extolled, and be very high. Like as many were astonied 
at thee, (his visage was so marred more than any man, and_ 
his form more than the sons of men,) so shall he sprinkle 
many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him: 
for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that 
which they had not heard shall they consider” (li. 13-15). 

“Who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm 
of the Lorp been revealed? For he grew up before him as a 
tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no 
form nor comeliness; and when we see him, there is no beauty 
that we should desire him. He was despised and rejected of 
men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and as 
one from whom men hide their face he was despised, and we 
esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our griefs, and 
carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of 
God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, 
he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace 
was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. All we 


y 4 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH, 


like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his 
own way; and the Lorp hath laid on him the iniquity of 
us all. He was oppressed, yet he humbled himself and opened 
not his mouth; as a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and as a 
sheep that before her shearers is dumb; yea, he opened not 
his mouth. By oppression and judgment he was taken away ; 
and as for his generation, who among them considered that he 
was cut off out of the land of the living? for the transgression 
of my people was he stricken. And they made his grave with 
the wicked, and with the rich in his death; although he had 
done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it 
pleased the Lorp to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when 
thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his 
seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lorp 
shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail of his 
soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous 
servant justify many: and he shall bear their iniquities. 
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and 
he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he poured 
out his soul unto death: and was numbered with the 
transgressors: yet he bare the sin of many, and made 
intercession for the transgressors” (lili, 1-12). 

“Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul 
shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, 
even the sure mercies of David. Behold, I have given him for 
a witness to the peoples, a leader and commander to the 
peojles. Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest 
not, and a nation that knew not thee shall run unto thee 
because of the Lorp thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel ; 
for he hath glorified thee” (lv. 3-5). 

“The spirit of the Lord Gop is upon me; because the Lorp 
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek. 
he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaira 
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them 
that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lorn,” &e. 
(Ixi. 1, 2). “Iam inquired of by them that asked not for me; I 
ain found of them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold 
me, unto a nation that was not called by my name. I have 


INTRODUCTION. 93 


spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people,” &e. 
(Ixv. 1, 2). 

Comment is almost needless. The passages speak for them- 
selves, and can apply to none but the Lord Jesus: His birth 
as unique as His ministry in the least likely sphere; His fol- 
lowers associated with Him during Israel’s non-recognition 
by Jehovah; the lineage of which He was born no less 
than the power of the Holy Spirit that rested on Him 
beyond any of the sons of men; His person, peculiarly put 
to the proof, and a foundation for the believer as none other 
was or could be; the delight of Jehovah, the meekest in 
Israel, yet righteously blessing the Gentiles in the face of 
all opposition; nor this only, but when owning His apparent 
failure through Jewish unbelief and rejection, having the 
promise from Jehovah to be a light of the nations. And 
what can incredulity do, but gnash its teeth at Isaiah 1, ii. 13 
—liii,? The suffering Messiah alone answers to the prophetic 
picture. Here there can be no possible pretence for imagining, 
as in the case of Cyrus, a sign on the horizon. For as the 
prophet wrote indisputably many centuries before His advent, 
so the events intended are unmistakably, specifically, and 
exclusively verified in the Lord Jesus; and this from His birth 
to the grave, yea, beyond it, to His resurrection, and the work 
that occupies Him now in heaven, His intercession, as well 
as that which He carries on by His servants on earth, even to 
the call of the Gentiles and the rebellion of the Jews. Hence 
the notion of human sagacity foreseeing all, or most, or any 
from first to last, is unreasonable in the highest degree. Even 
the blindness of Israel that withstood the light in Him who has 
blessed, who is blessing, once besotted heathen, is a distinct trait 
of the prophecy ; as it has its counterpart now in Christendom 
where men receive not the love of the truth that they may be 
saved. Nay, more, part remains to be fulfilled in His earthly 
exaltation, which is incompatible with His present work, both 
in executing judgment, and in establishing His glory in power 
over all the earth. 

It is allowed that there is One who is the true object 
of prophecy, being man in His sufferings and temptations, God 


24 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


in His holiness no less than His strength and power. We see, 
says one, how His resurrection and ascension into heaven are its 
entire fulfilment. All the promises of God in Him are yea, and 
through Him, Amen. But as to all others the language could not 
be literally accomplished: firstly, because it was not properly 
applicable to any earthly nation from the imperfection of all 
human things; and secondly, because even that character of 
imperfect good or evil, which made certain nations the repre- 
sentatives of the principles of good or evil themselves, was not 
and could not be perpetual. As every people changes for better 
or worse in time, the prophecy could not be fulfilled at all, as 
in the case of Jonah’s prophecy of Nineveh’s destruction. In 
all cases the fulfilment will fall short of the full strength of the 
language, because in its proper scope and force it was aimed at 
a more unmixed good and evil than have ever been exhibited 
in the character of any earthly people. Hence is deduced, 
as the general principle of interpretation, a uniform historical 
or lower sense, and also a spiritual or higher, almost involved 
necessarily in the very idea of prophecy. 

It is striking to find how a false start exposes souls to 
perilous delusion. In this case the effect was to discard openly 
the latter part of Daniel. And no wonder. Prophecy, as was 
assumed, has to do with general principle, history with particular 
facts. Now it is plain that Daniel x1, on the face of it, is 
as minute as a history, so far as it speaks. There are evident 
gaps, not by error but by design, in its course; one brief after 
verse 3, the other very great after the Maccabean era till “the 
time of the end,” as verse 33 itself points out. This scripture 
should have arrested Dr. A.’s steps. Instead of judging himself 
and his fallacious principle, he fell into the sin of rejecting 
God's word, the root of infidelity. Inspired history is as sugges- 
tive of general principle as prophecy; and prophecy is occupied 
alike in the Hebrew and the Greek scriptures with distinct 
places, fixed times, definite persons, and particular facts. Even 
in the symbolic forms of Daniel, Ezekiel, Zechariah, and the 
Revelation this holds good: how much more from Genesis 
throughout the entire range of discursive prophecy! The 
general difference is one of degree only. Prophecy is anticipated 


INTRODUCTION. 95 


history, though it is much more; and its language is 
occasionally no less explicit, though we can understand 
that in divine wisdom it is often veiled, so as to exclude 
human intention from its fulfilment. Thus it becomes all the 
more impressive when surprisingly accomplished. Scripture, 
whether historical or prophetic, is full of Christ, in contrast 
with the first man led of Satan. It abounds in particular facts 
and precise dates, which no wit of man could have anticipated. 
God divulged the future to act on souls there and then accord- 
ing to spiritual zeal and intelligence, whilst not a little might 
remain only to be cleared up later. No maxim, however, is 
more erroneous than the assumption that it is only the event 
which explains. This is to deny the proper value of prophecy, 
till, becoming history in effect, it ceases to be prophecy. Not 
so did Noah, Abraham, Daniel, Simeon, Anna, or those that 
looked for the redemption of Jerusalem. Doubtless it yields 
evidence when accomplished to convince unbelievers; but its 
proper function is to cheer, guide, and edify believers before- 
hand. “Shall I hide from Abraham that which I do?” 

The exceptional cases of Jonah with Nineveh, and of Isaiah 
with Hezekiah’s sickness, were indeed admonitory; but they are 
perverted to overthrow the rule: when prophecy is made con- 
ditional, its true character is annulled. In an exceptional 
instance, conditions may be either expressed or understood ; 
but to take advantage of this fact, which no one disputes, in 
order to deny the general current of absolute prediction, is 
deplorably evil. Is God to be shut out of prophecy? Can 
He not, does He not, know the end from the beginning? Man 
changes, no doubt; but God in prophecy reveals the future 
with absolute certainty and precision, and this is a mark of 
favour to His own. Nor is it merely as to their own circum- 
stances ; for God disclosed to Abraham the destruction which, 
concerning Lot far more than himself, fell with unmitigated 
severity on the guilty cities of the plain. Earlier still God 
had revealed the long affliction of the chosen race, in a land 
not theirs, but their coming out with great substance, and the 
divine judgment of their oppressors, and their entrance invo 
Canaan in the fourth generation. There was ample evil in 


26 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Israel; but it did not hinder the punctual fulfilment of the 
prophecy. Ishmael too had his lot, foreknown both to Hagar 
generally, and to Abraham with yet more particularity, and 
independently of moral conduct. And what shall we say of 
the flood predicted with its defined space of warniny for 
120 years, to say nothing of the seven days that preceded 
the actual deluge (Genesis vil. 4, 10)? And Noah’s curse on 
Canaan, as distinguished from the blessing of Shem and the 
enlargement of Japheth, what has conditionality to do with it ? 
The word of the Lord endureth for ever. One might dwell on 
Joseph’s dreams and interpretations, as well as on Jacob’s 
blessings on his sons; but enough is said to demonstrate the 
error, its grave character, and its consequences. 

The fact is that scripture everywhere rises up to break the 
theory that prophecy is uniformly conditional. The assump- 
tion would really annul the largest part, if not the whole, of 
proper prophecy, Its author felt surer of its harmlessness 
than of its truth; but he lived to point the moral for others, 
if not for himself, that an error in principle about God’s word 
is an unmitigated evil, which may injure ordinary meu yet 
more, because in his own case the poison found an antidote in 
the ardent homage his soul paid to Christ and in unfeigned 
faith in His atoning work. But in itself falsehood defiles and 
severs from God’s mind, as the truth gives communion and 
sanctification. Evil communications corrupt good manners. 


§ 2. Object of Prophecy. 

Scripture itself lays down, in a text already referred to, the 
criterion of its object so clearly as to preclude argument when 
it is understood. “ And we have the prophetic word more sure ; 
whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a lamp shining in a 
squalid place, until the day dawn and the daystar arise in your 
hearts; knowing this first, that no prophecy of scripture is of 
its own interpretation. For not by man's will was ever 
prophecy brought, but men spoke from God, being moved by 
the Holy Spirit” (2 Peter i, 19-21). 

Here we learn that the prophetic word was confirmed by 
the vision on the holy mount, where the King was seen 


INTRODUCTION, 27 


transficured, the Old Testament saints represented, the chosen 
witnesses of Israel in their natural bodies; and the Father’s voice 
was heard from the excellent glory pronouncing His complac- 
ency in His Son, the centre of the whole scene. The apostle, 
in his making known the transcendent blessings of the gospel, 
admits the value of taking heed to prophecy. It is like a lamp 
for those that need one where all is dark wretchedness, till the 
heart appreciates evangelic daylight, and, further, the heavenly 
hope of Christ coming to receive us to Himself, a light higher 
than the luminaries of heaven exceed a candle. How slow 
the Christian is to make good practically (and this the apostle 
urged) his own peculiar privileges! If it is so with us now, 
it was perhaps more so with those who then laboured under 
Jewish prejudice and were unwilling to admit aught superior 
to that which Daniel or David, Moses or Abraham, enjoyed. 
Vain thought ! which none would have reproved ore sternly 
than those saints of old. Did not the prophets (and such they 
were) seek and search diligently, who prophesied of the grace 
toward us, searching to what or what manner of time the 
Spirit of Christ that was in them did point, when it testified 
beforehand the sufferings of Christ (literally Christward), and 
the glories after them ? To whom it was revealed that not unto 
themselves, but unto us they ministered those things which 
were now announced to us by the Holy Spirit sent forth from 
heaven; which things angels desire to look into, Can any 
words more explicitly assert the peculiar blessing attached to 
this day of, not promise only, but accomplishment enjoyed 
in the power of a present Spirit? Among other results is the 
heavenly light so far surpassing the lamp of prophecy, good as 
this is. The hope is as much enhanced as the faith; and love 
proved, tasted, and shed forth as it could not be before, whatever 
be the reasoning or traditions of men. 

But further, we have it laid down as a known first principle, 
that no prophecy is of its own (ae. isolated) solution. Local 
and temporal circumstances give occasion ; but it forms part of 
a great whole, of which Christ the King is the centre. Taking it 
by itself is like severing a bough from a majestic tree, of which it 
is an integral part. All points to Him in that day. Hence 


98 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


the way in which both advents are connected habitually in the 
Old Testament, whilst the second is set forth prominently in 
the New. Hence the habit of the Spirit, when predicting the 
fall of Nineveh, Babylon, Tyre, Egypt, ete. of ever linking 
them with the day of Jehovah, when the Lord will in personal 
presence inflict vengeance on ungodly Jews and Gentiles. 
Making these prophecies of their own solution is when men 
stop short with present fact, and even misuse this to the deeper 
unbelief of effacing the great unravelling of that day when 
Jehovah alone shall be exalted, and every word verified indis- 
putably by divine judgment. 

Such is the genuine unforced meaning of this scriptural 
canon. It is not “our,” viz. the readers’, any more than “ of 
one’s own,” viz. the prophet’s, solution ; for neither is here in 
question. Not the prophet but the prophecy had as yet been 
before us. Nor again does éiAvoiws mean yéveors, production, 
but “interpretation.” The verb yivera:, here translated “ is,” 
does not warrant any such thought. Even if we plead for 
its primitive force of becoming or coming, the meaning is that 
no prophecy of scripture becomes a matter of its own solution. 
It is by its nature such as to exclude isolated interpretation. 
It belongs to a vast system which has Christ and His kingdom 
for its object. For though the prophets were men, they “ spoke 
from God” under the power of the Holy Spirit. He who 
used them to write is the only source of sound interpretation ; 
which views each prophecy of scripture as a component part 
of God’s testimony to Christ, in and by whom only His glory 
is secured and yet to be displayed. 

This, it ought to be evident, excludes the notion that 
history interprets prophecy. Of course, man’s history, as far 
as it is true, must coincide with prophecy, as far as it is 
accomplished ; but what of the great mass of prophecy, which 
bears on the day of Jehovah? Will it not be too late to get 
its interpretation then ? The very text itself disproves the 
thought: prophecy was given as a lamp for the dark place all 
through ; and now that Christ is come, a better light—the True 
Light—shines, at least for the sons of light and day, indeed for 
all who truly bow to Him. Plainly one must understand or 


INTRODUCTION. 29 


interpret aright the prophecy, before it can be applied save by 
guess-work to any event of history; but even so, if this he 
made all, prophecy is made of private solution. In fact it 
would be truer to say the converse—that prophecy inter- 
prets history ; for God’s mind is given in prophecy, which ever 
looks to Christ’s glory, anything short of which is at best 
partial and misleading. The only effectual interpreter of pro- 
phecy, as of all scripture, is His Spirit, who deigns to work 
in the believer. 

It is only then, as we seize the association of Christ with 
each subject coming before us in the prophetic word, that 
we really understand it as a whole or in detail. For the 
divine purpose is to display His glory on the earth, not only 
in a people called to the knowledge of Jehovah as His own, 
but with all nations yet to be blessed when His own people are 
blessed (Psalm Ixvii.; Isaiah lx). It is Israel that have the 
earthly call and purpose of God, the nations then subordinately. 

But there is blessing for none apart from Christ, the object, 
centre, and security of all the promises of God. And this, in 
varied form and fulness, the Old Testament demonstrates. 
Of old a curse came, not the blessing, as the law was violated, 
God’s witnesses were despised, and idolatry more and more 
prevailed, first in Ephraim, then in Judah, “ till there was 
no remedy.” God’s people not only vanished from the land 
of promise, but were pronounced Lo-ammi (not-My -people). 
The return from Babylon, important as it may be, was but 
provisional, and in no way the restoration of God’s people, 
according to patriarchal promises or early and later prophets. 
It was only a remnant of Judah and Benjamin, with in- 
dividuals of other tribes, especially of Levi, who were in 
time appointed to have their King, Messiah, presented to 
them, and, alas! rejected disdainfully to death, but in that 
death glorifying God and atoning for sin, as He had already 
glorified the Father in a life that bespoke the Word made 
flesh, full of grace and truth. When the Jew rejected the 
testimony of the Spirit to the Messiah exalted in heaven, 
whom they had crucified on earth by the hand of lawless 
men, it was all over with the returned remnant, as before 


30 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


with the nation. The same evil heart of unbelief, which 
gave up Jehovah for idols, rejected Jehovah-Messiah in Jesus, 
as well as the gospel through His blood; and “wrath is come 
upon them to the uttermost.” The King was wroth; and He 
sent His armies, and destroyed those murderers and burned 
their city, as the rejected Messiah forewarned. 

Then God began a new call above, believers from among 
Jews and Gentiles united to Christ on high, as the one 
body wherein is neither Jew nor Greek: all the old dis- 
tinctions blotted out; Christ all and in all. They are not 
of the world, as Christ is not; they are heavenly, as He is 
heavenly, though they be on the earth for the little while 
that God is calling them out. This explains why the church 
of God is not properly an object of prophecy; for prophecy 
regards the earth and living man upon it. But the members 
of Christ have died with Him, and belong to Him for heaven, 
being warned against “all that is in the world,” and exhorted 
to set their minds on things above: a state not at all contem- 
plated by the prophetic word, which is, we saw, as a lamp 
shining in a squalid place. This lamp we can use, and do 
well to heed; but we have by grace already a better light 
in our hearts, and are waiting for Him to take us where 
He is, the constant hope of the church, wholly independent 
of prophecy with its earthly times and seasons, its judgments 
and blessings under Messiah’s government here below. 

But has God cast away His people? This the apostle has 
answered elaborately in the Epistle to the Romans (chap. xi). 
To the saints in the metropolitan city of the world that then 
was, the Holy Spirit has declared on the contrary that the 
day is coming when “all Israel shall be saved ” (Romans xi. 26), 
that is, all Israel who survive the tremendous judgments of 
that day. He, Paul, was himself a pledge of it: as in 
Hlijah’s time there was a remnant, so there was in the 
apostle’s day. No doubt, the mass now, yet more than then, 
are blinded, and salvation is for the Gentiles, not to cast off 
the Jews but to provoke them to jealousy, as Moses pre- 
dicted (Deut. xxxii). Now, if their fall be the world’s 
wealth, what will be their future rise? Life from the dead. 


INTRODUCTION. 31 


After all, the Gentile was but a wild olive grafted into the 
olive tree of promise, and is warned not to be high-minded 
but to fear, seemg how God spared not the natural branches. 
It is only Gentile pride and delusion that Israel are gone 
for ever to make themselves “the Israel of God,’* and abide 
till time melts into eternity. Not so! Assuredly if the 
Gentile abide not in God’s goodness (and who will dare to affirm 
this ?), he will be cut off, and the Jews will be grafted into 
their own olive tree. Then the apostle drops argument and 
figure, declaring in plain terms that a hardening in part (it 
has never been complete) has befallen Israel, until the fulness 
of the Gentiles be come in; “and so all Israel shall be saved,” 
according to the prophet (Isaiah lix. 20). This will be the true 
restoration of Israel in the day of Jehovah, when the Gentiles 
meet with condign judgment at His hand. It is only fleshly 
Israel that can be said to be “enemies for your sake as 
touching the gospel.” It is only they who are “beloved 
for the fathers’ sake, as touching the election.” What 
theologians call “the spiritual people,” “the Israel of God,” 
or believers, cannot answer to this language. It is the same 
people, enemies as regards the gospel yet beloved as regards 
election, who shall be saved. For, adds the apostle, the 
gifts and the calling of God are without repentance—they 
are subject to no change of mind on His part. God will 
assuredly restore His people yet. 

Thus does the great prophet join the great apostle. “For 
a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies 
will I gather thee. In overflowing wrath I hid my face from 
thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have 
merey on thee, saith Jehovah thy Redeemer. For this is 
as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that 
the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so 
have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor 

* The reader, in weighing Gal. vi. 16, may satisfy himself how little the 
phrase sanctions the use commonly made of it. For the apostle distinguishes ‘6 
many as walk by this rule,” #.¢., of the new creation, from ‘the Israel of God,” 
instead of confounding them, as the popular error does. He means by the 


phrase such Jews as were so in deed and in truth. This indicates the propriety 
of his language. The error assumes that the apostle wrote incorrectly. 


32 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


rebuke thee. For the mountains shall dep-rt, and the hills 
be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, 
neither shall my covenant of peace be removed, saith Jehovah 
that hath merey on thee” (Isaiah liv. 7-10). So perfectly 
coincides the teaching of Paul with the prophecy of Isaiah ; 
as both are set aside by the figment that it is henceforth only 
a question of the church, in which merge all that believe, 
whether Jew or Gentile: as if God hud cast away His people 
according to Gentile conceit! 

Without full credit to God’s purpose in this respect, the 
prophets are unintelligible. Given the restoration of Israel 
not only to their land, but to Jehovah their God, whom they 
will own and see in their manifested Messiah; the field of 
prophecy begins to be truly discerned. Jerusalem is the 
city of the great King. “They shall look upon me whom 
they have pierced.” More than carnage may open “that 
day,” when the garments, rolled in blood, shall even be for 
burning, for fuel of fire. But how blessed when they say, 
“Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given! And the 
government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall 
be called Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Everlasting 
Father, Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government 
and of peace, there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, 
and upon the kingdom, to establish it and to uphold it with 
judgment and with righteousness henceforth even for ever. 
The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will perform this” (Isaiah 
AKON 7) 

Nor is this all. As grace called Gentiles when the Jews 
rejected the Messiah, so prophecy shows us Him in glory 
the Head of Israel and the Gentiles here below. “And it shall 
come to pass in that day [not in this], that the root of Jesse 
which standeth for an ensign of the peoples, unto him shall 
the nations seek, and his resting-place shall be glorious” 
(Isaiah xi 10). “And there was given him dominion, and 
glory, and a kingdom, that all the peoples, nations, and 
languages should serve him [the Son of Man]; his dominion 
is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and 
his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed” (Daniel vii. 14), 


INTRODUCTION. 33 


“And Jehovah shall be King over all the earth: in that day 
shall Jehovah be one, and his name one” (Zechariah xiv. 9). 

The key of all is Christ seen in His various glory: not alone 
Only-begotten Son of God in personal right, but Christ Jesus a 
Man, dead, risen, and glorified in virtue of His work as well as 
person ; Son of David, Son of Man, and, withal Head over all 
things to His church, the body of Him that filleth all in all. 
It is this fact which emerges with heavenly brightness in 
Ephesians and Colossians, as well as partially elsewhere. It 
is the omission of it (the mystery, hid in God from the ages, 
now revealed), which enfeebles alike Fathers, Greeks, Orientals, 
Copts, Abyssinians, Romanists, Anglicans, Lutherans, Reformed, 
Moravians, Methodists, &e. Yet the proper character even of 
Christianity cannot be intelligently apprehended without it. 
Thus it is a far larger question than prophecy ; for it affects all 
things spiritual, individual and corporate, inasmuch as we ought 
to be now on earth, as by-and-by in heavei, the answer and 
witness to Christ at God’s right hand. 

Hence also we need not disparage in the least the Old 
Testament saints, but can allow ungrudgingly their future 
and heavenly glory in reigning with Christ. Hence we can 
leave adequate room and time for the displayed Kingdom 
of Christ over the habitable world to come, which is therefore 
neither the present age nor yet eternity, but between the 
two. Then the Jews and the Gentiles shall be blessed under 
Christ’s reign—Jehovah King over all the earth, the peoples 
all suitably and sovereignly blessed, none confounded one 
with another, still less with the bride the Lamb’s wife, the new 
Jerusalem metropolis not of earth only but of the universe 
in heavenly glory, yet specially connected with the earth. 
Even now on earth is neither Jew nor Gentile in that body of 
Christ, but He is all and in all. 

Now there ought to be not the smallest hesitation about this 
great truth; for it is no question of prophecy as to its full 
revelation, but of the weightiest and plainest dogmatic 
scripture, as in Ephesians i, 9,10: “Having made known to 
us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure 
which he purposed in himself for the administration of the 

o 


34 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


fulness of the times, to sum (or head) up all things in the 
Christ, the things in the heaven, and the things on the earth—., 
in him, in whom also we were allotted (or obtained) inheritance, 
being fore-ordained according to the purpose of him that 
worketh all things according to the counsel of his own will.” 
Thus it is sure that God’s purpose in the coming economy is 
to put all the universe, heavenly and earthly, under Christ 
as head, we who believe (whether Jews or Gentiles) being His 
joint-heirs in this unbounded and glorious inheritance; of which, 
as the apostle proceeds to explain, the Holy Spirit, who has 
sealed us unto that day of redemption, is meanwhile the 
earnest in our hearts. The latter part of Colossians i. may be 
compared in proof of the general purpose, grounded on the 
work of the cross, and of the church’s special relationship 
with Christ as the head of His body. Hence we shall reign 
in that day with Christ, not certainly giving up our character- 
istic blessings in heavenly places, and therefore, as Rey. v. 10 
says, “over” rather than “on” the earth, where the Jews shall 
have the central place and first dominion (Micah iv.), and 
the Gentiles willingly bow, even their kings and queens, to 
Jehovah’s disposal and ordering (Isaiah xi., xlix., Ix., Ixvi.). 
It is thus the special relationship with Christ that makes 
all clear in scripture, and assigns the just place to each, 
whether to Israel, or to the Gentiles. As the church was 
part of “the mystery,’ which is expressly declared to be 
hid from ages and generations and hid in God, it is never as 
such the subject-matter of the prophets, though principles 
of the glorious future are already verified in and applied to 
the gospel now. We may regard it as bound up with, and 
eclipsed in, Christ (comp. Isaiah 1. 8, 9, with Romans viii. 33, 34). 
But when the day is come for the display of His glory before 
the universe, Revelation xxi. shows the bride, the Lamb’s wife, 
as the heavenly city, the new Jerusalem, the witness of grace, 
even then with healing for the nations (xxii. 2); as the earthly 
Jerusalem will be the witness still of earthly righteousness. 
“For that nation and kingdom that will not serve thee, shall 
perish ; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted” (Isaiah lx. 
12), She, in the heavenly places, will reign with Christ over 


INTRODUCTION. 35 


the earth; Israel will be reigned over, but the inner circle on 
earth, as the Gentiles also more distantly but blessed indeed. 

What throws all prophecy into confusion, darkness, and error, 
is making ourselves, the church, its object. This the church is 
not. Give Christ, the true centre, His place; then everything 
falls into order, and shines in the light of God before our °* 
souls. Such is the effect of God’s word intelligently enjoyed 
by His spiritual power. Without it all vision becomes “as the 
words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that 
is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee, and he saith, I cannot, 
for it is sealed. And the book is delivered to him that is not 
learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he saith, I am not 
learned” (Isaiah xxix. 11, 12). “By faith we understand.” 
There is no other way, nor ought there to be. 


§ 3. Occasion of Prophecy. 


The occasion, or moral ground, of prophecy is departure 
from God, who sends thereon His word, which eonvicts of the 
sin, and holds out His intervention in power to deliver those 
who believe, by the judgment of His and their adversaries. 
This we see verified in Eden from the fall of man. God at 
once appears on the scene, brings home to conscience the sin of 
each, and, in pronouncing judgment on the Serpent, points to ° 
the blessing that hangs on the triumph of the bruised Seed of 
woman, the bruiser of the Serpent’s head. A state of innocence 
before, or of fidelity afterwards, drew out no prophecy ; which, 
on the contrary, laid the evil of the creature bare, and held out 
God’s sure resource in bringing iu not only judgment of the 
evil, but a better hope: the first man superseded by the 
Second. 

So it is always as a general principle. If Enoch prophesied, 
it was, Behold, the Lord came with His holy myriads to 
execute judgment against all, and to couvict all the ungodly of 
all their ungodly works, and of all their hard speech against Him. 
If Noah so opened his mouth, it was the wickedness of Canaan 
that drew out the curse, whatever the blessing to Shem and 
Japheth. It was the foreseen oppression of Egypt and iniquity 
of the Amorites that formed the background for the predicted 


oc 2 


36 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


gift of the promised land to the seed of Abraham; and 
it was the too plain failure of his sons which led the way 
for dying Jacob to tell beforehand what should befall them 
in the latter days, culminating in the advent of Shiloh, to 
whom the obedience (or gathering) of the peoples shall be, how- 
ever long the interval between the first part and the second. 
Man’s theory is that the people of Israel, their kings, and 
their prophets, stand forth in the history and in the prophecy 
of scripture as the representatives of God's cause and of 
goodness; and that as the history shows them imperfect repre- 
sentatives, so they can only be imperfectly the subjects of 
predicted blessings, which did or did not belong to them in the 
measure of their faithfulness. Thus Moab was not all evil, 
Israel was not all good. Prophecy spoke without reserve of 
God’s triumphs and of His servants: if Israel belongs to God 
only imperfectly, her share in God’s triumphs must in that 
proportion be imperfect also. But the theory does not hold: 
for it is alleged on the one hand that Moab, Ammon, Amalek, 
are vanished out of history; it is allowed on the other that 
Israel exists still unchanged. Yet what were the sins of those 
nations compared with Israel’s, if at least we bow to the Lord’s 
_ estimate (Matthew xi. 21-24)? Jonah’s case, too, is misused to 
prove that it all depends on circumstances whether prophecy 
could be fulfilled or not. In all cases the fulfilment is sup- 
posed to fall short of the strength of the prediction, because it 
was aimed at a more unmixed good and evil than ever was 
in any people. Christ, therefore, remains the real subject 
of all prophecy for good; the Son of David has reigned for 
more than eighteen hundred years, owned over all the earth 
as King and Lord, and of His kingdom there shall be no end! 
Scripture in no way sanctions this sliding scale, and the un- 
certain or partial fulfilment it involves. The only thing true is 
that Christ is the object and security, not only of all God's 
promises to faith, but of executing His wrath and threats. 
He is the Son of God, in whom there is life eternal for those 
that believe; He is the Son of Man, the executor of judgment 
on those that believe not. That God used Jonah’s preaching 
to awaken the Ninevites to repentance for a season did not 


tnrropuctton, By 


hinder Nineveh’s utter ruin ere long, as Nahum predicted, 
nor Nahum’s going on to the last Assyrian, when Jehovah will 
make a full end, and affliction shall not rise up a second time. 
He may go forth in the pride of power, imagining evil against 
Jehovah ; but, behold, upon the mountains the feet of him that 
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace! Keep thy feasts, 
O Judah, perform thy vows; for the worthless shall no more pass 
through thee ; he is utterly cut off. The Ruler out of Bethle- 
hem shall be thy peace, when the Assyrian shall come into 
the land. Prophecy, whatever it may take in of partial accom- 
plishment, stays not short of the consummation at the end of 
the age, when He, whose right it is, takes the Kingdom. Thus 
what is partially accomplished amply encourages that faith 
which ever waits and longs for His appearing, whilst it 
furnishes material, because it is necessarily partial till then, 
for the unbelief which doubts the past and disregards the 
future, because its pleasure and its confidence are in man, not 
in the true God whom it knows not. 

But the thoughts even of good men are far from God’s mind 
and counsel; and deeply interesting it is to trace how true it is 
that moral ruin in man’s past brings out more and more God's 
voice in prophecy. Never were the Israelites in the wilderness 
lower than when Balaam was hired of Balak to curse them, 
after their manifold unfaithfulness in the day of temptation. 
His false prophet went forth to meet—! But Jehovah met 
Balaam, and put a word in his mouth. In His moral govern- 
ment He passes over no fault in His people, but blames and 
chastises. Before the enemy He brings out His thoughts and 
grace and purposes of glory. Every effort of Balak draws 
forth a fresh blessing from Balaam, compelled to be the mouth- 
piece in Jehovah’s hand. Israel dwell alone, are justified, and 
beautiful in God’s eyes; they have Messiah coming to be their 
crown of glory and power. But even so it is Jsrwel, and not 
some other people, and carrying all expressly on to “the latter 
days.” For no prophecy of scripture is of its own or isolated 
interpretation. It is part of God's revelation in view of 
Christ’s glory on earth in that day. 

So Moses’ song in Deuteronomy xxvii. flows from Jehovah's 


58 AN BXPOSTTION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


unchangeable purpose, whatever the undisguised failure of 
Israel, the centre of His government of the world (v. 8). 
The very call of the Gentiles is but to provoke them to 
jealousy (v. 21), as the apostle drew from this long after, 
when it came to pass (Romans x.). No doubt, the Gentiles 
proved utterly unworthy, and God will take vengeance on them 
(wv. 40-42); but even when He restores Israel as He will 
(v. 36), He calls the Gentiles to rejoice with His people 
(v. 43): a principle already, as we know, accomplished in the 
gospel, but to be fulfilled in the Kingdom of Messiah. 

When the priests failed as fully as the people, we hear 
of Samuel raised up on God's part; as Peter says (Acts iL), 
“beginning with Samuel and all the prophets.” And as the 
prophet was raised up in sovereign grace to speak for God, 
so a King is held out even before this as the hope of Israel. 
« And [ will raise me up a faithful priest that shall be according 
to that which is in my heart and in my mind; and I will build 
him a sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for 
ever.” The Messiah is the key, the King in God’s counsel, the 
new and only true Anointed, before whom the priest should 
walk (soon to have an earnest in David and Solomon, who 
rejected the house of Ithamar, and brought forward Zadok 
of the line of Phinehas), as will be seen fully in the Kingdom. 

Then, when the kings even of David's line fail more and 
more palpably, the prophets proper, who were inspired to write 
their imperishable books whether on a great or on a lesser scale, 
were raised up of God. Here, if we take Isaiah as a sample of 
the greater, and Hosea of the less, we may see the same 
principle as clearly at least as ever. For the introductory 
chapters (i-v.) of Isaiah self-evidently lay the ruin of Israel as 
the basis of his announcing divine intervention in judgment 
of evil, and mercy to the repentant remnant, as chapter vi. 
reveals his formal inauguration on that very ground. Nor 
is Hosea i. less explicit, called during the same kings of Judah, 
but adding Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel, with 
children given as signs of the kingdom ceasiug from the house 
of Israel; of no mercy thereon; and, what was still more 
serious, of Lo-Ammi pronounced; yet withal of the gathering 


INTRODUCTION, — 39 


of both another day under one head; “for great shall be the 
day of Jezreel,” thus carrying us on to the glorious scenes of 
the latter day. In both the ruin was imminent and irretriev- 
able, save provisionally, till Messiah reign over the earth. 

But Christ was wholly rejected in that capacity, as the New 
Testament clearly shows, in fulfilment of Psalm ii. and a crowd 
of Old Testament prophecies. He has never reigned for one 
day as Son of David. Undoubtedly the cross brought in 
higher things, and He sits on the Father’s throne, where David 
never did, never will sit; as by-and-by He will sit on His own 
throne. Then not only will the holy hill of Zion be the seat 
of His power, but He will ask and receive the nations for His 
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for His 
possession, to break them with a rod of iron and dash them in 
pieces like a potter’s vessel—a statement of His rule clearly 
future, and incompatible with His grace as now under the 
gospel. And though we Christians gladly own Him Lord, 
“King” does not express His relation to us, but Head, for 
we are members of His body; and the difference is as 
momentous in practice as in doctrine. In that day, when 
Israel is restored, and spiritually as well as literally in 
their land under Messiah and the new covenant, the nations 
shall be blessed, and bow before the Son of Man. In that day 
the races that have vanished out of history will once more re- 
appear, according to prophecy, as Isaiah distinctly declares 
(chap. xi. 14), and others also. The mouth of Jehovah has 
spoken it. Infidels ery, Impossible. Good men as credulously 
listen to their vanity, as they fear to trust the word that lives 
and abides for ever. But God will justify it in its time, and all 
the more, because not a trace appears now. Scripture cannot 
be broken. Races remain, whatever the shiftings of time, 
place, or circumstances, as J ehovah will prove in honour of 
His King. 

John xiii. 31, 32, puts the case from His own lips in the light 
of God. The moral glory of the cross is the basis of the Son of 
Man’s heavenly glory, and this straightway, i.e. Without wait- 
ing for the Kingdom which He is to receive, when He returns 
in visible power and splendour, Then only will the inhabitants 


40 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF TSATAH. 


of the world learn the righteousness which they dislike and 
disdain, while favour is shown as now in the gospel of grace to 
the wicked (Isaiah xxvi. 9,10). Meanwhile Jesus is a world- 
rejected Lord, but on the throne of His Father—a seat which 
none ever had or can share; and He will only take His own 
throne (Revelation iii.) at His coming. And hence the only true 
place of the Christian now, according to the uniform strain of 
New Testament teaching and sanctioned practice, where fellow- 
ship with Christ’s sufferings and conformity to His death are 
the highest. privileges. We who are His are called in the 
measure of our faith and love to share loyally His reproach in 
separation from the world till He comes, who is Lord of all. 
Then shall we be with Him where He is and for ever; then 
too shall we reign with Him, instead of being blessed and reigned 
over here below: a prospect bright beyond all thought, so that 
the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the coming glory. 


§ 4. Sphere of Prophecy. 

Prophecy is occupied, not with heaven, but with the earth, 
and consequently with Israel and the nations. This is evident 
to any familiar with its general scope or its details. Principles 
which apply in the highest degree to the Christian, the gospel, 
or the church, may and do appear therein. But the more 
closely the prophets are scrutinised, the more evident it 
becomes that Christianity and the church as such lie outside 
its purview, and that a wholly different condition is contem- 
plated: the government of the world, or divine dealings there 
to introduce it, not the action of heavenly grace by the 
power and presence of the Spirit, uniting those who believe, 
freed or justified from sin, to Christ their Head on high. 

Hence it is, as the attentive reader of scripture will not fail 
to discern, that times and seasons and external signs, as they 
are not for heaven, so belong not to heavenly men while on earth, 
save as they may read and understand them concerning others. 
They are given in profusion about God’s earthly people, 
Whether for their own help directly, or to signify God’s hand 
on their enemies. Where the Jew is concerned, alike in the 


intRobuCTION, 41 


New Testament as in the Old, there do we find those suited 
landmarks. The hope of the Christian and of the church 
stands wholly on the Lord’s sure promise of love. “In my 
Father’s house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would 
have told you; for I go to prepare a place for you. And if I 
go and prepare a place for you, I come again, and will receive 
you unto myself; that where I am, [there] ye may be also” 
(John xiv. 2, 3). It is His word, expressly and wholly in- 
dependent of earthly events. 

As their faith, so is their hope. Pharaoh was not in question, 
nor Balak, nor Sihon, nor Oy, nor the many hostile kings of 
Canaan. Satan did resist to blood by human instruments; but 
an infinitely greater must be met in death and judgement of 
sin. And so it was in the life of Christ, if we read it, as we 
ought, in the light of heaven and eternity. There sin is seen 
levelling. all distinctions, and no difference before God 
between Jew and Gentile is proclaimed; for all are lost. But 
grace through faith saves all equally and for ever, and consti- 
tutes a new man of which Christ is head above, wherein is 
neither Jew nor Gentile, but all are one in Him. This is the 
church, the fruit of sovereign favour, the heavenly Eve of the 
last Adam. It has nothing to do now with the government of 
the world, or with the execution of earthly judgments. God in 
love gave His Only-begotten Son, not only to become man for 
us men, but even to be made sin for us sinners, that we might 
become God’s righteousness in Him, yea, and be raised up 
together with Him and seated together in Him in heavenly 
places indeed, in the glory of His grace: for His own counsels in 
Christ alone account for it all. We are accordingly called 
to a walk quite different from that which was imposed by the 
law on the ancient people of God; created, as the apostle says, 
“for good works, which God afore prepared that we should walk 
in them,” the details of which fill the New Testament in 
general. Our worship too is confessedly distinctive, as is our 
service or ministry. Christ is the centre and object and 
expression of all, as the Holy Ghost is the power acting by 
the word of God. And the heavenly hope is the crown: His 
own coming, we are sure of soon, we know not when, to 


49 AN EXPOSITION OF THR BOOK OF ISATATT. 


receive us to Himself and present us with Himself in the 
Father’s house on high. 

Prophecy, strictly so called, is quite distinct, and bears 
directly on the future tribulation, whether that which is called 
“ the great one,” out of which God-fearing Gentiles come from 
every nation and tribe and people and tongue, or the unpar- 
alleled hour of Jacob’s trouble, out of which he will be saved. 
In either we never hear of the church; and no wonder. For 
the Lord, apart from those predicted sorrows, will have called 
us to meet Him in the air; so that we follow Him from 
heaven when He appears to deliver the Jews and Israel, who are 
ready to be swallowed up by their adversaries. On all this the 
lamp of prophecy sheds its light, deeply needed for the squalid 
place of the world. But we can say believingly, and without 
presumption, that we are not of the world, for Himself has told 
us so. We therefore find a better hope spread before us in His 
word, though many lose it by confounding it with the just 
expectation of the Jewish remnant, who look for deliverance by 
His appearing to take vengeance on their foes. Our hope has 
no such connection, as it is by our being caught up to meet 
Him. It is the translation of heavenly grace. For “that day” 
we come along with Him from heaven. Hence when Christ, our 
life, shall be manifested, then shall we also be manifested with 
Him in glory. “The day” is a time of displayed divine power, 
when “every eye” shall see, and Jehovah be exalted in that 
day. On this all prophecy converges. 

“The land,” and the earth too as a whole, will then become 
a direct object of divine blessing; and the reader of Old 
Testament scripture is inexcusable, who overlooks the many 
obvious places in which God pledges Himself to this end 
Doubtless His people and the nations are nearer to His heart ; 
but the long groaning earth, the creation travailing in pain 
together until now, shall be set free from the bondage of 
corruption into the liberty (not of grace, which is for souls by 
the Spirit now, but) of the glory of the children of God at 
Christ’s appearing. Does this surprise or offend any? It was 
here the Son of God, who created all, beeame man, and lived, 
and died, by the grace of God, It was here was manifested 


INTRODUCTION, 48 


the wonder of a divine person, humbling Himself in obedience 
unto death—yea, death of the cross. It was here God was 
glorified in the Holy One made sin; and here that Satan was 
vanquished for ever by Him who had accomplished redemption 
by His blood, and was raised in power according to the Spirit of 
holiness. If heaven and God’s throne be the worthy reward, 
this earth shall be delivered and reconciled. It may be a little 
spot compared with the universe, but it is the little spot where 
He wrought in divine love a work matchless in value, to which 
not man only is indebted for blessing, but God for His retrieved 
moral glory, and in virtue of which blessing the man who 
believes is made God’s righteousness. If sin of the first Adam 
subjected all to vanity, how meet it is that the second Man 
should more than restore all things! How blessed that Satan 
should be banished, not only grace as now reigning to eternal 
life in Christ, and that Christ, no longer hidden, should establish 
the rejoicing earth with His power and blessing, yet still to the 
glory of God the Father! . 
Undoubtedly our best portion is in Christ and with Christ 
where He is, to share His love and see His glory: better even 
than being manifested in the glory which the Father has given 
Him and He has given us, when we shall be perfected in one, that 
the world may know that the Father sent Christ and loved them 
as He loved Him. For they appear together in the same heavenly 
glory, as we see in Rev. xvii. 14, xix. 14, xxi. 9, ete. But every 
spiritual mind will feel that it is far better to have Christ’s 
desire fulfilled, for which He asks the Father as to that which 
He has given Him—that where He is they also may be with 
Him, that they may behold His glory which the Father has 
given Him, for He loved the Son before the world’s foundation. 
There shall we be in the richest grace; nothing else could explain 
it, as it all depends on the Father and the Son, and is outside 
all prophecy, save so far as the very exceptional glimpses of 
Revelation xxi. xxii, may suppose, if not reveal it. We can 
account readily for this exception; because at that time those 
who are heavenly enter with Christ on the reign over the earth ; 
and it is exactly the province of prophecy to speak of God’s 
government of the world, which cannot be in the full sense till 


44 AN EXPOSITION Of Tok BOOK of ISATAH, 


“Christ has taken His great power and reigns, and we shall reign 
with Him. 

There is thus a two-fold error to avoid. Many, if not all, 
the post-apostolic fathers of early date were chiliasts (without 
noticing heterodox men) ; and their tendency doubtless was to 
see little, if at all, more than the earth glorious and the glorified 
saints with Christ: an unworthy view which not only gave up 
heaven, but shut out Israel from the Messiah and the new 
covenant, to say nothing of the Gentiles, blessed distinctively 
on the earth. Revolting from the thought of nothing higher than 
the millennial earth, Origen, Jerome, Augustine, &c., thought 
only of heaven for those that are Christ's, and saw no prospect 
for Israel and the nations, beyond coming into Christianity by 
the gospel as now preached, which they conceived to constitute 
Christ’s everlasting dominion, where all nations should serve 
Him in perpetuity. Moderns etherealised yet more, so that 
the soul practically became all for heaven at death, and resur- 
rection faded away save in name. Revival of prophetic study 
and testimony recovered many from views so vague. But rarely 
have the children of God taken in the full truth of placing all 
things, both those in heaven and those on earth, under Christ 
as Head and the heavenly saints, heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Christ, thus comprehending the universe as His, both 
heavenly and earthly, to the glory of God the Father. This 
alone maintains the promised earthly blessings of the Old 
Testament, not set aside but sealed in the New Testament, 
leaves room for all that divine mercy has in store for Israel and 
the nations and creation generally, and without confusion 
conciliates with the accomplishment of the prophets the 
resurrection glory of the departed saints from the beginning, 
and above all, the incomparable results of the mystery of 
Christ and the church, now revealed in the New Testament, 
then to be displayed in the heavens and over the earth. 

Thus also is the progressive character of the divine dealings 
made evident. For under Christ’s reign in this fulness of 
glory, Israel will advance from the old to the new covenant, 
aud their Messiah glorified, as the church from her present 
anomalous ruin to be the glorious bride of Christ ; and all 


INTRODUCTION. 45 


nations be delivered from their infidelity, superstitions, and 
other abominations, to flourish in righteousness and peace; the 
whole earth be filled with His glory, and the heavens no longer 
severed through the first man’s sin, but maintained in the 
power of the Second man from heaven. Not only is there 
nothing retrograde in any sphere, but there is blessed progress 
everywhere for heaven and earth. It is only from looking at 
part of the coming glory that Christians have failed to seize 
the truth of an advance so marked and universal. 

Prophecy then treats of the earthly people, or rather the 
righteous remnant (Isaiah 1. iv. vi. x., etc.), saved by the Lord’s 
appearing for the destruction of their enemies, not by transla- 
tion to heaven, as the heavenly saints will know like Christ 
Himself, without any dealing in vengeance on the world. The 
difference is simple and complete. Hence it connects itself 
with day-light dawning and the day-star arising in the heart, 
as compared with the prophetic lamp. Our hope rests on the 
assurance of His love, that He will come and take us to 
heaven; prophecy tells of blessing and glory for Israel and the 
nations too on earth by the judgment He will execute om its 
evil. Hence a Christian might and ought to be waiting for 
Christ with all his heart, who knew little of prophecy, however 
good to be known in its place; as on the other hand, souls 
might be familiar with prophecy, on whose heart that heavenly 
hope has scanty power, if it have dawned there at all. The 
apostle Peter was solicitous that the believers he addressed, 
besides heeding prophecy, should enjoy a brighter light and the 
hope that belongs to it. 

Thus, to say nothing of “burdens” on the various nations 
that assailed or oppressed Israel, it is striking to observe that 
the blessed result of prophecy is, in every case where it is 
predicted, associated not with the energy of divine grace as 
now in the gospel, but with the unmistakable execution of 
God’s judgments at the close of the age. Who does not hail 
with joy the assurance that the earth shall be full of the know- 
ledge of Jehovah, as the waters cover the sea” (Isaiah xi. 9). 
It is certain, however, that the prophet declares that the Lord 
shall smite the earth with the rod of His mouth and with the 


46 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


breath of His lips (cf. Isaiah xxx. 27, 33) slay the wicked (xi. 4), 
as introducing this blessedness here below. The apostle cites 
this in 2 Thessalonians ii. 8, and binds it up with the mani- 
festation of the Lord Jesus. Moses had referred to the same 
thing in Numbers xiv. 21. Judgment there too, not preaching 
the gospel, is connected with filling all the earth with the glory 
of Jehovah. Habakkuk ii. 12-14 is yet more explicit; for after 
pronouncing woe on violence and iniquity, the prophet asks if 
it is not of Jehovah, that the peoples labour for the fire, and 
the nations weary themselves for vanity. “ For the earth shall 
be filled with the knowledge of the glory af Jehovah, as the 
waters cover the sea.” What the peoples toil at is but for the 
fire to consume; their weariness for vanity (cf. Jer. li. 58) 
the judgments of the Lord will demonstrate, but will do more 
and better. They will cause the earth to be filled with the 
knowledge of His glory. Then only will the inhabitants of 
the world learn righteousness, whatever be the vain hopes of 
Gentile conceit. Not the gospel in man’s mouth, but judgment 
in the Lord’s hand, will inaugurate the earth’s deliverance, 
blessing, and glory (compare Daniel ii. 35, 44, 45; vii. 11-14). 
The gospel is now calling and forming souls, apart from the 
world, for heaven. 


§ 5. Language of Prophecy. 

As much is often essayed to mystify prophecy on the score 
of its language, it may be well here to notice the subject a 
little. 

The fact is that all language is more or less figurative, more 
especially where it is poetic or impassioned. History, if it be 
not a dead chronicle, abounds with figures; but none the less 
dves it aim, or at least profess, to give nothing but the truth. 
Simple language is distinguished from figurative, though both 
styles are freely used and understood readily in all compositions, 
as well as in oral address and ordinary conversation. Carnal and 
spiritual are the true correlatives, as also literal and mystical, 
but these respectively apply to the sense of what is said or 
written, rather than to the diction. Allegory, parable (or 
its abbreviation in proverb), and symbol, again, are varieties of 


INTRODUCTION. 47 


form in which truth may be conveyed, but they ought not to 
be confounded with figurative language. A symbol may be a 
material object, actually existing, and applied morally; or it 
may be made up by combining in one a variety of existing 
objects, so as to give God’s moral view of what is thus revealed, 
as the four beasts or Gentile imperial powers of Daniel vii, 
the fourth of which re-appears in Revelation xi—-xix. But 
symbolic language is exceptional, and seems limited to prophecy 
during the times of the Gentiles. It is in no way characteristic 
of prophecy in general. In every case what was conveyed 
was real, not artificial: when accomplished, it is history from 
the divine side. 

It must never be forgotten, however, that, whatever the form 
or figure employed, the subject-matter referred to in prophecy 
is not ideal but real, any more than in the rest of scripture. 
It may be a fact or a place, a person or a people, a time or a 
state of things. Simple language may be used alone, or with 
figures to impart vividness, as in all speech; or symbol may be 
the method, as sometimes in Ezekiel and Zechariah, and yet 
more in Daniel and the Revelation; but what is conveyed is a 
reality, and not a figure. Poetical elevation is not uncommon, 
any more than figurative representation; and only in an 
exceptional way, as in Daniel xi, have we the revelation of 
events successive in relation to each other, though with gaps 
first and last, for which room is carefully made in the terms 
of the prophecy itself, before the grand terminus of all, the 
conflict of the close, in which figures for the first time “the 
king” in “ the land,” as distinct from him of the north and him of 
the south. “The King” it is as idle to confound with Antiochus 
Epiphanes as with the Pope or Buonaparte. It is the final 
catastrophe, ending where all the visions of Daniel, and we 
may say generally of the prophets, do end, in the coming 
Kingdom of the Messiah. As they have one divine authority, 
so have they one glorious consummation, when He takes His 
great power and reigns. Thus, as all prophecy looks to that end, 
none is of private or isolated interpretation. It is the Spirit 
glorifying Christ, when He shows the things that are to come. 

The Revelation, as it is the latest, so it is by far the most 


48 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


elaborate, of all prophetic books, consisting throughout of 
visions, in which symbolic cbjects fill a larger place than 
anywhere else in scripture. Still it is to be observed that the 
prophet conveys literally what he saw in the plainest 
language. The objects and acts in the scenes which he in the 
Spirit saw, and the words announced to his ears, are given with 
precision. The symbols we have to study and comprehend in the 
light of general usage and of the particular context; for sym- 
bolic forms, though less plant than the ordinary expressions of 
thought, are, like the rest, modified by their associations; and 
the Holy Spirit alone can guide rightly in this and in all else 
of scripture; as common sense does in the affairs and inter- 
course of natural life. Save in the symbolism which forms a 
comparatively small part of prophecy, its language differs only 
in degree from that of scripture generally, and must be inter- 
preted on exactly the same principle. Indeed even the 
symbolic portion finds its counterpart in the types not only 
of the Pentateuch, but of scriptural history as a whole. The 
form may vary according to divine wisdom, but one mind and 
purpose will be found to pervade all. Every scripture is 
inspired of God; and as Christ is the image of the invisible 
God, and He alone declared the Father, so is He the object of 
all revelation, and others only appear as related to Him. 

The late Dr. P. Fairbairn (Prophecy, 86), who sought to 
allegorise the prophetic word, contends that, if Gen. ili. 15 is 
to be read literally, “it speaks merely of the injuries to be 
received from serpents on the one side, and of the killing of 
serpents on the other: and any member of Eve’s future family, 
who might have the fortune to kill a serpent, should, by so 
doing, verify the prophecy.” But no spiritual mind could 
tolerate such an interpretation, no fair mind allow the relevancy 
of the argument. Jehovah Elohim addressed the tempter, and 
winds up His sentence by the words (so pitiably travestied for 
controversial purposes) which, understood in simple faith, have 
comforted believers from that day to this. It is burlesque, not 
argument, and utterly vain to maintain that Israel means the 
church, or that Jerusalem means the New J erusalem, which is 
the desired conclusion. Nor is there the slightest force in ex- 


INTRODUCTION. 49 


plaining away the bearing of Isaiah xl. 3, which was accomplished 
in the Baptist’s ministry preparing the way of Jehovah; as 
Isaiah lili. was in Messiah’s humiliation and atonement. But all 
that these scriptures say is not yet fulfilled, and cannot be till 
His second advent in power and glory, which will make good 
every word which the allegorical school dissipate into thin air. 
The rejection of the herald and of his Lord has suspended very 
important parts of both predictions as of prophecy in general, 
which await “that day,” when Jerusalem’s heart shall hear 
what is spoken, and rejoice that her warfare is accomplished 
and her iniquity is pardoned: then the glory of Jehovah shall 
be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. Even the first 
prophecy, like the great mass, awaits that day for its full effect 
in the execution of judgment on the Serpent. For prophecy, 
as the rule, lets us see the glorious end of God when Christ 
takes His great power and reigns. We may and ought to see 
what faith alone can see now; but the future King of glory 
will be the public display to every eye. 

Those whose theory it is that all prophecy is ideal, have to 
face the fact that a vast deal given out by the prophets has been 
fulfilled literally. Ignorant self-will denies in vain what is 
patent. Its accomplishment is plain in Nineveh and Babylon, in 
Tyre and Sidon, in Edom and Egypt, as well as in the Medo- 
Persian and the Macedonian powers, to say nothing of Rome ; 
above all, in Israel before the Assyrian and Chaldean captivities, 
and in the subsequent partial return of the Jews to be dis- 
persed again, as they were by the Romans, still more terribly 
after the Cross and the rejected gospel. In the predictions 
simple language, figures, and symbols were employed as God 
saw fit; but the cities, the nations, and the lands were known 
historically, as the changes were punctually accomplished ; and 
many an unbeliever has been arrested by this evidence, to learn , 
still better and deeper things from God’s word, even Christ 
and His redemption. 

Take an example of symbol in Ezekiel xvii. The parable is 
as determinate as if the prediction had been couched in literal 
terms. The scripture itself interprets the first great eagle as 
the king of Babylon, the second as Pharaoh. By the breaking 

D 


CAMPUS CRUSADE FOR CHRIST LIBRARY 


50 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


off the topmost twig of the cedar of Lebanon, and placing it 
in a city of traffic, was meant the king of Babylon putting 
down Jehoiachin, and carrying him captive to Babylon. By the 
taking of the seed of the land to become a vine of low stature, 
we are to understand his setting Zedekiah (for so Mattaniah 
was new named by the conqueror) to be his vassal king in the 
land. The king of Egypt, though typified by a great eagle 
with great wings and much plumage, is not said to be of long 
pinions, nor with feathers of various colours like the king 
of Babylon. Yet Zedekiah breaks his oath, and turns for aid to 
Egypt against Babylon, to the destruction of his kingdom by 
Jehovah’s decree. The manner of conveyance differs from that 
of history; but the parties in view, and the results of the 
action, are no less certain, fixed, and exclusive. If there are 
general lessons in divine prophecy, so there are in inspired 
history. Nebuchadnezzar and Pharaoh-Hophra (the Apries of 
the Greeks, and perhaps Psamatik III. of the Egyptian 
monuments) are here intended, and none else. So it is with 
the two deposed Jewish kings. 

But it has been contended with no small assurance that 
Ezekiel, referring to Isaiah i, connects it with circumstances 
which oblige us to understand the elevation of the sacred 
mount spiritually, and as verified in what has already been, and 
not in what is to be. The reference is dim to moderate eyes, 
without disputing that the elevation of Moriah is of a moral 
kind. But the evidence is certain that the glorious promise is 
future in both chapters. In the tender young twig from the 
highest branch of the lofty cedar is undoubtedly meant the 
Son of David, and not Zerubbabel. Yet it is not the first 
advent, but the second, which is in the perspective of the 
prophecy. It is the Kingdom, and in no way the church. 
Never will the “little stone” expand into the great mountain 
that fills all the earth till the blow is struck on the toes of the 
image of the Gentile powers, and breaks them all into pieces, like 
chaff to be swept away by the wind. The lowly condition 
of Messiah is no doubt pointed out here, but yet more the 
power and glory of His Kingdom, when He is set, as He will be 
set, on His holy hill of Zion, The church, on the contrary, is 


INTRODUCTION. 5) 


unfaithful to her calling, if she be not a despised pilgrim 
and stranger here below, as He was, till she joins her coming 
Bridegroom in the air, before she appears with Him, when 
He appears to fulfil His glory over all the earth, as He will 
in that day. Symbolic language therefore is no more vague 
than any other. 

Again, the attempt to turn the prophetic style and diction 
into an engine for setting one prophecy in opposition to another 
is unworthy of a Christian. Isaiah lvi. 7, 8, Ix., xvi. 21-23, 
are in no conflict with Isaiah lvi. 3-5, lxv. 17, Ixvi. 1-3; any 
more than Jeremiah ii 16 with xxx. 18-22, xxxi. 31, 
xxxiii, 15-22. Such objections spring from ignorance; for 
evidently the statements arrayed, one against another, are 
quite consistent, and teach distinct truths. So Ezekiel’s last 
vision, where the temple is so important on earth, in no 
way contradicts John’s last vision of the New Jerusalem 
on high, wherein is no temple. These cavils are a fair sample 
of the follies of spiritualising, which confounds heaven with 
earth, and sets prophet against prophet, and even the same 
inspired men against themselves. It is too sad to find 
such teaching in a believer, set forth and accepted with no 
small blowing of trumpets, though worthy only of an infidel. 
But it may be for that very reason the more instructive a 
warning against false principles of interpretation. Nor is it 
prophecy only that is misunderstood. The error substitutes 
Jewish for Christian relationship to our Lord, destroys that 
bridal separateness which is enjoined on the church (2 Cor. 
xi. 2, ete.), and consecrates desires and ways of undisguised 
worldliness to the dishonour of God and His word about us. 

Granted that prophecy in each case exceeds what history can 
tell. This is an essential constituent of its character, It is a 
vast system of divine prediction, the centre of which circle is 
Christ, and Christ assuming by God’s gift the government 
of the world with Israel nearest to Him at the end of this 
age. If the prophecies, even about races supposed to have 
vanished, were exhausted, every one might be made of its 
own interpretation. But it is not so. They look onward to 
“that day.” Their partial accomplishment is the pledge 

D2 


52 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


of all that remains to be fulfilled. Faith, accepting the part, 
assuredly awaits the whole. 

Unbelief, over-looking the divine mind, works evilly in two 
forms. Some are too instructed to deny the tallying of facts 
with the words of the prophets. Starting with the assumption 
that prediction is impossible, they essay to prove that the 
alleged predictions must have been written after the event. 
Hence the importance of knowing when the prophet wrote ; 
for, this once clear, their inspiration by God flows from the 
correspondence of word and fact, which is confessed. There is 
another class however, who, if they could, would pare down 

or eliminate all exactitude, and reduce the word of prophecy 
as much as possible to general principles and ideal forms, 
without definite line or historical issue. Vagueness of inter- 
pretation is so complete that even in the Apocalypse distinct 
prediction is nowhere, unless there remain enough Protest- 
antism to discern Romanism in Babylon. 

It is vain to reason from the curse on “the Serpent,” or the 
raising up of “David” in the future (Ezekiel xxxiv.), against 
a strict and full accomplishment of prophecy. All who are 
worthy of consideration agree that the context demands the 
great enemy in the one case, and the great King of Israel in 
the other; all repudiate a lowering literality, with which 
the surrounding words are incompatible. There is a genuine 
as well as a spurious literalism, with figures interspersed, as in 
Isaiah 11. or xl, which none but adversaries urge in their efforts 
after allegory. As vain is it to argue the discrepancy of Isaiah 
in his later chapters, which await the days of the world-kingdom 
of our Lord and of His Christ; as do the passages cited from 
Jeremiah, and yet more obviously Ezekiel. That Revelation xxi. 
is symbolical is true, as it treats of a heavenly object; whereas 
all the others speak of Israel and the Gentiles on the earth in 
plain terms, with figures here and there. Scripture is per- 
fectly consistent. The fault is in the confusion of its mis- 
interpreters. Israel and Judah mean expressly the two houses 
or families of Jacob’s posterity, and none other; Zion, and the 
mountain of Jehovah’s house, mean the seats of the throne and 
the temple respectively in the land, and the Gentiles are 


INTRODUCTION. 53 


the nations of the earth, distinct from Israel here below, 
and from the church and risen saints generally on high. 
The attempt to spiritualise these objects is a mere dream, 
which no idealist among Christians at least has ventured to act 
on consistently. For the theory is that all these objects dis- 
tinguished in prophecy are the Christian church now, or in 
the future, under the gospel. What? Israel, Judah, Jerusalem, 
and the New Jerusalem, Zion, Moriah, and the blessed 
Gentiles too! Can any scheme to interpret be more despairing 
or grotesque? It is really the aim of the enemy to discredit 
and destroy the true force of the prophecy, and thus of God’s 
word altogether. The result is little but cloudland, as it would 
be wholly, if it were applied logically throughout. 

If it had been drawn from an induction of scripture that 
prophecy is not mere history anticipated, but admits of a per- 
spective, and that an accomplishment may be true and not 
complete, that only the manifested Kingdom of our Lord in a 
day yet to come will exhaust it in its opening, its establish- 
ment, and its results, no sober Christian could rightly deny 
this. But the principle is false; for as the rule, prophecy sets 
forth divine intervention, not in grace, as in the gospel, but in 
judgment and power, as in the world-kingdom of our Lord and 
His Christ. There are common grounds of mercy and excep- 
tional hints, which were fulfilled in part, and justify the gospel 
meanwhile, as the New Testament shows. But prophecy 
cannot be fulfilled as a whole till Christ be glorified in Israel 
and their land, the centre of earth’s promised blessing, of which 
it speaks abundantly. Incredulity avails itself, not only of 
extravagant spiritualising on the part of erring Christians, but 
of fulfilment not yet complete, to deny what has been really 
accomplished. Let us search and see how that part was accom- 
plished, and thus learn what to expect for the future. That 
there were great moral principles, that there was a mani- 
festation of God’s ways and glory, is most true; but these are 
actual facts before all eyes. All this we shall find in the light 
of the New Testament; not less, but far more, we may surely 
expect for the day when every eye shall see Him, and they also 
which pierced Him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail 


54 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


because of Him, whatever the peace, joy, and blessing, and 
glory that follow. 

But it is pleaded by the allegorists of the Old Testament, 
that the apostle Paul in particular sanctions their principle of 
interpretation; and they cite in proof Rom. ii. 28, 29; Gal. iv. 
26, vi. 16; and Heb. xii. 22. These scriptures, however, do 
not touch the question, and are therefore invalid for their 
purpose. Let us review them in their order. 

In the first, the apostle is expressly arguing with the Jew 
from ver. 17, and charging home his guilt notwithstanding his 
privileges; as he had dealt with the Gentile in the latter half 
of chap. i, and in the first half of chap. ii. with the speculative 
moralist, who might pique himself on being no longer an 
idolater. In order to afford any show of reason, the text in 
question should have been an address to Gentiles treating them 
now as Jews; whereas it is to the Jew strictly and exclusively, 
to show that his privileges can in no way screen him if un- 
godly, and that he only is an accepted Jew who is so inwardly. 
There is not a thought accordingly of calling believing Gentiles, 
Jews. 

Nor is there any satisfactory ground in Gal, iv. 26; and this 
is the more in point because the apostle does say that 
Abraham’s two sons, and their mothers, contain an allegory ; 
not the language of the prophets, but the persons and facts in 
Genesis. “Now this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and 
answereth to the Jerusalem that now is; for she is in bondage 
with her children. But the Jerusalem that is above is free, 
which is our mother,” the critical text rejecting the word “all.” 
The truth is that this scripture disproves the hypothesis, 
instead of giving the least warrant to construe Jerusalem of 
the church. Our mother, says the apostle, is “the Jerusalem 
that is above.” The note to p. 81 has shown “the Israel of 
God” to mean those Israelites who now believe the gospel, and 
so to give no licence to call Christians, Israel, or to read Israel 
in the Old Testament into Christians. The general body of 
believers are distinguished from this special class, “the Israel 
of God,” in the verse itself. 

In the last, or Heb. xii, 22, the apostle contrasts with Sinai 


INTRODUCTION. 55 


(the mountain of the nation’s responsibility under law, with its 
associations of judicial terror and gloom) Mount Zion to which 
the Christians had come, no less conspicuous as the seat of 
royal grace, which was won for the true king of God’s choice 
in the past, after man’s choice had fallen by Philistine hands 
instead of working deliverance; Jehovah’s resting place for 
ever, for there He will surely set His King, upon His holy hill 
of Zion. But the epistle proceeds in the next clause to 
distinguish it from the city of the living God, heavenly 
Jerusalem, as well as from myriads of angels, a general 
assembly, and from the church of firstborn ones, with which 
last the hypothesis identifies Zion. Any intelligent Christian 
has only to weigh the passage in order to be satisfied that 
those addressed are here said to have come (of course by faith) 
to the entire circle of what is to be blessed in the coming day, 
rising up from Zion to God, Judge of all, and thence coming 
again to the blood-sprinkling, that speaketh better than Abel 
for the earth, when curse shall yield to peace and glory. No 
disproof of the traditionary confusion can be conceived more 
complete.or decided. 

There is another consideration which must strike every 
unbiassed mind. The restoration of Israel is so plainly inti- 
mated in the very scriptures which declare their ruin and 
scattering, that some of the allegorising school admit cordially, 
not their conversion only, but their return nationally, though 
truly renewed, and for such peace and glory in their land as 
they never had of old. Now this is to give up their false 
principle. For were it to stand logically, it is hard to conceive 
how on that principle God could predict His gracious purpose 
of restoring, in the latter day, Israel for blessing in their land 
under the Messiah and the new covenant. Taken in their plain 
and uniform meaning, the prophets are full of that blessed 
expectation for Israel in divine mercy, but not without hints 
here and there of grace toward the Gentile, sometimes during 
their eclipse, as in Isaiah Ixv. 1, 2, and Hosea i. 10. Yet these 
texts afford no pretence for the identification, but the contrary. 

It is full of interest to observe the spiritual skill which was 
given to the apostles Paul and Peter in quoting from Hosea. 


56 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


The former, in writing to the saints in Rome—chiefly Gentiles 
—applies, not only ch. ii. 23, which predicts the future recall 
of Israel, but also ch. i. 10, which reveals the actual call of 
Gentiles, not to be His people as Israel shall be by-and-by, but 
to have the blessed title of Christians now, “Sons of the living 
God.” Mark the singularity of the phrase “in the place where 
it was said unto them Lo-ammi, it shall be said unto them, 
‘sons, ” &e. It was among the nations while the Jews are not 
recognised as such. The latter, in writing to the Christian 
Jews scattered in Asia Minor, applies only ch. 1. 23. The mass 
of their unbelieving brethren forfeits any such privilege now, 
however surely to be made good to those that repent at the 
last, as God declares it will when the prophets are to be fully 
accomplished. Those who now believe anticipate that blessing 
(with much more peculiar to Christianity), “who were once not 
a people, but now God’s people; who were not objects of mercy, 
but now obtained mercy.” Only in the verses following it is 
carefully shown that, instead of being sown in the earth, never 
more to be rooted up, but to flourish for ever in the bright 
kingdom of Messiah here below, they are called to follow 
Him in present rejection and reproach and long-suffering, “as 
pilgrims and strangers” till His appearing in glory. This is 
the present calling of the Christian. 


§ 6. Some Old Testament prophecies referred to in the 
New Testament. 


In Matthew i. 23 we have Isaiah vii. 14 cited, and applied to 
the birth of the Messiah. The facts stated prove its literal fulfil- 
ment. Now there are symbols and figures, as well as simple 
language, in Isaiah vii-ix. 7; but this does not hinder the Holy 
Spirit stamping the prophecy of the Incarnation, not as an “idea” 
or general principle, but as an objective fact. There were other 
children for signs and for wonders in Israel—Shear-jashub 
already born, and Maher-shalal-hash-baz about to be, sons of 
the prophet; but they are as distinct from the Virgin’s Son 
Immanuel, as Hezekiah, already a dozen years old at least, and 
born before Ahaz came to the throne. Neither he, nor. Isaiah’s 
children, were born of the Virgin ; nor could even Hezekiah, 


INTRODUCTION. 57 


still less a future unknown son of Ahaz, call it his land, as 
Immanuel can, whose name shall be called Wonderful, 
Counsellor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace, 
the Destroyer of the last Assyrian, and the Deliverer and King 
on David’s throne for ever. Alas! there is the secret root of 
unbelief. He is the Great Unknown, not the writer of chaps. 
xl.-lxvi., though Isaiah’s was indeed the pen that indited them, 
but Isaiah’s theme, the Virgin’s Son, in the striking parenthesis 
of his introductory chapters. Had men but seen as God 
reveals Him at the beginning, they had not doubted the 
voice of God through Isaiah at the end. 

Even the chief priests and scribes (Matthew ii. 4-6) could 
answer unhesitatingly as to the place where Messiah should be 
born. It was none other than Bethlehem of Judea according 
to Micah v. 2. The Holy Spirit in no way discountenances, 
but accepts the light they saw from the lamp of prophecy. 
Luke ii. adds the providential ordering by which Joseph went 
from the north of the land to this particular spot in the south. 
God was taking care, we may boldly say, that the word should 
be fulfilled to the letter. And the true-hearted believer may 
see how full of instruction is the context; for the words 
immediately preceding declare that the Judge of Israel should 
be smitten upon the cheek. Then comes in the parenthetical 
verse 2, which reveals not only His birth as David’s Son, but 
an everlasting kinship (for indeed He is Immanuel, God with 
us). And because of the Jews thus contemning their Ruler in 
Israel, they are themselves given up (says verse 3) till she 
which travaileth hath brought forth—till the birth of the 
divine purpose for the restitution of all things. “Then the 
remnant of his brethren shall return unto the children of 
Israel,” or, in the figure of the apostle, the natural branches 
be grafted into their own olive tree. Then will the glorious 
hopes that follow be punctually fulfilled. Neither Satan nor 
the Lord will have any difficulty in finding the Assyrian who, 
in that day, is to perish in the land. ‘There the Assyrian 
stands on the page of prophecy, as he will on the stage of the 
future to perish for ever. So false is it that neither the 
restoration itself of Israel, nor the events growing out of it, 


58 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


can be understood according to the letter. So true is it that 
those who reason thus maintain that, in this sense, considerable 
portions of the prophetic scriptures can have no proper fulfil- 
ment. “And why, then,” they boldly ask, “should any be 
supposed to have?” It is systematic dishonour of God’s mind 
through ignorance of the scriptures and of His power. 

The next quotation (from Hosea xi. 1) is full of interest. 
The prophet was inspired to blend, as it were, Israel of old 
and Christ called out of Egypt. He, before God, was the 
true Israel, and their history recommenced in that blessed 
Person for Whose sake God had led out the ancient people 
at their beginning. Theirs is a sad tale of self-will, rebellion, 
idolatry, yet to be repented and forgiven, when the generation 
to come shall say, Blessed be He that cometh in the name of 
Jehovah. The observant reader may see a similar transfer and 
identification in Isaiah xlix. This is not merely literal, but 
spiritual in the true sense, not the vague spiritualising which 
fritters all away, forgets the glory and relationship of Christ, 
blots out Israel as such from God’s mercy in the future, and 
lowers the church from heaven to earth. 

Matthew ii. 17 exhibits a difference in the form of citing: 
“Then was fulfilled” Jer. xxxi. 15. What can more strik- 
ingly testify how Christ is ever before the Holy Spirit, than 
the application here by our inspired evangelist? A heathen, 
or certainly a Jew, might admire the beauty, and boldness, and 
elevation of the impersonation; who but God would have 
thought now of the mourning prophet’s words, which brought 
His Son before Him in the Edomite’s slaughter of the babes of 
Bethlehem? Matthew does not say that it was the object of 
the prophecy, as in other cases. If the evil one prompted the 
savage jealousy of Herod, God felt for Rachel’s children 
afresh when shielding the Messiah, who will yet reward her 
work, give hope for her latter end, and bring the children 
again to their own border. 

The last verse of chap. ii. gives another variety, that differs 
not only in the form, but in the general reference: so that (Szwe, 
not wa) it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets. 
It was their scope. He was to be despised of men. So His 


4 


INTRODUCTION. 59 


residence accorded. “Can any good come out of Nazareth?” 
There Joseph took Mary and the Heir of all the promises of 
God. Such was the scope of the prophets. 

“Tsaiah the prophet” is said, in Matthew i, to have 
predicted John as “ the voice of one crying in the wilderness” 
(Isaiah xl. 3). This would be decisive if higher criticism 
consisted with the fear of God—if it trembled at His word. 
How came men to set themselves above apostolic authority ? 
Because they must otherwise, accepting prophecy, give up 
their scepticism and bow to God’s revelation. If Isaiah wrote 
this wondrous moral pleading to the end, he clearly predicts 
Cyrus by name and character, by mission and work, and 
graphically foretells Babylon’s fall, and the return to Jerusalem, 
nor this only, but the rejection of the Messiah, and His 
atoning death, by the faith of whom the people, no longer 
impenitent, become God’s servants through Jehovah’s Righteous 
Servant, who appears at length for their final deliverance and 
everlasting joy, and the destruction of enemies within and 
without. As to the bearing of the words quoted by the 
Baptist, they must be childish indeed who fail to see that 
they describe the service of John as Messiah's herald, a moral 
work set out in material figures, as is common in the New 
Testament. Never have I heard a whisper of future “engineer- 
ing” intended, save by believers in human progress, and in a 
millennium brought about by man’s instrumentality rather 
than by Christ’s advent. But there may be souls no less 
simple and rash on the other side. 

“Tsaiah the prophet” is cited again (ix. 1, 2) in Matthew 
iv. 14-16, and with marked propriety. Just so much of the 
prophecy is used as bears on the first advent of Christ, the 
great light that shone on her that was distressed, “the way 
of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,” &c. The 
figurative language of the former quotation in no way forbade 
its literal accomplishment in John the Baptist, without a vague 
series of heralds to bring in the Lord. So equally bold figures 
here only render vivid testimony to that True Light which 
Christ was, not to His forerunner who bore Him witness. 
They are both definite and accomplished prophecies. Only 


60 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF TSATAH. 


the very next words of Isaiah ix. open the unfulfilled coming 
glory of Messiah here below. “Thou hast multiplied the 
nation, thou hast increased their joy. They joy before thee 
according to the joy in harvest, as men rejoice when they 
divide the spoil”: words alien from gospel blessing and from 
heavenly glory, but perfectly expressive of the world-kingdom 
of, our Lord at the end of the age. Hence the flash which 
shines next, lighting up the judgment which brings it in. 
“For the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, 
the rod of his oppressor, thou hast broken, as in the day 
of Midian. For all the armour of the armed man in the 
tumult, and the garments rolled in blood shall even be for 
burning, for fuel of fire. For unto us a child is born,” &c. 
(R.V.) This ought surely to be unmistakable. It is the 
Second Advent, not the first. In the perspective of the 
prophet the one is followed by the other. Christ’s death 
separated them; the New Testament, and its special work 
and heavenly relationships with the exalted Head of the 
body, come between. But the one is as literal and distinct 
as the other, though figures cluster round both to enlighten 
faith, not to wrap in mist and cloud as men wish. 

The next quotation of prophecy is from “Isaiah the 
prophet” (li. 4): “Himself took our infirmities and bare our 
diseases ” (Matt. viii. 17). The evangelist applies it to Messiah’s 
removal of disease. Atoning work is distinguished, and even 
contrasted, with the latter half of verse 4, in verses 5, 6, 8 (last 
clause), 10, 11, 12, though there is more than atonement. 
And so the New Testament cites these, not verse 4, for 
atonement, Thus all is precise and definite in the prophecy, 
as well as in apostolic citation. It is scientific theology 
which produces darkness, of which it is equally unconscious 
and vain, with which it would, if it could, envelop the divine 
word. It really deceives itself. The prophecy is luminous 
throughout, opening and closing with Messiah’s exaltation in 
His kingdom to come; but almost all between is the inimitable 
portrait of His humiliation and death in man’s rejection and 
God’s atonement. It is not surprising that those who love to 
regard the prophets as dwelling in their own fog are shy of a 


INTRODUCTION. 61 


chapter which is not more sharply defined than it is momentous 
and humbling. Nor is it that figures are lacking, but that 
simple language pervades it from first to last. Symbol is 
wholly absent, and all excuse for allegorising; and the 
rather, as there is most needed yet spiritual food already 
prepared of God for the spiritual. 

The Lord, in Matthew xi. 10, warrants our personal 
application of Malachi iii. 1 to the Baptist, stopping short 
of the verses that follow, which await His coming again. 
And though Luke i. 17 clearly refers to Malachi iv. 5, 6, 
it is even there only applied morally, or to faith, not 
historically; as our Lord Himself puts the case in Matthew 
xi. 14, and Mark ix. 13: “And if ye are willing to receive 
it, this is Elijah which is to come.” Nothing is farther from 
His mind than to set aside a future action of Ehjah (compare 
Mark ix. 12, John i. 21) before the great and terrible day of 
Jehovah come, a description in no way suiting His first 
advent in grace, even though moral judgment accompany 
that grace. 

The only other quotation that need be noticed here is in 
Matthew xii. 17-21, from Isaiah xlii. 1-4. The folly of a 
great unknown prophet is cut off here also by anticipation. 
“Tsaiah the prophet” spoke it: a distinct prediction applicable 
at that time to the Messiah’s presence in lowly meekness, and 
with tender care for the crushed or the dim, waiting for 
ultimate triumph. Never can it apply again as then, though 
it looks to the end from that beginning. The poor of the 
flock would, and did, appreciate His unpretending grace, 
whatever the disappointment of His brethren after the flesh, 
and however the wise and prudent find excuse for unbelief and 
a plea for stumbling. But divine wisdom is justified by all her 
children. 

Sioa General Result. 

Summarily then it may be said that the New Testament 
affords proof, ample and clear, that the prophecies of the 
Old Testament are so much the more strikingly accom- 
plished, because they are selected from all parts—Law, 
Psalms, and Prophets—written by many hands, scattered 


62 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


over many centuries, yet all meeting as in a common centre 
in Christ. His lineage in general and in particular, culminating 
in His unique birth, with its time and place; His despised 
position, His meek and lowly life, the gracious character 
of His ministry, and His miracles distinct from all others 
before Him; His disciples with the law sealed among them, 
while Jehovah hides His face from the house of Jacob, yet 
the mass not neglected, but instructed in righteousness by 
His knowledge. And what can surpass the minute care 
with which the Holy Spirit treasures up incidents of no 
value in the eyes of small or great who despise? but how 
momentous and precious for such as love Him, even where 
His infinite work of dying in atonement for our sins might 
seem calculated to overshadow all else! If God embalmed 
all in prophecy, His children do not explain away the literal 
fulfilment of His riding into Jerusalem, the predicted King 
on an ass, and a colt, the foal of an ass, or the Hosannas of 
the multitude, the cleansing of the temple, the children’s 
cry in the temple; or, again, His sale by Judas, or the 
traitor’s dreadful death and end, or the purchase of the 
field of blood, any more than the buffeting and scourging 
and spitting that befell Himself, or the piercing of His 
hands and feet, the insults and scorn of His enemies, the 
vinegar and gall, the parting of His garments, and the lots 
cast for His vesture. 

It is not only that every sacrifice before and since the law 
pointed to His death; but Isaiah liii. is the matchless clue, 
the prophetic comment, and so applied by the apostles. Even the 
manner of His death was predicted in His singular exemption 
from a broken bone, and the peculiarity of a pierced side, both 
in contrast with the two crucified along with Him. His burial, 
so different from His life, was not omitted ; and His resurrec- 
tion as the path to heaven, and to the right hand of God’s 
throne, all are as positively foretold as they were punctually 
fulfilled. Assuredly we have the fulfilment of these scenes so 
expressly set out in scripture, that God’s children need not 
hesitate who do, or who do not, teach according to God— 
those who regard the words as hyperbole and_ essentially 


INTRODUCTION. 63 


unhistorical, or those who take them all in the simplicity 
and fulness and precision of their meaning, without pre- 
suming to think that our faith has exhausted all that God 
wrote in the scriptures. 

How wrong, then, for any man to say that the 
passage about “the Virgin conceiving,” etc, has a manifest 
historical meaning as applied to Isaiah’s wife! though in 
unexaggerated strictness to our Lord only. What can one 
think of the judgment, that Isaiah liii. seems to refer to events 
more closely connected with the return of the Jews from 
captivity! Everyone at all versed in Isaiah’s prophecy must 
know that this has not the least justification in the contents, 
and supposes ignorance of the very structure, of the book. 
Chapter xlix. begins the prophetic dealing, not with idols 
judged in Babylon, and the deliverance wrought by Cyrus 
(for this closes at the end of chapter xlviii.), but with the 
deeper question of the more remote future, the rejection 
of Messiah and His atoning death and the glorious consequences 
for Israel, the nations, and kings, to which only Isaiah lit. 
refers, and not in the remotest way to the Jews’ return 
from the captivity. This is here said in Christian plainness 
of speech for the truth’s sake, and in no disparagement, but 
with all respect and love. The sentiments show how deadly 
is unbelief, even as to prophecy, and in a most estimable man. 

Another remark may close this section. Christ has been 
made an exception, and prophecy allowed in His case to be 
not hyperbolical, though assumed to be everywhere else. 
We have just seen how grudgingly its application even to 
Him is allowed. But where is the warrant for considering 
prophecy in His case valid; in every other, precarious and 
exaggerated? Scripture draws no such line; and man’s 
unauthorised rule to this effect is as capricious, as absurd 
and irreverent. It is forgotten in effect, as always, that 
every scripture is inspired of God, and that the prophetic 
word is His, no less than the Law or the Psalms, the Gospels 
or the Epistles. Even in human testimony, if we could not 
receive the witness of men about the least things, how trust 
it about the highest? Truthfulness we want, and have, nor 


64 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


this only, but divine character and purpose everywhere. If 
we believe it all to be God’s word, such questions are decided. 
Impossible that God could lie anywhere, or as to anything. 
If we can trust Him when promising life eternal in His Son, 
assuredly no less if He speaks of Edom or Egypt, of Jerusalem 
or Judah. 

The current interpretations of Christendom are here alto- 
gether at fault; and the consequence is the scanty interest 
in the prophets, of which people are conscious that they 
understand little and enjoy less. Men of learning owe 
much directly, and more indirectly, to Origen and Eusebius 
among the Greeks, and to Jerome and Augustine, for that 
perverse ingenuity which has darkened this large depart- 
ment of holy scripture. The earlier Christian writers, such 
as Justin Martyr and Irenaeus with Lactantius, were at 
least simpler, and avoided that allegorising to which those 
already named gave so large an impulse. But they were 
utterly wrong in confounding the Christian hope with the 
expectations of Israel. By this error was provoked the vague 
reaction which followed, in which Jerusalem or Zion, Judah 
or Israel, were regarded as no longer applicable as of old, but 
to be henceforth realised exclusively in the church. Thus 
by a different route the same evil result ensued: on the one 
hand, denying the faithfulness of God to His promises, and 
hence casting off Israel from that merey which awaits the people 
in the day that is rapidly approaching; and on the other, 
levelling down the church to the plane of Israel, in ignorance 
of her proper and heavenly relationship to Christ as His body 
and bride. 

Error, as it injures and darkens the good, lends ready and 
effective aid to the evil and corrupt. Hence the Romish harlot 
greedily adopted and perpetuated a system of interpretation 
exactly suited to earthly aggrandisement and intolerant pride 
and unrelenting persecution of all that stood aloof from its 
unscriptural aims. The commentary of Cornelius 4 Lapide 
may be seen as by one of its ablest exponents. Take as 
an instance his observations on Isaiah Ix. 12-14, though 
any other of less renown might suffice. Rome's faith and 


INTRODUCTION. 65 


kingdom, he says, stand from Christ’s coming through 1600 
years, and will stand till His return at the end of the world. 
For it is needless to say that, like theologians generally, this 
learned man wholly confounded “the age” with the world, and 
did not know of “the age to come,” introduced by the unsparing 
judgment of Rome, as well as of the quick everywhere, long 
before the world passes away. He adds that the bending 
unto Zion of their sons that afflicted her, and the bowing 
down of all that despised her at the soles of her feet, is 
plainly fulfilled in the Roman Pontiff, who is the church’s 
head. What a contrast with Christ’s beatitudes for His own 
(Matthew v. 3-12)! and especially for His chief servants 
(Luke xxii. 24-30)! The vain Corinthians began what Popery 
consummated (compare 1 Corinthians iv. 8-13); but God is not 
mocked. “Ye have reigned without us,” said the blessed 
apostle, content in present suffering to await the coming and 
reign of Christ. 

Let us now hear Calvin, who is no less a representative man 
among the Reformed. He says (Calvin, 7’r. Series in loco) that 
Zion denotes here, as in other passages, captives and exiles; 
for however far they had been banished from their country, 
still they must have carried the temple in their hearts. Can 
anything be more vague and vapid? He adds that Paul 
justly concludes from Isaiah lix. 20 (the passage cited in 
Romans xi.), “that it is impossible that there shall not be 
some remnant that come to Christ.” This is quite a mis- 
conception ; for the apostle had already shown that this is 
true now, but contrasts with the remnant at present the 
day when “a nation” shall be brought in at once, and all 
Israel shall be saved. Calvin, like others, ignores this 
through his mistaken principle. So on Isaiah Ix. 10-12, 
though heartily denouncing the Papists for their torturing 
the passage to uphold the tyranny of the Pope, he only 
modifies the same untenable ground, and deduces the sub- 
mission of kings to the authority of God and of the church. 
He has not even a glimpse of Israel under Messiah’s glorious 
sceptre, but swamps it all, saying that Isaiah “ intends to 
speak of that obedience which kings and nobles and the 

E 


66 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


common people render to the church when they promote, 
as far as they are able, sound doctrine.” Vitringa, in his 
elaborate folios, sees in verse 15 the change brought to the 
Waldenses and the Bohemian brethren by the Reformation 
from affliction to an eternal excellency. The Papist and 
the Protestant are equally mistaken in principle: which of 
the two is the more abjectly poor, and distant from the mind 
of the Spirit, it may be hard to decide; but Rome is more 
consistently proud and oppressive. 

There is another popular variety during the last century, 
which is, if possible, more ruinous; for it appropriates the 
earthly glory that restored Israel is to have under the 
Messiah as the portion of the church universal when it 
advances more and more on its race after perfection here 
below. The hoped for conversion of Israel and of all nations, 
or at least their profession of the gospel, it claims to be the 
fulfilment of the prophecy. 

These absurdities disappear when we believe the word as the 
Spirit wrote it; and, while holding fast the hope of Christ for 
the heavens, we can all the better rejoice in the ancient people 
blessed under the new covenant in Immanuel’s land, and made 
a blessing to all nations of the earth: the grand, constant, and 
universal prospect, which is found in all the prophets. The 
special Christian relationship, our calling, inheritance, and 
hope, are unfolded only in the New Testament. It is “the 
mystery concerning Christ and concerning the church,” founded 
on redemption, and formed by the Spirit sent from heaven to 
baptise us into the one body of the ascended Head. The 
effect of ignorance on this score is as disastrous for practice. 
For Christians have slipped from their rejected lot and the 
fellowship of Christ's sufferings, as they await heavenly glory, 
and thus become earthly like Israel in desires and walk and 
worship. Whereas we are not of the world as He is not, 
and are not to think it strange if fiery trouble come for our 
trial, but, as we share in Christ’s sufferings, to rejoice that 
when His glory shall be revealed, we may rejoice also with 
exceeding joy. It is a settled thing for the believer that the 
present age is an evil one, instead of the vain hope of man to 


INTRODUCTION. 67 


make it a good age by education, science, moral suasion, or 
religious influence. The gospel, as God sends it, essays no 
such aim, but is the testimony of God to separate us from 
its evil in order to be with Christ on high. Him, therefore, 
we are continually to await, knowing that He will judge the 
habitable earth in that day, and thus bring in the new age of 
righteousness and peace. 

In Romans xi. the apostle lays down the true and only 
sound principle. It is the more remarkable because in the 
first half of the Epistle he treats of the gospel which effaces 
the distinction between Jew and Greek, alike guilty, alike jus- 
tified by faith in the indiscriminate grace of God. There is 
no distinction on the one hand; for all sinned and come short 
of the glory of God; as, on the other, there is no distinction 
between either, for the same Lord of all is rich toward all 
that call upon Him. The rejection and death of the Messiah 
left the Jews justly rejected, and gave the occasion for God 
to proclaim His grace to every creature under heaven, that 
all who believe in Christ should be saved. When this work 
of the gospel is done according to God’s purpose, He will take 
up that government of the world of which Israel has the fore- 
most place according to promise and prophecy, but on the 
ground of sovereign mercy in which He will also bless all the 
nations, and this by His Son returning in power and glory to 
reign in Zion, and possess the uttermost parts of the earth— 
indeed to be the Head of the universe in that day, as the 
New Testament clearly proves. 

For the apostle in that chapter furnishes the most conclu- 
sive evidence that God has not cut off His people, as it might 
have appeared from the freeness of the gospel. First, there 
is a remnant of Israel (vv. 1-6) at this present time also, of 
which the apostle himself was an instance, the remnant accord- 
ing to the election of grace. Of no other people is this true. 
Its attaching to Jews only is the witness that God has not 
absolutely cast them off. Next, though the Jews have as 
a people stumbled at the stumbling-stone of Messiah’s humilia- 
tion, it is not in order that they might fall, but by their 
trespass, salvation is to the Gentiles (or nations) to provoke 


68 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


Israel to jealousy, and not therefore to cast them off. Again, 
the figure of the olive-tree teaches the same lesson. For theirs 
is that line of promise and testimony; and the Gentile, only a 
wild olive, was but grafted in, on the breaking off some of the 
branches; and he is called not to be high minded but fear, lest, 
failing to abide in God’s goodness, he be also cut off (vv. 7-12). 
As it is certain that the Gentile has not so abode, but 
dishonoured the grace and truth of God in the gospel, at least 
as much as the Jew failed in his previous responsibility, 
the natural branches shall no less certainly be grafted in, when 
the Gentile is cut off (vv. 13-24). Lastly, direct and absolute 
proof is adduced from Isaiah lix. to expose the fond delusion 
of conceited philosophy that the Gentiles have a lease of 
favoured place for ever. For when that complement or fulness 
of the Gentiles is come in, which God is taking, “All Israel shall 
be saved; even as it is written, the Deliverer shall come out 
of Zion; he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. And 
this is the covenant from me to them when I shall take 
away their sins.” 

Not a word of this could apply to the so-called spiritual 
Israel, but only to the ancient people of Jehovah; nor could 
the language consist with Gentiles either. Taken in their 
ordinary import of the terms the reasoning is as sound as the 
meaning is important. For we are thereby taught to read 
Israel in its literal force throughout the prophets as the 
apostle did; and so Zion, Jerusalem, Judah, Ephraim, and all 
other names. Figurative language there is abundantly in both 
the Old Testament and the New. It is so in every-day life, and 
yet more on occasions when we are more than ordinarily con- 
cerned, But the names designate facts, even the well-known 
objects as they occur, and are never themselves figures. 
Symbols also are employed, which differ from figures as being 
a composite of ideas which the prophet saw and describes 
for the more graphic delineation of the object. There is no 
uncertainty in the employment of either symbol or figurative 
expression, but rather to give objects all the more force, The 
objects are real, not ideal, in every case. As plain language 
is constantly intermingled with figures, there need never be 


INTRODUCTION. 69 


any great difficulty. So when symbols are employed, there 
is often an interpretation added: only we have to bear in mind 
that divine interpretations may and do frequently give more 
than the statement under explanation. The Holy Spirit gives 
all requisite guidance in comparing scripture with scripture ; 
and He is needed for profitable understanding of Genesis 
and John as truly as He is for using Ezekiel and the Revela- 
tion aright. The true difficulty is quite independent of figures 
or symbols, and lies in employing the same object now and 
then as the vehicle of a lesser primary application, while 
it also looks onward to a larger and more complete fulfilment 
in due time; the right apprehension of which is at least 
occasionally a matter of delicacy. 

The Jews therefore did not stumble because they under- 
stood the scriptures in their plain literal import. On the con- 
trary they shut their eyes and ears against all the prophecies 
which dwelt on Messiah’s sufferings, and warned them of 
unbelief and every other sin. They were wholly insensible to 
His moral perfection and His testimony of God as light and 
love, which should have led them to repentance. They clutched 
at the gorgeous visions of power and glory, and overlooked that 
they are as full of holiness and righteousness and peace. They 
ignored the plainest predictions, as much as if they never were 
written, of their own hatred and loathing of the Messiah, as 
well as of His being wounded for their transgressions, and 
being bruised for their iniquities. They never pondered the 
words that Jehovah laid on Him the iniquity of us all; that 
the chastisement of our peace was on Him; that by His saieee 
we are healed. 


Part II. 


§ 1. The character of Isaiah, and his place as compared with 
the other prophets. 


’ AS Isaiah stands out from all the other prophets by the 
sublimity of his conception, the elevation of his sentiments, 
and the grandeur of his style, so is he also by fulness and 
variety of subject matter. He was the suited vessel for 
the gift of inspiration which set him in the front rank, but 
in the highest place of those eminent servants of God. Even 
a rationalist says—it is true, a man of profound scholarship, and 
of the most cultivated taste—that “in Isaiah we see prophetic 
authorship reaching its culminating point. Everything con- 
spired to raise him to an elevation to which no prophet, either 
before or after, could attain as a writer. Among the other 
prophets, each of the more important ones is distinguished 
by some one particular excellence, and by some peculiar 
ability. In Isaiah all kinds of ability and all beauties of 
prophetic discourse meet together so as mutually to temper 
and qualify each other; it is not so much any single feature 
that distinguishes him as the symmetry and perfection of the 
whole. ‘This is true as far as it goes, though decidedly human. 

“We cannot fail to assume, as the first condition of Isaiah’s 
peculiar historical greatness, a native power and a vivacity 
of spirit, which even among prophets is seldom to be met with. 
It is but rarely that we see combined, in one and the same 
spirit, the three several characteristics of—first, the most 
profound prophetic excitement, and the purest sentiment ; 
next, the most indefatigable and successful practical activity 
amidst all perplexities and changes of outward life; and, 
thirdly, that facility and beauty in representing thought which 

79 


\ INTRODUCTION. 73 


is the prerogative of the genuine poet. But this threefold com- 
bination we find realised in Isaiah as in no other prophet; and 
from the traces which we can perceive of the unceasing joint- 
working of these three powers we must draw our conclusions 
as to the original greatness of his genius. Both as prophet and 
as author Isaiah stands upon that calm sunny height, which in 
each several branch of ancient literature one eminently 
favoured spirit at the right time takes possession of; which 
seems, as it were, to have been waiting for him ; and which, 
when he has come and mounted the ascent, seems to keep and 
guard him to the last as its own right man. In the sentiments 
which he expresses, in the topics of his discourses, and in the 
manner of expression, Isaiah uniformly reveals himself as the 
kingly prophet. 

“Tn reference to the last-named point, it cannot be said that 
his manner of representing thought is elaborate and artificial. 
It rather shows a lofty simplicity and an unconcern about 
external attractiveness, abandoning itself freely to the leading 
and requirement of each several thought; but nevertheless 
it always rolls itself along in a full stream which overpowers 
all resistance, and never fails at the right place to accomplish 
at every turn its object without toil or effort. 

“The progress and development of the discourse is always 
majestic, achieving much with few words, which though short 
are yet clear and transparent ; an overflowing swelling fulness 
of thought, which might readily lose itself in the vast and 
indefinite, but which always at the right time with tight 
rein collects and tempers its exuberance; to the bottom 
exhausting the thought and completing the utterance, and 
yet never too diffuse. This severe self-control is most admir- 
ably seen in those shorter utterances, which, by briefly 
sketched images and thoughts, give us the vague apprehension 
of something infinite, whilst nevertheless they stand before us 
complete in themselves and clearly delineated, eg., vill. 6, ix. 6, 
xiv. 29-32, xviii. 1-7, xxi. 11, 12; while in the long piece, 
xxviii.-xxxii,, if the composition here and there for a moment 
languishes, it is only to lift itself up again afresh with all 
the greater might. In this rich and thickly crowded fulness of 


72 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


thought and word, it is but seldom that the simile which 
is employed appears apart to set forth and complete itself 
(xxxi. 4, 5); in general, it crowds into the delineation of 
the object which it is meant to illustrate, and is swallowed up 
in it,—ay, and frequently simile after simile. And yet the 
many threads of the discourse, which for a moment appeared 
ravelled together, soon disentangle themselves into perfect 
clearness—a characteristic which belongs to this prophet alone, 
a freedom of language in which no one else so easily succeeds. 

“The verification, in like manner, is always full, and yet 
strongly marked; while, however, this prophet is little con- 
cerned about anxiously weighing out to each verse its proper 
number of words. Not unfrequently he repeats the same 
word in two numbers (xxxi. 8, xxxii. 17, xi 5, xix. 13), as 
if with so much power and beauty in the matter within, he did 
not so much require a painstaking finish on the outside. The 
structure of the strophe is always easy and beautifully 
rounded. 

“Still the main point lies here—that we cannot in the case of 
Isaiah, as in that of other prophets, specify any particular 
peculiarity, or any favourite colour, as attaching to his general 
style. He is not the especially lyrical prophet, or the especially 
elegiacal prophet, or the especially oratorical and hortatory 
prophet, as we should describe a J oel, a Hosea, a Micah, with 
whom there is a greater prevalence of some particular colour. 
But just as the subject requires, he has readily at command 
every several kind of style, and every several change of 
delineation; and it is precisely this, that in point of language 
establishes his greatness, as well as in general forms one of his 
most towering points of excellence, His only fundamental 
peculiarity is the lofty majestic calmness of his style, proceed- 
ing out of the perfect command which he feels he possesses over 
his subject-matter. This calmness, however, no way demands 
that the strain shall not, when occasion requires, be more 
vehemently excited and assail the hearer with mightier blows. 
But even the extremest excitement, which does here and there 
intervene, is in the main bridled stili by the same spirit of 
calmness, and, not overstepping the limits which that spirit 


INTRODUCTION. a 


assigns, it soon with lofty self-control returns back to its 
wonted tone of equability (ii. 10, iii, 1, xxviii, 11-23, 
xxix. 9-14). Neither does this calmness in discourse require 
that the subject shall always be treated only in a plain level 
way, without any variation of form. Rather Isaiah shows 
himself master in just that variety of manner which suits the 
relation in which his hearers stand to the matter now in hand. 
If he wishes to bring home to their minds a distant truth 
which they like not to hear, and to judge them by a sentence 
pronounced by their own mouth, he retreats back into a 
popular statement of a case drawn from ordinary life (v. 1-6, 
xxviii. 23-29). If he will draw the attention of the overwise 
to some new truth, or to some future prospect, he surprises 
them by a brief oracle in an enigmatical dress, leaving it to 
their penetration to discover its solution (vii. 14-16, xxix. 1-8). 
When the unhappy temper of people’s minds, which nothing 
can amend, leads to loud lamentation, his speech becomes for 
a while the strain of elegy and lament (i. 21-23, xxii 4, 5). 
Do the frivolous leaders of the people mock? He outdoes them 
at their own weapons, and crushes them under the fearful 
earnest of divine mockery (xxviii. 10-13). Even a single 
ironical word in passing will drop from the lofty prophet 
(xvii. 3, glory). Thus his discourse varies into every com- 
plexion; it is tender and stern, didactic and threatening, 
mourning and again exulting in divine joy, mocking and 
earnest; but ever at the right time it returns back to its 
original elevation and repose, and never loses the clear ground- 
colour of its divine seriousness.” 

This estimate of Isaiah is rather of his style of treatment as 
an author, and hence is almost entirely occupied with the man. 
But it is cited as an able sketch of Isaiah from without, being 
written by an adversary of inspiration in any real sense. 
Hence it will be observed that Isaiah xiii, and most of xiv., as 
well as xxi. for the most part, are not referred to, and above all 
xl-lxvi, though among the noblest and most characteristic 
strains of Isaiah; because if his, the predictions are seli- 
evident, prophecy is a fact, and rationalism must be abandoned 
for faith in the unmistakable voice of God through His 


74 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAT. 


servant. It is cited as the homage of a mind far too free, yet a 
witness true here as far as form goes. Even while manifesting 
his incredulity as to the authorship of the twenty-seven 
chapters that close the prophecy, he cannot avoid acknowledg- 
ing the surpassing powers of him who uttered them. “Creative 
as this prophet is in his views and thoughts, he is not less 
peculiar and new in his language, which at times is highly 
inspired and carries away the reader with a wonderful power. 
Although, after the manner of the later prophets, the discourse 
is apt to be too diffuse in delineation; yet on the other side 
it often moves confusedly and heavily, owing to the over-gush- 
ing fulness of fresh thoughts continually streaming in. But 
whenever it rises to a higher strain, as eg., xl. xlii. 1-4, it then 
attains to such a pure luminous sublimity, and carries the 
hearer away with such a wonderful charm of diction, that one 
might be ready to fancy he was listening to another prophet 
altogether, if other grounds did not convince us that it is one 
and the same prophet speaking, only in different moods of 
feeling. In no prophet does the mood in the composition 
of particular passages so much vary, as throughout the three 
several sections into which this part of the book is divided, 
while under vehement excitement the prophet pursues the 
most diverse object. It is his business at different times to 
comfort, to exhort, to shame, to chasten ; to show, as out 
of heaven, the heavenly image of the servant of the Lord, 
and in contrast to scourge the folly and base grovelling of idol 
worship; to teach what conduct the times require, and to 
rebuke those who linger behind the occasion, and then also 
to draw them along by his own example—his prayers, con- 
fessions, and thanksgivings, thus smoothing for them the 
approach to the exalted object of the New Time. Thus 
the complexion of the style, although hardly anywhere passing 
into the representation of visions properly so-called, varies in a 
constant interchange ; and rightly to recognise these changes is 
the great problem of interpretation.” * . 


“ SmirH’s Dictionary, i, 188-9, and is the source of these extracts from. 
Hwatp’s Propheten, i, 166-79, ii, 407-9, 


INTRODUCTION, 75 


The Christian will feel that, whatever the critical taste thus 
displayed, it only plays on the surface. The key for entering 
in was unknown: only Christ opens Isaiah, as every other 
scripture. And the latter part of our prophet deals after a 
deeper sort than the former with Israel’s sins, which gives it a 
more marked unity and a sustained moral pleading, as we shall 
see in its place, beyond the limits of any aesthetic plummet to 
sound. The truth is that the rejection of the Messiah is laid 
at the door of the Jews no less than their idolatry, both fully 
set out and at nearly equal length, and the former with yet 
more pathos and clearness withal; so that the writer, by 
the law of the higher criticism, must have lived after, not 
the captivity only, but the crucifixion! Nay more, the second 
advent is as distinctly predicted in the latest chapters, as the 
fall of Babylon and the Messiah a propitiation for sins. There- 
fore the only true result is the folly of unbelief and the sureness 
of the inspired prophecy, the partial accomplishment of which 
claims our assurance that all that remains will be not less 
literally fulfilled in “that day.” 

As to the scope of Isaiah’s prophecy, it has a rich compre- 
hensiveness and grandeur in keeping with his style. Beyond all 
others he takes in the vast range of divine plans for the glory 
of Christ, and a minute as well as a most extensive view of 
the necessary judgment of the nations. Jeremiah and Ezekiel, 
though speaking of the Gentile judgments, are not occupied 
as Isaiah was, with the crisis of Jerusalem when God gave 
up His people, even the portion who still clung to the house 
of David and the sanctuary in Jerusalem, now alas! rebellious 
and idolatrous beyond remedy. Daniel, starting from the same 
crisis, fills up the gap they leave, and reveals the Gentile 
powers entrusted with the government of the world outwardly, 
whilst Jehovah no longer governs directly within His people 
on earth, before Israel is restored to more than pristine right- 
eousness, peace, blessing, and glory. Hosea, Amos, and Micah 
variously traverse part of the eround occupied by Isaiah, 
as they also were more or less contemporary. Obadiah, Jonah, 
and Nahum testify judgment to the world in one form or 
another. Joel and Habakkuk concentrate their witness on the 


76 AN EXPOSITION Of THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


last days, one starting from the great northern army that 
ravaged Israel, the other with the faith that if the Chaldean 
is the needful chastiser of the guilty people, God will assuredly 
deal with his oppressive wickedness, and glorify Himself in 
His people whatever appearances may say. Zephaniah, in pre- 
dicting this judgment of guilty Jerusalem and of the nations, 
proclaims their blessing when God converts and delights in the 
restored remnant of Judah. The three prophets of the return, 
Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, only speak of the Jews as 
God’s prophetically. Haggai encourages them to build Jehovah's 
house in view of His coming glory, when He will shake all 
nations. Zechariah, in noticing the Gentile powers, returns in 
a measure to symbol like Daniel, and does not abandon this 
mystic style even in depicting the Jews throughout the 
first prophecy. In the next, to the end of the book, Christ 
is brought in, both in His humiliation, and in the glory of His 
second Advent, when the nations are judged, Jerusalem sancti- 
fied, and Jehovah reigns. Malachi testifies to the hypocrisy 
and corruption of the returned Jews, but distinguishes a godly 
remnant, and recalls to the law in view of the speedy coming 
day of the Lord. 

Connected with this, and most important in its bearing, 
is the difference between the prophets before the Babylonish 
captivity, and after that event, which expressed the solemn 
fact that God gave up that direct government which He had 
exercised while the people were owned as His. Lo-ruhamah 
marked Israel’s removal from the land. Lo-ammi was incom- 
parably more serious, and only pronounced when Nebuchad- 
nezzar carried off Judah, and became the golden head of the 
world-powers which intervene till God again interferes and 
recognises the ancient people as His own, as He will when 
Christ returns. Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel ; Hosea, Joel, 
Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, and 
Zephaniah prophesied while God had not yet disowned His 
people. Daniel traces the times of the Gentiles. Haggai, 
Zechariah, and Malachi prophesy after the return of a rem- 
nant still in subjection to the Gentiles, in view of Christ’s 
Advent, whether first or second. In all, blessing and glory 


INTRODUCTION. 77 


are predicted for Israel; but it is at the end of the age 
when the Lord appears in judgment of the quick. The chureh 
is completely passed over, as the great mystery which it 
was for the New Testament (the apostle Paul especially) 
to reveal after Christ’s rejection and ascension. The church 
is the body of the heavenly Head. The prophets deal with the 
earth, Israel, and the nations, when Christ was then as 
Jehovah. 


§ 2. The Structure of the Book of Isatah. 


It seems desirable here to consider briefly the general plan, 
or, at any rate, the chief divisions of the great book of Isaiah. 
There is an appearance of disorder in the arrangement of the 
book as it now stands; and many of those who have com- 
mented on it have complained and suggested their rectifications. 
But there is no sufficient reason to doubt that, under the 
semblance of confusion here as elsewhere in scripture, we have 
a deeper system than one of time or circumstance. Thus, in 
the Book of Exodus, the ritual for the consecration of the 
priests comes in abruptly in chapters xxvili. and xxix., after 
the Spirit of God has. given part of the account of the 
sanctuary and its vessels, and before He supplies the rest. 
And yet this seeming interruption subserves, as nothing else 
could, the moral object of the Spirit, which would have been 
frustrated by a merely obvious and mechanical arrangement, 
to which most minds are so prone. “The foolishness of God 
is wiser than men.” 

\~ So in the earliest division of our prophet, which embraces 
the first twelve chapters, we have the exordium of i, followed 
by ii—iv., which dwell on “the day of Jehovah.” Here we 
have what appears to be the earliest of the revelations given 
to the prophet: “The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz said 
concerning Judah and Jerusalem.” No date is attached ; but 
not sufficient appears to make us doubt that it is in its just 
place, after the preface, the inscription of which well suits its 
composition ever so late. The three chapters open and close 
with the glory of the day of Jehovah. Then comes v., “the 
song of my beloved touching his vineyard.” Now it is evident 


78 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


that the strain is followed by a cluster of woes showing that, 
for all yet done, Jehovah’s anger is not turned away, but His 
hand is stretched out still; and is interrupted by vi-ix. 7. 
After this episode it is resumed till we have the close of man’s 
day in the destruction of the Assyrian, the reign of Messiah, 
and Israel’s joy and praise (x.—xii.) “in that day” once more, 
when Jah Jehovah is Israel’s strength and song. We have no 
date to the “song of v.,” but we have one both to vi. and also 
to vil, vii. Many suppose chapter vi. to have been revealed 
before the song, and, indeed, the first vision the prophet ever 
had. But there does not appear to be any sufficient evidence 
to warrant the inference. It is opposed to the natural force 
of the opening of the book. The apostle was called to his 
special work from his conversion, preached immediately beyond 
others (Acts ix. 20), and was fetched by Barnabas from Tarsus 
to Antioch to teach, before he was formally separated for the 
work among the nations. So it may have been with the 
prophet. 

But it seems plain that there is a moral order of divine 
beauty in the collocation as the chapters now stand. 
Chapter v. is the case stated between Jehovah and His 
vineyard, and shows Israel tested by the painstaking care 
God had all through bestowed upon them. “What could have 
been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it 2” 
He can only thenceforward lay it waste, though His vineyard 
be the house of Israel, and the men of Judah His pleasant 
plant. Worse woe follows woe; and God summons the 
nations from far to chasten His people, over whose land hung 
darkness and sorrow. Then, before the conclusion of these 
Judgments on stricken Israel given in x., we have Israel tested 
in a wholly different way in chapter vi. For we have there 
the glory of Jehovah-Messiah manifested (compare John xii.), 
the people blinded judicially for their unbelief, and an elect 
remnant withal which did not appear in the preceding 
chapter. Thus, if v. convicts Israel on the score of their ill- 
return to all God’s past good and faithful care, vi. condemns 
them yet more, whatever grace may do, spite of all, by the 
manifestation of Jehovah’s glory in the person of Christ, 


INTRODUCTION. 79 


This accordingly leads to a lengthening out of the interruption, 
which shows us Immanuel, the virgin’s son, on the judgment 
of the Assyrian, spite of desolation inflicted by him for a time, 
and the complete deliverance of Israel and their establishment 
under the Messiah arrer the day when He was a stone of 
stumbling to them and the law was sealed among His disciples. 

Then, as we have seen, the broken links of v. are taken up 
again from ix. 8, and the general history of the nation renews 
its course, after we have had from first to last the special 
account of the Messiah, His rejection by the Jews, and the 
final blessing under His reign. The resumption, after so 
complete and weighty an episode, is made most evident, 
because the Spirit of God goes back to the very struggles 
of the prophet’s day and the judgment of Israel. In x. the 
indignation of Jehovah against Israel ceases in the destruction 
of their last foe, the Assyrian. Lastly in xi. we have the 

Messiah again shown, first in His moral ways, and then in His 
kingdom, followed by Israel’s song of praise, in the millennial 
day (xii). 

' The second great division comprehends xili—xxvii.; but, like 
the first, it admits of various sub-divisions or separate subjects 
within itself. Thus in xiii, xiv. we have the fall of Babylon 
and the overthrow of the Assyrian, with Palestina dissolved, 
terminating in mercy to Israel and the establishment of Zion. 
This clearly indicates that the last days are in question both 
for judgment and for deliverance, whatever preliminary accom- 
plishment in the past may have borne witness to the truth of 
the prophecy. But that which has been falls so short of all 
that is involved, as to evince itself but the shadow which the 
coming events cast before them. Next follows “the burden 
of Moab,” in xv., xvi. Then in xvii. comes “the burden of 

Damascus ;” but just as proud Moab must stoop before Him 
Who sits on the throne in the tabernacle of David, so the 
mighty rushing waters of the nations shall avail as little to 
sustain Damascus as to overwhelm Israel, though at the lowest 
ebb, when they look to their Jehovah God, and He rebukes the 
oppressor. The next chapter (xviii.) may be viewed in con- 
trast with xvii. Nevertheless it has its own special place, as 


80 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


showing us Israel restored, not by Jehovah at first, but by the 
influence and intervention of a maritime power. But this 
policy and its promising fruit come all to nothing, and the 
nations plunder and oppress as before, and Jehovah takes up 
Israel, working in His own grace and might. We have 
“Durdens” after this, but they are not quite similarly pre- 
sented after this great gathering of nations seen at the end of 
xvi. But first in xix. and xx. Egypt is judged (the Assyrian 
being the instrument) before its final blessing. Again in xxi., 
we have the “burden of the desert of the sea,” by which is set 
forth the capture of Babylon; “the burden of Dumah,” and 
that upon Arabia. Then in xxii, “the burden of the valley of 
vision,” Jerusalem itself is taken; and Shebna is set aside for 
Eliakim, the type of Antichrist overthrown, and the govern- 
ment of David’s house being transferred to the true Christ. 
In xxiii. Tyre’s burden comes before us. Then in xxiv. 
Jehovah is seen dealing with the earth, and the world 
languishes before His mighty hand. There is more than this, 
for it is the hour of His visitation for the host of the high 
ones on high, as well as for the kings of the earth on the 
earth: indeed the day is come for His reign in Zion and 
Jerusalem. Can one wonder then that xxv.-xxvii. are the 
sequel for Israel’s songs of victory, celebrating God and His 
character, and their deliverance and its character also? A 
song of praise closed the first division, song upon song closes 
the second ; and as we had in the first part the sorrowful song 
of the beloved to His vineyard, fruitful only in sin and shame, 
now all is changed; and “in that day sing ye unto her, 
A vineyard of red wine: I Jehovah do keep it; I will water 
it every moment, lest any hurt it; I will keep it night and 
day.” 

. It is evident that, as compared with the first division (i.-xii.), 
the second (xiii.—xxvii.) embraces a sphere incomparably larger. 
The first is occupied mainly with Israel, assailed, however, 
more and more by hostile nations up to their last great enemy, 
the Assyrian. The second begins with the great power that 
ravaged and enslaved Judah, goes on with each of the king- 
doms that had relations with Israel, and ends with the 


INTRODUCTION. 81 


{ _judgment of all nations, when the world is dealt with and the 
very powers of the heavens are shaken too, but when Israel, 
sifted and chastened, shall be gathered in at the great trumpet’s 
summons to worship Jehovah of hosts in Jerusalem. 

The third division is occupied with the details of that which 
“happens to Israel at the end of the age. Chapters xxviii. and 
xxix. give us the two final assaults on Jerusalem: the first 
of these, coming from the north and overwhelming Ephraim 
in its course, is successful against the guilty city, spite (or 
rather because) of its covenant with death; the second, when 
all seems lost, suddenly brings Jehovah of hosts to their 
rescue, and the multitude of the hostile strangers of all nations 
pass away as a dream. In xxx. and xxxi. the unbelief that 
sought unto Egypt is judged, and the Assyrian, its scourge, 
the mighty leader of the coalition against Israel, falls under 
God’s hand. Then in xxxii. Messiah is seen reigning in 
righteousness, and the last pre-millennial effort of the enemy 
(xxxiii.) is turned to his own destruction, and divine vengeance 
takes its course in Edom on all the other haters of Israel 
(xxxiv.). Thereon the blessing is now so rich and all-per- 
vading, that the wilderness itself rejoices for Israel, and 
blossoms as the rose: sorrow and sighing flee away. God is 
present with a recompence, and His ransomed ones are come 
to Zion with songs, everlasting joy upon their heads. Such 
is the fitting conclusion in xxxv. 

Ag The fourth division consists of the historical matter inter- 

 ealated between what may be called the first and second 
‘volumes of our prophecy. These are their main facts: the \ 

historical Assyrian rebuked of God before Jerusalem 
(xxxvi., xxxvii.) ; the raising up again of the then son of David, , 
who was sick unto death (xxxviii.) ; and the solemn intimation 

of the Babylonish captivity (xxxix.). 


After this transitional series of events, and founded on their 
weighty moral import, we have the remainder of the book 
(xl-Ixvi.) parting into the fifth, sixth, and seventh divisions, 
but with more of a consecutive bond than in the earlier half of 

F 


82 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. * 


the prophecy. The two great controversies of God with His 
people are here brought to issue with a conclusion to the entire 
_ book. 

The first is idolatry (xl—xlviii.), which Cyrus avenged in 
the overthrow of Babylon, whither the guilty Jews had been 
carried, alas! because of their desertion of Jehovah for idols of 
the Gentiles. But, providentially raised up as Cyrus might be 
and was, God points to His Servant who shall bring forth 
judgment to the Gentiles (xlii. 1-4). After this however the 
promised Messiah is dropped for the present. Israel mean- 
while had the responsibility of being Jehovah’s servant, but 
Israel was blind who gave Jehovah’s praise to graven images. 
Therefore had He given them up for a prey; but now they are 
delivered, the fall of Babylon being the pledge of a still 
mightier deliverance yet to come. This closes with xlviii. 

In xlix. the second and still graver controversy opens—the 
rejection of the true Servant, even the Messiah, who supersedes 
Israel as servant of Jehovah. . This makes way for blessing 
to the Gentiles in the wisdom and grace of God, the raising up 
of Jacob being now counted a light thing. “I will also give 
thee for light to the Gentiles.” Zion however shall never be 
forgotten, but be restored. It comes out with increasing 
evidence in ch. |, with the added truth that the Creator is 
none other than the humbled Man who hid not His face from 
shame and spitting. After striking calls to “hearken” and 
“awake,” the fullest witness to Christ’s suffering in atonement 
follows in li. 13-liii Then the results appear in liv., lv., 
with solemn appeals afterwards. This again closes with lvii. 
(Compare its last verse with the last verse of the preceding 
part, namely xlviii. 22.) 

- Chapters Iviii-Ixvi. are the conclusion. This, and indeed 
the whole of what we have called the second volume, are 
inferior, to say the least, to no other part in magnificence, 
interest, and practical profit. The contents of the last portion 
may be thus summed up. The Holy Spirit directs Himself 
(in lviiL, lix.) to the conscience of Israel, reasoning, if one may 
so say, of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come. 
Their hypocrisy was the hindrance to their blessing, and their 


INTRODUCTION. 83 


sins would bring on their punishment. Yet when all hope 
of salvation might justly be taken away, the Redeemer would 
come to Zion in His own sovereign mercy, and His Spirit and 
His word abide with Israel and their seed for ever. Chapter 
lx. most appropriately reveals their consequent glory and 
righteous condition. Next, chaps. 1xi—Ixiii. 1-6 form a section 
in which the character of Jehovah-Messiah is traced from His 
first advent in grace (with the blessing and glory He was ready 
and able to bestow on the people and their land), till He 
returns from the scene of the judgment executed in Edom, 
“the day of vengeance of our God.” Then from Ixiii. 7 to the 
end of lIxiv. the prophet goes out to Jehovah in earnest 
intercession for His people, finding the only hope in His mercy 
and faithfulness. . The last two chapters (lxv., xvi.) are the 
answer of Jehovah, who explains His dealings throughout : 
His grace to the Gentiles, His long-suffering toward Israel 
(rebellious and yet to return to their old idolatry and worse); 
His sure rejection and judgment of the mass, but with an elect 
remnant spared; the introduction of His glory in the new 
creation, of which Jerusalem is the destined earthly centre; a 
reiteration of His sympathy with the elect and of the 
vengeance He must take on the abominations of the latter day, 
when, if He suddenly bless Zion, He will as suddenly come and 
plead by fire and sword with all flesh. After this judgment of 
the quick, the spared shall go forth and declare (not His grace 
but) His glory, and all the dispersed of Israel shall be brought 
back ; and all flesh too shall worship before Jehovah, with the 
solemn permanent witness before their eyes of the doom of 
apostates. Such is the general scope, such the special 
divisional structure, of Isaiah’s prophecy. 

As some may wish, and even claim it as fair, to know what 
one of the ablest of the neo-critics has proposed for the 
arrangement of the book, the reader is here given Ewald’s 
view, who was second to none of his fellows in learning and in 
esthetic insight, if we can say nothing of reverential faith, or of 
the Spirit-taught intelligence of the word, which is its fruit: 
chap. vi; chaps. ii-iv.; chap. v. (vv. 1-25); chap. ix. 
(vv, 8-21); chap. x. (vv, 1-4); chap. v. (vv. 26-30); chap. xvil, 


84 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF JSATAH. 


(vv, 1-11); chaps. vii. viii; chap. ix. (vv. 1-7); chap. xiv. 
(vv. 28-32); chaps. xv. xvi.; chap. xxi. (vv. 11-17); chap. 
xxili.; chap. i; chap. xxii.; chaps. xxvili—xxxu.; chap. xx.; 
chap. x. (vv. 5-34); chap. xi; chap. xvii. (vv. 12-14); 
chap. xviii.; chap. xiv. (vv. 24-27); chap. xxxiiil.; chap. 
Xxxvil. (vv. 21-35); chap. xix.: chap. xxi. (vv. 1-10); 
chap. xiii.; chap. xiv. (vv. 1-23); chaps. xl-Ixvi.; chaps. 
XXXlv. xxxv.; chap. xxiv.; chap. xxv. (vv. 6-11); chap. xxv. 
(vv. 1-5); chap. xxv. (v.12); chaps. xxvi. xxvii. Chap. xii. he 
says cannot be Isaiah’s, but is of later origin. As for chaps. 
xl-lxvi. they are handed over to the Grosse Ungenannte 
(Great Unnamed). Yet Ewald differed from Rosenmiiller and 
Gesenius, to say nothing of others more audacious still, in 
attributing to Isaiah inspiration, though we must bear in 
mind that this is, in German lips, far short of unerring certainty 
in scripture, or of distinct and divinely given foresight of the 
future, however distant. This topsy-turvy shuffle of our 
prophet’s book comes from one as eminent for taste as for 
philology (oriental especially) and for chronological tact, who 
laid down as his judgment that “the learned follies of 
Tiibingen have justly aroused in all foreign countries a dis- 
like of German-knowledge!” query, dreams? MHiivernick and 
Drechsler are among the honourable exceptions. Of the new 
school of critics generally, we may say without exaggeration, 
what was said of others more openly profane in science, 
that their principle consists in believing everything but the 
truth, and exactly in proportion to want of evidence ; or, to use 
the words of a poet, “In making windows that shut out the 
light, and passages that lead to nothing.” 


§ 3. Neo-criticism of Isaiah briefly weighed. 


“Let us then for the time forget” (says the Camb. R. Prof. of 
Hebrew, Div. Lit., 26), “that this writing—or rather, whether it 
is the work of one writer, or of several, this group of writings— 
is attached to the book of Isaiah. Let us simply interrogate 
the document itself,.and collect the evidence which it offers 
concerning its author, and the time and place and circum- 
stances of its writing. Direct statement there is none. Very 


INTRODUCTION. 85 


rarely does the author let his own personality appear at all. 
But of indirect evidence, indicating the circumstances under 
which he wrote, there is no lack.” This would be reasonable 
if a merely human book were in debate; it is an absurd and 
unbelieving begging of the question in an avowed prophecy. 
* “The circumstances” predicted are assumed to be evidence of 
the time when it was written. Rationalism takes for granted 
that of real prophecy there is none. The picture, on the one 
hand, of Jerusalem in ruins, the temple in ashes, the cities of 
Judah deserted, the land desolate; and, on the other, of 
Babylon the scene of captivity, and the tyrant that holds 
Zion’s sons in thrall, is proof “entirely convincing”! of the 
time when the book was composed. For “the prophecy does 
not profess to predict the destruction of Jerusalem, the 
Babylonian exile, and the mission of Cyrus. These things 
are described, or assumed, as existing facts. ... What is 
foretold is the speedy deliverance of the exiles from their 
captivity. All these data point unmistakably to the last 
ten years of the Babylonian exile as the time at which the 
prophecy was delivered.” 

Such is Prof. Kirkpatrick’s argument. But it is the weakest 
of fallacies; for it starts with assuming what ought to be 
proved, what never has been even approached, and what, we 
may safely aver, can be disproved. It overlooks one of the 
most beautiful and striking modes of conveying prediction, 
the scenes presented to our eyes and ears; so the Holy Spirit 
brought them before the prophet as if already realised, but 
with such an intermingling of the future with the past or 
present, as to dispel the transparent deception of the critics, 
and convict them of spiritual ignorance. Take the very early 
witness of scriptural style resuscitated late in the New Testa- 
ment, “And to them also Enoch the seventh from Adam 
prophesied, saying, Behold, the Lord came with His holy 
myriads to execute judgment upon all.” What is this but 
a transfer of his position into the remote future, but taking 
account of present evil to testify? More boldly even than 
Isaiah did Enoch speak of the great event for all the world, 
the Lord’s judicial advent as if accomplished; and so it is 


86 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


frequently in the prophets. Take a disproof which no believer 
can dispute from Isaiah lii. 13-liii. It is not to be supposed 
that Prof. K. rejects the inspired interpretation of this 
prophecy. He will not deny the predicted basis of his 
own salvation. It is no question to him if the prophet wrote 
of himself or of another such man. He believes that the 
prophet wrote of One only, the Righteous Servant, the rejected 
but exalted Messiah, and of the great atonement wrought in 
His humiliation and suffering for sins. These things are 
described, or assumed, as existing facts, no less than the 
ruins of Jerusalem, the Babylonian captivity, and the mission 
of Cyrus. All such representations of the future, as though 
present or fulfilled, are as easy to the Spirit of prophecy as 
they are frequent in both Old Testament and New. How 
applicable the Lord’s word to similar sceptics of old, Ye do 
err, not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God! 
The grand and touching strain in Isaiah lii, liii. is filled 
with Christ crucified, and looks onward till His portion shall 
be with the great, and His spoil with the strong at His 
second coming, when He shall sprinkle many nations, and 
kings shall shut their mouths at Him, Lord of lords and 
King of kings. | 

Not before the revelation of the glorified Jesus Christ will 
be fully achieved that deliverance which God announced from 
of old. So utterly untrue is it that prophecy only bears on 
the horizon of the prophet’s day, and never rises above 
contemporary interests. The apostle had told the Jews in 
Solomon’s porch that Christ must be sent again from heaven 
to bring in times of restoring all things whereof God spoke 
by the mouth of His holy prophets since time began. Such 
is the universal prophetic testimony, They all converge on 
the kingdom ; whereas the gospel meanwhile is saving those 
who believe to reign with Christ when that day comes. 

The spirit of neo-criticism betrays its hostility to God, and 
its blindness to His goodness, in assailing all the more bitterly 
whatever is most bright and blessed. So in the first division 
the episode of the virgin’s Son (chap. vii.) must be got rid of at 
all costs, though foreshadowed from Genesis iii, 15, xxii, 18, To 


INTRODUCTION. 87 


reduce so glorious a person to the child of the king or of the 
prophet is worthy. of man’s pride and Satan’s guile. The word 
here only casts somewhat more light on the constant expecta- 
tion of faith. In its accession of another nature and a higher 
dignity it was the complement of the woman’s Seed, and 
Abraham’s; and it already went far to explain how He could 
crush the serpent’s head. Was it not within the compass 
of Immanuel, before Whom should be broken all the peoples 
and far countries, whatever be their counsel or conspiracy 
(chap. viii.)? And how fail to see that, after His service with 
the children given Him during Israel’s eclipse, shall the light 
which once shone in Galilee burst upon the multiplied nation 
in the joy of the true harvest, and the spoil they are yet 
to divide! Then Messiah, with His titles as true as they are 
lofty, shall take the throne of David (quite distinct from sitting 
as now on the throne of God), to establish and uphold it with 
judgment and with righteousness from henceforth and for 
ever (chap. ix.). 

Again, “the burden of Babylon” (chaps. xiii., xiv.) must be 
denied to Isaiah, because it exposes men’s incredulity, and 
proves him a true prophet, speaking of the things to come 
as present to his vision, and of the destruction of the power 
that was to enslave them. How vain is their petty lowering 
of the time to anyone capable of estimating the scripture ! 
For, though Cyrus captured Babylon, many centuries elapsed 
before the ruin here foreshown was verified. Alexander the 
Great proposed to make it the metropolis of his world-wide 
empire, but was cut off before he could essay to carry out 
what God had ruled otherwise. Then rival cities built near, 
sometimes from its material, kept dwindling it, till it fell 
gradually into utter desolation—here set out at its worst. 
With similar ill-will chapter xxi. has been attacked. It 
must not be Isaiah’s: else he is a true prophet, and they 
are false teachers. 

They will have the “burden of Moab” older than Isaiah 
for the flimsiest reasons. But chapter xxi. 1-10 must be much: 
later, and from the same author as of chapters xiii, xiv. 1-23. 
They are alike and evidently predictive long beforehand ; and 


88 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


this is intolerable. Their doubts of chapters xxiv.—xxvii. we 
may leave to be noticed in their place. According to 1 Cor. xv. 
the strain of chap. xxv. awaits its accomplishment still, but 
will be verified when the first resurrection comes to pass, and 
divine indignation against Israel ceases, when all peoples have 
the veil destroyed that overspreads all nations, and Satan is 
punished, and Jehovah of hosts reigns in Mount Zion and in 
Jerusalem and before His ancients in glory. 

The “woes” (chaps. xxviii—xxxiv. ending with the joyous 
chapter xxxv.) will also come before us duly, when the sceptical 
objections can be noticed, as well as the historical chapters 
(XXXV1.—Xxxix.) expounded. 

Over no portion is neologian criticism more jubilant than the 
closing series (chaps. xl.-lxvi.) in its three sections, nor with 
less reason. It is infatuation to object to Isaiah’s writings 
from the mention of Cyrus, when the prediction of Messiah’s 
humiliation, atonement, and ultimate glory in the Kingdom 
subverts their groundwork completely. Who can say that the 
sufferings of Christ, and the glories after these, belonged to the 
historical horizon of “the great unknown” any more than to 
the friend of Hezekiah? The Babylonish exile was the 
portion of Judah judged by Jehovah for idolatry; but it is 
left behind in the second and deeper arraignment, which 
begins with chapter xlix., the rejection of their own Messiah, 
Vainly do men deny the distinct prediction of the distant 
future. It is thoroughly within the analogy and scope of 
prophecy to predict the far-distant and personal Messiah. 
Far from being unknown, scripture shows such visions of 
the future to be frequent and certain. Both advents of 
Christ are clearly revealed, and their glorious consequences 
for time and eternity. 

In prophetic vision Isaiah predicts the dispersion of the 
people, the desolation of the land, city, and temple, and their 
return, in such terms as wholly transcend the days of Zerub- 
babel and Jeshua, or of Ezra and N ehemiah. Then the 
redeemed of Jehovah shall come to Zion with singing, and 
everlasting joy shall be on their head; then they shall obtain 
gladness and joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away, 


4 


INTRODUCTION. 89 


The prophet had, in the most distinct terms, predicted the 
exile just before to the king (chap. xxxix.). Therefore it was 
highly congruous to make known the comfort that God 
desires for His people, after (not the captivity alone but) their 
dispersion and national ruin, because of sin still more pro- 
found, and the solemn dealings of grace as well as of 
judgment at the end of the age, when they shall bow before 
their long-rejected King, who shall come as Redeemer to 
Zion, and to those that turn from transgression in Jacob. 
Thereby their blessing shall be from henceforth and for ever, 
and the glory of Jehovah arise as never before even in 
David’s days or Solomon’s, and through saved Israel to all the 
nations and kings of the earth. Is this the ideal of a poet, or 
the real of a prophet? Do these critics fancy that their 
speculations outweigh the authoritative comment and appli- 
cation of the apostle in Romans xi. 26, 27? The future is 
contrasted with the gospel as now in the verses that follow, 
and refers to the Kingdom in which Christ will surely come 
and reign over all the earth. The prophet Isaiah, like the 
rest, spoke of that Kingdom, as Moses in the law (Gen. xlix., 
Num. xxiii. xxiv.) had done; so do the Psalms. It is Christ 
suffering our judgment on the cross, which introduces 
Christianity and the church for heaven; it is Christ coming 
again to execute judgment on the ungodly quick which 
introduces His Kingdom in manifested power and glory for 
the earth. Both are revealed, and one therefore is as true as 
the other; but they are wholly distinct ways of God for His 
glory, each centring in Christ. © 


CHAPTER I. 


THE opening appeal of the prophet is to the conscience. No 
reader can avoid seeing that through Isaiah Jehovah charges 
His people with ungrateful, enormous, and persistent rebellion. 
It is the more terrible, because it is expressly general. There 
were marked differences between Uzziah and Jotham, between 
Ahaz and Hezekiah yet more and deeper. But the state of His 
people before the Holy One of Israel all through could not be 
truly described in terms less scathing. In themselves they 
were hopelessly evil ; and one of the most pious of Judah’s kings, 
prompt beyond all (2 Chron. xxix. 3) to care for Jehovah's 
honour and will, and large-hearted enough to embrace of all 
the tribes those who humbled themselves before Him whom 
they had long despised, gave the occasion for most solemn 
appeal. Granted that no one can fix a special epoch, or 
an outbreak of iniquity of peculiar malignity. Even this, 
however deplorable, is not so desperate as a continuous 
state of alienation, where their corruption was the com- 
panion of despite done to Him who had ever watched over 
them with a patience and tender merey as perfect as His 
righteousness; His chastenings only preceded revolt more 
and more. Not even intense misery drew out groans to 
Him. Israel was utterly insensible to their loathsome 
wounds and mortal disease at His hands who loved them, 
whose readiness to heal was set at nought by their callous 
indifference. The body politic, civic and rural, was a disastrous 
ruin and desolation ; and Zion’s daughter left as a temporary 
booth, instead of sitting for ever in royal grace above all rivals 
as became the favoured of Jehovah. In short, but for Him 
whose title is to rule heaven and earth, and who was pleased 


CHAPTER Tf. yl] 


to reserve a very small residue, they had been as the doomed 
cities of the Plain. 

But is this the gospel? or is such a national appeal in the 
least degree according to its spirit, or the revealed examples 
of those who preached it? Is it not evident from the Kpistles 
to the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, &c., as well 
as the Acts of the Apostles, that the gospel is sent forth 
by God’s grace, on the proved ruin of Jew no less than of 
Greek, to proclaim God’s righteousness in Christ (now that 
man’s unrighteousness is beyond dispute) unto all, and upon 
all that believe? Here probation still goes on under the law, 
as the rule of Jehovah’s government of His people. Their 
sins and their sufferings are urgently pressed home, and 
that mercy which is mingled with His law, as declared 
in Exodus xxxii—xxxiv., is before the prophet in pleading 
with the people perseveringly. Yet was he well aware that the 
mass would still stumble at the word, being disobedient, madly 
rushing to destruction, and that a very small residue would 
hear and in the end be blessed and triumph, when Jehovah 
would intervene for that double issue. This, however, is in no 
way what the gospel now makes known to the believer, but 
the display of Him who is coming to bring in together the 
acceptable year of Jehovah, and the day of vengeance of our 
God: not the mysteries, but the manifestation, of the kingdom 
of the heavens. ‘ The judgment of the wicked, and the restora- 
tion of the righteous remnant are here joined, which is a state 
of things wholly foreign to the gospel, as every Christian 
knows. And our hopes are as different from theirs, as heaven 
is higher than the earth. They will look for the Messiah 
to restore the kingdom to Israel in that day of the earth’s 
glory, as He surely will, and from Zion to rule all the nations ; 
but we hope to be with Him in the Father’s house, though we 
shall also reign over the earth. Those who merge both in one, 
not only defraud the Lord of His earthly reign, and Israel of 
the promises for them and the land, but lower and lose the 
heavenly glory of Christ and the church, which is our proper 
position. And this loss is Satan’s aim and success, ever since 
the apostles were succeeded by men who corrupted the truth. 


~ 


99 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


Here, as elsewhere, we find grave and precious instruction, 
humbling lessons for the heart of man, and on God’s part 
unfailing pity and long-suffering, but withal solemn and sure 
judgment of all evil. Everywhere and at all times God’s 
character shines out to the eye of faith, as His glory will to 
“every eye” in a day which hastens fast. But the only wise 
God has been pleased to bring out His mind and display His 
ways in a variety of forms, which create no small perplexity to 
the narrow mind and unready heart of man. Some are apt to 
forget the past, as if the revelation of present privilege were 
all; many more would merge the actual calling of God in a 
vague amalgam, a truly unintelligent monotony, which 
confounds Israel and the church, law and gospel, earth and 
heaven, grace and glory. Here it is national dealing 
throughout: national apostasy with vain religious  self- 
complacency ; as it will be national judgment, and national 
restoration for a remnant, by Jehovah Himself in the day of 
the Lord’s return. 

Doubtless, now that the Son of God has appeared, it is meet 
that we should hear Him; and it is vain to talk of honouring 
the law and prophets, Moses or Elias, if He have not the 
central and supreme place in our hearts. And it is to hear 
Him, if we believe that the Spirit of truth is come to guide 
into all truth ; much of which even apostles could not bear, till 
redemption was accomplished and the Son of man ascended 
where He was before. It is due, therefore, to the New 
Testament that we should look for our special portion there, 
the revelation of that mystery which was hid from ages and 
from generations. But we cannot forget, without dishonour to 
God and loss to our souls, that there are certain moral 
principles which never change, any more than God can act 
or speak beneath Himself, whatever may be His condescension 
to the creature. 

Thus obedience is always the right pathway for the faithful, 
and holiness is inseparable from the new nature; but then the 
character of the obedience and the depth of the holiness 
necessarily depend on the measure of light given of God and 
the power of the motives He reveals for working on the heart. 


CHAPTER I. 93 


What was allowed in Levitical time and order is largely out 
of place now, if we heed the Saviour’s authority. And this 
is at least as strikingly true of the public worship and service 
of God as of private life and duty. In many measures and in 
many modes He spoke in the prophets to the fathers; now He 
has spoken in the person of His Son. Hence unbelief assumes 
the character of resistance to the fullest love, light, authority, 
and wisdom, revealed in Him who is the image of the invisible 
God—Himself God over all, blessed for ever; while the faith, 
which has bowed to Him thus displayed, loves to hear the 
earlier oracles and to reflect the true light which now shines, 
along with the fainter but equally divine luminaries which 
pierced through the darkness of man’s night; for all the blessed 
promises of God are now verified in Christ. 

The title is, “The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he 
saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, 
Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, Kings of Judah” (v. 1). This gives unity 
to the entire collection, as distinguished from particular dates, 
as in vi. 1, vii. 1, xiv. 28, xx. 1. In strict accordance with all, 
the first chapter then has a more general character than any 
other in the book. It most pathetically accuses the people and 
the capital and the sanctuary of the grossest ingratitude. 

By the prophet before us God is still dealing with His people 
as a body; and therefore He pleads with them because of their 
iniquities, setting forth a full, searching, and even minute 
portraiture of their evil ways. For if prophecy encourages the 
faithful by the sure word of coming blessing from the Lord, it 
casts a steady and convicting light on the actual state of those 
who bear His name; its hopes strengthen those who bow to its 
holy sentences. Hence, if handled in a godly and reverent 
manner, it never can be popular, though notions drawn from it 
and used excitingly may be so. But the Spirit addresses it to 
the conscience in God’s presence, and there is nothing man as 
such more shrinks from. 

If it grieved Jehovah at His heart to behold man’s wicked- 
ness great in the earth, and to blot him out from the face 
of the ground, what was it now for Him thus to despair of the 
chosen people full of disease and wounds? For though He 


94 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


smote, they were but hardened, and revolted more and more. 
And outward disasters completely failed, though He had 
allowed it so far that only His mercy hindered destruction 
as unsparing as that which befell the doomed cities, Sodom 
and Gomorrah. How very small the residue! Compared with 
the days of David and Solomon, how evil and fallen even now! 

Need the details be pointed out in further proof of these 
remarks? “Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for 
Jehovah hath spoken: I have nourished and brought up 
children; and they have rebelled against me. The ox 
knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib: Israel 
doth not know, my people doth not consider. Ah! sinful 
nation; a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil-doers, 
children corrupting themselves. They have forsaken Jehovah ; 
they have despised the Holy One of Israel; they are estranged 
backward. Why be smitten any more? Ye will revolt more 
and more. The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. 
From the sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no 
soundness in it (or him): wounds, and wheals, and open 
sores—they have not been closed, nor bound up, nor molli- 
fied with oil. Your country [is] desolate; your cities [are] 
burned with fire; your ground, strangers devour it in your 
presence, and [it is] desolate, as overthrown by strangers. 
And the daughter of Zion is left as a booth in a vineyard, as 
a lodge in a melon-field, as a besieged city. Unless Jehovah 
of hosts had left us a very small remnant, we should have been 
as Sodom, we should have resembled Gomorrah” (vv. 2-9). 

So the law-giver in his song (Deut. xxxii. 1) called the 
heavens and the earth to give ear, as he proclaimed the 
name of Jehovah, and set before the people that searching 
glance into the future which, through divine power, took in 
the failure and ruin of Israel. Moses sees Jehovah judging 
Israel’s idolatry, and hiding His face from them; also the 
call of the Gentiles, but to provoke them to jealousy, not 
to give them up for ever; and at length His glorious inter- 
vention, both to deliver them and the land, and to execute 
judgment on their adversaries, while in the end causing the 
nations to rejoice with His people. Isaiah was given to fill 


CHAPTER IL 95 


up that magnificent outline, bringing in Messiah and His work 
and His reign in the clearest and richest way for all that have 
eyes to see. Here it is the dark picture of their sins. What 
an expostulation from God and for God! Heaven and earth are 
summoned to hear the complaint against His people. The 
dullest of their own beasts of burden put them to shame. 
God’s chastenings were as vain as His gracious training. The 
body politic was utterly diseased and loathsome from head 
to foot; medicine and remedial measures quite neglected. 
Country and town a waste and scene of devastation; the 
ground eaten up by strangers; the daughter of Zion no 
longer enjoying that holy fortress, but left in distress and 
isolation like a city besieged. But that Jehovah had left 
a very little residue, we (says the prophet) had been as 
Sodom and like Gomorrah. Sudden and complete destruc- 
tion was their deserved doom. The last chapters of the 
prophecy, like others throughout, attest the judgment 
executed by fire on the mass, the remnant also delivered 
and blessed as Jehovah’s servants under His righteous 
Servant. 

It is the Jew, not the church, throughout that is in 
question. Zion measures the privilege and the guilt of 
Judah. Nowhere in scripture is it applied to the church, 
which is Christ’s body. In Heb. xii. 22 this is distinguished 
from Zion; and Rev. xiv. sets Zion forth quite distinctly 
from those already glorified above as the church then is. in 
Matt. xxi. 5, John xii. 15, Rom. ix. 33, 1 Pet. ii. 6, the word 
has its historical sense. And so it is with Rom. xi 26. 
To read the church in any of these instances would yield 
no right meaning. And these are all the occurrences in the 
New Testament. 

But has not such an appeal to Judah a voice for us? It 
is not only that the church of God began to be called out 
and formed when all was a failure: man, Israel, the world, 
were judged morally in the cross. But besides for us, too, 
the house of God is in disorder. The last time of many anti- 
christs is long since come. The Christian witness has more 
deeply and widely departed from God than the Jewish one, 


96 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


notwithstanding immensely greater privileges. What remains 
but judgment for the mass, with the reserve of grace for those 
who humble themselves under God’s mighty hand? Does this 
produce hardness of feeling? On the contrary a spirit of 
intercession is the invariable companion of a holy heed to 
prophecy, both of them the offspring of communion with God. 
He loves His people too well to look with indifference on their 
sins, of all men’s; He must vindicate His outraged majesty; and 
those who are in the secret of His mind cannot but go forth in 
importunate desire for the good of souls and the glory of the 
Lord. But real love has no fellowship with the unfruitful 
works of darkness; rather does it reprove them. Neither does 
that love which is of God measure sin as nature does, but feels 
first and most that which slights Himself, His character, and 
His word. 

As to Israel, they were more guilty than the heathen, as bad 
as the worst. Hence it is no longer the doom, but the abomi- 
nations of Sodom and Gomorrah. “Hear the word of Jehovah, 
ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye 
people of Gomorrah. To what purpose is the multitude ‘of 
your sacrifices unto me? saith Jehovah: I am full of the burnt 
offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not 
in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats. When ye 
come to appear before me, who hath required this at your 
hand, to trample my courts? Bring no more vain oblations: 
incense is an abomination unto me; new moon and sabbath, 
the calling of assemblies—I cannot endure iniquity and 
the solemn meeting. Your new moons and your appointed 
feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am 
weary to bear [them]. And when ye spread forth your hands, 
I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many 
prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. Wash 
you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from 
before mine eyes, Cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek 
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for 
the widow. Come now, and let us reason together, saith 
Jehovah: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white 
as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as 


CHAPTER I. 97 


wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of 
the land: but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with 
the sword: for the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken. How is 
the faithful city become a harlot! she that was full of judg- 
ment, righteousness lodged in her, but now murderers. Thy 
silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water. Thy 
princes [are] rebellious, and companions of thieves; every one 
loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they judge not the 
fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. 
Therefore saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, the Mighty One of 
Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me 
of mine enemies: and IJ will turn my hand upon thee, and 
thoroughly purge away thy dross, and will take away all thine 
alloy. And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy 
counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called, 
The city of righteousness, the faithful town. Zion shall be 
redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness. 
But the destruction of the transgressors and the sinners [shall 
be] together, and they that forsake Jehovah shall be con- 
sumed” (vv. 10-28). 

There was no lack of zeal in religion, nor did they fail to 
seek a remedy for the evident pravities of their day; but 
their remedies were worse than useless. Divine privileges only 
rendered their moral state more portentous and intolerable. 
If they approached the doom of Sodom but for Jehovah’s 
mercy, morally they were already Sodom, and, therefore, their 
sacrifices, feasts, and assemblies all the more odious to Jehovah, 
who felt His courts to be profaned by their tread, and refused 
to hear their multiplied prayers. There was no real repent- 
ance, no trembling at His word, but a religious veil over utter 
and shameless iniquity. 

Yet Jehovah deigns to call them to repentance and the fruits 
suited to it. The language is clearly founded on the ceremonial 
washings so familiar to the Jews; but moral reality is the 
point, as is immediately after fisda plain. God can tolerate 
iniquity nowhere, least of all in His people. They must there- 
fore cease from evil and learn to do well, proving it in ways of 
ordinary life, But He adds withal a gracious invitation that 

G 


98 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


He and they should reason together. Soon would they then 
find where the fault lay, and with Whom is the grace that 
is willing to wash the foulest clean. The call ends with His 
promise to help them if they were broken down and obedient, 
and the threat to devour them by the sword if they refused. 
Ih the earlier of these verses there is much which we can freely 
take to ourselves now; for the immutable principle of God is 
to ally repentance to faith, and to insist on suitable works and 
ways in all whom He draws to Himself. Particularly do the 
words apply to saints who shirk responsibility and trifle with a 
pure conscience; and we may fairly encourage timid souls by 
the words “Come now, and let us reason together, saith 
Jehovah : though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white 
as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as 
wool.” But we necessarily stop there. Verses 19 and 20 cannot 
be torn away from the Jewish stock. Christians have ample 
appeals, and more direct in the later volume of inspiration. 
For God’s moral government as Father follows His grace. 

The universal corruption of Jerusalem, and of its rulers espe- 
cially, is then laid bare. “How is the faithful city become a 
harlot! she that was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in 
her, but now murderers. Thy silver is become dross, thy wine 
mixed with water. Thy princes [are] rebellious, and companions 
of thieves; every one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: 
they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the 
widow come unto them.” Finally Jehovah shows He must deal 
with His adversaries, as well as Himself restore Zion, when 
idols and their makers perish together under His mighty hand. 
Their present state of ruin is contrasted with what it was 
and what it is to be. “Therefore saith the Lord, Jehovah 
of hosts, the Mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine 
adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. And I will 
turn my hand on thee and thoroughly purge away thy dross, 
and take away all thine alloy. And I will restore thy judges 
as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning: after 
that shalt thou be called, The city of righteousness, the faith- 
ful town. Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her 
converts with righteousness. But the destruction of the trans- 


CHAPTER I. 99 


gressors and the sinners [shall be] together; and those that 
forsake Jehovah shall be consumed. For they shall be ashamed 
of the terebinths which ye desired, and ye shall blush for the 
gardens that ye have chosen. For ye shall be as a terebinth 
whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water. And 
the strong shall be as tow and his work as a spark; and they 
shall both burn together, and none shall quench [them]” (vv. 
24-31). 

The promise and judgment go far beyond the circumstances 
before and after the Babylonish captivity. The last fiery trial 
of Israel is in view, which grace will use for spiritual refining ; 
after which will follow the times of restitution of all things, 
when the former rule shall come to Zion (Micah iv.), the king- 
dom to the daughter of Jerusalem. It is a comprehensive 
preface of the prophet to his entire prophecy. But it is in no 
way the gospel as now, which is grace reigning through right- 
eousness unto life eternal by Jesus Christ our Lord. Here it is 
destructive judgment executed on the evil, when the repentant 
remnant of the Jews enjoy God’s mercy. This is beyond cavil 
the bearing of the address, and the only just inference from its 
terms. What God has thus joined, let not man sunder to suit 
the present dealing of God in Christianity. Only “in that 
day” will Jehovah restore the judges and the counsellors of 
Jerusalem as at the beginning, and the city itself be one of 
righteousness and fidelity. In that day shall Zion be redeemed 
with judgment and her converts with righteousness, coinci- 
dently with the execution of vengeance on the wicked and her 
idols. It is a victory reserved for Christ’s appearing in the 
consummation of the age. Jerusalem must be purged before 
God can make her a centre of the nations. It is Christ there 
in power which accounts for all. 

All believers thankfully acknowledge how much is shared by 
the faithful on earth from the beginning to the end of time. 
There is but one object of faith for all, though made known in 
very different measures before and since redemption, and in 
ways so distinct as the day of the displayed Kingdom must be 
from preceding time and especially from the present. Hence 
none need cavil at Jerome’s calling our prophet evangelical, as 


100 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


compared with his fellows, or wonder at the countless gospel 
discourses preached from this chapter and many more. But 
the important thing exegetically is to observe the essential 
differences which prove that not the gospel but God’s ways with 
His ancient people, strictly speaking, are intended. Thus in 
_ the first paragraph (vv. 2-9) the appeal is national, whereas 
the gospel is strictly individual, though the house may be joined 
in a spirit of grace to its head. In the second (wv. 10-20) 
Jehovah declares He will hide in anger from their hypocritical 
worship. Now, since the grace of redemption, this is never 
said of the Christian. God did hide His face from, yea for- 
sake, Him Who is our propitiation, and for this very reason 
when God made Him sin for us; but it was that we might 
never be thus abandoned. But He did abandon guilty Israel. 
In the third (wv. 21-31) He promises that “Zion shall be 
redeemed with judgment, and they that return of her with 
righteousness.” This characterises the redemption which will 
be, not only as a witness by the blood of the Saviour Who rose 
again, but with the mighty execution of God’s judgment of His 
adversaries when He with lye purges away Israel’s dross. So 
confirms all the context to the last verse. It is the distinctions, 
not of course the resemblances, which mark off the varying 
dispensations or ages one from another. 

But no Christian ought to need proof how different is the 
ground of the gospel from such an intervention of Jehovah as 
the prophet describes here, and almost everywhere else. For 
moral probation is closed; law can only condemn those under 
it. All alike are lost; every mouth is stopped, and all the world 
under judgment to God. The Lord Jesus, the Son of God, sent 
as Man in the infinite love of God, has been by all rejected and 
crucified. Yet the judgment of sins and sinners was then and 
there laid on Him; and God is so glorified in His sacrificial 
death that He can and does proclaim to everyone that believes 
life eternal in His name, remission of sins, justification, and 
salvation as everlasting as glory. Such is the new state of 
things under the gospel and for the church, which meanwhile 
suffers with Christ, and waits for His coming to take us on high ; 
whence He will appear in due time to judge the habitable 


CHAPTER tf. 101 


earth, and introduce His Kingdom before every eye here 
below, and over all nations and lands. 

But our prophet, like the rest, predicts that day of His 
appearing to judge living man on earth, and deliver a remnant, 
here of Jews, as elsewhere of Gentiles also, for His manifested 
reign, when no evil will be tolerated but righteousness is ex- 
alted under His dominion from sea to sea, and from the river 
unto the ends of the earth. Divine judgment will not be on 
Him, as the gospel we know is based on; but then at length, as 
the new and predominant fact in God's ways, He will judge 
His people in a way beyond all past experience, and put down 
the wicked both there and outside them throughout the world, 
as He alone can, and thus establish His Kingdom not only in 
Zion but over all the earth. It is this of which the chapter 
speaks, though in the general way which characterises every 
part of it, each divine communication having that perfect con- 
sistency with itself, which is proper to revelation, and in strong 
contrast with the gospel and the church, whatever be the efforts 
of popular theology in all ages to identify them, thus losing 
the distinctive power of both truths. 


CHAPTER II. 


We have seen that though the people if repentant are 
assured of God’s blessing, they are shown that governmental 
punishment must first be executed on the wicked by Him Who 
alone is capable of righteousness; then, and not before, shall 
Zion be redeemed in deed and truth. This redemption in 
power and with judgment is manifestly distinct from redemp- 
tion by blood only, as we know it in Christ by the gospel of 
salvation. Judah’s deliverance is accompanied by divine 
judgment. Jerusalem’s heart is at length reached, her time 
of hardness accomplished, her iniquity pardoned. 

“The word that Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw concerning Judah 
and Jerusalem. And it shall come to pass in the end of days,* 
[that] the mountain of Jehovah’s house shall be established on 
the top (head) of the mountains, and shall be lifted up above the 
hills; and all the nations shall flow unto it. And many peoples 
will go and say, Come and let us go up to the mountain of 
Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us 
of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion 
shall go forth the law, and Jehovah’s word from Jerusalem. 
And he will judge between the nations, and will reprove many 
peoples ; and they will forge their swords into ploughshares 
and their spears into pruning knives: nation shall not lift up 
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more” 
(we. 1-4). “He” Who thus reigns is Jehovah, but, having 
become man, is withal the Messiah, and the Son of Man with 
rights universal given Him, 


* Compare Gen, xlix. 1; Num. xxiv. 14; Deut. iy. 80, xxxi. 29; Jer. xxiii. 
20, xxx, 24, xlviii. 47, xlix. 89; Ezek. xxxviii. 16; Dan. ii, 28, x. 14, xii. 13; Hosea 
iii. 5; Micah iv. 1. All refer to the same time as Isa, ii. 2, the days when the 
power of the Second Man supersedes the sinful weakness of the first, Joel 


ii, 28 is ‘‘afterwards,” or ‘‘thereupon,” but its full accomplishment also is in 
that day, 


CHAPTER It. 103 


Apply this to Zion and the nations in the future day, and all 
is clear, sure, and consistent; accommodate it to the church, 
either now or in that day, and what contradiction ensues! The 
Lord Jesus, when here, announced that “the hour cometh when 
neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, ye shall worship the 
Father,” and that “the hour cometh and now is, when the true 
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; for 
such the Father also seeketh as his worshippers” (John iv. 21- 
23). The Saviour Who alone leads by the Spirit into true 
worship is now in heaven. There is owr centre, not Jerusalem 
nor any other place on earth, save as He is in the midst. And 
we are exhorted to approach with a true heart in full assurance 
of faith, having boldness for entering into the holiest by the 
blood of Jesus: such is the new and living way which He 
dedicated for us; as we have also a great priest over the house 
of God. Nor is this all. For it is of the essence of the church 
that we are no longer what we were after the flesh. “For by (é) 
one Spirit were we all baptised into one body, whether Jews or 
Greeks, whether bond or free, and were all made to drink of 
one Spirit” (1 Cor. xii. 13). When Christ comes again, the 
glorified will have manifestly their heavenly blessedness as they 
have the title even now (1 Cor. xv. 48, 49). Thus they are in 
quite a different position and relationship from either the 
nations, or even Jerusalem. They are members of His body 
Who will reign over both Israel and the nations in that day. 
But He is sitting now, rejected by both, and glorified on His 
Father’s throne; and we who believe are united to Him, one 
new man, both reconciled to God in one body by the cross. 
All for us is merged in heavenly glory; whilst on earth we are 
told to go forth unto Him without the camp, bearing His 
reproach. For we are not of the world as He is not; and if we 
suffer, we shall also reign with Him. 

Undoubtedly to apply these terms to the feeble remnant’s 
return from the Babylonish captivity refutes itself. But will 
the language seem hyperbolical when Christ appears in the 
glory of His Kingdom? Nor are other allegories more tenable. 
What for instance can exceed the poverty of Theodoret’s scheme 
(Opera IL, i, 183, ed, J, L. Schulze)? He tries to find the 


104 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


accomplishment in the flourishing unity of the Roman empire 
when our Lord first appeared, in the conquered races that com- 
posed it being no longer at war but engaged in agriculture, and 
in the unhindered diffusion of the gospel far and wide. Cyril 
of Alexandria (in his Commentary on our prophet) and Euse- 
_ bius of Ceesarea (Dem. Evang. viii. 3), and Latin Fathers like 
Jerome (in loco) follow in the same wake. Yet one knows 
nothing better in the attempts of men since, unless the Popish 
interpretation be thought more homogeneous, inasmuch as it is 
all supposed to be verified in the Catholie church. Certainly the 
interpretation of others cannot be preferred, which makes it all 
mystical, and imagines its accomplishment in the unbroken 
oneness and peace of all believers, in their perfect holiness, and 
their entire subjection to the scriptures. As on earth the actual 
state is far different, some seek more consistency with truth, 
by transferring the scene to heaven when every conflict is 
over; and these views have prevailed amongst Protestants. 

It is apparent that we have here the similar, if not same, 
prediction which Micah gives in his prophecy (chap. iv. 1-3). 
They were contemporaries. The question arises, who first 
communicated it from God? Three opinions are conceivable, 
and, as a fact, the commentators range themselves respectively 
under each of them: (1) Micah adopted it from Isaiah 
(Vitringa, Calmet, Lowth, Beckhaus, Umbreit). (2) Isaiah 
from Micah (Michaelis, Gesenius, Hengstenberg, Hoffmann, 
Drechsler, Pusey). (3) Both from an older source (Koppe, 
Rosenmiiller, Maurer, De Wette, Knobel, Vogel, and Hitzig, 
Ewald specialising Joel). The certain fact is, that one prophet 
uses another prophet’s words, only with such variations as the 
inspiring Spirit was pleased to sanction, as we find Daniel 
gathering light from the then to be accomplished word of 
Jehovah to Jeremiah (Daniel ix. 2). The hypothesis of an 
older source seems wanton and unworthy of serious discussion. 
Certainly the great apostle, in writing his first pastoral to 
Timothy (v. 18) adopts as scripture the language of his beloved 
companion Luke (x. 7), and not that of the apostle Matthew 
(x. 10), And some have argued that this passage was originally 
Micah’s, from the context in each. For in Micah we have the 


CHAPTER it, 105 


desolation of Zion and of the mountain of the house, at the end 
of his chapter iii, followed immediately in the beginning 
of his chapter iv. by this promise of glory, where the 
connecting particle (rendered “and,” or “ but,” according to the 
exigency of the discourse) is fully in place, “But in the latter 
days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of Jehovah's 
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it 
shall be exalted above the hills; and peoples shall flow unto it. 
And many nations shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up 
to the mountain of Jehovah, and to the house of the God of 
Jacob; and he will teach us of his Ways, and we will walk in 
his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word 
of Jehovah from Jerusalem.” Isaiah has the same initiatory 
particle, as if cited just as it stood, though in his case sounding 
strangely. But Dr. Kay has shown that the particle is used 
more freely than this admits, and that the time favours Isaiah 
as the original rather than Micah (Speaker’s Comm. in loco). 
However this may have been, these opening verses of 
chapter ii. constitute a noble frontispiece of lofty expectation 
for the earth’s blessing. The previous preface of chapter i. 
proved the necessity of fiery judgment to consume the 
transgressors, and leave room for Jehovah thereby to purify 
a remnant for His purpose of blessing. Whatever intervene 
through creatures, His goodwill shall assuredly triumph in the 
end. And in the answering vision of glory, which winds 
up the strain (chap. iv. 2), we see the Branch of Jehovah, often 
to reappear, on Whose agency all depends. Here it is the 
establishment, beyond all rivalry, of what had been hitherto 
feeble and fluctuating and fallen, the place which Jehovah chose 
of old to cause His name to dwell in, now at length cleared of 
every mark of evil, dishonour, ruin, and exalted in holy 
and indisputable supremacy. Then will all the nations flow 
unto it in undivided and peaceful stream. They need no 
compulsion then, nor yet inducements any more than emu- 
lation. They have seen Jehovah’s uplifted hand; they have 
beheld His arm laid bare. His judgments have been in the earth, 
and the inhabitants of the world are now learning righteous- 
ness. Nor need we wonder, since fire will have devoured His 


106 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


adversaries, who were many, strong, and high. And thus it 
is not merely that Israel has the heart enlarged, to invite 
them in the sense of that mercy which endures for ever, 
and alone sufficient to save themselves, but the Gentiles 
also join together in holy zeal and earnestness.. “And many 
peoples will go and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain 
of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he 
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for 
out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of Jehovah 
from Jerusalem.” . 

Never has it been thus under the gospel for a single nation. 
At no time hitherto has one people thus acted and exhorted _ 
others as a whole, no, not for a day; whereas here with 
Micah we have a double witness of it in the divine forecast of 
“that day” for all the earth. “To-day” on the contrary, even 
for His chosen people, the word is, “Oh! that ye would hear 
His voice. Harden not your heart, as at Meribah, as in 
the day of Massah in the wilderness.” But then the wilderness 
and the dry land shall be gladdened, and the desert shall 
rejoice and blossom as the rose. For then Jehovah reigns 
in the person of His image and Anointed; and Satan will have 
been hurled from his bad eminence as the prince of the world 
and god of this age, which he is still. Then the latter rain of 
the Spirit will have fallen on all flesh with fertilising power. 
“And he will judge among the nations, and will reprove many 
peoples; and they will forge their swords into ploughshares, 
and their spears into pruning knives: nation shall not lift 
up sword against nation, neither will they learn war any 
more.” (Can terms more explicitly or exclusively describe 
when God shall judge in the sense of reigning over the quick ? 
It is humbling to think that Christian men could persuade 
themselves that these magnificent and delightful changes for 
mankind have ever been verified. They are reserved ex- 
clusively to the praise of Jehovah and His Christ in the latter 
day. Should we not rejoice that so it is to be ? 

Nor is it without interest or importance to notice that the 
later words of Isaiah render just the same testimony in 
chapters Ix., lxi., xii, and Ixvi, Throughout the exaltation 
of Zion is still more fully developed, as it is involved 


CHAPTER It. 107 


plainly enough in xlii. and xlix. As Jehovah will introduce 
that day, pleading in word and fire with “all flesh,” which 
mankind has never yet seen, so will He gather all nations and 
-tongues, and they will come and see His glory after an 
unparalleled sort. “And it shall come to pass that from new 
moon to new moon, and from sabbath .to sabbath, all 
flesh [not all Israel only] will come to worship before 
me, saith Jehovah.” In Zech. xiv. it is declared that the 
spared of all the nations that came against Jerusalem will 
go up year by year to worship the King, Jehovah of hosts, and 
to keep the feast of tabernacles. Mal. i. 11 provides for 
the constant and universal recognition of Jehovah’s name 
among the Gentiles, and due worship in every place. More 
copious testimony assures us that they will regularly and 
solemnly come up, as is only right and due, to that earthly 
centre where He has set His name as nowhere else; a fact 
and principle entirely incompatible with “the hour that now is,” 
as the Lord Himself clearly laid down in John iv. If this dis- 
tinction be not firmly kept, if this age be confounded with that 
which is to come, the mind of God is lost, and darkness ensues 
as to the present and future. Zeph. iii. 8-10 is most explicit 
that the judgment of the Gentiles, and the restoration of the 
Jews then converted, precede the blessedness here described. 
“Therefore wait ye for me, saith Jehovah, until the day that 
I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather 
the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms to pour 
upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for 
all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.” 
The vision contemplates a wholly unprecedented panorama 
to be seen by every eye in that day. Christ will have 
been manifested, instead of being, as now, hidden on high; 
and we also shall be then manifested with Him in glory. But 
no word here reveals our association with Him. As He will 
have the earth as well as the heaven put under Him, in fact 
as now in title the holy hill of Zion will be His seat as 
Jehovah’s anointed King; and the nations will be given Him, 
and the uttermost parts of the earth. Jerusalem will be 
purged, and the people restored, not merely in virtue of an 


108 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


interior work, but through searching and solemn judgments. 
His enemies and adversaries must fall under His hand. As 
the mountain of Jehovah’s house is established above every 
rival, whatever their material vastness or the loftiest 
associations of the creature, thither flock the humbled yet 
happy and obedient nations to pay homage and worship, and to 
learn that they may walk in His paths, gladly owning Himself 
King of kings and Lord of lords, and Israel as His peculiar 
people here below. Jehovah reigns, and the earth rejoices, 
as never before. Universal peace accordingly in subjection 
to the God of Jacob characterises the nations hitherto self- 
willed and ambitious, jealous and cruel, but now under His firm 
and righteous sceptre, Who from His earthly centre of divine 
light and resistless power judges among them, and reproves 
many peoples. As these are the regular designations of the 
Gentiles, so with the same literality are Israel and Judah, 
Jerusalem the capital and Zion the citadel of the chosen 
people. Quite as little is Jehovah, the God of Jacob, to be 
taken vaguely; for this definite name will then shine and 
be known, when His mighty acts have made good unmistak- 
ably His purpose from of old that Israel shall be the chief 
people on earth (Deut. xxxii. 8, 9), restored from all halting 
and affliction and evil, and Jehovah reigning over them in 
mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever. 

Rev. xxi. 9-27 presents the heavenly glory in that day, 
but it is wholly different from that of J erusalem and the temple 
as shown in Isaiah. The bride, the Lamb’s wife, is seen under 
the symbol of the new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven 
from God, but not on the earth til] the eternal day (v. 3). 
Instead of Jehovah’s house being the centre of attraction, no 
temple is seen therein, for the Lord God Almighty and the 
Lamb are the temple thereof, There is thus complete contrast 
with the Jerusalem of that day in which the temple with 
its ordinances and officials occupies much the largest part 
of Ezekiel’s last great vision (xl-xlviii.). The utmost care 
is thus taken that we should not confound the earthly city 
with the heavenly one. The difference turns on relationship 
to Christ. The new Jerusalem is His heavenly bride, and 


GHAPTER It. 109 


reigns with Him; the earthly Jerusalem is the city of the 
great King, and is reigned over by Him. Whilst it is 
grace now to suffer with Him on earth, it is to fit us for heaven. 
Israel will have deliverance by judgment on the earth, as 
scripture shows. The Christian, the church, makes its way 
by faith, while evil is in power till the Lord comes; for Israel, 
or Jerusalem, the evil is crushed, and righteousness reigns 
over the earth in Christ’s person from first to last. No con- 
trast can be more decided. 

This is plain if we be simple. It is not only Shiloh 
come provisionally, as at the first advent ; but when “that day” 
arrives the link with Him, now broken by Judah’s ruinous 
unbelief, is riveted for ever; and as God’s repentant people 
welcome in Jehovah’s name their once rejected Messiah, to 
Him shall be the obedience of the peoples (Gen. xlix. 10). 
The early oracle of dying Jacob will be at length fulfilled by 
the living God of Jacob, not in part, but in its entire and un- 
forced meaning. It has no reference to the intermediate Christian 
system ; when Christ’s flock compared with the world is “little,” 
having tribulation assured in the world; despised, hated, and 
persecuted for righteousness’ sake, and yet more for Christ’s. 
They have the kingdom in mystery, not in manifestation, as 
it will be in that day; and hence are we called to the 
fellowship of Christ’s sufferings, waiting for heavenly glory 
with Him. The vision sets nothing of this before us, but 
the kingdom, not in patience but in power, when the Lord 
sits on His own throne and reigns in righteousness. It is 
no longer the gospel of God’s grace calling believers to Christ 
in heaven, doing well, suffering for it, and taking it patiently, 
in accordance with grace reigning through righteousness unto 
life eternal by Jesus Christ our Lord, but out of Zion shall go 
forth the law, and Jehovah’s word from Jerusalem; for He 
shall then be King over all the earth, in that day one Jehovah, 
His name one. Thus He is both Messiah reigning in Zion, 
and Son of man, to whom was given dominion, and glory, 
and a kingdom that all peoples, nations, and languages should 
serve Him; an everlasting dominion which shall not pass 
away, and a kingdom which shall not be destroyed. This new 


110 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


age characterises our vision, in evident contradistinction to 
what we now experience in the gospel, which separates from 
the world, and gathers together God’s children in one for 
heaven. Such is the church of God. 

Thus then is the divine government of this world, of which 
all the prophets bear witness as Christ’s reign over the earth. 
Chapter iv. 2-6 describes its application to J erusalem, as chapters 
X1., xi, to the earth and the creatures on it, with Israel’s joy. 
Compare also chapters xxiv. 21, &¢., XXV.-XXVIL., xxxii., xxxiii. 
20, &e., xxxv., lx.-Ixvi. Two differences of the utmost import- 
ance mark the new age from the present evil one—the displayed 
presence of the Lord in the power of His kingdom, and the 
enforced absence of Satan. So immense a change bespeaks the 
intervention of God in the person of Christ, Whose action 
will then have smitten the great image of Daniel ii., and 
replaced it by God’s kingdom, which became a great mountain, 
and filled the whole earth. When such judgments are in the 
earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness. 

We know from scripture that the gospel was to be preached 
for a testimony to all the nations; and so it has been; as it 
will yet be in a special form when the heavenly saints are 
taken on high (Rev. xiv. 6, 7). But according to the apostles 
Peter and James the Just, God has now visited the Gentiles, 
not to fill the earth with the knowledge of Jehovah, which: 
awaits the Messiah in the day of His power, but to take out 
of them a people for His name; and with this eclectic condition, 
both the name and nature of the church fall in; and therefore 
it suffers now to reign with Him in that day. Whereas these 
words of the prophet contemplate the wondrous change on earth, 
when judgment has delivered Zion, and Jehovah makes it His 
earthly capital for all the nations, no longer rebellious, but 
waiting for His law. In no sense is the vision yet accomplished, 
It is for the glory of the returning Jehovah-Messiah. He only 
will judge between the nations, and will reprove many peoples. 
Then, and not till then, will they abandon sword and spear 
for the implements of peace, and learn war no more. 

To attribute all or any of this to the church now dislocates 
all scripture, and dissolves the special teaching of the apostles 


CHAPTER IT. Tt 


and prophets in the New Testament. For we are not of the 
world, as Christ is not, and are now called to suffer with 
Him, that we may also be glorified together. “Through 
many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God.” 
When that day comes, there is peace on earth, and no 
tribulation more, but righteousness reigns in manifest triumph. 
Our calling of God in Christ Jesus is upward, bearing Christ’s 
reproach. But when the world-kingdom of our Lord and His 
Christ is come (Rev. xi. 15), the destroyers of the earth are 
destroyed, and Israel and the nations repose under the sceptre 
of a king reigning in righteousness, and princes ruling in judg- 
ment (Isa. xxxii. 1). 
Ignorance of the kingdom of the heavens, whether in its 
manifest form according to the prophets, when the Lord 
returns to reign in power and glory, or in its mysteries 
as now running their course while the Lord is seated on the 
Father’s throne and Christendom is the result —in either 
way ignorance of the kingdom is the common and fatal 
fault of most commentators. Hence they fall into the 
further error of confounding the kingdom with the church 
or assembly of God, which is fraught with evil conse- 
quences, both doctrinal and practical. Of this fanatics took 
advantage, or perhaps by it fell into a snare on the other 
side; for it is hard to say which were most astray, perse- 
cutors or persecuted. In fact, to take an instance from 
Protestants, whether one thinks of the wild Anabaptists 
who tried to set up a Zion of their own by force of arms, 
or of their more sensible, if not more spiritual, antagonists 
who put them down by fire and sword, both went on the 
mistaken ground of the servants in the parable of the 
wheat-field, who would root up the tares spite of the 
Saviour’s interdict, instead of leaving that work of judg- 
ment to the angels at the end of the age. The powers 
that be are responsible and competent to maintain order and 
punish evil-doers. Popery, as is notorious, has always acted, 
ecclesiastically, on the same error. Others, shocked by the 
evident mistake of Papists and Protestants alike, fell into 
the opposite extreme of denying to the king and the 


jie AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


magistrates the title and duty of using the sword. All 
these serious aberrations of men are due to confounding what 
ought to be held simply but firmly, and without confusion— 
God’s external authority in civil government, which holds 
good everywhere, and His spiritual power in His assembly, 
the church, where alone the Spirit is present to maintain the 
rights of the Lord according to the written word. 

Where these truths are seen, it is not merely that one 
stands amazed at those Calvin* calls “madmen,” who tor- 
ture this passage to promote anarchy, but at the Genevese 
chief, who chides them for thinking that “it took away 
from the church entirely the right to use the sword,” and 
bringing it forward for condemning with great severity 
every kind of war. Certainly those Christians were inex- 
cusably wrong who dictated to the powers that be, and 
interfered with their policy, either domestic or foreign. But 
not less in error was Calvin, who claimed for the chureh 
the right to use the sword. Mischievous idea! which denies 
in principle the pattern of Christ, the place of suffering holi- 
ness and love in this present evil world (1 Peter ii. 20, 21). 
So the citation by Calvin of Luke xxii. 36 in this con- 
nexion is just of a piece with that which we see in Romish 
controversialists. They are equally mistaken, from not seeing 
the true nature and calling of the Christian; they are equally 
mistaken in thinking that it is a question of acknowledging 
the kingly power of Christ (for He has not yet taken His 
own throne); they are equally mistaken in fancying we must 
always think of making progress, and so gradually bring in the 
perfection of that peaceful reign. Calvin charges it on the 
revolutionaries as excessive folly to imagine Christ’s kingdom 
in the sense of Isaiah ii, consummated. But was it wise in 
himself to think that it was even beginning? Not less un- 
intelligent and false is his conclusion that “the fulfilment 
of this prophecy in its full extent must not be looked for 
on earth;” for it is plain and certain that its terms refer 
to Christ’s future kingdom on earth exclusively, and not to 
heaven. How important to distinguish difference of dispensa- 
tion and relationship ! 


* C. Translation Society Series, Isaiah i, 101, 102, 


CHAPTER II. 113 
Take all now in its natural import,* and difficulties vanish. 


* Those who have access to La Venida del Mesias en Gloria y Magestad, 
en tres tomos, Londres, 1826, or the English translation in two vols. 1827, 
will read with pleasure the masterly investigation of the author, a pious Roman 
Catholic, in which he, by the scripture, sets aside the views which had so long 
reigned through the influence of Origen, Jerome, and others. The Spanish 
reader is referred to tom. ii. 478-511, the English to vol. ii, 174-190, 
for particular remarks on this very chapter, of which a compressed sample 
must suffice here. “In the first place I sincerely agree with all the doctors, 
both Christian and Jewish, that the times of Messiah are manifestly the 
times spoken of in these prophecies. ‘It shall come to pass in the last 
days,’ that is, in the time of Messiah, or of Christ. But this is very 
equivocal. That time, according to all ancient and modern writers, and 
according to the fundamental principles of Christianity, is not one only but 
two times infinitely distant from each other: one, which is already past, and 
which continues even till now its effects assuredly great and admirable ; 
another, which has not yet arrived, but which is believed and hoped for 
with faith and a divine confidence ; which second time would appear to be 
more grand and admirable, according to the scriptures, which are manifestly 
directed to this and terminate in it. This is the time of which the Prophets 
have said so much, ‘in that day,’ ‘at that time,’ &. This is the time of 
which §, Peter and 8. Paul have said so much in their Epistles. And it is 
the time of which the Messiah Himself has said so much in parables and 
without them, as may be seen in the Gospels. The first time of Messiah, 
of which the Prophets speak, is certainly verified already; and the world 
has enjoyed, does enjoy, and may to its satisfaction enjoy, its admirable effects. 
And yet the prophecies have not been fully verified ; for they embrace not only 
the first time of Messiah, but likewise and still more the second time, which is 
yet waited for. This is so evident and clear that, according to the different 
principles or systems, there have been derived two different conclusions ; and 
though the one be more deadly than the other, they are both none the less 
for that illegitimate and false. 

‘* First, ‘ Therefore the Messiah is not’come, because the prophecies have not 
been accomplished.’ 

“Secondly, ‘Therefore the prophecies cannot be understood as they speak 
but in another better sense—allegorical or spiritual, in which sense they have 
been and are being verified in the present church.’ ... . 

‘But is it very difficult to discover another conclusion conformed t@ 
Scripture? That is, 

“Thirdly, ‘ Therefore the prophecies of which we speak, and many others 
like them, which have not been verified, nor could possibly have been in the 
first time of the Messiah, may very well be verified in the second, which 
time is not less of divine faith than the first.’ ” 

After meeting the Jewish objections, as well as the traditional opposition 
of Christendom, the author replies to the last, which only sees in the day of His 
‘second coming a universal judgment of the dead. ‘‘ But whence was this 
idea taken? From the holy scriptures? Certainly not, for they oppose and 
. contradict it at every step..... Therefore we may well hope without any 
fear that the prophecies spoken of, with countless others like them, will be fully 


Be 


114 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


When judgment has done its work, “in the end of days,” the 
mountain of Jehovah’s house shall be established at the head 
of the mountains, and shall be lifted above the hills, and 
all the nations will flow unto it. Zion shall be the fountain 
of divine blessing in the word for all the world, and the centre 
to which the peoples shall gather when universal peace prevails, 
and Jehovah will administer justice as king over all the earth. 
“As is the Heavenly [Christ], such are they also that are 
heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy 
[Adam], we shall also bear the image of the Heavenly.” Such 
is our relationship and our privilege: our responsibility is in- 
alienable and clearly laid down in the New Testament. We 
are not of the world, as Christ is not, and are crucified to the 
world, as it is to us. The contrast of this glorious scene, the 
Lord predicted, should go on till the end of the age. “For 
nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.” 
Such too are the evident facts now. By-and-by, when the new 
age dawns under Messiah’s earthly reign (Rev. xi. 15), “nation 
shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn 
war any more.” It will be an order of things of which the 
world has had no experience; and if the casting away of Israel 
were the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving 
of them be but life from the dead? (Rom. xi.) The flowing 
of all nations unto Zion is the great change in that day, 
verified according to the letter in the second time of Messiah, since in the first 
they could not be. When then the second time, which we all religiously 
believe and expect, is arrived, there shall be, among other things, primary 
or principal, the elevation of Mount Zion above all the mountains and hills: 
a manifestly figurative expression, yet admirably proper to explain, according to 
the scriptures, the dignity, honour, and glory, to which the city of David shall 
be lifted up.... in whit) time consequently shall the nations and 
peoples flow toward the top of Mount Zion. What nations and peoples ? 
Without doubt those who shall be left alive after the coming of the Lord, as it 
seems most clear there shall be such... . How is He to judge the quick 
if there be none? What nations, and what peoples? Without doubt those 
which shall remain alive after the utter ruin of the Antichrist. .... What 
nations? Without doubt those who shall remain alive after the stone falls 
on the statue; and, this being reduced to powder, another kingdom shall be 
formed on its ruins, incorruptible and everlasting, embracing all under the 
whole heavens,” How ominous that a Romish priest, spite of the enormous 


hindrances around him, should have had an insight into the prophetic word 
so much beyond most Protestants ! 


CHAPTER II. 115 


and cannot mean the gathering out of them, which grace 
is doing now, and scripture speaks of as the church of God. 

Besides, according to our chapter and all prophecy, there will 
be a divine judgment executed on all (the Jews especially) 
before that. And this era of peace and blessing and Messianic 
rule is to be coincident with the supremacy of Israel, which 
is transparent in the predicted facts, and supposes a condition 
wholly distinct from that of the church, wherein there is 
neither Jew nor Gentile, but Christ is all and in all. But 
in that day Jehovah will make Zion His seat and centre. 
From that day the name of the city is Jehovah-Shammah, 
It is no longer, as now, the call of sovereign indiscriminating 
grace to heaven, but the establishment and display of divine 
government in Messiah over all the earth. 

The prophet on the contrary sees in the vision the religious 
supremacy of Israel under Messiah and the new covenant, 
when they shall call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah, and 
all the nations shall be gathered to it. For, needless to say, 
the voices of the prophets agree in one, whatever the several 
tones of Isaiah or Micah, of Jeremiah or Zechariah (xiv.). 
And the latter is important in this respect, as a prediction 
of the new Messianic age after the Return. The Lord in view 
of His rejection prepared the Twelve for war, not for peace 
meanwhile. “Think not that I came to send peace on the 
earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword” (Matt. x. 34). 
Those who claim to be their successors in this wholly mis- 
represent the Master, confound the church’s place with 
Israel’s, shirk the fellowship of His sufferings, antedate 
the time of earthly peace, and deny the restoration of the 
Kingdom to the people to whom God promised it. 

It is unfounded and undiscriminating to treat this as 
accomplished in, or even applying to, the mission of the 
gospel or the calling of the church. For the gospel is the 
proclamation of God’s sovereign grace in Christ to save lost 
sinners, who thenceforth as saints suffer with Christ on earth, 
and wait for heavenly glory, and to reign with Him. And the 
church is built on the rejected but risen and glorified Christ, 
when the Jews disclaimed their own Messiah, and have lost 


ay 


116 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


meanwhile all recognition on God’s part. In the Christian 
accordingly there cannot be either Jew or Greek, but the 
new man. Christ is what all put on. By one Spirit were we 
all baptised into one body whether Jews or Greeks, whether 
bond or free. It is in principle a heavenly corporation, though 
for the present on earth; not a mere idea, but a living body. 

That which follows falls in with the reference to the future 
blessing and glory of Israel under the new covenant, and the 
King Who shall reign in righteousness. For, says the prophet 
(v. 5), after that happy picture of the new age, “O house of 
Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of Jehovah.” 
The vision of glory when the Gentiles would bow and bless 
Jehovah, how should it shame Judah now! Then, speaking 
directly to Him, he owns why Jehovah had forsaken His 
people, instead of setting them on high, even because they were 
replenished from (or, more than) the east with all that man 
covets and worships. “For thou hast forsaken thy people the 
house of Jacob, because they are replenished from the east, 
and [full of] soothsayers like the Philistines, and they strike 
hands with the children of strangers. Their land is also full of 
silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures ; 
their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of 
their chariots. Their land is also full of idols; they worship 
the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers 
have made” (vv. 6-8). Their sin was quite unpardonable, 
that Judah, with such glorious prospects from God’s sure word, 
should seek heathen superstitions, not only Gentile wealth 
and power, but alas! their idols also. 

If their land was full of silver and gold, and no end of 
treasures ; if it was full of horses and chariots, it was also full 
of idols!’ Oh what sin and shame! “And the mean man is 
bowed down, and the great man is brought low: therefore 
forgive them not” (v. 9), cries the indignant prophet. 

Lastly, he calls on them to hide in the dust because of 
the day of Jehovah, which undoubtedly has not yet fallen 
on the pride and idolatry of man. “Enter into the rock, and 
hide thee in the dust, from before the terror of J ehovah, 
and from the glory of His majesty. The lofty looks of man 


CHAPTER It. LET 


shall be brought low, and the haughtiness of men shall be 
bowed down, and Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day” 
(vv. 10, 11). The passage needs only to be read in a believing 
spirit, in order to convince a fair mind, that neither on the one 
hand Nebuchadnezzar or Titus, nor on the other the gospel, 
has anything to do with the Lord’s advent in accomplishing the 
all-embracing judgment of man which is here portrayed. The 
true God would break down those who idolatrously bowed 
down. The hand of the Highest should be on all that is high 
and lifted up. The idols shall utterly pass away, and men 
go into caves and holes from before the terror of Jehovah 
and from the glory of His majesty when He arises to shake 
mightily the earth. All will be verified when Christ appears, 
not before. How can Christians flatter themselves that the 
gospel has done or can do this work, with the great majority of 
mankind openly idolaters, and the great majority of the 
baptised really so? For what is it to bow down to the 
mass or the crucifix, to the virgin and saints or angels? 
“For there shall be a day of Jehovah of hosts upon 
all that is proud and haughty, and upon all that is lifted 
up, and it shall be brought low; and upon all the cedars of 
Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of 
Bashan ; and upon all the high mountains, and upon all the 
hills that are lifted up; and upon every lofty tower, and upon 
every fenced wall; and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and 
upon all pleasant imagery. And the loftiness of man shall be 
bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be brought 
low: and Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day. And 
the idols shall utterly pass away. And men shall go into 
the caves of the rocks, and into the holes of the earth, from 
before the terror of Jehovah, and from the glory of his 
majesty, when he ariseth to shake mightily the earth. In that 
day a man shall cast away his idols of silver, and his idols 
of gold, which they made for him to worship, to the moles aud 
to the bats; to go into the caverns of the rocks, and into the 
clefts of the ragged rocks, from before the terror of J ehovah, 
and from the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake 
mightily the earth” (wv. 12-21). Vain then would it be to 


118 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


invoke the aid of man: his day will then have ended. Jehovah 
in that day arises to shake terribly the earth. 

How confound this with the gospel! It is not yet eternity, 
but the age to come when the idols shall utterly pass away, 
and Jehovah alone shall be exalted. The word, therefore, is, 
“Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein 
is he to be accounted of ?” (v. 22). Man* as such is not able 
to retain his own life-breath, still less to keep others in that 
day. All must manifestly hang on the sovereign pleasure of 
Him Whose glory will be no longer hidden, and Whose will 
is then to be displayed in righteousness. “That day” is the 
day of Jehovah. Whatever the gospel may effect for believers 
(and it makes them meet for God’s light and heavenly glory), 
there can be no real deliverance for the earth and the nations, 
till Messiah comes again in glory, executing judgment on 
the quick and reigning in peace. Thus, as we see in chap. i. 
that divine judgment is the revealed way in which God will 
restore Zion or the Jews, so does chap. ii. make it equally plain 
that it is at least as needful for man universally. The judgment 
of him and his pride and his idols will be in the day of 
Jehovah, in order that all the nations may flow to Zion in 
heart-homage, as the beginning of chap, ii. describes. The 
world-kingdom of the Lord and of His Christ will then have 
come (Rev. xi. 15). 

The Lord, according to Heb. xii. 25, is now speaking from 
heaven, and those who heed His voice He deigns to call holy 
brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling, heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Christ. In the church of God national dis- 
tinctions vanish even now. If we are Christ’s at all, we are 
members of His body, and in that day we shall reign with 
Him over the earth, where now we suffer with Him. Then 
shall go forth (not the gospel as we have it in the New 
Testament but) the law out of Zion and Jehovah’s word from 
Jerusalem: no longer will it be on earth that “ through Him 
(Christ) we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father.” 


* The notion that Christ is here intended is one of those freaks of notable men 


which illustrate the passage they so strangely misapplied. The LXX., strange 
to say, leave out the verse altogether, 


CHAPTERS TIP TV. “1: 


Bur universal as the prostration of human pride must be, 
this chapter indicates that most crushingly shall the blow fall 
on Jerusalem and Judah, and this not only in their public 
political life, but minutely and searchingly on the daughters of 
Zion in all their haughty littleness of vain show. Here we 
have this double ground for divine intervention. But is it not 
pertinent to ask, What has all this to do with the gospel as we 
have it now? Does not the prophet look at the ancient people of 
God as nationally on the road to ruin? Does he not here 
entirely pass over the present ways of grace in the gospel, to tell 
in the next chapter the deliverance which the Messiah will effect 
for the escaped of Israel? Does he not here omit all reference 
to the call of the Gentiles to-day and the church of God, that 
he may hold out the hope of Israel in the Branch of Jehovah 
for beauty and glory? For then everyone left in Jerusalem 
shall be called holy, when the Lord shall have washed 
away the filth of Zion’s daughters. “For behold the 
Lord, Jehovah of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem 
and from Judah the stay and the staff, the whole stay 
of bread, and the whole stay of water, the mighty man, 
and the man of war; the judge, and the prophet, and the 
diviner, and the elder; the captain of fifty, and the honourable 
man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the 
skilful enchanter. And I will give youths to be their princes, 
and children shall rule over them. And the people shall be 
oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his 
neighbour : the child shall behave himself proudly against the 
elder, and the base against the honourable. When a man shall 
take hold of his brother, of the house of his father, [saying,] 


120 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler and let this ruin be 
under thy hand: in that day shall he swear, saying, I will not 
be a healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing; ye 
shall not make me a ruler of the people” (wv. 1-7). 

What surer sign of decay and of imminent dissolution, than 
the absence of all power among those who are in the place of 
authority, when those who should be the props of the state are 
children—not in fact, but in mind and purpose! Respect for 
what is officially exalted must then give place to universal con- 
tempt, and oppression and shameless malpractices flaunt without 
check, with anarchy the result. “For Jerusalem is ruined, and 
Judah is fallen: because their tongue and their doings are 
against Jehovah, to provoke the eyes of his glory. The show 
of their countenance doth witness against them; and they 
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their 
soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves” (vv. 8, 9). 
There is no ruin without sin; and here it was frightful and 
shameless. 

Nevertheless the evil day only brings out the faithful care 
of God over the righteous, as surely as the wicked meet with 
the due reward of their deeds. It is, however, a humiliating, 
as well as sifting, time for God’s people; though the prophet 
declares in the most animated terms, how Jehovah espouses the 
cause of the poor against those who grind down their faces, “ Say 
ye-of the righteous, that [it shall be] well [with him]; for they 
shall eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked! [it shall 
be] ill [with him]; for the desert of his hands shall be given him ” 
(vv. 10,11). God holds in a day of confusion to His righteous 
government, and warns. “[As for] my people, children are their 
oppressors, and women rule over them. My people! they that 
lead thee mislead [thee], and destroy the way of thy paths. 
Jehovah setteth himself to plead, and standeth to judge the 
peoples. Jehovah will enter into Judgment with the elderg 
of his people, and the princes thereof, [saying,] It is ye that 
have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor [is] in your 
houses. What mean ye [that] ye crush my people and grind the 
faces of the afflicted? saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts” 
‘vv. 12-15). Thus far the rulers and princes. Others might 


CHAPTER III. +21 


plunder their enemies and enrich their followers at the expense 
of their neighbours; but the civil and religious chiefs of Israel 
were so degraded and depraved as to prey on the flesh and blood 
of their brethren for their own greed and gain, the defenceless 
poor faring worst in this scene of alternate flattery and 
oppression. How true that the corruption of the best thing 
is the worst corruption ! 

Quite as sorrowful is the picture of domestic life. When 
women live for display in apparel, no further proof is needed to 
bring to their door the charge that the sanctity of the home is 
tainted, and that there is no real heart for the relations 
God has set up. Such finery is assuredly not for a husband or 
the family; but, small as it is, it escapes not the withering 
notice of the Judge of all. Dress, gait, glances, are all noticed 
by the Spirit of God. “And Jehovah saith, Because the 
daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with outstretched 
necks, and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and 
making a tinkling with their feet: therefore the Lord will 
smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters 
of Zion, and Jehovah will discover their secret parts. In 
that day the Lord will take away the ornament of anklets, 
and the networks, and the crescents, the pendants, and the 
bracelets, and the mufflers, the head-tires, and the ankle-chains, 
and the sashes, and the perfume-boxes, and the amulets, the 
rings, and the nose-jewels, the festival-robes and the mantles, 
and the shawls, and the bags (or purses), the mirrors, and the 
fine linen, and the turbans, and the flowing veils. And it shall 
come to pass, instead of sweet spices there shall be rottenness 
and instead of a girdle, a rope; and instead of well-set hair, 
baldness; and instead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth ; 
branding instead of beauty. Thy men shall fall by the 
sword, and thy mighty in the war. And her gates shall lament 
and mourn; and she, stripped (or desolate), shall sit upon 
the ground” (wv. 16-26). 

How in the face of such a prolonged strain of detail as 
this can any one theorise, as we all know has been done, on the 
essential contrast of history as particular facts with prophecy as 
general principles? Nowhere in the Bible or out of it does 


122 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


any historian so copiously and minutely expose that luxury 
which internally ruins a people in their homes as Isaiah here, 
after dealing a deadly blow at their dishonour of the true God 
and hankering after false. It were more true to say that along 
with the infinitely great, the inspired prophecy penetrates and 
lays bare the smallest things as alike coming under God’s eyes. 
History in man’s hand would be ashamed to go down so low. 
Poor, proud, deceived man! Not only is there a change, and an 
exposure most humiliating to pride, but so complete would be 
the desolation, that the dearth of men is described as 
tempting women to a boldness contrary to female modesty. 
“And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, 
saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel : 
only let us be called by thy name. Take away our reproach ” 
(chap. iv. 1). Sober men will be surprised to hear it was 
an ancient notion of the spiritualising school that the “one 
man” is Christ, and the “seven women” believers! Possibly 
this absurd result of departing from its obvious and real 
meaning may account for the severance of the verse from 
chap. iil. and transferring it to chap. iv., where the Branch at 
once follows. 


CHAPTER IV. 2-6. 


Bor this time of tribulation, everywhere in scripture connected 
with the Jews in the last days, before they are delivered, is 
followed by an outshining of beauty and glory, and abundant 
mercy for the saved and holy remnant. “In that day shall the 
Branch of Jehovah be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of 
the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are 
escaped of Israel” (v. 2). The Branch is a favourite and frequent 
figure for the Messiah, as the reader of Jeremiah and Zechariah 
will recognise. He will be there in His beauty and glory, and 
all will be in unison for the escaped of Israel. However many 
the slain, this one Man will be the restorer of all breaches, and 
holiness will be a reality, and not a mere name, in Jerusalem. 
Yet it is not by the gospel of grace as now, but expressly “ by 
the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning.” “ And it 
shall come to pass, [that] he that is left in Zion, and he that re- 
maineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, [even] every one that 
is written among the living in Jerusalem ; when the Lord shall 
have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall 
have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof 
by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning” 
(wv. 3, 4). The translation of J. D. Michaelis is “by the 
righteous zeal of the tribunals and by a destructive wind.” 
Rationalism sinks yet lower than superstition. The truth alone 
preserves the dignity of the divine word. It is not the church 
but Israel which is in question, and purification by judgment, 
when the manifested presence of Jehovah will follow, and 
be security no less than glory. 

Vitringa’s application of the spirit of judgment and that of 
destruction, to the Holy Spirit guiding the ruler and ministers 


124 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


of the church in discrimination, is the old source of endless 
error—the turning aside of Jewish scripture to an essentially 
Christian object. It is manifestly the day of righteous judg- 
ment on earth, and especially in its metropolis, Jerusalem, 
though one deny not for a moment the action of the Spirit to 
be here meant, but in judicial power. First purity is effected, 
then glory shines brightly on Zion. “And Jehovah will create 
over every dwelling-place of mount Zion, and over her assem- 
blies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flame of 
fire by night ; for over all the glory [shall be] a canopy. And 
there shall be a booth (or tabernacle) for a shadow in the day- 
time from the heat, and for a refuge and for a covert from 
storm and from rain” (vv. 5, 6). Even as the cloudy pillar 
once covered the tabernacle of the divine presence, so Jehovah 
will create on every dwelling-place of Mount Zion, and on her 
assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a 
flame of fire by night; for upon all the glory shall be a canopy. 

The attempt to refer to the gospel these revelations of coming 
glory for Israel, after purging trial, involves in the highest 
degree a distortion of scripture. During the present dispensa- 
tion they are enemies for our sakes, as regards the gospel; 
while, as regards election, they are beloved for the sake of the 
fathers. When that day comes, the fulness of the Gentiles 
shall have come in, and so all Israel shall be saved. It is a 
total change from this day of grace to judgment-day for the 
living when Christ reigns, whatever the mercy of God to the 
rescued out of Israel and the nations. “In that day shall there 
be one Jehovah and His name one.” Then shall be the 
deliverance, not the destruction, of the still groaning creation. 
“All the land shall be turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon, 
south of Jerusalem ; and it shall be lifted up and inhabited in 
her place, from Benjamin’s gate unto the place of the first gate, 
unto the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananeel unto the 
king’s winepresses” (Zech. xiv. 9, 10). It is not the past nor 
the present; neither is it the eternal state, but the millennium, 
It is an epoch of glory when Jehovah will hear the heavens, 
and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the 
corn and the wine and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel, 


CHAPTER IV. 125 


Divine judgment shall have washed away the guilt of Zion, 
and the glory shall return both more blessedly than at the 
first and for ever. What can contrast more with our day of 
suffering grace, absent as we are from the Lord ? 

Manifestly the figures employed do not suit heaven but the 
earth, especially the land and people of Israel; which again 
demonstrates that it is no question here of eternity when all 
distinctions of land and race are passed away. To apply so 
bright a description to the refuge provided for some in Pella, 
when the storm of wrath overtook the guilty people, is wholly 
misleading, as well as beneath the language used. So it is wide 
of the mark to look at the history of the apostolic church as the 
fulfilment of the prophecy in the gifts of the Spirit, and in the 
judgments on open persecutors. It is really a vision of future 
divine glory for Israel on the earth, after judgments, under the 
Messiah, when we shall reign (not on, but) “ over ” it, as it should 
be in Rev. y. 10. Thus only does all scripture fall into its due 
place without violence to any. Eph. i. 10-12 and Col.i. 20 lay the 
dogmatic foundation for this immense and blessed expectation ; 
as Rev. xxi. 9 et segg. give us the glorious vision prophetically. 

Let us now listen to one of the best of the so-called spiritual- 
ising, but really allegorising, school on this chapter. “It is 
commonly agreed that this prediction has been only partially 
fulfilled, and that its complete fulfilment is to be expected, not 
in the literal Mount Zion, or Jerusalem, but in those various 
assemblies or societies of true believers, which now possess in 
common the privileges once exclusively enjoyed by the Holy 
City and the chosen race of which it was the centre and metro- 
polis” (Dr. J. A. Alexander’s Comm. on Isaiah, i. 122). 

One essential contrast overthrows the assumption. Israel 
was divinely severed from the Gentiles by the partition-wall. 
For the church it is gone absolutely : we are one body in Christ. 
In that day Israel is a blessing to the nations; yet are they dis- 
tinct, and never joined in one body but the contrary. We are 
now united to Christ in heaven, where such distinctions are 
unsuited. On the earth, even when Christ reigns over it, they re- 
appear. It is the Kingdom, in the beginning of chapter 1i., with 
the undisguised exaltation of the chosen people, yet the nations 


126 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


blessed and subject to Jehovah’s reign in Zion. So chapter iv. 
shows the Branch Who alone produces in Israel such excellent 
fruit, after His judgment has purged the guilty. The inter- 
vening part of chapter ii. and all chapter iii. unveils the evil 
and ruin of Zion publicly and privately. Judgment begins at 
God’s house. What will it be for Christendom still more 
favoured? The New Testament answers definitely without 
confounding the professing church with Israel, though we may 
and ought to use the principle in every case possible. The 
most ordinary creeds acknowledge that the Lord Jesus will 
come to judge the quick, as well as the dead. None but open 
infidels would deny the judgment of the dead. Few alas! 
really believe in the judgment of the living. Yet it is of this 
the Lord so often warned, as in Matt. xxiv. xxv., Mark xiii. 
Luke xvii. as well as xxi., which Christendom relegates to the 
end of the world; whereas it will be at the end of this age, 
after which will come the future good age, the blessed era on 
which the Psalms and the Prophets dwell with delight and 
joyful anticipation. Of this our chapter is a witness, as is also 
the beginning of chap. ii, as the latter part speaks of the 
humiliation of man and the overthrow of evil under Jehovah’s 
hand when ushering in His day. 


CHAPTER V. 


THE comparison of chapter v. with vi. illustrates most strikingly 
the ways of God in the judgment of His people. They are 
quite distinct. Indeed chapter vi. comes in abruptly in out- 
ward form, itself distinct from what follows down to the 
seventh verse inclusively of chapter ix. All this intervening 
portion forms a strikingly peculiar parenthesis, but a paren- 
thesis of profound interest and instruction; after which the 
strain of woe, begun in chapter v., is resumed in the thickening 
disasters of Israel and of the land up to their mighty and ever- 
lasting deliverance, which yet awaits its accomplishment in the 
latter day. 

But if these chapters were distinct in time as they certainly 
are in character, the Spirit of God has been pleased to set them 
in immediate juxtaposition with a view to our better admoni- 
tion. In fact they are the two-fold principle or standard 
of judgment which God is wont to apply to His people. 
In the one He would have us to look back, in the other to 
look forward; in the former by all He has done for them He 
measures what they should have been toward Him; in the 
latter He judges them by His own glory manifested in their 
midst. The one answers to the law by which is the knowledge 
of sin; the other to the glory of God, from which every soul 
comes short (Rom. iii. 20). 


In chapter v. the prophet sings a song of Jehovah, his 
well-beloved, about His vineyard. Moses had already (Deut. 
xxxii.) spoken in the ears of Israel a song which celebrates in 
magnificent language the sovereign choice and blessing of God, 
the sins and punishment of the people, but withal His final 


128 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


mercy to His land and people, with whom the spared nations 
are to rejoice. Our chapter takes in a narrower field of view. 

“I will sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touch- 
ing his vineyard. My wellbeloved had a vineyard in a very 
fruitful hill; and he dug it up, and gathered out the stones 
thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine; and he built a 
tower in the midst of it, and also hewed a winepress therein ; 
and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought 
forth wild grapes” (vv. 1, 2). There was no failure on God’s 
part. He had established Israel in the most favourable posi- 
tion, separated them to Himself, removed stumbling-blocks, 
crowned them with favours, vouchsafed not only protection 
but every means of blessing. “And now, inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, between me 
and my vineyard. What could have been done more to my 
vineyard that I have not done in it?” was His appeal to the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem and now of Judah (wv. 3,4). Yet was 
all in vain. The result was only bad fruit. “Wherefore, when 
I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth 
wild grapes?” They, like Adam, transgressed the covenant. 
It was the old story over again. Human responsibility 
ends in total ruin. Man departs from God and corrupts 
His way on the earth. “And now let me tell you what I am 
about to do to my vineyard; I will take away the hedge thereof, 
and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and 
it shall be trodden down; and I will lay it waste—it shall not 
be pruned nor hoed; but there shall come up briers and 
thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain 
upon it. For the vineyard of Jehovah of hosts is the house of 
Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked 
for judgment, but behold bloodshed; for righteousness, but 
behold a cry” (vv, 5-7). Such is His own application of the 
parable. 

Thus the nation, as a whole, is weighed in the divine 
balances, and found wanting. So manifest and grievous is the 
case, that God challenges the inhabitants of Jerusalem and 
the men of Judah to judge between Him and His vineyard, 
though they themselves are the legenerate trees in question, 


CHAPTER V. 129 


There was no more doubt of the goodness shown to Israel than 
of their obligation to yield fruit for God. But obligation pro- 
duces no fruit meet for Him. What was the consequence .on 
such a ground as this? Nothing but woe after woe. ‘Their 
doom would be according to their guilt. 

The truth is that, on the footing of responsibility, every 
creature has failed save One, Who was the Creator, whatever 
might be His lowly condescension in appearing within the 
ranks of men. And what is the secret of victory for the 
believer now or of old? We must be above mere humanity in 
order to walk as saints; yea, in a sense, be above our duty in 
order rightly to accomplish it. As of old, those only walked 
blamelessly according to the law, who looked to the Messiah 
in living faith; so saints now can glorify God in a holy 
righteous walk, only as they are under grace, not law. The 
sense of deliverance and perfect favour in the sight of God 
frees and strengthens the soul where there is the new life; 
the written word illustrated in Christ is the Christian 
rule. Therein, not in the law, is the true transcript of God. 

It will be observed, accordingly, that there is nothing of 
Christ here as the means and channel of grace. Consequently 
all is unrelieved darkness and death; and the prophet presses 
home the evidence of overwhelming constant evil in the people 
of God. Not a ray of comfort or even hope breaks through, 
but only their sins and His judgments chime continually. It is 
the severity of God, who did not spare the natural branches, 
as the apostle says in Rom. xi. ' Detailed sin is retributively 
dealt with, as under the government of God in His people. 
A sixfold series of bold and open sins then follows with their 
punishments from Jehovah. 

“Woe unto them that join house to house, [that] lay field 
to field, till [there be] no room, and ye be made to dwell 
alone in the midst of the land! In mine ears [saith] Jehovah 
of hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, [even] 
great and fair, without inhabitant. For ten acres of vineyard 
shall yield one bath, and a homer of seed shall yield [but] 
an ephah. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, 
[that] they may follow strong drink; that tarry late into the 

q 


ae 
130 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


night, [till] wine inflame them! And the harp and the lute, 
the tabret and the pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but 
they regard not the work of Jehovah, neither have they 
considered the operation of his hands. Therefore my people 
are gone into captivity, for lack of knowledge; and their 
honourable men [are] famished, and their multitude [are] 
parched with thirst. Therefore Sheol hath enlarged her desire, 
and opened her mouth without measure; and their glory, and 
their multitude, and their tumult, and he that rejoiceth among 
them, descend [into it], And the mean man is bowed down, 
and the great man is humbled, and the eyes of the lofty 
are humbled: but Jehovah of hosts is exalted in judgment, 
and God the Holy One is sanctified in righteousness. Then 
shall the lambs feed as in their pasture, and the waste 
places of the fat ones shall wanderers eat. Woe unto them 
that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were 
with a cart rope; that say, Let him make speed, let him 
hasten his work, that we may see [it]; and let the counsel 
of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we 
may know [it]! Woe unto them that call evil good, and 
good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness ; 
that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! Woe unto 
{them that are] wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their 
own sight! Woe unto [them that are] mighty to drink wine, 
and men of strength to mingle strong drink; who justify 
the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of 
the righteous from him! Therefore as the tongue of fire 
devoureth the stubble, and as the dry grass sinketh down 
in the flame, [so] their root shall be as rottenness, and their 
blossom shall go up as dust: because they have rejected the. 
law of Jehovah of hosts, and despised the word of the 
Holy One of Israel” (vv. 8-24). 

There is a woe to such as joined house to house and field to 
field, reckless of all but their own aggrandizement: Jehovah 
shall desolate so that their coveted vineyards and lands shall 
yield but a tithe of what they put in (wv. 8-10). There is a woe 
to the luxurious hunters of social pleasure: captivity shall 
drain them, and Hades itself shall swallow up the mean and the 


~~ 
CHAPTER V. deal 


mighty—multitudes without measure (vv. 11-17). And as for 
the bold sinners who scoffingly invited Jehovah to make speed 
that they might see His work (wv. 18, 19); and for the moral cor- 
ruptors, who broke down all moral distinction, and the wise in 
their own eyes, who could do without God, and the unjust 
friends of the wicked, whose heroism was in wine and strong 
drink, being foes of the righteous, there is woe upon woe (vv, 20— 
24) with utter destruction ; “because they have cast away the 
law of Jehovah of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One 
of Israel.” 

“Therefore is the anger of Jehovah kindled against his people, 
and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath 
smitten them, and the hills did tremble, and their carcases 
[were] as refuse in the midst of the streets. For all this 
his anger is not turned away, but his hand [is] stretched out 
still. And he will lift up an ensign to the nations afar 
off, and will hiss for them from the end of the earth: and, 
behold, they shall come with speed swiftly: none shall be 
weary nor stumble among them; none shall slumber nor 
sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor 
the latchet of their shoes be broken: their arrows [are] sharp, 
and all their bows bent; their horses’ hoofs shall be counted 
like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind. Their roaring 
[shall be] like a lioness, they shall roar like young lions: yea, 
they shall growl, and lay hold of the prey, and carry [it] away 
safe, and there shall be none to deliver. And they shall 
roar against them in that day like the roaring of the sea. 
And if [one] look unto the land, behold darkness [and] distress, 
and the light is darkened in the clouds thereof” (vv. 25-30). 

He had dealt with them already, but the strokes are not 
exhausted. “For all this his anger is not turned away, but 
his hand [is] stretched out still.” Such is the sad and recurring 
burden, as may be seen in chapters ix. x. The avenging 
nations may be far away; but He would give the signal to 
them and the hiss (as for one far off), and “behold, they shall 
come with speed lightly.” A most graphic picture follows of 
their vigour and promptness, their equipment and fierce deter- 
mination from which none can shield or escape. Against Israel 

12 


132 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


shall these foes roar. But they are not yet defined by name. 
« And if one look unto the land, behold darkness [and] distress, 
and the light is darkened in the heavens (or clouds) thereof.” 
Such is the lot of man, or rather here of Israel, where Christ is 
not. There is no deliverance, only judgment after judgment 
on the people and the land. Unrelieved darkness rests there. 
Such is the issue of Israel in their land, of Judah and Jerusalem 
tried under law, no matter what the favours of Jehovah on 
His vineyard and the plant of His pleasures. If He waited 
for judgment, behold bloodshed ; if for righteousness, behold a 
cry. What on this ground could follow but woe upon woe ? 


CHAPTER VI. 


THIs chapter opens a very different scene. It is not the law, 
but Jehovah revealed. Not that the people are one whit 
better; in fact it was only when Christ appeared seven cen- 
turies afterward, that man fully disclosed what he was and is. 
The law proved that man is not only sinful but loves sin; 
Christ’s presence proved that he hates good—hates God Him- 
self manifested in all the purity and lowliness, in the grace and 
truth, of Jesus. It was not only, then, that man was himself 
failing and guilty ; but when an object was there in every way 
worthy of love and homage and worship, the perfect display of 
man to God and of God to man, He was a light so odious and 
intolerable to man, that he could not rest till it was extinguished 
as far as he could effect it. Still we are on ground sensibly and 
strikingly distinct ; and this because the manifestation of Jeho- 
vah is in question, not the responsibility of Israel merely. 
Both chapters show the people judged, but the principles of 
judgment are wholly different. 

It was not in Uzziah’s palmy days that the prophet received 
this vision of glory and this solemn commission, but in the year 
when the once prosperous and now leprosy-smitten son of David 
breathed his last. Nevertheless “the year that king Uzziah 
died” looked very different from “the year that king Ahaz 
died” (Isa, xiv. 28). Yet in the former came the vision which 
fully disclosed to the prophet the universal uncleanness of God’s 
people; as in the latter a burden came on that enemy which 
vexed their south-western flank. In the former year, too, came 
Pekah to the throne of Israel, who laid the deadliest scheme 
with the Gentiles to destroy the line and hope of Messiah, 


134 AN EXPOSITION OF THR BOOK Of ISATAH. 


Then, however, Isaiah saw the Lord sitting on a throne high 
and lifted up, and the mere skirts of His glory filled the 
temple. 

“In the year that king Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting 
upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. 
Above him stood the seraphim: each one had six wings; with 
twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, 
and with twain he did fly. And one cried unto another, and 
said, Holy, holy, holy, [is] Jehovah of hosts: the whole earth [is] 
full of his glory. And the foundations of the thresholds were 
moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled 
with smoke” (vv. 1-4). No vision more glorious had ever burst 
on human eyes: but if the attendant burning spirits embraced 
the fulness of the earth as the scene of His glory, His holiness 
was their first care and chiefest cry. Activity even in the winged 
seraphim is not all nor most. Not all six wings did each need 
for flight, but two only. ‘“ With twain he covered his face, and 
with twain he covered his feet,” in awe toward God and shame 
as to himself, in both the reverence that befits them in His 
presence. 

The effect was immediate on the prophet. It is no longer 
woe unto these or those, but “woe to me.” He is profoundly 
touched with a sense of sin and ruin—his own and the people’s. 
But it is uttered in His presence Whose grace is no less than 
His glory and His holiness, and the remedy is at once applied. 
“Then said I, Woe to me! for Iam undone; for I [am] a man of 
unclean lips; and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean 
lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts. 
And there flew one of the seraphim to me, having a live coal in 
his hand, [which] he had taken with tongs from off the altar; 
and he laid [it] upon my mouth and said, Lo, this hath touched 
thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin is 
expiated” (vv. 5-7). Nor this only: for thus set free in His 
presence, he becomes the ready servant of His will. Before 
this there was no haste to act, but deep self-judgment, and true 
sense of the defiled state of His people, in the light of His 
glory. “Also I heard the voice of Jehovah, saying, Whom 
shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here [am] 1; 


CHAPTER VI. 135 


send me. And he said, Go and tell this people, Hear indeed, 
but understand not; and see indeed, but perceive not. Make 
the heart of this people fat, and make its ears heavy, and smear 
its eyes: lest it see with its eyes, and hear with its ears, and 
its heart understand, and it be converted, and be healed” 
(vv. 8-10). 

Grace thus gives confidence to do God’s bidding ; and though 
the sentence on the guilty people of God is an awful one, not 
only is it most righteous, but a remnant of grace is assured in 
the face of consuming judgment on judgment. This is not the 
way of the gospel which reveals Christ bearing divine judgment 
but the believer saved in sovereign grace, made meet for sharing 
the inheritance of the saints in light at any moment, and 
waiting for Christ’s coming as the chief joy. Judgment must 
be before the kingdom come for the remnant of Israel. Such 
is the charge, and we know how surely it was fulfilled in the 
judicial blindness which fell on the nation, when they confessed 
not their uncleanness and beheld no glory or beauty in Christ 
present in their midst, and refused the testimony of the Holy 
Ghost to Him risen and exalted by the right hand of God. 

But the Spirit of prophecy, if it pronounce the sentence of 
God on the people’s unbelief, is none the less a spirit of inter- 
cession. “Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, 
Until the cities be wasted for want of an inhabitant, and the 
houses for want of man, and the land be utter desolation ; 
and Jehovah have removed men far away, and have multiplied 
forsakings in the midst of the land. But yet in it [shall be] a 
tenth, and it shall return and be for consuming; as the tere- 
binth and the oak, whose stock [remaineth] when cut down: the 
holy seed [shall be] the stock (or trunk) thereof” (vv. 11-18). 
That is, a vital principle survives, the nucleus of what will 
sprout again. 

Nor is there a more surprising moral fact than the accom- 
plishment of this divine sentence on the Jews to this day. 
Thousands of years have elapsed. The Messiah came, and con- 
firmed it (John xii.); the Holy Spirit followed, sent of Him 
and the Father, and He has fully ratified it (Acts xxviii). No 
recondite arguments are needed, no evidence from Nineveh or 


136 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Babylon, from Egypt or Palestine. There the Jews are before 
all eyes, dead while they live, the standing witnesses of judicial 
blindness inflicted, after incomparable patience with their un- 
belief, by their own aggrieved and thrice Holy God, Jehovah of 
hosts. And the mark is proved all the more indelible, because 
they were not permitted to abide in the land they defiled, which 
was to become utterly waste, and themselves removed far away. 

Yet dispersed as they are everywhere, and really amalgamat- 
ing nowhere, no changing circumstances change the Jews any 
more than lapse of ages: a fact which staggered the incredulous 
Hegel as inexplicable, but failed to convince; for unbelief is in- 
vincible to nature. And what adds to the wonder is that they 
outwardly honour the Old Testament, which we Christians 
believe as fully as our own scriptures. But like the philosopher, 
though staggered by Law and Psalms and Prophets that teach 
the sufferings of Messiah and the glories to follow, as well as 
their own scattering for unbelief, and the call of Gentiles during 
that sad interval, the Jews believe no more than the philosopher. 
But this prophecy, with others, makes it plain and accounts for 
all; and He who smote with blindness has made it known here 
to them as to us; and, blessed be His name, He has set a limit to 
the sentence of woe. For the prophet that knew His grace said 
not in vain, “ Lord, how long?” They are kept for His blessing 
and glory in the end. But oh, what tribulation and sifting and 
consuming yet! Burning judgment is to be their means of 
purifying in a way wholly distinct from what ushered the church 
into its place, a still more solemn and unique judgment having 
been borne by Him, Who died, rose, and ascended to be its 
Head. The Jews must pass through the tribulation which has 
no parallel (Matt. xxiv., Mark xiii.) before their deliverance 
comes. “Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it; it 
is even the time of Jacob’s trouble, but he shall be saved out of 
it” (er. xxx. 7). 

Thus, if the departure from God is to be punished with out- 
ward and inward visitation, a remnant is clearly indicated here, 
mercy rejoicing against judgment, and God making good His 
own glory in both respects. But that returned remnant must 
be thinned under the pruning hand of Jehovah, Still the 


CHAPTER VI. 337 


holy seed shall be there, the stock or rooted stump* of the 
nation, when judgment has done its work over and over 
again. There is ever a remnant according to the election of 
grace. 


* NY is derived from a verbal root—to stand fast or establish—and thus in 
its primary sense means a pillar, Hence it can naturally express what sustains 
a tree when cut down. Some take it as the root, others as the trunk or stump; 
but the destruction seems to go farther than leaving the stump erect ; so that 
the idea of the Targum that it means the sap, or that part of the baietnes 
which contains the spring of life, seems agreeable enough to the context. 

We may also observe that, while chapter v. begins the impeachment of Israel’s 
guilt as responsible under the law, chapter vi. first and briefly presents their sin 
in despising Christ’s glory or disbelieving it, as John xii. applies this prophecy. 
So far is the earlier half of the book from being heterogeneous with the later, 
that these are just the twofold indictment which we find there, expanded and 
applied with mature and touching beauty. 


CHAPTER VII. 


In the last chapter we saw the glory of Christ revealed, and 
the assurance of a holy seed after the judgment of the land and 
people. We have now a weighty sequel recounting facts which 
occurred, not in the year king Uzziah died, nor even in the 
days of his successor, but strange as it might seem, in those of 
Ahaz. “This is that king Ahaz,” who without faith in Jeho- 
vah sent to the kings of Assyria for help. Sacrilegious he and 
at last apostate, Jehovah brought Judah low because of Ahaz, 
of David's line; for he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore 
against Jehovah. Even in the midst of his distress he tres- 
passed yet more. Hence the occasion for a fresh outburst of 
prophetic light. It could not otherwise have been clearly 
gathered how the glory of Christ was actually to appear. Our 
chapter solves this question, and connects His incarnation (for 
indeed He is God, yea, Jehovah) with His rejection and His 
final and everlasting triumph (chaps, viii. ix. 1-7). The first 
- part alone comes before us now. 

The occasion was the offensive and profane alliance of Rezin, 
king of Syria, with Pekah, Remaliah’s son and king of Israel, 
against Judah and Ahaz. “And it came to pass in the days of 
Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, [that] 
Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king 
of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to war against it, but could 
not prevail against it. And it was told the house of David, 
saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim. And his heart 
shook, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the forest 
are shaken by the wind” (vv. 1, 2). There were they in great 
fear, where no fear was, and this, alas! in Jerusalem and 
David’s house; and no wonder, for the heir of David’s throne 
walked not like David his father, but in the ways of the 


CHAPTER Vii. 139 


kings of Israel or worse, and drew Judah with him into sore 
transgression against Jehovah. Panic-stricken, yet in no way 
driven by his distress to God, on the self-same spot where 
Rabshakeh uttered his blasphemies against Jehovah at a 
later day, “the aqueduct of the upper pool in the highway 
of the fuller’s field,” Ahaz is met by the prophet. “And 
Jehovah said to Isaiah, Go out now to meet Ahaz, thou and 
Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the aqueduct of the 
upper pool, on the high way of the fuller’s field. And thou 
shalt say unto him, Take heed and be quiet; fear not, and let 
not thy heart faint before these two ends (tails) of smoking 
firebrands, because of the fierce anger of Rezin and Syria, and 
of the son of Remaliah. Inasmuch as Syria hath taken evil 
counsel against thee, Ephrcim and the son of Remaliah, saying, 
Let us go up against Judah, and harass it, and make a breach 
therein for us, and set up a king therein, the son of Tabeal” 
(wv, 3-6). 

How foolish, as well as base, is unbelief! It is joyous and 
confident when a labouring volcano is about to burst; it is filled 
with anguish, when God is going to deal with the evils it dreads. 
In this case, how could He behold in peace a compact between 
apostate Israel and heathen Syria? It was not merely that 
their enterprise, if successful, must vex Judah, but set aside 
David’s line. It was a blow at the Messiah, little as they 
might have thought of this; and the oath and honour of God 
were thus at stake. But “thus saith the Lord Jehovah, It 
shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. For the head of 
Syria [is] Damascus, and the head of Damascus [is] Rezin; and 
within sixty-five years shall Ephraim be broken, so as to be not 
a people. And the head of Ephraim [is] Samaria, and the head 
of Samaria [is] Remaliah’s son. If ye will not believe, surely 
ye shall not be established” (vv. 7-9). 

How blessed are the ways of God! The effort to destroy, 
which seemed so awful to its objects, especially as their con- 
science was bad, led at once to the revelation of the doom of 
the destroyers. The confederacy came to nought. The Syrian 
chief would not avail to shield more guilty Ephraim ; for it was 
sentenced—yea, to be so broken as not to be a people, within 


140 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


sixty-five years; and so it fell out to the letter (2 Kings xvii). 
The chief of Ephraim’s capital is paraded before us like his ally 
in due form and title. Such would each remain, and no more. 
Who were they to dispute the counsels of God as to David’s 
royal line, let Ahaz be personally faithless and false as he was ? 
God at least is God, and His word shall stand for ever, though 
surely unbelief shall not be established, whether in Ephraim or 
in Judah. God’s people, God’s king; how inexcusable, if such 
failed in faith! 

One can understand why rationalists cavil at the sixty-five 
years, challenge its accuracy, and reason on its being no answer 
to the anxiety of Ahaz. It does prove how specific is prophecy, 
and this beyond the present moment; for it is the exact point 
when Ephraim, suffering repeated blows, was not only swept 
away but excluded from the land by Esarhaddon’s importation 
of foreigners. It opens the way for the great prediction still 
farther off. 

For this was only the prelude to the weightier announce- 
ment that follows. “And Jehovah spoke again unto Ahaz, saying, 
Ask for thee a sign from Jehovah thy God: ask it in the depth or 
in the height above. But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will 
I tempt Jehovah” (vv. 10-12). Alas! how often the hypocrisy 
of unbelief thus essays to hide its contempt of Jehovah; and 
thorough presumption, which really despises the word of His 
grace, assumes the garb of superior reverence and humility. 
The prophet, however, sees through the cheat put forward by an 
evil heart of unbelief, and calls now on the house of David to 
hear, not alone his reproof, but what the Lord Himself was to 
give. Ahaz shrank from God even in His goodness, Flesh never 
trusts God. It is bent on its own will and instinctively avoids 
grace, which must assert and give effect to the will of God. 

Ahaz did not like God to draw too near. God answered it by 
Immanuel—God with us. “And he said, Hear then, house of 
David. [Is it] a small matter for you to weary men, that ye 
weary also my God? Therefore will Jehovah Himself give you 
a sign. Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son and 
shall call his name Immanuel. Curds and honey shall he eat, 
that he may know to refuse the evil and to choose the good” 


ys 


CHAPTER VII. 141 


(vv. 13-15). Was it not the most marvellous grace so to 
promise to sucha man? Yet in truth grace condemns unbelief 
and all other sin as the law never did or could. Had Ahaz 
asked any sign within his range of earth and heaven, how im- 
measurably short of God’s! If man refuses to ask through 
unbelief, God fails not to give a sign for His own glory: the 
virgin’s Son, the woman’s Seed, Immanuel! What thoughts, 
feelings, and facts cluster here together! What grace and truth, 
God and man united in one person! The security of David's 
royal line and rights, how much more than the predicted ruin 
of plotting Ephraim, in the presence of the sign, the truth of 
truths—God with us! Yet was it the assurance, if its grandeur 
betokened other and higher glories, that no conspiracy could 
prosper which struck at the Root and Offspring of David. 

It is well known that the Jews have made desperate efforts 
to evade this luminous testimony to the Incarnation in their 
own prophet. First they exaggerate the difference between 
maby and nding, Confessedly the latter is the more common 
word for virgin; for the former occurs in not more than six 
passages beside the one before us. But it is certain that in 
Joel i. 8 “b’thulah” is employed for a young married woman, 
which is never the case with “almah”; see also Deut. xxii. 19. 
For the argument on Prov. xxx. 19, 20, is quite invalid to prove 
it synonymous with an adulterous woman. In the present 
instance the context requires the sense of virgin with the 
utmost precision; for in a young married woman’s bearing a 
son there is no sign or wonder. It was from the first known 
that the Deliverer of man from the serpent enemy of the race 
must be born of woman in some distinctive way ; it was known 
that He must be also son of Abraham, in the line of Isaac, and 
Jacob, of Judah and David. It is now narrowed to a virgin 
therefore, by necessary implication, of that royal house. The 
virgin should be pregnant and bear Him; a sign indeed ! in one 
sense explained, in another enhanced, by the capital truth that 
He should be God—of divine nature as truly as the woman's 
Seed. The virgin’s Son is Immanuel, the Lord Jehovah, Whose 
glory the prophet had seen in connexion with the preservation 
of a holy seed, spite of their repeated desolations. Thus the 


142 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


person of the Messiah, and specifically the solution of the 
enigma of His divine being, yet in association with the 
family of David, is fully cleared up. 

Hence the Septuagint (a version made before the dispute 
arose) very properly gives here (as in Gen. xxiv. 43) 4 rapOévos, 
whereas Aquila and Symmachus chose vedic. But it is plain 
that even the latter cannot get rid of the truth intended in 
the context; and the wild interpretations of some Jews and all 
Rationalists prove how hard set they are to evade its truth. 
In Solomon’s Song (vi. 8), where the Septuagint translates 
the Hebrew term as veaydes, the strict meaning of virgins 
is certain; for it is distinguished from Bacldiooa and 
qaAAakal, and, like our word “ maidens,” can only be used 
as “virgins,” as Rashi seems to allow in his comment on chapter 
i. 3. Nor can there well be a more glaring instance of an 
offensive prejudice than Gesenius’ abandonment of the evident 
source of the word in bby, to “hide,’* in order to justify a 
more vague origin from an Arabic source. 

Again, the most recent Jewish version known to me, that of 
Isaac Leeser, renders the article by the demonstrative. This 
is illegitimate. The object clearly is to refer the person in 
question to a young person then present. Nevertheless Mr. 
Leeser is more candid in his rendering of 777 than some of his 
brethren and their rationalistic followers; for he, like Rashi 
before him, correctly renders it “shall conceive,” not “is with 
child.” Probably the latter considered the prophet’s wife+ to 
be in question, and the child to be the same as Maher-shalal- 
hash-baz. Here the Rabbis are in conflict. Thus Kimchi held 
that the young woman could not be Isaiah’s wife (for she must 
then have been designated the prophetess, as in chapter viii. 3), 
and therefore conceived her to be the wife of Ahaz, and 
imagined for them an unknown son named Immanuel. Aben 
Ezra is at issue with both; for he held it to be a third gon of the 
prophetess, and so rather approached Rashi; but with Kimchi 
he held the sign to be the child’s eating cream and honey as 


8 Even Aquila confirms this, the only true derivation of the word, and its 
kindred form for the other sex, by giving daréxpu@os in Gen. xxiv. 43, 


+ G¥senius, who thought so too, tried to escape the difficulty of nnbyn. 
Rime em 


CHAPTER VII. 143 


soon as born. No more words are needed to expose such views. 
Even Kimchi disposes of Isaiah and the prophetess by asking 
how then the land could be called Immanuel’s land. 

Manifestly the Jews do not agree, save in opposing the only 
interpretation which carries with it a clear and noble sense, yet 
to be the joy of repentant Israel. The notion that Hezekiah 
was the virgin’s son is wholly inadmissible; for as Ahaz reigned 
sixteen years, and he himself was twenty-five years of age when 
he began to reign, he must have been a boy at least eight years 
old before his father’s reign began; and hence no prediction of 
his birth could have been made by Isaiah to Ahaz already on 
the throne. There is not a hint in scripture of Ahaz taking 
another wife after his accession and the announcement; still 
less is there room for a personage so wonderful, to say the least, 
as the Immanuel to be born, Who should altogether eclipse 
Hezekiah and break off the yoke of the Assyrian from the neck 
of Israel, the glorious person to bring in the glorious state 
promised in chapter ix. 6, 7. 

It is as plain as can be on the face of these chapters that 
Shear-jashub (= the remnant shall return) was already born, 
and the prophet’s companion, as we see at the beginning of 
chapter vii. Not less plain is it that Maher-shalal-hash-baz 
(= hasten prey, speed spoil, chapter viii.) was to be born of 
the prophetess. Both distinctly set forth the great events of 
undying interest to Israel, the one pledging the return of the 
remnant, the other intimating the Assyrian attack and its con- 
sequences. Why trust the Assyrian who should spoil the holy 
land? Why dread the kings who were so soon to be swept 
away? But between the two comes a wholly different promise, 
the virgin’s Son, excluding in all fairness of exposition both the 
king and the prophet with their children. His name Immanuel 
(God with us) speaks incomparably better things; and it re- 
appears after the prophet’s second son, and even after the 
horrors represented by his name, when devastation had done its 
worst. But woe to those who meddle with Thy land, O Im- 
manuel! Israel, and Judah, and David’s house may too justly 
bring down the chastening, and “the king” in the land at the 
end be yet worse than the unworthy politician who then held the 


144 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


sceptre. The ruin may seem complete, deliverance hopeless ; 
but Immanuel! that is, God is with us. Such is the general 
outline. Further details are yet to be given in their place. 
We shall see that the following chapters, both in the extent 
and nature of Israel’s distress and evil, the changed relation of 
God to His people, and above all the glorious interposition of 
Immanuel, go far beyond any present or proximate encourage- 
ment to Israel (though there was this of course), and look on to 
days still future and quite distinct from anything meanwhile 
accomplished by Christ for the Christian or the church. 

Nothing can be more apposite than “the sign” Jehovah gave, 
little as the feeble and self-willed Ahab might appreciate it. 
For the coalition of the king of Israel with him of Syria was to 
depose the house of David and set up Ben-Tabeal over Judah. 
Man would have counted it enough to promise that his son 
Hezekiah, and his son, and so on, should succeed; and this 
would have been much to comfort one who simply confided in 
a promise through a divinely sent prophet. But as howsoever 
many the promises of God, in Christ is the Yea, so through Him 
too is the Amen for glory to God by us. Hence for the Jew all 
is made to centre in the Messiah. Not merely shall a remnant 
return, but the Seed of promise, the virgin’s Son, be born. Put 
this birth as far off as you please from the time of Ahaz, only 
thereby do you render more conspicuous the voice of God in 
prophecy and the sure mercies of David. The righteous cove- 
nant of God would not fail to judge what an Ahaz and a 
Manasseh, a Jehoiakim, a Jehoiachin, and a Zedekiah would 
sow, spite of a faithful Hezekiah or a godly Josiah. But Im- 
manuel was an indefectible assurance that no confederacy 
~ could put down David’s house finally. Messiah, Son of David, 
is the divine guarantee. The virgin must bear Him of that 
stock; the virgin’s Son must also be, in some true though 
mysterious way, God Himself. Immanuel ensures that God’s 
purpose of blessing shall stand and be established for ever. 

It has been observed that the “son” Immanuel, in verse 14, 
appears not to be “the youth” of verse 16; which last refers 
rather to Shear-jashub, who for this reason seems to have 
accompanied the prophet. And it is pertinent to observe 


CHAPTER VII. 145 


that the Hebrew here is neither “son” nor “child” strictly, 
but “the youth” or “lad,” Wit. “For before the youth knoweth 
to refuse the evil and choose the good, the land, because of 
whose two kings thou art alarmed, shall be forsaken 
(of. vi. 11). Jehovah will bring upon thee and upon thy 
father’s house days which have not come since the day 
when Ephraim turned away from Judah—the king of 
Assyria” (vv. 16,17). Great as the disaster had been under 
Jeroboam, a greater was at hand, with triumph in the end. 
It will be noticed, accordingly, that here we have Isaiah 
turning from “the house of David,” “ye” and “you” to 
“thou” etc., that is, Ahaz. Compare verses 13, 14 with 16, 17. 
And it is certain that the prophet’s child Shear-jashub had the 
character of a “sign” (see chap. viii. 18), though and of course 
very distinct from God’s great sign, the virgin’s Son. From verse 
16 the king was to learn, that before the youth (who appears 
almost certainly to be Shear-jashub) arrived at years of 
discretion, the allied kings must disappear from the scene. 
And so they did: for three years more scarce passed when the 
kings of Israel and Syria fell before the treachery or might of 
their enemies. 

It is only fair to add that some Christians, who fully see the 
Incarnation here, understand all the verses (14-16) to refer to 
Immanuel. Some even go so far as to accept the notion of 
certain Rabbis that the prophet in spirit beholds the virgin 
already pregnant, on the principle of prophecy anticipating the 
fact sometimes as though present. Others again, by the youth 
or lad of v. 16, understand any youngling, not one in particular. 
But whatever be the shade of difference in detail, the unique 
fact stands indelible in its majestic outline. 

The difficulty urged as to “the land” which should be for- 
saken, whose two kings were an object of abhorrence or alarm 
to Ahaz, is imaginary. The land or ground 38 is not at 
all restricted to the sense of a single country. It is a word 
susceptible of considerable variety of meaning, as the context 
may require, from land or ground in the narrowest sense, to an 
entire country or several countries, or even to the superficial 
world at large, the habitable earth, Thus in “all the families of 

K 


146. AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


the earth” its force is extended comprehensively ; and here the 
two kings define it as the land, not of one only, but of them both. 
Compare as to this chapter viii. 4, “ For before the child [Maher- 
shalal-hash-baz] shall have knowledge to ery, My father and my 
mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall 
be taken away before the king of Assyria.” See also 2 Kings 
xv. 29, 30; xvi. 9. The “two kings” would seem to be, there- 
fore, those of Syria and Samaria or Israel, and “the land,” that 
which pertained to each. The Messianic interpretation of ver. 
14 rests on an irrefragable basis, whether or not it be continued 
to verses 15, 16, and the application of the two kings to those 
of Israel and Syria. 

The efforts of Jews and rationalists to shake this striking 
prophecy of the Messiah are not violent merely but pitiable. 
Thus some of them turn it: He whose name is Wonderful 
Counsellor, Mighty God,* Father of eternity, shall call him 
(Hezekiah) Prince of peace. Even here the witnesses do not 
agree: for the Talmud, which applies it in the same way, boldly 
gives all eight titles to the son of Ahaz. But the construction 
is also, as Dr. M’Caul pointed out, contrary to Hebrew idiom, 
which requires that 1¥, referring to the person named, should 
be placed between the name and the person or thing named 
(see Gen. xvi. 15, xxi. 3, xxii. 14; Exod. ii. 22; Ruth iv. Lt: 
1 Sam. i. 20; 2 Sam. xii. 25). The Talmudical application of 
all to Hezekiah is too exaggerated if not impious for some 
modern Jews who follow Rashi. But even their attribute of 
Prince of peace to that pious king is in the face of all the 
scriptural account of his troubled reign. Others, like Mr. 
Leeser, translate it “Counsellor of the mighty God, of the ever- 
lasting Father, prince of peace,” and think it important to note 
that it alludes to a child already born, contrary to his own 
version of chapter vii. 14, and forgetful of the habit of the 
prophets to speak of things that are not as though they were 
(realising them in prophetic vision, but giving enough in the 
context to prove that they are future). 


* Gesenius would like to translate this title “the mighty hero,” in order to 
get rid of “‘God” here, But 28 is never used ag as adjective ; and even so, if 
it were here only, it should follow, not precede, 7433, as has been noticed, 


CHAPTER VII. 147 


_ But the Targum supports the proper Messianic reference, and 

proves that among the ancient Jews no doubt was entertained 
that the prophet spoke only of the Messiah. The desolation of 
the land of old by the Assyrian will be renewed by the last 
representative of the great northern and eastern power, to 
whom the prophets really look onward. How vain then for 
Ahaz to seek confederacy with the Assyrian of his day! Con- 
federacies were of old, confederacies will be pre-eminently in the 
last days; but the people of God must not trust and need not 
fear them. Let Jehovah be their refuge and their sanctuary ; the 
godly remnant, His disciples, will need it for the awful and un- 
exampled troubles at the end of this age. Yet the light of 
Galilee will appear for them. Immanuel, because of whose 
rejection Jehovah had so long hidden His face from the house 
of Jacob (what a comment on Jewish history since Titus took 
Jerusalem, yea, since the cross !), will cause light to spring up 
among the despised but godly ones of the people, as at Christ’s 
first coming. In that day, when the climax of trial is reached, 
and the righteous seem hopelessly broken by the pride and blas- 
phemy of the apostate mass of the Jews, in confederacy with 
the apostate head of the western powers to hold off the Assyrian, 
Jehovah of Israel will display Himself their deliverer, but 
prove no other than their own crucified Messiah, now to reign 
over them in power and glory and peace for ever. 

The reader will find abundant confirmation of all this in the 
context, and by a careful study of chapters x. xi., where he will 
find the Assyrian once more, and his destruction followed by 
the reign of the victorious Messiah. Many who love the truth 
are, grievous to say, to be censured for a too eager conversion of 
these scriptures to their own relationship with the Lord. Now 
the Old Testament gives us but common divine principles for 
all saints; in the New should we look for, as there only can we 
find, specific direction and instruction in what is properly 
Christian. Such an evident bias, and the plain perversion 
which results, do incalculable mischief to the Jews, as well as 
afford ready occasion of attack to unbelief where mind is exer- 
cised on scripture. ‘In such interpretations they can easily 
prove the popular views of Christendom erroneous, and hence 

K 2 


148 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


harden themselves in their own deadly error against the truth 
which the least enlightened Christian knows he has from God. 
Should guilty Ahaz and Judah, then, go unpunished? In no 
wise, as the prophet proceeds to let him know. “And it shall 
come to pass in that day, [that] Jehovah will hiss for the fly that 
[is] in the uppermost part of the streams of Egypt, and for the 
bee that [is] in the land of Assyria; and they shall come and 
settle all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the 
rocks, and on all thorn-bushes, and on all the pastures” (vv. 18, 
19). The faith of Hezekiah might stay the execution of Judah’s 
judgment, and the king of Assyria was rebuked for a season. 
But even Josiah, faithful as he was, suffered for his rash opposi- 
tion to “ the fly that is at the end of the streams of Egypt”; and 
“the bee that is in the land of Assyria” stung yet more fiercely 
at the summons of Jehovah. “In that day will Jehovah with 
a razor hired beyond the river, with the king of Assyria, shave 
the head and the hair of the feet, yea, it will also consume 
the beard. And it shall come to pass in that day, [that] a man 
shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep. And it shall come 
to pass for the abundance of milk [that] they shall give, he shall 
eat curds: for curds and honey shall every one eat [that is] left 
in the land. And it shall come to pass in that day, [that] every 
place, where were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, 
shall become briars and thorns. With arrows and with bow 
shall they come thither, because the whole land shall become 
briars and thorns. And all the hills that were hoed with the 
hoe, thither they will not come for fear of briars and thorns; 
but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the tread- 
ing of sheep” (vv. 20-25). The character of Israel’s land should 
thus be wholly changed; and so complete is the desolation en- 
suing, that the owner of a young cow and two sheep would find 
the amplest range for his scanty flock in the wilderness that 
succeeded to the rich cornfields of Palestine, and himself be fed 
on the nourishment proper to wandering hordes, not on the food 
of cultivated land. What a picture! Yes, and the best of vine- 
yards (compare Song of Sol. viii. 11) becomes a bed of briars 
and thorns; and men cannot pass unprotected by bows and 
arrows; and the carefully tended hills are turned into a place 


CHAPTER Vit. 149 


for oxen and lesser cattle. So dark as well as minute are the 
lines in which the sorrowful change in Judea is set before 
her king. 

Thus the league Ahaz dreaded came to nothing; but the 
Assyrian on whom he leaned became the rod for the guilty king 
and people. God will be the refuge of His people, and turns 
the resource of unbelief into their scourge. Here the Assyrian 
pursues his sweeping ravages unchecked for a season. The 
figure of shaving as with a razor, is expressive and obvious; 
but here it is carried out into striking details. It is not the 
head only that is thus stripped bare, but the least and lowest 
and scantiest parts of the body politic; as the beard represents 
that which in feelings then prevalent was most sensitive of 
dishonour. The closing verses set forth a vivid picture of the 
results of spoilation, where an agricultural people are reduced 
to a handful of stragglers living on pastoral produce that cost 
little or no labour. We must not confound a land flowing with 
milk and honey, the normal state of the land and people, and a 
man here or there keeping a young cow and two sheep, yet 
from that scanty stock finding such abundance of milk as to eat 
curds or butter. No corn, wine, or oil; no grapes or olives, figs 
or pomegranates; no exchange of harvest or stock produce for 
commodities amidst a numerous and thriving population; but 
thorns and briars where had been the richest vineyards, and one 
going thither with arrows and the bow; and what was once 
sedulously tilled consigned to cattle great or small. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


We have already the two great parties of which the prophecy 
treats, Lmmanuel and the Assyrian. The virgin should conceive 
a Son—Messiah, Immanuel; Jehovah should bring upon the 
unworthy son of David the king of Assyria, to whom alone he 
had looked for succour. The humblest Jew ought to have cried 
to Jehovah. 

In the chapter before us now we have other and fuller in- 
formation vouchsafed of Jehovah. “And Jehovah said unto me, 
Take thee a great tablet, and write upon it with the pen of man, 
For Maher-shalal-hash-baz. And I took (or will take) unto me 
faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the 
son of Jeberechiah. And I went unto the prophetess; and she 
conceived, and bare a son, Then said Jehovah unto me, Call 
his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz” (vv. 1-3), This is explained 
to Isaiah and by him, “ For before the child shall have know- 
ledge to cry, My father, and My mother, the riches of Damascus 
and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of 
Assyria” (v. 4). And all this, as the inspired history proves, was 
fulfilled to the letter. 

But there is more, “And Jehovah spoke again unto me, 
saying, Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah 
that flow softly, even rejoicing in Rezin and in Remaliah’s son, 
therefore behold the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of 
the river, strong and many, the king of Assyria and all his 
glory. And he shall mount up over all his channels, and go 
over all his banks; and he shall Sweep on into Judah; and he 
shall overflow and go farther, he shall reach [even] to the neck; 
and the out-stretching of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy 
land, O Immanuel” (vv, 5-8). We are here in the presence of 
the scenes of the latter day, whatever type in the measure of 


CHAPTER VIII. 151 


accomplishment near at hand. The water of Shiloah being des- 
pised, there must come the far different waters of the Assyrian, 
and these all but overwhelmingly, when He (whose Incarnation 
had been announced to the unbelieving Ahaz as God’s sign in 
mercy) shall at length appear to vindicate His land. The Assy- 
rian proudly fills the land, reaching even “to the neck ;” yet 
he is not merely checked and put to shame, but utterly and for 
ever broken in Immanuel’s land. Compare Micah v. 3-5; for the 
mind of the Spirit is one, and scripture cannot be in vain. 

The people here had no faith, any more than the king in the 
preceding scene. Both of them despised the ways and the 
promises of God. Their confidence, as their fear, was man. If 
Ahaz cowered before the two tails of the smoking firebrands, as 
Jehovah contemptuously designated the fierce anger of the com- 
bined kings of Israel and Syria, the people refused the softly- 
flowing streams of Shiloah. Just would be their retribution. 
The impetuous river, the Assyrian, should rise to overflowing 
and well-nigh overwhelm the land. 

But is it not “thy land, O Immanuel?” Assuredly; and 
whatever be the king, whatever the people, whatever the needed 
humbling of them both, will not God avenge the insult to Him 
who, when reviled, reviled not again? He is not deaf to the 
ery of His elect: how does He feel for Immanuel and Im- 
manuel’s land? Did the people associate themselves? They 
might spare themselves the trouble ; they shall be broken, Did 
all they of far countries gird themselves? If they fear not, let 
them hear their sentence of Jehovah. “ Rage, ye peoples, and ye 
shall be broken in pieces. And give ear, all ye distant parts of 
the earth. Gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces ; 
gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel 
together, and it shall come to nought; speak a word, and it 
shall not stand; for God [is] with us [Immanuel]” (vv. 9, 10). 
Immanuel is far more and other than Shear-jashub. 

This opens the door for pointing out the path of faith for the 
godly, Jehovah Himself the sole and sure resource, the one 
object of reverence and fear in a day of manifold evil and 
thickening danger. “For Jehovah spoke thus to me with a 
strong hand, and instructed me not to walk in the way of this 


152 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


people, saying, Say ye not, Confederacy (or conspiracy), of every- 
thing of which this people shall say, Confederacy ; neither fear 
ye their fear, nor be in dread. Jehovah of hosts, him shall ye 
sanctify ; and [let] him [be] your fear, and [let] him [be] your 
dread. And he will be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of 
stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the houses of 
Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken 
and snared and taken. Bind thou up the testimony, seal the 
law among my disciples. And I will wait for Jehovah that 
hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for 
him. Behold, I and the children whom Jehovah hath given 
me [are] for signs and for wonders in Israel from Jehovah of 
hosts who dwelleth in mount Zion” (wv. 11-18). 

Now it is certain that those “disciples,” who had pre-trusted 
in the Christ (Eph. i. 12), while the mass of the Jews rejected 
Him, as alas! they do still, became at Pentecost the nucleus of 
Christianity, and were “added together daily” by the Lord, and 
formed “their own company” (Acts iv. 23), distinctly called 
“the church” (Acts v.11) thenceforward. But this heavenly 
transformation is quite omitted here, and left as a secret to be 
made known in the New Testament. The prophet looks on- 
ward to the accomplishment of their hopes as Israel for the 
earth under the Messiah in the latter day. In neither the Old 
Testament is it Israel transferred to the church, nor in the New 
Testament the church incorporating Israel by-and-by. But 
the church itself, as Christ’s body, is in no way revealed here. 
Tt is left as a heavenly secret to be revealed to the holy 
apostles and prophets by the Spirit in the New Testament. 
And we pass over from the godly remnant at our Lord’s first 
advent to the troublous and dark scene which precedes the 
day of His appearing at the end of this age. This, which is the 
evident and simple truth of the passage, cuts up by the root the 
allegorising fancy that Judah or Israel means the church. In 
fact, they never mean it but the ancient people of Jehovah 
reserved, through the just chastisement of their sins, to be 
His people blessed in sovereign mercy in His day of blessing 
for all the families of the earth. The church is called out of 


CHAPTER VIII. 153 


the world for heavenly glory. To identify two bodies so dis- 
tinct and contrasted is to lose the definite truth of each and 
of both. 

Meanwhile the prophet believes in what Jehovah made 
known, whether in judgment of the mass, or in mercy to 
the remnant. It is a Gentile thought, deserving of all reproba- 
tion, that prophecy was given only to be believed and under- 
stood when, being fulfilled, it then became history. There is a 
remnant always that believes; and they gather thereby present 
cheer in the midst of sorrow. In truth, to be thus in felt and 
confessed weakness, to be cast therefore on “Jehovah of hosts 
Himself,” is really, spite of all appearance to the eyes and 
reasonings of men, to be master of the situation. Even in 
a still more blessed way the apostle could take pleasure in 
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in dis- 
tresses for Christ’s sake. “Most gladly (as he had said before) 
will I rather glory in mine infirmities that the power of Christ 
may rest upon me.” But here we listen to the prophet, who 
assures us of the final triumphant deliverance of Israel. There 
is connection with present facts, and looking onward through 
the dreary circumstances of the desolate remnant, till Jehovah 
rises up and settles all for their deliverance in the destruction 
of every foe. The united strength of their enemies should be 
vain, What those who feared Jehovah needed was neither 
a confederacy nor alarm at such as trusted in it, but to 
sanctify Jehovah, and make Him their sanctuary. Yet He 
should be a stone of stumbling, even to both the houses of 
Israel, yea, a gin and snare to Jerusalem itself. 

It is clear, then, that here we have not only the nations who 
would have swallowed up Israel doomed to a total overthrow, 
but the truth so strange and unpalatable (save to Gentile conceit) 
long after, of Israel too in all its extent stumbling at the stone 
of stumbling—their own Jehovah-Messiah. And withal, in the 
midst are seen a feeble few cleaving to His testimony, and owned 
as His disciples, while Jehovah hid His face from the people as 
a whole. They become a separate remnant, when the mass 
stumble, fall, and are broken, snared and taken. Hence, in the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Holy Spirit does not hesitate to cite 


154 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


v. 18 with other scriptures (Psalms xvi. and xxii.), to prove the 
sanctified and the Sanctifier “all of one.” For indeed He 
is not ashamed to call them brethren; and this, now in 
Christianity, while the nation is given over to blindness and 
unbelief. 

Surely in presence of such a prophecy, more than seven 
centuries before it began to be fulfilled, men ought to be 
ashamed of their cavils. How overlook so plain a key to the 
light of God with Christ’s disciples, while the Jews have 
stumbled at the stumbling-stone, and Jehovah hides His 
face from the house of Jacob? Yet the Jews shall yet under- 
stand these signs and wonders when they bow their stiff neck 
to their rejected Messiah. 

The closing verses show their exceeding iniquity and their 
impious recourse to the powers of darkness in their own 
evident want of light, as they despised and departed from the 
law and the testimony of Jehovah. The effect is intense 
misery, audacious rage, and blasphemy of their King and their 
God, in all the agony of despair. “And when they shall say 
unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits and unto the 
wizards, that chirp and that mutter: should not a people seek 
unto their God? on behalf of the living [should they seek] unto 
the dead? To the law and to the testimony! if they speak not 
according to this word, surely there is no morning for them. 
And they shall pass through it, hardly distressed and hungry: 
and it shall come to pass that, when they shall be hungry, 
they will fret themselves, and curse (or by) their king and 
their God, and turn their faces upward: and they will look 
unto the earth, and behold, distress and darkness, the gloom 
of anguish; and into thick darkness they shall be driven 
away” (vv, 19-22). 


CHAPTER IX. 


“For the gloom [is] not [to be] to her that was in anguish. 
At first he degraded the land of Zebulun and the land of 
Naphtali; but later he honoured, the way of the sea, beyond 
Jordan, Galilee of the nations** The people that walked in 
darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of 
the shadow of death, upon them the light hath shone” (vv, 1, 2). 
The citation of this in Matthew iv. gives much insight. There 
the fulfilment applies to the presence and ministry of the Lord 
in that region so despised, as far as the people are concerned. 
Let the hand of oppression be yet more grievous than had 
ever pressed upon them; yet would there be this difference 
(and how verified during our Lord’s first appearing in their 
midst !), that among the darkest and most despised in the land 
should spring up a great light. It was in Galilee, not 
Jerusalem, that the grace of Jesus shone. And so in the 
last days: the Galilean character attaches to the future 
remnant. Jerusalem will be the prey of the worst delusions 
and deadliest error. But the darkest and coldest night 
precedes a dawn of joy and glory. And so it will be for Israel 
when He who was despised and their stumbling-block, but 
withal Jehovah the shield and sanctuary of the weak yet godly 
remnant, shall rise and shine in all His effulgence on His 
people. 

“Thou hast multiplied the nation, thou hastt increased their 
joy: they joy before thee as with the joy of harvest, as they 

* Dr. W. Kay thus translates it, ‘‘ For no gloom is there to her that was dis- 
tressed, At the former time He brought contempt on the land of Zebulun, and 
on the land of Naphtali ; but in the latter time He brought honour, the way of 
the sea, &c.” 


+ It is plain that ‘‘ not increased the joy” is erroneous. The margin is right, 
substantially, as the next clause might prove to any reader, 


156 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


rejoice when they divide the spoil. For thou hast broken the 
yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of 
his oppressor, as in the day of Midian. For every boot of him 
that is shod for the tumult, and the garment rolled in blood, 
shall. be for burning, fuel for fire. For unto us a child is born, 
unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon 
his shoulder: and his name is called Wonderful, Counsellor, 
Mighty God, Father of eternity (or the coming age), Prince of 
Peace. To the increase of the government and to peace [there 
shall be] no end upon the throne of David, and upon his 
kingdom, to establish it and to uphold it with judgment and 
with righteousness from henceforth even for ever. The jealousy 
of Jehovah of hosts will perform this” (vv. 3-7). 

Now the Messiah rejected by the Jews sits on the throne 
of God His Father, in contrast with His own throne, which He 
is to take another day. Neither David nor any other sat 
on the Father’s throne. The very notion is not only ignorance 
but profanity. At His coming again He will sit upon the 
throne of David according to the prophecy before us and many 
more. Then will be fulfilled the latter part of Psalm ii. The 
nations will be shattered, not converted (whatever mercy may 
follow), and Zion rejoice with gladness everlasting. The 
transition here is plain and immediate from the first advent in 
grace and humiliation to the second in power and glory. The 
heavenly exaltation of Christ, and of the church in union with 
Him, is passed over. 

The hour of freedom and victory for Israel is come; and 
Jehovah it is who has done all. But it is not as in ordinary 
war: the noise of human conflict and bloodshed shall end, 
greave and war-cloak be for burning and fuel of fire. And 
no wonder, when He stands out their Kinsman-Redeemer, the 
true but once rejected Son of David, who is their boast now, 
with every name of power and peace and blessing, with an 
endless reign before Him, established with righteousness and 
judgment from henceforth and for ever. Truly “the zeal 
(or Jealousy) of Jehovah of hosts will perform this.” 

The prophet now resumes the dirge of judgment on the 
nation in general, begun in chapter v., and interrupted by the 


CHAPTER IX. 157 


two-fold episode of chapter vi, and of chapters vii. viii. ix. 
1-7. This last gave us the special development of Jehovah’s 
ways with His people: the revelation of His glory in Christ, 
with its effects in judgment and mercy ; the Incarnation, or 
Immanuel, the virgin’s Son, the stay of David’s house and hope 
of Israel, spite of the land desolated by the Assyrian ; then the 
reappearance of the Assyrian, now that it is Immanuel’s 
land, and the overthrow of all the Gentiles associated with 
him, whatever his great but temporary successes even in the 
pleasant land. Next, is an inner moral view of the people 
when (strange to say) Jehovah should be for a stone of stumb- 
ling to both the houses of Israel, but a sure sanctuary for 
a godly remnant, “My disciples,’ who would be for signs 
and wonders in Israel at the very time Jehovah hides His face, 
as He is clearly doing now, from the house of Jacob. All 
closes in darkness and trouble such as never was for the mass, 
and yet with light for the despised Galileans, as at the Lord’s 
first advent. So just before the nation is multiplied, the oppres- 
sion is broken, the victory won not by human sword but by 
burning and fuel of fire; and He who is not more surely 
the virgin’s Son, the woman’s Seed, than the mighty God, 
the Prince of peace, establishes His blessed kingdom from 
henceforth even for ever. 


Here we take up again (compare chap. v. 25) the general 
strain, but with allusion to some of the instruction, as for 
instance to Rezin and the Assyrian, in the parenthetical part. 
Verses 8-12 contain the renewed announcement of divine 
displeasure, which began with the sin of Jerusalem and Judah, 
as was fitting; now it passes to Ephraim and Samaria. 
“The Lord sent a word unto Jacob, and it hath lighted upon 
Israel. And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the 
inhabitant of Samaria, that say in pride and stoutness of heart, 
The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn 
stones: the sycamores are cut down, but we will replace [them] 
with cedars. And Jehovah will set up the adversaries of 
Rezin against him, and stir up his enemies, the Syrians before 
and the Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with 


158 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


open mouth.” It is clear that as yet the ten rebellious tribes 
are the object of judgment, and emphatically their pride 
of heart in despising Jehovah’s rebuke and confiding in their 
own powers. For this is their fond hope and vain-glorious 
arrogance, turning their breach into an occasion of greater 
strength and display than ever. “The bricks are fallen down, 
but we will build with hewn stones: the sycamores are cut 
down, but we will replace [them] with cedars.” But here came 
the retributive dealing of God. Had Syria’s king, Rezin, 
joined them in unholy league against Judah? “Therefore 
Jehovah shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, 
and join his enemies together; the Syrians before and the 
Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with open 
mouth.” So it ever is. The unfaithful people seek the world’s 
alliance against those with whom God’s testimony is, but prove 
ere long that the friendship of the world is not only enmity 
against God but destruction to themselves. “For all this his 
anger is not turned away, but his hand [is] stretched out still.” 
The next view of their judgment (vv. 13-17) is not so much 
judicial retribution from without, but, because His chastening 
was slighted, Jehovah’s giving up Israel to utter internal 
demoralization. “But the people turneth not unto him that 
smiteth them, neither do they seek Jehovah of hosts. And 
Jehovah will cut off from Israel head and tail, palm-branch 
and rush, in one day. The elder and honourable, he [is] the 
head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he [is] the tail. For 
the leaders of this people mislead [them]; and [they 
that are] led by them are swallowed up.” The ruin is 
universal in one day on all classes, from the highest to the 
lowest of Israel, “palm-branch and rush:” all plunged into 
common destruction, leaders and led. What a picture! and 
how much more dismal and hopeless, when the righteous Lord, 
indignant at the abounding falsehood and wrong under the 
highest pretensions to sanctity alike shuts up His affections, 
and even His compassion. “Therefore the Lord will not 
rejoice in their young men, neither will he have mercy on the 
fatherless and widows.” Neither youth and vigour are pleasant 
to Him, nor can orphanage or widowhood touch His heart 


CHAPTER IX. 159 


longer in a people so depraved. “For everyone [is] a hypocrite 
and an evil-doer, and every mouth speaketh folly. For all this 
his anger is not turned away, but his hand [is] stretched out 
still.” 

Then follows a most vivid picture of wickedness burn- 
ing like fire; of Jehovah’s wrath consuming the land; and 
of the reckless unsparing violence of brother against brother. 
“For wickedness burneth as the fire; it devoureth the briars 
and thorns: yea, it kindleth in the thickets of the forest, 
and they roll upward in thick clouds of smoke. Through the 
wrath of Jehovah of hosts is the land burnt up: the people 
also are as the fuel of fire; no man spareth his brother. And 
he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he 
shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: 
they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm: Manasseh, 
Ephraim ; and Ephraim, Manasseh ; [and] they together shall be 
against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but 
his hand [is] stretched out still” (wv. 18-21). The nearest of the 
ten should devour each other, and both Judah. Nevertheless, it 
is the earthly judgment of God. We must look elsewhere to find 
the still more awful eternal judgment which awaits the im- 
penitent and unbelieving in the resurrection of judgment. For 
the full revelation of this, however, we must turn to the New 
Testament, where the wrath of God is revealed from heaven 
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men that 
hold the truth in unrighteousness; as indeed the Lord in 
Mark ix. had solemnly shown in giving an everlasting force 
to language drawn from the earthly judgment of Isaiah 
lxvi. 24. 


CHAPTER X. 


Tue last of these disciplinary inflictions is given in chapter x. 
Here (vv. 1-4) it is the unrighteousness of the judges, who 
stood in the place of God himself, and were called Elohim 
or gods (Psalm ]xxxii.), but most grievously misrepresented His 
character and wronged His people, specially the defenceless. 
“ Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and unto the 
writers that prescribe oppression ; to turn aside the needy from 
judgment, and to take away the right from the afflicted of my 
people, that widows may be their prey, and [that] they may rob 
the fatherless! And what will ye do in the day of visitation, 
and in the desolation [which] shall come from far? to whom 
will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory?” 
And this is His sentence on them: “ Without me they shall 
bow down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under 
the slain.” The most exalted shall be most abased; and those 
shall fare worst whom it least became to turn their high estate 
and large power to God-dishonouring greed, and to oppression 
of the weak and wretched. “For all this his anger is not 
turned away, but his hand [is] stretched out still.” 

But now, from verse 5, we enter on a most weighty change. 
The Assyrian desolator comes up once more. It is his final 
working which is chiefly in the mind of the Holy Ghost; 
as indeed this is the grand catastrophe and last trouble of 
Jacob, and in contrast with the oft-repeated formula of. still 
continuing unexhausted wrath. Now, on the contrary, in 
this proud enemy of Israel we have the end of Jehovah’s anger. 
“The day of visitation” is there, the “desolation from far” 
is come. The indignation ceases and Jehovah’s anger in 
their destruction. His anger now is turned away and His 


CHAPTER xX. a 161 


arm stretched out no more. The rod should be broken, the 
scourge destroyed, as the chastening work is done. 

Again, it is of great moment to apprehend clearly that 
the Antichrist, or man of sin, is a totally distinct personage. 
The commentators from Eusebius to Horsley, to pass by a crowd 
of others who confound the two, are herein inexcusably careless 
of the Scriptures. For it is very clear that there will be a wilful 
king in the city and land who will set himself up as Messiah 
and Jehovah in His temple, received as such by the apostate 
Jews; and that, altogether opposed to this Antichrist in 
Jerusalem who is in league with the western power, will 
arise another chief, an external antagonist of the Jews, who 
is the Assyrian, or Daniel’s king of the north, so often 
occurring in the prophecies. Of him Sennacherib, to a 
certain extent, was a type. 

The Assyrian then was first used as a rod to chastise Israel. 
“Ho, Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, the staff in whose hand 
is mine indignation. I will send him against a hypocritical 
nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him 
a charge, to take the spoil, and to seize the prey, and to tread 
them down like the mire of the streets. But he meaneth not 
so, neither doth his heart think so; but [it is] in his heart 
to destroy and cut off nations not a few.” But he owned 
not God, “For he saith, [Are] not my princes all kings? [Is] 
not Calno as Carchemish ? [is] not Hamath as Arpad ? [is] not 
Samaria as Damascus? As my hand hath found the kingdoms 
of the idols (and their graven images exceeded those of Jerusa- 
lem and of Samaria), shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria 
and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her images ?” (wv. 5-11.) 
His own doom is therefore sealed. 

“ And it shall come to pass [that], when the Lord hath per- 
formed his whole work upon Mount Zion and upon Jerusalem, I 
will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, 
and the glory of his high looks. For he saith, By the strength 
of my hand I have done [it], and by my wisdom, for [ am 
prudent; and I have removed the bounds of the peoples, 
and have robbed their treasures, and like a valiant man I have 
put down them, that sit [on thrones]; and my hand hath 

L 


162 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


found as a nest the riches of the peoples; and as one gathereth 
forsaken eggs, have I gathered all the earth; and there was 
none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or chirped. 

“Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth there- 
with? Shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it ? 
as if the rod should shake them that lift it up; as if the 
staff should lift up [him that is] not wood. Therefore shall 
the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, send among his fat ones leanness ; 
and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning 
of a fire. And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his 
Holy One for a flame; and it shall burn and devour his thorns 
and his briars in one day; and it shall consume the glory 
of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body; 
and they shall be as when a standard-bearer [or, a sick man] 
fainteth. And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, 
yea, a child may write them” (vv. 12-19). It is the closing 
scene. The Lord has not even yet performed His whole work 
on Mount Zion and on Jerusalem. Nay, He will not have done 
it as long as the Antichrist will be in the land. He having 
been disposed of by His epiphany from heaven, the Assyrian 
still remains to be punished. The former is the enemy of the 
heavenly rights and divine glory of Christ (denying the Father 
and the Son), but will be destroyed by His sudden shining 
forth from heaven; the latter dares to oppose His earthly 
rights, and will be dealt with accordingly when He is come to 
reign over the earth. 

“And it shall come to pass in that day [that] the remnant of 
Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no 
more again rely upon him that smote them; but they shall rely 
upon Jehovah the Holy One of Israel, in truth. A remnant 
shall return, the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. For 
though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, [only] a 
remnant of them shall return: the consumption determined 
shall overflow in righteousness. For the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, 
will make a consumption even determined in the midst of all 
the land” (vv. 20-23). Then indeed Israel’s unbelief shall for 
ever pass away: Israel will trust no more in an arm of flesh, 
be it Egyptian, Assyrian, or what not. The slaughter of Midian 


CHAPTER X. 163 


and the manner of Egypt give the characteristic patterns of 
the future deliverance.* “Therefore thus saith the Lord, Je- 
hovah of hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid 
of the Assyrian: though he smite thee with the rod, and 
lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt. For 
yet a very little while, and the indignation shall be accom- 
plished, and mine anger, in their destruction. And Jehovah of 
hosts will stir up against him a scourge, as in the slaughter of 
Midian at the rock of Oreb: and his rod [shall be] over the sea, 
and he will lift it up after the manner of Egypt. And it shall 
come to pass in that day, that his burden shall depart from off 
thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall 
be destroyed because of the anointing” (vv. 24-27). The sign 
of Shearjashub is thus made good. The apostle uses these words 
in Rom. xi. to justify from the Old Testament the fact which is 
assumed throughout the New Testament that only a remnant 
of the people had saving relations with God. So it is now 
under the gospel, as it was after Babylon; and so it will be 
when the last crisis comes, and the struggles of the Antichrist 
and the Assyrian, till the Messiah decides all and displays His 
kingdom in power here below. (Compare Dan. vill. 19-25; 
ix. 26, 27; xi. 36-45; xii. 11.) 

* Dr. R. P. Smith, the late Dean of Canterbury, says well (in his ‘‘ Authenti- 
city and Messianic Interpretation of Isaiah,” 63): ‘‘Thus the Prophet at once 
marks the difference between the two kingdoms. The one has a definite place in 
the Divine economy ; the other is used but for a temporary object. For the 
moment, therefore, it may triumph; but it has no mission of its own, no 
settled final purpose in the world, and therefore no special providence hems it 
around. But Jerusalem, however unworthy, was the actual centre of the 
world’s history ; and in spite of her feebleness, in spite of her comparative 
insignificance, she must outlive the far mightier kingdoms of Nineveh and 
Babylon, of Persia and Macedon and Antioch ; for on her existence depended 
the accomplishment of God’s unchanging counsels.” It would have added 
immensely to the convictions of the author and to the value of his book, had he 
seen that the purposes of God as to the earth, which roll round Israel as their 
centre, are only suspended for a season because of their rejection of Messiah and 
the gospel, to be renewed by grace at the end of this age in order to bring in the 
new age, when God has completed His present gathering out from the nations 
for heavenly glory with Christ. Then as the Heir of all things He will take the 
universe under His sway (and we with Him risen and glorified), and the nations 
then on earth will enjoy the blessing under His reign. The present age has 
quite another aim and character from that age to come, whieh is again distinct 
{rom the eternity that sueceeds the great white throne, or judgment of the dead. 

L2 


164 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


The chapter closes with a most animated description of the 
Assyrian’s march down from the north into the utmost near- 
ness to Jerusalem. “He is come to Aiath, he is passed through 
Migron; at Michmash he layeth up his baggage. They are 
gone over the pass; they make their lodging at Geba: Ramah 
trembleth, Gibeah of Saul is fled. Lift up thy voice, daughter 
of Gallim. Hearken, Laishah. Poor Anathoth! Madmenah 
is a fugitive; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to 
flee. Yet to-day [is he] to halt at Nob: he shaketh his 
hand at the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of 
Jerusalem” (vv. 28-32). In vain, however: he shall come 
to his end, and none shall help him. “Behold the Lord, 
Jehovah of hosts, shall lop the boughs with terror; and 
the high ones of stature [shall be] hewn down, and the 
haughty [shall be] humbled. And he shall cut down the 
thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall 
by a mighty one” (vv. 33, 34). The image here employed 
most appropriately prepares the way for the introduction 
(in the next and connected chapter) of Messiah, the shoot 
from the stump of Jesse, and the fruitful sprout to grow 
from his roots. 


CHAPTER XI. 


IN contrast with the destruction of the high and haughty 
Assyrian under the stroke of Jehovah, we have in this chapter 
a remarkable and full description of the Messiah: first, in a 
moral point of view; and, next, in His kingdom, its character, 
and its accompaniments. It is no longer “the rod of His anger,” 
the staff in whose hand is Mine indignation, but a Branch from 
Jesse’s roots, yet withal the Root of Jesse, Who will infallibly 
bless both Israel and the Gentiles in that day of the Kingdom, 
though He will bring the lofty low, as well as smite the earth 
with the rod of His mouth, and with the breath of His lips 
slay the wicked or lawless one, in order to that wondrous end. 

The entire strain is closed with a suited song of praise 
(chap. xii.) in the lips of Israel, now indeed and for ever 
blessed of Jehovah, their Holy One in their midst. 

“And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of 
Jesse, and a branch out of his roots shall bear fruit: and 
the spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon him, the spirit of 
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, 
the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of J ehovah; and 
his delight will be in the fear of Jehovah: and he will 
not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after 
the hearing of his ears: but with righteousness will he 
judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of 
the earth: and he will smite the earth with the rod of 
his mouth, and with the breath of his lips will he slay 
the wicked [one]” (vv. 1-4). 

To look and contend for a fulfilment of this prophecy in 
Hezekiah or Josiah would be idle, and only shows the straits to 
which the rationalistic enemies of revelation are reduced, No 


166 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


king, let him be ever so pious or glorious, that followed Ahaz, 
no, nor David nor Solomon in the past, even approached the 
terms of the prediction either personally or in the circum- 
stances of their reign. Did the “Spirit of Jehovah” rest 
upon the better of the two when he said, “I shall now 
perish by the hand of Saul: there is nothing better for me 
than that I should speedily escape into the land of the 
Philistines?” Was it “the Spirit of wisdom and under- 
standing,” when he feigned himself mad, and scrabbled on 
the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon 
his beard? Was it “the Spirit of counsel and might,” when 
David amused his credulous host of Gath with his fictitious 
razzias against the south of Judah, when in truth he was 
invading the Geshurites, Amalekites, &c, without leaving 
a human being to tell the tale? Was it the “Spirit of 
knowledge” that dealt with Absalom? Was the numbering 
of Israel done in “the fear of Jehovah”? Was the matter 
of Uriah a proof that “righteousness” was “the girdle of 
his loins,” or “faithfulness” “of his reins”? When was 
the earth smitten with the rod of any king’s mouth? or 
whose lips ever breathed to the destruction of the wicked ? 
And who has seen that wondrous change, depicted in verses 
6-9, passing over the fierce beasts and the most timid; and 
man’s lordship owned at length by all, subject and harmonious, 
even in the person of a babe? Equally impossible, at the 
least, is it to say, that the latter part of the chapter was 
met by anything resembling its predictions in any era of 
Israel. The idea of Zerubbabel fulfilling it is preposterous. 
There was not a single resemblance in that day of small things. 

Is it contended, on the other hand, that so glowing a picture 
of the great King and His kingdom is realised spiritually in 
the church and in the blessings of the gospel? Without 
descending so low as the gross pretensions of papal ambition, 
the spiritual or rather mystical interpretation which suits 
worldly-minded Christendom finds its expression in Theodoret, 
or earlier still. This writer sees the apostolic doctrine change 
earth into heaven, and the picture in verses 6-8 accomplished 
in kings, prefects, generals, soldiers, artizans, servants, and 


CHAPTER XI. 167 


beggars partaking together of the same holy talk, and hearing 
the same discourses! Paul with the philosophers at Athens 
illustrates, according to him, the weaned child putting his 
hand on the cockatrice’s den; as the promise to Peter 
(Matt. xvi. 18) answers to the predicted absence of any 
destructive thing! Jehovah’s holy mountain he explains 
as the loftiness, strength, and immutability of His divine 
teaching, Theodoret justly explodes the folly of applying 
such a prophecy to Zerubbabel, who was only governor of 
a few Jews, and in no way whatever of Gentiles; but he 
offers an alternative hardly preferable in the Acts of the 
Apostles, or specially in St. Paul’s Epistles. 

Such an interpretation as this is not only false in fact 
but injurious and corrupting in principle. It confounds the 
church with Israel; it lowers the character of our blessing 
in Christ from heaven to earth; it weakens the word of God 
by introducing a haziness needful to the existence of such 
applications; it undermines the mercy and the faithfulness 
of God, because it supposes that the richest and most un- 
conditional of His promises to Israel are, notwithstanding, 
taken from them and turned into the wholly different channel 
of ourselves, If God could so speak and act towards Israel, 
where is the guarantee for the Christian or the church ? The 
apostle can and does quote from the prophets, and from this 
very chapter of our prophet, to vindicate the principle, so 
richly illustrated in the gospel, of God’s blessing the Gentiles, 
and of their glorifying God for His mercy. But the self-same 
apostle maintains that there is now the revelation of a mystery 
which was hid from ages and generations, the mystery of Christ 
and the church, wherein there is neither Jew nor Gentile, 
in the fullest contrast with the great day when Israel and 
the nations shall be blessed as such, and in their respective 
places, under Messiah’s reign openly displayed. 

In this prophecy, however, as in the Old Testament 
generally, we see the distinctive blessing of Israel on 
earth, though there is bright hope for the nations, as well 
as judgment on all enemies, Jewish or Gentile. All this 
supposes a state of things essentially differing from God's 


168 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


ways with His church, during which Israel ceases to be the 
depositary of His testimony and promise. For as the natural 
Jewish branches were broken off from the olive-tree and 
the Gentile wild olive was grafted in, so because of non- 
continuance in God’s goodness the Gentile will be broken off 
and the natural branches grafted in again; “And so all 
Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out 
of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from 
Jacob; for this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take 
away their sins.” Meanwhile blindness in part is happened 
to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in. 
Then they will hail their rejected Messiah, and the universal 
blessing of the earth will follow His destruction of their foes 
as the initiatory act of His kingdom. Of this (not of the 
gospel, as regards which the Jews are enemies on our account) 
the chapters speak; and, thus viewed, all flows harmoniously 
onward both as a whole and in the smallest detail. 

There is another decisive proof furnished by the same 
apostle Paul in 2 Thess. ii. 8, that the chapter applies to 
a future age, as contrasted with the present where the rejected 
Christ is hid in God and glorified on high. It is beyond 
controversy that our verse 4 is authoritatively interpreted 
of the Lord Jesus destroying the lawless one with the 
breath of His mouth, and annulling him by the shining 
forth of His presence or coming. A wholly new age of 
triumphant power in righteous government will be intro- 
duced and maintained by the Lord’s appearing, and thus 
essentially distinguished from this day of grace, while Satan 
reigns, and those that are Christ’s suffer yet overcome by 
faith. We wait for His coming as the close of our pilgrimage 
here below. They await His appearing as deliverance from 
imminent destruction, and the beginning of their allotted place 
of honour and blessing under His reign, and of all the nations 
in their measure. 

“And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of 
Jesse, and a branch out of his roots shall bear fruit.” 

One cannot but think with others that the allusion to the 
stem of Jesse is significant. Elsewhere Messiah is viewed as 


e 


CHAPTER XI. 169 


David’s son, or styled David himself. Here He is a Shoot 
or Rod from the stock of Jesse, and a Branch out of his roots 
for Israel, and the Root of Jesse for the peoples and nations. 
There would seem a purpose of drawing attention to the lowly 
condition into which the royal race should have sunk at the 
birth of the Christ. It was from that family, when of no 
account in Israel, that David was anointed for the throne. 
The prophet designates the rise of a greater than David, 
not from the glory that had been conferred on the house, 
but in a way readily suggestive of obscurity. From this 
stock, lowly of old, lowly once more, sprang the hope of 
Israel on whom the Spirit rested without measure; or, as 
Peter preached, God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the 
Holy Ghost and with power. In Rev. v. He is said to be 
the Root of David; in xxii. his Root and Offspring. “And 
the spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom 
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit 
of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah.” 

Here, however, it is not in the activity of grace among the 
sorrows of men and the oppressions of the devil, that we see 
Jesus, but in view of His government. Thoroughly subject to 
Jehovah, He rules not according to appearance but righteously 
in His fear. Such is the effect of the power that rested on 
Him. And His delight [quick understanding or scent] will 
be “in the fear of Jehovah; and he will not judge after the 
sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears; 
but with righteousness will he judge the poor, and reprove with 
equity for the meek of the earth.” The Holy Spirit portrays 
the Messiah’s moral fitness for His earthly reign ; emphatically 
His earthly reign, for so it evidently is throughout for every 
reader who is free from human tradition or prepossession. The 
Lord Jesus will then do what He refused to do at His first 
coming. He will judge in equity, and put down oppression, 
and cause righteousness to flourish in peace. This was in 
no way His work the first time; and the Christian, as the 
church, is called not to judge the earth or rule here below, but 
to suffer with Him, waiting to be glorified and to reign with 
Him when He returns. We walk by faith, not by sight. 


170 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Again, this is confirmed by the latter part of verse 4 already 
referred to. We need no human comment here, because we 
have already divine light supplied in 2 Thess. ii. 8. The 
inspired apostle applies it to the Lord’s future destruction 
of the lawless one, the man of sin, the issue of the apostasy of 
Christendom. It is the same personage, doubtless, that the 
beloved disciple describes in 1 John ii. 22: “Who is the liar but 
he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is the antichrist, 
that denieth the Father and the Son.” This latter testimony 
helps to link all together. 2 Thess. ii. views him specially as 
the result yet to be manifested of that mystery of lawlessness 
which was even then working unseen. Isaiah shows, not only 
the great outside enemy, the Assyrian, judged in chapter x., 
but in chapter xi. 4 the internal enemy, “the wicked,” whom 
the apostates will accept as their Messiah, destroyed by the 
true Messiah appearing in glory. He is “the lawless” one of 
Paul: such is the form of his iniquity. Again, 1 John ii. 
describes him, first, as the denier of the Messianic glory of 
Jesus; next, in his full character of the antichrist (not only 
the liar) as denying the Father and the Son, in other words, 
the personal glory of Christ as revealed in Christianity. 

What deplorable prejudice in men like Jerome, who avail 
themselves of figurative language (as in branch, rod of His 
mouth, and girdle) to mystify the vision of earthly change— 
the restitution of all things! Even such admit the reality of 
Messiah, as they ought to own that of His reign here below, for 
heaven is not at all in view; and in order to this the earth 
is to be smitten by Him whose word is power, and the lawless 
one of that day punished finally. Calvin and Hengstenberg 
would include the hope of a future change by divine power in 
the material creation (as pledged in Rom. viii. 11-22); but this 
presupposes glory revealed, and the sons of God no longer 
hidden as now, but manifested with Christ in glory (Col. iii.), 
We have the liberty of grace now, as creation is to be delivered 
into the liberty of glory then, our own bodies being part of it. 

But this proves the mistake of applying the language to 
spiritual effects now, still more of denying what awaits the 
earth and its denizens in “that day.” If conversion and the 


CHAPTER XI. ea | 


fruits of the Spirit in the heart and life were sought, the 
supposed figures would ill express the idea. For the wolf and 
the leopard and the lion are represented as still existing, and 
contrasted with the lamb and the kid and the calf and the more 
general “fatling,” but with instincts of prey quite vanished. 
Spiritually regarded, how strange to represent mankind as thus 
distinguished when the gospel pronounces all as lost and 
ungodly on the one hand, and all believers as alike saved, and 
God’s children on the other! One could understand the meta- 
phor of the wolf becoming a lamb, and perhaps the leopard 
a kid, if hardly a lion turning calf or fatling (though the 
shades become somewhat misty, even for the liveliest fancy). 
But the actual phraseology forbids all such flights; and as it 
speaks only of animals, once predaceous, dwelling in peace with 
the gentlest cattle, it cannot be duly interpreted, save as pre- 
dictive of facts yet to be made good. Till then faith counts on 
the power God gives against a state of disorder, as when David 
saved the lamb, and slew both the lion and the bear, and as 
figuratively now one may be delivered out of the lion’s mouth. 

In that day will surely be “the regeneration,” and the 
creature will be delivered into a state suited to Christ. An 
allegorical sense does not consist with the exactitude of the 
language; the simple grammatical or literal force is in unison 
with the Old Testament prophecy and New Testament doctrine. 
For as we were shown the setting aside of the antichrist at the 
end of this age, we have next a display of the reign of the true 
Christ and its beneficent effects. “And righteousness shall be 
the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. 
The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall 
lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and the 
fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. And 
the cow and the she-bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie 
down together ; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. - And 
the sucking child shall play on the hole of the adder, and the 
weaned child shall put forth his hand to the viper’s den, They 
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the 
earth shall be full of the knowledge of Jehovah, as the waters 
cover the sea” (vv. 5-9). 


04 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


It is the world or habitable earth to come whereof we speak 
(Heb. ii.)—not heaven, but earth, and especially the land of 
Israel under Him whose right it is. What ground is there to 
doubt its plain and punctual accomplishment? Who has ever 

heard of any serious objection, save for Sadducean minds which 
_ know neither the scriptures nor the power of God? Why 
should it be thought a thing incredible that God should, 
in honour of the reign of Jesus, change not the face only 
but the habits and bent of all animated nature, delivering the 
creature from the bondage of corruption under which it now 
groans? When the days come, as Jehovah declares they 
surely must, that the ploughman shall overtake the reaper, and 
the treader of grapes him that sows seed, it is not only the 
earth that shall answer suitably to His beneficent power, but 
the animal kingdom also, with the one exception which seems 
good to Him that does not forget the subtle evil-doer. They 
shall not hurt or destroy in all His holy mountain. Even 
now, when other and deeper questions are before Him, what 
pity for babes and even for cattle! (See Jonah iv. 11.) 

The Psalms celebrate the great day with songs of joy; the 
prophets are plain-spoken about it; the apostle Paul distinctly 
treats it as a settled Christian expectation, as did Peter to 
the Jews in Acts iii, only awaiting the revelation of Christ and 
of the sons of God along with Him. There is a grievous gap 
in every scheme and in every heart which does not look for 
the world’s jubilee ; without it the earth would only seem made 
to be spoiled by Satan; whereas to one as to this taught of God, 
if there were a single creature not put manifestly under 
the feet of the exalted Son of man, the enemy would be 
allowed so far to defraud Him of His just reward and supreme 
rights. In that day we shall see (for now we see not yet) 
all things put under Him: divine Judgment on the quick, 
executed by Christ, brings it in, as we have gathered from verse 
4 compared with 2 Thess. ii, 

It is either forgotten or explained away, that God has pur- 
posed in Himself for the administration of the fulness of times 
(that is, in the millennial age, or the day of His manifested 
kingdom) to gather together in one all things in Chris:, 


CHAPTER XI. 173 


both those in heaven and those on earth (Ephes. i. 9, 10); 
for the reconciliation will embrace not only those who believe, 
but all things whether on earth or in heaven (Col. i. 20, 21). 
Creation itself shall be delivered from the bondage of corrup- 
tion into the liberty of the glory of the children of God 
(Rom. viii. 21). Let those who allegorise the prophets take 
note that this divine and as yet unfulfilled purpose is plainly 
laid down in these great epistles in the New Testament, to 
which we might add 1 Cor. and Heb. 11. They cannot deny 
the literal form of this dogmatic teaching of inspiration. 
The time spoken of is neither the present state, nor is it 
eternity, but a blessed period between them which is to 
last a thousand years. It is strange doctrine to deny truth 
so clearly revealed; it is strange logic to adduce passages 
from the Greek and Latin classics, from the so-called Sibylline 
Oracles, Ferdosi, Ibn Onein, and the Zendavesta, as rendering 
improbable the direct interpretation. For it is certain that 
among the heathen lingered traditions of a golden age of 
creation to return another day. The complimentary appli- 
cation of this by a courtly poet is in no way inconsistent 
with the believer’s hope of a full fruition of God’s word. If 
it were so, what matters heathen thought, since scripture is 
clear in holding out such glorious expectations for the earth 
under the Messiah ? 

Under Christianity there is according to our Lord (John iv. 
21-24) no such earthly centre as we see there will be in 
that day. Even Jerusalem has for this vanished. “Believe 
me, the hour cometh when ye shall neither in this mountain 
nor yet in Jerusalem worship the Father.” The holy places 
made with hands are now abandoned for the true, even 
heaven itself, which Christ has entered. Further, it is the 
hour to worship the Father, of whom we hear nothing at all 
as such, nor of worship in spirit and truth. Christianity is 
wherever the true worshippers adore the Father and the Son 
in the power of the Spirit. The place on earth is of no 
moment; only the true object, the true worshippers, and the 
true principle and power. This only is genuine catholicity. 

But this is not all; Israel must be received back in order that 


174 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


the world may thus know life from the dead. “ And in that day 
there shall be a root of Jesse standing as an ensign or banner 
of the peoples;* it shall the nations seek: and his resting 
place shall be glory” (v. 10). 

“And it shall come to pass in that day [that] the Lord 
will set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant 
of his people which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, 
and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from 
Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea” 
(v. 11). Those do the enemy’s work who contend that these 
scriptures are fulfilled, or even in course of fulfilment. Save 
the general principle (which is, no doubt, conspicuous in the 
gospel)—that Gentiles seek and hope for and find eternal 
blessedness in Christ, it is a scene wholly future. We have 
the nations and the peoples blessed as such, no less than Israel, 
but not a syllable about that heavenly body which differs from 
both. The church of God is to be no longer on earth but on 
high, in that day when every creature will be in its true place 
according to divine purpose, because the Lord Christ will then 
have His rights everywhere incontestably displayed. 

The person of the Messiah has been revealed: and we know 
how truly He was the vessel of the Spirit on earth, and that in 
Him was displayed every grace which became man toward 
God—or God toward man in Christ Jesus Himself man, withal 
God over all blessed for evermore. But He is not yet seated on 
His own throne nor exercising His public kingdom here below ; 
nor is the remnant of His people yet recovered from north, 
south, east, and west. Are we therefore to suppose that His arm 
is shortened ? or that He has abandoned His cherished purpose ? 
and that His gifts and calling are subject to repentance? Such 
is not our God. Is He ours only and not also of the Jews ? 
Yes, theirs also; “ And he will set up an ensign for the nations, 
and will assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather the 
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. The 
envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and they that vex Judah 


* It would appear that the reference is not to the tribes of the ancient people 
of God, but to such of the nations as shall be in relationship with Jehovah, as 
distinguished from other Gentiles who are not. 


CHAPTER XI. 175 


shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah 
shall not vex Ephraim” (vv. 12, 18). 

On the one hand it is a pitifully poor fulfilment of this 
exceeding great and precious promise to suppose all fulfilled in 
‘the feeble return from Babylon, when a small part of the Jews 
went up to Jerusalem with a very few individuals of Ephraim ; 
and their neighbours sunk lower and lower under the various 
imperial powers till Rome ground all down to servitude. No, it is 
a bright day of great things, not for man only, but for the name 
of Jehovah on earth. On the other hand it is not the heavenly 
mystery of Christ and the church, but the times of restitution 
of all things according to prophecy. Nor is it the gospel calling 
souls out of the world for glory on high, but the earth 
delivered, Israel saved, and the Gentiles converted, under 
Messiah’s reign, when His rest shall be glory. The moral 
history of Israel shall be reversed, as decidedly as natural 
history must be learnt anew for the lower creation. Their old 
jealousies and mutual enmities, too well known after Solomon, 
fade away for restored Israel. And as for their plotting neigh- 
bours,* they may re-appear, but it is to be put down for ever 
not less than their mightier foes. “And they shall fly upon the 
shoulder of the Philistines toward the sea [or, westward] ; 

* The remarks of Houbigant may be helpful to some on this head. He 
is objecting to the popular error of allegorising without limit: ‘‘Sed enim occur- 
rendum est difficultati, que ex eis que mox diximus, nasci potest. Nam queri- 
tur, quomodo in ultimo reditu Judeorum accidere possit ut Judei exewrrant im 
terminos Philisteorwm, Moabitarum, Ammonitarwm, cum regna illa jamdudum 
perierint. Respondeo eadem regna jam periisse tum, cum Apostoli gentes Evan- 
gelio subdiderunt; itaque explicandum esse illis etiam, qui hoe Isaie caput XI. 
de conversione gentium per Apostolos facta intelligunt, quomodo Apostoli subdi- 
derint gentes, quae eorum etate jam interierant. Nos responsionem eorum nostram 
faciemus ; que quidem sic videtur fieri posse, ut credatur Isaias appellare Judiece 
rum vicinas gentes nominibus iis, que tum cognita erant, et notari eas gentes 
que illarum veterum regiones occupature olim sunt, forsan etiam idem nomen 
habiture : que responsio valere etiam potest in nominibus propriis, Assur, 
Ailam, Sennaar, &c. Judicabit sapiens Lector an hoc sit in explicandis 
Prophetis aperte judaizure, non discedere a proprietate verborum, nisi adest 
magna necessitas. Nos quidem eam necessitatem tantam esse credimus, quanta 
maxima esse potest, si Prophetarum verba explicare allegorice nequeas, nisi 
intervertas Prophet sententiam, ut mox Grotium fecisse vidimus ; vel, nisi, ut 
nunc Forerium videmus, mutes personas de quibus predicitur, et pugnes, 
vel tecum, vel cum ipsa vaticinatione, quam susceperis explicandam.”—Prolego- 
mena ad Prophetas, p. cclxviil, 


176 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


together they shall spoil the sons of the east; they shall lay 
their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon 
shall obey them” (v. 14). 

It is a favourite infidel argument against the literal accom- 
plishment of the chapter, adopted (one grieves to say) by the 
late Dr. Fairbairn (Prophecy, 272), that the people mentioned 
in verse 14 have disappeared from the stage of history, and 
therefore that neither the restoration of Israel nor the events 
growing out of it can be so understood. But this is sheer un- 
belief of the power of God and of the reliability of scripture. 
The God who will bring His hidden ones of Ephraim out of 
the darkness that still veils them will disclose the descendants 
of their old adversaries in due time, and among these of their 
neighbours, who were not less jealous because nearly related in 
blood. From the Assyrian, the towering king of the north, 
Edom and Moab and the chief of the children of Ammon con- 
trive to escape (Dan. xi.); but not so from the hands of Israel 
“out of weakness made strong.” Jehovah shall be seen over 
the sons of Zion, and His arrow shall go forth as the lightning; 
and the Lord Jehovah shall blow the trumpet, and shall go 
with whirlwinds of the south: figurative language un- 
doubtedly, but expressive of the divine intervention for 
Christ’s kingdom, which believers in the gospel should be 
the last to confound with their own mercies, still less to 
explain away. 

Then, in verses 15, 16, we have Jehovah’s supernatural 
dealing with external nature on behalf of His people, when 
He utterly destroys the tongue of the Egyptian sea, and smites 
the river into seven streams, so that men may pass dryshod, 
and there is a highway for the remnant from Assyria, as of 
old from Egypt. “And Jehovah will utterly destroy the 
tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his scorching wind shall 
he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it into seven 
streams, and cause [men] to march over dryshod. And there 
shall be a highway for the remnant of his people, which 
will remain, from Assyria; like as there was for Israel in the » 
day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.” In all this 
latter portion the mystical reading is at utter fault; and 


CHAPTER XI. LT 


greater wonders than in the destruction of Pharaoh’s hosts 
await the final deliverance of Israel from Egypt and from 
Assyria in the face of a gainsaying and incredulous age. 

Short of God’s glory established and manifested on the 
earth, no saint of God should ever rest. It is excellent to 
serve the living God and our Lord Jesus; it is better still to 
worship in spirit and truth also, as we wait for His Son from 
heaven ; but the best of all is when He comes and in due time 
sets up the displayed kingdom, Himself the Heir of all things, 
and we joint-heirs with Him. For this will be God’s glory 
below as well as above. Even Pentecostal blessedness, wondrous 
as it was though transient, did not meet all; and even then 
the apostle Peter looks for such a result through no action 
of the Spirit, but through the sending of our Lord Jesus from 
heaven. Preaching may win souls for heaven; but Christ 
must come thence to restore all things to God’s glory; and 
this is the chorus which unites all the prophetic choir. Most 
of all should the Christian have it at heart: for many prophets 
and kings desired to see what we see, and saw it not; and to 
hear what we hear, and heard it not. What is it to be of His 
body, to be of His bride? Least of all should we rest satisfied 
with anything but Christ exalted over the universe to God’s 
glory. In this chapter is the earthly side of it, as the next is 
Israel’s appropriate song. 


CHAPTER XIL 


THE song for “that day” concludes this section of our prophet, 
and is divided into two parts: the first of which (vv. 1-3) is 
Israel’s praise for what God has been and is to itself; the 
second (vv. 4-6) is the call to one another to spread His praise 
in all the earth, though Zion be still the centre where God 
dwells. Yet the defiling hand of neology has not spared the 
entire chapter, which it declares an expletive, added by another 
writer to the already complete series foregoing, and not even 
in the tone, style, or phraseology of Isaiah. Now it is plain 
to any spiritual mind how sensible the loss would be if this 
most worthy conclusion of praise were lopped off. Everyone 
ought to see that the change to such a song involves a tone 
and style and phrase quite different from the grave addresses 
and denunciations, and the solemn predictions which have 
preceded, but is the simple and suited sequel of chap. xi. 

“And in that day thou shalt say, I will praise thee, O 
Jehovah. Though thou hast been angry with me, thine anger 
is turned away, and thou comfortest me. Behold, God [is] my 
salvation: I will trust and not be afraid; for Jah Jehovah 
[is] my strength and song; and he is become my salvation. 
And ye shall draw water with joy from the fountains of 
salvation.” * 

“And in that day ye shall say, Give ye thanks to Jehovah; 
call upon his name; declare his doings among the peoples; 
make mention that his name is exalted. Sing psalms of 
Jehovah, for he hath done splendid things; this is [or, be it] 
known in all the earth. Cry out and shout, O inhabitress 


* This verse 3 is no interruption of the song, but a connected and beautifully 
harmonious part of it, and transitional to what follows, 


CHAPTER XII. 179 


of Zion; for great in the midst of thee [is] the Holy One 
of Israel” (vv. 1-6.) 

Certainly it is not a temporal deliverance only, however 
astonishing and complete, but there are rich blessings for the 
soul also. Best of all, the Holy One of Israel dwells in their 
midst. This, however, in no way takes it from Israel, nor 
compels us to interpret it of the Gentiles, however surely we 
now profit even more deeply during the gospel by the grace 
of God still more profoundly known in Christ. But it is 
plain that as a whole the language strictly belongs to a 
body once forsaken by God, and long the object of divine 
displeasure. This is not true of the church, but is precisely 
applicable to the ancient people of God, in the day when 
Messiah shall be manifested to them, and they shall say 
with heart and mouth, Blessed He that cometh in the name 
of Jehovah. 

We have the amplest ground, material, and pattern for our 
praise, as the church of God, in the New Testament. And 
it differs essentially from Israel’s, who do not speak of the 
Father and the Son, and know not what it is to draw near 
into the holiest through the rent veil, any more than it will 
be theirs to suffer with Christ; whereas we walk by faith, and 
wait for Him by virtue of the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. 
This cannot be conceived to be their experience, who have 
Christ reigning over the earth, freed from the tempter and 
blessed with boundless favours here below. 

It is sad to read the words of Bishop Lowth, a man of refined 
taste rather than of Biblical lore, that “this hymn seems, by 
its whole tenor, and by many expressions in it, much better 
calculated for the Christian church than for the Jewish, in any 
circumstances, at any time that can be assigned.” The fact 
is that every word quite suits Jews when delivered and under 
the Messiah’s reign, and that not a sentence is in harmony 
with the church of God. There is no God and Father of 
Christ before us; there is no Christ in heaven made known 
by the Holy Spirit’s power in the saints; there is no conscious- 
ness of union in one body. His more intelligent father, 
W. Lowth, talked of “the triumphant state of the church”; 

M2 


180 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


but this will be in heavenly glory. Whereas it is earth only 
that is contemplated here. 

The inhabitress of Zion has indeed the foremost place, and 
is called to cry aloud and shout, for great is the Holy One 
of Israel that dwells in its midst; but the Jews, blessed them- 
selves to overflowing, are fated: and will answer to the call, 
and declare Jehovah’s deeds among the peoples, and announce 
that His name is exalted. In all the earth is known what 
sublime things He has done. Mercy so rich causes greed and 
jealousy, pride and vanity, to vanish. 

We may observe that the usual notion of “Jah” as an 
abbreviated form of “Jehovah” can hardly consist with its 
usage here (v. 2) along with “Jehovah.” See also chap. xxvi. 4, 
where the same association occurs. As “Jehovah ” is used for 
the name of God in relation with His people (Exodus vi.), His 
name of moral government in general (Gen. ii. and throughout 
the Old Testament, with or without the name of Elohim), 
so “Jah” appears to express His intrinsic being. There is 
therefore great force in combining it with His name of 
relationship; while its own propriety remains where it stands 
alone, as in Exodus xv. 2, xvii. 16; Psalm exviii. 14. Jah 
then is God in His absolute being, the Self-existent ; Jehovah 
in His relative and continuous character, the God of ages 
especially in connexion with the sons of Israel, Who fulfils at 
length the promises He made to the fathers as God Almighty. 
So in Exodus xv. 2, “Jah is my strength and song”; and in 
chap. xvii. 16, “ The hand is on the throne of Jah” as the oath 
that “Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation to 
generation.” So in Psalm lxviii. 4, “His name is Jah”; and 
in v. 18 we find “the dwelling of Jah Elohim” for “the 
rebellious.” “The Most High,” as in Isaiah xiv. 14, and often 
from Genesis xiv. 18, &c., abundantly in the Psalms, and also 
in the so-called Chaldee of Daniel, is His title to be displayed 
in the future Kingdom, when all rivals vanish into their 
nothingness. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


HERE begins a quite distinct section of our prophet, which is 
not occupied so much as before with Israel, though, of course, 
we find Israel therein. Still Israel cannot be said to be the 
immediate object of the new series, but rather the nations and 
their judgment, running down from circumstances that were 
then comparatively imminent to the very “completion of the 
age.” It is as general in its character throughout, as the first 
section is occupied with Israel. Yet naturally we therein 
heard of the nations in relation to Israel, either as subjected 
willingly to Zion, as they will be in “that day,” or as instru- 
ments of providential chastening to the guilty people in this 
day, even though they may have enticed them from their true 
allegiance by their idols or any of their other iniquities. But 
in the second series, from chapters xiii. to xxvii., we shall see 
how the scope is enlarged in presenting the “ Burdens” of the 
nations (as the various prophecies are here first called), until 
we open out into the whole world coming under judgment 
in order to blessing quite as wide, though Israel’s part is 
shown us in corresponding largeness at the close. And here 
too, as in the first, we have at the close songs in unison with 
the grand result. 

As to the expression, “completion of the age,” which occurs 
so often in the Gospel of Matthew, its application is to that 
condition of things during which Israel are found under the 
law and without their Messiah. The new age, on the contrary, 
will be characterised by their being under the new covenant. 
Their Messiah: will then reign over them in glory. The Old 
Testament gives us, not only these ages, but the times before 
them, as the New Testament unveils the eternity that is to 


182 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


follow them. Practically the New, like the Old, speaks of 
these two ages as connected with Israel: the age that was 
going on when Christ came and was rejected, and that which 
is to come when He returns in glory. “In this age” there 
is a mixture of good and evil, to be closed by an awful conflict 
in which the Beast and the false prophet will fall. The age 
to come will see Satan bound and the Lord Jesus governing 
the earth in displayed power and glory. “End of the world” 
is an unequivocal mistranslation, which has led astray not 
only the mass of men but their leaders, particularly in their 
false expectation of earthly progress and victory for the 
church, and along with this their unbelief of Israel’s restora- 
tion to favour and glory under the promised reign of the 
Messiah, and the universal blessing of the earth and the 
nation. 

Thus the difference of the ages is of incalculable importance. 
If you do not distinguish the present age from that to come, 
all must be confused, not for truth only, but for practice also. 
For now it is a question of grace and faith, evil being allowed 
outwardly to triumph, as we see in the cross. In the age to 
come the evil will be externally judged and kept down, and 
the good will be exalted over all the earth, and fill the whole 
world with the knowledge of Jehovah and His glory. The 
completion of the age, therefore, is evidently future; and so 
scripture speaks. Thus for us it is “this present evil age,” 
from which Christ’s death has delivered us; the new age will 
be good, not evil, as surely as it is a future time. Again, if we 
think not of the church, but of Israel, it is to be supposed 
that the age began with their being under the law in the 
absence of the Messiah. The new age will be when Israel 
have their Messiah not only come, but come again and reign- 
ing; for the presence of the Messiah in humiliation did not 
interrupt the age; and still less did their rejection of Him 
bring in the new age. 

Only let us not forget, there is now another mighty work 
of God in process, based on the heavenly glory of Christ 
and the personal presence of the Holy Ghost, and marked 
here below by the church of God. During this period mercy 


CHAPTER XIII. 183 


is flowing out to the Gentiles; so that we may call it the 
Gentile parenthesis of mercy. Before, and quite distinct 
from this, were the Gentile times when God in His provi- 
dence gave certain nations to take the government of the 
world, beginning with Nebuchadnezzar, the golden head of 
the great image. This we may call the Gentile parenthesis 
of judgment. They are both of them within the limits of 
“this age,” and are going on still. The new age will be 
brought in by the Lord’s coming in the clouds of heaven. 
This at once introduces a very important change, namely, 
that repentant Israel will be delivered, and the nations 
come up for the judgment of the quick when the Son of man 
shall have entered on His kingdom. (Compare Matt. xxv. ; 
Rev. xi-xx.) The first part of Isaiah we saw to be 
the judgment of Israel, and then their final blessing. It is 
always a principle in the dealings of God, that when He 
judges, He begins at His own house. Hence Peter says, 
“The time is come that judgment must begin with the house 
of God”; and then he enquires if “the righteous scarcely 
{or with difficulty] are saved, where shall the ungodly and 
the sinner appear?” But God has undertaken to save the 
righteous, although it be with difficulty and in face of an 
amazing mass of contradiction and trial, as well as of their 
own utter weakness, All these things make it hard indeed; 
but what is insuperable to us is an opening for the glory of 
God; and He has got over the greatest difficulty, for this 
lay in our sins. Is sin—even all sin—any longer a difficulty 
for Christ? Has He not, for the believer, blotted out sins, 
and made peace by the blood of His cross? But if there 
remains no difficulty to God, there are many for us; and the 
word, “the righteous scarcely are saved,” is in relation to 
our dangers by the way. Now if this be so, what will be 
the end of the ungodly? The apostle Peter applies it to the 
Christian, and looks at the world as coming under judgment 
when the Lord shall appear. In the Old Testament it is not 
the church but Israel we find to be concerned; but God, in 
such a dealing, invariably begins with that which has the 
nearest responsibility to Him. Accordingly all the first 


184 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


twelve chapters have been occupied with Israel as the fore- 
ground of the picture, whatever incidental notice there may 
be of others. 

But from this portion onward through a dozen chapters 
more we have the Gentiles prominent, though Jerusalem too 
is judged in their midst, ending with the dissolution of the 
earth and with the higher ones punished on high. He had 
shown us the judgment of His own house; now He deals 
with the nations and all else in relationship with His people, 
one after another: both close, like all others, with triumph. 


First of all Babylon comes up: “The burden of Babylon, 
which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see” (v. 1). Babylon was 
the great Gentile. power first allowed to take possession of 
Jerusalem. But God shows that, while He may use the 
strangers to chastise His people, He will turn round ere long 
and deal with their oppressive cruelty, because their mind 
was to destroy, while God employed them only to chasten. 
And inasmuch as there was pride of power without conscience 
toward God, yea also the main souree of idolatry, so Babylon 
cannot escape, being the first among the Gentiles summoned 
to judgment. Thus the section we now enter upon is not 
the divine scrutiny of His house in Israel, but the judgment 
of the world and of the nations, and hence right early of 
Babylon. Observe, however, that, if the Spirit of God takes 
notice of what was ere long to befall the Jews (expressly 
noticing the ruin of their land and people that was imminent, 
when they should be taken captive to Babylon), for all that 
He never confines Himself to any blows, however grave, that 
were then struck. Human limits do not apply to scripture, 
which goes on from His first acts to the ultimate end. 

This indeed is just a characteristic difference between what 
is of God and what is of man. If man speaks, there are 
necessary bounds to the application of his words. In what 
God. says there is invariably a germinant sense deepening 
farther on, evidence of what God has in view to show what 
He is and to glorify Christ. This appears to be the true 
meaning of the scriptural canon in 2 Peter i. 20: “No pro- 


CHAPTER XIII. 185 


phecy is of any private (z.. its own) interpretation.” Apply 
it but to some isolated event, and you overlook the purpose of 
God; while prophecy may doubtless include such an event, it 
as a whole looks onward to the counsels of God in reference 
to the glory of His Son. Hence the holy prophets needed 
inspiration in the strictest sense; for whose eye could look 
onward unerringly and speak of the future according to God ? 
Such therefore is the aim of the Spirit’s testimony. Indeed 
this is true of all scripture, for Christ is the object of God in 
giving scripture first and last. He is not merely thinking of 
man, or of his salvation, blessed as it is, nor of Israel His 
people, nor of the church, Christ’s body, but of His Son. This 
in effect, as in purpose, is the vindication, security, and display 
of His own glory; while it gives scope to the fullest love and 
the holiest judgment, it will illustrate His rich grace in the 
heavens and His righteous and merciful government on the 
earth. Compare Eph. i. Phil. ii, Heb. ii, Rev. xx. xxi. xxii. 

God thinks of Christ, who is more precious to Himself than 
all besides. It is in virtue of Christ that there can be a holy 
purpose of good brought to issue in such a world as this has 
been. For it is not possible that the creature itself could have 
any intrinsic value in the sight of God. That which merely 
flows out of the sovereign will and almighty hand of God can 
cease to be. He that made can destroy; but when you come 
to Christ, you have that which, we may reverently say, nothing 
can annul; yea all the efforts of man or Satan to oppose and 
dishonour Him have been only turned, in the mighty and 
gracious wisdom of God, into a display of all-surpassing 
glory. 

Hence we arrive at the great truth for our every-day walk, 
no less than for eternity and God Himself. We have to do with 
One now, whose love nothing can exhaust, whose ways too are 
as perfect; we have to do with Him day by day, to wait on 
Him, to expect from Him, to trust Him, to make sure of His 
admirable care for us. Christ is worthy that our hearts should 
confide in Him, and He cannot be confided in without the 
blessing that ever flows out. Thus God proves Himself greater 
than all that can be against us. Apart from Christ there is 


186 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


nothing even that He Himself made but what, connected with 
man on earth, soon had a cloud over it. Nay, it is wider still: 
look where you may, above or below; look at any creature- 
height or beauty apart from Christ, and what is the security ? 

What is Satan now, and his angels? Where are those that 
left their first estate, and broke through all bounds of nature ? 
Is not the earth, once so fair,a wilderness? Is not man a moral 
wreck, and mortality working in him? Israel were brought 
out into the wilderness to keep a feast to Jehovah; but they 
made and worshipped a golden calf to His deep shame and 
their own. And what was Egypt’s wisdom? What is the 
world’s of old or now?» In the church of God, called to the 
unity of the Spirit and the reflection of Christ’s heavenly 
glory here below, what breaches, divisions, schisms, sects, 
heterodoxies, confusions, and every evil work! What guilty 
ignorance of the Father, what bold denial of the Son, what 
flagrant sin against the Holy Ghost! How many antichrists, 
the sign and forerunner of the last antichrist! For all this 
goes on at an aggravated and accelerating ratio, as the apostasy 
draws near and the manifestation of the man of sin, the lawless 
one, to succeed the mystery of lawlessness, whom the Lord Jesus 
shall destroy with the breath of His mouth and shall annul by 
the appearing of His coming (2 Thess. ii). 

By the lamp of prophecy we look as it were on the closing 
history of Christendom, the eve and execution of the judg- 
ment that slumbers not. But, thank God, we await first of all 
our Saviour from heaven—a blessed hope, which may be for- 
gotten by worldliness and unbelief but will never fade, because 
it is not founded on anything short of the grace and word of 
the Lord Jesus. He is coming; and as surely as He does, we 
have the turning-point of all blessing reached for our bodies 
and all things, even as now by faith for our souls. What a 
discovery it has been to some of us, that prophecy has the 
selfsame centre as the rest of scripture, and that its centre in 
Christ is so much the more conspicuous as it cannot content 
itself with past accomplishment, but ever looks onward to the 
grand fulfilment in the future! No matter what it may be, all 
acquires importance because God is thinking of His beloved 


CHAPTER XIII. ' 187 


Son. And His Son is to inflict the last strokes of judgment: 
God will deal with man, first by providential means, then in the 
person of Christ at His return in glory. “Lift up a banner 
upon a bare mountain, raise the voice to them, wave the hand 
that they may enter the gates of the nobles. I have com- 
manded my separated ones, yea, I have called my mighty ones 
for mine anger, even those that exult in my majesty. The 
noise of a multitude on the mountains, as of a great people! 
a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations assembled 
together! Jehovah of hosts mustering the host of the battle! 
They come from a far country, from the end of the heavens— 
Jehovah and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the 
whole earth” (vv. 2-5). 

From the chapter now before us we may gather these 
two things plainly enough—a preparatory application to the 
times of the prophet or near them, but the only adequate 
fulfilment reserved for the great day which is still future. 
This divine perspective simply and unequivocally meets the 
difficulty some find in the view of the city, not only taken and 
ravaged by the Medes, but such as when God overthrew Sodom 
and Gomorrah, the abode of doleful creatures, which was not 
for centuries after Cyrus conquered. And so it is that chap. 
xiv. regards its downfall even to the day when Jehovah will 
yet choose Israel and set them in their own land: a consum- 
mation far beyond the Return of the remnant of Judah, and 
only “in that day” fulfilled when Israel shall take them 
captive whose captives they were, and rule over their oppres- 
sors, which in no real sense has been accomplished. Those 
who explain it away are no friends of God or man. Those 
who presume to deny its future fulfilment set up to prophesy 
against scripture; and we need not hesitate to say that they 
are not prophets but do lie. 

For instance, in verses 6-10 one can see there are greater 
signs than have ever been verified. “ Howl ye; for the day of 
Jehovah [is] at hand; as destruction from the Almighty shall 
it come. Therefore shall all hands be feeble, and every heart 
of man shall melt, and they shall be dismayed: pangs and 
sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall writhe as a 


188 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


woman in travail; they shall be amazed one at another; their 
faces [shall be] faces of flames. Behold, the day of Jehovah 
cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to make the 
land a desolation, and to destroy the sinners thereof out of it. 
For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall 
not give their light; the sun is darkened in his going forth, 
and the moon shall not cause its light to shine.” These things 
cannot fairly be said to have literally taken place; yet the 
Spirit of God does not hesitate to connect them with Babylon’s 
fall. To talk of hyperbole or exaggeration is to show un- 
believing ignorance of scripture and of the power of God. 
One understands an infidel talking such language as this; 
but the moment men begin to allow that the Spirit of God 
willingly sets Himself to exaggerate, the authority of the 
whole written word is shaken. If He magnifies a temporal 
judgment beyond the facts, how can we be assured that He 
does not exaggerate grace and eternal redemption? And 
where is the ground in this case for solid peace with God? 
Is it, or is it not, a fixed principle, that the Holy Ghost 
always speaks the truth? Still, along with this, we must take 
care that we understand its application. 

“And I will punish the world for evil, and the wicked 
for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogance of the proud 
to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible. I will 
make weak man more rare than fine gold, a man than the pure 
gold of Ophir. Therefore I will make the heavens to tremble, 
and the earth shall be shaken out of her place, at the wrath 
of Jehovah of hosts, and in the day of his hot anger” (vv. 11-13), 
To restrain this scene to the past judgment of Babylon is to 
limit the word of God, and make the Spirit seem to be un- 
reliable. But this is merely our own evil misconception and 
irreverent error. How momentous, then, it is that we should 
be in malice children, in understanding men! We may well 
shrink with horror from a pathway that leads to an end so 
dishonouring to the word of God. On the other hand, that 
the Holy Ghost did really speak inclusively of a past accom- 
plishment we hold to be just as certain as that He was looking 
onward to far more than that, 


CHAPTER XIII. 189 


In verses 14-17 the terms imply that it is a temporal 
judgment that is spoken of, a description of the lawless way 
in which man wreaks his wrath upon his fellow. “And it 
shall come to pass, that as a chased roe, and as sheep that no 
one gathereth, they shall turn every one to his own people, 
and shall flee every one to his own land. Every one that is 
found shall be thrust through; and every one that is taken 
shall fall by the sword. Their infants also shall be dashed in 
pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their 
women ravished. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against 
them, who will not regard silver, and [as for] gold, they will not 
delight in it.” Verses 18, 19 present a total destruction. 
“ And [their] bows shall dash the young men in pieces; and 
they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye 
shall not spare children. And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, 
the beauty of the Chaldeans’ pride, shall be as God’s over- 
throwing Sodom and Gomorrah.” 

Babylon has indeed been judged in its beauty and pride. 
An almost unprecedented disaster and destruction fell on that 
golden city; and this, we know, was under God effected by the 
junction of the Medes and Persians with Cyrus for their leader. 
Only the closing verses point to the utter ruin that followed 
centuries after, and is to last for ever. “It shall never be 
inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in to generation and 
generation ; neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there, or shall 
shepherds make [their flocks] to lie down there. But beasts 
of the desert there shall lie down; and their houses shall 
be full of owls (or howls); and ostriches shall dwell there, 
and satyrs shall dance there. And wolves shall ery in their 
palaces, and jackals in the pleasant castles. And her time [is] 
near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged ” (vv. 20-22). 

But plainly Jehovah here uses the strongest language to 
show that it goes on to His day. In reading the New Testa- 
ment as well as the Old, it is of the utmost moment to under- 
stand “the day of the Lord” in its real character and import. 
It is not the same thing as the Lord’s “coming” to receive us. 
When He comes, the dead saints are raised and the living ones 
are changed, which is not “the day of the Lord,” nor ever so 


190 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


called in scripture. There is one chapter (2 Peter iii.) where 
there might seem to be some difficulty; but there it flows 
really from this very confusion, for when you distinguish the 
two phrases and thoughts here as elsewhere, all is plain. 
What the scoffers of the last day say is, “ Where is the promise 
of His coming?” etc. What the Spirit of God replies is, that 
the day of the Lord shall come, and come like a thief in the 
night to judge wickedness upon the earth. They make light 
of the Christians who are looking for this bright hope, their 
Master’s coming ; but the Holy Ghost threatens them with the 
terrible day of the Lord. The Lord is never represented as 
coming like a thief by night, except when judgment is 
distinctly spoken of, as to Sardis (Rev. iii). In 1 Thessa- 
lonians v. the Spirit brings in the comparison of the thief 
when He speaks of the day of the Lord coming upon the 
world, not in relation to the saints who wait for Christ and 
are not in darkness that the day should overtake them as a 
thief. (Compare wv. 3-8.) 

The plain truth is that the expression “coming of the Lord” 
may apply to His presence before He is manifested to every 
eye; while “the day of Jehovah” pertains to that part and 
aspect of His action which inflicts just vengeance upon the 
world, and after that presents Him judging in righteousness. 
Here it is the day of Jehovah; and, therefore, of darkness and 
destruction to sinners. There is not a word about the righteous 
dead being raised, still less of the living changed; all that 
which is proper to the New Testament you find therein, and 
therein only. In the Old Testament you have the dealing of 
Jehovah with Israel, judging what was wrong but finally 
blessing, and patient longsuffering with the Gentiles, where 
He took notice of them at all, till the day of visitation 
come in punishment of all ungodliness. 

This accounts for the language of Isaiah xiii. The Spirit of 
God has in His view Jehovah’s judgment of the whole world; 
and, therefore, it is called “the day of Jehovah.” It will be 
the termination of all the space allowed to man’s will and 
self-exaltation. It will be the manifestation of God’s moral 
ways when all that is high shall be abased, and Jehovah and 


CHAPTER XIII. 191 


the lowly whom He loves shall be exalted for ever. But while 
the Spirit of God goes onward to that day, there was enough 
to mark Babylon devoted to destruction by a predicted and 
extraordinary intervention of God near at hand. The truth of 
the prophecy was thus witnessed by a special accomplishment 
in those days. Babylon was doomed to become as when God 
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. Its desolation at last was 
as clearly announced in verses 19-22, as its sudden and 
unexpected fall in verses 2-8. If physically it was not so 
manifestly a divine judgment as that which of old fell on 
the cities of the plain, it was morally a stupendous event 
which changed the whole course of the world’s history. The 
conquest of Persia was in no way a type of the final judgment 
of the world, neither was the fall of Greece of any striking 
significance in this respect. The final judgment of Rome, of 
the fourth world-power, will be even more impressive of 
course; but this is yet future. It has been, as it were, shaken 
to pieces, and passed into a long transition state of separated 
kingdoms. The day is coming when Rome will rise again 
into splendour and commanding political power, when it will 
become the centre of a revived and godless empire. But it 
will then rise to meet its final doom from the mouth of the 
Lord (Rev. xvii. 11-14, xix. 11-21), The past ruin of Babylon 
is a type of the future destruction of Rome. When Babylon 
fell, the children of Israel were delivered; there was nothing 
of the sort when Persia yielded to Greece, or Greece to Rome; 
there will be a yet mightier result at the end of the age before 
and when the Son of man comes in power and glory. 

Thus the fall of the first great power of the Gentiles is 
a type of the doom of the last, when Israel will have been 
finally set free, a converted people, being delivered spiritually 
as much as nationally, and thenceforward made to express the 
glory of Jehovah upon the earth, 


CHAPTER XIV. 


In the chapter before us the Spirit of God goes forward to 
Israel’s deliverance. The connection is plain. The general 
character of the Burden becomes thus evident and most 
instructive. “For Jehovah will have compassion on Jacob, 
and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: 
and the stranger shall join himself with them, and they shall 
cleave to the house of Jacob. And the peoples shall take 
them, and bring them to their place; and the house of Israel 
shall possess them in the land of Jehovah for servants and for 
handmaids; and they shall take them captive, whose captives 
they were, and they shall rule over their oppressors ” (vv. 1, 2). 
The overthrow of Babylon involves the emancipation of Israel. 
It has thus much greater importance than the history of any 
ordinary power; and the past Babylon is simply a type of the 
fall of the greater power, its final heir, which is to the last the 
enslaver of the Jews, the would-be protector but master of the 
holy city. Israel are yet to have as their servants the very 
persons who formerly enslaved them themselves. Expecting 
this glory for Israel, and this mighty deliverance for the 
people of the Jews, one can understand their exulting tone. 

“And it shall come to pass in the day that Jehovah shall give 
thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy trouble, and from the 
hard service wherein thou wast made to serve, that thou 
shalt take up this parable against the king of Babylon, and 
say, How hath the oppressor ceased, the golden city ceased ! 
Jehovah hath broken the staff of the wicked, the sceptre of the 
rulers. He that smote the peoples in wrath with a continual 
stroke, that ruled the nations in anger, hath a persecution 
without restraint, The whole earth is at rest—is quiet: 


CHAPTER XIV. 193 


they break forth into singing. Yea, the cypresses rejoice at 
thee, the cedars of Lebanon, [saying,] Since thou art laid 
down, no feller is come up against us. Sheol from beneath is 
moved for thee to meet [thee] at thy coming ; it stirreth up the 
giants for thee, all the chief ones (or, he-goats) of the earth, 
raising up from their thrones all the kings of the nations, All 
of them shall answer and say unto thee, Art thou also become 
weak as we? art thou become like unto us ? Thy pomp is 
brought down to Sheol, the noise of thy lyres: the worm is 
spread under thee, and vermin covereth thee. How art thou 
fallen from heaven, O day-star, son of the morning ! how art 
thou cut down to the ground, that didst lay low the nations! 
And thou saidst in thine heart, I will ascend into the heavens, 
I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; and I will 
sit upon the mount of assembly, in the recesses of the 
north; I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I 
will be like the Most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down 
to Sheol, to the recesses of the pit. They that see thee 
shall narrowly look upon thee, they shall consider thee, 
[saying,] [Is] this the man that made the earth to tremble, that 
did shake kingdoms; [that] made the world as a wilderness, and 
overthrew the cities thereof; [that] let not loose his prisoners 
to their home? All kings of the nations, all of them, lie 
in glory, every one in his own house. But thou art cast 
out from thy sepulchre like an abominable branch, clothed 
with the slain—those thrust through with the sword, that go 
down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden under foot. 
Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou 
hast destroyed thy land, thou hast slain thy people: the seed 
of evil-doers shall not be named for ever. Prepare ye 
slaughter for his children because of the iniquity of their 
fathers; that they rise not up and possess the earth, nor fill 
the face of the world with cities. And I will rise up against 
them, saith Jehovah of hosts, and cut off from Babylon 
name and remnant, and son and son’s son, saith Jehovah. 
I will also make it a possession for the porcupine, and pools 
of water; and I will sweep it with the besom of destruc- 
tion, saith Jehovah of hosts” (vv. 3-23). 
N 


194 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


The king of Babylon sets forth no other than the 
last head of the Beast, just as Nebuchadnezzar was the 
first. We must distinguish the imperial chief of the last 
days from the religious head or the antichrist; and the more 
carefully, because, having a similar policy and being con- 
federates in evil, they are very generally confounded by 
ancients and moderns. Although the king of Babylon typifies 
the person who will finally have the Jews as his vassals, it 
would be a great mistake to conceive that it is to be a king of 
the Babylon in Shinar. We refer to this now merely to show 
that it rests upon a wrong principle. Some have the thought 
that there will be a re-establishment of oriental Babylon in 
the last days. They suppose there will be a literal city in the 
plain of Shinar. This appears to be fundamentally false. 

The New Testament points out by evident marks what the 
future one will be; and, in order apparently to guard against 
that illusion, even contrasts the Apocalyptic Babylon in some 
respects with that of the Chaldees. The Babylon of the old 
world was built upon a plain; the future Babylon is 
characterised by the seven mountains it sits on. Thus every 
one of common information would distinguish the scene of 
Chaldean pride, and understand the locality of the future 
Babylon. There is but one city that has had universally and 
proverbially this title attached to it among Gentiles, Jews, and 
Christians. Other cities may include seven or more hills, but 
everywhere Rome has acquired a designation from the circum- 
stance; so that if you speak of the seven-hilled city, there 
was, there is, hardly an educated child but would answer, “It 
must be the famous city on the banks of the Tiber.” So 
every one must have known in apostolic days. This is the 
city which is to occupy in the last days the same kind of 
importance that Babylon had in the beginning of Gentile 
times. It began then and ends with the person that is 
called in the Book of Revelation, “the Beast.” There were 
four Beasts in Daniel, but one is by St. John called “the 
Beast,” as indeed but the last existed ; and if it had to become 
imperially extinct, it was also to rise again and be present 
once more before its judgment. 


CHAPTER XIV. 195 


Here then God makes the old enemy to be a type of the 
new one that menaces them. The final holder of the power of 
Babylon thus naturally is a type of him who will wield 
imperial power against the glory of God in the last days. So in 
Revelation xvii. the general principle is exceeding clear, with- 
out the violent supposition of a literal metropolis in Chaldea ; 
where man would have not merely to build the city, but, first 
of all, to create seven hills. Another thing the Spirit of God 
speaks of is the reigning of the city over the kings of the 
earth, not of the control exercised over the empire, but far 
beyond, under the symbol of the harlot riding the beast; she 
sits too on “the waters.” 

The Apocalyptic Babylon will finally shift from a papal 
heathen character, as it did from an openly heathen beginning, 
to final utter corruption. What we have in Isaiah furnishes 
the groundwork for that which meets us in the Revelatign. 
Thus the strong language that is used in verses 9-14 could 
searcely be said to have been exhausted in Nebuchadnezzar 
or Belshazzar. There was pride and self-exaltation in the one, 
and most degrading and profane luxury in the other; but what 
we have here will be fully verified in the last days and not 
before. After taking this place of power, the lofty one is to be 
thus abased as no Babylonish monarch ever was historically. 


We do not enter into the rest of the chapter farther than 
to point out another declaration in verses 24, 25. Some 
suppose that the king of Babylon and the Assyrian are one 
and the same person; it is a common mistake, and particularly 
among men of learning. But it is clear that the later state- 
ment is something added to the fall of Babylon’s king, who has 
been already judged. Then the Assyrian follows, who is dealt 
with summarily in Jehovah’s land. This agrees perfectly with 
what may be gathered from other parts of God’s word as to the 
future. “Jehovah of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I 
have thought, so shall it come to pass, and as I have purposed, 
it shall stand: to break the Assyrian in my land; and on my 
mountains I will trample him; and his yoke shall depart 
from off them, and his burden from off their shoulders: this 

nN2 


196 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


the purpose [that is] purposed concerning the whole earth, 
and this the hand [that is] stretched out over all the nations. 
For Jehovah of hosts hath purposed, and who shall frustrate 
[it]; and his hand [is] stretched out, and who shall turn it 
back ?” (vv. 24-27.) 

But, if we look at the past history of Israel, the Assyrian 
came up first; his army was destroyed, and himself sent back 
into his own land, there to be slain by his rebellious sons 
in the house of his god. The astonishing destruction of his 
host was typical of the fall of “the Assyrian” in the last days, 
but only an earnest of it. This was considerably before 
Babylon was allowed of God to become supreme. It was after 
the disappearance of Nineveh that Babylon sprang up into the 
first place. The Assyrian never gained the supremacy of the 
world, but Babylon did, as a sovereign grant from God, after 
the royal house of David had become the helper on of idolatry, 
following the Jewish people in their love for the abominations 
of the heathen. Then, not before, God told (as it were) the 
king of Babylon to take the whole world to himself. Babylon 
was always most conspicuous for its many idols; but as the 
chosen witness had become idolatrous, the worst might as well 
have supremacy as another. Babylon was thus exalted to the 
empire of the world, when Lo-Ammi (not-My-people) was 
written on all Israel, even on Judah. Its active enmity and 
idolatry could hardly be thought a claim on the true God, 
Jehovah ; on the other hand, all this was not allowed to hinder 
its rise in God’s sovereignty into the place of the government 
of the world. This was, in fact, subsequent to the destruction 
of the Assyrian, which we have seen before in other chapters 
(vill. x.), must besides contemplate the future. 

Here, not as in history, Babylon is judged first; then the 
Assyrian comes up and is smitten in the land of God’s people. 
Why is this? Because the Spirit of God is now taking the 
circumstances of the Assyrian as well as the king of Babylon, 
not as a history of the past, but as looking onward to the last 
days; and in the last days the king represented by Babylon 
will be destroyed first, when the power of the Assyrian will 
be broken last of all. This perfectly agrees with the scene as 


CHAPTER XIV. 197 


a typical or prophetic picture of the last days. Whereas, if 
you confine it to the past, it does not tally, and there could be 
no right understanding of it. While the Spirit of God speaks 
of the Assyrian subsequently to Babylon, it is certain that 
in past history the Assyrian fell first in order, then Babylon 
afterwards. By-and-by Babylon will be smitten in the last 
holder of the Beast’s power, and this in connection with the 
Jews; while the power then answering to the king of Assyria 
will come up after that, when God occupies Himself with 
the ten tribes of Israel. The Babylonian despot and the 
Assyrian, then, are two distinct enemies of the Lord, and types 
of two different powers in the last days, the one before, the other 
after, the Jews are in recognised relationship with Jehovah. 

The Lord grant that we may be enabled to profit by all 
scripture, using it for instruction and warning, as well as 
refreshment and joy. All plans for worldly ease and honour 
will end only in destruction and bitter disappointment. Our 
business is to work out what God gives us now to do. He 
is saving souls to be the companions of Christ in heaven. Our 
responsibility meanwhile is to carry out His thoughts of 
mercy toward sinners, and His love to and in those that cleave 
to the name of His Son. 

The division of chapters is singularly unhappy here, for 
chapter xiv. 24-27 has a distinct place of its own to mark the 
future judgment of the Assyrian relatively to the Burden of 
Babylon, which is to be the inverse of history. Also the last 
five verses of the chapter form a sub-section to themselves, 
though the whole appears to be connected. The two following 
chapters (xv. xvi.) are but one subject, and a new one. What 
adds to the confusion is the insertion of the sign of the new 
paragraph at verse 29 of chapter xiv.; whereas verse 28 
really pertains to the new burden—not to Babylon or to the 
Assyrian, but to God’s judgment on the Philistines. 

“In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden. Rejoice 
not thou, Philistia, all of thee, because the rod that smote thee 
is broken; for out of the serpent’s root shall come forth a 
viper, and his fruit [shall be] a fiery flying serpent. And the 
first-born of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down 


198 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


in safety; but I will kill thy root with famine, and thy 
remnant shall be slain. Howl, O gate! ery, O city! dissolved, 
O Philistia, [is] the whole of thee; for out of the north cometh 
smoke, and none straggleth (or, standeth aloof) in his gatherings. 
And what shall [one] answer the messengers of the nation ? 
That Jehovah hath founded Zion, and in it the afflicted of his 
people find refuge” (vv. 28-32). 

The death of Ahaz might naturally excite the hopes of his 
neighbours, the Philistines, who had been put down by the 
strong hand of his grandfather Uzziah. Of him it is written 
in 2 Chronicles xxvi. 4, that “he did that which was right 
in the sight of Jehovah according to all that his father 
Amaziah did. And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, 
who had understanding in the visions of God: and as long as 
he sought Jehovah, God made him to prosper. And he went 
forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down the 
wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, 
and built cities in [the country of] Ashdod, and among the 
Philistines. And God helped him against the Philistines, and 
against the Arabians that dwelt in Gur-baal, and the Meunim. 
And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah; and his name spread 
abroad even to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened 
[himself] exceedingly.” 

And now not only Uzziah but Ahaz were gone; “the rod 
of him that smote” the land of the Philistines was “ broken.” 
The enemy had learnt to despise Judah in the days of un- 
worthy Ahaz. “For Jehovah brought Judah low because of 
Ahaz, king of Israel: for he made Judah naked and trans- 
gressed sore against Jehovah.” Who was his son that they 
should fear him? Let them not rejoice, however; “for out 
of the serpent’s root shall come forth a viper, and his fruit 
shall be a fiery flying serpent.” The primary accomplishment 
of this was in the reign of Hezekiah, of whom it is recorded 
(2 Kings xviii. 8) that “he smote the Philistines, even unto 
Gaza, and the borders thereof, from the tower of the watchmen 
to the fenced city.” 

- But is there any reason whatever to suppose that this 
Burden is an exception to the rest? Especially does the 


CHAPTER XIV. 199 


strength of the language point to a mightier destruction than 
what was inflicted by that pious king of Judah. Its proper 
fulfilment therefore awaits the latter day. And then to the 
full will be seen the twofold application of divine power, 
when, on the one hand, “the first-born of the poor shall feed 
and the needy shall lie down in safety”; and, on the other, 
Jehovah will not merely break the rod, but kill the root of 
Philistia with famine and slay its remnant (30). In the next 
verse (31) the prophet bursts forth with the utmost animation, 
calling on the gate to howl, and the city to cry out. “Howl, 
O gate! cry, O city! dissolved, O Philistia, the whole of thee ; 
for out of the north cometh smoke, and none straggleth in 
his gatherings (ae. of troops).” Thus an overwhelming and 
vigorously sustained force is threatened, which will sweep 
all before itself, as far as the Philistines are concerned. 
Here too the end is deliverance for the tried of His people. 
“And what shall one answer the messengers of the nation ? 
That Jehovah hath founded Zion, and the afflicted of his 
people shall trust [or, find refuge] in it.” This forms a 
sufficiently distinct sub-section: Babylon judged; the Assyrian 
broken in Jehovah’s land; Philistia melted away; and Zion 
founded by Jehovah as a refuge for the afflicted of His 
people. 

It is instructive to observe that in the day that is coming 
Jehovah will deal with comparatively small powers as well as 
the greatest, according to their hehaviour toward Israel. 
Thus, after Babylon and Assyria, we have now Philistia, as 
we shall have in their place Moab and Syria, the races and 
lands which surrounded the chosen people. It is in vain to 
argue that they are now unknown, or to assume that they are 
extinct, Whatever may have been in the past, these chapters 
look on to the future ; and He, Who will before all the world 
bring forward distinctly Israel as compared with Judah, will 
not fail to single out the long hidden remnants of their 
neighbours for His retribution in the end of the age. 

Nor can we have a more manifest evidence of divine pre- 
science conveyed to God’s people than that Babylon should 
take precedence of Assyria, then in its glory, while Babylon 


200 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


gave no sign of its eventual supremacy ; unless indeed we add 
that, in contrast with history which testifies of Assyria’s 
fall making way for Babylon’s rise, we read in prophecy of 
Assyria to be trodden down on Jehovah’s mountains after the 
desolation of Babylon has been set out to the utmost: a 
prophecy which awaits fulfilment. 

This was feebly, or not at all, seen by the mass of 
interpreters of old and in modern times. Bishop Lowth 
expresses their vagueness when he remarks on v. 25 that 
“the Assyrians and Babylonians are the same people”; yet he 
refers to his father, W. Lowth, who, after giving a similarly 
uncertain sound, says, “I am apt to think that by the Assyrian 
may be meant some remarkable enemies of God’s church (see 
note on xi. 14, xxxii. 16), and particularly those expressed by 
Gog and Magog (Ezekiel xxxviii.), who, as the prophet there 
tells us (v. 17), were under several names ‘spoken of by the 
prophets of Israel’; and it is particularly said of them that 
they shall ‘fall upon the mountains of Israel.” This is at 
least better than his son’s comment, and ought to have dispelled 
at once the confusion of Assyria with Babylon. It ought also 
to have shown without a doubt that our prophet was given to 
speak of a judgment which closes Jehovah’s indignation against 
Israel (for “the church” of course is not in question) in the 
destruction of the last of their enemies, when His whole work 
is performed on Mount Zion and on Jerusalem. Even Dr. 
Driver confesses (Lit. of the Old Testament, 202) that “The 
prophecy has no connexion with what precedes. It is directed 
against Assyria, not Babylon; and it anticipates, not the 
capture of the city of Babylon, but the overthrow of the hosts 
of Assyria in Judah.” This witness is true; but, if true, it 
points to an immense intervention of God at the close of the 
age, no such overthrow having ever been in the past, whatever 
the earnest then given, 


CHAPTER XV. 


In chapters xv. xvi. we have “the Burden of Moab,” the 
neighbour of Israel among the surrounding races as a pastoral 
people and outwardly prosperous hitherto. What a picture of 
desolation and woe; and so much the more felt, because so 
unexpected and sudden! The Philistines were not more 
offensive to God because of the pleasure they took in the 
calamities of Israel, than the Moabites in their excessive 
self-security and pride. They were among the neighbouring 
races which were allowed to harass Israel for their unfaithful- 
ness during the Judges, till David reduced them. Afterwards 
they took advantage of the revolt of the ten tribes, to shake 
off their subjection, first to Judah, and finally to Israel; but 
they, like others, fell under the Babylonish conqueror, as we 
may gather from a comparison of Jer. xlviii., which adopts and 
enlarges these very predictions of the older prophet, and serves 
thus to fix the epoch of their application. “For in a night of 
laying waste, Ar of Moab is undone; for in a night of laying 
waste, Kir of Moab is undone!”* (v. 1). Ar-Moab is the 
more forcible a phrase, because it was not only the capital, 
but the only real city that Moab possessed. Ar means city, 
and Kir means a wall and thence a walled fortress. It was 
not far from the city on the S.E. 

Broken thus in their city and stronghold, one after another 
surprised to their dismay, the people are supposed to go to 
their places to weep, with deep and universal signs of mourn- 

* Dr. Henderson prefers to render it thus: ‘‘ Assuredly in the night of 
assault Ar-Moab is destroyed ; assuredly in the night of assault Kir-Moab is 


destroyed.” They were the two main defences of Moab, the city and the castle 
a few miles off, the storming of which decided the fate of the people. 


202 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


ing in public and in private; and this, to the extremities of 
their land, the very soldiers crying out like the weaker sex. 
“He is gone up to Bayith, and to Dibon, to the high places, to 
weep; Moab howleth over Nebo, and over Medeba: on all their 
heads [is] baldness, every beard is cut off. In their streets 
they gird themselves with sackcloth; on their housetops, and 
in their broad places, every one howleth, weeping abundantly. 
And Heshbon crieth out, and Elealeh; their voice is heard 
unto Jahaz. Therefore the armed men of Moab cry aloud; 
his soul trembleth within him” (vv. 2-4). 

The prophet, or whosoever is personated by him, cannot but 
feel for the disasters of Moab; and the graphic sketch of 
desolation and want and carnage is continued to the end of the 
chapter, “My heart crieth out for Moab; their nobles [flee] unto 
Zoar, to Kglath-shelishiyah: for by the ascent of Luhith with 
weeping they go up by it; for in the way of Horonaim they 
raise up a cry of destruction. For the waters of Nimrim shall 
be desolate ; for the grass is withered away, the tender grass 
faileth, there is no green thing. Therefore the abundance they 
have gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry 
away to the brook of the willows. For the cry is gone round 
about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, 
and the howling thereof unto Beer-elim. For the waters of 
Dimon are full of blood: for I will bring yet more upon Dimon, 
a lion upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant 
of the land” (vv. 5-9). Even the escaped should find fresh 
disaster and destruction from Jehovah. Extreme humiliation 
is the chastening of excessive pride. But the intense feeling 
of the prophet, which was assuredly no less in Jeremiah, is the 
most complete disproof of the heartlessness which unbelieving 
critics ascribe to Isaiah, or at least to these Burdens assigned 
to him. Ewald had too much sense of taste to overlook it. 
There is no doubt as marked a difference in tone between 
the deep pathos over Moab’s fall and the ode of triumph be- 
fore the Babylonish potentate. This is as it should be; but 
vindictive and sarcastic in an evil sense it is not. Even the 
Christian, who is heavenly, is called to abhor evil, and cleave 
to good, And heaven resounds with hallelujahs over God’s 


4 


CHAPTER XV. 203 


true and righteous judgment of the Great Harlot, though her 
smoke goeth up for ever and ever. How suited it was for a 
Jewish prophet to triumph over the last holder of the impious 
power allowed to rise when Judah was swept away, and whose 
fall at length ushers in Israel delivered for ever! Here in 
chaps. xv. xvi. he can yield to the most impassioned feeling 
over kindred but proud Moab brought low. 

We may note among the places named which share in the 
national grief that the Dibon of ver. 2 appears to be called 
Dimon in ver. 9,a play on the word in order to associate it 
with the Hebrew for “blood,” which was to be its portion. 
Jerome records that the place in his day was called both. 
Death and disasters yet more impended, What a contrast was 
Beer-elim to Moab and Israel! There Moab’s howling was to 
reach; there Israel sung their song of triumph as they drew 
to the end of their journeying, where for the refreshing of all 
the well sprang up under the staves of the chiefs and nobles. 
So the true end with enduring joy yet awaits the people after 
a far longer wandering. But judgments accompany and 
distinguish “that day,” judgments on all the enemies of 
Israel small and great; judgments that begin with the ancient 
people of God, and with Judah first of all, For there is no 
unrighteousness with God. And if it be a day of sifting for 
all the nations of the earth, He must begin at His house, 
before Israel can say in truth of heart, His mercy for ever! 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Our chapter opens with a call to Moab to send the lamb to the 
ruler of the land from Sela in the wilderness unto the mount 
of the daughter of Zion: “Send the lamb to the ruler of the 
land from the rock in (or, to) the wilderness, unto the mount of 
the daughter of Zion. And it shall be, as wandering birds, as 
a scattered nest, the daughter of Moab shall be at the fords 
of Arnon” (vv. 1, 2). I see not the smallest reason to 
Justify the notion of an allusion to the lamb as the well- 
known type of the Messiah, still less that He is here spoken of 
as the Lamb, the Ruler of the earth, as if we were reading the 
Revelation. This appears to be a reference to their ancient 
tribute. They were subdued by David of old, and sent him 
gifts. “And he smote Moab and measured them with a line, 
casting them down to the ground; even with two lines 
measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep 
alive; and [so] the Moabites became David’s servants, and 
brought gifts” (2 Sam. viii, 2). Later on in the history, we 
find that the king of Moab was a sheep-master, and used to 
render to the king of Israel the tribute of 100,000 lambs, and 
as many rams with the wool (2 Kings iii. 4, 5). The prophet 
seems here to remind Moab of its obligation ; otherwise their 
daughters must prepare for still greater calamities to come. 
“Take counsel, execute judgment ; make thy shadow as the 
night in the midst of the noonday ; hide the outcasts, discover 
not him that wandereth. Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, 
Moab ; be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler. 
For the extortioner is at an end, the spoiler ceaseth, the oppressor 
is consumed out of the land. And in mercy shall the throne be 
established; and one shall sit upon it in truth in the tabernacle 


CHAPTER XVI. 205 


of David, judging and seeking judgment, and hasting righteous- 
ness” (vv. 3-5). The prophet, in his second counsel, touches 
on the dire offence of Moab in Jehovah’s eyes. Had he 
sheltered the outcasts of Israel ? or had he taken advantage of 
their distressful flight to smite and betray them ? The pro- 
phetic Spirit looks through Hezekiah to the true Son of David, 
Who shall reign in righteousness when the last oppressive 
spoiler has come to his end. For who can have overlooked, in 
the vast theatre of judgment we see in Isaiah xxiv. xxv,, etc., 
that Moab has a conspicuously affecting place? (xxv. 10-12.) 
To confine it to the past is far from spiritual intelligence. 

The verses that follow (6-12) detail once more the pride of 
Moab and his most humiliating downfall, when, spite of his 
arrogance, “ Moab shall howl for Moab ; every one shall howl,” 
and the country shall vie with the towns in extent of devasta- 
tion; and the prophet weeps afresh at the sight of the 
wretchedness of the once lofty foe, who prays in his 
sanctuary ; “but he shall not prevail.” “We have heard of 
the arrogance of Moab—I[the] very proud—of his pride, and 
his arrogance, and his wrath: his pratings [are] vain. Therefore 
shall Moab howl for Moab, every one of them shall howl. For 
the foundations of Kir-hareseth shall ye mourn, verily afflicted. 
For the fields of Heshbon languish, the vine of Sibmah; the 
lords of the nations have broken down its choice plants: they 
reached unto Jaazer; they wandered [through] the wilderness ; 
its shoots stretched out, they went beyond the sea. Therefore 
I will weep with the weeping of Jaazer for the vine of Sibmah; 
with my tears will I water thee, Heshbon, and Elealeh, for a 
ery is fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy harvest. 
And taken away is joy and gladness out of the fruitful field; 
and in the vineyard there is no singing, neither is there shout- 
ing: the treaders tread out no wine in the presses; I have 
made the cry to cease. Therefore my bowels sound like a harp 
for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kir-hares. And it shall 
come to pass, when Moab shall appear, shall weary himself on 
the high place, and enter into his sanctuary to pray, that he 
shall not prevail” (vv. 6-12). 

It is remarkably added, “This [is] the word which Jehovah 


206 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


hath spoken from of old concerning Moab. And now Jehovah 
speaketh, saying, Within three years,” etc. (vv. 13,14). It seems 
to be a supplement added to the former strain after an interval. 
The last verse shows that, whatever may be the full bearing 
of this Burden on Moab, “ within three years, as the years of 
a hireling [¢.¢., I suppose, exactly measured out, as would be 
the fact in such a case], and the glory of Moab shall be brought 
to nought, with all that great multitude; and the remnant 
shall be small, few, of no account.” That this was accomplished 
to the letter, there can be no doubt to the believing mind, 
though we know not the instrumentality, whether the king of 
Judah or the Assyrian. 

But as little need one question that the fulfilment of all the 
unaccomplished terms of the prophecy will be in the grand 
future crisis ; for it is certain that the final king of the north 
will fail to reach Moab, and that the children of Israel under 
the Messiah are to lay their hands upon him. Compare 
Isaiah xi, 14 with Daniel xi, 41, Nothing more clearly proves 
that, if unknown or little known now, there will remain 
representatives of that nation in the end of the age to take 
their part in that catastrophe, humiliating to man but to the 
glory of God, when the chosen people, in their totality, shall 
be saved, and restored by divine mercy to the land of their 
inheritance and their promised dominion. It is certain, from 
a later strain of our prophet (xxv. 10-12), the epoch of which 
is the day of Jehovah, that the final ruin of Moab will only be 
at the time when He exalts Israel to their promised place of 
everlasting supremacy on the earth. 

We may notice that if Micah was led to use a prediction of 
Isaiah in his chap. ii., Jeremiah was inspired to borrow from 
this strain of Isaiah. Compare Jer, xlviii. Was this poverty 
in the resources of any one of them? No inference can be 
more shallow and unjust, even if we only regard them ag 
writers ; but if we believe in plenary inspiration, it is baser and 
more evil still. It was the Spirit of God only the more firmly 
welding the divine together in that grace which honours every 
true testimony from God and the vessels of it. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


ASSUMING that these prophecies, whatever past accomplish- 
ment they may have received, have for their centre the day of 
Jehovah, how are we to meet the difficulty about these various 
peoples and cities which once troubled Israel 2? How are we to 
account for these prophecies looking onward to a future day, 
seeing that they no longer, or very feebly, exist? The answer 
is, that the very same difficulty applies to Israel. No one 
knows clearly or certainly where the ten tribes are; neither 
does it seem any one’s business to search beforehand. We 
may leave them in the obscurity that God has put them in. 
We know, if we believe His word, that as surely as He has 
preserved the dispersed remnant of the two tribes, so will He 
bring out of their hiding-place the descendants of the ten. 
We know that not only the Jews proper are to be restored, but 
also the full nationality of Israel. To this the dwoexapvdov 
hope to come ; the full twelve tribes making one nation in the 
land, and one King shall be King over them all. “And they 
shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided 
into two kingdoms any more at all.” Every letter of the 
promises will be accomplished. Scripture cannot be broken. 

Even if we saw no signs, why doubt? Do we need such 
tokens? It is a proof of feebleness of faith, if we ask a sign. 
God’s word is the best assurance; on this let us take our 
stand. If God has said that so it shall be, we have a right to 
expect that He will bring from their recesses the ten tribes, 
and will save them out of all their dwelling-places wherein 
they have sinned, and will cleanse them. We are far from 
being fully acquainted even with the little world on which we 
live. Long ago there were parts of the world better known 


208 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


than they have been till of late. Thus the early accounts 
of Africa and central Asia, for instance, have been largely 
confirmed by recent researches. God may have the ten tribes 
in some of earth’s little explored regions; or they may emerge 
unexpectedly out of a nation with which they have long been 
confounded. But we are not bound to show where they are. 
God has declared that He will bring them into their own land, 
and this in a peculiar manner; for they are to pass through 
the wilderness again, and there be purged of the transgressors 
in their midst, who thus never reach the land, instead of being 
destroyed in it like the apostate Jews. Thus there is a 
totally different destiny for the ten tribes as compared with 
the two. If God will accomplish both, nothing will be easier 
than for the same God to define the descendants of their old 
Gentile enemies, whether near or farther off. The truth is 
that the very same principle of faith accepts and accounts 
for both ; as it is mere incredulity which finds a difficulty in 
either. These remarks apply to almost all these chapters. 

Again, some strangely misunderstand the bold figures of the 
prophets, as if employed to cast their subjects into an 
enigmatic, if not ambiguous, mould. This is a great error. 
For they are meant, not so much to throw a cloud over things, 
as to give emphasis and energy. Many, whose object is to 
deter Christians from reading the prophecies, talk much of 
these tropes, as if their presence was evidence enough to show 
that the meaning is doubtful. Nothing can be more contrary 
to the fact ; for in the inspired writings, as in others, figures 
are used, by a kind of understood licence, to illustrate, adorn, 
and enforce the sense, and in no case to mystify. Figures and 
even symbols are quite as definite as plain or literal terms, 
and are meant to be only more forcible. The very speech of 
ordinary life abounds in metaphor and simile; but, of course, 
the poetical language of the prophecies gives occasion to their 
more frequent usage therein. 

Further, the difficulty of scripture does not lie so much in 
its figurative style as in the depth of its thoughts. In the 
word of God there is perhaps nothing more profound than 
the first chapter of the fourth Gospel. Yet what first strikes 


CHAPTER XVII. 209 


one there is the exceeding simplicity of this scripture as a 
matter of language. It used to be and perhaps is the common 
habit, of those teaching the Greek language in some parts of 
the country, to make this Gospel a sort of initiatory exercise. 
Notwithstanding, in all the Bible you can find no revelation or 
handling of truth more full of depths, none that will cause the 
really spiritual to stand more amazed, however attractive the 
grace it displays in Christ. This will show how entirely un- 
founded is the notion of such as fancy it is a simple question 
of words. 

The divine depth of scripture is in sober fact the difficulty, 
not its obscure language. It is difficult because of our 
darkness morally, because of our want of acquaintance with 
the mind of God, judging appearances by the natural senses 
or by the mind, instead of receiving things from God, and 
reading His words in the light of Christ. So far from the 
prophetic scriptures being the most difficult part, they are 
much easier than is commonly imagined. It is a great thing 
to begin with believing them ; intelligence follows and grows 
apace. If we may compare the various parts of scripture, the 
New Testament is without doubt the deepest of God’s com- 
munications; and of the New Testament none exceeds the 
apostle John’s writings for penetration into the knowledge of 
what God is; and of his writings who would treat the Epistles 
and the Gospel as less profound than the Apocalypse? None, 
I am persuaded, but such as are too superficially acquainted 
with any of them to warrant their pronouncing a judgment. 

This may encourage some to take up the prophecies with a 
more child-like spirit, always bearing in mind that God looks 
onward to the future crisis that ushers in “the day of 
Jehovah.” He thinks of His beloved Son, and of His glory 
here below. This gives importance to the prophecies; they 
unfold the scene, objects, and ways of His interests. The Jews 
are the people of whom the Lord Jesus deigned to be born as 
to the flesh. They have proved what they were to Him; He 
has now to prove what He will be to them. He means to have 
an earthly people (Israel), as well as a heavenly (the church), 
for His glory. The word of God stops not short of this, If it 

o 


210 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


is not fulfilled, yet it is in the sure keeping of God, Who has 
already given a partial accomplishment. Hence we learn the 
principle for interpreting prophecy; it is as a whole for the 
glory of the Lord Jesus in connexion with Israel and the 
nations upon the earth. We speak now of Old Testament 
prophecy. The New Testament takes another character—the 
Lord Jesus in connexion with Christendom also, besides 
confirming the oracles about Israel. The church then, too, 
is outside, and above all in union with its glorified Head in 
heaven, His body even now on earth. 

This may show too why Jehovah attaches importance to a 
little place or people on the prophetic field. Israel was much 
in His eyes, because of the Messiah; and His own counsels are 
ot dead if they sleep. Hence too, when God removes the 
veil from His ancient people Israel, their old antagonists will 
begin to appear. This is assuredly full of interest. There is a 
resurrection for every individual. The body will be raised for 
the manifestation of everything that was done in the body, for 
it is by the body that the soul acts. Even so will it be with 
these nations. There is a destiny analogous. As scripture tells 
us, they are to reappear when Israel does, for the Lord Jesus to 
take the kingdom; and God will distinguish them according to 
their original names, not by those they may bear in the process 
of human history. Jehovah will go up, as He alone can, to the 
sources, Hence we have their judgment connected with the 
last days, and not merely that which fell upon them long ago. 
His words go down to the close. Some may have been more 
completely accomplished in the past than others; but with 
this difference, they all look onward to the future. 

The last generation will do as their fathers, only with added 
manifestation of evil by-and-by; then judgment will fall. 
Thus it is that God will deal with the nations. They 
will manifest the same hostility to Israel, the same pride 
against God, as formerly, This may seem a hard principle to 
some, but it is most righteous. If a child has grown up, 
knowing his father’s dishonour, hearing of his disgrace and 
punishment, would not that sin be most peculiarly odious in 
his eyes, if any right feeling existed? The public example of 


CHAPTER XVII. 11 


his father’s evil ways would be ever before him. But if the 
son trifled with it, and used it as an encouragement to walk in 
the same path, is it not just that there should be a still more 
severe punishment exacted of that son? Besides having the 
universal conscience of men, he had special witness in his own 
family, which the heart of a child ought to have felt and 
pondered deeply to avoid all repetition of its evil. 

This is just the principle of God’s way in government. Man 
ought to take the more earnest heed from the past; and God, 
Who deals righteously, will judge according to that which man 
ought to have remembered. For he ought to have used the 
witness of the past as a warning for the future. These nations 
will then reappear, and, instead of recalling their fathers’ ways 
for their own warning and profit, they take exactly the same 
road of iniquity; and once more they will also endeavour to 
root out and destroy the people of God. 

So it is in Isaiah xvii. Damascus, which was to the north 
of the Holy Land, was the very ancient and most celebrated 
city of Syria of old. (See Gen. xv.) It was to be made a 
heap of ruins—the cities of Aroer a place for flocks. “The 
burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from 
[being] a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap. The cities of 
Aroer [are]forsaken; they shall be for flocks, which shall lie down 
and none shall make [them] afraid” (vv, 1, 2). And as of old 
Syria and Ephraim conspired against the realm of David's son 
to their own discomfiture, so once more the remarkable feature 
of this judgment is, that God will deal with His people as well 
as with their old ally. “The fortress also shall cease from 
Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of 
Syria; they shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, 
saith Jehovah of hosts. And in that day it shall come to pass, 
[that] the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of 
his flesh shall become lean. And it shall be as when the reaper 
gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; yea, 
it shall be as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim” 
(wv, 3-5). He will gather out all scandals from them and 
punish the transgressors; He will employ their enmity to 
purge that threshing-floor of the land of Israel; He will deal 

02 


212 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


in a judicial manner with His people. The nations may lure 
themselves and each other on with the hope that it is going 
hard with Israel; but their conspiracy will be offensive to God, 
however He may use it for Israel’s good. This is here 
described. “And a gleaning shall be left in it, as at the 
shaking of an olive tree: two, three berries in the tree-top ; 
four, five in its fruitful boughs, saith Jehovah God of Israel. In 
that day shall man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have 
respect to the Holy One of Israel. And he will not look to 
the altars, the work of his hands, nor have regard to [that] 
which his fingers have made, neither the Asherahs nor the 
sun-images ” (vv, 6-8). 

Tt is well to bear in mind that not Sennacherib but Tiglath- 
Pileser destroyed Damascus, a ruin that followed the alliance 
of Pekah and Rezin to depose David’s house in Judah, un- 
worthy and false as Ahaz was. This had been predicted by 
Isaiah in chap. vii., and our chapter speaks of its being a ruin 
heap. But the prophecy clearly goes on to its reappearance 
and overthrow in the latter day. 

There is also plainly anticipated at that time a discrimina- 
ting judgment proceeding in the land of Israel. Compare 
chap. xxviii, where the course of the overflowing scourge is 
described. “In that day shall his strong cities be as the 
forsaken tract in the wood, and the mountain-top which they 
forsook before the children of Israel; and there shall be 
desolation. For thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, 
and hast not been mindful of the Rock of thy strength; there- 
fore shalt thou plant pleasant plantations, and shalt set them 
with foreign slips: in the day of thy planting wilt thou hedge 
[them] round, and in the morning wilt thou make thy seed to 
flourish : [but] the harvest [will be] a heap in the day of grief 
and of desperate sorrow” (vy. 9-11). 

In due time comes the retribution that regards the end 
of the age set forth with great vigour. “Woe to [or probably 
Ho !] a tumult of many peoples, [which] roar like the roaring of 
the seas; and the rushing of nations, [that] make a rushing like 
the rushing of mighty waters! The nations shall rush like the 
rushing of many waters: but He will rebuke them, and they 


‘CHAPTER XVII 213 


shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the 
mountains before the wind, and like whirling [dust] before the 
storm. Behold, at eventide trouble; before the morning they 
are not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the 
lot of them that rob us” (vv. 12-14). Let the nations gather 
their multitudes; let them rush on like mighty waters. But 
the rebuke comes; and they flee and are chased, yea, like 
thistle-down before the whirlwind. “Behold at eventide 
trouble; before the morning they are not. ‘This is the portion 
of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.” 
When was all this accomplished in the past, from the day that 
Isaiah wrote? Where was seen the gathering of all these 
nations and their complete dispersion? On the contrary, 
Israel was broken and scattered, as were the Jews afterwards. 
Here it is not one nation triumphing over God’s people, but a 
gathering of all nations, who seem but waiting for the morning 
to swallow up Israel; but before the light dawns they and 
their leader are not. Surely it shall be; for the mouth of 
Jehovah has spoken it. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


THE true reference to Egypt and Ethiopia is in chaps. xix. 
xx., which accordingly have the title prefixed, “The Burden of 
Egypt.” It is not so here. Neither is the chapter called a 
“Burden”; nor should the opening exclamation be rendered 
“Woe” as it often is, but “Ho!” as the context shows. It is 
a call to a land designedly unnamed, quite outside the bounds 
of those which Israel knew, and characterised at the time 
of the action by sentiments of friendship, in contrast with 
the usual animosity of Gentiles, which here breaks out once 
more. The last verse intimates that the time when these events 
occur is the closing scene, marked subsequently by Jehovah’s 
interference on behalf of His people, and in full grace their re- 
establishment in Zion, to which prophecy as a whole points. 

Our chapter seems thus to be distinguished from the over- 
throw of the nations, predicted at the close of the preceding 
section, “the Burden of Damascus,” and so forms a scene 
sufficiently distinct to be treated separately. It is a deeply 
interesting episode; and it is plain that the new Burden opens 
chapter xix., and distinguishes the judgment of Egypt from the 
subject before us. 

This it is well to notice distinctly, because Jerome and Cyril, 
Bochart and Vitringa, among many more, have fallen into the 
error of supposing that Egypt is the“land shadowing with wings,” 
addressed in verse 1, and that the Egyptians or the Ethiopians 
are the people to whom the message is sent in verse 2, some of 
them being even brought to the grateful worship of God in 
verse 7. Others again are no less confident that Ethiopia 
is meant, as Calvin, Piscator, Michaelis, Rosenmiiller, Gesenius, 
Ewald, Delitzsch, Drechsler, and Driver. Yet Jerome and 


CHAPTER XVIII. 215 


Calvin agree with the more famous Jewish authors that the 
people spoken of in verses 2 and 7 are the Jews. All must be 
confusion where this is not seen, And a nation is here distin- 
guished by favour to the Jew in its own way, but in vain. 
There follow nations hostile as usually of old. But the main 
issue is God, Who observes all, at length accomplishing His 
gracious purpose in Israel. 

The reader need not be surprised at confusion, alas! too 
common in commentators ever so erudite and otherwise 
eminent. For there is hardly a portion of Isaiah which 
has given rise to greater discord and more evident bewilder- 
ment among men of note, from Eusebius of Caesarea (who saw 
in it the land of Judea in apostolic times, sending Christian 
doctrine to all the world, an interpretation founded on the 
amtooréANwy . . . . émistoAas BiBAtvas Of the LXX.) down to 
Arias Montanus, who applied it to America, converted to 
Christ by the preaching and arms of the Spaniards! Plainly 
the right understanding of the chapter depends on seeing 
that the Jewish nation are those intended in verses 2 and 7; 
and this, not in the days of Sennacherib, save perhaps as an 
historic starting-point, but for the future crisis, and its glorious 
issues. A few expressions, especially in verses 1 and 2, may be 
obscure, but the general scope is remarkably clear and of 
exceeding interest. 

It is true, as Henderson says in common with very many, 
that the chapter is not a “woe” (as the Sept., the Vulgate, and 
the A.V. translate), nor yet like the preceding or following Bur- 
dens, but rather a call summoning attention—“Ho!”—to the 
land unnamed, which is to be described. The contrast seems 
plain between chapter xvii. 12-14 and xviii. 4-6. One nation, 
whose name is not given, will seek to befriend the Jews in the 
time and way spoken of; while others break out into their old 
jealousy and hatred, and wreak their vengeance on them all the 
more. But that the friendly protector is Ethiopia seems wholly 
without and against the tests of the chapter. According 
to this idea, when Tirhakah in alarm summons his troops, the 
Jews send swift messengers to acquaint him with the destruc- 
tion of Sennacherib’s host, when it seemed to threaten, not 


216 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


only Jerusalem but Ethiopia. But this dislocates the chapter, 
making the Ethiopians the prominent figure instead of the 
Jews, and terminating ineptly with a present offered by the 
Ethiopians to the God of Israel. It is enough to examine the 
words of the prophet with care, in order to refute any such 
speculation. 

“Ho! land shadowing (or, whirring) with wings, which 
[art] beyond [the] rivers of Cush” (a2. beyond the Nile and the 
Euphrates). It means a country outside the sphere of those 
nations, which up to the prophet’s day had menaced or 
meddled with Israel. Usually firm against mere tradition, and 
careful of scriptural truth, even Dr. Kay has failed to notice 
the true force of this remarkable expression found here only 
and in Zeph. iii. 10, The object is not at all to direct 
attention to the country adjoining the Nile, nor even to 
combine with this the land adjacent to the Euphrates. The 
call is expressly to a land beyond either limit. Egypt and 
Assyria had been the chief of those powers; for there 
was an Asiatic as well as an African Cush. The land in 
question lay (not by any means contiguous to, but perhaps 
ever so far) beyond these well-known countries. Here is the 
first indication; and it is of the highest importance, but 
neglected by most. It expresses a country far away. This 
comparatively distant land espouses the cause of Israel; but 
the protection would be ineffectual in result, however loud the 
proffer and the preparation. The use of “ wings” to convey 
the idea of a cover for the oppressed or defenceless is too 
common to need proofs. “Ho! land shadowing with wings, 
which [art] beyond [the] rivers of Cush; that sendeth ambassa- 
dors by the sea, even in vessels of papyrus upon [the] face of 
[the] waters, [saying,]” (vv. 1, 2). 

The second verse shows, in addition to the previous charac- 
teristics of this future ally of the Jews, that it is a maritime 
power, for it sends its ambassadors over the sea, and in vessels 
of bulrushes (ie. of “papyrus”)* on the face of the waters. 


* This description of their vessels or boats is an apparent difficulty, as it is 
that which has induced most to conceive that Egypt is meant. For, no doubt, 
boats of that slight material sufficient to cross the Nile were notorious of old. 
But may we not infer that, as “ ships of Tarshish ” are sometimes used in a general 


CHAPTER XVIII. 217 


Israel is the object of their interest. “Go, swift messengers, to 
a nation scattered (or dragged) and peeled, to a people terrible 
from their beginning and onward, to a nation meted out and 
trodden down, whose land the rivers have spoiled” (v. 2). The 
attempt to apply this description to the Egyptians, or the 
Ethiopians, has largely affected the view taken of the epithets 
here applied (e.g. “tall and smooth,” and “that meteth out and 
treadeth down”). The mistake of not a few is to introduce 
Christianity into the chapter; whereas it is really a question 
of earthly things and the earthly people in presence of a 
friendly effort, but also of enemies before God's time comes to 
deliver them Himself. The learned may enquire whether 
“boats” are really intended by “2°22 in verse 2. Here only 
is the word so rendered in all scripture. It occurs very fre- 
quently for an ornament, implement, or utensil; even for sack, 
stuff, or any such thing in general; for armour, or weapons; for 
instruments of music, or furniture, &c. Hence the Seventy 
here translate by “paper letters,” which we can well understand 
requisite for ambassadors sent on their errand. It is the more 
worthy of careful consideration, as this phrase more than any 
other has misled the commentators. Otherwise there is but 
little difficulty in the chapter (Preface to it by Bp. Lowth). 
But, in fact, there seems no sufficient reason to question 
the general accuracy of our authorised version, which, as 
way for those employed on long commercial voyages, to whatever land they belonged, 
so the “vessels of papyrus” may designate rapid cruisers in general, whatever 
the material, or wherein employed? “Beyond the rivers of Cush” must surely 
exclude Egypt as well as Babylonia, or any country within those limits. The 
maritime people meant is described as outside the lands which used to have to do 
with Israel. Hence we find Bishop Horsley writing (Bibl. Crit. ii. 184, 135), 
“Navigable vessels are certainly meant; and if it could be proved that Egypt is 
the country spoken to, these vessels of bulrushes might be understood of the light 
skiffs made of that material, and used by the Egyptians upon the Nile. But if 
the country spoken to be distant from Egypt, vessels of bulrush are only used as 
an apt image on account of their levity for quick-sailing vessels of any material. 
The country, therefore, to which the prophet calls, is characterised as one which, 
in the days of the completion of this prophecy, should be a great maritime and 
commercial power, forming remote alliances, making distant voyages to all parts 
of the world with expedition and security, and in the habit of affording pro- 


tection to their friends and allies, Where this country is to be found is not 
otherwise said than that it will be remote from Judea, and, with respect to that 


country, beyond the Cushean streams.” — 


218 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


predicating them of Israel, yields the sole clear and good 
sense. Above any, they are a nation whose hope is indeed long 
deferred, and who have suffered indignity beyond all; yet 
marked by portents from their existence and thenceforth. 
Upon them has been exactly measured divine judgment, as 
none other had. Who else trodden down as they? Nor 
had their land escaped the desolating ravages of powers over- 
whelming like rivers, as we find the same figure used of it in 
Tsaiah viii. and elsewhere. The difference between the land in 
the first verse which sends out its messengers and ships, and 
the dispersed people from all time marvellous or hitherto 
formidable, but of late ravaged by their impetuous enemies, 
stands on no minute points of verbal criticism, but on the 
general bearing of scripture history as well as the context, 
which the English-reading Christian is quite able to judge. 

This is the weakest point in Bishop Horsley’s (Bibl. Crit. ii. 
162) otherwise able investigation of the chapter: “The 
standard of the Cross of Christ; the trumpet of the gospel. 
The resort to the standard, the effect of the summons, in 
the end will be universal.” But it is the prevalent bane of 
theologians to bring in the gospel or the church into the 
prophets, where the dealings of divine government and 
ultimately of Messiah’s kingdom are really meant. 

Thus far we have seen the intervention of this unnamed 
land, described as the would-be protector of Israel actively 
engaging with their swift ships, it would seem on a friendly 
mission in quest of that scattered people, to plant them again 
in their own land. 

But another enters the scene who puts an arrest on the 
zeal of man. Universal attention is demanded. Great events 
tremble in the balances, Signs are given visibly and audibly. 
“All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see 
ye when an ensign is lifted up on the mountains; and when 
a trumpet is blown, hear ye. For thus Jehovah said unto me, 
I will take my rest, and I will observe in my dwelling-place 
like clear heat upon herbs, like a cloud of dew in the heat 
of harvest” (vv. 3, 4). God is contemplating this busy enter- 
prise. Man is active. Jehovah, as it were, retires and watches, 


CHAPTER XVIII. 219 


It is like a clear heat in the sunlight, like a cloud of dew in 
the heat of harvest. It is a moment of deep stillness and sus- 
pense, where He allows apparent advantage of it but does not act 
Himself, while immense efforts are made to gather in the Jews 
by the patronage of the maritime nation of verses 1 and 2. 
All then seemed to flourish: but what is man without God ? 
“For before the harvest, when the bud is finished (or, past), 
and the blossom becometh a ripening grape, he shall both cut 
off the sprigs with pruning-knives, and take away [and] cut 
down the branches” (v. 5). Thus total failure of the friendly 
plan ensues. Everything in appearance betokened a speedy 
ingathering of good to Israel, and their national hopes seemed 
to be on the eve of being realised, when God brings all to nought 
by letting loose once more the old passions of the Gentiles 
against His people. The effect is that “they shall be left 
together unto the birds of the mountains and to the beasts 
of the earth; and the birds shall summer upon them, and all 
the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them” (w. 6). 

It was not for that power to interfere, nor was it Jehovah’s 
time; and yet it was for Himself in the end. The shadow of 
God’s wings is the true resource of His people’s faith (Psalms 
lvii. Ixi.). For “in that time [a period of course, not an 
epoch merely] shall be brought unto Jehovah of hosts a present 
of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible 
from their beginning and onward, a nation meted out and 
trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the 
place of the name of Jehovah of hosts, the mount Zion” (v. 7). 
Thus will the presumptuous help of man be rebuked, as well as 
the renewed wrath of the nations once more preying on the poor 
but loved people of Jehovah. For as surely as they turn again 
to rend Israel, He will appear in the midst of the desolation, 
and with His own mighty hand accomplish that which man as 
vainly seeks to effect as to frustrate. The Jewish nation, 
at that very season, shall be brought a present to Jehovah ; 
and they shall come not empty-handed but emptied of self, 
with lowly and grateful hearts to Jehovah in Mount Zion, 
after their final escape from Gentile fury in His mercy which 
endures for ever. They bring the present, and they are the 


220 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


present to Jehovah. Here, as ever, the dealings of God in 
judgment result in the blessing of His ancient people; and 
Zion accordingly is the place where His name is manifested in 
connexion with them. We also see how unreasonable it would 
be to imagine that the church, called to heavenly glory, is 
concerned as God’s object in the chapter. It is Israel only, 
destined to pass through renewed and bitter trouble, most 
of all at the close, before Jehovah does His own work of 
establishing them in the seat of royal grace under Messiah and 
the new covenant. He has never abandoned this purpose of 
His for the earth, 

The call of the church for union with its glorious Head and 
heavenly glory came into realisation, when the Jews stumbled 
at the Messiah in humiliation, as they had gone after idols, 
followed respectively by the Babylonish captivity for the latter, 
and by the Roman destruction for the former. Meanwhile 
Christendom enjoys far higher privileges; but not having 
continued in His goodness, it too shall be cut off, and irrevo- 
cably. There is no restoration, but utter destruction for 
the Babylon of Christian times; there is to be for Jerusalem. 
The natural branches shall be graffed into their own olive-tree. 
All Israel shall be saved, and so declares the apostle of the 
Gentiles as to both. The true members of Christ’s body shall 
be caught up to Christ, and glorified with Him. It is Israel, 
not the church, which is to be purified on earth, as we see 
throughout Isaiah and the prophets generally. The restoration 
of Israel to their land, and Supremacy given it over all the 
nations, we recognise as true and sure. But it is after the 
heavenly bride has joined the Bridegroom, and purging judg- 
ments then fit Israel for its destined place on earth, which 
is entirely incompatible with the church wherein Jewish 
and Gentile distinctions are gone, and Christ is all and in all. 
According to the last great prophecy the church has the 
promise of being kept out of the hour of temptation that 
is coming (Rev. iii.); whereas all the Gentiles shall be in it, 
though faithful ones come out (Rev. vii.). Again Jeremiah xxx, 
and Daniel xii, are express that the Jews must pass through it 
but be delivered—those that are written in the Book, 


CHAPTER XIX. 


TuIs chapter gives “the Burden of Egypt,” and is followed 
in the next by a personal sign enjoined on the prophet, as 
a token of the degradation soon to befall Egypt and Ethiopia. 
The general drift is so clear as to render prolonged remarks 
almost useless. 

“The burden of Egypt. Behold, Jehovah rideth upon a 
swift cloud, and cometh unto Egypt: and the idols of Egypt 
shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall 
melt in the midst of it. And I will stir up the Egyptians 
against the Egyptians: and they shall fight every one against 
his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city against 
city, kingdom against kingdom. And the spirit of Egypt 
shall be made void in the midst of it; and I will destroy the 
counsel thereof; and they shall seek unto the idols, and unto 
the conjurers, and unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto 
the soothsayers. And I will give over the Egyptians into the 
hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, 
saith the Lord Jehovah of hosts” (rv. 1-4). The prophet thus 
boldly and with the fullest moral truth sets forth the sure over- 
throw of the great realm of the old world’s prudence, and of 
debasing idolatry, and abundant natural riches. What availed 
the boasted bulwarks of their watery barriers, if Jehovah, who 
“rideth upon a swift cloud,” dooms Egypt to humiliation and 
decay? Worse than idle their appeal to their false gods; 
for their idols should be moved at His presence, and the 
heart of Egypt melt in its midst. Intestine division and 
civil war (v. 2) should be added to the overwhelming assaults 
from without; and the downfall be consummated by infatuated 
counsels as well as the wasting away of all national spirit; for 


222 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


on their recourse in their distress to their old haunts of 
superstition and sorcery, God would shut them up to the hard 
bondage of cruel lords and a fierce king. 

But the hand of Jehovah should be not only upon the 
defences of the country, but upon its internal supports, and 
this in all that was their glory and their confidence. For is 
not this Ezekiel’s “great dragon that lieth in the midst of his 
rivers, which hath said, My river is my own, and I have made 
it for myself?” Surely it is the same, of whom Isaiah here 
predicts “ And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river 
shall be wasted and dried up. And the rivers shall stink; 
the streams (or, canals) of Egypt shall be diminished and 
drain away: the reeds and the flags shall wither. The meadows 
by the Nile, by the banks of the Nile, and everything sown by 
the Nile, shall be dried up, be driven away, and be no [more]. 
And the fishers shall mourn, and all they that cast hook into 
the Nile shall lament, and they that cast nets upon the waters 
shall languish. And they that work in fine flax, and they that 
weave cotton (or, white stuffs), shall be ashamed. And her 
pillars shall be broken in pieces, all workers for hire shall 
be sad of soul” (wv. 5-10). 

The prophet next (v. 11) proceeds to taunt this haughty 
.. power in that for which, most of all, it stood high in its own 
“conceit and the reputation of men. For who has not heard 

of “the wisdom of the Egyptians?” Who does not know of 
their science and civilisation while the most renowned lands’ 
of the west, which early aspired to the sovereignty of the 
world, had not yet emerged from their condition of wild 
untutored barbarism? “The princes of Zoan [are] utterly fools; 
the counsel of the wise counsellors of Pharaoh is become 
senseless. How say ye unto Pharaoh, I [am] the son of the 
wise, the son of ancient kings? Where [are] they then, thy 
wise [men]?” is the piercing challenge of the prophet; “and 
let them tell thee now; and let them make known what 
Jehovah of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt” (vv. 11, 12). 
Alas! how many now are wrapped up in the same carnal 
security. How many in our day, like the wise counsellors 
of Egypt, are caught in their own craftiness, too wise to 


CHAPTER XIX. 223 


heed the sure and solemn words of divine prophecy; not 
wise enough to guard themselves from foolish superstition, 
or still more foolish incredulity! Is it not a maxim among 
‘the sages of Christendom, that prophecy cannot be known’ 
till the event accomplishes it and fixes its interpretation ‘ 
Than which notion, we dare to say, none can be produced less 
reasonable in itself or more flatly contrary to the word 
of God. Not a believer in the Old Testament but protests 
against the sinful error; for not a soul then was justified 
who did not look onward, trusting his soul and spiritual hope 
on that which was as yet necessarily in the womb of the 
future—the coming of the woman’s Seed, the Messiah. And 
are believers of the New Testament called of God to be 
less trustful, less to realise what is coming, with incom- 
parably more light of revelation? What! we, to whom 
God has revealed by the Spirit, that which, as the brightest 
of old was compelled to say, “eye had not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither had entered into man’s heart” to consider ? 
Even on grounds of reason, of which some are so vain- 
glorious, what can be more opposed to it, seeing that God 
has beyond controversy given His prophetic revelation? Is 
this alone, of all scripture, to be put under human ban? 
Even on grounds of personal danger the suicidal folly of . 
such scepticism as this is most apparent. For as the great 
central point of prophecy is the nearness of the day of Je- 
hovah, which is to judge all the pride and irreligion, all the 
idolatry and rebellion against God, found then on earth 
and specially in Christendom, it will be too late for men, 
before they believe, to await that event which will prove 
the truth of the prophecies in their own destruction. In 
short and in every point of view the maxim is as false as it is 
perilous. It really amounts to blotting out all direct use 
of prophecy whatsoever: for it refuses to hear its warning 
till its voice is wholly changed. Prophecy accomplished 
becomes in effect history rather than prophecy (no small 
value of which is the silencing of God’s enemies); it properly 
is, while unfulfilled, the admonition and comfort of His people 


as its primary aim. 


224 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


But to return. “The princes of Zoan [the ancient royal 
city of Egypt, named Tanis in profane authors] are become 
foolish, the princes of Noph [Moph, or Memphis, Hosea ix. 6] 
are deceived; and the corner-stones of its tribes have 
caused Egypt to err. Jehovah hath mingled a spirit of 
perverseness in the midst thereof; and they have caused 
Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunkard staggereth 
in his vomit. Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, 
which head or tail, palm-branch or rush, may do” (vv. 13-15). 
They are judicially confounded of God in their policy. 

Now we ought not to be indisposed to allow a measure of 
accomplishment in the time of the prophet. Only let not 
this measure be allowed to exclude the complete fulfilment 
which yet remains to be made good. Such a germinant 
inclusive style, we have seen, is the habit of Isaiah, as indeed 
of the prophets. Enough was then accomplished for a stay 
to the faithful; but it was no more than an earnest of that 
punctual and full payment which God will yet render, in 
honour both of His own words and of the Lord Jesus, when 
His manifested glory dawns and His world-kingdom comes 
(Rev. xi). “In that day shall Egypt be like unto women ; 
and it shall tremble and fear because of the shaking of the 
hand of Jehovah of hosts, which he shaketh over it. And 
the land of Judah shall be a dismay unto Egypt: every one 
that thinketh of it shall be afraid for himself, because of the 
counsel of Jehovah of hosts, which he purposeth against it (or, 
them)” (vv. 16, 17). Egypt has its part to play in the tremen- 
dous convulsions which precede Jehovah's appearing; and to 
this our chapter looks onward, with which compare Daniel xi. 
40-43, Out of that land shall He gather some of His outcast 
people (Isaiah xi.), and in the process, as we know, destroy the 
tongue of the Egyptian sea, and with His mighty wind 
shake His hand over the river, the Euphrates, smiting it 
into seven streams. 

But mercy shall rejoice over judgment; and at the very 
time when Egypt shall be as women trembling at the shaking 
of Jehovah’s hand, and the very mention of the land of Judah 
shall strike terror, “In that day shall five cities in the land 


CHAPTER XIX. 225 


of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to Jehovah 
of hosts; one shall be called, The city of destruction (or, 
Heres). In that day shall there be an altar to Jehovah in 
the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border 
thereof to Jehovah. And it shall be for a sign and for a 
witness unto Jehovah of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they 
cry unto Jehovah because of the oppressors, and he will send 
them a saviour, and a great one, and he shall deliver them. 
And Jehovah shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians 
shall know Jehovah in that day and serve with sacrifice and 
oblation ; yea, they shall vow a vow unto Jehovah and perform 
it. And Jehovah will smite Egypt; he will smite and heal: 
and they shall return to Jehovah, and he will be entreated of 
them and will heal them” (wv. 18-22). Thus evidently 
shall Jehovah then deliver and revive Egypt. In that day 
there will be doubtless not only a governing but a religious 
centre for all the nations of the earth (Isaiah ii). For 
Jehovah shall be King over all the earth; in that day shall 
there be one Jehovah and His name one (Zech. xiv.). It 
will be accomplished in and by the Lord Jesus, Who shall 
build the temple of Jehovah and bear the glory, and sit 
and rule upon His throne, as Priest as well as King (Zech. vi.). 
His house shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples 
(Isaiah lvi.). But this will not hinder the fulfilment of 
Mal. i. 11: “For from the rising of the sun even unto its 
setting, My Name shall be great among the nations; and in 
every place incense shall be offered unto My Name, and a 
pure oblation.” Under this universal provision for the local 
worship of the nation falls the special assurance of it for 
Egypt in that day, which Isaiah here predicts. It was the 
more impressive to declare it of a nation so debased by 
idolatry as Egypt of old. 

The efforts of interpreters to explain these verses are as 
manifold as they are vain: and justly are they doomed to 
darkness who see not the link with Christ, and with Christ 
the glory of His people Israel then, if they despise Him now. 
Origen, Eusebius, &c., interpreted it of the flight into Egypt 
(Matt. ii), and of the overthrow of idolatry and spread of 

P 


226 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Christianity there also; Jerome embraces along with this an 
application to the wasting of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar. 
Others have tried to find its accomplishment in the temple 
which Onias induced Ptolemy Philometor to build for keeping 
the Jews and their worship in Egypt, and which after 200 
years was destroyed under Vespasian, like that in Jerusalem. 
Moderns generally apply it in substance as Jerome did (in part 
historically, of the disasters under Sennacherib, Nebuchad- 
nezzar, Psammetichus, or the Romans; and in part mystically, 
of the triumphant spread of the gospel past, present, or 
future). These speculations do not seem to call for refutation : 
to state them is to condemn them sufficiently. 

_ The true reference to the future crisis on the earth is yet 
more confirmed by the blessed intimations of the closing verses. 
“In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, 
and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into 
Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians. In 
that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, 
a blessing in the midst of the earth; whom Jehovah of hosts 
will bless, saying, Blessed [be] Egypt my people, and Assyria 
the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance ” (vv. 23-25). 
Tt is not a heavenly scene, but earthly. It is not the present 
church condition, where there is neither Jew nor Gentile, and 
Christ is all and in all, but a future state of large yet graduated 
blessing of nations. It is not this dispensation, where tares are 
mingled with the wheat, but the coming age when all scandals 
are removed from the scene where the Great King reigns in 
righteousness. That nation, so proud of its natural wisdom, 
the old oppressor and frequent snare of Israel, shall be humbled 
to the dust, and out of the dust cry to J ehovah God of Israel, 
Who shall send them a mighty deliverer; and they shall know 
Him and worship Him acceptably, Who smote them but will 
heal them with a great salvation. For from the rising of the 
sun even unto the going down of the same, Jehovah’s name 
will be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense 
shall be offered unto it and a pure oblation ; for His name shall 
be great among the heathen. No wonder therefore that there 
shall be an altar to Jehovah in the land of Egypt, and a pillar 


CHAPTER XIX. 27 


at the border thereof to Jehovah—a sign and a witness unto 
Jehovah of hosts in that land. At the same time nothing will 
supersede Zion as the earth’s exalted and religious centre. 

But what of that later oppressor of Israel? Has Jehovah. 
but one blessing for the stranger foe? Has He not reserved a 
blessing for the Assyrian? Yes, for the Assyrian also. The 
haughty rival of the north and east shall be brought into the 
rich blessing of Jehovah. “In that day shall there be a high- 
_ way out of Egypt to Assyria.” Old jealousy and long-lasting 
animosity shall flee apace and for ever; intimacy and generous 
trust and mutual love shall cement the alliance that is founded 
on Jehovah truly known. “And the Assyrian shall come into 
Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria; and the Egyptians 
shall serve with the Assyrians.” Happy, though none then 
be despised and poor! “In that day shall Israel be the third 
with Egypt and with Assyria.” That is, Israel shall form one 
of the trio here specified, and stamped with singular favour in 
the millennial day. For indeed Jehovah shall bless them, 
“saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work 
of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.” Thus again is 
Abraham’s blessing verified and manifested. “TI will make of 
thee a great nation; and I will bless thee, and make thy name 
great; and thou shalt be a blessing. And I will bless them 
that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed.” But even here, 
as it appears, the due place of Israel is maintained, and the 
rank of the others nicely distinguished in God’s wisdom, 
however large His goodness to the rest; for Israel has the 
glorious title of Jehovah’s inheritance, if Egypt be called His 
people and Assyria fashioned for His praise, the work of 
His hands. 


r2 


CHAPTER XX. 


From this chapter, which is an appendix to the last, we learn 
that the Assyrian ravaged Egypt (with the Ethiopians), leading 
his captives in shame. “In the year that Tartan came unto 
Ashdod, when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him, and he 
fought against Ashdod and took it; at that time Jehovah 
spoke by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go, and loose the 
sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy sandal from thy 
foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. And 
Jehovah said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked 
and barefoot three years [for] a sign and a wonder upon Egypt 
and upon Ethiopia; so shall the king of Assyria lead away the 
captives of Egypt, and the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, 
naked and barefoot, and with buttocks uncovered, [to] the shame 
of Egypt. And they shall be dismayed and ashamed, because 
of Ethiopia their expectation and of Egypt their boast. And 
the inhabitant of this coastland shall say in that day, Behold, 
such [is] our expectation, whither we fled for help to be delivered 
from the king of Assyria: and how shall we escape ?” (vv. 1-6.) 
History here seems to be silent;* but not so prophecy, which 
_* The Assyrian inscriptions remarkably illustrate the accuracy of the state- 
ment here. For many now hold that the conjectures of commentators, which 
identified Sargon with Shalmaneser on the one side, or with Sennacherib or 
Ksarhaddon on the other, are uncalled for and erroneous. They count him 
a monarch of no common energy, not only distinct from his immediate prede- 
cessor, Shalmaneser, but also of a distinct family, and yet not Sennacherib but 
his father, The national annals indicate no allusion to his own father, which 
has been explained plausibly enough on the supposition that he contrived to 
substitute himself for his predecessor absent at the siege of Samaria, the con- 
quest of which he claims in the inscription. And it is certainly worthy of note, 
as has been remarked, that in 2 Kings xviii. 9, 10, though Shalmaneser is said 


to have come up against Samaria and besieged it, the writer avoids saying that 
he took it. “And at the end of three years they took it... . And the 


* 
CHAPTER XX. 229 


declares that the land of Egypt shall not escape the king of 
the north, or last Assyrian at the time of the end, who must 
then himself be broken without hand. In the past Israel was 
sadly distrustful. 1 

It is not surprising that those who only look at the historic ‘ 
pivots on which these utterances turn find a very unaccountable 
confusion of the events which then occurred. But who is to 
blame for reading the book of a prophet in a spirit so unbe- 
lieving 2? When it is received from God, as it claims and ought 
to be, light is shed on those scenes of darkness and evil, and all 
points harmoniously to Him Who is coming again in the power 
of His kingdom. There prophecy points and rests. 

The symbolical action is by many supposed to be in vision 
merely, not actual. Perhaps this is due to the very uncalled- 
for supposition, that the call was to a condition of entire 
nudity. But this is baseless, as “naked” is frequently used (see 
too 1 Sam, xix. 24, 2 Sam. vi. 20, Amos ii, 16, John xxi. 7) to 
express the absence, not of all covering, but of the usual outer 
garb, in one sort or another: so it is not uncommon in well- 
known Latin authors, as many have shown. The prophet 
already wore sackcloth. This he was to loose from off his 
loins, and to pull off his sandal from his foot. It seems not 
improbable that the true sense is “for a three years’ sign and 
portent,” &c., as the Masoretic punctuation implies and the 
Septuagint corroborates. The aim avowedly was to produce 
fear and shame in all who confided in Ethiopia or boasted 
of Egypt; for the Assyrian was to humble both to the dust. 
Vain therefore was man’s help. 

The moral lesson is apparent. Let not the people look to 


king of Assyria did carry away Isracl down to Assyria,” &c. Though this 
had been done by two of the preceding monarchs, it is known that Sargon 
minutely details the settlement of 27,280 families from Samaria in his eastern 
dominions. 

It may also be mentioned, that it is more than doubtful whether Tartan be 
a proper name, It means more probably ‘ general” or ‘‘ commander-in-chief” 
of Assyria, both here and in 2 Kings xviii. 17. As the other two given as 
proper names are appellatives of the chief eunuch and the chief butler, so this 
would point to a chief general employed by Sargon in taking Ashdod, as another 
was later by Sennacherib when Jerusalem was menaced, So Prof. Rawlinson in 


Smiru’s Dictionary of the Bible, 


* 


230 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


the kingdoms of the earth for protection in the hour of danger. 
Jehovah as the true God is and must be jealous. He will not 
allow compromise any more than unbelief. What are Mizraim 
_ and Cush to Israel? Let there be no hope for Israel, but 
weeping for their own impending humiliation; and let the 
dweller in the coastland, or Palestine, humble himself, for 
God is not mocked, and vain the help of man. Israel was 
really more guilty than any. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


In this chapter, and not a long one, are three sentences of 
judgment—on Babylon (wv. 1-10), on Dumah (wv. 11, 12), and 
on Arabia (vv. 15-17). 

“The burden of the desert of the sea. As whirlwinds in the 
south pass through, it cometh from the desert, from a terrible 
land. A grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous 
dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go 
up, Elam; besiege, Media; all the sighing thereof have I 
made to cease” (vv. 1,2). There can be no doubt to any fair 
mind that the great Chaldean capital is referred to. The com- 
mand to the Medes and Persians to go up and besiege is one 
indication; and so yet more is the graphic description of the 
sudden destruction in verses 3-5, which turned the night of 
revelry into the pangs of terror and death for the dissolute 
king and his court. “Therefore are my loins filled with pain ; 
pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman in 
travail; I am bowed down so as not to hear; I am dismayed 
so as not to see. My heart panteth, horror affrighteth me ; 
the night of my pleasure hath he turned into trembling 
unto me” (vv, 3, 4). Is this vindictive feeling or language ? 
It is a holy man of God deeply moved by the prophetic vision 
of the fall of Babylon, so awful and unexpected. Yet was 
Babylon Judah’s captor. 

“Prepare the table, appoint the watch; eat, drink: arise, 
ye princes, anoint the shield” (v. 5). 

“For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Go, set a watchman ; 
let him declare what he seeth. And he saw chariots, horsemen 
by pairs, a chariot with asses, a chariot with camels; and he 
hearkened diligently with much heed. And he cried [as] a lion, 


* 
232 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


Lord, I stand continually upon the watch-tower in the day- 
time, and I am set in my ward every night; and, behold, chariots 
of men come, horsemen by pairs. And he answered and said, 
Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her 
gods he hath broken unto the ground. O my threshing, and 
the corn of my floor! what I have heard of Jehovah of hosts, 
the God of Israel, have I declared unto you” (vv. 6-10). 

The latter part of the ninth verse crowns the proof, and 
expressly names Babylon’s fall as the object intended. The 
prophet personifies the city or its people in verse 10. 

Nevertheless there is somewhat to be noted in the phrase 
used of the doomed mistress of the world, especially as there 
seems to be an evident link between this enigmatic title, “the 
Burden of the desert of the sea,” and that applied to Jerusalem, 
“the Burden of the valley of vision,” in the beginning of chapter 
xxil. As the rise and glory of the first Gentile empire was 
only permitted sovereignly of God in consequence of hopeless 
idolatry in Judah and Jerusalem, so the judgment of Babylon 
was the epoch of deliverance for the Jewish remnant, the type 
of the final dealings of God with the last holder of the power 
which began with the golden head of the great image. There 
is thus a correlation between these two cities—J erusalem and 
Babylon—whether historical or symbolic; and as the latter is 
designated “the desert of the sea,” the former is “the valley of 
vision.” Jeremiah in his vision (chap. li. 42) beholds the sea 
come up upon Babylon, so as to cover her with the multitude 
of the waves. In fact too we know to what a waste this seat of 
human pride sunk; and so notoriously it remains until this day. 

In verses 6-10 is set forth the twofold leadership of the 
coming invasion, or at least the twofold nationality of the 
armies that conquered. The watchman in the vision attests 
his vigilance, and reports what he saw. This is followed by 
the solemn tidings of Babylon’s fall, and the prophet’s seal 
on the truth of the announcement. The ruin also we saw 
in chap. xiii, xiy. irremediable, in the face of the fullest 
hope and stoutest purpose to make it the metropolis of the 
earth. So too predicted Jeremiah 1. li, that Babylon should 
sink and not rise again. 


CHAPTER XXT. 233 


Next comes “the Burden of Dumah,” which some consider to 
border on, if not to be identified with, Idumea. “The burden 
of Dumah. He calleth to me out of Seir, Watchman, what 
of the night? Watchman, what of the night? The watchman 
said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye will 
inquire, inquire ; return, come” (vv. 11, 12). The Edomite cry 
is one of proud scorn and self-security. The brief answer 
is pregnant with serious expostulation. Let them not trust 
to hopes of the bright morn; for the dark and dangerous 
night would assuredly come. Nevertheless a door was still 
open for repentance. Let them “return, come.” How great 
is the longsuffering of God, not willing that any should 
perish, but that all should come to repentance! But 
whatever man does or fails to do, His purpose stands, and 
the day of Jehovah will come as a thief; not more welcome, 
nor less expected. Insult as the world may during the 
night, the morning will surely come. But there is no morning 
for the earth till He comes, Who was and is the true Light, 
and Whose it will be to judge the habitable earth. This is 
neither the gospel or church time, nor is it eternity when 
the new heaven and earth are wherein dwells righteousness. 
It will be an age of government when He reigns Whose right 
it is, alone competent to put all evil down, and to maintain 
both the glory of God and the blessing of man, as He will 
surely do in that day. 


As for “the Burden upon Arabia,” little remark is needed. 
“The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia shall 
ye lodge, O travelling companies of Dedanites. Unto him 
that was thirsty they brought water; the inhabitants of the 
land of Tema did meet the fugitives with their bread. For 
they fled away from the swords, from the drawn sword, and 
from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war. For 
thus hath the Lord said unto me, Within a year, according 
to the years of a hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall 
fail; and the residue of the number of the archers, the 
mighty men of the sons of Kedar, shall be diminished: for 
Jehovah, the God of Israel, hath spoken” (ve. 13-17). The 


234 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


thickets of Arabia* would bejno more an effectual hiding- 
place from the storm than the rocks and mountain 
fastnesses of Edom. It is not only the travelling companies 
or caravans of Dedan which are cast on the pity and care 
of the men of Tema; but utter wasting within a year is 
pronounced on the mighty men of the sons of Kedar. 
Man fails, great or small; Jehovah abides and will reign 
over this earth, and all the races of mankind. What a gap 
there is in the outlook of all who do not believe in the 
world-kingdom of the Lord and of His Christ! 

* Dr. Driver (Lit. of the O.T., 206) remarks that Arab denotes not Arabia, 
in our sense of the word, but a particular nomad tribe inhabiting the north of 
the Peninsula, and mentioned (Ezek. xxvii. 21) with Dedan and Kedar, as 
engaged in commerce with Tyre. Kedar was a wealthy pastoral tribe (lx. 7, 
Jer. xlix, 29). Téma lay some 250 miles south-east of Edom. Sargon’s troops 
were engaged in war with the Philistines in B.c. 720 and in 711 ; and it may be 
conjectured, he adds, that these two prophecies were delivered in view of an 


expected campaign of the Assyrians in the neighbouring regions, in one of these 
years. How sad to leave God out of prophecy. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


CHAPTER xxii. consists of a prophecy wholly directed against 
Jerusalem, and entitled, “The Burden of the valley of 
vision.” There may have been some anticipation in the 
prophet’s day, but it was partial. So much so was this the 
case, that Vitringa can only eke out an appearance of an 
historical answer by piecing together the invasion of the city 
by the Assyrians under Sennacherib, and that by the 
Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar; and even this by the 
strong inversion which places the Chaldean movement in 
verses 1-5 (comp. 2 Kings xxv. 4, 5) and the Assyrian in the 
part that follows (with which 2 Chron. xxxii. 2-5 corresponds). 
Granting this as a primary application, it affords a strong 
presumption that this chapter, like the last and all we have 
seen, points to the great day when the reckoning of nations 
will come in “the morning,” and of every individual throughout 
its course, even to the judgment of the secrets of the heart. 
It seems strange that believers should rest satisfied with so 
small an instalment from One who pays to the uttermost 
farthing. The spirit that treats as an illusion the expecta- 
tion of a punctual fulfilment for these prophecies as a whole, 
in every feature save those expressly limited to a definite 
time in certain particulars, is either ignorance or scepticism, 
or, what is common enough, a mixture of both. 

The order here ought to strike an attentive reader who 
believes in inspiration. After the events it would have been 
unmeaning, were man alone concerned. For where then is 
the sense of putting a vision of Jerusalem after that of 
Babylon, and of Babylon reduced to “the desert of the sea?’ 
The order owes all its propriety and force to its looking 


236 AN EXPOSITION OF THE ROOK OF ISATAH. 


onward to the end of the age, when Jerusalem shall be taken 
after Babylon’s fall, and the false administrator be replaced by 
the true, the Righteous servant. 

“The burden of the valley of vision. What aileth thee 
now, that thou art wholly gone up to the housetops? Thou 
that wast full of stir, a town of tumult, a joyous city, 
thy slain [are] not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle. 
All thy rulers fled together, they are bound without the bow, 
all that are found of thee are bound together, they fled far off. 
Therefore said I, Look away from me: let me weep bitterly; 
labour not to comfort me for the spoiling of the daughter 
of my people. For [it is] a day of trouble, and of treading 
down, and of perplexity from the Lord Jehovah of hosts in 
the valley of vision, of breaking down the wall and crying 
to the mountains. And Elam beareth the quiver, with chariots 
of men [and] horsemen; and Kir uncovereth the shield. 
And it shall come to pass [that] thy choicest valleys shall be 
full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves in array 
at the gate” (vv, 1-7). The certainty of the accomplishment 
of prophecy awakens the deepest feeling for God’s people, 
and even for their enemies on whom the judgment falls. It 
is the opposite of fatalism and its hardness on the one hand, 
or of that indifference on the other, to which the uncertainty 
of unbelief leads, 

The city is shown us in the early verses, changed from its 
stir and tumultuous joy to the deepest uneasiness and deadly 
fear, the slain not fallen in battle but ignominious slaughter, 
all the rulers fled, but taken and bound; so that the prophet 
can but turn and weep alone in bitterness. For the trouble 
and perplexity sprang not from the dust but were by Jehovah 
of hosts. 

The central verses expose the utter vanity and unpardonable 
sin of recourse to human measures by the people of God when 
He is dealing with them in judgment. Their only right place 
at such a time is to bow to His hand and accept the chastening 
He is pleased to inflict, always confident. that mercy rejoices 
against judgment, and that the end of Jehovah is that He is 
exceeding pitiful and of tender mercy. Here there was no 


CHAPTER XXII: 237 


humiliation in them, no recognition of Him or His ways, 
“And he uncovereth the covering of Judah; and thou didst 
look in that day to the armour in the house of the forest. 
And ye saw the breaches of the city of David, that they were 
many; and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool. 
And ye numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses 
ye broke down to fortify the wall, And ye made a reservoir 
between the two walls for the water of the old pool. But 
ye looked not unto the maker thereof, neither had regard 
unto him that fashioned it long ago. And in that day did 
the Lord Jehovah of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, 
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth; and behold 
joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, 
and drinking wine: let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we 
die. And it was revealed in mine ears by Jehovah of hosts, 
Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, 
saith the Lord Jehovah of hosts” (vv. 8-14). The one effort 
was to escape by policy—a fatal path for the people of God, 
which speedily leads into mere latitudinarian Sadduceeism. 
The believer is delivered alike from fear and haste, and from 
despair and present licence. 

The close of the chapter sets before us the setting aside 
of the unworthy Shebna who had crept into the place of chief 
minister, next to the throne, living only for self, and even 
seeking after death nothing but his own name and glory. 
“Thus saith the Lord Jehovah of hosts, Go, get thee in to this 
treasurer, unto Shebna who is over the house, [and say,] What 
hast thou here, and whom hast thou here, that thou hast 
hewn thee out here a sepulchre, [as] one hewing him out a 
sepulchre on high, graving a habitation for himself in the 
rock? Behold, Jehovah will hurl thee away violently as a 
strong man, and he will wrap thee up closely. He will surely 
roll and toss thee [like] a ball into a large country: there shalt 
thou die, and there [shall be] the chariots of thy glory, O shame 
of thy lord’s house. And I will thrust thee from thine office, 
and from thy station will He pull thee down” (vv. 15-19). 

Thereon Jehovah’s servant Eliakim is called to take the 
reins of office in his stead, a father to Jerusalem and Judah, 


238 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


with the key of David’s house laid by Jehovah on his shoulder, 
with full authority and adequate power. “And it shall come 
to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the 
son of Hilkijah; and I will clothe him with thy robe, and 
strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy 
government into his hand: and he shall be a father to the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah. And 
the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; 
and he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, 
and none shall open. And I will fasten him [as] a nail in 
a sure place; and he shall be for a throne of glory to his 
father’s house. And they shall hang upon him all the glory 
of his father’s house, the offspring and the issue, every smail 
vessel, from the vessels of cups even to all the vessels of 
flagons” (vv. 20-24.) We cannot here fail to recognise the 
type of Christ displacing the Antichrist, The very fact of the 
past historical circumstances being put together without regard 
to mere date, as we have seen, and with personages introduced 
who officially were not the highest, yet described in terms 
which open out to a dominion and power beyond the highest, 
prepares one for the magnificent events of the latter day in 
the Holy Land, as the only complete fulfilment of the scripture 
_ before us. 

“Tn that day, saith Jehovah of hosts, shall the nail that 
is fastened in a sure place be removed, and be cut down and 
fall; and the burden that [was] upon it shall be cut off; for 
Jehovah hath spoken” (v, 25). iat was not the position, but 
the person that made the difference, Shebna had just the 
same place, but he utterly failed and wrought ruin. Not so 
Eliakim who followed, as we have seen, in the verses last 
before us. Rey. iii, warrants the application to Christ. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


THE last of these local judgments here comes before us—“ the 
Burden of Tyre.” This city is the type of the world’s com- 
mercial glory ; wealthy, corrupt, and self-confident, but taken 
though not destroyed after a long siege by Nebuchadnezzar. 
Such historically is the destruction announced not here only 
but in Ezekiel xxvii. xxviii. Tyre and the Tyrians formed the 
centre of the merchandise of the ancient world, the emporium 
of all the commodities and the luxuries of that day, the link 
through “the ships of Tarshish” between the west and the 
east. Its fall therefore could not but affect painfully and 
universally the dwellers on the earth; and the rather, as 
trading rivals were fewer than now. Yet how would not in 
our day the overthrow of the proudest seat of modern com- 
merce make itself felt to the ends of the earth? We know 
from elsewhere that the siege was prolonged for a term quite 
unusual, thirteen years; indeed we need not travel beyond the 
prophetic record (Ezek. xxix.)* to learn how severe a task 
it was for the Chaldean conqueror; but so much the greater 
was the moral effect of its fall. So that Tyre and Sidon 
remained the proverbial and most striking warning of divine 
judgment, as may be gathered from our Lord’s reference. 


* Zechariah ix. alludes rather, it would appear, to the Macedonian chief 
who ravaged the sea-board cities of Phwnicia and of Palestine, north and 
south, so ruthlessly. This at least is the historic occasion ; for the Holy Ghost 
there, as everywhere, has the closing conflicts in His eye, and the future 
triumphs of Israe] under the Messiah. Some, it may be added, think that 
Isa. xxiii. refers to Shalmaneser’s siege of Tyre; but this seems to the last 
degree improbable, as the city is seen soon after in ap opulent and powerfu 
state. Others even deny its capture by Nebuchadnezzar; but Ezek. xxix, 18 
teaches not that he failed to take it, but that its results did not compensate for 
the time and toil, the Tyrian ships having carried off the treasures elsewhere. 


240 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


“The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is 
laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in: from the 
land of Chittim it is revealed to them” (v.1). There seems 
to be no need for departing from the ordinary sense of Chittim, 
either here or in verse 12, in which the learned Bochart 
understands the Cutheans or Babylonians and the meaning 
here to be “ from the land of the Cutheans doth their captivity 
come.” Neither is there in Chittim any necessity to refer this 
burden to the sack of new or insular Tyre by Alexander the 
Great, as do Luther and others. The prophet calls the far- 
famed ships of Tarshish, first and repeatedly, to take up the 
dirge of the ruined mart for their merchandise, and intimates 
that though there was no house to receive them, nor haven 
for their ships to enter, the ill news would be revealed in the 
far west (primarily Cyprus). 

“Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle (or, coast) ; the merchants 
of Zidon that pass over the sea have replenished thee. And 
on great waters the seed of Shihor, the harvest of the river, 
[was] her revenue; and she was the market of nations” (vv. 2, 3). 
What a change, when silence reigned where once had thronged 
their neighbours, the merchants of Zidon, where the treasures 
of the enriching Nile were gathered, “the market of nations,” 
now a waste! “Be thou ashamed, Zidon; for the sea 
hath spoken, the strength of the sea, saying, I have not 
travailed, nor brought forth, neither have I nourished young 
men, [nor] brought up virgins. As at the report concerning 
Egypt, they were sorely pained at the report of Tyre ” 
(vv. 4, 5). Zidon was too nearly allied to Tyre, too intimately 
bound up with it, not to feel and suffer keenly; and as Tyre 
had been its boast heretofore, so now its degradation could 
not but darken their neighbours; since the very sea is by 
bold but happy figure made to bewail her desolation: whom 
had she pertaining to her lineage, now that Tyre was no 
more? And so it was with Egypt also. The Zidonians, though 
directly profited by Egypt more than all other foreign nations, 
did not more grieve over the ruin of Tyre than at their great 
southern ally. 

Verses 6, 7 finish these addresses with a direct appeal to 


CHAPTER XXIII. 241 


the Tyrians themselves, taunting their haughty merchants 
with the reverse that awaited them, the just recompence of 
their deeds. “Pass over to Tarshish: howl, ye inhabitants of 
the isle (or, coast). [Is] this your joyous [city], whose antiquity 
fis] of ancient days? Her feet shall carry her afar off to 
sojourn” (vv. 6, 7). Far from being an attraction to the 
ships of Tarshish, they must go and howl there themselves, 
they the men of the sea-girt land, whose city rang with 
gaiety, and whose years of proud security were only less . 
ancient than Zidon, and yet more prosperous and eminent! 
Yes, they must go, and trudge sadly, painfully, in quest of 
some asylum in a strange land. 

And why was this? Who would smite and prostrate the 
proud city of Phcenicia? “Who hath purposed this against 
Tyre, that giveth crowns, whose merchants [were] princes, 
whose dealers [were] the honourable of the earth ?” (v. 8). 
The answer follows in verse 9. “Jehovah of hosts hath pur- 
posed it, to stain (or, profane) the pride of all glory, to 
bring to nought all the honourable of the earth. Overflow 
thy land as the Nile, daughter of Tarshish : [there is] no more 
restraint. He stretched out his hand over the sea, he shaketh 
the kingdoms. Jehovah hath given a commandment on Canaan 
for, the merchant city], to destroy the strongholds thereof, 
and hath said, Thou shalt no more exult, oppressed virgin, 
daughter of Zidon: arise, pass over to Chittim ; there also shalt 
thou have no rest” (vv. 9-12). Here the moral reasons are not 
given in full; we must search other prophets for all. But 
Jehovah’s opposition to the proud is stated, His scorn for 
the glory of man, His slight of all trust in earthly strong- 
holds. Even in exile the Tyrians should find no rest. In 
the next verse we have the instrumental means He meant 
to employ: “Behold the land of the Chaldeans: this people 
existed not. The Assyrian founded it for the dwellers in the 
wilderness: they set up their towers, they destroyed the 
palaces thereof; he brought it to ruin” (v. 13). The 
Chaldeans, who, in contrast with old Tyre, were nationally 
a people but of yesterday, are seen by the prophet bringing 
Tyre to ruin. Such appears to be the meaning, which 1s 

Q 


949 AN EXPOSITION OF TH® BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


confirmed by the fresh call to grief of the ships of Tarshish 
in verse 14: “Howl, ships of Tarshish, for your fortress is 
laid waste.” 

But the conqueror himself yields to an avenger. Babylon 
falls; and the full term of seventy years, which beheld the 
returning remnant of Juda, had a revival in store for Tyre, 
but a revival of her meretricious ways, pandering for gainful 
trade to all the luxurious habits and corruptions of the nations. 
“And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be 
forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king: 
after the end of seventy years it shall be for Tyre as a 
harlot’s song. Take a harp, go about the city, thou for- 
gotten harlot; make sweet melody, sing many songs, that 
thou mayest be remembered. And it shall come to pass after 
the end of seventy years, that Jehovah will visit Tyre, and 
she will return to her hire, and will commit fornication with 
all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the ground” 
(vv. 15-17). Nevertheless the last verse intimates that even 
this prophetic scene, though so largely accomplished in the 
past, is not without its bright side in the day of joy to the 
whole earth. “And her merchandise and her hire shall be 
holiness to Jehovah: it shall not be treasured nor laid up 
[as in former days, when conscienceless tricks of avarice 
dictated the manner and objects of her trade]; for her 
merchandise shall be for them that dwell before Jehovah, 
to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing” (. 18). The 
daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift, when the 
King shall greatly desire the beauty of His earthly Bride. 
(Psalm xlv.) 

That God was thus pleased to reveal, not only about Babylon 
and the Assyrian, but about Philistia and Moab and Damascus, 
about Egypt and Tyre, may seem little in the eyes of un- 
believing philosophy ; but what a favour to His people of old, 
the centre of all, and not the less because they were weak 
and worthless, and continually turning aside from Him like 
a deceitful bow! What will it be to that people when they 
are His in a truer and fuller sense than ever, as they can only 
be when they judge their apostasy, both in seeking every idol, 


t 


CHAPTER XXIII. 243 


and in rejecting His Messiah and theirs? Then they will know, 
as petty and pedantic rationalists cannot through their false 
starting-point (at bottom the same unbelief as Israel’s), that 
all these prophecies form parts of a vast harmonious system, 
converging on His future Kingdom over all the earth, when 
He receives it of God in association with Israel, then made 
willing in the day of His power, and strikes through kings 
in the day of His wrath, and judges amongst the nations. 
(Psalm cx.) Meanwhile the pride of commerce was judged in 
Tyre, as the pride of nature was in Egypt. 


93 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


THE prophet now launches into a larger theme. Hitherto we 
have had ten “Burdens,” the burdens of the nations from 
Babylon to Tyre, not without involving Jerusalem in those 
judgments which, starting from local circumstances, sweep on to 
the “end of the age,” when God shall put down the rebellious 
pride of the earth. In the present chapter Isaiah enlarges the 
scene, with the land and people of Israel as the centre, so as to 
disclose, not the great white throne before which the wicked 
dead stand and are judged, but the hour of the earth’s 
universal retribution from God, “the day of Jehovah” in its 
unrestricted final sense, of which previous dealings, as in the 
cases of Babylon and Egypt, were but the shadow and the earnest. 

“Behold, Jehovah maketh the earth [or, land] empty, and 
maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth 
abroad its inhabitants. And it shall be, as with the people, so 
with the priest ; as with the servant, so with his master; as 
with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so 
with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower ; as 
with the taker of usury, so with him from whom usury is 
taken” (vv. 1, 2). There are evidently no limits here. As 
verse 1 shows us the earth wasted, confounded, and prostrate 
under the divine dealing, so verse 2 indicates an unsparing 
overthrow of all grades among its inhabitants. “The land 
shall be utterly emptied and utterly spoiled: for Jehovah hath 
spoken this word” (v. 3). If it is hard work to apply such strong 
and comprehensive terms to the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, 
as some conceive, still less can verse 4 be evaded. “The earth 
mourneth, it fadeth away: the world languisheth, it fadeth 
away; the haughty people of the earth do languish” (v. 4). How 


CHAPTER XXIV. 245 


carefully too the Spirit guards against the too common 
resource of unbelief—the alleged hyperbole of an impas- 
sioned seer !—“ Jehovah hath spoken this word.” 

Next, we have the moral ground on which God judged and 
executed thus sternly. “The earth [or, land] also is defiled 
under the inhabitants thereof, for they have transgressed the 
laws, changed the statute, broken the everlasting covenant. 
Therefore doth the curse devour the earth, and they that dwell 
therein are desolate; therefore the inhabitants of the earth are 
burned, and few men left” (vv. 5,6). It is no mere providential 
judgment but a most comprehensive and divine infliction, of 
which God had spoken almost since the beginning. “Enoch 
also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these.” The oft- 
threatened long-suspended blow will at length fall, as Isaiah 
here intimates, and Jude later still, when Christendom’s evil 
becomes as plain as Israel’s. 

“The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the 
merryhearted do sigh. The mirth of tambours ceaseth, the 
noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth. 
They do not drink wine with a song; strong drink is bitter to 
them that drink it. The city of solitude is broken down; 
every house is shut up, that no man entereth in. [There is] 
a crying for wine in the streets , all joy is darkened, the mirth 
of the land is gone. In the city remaineth desolation, and the 
gate is smitten,—a ruin” (vv. 7-12.) Such and so complete is 
the picture of woe. Desolation overspreads the country and 
the city alike. Nevertheless, as always, God reserves a 
remnant. “For thus it will be in the midst of the land 
among the peoples, as the shaking of an olive-tree, as the 
grape-gleanings when the vintage is done. These shall lift up 
their voice, they shall shout for the majesty of Jehovah, they 
shall cry aloud from the sea. Wherefore glorify ye Jehovah 
in the east, the name of Jehovah the God of Israel in the 
isles of the west. From the end [wing] of the earth have we 
heard songs, Glory to the righteous” (vv. 13-16). It is manifestly 
a description of the righteous in Israel, who shall come into 
prominence, as divine judgments mow down their proud 


oppressors, 


gv wo 


246 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Nevertheless verse 16 appears to mark how deeply the 
prophet, foreshowing the exercised godly souls of that day, 
deplores the low condition of the remnant, and the fearful 
defection and ruin of the mass of Israel. “But I said, 
My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me! the treacherous 
have dealt treacherously; yea, the treacherous have dealt 
very treacherously. Fear, and the pit, and the snare [are] 
upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth for, land.] And it 
shall come to pass [that] he who fleeth from the noise of 
the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out 
of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare; for the 
windows on high are opened, and the foundations of the 
earth do shake. The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is 
quite dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly. The earth 
reeleth to and fro like a drunkard, and is shaken like a night- 
hut; and the transgression thereof is heavy upon it; and 
it falleth, and riseth not again. And it shall come to pass in 
that day [that] Jehovah will punish the host of the high ones 
on high, and the kings of the earth on the earth. And they 
shall be gathered together [as] prisoners gathered for the pit, 
and shall be shut up in prison, and after many days shall they 
be visited. And the moon shall be confounded, and the sun 
ashamed, when Jehovah of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, 
and in Jerusalem, and before his elders [or, ancients] in glory” 
lor, gloriously] (wv. 16-23), 

The entire chapter, specially its closing verses, brings into 
the strongest evidence the hopeless difficulties of those who 
confound earthly things with heavenly, and refuse to see the 
portion in store for Israel in the latter day, when judgment has 
fallen on the habitable earth. Writers as early as Theodoret 
confess the ulterior scope of the prophecy, whatever measure 
of accomplishment they might consider it to have had in the 
past. “The discourse contains a double prophecy; for it 
points out both what was going on at different times among 
the enemies, and what shall be in the consummation of the 
present age.” But then, immediately after, he makes the 
singularly unintelligent observation that the second verse 
describes a state of things properly and truly after the 


CHAPTER XXIV. 247 


resurrection. The judgment of the quick is ignored. There 
is in truth not a word here of the dead raised, or souls 
giving an account of their deeds, but emphatically and 
repeatedly of the earth’s crisis, and of the world smitten and 
languishing under God’s mighty hand. The language, no 
doubt, is excessively strong; it here and there appears to 
look on to the dissolution of all things, as is sufficiently 
common in prophetic style, where the prediction of the signal 
change which ushers in the millennium contains a more or less 
covert allusion to the utter passing away of the heavens and 
earth that now are, and the coming in of the eternal state. 
But the conclusion of the chapter makes it plain that the 
grand aim of the Spirit here is to portray that mighty and 
universal catastrophe which is succeeded by the times of 
refreshing for Israel and the earth, of which God has spoken 
by His holy prophets since the world began. 

So profound and all-embracing however is the dealing of 
God, that even the angelic hosts escape no more than the 
proudest potentates here below. “It shall come to pass in 
that day [that] Jehovah shall punish the host of the high ones 
on high [not, ‘that are on high’], and the kings of the earth 
on the earth.” These spirits of evil had up to this misled man 
and dishonoured God, seeking to corrupt every mercy almost 
from the source. But the time is come that angels should 
be judged as well as living men, far beyond even the judgment 
of the flood. The power of the heavens shall be shaken—not 
earth only, but also heaven, But far from its being as yet 
the melting away of time into eternity, “the moon shall be 
confounded, and the sun ashamed, when Jehovah shall reign 
on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his elders in 
glory.” It is the day of which Zechariah spoke (chap. xiv.), 
long after the return from the captivity, when Jehovah shall 
be king over all the earth. “In that day shall there be one 
Jehovah, and his name one. All the land shall be turned 
as a plain from Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem; and 
it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her place, from 
Benjamin’s gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the 
corner gate, and from the tower of Hananeel unto the king’s 


; 
248 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


winepresses.” Could expressions be used more precisely to 
exclude the mystical interpretation, or more calculated to 
maintain the hopes of Israel, then to be built on the Living 
Stone over Whom they have till yet stumbled? Jehovah- 
Messiah will come in His Kingdom and reign in Zion. The 
land as it were broadens out.to the earth; not only is the 
world comprehended in the divine dealing but the heavens. 
And He, Who has at length taken to Him His great power 
and reigned, proves Himself the ruler of all things that are 
in “heaven, and that are on the earth, the visible and the 
invisible, whether thrones or lordships or principalities or 
authorities.” As they were created in virtue of (év) Him and 
through Him, so were they created for. Him, as the day of 
Jehovah will display, when Jerusalem and Maunt Zion still 


.. subsist: a state of things manifestly different from and 


antecedent to the eternity that follows. 


CHAPTER XXV. 


THE bearing of chapter xxiv. on the consummation of the age 
is entirely confirmed by that which follows and is now before 
us, where we have the prophet personifying the people raising 
their hearts to Jehovah in praise. They are celebrating God 
for His wonderful doings, and own that His counsels of old 
are faithfulness and truth. “Jehovah, thou [art] my God; 
I will exalt thee, I will celebrate thy name ; for thou hast done 
wonderful [things]: counsels of old [which are] faithfulness 
[and] truth. For thou hast made of the city a heap; of the 
fortified town a ruin, a palace of strangers to be no city— 
it shall never be built up. Therefore shall the mighty people 
glorify thee, the city of terrible nations shall fear thee. For 

P cate hast been a fortress to the poor, a fortress to the needy 
in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the 
heat; for the blast of the terrible ones [was] as a storm 
[against] a wall. Thou hast subdued the tumult of strangers, 
as the heat in a dry place; [as] the heat by the shadow of 
a cloud, [so] the song of the terrible ones is brought low’ 
(vv. 1-5). The execution of His judgment takes effect on the 
strong and their city. It is the habitable earth which comes 
under Jehovah’s hand, as certainly as the end of the chapter 
before was His dealing with the heavens and the earth. 

The eternal state does not enter into account. On the other 
hand there is no ground for making it bear on present circum- 
stances. It isa new state of things that does not exist now ; 
for if there be one place in the earth where, less than another, 
the Lord has the appearance of reigning, it is in that very 
Jerusalem and Mount Zion. The chosen land of Israel is 
in the possession of the Turk; it has been in his hands for 


250 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH, 


hundreds of years, and before then it was the object of conten- 
tion for the kings of the earth and equally so for the followers 
of Mahomet; it has been the great battle-ground between the 
east and the west; and up to the present time God has 
permitted that the devotees of Mecca should appear to have 
gained the victory there. Ever since the cross of the Saviour, 
God is no longer maintaining the glory of His Son in con- 
nexion with Mount Zion. The Son of God has been rejected, 
and has died upon the cross. Since then all connexion with 
the world is broken, every link with the Jew is gone; and 
no man has ever seen the Lord of glory, except the believer. 

He was witnessed by the world before, seen of men—not 
merely of angels as now. He was displayed before human 
eyes, God manifest in the flesh. But, when man cast Him out, 
all acknowledgment of the world as such was terminated. He 
was no more seen after His resurrection by any unbeliever ; 
none but chosen witnesses were permitted to behold Him. 
Taken soon after up to heaven, He sits at the right hand 
of God; and thence He will come to judge the quick and the 
dead. A great mistake it is to confound the judgment of the 
quick with the judgment of the dead. Scripture indicates that 
there is a long interval of most remarkable character, which 
separates the one from the other. Indeed there is to be, 
in a certain and most important sense, a peaceful judgment 
of the quick going on all through the interval of 1000 years. 
An awful execution of judgment on open enemies must be 
before the Lord begins to reign, as there will be an insurrection 
of the distant nations at the end. The judgment of the dead 
follows that reign, before the eternal state is manifested. 
(See Rev. xx. xxi.) 

The judgment of the dead remains, then, perfectly certain. 
It is a truth of God that there is a resurrection both of the 
just and the unjust. But it has not been so generally seen 
that the Lord of glory is about to revisit this world and stop 
the whole course of human affairs, and interpose with both 
providential inflictions, and then His own personal judgment, 
upon the guilt of man; not yet for judging the dead, which 
will come afterwards, Before the dead stand before the White 


CHAPTER XXV. 251 


Throne, divine dealing by the Lord Himself will be the portion 
of living men from the highest to the lowest. To this our 
Lord referred, when He warned His disciples of the days that 
were coming. Thus Matthew xxiv. xxv. and Luke xvii. xxi. 
refer, save a part of the last chapter, exclusively to this time 
and to these circumstances. Some scriptures speak only of 
the judgment of the dead, others both unfold the portion of 
the risen saints to enjoy heavenly glory with Christ, and tell 
how the dead are to be judged according to their works. 

The believer is saved according to the worth of Christ’s 
work; he who shall be judged according to his own works 
is lost for ever. No child of God, if judged as he deserved, 
could be saved. For, if judged at all, God must judge after 
His own justice with no less a standard than Christ. We must 
be as spotless as His Son in order to be fit companions for 
Him. But on that ground there is an end of all hope. The 
gospel turns on this, that Jesus was delivered for our offences 
and was raised again for our justification, not our judgment. 
What is the value in God’s sight of the work He has done? 
Is it only a partial salvation? or for some believers? If it be 
not a full salvation for sinners, yea, for the worst of those who 
believe, it is not what God commends to us, nor a due and 
righteous answer to the cross of Christ. Therein is the very 
comfort of the salvation that Christ has effected. It is a 
perfect salvation, it delivers from -all sins, it places the chiet 
of sinners upon a new ground as Christians, kings, priests, and 
children of God. Thenceforward our business is to trust and 
obey Him, labouring for and suffering with Christ and for 
Christ, as we await His return from heaven, even Jesus our 
Deliverer, who will judge His adversaries. 

It is plain that there are two classes of men who are to 
enter the resurrection-state. I do not say to rise at the 
same time, for no scripture says this. It 7s said that “the hour 
is coming when all that are in the graves shall come forth, 
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and 
they that have done evil unto the resurrection of judgment.” * 


* Damnation,” though the effect of judgment, is not the sense of the 
expression, It is an instance of men giving their own strength to a word and 
really weakening the passage in result, 


252 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


All this is quite true, but not a word about their coming forth 
at the same time. Other scriptures show that the two resur- 
rections, here shown to be distinct in principle and issue, will 
not take place simultaneously. Hence, while both might be 
said to be the rising ef the dead, that of the righteous alone 
is or could be called a rising from the dead, the rest being left 
as yet in their graves. From Revelation xx., again, it is plain 
that a thousand years at least will transpire between the resur- 
rection of the just and that of the unjust. Any one reading 
the Revelation without prejudice could not fail to gather that 
the righteous dead are raised first to reign with Christ; and 
then, after the earthly reign, that the rest of the dead are 
raised, who are judged according to their works; and of these 
it is said that whosoever was not found written in the book 
of life was cast into the lake of fire. There is not a hint 
of any who were found written. When God judges according 
to works, nothing can follow but destruction. Their evil works 
abound in the books; and the book of life has none of their 
names in it. ; 

This strongly links itself with what is before us. Here we 
have the Lord, not hidden in heaven, but appearing from 
heaven to reign. He is not reigning on the earth now. It is 
chiefly among idle speculative men (of learning perhaps) where 
you find any dream so foolish. Who is not aware that if any 
period in the history of Christendom was particularly dreary 
as to outward light, it is from Constantine, or some time 
after, to the Reformation—the dark ages, as they are called ? 
Yet even pious men are not wanting who maintain that 
this is the very time when Christ was reigning; that 
it began in the year 320 and ended 1320! that is, the most 
unrelieved reign of darkness that Christendom has yet seen! 
Augustine made this reign begin with Christ and extend all 
through Christianity. This was bad; the other is worse, 
though maintained by H. Grotius. Both exercised an enormous 
influence in the world. The great Dutchman, if consulted in 
a matter of erudition, would have probably given no incon- 
siderable help to most men; but when he came to the word 
of God, he was as much at sea there as St. Peter or St. John 


CHAPTER XXV, 253 


would have been in that which was his favourite province. In 
divine things learning is of small value—except as a drudge 
to men of spiritual judgment and lowly; for the meek only 
has God promised to guide in judgment. The assumption that, 
because a man is a profound scholar, even if a Christian also, 
he is a safe expositor of scripture, is a grave mistake. 

Let my reader, if he know it not already, search and see 
whether there be not a time coming when the Lord, Who is 
now in heaven at the right hand of God, will leave it to 
introduce His reign over the earth with the chosen city as 
His earthly metropolis. Do you ask why there should be such 
an attraction to that spot? Certainly it has been the scene 
of sorrow and shame and rivalry between the east and west, 
and the deepest humiliation of God’s ancient people. But let 
me ask you, even on your ground, where there is a spot on 
earth so full of grand associations, so connected with all that 
is dear to the believer? There the Lord of glory came. There 
He died. It is His city, the city of the Great King. Why 
should He not then come and take it for Himself? Is it not 
worthy of Him to pardon and bless and sanctify and magnify 
Jerusalem before the world, overcoming her evil with His 
good? Most plain is the scripture that the Lord has to come 
there, and to establish it as the capital of His earthly kingdom. 
It is not meant that the Lord will dwell literally on the earth, 
but be King over it. Yet scripture says He will plant His foot 
upon the mount of Olives. It is only but quite necessary for 
the truth of His future kingdom to maintain that He will 
visibly come and smite the earth, and establish His kingdom 
there, and fill the world with the blessed effects of His presence 
and glory. Scripture says that He will surely come and 
display Himself here; but for how long, to what extent, and 
how often during that reign, it is not for me at least to pretend 
to aver; for I am not aware that scripture answers those ques- 
tions. And as there is a special place, so there is a people He 
will favour most—Jerusalem and the Jewish people. 

But what is to become of Christians? Are they and the 
Jews to be huddled in Jerusalem together, as the old Chiliasts 
affirmed? Is this the Christian hope? Such an idea is 


254 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


ignorant and monstrous. The Christian is even now in title 
blessed in the heavenly places. Thence he will reign over the 
earth. The Jews then gathered and converted will be in their 
own promised land and city, on which the eyes of Jehovah 
rest continually ; for it is the truth of God that He never with- 
draws a gift, and never repents of a promise. He might repent 
of creating man: this was not a promise; it was simply an 
exertion of His will. But if God chose Israel or the church, 
He repented of neither, though both have been unfaithful; for 
He meant to bless, He does bless, and, no matter what the 
difficulty, He will bless for ever. This we have to hold fast: 
the purpose of God shall stand. Changes in man and the earth 
may be, but the counsel of God must yet be accomplished. 

Hence the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, 
He gave the land of Israel to their fathers. He gave the 
promise to make their seed a blessing. He connected His own 
Son with Israel after the flesh, that, spite of their sin in Christ’s 
cross, in virtue of His grace therein, an immoveable basis of 
blessing might be laid, when they shall be raised to such a 
pinnacle of greatness on the earth as is reserved for no other 
people here below. When the Lord will come to reign, He will 
have removed to the Father’s house the heavenly people. He 
will have raised the dead from their graves, and changed the 
living into the likeness of His own glory. For this all 
Christians should be looking, as their expectation. When they 
are caught up thus, then the earth is clear for the Holy Ghost 
to work among the Jews. The Spirit of God does not operate 
to two different ends—a heavenly and an earthly—at the same 
time. But here we find Him at work among the Jews who are 
not caught up to heaven, as we expect, but to be blessed under 
the Messiah on the earth. 

Our Lord then having first come, and removed the Christians 
dead and living to be with Himself above, will next begin 
to act upon the Jews and prepare them as His people when 
He reigns. This is what is in question here. The earthly 
centre of His reign is Mount Zion and J erusalem. This it 
is which gives to the reign of David such emphasis in the word 
of God. For he was the chosen type of the Lord, not merely 


CHAPTER XXV. 255 


in his humiliation, but also in his glory. He had also to war 
and put down his enemies, and therefore was called a “man 
of blood.” Our Lord will be first an executor of judgment, 
though not, as David, allowing anything of his own spirit 
or will to interfere and spoil the work; but, in the holy 
authority of God Himself, in the pouring out of divine wrath 
and indignation, all will be perfect and dealt with in righteous- 
ness. In that day the Lord will convulse the whole universe, 
punishing “the host of the high ones on high,” that is, in the 
scene that they have defiled, “and the kings of the earth on 
the earth.” 

Thus the believing Jews of that day will utter the song 
in evident reference to their experience of the faithfulness 
of God. They do not address God as Father in the Spirit 
of adoption, for they are not Christians ; they will be believers, 
but believing Jews. It is gross ignorance to talk of Abel, 
Enoch, Abraham, David, or Daniel as Christians. They were 
all saints, but none then were Christians. Not merely was 
it after Christ came that the disciples were first called 
Christians, but the place into which believers were at length 
brought by the work of Christ and the gift of the Spirit differs 
essentially. There is hardly a worse error for a believer now; 
for it alike tells upon the present and the future and the past, 
merging all the various displays of God’s mind in confusion. 
This blunts the edge of the word, hinders the full blessing and 
testimony of the church, and by its ignorance mars the glory 
of God as much as man can, who is not an open adversary. 

Now, no doubt, in presence of the cross, and the Holy Ghost 
sent personally on earth, the old distinctions of Jew and 
Gentile fade before their common ruin in sin and death 
morally. But when the Lord comes, He will prepare the 
Jewish people to receive Him according to the prophets; and 
they will be made the witnesses of His mercies no less than 
of His glory here below; as now they are the most obstinate 
enemies of the gospel and of His grace to the Gentiles. Where- 
as in this chapter we hear the proper language of Jews. If 
a Christian were to address God as Jehovah, it is of course 
in itself true; but it isa very unintelligent title in our worship. 


256 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


To us there is one God, the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ. 
Jehovah is the name of God looked at as a governor that 
maintains His kingdom; whereas Father is that name which 
first came out in connexion with His beloved Son, and now, 
by virtue of redemption, is true of us who believe in Him. 

Hence, as often noticed, the very day that Christ was raised 
from the dead, He says, “Go to my brethren and say unto 
them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, to my God 
and your God” (John xx. 17). Christ, by His death and 
_ resurrection, has brought us into the same place with Himself. 
This the Lord always had in view when He was here, so that 
He never addressed God as Jehovah, because the New 
Testament presents Him in view of Christianity. But the 
Old Testament shows that the Lord will have a people, and 
that they will know Him and the Father as Jehovah. This 
suffices to indicate the difference; and these remarks have been 
made to show that another class of people are here spoken 
of, not Christians, but Jews, who recognise God by that title 
which God gave Himself in relation to Israel of old. When 
God chose Moses, He bade him go and make Himself known 
to them as Jehovah, telling them that He was not so known 
before. Thus was it chosen at the commencement of the 
public dealings of God with His people; and throughout their 
national history it was as Jehovah He appeared. It was not 
that the name did not previously exist, but He never took 
it before for His recognised title as the God of Israel. It 
is the prophet who speaks in behalf of Israel; he breaks into 
the language of praise, and individualises it in behalf of the 
people in verse 1. What are the wonderful things? The 
death and resurrection of Christ? Not a word about either. 
These are the themes we should speak about. Thus, on the 
Lord’s-day morning, when we come together, what occupies our 
hearts is the burden of His praise. We have the still more 
wonderful works of God in Christ and the new creation ; and 
the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven bears His witness to 
these (Acts ii. 11). 

Here Israel are supposed to be occupied with the wonderful 
things God has wrought for the deliverance of their nation. 


CHAPTER XXV. 257 


for God will have interposed and put forth His power to 
deliver His ancient people in the judgment of their mightiest 
enemies. They speak of the ruin God has inflicted on all 
around them. As long as the Jews are unbroken for their 
sins and indifferent to the truth of God, only bent on making 
money and serving as the world’s bankers, people will be con- 
tent to use them and let them alone. But from the moment 
that God calls the Jew out of his present spiritual and 
national degradation, when the dry bones are gathered together, 
when their hearts turn to the rejected Messiah, the nations 
will turn against them, and once more rend them, as truly as 
ever. How do we know this? The Bible delivers the believer 
from guess-work. People who do not study the prophetic 
word can only speculate about the future. There can be no 
certainty for them; to pretend to it would be presumptuous. 
But when you in detail believe the Bible, you are entitled 
through the teaching of God’s Spirit to have the certain light 
of God. It is entirely our own unbelief if we do not enjoy it. 
“And in this mountain shall Jehovah of hosts make unto 
all peoples a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, 
of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. 
And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the veil 
which veileth all peoples, and the covering that is spread over 
all the nations. He will swallow up death in victory. And the 
Lord Jehovah will wipe away tears from off all faces; and 
the reproach of his people will he take away from off all the 
earth: for Jehovah hath spoken” (vv. 6-8). The Spirit of 
God refers here to resurrection: so the apostle, in 1 Corinthians 
xv. 54, applies the beginning of verse 8, “ When this corrupt- 
ible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have 
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying 
that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.” The 
resurrection synchronises with the deliverance of Israel, which 
itself will be “life from the dead” for the world (Rom. xi. 15). 
Thus the first open stroke at death will be at this very time. 
Jesus is the resurrection and the life; and when He comes 
with His risen saints He will receive His ancient people, and 
will swallow up the covering that is spread over all the nations. 
B 


258 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


For there is no deliverance wrought in the earth up to that 
time. It is when His reign over the earth is to begin, not 
when it ends. 

“Jehovah hath spoken.” Why, we ask, does He say so here ? 
Is it not because He foresaw man would be incredulous? The 
special mark of Jehovah’s voice is here, the evil heart of 
unbelief being well known to Him, and all the delusions of 
wise and unwise, deceiving and being deceived. He knew how 
Christendom would say, in reading of predicted judgments, 
they were for the Jews; and of blessings, these are for them- 
selves. Thus they claim all the good things for the church, as 
they leave all the dark things for Israel; but even there they 
destroy conscience by the lie which views prophecy as past and 
obsolete. ‘And it shall be said in that day, Behold, this [is] our 
God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this [is] 
Jehovah; we have waited for him; we will be glad and rejoice in 
his salvation. For in this mountain shall the hand of Jehovah 
rest, and Moab shall be trodden down under him, even as 
straw is trodden down on the dunghill. And he will spread 
forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth 
spreadeth [them] forth to swim; and he will bring down their 
pride together with the plots of their hands. And the fortress 
of the high defences of thy walls will he bring down, lay low, 
[and] bring to the ground, into the dust” (vv. 9-12). 

We must examine of whom God speaks; there are judg- 
ments upon Israel and upon Christendom, and blessings for 
Israel and for the church. That this is for Israel has been 
already shown ; the language used is only suited to them. They 
speak of themselves, not as we do, conscious children of God, 
but as His people, and of judgments which introduce their 
blessing. Were all the earth to be dissolved, it would neither 
lessen nor increase our blessing. When Christ comes, He will 
simply remove us to Himself, changed into His likeness and 
out of the scene of weakness and sin and sorrow, into His own 
heavenly home. Whereas here, “It shall be said in that day, 
Behold, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will 
save us: this is Jehovah; we have waited for him; we will be 
glad and rejoice in his salvation.” They are not saved yet. 


CHAPTER XXV. 959 


Such is not our case now, save as to the body. Search the 
New Testament and you will see that, as regards the soul, we 
must be saved now; and if we believe, we are. It is plain 
that here is another class, Jews who have waited in shame for 
Jehovah, and who when He comes in glory, say, “This is our 
God, we have waited for him, and he will save us.” Not for 
us but for them “shall the hand of Jehovah” rest in “this 
mountain.” Our portion is in heaven., “This mountain” is 
the lofty centre of the earthly glory. And accordingly the 
name of a proud national foe of Israel follows, as doomed to 
humiliation. Is the Christian looking for Moab to be trodden 
down? The wholesale christening of the Jewish prophets tends 
to make scripture ridiculous, and many a man has become 
hardened in his incredulity by such baseless preoccupation 
with the gospel and the church. There are general truths 
and principles that apply to us; for all prophets are intended 
for the use of the Christian, as the law also. Every scripture 
is inspired and profitable; but it is absurd thence to infer 
that all is about ourselves. “The law is lawful,” says the 
apostle, “if a man use it lawfully”; and very profitable are 
the prophets; yet we must hear them, not as if we were Jews, 
but as Christians. 

Here then is proof plain enough that not Christians, not the 
church of God, are before us, but Israel. What have we to do 
with Moab as an enemy? and an enemy which is to be trodden 
down? Do we look to tread down our enemies, if it were even 
the Roman papacy? Here is scripture, but it is not a prophecy 
of scripture about us: assuredly we ought to enjoy it and to 
bless God for it; yet the people concerned are not ourselves 
but Israel. They on the earth will see their former enemies 
completely put down, and Moab among the rest—a considera- 
tion which ought to have kept any from interpolating the 
church and from obliterating the Jew. For they are preserved 
as a separate people for mercy at the end, and mercy enduring 
for ever, and for the first place of earthly distinction and power 
under the Messiah; whereas we of the church are sharers of 
Christ’s rejection on earth, but to be glorified on high as He 
is, and to reign over the earth with Him in that day. 

R 2 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


HerE we have another song to be sung. “In that day shall 
this song be sung in the land of Judah” (v.1). That in the last 
chapter is not so called, yet was it an outburst of praise after 
the shaking of heaven and earth; in this we have the prophet 
still further celebrating what God has done for Judah. 

If we look at the Jews now, the contrast with what they are 
to be made by-and-by is very striking. For in Romans i. 18 
they are thus alluded to: “For wrath of God is revealed from 
heaven against all ungodliness [ze Gentile wickedness in 
general] and unrighteousness of men that hold the truth in 
unrighteousness [that of Jews].” Here, on the contrary, it is 
said, “We have a strong city; salvation doth he appoint for 
walls and bulwarks. Open ye the gates, and the righteous 
nation which keepeth faithfulness shall enter in” (wv. 1, 2). 

Scripture will have been abandoned by the Jewish people, 
or the larger part of them, in the last days. At the first 
advent of Christ it could be said that “salvation is of the 
Jews”; they had the truth but held it in unrighteousness. 
They had the form of sound doctrine maintained for the most 
part, save among the Sadducees. But before the Lord comes 
the second time, the great mass of the nation will not hold 
the truth but a lie, the great deceit of the last days, the lie of 
Antichrist instead of the truth of Christ, Their unrighteous- 
ness will be manifest and fatal, 

Here we have the blessed contrast of all this: there is a 
remnant whom God will make to be a strong nation, and they 
are called, “The righteous nation which keepeth faithfulness.” 
In verse 3 it is not merely that there is a general profession 
of the nation, but there will be an individual reality among 


CHAPTER XXVi. 961 


them. In the past they were called “the holy nation,” as a 
description that belonged to them; but in the future there 
is this comfort to all that love them that it will be real 
collectively ané individually. No common privileges are ever 
meant to make us less mindful of individual fidelity. “Thou 
wilt keep in perfect peace the mind stayed [on thee], for he 
confideth in thee” (v. 3). 

For very many years the common joy of the church was but 
little entered into, because of the worldliness, legalism, schisms, 
divisions, and innumerable wrong ways that had crept in. 
But there is the danger, now that God has been pleased to 
show the importance and comfort of corporate blessing, of 
our forgetting that the individual place has to be all the more 
carefully watched. It is of primary moment to know the 
standing of the Christian and the position of the church, but 
the practical state must be most jealously looked to. Strength 
depends upon what passes between our own souls and God, 
Who in His gracious and vigilant care watches over the 
saints individually. 

These then do not forget the public blessings of the nation, 
but there is also the individual saint’s walk, staying upon God, 
caring for His glory,Who, on His part, keeps the soul in perfect 
peace; the mind is stayed upon God Himself. For no matter 
what the blessings be, if we have not God Himself as the 
object of our hearts, they are sure to be misused; therefore it 
is said, “because he trusteth in thee.” It is not merely the 
perception of the goodness of God and of the wonders He had 
wrought for them. Now they know Himself, and trust Him- 
self; and this is a very real thing for our souls—the personal 
knowledge of God and trust in God. Need it be said that God 
looks for it now in a still more intimate way than even then ? 
Yet all that ever has been done on the face of the earth will 
have been outwardly eclipsed with but one exception (and 
this exception is Christ, to say nothing of His body the 
church), Nothing can surpass the last Adam; nothing com- 
pare with Christ’s cross, unless it be Himself; and both will 
be our portion, of which we will joy and boast even in glory. 

Remark this also that, in all these statements of what they 


bo 


62 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


are to share, never do we find such language addressed to them 
as supposes them to enter into the depths of God’s ways in 
the cross as is expected of us now. What can be sweeter than 
the way in which they count on their deliverance, and confide 
their souls to God? But where are heard such words as “ God 
forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ” ? Yet nothing would have been more easy, had it been 
in due keeping, than for God to have said so here. We are 
called into such fellowship with God abeut His Son, and we are 
associated with the cross as well as heaven beyond what any 
one can really find in the Old Testament. When a person 
starts with the assumption that the theme is all one and the 
same, the distinctive value of scripture is lost. For the soul 
too the least possible measure of blessing is the result. 

Here we have the Lord Jehovah brought in for all. “ Con- 
fide ye in Jehovah for ever; for in Jah-Jehovah [is the] rock of 
ages” (v. 4). And the reason why they speak of His ever- 
lasting strength lies here, “For he hath brought down them 
that dwell on high, the lofty city; he layeth it low even to the 
ground ; he bringeth it [even] to the dust. The feet shall tread 
it down, the feet of the afflicted, the steps of the poor” (vv. 5, 6). 
It will be one nation whom God in the last days will clothe 
with such honour, after they have been vilified in every way by 
the Gentiles. Hence they are singing ; for not a single difficulty 
remains then why God should not fully bless them. It is 
touching to see how God insists that He has done everything 
that was needed for their deliverance and good. For them is 
assured the abasement of what is high and lofty; and grace can 
give poverty of spirit and lowliness to the Jews themselves, 
once so proud. They will have been brought through tre- 
mendous trials, having borne the added and painful reproach 
of being a most guilty and withal haughty people; but all 
is changed now. 

For a godly few of the Jews will entirely gainsay the lie of 
Satan when all the power of their nation, and the great mass 
of the westerns will have given way to Antichrist. A little 
despised remnant will still hold out for the Lord, refusing him 
who puts himself forward as the true Messiah. They will 


CHAPTER XXVI. 263 


have been faithful in the face of death, and now they are made 
thus to praise God. “The way of the just [is] uprightness: 
thou, the Upright, dost make the path of the just even” (a. 7). 
It is sweet in thinking of this, that their triumph will not be 
by their power or their knowledge, but by their simple trust in 
Jehovah and faith in His word. But a scanty glimpse will be 
theirs; for they are the very souls referred to in Isaiah 1 as 
walking in darkness and having no light. This ought never to 
be said of a Christian; though he may slip into such a feeling: 
for he has seen Christ, the light of life, the true light. He 
may have but a dim perception of Christ, but still Christ is 
before his soul and always shines; for it is not true, that 
where the light of grace has once shone, God takes it back 
again. The difference is on the part of the Christian. It is 
never the light that is gone; possibly he may have been 
unfaithful and turned his back upon it. The Holy Ghost has 
come down to abide with the Christian for ever. He may not 
always walk according to the light, but in it he walks as a 
believer, and cannot but walk; yea, he as now light in the 
Lord. The Christian walks in the light as long as he professes 
the name of Christ. He never walks in darkness. He may 
not enjoy the light, but this is quite another thing. 

The contrary language is very common in Christendom, 
because they confound the position of the Christian with that 
of the Jewish people, who must go through darkness by-and- 
by, before their light is come, and the glory of Jehovah is 
risen upon them. Possibly a very few may not be thus walking 
in darkness. Some certainly will have godliness in contrast 
“with the many”; they are “the wise.” But the beautiful feature 
of the godly is, that although they thus walk in darkness, 
yet as they have been touched by the Spirit of God, and know 
that what is of God can never have alliance with sin, so they 
will refuse to own that idols and Antichrist can be of God. 
Thus they pass through the tribulation with but a feeble 
measure of knowledge of God, no doubt; but still they will be 
true to what they have got, and will be brought out to praise 
God. They are entitled to be spoken of as “the just.” So 
now, it is a great snare as well as mistake of believers not to 


264 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


take the place of being saints of God; for if they decline it, 
they feel not responsibility in their walk. So in earthly 
relations, if persons in the position of masters or servants do 
not act from their true position, they will never carry them- 
selves in practice as becomes them. To own our proper 
relationship is not pride, but a duty and wisdom. If you 
are occupied therein with self, no doubt pride comes in; but 
it is all right and important to acknowledge God in the 
relationships to which He has called us. 

The Spirit of God leads them to say, “Yea, in the way of 
thy judgments, O Jehovah, have we waited for thee; to thy 
name and to thy memorial [is] the desire of [our] soul” (v. 8). 
Such is what they had been wading through. They had waited 
for Him in the way of His judgments, we follow Him in grace 
and look to appear with Him in glory. “With my soul have I 
desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will 
I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are in the earth, 
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness” (v. 9). 
Now we have the individual again. As far as the world is 
concerned, the patience of God will have ended in the most 
fearful departure from the truth. God is now suffering the 
ways of man. He has not left them to their own conjectures 
or darkness; but He has caused His light to shine in the 
person of Christ, leaving man to himself, save working by 
His word and Spirit. Outwardly God seems as though He 
did not notice what is passing here below, and all this after 
the full light of God has shone through Christ upon this 
world, Saving grace has appeared to men. Favour has been 
shown to the wicked; this is what is going on now. “If favour 
be shown unto the wicked, he doth not learn righteousness.” 
“Tn the land of uprightness,” it is added, “he dealeth unjustly 
and doth not behold the majesty of Jehovah” (v. 10). The 
gospel is but for a witness; it will not, it cannot, govern the 
world. When God’s judgments are here below, the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness. Hence there is the 
further warning in verse 11, “Jehovah, thy hand is uplifted.” 
He is coming in the way of judgment. Does the first answer 
Say that “they do not see” 2 But, says the prophet, “ They 


CHAPTER XXVI. 265 


shall see jealousy [for] the people, and be ashamed; yea, the 
fire which is for thine enemies shall devour them” (v. 11). 

The prophetic Spirit turns to speak of the blessing for the 
Jews. “Jehovah, thou wilt ordain peace for us; for thou also 
hast wrought all our works for us. Jehovah our God, other 
lords than thee have had dominion over us: by thee only 
will we make mention of thy name” (vv. 12,13). What had 
become of them? “[They are] dead, they shall not live; 
deceased, they shall not rise: for thou hast visited and 
destroyed them, and made all memory of them to perish” 
(v. 14). This is of course highly figurative language. If we 
look at the resurrection, we know that the wicked are to rise 
as well as the righteous; that is, there is a resurrection of all 
men just and unjust. These Gentile oppressors of Israel must 
rise in the resurrection of judgment. They will rise like other 
bad men. But when it is said here, “They shall not rise,” the 
Spirit does not describe the literal resurrection of the body, 
but the complete reversal of the lot of the nations and Israel 
in this world. These old lords are no longer to live or rise 
again in this world. This will suffice to show that the language 
here is put figuratively. 

In chapter xxv. 8 it is said, “He will swallow up death 
in victory.” This, we know from God Himself, will be realised 
in the literal resurrection of the body, when the saints are 
raised. But in chapter xxvi. the allusion to resurrection is 
employed as a figure, because the context proves that it cannot 
refer to that literal fact; for if it did, it would be to deny that 
the unrighteous are to rise. This is the true criterion for the 
understanding of any passage of the word. If a person bring 
you a text against what you know to be true, always examine 
what surrounds it, see what God treats of. Here it is plain 
that it is a question of the way in which God will deal in that 
day with the nations who lorded it over Israel. But is it not 
the fact, some may ask, that these Gentiles were literally dead? 
Certainly, is the answer; but in this case it is not true that 
they shall not rise. 

Perhaps this would not be worth dwelling on, were ib not 
that. many apply chapter xxvi. to the same literal resurrection 


266 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


as xxv. 8. We must never force but bow to scripture. The 
passages that do refer to a raising of bodies we must hold fast ; 
but it is dangerous to misapply others which only use it as 
a figure, because in this case one might infer, as from our 
chapter, that which is unfounded. In truth, as we know, all 
men must rise. “The hour is coming in the which all that 
are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth” 
(John v. 28, 29), There we have the most decisive proof that 
ali the déad, just and unjust, are to rise again from the 
grave. 

Here contrariwise the wicked enemies of Israel “shall not 
rise.” John clearly teaches the resurrection of all, good and 
bad. Isaiah xxvi. 14 refers only to the figure of not rising, to 
comfort Israel from all fears of their old troublers. “ Dead, 
they shall not live; deceased, they shall not rise: for thou hast 
visited and destroyed them, and made all memory of them to 
perish.” Thus effectually will Jehovah have disposed of 
Gentiles who had lorded it over the Jews. 

But what has been done for the nation? “Thou hast 
increased the nation, Jehovah, thou hast increased the nation ; 
thou art glorified. Thou hadst removed [it] far [unto] all 
the ends of the earth” (v.15). He does not here speak of the 
resurrection of the body. Clearly when this takes place 
as described, it could not be said that He had removed the 
risen saints far unto all the ends of the earth. Take it of 
Judah, and how true it is! 

Equally plain is what follows. “J ehovah, in trouble they 
sought thee; they poured out a lisping [when] thy chastening 
[was] upon them. As a woman with child, [that] draweth near 
the time of her delivery, is in travail [and] crieth out in her 
pangs; so have we been before thee, Jehovah. We have been 
with child, we have been in travail, we have as it were brought 
forth wind; we have not wrought the deliverance of the land 
(or, earth); neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen” 
(vv, 16-18). They will review their past conduct, and see that 
they have not accomplished God’s design by them. Where 
had they brought in a divine flow of blessing? They had 
learnt the bad ways of the Gentiles, and brought a curse on 


CHAPTER XXVL 267 


themselves as well as on others; the name of Jehovah was 
blasphemed because of them. 

But now it is said, as a glorious reverse, “Thy dead shall 
live; my dead bodies shall arise.” What mighty words, and 
how tender! Jehovah awakens Israel, and even calls them 
His dead bodies. It is no question of bodily death, but of 
national revival, and yet it will have spiritual character too. 
The daughter of Zion awakes from her long sleep, and J ehovah 
speaks of the Jews (so long defunct as His people) as His dead. 
They, for their part, own themselves to be just as bad as the 
rest of the nations; but the momentous difference is that 
Jehovah claims them as His own. “Let them be dead,” He 
says, as it were, “still they are Mine.” It is the Jewish nation 
that had been like a corpse which Jehovah is graciously pleased 
to identify as His own, and is bringing them out again. If 
Abraham would bury his dead out of his sight, here Jehovah 
asserts His title to fill them with a new life: “Thy dead shall 
live; my dead bodies shall arise. Awake and sing in triumph, 
ye that dwell in dust; for thy dew is the dew of the morning, 
and the earth shall cast forth the dead” (v.19). It indicates 
how fully the truth of the resurrection of the dead was familiar 
to the Jew when the prophet uses it so freely as the best 
expression for God’s resuscitating His people, at that time long 
defunct as a nation. 

As some may think this a questionable interpretation of the 
passage, a scripture or two will prove its soundness. In 
Ezekiel xxxvii. the terms of the figure are quite as strong 
as here; the Spirit of God shows the prophet a valley of dry 
bones. And “they were very dry.” “Can these bones live?” 
was the question (vv. 2-3). “ Behold, I will cause breath to 
enter into you” (v. 5). Thus the vision is realised, the bones 
come together. Next there was flesh on them (v. 8). Then 
the bones, coming forth and clothed with flesh, answer to the 
dead men here raised out of their graves. But, beyond con- 
troversy, this means the whole house of Israel. “Thy dead 
shall live,” says Isaiah. To put this chapter of Ezekiel along 
with Isaiah xxvi. makes, to say the least, a strong presumption, 
that if the fignre of resurrection is used to show the fresh 


268 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAT. 


start of Israel in the one, so it may be in the other. But it is 
certainly so intended in Ezekiel xxxvii.; for, if we have the 
vision, we have also the inspired interpretation. We are not 
therefore at liberty to explain the vision according to our own 
thoughts. The explanation of the Holy Ghost is express and 
conclusive. Thus we can carry divine light back to Isaiah 
XXv1., where the very same allusion is found. 

In Hosea vi. 2 again there is a similar figure. So there 
is also in Daniel xii. 2, “Many of them that sleep in the dust 
of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some 
to shame and everlasting contempt.” If we divert this to 
a resurrection of the body, in the first place it is not a resur- 
rection of all, but only of “many.” In the second place, it is of 
some to everlasting life and of some to shame and contempt 
at the same time. We must give up the doctrine of the first 
resurrection, separated by a thousand years and more from the 
second death (Rev. xx.), in order to found on this a literal 
rising from the graves. All is plain and just if it apply in the 
same way us Ezekiel and Isaiah to the national revival of 
Israel, whom God will bring out of all their present condition 
of shame, though some of them be allowed to display fatal 
wickedness and pride. This is another confirmation of the 
truth of the interpretation. 

But further the next verses are explicit, where we read, 
“Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy 
doors about thee; hide thyself for a little moment, until the 
indignation be past. For, behold, Jehovah cometh forth out of 
his place to visit the iniquity of the inhabitants of the earth on 
them ; and the earth shall disclose her blood, and shall no more 
cover her slain” (vv. 20, 21). Those who interpret the context 
of a literal resurrection are led into the error, that the risen 
saints (for such this scheme supposes to be here meant) would 
be here on earth whilst the divine indignation is going on! 
One could understand their holding that some are to pass 
through the tribulation, though this is not quite the same. 
thing as the indignation. But it is clearly a question of men 
alive here below, not of men changed. God tells them (the 
Jews) to enter into their chambers until He has spent all His 


CHAPTER XXVI. 269 


wrath upon the nations. Is this what we look for? Are we 
not to be taken out of this earthly scene and to enter into the 
Father's house above? We are not an earthly but a heavenly 
people. We know the Lord is coming Who will take us to be 
with Himself where He is; and when He has translated the 
Christians above, the Jews will be called fer the earth. The 
little remnant will be grievously tried, when the vast body of 
the nation will receive the Antichrist. 

Hence, when the day of Jehovah comes for the judg- 
ment of the quick, it is said, “enter into thy chambers.” 
He will not provide a heavenly abode for them, but they are 
to enter into their chambers—assuredly some place of refuge 
and earthly security. All this renders plain the right interpre- 
tation of the passage, and shows that God is not speaking 
about the heavenly saints, but refers to the remnant of the 
Jews in the last days, who are to have a haven of refuge 
provided for them. It is not like Abraham; for this is our 
place. Israel will be much more like Lot, for they will be 
in the midst of the scene where the judgment is to be 
executed. Lot entered into his chambers (that is, Zoar) when 
the judgment came; but as for Abraham, he was entirely out 
of the trial, and pleading before Jehovah in earnest inter- 
cession; and yet before the day came to pass, he knew about 
it far better than Lot. His position, communion, and experi- 
ence were typically different from those of his relative. So we 
shall be taken up to Christ and brought into the Father's house ; 
but afterwards, when the Lord comes to execute judgment, we 
shall come along with Him. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


Tuis is the closing portion of the series that has been occupy- 
ing us. It is “in that day.” Chapter xxviii, manifestly 
introduces a new part of the prophecy. 

The great crisis is arrived. Not only does Jehovah come 
out of His place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for 
their iniquity, and the earth is compelled to disclose her deeds 
of blood, and her slain shall be covered no more ; but there are 
yet greater things. For “in that day Jehovah with his sore 
and great and strong sword will visit leviathan, the piercing 
serpent (or, fugitive), and leviathan, the crooked serpent; and 
he will slay the dragon (or, monster) that is in the sea” (v. 1),* 
It is the execution of divine judgment on the power of Satan, 
figuratively set forth under forms suited to describe his 
hostility as at work against Israel among the Gentiles. “The 
day of Jehovah” takes in not only the thousand years of 
peaceful reign, but a little more, 

Thence the Spirit turns to Jehovah’s ways with His own. 
“In that day [shall be] a vineyard of pure wine, sing concerning 
it: I Jehovah keep it; I will water it every moment: lest 
[any] harm it, I will keep it night and day” (wv. 2,3). His care 
never failed, whatever the times that passed over His land and 
people. When earth comes once more into His view, and 
consequently Israel, His watchful goodness will prove itself 
unremitting on their behalf. “F ury [is] not in me. Oh that I 
had briars [and] thorns against me in battle! I would march 
through them, I would burn them together. Or let him take 


* Delitzsch suggests a reference to the Assyrian and Babylonian powers, 
answering to the swift and straight river Hiddekel, and the very winding 
Euphrates respectively, But the Serpent in either form clearly points to the 
subtle foe behind the scene, 


CHAPTER XXVII. ar i 


hold of my strength; let him make peace with me; peace let 
him make with me” (vv. 4, 5). There seems not a little 
obscurity in the language, if one may judge from the dis- 
crepancies of expositors, and the difficulty of suggesting such a 
sense as carries the unbiassed along with it. But assuming that 
the substantial force is given in the English Bible, Jehovah 
on the one hand challenges the adversaries and warns of their 
sure destruction; on the other He proffers His own protection 
as the only door of peace and safety. The next verse is trans- 
parent, “In future Jacob shall take root; Israel shall bud and 
blossom, and fill the face of the world with fruit” (v.6). Such 
is the purpose of Jehovah, and it shall stand. 

It was not only purpose, however: there was patient and per- 
severing discipline in His ways with Israel. “Hath he smitten 
him, as he smote those that smote him? [or] is he slain 
according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? In 
measure, in sending her away, didst thou contend (or, wilt 
debate) with her? He hath removed [her] with his rough wind 
in the day of the east wind. By this, therefore, shall the 
iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this [is] all the fruit of 
taking away his sin; when he maketh all the stones of the altar 
as chalk-stones that are beaten in pieces—the Asherahs and the 
sun-images shall not stand. For the fortified city [is] solitary, a 
habitation deserted and forsaken like a wilderness : there shall 
the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume its 
boughs. When its branches are withered, they shall be broken 
off: women come [and] set them on fire. For it [is] a people of 
no understanding: therefore he that made them will not have 
mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no 
favour” (vv. 7-11). Thus, there was indeed a mighty differ- 
ence in God’s ways with Israel and their enemies. Faithfully 
did He chastise them in their pride, and rebelliousness, and 
unbelief; but it was not with the unsparing judgment which 
uprooted and destroyed His and their foes. There was 
slaughter too; but what was it in comparison of those that 
are destined to be slain before the day of restitution arrives ? 
In Israel’s case judgment was tempered with mercy ; His 
dealing was measured. In His debate or controversy with 


Die, AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Israel He deigned to plead; and even when the sorest trial came, 
there was a gracious mitigation and arrest in His people’s 
favour; and not this only, but also moral profit, when every 
trace of idolatry should be ground like chalkstones to powder. 
They must not be surprised, then, if in such mighty changes 
the works of the men of the earth passed away, the defenced 
city was desolated, the habitation forsaken and left like a 
wilderness only relieved by pasturage for the calf, and by 
withered, broken firewood for women to come and set on fire ; 
for oh! the folly of the people and the ruin they bring justly, 
necessarily, on themselves. 

Yet here, as elsewhere, great tribulation is the immediate 
precursor of a greater deliverance. “And it shall come to pass 
in that day, [that] Jehovah shall beat off from the flood of 
the river unto the torrent of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered 
one by one, O children of Israel” (o. 12). The Judge of all 
the earth must do right; but He will interpose in saving and 
sovereign mercy. He will sift out and gather the Israelites 
one by one. Nay more, “And it shall come to pass in that 
day [that] the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall 
come that were perishing in the land of Assyria, and the out- 
casts in the land of Egypt; and they shall worship Jehovah in 
the holy mountain at Jerusalem ” (v. 13). Those who have 
accompanied me thus far will have no trouble or doubt in 
determining the true application. It is the trumpet of 
Matthew xxiv., not of 1 Thessalonians iv. and 1 Corinthians 
xv. The latter scriptures refer to the divine summons to the 
heavenly saints; our chapter, as well as the passage in the 
first Gospel, describes the call to Israel to re-assemble, from 
north and south, to worship Jehovah at J erusalem. 

It may be noticed that as chap. xxvi. was occupied with 
Judah and its land, however deep it might go, our chapter 
which deals with the crushing of Satan’s power in various 
forms goes on to Israel; and this throughout, so as to prove it 
is not casual. 

“We know not” (justly said the eloquent H. Melvill) «with 
what eyes those men can read Prophecy, who discover not in 
its announcements the final restoration and conversion of the 


CHAPTER XXVII. 273 


Jews. It is useless to resolve into figurative language, or to 
explain, by a purely spiritual [rather, mystical] interpretation, 
predictions which seem to assert the reinstatement of the 
exiles in the land of their fathers, and their becoming the 
chief preachers of the religion which they have so long 
laboured to bring into contempt. These predictions are in- 
separably bound up with others, which refer to their dispersion 
and unbelief; so that if you spiritualise [or, allegorise] any one, 
you must spiritualise the whole. And since every word has 
had a literal accomplishment, so far as the dispersion and 
unbelief are concerned, how can we doubt that every word will 
have also a literal accomplishment, so far as the restoration 
and conversion are concerned? If the event had proved the 
predicted dispersion to be figurative, the event in all probability 
would prove also the predicted restoration to be figurative. 
But so long as we find the two foretold in the same sentence, 
with no intimation that we are not to apply to both the same 
rule of interpretation, we seem bound to expect, either in both 
cases a literal fulfilment, or in both a spiritual ; and since in 
the one instance the fulfilment has been undoubtedly literal, 
have we not every reason for concluding that it will be literal 
in the other?” (Sermon on the Dispersion and Conversion of 
the Jews, 131, 132.) 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


THIS portion, which is intimately connected with chapter xxix., 
gives us a clear and detailed view of the ways of God with His 
people and His land, more especially with Jerusalem, in the 
last days. Israel is to fade as a flower, Jerusalem to be in 
sore displeasure, but delivered gloriously and for ever. I 
trust it may be seen plainly how impossible it is to apply 
what the Holy Ghost announces here, as a whole, to anything 
that has yet been accomplished. We must leave room for 
a further and closer bearing of these “ Woes” of the prophet. 
Now simple as this may be, it is immensely important. For 
even many Christians are looking onward for the gradual 
progress (not testimony alone) of the gospel. They expect 
that, by the blessing of the Holy Ghost upon the preached 
word, the nations are to be by degrees brought in; moral 
evil, infidelity, every form of superstition, all the pride and 
worldliness of man, to be slowly broken down, when the 
power of the Holy Ghost shall fill men’s hearts with 
righteousness and peace and joy, and thus the world in 
general become the reflexion of God’s will and ways. ‘To 
such persons the assertion seems strange that there is to be 
a total change of dispensation; that God, having first taken 
us away to be with Christ above, is going to restore Israel 
into pre-eminence in their own land,—not to convert them 
simply and bring them into the Christian church, but to lead 
them to repent and receive their Messiah. Then they shall 
have their own distinctive promises and the new covenant 
made good to them, Jehovah's glory shining upon Zion, 
themselves exalted above all nations, who will take a place 
of conscious willing inferiority to Israel, and vie with one 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 2'75 


another which shall pay most honour to the chosen of Jehovah, 
All this, with many weighty consequences, involves such 
a mighty revolution in people’s thoughts, that those more 
accustomed to the word of God can hardly conceive what an 
immense draft it makes upon the faith of those who are 
unversed in the prophetic word; how repugnant it is to all 
that is most cherished in their minds; and what a death-blow 
it gives to what they had fondly considered the legitimate hope 
of the church. 

If we come to God’s word as the only source of truth and 
sure test of all previous thoughts, nothing can be plainer; 
for here we have clearly a vision of the terrible blow that 
is to fall upon Ephraim, which is not only the name of a 
particular tribe, but the general designation of the ten tribes 
who mustered under that leading tribe. Judah and Ephraim 
are the two chief titles by which the prophets continually 
contrast the two houses of Israel. What the prophet com- 
municates here is the “Woe” that is to fall specially on Ephraim, 
that is, on those we call the ten tribes. This furnishes us with 
means for judging the time and circumstances of its fulfilment, 
because no such judgment as is here described ever historically 
fell upon the Jews. The others (ie. Israel) were carried away 
into captivity to Assyria, and were never as a people restored 
to the land. Isaiah wrote when this dreadful blow was falling 
upon Israel, and goes onward to their last days, even to the 
days when Christ Himself, first in faith, then in delivering 
power and glory, shall be connected with Judah’s remnant. 

Looking at the past history of the people, we fail to see 
any such connexion of Christ with Judah, anything that 
answered to this recourse to the tried Stone, save in those 
disciples who left the synagogue for the church at a later 
epoch, The ten tribes were swept away at an early day, 
and later on the two tribes were carried to Babylon, whence 
emerged only an inconsiderable remnant of Judah. The 
prophecy therefore has not yet been accomplished; and that 
which has not been must be fulfilled. Surely no canon of 
interpretation can be surer or plainer than this. Scripture 
cannot be broken: the word of God must be verified sooner 

8 2 


276 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK:OF ISAIAH. 


or later. The end of this age is the ripe season for making 
good the bulk of prophecy. Therefore the one question here 
is whether anything has occurred really and fully corre- 
sponding with these judgments to fall on the ten tribes and 
Judah with Jerusalem also. That there never has been an 
adequate accomplishment will be manifest enough as we pass 
on. To the believer the fulfilment is future and certain. 

“Woe to the crown of pride, of the drunkards of Ephraim, 
and to the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which [is] on 
the head of the fat valley of them that are overcome with 
wine! Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, 
as a storm of hail, a destroying tempest; as a storm of 
mighty waters overflowing, shall he cast down to the earth 
with might” (or, hand) (vv. 1, 2). It is not to be thought that 
drunkenness is to be taken in its merely literal acceptation. 
It represents their dreadfully excited and stupefied and 
besotted state, given up to their own pleasure and self-indul- 
gence to the shame of the true God. What intoxication is 
among men with its frightful natural effects, such in a large 
moral sense will be the condition of these proud insensate 
men of Ephraim. Fulfilled at whatever time it may be, 
plainly it will be in Israel as such. “The crown of pride of 
the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under feet; and 
the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which [is] on the head 
of the fat valley, shall be as an early fig before the summer; 
which [when] he that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet 
in his hand, he eateth it up” (vv. 3,4). And true glory follows: 
“In that day will Jehovah of hosts be for a crown of glory, 
and for a diadem of beauty unto the remnant of his people; 
and for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, 
and for a strength to them that turn the battle to (or, at) the 
gate” (vv. 5, 6). Yet was the condition of Judah better ? 

“But these also have erred through wine, and through strong 
drink are they gone astray; the priest and the prophet have 
erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, 
they are gone astray through strong drink; they err in vision, 
they stumble [in] judgment. For all tables are full of vomit 
[and] filthiness [so that there is] no place” (vv. 7, 8). In vain 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 277 


had God met their weakness, and fed them with infants’ food. 
“Whom will he teach knowledge? and whom will he make 
to understand the message? [them that are] weaned from 
the milk, [and] drawn from the breasts? For [it is] precept 
upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line 
upon line; here a little, there a little” (wv. 9,10). Another 
dealing is needed and will surely follow. “For with stammer- 
ing lips and with strange tongue will he speak to this people: 
to whom he said, This [is] the rest, give ye rest to the weary ; 
and this [is] the refreshing. But they would not hear. There- 
fore shall the word of Jehovah be unto them precept upon 
precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; 
here a little, there a little; that they might go, and fall back- 
ward, and be broken and snared and taken” (vv. 11-13). 
Not with that child-like instruction which they had 
slighted, but with the foreign tones of enemies would He 
scourge them. They would not have His words of rest for 
the weary, they must needs have a nation they understood 
not. It was a judgment on their unbelief. 

Thus the Assyrian is first represented as a hail-storm 
coming down from the north on Ephraim, “a mighty and 
strong one,” “as a storm of hail, a destroying tempest, 
as a flood of mighty waters overflowing.” It is the “king 
of the north,” as he is last described in Daniel xi. Attention 
has been already drawn to the mistaken supposition that the 
lawless one, who is to be manifested as “the king” in 
Palestine, is the only danger for tie Jews. No doubt he, 
though their king, is at bottom an enemy of the worst 
character. For what can be more afflicting or disastrous 
than to have one in your very midst whom you have 
embraced as a friend, and who turns out the bitterest foe? 

Such will be the case when the Antichrist appears in the 
midst of the Jews and reigns, accepted by them as the 
Messiah. The Antichrist will be in lawless ways and in 
false pretensions, what the Lord Jesus was in deed and in 
truth. Though He was God, when He came as man among 
men, never did He assert His rights as God in His ordinary 
path here below, however true the glory of His person was 


278 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF TSATAH. 


to faith. When did He ever use the Godhead to avert trials 
and sufferings, or man’s contempt of Him? He invariably 
waited on God and trusted in Him. His obedience as man 
contributed only the more, because of His divine dignity, 
to prove that He was willing to encounter all shame and 
reproach, yea, the death of the cross, that God the Father 
might be glorified. Antichrist will, on the contrary, use all 
that Satan gives him (and Satan will endue him with such 
energy as never has been possessed before by man upon the 
earth), putting forth all power, and signs, and lying wonders. 
The consequence will be that the Jews, who characteristically 
look out for external tokens and prodigies, will accept and 
worship him as both Messiah and Jehovah their God in 
Jerusalem. 

This is the person the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians 
warns us is to come, as well as the apostasy. Upon him first 
of all will the shining forth of the Lord Jesus deal; though 
the day of the Lord will take in the whole course of judg- 
ments, from its first destruction of the enemy’s power on 
earth till the end of the thousand years. All this period 
will be for the display of divine glory, but conspicuously in 
the execution of judgment from time to time on those that 
oppose themselves. Thus, of the other enemies of Jehovah, 
the chief is Daniel’s king of the north, or, as other prophets 
designate him, the Assyrian scourge that comes down upon 
Ephraim. Clearly he is an enemy that rises up against the 
people and the land; whereas Antichrist will reign in the 
land, being there received by the Jews, and probably a Jew 
himself, for otherwise he could hardly hope to pass himself 
as Messiah. But the other external enemy, though he may 
set up to understand dark sentences (Dan. viii.), takes, of 
course, an antagonistic attitude, as a fierce king and mighty 
man of craft. 

From chapters xxviii. xxix. we hear of two attacks on Jeru- 
salem in the coming day. First of all the enemy assails 
Ephraim, entering the Holy Land from the north, on which 
occasion he has it all his own way. He humbles the pride of 
Ephraim, and is allowed of God to gain a partial success 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 279 


over Jerusalem also. “Therefore hear the word of Jehovah, 
ye scornful men, that rule this people which [is] in Jerusalem. 
For ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and 
with Sheol are we at agreement: when the overflowing scourge 
shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have 
made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our- 
selves. Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Behold, I lay 
for foundation in Zion a stone, a tried stone, a precious 
corner [stone], a sure foundation: he that believeth (or, 
trusteth) shall not make haste. Judgment also will I appoint 
for a line, and righteousness for a plummet; and the hail 
shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall 
overflow the hiding-place. And your covenant with death 
shall be annulled, and your agreement with Sheol shall not 
stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, ye 
shall be trodden down by it. As it passeth through, it shall 
take you; for morning by morning shall it pass through, by 
day and by night; and it shall be terror only to understand 
the message. For the bed is shorter than that [one] can 
stretch himself; and the covering narrower than that he 
can wrap himself. For Jehovah will rise up as [on] 
mount Perazim, he will be wroth as [in] the valley of 
Gibeon; that he may do his work, his strange work, and 
bring to pass his act, his unwonted act. Now therefore be 
ye not scorners, lest your bands be made strong: for I have 
heard from the Lord Jehovah of hosts, a consumption, and 
[one] determined upon the whole earth” (vv. 14-22). Was this 
the case in past history? Supposing you look at Sennacherib 
and his army (2 Kings xviii.), what is there like it, save as 
a preparatory type? Was not his power completely humbled 
before the Jews? (Chap. xix.) Was it not a godly son of 
David who then reigned at Jerusalem? Had not Kphraim 
been swept off years before? It is manifest and certain that 
Sennacherib never gained an advantage over Jerusalem; 
whereas this power is to be victorious in the first instance, 
and even in the second to reduce them to the utmost, when 
total ruin befalls the enemy. 

Mark the language of the prophet here, “ Wherefore hear 


280 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


the word of Jehovah, ye scornful men, that rule this people 
which is in Jerusalem” ... “I have heard from the Lord 
Jehovah of hosts a consumption and [one] determined upon 
the whole land” (or, earth). Compare with this Isaiah x. 23 
in the first section of the prophecy. The fact is, when 
Sennacherib came of old against Jerusalem, the pious king 
Hezekiah ruled there, who, instead of making a covenant with 
death, implored the help of Jehovah against the scornful king 
of Assyria. The result was that the angel of Jehovah smote 
the host of Assyria, so that there fell no less than 185,000. 
Save that the Assyrian will once more oppose the Jews, there 
is scarce a feature in the past which is not the reverse of what 
we have here. 

Let rationalists, if they will, conclude that the book (for the 
Spirit of God they deny) has made a mistake; believers may 
be assured that it mainly looks onward to the judgments of 
the last days. Indolent readers, unintelligent or prejudiced 
commentators, may slur over the distinctive points of the 
prophecy, turning what they can to moral profit. But if a 
man follows out the matter closely, he must accept the truth 
of the future, or become a rationalist, that is, an infidel. It 
is perfectly certain that nothing which approaches the predic- 
tion has yet occurred. Therefore the only legitimate inference 
to be drawn from it is, either that the prophecy is yet to be 
fulfilled, or that the pseudo-prophet was guilty of a lie or 
a flourish. The Christian believes on the contrary, that God 
has written nothing in vain, and that every word, not yet 
accomplished, must be fulfilled to the letter ; among the rest 
this wonderful dealing in which God is to make “the land 
of beauty” the grave of man’s pride and power. 

Then God will appear for the everlasting deliverance of poor 
Israel. And that very people, now so proverbial for their 
obstinate rejection of Christ, will go forth zealously spreading 
the tidings of divine mercy to the ends of the earth. What 
an evident contrast with that which exists now! Israel will 
be brought into their own land and blessed there, when 
Jehovah of hosts shall reign in mount Zion. Now God has 
no land that is more particularly holy. The land, holy in His 


— 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 281 


purpose, is the possession of the Turk. It is still largely 
a waste country, though proofs of fertility are not wanting 
in the midst of barrenness. How is so vast a change to be 
brought about? When consummated, God will lead Israel 
to build a magnificent temple. The priests, the sons of Zadok, 
shall minister in due order. The land shall be divided among 
the twelve tribes after a new fashion. This and more we 
know from the last chapters of the prophet Ezekiel. In- 
deed abundant proofs are manifest elsewhere to any person 
moderately acquainted with the prophecies. 

At present the characteristics are, Israel rejected, the Gentiles 
called, the church formed in union with Christ on high and 
by the Holy Ghost here below, in which church is neither Jew 
nor Gentile. Thus the character of blessing for man is entirely 
altered. Instead of outward honour resting upon the Jews, 
they are cast out and dispersed, and have yet to pass through 
a fiery tribulation at the close. We are God’s people, His 
children now, not they. Peace in Christ is ours, but in the 
world we have tribulation. In the days that are at hand all 
will be changed: God, instead of rejecting the Jews, will again 
choose them to stand forth in their own land, converting them 
to Himself, quenching all tendency to rest on ordinances, and 
taking idols for ever away; whereas they formerly and per- 
sistently mixed up idols with the worship of Jehovah, later 
and worse still they rejected their own and His Christ. 

Plainly therefore a new state of things must have come in. 
The prophecies may take us down to the change; but how 
is the change itself to be brought about? By more tremendous 
judgments on Israel, and especially on their enemies, than the 
world has ever witnessed; not only a great nation, but the east 
and west, their old enemies, represented in their descendants. 
All nations of the earth, in short, will have their representa- 
tives there and then. The result will be, that God will judge 
all the nations, at length blessing His ancient people according 
to the promises He had assured to the fathers, then accom- 
plished to the children. In order to bring about this change, 
not only must there be an execution of judgment, but also the 
removal of the heavenly saints to be with the Lord above, 


282 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


As long as the church goes on here below, it is impossible, 
morally speaking, that God could accomplish these events of 
a wholly contrasted character. For it is contrary to all 
analogy that God would act upon two opposite principles at 
the same time. For instance, how could God both give and 
withhold outward honour for a Jew? How form the church 
at the same time that He restores and owns Israel? If a Jew 
were to believe now, he, baptised by the Holy Ghost, becomes 
a member of Christ’s body; whereas what we find in the 
prophets is, that a godly Jew in the last days remains a Jew. 
The Lord will quicken his soul, no doubt; but he will be found 
in his own land, where, instead of suffering, he will be blessed 
in earthly things. Thus it is an altogether different state 
here below. To this the New Testament supplies the key. 
Before Jehovah begins thus to work in Israel, the church 
is removed to heaven. : 

Hence in the Revelation the great initiatory lesson is taught, 
that when “the things that are” (or the seven churches) ter- 
minate, when those that truly believe now are seen glorified 
with the Lord in heaven, then (Rev. vii.) God takes up a new 
work among Israel and the Gentiles, who will be, both of 
them blessed, but even so presented as distinct from each 
other. Without doubt the Jews will return to their land in 
unbelief, and Satan will induce them to install a man as their 
Messiah, who will draw them by degrees to worship himself 
and an idol in the temple of God. Some might think it 
strange to assert, that these civilised and christianised nations, 
which count it impossible that the educated could worship 
idols or the Antichrist, should fall into these very snares. But 
scripture is explicit, that those who now boast of progress, 
knowledge, and religion will at that time fall into idolatry and 
the anti-Christian pit. All western Europe will be drawn 
into perdition with the mass of the Jews. God will. have 
previously translated to heaven all properly called Christians, 
Then the apostasy will take place, though in the midst of this 
fearful evil the Spirit of God will work, specially among certain 
of the Jews, who will go through this scene faithful to God, 
some being killed for the truth, and others surviving in the 


CHAPTER XXviii. 983 


flesh—a remnant God will reserve to Himself to make of it 
the nucleus of a new Israel. The Lord Jesus will appear in 
the midst of this lawlessness, and will execute judgment upon 
the ungodly, preserving the spared remnant who thereon be- 
come the chosen means of spreading the knowledge of Jehovah's 
glory for the millennial age. 

When the Holy Ghost says, “ Because ye have said, we have 
made a covenant with death” (v. 15), we are not to suppose 
that this is to be taken as if they confessed it. God is rather 
exposing their real mind in its evil and ruin. They may boast 
of their covenant, but they do not know it is with Sheol. 
They are deceived to accept a false Messiah, whose power will 
turn out to be of Satan; but they are ignorant of the cheat. 
Jews would not openly say that they had entered into a 
compact with the devil: a man must be in an extraordinary 
state of blindness and defiance of God in order to own such 
a thing. Nor does the word of God at all limit us to such 
an interpretation. The reference, one may suppose, is to those 
that enter into a covenant to save themselves from the king 
of the north. It appears to be a compact entered into between 
the false prophet and the Beast. The power that scripture 
designates as the Beast is the emperor of the west, the last 
Roman ruler when that empire re-appears. 

There was a living man, even of late, said to have his 
mind set on some such scheme: it is a notorious fact, that 
within the last few years the project had entered into the 
brain of one who proved that an idea was apt to govern him. 

Nor is it absolutely new, this yearning after the reorganisation 
of the empire, with Rome for its capital. The plan is not 
to overthrow other European nations, but to make them 
subject kingdoms, each having its king, under one supreme 
head. That this was the theory of a recent monarch, there 
can be no more question than that it was the idea of another 
before him. I may add, that he, too, like his predecessor, 
meddled with the affairs of the Holy Land, and that both 
sought to have a hold of Rome. Some of us have held 
these interpretations of the prophecies long before the war 
of the holy places or the possession of Rome. They were 


284 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


thoughts derived not from political events, but from scrip- 
ture, the shadows of coming events. 

Plainly then a great power shall arise, in scripture called 
“the Beast” or the revived Roman empire, with this peculiar 
form, that instead of putting aside the various kings of 
Europe, it will allow of separate kingdoms under him, 
nominally independent but really dictated to by the emperor. 
He accordingly will be the contracting party with the apostate 
Jews, in concert with their king the Antichrist ; the emperor 
of the west being the political head, as the prophet-king will 
be the spiritual head of Christendom (then properly anti- 
Christendom). Thus Jerusalem, which has been the cradle 
of professing Christendom, will be its grave. As to the 
particular person who will effect all this one says nothing. 
He shall be revealed in his own time. The great point is 
the manifestation of the chiefs at Jerusalem and Rome. 
Rome will be the centre of an earthly empire, with separate 
but dependent kings in western Europe, each having their 
kingdom subject to the one head. This is one feature. The 
other is, that many Jews will be in their own land, and will 
be allowed to form a kingdom; and that this will bring them 
into the hands, not of Christ, but of Antichrist. 

When the Jews are there, the rest of the great drama will 
follow ; they will soon have its predicted leader. Then comes 
the scene spoken of here. In order to strengthen themselves 
against the great northern oppressor, or the overflowing 
scourge, they enter into a covenant with “the Beast.’ In 
vain do they think to escape. At this very time God will 
raise to Himself the hearts of a little band of faithful Jews, 
who will feel assured that the wicked prince cannot be their 
Messiah; that the true God is a holy God; that His servant, 
their promised King, must be, not the man of-sin but of true 
righteousness. The false Messiah they refuse, their hearts 
in penitence cry, Blessed is He that cometh in the name of 
Jehovah. These are here individually spoken of as “he that 
believeth” (v. 16). The rest plot, make preparations, and 
hope to be saved from the overflowing scourge. But no; 
God will permit the mass to be trodden down (vv. 17-20). 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 285 


They shall in no wise escape. The first attack upon Jerusalem 
is to be successful. In the next chapter we see a very different 
result, when the people in the city have been purged and 
Jehovah interferes. (Compare Zech. xii—xiv.) 

Thus Jerusalem is the great battle-field of the nations, and 
the main platform of the. judgments of God. We do not 
speak now about the last eternal judgment—the great white 
throne; for this has nothing to do with the earth. Heaven 
and earth will have fled away before that. Remember there 
is to be a judgment of the habitable earth, not only a judgment 
of the dead, but also and previously of the quick. Every 
baptised man professes that Christ is coming to judge the 
quick and the dead. How few truly understand and believe 
it! All its acts will not take place at the same time. One 
form of the judgment of the quick comes before us here. The 
reason why Jerusalem becomes the scene of God’s judgments 
on the nations is that Jerusalem, Judah, and the people of 
Israel are the chosen centre of God among the nations. In 
the latter day He will resume His former relations with 
Israel, though on a better and everlasting ground. 

What solemn words in verses 14-22 for the scornful men 
ruling in Jerusalem! In vain do they plead past favour or 
present privileges. J ehovah should rise up to do His work, 
His strange work, and accomplish His act, His strange act. 
He loves not vengeance but mercy. But mockers are odious: 
most of all in Zion. A consumption, therefore, is determined 
upon the whole earth. He is the same unchanging God: let 
them not presume because of His long-suffering. 

Even with man it is not always ploughing, nor always 
time to sow. Threshing comes at last, and in divers modes 
and measures. So will it be in God’s judgment of the earth, 
“Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my 
speech. Doth the ploughman plough all day to sow? doth 
he [all day] open and break the clods of his ground? When 
he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad 
dill, and scatter cummin, and set the wheat in rows and the 
parley in an appointed place and the rye in the border thereof ? 
His God doth instruct him in judgment, he doth teach him. 


286 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


For the dill is not threshed with a threshing instrument, 
neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon the cummin; but 
dill is beaten out with a staff, and cummin with a rod. Bread 
[-corn] is ground; for he will not ever be threshing it; and 
though he drive the wheel of his cart and his horses [over it], 
he would not grind it. This also cometh forth from Jehovah - 
of hosts; he is wonderful in counsel, great in wisdom” 
(vv. 23-29). The discipline of the people under the mighty 
hand and the profound wisdom of Jehovah had been in vain 
through their unbelief. The dull earth yielded far better fruit 
to the husbandman. But the day of Jehovah is yet to come, 
and hastens. For yet a very little while He that cometh will 
come and will not tarry, And every righteous one shall live 
by faith. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


As the present chapter was to some extent anticipated in the 
remarks on the preceding one, one may speak the more briefly 
now. It opens with the final siege of Jerusalem by “the 
Assyrian,” so familiar in the prophecies. ‘Woe to (or, Ho!) 
Ariel, to Ariel, the city of David’s encampment! Add ye year 
to year; let the feasts come round. Yet I will distress Ariel, 
and there shall be sorrow and sadness; and it shall be unto 
me as an Ariel” (vv. 1, 2). By Ariel, the lion of God, is 
meant Jerusalem, which the proud stranger menaces with 
destruction. Spite of great names and associations of the 
past, it is actually brought down into deep distress. Delay 
should not hinder its humiliation. Feasts or sacrifices should 
not avert the storm. God’s indignation is in question, and 
not yet ended: still it abides to Him as Ariel, brought justly 
and utterly low, yet His lion. “And I will camp against 
thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with watch- 
posts, and I will raise forts against thee. And thou shalt 
be brought low, thou shalt speak out of the ground, and 
thy speech shall come low out of the dust, and thy voice 
shall be as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the 
ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust” (vw. 
3,4). That is, agony of terror would produce effects similar 
to the tone or language affected by those who dealt with 
spirits. “And the multitude of thine enemies shall be like 
small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones [shall be] 
as chaff that passeth away: and it shall be at an instant, 
suddenly. Thou shalt be visited by Jehovah of hosts with 
thunder and with earthquake and great noise, with whirl- 
wind and tempest and the flame of devouring fire ” (wv. 5, 6). 


288 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


It must be plain, I think, how entirely all this falls in with 
and confirms the reference to the great king of the north 
in the time of the end. Sennacherib was but a type. Hence 
the commentators, not seeing this, stumble in hopeless per- 
plexity. Some, applying it to the typical enemy, cannot get 
over the fact that Isaiah himself expressly predicts (as was 
the fact, of course) that Sennacherib should not come into the 
city of Jerusalem, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before 
it with a shield, nor cast’a bank against it. (See chap. xxxvii. 
33.) Others, again, suppose the Roman siege to be intended; 
but this, it is evident, is still more flatly contradicted by 
Jehovah’s intervention at the last gasp to the deliverance 
of Jerusalem and the utter overthrow of their enemies. 
In fact it is the future siege at the close of this age, when 
the great confederacy of the north-eastern nations shall be 
broken after a previous success against the Jews. The reader 
can compare Zechariah xii—xiv., which bear on the same 
events; also Psalms Ixxxiii, cx. 2, 6; Micah iv. 1 tk 
4-15; and the end of Daniel xi. compared with the beginning 
of chap. xii. 

The next verses, 7, 8, strengthen this conclusion, “And the 
multitude of all the nations that war against Ariel, even all 
that war against her and her fortifications, and that distress 
her, shall be as a dream of a night vision. It shall even 
be as when the hungry [man] dreameth, and, behold, he eateth ; 
but he awaketh, and his soul is empty; or as when the thirsty 
dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, 
behold, [he is] faint, and his soul craveth: so shall be the 
multitude of all the nations that war against mount Zion” 
(vv. 7, 8). Calvin’s notion that they were the various garrisons 
which the Jews brought in from elsewhere to defend their 
capital, and that they are threatened with being useless refuse, 
is quite unworthy of his reputation. It is a clear prediction 
of the destruction of their foes at the last, led on by him 
who was prefigured by the Assyrian. They shall be as 
disappointed of their prey as a hungry or thirsty man who 
wakes up from his imaginary feast. 

The prophet then turns to describe the moral condition 


CHAPTER XXIX. ; 289 


of the Jews themselves, and the blind infatuation that en- 
sued. For such a trial as God thus brought on them will 
have its ground in their evil state, whatever may be His mercy 
and its rejoicing against judgment in the end. “Be ye 
amazed and astonished; infatuate yourselves and be blind: 
they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not 
with strong drink. For Jehovah hath poured out on you the 
spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets 
and your rulers, the seers, hath he covered. And all the vision 
is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, 
which they deliver to one that can read, saying, Read this, I 
pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed. And the 
book is delivered to him that cannot read, saying, Read this, I 
pray thee: and he saith, I cannot read” (vv. 9-12). Israel were 
spiritually blind to God’s lessons. Judicial sleep oppressed all: 
learned or simple made no difference. 

Alas! they were formalists and hypocrites taught by the 
precept of men, as certainly as they avowed their ignorance 
of God’s word. Therefore by God’s sentence their wisdom 
should perish. “And the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people 
draw nigh with their mouth, and with their lips do honour 
me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear 
of me is a commandment taught of men: therefore, behold, I 
will proceed to do marvellously among this people, to do 
marvellously even with wonder; and the wisdom of their wise 
[men] shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent 
ones shall be hid” (wv. 13, 14). In vain their efforts to hide 
from the Lord or be independent of Him. God, after all, 
remains God, and man is but as clay in the hand of the 
potter. “Woe unto them that hide deep their counsel far 
from Jehovah! And their works are in the dark, and they say, 
Who seeth us? and who knoweth us? Ye turn things upside 
down! Shall the potter be counted as clay; so that the thing 
made should say of him that made it, He made me not; or 
the thing formed say of him that formed it, He hath no 
understanding ” (vv. 15,16)? If this be solemnly true, it is full 
of blessed comfort. For “{[Is] it not yet a very little while, and 
Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful 

T 


290 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


field shall be esteemed as a forest? And in that day shall the 
deaf hear the words of the book, and out of obscurity and 
out of darkness the eyes of the blind shall see; and the meek 
shall increase their joy in Jehovah, and the needy among men 
shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. For the terrible one 
shall come to nought, and the scorner shall be no more, and all 
shat watch for iniquity shall be cut off, that make a man an 
offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in 
the gate, and turn aside the just for nought” (vv. 17-21). 

Soon all will be reversed: not only the lofty Assyrian be 
abased, and humbled Israel be exalted, but the culpable in- 
sensibility of the people give place to spiritual understanding 
and earnestness. Sweet traits of the Spirit should find 
increase of blessing and joy: violence, scorn, and iniquity be 
judged and vanish. “Therefore thus saith Jehovah who 
redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob, Jacob shall 
not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale. 
But when he seeth his children, the work of my hands, in 
the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify 
the Holy One of Jacob, and shall stand in awe of the God of 
Israel. They also that err in spirit shall come to understand- 
ing, and they that murmur (or, the disobedient) shall learn 
doctrine” (vv. 22-24). 

It is clear that both the external deliverance and the internal 
work of spiritual blessing in spiritual intelligence indicate a 
time and a state which have never yet been realised for Israel. 
The day of Jehovah is in view, of which the sudden overthrow 
of Tartan and Rab-saris was but a proximate sign. Never yet 
has the blind stupor lifted from the heart of the people and its 
rulers, but wrought deeper sin and worse desolation. But the 
day is at hand which will verify the prophetic word to the full. 


CHAPTER XXX. 


THERE is a topic on which the Spirit of God enlarges much 
here which has been scantily noticed hitherto. Inasmuch 
as it comes before us in this chapter, a few words may 
be well said on it—the moral condition of Israel, as proved 
and brought home to them by the revelation of God. For 
what we have all throughout this section is not merely 
deliverance, nor this in His grace only, during a time of ruin, 
but also the righteous Lord proving that He loves righteous- 
ness. There was a cause for the proof that the condition of 
Israel was morally unbearable to God. Blindness was there, 
religious and finally judicial blindness. This is traced by the 
Spirit in a variety of ways. We will look briefly at what we 
have before us here. 

The first feature of their evil which draws out the indigna- 
tion of God, is that His people should go down into Egypt; 
that a people blessed of God, with promises of still better 
blessings than ever they tasted, with which they are yet to be 
blessed by God's own grace in the last days—the best possible 
blessings for a people upon earth—that such a people should 
go down into Egypt for help, was not only debasing to them- 
selves, but also peculiarly dishonouring to God. Hence the 
Holy Ghost now, having shown us their deliverance, goes back 
and indicates from what they were delivered. God brings out 
one character of evil after another, and shows that the 
necessary issue of it was destruction. Yet He brings them 
out of all their distresses, and at length blesses them fully as 
His own people. It is peculiarly comforting to read of the 
ways of God, how He is not only a deliverer from dangers, 
from outward enemies, from Satan, but also from every form of 

T2 


292 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


sin. He does not in any wise gloss over moral evil, for 
chapter after chapter brings it out, though, as the effect of its 
judgment, Israel seemed ready to be swallowed up. But as 
the dark side thus appears, so on the other God is seen 
interfering in grace, plucking their feet out of the net, setting 
the dispersed in their own land, and securing the triumph of 
His own grace as well as righteousness. For this cause, “ Woe 
to the rebellious children, saith Jehovah, that take counsel 
but not of me, and that make leagues, but not by my Spirit, 
that they may heap sin upon sin” (v. 1). It is a solemn 
thing to read such words as these, and still more so to think 
how applicable they may be to ourselves. Even as children of 
God, the proneness of our hearts is to act according to our 
own judgments; for the flesh in the Christian is not a whit 
better than in any other man. Whenever there is a listening 
to ourselves, we may be sure the same character of evil is at 
work that the Spirit of Jehovah was rebuking in Israel. 

What for Israel was going down into Egypt is to us the 
taking counsel not of God but of natural wisdom in any diffi- 
culty. It was the same fleshly wisdom which Israel sought; 
and of this Egypt is the symbol in the ancient world. No 
country in the early history of men was so distinguished for 
the wisdom of nature as Egypt. In later days Greece and 
Rome sprang up, but that was long after the time to which 
this vision applied as an historical fact. They were at first 
little more than a number of contentious hordes. No such 
wisdom was found anywhere to the same extent as in Egypt. 
The great Assyrian who invaded Israel was characterised not so 
much by wisdom as by vast resources, and appliances in the 
way of strength. Egypt depended mainly on good counsel, as 
if there were no living God—on the counsel of man sharpened 
by long experience, for it was one of the oldest powers that 
attained eminence. Accordingly, as they had been versed in 
the statecraft of the ancient world, they had an immense 
reputation for their familiarity with means of dealing in 
national difficulties, peace, plenty, &c. 

Israel, when threatened by the Assyrian, sought the help of 
Egypt: I am speaking now of the literal fact when this 


CHAPTER XXX. 993 


prophecy first applied. Though it did bear on the days of 
Isaiah, yet the character of the prophecy shows that it cannot 
be limited to that time: only a very small part was accom- 
plished then. But between the two terms of Israel’s past and 
future unfaithfulness, in turning to the wisdom of the world in 
their troubles, there is a serious lesson for us in the pressure of 
any trial that concerns the testimony of God. The tendency 
is immense to meet a worldly trial in a worldly way. That 
you cannot meet the world’s efforts against you by spiritual 
means is what one is apt to think; so there is the danger 
of recourse to earthly means for the purpose of escape. What 
is this but the same thing that we find here? And yet who 
that feels for the children of God and for the truth, but 
knows the danger of this? Be sure, if we do not feel the 
danger, it is because we are ourselves under the world’s 
influence. The feeling of the danger, the dread of our own 
spirits, the fear lest we should meet flesh by flesh, is what God 
uses to make us look to Himself. God will never put His seal 
on self-dependence; on the contrary, the great lesson the 
whole life of Christ teaches is the very reverse. He lived for 
the Father; so “he that eateth Him shall live for Him.” It 
is in dependence upon another, even Christ, as our object that 
the joy and strength and wisdom of the Christian are found, 
This we gather before the difficulty comes. Then “I can do 
all things through Him Who strengtheneth me.” 

Where we often fail is through acting from impulse. If we 
think to plan, instead of praying in real subjection to God, we 
need to fear for ourselves. What is rendered in 1 Tim. ii. 1 
“intercession,” and in 1 Tim. iv. 5 “prayer,’ means such 
intercourse with God as admits of confiding appeal to Him. 
We can thus freely and personally speak to Him about all 
things, now that through the one Mediator we know Him as 
a Saviour-God, Who has first spoken to us in grace, and given 
us the access we have into this grace wherein we stand. Is 
it not, then, an outrage on the God Who has thus opened His 
ear to us if we look to fleshly means? And yet who does 
not know that this is the very thing to which perhaps, more 
than any other, the wise and prudent are prone ? 


294 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


In this way it seems that the moral lesson of this chapter is 
to be seen—it is taking counsel, but not of Jehovah. Hence 
God caused the land of Egypt to become the means of deeply 
aggravating their evil. “Woe to the rebellious children, saith 
Jehovah, that take counsel, but not of me; and that cover 
with a covering (or, as some prefer, that make leagues), but 
not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin; that walk 
to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my. mouth; 
to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to 
trust in the shadow of Egypt! Therefore shall the strength 
of Pharach be a shame, and the trust in the shadow of 
Egypt a confusion. For his princes are at Zoan, and his 
ambassadors are come to Hanes. They shall all be ashamed 
of a people [that] cannot profit them, that are not a help 
nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach” (vv. 1-5). His 
princes mean those of God’s people, as the next chapter proves 
decisively. The prophet’s irony thus expresses itself, 

“The burden of the beasts of the South. Through the land 
of trouble and anguish, from whence [come] the lioness and 
the lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they carry their 
riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures 
upon the bunches of camels, to a people [that] shall not profit. 
For Egypt helpeth in vain, and to no purpose: therefore have 
I called her Rahab (or, Arrogance) that sitteth still” (vv. 6, 7). 
Not man’s pride, but God’s guidance avails for His people. 

If we examine the New Testament for our guidance in these 
difficulties, we shall find just the same truth. If the apostle is 
speaking merely about the ordinary trials of each day, we have 
the same lesson in other words. Thus he tells us we are to 
let our moderation be known unto all men, the Lord being at 
hand; that instead of being careful or anxious about anything 
(not that we are to be careless, but not to be careful in the 
sense of anxiety), our requests should be made known unto 
God with thanksgiving. 

Our strength, it is said, is in quiet confidence. Christians 
have a right to expect God to appear for us; He has entitled 
us to count on it. We may be perfectly sure, it matters not 
what the circumstances are; even supposing there has been 


CHAPTER XXX. 295 


something to judge in ourselves, if one tell it out to God, 
will not He listen? He cannot deny Himself. He must 
deny him that slights the name of Christ. Where He now 
puts to shame, it is in our self-will; so far from His putting 
shame on such being a proof that He does not love them, 
it is precisely the proof that He does. But at the same 
time, let men venture to go beyond what God sees good for 
the discipline of His child, He soon takes up the rod; and 
there can be nothing more terrible than when the adversary 
exceeds the chastening that is just, gratifying his hatred 
toward them, For God will rise up in His indignation, and 
deal with them according to His own majesty; even the 
grace of the gospel does not set aside that. For instance, see 
the Second Ep. to Timothy, iv. 14. If persons bearing the 
Lord’s name are carried away by their fleshly zeal, and fight 
against the truth of God or those charged with the proclama- 
tion of that truth, God may use them for dealing with faults 
in His people. God knows how to bring down His people 
where their looks are high because of anything in themselves, 
or that grace has conferred upon them. But when the limit 
of right rebuke is exceeded, woe be to those that fight against 
them, covering their own vindictiveness or envy under God’s 
name! It is evident that the very grace of the gospel makes it 
to be so much the more conspicuous; for it sounds so much 
the more tremendous that God should thus deal in the midst 
of all that speaks so loudly of His love. 

The Gospels also bring out, in the words of our Lord 
Himself, the wickedness of fighting against what God is 
doing even by poor weak disciples. This is the great lesson 
for us; we are not to consult our own heart or have recourse 
to the strength of man. When we flee to the various 
resources of the flesh, we slip out of our proper Christian 
path. Whereas the strength of God has indeed shone in 
that foundation pattern in which all the blessing of grace to 
sinners is contained; and it always takes this form for a 
Christian, and, that is, death and resurrection. There may 
very likely be a great pressure of trial; there may soon 
appear a sinking down under it; but as surely as there is the 


296 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


semblance of death, there will be the reality of resurrection 
by-and-by. Let no one be disheartened. The cross is the 
right mould for the blessing of the children of God. When 
we were brought to Him, was it not after the same sort? We 
knew what it was to have the horrors of the conviction of sin ; 
but God was going to bring us for the first time into a place of 
special blessing. 

It has always been so with His own. We find it in the 
case of Abraham, and in proportion to the greatness of blessing 
is the force of sorrow that precedes it. Isaac was given when 
Abraham was a hundred years old, and Sarah as good as dead, 
There was death, as it were, and he had to wait for a son. 
Even after the birth and growth of the child of promise, he 
had to surrender him, to offer up his only son to God. 
Directly that the singleness and truth of his heart was 
proved, and that the sacrifice was in principle offered up, 
the angel of Jehovah arrests his hand. How much sweeter 
now, when Isaac was, as it were, the child of resurrection! 
And so it is with all our blessings, it matters not what they 
may be. There must be the breaking down of our feelings, 
the mortification of self in a practical way, if we are to 
know what God is in blessing: our blessings are cast in the 
mould of death and resurrection. 

The way by which come all our blessings, is in Him Who 
is dead and risen, To be blessed practically we must morally 
go through the same process. There comes the frustration 
of all natural hopes, the blasting of all the objects we desire. 
When God visits us in His faithfulness with trial, the first 
thing man seeks is to escape. Israel goes down into Egypt, 
instead of looking up in the confidence that God is the 
giver of wisdom and of power. They go down to the land 
of human wisdom and ability. Were there no God, were 
they not His people, it would have been intelligible; but as 
it is, what folly! Yet is it the folly of our own hearts. 
Are we not conscious of it? Beware lest it be, because we 
are so accustomed to forget it, that we do not realise the 
humbling truth. We need to consider it more deeply to 
profit by this lesson. Their Strength is quiet confidence 


CHAPTER XXX. 997 


instead of hurrying down into Egypt. “Now go, write it 
before them on a tablet, and inscribe it in a book, that it 
may be for the time to come for ever and ever. For it is a 
rebellious people, lying children, children [that] will not hear 
the law of Jehovah; that say to the seers, See not; and to the 
prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us 
smooth things, prophesy deceits: get you out of the way, turn 
aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease 
from before us” (vv. 8-11). Those that wait not on Him 
for His power must feel the power of His enemies and theirs. 

“For ever and ever” (v. 8) it was to be graven in a book 
that they were “children that will not hear the law of 
Jehovah” (v. 9). That was even the least of all; rebellion 
could be forgiven, lying children could be made ashamed of 
their lies. “Prophesy not unto us right things” (v. 10), that 
is, things according to God. We are not to suppose that 
they actually said these words. We often read in the 
Gospels, that Jesus answered in many cases where not a 
single question was put to Him. Why does the Spirit of 
God say Jesus answered, when He was not asked? Because 
He knew the thoughts of their hearts. He answered not what 
they said, for they said nothing; but what He knew they 
would say if they dared, what He knew was at work within. 

So here, Israel may not say it in so many words, but 
it is what God saw and knew to be the truth of what 
they were feeling and doing. They did not like the truth 
which brought before them their rebellion and lies; they 
endeavoured to get out of the way and reach of the truth, 
God was in none of their thoughts. Why not use the best 
resources of men, now that God did not work miracles 
for them? Whereas, in truth, God had called out Israel 
for this—to be the manifestation of a people whose strength 
was in Jehovah; to be the witness of how blessed it is thus 
nationally to trust the living God, in all their public dealings 
and in their domestic life. All was to be regulated by the 
law of Jehovah (which is the technical term for the Old 
Testament). They were to be the practical exemplification of 
the blessedness of-a people and land in such a case, 


298 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


To go down into Egypt was to give up God for man: if 
they had asked counsel, they well knew God would never 
send them down to Egypt, out of which He had brought 
them. But they did not seek counsel, they act before they 
ask, and may have then prayed about it. But what is it 
to pray for God to bless what we are doing in self-will? 
Let us ask Him what He would have us to do before we 
act. It may be that God would have us to do nothing, or 
possibly give us counsel through one of His children. For 
God does not intend us to be so many independent lines 
that never unite, though they may closely approach. He 
works by Christ’s members; He purposes to make us feel that 
we are members one of another; but whatever may be the 
value of any one’s counsel, each must be responsible to God. 
The danger is of putting another in the place of God. Men 
do not value a man more for this, because when we are 
self-willed and our counsellor is firm for good, the speedy 
consequence will be that he who stood in the place of God 
one day, may seem almost in the place of the devil the next. 
This is the flesh—apt to deify the creature one day, and to 
demonise it the next. 

What we have to seek then is to look up to God; and this 
is just why the first word is here, “ returning and rest.” 
But there was more besides. In the chapter before, the point 
was the word of God, which the flesh treated as a sealed 
book; but God must be waited on as well as His word. He 
never intended scripture to be taken apart from Himself ; Over 
and above the Bible is God Himself. Not that God can ever 
be against His word, but He is the only power of entering into 
the application of it. For the Bible is not only for me to look 
down into: I must look up to God. I am not intended to 
read it merely as a book of true stories or good sermons, 
still less of enigmas to solve by wit or learning, but as the 
voice of the living God to my soul. When one reads it 
in true subjection to Him, the relation and attitude of the 
soul is totally changed; you are delivered from the danger 
of bending the word of God to your own mind and will. 
Whereas, when the word leads you out in prayer to God, then 


CHAPTER XXX. 299 


it is neither the word without prayer, nor prayer without the 
word; both of which are exceedingly dangerous, one leading 
to rationalism, as the other does to fanaticism. Hence, says 
the apostle, “I commend you to God and to the word of his 
grace.” We need to wait upon God that we may gather 
profit from His word, and ever to lean on Him for His 
grace that we may with simplicity and faithfulness carry it 
out in the Spirit. 

Here Israel had failed, as we see in chapter xxix. So now 
in chapter xxx. they flee down to the nearest neighbour that 
could help by human prudence, slighting God’s wisdom and the 
grace which entitled them to cast themselves on Him for it. 
Were they not a people that should dwell alone, and not be 
reckoned among the nations? “Therefore thus saith the Holy 
One of Israel, Because ye reject this word, and trust in 
oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon, therefore this 
iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling 
out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly in an 
instant. And he shall break it as the breaking of a potter’s 
vessel that is broken in pieces without sparing; and there 
shall not be found in the pieces of it a sherd to take fire from 
the hearth, or to take water out of the cistern” (vv. 12-14). 

Such was Egypt. The flesh is habitually fraudulent and per- 
verse. But God judges it in His own. It is ever restless and 
pretends to something. It may look imposing, but it is ready 
to crumble from top to bottom, and is doomed of God. “For 
thus saith the Lord Jehovah the Holy One of Israel, In 
returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and con- 
fidence shall be your strength; but ye would not. And ye 
said, No, for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: 
and, We will ride upon the swift [Egypt’s resources of common 
sense]; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift. One 
thousand [shall flee] at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five 
shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a 
mountain, and as an ensign on a hill” (vv. 15-17). God would 
make them a signal example, and show that the resources they 
trusted were only so many nets in which they were to be 
snared, Had they sought to flee? They should flee in 


300 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH, 


terror. Had they sought help to swiftly escape? Swift should 
be the vengeance of their foes. God constantly makes the 
earthly object of trust to be the rod for the fool’s back. 
What is the answer of the Lord when He comes to this? 
Nothing can be stronger than His condemnation. But if He 
deals sternly with His faulty people here, is it not always 
for blessing in the end? If God exposes His children, pulls 
them down from the seat of pride, brings them into trouble 
from those they prefer to Himself in some extremity, it is the 
real action of His great grace. To return to Him even with 
broken bones is blessed. How magnificent is the burst of the 
prophet! “And therefore will Jehovah wait, that he may be 
gracious unto you, and therefore will he lift himself up [not 
to cut off Israel, but] that he may have mercy upon you; for 
Jehovah [is] a God of judgment: blessed [are] all they that wait 
for him. For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem. 
Thou shalt weep no more: he will be very gracious unto thee 
at the voice of thy ery; as he heareth it, he will answer thee. 
And the Lord will give you the bread of adversity, and the 
water of oppression; yet shall not thy teachers be hidden any 
more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. And when ye 
turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left, thine ears 
shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This [is] the way, walk 
ye in it” (vv, 18-21). He had let all this trouble fall upon 
His people; He had Himself waited and been exalted; and 
why? That He might be gracious, The enemy might prove 
his malice, and they their weak and guilty preference of flesh 
to Himself; and He allowed it all to take place that He might 
have nothing to do but to take them out of the pit into which 
they had fallen, and bless them as they had never been blessed 
before, at length without hindrance to the outflow of all His 
love. He waits for them, and though He seem to tarry, it is to 
enrich them with a still greater blessing. They should be 
morally restored, too, and take vengeance on what had 
seduced their hearts in previous times. “And ye shall defile 
the silver covering of thy graven images, and the gold over- 
laying of thy molten images; thou shalt cast them away as 
4 menstruous cloth; Out! shalt thou say unto it” (v. 22), 


CHAPTER XXX, 301 


Outward happiness follows here below, and inward blessing 
and glory from above. For Jehovah asserts the rights of His 
grace, when His people, all wrong, have been chastened in 
adversity, and returned to Him in heart. 

“And he will give the rain of thy seed, with which thou 
shalt sow the ground; and bread, the produce of the ground, 
and it shall be fat and plenteous. In that day shall thy cattle 
feed in large pastures; and the oxen and the young asses that 
till the ground shall eat salted provender, which hath been 
winnowed with the shovel and with the fan. And there shall 
be upon every high mountain, and upon every high hill, brooks, 
water-courses, in the day of the great slaughter, when the 
towers fall, And the light of the moon shall. be as the light 
of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as 
the light of seven days, in the day that Jehovah bindeth up 
the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their 
wound” (vv. 23-26). 

Such is the deliverance which God will work for Israel; but 
what about the Assyrian? Israel are blessed, but not yet the 
Assyrian judged; Israel had been wrong, but the Assyrian had 
been merciless. God had dealt with Israel; now He must deal 
with their foes, as we are told in Isaiah x. “ When the Lord 
hath performed His whole work on mount Zion,” then will He 
bring down the Assyrian. “ Behold, the name of Jehovah 
cometh from far, burning [with] his anger, and a grievous 
conflagration: his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue 
as a devouring fire; and his breath as an overflowing 
stream, that reacheth even unto the neck, to sift the nations 
with the sieve of vanity; and a bridle that causeth to err 
[shall be] in the jaws of the peoples” (vv. 27, 28). The foe 
will not know that it is God who is guiding them to the 
Holy Land, but think they are going to have the land and the 
people an easy prey: God, on the contrary, is going to meet 
them there, and avenge His people. “Ye shall have a song as 
in the night a holy feast is kept; and gladness of heart, as of 
one going with a pipe to come unto the mountain of Jehovah, 
to the Rock of Israel” (v. 29). This is even more than there 
had been when Egypt was judged , Israel could then eat the 


302 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


lamb but with bitter herbs. Not so in the day which is 
coming; it is not that part of the passover that this is 
referred to, but the song of their holy festival, “And 
Jehovah will cause his glorious voice to be heard, and will 
show the lighting down of his arm, with indignation of anger, 
and a flame of devouring fire, [with] a crashing and tempest 
and hailstones” (v. 30). 

It is not a mere providential judgment—God from a 
distance acting and merely raising up one people to destroy 
another. The intervention of God shall be manifested, 
an unmistakable display of divine judgment. “For through 
the voice of Jehovah shall the Assyrian be broken in pieces ; 
he will smite with a rod. And every stroke of the appointed 
staff, which Jehovah shall lay upon him, shall be with tabrets 
and harps; and in battles of shaking will he fight with them” 
(vv. 31, 32). It is the staff of God’s correction, which shall 
deal to the bitter end with the Assyrian. For Israel such joy 
and gladness shall follow as never had been tasted heretofore. 
So manifestly is God espousing their cause, that it will be with 
the loftiest music of praise and every sign of confidence in 
God. Has this ever, since Isaiah, been accomplished in 
Palestine? Was it heard there even at the time of Senna- 
cherib? Israel was already in captivity, and Judah was soon 
swept away by the king of Babylon. Here we have triumph, 
peace, blessing, and glory. The mighty power of God will 
have destroyed their enemies for ever. There must then be 
a fuller accomplishment than the prophecy has yet received. 

But it is not to be a mere devastation. “For Topheth [is] 
prepared of old; for the king also it is prepared; he hath 
made [it] deep [and] large: the pile thereof fire and much 
wood; the breath of Jehovah, like a stream of brimstone, doth 
kindle it” (v. 33). Tophet is ordained: this shows clearly 
when and how it will be. Tophet is the figure of the judgment 
on God’s part that is coming. It should be “for the king 
also,” not “yea, for the king.” That little change has done 
much mischief in confounding two important personages, 
Nobody need deny that the word translated “yea” may be 
rightly so in certain cases; but the natural meaning of it 


CHAPTER XXX. 303 


is either “and” or “also,” and this is just what is required 
here. His declaration is, that Tophet is ordained not for 
“the Assyrian” only, but also for “the king.” The king and 
the Assyrian are so totally different and opposed that it was 
needful to reveal the same doom for both. The mistranslation 
was because our translators did not know the difference, but 
fancied the king and the Assyrian to be one and the same. 

“The king” is that false Messiah who will be found with the 
Jews in the last days. Received in his own name, he will 
be accepted as the true Anointed, but he is the devil's Messiah. 
And the consequence is that God’s fire or Tophet is prepared 
for him. The point here is that God will prepare the same fire 
for both of them; not only for the hostile Assyrian, but for 
the leader of Judah’s wickedness, “the king.” For him the fire 
of Tophet is prepared as well as for his enemy, the Assyrian. 
God in this marvellous manner, and not waiting for the day 
of eternity, will cast him directly into hell, even before the 
devil himself. Lest we might think that he is the only one, 
it is said, “for the king also”; for this personage, who is to 
reign over the apostate Jews, will also be singled out of God 
to be dealt with in the same way. Figurative expressions 
may be used, but they are figures of a terrible reality which 
Christendom has long forgotten. The more urgent is the need 
that the believer should wake up to his fuller confession of the 
truth, in a day when men sink down in a self-complacent 
dream of an onward progress for the earth, the ritualist being 
as besotted as the rationalist. “Behold, the J udge standeth 
before the doors.” 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


THE chapter now coming before us is a brief moral comment, 
or compressed rehearsal of chapter xxx. “Woe to them that 
go down to Egypt for help, and stay on horses; and trust in 
chariots, because [they are] many, and in horsemen, because 
they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of 
Israel, neither seek Jehovah!” (v. 1). How touchingly the 
prophet warns of the danger through Egypt as defection from 
Jehovah! “ But he also [is] wise, and will bring evil, and will 
~ not call back his words [which Israel vainly would escape], and 
he will arise against the house of the evildoers [Israelitish or 
not] and against the help of them that work iniquity. Now 
the Egyptians [are] men, and not God; and their horses flesh, 
and not spirit: and Jehovah shall stretch out his hand, and 
he that helpeth shall stumble, and he that is helped shall fall, 
and they all shall perish together” (vv. 2, 3). 

Jehovah’s protection over the righteous would be proved in 
the day when He judged the helpers and the helped. Their 
material resources were great, their political wisdom famous ; 
but where were they in that which is highest and alone 
enduring? The true God was in none of their thoughts. 
They were the most besotted of creature-worshippers. From 
Zion, not heaven only, He will deal. It ig the day of open 
intervention here anticipated. “For thus saith Jehovah unto 
me, Like as the lion growleth, and the young lion over his 
prey, if a multitude of shepherds be called forth against him, 
he will not be dismayed at their voice, nor abase himself for 
the noise of them: so will Jehovah of hosts come down 
to war upon mount Zion, and upon the hill thereof, As birds 
hovering, so will Jehovah of hosts cover J erusalem: covering 


CHAPTER XXXI. 305 


he will also deliver, [and] passing over, he will rescue [it]. 
Turn ye unto [him from] whom, O children of Israel, ye have 
deeply revolted. For in that day every man shall cast away 
his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands 
have made unto you [for] a sin. And the Assyrian shall 
fall with the sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not 
of a mean man, shall devour him; and he shall flee from 
the sword, and his young men shall become tributary. And 
his rock shall pass away by reason of fear, and his princes 
shall be dismayed at the ensign, saith Jehovah, whose fire 
[is] in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem” (vv. 4-9). 

The commentators naturally are perplexed who look not 
beyond Sennacherib; for though his host was smitten by the 
angel of Jehovah, and this might in some measure meet 
the prediction, there are strong expressions which can never 
be satisfied, short of the great enemy at the close. Then only 
will be felt the force of Tophet; then only will be seen 
the ensign of the Divine presence and power which protects — 
Zion and Jerusalem. 

For what can be plainer than the assurance that Jehovah 
will in very deed appear for the deliverance of His people? 
Whatever has been in the past is but a pledge of the coming 
glory. We know as a fact that Judah did not hear any more 
than Israel as a whole; and that as in Christendom, so among 
the Jews thenceforward evil men and seducers waxed worse 
and worse, deceiving and being deceived. Bright exceptions 
there were now and then; and faith working by love is never 
without honour from God, and fruit among men. But the 
general issue of old, as now, is the same sad and at times rapid 
and audacious declension. But the time of ultimate blessing 
is all the more sure. For the Lord will come quickly to receive 
His heavenly redeemed, and this will but give the utmost 
impulse to Satan’s wiles and apparent victory on earth, when 
those who stood most opposed in the Spirit are taken out 
of the way, and God works in a remnant of both Israel 
and the nations for the kingdom soon to be displayed. Only 
in chapter xxxi. we must hold fast that it is not a question 
of Antichrist sustained by the Beast or Western Empire, but 
D 


306 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


of the external chief of the nations hostile to the people and 
their land—the Assyrian. He is not to be destroyed, like 
the Beast and the False Prophet by the Lord’s shining forth 
from heaven, but by His going forth and fighting against 
those nations as when He fought in the day of battle. His 
feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives. 
(Zechariah xiv.) He will then deign to be in relationship 
with His people; of which His King set on His holy hill of 
Zion is the token and the glory. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


Tue whole work being now finished at Jerusalem, Jehovah 
is then shown us reigning, for He and no other is the personage 
spoken of here. “Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, 
and princes shall rule in judgment. Andaman shall be as a 
hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as 
rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in 
a weary land. And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, 
and the ears of them that hear shall hearken. The heart also 
of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the 
stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly. The vile person 
shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl said [to be] 
bountiful. For the vile person will speak villainy, and his 
heart will work iniquity, to practise profaneness, and to utter 
error against Jehovah, to make empty the soul of the hungry, 
and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail. The instruments 
also of the churl [are] evil: he deviseth wicked devices to 
destroy the meek with lying words, even when the needy 
speaketh right. But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and 
in liberal things doth he stand” (wv. 1-8). It is no longer a 
question of Christianity but of the kingdom. When He reigns 
for Whom all believers wait, as all prophets spoke of Him, the » 
righteous shall be called no more to suffer, but to dwell at ease. 
It is in view of heavenly glory, and as following Him Who 
passed through sufferings, that we are now called to do well, 
suffer for it, and take it patiently. This indeed is grace. But 
in the day that is coming righteousness shall be displayed 
by divine power here below, when Satan is set aside and 
Christ reigns. 

This is a totally different state of things from what prevails 

U2 


308 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


at present, for it is grace that now reigns through righteous- 
ness unto eternal life, not (so to speak) righteousness through 
glory in the government of the world. In the day that 
this chapter contemplates, the Lord Jesus will righteously take 
in hand the sceptre of the earth, and especially of the land of 
Israel. All the nations will come indirectly under His reign, 
because there will be one King over all the earth, not to 
the setting aside of others, as we know, but one supreme 
central government is to be then maintained. Other kings 
will be obliged to submit (compare Isaiah xlix. 23 5 dixulS; Ee 
16) to the sway of the Lord, which will continue throughout 
the whole unbroken period of the millennium. It is called 
therefore “the everlasting kingdom,” not being transferred to 
another, and lasting as long as the earth endures. At the end 
of the thousand years there will be an awful proof of man’s 
radically unchanged condition: for the nations will then 
gather together against “the beloved city,” the earthly Jerusa- 
lem, compassing about the camp of the saints. This will be 
allowed for the express purpose of proving the solemn truth 
that glory no more ameliorates the heart than does the present 
ongsuffering patience of God. If judgment against evil works 
be not executed, men’s hearts are hardened in wickedness ; 
when God’s judgments are in the earth, the world will learn 
righteousness. But alas! even that lesson is forgotten in 
time; and then is the end. 

Jehovah will reign in righteousness, Whose it will be to 
exercise strong and beneficent government all through His 
day ; but it will be proved once more that the heart is no more 
changed thereby than under the gospel now, unless renewed in 
conscience by the power of the Spirit. There must be the 
possession of a new nature. Man must be born again to see or 
enter the kingdom of God. It will then be evident that the 
new birth is requisite not merely for the heavenly glory, but 
even for the earthly things of that kingdom. (John iii.) It is 
in reference to the earthly part that we hear of a king reign- 
ing in righteousness, Revelation xx. shows the total failure of 
this display of glory to make the heart of man one whit 
better. In a higher point of view, far from failure, there 


CHAPTER XXXII, 309 


will be during this time an amazing exhibition of that which 
will bring praise to God Himself; and to this we have a 
reference here. 

But what a proof of the selfishness of our hearts, that 
we do not think much about this blessed time that is coming! 
Not that it is not believed in; but God give us to think far 
more, not only of a world set free, but of being with Christ 
where He is in heavenly blessedness. How blind men are! 
For, to love, what is so much our own portion as His? Besides 
we are too apt to slight the deliverance of creation (now travail- 
ing in pain) during the thousand years, and this because we 
are so little identified with the interests of Christ. Whatever 
glorifies Him ought to be very dear to us. Again we shall be 
connected with the earth, though our home will be heavenly. 
We shall indeed reign with Christ over it. God will make the 
risen saints to be the intermediary vessels of His glory, 
and the fruitful channels of His goodness in that bright day. 
Does it not then show the insensate selfishness of the heart 
that we are but little filled with the thoughts and feelings 
suitable to such expectations ? 

It is freely granted that there is a far higher and nearer 
hope, even to be with Christ Himself in the Father’s house. 
To see His glory there is more blessed than any inheritance 
we share anywhere else. But if we look around and see 
all the sins, miseries, sufferings, and sorrows of a world far 
from God, what a cheering truth it is that the day is so near 
when we shall be able to say even of the yet unbelieving 
Jews, “Their iniquities are forgiven, their sin is covered !” 
Will not God be magnified? A remnant of Israel suffices not: 
all shall be saved; every one of them, as the rule, shall then 
be righteous. Further, the miracles of Christ are called the 
“powers of the world to come,” because it was the sample 
of that divine energy in man which will never be revoked, 
though it may be suspended. But it is always in Christ, 
though the church may not know how to count upon Him for 
it, or apply it to a needy creation. But we ought to know it is 
in Christ for faith to draw on, and God has rebuked our low 
state by withholding the display of these outward ornaments, 


310 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


It is good, however, to remember that it is always in Christ, and 
that He is coming, and that the end of this age will witness the 
exercise of the glorious power of that exalted Man, the church 
too being associated with Him, and every blessing brought in 
to the exclusion of all evil. This is what the chapter before 
us anticipates. 

Now, while God does not put evil down, grace reigns; and 
now it is only grace in the gospel that can deliver from sins 
as well as for heavenly glory. But when the power of evil 
is smitten above and below (and the Lord will smite before the 
millennium), the King will rule. It is the kingdom of God 
administered by the exalted Man, Christ; and a blessed truth 
it is that God has always had it in His view to exalt Him. 
Adam’s sin was not the fall of man only, but, through him, 
of all the lower creation too; for the whole system was 
ruined when he departed from God. Adam was not a mere 
individual but a head. All thenceforward depends on the 
coming in of another Man, the Lord Jesus, Who has won a 
title, not for Himself to stand, which He did not need, but for 
us to have a standing in virtue of His blood, and death, and 
resurrection. The consequence is that for the believer the 
glory of Christ is saving in character, not destructive save of 
evil in that day. 

But much of bright expectation is practically lost for those 
who do not dwell upon the coming scene of glory. The 
distinctive mark is Jehovah reigning in righteousness; and 
moreover, it is a Man who thus reigns over the earth, not only 
a divine person. God will put all things under the Man that 
died and rose in delivering power, as truly as Adam drew down 
in his fall the race and creation. The world became a wilder- 
ness of thorns and briars; it was the consequence of man’s 
fall. Do you believe it? Believe also that the Second Man 
would be defrauded of no small part of His heritage if He did 
not deliver, not believing man only but creation, and govern 
it in power and glory. This future reign 18 necessary to 
vindicate the faithfulness of God, to manifest the worth of 
Christ and the results of what He has done, to display His 
bride along with Him. It is good therefore to look onward 


CHAPTER XXXII. 311 


to the scene where this blessed Man shall thus reign in 
righteousness. This would be true apart from our own share 
with Him, for which we must turn to the New Testament. 
The prophet’s subject is earth; we belong to heaven. - Hence 
it is the province of the New Testament to reveal the Father's 
house and heaven, no longer shut but opened first upon Christ 
and consequently upon us, that in peace and joy we may 
approach the presence of God. What a totally different 
theme from the Old Testament, which brings the earth into 
prominence as the scene of the reign in righteousness! In 
the earth it is judicial power that governs. A rod of iron, 
a sceptre of righteousness, is that by which Jehovah is to 
break down the pride of the world. 

But there are intimations of peace and comfort too. 
Jehovah is here viewed “as a hiding place from the wind, 
and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry 
place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land” (v. 2). 
The world had long been weary of the effects of sin, if not of 
sin itself, Now the blessing is come. “And the eyes of them 
that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall 
hearken. And the heart of the rash shall understand know- 
ledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shal! be ready to speak 
plainly. The vile (or fool) shall no more be called liberal, ner 
the churl said [to be] bountiful. For the vile person will speak 
villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, 
and to utter error against Jehovah, to make empty the soul 
of the hungry, and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail. 
The instruments also of the churl [are] evil: he deviseth wicked 
devices to destroy the meek with lying words, even when the 
needy speaketh right. But the liberal deviseth liberal things ; 
and by liberal things shall he stand” (vv. 3-8). 

It is not as you see now, men who appear to have every 
good natural quality, and yet when tested they have no heart 
for divine things, love not the name of the Lord Jesus, nor 
care for His glory. Here it will not be so. Blessing will flow, 
evil be judged, shame will vanish away. Things and persons 
will be manifest and bear their true character. Man will 
then accomplish for the first time on the earth that for which 


* 


312 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


he was made. It is in contrast with all the deceitfulness of 
unrighteousness that has gone, and still goes, on here below. 
We know the uncertainty of human judgment, and yet how 
men cling to and keep up appearances. There will be no vain 
show then. Good fruits will spring out of the rich resources 
of divine mercy, and, in the light of God then shining, there 
will also be the detection of everything that is false. If 
wickedness appear, the judgment of the Lord will fall upon 
it. For during the millennium there will be cases demanding 
vengeance; and God will not fail to deal with wickedness in 
@ summary manner. There will be a solemn public sight 
of the execution of His wrath continually before men’s eyes 
(Isaiah lxvi.)—the more stern in that day, because thenceforth 
is no temptation to evil. Accordingly the rebellious objects 
of God’s curse will be immediately visited, so as to keep up 
a wholesome horror of iniquity in the hearts of men. 

This leads the Spirit of God to give a warning, which will 
be needed, especially as the blessing of Israel will not be 
brought about in a single day. There is a coming time of sift- 
ing: as we know there will be for Israel in the wilderness, so in 
Jerusalem too there will be another mode of dealing with the 
Jews proper. Even when Jehovah appears for their deliver- 
ance, it is a mistake to suppose that all is complete at once. 
Jehovah will gradually put down the enemies round about the 
Holy Land, and will use Israel as the instrument of certain 
judgments (Isaiah x1, lxiii., Micah v., Zech. ix,, x.).» He swill 
send forth His armies and deal with the nations in various 
ways. In His appearing from heaven He does work by His 
own power. The Jews will have nothing to do with the judg- 
ment of the Beast and the false prophet; but He will employ 
them to put down the then representatives of their old neigh- 
bours, who rise up once more in envy against them. He will 
remember what their forefathers did, and will then definitely 
deal with them, seeing that they retain and show the same 
spirit to the last. Thus Jehovah will act thoroughly in 
righteousness, and Israel will need a warning previous to 
this judicial period. 

“Rise up, ye women that are at ease, hear my voice; ye 


CHAPTER XXXII. Sis 


careless daughters, give ear unto my speech. For days beyond 
a year shall ye be troubled, ye careless women; for the vintage 
shall fail, the ingathering shall not come. Tremble, ye women 
that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless ones; strip you, and 
make you bare, and gird [sackcloth] on [your] loins, They shall 
smite on the breasts for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful 
vine. Upon the land of my people shall come up thistles [and] 
briars: yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city. For 
the palace shall be deserted; the multitude of the city shall 
be forsaken; the hill and watch-tower shall be dens for ever, 
a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks; until the Spirit be 
poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness become 
a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest. 
And judgment shall inhabit the wilderness, and righteousness 
remain in the fruitful field” (vv. 9-16). The allusion is to 
what precedes Jehovah taking His place and reigning in the 
land. And all the sorrow is to be wnt the Spirit is poured 
down upon them. Then comes the great change in Israel. 
There is not of course the same dwelling of the Holy Ghost 
in any sense in the believer as now, for that He has a special 
dwelling in the church also is manifest. But there will be 
a suited and large outpouring of the Spirit in that day, as we 
have seen already. It isa mistake to suppose that Jehovah’s 
reigning is incompatible with the Spirit’s being thus poured 
out. He will be poured out very richly then. Now it is more 
in depth—if we may so speak of a divine person—than in 
extensiveness. What is not now in breadth is made up other- 
wise. The Holy Spirit has now baptised into union with 
Christ on high. Then will be the day for a wide diffusion over 
all flesh. Now this is only true in principle; and so it is 
applied from Joel ii. in Acts ii, not as if what is now were the 
full result for all flesh throughout the earth. 

The present time on earth is not a manifestation of judicial 
righteousness. The righteous One was rejected of men. Grod’s 
righteousness set Him risen at His right hand and justifies 
those who believe on Him. Then it will be the King, coming 
and sitting upon His own throne (not a rejected King exalted 
on His Father’s): earth will be ordered righteously. In in- 


314 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


comparable grace our Lord Jesus puts aside for the time His 
earthly Jewish titles, and God’s heavenly counsels are accom- 
plished and revealed while He is above. The Father has 
seated Him at His right hand and said, as it were, “ You shall 
reign; only, till You are seated on Your own throne, come 
and sit with Me on Mine.” Before Christ comes from heaven, 
the Jews (at least a remnant of them) will have welcomed 
Him in their hearts. Then He will come, where they are, to 
bless them in the earth, to govern them, and accomplish in the 
children the promises that were made to their fathers, and this 
for all the families of the earth. 

Accordingly, when the Christians are taken from this world 
at Christ’s coming, the Jews will in due time be converted, so 
as to be the earthly people of Jehovah, Who will make good in 
their midst earthly glory according to the prophets; and not 
this only, but the Holy Ghost will be poured out upon them. 
The great earthly change is consequent on the effusion of the 
Spirit from on high. Isaiah speaks of thorns and briars until 
the Spirit be poured upon Israel. Instead of all being in its 
appropriate order, everything will need to be restored round 
the only due centre. All as regards the earth and the Jews is 
now in confusion and misrule; but the Spirit shall be poured 
on them from on high, and then what a change! Thus, 
besides the removal of Satan, there are two things necessary 
to bring in this time of blessing—the King reigning in 
righteousness, and the outpouring of spiritual power, specially 
among the Jews, but also on the Gentiles. In nothing will 
God fail. 

Then shall “the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the 
fruitful field be counted for a forest.” “Then judgment shall 
inhabit the wilderness:” instead of its being the resort of 
robbers, judgment shall dwell there. Instead of covetousness 
hankering after the fruitful field, righteousness is to remain 
there. “And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and 
the effect of righteousness, quietness and confidence for ever” 
(v. 17). Ends and ways shall be righteous: all is governed 
with blessing. “And my people shall dwell in a peaceable 
habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting-places, 


CHAPTER XXXII. 315 


And it shall hail, coming down on the forest; and the city 
shall be low in a low place” (vw. 18, 19), The proud 
organisation of human order, wit, and power, shall be utterly 
abased in that day. Not the peaceful influence of grace shall 
effect it, but solemn judgment by the Righteous One. Never- 
theless then as now there is every incentive, the right and best 
encouragement to earnest and free dispersion of the good seed ; 
and grace will bless and use what was once common or un- 
clean. “Blessed [are] ye that sow beside all waters, that send 
forth [thither] the feet of the ox and the ass” (v. 20). God's 
people shall be sheltered and prosper in peace, whatever 
befall His enemies. For them assured blessing takes the 
place of fear and evil. The Seed of the woman triumphs, 
and the serpent is smitten. Heaven and earth and all things 
are set under Him Who is worthy. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


THE Spirit of God, having given us a blessed picture of the 
King Messiah reigning in righteousness, here contrasts with 
it a certain spoiler who is not expressly named by our prophet. 
But we need not find much difficulty in identifying him, if 
we remember the last prophecy of Ezekiel that describes a 
hostile Gentile power. It is remarkable that he there describes 
Gog as one who had been predicted before. Hence it is certain 
that this marauding power is not peculiar to the later prophet, 
who tells us in chapter xxxviii, 8-13, “After many days thou 
shalt be visited . . . at the same time shall things come into 
thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought, and thou shalt 
say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages; I will come to 
them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling 
without walls, and having neither bars nor gates, to. seize a 
spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thy hand upon the desolate 
places that are now inhabited, and upon a people that are 
gathered out of the nations, which have gotten cattle and 
goods, that dwell in the midst of the land. Sheba, and Dedan, 
and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young lions thereof, 
shall say unto thee, Art thou come to seize a spoil? hast thou 
gathered thy company to take a prey? to carry away silver 
and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great spoil ?” 
The next chapter comes in to show in detail that, if there be 
that which might seem inconsistent with their security, if God 
permits that there should be a dark cloud gathering for a 
while over Palestine, it at length falls on their foes themselves, 
not on Israel. This appears to be the same enemy who is 
here introduced. It is the last effort of the great coalition 
against Israel, which leads to the overwhelming destruction of 
the assembled nations, especially of the East. Then Israel 


CHAPTER XXXIIL. 317 


will help themselves to their arms; and their mere burial 
will occupy the conquerors, still more the spoiling of their 
arms and appurtenances. 

One need not doubt that the policy of the Assyrian, or king 
of the north, at the end is thus described. Gog will presumably 
have then accomplished his long-cherished designs on Constan- 
tinople and the Turkish empire in its chief dominions. Now 
“the Assyrian” is a familiar subject of prophecy. This may 
account for the statement that they were known before. There 
must clearly have been predictions of him previously to 
Ezekiel’s time, though some may have prophesied hings not 
committed to writing. 

By the way, some have been too anxious to show that the 
apostles never wrote anything but what we have got. It is 
quite enough to know that all intended to be of permanent 
use to the church and for God’s glory is preserved. Cer- 
tainly apostles taught (2 Thess. ii), and it is possible they 
may have written, things which were not meant of God to be 
preserved as part of the scriptures. But there is a character 
of perfectness about what we have, which to my mind precludes 
more. That this is not at all an exorbitant idea is evident from 
the fact that the apostles preached many discourses that are 
not recorded in the Acts of the Apostles. Of course we have 
only a very small part of what the apostles preached, as the 
evangelists were led only to select from what our Lord did. 
To have added more would have been rather to encumber 
scripture. Had more communications even of the apostles 
been added, it would have marred the perfectness of God's 
written word. We must have confidence in Him. He 
manifested His will in that all, which He designed for the 
permanent instruction of the church, was kept by His power 
in the midst of thousands and myriads of enemies who 
would have gladly destroyed the scriptures if they could. 
Never more in Christendom has this dislike of the word of 
God betrayed itself than now. But the efforts of the enemy 
only bring out God’s power, wisdom, and goodness for all who 
love Him, as they will to the ruin of those who hate and 


despise Him. 


318 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


To return, however: it is only Isaiah xxxiii. which plainly 
connects itself in character with the northern leader of Ezekiel, 
unless we identify the Assyrian also with that power, which 
seems perhaps within certain limits to be true at the close. 
However that may be, the moral traits of this foe are 
sufficiently plain. “Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou 
[wast] not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt 
not treacherously with thee! when thou shalt cease to 
spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; when thou shalt make an end 
to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with 
thee” (v. 1). This covetous foe appears to be the last which 
comes up, and so far distinct from “the king of the north,” 
which title is not limited to the end. But assuredly it is a 
ruler of the same sort, insatiable and treacherous. 

The Spirit now draws out the prophet, as personifying the 
godly in Israel, to supplicate, “Jehovah, be gracious unto us; 
we have waited for thee: be their arm every morning, our 
salvation also in the time of trouble. At the noise of the 
tumult the peoples fled; at the lifting up of thyself the nations 
were scattered. And your spoil sball be gathered [like] the 
gathering of the caterpillar: as the running of locusts shall they 
run upon them (or, it)” (vv. 2-4). How blessed to have J ehovah 
as the arm to lean on and do valiantly for us! How complete 
the reversal when the proud and countless foes yield their 
spoil to be gathered like that of the caterpillars or locusts! 
It is Jehovah’s doing, and may well be marvellous in our eyes. 
“Jehovah is exalted, for he dwelleth on high; he hath filled 
Zion with judgment and righteousness, And the riches of 
salvation, wisdom, and knowledge shall be the stability of thy 
times: the fear of Jehovah [shall be] his treasure” (vv. 5, 6). 
Thus Jehovah Himself has taken them in hand, and all 
becomes a spoil for Israel, and their proud hopes are blasted 
for ever. Note that at this very time Zion shall be filled 
with righteousness and judgment, The doom which swallowed 
up the Beast and the false prophet, with the chivalry of Europe, 
is a lesson heard in vain. Blinded by superstition as well as 
the lust of universal empire, Gog dreams of destroying Israel, 
not believing in the presence of Christ, or thinking Him a 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 319 


mere human king. Thus they too will come to their own 
destruction. 

The next verses portray the straits of the people of God and 
their despair before deliverance appears; nor is danger ever 
apt to be more felt than when blessing, that seemed to be ours, 
is once more in jeopardy. “Behold, their valiant ones shall 
cry without; the ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly. 
The highways lie waste, the waylaring man ceaseth. He hath 
broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth 
no man. The land mourneth, it languisheth; Lebanon is 
ashamed, is withered; the Sharon is become as a wilderness ; 
and Bashan and Carmel are stripped” (vv. 7-9). But man’s 
extremity is God’s opportunity, as they say; and so will the 
Jews then prove. “Now will I arise, saith Jehovah; now will 
I be exalted; now will I lift up myself” (v. 10). Had He 
chastened His people sore, and should the insolent foe be 
unpunished? Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth 
stubble; your breath [as] fire shall devour [not Israel, but] 
you, and the peoples shall be [as] the burnings of lime; [as] 
thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire” (vv. 11, 12). 
It is Jehovah who undertakes to dispose of their enemies 
and thus addresses them. Lime may be hard, but fire ere 
long reduces it to powder; and thorns, let them be ever so 
troublesome to those with whom they come into collision, are 
notorious, when cut up, for burning with singular rapidity. 

Next, attention is drawn (v. 13) to the notable display of 
God’s ways, as well as to the effects of these trials in showing 
out the true character of men even in Zion. “ Hear, ye [that 
are] far off, what I have done; and ye [that are] near, acknow- 
ledge my might,” followed by the most animated description of 
the alarm of the ungodly, and of the divine assurances to 
those that fear His name and walk in righteousness. “ The 
sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the 
hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring 
fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings ? 
He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly ; he that 
despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from 
taking hold of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of 


320 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil : he shall dwell on 
high, his high retreat [shall be] the fortresses of the rocks; 
bread shall be given him; his waters [shall be] sure” (vv. 14-16). 

Then follows (vv. 17-22) a sublime picture of Israel in their 
conscious blessedness. They should behold the King in His 
beauty, no longer cooped up within the beleagured city, but 
free to look at the most distant part of the land or the earth. 
Their hearts should meditate on terror, now happily and for 
ever past; but then it is the more sweet to look back and think 
of the never-to-be-forgotten rescue, when every expert failed in 
his calculations, the scribe, or the receiver. The wisest were at 
fault—at fault in counting up human resources, as if they could 
avail—at fault in overlooking the only sure Deliverer, though 
He be not far from every one of us. On the other hand they 
should see no more and hear no more the foreign foe, but look 
upon Zion, the Mount Zion, which Jehovah loved. “Thine 
eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold a far 
stretching land. Thy heart shall muse on the terror: where 
[is] he that counted, where [is] he that weighed [the tribute] ? 
where [is] he that counted the towers? Thou shalt no more 
see the fierce people, a people of a deeper speech than thou 
canst perceive, of a stammering tongue that cannot be under- 
stood. Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes 
shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tent [that] shall not be 
removed, the stakes whereof shall never be plucked up, neither 
shall any of the cords thereof be broken. But there J ehovah 
[will be] with us in majesty, a place of rivers, of broad streams; 
wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship 
pass thereby, For Jehovah [is] our judge, Jehovah [is] our law- 
giver, Jehovah [is] our King; he will save us” (vv. 17-22), 

Is it not utterly vain to apply words like these to the days 
of Hezekiah with some ancients and of the Maccabees with 
others, or to gospel times with thoughtless moderns? Even 
supposing that the rest of the circumstances of the J ews at 
bither of these epochs approached the strength of the prophet’s 
language, which is not at all admitted, who, in the face of 
approaching captivity, of a continual servitude to the Gentile 
powers, of a still more calamitous dispersion under the 


CHAPTER XXXII. 321 


Romans, the effects of which last to this day—who can affirm 
that Jerusalem has been seen a quiet habitation, a tabernacle 
that shall not be taken down? How can one hitherto apply to 
that city, yet trodden down of the Gentiles, the precise and 
most precious declaration, “Not one of the stakes thereof shall 
ever be pulled up, neither shall any of its cords be broken” ? 

Let in the light of the future for that people and place, and 
all is changed: the difficulty is at an end, and no wonder; for 
indeed “there Jehovah is unto us glorious; a place of rivers, of 
broad streams.” And thus there is not the smallest necessity 
for dislocating the prophecy from all connexion with its 
historic basis, or diverting its consolations from those whose 
sorrows it was given to assuage and dispel in proportion to 
their simplicity or strength of faith. No, whatever of comfort 
we justly glean, whatever hopes of future triumph from its 
bright anticipations we may gather, let us rejoice that God is 
here speaking of afflicted tempest-tost Israel, who in that day 
will find in Jesus of Nazareth their long-estranged Lord 
Jehovah of hosts, Who will prove Himself to be a better 
safeguard than those rivers and streams, of which Babylon or 
Nineveh might boast against Jerusalem. But even a river has 
its dangers as well as its beauty, facilities, and sources of pro- 
tection: so both these cities proved in opposite ways to their 
cost. Jerusalem has all these privileges without the perils, 
has incomparably more, in Jehovah. What if no galley with 
oars went there, what if no gallant ship passed by, will not 
Jehovah be their judge, Jehovah their lawgiver, Jehovah their 
king, and so save them pre-eminently of all nations on the 
earth? And why should we weaken their claim to advance 
our own—we who are called into heavenly seats of glory, the 
object of the Saviour’s love as His Bride on high ? 

To Jerusalem the King then will be their delight and boast 
and tower of strength. Had not the mightiest of old been 
broken when but a typical Son of David was there, looking 
onward to Him who will surely reign in Zion ere long? And 
what will it be when the Assyrian in his last phase—when 
Gog—essays to take Zion at the close of this age? “Thy 
tacklings are loosed ; they could not strengthen the socket of 

x 


322 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


their mast ; they could not spread the sail: then was the prey 
of a great spoil divided; the lame took the prey.” The 
triumph of Israel is complete, and the more so because it is 
Jehovah’s hand for them, more than their own. “ And the in- 
habitant shall not say, I am sick; the people that dwell therein 
[shall be] forgiven [their] iniquity” (vv. 23, 24), Happy the 
people that is in such a case: yea, happy is that people, whose 
God is Jehovah! Thrice happy are they who now can rejoice in 
Israel’s prospect, conscious themselves of a still higher portion 
in Christ, and in a still better country, that is, a heavenly! 
May we be content meanwhile to share His rejection, glorying 
in His cross, not without as an idol or vanity, but by faith 
graven on our hearts, and therefore proving it by the Spirit in 
our ways, each crucified to the world and the world crucified to 
each! For if we be dead together, we shall also live together ; 

‘if we suffer, we shall also reign together. He that is joined to 
the Lord is one spirit. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


Tue Spirit of God has with chapter xxxiv. brought together 
the earthly extremes of unsparing judgment and of unmingled 
mercy ; these things in two races naturally akin, but so much 
the more manifesting their divergence and the divine dealing 
with each from beginning to end. These nations, so judged and 
so blessed, sprang from the same stock, from the same father, 
from the same mother, and branched out into twin brothers, 
Esau on the one hand and Jacob on the other. The land 
of Idumea is the centre of the one picture, as of the other 
is Zion. The proud elder must serve the younger. There 
was from their birth, and before it, we may say, in antecedent 
revelation, much to strike the mind in these sons of Isaac 
and Rebecca, much that would cleave to their posterity till 
His coming Who will not only judge righteously the past but 
impress the future with the signs and substance of His own 
glorious presence. 

Yet the early history seemed little to answer either to 
prophecy or to its fulfilment. “Duke Teman, duke Omar, 
duke Kenaz,” and their successors, flourished in the land of 
Edom, while the sons of Israel were strangers in a land that 
was not theirs, and ere long proving it a furnace of affliction 


in bitter bondage. But so it ever is: “that was not first — 


which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward 
that which is spiritual.” If God’s people hope for that they 
see not, they must “with patience wait for it.” He Who is 
sovereign allows that the flesh should show its character 
to the utmost, save where special mercy interferes to, arrest 
and restrain because of other wise and gracious purposes, 


But His mercy it is, shown of His own good pleasure, which 
ae 


324. AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


roused to madness the unbending arrogance of Edom, who never 
looked to God with a broken spirit even in his deepest need. 

On the other hand it was no small moral test for the sons 
of Israel, that, spite of the divine promises to them, Esau’s 
descendants should be long cettled in peaceful enjoyment 
as lords of their soil, while Jacob and his seed were sojourners 
on sufferance, soon to be slaves—and slaves for a long while— 
in the land of Ham. Half the space that separated the 
promise from their triumphant exodus saw them a mere 
family group; and if they afterwards shot up rapidly into 
a people, it was in circumstances of increasing oppression 
and degradation. This was no small trial of faith, whether 
they looked on this side of the picture or on that. Esau had 
been long established in power and peace and plenty, while 
Israel lay among the pots of Egypt, and the accursed race 
of Canaan ruled in their land. And the Bible contains, in 
the same books, the promise and the trial which early 
appearances made for faith, presenting all calmly as the 
word of One Who sees the end from the beginning, Who 
therefore needs no apologies, puts forward few explanations, 
but claims the confidence of His children, who know Him 
Whom they have believed, and are persuaded that He is able 
to keep against that day the deposit they have entrusted to 
Him. Scripture does not in a demonstrative way force the 
truth of God upon His people; on the contrary great simpli- 
city of faith is demanded that we receive it unhesitatingly, 
trusting God in spite of appearances for the present and 
delays for the future. 

Had you looked more closely and spiritually into Jacob’s 
life, you might have expected long discipline; even as he, their 
father, was seen lying on his pillow of stone, and Jehovah held 
out the vision of glory before him. This might have prepared 
for the thought of trial first, then of gracious blessing. So, 
later, there was first the crushing of all natural hopes, and 
then the name of victory conferred (Gen. xxxii). Thus 
what we have in Jacob’s early history prepares one for the 
vicissitudes of his sons. He was a poor trembling man, with 
plenty of faults, shrinking from the presence of his brother, 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 325 


in whom might appear much that was attractive naturally. 
But God saw under it all that the flesh is a false and proud 
thing—enmity with God, Who allowed that the worst should 
show out in him, the despiser of his birthright, its real 
character. Present things were his life; hence profane 
unbelief and slight of the things of God. All this and more 
came out prominently in Hsau, as they were to be verified 
in his race. If Gentiles, at any rate they had a blood-relation 
with the people of God. But their very connexion with 
them, though a sort of transition between Israel and the 
nations around, was the occasion of envious enmity and ruin. 
They were to prove that it was not only an Egypt and a 
Pharaoh who were raised up for God to manifest His judgment 
upon, but that God would do just the same to the sons of Ksau, 
and that Esau’s flesh would betray the bitterest defiance of 
God and His people. 

The great northern enemy of chapter xxxiii. seems to be 
historically latest; but morally, the account of Edom’s judg- 
ment is kept for the last, perhaps as being so near to Israel by 
nature. After that great enemy the Assyrian is destroyed, we 
hear of Edom’s doom decided. The reader also may compare 
the intimation of Psalm Ixxxiii, 6-8. When God was dealing 
with Israel in blessing or chastisement we have Edom dis- 
puting the right of God to bless His people, and taking delight 
in their shame and sorrow. God resents such spite. And was 
it not in his race that despised the birthright? This, no doubt, 
accomplished the purpose of God; but then He admirably 
makes His end to agree with His word and means. Though 
a question of His own sovereignty, yet this goes hand in hand 
with His righteous ways. Jacob was chosen and Esau rejected; 
but God brought out at the critical time that there was also 
the seal of righteousness. Certainly Esau deserved to be cast 
off by God, though Jacob justly traces everything to His 
mercy and grace. Thus the transgression of selling his birth- 
right confirms what God had already given out as a question 
of His own disposal. Esau showed that he set no value on 
his birthright, present existence being dearer to him than any 
blessing of God, Jacob was utterly wrong in following his 


326 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


mother’s deceitful plan to hinder Isaac’s wish and secure the 
promise. He ought to have waited in peace and confidence, 
expecting God to make good His own word. But weak as he 
was, quite wrong more than once, yet one thing you do find in 
Jacob, not in Esau—a heart for God, a faith that valued the 
promises of God. He might be apt to drop into his old craft, 
and to form plans for himself, for he was indeed “that worm 
Jacob,” as scripture calls him; but still at bottom there was a 
purpose that clave to God and His word. So when the struggle 
came, when God wrestled with His servant, there was nature 
that needed to be withered up, lest he should suppose that 
because of any vigour of his own he prevailed. Still on 
blessing from God he was set, and would not desist till he 
had the assurance of it. If flesh was there to be judged, 
surely divine faith was very manifest. Hence Jacob becomes 
far brighter towards the close, when the flesh was practically 
set aside. 

So with Israel. Though there will be the chastening of their 
unfaithfulness, yet the day will come when the nations are 
fully judged, not borne with; and how will it then fare with 
Edom? When Israel was in the wilderness, Esau stopped 
their way. The power of God could have smitten him down 
(as He had determined long before); but the time was not yet 
come. So Israel struck not a blow upon their guilty brother, 
but rather turned back like a rebuked child. Ah! it was the 
token in its patience that a still more tremendous judgment 
was in store for Edom; for there is nothing so ominous as 
_ when God takes patiently the iniquity of men: If there 
be remonstrance, it shows there is, as it were, a hope; but 
if all be borne silently, it is the solemn sign of judgment that 
will fall as surely as it lingers. Blessed as it is for those 
who walk in grace, there is perhaps no more evident a token 
of perdition to the world than the saints passing through it 
without lifting a finger in their own defence, or on God’s 
behalf. Alas! we know that the church has failed in this, 
as Israel after their sort. But their path through the wilder- 
ness was a type of the journey of faith in grace, the earthly 
people and things being the shadow of the heavenly, 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 327 


Possibly there may have been a preliminary judgment at 
he time of Nebuchadnezzar’s onslaught on the Jews. One 
might judge from the Psalms (see especially Psalm cxxxvii., 
“Remember, O Jehovah, the children of Edom”) that there is 
a connexion between that and Edom; that is, there may have 
been a partial accomplishment in the days of Nebuchadnezzar. 
For though on his coming up against Jerusalem, the Edomites 
helped him to destroy the Jews more effectually, they them- 
selves were not spared by the conquerors. In Psalm 1xxxiu. 
we find connected with Edom the Assyrian, the great enemy 
of the ten tribes as we have seen; with Babylon the 
conqueror of the two. “Keep not thou silence,O God... 
They have taken crafty counsel against thy people . . . Let us. 
cut them off.” All confirms what has been already remarked. 
In the confederacy against Israel figure “the tabernacles of 
Edom.” It is the first power mentioned, of course not as the 
mightiest, but as setting on the others to Israel's ruin. Being 
neighbours, they would have a better knowledge of the people 
and their land, and so be the more dangerous, besides the 
moral bearing of the case. There are also the Philistines, 
Tyre, and the various peoples that lived near the sea coast, 
as well as round about Idumea and the contiguous regions. 
Then we find the great power of Asshur mentioned as having 

joined them. So the Spirit of God classes Edom with Israel’s 

final adversaries, as He had done already by Moses and Joshua 
with their earliest. There is an evident connexion between 
their rise and the gradual course of their history through 
scripture. Now at the close we find distinct prophecies 
applying to Edom. “They are confederate against thee” 
(v. 5). All their covenants God will break up, before the 
judgment falls upon Esau. They may have joined themselves 
unto Asshur; but that great power, like the lesser ones, will 
be directed against God’s people in vain, great and small alike 
hostile, uniting to aim a more effectual blow at Israel, but only 
to the destruction of themselves. 

God, we may see, always goes back to the beginning when 
He judges. ‘In the time of the Babylonish captivity, why did 
He judge Israel? He looks at what they did in the wilderness, 


328 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


It was because of Moloch and Chiun (Amos v. 26). They had 
learnt to worship their images in the wilderness, and therefore 
should be carried captive beyond Damascus. God, when the 
time of judgment comes, traces up to the root of evil. So our 
wisdom as Christians, when we fail, is to go back to our first 
departure. We never get right by merely judging this or that 
outbreak, but should always search out the cause. We do not 
else gather needed strength, nor is any sin rightly judged 
by merely judging the manifested effects; but we must probe 
into the hidden sources of the mischief. It is not enough 
to judge our acts; judging self is a very different process. We 
need to discern the springs within ourselves. If we discerned 
ourselves, we should not be judged. It does not mean pro- 
nouncing judgment upon any particular fault, but judging the 
real cause and not occasions merely. Such is the Christian 
way of judging. It is not occupation with the surface, but 
with that which is underneath, the hardly seen roots of the 
acts which any can see. 

With unerring wisdom then God goes back to what Esau 
did from the beginning of his history. He had waited long 
and patiently, nearly a thousand years, and now shows His 
perfect knowledge of the course and end; but when the end 
does come, God invariably traces all up to the beginning, 

We need not dwell on all the dark account. The full stroke 
of judgment comes upon them in the day of Jehovah. Here, 
though the scene be laid in Idumea, it is a question of all the 
heathen. This is referred to here. “Come near, ye nations, to 
hear; and hearken, ye peoples: let the earth hear, and the 
fulness thereof; the world, and all that cometh forth of it. For 
the indignation of Jehovah [is] upon all the nations, and fury 
against all their armies; he hath devoted them to destruction, 
he hath delivered them to the slaughter. Their slain also shall 
be cast out, and their stink shall come up from their carcases, 
and the mountains shall be melted with their blood. And all 
the host of heaven ghall be dissolved, and the heavens shall 
be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall away, 
as a leaf fadeth from off the vine, and as the withered [fruit] 
from the fig-tree. For my sword shall be bathed in the 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 329 


heavens; behold, it shall come down upon Edom, and upon 
the people of my ban, to judgment. The sword of Jehovah 
is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, with the 
blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams; 
for Jehovah hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter 
in the land of Edom” (vv. 1-6). The day of the calamity of 
His people! If there be anything He repeats over and over 
again, it is the day of their calamity. (Compare Obadiah 
11-14.) He means blessing, and there is nothing that more 
rouses His judgment than, when through their sin deep sorrow 
falls and strikes their hearts, men should then take advantage 
of this to behave themselves proudly against them. There was 
never a truer picture of the spirit of man than at this very 
time, unless it be the feeling of Christendom towards those 
who are seeking to walk in the way that is pleasing to God. 
If failure is known that fills such with shame, is it not used 
to wrong them, or to speak evil against them? This was the 
feeling of Edom; so that we may see how true these principles 
of God are, and how solemn it is for us to realise the duty that 
becomes us at the present time. 

“And the wild-oxen shall come down with them, and the 
bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be drunken with 
blood, and their dust made fat with fatness. For [it is] the day 
of Jehovah’s vengeance, the year of recompences for the con- 
troversy of Zion. And the streams thereof shall be turned 
into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land 
thereof shall become burning pitch. It shall not be quenched 
night and day; the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: from 
generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass 
through it for ever and ever. But the pelican and the poreu- 
pine shall possess it; and the owl (or, bittern) and the raven 
shall dwell therein. And he shall stretch over it the line of 
confusion, and the plummet of emptiness. They shall call the 
nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none [shall be] there ; and all 
her princes shall be nothing. And thorns shall come up in her 
palaces, nettles and thistles in the fortresses thereof; and it 
shall be a habitation of jackals, a court for ostriches. And 
the wild beasts of the desert shall meet with the wolves, and 


330 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


the satyr shall cry to his fellow; yea, the night-monster shall 
settle there, and shall find her a place of rest. There shall the 
arrowsnake make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather 
under her shadow: yea, there shall the kites be gathered, every 
one with her mate. Seek ye out of the book of Jehovah and 
read: not one of these shall be missing, none shall want her 
mate; for my mouth, it hath commanded, and his spirit, it 
hath gathered them. And he hath cast the lot for them, and 
his hand hath divided it unto them by line: they shall possess 
it for ever, from generation to generation shall they dwell 
therein” (vv. 7-17). There will be one destruction upon the 
mountains of Israel, but another special carnage in Edom. 
It is important to bear in mind that this is a future judgment : 
if any one were to apply it rigorously and in all its extent 
to the times of N. ebuchadnezzar, confusion must result, per- 
verting either scripture or the facts. The contrary rather was 
seen then. The nations had it all their own way. There was 
no such thing as God having a great sacrifice of all nations, 
though treacherous Edom suffered. The real fulfilment will 
be at the end of the age, though even then will be merely 
a tremendous convulsion of nature: the total dissolution of 
heaven and earth will be at the end of the millennium. The 
Spirit of God in a measure puts the scenes together here. 


CHAPTER XXXvV. 


In singular and striking conjunction with this terrible picture 
of the vast solitude for man, consigned as it were only to 
ravenous beasts and birds of prey and reptiles, God thereon 
shows that the day which beholds this desolation for Edom 
inaugurates Israel’s blessing. Nor is it only Israel rejoicing, but 
Jehovah will form a large and enlarging scene for His own 
glory, where erst was misery and barrenness. “The wilderness 
and the parched land shall be gladdened ; * and the desert shall 
rejoice, and blossom as the rose (or, narcissus). It shall blossom 
abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of 
Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and 
Sharon: they shall see the glory of Jehovah, and the excellency 
of our God” (vv. 1, 2). It is not mere fertility, but the resti- 
tution of all things when the day is come on earth: every 
joy, fruitfulness, and beauty. How singularly blinding is the 
theological prejudice which the pious J. A. Alexander ex- 
presses, when he says (Comm. ii. 34), without any change of its 
essential meaning, it may be applied to the restoration of the 
Jews from Babylon, to the vocation of the Gentiles, to the 
whole Christian dispensation, to the course of every individual 
believer, and to the blessedness of heaven. As it has been so 
applied, certainly it may; but the question is, what is its 
definite meaning? The chapter before gives the awful judg- 
ment that awaits the earth in one aspect of it; so does this 
the deliverance of creation, and especially of Israel that 
follows, “in that day.” 

* The ancient versions do not express the final, which the Authorised Version 
treats as a suffix, and renders ‘‘for them,” Some refer this to the noxious 


animals before named, others to the judgments threatened, as others again to 
the returning exiles. Many moderns agree with the ancients, 


Soe AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


And assuredly man’s deeper wants are not forgotten. 
“Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the tottering 
knees. Say to them [that are] of a fearful (hasty) heart, Be 
strong, fear not: behold, your God! vengeance will come, of 
God the recompence! He will come himself and save you. 
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the 
deaf be unstopped. Then shall the lame [man] leap as a hart, 
and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall 
waters break out, and streams in the desert. And the glowing 
sand (or, mirage) shall become a pool, and the thirsty land 
springs of water: in the habitation of jackals, where they lay, 
[shall be] grass with reeds and rushes. And a highway shall be 
there, and a way, and it shall be called, The way of holiness: 
the unclean shall not pass over it; but it [shall be] for these. 
They that go the way, even fools, shall not err [therein]. No 
lion shall be there, nor shall ravenous beast go up thereon nor 
be found there ; but the redeemed shall walk [there]. And the 
ransomed of Jehovah shall return, and come to Zion with 
songs and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain 
joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away” 
(wv. 3-10). 

God will then and thus demonstrate that, whatever Satan 
had brought of sin and woe into this world, goodness and 
mercy are His own delight. Such is the time that is coming 
for the earth, though an awful storm ushers it in. While 
all evil came through sin, and there is not an atom of the 
lower creation that does not bear some trace of Adam’s fall, 
there will surely come the day of the Lord, the last Adam. 
Tt seems plain however, that in the world to come judgment 
will leave its effectual mark. On the land of Edom the 
destruction will be unsparing, and that land will be left as 
a scar upon the face of the earth. It is not said that Edom 
will be the only one, for Rome also will be proved to be the 
vile corruptress, as in Paganism, so in Christendom and in anti- 
Christendom. But when the proud lie of the “ eternal city” 
is punished for ever, then the poor and despised Jew comes 
forward, as it is said here. Divine vengeance on the enemies 
accompanies their salvation, Take all its fulness of meaning : 


CHAPTER XXXV. 333 


it will be accomplished to the letter. God will prove that not 
a word of His mercy to Israel and their land can fall to the 
ground, 

Indeed the mighty and blessed transformation which the 
Lord will then cause for the lower creation is but part of the 
still grander prospect which the reconciliation of all things 
opens (Col. i.); when the things in the heavens and the things 
on the earth, even the universe, shall be headed up in the 
Christ, the Heir of all things (Ephesians i, 10), and the Head 
over all to His body the church. But here it was enough to 
give the earthly side of glory. It is the common point where, 
we may say, the bright visions of all the prophets meet. How 
astonishing that any Christian should fail to see what is so 
fully attested and so plain! It is painful that pious men in our 
land or any other should be behind Hengstenberg and the like, 
who own the change in the lower creation that is to accompany 
and characterise Messiah’s reign. The geologic ages do not 
touch the question. In Romans viii. 18-21 is apostolic dogma, 
which resists all such efforts of unbelief. And Christ’s death, 
so far from being exhausted in reconciling all saints to God, 
will assuredly reconcile all things in heaven and on earth, 
as Col. i. affirms. Prophecy, therefore, is in no collision but 
in perfect harmony with Christian doctrine. It is popular 
theology which opposes itself to God’s word through inatten- 
tion and prejudice and tradition. It is irrational to talk of 
a fulfilment gradually growing more complete in life, but 
perfected only when probation is over. Scripture reserves the 
mighty change for the appearing of the Lord, when we are 
manifested with Him in glory. Then at once, but not till then, 
shall the creation be delivered from the bondage of corruption 
into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. 

It is equally erroneous to deny heaven for the risen saints 
“in that day,” and to deny the change which God intends for 
Israel and the nations, and the earth itself and the creatures 
generally on it. If the fall be believed (and what more 
unblushing incredulity than to doubt it?), what joy to look 
onward to the glory of the Lord below as well as above! He 
is the Heir, as He was Creator, of all things; and were the 


334 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


least and lowest of His creatures excepted from the beneficent 
reach of His power, so far should He be defrauded of what is 
due to His name, and to His reconciliation which has no limit. 
Those only must be banished from the presence of His glory 
who persistently reject Him; yet even so they shall bitterly 
and for ever bemoan their rebellious folly. For “in virtue 
of the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of [beings] 
heavenly and earthly and infernal, and every tongue confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord to God the Father's glory.” 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


CHAPTERS XXXVI.—XXXIXx. form the next portion, the historical 
episode which severs the earlier half of the prophecy from its 
latter half. They are of importance not only for the weighty 
facts they present (for this is sufficiently done and in a two- 
fold point of view in 2 Kings and 2 Chronicles), but for their 
connexion with the great sections of the Book of Isaiah. No 
doubt the incidents had their value, and so also the record 
of them, as the most conspicuous seal which could then be 
affixed on the prophet’s character; for the danger was extreme, 
the distress of the people intense, the antecedents of the king 
in opposition to the Assyrian by no means reassuring, the 
confidence of the enemy boundless. Yet was the word of 
Isaiah distinct, and soon most punctually verified. 

But there are deeper grounds for the introduction of this 
historical matter into the midst of the prophecy. It was of 
moment that the believer should have the inspired and 
therefore sure means of discriminating between the part 
which was then accomplished and the part which yet awaits 
its fulfilment. The believer readily sees that the Shalmanesers 
and the Sennacheribs of the past have not exhausted the 
terms and scope of the prophecy; we can understand that 
enough has been done to form an adequate type, an historical 
basis, for that which is to come, and to make good every word 
that proceeds from Jehovah, Any mind can judge that the 
overthrow of the Assyrian—as the precursor of Babylon’s 
supremacy, the captivity of Judah, and the long times of the 
Gentiles—widely differs from the final judgment of the 
final foe, when Babylon in its last phase is itself destroyed, 
and the times of the Gentiles close in the glory of Jerusalem 


336 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


and Israel under the true David, the Beloved, their King, and 
the new covenant in the pleasant land. 

No king had shown such trust in Jehovah since the days 
of David as Hezekiah. But his faith was much tried. With 
alacrity of heart he had made Jehovah his object from the 
day he ascended the throne. “He in the first year of his 
reign, in the first month, opened the doors of the house of 
Jehovah and repaired them” (2 Chron. xxix. 3). He inspired 
the Levites and priests with somewhat of his own desire 
to renounce long indifference for loyalty to Jehovah. “Now 
they began on the first [day] of the first month to sanctify, 
and on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch 
of Jehovah: so they sanctified the house of Jehovah in eight 
days, and on the sixteenth day of the first month they made 
an end.” The vessels which were cast away in king Ahaz’s 
reign were once more prepared. “The king rose early and 
gathered the rulers of the city, and went up to the house of 
Jehovah.” Atonement was made for all Israel; “for the king 
commanded that the burnt-offering and the sin-offering [should 
be made] for all Israel.” What governed all was “the com- 
mandment of Jehovah by His prophets.” He was the first 
king, since the rent of Ephraim under Rehoboam, whose heart 
sought that all Israel should come to the house of Jehovah 
at Jerusalem to keep the passover to Jehovah the God of Israel. 
Godly predecessors felt it too little if they thought of it, they 
certainly did nothing toward it; ungodly predecessors would 
have desired nothing less, however much they would have seen 
all Israel re-united under their own sceptre. Hezekiah clave 
to Jehovah and sought for all Israel the same blessing. 
Though his overtures were laughed to scorn and mocked 
by most, “divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun 
humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem. Also in J udah 
the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the 
commandment of the king and of the princes, by the word 
of Jehovah.” The old altars to their false gods, at any rate 
unhallowed and unauthorised altars, were taken away and cast 
into the brook Kidron, the images were broken, the Asherahs 
were cut down, the high places disappeared. The due honour 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 337 


of the house and servants and service of Jehovah was provided 
for as written in His law. “And in every work that he under- 
took in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and 
in the Commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his 
heart, and prospered.” 

“ After these things and their faithfulness, Sennacherib king 
of Assyria entered into Judah, and encamped against the forti- 
fied cities, and thought to break into them” (2 Chron. xxxii. 1). 
Was it not strange? A great work had been wrought in 
restoring the defaced lineaments of the worship of the true 
God throughout Judah; yet this was no sooner done, than 
the enemy came to swallow them up! Those who judged not 
by scripture but by providence would at once be stumbled: 
was it not plain that Hezekiah had done wrong in rejecting 
the traditions of his fathers? Was not God now chastening 
him and them for his rash reformation? Had he not lifted 
up his sacrilegious hand to destroy the brazen serpent that 
Moses made, treating with contempt as a piece of brass the 
venerable sign of divine grace to their perishing fathers in the 
desert, to which the children of Israel had till his days burned 
incense? Was the Assyrian a judgment ? 

Moreover the pious king did what he could to fortify 
himself, sent the lowliest message to the proud Assyrian, gave 
him all the silver in Jehovah’s house, and stripped off for him 
the gold from its doors and pillars; but in vain. There was 
little of the simplicity, strength, or wisdom of faith in all this: 
no wonder that the blessing of God was not with him there, 
and that the enemy was emboldened to ask all. Rabshakeh 
is sent from Lachish to insult king Hezekiah, to blaspheme the 
God of Israel, and seduce the people to surrender at discretion 
to his master. Along with insolent, deceitful, and profane 
reproach of all kinds like this, truth is mingled; for there 
were those (not Hezekiah) who did look to Egypt for help. 
But the aim of all was to reduce the Jews to despair, and 
to accomplish the designs of Assyria. Hence the very piety 
of the king, his zeal for Jehovah in throwing down the altars 
of false gods, is cunningly perverted into a charge of robbing 
Jehovah of His honour, from Whom (he pretended) his master 

ns 


338 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


had received his charge to come up against Hezekiah. Thus 
the enemy knows how to give a religious gloss to his own 
wicked devices as easily as he can blacken the most faithful 
of God’s servants. What a mercy to have the unerring 
standard of His word to test and be tested by! 

Thus the account stands in the prophecy. “And it came 
to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah [that] 
Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified 
cities of Judah, and took them. And the king of Assyria 
sent Rab-shakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem, to king Hezekiah 
witha strong force. And he stood by the aqueduct of the 
upper pool, on the highway of the fuller’s field” (vv. 1, 2). 
There it was where Ahaz despised the gracious word of 
Jehovah through Isaiah some thirty years before; there now 
the Assyrian rudely insulted Jehovah and the king. 

“Then came forth to him Eliakim the son of Hilkijah, who 
was over the household, and Shebna the scribe (or, secretary), 
and Joah the son of Asaph, the recorder. And Rab-shakeh 
said to them, Say now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great 
king, the king of Assyria, What confidence [is] this wherein 
thou trustest? I say [sayest thou], Counsel and strength for 
the war [are but] a word of the lips. Now on whom trustest 
thou that hast revolted against me? Behold, thou trustest 
on the staff of that broken reed, on Egypt, on which if a 
man lean it will go into his hand and pierce it: so [is] 
Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to all that trust in him. But if 
thou say to me, We trust in Jehovah our God: [is it] not he 
whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath removed, 
saying to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this 
altar? And now, I pray thee, engage with my master the 
king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if 
thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them. How then 
wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of 
my master’s servants? And thou trustest in Egypt for horses 
mnd chariots! And am I now come up without Jehovah 
against this land to destroy it? Jehovah said to me, Go up 
against this land and destroy it. 

“And Hliakim and Shebna and Joah said to Rab-shakehk 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 339 


Speak, we pray thee, to thy servants in Syriac (or, Aramean), 
for we understand [it]; and speak not to us in the Jewish 
[language] in the ears of the people that [are] on the wall. 
And Rab-shakeh said, [Is it] to thy master and to thee that 
my master sent me to speak these words? [Is it] not to 
the men that sit on the wall, to eat their own dung and 
drink their own urine with you? And Rab-shakeh stood and 
cried with a loud voice in the Jewish [language] and said, 
Hear the words of the great king, the king of Assyria. Thus 
saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you, for he shall 
not be able to deliver you; neither let Hezekiah make you 
trust in Jehovah, saying, Jehovah will certainly deliver us: 
this city shall not be given into the hand of the king of 
Assyria. Hearken not to Hezekiah; for thus saith the king 
of Assyria, Make peace (lit. blessing) with me, and come out 
to me; and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of 
his fig-tree, and drink ye every one of his cistern (or, well) ; 
until I come and take you away to a land like your own 
land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 
Let not Hezekiah persuade you, saying, Jehovah will deliver 
us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land 
out of the hand of the king of Assyria? Where [are] the 
gods of Hamath and of Arpad? Where [are] the gods of 
Sepharvaim? And have they delivered Samaria out of my 
hand? Who [are they] among all the gods of these countries, 
that have delivered their country out of my hand, that Jehovah 
should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand? And they were 
silent and answered him not a word; for the king’s command 
was, saying, Answer him not. 

“And Eliakim the son of Hilkijah, who [was] over the 
household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph 
the recorder, came to Hezekiah with clothes rent, and told 
him the words of Rab-shakeh” (vv. 3-22). 

The entreaties of Eliakim and others that Aramean should 
be spoken rather than the Jewish tongue only drew out further 
and audacious insolence; for Rab-shakeh stood and cried in 
that very tongue to the people on the walls, warning them 


against their king and commending to them the hard terms of 
¥2 


340 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


deportation to the east, in the face of the overthrow of the 
nations already broken by the Assyrian. Little did the 
blasphemer think that there listened to his taunting demand 
whether Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem, not Elakim, 
Shebna, and Joah only, nor the men on the wall also, but 
Jehovah Himself. It was now His affair; and then at length 
begins to shine once more the faith of Hezekiah, whose 
commandment it was to answer him not. 


CHAPTER XXXVIL. 


His clothes rent, the king covered in sackcloth repairs to the 
house of Jehovah, and enquires of the prophet, who returns 
Jehovah’s answer that they were not to fear the words of 
blasphemy ; for Jehovah would undertake the matter and send 
back the Assyrian to perish in his own land. “ And it came to 
pass, when king Hezekiah heard [it], that he rent his clothes, 
and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house 
of Jehovah. And he sent Eliakim, who was over the house- 
hold, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, 
covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz. 
And they said to him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day [is] a day 
of trouble, and of rebuke, and of contumely (or, rejection): for 
the children are come to the birth, and [there is] not strength 
to bring forth. It may be Jehovah thy God will hear the 
words of Rab-shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master 
hath sent to reproach the living God, and will rebuke the 
words which Jehovah thy God hath heard. Therefore lift up 
[thy] prayer for the remnant that is left. And the servants 
of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah. And Isaiah said to them, 
Thus shall ye say to your master, Thus saith Jehovah, Be 
not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the 
servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. Behold, 
I will put a spirit into him, and he shall hear a rumour, and 
shall return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by 
the sword in his own land” (wv. 1-7). 

Still confident, Sennacherib from Libnah sends a letter of 
similar import to Hezekiah, who spreads it before Jehovah 
with earnest prayer for His intervention. “And Rab-shakeh 
returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against 


342 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


Libnah : for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish. 
And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He is 
come out to fight against thee. And when he heard [it], he 
sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying, Thus shall ye speak to 
Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God in whom 
thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given 
into the hand of the king of Assyria. Behold, thou hast 
heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by 
destroying them utterly ; and shalt thou be delivered? Have 
the gods of the nations delivered them, which my fathers have 
destroyed, Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of 
Eden that [were] in Thelassar? Where [is] the king of 
Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of 
Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah? And Hezekiah received 
the letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it; and 
Hezekiah went up into the house of Jehovah, and spread it 
before Jehovah. And Hezekiah prayed unto Jehovah saying, 
Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, that sittest [upon] the 
cherubim, thou [art] He, even thou alone, the God of all the 
kingdoms of the earth; thou hast made heaven and earth. 
Incline thine ear, Jehovah, and hear; open thine eyes, Jehovah, 
and see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib, who hath 
sent to reproach the living God. Of a truth, Jehovah, the 
kings of Assyria have laid waste all the countries and their 
land, and have cast their gods into the fire; for they [were | 
no gods, but the work of men’s hands, wood and stone; and 
they have destroyed them. Now therefore, Jehovah our God, 
save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may 
know that thou art Jehovah, thou only” (vw. 8-20). 

Isaiah again returns the answer of the only living God. 
“And Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus 
saith Jehovah the God of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed 
to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria, this [is] the word 
which Jehovah hath spoken against him, The virgin-daughter 
of Zion hath despised thee, [and] laughed thee to scorn ; the 
daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee. Whom 
hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom 
hast thou exalted the voice? Against the Holy One of 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 343 


Israel hast thou lifted up thine eyes on high. By thy servants 
hast thou reproached the Lord, and hast said, With the multitude 
of my chariots am I come up to the height of the mountains, 
to the recesses of Lebanon; and I will cut down its tall cedars, 
its choice cypresses: and I will enter into the height of its 
border, the forest of its fruitful field. I have digged, and 
drunk water; and with the sole of my feet have I dried up 
all the rivers of Matsor” (or, Egypt) (vv. 21-25). 

Insult as he might, himself or his servants, the great king, 
the Assyrian must learn that God knew all about him, making 
him but the instrument of His own dealing with the nations. 
This work done, he must go back humbled and smitten, for 
he had exceeded his commission ; and would God sanction his 
rage against Himself? “Hast thou not heard long ago I 
have done it, how of ancient days I purposed it? Now have 
I brought it to pass, that thou shouldest waste fortified cities 
[to] ruinous heaps. And their inhabitants [were] powerless, 
they were dismayéd and put to shame; they were [as] the 
grass of the field, the green herb, the grass on the housetops, 
and [corn] blighted before it be grown up. But I know thy 
sitting down, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy 
raging against me. Because thy raging against me and thine 
arrogance is come up into mine ears, I will put my ring in 
thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and J will make thee 
go back by the way by which thou camest” (vv. 26-29). 
After a sign of coming to Judah (vv. 30-32), Jehovah pro- 
nounces His decree (vv. 33-35). “And this [shall be] the 
sign unto thee: ye shall eat this year that which groweth 
of itself, and in the second year that which springeth of the 
same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant 
vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof. And the remnant that 
is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root down- 
ward, and bear fruit upward. For out of Jerusalem shall go 
forth a remnant, and out of mount Zion they that shall escape ; 
the zeal of Jehovah of hosts shall perform this. Therefore thus 
saith Jehovah concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not 
come unto this city, nor shoot an arrow there, neither shall 
he come before it with shield, nor cast a mount against it. 


344 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, 
and he shall not come unto this city, saith Jehovah. For I 
will defend this city to save it, for mine own sake, and for my 
servant. David’s sake. And the angel of Jehovah went forth, 
and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and 
fourscore and five thousand: and when men arose early in 
the morning, behold, they [were] all dead corpses. And 
Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, 
and dwelt at Nineveh. And it came to pass, as he was wor- 
shipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech 
and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they 
escaped into the land of Ararat (or, Armenia): and Esar- 
haddon his son reigned in his stead” (vv. 36-38). 

The total fall of the haughty Assyrian’s kingdom followed 
a few years after. Those that walk in pride God is able to 
abase. How blessed to hear His voice and know His love! 
Real as it was however, it was no more than a shadow of the 
great chief of the eastern nations in the latter day; even 
as Judah’s deliverance and blessedness under the gon of David 
of that day was but the witness of a brighter era and a more 
enduring glory, when Jehovah shall exalt him that was low 
and abase the high one. “I will overturn, overturn, overturn : 
and it shall be no more, until he cometh whose right it [the 
diadem] is ; and I will give it him,” 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


THE history we have seen in the preceding chapters is but a 
testimony to the total destruction which awaits the final 
Assyrian, as well as his hosts, in the latter day, and upon the 
mountains of Israel. This will be the more striking because 
he will, first of all, be allowed to capture Jerusalem, and slay a 
portion of the men and treat with indignity some of their 
women. Jerusalem must pay the penalty of its sins. The 
Assyrian, or king of the north of Daniel, will then retire 
southwards for other projects of ambition; and coming up 
again, when Jehovah meanwhile has owned His people Israel, 
he will be for ever put down and destroyed. 

This being so, it is evident that the mention of these 
historical circumstances, and no other, in the midst of our 
prophecy, is a remarkable sign, not only that their character 
is typical, but also that God would make plain to His people 
how far the prophecies already given had been accomplished. 
They might thus be encouraged to take what was already 
verified as an earnest of what was to come in full delivering 
power and glory. Nothing since that day has in the slightest 
degree resembled these intimations of the prophets. The past 
Assyrian, after having lost an immense part of his army, 
returned to his own land, and there was killed by his sons. 
The future Assyrian, after a partial success, is to come up a 
second time, and there and then be overwhelmed. The differ- 
ence is made particularly manifest by the introduction of the 
past history here; typical of yet greater things, as we know 
from direct prophecy in chapters xxviii, xxix., not to speak of 
other scriptures. 

But now in chapter xxxviii. we see another lesson : Hezekiah 


346 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


is sick, and apparently unto death. “In those days was 
Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of 
Amoz came to him, and said unto him, Thus saith Jehovah, 
Set thine house in order; for thou shalt die, and not live. 
Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto 
Jehovah, and said, Remember now, Jehovah, I beseech thee, 
how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect 
heart, and have done [that which is] good in thy sight. And 
Hezekiah wept much” (vv. 1-3). The king in this shadows 
forth the spiritual work God will by-and-by accomplish in 
His people. For Israel is destined in that day not only to 
furnish a grand external display of His power, but to ex- 
perience a deep internal change—the great practical lesson of 
death and resurrection. This we learn not in our souls alone, 
but still more profoundly according to the full scope of grace 
and truth in our Lord Jesus Himself. 

Hezekiah then is given up to die; but he humbles himself 
before Jehovah, who sends word by the prophet that he was to 
live. And here we have exercise of spirit; at first, exceeding 
sorrow, not unmingled with fear, with regrets at leaving the 
land of the living, and a certain shrinking from God. “And 
the word of Jehovah came to Isaiah, saying, Go, and say to 
Hezekiah, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of David thy father, I 
have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will 
add to thy days fifteen years. And I will deliver thee and 
this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria: and I will 
defend this city. And this [shall be] the sign unto thee from 
Jehovah, that Jehovah will do this thing that he hath spoken: 
behold, I will cause the shadow on the steps, which is gone 
down with the sun on the dial (or, steps) of Ahaz, to return 
ten steps backward. So the sun returned on the dial ten 
steps whereby it was gone down” (vv. 4-8). 

Is it possible that any professing to know and teach the 
truth, do not perceive that this is not life and incorruption 
brought to light by the gospel—not what we should look for 
in a Christian now, though Hezekiah was as truly a saint of 
God as any Christian? The working of the Holy Spirit in a 
godly Jew was necessarily modified in both depth and height 


CHAPTER XXXVIIL 347 


for the Christian because of accomplished redemption. When 
believers, Jews or Gentiles after the flesh, are brought to the 
knowledge of Christ now, they are entitled to the same high 
privileges. If they see or enjoy them not, it is because the 
flesh is not judged; they are merely following in this respect 
their own thoughts, instead of entering into the new revelations 
of God founded on a dead, risen, and ascended Christ, made 
known by the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. The 
natural thought and hope even of a converted Jew then was to 
live long upon the earth. He could not say “to depart and be 
with Christ is far better.” It was in the land of the living he 
desired to praise Jah; as he said, “the living, the living shall 
praise thee.” 

Israelites looked not within the veil; they saw not the 
Forerunner for them entered in. No such precious sight 
was revealed to their faith, though they did most truly expect, 
by God’s teaching, a coming Messiah to deliver and bless them. 
But they could not yet know death vanquished, nor raise the 
song of resurrection, nor look on a known Saviour theirs 
through the opened heavens. Hezekiah goes through the sign 
of death ; he was sentenced however to it, and shrank from it; 
earnestly pleading, he hears the sentence reprieved. This is 
the token of the spiritual work God will effect in Israel—not 
only deliverance from foes without, but deliverance from the 
power of death working in them. But the millennial kingdom 
will not furnish to Israel, or any other on earth, the faith or 
experience of the Christian, properly speaking; nor will they 
be raised from the dead or changed to go through that reign, 
but after it for eternity. The valley of dry bones is merely 
the symbol of their resurrection from death, when they are as 
a nation caused once more to live, though doubtless there 
will be a real spiritual work within. But still theirs will be 
a very different thing from our portion either now or when 
we are caught up to meet the Lord. 

“The writing of Hezekiah, king of Judah, when he had 
been sick and had recovered from his sickness. I said, In the 
still noon (or, cutting off) of my days I shall go to the gates of 
Sheol; I am deprived of the residue of my years. I said, I 


348 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


shall not see Jah, Jah in the land of the living. I shall not 
behold man longer with the inhabitants of the world. Mine 
age (or, dwelling) is departed, and is removed from me as a 
shepherd’s tent. JI have rolled off like a weaver my life; 
from the thrum he cutteth me off; from day to night wilt 
thou make an end of me. I kept still till morning: as a 
lion he breaketh all my bones; from day to night he will 
make an end of me. Like a swallow, a crane, so did I 
chatter; I mourned as a dove; mine eyes failed [with 
looking] upward. Jehovah, I am oppressed: undertake for 
me. What shall I say? He hath both spoken to me, and 
himself hath done [it]: I shall go softly all my years for the 
bitterness of my soul. Lord, by these things [men] live, and 
wholly in them [is] the life of my spirit; and thou recoverest 
me and makest me to live. Behold, for peace I had bitterness 
on bitterness; but thou hast in love delivered my soul from 
the pit of destruction, for thou hast cast all my sins behind 
thy back. For Sheol doth not praise thee, [nor] death cele- 
brate thee; they that go down into the pit do not hope for 
thy truth. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as 
I this day; the father to the children shall make known 
thy truth. Jehovah—to save me! My song too we will sing 
to stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house 
of Jehovah” (vv. 9, 20). 

Death was to him the most painful prospect. What can 
more pointedly differ from this than the triumphant language 
of 2 Corinthians v., for instance? There the apostle says, 
“In this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon.” 
“We are always confident, willing rather to be absent from 
the body [the very thing good Hezekiah was not] and to be 
present with the Lord.” Living here “we are absent from 
the Lord.” You, no doubt, find the king turning his face to 
the wall; but who could imagine such a thing of dying 
Stephen? If a Christian were in the spirit beholding Christ, 
it could not be so. It is not for any of us to say what 
chastening might fall on self-confidence, on negligence of 
walk, or anything else unjudged: God might smite the pride 
of heart which looked down upon a person thus tried. In 


CHAPTER XXXVIIL 349 


Old Testament times there could not be the rest and peace 
and joy of heart created by the revelation of Christ’s work 
and glorified person. 

In Hezekiah’s case God made him, as thus manifesting the 
feelings of a godly Jew, to be the sign of the quickening of 
the Jews, who will by-and-by go through a spiritual process 
which is likened to death and resurrection. In the future 
however, one gathers from other scriptures that their outward 
and inward deliverances will be in the inverse order of that 
which appears in the history given here. The quickening 
of at least the remnant will precede their external triumph. 
Ere the antitypical Babylon has been smitten, the Jew will 
go through no small spiritual sifting with God, and then the 
mighty outward deliverance will follow when the last Assyrian 
is broken and disappears. Thus distinctly is the future marked 
off from that which has been already accomplished. God will 
work in them first, and then display His power in their behalf. 
He gives us now in Christ that in which we shall be displayed 
at His appearing. Thus we know death and resurrection, 
because we are taught everything in Christ. Therefore having 
died with Christ, “why, as though living in the world, are 
ye subject to ordinances?” They will be like men living in 
the world; and so they will have their splendid temple, and 
their venerable priesthood, and their impressive ordinances, 
“Touch not, taste not, handle not.” The seventh or sabbath 
day will be resumed. In the millennium it will not be the 
Lord’s day but the sabbath-day. God will renew His sabbaths, 
instead of continuing the first day of the week, the Christian’s 
memorial of redemption. The sabbath-day occurs once more 
enforced beyond doubt, as we read in the prophecy of Ezekiel. 

Thus God will have prepared His people Israel for their 
future glory, not by what we know now in the gospel, but by 
what we have seen represented by Hezekiah’s sickness. He 
prays that he may not be brought to the gates of hell. “I said, 
I shall not see Jah, Jah in the land of the living.” To 
see the Lord in the heavenly country among the glorified 
is far better than to see Him in the land of Israel. Our 
joy is that we are to be with Him in heavenly blessing, as we 


350 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


know ourselves 77 Him in heavenly places even now. Such 
thoughts never enter the king’s mind according to these words. 
He desired as a Jew that his life might be prolonged to see 
Jah in the land of the living. So Israel will see Him in 
the land of the living, and be themselves brought under the 
shadow of His wing, spite of all their mighty foes. The pure 
in heart shall see God. We shall be with the Saviour and see 
Him as He is (not as He was, but as He ts), and be with 
Himself above in the Father’s house, in the presence of God. 
But here, on the contrary, the king mourns over his failing 
strength. “Mine age is departed.” “He will cut me off as from 
a [weaver’s] thrum.” “As a lion, He breaketh all my bones.” 
He repines at God’s will, not having a dead and risen Christ to 
interpret all by. He views death in itself, or its bearing on 
himself here. How deeply even saints needed a revealed 
Saviour and a known redemption! “Like a swallow, a crane, 
so did I chatter. . . . What shall I say? He hath both spoken 
to me, and himself hath done [it].” Now light begins to dawn 
somewhat more. He has asked Jehovah to undertake for 
him: “He hath both spoken to me,” &c. He began to 
appreciate better the blessed truth that it is not what we 
say to Jehovah which is the great matter, but what Jehovah 
says to us, and, more than that, what Jehovah does for us. 
“I shall go softly all my years.” All this trial was just the 
needed discipline, and good for him. “ And thou recoverest 
me.” He anticipates his sure deliverance, as Israel will know 
“in that day,” and surely be brought out of their distresses. 
However blessed it all may be, as showing us the working 
of God in the heart of a real saint of old and the type of the 
future ways of God to be made good in the hearts of the 
Jewish remnant, need I repeat that God does not give this as 
the full standard we ought to apply now? It is a serious 
thing, this misappropriation of scripture, through attempting 
to lump together all its testimonies, old and new, as if all 
must be about one and the same object. Thus what is of earth 
for the Jew is jumbled up with what is of heaven for the 
Christian: the result is a mere waste of uncertainty. Of 
course the Spirit of God never allows the real children of 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 351 


God to suffer all the consequences of their folly. There is a 
merciful preservative from going through with their mistakes. 
But still the loss is great indeed. How much we have to 
desire, that we may be enabled to feel, serve, walk, and 
worship as Christians entering into all the will of Jehovah 
concerning us, not foolish but as wise! All depends on a 
better knowledge of Christ, for this is the only sure and holy 
way for every need. 

God’s will as regards His people on the earth depends 
on His counsels and ways at any given time in His Son. 
Where is Christ now? He is at the right hand of God, cast 
out of the earth, as He said, “I go to my Father.” That is, 
He has total rejection here but all glory there, as may be seen 
in John xiii—xvii. He is thus separated to heaven, as He 
says, “For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might 
be sanctified through the truth.” Not of course that there 
ever was anything impure in or of Him: such a thought of 
Christ would be blasphemy. It was taking a separate place 
from the earth, setting Himself apart from all here below as 
the heavenly Model-man, so to speak. This is the key to 
Christianity. It is the power of the Holy Ghost working in 
the hearts of God’s children upon earth and forming them 
after the fashion of Christ in heaven, on the basis of His 
death and resurrection, which has justified them by faith. 
Thus it necessarily supposes Christ’s cross, resurrection, and 
ascension, and that we know ourselves in Him there (John 
xiv. 20). We become heavenly because related to Him there. 
«“ As is the Heavenly, such are they also who are heavenly.” 

When Christ comes in glory by-and-by, and takes the earth 
under His government, and in the truest sense fills the throne 
of Jehovah over it, the saints here below (not those risen and 
glorified) will be earthly. They will be born anew; but it will 
be for the earthly things of the kingdom of God. So the Lord 
says, “If I have told you earthly things.” &c. (John iii.) There 
is the earthly department of His kingdom no less than the 
heavenly. To confound them, or the scriptures that relate to 
them, is to ruin the distinctness of revealed truth, and to sink 
into half-Jews, half-Christians. The new age, or dispensation, 


352 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


will accordingly, as far as earth is concerned, be the forming 
man here below according to the character in which Christ 
is then displayed and will deal. It will be no longer the Spirit 
making us heavenly, because of uniting us to the Head on high. 
Christ will then govern the earth and its inhabitants as King, 
instead of gathering out from the world into one as His body. 
This may serve to show what a wonderful place is ours: in the 
midst of all the ruin of the outward framework of Christendom 
there is one body and one Spirit, even as also we were called 
in one hope of our calling. 

“Now Isaiah had said, Let them take a cake of figs, and lay 
it for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover. Hezekiah 
also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the house 
of Jehovah ?” (wv, 21, 22), 

If this addition seems trivial or spurious to the natural mind, 
it was not to the inspiring Spirit. God shows His interest 
in His own, whatever their infirmity, and explains the means 
employed, and why the sign was given. To unbelief such a 
detail has no value; for literary criticism knows as little of 
divine love, or of the soul’s need, as man’s philosophy, 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


THis chapter, it would seem, owes its place here chiefly as a 
basis for the very weighty place which Babylon (whither Judah 
was going into captivity) holds in the controversy which 
Jehovah had with His people. Hezekiah had not walked 
softly, when the ambassadors of Merodach-baladan came to 
congratulate him, but sunk to their level. Wherefore Jehovah 
sent the threat of sure judgment. All that David’s son in his 
vanity had spread before the eyes of the strangers should be 
swept into the city of confusion, the chastiser of Jerusalem’s 
idolatry; only it should not fall in the days of the pious 
king, notwithstanding his failure. 

“At that time Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king 
of Babylon, sent a letter and a present to Hezekiah; for he 
heard that he had been sick, and was recovered. And 
Hezekiah was glad of them, and showed them the house of 
his precious things, the silver and the gold and the spices 
and the precious oil, and all the house of his armour, and all 
that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his 
house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah showed them 
not. Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, 
and said unto him, What said these men? and from whence 
came they to thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come 
from a far country to me, from Babylon. Then said 
he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah 
answered, All that [is] in my house have they seen: there 
is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown 
them. Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of 
Jehovah of hosts. Behold, days come, when all that [is] in 
thy house, and [that] which thy fathers have laid up in 

Zz 


354 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon: nothing 
shall be left, saith Jehovah. And of thy sons that shall 
issue from thee, whom thou shalt beget, shall they take 
away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king 
of Babylon. Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, Good [is] the 
word of Jehovah which thou hast spoken. And he said, 
For there shall be peace and truth in my days” (vv. 1-8). 

The chapter is of special interest as the first plain indica- 
tion in later times of a power destined to overthrow the 
mighty kingdom of Assyria, to be then set up by the God of 
heaven, after the conquest of Jerusalem, in the imperial seat 
of the world as thenceforward an unrivalled king of kings. It: 
was as yet the struggle of a province to be independent. This 
very man, whose name has been recognised in the Assyrian 
inscriptions, as well as in a fragment of Polyhistor (Euseb. 
Chron. Can. i. v. 1), and in Ptolemy’s Canon, “sustaimed two 
contests with the power of Assyria, was twice defeated, and 
twice compelled to fly his country. His sons, supported by 
the king of Elam or Susiana, continued the struggle, and are 
found among the adversaries of Esar-Haddon, Sennacherib’s 
son and successor. His grandsons contend against Asshur- 
bani-pal, the son of Esar-Haddon. It is not till the fourth 
generation that the family seems to become extinct; and the 
Babylonians, having no champion to maintain their cause, 
contentedly acquiesce in the yoke of the stranger” (Canon 
Rawlinson in Smith’s Dictionary of the Bible, ii. 332). 

This outline by a competent hand may serve to show what 
an enormous gap of circumstances yet more than of time 
severed the Babylon of Nebuchadnezzar from him who sent 
his envoys to Hezekiah, still more from that Babylon whose 
downfall from the haughtiest seat on earth was announced 
long before by Isaiah in two of his most remarkable “ Burdens” 
(chaps. xiii. xiv. and xxi.). But all was proved the more to be 
before God, who deigned to disclose the end from the begin- 
ning. On every ground Hezekiah should have known better; 
whereas he forgot even the lessons of his sickness, as well 
as of God’s dealing with Sennacherib’s hosts, indulged in the 
things of men, and sunk to the level of a worldly, politician. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 355 


But at least the solemn rebuke of Jehovah through Isaiah 
recalled him humbly to accept the divine word with his 
wonted piety and thanksgiving, of which rationalism has no 
experience, and so with evil eye sees nothing but despicable 
egotism in a soul that judged self and bowed to God. 


Reviewing the parenthetic history of chaps. xxxvi—xxxix., 
the believer can but acknowledge the divine wisdom of their 
place between the first great division of the prophecy and the 
last. None could be so suited to the work of introducing 
them at this point than the inspired writer of the entire book. 
Although strictly historical, they are very much more; for 
they are instinct with prophecy, and, on the judicial check 
given to Assyria, prepare for the province given ere long to 
Babylon, little as it was then expected, of sweeping Judah and 
the house of David into captivity. But they adumbrate also 
the Son of David and David’s Lord, Who, instead of being 
sick and healed, would go down, for God’s glory and in His 
grace beyond all thought of man, into death most real as an 
offering for sin, yet rise again and make good an everlasting 
covenant for the blessing of Israel and all the earth, when 
kings shall stop their mouths at Him, once marred more than 
any, then exalted and high exceedingly. Striking it is to read 
in chapter xxxv. 4, “Behold, your God! vengeance cometh” 
(which in no way characterises the gospel, but the future 
kingdom fully), “the recompence of God. He will come himself 
and save you”; and in chap. xl. 9, 10, “ Behold, your God! 
Behold, the Lord Jehovah will come with might, and his arm 
shall rule for him; behold, his reward is with him, and his 
recompence before him.” The same Spirit, the same hand, 
wrote both parts. 


CHAPTER XL. 


A SENSIBLY different portion of the prophecy now opens on us. 
No longer is the overthrow of kings and peoples in the fore- 
ground; nor are we occupied as before with the various 
Gentile enemies that long beset and troubled Israel. Hence, 
most appropriately introducing it, stands a touching contro- 
versy between God and His own people. We are evidently 
not looking here on God’s dealings without; we enter within. 
His judgment begins as ever at the house of God: and more 
closely and thoroughly than the same process in the preface 
of our prophecy (chap. i.) More was wanted than ways and 
judgments in providence. There are moral wants and spiritual 
wrongs which must be taken up, if the people are to be blessed 
according to God; and what makes the distinction so much the 
more striking is the fact, that we shall find Babylon again in 
a totally different aspect from that which had been seen as yet, 
not so much in her aspect of worldly magnificence and power, 
but in her sad notoriety as the source and bulwark of idolatry 
on earth. Evidently this accords with God’s pleading with 
His people, and His distinct unfolding of the chastening that 
He caused to light upon them because of their idolatry and 
even worse spiritual sins, as we shall see. Thus not political 
but spiritual wickedness is here before us; into which they 
had been drawn by the enemy to set them into Opposition 
to God Himself. 

This great change gives rise to an altogether different 
character of revelation and even style of address. “Comfort 
ye, comfort ye, my people,” graciously lets us see the end of 
all. In the beginning of the book the Spirit of God appealed 
to Israel as the people then were, attesting God’s judgment 


CHAPTER XL. 357 


of their wickedness and the introduction of the glory of 
Jehovah. Here too the same Israel were guilty, and the divine 
glory is surely to be established in judgment; but before we 
behold the full distressing picture of what they really were 
in His eyes, He begins with unfailing words of comfort. Thus 
the heart of every saint would be strengthened at the very 
outset with the assurance that they were the object of divine 
mercy, and so too all the better would they bear to hear what 
Jehovah must tell them of their grievous faults, which could 
not but be in themselves fatal. 

The chapter before formed a kind of link with what follows; 
for there we have the prediction of their deportation to 
Babylon; which, as has been often remarked, holds a peculiar 
place. Babylon, being the beginning of the great image of 
Daniel, becomes also the type of the last representative 
of imperial power. The head of gold received supremacy 
from God in a more direct form than any of the other powers, 
which were only successors in the line. The grant of imperial 
power was immediate from the God of heaven to Nebuchad- 
nezzar, who thus typified in a certain sense the image from 
first to last. More particularly the fall of Babylon prefigured 
the overthrow of the world-power in the earth which rose on 
Judah’s ruin, now Lo-Ammi; the final judgment of that 
system of universal supremacy then begun, and, if not still 
going on, only suspended. For the image-power has not yet 
been struck by the little Stone (Daniel ii.), and is awaiting 
its reorganisation before it is dissolved for ever. Its com- 
ponents are at present in a broken state; but by-and-by they 
will again coalesce with an appearance of amazing and renewed 
strength, which its last head will use directly to oppose the 
Lord of lords and King of kings. This Revelation xvii. clearly 
shows us; for the judgment of Babylon and of the Beast as 
there set forth is not yet accomplished. The old Roman Empire, 
destroyed by the Gothic races, could not be fairly represented 
by the Beast with seven heads and ten horns, any more than 
the pagan city answers truly to the harlot drunk with the 
blood of the saints. What filled the seer with great wonder 
was the mystery of what claimed to be Christ’s bride seated 


358 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


on the Beast, the mother of the fornications and, yet more, 
of the abominations (or idols) of the earth, and guilty withal 
of such sanguinary persecution of Christ’s followers. 

Babylon has thus a special place as being the power of all 
others that was allowed to enslave Jerusalem and the house 
of David, from whom the Deliverer of Israel was to spring. 
Now we know that the Son of David is actually come, that He 
was presented to Israel and rejected by them, that He suffered 
death on the cross and is gone up to heaven, where He has 
taken His place, not as Son of David, but as the rejected Son 
of man who is the Son of God. The Lord Jesus is there the 
great High Priest of God as well as Head of the church, seated 
at the right hand of God, where and whence He acts in power 
and love, sending down whatever is needful for the good of 
the saints and for winning sinners by the testimony of God’s 
grace here below. This is what Christ is now doing, not at all 
hitherto fulfilling the prophecies of the Son of David as such, 
nor as yet as King of the nations. 

Hence anyone who in a serious enquiry takes up the Old 
Testament, to find the full and clear announcement of what 
occupies Christ now, must either give up these prophecies 
as dark and unintelligible, or he must put a false gloss and 
violent strain on them to eke out such an application as their 
full scope. In truth they refer to the future, not to the 
present; and to Israel, God’s earthly people, not to the 
heavenly church, save in certain general principles or special 
allusions to the Gentile parenthesis, which the provident 
wisdom of the Holy Ghost took care to furnish in order to 
confound God’s adversaries. Then there are displays of God 
in moral ways from which (though about Israel rather than 
ourselves) we can and ought to extract for our own souls that 
which is most helpful and cheering. For God is good and full 
of tender mercy to Israel; and He is surely not less full of 
grace tous. If He is love to the people He will govern, can 
He love less the children He now adopts to Himself by Jesus 
Christ? There are no doubt great differences between the 
saints He calls now, and those who are to be blessed in the age 
to come, Now it is His church, Christ’s body, the children He 


CHAPTER XU. 359 


is bringing into the place of heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Christ. Israel will inherit the promises made to the fathers; 
but we, if Christ’s now, are heirs with the Firstborn, sons not 
merely of “the fathers,” but of God the Father. 

When we thus examine the prophecies, not biassed with the 
foregone conclusion of finding ourselves in them, but free 
to understand the words as they are written, and simply 
accepting the intended objects God here speaks of, nothing 
can be clearer or more certain. Here for instance He calls 
to comfort His people. “Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, 
saith your God. Speak to the heart of J erusalem, and cry 
unto her, that her time of toil (or, suffering) is accomplished, 
that her iniquity is pardoned; that she hath received of 
Jehovah’s hand double for all her sins” (vv, 1, 2). The 
ground He puts it on is, that the warfare of Israel is over. 
Jehovah now interposes. Bad as Jerusalem’s sins were, she 
had, to His reckoning ol love, suffered double what her sins 
deserved in His governnent. He is not looking at the 
sins of Jerusalem apari from Christ, but as it were 
through Him. If there were no suffering Messiah con- 
nected with Jerusalem, nothing would remain but the judg- 
ment of her sins to her everlasting shame and ruin. But 
God always looks at Christ on her behalf, and can thus 
say, “Comfort ye, comfort ye” After disowning Israel as not 
His people, Lo-Ammi, whic holds good through the times 
of the Gentiles not yet expred, He will acknowledge them 
once more and for ever under Messiah and the new covenant. 

Next we have the manner or moral principle in which the 
comfort will be brought home to them. This furnishes a grave 
and interesting insight into God’s ways. “ The voice of one 
that crieth in the wilderness.” The allusion is evident to John 
the Baptist, who was “sent fron God” to bear witness of the 
True Light and prepare a way for the Messiah. In the midst 
of his testimony he was slain. Messiah too came, and in the 
midst of His testimony He was sain. Master and servant, they 
were both cut off by wicked hanls. Thus God’s work was, ag 
far as man could see, nipt in the bud; and hence the world is 
yet in misrule and confusion, in sin and misery. When God 


360 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


really fulfils for the earth what He has at heart, there will 
be the manifest power of ordered blessing to His glory. 

But look up, not down, and read in the risen and glorified 
Christ the proof to faith that the cross, the very thing that 
seemed the total ruin of all the counsels of God, is in truth 
their solid basis and justification, by which He is and will 
be for ever glorified. The cross of the Lord Jesus is the 
triumph of grace, as the resurrection and ascension are its 
righteous answer; but it is a triumph known only to faith. 
The world sees not heaven opened nor Him glorified there; it 
saw in the cross One who suffered to death. In the Acts of 
the Apostles man’s rejection of Christ is constantly contrasted 
with God’s raising Him from the dead. There we see that man 
and God are in complete opposition. The cross is thus looked 
at in the light not of God’s purposes, but of man’s wicked- 
ness. In the Epistles the truth chiefly insisted on is the cross, 
not so much as the extreme point of all man has done against 
God, but as the deepest exercise of the grace that God feels 
towards guilty man. Not that love was created by the CYOss ; 
it was in God before the coming ¢f Christ, and because of it 
He sent His Son. The propitiatior is the fruit of God’s grace, 
not its cause. Propitiation vindicates it, judging and putting 
aside all the sin on man’s part, which otherwise would have 
proved an insurmountable barrier, But the love was on God’s 
part from everlasting. We must bear this in mind in looking 
at propitiation, which indeed is the strongest possible proof of 
His love, while it equally proves His holiness and necessary 
judgment of our sins. 

John’s testimony was a all to repentance in view of 
Messiah’s advent ; his baptism therefore was a confession both 
of sins and of Him, Who shoald come after himself. It was 
“The voice of one crying in th wilderness, Prepare ye the way 
of Jehovah, make straight in the desert a highway for our God” 
(v. 3). It was not the personnor the work of Israel’s hope in 
power. For Israel as a whole was ‘blind and deaf; the testimony 
was interrupted, the Messiah refused. There was therefore but 
a partial application, the peoyle’s unbelief thus intercepting and 
breaking off the thread of Gdl’s ways, while His counsels abide 


CHAPTER XL. 361 


irrefragable and accomplished, through their unbelief, in the 
cross as they never else could have been. The way of Jehovah 
was not yet prepared, nor was there a straight highway in the 
desert for God. Man was put on his responsibility and heard 
the cry only to sin; by-and-by God will make all good in 
grace by His own power. Then “Every valley shall be 
exalted ; and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, 
and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places a 
plain. And the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed, and all 
flesh (not Israel only) shall see [it] together; for the mouth of 
Jehovah hath spoken” (vv. 4, 5). 

Thus plainly we have, as far as its scope goes, the sure 
purpose of God. Every difficulty, depths, heights, rough or 
crooked, all must disappear: for God yet means to make this 
earth the scene of His glory. A most blessed prospect it 
is, that the sin, misery, and weakness of man, the groaning 
of all creation around, the wiles and power and presence 
of Satan must vanish and give place, not to the revealed grace 
of God in Christ, which has shone (we know) in the despised 
Nazarene, but to the revealed glory of Jehovah, when all flesh 
shall see it together. It cannot refer to the day of the judg- 
ment of the dead, because it will not be “all flesh” nor any 
flesh whatever, but the dead raised before the great white 
throne. But here it is a question of man living in his natural 
body on the earth. The Jew was apt to overlook the judgment 
of the dead at the end of all dispensations; the Gentile 
is just as negligent as to the judgment of the quick, though 
it be confessed in the commonest symbols of Christendom. 
As infidelity increases, the rejection of this truth is perhaps 
more complete now than ever since the gospel was preached to 
the Gentiles. 

In the dark ages people at least believed enough to be panic- 
struck from time to time; but now Christians are accounted 
fanatics if they testify of these coming judgments. But none 
the less will God cut short the course of this world, and 
the glory of Jehovah be revealed, so that all flesh shall see 
it together. This John the Baptist had to announce : only the 
first word committed to him, and already accomplished in its 


362 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


measure, was the preparing the way of Jehovah. Hence it 
appears that the third verse does not solely refer to the 
mighty changes of the new age, but includes also such a moral 
preparation as befitted the coming of the Lord in humiliation. 
Thus, for the time, it went no farther than God’s working 
in the hearts of a remnant, whose souls were made to be 
in a measure prepared for the Messiah. We know that such 
was the fact. See John’s disciples leaving him to follow Jesus, 
and John delighting in it. “He must increase, but I must 
decrease.” Hence says our Lord in Matthew xi, “If ye 
will receive it, this is Elias that was for to come,” clearly 
showing that to faith John the Baptist was Elias (compare 
Mark ix. 11-13); but, as a matter of fact, the full predicted 
circumstances are postponed till the great day that 1s coming 
(compare Malachi iv.). Thus he is to come, not before the 
Lord takes up the church, with which he has nothing to do, 
but before the proper blessing of Israel, with whom he has 
a close connexion. John the Baptist went before Jehovah- 
Jesus in the spirit and power of Elias; but Elias himself 
publicly vindicated the true God in opposition to the apostasy 
of Israel and in the discomfiture of the priests of Baal. He 
will return by-and-by, and resume a work of the most solemn 
character before the great and terrible day of Jehovah. John 
the Baptist anticipated this in the way of preparing a remnant 
for receiving Him Who should and did come. 

Next, “A voice saith, Cry. And he saith, What shall I 
cry?” Here follows the substance of John the Baptist’s testi- 
mony, though it may be still more manifest in the end of this 
age. “All flesh is grass”; it is man morally and universally, 
“And all the goodliness thereof [is] as the flower of the field” 
(v. 6). Could a man use this to think well of himself? Verse 7 
cuts down all boasting—“The grass withereth, the flower fadeth : 
because the Spirit (or, breath) of Jehovah bloweth upon it.” 
Not its beauty but its frailty God refers to. The moment you 
have God testing its character, if it were only by the breath of 
His nostrils, all flesh comes to nothing ; and this too in Israel, 
not in Gentiles only: “surely the people is grass.” Nor is 
this all; He utters its sentence again and again, The reason 


CHAPTER XL. 363 


for the first repetition seems to be’the emphatic judgment 
of “the people,” that is, the Jews. The second case is parti- 
eularly connected with the resource for faith. “The grass 
withereth, the flower fadeth; but the word of our God shall 
stand for ever” (v. 8). 

Thus the reception of the Messiah and His reign over Israel 
by-and-by are conditioned by their repentance, a work 
wrought in their souls by the word of God applied by the 
Holy Spirit, as Nicodemus had to learn from our Lord in 
John iii. So the Christian proves yet more profoundly under 
the gospel, and receives eternal life in the Son of God. So 
must the Jew in due time for the future world-kingdom 
of our Lord and of His Christ. These two truths are of no 
less importance at the present moment, as we know how Peter 
used them for the Christian Jews from the first. They will be 
urgently needed when God begins to work in the Jews 
once more, when they painfully learn, feel, and prove the utter 
worthlessness of man as he is in divine things. Even now the 
men of the world are making no small strides; but they 
will do greater things. And the devil will mature and display 
his plans as they have never been witnessed in the world 
before. What then will be the security of faith? “The word 
of our God shall stand for ever.” 

But as the church really came into view, the heavenly 
mystery of Christ (or rather part of it), when all hopes of the 
earth and man for the present (and always, as far as they are 
concerned) were buried in Christ’s grave, so we may well 
believe, as the end draws nearer, we do greatly need with 
simplicity to rest upon God’s word. We may, as only knowing 
in part, understand but little; but it is a poor feeling and 
unworthy to be called faith only to believe His word when 
understood. Not that it is not sweet and cheering when we 
consciously enter into any of its depths; but intelligence of the 
word is the gift of grace and product of faith, not the ground 
why one believes. God sends one His testimony, and the soul 
bows to it, setting to its seal that God is true. Am I a sinner 
without peace or even hope, or any real anxiety before God? 
That word comes and pronounces to my conscience that all 


364 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


flesh is grass. My soul is laid bare. If I do not believe God, 
all my life and death will be just the proof of my folly and 
sin. But if I submit to the humbling yet gracious testimony 
of God, while proving its truth in what I am, I enter into the 
comfort and strength of His own word, and I too am made 
to stand through that same word. “The word of our God 
shall stand for ever.” Our experience follows, and confirms 
of course the truth of the word in breaking one down. Thus 
God’s word is the only standing-ground. Yet outwardly the 
word of God is just like the cross of Christ. There may well 
be difficulties to such as we are; and the word seems a weak 
thing to confide in for eternity ; but, in truth, it is more stable 
than heaven and earth. So in 2 Timothy iii. the apostle, 
anticipating the ruin of Christendom, casts the man of God 
on this unfailing resource. 

But we turn in the next verse to the special earthly object 
of God’s affection—Zion. It is the symbol of the grace of God 
working in Israel, also the centre of the royal glory that is 
about to be revealed here below. “O thou that tellest good 
tidings to Zion, get thee up into a high mountain; O thou 
that tellest good tidings to Jerusalem, lift up thy voice with 
strength; lift up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of J udah, 
Behold, your God! Behold, the Lord Jehovah will come with 
might, and his arm shall rule for him; behold, his reward [is] 
with him, and his recompence before him. He will feed his 
flock like a shepherd, he will gather the lambs with his arm, and 
carry [them] in his bosom; he will gently lead those that give 
suck” (vv. 9-11). As there can be no doubt, the person who 
came of old and will come by-and-by is Christ ; in a word, the 
same Jesus is not only Christ but Jehovah. He is here spoken 
of as the God of Israel, J ehovah, Whose reward is with Him 
and His work before Him. First of all is His coming in power ; 
next, with all tenderness of heart, as One taking compassion on 
them, because of their defenceless and exposed condition. 

But the verses from 12 let us know, when we come to 
enquire who is the great and loving Deliverer, He turns out 
u0 such petty conqueror as Rabbis conceived and the carnal 
desires of Israel craved so long and ardently; He is the 


CHAPTER XL. 365 


Creator. How strange that such a height of glory should be 
unwelcome! Even then it was God’s warning of His judgment 
on idolatry, which is the first great question in this part of 
Isaiah’s prophecy with Israel even more than the nations. His 
people would apostatise more and more from Jehovah and 
follow the Gentiles in their worship of idols. But before the 
Spirit of God deals with this iniquity, He first of all identifies 
the Messiah with God, and expatiates on what He is as the 
eternal, Almighty, and only wise, the Creator and Governor 
of all things, the Holy One, Jehovah of Israel. 

This accordingly gives an occasion for a glorious description 
of the true God. “Who hath measured the waters in the 
hollow of his hand, and meted out the heavens with [his] span, 
and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and 
weighed the mountains in a balance, and the hills in scales? 
Who hath directed the Spirit of Jehovah, and [as] his 
counsellor hath taught him? With whom took he counsel, and 
[who] made him understand, and instructed him in the path of 
judgment, and taught him knowledge, and showed to him the 
way of understanding? Behold, the nations are counted as 
a drop from a bucket, and as the fine dust on the balance; 
behold, he taketh up the isles as an atom. And Lebanon [is] not 
sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt 
offering. All the nations [are] as nothing before him; and they 
are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity” (vv. 12-17). 

Then He challenges the folly of those that set up graven 
images as entitled to resemble or represent Him. “To whom 
then will ye liken God? and what likeness will ye compare 
unto him? The workman casteth a graven image, and the 
goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver 
chains. He that [is] impoverished so that he hath no oblation 
chooseth a tree [that] doth not rot; he seeketh unto him a 
skilled workman to prepare a graven image [that] shall not 
be moved. Do ye not know? have ye not heard? hath it 
not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood 
the foundations of the earth? [It is] he that sitteth upon the 
circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof [are] as grass- 
hoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a veil (or curtain), 


366 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in: that bringeth. 
the princes to nothing; that maketh the judges of the earth 
as vanity. Scarcely are they planted, scarcely are they sown, 
scarcely hath their stock taken root in the earth, but he also 
bloweth upon them, and they wither, and the whirlwind taketh 
them away as stubble. To whom then will ye liken me, or 
shall I be equal? saith the Holy One. Lift up your eyes on 
high, and behold. Who hath created these [things], bringing 
out their host by number? He calleth them all by name; 
by the greatness of his might, and strength of power, not one 
faileth” (vv. 18-26). 

Lastly He falls back on what He has been to His own from 
the beginning, “Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, 
O Israel, My way is hid from Jehovah, and my judgment is 
passed over from my God? Dost thou not know, hast thou 
not heard, [that] the everlasting God, Jehovah, the Creator of 
the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? [There 
is] no searching of his understanding. He giveth power to the 
faint; and to [them that have] no might he increaseth strength. 
Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men 
shall stumble and fall; but they that wait upon Jehovah shall 
renew [their] strength; they shall mount up with wings as 
eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and 
not faint” (vv. 27-31). He cannot deny Himself, nor fail 
to strengthen the weakest that wait on Him. But the great 
public demonstration of His ways will be when His people 
at the consummation of the age are delivered from that evil 
heart of unbelief, which has been fatal to them hitherto in all 
their varied history, and has postponed the era of righteous 
happiness which yet awaits not Israel only but all the nations. 
Then shall the blessings prevail above the blessings of Jacob’s 
progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills; 
they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the 
head of Him that was separate from His brethren: Jehovah, 
how long! Then will Judah own in deepest penitence his 
sin of blood-guiltiness, “the great transgression,” against Him 
who deigned to be His brother, and against a greater Father 
than his father, Benjamin will be joined to Joseph in a mightier 


CHAPTER Xt. 367 


sense, and the true Joseph make Himself known to His 
brethren by grace made true, and Israel be at length the Israel 
of God. The fame thereof will be heard throughout all the 
earth, and the long alienated and unworthy nations that. knew 
not God will seek and rest in Him Who alone makes Himself 
known in deed and truth, whose resting-place shall be glory. 

Though a little out of its place, it seems but fair to say that 
while the text of v. 9 has been rendered with the Septuagint 
and the Latin Vulgate, Grotius, both the Lowths, Gesenius, 
Rosenmiiller, Leeser, and many otherwise differing scholars, 
that of the A.V. is supported by the Peschito, the Greek v.v. 
of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, as well as by Calvin, 
Vitringa, Ewald, Alexander, Stier, and many more of no small 
weight. According to these, Zion and Jerusalem are addressed 
as messengers of good tidings to the cities of Judah, instead of 
being the object of the message, which is to be spread to others 
also. 

It will be a blessed exchange, proved now in the soul of 
every one that believes the gospel, when Israel shall abandon 
confidence in self under law for the word of God which 
reveals His grace in Christ. They thus discover that flesh is 
but grass, and its goodliness no better than the flower of the 
field. He Who created the world is the same Jehovah, Israel’s 
Saviour God, Who will make good in power and glory for His 
people what He once presented personally in humiliation and 
obedience, when they, alas! in their pride and incredulity, 
refused Him. None but the Framer and Governor of the 
universe could be adequate to such a result; and the nations 
that envied while they despised the Jews will judge all their 
folly in the day when their graven images shall be spurned for 
ever. 


CHAPTER XLI. 


Tus chapter, if it be not a second part with the preceding one 
as the first, is a most appropriate sequel. For Jehovah, having 
opened His counsels as to Jerusalem and its comfort (after 
many vicissitudes and troubles) at His coming in power and 
glory, turns now to the Gentiles, challenging them to meet 
Him in judgment. He had there been displayed in His 
shepherd care over Israel, in His might and wisdom over all, 
needing no counsellor, and the nations counted less than 
a cipher and vanity, so that comparison or image was futile, and 
Israel’s unbelief was the more deplorable because of His 
special goodness to all amongst them who waited on Him. 
Now He says (v. 1), “Keep silence before me, islands, and let 
the peoples renew [their] strength: let them come near, then 
let them speak ; let us draw near together to judgment.” 

Cyrus is meant though not yet named. It is no question of 
a past name of renown, but of a future deliverer, of whom 
God knew all: man and his idols could say nothing. Before 
the prescient eye of the prophet stands the mighty conqueror 
of Babylon. None but the true God, who made him the 
instrument of His designs in providence, had anticipated his 
rise. Jehovah here describes him, but typically (in the 
manner of the prophetic Spirit) as the shadow of a greater 
than Cyrus, Who should for ever overturn the idols of the 
nations, judge their pride, and deliver the people of Israel 
from all their dispersions, as well as the sins which brought 
them on in the righteous way of Jehovah. “Who raised up 
from the east him whom righteousness calleth to its foot ? 
He gave the nations before him, and made [him] rule over kings; 
he gave [them] as dust to his sword, as driven stubble to his 


CHAPTER XLI. 869 


bow. He pursued them, he passed on safely, by a way he had 
not come with his feet. Who hath wrought and done [it], 
calling the generations from the beginning? I Jehovah, the 
first, and with the last; I [am] He” (wv. 3, 4). 

It is as vain to drag in the gospel of Christ here as in 
chapter xl. to interpret Jacob and Israel of Christendom. Nor 
is the plea at all valid that the Jews will never more meddle 
with idols. Matthew xii. 43, xxiv. 15, not to speak of the 
Revelation, are clear evidence confirmatory of Isaiah lxv. lxvi., 
and of other passages in the Old Testament, which prove that 
the end of the age will see a fatal revival of idolatry, the 
return of the unclean spirit with the full antichristian power 
of Satan, which will bring down the Assyrian scourge on the 
Jews and thereon also the Lord’s coming in vengeance, when 
the indignation shall be accomplished, and Jehovah’s anger, 
in the destruction of the foe. The last state of that genera- 
tion which rejected Christ will then be characterised both by 
idol-worship and the Antichrist ; so that, on this score, there 
is no pretence for turning aside the expostulation, here 
addressed to the people, to the Gentiles that are now baptised, 
or for interpreting Jacob and Israel of Christendom as some 
have done who ought to have known better. 

Again, it is absurd to say that the gospel could be foreshown 
by the first one raised up from the east; for, among the Jews, 
the east was always reckoned from Palestine, never Palestine 
itself. The Rabbinical idea (strange to say, espoused by 
Calvin, Hausschein, Piscator, Lowth the younger, Bengel, and 
stranger still, the late Mr. Birks) was not so unreasonable: 
the allusion, they thought, was to Abraham, who was a 
righteous man called out of Mesopotamia. But all else fails. 
For who could think that his exceptional sally against the 
kings of the east who were returning after their successful 
raid into the valley of the Jordan, or the incidents of Pharaoh 
and Abimelech, duly answer to the discomfiture of nations and 
subjugation of kings, making his sword as a column of dust 
and as the driven stubble his bow in resistless progress? Still 
less does it suit the testimony of Christ in the gospel. 

The comparison of chapter xlv. 1, 13, ought to convince any 

24 


370 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


unbiassed thoughtful mind that Cyrus is really in view, but 
of course ultimately the foreshadowed triumph when Christ 
comes in His kingdom, putting all enemies under His feet, 
instead of gathering souls out of the world in one body for 
heaven, as He is now doing by the Holy Ghost’s power through 
the gospel. (Compare also Ezra i. 1-3.) If the Babylonish 
captivity of Judah was the divine chastening of their idolatry 
by means of the chief patron of idols on earth, the fall of 
Babylon was a tremendous blow on its own idolatry, predicted 
as it was by the Jewish prophet long before either event. 
These were among the reasons which made the first success 
and the final ruin of Babylon so important in scripture. They 
were bound up with God’s ways in His people. And hence the 
answer to the infidel sneer touching the silence of prophecy 
respecting America. What has the discovery or growth of the 
new world in the far west to do with Israel? From the New 
Testament again all such matters are excluded, because the 
rejected Messiah involves not only the disappearance of Israel 
and the kingdoms of the earth from the foreground, but the 
calling of the church for glory in the heavenly places as the 
body and bride of Christ, at least until the corruption of 
Christendom becomes morally unbearable. For the age ends 
in the judgment of apostate Jews and Gentiles under the 
Beast and the false prophet, when Christ and His glorified 
saints appear from heaven, and the godly remnant of Jews 
here below will become a strong nation, the earthly centre of 
His kingdom under the whole heaven, 

Hence the suitability here of confronting in this very 
connexion “Jehovah, the first, and with the last,” the One 
Who had wrought and spoken. Why were the gods of the 
nations silent and powerless ? why were the boasted oracles 
dumb? If the fall of Judah, moral necessity as it was (unless 
Jehovah must sanction His own dishonour in the midst of His 
people, and sustain them to give His glory to a graven image), 
made His power questionable in a Gentile’s eyes, let them 
learn in the downfall of Babylon, which the Jews alone knew 
generations beforehand, even to the name and race of him who 
Was its instrument, that His righteousness and wisdom were 


CHAPTER XLI. a7 


no less than His power, and that the chastised Jews were the 
people of His choice. “The isles saw [it] and feared; the ends 
of the earth were afraid, drew near, and came. They helped 
every one his neighbour, and [each] said to his brother, Be 
of good courage. So the carpenter encouraged the founder, 
he that smootheth [with] the hammer him that smiteth on the 
anvil, saying of the soldering, [It is] good: and he fasteneth it 
with nails, [that] it be not moved. But thou, Israel, my servant, 
Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend, 
whom I have grasped from the ends of the earth, and called 
from its corners (or, nobles), and said unto thee, Thou [art] 
my servant; I have chosen thee, and not rejected thee. Fear 
not, for I [am] with thee; be not dismayed, for I [am] thy God. 
I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold 
thee with the right hand of my righteousness” (vv. 5-10). 

The honour to which Cyrus was called by the way was no 
change in His purposes or affections respecting Israel. Not 
Cyrus but Israel was His servant. “Behold, all they that 
are incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded : 
they that strive with thee shall be as nothing, and shall 
perish. Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them,— 
them that contend with thee. They that war against thee 
shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought. For I Jehovah 
thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not ; 
I will help thee. Fear not, thou worm Jacob, ye few men 
of Israel; I will help thee, saith Jehovah, and thy Redeemer, 
the Holy One of Israel. Behold, I have made thee a new 
sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh 
and beat small the mountains, and shalt make the hills as 
chaff, Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them 
away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt 
rejoice in Jehovah, thou shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel” 
(vv. 11-16). 

These last words, however, render it beyond just doubt that 
the prophet carries his eye far beyond the immediate occasion, 
and,'presents, not the condition of the Jews under their Persian 
or other Gentile lords, but days still future when Israel shall 
take them captive whose captives they were, and shall rule 

2Aa2 


372 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


over their oppressors. It is impossible to apply to the 
same period the prophetic description here and Nehemiah’s 
language (chap. ix.). “Behold, we [are] servants this day, and 
[for] the land that thou gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit 
thereof and the good thereof, behold, we [are] servants in it; 
and it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom thou hast 
set over us because of our sins: also they have dominion 
over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure, and 
we [are] in great distress” (vv. 36, 37). Here the word is in 
manifest contrast, and in figurative language, no doubt; but 
it prefigures neither servitude, nor the grace of the gospel, 
but triumph when the true Sun of Righteousness shall 
arise with healing in His wings, and Israel shall flourish and 
tread down the wicked in the day that shall burn all the proud 
and lawless as an oven. 

The Maccabean or the apostolic triumphs of Vitringa and 
others are a burlesque on a sound interpretation. Not only 
must we leave room for the future, but for a total change 
from the character of God’s actual working in and by the 
church. Now it is grace building living stones on the founda- 
tion of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being 
the chief corner-stone; then it will be the awful descent of 
the Stone cut without hands on the statue of Gentile empire 
in its last phase, which leads to, as it corresponds with, 
the judicial functions of Israel here described in “that great 
day” of the future. 

Not that refreshment will fail from Jehovah for Israel. 
“The afflicted and the needy seek water, and [there is] none; 
their tongue faileth for thirst: I Jehovah will hear them, [T] 
the God of Israel will not forsake them. I will open rivers on 
the bare heights, and fountains in the midst of the valleys ; 
I will make the wilderness into a pool of water, and the dry 
lands into water-springs. I will give in the wilderness the 
cedar, acacia, and myrtle, and oleaster; I will set in the 
desert the cypress, pine (or, plane), and box-tree together ; that 
they may see and know and consider and understand together, 
that the hand of Jehovah hath done this, and the Holy One of 
Israel hath created it” (vv. 17-20). 


CHAPTER XLL oTo 


Jehovah then recurs to a renewal of His challenge to the 
Gentiles and their idols, but in terms of justly increased 
contempt for their trust in a thing of nought, again grounding 
His appeal on their ignorance of the scourge of idolatry who 
should come from the north and east. “Produce your cause, 
saith Jehovah ; bring forth your strong [reasons] saith the King 
of Jacob. Let them bring [them] forth and show us what shall 
happen: show the former things, what they [be], that we may 
pay heed to them, and know their issue; or declare us things 
to come. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we 
may know that ye [are] gods; yea, do good, or do evil, that we 
may be dismayed, and behold [it] together. Behold, ye [are] 
of nothing, and your work of nought: an abomination [is he 
that] chooseth you. I have raised up [one] from the north, and 
he shall come; from the rising of the sun will he call upon 
my name: and he shall come upon princes as [upon] mortar, 
and as the potter treadeth clay. Who hath declared [it] from 
the beginning, that we may know? and beforetime, that we 
may say, Right? Indeed there is none that declareth, indeed 
there is none that showeth, indeed there is none that heareth 
your words. The first [I say] to Zion, Behold, behold 
them; and to Jerusalem I will give one that bringeth good 
tidings. For I look, and there is no man; even among them, 
and there is no counsellor, that, when I ask of them, can 
answer a word” (vv. 21-28). The oracles are dumb, even 
reason abashed—nothing but insensate folly is in men owning 
as gods things which could neither speak nor hear. “Behold, 
they [are] all vanity; their works [are] nought: their molten 
images [are] wind and confusion” (v. 29). Human helps to 
devotion are the death-bed of faith. Man by his devices, 
now as of old, only succeeds in shutting himself out from the 
living God; and the mercy He reveals in His word, as well 
as His judgments, are sealed up in the darkness of unbelief. 
Prophecy is the truest and most permanent witness of the 
true God, till His power overwhelm those that dispute it and 
dishonour Him. Hence the gravity of the present scepticism 
in Christendom, which will issue in “the falling away.” 


CHAPTER XLII. 


DISTINGUISHED though the place of Cyrus might be as the 
righteous man from the east, whom God employed to break 
the pride of Babylon and set the captives free to return to 
the land of Israel, a greater is here. “Behold my servant 
whom I uphold, mine elect [in whom] my soul delighteth! I 
have put my Spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment 
to the nations. He shall not ery, nor lift up, nor cause his 
voice to be heard in the street. A crushed reed shall he not 
break, and dim flax shall he not quench; he shall bring 
forth judgment in (or, for) truth. He shall not faint nor 
be crushed till he have set judgment in the earth: and the 
isles shall wait for his law” (vv. 1-4). We know that Christ 
is intended (the typical one, it seems, giving occasion to the 
introduction of the Antitype). It is the more remarkable as 
being lost after this brief moment, when the prophetic strain 
resumes its previous course, and the servant of J ehovah else- 
where in this chapter and to the end of chapter xlviii. is 
unequivocally not Christ, but Israel. | 
Here however it is the Servant, the object of Jehovah’s 
delight as of His choice, the vessel of the power of the 
Spirit, and the manifester of judgment to the nations, com- 
pared with whom the Gentile avenger of God’s honour on 
the source and patron of all idols was little indeed. Yet 
He, whose glory was thus beyond all competition, displayed it 
first in perfect unobtrusive lowliness. Might of far-reaching 
testimony even was not what characterised Him thus, meek 
retirement rather, not only in presence of murderous hatred, 
but away from the multitudes that followed Him and the 
admiration of the healed who would have spread His fame, 
He “charged them that they should not make him known, 


CHAPTER XLII. 375 


that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the 
prophet, saying, Behold my servant,” &c. (Matt. xii. 14-21.) 
This state of things is seen here terminated by the victory 
of His second advent, when He shall set judgment in the 
earth and the isles shall wait for His law. The intervening 
action of the Holy Ghost here below, while He is exalted on 
high, does not enter into account. 

This leads Jehovah in magnificent terms to speak of what 
He will accomplish through His own name and glory, in 
contrast with graven images. “Thus saith God Jehovah, he 
that created the heavens, and stretched them forth; he that 
spread abroad the earth and that which cometh out of it; 
he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to 
them that walk therein. I Jehovah have called thee in 
righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, 
and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the 
Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners 
from the dungeon, [and] them that sit in darkness out of the 
prison-house. I [am] Jehovah; that [is] my name: and my 
glory will I not give to another, neither my praise unto graven 
images. Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new 
things do I declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them” 
(vv. 5-9). Is this, or anything else, too hard for Jehovah ? 

“Sing unto Jehovah a new song, his praise from the end of 
the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein, 
the isles and the inhabitants thereof. Let the wilderness 
and the cities thereof lift up [their voice], the villages 
Kedar doth inhabit; let the inhabitants of Sela (or, the rock) 
sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains. Let 
them give glory unto Jehovah, and declare his praise in the 
islands. Jehovah will go forth as a mighty man; he will 
stir up jealousy like a man of war: he will cry, yea, he will 
shout aloud; he will do mightily against his enemies, I 
have long time holden my peace, I have been still, I have 
restrained myself: [now] will I cry out like a travailing woman, 
I will gasp and pant together. I will lay waste mountains 
and hills, and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the 
rivers islands, and will dry up the pools. And I will bring 


376 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


the blind by a way they know not, in paths they know not 
will I lead them; I will make darkness light before them, and 
crooked things straight. These things will I do to them, 
and I will not forsake them. They shall be turned back, 
they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, 
that say to the molten images, [Ye are] our gods” (vv. 10-17). 

From verse 18 onward we have the utter shame of such as trust 
in these lying vanities insisted on, so as to touch the conscience 
of the guilty Jew. “Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye 
may see” (v.18). Could Israel as they are testify for Jehovah? 
How could they look the Gentiles in the face, and reprove their 
idolatries? What were they themselves after all the favours of 
the true God? “Who [is] blind but my servant? and deaf as 
my messenger [that] I sent ? who [is] blind as [he that is] made 
perfect, and blind as Jehovah’s servant? Seeing many things, 
but thou observest not; opening the ears, he heareth not” 
(vv. 19, 20). It is Israel who are in view, “perfect,” yet 
“blind.” Such was their perfection in privilege and therefore in 
solemn responsibility, but such their woeful failure. Jehovah 
contrariwise is right in all His ways. “Jehovah was well 
pleased for his righteousness’ sake to magnify the law, and 
make [it] honourable. But this [is] a people robbed and spoiled; 
[they are] all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in 
prison-houses: they are for a prey, and none delivereth ; for 
a spoil, and none saith, Restore. Who among you will give 
ear to this? [who] will hearken and hear what is to come? 
Who gave Jacob for a spoil and Israel to the robbers? did not 
Jehovah ?—he against whom we have sinned ; and they would 
not walk in his ways, nor be obedient unto his law. There- 
fore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the 
strength of battle: and it set him on fire round about, yet 
he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid [it] not to 
heart” (vv. 21-25), 

Such has been the way in chastening His rebellious people. 
Nor does He disguise the severity of His discipline. The day 
is coming when it will prove not in vain, as the next chapter 
declares His faithful affection when they knew it not. But 
they will yet and soon learn it in His grace. 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


AFTER all their faithlessness to His name, which entailed on 
Israel the fury of Jehovah (yet misunderstood and unfelt 
through the blinding influence of idolatry), in this chapter 
He proclaims His faithfulness who had called Israel by their 
name and made them His own. “ But now thus saith Jehovah 
that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O 
Israel, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee; I have called [thee] 
by thy name, thou [art] mine. When thou passest through the 
waters, I [will be] with thee, and through the rivers, they shall 
not overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire, thou 
shalt not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. 
For I [am] Jehovah thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy 
Saviour; I have given Egypt as thy ransom, Ethiopia and 
Seba for thee. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou 
hast been honourable, and I have loved thee; and I will give 
men for thee, and peoples for thy life. Fear not, for I [am] 
with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee 
from the west; I will say to the north, Give up, and to the 
south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my 
daughters from the end of the earth, every one that is called 
by my name, and whom I have created for my glory; I have 
formed him, yea, I have made him. Bring forth the blind 
people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears. Let all 
the nations be gathered together, and let the peoples be 
assembled: who among them declareth this, and showeth us 
former things? let them bring their witnesses, that they may 
be justified; or let them hear, and say, [It is] truth. Ye [are] 
my witnesses, saith Jehovah, and my servant whom I have 
chosen; that ye may know and believe me, and understand 


378 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


that I [am] He; before me there was no god formed, neither 
shall there be after me” (vv. 1-10). 

This renders the subject (namely, Israel as God’s servant) as 
plain as His own mercy in the last days. The Jews by their 
idol-loving were the blind people that had eyes and the deaf 
that had ears. Yet were they alone of all nations Jehovah’s 
witness and His servant. They will yet know, believe, and 
understand. It was because of Him Whom they rebelled 
against that they have been so spoiled; it is because of Him 
that they will be delivered, pardoned, and blessed; for as He, 
Jehovah, is the only God, so is He equally the sole Saviour. 
It was for Israel’s sake that He had sent them to Babylon and 
brought down their pride; and new things should cause the 
old wonders to be forgotten when God gives water in the 
wilderness and rivers in the desert for His chosen people, 
formed for Himself to show forth His praise. It was God 
Who once, for their’ sins, profaned the princes and people of 
Israel; it is He Who for His own sake will blot out their 
transgressions and justify themselves. Before that day dawn, 
we know (what is to them still a secret) the great salvation by 
His grace, whereby alone He can thus righteously deal with 
the guilty: Christ, the cross, is the only key. 

“T, I [am] Jehovah; and beside me there is no saviour. I 
have declared, and I have saved, and I have shown, and there 
was no strange [god] among you: therefore ye [are] my witnesses, 
saith Jehovah, that I [am] God. Yea, since the day [was], I [am] 
He; and there is none that can deliver out of my hand: I will 
work, and who shall hinder it? Thus saith Jehovah, your 
redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, For your sake I have sent 
to Babylon, and I will bring down all of them as fugitives, 
even the Chaldeans, in the ships of their rejoicing. I [am] 
Jehovah, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King, 
Thus saith Jehovah, who maketh a way in the sea, and a path 
in the mighty waters; who bringeth forth the chariot and 
horse, the army and the power—they lie down together, they 
shall not rise; they are extinct, they are quenched as flax. 
Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things 
of old. Behold, I will do a new thing; now shall it spring 


CHAPTER XLIII. 379 


forth: shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the 
wilderness, [and] rivers in the desert. The beast of the field 
shall honour me, the jackals and the ostriches; because I give 
waters in the wilderness, [and] rivers in the desert, to give 
drink to my people, my chosen: the people have I formed for 
myself, that they might set forth my praise. Yet thou hast 
not called upon me, O Jacob; for thou hast been weary of me, 
O Israel. Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy 
burnt-offerings ; neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacri- 
fices, I have not made thee to toil with oblation, nor wearied 
thee with frankincense. Thou hast bought me no sweet cane 
with money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy 
sacrifices ; but thou hast made me to toil with thy sins, thou 
hast wearied me with thine iniquities. I, I [am] he that 
blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; and I will 
not remember thy sins. Put me in remembrance; let us plead 
together: set thou forth [thy cause], that thou mayest be 
justified. Thy first father sinned, and thine interpreters have 
transgressed against me. Therefore I profaned (or, will profane) 
the princes of the sanctuary, and made (or, will make) Jacob a 
curse, and Israel a reviling” (vv. 11-28). 

Kimchi remarks that the construction indicates the future, 
or the universal present, rather than past time, Jehovah always 
profaning the responsibly holy chiefs who betrayed His name. 
In the day that is coming grace will work not only for but 
in them. Jehovah will work for His own sake, man having 
failed in every way. The “interpreters” or mediators of v, 27 
that rebelled seem included in the “princes of the sanctuary.” 
Tt has been objected to the natural sense of “thy first father,” 
that Adam was not peculiarly father of Israel, being the parent 
of all mankind. But there seems to be no force in the argu- 
ment. Israel alone had sure knowledge from God about him 
who was the first man and head of the race; and he alone, who 
was created innocent, gave the due emphasis to the description 
—<“sinned,” 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


THE opening verses (1-5) seem to be the proper conclusion of 
the foregoing chapter. The salvation of God is worthy of 
Himself, even as it springs from His own grace, and can have 
no end short of His own glory. Hence it is that not only God 
blots out His people’s transgressions for His Son’s sake, and 
will not remember their sins, but that He would banish their 
fear and fill them to overflowing with His blessing. “ And 
now hear, O Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen. 
Thus saith Jehovah that made thee, and formed thee from the 
womb, [who] helpeth thee, Fear not, O Jacob, my servant ; and 
thou, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen. For I will pour water 
upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I 
will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine 
offspring: and they shall spring up among the grass, as 
willows by the water-courses. One shall say, I [am] Jehovah’s ; 
and another shall call [himself] by the name of Jacob; and 
another shall inscribe [with] his hand, [I am] Jehovah’s, and 
surname [himself] by the name of Israel” (vv. 1-5). There is 
not the slightest need, nay, nor even room, for diverting these 
exceeding precious promises from Israel to the Gentile. It is 
quite true of course that the wild olive graft enjoys now all this 
too; but the word of Jehovah is pledged and sure to Jacob His 
servant. The express object is to banish the dread of the 
conscience-stricken Jews after their long departure from the 
true God. Elsewhere express allusions to the call of the 
Gentiles during that interval appear, as notably in Isaiah Lxv. ; 
but the point here is the consolation of the ancient people 
when grace is at work on their behalf. 

Some, like Fry, from whose general teaching better might 


CHAPTER XLIV. 381 


have been expected, were led into this misconception by not 
understanding how the next sections could have any just 
bearing on the future ways or dangers of the Jew. But this 
is to overlook a large part of scripture, and a solemn portion of 
that people's wonderful destiny. For two thousand years 
idolatry has not been their snare, but other characters of evil, 
leading to and consequent on the rejection of their Messiah. 
This, as we shall find, has its place in our prophecy from 
chapter xlix. to lvii.; as the general picture is portrayed with 
signal precision in Hosea iii. 4. But it is certain, both from 
the Old Testament and the New, that in the latter day they 
will fall once more into their old love of idols, along with the 
acceptance of the Antichrist, thus finally reproducing together 
the two sins of the past which had, each of them, brought 
on them such stern judgment providentially from God’s 
vengeance. And “there shall be great tribulation, such as 
was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, 
nor ever shall be.” (Comp. Matt. xxiv. 15, with verse 21.) 
There is thus no ground for turning aside these plain pre- 
dictions of Isaiah from the literal Israel, of whom he speaks so 
often and emphatically, to the apostate churches of Christendom. 
Idol-worship is here too, no doubt, and will surely not go 
unpunished ; but the mass of the Jews in future days will fall 
for the last time into that besetment and worse. Hence, while 
the remonstrance of the prophet bore on the evil of his own 
days, there need be no question of its being requisite for the 
Jew up to the end. 

And who can assert the glory of the true God, who expose 
the folly of false gods, like the Holy Ghost? “Thus saith 
Jehovah, the King of Israel, and his redeemer Jehovah of 
hosts; I [am] the first, and I [am] the last; and besides me 
there is no God. And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, 
and set it in order for me, since I appointed the ancient 
people? And the things that are coming, and shall come, let 
them show unto them. Fear not, neither be afraid : have not I 
caused thee to hear long ago, and showed [it]? And ye [are] 
my witnesses. Is there a God besides me? yea, there is no 
Rock: I know not [any]” (vv, 6-8). 


382 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Next follows a withering exposure of idolatry. If Israel 
were witnesses of the true God, Jehovah, the idols themselves 
bore witness by their powerlessness against their foolish 
devotees. “They that make a graven image [are] all of them 
vanity ; and their delectable things shall not profit; and they 
[are] their own witnesses: they see not, nor know, that they 
may be ashamed. Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven 
image [that] is profitable for nothing? Behold, all his fellows 
shall be ashamed ; and the workmen [are] but men. Let them 
all be gathered together, let them stand up; they shall fear, 
they shall be ashamed together. The smith [hath] tongs (or 
axe), and worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with 
hammers, and worketh it with his strong arm; but he is 
hungry and his strength faileth ; he drinketh no water, and is 
faint. The carpenter stretcheth out a line; he marketh it out 
with chalk ; he fitteth it with adzes, and he marketh it out 
with the compass (or, chisel), and maketh it after the figure of 
a man, according to the beauty of man, to remain in the house. 
When he heweth him down cedars, he also taketh a holm-oak 
and a terebinth, and he maketh one strong for himself among the 
trees of the forest; he planteth a mountain-ash, and the rain 
nourisheth [it]. And it shall be for a man to burn; and he 
taketh thereof, and warmeth himself; he kindleth [it] also, and 
baketh bread ; he maketh also a god, and worshippeth [it]; he 
maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto. He 
burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth 
flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth 
[himself], and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the light. 
And with the residue thereof he maketh a god, his graven 
image; he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth [it], and 
prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou [art] my god. 
They have no knowledge and understand not: for he hath 
plaistered their eyes, that they see not ; [and] their hearts that 
they understand not. And none taketh it to his heart, 
neither [is there] knowledge nor understanding to say, I have 
burned part of it in the fire, and also have baked bread upon 
the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and eaten [it]: and 
with the residue thereof shall I make an abomination? shall I 


CHAPTER XLIV. 383 


bow down to a block of wood? He feedeth on ashes: a 
deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver 
his soul, nor say, [Is there] not a lie in my right hand?” 
(w. 9-20). The sarcastic shafts of classic poets are poor in 
comparison for beauty or power, not to speak of their worth- 
lessness morally ; for mere ridicule, which ends in leaving the 
satirist at the shrine of his despised divinities, is the mirth of 
a fool which ends in sorrow and shame without end. 

Not so Isaiah: “Remember these things, O Jacob and Israel ; 
for thou [art] my servant: I have formed thee; thou [art] my 
servant; O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me. I have 
blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, 
thy sins: return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. Sing, O ye 
heavens, for Jehovah hath done [it]; shout, ye lower parts of 
the earth; break forth into singing, ye mountains, the forest, and 
every tree therein. For Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob, and 
glorified himself in Israel. Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer, 
and he that formed thee from the womb, I [am] Jehovah the 
maker of all [things]; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone ; 
that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself ; that frustrateth the 
tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth 
wise [men] backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish; that 
confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the 
counsel of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt 
be inhabited, and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and 
I will raise up the decayed places thereof; that saith to the 
deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers; that saith of Cyrus 
[He is] my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even 
saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built, and to the temple, 
Thy foundation shall be laid” (vv. 21-28). 

And how comes it to pass after so lofty and striking an 
assertion of Jehovah’s glory and wisdom and power, that 
men wonder He by His interpreter discloses to His people 
the conqueror of Babylon, and the restorer of the remnant? 
What more pertinent than to proclaim the name of Cyrus at 
this point? So did the man of God out of Judah name Josiah 
at Jeroboam’s altar in Bethel (1 Kings xiii.) three centuries 
and more before the event. When will they be ashamed thus 


384 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


to belittle either God and His word, or His care for His people ? 
Alas! if the night be far spent, the darkness is not less but 
more. And we know that the darkest hour is not yet come, 
though the day is at hand. But it will not be, except the 
falling away, the apostasy, come first, and the Man of sin 
be revealed. Truly coming events cast their shadows before ; 
which may sadly and satisfactorily account for the wave of 
incredulity, and against prophecy in particular, that now 
overspreads Christendom. But God does not leave Himself 
without witness; and He has wrought by His Spirit in 
many a land and tongue, that there should be faithful men 
who have a Spirit-given confidence in the living oracles. 
These, not content with having learnt by grace what the 
church of God is in union with its glorified Head, are awaiting 
Him from the heavens and proclaim the coming of His 
universal Kingdom over the earth. Hence they look with 
unwavering faith for a deep and gracious work in a remnant 
of the Jews first, and of Israel afterwards, to be united at 
length as one people of Jehovah under the true Beloved, 
their Messiah once despised and crucified, their one Shepherd 
and Prince, yea withal the Lord Jehovah of Israel. All the 
earth in that day shall be filled with His elory, and with - 
the knowledge of it and of Himself, when the heavens shall 
show it forth still more wondrously in the glorified saints, 
especially in the bride, the Lamb’s wife. 


CHAPTER XLV. 


Here Jehovah deigns to explain why He called the Eastern 
deliverer of His people by name. “Thus saith Jehovah to 
his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have held fast, to 
subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of 
kings, to open before him the two-leaved gates, and the 
gates shall not be shut. I will go before thee, and make 
the elevated places plain; I will break in pieces the gates 
of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron; and I will 
give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of 
secret places, that thou mayest know that I Jehovah, who call 
[thee] by thy name, [am] the God of Israel. For Jacob my 
servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee 
by thy name; I surnamed thee, though thou didst not know 
me” (vv. 1-4). 

The challenge of Jehovah which begins with verse 5 does 
not appear to be a mere repetition of that in chapter xliv. 
6 et seqqg., but in a very interesting way meets the special evil 
into which those fell who under Cyrus overthrew Babylon 
and its idolatrous vanities. For the Persians were famous 
for their dualistic scheme of good and evil, light and darkness, 
Ormusd and Ahriman. What can be more pointed in view of 
the utter confusion of this scheme than the words that follow ? 
“T [am] Jehovah, and there is none else, there is no God 
besides me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me: that 
they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, 
that there is none besides me. I [am] Jehovah, and there is 
none else, forming the light, and creating darkness; making 
peace, and creating evil: I Jehovah do all these [things]. Drop 
down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down 

28 


386 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


righteousness; let the earth open, and let them bring forth 
salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I Jehovah 
have created it. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! 
[Let] the potsherd [strive] with the potsherds of the earth. 
Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest 
thou? or thy work, He hath no hands? Woe unto him that 
saith unto a father, What begettest thou? or to the woman, 
What hast thou brought forth?” (vv. 5-10). 

If Jehovah reprove with woe upon woe all striving with 
Himself and fault-finding with His ways, how graciously He 
calls on His people in the very next verse to ask Him of things 
to come about His sons, and to command Him concerning His 
sons, and the work of His hands? “Thus saith Jehovah, the 
Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of the things that 
are to come; concerning my sons, and concerning the work of 
my hands, command ye me. I have made the earth, and 
created man upon it; I, [even] my hands, have stretched out the 
heavens, and all their host have I commanded. I have raised 
him up in righteousness, and I will make straight all 
his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let my exiles go, 
not for price nor reward, saith Jehovah of hosts” (vv. 11-13). 
He who made heaven and its host, earth and man upon it, was 
the raiser up of Cyrus to build His city and liberate His cap- 
tives, “not for price nor reward, saith Jehovah of hosts.” The 
haughtiest of the Gentiles should yet own God to be in Israel, 
as enemies once owned the power of the Spirit in the church. 

Then when the last idol-makers perish to confusion, Israel 
shall be saved in Jehovah with an everlasting salvation. 
“Thus saith Jehovah, the labour of Egypt, and the merchan- 
dise of Ethiopia, and the Sebaim, men of stature, shall come 
over unto thee, and they shall be thine; they shall go after 
thee; in chains they shall come over; and they shall fall down 
unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, [saying], 
Surely God [is] in thee; and there is none else, no [other] God. 
Verily thou [art] a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the 
Saviour. They shall be ashamed, yea, confounded, all of them; 
they shall go into confusion together [that are] makers of idols. 
beaal Israel shall be saved by Jehovah with an everlasting 


~ 


vw? 


CHAPTER XLV. 387 


Salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded unto the 
ages of ages.” Jehovah, the Creator, had not spoken in secret 
nor bid the seed of Jacob seek Him in vain; He speaks 
righteousness. “For thus saith Jehovah that created the 
heavens, God himself that formed the earth and made it; he 
that established it, not a waste he created it; he formed it to 
be inhabited: I [am] Jehovah; and there is none else. I have 
not spoken in secret, in a place of the land of darkness; I said 
not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I [am] 
Jehovah speaking righteousness, declaring things that are 
right” (vv. 14-19). 

The closing appeal is exceedingly direct, urgent, and trium- 
phant. “Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, 
ye [that are] escaped of the nations. They have no knowledge 
that carry the wood of their graven image, and pray unto 
a god [that] cannot save. Declare, and bring [them] near; yea, 
let them take counsel together. Who hath declared this from 
ancient time? [who] hath told it long ago? [Have] not I 
Jehovah? and there is no God else besides me; a just God 
and a Saviour, there is none besides me. Look unto me, and 
be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I [am] God, 
and there is none else. I have sworn by myself, the word 
is gone out of my mouth [in] righteousness, and shall not 
return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall 
swear. Only in Jehovah, shall [one] say, have I righteousness 
and strength: to him shall [men] come; and all that are 
incensed against him shall be ashamed. In Jehovah shall all 
the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory” (vv. 20-25). 

The commentators clash as to the “escaped of the nations.” 
But the conjecture of Mede is far from the mark, for he puts 
the expression along with Revelation xxi. 24. He ought to 
have known that “the nations of them that are saved ” would 
be the inverse of. Isaiah’s phrase, rather than a parallel. But 
it is a bad reading, probably from a scholium of Andreas, and 
contrary to every authority of value, all of which have simply 
“the nations.” Our prophet widens the salvation in these con- 
cluding verses: “Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends 


of the earth.” So in the next verse, “unto me every knee 
282 . 


388 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


shall bow, every tongue shall swear.” This extends beyond 
“all the seed of Israel who shall be justified and glory in 
Jehovah.” It is clearly applied to the Lord Jesus by the 
apostle Paul in the largest extent, and with the utmost depth 
of its meaning. (Rom. xiv., Phil. 11.) 

It is indeed a triumphant result for Israel. An everlasting 
salvation is assured them when they recognise in the Christ 
Jehovah, to Whom every knee shall bow, every tongue shall 
swear in that day. No glorying shall be in the creature 
thenceforth. The idols are no gods, but wood or stone, or 
other material of man’s device, with demons behind all, as the 
apostle teaches. God is a just God and a Saviour: how true 
now in the gospel! how manifest when the vanities of man 
are demolished by the shining forth of the glory of the Lord! 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


THE chapters xlvi—xlviii. close this section of the prophecy, the 
discussion of Israel’s guilty love of idols in presence of the 
doom of Babylon, the patron of idolatry and the instrument of 
the punishment of the Jews for that sin. 


Chapter xlvi. in the most spirited way contrasts the fall of 
the helpless objects of Babylonish worship with God’s gracious 
care over Israel. “Bel [their chief god, answering to the Zeus 
of the Greeks] boweth down, Nebo [answering to the Greek 
Hermes] bendeth: their idols are upon the beasts, and upon 
the cattle: your loads are lifted up, a burden to the weary 
[beast]. They bend, they bow down together, they could not 
deliver the burden, and themselves are gone into captivity” 
(vv. 1, 2). Thus, chief or subordinate, these false deities could 
do nothing for their votaries, and could not deliver themselves. 
The victorious foe carries them off as part of the spoil, The 
Persians detested idols. 

On the other hand, Jehovah had carried Israel from their 
national birth to their old age: “Hearken unto me, house 
of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, who 
have been borne [by me] from the belly, who have been carried 
from the womb: even to old age I [am] He, and to hoary hairs 
will I carry [you]: I have made and I will bear; and I will 
carry and will deliver” (wv. 3, 4). 

Next follows the challenge to whom they would liken the 
God of Israel. As for the Chaldean gods, it was but a question 
of gold and silver, which the goldsmith made up, and the 
people fell down and worshipped. “ To whom will ye liken 
me, and make [me] equal, and compare me, that we may be 


390 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


like? Such as lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver 
in the balance, they hire a goldsmith, and he maketh it a 
god; they fall down, yea, they worship. They bear him 
upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his place, 
and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea, 
[one] shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save 
him out of his trouble. Remember this, and show yourselves 
men: bring [it] again to mind, ye transgressors” (vv. 5-8). 

Nor is this the only appeal. It was well to bethink them 
that the gods of the nations were beneath those that adored 
them: but the prophet adds, “Remember the former things of 
old: for I [am] God, and there is none else; I [am] God, and 
there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, 
and from ancient times [the things] that are not done, saying, 
My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure, calling a 
bird of prey from the east, the man that executeth my counsel 
from a far country. Yea, I have spoken, I will also bring it to 
pass ; I have purposed [it], I will also do it” (vv. 9-11). Cyrus 
is here again cited as a striking proof of the reality of God’s 
dealings with His people, and this both in foreknowledge, in 
declared purpose, and in providential ways. This leads to the 
concluding call: “Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that [are] 
far from righteousness: I bring near my righteousness; it shall 
not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry; and I will 
give salvation in Zion unto Israel my glory” (vv. 12) 13), 
Such is the end of Jehovah, and He is very pitiful and of 
tender mercy. He Who carried His people as a nurse through 
the wilderness at the beginning will manifest unfailing grace 
at the end. In the face of their long and manifold wanderings 
from Him Who did them nothing but good, He will deliver. 
Yet will His salvation be no more sure than His righteousness. 
This we know now in the gospel, as Israel will when the 
kingdom comes in display. 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


Tus chapter shows us the degradation of Babylon itself, as in 
the preceding chapter we had judgment executed against its 
gods. 

“Come down, and sit in the dust, virgin daughter of Babylon; 
sit on the ground: [there is] no throne, O daughter of the 
Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and 
delicate. Take the millstones, and grind meal; remove thy 
veil, strip the train, uncover the leg, pass over rivers. Thy 
nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen. 
I will take vengeance, and I will meet no man. [As for] our 
Redeemer, Jehovah of hosts [is] his name, the Holy One of 
Israel. Sit silent, and get thee into darkness, daughter of the 
Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called Mistress of 
kingdoms. I was wroth with my people, I profaned mine 
inheritance, and gave them into thy hand: thou didst show 
them no mercy ; upon the aged hast thou very heavily laid thy 
yoke. And thou saidst, I shall be a mistress for ever; [so] 
that thou didst not lay these [things] to thy heart, neither 
didst remember the latter end thereof” (vv. 1-7). 

The anger of God at His guilty people was no justification 
for the merciless behaviour of Babylon ; and her confidence 
in the stability of her resources would be the precursor 
of ruin. “Now therefore hear this, [thou that art] given to 
pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thy heart, 
I [am], and all besides me [is] nothing; I shall not sit [as] 
a widow, neither shall I know loss of children. But these 
two [things] shall come to thee in a moment in one day, loss 
of children, and widowhood: in full measure shall they come 
upon thee, in spite of the multitude of thy soreeries, of 


392 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


the great abundance of thine enchantments. For thou hast 
trusted in thy wickedness; thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy 
wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou 
hast said in thy heart, I [am], and all besides me [is] nothing. 
And there cometh upon thee evil; thou shalt not know the 
dawning thereof: and mischief falleth upon thee; thou shalt 
not be able to put it away; and desolation thou knowest not 
shall come upon thee suddenly” (vv, 8-11). 

We must remember too that what made the taunt the 
more cutting was Babylon’s boast in their sorceries and 
enchantments; but even so, they could not profit nor prevail. 
“Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multi- 
tude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy 
youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou 
mayest terrify. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy 
counsels: let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly 
prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from [the things] that 
shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble, the 
fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from 
the power of the flame: [it shall] not [be] a coal to warm at, a 
fire to sit before. Thus shall they be unto thee wherein 
thou hast laboured ; they that have trafficked with thee from 
thy youth shall wander every one to his quarter; none shall 
save thee” (vv. 12-15). As they could not really predict, 
still less could they save; so He predicts, Who is the Saviour 
God. And it is to be feared that such as believe not His 
prophetic word are strangers to His saving grace. For without 
faith it is impossible to please God.. To predict, divine as it is, 
must be regarded as a small thing compared with the grace 
that saves righteously. Comparatively few in Christendom 
accept that man here as elsewhere is wholly lost in himself, 
or that in Christ the believer is truly saved. Those who trust 
in ordinances and in such as administer them never rise above 
the uncertainties of probation. Human contingency is not the 
true grace of God in which we are called to stand. 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


Our chapter is a more direct and exclusive appeal to Israel, 
to those that come forth “out of the waters of Judah.” It 
is a beautiful homily to His people. “Hear ye this, O house 
of Jacob, who are called by the name of Israel, and are come 
forth out of the waters of Judah; who swear by the name 
of Jehovah, and make mention of the God of Israel, not 
in truth, nor in righteousness. ‘or they call themselves of 
the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; 
Jehovah of hosts [is] his name” (vv. 1,2). It explains why God 
had long foretold, and then suddenly acted. They could not 
thus defraud Him of His praise. “I have declared the former 
things from of old; yea, they went forth out of my mouth, and 
I showed them: suddenly I wrought, and they came to pass. 
Because I knew that thou [art] obstinate, and thy neck [is] 
an iron sinew, and thy brow brass; therefore I have declared 
[them] to thee from of old, before they came to pass I showed 
thee, lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, 
and my graven image, and my molten image hath commanded 
them. Thou hast heard; behold all this; and ye, will ye not 
declare [it]? I have shown thee new things from this time, 
and hidden things, which thou hast not known. They are 
created now, and not from of old; and before this day thou 
heardest them not, lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew 
them. Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, 
from of old thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou 
didst deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor 
from the womb” (vv. 3-8). 

~ In verse 9 Jehovah tells them why He had not cut them 
off, “For my name’s sake will I defer mine anger, and [for] 


394 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


my praise will I refrain as to thee, that I cut thee not off. 
Behold, I have refined thee, but not as silver; I have chosen 
thee in the furnace of affliction. For mine own sake, for 
mine own sake, will I do [it]: for how should [my name] be 
polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another” 
(wv. 9-11). 

Then (in vv. 12-21) comes a tender expostulation, accom- 
plished in measure at the return from captivity, but to be 
fulfilled by-and-by in all its extent. “Hearken unto me, 
O Jacob, and Israel my called: I [am] He, I the first, I also 
the last. Yea, my hand hath laid the foundation of the 
earth, and my right hand hath spread out the heavens: 
I call unto them, they stand up together. Assemble your- 
selves, all ye, and hear; which among them hath declared these 
[things]? He whom Jehovah hath loved shall perform his 
pleasure on Babylon, and his arm [shall be] on the Chaldeans. 
I, I, have spoken; yea, I have called him: I have brought 
him, and his way shall be prosperous. Come ye near unto 
me, hear ye this; from the beginning I have not spoken in 
secret ; from the time that it was, there [am] I: and now the 
Lord Jehovah hath sent me, and his Spirit. Thus saith J ehovah, 
thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, I [am] Jehovah thy 
God, who teacheth thee to profit, who leadeth thee in the 
way thou shouldest go. Oh that thou hadst hearkened to my 
commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy 
righteousness as the waves of the sea; thy seed also had been 
as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel 
thereof: his name should not be cut off nor destroyed from 
before me. Go ye forth from Babylon, flee from the Chaldeans ; 
with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it to the 
end of the earth; say ye, Jehovah hath redeemed his servant 
Jacob. And they thirsted not [when] he led them through the 
deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them : 
. he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out.” Cyrus had 
not acted without the God Who had called him by name. Nor 
was it (save judicially) he who had ordered things for Israel. 
The word is, “Jehovah hath redeemed his servant J acob.” The 
moral is, “[There is] no peace, saith Jehovah, unto the wicked,” 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 395 


It is a misconception of Israel’s future to imagine that no 
future question arises between God and them as to graven 
images. The Lord Jesus has ruled the contrary, if we under- 
stand His intimation in Matt. xii. 43-45, with other scriptures 
of like purport, and even from the prophet before us. We all 
know how confident the Jews seem that they are proof against 
idols. They were not in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, long 
after the return from Babylon; and they are destined to fall 
into the same pit again ere the age closes, as the last verse 
of Daniel ix. and ch. xi. 38, 39 plainly prove. For when has 
self-righteousness effectually resisted Satan’s wiles? “ Even 
so shall it be unto this wicked generation.” The generation 
of unbelief has not yet passed away. And as it will be guilty 
once more of its old love of such abominations, it will also see 
greater than these, as the next part of our prophet notifies. 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


A NEw division of Isaiah opens here. It is no longer Babylon 
and idolatry, and a destruction viewed as the overthrow of 
image worship in the earth. Here it is the far deeper question 
of Christ Himself and His rejection by the Jews. We shall 
find that this portion, from chapter xlix., runs down to the end 
of chapter lvii., where, as the former was “There is no peace, 
saith Jehovah, unto the wicked,” so the latter ends with 
“There is no peace, saith my God, unto the wicked ”; “Jehovah” 
being in contrast with idols, and “my God” connected with 
the still deeper iniquity of the people in refusing “the true God 
and eternal life,” even the Lord Jesus their anointed King. 
They were wicked in both respects: wicked in going after false 
gods of the Gentiles; wicked yet more in rejecting their divine 
Messiah. 

The chapter opens with a call to the isles to listen. “Listen, 
O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye peoples from afar. J ehovah 
hath called me from the womb ; from the bowels of my mother 
hath he made mention of my name.” There was a great 
providential preparation. “And he hath made my mouth like 
a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, 
and made me a polished shaft ; in his quiver hath he hid me.” 
There was thus protection also, “And he said unto me, Thou : 
[art] my servant, Israel, in whom I will glorify myself” 
(vv. 1-3). Such was the purpose of God about Israel ; but, 
Israel failing, Christ becomes the true Israel. It is the 
transition from the people to the Messiah in Whom alone 
it could be. 

“And I said (says Christ), I have laboured in vain, I have 
spent my strength for nought.” Christ substitutes Himself 


CHAPTER XLIX. 397 


for Israel. They had been the servant nominally and 
responsibly ; Christ becomes the true and righteous servant of 
God, when the other proved false. Nevertheless, even in 
Christ all comes to nothing at first through Jewish unbelief, 
through man’s evil and enmity. “I have laboured in vain, 
I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain ; nevertheless 
my judgment [is] with Jehovah, and my work with my God” 
(v. 4). The failure, apparently, of the purposes of God in the first 
instance from man’s wickedness only leads to a better estab- 
lishment of them, and to a more glorious form and display in 
result. “And now, saith Jehovah that formed me from the 
womb [to be] his servant, that I should bring Jacob again 
to him (though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious 
in the eyes of Jehovah, and my God shall be my strength).” 
This is the comfort of Christ, that although the work was not 
done, and Israel would not be gathered (how often would He 
have gathered them!) yet would He be glorious. “ And he saith, 
It is a small thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise 
up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: 
I will also give thee for a light to the nations, that thou 
mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth” (wv. 5, 6). 
The original thought was to gather Israel, but Israel would 
not be gathered. Then, says God, That is too small a thing; 
I will save the nations also. But He is first given as a light 
to the Gentiles. It is rather going out than gathering in: at 
any rate, such is the turn given to the passage now, under 
the gospel. While Israel is not yet gathered, Christ becomes 
a light to the Gentiles. But God’s purpose never fails, and 
so we find, “Thus saith Jehovah, the Redeemer of Israel, his 
Holy One, to him whom the soul despiseth, to him whom the 
nation abhorreth” (it is clear that Christ is now viewed as 
a rejected person, the cross being the great expression of that 
rejection), “to a servant of rulers, kings shall see and arise, 
princes and they shall worship, because of Jehovah that is 
faithful, the Holy One of Israel, who hath chosen thee. Thus 
saith Jehovah, In an acceptable time have I answered thee, 
and in aday of salvation have I helped thee: and I will 
preserve thee and give thee for a covenant of the people (that 


398 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


is, of Israel), to establish the land (or, earth), to cause to 
inherit the desolate heritages; saying to the prisoners, Go 
forth, to them that [are] in darkness, Show yourselves” 
(vv. 7-9). It is evident that this supposes all to be in ruin, 
but that the Lord Jesus is the destined repairer of the 
breaches. 

“They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures [shall 
be] on all bare heights. They shall not hunger nor thirst; 
neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath 
mercy on them will lead them, and by the springs of water will 
he guide them. And I will make all my mountains a way, 
and my highways shall be exalted. Behold, these shall come 
from afar; and behold, these from the north and from the west; 
and these from the land of Sinim” (vv. 9-12). It is the 
return of Israel that is here predicted from all parts of the 
earth, but a return after they have been dispersed thither; so 
that not only from the north and south, but even from the 
land of Sinim—that is, from China—they finally emerge and 
gather in Palestine. It may not be known to all who read 
this volume, that the learned Ewald tries to prove, in opposi- 
tion to the “higher critics” generally, that Egypt was the land, 
not Babylon, where these closing chapters of Isaiah (or, as they 
would say, the pseudo-Isaiah) were written. He bases his 
dream on the slender ground that there are so many allusions 
of interest to Egypt and Ethiopia; so much acquaintance with 
their habits and ways, &. To this end he binds the name 
of Sinim to the people of Pelusium. Gesenius, however, was 
too sensible to overlook that a remote race in the south-east 
was meant; and even Knobel and Hitzig point to China, 
the Rabbinical name of which is Tsin. 

No wonder that we find not merely a call to the isles, but 
to heaven and earth to rejoice. “ Shout, O heavens; and be 
joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains, 
For Jehovah hath comforted his people and will have merey 
on his afflicted ones” (v. 13). It is the last days, and Jehovah 
reviewing His goodness and calling upon all the universe to be 
joyful. 

“But Zion said, Jehovah hath forsaken me, and the Lord 


CHAPTER XLIX. 399 


hath forgotten me.” But Jehovah pleads with Zion’s reproach, 
and says, “Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she 
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, 
they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I have 
graven thee upon the palms of [my] hands: thy walls [are] 
continually before me. Thy children shall make haste; thy 
destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth from 
thee” (vv. 14-17). The enemies of Israel disappear, and Israel 
comes forward, long forgotten apparently, but now to be estab- 
lished for ever. So their God calls upon them to see a wondrous 
sight: “Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these 
gather themselves together, [and] come to thee. [As] I live, 
saith Jehovah, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as 
with an ornament, and bind them [on thee], as a bride [doeth]. 
For [in] thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of 
thy destruction, thou shalt even now be too straitened by 
reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up 
shall be far away. The children of thy bereavement shall yet 
say in thine ears, The place [is] too strait for me: give place 
to me that I may dwell” (vv. 18-20). 

It is the harvest of joy for the chosen but guilty people, 
after the long sowing in tears. And now there seems no room 
to stow away the children. “And thou shalt say in thy heart, 
Who hath begotten me these (seeing I had lost my children, 
and was desolate, a captive, and driven to and fro)? and who 
hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where 
[were] they?” (v. 21). It is the joining together of the dis- 
persed of all Israel, those who had been forgotten. At the 
present time the Jews are the only ones clearly known to be of 
Israel; but those so long hidden are the ten tribes. The Jews 
will have the certainty that they are Israel and yet not 
known to them. They had been in the dark for ages. But now 
Jehovah signifies His will to the nations of the earth. “Thus 
saith the Lord Jehovah, Behold, I will lift up my hand to the 
nations, and set up my ensign to the peoples; and they shall 
bring thy sons in [their] bosom, and thy daughters shall be 
carried upon [their] shoulders. And kings shall be thy nursing 
fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow 


400 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


down to thee with [their] faces to the earth, and lick the dust 
of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I [am] Jehovah, and they 
that wait for me shall not be ashamed” (vv. 22, 23). Such will 
be the moral state of Israel in that day. They shall wait for 
Jehovah and shall not be ashamed. 

But, further, they will have no reason to fear their enemies. 
The last verse shows that the same God, Who deals in such 
incomparable mercy to Israel, will beat down all those who 
had plundered them. “Shall the prey be taken from the 
mighty, or the lawful captives be delivered? For thus saith 
Jehovah, Even the captive of the mighty shall be taken away, 
and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: and I will 
contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save 
thy children. And I will feed them that oppress thee with 
their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own 
blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I 
Jehovah [am] thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One 
of Jacob” (vv. 24-26). The condign vengeance of God upon the 
enemies of Israel is come. Such is the future that Jehovah 
guarantees to Israel after the rejection of the Messiah. It is 
impossible therefore, if we apply, to exhaust this chapter in the 
return from the Babylonish captivity ; it beyond doubt speaks 
of the far more complete ingathering at the end of this age. 
So opens the new subject of Christ’s rejection by His people, 
and of their gathering in after He has been made a light to the 
end of the earth. But when Zion might have thought herself 
entirely forgotten, Jehovah turns His hand upon these little 
ones, and puts down the nations of the earth; when either 
their kings and queens become the servants of Israel, or He 
makes an example of them in divine judgment. 


CHAPTER L. 


Ovr last chapter set forth the vast change which turns on the 
substitution of Christ, the true servant of God, for Israel His 
servant publicly and responsibly, but in truth the slave of His 
enemy. The new sin of the people ensued thereon, not 
idolatry, but rejection of the Messiah by the Jews, only 
consistent in their unbelief and opposition to God. They 
would none of Him or His law. They had followed heathen 
gods; they now refuse His anointed servant. But this leads 
in the wisdom of God to the immediate blessing of the 
Gentiles in the day of grace; as it also becomes in result 
the basis of the ultimate restoration of Israel and the joy 
of all the earth in the day of glory. The chapter accordingly 
sketches the whole sweep of God’s ways from the rejection 
of Christ to the triumphs of the last days. 

In chapter 1. we are in presence of little more than a single 
point in that great circle of events; but is it not the centre 
and pivot of all? The humiliation of Jesus, the servant of 
Jehovah, but withal Jehovah Himself, their own Messiah, 
despised not of strangers merely but of His own people! 
Deliverance and glory were sure in the end. But so was the 
sad alienation of Israel meanwhile; so moreover was their sale 
of themselves. How was this? “Thus saith Jehovah, Where 
[is] the bill of your mother’s divorcement, whom I have put 
away ? or which of my creditors [is it] to whom I have sold 
you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and 
for your transgressions is your mother put away” (v. 1). 
It was no churl who found his wretched pleasure in putting 
away the wife who displeased him; it was no selfish parent 
who relieved his own necessities at the expense of his children, 

20 


402 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


And the proof of their rebellion appears in verses 2, 3: 
“Wherefore did I come, and there was no man? I called, and 
there was none to answer? Is my hand at all shortened, that 
I cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, 
at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a wilder- 
ness: their fish stink, because [there is] no water, and die for 
thirst. I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make 
sackcloth their covering.” His coming, His call was unheeded, 
though He had already, since the days of Pharaoh, proved 
what He was in behalf of His people. 

Did the Jews question this? Did they say to Jehovah, 
as the Gentiles by-and-by will to the King coming in glory, 
“When saw we thee,” &c.? Here is His answer by anticipa- 
tion: “The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of the 
instructed, that I should know how to speak a word in season 
to the weary. He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth 
mine ear to hear as the instructed” (v. 4). Nor this only. “The 
Lord Jehovah hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, 
I turned not away back” (v. 5). Jehovah had deigned to 
become a man on earth, and here to walk in obedience, owning 
God; and this Christianity alone fully explains; for Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost were most truly and equally Jehovah. 
And He, who came thus to do the will of God as man here 
below, was, as we know, the Son, Who, Himself God and 
Jehovah, could look up and say, “The Lord Jehovah hath 
opened mine ear,” &c. 

It is not the same truth here as in Exodus xxi., where the 
Hebrew servant might have gone out free, but says, I love my 
master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free; 
and he is brought to the door-post before the judges and has his 
ear bored through in sign of perpetual service. So did Christ 
the true servant and Lord of all; He too has pledged Himself 
to serve eternally. Again, it is not the same as Psalm xis 
where “mine ears hast thou digged” is cited from the LXX 
(so in Hebrews x.), as “a body hast thou prepared me.” The 
“boring” of the ear found its answer in the Lord's willing 
subjection to death, in which He identified Himself with the 
need and interests of Master, wife, and children. The “digging” 


CHAPTER L. 403 


of the ear was not after He became a servant, but rather in 
order to it. Thus was He formed as it were to be a servant, 
a body fitted in which, though He were a Son, He learned 
obedience by the things which He suffered. For indeed He 
did become a man and a servant in this world. Isaiah looks 
at a time intermediate—neither incarnation, nor death, but 
His path in life, wherein the opened ear marks lowly intelli- 
gent attention to His Father’s will; as the closed ear in fallen 
man’s case is significant of disobedience or indifference to the 
communications of God. 

But obedience (especially public service) in such a world 
as this could only be, to such a One as He, continual, and to 
us hardly conceivable, suffering. Hence the issue at once 
follows, “I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to 
them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face from shame 
and spitting” (v. 6). How solemn the thought; and what a 
picture of God in the presence of man! His humiliation 
(which should have made Him infinitely more precious, as 
being the incomparable proof of His love) gave the desired 
oceasion to man under Satan’s leading to insult Him to the 
uttermost, Who reviled not again. 

But still He goes on—yea, to death, the death of the cross. 
“But the Lord Jehovah will help me; therefore shall I not 
be confounded ; therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I 
know that I shall not be ashamed. [He is] near that justifieth 
me; who will contend with me? let us stand together: who [is] 
mine adversary ? let him draw near to me. Behold, the Lord 
Jehovah will help me; who [is] he [that] shall condemn me? 
Behold they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall 
eat them up” (vv. 7-9). 

Thus Jehovah challenges His foes and sees their ruin sealed 
in their momentary triumph over Him Whom, if man slew, 
God raised again from the dead. Notice here what has been 
often pointed out, that the apostle Paul cites this passage in 
the close of Romans viii, and applies to the Christian what 
the Spirit here predicates of Christ. It would be childish to 
deny its application to the Lord because of this; but it is 
hardly less childish to overlook the precious intimation that 

202 


404 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


the same Spirit applies to us now what He uttered then in 
God’s vindication of Christ rejected. Such is the Christian’s 
blessed and present privilege—association with Christ risen 
after God undertakes to glorify Him Whom the Jews (and 
Gentiles) cast out. But this plain truth distinguishes those 
who now believe from Israel in their best estate. Christianity 
is quite another thing from Israel, though it may inherit 
promises; for we, being Christ’s, are Abraham’s seed, heirs 
according to promise. But the Christian is also much more, 
and has a relation to Christ in heavenly glory which is far 
beyond Abraham or Israel. Now only are believers His body, 
one with their Head in heaven. 

The closing verses make this yet plainer and prove its 
importance. “Who [is] among you that feareth Jehovah, that 
obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh [in] darkness, 
and hath no light? let him trust in the name of Jehovah, 
and stay upon his God” (v.10). For thus we have distinguished 
most definitely the Christian from the future Jewish remnant. 
The mystery was yet hid in God. Christ humbled and 
delivered was revealed; our place, not then revealed, is now 
seen in Him risen and glorified. ‘They on the contrary, 
walking in darkness and wanting light, will be called to 
trust in Jehevah and stay on their God, when there is 
nothing else to lean on. But these, who have no light yet, 
walking in darkness yet confidingly in hope, shall find a 
glorious deliverance when He appears. We are children of 
light now, children of day before it dawns upon the earth; 
we follow Him in spirit where He is, yea, are brought to God 
and free of the holiest while here. They must pass through 
an unequalled tribulation because of Jewish apostasy, but 
shall be blessed at the end. 

As for the apostate mass of the Jews, their portion plainly 
follows. “Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass 
[yourselves] about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, 
and in the sparks [that] ye have kindled. This shall ye have 
of my hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow” (v 11) Tt sia 
always vain for a sinful man to trust his own devices or 
the remedies of men to better his condition before God, or 


CHAPTER L. 405 


to enjoy enduring comfort. The God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ is the Father of mercies and the God 
of all encouragement. But in the day that is at hand the 
folly and the madness of unbelief will be made apparent. 
Judgment will demonstrate what it is to confide in self, not 
in Him to Whom God directs those who hear His word. 
“Blessed are all they that put their trust in Him,” the Son. 

But among the Jews, as in Christendom, men will turn from 
Christ to every idol and abomination Satan puts before them. 
Then also the day will come, in contrast with the day of 
salvation now, when He will break them with a rod of iron, 
and dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel. Rev. ii. 26, 27 is 
express, that this judicial dealing will only be when the church 
is glorified, not in the day of grace. “Now therefore be wise, 
O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve 
Jehovah with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, 
lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, for his wrath 
will soon be kindled. Blessed are all they that put their 
trust in him” (Ps. ii). This is very different from the gospel 
now, but it is equally of God in its due season, and will surely 
go forth when the dealings of divine judgment on man begin. 
And the wicked among the Jews must suffer more than the 
Gentiles, and professing Christians more severely than the 
Jews, as is most righteous. 

It is not as yet expiation that is foreshown here as in chapter 
liii., but the divine power that belonged to Him Who came into 
the humiliation and need of His people, only to prove the 
depth of His love and of their evil heart of unbelief. In these 
circumstances of unfathomable trial His entire and lowly 
submission was proved, and Jehovah’s vindication of Him Who, 
being God, became the Servant of His will and for His glory, 
with its results for friends and foes. 


CHAPTER LI. 


In chapter 1. we have seen the divine Messiah in the depths of 
humiliation, but the Lord Jehovah helping and justifying Him. 
In chapter liii. (which really begins at lii. 13) we shall see Him 
“wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities,” 
when Jehovah “laid on him the iniquity of us all.” (Compare 
Psalms xxii. and lxix.) Between these everlasting foundations 
of blessing for Israel (or for any), the Holy Spirit gives us 
awakening appeals of the utmost force, interest, and beauty. 
It is a complete whole, consisting of seven distinct parts 
(chap. li, 1-3; 4-6; 7, 8; then, 9-16; 17-23; lii. 1-10; lastly, 
11, 12), which trace the gradations of the godly Jewish 
remnant from their deep distress, fearing Jehovah and obeying 
the voice of His servant, though in darkness as yet and having 
no light, but gradually advancing till they stand in the full 
glory that was promised them. 

The first remark to be made is one of no small importance 
as affecting the interpretation or rather application of this 
prophetic strain. It is not under the head of Babylon, but of 
a rejected Messiah. And in fact the attempt to apply to their 
state after the return from Babylon either the calls of 
righteousness to them, or the answers of the Spirit in them, and 
the final word as of a priest to Jehovah abandoning their old 
seats of impurity, is not worth a refutation—hardly a notice. 
Chapter xviii. closed the old part of the subject. Chapter xlix. 
opened the new complaint and ground of judgment God lays 
against His people—not idolatry judged by the captivity in 
Babylon, but the refusal of Christ, the ground of their dis- 
persion and distresses under the fourth empire. Therefore was 
Israel divorced from Jehovah; but a remnant, poor in spirit, 
by grace obey the voice of His hurabled Servant. Their moral 


CHAPTER LI. 407 


restoration and final triumph are here brought before us in as 
orderly a way as is compatible with the sublimest of prophets. 

The first appeal to hear is to them as following after 
righteousness and seeking Jehovah. Such will be few indeed 
at first. They may feel themselves alone, the mass of Israel 
being apostate like the Gentiles. But they are exhorted to 
look to Abraham and Sarah. “Hearken to me, ye that follow 
after righteousness, ye that seek Jehovah: look unto the rock 
[whence] ye were hewn, and to the hole of the pit [whence] ye 
were digged. Look unto Abraham your father, and unto 
Sarah [that] bare you: for when he was alone I called him, and 
blessed him, and made him many” (vv.1, 2). Then faith must 
count on no less but more manifest blessing, after all their 
sorrow now at its worst. “For Jehovah will comfort Zion ; 
he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her 
wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of 
Jehovah: joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanks- 
giving and the voice of melody” (v. 3). 

The next goes farther and calls them Jehovah’s people and 
His nation. “Listen unto me, O my people; and give ear 
unto me, O my nation: for a law shall go forth from me, and I 
will make my judgment to rest for a light of the peoples. My 
righteousness [is] near, my salvation is gone forth, and mine 
arms shall judge the peoples: the isles shall wait for me, and 
on mine arm shall they trust. Lift up your eyes to the 
heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens 
shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old 
like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like 
manner ; but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteous- 
ness shall not be abolished” (vv. 4-6). “Listen,” &e. (the word 
being a different one from the more general term in verses 1, 7, 
and implies attention). It is a total mistake in Bishop Lowth 
to think the address in this case is made not to the Jews but 
to the Gentiles, “as in all reason it ought to be! ” It was the 
more required as a comfort for the Jews, because they have 
been so long called Lo-ammi. (Compare Hosea i. ii.) “The 
peoples” are distinguished, for whose light His judgment 
should be established, as His arms should judge them, while 


408 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


His righteousness and salvation made good for ever should be 
the portion of Israel. 

The third calls them to hear, as knowing righteousness and 
having Jehovah’s law in their hearts. Why should such fear 
the reproach and revilings of men whom the moth and the 
worm, little and feeble as they are, should devour? “ Hearken 
unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose 
heart [is] my law ; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be 
ye dismayed at their revilings. For the moth shall eat them 
up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but 
my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation unto all 
generations” (vv. 7, 8). 

Similarly the Spirit now answers, as it were, in the remnant. 
First, they call for the power of Jehovah to assert. itself 
against their mighty foes, as of old against proud Egypt. 
“ Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of Jehovah; awake, 
as in the ancient days, the generations of old. [Art] thou not 
he that cut Rahab in pieces, [and] wounded the monster? [Art] 
thou not he who dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; 
that made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to 
pass over?” (vv. 9, 10). They predict their deliverance in 
verse 11, and Jehovah's reply to their trembling hearts in 
terms as full of pathos as of grandeur in verses 12-16. “And 
the ransomed of Jehovah shall return and come to Zion with 
singing ; and everlasting joy [shall be] upon their heads: they 
shall obtain gladness and joy; sorrow and sighing shall flee away. 
I, 1, [am] he that comforteth you: who [art] thou, that thou art 
afraid of weak man [that] shall die, and of the son of man [that] 
shall be made [as] gras: ; and thou hast forgotten Jehovah thy 
Maker, who stretched forth the heavens, and laid the founda- 
tions of the earth; and thou fearest continually all the day 
because of the fury of the oppressor, when he maketh ready 
to destroy? and where [is] the fury of the oppressor? The 
captive exile shall speedily be loosed; and he shall not die 
[and go down] into the pit, neither shall his bread fail. And T 
[am] Jehovah thy God, which stirreth up the sea, that the waves 
thereof roar: Jehovah of hosts [is] his name. And I have put 
my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee with the shadow 


CHAPTER Lt 409 


of my hand, to plant the heavens, and to lay the foundations 
of the earth, and to say unto Zion, Thou [art] my people” 
(vv. 11-16). 

Next, the Spirit of God summons Jerusalem to arise and 
stand up, with a most vivid description of her reeling under 
Jehovah’s judgment without one of her sons to guide or help, 
and of His taking the cup from her hand, not here to drink it 
Himself, but to put it into the hands of their oppressors. 
“ Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at 
the hand of Jehovah the cup of his fury ; thou hast drunk— 
hast drained out the bowl of the cup of staggering. [There is] 
none to guide her among all the sons [whom] she hath brought 
forth ; neither [is there any] that taketh her by the hand of all 
the sons [that] she hath brought up. These two [things] are 
befallen thee ; who will bemoan thee? desolation and destruc- 
tion, and famine and sword ; how shall I comfort thee? Thy 
sons have fainted, they lie at the top of all the streets, as 
an antelope (or, oryx) in a net; they are full of the fury of 
Jehovah, the rebuke of thy God. Therefore hear now this, thou 
afflicted and drunken, but not with wine: thus saith thy Lord 
Jehovah, and thy God [that] pleadeth the cause of his people, 
Behold, I have taken out of thy hand the cup of stagger- 
ing, the bowl of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more 
drink it again: and I will put it into the hand of them that 
afflict thee, who have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we 
may go over: and thou hast laid thy back as the ground, and 
as the street, to them that went over” (vv. 17-23). 

It is no wonder that interpreters should be much divided 
who apply these appeals and answers of increasing earnestness, 
either to the past history of the Jews or to the time of the first 
advent. Neither at all corresponds to the language of the 
Holy Spirit, who really looks forward to the gradual progress 
of Jehovah’s dealings with the future remnant and His 
working in their souls as they rise from their degradation or 


apprehend their calling. 


CHAPTER LII. 1-12. 


THIRDLY, Zion is now called on. “ Awake, awake, put on thy 
strength, O Zion ; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, 
the holy city: for henceforth there shall no more come into 
thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. Shake thyself from 
the dust ; arise, sit thee down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from 
the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. For thus 
saith Jehovah, Ye were sold for nought; and ye shall be re- 
deemed without money. For thus saith the Lord Jehovah, My 
people went down at the first into Egypt to sojourn there: and 
the Assyrian oppressed them without cause. Now therefore, 
what have I here, saith Jehovah, that my people is taken 
away for nought? their rulers make them howl, saith 
Jehovah, and my name continually all the day [is] blasphemed. 
Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore [they 
shall know] in that day that I [am] He that saith, Behold, 
[it is] 1” (wv. 1-6). The days of Egypt and of Assyria should 
never return: no more the oppressor should be known. 
Jehovah’s people shall know His name, Himself as revealed in 
it, as unchangeable in His mercy to them as in His own being. 

Beautiful then in their eyes, as in His, are the feet of 
him that brings good tidings and publishes peace. Before 
(chap. xl) the cities of Judah were told, “ Behold your God.” 
Now Zion hears, “Thy God reigneth!” The watchmen lift up 
their voice, singing, not warning ; the very wastes of J erusalem, 
so long forsaken, sing together in their irrepressible joy, 
“How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that 
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth 
good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation ; that saith 
unto Zion, Thy God reigneth! The voice of thy watchmen ! 


CHAPTER LI. 1-12. 411 


they lift up the voice, together do they sing; for they shall see 
eye to eye, when Jehovah bringeth again Zion. Break forth into 
joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for Jehovah 
hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem, 
Jehovah hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all 
the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the 
salvation of our God” (wv. 7-10). 

Lastly, the strain closes with the peremptory call to act 
consistently with the holiness of Jehovah and of His sanctuary. 
“Depart, depart, go out from thence, touch no unclean [thing]; 
go out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the 
vessels of Jehovah” (v. 11). Babylon is pointedly dropped: 
a larger sphere is meant. It should not be, as of old, in haste 
or in anxiety, however they were guided and delivered then. 
The greatest triumphs of their fathers fade in the glorious 
intervention of Jehovah which the children now know. “For 
ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight; for J ehovah 
will go before you, and the God of Israel [will be] your rear- 
ward” (v. 12). It is in truth and in its fullest display 
the day of Jehovah, when Israel for ever leave the unclean 
Gentiles, henceforth to be a richer blessing to them than their 
evils had been a snare and ruin to Israel. 

Now that Zion is thus summoned to awake out of ruin and 
suffering and degradation through her sins, and is by grace 
bidden to rise, and stand forth in the righteousness and beauty 
Jehovah puts on her, the end of the chapter introduces once 
more and more fully than ever Him through Whom so blessed 
a change could come to pass. But it also, to make it adequate, 
demands that His vicissitudes should be set out distinctly ; and 
this was the more needful, because it seemed unaccountable 
that One, so infinitely worthy and glorious, should have passed 
through them, when one thought either of Jehovah on the one 
hand, or of the Jewish people on the other. This gives rise, 
therefore, to the opening out of the great hidden necessity for 
Messiah’s atoning sufferings, if the divine nature were to be 
vindicated respecting sin, and Israel (or any others) were to 
be purged and blessed. As we of the church behold Christ 
glorified on high in answer to His cross, so will Israel see Him 
set on the summit of earth’s universal glory for the same reason. 


CHAPTER LII. 13-15. 


THE section, of which this is the preface, assumes the truth 
already before us in chapter 1, pursues it farther and more 
profoundly, and thus completes the foundation of all that 
follows. It embraces all the next chapter which forms part 
of it, and is of the profoundest interest and importance. 

The elder Jewish interpreters did not contest the application 
to the Messiah. Thus Jonathan Ben Uzziel expressly speaks 
to this effect in the Chaldee paraphrase (given in the Antwerp, 
Paris, and London Polyglotts). So the Talmud Babyl. (in 
Tr. Sanhedrim, cap. helek, fol. 98) applies to the Messiah, 
chap. li. 4. Again, the book of Zohar confirms this in the 
comment on Exodus (fol. 95, col. 3), and the Mechilta (accord- 
ing to the Jalkut Shimoni, part ii. fol. 90, col. 1) is no less 
distinct, as even Aben Ezra, Abarbanel, and other distinguished 
men among their later authors confess. I am indebted to 
another (who has supplied some of these references) for the 
striking fact that even now, in the prayers of the synagogue 
used universally, there is the clearest witness to the same 
truth. For instance, at the Passover they pray in these terms: 
“Hasten and cause the shadows to flee away. Let him be 
exalted and extolled and be high, who is now despised. Let 
him deal prudently and reprove and sprinkle many nations.” 
Again, in the prayers for the day of Atonement, there is 
as plain an allusion to the righteous Anointed bearing the yoke 
of iniquities and transgression, wounded because of it, and men 
(or Israel at least) healed by His wound. The translator (D. 
Levi) tries to turn part of the prayer aside to Josiah, as do 
some of the Rabbis; but the prayer expressly alludes to the 
Messiah in one of these references to Isaiah liii, just cited, 
even according to the same person. 


CHAPTER LII. 13-15, 413° 


The more modern writers, who dread the ancient application 
of their fathers, have invented a double means of escape, either 
by some distinguished man like Josiah or Jeremiah, or by the 
Jewish people elsewhere styled “my servant” in the prophecy. 
But in vain. This section is so punctually and exclusively 
applicable to our Lord that these efforts only prove the will of 
unbelief and its failure. In the beginning of chapter xlix. 
we have already seen Christ, the Servant, substituted for Israel 
who had been altogether wanting. We have seen in chapter I. 
that the godly Jews are exhorted to obey the voice of this Ser- 
vant of Jehovah, humbled though He has been among men, but 
vindicated of God, and indeed He is God. 

The three closing verses of lii. open the new and full view of 
Messiah suffering and exalted in connexion with Israel; for 
this last qualification needs to be borne in mind, lest man 
should look for that which it is no part of the Spirit’s work 
here to reveal. The union of Jew and Gentile in one body, as- 
well as Christ Head over all things to it, His church, is, as the 
apostle tells us, a mystery, that is, a secret not revealed in Old 
Testament times. Many points true of the church and the 
Christian are revealed in this prophecy as in others; but 
nowhere is heavenly union until after His rejection and 
ascension, and not fully known till the apostle Paul was 
entrusted with the administration of it. 

The exalted Messiah of Israel is then before us, who erst was 
covered with shame and bent to such humiliation as was never 
before nor since the portion for any son of man. Hence many 
were dumb through astonishment, or rather perhaps abhorrence 
_“shocked * at Him: they had looked for Messiah far other- 
wise. His lowly mien and surroundings of life and labours 
first disappointed ; His meek acceptance of insult and suffering 
next drew out all their malice and aversion. “So shall he 
sprinkle many nations.” The Septuagint translates, “So shall 
many nations regard him with admiration ” ; that is, it would 
seem, in contrast with Jewish vexation and hatred; but this 
supposes a different verb in their Hebrew copies, though 
differing only very slightly in form. Some of the ablest Jewish 
critics take it as meaning that He will drop the word, and 


414 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


so teach if not refresh many Gentiles. Certainly what is 
said of kings implies a reverent and subject silence before Him. 
Thus verse 15 may be considered to stand in antithesis to verse 
14: the one presenting the bitter unbelieving disappointment 
of the chosen; the other the beneficent dealing with the 
Gentiles, so that their kings are mute with awe in His presence. 
This accordingly cannot, save generally, apply at this time, 
but joins on the effects of His advent in glory in contrast with 
the days of His flesh, in verse 14, and in unison with the 
opening words of verse 13. The apostle only uses the 
principle of the last words for his own going out with the 
gospel where no other had preceded, and no sound of Christ 
might have yet reached; but he in no way treats this as 
the fulfilment of that oracle. 

“Behold,” says God now through His prophet, “my 
servant will deal prudently [or, rather prosper], he shall be 
exalted and extolled and be very high. As many were 
astonished at thee (his visage was so marred more than 
any man, and his form more than the sons of men), so 
shall he sprinkle* many nations; kings shall shut their 
mouths at him: for that which had not been told them shall 
they see; and that which they had not heard shall they 
consider” (vv. 13-15). What can be less congruous than 
the facts of Josiah, Jeremiah, or the Jewish people? Neither 
the king nor the prophet had any such destiny as could be 
fairly brought into this remarkable contrast of, first, deep 
shame, then wide and lofty glory before subject nations and 


* This phrase has tormented the critics. The Fathers in general apply it 
to the spiritual work of Christianity; the ancient Jews for the most part 
to the judicial effect of Messiah’s kingdom in dispersing or casting away 
the Gentiles. Some of the old versions took the word as expressive of 
amazement. Gesenius (in his Zhes.) comes pretty much to the same thing, 
considering the word to mean the effect in starting from their seats those 
who suddenly see some great personage when it was least expected. But 
“sprinkling” is the literal meaning, however we may apply it. Some think 
it simpler to take it that He, Jehovah, will sprinkle many nations on Him, 
the Messiah. But it is hard to see the superior propriety of such a sense 
to the common view, that the very humiliation for the gracious work of 
redemption, then achieved, answers the surprise of many of old in the 
cleansing of many nations by-and-by, 


CHAPTER LIL 13-15. 415 


kings. And though it is true, as we have often noticed, that 
“my servant” sometimes applies to Israel in this prophet, there 
are always definite contextual marks which render the decision 
by no means difficult or doubtful. This is made evident and 
certain from chapter liii, where there is the most obvious 
distinction between the Individual in question and the people 
who esteemed Him not. For He bore their griefs and 
carried their sorrows, yea, was wounded for their trans- 
gressions, and brought healing to them by His stripes when 
bruised for their iniquities. To identify this suffering One 
with the people from whom and for whom He thus suffered, 
and to whom He afterwards brings such signal blessing, is 
the grossest confusion on the face of the matter. But let 
us turn to the wondrous words of our God from these 
unbelieving and biassed vagaries of men. 

The humiliation of the Messiah ran so counter to every 
preconceived thought and wish of the Jew that one can 
readily understand the advantage which Satan found in urging 
on the people, leaders and all, to their fatal unbelief and 
rejection of Him. But there was a deeper ground of aversion 
in the heart than disappointment in their national ambition ; 
and this takes in man universally, and not Israel only. “ For 
he was despised and left alone of men.” They shrank from 
One who sounded and laid bare man’s iniquities and enmity to 
God, Himself the perfection of obeying God and loving man. 
Hence, notwithstanding the attractiveness of moral beauty 
and lowly grace, with power that proved itself superior to all 
the sickness and misery of man, the hatred that grew more 
intense and deadly as He brought in God to deal with their 
conscience. To interpret what is predicted of Him with the 
state of “that wicked generation” is beyond measure absurd. 

It is not here as in the close of chapter 1. the remnant of 
‘the Jews distinguished from the mass by hearkening to the 
voice of Jehovah’s Servant, but many nations and kings in 
astonishment at His exaltation Who was once so humbled. 
The inspired word puts every thing and every one in the just 


place. 


CHAPTER LIIL 


HERE we have the confession and wondering complaint over 
the unbelief of men, yea, over their own unbelief; for Israel, 
now broken down in sense of sin, acknowledge that it was 
not merely those without who heeded little the report of 
the Messiah, but that they too themselves had been hard and 
rebellious against Him. “Who hath believed our report ? 
and to whom hath the arm of Jehovah been revealed? For 
he shall grow up before him as a tender sapling, and as a 
root out of dry ground; he hath no form nor comeliness; 
and when we see him, [there is] no beauty that we should 
desire him. He is despised and shunned of men, a man of 
sorrows, and acquainted with grief; and like one from whom 
they hide [their] faces, he was despised, and we esteemed him 
not. Surely he [it is] hath borne our griefs and carried our 
sorrows; and we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, 
and afflicted. But he [was] wounded for our transgressions, 
[he was] bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our 
peace [was] upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. 
All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every 
one to his own way; and Jehovah hath laid on him the 
iniquity of us all” (vv. 1-6). - 

The close of the last chapter (vv. 13-15) gave us Jehovah’s 
contemplation of His Anointed, once put to shame, and now 
on the summit of glory before every eye. His deity intro- 
duced His humiliation in ch, 1; here His humiliation leads 
to His glory: expiation was the divine aim in that humilia- 
tion. Then in ch. liii. His people trace, in view of Him, 
their past and most guilty blindness, as they think of 
His wondrous humiliation, their misjudgment of His life 


CHAPTER LIIL. 417 


and death, and their present perception of its cause in 
their sins and misery from which He had come to save 
them. When they had of old beheld His path of shame 
and sufferings from first to last, they understood neither the 
grace which brought Him down so low nor the glories that 
should follow. They justly feel and own (in verses 1-3) the 
power of unbelief in the chosen people: a far more humbling 
fact than among the nations sitting in darkness and the 
shadow of death. Israel had ample testimony; yet what 
scepticism! The very humiliation of the Messiah which 
should have endeared Him only drew out aversion. They 
misread Himself utterly, as if He were under ban like 
another Gehazi or Uzziah. But now (verses 4-6) being 
taught of God, they avow before Him and men that under- 
neath all that humiliation, and, as they wrongly thought, 
personal obnoxiousness to His judgment, a deeper work was 
being done: first, the fullest identification with their burden 
on His own heart, as He went up and down the land, 
Immanuel’s land, entering into the weight of all that He 
healed (v. 4); and finally atonement before Him (v. 5). They 
had regarded Him, on the contrary, as an object of God’s 
displeasure, and justly cast out and trampled on. But it was 
a total misconception of all His marvellous grace, a negligent 
oversight of their own deep necessities, both in the life that 
now is, and yet more for that which is to come. Hence 
Matt. viii. 17 justly applies the first part of verse 4 to the 
Lord, as He relieved the afflictions of the Jews, and healed 
their diseases in His ministry, never bringing in bare power 
merely, but bearing all in spirit before God, while He cured 
them; as 1 Peter ii. 24, 25 applies verse 5 to His work for 
our sins on the cross. This opens the mouth in lowly con- 
fession of sin; as the heart can then feel its past evil ways, 
and each judges himself before God. 

In verses 7-9 Jehovah expresses His delight in the moral 
beauty which shone in the suffering One, affirming on His part 
the explanation of the enigma of the cross, though up to His 
death of shame man was allowed his way in disposing of Jesus. 
“He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not 

2D 


418 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


his mouth; he was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and 
was as a sheep dumb before her shearers, and he opened not 
his mouth. He was taken from detention and from judgment: 
and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out 
of the land of the living; for the transgression of my people 
was he stricken. And they made his grave with the wicked, 
but [he was] with the rich in his death,* because he had done 
no violence, neither [was there] guile in his mouth” (vv. 7-9). 
The plague-stroke was upon Him for the transgression of the 
people of Jehovah. It was not the outward fact simply of a 
rejected Messiah to which He was pleased to submit, the awful 
proof of man’s and Israel’s moral state; but there is this divine 
key, and the far more wondrous meeting of a more hidden and 
a deeper need, even expiation. Yet even in His ignominious 
death God wrought so that He should have honour unexpectedly. 

Israel then reiterate the blessed truth with their Amen, 
pursuing the glorious consequences as far as it is theirs to see 
them. “Yet it pleased Jehovah to bruise him; he hath put 
[him] to grief: when thou shalt make his soul (or, when his 
soul shall have been made) an offering for sin, he shall see 
a seed, he shall prolong [his] days, and the pleasure of Jehovah 
shall prosper in his hand” (v. 10). Here the atoning work, 
in the suffering of the Lord for sin, is dwelt on, with its issue 
as far as was suitable then to speak. It is blessedly true that 
the death and blood-shedding of the Saviour must be for 
propitiation ; but it is as false a thought as the enemy of souls 
ever insinuated that this propitiation or atonement is or could 
be, according to God and His word, without His sufferings 
specifically, yea, that suffering which was the deepest expression 
of God’s judgment of our iniquities, when He Who knew no 
sin was made sin for us and forsaken of God. His blood and 
death when viewed as expiatory, and not as the evidence 
simply of man’s wickedness, are the blood and death of Him 
Who really bore our sins in His own body on the tree, and 


* The phrase used here is most expressive, M23, and points to the 
intensive and exceptional death of the Holy Sufferer, as concentrating many 


—countless—deaths in that one. Henderson takes the phrase to mean “ after 
his death.” 


CHAPTER LIT. 419 


endured the to us unfathomable judgment of God, when not 
the Jews only but God hid His face from Him. Can a 
Christian slight this divine abandonment of Him Who suffered, 
the Just for the unjust, to bring us to God? He may, 
but only as he may be guilty of grievous, not to say fatal, 
error.* God’s part in atonement is and must be the deepest. 


* It is notorious that Jesuit preachers are wont to draw moving pictures, as 
of the physical torments of the lost, so of the external sufferings of our blessed 
Lord (7.e. the human rather than divine side). Nor does one deny the sub- 
stantial truth of what they allege, but only their use of it to the exclusion 
of other truths, yet more weighty. Their reason is obvious. Unspiritual 
themselves, they appeal to that which strikes the senses and can excite the 
feelings or the fears of their least spiritual auditors. But men of a different 
stamp have always recognised that the word of God reveals a far deeper truth, 
not of what was before the eye or by the hand of man merely, but of what 
passed unseen between God and Christ in that awful hour. So, to take an 
instance from one of the better sort, Archbishop Leighton rightly distinguishes 
this: ‘‘In that outside of His suffering, the visible kind of death inflicted on 
Him, that it was hanging on the tree of the cross, there was an analogy with 
the end and main work which was ordered by the Lord with regard unto that, 
being a death declared accursed by the law, as the Apostle Paul observes, and 
so declaring Him that was God blessed for ever to have been made a curse, that 
is, accounted as accursed for us, that we might be blessed in Him, ‘in whom,’ 
according to the promise, ‘all the nations of the earth are blessed.’ 

‘‘But that wherein lay the strength and main stress of His sufferings was 
this invisible weight that none could see that gazed on Him ; but He felt more 
than all the rest. In this are three things. 1. The weight of sin. 2, The 
transferring of it upon Christ. 3. His bearing of it. 

“1, He bare sin as a heavy burden: so the word of bearing in general, 
dviveyxev, and those two words, particularly used by the prophet to which 
these allude, Xv/3, bap, are the bearing of some great mass or load, and that sin 
is. For it hath the wrath of an offended God hanging on it, indissolubly tied 
to it; of which who can bear the least? . . . . Yea, to consider in the 
present subject where we may best read what it is, it was a heavy load to Christ, 
where the psalmist, speaking in the person of Christ, complains heavily, 
‘Innumerable evils have compassed me about. Mine iniquities’ (not His, as 
done by Him, but yet His by His undertaking to pay for them), they ‘have 
taken hold of me, so that I am not able to look up; they are more than the 
hairs of my head: therefore my heart faileth me.’ And sure that which 
pressed Him so sore, who upholds heaven and earth, no other in heaven or earth 
could have sustained or surmounted, but would have sunk or perished under it. 
Was it, think you, the pain of that common outside of His death, though very 
painful, that drew such a word from Him, My God, my God, why hast thou 
forsaken Me? Or was it the fear of it beforehand, that pressed a sweat of 
blood from Him? No, it was this burden of sin, the first of which was com- 
mitted in the garden of Eden, that then began to be laid upon Him, and 
fastened upon His shoulders in the garden of Gethsemane, ten thousand times 
heavier than the cross which He was caused to bear: that might be for a while 

2D 2 


420 AN EXPOSITION OF TIIE BOOK OF ISATATI. 


The chapter closes with Jehovah’s confirmation, repeating the 
glorious results of both grace and government, and in each case 
connecting them with the work of salvation. “From (or, of) the 
travail of his soul shall he see, he shall be satisfied; by his know- 
ledge shall my righteous servant instruct the many in righteous- 
ness; and he shall bear their iniquities” (v. 11). Such seems 
the simple, true, and exact sense of the verse which has been 
lost sight of often by translators, and still more by preachers, 
as well as through a very different influence by Jews. There 
is no need of importing an evangelical phrase, which really 
misleads, “by the knowledge of himself.”* The broad facts 
in the Lord’s history are before us: His ministry, when 
through His knowledge He instructed the mass in righteous- 
ness; His death, when He bore their iniquities on the tree. 
The order is quite clear and sound; and there is no need for 


turned over to another, but this could not. This was the cup He trembled 
more at, than that gall and vinegar after to be offered Him by His crucifiers, 
or any other part of His external sufferings. It was the bitter cup of wrath 
due to sin that His Father put into His hand and caused Him to drink, the 
very same thing that is here called the ‘ bearing our sins in his body,’ oe 
Jesus Christ is both the great high priest and the great sacrifice in one, And 
this seems to be here implied in these words, ‘ Himself bare our sins in his own 
body’; which the legal priest did not: so ‘He made his soul an offering for 
sin.’ He offered up Himself, His whole self. In the history of the Gospel, 
it is said, His soul was heavy and chiefly suffered ; but the bearing in His body 
and offering it, that is oftenest mentioned as the visible part of the sacrifice, 
and in His way of offering it, not excluding the other. Thus we are exhorted 
to give our bodies in opposition to the bodies of beasts, and they are therefore 
called a living sacrifice, which they are not without the soul. Thus His bearing 
in His body imports the bearing in His soul too.”—The Works of R. Leighton, 
Jerment’s edition, 1805, i. 370-376. 

It may be added that this was a point of objection by Cardinal Bellarmine 
to Calvin, who maintained the same doctrine as is carped at now-a-days, and 
not merely by rationalist speculators, such as Mr. F. D. Maurice and his friends, 
It seems rather a peculiar mind which could cite 1 Peter iii, 18 in a paragraph 
designed to prove that reconciliation or atonement is never in connexion with 
Christ’s sufferings specifically. It is false that the statement they oppose 
separates His sufferings from His blood and death: on the contrary, while 
distinguishing the other points, the object was to insist on the inseparableness 
of His sufferings with His blood and death for atonement. The admission that 
they are not separated in the Spirit's mind for atonement is the true thesis, which 
is yielded. But it is wrong to say, ‘‘ the two are never separated.” It is merely 
inattention to scripture (which distinguishes them), and it claims no answer. 

* Even Dr. Henderson, who is often free enough from popular prejudice, gives 
this straining of the phrase. : 


CHAPTER LIII. 491 


taking the copulative in a causal sense, or in any other than its 
own strict meaning. 

It was thus the Lord taught on the mount as well as in 
other places and times during His sojourn on earth. Then 
came another and mightier work which could be shared 
by none. Others might suffer in love or in righteousness; 
He not merely in both, but He alone for the sins of others 
at God’s hand, as we were expressly told in the verse before. 
But the Spirit never tires of the wondrous fact, and loves 
to present it on all sides, from God to man, and from man 
to God. Dan. xii. 3 proves irrefutably that the Hebrew wili 
bear the sense of “instruct in righteousness” as well as “justify”: 
which of the two depends on the contextual necessity ? There 
indeed it must mean the former; for, first, teachers cannot 
“justify” in the forensic sense (which is the true doctrinal 
force of the word, when thus employed as to the soul of a 
believer) ; and, secondly, as it is there a question of the many 
(the apostate mass of the Jews, which is the technical value 
of O°227 in Daniel), it must mean “instruct in,” rather than 
“bring to, righteousness,” for they do not bring them. Hence 
I doubt not it means similarly in this place, though it may be 
here not so clear that “the many” has the same force. Still 
the burden of proof would lie on such as contend for a differ- 
ence in the usage of the two prophets. To most minds their 
coincidence Jends a mutual confirmation. But sinful souls 
need far more than instruction, were it ever so perfect, as the 
Lord’s surely must be. Hence it is added, “And he shall bear 
their iniquities.” He suffers for them according to the scrip- 
tures, and His suffering for sin is efficacious. The change to 
“for” was due to the supposition that justification was meant 
in the previous clause, for which His bearing iniquities was the 
ground. Abstractly this is true, as all believers admit, accord- 
ing to abundant scripture; but the question here is, whether 
the text does not convey another truth, apt to be overlooked, 
in its plain unforced meaning with emphasis on “ He.” 

Jehovah closes his answer with the assured triumph that 
awaits Messiah, based as it is, for Him alone of conquerors, on 
His sacrificial death so long misread, and His gracious use 


422 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


of it on behalf of the transgressors with whom malice had 
confounded Him. “Therefore will I assign him [a portion] with 
the great (or, many), and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; 
because he poured out (or, bared) his soul unto death, and was 
numbered with the transgressors; and he bore the sin of 
many, and made intercession for the transgressors” (v. 12). 

The notion of the later Jews, (represented by Dr. Philippson 
for instance), that itis Jacob as a whole, is a mere subterfuge, or 
that Israel’s sufferings conduce to the happiness of the nations. 
“They are become the martyrs of the acknowledgment of the 
ONE, and by their exaltation the nations will be directed with 
the strength of conviction to the sole and only God. This 
view of the prophet is truly sublime. . . . The doubts, 
therefore, which the Jewish commentators (Redak and 
Abarbanel) have raised here, that this procedure would be 
opposed to the justice of God, which must allow every one 
to bear the punishment of what he has himself committed, can 
only be applied to individuals, while the prophet had in view 
the whole development of mankind.” Now the fact is 
admitted, even by the Rabbis who brought in the idea, that 
the ancient Jews referred the suffering but righteous Servant 
of the passage to the Messiah, and this not of some but of the 
elders with one mouth. However, not any such confessions 
are cited as authorities in the least, but scripture only. 
Here all is light. The “we” of this section, as elsewhere, 
is unquestionably Jewish, not Gentile; as unquestionably 
distinct from the One whose position and relation to God 
they confess had been so fatally misconceived. To understand 
the “we” of the Gentiles is an impossibility; to take both 
“we” and “he” as Israel, or the prophetic body, is too absurd 
and self-contradictory. “He” is a real individual who suffers 
from and for Israel, instead of being the same. 

Then also, to notice another plea, the interchange of 
tenses is no more difficult here than elsewhere. It is 
habitual with the prophets, and with Isaiah no less than 
others. That Israel was viewed as the servant is true; and 
Israel failed as such. Then comes Messiah the Servant, Who 
glorifies God, yet suffers and dies, but, as here we learn, it was 


CHAPTER LIII. 423 


for Israel, though not for Israel only; and then Israel sifted 
and repentant, and believing in Him, are viewed in conse- 
quence as servants for His glory by-and-by. Such is the 
scope of these later chapters of Isaiah. 

But the idea of Israel being here meant by the suffering One 
is as false morally as exegetically. For it supposes that the 
Gentiles will yet acknowledge that Israel had to bear this hard 
fate solely for their redemption out of their sinful state (4-6); 
so that Israel through the patience which they exhibit notwith- 
standing all their sufferings, since they never departed from the 
only God, shall be placed on a yet higher eminence (7-9). 
Assuredly the Gentiles will yet confess their sins, not only their 
sins against God, but their cruel persecution and jealousy and 
envy of Israel. Assuredly they will yet trust with the real 
faith that is to be, but is not alas! yet, Israel’s. But a more 
flagrant mistake was never made than that Israel can take the 
ground of unswerving righteousness like the suffering Messiah 
here, Take alone the very first chapter of Isaiah: we see there 
Israel suffering ; but is it for righteousness ? Is it not for their 
own appalling sins? And if it be said that such they were of 
old, but that all is changed when we arrive at a later day such 
as in Isaiah liii, I answer let them see their divinely-painted 
portrait in its neighbourhood, in Isaiah lvii—lix., and let them 
say where is the conscience which can so trifle with the word 
of God and the facts of their own hearts and ways. 

No; reading Isaiah liii. we find ourselves in the midst of sacri- 
ficial imagery, of atonement for sin, of intercession for sinners; 
and these sins are pre-eminently Israel's, as will be the blessed- 
ness. We heartily admit this last, and rejoice and give God 
thanks for the grace He will yet extend to His ancient people. 
But they by grace will justly prove its genuineness by the confes- 
sion of their own sins, above all against their own Messiah, 
not in self-righteousness pretending to have been a suffering 
Messiah themselves for the Gentiles. There is indeed vicarious 
suffering here, a holy substitute atoning for the guilty before 
God; but it is Messiah for Israel expressly, though not 
exclusively. For His death embraces every creature to be 
delivered from evil, and from first to last; not in the most 


494 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


distant hint of it Israel suffering for the Gentiles. Jews 
suffered from them far, far too much; but they will never 
suffer for them. Jesus, the only spotless Lamb of God, 
Immanuel, died for that nation, for Israel, though—thanks be 
to God—for us also (John xi. 51, 52). Worthily therefore is 
He now exalted, and we are in living union with Him Who sits 
on the throne of God. This however is not the point here, but 
His exaltation over the earth and the nations when Israel come 
to own their sins in the recognition of their suffering but then 
glorified Messiah. Thus it falls in with the general bearing 
of Old Testament prophecy, though it contains also the most 
luminous testimony to His humiliation and atoning work. 

The language of the last verse presents no real difficulty 
save to those who read the first clause in connexion with the 
gospel; whereas it looks on to the day of the world-kingdom 
of the Lord and of His Christ, when He will come forth 
before every eye as the Lord of lords and King of kings, 
sharing with others the fruits of His victory. What gave 
occasion to the mistake is that the ground laid in the later 
clauses is His humiliation, atoning death, and intercession. 
This beyond doubt is the basis and the boast of Christianity. 
Only it is an inexcusable error to confine it to us who are 
now called from Gentiles as well as from Jews. The day 
hastens when the fulness shall have come in; and so Israel 
shall be saved. Then will this vision (Isaiah lii, 13-lii, 12) 
be fulfilled, and not till then as a whole, 


CHAPTER LIV. 


How beautifully seasonable is the voice of the Spirit calling on 
Jerusalem to sing, after His own clear and full prediction 
of Messiah rejected of Israel and bruised of Jehovah in atone- 
ment! Indeed the last section of the prophecy gave us a most 
striking and instructive rehearsal or dialogue between God and 
His people about Messiah, His sufferings, and the glories 
that should follow. Fitly therefore follows the invitation, to 
her who had sorrowed so long and so justly, now to rejoice 
because of her new blessing in His grace. 

“Exult, thou barren, [that] didst not bear; break 
forth into singing, and shout aloud, thou [that] didst not 
travail with child: for more [are] the children of the 
desolate than the children of the married wife, saith 
Jehovah” (v. 1). Never ought it to have been a question who 
is meant. As usual however, the commentators have con- 
fused what is plain, and agreed in scarce anything but 
departure from the true sense and aim. The occasion of 
stumbling they have in general found, partly by their habit of 
excluding the Jews from the prophets and so judaising the 
Christians (limiting themselves to the past and present, with- 
out taking in the future), partly from a misunderstanding 
of Galatians iv. 27 through mixing it up with the “allegory” 
of Sarah and Hagar. But who does not see that the citation 
of the prophet connects itself rather with Jerusalem which is 
above, in contrast with Jerusalem which then was? When 
the prophecy is fulfilled in the millennial day, God will count 
those who now believe to be Jerusalem’s children, as well 
as the race to come in that day. Doubly thus it will be 
verified that more are the children of the desolate than the 


426 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


children of the married wife. For what fruit of the most 
flourishing times, say under David or Solomon, could compare 
with the gathering-in of the Christian saints since the Jews 
lost their place as the recognised witness and wife of Jehovah ; 
or, again, with the vast progeny which Jehovah will give her 
after her long desolation, when His reign shall be displayed 
over the earth ? (Consult chapters xlix. 13-23; lx. 8, 20-22). 

It is important to see, on the one hand, that though it 
is according to scripture to regard Christians mystically as the 
children of desolate Jerusalem far outnumbering those of her 
married estate of old, the church, on the other hand, is not yet 
presented by God’s word as in the relationship of the wife 
either desolate or married. The marriage is future and on high. 
The bride, the Lamb’s wife, will not have made herself ready 
till she has been caught up to heaven glorified, and the harlot 
Babylon, the anti-church, has been judged of Jehovah God. 
The real position of the church meanwhile is that of one 
espoused; her responsibility is to keep herself as a chaste 
virgin for Christ. The marriage will be in heaven, just before 
the Lord and His glorified saints appear for the destruction of 
the Antichrist and all his allies. (Compare Rev. xix.) 

On the other hand, it is undeniable that the Jews, or Zion if 
you will, had the place of nearness to Jehovah which is repre- 
sented under the figure of the marriage-tie, that she had been 
faithless and played the whore with many lovers (even the 
idols of the Gentiles), and that in consequence she was 
divorced, becoming a widow and desolate under the righteous 
dealing of God. Adultery was her sin, rather than fornica- 
tion. No one in the least familiar with the prophets 
can have failed to notice this and more said of Israel. Then 
it was she became barren and did not bear. Praise is still 
silent for God in Zion; but the vow shall yet be performed 
to Him ; and the barren one shall sing and be no more barren 
but bear, astonished to find during those days of literal 
barrenness such an abundant offspring in the saints glorified 
on high, whom grace has been the while actively bringing in. 

Nor is this all. “Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let 
them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations; spare not, 


CHAPTER LIV. 427 


lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; for thou shalt 
break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed 
shall possess nations, and make desolate cities to be inhabited ” 
(vv. 2, 3). The land, the earth, must be filled with a suited 
seed; for Jehovah shall be king over all the earth; in that day 
shall there be one Jehovah and His name one. Yea, Jehovah 
deigns to be the husband of Zion, not now a mere testimony and 
display of responsibility of man under law, but in the efficacy 
of grace when glorying is no more in the flesh but in Jehovah. 
“Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed; neither be thou 
confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou 
shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember 
the reproach of thy widowhood any more. For thy Maker [is] 
thy husband: Jehovah of hosts [is] His name, and thy 
Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; the God of the whole 
earth shall he be called. For Jehovah hath called thee as 
a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, 
when rejected, saith thy God” (wv. 4-6). 

Thus, and thus only, our chapter flows in its own proper 
channel: the exclusion of Israel by-and-by, and the appropria- 
tion of it to the church as its intended scope, produce nothing 
but violence and confusion. It is not true that God has 
forsaken the church even for a small moment, nor that in 
a little wrath He hides His face for an instant from the 
Christian: such and so great is the efficacy of redemption. 
Of the Jew as such it is precisely the fact: as surely will 
He gather His ancient people in His mercy for ever. “For 
a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies 
will I gather thee. In overflowing wrath I hid my face from 
thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have 
mercy on thee, saith Jehovah thy Redeemer. For this [is as] 
the waters of Noah unto me; since I have sworn that the 
waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I 
sworn that I will no more be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. 
For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed ; but 
my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall my 
covenant of peace be removed, saith J ehovah that hath mercy 
on thee” (wv. 7-10). 


428 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


No doubt the application to the Maccabean epoch falls 
incomparably short of the terms of blessing, and such views 
cast no small slight on the character of the word of God. 
But this is the fault, not of scripture, but of its misreaders. A 
people are in question who, having once stood in full favour 
and near relationship to Jehovah, forfeited it for a season, and 
finally are restored more than ever and for ever. There is but 
one such people: impossible that God should fail to have 
mercy on Israel. Guilty Christendom is doomed to destruction, 
and has no promise of restoration. Strong is the Lord God 
Who is to judge the Babylon that is now, worse and guiltier 
far than her of old. 

“O afflicted, tossed with tempest, not comforted! behold, 
I will set thy stones in antimony, and lay thy foundations 
with sapphires. And I will make thy pinnacles of rubies, 
and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy border of pleasant 
stones. And all thy children [shall be] taught of Jehovah; 
and great [shall be] the peace of thy children. In righteousness 
shalt thou be established; thou shalt be far from oppression, 
for thou shalt not fear, and from terror, for it shall not come 
near thee. Behold, they shall surely gather together, [but] not 
by me: whosoever gathereth together against thee shall fall 
because of thee. Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth 
the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument 
for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy. No 
weapon that is prepared against thee shall prosper ; and every 
tongue [that] riseth against thee in judgment thou shalt con- 
demn. This [is] the heritage of the servants of J ehovah, and 
their righteousness [is] of me, saith Jehovah” (vv. 11-17). 
Thus it is not everlasting mercy alone reinstating the ancient 
people, but along with it images of beauty and glory with 
which Jehovah will adorn them. Truth will be theirs, for they 
all shall be taught of Jehovah ; peace too, great peace, will 
be enjoyed ; and, established in righteousness, they shall be far 
from oppression and fear, though not from hostile intention 
(as we know from Ezekiel xxxviii. xxxix. at the beginning 
of the millennium, and from Revelation xx. 7-9 at the end). 
But Israel will have hoped in J ehovah, and not in vain: for 


CHAPTER LIV. 429 


with Jehovah is mercy, and with Him plenteous redemp- 
tion. 

See on the two sides the frightful perversion to which all 
are exposed who allegorise the prophecies, as is the popular 
fashion of so-called high church and low church and no 
church; for it is hard to say who is most guilty in this path, 
ruinous to all faith and practice characteristic of Christianity. 
“To take an example” (said the late Matthew Arnold) “which 
will come home to all Protestants, Dr. Newman, in one 
of those charming Essays which he has of late rescued for 
us, quotes from the 54th chapter of Isaiah the passage 
beginning, J will lay thy stones with fair colours and thy 
foundations with sapphires, as a prophecy and authorisation 
of the sumptuosities of the Church of Rome. This is evidently 
to use the passage in the way of application. Protestants will 
say that it is a wrong use of it; but to Dr. Newman their 
similar use of passages about the beast, and the scarlet woman, 
and Antichrist, will seem equally wrong. But as to the 
historical substratum, the primary sense of the passage which 
Dr. Newman quotes, what dissension can there be? Who can 
deny that in the first instance, however we may apply them 
afterwards, and whether this after-application be right or 
wrong, the prophet’s words apply to the restored Zion ?” 

Now, without profitless wrangling on primary or secondary 
application, it is certain to faith that the Romanists have 
corrupted God’s word to justify the lusts, vanities, and pomps 
claimed as her due by the great harlot of Rome, through the 
same insubjection to scripture which leads others at the 
opposite pole to make the best of both worlds; whose judg- 
ment is alike just. For they are verily inexcusable. The 
Christian, the church, is called to set the mind on things above, 
not on things on the earth, where we are called to walk by 
faith, not by sight, and to suffer both for righteousness’ sake 
and for Christ’s, in view of the heavenly glory into which He 
is gone before, and we await His coming to enjoy with Him. 
For Israel it is altogether different. When brought into 
known relationship with Him, it is in earthly honour and 
glory; and nothing in nature will be too precious for the 


430 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


adornment of Zion. Beyond doubt they too will be born 
anew; but the days of the kingdom displayed in power (no 
longer in patience during the prevalence of evil) account for 
the radical and evident difference. Then will be the days 
of restored Zion, as much denied by the rationalist as by the 
superstitious, who look to man and present things. And thus 
is God’s word made of none effect through his traditions. 
Without faith it is impossible to please God; and there is 
no real faith where God’s great object of faith, the Lord Jesus, 
does not arrest, command, and satisfy the heart. We speak 
now of those to whom He has been announced by the Holy 
Spirit sent from heaven, rather than of the saints who waited 
for redemption before His first advent. We must not be 
deceived by or about such as find an entrancing interest, 
literary or even moral, in the scriptures, without faith in 
Christ or the gospel. For this may be in the vilest of mankind 
where intellectual and esthetic force is strong. Take another 
instance, to which we are referred in the same page of Mr. 
Arnold. “Admirably true are these words of Goethe, so 
constant a reader of the Bible that his free-thinking friends 
reproached him for wasting his time over it: ‘I am convinced 
that the Bible becomes even more beautiful the more one 
understands it; that is, the more one gets insight to see that 
every word which we take generally and make special applica- 
tion of to our own wants, has had, in connexion with certain 
circumstances, with certain relations of time and place, a 
particular, directly individual, reference of its own,” Sadly 
true in its measure, say we; for God dealing with the soul, 
and hence with the life, by the truth in Christ, and meeting 
the sin-convicted with the fulness of His grace, was distasteful, 
yea, despised and hated. He, who was never weary of talking 
about “the good of evil” (a sentiment worthy of Mephis- 
topheles), had God in none of his thoughts, and was as far as 
possible from the grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ. 


CHAPTER LV. 


Our chapter does not, after these remarks, call for many words. 
Its connexion with what goes before is plain and makes its 
own bearing evident. The call is to Israel, but in such large- 
ness of language as to warrant an aspect to the Gentiles. “Ho, 
every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that 
hath no money, come ye, buy and eat; yea come, buy wine 
and milk without money and without price. Wherefore do 
ye weigh money for [that which is] not bread? and your labour 
for [that which] satisfieth not? Hearken diligently unto me, 
and eat ye [that which is] good, and let your soul delight itself 
in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto me, hear, and 
your soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant 
with you, the sure mercies of David. Behold, I have given 
him [for] a witness to the peoples, a prince and commander 
to the peoples” (vv. 1-4). Here plainly some outstanding 
One is referred to, as to whom no believer need hesitate. It 
is the Lord Jesus, in royal relation to Israel (v. 3), and withal 
a witness and commander to the peoples of the earth (v. 4). 

The thoughtful mind—at least if taught of God—will not 
overlook the divine application of verse 3 to the resurrection 
of our Lord, contra-distinguished from the use of Psalm ii. 7, 
in Acts xiii. 33, 34. It had been indeed implied in Isaiah 
liii. 10, as in Psalms xvi. 10, 1 lie 4 Pa A resurrection 
is both the security for the accomplishment of what was 
promised to Israel, and the occasion for the outflow of the 
grace which calls and shall yet call Gentiles into a share 
of God’s blessing, and of the knowledge of Himself. Before 
death and resurrection, though He could never deny His 
deeper glory or His grace to the faith that saw either, He was 
not sent save to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 


432 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


Crucified and risen, Christ is the attractive object for all 
indiscriminately. And the spirit of this wide grace breathes 
fragrantly through this chapter. “Behold, thou shalt call 
a nation thou knowest not, and a nation [that] knew not thee 
shall run unto thee, because of Jehovah thy God and the 
Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee. Seek ye 
Jehovah while he may be found, call ye upon him while he 
is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous 
man his thoughts; and let him return unto Jehovah, and 
he will have merey upon him; and to our God, for he will 
abundantly pardon. For my thoughts [are] not your thoughts, 
neither [are] your ways my ways, saith Jehovah. For [as] the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than 
your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. For as the 
rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth 
not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth 
and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the 
eater; so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth; 
it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that 
which I please, and it shall accomplish that for which I sent 
it. For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace : 
the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into 
singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap [their] hands. 
Instead of the thorn shall come up the cypress, and instead 
of the nettle shall come up the myrtle; and it shall be to 
Jehovah for a name, for an everlasting sign [that] shall not be 
cut off” (vv. 5-13). 

Certainly the language rises into bright figures, expressive of 
a joy and blessing incomparably beyond human experience 
since sin came into the world, and with all the firmness given 
by Christ’s coming to blot out sins by His blood, to establish 
everlasting righteousness, and to display the mercy and the 
glory of God here below. But can anything be more unreason- 
able, to say nothing of the ingratitude of unbelief, than to 
misuse such modes of expression to get rid of the truth and 
reduce the living word to inanity? Apply the grace of the 
chapter as much as can be done truly to the need and comfort 
of souls now by the gospel; there still remains the clear 


CHAPTER LV. 433 


intimation of the times of refreshing reserved for Him Who 
died and rose, when He comes from heaven to reign over the 
earth. Doubtless Christ is exalted to the highest in heaven; 
He sits on the Father’s throne; but He is coming to sit on His 
own throne, and will make His enemies His footstool. This 
He is not doing, but sitting on high till that moment be 
arrived. Now He is converting souls, as well as baptising 
believers into one body by the Spirit. Then He will break 
the nations with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like 
a potter’s vessel. How monstrous to pervert such words to 
the work of the gospel! It is that execution of divine judg- 
ment which inaugurates the Lord’s taking His own throne. 
He is now seated on His Father’s throne. When He reigns 
over the earth, we shall reign with Him, instead of suffering 
with Him, as we are called to do now. 

Even to apply, yet more to restrict, such glowing language 
and such glorious hopes for Israel, the peoples, and the earth, 
to the restoration from the Babylonish exile, must always have 
been an extreme assumption, and it evidently tends to bring 
on scripture the charge of exaggeration. Yet more than ever 
in our day men claiming to be critics would reduce it to a 
promise that the homeward journey of the exiles should be 
pleasant and comfortable! Truly faith is not the portion of 
all, least of all, one might sorrowfully say, of critics. It is 
also flagrant ignorance of the book they essay to interpret, 
and of its structure; for we have done with Babylon since 
chapter xlviii.; and chapter xlix. has begun the new theme 
of the rejected but glorified Messiah, and the everlasting 
consequences. This fact dissipates all such delusions. 


CHAPTER LVI. 


THE next two chapters carry on the same line of truth we 
have seen since the rejection and atoning death of Christ came 
distinctly into view, and pursue the consequences of that 
infinite fact. As far as a natural division goes, one might be 
. disposed to close the first subject treated in them with verse 8 
of chapter lvi. and then to take from verse 9 to the end of 
chapter lvii. as completing not the second only but the entire 
section, which began with chapter xlix. According to this we 
should have here, first, the ways of Jehovah founded on the 
Messiah’s death for sin in respect of the godly, even outside 
Israel; and, secondly, His ways, when He was displeased with 
the ungodly, not merely outside but in the midst of Israel. 
For they are not all Israel who are of Israel. 

Some have drawn from the Lord’s citation of a clause of 
this section, that He intimates its then approaching accom- 
plishment in the Christian church. Now it is not denied that 
as we have broad moral principles of grace on God’s part in 
Isaiah lv., so too in its flowing out to the Gentiles in Isaiah lvi,, 
which are now realised in the gospel and the church, even 
more fully than anything here developed. But we ought not 
to overlook the fact that neither in Matthew nor in Luke is 
the Lord represented as quoting the reference to all the 
nations: an omission the more notable inasmuch as in both 
these Gospels, above all others though in each for a special 
reason, we have more respecting the change of dispensation 
then at hand, and the call of grace going out to the Gentiles 
than anywhere else. One cannot but gather thence, that, 
though i in fact, as the full citation in Mark shows, the Lord did 
quote the words of our prophet without abridgment, yet this 


CHAPTER LVI. 435 


marked exclusion of “all nations” in the two Gospels which 
most insist on the change from Israel to the Gentiles, is meant 
to intimate that no such application was then in His mind, but 
simply the gross perversion of Jehovah’s house of prayer into 
a den of robbers before His eyes, even as Jeremiah reproached 
the Jews of his day. There is nothing therefore, if this be 
correct, to turn aside the fulfilment of this blessed fruit of the 
cross from the future, however large the terms may be, and 
this not without purpose on God’s part. 

The chapter then opens not with a call to sinners, as such, to 
repent and believe the gospel; but to the people of God to 
keep judgment and do justice, though the reason assigned is in 
no way the law given by Moses, but “ my salvation is near to 
come, and my righteousness to be revealed.” When the 
apostle unfolds the glad tidings, he says that God’s righteous- 
ness is being revealed in the gospel; that it is manifested apart 
from law. Clearly this goes farther. Salvation 7s come, as we 
find in Ephesians ii, “For by grace are ye saved through 
faith” ; though, in view of our resurrection and glory, we as 
truly say that it is nearer than when we believed. For we 
through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by 
faith. The righteousness is established, and we are justified 
in virtue of this already; but we await through the Spirit 
the hope, the glorious issue, proper to that righteousness, when 
even in the body we shall be conformed to the image of God’s 
Son: “ whom he justified, them he also glorified.” But this is 
the language of the New Testament apostle, not of our Old 
Testament prophet, who is occupied with the earthly people 
and their hopes, but in God-given terms of such comprehen- 
siveness as to justify the largest ways of grace. 

“Thus saith Jehovah, Keep ye judgment and do righteous- 
ness: for my salvation [is] near to come, and my righteousness 
to be revealed. Blessed [is] weak man [that] doeth this, and the 
son of man [that] holdeth fast by it; that keepeth the sabbath 
from profaning it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil” 
(vv. 1, 2). The following verse (3) is even more express: the 
most distant, “the son of the stranger,” and the most desperate, 
“the eunuch,” were not beyond the reach of God’s merciful and 

252 


436 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


mighty blessing, And this is repeated in the most forcible 
language as to both classes in the subsequent verses, concluding 
with the expression of Jehovah’s mind to be known and read 
of all men, that His “house should be called a house of prayer 
for all peoples.” “Neither let the son of the stranger that 
hath joined himself to Jehovah speak, saying Jehovah hath 
entirely separated me from his people; nor let the eunuch say, 
Behold, I [am] a dry tree. For thus saith Jehovah, Unto the 
eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose [the things] that 
please me, and hold fast by my covenant, unto them will I 
give in my house and within my walls a memorial and a 
name better than of sons and of daughters; I will give them 
an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. Also the sons of 
the stranger that join themselves to Jehovah, to minister unto 
him and to love the name of Jehovah, to be his servants, 
every one that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and 
holdeth fast by my covenant—even them will I bring to my 
holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer ; 
their burnt offerings and their sacrifices [shall be] accepted 
upon my altar: for my house shall be called a house of prayer 
for all the peoples. The Lord Jehovah who gathereth the 
outcasts of Israel saith, Yet will I gather [others] to him, with 
those of his that are gathered” (vv. 3-8), 

The second part (from lvi. 9 to lvii. 21) stands out in 
startling contrast at first sight; but it flows, without doubt, 
from the same principle. The grace which goes forth ever so 
actively to the most miserable is of all things the most 
intolerant of evil; and its dealing is ever most delicate and 
jealous with those that are near enough to be so much the 
more responsible to reflect Jehovah brightly. “ All ye beasts 
of the field, come to devour, all ye beasts in the forest. His 
watchmen [are] blind, they are all without knowledge; they 
[are] all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, dreaming, lying down, 
loving to slumber. Yea, the dogs [are] greedy, they can never 
have enough; and these [are] shepherds [that] cannot under- 
stand: they have all turned to their own way, each one to 
his gain, from every quarter. Come ye, [say they,] I will 
fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and 


CHAPTER LVI. 437 


to-morrow shall be as this day, [a day] great. beyond measure” 
(vv. 9-12), 

The Gentile oppressors are first invited to lay waste (v. 9). 
Those who ought to have watched and tended the beautiful 
flock of Jehovah not only slept, but they awoke to their own 
greed of gain and love of present ease, as indifferent about 
God as about His people (wv. 10-12). It is a vivid picture 
of that living to self and the things that are seen, which at 
a later date characterised the Sadducees who denied not only 
the resurrection but angel or spirit. The origin of their name 
is of small moment; their materialism was ruinous. If, as 
is said, they derived their title from pretension to righteous- 
ness, or even claimed to be a sacerdotal aristocracy from the 
eminent priest who in early days superseded Abiathar, either 
matters little. High-sounding representations among the Jews, 
as elsewhere, are commonly put forward to cover ungodliness 
and sensualism. And this frightfully evil state is here declared 
to have been conspicuous among the watchmen and shepherds 
of the chosen people. Such corruption laid the people and 
their leaders open, as we shall see in the chapter that follows, 
to yet worse, beneath which depth is none lower, idolatry 
leading the way. 


CHAPTER LVII. 


On the other hand the Shepherd of Israel neither slumbered 
nor slept, and if the righteous perished without a soul’s laying 
it to heart, it was but His hand after all taking the righteous 
away from the evil to come. 

The growing apostasy of Judah made it no longer a desirable 
thing to live long on the earth, though normally it was a 
special promise for those obedient to the law. Now says the 
prophet, “The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth [it] to 
heart; and merciful (or, godly) men [are] taken away, none 
considering that the righteous is taken away from before the 
evil. He entereth into peace: they rest in their beds, [each] 
that hath walked [in] his uprightness * (vv. 1, 2). 

Next, the prophet under various figures of uncleanness 
arraigns the idolatrous Jews. “But draw near hither, ye sons 
of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore. 
Against whom do ye sport yourselves ? Against whom make 
ye a wide mouth, [and] draw out the tongue? [Are] ye not 
children of transgression, a seed of falsehood, inflaming your- 
selves among the oaks (or, with idols) under every green tree ; 
slaying the children in the valleys under the clefts of the 
rocks? Among the smooth [stones] of the valley [is] thy 
portion ; they, they [are] thy lot: even to them hast thou 
poured a drink-offering, thou hast offered an oblation. Shall 
I be appeased for these things? Upon a high and lofty 
mountain hast thou set thy bed: thither also wentest thou up 
to offer sacrifice. And behind the doors and the posts hast 
thou set up thy memorial: for thou hast uncovered [thyself] 
apart from me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, 
and made thee [a covenant] with them; thou lovedst their bed, 


CHAPTER LVII. 439 


thou sawest their nakedness. And thou wentest to the king 
with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst 
send thine ambassadors far off, and didst debase [thyself] unto 
Sheol” (wv. 3-9). 

The sketch is most energetic, and the general. scope is 
plain. The only allusion which strikes one as calling for 
particular notice is found in verse 9, “ And thou wentest to 
the king with ointment.” This will be the climax of their 
heartless desertion of Jehovah, and rejection of the Messiah. 
They received not Him Who came in His Father’s name ; 
they will receive another who is to come in his own name. 
The spirit of this has been often verified, doubtless ; but it 
awaits its full final signature in the Antichrist of the last 
days. He is “the king,” as abruptly (but so much the more 
strikingly) brought in here as in Daniel xi. 36-40. Unbelief 
as blindly acquiesces in the false and evil, as it ignores the 
truth and hates righteousness and grace. “The king” is not 
“the woman,” “the great whore,” but with those that work the 
destruction of Babylon, though only the more audaciously 
opposed to God and the Lamb. The Jew will play a solemn 
part during this last struggle in the end of the age. “The 
king” will be in the land and city destined for the Messiah ; 
the centre of the Babylonish system is the great city of the 
west, Rome: but God will destroy the one, and the Lamb 
vanquish the other. The Beast and the false prophet, or “the 
king,” perish together. 

As they are thus shown persevering in wickedness and going 
from bad to worse, only destruction awaited ; he alone should 
inherit the land who put his trust in Jehovah ; for a remnant 
there ever is. “Thou wast wearied with the length of thy 
way; thou saidst not, There is no hope. Thou didst find a 
quickening of thy strength; therefore thou wast not faint. 
And of whom hast thou been afraid and in fear, that thou 
hast lied and not remembered me, nor laid [it] to thy heart ? 
Have not I held my peace even of long time, and thou fearest 
me not? I will declare thy righteousness ; and as for thy 
works, they shall not profit thee. When thou criest, let them 
whom thou hast gathered deliver thee ; but the wind shall take 


440 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


them, a breath shall carry [them] all away: but he that putteth 
his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my 
holy mountain” (vv. 10-13). 

Thus in the midst of this harrowing description of coming 
wickedness and woe Jehovah contrasts, with the hopeless 
destruction of the apostate, him that trusts in Himself as 
destined to possess the land (so long the prey of one usurping 
stranger after another) and to inherit His holy mountain 
(even to this day the boasted spoil of, the infidel). “And it 
shall be said, Cast up, cast up, prepare the way, take up the 
stumbling-block out of the way of my people. For thus saith 
the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name [is] 
Holy, I dwell in the high and holy [place], with him also [that 
is] of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the 
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. For I 
will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth ; for 
the spirit should fail before me, and the souls [which] I have 
made. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and 
smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on fro- 
wardly in the way of his heart. I have seen his ways and will 
heal him; and I will lead him, and will restore comforts to 
him and to those of his that mourn. I create the fruit of the 
lips: peace, peace, to [him that is] afar off and to [him that is| 
near, saith Jehovah, and I will heal him. But the wicked [are] 
like the troubled sea, which cannot rest, and whose waters cast 
up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the 
wicked” (vv. 14-21). 

“Except those days should be shortened, no flesh should be 
saved: but for the elect’s sake they shall be shortened.” Yea, 
Jehovah will heal, lead, and comfort. He creates thankful 
praise. Peace is His word, peace to him that is far off and to 
him that is near; but as for the wicked, like the troubled sea 
that casts up mire and dirt, “There is no peace, saith my God, 
to the wicked.” Let the Jew take heed. Certainly the wicked 
of that people shall not escape. Of all nations, none then so 
favoured, and therefore were they beyond all responsible ; and 
as they failed to the uttermost, who so guilty ? Christendom, 
favoured much more than the Jew then, is of all conditions of 


CHAPTER LVII. 441 


mankind far the most guilty. Before its eyes Jesus Christ is 
openly set forth crucified. Yet has it fallen from grace, and 
gone under law, and turned back again to the weak and 
beggarly elements, whereunto they desire once more to be in 
bondage. Nay, the spirit of the apostasy sets in rapidly, and 
antichrists multiply far and wide. “There is no peace, saith 
my God, to the wicked.” But the Lord is at hand. Behold, 
the Judge standeth before the doors. 

Let it be observed that it was “saith Jehovah” as against 
idols. Now that the deeper evil of rejecting God in Christ is 
discussed, the word is “saith my God.” Fancied Elohist or 
Jehovistic authors have nothing to do with it here or anywhere 
else. It depends on the nature of what is conveyed by the 
same writer. This, superficial and unbelieving readers failed to 
see, and betook themselves to the hypothesis of distinct author- 
ship, partly out of their own lack of intelligence, and partly to 
unsettle and lower the scriptures. Familiar as we are with 
the rationalistic craze which denies to Isaiah the deep, lofty, 
and tender closing volume of his prophecy (chaps. xl.—lxvi.), 
it would be hard to find a respectable name bold enough to 
demand an author for chapter lvii. different from him who 
wrote chapter xlviii. In truth the hypothesis is everywhere 
a baseless dream, mischievous to a high degree, and shutting 
out the divine light afforded by an intelligent discrimination of 
those instructive names, 


CHAPTER LVIIL. 


To chapters Iviii. and lix. one might add chapter Ix. as 
completing the series. This is the opening of the last section 
of the prophecy, that is, of chapters lviii—Ixvi. The Spirit 
had closed both His counts against God’s ancient people, 
their idolatry, and their rejection of the Messiah, with the 
consequences in the certainty of judgment, and not peace, for 
the wicked on either side. We have now a sequel or appendix, 
consisting of moral argument and appeal to the people, with 
a positive revelation of Jehovah’s intervention and their 
establishment in glory and blessing. For no prophecy of 
scripture is of isolated interpretation ; each links itself with 
the kingdom of Jehovah in the last days, however it may 
apply to lesser and passing circumstances in the prophet’s 
days, or in the times that succeeded, Prophetic scripture does 
not interpret itself apart from that day, but forms a united 
system. Though it may be verified in particulars now and 
then, here or there, it looks onward to the final scenes, and 
connects what was wrought in the past with the state of 
things which will necessitate Jehovah’s appearance on the 
scene to introduce His own day. The state of the Jews at 
the time called for this unveiling of their sing, « Cry aloud, 
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and declare unto 
my people their transgression, and to the house of Jacob 
their sins. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know 
my ways, as a nation that doeth righteousness, and forsook 
not the ordinance of their God; they ask of me righteous 
ordinances, they delight to draw near unto God. Wherefore 
have we fasted, [say they,] and thou seest not? [wherefore] 
have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge ? 


CHAPTER LVIII. 443 


Behold, in the day of your fast ye find [your own] pleasure, and 
exact all your labours” (vv. 1-3). It is the spirit of Pharisaism. 

The notion of some* that Protestantism is in question is 
as unfounded as the unbelief of an older day which turned 
aside the prophecy from Israel, because no part of the blessing 
has as yet been accomplished in them ‘as a nation. The 
quotation of the prophecy, as employed by the apostle in 
Romans xi, appears clearly to refute both, by giving as 
the divine key the future salvation of that Israel which is 
now the most blinded and has stumbled at the Stumbling- 
stone. The time too is rendered certain ; it is unquestionably 
not present any more than past, but future. For, as the 
Spirit there interprets the prophecy, we are not to look for 
its fulfilment in the salvation of all Israel (chap. lix. 20), 
till after the fulness of the Gentiles is come in; whereas this 
is only going on now and not therefore complete. Hence 
the moment is not arrived even for commencing to apply to 
Israel. But faith can profit by it at any time. 

Jehovah then deals with the exceeding hypocrisy of this 
people in their holy things. It was not that they failed to 
approach His temple, not only professing delight in His 
ordinances, but fasting and afflicting their souls. In vain! 
“Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure and exact 
all your labours. Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and 
to smite with the fist of wickedness; ye fast not [this] day to 
cause your voice to be heard on high” (vv. 3, 4). Nothing 
of the kind could be acceptable to Jehovah, who will have 
truth in the inward parts, with things fair and good in the 
sight of all men. Hollow and sterile religiousness is abomin- 
able in His eyes; for such religiousness compromises His 
name and compels Him to judge themselves if He cannot 
sanction their sin. Hence the expostulation in verses 5-7. 
“Ts such the fast that I have chosen? the day for a man tc 
afflict his soul—that he should bow down his head as a rush, and 
spread sackcloth and ashes [under him]? wilt thou call this 
a fast, and an acceptable day to Jehovah? [Is] not this the 
fast that I have chosen: to loose the bands of wickedness, 


* Vitringa, Horsley, and Fry in modern times. 


444 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


to undo the thongs of the yoke, and to let the oppressed go 
free, and that ye break. every yoke? [Is it] not to deal 
thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor 
wanderers to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that 
thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine 
own flesh?” (vv. 5-7). 

Were there a response to His own goodness, in the 
practice of mercy which became the people of Jehovah to 
the oppressed and destitute, how would He not bless them! 
Were they to heed the sabbath, calling it a delight, and 
honouring Jehovah, how should they not delight themselves 
in Him, riding in the high places of the earth, and fed with 
the heritage of their father Jacob! “Then shall thy lght 
break forth as the morning, and thy healing shall spring 
forth speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before thee, 
the glory of Jehovah shall be thy rearward. Then shalt 
thou call, and Jehovah shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he 
shall say, Here I [am]. If thou take away from the midst of 
thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and the speaking 
vanity; and [if] thou proffer thy soul to the hungry, and 
satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in darkness, 
and thine obscurity [be] as the noonday: and Jehovah will 
guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and 
make strong thy bones; and thou shalt be like a watered 
garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters deceive not. 
And [they that shall be] of thee shall build the old waste 
places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many genera- 
tions; and thou shalt be called Repairer of the breach, 
Restorer of paths of habitation. If thou turn back thy 
foot from the sabbath, [from] doing thy pleasure on my holy 
day, and call the sabbath a delight, the holy [day] of Jehovah, 
honourable; and thou honour him, not doing thine own 
ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking [idle] 
words; then shalt thou delight thyself in Jehovah; and 
I will make thee to ride upon the high places of the 
earth; and I will feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy 
father: for the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken” (vv. 8-14), 


CHAPTER LIX. 


“BrHoip, Jehovah’s hand is not shortened, that it cannot 
save; nor his ear heavy that it cannot hear; but your 
iniquities have separated between you and your God, and 
your sins have hid [his] face from you, that he doth not 
hear” (vv. 1, 2). And what a picture follows in verses 3-15! 
“For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers 
with iniquity; your lips are speaking lies, your tongue 
muttereth wickedness. None sueth in righteousness, none 
pleadeth in truthfulness. They trust in vanity, and speak 
falsehood; they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. 
They hatch serpents’ eggs, and weave the spider’s web: he 
that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed 
breaketh out into a viper. Their webs shall not become 
garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their 
works; their works [are] works of iniquity, and the act of 
violence [is] in their hands. Their feet run to evil, and they 
make haste to shed innocent blood; their thoughts [are] 
thoughts of iniquity; desolation and destruction [are] in their 
paths. The way of peace they know not; and there is no 
judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked 
paths ; whosoever goeth therein knoweth not peace. Therefore 
is judgment far from us, neither doth righteousness overtake 
us: we look for light, but behold darkness; for brightness, [but] 
we walk in obscurity. We grope for the wall like the blind, 
yea, we grope as having no eyes: we stumble at noonday as in 
the twilight; among the flourishing we [are] as dead [men]. 
We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for 
judgment, and there is none ; for salvation, [but] it is far off 
from us. For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, 


446 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


and our sins testify against us; for our transgressions [are] with 
us, and our iniquities, we know them: in transgressing and 
lying against Jehovah, and turning away from following our 
God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering 
from the heart words of falsehood. And judgment is turned 
away backward, and righteousness standeth afar off: for truth 
is fallen in the street, and uprightness cannot enter. And truth 
is lacking ; and he [that] departeth from evil maketh himself a 
prey. And Jehovah saw, and it displeased him that there 
was no judgment.” Hands and fingers, lips and tongues, al] 
polluted and perverse; justice not called for; truth unpleaded ; 
vanities and lies, mischief and iniquities ; subtlety of evil 
and ever-increasing virulence ; active but vain corruption and 
violence. What sanguinary feet! what iniquitous thoughts! 
What wasting and destruction in the crooked paths where 
peace is unknown! Hence, without judgment, they walk in 
darkness, grope like the blind, and are (? in desolate places) as 
dead men, whether raging as bears or mourning as doves. 
Salvation is far off, because of multiplied transgressions and 
departure from God, with truth fallen in the street, and equity 
unable to enter, and the godly a prey, so that Jehovah had 
it evil in His sight that there was no judgment. The Spirit 
guides into confession and hides nothing. 

But such utter moral chaos, hopeless for man, was the call 
for Jehovah. “And he saw that there was no man, and 
wondered that there was no intercessor; and his arm brought 
salvation unto him; and _ his righteousness, it sustained him. 
And he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and a helmet 
of salvation upon his head; and he put on garments of 
vengeance [for] clothing, and was clad with zeal as a 
cloak. According to deeds, accordingly he will repay: fury 
to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he 
will repay recompence” (vy, 16-18). It is the picture of the 
mighty intervention of God for His people in the last days, 
though not at all resembling what He will do for the heavenly 
saints. These He will remove from the scene of their pilgrim- 
age to heaven ; His people He will deliver from their enemies 
by judgment in that day. Thereby He will teach the nations 


CHAPTER LIX. 447 


wisdom, or at least the beginning of it in His fear. “And they 
shall fear the name of Jehovah from the west, and his glory 
from the rising of the sun. When the adversary shall come 
in like a flood, the Spirit of Jehovah shall lift up a standard 
against him” (v. 19). It is not by the gospel, but by the 
execution of judgment on the Gentiles. Can any conclusion 
be plainer? Our translation to heaven is purely of grace. 

It is not, on the one hand, a mere outward interference, but 
the power of the Spirit will accompany it. On the other hand, 
here is not the action of the Spirit in the absence of the Lord, as 
now in Christianity. “And the Redeemer will come to Zion, and 
unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith Jehovah” 
(v. 20). The apostle (Rom. xi. 26) cites it* as His coming 
out of Zion. Doubtless both are true and each appropriate in 
its place. He must come to that mountain of royalty in the 
Holy Land in order to come out thence; and He will come 
to the righteous remnant, the Israel of God, even to such as 
turn from transgression in Jacob, as He will also turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob. There will be conversion of heart 
before Jehovah appears in the extremity of their distress and 
to the destruction of their foes; but that appearing will deepen 
all their feelings toward Himself and bring them into peace 
and blessing fully and for ever. “And as for me, this [is] my 
covenant with them, saith Jehovah, My spirit that [is] upon 
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not 
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, 
nor out of the mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith J ehovah, from 
henceforth and for ever” (v. 21). 

Now when the same apostle was opening out in Rom. ii. the 
gospel of God, he cites weighty and withering words from the 
early verses of our chapter to convict of sin and ruin, and 
thus to prove the abject need of grace, as in verses 15-17 and 
19, 20. But this he follows up with God’s justifying freely by 


* In the LXX it is different again from both the Hebrew and the apostle, 
and runs thus: ‘‘and the Deliverer will come on account of” Zion, This also 
appears to be correct enough. The Holy Spirit, in modifying the words by the 

apostle, seems to have had in view Pss. xiv. 7, liii. 6; so that it is absolutely 
true. (Compare Ps. cx. 2.) 


448 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, 
whom God set forth as a mercy-seat through faith in His 
blood. This is truly good news to the sinner, Jew or Gentile. 
But the prophet follows up his unveiling of the sins of the 
people with the intervention of Jehovah in garments of 
vengeance, rendering fury to His adversaries, recompence to 
His enemies. This is not what He is doing now, nor is it 
in any way the gospel of grace. It is His coming in the 
displayed kingdom. Then indeed will the Redeemer come 
to Zion, as He will identify Himself with His people Israel; 
and He will come out of Zion, as manifestly espousing their 
cause, to tread down their foes. 

The Epistle to the Galatians gives no countenance to the 
prevalent error that all believers now, the church, are the 
Israel of God. The apostle does apply the phrase only to 
such Jews as now confess Jesus to be the Christ. They and 
they only are now acknowledged as the Israel of God; but 
they are distinguished in the same verse from the general 
mass of the saints, “as many as walk according to this rule ”— 
the rule not of circumcision or of uncircumcision, but of a 
new creation in Christ Jesus. And the Epistle to the Romans 
adds, to the full assertion of the gospel and its effects, the 
distinct intimation that, when the fulness of the nations, now 
being called But, shall have come in, all Israel shall be saved. 
The teaching of the apostle is largely lost by those who do 
not see the present indiscriminate grace shown to the Gentiles 
as well as Jews, and the future recall of Israel which shall be 
“life from the dead.” 


CHAPTER LX. 


As we have had the failure and guilt of Israel in idolatry and 
the rejection of the Messiah, traced down to their reception 
of “the king” as well as of idols in the last days, so now we 
have not a pledge or promise of covenanted blessing under the 
Redeemer-King, but the scene of joy and blessing and honour 
for Zion, when the hour arrives for His glory to be revealed 
here below. There is no ground for doubting that, as before 
we had the dark picture of God’s earthly people, so here we 
are permitted to behold the sure anticipation of the brightness 
in store for them. The church is not here in question. 

“ Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of 
Jehovah is risen upon thee. For, behold, darkness shall cover 
the earth, and gross darkness the peoples: but Jehovah will 
arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And 
nations shall walk in thy light, and kings in ‘The brightness 
of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all 
they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons 
come from far, and thy daughters are nursed upon the side. 
Then thou shalt see and be brightened, and thy heart shall 
throb and be enlarged; for the abundance of the sea shall 
be turned unto thee, the wealth of the nations shall come 
unto thee. A multitude of camels shall cover thee, drome- 
daries of Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come: 
they shall bring gold and incense, and they shall show forth 
the praises of Jehovah. All the flocks of Kedar shall be 
gathered unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall serve thee; 
they shall come up with acceptance on mine altar, and I will 
beautify the house of my magnificence” (vv. 7): 

But there is another picture which sets out the change 

re 


450 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


‘among men by divine goodness. The ships of the Gentiles 
play their part now in serving Israel’s sons with honour. 
“Who [are] these [that] fly as a cloud, and as doves to their 
dovecotes? Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships 
of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from afar, their silver and 
their gold with them, unto the name of Jehovah thy God, 
and to the Holy One of Israel, for he hath glorified thee. 
And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their 
kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, 
but in my favour have I had merey on thee. Therefore thy 
gates shall be open continually (they shall not be shut day nor 
night); that [men] may bring unto thee the wealth of the 
nations, and [that] their kings [may be] brought. For the 
nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish ; yea, 
[those] nations shall be utterly wasted. The glory of Lebanon 
shall come unto thee, the cypress, the pine (or, plane), and the 
box-tree together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and 
I will make the place of my feet glorious. The sons also of them 
that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they 
that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of 
thy feet; and they shall call thee, The city of Jehovah, The 
Zion of the Holy One of Israel” (vv. 8-14). 

There is no thought here of God’s glory revealed in the face 
of Christ on High and made known by the Spirit to the heart; 
the earth itself is the theatre of this divine display. Another 
point to be noticed is, that, immediately before the time 
arrives, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness 
the peoples. Plainly therefore it is a false interpretation of 
prophecy that light is to be diffused universally when the time 
of earthly glory for Israel, as well as the heavenly glory of the 
church, dawns on the world. Zion is to be visited in the 
mercy of God, when the Gentile lands are enveloped in the 
grossest ignorance of God. So the apostle predicts the apos- 
tasy before that day. (2 Thess. ii.) 

Again, there is a point of striking contradistinction to the 
present dealings of God in verse 3. For now the fall of the 
Jews has been the riches of the world, and the diminishing 
of them the riches of the Gentiles; but here all is in contrast : 


CHAPTER LX. 451 


so indeed Romans xi. also teaches us that their reception shall 
be to the world life from the dead. Hence, when Jehovah’s 
glory shall be seen on Zion, the nations shall come to that light 
and kings to the brightness of its rising. 

The gospel goes out, its light is diffused far and wide, though 
only as a testimony; for it admits not of the power which 
binds Satan and changes the face of creation. But in our 
chapter Jerusalem has its proper central place, as the metro- 
polis of the earth when all shall be settled and governed 
according to God. Nor is it only sons and daughters that 
thus come to Zion from far, but strangers too. For there is 
then to be no such state of things on earth as the church 
of God, one body, Christ’s body. On the contrary Gentiles 
and Israel, though blessed by Jehovah, will be distinct and 
kept so, however harmonious. So too it is the day when 
outward things are to be no unmeet offering to Jehovah: 
camels and dromedaries, flocks and herds, land and sea, shall 
pour their tribute before His feet. To think of serving God 
thus now would be to go back to beggarly elements from the 
revelation of heavenly and eternal things in Christ; whereas 
gold and incense will be in season, and sacrifices will be then 
acceptable for His altar and the house of His glory. But no 
such joy shall be for the isles and the nations and creation 
generally, till the Holy One of Israel glorifies Zion, rescuing 
her from the stranger that now treads her down to her sorrow 
and his own loss. But He shall arise and have mercy on 
that royal hill, and His servants take pleasure in her stones 
and favour her dust. Not till then shall the heathen fear 
His name, and the kings of the earth His glory, as is here 
described so variously. 

But when Jehovah builds up Zion, all shall be turned. God 
will make this felt universally in due time, after punishing those 
who think to gain all by the overthrow of His people. All 
nature will join to adorn the sanctuary of Jehovah , and those 
who by-and-by represent the nations that once afflicted Israel 
will then be abject in their homage and prostration when Zion 
is exalted. Many images here used to mark the glory of the 


earthly Jerusalem are employed in a more glorious way for the 
2¥2 


{J 


452 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


new Jerusalem of Rev. xxi. xxii. But the attentive reader 
will not fail to mark the essential differences also. Take this 
one in particular. The nation and kingdom that will not serve 
the restored earthly Jerusalem shall perish; yea, those nations 
shall be utterly wasted. The glorified church, the heavenly 
Jerusalem, on the contrary, is true to her mission of grace even 
in the day of glory. For as to her not only is there no 
word of this judicial character, but there is the witness of 
beneficent and unfailing grace. The tree of life is there, on 
either side of the river of life. No other tree is seen to 
threaten death. But the tree of life, while it bears its full 
and varied yet constant fruits for those within, affords its 
gracious succour also to the need of those without: its leaves 
are for the healing of the nations. 

For anything like such heavenly grace as this, Babylon 
(proud, corrupt, cruel) had no eyes, ears, or heart; she did and 
does arrogate the claims which are alone true of Jerusalem 
by-and-by. She even ignored and hated the reality of grace 
which the bride of Christ is called to show. And no wonder; 
for she is a harlot, and detests Him that is Holy, Him that 
is True, indulging in lusts and lies and blood, till divine 
judgment fall. 

But of Zion, “Instead of thy being forsaken and hated, 
so that no man went through [thee], I will make thee an 
eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. Thou shalt 
also suck the milk of the nations, and shalt suck the breast 
of kings; and thou shalt know that I Jehovah [am] thy 
Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob. For 
bronze I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and 
for wood bronze, and for stones iron; I will also make thine 
officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness. Violence 
shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction 
within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, 
and thy gates Praise. The sun shall be no more thy light by 
day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto 
thee; but Jehovah shall be unto thee an everlasting light, 
and thy God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down; 
neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for Jehovah shall 


CHAPTER LX. 453 


be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall 
be ended” (vv. 15-20). 

Here is evidence overwhelming, were more wanted, that the 
church on earth or in heaven is not represented, but the 
ancient people of God blessed according to His promise and 
prophecy. For righteousness dealing according to an earthly 
measure is the rule; and it is the day also not for an elect 
witness, but “thy people also [shall be] all righteous,” and this 
in prosperous power, instead of knowing the fellowship of 
Christ’s sufferings, being made conformable to His death. 
“They shall possess the land for ever—the branch of my 
planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. The 
little one shall become a thousand, and the smallest a strong 
nation: I Jehovah will hasten it in its time” (vv. 21, 22). 

The main source of erroneous interpretation among the 
orthodox is the obliteration of Israel to bring the church 
into their place of promised earthly glory. Therefore minds 
at all spiritual revolted from these visions of worldly honour, 
material prosperity, long life, and the like, and sought to make 
them figures of higher things. But the Christian and the 
church have their spiritual blessings in heavenly places as 
distinctly set forth in the New Testament; as the Old Testa- 
ment predicts these wondrous changes in the land and the 
earth for Israel and the nations, when the kingdom is set up 
in visible power and glory. There is therefore not only no 
justification for getting rid of the plain meaning of the 
prophets, but we wrong God's ancient people, to say nothing 
of the nations, of that bright prospect which is revealed for 
the earth. And good men are guilty of bad reasoning and 
worse exegesis who dislike to admit the glorious state predicted 
as a simple literal fact in honour of the Second man, the last 
Adam. Far be it to accuse such unbelieving believers of 
Manicheeism ; but their speculations deprive them of entering 
into that immense counsel of God which will put the entire 
universe under Christ’s headship, and bind the earth beneath 
and the heavens above in united blessedness to His own glory, 
as we may read in Eph. i. 10; of which Rey. xxi. xxil is the 
New Testament display prophetically. 


CHAPTER LXI1. 


Tuis forms the beginning of a section (chaps. lxi—Ixiii. 1-6) 
which embraces Jehovah-Messiah in His first advent as well as 
His second for the blessing and glory of Israel and the destruc- 
tion of their enemies. We have the Lord’s own warrant in 
Luke iv. for declaring that the early portion He read applies to 
His then presence in grace here below. It has been often and 
Justly observed how He stopped after the first clause of verse 2, 
closing the book, and in due time saying, This day is this 
scripture fulfilled in your ears. He cites what portrays His 
character as it was (or about to be) displayed on earth at that 
time in ways of divine mercy, but forbears even to finish 
the sentence where the part following alludes to His exercise 
of judicial wrath. Such was in no way the object of His first 
coming; and so, if strangely in appearance, with divine wisdom 
He read no more. “The day of vengeance of our God” awaits 
the epoch of His appearing in power and glory. “The Spirit 
of the Lord Jehovah [is] upon me, because Jehovah hath 
anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek. He 
hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim 
liberty to the captives and opening of the prison to the 
bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of Jehovah, and the 
day of vengeance of our God: to comfort all that mourn ; to 
appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, that beauty be given 
them instead of ashes, the oil of joy instead of mourning, the 
garment of praise instead of the spirit of heaviness” (vv. 1-3), 

The richest merey will then indeed be the spring of God’s 
way with Israel. For Jehovah, while He executes earthly 
Judgment, will comfort those that mourn, especially mourners 
in Zion, giving them beauty for ashes, the oil of Joy for mourn- 


CHAPTER LXI. 455 


ing, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, “ that 
they might be called oaks of righteousness, the planting 
of Jehovah, that he might be glorified. And they shall build 
the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and 
they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many 
generations. And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and 
aliens’ sons [shall be] your ploughmen and your vinedressers. 
But ye shall be named Priests of Jehovah: they shall call 
you Ministers of our God. Ye shall eat the wealth of the 
nations, and into their glory shall ye enter. Instead of your 
shame [ye shall have] double; [instead of] confusion they shall 
rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shall 
possess the double; everlasting joy shall be unto them. For 
I Jehovah love judgment, I hate robbery with iniquity; 
and I will give their recompence in truth, and I will 
make an everlasting covenant with them. And their seed . 
shall be known among the nations, and their offspring 
among the peoples: all that see them shall acknowledge 
them, that they [are] a seed Jehovah hath blessed” (vv. 3-9). 
Restoration of past decayed places shall go forward; strangers 
shall serve Israel, who shall themselves be called priests 
of Jehovah. For their shame they should have not merely 
reinstatement of what had lapsed but double, like Job; 
and Jehovah, who as fully loves judgment as He hates 
robbery with wrong, will make an everlasting covenant with 
them; so that all who see acknowledge that they are indeed 
the blessed of Jehovah. 

Nay more, Jehovah Himself becomes the centre of all joy 
and the giver of all beauty, causing righteousness and praise 
to spring forth before all the nations. “I will greatly rejoice 
in Jehovah, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath 
clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered 
me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh 
[himself] with the turban, and as a bride adorneth [herself] 
with her jewels. For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and 
as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring 
forth; so the Lord Jehovah will cause righteousness and praise 
to spring forth before all the nations” (vv, 10, 11). 


456 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


We see how the Holy Spirit, having testified to the Messiah 
and His character which was of the utmost value for souls 
at His first advent, passes by His rejection and going on 
high which brought in the church, and hastens on to His 
establishment of the Kingdom in Zion at the latter day. 
So it is here, as with prophecy in general. They look on’ 
to Israel restored in the land when Christ reigns publicly. 
The fundamental principle of neology, that we have no more 
than a forecast of what was at the door, is a daring lie against 
inspired prophecy, the great body of which is on the magnifi- 
cent and holy reign of the Messiah not yet begun. Hence 
the desire to treat it as “ideal ”; hence indifference to the bright 
and assured prospects of Israel under Him and the new 
covenant, not in principle only, but in its fulfilled terms to 
the joy and blessing of all the nations and of the earth itself. 

Theodoret in his comment, like others, saw the church, not 
the future restoration of Israel and the Lord reigning in Zion 
after receiving those that now believe to heavenly glory. And 
such is the prevalent view of Christendom still. They overlook 
the plain testimony which the New Testament renders to the 
setting aside, as of the J ew, so of the Gentile, because of 
failure to continue in the goodness of God. Yet that failure is 
a fact over which every God-fearing soul mourns; and the 
apostolic warning is set forth beyond doubt in Romans XL, as 
the judgment of Christendom and the habitable earth is in 
many scriptures from Matthew to the Revelation. When that 
judgment of the quick is executed, Israel shall be saved, and 
these bright promises for the earth fulfilled, not before nor 
otherwise, 


CHAPTER LXII. 


TuE Spirit of Christ is importunate in intercession for Zion, as 
we see in the beginning of this chapter. For He it is that 
praises Jehovah in the name of the people and their capital. 
He speaks, for the Bridegroom and for the earthly bride, so 
perfectly now in the expression of joy, as once in that of un- 
fathomable grief and infinitely gracious suffering for sin. But 
it is not now in view of sin and weakness and unworthiness, 
but that Zion may henceforth shine brightly in her light of 
righteousness and salvation before the nations and all kings. 
“For Zion’s sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem’s 
sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as 
brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp [that] burneth. 
And the nations shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy 
glory ; and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the 
mouth of Jehovah shall name, Thou shalt also be a crown of 
glory in the hand of Jehovah, and a royal diadem in the hand 
of thy God. Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken, neither 
shall thy land any more be termed Desolate : but thou shalt be 
called Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah; for Jehovah delighteth 
in thee, and thy land shall be married” (vv. 1-4). Land 
and people are bound up in the plans and affections of Jehovah; 
the latter called, My delight is in her; the former, Married. 
And this will prove a divine ground of patriotism for Israel. 
“For [as] a young man marrieth a virgin, shall thy sons marry 
thee; and with the joy of the bridegroom over the bride shall 
thy God rejoice over thee” (v. 5), a still higher source of joy. 
The Spirit of Christ working in the prophet bears witness 
of the unceasing cry to Jehovah to effect His glorious counsels 
as to Jerusalem. “I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O 


458 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


Jerusalem ; they shall never hold their peace all day and all 
night: ye that put Jehovah in remembrance, take ye no rest 
and give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make, Jeru~ 
salem a praise in the earth” (vv. 6, 7). It is of great interest 
to observe the place of watchmen here. And blessed the 
day when it will be not so much against evil in treachery 
or violence, as for loudly reminding Jehovah of the mercy 
that endures, and the reversal of all past sin and shame 
in Jerusalem, established and made a praise in the earth. 
“Jehovah” on His part “hath sworn by his right hand, and 
by the arm of his strength, Surely I will no more give 
thy corn [to be] meat for thine enemies; and sons of the 
alien shall not drink thy wine, for which thou hast 
laboured; for they that have garnered it shall eat it, and 
praise Jehovah; and they that have gathered it together shall 
drink it in the courts of my holiness” (vv. 8, 9). Assuredly 
this oath infallibly secures Israel on the earth. 

Hence the animation of verse 10: “Go through, go through 
the gates; prepare the way of the people; cast up, cast up 
the highway ; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the 
peoples” (v.10). The day of Jehovah is there; He the Messiah is 
there for the salvation of Zion’s daughter—His reward with Him, 
and His work before Him. So Jehovah proclaims to the end of 
the world as His message to her. “ Behold, Jehovah hath pro- 
claimed unto the end of the earth, Say ye to the daughter of 
Zion, Behold thy salvation cometh; behold, his reward [is] with 
him, and his recompence before him” (v.11). “And,” on the other 
hand, “they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of 
Jehovah: and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not 
forsaken” (v, 12). . 

“Happy people that is in such a case; happy people whose 
God is Jehovah.” He will rejoice over Jerusalem, as a bride- 
groom over a bride. No more shall His people be called 
Azubah (Forsaken), no more the land be called Shemamah 
(Desolate), but Hephzibah (My delight is in her) the one, and 
Beulah (Married) the other, The blessing henceforward rests 
on Jehovah-Messiah, Who never did or can fail: not on 
the worm Jacob who neither could be, nor ought to have been, 


CHAPTER LXIL. 459 


relied on. Henceforward it is not the first covenant which 
claimed but could not find fulfilment fit for Jehovah from 
sinful Israel. It will be for ever the new covenant, founded 
on an infinitely better sacrifice which brings the remission of 
sins, and Jehovah’s putting His law in their inwards and 
writing it in their hearts, Himself their God, and they His 
people. Messiah’s prime interest then will be Israel and 
Jerusalem; but all the nations and the earth shall be blessed 
in divine goodness. 

Some find a difficulty, because the Revelation (xix. xxi. 
xxii.) clearly teaches that the church is the bride, the Lamb’s 
wife; whereas Isaiah says it of Israel, and of their land with 
Jehovah. But there is really none; for the one speaks of what 
is for heaven, the other for the earth. And what hinders 
an object especially dear on high, and another here below in 
that day? But there is no confusion of the two in scripture; 
still less room for that truly carnal method of interpretation 
which by a strange hallucination the divines call spiritualising, 
the essence of which system is to identify the Jew with the 
Christian, to metamorphose the land into heaven, to swamp 
long-suffering grace into the reign of righteousness, and imagine 
a kingdom of the Spirit to the denial of Christ’s world- 
kingdom, heralded by prophets of old, sung by psalmists, 
and sealed by the Saviour and the apostles. Both are true, 
but their spheres as distinct as the objects themselves, the 
character of the relation which Christ bears to each, or even 
the languages in which they are respectively revealed. To 
confound them is to deny the future hopes of Israel, and to 
lose the heavenly place of the church. 

The church has never been forsaken, as Zion unquestionably ; 
nor have we as members of the glorified Christ another father- 
land but heaven, which cannot be termed desolate. Apply the 
language to Israel, and all is clear and unequivocal, without 
doing violence to a single expression. 


CHAPTER LXIII. 1-6. 


THESE verses connect themselves with the close of chapter lxii, 
following up the coming of the Messiah (as the Deliverer of 
Zion no longer forsaken but sought out, and all her dispersed 
children now gathered in) with a most vivid sight, as it were, 
of His return from executing vengeance on their Gentile foes. 
The scene of the slaughter is laid in the land of Edom and the 
city of Bozrah. Horsley seems inconsistent in denying any 
mention of these places here, while admitting them in chapter 
xxxiv. He would translate the proper names as appellatives 
thus: “Who [is] this that approacheth all in scarlet, with 
garments stained from the vintage? This [that is] glorious,” 
&c. But that able man had overlooked the chapter just 
referred to, where the scene demands the proper names. This 
consideration, in my judgment, gives conclusive support to the 
ordinary translation. 

But commentators in general contradict each other without 
being able to discern the divine light in the words of the 
prophet. Thus Origen and Theodoret, Tertullian and J erome, 
may illustrate views which have too long prevailed, so far as to 
lead the compilers of the English Common Prayer to read it for 
the Epistle on the Monday before Easter, They actually regard 
the scene as prophetic of the Saviour suffering for our sins, 
instead of seeing in it the Avenger of His long-oppressed 
Israel; as a pledge of mercy, not as a threat of judgment. 
Hence the good Bishop of Cyrrhus thinks the prophet here 
points out Jehovah’s ascent to heaven, lays stress on Edom 
as the red land, connects the pierced side and blood and water 
with the blood-stained garments, and sees the destruction of 
the devil and all his host in the treading of the winepress, 


CHAPTER LXIII. 1-6. 461 


Calvin justly objects to such a perversion of the prophecy ; 
but he is quite as far from the true mark as any when he 
proceeds to apply it not to Christ, but simply to God Himself 
as such in His dealings of old with the Edomites, and other 
enemies of His people, when He broke them by the Assyrians 
of old. This is to make the word of private or isolated 
interpretation, dislocating it from its true aim and scope in 
the illustration of the glory of the Lord Jesus, not at His first 
advent, but when He comes again. 

Luther’s notion is strange enough: he regards it as a 
prediction of the punishment of the Jews cr Synagogue, not 
an infliction on their enemies for their rescue in the latter day. 
The Jew, as is commonly known, conceives that the divine 
wrath which impends over Rome, as the full meaning of the 
enemy here named Edom, is the real thought. Bishop Lowth 
rightly combats Grotius’ hypothesis that Judas Maccabeeus and 
his victories make the subject of it; or the subsequent exploits 
of John Hyrcanus, his brother Simon’s son. “It may be 
asked [he adds], to whom, and to what event, does it relate ? 
I can only answer, that I know of no event in history to 
which, from its importance and circumstances, it can be 
applied, unless perhaps to the destruction of Jerusalem and 
the Jewish polity; which in the Gospel is called the coming 
of Christ and the days of vengeance. Matt. xvi. 28; Luke 
xxiv22.7 

This suffices to prove the bewilderment of Christian writers 
down to our times, which is yet more confessed by some, like 
the last, owning that “there is no necessity of supposing that 
it has been already accomplished.” 

Vitringa, as usual, is more erudite than the mass; but there 
seems to be no good reason for treating, as he does, the local 
references as mystical. For when the great day arrives, the 
world will behold a wonderful reappearance, not of Israel only, 
but of their ancient rivals and enemies, whom, like the ten 
tribes, men of the world assume to be for ever extinct. It 
will be the day of reckoning for the nations, and the end will 
righteously answer to the beginning. At any rate there is 
nothing valid enough to set aside the plain mention of these 


462 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


localities, nor the fact of an utter overthrow of the Gentile 
enemies of Israel there. 

But the great fact which is overlooked by almost all is, 
that if is no question of the heavenly church, but of the 
earthly people, Israel. The church is removed from the scene 
by grace to meet the Lord, and be with Him in the Father’s 
house, though surely also to appear with Him in glory and to 
reign with Him over the earth. But not such is the character 
of the deliverance of Israel; and of this Isaiah treats, like the 
Old Testament in general. It is by the execution on earth of 
judgments, which have for their object the salvation of the 
Jews and the destruction of their enemies. This accordingly 
accounts for terms, which are hard indeed to be explained 
when men think of the church in these verses. Believe that 
Israel is there, and what more proper than such a description 
of their Deliverer, as “I that speak in righteousness, mighty 
to save,” or “The day of vengeance is in my heart”? Is this 
the way we think of His love to us, or His attitude even to the 
world while we are passing through? How can verses 5, 6, 
apply to Him as Head of the church ? Bring in the question 
of Israel delivered for His kingdom here below, and all is 
consistent and clear. 

It is then the Lord, Jehovah-Messiah, who is here seen in 
the prophetic vision, returning victorious from the spot which 
more than one prophecy declares to be the theatre of the wrath 
which shall be poured out unsparingly on the foes of His 
people. “ Who [is] this,” asks the prophet identifying himself 
with the people, “that cometh from Edom, with deep-red 
garments from Bozrah, this [that is] glorious in his apparel, 
travelling in the greatness of his strength?” His answer (for 
it assumes the form of a dialogue) is, “I that speak in right- 
eousness, mighty to save.” “Wherefore,” asks Isaiah again, 
“[art thou] red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him 
that treadeth in the wine-vat?” “J have trodden,” answers 
He, “the wine-press alone: and of the peoples not a man was 
with me; and I have trodden them in mine anger, and 
trampled them in my fury; and their blood is sprinkled upon 
my garments, and I have stained all my raiment. For the day 


CHAPTER LXIII. 1-6. 463 


of vengeance [is] in my heart, and the year of my redeemed 
is come. And I looked, and there was none to help; and I 
wondered that there was none to uphold: and mine own arm 
brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me. And 
I have trodden down the peoples in mine anger, and made 
them drunk in my fury, and I have brought down their 
strength (lit. juice) to the earth” (wv. 1-6). 

Manifestly it is no picture of Christ forsaken of God nor 
even rejected of man, but of His treading down the opposed 
nations, as grapes in a wine-press. It is not infinite love 
suffering infinitely that sin might be judged, and God glorified 
about it, and thence able to justify the believer from all things. 
It is One trampling down in wrath, and the blood of His 
enemies sprinkling His garments, not His blood washing them 
in divine grace. It is not the day of grace but of vengeance, 
though along with it the year of His redeemed is come when 
the scattered and peeled people shall be brought to Zion with 
everlasting joy on their heads. Now it is the day of salvation 
for the Gentiles who believe, while wrath to the uttermost 
is come on the Jews who believe not. 

The reference is plain to chap. lxi. 2 with the notable 
difference that here “the day of vengeance” precedes “the 
year of my redeemed” ; whereas in the previous chapter “the 
acceptable year of Jehovah” takes precedence of “the day of 
vengeance of our God.” And this latter had a beautiful 
propriety in the Lord’s own application of that part only 
which illustrated His first advent. For if we have eyes to see 
according to God, we shall not fail to discern the admirable 
way in which the Holy Spirit, while looking onward to the day 
of manifested glory even for Israel and the earth, does. not 
omit to prepare for the grace and humiliation on which that 
glory is based, that it should have the deepest moral grounds, 
not mere power or even wisdom. God must intervene for the 
heart to know Him; and man, believing man, must be cleansed 
from every sin and all unrighteousness. 

Here however it is Jehovah-Messiah executing unsparing 
judgment on earth, treading the peoples in His anger and 
trampling them in His wrath. Those who cavil at this ag 


464 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


inconsistent with His holy goodness betray their own 
rebelliousness and the bad conscience which dreads His day 
at length, when He summarily puts down the iniquity which 
has so long destroyed the earth. When divine vengeance has 
done its necessary and righteous work with the peoples and 
enemies of Israel, the ways of God succeed in goodness, and 
the godly remnant, His people, testify to them with praise, 
as we shall next hear. 

Far different is the gospel era. It is truly a time of 
acceptance, and a day of salvation, quite apart from judgments 
on either Jew or Gentile. It is based on an incomparably 
deeper and more mysterious judgment, when God availed 
Himself of the rejection of the Messiah by both Jews and 
Gentiles, and wrought the amazing work of His grace toward 
ungodly and lost man in the sacrifice of His Son, the Lord 
Jesus, for our sins, and for the redemption of all who believe. 
In the gospel there is no difference: all sinned ; and the same 
Lord of all is rich toward all that call upon Him (Romans iii. 
x.). In the kingdom there will be a difference, at least in 
honour; Zion and Israel shall have a position beyond every 
other place and people under their King Jehovah of hosts. 
The church glorified has at that very time a still higher and 
nearer relationship beyond question; as we are now called to 
walk in faith and hope. For it is always the special and 
proper revelation for any given time which is intended of 
God to act on souls, not merely the general principles of 
divine truth which apply necessarily from first to last. The 
coming of our Lord brought this out in the strongest relief ; 
as He personally was the truth in all its fulness, His finished 
work removed all impediments and led to the revelation of 
the light of God’s glory in His face, and the Holy Spirit was 
thereon sent forth to be in the believer and in the church a 
spirit of communion, such as never could be before, and never 
is nor can be again. 


CHAPTER LXIII. 7-19. 


THE last section brought together at its beginning the Lord’s 
first advent, at its end His second advent, with Jerusalem as 
the special object here contemplated in His earthly plans. We 
now enter on the closing part of this great and varied 
prophecy. There are two divisions in it. The first, that 
which affords us our present theme (from verse 7 of chapter 
lxiii. to the end of chapter Ixiv.), consists of a most urgent 
intercession by the Spirit in the mouth of the prophet on 
behalf of Israel with Jehovah, after recalling His grace toward 
them. The second is His answer, which carries us to the end 
of the book. 

Even the least enlightened of modern commentators admits 
that we open with what seems designed as a formulary of 
grateful recognition of loving-kindness and tender mercy, but 
also in humiliation for the Israelites in order to their restoration. 
“J will record the loving-kindnesses of Jehovah, the praises 
of Jehovah, according to all that Jehovah hath bestowed on 
us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which 
he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and 
according to the multitude of his loving-kindnesses. And he 
said, Surely they [are] my people, children [that] will not lie; 
and he became their Saviour. In all their affliction he was 
afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his 
love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bore them 
and carried them all the days of old” (wv. 7-9). 

Nothing is more suitable than this exordium, whether one 
thinks of Jehovah first or of His people next. Mercies 
acknowledged lead to fresh mercy. He was not changed in 
His loving-kindness, nor they in their deep need of it, as only 

24 


466 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAH. 


He could show it to them. Hitherto His love had received 
no return, nothing but bitter disappointment.* Yet what 
could exceed His tender care? “But they rebelled and vexed 
his holy Spirit: and he turned to be their enemy; himself, he 
fought against them. But he remembered the days of old, Moses 
[and] his people, [saying], Where [is] he that brought them up 
out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? where [is] he 
that put his holy Spirit in the midst of him, his glorious 
arm leading [them] by the hand of Moses, dividing the waters 
before them, to make himself an everlasting name, who led them 
through the depths; as a horse in the wilderness [that] they 
stumbled not? As cattle go down into the valley, the Spirit 
of Jehovah gave them rest: so didst thou lead thy people, 
to make thyself a name of glory” (vv. 10-14). 

It is evident then that God will work morally in Israel. 
No external deliverances for themselves nor execution of 
vengeance on His and their foes will suffice for His great 
purposes, any more than for His own glory or their real good. 
Hence the Spirit will exercise them in confession and in 
supplication before Him. As the verses already looked at 
set out their ingratitude and selfwill in presence of His 
unmerited goodness, so the next take the form of prayer. 
“Look down from the heavens, and behold from the habitation 
of thy holiness and of thy glory, Where [is] thy zeal and thy 
strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies? 
Are they restrained toward me? For thou [art] our father, 
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge 
us not: thou, O Jehovah, [art] our father; our Redeemer, from 
everlasting [is] thy name. O Jehovah, why hast thou made us to 
err from thy ways—hast thou hardened our heart from thy fear? 
Return for thy servants’ sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. 
The people of thy holiness have possessed [it] but a little 


* It may be well to remark that verse 9 is by no means certain for the reading 
or sense. Our translation followed the Keri, others (as the Vulgate, the Syriac, 
the Targum of Jonathan, &c., and of moderns, Houbigant, Rosenmiiller, 
Horsley, De Wette, &c.) follow the Ketib. This would give properly, one 
may suppose, ‘‘in all their straits he was not straitened,” The Septuagint, 
followed by the Arabic, contrasts His personal interest and action, ‘It was not 
' an ambassador nor an angel, but He Himself saved them,” &c, 


CHAPTER LXIII. 7-19. 467 


while: our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary. We 
have become of old [like those] thou never ruledst, those not 
called by thy name” (vv. 15-19). 

They are broken in heart and turn in affiance of spirit to 
Jehovah. Had He of old said, Surely they are My people, 
children that will not lie? Now they say, Surely Thou art our 
father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknow- 
ledge us not. Yet do they own that there had been judicial 
hardening over them as erst over Pharaoh and his people. How 
deep and persevering the sins that could turn Jehovah against 
His own people as against their enemies of old! and this too 
how long! for Israel had enjoyed their inheritance but a little 
while. Long, long had their adversaries trodden down Jehovah’s 
sanctuary, and Israel had been as those on whom His name 
was not called, who knew not His rule. 


2a 2 


CHAPTER LXIV. 


THis leads out the heart in still more earnestness. “Look 
down from heaven” suffices no more. “Oh that thou wouldest 
rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down — that 
the mountains might flow down at thy presence, as fire 
kindleth brushwood, [as] fire causeth the waters to boil 
—to make thy name known to thine adversaries, [that] 
the nations may tremble at thy presence! When thou 
didst terrible things we looked not for, thou camest down, 
the mountains flowed down at thy presence. Ever since the 
beginning of the world they have not heard, nor perceived 
by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, a God besides thee, 
who will act for him that waiteth for him” (vv, 1-4). 

It is interesting here to note the great difference for which 
the accomplishment of redemption gives occasion by the gift 
of the Holy Ghost. (Compare 1 Corinthians ii.) We see that 
God now does reveal the things He has prepared for them that 
love Him. We do not wait for the emergence of the great 
High Priest to know our blessedness; for while He is still 
in the holiest, the Holy Spirit, as the gospel teaches, has come 
out and given us to enter in as anointed of God and made free 
to go boldly within the veil. Indeed for us the veil is rent, 
and all things hidden are revealed. But Israel (and the 
prophet speaks of Israel) must wait till they see Him Whom 
their fathers so guiltily pierced, though undoubtedly their 
heart will be then converted to Jehovah-Messiah. They are 
born again but not in peace till they actually behold Him, and 
even then what searchings of heart, what self-reproach ! 

Hence we have in what follows the language of true repent- 
ance. “Thou meetest him that rejoiceth to work righteousness, 


CHAPTER LXIV. 469 


[those that] remember thee in thy ways (behold, thou art wroth ; 
for we have sinned): in those is perpetuity, and we shall 
be saved. But we are all as an unclean [thing], and all our 
righteousnesses as filthy rags; and we all fade as a leaf; 
and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away. And 
there is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up 
himself to take hold of thee; for thou hast hid thy face from 
us, and made us melt away, through our iniquities. But now, 
O Jehovah, thou [art] our father; we [are] the clay, and thou 
our potter; and we all [are] the work of thy hand. Be not 
wroth very sore, O Jehovah, neither remember iniquity for 
ever. Behold, see, we beseech thee, we [are] all thy people. 
Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, J erusalem 
a desolation. Our holy and our beautiful house, where our 
fathers praised thee, is burned up with fire; and all our 
pleasant things are laid waste. Wilt thou refrain thyself for 
these [things], O Jehovah? wilt thou hold thy peace, and 
afflict us very sore?” (vv. 5-12). 

The truth is that we must leave room in our faith for others 
to be blessed in the grace of God, when the saints called to 
a distinctively heavenly portion are no longer on earth. God 
will prepare Israel, His firstborn son here below, to be His 
destined chief among all the families of the earth, whom He 
will surely bless according to promise, and in honour of His 
Only-begotten Son. And thus it is that the Jew must, after 
his long and varied failure, undergo so searching a spiritual 
process to fit him for his assigned post as the most honoured 
nation. For this he is kept now, the standing witness (in spite 
of his present heart-unbelief) of divine chastening, in order 
to obtain mercy in “that day,” when he renounces self- 
confidence, confesses his sins unreservedly in truth, and 
hails in Jehovah’s name Him Whom heretofore he slew by 
the hand of lawless men. It was a grand discovery for faith, 
that Jehovah’s honour was concerned in their blessing ; and 
that the desolation touched Him at least as much as them, 
though the sins were theirs and the grace was His. 

There is a remarkable form of expression in verse 9, where 
the substantive verb occurs and is repeated, contrary to the 


470 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISATAK. 


well-known Hebrew usage which ordinarily omits it. As its 
insertion cannot be without a sufficient reason, we are entitled 
to infer that the revealing Spirit had in His mind by the 
preterite form employed a continuous state of desolation from 
a past act of judgment. This entirely agrees with the facts, 
not so much of the Babylonian infliction but of the more 
permanent ruin which followed the destruction by the Romans. 
For God was marking His sense, not only of the national 
defection of His people in idolatry, but of the returned 
remnant’s still more heinous and fatal rejection of the 
Messiah, All hope therefore turns on His mercy and faith- 
fulness to His gifts and calling. All must be vain, unless 
Jehovah rent the heavens and came down in the person of 
Him Who had already come to suffer for all their iniquities 
and all their transgressions in all their sins, banishing and 
effacing their guilt for ever. This, we know from other 
scriptures, He will assuredly do for His own great name, 
and in virtue of the atonement already effected. 


CHAPTER LXV. 


Tuis chapter begins the answer of Jehovah to the appeal of 
His people, in which He explains not only what is now an 
accomplished fact, but also what still goes on. “I am sought 
out of [them that] asked not [for me]; I am found of [them 
that] sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a 
nation [that] was not called by my name. I have stretched 
out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, who walk 
in a way [that was] not good, after their own thoughts” (vv. 
1,2). The last two verses of Romans x. leave no ground for 
hesitation as to their bearing. They furnish an inspired 
comment on our opening verses, and prove beyond controversy 
that the first intimates the call of the Gentiles which is now 
proceeding, as the second is the agerieved witness on God’s 
part of that which gave occasion to their call—the rebellious- 
ness of His ancient people Israel. It is an enemy’s work to 
slight the New Testament use of the passage, as is done by 
rationalists in order to limit the prophecy to the Jews of the 
times before and after the Babylonish captivity. Besides, 
what can be more inconsistent with the evident contrast at 
the same epoch between verses 1 and 2? The inspired 
application we might never, unaided, have discovered; but, 
once made, it approves itself to the spiritual understanding 
as exactly tallying with notorious facts. 

Grace is sovereign and goes out now to those who never 
so much as looked for it—to the ungodly Gentiles who had 
till now stood in no recognised relationship with God. But 
in turning from Israel God was entirely justified by their 
iniquities: after all their advantages, His name had been 
plasphemed among the Gentiles through the chosen people. 


472 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Most gracious was He then in calling from among the 
Gentiles ; most righteous in discarding the Jew. This Jehovah 
proceeds to prove by a detail of Israel’s insulting wickedness 
in verses 3-5: “The people that provoke me to anger con- 
tinually to my face; that sacrifice in gardens, and burn 
incense upon the bricks; who sit down among the graves, and 
lodge in the secret places, who eat swine’s flesh, and broth of 
abominable [things is in] their vessels; who say, Stand by 
thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier than thou. 
These [are] a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the 
day.” 

Ti has been objected by some that these idolatries and 
superstitions, covered over with hypocritical affectation of 
holiness, did not occur after the return from Babylon. But 
we must not forget that the Holy Ghost in prophecy deals 
with the evils then existing or in progress, the judgment of 
which was not met by providential chastisement, such as the 
conquest of Nebuchadnezzar. Just as the idolatry of the 
wilderness was only checked from time to time, but not judged 
‘duly till the nation was carried into captivity beyond Damas- 
cus (Amos v.); so these evil ways which Isaiah describes did 
not meet with adequate condemnation till God turned the 
stream of His calling into other channels. The principle 
indeed is fully confirmed by the use our Lord and the Spirit 
make of Isaiah vi. The judicial sentence so long suspended 
from the days of the prophet only fell adequately in gospel 
times. It is just so here. Also we must bear in mind what 
we have seen already, that idolatry is to revive in the latter 
days, when the Jews settle themselves in their land before the 
Lord appears, judging the evil and establishing the good in order 
to His millennial reign. 

One cannot but think too that the closing words of this 
divine censure intimate the long patience of God; so that, 
flatter themselves as they might that He like themselves 
did not heed the character of their misdeeds, judgment would 
at length demonstrate, that, however loath to break silence, 
He will recompense the iniquities of both fathers and children. 
“Behold, [it is] written before me: I will not keep silence, 


CHAPTER LXV. 473 


but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom, your 
iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith 
Jehovah, who have burned incense upon the mountains, and 
outraged me upon the hills: I will measure their former 
work into their bosom” (wv. 6, 7). 

This might seem to threaten total and hopeless ruin to the 
ancient people. But no: God had promised ; and the unfaith- 
fulness of the people, however surely judged, cannot make void 
the promises of grace. Hence in verses 8-10 God proceeds 
to make known, not the bringing in of the Gentiles during 
Israel’s temporary excision from the olive-tree of promise and 
testimony on earth, but the reservation of a portion, the germ 
of a nation, blessed and a blessing, from Jacob and Judah, 
according to His early pledges to their fathers. “ Thus saith 
Jehovah, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and it is 
said, Destroy it not; for a blessing [is] in it: so will I do for 
my servants’ sakes, that I may not destroy [them] all. And 
I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah a 
possessor of my mountains; and my chosen shall inherit it, 
and my servants shall dwell there. And the Sharon shall be" © 
for a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a couching-place 
of herds, for my people that have sought me.” His chosen, the 
remnant, are here definitely distinguished from the rest of the 
people, or “the many” as Daniel describes them in speaking 
of the same time. 

Then in verses 11-16 Jehovah contrasts the apostates 
and the elect of the people, the idol-worshippers and His 
own servants, with their respective destinies. “ But ye 
that forsake Jehovah, that forget my holy mountain, that 
prepare a table for Gad,* and fill up mixed wine unto Meni,* 
T will even number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow 
down in the slaughter: because I called and ye did not answer, 
I spoke, and ye did not hear; but ye did the evil in mine eyes, 
and [that] wherein I delight not ye chose. Therefore thus saith 
the Lord Jehovah, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall 


* These idolatrous objects have been contested not a little, some arguing for 
Baal and Ashtoreth, or Sun and Moon, others for the planets Jupiter and Venus, 
as others again for Chance and Fate. Gad means a troop, and Meni number, 


474 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


be hungry; behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be 
thirsty; behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be 
ashamed ; behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, 
but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for 
vexation of spirit. And ye shall leave your name for a curse 
unto my chosen; for the Lord Jehovah will slay thee, and 
call his servants by another name: so that he who blesseth 
himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth ; 
and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of 
truth; because the former troubles shall be forgotten, and 
because they shall be hid from mine eyes.” The old evil will 
be judged at the close; just as inquisition for all righteous 
blood shed will then be made. It is a time of judgment which 
ushers in days of unparalleled enjoyment for this earth: 
that is, it is the end of this age, and the dawn of a new one 
when former troubles are forgotten. Yet “ the land” may here 
be meant rather than the wider sense. 

“For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and 
the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. But 
be glad and rejoice for ever [in that] which I create: for, behold, 
I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. And I 
will rejoice over Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the 
voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice 
of crying” (vv. 17-19). The true key to this is that the 
predicted change from present things begins at the commence- 
ment of the day of the Lord, and is only complete before that 
day gives place to eternity. This alone, as is plainly revealed, 
will be found to reconcile all the scriptures which treat of the 
subject. So in Christ the Christian can even now say that 
“old things are passed away: behold all things are become 
new”; while in fact this will only be literally verified when 
he is changed into His image at His coming. Just so the 
beginning of the day of the Lord will be an incipient accom- 
plishment of “new heavens and a new earth,” when Jehovah 
creates Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy; but the 
absolute fulfilment awaits the close of the millennial day, 
when to the fullest all things shall be made new, the earth and 
heavens that are now being not shaken only but dissolved, the 


CHAPTER LXV. 475 


sea for ever gone, and a new heaven and a new earth appearing, 
wherein righteousness shall dwell, and God shall be all in all. 
The New Testament naturally dwells on the full issue ulti- 
mately involved in the prophecy, as we may see in 2 Peter 
iii. and in Revelation xxi. 1-8. But the Jewish prophet, as 
naturally, was led of the Spirit to dwell on the earliest pledge 
of this blessing in its dawn on the land and capital and people 
of Israel. 

That Isaiah does embrace this earlier phase as bearing on 
the Jews and Jerusalem will be manifest to every attentive 
reader. For the entire description here suits the millennium 
rather than eternity. The special place of Jerusalem and her 
people has been already pointed out. Now this of itself suffices 
to prove it; for though the new Jerusalem possesses an abiding 
character of special glory, the New Testament is explicit that 
on the new earth all such distinctions as an earthly city or 
people melt away for eternity. 

Next, verse 20 is decisive against the notion. “There shall 
be no more thenceforth an infant of days, nor an old man that 
hath not completed his days; for the youth shall die a hundred 
years old, and the sinner [being] a hundred years old shall be 
accursed.” Thus death is not wholly extinct in the state 
of things prominently before our prophet. It is exceptional, 
but still exists as an instrument of judicial infliction. Man 
will then fill his days, which he has never yet done—not even 
before the flood—no, not even Methuselah himself. Not one 
as yet has stretched across ten centuries. This will be the 
rule for the righteous who are found alive on earth when the 
Lord reigns for the thousand years. So thoroughly will death 
be not the rule but the exception, that one dying a hundred 
years old will be but a youth; and even so he that dies at 
a hundred years will be a sinner under some express curse. 
In eternity death does not exist. | 

Again, it is written here, “ And they shall build houses, 
and inhabit [them]; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat 
the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another inhabit ; 
they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree 
[shali be] the days of my people, and my chosen shall long enjoy 


476 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


the work of their hands. They shall not labour in vain, nor 
bring forth for trouble ; for they [are] the seed of the blessed of 
Jehovah, and their offspring with them. And it shall come to 
pass, that before they call, I will answer; while they are 
yet speaking, I will hear. The wolf and the lamb shall feed 
as one, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox: and 
dust [shall be] the serpent’s meat. They shall not hurt nor 
destroy in all my holy mountain, saith Jehovah ” (wv. 21-25). 

Now, sweet and worthy of God as all this is, it is not heavenly 
nor eternal in the full sense, though an earnest of final blessed- 
ness. It is God’s vindication of His character on earth and of 
His faithful promises to Israel there, when power shall be 
on the side of righteousness, and the works of the devil shall 
be manifestly destroyed here below. Not even disappointment 
shall be known; for before men call, Jehovah will answer and 
will hear while they speak. And the long-groaning earth, 
freed from its travail, shall yield her increase. The very beasts 
shall share the general joy, with one solemn and marked excep- 
tion. Did the enemy of God and man choose one animal to be 
the vehicle of his temptation with the mother of all men ? 
Even in the otherwise universal joy God cannot forget this, 
and would have men also to remember it when that active 
spirit of evil is debarred from his ravages. So if “the wolf 
and the lamb shall feed together,” and the lion shall eat straw 
like the ox, none the less shall dust be the serpent’s meat. 
“They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, 
saith Jehovah.” There emphatically, and not there only, is 
the power of evil broken to the glory of God. 

In a Christian effort to defend the Messianic interpretation 
of these prophecies (with the aim of which one cordially 
agrees), it is sad to read such incredulity as could say, “The 
lion could not eat straw like the bullock, and continue to be a 
lion”... “And even were this change possible, nothing 
would be gained by it. A lion go transformed would be a 
defect in creation,” &c. (R. P. Smith’s Auth. and Mess. 
Interp., 260, Oxford, 1862.) What is the value of such reason- 
ing against the positive word of God ? The New Testament is 
even more distinct than the Old; because apostolic doctrine 


CHAPTER LXV. 477 


lays down what the prophets present in the elevated style of 
poetic prose. Not the Holy Spirit but the Lord Jesus is 
the revealed Restorer of fallen creation. For He is the Heir of 
all. As the heavens have now received Him, He will surely 
come again, not for the destruction but for the restitution of 
all things. It was on earth that the grace of God appeared 
in Him; here was accomplished redemption; here will the 
glory of God be manifested, though on high it will shine more 
brightly in the glorified. On the cross Satan was defeated 
before God, though seemingly he defeated the Saviour; and 
what the believer knows by faith will be manifested to every 
eye when the Lord appears again in glory. Meanwhile the 
dead and risen Christ is received up in glory, and all the angels 
of God worship Him. But the day comes when the earth shall 
be full of His glory, though this cannot be without a judg- 
ment of the living ungodly, in the most marked contrast with 
the gospel which now goes forth. Those who fail to believe 
this immense change, being most defective in their apprehen- 
sions of the revealed future, set up to prophesy smooth things 
of man and his progress. Who can wonder that they prophesy 
falsely 2? Scripture is direct and express that creation is to be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of 
glory; and the Lord Jesus is worthy of it, Who will make it 
all good in its season, 


CHAPTER LXVIL 


THE concluding chapter of our prophet pursues what was begun 
in chapter Ixv.—the answer of Jehovah to the supplication 
which precedes them both. 

“Thus saith Jehovah, the heavens [are] my throne, and the 
earth [is] my footstool: what [is] the house that ye will build 
unto me? and where [is] the place of my rest? Even all those 
[things] hath my hand made, and all those [things] have been, 
saith Jehovah ” (wv, 1, 2). It is not that God did not accept 
the house which king David desired, and his son Solomon was 
given, to erect for His glory. It is not that He will not have a 
Sanctuary in the midst of Israel in the glorious land; for He 
has revealed it minutely, with the feasts, sacrifices, priests, 
and appurtenances, by Ezekiel (chaps. x].-xlviii.), 

But it is another thing when His people, despising the only 
Saviour and Lord, their own Messiah, rest in the sanctuary, as 
of old in the ark to their own shame and discomfiture before 
their enemies. So it was when the Lord left the temple—no 
longer God’s house but theirs, and left to them desolate, Himself 
its true glory being despised and rejected. So Stephen charged 
home on them these very words (Acts vii, 48-50). Te 
was not he, nor Luke, but Isaiah who declared that the 
Most High dwells not in temples made with hands: and this in 
full view of the « exceeding magnifical ” temple which Solomon 
built. Heaven is His throne, earth is His footstool.. What 
can man do worthily for Him to rest in? He needs nothing 
of human resources. His own hand has made all thege 
things, in comparison with Which man’s greatest exertions 
are puny indeed. Once more among the Jews at the end of 
the age shall be the state of things which draws out this 


CHAPTER LXVI. 479 


rebuke of their own prophet. Trusting in the house that they 
are at length allowed to build in Jerusalem, they must prove 
afresh that an unbelieving idolatrous heart desecrates a temple, 
and that not thus can sin be settled between God and the 
sinner. Earthly splendour in such circumstances is but gilding 
over iniquity. It is real hypocrisy. They may seek in unbelief 
to restore “all these things that have been”; but God has a 
controversy with the people about idolatry and the rejected 
Messiah not yet judged; and His elect own their sins and look 
for the new estate He will create in honour of Messiah. The 
heart must be purified by faith in order to acceptably worship. 

“But to this [man] will I look, to the afflicted and contrite 
in spirit, and trembling at my word” (v. 2). Thus the line 
is drawn here as before between a godly remnant, and the 
people apostate as a whole. Hence their oblations are vain. 
“He that killeth an ox slayeth a man; he that sacrificeth a 
lamb breaketh a dog’s neck; he that offereth an oblation [is as] 
swine’s blood; he that burneth incense [is as] he that blesseth 
an idol. As they have chosen their own ways, and their soul 
delighteth in their abominations, I also will choose their 
delusions, and will bring their fears upon them; because when 
I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did not 
hear: but they did the evil in mine eyes, and chose [that] 
wherein I delight not” (vv. 3, 4). The English Bible follows 
the Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and Arabic, as well as the 
Chaldee paraphrase. Houbigant, Bishop Lowth, Horsley, 
De Wette, &c., omit the terms of comparison (inserted in 
italics in the A. V.), which in their judgment mar the true 
sense. Their translation makes the verse to intimate the 
combination of ritual observance with open wickedness and 
Gentile abominations. Otherwise the statement is that their 
impiety made their acts of worship to be so many horrors. 

In either view they had chosen their own path of self-will 
and disregard of God for the evils they loved; but God's 
retribution would not be wanting. No delusions among the 
nations were more complete than Israel’s have been and are 
yet to be; and the evils they dreaded, and sacrificed all to 
avoid, were just what befell them, and must till the end come. 


480 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


Did they refuse the Messiah ? They have been a prey to false 
Messiahs, and shall yet bow down to the Antichrist, Did they 
own no king but Cesar? In Cxsar they found a destroyer. 
Did they fear the Romans would come and take away their 
place and nation? All the world knows how punctually their 
fear was accomplished; and yet the end is not. Greater 
abominations shall be seen in them: greater delusions, greater 
fears, and a greater fulfilment. The abomination of desolation 
of which the Saviour spoke (citing not Daniel xi. 31, which 
was then past, but Daniel xii. 11, which is still future) must 
yet be set where it ought not, in the sanctuary at Jerusalem: 
and then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the 
beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. 

It is impossible to interpret of the Roman siege either 
Matthew xxiv., or Daniel xii., or our chapter; but the days are 
at hand, and the effect of every vision. “Hear the word 
of Jehovah, ye that tremble at his word, Your brethren that 
hated you, that cast you out for my name’s sake, said, Let 
Jehovah be glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and 
they shall be ashamed ” (v. 5). 

But hark, what is this that breaks on the ear? “A voice 
of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of 
Jehovah that rendereth recompence to his enemies. Before 
she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she 
was delivered of a man-child. Who hath heard such a thing 2 
who hath seen such things? Shall a land be made to bring 
forth in one day? shall a nation be born at once? for as soon 
as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children. Shall I 
bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith Jehovah : 
shall I cause to bring forth, and shut [the womb]? saith thy 
God. Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye 
that love her; rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn over 
her; because ye shall suck, and be satisfied with the breasts 
of her consolations ; because ye shall drink out, and be delighted 
with the abundance of her glory. For thus saith J ehovah, 
Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory 
of the nations like a flowing stream; and ye shall suck, ye 
shall be borne upon the side, and be dandled upon the knees, 


CHAPTER LXVI. 481 


As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; 
and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And ye shall see 
[this], and your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall 
flourish like the grass: and the hand of Jehovah shall be 
known toward his servants, and indignation toward his 
enemies” (vv, 6-14). 

Thus no longer by testimony to the heart, but by manifest 
judgment will Jehovah decide between eattle and cattle. The 
infidel scoff, which so long harassed the heavenly people, will 
then be put to shame before the poor in spirit of the earthly 
people. It is not the gospel that is here described, but the 
effect of the Lord’s taking His great power and reigning, 
according to Revelation xi. It is the world-kingdom of our 
Lord and of His Christ actually come. Hence judgment is 
executed on the living destroyers of the earth. J ehovah will 
be glorified to the joy of such as trembled at His word before 
He appears, to the eternal infamy of those who knew Him not 
and doubted His interest in His despised confessors here 
below. ‘For Christ and for the church, they were raised or 
changed and taken on high, leaving the world without a blow 
or even a notice. But it will not be so for the Jew by-and-by : 
“A yoice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, 
a voice of Jehovah that rendereth recompence to his enemies.” 
The Roman destruction is no adequate fulfilment of this: but 
it shall be fulfilled to the letter of many prophecies. (Compare 
Isaiah ix. 3-5; xviii. 3-7; xxix.; Zech. xiv. 1-4.) And then 
shall follow the new birth or ingathering of Zion’s children, 
no longer to be Abraham's seed alone but his children in deed 
and in truth. As nothing of the kind followed the capture 
by Nebuchadnezzar, no more did it ensue when Titus took 
Jerusalem. No outpouring of vengeance on the guilty city, 
followed by blessing unexampled for fulness and without 
sorrow, has as yet appeared to satisfy the terms of the predic- 
tion. Sudden as it will be, it will also be permanent. 

It will be the day of Jehovah when man’s and Israel’s sad 
history is to be reversed ; and those who loved and mourned 
for Jerusalem shall rejoice for her and share the rich results 

her blessedness. Yet is it in no way the character of gospel 

2H 


! 


482 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH. 


joy which blends inward comfort by the Spirit’s power with 
shame and sorrow and rejection in the world. Here contrari- 
wise, “ And ye shall see this, and your heart shall rejoice, and 
your bones shall flourish like the grass; and the hand of 
Jehovah shall be known toward his servants, and indigna- 
tion toward his enemies,” It is the future day, not of grace 
and salvation only, as it is to-day, but of vengeance also, when 
Jehovah will not stop short as once He did on earth. Then 
He was proclaiming the acceptable year of Jehovah and this 
only. By-and-by He will proclaim and accomplish both that 
year and the day of vengeance. For this is in His heart, and 
the year of His redeemed is come. Both will be fulfilled then 
without let or delay. It will be the introduction of His day, 
and of the millennial reign. 

“For, behold, Jehovah will come with fire, and his chariots 
like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke 
with flames of fire. For by fire and by his sword will Jehovah 
plead with all flesh: and the slain of Jehovah shall be many. 
They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the 
gardens behind one in the midst, eating swine’s flesh and the 
abomination and the mouse, shall perish together, saith 
Jehovah. And I [know] their works and their thoughts: 
it cometh, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and 
they shall come, and see my glory. And I will set a sign 
among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto 
the nations, [to] Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, [to] 
Tubal, and Javan, [to] the isles afar off, that have not heard my 
fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my 
glory among the nations, And they shall bring all your 
brethren [for] an offering unto Jehovah out of all the nations 
upon horses and in chariots, and in covered Wwaggons, and 
upon mules, and upon dromedaries, to my holy mountain, to 
Jerusalem, saith Jehovah, as the children of Israel bring an 
offering in a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah. 
And of them also will I take for priests, for Levites, saith 
Jehovah” (vv, 15-21). The efforts of ancient and modern 
commentators to apply this passage, like the rest, to gospel 
times are desperate but vain. How unequivocally is it a day of 


CHAPTER LXVI. 483 


judgment, not the glad tidings of salvation by His grace, but 
His revelation from heaven in flaming fire taking vengeance on 
them that know not God, and on them that obey not the 
gospel! Evidently the Jews in that day will not only set up 
their ritual again, but be addicted to heathen abominations. 
The day of divine recompence shall be when old evils revive 
and amalgamate with novel iniquities, that all may come 
before Jehovah in judgment, and a new era dawn on both Jew 
and Gentile over the earth now purged. It will be a question 
then not of believing the grace of God, but of seeing the glory 
of Jehovah that is to be revealed. Jewish worship with its 
priests and Levites is restored in that day. 

Vitringa’s argument on verse 19, that no future call of 
Gentiles can be here intended, because those named have long 
since known the God of Israel, seems to be of no real force. 
For even Christendom will then be in a state of apostasy 
(2 Thess. ii.); and, besides, the hearing of Jehovah’s fame and 
seeing His glory refers to the manifestation of Himself that 
will then be made here below. How little is the future looked 
for according to God’s word! 

Thus an unsparing divine judgment will be executed on all 
the gathered nations when the Jews are dealt with in their 
pollutions ; and those that escape of them will be sent of God 
to the distant nations ignorant of what He has wrought, and 
Gentiles bring back all the Jews remaining outside the Holy 
Land. It appears to be the detail of the prediction in chapter 
xviii. 7. From all nations shall this offering to J ehovah 
be brought, and by every means of conveyance. Before this, 
it will have been only the Jews and not all Israel. 

All this is evidently not the same as the gospel or its effects, 
but in the most certain and evident contrast with it. The 
offering now is characteristically of the Gentiles, as we see in 
Romans xv. 16, and as experience shows. Jews are no doubt 
now as ever converted, but they are comparatively rare. The 
prophet contemplates the day when “all Israel shall be saved,” 
the apostates having been surprised by the divine judgment. 
- And as to any supposed difficulty of reconciling with John iv. 
21 Jerusalem as a centre for all nations, it is imaginary, 


484 AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF TSATAH. 


or rather it depends on the confusion of the hour that now 
is with the day that shall be. Our Lord was contemplating 
the time of His rejection and His approaching absence in 
heaven; the prophet had in view the day of His glory for the 
earth, Distinguish the times, and the objection vanishes. 
Jerusalem has no place in the Christian system; in the coming 
day of Jehovah it will have a greater and holier place than it 
ever had of old; and no wonder with the name of Jehovah- 
Shammah. 

Hence it is obvious that the ordinary strain of argument and 
interpretation, popular from the days of Origen and Jerome 
down to the present, is founded on a total confusion of things 
that differ. Christianity no doubt is very distinct; but that 
the new age must be a repetition of the same aims, principles, 
and ways, is an error quite as great as that which fancies 
the gospel to be only a continuation of the law with a 
great accession of better privileges. Israel shall be estab- 
lished for ever before Jehovah. “For as the new heavens 
and the new earth which I will make shall remain before me, 
saith Jehovah, so shall your seed and your name remain. And 
it shall come to pass, [that] from new moon to new moon, and 
from sabbath to sabbath, shall all flesh come to worship 
before me, saith Jehovah” (vv, 22, 23). There is no solid 
reason for doubting the literal bearing of the prediction. 
New moons and sabbaths shall once more figure in the 
worship of Jehovah; but it will be no more in the letter so 
hiding Christ or in its range so contracted as of old. For 
“all flesh” shall share in it, though (from other scriptures we 
may gather) on no such exalted ground or such dispensed near- 
ness to the King as His chosen people. He is Sovereign, and 
disposes as He pleases; and our eye should not be evil, 
because He is good, alike in what is special and in what 
is common. His house shall be literally a house of prayer 
for all the peoples, which will in no way hinder the greatness of 
His name among the nations, or the offering of incense to it 
or a pure offering in every place. 

And as His honour is thus maintained, so is His fear. Not 
only shall there be an awful outpouring of wrath on His adver- 


CHAPTER LXVI, 485 


saries at the end of this age, but Jehovah will keep up a 
salutary warning nigh the very spot where His glory dwells. 
“ And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the 
men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall 
not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be 
an abhorrence unto all flesh” (v. 24). There is nothing really 
obscure in this, save to those who, from regarding the passage 
only in a Christian point of view, deny its full accomplishment 
in judgment at the end of the age. In its own connexion it 
is most simple, solemn, and expressive. No doubt in Rev. xx. 
xxi. we are let in to the still more awful sight of eternal 
punishment for all the wicked in its full force, when raised up 
from death for the second death. Annihilation is a wicked 
imposture, and an impossibility for all but God, who, far from 
intimating any such end, declares that He will judge by Jesus 
Christ the Lord. Universalism is the still more audacious lie 
of the enemy. 


‘THE WORD OF OUR GOD SHALL STAND FOR EVER,’ 


Genesis ii. 


Exodus 


Numbers xiv. 
xxiii. 


Deut. 


21 


INDEX 


OF TEXTS QUOTED OR REFERRED TO 


one 


I4I 
AA nee p RO 
:..12, 30, 37, 127 
as Abe 94 


Deut. xxxii. 3,9 
Ruth ine: £7 
1 Samuel 1°20 
i020 
xix. 24 
2Samuel vi. 20 
Wilt.) <2 
xii. 25 
1 Kings xiii. ... 
2 Kings iii. 4,5 
v. 26 
xv. 29, 30 
xvi. 9 
KVIlT) cs 
RViTie | sae 
xviii. 8 
xviii. 9, 10 
xviii, 17 
SUK, ver 
xxv. 4,5 
2 Chron. xxvi. 4 
xxix. 3 
xxxii. I 
xxxiil. 2-5 
Ezra 1.) I-3 
Nehemiah ix. 36, 37 
Psalms iiaviees 
nb Iie ays 
sak hl oAoe 
mV eT 
KVIE Gee 
xvi. Io, Il 
xxi. 
xxii 
xxxiy. 20 
> a re 
xli. 9 
SL Seats 
Litt) 6 
Wha bhie heres 
\xi. 
Ixvii 


39, 156, 


10, IT, 14, 154, 


405 


431 
406 
BY 


INDEX OF TEXTS QUOTED OR REFERRED TO 


Psalins Ixviii. 4,18 
Lxixvtee: 

Ly scxtife ee 
Ipee-oNblN aa. 
Ixxxiii. 6-8 
Ixxxix. 30-32 

xe. I0 

CVeeeS 

cx. 

Cx 2 

Cx. 426 

CxVili. 14° 

CEUX Vil ems 
Proverbs xxx. 19, 20 


SongofSol.i. 3 


Nila i fe} 
Nokbly. 18! 
Jeremiah ili. 16 
XXili. 20 
xxx eee 
xXx 7 
xxx. 18-22 
ex, 24 
xXxi es 
Deo diy BAe 
Xxxili, 15-22 
adkabhi son 
lvili soa 
Xlixx, 29 
xlix. 39 
il. 
li. 
Ihe, 28 
ii. 58 
Ezekiel xvii. 
X¥xvil. 
XXVIli. 
xxi lo 
xxXxiv. 
XXXVIi. 
XXXViii. 
XXXViii, 8-13 


Xxxvili. 16 
XXXVIiii, 17 


XXXix, 
xl-xlviii. 
Daniel 11. 
ji, 28 “S 
Tl. 35, 44, 45 
vii. oes 
vii. 11-14 
vii. 14 
Vili 
Vili. 19-25 
ix, 
Ix, 22 
ix, 26, 27 
ix, 36-40 


201, 


"267, 268 


ore8 LON AY 


PAGE. 
180 


II0, 357 
102 


46 


46 

$2 
278 
163 
395 
104 
163 
439 


Daniel 


Hosea 


Joel 


Amos 


Obadiah 
Jonah 
Micah 


Habakkuk ii. 
Zephaniah iii. 


Zechariah vi. 


Malachi 


PAGE. 
x 14 aape 102 
xi. 24, 47, se 27 288 
Sees ee 480 
xi. 36-45 163 
xi. 38, 39 395 
x1. 40-43 224 
Sale eae ee an e206 
xil. ... 220, 288, 480 
x11 ee : Rape Sto) 
Sits es 421 
i. #1 163, 480 
srebly + ite: Io2 
Be ere 38 
145) 55 
ies 56 
ii. 12 
lil. 4 381 
tit, 5 102 
Aile. 0G 268 
ix. 6 224 
raty BER 10 
ho FcS I4I 
hie 8 313 
lite 25 102 
ir 16 229 
Sa 472 
Vig 212) 328 
II-I4 329 
Dice ME 172 
ii, Fy 206 
be Bee Ae ss =: 105 
IV. a 99, 105 
Iv. I elO® 
iv. I-3 Re 104 
IVoeLE 288 
Woes: 312 
Vion 23 57 
Vie oro I51r 
Vv. 4-15 288 
12-14 46 
8-10 107 
iit.) Io 216 
Ree int 225 
x es ou 239, 312 
b eee me ae Gib 
Dinette Sel ay ES. nee Io 
dt Ge 285, 288 
Xili. 285, 288 
xiv. 107, II5, 225, 247 
: 285, 288, 306 
xiv, I-4 ne ws. = ABE 
xiv. 9 va 33 
XIV. 9-IO.., By Mee 
ms TI 107, 225 
Obi | at co Oe 
lv. sas OR 


iv. 5 6 as Sb 61 


Matthew 


Luke 


John 


INDEX OF TEXTS QUOTED OR REFERRED TO 


PAGH. 

23 56 
oA 225 
4-6 57 
17 58 
wee ‘ 59 
14-16 59 
3-12 65 
17 4I7 
10 104 
34 TI5 
17 60, 417 
10 61 
14 61, 362 
21-24 36 
14-21 375 
17-21 61 
43 369 
43-45 395 
II 8 
18 167 
28 461 
15 ee ae 95 
sue 9; 126, 136, 251, 
272, 480 

15 Se 309 
Ty 2hee es # Si est! 
a. 9, 126, 136, 183, 251 
II or = 8 
Bes 159 
TX-13 362 
I2 61 
13 te 61 
ah g, 126, 136 
17 ae 61 
ris 57 
4 104 
ye 126, 251 
ee g, 126, 251 
22 . 461 
24-30 65 
36 112 
25-27 ; 12 
21 : 61 
ie 308, 351 
By : 107 
19 a 
21-23 een TOs 
21 eo 403 
21-24 mene lipo 
28, 29 e200 
51, 52 we 424 
15 «33 95 
ai 78, 135, 137 
ave oe SI 
31-32 39 
es 351 
2,3 ai 
20 351 
aoe . 351 


John 


Acts il. 


XxXViti. 
Romans it 


t Cor. li. 


2 Cor, Ve 


xii. 
ave 


Galatians 


Ephesians 


xvi. 
xvi. 
xvii. 
Xx, 


39, 65, 67, 

114, 129,163, 443, 
451, 456 

aaa ree 257 

14, 30, 95, 447 

565 ANS 9 


INDEX OF TEXTS QUOTER OR REFERRED TO 


Philippians ii. 
Colossians i. 


20 


120527, 
ili. 
I Thess. iv. 
v. 3-8 
2 Thess. die Mex 
ii. 33 
I Timothy ii. 1 
LV. Wises 
ive 5 
ie as. 
2 Timothy iii. ... 
iv. . 14 
Hebrews ii. ... 
BW = G80) 
x. ees 
xXit, 522 
Salt, Gas 
I Peter she tS} 
ii, 20, 21 
li. 24,25 
iii, 18 
2 Peter 1 tO 
i. 19-21 
ley Were) 
iit eee 
I John 56 Barnes 
ii. 22 


Jude 


as 172, 173, 185 
ae aey 15 


PAGE. 
185, 388 


one 30) 9190 
9, 170, E72, 156, 
317, 450, 483 
46, 168, £70 

ser 1293 

9 

293 

ste LOF. 

++ 9, 364 

295 


Revelation ii. 26, 27 


tii. 
v. 


Vv. 


Io 


vii. 
xi. 
x1.-xix. 


XX1. 9-27 
eae 


15 


- 67 


i. II-14 


14 


4, ee 
»--43, 169, 452, 453, 459 
2 os 


PAGE. 

sos -, AO5H 

40, 190, 220, 238 
oes vas 1 Og 


oes, LUD, 214 Gre 


95 
IIo 


195) 357 

a.) EU 

wee 43 

426, 459 

Bee 16 

I9I 

age acs 43 
250, 252, 268, 
308, 485 

eas oes) raeees 
34, 43, 52, 250, 


452, 453, 459 
485 


ase eS 


KING’S LIBRAR 


ie 


z | THE ‘ 
CRUSADE FOR | 


a. 


RARY By 


, Sie iin 


001 34480 ; 
‘th : ae 
4 DATE | ISSUED TO ; a 
+ = ay 


f 
¢; 

shy be - 3} 

a 

t 

i \ 4 
) i 
5 ay 
= y 
, } fe 
i ok 
t * SS 
iy ve bY ‘ 
1; ee 
} re 5 
4 re 
rm ‘| Re ead 


ne 
Foie, 


iT Sixth SY 
MINNEAPOL' 


Pidchasel a SE Ain ciy LY 


Rhea 0 arse te ee gm bok 


wsabhy 


soni ativcenes br cot sannanomayapoenannaate te 
Sir ao tana aaa kmrncaoene Soemwe onl 


ab" 


iepuldl nesgiessopenp cos ebat eros a aib: 


ee 


