[Illustration]




                            AN ENGLISHWOMAN’S
                            TWENTY-FIVE YEARS
                           IN TROPICAL AFRICA:

                       BEING THE BIOGRAPHY OF GWEN
                      ELEN LEWIS, MISSIONARY TO THE
                         CAMEROONS AND THE CONGO

                                    BY
                              GEORGE HAWKER
              MINISTER OF CAMDEN ROAD BAPTIST CHURCH, LONDON
                 AUTHOR OF “THE LIFE OF GEORGE GRENFELL”

                        WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAP

                           HODDER AND STOUGHTON
                         LONDON NEW YORK TORONTO




To

WILLIAM COULSON PARKINSON,

WHO HAS SERVED THE BAPTIST MISSIONARY SOCIETY ON COMMITTEE FOR TWENTY-TWO
YEARS, WHO WAS SUPERINTENDENT OF CAMDEN ROAD CHURCH SUNDAY SCHOOL WHEN
GWEN ELEN THOMAS WAS A TEACHER, WHO BECAME AND REMAINED HER TRUSTED
FRIEND, WHOM THE AUTHOR ALSO GLADLY CLAIMS AS FRIEND,

THIS BOOK IS

AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED.




PREFACE


In July, 1910, I was requested by the Committee of the Baptist
Missionary Society to write the life of Mrs. Thomas Lewis of the Congo.
I had shortly before arranged with Mr. Lewis to undertake the work
independently; but it accorded well with his feelings and my own that it
should be done under the direction of the Society which Mrs. Lewis had
served for five-and-twenty years. Unfortunately the final decision was
not arrived at until Mr. Lewis was on the point of returning to Africa,
having already sent forward his wife’s journals and papers. Consequently,
in executing my task, I have missed the great advantage of consultation
with him. Chapters III., IV., V., and VI. only have received his revision.

When I asked him about materials, he replied: “If you can get hold of the
Hartland letters, you will have almost all you need. Gwen wrote to one or
other member of the family by every mail during all her missionary life,
and told them everything about her work which was worth the telling.”

The Misses Lily and Alice Hartland were kind enough to place “the
Hartland Letters” in my hands. The series was not complete, some letters
having been destroyed, and a few lost. But the remainder constituted a
great mass of most valuable material, and this book is largely based
upon it. On September 12th I received from Kimpese a small trunk filled
with Mrs. Lewis’s journals and papers; and meanwhile important parcels
of letters were entrusted to me by the Misses Percival, Mrs. John
Jenkyn Brown, and Miss Taylor. I am also specially indebted to Mrs.
Percival, the Misses Hartland, and Mrs. W. C. Parkinson, for personal
recollections, and for many suggestions and corrections.

The Rev. C. E. Wilson, B.A., General Secretary of the Baptist
Missionary Society, has given me the freedom of the Mission House for
the consultation of books and papers; and the Rev. Lawson Forfeitt has
helped me in many ways, especially in arranging the illustrations, and in
reading the proofs.

To these, and other friends whose names are mentioned in the text, I
acknowledge my obligations with warmest thanks.

In the numerous passages selected from Mrs. Lewis’s letters, the reader
will observe that the name of the correspondent is sometimes given. When
no name appears it must be understood that the citation is from “the
Hartland Letters.”

As my task neared completion I realised that I had been guilty of one
grave omission. During more than twenty years of her missionary life
Mrs. Lewis was in frequent communication with Mr. Baynes, her official
director, whom she regarded also as a most dear and honoured friend.
Yet so far as I remember, there occurs in this book but one incidental
and oblique reference to Mr. Baynes’s esteem for her. Observing this
I wrote to him, expressing regret for my default, and begging him to
send me a few lines of appreciation of his friend. With prompt kindness
he wrote the following letter, which contains what I wanted, with some
embarrassing additions. My respect for him prevents me from cutting
up what he has been good enough to write; and if I incur reproach for
printing appreciation of myself, I must bear it meekly for his sake.

    “MY DEAR MR. HAWKER,—I am indeed most thankful to learn that
    you have undertaken to write a Memorial of the life and labours
    of my intimate and much-valued friend Mrs. Thomas Lewis, who
    gave herself with such whole-hearted consecration to the
    uplifting and enlightenment of the native peoples of the vast
    Congo Region of Central Africa, and whose name and labours will
    live for long years to come in the hearts and memories of those
    on whose behalf she toiled so lovingly and so cheerfully, and
    bravely endured such hardships and privations.

    “I cannot help saying I know of no one who can tell the story
    of her consecrated life and labours so sympathetically as
    yourself, her beloved Pastor and her valued friend and adviser.
    Her name will ever be associated with your Church at Camden
    Road, from which have gone forth so many heroic missionaries
    and martyrs whose one desire it was to bear to the benighted
    peoples of Central Africa ‘The Light of Life,’ counting it
    highest privilege to tell out the Story of His Love, Who
    though He was rich for our sakes became poor.”

    “For many years I had the joy of intimate friendship with Mrs.
    Lewis, and a more devoted, consecrated missionary I have never
    met. It is a great satisfaction to me that you have undertaken
    to write the story of her life and labours, and I trust that
    as the result many may be led to follow in her footsteps, who
    shall realise in doing so a joy akin to that which inspired her
    to the end, and described in her own words:—

    “‘No toil so sweet, no joy so deep as following in His
    footsteps who gave Himself for us.’

    “‘Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.’

                         “With sincere regard,

                            “Yours as ever,

                                                 “ALFRED H. BAYNES.’

May the good wish of one who has been a great helper of the cause of
Foreign Missions be graciously fulfilled.

                                                            GEORGE HAWKER.

ANSON ROAD, N. 1911.




CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE

    PREFACE                                                              v

                                CHAPTER I

    EARLY YEARS                                                          1

                               CHAPTER II

    BETROTHAL, BEREAVEMENT, AND DESIGNATION TO THE CAMEROONS            19

                               CHAPTER III

    VOYAGE TO THE CAMEROONS, AND A SURFEIT OF ADVENTURES. 1884          39

                               CHAPTER IV

    ORANGE BLOSSOMS AND _IMMORTELLES_. 1885                             64

                                CHAPTER V

    RETURN, MARRIAGE, AND JOURNEY TO CONGO. 1885-1887                   82

                               CHAPTER VI

    FIRST TERM AT SAN SALVADOR. 1887-1890                              102

                               CHAPTER VII

    SECOND TERM AT SAN SALVADOR                                        128

                              CHAPTER VIII

    SECOND TERM AT SAN SALVADOR (_continued_)                          145

                               CHAPTER IX

    THE BUILDING OF THE NEW CHAPEL AT SAN SALVADOR, AND OTHER MATTERS  165

                                CHAPTER X

    THE OPENING OF THE NEW CHAPEL AT SAN SALVADOR. SEPTEMBER, 1899     184

                               CHAPTER XI

    PIONEERING IN ZOMBO: PERILS AND PROVIDENCES. 1898-1899             198

                               CHAPTER XII

    LIFE AT KIBOKOLO                                                   227

                              CHAPTER XIII

    LIFE AT KIBOKOLO (_continued_)                                     247

                               CHAPTER XIV

    A MISSION OF MERCY                                                 271

                               CHAPTER XV

    LAST FURLOUGH                                                      281

                               CHAPTER XVI

    SETTLEMENT AT KIMPESE                                              299

                              CHAPTER XVII

    THE FIRST SESSION AND THE LAST VOYAGE. 1909                        312

                              CHAPTER XVIII

    CHARACTERISTICS                                                    333

    APPENDIX                                                           343

    INDEX                                                              348




ILLUSTRATIONS


    MRS. LEWIS. PORTRAIT                                     _Frontispiece_

    LINE MAP OF AFRICA SPECIALLY INDICATING CAMEROONS AND CONGO        xvi

                                                                      PAGE

    CAMDEN ROAD BAPTIST CHURCH, LONDON                                  12

    PORTRAITS: MR. GEORGE THOMAS, MRS. THOMAS, MISS THOMAS, AND
      REV. THOMAS LEWIS                                                 52

    CHIEF NOSO AND PART OF HIS FAMILY                                  122

    BWINGIDI (EVANGELIST’S WIFE) AND GIRLS’ SCHOOL AT NKABA, AN
      OUT-STATION NEAR SAN SALVADOR                                    140

    SAN SALVADOR: RUINS OF ANCIENT PORTUGUESE CATHEDRAL                170

    SAN SALVADOR. OLD SCHOOL-CHAPEL                                    188

    SAN SALVADOR. NEW CHAPEL                                           188

    FERRY OVER NKISI RIVER. MRS. LEWIS IN CANOE                        224

    HOME OF MR. AND MRS. LEWIS AT COMBER MEMORIAL STATION,
      KIBOKOLO (1903)                                                  224

    THE DISPENSARY AT KIBOKOLO. MRS. LEWIS STANDING IN DOORWAY         240

    BRIDGE OVER LUSENGELE STREAM, NEAR COMBER STATION, KIBOKOLO        260

    GRASS HOUSE AT KIMPESE IN WHICH MR. AND MRS. LEWIS LIVED
      DURING CONSTRUCTION OF PERMANENT BUILDINGS (1908)                302

    KIMPESE: KONGO TRAINING INSTITUTION. PART OF STUDENTS’ QUARTERS    312

    KIMPESE: KONGO TRAINING INSTITUTION. THE REV. THOMAS LEWIS
      (PRINCIPAL), MRS. LEWIS, THE REV. S. E. MOON (A.B.M.U.,
      TUTOR), AND STUDENTS (1909)                                      324




[Illustration: WEST CENTRAL AFRICA showing KAMERUN (CAMEROONS) and THE
LOWER and MIDDLE CONGO

                                                      _Bartholomew, Edinʳ_

Baptist Missionary Society’s Stations thus _S. Salvador_]




CHAPTER I

EARLY YEARS


Gwen Elen Thomas was born in London, and resided in the metropolis until
the call of Africa drew her across the sea. She never lived in Wales,
save during brief holiday visits, yet the Principality had its rights in
her character and career, and a cherished place in her natural affection.
Her father was a Welshman, and her husband was a Welshman. All her life
long the beauty of the western hills glimmered through the dear home
talk; she was passing happy in her occasional holiday sojourns among
them; and often, when spent by labour in the torrid heat of Africa,
longed for wings which might bear her away to some bracing mountain
height in Wales.

Her father, George Thomas, was born at Maentwrog, to fair-seeming
prospects; but his sky was soon overclouded by dire bereavement, and his
life was much acquainted with adversity and disappointment. His father,
Griffith Thomas of Maentwrog, early held a good position as “Crown Agent
for the Woods and Forests of North Wales,” and married a woman whom he
loved with intense devotion. Several children were born of the marriage,
but at the birth of the youngest the mother died. Two years later her
husband was laid beside her in the grave. It was commonly affirmed that
the death of his wife shattered him, and that he died of a broken heart.

The heads of this plaintive little story are inscribed, with customary
brevity, upon a tombstone in the graveyard of the church at Maentwrog,
and read as follows:—

“To the memory of Jane, wife of Griffith Thomas of Maentwrog, Gent.
She departed this life on the 21st day of September, 1811, aged 37
years. Also of the above-named Griffith Thomas, died on the 10th day of
September, 1813, aged 34 years.”

The young orphaned children were taken charge of by relatives, and George
was brought up by his grandmother.

At the age of eighteen, or thereabouts, he came to London to seek his
fortune, and obtained a position in Finchams’ Tea Warehouse at Charing
Cross. Some years later he met a young lady, Anne Clarke, at an evening
party and resolved, precipitately, that if he ever married, she should be
his wife. His affection was subjected to the test of time. Three years
elapsed before he secured an engagement, and four more ere he carried off
his bride.

Anne Clarke was the daughter of George Rix Clarke, a Suffolk man, who
wrote a history of Ipswich, which is still esteemed by antiquarians and
topographers. In middle life he married a Scottish girl of seventeen, and
Anne, their first child, was born at her mother’s home in Edinburgh.
The china bowl used at her christening is a treasured possession of the
family.

Four children were born to George and Anne Thomas, of whom Gwen Elen was
the third. At the date of her birth, January 28, 1853, her parents were
residing at Albion Grove, Barnsbury, in comfortable circumstances. They
had previously become associated with the Baptist Church worshipping
at Providence Hall (now Cross Street), Islington, under the pastorate
of the Rev. John Jenkyn Brown, who was subsequently well known to
the Nonconformist world as “John Jenkyn Brown of Birmingham,” and
who in 1882 was President of the Baptist Union of Great Britain and
Ireland. Mrs. Thomas was received into the fellowship of the Church
at Islington. Her husband, though a man of pronounced evangelical
conviction, was restrained by invincible compunction from ever assuming
the responsibility of Church membership. None the less, a warm friendship
subsisted between him and his minister, which was maintained through all
the changes of following life. When he died, his daughter, Gwen Elen,
looked to Mr. Brown with filial affection which was warmly answered, and
it is significant that upon the occasion of her marriage, he came from
Birmingham to London to fulfil the paternal office of giving the bride
away.

While Gwen Elen was still in early childhood the family fortunes
sustained a severe reverse. Her father, who was in business as a Scotch
agent, was the victim of a fraudulent transaction, and the loss entailed
was so heavy that his business was ruined. There followed years of
struggle and vicissitude. During part of this period the family resided
at Fulham, but before Gwen had emerged from childhood, they returned
to the north of London and became connected with the Baptist Church at
Camden Road.

One suggestive glimpse of her child-life comes down to us. Gwen and her
younger brother Herbert, who were great chums, used to sit together,
under the dining-room table, reading stories of Moffat and Livingstone.
Years afterwards, when they were both still quite young, and the
missionary interest at Camden Road Church had become acute, Herbert said
one day to his sister, touched surely by the spirit of prophecy: “Gwen,
you had better marry one of these missionaries, and I will come out and
be your lay-helper.” The forecast was only realised in part. Gwen did
marry a missionary, but before that came to pass, at the early age of
nineteen, Herbert died.

In these days the Church at Camden Road was a strong and flourishing
community, and by way of becoming yet wealthier and more influential.
The sanctuary was erected in 1854 by the Metropolitan Chapel Building
Association, and at first stood in the fields. But the tide of building
soon swept beyond it, and the surrounding district became the kind of
suburb in which a Nonconformist Church enjoys conditions favourable
to success. In 1857 the congregation invited the Rev. Francis Tucker,
B.A., of Union Chapel, Manchester, to become its minister. He accepted
the invitation, formed a Church, and commenced a period of service,
honourably and successfully maintained for twenty-seven years. Mr.
Tucker was a man of winning personality and sympathetic manners. As
a preacher he possessed commanding advantages; his musical voice was
managed with consummate skill; he was master of refined, poetic diction,
was gifted with imagination, and swayed withal by fervent evangelical
conviction. Moreover, having held for a short period a missionary
pastorate in Calcutta, his interest in the foreign work of the Church was
enlightened and intense.

As a child Gwen Thomas passed under the influence of this estimable man,
an influence which waxed but never waned until the day of his death. It
is touching to recall that upon one occasion when she was recovering from
a severe attack of fever at the Cameroons, and tormented by insomnia, her
restless mind was haunted by the thought that if only Mr. Tucker could
come and read to her she would be hushed to sleep.

While yet a girl her heart was given to Christ, in surrender which knew
no recall, and at the age of eighteen she was baptized by her beloved
minister and welcomed into the fellowship of the Church. It was at
this time, or perhaps a little earlier, that she became a teacher in
the Sunday School, which she had attended as a scholar for several
years. Owing to circumstances, her secular schooling had been somewhat
irregular, but she was fortunate in its finishing stage. It was the day
of “Private Schools for Young Ladies,” now almost obsolete, and one of
the best establishments of this order was conducted in Hilldrop Road by
the Misses Hewitt. The school was distant from Camden Road Church less
than a hundred yards, the principals were members of the Church, and
were women of high character and adequate attainments. Their school was
held in great repute in the district, and their influence was a social
factor of happy moment. That the Misses Hewitt were able to command the
esteem and affection of their pupils is pleasantly evidenced by the fact
that, though the school has been discontinued for years, “The Hilldrop
Old Girls’ Club” still exists, and it will interest readers of this book
to be informed that the last annual issue of _The Hilldrop Magazine_, the
organ of the club, contained an “In Memoriam” article on Gwen Elen Lewis.
To the pages of this magazine she was an occasional contributor.

At the age of nearly sixteen she entered the Hilldrop school, and for
about a year enjoyed advantages which greatly improved her equipment for
the battle of life. Like many of her fellow pupils, she became warmly
attached to her teachers, and the ensuing friendship was only broken by
her death. I am happily indebted to Miss Amy Hewitt for the following
paragraphs. Confessedly unable to supply incidents, Miss Hewitt has
conveyed impressions which are as vivid as they are helpful:—

“It is many years since she was a school girl, and the lapse of time
has naturally robbed my memory of all but the most startling individual
happenings in our professional experience. Moreover, Mrs. Lewis was
not the sort of girl to make dramatic school history. High souled, law
abiding, and very conscientious, loving knowledge for its own sake, and
eager to make the most of her advantages, she was an ideal scholar.

“Coming into an atmosphere thoroughly congenial to her temperament, she
settled happily at once, and though she has since said that the influence
of the few months spent as a daily pupil at Hilldrop Road was amongst the
most permanently formative of her life, there was nothing at the time
to distinguish her from a set of like-minded young girls who were her
companions, and some of whom became her life-long friends.

“Though I have no definite facts to communicate, my impressions of her
personality and character remain undimmed. I remember that as Gwen Elen
Thomas she entered our school on October 12, 1868, a short, plump,
fair, blue-eyed girl of sixteen, whose slight guttural accent, even
without the additional hint of her Welsh name, would have suggested
her nationality. Her bearing was self-contained but alert. She was
_there_—her individuality well developed; and she was _there_, with all
her faculties alive to receive and to give out influence. That was the
first superficial impression.

“Later on we became familiar with, and learned to love, the serious,
intent face, the steady penetrating glance, and the quick sense of
humour, which on the slightest provocation lighted up her countenance
with fun, and moved her to hearty laughter. She was keenly interested in
her studies and brought to bear on them strong intelligence and powers
unusually mature for her age.

“Monsieur de Lamartinière was at that time our French master, and Gwen
Elen greatly delighted in his lessons. She had been thoroughly well
grounded in the language, and so was prepared to profit by advanced
lessons; and she made very rapid progress.

“Gifted and eager, she never seemed to find any subject dull or
distasteful, but, as was natural to one of her sympathetic and deeply
religious character, History, Literature, and Scripture particularly,
attracted her and brought her original mind into play.

“The splendid endowments of heart and head which made her so good a pupil
were given unstintedly to her missionary work, and it was with great
delight that we heard from time to time of her wonderful success in
Africa.”

One of her fellow scholars at the Hilldrop School was Emily Smith,
daughter of Mr. Jonas Smith, a deacon of Camden Road Church, and between
these two girls there grew up a warm and helpful friendship. They
prepared their lessons together, and entered with girlish ardour into
each other’s interests. In course of time Gwen Thomas became a frequent
visitor at her friend’s home. And that it was a genial, hospitable home,
there are not a few who could bear grateful witness. When her own mother
died, the Smiths loved her the more for her sorrow, and for the filial
devotion she had displayed; and how the friendship was maintained, and
how Annie Smith a younger daughter followed her into the mission-field,
will appear as this story proceeds.

And now something must be said of a man whose influence upon the life of
Miss Thomas was not less than that of her minister, though he was her
senior by a few months only. Thomas J. Comber was a member of the Baptist
Church at Denmark Place, Camberwell, of which Dr. Charles Stanford, of
gracious memory, was the gifted honoured minister. The love of Christ
and the passionate desire to be a missionary of the Cross came to Comber
in his early youth. While yet a lad, he became a Sunday-school teacher
at Denmark Place, and was barely nineteen when he entered Regent’s Park
College to gain equipment for his ordained career.

It is more than a convenient Sabbath day’s journey from Regent’s Park to
Denmark Place, and so it fell out that in his student days Comber became
a frequent worshipper at Camden Road. He loved children, was keen for
any kind of Christian service, and soon found an opening in the Sunday
morning infant class. It occurs to me to remark, in passing, that he is
the only theological student of my remembrance who ever found himself
effectually called to this modest sphere of labour. And I am tempted to
add that if there be aught of disparagement in this reflection, it is not
of the sphere.

His increasing interest in Camden Road Sunday School, and his zeal for
the spiritual welfare of the scholars, led him to request permission to
conduct a week-evening children’s service. Camden Road Church has always
been reasonably conservative, and the proposed innovation was not acceded
to without demur. But Comber, thus early, was not a man to be deterred
from treading any path which seemed to him the path of duty, because
certain excellent people might be in doubt of its expediency. Hesitating,
dubious folk are apt to draw aside when one appears who will not be
denied, and Comber had his way. The service was instituted, and spiritual
forces generated by its means are working to-day.

The early hour of the children’s meeting made it difficult for young men
to attend, and Comber’s helpers were at first exclusively drawn from
the teachers on the girls’ side of the school; and now and then he was
twitted by the remark that all his lieutenants were girls. But he was
too much in earnest to be perturbed by a gentle gibe, and in the course
of a few years the pleasantry would seem a feeble thing, in relation to
a man who had proved himself, under heroic conditions, to be a resolute,
virile, and resourceful leader of men.

Meanwhile if his lieutenants were girls they were of the right mettle,
believed in him implicitly, admired him profoundly, backed him bravely in
his Christian endeavours, and were destined to remain his warm friends
as long as he lived. Gwen Elen Thomas was one of them, and among others
associated with her in this service were Miss Emily Smith, Miss Rosa
Nodes, who played the harmonium, and Miss Emily Pewtress, daughter of Mr.
Stephen Pewtress, deacon and secretary of the Church.

Comber believed profoundly in child conversion. He set himself to bring
about early and intelligent decision for Christ, and his purpose was
honoured of God. There were many such decisions, and in course of time
there was a goodly list of children who simply but credibly affirmed
their personal faith in Christ. These Comber wisely accounted babes
in Christ, who needed nursing, and as many of them were girls, some,
fourteen or fifteen years of age, he concluded that their own teachers
were fitter for the business than himself. So he called his four
lieutenants together and informed them that these young converts must be
divided up into classes, of which they must take charge. In the course of
his instructions concerning procedure, he said that each little meeting
must be commenced with prayer. They were dismayed. No one of them had
ever engaged in prayer with a human audience; the thing could not be
done. Practical and gently autocratic, he bade them meet together and
make their first attempts among themselves. They were obedient, and the
work went on according to the leader’s plans.

Though Comber did very well with his young women helpers, it was all
joy to him when one of the teachers from the other side of the school
joined him, and shared his labours in the conduct of the services. Of
John Hartland, now entering the story of Miss Thomas’s life, much will
be written in the next chapter. Suffice it to say at this point that
he stood beside Comber in his work among the children at Camden Road,
conducted it after Comber had sailed for the Cameroons, joined him later
on the Congo, and died in his arms, having won from him a love as deep
and tender as that he gave him.

Comber now had a man lieutenant, and had need of him. For though the
majority of his weekly audience may have been girls, there were always
boys present, and of the importance of his work among the boys the
following letter from Mr. S. Leslie Pewtress yields convincing and
beautiful evidence:—

“My remembrances of these services for children conducted by Mr.
Comber at Camden Road are very hallowed ones. I was quite a lad, but
can distinctly recollect how the talk in our home ran that he was a
very brave young student to attempt them, and very persevering to get
permission to hold them, in spite of much opposition and cold water.

“There was no Band of Hope then. For children there were occasional
magic lanterns, annual Sunday-school meetings, and a composition and an
elocution class for young fellows—also a singing class. But Mr. Comber’s
meetings were so different from all these. I felt as I entered the room
that there was a holy purpose in it all. Coming, as Mr. Comber did, from
outside, having no relatives or friends in the place, he seemed to me a
direct messenger from God. I had a strange awe of him that he dared speak
as he did, and yet I rejoiced that he could. I wish I could recall the
hymns we sang. They seemed very special at the time I know.

[Illustration: CAMDEN ROAD BAPTIST CHURCH, LONDON.

(Photo: F. Thurston, F.R.P.S., Luton.)]

“Mr. Comber made a practice of standing at the door and saying goodbye
to us as we went out. I tried to avoid him if I could, and being one of
the bigger lads he let me pass many times. One night, however, he took
my hand somewhat diffidently, and as he said good-night, added, ‘Do
you love the Lord Jesus?’ I was quite dumb with emotion. I can feel the
appealing look with which I lifted my eyes to his face and met his kindly
loving eyes, even now. Then I broke away and hurried home to my bedside,
where, on my knees, the tears streaming down my cheeks, and in utter
silence, my heart poured itself out to God in longing desire to be a
better boy. It was my first conversion, the first yielding of heart and
will to God I ever made.

“Mr. Comber never knew. He said no word to me at later meetings. What
he thought of my rudeness and coldness I do not know. I fear I hurt him
a little, but he never resented it. His later work, especially as a
missionary, was always shaming me to myself, while he has always been
to me the ideal Christian young man, and hero. But when I look at his
photograph it is always to the children’s services that my thoughts are
carried back.”

The writer of this letter, who, to my personal knowledge, has been for
five-and-twenty years a cultured, devoted, and successful Christian
worker among children and young people, would probably be in agreement
with one of Comber’s four helpers, already named, who recently told me
that he was unquestionably one of the strongest personal, spiritual
forces she had ever encountered in a lifetime of Christian service.

That this man exercised a formative and dominant influence upon the life
of Miss Thomas, during the years of their association, is a statement
that needs no other proof than that afforded by the facts, that she
began her missionary career in his tracks upon the Cameroons; spent
three-and-twenty years of her life in the great Congo field, which he and
Grenfell opened up for the Baptist Mission; and, as long as she lived,
continued to speak of him with reverent affection.

In certain regards Comber and Miss Thomas were greatly unlike in
temperament, yet had they much in common of gravest moment. The love of
Christ was the grand passion of both their lives. They were both endowed
with indomitable will and the consequent capacity for sustained industry.
They both loved and understood children, possessed the saving grace of
humour, and, devoutness notwithstanding, took innocent and wholesome
delight in fun.

I met Comber several times during his last furlough, but my visual
remembrances of him are restricted to two living pictures, typical and
contrasting, which I will endeavour to call up before the mind of the
reader. A children’s party is in course at the house of Mr. Jonas Smith.
The company is gathered in the drawing-room, and consists of twenty or
thirty children of varying ages, with a sprinkling of benevolent elders.
Comber is at the piano, singing, to his own accompaniment, a humorous
song. The accompaniment is mimetic as well as musical. Every feature of
his mobile face, roguishly turned to his audience, and every muscle of
his lissom body, seem to move in concert with the fun. When it is over
and he is about to leave the instrument, he is stormed by overwhelming
numbers, held to his place, and coaxed and coerced into singing again.

Three months later I find myself sitting in the area of Exeter Hall.
This time it is not a children’s party which is in course, but the Annual
Meeting of the Baptist Missionary Society. The Hall is crowded in every
part, and in the middle of the platform stands a young man, with a keen,
clean-shaven, boyish-looking face. The great hushed throng is mastered
by the speaker, who is none other than the singer of the laughing song.
He does the storming this time, and he has his way with the hearts of
his audience. There have been heavy losses on the Congo. Counsels of
retreat have been urged. What has Thomas Comber to say about it? He has
the right to speak. He is a lonely man. His young bride has lain for
years in a Congo grave, and the Congo grave of his brother, Dr. Sidney
Comber, is newly made. Yes, surely he has the right to speak! What has
he to say? Even now after four-and-twenty years I can see the flame of
passion kindling in his face as he pleads that he and his brethren may
be spared the shame, and the cause of Christ the wrong, which would be
involved in retreat. Would they bid Grenfell back, whose exploits he
praises and whose gallant words he quotes? It is unthinkable. That speech
made history. Counsels of retreat died into silence. “Forward,” not
“Backward,” became the order of the day.

Such are my two distinct remembrances of the man, whom the children at
Camden Road loved as a teacher, admired as a hero, and romped with as a
playmate; whom the Congo natives, when they came to know him, regarded as
a miracle of love and power; and whom his comrades followed as a captain
whose belt has been buckled by the fingers of Almighty God.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the years of Comber’s memorable service at Camden Road, Miss
Thomas lived at home with her parents. Her mother was a woman of gentle,
retiring disposition, who permitted herself to be absorbed by domestic
interests, and was remarkable for an inexhaustible patience, which her
daughter Gwen inherited, to the great advantage of her own soul, her
comrades, and her work. Mr. Thomas was a man of keen intellect and
independent outlook, who was wont to talk freely with his children about
books and men and movements of the day, and whose conversation was an
educative influence of major importance.

On Christmas Eve, 1876, Miss Thomas sustained one of the great
bereavements of her life, in the passing away of her mother, long an
invalid, to whom her filial attention had been unremitting. Three months
earlier, in September of the same year, she, with many others, had said
“goodbye” to Thomas Comber, who sailed for the Cameroons. The Children’s
Service Valedictory Meeting at Camden Road was at once sorrowful and
enthusiastic. The young folk were grieved to lose their leader, but loyal
enough to be glad that he was going to the great work marked out for him
by God. A testimonial address, headed “Mizpah,” was presented to him by
John Hartland, in the name of the children who had signed it, together
with a magic lantern, for which they had subscribed; and promising
faithful, affectionate, and prayerful remembrance, Comber passed on his
way.

Of course, he continued to correspond with his young friends, and by way
of augmenting their interest in his work, suggested that they should
support a mission boy. The suggestion was adopted, and a scholars’
working meeting was instituted by Miss Gwen Thomas and Miss Emily
Smith, to raise the necessary funds. It was a modest enterprise at the
beginning. The first sale was held in a corner of the schoolroom, with
goods displayed upon a single table. Later a second corner was annexed,
and a second table furnished. Later still Mrs. Jonas Smith took practical
interest in the undertaking, a “Ladies’ Missionary Working Party”
was formed, and so on, until the whole Church became involved in the
business of “The Camden Road Congo Sale,” which at one period ranked as a
Denominational Institution.

The Annual Sale is still maintained, though in modified form, and in
the course of its history has contributed to the funds of the B.M.S.
some £3,000, more or less. Mrs. Lewis loved “The Congo Sale,” was often
occupied with its business when on furlough, had the honour of opening it
more than once, when the opening had become a function, and talked of it
when she lay a-dying.

Miss Alice Hartland remembers that at the early working meeting Miss
Thomas used to read to the children as they sat sewing, “The Life of
Robert Moffat.” Naturally Robert Moffat was one of her heroes, and many
years later she wrote, in a passage which I propose to quote, that Mrs.
Moffat was her ideal of what a missionary’s wife should be. Happily, by
the grace of God, she lived to realise her ideal, in marked degree, and
to create a new one for others who may follow in her steps.

One pathetic family incident relates itself to this children’s working
meeting shortly after its inception. In 1868 Miss Thomas’s elder sister,
Eliza Jane, was married to Dr. Richard Percival, and some three years
later accompanied him to St. Lucia, West Indies, where he had secured a
medical appointment. His health failed, and after a short stay he was
compelled to return. There were three children of the marriage, Ethel,
Eva, and Beatrice, whose names will often appear in this book. But
their father’s health was never strong, and in 1877 he was lying ill at
St. Leonards. Two of the children were staying with their Aunt Gwen,
and on Saturday afternoon were taken by her to the Working Meeting.
While engaged in the meeting she received a telegram bidding her bring
the little ones to the bedside of their dying father. They were taken
immediately, and shortly afterwards he passed away.




CHAPTER II

BETROTHAL, BEREAVEMENT, AND DESIGNATION TO THE CAMEROONS


Comber began his missionary life at Victoria, the colony founded by
Alfred Saker as the new home of the little Protestant community, driven
from Fernando Po by the intolerance of the Roman Catholic authorities.
Victoria was situated on the shore of Ambas Bay, and at the foot of the
Cameroons Mountain, which Comber climbed one day, finding at the top the
bottle left there by Captain Burton, an exploit which led to a pleasant
interchange of compliments at a meeting of the Royal Geographical Society
in London.

Not long after his arrival Comber was left in sole charge of the station,
and threw himself into the work with characteristic zeal. Grenfell,
meanwhile, was working at Bethel station on the Cameroons river.
Subsequently the two were thrown much together and formed a friendship
which was of happiest omen for the cause of Christianity in Central
Africa. Both of them turned with longing eyes to the interior, yearning
for work among heathen tribes whose original depravity had not been
complicated and deepened by imported European evils. But their dreams of
local extension were broken by the call to the Congo.

Stanley’s historic journey “Through the Dark Continent,” in the course
of which he proved that the Lualaba River and the Congo were one and the
same stream, and the opportune munificence of Mr. Robert Arthington of
Leeds, whose inspired guess had anticipated the explorer’s discovery,
made a new departure in the work of the Baptist Mission at once possible
and obligatory. I have told the story of this new departure at some
length in “The Life of George Grenfell,”[1] and must here compass the
matter in a few rapid sentences.

The Committee of the B.M.S. realised that in Comber and Grenfell they had
men who were providentially raised up, endowed, equipped, and placed, for
the new enterprise. On January 5, 1878, the young missionaries received
the expected invitation to undertake a pioneering expedition in the Congo
region. Their assent was instant and enthusiastic, and while awaiting
final instructions they made a flying visit to the lower reach of the
Congo, and laid some stepping-stones for future use.

Encouraged by their reconnoitring experiences, they returned, completed
their preparations, sailed from Cameroons on June 28th, and early in
August were in San Salvador, the capital of the ancient kingdom of Congo,
making friends with the king. They felt their way a stage or two further
on toward Stanley Pool, but encountering obstacles, realising the
imperative need of reinforcements, and being profoundly convinced of the
feasibility and the obligation of the new enterprise, they went back upon
their tracks, Grenfell returning to the Cameroons, and Comber coming to
London to tell his story and to ask for men. He got them in the persons
of Holman Bentley, Harry Crudgington, and John Hartland.

Hartland had long cherished in his heart the desire to be a missionary,
but the way had never opened for him to secure the college training
which seemed to be necessary, and so his desire had remained his secret,
discussed only with his sister. But Comber’s appeal so stirred him that
he could not restrain himself longer. On returning from a meeting of the
Young Men’s Missionary Society, held at the Mission House, he wrote to
Comber in these terms:—

“I have longed, I have prayed to go, and have often cried, ‘Here am I;
send Me’; but I have never yet felt that He was sending me, and I dare
not go alone. But to-night you said you wanted to take back with you
to Africa one or two men at once. The preparation for mission work was
always my obstacle, but if the men you need are men ready to dedicate
themselves, _as they are_, and at once to the Lord’s service—if the only
preparation needed is the preparation of the Holy Spirit; if the wisdom
needed is that wisdom promised to those who ask; if the sufficiency is
not a college education, but the sufficiency which is of God—I cannot, I
dare not hold back.... My mind is fully made up, that if you will accept
me (and you know what I am, I have no need to introduce myself to you),
as a fellow-helper in the Lord’s work, and if the Society will take me
as one of their workers, I am ready this day to consecrate myself to the
Lord.”

Comber’s joyous answer was: “Apply at once.” The application was duly
made and accepted, and on April 26, 1879, John Hartland, to his heart’s
desire sailed with Comber, Bentley, and Crudgington for the Congo. He was
known at Camden Road, as a quiet, rather nervous, good young man, and
probably none, save two or three who knew him best, supposed that he had
in him the making of a capable, heroic, missionary pioneer. But he had.
And in quiet station work at San Salvador, in adventurous journeys in
which he shared attempts to find a practicable way to Stanley Pool, and
in the heavy subsequent labour of establishing a line of communications
for the traffic of the mission, and especially for the transport of the
steamer _Peace_, he exhibited readiness of hand, resource of brain, and
devotion of spirit, which elicited the unstinted admiration and affection
of his colleagues. That he could write vividly is sufficiently proved
by the following extract from a long and profoundly interesting letter
wherein he tells of an experience which almost made an end of Comber’s
career and his own:—

“We walked into the town (Banza Makuta) and asked the people its name,
but got no answer. They drew back a little, and then one man called
out, “Nda bongo nkeli, vonda mindeli!” (“Fetch the guns; kill the white
men!”) and in an instant they rushed away returning immediately armed
with great sticks, huge pieces of stone, knives, cutlasses, and guns,
and without any word of palaver, commenced dancing and leaping round us,
and brandishing their weapons. Mr. Comber sat down by a house, and I was
about to do the same, but our assailants yelled out, “Get up, get up,”
and rushed upon us. Such fiendish, blood-thirsty, cruel countenances
I never saw. We got up and called to them to stop, that we would go
back, but it was no good, and stones came flying towards us, and sticks
and knives were brandished around us. We could see the people were
determined, not only to drive us from the town, but to have our lives,
so there was nothing left for us to do but to attempt flight, though
it seemed hopeless. Away we started, amid stones and blows. We all got
hit and bruised, but managed to reach the top of the steep hill, when a
sudden report rang out behind us, above the uproar, and Mr. Comber, who
was in front of me, fell. I dashed up to him and tried to assist him to
rise, but he said, “It’s no use, John; I’m hit, you go on.”

How Comber got up again, overtook Hartland and Cam, and ran with them for
many miles with a jagged ironstone bullet embedded in the muscles of his
back; and how ultimately they all three reached a friendly town and were
safe, is familiar history.

Possibly the reader may be wondering by this time whether, carried away
by interest in John Hartland and the Congo Mission, I have forgotten Miss
Thomas and my proper business. I hope the next paragraph may afford
adequate proof that this is not the case.

Early in 1882 Mrs. Seymour, who as Miss Nodes had been closely associated
with John Hartland in the children’s work at Camden Road, and whose
husband was his friend, received from him a most interesting and
momentous letter. In it he confessed that before leaving for the Congo
he had conceived a strong affection for Miss Gwen Thomas, and the hope
that one day he might have the happiness of securing her as his wife.
Foreseeing that he might not be able to endure the Congo climate, he
determined to keep his love and his hope secret, and had sailed without
giving word or sign. At least he had done his best in the matter of
concealment. But now that he had become acclimatised, and good prospect
of life and work was before him, he was minded to put his fate to the
test, and he desired Mrs. Seymour to broach the subject for him. On one
condition! He conceived it possible that during his absence Miss Thomas’s
interest and affection might have been engaged by some other man. If Mrs.
Seymour had reason to suppose that such was the case, then he would have
her burn his letter, and keep his secret, as he was sure that if Miss
Thomas knew she had been the innocent occasion of suffering to him, she
herself would suffer, and that purposeless suffering he would have her
spared. But if the way seemed clear, he desired a friend’s most friendly
mediation. He enclosed a letter addressed to his sister. If all went well
with his indirect wooing, he desired Mrs. Seymour to hand this letter to
Miss Hartland that his friends at home might have the earliest possible
intimation of his joy. But if things went awry, he would have the letter
destroyed, that they might not know that with other burdens he carried
the grievous addition of an unrequited love.

It was obviously the letter of a courteous, Christian gentleman, and much
impressed by its extreme chivalry, Mrs. Seymour proceeded to execute her
difficult commission. But finding that the negotiation was not to be
precisely a matter of plain sailing, with sound, womanly wisdom she made
haste to convey to her correspondent the time-honoured counsel, “Speak
for yourself, John.”

John spoke for himself, on such wise that obstacles were removed,
hesitations overcome, and in due course he received the word of assent
which his heart coveted. But he had to wait for it, with what patience he
could muster, through several weary months. The following letter will say
much to the discerning reader and spare me pages of laboured exposition:—

                                  “ST. MARGARET’S,” HAMPSTEAD HEATH.
                                  “_July 5, 1882._

    “MY DEAR MRS. HARTLAND,—Thank you so much for your kind letter
    of this morning. I am so glad that our engagement is pleasing
    to you. I feel sure that it is the hand of God which has guided
    us both in this matter. My only regret is that dear John should
    have had such a weary waiting time. But I try to remember that
    he is in ‘Our Father’s’ care as well as I. I do most earnestly
    pray that I may be a help to him in the great and noble work he
    has undertaken: work in which I have so long wished to have
    a share, that I am almost afraid to realise that my heart’s
    desire is about to be fulfilled. I can only leave my joy where
    I have so often left my desires, at the feet of Him to whom
    all hearts are open, all desires known. I am hoping to go home
    on Saturday evening to spend the Sunday. If I am early enough
    I will try to look in on my way. If not, I shall be at chapel
    on Sunday morning and stay to communion there, when I shall
    hope to see some of you. I would propose coming down in the
    afternoon, but my own dear papa is so very unwell that I don’t
    think I could leave. With best love to you all,

                              “Believe me,

                         “Yours affectionately,

                                                 “GWEN ELEN THOMAS.”

“St. Margaret’s, Hampstead Heath,” from which this letter is dated,
was the residence of Mr. and Mrs. May, in whose family Miss Thomas was
acting as governess, having responsible charge of their young children.
Her position was a singularly happy one. She was treated as a friend,
and received the utmost Christian courtesy and kindness, of which she
often speaks in her letters, with expressions of warm gratitude. Mr. and
Mrs. May used to spend the winter in Spain, and during their absence
Miss Thomas had the care of their children at Ramsgate. Consequently
her opportunities of seeing Mrs. Hartland were only occasional, but her
letters were frequent and affectionate. It is manifest that Mrs. Hartland
had taken the woman of her son’s choice into her heart, and that Miss
Thomas gladly accepted the spiritual hospitality.

She had kept John Hartland waiting a long time. A curious Nemesis
ordained that she in her turn should be kept waiting. Having despatched
the letter which is to abolish his anxieties and fill his heart with
rapture, she naturally yearns to have the record of the rapture before
her in black and white. Of course, she must wait for the mails; but
the mails come and the record tarries. Shipwreck and minor mischances
cause her hope to be deferred. Toward the end of September she writes
plaintively to Miss Hartland: “It seems as if all this year has been
taken up for me and John in waiting for letters.” Meanwhile her spare
time is not occupied in idle dreaming. She has taken up the study of
Portuguese, and writes out her Sunday-school lessons, finding this a more
fruitful means of studying the Bible than reading merely. Moreover she
thinks her MSS. “may come in handy by-and-by.” In October, by the irony
of fate, she gets news of her sweetheart through other people’s letters,
and ruefully writes to Mrs. Hartland: “John seems to have written to
every one by this mail except to Mrs. Seymour and to me”; and goes on to
say that she will be very glad when the suspense is over and she can look
forward to getting her letters every month. The November mail brought
peace.

                                 “13, WELLINGTON CRESCENT, RAMSGATE.
                                 “_November 19, 1882._

    “MY DEAREST MRS. HARTLAND,—I must write just a line or two to
    tell you I had my letter last night. Wasn’t it nice? On his
    birthday! And so the long waiting time is over for both of us
    at last. I can hardly believe it. It is all so wonderful, the
    way that the Lord has led us both. Poor dear old boy! he has
    had a long, weary time altogether. But it is over at last, and,
    as he puts it, ‘The joy of the present is all the sweeter for
    past sorrow.’ I suppose you have had a letter, for he tells me
    he is going to write to you. In mine he says it will be nearly
    another year, he fears, before he is home. My letter is dated
    September 15th. I can’t write about other things now. But I
    know you will rejoice with us both in our happiness. With much
    love to all,

                    “Believe me, dear Mrs. Hartland,

                         “Yours affectionately,

                                                 “GWEN ELEN THOMAS.”

At the end of November Messrs. Grenfell and Doke were on the point of
sailing for the Congo, and Miss Thomas records her regret that she was
unable to see them, but cherishes the hope of meeting them in Africa.
Grenfell she met, though under other conditions than those she had
forecast; but Doke had passed on. As the year waned her father’s illness
had caused her grave concern, but before it closed he was better. She
records also with pleasure that she is wearing the ring which Mrs.
Hartland had procured at her son’s desire.

The little spell of happy work and happy correspondence to which she had
looked forward was quickly troubled. Later deep called unto deep. In
January her father died, at the age of seventy-three, and her natural
sorrow was rendered more acute by the fact that he had been to her, as
to his other children, a friend as well as a father, who desired and
received not only their filial affection, but their understanding and
sympathy in the intellectual interests of his life.

Soon afterwards came news of the death of Mr. Doke, who had studied and
practised engineering, as well as theology, and had gone out to the
Congo with Grenfell, specially to superintend the reconstruction of the
steamer _Peace_. This sad event moved Miss Thomas deeply and touched her
happy dreams with a shadow of new anxiety. Three months later the shadow
suddenly blackened.

On June 19th Mr. Brock called to inform her that the Baptist Missionary
Committee had received a letter from Grenfell stating that John Hartland
was ailing, and that Grenfell hoped to send him home immediately, in
which case he might be expected at the end of the month. At first she
was naturally tempted to regard the news as good, giving promise of an
early meeting with the man she loved. But reflection quickly taught her
that Mr. Brock would not have been deputed by the Committee to bring her
happy tidings, and she prepared herself for the disclosure of the fact,
designedly withheld from her for the moment, that John Hartland’s illness
was very grave. For three weeks her heart was tense with anxiety, and she
wrote to Mrs. Hartland frequently, sometimes day by day, pouring out her
solicitude, her sympathy, the pain of her love and the comfort of her
faith.

On July 4th she wrote in a letter to Mrs. Hartland: “I heard from Mr.
Crudgington this morning, telling me of the answer he had received.
He seems to think it probable that our dear John will be on board the
English mail, as it is so late. But I am trying not to count upon it too
much.” This was written in the morning. In the afternoon the following
telegram was received at the Mission House:—

    “Madeira, 1.55, July 4th. Received here 4.11 p.m.

    “Baynes, Baptist Missionary Society, London.

    “Hartland dead, dysentery. Break news gently.

                                                    “DIXON (Congo).”

In the evening Mr. Baynes broke the news to Mrs. Hartland, and his
colleague, the Rev. J. B. Myers, to Miss Thomas. Mr. Myers has given me
an account of the well-remembered interview. Upon receiving him Miss
Thomas took her seat upon a couch. When he had communicated his heavy
tidings her features became rigid, but she gave no other sign of emotion.
He spoke gently, and prayed with her, “Yet she neither moved nor wept,”
and when he left her she remained silent and still as one in a trance.

When the mail came it was pitiful to learn that the man she had loved
had been lying in his grave five weeks before the first intimation of
his illness had been received at home. Here I take leave to reproduce
the brief account of John Hartland’s death, given in “The Life of George
Grenfell”:—

“The timely arrival of Mr. Dixon at Underhill, and his willingness to
take charge while Grenfell got away, made the desired journey possible.
The ‘run-up-country’ was a figure of speech, for he was so weak that he
had to be carried in a hammock.

“Prior to starting he had written cheerily of his hope of soon meeting
his friend, John Hartland, who, while willing to stay, was to be
constrained to take furlough in July or August. This hope was fulfilled
earlier than he had forecast, but under conditions which made the
fulfilment a heart-breaking disappointment.

“At Manyanga, in the middle of April, Hartland found himself so weakened
by fever that he took boat and came down river to Bayneston, arriving
on April 21st. Hughes, who was in charge of the station at Bayneston,
overborne by the heavy nursing which Hartland’s serious condition
entailed, wrote to Butcher, who was at the camp on the Luvu River,
beseeching him to hurry on to Bayneston. With fever upon him, Butcher
started immediately, and by dint of hard walking arrived at Bayneston the
next day, having previously despatched a message to Grenfell, who had
left Underhill on the 27th. The message reached him on the second day of
his journey, and though ill himself, he pushed on with forced marches
arriving at Bayneston on May 1st. It was at once apparent to him that
Hartland, whom Hughes and Butcher had ‘carefully nursed through ten days
of the severest form of dysentery,’ was in a dangerous condition. But
abatement of the worst symptoms gave hope, which again was subdued to
fear.

“After further fluctuations, hope was abandoned on May 10th, and it was
Grenfell’s duty to inform his friend that his day’s work was done. ‘I
shan’t easily forget,’ he writes, ‘his look, as he gazed at us and said,
‘Well, I am not afraid to die. My trust is in Jesus. Whosoever believeth
in Him hath everlasting life!’ A little while later he said, ‘After four
years’ preparation, and just as I am about to enter upon mission work
proper, it seems strange for me to realise that my work is done: but He
knows best.’

“On the evening of the same day Comber arrived unexpectedly, and most
opportunely, for the affection of these two men for one another was
intense. They had worked together in the home country, they had shared
early perils, and were absolutely one in their devotion to Christ and
His work in Africa. Their intercourse during the two remaining days of
Hartland’s life was very tender and sacred, and the letter which Comber
wrote to Mrs. Hartland is one of the most beautiful and touching of all
our missionary records. It reveals how the dying man’s gaze was absorbed
by Christ; how he turned from dear thoughts of home and marriage and
happy work to the dearer thought of being with Him, and seeing Him as He
is. His last words, uttered at the final moment, were: ‘Christ is all in
all; Christ is all in all. Let me go, my friends. Don’t hold me back.
Let me go, Tom. I must go. I want to go to Him. “Simply to Thy cross I
cling.” Let me go.’ So he passed on.”

To this account I am now enabled to make a touching addition. On May 10th
Grenfell told Hartland that he was dying. After hearing the announcement,
and having the witness in himself that it was true, he indited four
letters, severally addressed to his father, his mother, his two sisters,
and Miss Thomas. The first three have been placed in my hands.

In the letter to his father Hartland explains that as the power of
writing has passed from him, his friend Butcher is taking down the words
at his dictation. The same notes of dignity, tenderness, and calm faith
are found in every one. Assured that only good can come of it, I venture
to print the tenderest of them all.

                                            “BAYNESTON, CONGO RIVER.
                                            “_May 10, 1883._

    “MY DEAR MOTHER,—You will be sorry to know when you get this
    letter that your missionary boy has passed away from the field
    of active service to rest. My views of missionary life were not
    that I should fall after four short years, but that I should
    spend my whole life in Christ’s service. But He knows best. I
    know you will not grieve to hear that He has delivered me from
    a long and painful illness, and at last taken me to Himself.
    But, oh! my dear mother, I am so sorry for you. Your heart will
    break. Oh, may He be very near to you! You have been a dear,
    good mother to me, and now in writing this brief farewell I
    feel happy that it will not be so long before we meet again, in
    His land, where sickness and dying are no more.

    “Comfort poor, dear Gwennie; and while you live, be a mother
    and a friend to her.

                               “Farewell,

                        “Your affectionate son,

                                                             “JOHN.”

Mrs. Hartland was faithful to the charge of her dying son. From that time
forth, as long as she lived, she was “a mother and a friend” to Miss
Thomas, and from that time forth Miss Thomas called her “mother.” What
wonder that she wrote to Miss Hartland while her grief was new, “I feel
so thankful ever to have had the love of such a brave, good, noble man?
Oh, Lily, what have I lost?” With wonted kindness Mrs. May granted Miss
Thomas leave of absence. Part of the resting-time was spent with Mrs.
Hartland and part with her cousin in Yorkshire.

At first, in the great weariness following suspense and shock, Miss
Thomas confessed more than once a yearning to follow her dear one into
the great rest. But her native strength of mind, and her loyalty to God
quickly conquered such weakness. Rather would she live to carry on his
work.

The following extracts from letters written while her great sorrow was
still fresh and keen, will give the reader some insight into the inner
life of a woman who was learning in the school of pain, those deeper
lessons of the faith, which may be learned by rote in other schools, but
not by heart, lessons which she never forgot, which contain the last
secret of her victorious life.

“August 21st. (To Mrs. Hartland.) But don’t think from this that I am
worrying or fretting; for I am not. God is with me, and I feel more
and more as the days go by that our darling’s prayers for me have been
wonderfully answered, that I am helped and comforted. And is it not an
honour and privilege ‘to know Him and the fellowship of His sufferings’?
He has always been with me in trouble and sorrow, but never so near as
in this the deepest of all. I hardly like to write thus, but I want you
to know, so that you may not be anxious about me. And as to my future, I
have left it with Him to do as He will with me, and I pray for grace to
be faithful in whatever work He calls me to.”

“August 28th. (To Miss Hartland.) To-day I have had a letter, a very
precious one, from Mr. Comber.... I think he is feeling his loss very
much, though he writes as brightly as he can.... Since I have been back
I have read through Farrar’s ‘Life of Christ,’ and it has helped me so
much. I think these sorrows must be sent to us to make us know that
‘Christ is all in all’; for gradually we come to learn that having Him we
can do without all else. And yet, how we long for human love! Nor do I
think it can be wrong to do so; for even Christ looked for human sympathy
in His sorrow. He could not find it. And, oh, how much we have had in
ours! I never so much realised before the oneness of the people of God;
so many kind letters from far and near, some even from unknown friends,
and yet so full of sympathy and prayer. I have thought of that verse so
often:—

    “‘His way was much rougher and darker than mine;
    Did Christ my Lord suffer, and shall I repine?’”

“Same date. (To Mrs. Hartland.) I am very thankful the way seems to be
opening. Of course I will go to India if it is thought best. But no one
knows how dear and sacred Africa is to me.... My only wish now is to
live as he lived, and when my work is done (if God wills) to die as he
died, for Christ and Africa. I do think of you so much, and could almost
envy you at times the sweet, pure memories of his boyish days. I do feel
it is an honour to have had the love (for so many years though I did not
know it) of such a noble, true, good man. And I am sure you, dear mother,
feel it a high privilege to have had such a son. It is a great comfort
to look back, and while we sorrow, to feel there is nothing to regret. A
pure, noble life, and a glorious death. I think of that text so often,
‘If ye loved Me, ye would rejoice because I go to My Father.’ Oh, how
happy he must be!”

       *       *       *       *       *

As soon as she had recovered strength after the shock of her great
bereavement, Miss Thomas formed the determination to go to the
mission-field alone, and with little delay made application to the
Baptist Missionary Society. Her application was accepted in September.
At first there was thought of sending her to India, but finally, to
her great joy, it was decided that she should labour at the Cameroons,
travelling thither with Miss Comber, who had already spent one term of
service in the field which her brother had left for the Congo.

Uncertainty as to the time of her actual departure compelled her to
relinquish forthwith her engagement with Mrs. May, who was on the point
of going abroad for some months. But she was opportunely invited to
take another position, for the time being, which she rightly affirmed
that Providence had specially arranged for her. Her friend Mrs. Seymour
required the help of a lady in her home, and was willing to receive Miss
Thomas on terms which friendship dictated, and which friendship eagerly
accepted. She was to regard herself as a visitor, and feel perfectly free
to attend to her own affairs, and to depart whenever the call should come.

So Miss Thomas went from Hampstead to Highbury, where she passed the busy
months of waiting in an atmosphere of sympathy and friendship. After
some changes of arrangement it was ultimately fixed that she and Miss
Comber should sail from Liverpool on March 5th. On Monday, March 3rd, a
farewell meeting was held at Camden Road Church, and on behalf of the
Sunday School, Mr. Parkinson presented Miss Thomas with a harmoniphon.
She also received at the same meeting a medicine chest, the gift of Mr.
Baynes, whose absence in consequence of illness was much deplored. There
were some forty other presents privately given of which I have the list.
It included items of practical utility. Among them, five pounds’ worth
of spoons, forks, and table requisites, from “the Ladies’ Missionary
Working Party”; and (equally useful) from other friends, four five-pound
notes. Notable among the names of the donors are those of M. Gustave
Masson, French Master at Harrow, Miss Thomas’s uncle by marriage with her
mother’s sister; and the Rev. William Brock, minister of Heath Street,
Hampstead, whose church Miss Thomas had attended during her stay in
the district, and from whom she had received much of that discerning,
sympathetic kindness which still endears him to all who come within its
scope.

Miss Thomas spent the last fortnight with her friends, the Hartlands, at
34, Falkland Road, and on the morning of March 4th, she and Miss Comber
left St. Pancras after an enthusiastic valediction from a large group of
friends. They were accompanied to Liverpool by Mr. Percy Comber, Miss
Comber’s younger brother, and Miss Alice Hartland. Mrs. Fletcher of Edge
Lane, whose daughter was on the field at Cameroons, entertained them,
with warmest hospitality, and in the evening a drawing-room meeting was
held, at which the Rev. John Jenkyn Brown presided.

The next day shortly after noon they embarked in a tender, and proceeded
to board the ss. _Corisco_, which lay in the stream. Many friends elected
to say “goodbye” on board, and when the bell rang and the tender left,
two of them, Mr. Percy Comber and Miss Alice Hartland, remained as
stowaways, and secured the unchartered pleasure of a voyage with their
dear ones down the river and across the bar. But their deferred farewells
must needs be said at last. They also were put off in turn, and the two
young missionary women passed out to sea.




CHAPTER III

VOYAGE TO THE CAMEROONS, AND A SURFEIT OF ADVENTURES. 1884


The trials of the missionary life commenced early for Miss Thomas.
During the voyage to Madeira the weather was exceptionally bad, and she
and Miss Comber endured the horrors of sea-sickness for a week. Happily
their sorrows were mitigated by invincible good spirits. They “were
very jolly all the time,” made jokes of their own miseries, and when
the doctor enquired with traditional sympathy whether they yearned to
be flung overboard, his obliging suggestion was repelled with scorn.
The ship carried no stewardess, and at first they found it embarrassing
to be waited upon by a man. But “any port in a storm,” and any help in
the sickness which the storm produces! The steward was a nice kindly
person, and they soon became used to his presence and grateful for his
attendance. During the days of wild buffeting by wind and wave, the
harbour of Madeira was looked forward to with strong desire, and it was
a doleful hour in which the Captain expressed his fear that the badness
of the weather would preclude his touching at the Island. That fear was
discredited by the event; the weather moderated, and upon sighting land
the sufferers were able to appear on deck.

They both found much comfort in the presence of a third lady, Mrs.
Buckenham, who was going out to her husband, a Primitive Methodist
missionary stationed at Fernando Po. The Captain’s marked kindness was
an additional comfort, and indeed the source of very many. His cabin on
deck had been annexed by certain gentlemen as a smoking saloon, but upon
the appearance of the missionary ladies, the smokers suffered summary
eviction, and the cabin was placed at their service. On the morning of
March 12th they steamed round Madeira and made the harbour in perfect
weather, which permitted them to take unchecked delight in the lovely
scenery. The Captain saw them ashore, secured for them a spacious,
private, detached apartment at the hotel where he himself put up, and in
the afternoon Miss Thomas sat down to write a merry letter to her “dear
Mother,” Mrs. Hartland.

As she writes her attention is confessedly distracted by the dazzling
charms of the flower-garden she looks out upon, and the more sober, but
more enthralling charms of the tea-table, which is being spread. Her week
of sea-sickness is pleaded as an excuse for gloating over mere victuals,
the validity of which plea the humane reader will immediately allow.
Referring to the troubles passed, she writes gaily: “And we had many a
laugh at our own expense. To see the boxes and chairs executing a jig in
the middle of the room, and then to hear the fearful crashes of crockery
in the pantry next our cabin, ourselves making frantic efforts to get
from one side of the room to the other, and ending by being landed on the
floor in an elegant sitting posture, or coming up with a spin against the
door—all this was very diverting.”

As the _Corisco_ was timed to sail at nine o’clock the next morning, Miss
Thomas and her friends had little opportunity of making acquaintance with
Funchal. Yet, in the limited time at their disposal they moved about
briskly, with eyes wide open, and acquired many vivid impressions of the
natural beauties of the place and the non-English social novelties which
appealed to them in the shops and in the streets.

From Madeira to Sierra Leone the voyage was pleasant as a picnic. Miss
Thomas and Miss Comber were much in favour with their fellow-passengers,
and the Captain made them his peculiar care. He was an English sailor of
the best type, and though he had no special reverence for their mission,
he unfeignedly admired their British pluck, in which they were at least
his peers. Sometimes he told them dismal, tragical tales of Africa,
with the purpose of testing their mettle, and when he found that they
refused to be dismayed, he assured them they were just the kind of folk
to do well on the West Coast, where courage and good spirits are the
best defence against the hostilities of the deadly climate. One day he
came upon them at afternoon tea, winked at their illicit spirit-stove,
and craved to be allowed to join them. Thereafter, at this little
function, he was their daily guest. He told them “wonderful stories of
his wife, of whom he was very proud,” made his black boy “Dollar” their
servant, and taught his retriever dog to amuse them and attend them. His
apology for his rather more than conventional kindness was ingenious
and conclusive. “At Liverpool the ‘Sky-pilot’ (Rev. John Jenkyn Brown)
specially charged me to take good care of both of you, and I am going to
fulfil my commission faithfully.” His protégées so far imbued him with
the missionary spirit that he promised to give a concert at Bonny in aid
of the work. The promise may have been kept, but the fulfilment of it is
not recorded.

On March 19th the _Corisco_ was “off Sierra Leone.” Nine days later she
lay outside the bar at the mouth of Benin River. The Captain and some of
his passengers had business up the river, and took the three missionary
ladies with them. They were deposited in the launch by means of the crane
and the chair, an experience which they found amusing, the time of their
departure from the ship being 9 a.m. At the Bar the sea was rough to the
point of ugliness, and the Captain regretted that he had brought the
ladies; but there was no mishap, and very soon the voyagers, whose pulses
had been quickened by the passage of the Bar, were enjoying the quiet
waters of the mile-wide river, with its banks “dotted here and there by
little towns.” Miss Thomas shall tell in her own words the rest of the
story of her Benin expedition:—

“As we stopped at the various traders’ wharves while the Captain and some
of the gentlemen went ashore, the people came crowding down to look at
us, as only two white ladies had passed up the river before, and that
many years ago. Our eyes were the great attraction, which all happened to
be light. One woman was very proud because she could manage to say, ‘How
do, Mammy?’

“We went on to see a Mr. Henderson whose house is built on an island. He
is a very good man, and a total abstainer, so we determined to lunch with
him. Upon arrival we knocked and made a great noise before we could get
any answer. At last a man came, and most politely taking off his hat,
inquired, ‘You live, Mammy?’ To which we responded, ‘Yes, we live. You
live?’ Finally he brought a key and we went into the courtyard where we
met Mr. Henderson whose astonishment was complete. He said that when he
was told three white ladies had come, he surmised that the sailors of a
ship in the river were having fun with him, and would not come down. We
had a very nice lunch, and some delicious tea for which Mr. Henderson is
noted. Among other presents he gave us a tin full of it. We commenced
our return at 3.30 and had a very rough passage. Our little boat was
tossed on the waves, and the spray kept breaking over us. Darkness fell,
a tornado followed in our track, and the lightning was most splendid. We
sat, well covered up, singing Sankey’s hymns. It was a fine experience,
and happily we reached the ship just before the rain fell.”

On Sunday, March 30th, the _Corisco_ reached Bonny, and on the morrow the
mail steamer _Senegal_ arrived bringing two passengers whose presence
was cordially welcomed; Mr. Buckenham, who had come so far to meet his
wife, and Mr. Liley, of the Livingstone Inland Mission from the Congo.
But the pleasure of meeting Mr. Liley was shadowed by the heavy news
he bore. From him Miss Thomas received part of that terrible budget of
evil tidings which greeted George Grenfell at Stanley Pool, when he
returned from his boat journey to the equator on March 4th. She learned
that Mr. Hartley, the new missionary, and the two engineers sent out to
reconstruct the _Peace_, had all died on their journey up-country, and
that the work on the Congo, passing dear to her, was gravely disorganised
by the sickness of several workers. Moreover, a letter from Miss Saker
announced that Mr. Lewis had broken down and gone south, Miss Fletcher
was ailing, while the writer herself was in such poor case that she would
be compelled to start for a trip to Gaboon immediately upon the arrival
of Miss Thomas. This would necessitate that Miss Comber should come to
Bethel Station, Cameroons, to remain with Miss Thomas during Miss Saker’s
absence, instead of commencing her work forthwith at Victoria.

The young missionaries were delayed several days at Bonny, made a visit
to Opobo, and called upon King Ja-Ja, whose hospitality they enjoyed, not
without effort. The palm oil “chop” was an ordeal. The King himself was
a nice man and friendly, but his house was frightfully dirty and wore
the aspect of a curiosity shop, promiscuously furnished with odds and
ends presented him by the traders. Miss Thomas and the other ladies were
permitted to visit his wives, concerning which visit she significantly
remarks: “It was awful.” The bright side of a depressing experience was
the King’s earnestly expressed desire that a white missionary should come
to reside in his town, and she had some hope that Mr. Buckenham’s society
might be able to meet his wish.

Before leaving Bonny Miss Thomas and Miss Comber said “goodbye” to the
_Corisco_ and its genial captain, and were transhipped to the _Loanda_. A
few days later they arrived at Victoria, and the elements accorded them a
boisterous welcome, as the following extract from the _Missionary Herald_
will make apparent:—

“On April 4th Miss Comber and Miss Gwen Thomas safely reached Victoria.
Miss Comber writes: ‘When we reached Victoria, Mrs. Thomson came on the
vessel to meet us, and when all was ready we started for the shore in two
boats—our mission boat, and the ship’s boat—Mrs. Quintin Thomson, the
doctor and the purser of the ship, going in the mission boat, while Miss
Thomas and I went with the Captain in the ship’s boat. When we were near
the shore a very large wave came suddenly, and before the Kroo-boys had
time to pull away from it, it broke over us and turned the boat right
over, and we directly found ourselves in the water. Fortunately the other
boat was not far off, and very quickly came back for us and picked us
up before we had been in the water many minutes. The children were all
on the beach waiting to welcome us with singing, but when they saw Miss
Thomas carried to the house (she had lost her shoes) and me walking up
drenched with water, they said they were “not fit to sing.” Happily we
are none the worse for our wetting. This happened on Saturday. On Sunday
night we had the heaviest tornado I have ever known. Our people say there
has not been so strong a one for twenty-three years. Unfortunately it did
a good deal of damage to Brook Mount, taking down the front piazza and a
good deal of the roof. It happened just as we were going to bed, and a
second time we got a wetting; so we had rather a rough welcome to Africa.’

“From Bethel Miss Thomas adds: ‘The country is all so beautiful, and the
climate so delightful, that it is hard to understand it is so unhealthy.
I am very anxious to get on with the Dualla language, as I see it will
be very necessary here. We had a most delightful day yesterday (Sunday).
Miss Saker is away, just now, having gone South for her health. But we
were just in time to see her before she left, and Miss Comber is with me
now. I am so glad and thankful to be at last really engaged in mission
work in Africa. We have six children in the house now, and there are
several more wanting to come.’”

Miss Thomas was an excellent correspondent from the beginning of her
missionary life, but not many of her earliest African letters are
available, and the reader must be content with fragmentary notes of the
beginnings of her work. The passage quoted above was written on or about
April 16th, and on that date, in a letter to Miss Alice Hartland, she
states that she is very well, and has not had a single headache since
leaving England. The rains are just commencing. She has had a walk
through the town with Mr. Silvey, and is impressed by the size of it. In
the absence of King Aqua she has been granted the honour of an interview
with his chief wife. She has also paid a visit to the week-old baby of
Dubundu, the native pastor. The lady was almost as bare of clothing as
the baby. The one struck her as “horrid-looking,” the other as “funny.”
Definite arrangements as regards her particular work are postponed,
pending the return of Miss Saker, who is expected home in ten days. A
present is enclosed for “Mother’s” birthday.

On April 21st Miss Thomas reports receiving the sad news of the death
of Mr. Johnstone, a Christian trader, residing at Bonny, who had shown
much kindness to her and her friends during their stay at that port.
Assured of his sympathy, they had been able to speak to him with grateful
freedom of their ideals and their work. He had traded on the coast for
fifteen years, was due home in two months, but was suddenly stricken down
with erysipelas and died. The kind heart of the writer is heavy with
the thought of the desolation which the news will bear to his wife and
children in England. Flags are flying half-mast in the river. An English
sailor lies dead, who leaves a wife and nine children in England. The
Mission people are sending a wreath for his burial.

May 12th was the anniversary of John Hartland’s death, and Miss Thomas
wrote to his mother assured that both would be “thinking of the dear one
who, this day last year, went home to God.” Sad news has come from the
Congo, including a report of the very serious illness of Thomas Comber.
During Miss Saker’s continued absence Miss Comber is to remain with Miss
Thomas, much to her joy, as they are like-minded. But the tidings of her
brother’s illness, and the necessity of a flying visit to Victoria, have
prostrated Miss Comber with fever, through which she is affectionately
nursed by her friend. Mr. Lewis has come over from Victoria, and Miss
Thomas finds him “nice,” and “a thorough Welshman.” He had lent her a
book on Wales, which interests her much. But the only time for a good
read is the time of recovering from fever. The Sunday services are mostly
in Dualla, and although they include a short address in English, it is
framed with a view to local capacities and requirements, and her soul
longs for a Sunday at Camden Road with Mr. Tucker, to whom she sends her
love.

Miss Alice Hartland had helped Miss Thomas with some of her packing, and
on May 17th the results were reported. A good many things had come to
grief. A number of books needed to have their covers washed and to be
laid in the sun to dry—a statement which the book-lover will read with
shuddering. But the worst misfortune was not to be laid to the charge of
the amateur packers. The Kroo-boys who carried the cases must needs drop
something, and with fine discrimination they chose a case containing a
bath filled with crockery. The smash was effective, and the details may
be left to imagination.

In this letter Miss Thomas reports her continued good health, but
complains of bad nights as her worst trouble. “The Kroo-boys on the beach
strike every hour by banging something which sounds like a tin tray. The
natives are constantly beating their tomtoms, which sets our dog ‘Fidele’
barking. Then the goats begin to bleat, and the little dogs in the yard
to howl, so that between them all it is horrible. As this happens almost
every night, and storms are frequent, a good night is consequently a rare
blessing.”

Miss Saker and Mr. Lewis are expected from Victoria, their boat is in the
river. Sunday was enjoyed. Miss Thomas took the two senior boys’ classes,
and hopes that a senior boys’ class will be allotted to her. “They
understand English properly and are very intelligent.”

A month later she refers to a letter which has told of her first attack
of fever and how wonderfully she had got over it. Her friends think she
will not have it so badly again. Her fevers are likely to be “strong,”
but it is believed she can bear them better than most people, so anxiety
about her is to be dismissed.

Miss Fletcher, of Victoria, is returning home broken down. The sorrow
of her friends is forecast and deplored, and Miss Comber’s ensuing
loneliness at Victoria occasions solicitude. In this letter, dated June
17th, and addressed to Mrs. Hartland, Miss Thomas pleads for more Camden
Road news and adds, touchingly: “When I was ill, and my head was so bad
that I could get no sleep, I kept fancying if I could only hear Mr.
Tucker read something it would send me to sleep. Of course it was only
fancy, but it was the one thing I seemed to long for.” In consequence
of the fever her hair has been cut quite short like a boy’s. She cares
nothing for the look of it, and it will be much better in case of the
recurrence of fever.

On July 11th Miss Thomas was at Victoria whither she had been hastily
summoned to attend Miss Comber who was down with fever and dysentery.
Pending Miss Thomas’s arrival Mr. Lewis had acted as doctor and nurse,
and his gentleness and skill were gratefully appreciated by his patient
and by her nurse, when she came. The other missionaries at Victoria, Mr.
Hay and Mr. Pinnock, were also full of kindness and concern. Referring to
her call from Bethel Station, Miss Thomas says:—

“This is how the work is interrupted here. I will try to give you an idea
of it from this week’s experience. Miss Saker and I had just been making
new arrangements for the management of our school, and had planned out
our daily work afresh. On Monday morning we had told the girls of our new
arrangements. We had also set apart a time every day in which Mr. Silvey
and I were to read Dualla with Miss Saker. She had not been well enough
for this previously. Well, on Monday evening, Mr. Silvey came running
in with Mr. Burnley bringing letters from Mr. Lewis requesting me to
come at once. First, they had to knock up some men and go to Dr. Allen’s
ship to learn his opinion of the treatment adopted. It was half-past one
a.m. when they returned. Meanwhile I got my things ready and at 6 a.m.
started. The travelling is bad in the rainy season....

“I think you may like to know something about the journey between
Cameroons and Victoria. First we are carried by Kroo-boys into the boat,
which is a six-oared lifeboat with an awning over one end. Then our
course lies down the river for about twenty miles. After that we cross
a stretch of sea, and then turn into creeks, which run between mangrove
swamps. This time, about eleven o’clock, the boat was pulled up to the
bank, and tied fast to a tree. Then we all had ‘chop.’ ... The Kroo-boys
eat theirs at the other end of the boat. After rather a rough passage
we reached Bimbia about 8 p.m. The sea was too rough to go further that
night. I never saw anything more beautiful than the scene as I lay in
the boat in Bimbia Bay. The water there was comparatively calm, while
outside one could see the raging breakers. The sky was clear overhead,
the moon shining brilliantly upon the little town, which consists of
a few native houses, surrounded by loveliest trees. There is only one
white man’s house, that of the German Agent, at which I was forced to
stay the night. He was very kind, got me supper, made up a bed for me,
and provided a black girl to sleep with me and to wait upon me. The next
morning we started at sunrise, and arrived here (Victoria) at half-past
eight. Mr. Lewis, Mr. Hay and John Pinnock were on the beach waiting for
me. Mr. Lewis has just come in to say the mail is leaving to-night, so I
must not write more. Miss Comber has made good progress. She is sitting
up in her room, and with assistance walked twice round the sitting-room
to-day. I think she will do well now, with care; but she will need to
go for a trip South before resuming her work. Mr. Hay and John Pinnock
are both down with fever, and very ill, especially the former. Mr. Lewis
is staying with both and nursing both. I do trust they will get over it
well. I am very anxious about Mr. Hay. There is a man-of-war at anchor
here now. Mr. Lewis and I went on board yesterday for a change. That was
before John Pinnock fell ill. The doctor came ashore and saw the two
patients, but he is evidently not very reliable. We think he had been
drinking. Mr. Lewis is becoming quite a doctor now. I cannot write more.”

As Mr. Lewis, whose name has been mentioned two or three times, is
destined to take a very prominent place in this life-story, it is fitting
that at least a few words of formal introduction should be accorded
to him; and if they are but few, the reader must know that my hand is
restrained by his express desire.

Thomas Lewis was born at Whitland, Carmarthenshire, in 1859. He was a
Welsh-speaking Welshman, and his early Christian work was done in the
vernacular. He can still preach in Welsh upon occasion, though he has
lost some of his former fluency. But when he preaches in English his
accent and his lilt bewray him. In the order of Providence he learned
to work in wood and iron before he studied theology, and his skill as a
handicraftsman has been scarcely less useful to him in his African career
than his book-learning. After an honourable course at Haverfordwest
College he was accepted by the B.M.S. for service in Africa, and was
sent to the Cameroons in 1883. When Mr. Lewis first met Miss Thomas he
was engaged to Miss Phillips of Haverfordwest, and how he was happily
married and swiftly bereaved will be told in the next chapter.

[Illustration:

  MR. GEORGE THOMAS.                MRS. THOMAS.

  MISS THOMAS (At the age of 17).   REV. THOMAS LEWIS.
                                    (Photo by Mr. Wickens, Bangor.)]

On August 5th Miss Thomas writes of “our troubles” which came in
sequence to the anxious stay at Victoria. She herself has been down with
fever, has made a good recovery, but has been “silly enough” to sprain
her ankle. Yet on the whole she is in good form, and is pronounced
“wonderful” by the local doctor. But Miss Saker’s continued and alarming
illness will necessitate her return home. Her things are packed, they
are awaiting the arrival of the mail, and Miss Thomas is to accompany
her part way. Miss Thomas continues: “It is now a month since I went to
Victoria to nurse Miss Comber, and I have been nursing ever since with an
interval of five days for my own fever.” The news from Victoria is bad.
Miss Comber is very unwell; Mr. Hay is very ill; and the work is at a
standstill.

The mail steamer _Bonny_ arrived on August 19th under the command
of Captain Dyson, who had shown Miss Thomas and Miss Comber so much
kindness on their voyage out from Liverpool. Captain Dyson was amazed
and delighted to find his young friend looking so well—better than when
she left England, though perceptibly thinner. Mr. and Mrs. Buckenham
were with Captain Dyson, and they all spent a day at the Mission. Miss
Saker was placed in the Captain’s boat, in a bed, and carried aboard the
_Bonny_, and the homeward voyage was commenced.

While at sea Miss Thomas herself fell ill, and was constrained to go
much further than she intended, even to Madeira. Misadventures retard
her return, and on October 29th she is still at sea, and dates from the
“ss. _Congo_, between Akassa and Bonny.” Her letter will return from
the Cameroons by the mail ship on which she writes. She is quite a good
sailor now; never feels sick, and can take her constitutional, however
badly the ship may be rolling. But her mind is gravely exercised by
grievous thoughts of the long interruption of her work, and the heavy
expense to the Society, which this voyage entails. She is dreading to
hear from the Mission House lest the official letter may convey rebuke,
and Mr. Baynes may be vexed by action on her part which may seem to be
ill advised. A vain fear, at the recollection of which she would smile in
later years, when she came to know how warm was Mr. Baynes’s friendship
for her, and how from earliest days his insight into character had taught
him to place implicit reliance upon her good feeling and her good sense.
Meanwhile she adds grimly: “I’ll never come bringing invalids home
again”—the mere voice of a mood which sympathy will know how to interpret.

While writing this letter her thoughts turn to Christmas. At the great
anniversary seasons, friends far sundered, meet in spirit, and she will
think much of dear ones at home; though on Christmas day she will be very
busy, as the school treat at Bethel will then take place. Little did
Miss Thomas realise when she wrote this down, how strange would be the
conditions in which that treat would be held, and how little of outward
peace the birthday of the Prince of Peace would bring to the Cameroons.
The German annexation had been negotiated without the consent of certain
local rulers who were concerned, and this fact bred discontent which
ultimately fomented insurrection and internecine hostilities between the
chiefs who were aggrieved. For an account of the general aspect of the
German troubles the reader is referred to Note A at the end of the book.
The volcanic upheaval came at the close of the year, and the following
graphic letter gives the personal experiences of Miss Thomas, and affords
an early disclosure of the heroic material of which she was made:—

                                               “BETHEL STATION,
                                               “_December 16, 1884._

    “MY DEAREST MOTHER,—I am afraid you will get short letters from
    me this time. The mail is due in two days, I have not a line
    written yet, and I am so busy this week. I had a most pleasant
    time at Victoria, and when Mr. Comber went [who had called at
    Victoria on his way home from Congo], Mr. Lewis came to fetch
    me back. By the by, he told me some time ago to give his kind
    regards to you and to say that he had heard much about you, and
    hoped some day to make your acquaintance. The little steamer
    did not come, so I was forced to return in the boat. The voyage
    was rather long, but we arrived none the worse for it. The
    fact was I slept nearly all the way. We were very naughty at
    Victoria and used to stay up very late talking. Not having seen
    one another for so long, we had heaps to say. I left Carrie
    well, and also John Pinnock.

    “The river here is in a most unsettled state. There is fighting
    all round us, but it has not come to our town yet. It is all in
    consequence of the German occupation, and the Germans encourage
    it. To-day Bell Town has been burnt down. I am now expecting
    Mr. Lewis to tea, so shall hear all about it. Two men were put
    to death there this morning, and one at Hickory yesterday.
    Jibarri was burnt down on Monday. The native teacher has fled,
    and the place is deserted. Firing is constantly going on, and
    war canoes are passing up and down the river. Do not be alarmed
    for me. We are quite safe, and the trouble has not affected our
    people yet.

    “It seems so strange to think that Christmas is so near, I
    can hardly believe it. We are having fine hot weather, though
    the rains have not entirely ceased. Our school examinations
    are in course this week, and on Thursday we hold a public
    examination in the chapel. I must tell you about it next time.
    Our treat is fixed for Friday, and other treats are to be held
    at other stations during next week. Of course it entails work
    in looking out prizes, presents, &c., and on Friday Mr. Lewis
    is going to show the magic lantern. The children have come
    out pretty well in the examinations. Of course the subjects
    are elementary: writing, reading, spelling, dictation, sums,
    tables, needlework, and recitation of hymns.

    “December 22, 1884. Since writing the foregoing so much has
    happened that will be interesting to all my friends that I beg
    you to let Mr. Tucker see this letter, and any others who may
    desire, for I cannot write a second, I have so much to tell.
    I have already told you of the unsettled state of the river.
    On Friday last (this is Monday) we heard that there were two
    German warships at the Bar, and on Saturday morning two small
    steamers came up the river towing boatloads of soldiers.
    Without giving any notice, they steamed up to Hickory Town,
    firing at every canoe on their way, landed men at Hickory, who
    set fire to the town while their comrades kept up a fusillade
    from the boats. Epea was down here and afraid to return. But
    his wife and children were at Hickory, so Mr. Silvey went up
    with him immediately, and sent Mrs. Epea and the children down
    to us, remaining himself with Epea. He found that Mr. Schmidt
    (of the German House) had saved our Mission House, but the
    chapel and schoolroom were burnt to the ground. (By this time
    the house is burnt also. The people have all fled to the bush,
    and the town is destroyed.) When Mr. Silvey returned he brought
    with him about fifty people, whom we managed to sleep as best
    we could, some in our house and some in the school-house. In
    the meantime the Germans steamed down the river and attacked
    Joss Town, which adjoins Bell Town. There they met with most
    determined resistance, and at first were driven back, forty-one
    of their soldiers being killed. The Joss people also went to
    Schmidt’s beach, dragged out Mr. Hammer (the clerk in charge)
    took him into the bush and killed him. The fighting went on
    for hours. Mr. Lewis could not leave, having no boat; and he
    and his two boys had to turn up the table and lie behind it,
    as the bullets were flying through the house; one passed close
    to his ear. He did not reach us until 5 p.m., when the tide
    went down, and he could walk along the beach, having had a very
    narrow escape. Of course all this time I was alone here and
    very anxious about Mr. Silvey and Mr. Lewis. At the first sound
    of firing the people came rushing to the Mission House being
    terribly frightened, as both the towns involved in the trouble
    are so close that we could see them burning. The firing was
    going on all around, and a gunboat was passing up and down in
    front of this town, firing on the beach. One of the white men
    was wounded, and had to be carried to Buchan’s ship. Of course
    we did not know what was going to happen next. The house was
    crowded with people, and I did my best to quiet them, but with
    no great success.

    “Yesterday we were hoping for a quiet day. We held a
    prayer-meeting in the morning instead of the service, and had
    Sunday School as usual. But shortly after our return home,
    the Mission premises were surrounded by hundreds of German
    soldiers who commenced searching for Hickory and Joss people.
    Our houses were full of people, but they were not those whom
    the Germans wanted. Yet they persisted in believing that we
    were hiding their enemies. They searched every nook and corner
    of Mr. Silvey’s house, and of mine, walking about with loaded
    revolvers in their hands, with which they threatened Mr.
    Silvey and Mr. Lewis. They were a little more polite to me. My
    house was full of women and children, who were so frightened
    that they begged me not to leave them even to go into the next
    room. The Germans then compelled Mr. Lewis to go with them to
    Bell Town that they might search the house there, which is
    completely ruined, all his work there having gone for nothing.
    Bethel Station only is left now, there being neither buildings
    nor people at the others. Yesterday the Germans sent round a
    proclamation saying that any persons who directly or indirectly
    help the disaffected people will be treated as enemies and
    banished. This morning one of the warships came up the river
    and threw shells into Hickory, completing the ruin. It does
    seem dreadful that all this cruel work should be done by
    people calling themselves Christians. You may imagine that it
    has been, and is, a very anxious time for us all. But we have
    great cause for thankfulness, as we are all well. I am only
    afraid this news will reach you before our letters and cause
    anxiety on our behalf. What will be the result to the Mission
    we cannot tell. We hear that the Basle Mission are coming. (It
    is the best Mission on the coast.) In that case I suppose our
    Mission will give up the work. It does seem a pity. But it will
    require a large staff to do any good, so much building will be
    necessary. I am especially sorry about Hickory. It was such
    a nice little station, and had the best of our chapels. How
    strange that these things should be permitted. But the work is
    God’s, and we must leave it in His hands. The worst thing about
    the Germans is their manner of treating the people. Morgan,
    the pilot, is one of our best men, a very superior person.
    They put a rope round his neck, and told him they would hang
    him if he did not bring the man-of-war properly up the river.
    The people are full of comparisons between the English and the
    Germans, but little complimentary to the latter.

    “Now I will turn to a more pleasant subject. Last Thursday we
    held a public examination of our schools in the chapel, and
    invited parents and friends. The children behaved nicely, sang,
    recited, and were examined in tables and spelling. Mr. Lewis
    presided and gave the prizes, which consisted of work-boxes,
    desks, books, shirts, &c. Then on Friday we held our treat,
    and had a fine time. My arms are still stiff from the effects
    of it. We began, in the morning, to cut up the pork, which I
    had cooked the previous day. It took me and two of my boys
    more than an hour to do this, and it was hot work. Meanwhile
    two of the women were cooking the rice in the yard, while Mrs.
    Williams made the fish soup in her house. The soup and the rice
    were then put into baths and carried into the chapel. When
    all was ready, and two tables covered with toys for ‘dashes,’
    the children were let in. Each brought a plate or something
    equivalent (in many instances a wash-basin or old vegetable
    dish). Some brought spoons, but the majority were content with
    their fingers. Mr. Lewis, Mr. Silvey and I did ‘the helping,’
    while some of the women and big boys ‘waited.’ You should have
    heard the noise! When they had eaten as much as they could,
    each one received a toy, and they were sent out to play.
    Meanwhile we cleared up the fragments and came home to rest
    and have dinner. After dinner we went out to join their games,
    and were soon hard at work. The play included races, racing in
    sacks, blind-man’s-buff, round the mulberry bush, orange and
    lemons, &c. You may imagine that it was rather hot work. Then
    about five o’clock we set them scrambling for sweets and nuts,
    and having given to each one a packet of sweets, we came in to
    our tea. After tea, as soon as it was dark, the magic-lantern
    sheet was put up, outside the big house, and Mr. Lewis showed
    the pictures to a very large audience. Indeed, most of the
    townspeople turned out. They behaved very well, and thoroughly
    enjoyed the exhibition. When the pictures were finished we
    sang, “I think when I read that sweet story of old,” which
    was thrown upon the screen, and so brought to an end a very
    pleasant, though very tiring day. Everything went off well, and
    those concerned departed having thoroughly enjoyed themselves.
    Of course all the other treats are stopped by this horrid
    fighting; but I am glad we held ours when we did.

                                                   “_December 24th._

    “I have written the latter part of this letter separately, so
    that you may lend it. Mr. Lewis and Mr. Silvey are writing
    to Mr. Baynes so that he will know all about the trouble. I
    should be glad if you could copy my account and send it to Mrs.
    Seymour.

    “A little branch steamer has just come up the river, and will
    take letters early to-morrow morning. The _Benguela_ came to
    the Bar a few days ago, but could not get up river on account
    of the fighting. I am so disappointed at getting no Christmas
    letters, and so are we all. We hear that the English Consul
    and a British man-of-war are coming to-morrow. The pilot has
    gone down to bring her up. I hope the Germans will have to pay
    for what they have done. Our people are all in panic, and are
    running away as fast as they can, some to Victoria and others
    to the bush. Half the town is deserted.

    “I shall be thinking of you all to-morrow. Of course Mr.
    Silvey, Mr. Lewis, and I are going to spend the day together.
    We have had a goat killed, and I shall have one of Morton’s
    puddings. I would have made one but we cannot get suet, and
    eggs are very scarce just now. If all is well, we shall have a
    merry evening with our house-children. But I expect there will
    be great excitement as soon as the Consul comes, so I cannot
    really tell what we shall do. You must please give my love to
    my sister, and to any kind friends who may ask after me. I am
    sure they will excuse my not writing when they hear the cause.

    “Yesterday we went to Bell Town. It is a complete ruin, and not
    a person was to be seen. Hickory is even worse, I believe, if
    that be possible. Well, I must finish now as it is bedtime. And
    with very much love to all,

                                 “I am,

                            “Yours lovingly,

                                                             “GWEN.”

    “PS.—I forgot to say that I am quite well; never felt better in
    my life. If you should see Miss Saker, please tell her all, as
    I cannot write to her now. I do not understand not hearing from
    any of you by this mail. I only had two letters, one from Miss
    Saker, and one from Miss Phillips. I did want some Christmas
    letters. I suppose I shall not get them now for another month,
    and we are all in the same box.

    “I am sure if any of you want adventures, you had better come
    to Africa. I have had enough in eight months to last for some
    time.”




CHAPTER IV

ORANGE BLOSSOMS AND _IMMORTELLES_. 1885


At this period a strong friendship was formed between Mr. Lewis and Miss
Thomas which made for joy and strength in both their lives. It could
hardly have been otherwise. They were kindred spirits and were much
thrown together in experiences which taxed and tested the best that was
in them; and each was conscious that the other had endured the testing
well. Labour, sickness, peril had proved them, under intimate mutual
observation, to be tireless in service, patient in pain, and endowed
with high courage. Compelled by the exigencies of their lot, they had in
turn nursed each other through long days and nights of heavy sickness,
when the angel of death seemed to hover at the door in indecision. They
had passed through scenes of panic without display of fear. In tedious
hours of convalescence they had exchanged confidences; the woman had
spoken of her dear transfigured sorrow, and the man had spoken of those
tender hopes which, in the winter of desolation, made music of spring
within his heart. So they became as brother and sister, and enjoyed high
friendship, serene and unperplexed by such sentiment as the order of
their lives disallowed. That this is all true is amply proved by the
joyous, sisterly interest which Miss Thomas took in the anticipations of
Mr. Lewis’s marriage, by her part in the celebration of the event, and by
her unfeigned sorrow in the pathetic sequel; all which things her letters
most artlessly record.

But in addition to her high spirits, sober saintliness, and heroic
courage, Miss Thomas was endowed with a full share of common sense. She
was woman of the world enough to be aware that a young wife might not
regard with perfect complacency such close comradeship as she and Mr.
Lewis had enjoyed, and wisely prepared herself for some diminution of
friendly intercourse, with ensuing access of loneliness. Happily this
forecast of worldly wisdom was proved to be superfluous. Of course Miss
Phillips had heard all about the friendship, and when she came, in the
trustfulness of perfect love which casteth out fear, she straightway took
Miss Thomas to her heart, claimed her as a sister, and enriched her life
with that mystic gold which is incorruptible, getting back as much again
in sweet commerce which flourished more and more through all the hurrying
days of their brief friendship, even until its latest hour. This also
Miss Thomas has movingly set down, as will presently appear.

It must be confessed that this chapter is concerned with other matters
than a wedding and a funeral, but at this stage these two events have
assumed a certain dominant interest in my mind, as the title indicates,
and herein I expect to secure the sympathy of the reader.

The events recorded in the previous chapter had left the future of the
English Mission at the Cameroons in grave uncertainty. Meanwhile the
Baptist Missionary Society made representations to the German Government,
protesting against the arbitrary and unjust behaviour of its agents,
and demanding compensation for the destruction of its property; which
compensation was never received. Pending unknown providential issues the
work was continued as far as possible on the old lines. In January, 1885,
Mr. Silvey returned to England, and Mr. Lewis and Miss Thomas were left
alone in charge of the Mission at Bethel Station. Mr. Silvey was sorely
missed, especially in the educational work. He had proved, as Miss Thomas
testifies, “a capital schoolmaster,” and his departure necessitated new
arrangements which added to her burdens. She took charge of his school,
besides her own three classes. John Diboll, one of the native teachers,
managed the Lower School, and Alfred Bell, the Infants. Miss Thomas
ascribes her slow progress in Dualla to the fact that all her teaching
was done in English. This pleased the people well, who were eager to
obtain efficiency in the use of our tongue, and had complained that Miss
Saker taught in Dualla. Miss Thomas wishes that she were able to incur
the same criticism.

In a letter to Mrs. Hartland, which Mr. Silvey carried with him and
posted in England, Miss Thomas writes: “It seems ages since I left
England. I feel as though I had been in Africa all my life; and it is not
so strange as I anticipated. I suppose and hope that our next excitement
will be the arrival of Miss Phillips. I hear that Mrs. Lyall is coming
with her, to see her husband’s grave, and then is going to labour as a
missionary [at Calabar].”

The hoped-for excitement was long delayed. At the end of March Miss
Thomas wrote again to Mrs. Hartland: “Mr. Lewis tells me to send his love
to you, we often talk about you and about dear John, and he tells me all
about his ‘intended.’ Poor man, he will be disappointed this mail again,
for we hear she is not coming out until the next. It really is too bad as
there have been plenty of opportunities lately. He says I cheer him up.
I do my best, and he is not low-spirited at all. But it is very trying
for him, and for her too. We have just had a visit from Mr. and Mrs. Hay.
They came quite unexpectedly on their way back from Calabar, and stayed
from Friday till Tuesday. They were both fairly well.... I am wondering
whom you will get for pastor. How strange it must seem without dear Mr.
Tucker! Give him my love if you ever see him.”

Late in April Miss Thomas records that she has been suffering from
bilious fevers, and her friends must not be surprised by news of her
return. Change is recommended, but she feels, in the circumstances of the
Mission, it would be absurd to incur the expense of a trip south. The
coming of the wet season, however, has brought hope of better health.
Mr. Lewis has also suffered much from fever, but has patched himself up
by going out in his boat. They are growing weary of awaiting the arrival
of Miss Phillips and Mr. Fuller. If she does not come soon, it will
scarcely be worth while for her to come at all, as Mr. Lewis’s return
cannot be long postponed. Meanwhile they are both reasonably well, but
the school work has suffered damage through their illness. Some Victoria
people, arriving from the Congo, have brought the heavy news that three
more missionaries have succumbed, and Miss Thomas wonders whether these
casualties are due to the deadliness of the climate or to want of due
care on the part of the victims. The letter continues:—

“The Sunday before last we had a baptism of nine converts here. I was so
sorry to be in bed and unable to be present at the service. The work is
very promising, I think, especially considering the many drawbacks it has
had to contend with. Whatever society comes here after us will have a
fine field to work in. Sometimes I can’t help wondering if it would not
have been better to develope the work from here, with a good base station
ready established, and native teachers to hand, than to begin the new
work on the Congo. But, however, that is done, and I suppose the days of
this Mission are numbered, as far as we are concerned.”

On May 13th Mr. Lewis wrote to Mrs. Hartland, at the request of Miss
Thomas, to explain her own silence. She is recovering from another severe
attack of bilious fever. When she fell ill Mr. Lewis was himself in bed;
but the next day he was able to attend her. She is better, but not well
enough to write. He proceeds: “We are now looking forward to the arrival
of Mr. and Mrs. Fuller, and I venture to hope that Miss Phillips will
accompany them. We have had no definite news.

“You will have heard of the death of Mrs. Buckenham of Fernando Po. Mr.
Buckenham brought her here on board the _Volta_ three weeks ago, hoping
she would get better. She could not come ashore, and died on the ship.
Her remains are now lying in our graveyard, where she was buried the
next day. Poor Mr. Buckenham has gone home in the _Benguela_. Things
here are much as usual. The Germans are fairly quiet; but the natives
are profoundly unsettled, and we do not know what they will do. A large
number of them are in the bush; the rainy season is coming on, and they
will be homeless. This is hard.

“We heard from Victoria yesterday, and the friends there are well. It
is very evident that the Committee intend to relinquish this Mission.
It is a great pity, and yet I believe it to be the best course. I have
heard that the authorities are going to compel the teaching of German in
our schools. I confess I would rather leave at once than Germanise these
people. However, we trust that all will be for the best in the end.”

The year wore on with its round of duties varied by intervals of
suffering—school-work, nursing, fevers—and the long-looked-for arrival
of Miss Phillips was still in anticipation. At the end of August,
however, it was known at Cameroons that she had sailed in the _Lualaba_,
accompanied, not by Mr. and Mrs. Fuller, but by Mr. Comber, and a band
of young missionaries, including his own brother Percy, whom he was
joyously convoying to the Congo. And here I must interrupt the story
for a moment to introduce the following significant little letter. It
was addressed by Miss Thomas to her three nieces, the daughters of her
sister, Mrs. Percival.

                                         “BETHEL STATION, CAMEROONS.
                                         “_August 29, 1885._

    “MY DEAR ETHEL, EVA AND BEATRICE,—I have written to Ethel
    already, but when I received your mother’s letter, with the
    good news it contained, I felt I must write to you, if only
    a few lines, to tell you how very glad I am to hear that all
    three of you have learnt to love the dear Saviour, and have
    come forward to confess His Name. Although I am so far from
    you, you may be sure I often think of you and pray for you, and
    I am so glad that you have chosen the right way thus early, and
    that all your lives will be given to His service. I hope that
    you will all become very useful Christians, and that each of
    you will in time find some direct work to do for the Master.
    But after all I feel more and more convinced that it is in the
    little things of everyday life we can best show our love to Him.

    “That He may bless you all and keep you very near Himself, is
    the earnest prayer of

                           “Your loving aunt,

                                                          “GWENNIE.”

“The excitement” which was looked for as imminent in January came in
September. On the 10th news was received in Cameroons that the _Lualaba_
was due at Calabar some few days later. For the rest of this chapter I
leave the narrative to Miss Thomas, who shall tell, in her own words, of
the burst of happy sunshine, and of its sudden dire eclipse, assured that
her artless recital of the happenings, written only for the loving eyes
of friends, with no faintest dream of publication, will be immeasurably
more affecting than any studied treatment of my own.

On September 14th Miss Thomas sat down in the Mission House at Old
Calabar and commenced a letter to Mrs. Hartland, accounting at the outset
for her new address:—

“On Friday morning (this is Tuesday) the _Loanda_ came into Cameroons
with our mails, which included a letter from Mr. Comber telling Mr.
Lewis that he was to meet Miss Phillips here. Their ship would arrive
on Monday, so the only course open to him was to start off by the
_Loanda_. He was worried about leaving me alone, as the time of return
was uncertain, so I decided to accompany him and get a change. The
steamer was timed to start on Saturday, but fortunately waited until
Sunday morning, for we had invited John Pinnock for the wedding, and
arriving on Saturday night he was able to come with us. We started early
on Sunday morning, and as we were all seasick no one of us could laugh at
the others. In the afternoon we reached Fernando Po, and went on shore
to see Mr. and Mrs. Welford, who have taken the Buckenhams’ place there.
The Spanish authorities are most arbitrary. We found that they had put
Mr. Welford in prison, and that poor Mrs. Welford was sick. Of course she
was delighted to see me and I stayed with her while Mr. Lewis and John
obtained permission and went to visit her husband.”

“October 2nd. [Bethel Station, Cameroons.] So much has happened since I
wrote the above, which you will like to hear, that I think I must send
you a kind of diary, which you must please allow my sister, and any other
interested friends, to read, as I cannot write it twice. Well, just after
I had written the piece above we heard the Kroo-boys shouting, and knew
that the _Lualaba_ was coming up the river. [At Old Calabar on September
14th.] We rushed over to the Ludwigs to tell them, then returned, took
a hurried meal, and as a storm was coming on got into thick dresses and
mackintoshes and made haste down to the beach, where the others were
waiting for us. Very soon we were on board the _Lualaba_. Mr. Lewis made
his way to the ladies’ cabin, while I was receiving very warm greetings
from Tom and Percy Comber. Then I was introduced to the others, and was
very pleased to see such a nice band of young men, for they all seem
nice. I do trust they may have good health. Then I went in to see Miss
Phillips, with whom I felt at home immediately. We all went on shore
together, took tea, inspected the Mission premises, and called on Mrs.
Beadie, who was ill. We finished up the evening at Mrs. Ludwig’s. Miss
Phillips stayed with me, and we slept together. Unfortunately I got fever
in the night, which put an end to my going about. The next day we were
to visit Creek Town, but Mrs. Lyall very kindly remained at home to look
after me, and the next day also.

“I was much amused to have all the young missionaries coming in to see
what African fever was like. Of course Percy was as playful as ever, and
wanted to take my temperature about every half-hour. On Friday morning
I was a little better, but still in bed, and the _Redland_, a small
steamer, was timed to start for the Cameroons. So there was a grand
discussion as to what was to be done with me. Mr. Lewis could not remain
away any longer, but we did not like Miss Phillips to go on alone with
him and John Pinnock, knowing what a place this is for talk. I begged
to be allowed to return with them, so Mr. Lewis sent for Mr. Comber,
and left him to decide. At first he would not hear of my going, but
ultimately it was settled that I should do so, as Mrs. Lyall was willing
to go too. So I was carried down to the beach in a hammock, Mr. Comber
coming to see us off. At night a tornado broke upon us and Mrs. Lyall and
I were very seasick. Miss Phillips kept well, and by the time we reached
Cameroons we were all right. I have had no fever since.

“We received a very warm welcome from the people, who were full of
curiosity to see ‘Mrs. Lewis.’ The next day was Sunday, and we rested
quietly. On Monday Mr. Lewis went to make arrangements for the wedding,
which had been fixed for the following day, but found that according
to the German law three days’ notice must be given to all the white
residents, which necessitated the postponement of the event until
Saturday.... On Tuesday we all went to the Governor’s, as we were to be
witnesses of the marriage. The authorities are very particular. Mrs.
Lyall had to declare that she knew Miss Phillips had been sent out by
the Society, and we were minutely questioned as to our names, ages,
birthplaces, professions, and so on.

“On Wednesday we gave all our house children (and ourselves too) a treat
by taking them for a picnic to Didumbari beach.”

There follows an account of the picnic, piquant and diverting enough, but
too long to be inserted here. Thursday was a quiet day, but on Friday
everybody concerned was cumbered with much serving in preparation for the
long-looked-for rejoicing. The narrative continues:—

    “We were determined to have as nice and home-like a wedding as
    was possible in our circumstances. To avoid work upon _the day_
    a cold breakfast was arranged. On Saturday the weather was most
    kind. The sun shone brightly, and everything looked beautiful.
    The marriage took place at Bethel Chapel at half-past nine.
    Miss Phillips, who looked charming in her bridal attire, wore
    a cream satin dress, very simply made, and a white hat trimmed
    with lace. A long spray of real orange-blossom encircled her
    neck, and she carried a bouquet of blue and white flowers
    culled from our garden. I wore my embroidered tussore, with the
    hat you sent out; and Mrs. Lyall, who acted as mother and gave
    her away, a thin black silk, with hat to match. The children
    all had new dresses, and each carried a new handkerchief, in
    which was tied up as much rice as it would hold. John performed
    the ceremony, and all the way home the happy pair were well
    pelted with rice. The breakfast was laid in my house, and the
    table really looked quite pretty with abundance of flowers,
    and the cake, decorated with ferns, which Mrs. Lyall had
    brought with her.

    “Later in the day we went off in the boat to attend the civil
    marriage, and you would have laughed to see the undignified
    manner in which the bride and bride’s-maids secured their
    places. The tide was far out, and we were handed about from
    one man to another as if we were babies in long clothes. We
    called for Dr. Allen on our way, as he was to be one of the
    witnesses. When we arrived at Government House, we found the
    Governor (Baron Von Soden) and his secretary awaiting us in
    full uniform. We sat round a table, and when all the recorded
    particulars had been read over the bride and bridegroom were
    required to answer the question whether they really intended to
    contract matrimony by ‘a loud and distinct “yes”.’ Thereupon
    the Governor pronounced them to be ‘husbands together,’ which
    very nearly upset my gravity. He was translating as he went
    along. After the business was over, we were invited into the
    piazza, and the Governor brought out champagne to drink their
    healths.

    “When our boat had started out for the marriage, the German
    House hoisted all their flags, an example which all the other
    traders followed, so that as we returned the river was gay with
    bunting, and all the flags were dipped in salute, before being
    taken down. I thought this very nice. Great interest was being
    shown in consequence of this being the first marriage of a
    white man in the river. The Germans were specially pleased that
    it was solemnised by German law. In coming back we had our
    single misfortune. One of the Kroo-boys who was carrying Mrs.
    Lyall slipped and dropped her into the water. Happily she took
    no harm, and only had to change her clothes and iron out her
    dress. Dr. Allen came to tea. Later we all went into the big
    house, and after supper and a chat Mrs. Lyall and I came back,
    leaving the bride in her new home. John Pinnock had to start
    for Victoria in the afternoon.

    “Mrs. Lewis is so jolly and nice, I wish you had seen her. Mrs.
    Lyall returned to Calabar on Monday. She was much pleased with
    the Mission here and enjoyed her stay greatly. She said that
    prior to coming here she had not had a laugh since she came to
    Africa. She had plenty here, for we are a very merry party, I
    assure you. Since the wedding, we have settled down. I began
    school again on Tuesday. Last week we gave holiday in honour
    of the great event. Things are very happy here now, and we are
    just like one family. I go into the next house for dinner, and
    we always have tea together, taking turns. I am so glad Mrs.
    Lewis is so nice, for Mr. Lewis and I are exactly like brother
    and sister, and now I seem to have a sister, too. I have been
    wonderfully fortunate in having such kind friends, so that
    really I never feel lonely.... Two of my girls have gone to
    Mrs. Lewis. I have taken two new ones, and another is to come
    on Saturday. I really cannot take any more, as that will make
    fourteen. I wish I had a bigger house and room for a lot more.
    Many are begging to come. I was so glad to hear of you all from
    Tom Comber, but so sorry to hear that dear Mr. Tucker has lost
    his wife. He will miss her dreadfully. They always seemed so
    fond of each other. I think I must finish up now, with heaps of
    love to Lily, Alice, Mr. Hartland and yourself, from

                          “Yours lovingly,

                                                             “GWEN.”

Before the honeymoon was over the young bride had passed on to the
Father’s house, with its many mansions, and its prepared place.

On October 27th Miss Thomas wrote again to Mrs. Hartland: “This letter
I mean for my sister as well. I cannot write all I wish to say twice
over. I hardly know how to tell you the news, it is so sad, so sudden,
so unexpected. Dear Mrs. Lewis has gone to a better home than that which
we had prepared for her. She passed away at about 5 p.m. this day week,
Tuesday, 20th. I told you in my last letter how bright and merry she was,
and how pleased with everything. We were so happy all together, just like
one family. Breakfast was the only meal we took separately. I was as a
sister to them in everything, and we were making plans for future work,
so that we might not be separated. But as Grenfell said about dear John,
‘man proposes, but God disposes,’ and His ways are not our ways. Janie
seemed so suitable to be a missionary’s wife, and was just getting into
our African ways, beginning to understand the children in the house,
taking a class in the Sunday School, coming to school once in the week
with me, and helping me with the sewing at home.

“On Saturday, 17th, we went up the river to Jibarri with Mr. Lewis and
Dibundu, who, after examining six candidates, baptized them in the river.
We then sat down to the Lord’s Supper together. I do not think I ever
enjoyed that solemn service more, although it was conducted in Dualla. It
was so simple. There were only twenty-six present, in all; no communion
plate, but just the common things we had with us. It was indeed a happy,
holy time. And that was the last meal we took together.

“When we returned home I went to get tea, and coming back in a few
minutes found Mrs. Lewis in fever. Of course I took her into her own
house at once, and put her to bed in blankets; and from that time, until
she died, she was never left without her husband or me. On Sunday her
temperature fell to 101°, but rose later, and we could not bring it down
again.... Still we were not alarmed, for the first fever is often very
severe, as my own experience had proved. She had a bad night on Monday,
and spoke then about dying, but on Tuesday morning seemed better. About 1
p.m. John Pinnock arrived unexpectedly from Victoria. She was so pleased
to see him, and after talking a little said she thought she could sleep
if we would all leave her, which we did. But very soon she felt the fever
coming on again, and called her husband, and he put her into blankets.
After dinner I went to sit with her, and about half-past three she said:
‘Gwen, I wish you would call Tom.’ I started to do so, but came back and
said: ‘Are you getting low-hearted?’ She said: ‘No, but I don’t think
I shall get over this, do you?’ I told her that I really thought she
might, but would let her know if I came to think otherwise. Whereupon she
said: ‘Very well, I won’t worry Tom by telling him.’ However, I took her
temperature, and finding it to be 106·8°, I called Mr. Lewis, and told
him what she had said. I then went to get her a cup of tea, and left them
together.

“After my return she said: ‘I should have liked to live for your sake,
Tom, and for mother and Katie, but I am not afraid and shall be happier
_there_.’ She also said: ‘You will give Gwen my wedding brooch, won’t
you?’ Soon after she became delirious, but still recognised us, turning
from one to the other, and calling us by name. Just then Dr. Allen came
to the beach, and she fell into a kind of coma, but while I had gone to
meet him she roused again and said a few precious words to her husband.
When we came into the room she was quite unconscious. Everything possible
was done, but all was unavailing, and she passed away at five o’clock.
Dr. Allen, who was very kind and attentive, says he never knew of such a
case before.... She was very anxious that the friends at home should know
that she had been _so_ happy, and never regretted coming to Africa.

“We buried her the next morning, John Pinnock officiating, as he had done
at the wedding three weeks earlier. His coming was providential. I think
he was sent, for there was nothing very special to bring him, and his
presence was a great comfort just then. We put the orange-blossoms in her
coffin, and made a wreath from our garden. Afterwards, one of the German
traders sent a beautiful wreath for the grave. We had a simple service
in the chapel, which began with the singing of “Rock of Ages.” Then John
read parts of 1 Cor. xv., and Rev. vii., and offered prayer. After this
the first class schoolboys carried her to the grave, and we sang, ‘Hear
what the voice from heaven proclaims.’ Then John concluded with prayer,
and we left her to rest beside Mrs. Buckenham.

“It all seems like a dream. Her poor husband! It is terrible for him,
but he bears it so bravely and patiently. I never knew any one else so
patient. I am very thankful to have been here. We have been packing some
of her things to send home. Many of her presents had been scarcely looked
at, and most of her dresses were never worn. I feel so for her friends at
home. This is the second child they have lost abroad, and she was very
anxious about her mother’s health. I know how you will all sympathise
with them and with us here. It has brought back so vividly to me all the
sad time when dear John died.... I had grown so fond of her, and she
was so kind to me. She brought me a beautiful little present, always
called Mr. Lewis my brother; and however much we had been together in the
daytime, they never failed to walk in about eight o’clock, saying, ‘We
have come to say good-night to our sister.’ You will understand what a
blow this has been to me, yet I am thankful to be keeping so well.

“I can’t think what they are going to do about sending some one to
relieve us. Mr. Silvey does not mention returning, and Mr. Fuller says
he sees no hope of it yet. Mr. Lewis will have been out three years in
February, and has written saying he wishes to go home; and although I am
anxious to remain as long as possible, I do not think it would be wise to
stay too long, as I have had so many shocks since I came. Do not be too
anxious about me, dears. I really take every care, and try to do my work
quietly, having quite given up the rushing-about system, and in spite of
everything am happy and content. I know you will pray for us that we may
be strengthened and helped in the work here, and for poor Mr. Lewis that
God may continue to help and comfort him.”




CHAPTER V

RETURN, MARRIAGE, AND JOURNEY TO CONGO. 1885-1887


No woman could pass through such experiences as had befallen Miss Thomas
in Africa without incurring physical and mental strain which would render
a prolonged stay perilous to life. Her recall was wisely determined upon,
and in the middle of November she wrote to Mrs. Hartland of her return
as decreed and imminent. On January 12, 1886, Mrs. Hartland wrote to Mr.
Baynes requesting to be informed of the date of Miss Thomas’s arrival.
Mr. Baynes was absent in Liverpool, but immediately upon his return
replied that he had made inquiries of the secretary of the African Mail
Company, and learned that the _Ambriz_ had been telegraphed from Madeira,
“All well,” but would not be in Liverpool for another week. Mr. Baynes
also acknowledged the receipt of a letter from Mr. Lewis, enclosed by
Mrs. Hartland, conveying the sad news of the death of Mrs. Wright Hay
(formerly Miss Comber), following the birth of her child. It was the
first intimation which had reached the Mission House, and Mr. Baynes
says: “My colleague, Mr. Myers, communicated the sad intelligence to Mr.
Comber within an hour of the receipt of your letter.” He adds: “May the
Lord comfort and sustain Mr. Hay, and the sorrow-stricken family at home.”

Upon her return to England Miss Thomas commenced to keep a diary, as
thousands of other young women have done at certain interesting periods
of their lives. The note of distinction in her case is, that she
continued to do what she had resolved to do. So it comes to pass that I
have nearly a score of volumes of her journals about me as I write. The
diary commences with the following entry:—

“Sunday, January 24th.—Arrived at Liverpool. Came to London by 11.30
train. Got to Hartland’s about five o’clock. Stayed all night. Had
bilious attack. E. Jane [her sister, Mrs. Percival] and the children came
to see me. They all look well.”

The first entry is typical, and for a year or two the diary amounts to
no more than the barest indication of daily engagements. Sometimes the
record is a single word, as, for instance, “Indoors.” Indeed, there were
many days upon which the “awful cold” of the London winter made going
out impracticable for one who had just come from the tropics. In later
years the little pocket diary was succeeded by a bulkier volume, and the
account of the day’s proceedings was more extended.

It was at this time that I became acquainted with Miss Thomas, and the
reader will appreciate the touch of anxiety with which I turned to the
next Sunday’s record, expecting to find some hint of her impressions
of the new minister. For it was only two months earlier that I had
succeeded the Rev. Francis Tucker, whom she loved so well, in the
pastorate of Camden Road Church. Our friendship grew with the years, but
I am grateful to know that my friend thought kindly of me from the first.

“Sunday, January 31st.—Went to Camden in the morning. Heard Mr. Hawker.
Like him very much. Emma came in the afternoon, and Alice H. [Hartland]
came to supper.”

Mrs. Percival’s residence, in which Miss Thomas found her temporary
home, was but little distant from the church, and she attended many
meetings and paid and received many visits, in which former associations
were renewed and old friendships deepened. At an early date Miss Saker
called and remained until the next day. The journal credibly relates
that the writer and her guest “kept awake talking for long time.” In
March Miss Thomas received a proposal of marriage, by letter. Her answer,
declining it, was written on the morrow. During the spring and summer she
frequently visited at her uncle’s house in Harrow, and once or twice made
a lengthened stay. In April she went to Haverfordwest, to be the dear
and welcome guest of Mr. and Mrs. Phillips, the parents of the late Mrs.
Lewis; and while she was there Mr. Lewis arrived. The happiness of her
visit to Wales was marred by illness. Both guests suffered from serious
attacks of African fever, but were tenderly cared for by the friends of
the girl-bride, whose passing away had involved them all in one great
common sorrow. For Miss Thomas the visit lasted three weeks.

Thereafter the references to Mr. Lewis in the journal are more frequent.
For some time, and throughout the May Meetings, which the two friends
attended with keen interest, Mr. Lewis remains “Mr. Lewis.” But before
“the merrie month” is over the entries give a hint of new conditions,
as significant as the change of pronouns in the Acts of the Apostles.
On Sunday night Miss Thomas attends Camden Road Church accompanied by
“Mr. Lewis.” On Monday morning she meets “Tom” at the Mission House,
and thereafter “Mr. Lewis” is dropped in favour of “Tom.” If Mr. Lewis
were in London instead of in Kimpese, I should endeavour to persuade
him to aid me in increasing the interest of this page. As it is, I am
constrained to depend upon the diary, and turning over the pages I find
the following pertinent records:—

“Sunday, July 4th.—Went to chapel twice. Communion in the evening. Stayed
at Hartlands’. Told them about Tom and me.”

“Sunday, July 25th.—Went to the parish church [Harrow] in the morning.
Bishop of G—— preached. Very poor sermon. Katie and Dora came to tea. I
told them of my engagement.”

“Tuesday, August 10th.—Tom saw Mr. Baynes. So glad he approves.”

Early in the year Miss Thomas arranged for a short course of practical
study at the Zenana Medical Home (or College) in St. George’s, E., of
which Dr. Griffiths was principal. She went into residence in May,
sharing a room with Miss Saker, and on Tuesday, May 25th, reported
attending her first case. Her engagements at the Home permitted
considerable freedom of movement, and she continued to visit friends and
attend services at Camden Road, Spurgeon’s Tabernacle, and elsewhere.

Affectionate solicitude for her friend Mrs. Seymour occupied much of her
time and involved many journeys across London. Mr. Seymour’s health had
been broken for some years, and in the middle of May he died. His wife’s
case was rendered the more pathetic by the fact that she was shortly
expecting the birth of her third child. Miss Thomas was with her friend
when this event occurred, some six weeks later, and it is not surprising
that an early friendship, deepened by this passage through the Vale of
Tears, held to the end. Miss Thomas’s letters to Mrs. Seymour—who, later,
became Mrs. W. C. Parkinson—would alone have supplied ample material for
a biography.

The engagement to Mr. Lewis gave the greatest satisfaction to many of
her friends, and the late summer brought happy relaxations, including
a stay at Deal. The Autumn Meetings of the Baptist Missionary Society
were held in Bristol, and Miss Thomas and Mr. Lewis were required to be
present, that, with other outgoing missionaries, they might have part in
the valedictory service. For by this time it had been arranged that after
their marriage Mr. Lewis and his bride would proceed to the Congo. In a
letter written to Miss Lily Hartland from York, where she was paying a
visit to her cousin, Miss Thomas gives a lively account of her Bristol
experiences, and the story of her first day may be quoted:—

“We arrived at noon on Tuesday, went straight to Broadmead Chapel, left
our luggage in the cloak-room there, and thence proceeded to get some
dinner, meeting a good many Welsh friends on the way. As the afternoon
sermon was to be preached in Tyndale Chapel, we set out to find it.
Bristol is built on seven hills. One of these, Clifton, seems to be
the ‘swell’ part of the town, and we found that Tyndale Chapel (Mr.
Glover’s) is at the top of it. We got there long before the time of
service, sat down against the railings, and studied the map to discover
the whereabouts of our respective places of abode. Happily they were both
fairly near, but a long way from Broadmead, where our luggage was left.
While waiting outside, we met Mr. Phillips, who was very glad to see us,
and came in with us to the service. The sermon, by Mr. Oswald Dykes, was
very good; but I was rather too sleepy to appreciate it duly, for the
chapel was packed to excess; pouring rain came on in the middle, and it
became so dark that the gas had to be lighted. Mr. Ross sat in the same
pew with us, and on coming out introduced me to his wife, whom we met
several times after; she does seem nice.

“Outside, our problem was how to meet Mrs. Robinson. I heard afterwards
that Mr. Baynes was shouting for me from the platform; but he was too
late. However, we met Mr. Brown, who undertook to be my guide, while
Tom raced down to send up the luggage. We met Mrs. Robinson with Mrs.
Frank Smith just outside the house. The Robinsons are such nice people,
evidently rich, but so very kind and friendly.

“After tea we drove down to the Colston Hall. Rain was still pouring.
As Mr. Baynes wished me to sit on the platform, I had to go to the
Committee-room. Being the only lady, I felt rather odd, especially as we
filed on to the platform in Exeter Hall style. Colston Hall is an immense
place, and was crowded as tight as could be. You will read the speeches,
so that I need not report them. The meeting was most solemn, most of all
Dr. Maclaren’s address, which I shall never forget. I was so thankful
that, though I was tired, for the day had been a very long and exciting
one, I was quite well and had no headache.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The valedictory meetings of the Baptist Missionary Society have long been
remarkable for their impressiveness. The meeting at Bristol remains among
the most remarkable. I was present, and have no doubt that its influence
would count as a constant inspiration in the lives of the departing
missionaries. The valedictory address, delivered by Dr. Maclaren, which
Mrs. Lewis affirmed that she would never forget, was a great utterance.
The speaker had reached, but had not passed, the zenith of his powers.
The occasion appealed to him, and commanded all the resources of his
genius and intensity. One sentence only I could quote from memory: “If
you want to drive a pointed piece of iron through a thick board, the
surest way to do it is to heat your skewer.” The pronunciation of the
word “skewer” was as extraordinary as the choice of it, and half achieved
the miracle of changing a mere vocable into a thing of iron, pointed and
red-hot.

I have read over again the printed report of the address, and have felt
over again the thrilling force imparted to its periods by “the sound of
a voice that is still.” The points were: “Have ever clear before you the
ultimate object of your work”; “Be enthusiasts”; “Cherish a boundless
hope in the possibilities of your work”; “Live in close communion with
your Lord.” The hearing of such an address in an emotional hour is
a biographical incident of first-rate importance, and I hold that I
shall be minding my own business in reproducing its opening and closing
passages.

“Dear Brethren and Sisters, you are here this evening probably never to
meet again till you give an account of your stewardship. A momentary
association in this hall will be followed by a wide separation to
strangely different conditions of work. As Rome’s eagles parted at the
city gates to march east, west, north, and south, pushing forward in
every quarter the boundaries of the Empire, you go forth to bear the dove
of peace farther than Rome’s eagles ever flew....

“And now, dear friends, the languages of many nations have different
forms of leave-taking. We would say to you with the Hebrew, ‘Peace be
unto you,’ the peace of conscious communion, the calm of a quiet heart,
the rest of faith, the tranquillity of submission, be ever yours. We
would say with the Greek, ‘Rejoice’ with the joy which may blossom amidst
sorrow, like the blue and delicate flowers which blossom on the very edge
of the glacier—the joy which Christ Himself has connected with keeping
His commandments, and abiding in His love, the joy of the Lord into which
faithful followers even here may enter. We would say with the Roman,
‘Be strong,’ strong with the strength of those who wait upon God, and,
therefore, mount up with wings as eagles in contemplation, who can run
without weariness in occasional spurts of severe effort, and can walk
without fainting along the monotonous dusty road of petty duties. We
would say in our own familiar English, only venturing to put it in its
enlarged and proper form, ‘God be with you!’ May He, whose presence makes
the solitary place glad as with a sudden burst of light, be always with
you. May He be with you for your wisdom and your success, for your shield
and exceeding great reward. We wish you peace, joy, strength. But our
highest wish is that which includes them and a whole universe besides:
Farewell, and God be with you.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Lewis and Miss Thomas were married in Camden Road Baptist Church, on
Wednesday, December 1, immediately prior to the opening of the Annual
Congo Sale. Under normal circumstances the Sale, which is something of
a festival, would have added brightness to the wedding. But the sky was
overclouded for Sale and wedding. It had been arranged, most naturally
and happily, that the ceremony should be performed by the Rev. Francis
Tucker, who had been the bride’s minister from her childhood, and whom
she regarded with reverent and filial affection. But when the wedding-day
came his eloquent lips had been touched by the great silence, and two
days later his coffin was carried down the aisle of the church in which
he had ministered for twenty-seven years, on its way to the grave. So it
fell to my lot to conduct the marriage service. Of course if I had known
that twenty-four years later I should be writing the biography of the
bride, I should now be able to supply a reasonably interesting account
of an hour so momentous in the life of my friend. I could not know. I
have been told that she was married from the house of her sister, Mrs.
Percival, but all that I can recall unaided is, that she was “given away”
by the Rev. John Jenkyn Brown, of Birmingham, and that Mr. Lewis went
away in my overcoat. His case was worse than mine; for whereas in his
coat I had room and to spare, in mine he was in straitened circumstances.
When he was again capable of observing matters so prosaic, he was prompt
to repair the blunder. The consequences were not serious, but rather the
reverse, for the humorous reminiscence has many times provoked laughter.

Perhaps it was well that the event should have one touch of humour,
for the atmosphere was inevitably sombre. Conscious of my own poverty
of remembrance, I consulted a friend who would be likely to help me.
She looked up her diary and found the following: “Wedding; Congo Sale;
2.30. The most dismal wedding I was ever at.” I forbore further quest of
detail, and make haste to say that if the wedding was “dismal” the union
which it celebrated was one of rare and radiant happiness which remained
unclouded till its earthly close.

The first two months of 1887 were busy with meetings, journeys, including
a tour in South Wales, and the usual necessary preparations for a long
stay abroad. On Thursday, March 3rd, a farewell meeting was held in
Camden Road Church, and on the following Wednesday, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis
sailed from Liverpool for the Congo, their particular station being as
yet undetermined.

       *       *       *       *       *

At Old Calabar they found to their great regret that they had just missed
meeting Mr. and Mrs. Grenfell, who had passed them in the ss. _Nubia_,
homeward bound. Victoria, and Bethel, Cameroons, were also visited.
Early in May, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis reached Underhill and learned that they
were to work in San Salvador. Mrs. Lewis was disappointed in her first
impressions of the Congo, the aspect of the country being oppressively
barren after the luxuriance of the Cameroons. She and her husband were
also saddened by news of more deaths. But they were eager for their work,
and on May 10th started inland for San Salvador. The remainder of this
chapter will be occupied with Mrs. Lewis’s diary of the journey.

“Tuesday, May 10, 1887.—We started from Underhill Station at 2.30.
Our men were sent on before to a town called Vunda, where they were
to pitch the tent for the night. The caravan consisted of thirty-five
carriers—eight for my hammock, six for the hammock used in turn by Mr.
Phillips and Mr. Lewis, and the rest for loads—Malevo, who was our
interpreter, Mpombolo, who was our cook, two personal boys, my Cameroon
girl Marian, and ourselves. Mr. Scrivener took us in a boat to Noki,
where we disembarked. I got into my hammock and the others followed on
foot. We soon reached the bottom of a steep hill, where Mr. Scrivener
said goodbye, and returned. It was dreadful work for the hammock-bearers
to get up this hill. Most of the time I was nearly perpendicular. They
stumbled once but did not let me down. The country here is a succession
of steep and barren hills.

“We arrived at Vunda about six o’clock, just as it was getting dark. Here
we met another caravan from San Salvador with letters from Messrs. Weeks
and Graham, reporting all well and welcoming us. The Underhill boys were
sent back, and we went on with those from San Salvador. After prayers,
we retired to bed at eight o’clock. The mosquitoes were very bad. Mr.
Phillips slept in a native house.

“Wednesday, 11th.—We got up at four-thirty and had breakfast in our tent
by candle light. The morning was very damp, but as I was wrapped up for
the journey in a waterproof sheet and had a waterproof rug for awning,
I did not get wet. It amuses the people very much to see Mr. Lewis lift
me into the hammock. The carriers object to stooping, so I am lifted in
and tucked up in rug and rainsheet. Soon after starting we encountered a
very steep hill, but as the path was wide, I was carried up comfortably
sideways. On our way we passed a market where the people all screamed
out on seeing me, ‘Mundele ankento’ (a white woman), and were delighted
when I pulled back the awning and looked out. We reached our next
camping-place, a little town with a big name, Kingonde a miezi, about 10
a.m. Here also I was an object of interest and wonder, as Mrs. Weeks was
the only white woman they had ever seen before, and she was very ill as
she passed through on her way home.

“Thursday, 12th.—We started early. The road to-day is much smoother,
and now and then we come upon pretty patches of tropical vegetation. We
have seen a great number of brilliant birds, red, with black rings about
their necks. The road being smoother, the carriers took me along at a
brisk run, and I suffered a severe shaking up. They make the most fearful
noises when running, to keep up their spirits. About 10.30 we came to a
large plateau where we were to camp for the day. There were few trees,
and it reminded me of Hampstead Heath, only it was flat. We managed to
find one tree which afforded a little shade, and sat under it until the
others came up. Mr. Phillips was suffering with a touch of fever, and had
his travelling bed set up until the tents were ready. We have Mr. Weeks’
tent which is a large one, with a small room behind in which Marian
sleeps. It was dreadfully hot all day, and we were glad to retire to our
tents. In some respects it is pleasanter to camp out than to stay in a
town. One is tired after a journey and does not desire to be stared at
for the remainder of the day.

“Friday, 13th.—Last night we were much disturbed by the carriers, who,
having no other shelter, got under the fly of our tent, and spent the
greater part of the night in telling Congo tales. After very little
sleep, we rose and had breakfast by moonlight. Mr. Phillips, still
feeling poorly, took the hammock most of the way. We crossed one or two
small streams and passed through some splendid scenery. A tree covered
with bright scarlet blossoms, and some magnificent boulders, balanced one
on another, specially attracted my attention.

“About 9 a.m. we came to a place where some women appeared with ‘chop,’
ready cooked, for sale. Although we wanted very much to get on the men
insisted on buying; so we got out of our hammocks and sat on a rock while
they took their refreshment. After making another start we reached Lombo
town. There the hammock men made a stand, determined to wait for Mr.
Lewis. At this place a kind of play is performed by which it is hoped
to frighten strangers. Men called ‘Nkimba,’ smeared all over with white
stuff, and wearing petticoats of grass, rush out, make whirring noises,
and screech horribly. However, seeing two white men, they did not come
very near to us.”

“About 11 a.m. we halted at Kiunga, a small, wretched place where the
people were exceedingly troublesome. It was some time before the tent
men arrived, and we had to sit under the eaves of a native house and
take our ‘chop.’ Having a severe headache, Mr. Phillips retired into
the native house in which he was to sleep, and lay down to rest. Mr.
Lewis fell asleep in his chair. In the meantime the chief, who was
absent when we arrived, returned. Seeing us he ran up, shook hands with
me, and having shaken up Mr. Lewis went into the house, and in spite
of the boys’ protest insisted upon waking Mr. Phillips. After this he
brought us some palm wine. It was refreshing, but I do not care for it.
Later, having fallen asleep, I was rudely awakened by some one shaking
me, and shrieking something in Portuguese. It was another man who had
just come home and was decidedly the worse for drink. Of course, I had
to smile and shake hands with him. Mr. Lewis had retired to our tent.
I followed him, but both he and Mr. Phillips had to submit to the same
process. We were all very tired, and it was very hot, but there was no
rest for us that afternoon. We were just beginning to enjoy a little
quiet, when a number of men appeared at the tent door, gesticulating and
talking loudly, several of them having obviously had too much to drink.
They spoke Portuguese, and upon sending for Lembwa we found they were
insisting that we should give them gin. It was long before we could be
rid of them. At tea-time they returned clamouring for sugar. As we were
short of that article, we put them off by allowing them to have a drink
of tea all round, which not being sweet they did not like. We were glad
when the time came for bed, though even there we had little rest, for the
mosquitoes were dreadful in spite of curtains.

“Saturday, 14th.—We started early, as usual, and left Kiunga without
regret. Hence to San Salvador the track runs mostly through long grass.
It is from twelve to twenty feet high, and so thick and strong that the
carriers had hard work to pull the hammock through. In the early mornings
the dews were so heavy that the water was running off the hammock-pole,
and Mr. Lewis and Mr. Phillips were wet to the skin. We reached Kongo
dia Ntinu about 10.30. I arrived some time before the others, alighted
from the hammock, and sat on the cushions in the shade of a house. Here
the people did not venture near me at first, but sat at a respectful
distance, staring with all their might. When our ‘chop’ box arrived we
found, on opening it, that the bottle containing butter had been broken,
and that consequently everything was bathed in oil. We managed to save a
little, but must needs take everything out, as milk, tea-leaves, butter,
and salt were well mixed together. A man here brought a queer little
animal for sale. It was quite tame and the boys declared it would make
good ‘chop.’ After some discussion, we decided that it was an ant-eater.
Mr. Phillips bought it as a pet, but since our arrival at San Salvador
it has disappeared. Kongo dia Ntinu is a clean town, and a nice native
house was placed at our service, which we found much cooler than the tent
in the afternoon. While walking in the town we came upon some splendid
lime trees growing wild and laden with fruit; also some guava trees. We
refreshed ourselves from the latter, and gathered a lot of limes to take
with us. I should have mentioned that our new pet received the honoured
name of ‘Jeremiah.’

“Sunday, 15th.—It was not considered advisable to make a halt on Sunday,
so we started as usual. The height of the grass made it impossible for
my carriers to turn, so I was carried up hills with head where my feet
ought to be, a posture which was not productive of pleasant sensations.
At the foot of one hill I had to alight to cross a small stream, and as
I happened to be ahead of the others I did not relish the prospect of
getting in again on the slope of such a steep hill, so I ventured to walk
up with the assistance of Lembwa’s climbing-stick. But my husband and Mr.
Phillips shook their heads so gravely over my imprudence that I did not
dare to repeat the exploit.

“To-day we crossed a river called the Lusu, which is bridged by a few
branches of trees, twisted and tied together. It was rather awkward, but
we took off our boots and got over safely. On this side we were detained
for some time by a long palaver about paying toll for the use of the
bridge. When this was settled the chief ‘dashed’ us a goat, for which we
returned about twice its value in cloth. We then resumed our journey.
At most of the towns they ‘dashed’ us fowls, and sometimes one of the
women would bring me something special. Just before arriving at Mongo
Kongo, where we camped to-day, we had to cross a small stream, in doing
which Mr. Lewis sat down in the middle, and was carried into camp in a
sopping condition, as his boots were off and shared the immersion. He
had to sit, minus some of his garments, wrapped up in a rug in a native
house till the man arrived with his bag. We passed through some lovely
bits of forest to-day, but the greater part is not what we understand by
‘tropical.’

“At Mongo Kongo we met a man from San Salvador, bearing a letter from Mr.
Graham, begging Mr. Phillips to come on quickly as Mr. Weeks was very
ill. So about 3 p.m. he started off taking the hammock, his personal
boys, and one or two men with bed and ‘chop’ loads; also ‘Jeremiah,’
leaving us to follow with Lembwa. Shortly after his departure a number
of people came and knelt down before our tent desiring to know why rain
had not come. It was difficult to make them understand that we were not
responsible, and as rain came plentifully the next night I fear we had
the credit of the boon.

“Monday, 16th.—On the way to-day we met some women coming to a small
market who stopped the hammock bearers and insisted on looking at me.
So I got down and submitted to inspection. They all crowded around me,
shaking hands in turn, and two of them presented me with a few pieces
of sugar-cane.... It was rather late when we reached Nkiendi our next
halting-place, and shortly after the tent was up a storm came on which
lasted about an hour.

“Tuesday, 17th.—After a wild night with mosquitoes, in the early morning
the storm returned with increased violence and continued until six
o’clock, so that we could not start till late. We soon reached the Lunda
River, where we were long delayed. The river is crossed by a curious
suspension bridge, which the natives have constructed of twisted and
plaited branches of trees. It is hung from two trees which are slightly
bent, and the getting up is a somewhat awkward proceeding, as is also
the getting down. We had to climb and walk very carefully. The Loangos
declined to take their loads across. After a lot of palavering, the loads
were undone and the Congo men carried them over. It was getting late when
the crossing was completed, but fortunately the sun was not hot, and we
were able to go on in comfort. We passed several small rivers, and one
larger one, the Lele, which was much swollen after the rain. Here we had
trouble again with the carriers. They declared they could not take me
over in the hammock, and had no idea of carrying without it, except in
their own way of carrying gentlemen. So we were in a fix, as the water
was too deep to permit me to attempt wading. Mr. Lewis was just going to
carry me himself, when two of them at last consented to return with the
hammock and take me over. We were very glad of this; for the river-beds
are full of big stones, and we might both have had a dip together. At
one place we noticed a very curious and picturesque formation of rock
which assumed the appearance of a door cut in the hill. We stopped at a
town called Kimvangi, and here the chief gave us a little goat, which
was killed in the evening. After a short rest, we went on for about
three-quarters of an hour to Lubamba, where we stayed the night.

“Wednesday, 18th.—We rose very early to-day and started at 6 a.m. sharp.
The hills in this region are steep and frequent, and we were continually
going up and down. In one place we went down into a very deep ravine. The
descent was so steep that, after making several attempts, the carriers
found themselves unable to take me down in the hammock; so I had to get
out and walk, for which I was not sorry. The way was very slippery and
foothold difficult to keep, but with the aid of Lembwa and his stick I
got safely to the bottom. After comfortably crossing several small rivers
we reached Mbanza Ngozela before 11 o’clock. Here we rested, and after
taking some refreshment, pushed on again, as it was a dull day and we
were anxious to reach San Salvador. The road was not at all monotonous
now, ascending a place as awkward as the roof of a house, then forming
a narrow path along the edge of a precipice which made me quite giddy.
There are some magnificent rocks hereabout. Leaving this region of rocks,
we traverse a wide valley and ascend a small hill to San Salvador, which
lies on high ground, where baobab-trees grow in abundance. As we neared
Kongo (San Salvador) many women came from their farms to speak to me.
We arrived at the Mission House about 1 p.m. The boys, arrayed in clean
shirts, came running out to meet us, followed by Messrs. Phillips and
Graham, who gave us a hearty welcome, as also did Mr. Weeks who was
getting better.”




CHAPTER VI

FIRST TERM AT SAN SALVADOR. 1887-1890


The commencement of Mrs. Lewis’s work at San Salvador was mercifully tame
in comparison with her adventurous beginnings at Cameroons. The Mission
was fairly established. There was a serviceable chapel, attended by a
large congregation. Work among the men and boys was well organised, and
gave promise of early harvest. Unhappily, almost immediately after the
arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Lewis, Mr. Weeks, the senior missionary of the
station, was compelled to return home. He had remained to the last limits
of endurance, and his condition gave rise to grave fears. By the mercy
of God he is still fulfilling a distinguished ministry in the service of
the Mission. In Messrs. Phillips and Graham, their remaining colleagues,
Mr. and Mrs. Lewis found fellow-workers, much to their mind, and the
friendships formed in those far back days have known no interruption but
that of death. On Friday, December 4, 1887, five candidates whose lives
and testimony yielded adequate evidence of their conversion to God, were
baptized by Mr. Lewis, and on the following Sunday a Church was formed.
The next day Mr. Graham wrote a happy letter to Mr. Baynes, containing
the following passage:—

“The names of these five you will doubtless know. They are: Matoko,
who was one of the first of Mr. Comber’s friends here; Dom Miguel, the
blacksmith; the other three are our own boys—Kivitidi, who was at first
Mr. Hartland’s boy; Nlekai, whom many of the friends will remember seeing
with Mr. Weeks in England; and Luzemba, who came up from Tunduwa to visit
his family here.

“The baptismal service was very impressive. Quite a large number of
people gathered to witness the ordinance, and both candidates and
onlookers behaved exceedingly well.

“We all felt it to be a great joy yesterday evening to sit down at the
Lord’s Table for the first time with native Christians in Congo.

“It seems rather strange that it was just twelve months on Saturday since
Mr. Phillips and I came to San Salvador. We could scarcely have hoped
that in one year we should enjoy the privilege we had yesterday.

“As we intended to organise a Church, we called together these five,
who were to be its first members, a little earlier than our usual time
for the Communion Service, that we might explain matters to them. Mr.
Phillips told them the nature and some of the principal laws of the
Church of Christ, after which we each gave them the right hand of
Christian fellowship. As it was my turn to preside at the Communion, I
said a few words on the nature of the ordinance before we proceeded to
the observance of it. It was indeed a season of hallowed joy.”

As yet there were no women converts. But from the first Mrs. Lewis
realised that she was specially called to be the teacher and evangelist
of the women and girls of San Salvador. Her efforts secured quick and
encouraging response. Some three months after her arrival the Rev. H.
Ross Phillips reports: “Here, at San Salvador, Mrs. Lewis has already
gathered a fine class of girls, and a women’s class also. Great interest
is being shown by the women in the new work, and evidently it is much
appreciated.” It may be useful to the reader if at this point I reproduce
one or two paragraphs written shortly after Mrs. Lewis’s death. They
anticipate the story, but present an outline picture, details of which
this and following chapters will supply:—

“The chapel, which also served as school, was a bamboo structure capable
of seating some 250 persons. It was well attended on Sundays, men sitting
in front and women behind; the women often chattering and inattentive,
accounting it ‘a men’s palaver.’ One day, soon after her arrival, a
woman came to Mrs. Lewis, saying that she imperfectly understood the
teaching in the chapel, and begged that she might come and be taught
privately. She was, of course, encouraged. The next week two or three
others came with her, and so began Mrs. Lewis’s women’s meeting, which,
with its developments, has ever since been one of the most important
parts of the work at San Salvador. It was all to the good that the first
inquirers were women of some distinction—indeed, wives of the King.
Their example encouraged others. Very wisely Mrs. Lewis determined
that these meetings should be as informal as possible. The teaching was
conducted in conversational fashion. Questions were welcomed and comments
solicited. The meetings were held by Mrs. Lewis in her dining-room, the
women sitting on the floor, and when the dining-room could not hold them
they overflowed into the verandah. Sometimes there were as many as fifty
present. But again, wisely, Mrs. Lewis preferred, for her special work,
the small class to the large congregation. She could get closer to ten
women than to a hundred, and so her inquirers and converts were divided
up into many classes, held on different days. As the work developed, and
the surrounding districts were reached, the women of each district had
their day, and by these means our friend became the teacher, the friend,
the confidante of hundreds of African women, who understood something of
the love of God as it came to them through her heart.

“While she was acquiring the language her work was done through an
interpreter; an intelligent, good lad, who followed her about with
absolute devotion and was always at her service. The first converts were
men. But a few months after Mrs. Lewis’s arrival at San Salvador two of
the King’s wives were baptized, and now for long years there have been
more women members than men in the Church at San Salvador. In addition to
her women’s classes, Mrs. Lewis conducted, with great success, a large
school of girls held in the chapel.

“I am indebted to Mr. Lewis for a time-table of his wife’s day’s work at
San Salvador. She rose at 7, breakfasted at 7.30, concerned herself with
domestic matters until 9, when the morning service of prayer was held.
At 9.30 she dispensed medicines to sick folk, and then came classes for
women, which lasted till one o’clock, the dinner hour, followed by an
hour’s rest and tea. From 3 to 5 the school occupied her. Once or twice
in the week there was a woman’s prayer-meeting from 5 to 6, and the
evening hours were filled with domestic duties, writing, and study. A big
day’s work for Africa.”

By a happy coincidence, on the morning of the day which I had set apart
for the composition of this chapter, the post brought me a letter from
Mrs. Graham of San Salvador. I quote certain apposite sentences. Mrs.
Graham had been asking some of the elder women to give account of their
earliest remembrances of Mrs. Lewis. “They say that when she came they
had got used to white people, and were not afraid of her, but none of the
women had come out from heathenism. Her teaching was so convincing, and
she so unwearying in her efforts to get hold of them, that they never
once doubted the truth of her message, even when threatened with death
by the King. Some of these women are still among our most consistent
members, and to this day we are reaping the fruit of the thorough
training in elementary theology which they received from her. She loved
teaching, was devoted to the women and girls, and we learnt from her wise
plans of work.”

Upon arrival at San Salvador, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis took up their residence
in the grass-house, which was available—a good enough house of its kind,
but leaving much to be desired both as to comfort and accommodation. Mr.
Lewis, like his friend George Grenfell, was a practical man, who had been
taught to work in iron, and knew, half by instinct, how to work in wood
and stone. Immediately he set himself to build a more solid, spacious
home for his wife, and on November 5, 1887, this important addition to
the Mission properties in San Salvador was completed, and Mrs. Lewis
proudly took possession of a house which afforded better facilities for
the ordered housekeeping and evangelical hospitality to which, by nature
and by grace, she was inclined.

Mr. Lewis’s “right-hand man” in this building business was his “boy”
Kivitidi. And here some particulars concerning Kivitidi, who will often
appear in the story, may be compendiously set down. He had been one
of John Hartland’s boys. From his much-loved and lamented master he
had received the seeds of truth and book-learning, and good measure of
instruction in manual work. From the first he became much attached to Mr.
Lewis, and when he was informed that Mrs. Lewis had formerly been engaged
to John Hartland, he said he “knew all about her,” and thereafter was
her devoted servant too. His regard was reciprocated, and his master and
mistress were his truest friends.

Yet Mrs. Lewis finds it in her heart to laugh at him, a fact which is
nowise to his discredit. For surely she never had a friend from whom her
bright humorous spirit would not derive amusement as well as other and
more momentous benefits. When the house was roof high, Kivitidi had to
work at an unwonted elevation, and Mrs. Lewis gives a quaint account of
his obvious tremors. But when Mr. Phillips was about to be married in San
Salvador, some months later, Kivitidi once more suffered tremors. His own
matrimonial projects were ripening, and he requested that the Christian
marriage service should be explained to him. Mrs. Lewis complied with his
request. Whereupon he owned himself appalled at the thought of having “to
promise all that in the presence of all the people.” However, like many
another of his sex, when the day came, he “screwed his courage to the
sticking-point,” and promised “all that.”

Prior to his marriage, he built a house for himself, in the vicinity
of his master’s, so fine a house that it excited the dangerous envy of
the King; for was it not the finest native house in Congo? Within a
year of the building of his own house, Kivitidi was engaged in erecting
a temporary mission chapel in Etoto, and became the first teacher of
the first sub-station of our Congo Mission. Later, a son was born to
him, whom he named “John Hartland,” and it was one of the trials of
the young mother, that she found her baby’s name exceedingly difficult
to pronounce. Probably she quickly discovered a manageable working
substitute.

The young interpreter referred to above was Nlekai, who was devoted to
Mrs. Lewis, her instructor in the native language, and her indispensable
attendant in her labours among the women. Confessing her profound
obligations to him, she yet yearned for the time when she would be
able to dispense with at least one important part of his service. This
yearning is incidentally expressed in a letter written to Miss Hartland
on January 25, 1888, a letter which exhibits her work among the women in
process of evolution.

“The women’s meeting on Monday is not well attended except by the elder
girls. I have usually an attendance of from thirty to forty, but not more
than two or three of the town women. I long so to be able to talk to them
in their own language, though Nlekai does his best, and really takes an
interest in making them understand. But many matters come up from time
to time which it is awkward to speak about through a boy. Not that these
women are particular, but it is bad for the boy. I have another class
now, which I think will become regular. A few Sundays ago three or four
of the King’s wives, and several other women, came on Sunday afternoon,
directly after dinner, saying, they wanted to hear more of God’s palaver.
This is my resting-time, but, of course, I could not send them away. They
said they would like to come every Sunday at the same hour, and they
have come several times. Two or three of them are, I believe, earnestly
seeking the way of salvation. It is very hard for them to understand even
the simplest truths.... I do feel for them! They are so surrounded by
filth of every kind.”

Kivitidi and Nlekai are spoken of as “boys.” In truth they were young
men; and as early as October, 1887, Mrs. Lewis has occasion to correct
the mistaken impression which the designation “boys” has made upon
the minds of certain of her friends. They have sent out shirts which
are pitifully scant, and are implored to remember that the “boy”
Kivitidi is as big as Mr. Lewis. Three months later she has to plead
for bigger dresses for the “girls.” Of the sixty “girls” in her school,
two-and-twenty are married women, some of them with two or three
children; and when the school examination is held the writing prize is
taken by one of the King’s wives.

The sympathetic appreciation which the “boys” received from the woman
whom they all revered is indicated in the following luminous and
discerning passage, which occurs in a letter written in November, 1888,
to Mrs. Hartland:—

“I will give the boys the things as you say. Thank you very much for
putting in something for Nlekai. He has no one in England who sends him
things, and he is such a good boy; a real earnest Christian worker, who
has been my greatest help all round. He spends two evenings with me every
week, one helping me with Kongo[2] translation, while on Saturday he
receives a Bible-lesson. We are going through the Epistles together, and
I am also teaching him English at odd times. He is so very anxious to
learn. He goes with me when I visit in the town, and until just now has
done all my interpreting. Since Kivitidi’s foot has been bad, Nlekai has
been doing part of his work for him, and now that Kivitidi is resuming
his work, I am going to take Elembe to translate for me on Sundays so as
to set Nlekai free. During the last year and a half he has had a thorough
drilling by means of interpreting and visiting, and we think he will
make a first-rate evangelist, though of a kind greatly different from
Kivitidi. They are not in the least alike. Kivitidi has not the slightest
fear of man, and for speaking to chiefs and big men, or addressing
a congregation, he is far the better of the two. But Nlekai is our
‘Barnabas,’ and goes so nicely in and out of the houses and among women
and sick people. Mr. Phillips is going to spare him one day from school,
and he is to have a district to work twice a week. We pray that these two
may have a great blessing and do much good. Matata, I think you know, is
helping Nlekai with day school, and Mrs. Phillips with the language. So
we hope that in time both he and Elembe will be able to work on their own
account. Helping us is a capital training for them.”

Though the work of Mrs. Lewis among the women of San Salvador prospered
from the beginning, it was not without its vicissitudes, and she was not
without her hours of depression. In a letter addressed to Mrs. J. Jenkyn
Brown, dated May 15, 1888, she confesses that just before Christmas she
was tempted to give up her Monday class for the town women, as on several
occasions only one came. But at the time of writing she is able to report
most encouraging progress. Her day school is increasing rapidly. From
twenty to twenty-five of the town women attend the Monday class, besides
a number of the schoolgirls who remain. “Then the women came of their
own accord on Sunday afternoon to my house to hear more, and this has
become a regular institution. On Fridays I have only the Church members,
and on Saturdays any who are inquiring the way of salvation. There are
now five of the King’s wives awaiting baptism, and several other women
of whom I have great hopes. So you see we have much reason to rejoice in
the blessing of God, and to take courage for the future. We might baptize
many more, but we feel the need of great care. A little waiting will not
hurt them, if they are sincere; and meanwhile we are able to watch their
lives and instruct them further. It is so easy for these people to make a
profession and to make long prayers. It is another thing for them to give
up their bad country customs and to lead pure lives.”

This letter will probably raise a question in the mind of the reader,
which was raised in the mind of Mrs. Lewis’s correspondent. Writing
some months later to Mrs. Brown, she says, “I am not surprised that
you should think it strange to hear of _some_ of the wives of the King
being baptized. But as far as the women are concerned, they cannot leave
their husbands, if they would, and therefore this could hardly be made a
condition of baptism or Church membership. As to the other side, it is a
very vexed question, and I am not at all sure that the position we have
taken up as a Mission is the best. But the matter was virtually settled
before we came here. There are so many opinions upon the subject that
it is difficult to say which is right, in the absence of any absolute
command. Of course, we do not allow Church members to take any more wives
than they have already, and those not married can only take one wife.”

Having attempted to give the reader some general idea of Mrs. Lewis’s
work among women during the earlier period of her labours in San
Salvador, I proceed to make some rapid notes of events in due sequence
culled from diaries and letters. In June, 1887, the missionaries took
their modest part in the Imperial Jubilee rejoicings, though they mistook
the date, and on June 6th instead of June 22nd, Mr. Lewis dipped the
flag, and in the absence of big guns Mr. Phillips fired salutes with his
revolver.

Little more than a month later the Mission was plunged into depths of
sorrow by news which afflicted every Christian worker on the Congo, and
sent a thrill of intense pain through thousands of Christian hearts at
home. The diary records:—

“Saturday, July 16, 1887.—Had a very slight fever last night. While at
school letters came telling of the death of Tom Comber. What can it all
mean?

“Sunday, July 17th.—Had a very sorrowful and solemn Sunday. Mr. Phillips
spoke in the morning, Tom in the afternoon.”

Mr. Comber had many friends, but none of them regarded him with more
affectionate reverence than Gwen Lewis, and her remembrance of him was
vivid, and tender, and sacred, until the day on which she died at sea, as
he had died.

Many minor illnesses are recorded, and in a letter dated January 25,
1888, Mrs. Lewis remarks that her schoolgirls get holidays when she is
sick, but none other. Even these are ill-esteemed, and the scholars are
painfully eager for the resumption of their work.

In the same letter reference is made to a case of more than local
interest. A man of some education obtained an interview with Mr. Lewis,
and expressed a wish that his wife, who was a scholar in the school,
might be taught to obey her husband. Mr. Lewis stated that such obedience
was taught as a general principle, but that a particular application of
the principle could not be insisted upon until the nature of the case was
known; for if a husband commanded his wife to do a bad thing she ought
not to obey him. The applicant did not specify the trouble, but said he
came, fearing that he might grow angry and beat her, and that she might
carry tales about him. Later it was ascertained that he desired her to
leave Mrs. Lewis and go to the priests’ school. This desire was not
fulfilled.

“Monday, April 23, 1888 (Diary).—A big palaver between the King and our
Mission. He wants our people to build their houses in another part of the
town. They are to answer to-morrow. Such a number of women at my meeting
to-day.

“Tuesday, April 24th.—School as usual. Palaver with King finished and all
serene. He sent Tom and Mr. P. a grand stick each. Sat up very late to
finish mails for up-country.”

At the end of May four of the King’s wives were baptized, and Kivitidi
was set apart for the work of an evangelist by the infant Church which
undertook to support him.

Some three months later Mr. and Mrs. Lewis accompanied by Matoko,
Kivitidi, Elembe, and three girls made an important journey to Madimba, a
large district to the south and south-east of San Salvador, with a view
to discover some place which would be suitable for the establishment of
a new station. The little expedition started early on August 18, 1888.
Mrs. Lewis wrote notes of the journey, and we come up with the travellers
as they are on the point of leaving Nsoni at noon August 20th.

“We started again at 1 p.m., crossed the Lunda River, where was a
bridge of one stick, passed two small towns, and arrived at Kiunga at
2.50. The chief was not ready to receive us, so we sat down outside an
empty house and waited patiently. The cause of the delay was the fact
that, never having seen a white man in his town before, the chief was
much frightened, and sent for his fighting men, who were assisting a
neighbouring chief. He appeared at last surrounded by men with guns, but
in obvious perplexity as to what our visit could mean.

“He was a most picturesque figure; an oldish man with an extraordinary
head-dress, wearing his cloth arranged in a fashion which reminded us of
the pictures of Aaron. He quite jumped when Tom offered to shake hands.
Tom told him that we had come to speak to him about God, and all that
we desired of him was a house to sleep in, and permission to speak to
his people. I felt quite sorry for the old man; for between his fear of
offending the white man, and his caution against falling into a trap, he
did not know what to do. Tom somewhat allayed his fears by pointing to me
as a proof that he had come on a peaceful errand. Finally it was agreed
that we should have the house we were sitting against, and that the
people should come to hear our message when the moon was up.

“At the time appointed the chief and his men came, fully armed, but said
that the women were afraid. When we had given our message, they were much
relieved, and afterwards a number of women came saying that they wished
to hear too; so I sat outside my house for some time talking to them.
The next morning chief and people pressed us to stay, and upon learning
that we could not do so, said that as none of our party had done any bad
palaver they would like to see a white man again. We were much interested
in the Kiunga people, but decided that it would be premature to consider
the planting of a station there just now.

“It was late and hot when we started, but I was comfortable and well
shaded in my hammock. I had to alight twice in this stage of our journey
as we came to rivers through which the men could not carry me. One
passage was very awkward, the ‘bridge’ consisting of two pieces of stick
which extended only half-way across, and that under water instead of over
it. I took off shoes and stockings, waded to the end of the bridge, which
was frightfully slippery, and was carried on two men’s shoulders the rest
of the way. Soon afterwards we reached Lunda.

“This is a large town, but the people are the most unpleasant we have met
with—dirty, drunken, very much afraid of us, yet so full of curiosity
that they did not leave us for one minute in peace. There are two chiefs
here. One had just started out to bury his brother. He was called back,
and did not venture forth again until we had gone. In the evening a
crowd assembled to hear what we had to say, but our speech made no
impression, and they went away, evidently saying in their hearts, ‘Is
that all?’ There were about a hundred and fifty present, and many of
the men were half drunk. The house they gave us was filthy, and full of
cockroaches—you know how I love them—and we were not sorry to depart next
morning.

“August 21st.—Our journey to-day was short, and we arrived at Etoto
about 11.30. This is a large town for Congo, containing about four
hundred inhabitants, nicely situated on the top of a high hill slightly
indented in the middle. We waited some little time for the coming of the
chief, who seems rather an agreeable man, quiet and less important in
his own eyes than most of these petty rulers are. He gave us one of his
houses, or rather part of one, built of planks. We ventured to peep in
at the other part, and found it full of old chairs, images of nkixi, and
dreadful rat-holes, so we thought it expedient not to ask for the loan
of that. The rats held high revels at night and seriously disturbed our
slumbers.

“We discovered in this place a wife of the King of San Salvador, who
was sick, one of my schoolgirls, and two schoolboys, who afforded us
something of an introduction. The people were shy but friendly, and we
quickly decided that this was the place we were seeking, if only the
people were willing. Tom spoke to the chief men about the matter, saying
that we should like to come often to teach the children to read, and to
give them all some knowledge of God; asking them also if they would be
willing for us to build a house for these purposes. At first they could
hardly believe him. It seemed too good to be true. But being assured that
we were in earnest, they said, in African fashion, that ‘they would drink
water,’ _i.e._, consider the matter, and tell us next day.

“In the morning they declared that they would much like us to come, and
we went with the chief to seek a site for our house and school. We chose
a good one on the highest point of the hill, with a fine view across
country to Arthington Falls. This settled, we returned to our house. I
went to visit the King’s wife, and after ‘chop’ I held a large meeting of
women outside her house. There were some fifty or sixty present who had
remained away from their farms on purpose. Then the men came, desiring
to hear, and Tom had a long talk with them. In the evening two women
came, asking to hear more, and after discussing matters with Matoko and
Kivitidi we went to bed.

“August 24th.—To-day we started homewards, made a long journey, and had
much trouble in getting through a very bad marsh. Once I was landed
comfortably on the branch of a tree, and my hammock could not be moved
one way or the other until Kivitidi came to the rescue with his long arms
and legs. Our stray sheep (school-children) came with us from Etoto. We
slept at Nkala, a miserable little town, chief away, few people, and no
opportunity for speaking. The next morning, August 25th, we left early,
made a long march over the hills, and arrived at San Salvador at 11 p.m.
We had a warm welcome, and found all well.”

Mr. Lewis hoped, with the aid of Kivitidi, to commence building at
Etoto in the course of a few weeks, but a series of misadventures and
adversities postponed the work until the new year, and even then the
evangelist had to make the start without the missionary’s personal
oversight and direction.

In September the marriage of Mr. Phillips to Miss Phillips was the
occasion of glad excitement in San Salvador. It was intended that the
marriage should take place at Underhill, but legal difficulties arose, as
the parties were to reside in Portuguese territory. The interest of the
event was increased by the presence of Mr. Holman Bentley, who was paying
a short visit. Mrs. Lewis records: “September 18th, Tuesday.—Up early,
went to the Resident’s first, where the civil marriage was performed
between Mr. and Miss Phillips, then came back and went to the chapel,
which Tom and Mr. Bentley had decorated beautifully. Tom performed the
ceremony, Mr. Bentley giving the bride away. The Resident, with Messrs.
Pereiro and Dumas, came home to breakfast, and afterward we had our
photos taken. Mr. Bentley left.”

A few weeks later occurs another entry which the reader will be
expecting. “October 31st, Wednesday. Had breakfast in our bedroom early.
Wedding of Kivitidi and Tomba in chapel at 11 a.m.; then ‘feed’ at our
house, and festivities all day. Mr. and Mrs. Phillips stayed to tea, and
spent the evening. All went off well.”

It was a grievous disappointment to all concerned that Mrs. Phillips, who
commenced her missionary work with glad eagerness and no little aptitude,
soon suffered serious illness, and in the earlier part of January she and
her husband were compelled to leave for England.

Meanwhile, Mrs. Lewis has advanced so far in her mastery of the language
that she finds herself making some modest literary ventures, of which
she gives an amusing account in a letter dated December 29, 1888. It is
not wonderful, perhaps, that her appreciation of the language was not as
enthusiastic as that of the man whose stupendous labours were reducing it
to literary form. Mrs. Lewis writes to Miss Hartland: “I do not wonder
that you are amused by the look of the Congo hymns. It is a very ugly
language, I think, in sound and appearance. But Holman Bentley thinks it
lovely. It is as the red rag to the bull if one disparages this language
to him. When he was here, I was wicked enough to remark that I thought it
very unmusical, whereupon he replied, in severe tones: ‘It has all the
elements of a beautiful language.’ The poetical mania has taken us all
just now. The big boys are hard at work translating hymns. The trouble
is to understand the English first, and then to get the right number of
syllables. Some of their verses are not bad, others are most amusing, and
require a great deal of puckering to get them in. I have just finished
‘There is a Happy Land,’ and our old hymn which we used to sing at Mr.
Tucker’s Bible-class, ‘Children, will you go?’ Mr. Phillips and Tom are
both at it. We shall have quite a San Salvador Supplement soon. But
though the number of the hymns will be considerable, I will not say much
for the quality. Yet they please the people, and will serve until a
native poet arises.”

In the same letter she tells of how the commencement of the projected
station at Etoto has once more been delayed by an outbreak of smallpox.
The people of the town, in their distress, much to the regret of the
missionaries, and without their knowledge, sent for a witch doctor. He
came. But the fear of the white man’s influence was strong upon him, and,
with admirable shrewdness, he affirmed that the witch was one of the
people who had died of the pestilence, and having given this judgment,
departed with discreet alacrity. Other troubles caused further delay, but
at the end of January Kivitidi and Matoko started for Etoto to begin to
build.

As the steady strain of the work and the inevitable trials of the climate
were telling upon Mrs. Lewis, it was thought desirable in the early
part of the year that, somewhat later, she should return and make a
short stay in England. At the end of March she writes cheerily of the
abandonment of this scheme, and of the possible substitution of a short
visit to Madeira. She reports that Padre Barosa has written promising
great reinforcements for the Catholic Mission at San Salvador, which she
surmises will prove “mythical,” as in other instances. The work at Etoto
is making good progress. She also casually mentions that a leopard has
located himself “just outside our fence,” is raiding the live-stock of
the Mission, but, to her great regret, is too clever to be seen.

On April 20, 1889, Mrs. Lewis wrote a circular letter to be read in
certain Sunday schools with which the mission maintained correspondence.
It is too informing and suggestive to be omitted, and too long to be
reproduced in full. So I give it in slightly condensed form.

“I suppose many of you have read in the _Missionary Herald_ of the little
branch station which we have established at a town called Etoto, two
days’ journey from San Salvador. Mr. Lewis visited Etoto about a month
ago, and found the work going on well under the care of Kivitidi, our
native evangelist. The services on Sunday and daily evening prayers
are well attended, and thirty boys come regularly to school. As yet no
girls have been induced to come. But as soon as the dry season arrives,
I hope to pay them a visit with my husband, and then I have no doubt
we shall get some girls to attend school. Mr. Moolinaar has just been
spending a month there, and has visited some towns of the district. The
school-house, with rooms for native teacher and missionary, is nearly
finished. Please think of this new station and pray that many of the
people may be brought to know and love our Lord Jesus Christ....

“The town Nlekai goes to on Sundays is called Mbanza Mputu and is about
one and a half hour’s walk distant. The townspeople have received the
good news very gladly, and have themselves built a little meeting-house,
that the rains may not stop them from hearing ‘God’s palaver.’ My
husband has visited them several times, and they have been anxious to see
me, as white women are scarce in this part of the world. As there is a
deep river to be crossed on the road, I sent word that if they wished to
see me they must make a bridge. They have done this; and last week I went
with Nlekai.

[Illustration: CHIEF NOSO AND PART OF HIS FAMILY.]

“I was heartily welcomed. All the people came together, and I talked to
them for a long time about the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ;
after which, the chief and other people asked many questions. They are
very fond of singing, and know two or three hymns already; so we sang all
they knew and I taught them another, ‘Oh, what a Saviour!’ which has been
translated by one of our boys. Then I walked about the town and saw some
sick people, everybody being anxious to know when I would come again.

“Before I left they told me that in a town not far away a witch palaver
was to be held in three days’ time. Many people had been sick and had
died. A witch doctor had pointed out a certain woman as the witch.
She was to undergo the trial by poison. But being very angry they had
determined that she should surely die. The chief and the people of Mbanza
Mputu had tried to prevent this wickedness, but their protests were not
listened to, and they wished to know if we could do anything. I promised
to tell my husband. He started off the next day and arrived just in time
to stop the cruel deed. There was a long discussion, and at last they
agreed not to harm the woman. Mr. Lewis then told them something about
God, to which they listened attentively, and afterwards begged him to
come and teach them again. So you see, their wicked purpose is likely to
turn out for the spread of the Gospel. The people at Mbanza Mputu have
long ago thrown away their fetishes, and we hope that many of them may
soon become true servants of God.

“When you are thinking about us out here, do not forget Nlekai and his
work. He has just become engaged, though he will not be married for some
years yet, and I think you may like to know how he got his future wife.
Among the bad fashions of this dark land, one of the worst is, that men
have many wives. The richer a man is the more wives he gets. Men buy
little girls when they are quite small, and soon take them away to live
with their other wives. Very often the little girls do not like to be
taken away from their own families, but if they make a fuss they are
beaten and tied and carried off.

“Well, the little girl whom Nlekai is to marry had been given by her
family to a man who had ten wives already. He had bought a wife from the
same family before. She had died, and so they gave him Bwingidi instead.
She had been attending my school for some time, but her mother died,
and soon after this man came to take her away. One Sunday, just as we
had finished our morning service, she came running to us, begging to be
allowed to stay, as she did not like the man, and did not wish to go
where there was no school or teacher. He had come to fetch her the day
before, but she had run away, had remained all night in the bush, and now
they were looking for her.

“The next day all her people came; but when the ‘husband’ saw Bwingidi
here, and dressed like the other girls, he said he did not want her,
now that she had been living in the white man’s house, but he wanted
the money which he had paid to her family for a wife. So we settled
the matter by paying the price on condition that her family made her
perfectly free, and they signed a paper putting her in our charge till
she married. She is a bright girl of eleven or twelve years, and now it
has been arranged that she is to be Nlekai’s wife when she grows up....

“We have now another member of our mission family, a baby boy about five
months old. His mother having died, his father left him with some women,
and cared no more for him. No one could be found to nurse him. So he was
just flung into the corner of a dirty house to starve. When my husband
brought him to me, he was so weak that he could not move nor even cry,
and had a great boil on his neck. However, after being washed and fed,
he slept well, and in a day or two could kick and scream finely. He is
getting on well now, though he has many ailments, the effects of his
ill-treatment. We call him ‘Daniel’ and hope he will grow up to be good
and brave like his namesake.

“Now I have told you all these things that you may know how the little
children suffer in this country, and how much the people need to be
taught about the Lord Jesus, Who loved little children....”

Mrs. Lewis’s estimate of her staying power indicated in the March letter
proved to be over-sanguine, and in June she was sent off to England,
where she arrived in August, having made a visit to the Cameroons on
the voyage. Naturally she was warmly welcomed by many friends and found
refreshment and inspiration in the renewal of former associations.
Her stay was brief, and in November she sailed for Africa in the ss.
_Mexican_, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Graham, newly married, and Mr.
Walter Stapleton, of whose character she formed a penetrating estimate,
wholly justified by his notable, but all too short career. She much
enjoyed the voyage and took kindliest interest in the conversations of
the two young men, who sharpened their wits by the discussion of high
points of doctrine, and essayed to settle minor questions (of course
without prejudice and upon adequate data), such as “whether dark girls or
fair ones were the pluckiest.”

The voyagers were met by Mr. Lewis and Mr. Weeks at Banana, and received
a tumultuous welcome at Underhill, whither Mr. Lewis had been constrained
to bring all the girls of the household, having no one to take charge of
them in his absence. He also brought Daniel Jones, the one-time squalid,
sickly, outcast baby, who in a few months had developed into a sleek,
tiny tyrant who imagined that the world was made for him and “wanted to
be king of everybody.”

A still more touching welcome awaited Mrs. Lewis at San Salvador. The
women were overjoyed by her return. They abandoned their work for the
day, and for days to come kept bringing her presents, not “dashes” to be
returned, but free gifts, “because they saw plenty joy.”

It was “plenty joy” to Mrs. Lewis also to be in her own home again, which
her husband had furbished and improved during her absence, and she looked
for another year of work before the long vacation of the proper furlough.
But Providence ordered otherwise. Mr. Lewis’s health failed, and within
six months they were on their way to England. The following paragraph
from the _Missionary Herald_ of July, 1890, may fitly close this chapter:—

“We are thankful to report the arrival of the Rev. Thos. and Mrs. Lewis
from San Salvador. For some months past Mr. Lewis has suffered greatly
from repeated and severe attacks of bilious fever with strongly marked
typhoidal symptoms, which have greatly reduced his strength and rendered
an immediate change absolutely needful. For nearly four years Mr. Lewis
has been resident on the Congo without change.”




CHAPTER VII

SECOND TERM AT SAN SALVADOR


Mr. Lewis gathered strength during the voyage. Upon arrival in England he
was pronounced “much better” and Mrs. Lewis “very well.” A visit to the
Parkinsons at Deal and a stay with the Hartlands at Aberystwyth yielded
much pleasure to all concerned and went far toward restoring Mr. Lewis
to customary vigour. Toward the end of November Mrs. Lewis is busy with
her old friends at Camden Road preparing for the Congo Sale and records
with evident delight a surprise visit at the schoolroom by Grenfell, who
had arrived in England two days earlier. On November 25th the Sale was
opened by Mrs. Lewis, Mr. Baynes, the Secretary of the B.M.S., and the
Rev. William Brock, of Hampstead, being among her supporters. She spoke
in calm, simple, restrained, but intense fashion of her work among the
women of San Salvador, and held a large audience in closest and most
sympathetic attention.

And here I may remark—and the judgment is based not upon this speech
only, but also upon many others heard in later years and more fully
remembered—never was there a missionary speaker who more conscientiously
avoided excessive use of bright colouring in pictures of missionary
success. Her nature was passionately truthful, and she ever sought as far
as possible to make her audiences see things as they really were. As far
as possible, I say, for her saddened eyes saw much which her woman’s lips
could never speak, and this she allowed her friends to understand.

In the New Year Mr. Lewis was sent north, south, east, and west on
deputation journeys, but Mrs. Lewis’s work was largely confined to the
London district, in which she attended many meetings advocating the cause
to which her life was given. Once she started at an hour’s notice for
Newport, Mon., and spoke at an evening meeting the same day, “with Tom
and Mr. Evans, of Merthyr.” As much as possible of her time was given
to her “dear mother,” Mrs. Hartland, who was at this time a confirmed
invalid and subject to the discipline of much suffering, which she
endured with exemplary Christian patience and submission.

It is interesting to me, as it will be to many readers, to gather from
the diary that Grenfell was a frequent visitor at the rooms of Mr. and
Mrs. Lewis. The entry for Saturday, March 21st, surprised me. “Mr.
Grenfell and Mr. Hawker called.” The eclecticism of memory is one of
the mysteries of life. Incidents of no moment and little interest are
retained with photographic clearness, other incidents which it would be
precious to recall pass utterly out of mind. Clearly upon this day I must
have spent some time—probably an hour, perhaps more—in conversation with
two people whom I regarded with affectionate esteem and whose lives I was
destined to write long years afterwards. Yet I confess with wonder and
humiliation that the utmost effort at recollection leaves me destitute of
the faintest remembrance of the fact.

Six weeks later Mr. and Mrs. Lewis were both down with influenza. The
illness was somewhat serious and involved a visit to Ventnor, where lost
energies were recovered. They returned to London in the middle of June,
and on the day of arrival met Mrs. J. J. Brown and Messrs. Grenfell
and Oram. On June 19th Mrs. Lewis records with a note of relief that
she has “passed Dr. Roberts,” and on the last day of the month she and
her husband leave London for Liverpool amid the cheers of a company of
friends who had gathered at St. Pancras for the send-off. Mrs. Parkinson
accompanied them to Liverpool, where Mr. Parkinson joined them later.
On Wednesday, July 1st, the little party spent the day at Southport.
Surely it must have been a wet day, for Mrs. Lewis smites the fair town
with the scornful phrase, “wretched place,” and is glad to get back to
Liverpool to tea. An evening entertainment in Liverpool proved as little
satisfactory as Southport. Perhaps she was in no mood for entertainment.

The next day she sailed upon her fourth voyage to Africa, which, though
enlivened by many incidents of interest, proved on the whole the most
wearisome and comfortless of her experience. On August 20th she writes:
“Arrived at Banana about 7 a.m. After breakfast went ashore and called
at the Dutch House. Went to see dear Annie’s grave. Tom photographed it.
Rather tired.”

The mention of “Dear Annie’s grave” calls for a slight digression. Annie
was the youngest daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Jonas Smith, of Camden Road
Church, and one of Mrs. Lewis’s girl friends, whose name has already been
mentioned. She became engaged to Mr. Percy Comber and went out to Africa
to be married. Arriving at St. Thomé on the voyage, she was overjoyed
to find that the homeward-bound steamer was in port and that among her
passengers were Mr. and Mrs. Lewis. There lies before me as I write
her letter to Mrs. Hartland, written at the close of this happy day of
meeting, telling of how her friends were brought aboard her ship and of
the eager, happy converse which ensued.

They parted. The Lewises arrived safely in England. Annie Smith was
married at Matadi on June 5th, and passed up to Wathen, where she worked
for a few months with great joy and much promise. Toward the end of
the year serious illness fell upon her, and under doctor’s orders she
started for home, accompanied by her husband. But her journey ended at
Banana on December 19th. She was laid to rest beside the sea, and her
stricken husband turned back to his work—alone. The sorrow at Camden
Road was great. She had gone from us such a little while before, so full
of radiant life, so joyous in her consecration to the great cause. Mrs.
Lewis was present at the memorial service held in Camden Road Church on
January 25, 1891, and the reader will appreciate the sorrowful interest
of her visit to “dear Annie’s grave,” and the intensity of her sympathy
with “poor Percy, so sad and lonely.”

On August 28th, Mrs. Lewis writes from Tunduwa (Underhill) lamenting
endless delays. The old King of San Salvador is dead, and the hoped-for
carriers are detained by the prolonged obsequies of their late sovereign.
She is still in Tunduwa on September 6th, but has been of service in
nursing Mr. Lawson Forfeitt through an illness, whose return to England,
she suggests, should be arranged speedily. Finally, on September 12th,
San Salvador is reached, and the longed-for work is resumed. A fortnight
later Mrs. Graham and Mrs. Phillips are on the point of leaving for
England. Their husbands are to accompany them to the coast, and Mr.
Graham is to remain in charge at Underhill, while Mr. Forfeitt takes his
much-needed furlough.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not practicable, as it is not necessary, to attempt anything like a
continuous story of the next two or three years. The work proceeds along
the lines laid down, and the days are passed in the quiet and sometimes
monotonous discharge of routine duties. San Salvador is off the main line
of the Mission, and Mrs. Lewis and her friends live in a little world
of their own, which occasionally seems to be very small and secluded.
But the work is too constantly exacting to give time for dispiriting
reflection upon its isolation, nor is it destitute of occasional
excitements.

Mrs. Lewis resumed with undiminished zeal her school work and her women’s
classes. Her medical and dispensary work steadily increases. There are
successes which cheer and disappointments which test faith and endurance.
An untoward accident interrupts the promising work at the sub-station
of Etoto. Some of the “boys” become less zealous, and, like certain of
their white brethren in England, yield to the seductions of worldly
interest. Kivitidi resigns the office of evangelist, and occupies himself
in tailoring and trading, which he finds much more remunerative. Yet he
continues to live the life of a Christian man, and renders to the Mission
much voluntary service. Nlekai and others involve themselves and their
missionary friends in troubles and embarrassments by their matrimonial
aspirations and ventures.

The marriage business is still more distracting in relation to the girls.
It is not to be thought of that they should not marry; they marry when
they are mere children, and their babies keep them away from school at
the time when they would profit most by instruction. In some instances
the grandmothers take care of the babies, and set the girl-mothers free.
Mrs. Lewis observes that the grandmothers are much more devoted to the
babies than the mothers, and she surmises that this is due to the fact
that the mothers are mere children themselves, too immature to appreciate
or discharge maternal responsibilities.

1892 was the centenary year of the Baptist Missionary Society. The little
Church at San Salvador, numbering thirty-nine members, resolved to make
its contribution to the Centenary Fund in the form of a Christmas
collection. The conditions of native life made it desirable that the
gifts should be brought in as soon as they were ready. If they were
stored up in the native huts they might be used or lost, so the Christmas
collection began early.

Writing on New Year’s Day, Mrs. Lewis says: “Kivitidi was the first to
bring his offering. Since then the people have been constantly coming,
and a strange collection you would find it. Some have brought cloth,
some beads, some fowls, some baskets full of ground nuts. One woman
brought a keg of gunpowder, and one man—the largest contribution of all—a
pig. This last offering caused much amusement. It was so difficult to
catch that it seemed doubtful whether it would be ready for Christmas
Day, either dead or alive. However, on the morning of Christmas Eve,
it arrived dead, borne triumphantly in a hammock, and made a capital
Christmas feast for all the people on the station.[3] The people have
indeed offered willingly, and have both surprised and gladdened our
hearts by their generosity. On Christmas morning a large congregation met
together in our chapel for a thanksgiving service, when the names of the
contributors were read out, and it was announced that the total value of
the collection was £33 14s. 3d. Earnest prayers were offered by some of
the native Christians that God’s blessing might go with their gifts, and
we closed by singing the Te Deum and the Doxology.”

In the same letter Mrs. Lewis tells of certain horrible cruelties
perpetrated in the district in deference to native customs. Two runaway
slaves were captured, tied to long poles firmly fixed in the earth, and
left to starve. In returning from Tunduwa Mr. Phillips saw the charred
bones of a woman who had been burned to death in a witch palaver. In a
town near by a slave, for a threatening word, was put in irons, his neck
made fast in the fork of a heavy stick six feet long. In this plight he
had remained for twenty-one days when Mr. Lewis came upon him, while the
death palaver was in process. Happily, in this instance, he was able to
effect a rescue, and the man was taken to work on the Mission station.

On April 28th in a long letter to her niece, Miss Ethel Percival, Mrs.
Lewis tells of Nlekai beginning work in Mawunza; of the hindrance to the
Mission arising from the unpopularity of the present Portuguese officials
and the Catholic Mission; and then gives the following account of her
garden, which is yielding Mr. Lewis recompense for his labours.

“We have lots of flowers in our garden—English ones, too—verbenas,
heliotropes, petunias, and roses pink and white. We have also a quantity
of maize, plantains, and bananas in our kitchen garden, splendid onions
and potatoes, which will be ready shortly. Yams, too, are coming on.
Limes are in abundance, and the trees are laden with oranges, which I
hope will ripen in due time. This is the Vegetable dispensation. Under
Mr. Graham it was the Animal dispensation, and the two do not run well
together. Now our live-stock is kept within bounds, and consists of one
goose, which is fattening for the table, several ducks, a few goats, a
lot of pigeons, and one dear rabbit, Jack, who has a spacious yard all to
himself, for his tiresome wife has run away. How she went is a mystery.
Mr. Phillips also possesses a monkey, who lives in a cage, poor fellow! I
forgot the fowls, whose name is legion.”

“June 28th.—I don’t think I told you that since I returned this time I
have started quite a midwifery practice. It came without seeking. Of
course I could not do anything in this line until I could speak without
an interpreter. Now I am in request at the advent of every baby. I keep
a registry of births, that we may have some idea of the children’s
ages. I could tell you some laughable things about habits and customs,
but I cannot write them. At last, this month, we have dispensed with
interpreters altogether—_i.e._, Tom and I. I think Mr. Phillips will also
when he comes back. We have managed for some time everything except the
regular services. In these we were afraid of making mistakes, which are
so easy. But for three Sundays Tom has preached in the native language,
and all the people say he speaks well, and that they can understand
him perfectly. Last Sunday my interpreter was away, and having asked
the women if they would understand me, and being reassured, I made the
attempt, though I was awfully nervous. At the end one of the women kindly
told me that they understood perfectly, and liked it much better. It
means a lot more work, as one has to prepare the words as well as the
matter of one’s sermons; and I have a Bible-class in school on Wednesday,
another in the house on Thursday evening, and give an address at the
women’s prayer-meeting on Saturday. Then there are the Sunday school and
the women’s meeting on Sunday, and in every case the preparation must
be different, as some of the audience come to all. However, we are very
thankful to have got so far. It seems like beginning a new stage in our
missionary work.... People in England seem to forget sometimes that I
am as much interested in their work as they are in mine. It is the same
work, only we are on distant service. But we do not forget the work at
home, either in our thoughts or in our prayers.

“July 29th.—I do hope dear mother is not suffering very much; we so often
think of her and of you all. I am thinking that perhaps to-morrow you
and Mr. Hartland are setting off upon your travels. We should just like
to fly over and go with you for a month to Wales. Wouldn’t it be jolly?
But we are unable to get away, even for a journey here. Mr. Phillips has
been away just on three months, and we are alone. We have heard nothing
from Tunduwa since last mail. We suppose the carriers are afraid to come,
and we cannot get away to go to him. There is a palaver proceeding in
the town, and the King forbids any one to leave. One family, who are
slaves of the Padres, are claiming another family as slaves of theirs,
and the Padres are backing them. This same dispute was brought up and
settled several times, some years ago. The whole town is in a state of
commotion, and nearly every day the people assemble under the big tree.
The King, got up in striking costume varied from day to day, sits on his
throne with the Queen beside him. They are a pair! The disputing parties,
holding their guns, are ranged opposite one another. Then the counsellors
on either side sing songs, make speeches, and finish up with a dance. Of
course there is also any amount of malavu drinking.

“The old road to Noki is shut up. There are other roads by which we send
letters, but the carriers are all afraid to go for loads. The Portuguese
talk about soldiers coming, but they are a long time on the way. The
Resident told Tom the other day that they are going to make a military
station half-way to keep the road open. I wish they would remove this
Resident. There have been palavers ever since he came, and he does not
know how to settle them. This palaver has brought many strangers to the
town, and they attend our meetings, so good may come out of evil. But all
these things interrupt our work. The minds of the people are unsettled,
and full of other things. I have just received a new girl into the house,
and she _is_ a caution! the wildest specimen I have yet had to deal with.
She is put under our protection by the Resident, and is quite grown up.”

The following extract from a circular letter written on September 26th
gives an instructive and idyllic picture of a Congo baptism, with certain
other matters suggestive of the dark background:—

“We had a very happy time at Mbanza Mputu at the end of last month. Tom
and I went over on Tuesday, and stayed two nights. There were six whom we
wished to baptize, the chief, his sister, three of his wives, and another
man. But we found that one of the women was sick, and another away. The
event caused quite an excitement in the towns around, as the chief holds
a position, second only to that of the King of Congo. On the day before
the baptism the women of the town were hard at work preparing to receive
visitors from other places. A pig was killed, and in every house might
be seen groups of women pounding pepper and skinning pumpkin seeds for
seasoning the dishes on the morrow. We spent the day in speaking to
inquirers, and preparing the candidates. None of these people had ever
seen a baptism, so it was necessary to explain every detail to them.

“Early on Thursday morning Mr. Phillips arrived from San Salvador, our
boy Vita coming with him. Soon afterwards nearly all our Church members
followed. After they had rested a little we went down to the water. At
the bottom of a very steep hill runs a watercourse, obstructed at one
point by very large stones, forming a natural basin, into which a spring
rises, so that there is water in the basin even when the course is dry,
as it is now. A steep cliff almost surrounds the basin, covered with
ferns and tropical growths, the branches of trees interlacing overhead.
The congregation sat on the sides of this dell, which formed a splendid
meeting-place, Tom standing on one of the big stones in the middle.

“The hymn sounded grandly; Kivitidi prayed; Tom explained the rite, and
then baptized the candidates, beginning with Vita, of whom you will have
read in the _Herald_. He took the first place, that the others might see
what was required. He was followed by the chief, and the other man, and
then came the two women, one of them very old and thin and shrivelled,
the other quite a young girl. After the benediction we climbed up
the hill and returned to the town, making our way to the little
meeting-house, where we celebrated the Lord’s Supper. The Church members
and those newly baptized half filled the house, but other people crowded
in, or sat round the doors, curious to see what we were doing. Mr.
Phillips presided and gave the right hand of fellowship to the five new
members. Nlekai and Kalendenda offered prayer, and then after a few words
of explanation from Kivitidi we ate and drank together the memorials of
dying Love. We hope soon to baptize three more at least.

“Pray for these new converts that they may be kept faithful. At present
things go smoothly with them. The fact that their chief is a humble
Christian makes all the difference, and saves them from many trials and
temptations. Only one thing marred our pleasure. Mr. Phillips brought
news of a terrible calamity which had happened in San Salvador the day
before. A young man who has been one of our hammock-bearers from the
beginning of the Mission, Ntoni, was overtaken by one of the grass fires
while hunting, and horribly burnt. Mr. Phillips did what he could, but
the poor patient died in great agony the same evening, and upon our
return from Mbanza Mputu the funeral took place. He had not professed
faith in Christ, but he knew the gospel well, and one of our Christians,
who was with him when he died, says that he spoke much about his sins and
prayed for forgiveness for Jesus’ sake. We can but leave him with God,
assured that He Who received the dying thief will never turn away from a
dying sinner’s cry.

“So many horrid things have happened lately. The other day in a town
close by, a man beat his wife to death. The chief of Mbanza Mputu has
been over to the Resident about the matter, and is doing his best to find
the man, who has run away. It seems that he was drunk with palm wine
and had been beating his wives all the evening. The palm wine drinking
has been dreadful this season, the yield has been so plentiful. We are
trying to get our boys to leave off taking it altogether, but it is very
difficult to teach them self-denial for the sake of others.”

[Illustration: BWINGIDI (EVANGELIST’S WIFE) AND GIRLS’ SCHOOL AT NKABA,
AN OUT-STATION NEAR SAN SALVADOR.]

While she was writing this letter, news was on the way to Congo destined
to fill the heart of Mrs. Lewis with heavy sorrow, sorrow which her
husband would share profoundly, and in which all our Congo missionaries
would have their part. Some few months earlier, in writing to Miss
Hartland, Mrs. Lewis said: “I am sure we shall never cease to thank God
for all the love and kindness which dear mother and you have shown to us.
Having lost our own mothers, we have appreciated her love all the more.”

On September 13th, Mrs. Hartland died. Mrs. Lewis’s diary for 1892 is
missing, and the letter or letters in which she poured out her own
sorrow, and her sympathy with those whom the bereavement touched yet more
nearly, have not come to my hand. Assured that Mrs. Lewis would desire
some tribute to the “dear mother,” who loved her so well, to appear in
the record of her own life, I venture to reprint certain paragraphs from
a short article which I wrote a few days after Mrs. Hartland had entered
into rest[4]:—

“After four years of heroic service John Hartland died in Comber’s
arms, and his mother bowed her head, as mothers do. But when she rose
again, it was not to regard this costly Congo Mission with reserved
toleration which applauded itself for not changing to dislike, but with
self-devotion and enthusiastic love. The life of her son was in the
Mission; so she took it to her heart and carried it gently in her bosom
before God.

“Mrs. Hartland lived as much upon the Congo as in Falkland Road, and was
more intimately acquainted with the history of the Mission, internal
and external, than perhaps any other person, excepting only Mr. Baynes.
Almost all the missionaries knew her. Before they went out they were
invited to Falkland Road, and when the interview was over they knew
themselves to be possessed of at least one mother-hearted friend. Aware
of the secret of her love each man and woman honoured her unspoken claim
to some measure of their filial affection, and the motherless among
them called her “mother.” Upon returning to this country they went to
see her, naturally; and while upon the field many of them corresponded
with her, receiving letters which were like cold water in a thirsty land.
Many times have I seen her, with hands distorted and half paralysed by
relentless rheumatism, writing painfully and patiently to her friends
upon the Congo. Her letters were peculiarly precious, because they were
indited by one who understood the work, who loved the workers, and
believed in God. And so from one quiet heart, in one quiet London home,
there went forth waves of spiritual energy that were felt hundreds of
miles above Stanley Pool. This was her work. She wrote till she could
no longer hold the pen; she dictated till she could no longer think
sustainedly by reason of agony and growing weakness; then she sent
messages; then she murmured prayers; and now she is with Him Who ever
liveth to make intercession for us.

“We do not know much about the gates of heaven. We do not know whether
some vigilant angel on the battlements of God’s city announces with
silver trumpet the coming of the enfranchised soul. We do not know
whether comrades and kinsfolk hurry to the gates to welcome and
congratulate their beloved. We can only dream. But if it be so, the
sainted heroes of the Congo Mission were by the gates last week.

“Two things were remarkable in Mrs. Hartland’s life to all who knew
her—unselfishness and faith, evinced in little things and great. A few
days before her death I visited her, and, leaning over her bed that my
voice might reach the ear that was growing heavy I noticed four exquisite
roses lying near her face. She insisted that I should take one. In my
prayer, I used the word ‘doubts,’ and I shall never forget the quick and
confident words that followed the ‘Amen’—‘I have no doubts.’ Verily, she
has none.”




CHAPTER VIII

SECOND TERM AT SAN SALVADOR—_continued_


Though the missionaries craved greater progress the work of the year
1892 was encouraging, and their devotion and their hope were unabated.
In his official report Mr. Lewis records that eleven persons were
baptized during the year, and that the membership stands at forty-seven,
a clear increase of nine. The Christmas collection was again made with
enthusiasm, and concerning this Mr. Lewis writes: “We closed the year by
making a special effort to seat our chapel. We have a spacious native
building, but it has never been seated, and our few forms are next to
no good. We suggested that the Church and congregation should join in
defraying the expenses of good pitch-pine seats on iron standards,
ordered from England. They took it up enthusiastically, and last week
made a collection with this object. The meeting was the largest we ever
had in Congo, and goods to the value of £50 were taken. This is more than
we really needed, but we can use it in some other way.”

The report contains two lines which are significant in relation to the
work of Mrs. Lewis: “The girls’ school has had no interruption through
the past year, and the girls have made satisfactory progress. There are
sixty-two scholars, four of whom are boarders.”

On February 2, 1893, Mrs. Lewis wrote a long letter to Miss Hartland
reporting a fortnight’s itineration, made with her husband, in the course
of which they visited many places where no white man had been seen
before. The women were delighted to find that she could speak with them,
and she and Mr. Lewis agreed that in most places “the women were by far
the better part of the population.”

In this letter occurs the following interesting passage about her girls:—

“You ask in your letter if we have any nice bright girls, like the boys.
Several other people have asked much the same question, and I begin to
fear that I have not said enough about the girls and women. I am so much
afraid of giving a wrong impression, and have perhaps gone to the other
extreme. There has been so much fuss made at home over these boys that
many people seem to think them paragons of excellence, and that our work
lies mainly among them. You see when people come out first it is only
with the boys they have to do, as they alone understand English. It takes
much longer time to get to know the girls and women. Since I have been
in Africa my work has lain entirely among them, and I consider, on the
whole, that it is decidedly encouraging.

“Two of my girls are now teachers, helping us in school. Another, who is
married to Zwarky, Mr. Grenfell’s boy, has a very good character from
every one up river. Yet another who married Lo last summer, though not so
clever with her brains as some, is a dear good girl and a splendid nurse.
She nursed Mrs. Graham’s baby, and was most devoted. These four are all
Christians. Of course we have had some trouble, some naughty girls,
but they do not exceed the boys in that regard; and although we have
many more women than men in the Church, we have not yet had to exercise
discipline on one. Two have lately fallen into sin, but have seemed so
truly penitent that we felt we could only say to them, ‘Go, and sin no
more.’

“The girls I have in the house now are comparatively new. Ntumba, who is
engaged to Elembe, is a very quiet useful girl who is getting on nicely.
She has been with us just a year. Nsukula, who is engaged to our cook,
Manwana, is a very bright little girl and, I believe, a Christian. She
has been in the day school a long time, and can read fluently, but has
only been in the house a few months. Nsunda, who is quite a young woman,
has been here about six months, and is under our protection from her own
father. She is very wild, but not at all stupid. Then there is Ndungani,
who has just come. She is the King’s daughter and is engaged to Vita.
She is a very big girl, and seems very anxious to learn. Another is just
coming, Kuvovwa. She has been at school a long time, but I fear is rather
stupid. However, we must see what can be done with her.

“Of course our great object in dealing with these girls is to lead them
to become followers of Jesus Christ, and we are very thankful when this
is the result of our teaching. Unfortunately we can never keep them as
long as we keep the boys, because they get married too soon, according
to our notions; but I am very glad if they will only wait until they are
fairly grown. The marriage question in its many aspects is our greatest
trouble, and that can only be remedied by teaching the girls and women,
as well as the boys and men, to think and act rightly in the matter. Only
women can do this. It is most important to let the girls understand, as I
think they do now here in San Salvador, that we take them and teach them
for their own sakes, and not simply because they are engaged to certain
boys. I go on the principle of never keeping a girl against her will, for
I have only a limited amount of time and strength, and I feel it better
that they should be spent in training a few who wish to learn, than in
coercing a larger number, retained against their will. Although I have to
be very strict, I think they like it, and we are on the best of terms. I
treat them as much as possible as I should treat school-children at home.
Now I think you know most of what there is to know about my girls.”

The report said: “The girls’ school has had no interruption through
the past year.” But the girls’ school and all Mrs. Lewis’s work in San
Salvador were destined to suffer serious interruption full soon. At the
end of March, 1893, she records that her husband has been seriously ill,
and that all things are packed up for a voyage to Grand Canary, where
it is proposed that they shall spend five or six weeks, in the hope that
so much rest and change may effect such restoration as will enable him
to resume his work without a return to England. She is thankful that her
own health has been preserved, and the general concern displayed by the
natives in her husband’s illness is noted with grateful appreciation. The
chiefs of neighbouring towns have been assiduous in their inquiries, and
carriers, many more than they would need, have eagerly volunteered for
the journey to the coast, that they might serve those whom they esteem
highly, though it is the middle of the wet season.

Mrs. Lewis had received news in advance of a plum-pudding which had been
despatched in honour of her birthday, and says in a postscript to the
letter containing the foregoing particulars, that they are hoping to meet
the plum-pudding at Tunduwa. They did meet the plum-pudding at Tunduwa,
but no immediate intimacy ensued. It was handed to them just before their
steamer sailed, and they handed it back to Mr. John Pinnock, to be taken
care of till the first week in July, when they hoped to share the joy of
it with him, and maybe others.

On May 10th they arrived at Grand Canary, having made the voyage in the
steamer _Lulu Bohlen_, which they hoped to catch again upon her return
from England, as they well liked her appointments and her officers. Two
days after landing Mrs. Lewis reports that Mr. Lewis is much better,
and that they are comfortably housed in an hotel which is made charming
by spacious gardens ablaze with flowers. The island is not so pretty
as Madeira, but much drier, and therefore more suitable to their health
requirements. Her letter continues:—

“This island is, of course, Spanish, and terribly priest-ridden. The
people are wretched and dirty. Oh, the contrast between the miserable
shanties of Canary, with their dirty, half-naked children, and the clean,
sweet cottages of Wales! We went into the cathedral the other day, a
strange, uninteresting building, where the priests were droning the
service. The only thing we admired was a series of pictures, of more than
life-size, illustrating “The Way of the Cross.” I was glad to see them
there, and hoped that some poor people would derive from them knowledge
of Christ’s love and suffering, which they might not otherwise obtain.

“There are crowds of lazy, sleek priests about, who grind every possible
penny out of these poor people. Next to no mission work seems possible
among them, the restrictions are so many. There is the Sailors’
Institute, for English sailors especially, and the English church,
recently opened, for English visitors. I think the Searles do a little,
and perhaps the English clergyman does; I do not know. But it is very
little. There is one comfort, we shall have somewhere to go on Sunday.
There will be the church in the morning; we have promised to go down to
tea with the Searles; and in the evening there will be the Gospel Service
for sailors. I have promised to do my best to play the hymns for them.
There is a man-of-war lying here now, so the sailors, or many of them,
will be present. I was asked to speak, as they say the sailors listen
better to ladies; but I begged off for next Sunday at least. I am not
comfortable in speaking to men only.”

As Mr. Lewis grew stronger they were able to make interesting excursions
into the heart of the island, and in the course of a journey to an
extinct crater received beautiful hospitality at the hands of a venerable
peasant couple, of which Mrs. Lewis gives an idyllic picture.

The first day of June brought the sojourners no little joy in the
appearing of Mr. W. C. Parkinson, who had so timed a flying visit to
Grand Canary that he might spend a few days with Mr. and Mrs. Lewis. Mr.
Parkinson was and is an honoured and devoted member of the Committee
of the Baptist Missionary Society; he was the Superintendent of Camden
Road Sunday School, under whom Mrs. Lewis served in earlier years, and
withal an intimate personal friend. Mr. Parkinson was accompanied by his
daughter May, who, as a child, had known Mrs. Lewis in the Sunday School,
and in the class conducted by Thomas Comber. She also was inspired by
missionary ideals, and has since served the cause of Christ for many
years on the hard field of Morocco.

The four following days were golden days glowing with the glad, free
intercourse of kindred minds, maintained amid delightful physical
conditions. The happiness passed into memory on June 5th, when their
friends left, but Mrs. Lewis’s remark: “We did just enjoy the Parkinsons’
visit. It was splendid, hearing all about everybody, and I think they
enjoyed it too,” indicates how keen the happiness had been.

The stay in Grand Canary had done all that was hoped for in mending the
health of Mr. Lewis, and on June 13th, when the _Lulu Bohlen_ was hourly
expected, to take them back to Congo, Mrs. Lewis wrote a letter to her
friend, Miss Hartland, which bubbles over with high spirits and pulsates
with laughter. It contains a long, humorous account of an equestrian
picnic expedition, made by the Lewises and certain acquaintances,
to a distant part of the island. The use of the convenient epithet
“equestrian” involves a certain economy of truth, for most of the horses
were donkeys, and one of them was a mule. In fact, there was only one
horse, but the reader will pardon the inexactitude for the sake of
euphony. The letter was accompanied by a pencil sketch of the cavalcade.
Candour compels me to confess that the artistry is of the nursery order,
and that the names written beneath the figures in the picture are
necessary for identification, save in the case of Mr. Lewis, whose long
beard, black spectacles, and big helmet would enable the reader of the
epistle to be sure of him at once. I quote one paragraph:—

“As we sat waiting for coffee we rested in various fashions. Tom lay on
the floor with his feet on a chair. The other two gentlemen sat in an
opposite corner, each with his chair tilted up, and his feet on another.
Our ride had made us so lively that we laughed continually. When the
waiter appeared with the coffee—none of your sleek waiters in evening
dress, but a very rough Spanish man in country clothes—he asked if Tom
would have his coffee on the floor. Tom answered ‘Yes.’ Whereupon Mr.
Kennedy laughingly instructed the waiter to pour it down his throat. And
this the obedient fellow was on the point of doing, with utmost gravity,
evidently regarding it as one more freak of ‘those English,’ who ride
donkeys and take long walks for pleasure. We had a splendid ride back, my
donkey keeping up with Mr. Kennedy’s horse and coming in at a gallop, far
ahead of all the rest.”

In good health and good heart Mr. and Mrs. Lewis left Grand Canary on
board the _Lulu Bohlen_, sailing on June 15th, and early in July were
safe at Tunduwa, greatly cheered by good news of the Mission. Their short
stay at the base station was made memorable by the arrival of Mr. and
Mrs. Grenfell, who appeared just in time to partake of the plum-pudding,
which was destined for exceptional honour. Writing on July 5th to Miss
Hartland, Mrs. Lewis says: “We had the plum-pudding for dinner to-day,
and just before ‘chop’-time Mr. and Mrs. Grenfell arrived, so they
partook of it as well. Mr. G. said he hardly dared to, but must for your
sake. He did not know of dear mother’s death, as his letters failed to
reach him and were sent back here. He is now reading them all. Though
he looks very well, he has been ailing for some days. We were ardently
hoping that he would come before we left, as was Mr. Forfeitt. So the
Pinnocks, Messrs. Forfeitt, Pople, and Kirkland, Mr. and Mrs. Grenfell,
Mr. and Mrs. Roger and ourselves, all ate of your pudding and enjoyed it.
It was first-rate after all these months. I thought you would like to
know.”

“San Salvador, August 27th.—Since my last letter Messrs. Grenfell and
Lawson Forfeitt have been here for a flying visit. We were so sorry they
could not stay over Sunday. It was such a pleasure to have them, and they
said their coming did them both good. Mr. Grenfell stayed at Mr. Graham’s
house, and Mr. Forfeitt with us, but they both ‘chopped’ here, and we
had welcome talk with them about many matters. They are both special
favourites with us. We were sorry Mrs. Grenfell could not come, but she
had not returned from the Cameroons.”

A fuller account of this visit is given in “The Life of George Grenfell”
(page 338), including a letter from him, in which he refers to the great
change which had come over the place since his previous visit, and
proceeds: “The Church members number forty-nine; the scholars in regular
attendance, about twice that number, the girls being more numerous than
the boys; a fact largely due to the marked influence of Mrs. Lewis, who
is a splendid missionary.”

“October 31.—The commodity, time, has been very scarce with me lately.
You may possibly have heard that Mrs. Phillips had a son on the 7th of
this month. He is a darling little fellow, and of course I love him
muchly, as you know my predilections in that line. Mrs. Phillips is
getting on nicely. I have just returned from bathing baby, and getting
her up. She is now sitting on her piazza.

“February 5, 1894.—If you only knew how busy I am you would forgive a
short letter I am sure. I will just tell you in detail of my day’s work
and then you will know how time flies. Directly after breakfast this
morning came prayers with the girls, then I gave out ‘chop’ to them and
the small boys, and arranged dinner for ourselves with the cook. After
this I dispensed medicine to over sixty people, and you can imagine what
a job this is. Next came conversation with some Christian women who had
come over from two other towns for Communion yesterday, and had many
things to discuss before they went back. Then I took a class of inquirers
from one of these towns, consisting of six women. By that time it was
after twelve, noon.

“Just as I was coming to sit down quietly, one of my house-girls came to
speak to me. So I sat down in my bedroom to listen to the good news that
she wished to give her heart to Christ. While she was speaking another
girl came on the same errand. When I got to the sitting-room I found Tom
talking to one of our boys, one of those everlasting marriage palavers
which is not settled yet. By that time there were ten minutes left before
dinner, after which we get an hour’s rest, and need it, especially just
now when the weather is broiling in the middle of the day. After rest and
a cup of tea I wrote a note to one of our boys at Tunduwa about another
matrimonial affair, and then went to school for two hours. When I came
out I found Mr. Pople in fever and Tom looking after him. Then I took a
quarter of an hour’s stroll outside, and have been writing ever since
tea. I was forced to write many letters for this mail. This is a fair
sample of a day. Only the evenings are usually given to teaching, sewing,
or translating.

“We had a delightful baptismal service last week, when five persons from
one town, one from Mbanza Mputu, and two of my schoolgirls confessed
Christ. I have written in full about the candidates to Mr. Baynes, so
perhaps you may see the letter in the _Herald_.... We are so delighted to
hear about the Congo Sale. You have done splendidly this year!”

                                  “_May 22nd._ [To a correspondent.]

    “There is no doubt we shall require them [unmarried women
    missionaries] by and by as the Mission develops. At present
    all the work among women is done by missionaries’ wives. I
    should say the chief qualifications for a woman missionary,
    either married or single—after, of course, those which are
    spiritual—are, first, and most essential, really good health
    and a sound constitution, then, common sense, a sound knowledge
    of all household matters including the making of clothes,
    aptness to teach, and a cheerful, contented disposition. These,
    with a large stock of patience, a heart full of love, some
    knowledge of nursing and medicine if possible, and a single eye
    to the glory of God, will, I think, make an ideal missionary.
    Alas! we feel we fall far short of this ideal, but it is well
    to aim high. I have always regarded Mrs. Mary Moffat as my
    model, and have many times taken ideas from her life and work.
    I think one who is to become the wife of a missionary could not
    do better than study her life....

    “Now a little about our work. We are very short-handed just
    now. My husband and I are quite alone, and are likely to be for
    some time. We are always busy, and cannot do half the work.
    We have at this station a native Church of fifty-nine members,
    thirteen of whom belong to other towns. These, we believe, are
    Christians, but the majority cannot read, and they all need
    constant teaching and supervision. Then we have a boys’ school
    of sixty, which meets every morning, and a girls’ school in the
    afternoon with eighty-five names on the books. Of course some
    of these are irregular, so that the average attendance would be
    a hundred and ten boys and girls. Then we have schools in three
    other towns. Two young men who were our personal boys are in
    charge of them, and there are over a hundred and twenty people
    in attendance. In all our schools there are a good many who are
    no longer children, but who are anxious to learn to read.

    “Three times a week I have a dispensary, giving medicines to
    all who come. I have about one hundred and fifty patients
    weekly, sometimes more. Some are very sad cases for which
    we can do little. Others we are able to help and sometimes
    to cure. We have the boys and girls living with us who are
    trained to work in different ways. You can imagine that all
    this with classes, services, visitations of the sick and others
    in their own houses, keeps our hands pretty full. But we long
    so intensely to go about among the other towns and preach the
    Good Tidings. Several of these towns are visited on Sundays
    by the native Christians, but only those that are within
    walking distance, and there are scores beyond, speaking the
    same language which would gladly welcome us, but we cannot go
    for lack of helpers. If only the young men of England could
    really know the greatness of the work, and the scarcity of the
    workers, I am sure many would willingly offer themselves. One
    qualification I omitted to mention, needed by men and women, a
    good education. We do not need merely good people, but those
    who can influentially lead others. For after all Africa must be
    evangelised by her own people.”

“September 5th. (To Mrs. J. Jenkyn Brown.)—You ask if the deaths occurred
near us. Both of the brethren [Messrs. Oram and Balfern] were well known
to us, but one died at our farthest station [Bopoto], hundreds of miles
distant, and the other on his way home, at Madeira. It is a rare thing
for us to see any of our colleagues from the other stations. We are quite
out of the world here, even the Congo world. It is a drawback in some
respects, but there are advantages, and we are so busy that we have no
time to pine for society. Still it would be very pleasant to see our
friends sometimes, and the idea of being ‘spirited over to Birmingham
for rest and petting’ is most alluring. But when we look around and see
just our two selves, and our fellow-missionary, Mr. Graham, with every
other influence, in the place and about it for hundreds of miles, telling
against truth and righteousness, we can only hope and pray to be allowed
to remain and work here.

“October 4th.—Your last letter was written from Devonshire and called up
visions of lovely country walks which I should not mind sharing if only
one could fly backwards and forwards. But there is no holiday for us.
For the last ten days or so we have been busier than ever. We have been
having a grand vaccination frolic. A few weeks ago our Resident left to
be promoted to a better place. He wrote back from Noki to Tom, and sent
him some tubes of vaccine. Most of it was bad, as it usually is by the
time it comes here, but one tube was good, from which we vaccinated our
house-children; then from them some of the outside people, and so on. The
news soon spread, and people came in crowds. Every morning hundreds are
to be seen entering the station. We all go to chapel and have prayers
first; then I take all the medical work, while Tom and Mr. Graham go at
it as hard as they can. You can imagine it is no play. Yesterday I gave
medicine to over fifty people while they vaccinated 402!—225 were done
to-day. This has been going on for nearly a fortnight, and ‘still there’s
more to follow.’

“The people come from towns far and near, for they are terribly afraid
of smallpox, and vaccination is something tangible which they can
understand. So many are quite strangers, knowing nothing of God’s
palaver, that it is very difficult to keep order at prayers. Indeed,
it is hard to get silence to begin, for we have had the chapel crowded
out. I am afraid they don’t take much in, at just one service. Still, it
prepares the way for them to listen next time. Up till now the cases have
numbered 1,651.

“The rains have just begun, and Tom is busy with his garden. On Saturday
and Sunday he had a touch of liver trouble, and had to keep quiet for
a couple of days. He is all right again now. I am thankful to say Mr.
Graham and I are well too. We hear some talk of Mr. Phillips coming
back soon after the new year as his time will be up, but Mrs. P. is not
coming, and we are very much afraid Mrs. Graham won’t come either. We
are waiting anxiously for this mail to hear something definite. I don’t
mind much if my health keeps good except that there might be so much more
done. Really my health is wonderful considering everything. I feel I
can’t be thankful enough for it.

“We are having a hard fight here now, there are many forces of evil
against us. Some of those who have been trained in the Mission are doing
their very best to keep people away from us and our meetings, and trying
hard to destroy and lead into sin those who do come. Still we have God
on our side, and in spite of them all the work goes on. We have large
meetings, good schools, and many people coming to be taught. Mr. Graham
has been visiting the out-stations since I wrote last. He was very
pleased with the work. He had not seen them before.

“November 23rd.—There is a great deal of opposition now to girls coming
into the station, because the men find that they will not be slaves
afterwards. Only those who really wish to live in a decent fashion
will allow their girls to come, and even when they do there is often
difficulty with their families.... But the conceit of these people,
especially the young men and big boys, is astonishing. It is beyond
measure! There is just that air about them: ‘I’m as good as you.’
They are not at all the poor humble negroes whom one reads about in
story-books. They are very different even from the Cameroons people in
their behaviour to the white man. There is one good thing about it. I
think it will be easy to develop independent, self-supporting Churches as
soon as we can find people to take the leadership.

“December 16th.—You said in your last letter that there will always be
a welcome for us at 34. Thank you very much for the assurance. I am
afraid we shall come to claim it earlier than we had expected. We did
hope to stay out another year, but Tom is sick in bed with one of his
old attacks, the second he has had, and a very severe one. So we dare
not risk another, and shall leave as soon as there is some one with Mr.
Graham. We shall not come to England though, until May, all being well,
but shall stay at Madeira, to avoid east winds, and to learn Portuguese,
which we badly need here.”

       *       *       *       *       *

On January 16, 1895, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis left San Salvador, and after
a tedious voyage reached Grand Canary on March 20. There they were
compelled to wait eight days, and the subsequent passage to Madeira
proved frightfully rough and perilous. They arrived much knocked about,
but not permanently damaged by the buffeting. Their friend Mr. Parkinson,
who had called upon them at Grand Canary in the previous year, dropped
in again at Funchal, and remained with them a week, to the great
augmentation of their pleasure and their cheer, but whether or not to
the advantage of their projected study of the Portuguese language I
cannot say.

Early in May they were in London, and found a temporary home in the near
vicinity of the church which Mr. Lewis had come to regard with affection
akin to that long cherished by his wife.

In the following month, Mrs. Lewis had an important interview with Mr.
Baynes respecting the work of women missionaries on the Congo, and the
advisability of allowing unmarried women to join the staff. She was of
opinion that this should be done when the Committee had been educated
to adopt right lines in the matter, concerning which her judgments were
very definitely formulated. Suffice it here to say that ultimately her
recommendations have been almost exactly embodied in practice.

At the end of July, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis, accompanied by their niece, Miss
Eva Percival, joined Mr. and the Misses Hartland at Penmaenmawr, and
began a holiday in North Wales which was ever remembered with enthusiasm.
Among the pious pilgrimages of this sojourn in the hill country was one
to the inn at which Mrs. Lewis’s father and mother spent their honeymoon,
and another to the churchyard at Maentwrog where her grandparents and one
of her uncles were buried.

As the year drew to its close, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis were both in the full
swing of deputation work, and in a letter dated December 16th, Mrs.
Lewis states that she and her husband have each had fourteen meetings at
Loughborough within one week. Their programme included a five weeks’
working tour in Scotland, in the interests of the Mission; and after
many labours there came a spell of strenuous rest in Switzerland, of
which no other record has reached my hand than the following enthusiastic
picture-postcard communication, addressed to Miss Ethel Percival:—

“Chamonix, June 9th.—Here we are in the midst of glories too big for
words. Mont Blanc showed us his head yesterday. Such a sight! This
morning we walked over the Glacier du Borson. Had to start by climbing
a long ladder, then steps cut in the ice just big enough for one
foot—woollen socks over our boots. Splendid walk there and back through
pine woods smelling deliciously! Waterfalls, mountains, streams, and
flowers in abundance. Love to all. Tell Eva I have got my mountain
spirits on.... To-morrow we go to see another glacier, bigger and farther
off. I go on a dear beast.”

The furlough with its manifold labours and spells of recreation which
constitute the “rest and change” which missionaries come home to enjoy,
wore to its close. Public and private farewells were spoken, and on
Saturday, July 4th, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis, Mrs. White, Mr. Wherrett, and
Mr. Gardiner of another mission, left London for Antwerp. Mr. Parkinson
accompanied them upon this first stage of their journey. Sunday was spent
in Antwerp, where they attended services at the Seamen’s Church and
visited St. Paul’s and the Cathedral. On Monday Mr. Parkinson took the
whole party to Brussels for the day, but on returning to Antwerp had to
say “goodbye” without waiting to see them off. They were sorry at the
leave-taking, and would fain have had his company all the way, as I, who
have had the privilege of travelling with him more than once, can well
believe.

But if Mr. Parkinson did not see them off a good many other people did.
Their ship was a new one, named _Albertville_, after the Crown Prince.
When she loosed from the quay flags were flying, bells ringing, bands
playing, all the craft in the river ablaze with bunting, and “all
Antwerp” at the riverside to see the spectacle; for the Crown Prince
himself had come aboard, and ten nuns and two priests bound for Africa
had embarked in procession, led by two dignitaries of the Church wearing
gorgeous apparel. As the _Albertville_ dropped down the Scheldt “music
played while His Serene Highness was pleased to eat his victuals.” At
Flushing the Crown Prince and the bishops left the ship with ceremonious
adieux and episcopal benedictions. It was all glorious and affecting, but
left somewhat to be desired. The music which cheered the Prince at his
banquet failed to satisfy the cravings of hungry English missionaries,
and Mrs. Lewis ruefully records in her journal that they did not get
their lunch until four o’clock.




CHAPTER IX

THE BUILDING OF THE NEW CHAPEL AT SAN SALVADOR, AND OTHER MATTERS


The voyagers reached Matadi safely on Sunday, August 2nd, and before
going to San Salvador made the journey to Stanley Pool to attend meetings
of the local committee. They found great refreshment in converse with
their colleagues, and Mrs. Lewis wrote a long letter containing brief,
kindly notes concerning every one of them. The return journey was made
in the company of Mr. and Mrs. Lawson Forfeitt and included a brief but
happy stay at Wathen. Mr. Forfeitt has given me an idyllic picture of
a Sunday evening encampment upon a hillside, where, in ideal natural
conditions, the travellers worshipped God in informal service and read
together one of Dr. Maclaren’s sermons. Upon reference to Mrs. Lewis’s
journal I find the date of this incident was August 30th, and the reading
of the sermon is mentioned.

San Salvador was reached on Wednesday, September 9th, and Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis forthwith settled down to their customary round of duties. In
October they made a journey of visitation to the outposts, and one
incident points the moral that we appreciate our privileges when we are
on the point of losing them. The people of Mawunze, among whom Vita and
his wife had been working, had proved apathetic to such a degree that
it was determined to withdraw Vita, for other towns were clamouring for
a teacher. As soon as this decision was known all Mawunze turned out in
a fit of penitence and besought that Vita might be allowed to remain,
promising all manner of amendment. In the end he left for a season with
the understanding that if the newly awakened ardour were maintained he
should return.

In November the town of San Salvador was plunged into excitement by the
sudden death of the King, following a flagrantly nefarious piece of
conduct, the culmination of an evil course. To the great indignation
of Mrs. Lewis and her colleagues the Resident consented to wink at the
following of certain heathen and illegal customs in the observance of
the obsequies. It was peculiarly painful to Mrs. Lewis that certain of
her women friends and converts, wives of the deceased King, would have
to sit all day long for months in a house with the corpse, never going
out except at night. The only concession secured was that those who were
professed Christians should be permitted to attend the services of the
Mission.

Matter for discouragement and encouragement appears in the following
extracts from a letter to Miss Hartland dated December 21, 1896:—

“The dreadful thing with these children is their propensity to steal. E.
is just the same as D., and so are L. and M. at the other houses. We have
tried everything with them—admonition, punishments of various kinds—but
nothing has any effect. Can you suggest a remedy? We have even bribed,
but to no purpose. Steal they will, and some of them ‘lie on the top.’ If
any one has doubts about ‘original sin’ let him come here!

“E. is a regular Topsy. She informed Mrs. Graham once, who was trying to
talk to her seriously, that she didn’t want to go to heaven; she should
prefer going to the other place. Isn’t it dreadful? What are you to
do with a child like that? One of Mr. Hawker’s sweet little angels of
seven!!! None of the black children would _say_ that, though they _do_
just as bad things. She is a mulatto. I do hope she may be converted, for
she is very pretty, unfortunately for her, and what will become of her I
can’t think. She can read nicely, but is not very clever otherwise....
You will be glad to know that the chief of Mbanza Mputu refused to
apply for the throne here after the death of the King, because it would
entail his becoming a Roman Catholic. I think it was a fine evidence of
sincerity, for he was really the rightful heir.... Another thing you will
be interested to hear. When we were at Mbanza Mputu a fortnight ago,
Matata brought a man to Tom, saying he came from his town of Bangu (near
the Arthington Falls, you know), and he wanted to come to learn more
about God’s palaver. When Tom began to ask him questions, it turned out
that he first heard the Gospel from John [Hartland] when he went to the
falls with Matata, and that he was sent up to Manyanga with a message
when John was ill there. He seems a very hopeful inquirer, and thus the
seed sown so many years ago seems to be bearing fruit now. It is an
encouragement, too, to us, as one never knows how even one visit to a
town may be the means of awakening some hearers to a sense of their need.”

Early in the year 1897, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis were again engaged in visiting
the out-stations. In April San Salvador is visited by mumps, in epidemic
form, and Mrs. Lewis contracts the disease in the course of her work
among the people. About this time she is filled with sorrow by the death
of Mr. Pople at Tumba; and, two months later, she and all friends of the
Mission are again plunged into mourning by the death of Mr. White at
Yakusu. In July she is away at Nkoko, concerned in the appointment of a
new teacher—Manwana, one of their first boys. And in the following month
mention is made of the undertaking which gives the title to this chapter.

“August 18th. (To Miss Ethel Percival.)—In San Salvador the sickness is
dreadful, and hardly a day passes without a death. Uncle and Mr. Phillips
are continually at funerals, and we don’t hear of all those who are
buried by the Padres, or in country fashion as heathens. The Catholics
are beginning to restore the old cathedral.[5] I am sorry, as they have
spoilt the beautiful ruins—the only pretty thing in the place. And they
won’t do it properly. It will be a very small, insignificant place when
it is finished. Of course it is to save trouble, for one thing, as some
of the walls are already there. We hope to build our new chapel next dry
season, all being well. Uncle is busy with plans now. That will be very
much larger. By the way, you would love our cat! She has two dear little
kittens. She had five—but—I draw a curtain! These two are sweet! Sandy we
shall keep; Tiger goes to Mrs. P. But Mrs. Tabitha is nearly human in the
way she goes on. We put her in the medicine-room on the piazza at night;
but as soon as our door is open in the morning she carries her two babies
to their day nursery in our bedroom. She much regrets that they are not
allowed there at night, and protested loudly when we came home, for she
had been allowed to keep house in our absence. She likes to be near us,
though she does not like being nursed.”

Early in October Mrs. Lewis reports the glad and ceremonial welcome
accorded to a new colleague, Mr. Adams, and a journey of itineration in
which she and Mr. Lewis were accompanied by him. A striking incident
occurred in the course of this tour. As they were on the point of leaving
one town certain women came and laid a bundle of fetishes before her,
saying, “Here are the things which tempt us.” She had not spoken of
fetishes, but they had made practical application of her words.

“November 25th.—I think I told you that the Resident and priests were
starting to rebuild the cathedral. They laid the foundation-stone, with
their names on it, and built very thick stone walls. But a few days ago,
lo, and behold, in the walls appeared two great cracks, and the workmen
were sent off in a great hurry lest the whole thing should collapse
upon the top of them. They had built above rotten graves and without
sufficient foundation. So it is left now, and I very much doubt if it
will ever get finished. The King and the people are rather wild because
the priests have been forcing them to pay for it, taking a part of the
King’s monthly allowance. They have just managed to spoil the beauty of
the old ruins, though. By the way, one of you speaks about the future
King being in our school. He was in our school; but as soon as he was
appointed to be King he was taken away to stay with the Resident, treated
like one of themselves, and sent to the Padres’ school. Now he has been
sent to school at Loanda, and they say in a little while he will go to
Portugal. He was perfectly spoilt before he left here. He will learn
at Loanda every conceivable kind of wickedness. So I am afraid he is
more likely to be a curse than a blessing when he returns. However,
‘sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.’ We must trust that in some
way things will be overruled for good.”

Some weeks after the foregoing paragraphs were written, the tottering
walls of the new cathedral crashed down in a storm.

“December 26th.—The new chapel is not yet in process of building. We are
only getting things ready. The collection is coming in well this year,
and we hope to be quite prepared to commence the work at the beginning of
the dry season, next May. Tom is architect, and I suppose will be builder
also. It will be a big job.”

[Illustration: SAN SALVADOR: RUINS OF ANCIENT PORTUGUESE CATHEDRAL.]

“February 7th. (To Miss Ethel Percival.)—Things go on much the same here.
It is really difficult to write about anything.

“We have been reading in odd times a book called ‘The Sowers,’ by the
author of the ‘Tents of Kedar.’ It is good and rather exciting, but it
takes us a long time to get through a book unless we are ill. Did I tell
you that Uncle is busy building a dispensary among other things? It will
be a nice little building when finished—one side for men and the other
for women, which latter will be my domain, so I am watching it with great
interest. At present I have to dispense from our own house, which takes
up room, moreover the smell is not always pleasant. If you were to see
some of the awful sores I don’t know what you would say! I think I told
you the Resident’s wife has a baby. He is six months old now, and I nurse
him occasionally. He is a dear. I am his medical attendant. The moment
anything is the matter with him they send off for me. Poor little chap,
it’s hard on a baby here, though the Portuguese don’t feel it as we do.”

“March 27th.—What will you say when I tell you there is every likelihood
of our leaving San Salvador and going to plant a new station? For a long
time Mr. Bentley has had a scheme on foot for placing a new station in
a district some eighty miles N.E. from here called Zombo. It is very
populous and is a great trading centre. The people speak nearly the same
language as here so books, &c., would be all ready. At first there were
obstacles in the way, but we are all agreed now as to the advisability
of the plan. There is nothing definitely settled yet, but we hear that
Mr. Baynes is in favour of it, and that if the Committee agree, we shall
be going there with John Pinnock, as we and he have offered. It will be
nice to have him for a colleague, as we shall all be from Camden, and
the station will be a memorial to Tom Comber. I hope that Camden folks
will feel a special interest in it from the first. Tom and I hope to go
there in June to see the place and people, and to study the prospects
generally. Sometimes some people from Zombo come here as carriers,
otherwise there has been no evangelistic work done there. Mr. Bentley
paid a visit there two or three years ago, and Mr. Phillips made a rush
to one town when we were at home. The district is under Portuguese
rule, and there is a Resident, and a Portuguese trader who used to be
here. But it is a very large district with room for no end of work. The
priests have not gone there yet. I wonder if they will follow. It will
be beginning again quite at the beginning and we shall be farther away
from civilisation even than here; but by means of the railway we shall
be able to get to Matadi in case of need in about the same time as from
San Salvador, for Tumba is about as far from Zombo as we are, and then
there is only a day’s journey in the train. When we go there I shall be
able to tell you all about it; until then this is all I know. Tom is busy
with the new chapel and it is getting on fast. He hopes to finish that
work before we leave permanently. Of course we shall regret leaving here
for many things, but we wish to go there very much and shall be very
disappointed if anything prevents now. Well, these are our plans, but the
future is in God’s hands, and He will order everything for the extension
of His Kingdom in this dark land.”

“April 11th. (A circular letter.)—I expect you will be looking for
another letter from me by now, so I am writing to tell you about the
commencement of our new chapel. For eleven years we have met in a house
made entirely of native materials with a mud floor. It has been repaired
a great many times, and now shows signs that it will not last much
longer. We have been collecting money for the erection of a new permanent
chapel for the last four years, each New Year’s collection being set
apart for that purpose. At the beginning of this year the people made a
great effort, and brought a larger amount than in any previous year, so
that we felt justified in beginning to build. We hope by the end of this
year to have enough to complete it, as it must be opened free of debt.
Mr. Lewis undertook the task of planning and directing the work, and much
time and labour it cost him, for you must remember that we have no really
skilled workmen. There are one or two pretty fair bricklayers, but they
can build nothing more elaborate than a plain square wall. Many of the
tools, too, he has had to make himself, in the smithy. Mr. Lewis drew
up a plan and decided to build a stone chapel capable of seating five
hundred comfortably. The next thing was to get the stones. There was an
old ruined wall, a part of the old monastery, which was getting dangerous
to passers-by, so that came down and supplied a good many; then there is
the old stone house which the first missionaries built now fast going to
ruin, that is supplying a good many more. All the large stones in and
about the station were gathered together, and then the builders began to
make the foundations. It occurred to us that it would be nice to have a
stone-laying ceremony. Something that would draw the people together,
make them feel that it was their work, and give them something to look
back upon in years to come. To-day the great event has taken place and I
am sure it will be a red-letter day in the lives of many. I have never
seen them so thoroughly interested in anything.

“It was decided that Mrs. Phillips and I should each have the honour
of laying a memorial stone. Mr. Lewis and his men chose two nice grey
stones, upon which he cut our initials and the date of laying. He also
made two pretty little new trowels, and got everything ready and fitted
for this morning’s ceremony.

“Mr. Phillips, too, was busy. He composed a special hymn and tune, and
taught the people to sing it. He also got programmes printed, sufficient
to give to all who could read. Meanwhile the people had not been idle.
Down at the bottom of the hill is a little stream where there are very
fine grey stones. We asked every one to bring a stone, and every day some
people were to be seen going down to fetch them, until yesterday there
was hardly a house from which any one came to our Mission, but there lay
one or more stones outside it, waiting for the morrow. Yesterday morning
after service, when Mr. Lewis announced the meeting of to-day, to our
surprise the people burst out in loud applause, round after round of
clapping, and it was some time before we could get sufficient quiet to
dismiss them. Just now it is the middle of the wet season, so we were a
little anxious about the weather. We were greatly rejoiced this morning
to find a beautiful bright sunshiny day with a pleasant breeze keeping
it a little cool. Every one was astir early, and at half-past eight the
bell rang and we five missionaries all went over to the site of the new
chapel. Then from all directions came women and girls carrying stones
on their heads. Now came one with a stone balanced on her head, a baby
tied on her back, and a bunch of beads (Congo money) in her hand; then
a little mite of a child with a stone clutched tight with both hands,
then women and girls of all sorts and sizes down to the tiny tots in the
infants’ class, but each with her stone, which was deposited in front of
the missionaries. Soon from a little distance came the strains of a hymn,
boys’ and men’s voices joining in singing ‘All hail the power of Jesus’
name’ in the Congo language, and as we looked we saw a long procession of
men and boys, each carrying a stone, coming from the opposite direction,
Mr. Adams, who had arranged this little incident, bringing up the rear.
As they reached the place each put down his stone, and then all stood
round singing lustily till the hymn was finished. By this time fully five
hundred people were gathered together. Quiet was called for, and the
service began with a short prayer by Mr. Lewis, then a hymn which was
heartily sung, Mr. Phillips presiding at the harmonium. Mr. Lewis read a
few verses telling how Solomon prepared to build the temple, Mr. Phillips
spoke about the history of the Mission from the time Messrs. Grenfell
and Comber came here in 1878—when they used to meet under the old tree
in the palaver ground—up till now, and drew some lessons from it. Then
came the ceremony: Mr. Lewis presented me with the trowel, helped me to
lay the stone, did the same for Mrs. Phillips, and we declared them ‘Well
and truly laid to the glory of God.’ Behind each stone was deposited a
sealed bottle containing the current number of our magazine, which gives
an account of the formation and growth of the Church here, with full
details of the station, staff, native teachers, &c., also a programme of
to-day’s proceedings. After the stone-laying, freewill offerings were
laid upon them; a great number of people pressed forward with beads and
cloth, one woman with a live fowl, and others with papers giving part
of their wages. Then Mr. Lewis offered prayer, asking God’s blessing on
all, and His help to complete the work, so that in years to come, when
all we shall have passed away, many may meet within its walls to hear the
good news of a Father’s and a Saviour’s love. Then with all our hearts
and voices we sang a translation of ‘O’er the gloomy hills of darkness’
to old ‘Calcutta.’ Mr. Adams pronounced the Benediction, and we all
dispersed after the scene had been photographed.

“At the end of next month my husband and I hope to start on a long
journey to a country where no missionary has been before. We expect to
be away many weeks, so you will not hear from me for some little time
probably. I shall hope to write and tell you about it on our return.
Meanwhile will you pray for us that God may give us favour in the sight
of the people and lead us to a place which may become another centre of
light in this dark land.”

“May 19th.—There has been quite a smallpox scare in this town. There
have been eight cases, all at the same time. A house has been built
outside the town to accommodate them. There have been no fresh cases
for about ten days now, so we hope it is over; but the people are so
foolish. Although they are terribly afraid of it, yet they will not take
any precautions, and hide cases if they possibly can. We have had to be
very careful with the children in the station, not allowing them to go
visiting in the town, and we have stopped inquirers and others coming
from other towns, so as not to spread the mischief. Tom actually found
the King hiding a boy with it in his house. Of course he sent him at once
to the Resident.

“The new chapel is getting on slowly. Tom’s illness has not helped it.
Next week, if well, we shall be very busy. Going away for so long and not
knowing exactly whither we go is a big job, and we shall need to take a
great many things with us.”

“August 4th.—The girls’ school flourishes exceedingly, and now we are
getting all the little children, the children of those we taught in years
gone by. It is so nice to see the little tots coming in, and they really
like coming, and of course will be able to learn so much more than those
who have only two or three years to learn in and who in many cases are
working hard all day. We have ninety-two girls on the books. If we go
away I hope they will send another man and his wife out here. Of course
at Zombo we shall not need another lady just yet, as the work will be
very gradual there. At first we shall have to gain the confidence of the
people and that will take some time.”

In June Mr. and Mrs. Lewis, with some of their boys, made the eventful
journey to Zombo, which will be fully described in a later chapter. After
notable adventures, they arrived back safely at San Salvador on July 6th,
and took up their customary work again. For many months, however, the
chapel building was a matter of commanding interest, and for Mr. Lewis
a matter of heavy labour and multiplied anxieties. His wife’s letters
teem with lively and sympathetic references to his trials. His workmen,
imperfectly skilled, need constant supervision. It is passing difficult
to induce them to take an interest in doing things well. Their invincible
propensity to “jabber” while at work leads them to make mistakes which
necessitate the pulling down again of that which they have built up,
and all this with the rainy season imminent, making it a matter of
moment that the stone-laying should be swiftly done. When it comes to
constructing the arches for doors and windows, she fears that Mr. Lewis
will have much trouble in teaching his craftsmen, for no one in San
Salvador has made an arch before. Yet in spite of all drawbacks, the work
goes on.

Meanwhile they await long and anxiously the final consent of the
Committee to the Zombo Scheme.

Early in April, 1899, Mrs. Lewis reports with joy that the desired
consent has been received, and gives account of the progress of the
building.

“The chapel will look fine when it is finished. The roof is nearly on.
It is a year to-day, counting by Easter and not by the date, since
the stones were laid. By the way, we missionaries, the Grahams, the
Phillipses, and ourselves are paying for the pulpit and the baptistery,
and building them in memory of those who have gone. We intend to affix a
brass plate recording that they are erected in memory of Tom and Minnie
Comber, John S. Hartland, A. Cowe, S. Silvey, and Wilkinson. We thought
it would be good for the natives not to forget those who have worked and
died for them.”

Before the month of April closed an event occurred which plunged the
Mission into deepest sorrow. Here follows the account written by Mrs.
Lewis and addressed to Mr. Baynes.

“All last week Mrs. Phillips was very unwell, and caused us some anxiety,
and on Sunday, the 23rd inst., fever appeared, which continued in spite
of all efforts to subdue it. Mrs. Phillips was much worse on Tuesday,
and we began to fear for her: from that time until Wednesday afternoon
we did everything we could think of, but, although we were able to allay
the distressing symptoms, the inward fever remained, and at 1.45 p.m., on
April 26th, she passed peacefully away. Mrs. Phillips was conscious to
within an hour of her death, a fact for which she was very thankful, and
so are we. She was able to speak to us words of faith and hope, and to
send loving messages to all the dear ones at home, and to the women and
children here. At first she was grieved at the thought of not seeing her
little ones again, and at the thought of their childish sorrow when they
should learn that mother would come home no more. But even that passed,
and she was able to leave them in the care of the Heavenly Father. She
had taken such an interest in the building of the new chapel, and the
day before she died asked if it was possible for her to go to look at
it. On Wednesday, when Mr. Lewis came into the room, she said: ‘Ah! I
shall never see the bonny chapel after all!’ She spoke, too, of the work
to which we hope to go in Zombo, and said she thought she should see us
there, and hoped we should have great blessing, and was so grateful for
every little thing done for her, and was brave and unselfish to the last.

“When it became known how ill Mrs. Phillips was the greatest concern was
evinced by the people. None of the women went to their farms, but sat
and watched outside the house. When all was over, and she lay as in a
peaceful sleep, with white English roses scattered around, the women came
in to take a last look at their friend; they burst out into the terrible
death wail, but when we asked them to desist they stopped, and nothing
could have shown the sorrow and sympathy so much as the absolute quiet
that reigned through all that sad day and the day following. The people
all—men, women, and children—did their very utmost to show their love
and respect. They cleared the path to the chapel and to the cemetery,
and the next morning, when six of the station boys carried the coffin
into the chapel, it was through two long rows of mourners that we
passed. Mr. Lewis conducted a short service and gave a brief address,
and all that day a crowd of women sat round the coffin until four in the
afternoon, when the funeral took place in the cemetery on the outskirts
of the town. Every one was most kind. The Resident, the Padres, and the
representatives of the trading houses all came, the Padres even offering
their band. Such a funeral has never been seen in Congo before, and all
the way to the grave and back again the most reverent silence. Before
starting we sang a translation of the hymn, ‘Guide me, O Thou great
Jehovah,’ and at the grave, ‘Abide with me,’ and then we left our sister
asleep in Jesus until the day break and the shadows flee away.

“Mrs. Phillips was one of those quiet, unobtrusive workers whose work is
not much known or appreciated, but we who have been her fellow-workers
for more than ten years know how real was her love for the work, and how
often in great weariness and pain she did her utmost to bring the women
and children to the feet of Jesus. For the last two years she had very
few interruptions from illness, and has been able to work continuously
with me in the school and other parts of the work, especially in the
Sunday School, taking the oversight of the girls’ department, and holding
a female teachers’ preparation class. Our hearts are sad for her husband
and the dear little motherless children as well as the parents and other
friends in the homeland. May the loving Heavenly Father be very near to
sustain them when this news reaches them.

“We mourn, too, for ourselves and the work here. We have lost a kind and
unselfish colleague and the women’s work a true friend and helper. Who is
to take her place? If you could have seen the sympathy and sorrow shown
yesterday; if you could have watched the devotion of Mrs. Phillips’s
eldest girl during her illness and all through this sad time; if you
could have heard the prayers offered by the women this evening, when we
met in our weekly prayer-meeting—prayers for the friends at home, for us
who are left, and for themselves in their own sad loss—you would have
felt as I did that our work has not been in vain, and that the Congo
women are priceless jewels to be won for the Saviour’s crown. You know
that I am hoping to go further afield, and work among the women of Zombo.
I would earnestly beg the Committee to send some one to help Mrs. Graham
in this work. We are so short-handed here; we want more workers, both men
and women, to do for these people what they cannot do for themselves.
They are willing to work, but they need teaching and guiding, and we must
have more workers among the women. These Congo women, with a large amount
of personal freedom and strong will, must become a power for good if
only they are led aright. The fields are white unto harvest, the time is
short, and the workers swiftly pass away. May the Lord thrust forth more
labourers into His harvest.”

On June 7th Mr. and Mrs. Lewis, accompanied by Mr. John Pinnock, started
again for Kibokolo, the journey occupying nearly a fortnight. They
succeeded in securing a plot of ground, and before they left, six days
later, the Comber Memorial station was commenced. Mr. Pinnock remained to
proceed with the necessary building, while Mr. and Mrs. Lewis returned
to San Salvador for the short closing period of their work in that
town. They arrived back on July 5th; the chapel building work was duly
completed, and on Saturday, September 16th, and following days, the
opening ceremonies took place. Mrs. Lewis’s report of the celebrations
will constitute the next chapter.




CHAPTER X

THE OPENING OF THE NEW CHAPEL AT SAN SALVADOR. SEPTEMBER, 1899


The following account of the opening of the new chapel at San Salvador,
and the detailed reports of two public meetings, were written by Mrs.
Lewis. The reader will, of course, remember that the speeches reported
were delivered in the Congo language, and that Mrs. Lewis translates as
well as reports. I have thought it worth while to print these documents,
believing that they will convey more vivid and convincing impressions of
missionary success than many pages of abstract exposition.

“We have just finished the opening services of the new chapel at San
Salvador, and a splendid time we had; one which we hope will have good
results in days and years to come. More than two hundred people from
the surrounding towns gave notice that they intended to be present. So
we formed a hospitality committee consisting of the deacons, with Mr.
Phillips and myself; and on the Wednesday after the service, we took the
names of those willing to entertain strangers, while native mats were
put down in the old chapel for any men who failed to find accommodation
elsewhere. Of such there were very few. Indeed, the difficulty was to
provide visitors for all who wished to receive them. Hospitality was
offered for four days without any expense to the Mission. A great many
brought ‘chop’ themselves, and whatever else was required was freely
given by the people here, with a little help from the missionaries
themselves, in the form of beef.

“All Saturday we were as busy as we possibly could be; Mr. Phillips and
I receiving our visitors and sending them to their respective hosts; Mr.
Lewis with Messrs. Beedham and Pinnock putting the finishing touches
to the new chapel. At four o’clock all was ready, and a crowd waiting
outside which rushed in as soon as the doors were opened. We, that is
Mr. P. and his choir, consisting of the boys and girls on the station
and us three ladies, took our seats and sang for nearly half an hour
before each service commenced, which had a little effect in quieting the
noise. Mr. Phillips presided at this first meeting. Prayer was led by two
natives, one man and one woman, an address was given by Mr. Phillips,
and a welcome proffered to the missionaries new and returned—Nekaka
welcoming them on behalf of the men, and Mbwanzi on behalf of the women.
It was really wonderful how well they did it, shaking hands with the
missionaries afterward. Mr. and Mrs. Graham responded, as the others
could not speak Kongo. The chapel looked beautiful, and every one was
delighted. Mrs. Beedham had prepared three texts, which were hung
severally behind the pulpit and on each side of the chapel: ‘Enter into
His gates with thanksgiving’; ‘The Lord has been mindful of us’; ‘He will
bless us.’

“On Sunday morning there were some six or seven hundred present at nine
o’clock, when Mr. Pinnock conducted a children’s service, and gave a
capital address from ‘Knock.’ At eleven o’clock Mr. Lewis conducted the
usual meeting, when the place was crowded, about eight hundred being
present. He preached from the text ‘My house shall be called a house of
prayer for all nations.’ At half-past two p.m., there was a gathering
of between four and five hundred women. We had such a good meeting—Mrs.
Graham prayed, Mrs. Beedham gave out the hymns, and I gave an address
from ‘He appeared first unto Mary Magdalene, out of whom He had cast
seven devils.’ The attention and behaviour were really wonderful,
seeing that many had never been to service in a building before. It
was a gathering such as is rarely seen in Africa, and far exceeded our
expectations. In the evening at five o’clock Mr. Graham preached to an
audience of men only, some three hundred being present, on the ‘whole
armour of God.’ When in the evening we nine missionaries met together
for our little English service, our hearts were indeed full of joy and
thankfulness.

“On Monday morning all was again excitement, for this was the great
meeting, and long before we were ready a big crowd was waiting outside,
and Messrs. Pinnock and Beedham had as much as they could do to prevent
the people from tumbling over one another. The speakers and choir were
already seated, and Mr. Bowskill with four cameras was taking pictures
all the time. Mr. Lewis was in the chair, and we had a most interesting
meeting, of which I enclose a report. It was really marvellous at all
the meetings to see how well the natives, both men and women, acquitted
themselves. Some of their speeches would not have disgraced Exeter Hall;
they were so much to the point and so well put. Nlekai’s was the best in
this meeting, but all were good. We had a time limit of ten minutes for
natives, and five for missionaries, and the gong kept them up to it. The
meeting lasted for two hours and a half and was thoroughly enjoyed by all.

“In the afternoon there were many people to see the children, who played
games in the station, Mrs. Graham helping them to enjoy themselves,
and after tea we all went over again to the chapel for the service of
song, based on the ‘Pilgrim’s Progress,’ which Mr. Phillips had taken
much trouble to prepare. We were rather afraid that some accident might
happen, as so many strangers came. The place was crammed to its utmost
capacity. Fully one thousand must have been present. But Mr. Lewis told
them at the beginning, it was a service, not a play, and asked for good
behaviour, and got it. The King was present, and when his photo was put
on the sheet we allowed the audience to clap. But during the service the
attention was as good and reverent as we could wish. All went off well,
Mr. Lewis reading and Mr. Graham showing the pictures, while Mr. Phillips
and Mr. Pinnock accompanied, Mr. Phillips leading. It reminded me of old
days when we sang the same service with Mr. Charlier at Camden.

“The next morning (Tuesday) some of the strangers left to return to
their towns, so that the attendance at the missionary meeting was not
quite so large. But there were about six hundred present, and a most
delightful meeting we had. The speeches were all good, and that of Lau
was universally acknowledged to be the best in all the meetings. It was
really wonderful to hear this woman, who can neither read nor write,
stand up and speak as if her address had all been prepared, with not
one word too much. Vita and Elembe, our old boys, now teachers in other
towns, spoke also very well, and then Mr. Phillips gave an address,
bidding _us_ goodbye, after which we all three replied, and the meeting
closed with singing ‘God be with you till we meet again.’

“In the afternoon the whole Church gathered together to commemorate
our Lord’s death, when three new members were received, two from here
and one, Luvumbu, a Zombo native—who was converted while working with
Mr. Pinnock at Tumba—the first-fruits of Zombo for Christ. Mr. Graham
presided. The following afternoon Mr. Pinnock baptized these three.

“And so ended a memorable time in the history of the San Salvador
Church—a time to which we shall look back joyfully, with thankfulness
that thus God has permitted us to see the result of our labours, with
prayer that He may richly bless the native Church meeting in this new and
beautiful house, and that in many an instance ‘The Lord shall count, when
He writeth up the people, that this man was born there.’

[Illustration: SAN SALVADOR. OLD SCHOOL-CHAPEL.]

[Illustration: SAN SALVADOR. NEW CHAPEL.]


“MEETING HELD ON MONDAY MORNING.

“The Chairman, the Rev. T. Lewis, said how great a pleasure it was to
them to meet in this new house of God. When they began to build, many
people thought they would not be able to finish, but by the blessing of
God they were meeting there to-day. He wanted to thank all who had helped
in this work, the bricklayers and the carpenters, those who had carried
stones, and the labourers and children who had carried water. Some
had worked very, very slowly, and they knew that sometimes he had had
palavers with them about their slowness and carelessness. Now he hoped
all these things would be forgotten. The work was finished, and to-day
they were meeting to rejoice together.

“They remembered three who had begun the work with them, whom God had
called in the middle of it—Makaya, Mponda, and William. But they had hope
in their deaths that they believed in Jesus Christ, and trusted they
were now with Him. He would say to the workmen just one thing. Let them
take care lest any of those who had helped to build this house failed
to enter into the house God had built above. The workmen who built the
ark perished because of their unbelief. Let them make sure that they had
entered into the kingdom now, by faith in Christ, lest they should be
left outside the Holy City at last.

“He then introduced Mantu Parkinson, who was the first native baptized.
Mantu recalled the time when the old King of Kongo received a letter
from Mr. Comber, saying that he and his companions were down at Mosuca.
He was a very little boy then, but he remembered the excitement of the
day when Mr. Comber arrived with his wife and Messrs. Bentley, Hartland,
and Crudgington; how the people wondered what they had come for, whether
for rubber or slaves. Then soon after they heard that Mrs. Comber was
sick, and the big people went to see her day by day, till one day they
saw all the white men crying, and heard that she was dead. There was a
great cry in the town, and he was among those who followed her to the
grave. And though he could not understand what they said, he and others
began to wonder what it might all mean. He spoke of several incidents
which occurred in Congo, and then of his visit to England, and of many
things he saw there. Especially he recalled a remark made to him by the
Rev. Francis Tucker, of Camden Road, that God had remembered Congoland
and sent them His Word. When he returned with Mr. Comber he often thought
of those words, and he was reminded of them again this morning, when he
saw the text on the wall, ‘The Lord hath been mindful of us.’ Those words
and the teaching he afterwards received brought him to Christ, and he was
baptized.

“Nlekai, teacher in charge of an outstation, was one of the first five
who formed the Church, December 2, 1887. He said he was a native of
Bangu, Arthington Falls. He was a very little boy and couldn’t understand
much when Mr. Comber first came to Congo. But he remembered one day when
there was a great noise in his town and Messrs. Comber and Hartland
arrived, and all the people gathered together to hear them preach. Some
of the other boys went back with them, but he was left. A short time
afterwards Mr. Dixon visited his town, and after he had preached, asked
the chief for some boys to go back with him. Then Nlekai was sent with
others. Soon afterwards Mr. Dixon left San Salvador, and he became Mr.
Weeks’s boy. With him he went to England. While there he went about and
saw many people, and went every Sunday to a big house where they taught
the people (the Metropolitan Tabernacle). And the people were constantly
asking Mr. Weeks ‘Is your boy a Christian?’ And Mr. Weeks used to answer,
‘I do not know, perhaps he is!’ And he asked himself what they could
mean. ‘Of course I am a Christian. I have not done any bad palavers, I
have always washed the dishes properly.’ He thought very much about this
till he came back to Congo, when from the words spoken by the teachers
there he began to see that a Christian means some one who believes in
Christ. Then Mr. Lewis came, and soon after he was baptized, and Mr.
Lewis taught them they must join together to work, and they began to
go into the other towns and tell the people there about the gospel. He
finished by an appeal to all to come to Christ, and then to help in the
work.

“The Rev. R. H. C. Graham next spoke. He said that when in England many
people tried to dissuade him from returning to Congo. They said the
Congos were too lazy to learn to work, and even if they professed to
believe in Christ it was only with their mouths. Even many Christian
people said, ‘You had better stay at home and teach the people here.’ But
when they heard about this house which they were building and saw the
photos of it which had been sent home; when they heard that it was being
built by native workmen, they said, ‘Truly your work is not in vain.’ He
then referred to having seen Mr. Dixon, and said how pleased he and Mr.
Crudgington would have been had they been present to-day.

“Wavatidi was the next speaker. She, and another, now dead, were the
first women baptized in 1888. She said she remembered the day that Mantu
was baptized. She, with some other women, went down to the water to wash
and saw Mr. Comber baptize Mantu. They thought to themselves, ‘What is
this palaver? What can be the use of it?’ Then she heard many palavers,
and soon after that Mrs. Lewis came, and then she began to be taught
properly, and learnt to love Christ. When she and Mpuna went to the
King, their husband, to ask permission to be baptized, he was very angry
and threatened to shoot them. But Padre Barosa interfered, telling the
King that baptism was a very good palaver, and he must let his wives be
baptized if they wished. She then spoke of how she first went to school
and tried to learn to read, and how Mpuna, who had been baptized with
her, had been called home.

“Mata, who has been chief capita since the beginning of the Mission,
spoke of those who first came to Congo and of the journeys that he took
with them, especially of the time when he went to Stanley Pool with
Messrs. Bentley and Crudgington, telling some wonderful ‘crocodile’
tales, and also some Congo parables quite incomprehensible to any
European.

“The Rev. H. Ross Phillips said his part was to look after the money,
so that his speech would be about that. First he read out a list of
special contributions from the natives amounting in all to the value of
578 francs. He then mentioned that the missionaries at present on the
staff had presented the pulpit and baptistery, with a brass plate in
memory of those who had been on the San Salvador staff, but were now
dead, and spoke briefly of Mr. and Mrs. T. J. Comber, Mr. Hartland, Mr.
Silvey, Mr. Cowe, Mr. Wilkinson, and his own wife. He also said that Mr.
and Mrs. Lawson Forfeitt had promised chairs for the platform, and that
he and his children would give a communion table and desk in memory of
Mrs. Phillips. He spoke of how the work had grown since he came first to
San Salvador, pointing out the next speaker as an example to the men,
he having learnt to read when grown up, and being now able to preach to
others.

“Ndonzwau, a deacon from an outside town, remembered the time when he was
in darkness. Nlekai talked to him and taught him to read; and now that
the white man had brought the gospel to them it was their duty to take it
to others.

“At the missionary and farewell meeting held on Tuesday morning, Mr.
Phillips presided, and after prayer and singing called on Elembe, who
had a bad foot and occupied a chair on the platform. Elembe, who is
teacher at Kimpese, said he was sorry he could not say much as he was not
well enough to stand up. They all saw great joy in meeting in that new
house, but they must remember it was not built for them just to sit down
and enjoy themselves. They must remember it was their duty to go about
and teach the people in other towns. There were many towns begging for
teachers. But very many people did not like to leave San Salvador. They
wanted to sit down in their houses and be comfortable there. To-day they
saw how their teachers who were in the pulpit had finished building this
beautiful house, how they had a nice station here; but they were going to
leave all these good things for the sake of preaching the gospel to the
people in Zombo. This was an example for them.

“Lau, the senior woman deacon, said she remembered so many things that if
she were to speak of them all they would never get out of that place. She
remembered the time when the first white men[6] came to San Salvador and
went to see the King, who was ill with smallpox, and gave him medicine
which by the blessing of God was a help to him. Those white men said
they had come after some stray goats, but truly those who followed had
come to seek the sheep who had gone astray. She remembered the coming of
the first missionaries and of their present teachers. She remembered the
baptism of the first two women, and how, very soon after that, she and
two others professed their faith in the same way, and ever since Mr. and
Mrs. Lewis had taught them well, both men and women. She wanted to thank
Mr. Lewis for building that chapel. They looked at its strong walls,
thick roof, but they knew they could never have built it had it not
been for Mr. Lewis and the help of God. Let them remember all that their
teachers had left for their sakes, their good country, their friends and
families. Nengwa (Mrs. Graham), who had just arrived, had left a little
crawling baby. Why was that? For their sakes and the gospel’s. And now
those in the pulpit were going farther on to preach to people who were
still in darkness. They saw much sorrow at their leaving, but should
not forget them, always remembering them in prayer, and when they met
together in that beautiful house.

“Mr. Phillips here said Lau had reminded them of something they had
omitted, viz., to thank Mr. Lewis for all the trouble he had taken in
the building of that chapel. Many a time after the workmen had left Mr.
Lewis had been busy all the evening till late planning and arranging,
and if he had not been here, it could not have been built. He therefore
proposed they should thank Mr. Lewis heartily for all his trouble. This
was vigorously acceded to by clapping of hands.

“Vita, teacher at Mwingu, spoke next. He said he was a native of Bangu,
and when Mr. Dixon went there to ask for schoolboys many of the people
thought he wanted them to sell, but he, Vita, thought, ‘If I go with the
white man I shall learn to get rich like him.’ Since then he had learnt
that the missionaries came not to get money but to teach them about God,
and they left their friends and all their good things behind, for their
sakes. Mr. and Mrs. Lewis had brought him up, and he was very sorry to
lose them, but he knew it was to preach the gospel in Zombo they were
going. They were leaving their nice house on the station. So they must
all try to do the same, and be willing to go anywhere to lighten the
darkness all around.

“The Chairman, the Rev. H. R. Phillips, spoke of the long time he and
Mr. Graham and Mr. Lewis and their wives had worked together happily,
so that there was joy and sorrow in his heart that day—sorrow because
they were now to part, gladness because the people in Zombo were going
to hear the good news of salvation. He remembered how his wife on her
death-bed spoke of the Zombo work, and prayed God to bless it. They all
knew Mr. Pinnock’s work at Underhill and Tumba, and they hoped that God
would greatly bless the work in Zombo, until there, too, there might be a
chapel like this, and numbers of those who loved and followed Christ. He
concluded by wishing them goodbye and Godspeed.

“The Rev. T. Lewis said he was there just to say goodbye. They all knew
he was not going away because he wished to leave them or the work there,
or because he wanted to part from his colleagues, but only so that he and
his wife might go to Zombo and take the gospel to the people there. He
thanked those present for their kindness to him while he had been with
them, and would now simply say, ‘Sala Kiambote’ (Congo, ‘goodbye,’ _lit._
remain good).

“Mrs. Lewis said she remembered being at the farewell meeting of those
who first came to Congo. Mr. Pinnock was present also. She went out
to Africa and worked for a short time with Mr. Comber’s sister. She
remembered the first day she arrived in San Salvador and the welcome
the women gave her, and ever since then they had loved each other. Two
especially she thought of that day whom God had called: one Mansonso, who
started the work at Nkaba, although she could not read and did not know
much; the other [Mrs. Phillips], her fellow-worker among the women who
had so recently passed away. Some there were her children in the faith,
and she had tried to teach them all the gospel, and to show them good
fashions for Christian women. Now they were to part, and she had much
sorrow because of that. Yet she was glad to go to Zombo, because they in
Congo had other teachers now just arrived, but the women in Zombo had
none. They should not forget one another, but should pray for one another
very often, and then if they loved and followed Jesus here, they would
meet one day before the face of God.

“The Rev. J. Pinnock began by saying he couldn’t speak, but would try.
Many of the men there had given him plenty of trouble down at Underhill,
grumbling about their loads. He would ask them not to trouble the
missionaries who were there now, but to try and do their work cheerfully.
He was very glad to go to Zombo, so wished them goodbye and God’s
blessing on the work at San Salvador.”




CHAPTER XI

PIONEERING IN ZOMBO: PERILS AND PROVIDENCES. 1898-1899


Hitherto the events recorded in this book have been arranged, more or
less strictly, in chronological order. At this point I consult my own
convenience and that of the reader by slight departure from the order
of time, and group together in one chapter the facts concerning the
initiation of the work in Kibokolo, Zombo. The story is one of the
romances of the Baptist Mission, and an illustration of the manner
in which Providence ordains that events, seemingly adverse, shall
subserve the progress of the good cause. Upon their first visit to
Kibokolo Mr. and Mrs. Lewis endured indescribable insult, were riotously
mobbed, threatened with death, and probably only saved from it by calm
fearlessness, which inspired their persecutors with a secret awe. On
their return journey, Mr. Lewis was enabled to render signal friendly
service to certain fellow-townsmen of the people who had driven him and
his wife away, and foresaw that good might come of it. A few months later
a deputation arrived in San Salvador and begged him to come and settle
as a friend among the people who had been thirsty for his blood. With
her own pen Mrs. Lewis wrote a journal, extending to sixty pages, of
the first pioneering journey, made in June, 1898. Unfortunately that is
lost. But happily a vivid account written by Mr. Lewis is available, and
I give the story as he wrote it and as it appeared in the pages of the
_Missionary Herald_.

“Many of the friends at home have been already interested in the proposal
to establish a Comber Memorial Station in the Zombo country, in memory
of that devoted family who have laid down their lives in the service of
Christ in Africa. The wonderful story of the labours of the brethren and
sisters who bore that noble name, with their whole-hearted devotion to
the Congo Mission, is to us who are now on the field much more than a
memory—it is an inspiration to go forward in the same work, and fills
us with hope for the future, knowing that their labours and ours cannot
be in vain in the Lord. How Thomas Comber and the rest of them would
rejoice with us to-day were they permitted to gather in the ripened fruit
of their early toil in this land; and how they would hail with delight
the prospect of carrying forward the banner of the Cross right into the
long-neglected country of the Zombos. We have already gathered in some
of Christ’s lambs at Makuta, where Thomas Comber was shot at and wounded
on that memorable journey when he and John Hartland had to abandon their
project of making that their route to the Upper Congo. Now the country is
open for us to penetrate much further into that dark region, and we can
see God’s finger clearly directing us to go forward and possess the land
in the name of the Saviour of the whole world. To us it seems peculiarly
fitting that we honour the memory of the beloved name of the Combers by
occupying that dark and hitherto wholly neglected district.

“At the request of the Committee, Mrs. Lewis and myself made a journey
into the Zombo country in the months of June and July, with a view of
ascertaining the suitability or otherwise of the place for a mission
station. We were well received in most parts, but in some places we
were regarded with much suspicion, and the people were very much
afraid of Europeans. Until recently no white man had settled among the
Zombos within the Portuguese territory, and now there are only two
Portuguese—one a trader and the other a Government official. Even these
have settled close on the borders, and they are the only representatives
of civilisation at present. There are no missionaries anywhere near
Zombo, and the work naturally falls upon our Society. Besides, the Zombo
language being to all practical purposes the same as that spoken at
San Salvador, we consider it doubly incumbent upon us as a Mission to
establish ourselves among these people without any further delay.

“I, therefore, confidently appeal to the many friends at home for their
prayerful sympathy and practical support in this new forward movement.
Let me say at once that we need £1,000 to build temporary and permanent
stations, and that we expect to receive this sum in special gifts to be
devoted to the erection of the Comber Memorial Station. We are anxious to
complete this work without in any way being a burden to the general fund
of the Society. Many friends have already intimated their intention of
contributing to this special fund; and we feel sure that there are many
more in all parts of the country who will co-operate in this matter, and
enable us to raise up a living and lasting memorial to those who lived,
laboured, and died for the evangelisation of Africa.

“Zombo is a name given to an extensive tract of country lying to the east
of San Salvador and about a hundred miles distant. The name is often
applied to a wider area than that occupied by that branch of the Congo
family known as Zombos. Zombo proper has an area of over three thousand
square miles and is very thickly populated. From native reports we were
prepared to see large townships, but we were astonished to find so many
people everywhere. Nowhere on the Lower Congo is there anything that can
bear comparison with Zombo for population, and without any reservation we
can say that this district presents a most promising field for missionary
work.

“Superstition and heathenism are rampant everywhere, and the moral and
spiritual darkness is simply appalling. We witnessed sights and scenes
which are only possible to the most degraded of human beings. They know
nothing of God; they have the name of God in their language and upon
their lips, but what idea the name conveys to their mind it is difficult
to say. An example of this vagueness is seen in the fact that on several
occasions they addressed me by that name, and on my remonstrating with
them and explaining that we were only men teaching them of God and His
love to us all, they insisted upon calling me ‘Son’ of God. Such things
are very revolting to one’s feelings, but it shows their utter darkness
and ignorance of spiritual things. In Zombo the houses and towns are
full of fetishes and charms; we came across many fetishes which even
our carriers had never seen before. One thing interested us all, and
we found it in many towns. It was a ‘trap to catch the devil.’ It was
cleverly arranged—sometimes on the square space where the people meet for
palavers, and sometimes in the houses—with cord loops and cane springs,
and they had special charms to attract their prey into it. The idea was
very commendable, and the trap would be a great blessing to the world at
large if it were successful. But they all confessed that the trap had
not caught yet! I enclose two photographs, which will serve as samples
of carved images, placed by the roadside to guard the entrance into the
towns.

“In most of the towns we visited we had a good hearing, as the people
were very curious to know what we had come for. We took with us as
carriers several of our San Salvador Christians, who were a great help in
getting the people together, as well as in speaking. Our headman, Mata,
is well versed in native customs, and knows all about the tricks of witch
doctors and others, having gone through them all in his early days. He
is also a capital speaker, and is sharp at taking up points and meeting
objections made. At one town, where the chief begged us to prolong our
stay a day longer, so that he might call his friends from other towns to
come and hear us, we had one of the most interesting gatherings that I
have seen in Africa. The crowd which assembled squatted on the ground in
the usual open space, and by the time we were summoned there was a large
audience of several hundreds. The men arranged themselves on both sides,
leaning on their loaded guns, while the women kept at a distance right
in front of us, just near enough to hear, and the carriers and our boys
took their position behind my wife and myself. We sang a hymn to begin
with, and then I spoke to them as simply as I could of the message which
we had come to deliver, and they all listened attentively. When I had
done Mata got up and told them how the missionaries had come in their
country years ago in order to tell them of God, how many at San Salvador
and other places had been brought into the light of the gospel of Christ,
and how they were doing all they could to enlighten and help their fellow
country people. He retold the old story of the death of Christ and His
resurrection. The people were intensely interested, but on hearing of
the resurrection some of them began with expressions of dissent, and
this led to a lively but good-natured discussion on fetishism and native
superstitions.

“They wanted Mata to answer some questions bearing on witchcraft; among
other things, they wished to know that if it was a wicked thing to kill
people, what were they to do with witches? Killing ‘ndoki’ (witch)
was certainly a good thing. Mata denied that there was such a thing as
‘ndoki,’ and graphically told them how the witch doctors deceive them
with lies and tricks. He related to them his own personal experiences
in early life, and was often interrupted by shouts of laughter and
approbation from the audience, and they all saw that the speaker was well
up in his subject. Objectors plied him with questions, and he took them
one by one, and exposed the utter rottenness of their customs. After
much talk and banter, Mata, with his usual boldness, asked if there was
a witch doctor present who could tell them all about it, whereupon a
grey-bearded old man rose on his feet and said that he was one. Mata
asked him to tell what ‘ndoki’ was. He said that for many years he had
followed his calling as a witch doctor, but he himself had never seen a
‘witch,’ and in a bold speech he went over what Mata had said, and added
emphatically that all he had told them that day was perfectly true. The
crowd howled and hooted at the old man, and some became rather angry at
this admission of their witch doctor, but the majority of them sided with
Mata, and declared that ‘God’s palaver’ was good. I interfered at this
point, and order being restored, I tried to impress upon their mind that
each man must think for himself in this matter. We had told them the
message, and showed them how they may obtain salvation and go to heaven,
and that we could do no more than this, but that each man in his heart
must decide for himself. Thus our long afternoon meeting came to a close,
and the people returned to their homes. We hope and pray that they will
retain the thing which they heard that day for the first time in their
minds, and realise the truth and blessedness of the gospel message.

“At this and many other towns the women were particularly friendly, and
my wife had them together separately for teaching. A white man in Zombo
was a wonder to behold, but a white lady much more so, and the women
were not so frightened at my wife as at myself. Her presence on this
journey was on this account a great help in getting at the women. The
first announcement that ‘white men’ were coming into a town was a signal
for a general stampede of the women and children; but my wife generally
being the first to arrive in her hammock, the carriers would call after
them and assure them that this person was a woman like themselves, then
they returned to her to shake hands. After a while it would gradually
dawn upon them that we spoke their language, and friendship was at once
established, and very inconveniently they would crowd around us from
morning till night.

“This fresh advance into the ‘regions beyond’ calls for renewed energy
and consecration on our part, and for more sympathy and help from
Christians at home. I feel convinced that these new responsibilities will
move the Churches at home to a greater liberality than ever before, and
deepen their interests in the work abroad, and fill them with a fuller
measure of prayer and self-sacrifice. They call upon us all to a purer,
whole-hearted devotion to our Master, and compel us in all humbleness of
spirit to supplicate the Throne of Grace, whence alone we can obtain
strength and guidance needed for the work. There is much land still to be
possessed in the name of the Lord. ‘Ask of Me, and I shall give thee the
heathen for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
Thy possession.’”

The foregoing article was written for publication. It was accompanied by
another, written for the information of the Committee, to be published or
not, at their discretion. This also was printed under the title, “Further
Incidents,” and I give it here.

“We first of all made our way to the Makela towns, where there is a
Portuguese Resident and a trader. There are two or three firms who are
arranging for sites, and are about to send their representatives there,
so they evidently look upon it as a promising field for trade. As our
business was to make friends with the natives, we declined the offers
of hospitality kindly tendered to us by the Resident and trader, and
stayed in native huts as guests of the people. We were well received
at all these towns, and the native chiefs were very pressing in their
representations, asking us to build in their towns. Both at Mbongi
(where the Resident lives) and at Mbanza Makela (the principal town
of the group) they begged of me to choose a plot of ground and build
immediately. These Makela people came to San Salvador sometimes, and know
me well by name and repute, and they wanted me to make a promise that I
would come to stay in their town. I explained that I wanted to see all
the country first, and that I could make no promise just then. Still, we
were very glad to receive such a hearty welcome, and we stayed there
several days, including Sunday.

“The chief of Makela supplied me with a guide to take us to the next
district—Mbuzu—with its thirty-six towns and a population of about five
thousand. All along the route we passed many towns, including Ngombe,
with its population of about three thousand. Both on the right and left
there were large towns which I could not visit or form any idea of the
number of people in them. We were now among people unaccustomed to
white men, very superstitious, frightened, and suspicious. We were well
received at Mbuzu, and they begged us to stay a day longer, which we did,
and they came in good force to hear our message. We were making our way
to the Nkisi River, which runs in a north-west direction to the Congo
River, into which it empties itself between Wathen and the Pool. We had
been told that there was a very large population on the banks of this
river, but on reaching Kibulungu we found that the towns were not large
nor numerous. The valley is exceedingly swampy, and in the wet season
the river overflows its banks, and crossing in canoes is a dangerous
business. Native ferries are the only means of crossing, and alligators
are plentiful. Altogether, the river district is not tempting, either as
a place of abode or a field of labour. The towns are difficult to reach
on account of the river and swamps. We had intended to cross the Nkissi
into the Kidia district, but from the hills on this side we could see
that the towns opposite were less numerous than on this, and therefore we
decided to turn back and waste no time on an unlikely district. Besides,
the River Nkisi would be a great obstacle in the transport of goods to
the Kidia side. We therefore gave up all idea of crossing, and after
three days’ stay we made our way back to Zombo proper.

“Two days’ journey brought us to Kinzau, another populous district, where
we stayed three days. Three hours’ march further south is Kibokolo, which
may be considered the heart of Zombo. This district is very thickly
populated, and here is one of the most important markets in the country.
The principal town—shown in the map—is the largest I have seen in Congo.
I estimate that there are about five thousand people in it (San Salvador
has about fifteen hundred—not more than two thousand). Within a one-hour
radius there are at least a score of towns of some considerable size. I
was not able to visit these towns, and cannot therefore form any estimate
of the number of people within easy reach. This is by far the best centre
for mission work. Heathenism is rampant, and never before have I seen
such a display of fetishes and superstitious rites. Our appearance in the
district caused much confusion, and the people were afraid lest we should
bewitch them and cause them all to die right off. There were cries of,
‘The country is dead, the country is dead’; and I have no doubt but that
they firmly believed it. However, in about an hour’s time we succeeded in
finding the chief, and he gave us a native house to sleep in, and then
some of the people came round us to shake hands. That evening the chief
and some of his followers came together, and I talked to them about the
gospel and explained our message. They could not understand anybody being
so disinterested as to take all this trouble for their sake. Next day,
being market day, the chiefs of the surrounding towns came and discussed
with the Kibokolo folks our presence in their country. There was a strong
party in favour of fighting and killing us, carriers and all; but others
would not agree to this, as they heard we had stayed at many towns on the
way but knew of nothing bad done by the white man or his carriers. At
last they agreed to drive us away from their towns, but no bodily harm
was to be inflicted upon us. We found this out afterwards; at the time we
knew nothing about the agitation against us.

“Early in the afternoon the townfolk—many of whom were intoxicated with
palm wine and did not know exactly what they were doing—raised a cry
that the white man’s boys were poisoning the water (they were washing
some clothes in the stream which runs through the centre of the town,
and the soap was considered poison), and that a carrier was seen hiding
a charm in the ground outside the town; and again that one of the
carriers was ill with smallpox; all of which were absolutely false, but
the leaders invented them to create an uproar and force us away. In an
extraordinarily short space of time the greater part of the town were
around us, some with loaded guns and others with cutlasses, spears, bows
and arrows, and sticks, while the witch doctors and women brought out
their fetishes and commenced dancing and gesticulating in the wildest
manner. This was heathenism in its worst aspects, and the scene was
indescribable. The excitement was growing in intensity, and their
attitude became more threatening, and they were demanding our immediate
departure. I got all the carriers and boys together, and induced them to
keep perfectly quiet. The owner of the house which we occupied was very
friendly, and he with three or four others tried to keep back the crowd.
We told them over and over that we would not go away that day, do what
they would. The chief sent us the usual complimentary present of two
fowls and a calabash of native beer—said to be non-intoxicating—for the
carriers. This was to dismiss us from the town ‘on friendly terms,’ and
he considered his responsibility at an end. The ‘beer,’ as we suspected,
had been previously ‘cursed’ by the witch doctor, and it was supposed to
have the power of killing us all at once if we partook of it. I accepted
the present, and the carriers finished the drink in the presence of all,
and they were greatly astonished to find that they did not fall down dead
on the spot. I told the headman, who brought the present, that we did
not mean to go away that day, but that in the morning we would pay our
respects to the chief before leaving their town. The excitement among
the people, however, did not cool down, for they kept on at a furious
rate to the middle of the night. We retired to bed early, and in spite
of the beating of drums and the blowing of horns, we managed to get some
sleep. Next morning we packed up our things, and the same noise and
excitement continued. They were evidently surprised at our showing no
fight. A crowd followed us about a mile or two outside the town, with
their horns and drums; but for some reason or other they changed their
cursing into blessing, and were calling upon the ‘spirits’ to protect
the white man and his people ‘if they have done no harm in the town.’ So
we left Kibokolo, but we had carried out our plans in full, except that
we had hoped to stay in this town a few days longer. We thought that, on
the whole, it was the wiser policy to retire for the time being, and let
the people have time to find out that our presence did them no real harm.
Still, at Kibokolo there are two or three who gave up their houses for
ourselves and carriers, and who stood by us all through the uproar.

“On our return journey a most unusual thing occurred, which I have
great hopes will cause them to change their attitude towards us. When
nearing San Salvador we found that the whole country was much disturbed
on account of a mistaken policy of the Portuguese Residents, and the
people of Lembelwa and Tanda districts had closed the road to the coast
against all carriers. We met some five hundred Zombos returning to their
country with their rubber, having failed to pass. A large number were
from the Kibokolo district. They were much afraid of us, lest we should
retaliate on them for the treatment we had received in their country; but
I succeeded in getting them together and persuaded them to come along
with me, promising to pass them to the coast without molestation. It
took some time to convince them of my good intentions, but ultimately
they agreed to trust themselves to me. On the next day we came to the
disturbed district, and I took my position in front of the whole
company. At the entrance into each town we were met by armed men, who
were stopping passers-by. I was well known to them all, and they made
no resistance when I asked them to stand on one side, and waited myself
until the Zombos had passed. That night all of us slept in one of the
disturbed towns, and I gathered the chiefs together and talked to them
very strongly of the wickedness and foolishness of their behaviour, the
headmen of the Zombos listening to all.

“The outcome of our palaver was that they promised to reopen the road and
allow carriers to pass unmolested. The effect of this upon the Zombos
was very remarkable, for they had looked upon the white man as their
enemy, and now they saw that we were their best friends after all. When
they return from the coast they will inform their people what happened,
and we hope for a very different reception at Kibokolo next time we go.
The native Christians who accompanied us as carriers were delighted at
the turn of affairs, and Mata, the headman of the caravan, said to me
that night, ‘Oh, master, I have seen a wonderful work of God to-day;
the Kibokolo people drove you away, but when these carriers return home
your name will be lifted up to the sky all through Zombo. Truly God has
wrought this marvellous work.’ We, too, feel in the same way, and that
this incident will help very materially in the opening up of Zombo to the
preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ. We pray that it may be so.

“I have entered fully into this incident, so that you may be able to
understand our position with regard to Kibokolo. It is by far the
best place for a mission station, and it may be that very soon we can
build there without much difficulty. We have, however, to face strong
prejudices against the white man, and I feel that it is better to wait
a little and not to unduly force our way contrary to the will of the
people. We cannot, if we wished it, depend on any protection from the
Portuguese Government. As you know, there are already a trader and a
Portuguese official in Zombo, and their conduct towards the natives does
not make it easier for us who go on a different mission; and I deem it
of the utmost importance that we should enter the country as soon as
possible. The longer we delay the more difficult will it be to disabuse
the minds of the people.

“I am deeply sensible of the great responsibility laid upon me in making
suggestions as to Zombo. I have kept back this report for a month in
order to consider the whole question very carefully, and now I am in a
position to lay before you the conclusions I have arrived at as to the
course to be taken:—

“1. The Zombo country is beyond doubt a most promising field for
missionary labour, and no matter where we settle there is a good
population; for itinerating purposes we are within reach of an immense
number of people.

“2. Our duty to occupy the country is emphasised by the fact that no
other society works there, or anywhere within reach.

“3. The language is practically the same as at San Salvador, and all the
literary work done on the Lower River will serve for Zombo immediately.

“4. Kibokolo is the most populous district, and the place where I would
most desire to settle and make our permanent station, if it be possible.

“5. The transport expenses will be about 10s. per load from Matadi
to Zombo, which is lower than that of any other station of the Congo
Mission, excepting San Salvador. For the first year we may have to work
the transport in two stages, _viâ_ San Salvador, but there will be no
difficulty in getting carriers to go through with our loads from Matadi
to Zombo after a little while.”

The reader has been informed in an earlier chapter of how Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis, having returned from Kibokolo, continued their work in San
Salvador, awaiting the consent of the Committee for the forward move.
When that consent came it was supposed that the work in Zombo would have
to be begun in Makela, until such time as the Kibokolo people had come
to a better mind. But in the spring of 1899 the foreseen revulsion of
feeling had already taken place, and on April 18th Mr. Lewis was able to
write to the Committee in the following terms:—

“It seems now almost certain that we shall be able to settle at once at
Kibokolo, instead of first going to Makela. We are now in negotiation
with the Kibokolo people, who are most desirous we should settle with
them; and I hope by the next mail to send you positive information on
this matter. The prospect just now is most encouraging; the work at San
Salvador also is most cheering. Last week I baptized eleven persons, and
there are fourteen other candidates.”

Reviewing his work in connection with the Congo Mission, Mr. Lewis wrote
at the same time:—

“It is now nearly seventeen years since my acceptance by the Society
for work at the Cameroons, and thirteen since my transfer to the Congo
Mission, and during this period I have been stationed with my wife at
San Salvador. We have seen the formation of a native Church, which has
grown slowly but steadily year by year, and our Church roll numbers at
present 142, and there are many more inquiring after the truth. We have
experienced much blessing in the work here, and in many ways it will be
hard to tear ourselves away from the people and the work. Yet I must
confess that never before have I felt so eager for work in fresh fields
where the gospel has hitherto never been heard of.

“In spite of the fact that I have seen many years of service in Africa,
my feeling to-day is much as I felt when I was first permitted to come to
this land—a feeling of a young man just entering upon his life’s work. We
look eagerly forward to this Zombo opportunity, and pray God to give us
all the strength and wisdom needed, and to guide us in all our ways.

“In entering upon this new and forward work I trust that what we may
have lost of the enthusiasm and buoyancy of youth will be more than
compensated by the experience which we have had of the work and of
the people. May God go with us and prosper us. We are delighted that
Mr. Pinnock is associated with us in this new and deeply interesting
movement. The way is, indeed, being wonderfully opened up, and the Master
Himself seems to be calling to us to go in and possess the land.”

In the foregoing paragraphs Mr. Lewis speaks mainly for himself. But his
feelings were perfectly in accord with those of his wife. It was their
singular happiness not only to share domestic life in confiding love, but
to stand side by side in life’s practical labours and conflicts, and to
be of one mind, without the need of laborious reconciliation, in those
critical junctures which call for new decisions. They were made for each
other. It was restful to be with them.

The negotiations were successful, and a little later Mr. Lewis writes
with natural exultation, recalling the facts of his first visit to
Kibokolo, and rejoicing in the fulfilment of his own prophecy.

“I am now in a position to report the satisfactory ending of the
negotiations with the chiefs and people of the Kibokolo district,
in reference to the establishment of our new Zombo station in that
neighbourhood.

“You will remember that on our visit to Zombo last year I was very much
impressed with the large population of the Kibokolo towns, and the fine
sphere presented for missionary work. There was no doubt in my mind but
that this was the place which we had been looking for. Unfortunately,
however, when they suspected that we were contemplating to build a
station and settle in Zombo, they were very anxious to get rid of us,
and on the second day gathered around us with their guns, cutlasses and
sticks, demanding our immediate departure. You will also remember that on
the way back to San Salvador the caravan route had been closed against
Zombos and other tribes. About five hundred Zombos—and among them many
from the Kibokolo towns—came with me (after they had been sent back by
the disaffected people who had closed the road), and I was able to pass
them through without any molestation. When these people returned from the
coast they related all that had occurred, and the Kibokolo people began
to think they had been foolish in sending us away as they did. Since then
it seems that the natives in the neighbourhood of Kibokolo are troubled
with the _capitas_ from the Makela traders, who are finding carriers.
These men, coming as they do from the white men, take many unauthorised
liberties, and do much mischief in these towns. It is chiefly for this
reason that they are anxious for me to come and build in their district,
thinking that our presence there will be a protection to them. Some
months ago the chiefs of the district called all the people together to
discuss the situation and see what they could do. They all agreed that
the best thing was to try and get ‘Lewizi’ to come and build there,
or send one of his teachers to them. But then the difficulty was that
they had driven me away from their town, and they were afraid to send a
messenger to me in case I would punish him. They then decided to send
their messenger to the chief of Mbanza Mputu, and enlist his sympathy and
help. He is a member of our San Salvador Church, and next in power to the
King of Kongo. As a preliminary to open negotiations with me, they asked
the chief of Mbanza Mputu to send a messenger to receive schoolboys to
give me. This messenger went, and the boys were given him to bring to
San Salvador. The messenger (also one of our Christians), was able to
tell them that Mr. Lewis himself would be coming in a short time, and
that they had better keep the boys until then, and that he would very
likely build and settle at Kibokolo. There was a little jealousy between
the different parties as to the town where the new white man should
settle, but they are all satisfied to let me have my own choice of site
and location. This intimation was received with great delight, and the
messenger says that they kept on firing guns in all the towns, and there
was general rejoicing. One of the Zombo lads came with the messenger, and
he will return with us when we go. When we were returning from Zombo last
year, and had passed the Zombos safely through the country, our headman
said, ‘Oh, master, I have seen a wonderful work of God to-day. The
Kibokolo people drove you away, but when these carriers return home your
name will be lifted up to the sky through Zombo. Truly God has wrought
a marvellous work.’ This prophecy has already become true, and we thank
God for it. The people at present have only their material good in view;
and we trust that, having won their confidence in this, we shall be able
soon to make them realise and understand our great message of God’s love
to sinners, and then His Name will be lifted and praised by the thousands
of Zombos who are now in utter darkness.

“God has opened the way for us in a marvellous way, and we are now
anxious to enter in by this open door. If all is well we hope to go and
start the work of building at Kibokolo in three or four weeks from now,
but owing to the shorthandedness of the San Salvador staff we may have to
return and await the arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Graham, leaving Mr. Pinnock
alone in Zombo for a month or two.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In June, 1899, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis, with Mr. Pinnock, left San Salvador
for Kibokolo, to found the Comber Memorial station, as already recorded,
and, in the following letter addressed to Mr. Baynes, Mrs. Lewis gives an
interesting account of their experiences. The date is July 17th.

“My husband is writing to tell you of our return from Zombo and the
founding of the Comber Memorial station. It is a peculiar pleasure to me
to have a share in the work, as I have such happy memories of work at
Camden Road with Mr. Comber, and of my first introduction to mission work
in company with Carrie Comber at the Cameroons, beside later associations
with others who bore that name. We thought you would like to know
something of the journey we have just taken, so I am writing down a few
incidents.

“You know, I think, that Noso, the chief of Mbanza Mputu, accompanied us
on this journey, and we found his presence most helpful. His name as
head of the tribe is known everywhere, although they had not seen him
since his conversion, and great was their astonishment at his changed
demeanour. The lion had become a lamb. The chief, who formerly thought
nothing of shooting a man for a slight act of disrespect, was now so
meek and humble that his own carriers took advantage of him, and thought
a great deal more of their own comfort than of his. After going some
distance from San Salvador we had some difficulty in getting people to
show us the road; we were consequently taken many miles out of our way,
through some most picturesque scenery, but by roads more fit for monkeys
than men. Some of the hills are very steep, and I had to scramble up on
hands and feet, while it took the combined efforts of three men to drag
and push the poor old chief. We went through one very large swamp which
is utilised as an eel fishery. In some of the towns they were very much
afraid at first. In one, on my arriving first, every woman and child
disappeared, and the men took up their guns. I told my hammock men to say
who we were, and upon their calling out, ‘They are the English teachers
who have come with Noso,’ every gun was put down, they crowded round to
shake hands, and then asked me to speak that they might ‘hear my voice.’
In many of the towns we were received with beating of drums, firing of
guns, and dancing. In consequence of the excitement we were not able to
do much preaching, but in all the towns we stayed at, either Mr. Lewis or
Mata explained to the people the object of our coming among them, though
it is hard for them to believe that we only go for their good.

“When we arrived at Nkusu, the place from which the messengers were sent,
we had a very warm welcome, and found the chief, who is indeed the head
of the whole district, a very nice, quiet man. We stayed here from Friday
till Wednesday. The people would have liked us to stay and build, but
consented to send for the Kibokolo chiefs.

“On Sunday morning Noso sent a man round the town to blow a trumpet and
tell the people all to stay at home and come to meeting to hear the white
man’s teaching; and soon after breakfast he came for us with a train of
chiefs. They came saluting in Congo fashion, kneeling down every few
yards, and clapping their hands. We went with them to a cool place and
had a meeting, Mr. Lewis and Mata speaking, and Noso finishing with a few
words, saying how good a thing this teaching was. Before we had quite
finished others came from surrounding towns, so we began over again. So
it went on, relays of people, and the old story was told again and again.
After a time I left, but at the door of our hut I had a little crowd of
women and boys, who gladly listened while I spoke to them.

“In the afternoon we had another meeting there. A very interesting
incident occurred. Mata was speaking about our teaching—how it brought
peace and good-will, how people should love one another, and not keep
anger in their hearts. The chief, Ndosimao, was not in the meeting,
but heard it all from his own house. Now it seems that he and two
other chiefs who were there were at enmity. As Mata finished speaking
Ndosimao appeared, walked through the crowd up to where we were sitting,
and, kneeling down, said, ‘We have been asking for the white man; this
teaching of his is good, so let us receive him and his teaching and make
friends.’ He then did obeisance to the other two chiefs, who returned his
salutation, after which they shook hands and were friends. This man seems
to be prepared for the gospel. We trust and pray he may receive it. What
made this incident the more remarkable was that both the others were his
inferiors.

“The following day the Kibokolo chiefs arrived, and then we found that
there was a great deal of jealousy as to where we were to build; in fact,
they became so hot about it that we feared we should be only creating
a disturbance by going there at all, and we decided when they left to
go off to Makela the next morning. This they said they would prevent
us doing, threatening to shoot any one who passed through. Some of the
carriers were very much frightened, so the next morning we sent to
Ndosimao, asking for a guide to take us another way. While Mata was gone,
however, Noso arrived, saying the Kibokolo folks would agree to anything
rather than we should build at Makela. So it was settled. We went first
to Kinzalu, the chief of which town, Dom Miguel, was the one who caused
the trouble the night before. He is an intelligent man, who has been
about a great deal. He showed us much kindness, and his people were very
friendly. It is a very nice town, and only forty minutes from Nzamba,
where we are building the new station. We went there the next morning,
and were received kindly by the chief, and our friend of last year,
Mbala, who was very pleased to see us again. The people, as yet, are shy
and somewhat suspicious.

“Noso and Ndosimao both came with us, the former staying several days,
when he left us to return by another route. On Sunday we had a very good
meeting, when we tried to explain our message, and in the afternoon eight
of us sat together at the Lord’s Table for the first time in that dark
land—one a Zombo man, who had been working with Mr. Pinnock at Tumba,
and while there had been brought to Christ. He was accepted at our last
Church meeting at San Salvador, and sat with us for the first time at
Kibokolo. May he be but the earnest of many more! It was a hallowed time;
we spoke and thought of those who have gone before, and remembered Him
Who died for us and for all those thousands of dark souls around. The
work before us is overwhelming. We have now gone and returned by four
different roads. But wherever we go there are towns close together and
crowds of people in utter darkness. But God has so wonderfully guided
us hitherto and has gone before us, opening the road and preparing the
people to receive us, that we dare not lose heart in view of the vastness
of the work, but rather thank Him for all His goodness in the past and
take courage for the future.”

In September the new chapel was opened at San Salvador, and in October
Mr. and Mrs. Lewis started out to make their new home in Kibokolo. The
parting from dear friends and the relinquishing of dear work involved
pain which no eager expectations of new service could quench, and in
describing their send-off Mrs. Lewis remarks that it seemed like going to
one’s own funeral. Yet it was solace to her to remember that whereas when
she began her work at San Salvador no girl or woman knew the alphabet,
now she could leave many of her classes and meetings in the hands of
young native women, who had been educated and brought to Christ.

Of their departure, their reception at Kibokolo and their immediate
prospects, Mr. Lewis writes in the following terms:—

“It is with devout thankfulness to God that I am able to report our
safe arrival and our settlement at our new Comber Memorial Station. My
wife and I left the many friends at San Salvador on October 7th, and we
reached our destination on the 15th, when we were warmly received by our
dear friend and colleague, Mr. John Pinnock, who had preceded us the
previous week, having come to San Salvador to join us in the festivities
in connection with the opening of the new chapel there. It was difficult
to wrench ourselves finally from the place where we had seen so many
happy days in the service of God, and it was with very mixed feelings
that we said goodbye to the Christians at San Salvador and to our
co-workers there. Still, the joy at the prospect of new work in a wholly
heathen country more than overbalanced all our regrets and sorrow. It
was a great comfort to us to feel that the work which we were leaving was
now well provided for in the appointment of Mr. Bowskill and of Mr. and
Mrs. Wooding to that station, as colleagues of Mr. and Mrs. Graham. The
work at San Salvador has made great advance during the past few years,
and we are very thankful to God for all that we have seen there. May the
Master be very near to those who labour there, and abundantly bless the
growing native Church and make it a power for good in Kongo-land.

[Illustration: FERRY OVER NKISI RIVER. MRS. LEWIS IN CANOE.]

[Illustration: HOME OF MR. AND MRS. LEWIS AT COMBER MEMORIAL STATION,
KIBOKOLO (1903).]

“At Kibokolo we are surrounded by a very large population, and we shall
have our hands very full with work. As yet the people are a little afraid
of us, and they find considerable difficulty in understanding why we
have come to Africa at all. They understand the business of a Government
official or of a trader; but they cannot account for the purpose of a
missionary in coming to them and not buying either rubber or ivory.
When we tell them that we bring them the good news by which they may be
saved, at first it gives a fine scope for their superstition to work. The
general opinion among these people is that we come to take their souls
away, and especially those of children, to be made into white men in the
white man’s country. They believe that it is our subtle way of carrying
on the slave-trade. This is the common belief; but of course many know
better, especially the men-folk, who go to sell their rubber, &c., at the
coast. As the people become accustomed to us and to our ways they will
see things in a different light, and this is so with not a few of them
already.

“Mr. Pinnock has made good use of his two months’ residence here, for
several of the leading men in this town are on very friendly terms with
him, and will do anything for him. When the food for workmen is short,
he has only to speak to the chief and he gets it. It is wonderful what
influence he has, when we consider the short time he has been among them.
Nearly all his time has been spent in putting up a grass-house, which
is to serve all three of us for the present. We are now living in this
house, which is very comfortable. It has two rooms measuring 18 feet by
15 feet. Mr. Pinnock occupies one, and my wife and I the other. At one
end we have a ‘lean-to,’ which serves for a dining-room. The furniture at
present consists principally of cases of provisions and bales of cloth,
with some tin trunks containing our personal apparel, &c., which we have
brought with us from San Salvador. The rainy season has just commenced,
and we are thankful to be under a rainproof shelter before the very heavy
rains come. We shall live in this condition until next May or June, when
I trust we shall be in a position to commence building our permanent
houses.”




CHAPTER XII

LIFE AT KIBOKOLO


Mr. and Mrs. Lewis began their work in Kibokolo, Zombo, in October, 1899,
and left it finally seven years later, having spent the year 1901, and
the first half of 1902, in England on furlough. Those seven years were
lean and hungry years which would have eaten up all the joy of former
harvests if the hearts of the workers had not been nourished and cheered
by unfailing faith in God. It was their business and that of their
colleagues, in fact and in figure, to clear the ground, and transform
a patch of wilderness into fields capable of bearing plenty. Their new
neighbours were a wild, shy, suspicious people, and life at San Salvador
with all its crudities seemed like civilisation when compared with the
unmitigated barbarism of Zombo.

The people had invited Mr. and Mrs. Lewis to come among them, but
they had done so, moved by considerations which were of the earth
earthy, and it was inevitable that they should experience a measure of
disappointment. The missionaries were of course prepared for this, and
entered the open door with a good conscience, assured that in the end
their mission would secure for the people even greater earthly blessings
than those they had forecast.

At first their work consisted in the main of building houses and making
friends. All the time they preached the gospel, knowing in their hearts
that there was small likelihood of their doctrine winning acceptance,
until they themselves had been accepted and had won trust and love.

In the beginning, the women, and by consequence the children, were afraid
of Mrs. Lewis, and it was an event in her life, when the first Zombo baby
stretched out its little arms in welcome to her, suffered her to nurse
it, and was loath to be given up. She did not wait for the women to come
to her, but went to them in their towns, exhibiting skilled and patient
kindness which could not fail in the end.

Meanwhile the charge, domestic and educational, of the children on the
station, and multifarious household duties, kept her perpetually busy.
It should also be mentioned that she maintained a regular correspondence
with many friends at home, and with several of the missionaries’ wives
upon the Congo, in whose work she took the deepest and most sisterly
interest, and who were wont to consult her when difficulties arose; and
quite commonly the difficulties were at least as frequent as the mails.

Somewhat straitened for human society her affection went out to the tame,
dumb creatures about her, and to one who was not dumb, the parrot. Her
cat, “Sandy,” whom the mail-man lost on the way to Kibokolo, was brought
into San Salvador after many days, and sent on, safely this time, to
Kibokolo, to the great joy of his indulgent mistress. “Edward,” Mr.
Pinnock’s donkey, was useful as well as handsome, and her friendship
with him inclined to weakness; so much so that when one day he walked
into the dining-room and eat her last loaf of bread, she merely reminded
him in gentle tones that it was wicked to steal. After Edward’s day
came Taffy and Queenie, two mules, who were much esteemed, especially
Queenie, who died too early; and later a cow and bull, the joint property
of Mr. Hooper and Mr. Pinnock. The bull died. The cow pined and took
to wandering. Mrs. Lewis was sorry for her grief, and when Mr. Hooper
decided to shoot her, to provide beef for a certain feast, Mrs. Lewis
was torn between sentiment and prudence. She could not touch such unholy
beef, nor could she be sorry that it would feed a hungry crowd.

Her garden was an increasing joy to her, and though she loved flowers
with something akin to passion, her dutifulness as a housewife made
kitchen produce her first care. When Mr. Lewis and Mr. Hooper, who also
had the building gift, much to his senior colleague’s joy, had erected
the permanent houses, residential conditions were pleasant enough.

But Mrs. Lewis was not in Kibokolo for pleasure, but for souls; and as
the years passed her hunger grew. It was joy to her when she had a decent
school once more, and women sitting at her feet to listen to the gospel;
and the new chapel and the ultimately growing congregations called forth
her glad thanksgiving; but she wanted souls; and when the call to
Kimpese came, her lament was that she would not be in Kibokolo when the
harvest of souls began, of the coming of which she had no doubt. Even as
she was writing this lament, news arrived of the baptism of the first
Kibokolo convert, and she took her part in the happiness of Mr. and Mrs.
Hooper, and of their common Lord.

Shortly after her return from furlough in 1902 tragical events occurred
which desolated the towns about the station, and darkened the immediate
outlook of the Mission. But light came again into the sky, and the work
went on.

Mr. and Mrs. Lewis were fortunate in their colleagues at Kibokolo: an
immeasurable mercy! John Pinnock was their old and tried friend. Mr.
Hooper, who came out to them fresh from Bristol College, was made of
true missionary stuff, and walked straight into their affections and
their confidence. When later Mrs. Hooper appeared in Kibokolo she found
waiting for her a great woman’s love, which by God’s grace she knew
how to appreciate, to retain, and to deserve. Mr. and Mrs. Bowskill’s
temporary sojourn in Kibokolo was also a great joy to Mrs. Lewis, and the
friendship formed in the months of its duration lasted to the end of her
life.

From Kibokolo she made many journeys with her husband, of which only
hints and glimpses can be given to the reader, and one journey without
him. The story of this journey and its sequel is so unique and heroic,
that I have detached it from the sequence of events, and related it at
some length in a following chapter.

For the rest the reader must be content with a selection of passages from
Mrs. Lewis’s correspondence, which I am not without hope may suffice to
convey, in their cumulative effect, a realistic impression of life at
Kibokolo.

“November 13, 1899.—Alice wonders how I should like to be doing servant’s
work. As a matter of fact that is what I am chiefly doing these days
since coming here. No, none of the San Salvador people are with us here.
We have two wretched workmen from another town, our own boy Veza, and
John Pinnock’s boy Kinsengwa. That is our staff of workmen, with another
man who originally came from Zombo, but is leaving at the end of the
year. Then we have Kumbu and Zika, two boys about twelve, who have been
with us some time at San Salvador and wished to stay with us; Kidimbu, a
little boy of about eight, who comes from Nkaba, where Nlekai is working,
and John Pinnock’s Mayowela, a little fellow of seven. I have two girls,
Talanga and Salune, aged respectively, perhaps, eleven and thirteen, and
between us we do all there is to be done, cooking, washing, mangling,
ironing, and the regular routine, besides some ground clearing and
sewing; and I have school with those six in the afternoon. Of course,
being so small, they can do nothing without help. All my mornings have to
be given up to household matters; but these things are important, without
which we cannot keep in health, so I don’t consider it is time wasted,
although it is not so much to my taste as preaching and teaching.

“Yesterday was Sunday, and Tom and I went to another town to hold a
service. The chief there rejoices in the name of ‘Lion’s tail,’ and is
the most sensible chief about here, though he is not much interested in
God’s palaver yet. Kinzala, his town, is about an hour from here. I went
on Pinnock’s donkey (who, by the way, has his head in at the door now).
It is rather awkward riding sideways on a man’s saddle, but I can manage
it. We had not a large congregation as there was a funeral near, but
our great object just now is to make friends. There was a nice little
baby present who would come to me and didn’t want to leave—the first in
Zombo who has made friends, and I was quite pleased, for I miss all the
little people at San Salvador who were my special friends. It was such a
broiling day. I got so sunburnt that I am the colour of a lobster to-day.
It was 90° in the shade yesterday. To-day it is raining and thundering
incessantly. The weather just now is very trying, and in our grass-house,
of course, we feel it more, not having proper doors and windows, so that
the house is very draughty and one has to be very careful not to take
cold.

“In the afternoon yesterday I went round the town and got into
conversation with some women. One woman, when I asked her if she wouldn’t
come to meeting to hear ‘God’s palaver’ said, ‘But I have nothing to
pay so how can I come?’ That, of course, gave me a good opportunity of
telling her about the free gift of God’s love to all the world. This
woman has been very friendly, and is the only one, so far, who has
invited me into her house.”

“April 10, 1900. (A circular letter to children.)—Since I last wrote to
you we have removed from our old home at San Salvador, where we spent
so many happy years, and are settled here at the new station—my husband
and self and Mr. Pinnock. I expect you will have read in the _Herald_
about the opening of the new chapel at San Salvador, which Mr. Lewis
had just finished before we left, and also about our arrival here. We
were very sorry to leave all our dear friends, and on the day we parted
we felt very sad indeed. But we are glad to be allowed to tell of God’s
love to those who have none others to tell them of it, and we often have
nice letters from our old girls and boys in San Salvador, and sometimes
some of the men come as carriers with our mails, so we do not forget one
another....

“Well, now, I am sure you want to hear something about our work here. You
must remember it is very different from that at San Salvador. At present
we are living in grass-houses, with just the sand for a floor. We have no
chapel, only an open porch, where we meet on Sundays, and every afternoon
I have school, a very small one, in our room, which has to serve all
purposes except sleeping. We have only been here six months, and the
people, although they begin to know us a little, still cannot understand
what we have come for. They say, ‘These white men do not buy rubber or
cows; they do not come here to rule, and they want us to come and talk
with them and to send our children. They must want to buy our spirits and
send them to the white man’s country. We are not going to be caught! We
will keep our women and children away, and while we will not offend them
because they are very powerful, we will just watch to see what they are
up to.’ Some time ago there was heard a peculiar rumbling sound, like
a very slight shock of earthquake. When they heard it they said, ‘That
is Lewis’s train, taking the spirits away.’ Some of the men had been to
Tumba and seen the train there.

“For some weeks now the country has been very unsettled, and the other
towns threatened to come and fight our chief, Kapela, and his people,
because they kept a white man in their town. Just then there happened,
as is common in March, to be a lull in the rains, and their farms were
getting dry. Now that April is in the rains have begun again. But the
people put this down to us. While they were unfriendly we stopped the
rain; now the palaver is nearly over we have brought it again. Poor
creatures! how we long for the time when they shall open their hearts
to receive our message of a loving Father and a tender Saviour and know
that all things are ordered by Him. We have made a beginning; we have
four little Zombo boys on the station, and I should like to tell you how
we got them. When we had been here two or three months we thought it was
time to make an effort to get children to school. So we asked all the
chiefs of the district to meet us one day as we had something to talk to
them about.

“They had been expecting this, and fifteen came with their
followers—altogether over a hundred men assembled. We had made
preparation for their entertainment, had killed and cooked a goat, opened
some tins of sardines, and got some townswomen to cook ‘luku’ for them.
Then we made three or four large jugs of lemonade. They would not enter
the house, so we spread mats for them outside, while we three sat under
the eaves. Then Mr. Lewis told them once more the reasons for our being
here, and that we wanted to teach their children. Those near could come
daily; but we wanted some others to live with us, so that they might
know our ways and might learn to read in God’s book. There ensued a long
discussion. One after another the chiefs spoke, some saying that was
not what they wished for. They wanted a trader who would help them to
get rich. Finally they went off to consult among themselves. When they
returned most of them said they were willing to give us some boys, some
did not speak, while others said they would let us have some carriers,
but did not want their children to come to us. What was the good?
However, they settled a day when they should bring some boys, and then we
invited them into one of the houses to eat. But no, they would not enter;
so the ‘chop’ was brought and they eat it as they sat, only one or two
refusing to partake, as to ‘eat goat’ in Kongo means to acknowledge the
one who provides it as your chief. I wished we could have photographed
the scene, but we thought it might frighten them.

“On the day appointed only two parties turned up—Kapela, our head chief,
and one other. Kapela brought three little boys and two young men, but
as the latter have wives and families we said they could come daily to
school. The three boys were delighted, and when their relatives’ backs
were turned began to dance for joy, and very proud they were when I
rigged them out in new shirts and cloths.

“One of them is very bright, and gets on fast; the others are slower, but
the youngest is a dear, affectionate little fellow. I must not tell you
more about them now, or you will get tired of this letter; but just one
thing I will add, to show you they are already learning the best of all
truths. The other day in school I asked, ‘Who is the Son of God?’ and
Mpululu answered, ‘Jesus.’ Then, ‘What did He come to earth for?’ and one
of my Congo boys said, ‘To save us.’ But I asked again, ‘To save us from
what?’ and again Mpululu answered, ‘From our sins.’ I thought that a very
nice answer from a little heathen boy; don’t you?

“May 2.—Edward usually comes to school and has regular ‘larks’ with the
children, racing about with them. Sometimes they get on his back, and
he goes quietly a little way, then suddenly kicks up his heels and off
they go. They don’t mind: there is only soft sand to fall on. It is
just mischief of his! It is quite pretty to see little Mvulu cuddling
him. I am going to get a snapshot one day of them. Well, this is a long
rigmarole, mainly nonsense. But really I have not much to write. It is
foundation work just now, and apparently little or nothing being done. On
Sunday we had three boys, or men, to service here. J. P. went to a town
close by and was sent away: ‘They didn’t want the teaching.’ Tom went to
Nzamba in the afternoon and had a pretty fair audience, thirty to forty;
J. P. to another town and had twelve. I cannot get about much till the
rain ceases, and, besides, I have not been very first rate—neuralgia,
&c. But I feel better now, and trust to be all right when the dry season
comes.”

“June 22.—We have just returned from a visit of eight days to Kimfuti,
Ndosiman’s town. There was a funeral there and lots of people from other
towns, so we had splendid opportunities for preaching. The people are
friendly and the women not afraid, so we had quite a good time and have
brought back with us the chief’s nephew, a nice little boy of about
eleven years old, I should think. I expect we shall get more from there
later. We stayed at another town half-way, going and coming, and they too
were friendly.”

“July 14.—We have had no news later than May 25th, so know nothing. How
thankful I shall be to hear that it [the Boer War] is at an end. Of
course we have been interested in the demonstrations about the relief of
Mafeking, and are delighted at the news, and proud of B. P. & Co., but
people really seem to have gone mad.

“Here we are very quiet, and there is really nothing to tell. They are
waiting for the materials to come up from Matadi to begin the new house.
But there is a difficulty about carriers.”

“October 12th.—The other day I got into a rare pickle. I went to a town
an hour and a quarter from here, and, coming home, the donkey, having
fasted for an hour or two, grew thinner, and the saddle got very loose
and kept tumbling on one side. At last it was hopeless, especially as I
had no bridle, and Edward would keep going round when the saddle twisted.
I did not feel up to walking all the way home, as it was blazing hot.
Fortunately I only had the three girls with me, so I made a virtue of
necessity, and rode astride (Don’t be too shocked, there was no one to
see!) until I got within sight of the station; then dismounted and
walked home. But I don’t feel inclined for that game again.”

In the long interval between the writing of the paragraph just quoted,
and that which follows, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis spent another furlough in
England, and returned again to Kibokolo. On the outward voyage they were
happy in the company of their friends, Mr. and Mrs. Lawson Forfeitt. When
the party left England the preparations for the Coronation were complete.
At Teneriffe they heard the heavy news of the King’s illness, and spent a
week of grave anxiety, to be relieved by hopeful tidings at Sierra Leone.

“August 25, 1902. (To Mrs. J. Jenkyn Brown.)—We had a pleasant voyage
and a very happy time at San Salvador with our old friends. Mr. and
Mrs. Graham were well; but Mrs. G. is overworked. I wish very much she
had some one to help her; I am afraid of her breaking down. We had an
uproarious welcome here from our two colleagues, Messrs. Pinnock and
Hooper, and also from the people, who really seemed glad to see us. They
are much less afraid of us than they used to be, and the women come round
about much more freely.

“I am hoping very soon now to have some women to teach. Several come
to talk to the girls, and seem pleased when I go to them. Mrs. Graham
kindly let me take one of her big girls, and I have two other little ones
who are attached to two of our boys. I have two or three Zombo girls
promised, but they are too small to come just yet.

“Mr. Hooper has had wonderful health; not a day’s illness since he came
two years ago. Mr. Pinnock looked very poorly; he has just left for his
furlough. They have both worked very hard, and have got up a nice house
in which we are now living. Tom is now beginning our new house. It is a
great comfort to have a boarded floor once more.

“We miss our old friend Edward very much, but the two mules we brought
out with us are delightful. I rode nearly all the way up, and you can
hardly imagine the lovely change it was from the hammock. They go
beautifully. Tom rode the whole way, and so saved all his hammock men.
They will be a great saving both of money and fatigue if they live. They
are dear creatures, very friendly and tame. We have named them ‘Taffy’
and ‘Queenie.’ My little furry friend Sandy flourishes still; he actually
knew me at once, and ever since has been doing his pussy best to let me
know how glad he is.

“You will be pleased to know that my little boy, Daniel, has grown a very
nice useful boy, and I am in hopes that he is going to turn out well. He
with another came down to the coast to meet us. There and back was a walk
of some four hundred miles. Not bad for a boy of twelve! He enjoyed it, I
think, and was very pleased to see us again.”

“September 8th.—When I last wrote I had just recovered from a slight
fever; I am thankful to say I have been quite well since then. Tom has
been suffering from toothache, a most unusual thing for him; I do hope
it will soon go, for it pulls one down so. He is very busy starting
our new house; Mr. Hooper helps him in the morning, and takes school in
the afternoon. I take the medicine in the morning, which is not much
here compared with what it was at San Salvador. In the afternoon I give
my three girls some lessons, and on Wednesday evening I have all the
children to a Bible class. Yesterday was Sunday, and we had about twenty
outside people to the service. That is the largest number we have had
since we returned. I get two or three women sometimes to come and talk
with me, and the girls on Sunday afternoons, but as yet I cannot get any
girls to school. Some want to come very much, and one little thing came
several afternoons running; but she has been stopped by her master, and
it is the same with the others; so there is nothing for it but patience.
They will come in time. I do all I can to make friends with the women; I
go round the towns as often as possible with the girls, so as to get them
accustomed to me and to get to know them. Just now there seems nothing
but burials; day and night the drums are going, and the people dancing
and howling. The darkness is appalling to think of, and although the
light is here, as yet they will not come to it. Of course it is nothing
new; but it is so different from where we have been before. There the
difficulty was to find time to talk to all the people who wanted to be
taught; here the trouble is to get the people to listen.”

[Illustration: THE DISPENSARY AT KIBOKOLO. MRS. LEWIS STANDING IN
DOORWAY.]

“September 30th.—Well! here there is nothing to write about. Tom is
housebuilding, assisted by Mr. Hooper, who teaches the boys in the
afternoon, and studies the language in the evenings. They both of them
take prayers in turn, to which we try to get the people to come, without
much success so far. As for me, I am a kind of maid-of-all-work. I am
housekeeper, gardener, organist, and occasional preacher, _i.e._, when
they both go out on Sunday morning. Sometimes, too, I go round to the
towns on Sunday afternoon and hold a service. Last Sunday, after hunting
everybody up, I got thirty, sometimes we only get two or three. One of
the women who lives close by has just been here to sell plantain. I asked
her why she did not come to service; she said, ‘What will you give me for
coming?’ and that is the answer one usually gets.”

“October 8, 1902. (A circular letter.)—A sad trouble has befallen us. As
I write I look from the window upon the still smoking ruins of what but
two days ago was the flourishing and most populous township in Zombo. But
I will begin at the beginning and try to tell you what has happened.

“This is Wednesday. On Sunday morning, as we were just about to sit down
to breakfast, two soldiers came asking to buy something. We told them
to wait till the next day, and inquired then what they were here for.
They said they had come from the Resident at Makela to demand carriers
which were owing to him from Nzamba (the town just opposite, across the
stream). We thought the people would be a little frightened, so did not
expect a good meeting. Tom and Mr. Hooper went off, each to separate
towns, and I had the service here. On their return we all felt a little
encouraged, for I had had over twenty townsfolk here, and they both had
had fair numbers to listen.

“In passing through Nzamba Tom had found about fifteen soldiers there,
he had also seen some of our folks and told them to keep quiet and give
the men that were owing. Just before dinner we heard the sound of rifle
firing, and as we sat at table the boys told us three men had been shot
by the soldiers. Tom and Mr. H. went over to see if it were true, and
found one man, the coming chief, dead, and two others of the headmen
badly shot, both of whom died that evening. The soldiers had gone to the
town where they were staying, and the people were vowing vengeance on
Nkil’a nkosi, the chief of that town.

“There is an old feud between these towns and his, and lately Nkil’a
nkosi has attached himself to the Portuguese Resident and traders at
Makela, and has been doing his best to get our people into trouble. Now,
through their own foolishness, he has succeeded only too well.

“It seems that the soldiers tied up one of the headmen, and two others
rushed to untie him, whereupon the soldiers fired and shot all three. One
soldier was badly wounded. He is here now, and we are afraid he will not
recover.

“Tom tried all he could to persuade the Nzamba people not to follow the
soldiers, but they would not listen, and when they had finished attending
to the sick men the fighting men were all on their way to the fight.

“In the meantime the people were rushing here, bringing all their poor
belongings into the station as it was too late to go far. Our yard was
soon full of women and children, goats, pigs, two cats, fowls, baskets
of manioc and other food, and bunches of plantain which had been hastily
cut down; while under our house were packed matetes containing cloth,
beads, gunpowder, &c. They were far too frightened to go back to their
houses that night, so we packed them in with the children as well as we
could, only glad to be able to prove to them that we were sorry for their
trouble and wanted to help them. The men came begging Tom and Mr. H. to
go and fight on their side, and because they refused, cannot understand
how we can be their friends. Night at last came, and very little sleep
any one had, as you may imagine, and by dawn the next morning all the
women and children, or nearly all, had left the town to go to their
various families in other and more distant towns. The Nzamba men buried
their dead the first thing without any noise and did not intend to fight
again that day, but the other side came down the hill calling out to
them, so they went, and returned in the evening very proud of themselves,
saying they had conquered. But their triumph was very shortlived.

“Yesterday morning about eleven o’clock we saw from our window the
Portuguese flag on the top of the hill, and very soon recognised the
Resident just behind, accompanied by four soldiers and men carrying his
hammock.

“He came straight to the station, would not take any refreshment, said he
merely wanted to hear what we knew of the palaver, and to ask us to see
to the soldier who had been wounded, and to ask me for some medicine for
his wife.

“October 10th.—I had to leave off, but now I must try to go on with my
tale. The Resident left us, saying that he was going to see the chiefs of
the towns, but we could see from our windows that the towns were quite
empty, and he simply passed through and returned whence he came. Directly
after dinner Tom and Mr. Hooper rode off to see the sick soldier, and
met him being brought here in a hammock. The Resident had told us that
he had a thousand men from Makela with him, and they saw the valley was
full of armed men. They had come from all the towns round; some to pay
off old scores, others to be on the winning side, and to save themselves
had joined Nkila. We gathered the children and workmen into our house and
there stood and watched as they poured down the hill in hundreds and set
fire to all the houses in Nzamba. It was hard for our three boys who came
from there to see their town in flames and to know that their enemies had
the best of it. ‘They could not have done it except with the white man’s
soldiers,’ they said. At last they crossed the brook which separates the
two towns, and began burning this one. The old man who is our nearest
neighbour and the headman of this part stayed on the station, for his
wife had gone with the other women. He has been a friend to us from the
beginning, and it was very pathetic to see the poor old man watching with
eager eyes as they came nearer and nearer to his house. They went into
all the huts and took anything that was left. I am glad to say it was
not much in this town, but when they came near the station they stopped
burning, and just then a tremendous storm came on, the worst we have had
this season.

“The two little towns which I generally visit on a Sunday afternoon
were destroyed, and one on the other side nearest to us. Whether it was
the storm that stopped them going further we do not know, but they did
not return to burn any more, though some came down the next morning to
finish looting. We sent up to ask for some help with the sick man, and
two soldiers came to stay with their wounded comrade. Soon after that the
white sergeant arrived with a message asking Tom to call the chiefs of
Kibokolo together. We were very glad to be able to say with truth that we
did not know where they were, for it was only to get them into a trap.

“Yesterday morning the poor soldier died; his wounds had been left too
long for any but skilled help to avail. They came and carried him away
for burial, and that is the last we have seen of them. We hear that the
Resident has gone back to meet the delimitation party at Makela, but
the soldiers are left at Kimalomba (Nkila’s town), and they are vowing
vengeance against these people, so we are afraid we have not seen the end
yet.

“There are fifteen houses left in this town; the next nearest is ten
minutes away, and there are plenty of people within an hour. But it is
a terrible upset, and at present we hardly know what to do or say. One
little consolation we have, that the people evidently understand that we
are their friends.

“Yesterday one of the wives of Mwan’a Mputu came to the station saying
she did not know where her husband was, so she and her child are staying
here. In the afternoon a little boy came with a bad foot; he and his
mother were in hiding, and as his foot was bad he came here. He does not
want to go away again, but that is an after consideration; he may not be
allowed to stay.

“We hear shots in the direction of the town he has come from, but do not
know yet what they mean. We are in no danger personally, and we can only
trust that God Who led us here and has been so evidently with us in all
times will not fail us now. We know He will not, neither will He let His
work suffer; but for the present it is a long set-back, we are afraid.

“Just now we have plenty of food for the station folks, but we may have a
little difficulty in that important matter.”




CHAPTER XIII

LIFE AT KIBOKOLO—_continued_


“October 20th, 1902. (To Mrs. J. Jenkyn Brown.)—I expect you will be
surprised to hear from me so soon again. I want you to know of the events
which have happened during the last fortnight, which have been a great
blow to us, and, as far as we can see at present, to the work here.

“You will, I know, sympathise with us and pray that we may be guided
aright in all we do, and that good may come out of even this seeming
evil. It is so sad to think of all those poor things scattered like sheep
and wandering about in the bush during this terribly wet weather. We hear
that two have died already, and I am afraid they will not be the only
ones. Three women with their little ones have sought refuge here, and are
with us now. We have not been long enough here for the people to have the
confidence in us which they had in Congo, or no doubt there would have
been many more. All the towns about have taken a vow not to harbour the
Kibokolo people, and the soldiers are on the look-out for the men to take
prisoners. So far they have not succeeded in taking any....

“As I write, further bad news has come that three towns which were spared
have decided to go away. If so, we shall be left in the midst of a
howling wilderness. We can only wait at present and pray for guidance.”

“November 17th.—Tom is very busy building. There seems no end to building
of one kind and another. You see here, where our houses only consist of
three or four rooms, there are so many outbuildings needed to each house,
besides chapel, carpenter’s shed, blacksmith’s shed, and stores. Now he
is just going to build a dispensary. The old house which we have been
using for that and a store combined, may come down any day in a heavy
storm. Mr. Hooper’s house is going on at the same time, and with these
wonderfully industrious men I can tell you it is no joke.

“So many sad things seem to be happening everywhere. I am afraid our
dear old B.M.S. is getting into hot water over these atrocities. I do
think that the Congo State has been too much praised by some; still it is
absurd to suppose that any of our missionaries would condone brutality or
injustice. Perhaps they have been slow to believe things which they have
not seen themselves. Personally I never had any love for King Leopold or
the State. I even prefer the easy-going Portuguese.”

“February 20, 1903.—I had to leave off there the other night, so must try
to finish now. Since then the old chief of this district came the other
day, or rather sent to say that he was outside the station, and wanted
Tom to go to him, as he had ‘eaten nkisi’ not to come in. Tom sent word
that if he wanted him he must come in, as he had nothing to do with his
nkisi palavers. So he and the other men came just inside, to where our
new house is, and had a long talk; but there is no doing anything with
these people. They wanted us to guarantee that no Makela man should come
any nearer than Nkil’a nkosi’s town, and declared there would be no peace
until Nkila and Nzanza (his fellow chief) were both killed; that until
then they would not settle down, and the country would not be at rest.

“They are brimming over with revenge, and think of nothing else. A man
named Luvumbu, the chief of a little town which was burnt, called Wembo,
is now the head of all this district. He was the one who refused our
‘chop’ when all the chiefs promised us boys a long time ago when we first
settled here. He professed to be tamed as regards having dealings with
us, but the other day when Tom offered a tin of sardines each to the
three chiefs, he refused one. Nearly everybody here is related to him,
and he is the head cook in all witch palavers, so prospects are not very
bright. I am afraid there is little chance of the regular people coming
back here for a very long time. It is very disheartening, and just now we
are so tied with one thing and another. Mr. Hooper is not well, we lack
carriers, and the mules are ill, so that we cannot get about to the other
towns as we should like to do. Even the nearest towns are difficult to
reach this time of the year, as now the people do not clean the roads,
and to walk through the wet grass means a good wetting and a good chance
of fever. If the mules were well we could get to those near. Then
besides, Tom has his hands full with the new house and a brilliant lot of
workmen, who mostly do nothing if he is not there; or if they do attempt
anything it is pretty sure to have to be undone again. So you can see
what a nice hole we are in at present. I hope things will change for the
better before long, though as far as we can see they are not likely to.”

“April 18th.—Certainly everything has been so far most disappointing,
and disappointment is depressing here, for there is nothing to take
it off. As soon as the rains cease and Mr. Bowskill has got into the
station work, Tom and I hope to get out to the towns round about. We
shall not be able to go far, as Mr. Bowskill will be alone, but there are
very many towns we want to visit. We are also anxious to get some more
children on the station. Just now the chiefs are at San Salvador, and we
are anxiously awaiting their return. If they come back with everything
settled we are going to have high jinks, a big feed for them and the
station children and workmen. I think I told you J. P. and Mr. H. had a
bull and cow between them. Well, the poor bull died, after which the cow
took to wandering, and was away quite a long time. The other night she
returned. Mr. H. means to shoot her for the feed. I need not say I shall
not partake of it; but I suppose every one else will enjoy the beef. I
daresay it is the kindest thing to do, for she is very lean, and not very
happy, I should say.”

“June 3rd. (Circular letter to children.)—It seems a long time since I
wrote to you, but no doubt you have read about us in the _Herald_, and
have heard how all the towns close to our station were burnt down, so
that the poor people had to run away. Some had friends in other towns
to whom they could go, but many lived in the bush for several months,
building themselves little shelters in the tall grass, so that no one
might know where they were. A short time ago the Portuguese Governor sent
word that they might return and build their towns, and live in peace if
they would obey the laws, but the chiefs of the towns must first go to
San Salvador and obtain permission of the magistrate there. At first they
were very much frightened at the idea and did not like to go, but at last
we persuaded the chief of the biggest town, Nzamba, to venture, and when
he returned safe and sound the others consented to go also. Now it is the
dry season, and they want to begin to build. They were much astonished
at all they saw at San Salvador, and very pleased with their visit. All
this has greatly interrupted our work. A very few people could come to
listen to God’s Word on Sundays, and those in the towns around were so
frightened and restless that it was of little use our going to them.

“The witch doctors had passed a law that no children were to come to
school, so if we asked any boy to come one day, the next he had run away
and was nowhere to be found.

“Now, however, things are beginning to look brighter. When the people
said they were coming back, we called the chiefs together and told them
they must take away this law about school and allow any one to come who
wished. We also said we expected them to keep the promise they made a
long time back, to bring us some boys to live on the station so that we
might teach them good fashions. After a great deal of talk they agreed,
and a few days after came with six boys, such funny little fellows—the
eldest about eight, perhaps; but he, poor child, is an orphan and
slightly crippled, his feet being deformed. He also has a skin disease
which I hope to be able to cure in time. He has been badly neglected.
His name is Nsumbi. Next to him is Nekiana; he is about seven, and is
a bright, sharp boy, who, I think, will learn very quickly. Then comes
Ntambu, about six years old, a good-tempered, lovable little fellow, but
a little inclined to be lazy and dirty. The three others are about four
and five years of age—such little mites! At first I said they ought to
be with their mothers, but when we were told they had none we consented
to take them. Their names are Nzingula, Nzuzi, Muntu; their poor little
fingers and toes have been badly eaten by ‘jiggers,’ the nasty little
insects of which some of you have heard; but I hope soon they will be
quite well. You see they are all little, so we hope to be able to teach
them many things, and that when they know more about Jesus, they will
begin to love Him and try to please Him. They all go to school, and the
two elder ones have already learnt their A B C.

“So far I have not been able to get any Zombo girls either to school
or to live with us. There are many nice little girls about who come
sometimes for medicine, and some of them would like very much to come
into the station. A woman told me the other day that her child wanted
to come and she would like her to, but I am afraid the man to whom she
belongs will not let her. The girls here are betrothed when quite babies
to old men who have money to buy them. These men do not like them to
learn, because they are afraid if they do they will not want to be their
wives when they grow up. No doubt that would be so. However, I am in
hopes of getting my first Zombo girl in this week. The chief of Nzamba
has promised to bring me some girls, and I believe he is trying to get
them; but he owns a number of little girls and does not like to give them
up, and the other people are just the same; because in this land little
girls are articles that can be bought and sold just like pigs or goats.
It seems so sad that nice little children should be sacrificed in this
way; that is why we are so anxious to get them to school, so that when
they grow up they may know better.

“There are so many dreadful customs here which make us feel very sad, and
we know that it is only the light of the gospel of Jesus which can dispel
the darkness and give these people the desire to live differently.

“I want you all, especially those of you who love Jesus, to pray with
us for these Zombo boys and girls, that very soon a great many may come
to school, and there learn to read the Word of God and to love the dear
Saviour who died for us all.”

Toward the end of July, Mr. and Mrs. Cameron came from Wathen to spend a
few weeks at Kibokolo. This visit was especially welcome to Mrs. Lewis,
as Mrs. Cameron was one of her old Camden Road friends, and though
younger by a good many years, it is still true that she and Mrs. Lewis
were at school together. The friendship had been maintained, and the
reunion in Zombo was no small joy and refreshment to both. The visitors
made holiday, but busy holiday. The work of the Station went on, and Mr.
Cameron accompanied Mr. Lewis upon an eight days’ journey of itineration.
The interest of the happy intercourse at Kibokolo was deepened by the
arrival of Mr. Bentley before the Camerons left, and Mrs. Lewis records
her happiness in his presence and her concern for his health. Indeed,
all three of her visitors were ill and required nursing during their
stay, which was prolonged in consequence. On August 27 they all departed,
having given and received cheer.

“September 11th.—Of course we had a big day when they (Mr. and Mrs.
Bowskill) arrived; and the same week we had other visitors: the Governor
of Cabinda, the Resident from San Salvador, the Resident from Makela,
and another white man with them. The Governor seems a very nice man, and
we hope that his visit will result in good to the people. Tom told him
exactly how matters stood, and how the soldiers behaved when they came to
the towns; also how Nkil’a nkosi used the Resident’s name in terrorising
these folk. The Governor sent for Nkila, who came in style with all his
followers. He also sent for the people and chiefs of these towns and had
a long talk with them; told them that they must live in peace and that
they were to send their children to school, so that they might learn good
ways and be able to read, and that if any one came to trouble them, they
might tie him up, and send him to San Salvador and on to Cabinda. They
were all very polite and tried not to give trouble; but you can imagine I
had a busy time of it, having eight to sit down to table. They were here
one night only and two days. They looked at the ground and were supposed
to measure it, but accepted Tom’s measurements. We are very glad they
have been. Nlekai is still with us. He is to leave in a fortnight. We
shall miss him very much, he has been such a help. By that time the B.’s
will be settled in their own house and we shall be able to start work
regularly again. I hope you will see Mr. Hooper while he is at home. Is
it not a trial for poor John Pinnock, having to leave his wife at home so
soon? I am sorry for them both.”

“October 11th.—To-day we have opened the first chapel in Zomboland. Tom,
Nlekai & Co. have been hard at work for the last three weeks putting it
up, and it looks so nice. Iron walls with four windows, shutters on each
side, two doors, grass roof and a platform. On the platform to-day was
our travelling table, covered with the cloth which you and Alice gave
me when at home, I think, my harmonium, Mr. Bowskill as organist, and
the four of us. The school children were just in front. We had been busy
practising hymns, as we wanted to make it a big day as well as we could.
We sent round to all the chiefs, but without much success; only Nembamba,
the chief of Kimfuti Nkusu, arrived. Some of them say they are coming
next Sunday instead, as they had a funeral going on, but!—we shall see.
Still we had a good time. The children sang very nicely, each of us gave
a short address, and all repeated the Commandments together. The people
listened very attentively; Tom and Mr. B. both led in prayer, and we can
only hope and pray that some word may have fallen into good ground and
bring forth fruit in days and years to come.”

In February, 1904, in the course of an itineration, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis
arrived at Kimpemba, where they met Mr. Bentley. The story of the meeting
is briefly told by Mrs. Lewis as follows: “Kimpemba, February 15, 1904.
There is a chance of sending, so I am just writing the latest news.
We arrived here Saturday, 13th, and found Mr. Bentley, who had been
suffering from influenza. He was up, but that night went to bed in fever,
and is not up yet. His cough is bad. It is awkward here with no proper
house, bed, or other comforts. Fortunately we have plenty of fowls.
Expecting to be back in less than a fortnight, we did not bring much with
us. Of course we shall not leave Mr. Bentley until he is fairly well, and
fit to return. Tom and I have a little neuralgia, but are quite well.
17th.—Mr. B. is decidedly better.”

“Kibokolo, March 7. I wrote you a card when we were at Kimpemba, telling
you how ill Mr. Bentley was. I am glad to say he got fairly well before
we left, and was able to proceed on his journey, but he is very shaky,
though awfully plucky. I do hope he will go home soon. I did my best
to persuade him, but he said there was this thing and the other which
he must do first. Still he acknowledged that he must go as soon as
possible, as he did not wish to throw away his life. We spent six days
there and were very glad to have a little time with him, although we were
only able to have chop together one day. He was asking about you all.”

“March 25, 1904. (To Miss Ethel Percival)—You would love the little birds
here! on a fine day there are crowds. Sweet little palm birds, soft
brown, with lovely blue breasts, and the dancing birds—the cocks with
long tail feathers, some six inches long, and very handsome black and
white plumage, and their little brown mates—dance a kind of jig while on
the wing. This is a regular bird paradise, for no gun, arrow, or missile
of any kind is allowed to be used within our part of the station. I am
afraid dear Sandy sometimes makes a meal of poultry, but he usually
confines himself to rats, of which there is an abundant supply, and he
never touches the chickens or ducks which are all running about. Some of
our English chickens hatched here are very fine birds, and the ducks do
well too. But I try not to take too much interest in them individually,
because you see some of them have to be eaten eventually. Dear Dombe is
growing, but I do not think he will be a big donkey. He is much petted,
and I think enjoys his little self. He does not like Sundays, for his
friends then retire to the chapel for very long periods, he thinks. He
welcomes them rapturously on their return.

“I have been very busy this week sewing and writing. It was no use to
go into the town for there are two funerals proceeding, and the people
are too busy and excited with drink and dancing to listen to anything.
Then it is Mrs. Bowskill’s week for school—we take it week about—so I
have taken the opportunity to answer some of the letters which have
been waiting for replies. Then too I am writing a catechism for little
children on the Life of Our Lord, which is getting on.”

“July 10th.—I think I told you in my last that I am taking school in
the morning now, boys and girls together. There are thirty-six in all.
I quite enjoy having a respectable school again. I like school teaching
better than any work, I think, when I am well. Then with the medicine,
house, girls’ work and small boys to see to in the afternoon I am pretty
busy, as you may imagine. Between whiles Tom and I do just a little
gardening, so as to keep some fresh vegetable going (that is mostly my
department); Tom is growing vines and roses. So between us we are getting
a few things about the station. Then there are the services for Tom on
Sunday, and prayers every morning in chapel, and my class on Sunday
afternoons for all young folks on station, when they learn portions of
Scripture by rote to repeat to me, and a class of big boys on Wednesday
evenings, whom I am taking through the Acts. So though sadly behind in
visiting and itineration we are working for the future, and trust and
pray that some of the young folk may prove to be blessings in their towns
in the years to come.”

“February, 1905. (Circular letter to children.)—It is rather a long time
since I wrote to you about the work here, but I have no doubt you read
the _Herald_ and so know a little of how we are going on. This is such a
very dark spot, and the saddest part is that now the True Light has come
into their midst the people still prefer darkness. Night after night we
can hear them shouting and dancing at their fetish palavers. When any one
falls sick they say it is caused by an evil spirit, and all the friends
of the sick person assemble after dark to drive it away by charms and
incantations, accompanied by singing and dancing. The next day they will
solemnly tell us that they saw the spirit go away into the darkness,
although the patient is no better and oftener than not dies.

“Yet in a few cases the light is beginning to pierce the gloom; some are
wishing to learn, and what I think is even more hopeful, some—very few
at present—of the men are beginning to want their wives and children
taught. For the last six months all the workmen on the station have been
attending day or night school, and at Christmastime some of them came and
said they saw that we—the missionaries’ wives—were not happy because the
women did not come to be taught, so they were going to make an effort
to get them, as they wanted their wives to learn. They made a feast, to
which they invited all the chiefs and headmen, and told them that now
they themselves went to school and knew there was no witch palaver in
it, so they must not prevent the women from coming. The chiefs agreed to
this, and the following Monday when we began school after the holidays
two women and a little girl came. These two have long wished to come,
but were prevented by the superstition of their husbands and relatives.
Others came afterwards, so now we have eleven besides the nine girls who
live with us on the station, and we hope many more will come since they
have made a beginning. They are not stupid. Four have already learnt
their letters, and I was surprised yesterday at the slate of ‘a’s’
written by one of them from the blackboard. She had a child in her arms,
and had never attempted a stroke until she came to school.

“They are very wild and dirty and not at all inviting-looking, but it is
wonderful to see how gradually, almost imperceptibly, they are getting
into order and how well they learn to say the text with which we close
school.

“On Sunday afternoons I have started a class for any girls or women who
will come, and I get from five to fifteen besides the station girls. Some
of these are older women who do not come to day school. They learn a
text, and then I tell them as simply as I can something about Jesus. Some
of them listen very well, and I want you all to join in praying for these
Zombo women and girls that many more may come to be taught, and that
those who do come may learn to love and follow the Saviour.

“A week or two ago my husband and I went out for a visit to some of the
towns to the north of this place. In some we were well received, as we
had visited them before when we first came to Zombo. In one group of
towns in particular we were able to make friends and have some nice talks
with the people. In one town there were several sick folk, who were glad
of medicine, and in the same town there was one woman who had just lost
her daughter, another who had a little baby, and both of these seemed to
like to listen to what I told them about the great God Who made us all
and loves us.

[Illustration: BRIDGE OVER LUSENGELE STREAM NEAR COMBER STATION,
KIBOKOLO.]

“One day a rather tiresome incident occurred, although we cannot help
laughing when we think of it now. We wanted to go to a place called
Kidia, which is on the other side of the Nkisi river. This is a fine
river and too deep to ford; the only way of crossing is in a large canoe,
which is kept there as a ferry. We crossed, but found the district most
miserable; the people and the houses all seemed dead or dying, so we did
not stay there long, but returned to the river at another place, as we
wished to come back by a different route altogether.

“We got to a wretched little town early in the morning, and as the people
did not seem friendly, and there was not a decent house in the place, we
decided to cross the river and go another way. When we arrived at the
ferry the canoe was on the farther bank and the ferryman nowhere to be
seen. The carriers called and shouted for about an hour, when two boys
came down to bring the canoe over, but when they saw Mr. Lewis they
fled, and as we heard afterwards, went and told the townsfolk there was
‘something’ on the opposite bank, not a man at all! We sat and waited,
hoping they would bring their master, as our men called after them to
do, but hour after hour passed and still no one came. At last one of our
young men, the only one who could, swam across; but when he attempted to
punt the canoe, he only fell over into the water, so the men called to
him to go into the town and fetch the ferryman. We waited another hour
and a half, when the boy returned, saying he could find neither town nor
people. So there was nothing for it but to go back to the little town we
had left in the morning. We were very weary, for we had taken nothing
but some biscuits and milk all day, and had not been able to rest at all
between the hot sun in the open space by the river, and the insects when
we retreated into the shade. The people were very angry when they saw us
coming back; they thought we had been driven away from somewhere, and
suggested that if we had only waited till dark, ‘the devil would have
taken us over.’ We got the best house we could; but there was hardly room
for our beds in the one place in the middle where the roof was whole, and
we had hardly got them up before a tremendous storm came on. The next
morning we went back to the ferry by which we had previously crossed and
got over all right.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1908 Mr. Lewis read a paper before the Royal Geographical Society in
London, entitled “The Ancient Kingdom of Kongo.” It was illustrated by
splendid photographs, and received with enthusiasm. I was present, and
can testify to the heartiness of the cheer given by the audience for
Mrs. Lewis, who had been her husband’s fellow-traveller. The following
passage is taken from this paper, which was printed in the _Geographical
Journal_ for June, 1908:—

“Two years ago (August to October, 1905), in company with my wife (who
has always travelled with me, and assisted me in my observations for some
twenty years), I made a journey through Nkusu into Mbamba, visiting on my
way the celebrated, but now abandoned, copper mines at Mbembe.

“The Nkusu district is the most populous I have visited in the whole of
my journeyings through Northern Angola. The villages are numerous, and
the inhabitants generally seemed to be strong and healthy. I always judge
of the prosperity of the country by the area of land under cultivation.
The extensive plantations of manioc, maize, beans, sweet potatoes, and
other native products point to the inhabitants being industrious and
prosperous. The Nkusu folk also engage in trade like all the other
tribes, and spend much of their time away in the rubber market. This
being a free trade in Portuguese Congo the natives make good profit by
it. The highest altitude I have registered on the plateau is in this
district, being 3,600 feet above sea-level.

“I cannot help comparing this district with that of Kidia, on the east
side of the Nkisi, where we passed through some of the most wretched
villages I ever saw. There was hardly a hut fit for any human being to
live in, and all were in a tumbledown condition. The people were ill-fed
and dirty, and the children—the few I saw—were feeding on palm-nuts and
raw manioc. We came to two villages close to each other, and found that
all the inhabitants had died of sleep-sickness. The carriers entered some
of the huts and saw the bodies of two or three in the last stages of
decomposition on the floor. These were possibly abandoned by the small
remnant who had fled before this terrible scourge of Central Africa.

“It was, therefore, an agreeable change to travel day after day among
a bright and prosperous tribe of people. But even there we came across
some disagreeable scenes and cruel customs. One day we arrived at a
village where they were just preparing the body of a woman for burial in
the Lueka River close by. Our carriers, always attracted by a funeral
feast, went to look on, and one of the lads ran back to tell us that they
were going to bury a four-days-old baby with the mother. I hastened to
the spot just in time to see the grandmother pulling a native cord and
fastening the living babe to the neck of the dead mother. Amidst great
confusion and wild protests I rescued the child out of her hands and
carried it to my wife. It only lived, however, ten days, but we remember
with horror that the child had been left for twenty-four hours to suck
at the breast of a dead woman. The burying of infants with their dead
mothers is a common practice through the whole Congo region, except
where there are missionaries or Government officials to stop it. I have
heard of one father who reared his motherless child with native beer
(mbamvu) and palm wine, but I know of no other case outside the members
of Christian communities.”

In the course of this journey Mr. and Mrs. Lewis visited Mabaya, a new
station far south of San Salvador, recently founded by Mr. and Mrs.
Cameron. Their coming had been eagerly expected, and was warmly welcomed.
They were delighted with the progress their friends had made in so short
a time, and in the following letter Mrs. Lewis gives a brief account of
the visit:—

“Mabaya, September 17th. We have been here nearly a week.... We found
Josephine fairly well though rather depressed, for Mr. Cameron had been
very unwell and she was very anxious about him. His health is not at
all satisfactory. He has been left far too long without a colleague,
and when the Kirklands come there ought to be a third man very soon,
in case the Camerons have to return. They are holding on bravely here,
doing with the minimum of comforts to save transport, and the work seems
decidedly promising. The people here are more like San Salvador folk
than are our wild creatures in Zombo. Josephine has three meetings for
women; that in the near town is very good, and the women are learning
to sing quite nicely. To-day we are assisting at the opening of the new
chapel, a very nice, large grass structure—not quite finished. Tom and
I are to speak this afternoon (Sunday), and to-morrow night Tom is to
show a magic lantern. Then, on Tuesday, we start homewards by a different
route. I shall write a circular letter about our journey, so I must not
write about it now. I had a nasty fall from my hammock which might have
been serious. It delayed us a day, and kept me from doing anything for
several days. I am thankful to say the effects have passed off without
any permanent damage, though I have reminders now and then.”

“November 14th. (To Mrs. J. Jenkyn Brown.)—We have had a most
discouraging year with regard to the work here. It seems like a blank
wall of superstition and wickedness, and were it not that we know that
there is nothing impossible to God we might well despair. We have been
here now more than five years, and seem to make very little headway. I
do hope the women’s meetings I have just begun will be maintained. I
have not been able to get them hitherto, so that is a step in the right
direction. Also, the women are coming better now to school, but the boys’
school is so interrupted by the constant demands for carriers from the
Portuguese authorities, who are simply recruiting agents for the traders.
At ‘women’s meetings’ so far, I have had a number of boys and girls and a
few men as well, but I am glad to get any one who will listen. The Sunday
services are a little better attended lately, but the numbers are still
small.”

In January, 1906, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis attended the United Conference
of Congo Missionaries at Kinshasa, Stanley Pool, to which Mr. Lawson
Forfeitt brought the heavy news of the death of Dr. Holman Bentley. The
following passage is from a letter dated Kibokolo, February 3rd:—

“The ladies were a good deal to the fore in the meetings and there were
several papers read, and discussions in which we all took part, about
women’s work. Then the ladies had two close meetings to talk over private
matters with regard to the time for these girls to marry, &c., &c. These
were felt to be most helpful, especially to the younger ones among us,
who were quite surprised at many of the customs which we older ones could
tell them of. I certainly feel now that the time was not wasted which I
spent up there, for they said I had taught them many things with regard
to women’s work here which they could not have learned otherwise. I was
very glad to have some talks with Dr. Catherine Mabie of Banza Manteka,
on medical matters. She is so nice, and so are Dr. Leslie and his wife.
Their little boy, ten months old, was with them. Then all other sides of
the work were discussed and many papers read. On Sunday morning we met
for a memorial service for Dr. Bentley, when Mr. Grenfell gave such a
beautiful address. After that we all sang a hymn I chose, which seemed to
me so specially appropriate,

    “‘Captain and Saviour of the host
      Of Christian Chivalry,
    We thank Thee for our comrade true,
      Now summoned up to Thee.’

“Then we had the Conference sermon by Mr. Harvey, and in the afternoon a
native service, Mr. Richards preaching in Congo and Mr. James Clark in
Bobangi, and finally a united communion service.

“All except our own people left on Monday. We had to stay for our local
committee.”

“February 19th, I was very disappointed with the _Baptist Times_ article
about Dr. Bentley. There is no proper account of the funeral. In the
editorial note it says, and Charles Williams repeats it, that he had
finished translating the Bible. That is not correct, and we are all so
grieved about it. Arrangements are now being made for its completion.
Then, to crown all the blunders, C. Williams in writing about the
commencement of the Mission speaks of the four noble men, Grenfell,
Bentley, Comber and Crudgington! leaving out John altogether. I think it
is too bad in the official organ. I hoped that Harry Crudgington might
see the latter error and correct it. I wonder if you noticed it. Of
course it does not matter really, for the Master knows all the faithful
workers, but still the younger generation ought to know the names of
those who lived and died for Christ and Congo. We are indeed thankful
for Dr. Bentley’s life and work. His place cannot be filled. Although we
disagreed with some of his plans we were always pleased to see him and
to talk with him; and we are so glad that we had that week with him, two
years ago, when he was ill. Poor Mrs. Bentley and the children: they must
feel his loss sadly. Mrs. Bentley’s whole life will be changed. Their
photograph came out as a New Year’s card, and it seemed like a farewell
from our old friend and colleague. He looked so young in it.”

“July 8th. (To Mrs. J. Jenkyn Brown).—We hope to leave for home in
January, as we feel it would not be wise to attempt to stay another bad
season here. So we do hope a new man for Mabaya will hurry up. We had
purposed to stay another year, but that is out of the question now. We
enjoyed the Grahams’ visit very much, though so short, and while they
were here we had our first baptism—not a Zombo, that joy is yet to come;
but a girl who has been with me four years, and has been the greatest
comfort to us all for the last two. We went down singing to the beautiful
little river at the bottom of the Mission grounds, a good many Zombos
coming too, to see what we were about. Tom and Mr. P. had “throats” so
Mr. Graham conducted the service and then Tom baptized. Afterwards we
went into our chapel and sat down to the Lord’s Table, together with a
few Christians from San Salvador. While they were here Mrs. Graham went
with me to my women’s meetings in two towns just a little way off. She
was so amused with the women here; she had never seen such a wild lot.”

“August 3rd.—We are both fairly well but rather overdone. You will
feel as grieved as we do to hear of dear Mr. Grenfell’s death, and so
soon after Dr. Bentley’s. We were much surprised when we heard he was
hopelessly ill, as he seemed quite well in January, though very sorrowful
and downhearted. All this trouble with the State and then Dr. Bentley’s
death greatly upset him. We can ill spare either of them, so if seems to
us, but God knows best. Mr. Grenfell was a really good man and so humble
and meek. May we have grace to follow him so far as he followed Christ!”

“August 22nd.—Just now we have with us a Christian woman from San
Salvador Church. She is a wife of ‘Noso,’ the old chief of Mbanza Mputu,
our old friend. Ditina is an old friend of mine too, and has been a
Christian for many years. She would have been a deacon long ago but that
she is a co-wife. She is a splendid worker, and we thought she might
be able to get at those whom we cannot reach. She has been here a week
nearly now, and has been out every day making friends and talking to the
people. She will be here for about three weeks longer. Then in October we
hope to have Nlekai to go over with me the second part of ‘The Pilgrim’s
Progress,’ which I am translating. I hope he will be able to come.”




CHAPTER XIV

A MISSION OF MERCY


It has long ago been clear to the sympathetic reader that Mrs. Lewis
was a woman of exceptional determination and heroic courage. In the
late spring of 1904 occurred a series of events in which, according to
the judgment of her friends, these qualities were revealed in supreme
degree. A cry of distress came from San Salvador, which her loyal and
affectionate heart interpreted as imperious, and in one of the wildest
rainy seasons, when natives would only take the round under compulsion,
she made the journey of something like one hundred miles _alone_.

In April, 1902, the Rev. Arthur Mayo joined the Mission at Matadi, and
a few months later passed on to San Salvador, his destined sphere of
service. In May, 1903, he went down to Matadi to meet Miss Sygrave, who
had come out from England to be his wife. They were married on May 17th,
and shortly afterwards Mr. Mayo resumed his work in San Salvador, happily
supported by his wife, who had been specially trained as a teacher. At
this time Mr. and Mrs. Graham and Mr. Phillips were also in San Salvador,
but the Grahams left for England in September, and Mr. Phillips for
Matadi before Christmas. Meanwhile Mr. and Mrs. Wooding had arrived,
and the two missionaries and their wives maintained the service of the
station with no more than the usual vicissitudes until, in March, 1904,
Mr. Wooding was stricken down by serious fever. The case was obstinate
and assumed a very grave aspect. It happened that the Portuguese Resident
was ill at the same time, so a messenger was despatched to Matadi
requesting advice from the doctor there.

A few days later news arrived that the messenger had been killed by
an elephant, and under this final blow Mr. Mayo, overstrained by work
and anxiety for his colleague, staggered and went down. When the fatal
message was delivered he said, “I am ill, too,” and went to bed. So the
two wives were occupied in nursing their sick husbands, for Mr. Wooding’s
obstinate fever still burned. For fourteen nights Mrs. Mayo sat up with
her husband. Happily Nlekai and Vita were on the spot and rendered good
service, Nlekai’s ministry being notably gentle, skilled, and welcome. As
Mr. Mayo’s case grew graver, Mr. Wooding, still in fever, dragged himself
from his bed to render assistance to his colleague, whose case was
heavier than his own. The trouble deepened. Mr. Mayo’s temperature rose
to 106°·8, and he fell into delirium. It was obvious that unless relief
came there would be general collapse; and in the extremity, not without
compunction, for it was one of the worst and deadliest of Congo seasons,
Mr. Wooding wrote to Kibokolo begging Mr. and Mrs. Lewis to come over and
help.

Now at this time Mr. and Mrs. Bowskill were staying at Kibokolo, and Mrs.
Bowskill was in delicate health. It was at once felt impossible that she
and her husband, new to the place and people, should be left alone in
that wild region. Therefore Mr. or Mrs. Lewis must needs go alone. Of
course Mr. Lewis wished to go; but his wife said, “No, this is a woman’s
business. Whatever happens to poor Mr. Mayo, Mrs. Mayo will be at the end
of her tether. She will want a woman’s comfort and a woman’s nursing. I
must go.” And when Mrs. Lewis said “I must,” her friends knew that they
were confronted by finality, and she had her way.

Her little caravan was hurriedly loaded, and on Sunday afternoon, just
twenty-four hours after receiving the summons, she started on her
venturesome journey. Mr. Lewis accompanied her some few miles on her way;
and the parting would not be without emotion, as during the seventeen
years of her Congo life she had never been separated from her husband for
more than the briefest period of time.

By one of those mischances which every biographer has to deplore, the
letter in which she wrote a more or less detailed account of her journey
has been lost, and I can only supply the brief records of her diary. In
following these the reader will remember that it was the season of heavy
rains and wild tempests; rivers were in flood; rank grass from twelve
to twenty feet high overhung and obstructed the track in many parts;
the track stretched to a hundred miles, and in covering it this frail
Englishwoman, worn with many years of strenuous African life, but for
her rough, dispirited, apprehensive native carriers, was alone.

“Saturday, April 16th.—Just at half-past one, as we were ready for
dinner, two men arrived from Congo (San Salvador) with letter from Mr.
Wooding begging for help. Mr. Mayo very ill and all knocked up. Decided
that I should go. Very busy all afternoon packing.”

“Sunday, 17th.—Breakfast very late. All morning arranging things for
road, and for those left behind. Started at 1.45. Tom came to Nzinda.
Road very bad in parts; slippery and grass trying. Arrived at Mbawa at 5
p.m. After ‘chop’ and prayers, and writing a few lines to Tom and Bessie,
went to bed early.”

“Monday, 18th.—Wanted sleep so badly last night but was kept awake by
a wretched biti (a native musical instrument) till very late. Rain all
night; storm early this morning; rain continuing till 10.30. Headache;
took phenacetin; read ‘Weir of Hermeston’ a little. This afternoon sent
forward to prospect, but Lupunde (river) impassable, so had to stay the
whole day. Awfully tedious. A funeral here. Wrote a little to Tom. After
prayers early to bed.”

“Tuesday, 19th.—Started at 6.50; very bad road; did not get to Nkamba
till 11.50. Started again at 1.40. Made very quick march to Tadi,
arriving at 3.57. Wrote to Tom. At Nkamba, mail-man overtook us. Letters
from Tom; all well.”

“Wednesday, 20th.—Got to Nkanka to lunch—Fwese to sleep, arriving at
about 3.35. All very wet when we got in. Had to change, &c. No harm, but
awkward for to-morrow.”

“Thursday, 21st.—First dried all things. Started at 10.30. Did not reach
Nkwimba (Zeka Town) till 2.45. Hesitated about going on, but big storm of
rain compelled us to stay. Wrote up diary and letters to Tom. Cannot get
a fowl.”

“Friday, 22nd.—Started at 8.5. Found no town at Zamba, so ‘chopped’ by
stream and went on. Caught in big storm; arrived at Mwinga 6.45, awfully
tired. Found Vita with some clothes, and ‘chop,’ and note from Woodings.
Got into bed, after ‘chop,’ as soon as possible.”

“Saturday, 23rd.—Started at 7.40. ‘Chopped’ at Kintina. Weather very
bad. _Had to wade Luanza [river]._ Arrived at San Salvador about 5 p.m.
Very kind welcome. Mrs. Mayo keeping up well. Wrote to Tom. Up very late
talking.”

       *       *       *       *       *

On the day before her arrival, Mrs. Lewis had learned from Vita at Mwinga
that she was too late to aid in nursing Mr. Mayo. He had passed away on
Wednesday, the 20th, when she was but half-way on her journey of mercy.
Of course she was much exhausted when she reached San Salvador, though
perhaps her exhaustion was most intense on the Friday, when she confesses
herself to be “awfully tired.” The much-abused word “awfully” is perhaps
used legitimately in this case, for she admitted afterwards to Mrs.
Graham that there were moments in that day during which she thought she
would die before she got through. Her carriers too were so utterly spent
that they sank down on the verandah of Mr. Wooding’s house and remained
for hours without moving.

For some days Mrs. Mayo kept up, despite the terrific strain to which
she had been subjected, and Mrs. Lewis was free to throw herself into
the work of the Mission, which she did with keenest interest. Difficult
palavers taxed her patience and her wisdom. Inquirers were seen, medicine
given out, and on the Sunday, eight days after her arrival, the diary
records:—

“I took the women’s meeting; a crowd; and they all seemed pleased to see
me.”

Mrs. Mayo (now Mrs. Kirkland)—to whom I am indebted for many of the
facts embodied in the remainder of this chapter, and for some already
recorded—informs me that this women’s meeting was quite a memorable
gathering. The demonstrations of respect and affection on the part of
the audience were most touching. These black women clung about their
friend and former teacher, and received her words with enthusiasm and
with meekness. And the meekness was as great a tribute as the enthusiasm.
For Mrs. Lewis had heard that some of them were not “walking worthily,”
and though she spoke the truth to them in love, she spoke the truth
unsparingly, giving them a sound and wholesome lecture. On the same day
the thing foreseen happened, and Mrs. Mayo went down with fever. For
several days Mrs. Lewis was occupied in nursing her friend. Then Mrs.
Wooding became ill and there was more nursing.

It was early apparent to Mrs. Lewis that Mrs. Mayo ought to start for
England without delay, and, as other escort was not available, she
determined herself to take her to Matadi. The caravan was loaded, and on
Monday, May 16th, the two ladies started for the coast. On the second day
out they met Diamanama with mails, who said that the Lunda river, which
lay immediately before them, was impassable for carriers.

That evening their plight was pitiable. Lodged in a hut just big enough
to accommodate their two camp-beds, Mrs. Mayo weak from fever, Mrs. Lewis
aware that her turn was coming, heavy rain blown into their miserable
shelter by a wild wind, a flooded river awaiting them on the morrow, too
dispirited for conversation, they sat down each on her camp-bed, and “had
a good long cry.” Though the pity of God, Who knoweth our frame, was
not withheld from them, the sky gave no hint of it; for with the night
came a fierce tropical thunderstorm. When at last they got to sleep they
were attacked by driver ants, and had to make a hasty midnight flitting.
Another poor shelter was procured, and in the morning they went down to
see the Lunda. In truth they did not see it. The river had overflowed
its banks, and before they had got through the long grass, to its normal
margin, they were in deepening water. A colloquy with the head-carrier
ensued. Mrs. Lewis stoutly said, “We will go across.” The laconic and
conclusive answer was: “But your boxes will not.” Human will is a mystic
and incalculable force, and often achieves miracles; but when its
immediate organ is the frail body of an exhausted woman, it cannot lift
the dead weight of a passively resistant caravan. There was but one thing
to be done. They retraced their steps to San Salvador.

I give the record of Mrs. Lewis’s diary for several days:—

“Thursday, May 19th.—Arrived back at San Salvador this evening awfully
tired.

“Friday, 20th.—Feeling very queer.

“Saturday, 21st.—In bed with fever, bad.

“Sunday, 22nd.—In bed with fever, rather bad. Bessie (Mrs. Mayo) is
nursing me.

“Monday, 23rd.—Sat up to-day. Normal all day.

“Tuesday, 24th.—Loaded and arranged caravan this morning. Feeling a bit
queer, but much better.

“Wednesday, 25th.—Started, went to Kintina.”

A few words of comment upon these entries are perhaps called for. The
reader will wonder why Mrs. Lewis, just up from fever, made so much haste
to depart upon the long, trying journey to Kibokolo. The cause of her
haste was her concern for Mrs. Mayo. She felt that her young friend must
not be allowed to remain a day longer than was absolutely necessary amid
the scenes of her recent suffering and sorrow. Her nerves were perilously
overstrained; she could not sleep, and Mrs. Lewis judged that the journey
to Kibokolo, with its inevitable hardships, would be far preferable to
a prolonged stay in San Salvador. In her own home, too, she would be
naturally able to give, with fuller freedom and competency, the careful,
sympathetic treatment which the case required. So on the day after her
recovery from fever, and while still “feeling a bit queer,” Mrs. Lewis
“loaded and arranged the caravan.” And these words are to be taken
literally. It was a man’s job, but masculine help being unavailable at
the moment, in her determination to get away quickly Mrs. Lewis did it
herself.

From Wednesday, May 25th, to Tuesday, 31st, the diary is blank. The
journey yielded no incidents of special moment. The usual discomforts
were endured, aggravated by the inexperience of the hammock bearers. On
May 31st occurs this entry:—

“Met Tom on the Nyanza. All came in together this afternoon. ‘Chopped’ at
Bowskills.”

Mr. Lewis was returning from a vain journey to Tumba. When Mrs. Lewis was
starting from San Salvador to escort Mrs. Mayo to the coast, she wrote to
her husband, informing him of her project, saying also that in returning
she purposed to take the train from Matadi to Tumba, and asking him to
meet her there and accompany her home. Turned back from the flooded
Lunda, she wrote again, hoping to be able to prevent his setting out. The
second message arrived too late.

The question naturally arises: If Mrs. Lewis could not consent to her
husband’s leaving Kibokolo to accompany her to San Salvador, how was
it she felt able to ask him to meet her at Tumba? One can only surmise
either that less anxious conditions at home made his short absence
feasible, or that she foresaw that her own probable exhaustion would make
his escort necessary, even at some risk.

A fortnight later Mr. John Pinnock arrived at Kibokolo, and took Mrs.
Mayo to the coast, whence she sailed for England. At home her health and
vigour were happily restored. Later, she was married to Mr. Kirkland,
with whom she has since rendered excellent service to the Mission in the
Congo region.

It goes without saying that the woman who did and dared so much for her
in time of trouble, is remembered by Mrs. Kirkland with intense and
reverent affection. But it is important to add that she regards her
lamented and devoted friend as an ideal missionary, whose wisdom and
efficiency were as great as her affectionate devotion. Moreover, Mrs.
Kirkland likes to think that she is not the only woman missionary on the
Congo who endeavours to prosecute her work according to the plans and
methods of one whose life was a model and whose memory is an inspiration.




CHAPTER XV

LAST FURLOUGH


In the middle of September, 1906, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis were busy at
Kibokolo making plans for future work, and entertaining no thought
of immediate return to England. Mr. Lewis had been ill, but was well
again, and was on the point of starting for a local journey. Mrs.
Lewis was expecting the arrival of Nlekai, to aid her in finishing and
correcting a translation of the second part of “The Pilgrim’s Progress.”
Yet, on November 9th, they were in the English Channel, aboard the ss.
_Bruxellesville_, and Mr. Lewis wrote as follows to Mr. Wilson:—

“You will be surprised to hear that Mrs. Lewis and I are nearing
England. When the last Antwerp mails left Congo we had no intention of
returning so soon. Our letters had scarcely been posted when I went
down with bilious fever, the second attack within a month; and as I
have been suffering from repeated attacks since January, we decided to
leave at once. We were able to take this step when Mr. Hooper returned
to Zombo from Mabaya, without seriously crippling the work at Kibokolo.
He arrived ten days before we left. At Matadi I saw Dr. Sims, who said
that I had been suffering from continued fever for some time, and, to my
astonishment, that I was in fever at the time of his examination. I think
I am getting rid of it. Indeed, after a week at sea I felt comparatively
well, and am now myself again. My wife is much run down and tired. We
hope to reach Southampton to-morrow (Saturday) morning, and to proceed at
once to London. We shall call to see you on Monday morning.”

This call was duly made, and later in the same week there ensued the
necessary interview with Dr. Habershon, the physician of the B.M.S.
Dr. Habershon reported that the illness which had sent Mr. Lewis home
was “subsiding,” but felt moved by his study of both their cases to
make representations to the Committee concerning the advisability of
shortening the term of residence on the Congo between furloughs.

Late in December Mrs. Lewis was called upon to endure a great sorrow.
Childless herself, her sister’s children had ever been dear to her, and
became dearer as the years passed, and intercourse and mutual kindness
strengthened the ties of nature and of spiritual affinity. Moreover, one
of them, Eva, was called to the discipline of pain, lingering, long drawn
out.

Not more than a year or two after that radiant holiday at Penmaenmawr,
referred to in a previous chapter, Eva Percival, a beautiful and winsome
girl, suffered from the first slight assaults of a mysterious nervous
malady which defied the treatment and even baffled the diagnosis of
the best physicians of the day. For ten years, with fluctuations and
intervals of hopeful improvement, her trouble grew upon her, until at
last, after much anguish, endured with the patience and the sweetness of
a saint, it quenched her life.

When Mr. and Mrs. Lewis arrived in this country Eva’s case was grave,
and her aunt was continually with her. Shortly before Christmas, Mr.
Lewis was sent to Edinburgh to make close personal inquiry concerning the
critical illness of the Rev. George Cameron, and to convey the sympathy
of the Committee. It was felt that his presence and the loving messages
which he bore might be elements of help to one who lay in extreme
weakness. But while Mr. Lewis was in Edinburgh there occurred a sudden
change for the worse in the case of his niece, Eva, scarcely less dear to
him than to his wife. He was called back to London by telegram, and she
died the next day.

In the presence of such facts the mystery of pain is so exigent that it
compels us to assume a simple solution. The spiritual force expended, and
the spiritual peace acquired, in the brave endurance of such affliction
_must_ have their mission and their future. God is not a prodigal Father
Who wastes His substance in random ordinances; and what is there, in all
the sum of His known belongings, more precious than such a soul as that
of Eva Percival?

Despite the consolations of the Evangel, the natural grief of her mother
and her sisters was very great, shared to the full by Mr. and Mrs. Lewis,
whose presence and sympathy yielded the best earthly comfort. And there
were those, themselves among the number, who felt that it was a kindly
dispensation of Providence which had brought them home for such a time as
this.

Shortly after the commencement of the new year, Mr. and Mrs. Lewis
were able to undertake deputation work, and early in March, while away
from London on this business, Mr. Lewis received a momentous letter
from the Secretary of the B.M.S., the Rev. C. E. Wilson, conveying the
request of the Committee that he would accept the appointment of B.M.S.
tutor, at the projected United Training Institute, on the Lower Congo,
with the understanding that Mrs. Lewis would take the educational and
general oversight of the women, wives of the students, who would reside
with their husbands at the Institute during term time. Confessedly
reluctant to abandon pioneering and forward work, for which he had
striven specially to qualify himself, Mr. Lewis was so impressed by the
importance of the new scheme that he could not decline the invitation.
Meanwhile he asked for time, that he might consult his colleagues on the
Congo; for gratifying as was the confidence of the Committee, he could
not regard the proposed position as tenable, unless the brethren on the
field approved.

As the story of the remainder of Mrs. Lewis’s missionary life is so
largely the story of the Kimpese Institute, it is highly desirable that
the reader should have good understanding of its character and its
aims. I cannot better ensure this than by quoting at length from an
article subsequently written for the _Missionary Herald_ by Mr. Lewis.
At the time of writing he and Mrs. Lewis had accepted the proposals of
the Committee, which had received the most cordial endorsement of the
missionaries concerned. It may also be stated here that the Swedish
Missionary Society, which had been party to the original scheme, stood
aloof in the end, thus for the time being lessening the scope of the
Institution.

“The very gratifying result which has attended our work on the Congo,
and the rapid growth of the native Christian Church during the past few
years, have brought the various missionary societies face to face with
the problem of the better education of a native ministry. So urgent
has this question become that for several years past it has occupied a
prominent position in the joint Conferences of all the Protestant bodies
labouring in that country.

“Fifteen months ago representatives of the American and British Baptist
Missions met at Matadi to consider the possibility and advisability of
establishing a United College for the training of native preachers,
evangelists, and teachers, in connection with the Missions which work
within the Congo-speaking area. There were some difficulties arising
out of differences of dialects in use in the various Missions, but on
talking over these matters we found that most, if not all, of these could
be surmounted, and the feeling of the brethren was wholly and strongly
in favour of a _joint_ institution for the three principal societies
working on the Lower Congo and in Portuguese Congo. Negotiations were
entered into with the Swedish Missionary Society, who were also desirous
of joining. This Society, as well as the Americans, have training
schools already in connection with their own work; but all consider that
a well-equipped _United College_ would be an immense advantage to the
cause of Christ in Congoland. Not only can the training be better and
more economically done, but a combined effort of all the Missions will
have the supreme merit of uniting in Christian activity all the native
Churches in connection with the different societies. It is confidently
hoped that this bringing together of our future native teachers and
leaders will be a source of true strength to the Churches in the land,
and unite them all in aggressive evangelistic work.

“The negotiations are now sufficiently advanced to issue an appeal to the
readers of the _Missionary Herald_ for their help and sympathy in this
great undertaking. All the friends of our Congo Mission will join us in
thanking God that the time has now come for this advance, and already I
am glad to find great interest is being exhibited by friends all over the
country in this new college scheme.

“The location of the Institute will be at Kimpese, a point close to the
Congo Railway, at a distance of about eighty miles from Matadi. Our
American brethren in the early days secured a plot of ground of about
thirty acres, with the intention of establishing a Mission Station
at that place, but it was not occupied. This property is now to be
transferred to the United College authority.

“The Constitution provides that ‘in accord with the commonly understood
position of evangelical Churches, and also in accord with the ordinance
of immersion on a profession of faith, the instruction given in the
Institution shall be based upon the acceptance of the Old and New
Testament Scriptures as an authoritative standard of faith and practice.
The importance of strict regard for Scriptural teaching in the observance
of the ordinances of the Church shall be fully recognised.’

“The Institution is to be controlled by a Board of Trustees representing
the three Missions.

“Three tutors have been appointed, one from each Society, to form the
faculty of the College. This number is considered sufficient for the
present, but as the work develops we shall require more assistance.

“It is estimated that we shall have in residence about 150 students, who
will be brought in from various missions for a three years’ course of
training. Provision is also made for the training of young women who are,
or will become, the wives of teachers, it being of the utmost importance
to have trained women teachers for work among their Congo sisters.

“For the first few years the married teachers who are now in service at
sub-stations will come in for special training. Arrangements will be made
for them to live in native-built houses in the College grounds—husband
and wife together. Later on, when the married people have received their
course of training, we hope to open a special branch for young women who
will be likely to become wives of teachers and evangelists.

“In this educational work we attach great importance to the principle
of a native ministry, and we shall avoid anything in the shape of an
imitation ‘white man.’ Thus the life, housing, clothing, and feeding will
be in accord with native ideas, only insisting on cleanliness, decency,
and industry.

“The chief aim of the Institution will be to secure enlightened and
intelligent teachers and evangelists, and to train them for evangelical
work among their own people.

“The students will be required to do a certain amount of plantation and
garden work to secure a supply of food for themselves. There will also
be carpenters’ and blacksmiths’ shops, and a brick-making department, so
that they will be able, in their sphere of labour, to build their own
houses and schools and chapels without monetary help from the native
Churches which employ them, and be in a position to elevate the people by
teaching them these crafts.

“In addition to the cost of buildings, which it is hoped will be provided
for out of the Arthington Fund, we shall require furniture, fittings, and
accessories for the halls and classrooms, and also tools for our various
industrial workshops.

“The support of students must be provided for, and it is estimated that
£8 per year will keep a single student at the College, while £14 will
support a student and his wife for the same period. I feel sure that many
friends will count it a privilege to contribute such a sum yearly for
the training of these young men and women for the native ministry of the
gospel in Congoland.

“I may say that at the request of my brethren in the field I have
consented to become the B.M.S. tutor in this new college, and I have
also just been appointed Principal. And as first Principal of this
United Training Institute, I most earnestly and confidently appeal to
all friends of the Congo Mission for their kind co-operation and liberal
help.”

On March 20th Mrs. Lewis wrote to Mrs. Pinnock of Kibokolo: “Before now
you will have heard about the Training Institute and the probability that
we shall not return to Kibokolo. I know you will be sorry, and so shall
we; but the Committee are so anxious that we shall undertake this work,
as also are the San Salvador folk, that we do not see our way to decline.
In God’s work we must do what is best for the work itself and not
consider our own personal wishes, so if all goes well I suppose we shall
go to Kimpese. It is a big undertaking at our time of life, but I know
we shall have the prayers of you all for our guidance in all matters. I
am sorry not to have the joy of gathering in when the harvest begins at
Kibokolo, but none the less we shall take an interest in your work there
and rejoice with you when that time comes.... To-night we go to chapel to
attend our Sunday School Anniversary Tea Meeting. We had a lovely time on
Sunday. Several hundred young folk occupied the galleries, all wearing
daffodils and singing like larks. It was grand. I thought they would
never finish. Dr. Clifford preached in the evening, and it was a rare
treat to hear him.”

“March 20th. (To Mrs. Hooper, of Kibokolo.)—I have written all news to
Mrs. Pinnock and have asked her to let you read it, so please ask for
it. I am very anxious to have news of your husband’s health. No one
mentions him, so I presume he is much better. ‘It is not good for man to
be alone,’ you see, and I shouldn’t be surprised if your company and care
do wonders. I do trust you will both keep well, and have much blessing on
your work.

“Please pet Sandy for me. I have a dear puss here, but don’t forget old
Sandy. I am afraid it will be a long time before I shall be able to have
him again, if ever. I don’t know how we shall be situated in this new
station. I am sorry that we shall not work together again, and especially
that I shall not have the joy of seeing some of those Zombo women and
girls come to Christ. But I shall think of and pray for them, and I hope
you may have the great joy of reaping a rich harvest from the seed sown
through so many years of barrenness and discouragement.

“I hope you will write as often and as fully as you can, for I shall be
very anxious to know how things go on. This work to which we are going
is so important that we shall need all the help we can get, and trust we
may have the prayers of all our brethren and sisters on the field, so
that everything may be started on the right basis. I hear that Mr. Weeks
has arrived safely, for which we are thankful. The spring flowers are out
now: oh! they are so lovely. Though as yet there are not many English
ones to be had: plenty of snowdrops in the country and crocuses in the
gardens.”

“May 7th. (To Mrs. Kirkland, of Mabaya.)—That opposition of the old chief
is natural, but I should think, from what Mr. Graham writes me with
regard to the action of the San Salvador Resident, that it will turn out
rather for the furtherance of the gospel. Opposition is far better than
indifference. In the old days at San Salvador it was just at the time
when the King so fiercely opposed his people coming to our services that
the work began to develop and the nucleus of a Church was formed.”

“June 5th. (To Mrs. Hooper, of Kibokolo).—I am sorry I did not write last
mail, I was visiting friends and could not. This must be only a few lines
as we are very busy. We leave London on Monday, 10th, and give up these
lodgings until September or October. I have not seen your folks yet. I
wrote the other day to say that we shall be going to Wales in September
and hope to call on them if convenient.

“And now I want to tell you how greatly we rejoice with you in the
baptism of Mayungululu. I am sure it will be a very great joy and
encouragement to you both to feel that you have been the means of
bringing the first Zombo convert to the Saviour’s feet. May that joy be
greatly multiplied to you all! You may be sure that in all your successes
we shall rejoice with you, and shall ever pray that you may be guided and
helped in all difficulties.”

June brought holidays, and holiday spirits, and I would that space
permitted me to quote at length Mrs. Lewis’s letters and postcards.
She is over fifty years old; she has done more than thirty years of
strenuous work at home and abroad; yet she writes with the enthusiasm
and _abandon_ of a girl of eighteen, just loosed from a convent school.
The beauty of the Rhine scenery intoxicates her. With her husband’s
assistance she calculates how many Camden Road Chapels could be housed
comfortably in the nave of Cologne Cathedral. She boasts of sleeping in a
gorgeous chamber, one time occupied by the Queen of Holland, and chuckles
over the deprivations of a young Anglican priest, who was evidently
pining for splendid ritual, but having to officiate in a crude little
church, must needs be content with “plain morning prayers and a sermon,”
which none the less she enjoyed exceedingly. From Stockholm she sends a
message to “Prince,” Mrs. Percival’s dog, saying that she has seen some
distant relatives of his, lovely little Esquimaux, and is sorry that she
cannot send him photographs of them also.

This missive was dated June 25th. In July the postmarks are British
once more, and on the 3rd she is in Peebles, N.B., enjoying gracious
hospitality and the delights of long, luxurious drives among the hills.
Ten days later her address is Maelgwyn, Pwllheli, where, amid familiar
scenes, she is awaiting expectantly the mild discipline of an imminent
“Chatauqua,” meanwhile taking delight in many simple things, including
the happy freedom of her neighbours—“the dear donkeys who roam at will
across the common, and salute me from time to time with their melodious
voices.”

Late in August she is in Deal, staying with her friends the Parkinsons,
and is one of a merry party, mostly young folk. Among other diversions
they all get weighed and measured, and Mrs. Lewis pokes fun at her
husband’s proportions and makes boast of her own. She weighed 8 st. 9
lbs. 10 oz. and measured 5 ft. 2¼ in. She might well boast, for I recall
a Congo entry in her diary, in which her recorded weight is less by a
good 20 lbs.

Early in September she is staying with her cousin, Mrs. Welch, at the
Vicarage, Millington, in Yorkshire; casually mentions that she cannot
be impeded by more than the lightest baggage, and is on the point of
departure for Swansea.

In the autumn she and her husband are occupied again by the labours
and journeyings of deputation work. Yet all the while she maintains a
voluminous correspondence with her sister colleagues upon the Congo,
eagerly scanning their news and earnestly giving the counsel and
information and sympathy which are often solicited or required.

The following letter was written on November 26th to Mrs. Moon, wife of
the tutor appointed by the American Society to be the colleague of Mr.
Lewis at Kimpese.

                        “66, HILLDROP CRESCENT, HOLLOWAY, LONDON, N.
                        “_November 26, 1907._

    “DEAR MRS. MOON,—I have not the pleasure of knowing you
    personally, that is yet to come, but your husband writes that
    you wish to hear from me with regard to the work that lies
    before us, _i.e._, the training of the women students in the
    new college. As I believe you already know, I have always
    taken a great interest in the teaching and training of the
    Congo women and girls. I believe there are great possibilities
    in them, and that up till now they have hardly received the
    attention they deserve. This being so I greatly rejoice in the
    prospect of doing something more for them, and am very glad to
    hear that you also are interested in this most important work.

    “I suppose at first the women we have to train will be mostly
    wives and mothers, and that fact must necessarily influence
    the character and extent of their training. I do not see how
    we can expect those for instance who have babies to spend more
    than a small proportion of their time in the classroom. Then I
    think we shall have to arrange somehow for their children to
    be cared for while they are attending classes. Perhaps those
    without children might have extra teaching. I see no reason if
    it is thought desirable why the brighter ones should not attend
    some of the men’s classes or vice versa. Then, too, there is
    the question as to men with heathen wives, or wives who are not
    professing Christians. What do you think about them? Are they
    to be left in their towns, or to come in with their husbands?
    Or is it to be optional? Of course they could not attend all
    the classes; should they attend any?

    “Then as to the subjects to be taught, I am writing somewhat in
    the dark, as I only know the teachers’ wives who belong to the
    San Salvador Church. But if I were arranging for them alone I
    should suggest the following:—

    1. Old Testament.
    2. New Testament.
    3. The Christian Life.
    4. Training of children.
    5. The art of teaching.
    6. Nursing of the sick.

    “That course, with their farm work as exercise, is I fancy
    as much as we could attempt. Later on when we have a proper
    women’s department with unmarried students, other subjects
    might be added. What do you think of this? I hope you will
    write and let me have your views freely, so that we may be able
    to arrange plans which shall commend themselves to us all.
    The wives of the San Salvador teachers are all Christians,
    able to read, write, and sew, and most, if not all, engaged in
    teaching. How far that is the case with others I do not know;
    perhaps you can tell me. Details as to our various duties must
    of course wait until we can meet and talk over matters. It
    seems to me that there will have to be a school conducted by
    one of us for the children of teachers, and for any boys and
    girls employed by us in our houses. This will provide a good
    opportunity for teaching how to teach.

    “These are merely suggestions (which my husband agrees with),
    and I shall look forward to hearing from you with regard to
    them, or any others you can make.

    “With kindest regards to you and Mr. Moon,

                         “Yours very sincerely,

                                                    “GWEN E. LEWIS.”

The co-operation of Mrs. Moon in the work at Kimpese, to which Mrs.
Lewis was looking forward, was not vouchsafed to her. In the order of
Providence Mrs. Moon’s arrival was delayed until Mrs. Lewis’s work was
almost done, and the shadow of death fast approaching.

In December Mrs. Lewis suffered from a serious attack of influenza, and
during the spring of 1908 deputation work was sometimes interrupted, and
fears of delayed return to the Congo occasioned, by the illness of Mr.
Lewis. Happily these fears were dispelled, and in May Mrs. Lewis writes
of packing, and the hope of starting from Antwerp on June 11th, with Miss
Spencer, who is going out to marry Dr. Gamble.

So the last, and in some respects the happiest, of her furloughs came
to its end. It began with deep sorrow, but it yielded many joys. She
was happy in her deputation work, happy in her holidays, happy in her
intermittent life at home, and supremely happy in her relations with
the Church. During these months I saw more of her than ever before,
and was privileged to hold much converse with her and her husband, of
that trustful order which yields true spiritual refreshment. I may be
permitted to relate a single incident of our intercourse. During one of
my visits to their home in Hilldrop Crescent Mr. and Mrs. Lewis spoke
of Grenfell, and of the Committee’s purpose to issue a biography. Drawn
out by them, I freely expressed extemporaneous judgments as to the
possibilities of the work and the manner in which it should be done.
They listened with quiet interest, and in due course I went away, to
return a few days later bringing with me, for their perusal, a letter
from Mr. Wilson containing the Committee’s request that I would write
Grenfell’s Life. Instead of sharing my amazement they broke into hearty
laughter, confessed that they knew all about it, and that in our previous
conversation they had been quizzing me. Their knowledge had come to them
through attendance at Committee, and they felt in honour bound not
to anticipate the official communication. Needless to say, after that
Grenfell’s Life became a bread-and-butter topic between us, and I had the
privilege of submitting certain early chapters for their criticism before
they went away.

They had many missionary visitors, and among the most welcome and
most frequently entertained were Mr. and Mrs. Lawson Forfeitt, whose
disappointment at being forbidden to return to Congo, on the ground of
Mr. Forfeitt’s broken health, elicited their warmest sympathy. They
attended as many as possible of the services at Camden Road Church,
and often took part in its meetings; made many new friends among those
who had joined the congregation in their absence; and were delightedly
received in many homes. As ever, Mrs. Lewis won her way to the children’s
hearts. Two little girls of one family were specially drawn to her, and
she asked them, when they said their prayers, to seek God’s blessing upon
her husband, herself, and their work. The little ones gave their promise,
and kept it. When they were informed of her death, they were much grieved
and perplexed, and at night the younger of them prayed on this wise:
“Dear God, we are very sorry that you have taken Mrs. Lewis to heaven,
for we wanted her here. And please do not let Mr. Lewis be too sad.”

Her last farewell meeting at Camden Road will long be remembered by
those who were present. A few friends in the company had loved her from
girlhood, and many had loved her and her husband for long years. But
during her last furlough the heart of the whole Church had gone out to
them in notable degree. I mentioned this in the meeting, and in so doing
expressed the common consciousness of the audience. It is a tranquil joy
to those of us who are left, to realise that in all her long association
with it, the Church was never dearer to Mrs. Lewis, and that she was
never dearer to the Church, than when it said its last “goodbye.”




CHAPTER XVI

SETTLEMENT AT KIMPESE


A second time Mr. and Mrs. Lewis sailed from Antwerp amid a storm of
music and enthusiasm. The storm was not raised for them, yet none the
less they enjoyed the thrill of it. The voyage was propitious, and in the
quiet resting days their thoughts turned fondly backward to the friends
they had left behind, as well as eagerly forward to the new work they
were about to undertake. In her first letters Mrs. Lewis gives expression
to that feeling of deepened affection for the Church, to which I have
referred, little thinking that those who had become more than ever dear
to her would see her face no more.

“SS. _Bruxellesville_, approaching Teneriffe, June 17, 1908. (To Miss
Taylor.)—I shall very very often be thinking of you all, especially on
Sundays. I shall try to keep in with your prayer circle; for somehow this
time we are more than ever bound up in love and friendship with Camden.
Give our love, too, to the dear friends at Harrow.

“We have had a splendid voyage so far, smooth and fine. There are three
other missionaries on board—a young couple and a single lady, nice quiet
people, ‘Brethren,’ going to Westcotts’ Mission on one of the tributaries
of the Kasai—and we have a table together. Thousands of people gathered
to see us off at Antwerp, as our captain is a Belgian—the first to attain
that dignity. He seems a decent man.

“Matadi, July 8th.—We arrived at Banana ten days ago and found a letter
waiting from Dr. Gamble, saying he was down with his first fever at
Matadi. However, a week yesterday we came to Boma, and soon after
eleven the next morning saw a little boat approaching in which was the
Doctor. We were indeed glad for Miss Spencer’s sake. That day we could
do nothing but make arrangements, as it was a general holiday, flags
flying, a regatta in the afternoon, and a torchlight procession in the
evening, which was very pretty. On Thursday afternoon, July 2nd, we
went ashore—just Dr. Gamble and the bride, with Tom and me. The British
Consul accompanied us in a tram (steam) to the Governor’s house, and the
marriage took place in the Court of Justice, according to Belgian law,
with the British Consul as witness. Then we walked down to the American
Mission, where Tom conducted the religious service. Our other missionary
friends were there from the ship, and the American missionary, his wife,
and another lady. They had prepared a pretty tea, with flowers and a
sugared cake. It was very kind. When we returned to the ship the captain,
who was waiting to congratulate the bride and bridegroom, invited us
to his cabin, and we must needs have tea and cake again. The next day
we came here, where Mr. Phillips and Mr. Norman gave us a most hearty
welcome, and we had letters awaiting us from San Salvador, Kibokolo, and
the Howells, bidding us welcome back to Congo. We have had a pleasant few
days together. The Kasai friends left on Monday, and we saw the young
couple off in the train at six this morning. By the same train went six
nuns bound for San Salvador. I am sorry.

“The news from most of the stations is good, but Mrs. Graham is very
unwell, and we have written urging her to take the doctor’s advice and go
home as soon as the Bowskills arrive. Mr. Graham is not well either, so I
do hope they will go.”

“Matadi, July 8th. (To Miss Ethel Percival.)—On Sunday the Commissaire
(that is the magistrate in charge) and his wife from Boma, paid us a
visit. They gave Kimpese a very good character. It is very pretty, with
good water and plenty of fish, good food, &c. In that case we shall be
better off than we expected. I shall be able to write more about this
next mail. There is no lady on this station, so I have been making cakes
and pies since I arrived, of which the gentlemen have been very glad.”

“Kimpese, July 27th. (To Miss Beatrice Percival.)—This is such a
queer place, just a kind of clearing in the bush, and we live in a
one-roomed grass-house. On the opposite hill the Roman Catholics have
an establishment, and we can see and hear the little train as it winds
in and out and goes puffing up the hill. There is a fine range of hills
on one side of us, and we shall look out upon them from our new home.
Uncle is very busy getting the ground and foundations ready, and I am
endeavouring to teach three bush boys housework and cooking, as well as I
can under the circumstances. I have also started to make a little garden
with their help this morning, so that we can get some mustard and cress,
lettuces, &c., before we get into our regular house, and Uncle makes the
proper garden.”

“August 19th.—We are both well I am thankful to say, but one never seems
clean. It is the dry season, and the dust and ‘jiggers’ are dreadful. I
am afraid this is a very bad place for insects. There are no end of flies
now and a good many mosquitoes. What they will be in the rainy season I
don’t know! There is so much bush about. A good deal has already been
cleared, but there is much yet to be done. It is so unfortunate that Tom
has no one to help him responsibly. Of course we have a lot of men, but
they need constant looking after. My boys are just beginning to be of
use, and on Sunday two little girls arrived. They come from Makuta.”

“September 10th. (To Miss Ethel Percival.)—Our garden is getting on.
Yesterday Uncle and I put in peas and beans. The melons and cucumbers
are coming up, and the flowers, some of them, will soon be in blossom.
Uncle’s carpenter has turned up ill, and has had to go away for several
days, also one bricklayer. It is very trying, as it keeps everything
back. Mr. Moon arrived on Monday, and to-day, Thursday, he has gone off
to his old station to see about his things. His wife and two children are
left in America. He has his meals with us, and seems a nice quiet man,
and very earnest. The weather is getting very much hotter. Several days
lately it has been 86° or 87° in the shade.”

[Illustration: GRASS HOUSE AT KIMPESE IN WHICH MR. AND MRS. LEWIS LIVED
DURING CONSTRUCTION OF PERMANENT BUILDINGS (1908).]

“October 7th. (To Miss Ethel Percival.)—It was too bad to put you all
off last mail with a p.c., wasn’t it? But really I could not help it. I
was so rushed, and in consequence, of course, headachy. On the Sunday
Uncle was very poorly, and I had to take service. He got better, and
managed to finish a classroom he was putting up with iron walls and grass
roof. It is divided by a partition, and we moved into it on Wednesday.
We had just got in, thinking to get everything in readiness for the
visit of the Trustees on Friday, when Mr. Moon came back from Matadi, as
we expected, and with him Mr. Lowrie, from Mabaya, on his way home. We
were very pleased to see him, but of course there had to be a fly round
to get him bed, ‘chop,’ &c. Then just in the middle of the stir Daniel
arrived from Zombo, bringing _Sandy_! He had to be petted and comforted
after his long journey. Mr. L. went off early the next day, and just as
I was making some cakes in readiness for the day following, in walked
Mr. Frame! Another fly round! Then on Friday there was, of course, a big
dinner to prepare for night. They all arrived by midday train, _i.e._,
about half-past two, Mr. and Mrs. Bain, Mr. Phillips, and Dr. Sims....
As my cook is so new, I had to look after everything myself, so that I
could not enjoy their company as I should have liked to do. Mrs. Bain is
a Swede, and very pleasant. Dr. Sims is most kind. I don’t know what we
should do without him.... I can also consult him about the medical work
which I have begun here. I was forced to it. We have so many workmen with
us, and lots of other people come as well. I have only begun regularly
to-day. My garden is doing so well, and looks so pretty; I wish you
could see it.... You would love the pretty little chicks we have now,
such a lot of them. Four broods are out, and two other hens and the
duck sitting. Yesterday men arrived from Kibokolo with sixty fowls; so
you see we have plenty of fresh ‘chop’, and do not need to fall back on
tins, as we did at first. All food is much dearer than at Kibokolo or San
Salvador. Uncle is awfully busy, and Mr. Moon, with the two houses. The
roof of the office is just being put up. By the way, a day or two after
I wrote to Mother, one of our men brought us a fine big fish from the
river, which we enjoyed very much; but we have not seen any since.”

“November 18th. (To Miss Ethel Percival.)—It is just pouring with rain
now, and after the frightful heat of the day the rain is quite a relief.
Our house is going up fast. The office outbuilding is nearly finished,
and to-day our two roll-top desks were unpacked so as to keep them from
the white ants. The rest of the house has only a skeleton yet. It will be
delightful when finished. I only wish our friends could see us in it....
The garden is not flourishing quite as well as it did; there is too much
rain for it, and the insects are awful.”

“November 30th. (To Miss Beatrice Percival.)—Uncle is looking for a
snake, a Boa, who came and paid us a visit last evening just as we were
going to tea. Two hens were sitting on one nest. One was killed, the
other they saved and transported to a place of safety, with her eggs,
but in the night the silly thing went back to the place of peril and
was killed by the snake. It was dark yesterday, and while the boys were
getting a light the snake made off, and they cannot find it. But we know
it is about, and are afraid it will kill more fowls, or the ducks. Did I
tell you the duck had a family of fourteen? but there are only ten now.
It is wonderful they have survived; but she is a splendid mother, and
we should be sorry if anything happened to her, poor thing. The snakes
are plentiful about here. Uncle has just returned, but can’t find the
enemy. December 1st.—I am just waiting breakfast, 7.25 a.m. This is our
twenty-second wedding day; just fancy! We have indeed much to be thankful
for. Here we are quite well and very busy—both desirable things. I
believe the ducks and fowls are all right this morning, so I suppose the
Boa has gone elsewhere. The monkeys came the other night and eat up the
maize which the girls had planted. They say there are crowds of them, but
I have not seen them yet. I have told the boys and girls to let me know
next time they appear.”

“December 2nd. (To Miss Taylor.)—”We are still in the classroom, into
which we moved from our grass-house. Our permanent house is getting on,
but the workmen are very slow and very stupid, and Tom cannot do as
much here as in Kibokolo, the atmosphere is so different. I am thankful
to say that for many weeks now we have all been quite well. It will be
nice when we get into our new home and really begin the work of the
Institute. But there is much to be done first, of all sorts.

“We thought of you all very much last week at the Sale time. I trust it
was a great success. I am glad Mr. Parkinson was there.... I wonder where
you are going to spend your Christmas. We expect to go down to Matadi on
the Saturday before Christmas Day, remaining until the Wednesday. Mr.
Phillips is marrying a very nice Swedish lady, a widow, and wishes Tom
to tie the knot. We shall be alone probably on Christmas Day, as our
American colleague, Mr. Moon, is going for a few days to his friends at
Mbanza Manteka, as soon as we return.”

“December 2nd.—Thank you so much for the papers. There seem to be
stirring times just now—what with the unemployed and the suffragists.
The Government strikes me as a bit disappointing. ‘Put not your trust in
princes’—nor in statesmen! That was a charming letter to Dr. Clifford
from the Archbishop; I am very glad he wrote it. I hear they are starting
Study Classes at Camden; I am very glad of that too.”

“December 16th.—It is pouring with rain and is very dark, as I have had
to close the windows, or rather the shutters, and I have only half of
the door open to let in some light. Tom is over at the new house getting
work done inside, as they cannot go on with the roof. But part of it is
up and the office, so he can be there to keep the men at work, which they
think very hard. These people always go to sleep directly there is rain,
and don’t think they ought to work. Seeing that it rains mostly half of
every day now they would have a pretty easy time of it. Since I wrote
last, we have both been ill again. We were in bed together for two or
three days with fever; Tom with his usual gastritis, and I with a very
bad head. It hindered things for a week. The boys and girls were very
good. My cook did everything very nicely, and made us soup and arrowroot,
and the biggest girl waited on us, so we got through. I was well enough
just to say what we wanted and tell them how to do it. Mr. Moon kept
things going on the station, and looked in and out.... We are expecting
to go down to-morrow to Matadi to Mr. Phillips’s wedding. I hope we shall
get there all right. The river is in flood they say, piers covered and
trains running in water. It is an exceptionally wet season.”

“December 16th. (To Miss Beatrice Percival.)—You would have enjoyed
the sight I had recently. At the back of our house at the bottom of a
steep slope runs a stream, thickly wooded, and the other day the girls
called me to see the monkeys. I had planted a little sweet maize as
an experiment, and the girls saw a monkey come right up to within a
few yards. When I went I had a fine view of big and little monkeys,
regular ‘Banderlays,’ running up and down, in and out, among the great
tree-branches. Uncle says they will have to be killed. But I can’t bear
the idea. They do seem like distant relatives, don’t you think? Dear old
Sandy is as sweet as ever. Mr. Moon is going to see to his feeding. He
likes Sandy, as indeed does every one. I wonder how the servant is going
on; I hope she won’t scoot after Christmas. It is such a comfort having
a decent girl who can really do things. That book you sent Uncle by an
American, Mr. Bradford, I like very much. But it does not go far enough.
He is hardly evangelical, I should say. I like that of Rendel Harris
immensely. I am reading now Mr. Grenfell’s Memoir, by Sir H. Johnston. It
is very interesting, but hardly gives a portrait of the man. I expect Mr.
Hawker’s will do that. This is more a series of pictures of the country,
and the people and missions in general, to which the author is most
sympathetic. You would like to read it, I think. Mr. Parkinson sent it to
us.”

“Matadi, December 24th.—Your letters were so sad this time that I hardly
know how to write to you, as I do not know in what circumstances this
letter may find you, but I must write to wish you from us both very
many happy returns of your birthday; and if this birthday is clouded by
anxiety and trouble [occasioned by Mr. Hartland’s grave illness], may
the new year upon which you are entering be bright with the sunshine of
the Master’s presence, and even darkest days and nights be lightened
by His countenance and His help. How I wish I could be with you! I am
afraid your Christmas is a sad and anxious time. We have had a very
queer Christmas, or rather shall have had when it is over. We came down
here on Thursday last, this day week. On Sunday morning we proceeded to
Boma by the French steamer. I was in bed with fever all the time there.
Mr. Phillips was married by the Consul on Monday, and on Tuesday we
came up in the gunboat. I was much better, and was able to attend the
wedding here in the afternoon, and to help in getting the boys’ feast
yesterday. To-day we have been talking and arranging all sorts of things
and packing. To-morrow (25th) we expect to go up to Kimpese. I am pretty
well, though not very strong yet.”

“January 4, 1909. (To Miss Ethel Percival.)—I have just read your letters
over, but I am rather in a ‘wigwam’ as to who sent which books. We have
dipped into them all, I think, and Uncle is much taken with ‘Lloyd
George.’ But who sent me ‘The House of the Wolf’? Was it one of you? We
got part of our mail here and part at Matadi: then with the wedding and
my fever I have got regularly mixed. I was interested about your visit
to Mrs. Taylor and should have loved all the dear animals. But I don’t
believe you like them better than the babies! Of course some of those
are not so interesting. As for Sandy, I think you might write that book.
A good idea! I have no time or brains for it. My time seems taken up in
all sorts of mundane ways—cooking, cutting out and machining clothes for
my ten ‘children,’ looking after and growing (and eating) vegetables,
nursing, and so on. Then in a few weeks’ time I shall have three or four
hours’ teaching daily. I don’t know how all is to be squeezed in. Now
I must leave off and go to the garden with one of my girls. I want to
transplant some lettuces and sow some others. We have had lovely cabbages
every day for some time; to-day we had beans again and tomatoes galore.
Yes, I agree with you that I do not like the fowls having to be killed.
Still, I think it much better for them than getting ill, and the hens
and chicks are most interesting, to say nothing of the eggs, which are a
great blessing. The ducks, too, are doing splendidly; the nine ducklings
are growing fast. The old drake eats out of my hands, and the duck is
most friendly, I shan’t make friends with those which have to be killed.

“I wish you could see my convolvuli, they are so lovely, and the French
and African marigolds do splendidly. Uncle, too, has a lot of flowers
coming on. I only wish his health was better.”

“January 28th. (To Miss Taylor.)—I know you will be sorry to hear that
I have had two fevers since the one at Boma, and that Tom is only just
recovering from a nasty fever and gastric attack; so you can imagine
things do not go on very fast. The students (some of them) arrived last
week and are busy building their houses; fortunately Mr. Moon is well.
He is a very hard-working, earnest man. The wives and children are not
to come until March. I do hope we shall be having better health by that
time. We expect to be in our house in a few weeks now. We should have
been there long ago but for these illnesses. We had Mr. Thomas with us
for a week from Wathen. He came to sit for his exam, in the language,
and has come off splendidly. We like him very much. He seems the right
sort of man.... The day after we returned from Matadi we made a sort
of Christmas for the children, and when they were all here inspecting
their presents, with a lot of the workmen and other people looking on, I
brought out _Bella_.[7] You should have seen them. The girl who was with
Mrs. Pinnock rushed at her as an old friend, and the others were lost in
astonishment. They are all delighted to have her, though two of them are
rather old for dolls.”

“February 24th. (To Miss Ethel Percival.)—We are in our new house, or at
least part of it, two rooms and the office, and are enjoying the boarded
floors and the advantage of being able to get to the kitchen without
going out of doors. Of course there is one drawback. The house not being
finished the workmen are busy and the noise is awful. Fortunately I do
not suffer with my head as I used to do, but it rubs up my spine and is
not conducive to comfort. Still, things are getting on, so we are very
glad. The house will be lovely when finished. I have not attempted to
beautify yet. That is to come. The men are here getting their houses
ready. Next week the women and children come, and on the 8th we begin the
real work of the College. Then I shall be very busy, as besides what I
have to do at present I shall have about three hours’ teaching every day
except Saturday. I shall be able to tell you more about that later on.

“Concerning the monkeys! they have mostly gone to another part of our
grounds, and have not troubled us lately. The snakes come after the fowls
and eggs, and that is a real trouble. We are not afraid of them. It is a
strange fact (which Sir H. Johnston mentions in his book, I see) that one
rarely hears of accidents from snake-bites either to the natives or white
people. I don’t know how it is except that one does not go out much at
night when the snakes are most abroad.”




CHAPTER XVII

THE FIRST SESSION AND THE LAST VOYAGE 1909


The United Training Institute, the evolution of which has been rather
indicated than described in the previous chapter, was formally opened on
March 15th. It is almost certain that Mrs. Lewis wrote to some of her
friends an account of this interesting function, which marked at once the
attainment of a goal and the starting of a new race; or perhaps it would
be more fitting to say, the beginning of the last lap of a long race, run
throughout in the spirit of St. Paul. But such account has not come to my
hand, so I fall back upon that written by her husband, and printed in the
_Missionary Herald_.

“When we arrived here in July last we had only one small grass-house for
our shelter. The ground had to be cleared and laid out, dwelling-houses
and stores as well as lecture-halls had to be erected, and before the
work of teaching could be commenced nineteen two-roomed grass-houses had
to be built for the accommodation of the students. This was a great work,
and we are grateful to God for the strength given us to enable us to
open the College for actual teaching within nine months of our arrival
on the ground.

[Illustration: KIMPESE: KONGO TRAINING INSTITUTION—PART OF STUDENTS’
QUARTERS.]

“March 15th was a memorable day with us, for it was the opening day of
the first United Training College on the Congo. We had no great personage
or any strangers to share in our festivities. My American colleague,
the Rev. S. E. Moon, and Mrs. Lewis and myself had the students all to
ourselves. The proceedings were very simple, and consisted only in an
inaugural address from the Principal, in which he reviewed the work
of the two Baptist societies on the Congo and the development of the
native Churches and native workers. The importance of the College work
was insisted upon for all the teachers and their wives, that they might
be better equipped for the Master’s service in Congoland. Matters of
conduct and discipline in the school were put before them and explained.
Answering a question from one of the men, I told them that we were not
going to make any rules or regulations, as we expected them in all things
to conduct themselves as men of God, always mindful of the honour of
the school. We started by trusting them, and we hoped there never would
be any necessity to formulate rules and regulations for their personal
conduct. At the same time we shall at the commencement of each session
make it clear to all the students what is expected of them.

“We have now had seven weeks of uninterrupted study, and are most pleased
with our first set of men and women. We have this session nineteen men
and fourteen women, making the total number of students thirty-three. We
consider this an excellent beginning, and next October we shall receive
several fresh ones. There are a number of applicants, but at present we
cannot say how many we can receive.

“I undertook the work of this United College with considerable reluctance
and only under pressure from my brethren of the two Missions. It has
meant a great deal of hardship to Mrs. Lewis and myself. At our age rough
work and poor accommodation in a country like this are very trying, but
we have been wonderfully preserved through it all. For some months we
were not in good health, but since getting into our new permanent house
we have been much better. The anxiety about the successful issue of the
College work was also great, and it is no small satisfaction to know that
not only has the class work been started, but that everything has gone on
smoothly with the students. Indeed, we have succeeded far better than I
anticipated and are all very happy in the work.

“Much is due to the manner in which brethren from other stations have
supported us, and I wish to record my deep appreciation of the confidence
they have given me in this undertaking and of their brotherly love and
sympathy. Moreover, the trustees of the Institution have taken the
deepest interest in all the work, and we greatly appreciate the complete
confidence they have shown the staff.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Two days after the opening Mrs. Lewis wrote to her niece stating that she
was very well, notwithstanding the fact that the temperature nearly every
afternoon exceeded 100°, sometimes reaching 103°, and this great heat a
damp heat withal. Mr. Lewis has had another illness, not severe, and they
are looking forward eagerly for the dry season, when life at Kimpese will
be reasonably pleasant. In reply to congratulations upon the coming of
many visitors she has to admit with regret that the joy of hospitality is
sometimes a little burdensome, owing to imperfect domestic conditions and
the press of constant work.

“April 6th.—I was glad to find from your letters that father [Mr.
Hartland] was no worse and able to keep warm.... We have been sweltering
here with the heat. I have been sitting in school with perspiration
literally streaming from my face. We have been very busy, not only
with our classes, which begin at 6.30 a.m. and go on all day, but in
getting into our sitting-room and store. Hitherto we have only occupied
dining-room and bedrooms. The sitting-room is painted with the pretty
green enamel which Mr. Keep gave us, and when we get our pictures up and
our curtains hung it will look very well. We have mosquito-netting for
windows and door, so that we may sit there in the evening without being
bitten all over.”

A tea-service, knocked about for months, has been unpacked with only
one small plate broken. The use of it is a great luxury after the crude
make-shifts of the building-time; and significant of the bigness of the
Congo field is the following sentence, “We have met the William Forfeitts
_at last_, after working twenty years _together_ on the Congo. They were
on their way down in the train, and as a truck got derailed they were
detained, and we had nearly two hours of their company.”

“May 12th. (A circular letter.)—I am sending you a few lines with some
photos to give you a little account of our work here.

“In one sense it is quite different to any we have been engaged in
before, for except on Sundays all our teaching is for Christians and
Christian workers. They are men and women who have a little knowledge—in
most cases _very little_—but who wish to learn more that they may be
fitted to help and teach their fellow-country-people. These students
come from different parts of the Lower Congo, and have been sent here by
the missionaries of the two Societies, our own and that of the American
Baptists. They speak in various dialects, but are all able to understand
us and one another, as the language is really one.

“In January the men came (nineteen of them), and soon a number of little
two-roomed grass-houses could be seen springing up in the portion of
ground set apart for them. They are arranged in three roads, and look
quite a little town. When the houses were finished the men went back to
their towns and in a fortnight returned with their wives and children.
We have fourteen women here at present. Two or three of the men have not
their wives with them this term, but hope to have them next, and one is
a bachelor. Then there are about twenty-four children, some little ones,
belonging to students; others the little nurses who take care of the
babies while the mothers are in their classes. These children and our
boys in the house have school each afternoon.

“The days are all very busy, and go too quickly. The school bell rings
at half-past six in the morning, when Mr. Lewis has the men to begin the
day. After breakfast the men’s classes, taught by Mr. Lewis and Mr. Moon,
proceed till noon, in which they study many subjects, such as Old and New
Testament, Geography, Astronomy, Arithmetic, and Homiletics; also French
and Portuguese languages.

“The men we have here seem very nice and intelligent, and all have been
engaged in teaching at the various stations of the two Missions. The
women, two or three of whom are old friends of mine, cannot give so much
time to school as their husbands, as they have their children to look
after; but we have three hours every day, one and a half hours in the
morning, and the same again in the afternoon. This kind of teaching is
quite new to them, but they seem really to enjoy it, and it is quite
interesting to see how their minds begin to open to ideas that have never
entered them before. Many could not even read when they came, and never
tried to sew or write. But sewing they take to easily, and they are
getting on very quickly with their reading. The writing they find more
difficult, but that will come in time. Some can read and write well, and
can cut out and sew both with hand and machine, but these are the women
who as girls were on one of the Mission stations. We have these subjects
in the afternoon, when my four girls join us. Also in Geography and
Arithmetic they are most interested. On Fridays while they sew I read to
them from ‘The Holy War,’ which has been translated by Mr. Phillips.

“In the morning we have two classes each day. Three mornings weekly we
give to the study of the Old and New Testament; on one I am telling them
_how_ we got the Bible; and on Fridays we have prayer, and a talk about
Christian living. Beside that they are learning a little about Natural
History: our bodies, health, &c., and also how different things are made.
By all these means we are trying to teach them to see God’s finger in all
His wonderful works, and to enlarge their thoughts. We finish the week’s
work as far as teaching is concerned by a singing class, which I hold on
Friday evening. All the men and as many of the women as can crowd into
our dining-room, sing hymns for an hour. That is a hot hour, and you
might see the perspiration pouring off my face as I play the American
organ.

“On Sundays we all meet together—teachers, students, workmen, and
children—for our morning service, which is conducted alternately by Mr.
Lewis and Mr. Moon. In the afternoon the students have a service, which
any one who likes can attend, and at the same time I have a class of all
the girls on the Station. There are only eight of them, but with pictures
and hymns and Bible stories we have a good time. After teaching the women
all the week I am glad to have the children on Sundays.

“I have not mentioned the industrial classes which the men attend in the
afternoons, or the gardens in which both men and women work. Each couple
has a piece of land, which they cultivate for food, and it is a pleasant
sight to see husband and wife working together in these plantations.

“To us who can remember the conditions which obtained here when we came
to Congo twenty-two years ago, it is indeed a source of encouragement and
thankfulness to look at the faces of these young men and women, and to
see that they are the fruit of the toil of the last thirty years. Many of
the labourers have passed away to their rest, but their works do follow
them. Just now we are at the beginning, and the Institute will grow both
in the number of students and in their attainments. We are now anxious to
lay good and firm foundations upon which others may build in the days to
come.”

“May 21st.—There has been great excitement here to-day, we have been
terribly busy and are very tired this evening. The Belgian Colonial
Minister has come out to Congo, and is going to look at things in
general. Yesterday he sent up a message saying that he was coming here
to see us, so we had to fly round. We had already heard that he purposed
staying at the Catholic Mission, and Tom had sent a note to say he would
like to have a share in welcoming him. The head priest, who speaks
English, wrote a very pleasant reply. So we had our road from the station
cleaned, the Catholics had theirs cleaned, and each Mission erected a
triumphal arch. Last night Tom and I were up quite late finishing a
motto: ‘Congo Training College welcomes Colonial Minister.’ Of course
to-day everything had to be swept and garnished, and after dinner Tom
and Mr. Moon went down to the station followed by all the students,
workmen, and children, bearing a banner with ‘Vive le Ministre!’
inscribed. I did not see all this as I had to stay at home to receive the
great man. The priests were there also with their contingent. We lent
them our rickshaws to convey the Minister (Mons. Renkin) and his wife.
They went straight to the Catholic Mission, and then came on here; not
the lady, for which I was sorry, but the Minister and his Secretary, the
Secretary-General of the Congo State, the attendant Doctor, and a priest.
They came and had a cup of tea first. Of course I got out all my pretty
things for them; then they went and saw everything. They were especially
pleased and evidently impressed by the students’ quarters, and I hope
this and other things M. Renkin may see will give him a good idea of
Protestant missions. He seemed quite inclined to be friendly with the
natives, and we hear that his sympathies are with reform, so we trust
good may come of his visit. Prince Albert has gone through Katanga, and
M. Renkin is going to meet him and bring him down the Congo home. He
had seen Mr. Phillips and Dr. Sims at Matadi. To-morrow he will have a
send-off from the station.”

“May 25th. (To Mrs. Gamble, San Salvador.)—You asked about the lemon
grass at San Salvador. We brought it from Matadi, and I suppose it
came originally from Jamaica, but we do not know; neither do we know
its proper name. I learned from an article by Winston Churchill in
the _Strand_ that it is extensively planted in Uganda and keeps off
mosquitoes. We have some growing here, and if only it would render this
service it would indeed be a blessing. But I doubt if anything will rid
us of mosquitoes unless we could alter the whole place. We are longing
for the complete cessation of the rains that we may have a few months’
respite from these plagues.”

“June 10th. (To Miss Ethel Percival).—Since Monday—this is Thursday—I
have been in bed with a nasty liver attack, severe headache, and a little
temperature. I am better to-day, and we hope to go out this evening for
a ride in our rickshaws. It will do Uncle good, too, to have a blow. My
being in bed is very worrying for him with all his other work, and he has
not been at all fit. Happily he is better to-day, and we hope that now
the dry season has really set in we shall keep well. We have been much
better lately, but the mosquitoes here are really dreadful.”

The next day, June 11th, Mrs. Lewis wrote to me, sending her own and her
husband’s congratulations upon the completion and publication of “The
Life of George Grenfell.” The _British Weekly_ was the most prized by
her of all the papers which came from England, and its Editor was one
of her oracles. She had received the issue containing Claudius Clear’s
appreciative review, and told of her joy and pride in reading it,
regretting that expanse of land and sea prevented her from dropping in
to say what she felt with her own lips. She also wrote in affectionate
terms of her gladness in the recovery of my little daughter Phyllis, who
had lain for weeks in the valley of the shadow of death. It was my last
letter, and abides a cherished possession.

“June 17th.—Next week we expect Mrs. Moon out.... Mr. and Mrs. Bowskill
from San Salvador are coming to spend a week, and all the Trustees are
coming for two nights. This will make a party of ten or eleven to provide
for. In the middle of July the Institute breaks up for two months’
vacation, during which many things will have to be done which hitherto
have been left undone.”

This meeting of the Trustees was much upon Mrs. Lewis’s mind from the
date of the Colonial Minister’s visit. The instinct of the hostess
was strong in her, and she must needs do all within her power for the
comfort and good entertainment of so large a company of friends. When one
remembers the exacting and incessant calls of every day, following the
hardships and long strain of previous months, it is a matter of regret
that this additional stress could not be avoided. Every week-end she was
completely spent, but resting as much as possible on Saturday and Sunday
she commenced again on Monday, kept the pace and would not be restrained.

On June 30th, she wrote the following report of her work to be read at
the Trustees’ meeting held the next day:—

    “This session has been very encouraging, and gives good promise
    for the future; the women have attended the classes regularly,
    and shown much interest in their work.

    “Of the fourteen women who came into the Institute, only five
    could read, write, or sew. The others, with two exceptions,
    have made good progress in these subjects, and from among
    these, two have done so well that they should be reading in
    their New Testaments in a few weeks’ time.

    “It is of the utmost importance that teachers’ wives should
    be able to read, and I would like to suggest that in stations
    where the men are receiving preparatory training some
    arrangement should be made whereby their wives should at least
    be taught to read.

    “Four of the women are so far beyond the others that they ought
    to have been taught separately, but that has been impossible,
    owing to my being single-handed. I feel, however, that they are
    all benefiting more or less, and some seven or eight bid fair
    to make useful teachers when their term of training is over.

    “One hour and a half in the afternoons has been occupied with
    ordinary school subjects—reading, writing, arithmetic, elements
    of geography, including the compass and maps of Palestine and
    Congo, and sewing, during which I am reading aloud from ‘The
    Holy War.’

    “In the mornings we have had two classes a day, in which we
    have studied the following subjects: Old Testament: first
    fifteen chapters Genesis. New Testament: first three chapters
    Luke, and life of John the Baptist. History of the Bible—till
    time of Wycliffe. Natural history of trees and flowers. Simple
    hygiene and physiology: cleanliness, prevention of disease,
    structure of the eye. Object-lesson: paper, cloth, slates,
    glass. These last three subjects, which were almost entirely
    new to them, have excited much interest, and I trust have been
    and will still more in the future be the means of opening their
    eyes and minds to the wonders of God’s universe.

    “On Friday mornings I have given them a series of talks on the
    Christian life, taking as my subjects love, truth, purity,
    thankfulness, joy, peace, temperance, prayer. After which a
    quarter of an hour or twenty minutes have been spent in prayer,
    led by the women themselves; and it has been good to listen
    as they voiced their thankfulness to God for giving them this
    opportunity of learning more of His works and will, and asked
    for more grace and wisdom in the various relationships of life.

    “In conclusion, I can only express my joy in the work, which
    has been a great pleasure to me personally, and my gratitude
    to God for health and strength, so that I have only missed one
    week’s teaching during the term.

                                                     “GWEN E. LEWIS.

    “_June 30, 1909._”

The much anticipated meeting was duly held, and all passed off well. The
cares of entertainment were rather lightened than increased for Mrs.
Lewis by the presence of one of her visitors, Mrs. Bowskill from San
Salvador, for whom she had conceived a warm affection. More than once
she had written expressing earnest desire that her friend might be able
to come, and though grief-stricken by recent news of the death of her
father, Mrs. Bowskill came, finding solace in sympathy and relief in
service.

[Illustration: KIMPESE: KONGO TRAINING INSTITUTION. THE REV. THOMAS
LEWIS (PRINCIPAL), MRS. LEWIS, THE REV. S. E. MOON (A.B.M.U. TUTOR), AND
STUDENTS, 1909.]

All passed off well, but the long tension proved to be too severe. The
dauntless spirit was finally overborne by the now frail and exhausted
body. A week after the meeting of the Trustees Mrs. Lewis collapsed, and
in the four following letters, which contain all matters of moment, she
brings her life-story to the verge of conclusion.

When the fever struck her down she had just finished reading “The Life
of George Grenfell,” and when hæmaturic symptoms appeared she quietly
remarked to her husband: “Hæmaturia killed Grenfell and it is going to
kill me.”

                                                   “KIMPESE,
                                                   “_July 22, 1909_.

    “MY DEAREST LILY AND ALICE,—I know you won’t mind another joint
    letter when you hear the reason. Thank you so much for your
    kind letters telling us all the sad details of dear father’s
    last days and funeral. You know how we loved him, and I cannot
    think of that armchair without him and the outstretched hands
    and kind smile with which he always greeted us. It is well with
    him! May you two dear ones be kept and comforted!

    “Well, two weeks ago to-night I went to bed with fever, and
    yesterday I got into the sitting-room for the first time. I
    am reclining on the couch writing this, so you must not mind
    pencil. On the Sunday hæmaturia appeared, and all Sunday and
    Monday I was very seriously ill. On Sunday morning, as soon as
    was possible, Dr. Sims arrived, but I had just taken a turn for
    the better. He said the treatment was quite satisfactory, but
    gave me some fresh medicine and watched me carefully. The next
    morning he pronounced me out of danger, so was able to return
    to Matadi, leaving all directions with Tom. Since then I have
    been gradually but surely getting better. The kindness of every
    one has been beyond words, and indeed I cannot but feel that my
    life has been spared in answer to prayer, though, under God, I
    owe it to the careful and skilful nursing of my dear husband.
    He has been my only nurse night and day and has had strength
    sufficient. The Moons, Mr. Phillips, and Dr. Sims have done
    all they could in every way. Mr. P. sent up by the mail to San
    Salvador. Yesterday two men arrived post haste with letters so
    full of kindness and love that they nearly upset me. When the
    natives heard of my illness they arranged to send, and pay, a
    messenger with a loving letter of sympathy—had done it, indeed,
    before the missionaries were aware. Dr. Gamble wrote to say
    he was ready to come at once if Dr. Sims could not stay, and
    Mrs. Bowskill wanted to come and nurse me. Mr. B. said she was
    ‘pining to be with me.’ Mr. P. sent to them a special messenger
    with the Doctor’s report that I was better, and part of the
    morning service was given up to prayer for us. I think it was
    lovely of them, now that we have been away for so long, and
    very encouraging; so I tell it you. I cannot write all these
    details over again, so read to Mrs. P. what I have written. I
    am so glad you were having a change, and trust you are getting
    over the strain a bit now. I am being fed up, only I don’t want
    to eat. This afternoon I had a ride round the piazza.

                         “Ever yours lovingly,

                                                             “GWEN.”

                                                 “KIMPESE,
                                                 “_August 13, 1909_.

    “MY DEAREST FANNY.—Many thanks for your long newsy letter. I am
    sorry I cannot send you one ditto. Possibly you may have heard
    of my serious illness—hæmaturic fever. It is five weeks since I
    went down, and here I am still in bed with temperature 100°·5.
    Tom had one of his gastric and fever attacks in the middle
    of it, so we had to nurse each other. Now he is up and about
    again. And if all goes well we hope to travel to England some
    time next month with Dr. and Mrs. Gamble. Of course we can only
    make provisional plans, and leave our future in God’s hands.
    But it seems the only thing to do. Please tell Mr. Hawker and
    any other friends. You will, I know, pray for us that we may
    reach England in safety. Love to all dear friends, especially
    your dear self.

                            “Yours lovingly,

                                                             “GWEN.”

                                                 “KIMPESE,
                                                 “_August 16, 1909_.

    “MY DEAREST BEE,—Your letters came on Saturday just as ours
    had gone. We hope to send this by French mail, and you will
    get it in the middle of September. I am afraid I have treated
    you badly without meaning to do so. Never mind, dear old Bee,
    we will make it up when we meet. On Saturday came very kind
    letters from San Salvador, and one from Dr. Gamble, in which
    he said the only thing to be done for us folks was that he and
    his wife should come to look after us, so they were packing
    up to go by the next mail, and would be with us next week to
    help us to pack, and then take us home with them. I suppose,
    therefore, it is pretty certain that we shall start by boat on
    September 5th, and arrive about the end of the month. There is
    no knowing where we land. We shall wire when we get somewhere.
    I am in bed now, but yesterday made some headway and was lifted
    on to a couch and hope to be again to-day. My temperature was
    normal, or below, this morning, but it rises a little daily.
    It is a relief to know the Gambles are coming. I am especially
    glad for Uncle’s sake, for although about he is not fit to
    do everything. Don’t try to get rooms: I like to see to that
    myself. We shall probably be at 66 again.

                        “Your ever loving Aunt,

                                                             “GWEN.”

    PS.—Heaps of love to you all. I hope you will have a nice
    holiday.

                                                 “KIMPESE,
                                                 “_August 26, 1909_.

    “MY DEAR MRS. HOWELL,—I have wanted to write to thank you so
    much for your kind letters and for the lovely eggs, which I
    have greatly enjoyed. Your letter to-day is very kind, for I am
    sure you will have a busy time preparing for the Conference. I
    am thankful to say I am very much better. I have walked into
    the bedroom for the first time with my husband’s assistance.
    I daresay you have heard that both Dr. Sims and Dr. Gamble
    have ordered us home. Dr. and Mrs. G. have been here now a
    week, helping to nurse and pack, and we hope to go down next
    Tuesday to Matadi and home with them. They have hastened their
    homegoing by one mail so as to take us with them, and have been
    most kind, as indeed has every one. Mr. Thomas from Wathen was
    here for a week giving a hand all round. As probably you heard,
    Mr. Lewis was down for nine or ten days with fever and gastric
    attack, so we were both in bed together. Our children have been
    most good, indeed I don’t know what we should have done without
    them, especially two. Mr. Frame has kindly consented to take
    Mr. Lewis’s place while we are away. He has just been here for
    two nights arranging things, and left us this morning. You can
    understand how loath we were to go, but it seems the only thing
    to do, as we are neither of us fit to face another session’s
    work. Mrs. Moon will do her best for the women, but she is not
    free with the language. Still they will be able to join some of
    the men’s classes.

    “I am writing this on the couch, so please excuse pencil. This
    must be to say goodbye. May you all be kept in health. We are
    so sorry to hear of the bad colds. God bless and keep you in
    all your goings and comings. Kindest regards to your husband
    and Mr. and Mrs. Stonelake, and love to yourself, from

                         “Yours affectionately,

                                                    “GWEN E. LEWIS.”

This was the last letter Mrs. Lewis ever wrote.

The rest may be told in a few words. The railway journey was accomplished
with comparative comfort. The authorities reserved a compartment for
her and she travelled in bed. On September 5th the party sailed from
Matadi. The unremitting and skilled attention of Dr. and Mrs. Gamble was
of greatest comfort to the patient and her husband, and during five days
there was hopeful improvement, and happy intercourse was enjoyed. Then
hæmaturia suddenly returned and hope was relinquished. She said quietly
to her husband: “Tom, we know as much about this as the doctors; I think
I am dying, don’t you?” And he had to reply, “Yes, my darling, I do.”
Then she concerned herself with messages to her friends, some of whom
she saw with the clearness of vision, and much was said of Camden Road
Church, and even of its Sale of Work, which she had hoped to attend. She
was especially concerned for her sister and her nieces, saying simply,
“They will be grieved”; and begged that Mr. Myers, who, five-and-twenty
years before, had brought her news of John Hartland’s death, might bear
the heavy tidings to them. The words “They will be grieved,” became a
kind of refrain which she repeated after naming her friends. She could
not bear gloom, and smilingly rebuked her doctors for looking grave,
saying, “One would think it was a terrible thing to die.” The Mission was
more to her than life, and she said to her husband, “It is well that I am
going. The doctors would never allow me to return, and that would block
your work; now you will be free to go on with it.” She lingered for
days, calm and bright, often murmurously singing hymns, the tunes only
when the words no longer came at call; and on September 17th passed away,
holding tightly the hand of the man to whom she had been gentle wife, and
gallant comrade, and perennial inspiration, for three-and-twenty years.

    “Nothing is here for tears, nothing to wail
    Or knock the breast; no weakness, no contempt,
    Dispraise or blame; nothing but well and fair,
    And what may quiet us in a death so noble.”

Every one on board had exhibited the kindliest concern during her
illness. The captain and the stewards could not do enough for her; and
the sorrow occasioned by her death was shared by all. Her funeral was
reverently ordered. The officers attended in full uniform, and all the
stewards and passengers were present. M. Renkin, the Belgian Colonial
Minister, who had so recently been her guest, for whom she had set out
all her pretty things, and from whom she hoped good service for Congo,
walked in the procession to the main deck, immediately behind the chief
mourner. The captain read the burial service, and as the day was dying
her body was committed to the deep, off Cape Blanco.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Mr. Lewis arrived in this country he received nearly a hundred
letters expressing sympathy with him in his great bereavement and
appreciation of his wife. The following typical quotations are taken from
letters written by four friends of Mrs. Lewis whose names are mentioned
in this book.

From Mrs. Edward Robinson, Bristol: “My thoughts go back to the time when
she stayed with us before she was married, and I always retained such a
loving regard for her, and thought her one of the finest women I knew.
The loss to the Mission will be almost irreparable.”

From the Rev. William Brock, London: “I knew your dear wife when she was
still Miss Thomas, and used to come over to Heath Street from the West
Heath. How keenly was she then looking forward to work in Africa! Yours
was an ideal union: both of you such ardent and far-seeing missionaries,
and each so fitted to the other, as by the very hand of God. The new
sphere, too, seemed made for you both, and you for it. Well, she must be
wanted for some heavenly ministry.”

From Mrs. Jenkyn Brown, Birmingham: “It is little to say we all loved
her—every one must—but we had the privilege of knowing her better than
many, and I almost inherited love for her before we met, from my husband,
who had known her longest.”

From Mrs. Hooper, of Kibokolo: “To me Mrs. Lewis has ever been a dear
elder sister, honoured and loved unspeakably. My sorrow is too deep for
words.”




CHAPTER XVIII

CHARACTERISTICS


More than once, since I began to write this book, it has been remarked to
me by persons whose thoughts of Mrs. Lewis were altogether kindly, that
she was an ordinary woman, and that the interest of her life is rather
due to circumstance than to personality. Dissenting profoundly from this
judgment, regarding her as one of the most extraordinary women I have
ever met, I have wondered how such an opinion could have arisen. And I
have to confess that if the lack of specific brilliant endowments makes a
person ordinary, then perhaps there is excuse for speaking of Mrs. Lewis
in such terms. Of genius, in the usual acceptation of the term, she had
none. And no one was more perfectly aware of this than herself. She had
no great learning. She was not a great speaker. Her speeches were quiet,
earnest, matter-of-fact statements of the things which she had seen with
her eyes, or which she most surely believed in her heart. She was not a
brilliant writer. Her letters are interesting, and often fascinating,
because she tells, with artless directness, stories of life and work
which are remote from common experience. And withal her personal bearing
was quiet and unobtrusive to a degree.

Mrs. Lewis was an extraordinary woman, not by reason of unusual mental
endowments, but rather by reason of distinguished moral and spiritual
qualities, which achieved such co-ordination and control and consecration
of modest gifts, as resulted in the building up of exalted character and
the accomplishment of splendid work. Her life affords an illustration of
the truth that common gifts, conscientiously used to the utmost limits
of their content, become uncommon, and that whoso does his absolute
best in a good cause avails himself of the mystic forces of a divinely
ordered universe, unconsciously, if unconsciously, fulfilling Emerson’s
injunction: “Hitch your waggon to a star.”

If Mrs. Lewis’s gifts were common gifts, they were good gifts, and she
had good store of them. No woman could have done what she did without
a splendid physical constitution, managed and conserved with the
wisdom of common sense. Her powers of endurance under exhausting and
perilous conditions often elicited her wondering gratitude. In exigent
circumstances, when the call of God came to her, she could take the
biggest risks, brave woman that she was. But in normal conditions her
devotion to her vegetable garden and her religious solicitude for all
the details of domestic management which made for hygiene, proved how
precious in her eyes was the matter of health, without which the work
could not be done. The reader will remember that in her discussion of
the qualifications of a woman missionary, next after spiritual fitness
she places a sound constitution. In her judgment an imperfect recognition
of the fundamental importance of this matter was the simple and
lamentable explanation of much sorrow and disappointment and loss.

Possibly not without subtle relation to her sound physical constitution
was her notable force of will, which has been sufficiently illustrated in
the foregoing pages. And I think it likely that the calmness which was
one of her marked characteristics was due to her consciousness that when
all was said she would do what seemed to her to be right, to the limit of
her powers, irrespective of opposition, protest, or demur. Irritation,
fuss, and fluster are the froth of weakness. She knew herself to be
strong. She feared God and nothing else, and declined to waste her energy
in superfluous perturbation.

In her native force of will is to be found the explanation of her
extraordinary power of work. The amount of labour which she got through
day by day in the debilitating climate of tropical Africa is amazing
to many people of normal health, who perform their tasks in the
comparatively bracing atmosphere of the homeland. What she willed to
do she did. Fluctuations of mood were disregarded; petty distractions
were disallowed. Enlightened and determined, she kept her course, as a
liner forges on its way in spite of contrary winds, or buffeting seas,
or enervating calms. Of course the volume and value of her work were
immensely increased by her strict observance of method. She worked by
plan; and here again it is force of will that tells. We are all of us
methodical in ideal. The most casual of mortals has probably made schemes
of work and time-tables enough to suffice for the good ordering of half
a dozen lives. We resolve to make plans, exhaust our impulses in the
seductive labours of construction, and fail in the detail of fulfilment.
Mrs. Lewis made her plans and did what she planned to do. In an early
chapter I have referred to her diary-keeping. Another illustration may
be cited. Fifteen years before her death she determined to retain copies
of her letters. The last letter she ever wrote, given in the previous
chapter, was taken from her copy, and not from the original.

Her patience was as impressive as her strength of mind, and she had need
of it all. The perversities and the backslidings of men and women and
children for whose salvation she toiled and prayed tried her sorely,
but she never gave up hope or the effort and the prayer which hope
inspires. The children under training in her household were a care to
her by day and night, which she sustained to the very end. After the
session had closed at Kimpese, and when the illness was already upon her
which resulted in her death, she wrote a long letter to Mrs. Bowskill,
extending to several closely written quarto pages, discussing mission
business. In the course of it she gave an account, not untouched with
humour, of the impish tricks of one small girl of the household, whose
genius for mischief engineered a series of midnight casualties and
alarums suggestive of the interference of malignant spirits. Detected
and foiled in other matters, the culprit one night startled the dormitory
with outbursts of screaming, ostensibly occasioned by a recurrent dream
that she was being badly beaten. Finally, Mrs. Lewis sent her husband to
assure the innocent sufferer that next time the dream came _he_ would
fulfil it _with a stick_. There was no next time.

But the grand trial of her patience was the seven years’ work at
Kibokolo. By long labour, by kindness which could not be exhausted and
would not be gainsaid, she won the respect and confidence of her wild,
barbarous neighbours, and toward the end of her stay there were hopeful
signs of coming harvest—the harvest of souls, for which her soul longed
with passion derived from the very heart of God. She often spoke of
the weariness and discouragement of those years of waiting. But her
patience never failed. She held to her work, confident that if not in her
day, yet surely in days that followed hers, the faithful sowing would
be recompensed by Divine increase. It was even so. And the patience
which waited for it was divine patience. I do not know whether she was
acquainted with Dora Greenwell’s “Carmina Crucis,” but I can well imagine
her finding comfort in one fine verse, so perfectly expressive of her own
soul’s attitude:

    “And while my God is waiting I can wait.”

There is little need to speak of her courage. I decline to call it
masculine. There was nothing masculine about her. Her courage was
sustained by faith. She was engaged on God’s business; she trusted Him
to take care of His servant, and trusting found no cause for fear. One
incident which I have failed to locate in the story may be cited in
further illustration. In the course of a journey which she was making
with her husband through unexplored country, her hammock-bearers and
a number of carriers got ahead of Mr. Lewis, who had been detained.
Suddenly their progress was barred by armed natives, who opened fire. The
carriers dropped their loads and bolted, and her hammock-bearers besought
permission to set her down. This she peremptorily refused, and by sheer
power of will kept them to their duty. There was more firing, but putting
large trust in God and some lesser confidence in the bad marksmanship of
the natives with their flint-lock guns, she waited until Mr. Lewis came
up and placated the enemy.

If Mrs. Lewis lacked the brilliant intellectual qualities which are notes
of genius, she possessed in liberal measure what genius often wants, in
disastrous destitution, viz., good sense—sense so good that it made her
far-seeing, as Mr. Brock justly observes, and of sound judgment. Her
papers which have passed through my hands prove abundantly how profoundly
her practical wisdom was respected by her colleagues, who, as I have
already stated, were accustomed to appeal to her for counsel in their
many difficulties; and I know that I can claim the concurrence of Mr.
Baynes and Mr. Wilson when I say that there was no woman on the field
whose opinions concerning the conduct and the policy of the Mission were
received by the Committee with greater consideration.

She was an excellent judge of character, and though charitable toward
all men, by no means confined herself to the use of honeyed words.
She never found fault where there was none; but when she found it she
described it in plain terms. In confidential letters to her friends occur
passages of personal criticism which would make piquant reading if it
were permissible to publish them. Conscientious and painstaking herself,
she loathed slackness and slovenliness, especially when they appeared in
what purported to be the service of God. Once, upon a great occasion, she
heard a paltry speech from a minister of repute. Upon a lesser occasion
he repeated large part of this speech, watered down to more insipid
weakness, in her hearing and mine. I had known her a long time, but the
withering terms of her criticism were something of a revelation.

Her habitual calmness of demeanour tended to suggest that she was
unemotional; and this sometimes placed her at a temporary disadvantage
in dealing with people who looked for demonstration. She was conscious
of such disadvantage; and I recall a letter in which she congratulates a
sister missionary upon the possession of a temperament which encouraged
instant response. But “still waters run deep,” and if Mrs. Lewis was a
great woman, as I believe she was, it was in chief because “she loved
much.” She loved the dumb creatures about her, and was profoundly moved
by the sight of their suffering. I once said to her husband, since her
death, “Was her calmness never broken up? Did she never explode?” And
he replied, “I only remember three or four occasions upon which she was
carried away by fierce anger, and in every instance it was cruelty to
animals which provoked the explosion.”

She loved the lowly creatures of God; but her greater love was given to
those whom He has made in His own image, and for whom Christ died. Of her
love for her husband and her kinsfolk and her elect friends, who answered
her love in kind, little need be said. It was beautiful and worthy of
her, but still within the common range of human experience and emotion.
The love which marked her out and made her great was that holy charity
which regards with divine compassion the ugly, the unthankful, and the
evil. Squalid African babies, men and women foul with hideous vices and
enthralled by bestial customs, were to her kind heart the dear objects
of incessant solicitude. Enlightened by her great love, she understood
the frightful strength of the forces which crushed them, yet steadfastly
believed in the possibility of their deliverance. Surrounded by naked
savages possessed by legions of devils, she saw as in a vision these same
savages, clothed and in their right minds, sitting at the feet of Jesus,
and the vision lured her on to persist, at any cost, in those ministries
of love through which she hoped He might effect the transforming exorcism.

And this great love was begotten and sustained in her soul by faith in
“Jesus Christ and Him crucified.” She was an evangelical Christian. In
early youth, as she journeyed, she came to a place where there was a
cross, and as she gazed at Him who hung there, the burden of sin rolled
away, but the burden of love came upon her, and she never dropped the
blessed load. “He loved me and gave Himself for me,” was the dominant
note of those “everlasting chimes” which made the cheer and inspiration
of her sacrificial life. And the love which was “unto death” for her, was
“unto death” for the whole world. And where in the whole world were men
and women whose need of the knowledge of the love of God was more clamant
and tragical than that of the Congo peoples? The fingers of the pierced
hand beckoned her to Africa. To Africa she went; and for Africa she lived
and died.

       *       *       *       *       *

One personal word, and my task is done. Upon his return to England,
alone, Mr. Lewis told me that during one whole day, as his wife lay
dying, her minister’s name was continually upon her lips; and, moreover,
that she had expressed the desire that if anything were written about
her it should be written by his hand. The kindly reader will understand
that this affecting statement could not fail to impart a certain solemn
tenderness to the temper in which I undertook my work. I would that the
hand had been more cunning, and the heart and brain behind it worthier
of the confidence and affection of my friend. But I have done my best. I
have observed restraint. I have painted in quiet colours, as she herself
would have desired. And if this simple memorial of Christian character
and consecrated service carries on the thought of the reader to the Lord
who inspired them, and elicits sympathy for the cause to which they were
so freely given, my recompense will be great, and I will render humble
thanks to God, Who made her what she was, and permitted me to write her
story.




FOOTNOTES


[1] “The Life of George Grenfell, Congo Missionary and Explorer”
(Religious Tract Society), p. 91 _et seq._

[2] See Note B (p. 345).

[3] See Appendix, Note C.

[4] _The Missionary Herald_, 1892, p. 400.

[5] See Appendix, Note D.

[6] See Appendix, Note E.

[7] See Appendix, Note F.




APPENDIX


NOTE A.—P. 55.

THE GERMAN ANNEXATION

The following passage taken from the Report of the Baptist Missionary
Society, May, 1885, states the case succinctly:—

    “For many years past the Committee of the Society have indulged
    the hope that a favourable response would be returned by the
    British Government to the repeated appeals from the chiefs and
    headmen of the Cameroons district that their country might be
    taken under the government and protection of the English Crown,
    and when sending in memorials to successive Governments asking
    the same favour for the Society’s settlement of Victoria and
    the adjacent district belonging absolutely to the Mission,
    the Committee have frequently pleaded on behalf of the Dualla
    people also.

    “With regard to the Cameroons, however, all such expectations
    must be finally abandoned, as the district is now under German
    authority, the whole country having been annexed to the German
    Empire in August, 1884. The story of how this was brought
    about is so plainly told in a recent Blue Book presented in
    both Houses of Parliament, and entitled ‘Africa, No. 1, 1885.
    Correspondence respecting affairs in the Cameroons,’ that
    further reference to it here is unnecessary.

    “The Committee, however, cannot refrain from placing on record
    their sincere regret that the British Government so long
    delayed taking action in response to the numerous appeals of
    the Cameroon chiefs and peoples, as but for this delay recent
    painful and disastrous events might altogether have been
    avoided, and the often expressed desires of the Dualla peoples
    complied with.

    “Nor is the recent annexation of the settlement of Victoria
    by the British Government likely to be attended with any real
    advantage to the dwellers there, if reported concessions of
    surrounding territory by the English Government to Germany be a
    fact; as by such arrangement the small township and territory
    belonging absolutely to the Mission will be completely
    environed by German possessions, and trade with the interior
    rendered practically valueless in consequence of restrictive
    and almost prohibitive duties and exactions.

    “The outlook at present is dark in the extreme, and it appears
    more than probable that the work of the Society on the West
    Coast, rendered so dear to the denomination by the sacrifice
    of many noble lives and the outlay of large sums of money, may
    have to be relinquished.

    “Should this eventually prove needful, the Committee earnestly
    hope that the work there may be carried on by some Evangelical
    German Missionary organisation, whose agents may have the joy
    of reaping a rich harvest from the toils, the tears, and the
    seed-sowing of devoted workers, many of whom have fallen asleep.

    “Under present circumstances, however, and while negotiations
    are being carried on with Her Majesty’s Government by the
    Committee, it would be premature to forecast the future, or
    take any definite steps in the matter.

    “The Committee are devoting to this painful business their
    constant and careful attention, and they earnestly invite
    friends of the Society to unite in special prayer on their
    behalf, that they may be Divinely guided to such issues as
    shall best promote the glory of God and the truest welfare of
    the peoples of the West Coast.”

    The apprehensions of the Committee were realised, and in 1887
    the stations on the Cameroons River and at Victoria were handed
    over to the Basle Mission.


NOTE B.—P. 110.

KONGO AND CONGO

The ancient kingdom, of which San Salvador was the capital, was the
kingdom of _Kongo_. And the language of the Lower Congo region, of
which Dr. Bentley wrote the grammar and dictionary, and into which he
translated the New Testament, is the _Kongo_ language. The San Salvador
district is spoken of by the natives as _Kongo_. Hence when Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis were departing for Kibokolo, they were said to be leaving _Kongo_.
The distinction between Congo and Kongo is not always observed, but the
reader will understand, when he meets the “K” spelling, that it is not
used in error.


NOTE C.—P. 134.

“CONCERNING THE COLLECTION”

It may perhaps not be quite superfluous to inform the reader that the pig
was duly paid for, and its price placed in the treasury, before it was
eaten at the Mission Christmas feast. Obviously all the other items of
this strange collection must needs be in like fashion turned into money,
for transmission to London. Otherwise Mr. Baynes and his staff would have
been decidedly embarrassed by the receipt of a consignment of goods,
including a very dead pig, a keg of gunpowder, and all the rest of it.


NOTE D.—P. 168.

THE OLD CATHEDRAL

The Portuguese discovered the Congo River in 1482, and in course of
time San Salvador became the centre of a Christian civilisation of a
kind. Several churches were built, and the Cathedral ruins referred to
were the relics of the greatest of them. But the slave trade was of
greater interest to the Portuguese than the business of evangelisation,
and ecclesiastics engaged in it. When our missionaries reached San
Salvador, only the faintest traces of earlier missions remained. For many
generations barbarism had resumed its ancient sway.


NOTE E.—P. 194.

“THE FIRST WHITE MEN”

When Lieutenant Grandy reached San Salvador in 1873, the King was ill
with small-pox. The traveller treated him, left directions for further
treatment, and foretold the progress of the case. Upon his return from
Tungwa, he found the King full of wonder at the traveller’s knowledge and
gratitude for his own recovery. By way of proving his gratitude he was
asked to treat kindly the next white men who came along. He promised; and
our missionaries reckoned themselves, in part, indebted for their good
reception to the King’s fidelity to his promise.


NOTE F.—P. 310.

“BELLA”

“Bella” is 27 inches high, with fair hair and eyes that open and shut.
She was sent out to Kibokolo by the children of Belle Isle Church Sunday
School, for Christmas, 1903. In due course she migrated to Kimpese, and
though her complexion had suffered in the Congo climate, as is usual with
English children, her first appearance made a great sensation, and the
fading of her beauty was overlooked by her admirers. It was originally
intended that she should be the “child” of a certain black girl whom the
Belle Isle scholars supported. But Mrs. Lewis determined that she should
be the “child” of the Mission; and to this decision, with its consequent
restrictions, “Bella” doubtless owes her soundness of limb and her
comparatively long career.




INDEX


  Adams, Mr., 169, 176

  Allen, Dr., 50

  American Mission, 300

  Antwerp, Seamen’s Church, St. Paul’s, and Cathedral at, 163

  Appendix, 343-7

  Arthington, Robert, 20


  Bain, Mr. and Mrs., 303

  Balfern, Mr., 158

  Baptist Missionary Society—
    Annual Meeting of, 15
    demands compensation for property destroyed by Germans, 66
    valedictory meeting at Bristol, 88

  _Baptist Times_, the, 267

  Barosa, Padre, 121, 192

  Baynes, Mr., 30, 37, 54, 61, 82, 87, 128

  Bayneston, 31

  Beedham, Mr. and Mrs., 185, 186

  Belgian Colonial Minister, 319, 331

  “Bella,” 347

  Bentley, Dr. Holman, 21, 120, 254, 256, 266, 267

  Bowskill, Mr. and Mrs., 225, 230, 250, 254

  Bristol, 87

  _British Weekly_, the, 321

  Brock, Rev. William, 29, 37, 128

  Brook Mount, 46

  Brown, Rev. J. J., and Mrs., 3, 42, 91, 130

  Buckenham, Mrs., 40, 53, 69

  Burnley, Mr., 50

  Burton, Capt., 19

  Butcher, Mr., 31


  Camberwell, Denmark Place, Baptist Church at, 9
    “Camden Road, Congo Sale,” the, 17

  Camden Road, London, church at, 4, 297

  Cameron, Mr. and Mrs., 253, 283

  Cameroons, German annexation of, unpopular, locally, 55

  “Carmina Crucis,” 337

  Catholic Mission, 319

  Churchill, Mr. Winston, 320

  Clarke, George Rix, 2

  Clifford, Dr., 306

  Comber Memorial Station, 183, 219

  Comber, Miss, 36, 48, 50

  Comber, Percy, 38, 131

  Comber, Dr. Sidney, 15

  Comber, Thos. J., 9-15, 18-23, 32, 113, 190

  Congo Mission, 20-23

  Crudgington, Mr. Harry, 21


  Dibundu, 47

  Doke, Mr., 28, 29

  Dom Miguel, 222

  Dykes, Rev. Oswald, 87

  Dyson, Capt., 53


  Elembe, 188, 193


  Fletcher, Miss, 44, 49

  Forfeitt, Mr. and Mrs. Lawson, 132, 154, 165, 193, 238, 266, 297

  Forfeitt, Mr. and Mrs. William, 315

  Fuller, Mr. and Mrs., 69


  Gamble, Dr., 296, 300

  Gardiner, Mr., 163

  _Geographical Journal_, the, 263

  German annexation, the, 343-5

  Graham, Mr. and Mrs., 98, 101, 102, 103, 132, 191

  Grand Canary, Sailors’ Institute at, 150

  Greenwell, Dora, 337

  “Grenfell, George, Life of,” 154, 321, 325

  Grenfell, Mr. and Mrs., 14, 15, 19-23, 30, 31, 32, 92, 129, 153, 267


  Habershon, Dr., 282

  Hampstead, Heath Street, church at, 37

  Harris, Rendel, 308

  Hartland, John, 11, 16, 21, 29, 30-33

  Hartland, Miss Alice, 17, 24, 38

  Hartland, Mrs., 25-8, 30, 33, 34, 142-4
    (_See under_ “Letters.”)

  Hartley, Mr., 44

  Hay, Mr., 52, 53, 67

  Henderson, Mr., 43

  Hewitt’s, Miss Amy, impressions of Mrs. Lewis as schoolgirl, 6-8

  Hewitt, Misses, their school, 5

  _Hilldrop Magazine_, the, 6

  Hilldrop Old Girls’ Club, the, 6

  Hooper, Mr. and Mrs., 230

  Hughes, Mr. W., 31


  Ipswich, history of, 2

  Islington, Providence Hall, Baptist Church at, 3


  Ja-Ja, King, 44

  “Jeremiah,” 99

  Johnston, Sir H., 308

  Johnstone, Mr., 47


  Kimpese Institute, 284, 312

  Kirkland, Mr., 279

  Kivitidi, 107, 108, 114, 119, 133

  Kongo and Congo, 345


  Ladies’ Missionary Working Party, the, 37

  Lamartinière, Monsieur de, 7

  Lau, 194

  Lembwa, 98, 99

  Leopold, King, 248

  Letters from Mrs. Lewis to—
    Mrs. Hartland, 25-6, 27-8, 29-30, 34-5, 36, 40, 49, 55, 63, 66-7,
        71-7, 77-81, 110-11
    Miss Hartland, 35, 86-8, 109, 120, 146-8, 152-6, 166-8
    Nieces, 70, 135
    Mrs. J. Jenkyn Brown, 111-12, 158-61, 238-41, 247-50, 266, 268-70
    “A correspondent,” 156-8
    Miss Ethel Percival, 163, 168-9, 170-3, 257-8, 301, 302-4, 309-10,
        311, 321
    “Lily and Alice,” 325-6
    Mrs. Howell, 328-9
    Mr. Baynes, 179-82, 219-23
    Mrs. Pinnock, of Kibokolo, 289
    Mrs. Hooper, of Kibokolo, 289-90, 291
    Mrs. Kirkland, of Mabaya, 290-1
    Mrs. Moon, 293-5
    Miss Taylor, 299-301, 305-7, 310-11
    Miss Beatrice Percival, 301-2, 304-5, 307-9
    Mrs. Gamble, 320-1
    “Fanny,” 327
    “Bee,” 327-8

  Letters from Mr. Lewis to—
    Mrs. Hartland, 68-9
    Mr. Wilson, 281-2

  Letters to Mr. Lewis from—
    Mrs. Edward Robinson, 332
    Rev. Wm. Brock, 332
    Mrs. Jenkyn Brown, 332
    Mrs. Hooper, 332

  Lewis, Mr., first meeting of, with Miss Thomas, 48;
    acts as doctor and nurse, 50;
    brief account of, 52-3;
    compelled by Germans to go to Bell Town, 59;
    friendship with Miss Thomas, 64;
    goes to Old Calabar to meet Miss Phillips, 71-2;
    marriage with Miss Phillips, 74;
    death of his wife, 77;
    engagement to Miss Thomas, 85;
    attends valedictory meeting at Bristol, 88-90;
    marriage, 90;
    sails for Congo, 92;
    baptizes five candidates at San Salvador, 102;
    builds home, 107;
    health fails, goes to England, 127;
    deputation journeys, 129;
    ill with influenza, 130;
    sails for Africa, 130;
    report for 1892, 145-6;
    seriously ill, 148;
    voyage to Grand Canary, 149;
    return to Mission, 153;
    undertakes planning and directing work of building new chapel, 173;
    opening of new chapel, 184-97;
    invited to settle in Kibokolo, 198;
    story of work in Zombo, 198-215;
    review of work in connection with the Congo Mission, 215-19;
    new home in Kibokolo, 224;
    account of reception and prospects, 224-6;
    accompanied by Mr. Cameron on journey of itineration, 254;
    reads paper before Royal Geographical Society, 262;
    visits England for sake of health, 281;
    sent to Edinburgh, 283;
    deputation work, 284;
    offered and accepts appointment of B.M.S. tutor at United Training
        Institute, Lower Congo, 284;
    article by, on Kimpese Institute in _Missionary Herald_, 285-9;
    account of opening of United Training Institute by, 312-4;
    death and burial of wife, 331

  Lewis, Mrs., birthplace and parentage, 1-3;
    her affection for Wales, 1;
    comes under influence of Rev. Francis Tucker, 5;
    conversion, baptism, admission to Church fellowship, becomes
        Sunday-school teacher, 5;
    influence of T. J. Comber upon, 9;
    death of her mother, 16;
    death of brother-in-law, 18;
    becomes governess, 26;
    dispatches letter to Mr. John Hartland accepting proposal of
        marriage, 27;
    studies Portuguese, 27;
    death of her father, 28;
    receives news of John Hartland’s death, 30;
    accepted by Baptist Missionary Society, 36;
    receives farewell gifts from Camden Road Church, 37;
    embarks on the _Corisco_ for the Cameroons, 38;
    suffers from sea-sickness, 39;
    arrives at Madeira, 40;
    story of Benin expedition, 42-3;
    reaches Victoria, meets Mr. Lewis, 48;
    attacked with fever, 49;
    called to nurse Miss Comber, 50-52;
    a good sailor, 54;
    misadventures on board the _Congo_, 54;
    writes account of German attack, 55-60;
    strong friendship with Mr. Lewis, 64-5;
    left with Mr. Lewis in charge of Mission at Bethel station, 66;
    in poor health, 67;
    meets Miss Phillips, 72;
    in a tornado, 73;
    at marriage of Mr. Lewis and Miss Phillips, 74-5;
    account of illness, death, and burial of Mr. Lewis’s first wife,
        77-81;
    returns to England, 82;
    receives, and declines, proposal of marriage, 84;
    engagement to Mr. Lewis, 85;
    in residence at Zenana Medical Home, 85;
    experiences at Bristol, 86-8;
    attends valedictory meeting at Bristol, 88-90;
    married to Mr. Lewis, 90;
    sails for Congo, 92;
    diary of journey to San Salvador, 92-101;
    work at San Salvador described, 104-6;
    journey to Madimba, 115-19;
    mastery of language, 120;
    circular letter, 122-5;
    sent to England, 126;
    returns to San Salvador, 127;
    accompanies husband to England, 127;
    Congo Sale at Camden Road, 128;
    ill with influenza, 130;
    sails for Africa, 130;
    extracts from circular letter, 139-41;
    accompanies husband to Grand Canary, 149;
    return to Mission, 153;
    deputation work in England, 162-3;
    resting in Switzerland, 163;
    return to duty, 165;
    contracts mumps, 168;
    circular letter, 173-8;
    writes account of opening of new chapel at San Salvador, 184-97;
    visits Kibokolo, to found Comber Memorial Station, 219-23;
    her affection for dumb animals, 228-9;
    extracts from correspondence giving impressions of life at
        Kibokolo, 231-62;
    account of visit to Mabaya, 265-6;
    journey to San Salvador, to nurse Mr. Mayo, 273-5;
    takes Mrs. Mayo to Matadi, 276-7;
    extracts from diary, 278-9;
    visits England, 281;
    death of niece, 283;
    holidays at Stockholm, Peebles, Pwllheli, Deal, Millington, 292-3;
    serious attack influenza, 295;
    returns to Africa, welcomed there, 299-301;
    circular letter by, 316-20;
    report of her work, 322-4;
    stricken with fever—collapse, 325;
    her last correspondence, 326-9;
    death and burial, 331;
    characteristics, 333-42

  Liley, Mr., 44

  Lloyd George, 309

  Lowrie, Mr., 303

  Lualaba River, 20

  Lyall, Mrs., 73, 74


  Mabie, Dr. Catherine, 267

  Maclaren, Dr., 89

  Maentwrog, 1, 162

  Mansonso, 197

  Masson, M. Gustave, 37

  Mata, 192, 202, 203, 204, 221

  May, Mr. and Mrs., 26

  Mayo, Mr. and Mrs., 271-9

  _Missionary Herald_, the, 45, 122, 127, 142, 199, 233, 284, 312

  Moolinaar, Mr., 122

  Moon, Mr., 302-3, 310

  Myers, Rev. J. B., 30


  Ndonzwau, 193

  Ndosimao, 222

  Newport, Mon., 129

  Nlekai, 108, 109, 135, 190

  Nodes, Miss Rosa, 10, 24


  Oram, Mr., 158


  Parkinson, Mr. C. W., 151, 161, 163

  Parkinson, Mantu, 189

  Parkinson, Miss May, 151

  Penmaenmawr, 162

  Percival, Beatrice, 18

  Percival, Ethel, 18

  Percival, Eva, 18, 282-3

  Percival, Dr. Richard, 18

  Pewtress, Miss Emily, 10

  Pewtress, Mr. S. Leslie, letter from, 12-13

  Pewtress, Stephen, 10

  Phillips, Mr., 92, 93, 94, 97, 98, 101, 104, 132, 174, 175, 176, 185,
        196, 306, 307, 308

  Phillips, Mrs., death of, 179

  Phillips, Miss, 53, 65

  “Pilgrim’s Progress,” the, 270, 281

  Pinnock, Mr. John, 52, 71, 149, 197

  Pople, Mr., 155


  Robinson, Mr. and Mrs., 87

  Ross, Mr., 87

  Royal Geographical Society, 262


  Saker, Alfred, 19

  Saker, Miss, 44, 46, 47, 49, 53

  San Salvador—
    King of, 117, 132
    Catholic Mission at, 121, 135

  Scrivener, Mr., 93

  Seymour, Mrs., 24-5, 61, 86

  Silvey, Mr., 47, 50, 58

  Sims, Dr., 303

  Smith, Annie, 8, 131

  Smith, Emily, 8, 17

  Smith, Mrs. Frank, 87

  Smith, Mrs. Jonas, 17

  Smith, Jonas, 8, 14

  Soden, Baron Von, 75

  Spencer, Miss, 296, 300

  Stapleton, Mr. Walter, 126

  Swedish Missionary Society, 285

  Sygrave, Miss, 271


  Thomas, Eliza Jane, 18

  Thomas, George, 1

  Thomas, Griffith, 1-3

  Thomas, Herbert, 4

  Thomas, Jane, 2

  Thomson, Mrs. Quintin, 45

  Tucker, Rev. Francis, 4

  Tyndale Chapel, 87


  Union Chapel, Manchester, 4

  United Conference of Congo Missionaries, 266

  United Training Institute, 284, 312


  Vita, 166, 188, 195


  Wavatidi, 192

  Weeks, Mr., 101, 102

  Weeks, Mrs., 93

  Welford, Mr. and Mrs., 71

  Wherrett, Mr., 163

  Wilson, Rev. C. E., 281-2, 296, 338

  Wooding, Mr. and Mrs., 225, 272


  Zombo—
    Scheme, 178
    Story of work in, 198-215


UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED, THE GRESHAM PRESS, WOKING AND LONDON.
