Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



At- f'tj. 




AN EARNEST MINISTRY 



THC 



WANT OF THE TIMES. 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY 



THE 



WANT OF THE TIMES, 



BY 



JOHN ANGELL JAMES. 



FOURTH EDITION. 




LONDON : 

HAMILTON, ADAMS, dc CO., PATERNOSTER ROW. 
BIRMINGHAM : B. HUDSON, BULL STREET. 

MDCCCXLVIII. 



TO THE 

PROFESSORS AND COMMITTEE 
OP CHESHUNT COLLEGE, 

THE FOLLOWING TREATISE, 
BRING THE EXPANSION OF A SERMON 
PREACHED 
BEFORE THEM AT THEIR LAST ANNIVERSARY, 

IS INSCBIBEB 

WITH SENTIMENTS OF AFFECTIONATE RESPECT, 

AND WITH EARNEST PRAYER 

FOR THE PROSPERITY 

OF THEIR VALUABLE INSTITUTION, 

BY 

THE AUTHOH. 



PREFACE. 



Has the modern evangelical pulpit lost^ and is it 
still losing, any of its power ? This is a question far 
too momentous to he asked in the spirit of mere 
curiosity, or to be answered in unreflecting and igno- 
rant haste. An affirmative reply involves consequences 
so deeply and so painfully affecting the eternal welfare 
of mankind, as well as the cause of orthodox doctrine, 
that it should not be given but upon indubitable 
evidence ; while on the other hand, a negative answer 
would only perpetuate the evil, if it really exists, by 
superseding all measures which might remain in oiu: 
power for coiTecting it. 

In settling this question, it is necessary to define 
what is meant by the loss of the power of the pulpit. 
If by this it is intended only to ask whether evan- 
gelical ministrations have lost their attractiveness in 
drawing the people together to hear them, it may be 
unhesitatingly affirmed that they bave not ; for 
perhaps there never were such numbers found listening 
to the glad tidings of salvation as at the present time. 
The true intent of the inquiry then is this, has the 
modem pulpit lost any of its efficiency as regards the 
great end for which the gospel is preached ; that is, the 
conversion of sinners, and the spiritual advancement 
of believers. In coming to a right conclusion upon 
this matter, another question must be proposed and 
answered^ which is this, — with what past period of his- 



VIU PREFACE. 

tory is the present to be compared ? If we go back 
to the time of Baxter, Howe, Owen, Bates, Manton, 
and Chamock, there can be little reason to believe 
that the moderns preach with the same results that 
these men did. As little can it be questioned whether 
Whitfield and Wesley, with the men called out by 
their labours, both in the Church of England and 
among Nonconformists, proclaimed the gospel of the 
grace of God with more power and success than the 
preachers of the present day. It is better, therefore, 
to limit the range of inquiry to the last quarter of a 
century, and to state the matter thus;— does the 
preaching of the gospel now, taking all evangelical 
denominations into the investigation, appear to be 
followed with the same saving and sanctifying results, 
as it was then ; and if not, does there appear to be a 
progressive diminution of effect still going on ? 

This it must be obvious is a question which cannot 
be settled by very accurate statistics, and for the 
solution of which we must depend pretty much upon 
general reports and concurrent testimony. It may 
be asked then, whether the want of efficiency is not 
matter of acknowledgment and lamentation by all 
evangelical bodies ? True it is, that, to a certain 
extent, similar acknowledgments and lamentations 
have been made in every age, and by ministers of all 
denominations. But the inquiry now supposed is 
made chiefly by those who compare themselves with 
themselves; and their success at the present time, 
with their own success in past time. The confession 
from the United States, by Presbyterians, Congrega- 
tionalists. Baptists, and Methodists, is concurrent that 



PREFACE. IX 

there is a deadness over the churches, that revivals are 
rare, and conversions few, while the power of godliness 
among professing Christians is low. The Methodist 
Body in these United Kingdoms reported last year 
but an increase of about seven hundred members, and 
this year a decrease of ^ve thousand. The evangelical 
clergy of the Church of England lament the rarity of 
conversions by their preaching, and confess that the 
power of Venn, and Romaine, and Cecil, and Newton, 
seems wanting to their successors. . The Baptists and 
Independents have no better report to make. Dr. 
Chalmers, in a late article in the North British Review, 
in speaking of Scotland, and that at a time when the 
disruption of the Presbyterian Establishment might 
have been supposed to have given new activity to the 
ministry of the Free Church at least, uses the following 
mournful language : " As things stand at present, our 
creeds and confessions have become effete ; and the 
Bible a dead letter ; and the orthodoxy which was at 
one time the glory, by withering into the inert and 
lifeless, is now the shame and reproach of all our 
churches." This is strong language, and a startling 
opinion. But the most melancholy thing connected 
with it, is its truth. 

Assuming then the fact that the modem evangelical 
pulpit has kwt and is losing something of its power, 
in the way of converting sinners and carrying forward 
the spiritual life of believers, it surely becomes us all 
to reflect upon the painful fact with the deepest serious- 
ness, and with the most intense anxiety to endeavour 
to discover the cause. It would ill become us in a 
spirit of antinomian indolence or fanaticism to resolve 



/ X PREFACE. 

this whole matter into Divine sovereignty, and to say, 
"God wills it." With the same propriety, and on as 
good ground, might the impenitent sinner he satisfied 
with his condition, and trace it up to a withholding of 
the influence necessary for his conversion. That 
there is a suspension of Divine influence must be 
admitted, if there he a diminished saving result ; hut 
as the Spirit works by appropriate means, may not this 
very suspension itself be traced up to some fault of 
the preachers themselves ? Would not a diflferent 
order of means, or more energy in the use of them, 
lead to a removal of this suspension of the Spirit's 
power ? The question for us to ask in all seriousness 
and prayerful examination, is this: Does the dimi- 
nished power of the pulpit arise from a diminished 
adaptation of the pulpit to the state of the people, or 
is the lamented deficiency to be traced up exclusively 
to the circumstances of the times that are now passing 
over us ? Something, no doubt, may be set down to 
both these causes. 

This then, is a matter that concerns all, and deeply 
conceiiis them too; for the tendency of decline is 
always downward ; what is weak will become weaker, 
if not arrested in its progress. 

There is another consideration which may account 
for the diminished efifect of the pulpit, and that is an 
increased power of the press and of the school. At 
one time the preacher had the public mind almost to 
himself. There were indeed Bibles, and schools, and 
tracts; but how few and uninfluential compared with 
what they are in the present day ! Evangelical truth 
now comes before the million in every possible variety 



PBEFACE. XI 

of form, and in every variable quantity : the child 
learns his lessons from the Sunday-school teacher, 
and the poorest adult reads it at home in the tract 
and the penny magazine ; and though this is a help in 
one respect to the preacher, it takes from him all the 
advantage which novelty of representation, and some- 
thing approaching to exclusiveness, once gave him, for 
he has been already forestalled by the living voice of 
the Sunday-school teacher, and the silent invitations 
of the tract These auxiliary means of conversion 
will never supersede the pulpit, if the pulpit does not 
allow itself to be superseded ; but it is evident that 
such competitors with it for the public mind, should 
increase its labours to be, what God ever intended it 
to be, his power to the salvation of men. That the 
pulpit has nothing to fear from the increase of reli- 
gious knowledge by the school and the press, is 
evident from the fact that as science multiplies its 
treatises, and cheapens them down to the poorest 
pocket, it multiplies in equal proportion its public 
lecturers. 

The facts thus briefly noticed will account for, and 
perhaps be admitted to justify, the appearance of the 
volume, which this preface is intended to introduce. 
We live in an earnest age, and nothing but an earnest 
ministry may hope to succeed in it. With this con- 
viction, when honoured with an invitation to preach 
last year the anniversary sermon for Cheshunt Col- 
lege, the author found his subject in his own views 
and convictions. The publication of the discourse 
then preached was solicited at the time of its delivery; 
]l)ut as it was given to the world pretty fully in the 



XU PREFACE. 

pages of the Patriot newspaper, he abandoned all 
thoughts of complying with a request so kindly pre- 
ferred. His attention was, however, called again to 
the subject, and his resolution changed, by the solici- 
tation of that distinguished man who presides with so 
much wisdom and dignity over the collegiate institu- 
tion at Cheshunt ; and who, to all his other works, so 
rich in practical piety, has added another of a very 
different kind, which, while it lays the world under 
deep obligations to its author, will associate the name 
of Dr. Harris with the most profound religious phi- 
losophers of any age or country. May his valuable 
life be spared to complete that magnificent series 
of treatises, which, with such adventurous but well- 
balanced intellect, he has projected, and of which the 
volume lately issued is but the commencement ! 

When revising his manuscript for publication, the 
author of this work found that it admitted of more 
expansion of thought, and more extended amplification, 
than at first struck him ; and he resolved as soon as 
time should be found for it, to prepare a small treatise 
which should have a better chance of living than 
an ephemeral pamphlet. The subject grew under his 
hand, and has at length swelled into this volume. 

In undertaking to become, especially at such 
length, the counsellor of his brethren, he can scarcely 
acquit himself of the charge of presumption. He 
feels that he has little claim upon the attention of his 
fellow-labourers in the ministry, even the youngest of 
them, and very little right to ask it True it is that 
he has now arrived at an age when he takes his place 
among the fathers; but then years do not always 



PREFACE. Xm 

teach vrisdom. It is no less true that he has now 
lahoured two-and-forty years in the ministry of the 
word, and has had no very limited opportunity of 
ohserving in others^ and of discovering experimentally, 
what contributes to ministerial acceptableness and 
usefulness ; — still he can truly say, without a grain of 
vanity concealed under a simulated modesty, he offers 
the present treatise to the notice of his brethren with 
fear and trembling. He knows that what is offered 
to them should, both as to matter and manner, be 
worthy of their attention ; but had he a literary repu- 
tation to sustain, over which he was jealous even to 
fastidiousness, he would feel still more solicitude 
about the reception of his work; yet as he aims at 
nothing but usefulness, without making any preten- 
sions to a finished style, he can only express a hope 
that they may not deem this offering uuworthy that 
attention, and respectfully ask them to accept it as an 
affectionate endeavour, made in his own way, to aid 
their usefulness. God has helped him to do some- 
thing for his cause, and knowing how it has been 
done, he is anxious to draw others into the same way. 
And now while his shadows lengthen on the plain, 
and his eye is fixed on the declining sun, he feels in 
the review of life, that the thought of having done 
any thing to save souls from death is more precious 
to him, than could have been the consciousness of 
having made the largest acquirements of learning and 
science, or gained a reputation for genius and taste. 
There is a time coming in every man's history when 
the knowledge of having been the instrument of 
plucking a single brand from the eternal burning. 



XIV PREFACE. 

mil yield more real satisfaction than the certainty of 
having accomplished the loftiest ohjects of literary 
ambition. 

The author anticipates a remark which will be made 
by many of the readers of this volume, that it is in 
some measure, a book of extracts. They will, how- 
ever, have little cause to complain of this, since what 
he has given from the stores of other men s thoughts 
is so much better than what he could have brought 
from his own. Besides, in so important a matter as 
advice to the ministry, he was anxious to be sustained 
in what he advanced, by the authority of men, whose 
names and counsels would carry far more weight than 
his own. Be it so, then, that the book will present 
the appearance of a literary mosaic, — the author is 
quite content, for the sake of such precious stones, 
that his own part of the volume should perform no 
higher office than to be the frame-work in which they 
are set. 

There will be found some repetitions of sentiment, 
and even of expression in the work; and this was 
hardly to be avoided from the nature of the subject. 
It is a poor excuse for imperfections, to plead the want 
of time for correcting them; and yet it is the best 
excuse the author has to make for the many that will 
be found in his little volume. His situation exposes 
him to a thousand vexatious interruptions, which 
many in more retired nooks never suffer. These pages 
have been written amidst such abounding and various 
occupations, that they could be composed only during 
snatches of time redeemed from other duties^ and in 
brief intervals of busy activities. 



PREFACE. XV 

If this work should do nothing more than draw the 
attention of writers in our Reviews and Magazines, as 
well as of our more talented authors, to a renewed con- 
sideration of that most vital point — our ministry, it 
will, however humble are its pretensions and low its 
merits, have accomplished a high and holy vocation. 

Edobastom, April, 1847. 

PEEPACE TO THE THIED EDITION. 



It is not with vanity, but with gratitude, that the 
author of this volume refers to the fact of a third 
edition of it having been called for within six months 
after the publication of the first: and he willingly and 
joyfully considers this rapid sale rather as an indica- 
tion of the deep interest taken in the subject, than as 
a proof of approbation of the manner in which it has 
been here treated. Scarcely any thing could be a 
more hopeful sign of the times, religiously viewed, 
than this interest in a matter so deeply involving the 
eternal welfare of mankind, as that of an " Earnest 
Ministry.'* Whether the author has, or has not, 
ability to excite and guide this earnestness, it is 
evident by the many who have purchased his volume, 
that there is a prevailing disposition to consider the 
subject: and that multitudes are prepared to be 
moved to a greater intensity of feeling and energy 
of action in their high and holy vocation, if any one 
can be found to give the impulse. 

The author has had abundantly more than enough 
to gratify him and to be a reward to him for his 



XVI PREFACE. 

labour^ in tbe private acknowledgments he has received 
from various quarters, and in the notice which has 
been taken of his treatise by the periodicals ; but he 
is still anxious that the editors of our leading journals 
which are devoted to religious literature, should call 
some of their ablest writers to the subject, who would 
speak with a power and authority which do not apper- 
tain to his pen. Intently bent upon his subject, how 
gladly would he sink into the shadow of some of these 
gifted men, if they would come forward and fill the 
land and the age with a sense of the importance of a 
competent, energetic, and efficient ministry. One has 
already done much to accomplish this object: and to 
Dr. Vaughan we stand indebted for his valuable work 
on the Modem Pulpit. May we soon see another 
contribution from his pen in the pages of the " British 
Quarterly!" The pulpit, notwithstanding the won- 
drous power of the press, must still remain the main 
lever of the moral world : how much, therefore, does 
it become all those who are concerned for the spiritual 
interests of the community, to endeavour to augment 
the force of this momentous engine. The friends of 
• evangelical doctrine, and the advocates of a pure 
orthodoxy, have the following objects to keep ever in 
view in this age — they must take care of their Bibles, 
that they be not mutilated or curtailed by a lawless 
criticism — they must take care of their theology, that 
it be not perverted by a false philosophy — and they 
must take care of their pulpits, that they be not 
occupied by heretical, unspiritual, or incompetent 
ministers. 

Edobaston, Octobbk 19, 1847. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE APOSTOLIC MINISTRY. 

*'N0W TfiEN WE ARE AMBASSADORS FOR CHRIST; AS 

THOUGH 60D DID BESEECH YOU BY US, WE 

FRAY YOU IN CHRISt's STEAD, BE 

YE RECONCILED TO OOD/' 

2 Cor., v, 20. 

In this truly wonderful passage, viewed in con- 
nection with its context, are set before us with 
beautiful simplicity, yet with surpassing grandeur, 
the theme, the design, and the method, of the 
Christian ministry : — the theme is God reconciling 
the world to himself; a subject compared with 
which the negotiations of hostile nations and the 
treaties which put an end to the horrors of war, 
and bind in concord the fiercest passions of hu- 
manity, are matters of only momentary and limited 
importance : — ^the design of the ministry, which is 
strictly in harmony with its theme, is to bring sin- 
ful men into actual reconciliation with God, on the 
ground of that system of mediation through Christ 
which God himself has devised and proclaimed: — 
and its method is the earnestness of persuasion 
addressed to the rebel heart of man, to induce him 
to lay aside his enmity against his offended Sove- 
reign, and to accept this ofifer of a gracious amnesty. 
The union and the harmony of these three views 

B 



2 THE APOSTOLIC 

of the ministry are singularly impressive : he who 
leaves out the great scheme of Christian reconci- 
liation from his habitual ministrations, omits the 
divinely appointed theme; he who does not su- 
premely aim to bring sinners into a state of actual 
friendship with God, falls short of the design of 
the sacred office ; while he who does not employ 
all the arts and efforts of persuasion, mistakes, or 
at least undervalues, the divinely inspired method 
of fulfilling its duties. 

As the apostle is writing to a Christian church, 
it is perhaps a matter of surprise to some that he 
should entreat them to be reconciled to God, who 
by their very profession of religion must have been 
supposed to be already in that state. Upon look- 
ing attentively at the passage as it stands in the 
Bible, the reader will perceive that the pronouns 
of the second person are in italics, intimating that 
they are not in the original Greek, but are supplied 
in our English translation to complete the sense ; 
consequently any other term that would accomplish 
this better may be substituted for them. If there- 
fore we put the substantive "men," instead of the 
pronoun "you" in the first clause of the verse, and 
the third personal pronoun "them" for the second 
personal pronoun " you" in the latter clause, we 
shall avoid the improbability of his calling upon 
professing Christians to come into a state to which 
they must be supposed to have already attained, and 



MINISTRY. 3 

shall bring out what the apostle intended to set 
forth, the usual manner in which he discharged the 
functions of his momentous office ; and with this 
alteration it would read thus, " As ambassadors for 
Christ, as though God did beseech men by us, we 
pray them in Christ^s stead to be reconciled to 
Qod" It was as if he had said, " wherever we 
go, we find men in unprovoked hostility, invete- 
rate enmity, and mad rebellion against God^s holy 
nature^ law, and government. We carry with us, 
as his ambassadors, the proclamation of mercy 
through the mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
We tell them that wq are appointed by the God 
whom they have oflFended, and who could over- 
whelm them with the terrors of his justice, to 
call upon them to lay down their arms and accept 
the oflFer of eternal pardon and peace : but we find 
them every where so bent upon their sins, and the 
enjoyment of their worldly occupations and posses- 
sions, that we are compelled to use the language of 
the most vehement entreaty, and to beseech and 
implore them in God^s name, and in Christ^s 
stead, to come into a state of reconciliation.^^ 

The apostle not only used the most intense 
earnestness of entreaty, as an expression of his 
own concern, but he told the objects of his im- 
ploring anxiety that his importunity for their 
welfare was but an imitation of, and a substitute 
for, that of God himself — that his beseeching 
b2 



4 THE APOSTOLIC 

solicitation to them, on behalf of their own salva- 
tion^ was uttered in Christ^s stead. This is the 
most wonderful scene that the universe will ever 
witness — a beseeching God, an imploring Saviour, 
standing at the door of the sinner^s heart with 
eternal salvation in his hand, knocking for en- 
trance and begging to be let in; the insulted 
Omnipotent Creator of the universe, beseeching a 
worm, whom a volition of his will could sink in a 
moment to perdition, and whose justice would be 
glorified in the act, to accept his pardoning mercy, 
and waiting year after year, in all long-suflFering, 
for the sinner's reconsideration of his obstinate 
refusals. Be astonished, heavens! at God's un- 
utterable mercy, and be horribly afraid, earth !" 
at man's indescribable wickedness ! Here is the 
climax of God's divine love, and man's desperate 
depravity. Divine benevolence did not reach its 
uttermost when Jesus Christ was nailed to the 
cross ; that was reserved for the scene before us. 

I might with ineffable delight expatiate at length 
on this scene of matchless mercy, but let us pass 
on to other applications of the passage appropriate 
to the subject before us; and what a view does it 
give us of the Christian ministry^It is an embassy 
from God to man, and therefore most dignified and 
honourable ! I admit that it is only in a qualified 
sense that the title and office of an " ambassador" 
for Christ can be appUed to the ordinary ministers 



MINISTRY. 5 

of the gospel; but in such a subordinate sense it 
may be applied to them^ since they are ordained to 
do what he would do were he personally present ; 
they are to propose the same blessings^ to lay down 
the same terms of peace^ as he would^ were he again 
on earth; and therefore are^ so far^ his ambas- 
sadors : and if the honour of an ambassador be in 
proportion to the power and glory of the sovereign 
who employs him^ what is the dignity of him who 
is the ambassador of the King of Kings^ and Lord 
of Lords; and at the same time^ what ought to 
be the sanctity of his conduct^ and the elevation 
of his character ? If nothing unworthy of the 
monarch who sends him^ and the nation which he 
^represents^ should be done by him who is des- 
patched on an embassy to a foreign court and 
people^ how vigilant and solicitous to do nothing 
unworthy of God and his Christ, should he be 
whose business it is to negotiate with man the 
weighty affairs of judgment and of mercy from 
heaven ! If he bears the dignity of this office, let 
him couple with it a corresponding dignity of 
character. How natural, how just, how necessary 
the reflection, " I am an ambassador for Christ : 
what manner of person ought I to be in all holy 
conversation and godliness ? What should / be 
who represent, so far as my office is concerned, 
the majesty of heaven and earth ? " 
The ministry of the gospel is shown in this 



b THE APOSTOLIC 

passage to be an embassy of peace : this is its very 
designation, "the ministry of reconcilia- 
tion/' Never was any thing more beautiful and 
important, expressed or conceived : nothing could 
be devised to throw over the ministry a charm of 
greater loveliness. If in one hand the preacher of 
the gospel carry the sword of the Spirit, it is only 
to slay the sin; while he holds forth the olive 
branch in the other, as the token of peace and life 
to the sinner. He enters the scene of strife and 
discord to harmonize the jarring elements, and goes 
to the field of conflict to reconcile the contending 
parties. It is his to proclaim the treaty of man's 
peace with God, to explain its terms, to urge its ac- 
ceptance and to bring the sinner into friendship* 
with his offended lawgiver; to carry peace into 
man's troubled bosom, and reconcile him to his own 
conscience ; to cast out the enmities and prejudices 
of his selfish and depraved heart, and to unite him: 
by charity to his fellows ; to calm down the violence 
of his temper, and give him peace at home ; and 
then to conduct him to the realms of undisturbed 
tranquillity in the celestial world. This is his 
business. Angels hover over him in his course^ 
and chant over his labours their ancient song^ 
"Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, 
good will toward men ;" redeemed men and wo- 
men saved by his instrumentality from the wrath of 
God, the stings of conscience, and the turbulence of 



MINISTRY. 7 

passion^ hail him in the language of the prophet^ 
" How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet 
of him that bringeth good tidings^ that publisheth 
peace;" while the Saviour himself pronounces 
upon him the beatitude^ " Blessed are the peace- 
makers^ for they shall be called the children of God." 
Honoured and happy man ! Minister of reconcili- 
ation ! Friend and promoter of peace ! the world 
knoweth thee not, because it knew not Christ; 
nor, perhaps, does even the church duly appreci- 
ate, or adequately reward, thy services ; but even 
now thy work is its own reward: peace attends 
upon thy steps, and its blessings spring up in 
thy path. 

But still it is an embassy of difficulty. It is to 
treat vrith those who are unwilling to be saved, 
and to persuade the sinful, proud, and stubborn 
hearts of men to capitulate to holiness and grace. 
The minister carries the offer of infinite and inef- 
fable blessedness, but it is to men who have no 
taste for that species of felicity. His were an easy 
office did he find men every where predisposed 
to close in with the proposals of infinite benevo- 
lence ; but he meets wherever he goes with hearts 
not only indifferent, but hostile, to his message. 
The parable which represents the excuses made 
for not coming to the marriage feast, is still ap- 
pUcable to the children of men in reference to 
the invitations of the gospel : men are as they ever 



^ . THE APOSTOLIC 

were, too busy, or too well satisfied with their en- 
joyments and possessions, to care about salvation. 
They are madly set upon the objects of the present 
world ; they are asleep, and need to be roused ; 
careless, and need to be interested ; indolent, and 
need to be stimulated ; and it is with the greatest 
difficulty we can engage their attention to the in- 
visible realities of eternity. No one can form a 
true estimate of the nature, design, and difficulties 
of the ministerial office, who leaves out of view 
the desperate wickedness of the human heart: 
and the reason why there is so little of that hard 
labour, and intense earnestness, and beseeching 
entreaty, in the ministers of the gospel, is, that 
there is the want of that deep conviction, or pro- 
per consideration, of the resistance to their endea- 
vours which is perpetually meeting them from the 
sinner^s heart. 

This brings us to the subject of the present 
discourse, and that is the necessity of an earnest 
MINISTRY. Nothing le^s than earnestness can 
succeed in any cases of great difficulty, and the 
earnestness must of course be in proportion to the 
difficulty to be surmounted. Great obstacles can- 
not be overcome without intense application of the 
mind. How then can the work of the ministry 
be accomplished ? Every view we can take of it 
replies, " Only by earnestness." Every syllable of 
the apostle's language replies, " Only by earnest- 



MINISTRY. 9 

ness/' Every survey we can take of human nature 
replies, "Only by earnestness/' Every recoil 
lection of our own experience, as well as every 
observation we can make of the experience of 
others, replies, "Only by earnestness/' This, 
this, is what we want, and must have, if the ends 
of the gospel are ever to be extensively accom- 
plished — an EARNEST ministry. 

We have heard much of late about a learned * 
ministry, and God forbid we should ever be afflicted 
by so great an evil as an unlearned one. We have 
been often reminded of the necessity of an educated 
ministry ; and in this case, as in every other, men 
must be educated for their vocation; but then that 
education must be strictly appropriate and specific. 
We are very properly told from many quarters, we 
can do nothing without a pious ministry. This 
is very true, nor can any truth bearing upon this 
subject be more momentous ; for of all the curses 
which God ever pours from the vials of his wrath 
upon a nation which he intends to scourge, there 
is not one so fearful as giving them up to an 
unholy ministry. I trust our churches will ever 
consider piety as the first and most essential quali- 
fication in their pastors, for which talents, genius, 
learning, and eloquence, would and could be no 
substitutes. It will be a dark and evil day when 
personal godliness shall be placed second to any 
thing else in those who serve at the altar of God. 



i 



10 THE APOSTOLIC MINISTRY. 

But still there is something else wanted in addition 
to natural talent^ to academic trainings and even 
to the most fervent evangelical piety^ and that is^ 
intense devotedness. This is the one things more 
than any or all other things, that is wanting in 
the modem pulpit, and that has been wanting in 
most ages of the Christian church. In a valuable 
article in a late number of the British Quarterly 
Review, the following sentence occurs : ^^ No 
ministry will be really effective, whatever may be 
its intelligence, which is not a ministry of strong 
faith, true spirituality, and deep earnestness,^' I 
wish this golden sentence could be inscribed in 
characters of light over every professor's chair, 
over every student's desk, and over every preach- 
er's pulpit. Condensed into that one short para- 
graph is every thing that needs be said on this 
subject. I feel as though every syllable I have to 
write were superfluous, if all our pastors, students, 
and tutors, would let that one sentence take full 
occupation of their hearts, possess their whole 
souls, and regulate all their conduct. The most 
I can hope to accomplish is to expand and 
enforce it. 



CHAPTER 11. 

THE NATURE OF EARNESTNESS. 

Perhaps there is scarcely one single phrase 
more frequently employed in the sphere of human 
activity, or better understood, than this, — Be in 
EARNEST. What distinctness of aim, what fixed- 
ness of purpose, what resoluteness of will, what 
diligence, patience, and perseverance of action, are 
implied or expressed in these three words. He 
who would stimulate indolence, quicken activity, 
and inspire hope ; he who would breathe his own 
soul into the soul of another, and kindle the en- 
thusiasm which glows in his own bosom, says to 
his fellow, *'Be in earnest:" and that short sen- 
tence, uttered by his lips, has often been like a 
scintillation flying off from his own ardent mind, 
which lighting upon the spirit of the individual 
whom he was anxious to move to some great 
enterprise, has lighted up the flames of enthu- 
siasm there also. And what else, or what less, 
does Jesus Christ say to every one|whom he sends 
into the work of the Christian ministry than, 
" Be in earnest ?" 

There is something in the aspect and power of 
earnestness, whatever be its object, that is impres- 



12 NATURE OP 

sive and commanding. To see a man selecting 
some one object of pursuit, and then yielding up 
himself to the desire of its attainment, with a sur- 
render which admits of no reserve, a steadiness of 
aim which allows of no diversion, and a diligence 
which consents neither to rest nor intermission; 
which is so uppermost in his heart as to fill his 
conversation, and so entirely and constantly before 
his mind as to throw into its broad shadow every 
other subject of consideration, and which borrows 
from the intensity of his own feeling a strange 
fascination to engage the feelings of others, — such 
an instance of decision, amounting to a ruling 
passion, exerts over us, while witnessing it, an 
influence which we feel to be contagious. We in- 
voluntarily sympathise with the individual who is 
thus carried away by his own fervour ; and if at 
the same time it be an earnestness for promoting 
our own interests, the effect is all but irresistible. 
That man must be a stone, and destitute of the 
ordinary feelings of humanity, who can see another, 
interested, active, and zealous for his welfare, while 
he himself remains inert and indifferent. Even 
the apathetic and indolent have sometimes been 
kindled into ardour, and led to make efforts for 
themselves, by the solicitude which others have 
manifested for their welfare. 

How strictly does this apply to the ministry of 
God's word, which relates to the most momentous 



EARNESTNESS. 13 

matters that can engage the attention of the hu-* 
man understanding. Sympathy is a law of our 
mental economy which has never been sufficiently 
taken into the account in estimating the influences 
which God employs for the salvation of men. 
There is a silent and almost unconscious process 
of thought and sympathy often going on in the 
mind of those who are listening to the sermons of 
a preacher really labouring for the conversion of 
souls. — " Is he so earnest about my salvation, and 
shall I care nothing about the matter? Is my 
eternal happiness so much in his account, and 
shall it be nothing in mine? I can meet cold 
logic with counter-arguments; or at any rate, I 
can raise up objections against evidence. I can 
smile at the artifices of rhetoric, and be merely 
pleased with the displays of eloquence. I can sit 
unmoved under sermons which seem intended by 
the preacher to raise my estimate of himself, but I 
cannot stand this earnestness about me. The 
man is evidently intent upon saving my soul. I 
feel the grasp of his hand laying hold of my arm, 
as if he would pluck me out of the fire. He has 
not only made me think, but he has made me 
feel. His earnestness has subdued me." 

But it will be necessary now to meet and 
answer the question, What is meant by an earnest 
ministry ? 

In the first place then, earnestness implies — > 



14 NATURE OP 

The selection of some one object of special pursuit, 
and a vivid perception of its value and importance. 
It is next to impossible for the mind to be intently 
employed, or the heart very deeply engaged, on a 
multiplicity of objects at once. We have not 
energy enough to be so divided and distributed. 
Our feelings, to run with force, must flow pretty 
much in one channel : the attention must be con- 
centrated, the purpose settled, the action directed 
to one thing, or there can be no efficiency. The 
earnest man is a man of one idea, and that one 
idea occupies, possesses, and fills his soul. To 
every other claimant upon his time, and regard, 
and labour, he says, "Stand by; I am engaged, I 
cannot attend to you; there is something else 
waiting for me.^' To that one thing he is com- 
mitted. There may be many subordinate matters 
amidst which he divides what may be called the 
surplus water, but the main current flows through 
one channel, and turns one great wheel. This 
''one thing I do," is his plan and resolution. 
Many wonder at his choice, many condemn it: 
no matter, he understands it, approves it, and 
pursues it, amidst the ignorance which cannot 
comprehend it, or the diversity of taste which 
cannot admire it. He is no double-minded man, 
unstable in all his ways, whose preference and 
purpose are shaken by every cross current of 
opinion. It is nothing to him what others do, or 



EARNESTNESS. 15 

what they say of his dohig: he must do that, 
whatever else he leaves undone. No one can be 
in earnest who has not thus made up his mind ; 
and he who has, and is resolutely bent upon it, 
keeps the object constantly before his mind ; his 
attention is so strongly and tenaciously fixed upon 
it, that even at the greatest distance, ^^like the 
Egyptian pyramids to travellers, it appears to him 
with a luminous distinctness, as if it were nigh, 
and beguiles the toilsome length of labour and 
enterprise by which he must reach it/' It is so 
conspicuous before him that he does not deviate a 
step from the right direction, he hears a voice ever 
calling him onward, and every movement and every 
day becomes an approximation. Break in upon 
him at any moment, you know where you shall 
find him and how employed. 

This is the first part of the description of an 
earnest minister : he too has selected his object, 
and made up his mind concerning it, and insulat- 
ing it from all others, sets it clearly and distinctly 
before his mind ; — and what is it ? What should 
it be ? Not science, nor literature, nor philosophy; ' 
not a life spent in the acquisition of knowledge, nor 
the gratification of taste ; not the power of adding 
to the treasures of national elegance in the depart- 
ment of letters, nor to the ornaments which em- 
bellish our civilised existence, and give amenity to 
our social intercourse. The man who has entered 



16 NATUEE OF 

the sacred office merely to luxuriate in the haunts 
of the muses^ has mistaken his errand to the pulpit, 
and is no less guilty, though somewhat less sordid, 
than he who says, " Put me into the priest^s office, 
that I may eat a morsel of bread." That a minister 
may to a certain extent, indulge a literary or sci- 
entific taste, and that he may even make it subser- 
vient to a higher andmore sacred object, is admitted. 
The pulpit has done, and is doing, much service in 
all the departments of learning and philosophy. It 
is in Christian countries that the valuable remains 
of Eastern, Greek, and Roman wisdom and elo- 
quence have been preserved, studied, imitated, and 
sometimes even excelled. Christian nations have 
conducted philosophical inquiries with the best 
success, and improved them for the most useful 
and benevolent purposes. 

*' If these things are good and profitable unto society, 
a large portion of the honour of such usefulness belongs 
to men set for the defence of the gospel, desirous by 
sound reasoning to convince gainsayers, and conscious 
what arms human literature furnishes for this holy war. 
And then in addition to all this, consider the effect of the 
pulpit upon what might be called the popular mind. To 
thousands who have comparatively little leisure or oppor- 
tunity to form their taste, and cultivate their rational 
powers, by conversation with the wise and enlightened, 
or by reading their works, a school is thus open, estab- 
lished indeed for higher purposes, where men of sound 
understandings, though low in rank, may, without ex- 



EARNESTNESS. 17 

pense, and almost without intending it, learn from ex- 
ample to distinguish or connect ideas, to infer one truth 
from another, to examine the force of an argument, and 
«o to arrange and express their sentiments as deeply to 
impress themselves and others. As in a few years the 
child gradually acquires the faculty of speaking his 
mother-tongue with a considerahle degree of ease and 
fluency, without any formal lessons, merely hy hearing it 
spoken, so there is a natural logic and rhetoric which 
some acquire without designing it, who go to church for 
nobler ends, whereby they are enabled to detect the 
cunning craftiness which the enemies of religion or of 
public tranquillity, lie in wait to deceive. Indeed the 
culture of the talents and improvement of that respectable 
class of men who earn their bread by the sweat of their 
brow, generally rise^ or falls in proportion to the character 
and genius of their religious instructors."* 

This is as true as it is beautiful, and should 
remind til ministers of the gospel of the necessity 
and importance at all times, but especially in such 
times as these, of keeping in mind the collateral 
and secondary objects of pulpit instruction, and of 
preparipg themselves for conducting it with power 
and eflScicncy. There is not a temporal interest 
of man as an individual, or of society, on which 
the sermons and general influence of the ministry 
may not be made to bear advantageously; but 
then it must never be forgotten that these things 
which have just been enumerated are at best only 

* Discourses by Dr. John Erskine. 
C 



18 NATUBB OF 

the incidental^ secondary^ and collateral benefits 
of the ministry of the word : they are among the 
many things that may be touched, but are not the 
one thing that must be grasped : they are like the 
little lateral rills which may be led oflf from the 
main stream for the purpose of irrigation, but are 
not the great body of water that rolls onward 
in its channel for the purpose of commerce and 
national advancement. 

Nor is it the great object of our ministry merely 
to preside with dignity over the solemnities of 
public worship; to content ourselves and please 
our people with preparing and delivering two 
well-studied discourses on the Sabbath ; to keep 
all quiet and orderly in the church ; to maintain a 
kind of religious respectability and intellectuality 
in the congregation; and to infuse into them 
much of the element of political power. The end 
and aim of the ministry are to be gathered from 
the apostle's solemn and comprehensive language, 
"They watch for your souls as they that 
MUST GIVE ACCOUNT." There, in that short, but 
sublime and awful sentence, the end of the pastoral 
office is set before us. The design of the pulpit is 
identical with that of the cross : and the preacher 
is to carry out the design of the Saviour in 
coming to seek and to save that which was lost. 
Preaching and teaching are the very agency which 
Jesus Christ employs to save those souls for which 



EARNESTNESS. 19 

he died upon Calvary. If souls are not saved^ 
whatever other designs are accomplished, the great 
purpose of the ministry is defeated. 

We are now prepared to understand what is 
the nature of real earnestness in a minister of 
Christ; — a distinct, explicit, practical recognition 
of his duty to labour for the salvation of souls as 
the end of his office. Such a man has settled 
with himself that this is his vocation and business. 
He has looked at every thing else which could be 
presented to his mind, has weighed the claims of 
all, and with intelligence and firmness has said, and 
is prepared to stand by his affirmation, " I watch 
for souls.^^ He thus understands his errand ; he 
is under no mistake, no uncertainty, no confusion. 
He has entered into fellowship with God the Father 
in bis eternal purpose of the salvation of the 
human race ; with the Son in the end of his incar- 
nation and death ; and with the Holy Spirit in his 
coming down upon our desolate world. Of this 
salvation, which is the object of his ministry, the 
prophets enquired; to accomplish it apostles 
preached, and angels ministered ; and thus justi- 
fied in his choice by the Triune God and the noblest 
of his creatures in the universe, he leaves far below 
him, in the aspirations and the soarings of his 
ambition, the scholar, the philosopher, and the 
poet. He has taken up an object in reference to 
which, if he succeed but in a single instance, he 
c2 



20 NATUEE OP 

will have achieved a triumph which will endure 
infinite ages after the proudest monuments of 
human genius have perished like a garland in the 
conflagration of the world. 

'' The salvation of souls " as the great object of 
the ministerial office^ is a generic phrase^ including 
as its species, the awakening of the unconcerned ; 
the guidance of the enquiring ; the instruction of 
the uninformed ; and the sanctification, comfort, 
and progress of those who through grace have 
believed — in short the whole work of grace in the 
soul. But the attention of the reader is directed 
to the first of these particulars as the most com- 
manding object of ministerial solicitude, — I mean 
the conversion of the unregenerate ; and if without 
an oflfence of the law of modesty I may refer to my 
own history, labour, and success, I would observe, 
that I began my ministry, even as a student, with 
a strong desire after this object ; and long before 
this^ while yet a youth engaged in secular concerns, 
I had been deeply susceptible of the power of an 
awakening style of preaching, which was strength- 
ened by the perusal of the rousing sermons of Dr. 
Davies,* of New Jersey. From that time to the 
present I have made the conversion of the impeni- 
tent the great end of my ministry, and I have had 

* 1 wish these discourses were better known and more imi- 
tated by our young ministers. They are admirable specimens, 
formed upon the model of Baxter, of persuasive, hortatory, and 



EARNESTNESS. 21 

iny reward. I have been sustained in this course 
by the remarks of Baxter in his "Reformed Pastor/^ 
a long extract from which I must now be permit- 
ted to introduce. 

" We must labour in a special manner for the conver- 
sion of the unconverted. The work of conversion is the 
great thing we must drive at ; after this we must labour 
with all our might. Alas ! the misery of the unconverted 
is so great that it calleth loudest to us for compassion. 
If a truly converted sinner do fall, it will be but into sin 
which will be pardoned, and he is not in that hazard of 
damnation by it as others are. Not but that God hateth 
their sins as well as others, or that he will bring them to 
heaven, let them live ever so wickedly; but the spirit 
that is within them will not suffer them to live wickedly, 
nor to sin as the ungodly do. But with the unconverted 
it is far otherwise. They ' are in the gall of bitterness, 
and in the bond of iniquity,' and have yet no part nor 
fellowship in the pardon of their sins, or the hope of 
glory. We have therefore a work of greater necessity to 
do for them, even * to open their eyes, and to turn them 
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto 
God; that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an 
inheritance among them who are sanctified.' He that 
seeth one man sick of a mortal disease, and another ^only 
pained with the tooth- ache, will be moved more to com- 
passionate the former than the latter; and will surely 
make more haste to help him, though he were a stranger, 
and the other a brother or a son. It is so sad a case to 

impressive preaching. It is such preaching we want. In these 
striking discourses may be seen what I mean by earnest preach- 
ing. They are by no means scarce, and I would advise my 
younger brethren to buy and read them. 



22 NATURE OP 

see men in a state of damnation, wherein, if they should 
die, they are lost for ever, that methinks we should not 
be able to let them alone, either in public or private, 
whatever other work we have to do. I confess I am fre- 
quently forced to neglect that which should tend to the 
further increase of knowledge in the godly, because of the 
lamentable necessity of the unconverted. Who is able to 
talk of controversies, or of nice, unnecessary points, or 
even of truths of a lower degree of necessity, how excel- 
lent soever, while he seeth a company of ignorant, carnal, 
miserable sinners before his eyes, who must be changed 
or damned? Methinks I even see them entering upon 
their final woe ! Methinks I hear them crying out for 
lielp — for speediest help ! Their misery speaks the louder, 
because they have not hearts to ask for help themselves. 
Many a time have I known that I had some hearers of 
higher fancies, that looked for rarities, and were addicted 
to despise the ministry if I told them not something more 
than ordinary; and yet I could not find in my heart 
to turn from the necessities of the impenitent for the 
humouring of them; nor even to leave speaking to 
miserable sinners for their salvation, in order to speak so 
much as should otherwise be done to weak saints for 
their confirmation and increase in grace. Methinks as 
Paul's ' spirit was stirred within him,' when he saw ' the 
Athenians wholly given to idolatry,' so it should cast us 
into one of his paroxysms to see so many men in the 
greatest danger of being everlastingly undone. Methinks 
if by faith we did indeed look upon them as within a step 
of hell, it would more effectually untie our tongues than 
Croesus' danger did his son's. He that will let a sinner 
go down to hell for want of speaking to him, doth set 
less by souls than did the Redeemer of souls ; and less by 
his neighbour than common charity will allow him to do 



EARNESTNESS. 23 

by his greatest enemy. O therefore, brethren, whom- 
soever you neglect, neglect not the most miserable ! 
Whatever you pass over, forget not poor souls that are 
under the condemnation and curse of the law, and who 
may look every hour for the infernal execution if a speedy 
change do not prevent it. O call after the impenitent, 
and ply this great work of converting souls, whatever else 
you leave undone !" 

The editor of Baxter says : — 

** These powerful and impressive observations we can- 
not too earnestly recommend to the attention of ministers. 
We have no hesitation in saying that the most of preachers 
whom we have known were essentially defective in the 
grand and primary object of the Christian ministry, — 
labouring for the conversion of souls. From the general 
strain of some men's preaching, one would almost be 
ready to conclude that there were no sinners in their con- 
gregations to be converted. In determining the propor- 
tion of attention which a minister should pay to particular 
classes of his congregation, the number of each class, and 
the necessities of their case, are unquestionably the prin- 
cipal considerations which should weigh with him. Now 
in all our congregations we have reason to fear the uncon- 
verted constitute by far the majority; — their situation is 
peculiarly pitiable; their opportunities of salvation will 
soon be for ever over; their danger is not only very great, 
but very imminent ; they are not secure from everlasting 
misery, even for a single moment. Surely then the un- 
converted demand by far the largest share of the Christian 
minister's attention, and yet from many they receive but 
a ver)' small share of attention — their case, when noticed 
at all, is noticed only, as it were, by the bye. This no 
doubt is a principal cause that among us there are so few 



24 NATURE OF 

conversions by the preaching of the word, and especially 
in the congregations of particular ministers. We feel 
this subject to be of such transcendent importance that 
we trust we shall be excused for here introducing a quo- 
tation connected with it, from another work of our 
author, which has been introduced into the series of 
* Select Christian Authors.' " 

" It is not," says he in his " Mischiefs of Self- Igno- 
rance," " a general dull discourse, or critical observations 
upon words, or the subtile decision of some nice and 
curious questions of the schools, nor is it a neat and well- 
composed speech, about some other distant matters, that 
is like to acquaint a sinner with himself. How many 
sermons may we hear that are levelled at some mark or 
other which is very far from the hearer's hearts, and 
therefore are never likely to convince them, or open and 
convert them ? And if our congregations were in such a 
case as that they needed no closer quickening work, such 
preaching might be borne with and commended. But 
when so many usually sit before us that must shortly die, 
and yet are unprepared for death ; and that are condemned 
by the law of God, and must be pardoned or finally 
condemned : that must be saved from their sins that they 
may be saved from everlasting misery — I think it is time 
for us to talk to them of such things as most concern them, 
and that in such a manner as may most effectually con- 
vince, awaken, and change them. 

" A man that is ready to. be drowned is not at leisure 
for a song or a dance ; and a man that is ready to be 
hanged, methinks should not find himself at leisure to 
hear a man show his wit and reading only, if not his folly 
and malice, against a life of holiness. Nor should you 
think that suitable to such men's case that doth not evi- 
dently tend to save them. But alas ! how often have we 



EARNESTNESS. 2^ 

heard such sermons as tend more to diversion than direc- 
Hon, to fill their minds with other matters, and find them 
something else to think of, lest they should study them- 
selves, and know their misery ! A preacher that seems 
to speak religiousiy, hy a dry, sapless discourse, that is 
called a sermon, may more plausibly and easily ruin him. 
And his conscience will more quietly suffer him to be 
taken off the necessary care of his salvation, by something 
that is like it, and pretends to dp the work as well, than 
by the grosser avocations or the scorn of fools. And he 
will be more tamely turned from religion by something 
that is called religion, and which he hopes may serve the 
turn, than by open wickedness or impious defiance of 
God and reason. But how often do we hear sermons 
applauded, which force us in compassion to men's souls 
to think, * O what is all this to the opening of a sinner's 
heart unto himself, and shewing him his unregenerate 
state ? What is this to the conviction of a self-deluding 
soul, that is passing into hell, with the confident expecta- 
tions of heaven ? What is this to show men their undone 
condition, and the absolute necessity of Christ, and of 
renewing grace ? What is in this to lead men up from 
earth to heaven, and to acquaint them with the unseen 
world, and to help them to the life of faith and love, and 
to the mortifying and pardon of their sins V How little 
skill have many miserable preachers in the searching of 
the heart, and helping men to know themselves, whether 
Christ be in them, or whether they be reprobates ? And 
how little care and diligence is used by them to call men 
to the trial, and help them in the examining and judging 
of themselves, as if it were a work of no necessity? 
' They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people 
slightly, saying. Peace, peace, when there is no peace, 
laith the Lord.' " 



26 NATURE OF 

Oh what preachers we should be, could we drink 
into the spirit of these powerful passages ! May 
God impress them on our hearts, and lead us to 
mould our discourses after this fashion. We 
should, however, by no means be unmindful of 
the importance of building up the believer on his 
holy faith. Not only must the children of the 
redeemed family be born, but they must also be 
fed, watched, guided, and nourished up to man- 
hood. The growth in grace and in knowledge of 
the heirs of immortality must be an object of 
deep solicitude with the faithful pastor. His 
children in the faith are not glorified, as soon as 
converted, but are carried through a probation, 
and often a long one, of conflict, trial, and temp- 
tation ; and it is his business, by the instrumen- 
tality of the truth, deeply searched, carefully 
expounded, and appropriately apphed, to conduct 
them through the perplexities and the dangers of 
the divine life. Hence, therefore, it is the duty 
of the minister, not to be always dwelling on first 
principles, nor teaching the mere alphabet of Bible 
knowledge, but to lead his people " on unto per- 
fection ;" yet still amidst all this, he is never to 
forget that by far the greater number of those 
who are before him do not experimentally know 
these first principles, and have not learnt even 
this alphabet of practical piety. I once had a 
member of my church, who had been brought out 



E^ARNESTNESS. 27 

of the literary world to a deep, experimental 
knowledge of divine truth. She was a woman of 
uncommonly fine and tasteful mind. After her 
conversion she dwelt for a season in London, and 
on her return from the metropolis, in giving an 
account of the various preachers she had heard, 
expressed her surprise and regret that their 
sermons, however excellent, seemed to be addressed 
almost exclusively to true believers, as if they took 
it for granted that their congregations were com- 
posed wholly of such, and contained none who 
were dead in trespasses and sins. And I know 
a devoted and consistent Christian, who, upon 
leaving a minister whom he had attended for several 
years, declared he had scarcely ever heard one 
thoroughly practical sermon from him during the 
whole time : there had been much doctrinal state- 
ment, much theological science, much religious 
comfort ; but no vivid and pungent appeals either 
to saints or sinners: no wonder he knew of no 
conversions there : and yet this preacher is not an 
antinomian. 

Secondly. Earnestness implies that the sttb- 
ject has not only been selected, but that it has taken 
full possession of the mind, and has kindled towards 
it an intense desire of the heart. 

It is something more than the correctness of 
theory, and the deductions of logic ; more than 
the cool calculation of the judgment, and the 



28 NATURE OF 

play of the imagination — earnestness means that 
the understanding; having selected and appreciated 
its object; has pressed all the faculties of both 
mind and body into its pursuit. It urges the 
soul onward in its career of action at such a speed 
that it is set on fire by the velocity of its own 
motion. The object of an earnest man is never 
for any long period of time absent from his 
thoughts. He meditates on it by day^ and dreams 
of it by night : it meets him in his solitary walks 
as some bright vision which he loves to contem- 
plate, and it comes over him in company with 
such power that he cannot avoid making it the 
topic of his conversation, till he appears in the 
eyes of those who have no sympathy with him, in 
the light of an enthusiast. 

Foster in his "Essay on Decision of Character" 
has alluded to Howard as supplying a fine illus- 
tration of this mental quality. I furnish one 
extract bearing more directly than perhaps any 
other on our present theme. It relates to the 
singular fact that this great philanthropist turned 
not a moment from his course, when traversing 
those scenes most calculated to awaken curiosity, 
and to enkindle enthusiasm by the associations 
of ancient glory with which they are connected — 
even Rome itself. 

" The importance of his object held his faculties in a 
«tate of excitement which was too rigid to be affected by 



EARNESTNESS. 29 

lighter interests, and on which, therefore, the heauties of 
nature and art had no power: like the invisible spirits 
who fulfil their commission of philanthropy among mor- 
tals, and care not about pictures, statues, and sumptuous 
buildings. It implied an inconceivable severity of convic- 
tion that he had one thing to do ; and that he who would 
do some great thing in this short life, must apply himself 
to the work with such a concentration of his forces, as, to 
idle spectators, who live only to amuse themselves, looks 
like insanity. It was thus he made the trial, so seldom 
made, what is the utmost effect which may be granted to 
the last possible effort of a human agent ; and therefore 
what he did not accomplish, he might conclude to be 
placed beyond the sphere of mortal activity, and calmly 
leave to the disposal of Omnipotence." 

There, again, is the representation of the really 
and intensely earnest minister of Jesus Christ, 
and of the manner in which he regards th^ object 
of his ministry, — the salvation of immortal souls. 
He has drunk in the inspiration of those inexpres- 
sibly sublime and solemn words, so often already 
quoted, " They watch for your souls, as they that 
must give account, that they may do it with joy, 
and not with grief/* This declaration has come 
over him like a spell, from the fascination of which 
he neither tries nor wishes to escape. Whether 
seated in his chair in his study ; or carrying on 
the exercises of devotion in the closet ; or preaching 
the gospel in the pulpit ; or enjoying the pleasures 
of Christian friendship in the social circle; or 
recreating his energies amidst the beauties of 



30 NATURE OF 

creation^ the words of Solomon stand out conspi- 
cuously before his mind's eye, '* He that winneth 
souls is wise/' While, ever and anon, the 
thunder of Christ's awful inquiry comes pealing 
over his ear ; " What shall it profit a man if he 
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, or 
what shall a man give in exchange for his soul ? " 
To be useful in converting souls is his constant 
and practical aim : with a view to which his texts 
are chosen, his sermons are composed and deli- 
vered, and his language, figures, and illustrations 
are selected. That word usefulness has the 
same meaning in his ear, the same power over his 
soul, as the word " victory" has over the mind of 
the hero : and the preparation and delivery of the 
most eloquent sermons, with all the plaudits that 
follow them, will no more satisfy his ambition, 
than the skilful evolutions, the military splendour, 
and the martial music of a field-day, however they 
may be admired by the multitudinous spectators, 
will content the desires of the patriot-warrior who 
burns to defeat his country's foe upon the field of 
battle, and to rescue the liberties of his enslaved 
nation from the grasp of a tyrant. By the earnest 
minister, the salvation of souls is sought with the 
obligation of a principle, and the ardour of a pas- 
sion. It is impressed upon his whole character, and 
is inseparable from his conduct. It distinguishes 
him among, and from, many of his brethren. 



EARNESTNESS. 31 

When the congregations either at home or abroad 
go to hear him, they know what to expect, and 
consequently do not look for the flowers of rhetoric, 
but for the fruit of the tree of life ; not for a dry 
crust of philosophy, nor a petrifaction of criti- 
cism, but for the bread which cometh down from 
heaven ; not for a display of religious fire -works, 
splendid but useless, but for the holding up of the 
torch of eternal truth in all its bright light to guide 
the wandering and benighted souls to the refuge of 
the lost. He has by the usual style of his pulpit 
discourses established his character as a tiseful 
preacher, and those who go to hear him would as 
soon expect to listen to a mere poetical efi^usion 
or classical dissertation, instead of directions for 
health, from a physician whom they consulted in 
a time of sickness, as such matters from this ser- 
vant of Christ, instead of a sermon calculated and 
designed to do good to their souls. He could pos- 
sibly be eloquent, profound, or learned, and when 
these things can aid him in securing his one great 
end, he does not scruple to appear so. His aim is 
at the heart and conscience, and if the poetic, the 
literary, the logical, the scientific, will at any time 
so polish and plume the shaft, or sharpen the point 
of the arrow, he will not reject them, but will avail 
himself of their legitimate uses, that he may the 
more certainly hit and pierce the mark. This is his 
motto, " If by any means I might save some.'* 



32 NATURE OP 

But this touches a third thing implied in 
genuine earnestness^ and that is the stvdious inven- 
tion and diligent use of all appropriate means to 
accomplish the selected object. An earnest man is 
the last to be satisfied with mere formality, routine, 
and prescription. He will often survey his object, 
his means, and his instruments : will look back 
upon the past to review his course, to examine his 
failure and success, with the causes of each ; to 
learn what to do, and what to avoid for the future. 
His enquiry will often be. What next ? What 
more ? What better ? And as the result of all 
this, new experiments will be tried, new plans 
will be laid, and new courses will be pursued. 
With an inextinguishable ardour, and with a reso- 
lute fixedness of purpose, he exclaims, "I must 
succeed — How ?'' 

And shall we ministers possess nothing of this 
earnestness, if we are seeking the salvation of souls? 
Shall dull uniformity, stiflF formality, wearisome 
repetitions, and rigid routine, satisfy W5 ? Shall 
we never institute the inquiry, "Why have I not 
succeeded better in my ministry ? How is it that 
my congregation is not larger, and my church more 
rapidly increasing ? In what way can I account 
for it that the truth as it is in Jesus, which I 
believe I preach, is not more influential, and the 
doctrine of the cross is not, as it was intended to 
be, the power of God unto the salvation of souls ? 



EARNESTNESS. 33 

Why do I not more frequently hear addressed to 
me^ by those who are constantly under my minis- 
try, the anxious inquiry, * What shall I do to be 
saved V I am not wanting, as far as I know, in 
the regular discharge of my ordinary duties, and 
yet I gather little fruit of my labours, and have to 
utter continually the prophet^s complaint, ' Who 
hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm 
of the Lord revealed V '^ Do we indeed indulge 
in such complaints ! Have we earnestness enough 
to pour forth such lamentations ? Or is it of Uttle 
consequence to us, provided we get our stipend, 
keep up the congregation to its usual size, and 
maintain the tranquillity of the church, whether 
the ends of the ministry are accomplished or not ? 
Are we often seen by God's omniscient eye pacing 
our study in deep thoughtfulness, solemn medita- 
tion, and rigorous self-inquisition; and after an 
impartial survey of our doings, and a sorrowful 
lamentation that we are doing no more, question- 
ing ourselves thus ? '^ Is there no new method to 
be tried, no new scheme to be devised, to increase 
the efficiency of my ministerial and pastoral la- 
bours ? Is there nothing I can improve, correct, 
or add ? Is there any thing particularly wanting 
in the matter, manner, or method of my preaching, 
or in my course of pastoral attentions V Surely 
it might be supposed that such inquiries would be 
oitta instituted into the results of so momentous 



84 NATUBE OF 

a ministry as ours; that seasons would be not 
unfrequently set apart^ especially at the close or 
beginning of every year, for such a purpose. The 
result could not fail to be beneficial. 

Here it may be proper for us to look out of our 
own profession, and ask if the earnest tradesman, 
soldier, lawyer, philosopher, and mechanician, are 
satisfied to go on as they have done, though with 
ever so little success ? Do we not see in all other 
departments of human action, where the mind is 
really intent on some great object, and where 
success has not been obtained in proportion to the 
labour bestowed, a dissatisfaction with past modes 
of action, and a determination to try new ones ? 
And should we who watch for souls, and labour 
for immortality, be indifierent to success, and to 
the plans by which it might be secured ? In call- 
ing for new methods, we want no new doctrines ; 
no new principles ; no startling eccentricities ; no 
wild irregularities ; no vagaries of enthusiasm, nor 
phrensies of the passions ; no, nothing but what 
the most sober judgment and the soundest reason 
would approve ; but we do want a more inventive, 
as well as a more fervid zeal in seeking the 
great end of our ministry. Respectable but dull 
uniformity, and not enthusiasm, is the side on 
which our danger lies. I know very well the con- 
tortions of an epileptic zeal are to be avoided, 
but so also is the numbness of a paralytic one ; 



EARNESTNESS. 35 

and after all^ the former is less dangerous to life^ 
and is more easily and frequently cured, than the 
latter. We may, as regards our preaching for 
instance, examine whether we have not dwelt too 
little on the alarming, or on the attractive themes 
of revelation ? — whether we have not clothed our 
discourses too much with the terrors of the Lord ? 
and if so, we may wisely determine to try the 
more winning forms of love and mercy: or whether 
we have not rendered the gospel powerless by a 
perpetual repetition of it in common-place phrase- 
ology ? whether we have not been too argumenta- 
tive ? and resolve to be more imaginative^ prac- 
tical, and hortatory: whether we have not addressed 
ourselves too exclusively to believers ? and deter- 
mine to commence a style of more frequent and 
pungent address to the unconverted : whether we 
have not been too vague and general in our des- 
criptions of sin? and become more specific and 
discriminating : whether we have not been too 
neglectful of the young? and begin a regular 
course of sermons to them : whether we have not 
had too much sameness of topic ? and adopt 
courses of sermons on given subjects : whether we 
have not been too elaborate and abstract in the 
composition of our discourses ? and come down to 
greater simplicity : whether we have not been too 
careless ? and bestow more pains : whether we 
have not been too doctrinal ? and in future, make 
d2 



36 NATURE OF 

all truth bear, as it was intended to do^ upon the 
heart, conscience^ and life. 

Nor must the inquiry stop here. There ought 
to be the same process of rigid scrutiny instituted 
as to the labours of the pastorate. We must re- 
view the proceedings of this momentous depart- 
ment, for here also is most ample scope for inven- 
tion as to new plans of action. Perhaps upon in- 
quiry we shall find out that we have neglected 
various channels through which our influence might 
have been poured over the flock committed to our 
care, and shall discover many ways in which we 
can improve upon our former plans, in the way of 
meeting the inquirers after salvation, giving our 
aid to Sunday schools, setting up Bible classes^ or 
visiting the flock. What is needed is an anxious 
wish to be wanting in nothing that can conduce to 
our usefulness^ a diligent endeavour to make up 
every deficiency, and a mind ever inquisitive after 
new means and methods of doing good. Could 
we all but adopt the plan of setting apart a day at 
the close of every year for solemn examination 
into our ministerial and pastoral doings, with the 
view of ascertaining our defects and neglects^ to 
see in what way we could improve^ to humble our- 
selves before God for the past^ and to lay down 
new rules for the future^ we should all be more 
abundantly useful than we are. And does not 
earnestness require all this 7 Can we pretend to 



EARNESTNESS. 37 

be in earnest if we neglect these things ? The 
idea of a minister's going on from year to year 
with either little success^ or none at all, and yet 
never pausing to inquire how this comes to pass, 
or what can be done to increase his efficiency, is 
so utterly repugnant to all proper notions of de- 
votedness, that we are obliged to conclude, the 
views such a man entertains of the design and end 
of his office are radically and essentially defective. ' 

Fou RTHLY. Earnestness implies a purpose and 
power of subordinating every thing it meets with, 
selects, or engages in, to the accomplishment of its 
one great object. 

An earnest man has much sagacity in discerning 
objects, even at a distance, that are favourable to 
his purpose ; much power in seizing them as they 
approach ; and much tact in pressing them into 
his service, and weaving them into his schemes. 
He avoids at the same time the folly of letting go 
his main object in pursuit of inferior ones ; and 
of thus converting what ought to be only means 
into ends. The operations of his mind resemble 
those of a vast machine, in which the ruUng power 
subjects to itself the thousand httle wheels and 
spindles that are set in motion, and makes them all 
accomplish the purpose for which the engine has 
been set up. Or the current of his thought and 
feeling may be compared to the majestic flow of 
some noble river, which receives into its stream, and 



38 NATURE OF 

bears forward in its course, the numerous rivulets 
by which its waters are swollen, and its power in- 
creased. So acts the earnest minister. There 
are various matters which he may attend to, and 
ought not to neglect, which may with great pro- 
priety be considered as means, but which cannot 
be viewed as the end of his high and holy calling. 
The FIRST of these which I mention is leaiti- 
inff, and indeed, general knowledge of all kinds. 
^ Literature, science, and philosophy, however ex- 
cellent in themselves, and however subservient 
they may be rendered as means to accomplish the 
great ends of the ministerial office, must never be 
exalted into the place of the ends themselves. 
Viewed as subordinate and subsidiary, they cannot 
be too highly valued, nor too diligently sought. 
There is not any kind of knowledge, nor any 
degree of it, which may not be made tributary 
to the ends of gospel ministrations. All other 
things being equal, he is likely to be the most 
useful preacher, who is the most learned one. 
There is nothing, there can be nothing, in liter- 
» ature and science, which of themselves can be 
injurious to a minister of Christ : the pride and 
vanity which produce such a result are but as 
those weeds which flourish in a shallow and sandy 
soil, but which wither and die in rich, deep 
loam. , The man who decries learning as in itself 
mischievous to the ministry, is fit only to be torch 



EARNESTNESS. 39 

bearer to another Caliph Omar, and to act the part 
of an incendiary to all the libraries of the world. 
A minister may have too little piety, too little soli- 
citude for the salvation of souls, too little devoted- 
ness, too little care to render his acquisitions sub- 
servient to the ends of his vocation, but he can , 
never have too much knowledge. 

" Perhaps the best answer that can be given to those i 
inconsiderate Christians who say that religion needs not 
such foreign and meretricious aids as human learning, is 
that of South, — ' If God hath no need of our learning, he 
can have still less of your ignorance/ In the spiritual 
temple, as well as in the ark of the covenant, there is 
room not only for those humbler gifts, the skins and hair 
cloth, but also for the gold and silver of human learning : 
and even the sciences themselves, daughters as they are 
of the uncreated wisdom, may receive consecration from 
seraphic piety, and be made priestesses of the Most High, 
by the very service in which we employ them." 

How beautiful is the following language of Dr. 
Wiseman, and how correct the sentiment which 
it clothes and adorns ! 

"You all, I doubt not, have often admired those 
exquisite paintings in the ceilings in the Borgia apart- 
ments of the Vatican, wherein the sciences are repre- 
sented as holding their separate courts ; each enthroned 
upon a stately chair, with features and mien of the most 
noble and dignified beauty, surrounded by the emblems 
and most distinguished representatives of its power on 
earth, and seeming to claim homage from all that gaze 
upon it. And judge what would have been the painter's 



40 NATUBE OF 

conception, and to what a sublimity of expression be 
would have risen, bad it been bis task to represent the 
noblest of all sciences, our divine religion, enthroned, as 
ever becomes her, to receive the fealty and worship of 
these her handmaids. For if, as hath been proved, they 
are but ministers to her superior rule, and are intended to 
furnish the evidences of her authority, how much above 
theirs must be the comeliness, and grace, and majesty, and 
holiness, with which she must be arrayed ! And what 
honour and dignity must be conferred on him who feels 
himself deputed to bear the tribute of these fair vassals ; 
and how must his admiration of their graces be enhanced^ 
by finding himself brought so near her presence."* 

This splendid passage expresses what I would 
urgently enforce, that literature and science may 
be subservient, but must be only subservient to 
the ends of the ministerial office. 

Having thus quoted a passage from a Roman 
Catholic author, let me subjoin to it another from 
a Protestant, of a diflFerent kind indeed, but by no 
means inharmonious with it. The amiable and 
pious Doddridge, in his incomparable sermon on 
"The Evil and Danger of Neglecting Souls," 
says, 

"Oh my brethren, let us consider how fast we are 
posting through this dying life, which God has assigned 
to us, in which we are to manage concerns of infinite 
moment ; how fast we are passing on to the immediate 
presence of our Lord, to give up our account to him. 

* Dr. Wiseman's "Lectures on the Connexion between 
Science and Reveiaed Religion.'' Vol. II, p. 317. 



EARNESTNESS. 41 

You must judge for yourselves, but permit me to say for 
my own part, I would not for ten thousand worlds be 
that man, who, when God shall ask him at last how he ' 
has employed most of his time, while he continued a 
minister of his church and had the care of souls, shall be 
obliged to reply, * Lord, I hare restored many corrupted 
passages in the classics, and illustrated many which were 
before obscure; I hare cleared up many intricasies in 
chronology or geography ; I hare solved many perplexed 
cases in algebra ; I have refined on astronomicid calcula- 
tions, and left behind me many sheets on these curious 
and difficult subjects ; and these are the employments in 
which my life has been worn out, while preparations for 
the pulpit, and ministrations in it, did not demand my 
more immediate attendance/ Oh Sirs, as for the waters 
that are drawn from these springs, how sweetly soever 
they may taste to a curious mind that thirsts after them, 
or to an ambitious mind that thirsts for the applause they 
sometimes procure, I fear there is too often reason to 
pour them out before the Lord, with rivers of penitential 
tears, as the blood of souls which have been forgotten, 
whilst these trifles have been remembered and pursued." 

This is the language of a scholar^ a critic^ and 
a man of varied knowledge ; but whose piety as a 
Christian^ and whose devotedness as a minister^ 
were equal to his other attainments. 

In a very elaborate and able critique on Hagen- 
bach^s '' History of Doctrines/' contained in the 
Eclectic Review, for September, I find the follow- 
ing just and admirable remarks — 

*' We trust that among the rising ministry no one will 
allow himself to be tempted to the task for the mere repu- 



42 NATURE OF 

tation of learning. The real value of learning, in the 
estimate of a faithful servant of Christ, lies solely in the 
use that can be made of it. He who employs time and 
toil in rendering himself a learned man, which, employed 
otherwise, would more effectually render him a useful 
man, is unfaithful to his Master. There are few things 
more important than the right appreciation of learning. 
There are some who spend their whole lives in acquiring it, 
in amassing hoard upon hoard ; — as if it were the object 
of life to try how much may be got in a given time ; not 
how much good nay be done with it, or to what uses it 
may be turned as it is acquired. It is get, get, get ; all 
getting and no giving. This is of a piece with the mania 
by which some are possessed in the mercantile world — the 
mania of money-making : — with whom life's problem is — 
how they may die rich — how much they can be worth in the 
world, before the moment comes when they must leave it. 
There is one material difference between the two cases; 
and, strange to say, it is in favour of the rich rather than 
of the learned man. The rich man leaves his amassed 
treasures behind him ; so that, although to himself they 
have been of little use while he lived, and now are 
of none, they are not lost; others may use them, 
and use them well. But he who has been acquiring 
learning all his days, without expending it in its appro- 
priate uses, leaves nothing behind him. He carries all 
with him. There is no bank for deposits of learning, as 
there is for lodging silver and gold. So far as his fellow- 
men are concerned, therefore, the money-hoarding miser 
does most good. And should it be thought an advantage 
on the side of the miser in learning, that he carries his 
mental stores away with him — as being treasures that 
belonged to the immortal mind — there are two serious 
deductions to be made from this advantage ; — the first. 



EARNESTNESS. 43 

that the large proportion of what he had acquired, is of a 
nature to he of little use to him, in all likelihood, in the 
world to which he is going; — and the second, that in 
common with the man of wealth, he carries with him to 
that world, the guilt, (un thought of by him here, it may 
be, but noted in his account with his Divine Master,) of 
not having laid out his acquisitions for the good he might 
have accomplished by them, where and when alone they 
could be available. Let it not be forgotten that mere 
learning is not wisdom;, that wisdom is learning or know- 
ledge in union with the disposition and ability to make a 
right use of it. — Neither let it be forgotten that there is 
an opposite extreme to that which has just been described. 
If there are some who are ever getting and never giving, 
there are some too who would fain be ever giving, while 
they are never getting. They are fond of preaching, but 
not of reading and study. Such young ministers may be 
well-meaning; — but they are under the influence of a 
miserable mistake. Itinerants they may be, and useful 
ones : but efficient pastors they can never be. They may 
preach the simple elements of the gospel, from place to 
place ; but for the constant regular instruction of the same 
flock they are utterly unfit. lie must be an extraordinary 
man who has resources in himself for such a work, that 
render him independent of reading and study. Barren- 
ness, tameness, sameness, triteness, irksome and unprofi- 
table repetition, must be the almost invariable result of 
such presumption. There are some too, who, by way of 
honouring the Bible, make it their rule to study nothing 
else, — not even such human helps as may fit them for 
understanding and illustrating its contents. This also, 
though a better extreme than his, who neglecting the 
Bible itself, studies only human opinions about it, yet is 
still an extreme^ and an extreme which, while it professes 



44 NATURE OF 

to put honour upon the Bible, indicates no small measure 
of self-sufficiency. We put most honour upon the Bible, 
when we manifest our impression of the value of a full 
and clear comprehension of its contents, in the diligent 
application of all accessible means for the attainment 
of it."* 

It might be conceded^ that we live in an age 
when, to carry out the main purpose of the Chris- 
tian ministry, and to render it efficient for the sal- 
vation of souls, there are required higher minis- 
terial qualifications, and larger acquirements of 
general knowledge, than at some former periods. 

It will be clearly seen from all this, that I 
am not decrying education, or learning, or the 
greatest diligence in ministers for the acquisition 
of knowledge. Quite the contrary: but I am 
enforcing with all the earnestness I can command 
the indispensable necessity of rendering all acquire- 
ments subordinate to the great work of saving 
souls. Learning as an ultimate object, and for 
its own sake, is infinitely below the ambition of a 
holy and devoted servant of Christ ; but learning 
employed to invigorate the intellect, to enrich the 
imagination, to cultivate the taste, to give power 
to thought, and variety to illustration ; to add to 

* The whole critique, of which this is a quotation, is of ines- 
timable value, and makes one rejoice that we have periodicals, 
and able writers for them too, all, to use this writer's own 
remark, ** too old-fashioned and puritanical to endure'' much 
of what is now coming from even the orthodox German school 



EARNESTNESS. 45 

the skill and energy with which we wield the 
weapons of our warfare^ — is in some cases indis- 
pensable^ and in all invaluably. Unhappily it is 
not uncommon for those who have made large 
acquisitions in varied learnings and acquired a 
scientific, philosophic, or literary taste, to yield to 
the seductions of these pursuits, and to allow 
themselves to be led astray from the simplicity 
that is in Christ Jesus. Their eye is not single, 
and their whole body is not full of light. If there 
is one man to be admired, envied, and imitated 
above all others, it is he who has baptized all his 
classic and scientific acquirements at the font of 
Christianity, — has presented them at the foot of 
the cross, and has used them only as the instru- 
ments and the materials of that divine art by 
which he is enabled to give a richer colouring, a 
stronger light, or greater power to those facts and 
scenes, of which the cross is the centre and the 
symbol. To hear such a man chastening and 
guiding, but not checking or .freezing the gush- 
ing utterances of a full heart, by the standard 
of genuine eloquence; and warming and sancti- 
fying the finest specimens of rhetoric by 
the glow of a soul on fire with the passion 
of love to God and souls; to see the genius 

of theology ; periodicals and writers, that will continue, it is 
ardently hoped, to use their critical and evangelical sieve to 
winnow the works which in such numbers are now being trans- 
lated from Grerman into English : and which though they have 
much wheat, have also some chaff. 



46 NATUEE OF 

of Tally and Demosthenes^ clothing itself with 
the mantle of Paul^ Peter^ and John^ and under 
the constraining love of Christ, employing all its 
resources of diction, of dialectics, and of metaphor, 
to persuade men to be reconciled to God, — is the 
accomplished earnestness which the pulpit deserves 
and demands. Such a minister is a polished shaft 
in Jehovah^s quiver, and to such a preacher we can 
almost fancy that not only men but angels must 
Usten with delight. Such preachers we have had, 
and by the divine blessing may have again : only 
let us use the means, and look to have our tongues 
touched with the live coal from the divine altar. 

There is, however, too much truth in the follow- 
ing remarks of Dr. Vaughan. — 

" The effect of learning and elegant scholarship, in the 
modem pulpit, has commonly been to render men inca- 
pable of producing impression of this nature in any 
degree. In the case of such preachers, neither the dic- 
tion they use, nor the mould into which they cast their 
expressions and sentences, nor the comparisons they in- 
troduce, nor any thing belonging to their rhetoric, has 
been an object of study with a view to its fitness to secure 
attention, and to move the thoughts and passions of such 
assembUes as are generally convened by the preacher — 
assemblies made up from the popular, much more than 
from the thoroughly educated classes of society. The 
great object of this class of preachers has been to acquit 
themselves learnedly, or to acquit themselves elegantly. 
It is grievous to witness the mischiefs which have resulted 
from this conventionalism in pulpit taste. If our pulpit 



EARNESTNESS. 47 

lessons must be veiled in the language of a particular 
kind of scholarship, then the people generally, and even 
men of good natural parts, who have not been initiated 
into that scholarship, will fail to perceive our meaning, 
and will begin as the consequence, to cast about for some 
better employment than listening to the utterance of our 
unknown tongue." * 

I go on now to mention another qualification 
for the sacred oflSce, and which the earnest 
minister will anxiously cultivate with a view to 
the great object of his life and labours, and to 
which I advance with a praying mind, an anxious 
heart, and a trembling hand, ardently desirous to 
set it forth in such manner as shall secure for it 
the attention which its importance demands ; I 
mean personal religion. We are weak in the 
pulpit, because we are weak in the closet. An ear- 
nest man will not only train his mind to understand 
his object, and draw around him the resources requi- 
site for its accomplishment, but will discipline his 
heart : for there, within, is the spring of his ener- 
gies, the seat of impulse, and the source of power. 
There the life that quickens must reside, and thence 
it must be felt to emanate. If the heart beat feebly, 
the whole circulation must be sluggish, and the 
frame inert. So it is with us ministers : our own 
personal religion is the mainspring of all our power 
in the pulpit. We are feeble as preachers, be- 

* Modem Pulpit, pp. 23, 24. 



48 NATURE OF 

cause we are feeble as Christians. Whatever other 
deficiencies we have, the chief of all lies in the 
heart. The apostle said, " We believe, and there- 
fore speak.^' We not only speak what we believe, 
but as we believe : if the faith be weak, so will be 
the utterance. In another place the same inspired 
^ writer said, "Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we 
persuade men/^ It was when standing as amidst 
the solemnities of the last judgment, that apostles 
besought men to be reconciled to God. The 
flame of zeal which in their ministrations rose to 
such a height and intensity as to subject them to 
the charge of insanity, is thus accounted for, 
" The love of Christ constraineth us.^* We have 
too much forgotten that the fount of eloquence is 
in the heart ; and that it is feeling which gives to 
words and thoughts their power. An unrenewed 
man, or one with a lukewarm piety, may preach 
elaborate sermons upon orthodox doctrines, but 
what are they for power and efficiency when com- 
pared even with the inferior compositions of the 
preacher who feels as well as glories in the cross, 
but as the splendid coruscations of the aurora 
borealis to the warm and vivifying rays of the sun ! 
The Christian minister sustains a double rela- 
tion, and has a double duty to perform ; he is a 
preacher to the world, and a pastor to the church ; 
and it is impossible he can fulfil, or be in earnest 
to fulfil the obligations he is under to either. 



EARNESTNESS. 49 

without a large measure of personal godliness. 
As regards the church which is committed to his 
care, andjof which he is made by the Holy Ghost 
the spiritual overseer, he has not only to increase 
their'knowledge, but their holiness, their love, and 
their spirituality; to aid them in performing all 
the branches of their duty, and in cultivating all 
the graces of their sanctification. And what is the 
present spiritual condition of the great bulk of 
the professors of religion ? Amidst much that is 
cheering, there is on the other hand much that is 
discouraging and distressing to the more pious 
observer. We behold a strange combination of 
zeal and worldly-mindedness : great activity for 
the extension of religion in the earth, united with 
lamentable indi£Perence to the state of religion in 
the soul ; apparent vigour in the extremities, with 
a growing torpor at the heart. Multitudes are 
substituting zeal for piety, liberality for mortifica- 
tion, and a merely social for a personal religion. 
No careful reader of the New Testament, and 
observer of the present state of the church, can 
fail to be convinced, one should think, that what 
is now wanting is a higher tone of spirituality. 
The^Christian profession is sinking in its personal 
piety ; the line of separation between the church 
and the world becomes less and less perceptible : 
and this is taking place, less through the elevation 
of the world, than through the depression of the 

E 



50 NATURE OF 

church. The character of genuine Christianity, 
as expounded from pulpits, and delineated in 
books, has too rare a counterpart in the lives and 
spirit of its professors. 

How is this to be remedied, and by what means 
is the spirit of piety to be revived ? May we not 
ask a previous question — How came this spirit of 
slumber over the church ? Was it not from the 
pulpit ? And if a revival is to take place in the 
former, must it not begin in the latter ? Is the 
ministi*y of the present day in that state of earnest 
piety which is likely to originate and sustain an 
earnest style of preaching, and to revive the luke- 
warmness of our flocks ? I do not mean for a 
moment to insinuate that the ministers of the 
present day among the Dissenters, or Methodists, 
or the Evangelical clergy of the Church of Eng- 
land, are characterised by immorality, or even by a 
want of substantial holiness ; or that they would 
suflfer, as regards their piety, in comparison with 
those of some other periods of the history of their 
denominations : but what I am compelled to be- 
lieve, and what I now express, is, that our defici- 
encies are great, as compared not only with what 
is always required of us, but what is especially 
required by the circumstances of the times in 
which we live. Amidst the eager pursuits of 
commerce, the elegancies and soft indulgences of 
an age of growing refinement, the high cultivation 
of the intellect, and the contests of politics, the 



EARNESTNESS. 51 

church needs a strong and high barrier to keep 
out the encroachment of tides so adverse to its 
prosperity ; and needs equally a dam to keep in 
and to raise higher its spiritual life. And where 
shall it find this^ if not in the pulpit ? It is not 
in the nature of things to be expected that the 
spiritual character of the church should ever be 
superior to that of the ministry : and it is per- 
fectly consistent with what we know of human 
nature to expect that it will always hold itself 
excused for being inferior. It will not tread a 
path which its spiritual guides are slow to pursue ; 
and will deem it an affectation of sanctity, and a 
presumptuous ambition, to attempt to advance 
beyond them. How else than by admitting a 
deficiency of our piety can we account for the fact 
of a diminished efficiency in our ministry ? 

I cannot resist the temptation of giving here a 
long extract from that beautiful tract entitled " A 
Revived Ministry our only Hope for a Revived 
Church '/' a tract so eminently excellent, and so 
adapted to promote the end of the pious and 
accomplished writer, that it is a proof that we 
have little wish to be raised to higher attainments 
in piety, that such a heart-searching, soul-reviving 
production has yet reached only a second edition.* 

* A pious clergyman of this town was so impressed with the 
beauty, fidelity, and earnestness of this tract, that he purchased 
a hundred copies for distribution among his brethren. 

s2 



52 NATURE OF 

^' And for such a revived ministry there would be the 
most hopeful preparation of mind. The object to be 
aimed at would be distinctly conceived ; it would be loved 
and cherished as the noblest to which a redeemed being 
can consecrate himself; and there would be a readiness 
to yield every thing to the urgency and grandeur of its 
claims, together with a simplicity and guilelessness of inten- 
tion, which would mightily aid the judgment in seeing its 
best way to the best methods of achieving it. In such 
circumstances, all the distracting influences arising from 
indistinct views, a divided heart, aad infirmity of purpose, 
would be withdrawn, and leave the minister of Christ 
free to take a decided and energetic course. The subjec- 
tion of the church and the world to the dominion of the 
truth, in a pure heart and holy life, would be ever present 
to his mind as the sole and sublime end of his ministry : 
and, drawing after it the full tide of his sympathies, and 
permitting no diversion of his strength to any inferior 
object, it would command all his powers, and dispossess 
him of every wish but that of living and dying for it. 
And that moment would be the dawn of an era of pros- 
perity. 

" Every thing which he did would be enlivened by the 
presence of a warmer and holier zeal ; but it would be the 
public administration of divine truth, in the ordinance of 
preaching, in which the stronger and healthier pulsations 
of spiritual life would be most signally displayed, and 
from which the largest results might be expected. In this 
he would be prepared for acting a new part. Himself 
saved, and eminently sanctified, as well as possessed of 
the whole treasury of sacred knowledge in the inspired 
volume, he would be well versed in the respective truths 
best calculated for awakening the unconverted, and pro- 
moting the highest sanctification of the church, and 



EARNESTNESS. 53 

ftdtninister them with improved wisdom and force. The 
wretchedness of the soul as guilty, depraved, and hasten- 
ing to the judgment-seat ; the blessedness of arresting it 
in its downward course, and of exalting it once more to 
the glory of the Divine image and favour; the ample 
means provided for all this in the mediation of -Christ; 
the experience of their efficacy in himself, and the convic- 
tion of their undiminished power to do as much for 
others ; the rapid flight of time, and the possibility of all 
the mercy overshadowing that hour being trifled with and 
lost for ever, — ^these thrill his soul with mingled commise- 
ration, hope and fear, and urge him to improve to the 
utmost the fleeting opportunity of snatching sinners from 
perdition, and adding to the brightness of the Redeemer's 
crown. How well chosen is his theme! no matter of 
curious speculation, but some one or more of the solemn 
verities which concern the instant faith and obedience of 
every hearer, and bring life or death, as accepted or 
rejected. Away with those artificial rules which some 
have prescribed, as if to prepare a sermon were something 
like composing an epic ! He has a truth to enforce, a 
moral efi^ect to produce, and the sense of its unutterable 
importance brings to bear upon it all the resources of a 
judicious, intelligent, and impassioned mind. Bent on 
winning souls to God, or quickening them to higher 
obedience, this one desire possesses and inflames him^ 
and gives a unity and completeness to his subject, a force 
and compactness of argument, a felicity of speech and 
manner, an ardour and impressiveness of appeal, which 
the art of the rhetorician could never have supplied. He 
feels, moreover, that his strength is in God, and that the 
pleadings of human wisdom and pity never availed apart 
from a higher inspiration. Would there not be more 
than HOPS from a ministry like this ? In itself so con- 



54 NATURE OF 

Tincing and persuasive, rendered still more so by the 
practical exhibition of all the faith, uprightness, benevo- 
lence, and spirituality which it inculcates, looking to 
God, and owning its weakness without his blessing, it 
would have all the characteristics from which the suscep- 
tibilities of the human mind, and the solemn promises of 
the Almighty, authorise the expectation of enlarged suc- 
cess. When was such a ministry known to be long in 
contact with the minds of men, without producing the 
happiest effects ? * The word of the Lord would have 
free course and be glorified,' converts press into the 
church, and the church be raised to a higher renovation. 

" And the minister thus revived woidd have unwonted 
power in individual intercourse with the members of his 
flock. Living only for their advancement in faith and 
holiness, the warmth and tenderness of his concern for it 
would make him prompt to seize every opportunity of 
promoting it, and give an appropriateness and weight to 
his sayings, which a colder and less earnest piety would 
never have dictated : while the objects of his solicitude, 
feeling the point and force of his words, and impressed 
vnth his singleness of purpose, and still more with that 
uniform display of the Christian virtues, which was the 
best voucher of his deep sincerity, would find themselves 
drawn along by a combination of influences so pure and 
sommanding, that they must tread in the steps of his 
piety, and bend to his hallowed purpose of extending the 
limits of the church, and giving it a holier aspect. £very 
faithful minister can look back upon seasons when, under 
the kindlings of a warmer love and zeal, and a more 
affecting sense of eternal things, he was animated to 
increased exertion ; and he has found that not only did 
his preaching fix the attention and touch the souls of his 
hearers more than at other times, but that, when he went 



EARNESTNESS. 55 

among them in private, the elevation of his spirit, the 
seriousness of his converse, and the solemnity and unction 
pervading his petitions, produced an evident impression, 
and that he left them with improved feelings and resolves* 
All emotion is contagious, and easily propagates itself to 
other hosoms; but, beside this, the wakefulness of his 
zeal, and his steadiness of purpose, made him eager to 
extract the highest amount of good from every opportu* 
nity, stimulated ingenuity, and gave an aptness and charm 
to all that he said, which fell with happy efifect on the 
understanding and the heart. And had the ardour and 
determination of those seasons been permanent, the equa- 
ble and healthy excitement of every day's labour, instead 
of soon relapsing into the feebler sensibility of other 
times, his ministry would, doubtless, have told a different 
history, and be far more richly laden with precious fruit.'' 

Happy shall I feel if this feeble tribute^ not 
only of the recommendation of my pen^ but of my 
heart's gratitude for the benefit I have derived 
from this production^ shall induce any of my 
brethren to peruse this precious gift^ which has 
been oflfered to them by a writer who veils himself 
under the modest title of ^' One of the least among 
the Brethren.'* 

Do we want examples and patterns of eminent 
and earnest piety, how richly are they supplied 
both in number and in quality in the pages of our 
own denominational history ! Where is the deep^ 
ardent^ experimental religion of our ancestors, the 
fathers and founders of Protestant nonconformity ? 
What a theologian was Owen, when he wrote his 



56 NATURE OF 

- '^Exposition of the Hebrews !" What a polemic 
when he penned his '' Controversy^' with Biddle ! 
What an ecclesiastic when he drew up his " Trea- 
tise on Church Government V^ But what a Chris- 
iian when he indulged in his ^^Meditations on the 
Glory of Christ/' and gave us his treatise " On 
Spirituality of Mind and the Mortification of Sin !'' 
What a logician and divine was Howe^ when he 
produced his "Living Temple/' but what a 
Christian^ when in the shadow of this noble 
structure of his holy genius^ he poured out his 
heart in his work on " Delighting in God/' and 
'^ The Blessedness of the Righteous." And then 
think of holy Baxter^ who gained repose from the 
labours of polemic strife^ and relief from the tor- 
tures of the stone^ in the believing anticipations 
of "The Saint's Rest." Was their piety the 
result of their suffering ? Then for one I could 
be almost content to take the latter^ so that I 
might be possessed of the former. Lead me to 
the spots — I do not say where they trimmed their 
midnight lamp^ and continued at their studies till 
the morning star glittering through their case- 
ment chided them to their pillow — but to those 
more hallowed scenes^ where they held their 
nightly vigils^ and wrestled with the angel till the 
break of day. Mighty shades of Owen and 
Baxter; Howe and Manton; Henry and Bates; 
Goodwin and Nye ; illustrious and holy men^ we 



EARNESTIfESS. 57 

thank you for the rich legacy you have bequeathed 
to us in your immortal works : but where has 
the mantle of your piety fallen ! 

** God of our fathers ! be the God, 
Of their succeeding race." 

Here then let us begin, where indeed we ought 
to begin, with our own spirits^ for what should be 
the piety of that man on the state of whose heart 
depends in no small degree the spiritual condition 
of a whole Christian community ? If we turn to 
any department of human action, we shall learn 
that no one can inspire a taste, much less a pas- 
sion, for the object of his own pursuit, who is not 
himself most powerfully moved by it. It is the 
scintillation of his zeal flying off from his own 
glowing heart, and falling upon their souls, which 
kindles in them the flre which burns in himself. 
Lukewarmness can excite no ardour, originate no 
activity, produce no effect : it benumbs whatever 
it touches. If we enquire for the sources of energy, 
the springs of activity, in the most successful 
ministers of Christ, we shall find that these lay in 
the ardour of their devotion. They were men of 
prayer and of faith. They dwelt upon the mount 
of communion with God, from whence they came 
down like Moses to the people, radiant with the 
glory on which they had themselves been intently 
gazing. They stationed themselves where they 



58 NATURE OF EARNESTNESS. 

could look at things unseen and eternal^ and came 
with the stupendous visions fresh in their view, 
and spoke of them under the impression of what 
they had just seen and heard. They drew their 
thoughts and made their sermons from their 
minds and from their books, but they breathed 
life and power into them from their hearts, and 
in their closets, Trjice either Whitfield or Wes- 
ley in their career, and you will see how beaten 
was the road between the pulpit and the closet : 
the grass was not allowed to grow in that path. 
This was in great part the secret of their power. 
They were mighty in public, because in their 
retirement they had clothed themselves, so to 
speak, with Omnipotence. They reflected the 
lustre they had caught in the Divine presence; 
and its attraction was irresistible. The same 
might be said of all others who have attained to 
eminence as successful preachers of the gospel. 
If then we would see a revival of the power of the 
pulpit, we must first of all see a revival in the 
piety of those who occupy it : and when this is 
the case, then, '^ He that is feeble among us shall 
be as David, and the house of David shall be as 
God, as the angel of the Lord before tbem.^' 



CHAPTER III. 

THE NATURE OP EARNESTNESS CONTINUED, AS 

EXEMPLIFIED IN THE MATTER AND 

MANNER OF PREACHING. 

Fifthly. Earnestness will manifest itself by 
energetic and untiring action in the use of those 
means by which its object is accomplished. It 
does not satisfy itself with contemplation, however 
enraptured; schemes, however well concerted; 
wishes, however fervent; or anticipations, however 
lively: but proceeds to vigorous, well arranged, 
and well adapted exertion. An earnest man must 
of necessity be an active one : he is the opposite 
and the contrast of an idle dreamer. '' I see my 
object,'^ he exclaims; "it stands out in bold relief, 
clearly defined before my eyes, and I will leave no 
eflFort untried to accomplish it. I have made up 
my mind to labour, self-denial, and fatigue ; and 
if I do not succeed, it shall not be for want of de^ 
termined and continuous eflFort.'^ Such is his re- 
solution, and his practice fulfils it. He is always 
at work. You know where to find him, and how 
he is employed. He is the very type of diligence. 
Labour is pleasure. No difficulties deter him, no 
disappointments dishearten him. The ignorant 



60 NATURE OP 

do not understand him^ the indolent pity him^ but 
the intelligent admire him. There is something 
in his earnestness commanding^ attractive^ inspir- 
ing, especially when the object of it is worthy. 

Apply this to the ministry; there are two 
means by which this accomplishes its end, preach^ 
ing and the pastorate. 

In reference to the former, we advert first to 
the MATTER of our ministrations. And this must 
consist of course of those topics which bear most 
obviously and directly upon the great ends we are 
seeking to accomplish. Earnestness will take the 
nearest and most direct road to its object; nor 
will it be seduced from its path by beautiful pros- 
pects and pleasant walks, that lie in another direc- 
tion. " I want to reach that point, and I cannot 
allow myself to be attracted by scenes, which how- 
?ever agreeable and appropriate to others, would, if 
I stayed or turned to contemplate them, only hin- 
der me in my business.^^ Such is the language of 
one intent upon success in any given scheme. Now 
what is the end of our office ? The reconciliation 
of sinners to God, and their ultimate and complete 
salvation, when so reconciled. It is easy then to 
see that the matter of our instruction and persua- 
sion must be, the ministry of reconciliation. Of 
course it must be our purpose to declare the whole 
counsel of God, and to remember ^^ that all Scrip- 
ture is given by inspiration of God, and is profit- 



EARNESTNESS. 61 

able for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for 
instruction in righteousness; that the man of 
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto 
all good works." In the way of exposition, a 
minister should go through the greater part of the 
whole Bible, fairly and honestly explaining and 
enforcing it. But since the whole Bible, as ex- 
plained by the more perfect revelation of the New 
Testament, directly or indirectly points to Christ, 
or may be illustrated and enjoined by considera- 
tions suggested by his mission and work, our 
preaching should have a decidedly evangelical 
character. The divinity, incarnation, and death 
of Christ — ^his atonement for sin — his resurrec- 
tion, ascension, intercession, and mediatorial reign 
— his spiritual kingdom, and his second coming : 
the oflSces and work of the Holy Spirit in illumi- 
nating, regenerating, and sanctifying the human 
soul : the doctrine of justification by faith, and 
the new birth : the sovereignty of God in the dis- 
pensation of his saving gifts — these and their 
kindred and collateral topics should form the 
staple of our ministrations and teaching. It surely 
must be this which the apostle meant when he 
said, " I determined to know nothing among you, 
save Jesus Christ and him crucified." " The Jews 
require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, 
but we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stum- 
tling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness ; but 



62 NATUEE OF 

unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, 
Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God." 
If there be any meaning in language, this must 
imply that the apostle in his ministry dwelt chiefly 
upon the work of Christ. His epistles all sustain 
this view of his meaning. They were all full of 
this great subject. We may perhaps smile at the 
simple piety of the individual who was at the trou- 
ble of counting the number of times that the apos- 
tle mentioned the name of Jesus in all his epistles; 
but at the same time, something is to be learnt 
from the fact that he found it to reach between 
four and five hundred. This teaches us how tho- 
roughly Christian, how entirely imbued with evan- 
gelism, his mind and his writings were. His moral- 
ity was as evangelical as his doctrine, for he enforced 
all the branches of social obligation by motives 
drawn from the cross. His ethics were all bap- 
tised with the spirit of the gospel ; so that the be- 
liever, in reading the writings of Paul, has his eye 
as constantly kept upon the crucified One, in the 
progress of his sanctification, as the sinner's eye 
is turned towards the same object, for his justifi- 
cation. Here then was the earnestness of the 
apostle — one constant, uniform, and undeviating 
endeavour to save men's souls by the truth as it is 
in Jesus. 

A question now arises whether it is the duty of 
modem preachers to adopt the same method, and 



EARNESTNESS. 63 

whether inasmuch^ as their ends are the same 
with those of the apostle, they are to seek them 
by the same means. One would suppose there 
can be no rational doubt of this. If the apostles 
were the inspired teachers of Christianity, and 
have given us in their writings a full exhibition of 
what Christianity really is ; and if it is our busi- 
ness to explain and enforce their writings, it seems 
to follow, as a thing of course, that our teaching, 
as to the matter of our discourses, must resemble 
theirs : and will any one pretend that this resem- 
blance can be established, unless our preaching is 
richly and prevailingly evangelical ? I am aware 
it is sometimes said that the times are altered 
since the apostles' days, and that the state of the 
world is diflferent from what it then was. But is 
not human nature in all its essential elements the 
same ? Is it not the same in its moral aspect, 
impotency, and necessities ? Does it not as much 
need, and as much depend upon, the gospel 
scheme, as it did then ? Is not the gospel as 
exquisitely and fully adapted to its miserable con- 
dition as it was then ? Can sin be pardoned in 
any other way than through the atonement of 
Christ; or the sinner be justified by any other 
means than faith in the Lord our Righteousness ; 
or the depraved heart be renewed and sanctified 
by any other agency than that of the Holy Spirit ? 
Are not all the motives of evangelical doctrine as 



64 NATURE OF 

adapted^ as powerful^ and as efficacious^ now^ as 
they were then? No alteration of subject then 
ean be called for now^ to meet the advancing state 
of society^ since the gospel is intended and adapted 
to be God's instrument for the salvation of man^ 
in all ages of the worlds in all countries^ and in 
all states of society. The moral epidemic of our 
nature is always and every where the same, in 
whatever various degrees of virulence it may exist, 
and the remedial system of salvation by grace, 
through faith, is God's own and unalterable spe- 
cific for the disease, in every age of time, in every 
country of the world, and in every state of society. 
Men may call in other physicians than Christ, 
and try other methods of cure, as they already 
have done; but they will all fail, and leave the 
miserable patient hopeless and helpless, as regards 
every other means of health, beside that which the 
cross of Christ presents. We reject alike as delu- 
sive and fatal the ancient practice of conforming 
the evangelical scheme to systems of philosophy, 
and the modern Puseyite notion of the progressive 
developement of Christian doctrine by the church. 
To the men who would revive the former, we say, 
" Beware lest any man spoil you, through a vain 
and deceitful philosophy, after the tradition of 
men, after the rudiments of the world, and not 
after Christ :" to the latter we say, " Jesus Christ, 
the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever. Be 



EARNESTNESS. 65 

not ctarried about with divers and strange doctrines: 
for it is a good thing that the heart be established 
with grace/^ It appears to me that something 
like the same attempts are being made in this 
day to corrupt the gospel by superstitious addi- 
tions on the one hand^ and by philosophic accom- 
modations on the other, as were made in the early 
days of Christianity. Our danger lies in the latter. 
It should never be forgotten that the time when 
the apostles discharged their ministry was only 
just after the Augustan era of the ancient world. 
Poetry had recently bestowed some of its golden 
favours on the empire of letters in the works of 
Virgil and Horace. The light of philosophy, 
though waning, still shed its lustre on Greece. 
The arts, and their most splendid creations in 
architecture, sculpture, and painting, still lived, 
though they had ceased to advance. It was at 
such a time, and amidst such scenes, the gospel 
began its course. Apostolic voices were listened 
to by sages and their pupils, who had basked in 
the sunshine of Athenian wisdom, and were rever- 
berated in startling echo from temples and statues 
that had been shaken by the thunders of Cicero 
and Demosthenes; yet these holy men conceded 
nothing to the demands of philosophy, but held 
forth the cross as the only object they felt they 
had a right to exhibit. They never once enter- 
tained the degrading notion that they must accom- 
p 



66 .NATURE OF 

modate themselves to the philosophy or the taste 
of the age in which they lived, and the places 
where they ministered. It is true the philosophy 
of that day was a false one, but it was not known 
or acknowledged to be such at the time. It was 
admired as true, though like many systems that 
have succeeded it, it gave place to another, and 
was doomed, like some that now prevail, to wane 
before new and rising lights. Whether the apostle 
addressed himself to the philosophers on Mars 
Hill, or to the barbarians on the island of Melita ; 
whether he reasoned with the Jews in their syna- 
gogues, or with the Greeks in the school of Tyran- 
nus — he had but one theme, and that was Christ, 
and him crucified. And what right, or what 
reason, have we for deviating from this high and 
imperative example ? Be it so, that we are in a 
literary, philosophic, and scientific age, what then? 
Is it an age that has outlived the need of the 
gospel for its salvation ; or to the salvation of 
which any thing else can supply a means, but the 
gospel? The supposition that something else 
than pure Christianity, as the theme of our pulpit 
ministrations, is requisite for such a period as this, 
or that this must be presented in a philosophic 
guise, appears to me a most perilous sentiment, 
as being a disparagement to the gospel itself, a 
daring assumption of wisdom superior to the 
divine, and containing the very germ of infidehty. 



EARNESTNESS. 67 

The gospel sustains the nature of a testimony 
which must be exhibited in its own peculiar and 
simple form; a testimony to certain unique and 
momentous facts which must be presented as they 
really are, without any attempt or wish to change 
their nature or alter their character, in order to 
bring them into a nearer conformity to the systems 
of men. Let the taste be cultivated as it may by 
literature, or the mind be enlightened by science, 
or the reason be disciplined by philosophy, the 
heart is still deceitful and wicked, the conscience 
still burdened with guilt, and the whole soul in a 
state of alienation from God. The moral consti- 
tution is mortally diseased, and nothing but the 
gospel can convey God's saving health, which is 
as much required for the spiritual restoration of 
the polished son of science, as for that of the 
savage of New Zealand, or the Hottentot of South 
Africa. All else is but pretence and empiricism ; 
and the man who would be in earnest, and suc- 
cessful in the salvation of souls must have a clear 
conviction and a deep impression of these facts* 
Philosophy must never be allowed to dilute the 
elixir of life, nor to evaporate it into the clouds of 
metaphysics. 

But perhaps the danger to which the evangelical 

ministry of the present age is exposed is not so 

much a philosophising spirit, or an attempt to 

conform the gospel to any metaphysical theory, as 

p2 



68 NATURE OP 

an effort to attain to a high intellectuality in 
• setting forth received truths. We hear a great 
deal about this in modem times. It is become a 
kind of cant term^ (for there is a high cant as well 
as a low one,) to speak of some men as very intel- 
lectual preachers. If by an intellectual preacher 
be meant a man who applies the acquirements of 
a well furnished and well trained understanding 
to explain and enforce the great topics of evange- 
lical truth ; or the application, in the most attrac- 
tive form, of whatever knowledge such a mind, in 
the pursuit after information of all kinds, can 
obtain, to the great end of the Christian ministry; 
or the employment of sound logic and natural 
eloquence to make the doctrines which are unto 
salvation bear down upon the heart and conscience 
— in that case a man cannot be too intellectual : 
the great and glorious doctrines of revealed truth 
and life eternal deserve and demand the mightiest 
energies of the noblest intellects : but if, as is too 
generally the case, this intellectuality means the 
cold, dry, argumentative discussion of religious 
truth, rather than evangelical subjects, or even of 
the latter in an abstract and essay-like form; a 
mere heartless exercise of the understanding of 
the preacher, and intended or adapted only to 
engage the understanding of the hearers, without 
either interesting their affections or awakening 
their conscience; such intellectuality will do 



EARNESTNESS. 69 

nothing but empty the places of worship in which 
it is exhibited, or at best draw together a congre- 
gation of persons who cannot do without some 
kind of religion, but who prefer the cold abstrac- 
tions of the head, to the warm aflFections of the 
heart. Such hearers assemble to listen to the 
metaphysical lecturer on spiritualities, and not to 
the publisher of glad tidings to sinners. 

Here I would not be misconstrued to mean 
that every sermon must be on strictly evangelical 
themes; but that these must be the prevailing 
topics of the man who is in earnest for the salva- 
tion of souls. Nor would I go so far as to say 
that each sermon must contain as much of the 
gospel as would make every hearer of it acquainted 
with the way of salvation, though he never should 
listen to another discourse. There is such a thing 
as treating these subjects so carelessly, so fami- 
liarly, and so frequently, as to deprive them of all 
their power to interest and impress. A man 
whose soul is possessed with the passion for doing 
good, will make almost any and every topic con- 
nected with the gospel tend to usefulness. Sub- 
jects which in other hands will be dry and unin- 
teresting, will in his be invested with the glow 
and the warmth which live in his own soul, and 
which he imparts to every thing he touches. His 
heart beats with an action so strong, so steady^ 
and so healthful, that his fervid and holy intelli- 



70 NATURE OP 

gence circulates an evangelical vitality through 
what in others would be a cold and torpid frame^ 
and thus causes the principle of gospel life to 
reach to the very extremities of the system of 
general truth. Still even he, though he dwell 
occasionally on every topic which can with pro- 
priety be brought into the pulpit, will, like the 
apostle, " Glory only in the cross of Christ/' 
Resisting the temptations to neglect a plain gos- 
pel, and to go in quest of airy speculations and 
unprofitable novelties, his aim will not be to 
gratify the imaginative by what is tasteful and 
poetic, the philosophical by what is profound, the 
metaphysical by what is subtle, or the curious by 
what is strange; but by manifestation of the 
truth, to commend himself to every man^s con- 
science in the sight of God. Alas, that any 
preacher of the gospel should take any other aim, 
and seek any other object, than this! Do we 
want subjects for eloquence, where can we find 
them in such abundance, grandeur, and sublimity, 
as in the gospel theme ? The cross is a fount of 
the purest, most impassioned, and most pathetic 
eloquence in the world, from which genius may 
go on to draw its streams, without ever exhausting 
it. Compare the most finished orations and ser- 
mons of Massillon, Bossuet, or Bourdaloue, with 
McLaurin's discourse on "Glorying in the Cross ;" 
and though the former are more perfect as models 



EARNESTNESS. 71 

of composition, more decorated by all the artifices 
and graces of rhetoric, yet how far below that 
incomparable sermon in the sublimity of its 
theme, and the grandeur of its evangelical elo- 
quence, are these boasted models of the French 
pulpit. Even the soul of the polished, but point- 
less Blair kindled into something like a glow of 
pious warmth when he came, which he seldom 
did, within the attraction of this object; and 
though it was but as moon-light, compared with 
the ardour of his colleague Walker, yet in his 
sermon on "The Death of Christ," his frigid 
elegance becomes enlivened by his theme, and 
furnishes a standing proof that the heathen morals 
of Epictetus are a barren source of eloquence, 
compared with the Christian doctrines of the 
apostle Paul. I make no apology here for re- 
quoting a passage from an American author, which 
I have already given to the public in my " Address 
to Students.^' 

" My dear brethren, why are we not more impressive ? 
Theology affords the best field for tender, solemn, and 
sublime eloquence. The most august objects are pre- 
sented ; the most important interests are discussed ; the 
most tender motives are urged. God and angels; the 
treason of Satan ; the creation, ruin, and recovery of a 
world; the incarnation, death, resurrection, and reign of 
the Son of God ; the day of judgment ; a burning uni- 
verse ; an eternity ; a heaven and a hell — all pass before 
the eye* What are the petty dissensions of the states of 



72 NATURE OP 

Greece, or the ambition of Philip ? What are the plots 
and victories of Rome, or the treason of Catihce, com- 
pared with this? If ministers were sufficiently qualified 
by education, study, and the Holy Ghost; if they felt 
their subject as much as Demosthenes and Cicero did, 
they would be the most eloquent men on earth, and would 
be so esteemed wherever congenial minds were found."* 

To know what themes contain the greatest 
potency over the public mind, and which should 
form the subject of an earnest ministry, we have 
only to consult the pages of ecclesiastical history. 
It is unnecessary to dwell again upon the matter 
of apostolic preaching. It was by the purest 
evangelism that Christianity was planted in the 
earth, and it was when this gave place to a religion 
of forms and ceremonies that the power and 
vitality of true godliness declined, and a mass of 
splendid corruption grew up, in the dark shadow 
of which the man of sin erected his throne, and 
the Papacy commenced its bloody reign. During 
the long night of the middle ages the sound of 
the faithful preacher was not heard, and the voice 
of Zion's watchman was silent, except in a few 
obscure nooks and corners of the earth; but 
wherever it was then heard, the same eflFects fol- 
lowed. It was this subject with which Claude, of 
Turin, when nearly all the world was wondering 
after the beast, awakened in the ninth century 

* Dr. Griffin's Sermon on '* The Art of Preachmg." 



EARNESTNESS. 73 

the inhabitants of Piedmont, and commenced that 
glorious work which was carried on, more or less, 
for centuries, amid the seclusion of Alpine rocks 
and vallies; and which the concentrated power 
and fury of the Papacy could never entirely sub- 
vert. It was this evangelism which our Wickliff 
preached in England in the fifteenth century, and 
by it kindled a fire, amidst the smouldering ashes 
of which lay concealed the embers that were again 
to ignite, when fanned by the breath of other 
reformers, a century afterwards. By what means 
did Luther achieve his immortal triumph over the 
powers of the Vatican, and smite oflF the fetters 
which had enslaved the judgment, heart, and con- 
science of man ? By the potency of what subject 
did he lift up into freedom and dignity the pros- 
trate intellect of the human race ? What was the 
instrument with which he struck the empire of 
darkness, and inflicted a blow which resounded 
through Christendom ? It was the great evange- 
lical doctrine of justification by faith. By what 
means did Whitfield and Wesley rouse the slum- 
bering piety of our nation, and call up a spirit 
which is going on from strength to strength to this 
day ? By the evangelical system of divine truth. 
What called forth the missionary enterprise, and 
constructed all that moral machinery which is at 
work upon the world^s conversion ? Before what 
system of truths have the inhabitants of Polynesia 



74 NATURE OF 

and New Zealand surrendered their licentious 
habits and bloody rites ; and the Hottentots and 
Esquimaux dropped their barbarism^ and risen up 
into the form and manners of civilized men ? 
What is the doctrine by which our missionaries 
are taking possession of India and China ? I 
answer in one word, the doctrine of the cross. 

Here then is a fact attested by authentic his- 
tory, and uncontradicted by any one who is 
acquainted either with the present or the past, 
that all the great moral revolutions of our world, 
during the time of the Christian era, have been 
eflFected by one simple process, by one set of 
means, and by one grand truth, — and that process 
is preaching, — those means are earnest men, — and 
that truth is the gospel of the grace of God. Pro- 
vidential events may have prepared the way, by 
levelling mountains, and filling up vallies, and 
making smooth the course of the herald of the 
cross ; but it was that herald^s mighty voice pro- 
claiming, " Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh 
away the sins of the world,^' which by the power 
of God's Spirit has changed the moral aspect of 
our dark and dreary world. All this has not 
been done by learning, science, and philosophy — 
it is not the result of profound speculations on any 
theory of morals ; or of fine processes of reason- 
ing ; or of splendid creations of poetic genius ; or 
of the subtleties of metaphysical discussion: no^ 



EARNESTNESS. 75 

but of the simple testimony of the gospel. While 
the philosopher has been theorising in his closet, 
and the moral arithmetician has been carrying on 
his calculations in his study, the preacher has 
gone forth into the midst of the people, ignorant, 
wicked, and wretched, as they were, — ^has lifted up 
the great truth of a loving God, a dying Saviour, 
and a regenerating Spirit, and has by these 
means, as an instrument of God, changed the 
aspect of society, and revolutionized the moral 
habits of the nations. 

Strange that with the knowledge of these facts, 
any of our preachers should think of substituting 
these glorious truths which have wrought such 
wonders in the world, by any other themes; or 
should act as if weapons that had proved their 
adaptation and their power, should be wielded now 
with a doubtful mind, with a hesitating and waver- 
ing hand. If we would know how we are to 
convert souls to God, we have only to ask how has 
God converted them. Nor is it necessary to go 
back to past ages, or abroad to other countries. 
Let us only look round upon our own country ; 
let us go to our largest congregations and our 
most numerous churches, and ask what kind of 
preaching has done all this: what doctrine, and 
how handled, has drawn this multitude together ; 
what magnet has put forth its attractions here ? 
And the secret is soon discovered, and it will be 



76 NATURE OP 

found that here is an exemplification of our Lord 
Jesus Christ^s words, "And I, if I be lifted up 
from the earth, will draw all men unto me/^ Go 
into other places where a religious intellectuality 
is substituted for the vital truths of the gospel ; 
where philosophical abstractions take the place of 
popular addresses on great fundamental doctrines, 
and cold, logical essays are read, instead of heart- 
stirring sermons being preached ; and the attenu- 
ated and still declining congregation proclaims 
the want of adaptation in the pulpit ministrations, 
and proves that for the popular mind there can be 
no substitute for the cross of Christ. Nor does 
this apply exclusively to the uneducated, or par- 
tially educated classes. Human nature in all its 
prevailing features, tastes, necessities, and enjoy- 
ments, is the same in the king and in the peasant : 
in the savage and the sage. All men are suscep- 
tible of emotion, as well as capable of feeling: 
and all men love to feel, as well as to think. A 
tradesman, or professional man, who has been at 
work all the week, having had his mind strained 
with hard thinking, as well as his body by hard 
labour, when he takes his seat in his pew on a 
Sabbath morning, wants something for his heart, 
as well as for his head. With a sermon, however 
intellectual it may be, which has nothing that 
comes home to his affections, and causes him to 
feel, he is sure to be disappointed and dissatisfied. 



EARNESTNESS. 11 

A dry essay on sorae gospel subject which only 
proves a point he never doubted, or starts a diffi- 
culty he never dreamt of, is like giving him a 
stone when he asks for bread. He wants to be 
made iofeely and to realise that there is something 
higher and better than this world. He desires to 
enjoy the luxury of hallowed emotion, he covets 
the joy and peace of believing, and the anticipa- 
tions of that world where the weary are at rest, 
and the din of business will be for ever hushed. 
That man, tired and jaded by the cares, anxieties, 
and toils of six days, wants to lie down and take 
repose on the soft green of evangelical truth, and 
not on the hard rocks of abstract speculation. It 
is true that being a man of education and reading, 
his heart must be reached through his intellect, 
and though it must be the substantial bread of 
evangelical truth with which he is fed, yet it 
must not be coarse or chaflFy ; it must not only be 
prepared and made of the finest of the wheat, but 
it must also be well mixed and made palatable to 
a healthful taste by a skilful hand. 

It is however said th^t though the same gospel 
is to be preached, and the matter of sermons is in 
substance to be ever the same through all the 
varying states of society, yet that the mode of ex- 
hibiting it is to be accommodated to the circum- 
stances of the age, and that a different method of 
presenting the truth must be adopted in an age of 



78 NATURE OF 

advancing knowledge^ to what is pursued in one 
of less refined and cultivated habits. If by this 
be meant that there must be more vigorous think- 
ing, more profound analysis, more accurate criti- 
cism, more varied illustration from the fields of 
science, more pains to show the harmony of a 
sound theology with a sound philosophy, then it 
may, and must be admitted, that the mode of 
preaching should be adapted to the circumstances 
of an advancing age. But even with this admis- 
sion, it must still be remembered that the essential 
nature of the gospel as a testimony from God, 
which is to be received on the ground of its own 
evidence and authority, must not be altered ; nor 
any attempts made to shift the obligation to re- 
ceive it from this ground to its apparent reason- 
ableness or conformity with the principles of any 
system of human philosophy. Nor must this 
adaptation to the circumstances of the age be 
carried so far either in the way of logic, criticism, 
or illustration, as to obscure the light, or corrupt 
the simplicity of the evangelical system. The 
substitution of a dry, abstract, and philosophical 
mode of preaching the gospel, for a lively, forcible, 
and heart-aflFecting, conscience-rousing method, so 
far from being adapted to this age of excitement, 
is quite opposed to it. This is a busy, active, 
glowing period of timers history, as well as a 
thinking one. The heart is yearning, as well as 



EARNESTNESS. 79 

the intellect. The abstractions of the intellect are 
dealt with now in such manner as to kindle the 
aflfections into a very blaze^ and the method of 
exhibiting the gospel must^ if it be successful^ 
have an adaptation of this kind. Flimsy thought^ 
thread-bare common-places, will not do: so nei- 
ther will airy speculation, hard logic, cold meta- 
physics, nor modem philosophy. It must be the 
gospel, preached with manly, vigorous thinking, 
in good Saxon words, and with classic simplicity and 
perspicuity of style. I am somewhat jealous about 
this idea of accommodating our method of preach- 
ing to the taste and circumstances of the age, till 
the meaning of the expression be thoroughly 
understood and accurately settled. Without great 
care, the spirit of accommodation and the attempt 
at adaptation will go on from manner to matter, 
and even our creeds will be somewhat curtailed and 
altered, to establish a harmony between our theo- 
logy and our philosophy. Already the process is 
begun, and the neology of Germany, like a beacon 
gleaming upon us from its dreadful rocks, should 
warn us of the danger we are in on such a coast, 
of making shipwreck of our faith. Perhaps the 
best mode of making the subject understood, and 
showing to what extent this adaptation might be 
carried, would be to select and compare the ser- 
mons of two diflFerent periods of the history of the 
pulpit. Take, then, for example, a sermon of Dri 



80 NATURE OF 

Owen, or Dr. Manton, with all tlieir numberless 
divisions and sub-divisions, quaint phraseology^ 
and violations of taste, and put them by the side 
of a sermon by Dr. Chalmers, Mr. Bradley, and 
especially of Dr. Wardlaw ; and in this comparison 
we see enough of growing adaptation, and behold 
with delight the same glorious verities, but exhi- 
bited by the latter, with all the improvements of 
modern style and method of arrangement. 

Before we pass from this part of the subject, it 
may be proper to remark that perhaps there are 
few expressions more misunderstood, and on which 
more mistakes have been made, than, '^ preaching 
the gospeV^ Many by the use of this phrase aim 
to exclude from the pulpit almost every topic but 
a perpetual and almost unvarying exhibition of the 
death of our Lord, and consider this specifically, 
and this only, as preaching Christ. But it is 
strangely forgotten by the preachers of this school, 
that as the scheme of mediation by the Saviour is 
founded on the eternal obligation and immutable 
nature of the law of God, and was intended, not 
to subvert, but to uphold its authority, the moral 
law must be explained and enforced, in all its 
purity, spirituahty, and extent. Repentance to- 
wards God is no less included in the apostolic 
ministry, than faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; and 
how can a sinner repent of his transgressions 
against the law, if he know not the law he has 



EARNESTNESS. 81 

violated: for "sin is the transgression of the law;*' 
and " by the law is the knowledge of sin/^ So 
that no man can know sin without knowing the 
law : and herein appears to me one of the prevailing 
defects of modern preaching : I mean the neglect 
of holding up this perfect mirror, in which the 
sinner shall see reflected his own moral image. 
It is true that some are melted down at once into 
a sense of wickedness, and brought to the exercise 
of both repentance and faith, by an exhibition of 
divine love in the death of Christ ; but this is not 
so usual a method of conversion as the first 
awakening of the sinner by an exposition and 
application of the perfect law. Dr. Dwight says, 

"Few, very few, are ever awakened or convinced by 
the encouragements and promises of the gospel; but 
almost all by the denunciation of the law. The blessings 
of immortality, the glories of heaven, are|*u8ually, to say 
the least, preached with little efficacy to an assembly of 
sinners. I have been surprised to see how dull, inatten- 
tive, and sleepy, such an assembly has been, amidst the 
strongest representations of these divine subjects, com- 
bining the most vivid images with a vigorous style and an 
impressive elocution."* 

This is a strong testimony, and it is perhaps a 
little overstated. Still I am persuaded there is 
much truth in it, for it seems to stand by reason, 
that men will care little about pardon, till they are 
convinced of sin ; and aff the apostle says^ it is by 

* Vol. II, p. 417. 
o 



82 NATURE OF 

the law that they come to the knowledge of sin. 
In this particular there appears to me a greater 
adaptation in the American preaching to the work 
of conviction, than in the British pulpit : there is 
more of this exposition of the law, and of the 
appUcation of it to the sinner's conscience ; more 
that is calculated to make him feel at once his 
obligations and his guilt ; more of that which 
silences his excuses, unravels the deceitfulness 
of his heart, strips him of self-righteousness, 
makes him thoroughly acquainted with himself, 
and his intense need of a Saviour : in short, 
more of what the apostle calls commending him- 
self to every man's conscience in the sight of 
God. With this, however, is I think associated 
a want of evangelical fulness and tenderness. 
I remember a discussion by a large company 
of ministers in my vestry, on one occasion, as to 
what style of preaching had been found in their 
own experience to be most useful : and it was 
pretty generally admitted, and some of them .had 
been among our most successful preachers, that 
sermons on alarming and impressive texts had 
been most blessed in producing conviction of sin, 
and first concern about salvation. At the same 
time it must be recollected, that though descrip- 
tions of sin may aflfect — exhibiting the conse- 
quences of it may aflfright — vehement censures of 
it may alarm — reasoning concerning it may open 



EARNESTNESS. 83 

,the gloomy road to despair — ^this alone will not 
convert. Law without gospel will harden, as 
gospel without law will only lead to carelessness 
and presumption : it is the union of both that will 
possess the sinner with a loathing of himself^ and 
love to God. Still our danger in this age lies not 
so much in neglecting the gospel, as in omitting 
to associate with it the preaching of the law. 
It is worthy of remark, that Jesus Christ, who was 
incarnate love itself, the living gospel, yea the way, 
the truth, the life, was the most alarming preacher 
that was ever in our world. It is, however, especi- 
ally incumbent upon us not to mistake grossness 
for fidelity ; nor harshness for earnestness. The 
remarks of Mr. Hall on this, are as correct as they 
are beautiful. " A harsh and unfeeling manner of 
denouncing the threatenings of the word of God, 
is not only barbarous and inhuman, but calculated 
by inspiring disgust, to rob them of all their 
eflSciency. If the awful part of our message, 
which may be styled the burden of the Lord, ever 
fall with due weight upon our hearers, it will be 
when it is delivered with a trembling hand, and 
faltering hps.^' The look, the tone, the action, 
when such subjects are discussed, should be a 
mixture of solemnity and aflFection — the awfulness 
of love. To hear such topics dwelt upon in strong 
language, vehement action, and boisterous tones, 
strikes us as being an utter violation of all pro- 
g2 



84 NATUBS OF EARNESTNESS. 

priety^ and in every hearer of the least discernment, 
is hkely to excite horror and revulsion. Real 
earnestness is the result of deep emotion^ and the 
emotion excited by the sight of a fellow-creature 
perishing in his sins^ is that of the tenderest com- 
miseration^ which will express itself not in stormy 
declamation and thundering denunciations^ but of 
solemnly chastened expostulation and appeal. 



CHAPTER IV. 

NAtURE OF EARNESTNESS CONTlNtJfiD. 

EARNESTNESS IN REFERENCE TO MANNER. 

I NOW pass from matter to manner ; and when 
I say manner^ I wish to be understood as includ- 
ing in that term^ not simply the method of com- 
municating truth by voice and gesture^ but the 
cast of thought and the style of composition in 
reference to the truth so enunciated. What is 
wanted for the pulpit is a vivacious, in opposition 
to a stiff, formal, and dull method. Style must 
of course, to a considerable extent, vary with the 
subject matter, and be regulated by it. In exe- 
getical preaching, or in that part of a sermon 
which is merely expository, all that is required, 
and what is required, is a calm perspicuity, a flow 
of clear, limpid, quiet thought, which shall instruct 
the understanding, and gently draw after it the 
heart, without being intended or expected in any 
great degree to move the passions. We have 
some beautiful specimens of this in the elegant 
discourses of Dr. Wardlaw. Well would it be if, 
after his manner, we could be critical without 
being pedantic; exegetical without being scho- 
tastic; and invest exposition with charms which 



86 NATURE OF 

should make it attractive to all our congregations. 
But though a careful analysis of the text should 
form the basis of almost all our sermons, there must 
be something more than mere exegesis, however 
clear, or correct, and instructive. We have to do 
not only with a dark intellect that needs to be 
informed, but with a hard heart that needs to be 
impressed, and a torpid conscience that needs to 
be awakened ; we have to make our hearers feel 
that in the great business of religion, there is 
much to be done, as well as much to be known. 
We must give knowledge, for light is as essential 
to the growth of piety in the spiritual world, as it 
is to the growth of vegetation in the natural one : 
and this analogy holds good in another point ; we 
must not only let in light, but add great and 
vigorous labour to carry on the culture. We 
must therefore rise from exegesis into exhortation^ 
warning, and expostulation. The apostle^s manner 
is the right one, — " Whom we preach, warning 
every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, 
that we may present every man perfect in Christ 
Jesus.^^ There must not only be the directive, 
but the impulsive manner. All our hearers know 
far more of the Bible than they practise: the 
head is far in advance of the heart ; and our great 
business is to persuade, to entreat, to beseech. 
We have to deal with a dead, heavy vis inertue o{ 
mind; yea more, we have to overcome a stout 



EARNESTNESS. 87 

resistance^ and to move a reluctant heart. If all 
that was necessary to secure the ends of our 
ministry were to lay the truth open to the mind ; 
if the heart were already pre-disposed to the sub- 
ject of our preaching, then like the lecturer on 
science, we might dispense with the hortatory 
manner, and confine ourselves exclusively to ex- 
planation. Logic, unaccompanied by rhetoric, 
would suffice; but when we find in every sinner 
we address, an individual acting in opposition to 
the dictates of his judgment, and the warnings of 
his conscience, as well as to the testimony of 
Scripture; an individual who is sacrificing the 
interests of his immortal soul to the vanities of the 
world, and the corruptions of his heart; an indi? 
vidual who is madly bent upon his ruin, and rush- 
ing to the precipice from which he will take his 
fatal leap into perdition ; can we, in that case, be 
satisfied with merely explaining, however clearly, 
and demonstrating, however conclusively, the truth 
of revelation ? Should we think it enough, coldly 
to unfold the sin of suicide, and logically to 
arrange the proofs of its criminahty, before the 
man who had in his hand the pistol or the poison 
with which he was just about to destroy himself? 
Would exegesis, however clear and accurate, be 
enough in this case ? Should we not entreat, ex- 
postulate, beseech ? Should we not lay hold of 
(he arm uplifted for self-destruction, and snatch 



8S NATURE OF 

th^ poison cup from the hand that was about to 
apply it to the lips ? What is the case with the 
inpenitent sinners to whom we preachy but that 
of individuals bent upon self-destruction^ not in- 
deed the present destruction of their bodies^ but 
of their souls ! There they are before our eyes, 
rushing in their sins and their impenitence to the 
precipice that overhangs the pit of destruction ; 
and shall we content ourselves with sermons, how- 
ever excellent for elegance, for logic, for perspi- 
cuity, and even for evangelism, but which have no 
hortatory power, no moving tendency, none of 
the apostle^s beseeching entreaty ? Shall we 
merely lecture on theology, and deal out reUgious 
science, to men, who, amidst a flood of light 
already pouring over them and blazing around 
them, care for none of these things ? 

It is a question of not a little difficulty, how 
far the usual rules and qualities of secular elo- 
quence may be carried out in the composition of 
our sermons. The language of the apostle in 
reference to his own preaching, has been thought 
to forbid all elaboration, — "Christ sent me to 
preach the gospel, not with wisdom of words, lest 
the cross of Christ should be made of none effect^' 
A right imderstanding of his circumstances and 
ours, will show us that there are differences which 
forbid too rigid and literal an application of this 
sentiment to our own case. Miracles gave a 



EARNESTNESS. 89 

potency to his preaching, which is wanting in ours. 
Besides, the wisdom here forbidden was not the 
selection of the best words, and placing them in 
the best order for the statement of divine truth, 
but that combination of false philosophy and 
artificial rhetoric, which were the usual practice of 
the Grecian schools ; what he forbade was such a 
method of setting forth evangelical doctrine as 
would have brought it into conformity, both as to 
matter and manner, with the fashionable systems 
of philosophy. Provided the elaboration is carried 
on with a view to make the sermon at once per- 
spicuous and impressive, to give it power to 
command the attention, and at the same time to 
instruct the judgment, engage the affections, and 
awaken the conscience; to render the subject 
clearly understood, and at the same time deeply 
felt, it cannot be too perfectly done. No prepara- 
tion which causes the hearer to forget the preacher, 
and even the sermon, as a production of art, and 
to think only of himself and the subject ; which 
rivets attention, and makes every one feel that he 
is in the presence, not only of man, but of God ; 
which lays open the way of salvation so clearly 
that the most obtuse understanding shall compre- 
hend it, and at the same time so forcibly and touch- 
ingly that the dullest heart shall feel it, cannot be 
wrong. If a preacher were to arise of the power 
qf Demosthenes, he would, and must, carry that 



90 NATURE OP 

power into the pulpit^ and ought to do so. But 
on the other hand^ an elaboration that is betrayed 
in every part of the discourse^ and which makes it 
but too evident to every serious or observant mind 
that it was the preacher^s aim not to convert souls^ 
but to catch applause ; which in the view of the 
fashionable^ the giddy^ and the frivolous^ entitles 
the sermonizer to the highest rank among pulpit 
orators; which fills the discourse with flowery 
diction and gaudy metaphors^ with elegant decla- 
mation, and fanciful descriptions, with tasteful 
addresses, and beautiful pictures; which, though 
it takes the cross for its subject, almost instantly 
leaves it, and runs out into the fields of poesy, 
or the labyrinths of metaphysics, for its subtle argu- 
ments, or its sparkling and splendid illustrations ; 
which to sum up all, engages the judgment or 
amuses the imagination, but never moves the 
heart, nor calls the conscience to discharge its 
severe and awfiil functions — such preaching may 
render a minister popular, secure him large con- 
gregations, and procure for him the plaudits of the 
multitude ; but where are the sinners converted 
from the error of their way, and the souls saved 
from death ? Verily I say unto you, if such a 
preacher has his reward only in the applause of 
the multitude, whose object and aim were as low 
as his own — ^it was what he sought, and all he 
sought, and let him not complain if he gain this. 



EARNESTNESS. 91 

and nothing else. From such preachers may God 
Almighty preserve our churches, and may he give 
us men who better know their boaineas in the 
pulpit, and better do it I 

Simplicity of style, then, as opposed to the 
artificial and rhetorical, is essential to earnestness; 
for who can believe that man to be intent on saving 
souls, who seems to have laboured in the study 
only to make his sermon as fine as ghttering 
imagery and high sounding diction could render 
it. I could as soon beUeve a physician were intent 
on saving his fellow creatures from death, who, 
when the plague was sweeping them into the 
grave, spent his time in scattering over his patients 
flowers or perfumes, or writing his prescriptions 
in beautiful characters and classical latinity. 

There are some judicious remarks on the style 
of the pulpit in two papers which appeared some 
time since, one in the Edinburgh Review, and 
the other in the Quarterly, on Hare's "Village 
Sermons,'' those admirable models of simplicity. 
The object of the reviewer in the Quarterly is 
to illustrate the nature, to prove the necessity, and 
to urge the cultivation of simplicity, especially in 
those sermons which are addressed to congrega- 
tions which are composed in great measure of the 
poor. After giving a quotation or two in which 
Mr. Hare had made mention of " smugglers and 



92 NATURE OF 

poachers," ''tea and wheaten bread/' the critic 
remarks, 

"We have preachers in our time who would have 
flinched from expressions so natural and straight-forward, 
and would infallibly have warned their poor people against 
holding any intercourse with the nocturnal marauder on 
the main or the manor; and have suggested to them 
the gratitude they owed for & fragrant beverage and fari- 
naceous food. And so might Mr. Hare, if his taste 
had been less correct, and his desire of doing good less 
earnest. Affectation is bad enough any where; in the 
pulpit it is intolerable." 

In speaking of illustrations, the writer goes on 
to advert to the excessive quaintness which was 
one of the vices of sermons before and about the 
time of the Reformation : — 

'' Accordingly within a century after the Reformation 
we find Thomas Fuller, the last man from natural tempera- 
ment one would have thought likely to offer a caution 
upon such a subject, saying of the faithful minister, ' His 
similes and illustrations are always familiar, never con- 
temptible. Indeed reasons are the pillars of the fabric of 
a sermon, but similitudes are the windows which give the 
best light. He avoids such stories whose mention may 
suggest bad thoughts to the auditors, and will not use a 
light comparison to make thereof a grave application, 
for fear lest his poison go further than his antidote.' 
Preaching therefore now took an opposite tack, and from 
having been certainly once too succulent, by the time of 
John Wesley had become sapless. This was one cause 
which rendered the new style of preaching adopted by 
him and his followers so attractive. The standard accord- 



EARNESTNESS. 93 

log to which the character of the imagery and diction of 
the pulpit of modem days was regulated, was not fixed 
before the divines of Queen Ann's time ; as the vocabulary 
of poetry, according to Johnson, was not determined before 
the age of Dry den. In both cases the restraint has been 
injurious to the subject of it. There was a Doric simpli- 
city — * wood-notes wild' — in the poets before Dryden, for 
which the greater correctness, it may be, of those who 
have since lived is but a poor substitute ; and there was 
a homely vigour in the sentiments and phraseology of the 
pulpit of the first and second Charles, which has been ill 
replaced by the decorous tameness of later times. Surely 
it is a morbid taste, and one that requires correction, 
which would kick at images that satisfied a Barrow ; and 
yet we could point to numbers in his sermons which 
would now be rejected by the preacher, even the village 
preacher too, as mean and pedestrian. The familiar 
illustrations, therefore, by which a subject is rendered 
clear to persons slow to apprehend, and interesting to 
persons hard to be excited, is a figure not lightly to be 
renounced in deference to the false refinement of the 
magnates of a congregation — though doubtless capable of 
abuse. We say false refinement, for there are parables 
both in the prophets and in the gospels, against which the 
same parties might raise the same objection."* 

In a similar strain and with a like object^ 
though with still more expansion of thought^ a 
masterly writer in the Edinburgh Review re- 
marks : 

'' We have long felt that the eloquence of the pulpit 
in its general character has never been assimilated so far 

* Quarterly Review, Article II, No. 117. 



94 . NATURE OF 

as it might have been, and ought to have been, to that 
which has produced the greatest effects elsewhere, and 
which is shewn to be of the right kind, alike by the success 
which has attended it, and by an analysis of the qualities 
by which it has been distinguished. If. we were compelled 
to give a brief definition of the truest style of eloquence, 
we should say it was ' practical reasoning, animated by 
strong emotion ; or if we might be indulged in what is 
rather a description than a definition of it, we should say 
that it consisted in reasoning on topics calculated to inspire 
a common interest, expressed in the language of ordinary 
life, and in that brief, rapid, familiar style, which natural 
emotion ever assumes. The former half of this description 
would condemn no small portion of the compositions 
called sermons, and the latter half a still larger portion. 

"We would not be misunderstood. It is far — very 
far — from our intention to speak in terms of the slightest 
depreciation of the immense treasures of learning, of acute 
disquisition, of profound speculation, of powerful contro- 
versy, which the literature of the English pulpit exemphfies. 
In these points it cannot be surpassed. In vigour and 
originality of thought, in argumentative power, in extensive 
and varied erudition, it as far transcends all other. litera- 
ture of the same kind, as it is deficient in the qualities 
which are fitted to produce popular impression. We 
merely assert that the greater part of ' sermons' are not 
at all entitled to the name, if by it be meant discourses 
especially adapted to the object of instructing, convincing, 
or persuading the eommon mind,** 

After some admirably judicious remarks ou the 
topics of the pulpit, designed to prove that these 
should be such as are calculated to inspire a com- 
mon interest in the mass of a common audience, 



EARNESTNESS. 95 

the writer goes on to speak of the manner of 
discussing them, and observes — 

" Where the topics are not such as are fairly open to 
censure, a large class of preachers, especially amongst the 
young, grievously err by investing them with the techni- 
calities of science and philosophy; either because they 
foolishly suppose they thereby give their compositions a 
more philosophical air, or because they disdain the homely 
and the vulgar. We remember hearing of a worthy man 
of this class, who having occasion to tell his audience the 
simple truth that there was not one gospel for the rich 
and another for the poor, informed them, 'that if they 
would not be saved on general principles, they could not 
be saved at all I' With such men it is not sufficient to say, 
that such and such a thing must be, but there is always ' a 
moral or physical necessity for it.' The * will' is too old- 
fashioned a thing to be mentioned, and every thing is 
done by * volition ;' duty is expanded into ' moral obliga- 
tion ;' man not only ought to do this, that, or the other, 
it is always * by some principle of their moral nature ;' 
they not only like to do so and so, but 'they are impelled 
by some natural propensity ;' men not only think and do, 
but they are never represented as thinking and doing 
without some parade of their ' intellectual processes and 
active powers.' Such discourses are full of ' moral beauty,' 
and ' necessary relations,' and ' philosophical demonstra- 
tions,' and 'laws of nature,' and a priori, and * a fortiori* 
arguments. If some simple fact of physical science is 
referred to iit the way of argument or illustration, it can- 
not be presented in common language, but must be exhi- 
bited in the pomp of the most approved scientific techni- 
cahties. If there be a common and scientific name for 
the same object, ten to one that the latter is adopted. 



96 NATURE OF 

Heat straightway becomes 'caloric;' lightning, ^the elec- 
tric fluid ;' instead of plants and animals, we are surrounded 
by ' organised substances ;' life is nothing half so good as 
'the vital principle/ Not only is such language as this 
obscurely understood, or not understood at all; but even 
if perfectly understood, must necessarily be far less effec- 
tive than those simple terms of common life, which for 
the most part may be substituted for them. The sermons 
of Augustus William Hare may serve to show how the 
abstract terms of philosophy may be advantageously 
translated into simple, racy English."* 

So harmonious are the judgments^ on the best 
style of preaching, of two writers belonging to very 
different schools of literature and religion, whose 
keen sarcasm it may be hoped will correct the 
pedantry at which it is aimed^ and convince many 
an ambitious aspirant after popularity that what- 
ever may be the method which will secure the 
applause of the frivolous and the ignorant, simpli- 
city is the only way to attain usefulness and to se- 
cure the approbation of the serious, the wise, and 
the good. An affectation of learning and science 
in the pulpit, is not only a sin against good taste, 
but betrays an utter want of that watching for 
immortal souls, which is, or ought to be, the 
preacher^s steady and constant aim. To borrow 
the homely, but forcible language of Doolittle, — 

"The eyeing of eternity should make us ministers 

* Edinburgh Review, No. 145. " On the British PDlpit." 



XA1INE8TNE86. 97 

painftil and diligent in our studies to prepare a message 
of sucb weight as we come about, when preaching to men 
ocmeeming ererlastmg matters, and should especially move 
us to be plain in our speech, that even the capacity of the 
weakest in the congregation, that hath an eternal soul 
that must be damned or saved, might understand in things 
necessary to salvation, what we mean, and aim, and drive 
at. It hath made me tremble to hear some soar aloft, 
that knowing men might know their parts, whilst the 
meaner sort are kept torn the knowledge of it ; and put 
their matter in such a dress of words, in such a style so 
composed, that the most stand looking at the preacher in' 
the face, and hear a sound, but know not what he saith, 
and while he doth pretend to feed them, doth indeed 
starve them. Would a man of any bowels of compassion 
go from a prince to a condemned man, and tell him in 
such a language that he should not understand the con- 
dition upon which the prince would pardon him, and then 
the poor man lose his life because the proud and haughty 
messenger must shew his knack in delivering his message 
in fine English, which the condemned man could not 
understand ?" 

I shall, not inappropriately, introduce here a 
quotation from that great master of chaste elo- 
quence, Robert Hall ; whose opinion on any sub- 
ject, but especially on that of the art of preaching, 
in which he was himself so extraordinary a profi- 
cient, is entitled to peculiar deference. 

'' A great diversity of talents must be expected to be 

found amongst them ( the evangelical clergy ; ) but it has 

not been our lot to hear of any, whose labours a good 

man would think it right to treat with indiscriminate con- 

H 



98, NATURE OP 

tempt. . A|3 they are called for the most part, to address 
the middle and lower clajsses of society, their language is 
plain and simple : speaking in the presence of God, their, 
address is solemn ; and, * as hecomes the ambassadors of 
Christ,' their fippeals to the conscience are close nnd, 
cogent. Few, if any, among them aspire to the praise, 
of consummate orators : a character which we despair of 
ever seeing associated, in high perfection, with that of ,a. 
Christian teacher. The minister of the gospel is called to 
declare the testimony of God, which is always weakened 
by a profuse employment of the ornaments of secular 
eloquence. Those exquisite paintings and nice touches, 
of art, in which the sermons of the French preachers, 
excel so much^ excite a kind of attention, and produce a 
species of pleasure, not in perfect accordance with devo- 
tional feeling. The imagination is too much excited and 
employed, not to interfere with the more awful functions 
of conscience ; the hearer is absorbed in admiration, and 
the exercise i^hich ought to be an instrument of conviction, 
becomes a feast of taste. In the hand of a Massillon, the 
subject of death itself is blended with so many associations 
of the most delicate kind, and calls up so many sentiments 
of natural tenderness, as to become a source of theatrical 
amusement, rather than of religious sensibility. Without 
being insensible to the charms of eloquence, it is our- 
decided opinion that a sermon of Mr. Gisborne's is more^ 
calculated to * convert a sinner from the error of his way,' 
than one of Massillon's. It is a strong objection to a' 
studied attempt at oratory in the pulpit, that it usually^ 
induces a neglect of the peculiar doctrines of Christian^ 
verity, where the preacher feels himself restrained, and is 
under the necessity of explaining texts, of obviating 
objections, and elucidating difficulties, which limit the 
excursions of imagination, and confine it within narrow 



EARNESTNESS. ^ 

bounds. He is therefore eager to escape from these 
fetters, and, instead of ' reasoning out of the Scriptures,' 
expatiates in the flowery fields of declamation." 

A want of powerful, eloquent, yet simple and 
unaffected exhortation, is among the greatest defi- 
ciencies of the modem pulpit. Let any one read 
the sermons of our great nonconformist ancestors, 
of Clarkson, Doolittle, Manton, Howe, Owen, 
Bates, Flavel, and especially of Baxter, and mark 
the all but overwhelming force of persuasion which 
is put forth in the application of their powerful, 
discpurses; let him see how these great men 
exerted the mightiness of theif strength to make 
all they said to the judgment, reach the heart and 
aiwaken the conscience. And to come to more 
modern times, let him read the sermons of 
Whitfield, Jonathan: Edwards, and Davies, of 
New Jersey ; and to advance to still more modera 
productions, let him peruse the sermons of Mr. 
Parsons, of York, and many of the best preachers 
on the other side of the Atlantic — Spring, Barnes, 
Skinner, Beecher, Griffin, Clarke, and Sprague ; 
also Robert HalFs sermon on " Marks of Love to 
God,'' and Bradley's sermon on ^' Our Lamps are 
Gone Out," for tine specimens of this hortatory, 
method ; this bearing down with the whole power 
of the truth on the sinner's heart and conscience ; 
this beseeching men to be reconciled to God. 

h2 



100 NATUBE 07 

Some specimens of this method will be given in 
the following chapter. Now this is earnestness in 
preaching *, when it is evident to the hearer that 
the preacher feels the truths he discusses ; when 
it is manifest to all that he believes what he says, 
in affirming that his hearers are sinking into per- 
dition, and that he is labouring to persuade them 
to forsake their evil courses; when his sermons 
are full of close, pointed, personal addresses; 
when, in short, through the whole discourse, the 
preacher is seen moving onward from the under- 
standing to a closer and closer approximation to 
the heart in the conclusion, and the hearer feels 
at length the hand of the preacher seizing him 
with a mysterious and resistless power, and bear- 
ing him away, almost whether he will or no, to 
Christ, salvation, and heaven. The conviction of 
the judgment is not the ultimate object of good 
preaching ; though if we are to judge by their man- 
ner of preaching, it is the chief, if not the exclu- 
sive end of some preachers : but they ought to 
know that the persuasion of the heart does not 
follow as a matter of course ; this has still to be 
effected, and they have yet to undertake it as a 
distinct purpose, and to aim at it with a different 
sort of skill, and with a different instrumehtality 
from that by which they chiefly work. Compel 
them to come in, was the method prescribed to the 
servants of the Lord who made a great supper. 



EARNESTNESS. 101 

and sent out his invitations to JS^ e poor and 
needy. It is this compulsion we want; this 
earnest entreaty^ this laying hold of the sinner^ 
and making him feel that his salvation is with as 
an object of intense desire, and that we shall be 
bitterly disappointed if it be not accomplished. 



CHAPTER V. 

NATURE OP EARNESTNESS ILLUSTRATED BY 
SPECIMENS PROM VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Familiar as most of the readers of this work 
are with examples of the kind of mamier intended^ 
it will help to illustrate and enforce its nature^ if a 
few extracts from different authors are here intro- 
duced^ by way of specimens. Those which are 
here presented are not selected as possessing any 
thing very extraordinary, or as being the best of 
the kind that could be selected from the same 
authors ; but they are sufficient to answer the pur- 
pose. Nor are they exhibited as models, to be in 
every particular imitated in modem composition, 
but as being pervaded by that one quality of intense 
earnestness, which it is the object of this work to 
recommend. 

The first extract which shall be quoted is from 
a sermon of Mr. Doolittle. This eminent minister 
of Christ was ejected by the Act of Uniformity in 
1662, from the church of St. Alphage, London 
Wall. He was a man of extraordinary courage, 
power, and success, in preaching ; and after his 
expulsion from his living, educated young men 
for the ministry. The extract which follows is 



I 



I 

SPECIMENS OF EARNESTNESS. 103 

taken from a discourse contained in that valuable 
series called ^^ The Morning Exercises/^ * and is 
entitled, ^^How we should eye Eternity, so that it 
may have its infltience on all we do,'' It is per- 
haps the most solemn and awful sermon in the 
Enghsh or any other language ; and is overcharged 
•sadly with terminology, which though it should be 
sparingly introduced, ought hot to be altogether 
excluded from the modern pulpit, even in this 
;fastidious age. The sickly sentimentalism which 
would "never mention hell to ears polite,^^ should 
be abjured with as much disgust as a gross famili- 
arity with these awful realities. It was not only 
Doolittle's fault, but it was the vice of the age to 
approach somewhat too near to the latter extreme. 
But then, after this admission is made, let us look 
at the burning and overwhelming earnestness of 
the sermon. 

" Is there an eternal state : such unseen eternal joys 
and torments? Who then can sufficiently lament the 
blindness, madness, and folly of this distracted world, and 
the unreasonableness of those that have rational and eter- 
nal souls, to see them busily employed in the matters of 
time, which are only for time, in present honours, 
pleasures, and profits, while they do neglect everlasting 
things; everlasting life and death is before them, everlast- 
ing joy or torment is hard at hand ; and yet poor sinners 
take no care how to avoid the one, or obtain the other. 

* A new edition of this work has been lately published by 
Tegg : and let every young minister be sure to purchase a copy. 



104 8P£CIM£NS OF 

Is it BOt matter of lamentation to see so many thousands 
bereaved of the sober serious use of their understandings? 
That while they use their reason to get the riches of this 
world, they will not act as rational men to get the joys of 
heaven, and to avoid temporal calamities, yet not to escape 
eternal misery. Or if they be fallen into present afflic- 
tions, they contrive how they may get out of them : if 
they be sick, reason tells them they must use the means 
if they would be well : if they be in pain, nature puts 
them on to seek after a remedy; and yet these same men 
neglect all duty and cast away all care concerning ever- 
lasting matters: they are for seen pleasures and profits 
which are passing from them in the enjoyment of them ; 
but the unseen eternal glory in heaven they pray not for> 
they think not of: Are they unjustly charged? Let con- 
science speak what thoughts they lie down withal upon 
their pillow ; if they wake, or sleep fly from them in the 
silent night, what a noise doth the care of the world 
make in their souls? With what thoughts do they rise 
in the morning? Of God, or of the world? Of the 
things of time, or of eternity? Their thoughts are in 
their shops before they have been in heaven ; and many 
desires after visible temporal gain, before they have had 
one desire after the invisiUe, eternal God, and treasurea 
that are above. What do they do all the day long? What is 
it that hath their endeavours, all their labour and travel ? 
Their most painful industry and unwearied diligence? 
Alas I their consciences will tell themselves, and tiieir 
practices tell others, when there is trading, but no pray- 
ing, buying and selling, but no religious duties performed : 
the shop-book is often opened, but the sacred book of 
God is not looked into all the week long. 

" O Lord ! forgive the hardness of my heart that I can 
see such insufferable folly among reasonable creatures. 



EARNESTNESS. 105 

and can lament this foUy no more : good Lord, forgiTe 
the want of compassion in me that.can stand and see this 
distraction in the world, as if the most of men had lost 
their wits and were quite beside themselves, and yet my 
bowels yearn no more towards immortal souls that are 
going to unseen miseries in the eternal world; to see 
distracted men busy in doing things that tend to no 
account is not such an amazing sight as to see men that 
have reason for the world, to use it not for Qod, and 
Christ, and thdr own eternal good : to see them love and 
embrace a present dunghill world, and cast away all 
serious, affecting, and effectual thoughts of the life to 
come : to see them rage against the God of heaven, and 
cry out against holiness as foolish preciseness; and serious 
godliness as madness and melancholy. 

'* Let us call the whole creation of God to lament and 
bewail the foUy of man that was made the best of all 
God's visible works, but now by such wickedness is bad 
beyond them all; being made by God for an everlasting 
state, and yet minds nothing less than that for which he 
was principally made. 

** O sun! why is it not thy burden to give light to men 
to do those works and walk in those ways that bring them 
to eternal darkness ? O earth I why dost thou not groan 
to bear such burdensome fools that dig into thy bowels 
for gold and silver, while they do neglect everlasting 
treasures in the eternal world ? O ye sheep and oxen I 
fish and fowl t why do ye not ery ont against them that 
take away your present life to maintain them in being, 
but only mind present things, but forget the eternal God 
that gave them dominion over you, to live upon you, 
while they had time to mind eternal things, but do not 7 
O ye angels of God, and blessed saints in heaven, were 
ye capable of grief and sorrow, would not ye lutteriy 



106 SPECIMENS OF 

lament the sin and folly of poor mortals upon eai^h? 
Could ye look down from that blessed place where ye do 
dwell and behold the joy and glory which is to us unseen, 
and see how it is basely slighted by the sons of men, if 
ye were not above sorrow and mourning, would not ye 
take this up for a bitter lamentation? O ye saints on 
earth ! whose eyes are open to see what the blind deluded 
world doth not see, do ye bitterly take on, let your heads 
be fountains of water, and your eyes send forth rivers of 
lears for the great neglect of eternal joys and happiness 
of heaven. Can you see men going out of time into 
eternity in their sin and in their blood, in their guilt and 
unconverted state, and your hearts not be moved ? your 
bowels not yearn? Have ye spent all your tears in 
bewailing your own .sin, that your eyes are dry when you 
behold such monstrous madness and unparalleled folly of 
80 many, with whom daily ye converse? Ye sanctified 
parents, have ye no pity for your ungodly children ? Nor 
(sanctified children, for ungodly parents?'' 

The next extract I shall present is from holy 
Baxter^ under whose ministry Doolittle was con- 
verted, and from whom he appears to have bor- 
rowed his own manner of preaching. 

" O sirs, they are no trifles or jesting matters that the 
gospel speaks of. I must needs profess to you that when 
I have the most serious thoughts of these things, I am 
ready to wonder that such amazing matters do not over- 
whelm the souls of men : that the greatness of the subject 
doth not so overmatch our understandings and affections 
as even to drive men beside themseves, but that God hath 
always somewhat allayed it by distance ; much more do I 
wonder that men should be so blockish as to make light 



EARNESTNESS. 107 

of such thii^. O Lord^ that men did but know what 
everlasting glory and everlasting torments are ! Would 
they then hear us as they do? Would they read and 
think of these things as they do ? I profess I have been 
ready to wonder when I have heard, such weighty things 
delivered, how people can forbear cr3dng out in the con- 
gregation; and much more do I wonder how they can 
rest till they have gone to their ministers, and learned 
what they shall do to be saved, that this great business 
should be put out of doubt. O that heaven and hell 
should work no more upon men ! O that eternity should 
work no more I O how can you forbear when you are 
alone to think with yourselves what it is to be everlasting 
in joy or torment ! I wonder that such thoughts do no^ 
break your sleep, and that they do not crowd into your 
minds when you are about your labour ! I wonder how 
you can almost do any thing else ! How can you have 
any quietness in your minds? How can you eat, or 
drink, or rest, till you have got some ground of everlast- 
ing consolations ? Is that a man or a corpse that is not 
affected with matters of this moment — that can be readier 
to sleep than to tremble when he hears how he must 
stand at the bar of God ? Is that a man or a clod of clay 
that can rise up and lie down without being deeply 
affected with his everlasting state — that can follow his 
worldly business, and make nothing of the great business 
of salvation or damnation, and that when he knows it is 
so hard at hand? Truly, sirs, when I think of the weight 
of the matter, 1 wonder at the best saints upon earth that 
they are no better, and do no more, in so weighty a case. 
I wonder at those whom the world accounts more holy 
than needs, and scorns for making so much ado, that they 
can put off Christ and their souls with so little ; that they 
do not pour out their souls in every prayer ; that they are 



108 SPECIMENS OF 

not more taken up with God; that their thoughts are not 
more serious in preparation for their kst account. I 
wonder that they are not a thousand times more strict in 
their lives, and more laborious and unwearied for the 
crown than they are* And for myself, as I am ashamed 
of my dull and careless heart, and of my slow and unpro^ 
fitable course of life, so the Lord knows I am ashamed of 
every sermon that I preach : when I think what I am> 
and who sent me, and how much the salvation and damna* 
tion of men is concerned in it, I am ready to tremble lest 
God should judge me a slighter of his truth and the souls 
of men, and lest in my best sermons I should be guilty of 
their blood* Methinks we should not speak a word to 
men in matters of sudi consequence without tears, or 
the greatest earnestness that possibly we can. Were we 
not too much guilty of the sin which we reprove, it would 
be so. Whether we are alone or in company, methinks 
our end, and such an end should still be in our mind, 
and as before our eyes ; and we should sooner forget any 
thing, or set light by any thing, or by all things, than by 
this." 

The third extract is from the works of that 
great and serene spirit, John Howe ; whose surpas- 
sing grandeur of thought and expression places 
him in this respect far above all his compeers. 
His sermon on the '' Inquiry whether or no we 
truly love God/' is one of the finest pieces of 
solemn, heart-searching expostulation, which can 
be found in the whole range of English theology, 
from which I give the following pages, the spirit 
of which should enter into the soul of every min- 
ister and student who reads them. 



EARNESTNESS. 109 

*'For further direction take heed of passing a false 
judgment in this case^ a judgment contrary to the truth : 
for — 

'^ First, That is to no purpose^ it will avail thee nothings 
you cannot be advanti^ed by it, for yours is not the 
supreme judgment. There will be another and superior 
judgment to yours, that will control and reverse your false 
judgment, and make it signify nothing, it is therefore to 
no purpose. And 

" Secondly, It is a great piece of insolency, for it will 
be to oppose your judgment to his certain and most autho« 
rized one; who, if this be your case, hath already judged 
it, and tells you, * I know you, that you have not the love 
of God in you.' It belongs to him by office to judge : 
^The Father hath committed all judgment to the Son,' as 
a little above in this chapter ; From which will you depose 
him ? dethrone him ? disannul his judgment ? condemn 
him? that you may be righteous? (to borrow that. 
Job xl, 8.) 

*' Thirdly, It is most absurd, supposing such characters 
as you have heard do conclude a man in this case, yet to 
judge himself a lover of God. If against the evidence of 
such characters a man should pronounce the wrong judg- 
ment, it would be the most unreasonable and absurd thing 
imaginable ; for then let us but suppose, how that wronged 
judgment must lie related to those fore-mentioned charac- 
ters, that have been given you. Let me remind you of 
some of them, — ^he that never put forth the act of love to 
God cannot say he hath the principle, — he that is not 
inclined to do good to others, for the sake of God, 1 John 
iii, 17 — he that indulges himself in the inconsistent love 
of this world, 1 John ii, 15 — he that lives not in obedience 
to his known laws, John xiv, 14, 1 John v, 3, with many 
more. Now if you will pass a judgment of your case 



lid SPECIMENS OF 

against the evidence of such characters, come forikh then, 
let the matter he hrought into clear sight, put your sense 
into plain words, and this it will he : — ' I am a lover of 
Gk)d, or I have the love of God in me, though I cannot 
tell that ever I put forth one act of love towards hibi in 
illl my life; I have the love of God in me, though I never 
knew what it meant to do good to any for his sake, against 
the express words of Scripture : How dwelleth the love of 
God in such a man? I have the love of God in me, 
though I have constantly indulged myself in that which 
he maketh an inconsistent love, ' Love not the world, nor 
the things which are in the world : if any man love the 
world, the love of the Father is not in him.' I have the 
love of God in me, though I would never allow him to* 
rule me, though I never kept his commandments with a 
design to please him, and comply with his will. I have 
the love of God in me, though I never valued his love. I 
have the love of God in me, though I never cared for his 
image, for his presence, for his converse, for his interest- 
and honour.' I beseech you consider how all this will 
sound ! Can any thing he more absurdly spoken ? and 
shall it be upon such improbabilities or impossibilities as 
these, that any man will think it fit to venture bis soul t 
' I will pawn my soul upon it, I will run the hazard of my 
soul upon it, I am a lover of God for all this !' Would 
you venture any thing else so besides your soul? Would 
you venture a finger so, an eye so ? It is to place the 
name where there is nothing of the thing ; it is to place 
the name of a thing upon its contrary. The soul of man 
cannot be in an indifferency towards God ; but if there be 
not love and propension, there is aversion, and that is 
hatred. And what ! is hatred to be called love ? If you 
bear that habitual disposition of soul towards God, to go 
all the day long with no inclination towards him ; no 



EARNESTNESS. Ill 

design to please him, to serve him, to glorify him ; if this 
he your hahitual temper and usual course, will you cair 
this love? Shall this contrariety to the love of God be 
called love to him? You may as well call water fire, or' 
fire water, as so grossly misname things here ; and there- 
fore again, 

"That we may advance somewhat ; plainly and posi- 
tively pass the true judgment. If the characters that you- 
have heard do carry the matter so, come at last plainly 
and positively to pass the true judgment of your own 
case, though it he a sad one : and tell your own souls, 
' Oh my soul ! though I must sadly say it, I must say it, 
all things conclude and make against thee : the love of 
God is not in thee.' Why is it not as good this should 
be the present issue at your own bar, and at the tribunal 
of your own conscience, as before God's judgment seat? • 
Why should you not concur and fall in with Christ, the 
authorized Judge, whose judgment is according to truth? 
Why this is a thing that must be done, the case requires 
it, and God's express word requires it, 1 Cor. xi, 31. 
Other previous and preparatory duty plainly enjoined, 
(Joth by consequence enjoin it, and requires that it follow, 
2 Cor. xiii, 5. What is examination for, but in order to 
judgment? It must therefore be done, and I shall shew 
ho.w it must be done, and proceed to some further direc- 
tions. 

" First, You must do it solemnly. Take yourselves 
^,side at some fit season or another, inspect your own 
souls, review your life, consider what your wonted frame, 
and your ordinary course has been. And if you find by 
such characters as heretofore were given, this is the truth 
qf your case, then let judgment pass upon dehberation : 
* Oh my soul ! thou hast not the love of God in thee, 
whatsoever thine appearances hitherto have been ; and 



112 SPBCIHENS OF 

whatsoever thy peace and quiet hath been, thou hast not 
the love of God in thee.' Let it be done with solemnity. 

^* Secondly, Do it in the sight of God as before him, as 
under his eye^ as under the eye of Christ, That eye that 
is as ft flame of fire, that learches hearts, and tries reins ; 
arraign thyself before him. ' Lord, I have here brought 
before thee a guilty soul, a ddinquent soul, wretchedly 
and horridly delinquent, a soul that was breathed into me 
by thee, an intelligent, understanding soul, a soul that 
hath love in its nature, but a soul that never loved thee.' 

" Thirdly, Judge thyself before him as to the fact, 
and as to the fault. As to the fact : ' I have never yet 
loved thee, O God, I own it to thee ; Lord, I accuse, I 
charge my soul with this before thee, this is the truth of 
the fact, I have not the love of God in me.' And charge 
thyself with the fault, * Oh horrid creature that I am ! 
I was made by thee, and do'nt love thee; thou didst 
breathe into me this reasonable, immortal spirit, and it 
doth not love thee ; it is thine own offspring, and does not 
love thee. It can never be blessed in any thing but thee, 
and it does not love thee.' And then hereupon, 

*' Fourthly, Join to this, self ^ judging and selfJoathing. 
That we are to judge ourselves is a law laid upon us by 
the supreme Lawgiver, the one Lawgiver, that hath power 
to save and to destroy. And his word that enjoins it, as 
plainly tells us what must go with it, that this self-judging 
must be accompanied with self-loathing, Ezek. vi, 9 ; xx, 
43, and xxxvi, 31. Do God that right upon thyself that 
thou mayest tell him, 'Blessed God! I do even hate myself, 
because I find I have not loved thee ; and I cannot but 
hate myself, and I never will be reconciled to myself, till 
I find I am reconciled to thee.' This is doing justice, 
doth not the Scripture usually and familiarly so represent 
to us the great turn of the soul to God ; when poor 



EARNESTNESS; 113 

sinners become penitents and return, that tbey are brought 
to hate themselves, and loathe themselves in their own 
eyes ? And is there any thing that can make a soul so 
loathsome in itteif, or ought to make it so loathsome to 
itself, as not to love God, to be destitute of the love of 
God? And then 

'^Fifthly, Hereupon too, pity thyself, pity thy own 
soul. There is cause to hate it, to loathe it, and is there 
no cause to pity it? to lament it? Doth not this look 
like a lamentable case, ' Oh ! what a soul have I that can 
love any thing else, that can love trifles, that can love 
impurities, that can love sin; and cannot love God, 
Christ, the most desirable good of souls. What a soul 
have I? What a monster in the creation of God is this 
soul of mine !* Methinks you should set yourselves, if 
any of you can find this to be the case, to weep over your 
own souls. Some may see cause to say, ' Oh, my soul ! 
thou hast in thee other valuable things, thou hast under- 
standing in thee, judgment in thee, wit in thee; perhaps 
learning, considerable acquired endowments, in thee ; but 
thou hast not the love of God in thee. I can do many 
other commendable or useful things, I can discourse 
plausibly, argue subtilly, I can manage afiairs dexterously, 
but I cannot love God. Oh my soul, how great an essen- 
tial dost thou want to all religion, to all duty, to all 
felicity ! The one thing necessary thou wantest, thou 
hast every thing but what thou needest more than any 
thing, more than all things ; and oh my soul, what is like 
at this rate to become of thee ? Where art thou to have 
thy eternal abode ? To what regions of horror and woe 
art thou going ? What society can be fit for thee ? No 
lover of God ! no lover of God ! what, but of infernal, 
accursed spirits, that are at utmost distance from him, 
and to whom no beam of holy vital light shall ever shine 



114 SPECIMENS OF 

to all eternity ! Thou, oh my soul, art self-abandoned to 
the blackness of darkness for ever. Thy doom is in thy 
breast, thy own bosom, thy no love to God is thy own 
<loom, thy eternal doom ; creates thee a present hell, and 
shews whither thou belongest/ 

" Siocthly, ♦ * * All disobedience and rebel- 
lion is summed up in this one word. Having been no lover 
of God; and won't it make any man's heart to meditate 
terror, to think of having such a charge as this likely to 
lie against him in the judgment of that day ; that day, 
when the secrets of all hearts are to be laid open ? Every 
work must then be brought into judgment, and every 
secret thing, whether it be good or evil, Eccles. xii, 14. 
And it will be to the confusion of many an one. It may 
be your no love of God was heretofore a great secret, you 
had a heart in which was no love of God, but it was a 
secret, you took not care to have it writ on your forehead ; 
you conversed with men so plausibly, nobody took you to 
be no lover of God, to have a heart disaffected to God. 
But now out comes the secret, that which you kept for a 
great secret all your days, out comes the secret ; and to 
have such a secret as this disclosed to that vast assembly, 
before angels and men ! Here was a creature, a reason- 
able creature, an intelligent soul, that lived upon the 
divine bounty and goodness so many years in the world 
below, and hid a false disloyal heart by a plausible show 
and external profession of great devotedness to God, all 
the time of his abode in that world : oh, what a fearful 
thing would it be to have this secret so disclosed I And 
do you think that all the loyal creatures that shall be 
spectators and auditors in the hearing of that great day 
will not all conceive a just and a loyal indignation against 
such an one when convicted of not loving God ; convicted 
of not loving him that gave him breath, him whose he 



EARNESTNESS. 115 

was, and to whom he belonged, whose name he bore? 
What a fearful thing will it be to stand convicted so upon 
such a point as this ! And sure in the meantime there is 
great reason for continual fear, why a man's heart should 
meditate terror! One would even think that all the 
creation should be continually every moment in arms 
against him ! One would be afraid that every wind that 
blows should be a deadly blast to destroy me : that when 
the sun shines upon me, all its beams should be turned 
into vindictive flames to execute vengeance upon me ! I 
would fear that even the very stones in the streets should 
fly against me, and every thing that meets me be my 
death ! For what? I have not the love of God in me ! 
What, to go about the streets from day to day with a 
heart void of the love of God !" 

The next extract is from Jonathan Edwards' 
sermon, on " Pressing into the Kingdom of God/' 
This extraordinary man presents a remarkable 
proof and illustration that the most acute logician 
and the most subtle metaphysician may be at the 
same time the most earnest preacher. His ser- 
mons are some of the most impressive and alarm- 
ing in print, but certainly not a little wanting in 
the tenderness and melting pathos of the gospel 
of salvation. They may be read with admirable 
ejffect to teach us how to expound the nature and 
enforce the obligations of the moral law so as to 
awaken the slumbering conscience of the uncon- 
verted sinner. His astonishing usefulness shows 
the adaptation of his preaching to the age and 
state of society in which he lived, but his method 
i2 



116 SPECIMENS OF 

could not be rigidly followed, except in its earnest- 
ness, in the present day. 

" 1. I would address myself to such as yet remain un- 
awakened. It is an awful thing that there should be any 
one person remaining secure amongst us at such a time as 
this ; but yet it is to be feared that there are some of 
this sort. I would here a little expostulate with such 
persons. 

" When do you expect that it will be more likely that 
you shall be awakened and wrought upon than now? 
You are in a Christless condition ; and yet without doubt 
intend to go to heaven ; and therefore intend to be con- 
verted some time before you die ; but this is not to be 
expected till you are first awakened, and deeply concerned 
about the welfare of your soul, and brought earnestly to 
seek God's converting grace. And when do you intend 
that this shall be ? How do you lay things out in your 
own mind, or what projection have you about this matter? 
Is it ever so likely that a person will be awakened, as at 
such a time as this? How do we see many who before were 
secure now roused out of their sleep, and crying. What 
shall I do to be saved? But you are yet secure! Do 
you flatter yourself that it will be more likely you should 
be awakened when it is a dull and dead time ? Do you 
lay matters out thus in your own mind, that though you 
are senseless when others are generally awakened that 
yet you shall be awakened when others are generally 
senseless ? Or do you hope to see another such time of 
the pouring out of God's Spirit hereafter ? And do you 
think it will be more likely that you should be wrought 
upon then than now ? And why do you think so ? Is 
it because then you shall be so much older than you are 
now, and so that your heart will be grown softer and more 
tender with age? or because you will then have stood out. 



EARNESTNESS. 117 

80 much longer against the calls of the gospel, and all 
means ot grace ? Do you think it more likely that God 
will give yott the needed influences of his Spirit then 
than now, because then you will have provoked him so 
much more, and your sin and guilt will be so much greater ? 
And do you think it will be any benefit to you to stand it 
out through the present season of grace, as proof against 
the extraordinary means of awakening there are? Do 
you think that this will be a good preparation for a saving 
work of the Spirit hereafter ? 

" 2. What means do you expect to be awakened by ? 
As to the awakening awful things of the word of God, 
you have had those set before you times without number, 
in the most moving manner that the dispensers of the 
word have been capable of. As to particular solemn 
warnings, directed to those that are in your circumstances, 
you have had them frequently, and have them now from 
time to time. Do you expect to be awakened by awful 
providences? Those also you have lately had, of the 
most awakening nature, one after another. Do you 
expect to be moved by the deaths of others ? We have 
lately had repeated instances of these. There have been 
deaths of old and young : the year has been remarkable 
for the deaths of young persons in the bloom of life, and 
some of them very sudden deaths. Will the conversion 
of others move you? There is indeed scarce any thing 
that is found to have so great a tendency to stir persons 
up as this : and this you have been tried with of late in 
frequent instances; but are hitherto proof against it. 
Will a general pouring out of the Spirit, and seeing a 
concern about sidvation amongst all sorts of people, do it? 
This means you now have, but without effect. Yea, you 
have all these things together; you have the solemn 
warnings of God's word, and awful instances of death,. 



118 SPECIMENS OF 

and the conversion of others, and see a general concern 
about salvation ; but altogether do not move you to any 
great concern about your own precious, immortal, and 
miserable soul. Therefore consider by what means it is 
that you expect ever to be awakened. 

" You have heard that it is probable some who are now 
awakened, will never obtain salvation; how dark then 
does it look upon you that remain stupidly unawakened ! 
Those who are not moved at such a time as this, come to 
adult age, have reason to fear whether they are not given 
up to judicial hardness. I do not say they have reason 
to conclude it, but they have reason to fear it. How 
dark doth it look upon you, that God comes and knocks 
at so many persons' doors, and misses yours ! that God is 
giving the strivings of his Spirit so generally amongst us, 
while you are left senseless ! 

"3. Do you expect to obtain salvation without ever 
seeking it? If you are sensible that there is a necessity 
of your seeking in order to obtaining, and ever intend to 
seek, one would think you could not avoid it at such a 
time as this. Inquire therefore whether you intend to go 
to heaven, living all your days a secure, negligent, care- 
less life, — Or, 

"4, Do you think you can bear the damnation of 
hell ? Do you imagine that you can tolerably endure the 
devouring fire and everlasting burnings ? Do you hope 
that you shall be able to grapple with the vengeance of 
God Almighty, when he girds himself with strength, and 
clothes himself with wrath ? Do you think to strengthen 
yourself against God, and to be able to make your part 
good with him ? 1 Cor. x, 22, — * Do we provoke the Lord 
to jealousy? are we stronger than he?*' Do you flatter 
yourself that you shall find out ways for your ease and 
support, and to make it out tolerably well, to bear up 



EARNESTNESS. 119 

your spirit in those everlasting burnings that are prepared 
for the devil and his angels? Ezek. xvii, 14. ' Can thine 
heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days 
that I shall deal with thee V It is a difficult thing to 
conceive what such Christless persons think, that are 
unconcerned at such a time." 

The following extract is from that first of all 
preachers, Whitfield ; and who that considers the 
circumstances under which tbese flaming periods 
were enunciated, and the feeling and action which 
accompanied their delivery, can wonder at the 
eflfects they produced ? 

Bbrebching Sinners. ''O my brethren, my heart 
is enlarged towards you. I trust I feel something of that 
hidden but powerful presence of Christ, whilst I am 
preaching to you. Indeed it is sweet, it is exceedingly 
comfortable. All the harm I wish you, who without 
cause are my enemies, is, that you felt the like. Believe 
me, though it would be hell to my soul to return to a 
natural state again, yet I would willingly change states 
with you for a little while, that you might know what it is 
to have Christ dwelling in your hearts by faith. Do not 
turn your backs ; do not let the devil hurry you away ; be 
not afraid of convictions ; do not think worse of the doc- 
trine because preached without the church walls. Our 
Lord, in the days of his flesh, preached on a mount, in a 
ship, and in a field ; and I am persuaded many have felt 
his gracious presence here. Indeed, we speak what we 
know. Do not reject the kingdom of God against your- 
selves ; be so wise as to receive our witness. I cannot, I 
will not, let you go ; stay a little, let us reason together. 



120 SPECIMENS OF 

However lightly you may esteem your souls, I know our 
Lord has set an unspeakable value on them. He thought 
them worthy of his most precious blood. I beseech you 
therefore, O sinners, be ye reconciled to God. I hope you 
do not fear being accepted in the Beloved. Behold, he 
calleth you : behold, he prevents and follows you with his 
mercy, and hath sent forth his servants into the highways 
and hedges, to compel you to come in. Remember then, 
that at such an hour of such a day, in such a year, in this 
place, you were all told what you ought to think concern- 
ing Jesus- Christ. If you now perish, it will not be for 
lack of knowledge : I am free from the blood of you all. 
You cannot say I have, like legal preachers, been requiring 
you to make brick without straw. I have not bidden you 
to make yourselves saints, and then come to God ; but I 
have offered you salvation on as cheap terms as you can 
desire. I have offered you Christ's whole wisdom, Christ's 
whole righteousness, Christ's whole sanctification and 
eternal redemption, if you will but believe (m him. If 
you say you cannot believe, you say right ; for faith, as 
well as every other blessing, is the gift of God : but then 
wait upon God, and who knows but he may have mercy 
on thee ? Why do we not entertain more loving thoughts 
of Christ? Or do you think he will have mercy on 
others, and not on you ? But are you not sinners ? And 
did not Jesus Christ come into the world to save sinners ? 
If you say you are the chief of sinners, I answer, that will 
be no hindrance to your salvation ; indeed it will not, if 
you lay hold on him by faith. Read the evangelists, and 
see how kindly he behaved to his disciples, who fled from 
and denied him : ' Go tell my brethren,' says he. He did 
not say. Go tell those traitors ; but ' Go tell my brethren, 
and Peter y' as though he had said. Go tell my brethren, 
in general, and poor Peter in particular, ' that I am risen :' 



EARNESTNESS. 121 

comfort his poor drooping hearty tell him I am recon- 
ciled to him; bid him weep no more so bitterly: for 
though with oaths and curses he thrice denied me, yet I 
have died for his sins, I am risen again for his justifica- 
tion : I freely forgive him all. Thus slow to anger and of 
great kindness was our all- merciful High Priest. And 
do you think he has changed his nature, and forgets 
poor sinners, now he is exalted to the right hand of God ? 
No, he is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, and 
sitteth there only to make intercession for us. Come 
then, ye harlots; come, ye publicans; come, ye most 
abandoned of sinners, come and believe on Jesus Christ. 
Though the whole world despise you and cast you out, 
yet he will not disdain to take you up. amazing, O 
infinitely condescending love! even you he will not be 
ashamed to call his brethren. How will you escape, if 
you neglect such a glorious ofier of salvation? What 
would the damned spirits, now in the prison of hell, give, 
if Christ was so freely ofiered to their souls ! And why 
are not we lifting up our eyes in torments ? Does any 
one out of this great multitude dare say, he does not 
deserve damnation ? If not, why are we left, and others 
taken away by death? What is this but an instance of 
God's free grace, and a sign of his good will towards us ? 
Let God's goodness lead us to repentance ! O let there 
be joy in heaven over some of you repenting ! Though 
we are in a field, I am persuaded the blessed angels are 
hovering now around us, and do long, ' as the hart panteth 
after the water-brooks,' to sing an anthem at your con- 
version. Blessed be God, I hope their joy will be ful- 
filled. An awful silence appears amongst us. I have 
good hope that the words which the Lord has enabled me 
to speak in your ears this day, have not altogether fallen 
to the ground. Your tears and deep attention are an, 



122 SPECIMENS OF 

evidence that the Lord God is amongst us of a truth. 
Come, ye pharisees, come and see, in spite of your fana- 
tical rage and fury, the Lord Jesus is getting himself the 
victory. And brethren, I speak the truth in Christ, I lie 
not : if one soul of you by the blessing of God be bronght 
to think savingly of Jesus Christ this day, I care nat if 
my enemies were permitted to cary me to prison, and put 
my feet fast in the stocks, as soon as I have delivered this 
sermon. Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to God 
is, that you may be saved. For this cause I follow my 
Master without the camp. I care not how much of his 
sacred reproach I bear, so that some of you be converted 
from the errors of your ways. I rejoice, yea, and 1 will 
rejoice. Ye men, ye devils, do your worst: the Lord 
who sent will support me. And when Christ, who is our 
life, and whom I have now been preaching, shall appear, 
I also, together with his despised little ones, shall appear 
with him in glory. And then what will you think of 
Christ ? I know what you will think of him. You will 
think him to be the fairest among ten thousand ; you will 
then think and feel him to be a just and sin-avenging 
Judge. Be ye then persuaded to kiss him lest he be 
angry, and so you be banished for ever from the presence 
of the Lord. Behold I come to you as the angel did to 
Lot. Flee, flee for your lives ; haste, hnger no longer in 
your spiritual Sodom, for otherwise you will be eternally 
destroyed. Numbers no doubt there are amongst you 
that may regard me no more than Lot's sons-in-law 
regarded him. I am persuaded I seem to some of you as 
one that mocketh : but I speak the truth in Christ, I lie 
BOt ; as sure as fire and brimstone was rained from the 
hord out of heaven, to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, so 
surely at the great day shall the vials of God's wrath be 
poured on you, if you do not think seriously of, and act 



EARNESTNESS. 123 

agreeably to, the gospel of the Lord's Christ. Behold, I 
have told you before ; and I pray God, all you that forget 
him may seriously think of what has been said, before he 
pluck you away, and there be none to deliver you." 

Not to multiply these extracts unnecessarily, I 
give one more from a preacher, who is, perhaps 
without any exception, the most impressive living 
example of earnestness, both in matter and man- 
ner, I mean Mr. Parsons, of York. 

" Oh, do not deceive yourselves ! I would strive to 
tear away the veil. I tell you, O ye whose 'goodness has 
been as a morning cloud, and as the early dew that goeth 
away,* — if unchanged you die, and if unchanged you 
stand before the dread tribunal where an account must be 
rendered of all providences, all immunities, and all feel- 
ings, you will be found fatally wanting, and will hear a 
sentence of condemnation that will consign you to realms 
of everlasting despair. As true as that Jehovah lives is 
it that he will thus execute the fierceness of his indigna- 
tion. Abodes of sorrow await you, where every past 
benefit will but be an instrument of torture; where 
memory and conscience will hold up the mirror of by-gone 
privilege and promise, of abused mercy, of forsworn and 
perjured vows, only that remorse may strike upon the 
soul its more than scorpion sting, and where grace and 
hope can never alleviate the wailings that will reverberate 
through the dungeons of outer darkness for ever and for 
ever ! — ^Your doom will be more tremendous precisely in 
proportion to the means you possessed, and the signs you 
gave, of averting it:— can any doom be worse than yours? 
When these 'terrors of the Lord* are expounded, say if 
there be not an argument of mighty force why you should 



124 SPECIMENS OF 

now beware, and why you should now hear the voice of 
God, lest you should be hardened by the deceitfulness of 
sin, and lest he should swear in his wrath that you shall 
not enter into his rest 1 

"But once more to appeal to those for whom this 
address has been particularly designed. That such there 
are, / know, I could turn round and fix my eye, and 
rest my hand, on persons by whom, if so arraigned, the 
accusation of the text could not be denied or evaded. 
You have been again visited by the instrumentality which 
is adapted for the impression of the heart. Do not reject 
it ; do not let it have that insufficient influence which is 
but to be dissipated for the world, and which makes the 
end worse than the beginning. No — nothing will avail 
but the entire surrender of the soul to him who gave it — 
the determination to live to Christ, and to glory only in 
his cross. In the name of the great God, who is not 
willing that any should perish, but that all should come 
to repentance, I do now adjure you, that you trifle not a 
moment longer, that you delay not a moment longer, 
that you resist not a moment longer : ' Come and return 
unto the Lord :* let this be a season of consideration ; let 
thU be a season of repentance ; let this be a season of 
prayer; let this be a season of dedication to your God : — 
Now, my hearers. Now I 

« — Minister and people must part once more. The 
book must be closed again; the voice must be silent 
again ; the congregation must retire again. O, Spirit of 
God, perform thy work I ' Come from the four winds, O 
breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live !' 
Let there not be one here before thee, of whom, when yon- 
der heavens shall be on fire, and when this earth shall be 
burned up, it shall be found — that their ' goodness was as 
a morning cloud, and that as the early dew it went away ! 



> » 



EARNESTNESS. 125 

These extracts will illustrate what I mean by 
earnestness better than any language which I 
have employed or could select, and they appear to 
me to answer well to the apostolic method of 
beseeching entreaty. I do not of course insist 
that the pulpit should be restricted to the specific 
variety of preaching which we designate the hor- 
tatory method, under which classification these 
specimens must all be placed. There should be 
exegesis, as well as application; exposition, as 
well as expostulation. The judgment must be 
enlightened, in order that the heart may be im- 
pressed, and the conscience awakened; and the 
believer edified, no less than the sinner converted; 
and for this a less impassioned strain of preaching 
will not only suffice, but will indeed be more 
appropriate. Yet with regard to that portion of - 
our public ministrations, and it should be no small 
portion of it, which has reference to the conversion 
of the impenitent, where shall we find better 
models on which to construct our sermons, than 
the Doolittles, the Howes, the Baxters, and the 
Whitfields, of former times, so far at least as their 
intense earnestness is concerned. It is true the 
moderns have improved upon these men in mat- 
ters of taste, in reference to which we do not of 
course hold them up for imitation. In their 
numerous and complicated divisions and subdivi- 
sionsj through which, as so many little rills and 



126 SPECIMENS OF 

channels, they poured the current of their thought, 
instead of causing it to roll onward in the channel 
of their sermon ¥rith the majestic flow of a noble 
river; in their quaintnesses and quirks; in their 
fantastic imagery and uncouth diction ; in their 
occasional grossness and vulgarity, in which some 
of them were but too prone to indulge — they are 
to be studiously avoided. Yet even in reference 
to some of these things, it may be affirmed, that 
though in their free and reckless resort to every 
mode of stimulating attention they were often 
betrayed into great violations of taste, the very 
same audacity of genius often produced felicities 
of imagery and diction, with which, neither for 
beauty nor effect, the blameless common-place 
and the accurate insipidity of many modern dis- 
courses will bear any comparison. For pregnancy 
of thought, for knowledge of the word of God, for 
raciness of style, for evangelical sentiment, for 
anatomy of the human heart, for closeness of 
application, and especially for intensity of feeling, 
where shall we find their equals ? They preached 
to their congregations, and not merely before 
them : they felt that the objects of their addresses 
were immortal souls in danger of being lost, and 
knew their business in the pulpit was to save 
those souls from perdition : they preached as if 
they expected there and then to achieve the great 
work of conversion ; and felt as if the eternal 



EARNESTNESS. 127 

destinies of their hearers were suspended on the 
manner in which they discharged their duties^ and 
as if they were to ascend the next moment after 
they had finished their sermons to give an account 
of them at the bar of God. Do not the extracts 
given, and which are but a very inadequate sample 
of their works, bear out these assertions ? The 
power they exhibit, the heart- searching appeals in 
which they abound, are the very things now want- 
ing. There may be, and should be, more of 
classic elegance, more of logical arrangement, of 
philosophic precision, of vigorous and clear argu- 
mentation; but still, combined with this, there 
should also be the pointed interrogation, the pun- 
gent appeal, the bold apostrophe, the gush of 
feeling, the forcible expostulation, and the tender 
invitation : now the gentle flow of deep, and 
solemn, and placid thought, and then the torrent- 
rush of impassioned sentiment : the beautiful and 
harmonious combination of reason, imagination, 
and affection ; and all this employed to carry out 
the purpose for which the gospel is to be preached, 
even to win souls to Christ. Especially should there 
be the direct personal address which characterises 
all these extracts. Our hearers must be made to 
feel that they are not merely listening to the dis- 
<Jussion of a subject, but to an appeal to them- 
selves: their attention must be kept up, and a 
close connection between them and the preacher 



128 SPECIMENS OF 

maintained, by the frequent introduction of the 
pronoun, "you;^^ so that each may realise the 
thought that the discourse is actually addressed to 
him. Many preachers do not come near enough 
to their congregations. Those who were privi- 
leged to hear Mr. Hall deliver, in his best days, 
some of his most popular and powerful discourses, 
will not fail to recollect how strikingly he com- 
bined the intense earnestness of the passages just 
quoted, with the chaste and classic elegance of our 
best writers; and thus, considering the evangelical 
strain of his preaching, he may be said to have 
poured forth a torrent of the water of life, clear as 
crystal. He reminded you of one, who in his 
yearnings for the salvation of sinners seemed to 
feel that language was too feeble an instrument 
for such a purpose : and who, notwithstanding his 
sovereign command and exquisite selection of ter- 
minology, was struggling to burst the barrier by 
which words limit the communication of thought, 
in order that he might by a still more direct and 
facile method reach and grasp the soul of his 
hearers. 

There is, however, hope that our old theologi- 
cal writers will not be quite forgotten or neglected, 
while such men as Professor Stowell, of Rotherham 
College, shall employ their talents in writing pre- 
faces to reprints of such works as those of Thomas 
Adams, and shall lend their authority to recom- 



EARNESTNESS. 129 

mend the perusal of these monuments of sancti- 
fied genius. Beautifully and no less correctly has 
he said^ " As Edwards constrains to closeness of 
thought; as Howe inspires sublimity of sentiment ; 
as Bates lights up the soul with a soft and silvery 
light ; as Owen lades the mind with a harvest of 
rich knowledge ; as Taylor cheers the imagination 
with a vintage of delicious grapes ; as Baxter fires 
the soul with longings for salvation, first of our- 
selves and then of others ; — even so does Adams 
lead to those springs of graphic power, of dramatic 
grandeur, and of subduing pathos, of which it is 
the fear of many that they are dried up. We 
believe they are not. We cannot but think there 
are minds now opening on the awful solemnities 
of the Christian ministry, to whom this example 
will be inciting : let them look at things with 
their own eyes, ponder them in silent and lonely 
thought, pray over the fruits of such meditations, 
till they kindle into living pictures ; and so let 
them pour out their feelings in the best words 
they can find; there will then be no just com- 
plaint of the want of power and originality in the 
English pulpit." 

Happy will it be for this, and for all coming 
ages, if the men of the present day will study, 
with all the advantages, checks, and guides of 
modem education, the divines of the seventeenth* 
century, both of the Episcopalian and Noncon- 



130 8FECIM1SNS OF EARNESTNESS. 

formist churches : not indeed as models of style 
or logic^ but of intense earnestness ; not as writers^ 
who should teach us in all things how to think^ 
but how to feel. We would not have the modem 
mind, so much as the modem heart, cast in the 
mould of these great hearted writers. Even their 
theology is not to be rigidly copied ; but their 
unction — their mighty power of realization — ^their 
nearness to God — their views so intent, so clear, 
so piercing, of eternity — their thorough under- 
standing of the object of their ministry, and their 
entire consecration of themselves to its awful 
functions — would we could transcribe and make 
all these our own ! 



CHAPTER VI. 

EARNESTNESS OP MANNER CONTINUED, AS 
MANIFESTED IN THE DELIVERY OF SERMONS. 

By the delivery of sermons is meant voice and 
gesture, or what Demosthenes called action ; who 
on being asked what was the first excellence of 
an orator, replied, " Action :" what the second, 
"Action:" what the third, "Action/^ An im- 
pressive admonition this, from such an authority, 
to all preachers, on the importance of that part 
of our subject which we are now considering. 

After the death of that flaming seraph, Mr. 
McCheyne, there was found upon his desk an 
unopened note from one who had heard his last 
sermon, to this effect; "Pardon a stranger for 
addressing to you a few lines. I heard you 
preach last Sabbath evening, and it pleased God 
to bless that sermon to my soul. It was not so 
much what you said, as your manner of speaking 
it, that struck me. I saw in you a beauty of 
holiness I never saw before.^^ 

This is only one instance out of ten thousand, 

in which the earnestness of a preacher's manner 

has secured that attention to his matter, which 

would not otherwise have been paid to it. The 

k2 



1 



132 EARNESTNESS 

power of oratory has its foundations in the prin- 
ciples of our nature. It is not merely that ideas 
are conveyed by articulate language through the 
ear to the mind^ but also that emotion is awakened 
by agreeable tones and pleasant modulations of 
the voice. Hence the power of music : and what 
is human speech but music ? No instrument has 
ever yet been constructed which can emit sounds 
80 exquisitely moving as the human voice. Art 
is in this respect still below nature. True it is 
that we must go to the best voices for this superi- 
ority ; but even in voices far below the best, there 
is an expression of the various passions which no 
instruments can equal. All nations, therefore, 
savage as well as civilized, have confessed the 
power of oratory, not only as a vehicle of instruc- 
tion, but as a means of impression. It is vain to 
pretend that matter is, or ought to be every 
thing, and manner nothing. Truth, it may be 
said, ought to make its own way, independently 
of the accompaniments of good elocution and 
graceful action. So it should, but then these 
things are necessary, in many cases, to gain for it 
attention, and to secure that due xjonsideration 
without which it can make no impression. Man- 
ner is, so to speak, the harbinger and herald of 
matter, summoning the faculties of the soul to 
give audience to the truth to be communicated, 
and holding the mind in a state of abstraction 



IN DELIVERY. 133 

from all other subjects that woald divert the 
thoughts and prevent impression. It is not only 
the more illiterate and feeble-minded^ not only 
the multitude who are led by feeling more than 
by reason, that are influenced by good oratory, 
but also men of the sturdiest intellect, and of the 
most philosophic cast of mind. The soul of the 
sage as well as of the savage is formed with a 
susceptibility to the power and influence of music, 
and therefore to the power and influeuce of elocu- 
tion. The importance of manner is consequently 
great, yea far greater than either tutors or preachers 
have been disposed to admit. It is true that a 
good voice is necessary to good speaking, but not 
always to earnest speaking. Nature must do 
much to make a graceful and finished orator ; but 
still in the absence of this, an ardent mind, burn- 
ing for the salvation of immortal souls, can, by an 
impressive earnestness of manner, be a more intense 
and eflective speaker, notwithstanding naturally 
weak and unimpressive organs of speech, than the 
possessor of the finest voice who is destitute of a 
vivacious and ardent enunciation ; just as an ex- 
quisite performer can bring better music out of a 
bad instrument, than a bad musician can out of a 
good one. What may be done, where the mind is 
resolutely bent upon accomplishing it, for supply- 
ing deficiencies and correcting faults in elocution, 
Demosthenes has taught us ; and were a half or a 



134 EARNESTNESS 

tenth part of the pains taken by us to obtain 
a powerful and effective method of pulpit address 
which were submitted to by this prince of orators 
to become an effective speaker ; were we as much 
set upon it as he was, and were we to give ourselves 
to the same means, by declaiming to the waves of 
the sea, or to the winds of heaven, determining to 
overcome every obstacle, we too should be orators, 
and that in a still better cause. And surely if 
ambition, or patriotism, prompted the Athenian 
and the Roman orator to such studies and such 
efforts for self-improvement, ought not the love of 
souls, zeal for God, and the interests of eternity, 
to prompt us to similar endeavours? Did they 
cultivate elocution with such unwearied perseve- 
rance to counteract the designs of Philip, or to 
defeat the conspiracies of Catiline, and shall we 
not do it to destroy the works of the devil, and to 
advance the kingdom of the Redeemer ? 

It is impossible not to observe how much the 
popularity of some preachers depends upon their 
manner ; they do not say better or more striking 
things than other men ; but they say them in a 
better and more striking manner. There is a 
pathos in their tones, a power in their looks, a 
gracefulness in their gestures, which other men 
have never studied, and therefore have never 
acquired. This was eminently the case with 
Whitfield, the greatest of preachers. Much of the 



IN DELIVERY. 135 

wondrous power of that extraordinary man lay in 
his voice and action. We have already given an 
extract from his sermons to illustrate his manner 
as regards style of composition, but who that 
never heard him, or indeed who that had, could 
illustrate his manner of delivery ? Think of such 
paragraphs as those just quoted, delivered with an 
utterance appropriate to their nature; with an eye 
melting into tears; a voice tremulous with emo- 
tion, shrill yet full, now swelling into thunder, and 
then dying away again into soft whispers; one 
moment apostrophising God, and the next piercing 
the sinner's conscience with an appeal that was as 
sharp arrows of the Almighty ; at one time pour- 
ing out a stream of impassioned pity for the sinner, 
and the next moment a torrent of burning indig- 
nation against his sin; his very hands all the 
while and every gesture seeming to heighten his 
matchless elocution and help his labouring soul; 
and all this not the trickery of an artificial rhetoric 
to catch applause, but for the conviction of his 
hearers; nor the effort of a man striving after 
popularity, but the spontaneous gushing forth of 
a heart agonising for the salvation of their immor- 
tal souls ! What oratory must that have been 
which extorted from the sceptical and fastidious 
Hume the confession that it was worth going 
twenty miles to hear it — which interested the 
infidel BoUngbroke, and once warmed even the 



136 BARNESTNESS 

eold and cautious Franklin into enthusiasm ? 
In those discourses which roused a slumbering 
nation from the torpor of lukewarmness^ and * 
breathed new life into its dying piety, you will find 
no profound speculation, no subtle reasoning, no 
metaphysical disquisition ; for these never formed, 
and never can form, the staple of pulpit eloquence: 
but you will find "thoughts that breathe, and 
words that bum/^ and which, when enunciated 
with the magic of his wondrous voice, spoke, by 
the blessing of God, hfe into thousands dead in 
trespasses and sins. As a proof of the all-subdu* 
ing power of his orator^, take the following scene, 
extracted from his '^ Life and Times,^^ by the Rev. 
Robert Philip. 

"In February, 1742, Whitfield returned to London, 
where ' life and power soon flew all around him again ; 
the Redeemer getting himself victory daily in many 
hearts/ The renewed progress of the gospel at this time 
in London, he calls emphatically, ' the Redeemer's stately 
9teps.* Well he might ; for during the Easter holidays, 
' Satan's booths' in Moorfields poured out their thousands 
to hear him. This determined him to dare all hazards on 
Whit-Monday, the great gala-day of vanity and vice there. 
Gillies* account of this enterprise, although not incorrect 
nor uninteresting, is very incomplete, considering the fame 
of the feat at the time. The following account is from 
the pen of Whitfield himself. 

" For many years, from one end of Moorfields to the 
other, booths of all kinds have been erected for mounte* 



IN DELIVEBT. 137 

banks, players, puppet-shows, and such like. With a 
heart bleeding with compassion for so many thousands led 
captive by the devil at his will, on Whit-Monday, at six 
o'clock in the morning, attended by a lai^ congregation 
of praying people, I ventured to lift up a standard amongst 
them in the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Perhaps there 
were about ten thousand in waiting, not for me, but for 
Satan's instruments to amuse them. Glad was I to find 
that I had, as it were for once, got the start of the devil. 
I mounted my field-pulpit; almost all flocked immedi^ 
ately around it. I preached on these words, ' As Moses 
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so shall the Son 
of Man be lifted up,' etc. They gazed, they listened, 
they wept ; and I believe that many felt themselves stung 
with deep conviction for their past sins. All was hushed 
and solemn. Being thus encouraged, I ventured out 
again at noon ; but what a scene I The fields, the whole 
fields, eemed, in a bad sense of the word, all white^ ready 
not for the Redeemer's^ but Beelzebub's harvest. All his 
agents were in full motion, drummers, trumpeters, merry-i 
andrews, masters of puppet-shows, exhibiters of wild 
beasts, players, etc., etc., all busy in entertaining their 
respective auditories. I suppose there could not be less 
than twenty or thirty thousand people. My pulpit was 
fixed on the opposite side, and immediately to their great 
mortification, they found the number of their attendants 
sadly lessened. Judging that like Saint Paul, I should 
now be called as it were to fight with beasts at Ephesus, 
I preached from these words: 'Great is Diana of the 
Ephesians.' You may easily guess that there was some 
noise among the craftsmen, and that I was honoured with 
having a few stones, dirt, rotten eggs, and pieces of dead 
cats thrown at me, whilst engaged in calling them from 
their favourite but lying vanities. My soul was indeed 



188 .EARNESTNESS 

among lions : but far the greatest part of my congrega- 
tion, which was very large, seemed for awhile to be turned 
into lambs. This encouraged me to give notice that I 
would preach again at six o'clock in the evening. I 
came, I saw, but what — thousands and thousands more 
than before, if possible, still more deeply engaged in their 
unhappy diversions ; but some thousands amongst them 
waiting as earnestly to hear the gospel. 

" This Satan could not brook. One of his choicest 
servants was exhibiting, trumpeting on a large stage; but 
as soon as the people saw me in my black robes and my 
pulpit, I think all to a man left him and ran to me. For 
awhile I was enabled to lift up my voice like a trumpet, 
and many heard the joyful sound. God*s people kept 
praying, and the enemy's agents made a kind of roaring 
at some distance from our camp. At length they ap- 
proached nearer, and the merry-andrew, (attended by 
others, who complained that they had taken many pounds 
less that day on account of my preaching,) got up upon a 
man's shoulders, and advancing near the pulpit attempted 
to slash me with a long heavy whip several times, but 
always with the violence of his motion tumbled down. 
Soon afterwards they got a recruiting serjeant with his 
drum, etc., to pass through the congregation. I gave the 
word of command, and ordered that way might be made 
for the king's officer. The ranks opened, while all 
marched quietly through, and then closed again. Finding 
those efforts to fail, a large body quite on the opposite 
side assembled together, and having got a large pole for 
their standard, advanced towards us with steady and for- 
midable steps, till they came very near the skirts of our 
hearing, praying, and almost undaunted congregation. 
I saw, gave warning, and prayed to the Captain of our 
salvation for present support and deliverance. He heard 



IN PELIVERY. 139 

and answered; for just as they approached us with looks 
full of resentment, I know not by what accident^ tb^ 
quarrelled among themselves, threw down their staff, and 
went their way, leaving, however, many of their company 
behind, who before we had done, I trust were brought 
over to join the besieged party. I think I continued in 
praying, preaching, and singing, ( for the noise was too 
great at times to preach) about three hours. 

" We then retired to the Tabernacle, with my pockets 
full of notes from persons brought under concern, and 
read them amidst the praises and spiritual acclamations 
of thousands, who joined with the holy angels in rejoicing 
that so many sinners were snatched, in such an unexpected, 
unlikely place and manner, out of the very jaws of the 
devil. This was the beginning of the Tabernacle society. 
— Three hundred and fifty awakened souls were received 
in one day, and I believe the number of notes exceeded a 
thousand ; but I must have done, believing you want to 
retire to join in mutual praise and thanksgiving to God 
and the Lamb.'' 



I venture to pronounce this the greatest achieve- 
ment of elocution which the history of the world 
presents, next to the splendid triumphs of the 
apostle Peter^s sermon over the murderers of Christ 
on the day of Pentecost. Who that considers the 
spot on which Whitfield then stood ; the scenes by 
which he was surrounded ; the discordant noises 
of the motley crew, which rung in his ears, and 
in the ears of his audience ; who, in short, that 
recollects what is the wild uproar and the hurly 
burly of a London popular fair^ must not stand 



140 SABNESTNESS 

astonished^ first at the courage of the man who 
could erect his pulpit, and preach a sermon in 
such a scene ; and then still more at the marvel- 
lous success of his effort in the conversion of 
hundreds of souls by that one discourse. What, 
I ask, was the effect of the orations of Demosthenes 
on the Athenians, in rousing them against Philip 
of Macedon, compared with this ? The illustrious 
Grecian had on his side every thing which the 
scenery, and the historic associations that connec- 
ted themselves with it,— every thing which the 
prepared mind of his audience could give, in the 
way of advantage, to his splendid declamation and 
its success — but the Christian orator had to combat 
with, and to triumph over, every thing that seemed 
inharmonious with his theme, and opposed to the 
accomplishment of his object: and what must 
have been the magic power of that elocution 
which could blind the eyes of an audience to the 
sights, and deafen their ears to sounds so near 
them, and produce such fixedness of attention, 
and such power of abstraction, as to leave them 
at liberty for those processes of thought, which 
resulted in the conversion of hundreds to God ! 

And to what, in the way of instrumentality, 
shall we attribute this astonishing effect, but to 
the power of his wonderful oratory, combined with 
the simplicity and power of the truths he enforced ? 
This fact has stood for a century upon record, and 



IN delivery; 141 

yet we have been slow to learn from it the lessons 
it is adapted to teach — and among these lessons 
the chief is^ the effect produced by a commanding 
method of address, in circumstances apparently 
the most unlikely for such a result. I am not 
calling upon my brethren to imitate this daring 
attack upon the very citadel of Satan : even 
Whitfield never, I believe, repeated it, and per- 
haps ought never to have attempted it — ^but my 
object is to show the power of voice and action, 
and the nature of ministerial earnestness. 

We shall now contemplate another instance of 
the power of oratory, which if it be less grand and 
commanding in itself, is perhaps more likely to be 
useful to the readers of this little work, because it 
is an instance brought nearer to their own times, 
and to the level of their own circumstances : I 
mean the truly interesting and much lamented 
Mr. Spencer, of Liverpool. In reference to this 
transcendent young preacher, Mr, Hall remarks, 
*^The writer of this deeply regrets his never 
having had an opportunity of witnessing his ex- 
traordinary powers; but from all he has heard 
from the best judges, he can entertain no doubt 
that his talents in the pulpit were unrivalled, and 
that had his life been spared, he would, in all 
probability, have carried the art of preaching to a 
greater perfection than it ever attained, at least in 
this kingdom. His eloquence appears to havQ 



142 EARNESTNESS 

been of the purest stamp, effective not ostenta-* 
tious ; consisting less in the preponderance of any 
one quality requisite to form a public speaker, 
than in an exquisite combination of them all; 
whence resulted an extraordinary power of impres- 
sion, which was greatly aided by a natural and 
majestic elocution." In this last expression Mr, 
Hall has disclosed much of the secret of Mr. 
Spencer^s popularity and usefulness ; " a natural 
^nd majestic elocution ;" this, accompanied as it 
was, with a most engaging countenance and form,^ 
setting forth with simple and unaffected earnest- 
ness of manner the grand doctrines of evange- 
lical truth, constituted the charm, and led to, 
the success, of this most captivating preacher of 
jnodern times. Let the young ministers of this 
age read his ^'Life and Remains,^^ as published 
by his gifted successor, Dr. Raffles ; and also his 
posthumous sermons, which have been since given 
to the world, and they will find nothing whatever 
of extraordinary genius; no lofty eloquence, in 
the usual acceptation of that term ; no profound 
speculation ; no splendid imagery or diction — but 
they will meet at every step with the doctrine of 
Christ crucified, set forth with manly vigour, in 
plain, perspicuous language ; the utterances of a 
mind well instructed in the way of salvation, and 
of a heart overflowing with benevolence for the 
good of his fellow-creatures. To what then shall 



IN DELITERV. 143 

ire attribute, under God, his success, not only iu 
filling the large town in wliich he lived, and the 
nation at large, with his fame, but what was infi- 
nitely more important, in itself, and far more 
eagerly coveted by him, in bringing so many 
souls to Christ ? There is but one answer to be 
given to this, and that is, it was the fascination of 
his manner. He was in earnest. The stream of 
his simple, elegant, but by no means profound 
thought, flowed forth with a resistless impetuosity 
that carried away his hearers before it. There is 
scarcely any more important lesson to be learnt, 
or any inference more valuable to be drawn, from 
the short life of this most interesting young man, 
so mysteriously cut off" at the very commencement 
of his career, than the vast consequence of an 
animated manner of preaching the gospel. 

We may here advert to another individual, who 
was considered, in a particular way, to be one of 
the most impressive preachers of his times, the 
late Mr. Toller, of Kettering; and who also no 
doubt owed much of the effect which his sermons 
produced, to his mode of address ; and the effect 
in this instance proves that vehemence, boiste- 
rousness, and vociferation, are not essential to 
earnestness and deep impression ; for nothing 
could be more calm and subdued, though nothing 
more solemnly commanding, than his whole de- 
meanour in the pulpit. His printed sermons are 



144 EARNESTNESS 

characterised by manly strength of thought, uttered 
in language of great perspicuity, though not irra- 
diated by the corroscations of what might be 
termed a brilliant genius. ^^A noble simplicity 
and careless grandeur/' says Mr. Hall, with whon^ 
he lived on terms of most intimate friendship, 
'Vere the distinguishing features of his eloquence/' 
There was an irresistible charm in his manner 
which threw a spell over all his hearers, and 
which fascinated alike the learned and illiterate ; 
he made the latter to understand, and the former 
to feel. I never heard him but once, but it was 
on a memorable occasion, at the ordination of Mr, 
Robertson, of Stretton, when Mr. Hall delivered 
the admirable charge which was afterwards pub-» 
lished under the title of "The Difliculties and 
Encouragements of the Christian Minister.'' It 
is impossible ever to forget, and equally so to 
describe, the effect produced by two such preachers 
on such an occasion : it was the first time I had 
even heard either of them, and the last that I ever 
heard Mr. Toller, and it almost seemed as if I had 
never heard preaching before : both were excited 
no doubt, and stimulated to do their best, not only 
by the occasion, but by the presence of each other. 
The terms employed by Mr. Toller's biographer 
were the most appropriate that could be selected 
to describe his style and manner, "simplicity and 
careless grandeur." It was impossible not to 



IN DELIVERY, J146 

listen; neither eye nor ear played truant for a 
moment while he was preaphing: his delivery 
was not the rushing torrent of impassioned elo- 
quence which gushed afterwards from the lips of 
his distinguished fellow-labourer, but the majestic^ 
silent flow of a noble river. ^^ In the power of 
awakening pathetic emotions/' says Mr. Hall, in 
his Memoir, ^^ he has excelled any preacher it has 
been my lot to hear. Often have I seen a whole 
congregation melted under him like wax before 
the sun : my own feelings on more than one occa- 
sion have approached to an overpowering agitation. 
The effect was produced apparently with perfect 
ease. No elaborate preparation, no peculiar vehe- 
mence or intensity of tones, no artful accumulation 
of pathetic images, led the way : the mind was 
captivated and subdued, it hardly knew how. 
Though it will not be imagined that this triumph 
of popular eloquence could be habitual, much less 
constant, it may be safely affirmed that a large 
proportion of Mr. Toller's discourses afforded 
some indications of these powers." The following 
is Mr. Hall's description of the effect of two ser- 
mons preached in his hearing by this eminent man. 

"It was about this period (1796), that my acquaintance 
with him commenced. I had known him previously, and 
occasionally heard him: but it was at a season when I was 
not qualified to form a correct estimate of his talents. 
At the time referred to, we were engaged to preach a 

L 



1^ EARNESTNESS 

donble lecture at Thrapstone, nine miles from Kettering ; 
and never shall I forget the surprise and pleasure with 
which I listened to an expository discourse, from 1 Peter, 
ii. 1, 3. The richness, the unction, the simple majesty 
which pervaded his address, produced a sensation which I 
never felt before : it gave me a new view of the Christian 
ministry. But the effect, powerful as it was, was not to 
be compared with that which I experienced on hearing 
him preach at the half-yearly meeting of the Association, 
at Bedford. The text which he selected was peculiarly 
solemn and impressive : his discourse was founded on 2 
Peter, i, 13-15, 'Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am 
in this tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remem- 
brance; knowing that shortly I must put off this my 
tabernacle,' etc. The effect of this discourse on the audi- 
ence was such as I have never witnessed before or since. 
It was undoubtedly very much aided by the peculiar 
circumstances of the speaker, who was judged to be far 
advanced in a decline, and who seemed to speak under the 
impression of its being the last time he should address his 
brethren on such an occasion. The aspect of the preacher, 
pale, emaciated, standing apparently on the verge of eter- 
nity, the simplicity and majesty of his sentiments, the 
sepulchral solemnity of a voice which seemed to issue 
from the shades, combined with the intrinsic dignity of 
the subject, perfectly quelled the audience with tenderness 
and terror, and produced such a scene of audible weeping 
as was perhaps never surpassed. All other emotions were 
absorbed in devotional feeling : it seemed to us as though 
we were permitted for a short space to look into eternity, 
and every sublunary object vanished before 'the powers 
of the world to come.' Yet there was no considerable 
exertion, no vehemence, no splendid imagery, no magni- 
ficent description ; it was the simple declaration of truth, of 



IN DELIVERY. 147 

truth indeed of infinite moment, borne in upon the heart 
by a mind intensely alive to its reality and grandeur. 
Criticism was disarmed ; the hearer felt himself elevated 
to a region which it could not penetrate ; all was power- 
less submission to the master spirit of the scene. It will 
be always considered by those who witnessed it as afford- 
ing as high a specimen as can be easily conceived, of the 
power of a preacher over his audience, the habitual or 
even frequent recurrence of which would create an epoch 
in the religious history of the world."* 

This description^ even though some allowance 
should be made for the eloquence of friendship, 
which was poured forth by the pen of Mr. Toller's 
admiring friend, is replete with instruction to our 
rising ministry. They may learn the vast impor- 
tance of the manner in which a sermon is delivered, 
as well as the matter of which it is composed. 
Nor is this the only lesson, nor perhaps the most 
valuable one, to be learnt from this short but 
precious piece of ministerial biography; for we 
gather what it is that with minds of the highest 
order, such as Mr. HalFs, constitutes the nearest 
approach to perfect pulpit eloquence, and to which 
even these commanding intellects yield themselves 
up with most wilUng submission — ^uot the artificial 
elaboration df men intent upon producing a ffreat 
sermon ; not the magniloquent diction and splendid 
imagery which have been sought with ambitious 

* " Memoirs of Mr. Toller," by Mr. Hall, prefixed to a 
volume of Mr. Toller's Sermons. 

l2 



148 EARNESTNESS 

eagerness by those who aim to shine; not the 
cold^ abstract^ philosophical reasoning of a meta- 
physical dialectician^ — but the simpUcity and 
earnestness of a preacher who aims to instructs the 
judgment^ awaken the conscience^ and affect the 
heart. All great minds love simpUcity and detest 
affectation. This was especially the case with Mr. 
HaU. His censure of the opposite quaUty to 
unaffected eamestnesSj amounted sometimes to 
eloquent extravagance and burlesque^ and his 
sarcasms not unfrequently were tinged with un- 
charitable bitterness ; while his admiration of sim- 
plicity was occasionally expressed in somewhat 
exaggerated panegyric. The ambition of a preacher 
whose aim is usefulness might well be gratified in 
a remark which he once made after hearing a 
sermon^ '^ I should not wonder if a hundred souls 
were converted to-night !" 

These are only a few out of innumerable in- 
stances which could be adduced to prove the vast 
importance which attaches to an effective enuncia- 
tion. Far greater numbers of our preachers fail 
for want of this^ than from any other cause ; a 
fact so notorious as to need no proof beyond com- 
mon observation^ and so impressive as to demand 
the attention^ not only of the professors^ but the 
committees of all our colleges. It is too generally 
the case that no adequate culture is bestowed 
upon the speaking powers of our students^ from 



IN PELITEBT. 149 

the beginning to the end of their course of study. 
There is great assiduity manifested in giving them 
a fulness of matter^ but far too little in producing 
an impressiveness of manner. Every assistance is 
granted to them to make them scholars, philoso- 
phers, and divines ; but as to good speaking, fat 
the acquisition of this, they are I fear left pretty 
much to themselves. Nay, it is not even incul« 
cated upon them with the emphasis it should be 
to try to make good speakers of themselves. A 
complete system of ministerial education must of 
necessity include some attention to elocution, and 
this should commence as soon as a student enters 
college ; so that by the time he is put upon the 
preaching list, he may have some aptitude for 
the management of his voice, and not have his 
thoughts diverted then from his matter and his 
object, to his manner. He should by that time 
have acquired a habit of good speaking, so as to 
be able to practise it with fEicihty, and without 
study. The great objection to lectures on elocu- 
tion is, that they are apt to produce a pompous, 
stiff, and affected manner ; but this is an abuse 
of the art, the object of which should be to cure 
the vices of a bad, and to supply the wants of a 
defective, enunciation, and to form an easy, natural, 
and impressive deUvery. When will preachers 
leam that preaching is but talking in a louder 
tone, and with a Uttle more emphasis of manner ? 



150 VARNPSTNESS 

Why affect a preaching or a praying tone^ a 
manner of speaking peculiar to the pulpit ? The 
conversational manner^ occasionaUy elevated, ani-* 
mated and energetic, as impassioned passives and 
feeling may require, is what we want. There are 
some men who are good talkers out of the pulpit, 
yet bad speakers in it. How much more accept- 
able would they be, if they would carry their easy, 
natural manner of conversation with them into the 
•acred desk. 

I entirely concur therefore with Dr. Vaughan, 
in his important and impressive remark, ^'that let 
our students fail in the matter of a good elocution, 
and so far as regards their ministry among Pro- 
testant Dissenters, it will matter little in what else 
they may succeed.'^ This is sustained by a refe- 
rence to the great number we observe, who, though 
soundly orthodox in sentiment, possessed of large 
acquirements in scholarship and philosophy, par- 
takers of undoubted piety, and even desirous of 
doing good — ^yet make no way, can with difficuhy 
procure a charge, and are filled perhaps with 
wonder, that men very much their inferiors in 
natural talent and literary acquirement, are every 
where followed, while they are every ^ere neg- 
lected. The problem is easily solved, the mystery 
soon explained; these inferior men, by their 
earnest, animated manner, make their slenderer 
abilities tell more upon the popular mind, and 



IN DELIVERY. 151 

hearty and conscience^ than do the heartless dissert 
tations and elaborate essays of dull scholars^ frigid 
philosophers^ and badflpeakers^ with their accomu* 
lated bat useless stores of knowledge. 

It should, however, be remarked, that there is 
nothing more likely to be mistaken than animatioa 
in the pulpit. There are some young ministers, 
who, aware of the importance of a graceful and 
effective elocution, take no small pains to acquire 
it, by studying and practising the most approved 
rules of the art. But it is not this alone for which 
we contend : for as the lessons of the dancing 
master form only a stiff and formal action, where 
there is no natural ease and elegance, so the 
teacher of elocution can do little to form an earnest 
and energetic speaker, where there is no Uving 
source of animation in the soul. It is not a pomp- 
ous, swelling, ore rotundo style of speaking that 
constitutes the excellence of an orator ; not *^ the 
start and stare theatric ;" not modulations of the 
voice that sound as if the speaker were regulating 
tones and cadences by the fugle motions of a 
teacher standing before him ; but the impassioned 
vivacity of one who feels intensely his subject, and 
speaks nnder the influence of strong emotion, as 
one determined to make others feel. The secret 
of animation, the nature of earnestness, lie as we 
have said, in an intense feeling of the subject of 
discourse; in a mind deeply impressed, and a 



152 EARNESTNESS 

heart warmed^ with the theme discussed. All 
men are in earnest when they feel. Hence the 
anecdote of the pleader^ who^ on being appUed to 
by a client to undertake her eause^ upon perceiving 
the coldness of her manner in stating her case^ 
told the applicant he did not credit her tale» 
Stung by this reflection upon her veracity, and 
this disbeUef of her grievance^ she rose into strong 
emotion^ and affirmed with expressive vehemence 
the truth of the story. " Now/' said he, " I 
believe you.'' 

The hacknied, but valuable, rule of the ancient 
teacher of eloquence remains, and ever will remain, 
as true as when it was first uttered, " Weep your- 
self, if you expect me to weep.'' Sympathy is 
the speaker's most powerful auxiliary : there is 
nothing so contagious as strong emotion. We 
have most of us, perhaps, seen a large portion of 
a^ congregation brought to tears by the pathetic 
and faltering tones, the tremulous Ups, and suffused 
eyes of the preacher. But then it must be on a 
subject which is worthy of it — must be sincere, 
and not simulated emotion, and must come only 
when the people's minds are prepared to sympa- 
thize. It is well said there is only a step between 
the subUme and the ridiculous; and the same 
remark may be apphed to the pathetic, it may 
degenerate into imbecility. Genuine emotion is 
the charm of all speaking upon moral and reli- 



IN DELIVERY. 153 

gious subjects^ in the absence of which the most 
measured and stately elocution^ whatever pleasure 
it may impart to the ear^ will have httle power to 
jBiffect the heart. We have sometimes listened to 
lofty and well composed music, to an overture for 
instance, which we could not but admire ; but it 
was still cold admiration, for the whole piece had 
not a note of passion from beginning to end : but 
some simple melody followed it, which by the 
pathos of its notes or the power of its associations 
touched every chord in our hearts, and raised in 
us a tumult of emotion. Thus it is with dijBferent 
preachers, we listen to one whose excellent compo- 
sition, and sonorous, perhaps even musical voice, 
command our admiration ; but not a passion stirs, 
all within is cold, quiet, and without emotion; 
the speaking is good, but it does not move us: 
but there is another, with perhaps less talent, yea 
less oratory in one sense, but his tones, his looks, 
his manner throughout, is full of earnest feeling ; 
it is a strain, every word of which comes from 
the heart, and every word of which awakens by 
sympathy a correspondent state of feeling in out 
hearts. Who is likely to be moved by hearing a 
man discuss the most awful reaUties of eternal 
truth, such as the danger and the doom of impe- 
nitent sinners, the glories of heaven, and the tor- 
ments of hell, with as much coolness, and with as 
httle emotion, as a lecturer on science would 



154 BARNK8TNESS 

eidiibit when dwelHng on the facts of nataral his- 
tory? Is it protmble there can be any earnestness 
in the hearer^ when ^ere is none in the preacher? 
''How is it/' said a minister to an actor, ''that 
your performances, which are but pictures of the 
imagination, produce so much more effect than 
our sermons, which are all reahties V "Because," 
said the actor, "we represent fictions as though they 
were reaUties, and you preach realities as though 
they were fictions." It is difficult to believe that 
a dull, cold, statue-like preacher, whose passionless 
monotony is a mental opiate for his hearers, can 
himself credit the message he is deUvering. What, 
that man who never elevates or depresses his voice 
from one given pitch of sop(»rific dulness, whose 
t<Hie never Adters, whose eye never gUstens, whose 
hand never moves, who speaks as if lie was afraid 
of awakening the slumberers whom his '^ drowsy 
tinklings" had lulled to sleep, — he feel the weight 
of souls; he in earnest for their salvation; he 
endeavouring to pluck them as brands from the 
burning 1 Who will credit it ? It is true he may 
have no great power of voice, and a naturally 
phlegmatic mind, with a great deficiency in the 
natural powers of oratory ; but place him by the 
side of a river where he has seen a fellow-creature 
fall into the water, and has thrown a plank or a 
rope to aid the drowning man to escape, will he 
not have power dl voice, and of animated tones. 



IN 0ELIVJSBY. 155 

and of persuasive earnestness there^ as he clirects 
the object of his solicitude to the means of deliver- 
ance? Will he not rise out of his monotone 
there ? Will he not make himself heard and fdt 
there ? 

Bj an earnest manner, then, is meant, the 
enunciation that is dictated by a deep and feeling 
sense of the importance o£ our message. We are 
to persuade^ to enireat, to beseech, and these 
modes of speech have an utterance of their own. 
What must Paulas manner have been, how im- 
passioned and impressive when he made Felix 
tremble, and Festus exclaim, ''Thou art beside 
thyself, much learning doth make thee madP 
But even the sublime and awful truths of reve- 
lation, if they do not press upon the heart of the 
preacher, and command, and possess it, will be 
but coldly handled and feebly discussed. It is 
only when the love of Christ constraineth us, and 
besureth us away as with the foree of a torrent, 
that we shall speak with a manner befitting our 
great theme. If we are not intensely real, we 
shall be but indijBferent preachers. 

This shows us the vast moment of our living 
under the powerful impression of the truths we 
preach. We cannot, like the actor, have a stage 
dress and character to put on for the occasion, 
and put off when the curtain drops. There may 
indeed be a factitious earnestness excited by the 



156 EARNESTNESS 

sounds of our own voice^ and by the solemnities 
of public worship ; but this will usually be fitful, 
feeble, assumed, and very different from that bum^ 
ing ardour which is the result of eminent piety, 
and which imparts its own intensity of emotion 
to the words and tones of the speaker. It was 
the patriotism of Demosthenes that communicated 
the fire of his eloquence: he loved his country, 
and trembling for the ruin that PhiUp was bring- 
ing upon the liberties of Greece, he poured forth 
his lightning-words, in tones of thunder. His 
philippics were a torrent of the strongest emotion, 
bursting from his heart, though guided in its 
course by the established rules of eloquence. He 
could never have spoken as he did, had not the 
wrongs of Philip, and the dangers of Greece, 
entered into his soul. So must it be with us, our 
animation must be the earnestness, not of rhetoric, 
but of religion ; not of art, but of renewed nature ; 
and not designed to astound, but to convince and 
move; not the manner studied and intended 
merely to attract a crowd, and to excite applause, 
but to save the souls of men from death. For 
this purpose whatever means we employ, and 
whatever rules we lay down, to cure the vices of a 
bad elocution, and to acquire the advantages of a 
graceful one, and such an aim is quite lawful, — we 
must ever remember that the basis of a powerful 
and effective pulpit oratory will consist of a deep 



IN DELIVERY. 157 

and fervent piety; in the absence of which^ the 
most commanding gift of public speaking will be 
but as sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal. 

Dr. Cotton Mather^ in his beautiful and inva- 
luable work, now nearly forgotten, entitled, " The 
Student and Preacher," in speaking on this sub- 
ject, remarks : — 

" It is a pity but a well prepared sermon should be a 
well pronounced one. Wherefore avoid for ever all inanes 
sine mente some, and all indecencies; every thing that is 
ridiculous. Be sure to speak deUberately. Strike the 
accent always upon the word in the sentence it properly 
belongs unto. A tone that shall have no regard to this ia 
very injudicious, and will make you talk too much in the 
clouds. Do not begin too high. Ever conclude with 
vigour. If you must have your notes before you in your 
preaching, and it be needful for you, De scripto dicere, 
which even some of the most famous orators, both among 
the Grecians and the Romans, did ; yet let there be with 
you a distinction between the neat using of notes, and the 
dull reading of them. Keep up the air and life of speak- 
ing, and put not off your readers with a heavy reading to 
them. How can you demand of them to remember much 
of what you bring to them, when you remember nothing 
of it yourself? Besides by reading all you say, you will 
so cramp and stunt all ability for speaking, that you will 
be unable to make a handsome speech on any occasion. 
What I therefore advise you to is, let your notes be little 
more than a guide, on which you may cast your eye now 
and then, to see what arrow is to be next fetched from 
thence ; and then with your eye as much as may be on 
them whom you speak to, let it be shot away with a viva- 



158 EARNESTNESS 

city becoming one in earnest for to have the truths well 
entertained by the auditory. Finally^ let your perora- 
tions be lively expostulations with the conscience of the 
bearer; appeals made and questions put unto the con- 
science, and consignments of the work over into the 
bands of that flaming preacher in the bosom of the hearer. 
In such flames you may do wondrously." 

Pity that Dr. Mather had not gone a little 
farther than ihis^ and affectionately advised his 
younger brethren in the ministry to begin their 
career without any notes at all in the pulpit; 
advice still more necessary in this day^ as there 
seems a rising indination to adopt the practice of 
reading. Nothing can be conceived of more 
likely to repress earnestness^ and to hinder our 
usefulness^ than this method becoming general. 
True it is that some preachers may rise up^ who, 
like a few living examples^ may^ in despite of this 
practice^ attain to eminence^ to honour, and to 
usefulness^ such as rarely falls to the lot of 
ministers in any denomination ; but this will not 
be the case with the greater number, who having 
no commanding intellect to lift them above the 
disadvantage of this habit, will find few churches 
willing to accept their dulness, for the sake of the 
accuracy with which it is expressed. And who 
can tell how much greater our greatest men would 
be, if they delivered their sermons without their 
notes ? Think of Whitfield, Hall, Parsons, reading 



IN DKLIYERY. 159 

tbeir sermons ! What a restraint upon their noble 
intellects^ and their gushing hearts ! Where is 
reading tolerated but in the pulpit ? Not on the 
stage, nor at the bar, nor in the senate. It is 
conceded that we lose something of precision and 
accuracy by spoken discourses, as compared with 
those that are read, but is not this more than 
made up by what we gain in ease and impression ? 
By him who slanshly reads, the aid borrowed from 
the countenance and graceful action, is lost : the 
link of sympathy between his soul and that of 
the audience is weakened : the lightnings of his 
eloquence flash less vividly, and its thunders roll 
less grandly through this obstruction. Perhaps 
even those who do read are aware of the dis- 
advantages of the habit, and would say to their 
younger brethren, whose habits are not yet formec^ 
avoid if you can, the practice of reading your dis- 
courses. There are however occasions, when from 
the nature and extent of the subject, this practice 
is not only allowable, but necessary. 

In connexion with the subject of preaching, 
we may consider with propriety, the matter and 
manner of prayer. Between these two there is a 
close and obvious connexion, for earnest sermons 
should ever be associated with earnest prayers; 
and it cannot be doubted that a pious, faithful, 
and devoted minister, is scarcely less useful, at 
least in the way of keeping up the spirit of deva- 



160 EARNESTNESS 

tion in his congregation^ by the latter, than by 
the former. His chastened fervour, like a breeze 
from heaven, comes over the languid souls of his 
hearers, and fans the spark of piety in their hearts 
to a flame : while on the contrary, the duhiess 
and coldness of some public prayers are enough to 
freeze what little devotion there may be in the 
assembled people. We have thought too little of 
this, and have too much neglected to cultivate the 
gift, and to seek the grace, of supplication. If 
entreating and beseeching importunity be proper 
in dealing with sinners for Gk»d, can it be less so 
in dealing with Ood for sinners ? Our flocks 
should be the witnesses of both these, and hear 
not only how we speak to them, but how we plead 
with God for them ; they should be the auditors 
of our agonizing intercession on their behalf; and 
be convinced how true is our declaration that we 
have them in our hearts. How such petitions, so 
full of intense afiection and deep solicitude, would 
tend to soften their minds, and to prepare them 
for the sermon which was to follow. Who has 
not beheld the solemnizing and subduing effect 
upon the congregation, of such holy wrestling 
with God ; the audience seemed to feel as if God 
had indeed come down among them in power and 
glory during the prayer, and was preparing to do 
some work of grace in their midst. The rudest 
and most turbulent spirits have sometimes been 



IN D ELITE RT, 161 

awed^ and the most trifling and frivolous minds 
made serious, by this holy exercise. We who 
practise extempore prayer have advantanges for this, 
of which we shduld not be slow to avail ourselves. 
Not being confined by the forms of a liturgy, but 
left to our own choice, we can give a harmony to 
all the various parts of the service, and make the 
scripture we read, and the hymns we sing, as well 
as the prayers we present, all bear upon the sub- 
ject of the sermon, and thus give a unity of design, 
and a concentration of effect, to the solemn en- 
gagements of the sanctuary. This should be 
an object with every minister, in order that the 
thoughts of the people may, without being divided 
or diverted, flow pretty much in one channel, and 
towards one point. Moral, as well as mechanical 
effect depends upon the combination of many 
seemingly small causes. But more especially 
should the prayers be in harmony with the ser- 
mon, and every preacher knows what the sermon 
is to be. If he is about to address himself in a 
strain of beseeching importunity to the impenitent 
and unbelieving, how much would it tend to pre- 
pare them for his appeal, if his heart were pre- 
viously, and in their hearing, to pour forth a strain 
of fervent pleading with God on their behalf. 
They would thus be awed and subdued into a 
state of mind likely to render the forth-coming 
sermon effectual, by the blessing of 6od^ for their 

M 



16/^ EARNESTNESS 

conversion. Such a prayer would be the most 
appropriate introduction he could give to his dis- 
course. But then especial care should be taken 
•that the hymn, and even the tune^ which inter- 
poses between the prayer and the sermon^ should 
not be of a kind to divert the current of thought^ 
much less to efface the solemn impressions already 
produced^ and hinder the effect of the discourse 
about to be delivered. I remember to have heard 
a preacher^ who was going to preach a very solemn 
«ermon^ breathe out one of the most impressive 
strains of intercession for the impenitent I ever 
listened to^ as if even anxious to begin the work 
of conversion by his prayer, which he hoped to 
finish by his sermon. The people sat down in 
solemn awe, when as if by a prompting of the 
wicked One, who catcheth away the seed out of 
the heart, the clerk gave out a most inappropriate 
hymn, and the choir, with a band of musical in- 
struments, sung a tune more inappropriate still : 
as may be easily imagined, the seriousness pro- 
duced by the prayer was instantly dissipated, and 
the preparation for the sermon entirely destroyed. 
How true is it, that the singing-seat is often 
hostile to the usefulness of the pulpit, and the 
choir in opposition to the effort of the preacher. 
Finney, in his book on Revivals, descends to so 
minute a specification of the circumstances to be 
attended, to in preparing for the revival, as to 



IN DELIVERY. 183 

expose him to the ridicule of many of his readers; 
and no attempt is here made to defend him^ or to 
recommend his volume; but still there is true 
philosophy in the spirit of his directions^ which 
amounts to this, that the effect of sermons, and 
indeed of all pubhc speaking, depends often upon 
very little things. Trifles have great power to 
divert the current of thought, to break the chain 
of reflection, and to disturb the process of emotion. 
Every thing connected with pubhc worship should 
be still, orderly, solemn ; as beflts a service con- 
ducted in the presence of God, and with reference 
to him. 

Returning to the subject of prayer, it becomes 
every minister to take especial care that this should 
be conducted with propriety, not only on account 
of its nature and design, as addressed to God, and 
as the medium of obtaining blessings at his hand, 
but because of its moral effect upon the people. 
We object to pre-composed forms, and we think 
on sufficient grounds, as wanting in adaptation to 
the ever changing circumstances of the congrega- 
tion, to the events of the times, arid to the services 
of the minister, and as at the same time teuding 
to produce formahsm — but then we are bound to 
take care that our free prayers are such as are 
eminently adapted to edification. And is there 
not room for much improvement in our public 
devotional exercises ? In some cases there is too 
much elaboration and appearance of study; thoot^]^ 



164 VARNE8TXE88 

in far more^ a want of richness and fulness of 
unction and importunity. The prayers are often 
too excursive and vague^ a mere string of petitions 
which have no connexion with each other, and 
which leave the whole without unity of design, or 
definiteness of object. There are some admirable 
remarks on the subject of public extempore prayer 
in Foster^s sketch of Mr. HalPs character as a 
preacher, which go to prove that more concentra- 
tion of thought on particular topics would pro- 
duce a greater effect than that unrestrained dis- 
cursiveness, which characterises too many of our 
devotional exercises. We pass too rapidly from 
one subject to another, and thus as it were, sur- 
prise our hearers, by their being brought to a new 
topic, before they are aware that they had left the 
preceding one ; and it may be safely affirmed that 
prayers which do not detain the thoughts on any 
certain things for a few moments, take slight hold 
on the auditors. '^Things noted so transiently 
do not admit of deliberate attention, and seem as 
if they did not claim it.^' With the liberty of 
unrestricted variety which we possess, why should 
it be thought necessary to go always over the 
same ground, and to bring in the same topics, in 
the same exact order, in much the same length, 
and in almost the same words? Why may we 
not sometimes drop every thing else, and break 
out into a continued strain in reference to one 
selected object ? How deq> would be the convic- 



IN DELIVERY. 165 

tion of the audience of the importance which we^ 
at any rate^ felt to belong to it^ and how likely 
would be such a method to engage them in deep 
sympathy with us, in reference to it. We should 
also be careful to avoid all personaUties which 
would excite curiosity or disturb devotion, and 
especially all laudatory epithets on the one hand, 
and criminatory ones on the other. In using our 
freedom, let us take care not to abuse it, and 
endeavour that the end and object of our preach- 
ing shall be helped, and not hindered, by the 
method of our praying. If pre-composed forms 
of prayer have their disadvantages, so also has 
free prayer ; and while we consider the balance of 
advantage vastly in favour of the latter, let us 
recollect that our brethren of the Establishment 
are of the same opinion respecting their liturgy ; 
it becomes us therefore, while we charitably bear 
with each other, to make the best possible use of 
the method we prefer. 

The manner of prayer, as well as its matter, 
demands also our serious attention. While the 
very nature of the exercise forbids every thing 
showy or elaborately ingenious ; every thing quaint, 
familiar, and irreverend, and enjoins the utmost 
simplicity and spirituality, it no less prohibits all 
flippancy, carelessness, and pompous oratory. The 
most serious, reverend, and devotional manner i» 
required not only on our own account, but on 
account of the audience. There are some men 



166. EARNES.TNESS IN DELIYERY. 

vhose very tones are enough to extinguish all 
devotional feeling at once : it is almost impossible 
to conceive that it is a sinful mortal we hear 
addressing himself to the Holy, Holy, Holy Lord 
God, before whom the seraphim veil their faces,. 
While on the contrary there are others whose deep 
devotional tones, whose subdued manner, whose 
awe-stricken demeanour, seem to remind us that 
they are indeed speaking to the Almighty. It is 
not necessary to suppose that earnestness requires 
boisterousness ; a mistake too commonly made by 
many who work themselves up into vociferation 
and actual contortion. Such vehemence, like a 
violent blast of wind, puts out the languid flame 
of devotion, when a gentler breeze would fan it to. 
greater intensity. It were well also to avoid that 
sing-song tone which we too often hear in those 
who lead the public devotions. Still there must be 
earnestness — the earnestness of deep feeling, of 
lively devotion, of a heart intent upon its own. 
salvation, and the salvation of those who are then 
and there waiting to liear the word of life. 

Our pleading, though in the greatest degree 
reverential, should be that of men who are standing 
between the living and the dead, a subdued and 
chastened, yet importunate intercession, such as it 
might be supposed we should use in addressing ^ 
an earthly monarch, when interceding for thei 
Uvea of some for. whom we were anxious tQ obtain 
the.interposition, of jrpyal mercy. . ^ .... 



CHAPTER VII. 

EARNESTNESS MANIFESTED IN THE PASTORATE. 

This must by no means be omitted. The 
pulpit is the chief, but not the only, sphere of 
ministerial solicitude and action : just as preach- 
ing is Ood's jSrst, but not his exclusive, means of 
saving souls. DiflFerent ministers have fallen into 
two opposite mistakes ; one class have thought to 
do every thing in the pulpit as preachers, while 
they have neglected the duties of the pastor; 
the others have purposed to do every thing as 
pastors, but have neglected the diligent prepara- 
tion of their sermons. Of the two errors the 
latter is the more mischievous, inasmuch as no 
pastoral devotedness, however intense, will long 
keep together a congregation among Protestant 
Dissenters, much less collect one, when the preach- 
ing is indifferent and unattractive ; while on th6 
other hand, good preaching will of itself do much 
even in the absence of pastoral attentions to keep 
the flock from being scattered. But why should 
not both extremes be avoided ? Good preaching and 
jgood shepherding are quite compatible with each 
other, and he who is in earnest will combine both. 
He will be a watchman for souls every where, aiid 



168 EARNESTNESS IN 

seek if by any and by all means he can save some. 
He can never entirely lay aside his anxiety for the 
objects of his regard^ and is ever ready to manifest 
it on all suitable occasions. His sermons are 
composed and delivered for this object^ and he is 
afterwards inquisitive for the effect they have pro- 
duced^ and watches and prays for the result. 
His anxious eye is searching the congregation^ 
even while preachings to see^ not so much who is 
delighted^ but who is seriously impressed. He 
will not, cannot^ be content to go on^ without 
ascertaining whether or not his sermons are sue-* 
cessful. Like a good physician^ who is minutely 
watchful for the effect of his medicines upon his 
patients individually, according to their specific 
varieties of disease, he will endeavour to ascertain 
the impression which his sermons have produced 
on particular persons. He will aim to attract to 
him the anxious inquirers after salvation, and for 
this purpose will have special meetings for them^ 
will invite and encourage their attendance, will 
cause them to feel that they are most welcome^ 
and by his tender, faithful, and appropriate treat- 
ment of their case, will make them sensible that 
to him they are as truly the objects of deep inte- 
rest, as the lambs are to the good shepherd. And 
though he will very naturally wish not to be too 
frequently broken in upon in his private studies^ 
by those to whom he has given set times for 



THE PASTORATK« 169 

meeting him — ^yet a poor^ burdened^ trembling 
penitent will never find him engaged too deeply or 
delightfully in study, to heal the broken in heart, 
and to bind up their wounds. It is really distress- 
ing to know how little time some ministers are 
willing to give up from their favourite pursuits^ 
even for relieving the solicitudes of an anxious 
mind. They read much, and perhaps as the 
result, preach well composed, though possibly not 
very awakening sermons ; but as for any skill, or 
even taste, for dealing with convinced sinners, 
wounded consciences, and perplexed minds, they 
are as destitute of this as if it were no part of 
their duty. They resemble lecturers on m^icine, 
rather than practitioners ; or they are like physi- 
cians who would assemble all their patients able 
to attend, in the same room, and then give general 
directions about health and sickness to all alike, 
but who do not inquire into their several ailments, 
nor visit them at their own abodes, nor adapt the 
treatment to their individual and specific disease. 
It is admitted that some men have less tact, and a 
still greater destitution of taste, than others, for 
this department of pastoral action ; but some skill 
in it, and some attention to it, are the duty of 
every minister, and may be acquired by all : and 
no man can be in earnest without it. He who 
can only generalise in the pulpit, but has no ability 
to individualise out of it ; who cannot in some 



170 SARNESTNESSl IN 

pleasure meet the varieties of religious perplexity, 
and deal with the various modifications of awakened 
9olicitude ; who finds himself disinclined or disa- 
bled to guide the troubled conscience through the 
labyrinths which sometimes meet the sinner in the 
first stage of his pilgrimage to the skies^ may be 
a popular preacher^ but he is Uttle fitted to be the 
pastor of a Christian church. One half-hour's 
individual conversation with a convinced but per- 
plexed mind, may do more to correct mistakes^ to 
Qonvey instruction^ to relieve solicitude^ and to 
settle the wavering in faith and peace, Uian ten 
sermons. True it requires much love for souls^ 
];nuch devotedness to their salvation, and much 
anxiety for the success of our ministry, to devote 
that half-hour to one solitary inquirer after life 
eternal ; but surely no really earnest minister will 
think his time ill bestowed in guiding that single 
inquirer into the way of peace. 

This individualising labour is more easily carried 
on in some situations than in others, and is indeed 
more important in some situations to ministerial 
success. In small congregations, for instance, 
especially when they are found in our lesser towns 
or villages, the objects of such special attention 
come more under the notice of a pastor, are more 
accessible, and can have more time given to them, 
than in large congregations in more considerable 
towns. To these smaller churches, individuals. 



7HE PASTORATE. 17X 

though not of more importance or value in them- 
selves, since the soul and its salvation are of equal 
worth every where, are of more consequence to the 
comfort of the minister, and the prosperity of the 
cause, than they are where a crowd is gathered. 
Pastors of large churches are much more occupied, 
both with the concerns of their own flock, and 
with public business, than their brethren in more 
retired situations, and are often so occupied and 
hurried as to have too Uttle leisure for the indi- 
vidual attentions now recommended; and are 
perhaps apt amidst the aggregate of numbers, to 
think too little of the units. Still some excuse 
may be made for ihem, of which the others cannot 
avail themselves. The accession even occasionally 
of only a single member to our smaller churches 
is felt to be of more importance, and produces a 
more reviving and cheering effect, than the addi- 
tion of several to the larger ones. We have all 
something to learn even from the Scribes and 
Pharisees of ancient times, who compassed sea and 
land to make one proselyte; and also from the 
Papists of modem times, who pursue a like course: 
or to change the examples, we want more of the 
benevolent disposition of angels, who rejoice over 
one sinner that repenteth. No efforts would be 
more likely to be successful, none would more 
amply reward those who make them, than the 
selection of the most hopeful individuals in th^ 



173 BABNB8TNE88 IN 

congregation, and the following of them np with 
all the assiduities of a special, affectionate, and 
judicious attention. Such a course of pastoral 
labour, though it would not altogether be a substi- 
tute for pulpit attractiveness, and should never be 
allowed to supersede the most diligent pulpit 
preparation, would enable many a minister, who 
may not be gifted with large abilities, to retain a 
strong hold upon his flock. This is a line along 
which almost any one may carry on a career of 
earnestness. 

Another object of pastoral obligation may be 
mentioned — attention to the young : and these may 
be divided into two classes, the young persons 
who belong to the congregation, and those which 
belong to the Sunday schools. With regard to 
the former, it is a matter of congratulation that 
the modem plan of Bible-classes is not infrequent 
nor unsuccessful : but even at this time, it is 
rather the exception than the rule. It may be 
feared that there are some who from the beginning 
to the end of the year, aye, and of their ministry 
also, take no interest in the youth of their congre- 
gations; they have no catechetical classes, no 
Bible-classes, and even rarely preach to the young. 
Who can wonder that such men have to complain 
that their young people go off to the Church of 
England, or what is far worse, to the world ? 
What have they ever done to attach them to them- 



THE FASTORATX. 173 

selves^ or to their place of worship ? Let do man 
be surprised that his congregation^ diminished by 
death and removals^ continually declines^ if he 
neglects to call around him the youth of his flock. 
Whence does the shepherd look for his future flock, 
but from the lambs ? And who are to constitute 
our future congregations and churches, but our 
young people ? 

I am an advocate also for the catechetical 
instruction of the younger children, and am sorry 
that this admirable method of imparting reli- 
gious truth has fallen into such general desuetude. 
Even the Bible- class, however accommodated to the 
capacity of these junior members of our congrega- 
tion, is not altogether a substitute for the practice 
of catechising, but should be regarded only as an 
addition to it. There is still a great desideratum 
to be supplied to our denomination, whose thanks 
would be pre-eminently due to the man who 
should supply it, — I mean a set of well-composed 
catechisms, which might be introduced to all our 
families, and thus set up a uniform system of 
religious instruction for the body. I say which 
might be introduced to all our families ; for it is 
by no means my wish or my intention to obtrude 
the pastor between the parent and child, and take 
the religious instruction of the latter from his 
natural guardian and teacher, to devolve it upon 
the pastor. It is to parents that the injunction is 



174 EARNESTNESS I^ 

delivered, " Thou shalt teach these words to thy 
children diligently, and shalt talk of them when 
thou sittest in thy house /' and, " Bring them 
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord/' 
No pastoral attention should be intended, nor can 
be adapted, to supersede or lighten this solemn 
parental obligation. But then the pastor should 
labour to the uttermost to urge and keep up th6 
parents which are of his flock to the right dis- 
charge of their duty. There are few of us who 
are not sorrowfully convinced that little is to be 
expected from our sermons in the pulpit, or our 
instructions in the class-room, while all our 
endeavours are so miserably counteracted, by the 
"neglect of domestic instruction, and the want of 
parental solicitude. It is not intended to justify 
pastoral neglect by advancing the obligations of 
parental duty, for perhaps we have been, and are; 
all verily guilty of a criminal defect of duty, in 
not giving more of our time and attention to the 
children of our congregations ; — but still even the 
time and attention we do give, is all likely to be 
lost, by the low state of religion in the homes of 
some of our people. 

We might very naturally expect that our 
churches would be chiefly built up from the 
families of our members ; whereas the greater 
number of accessions are from those who were 
once the people of the world. There is a great 



^fiE pastorate: 175 

mistake on this subject, into which both parents 
and ministers have fallen ; and that is^ that the 
conversion of the children of the professor is to b6 
looked for more from the sermons of the latter^ 
than from the instructions of the former ; whereas 
the contrary is the true order of things ; and were 
domestic piety and teaching what they ought tO 
be, this is the order which would be found to exist. 
There is unquestionable truth in the proverb^ 
" Train up a child in the way he should go, and 
when he is old he will not depart from it/^ Were 
the nature and design of the domestic constitution 
thoroughly understood, and its religious dutied 
early, judiciously, aflFectionately, and perseveringly 
discharged, the greater number of our young 
people would be converted to God at home.* 
Were all religious professors, who are parents, 
real and eminent Christians ; were they, from the 
time they became parents, to set their hearts upon 
being the instruments of their children's conver- 
sion ; where they to do all that prayer, instruction^ 
discipline, and example could do, for the format 
tion of the religious character of their oflFspring ; 
and were they carefully to abstain from every 

* I take this opportunity to recommend a most valuable 
Volume, entitled ''Hie Domestic Constitution/' by the Rer. 
Christopher Anderson ; a new and cheaper edition of which 19 
lately published. Every minister should know, by reading it, 
the worth of this inestimable book, and recommend it to his 
ilock. 



176 XARNE8TNES8 IBT 

thing which would obstruct these ends, it might 
be confidently expected that it would be within 
the hallowed precincts of such homes, and not in 
the sanctuary, that the children of the godly 
would usually become godly themselves. Here 
then should be, and will be, an object with every 
truly earnest pastor, to bring up the parents in 
his church to a right sense and faithful discharge 
of their functions. He will labour to impress 
upon them the solemn obligations under which 
they live, to train up their children for God. It 
will be a matter of prayer and solicitude with him 
to excite them to their duty, and to keep them in 
it For this purpose he will not only make his 
pulpit ministrations bear much upon parental obli- 
gations, but he will make a point of visiting the 
families which are in his church, to pray with 
them, and to hold up the hands of the parents in 
this godly duty. Deeply is it to be regretted that 
this part of pastoral occupation, as well as cate- 
chising, has disappeared amidst the bustle and 
engrossing power of trade, and the public business 
of modern religious institutions. How little do 
the families of our people know of us in the cha- 
racter and hallowed familiarity of the pastor? 
When are we seen amidst the domestic circle as 
the respected and beloved minister of that lovely 
and interesting group, labouring, by our affec- 
tionate, serious, and solemn discourse, and by 



THE FAgTORATE. 177 

prayer as serious, solemn, and affectionate, to 
entwine ourselves round the young hearts which 
there look up to us with reverend regard ? Why^ 
why, do we neglect such important scenes of 
labour, such hopeful efforts for usefulness I What 
power would this give to our sermons, and what 
efficacy to our ministrations ! These young ones 
would grow up to love us, and it would not be a 
light or little thing which would break them off 
from our ministry when we had produced in them 
such a personal attachment to ourselves. But 
then we must take especial care that our conduct 
in the houses of our people should be such as to 
give weight and influence to their reUgious instruc- 
tion of the family, and to ours in the sanctuary. 
We must be known there as the servants of God, 
the ministers of Christ, the watchpnen for souls ; 
and not merely as the table-guest, the parlour 
jester, the gossiping story-teller, the debating 
politician, the stormy polemic, the bitter sectarian ; 
much less as the lover of wine. Would God that 
those of my brethren who have acquired the habit 
of smoking, if they cannot leave it off, would 
abstain from this practice in the houses of their 
friends, and confine it to their own : would that 
they did not permit the young inquisitive eyes of 
the junior members of the families which they 
visit, to see the pipe brought out as their necessary 
adjunct. Did they know the regrets of their best 

N 



178 EARNESTNESS IN 

friends, and consider the power of their example, 
they would, at any rate, so far abstain as to wait 
till they had reached their own habitation, before 
they indulged themselves with their accusftomed 
gratification. Still, it is freely conceded, with- 
out justifying this habit, there are some who are 
addicted to it, so grave, and serious, and dignified 
in other respects, as to furnish by their general 
demeanour an antidote against their example in 
this one particular: but what antidote can be 
found to neutrahse the mischief inflicted by the 
levity and frivolity of the parlour-buflFoon, whose 
highest object in going to the houses of his 
friends, seems to be to tell a merry story, and 
to excite a hearty laugh. In his hands and lips 
the pages of " Punch" are far more becoming, as 
they are, perhaps, far more frequent, than those of 
David, Isaiah, or Paul. Happily we have very few 
that go to this extreme of lightness and frivor 
lity, but far too many, as is the case with all 
denominations, and with ours not more than 
others, of those whose hilarity is destructive at 
once of their dignity, their seriousness, and their 
usefulness, as ministers of Christ. Not that I 
contend for affected demureness, and solemn 
grimace, or even a perpetual sermonizing conver- 
sation; as if a pastor could not talk, without 
violating official decorum, upon any topic but 
religion, and were letting dawn his dignity, or 



THE PASTORATE. 179 

desecrating his sanctity, if he joined in ordinary 
conversation, and partook of, or even helpedj the 
cheerfulness of the circle. By no means : he is 
not to appear like a spectre that has escaped from 
the cloister, to haunt the parlour, striking every 
face with paleness, and every tongue with silence. 
He is a man, a citizen, and a friend, as well as a 
minister; and has a stake and an interest in 
the great questions which occupy human minds, 
and engage their conversation : and provided he 
do not forget what is due to his ministerial cha- 
racter, he need not throw oflF what belongs to him 
in common with others. Nay, his very cheerful- 
ness may be made a part of his earnestness, by 
being taken up and employed as a means to con- 
ciliate the aflfections of all around him. The man 
who is seriously cheerful, who engages in general 
conversation, and accommodates himself to the 
innocent habits of those with whom he associates, 
and does this in order really to do them spiritual 
good, and aid him in the great work of saving 
their souls, will find in the sublimity and sanctity 
of his end, a sufficient protection against the abuse 
of the means. This is widely diflferent from the 
unchecked levity, and unrestrained frivolity in 
which some indulge, and which make it difficult 
to imagine how they can feel the value of souls, 
or the obligation of attempting their salvation. 
Howard at a masquerade, or Clarkson at a fancy 
n2 



180 EARNESTNESS IN 

ball, would not have been more out of place : a 
physician would not be more out of character, who 
had just come fiom the ravages of the plague, and 
was immediately going back to them again, yet 
was seen wasting his time and amusing himself 
with the tricks of a merry-andrew, than is a mes- 
senger of God's mercy, and a preacher of Christ^s 
gospel, in the circles of folly and vanity, and he 
himself the Momus of the party. 

But we now advert for a few moments, to the 
scope for earnestness which is presented to the 
pastor by the children of the Sunday-school. Bj 
a most fatal error, too many of our ministers deem 
these institutions as either beyond their duties^ or 
below their notice. They are neither. A pastor 
is, or ought to be, the head and chief in the 
department of all the rehgious instruction which 
goes on in connexion with the congregation under 
his care. He is the teacher, the superintendent, 
and the responsible organ of religious knowledge 
for all the flock, and the Sunday-school is a part 
of it. It is a wrong state of things that has 
grown up among some of us Dissenters, in which 
two, three, or four hundred rational minds and 
immortal souls are brought every Sabbath-day to 
our Sunday-schools, and to our places of worship, 
for the very purpose of receiving rehgious instruc- 
tion, and yet all this is to be carried on without 
its being once thought by the pastor that he has 



THE FASTOBATE. 181 

something to do in this business ; or by the con-^ 
gregation or the teachers^ that he has by virtue of 
his office a right and a reason to interfere. In 
most cases the pastor has given the matter out of 
his hand^ and has thus raised up, or has been 
accessory to there being raised up, a body of young 
instructors of divine truth, who are acting inde- 
pendently of hini, and who, in some few instances, 
have confederated against him. This is not as it 
should be. The teachers are, or ought to be, a 
pastor^s special care; to quaUfy them for their 
office, and to assist them, in its duties, should be 
thought by him no inconsiderable part of his func- 
tions. Nor should even the children themselves 
be viewed as persons with whom he has nothing 
to do. There are always among these some whose 
minds have been brought to serious reflection, who 
are inquiring witia solicitude after salvation, and 
whom he should take under Jiis own teaching and 
special care, and aim to guide into the way of 
faith, peace, and holiness : and he should not 
neglect to give frequent, a&ctionate, and solemn 
addresses to the rest. In a Sunday-school of two 
or Uiree hundred children there are of course two 
or three hundred immortal souls, exposed by their 
very situation in life to pecuhar dangers, yet all 
capable of eternal blessedness, and all brought 
weekly under the eye of the pastor : and yet by 
how many of our pastors is this hopeful object of 



182 EARNESTNESS IN 

religious zeal and benevolence thrown oflF from 
ministerial solicitude^ and handed over to the 
Sunday-school teachers^ as if there were no hope 
of a minister's saving the soul of a poor boy, nor 
any reward for his saving a poor girl. This obli- 
gation of attending to the souls of the Sunday- 
scholars, while incumbent upon all ministers, is 
especially so upon those who are labouring amidst 
much discouragement in small congregations. 
Many of these men are continually uttering their 
complaints over the smallness of their congrega- 
tions, and the inefficiency of their labours; and 
yet perhaps have never thought of turning their 
attention to the two or three hundred youthful 
minds which are every Sabbath-day before their 
eyes, and under the sound of their voice. No one 
who ever threw his mind and heart into his Sun- 
day-schools had to complain that he laboured in 
vain, and spent his strength for nought. No part 
of ministerial labour yields a quicker or a larger 
reward. By some it is made the main pivot on 
which their whole system of religious instruction 
turns, and flourishing congregations have risen up 
under its potency. I have myself been the aston- 
ished and delighted witness of this, especially in 
one well-known instance, and am so deeply im- 
pressed with its importance, that I conjure my 
brethren not to neglect this means of usefulness, 
nor to throw away the golden opportunity which 



THE PASTORATE. 183 

the present circamstances of our country still 
hold out. 

Nor is it Sunday-school instruction alone which 
claims our attention^ but daily education. In this 
we must be in earnest also. It is one of the great 
subjects of the day: and belongs to us^ as much 
as to any one. We must not allow the popular 
mind to be wholly taken from us^ but must exert 
ourselves according to our ability and opportunity 
to train it up for society and God. Others know 
and feel the importance of this, if we do not. The 
Roman Catholic priests are aware of it, so are the 
clergy of the EstabUshed Church, and so are the 
Methodist ministers-; and shall Dissenting minis- 
ters be behind the most zealous and devoted friends 
of education ? I trust not. 

But there are other departments of the pastorate 
in which earnestness will manifest itself; such as 
visiting the sick, especially where the disease is 
chronic, and leaves the mind at Uberty for conver- 
sation; and then also there is the difficult but 
incumbent duty of rebuke, warning, and ecclesias- 
tical discipline. No devoted servant of Christ can 
neglect the state of the church, but will be solici- 
tous to maintain such order there, as shall be 
pleasing to him to whom the church belongs. 
Like a good shepherd he wiVL look after his flock, 
and will endeavour to avoid the denunciations of 
God deUvered by the prophet Ezekiel ; " Woe be 



184 EARNESTNESS IN 

to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! 
Should not the shepherds feed the flocks ? The 
diseased have ye not strengthened ; neither have 
ye healed that which was sick; neither have ye 
bound up that which was broken; neither have 
ye brought again that which was driven away; 
neither have ye sought that which was lost/^ 
Impressive description of our duty ! May we be 
found so discharging it as to avoid this fearful woe! 
I may appropriately introduce here the words 
of the Bishop of Calcutta^ in his admirable and 
heart- searching introduction to the edition of 
" Baxter's Reformed Pastor/' written when Vicar 
of Islington^ and published by Collins^ in his 
series of " Select Authors/' 

" What have we been doiDg as ministers? Lamentably 
as we have failed in a general estimate of the vast impor- 
tance of our office, we have failed as lamentably in all those 
parti of it which relate to personal inspection and vigilance 
over our flocks. We have confined ourselves to preaching, 
to ecclesiastical duties, to occasional visits to the sick, to 
the administration of the sacraments, to the external and 
secular relation in which we stand to our parishes ; but 
what have we done in personal care and direction, in affec^ 
tionate catechetical conferences, in going from house to 
house, in visiting every family and individual in our dis- 
tricts, in becoming acquainted with the characters, the 
wants, the state of heart, the habits, the attendance upon 
public worship, the observance of the Sabbath, the instruc- 
tion of children and servants, the &mily devotions, of each 
house ? Have we looked after ^h individual sheep with 



THE PASTORATE. 185 

an eager solicitude ? Have we denied ourselves our own 
ease^ and pleasure, and indulgence, in order to 'go infter 
Christ's sheep> scattered in this naughty wicked world, that 
they may be saved for ever.' What do the streets and 
lanes of our cities testify concerning us? What do the 
highways and hedges of our country parishes say as to our 
fidelity and Idve to souls ? What do the houses and cot- 
tages and sick chambers of our congregations and neigh- 
bourhoods speak? Where have we been ? What have we 
been doing? Has Christ our Master seen us follow his 
footsteps, and going about doing good ? Brethren, we are 
verily faulty concerning this. We have been content with 
public discourses, and have not urged each soul to the 
concerns of salvation. Blessed Jesus ! thou knowest the 
guilt of thy ministers in this respect, above all others! 
We have been divines, we have been scholars, we have 
been disputants, we have been students — we have been 
every thing but the holy, self-denying, laborious, consist- 
ent ministers of thy gospel." 

It has long appeared probable to me^ that we, 
as Dissenting ministers, have something to learn 
in reference to this part of our duty from the 
clergy of the Church of England, and even from 
the priests of the Church of Rome. We do not 
perhaps sufficiently enter into the meaning and 
functions implied in that very expressive phrase, 
" The cure of souk;" a phrase which comprehends 
far more than the preaching of sermons, and the 
duties of the Sabbath and the sanctuary, however 
well performed. There is a definiteness, an expli- 
citness, in this beautiful expression, into which we 



186 EARNESTNESS IN 

have need more deeply to enter. It is true we 
have our word '* pastor" which in the impressive 
Saxon term ^^ shepherd," implies a great deal^ but it 
is neither so specific nor so solemn as the descrip- 
tion conveyed by "The cure of souls/' Nor do 
I think we have all the functions which this phrase 
implies so much within the range of our habitual 
contemplation as those by whom it is employed. 
In leaving college, and entering upon the sphere 
of our ministerial labour, our attention is perhaps 
often chiefly fixed upon the pulpit, without taking 
sufficiently into consideration the various private 
duties of which this is but the centre : while the 
clergy, though not altogether neglecting the work 
of preaching, enter upon their parishes with a 
wider range of view, as regards the duties of their 
office. The visitation of the sick, the catechising 
of children, and an attention to private exposition 
of the Scriptures and individual cases, enter more 
into their plans of clerical activity than into ours. 
There seems to be with them a little more of the 
sense and admission of individual claims upon 
their time and attention, than with us. Our sphere 
is felt to be the pulpit, and our relation to be to the 
congregation as a whole. It is not unUkely we 
take more pains in the preparation of our sermons ; 
for as our discourses are usually much longer than 
those of the clergy of the Establishment, we must 
of course spend more time in composing them. 



THE PASTORATE, 187 

It will also be said that the parochial system of 
the Church of England gives to its ministers, by 
prescribing local boundaries, advantages which we, 
whose flocks are scattered all over the expanse of 
a large town, do not possess. There is something 
in this, but not so much as appears at first sight, 
inasmuch as attachment to favourite preachers is 
as strongly felt in the Establishment as it is with 
us, and over-leaps all these distinctions of mere 
streets. It is also affirmed that it is more a part 
of the system of the Church of England to incul- 
cate this looking up by their parishioners to their 
clergy in all spiritual matters out of the pulpit, as 
well as to his sermons in it. If it be so, it must 
be confessed that it is an excellence ; and if we- 
have it not, the sooner we obtain it the better. 
There seems to be in our system as much room 
for it, as in that from which we have separated, 
perhaps more ; since the voluntary choice of their 
pastor by the people themselves is a more solemn 
surrender into his hands of the oversight of their 
spiritual affairs, than the negative acceptance of 
the minister who has been appointed by a patron, 
without asking the consent or approbation of the 
congregation. But the fact is, we have too much 
contented ourselves with the functions of the 
preacher, to the neglect of those of the pastor, 
and have thus taught our people to regard us too 
exclusively in the light of the former. What we 
need, therefore^ is more earnestness in the pasto- 



188 EARNESTNESS IN THE PAI^TOBATE. 

rate, as well as in the pulpit, for it is in this we 
are brought into most powerful competition with 
the clergy of this day. Let us then tiake up the 
phrase^ as descriptive of the duties of our office, 
and consider ourselves as called by the Holy Ghost, 
chosen by the people, and ordained by the laying 
on of the hands of the presbytery, to " the cure of 
aouls,^' — a cure which we are to carry out by all 
the beseeching entreaty of the pulpit, and all the 
endless and ceaseless assiduities of the pastorate. 

Such, then, is a view, and but an imperfect one 
too, of an earnest ministry. 

I would have made it more comprehensive and 
impressive if I could : for the reaUty can never be 
overdrawn nor exaggerated. Let any one consider 
what that object must be which occupied the mind 
of Deity from eternity; which is the end of all 
the Divine dispensations of creation, providence, 
and grace, towards our world; which is the pur- 
pose for which the Son of God expired upon the 
eross; which formed the substance of revealed 
truth, and employed the lives and pens of apostles; 
to which martyrs set the seal of their blood ; in 
short, let him recollect that the end of the Chris* 
tian ministry is the salvation of immortal souls, 
through the mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and then say if any thing less than an earnest 
ministry is befitting such an object, or if that 
earnestness can comprehend in it less than has 
been set forth in these chapters. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

EXAMPLBS OF EARNESTNESS. 

The power of exampb is proverbial. We arc 
constituted to be moved by it^ as well as directed^ 
It teaches us how to act> and impels us to action. 
Hence the excellence of Scripture ; it is a book of 
models as well as of niaxims. Towering above all 
the rest, standing out in bold relief beyond all 
the others, is the chabacteb of Cheist. He 
is an example of all excellence, and an example to 
all persons. To the ministers of the gospel this 
beautiful and perfect embodiment of all that is 
holy and lovely commends itself with peculiar 
energy. He was himself a minister of the gospel, 
sent by the Father in the same manner as he has 
sent others. He is the great model, the Divine 
archetype as a preacher and a teacher, after which 
they are to copy. In his manner of preaching, as 
well as in his matter, he is to be imitated ; in his 
liveliness, his tenderness, his fidelity, his solemni^, 
he is to be closely and constantly followed. We 
of all men are under the most solemn obligationjB 
to tread in his steps and do as he did. But I 
now select from all his qualities-^his earnestness. 
In this, as well as in every thing else, be surpas- 



190 EXAMPLES OF 

singly excelled all his most devoted servants. 
When he came into the world, he said, " Lo, I 
come, in the volume of the book it is written 
of me, I delight to do thy will, God/' When 
he emerged from his obscurity at Nazareth, and 
entered on his public ministry, he commenced a 
career of increasing and untiring activity. His 
eye, his heart, his tongue, embraced one object, 
and one only, — the salvation of souls. We see 
him always in action, never in repose. Follow 
him where we will, we find him always working, 
preaching, praying, or weeping, but never loiter- 
ing. He gathered up the very fragments of his 
time, when waiting in the house of Martha for 
his food, and when resting at the well of Samaria 
while his disciples had gone into the city to pur- 
chase provisions, and employed these brief intervals 
in doing good. He was the compassionate Saviour, 
and not the cold and heartless philosopher. His 
preaching was the breathing of a soul replete with 
love, his discourse was the overflowing of mercy. 
He was not a mere personification of reason, but 
an incarnation of love; and sent forth not the 
moon-beams of a cold and clear intellectuality, 
but the sun-rays of a fervid and fructifying bene- 
volence. To save souls he scrupled not to go, 
where but for this object we should have never 
.seen him, to feasts and weddings, as well as 
funerals. From the hour when he thus addressed 



EARNESTNESS. 191 

bis mother, '^ Wist ye not I must be about my 
Father's business f his meat and his drink were 
to do the will of his Father. He denied himself 
all that was of an indulgent and self-gratifying 
nature ; his only relaxation was devotion, which, 
after labouring all day in the city, he sought by 
prayer upon the mountains, and in the midnight 
air. As a scene of earnestness, never surpassed 
till he ascended the hill of Calvary, behold him 
bathed in tears over the guilty city, and choked 
in his utterance by the sobs with which the fore- 
sight of the approaching destruction of Jerusalem 
convulsed his bosom ! 0, that was a spectacle 
which was enough to draw into a sympathy of 
grief the moral universe! What a heart that 
must have been, which on such a spot, and at 
such a time, could find relief for its intense emo- 
tions only in tears ! Truly has it been said, that 
melting scene is inferior in pathos, in tender and 
solemn grandeur, only to Calvary itself. But 
this was only a prelude to what followed. In 
prospect of the hour of the solemn and mysteiioits 
scenes of Gethsemane and Golgotha, he exclaimed, 
'^ I have a baptism to be baptised with, and how 
am I straitened till it is accomplished.^' His 
eagerness for man's salvation was such that the 
guilty heart of the traitor was too slow in its 
purpose for his love, and he quickened the move- 
ments of Judas by those memorable words, ^' What 



}92 BXAMPLES OF 

thou doe^t^ do quickly/^ He made haste to the 
fnross. He was almost impatient for the hour of 
sacrkice. 9e could brook no delay in lovers 
redeemii^ work. 

Here, ministers of the gospel, here is your 
pattern. This earnestness is your model. You 
are to be something like this. The work of 
Christ in saving souls is to be regarded in a 
double aspect by you, both as the means of your 
personal salvation, and the example for your official 
character. We have too much forgotten the latter. 
Even though as Christians we may have looked to 
his conduct as our exemplar, we have too much 
neglected to do so as ministers. As aervants we 
have not kept our eyes fixed «8 we ought to have 
done, upon the Great Master. Shame upon us, 
that we have been so little careful to catch the 
fire of intense and ardent devotedness from this 
glowing and Divine example. 

We have seen the sun, let us now turn to the 
stars : we have beheld the Master, let us now 
contemplate the servants. Perhaps the former is 
so high above you that you are discouraged by its 
loftiness and perfection : well, look now at some 
nearer your own level. First of all observe the 
apostle Paul ; and where shall we find any thing 
so nearly approaching to the earnestness of his 
Divine Lord, as the conduct of this wondrous 
m^u. From the moment of his conversion on the 



EARNESTNESS. 193 

way to Damascus^ he had but one object of 
existence, and that was the glory of God in the 
salvation of souls ; and but one way of seeking it, 
and that was the preaching of the cross. Wher- 
ever he went, whatever he did, to whomsoever he 
addressed himself, he was ever watching for souls. 
Whether reasoning with the Jews in their syna- 
gogues ; or discoursing with the philosophers on 
Mars' Hill ; or preaching to the voluptuous inha- 
bitants of Corinth ; or appealing to the Ephesian 
elders at Miletus ; or pleading in chains the cause 
of Christianity before the tribunal of Festus, in 
the presence of Agrippa ; or writing letters from 
prison to the churches he had planted — we find 
him every where and always the earnest minister 
of Jesus Christ. There is one expression in his 
address to the Ephesian elders which reveals in a 
short compass the whole spirit and marrow of his 
preaching; " Remember that by the space of three 
years, I ceased not to warn every one of you, night 
and day, with tears.'' The terror of the Roman 
government could not extract from his firmness a 
single groan — but the sight of an immortal soul 
perishing in its iniquity, and pleased with its 
delusions, altogether unmanned him, and suffused 
his face with tears, which in other cases would 
have been the sign of weakness. those tears, 
those tears, how they reprove us for our insensi- 
bility, and how they prove to us our deficiencies, 
o 



194 EXAMPLES OF 

Every view we can take of this illustrious servant 
of the cross fills us with astonishment and admi- 
ration. His conversion and history seem designed 
to teach us how much energy may be compressed 
into one human hearty to be developed in one 
single life ; what sufferings may be endured^ what 
power exerted, what results produced, by one man 
who is constrained by the love of Christ, and 
filled with all the fulness of God; and what God 
can accomplish in fulfilling the purposes of his 
wisdom and love, by the instrumentaUty of an 
individual of our species. There is a short sen* 
tence in his epistle to the Philippians, which in a 
few words sums up his whole life and labours, — 
'' For me to live is Christ." What a com- 
pass of meaning, what a developement of soul, 
what a comprehension of purpose and plan, do 
those few monosyllables contain. "Christ is my 
life : apart from him and his work I seem to have 
no separate existence. I have grown into that 
one object, and it absorbs me." 

This is earnestness : and what obligation rested 
on Paul to cultivate it, which does not rest on us? 
What was Christ to him, which he ought not to 
be to us ? Why should he thus labour for souls, 
and not we ? Is there a single reason which 
appertains to him, that does not appertain to us ? 
Ministers of Christ, read this great man's life with 
a view to know what you ought to be, and how 



EARNESTNESS. 195 

you ought to live and labour. In view of what 
this blessed apostle was, and how he laboured, will 
you be satisfied with cold intellectuality, flowery 
orations, subtle metaphysics; with thinking you 
have answered the end of your calling when you 
have composed two sermons a week, and kept the 
people tolerably well satisfied with your labours ? 
Will you think it enough to be a close student, a 
hard reader, a good writer — though all this while 
souls are not converted to God, nor the cause of 
religion advanced in the world? Talk you of 
hard labour, and severe trials, and scanty incomes, 
and ungrateful congregations, and fickle friends, 
listen to his tale, and be silent : ^^In labours more 
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons 
more frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Jews five 
times received I forty stripes, save one. Thrice 
was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice 
I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have I 
been in the deep ; in journey ings often, in perils 
of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine 
own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils 
in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in 
the sea, in perils among false brethren ; in weari- 
ness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger 
and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. 
Beside those things that are without, that which 
Cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches. 
Who is weak, and I am not weak ? who is offended, 
o2 



196 EXAMPLES OF 

and I burn not V Is there to be found in human 
composition or history such a passage as this ? 
In reading this who can help askings What have 
/ done or suffered for Christ, that can give me a 
title to be ranked as a minister of Christ after this ? 
But perhaps this also is too lofty an example to 
have much weight with you ; then take an instance 
next from the Nonconformist's Memorial. It 
appears from the diary of that eminent servant 
of Christ, Oliver Heywood, that in one year, 
besides his stated work on the Lord's day, he 
preached one hundred and fifty times ; kept fifty 
days of fasting and prayer, and nine of thanks- 
giving, and travelled fourteen hundred miles, in 
the service of Christ and immortal souls. And 
when we consider that these jouruies must have 
been either on foot or on horseback, this distance 
was more than ten thousand miles by our modern 
railways. And then think of Baxter, that won- 
drous man, who though hunted and imprisoned 
by the demon of persecution, and tortured with 
the stone, was always preaching and writing, till 
he had composed and published those hundred 
and twenty volumes, the very writing of which, as 
to the mechanical labour alone, seemed enough to 
occupy a whole life, and of the contents of which 
the celebrated Dr. Barrow said, that " his practical 
works were never mended, nor his controversial 
ones ever confuted." 



EARNEBTNESS. 197 

Now turn to those extraordinary men, Wesley 
and Whitfield ; and who can read the account of 
their amazing labours, and equally amazing success, 
without something of a self-reproachful and des- 
ponding feeling, as if we were living almost in 
vain. When we see them dividing their whole 
lives between the pulpit, the closet, and the class- 
room; sacrificing all domestic enjoyment and 
personal ease; encountering savage mobs, and 
addressing congregated thousands ; travelling 
backward and forward the whole length of the 
kingdom, and crossing the ocean many times; 
moving the population of cities, and filling nations 
with the fame and the fruit of their evangelical 
labours ; breathing little else than the atmosphere 
of crowded chapels and preaching rooms, except 
when they lifted up their voice under the canopy 
of heaven; regaling themselves, not with the 
dainties of the table, nor the repose of the soft;> 
luxurious couch, but with the tears of the penitent, 
and the songs of the rejoicing believer ; making it 
their one and only business to seek the salvation 
of souls, and their one and only happiness to 
rejoice in the number of their conversions ; indif- 
ferent alike to the savage fury of their persecutors, 
and the fondest flatteries of their followers ; some- 
times rising from the bed of sickness to address 
the multitude in circumstances which rendered it 
probable they would exchange the pulpit for the 



198 EXAMPLES OF 

tomb ; to sum up all in one short sentence, wearing 
out life in labour so great that it looked as if they 
were in baste to die — ^when we see this, how can 
we endure to think of the way in which we are 
living, or how can we imagine we are living at all ? 
How can we read their lives, and not blush for 
ourselves ? How can we witness their earnestness, 
and not feel as if we knew nothing of the passion 
for saving souls ? 

And what shall be said of Brainerd, the missi- 
onary of Christ, and preacher of the gospel to 
the American Indians ? See him harassed by a 
nervous and gloomy dejection, and wearing down 
by a slow consumption ; yet for the love of souk 
dwelling amidst savages, helping to build his own 
comfortless and ill-furnished hut ; living at times 
on parched corn ; travelling and benighted in the 
woods, sleeping, if sleep he could, wet and cold in 
a tree ; throwing himself down on his return to 
his own solitary dwelling on his hard bed, with none 
to comfort him ; and amidst such privations, long 
tried and harassed by the want of success in his 
apostolical labours — and all this for the love of 
souls, and the glory of Christ ! Where, where, 
even among modern missionaries, to say nothing 
of ministers at home, do we find this rigorous 
self-denial, this self-sacrificing disposition, this 
intense desire after the salvation of souls ? 

We may profitably refer to one more instance 



EARNESTNESS. 199 

of ministerial devotedness, — that is the excellent 
Dr. Payson, of America, whose biography should 
be read by every Christian pastor. Many have 
read it, and we would hope with no small advan- 
tage. During his ministry his solicitude for the 
salvation of souls was so earnest, that he impaired 
his health by the frequency of his fastings and 
the importunity of his prayers. His whole life 
was spent in one constant series of efforts to pro- 
duce revivals of religion ; and the anguish of his 
mind when his labours failed was so acute, as to 
bring on bodily disease. It was said of him by his 
biographer, that his language, his conversation, 
and his whole deportment, were such as brought 
home and fastened to the minds of his hearers the 
conviction, that he believed, and therefore spoke. 
So important did he regard such a conviction in 
the attendants on his ministry, that he made it the 
topic of one of his addresses to his clerical brethren, 
which he entitled, " The importance of convincing 
our hearei's that we believe what we preachJ^ In 
the course of this address he remarks, that a min* 
ister who acted thus — 

" In delivering his message as an ambassador of Christ, 
would show that he felt deeply penetrated with a convic- 
tion of its truth and infinite importance. He would speak 
like one whose whole soul was filled with his subject. He 
would speak of Christ and his salvation, as a grateful, 
admiring people would speak of a great and generous deli* 



200 EXAMPLES OF 

verer, who had devoted his life for the welfare of his 
country. He would speak of eternity, as one whose eye 
had been wearied by attempting to penetrate its unfathom- 
able recesses, and describe its awful realities, like a man 
who stood on the verge of time, and had lifted the veil 
which conceals them from the view of mortals. Thoughts 
that glow and words that bum would compose his public 
addresses, and while a sense of the dignity of his official 
character, and the infinite importance of his subject, would 
lead him to speak as one having authority, with indescri- 
bable solemnity, weight, and energy, a full recollection 
that he was by nature a child of wrath, and that he was 
addressing fellow men and fellow sinners, mingled with 
compassion for their wretched state, and ardent desire 
after their salvation, would spread an air of tenderness 
over his discourses, and invest him with that affectionate, 
melting, persuasive correctness of manner, which is best 
calculated to affect and penetrate the heart. To say all in 
one wordy he would speak like an ambassador of Him who 
spake as never man spake, and who would say, ' we speak 
that we do know, and testify that we have seen.' " 

When disabled by increasing disease from 
preachings Dr. Payson carried with him into his 
sick chamber all his undiminished earnestness for 
the salvation of souls. Being present on one occa- 
sion at the iadrainistration of the Lord's Supper, 
he rose, and thus addressed his flock — 

"Ever since I became a minister, it has been my 
earnest wish that I might die from disease which would 
allow me to preach a farewell sermon to my people; but 
as it is not probable I shall ever be able to do this, I will 
attempt to say a few words now : it may be the last time 



EARNESTNESS. 201 

I shall ever address yon. This is not merely a presenti- 
ment ; it is an opinion founded on facts, and maintained 
by physicians who know my case, that I shall never 
behold another Spring. 

"And now, standing on the borders of the eternal 
world, I look back upon my past ministry, and on the 
manner in which I have performed its duties; and oh, 
my hearers, if you have not performed your duties better 
than I have done, woe ! woe I be to you — unless you 
have an Advocate and Intercessor in heaven. We have 
lived together twenty years, and have spent more than a 
thousand Sabbaths together, and I have given you at 
least two thousand warnings. I am now going to give an 
account how they were given ; and you, my hearers, will 
soon have to give an account how they were received. 
One more warning I will give you. Once more your 
shepherd, who will be yours no longer, entreats you to 
flee from the wrath to come. Oh, let me have the happi- 
ness of seeing my dear people attend to their eternal 
interests, that I may not have reason to say, 'I have 
laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for naught.' 



ts 



After this he entered the chapel but once more. 
Confined now to his house and to his room, he 
still carried out his intense desires to be useful in 
saving souls, by dictating letters and addresses to 
individuals and to bodies. Persons under anxious 
concern for their salvation, young converts entering 
on the Christian life, ministers just commencing 
the arduous duties of their office, and various bodies 
and classes of individuals, were sent for to visit him 
in his sick chamber, and receive his dying counsels 



202 EXAMPLES OF 

and admonitions. What messages also went forth 
from that scene of agony and of glory to ministers 
and friends ! His '' ruhng passion was strong in 
death." His love for preaching was as invincible 
as that of the miser for gold^ who dies grasping 
his treasure. Dr. Payson directed a label to be 
attached to his breast with the words, " Remember 
the words which I have spoken unto you, while I 
was yet present with you /' that they might be 
read by all who came to look at his corpse, and 
by which, he being dead, yet spake. The same 
words at the request of his people, were engraven 
on the plate of the coflSin, and read by thousands 
on the day of interment. 

Here was a beautiful instance of ministerial 
earnestness, and if I have dwelt longer on this 
than on some of the still more illustrious ones 
which have preceded it, the reason may be found 
in the fact, that it is the example of a minister of 
our own times, and placed in nearly the same cir- 
cumstances as ourselves; and also in the wish 
that many who have not read this most instructive 
piece of ministerial biography, may be induced by 
these extracts to peruse the volume. That man's 
heart must be in a bad state indeed, both as a 
Christian and a minister, who is not made the 
holier and more earnest by contemplating this 
bright and lovely example. 

Leaving the ministry, and turning towards the 



EARNESTNESS. 203 

laity for some rare examples of unquenchable 
earnestness, we find two deserving above most of 
honourable mention, and assiduous imitation, — 
Lady Huntingdon, and the late Thomas Wilson, 
Esq., of Highbury. In the former we see a 
peeress, related of course to many noble families, 
to whom the honours of the court and the elegan- 
cies of fashion were accessible, relinquishing from 
the hour of her conversion to God, all these pomps 
and gaieties of the world, and consecrating her 
rank, her influence, and her wealth, to the glory 
of God, and the salvation of souls ; quitting the 
saloons of the gay for the conventicles of the 
pious, and the society of nobles, statesmen, 
orators, and wits, to hold converse with itinerant 
preachers; selling her jewels to enable her to 
purchase chapels ; opening her own drawing- 
room for religious worship ; and unmoved or 
undiverted by the wonder, the reproach, and the 
sneers of a proud and scoffing aristocracy, pursu- 
ing with an intensity which they could as little 
comprehend, as they could the object to which it 
was directed, the spread of evangelical truth, and 
the salvation of immortal souls, both among the 
rich and the poor. In this one object her whole 
life was bound up, apart from which she had 
neither occupation nor enjoyment. 

Pretty much the same in substance may be said 
of the late Treasurer of Highbury College. We 



204 EXAMPLES OF 

needed not the very valuable and interesting 
memoir of this inestimable man^ with which his 
son has favoured the world, to convince us of this ; 
much as the conviction is deepened, and the impres- 
sion perpetuated, by the tout ensemble of the life 
and character there presented to our view : those 
who knew Mr. Wilson, — and who in the religious 
circle of all parties did not know him ? — always 
considered him as a person of extraordinary zeal 
and great benevolence, and a most useful specimen 
of an earnest man. This character will be assigned 
to him even by those who diflFered from him in 
some views of the object on which he lavished the 
energies of his active mind, and the resources of 
his ample fortune. But now that the whole out- 
ward career of this indefatigable man is laid 
before us, and the mechanism of his heart, as 
the spring of his energy, is disclosed to us in 
this seasonable and instructive biography, we 
learn the important lesson, how much one man, 
whose heart is given to the work, may accomplish 
in the way of evangelising our dark and wretched 
world. Perhaps modern times have produced or 
presented few more striking instances of that 
quality of character which it is the design of this 
volume to illustrate and to enforce. He selected 
his one object of life, and that was the support and 
spread of evangelical religion by means of build- 
ing chapels, and the education and support of 



EARNESTNESS. 205 

ministers^ in connexion with the denomination to 
which he belonged. For this he retired from 
business^ and consecrated to it his time^ his for- 
tune^ his influence^ and his piety. His journies 
from home^ and his occupation at home^ were in a 
great measure devoted to this. He had his office^ 
his clerk^ his house of business^ his correspondence^ 
all in reference to this^ as much as the merchant 
has for his commercial affairs. To this was given 
his conversation in company^ and his musing and 
letters when alone. The consummation of one 
scheme of usefulness in his own line of effort was 
but the commencement of another. While others 
talked, he worked. We knew where to find him, 
and how he was employed. If a voice from heaven 
had commanded him to build chapels and educate 
ministers, he could not have pursued this object 
with more fixedness of aim, unity of action, and 
steady perseverance, than he manifested. He 
knew his object, and therefore needed no counsel : 
he loved it, and suffered nothing to divert his mind 
from it : he saw its practicability, and hearkened 
to no objections. If others would act with him, 
well ; and if not, he would go alone. It was not 
brilliant talents, nor a princely fortune, nor a 
commanding eloquence ; though he had good 
abilities, a handsome income, and an easy utter- 
ance ; — ^but it was earnestness that made him what 
he was, and enabled him to do what he did. Ye8> 



206 EXAMPLES OF EARNESTNESS. 

Thomas Wilson was an earnest man : and would 
to God that all whom he helped to introduce into 
the ministry^ partook^ in the still more sacred 
duties of their calling, of the same intensity of 
action as he did in his.* 



• It is important to the interests of the Congregational body 
that the Memoir of Mr. Wilson, by his Son, should haye a wide 
circulation. 



CHAPTER IX. 

MOTIVES TO EARNESTNESS, AND THE INDIS- 
PENSABLE NECESSITY OF IT. 

I. It is demanded alike by the theme and the 
object of it. 

When Pilate proposed to the illustrious pri- 
soner at his bar the question, What is truth ? 
he placed before him the most momentous subject 
which can engage the attention of a rational 
creature : and if Christ refused to give an answer, 
his silence is to be accounted for by the captious 
or trifling spirit of the querist, and not by any 
supposed insignificance of the question, since truth 
is the most valuable thing in the universe, next to 
holiness : and it is truth that is the theme of our 
ministry, even that which by way of eminence and 
distinction is called the truth. Take any branch of 
general science, be it what it might, and however 
valuable and important it may be considered, its 
most enthusiastic student and admirer cannot 
claim for it, par excellence, that supremacy which 
is implied in the definite article, the truth. Who 
shall adjust the claims for this distinction between 
the various sciences of natural and moral truth, 
and declare which is the rightful possessor of the 



t^mm^mmmmmmmmmmtmmmm^^immmmma^mmmmmm 



208 MOTIVES TO 

throne, against the false pretensions of usurpers ? 
Who? The God of truth himself; and He has 
done it, and by placing the Bible on the seat of 
majesty in the temple of truth, He has called upon 
all systems of philosophy whatever to fall down 
and do it homage. This is our subject : eternal, 
immutable truth. Truth given pure from its Di- 
vine Source, and given with the evidence and im- 
press of its own Omniscient Author. what are 
the loftiest and noblest of the sciences : chemistry, 
with its beautiful combinations and afl&nities ; or 
astronomy, with its astounding numbers, magni- 
tudes, distances, and revolutions of worlds ; or 
geology, with its marvellous and incalculable dates 
of by-gone millions of ages — to the truths of reve- 
lation ? What is dead, inert matter, with its laws of 
materiality, however diversified, classified, or com- 
bined, — compared with the world of mind, of souls, 
of immateriality and immortality, and with the 
laws of moral truth by which they are regulated ? 
What is nature, to the God of nature ? What the 
heavens and the earth, to the glorious mind that 
looks out upon them through the organ of vision, 
as from a window that commands the grand and 
boundless prospect ? What the fleeting term of 
man^s existence upon earth, with its little cycles 
of care, and sorrow, and labour, compared with 
the eternal ages through which the soul holds on 
her course of deathless existence ? The works of 



EARNESTNESS. 209 

creation are a dim and twilight manifestation of 
God^s nature, compared with the grandeur and 
more perfect medium of redemption. The person 
of the Lord Jesus Christ is itself a wonder and a 
mystery^ which will shine all other displays of 
Deity into darkness ; this is the shekinah in the 
holy of holies of the temple of God^s creation, 
towards which, as they bend over the mercy seat 
of his work of redemption, all orders of created 
spirits, from the most distant parts of the universe,, 
reverently turn and do homage to the great God 
our Saviour. This, this, is our theme, the truth 
of God, and conderning him ; the truth of an in- 
carnate Deity ; the truth of man^s redemption by 
the cross ; the truth of the moral law, the eternal 
standard of rectitude, the tree of knowledge of 
good and evil ; the truth of the gospel, as the tree 
of life in the midst of the paradise of God ; the 
truth of immortality, and of heaven, and of hell : 
the truth couched under the symbols of the Levi- 
tical law, and the predictions of inspired prophets, 
and fully exhibited in the gospels of evangelists,, 
and the inspired letters of apostles. Again I ask, 
exultingly and rapturously, what are the disco- 
veries of Newton, or of Davy ; or the inventions 
of Watt, or of Arkwright, compared with these ? 
Viewing man in his relation to immortality, as a 
sinful and moral agent, what is art or science, 
compared with revealed truth? And shall we. 



210 MOTIVES TO 

can we^ be otherwise than earnest in the promul- 
gation of this truth ? Shall we touch such themes 
with a careless hand and a dronish mind ? Shall 
we slumber over truths which keep awake the 
attention^ and keep in activity the energies, of all 
orders of created intelligences, and which are the 
object and the resting place of the uncreated 
mind ? Let us look at the earnestness with which 
the sons of science pursue their studies ; with what 
enthusiasm they delve into the earth, or soar on the 
telescope to the heavens, or hang over the fire ; with 
what prolonged and patient research they carry on 
their experiments, and pursue their analysis ; how 
unwearied in toil, and bow enduring in disappoint- 
ment, they are: and then how rapturously they 
hold up to the world^s gazing and wondering eye, 
some new particle of truth, which they have found 
out after all this peering and prying into nature's 
undiscovered secrets I Ministers of the gospel, is 
it thus with the men who have to find out the 
truths of nature, and shall we who have the volume 
of inspired, revealed truth opened before us, drone, 
and loiter, and trifle over such momentous reali- 
ties ? Shall the example of earnestness be taken 
from him who analyses man's lifeless flesh, to tell 
us by the laws of organic chemistry its component 
parts, rather than from him who has to do with 
the truths that relate to the immortal soul ? Shall 
he whose discoveries and lessons have no higher> 



EAltNiil^NEdS. 211 

object than our material ^Ibbe^ and no longer date 
than its existence^ be more intensely in earnest^ 
than we who have to do with the truth that relates 
to God and the whole moral universe^ and the 
truth that is to last through eternity? What 
deep shame should cover us for our want of ardour 
and enthusiasm in such a service as this ! 

And then what is the purpose for which this 
truths so grand^ so awful^ so sublime^ is revealed 
by God, and to be preached by us ? Not simply 
to gratify curiosity; not merely to conduct the 
mind seeking for knowledge to the fountains 
where it may slake its thirst ; no, but to save the 
immortal soul from sin, and death, and hell, and 
conduct it to the abodes of a glorious immortality. 
The man who can handle such topics, and for such 
a purpose, in an unimpassioned, careless manner, 
and with an icy heart, is the most astounding 
instance of guilty lukewarmness in the universe : 
to his self-contradiction no parallel can be found, 
and he remains a fearful instance how far it is 
possible for the human mind to go in the most 
obvious, palpable, and guilty inconsistency. A 
want of earnestness in the execution of that com- 
mission, which is designed to save immortal souls 
from eternal ruin, and to raise them to everlasting 
hfe, is a spectacle which, if it were not so common, 
would fill us with amazement, indignation, and 
contempt. We have read the speeches of the 
p2 



212 MOTIVES TO 

great masters of eloquence^ both of ancient and 
modem times : and have read also of the intense 
anxiety, and untiring effort, with whi<;ii tbey gave 
utterance to the mighty periods that flashed from 
their burning souls ; and do we condemn as an 
enthusiast the Athenian orator who thus agonized 
to save his country from the yoke of Phihp ; the 
majestic Roman who roused the indignation of the 
repubUc against the treason of Catiline ; or our 
own Wilberforce, who for twenty years lifted his 
voice, and appealed to the justice and mercy of a 
British FarUament, against the atrocities of the 
slave trade ? On the contrary we deem no eulogy 
sufficient to express our admiration of their noble 
enthusiasm. But our panegyric upon them, is a. 
condemnation upon ourselves ; for how far short 
of them do we fall in earnestness, though the sal- 
vation of a single soul, out of all the multitudes 
that come under the influence of our ministi*ations, 
is an event, which in its consequences is inconcei- 
vably more momentous, because enduring through 
eternity, than jail the objects collectively for which 
these men exhausted the energies of their intellect 
and hfe. Do we really beheve that we are either 
a savour of life unto life, or of death unto death, 
to them that hear us? Or is this mere official 
phraseology, which is never intended to be under- 
stood in its ordinary and fullest import ? Is it a 
matter of fact, or only the solemn garnish of a 



EARNESTNESS. 213 

sermon, the trickery and pufiSng of pulpit vanity, 
that souls are perpetually rising from beneath our 
ministry into the fehcities and honours of the 
skies, or dropping from around our desk into the 
bottomless pit ? Are companies of immortal spi- 
rits continually summoned from our congregations 
to inhabit eternity, to people heaven or hell, to 
swell the numbers of the redeemed, or to add to 
the multitude of the lost ? If this be true, — ^and 
we are gross deceivers, mere pulpit actors, reverend 
hypocrites, if we do not believe in its truth, — ^then 
where is the earnestness that must give consist- 
ency to our professions, and which is appropriate 
to our situation, and adequate to our convictions ? 
Have we really become so carelessly, so criminally 
familiar with such topics as salvation and damna- 
tion, that we can descant upon them with the 
same calmness, coolness, not to say indifference, 
with which the public lecturer will discuss one of 
the minutest branches of natural philosophy ? 0, 
where is our reason, our religion, our consistency ? 

II. Earnestness is imperatively demanded by the 
state of the human mind, viewed in relation to the 
truths and to the objects just set forth. 

This was glanced at in an earlier part of the 
work, but must be now resumed and amplified. 
The entreating and beseeching importunity em- 
ployed by the apostle, and which are found to be no 
less necessary to us, pre-suppose on the part of its 



214 MOTIVES TO 

objects, a reluctance to come into a state of reconci- 
liation with God, which roust be assailed by the 
force of vehement persuasion. Although we have 
to treat with a revolted world, a world engaged in 
mad conflict with Omnipotence, yet if the guilty 
rebels were weary of their hostilities, and in utter 
hopelessness of success, were prepared on the first 
offer of mercy to throw down their arms, and in 
the spirit of contrition to sue for pardon, ours 
would be an easy mission, and we might spare 
ourselves the trouble of earnestness and expostula- 
tion. But the very reverse is the case. "The 
carnal mind is enmity against God, and is not 
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.'' 
The hearts of men are fully set in them to do evil. 
We find them taken up, occupied, influenced^ 
governed, by the palpable and visible things of the 
present life ; and our business is to engage them in 
a constant resistance of the undue influence of the 
things which are seen and temporal, and to do 
this by a vigorous faith in things that are unseen 
and eternal : our aim and labour are, by the power 
of the unseen world to come, to deliver them from 
the spell of the present state, with whose pageantry 
they are enamoured, and under whose fascination 
they are well pleased to continue. And then apart 
from this, or at any rate in connexion with it, they 
are so occupied by the pursuits of business, so 
engrossed by the cares^ the comforts, and the 



EABNESTNESS. 215 

trials of life ; engaged in such breathless haste to 
pursue^ such distracting bustle to possess^ and 
such ardent hope to enjoy^ the various objects of 
their earthly desires, that when we call their atten- 
tion to serious religion, as the one thing needful, 
we are as one who would stop another in a race, to 
offer him an object foreign to that for which he 
is contending, and who, by the competitor for 
the prize, is deemed intrusive, impertinent, and 
obstructive. 

But the difficulty stops not here ; if this were 
all, we should have only a very small share of the 
opposition which now calls forth our energy and 
requires our most strenuous efforts ; for when we 
have succeded in gaining a hearing and arresting 
attention, we have to contend not only with an 
indisposition to receive the truth, but a determined 
hostility against it. We have, as our first business, 
to fasten a charge of guilt upon men naturally dis- 
posed to think well of themselves : to produce a 
sense of utter worthlessness and depravity in those 
who in the utmost length to which their concession 
will go, admit only some few imperfections and 
infirmities; to displace a feeling of complacency 
by one of self-condemnation and abhorrence; 
and to substitute for a general and unhumbled 
dependance upon Divine mercy, such a convic- 
tion of exposure to the curse of a violated law, 
as makes it difficult for the trembling penitent 



2l6 MOTIVES TO 

to see how his pardon can be harmonised with 
the claims of justice: to oflFer salvation upon 
terms which leave not the smallest room for self- 
^atulation^ or the operation of pride; indeed 
to carry such a message as frequently excites 
disgust^ and calls forth the bitterest enmity of the 
human hearty and arms all its passions in deter- 
mined hostility. And then the salvation exhibited 
in the gospel is not only opposed to the pride^ but 
to the passions^ of the soul of fallen man. It 
requires the excision of sins dear as a right hand^ 
the surrender of objects which have enamoured the 
whole soul, the breaking up of habits which have 
grown with our growth, and strengthened with 
our strength. 

Sometimes we have, in addition to all this, to 
summon our hearers to a war without, as well as to 
a conflict within, and to verify the words of Christ, 
that he came to send a sword instead of peace^ and 
to set parents against children, and children against 
parents. What minister has not sometimes felt 
his courage ready to quail, and his stedfastness in 
danger of faltering, when called to lead on some 
persecuted convert to brave the cruel mockings and 
reproaches, the frowns, the threats, and the vio- 
lence, of his nearest and dearest earthly con^ 
nexions. I agonise as I write, to think what I, 
among others, have witnessed of this kind. Verily 
it is through much tribulation that some^ even in 



i 



EARNESTNESS. 217 

these peaceful times^ are called to enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. And then, following on the 
difficulties of the Christian ministry, — to prevent 
the first impressions of divine truth from vanishing 
like the cloud, or exhaling like the dew; to guide 
the inquirer from finding repose any where but at 
the cross of Christ ; to guard the feeble, and to 
inspire the timid with courage; to detect the 
deceit of the heart, and to aid the novice in 
breaking oflF from besetting sins ; to inspire the 
resolution of crucifying the flesh, and to stimulate 
the soul to an ever onward progress in sanctifica- 
tion ; to meet the epidemic malady of our nature, 
which assumes so many shapes, and appears under 
such a variety of symptoms, with a proportionate 
and well adapted variety of treatment; to help 
the believer to beat down his foes under his feet, 
and amidst all his various trials, temptations, and 
difficulties, to continue stedfast, immoveable, and 
always abounding in the work of the Lord, not- 
withstanding the counteracting influence of much 
unremoved corruption in his heart ; this, all this, 
must require in him who has to do it, earnestness 
of the most collected and concentrated kind. 

To carry on the ministry of reconciliation in 
this revolted world, with the intention and desire 
of recovering its inhabitants from sin and Satan 
unto God, when the opposition to be overcome is 
considered, must appear to every reflecting mind 



218 MOTIVES TO 

the most hopeless of all human undertakings, 
apart from the promised aid of the Holy Spirit. 
It is this alone that could induce us to continue in 
the ministry another hour. Without this i^ncy, 
we must retire in utter despair. But then even 
this is not to be viewed^ much less expected^ apart 
from human instrumentahty ; and man^s earnest- 
ness is that very species of instrumentahty which 
the Divine Agent employs. It is not the feeble 
ministrations of the lukewarm and the negligent 
that God blesses for the conversion of souls, but 
the heart-breathed, fervent wrestlings of the ardent 
and the diligent. He maketh the winds his mes- 
sengers, and flames of fire his ministers. Here 
then is a double argument for earnestness, in the 
difficulties which are to be subdued in the accom- 
plishment of our object, and the necessity of the 
co-operating agency of the Spirit of God. The 
former shows the indispensable necessity of such 
earnestness, and the latter encourages us to put it 
forth. Without it, we cannot look for the aid of 
the Spirit ; and without the aid of the Spirit, it 
would be exerted in vain. May we be able to take a 
right view both of our obstacles and our resources ! 

III. Consider the aspect of the times, as affecting 
the human mind, and the objects of our ministry. 

The view which has been just given of the dif- 
ficulties that lie in the wav of the faithful minister, 
applies to all countries and to all times, inasmuch 



EABNESTNEflS. 219 

as the depravity of human nature is co-extensive 
with the race of man. But still there may^ and 
do^ exist circumstances in one age and country^ to 
give greater force to these difficulties, which are 
not found, at any rate to the same amount, in 
others. The features of our own age are strikingly 
impressive, and in no small degree hostile to the 
success of the gospel, and the prevalence of evan*- 
gelical piety. 

The sphere of human pursuits, whether we con- 
sider the active or speculative departments, is filled 
with unusual energy and excitement. Earnestness 
is the characteristic of the age. If we turn our 
attention to trade, we see men throwing their 
whole soul into its busy occupations, and labouring 
as if their salvation in another world depended 
upon their success on earth. What ardour of 
competition; what rage for speculation; what 
looking about for novel schemes, and what eager- 
ness to embrace them when offered ; what hazard- 
ous and reckless gambling do we see going on all 
around us, — leaving out the impetus to all this 
which the railway system has introduced, and 
saying nothing of the multitudes, who, instead of 
plodding onward in the beaten path of regular 
trade, endeavour, by watching the share market, 
to make a bound to wealth, — how engrossing are 
the pursuits of secular business, in these days of 
large returns and small profits. Think of the 



220 MOTIVES TO 

consumption of time^ and the absorption of soul^ 
which are necessary to maintain credit and respec- 
tability ; and also the strength of religious prin- 
ciple which is indispensable to follow the things 
that are just^ and true^ and honourable^ and of 
good report. How many professors are in danger 
of being carried away, how many are carried away, 
by the tricks, artifices, and all but actual dishones- 
ties, of modern trade : and what but a powerful 
and energetic ministry can be expected to rouse 
and help God's professing people to bear up 
against, and to keep in check, much more to 
subdue, this sordid and selfish spirit ? What can 
be sufficient but an intense devotedness on the 
part of ministers to make things unseen and 
eternal bear down the usurping power of things 
seen and temporal? Who but the man that 
knows how to deal with invisible realities, and to 
wield the powers of the world to come, can pluck 
the worldling from the whirlpool of perdition, 
which sucks down so many in the torrent of 
earthly-mindedness, or prevent the professing 
Christian from being drawn into it ? If our own 
minds are not much impressed with the awful 
glories and terrors of eternity, we cannot speak of 
these things in such a manner as is likely to rescue 
our hearers from the ruinous fascinations of Mam- 
mon. How in such an age we seem to want a 
Baxter and a Doolittle ; an Edwards and a Howe ; 



EARNESTNESS. 221 

a Whitfield and a Wesley, to break in with their 
thunder upon the money-lovingi money-grasping 
spirit of this grossly utilitarian age. 

Then think of the engrossing power of politics. 
What a spell has come over the popular mind 
from this source, since the tremendous outburst of 
the French revolution : for more than half a century 
the potency of this subject has been perpetually 
augmenting, till the rustic of the village, as well 
as the merchant of the city ; the recluse student of 
the cloister, no less than the man of the exchange, 
have alike yielded themselves up to the fascina- 
tions of the newspaper, now accommodated, not 
only to every party in politics, but to every creed 
in religion, and at the same time cheapened down 
to almost the poorest member of society. This is 
matter neither of surprise, nor, provided it do not 
thrust out other and still more important matters, 
of regret. It is but the constitution of our country ; 
developing the energies of its popular element. 
The people are claiming their share of power and 
influence; may they prepare themselves by know- 
ledge and piety to exercise it rightly. The stream 
and tendency of opinion in Europe at large, as well 
as in our own country, are evidently democratic ; 
but without education and religion the nations will 
daily become desirous of more liberty, and at the 
same time less capable of enjoying and preserving 
it. The less they feel of outward force and of 



222 MOTIVES TO ' 

the compulsion of secular power^ the more they 
need the control of moral principles. At such a 
time^ when the elements of good government are, 
so to speak^ in a high state of excitement^ and 
amidst much repulsion and attraction amongst 
themselves^ are settling into their proper order^ 
there will be such an unusual degree of interest 
felt in this great matter^ as to throw into the 
shade matters of still deeper moment. 

While all this is obvious in the state of modern 
society^ will any one deny that we want an earnest 
ministry to break in some degree the spell^ and 
leave the soul at liberty for the affairs of a king- 
dom which is not of this world ? When politics 
have come upon the minds^ and hearts^ and imagi- 
nations of the people^ for six days out of the 
seven^ invq^ted with the charms of eloquence^ and 
decked with the colours of party; when the orator 
and the writer have both thrown the witchery of 
genius over the soul, how can it be expected that' 
tame, spiritless, vapid common-places from the 
pulpit, — sermons without either head or heart, 
having neither weight of matter, nor grace of 
manner, neither genius to compensate for the 
want of taste, nor taste to compensate for the 
want of genius ; and what is still worse, having 
no unction of evangelical truth, no impress of 
eternity, no radiance from heaven, no terror from 
hell ; in short, no adaptation to awaken reflection, 



EARNESTNESS. 223 

to produce conviction, or to save the soul, — -how 
can it be expected, I say, that such sermons can 
be useful to accomplish the purposes for which 
the gospel is to be preached 7 What chance have 
such preachers, amidst the tumult, to be heard 
or felt, or what claim have they upon the public 
attention, amidst the high excitement of the times 
in which we live ? Their hearers too often feel, 
that in listening to their sermons on the Sabbath, 
as compared with what they have heard or read 
during the week, it is as if they were turning 
from the brilliant and tasteful gas-light, to the dim 
and smoking spark of the tallow and the rush. 

Another characteristic of our age is an ever- 
growing taste for elegance, refinement, and 
luxurious gratification. We cannot wonder at 
this, nor if it be kept within proper bounds, 
greatly regret it. It is next to impossible that 
the progress of art, and the increase of wealth, 
should not add to the embellishments of life, and 
multiply the sources of tasteful enjoyment. But 
then, just in proportion as we multiply the attrac- 
tions of earth, is our danger of making it our all, 
of leaving heaven out of sight, and of learning to do 
without it. This is now afiecting the church, and 
the hardy and self-denying spirit of our practical 
Christianity is in danger of being emasculated, 
and of degenerating into a soft and sickly efiemi- 
nacy. Elegance and extravagance^ luxurious en- 



224 ^MOTIVES TO 

tertainments, and expensive feasts, are beginning 
to corrupt the simplicity that is in Christ : and 
amidst sumptuous buildings, gorgeous furniture, 
costly dress, and gay equipages, professors of 
religion are too much setting their affections upon 
things that are upon the earth, and turning away 
from the glory of the cross, to the glory of the 
world. Who is to call them off from this pa- 
geantry, and make them by God's grace feel how 
vain are all these things ? Who can set up a 
breakwater against the billows of this ocean of 
worldly-mindedness, and guard the piety of the 
church from being entirely swept away by a flood 
of ungodliness ? Who but a pastor that can speak 
in power and demonstration of the Spirit, — a man 
who shall rise Sabbath after Sabbath in the pulpit, 
clothed with a potency to throw into shadow, by 
his vivid representations of heaven and eternity, 
all these painted nothings, on which his hearers are 
in danger of squandering their immortal souls ? 

Akin to this is a continually augmenting desire 
after amusement, for the supply of which hosts 
of ingenious and accomplished persons are in con- 
stant requisition. A love for pleasure, diversion, 
and recreation, is an appetite evidently increasing, 
for which there are those who are ever ingenious 
and ever busy to furnish a supply. Religion is no 
enemy to rational enjoyment, even though it be 
not strictly Scriptural; and they who can supplant 



EARNESTNESS. ^225 

the low and vulgar sensualities on which the mul- 
titude have fed, by a more refined and elevated 
taste, even if it should not rise into the element 
of moral instruction, are doing a service to their 
country and to their species. But still, a taste 
for amusement, both mental and bodily, may be 
carried too far, and many foreseeing and deeply 
reflective minds are of opinion that it is going too 
far now. 

There cannot be a thoughtful mind, one that 
looks upon our sojourn in this world as a probation 
for eternity, but must reflect with serious alarm 
and grief upon the endless devices which are sug- 
gested by the wisdom that cometh from beneath^ 
to hide from mankind their duty and their destiny, 
as immortal creatures. It seems as if by common 
consent, mankind were striving who should be 
most successful, by inventing new kinds of diver- 
sions, in blotting from the mind all considerations 
of eternity. Pleasure-taking is the rage of the 
day, a taste which has been excited into a hungry 
appetite by the railway system. Before this deso- 
lating influence, the sanctity of the Sabbath, and 
with it of course the prevalence of religion, are 
likely to be destroyed. It may be said that any 
thing is better than the ale-house and the gin- 
shop. This is freely admitted, but it may b^ 
questioned whether some of the modern stimulants 
to pleasure do not lead to, and not from, these 
Q 



226 MOTIVES TO 

scenes of iniquity. The people^ it is affirmed, 
must have recreation. Be it so^ but let it be of a 
healthful kind^ and let the great aim of all who 
have any influence upon the public mind be to 
endeavour to implant a taste for the recreations 
afforded by cheap and wholesome literature^ by 
quiet home enjoyments^ and above all^ by the 
sacred delights of true piety. 

In connexion with this may be mentioned^ as 
one particular species of amusement^ the taste for 
• works of HUMOUR^ which has been increased in 
this country within the last ten years. There is 
no sin in mirth: man is made to enjoy it^ and 
there is a time to laugh as well as to weep. And 
he must be a very misanthrope^ a vampire which 
in the dark night of sorrow would suck the last 
drop of happiness from the human sufferer^ who 
would forbid the smiles of gladness^ and every 
thing which ministers to the gratification of the 
laughter-loving heart. But then it is a different 
thing from this, to wish to keep this propensity 
within due bounds, to prevent it from becoming 
the staple of life, and to remind men that they 
have other things to do in this world than to 
laugh and be merry. Dr. Yaughan says, 

" We are not certain that some of our wise men do 
wisely, who are going abroad just now with their cap and 
bells, in the hope of securing better attention to their 
lessons from the foolish. A fondness for grotesque jokes 



EAENESTNESS. 227 

and everlasting caricature, bears as little resemblance to 
manly feeling, as the ecstacies of a young lady over the ** 
last new novel. Truth is a grave matter, and can owe 
little ultimately to the services of a buffoon. It loses half 
its dignity, if often presented in association with the ridi- 
culous. Those who find their chief pleasure in broad 
farce, are rarely capable of a due exercise of earnest and 
reverential feeling. Your great wits do not spare their 
best friends, and your votaries of fun are generally persons 
prepared to sacrifice any thing to their god. The mind 
which is wont to pay much homage to the laughers, too 
often forgets to pay a real homage to any thing higher. 
In such a service, the fine edge of moral feeling is almost 
of necessity worn away. Not that we would send a man 
to the bow-string because he has indulged a laugh. On 
the contrary, the man who cannot so indulge is not a man 
to our liking. There is something wrong in him, physi- 
cally, mentally, and morally. All truly healthful men, in 
the spiritual, as well as in the natural sense, know how to 
enjoy their laugh. But your great laughers are generally • 
slow workers. To make a merriment of folly is not to 
displace it by wisdom. Our proper business here is 
neither to grin nor to whine, but to be men. We say not 
that good may never be done by means of ridicule, but 
we are convinced that its general effect is such as we have 
ventured to indicate. It is an instrument, moreover, 
which has two edges, — use it, and you have no right to 
complain of its being used."* 

These are wise and true sayings^ as seasonable 
as they are important^ and called for by the exces- 
sive taste for this species of composition which 

* British Quarterly Review, No. VI, p. 254. 

q2 



228 MOTIVES TO 

now prevails. If any thing need be added in c6r-« 
roboration of these arguments, it is tYitfact stated 
by the justly lamented Dr. Arnold, that since the 
publication of periodical works of humour, he had 

, perceived a visible declension of manly sentiment 
and serious thoughtfulness among the elder boys 
of his school. This is strong and decisive testi- 
mony as to the influence of a continued indulgencci 
in broad farce. Is there not precisely the same 
effect produced on the minds of our young men„ 
especially when to this is added the moral ten* 
dency of the sentiments which are sometimes 
clothed in the garb of humour. Nothing can be 
more opposed to the serious spirit which true 
religion requires, or more destructive of it, that^ 
this constant supply of new materials for laughter. 
Nor does the mischief stop with the young and 
the worldly, it is infecting the professors of reli- 
gion. It is hard to conceive how earnestness and 
spirituality can be maintained by those whose 
tables are covered, and whose leisure time is con-i. 
sumed, by the bewitching inspirations of the god 
of laughter. There is little hope of our arresting 

• the evil, except we make it our great business td 
raise up a ministry who themselves shall not be 
carried away with the torrent ; who shall be grave> 
without being gloomy ; serious, without being 
melancholy ; and who, on the other hand, shall be 
cheerful, without being frivolous, and who, by 



EJIBNESTNESS. 229 

their chastened mirthfiilness, shall be among the 
laughers^ if not as total abstainers^ yet as a mode- 
rate man among drunkards, and whose temperance 
shall check, or at any rate reprove, the excesses of 
their companions. And then what a demand does 
this state of things prefer for the most intense 
earnestness in our Sabbath-day exercises, both as 
to prayers and sermons. In this modern taste we 
have a new obstacle to our usefulness of a most 
formidable kind, and which can be subdued only 
by God's blessing upon our fidelity and zeal. 
Such men are wanted, as shall by their learning, 
science, and general knowledge, give weight to 
their opinions, and influence to their advice, in 
their private intercourse with their flocks, and 
shall by their powerful and evangelical preaching, 
control this taste, and counteract it by a better. 

Nor must we omit to notice, and to notice with 
peculiar emphasis, the impetus that is now given 
to the human understanding through all its gra- 
dations, from the highest order of intellect down 
to the humblest classes of the labouring population. 
We have already alluded to this subject, but on 
account of its importance must here refer to it 
again, and a little more at length. As regards 
the labouring classes, education is advancing 
among them with rapid strides, as far at least as 
the counteracting tendency of the manufacturing 
system. will allow* The poor must and will be 



230 MOTIVES TO 

instructed. The change of opinion on this subject 
that has come over a large portion of the commu- 
nity within the last quarter of a century^ is indeed 
marvellous; and instead of loud descants upon 
the dangers of an educated people^ we now hear 
little else but descants as loud on the evils of 
ignorance. This is a happy change^ and its results 
will be auspicious^ not however without some tem- 
porary admixture of evil. It is really refreshing 
to read the programmes of educationary schemes 
which are drawn up for the culture of the working 
classes^ by those who are promoting their mental 
improvement. But improvement in education is 
not confined^ and cannot be confined^ to the lower 
classes^ but must be carried forward in equal pro- 
portions among those that are above them. The 
universal mind is awakened^ and in motion onwards: 
it is in a state of intense excitement and irrepres- 
sible activity. Discoveries in science^ and inven- 
tions in art^ come so fast upon us^ that we have 
scarcely recovered from the surprise produced by 
one^ before another calls upon us to indulge in new 
wonder. Feats of science and art, especially in 
the department of engineering, are performed or 
projected, which look as if man in the pride of his 
intellect felt that nothing was impossible to him. 
As might be expected, all the knowledge thus 
obtained and accumulated is flowing by the thou^ 
sand rills of the press and cheap books, through 



EARNESTNESS. 231 

every department of society. The annual expen- 
diture of millions of pounds in cheap literature, 
will show to what extent information on all subjects 
is reaching the working and other classes. Know- 
ledge is the great idol around which the multitudes 
are gathering to pay their homage and record their 
vows. Is there any thing in such a state of things 
at which the friends of rehgion should take alarm? 
Quite the contrary. Christianity began her career, 
as every tyro in history well knows, in the most 
enlightened age, and amongst the most polished 
nations of antiquity; and from that moment to 
the present, has never shrunk from the broadest 
day-light of learning and science, to sculk in the 
darkness and gloom of barbaric ignorance; and 
its ministers should ever be foremost as the pa- 
trons of knowledge. But then it is evident that 
such a state of things requires an indomitable ear- 
nestness in the sacred duties of their calling, to 
secure for rehgion its due pre-eminence amidst all 
the various claimants upon the pubUc attention. 
Allowing to general knowledge all the importance 
that is claimed for it, yet this apart from religion, 
is not the sovereign remedy, the grand catholicon, 
which is to heal the disorders, and restore the 
moral health of diseased humanity. There are 
some, and indeed not a few, in our own country, 
as well as upon the continent of Europe, whoi 
dream — and all history prpves it to be but a dream 



232 MOTIVES TO 

— of regenerating the world by the principles of 
reason and the aid of secular education. They 
think they can regulate society without religion, 
and renew the heart of man without God. We 
might ask them what philosophy did for such pur- 
poses in Egypt, its cradle, or in Greece, its temple? 
They forget that by the permission of Providence a 
grand experiment was made in the latter country, 
during the five centuries that preceded the Chris- 
tian era, by the sages of the schools, to see what 
knowledge apart from Divine revelation, could do 
to reform the moral world, and make it virtuous 
and happy. We venture to call for the result, and 
if the advocates of reason refuse to give it, an 
apostle shall supply the answer, — " The world by 
wisdom knew not God," Still more in point is his 
testimony, — Rom. i, 28, 31. It would seem as 
if, not satisfied with a single demonstration, our 
modern philosophers were hazarding a second trial. 
Again with still greater advantages, and with still 
greater confidence, they are flocking to the ordeal. 
Education is to be improved and extended ; the 
press is pouring forth its cheap literature ; science 
is broken down to such fragments, and measured 
oat in such drops as even infant minds can receive 
and digest ; and every appliance is to be furnished 
to give effect to the knowledge thus communicated ;. 
lecturers on all subjects are travelling through the 
country, and are pouring forth streams of infor-* 



EARNESTNESS. 233L 

mation in every direction; while rational and 
invigorating amusements are to come in to aid the 
general improvement. By the advocates of the 
sufficiency of knowledge alone to improve the 
taste and raise the morals of the nation, the largest 
expectations are indulged of the regeneration of 
society, as the consequence of all these laborious 
effi)rts ; but which, without a prophet's eye, we 
may predict are doomed to certain and bitter 
disappointment. We may confidently anticipate 
that the result of the second experiment will be 
the same as of the first, and prove not only that 
the world by wisdom will never know God, but 
that nothing less than the foolishness of preaching 
will achieve its moral reformation. 

The state of our popular literature, as moulded 
to a considerable extent by these men, proves that 
such an experiment as that of teaching mankind 
to do without religion, is going on. In much of 
what is read by the masses, there is an unconcealed 
hostility to Christianity. Infidelity of the boldest 
and most daring kind is associating itself with a 
great many of the cheap publications of the day, 
and with an energy and a success that would 
astound as well as alarm those who are not in the 
secret. But gtill there are many of the guides of 
the popular mind, perhaps most of them, who 
would not patronise this open assault upon the 
foundations of our faith — they go a more insidious. 



234 MOTIVES TO 

though scarcely a less injorious way to work; they, 
are acting upon the principle that the best way to 
attack religion^ and the least likely to shock pre-' 
judice and excite alarm^ is to say nothing about it, 
to treat the whole subject as a negation ; a nonen^ 
tity ; a thing to be forgotten ; with which it is no 
part of their business to concern themselves^ and 
which may be left to float quietly down the streant 
to the gulph of oblivion. In many cases false 
principles on the subject of revealed religion^ are 
worked into the staple of scientific books^ and 
many readers are made infidels almost before they 
are aware of the dreadful perversion. All that it 
is thought necessary to provide for the million in 
the way of reading, is amusement and general 
knowledge : and to a very great extent the object 
of all this is accomplished. The labouring classes, 
with increasing knowledge, are more and more 
alienated from religion. The masses are not yet 
won to Christianity, but are sullenly standing 
aloof from it, doubting whether it deserves their 
attention. 

In such a state of things, what kind of ministry 
is it that is wanted ? The answer is easy — men 
of earnestness; of earnest intellects, earnest hearts, 
earnest preaching, and earnest faith. Men whose 
understanding shall command respect, whose man- 
ner shall conciliate affection, and whose ministra* 
trations shall attract by their beauty, and command 



EARNESTNESS. 233. 

by their power. The accessibility of the labouring 
classes gives us an advantage in approaching 
them; neither prejudice nor fashion bars us out from 
them. We have neither to scale the walls of 
bigotry, nor to silence or evade the dogs of angry 
intolerance : the door is open, and we may walk 
in. But we must be men of the age, men who 
understand it ; and who are, to say the least, up 
with it, and know how to avail ourselves of its 
advantages, and to surmount its difficulties. But 
I cannot do better here than refer to an admirable 
article in the Eclectic Review, on the Modern 
Pulpit, from which the following extract is to the 
point. 

"What is good preaching? Alas, how many answers 
would be given to this question ! And yet is not the true 
answer, — ^the preaching by which souls are saved? Then, 
the best preaching must be that by which the greatest 
number of souls are saved. In order to that end, however, 
men must be brought within the sphere of the pulpit ; and 
to bring the greatest number of men within that sphere is 
the design of Dr. Yaughan in his treatise ( on the Modern 
Pulpit), and it is ours. In one word, what we specifically 
want in the modem pulpit is — adaptation. Now we 
have read a good deal in our time, not more than enough, 
of the necessity of adapting the efforts of the pulpit to the 
constitution of the human mind, to man's moral nature, 
to his actual condition as fallen, guilty, wretched, and 
exposed to future punishment. And not seldom have we 
read most seasonable injunctions, addressed to our young 
ministers, on the personal adaptation of their discourses 



236 MOTIVES TO 

to the condition of individual men. All this we regard as. 
of equal importance at all times, and in all conceivable 
circumstances. But at present our aim is to excite as 
much attention as we can to the truth, — that along with 
these general and fixed adaptations, there is required a con- 
stantly varying adaptation to the constantly progressive 
changes of society." 

The writer then goes on to explain what he 
means by this varying adaptation of the pulpit to 
the advancement in society, in reference to one 
portion of it, — the working classes. 

^' Education is raising these great masses of the com* 
munity into higher degrees of intellectual culture. New 
powers are at work. Incredible facihties are multiplied 
for diffusing knowledge, spreading opinions, and increasing 
the number of thinkers. Now in such an age, to say 
nothing of other views of society, it is obviously the duty 
of evangelical preachers to adapt themselves to the 
circumstances in which they are placed; not, [as this 
talented writer would be among the last to suggest,] by 
withdrawing from the pulpit the great themes of the 
mediatory system, and substituting for them philosophic 
truth, or a rationalised gospel, but by such a general 
line of conduct with reference to the circumstances of a 
growingly enlightened age, and such a strain of preaching 
as shall lay hold of the public mind, and bring it under 
that doctrine, which, and which only, is the power of God 
unto salvation. Let there be a just estimate formed, and 
which to be just cannot be alow one, of the mental powers 
of the common people ; a judicious and hearty sympathy 
with their real wants and reasonable wishes ; a studious 
consideration of the mieans by which the multitude shall 



EARNESTNESS. 237 

be brought bi^ck to the sanctuaries of religion, which they 
have to a considerable extent deserted ; an assiduous en- 
deavour to connect the functions of the pastor, with the 
literary cultivation of the people. For these purposes let 
there be correct information of their state of intellect, 
their prevailing habits, their peculiar temptations, their 
literary tendencies and aspirations as to the books they 
read — let there be all this, but then let it be only as so 
much power put forth to bring these masses under the 
influence of the gospel. Oh, it were a noble triumph of 
the modem pulpit, to see men of strong principle, and 
self-controlling wisdom, gathering round them the most 
boisterous elements of our social atmosphere, conducting 
the lightnings with which its darkest thunder clouds are 
charged, and showing to the nation they have saved, tha^ 
the preaching of the cross is still the * Power of God.'**' 

Of course such an enterprise of home- evangeli- 
sation will require that our ministers shall be men 
of action.^ Adaptation, then, there may be, and 
should be, in the sermons and the general habits 
of the ministry, to the age in which they live, in 
the way of laying hold of pubUc attention, widen- 
ing the sphere of their action, and adding to their 

* Connected with my own congregation is an Institution, 
partly religious and partly literary, for the benefit of the young 
men and eider boys of all classes, but chiefly of the working 
classes, which has existed for more than a quarter of a century, 
which has a library of nearly 1200 volumes, and to the members 
of which lectures on miscellaneous subjects are periodically 
delivered. As a proof of the advantages it has conferred, as 
well as of the taste of the age, two of our members, one of them 
formerly a boy in our Sunday school, and the other belonging 
to the more respectable class of operatives, took an excursion 



538 MOTIVES TO 

influence as preachers of the cross. Stronger 
intelligence^ profounder thinkings more logical 
argumentation^ more varied illustration^ more 
chastened composition^ more refined sentiment^ 
more genuine yet Christian and unobtrusive phi- 
losophy^ may be required in one age than in ano- 
ther^ and in this^ more than in some preceding 
ages — but then all this must be in harmony with 
the simplicity that is in Christy and must appear 
as only so much added to the height or the orna- 
ments of the pedestal which is to exalt the 
Saviour^ and not to exhibit an idol^ however beau- 
tiful^ in his place. 

Having referred to the state of public opinion 
and feeling with reference to religion among the 
lower classes^ it may not be amiss to glance at the 
higher and more educated portions of the commu- 
nity. Many of these are moving on two lines, or 
in a stream that divides into two channels ; and 
flows in two diverging directions — the devout and 
imaginative going off to Puseyism, and a large 

last summer through France, up the Mediterranean to Athens, 
^m thence through Southern Greece, back to Sicily, Naples, 
Pompeii, Rome, and Italy : and on their return delivered in 
lectures to the society of which they were members, an account 
of their travels, that would bear no distant comparison with 
some other accounts that have been given to the public from the 
press. They were able to appreciate, and did appreciate with 
enthusiasm, the remains of antiquity in Greece and Rome, as 
well as the exhibitions of modern times. 



EARNESTNESS. 239 

part of the rest to a philosophical infidelity. A 
loose^ unsystematised theism is adopted by many 
of our men of letters^ in some cases a new edition 
of the opinions of our English deists of the last 
century ; and in others^ and a still more numerous 
class^ bearing a strong affinity to the pantheistic 
or mystic theory of the German philosophy. Of 
the disposition of modern science^ in the persons 
of some of its more illustrious votaries, to retire 
from revealed religion, as if ashamed to be seen in 
its company, we have an affecting instance in the 
great octogenarian naturalist of Prussia. It is 
indeed a melancholy spectacle, to witness such a 
man as Humboldt, — whose eye has seen so much 
of the visible universe, and whose pen has recorded 
so ably the researches of his vast genius ; whose 
intellect seemed formed by the Creator, not only 
to study his works but to proclaim his glories, 
—send forth such a work as " Kosmos,*^ and in 
that work declare it was no part of his business to 
trace the wonders he describes to their still more 
wondrous Author ! How deeply painful to see 
this high priest of nature officiating with such 
zeal and devotion to the shrine of matter, and yet 
never throwing one grain of incense on the altar of 
the Infinite Mind which made the worlds! Yet 
this is only a specimen of other similar cases. 
Alas^ alas, that such a mind should be so warped 
by the modes of thinking prevalent among his 



240 . MOTIVES TO 

countrymen, and should have sent forth perhaps 
his last gift to the lovers of science, in which the 
Hegelian pantheism is too obviously interwoven. 

With such a view of the state and tendency of 
the educated mind in this age, we see an additional 
argument for an earnest, and at the same time an 
intelligent and educated ministry. We shall want 
men, and we are not without them already, who 
can enter the lists and do battle with the seductive 
and dangerous forms of error, that have done 
such mischief on the continent of Europe, and 
which are likely, without great vigilance and stout 
resistance, to repeat the mischief here also. The 
spirit of mental philosophy which was called up 
by Locke, and has since been sustained in different 
schools, by Reid and Kant, and those who have 
descended from them, is at the present moment 
widely diffusing itself through the English and 
American mind. Education will no longer be 
confined to literature and natural science. A dis- 
position and determination are formed to explore 
the world of mind, as well as that of matter, and 
to give to subjective studies a place, and that a 
very high one, perhaps above the objective ones., 
Pyschology is now, and will be still more so, the 
favourite pursuit of great multitudes of reflective 
intellects. The mind of Germany is operating 
with power and success upon the mind of England, 
to an extent which is surprising, and in some 



EARNESTNESS. 241 

views of the case alarming. It is^ one should 
thinks impossible to trace the progress of transcen- 
dentalism from the time of Kant to that of Hegel^ 
and to see how^ as it diverged more and more widely 
from the metaphysics of our land^ it has associated 
itself with rationalism in theology^ and led on to 
pantheism in philosophy^ and not feel some appre-> 
hension for the result of its introduction to this 
country. Perhaps the practical character of the 
English understanding will be one of our safe- 
guards against a system which to the great multi- 
tude must ever remain a matter of mere scientific 
speculation. It may^ however^ be feared that some 
of our young ministers^ and our students in theo- 
logy« especially those of speculative habits^ capti- 
vated by the dariug boldness, the intellectual vigour, 
and the theoretic attractions of the great German 
philosophers, may too adventurously launch forth 
on this dangerous ocean, and make shipvvreck of 
their doctrinal simplicity, and practical usefulness. 
Let them be assured that neither the transcenden- 
talism of Kant, nor the eclecticism of Cousin, is a 
safe guide for men who would be useful in saving 
souls. The warning voice has already been lifted 
up in high places on the other side of the Atlantic, 
where German philosophy was likely at one time 
to be received with avidity ; and there will not be 
wanting voices to utter words of warning in this 
country also. It would not only be useless, but 

R 



242 MOTIVES TO 

unwise, to set out this, or any other system of phi- 
losophy, as the tree of knowledge of good and evil, 
which we are forbidden by the command of God, 
and by the flaming sword of the cherubim, to 
approach: this, as well as every other object of 
human inquiry, may be studied, and by a cautious 
and discriminating mind, may of course be studied 
with advantage. We would by no means contend 
that there is nothing in the industry of German 
investigation, in its method of analysis, in its 
subjective taste, or even in the systems which are 
the fruits of its researches, which may not be bor- 
rowed with advantage by ourselves; but against 
that willing and entire surrender of the under- 
standing to a school, the masters of which have 
left us no gospel but a fable, and no God but 
nature, which some in this land are beginning to 
manifest, we must raise an emphatic and protesting 
voice. 

A work has lately made its appearance, likely 
to be extensively circulated among those who have 
any taste for philosophical studies, or any wish to 
become acquainted with German literature ; a work 
which cannot fail to command attention, and will 
certainly secure for its accomplished author the 
admiration and respect of his numerous readers,^ — 
I mean the " History of Modern Philosophy,'^ by 
the Rev. J. D. Morell. It is impossible to deny 
to this gentleman the fidelity of the historian, the 



EARNESTNESS. 243 

impartiality and the candour of the true philo- 
sopher, and at the same time the excellence of a 
very able writer. It is on some accounts a happy 
circumstance that such a subject has fallen into 
such hands, since Mr. Morell's attachment to 
evangelical truth, united with his intimate acquaint- 
ance with continental literature, will qualify him 
we trust to be a safe pilot for the EngUsh mind 
through the perilous seas he has undertaken to 
navigate. It may be hoped that his own attach- 
ment to the subjective system of philosophy will 
not lead his ardent readers and admirers to go 
further in that direction than his own discrimina- 
ting and well-balanced mind would wish or approve; 
and we are quite sure that he would join with 
many, who are perhaps more apprehensive than he 
is of the influence of German philosophy, in the 
opinion, that no more direct way could }ft taken 
by our young ministers to hinder their usefulness, 
than to allow such studies to obscure the simpli- 
city of their matter, or to deaden the energy of 
their manner, as preachers of the gospel ; and we 
hope that he would also most emphatically say, 
" Beware lest any man spoil you ( as preachers) 
through philosophy and vain deceit." 

From a very able and complimentary critique 

on Mr. MorelPs work, contained in the twelfth 

number of the " North British Review/^ obviously 

by the late Dr. Chalmers, the following appro- 

r2 



244 MOTIVES TO 

priate passage may with advantage be introduced 
here. Speaking of Carlyle, the reviewer says, 

" They are not creeds, but men, who are the objects 
of his idolatry, which under the name of hero-worship, he 
renders alike to those of most opposite opinions — as to 
Luther, and Knox, and Cromwell, on the one hand> 
so with equal veneration to the lofty poets and transcen- 
dentalists of Germany, upon the other. He is a lover of 
earnestness, more than a lover of truth : and it would not 
be our counteractive at least to urge that he should be a 
lover of truth, more than a lover of earnestness. We 
should rather say that both are best, and would oiur island 
only not be frightened from its propriety by the high 
sounding philosophy of the continent — neither overborne 
by its pretensions, nor overawed by its cabalistic nomen- 
clatures—would our savans and theologians but keep un- 
moved on the ground of common sense, and by their 
paramount demand for evidence at every step, lay resolute 
arrest on the pruriences of wanton speculation — then, 
while they rejected all that was unsubstantial and unsound 
in the dogmata of the transcendental school, it were well 
that they imported the earnest and lofty enthusiasm of its 
disciples into the phlegmatic universities, and no less 
phlegmatic churches, of our land. We do not need to 
take down the frame-work of our existing orthodoxy, 
whether in theology or in science. All that we require is 
that it shall become an animated frame- work, by the breath 
of a new life being infused into it. Ours has been most 
truly denounced as an age of formalism ; but to mend this; 
we do not need to exchange our formulas, only to quicken 
them ; nor to quit the ground of our common sense for 
baseless speculations ; nor to substitute the Divine Idea 
of Fichte for a personal and living God; nor to adopt 



IABNE8TNE8S. 245 

for our Saviour a mere embodied and aUegorised perfer- 
tion, and give up the actual and hiitorical Jesus Christ of 
the New Testament ; nor finally, to go in quest of a chi- 
merical ontology in upper regions far out of mortal ken ; 
and for visions of merest fancy there, to renounce either 
the certainties of our own palpable and peopled world, or 
the truths which He who dwelleth in the heavens broogbt 
down from heaven, because no man can ascend into heaven, 
or tell the mysteries and glories of a place which he never 
entered. What we want is that the very system of doc- 
trine which we now have, shall come to us not in word 
only, but in power. As things stand at present, our 
creeds and confessions have become effete, and the Bible 
a dead letter : and that orthodoxy which was at one time 
the glory, by withering into the inert and lifeless, is now 
the shame and the reproach of all our churches. If there 
have been the revival of a more spiritual philosophy in 
France, or elsewhere, it might well humble us; but 
this is not exactly the quarter from which we should 
expect our revival to come. Prayer could bring it down 
from above ; and it is only thus that all which is good in 
Puritanism, its earnestness, without its extravagance ; its 
faith, without its contempt for philosophy ; its high and 
heavenly-mindedness, without the baser admixture of its 
worldly politics and passions — it is only thus the Augustan 
age of Christianity in England, an age which Mr. Carlyle 
has done so much to vindicate and bring to light, will 
again come back, to reform our State, and bless our 
families." 

From this article it is perfectly evident that if 
England should have a tendency to go wrongs 
Scotland will do something to put us rights and 
that the followers, but improved ones, of Reid, 



246 . MOTIVES TO 

will do much to keep the disciples of Kant in 
check, and hold the balance even between the 
Scotch and German philosophies. Surely nothing 
more need be said to shew and to prove what kind 
of men we want for such an age, and to indicate 
that for times of such excitement, we must have 
men of strong intelligence, simple faith, and entire 
devotedness. It is, in every view we can take of 
it, an earnest age, and earnest men alone can at 
such a time do any thing any where, and least of 
all in the pulpit. Events, with trumpet-call, sum- 
mon us to our post, with every faculty awake, and 
every energy engaged. Amidst the din of busi- 
ness, of politics, of science, and of fashion ; amidst 
the jests of laughers, the eloquence of orators, 
and the clamour of parties, the voice of the 
preacher will not be heard, unless he speak loudly, 
nor listened to, unless he speak earnestly and 
intelligently ; we shall gain no heed for our holy 
religion, unless we put forth all our strength ; it 
will be pushed aside, overborne, trampled down in 
the jostling crowd, if we do not exert our very 
mightiest energies to bear it up, and to make way 
for it through the strife and the theory of abound- 
ing secularities. 

Let us not deceive ourselves by substituting any 
thing else for this. It may be all very well and 
proper in its place to keep pace with the times ir^ 
which we live, as regards other matters ; in qlas^ 



EARNESTNESS. 247 

sical, mathematical^ and philosophical literature, 
in academic degrees^ in tasteful architecture ; but 
these things^ in the absence of a living power of 
intense devotedness, will be but as the flowers 
which shed their fragrance upon our grave, or as 
the sculpture which decorates our tomb. 

IV. We may next contemplate the earnestness 
displayed by some other bodies^ with which, it may 
be truly said, we have to compete, and in some 
instances to contend. 

And first of all let us look at the activity of the 
Church of Rome. What a change has of late 
years come over that wonderful and dreadful 
system, so far as its external circumstances are 
concerned. Many are disposed to think lightly 
of its present condition, efforts, prospects, and 
hopes : and it will be acknowledged it is unwise 
and impolitic for Protestants to lend their aid in 
magnifying the power and swelhng the pride and 
expectations of the Man of Sin. But then it is 
no less unwise and impolitic on the other hand to 
miscalculate his forces, to shut our eyes on his 
efforts, and to deny his victories. What we need 
is just as much of alarm as shall rouse us to action, 
without producing panic ; enough of fear to lead 
us to buckle on our ^mour, and yet not so much 
as to paralyse our energy. Look at the present 
condition and prospects of Popery, as compared 
with what they were soon after the French revolu- 



248 MOTIVES TO 

tion. Weakened by the withering scorn of an 
infidel philosophy, to which its own corruption 
had given rise, it was ill-prepared to sustain the 
shock of that awful outbreak of human passion^ 
and it fell an apparently lifeless corpse before it* 
The Gallican church was subverted; its priests 
were banished; its property confiscated; its places 
of worship closed. A French army was in posses- 
sion of Rome, and the Pope was a prisoner in 
France, while his adherents were trembling and 
dispersed in all parts of the world. The opponents 
of Romanism exulted in the confidence that its! 
days were numbered, and its end was come. They 
exulted too soon. That lifeless corpse which lay 
prostrate in Europe, has since then shown signs of 
returning animation — its wounds have been healed 
—it has risen from the earth — and recovering ita 
full health, is going forth at this time with giant 
strength to contend with Protestantism for the 
mastery of the world. Popery has gained political 
power in England. It is renewing its old fight 
in France for the education of the people — ^its 
chapels, its priests, its bishops, its monks, its 
missions, are every where multiplying — ^its ancient 
craft and cruelty are again called into activity, as 
Tahiti can witness, — it is drawing hundreds, if we 
include both clergy and laity, of influential persons 
from the Church of England, and tainting with 
its spirit hundreds more who remain behind to 



EARNSSTNE8J3. 249 

diffuse the corruption still more widely — it hui 
done much to blot from the memory of statesmen 
its past history, and to hide from their eyes its 
hideous form — and with an ardour, kindling to an 
intense flame, and a hope flashed into a stronger 
confidence by these victories, it is still going on 
from conquering to conquer. There are, it is 
true, for Rome, fearful and apalling portents to 
be set off against these bright signs — there is the 
confiscation of Ecclesiastical property and the dis* 
solution of the monasteries in Spain — the rapid 
defection going on in Germany, under Ronge and 
Czerski — the conversion of whole congregations 
and parishes in the south of France to Protes- 
tantism — the rising spirit of free inquiry even iii 
Italy — with the growth of knowledge and the 
advance of education every where. From all this 
it is evident that the great battle of the Reforma- 
tion is to be fought over again, and we are in the 
field of action, where the forces are mustered and 
the conflict is going on ; and we are unworthy of 
our position and our occupation if we do not give 
our energies, the best and the noblest, to the cause. 
Let us take pattern from our foes: and imitate 
their intensity of action. They are in earnest, if 
we are not. Were it possible for us to see a 
perfect disclosure, in one bird's-eye view, of all 
that is going on in the Vatican, that most astound- 
ing instance of centralisation out of the bottomless 



?50 MOTIVES TO 

pit ; could we see the gigantic intellects that are 
planning^ and the burning hearts that are feeding 
the fire of their zeal, and the busy hands that are 
working in that focus of all that is daring in 
design^ and mischievous in effect, upon the world's 
intellectual and spiritual welfare, we should feel 
that we are safe from the tyranny of that auda- 
cious system, only under the vigilance of an 
Omniscient eye, and the protection of an Omni- 
potent arm. But that help and that vigilance are 
not to be looked for by the supine and lukewarm, 
and can be expected only in the way of zealous 
activity and confiding prayer. To whom chiefly 
should Protestantism look for the instrumentality 
necessary for its defence, but to its ministers ? 
Let them, in answer to the call which events are 
making upon their energies, prepare themselves 
by study, by deep devotion, and by intense action, 
to grapple with this ancient foe of spiritual Chris- 
tianity. 

But this is not the only instance of earnestness 
which we should contemplate, and from which we 
should deduce a stimulus to our own activity. 
The Church of England also is in earnest. Many 
of us can recollect the time when it was not so. 
A pervading secularity characterised her clergy ; a 
drowsy indifference her people; if the former got 
their tithes, and ate, drank, and were merry ; and 
the latter got christening, confirmation, and the 



EARNESTNESS. 251 

sacrament when they died, it was all they cared 
for. The only thing that moved either of them 
to a pang of zeal, was the coming of the Method- 
ists into the parish ; and when these were mobbed 
away, they relapsed again into their former apathy. 
Exceptions there were — bright and blessed ones — 
but they were only exceptions. Thank God, it is 
not so now. A vivifying wind has swept over the 
valley of dry bones, and an army not only of living, 
but of life-giving, men has sprung up. Venn,. 
Berridge, and Romaine; Newton, Cecil, and 
Simeon, have lived, and have awakened a new 
spirit in the church to which they belonged. 
Look at that church as she is now to be seen, full 
of energy and earnestness : divided it is true into 
parties, as to theological opinion, to a considerable 
extent Romanised in her spirit, and aggressive in 
her designs ; but instinct with life, and a great 
deal of it life of the best kind. Even the orthodox • 
and the Puseyite clergy are all now active, preach- 
ing, catechising, visiting the sick, instituting and 
superintending schools. The day is happily gone 
by when the taunt of fox-hunting, play-going, ball- 
frequenting parsons, could be with justice thrown 
at the clergy of the State-church : they are now 
no longer to be found in those scenes of folly and 
vanity, but at the bed-side of the sick man, or in 
the cottage of the poor one. We must rejoice in 
their labours and in their success, except when 



252 MOTIVES TO 

their object and their aim are to crush Dissenters. 
There are very many among them of the true 
apostolic succession in doctrine^ spirit^ and devo* 
tedness : many whose piety and zeal we should do 
well to emulate: many with whom it is among the 
felicities of my life to be united in the bonds of 
private friendship and public co-operation. Sin- 
cerely and cordially attached to their church, they 
are labouring in season and out of season^ to 
promote its interests. Who can blame them? 
Instead of this, let us imitate them. For zeal and 
devotedness they are worthy of it. I know their 
labours, and am astonished at them. Think of a 
clergyman, and multitudes of such there are, who> 
besides his other labours, spends four or five hours 
every day in going from house to house, visiting 
the sick, instructing the ignorant, comforting the 
distressed. Can we wonder that such men should 
lay hold on the public mind ? Is it not in the 
natural course of things that it should be so ? It 
is admitted that the clergyman of a parish has 
advantages for this species of ministerial occupa- 
tion which we have not: he considers all the people 
within certain topographical limits as belonging 
to him, — as being in fact, his cure; while, oJn 
the other hand, most, if not all, of these persons, 
except such as by profession really belong to other 
denominations, look upon him in the light of their 
minister. This ever active assiduity, in addition 



fiARNESTNESS. 253 

to the Sabbath-day exercises^ is admonitory to ub. 
Can we see this new sight, the whole Church-esta- 
blishment, from the Archbishop of Canterbury down 
to the curate of the smallest village, with all their 
modern and comprehensive agency of Pastoral- Aid 
Societies, liadies' District Visiting Societies, Scrip- 
ture readers, Church of England Tract Societies, 
and other means of influence and power, in busy 
commotion, dotting the land all over with churches 
and schools, and thus by all these efforts labouring 
to occupy so entirely the nation, as to leave no 
room for, and to prove there is no need of,, any 
other body of Christians — can we see all this 
constantly before our eyes, and not see the need 
of an earnest ministry, not only to maintain our 
ground, but to advance? Not that I mean to 
assert that the evangelical clergy would altogether 
wish to push us off the ground. No, I believe 
there are many who unfeignedly rejoice in the ex- 
istence, operations, and success, both of the Metho- 
dists and Dissenters, and who would consider it a 
deep calamity for the nation, if they were arrested 
in their career of evangelical ministration. The 
spirit of the Evangelical AlUance is diffusing itself 
abroad. Sectarianism is, we hope, beginning to 
wither at the root ; and Christian charity is grap- 
pling with the demon of bigotry. But still we are^ 
at present not prepared for the fusion and amaU 
gamation of all parties into one, and till then we 



254!^ . MOTIVES TO 

may learn from each other; and with the most 
entire good will towards my brethren in the Church 
of England, without envy or jealousy, I call upon 
my other brethren within my own denomination 
to imitate the zeal of which they are the witnesses 
among the clergy of the Establishment. I am a 
Dissenter from conviction as well as by education, 
and know not the lure which would induce me, or 
the sufiering which would terrify me, to abandon 
my principles. I believe as I ever have believed, 

\ since I reflected upon the subject, that the Estab- 
lishment of religion by the enactments of secular 
legislation, has no sanction from the New Testa- 
ment, is a corruption of Christianity, and is inju- 
rious to its spirit; and I believe the time will 
come, when the same views will be entertained by 
all the genuine followers of Christ ; hence I am, 
and ought to be, anxious, while I cultivate a spirit 
of brotherly love towards those who differ from 
me, to uphold, though without wrath, malice, or 
any uncharitableness, the denomination by which 
my conscientious opinions arc embodied and ex- 

» pressed. Dissenters of England, and especially 
Dissenting ministers, I say therefore unto you, be 
in earnest : first of all, and chief of all, in attach-* 
ment to the doctrines of evangelism, to the creed 
of Protestantism, to the great principles which 
God has employed in every age and country where 
true religion has had existence, to vitalise a dead^ 



EARNESTNESS. 255 

and purify a corrupt, world. Be it your prayer, 
your endeavour, your hallowed ambition, to possess ' 
a ministry of competent learning, and especially of * 
soundly evangelical sentiment ; a ministry which 
as regards their pulpit ministrations, shall be the . 
power of God to the salvation of souls ; a ministry 
which in the simplicity of their discourses and the 
intensity of their zeal, the fervour of their piety, • 
and the all-comprehending extent of their labours, 
shall vie with the best specimens of the clergy of 
the Church of England. There is earnestness 
among them, and if we would not be swallowed 
up in the rising tide of their zeal, let us meet it 
with a corresponding intensity. Let each minister, 
in his own separate and individual sphere of 
action, set himself to work, and put forth all his 
energies, without waiting for combination with 
others. Not that I speak against combination. 
We have far too little of it, and this is our weak- 
ness. In pohty we are too independent, and 
should be vastly improved as regards our internal 
condition and our external influence, if we were 
more compact. But as to ministerial earnestness, 
we need not wait for others : each man can do 
what he wills, and may do much, though no other 
man did any thing. Ministerial activity, like 
Christian piety, is a matter of individual obliga- 
tion, and no one is so dependent upon bis neigh- 
bours, as that he needs to halt till they are ready 
to march with him. 



256 MOTIVES TO 

Nor is it necessary nor proper, advocate though 
I be for the EvangeUcal Alliance, that we should 
be silent as to our views of the spirituality of 
Christ^s kingdom. As we are not to sacrifice love 
for truth, so neither are we to sacrifice truth for 
love, nor to throw away a smaller diamond of 
truth out of regard to a larger one. All truth 
must be held, as well as all love. I difibr from 
some of my brethren in my views of certain con- 
federations for the maintenance and spread of our 
Nonconformity, because I believe that whatever 
good they may do in one way, they do more harm 
in another ; but I do not dififer from them in my 
conviction that our principles, as a part of the 
New Testament, ought to be taught, and to be 
taught with earnestness too. If true they must 
be important, and if important at all, very impor- 
tant: subordinate I know, immeasurably so, to 
the doctrines whereby men are saved ; but still of 
consequence. Provided the gross misrepresenta- 
tion, the exaggerated statement, the studied cari- 
cature, the uncharitable imputation, the withering 
sarcasm, the bitter irony, and the malevolent 
ridicule be expunged from controversy, and there 
be as much of the delicacy of love, as there is of 
the firmness of truth, there can be no harm, but 
must be much good, not only in stating our own 
opinions, but in answering those who difibr from 
ua. All systems of church-polity derive their 



EARNESTNESS. 257 

value and importance from their subserviency to 
the cause of evangelism. Church-of-Englandism or 
Dissent apart from this^ is but as the pole without 
the healing serpent which it was erected to exhibit; 
and to be zealous about either^ except as viewed in 
reference to the truth as it is in Jesus^ is but like 
contending about the wood of the cross^ to the 
neglect of the Saviour who was crucified upon it. 

How^ then^ are we to meet that abounding zeal 
which we ourselves perhaps have been in no small 
degree the occasion of awakenings but by a cor- 
responding vigour of action? We cannot advance^ 
nay we cannot keep our ground^ without it. We 
have to contend against an energy which is 
astounding and all but overwhelming ; and if this 
cannot move us to earnestness^ nothing will. 

V. This state of mind and action is within the 
reach of every minister of Christ. 

Some men^ from a natural physical energy of 
character^ may be more prone to^ and better quali-^ 
fied for^ this fervid and devoted zeal, than some 
others. They are of a more mercurial tempera- 
ment than their phlegmatic brethren, who creep 
while the others fly, and who require more sti- 
mulus to rouse them into activity than is neces- 
sary to keep the rest at the full speed of their 
progress. This is constitutional to a very consi- 
derable extent; but it is, after all, more of a 
moral than a natural inability in many ; and the 

8 



258 MOTITES TO 

sinners whom they address and call to repentance^ 
and to whom they declare that the only hindrance 
they have to true religion is an impotence of will^ 
are just as excusable for their want of penitence 
and faith^ as any minister under heaven is for a 
want of earnestness. He may never be able to be 
a scholar^ or a philosopher^ or a mathematician, 
though he may acquire more of all these attain- 
ments than he supposes is within his reach^ if he 
will but give himself to early risings make a good 
apportionment of his time^ and adopt a well-arran-^ 
ged plan of study. His situation and engagements 
may be such^ however^ that he may not hope to 
rise to eminence in these things ; but nothing for- 
bids his activity^ zeal^ and entire devotedness to 
the great work of preaching the gospel^ and caring 
for men^s souls. He may not be a consummate 
orator, for perhaps he has not voice for this; but he 
may, if he pleases, use what voice he has with good 
effect : he may not have the abiUty for finished com- 
position ; but he can, if he gives time and labour, 
produce sermons full of spiritual power : he may 
not be able to attract around him the rich, the 
literary, or the great ; but he can interest the poor, 
and engage the children of the Sunday school, and 
perhaps their parents; he may not have ten talents, 
but he need not wrap up his one in a napkin and 
bury it in the earth. Every man has one talent 
at least, with which he can busily trade and acquire 



EARNESTNESS, 259 

profit for his employer and reward for himself. If 
the pride of some men over-estimate the number 
of their talents — the modesty, or in some cases 
the indolence of others, leads them to make too 
low a calculation of theirs. There is a source of 
latent energy in most men, which they have been 
so far from exhausting that they have scarcely 
touched it : they have in many cases to break up 
a virgin soil. I knew a minister of Christ, and 
loved him well, who was in a situation where he 
had done little, and feared he never should do 
more. Every thing was dull around him, and 
he was dull with it. It pleased God to remove 
him to a new situation, and then he became a 
new man. He revived from his torpor, and 
every thing revived around him. An activity and 
energy were now evinced, which surprised himself 
and those who knew him. He formed a new con- 
gregation, instituted a variety of religious organi- 
sations of a useful kind, and was one of the most 
earnest men I knew. All this energy was not a 
new creation, but a resurrection. So it might be 
with many more. There are the principles of 
activity within them, which are only waiting for 
the influence of circumstances, or the power of will, 
to give them life, motion, and vigour. Away then 
with the excuses of indolence, the fears of timi- 
dity, the objections of modesty, and the opiates of 
conscience ; for it is these, and not impossibilities, 
s2 



260 MOTIVES TO 

which prevent any man from being zealously 
affected in a good thing. Every minister can be 
an earnest minister if he so wills : and he is so when 
any thing in which he has a deep interest is at 
stake. Let his house be on fire^ or his health and 
life be in danger^ or his wife or child be in perils 
or some means of greatly augmenting his property 
be thrown in his way^ and what an intensity of 
emotion and a vehemence of action will be exerted; 
and there needs but the might and pressure of the 
interests of immortal souls upon his conscience ; 
there needs but a heart constrained by the love of 
Christy so as to be borne away by the force and 
impetuosity of this hallowed passion ; there needs 
but a longing desire to be wise in winning men to 
Jesus ; there needs^ in fine^ but a heart fully set 
in him to accomplish the ends and objects of his 
office^ to possess that high and noble quality of 
soul which it is the object of this work to recom- 
mend. There are the same constitutional varieties 
in tradesmen as are visible in ministers^ and yet 
we never hearken to the former^ when in justifica- 
tion of their failure for want of energy, they tell 
us they have no physical capacity for, or tendency 
to, activity. Our reply to them is, that what is 
deficient in them by nature, must be made up by 
reason and resolution. We say the same to the 
preacher of the gospel, and while in this represen- 
tation we would constrain his conscience by a sense 



EARNESTNESS. 261 

of obligation^ we would equally aim to interest 
his heart by awakening hope. He may never be 
able^ with his measure of talent^ to reach the 
success of some more gifted and more favoured 
brethren ; but he may have a measure of his own^ 
far more than enough to recompense any labour he 
mav bestow to obtain some success : and instead 
therefore of spending his time in envying others, 
or of sitting down in despair to do nothings be- 
cause he cannot do as much as they, let him rise 
up, and have the blessed consciousness and reward 
that he has done what he could. 

Young ministers of the gospel, and students 
preparing for the ministry, who may read these 
pages, you can possess and exhibit real earnest- 
ness ; all its delightful excitement, all its blessed 
results, all its eternal consequences, are within 
your reach. There is no lion in the street, except 
what your own imagination sees there, and your 
own sloth has placed there. Make the effort, it is 
worth the making : try, you can but fail, and it is 
better to fail, than not to make the attempt. Think 
what a result may issue from a new devotedness. 
We have never yet any of us adequately estimated 
the immense importance and momentous conse- 
quences of our work. How can we ? They are 
eternal, and who can duly estimate eternity ? Do 
we believe what we preach, that the conversion of 
a soul is of more consequence than the creation 



262 MOTIVES TO 

of a world ? Is this sober truth, or mere rhetoric ? 
Is this fact, or the mere garniture of a sermon i 
only a dash of eloquence, an artifice of our oratory? 
If true, and we know it is so, how momentous ! 
A soul, weigh it in the balances of the sanctuary, 
and settle its worth : appraise its value. Salva- 
tion ! wondrous word, and more wondrous thing. 
One word only, but containing millions of ideas ; 
uttered in a moment, but requiring everlasting 
ages, and all the amplitude of heaven, for the 
unfolding of its meaning. Archbishop Williams, 
who was also Lord Keeper in the time of Charles 
the First, once uttered this memorable speech : 
■' I have passed through many places of honour 
and trust both in Church and State, more than 
any one of my order for seventy years before. 
But were I assured, that by my preaching I bad 
converted one soul to God, I should therein take 
more comfort than in all the honours and offices 
that have ever been bestowed upon me." What 
a confession from an archbishop, that he did not 
know he had been the instrument of converting 
a single soul to God ; what an impressive import- 
ance does the confession stamp upon the work of 
saving souls; and what a stimulus should it 
supply to us who are engaged in this divine 
employment ! 

How vain and worthless a thing is the popular 
applause which some receive for their eloquence^ 



EARNESTNESS. 263 

compared with the proofs of usefulness in the con- 
version of immortal souls! What are the flatteries 
of the foolish, or what the eulogiums of the wise ; 
what the honeyed compliments, or the golden opi- 
nions of the most distinguished circle of admirers, 
weighed against the testimony of one redeemed 
sinner that we have heen the instrument of saving 
from death, but as the small dust in the balance ! 
How have some men, pre-eminent for their intel- 
lectual power, and accustomed to fascinate the 
spell-bound multitude by the power of their elo- 
quence, yearned amidst all their popularity for 
some more substantial, satisfying, and abiding 
reward of their labour, than that admiration of 
their talents, which they were accustomed to 
receive. It may be they were not unsusceptible 
to the emotions of vanity, nor ungratified by the 
expressions of applause, at the time ; but when 
they found that this was all the result of their 
labours, they sickened of the incense and the 
honey, and exclaimed in the bitterness of disap- 
pointment, and the anguish of self-reproach, " Is 
this all my reward ? Oh, where are the souls I 
have converted from the error of their ways V 
We have a striking proof of this in the late Dr. 
McAU, whom it was my privilege to call my friend. 
It was impossible for this extraordinary man to be 
ignorant either of his great powers, of the estimate 
in which they were held, or of the effect they pro- 



264 MOTIVES TO 

duced on others by his pulpit exercises. Nor was 
he by any means unsusceptible of the influence of 
applause. But how empty did this appear to him 
as compared with the abiding results of real use- 
fulness; which^ if he had not enjoyed in such 
large measures as some others^ it was not for want 
of any anxiety to obtain it. ** Deeply affected was 
he often/* says Dr. Leifchild^ " by the fear of not 
being useful in his ministry.*' ** I have admira- 
tion enough/' he would say^ '^ but I want to see 
conversion and edification.'* He spoke of some 
other neighbouring ministers^ whose churches he 
said resembled a garden which the Lord had 
blessed^ or whose spots of verdure were more vivid 
than his own; but added^ that his emotions in 
making the comparison^ partook of a character 
that absorbed or overwhelmed him with sorrow for 
himself. I remember on one occasion^ after a 
brilliant speech from himself^ he listened to a 
much plainer and less oratorical brother^ whose 
address however^ seemed much more penetrating 
on the minds of the audience^ and produced on 
their countenances an appearance of being deeply 
affected. At that moment^ the speaker hearing a 
loud sobbing behind him^ turned round ; it was 
McAlL " Ah/* said he afterwards, " that effect, 
in such a legitimate way, I would give the world 
to be able to produce.** Though the desire thus 
ardently breathed, was eUcited on the platform, it 



EARNESTNESS. 265 

extended to every description of ministerial address. 
"Oh/' said he to Mr. Griffin^ again and again, "I 
care nothing what the people may think or say of 
my abihties, if I may but be useful to souls \" and 
once with a kind of swelling indignation, " God 
knows, I do not want their applause — I want their 
salvation.'^ This is eminently instructive and 
impressive, and is one of the most convincing 
instances which the history of the pulpit can 
furnish of the worthlessness of every thing else 
as an object of ministerial pursuit, and as the 
reward of ministerial labour, compared with the 
salvation of immortal souls. This was not the 
confession and the lamentation of one whose envy 
led him to depreciate the value of that which he 
had no hope of obtaining, but of one who was 
the admiration of every circle into which he 
entered, and whose surprising talents commanded 
the plaudits of all who heard him. How much of 
the power of that vast intellect, of that splendid 
eloquence, and of the admiration and eulogium 
which they drew upon him, would Dr. McAll have 
given up for a portion of the usefulness, which he 
saw was granted to the humbler but more effective 
talents of some of his far less gifted brethren. 
Let the men who are but too apt to envy such 
displays of genius, and who, when they see 
the spell-bound multitude listening in breathless 
silence^ or dispersing with audible applause, &et 



266 MOTIVES TO 

because they cannot do so with their enchant- 
ments^ study the scene before us : let them follow 
Dr. McAll home from the crowded^ fascinated^ 
admiring congregation, leaving behind him the 
atmosphere perfumed and vocal with delight^ to 
commune with God and his own heart in his 
closet, and there hear him exclaiming with a burst 
of agony, "Lord, who hath believed our report, 
and to whom h^s thine arm been revealed V Let 
them mark all this, and learn that, in the estima- 
tion of the most gifted minds, there is no object 
of pursuit so sublime, nor any reward for minis- 
terial labour so rich, as the salvation of immortal 
souls. 

VL We may next direct our attention to the 
fact that earnestness has visually been successful in 
the accomplishment of its object^ and that little 
has ever been achieved without it. 

We admit, and in the conclusion of this work 
shall more emphatically state, the necessity of a 
Pivine influence to convert the soul ; but still the 
Spirit works by means, and by means best adapted 
to accomphsh the end proposed. We do not look 
for the Spirit to convert souls without the truth ; 
it is by the presentation of this to the judgment, 
and by the co-working of Divine grace upon the 
heart, that the great change of regeneration ia 
effected. It is evident, however, that this blessed 
result can take place only in those cases where the 



lABNESTNESS. 267 

truth is really contemplated. The attention must 
be fixed upon it, or no result can talce place. At- 
tention, and to a certain extent abstraction of 
mind, may be said to be essentially necessary to 
the work of conversion. Hence those preachers 
are not only likely to be most useful, but are most 
useful, who have the greatest power of fixing 
attention upon the truth, and holding the mind 
in a state of abstraction from all other topics. 
When the attention is so withdrawn, by their 
manner of preaching, from foreign matters, and 
fixed upon the truth then presented, the Spirit in 
a way of sovereign mercy gives forth his influence 
to change the evil bias of the heart towards the 
truth thus exhibited. We perceive in different 
preachers very various kinds of power to engage 
the attention : some do it by a commanding elo-* 
quence ; others by an impressive oratory ; others 
by a burning ardour; others by a melting affisc- 
tion ; and some even by eccentricity ; but amidst 
all these specific varieties of manner, we shall find 
the one prevailing characteristic to be, an adapta- 
tion to arrest and fix the attention. A preacher 
may be immeasurably inferior to many others in 
the vigour of his intellect and richness of his ima-i 
gination, and yet may be very far their superior in 
seizing and holding the minds of his hearers. We 
cannot hope to do good if we do not succeed in 
gaining the attention of the hearers^ and our expec- 



268 MOTIVES TO 

tatioDS of accomplishing the objects of our minis- 
try may be indulged with much confidence^ if we 
can so preach as to compel our hearers^ so to speak^ 
to listen to us. There is a striking incident men- 
tioned in the "Life and Remains ^^ of Mr. Cecil, 
of St. John's Chapel, Bedford Row — that master 
of pulpit eloquence. He was once invited to preach 
in a village, where the joyful sound of evangelical 
truth was rarely heard in the parish church, and 
where he thought it probable he should have no 
other opportunity to proclaim it. To his mortifi- 
cation when he had got half way through the ser- 
mon he perceived that he had not succeeded in 
gaining that close attention of the people which he 
deemed essential to the success of his sermon. 
The time was going by, the case seemed desperate, 
and it occurred to him that something must be 
done, or the opportunity was lost; and pausing for 
a moment where the subject admitted of his trying 
his experiment, he said with some degree of that 
impressiveness which pertained to him, "Last 
Monday morning a man was hanged at Tyburn,'^ 
and then went on to make the recent execution 
bear upon the subject of discourse. The expedient 
of course succeeded, the wandering eyes of the 
congregation were fixed upon the preacher, and 
their truant minds upon the sermon. He gained 
their attention, which was rivetted to him through- 
out the remainder of the discourse. Such self- 



EARNESTNESS. 269 

possession is a noble qualification for a public 
speaker ; and the moral of the anecdote is, — we 
must have the attention of our congregations^ or 
we can do them no good ; and the more we can 
command this, so as to lead them to think of the 
truth, the more likely we "are to do them good. 
The history of all successful preachers will prove 
that amidst a vast variety of means of gaining 
this, they each had the power of doing it, and in 
that power lay the secret of their success. 

Let any one who is at all in doubt whether the 
importance of earnestness is overstated in this 
work, consider who among departed ministers * 
have been, and who among living ones are, the 
most distinguished as successful preachers of the 
word of God. If he apply this to the fathers and 
founders of Nonconformity, he will find that in 
the first rank stand Baxter, Bunyan, Doolittle,- 
Clarkson, Flavel, Heywood, and Howe: and when 
he has read their glowing, and pungent, and 
powerful appeals to the hearts and consciences of 
sinners, he will not wonder that such sermons 
efiected the high purpose for which all sermons 
should be preached, that is, the conversion of 
sinners. Coming on to latter times, it is unne- 
cessary, after what has been said to mention 
Whitfield and Wesley, except to reiterate that in 
addition to other high and nobler qualities, earn- 
estness was the great means of their extensive 



270 MOTIVES TO 

success. They lived and laboured for scarcely any 
thing else than the salvation of immortal souls. 
As a proof of the intensity of their zeal^ reference 
may be made to the race of men into whom they 
breathed the fervour of their own souls^ and whom 
they raised up now and then^ to carry on their 
own great work. With here and there an excep- 
tion^ the present race of Methodist and Dissenting 
ministers are stiffs formal^ cold-hearted men^ <;om- 
pared with not only the leaders^ but the next 
immediate followers of those illustrious instru- 
ments of the modem revival of evangelical religion. 
How few of us are worthy to be mentioned with 
Coke and Fletcher^ Kowland Uill^ Berridge^ and 
Grimshaw; with Cecil, Newton, and Bomaine. 
What men were raised up in Wales by the Whit- 
field movement — Daniel Rowland, Jones of Llan- 
gan, Howell Harris, and their successors, John 
Elias, Christmas Evans, and Williams of Wem ; 
men who caused the mountains of their own 
romantic country to echo to their mighty voices, 
and who filled its vallies with the fruit of their 
impassioned oratory. If we look across the Ati- 
lantic, what a wonderful man do we discover in 
Jonathan Edwards, whose printed sermons, and 
which were only in accordance with his ordinary 
ministry, are full of such earnestness as is exhibited 
in the specimen given earlier in this work, and 
whose ministry was so full of its successful results. 



EARNESTNESS. 271 

Call to recollection Stoddart, Bellamy, Dwight, 
Davies, who, in the land of the pilgrim fathers, 
diffused abroad by their unreserved devotedness 
the savour of that Name which is above every 
name. In Scotland there have been the Erskines, 
the McLaurins, the Walkers, the Dicksons, and 
others, of by-gone days, whose remains tell us 
how they handled the word of God, and whose 
memoirs inform us with what success. In these 
venerated men we see the secret of all ministerial 
power, a desire amounting to a fervour for the con* 
version of sinners, and an adaptation to accomplish 
this in their preaching. 

If the illustrious company of reformers, who 
present the most august examples of burning zeal, 
next to the apostles, be not referred to, if the ma« 
jestic and mighty Luther, the profound Calvin, 
the heroic Zuingle, the intrepid Knox, the elegant 
and classic Melancthon, are passed over, it is not 
only because they are too well-known to need a 
mention, but also because they may be thought 
too high above the ordinary sphere of ministerial 
activity to be imitated : and yet if the pattern of 
the great Master himself is placed before us for 
contemplation and imitation, surely that of the 
most renowned of his servants need not be with-^ 
held. What singleness of aim, and unity of pur- 
pose, and concentration of energy, were there in 
these rare and extraordinary men, and what less 



272 MOTIVES TO 

could have carried them on and through their 
noble career. 

Descending to others — what men have been 
with us in the recollection of the present genera- 
tion, and the brilliant horizon of whose setting 
sun has scarcely ceased even yet to glow with the 
radiance of their names ; the original and striking 
^ Fuller, the mighty Hall, the seraphic Pearce, and 
the lion-hearted Knibb ; the intellectual Watson^ 
and the masculine Bogue; the eccentric, yet 
generous Wilks, the judicious Roby, the mild yet 
persuasive Burder, the pathetic Waugh, the wise 
and tender Griffin, the captivating and lovely 
Spencer, and the eloquent McAlL Honoured be 
their names, fragrant their memories, and precious 
the recollection of their example ! May we who 
survive cherish the recollection of their life and 
labours, and never forget that their greatness and 
their usefulness arose not more from their talents^ 
than from their devoted earnestness in the cause 
of evangelical truth. 

But coming to other and living examples, more 
upon the ordinary level, it may be well to look 
around upon those by whom in our own day, and 
before our own eyes, the ends of the Christian 
ministry and the object of evangelical preaching 
are most extensively accomplished, and to inquire 
by what order of means this has been done. It 
would be invidious to mention the names of living 



EARNESTNESS. 273 

men, and to select from among the multitude those 
who are pre-eminent above their fellows in useful- 
ness, in popularity, in the constant exhibition of 
evangelical truth. Two names, however, may 
here obtain a place, honoured by us all, and an 
honour to us ; the names of men widely diflFering, 
yet of equally conspicuous and acknowledged ex- 
cellencies, who are too far above us to excite our 
envy, and whose celebrity will defend this willing, 
affectionate, and admiring testimony, from the 
charge of invidious selection or fulsome adulation ; 
and who, each in his own sphere, one in the 
northern, the other in the southern hemisphere, is 
shedding the lustre of an evening star, and reflect- 
ing upon the church the glory of that great Sun 
of Righteousness, in whose attraction it has been 
their delight through a long, and holy, and useful 
life, to revolve : who yet live, and long may they 
live, that our younger ministry may learn in the 
holy labours of Chalmers* and Jay, how beautiful 

* Alas, that so soon after this paragraph was penned, one of 
these venerated names should be expunged from the record of 
living men, and added to the list of the illustrious dead ! Yes, 
the mighty Chalmers is gone, and to quote the apostrophe of 
Hebrew poetry, selected by Mr. Jay as his funeral text for 
Rowland Hill, we may utter the wail and exclaim, *' Howlffir- 
treCf the cedar has fallen /" The very glory and pride of Leba- 
non has fallen, and every one who surveys the gap which his 
removal has made in the forest, feels that there is no source of 
consolation under such a bereavement, but that which is sup- 
plied by the consideration that the Lord liveth. It is beyond 



274 MOTIVES TO 

and how useful is human genius, when sanctified 
by grace, and devoted to an earnest preaching of 
the gospel of salvation. 

But we are not considering now what may be 
done, and is done, by the gifted few, who by their 
rare endowments are fitted, as well as designed, to 
enrich our theological literature by their valuable 
works, or to gather around our pulpits the literary 
or philosophical spirits of the place in which they 
dwell — these are the exceptions in all denomina- 
tions to the general rule of preachers, even as 
those who listen to them, are the exceptions to 
the general rule of hearers. Our remarks apply 
to the men who move the masses, who operate 
upon the popular mind as it is most commonly 
found ; and what are they ? — not perhaps men of 
high scholarship, profound philosophy, or elegant 
composition ; but men of energy and earnestness ; 
men laying themselves out for usefulnesss; men of 

my ability to describe or to eulogise this wonderful man, whose 
death has clothed the whole church of God in mourning ; I 
would therefore only say that ever since his vast intellect wns 
irradiated by the light of truth, and his noble heart was brougbt 
by fkith under the constraint of love to Christ, he has exhibited 
one of the finest specimens oi the character I have attempted 
to delineate in this volume ; so that every student of divinity in 
our colleges, and every minister of every denomination, may be 
directed to Dr. Chalmers, as one of the most beautiful types 
and models of an Earnest Miniiiter. Dr. W. Lindsay Alex- 
ander's funeral sermon, which contains an admirable analysis of 
his mind and character, will well repay perusal. 



EARNESTNESS. 275 

tact and of business in the management of their 
fellow-men ; men of heart, of feeling, and perseve- 
rance. Where is a large congregation, a flourish- 
ing, well-compacted church to be found ? — there 
is an earnest man. Where, in what country, or in 
what denomination, does one such man labour 
without considerable success? Where has the 
faithful, devoted, energetic preacher of evangelical 
truth, to borrow and use in a figurative sense the 
words of the Lord's forerunner, had to say, " I 
am the voice of one crying in the wilderness ?'^ 
Where do we find small congregations, dissatisfied 
or declining churches, and empty chapels ? Where 
do the ways of Zion mourn, and her gates languish, 
because none come to her solemn feasts? Certainly 
not where the ministers are as flames of fire. No 
matter where, or under what discouraging circum- 
stances, such a man, who is one of these sacred 
flames, may commence his labours, he will soon 
draw around him a deeply interested and attentive 
congregation : no matter what may be the deno- 
mination with which he may be associated, he will 
not only excite the indifference, or subdue the pre- 
judice by which he is surrounded, but will awaken 
interest and conciliate regard. Under the magic 
power of his devotedness, blessed as it will be by 
God the Spirit, the verdure and beauty of Spring 
will succeed to the gloom, desolation, and sterility 
of Winter^ and the wilderness and the solitary place 
t2 



276 MOTITES TO 

shall be glad for him^ and the desert rejoice and 
blossom as the rose. In some cases^ the change 
has been as sadden and as complete as in Russia, 
from hybemal frosts and snows to vernal flowers 
and fragrance: charches that seemed only the 
repositories of the dead^ and places for monuments 
and epitaphs^ have become crowded with living 
and hstening hearers of the joyful sound : and 
chapels once far too large for the last remains of 
a former congregation^ have been soon found too 
small for the new one that has filled up its place. 

It would be no unprofitable exercise for any one 
to look round upon some of our most successful 
ministers^ and after surveying the extent of their 
usefulness^ to say to himself^ '' How has that man 
done this ? What have been the means by which 
under God, he has accomplished so much V^ Un- 
happily there are a few, perhaps, who are so 
enamoured of what is literary, intellectual, or phi- 
losophical, that even in large ministerial success, 
they see little to admire or to covet, if this be not 
associated with scholarship and science. This is 
a bad state of mind, indicates a worse state of 
heart, and proves that the man who is the subject 
of it, has totally mistaken the end of the ministe- 
rial office. There are some of our most useful 
preachers, who are far more conscious of their 
literary and philosophical defects than these super- 
cilious scholars may imagine: and who would 



EARNESTNESS. 277 

purchase, if they could be obtained by money, at 
almost any cost^ the high attainments which their 
more limited education never enabled them to 
acquire ; but who at the same time would not give 
up their usefulness for all the literature of Greece 
and Rome, with all mathematics and philosophy 
in addition : and amidst their deficiencies in all 
that would give them weight and influence in the 
world of letters, feel adoringly thankful for all 
that other kind of weight and influence which 
they have acquired in the church. Their labours 
in the pulpit have gained them an acceptance 
which is far more surprising to themselves than it 
can be to others. Peradventure also, they may 
have launched on the sea of authorship, and have 
had a prosperous course, where many expected 
they must soon make shipwreck. None can be 
more sensible than themselves of their defects in 
composition, and often they have been ready to 
blame their presumption in taking up their pen, 
and to resolve to lay it down for ever, when per- 
haps some instance of usefulness has come to their 
knowledge, as if to reprove their vanity, wounded 
by a sense of their own deficiencies, and to make 
them thank God, and take courage. They knew 
their own department of literary action, and aimed 
at nothing higher than to be useful; willing to 
bear the sneer of literary pride, and endure the 
lash of critical severity, if this one only object of 



278 MOTIVES TO 

their ambition could be accomplished, the salvation 
of immortal souls, and the establishment of be- 
lievers in their holy faith. Such men there are 
among us, who owe not their success to a finished 
education, for it was their misfortune not to enjoy 
this precious advantage to the same extent to 
which it is now carried ; nor to high scholarship, 
to which they make no pretensions, but to an 
intense desire to be useful, and to something of 
earnestness in carrying out the desires of their 
heart; and in addition to the direct usefulness 
they have accomplished by their own labours, 
they may be abundantly useful in another way, by 
showing that where large literary acquisitions can- 
not be obtained, still simple earnestness without 
them, may be blessed of God, for accomplishing 
in no inconsiderable extent the great ends of the 
Christian ministry. 

It has been said, in reference to secular matters, 
that a man who has decision of character enough 
to make up his mind to the determination to be 
rich ; who has a good share of talents to uphold 
his resolution ; and a rigid system of self-denying 
economy, will ordinarily succeed : and observation 
seems to a considerable extent to support the 
remark. With far greater certainty may it be 
said, that he who enters upon his ministry with 
an intense zeal for God ; an ardent passion for the 
salvation of souls ; a well sustained, deep piety ; 



EARNESTNESS. 279 

a tolerable share of talents and acquirement ; and 
a fixed purpose in humble dependance upon God's 
grace, to be a useful minister of Christ, will not 
fail of his end. The failure of such a man would 
be a new thing in the earth. We know of no 
such case, and we may not expect to know it. In 
deaUng with sinners and calling them to repent- 
ance, we say to each, he may be saved if he will : 
not intending by such an expression that he can 
be saved without the Spirit of God ; but that he 
may secure that Divine power if he have faith to 
receive it : so we may almost venture to say to 
every minister of Christ, it is his own fault if he 
is not useful ; intending by such an assertion, that 
as the gospel he preaches is God's own truth ; as 
preaching is his own institute ; as the minister is 
his own servant ; and as to all this, He has added 
the promise of his grace, it would seem as if in the 
case of entire or extensive failure, the minister has 
himself only to blame. 

But we may look at the power of earnestness, as 
seen not only in the cause of truth, but of error. 
It has often served a bad cause as well as a good 
one. Islamism owes its existence and its wide 
dominion to this quality in its extraordinary 
founder. Mohammed exhibits one of the most 
wonderful instances of this quality the world ever 
witnessed ; and with what dreadful results was it 
followed in his case ! We may say the sam^ of 



280 MOTIVES TO 

Popery: — that stupendous fabric of delusion, 
which throws its dark and chilling shadow over 
so large a portion of Christendom, owes its erec-: 
tion and its continuance to the intense devotedness 
with which it has inspired its votaries : it is this 
that upholds a system constantly at war against 
the dictates of reason, the doctrines of revelation, 
and the dearest rights and liberties of humanity. 
It is the mysterious and indomitable earnestness 
of the priesthood, which has resisted the attacks of 
logic, rhetoric, and piety ; of divines, philosophers, 
and statesmen ; of wit, humour, and ridicule ; and 
which in this age of learning and science, com- 
merce and liberty, not only enables it to maintain 
its ground, but to advance and make conquests. 
The Church of Rome, which would in the hands 
of a lukewarm priesthood fall by the weight of its 
own absurdity, or be crushed by the hands of its 
constant assailants, is still strong in the hearts of 
its members : each of whom, from the Pope down, 
through all its civil and ecclesiastical gradations, 
to the most insignificant member, is a type of 
concentrated and intensely glowing zeal. 

The pages of ecclesiastical history furnish us with 
some extraordinary instances of the power of the 
pulpit, as exhibited in the sermons of some Popish 
preachers. I do not now refer to the court of 
Louis the Fourteenth, which, with that grand and 
licentious monarch at its head, was subdued into 



EARNESTNESS. 281 

a transient frame and season of devoutness by the 
sermons of Massillon^ but to the preaching of far 
inferior and less known orators ; and to effects less 
courtly, but not less striking. When Connecte, 
an Italian, preached, the ladies committed their 
gay dresses by hundreds to the flames. When 
Narni taught the populace in Lent, from the 
pulpits of Rome, half the city went from his 
sermons, crying along the streets, "Lord have 
mercy upon uSy Christ have mercy upon us;'' so that 
in only one passion week, two thousand crowns' 
worth of ropes were sold to make scourges with ; 
and when he preached before the Pope, to cardi- 
nals and bishops, and painted the crime of non- 
residence in its own colours, he frightened thirty 
or forty bishops who heard him instantly to their 
own dioceses. In the pulpit at Salamanca, he 
induced eight hundred students to quit all worldly 
prospects of honour, riches, and pleasure, and to 
become penitents in divers monasteries. Some of 
this class were martyrs too. Here then was the 
power of earnestness ; but being given in this case 
to the cause of error, being directed rather to the 
imagination than to the heart, and intended to 
correct mere ceremonial irregularities, rather than 
to lead to repentance towards God, and faith in 
our Lord Jesus Christ, we are not surprised that 
the storm of passion soon subsided; that Narni 
himself was so disgusted with his office, that he 



282 MOTIVCS TO 

renounced preaching and shut himself up in his 
cell^ to mourn over his irreclaimable contempora- 
ries ; for bishops went back to courts and rope- 
makers lay idle again. This striking fact is replete 
with instruction^ not only as showing the power of 
the pulpit^ but at the same time the essentia 
feebleness of that religion which does not aim at 
the renovation of the hearty and the transient 
nature of that eflFect which is produced by mere 
rhetoric, unaccompanied by a sober exhibition of 
the truth to enlighten the judgment, to warm the 
affections, and to awaken the conscience. 

But it is not only on this grand scale that we 
see the power and success of an ardent zeal, even 
in a bad cause : for there is no system of opinions, 
nor any course of religious practice, however re- 
mote, not only from the truth of revelation, but 
from the dictates of common sense, and even the 
decorum of society, but what if preached and pro- 
pagated by men of intense ardour, will gain for 
awhile some disciples to believe it, and even some 
apostles to propagate it. If men are really in 
earnest in blowing bubbles, some will be found to 
look at, to admire, and to follow their airy and 
unsubstantial balloons. It has been already said 
that earnestness is contagious: a man in this state 
of mind and action is sure to draw some others 
under the influence of his own example. If this 
is the case with a bad cause, how much more may 



EARNESTNESS. 283 

we expect it to be so in a good one. Every thing 
then combines to prove that our want of success 
must be traced up rather to our neglect of the 
right means to obtain it, than to any backward- 
ness on the part of God to give his blessing to our 
own intelligent, judicious, and earnest exertions. 

Surely, surely, there must be, I repeat, a latent 
power in the evangeUcal pulpit, viewed as a moral 
and well adapted means of impression, which we 
have not, except in such cases as that of Whitfield 
and a few others, studied, discovered, and applied. 
Surely if we had more intense piety, more strong 
faith, more knowledge of the human heart, more 
anxiety to obtain an impressive elocution, more 
ardent longings after the conversion of sinners, 
we could and should by God's grace move and 
command the masses. There is, there must be, 
neglected power somewhere ! 

VII. The state of our denominations demands 
immediate and devoted attention to the subject. 

In speaking of our own denomination, we 
fiud in its general condition much cause for 
thankfulness and congratulation. In the number 
of our churches and the competency of a very 
large number of their pastors ; in our colleges and 
schools; in our missionary and other organisa- 
tions ; in our periodical and other religious litera- 
ture ; in our pubUc spirit and liberality — we see 
signs of prosperity, and tokens for good : and if 



2i84 MOTIVES TO 

we are true to ourselves and to our cause, we have 
nothing to fear. Our opponents cannot do us so 
much harm as we may do to ourselves. With a 
system of doctrine which we believe is taken from 
the New Testament, and a system of poUty which 
in all its general principles is derived from the 
same source, we may not only stand our ground, 
but advance, if we will present the former in all 
its fulness, and will administer the latter with 
discretion and charity. Every thing, under God^s 
blessing, depends upon our ministry. This, which 
is important to every denomination, is especially 
80 to ours. We go forth not only unsupported 
by the wealth and the power of the EstabUshed 
Church, but without the aid of that elaborately 
organised combination which is to be found in 
some sections that separate from it. Our minis- 
ters, so to speak, do not contend in regiments and 
in rank and file, but single-handed, and should 
therefore be all picked men, each possessed of 
courage and of skill. Let us only take care to 
send none but such into the field, and we may 
hope for a still more abundant measure of prospe- 
rity than we at present enjoy. 

There is room enough for all denominations in 
the vast wilderness of our neglected and unchris- 
tianised population, and we have no need to look 
at each other's labours with jealousy and envy. 
Satan is ruining souls faster than all of us united 



^ 



EARNESTNESS. 285 

can save them. It is a mark of deep malignity 
of heart, and a proof that it is the distempered 
zeal of bigotry that moves us, and not a pure love 
to God and souls, when we see with uneasiness 
the success of other denominations of evangelical 
Christians, and rejoice over their failure. To seize 
with avidity any acknowledgments of, and lamen- 
tations over, a want of usefulness, and then tearing 
them from their connexion and exaggerating their 
statements, to hold them up exultingly to the 
world, and tauntingly to the denomination, from 
which in frankness and in sorrow they have come, 
may suit well with the strategy of polemical war- 
fare, and serve the cause of a party, but ill accords 
with the spirit of divine charity, and cannot pro- 
mote the cause of our common Christianity. In 
how many places of worship connected with the 
Establishment, even where the gospel is preached, 
but preached with feebleness, do we find small 
congregations, and few souls converted to God. 
Do we rejoice over this ? On the contrary, it is 
for a grief and a lamentation. And is there a 
heart so envenomed with the gall of bigotry, as to 
rejoice in the confession that is now made, that 
many of owr congregations are withering away 
under the effete ministrations of incompetent men? 
Such a withering is indeed going on in many 
])laces. The fact cannot be concealed, it is noto- 
rious. We have been incautious in the admission, 



286 MOTIVES TO 

not of bad meD^ for few of these ever find their 
way into our pulpits ; not of heretical men, for we 
take care not to receive such ; but of incompetent 
men : not always incompetent in intellect, but in 
talents for public speaking and the active duties 
of the pastorate. From this cause, combined with 
the increased energy and activity of the Church 
of England, our congregations are diminishing in 
some places, though multiplying and increasing 
in others. With the freedom of action we possess, 
unrestricted by parochial limits and ecclesiastical 
laws ; with the world all before us, and Providence 
our guide ; with a good feeling towards us on the 
part of the middle and lower classes, we have 
every ground to hope for success, if we can obtain 
an adequate number of energetic and earnest 
preachers ; but we have not taken sufficient care 
to find out and educate the right sort of men, and 
in some places are certainly losing ground. Con- 
siderable towns might be mentioned where con- 
gregations once numerous and flourishing, are 
reduced down to mere skeletons, under the dull 
and deadening influence of feeble men, and yet 
perhaps good men too. It is more easy to settle 
an incompetent minister over a church than to 
remove him. It is true we have advantages for 
8uch removal not possessed by the Church of Eng- 
land. The pastorate is not in our churches a free- 
hold; yet it must be confessed that even with us. 



EARNESTNESS. 287 

the difficulty of getting rid of a pastor^ except for 
immorality or heresy, and only on the ground of 
inefficiency^ is not small. That a minister should 
wish to stay when he has preached away nearly 
all his congregation, breeds a suspicion of the 
purity of his motives, and is a reflection upon the 
integrity of his character. To reduce a congrega- 
tion and scatter a church, first by inefficiency, 
and then by obstinacy in retaining his post in 
opposition to the wishes of his flock, and the 
advice of his friends, is a serious matter to account 
for to God. Some such men talk of waiting for 
the leadings of Providence. One is at a loss to 
find out what rule of interpretation for ascertain- 
ing the will of God they have adopted : to every 
body else but themselves, deserted pews and a 
dissatisfied as well as a reduced church, are a suf- 
ficient indication of the leadings of Providence, for 
their removal. In such a case one should suppose 
there needed no voice from heaven to say to the 
minister, " Arise, and go hence ;" nor any finger 
to come forth, and in flaming characters write 
^' Ichabod^' on the walls. It is sometimes said that 
the people must sufier the consequences of a hasty 
choice: and so far as they are concerned, they 
deserve it ; but then they sufi*er not alone, for the 
denomination in its strength, and character, and 
efficiency, suffers with them. The work of conver- 
sion, not only in our own denomination, but in the 



288 MOTIVES TO EARNESTNESS. 

Church of England^ and among the Methodists, 
goes on but slowly, and the spirituality of the 
great bulk of professors is too low. This is con- 
fessed and lamented by the Evangelical clergy, 
and by the Wesleyan ministers, as well as by our- 
selves. The Spirit's influence seems in some way 
and from some cause obstructed : and in the 
absence of this, our denomination is more likely 
to feel and manifest the visible results of it than 
almost any other ; and such a consideration should 
lead us to more serious thoughtfulness and earnest 
prayer for a revived and intensely devoted ministry. 



CHAPTER X. 

MEANS TO BE USED FOR OBTAINING AN 
EARNEST MINISTRY. 

This is a most important part of our subject : 
for however desirable the blessing may be, yet if 
it cannot be obtained, or if there are no means by 
which we can obtain it, the discussion and con- 
templation of it are quite useless, and even worse, 
being calculated only to excite a fruitless with, or 
what is most injurious of all> a disposition to 
neglect the means we have, in the hopeless desire 
after what vie have not. But we are not to enter- 
tain so desponding a view. Such men there have 
been, and blessed be God, such men there are, 
and that in no small number, in every section of 
the Christian church ; men labouring with intelli- 
gence, zeal, and success, both in the metropolis 
and in the provinces ; men of whom their age 
need not be ashamed, and over whom any age 
would have rejoiced. Still there are too many of 
an opposite character ; far too many to render the 
question impertinent and out of season, ''How 
shall such a ministry be obtained V 

I. It is imperative first of all to have the truth 
deeply engraven upon all hearts^ that the church 
u 



290 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

is the coTiservator of the Christian ministry, and 
that it is her business^ and almost her first and 
most important business, to see that she discharge 
well her duty in this momentous affair. She has 
not only to provide for her own edification at the 
present time, but also to secure by all possible 
vigilance and care, the administrative transmission 
of our holy religion through every age, pure, and 
undefiled, and unimpaired in its capacity to confer 
essential and eternal benefits upon the children oS 
men. But then it is obvious that for such a func- 
tion the church must be regarded as a purely spi- 
ritual body. And it should be deemed a question 
of no small moment, bearing as it does upon this 
controversy about church government, what system 
of polity has the most direct tendency and the 
greatest power to call out, to secure, and to perpe- 
tuate an evangelical and effective ministry. An 
ecclesiastical system which of itself has no effectual 
provision for this cannot surely be of Divine origin, 
and that of which the tendency to this is moat 
obvious and direct, is most in accordance with the 
word of God. A church without such a conser- 
vative principle cannot be the church of the New 
Testament, much less that which includes various 
and ever active influences against it. Nothing 
but a spiritual church can provide a spiritual 
ministry, and whatever spiritual ministry a worldly 
church may have^ cannot be so much the result of 



AN EARNEST MINISTBT. 291 

ihe system itself^ as of something extraueous to it. 
Even in spiritual churches, if discipline be relaxed, 
and worldly-minded persons be admitted, the con- 
servative principle, which in fact consists of the 
vital piety of the members, is impaired ; and if at 
the same time there be neglect of discipline, it 
will be altogether lost, and heretical men come in 
to fill the places of those who were the preachers 
of the truth as it is in Jesus. It is well, therefore^ 
for all our churches to bear in constant recollection, 
this their high and sacred function as conservators 
of an evangelical ministry ; and to maintain the 
power of vital godliness, and the exercise of a 
salutary discipline, as that in which this power of 
conservation resides. Let the churches consider 
their high, their glorious commission; let them 
remember they must be of such character, and 
such order, that Christian truth, as to its essential 
doctrines and holy practice, and at the same time 
the calUng out and supporting such men to uphold 
and preach it, may be safely trusted to their vigi- 
lance and care. But let them forget this and cor- 
rupt their fellowship by the admission of worldly- 
minded professors, 'Uhe mounds are gone, the 
fence is broken up, and wolves may enter in, not 
sparing the flock.^' Preserve this spiritual condi- 
tion of the church, and it is what it was intended 
it should be — an undying torch, which while it is 
the light of the present age, shall safely light suc- 
u2 



292 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

cessive ages along the only way which leads to 
happiness and heaven/' 

II. Let the subject be thoroughly considered^ and 
universally admitted, that this is the ministry we 
want, and must have. In an age like the present^ 
when so much is said about knowledge^ and such 
high value is attached to it, there is a danger of 
our being seduced from every other qualification, 
and taken up with this. The establishment of the 
London University, and the incorporation of our 
Colleges with it, have given access for our students 
to the fount of academic degrees and honours; 
and there is some danger in the new condition of 
our literary Institutions, lest our young men 
should have their minds in some measure drawn 
away from much more important matters, by the 
hope of having their names graced by a Bachelor's 
or a Master's degree. It is a foolish clamour 
that has been raised against all attention to such 
matters, and it is a vain and barbarous precaution 
that would fortify the ministerial devotedness of 
our students, by restraining tliem altogether from 
such scholastic distinctions. The studies necessary 
to enable them to attain the object of their ambi- 
tion, are a part of their professional education; 
while the vanity likely ro be engendered by success 
will soon be annihilated by the commonness of the 
acquisition. Pride and vanity are founded on 
conscious distinction, and when these University 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 293 

degrees are so common that almost all ministers 
possess them^ they will no longer be a snare to 
the humility of their possessors. Besides^ like 
every other object of human desire, when once 
they are possessed, much of the charm that dazzled 
the eye of hope has vanished. Henry Martyn, 
when he came from the senate-house at Cambridge, 
where he had been declared Senior Wrangler for 
his year, and had thus won the richest prize the 
University had to confer, was struck with the 
vanity of human wishes, and expressed his sur- 
prise at the comparative worthlessness of the 
bauble he had gained, and the shadow he had 
grasped. No, it is not by closing the door against 
such distinctions that we can hope to raise the 
tone of devotedness in our ministry, but by foster- 
ing in the minds of our young men at College, 
and equally in the minds of our congregations, 
and ministers in general, the conviction that ear- 
nestness is just that one thing, to which all other 
things must be, and can be, made subservient, 
and without which all other things are as nothing, 
whatever else education can impart. 

Our congregations need perhaps a Uttle instruc- 
tion on this subject. I am afraid the taste is not 
quite so pure, correct, and elevated on this matter, 
as it should be. There is, it is true, a demand, 
and it is well there is, for a vivacious and animated 
manner of preaching, and provided theire be what 



294 MEANS TO OBTAI^r 

is intellectual, there is a decided preference for 
what is evangelical in association with it; but 
there is reason to fear that in some cases a small 
modicum of evangelical truth would do, provided 
there was an abundance of talent. Earnestness is 
demanded, but with some, it is rather the earnest- 
ness of the head, than of the heart ; the laboured 
and eloquent eflfusion of the scholar, the philoso- 
pher, or the poet, rather than the gush of hallowed 
feeling of him who watcheth for souls, as one that 
must give account. Dulness, however learned or 
profound, will not do, but the heartless declama- 
tions of the pulpit orator will do for some, though 
it have little tendency to do any thing more than 
])]ease the intellect or captivate the imagination. 
There is an idolatry of talent in this day which 
runs through society ; and this man-worship has 
crept also into the church, and corrupted its 
members. It is painful to perceive how far this 
is carried in many circles, and to see what homage 
is paid, what incense is burnt, to some popular 
favourites. It is not religion or holiness that is 
thus elevated, but genius and knowledge: it is 
not moral beauty, but intellectual strength, that 
is lauded to the skies : the loftiest models of 
human goodness receive but few devotees and 
scanty offerings at their shrine, compared with 
the gods of the understanding. It is very evident 
that in many cases the gospel is loved, if loved at 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 295 

all^ for the sake of the talent with which it is 
preached^ and not the talent for the sake of the 
gospel. Even the village tyro begins to talk about 
intellectual preachers. This however is admoni- 
tory, and shows that imbecility, however holy, 
will not do, even in rural districts, in these days. 
There can be no surer mark of a moral apostacy, 
a lapse from man's primaeval innocence, when he 
came perfect from the hands of his Maker, bearing 
the moral image of his Creator, than this disposi- 
tion to exalt genius above piety. What an inver- 
sion is this of the right order of things, since it 
must be allowed that man's intellectual nature is 
inferior and subordinate to his moral being. It 
is by the latter that he is removed to the greatest 
distance from the brute creation, is placed in most 
direct opposition to fallen spirits, makes his near- 
est approach to the angels of God, and bears the 
most correct resemblance to the Holy and Eternal 
One. The God of the Bible is not merely a Divine 
Intellect, though it be true that his understanding 
is infinite ; nor is Omniscience his only attribute, 
though this is one of his glorious perfections — but 
God is Love ; and when the seraphim select for 
the subject of their anthem that view of his nature 
which calls forth their loftiest praise, they contem- 
plate him as the Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God 
Almighty. Infinite goodness, and not merely 
infinite greatness, is the Deity we are called by 



296 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

the inspired writers to worship^ and all the most 
sublime speculations or descriptions of God that 
are not founded upon true goodness, are but the 
mere inventions of men^s minds, and no true 
copies of God's representations of his own nature. 
The prevailing disposition, therefore, to do such 
homage to talent, rather than to moral excellence, 
is only another species of idolatry that exists in 
our world, more refined and subtle than the wor- 
ship of stocks and stones, but still scarcely less 
guilty. 

That some respect must be paid to talent, even 
in the ministry of the word, is admitted ; such a 
disposition is inseparable from human nature, and 
is a part of the design of God in creating our race, 
and forming man with varied powers of the under- 
standing : a fine intellect is to be admired as well 
as an elegant form or a beautiful flower ; and so 
much the more, as that which is mental is supe- 
rior to that which is corporeal. But when the 
Christian public shall be so enamoured of talent, 
as to admire it more than the message which it is 
employed to set forth ; when no preacher can be 
heard with pleasure or endurance, however sound 
his doctrine, or clear his statements, or impressive 
his manner, or earnest his address, unless his 
discourse is radiant with the light of genius, or 
fragrant with the flowers of rhetoric ; when truth 
itself is onpalateable unless it be sweetened with- 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 297 

the honey of human eloquence, and even error 
90 sweetened, can be swallowed for the sake of 
the luscious accompaniment ; when the hearer of 
a sermon can turn from it with disgust, because 
it fails to regale his fancy by the brilliancy of its 
images, or to lull his ear by the smoothness and 
harmony of its periods ; when this is the state of 
the pubhc taste, and it is to be feared that to a 
great extent it is the state of it now ; surely, it is 
time to call the attention of our congregations to 
something higher and better. 

No one who is attentive to the features of the 
age, can doubt that there ia much now going on 
which has an obvious tendency, though of course 
not a design^ to corrupt in some degree the simpli- 
city of the public taste with reference to preachers 
and their sermons. The pulpit has some reason to 
be jealous of the platform, and the sermon of the 
speech. If the modem practice of endless speech- 
ifying had only done something to break down the 
stiffness and formality of sermonic speaking, and 
to introduce a more easy, fluent, and energetic 
method of address on the part of the preacher, and 
a corresponding taste for a more vivacious method 
of instruction on the part of the people, it would 
have conferred a substantial benefit ; but with this 
has come perhaps the opposite evil of making the 
preacher too oratorical, and the people too fasti- 
dious ; and of destroying somewhat of the solem- 



298 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

nity and spirituality of both. No doubt some 
degree of earnestness will come in with this, but 
it may be it is the earnestness which is anxious to 
please^ rather than that which is desirous to con- 
vert ; which aims to gratify the fancy rather than 
to save the soul. 

It is in vain then to hope for such a min- 
istry as that which it is the object of this work 
to describe and to recommend, till our congrega- 
tions are brought to see its vast importance, and 
to demand that it shall be given them. In this 
case, as in every other, both the demand will bring 
the supply, as well as the supply create the demand. 
When the churches shall be brought up to that 
state of piety, that deep solicitude about salvation, 
that intenseness of pursuit of eternal life, which 
shall make them anxious to gain ministers who will 
aid them in this momentous business ; and when 
they shall say to the tutors and committees of our 
colleges, "You must not only send us learned men, 
but earnest men,^^ then will the minds of our 
excellent professors be still more fixed on the most 
essential qualifications of the Christian ministry^ 
and still more anxiously endeavour to meet this 
demand. And when our destitute congregations 
shall let it be distinctly known that it is not merely 
a Master of Arts, nor a merely eloquent speaker, nor 
even a good divine that they want : but one who 
shall watch for their souls, and feed the flock of 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 299 

God, then the attention of our young ministers 
will be still more turned upon the end of their 
ministry, and the necessary qualifications for the 
just discharge of its functions. Let the church 
therefore only be rightly instructed on this subject, 
and fix properly its standard ; let it be brought up 
to this conviction, that nothing less and nothing 
else than such men as are intently fixed upon 
saving souls, will be likely to be useful ; and such 
men will come at its bidding ; especially if — 

III. There be much earnest prayer presented to 
God for such a blessing. It must never be for- 
gotten that ministers are called, qualified, and 
blessed, by the Lord, the Spirit. Hence the pro- 
mise of God to the Jews, "I will give you pastors 
according to mine own heart ; which shall feed you 
with knowledge and with understanding.^' And 
hence also the language of the apostle, " He gave 
some pastors and teachers ; for the perfecting of 
the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the 
edifying of the body of Christ.'^ It was a special 
injunction of Christ to his disciples, and intended 
to apply to his people in every age, to pray to the 
Lord of the harvest to send forth labourers into 
the field. From these passages, as well as from 
the general principle that every good gift is from 
the Lord, we learn that a faithful ministry is one 
of God's gifts, and a precious one it is ; and were 
the church in a high spiritual state, this would 



300 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

constitute one of its chief subjects of prayer. 
Perhaps we are not brought to feel with sufficient 
depth of conviction our dependance upon God for 
this great blessing, for there is little doubt that 
the church's possessions and the church's prayers 
would bear in this particular some tolerable pro- 
portion to each other. W^ cannot conceive of 
any case in which the promise, ^^ Ask, and ye shall 
receive/' would be so abundantly fulfilled, as in 
reference to this. It has not been enough consi- 
dered what kind of men are wanted at all times, 
and especially in these, for the ministry of recon- 
ciliation ; that in fact we need men formed exactly 
and in all respects, except inspiration and the 
power to work miracles, upon the apostolical 
model. Much the same work is now to be done 
as was done by them, and we must have men as 
full of the power of God, and the graces of the 
Holy Spirit, to do it. Let it be seen what ministers 
have to contend with in this day of their vocation ; 
not indeed the spirit of persecution, not sanguinary 
laws, not the amphitheatre, the axe, or the stake ; 
but obstacles almost as formidable as these things, 
and in some respects more so; for such impedi- 
ments, if they lessened the number of professors, 
raised those that stood firm into the devotion of 
seraphs, the courage of heroes, and the constancy 
of martyrs ; — but our obstacles are the emascula- 
ting influence of ease and prosperity ; the insidious 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 301 

snares of wealthy knowledge^ and fashion; the 
engrossing power of trade^ politics^ and secular 
ambition; — and then let any one consider what 
kind of preachers and pastors we want for such an 
age. If we had nothing more to do^ and were 
contented to do this and no more, than to keep 
religion up to the low level which it now maintains, 
then ministers of common stamp might suffice; but 
to keep in check all the enemies of vital godliness 
which threaten the devastation of the church ; to 
resist by the potency of personal example and the 
energy of the pulpit, the worldly spirit which 
threatens to eat out the very core of vital piety ; 
to keep up the evangelising zeal which is awakened, 
and to blend with it a sanctity and a spirituality 
which shall make it as effective as it is busy ; to 
do battle with all the forms of error by which our 
common faith is likely to be assailed ; and to do 
this not only by the force of intellect, but by 
being strong in the Lord, and in the power of 
his might — to achieve this we want men of the 
same spirit as those who under the direct com- 
mission of Christ, preached the word of salvation, 
with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. 
Have we many such men in the field ? If not, 
why not ? Must not the church of God blame 
herself, for has she sought such men by all the 
wrestling power of believing prayer ? Had she 
felt the need of such men, and had lifted up not 



302 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

her hands nor her voice merely, but all the ener- 
gies of her renewed nature^ in beseeching snppli- 
cations to Him who is ascended to bestow this very 
gift^ she would have obtained all she asked or 
wanted. Let the church only set her heart upon 
such a blessing as this^ let her faith be equal to 
the expectation of it^ and her prayer be as her 
faith^ and she will have it. And why should she 
not expect it ? What is there in the nature of the 
boon that forbids her to look for it? Does it 
contradict a single promise^ or contravene a single 
arrangement of her Divine Head ? Does it com»- 
promise his honour^ or require his miraculous 
interposition ? Does it involve any stepping out 
of his ordinary course of action? Why then 
should it be thought incredible that she should 
obtain a more^ a far more devoted and successful 
ministry than she now possesses? Does the 
gospel of God's grace, either at home or abroad, 
prevail as could be wished and might be expected? 
Does the work of conversion go forward, and 
Christ^s kingdom make those encroachments on 
the empire of darkness which might be looked 
for ? Who will venture to answer in the aiOSrma- 
tive ? Whose love to Christ and souls beats with 
so feeble a pulsation as to be satisfied with what 
is doing, and to be contented that things should 
go on as they do ? Is there nothing to be done, 
no way to accelerate the work of redeeming 



AN EARNEST MINI8TBT. 303 

mercy, no method to pour the principles of spirit- 
ual fertility more rapidly and more diffusively 
through the moral wilderness of our barren world ? 
Yes — one way is yet open, and that is for Zion to 
awake and bestir herself, and lay hold of God's 
strength, saying, " Send us more labourers into 
the field." We have forgotten to pray for ministers 
of a right stamp. The subject has never occupied 
the place in our private, family, and social devo- 
tions, which its importance demands. It has 
been only occasionally and coldly alluded to, but 
has not been lifted up to heaven with all the im- 
portunity of men who felt that they could not do 
without it. 

"Truly if ever there was a period when the whole 
Christian world should be down upon their faces before 
the throne of mcrcy^ imploring with all the importunity^ 
and boldness, and perseverance of faith, a race of ministers, 
each full of the Holy Ghost, as was Barnabas or Paul, 
that period is passing over us. Not from one place or 
another, but from all quarters of the earth, testimony 
multiplies daily that amidst the greatest possible facilities 
for converting the world, a greatly increased and more 
devoted ministry is indispensable. This testimony comes 
to us, not indeed as the Macedonian cry came to the 
apostle in a supernatural vision ; but in a manner not less 
affecting or decisive as to its purport. It is a real sound 
which flies round the land and rings in our ears all the 
day long ; ' Send us preachers,' is the universal, ceaseless 
demand, at home and abroad. It comes from more than 
a thousand of our destitute churches ; it comes from the 



304 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

cities, from the wilderness, from the islands, from Che 
uttermost parts of the sea, from tracts until lately un- 
known to civilized man. This cry which sounds so loudly 
and so complainingly in our ears, should by general 
consent be turned into prayer and sent up to heaven. 
And shall we longer forbear to do this ? Shall we stand 
and hear that unusual cry and feel no inclination to direct 
it to the ear of Him from whom help alone can come ? Is 
it not a mysterious species of infatuation to forbear to lift 
up our cry to the Lord of the harvest? Why do we not 
if this be the case, abjure the very religion of Jesus, and 
abandon ourselves, as well as the heathen, and the whole 
race of man, to despair? Why should not a reform 
forthwith commence, and the place of prayer have more 
attractions than the eloquence of any mortal, or any 
angel's tongue? Why then will not every true Christian 
make a covenant with himself to change his life in this 
particular, and from henceforth make it one of his chief 
subjects of wrestling supphcation, that God would give us 
a more faithful, earnest, and laborious ministry ? Why 
will we not call to mind how Abraham, and Moses, and 
Elias, and Daniel, and Paul, and above all how the blessed 
Jesus laboured in prayer, and resolve in God's strength 
to pray in the same manner ? Oh, what an amount of 
beneficent power would such prayers exert upon the eternal 
destinies of our world ! What wonders of grace would be 
witnessed in our churches, what accessions would l)e 
made to the sacred ministry, what an impulse would be 
given to the cause of missions, what brightness would be 
shed on all the prospects of the church ?"* 

I echo these beautiful sentiments^ and earnestly 

* ''Religion of the Bible.'' Select Discourses, by Dr. 
Skinner, of New York. 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 305*. 

implore for them the attention they demand. 
They touch us at the right point, and they speak 
to us at the proper season. We have multiphed 
and extended^ of late^ our collegiate institutions, 
and greatly improved our systems of ministerial 
education. We can speak of colleges whose archi- 
tecture* would not disgrace either Cambridge or 
Oxford, and of professors whose attainments in 
Biblical hterature would not be surpassed by many 
of the teachers in our national seats of learning ; 
but as if to teach us our dependance upon (rod, 
few of them are at the present moment filled with 
students, and for those who are coming forth from 
them, how great is our anxiety lest they should 
not prove such eminent and earnest men as wo 
could wish to see them. The same remark will 
apply to the evangelical men of the Church of 
England, and of all other denominations. I would 
be the last man to speak Hghtly of education, but 
I would be the first to caution the church of Christ 
against the sin and the folly of making this our 
supreme dependance. Tutors can give Latin, 
Greek, and philosophy, but God alone can bestow 

* The age is past when the taunt conld with truth be thrown 
at Dissenters, tliat theirs is the religion of bams ; and if it were 
not, this would be no reproach to those whose Lord was born in 
a stable, and cradled in a manger. Their danger lies perhaps 
more in going to the opposite extreme of coveting and exhibiting 
the aid of tasteful architecture. Splendid men, both as pastors 
and preachers, will do more for us than splendid buildingsr— not 



306 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

those physical and spiritual gifts which constitute 
the chief qualifications for the work of the ministry* 
It is a fact which must have struck every attentive 
observer, that of those who are employed in the 
ministry of the word, whether in the Established, 
Church, or out of it, comparatively few are very, 
eminent. The brightest flowers of humanity are 
not in great numbers laid upon the altar of the 
Lord. Many of those who are engaged are of a 
common order of intellect, while as in the firma- 
ment of heaven, only here and there a star of 
unusual brilliancy meets the eye and attracts the 
attention by its magnitude and brightness. Let 
it not be said that God chooses the weak things 
of the world to confound the mighty. This apper- 
tained to apostles, who, as they were clothed with 
the power of God by their gifts and miracles, could 
dispense with all other potency; but this is not 
the case with us, who without appropriate qualifi- 
cations of native talent and education, can scarcely 
expect the blessing of God. 

IV. A revived state of the Church would produce 
a ministry such as that which has been described 
in the foregoing pages. In the natural order of 

that these are incompatible with each other ; bnt then they by 
jio means imply each other. Butler, the author of ** The 
Analogy/' and Jones, the author of the most learned work on 
the Canon, both studied within the ocre-coloured, old-fashioned 
walls of Tewkesbury College : and how many dolts have gone 
forth from our most magnificent Dissenting buildings. 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 307 

things it would seem tliat the church cannot be 
revived without a previous revival of the ministry ; 
and yet^ as the ministry are the children of the 
church, they can hardly be expected to rise above 
the level of the community out of which they 
spring. There is a kind of average piety of almost 
every age and every church, and our yoimg men 
rarely come with more than this to our colleges : 
and therefore, although we do not dispute the fact 
that little expectation can be indulged of an in- 
creased piety in the churches, without an augmen- 
tation of ministerial devotedness, yet at the same 
time, the latter can almost as little be looked for, 
without the former. Revivals have sometimes 
began with the people, who have drawn the min- 
istry up to their own level. A lively church could 
not long endure a dull and lukewarm pastor, who, 
if he partook not of the prevaiUng excitement, 
would feel himself soon obliged to leave his situa- 
tion. If, therefore, the ministry cannot revive 
themselves and each other, it were unspeakable 
mercy if they should receive an impulse from the 
people. 

As we have already seen, there are many things 
in the present age which are of a most auspicious 
character, and which give it a lofty pre-eminence 
above some others that have preceded it. Who 
can witness its busy activity, its generous liberality, 
its exhaustless ingenuity for the conversion of the 
x2 



308 MEANS TO OBTAIN , 

worlds without admiration and gratitude : but 
these are not all the elements of true piety^ and it 
may be apprehended that in innumerable cases, 
these things are only the substitutes for the essen- 
tial work of regeneration and sanctification. It 
may be feared that Satan is taking advantage of 
these matters to blind the judgment^ and to delude 
the souls of many. Men of keen observation^ who 
can penetrate the surface^ and see what lies below^ 
are of opinion that underneath this external cover- 
ing of Uberality and zeal^ there lies a want of vital 
godliness; that much of what we see in our mul« 
tiplied public institutions is but as the flowera 
which bloom in a shallow and sandy soil. They 
who are best acquainted with the state of our 
churches, express a doubt whether there is not a 
deplorable lack of that separation from the world 
in its spirit and customs, which the Christian 
profession implies. While this is the case^ the 
ministers who come out from such a state of 
things are likely to rise no higher than their 
source. Hence does it become our churches to 
consider the urgent necessity of their being ele- 
vated to a higher tone of piety, and of joining 
heartily in any efforts that are made to bring about 
BO desirable a state of things. Even those who 
have themselves drank deepest into the spirit of 
the world, will sometimes lament the want of 
intenseness and spirituality on the part of th^iir 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 309 

ministers : but do they not remember that their own 
worldly-mindedness is exerting an influence over 
their pastor, and producing that very state of mind 
in him which is the subject of their remark and cen- 
sure ? He was perhaps a more holy and heavenly 
man, when young and flexible he came to them 
from college, and was at first surprised and grieved 
to witness the prevalence of lukewarmness among 
them; but after striving, in vain, to produce a 
better state of things among the members of his 
church, he was gradually drawn down to that low 
level from which he found it impracticable to raise 
them. Thus while we admit there is little hope of 
a revived church which does not rest on the pre- 
vious revival of the ministry, we are tempted almost 
to argue in a circle, and to say there is little hope 
of the revival of the ministry which does not rest 
on the previous revival of the church. 

Let us then, both ministers and churches, set 
about in good earnest the revival of religion. We 
act and re-act upon each other. We help or hin- 
der one another. We both want more religion ; 
let the ministry seek it for the sake of the people, 
and the people for the sake of the ministry. If 
the ministers will not lead the people, let the 
people lead the ministers. If the blessing cannot 
descend from the pulpit to the pew, let it ascend 
from the pew to the pulpit. Let the church of the 
living God arise^ put on her robe of righteoaaneas. 



310 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

her garment of salvation^ shake off the dust from 
her apparel^ and shine forth in the beauties of 
holiness. We want a better church to make a 
better world; and a better church would most 
assuredly make a better world : and we also want 
a better ministry to make a better church ; but if 
we cannot have this order, may we have the other, 
and find that a better church is making a better 
ministry. If the rain of heaven collect not upon 
the hills to pour down its streams upon the valUes, 
may the dew of the vallies rise to revive and refresh 
the tops of the hills. 

V. We should, as pastors of the churches, look 
round our respective flocks, and see what devoted 
youths, of ardent piety and competent abilities, we 
have within our circle, who are likely to be usefid 
as ministers of Christ, and should call them out to 
the work, without waiting for the first impulse to 
come from themselves. A radical mistake has been 
committed through our whole denomination, in 
supposing it is necessary in all cases for the desire 
after the sacred office to rise up first of all, and 
spontaneously, in the breast of the aspirant. In 
consequence of this, many have thrust themselves 
forward who were altogether unfit for the work ; 
while many as eminently qualified for it, have been 
kept back by modesty. Does it not seem to be 
the work of the pastors and the churches, to call 
out from among themselves the most gifted and 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 311 

pious of their members for this object ? Is not 
this the working out of the principle we have 
already considered^ that the church is the conser- 
vator of an effective ministry ? Are not they the 
best judges of talent and other pre-requisites ? 
Should this matter be left to the inflations of self- 
conceit^ the promptings of vanity^ or the impulses, 
it may be of a sincere^ but at the same time of an 
unenhghtened zeal ? Nothing can be more erro- 
neous than that this call of the church would be 
an officious intermeddling with the work of the 
Spirit in calling the ministry ; for it may surely 
be conceived to be quite as rational a notion to 
suppose that the Spirit calls a person through 
the medium of the church and its pastor, as to 
imagine that the commission from above comes 
direct to the heart of the individual — especially as 
the church and the pastor, or at any rate the 
latter, is usually applied to, as a judge of the can- 
didate's fitness for the work ; and thus after all, 
the power and the right of pronouncing a judg- 
ment upon the alleged call of this Divine Agent, 
are vested with the pastor and the church. To 
affirm that an individual cannot be supposed to 
have a very great fitness for the office, unless his 
love of souls has been strong enough to prompt 
him to desire the work of the ministry, and that 
he is not likely to be very earnest in it, if he be 
thus sent, instead of his going of his own accord, 



313 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

is assuming too much; for in the plan here 
recomniended^ it is supposed that the individual 
who attracts the attention of the pastor is one who, 
in addition to true piety and competent abilities^ 
has manifested an active zeal in the way of doing 
good. It is only on such an one that his eye 
would hght^ or to whom he would venture to 
make the suggestion. In all the official appoint- 
ments recorded in the New Testament^ from an 
apostle down to a deacon^ the people were requested 
to look ovi for suitable men, and not to wait till 
they presented themselves. Let us then give our 
serious attention to this subject^ and look out for 
the most pious, the most intelligent, and the moat 
ardent of our young men, not forgetting at the 
same time to ascertain their physical quaUfications 
of voice and energy. It is not studious youths 
only that will do for this work, mere book-worms 
who will devour knowledge and make no return ; 
but such as will unite a thirst for knowledge with 
an intense desire to employ every acquisition for 
saving souls. We must be inquisitive after such ; 
and if they are youths in the more respectable 
classes of society, young men that have known 
something of good society, and have acquired the 
manners and habits of gentlemen ; that have had 
something to do with business, and have acquired 
such a proper degree of self-confidence, as shall 
give them weight and influence of character, all 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 813 

the better. Low men, with coarse vulgar man- 
ners, may by the power of great talents rise above 
their origin, and be of value, as diamonds uncut 
and unpolished ; yet how much would the value of 
these spiritual diamonds be increased by the lapi- 
dary^s art : but when vulgarity is associated with 
slender talents, it is only as flint set in lead. 
There is nothing in gentlemanly manners that 
deteriorates piety; though much, very much, that . 
adds not only to the gracefulness, but to the use- 
fulness of the ministerial character. The graces, 
when baptised at the font of evangelical piety, 
arrayed in the robe of righteousness, and wearing 
the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, are use- 
ful handmaids to the Christian pastor, and procure 
favour for him in the solemn duties of his office. 
If we may judge from the specimens left on record 
in the Acts of the Apostles, Paul united the 
manners of a courtier, with the fidelity of a pro- 
phet, and threw over the stern courage of a 
martyr, the mantle of a gentle courteousness. 
What could be more polished, yet what more 
faithful, than his address to Festus and Agrippa ? 
and we can imagine that even his denunciation 
against the High Priest, who had commanded 
him to be smitten on the mouth, was all the more 
terrible because of the dignified severity with 
which it was uttered. Earnestness then is not 
incompatible with refinement, but is render^ 



314 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

more eflFective by it, and hence the importance of 
our sending our patrician youths to the sacred 
office. 

Occasionally we may find in our churches some 
who are possessed of extraordinary talents for 
speaking and for active duty, who are too hi 
advanced in manhood to go through a College 
curriculum, but who notwithstanding would make 
admirable preachers, and attain to considerable 
usefulness, as well as respectability. A man of 
natural genius, of strong intelligence, of eminent 
piety, and of pulpit power, is not to be rejected 
because he has not passed through the schools. 
Those who remember WiUiam Thorp, and espe- 
cially that great theologian, Andrew Fuller, will 
not deny that He who called his apostles, not 
from the philosophers of Greece, nor from the 
orators of Rome, nor from the Rabbis of Jerusa- 
lem, but from the fishermen of Galilee, may some- 
times select a servant, even in our days, from those 
classes which have been debarred the privileges of 
a classical or a philosophical education. Among 
the prophets of antiquity was Amos, the herdsman 
of Tekoa. These however are the exceptions, but 
not the rule. Even the bishops of ouc ecclesi- 
astical establishment are lowering their standard 
of qualifications, as necessary in all cases, for the 
ministerial functions, and are accommodating their 
system to the wants of the people, by ordaining 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 315 

men to the sacred office, whom their predecessors 
an age or two back, would have unquestionably 
refused.* We must not pretend to more fastidi- 
ousness than they, nor be horror-struck at the 
idea of introducing to the pastorate, men, who 
though they are neither scholars nor philosophers, 
are likely to be powerful and useful preachers of 
the gospel. A collegiate education must be our 
general rule, which it may be hoped we shall 
never abandon; but it is a rule from which we 
must make exceptions in the case of those strong- 
minded, warm-hearted, earnest men, whose tough 
broad-sword, and their strength in wielding it, 
may do more execution than many a weapon 
whose blade has received the highest polish that 
art can give it, whose hilt sparkles with the richest 
diamonds, and whose possessor is only a dexterous 
fencer, or a graceful flourisher. 

VI. This is a subject which demands the close 
and serious attention of the ministry themselves* 
The whole present generation of our preachers 
from the oldest to the youngest must give their 
attention to this matter. We have known men of 
a past age, whose names are dear, and whose 
memory is fragrant, who to the last retained the 

* Seyeral of them have lately determined to ordain as dea- 
cons, men who have had no classical education, provided thej 
have good preaching abilities. Latin and Greek are in such 
cases to be dispensed with. 



316 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

ardour of their zeal^ and whose labours^ like the 
flame of the volcano rising from beneath the anow- 
oovered surface of the mountain top, were carried 
on in association with their hoary hairs : and some 
such, though they are very few, still linger amongst 
us. Even they, and we who come next to them, 
and are verging on old age, must all do something 
more and something better than we have done for 
Christ and souls. Our sun is decUning, and our 
shadows lengthen on the plain, but the day^s work 
is not done ; and instead of relaxing our diligence, 
we must work the harder because the time of 
working is nearly over. As long as we have 
strength to grasp the sickle, or light to bind a 
sheaf, let us work on. Harvest-home will soon be 
here, and it is time enough for enjoyment when 
that arrives, and we shall meet the Master and 
our fellow-servants. To us comes with solemn 
emphasis the admonition, " Whatsoever thy hand 
findeth to do, do it with thy might, for there is 
no work, nor device, nor knowledge, in the grave 
whither thou goest.'^ For the sake of our younger 
brothers, let us be diligent. They look upon us 
as patterns, and let us therefore set them an 
example which shall come to them with the cor- 
rectness of a good model, and the power of aa 
ardent inspiration. Let there be no running from 
our post as if we were weary of our service^ and 
were panting for the otium cum dignitate. Let it 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 317 

be seen as if the earnestness of our minds imparted 
vigour to our bodies^ kept off the infirmities of 
our declining years^ and enabled us to renew our 
youth like the eaglets. It is a spectacle which the 
admirer of military glory loves to witness, to 
behold the veteran soldier, on whose countenance 
the suns of innumerable campaigns and the swords 
of his foes have left their visible marks, out-strip- 
ping in courage, in feats of arms, and in swiftness 
of foot, all the younger warriors that fight at his 
side, and to see him rallying their fainting hearts 
by the strength of his own. Veterans in the hosts 
of Emmanuel, see then your duty ! On you it 
devolves to train the young recruits, and form 
their character; let them feel that they are by the 
side of heroes, and catch the inspiration of your 
heroism. Cast over them your shadow while you 
Uve, and they will then be anxious to find your 
mantle when your spirit has dropped it in her 
flight to the skies. Let them see you intent upon 
the conversion of sinners, given up to your work 
of saving souls : and let them hear in your conver- 
sation how much your heart is set upon this work. 
Show them by the manner in which you are finish- 
ing your course, how they ought to begin and 
carry forward theirs. Correct their mistakes, ele- 
vate their aims, and inflame their zeal. Do all you 
can by your private intercourse with them to form 
their character aright for the service of the Lord. 



318 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

Talk to them modestly of your own success in the 
ministry^ and how you succeeded in this high and 
glorious achievement. What manner of men ought 
ye to be, by whom the ardour of others will be 
kindled or extinguished? May God's grace be 
sufficient for you. 

But of what momentous consequence is it that 
our younger ministers and students should give to 
this subject its due attention ! You have advan- 
tages which some who have gone before you never 
enjoyed, and which at times make them almost 
envy your privileges ; but if this be all you seek ; 
if it be the best and the highest object you aspire 
to ; — ^you have mistaken your way in going to the 
pulpit, and had better, whatever of literature you 
may acquire, have drudged out life in one of the 
darkest of its recesses, or the humblest of its 
occupations, than to have entered the Christian 
ministry. Oh, what scenes attract your attention, 
and ought to engage your energies ! There around 
you are immortal souls perishing in their sins, 
each one of more value than the whole material 
universe, each capable of being saved by your 
ministrations, or sure to acquire by them a deeper 
guilt and a heavier condemnation — there, in sight 
of your faith, is the Son of God, bleeding upon 
the cross for their redemption — there beneath you 
is the pit of hell, opening wide its mouth to receive 
them if they die in unbelief — ^there above you ia 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 319 

heaven^ throwing back its everlasting portals to 
receive them^ if they are saved — there before you 
is the bar of judgment, at which you must soon 
meet them, to account for your ministry in reference 
to them — and there, beyond all, is eternity with its 
ever rolling ages, which are to be spent by them 
and you in rapture or in woe. Is this true ? Is 
it fiction, or is it fact ? If these things are not so, 
you are found false witnesses for Christ, for they 
are the common topics and the first principles of 
your discourses — but if they are all realities, then 
with what state of mind and heart should they be 
handled? Begin your ministry, beloved young 
brothers, with a clear understanding of its nature, 
and a deep impression of its importance. Do you 
covet usefulness? Earnestness is essential to it. 
You cannot do good, at least in any extensive 
degree, without it. Listen to those who have 
gone before you ; their testimony is founded both 
upon experience and observation. All, all, will 
unite in this exhortation, " Be in earnest ;" as well 
the very men who have had least, as those who 
have exhibited most, of this quality of character, 
aud mode of action. Without this you cannot 
even be popular, to say nothing of usefulness. 
The public will hear an earnest minister, and will 
not hear any other. You may call this, if you will, 
bad taste, and wonder they will not listen to your 
highly intellectual and philosophical discourses^ 



820 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

and be ready in resentment to withdraw the eh- 
borate preparations they so little value, and retire 
from the pulpit. Whether they or you are wrong, 
this is the fact. He is an unwise tradesman;' who 
because he thinks the public taste is vicious, and 
ought to be corrected, will exhibit in his window, 
and place upon his shelves, no other goods than 
those the public will not buy. In this case the 
taste of the public may be wrong, and that of the 
tradesman right : but in the case of preaching, if 
the people demand an earnest exhibition of gospel 
truth, and the ministry instead of this, will give 
them nothing but dull, dry, abstract sermons, it is 
they who are right, and he is wrong : they, better 
than he does, know not only what they want, but 
what he was appointed by God to furnish them. 
Do not then mistake, and determine to try to be 
useful in some other way than that which the Grod 
of nature and of grace has determined upon. Do 
not resolve to try the experiment of opening a 
new road to usefulness for yourself ; another way 
than that which apostles, martyrs, and reformers 
have trod, and which the ministers and missionaries 
of every age and every country have found to be 
the power of God unto salvation, even the doctrine 
of the cross j another way which you may deem 
more befitting the talents of a scholar, and an age 
of philosophy. You will inevitably go wrong if 
you do, and close your career, lamenting your folly 



AN. EARNEST MINISTRY. 321 

and confessing that your ministerial life has been 
a lost adventure; a melancholy confession^ and 
one that is not unfrequently made. God gives to 
no man in any department of action more than 
one life^ and affords to none an opportunity to live 
through another term of existence, in which he 
might profit by his own experience ; but he gives 
abundant opportunity to avail ourselves of the 
knowledge gained by trial, as it goes on, and by 
extensive observation. You have known enough 
and seen enough already of what will do, and what 
will not do, to answer the ends of your office, and 
save souls. You have only to look back, and to 
look around, to find evidence to guide you. You 
cannot mistake your means easily, if you do not 
mistake your object. Settle with yourselves what 
is the latter, that it is to save sinners by leading 
them to repent of sin, to believe on Christ, and to 
lead a holy life ; and then you can scarcely fail to 
perceive that this never has been accomplished, 
and ordinarily never can be, but by beseeching 
them, and praying them, in Christ^s stead, to be 
reconciled to God. 

We, who are growing grey in the service of 
Christ, feel somewhat anxious about those who 
are to succeed us. We see with gratitude and 
wonder what God has wrought by us; and we 
know how, as instruments, we have done this 
thing. We see how souls have been converted, 

Y 



322 MEANS TO OBTAIN ' 

churches have risen up, and heUevers have lived 
and died in the faith, and know full well that it 
was by the testimony of the gospel, plainly but 
energetically stated. In looking back, we often 
feel regret that the activities of the age have taken 
from us the opportunity to make greater attain-* 
ments in elegant Uterature and general knowledge; 
but no regret that we have made the great theme 
of Christ crucified the subject of oar ministry, and 
the salvation of souls the object of our lives. We 
feel, amidst the gathering shadows of evening, a 
calm and sweet satisfaction that in this we have 
made a right choice ; mingled at the same tim^ 
with a profound humihation that we have not 
followed it with more intensity of devotion. We 
see many things in the review of the past that we 
would alter, but we would make no alteration in 
these matters; we see much that we could improve, 
but only in the manner by which we could more 
successfully accomplish this object ; and if it wei*e 
. permitted us to live over again our existence, or to 
speak more correctly, to spend another term, and 
set out afresh, it would be our high resolve to get 
more of what the men of science and of literature 
admire, but only to enable us to preach with 
greater power the doctrine of the cross, and to be 
better qualified to seek with more ardour, and with 
better hopes of success, the end of our ministry. 
The love of applause, and we have all too much of 



AH ZARNEST MINISTRY. 323 

it^ is we hope dying in our hearts^ or at any rate 
appears to be more and more worthless in its 
object^ and the approval of the great Master more 
and more intensely desired. Whether we look 
back upon the past^ or consider the complexion of 
our feeUngs for the present^ or look at the pros- 
pects and anticipate the disclosures of the future, 
we know of no arguments cogent enough, no lan- 
guage sufficiently expressive, by which to enforce 
upon our younger brethren in the ministry, and 
in reference to the purpose of their Hves, the 
important admonition, " Be in earnest/^ 

VII. Considej^abk care and caution are requisite, 
much more than have been exercised hitherto, in the 
introduction and reception of young men to our 
colleges. Incompetent ministers are the burden, 
as inconsistent ones have been the dishonour, of 
every section of the church, and the hindrance of 
the progress of the gospel in the world. In hear- 
ing them, one is ready to wonder how it ever 
entered into their hearts to conceive they had been 
called of God to a work for which they seemed to 
possess scarcely a single qualification beyond their 
piety ; and the wonder is doubled to account for 
it that any minister could recommend them, or 
any committee receive them : without intellect, 
without heart, and equally without voice, they 
seem sent into the ministry only to keep out 
others more competent for the work. How many 
y2 



324 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

have been permitted to escape from the pursuits 
of business^ in which they might have done well, 
to endure the greatest privations, and to submit 
to the most humiliating mortifications^ in an office, 
for the functions of which they were deplorably 
unfit. How many of them have passed through 
life in the misery of being amidst a discontented 
people, or in wandering from place to place, with- 
out remaining with any church long. Such cases 
have been found in every age, and in every deno- 
mination, but they were never so numerous as 
they are now. A spirit of fastidiousness has crept 
over the churches, and of unsettledness over their 
pastors. How great then is the responsibility of 
recommending a young man to enter the ministry. 
It is an act drawing after it consequences of a 
most momentous nature, and should never be 
done without the utmost care and caution. It 
would be well if ministers would call in others to 
bear the burthen with them, and to share the 
responsibility. It may in some cases expose a 
pastor to some risk of giving oflence, if in the 
exercise of his fidelity he should discourage the 
aspirations of an unsuitable candidate; an evil 
from which he would be sheltered, at least in part, 
by referring the case to the consideration of two 
or three of the brethren in the vicinity. It is not 
however the pastor only who should be cautioned 
against recommending unsuitable candidates, but 



AI^ EARNEST MINISTHY. 325 

the committees of our colleges should be no less 
careful about receiving them. It is extremely 
difficult by a first examination^ or even by a pro- 
bationary term^ to judge of eligibility and fitness^ 
as great excellence in some cases lies hidden under 
a very uncouth and unpromising exterior^ and in 
others is very slow to develop itself; while on the 
contrary, a showy exterior over a shallow substra- 
tum is so deceptive^ that not only months, but 
even years, must roll on, before the necessary 
qualifications can be determined upon. A false 
delicacy has sometimes led our committees to 
retain young men in the colleges, of whose unfit- 
ness there remained no question, rather than put 
them and their friends to the pain of recommend- 
ing them to discontinue their studies, and return 
to trade. It should be recollected that to carry 
on the education of those of whom there is no 
rational probability that they will ever attain to 
usefulness of any kind, either as authors, tutors, 
or preachers, is on the part of the committee a 
betrayal of their trust, and a malversation of the 
funds entrusted to their care. Let there be, then, 
a far greater degree than there has been of care 
and discrimination exercised in the initiative by 
our pastors : ten earnest men are better, and will 
do more for us than a hundred incompetent ones. 
It would be better that many of the churches 
should remain longer without a pastor^ than gain 



326 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

an unsuitable one ; just as it is a far more endu- 
rable evil for a man who wishes for connubial 
felicity, to endure the privations of celibacy any 
length of time, than to hurry from these into the 
miseries of an unhappy marriage. We must be 
more careful in the selection, the reception, and 
the retention of our students, than we have been. 
Since it is so difficult to find an egress for those 
who are once in, it is highly incumbent upon us to 
watch with greater vigilance the door of entrance. 

VIII. There is no class of men to whom we can 
look 80 naturally, or with so much entreaty for their 
aid, in furnishing us with devoted ministers, as our 
Professors. If the college be the mould in which 
the preacher and pastor are cast, the tutor is the 
man who shapes the mould, and pours into it the 
metal. How much then depends upen these 
beloved and honoured brethren. What a trust is 
reposed with them, how solemn, how awful, how 
responsible I If it be a momentous thing for a 
pastor to have the care of a single church, how 
much more so, for a tutor to have the care of 
twenty or thirty youthful minds, each of which is 
looking forward to the pastorate; and to have 
these replaced by others every five years ! Such 
an occupation is enough to make the stoutest heart 
to tremble under an oppressive sense of its respon- 
sibilities. The strength of our churches lies in 
our ministry; of our ministry in our colleges ; and 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 327 

of our colleges in our tutors. There is nothing 
about which we ought to be more anxious than 
about this part of our system. Happily to what- 
ever department of ministerial education we look, 
whether to the philological, mathematical, or philo- 
sophical ; whether to hermeneutical or dogmatical 
theology, we find in our various academic institu- 
tions, professors of whom we need not be^ and are 
not, ashamed. If we need improvement any 
where, it is in the homiletical and pastoral depart- 
ment. We can scarcely wonder that in such an 
age as this, our professors should be anxious to 
push forward their alumni as far as possible into 
the regions of literature and science ; or that they 
should feel a solicitude, now that the London Uni- 
versity gives an opportunity to Nonconformists 
for obtaining academic degrees and honours, to 
give full proof of their official assiduity in the 
distinctions won by their students in these laudable 
contests for scholastic fame ; but at the same time 
it is well for them to remember that while these 
things are not neglected, one popular, earnest, 
and successful preacher, will bring more real credit 
to their college, and give it more favour with 
the public, than a dozen Bachelors of Arts, and 
half-a-dozen Masters to boot. The occasional 
exhibition, and it can be but occasional^ of the 
titular letters affixed to a man^s name, will not 
often excite the inquiry, "Where was he edu- 



328 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

eated V but the constant exhibition and effect of 
his preaching powers will be a public and perma- 
nent recommendation of the institution where such 
a character was formed. It is true that natural 
preaching talent wiU grow in almost any soil, and 
under almost any culture; but it may still be 
carried to a higher degree of perfection in one 
place^ and by one hand^ than another. There is 
also such a thing as colleges gaining an identifying 
character^ one for turning out better scholars^ a 
second for giving more philosophy^ and a third for 
carrying on a better theological training — ^but 
that in the long run will be the most useful^ and 
deservedly the most popular^ which succeeds in 
sending forth the greatest number of earnest and 
successful preachers. 

All earnestness has a tinge of enthusiasm about 
it^ and as no man can kindle enthusiasm in the 
soul of another who has none of this mental fire in 
himself, our tutors should have some fire^ though 
with judgment enough to keep it in its proper 
place^ and to do its proper work ; and however 
enthusiastic they may be for classical^ scientific^ 
and philosophical studies, they should concentrate 
their energies, their aims, and their hopes, in the 
formation of the popular, powerful, and useful 
preacher. They who know how much there is to 
do in the way of even preUminary training, with 
many young men that enter our seats of leamin^ 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 329 

and how much of necessity the time and attention 
mast be divided among the various objects of 
study^ will confess that it is no easy matter to give 
that prominence to homiletics which their supreme 
importance demands. But notwithstanding this, 
opportunities will continually present themselves 
to an anxious and observant professor for inculca- 
ting upon his students that all that he is teaching 
them will be useless, if they do not make it sub- 
servient to their great business in preaching the 
gospel and converting sinners. But it is of espe- 
cial importance that our tutors should be much 
upon the alert when the students begin to preach, 
that these young men in their first pulpit labours, 
should select the true object of all preaching, 
pursue it by a right course, and seek it with due 
vigour. What a student is in his first public 
services, that he is likely to be through life ; and 
if there be no earnestness then, there is likely to 
be little^ afterwards. It happens that as all excel- 
lencies rarely combine in one man, many of our 
professors, though so highly gifted as regards 
talent and acquirement, are not all of them distin- 
guished as preachers, and therefore can present in 
themselves no living models of what pulpit power, 
as to manner, really is. Still, they who cannot 
illustrate it by example, can teach it by precept. 
May they see the importance of the subject, and 
labour to the utmost to inculcate it upon the youth 



I 



330 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

that are looking up to them for instruction^ and 
labour to the uttermost to kindle in their breast 
the ardour of a pulpit enthusiasm ! 

We can easily imagine with what delight they 
most sometimes witness the advance by their 
pupils in extensive and accurate scholarship, in 
analytical power^ in logical acuteness, in metaphy« 
sical subtlety ; and in some rare eases may felici- 
tate themselves on such results of their labour^ 
though they can foresee they will never be associ- 
ated with pulpit efficiency — but as a general rule 
nothing should gratify^ much less satisfy them^ 
with reference to their students^ short of adapta- 
tion for popular eflfect. The demand preferred by 
our country upon the military schools is, " Give 
us soldiers:" upon our medical colleges, "Give 
us skilful surgeons and physicians:" upon our 
Inns of Court, " Give us lawyers." The cry sent 
up to our colleges is, "Give us powerful preachers, 
devoted pastors;" — nor will it do to meet this 
demand, any more than it would the others, 
by replying, " We will send you Bachelors and 
Masters of Arts." Much less will it do to send 
men who will feed the churches with the dry and 
sapless verbal exegesis of German theology, instead 
of the sweet and succulent expositions of our 
Scotts, our Henrys, our Wardlaws, and our 
Barnes's. Ministers may study the profoundest 
criticisms for their own improvement^ and carry 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY, 331 

on a course of exegetic exposition in the pulpit ; 
but it must be of a character that shall combine 
impression with instruction; and let our tutors 
aim to train preachers^ who shall make their ser- 
mons expository^ their expositions sermonic^ and 
both, instinct with life^ and essentially popular. 
Let them, with the men they send into our 
churches, give us as much as they can of every 
thing which can polish the taste, inform or even 
adorn tbe intellect, and give weight and influence 
to the character in general society, — the more of 
all these the better; but let them never forget 
that what is always wanted for the momentous 
subject of religion, and what is especially wanted 
in these times of intense earnestness, is a race of 
ministers as earnest as the times in which they 
live. May God help them to train such ministers 
for us ! 

IX. If it be the duty of the churches to call 
out a ministry, it must of course be no less their 
duty to provide the means for the education of those 
who compose it. Among all the objects of Chris- 
tian benevolence, there is not one which has a 
prior or a stronger claim than our collegiate 
institutions, and yet it is too true that they are 
the last whose demands are properly regarded. 
Among Protestant Dissenters especially, the main 
pivot of their whole system is their ministry; 
upon this, every thing, under God^ must turn. 



332 MEANS TO OBTAlN^ 

As this is strongs every thing else amongst them 
will be strong ; and as this is weak^ every thing 
else will be weak. The springs which supply the 
reservoirs of our evangelising societies, both at 
home and abroad^ are to be traced back to our 
colleges : and yet the churches do not seem, if we 
may judge from their conduct, to be duly aware 
of this fact. Colleges are not however to be con- 
sidered as eleemosynary institutions, where a race 
of literary paupers are sustained by the alms of 
the affluent ; for it is becoming increasingly the 
practice for our students to pay for their own 
board: but beyond this, we have the invaluable 
services of our professors to reward, and many 
other expenses to defray. This outlay must be 
borne by the churches in all cases where there is 
no vested property, or where it is not adequate to 
the support of the institution. How can property 
be better applied ? What expenditure produces a 
quicker or more abundant return ? A good edu- 
cation for our ministry is cheaply obtained at any 
price : and every shilling we expend in this way 
tells at once and before our eyes upon the object 
for which it is intended. And yet strange to say 
there is no object for which we find it more diffi- 
cult to maintain a regular and adequate supply 
of means. Foreign and home missions have an 
annual collection from almost every church in our 
denomination^ and yet how few are there of these 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 333 

churcbes who grant an annual collection for any 
college, and what multitudes who never grant a 
collection at all ! The platform is the stage of 
modem activity, but our colleges can make no 
exhibition there : we can employ no succession of 
orators to advocate our cause by speeches in • 
support of resolutions ; can exhibit no foreigners ; 
can produce no excitement by tales of horror, of ' 
pathos, or of adventure : yet where would be the 
platform but for the pulpit, and what is the pulpit 
without the college ? We ought not, it is true, to 
do less for our other organisations, but we ought 
to do far more for our educational system. We 
must bestir ourselves, and not allow this on which 
every thing depends, to fall into the rear and to 
pass into the shadow of one or two deservedly 
popular societies. If a larger part of the zeal 
manifested in arguing for our voluntary principle 
were employed in a more liberal support of our 
denominational institutions, they would be in a 
far better state than they now are, and the power 
of that principle more clearly seen, and more 
successfully advocated. With all our ardour in 
the cause of Nonconformity, it is easier to raise 
large funds for other objects of benevolence than 
for this. The London Missionary Society, which 
is chiefly supported by the Congregational body, 
has an income of nearly eighty thousand pounds 
a year ; while that same body does not raise by 



334 MEANS TO OBTAIN 

volantary contributions more perhaps than eight 
or nine thousand for our seats of learning, and 
even this is not so economically expended as it 
might be by a consolidation of our colleges. It 
is high time this whole system were looked into. 

It is however somewhat cheering to know that 
this subject is beginning to be understood by our 
churches^ and a more just appreciation to be made 
by the intelligence of the age of the value of an 
educated ministry ; and as a natural consequence 
there is springing up a more general disposition 
to support the expense which it incurs. Many 
instances have occurred of late, of the owners of 
property apportioning a lai^ share of it, either in 
the way of founding colleges, or establishing scho- 
larships, for the education of young men for the 
ministry. An individual who founds one of these 
scholarships, may, if he give his property at the 
age of thirty-five, and should live to be seventy, 
have during his life-time, and ever afterwards, six 
or seven ministers preaching the gospel at the 
same time, who were educated by his means ; and 
when he has reached his heavenly home, may 
welcome to glory through a long succession of 
ages the souls that were saved by the labours of 
those ministers for whose education he had set 
apart his property. How laudable and how noble 
an object of honourable ambition does such a pro- 
posal present to those who have at once the wish 



AN EARNEST MINISTRY. 335 

and the means to do good. Let the churches 
collectively, and their wealthy members indivi- 
dually, well consider then the obligation which 
is laid upon them to provide all that may be 
necessary to ensure the education of a ministry 
adapted to the circumstances of this extraordinary 
age. 



CHAPTER XL 

ON THE NECESSITY OF DIVINE INFLUENCE FOR 
AN EFFICIENT MINISTRY. 

This treatise would be essentially defective in 
the estimation both of its author and its readers^ 
if after so much has been advanced about instm- 
mentality, nothing were to be said about the agency 
which is necessary to render it effectual for the 
accomplishment of its object. In all Divine opera- 
tions, whether in the world of nature or of grace, 
Ood employs a chain of dependant means for the 
working out of his purposes and plans : but 
though dependant, they are appropriate. In 
acknowledging, as we must do, the adaptation of 
these means to the production of the intended 
result, we do homage to God's wisdom ; while in 
confessing their dependance for efficiency upon his 
blessing, we do no less homage to his power and 
grace. There is no analogy which we can borrow 
from the world of nature that can satisfactorily 
illustrate the operation of Divine grace on the 
human mind. We know very well that second 
causes in the material universe depend for their 
efficiency upon Divine influence : but it is an 
influence of a totally different kind^ and exerted 



NECESSITY OP DIVINE INFLUENCE. 337 

altogether in a different matter from that of 
which we now write ; and we are very little aided 
in our perceptions of the nature of the Spirit's 
operation upon the human mind^ by any thing we 
observe in the world of vegetable or animal life. 

There are two aspects in which man is to be 
viewed in relation to the means employed for his 
salvation — ^he is to be considered as both a rational 
and a sinful creature; or as a rational creature 
whose reason is under the dominion of sin ; con- 
sequently^ whatever method be adopted for his 
salvation, he must be dealt with in both these views 
of his condition. His fallen state as a sinner ha» 
not bereft him of his reason, will, and responsibi- 
lity ; but his reason and will alone, will never lift 
him out of his condition as a fallen sinner. He 
cannot be dealt with otherwise than he is, and as a 
rational creature he must be treated as such, and 
not as a brute or a block. His intellect must be 
appealed to by argument, and his heart by motivesi> 
Now it will be seen that in the means of grace, and 
especially in preaching, there is a provision for all 
this. Here is truth to be presented to the intellect; 
truth which represents the whole state of the case 
between God and the sinner, the nature and obli- 
gations of the moral law, the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin, the weight of the tremendous penalty of 
the violated precept, the wonderful love of God in 
the provision he has made for the salvation of the 
z 



338 THE NECESSITY OF 

sinner, with the eternal results of misery or bliss 
which follow upon faith and unbeUef. In all this, 
there is something in its own nature adapted to 
engage the attention, and to interest the heart irf 
the sinner. It is not only the truth, but just tho 
truth that suits his condition. In addition to 
this, there is in preaching the adaptation of the 
manner, as well as the matter, to his circum« 
stances, the tendency of the Uving voice, and 
ministerial solicitude, and earnest elocution, to 
engage the intellect and impress the heart. It 
will follow of course that earnestness is a part of 
this well-adapted system of means, and the more 
earnest a man is, the more likely, so far as means 
go, is he to do good ; for if it be the matter which 
God blesses to change the heart, it is also the 
manner which he blesses to fix the attention pre- 
paratory to this change : there is as obvious an 
adaptation in the latter as in the former. How 
comes it to pass that there is greater efficiency 
usually attendant upon hearing the word, than 
there is upon reading it ? Just because there is 
a greater adaptation to fix attention and to im- 
press the heart ; and by the same rule we argue 
there is more adaptation to do this in one man's 
manner than in that of another. Hence we see 
that those preachers are most successful, who 
independently of a Divine power, we might expect 
to be so. This does not disprove the necessity of 



BIVINE INFLUENCE. 339 

a Divine influence, but only shews what order of 
instrumentality it is that the Divine Spirit usually 
employs, and consequently what instrumentality 
we should select. As God does not usually bless 
ignorance, or dulness, or obscurity, or feebleness, 
we should avoid these; and to look for great 
results from them, is to expect not only what God 
has not promised, but what he very rarely bestows 
without having promised it. Thus God deals 
with us as rational creatures, by presenting to us 
that truth, and requiring us to understand and 
believe it, the reception of which into the heart 
changes the whole character and conduct. 

But then there is in the heart of man not only 
an indifference, but an opposition to divine truth. 
" The carnal mind is enmity against God, and is 
not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can 
be." The heart so blinds the judgment that "the 
natural man discerneth not the things of the 
Spirit of God, neither indeed can he know them, 
because tbey are spiritually discerned." Therefore 
however the attention may be gained by the man- 
ner, and gained it must be in order to conversion, 
yet the heart is still opposed to the truth ; hence 
the need of the Spirit's influence to subdue this 
resistance of the heart to truth itself. Here it 
will be perceived is the concurrence of the truth 
and the Spirit in conversion — conversion is the 
sinner being brought to know and love the objects 
z2 



340 THE NECESSITY OF 

presented in the truth — ^therefore the truth must 
be presented to the intellect in order that it might 
he thus known and loved : but then it never wiU 
be so loved; however theoretically understood^ till 
the Spirit takes away that disreUsh for it which 
is in the heart. Without the truth, there is nothing 
to engage the attention and employ the intellect 
of man as a rational being ; without the Spirit, 
there is no right disposition of the heart, when 
the truth is so presented. If a certain quality at 
an object be the ground of dishke to it, an increa- 
HJng knowledge of the object and of this quality, 
cannot in the nature of things subdue our hos- 
tility ; the taste must be changed ere the object 
can be relished. It is precisely thus with the 
sinner and the truth ; he dislikes the gospel for 
its holiness, and no increase of light will vanquish 
enmity. Consequently whatsoever be the earnest- 
ness of the preacher's manner, or whatever be th« 
clearness of his matter, no saving result will follow, 
unless the Spirit give his blessing. Yet preaching 
is as necessary, as if all were done by this alone, 
without the Spirit, because it is by this order of 
means that the Spirit usually works in the con- 
version of sinners. And since it is by appropriate 
means that he accomplishes his purposes, there is 
nothing in this doctrine to discourage exertion. 
There are means which carry in themselves the 
rational hope, if not promise, of success. Ood 



DIYINJB INFLUENCE. 8:^1 

will not accept the lame for sacrifice, nor send 
down the signs of his approval on the service 
which involves no real effort of heart or mind iii 
his cause. No : the influence of the Holy Spirit 
comes not as a bounty upon indolence^ but as a 
stimulus to exertion. Its office is not to give the 
human faculties a Hcense to slumber^ but to 
supply them with motives to watchfulness. Its 
descent upon the church is not as the creeping 
torpor which betokens disease^ but as an element 
of activity, bespeaking moral and spiritual health. 
This blessed influence is unquestionably sovereign 
in the dispensation of it. God giveth it in such 
measures, on such occasions, and to such instru- 
ments, as it seemeth good unto him. He that 
directeth the course of the clouds, and causeth 
them to drop their treasures where and when he 
pleaseth, makes the dew of his grace, and the 
rain of his Spirit, to fall according to the counsel 
of his own will. There is no such necessary con- 
nection between the exhibition of the truth and 
the conversion of the soul, as there is between the 
application of fire and the combustion of inflam- 
mable matter. The apostle says, " Who then is 
Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom 
ye believed, even as God gave to every man ? I 
have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the 
increase. So then neither is be that planteth 
any thing, neither he that watereth; but God that 



342 THE NECESSITY OF 

giveth the increase/^ 1 Cor. iii, 5-8. One should 
think it impossible to mistake the meaning of this 
language, or to doubt whether special Divine in- 
fluence be necessary for the conversion of the soul, 
or whether the communication of it be a preroga- 
tive of Divine sovereignty. 

Still there is every ground to expect the influence 
we need. It is our privilege to live under the dis- 
pensation of the Spirit, as well as under that of the 
Messiah. The former of these is connected with 
the latter: or perhaps more correctly speaking they 
are identical ; the covenant established in Christ^s 
blood is the economy of the Spirit. The ministry 
of reconciliation is the ministry of the Spirit, We 
do not mean to assert that this Divine influence is 
confined to the Christian economy, for since the 
beginning of time hath no soul been converted or 
sanctified but by this heavenly power; but the 
communications before the coming of Christ were 
limited, partial, and scanty, compared with what 
they have been since : they constituted not the 
shower, but only the drops which precede it. 
Hence the language of the evangelist, "This spake 
He of the Spirit, which they that believe on him 
should receive, for the Holy Ghost was not yet 
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified/' 
John vii, 39. This idea, that we are under the 
Spirit's economy, should enlarge our expectation 
of the richest communication of this invaluable 



DIVINE INFLUENCE. 343 

and essential blessing. The view we have given 
of Divine sovereignty is not intended, nor when 
rightly understood, is it even calculated, to dis- 
courage hope, but simply to teach dependance. 
While God reserves to himself the right of bestow- 
ment, and acts upon his own rules of communica- 
tion, he warrants and invites the most expansive 
requests, and the largest anticipations. Since he 
has promised to give the boon in answer to the 
prayer of faith, it would seem to be our own fault 
that we have it not in more abounding measure. 
The very recollection of our privilege, as placed 
under such an economy, might seem to be enough 
to call forth our prayers and to awaken our expecta- 
tions. Instead of being surprised that we receive 
so much of this Divine power on our ministry at 
any time, even the most successful periods of our 
history, we should be surprised that we receive so 
little, and enquire after the cause of obstruction. 
In a country like Egypt, where rain seldom falls, 
the shower is the exception, and a dry atmosphere 
the general rule ; but in our variable climate, the 
long drought is the rarity, and the frequent 
shower is the common occurrence. The husband- 
man ploughs and sows in this land, with his 
expectant eyes upon the heavens, and feels disap- 
pointed if the fertilizing rain is withheld. So 
should it be with us, in reference to the shower of 
God^s grace. We are not under the dry and arid 



344 THE NECESSITY OP 

atmosphere of the Levitical eooDomy^ bat we enj^^ 
the privilege of the cloud-droppings rain-falliag 
dispensation of the Spirit ; and with us the ques- 
tion should be^ why have we not more of this 
Divine influence ? What has provoked the Lord 
to withhold from us the genial influences of his 
grace ? Instead of being at any time astonished 
that our ministry is so much blessed^ we should 
enquire why it is not always so. When we con«> 
sider what is said^ that God ''willeth not the 
death of a sinner^ but would rather that he should 
repent^ and turn from his wickedness and live ;'' 
when we recollect what he has done for the salva^ 
tion of sinners ; when we add to this^ that the 
gospel is his own truths and preaching his own 
institution^ we are sometimes ready to wonder 
that he does not pour out that influence which is 
necessary to give effect to the purposes of his own 
benevolence^ and almost to inquire, '' What does 
the Lord now wait for V In answer to this, it 
might be replied, ^'He waits for the earnest 
labours of his ministers, the faith of his churdi, 
and the believing prayers of both," 

It is quite perceptible that the necessity of 
Divine influence is rather a dogma of faith, thaa 
a principle of practice, both with ministers and 
their flocks. Did the people really believe it, was 
it matter of inwrought conviction, and there were 
the least seriousness of spirit in their religion^ 



BIVINB INFLUEKCB. 845 

how mucb less dependanoe would there be upon 
men, how much less said about talent^ how much 
leas homage paid to genius and eloquence^ and 
how much more looking up to God by intense 
$ind persevering suppUcation. Recollecting that 
God works by means^ and by means adapted to 
promote the end^ there would be no danger of 
sinking into an enthusiastic and irrational neglect 
of these^ while on the contrary there would be 
more constant and serious attendance upon them. 
The knowledge that preachings and especially 
earnest preaching, is the Spirit's instrumentality, 
would lead men to seek that very instrumentality, 
in order that they might have the blessing. How 
highly would it exalt the minister to consider him 
as the Spirit's instrument, and how important 
would it make the sermon to view it as God's 
means to bless the soul. It is immeasurably to 
sink both, to view them apart from God's agency ; 
it is to cease to view the preacher as an ambas- 
sador for Christ, and instead of this, to listen to 
him only as the lecturer on religion. With what 
sacred awe would he be heard, and with what 
fervent prayer too, by those who viewed him as 
the appointed medium of that influence, which, if 
it be received, would illuminate, renew, and sanc- 
tify the soul ! 

But if it be incumbent on the people to remem« 
ber the dependance of means upon the Divine 



346 THE NECESSITY OF 

blessing, bow macb more so is it tbe daty of min- 
isters themselves ? It is an article of our creed^ it 
is often tbe subject of our sermons, and it is ac- 
knowledged in our prayers ; but after all, is oar 
conviction of dependance upon tbe Spirit so deep, 
so practical, and so constant, as to prevent us 
from attempting any tbing in our own strength, 
and to impel us to be strong only in tbe Lord, 
and in tbe power of bis migbt ? Do we conduct 
tbe pursuits of tbe study, as well as regulate tbe 
prayers of tbe closet, by tbis conviction ? Do we 
with child-like simplicity, and in the very spirit we 
inculcate upon our hearers in reference to their 
own personal salvation, habitually give ourselves 
up to tbe guidance and blessing of this Divine 
Agent ? Do we look up for wisdom to guide us 
in the selection of our texts, and tbe composition of 
our sermons ? Do the eye and tbe heart go up 
to heaven, as we think and write for tbe people ? 
Do we go to our pulpit in a praying frame, as well 
as in a preaching one; praying, even while we 
preach, for our people, as well as for ourselves ? 
Do we thus clothe ourselves with Omnipotence, 
and go forth as with the Lord ever before us ? 
Do we recollect that from all that crowd of im- 
mortal souls before us, we shall gather nothing 
but human praise or censure, except tbe Lord be 
with us; that not one dark mind will be illu- 
mined^ not one hard heart softened^ not one 



DIVINE INFLUENCE. 347 

inquiring soul directed, not one wounded spirit 
healed, not one uneasy conscience appeased^ unless 
God the Spirit do it ? Do we really want to 
accomplish these objects, or merely to deliver a 
sermon that shall please the people, and gratify 
our own vanity ? If the former, how entire, how 
confident, how believing, should be our sense of 
dependance upon something far higher than the 
best and most appropriate instrumentality ! Such 
a feeling of dependance would cramp none of the 
energies of our soul, would stunt none of our 
powers, quench none of our fire, repress none of 
our intensity of manner. So far from this, we 
should derive from it unspeakable advantage in 
addressing our hearers; a seriousness, tender- 
ness, and majesty, would pervade our discourses, 
beyond what the greatest unassisted talent could 
command; a something superhuman would rest 
upon us ; a divine glory would irradiate us, and 
we should speak in power and demonstration of 
the Spirit. " Possessed of this celestial unction, 
we should be under no temptation to neglect a 
plain gospel, in quest of amusing speculations and 
unprofitable novelties; the most ordinary topics 
would open themselves with a freshness and inter- 
est, as though we had never considered them 
before ; and the things of the Spirit would display 
their inexhaustible variety and depth. We shall 
pierce the invisible worlds we shall look^ so to 



348 THE NECESSITY OF 

speak, into eternity, and present the very esseoee 
and core of religion, while too many preachem, 
for want of spiritual discernment, rest satisfied 
with the surface and the shell. We shall not 
allow ourselves to throw one grain of incense oii 
the altar of vanity, and shall forget ourselves so 
completely, as to convince our hearers we do so ; 
and displacing every thing else from the attention, 
leave nothing to be felt or thought of, but the 
majesty of truth, and the realities of eternity/'* 
The preacher who cherishes such a frame of mind 
will appear with a radiance not less dazzUng per- 
haps than that of genius, but far more sacred, 
heavenly, and divine; and when carried to his 
highest pitch of earnestness and dependance, he 
will seem almost to reach the sublime symbol of 
the apocalypse, of the angel standing in the sun. 

'^ But this kind goeth not forth but by fasting 
and prayer." A deep, practical conviction of th« 
need of the Spirit, would make us men of prayer, 
would send us much to our closets, and keep us 
there. Here perhaps is the cause why we have 
not more success in our ministry, and are not 
more frequently and more heartily gladdened by 
the conversion of souls to God; we seek to be 
men of the pulpit merely, and are not sufficiently 
men of the closet. It is a mystery in God's 

* Mr. Hall ** On the Discouragements and Support of th» 
Christian Ministry. '^ 



DIVINE INFLUENCE. 849 

moral government that he should make the com- 
munications of his grace for the salvation of sin-: 
ners dependant in any degree upon the prayers of 
others ; yet he does so^ and we know it ; and yet 
knowing it^ how little have we been affected by it 
and stirred up to prayer on this account! We 
have uttered our complaints of the fruitlessness of 
our ministry long enough before one another ; but 
as Dr. Wilson says in his Introduction to the 
'^ Reformed Pastor," " One day spent in fasting 
and prayer to God, is worth a thousand days of 
complaint and lamentation before men." The 
{Author of tliis work can assure his brethren that 
it is not with any disposition to accuse them, and 
exalt or exculpate himself, that he writes thus. 
He takes his full share of blame in this deficiency 
of a spirit of fervent prayer, and his full share of 
humiliation too, on that account. The activities 
of the age, which require us to be so much in 
public, may furnish some mitigation of blame, if 
not an excuse, for the too little time spent in the 
fervour of private prayer. Devotion is damped by 
business. Still even with this palliation, we are 
verily guilty, for we do not pray as if we believed 
we were sent to save souls from death, and that 
we could not be successful in a single instance 
without the grace of God. Who of us can 
read the diaries of such men as Doddridge, and 
Brainerd, and Fayson, and Martyn, and very many 



350 THE NECESSITY OP 

others^ and not stand reproved for our lamentable 
deficiency in the exercise of prayer. Perhaps in 
modern times there was never so much of aocial 
prayer, and never less of private. We introduce 
all our business transactions with prayer, and too 
often in a kind of business spirit, and with a sad 
want of sincerity, seriousness, and deep devotion ; 
so that the very frequency and want of reverence 
with which we engage in these exercises of devotion, 
tends to diminish the spirit of prayer. Nothing 
is more to be dreaded than a depression of the 
spirit of devotion, and nothing more intensely to 
be desired than its elevation. A praying ministry 
must be an earnest one, and an earnest ministry a 
praying one. Let us then feel ourselves called 
upon by all the circumstances of the times to 
abound more and more in fervent supplications. 
Let us, if we can in no other way command more 
time for prayer, take it from study or from sleep. 
We have neither right nor reason to expect the 
Spirit, if we do not ask for his gracious influence 
and without him we can do nothing. Let us take 
care lest a bustling activity, and the endless mul- 
tiplication of societies, should supplant, instead of 
calling forth as they ought to do, a feeling of 
intense devotion. We never more needed prayer 
we were never in more danger of neglecting it. 
There is plausibility in the excuse that we had 
better abridge the time of praying than the time 



DIVINE INFLUENCE. 351 

of acting. But it will be found in the end that 
doings carried on at the sacrifice of prayer, will 
end in confusion and vanity. A public spirit, 
even in the cause of religion, however prevalent 
or energetic, if it be not maintained in a feeling of 
dependance upon God, will be regarded by him as 
the image of jealousy in the temple, which maketh 
jealous. Our sermons are the power of men, or 
perhaps we might say their weakness; but our 
prayers are in a modified sense the power of God. 
Let us not slacken in preaching, but let us quicken 
in devotion : let us not quench a ray of intellect, 
but let us add to it the warmth of devotion : let 
us labour as if the salvation of souls depended 
upon our own unaided energies, and then let us 
feel as did the apostle when he said, " though I be 
nothing." The eternal destinies of our hearers 
hang not only upon our sermons, but upon our 
prayers ; we carry out the purposes of our mission, 
not only in the pulpit, but in the closet ; and may 
never expect to be successful ministers of the New 
Covenant, but by this two-fold importunity of 
first beseeching sinners to be reconciled to God, 
and then beseeching God to pour out his Spirit 
upon them : thus we honour his wisdom in the 
use of the means he has appointed, and then his 
power by confessing our dependance upon his grace. 
Baxter concludes his " Reformed Pastor," with 
an expression of his confidence in the usefulness of 



852 NECESSITY OP DIVINE INFLUENCE. 

the book he had written, which it would be unwar- 
rantable and ridiculous vanity in me to adopt in 
reference to mine, at least in any other way than 
that of hope and prayer ; and in this spirit I bor- 
row the language of that great and holy man, and 
say, "I have now, brethren, done with my advice, 
and leave you to the practice. Though the proud 
receive it with scorn, and the selfish and slothful 
with distaste, or even with indignation, I doubt 
not but Grod will use it, in despite of the opposition 
of sin and Satan, to the awakening of many of his 
servants to their duty, and to the promotion of a 
work of right reformation : and that his blessing 
will accompany the present undertaking for the 
saving of many souls, the peace of you that under- 
take and perform it, the exciting of his servants 
throughout the nation to second you, and the 
increase of the purity and unity of his churches. 
Amen." 



THE END. 



PRINTED BV B. fil'DtiON, BlKMlNOHAM. 



A LIST OP BOOKS 



SOLD BT 



HAMILTON, ADAMS, & CO., 

33, PATERNOSTER ROW. 



ABERCROMBIE'S INQUIRIES CONCERNING the INTELLECTUAL 
POWERS, and the INVESTIGATION of TRUTH. New Edition. 
Foolscap, 6s. 6d. cloth. 

— ESSAYS and TRACTS; including, Harmony of Christian Faith and 
Character; Culture and Discipline of the Mind; Think on these XhingBf 
&c. &c. 18mo. 3«. 6d. cloth. 

ANDERSON'S NATIVE IRISH and their DESCENDANTS. Third Edi- 
tion, improved. 12mo. 2«. 6d. cloth. 

BARTLETTS WALKS about the CITY and ENVIRONS of JERUSALEM ; 
embracing the principal objects of interest, many of which have not been 
drawn or described m any previous publication. With 9 Engravings, s 
Map, and 40 Woodcuts. 8vo. 10«. 6d. cloth. 

BICKERSTETH'S SCRIPTURE HELP; designed to assist in Reading the 
Bible profitably. Nineteenth Edition. Foolscap, S«. doth. 

<— TREATISE on PRAYER ; designed to assist in the Devoat Diachaige 
of that Duty. Sixteenth Edition. Foolscap, S«. cloth. 

— FAMILY PRAYERS: being a Complete Course for Eight Weeks ; with 
additional Prayers suited to the Fasts and Festivals of the Church, and the 
various Occasions and Circumstances of a Family. Ninth Thousand. 
Foolscap, St. cloth ; 9«. morocco. 

BIRTHDAY (The) By the Author of " Gideon," &c. 12mo. Ss. 6d. cloth. 

BLUNrs LECTURES upon the HISTORY of JACOB. Fifteenth Edition. 
12mo. is. 6d. cloth. 

upon the HISTORY of ST. PETER. Seventeenth Edition. 4s. 6d. 

upon the HISTORY of ABRAHAM. Eleventh Edition. 6*. 6d. 

upon the HISTORY of ST. PAUL. Ninth Edit. 2v. Ss.6d. each. 

upon the HISTORY of OUR LORD and SAVIOUR JESUS 

CHRIST. Tenth Edition. 3 vols. 5s. 6d. each. 

upon the HISTORY of EUSHA. Fourth Edition. 5*. 6d. 

^ DISCOURSES upon some of the DOCTRINAL ARTICLES of the 
CHURCH of ENGLAND. Eighth Edition. 5s. 6d. 

— PRACTICAL EXPOSITION of the EPISTLES to the SEVEN 
CHURCHES of ASIA. Fourth Edition. 5s. Sd. 

— SERMONS, preached in Trinity Church, Upper Chelsea. Sixth Edit. 6*. 

— FAMILY EXPOSITION of the PENTATEUCH. Genesis— Exodus and 
Leviticus — Numbers and Deuteronomy. 8 vols. 6s. each. 

— POSTHUMOUS SERMONS. New Edition. 3 vols. 6s. each. 



-IiOHSOK : HaIIXIjTOK, AsaUB, AXn Co.- 



X 



LIST OF NEW BOOK8 



BLACK'S GENERAL ATLAS of the WORLD. New Edition. Con 
ing 61 Folio Maps, from the latest and moat Authentic Sources, 
Geographical Descriptions, Statistical Tables, and an Index of al 
Names occurring in tlie several Maps, amountin{ir to upwards of M 
with their latitudes and longitudes. Folio, 56«. hs& morocco. 

BONAR'S (REV. HORAT1U8) NIGHT of WEEPING ; or. Words fin 
Suffering Family of God. 18mo. 2*. cloth. 

BORROWS BIBLE in SPAIN ; or, the Journeys, Adventures, and 
prisonments of an Englishman, in an Attempt to circulate the Scrift 
in the Peninsula. New Edition. 12mo. 6«. cloth. 

BRADLEY'S SERMONS, preached in the Parish Church of Hiffh Wyeoi 
Eleventh Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 21«. cloth. 

— PAROCHIAL SERMONS, preached at Glasbury, Brecknockshire Eii 
Edition. 10#. 6d. ' 

— SERMONS, preached in St. James' Chapel, Clapham. Sixth Edit 
10«. 6d. 

— PRACTICAL SERMONS, for every Sunday and principal Holydai 
the YEAR. Second Edition. 2 vols. 21*. ^ ' 

— SERMONS, preached chiefly at the Celebration of the Lord's Sup 
Second Edition. 8vo. 10«. 6d. 

BREAY'S (REV. JOHN GEORGE) MEMOIR, with a Selection Ihnn 
Correspondence. To which is added a Visitation Sermon, preachec 
Coleshill, near Birmingham, in 1838. Fifth Edition. 12mo. 7s. doth. 

BRIDGES' (REV. CHARLES) EXPOSITION of PSALM CXIX., as H 
trative of the Character and Exercises of Christian Experience. £: 
teenth Edition. 12mo. 7«. cloth; ll«. morocco. 

CAMPBELL'S POETICAL WORKS. Illustrated by thirty-seven Woodi 
from designs by Harvey. Foolscap, 8<. cloth; I2«. morocco. 

CARLYLE'S FRENCH REVOLUTION: a History. Second Edit 
S vols. 12mo. 25«. cloth. 

CECIL'S REMAINS. With a View of his Character, hy the Rbv. Jos] 
Pratt, B.D., F.A.S. To which is prefixed a Memoir of his Life. Twe 
Edition. Foolscap, 5*, doth ; 9«. morooco. 

CHALMERS' (REV. DR.) WORKS. Complete In 25 volumes, 4/. 7«. ( 
or, any subject may be had bound as a distinct Work, If preferred at is, 
volume. ' 

CHAPTERS ON FLOWERS. By Chaulotte Eliza bstr. NewEditJ 
with Woodcuts. Fodscap, 6s. cloth ; 10«. morocco. 

CHRISTIAN RETIREMENT; or, Spiritual Exercises of the Heart 
a Layman. (T. S. B. Rsadb, Esa.) Fifteenth Edition. 12mo. 6s 
doth; 1 Of. 6d. morocco. 

Bt thb samb Attthok: CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCE, as DISPLAY 
in the LIFE and WRITINGS of ST. PAUL. Fourth Edition. 12i 
6s. cloth; 10s. morocco. Also, 

CHRISTIAN MEDITATIONS ; or, the Believers' Companion in SditB 
Second Edition. 12mo. 7s. cloth ; Us. morocco. 

CLOSE'S (REV. F.) FIFTY-TWO SKETCHES of SERMONS on MlRn 
LANEOUS SUBJECTS. 8vo. 6#. cloth. «*ov-j 

DALTON'S COMMENTARY. An Explanatory and Practical Comment 
on the New Testament of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Intended chieflv i 
Help to Family Devotion. Edited and continued by the Rev. W Dalt 
M.A., Wolverhampton. Second Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 24*. cloth. 

— FAMILY ALTAR ; or, a Series of Prayers suited to Domestic 'WamI 
for every Day in the Month ; with Occasional Prayers and tJLJL^ 
Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s. doth. ^ Mcditatk 



-LOHTDOM : TSautltov . Ad*mb. awo Oo.« 



AND NEW EDITIONS. 



D'AUBIGNE'S HISTORY of the REFORMATION in the SIXTEENTH 
CENTURY. The Translation careftilly revised by Dk. D'Aubighs, who 
has also made various Additions not hitherto published. Vols. I. to III., 
Ss. each ; Vol. IV., 5«. cloth. 

DALE'S (REV. THOMAS) SABBATH COMPANION; behig Essays on 
First Principles of Christian Faith and Practice. Designed especiaUy for 
the Use of Young Persons. 2 vols, foolscap, 6«. 6d. each, cloth. 

— GOOD SHEPHERD and the CHOSEN FLOCK; showing the Progress 
of the Sheep of Christ through the Wilderness of this World to the Pas- 
tures of the Heavenly Zion — an Exposition of the Twenty-third Psalm. 
Foolscap, 5s. cloth. 

DARWIN'S JOURNAL of RESEARCHES into the NATURAL HISTORY 
and GEOLOGY of the COUNTRIES visited during the Voyage of H.M. 
Ship Beaole Round the World, under Capt. Fitzroy, R.N. Crown 8vo. 
&r. 6d. cloth. 

DAVY'S COTTAGE SERMONS ; or. Short Discourses addressed to Plain 
People ; being principally designed for the use of Pious Cottagers, and 
those in humble life who have not leisure to read, at the seasons of Social 
Prayer or Family Worship, more extended Discourses. 2 vols. 7s. half-bd. 

DERRY. A Tale of the Revoluticm. By Charlotte Elizabeth. Eighth 
Edition. Foolscap, 5s. cloth. 

DICK'S (DR.) CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHER; or, the Connexion of Science 
and Philosophy with Religion. Ninth Edition, corrected and enlarged. 
12mo. Ss. cloth. ; or, common edition, 2 vols. 4s. cloth. 

DRAPER'S (REV. BOURNE HALL) STORIES irom the OLD and NEW 
TESTAMENTS, on an improved Plan. Fifth Edition. 12mo. 6s. hf. bd. 

DUNCAN'S (MRS. MARY LUNDIE) MEMOIR. Being RecoUections of 
a Daughter, by her Mother. Fourth Edition. Fcap. 4s. 6d. cloth ; Bs. 6d. mor. 

— (DR.) PHILOSOPHY of the SEASONS ; iUustrat'ing the Perfections of 
God in the Phenomena of the Year. Fourth Edit. 4 vols, foolscap, 24s. 
cloth. 

— (MRS.) MISSIONARY LIFE in SAMOA, as exhibited in the Journals 
of the late Georoe Archibald Lundib, during the Revival in Tutuila 
in 1340—41. Third Edition, enlarged. 12 mo. 4s. 6d. cloth. 

EDGEWORTH'S PARENT'S ASSISTANT; or. Stories for Children. 8 vols. 
18mo. 7s. 6d. cloth, 

ELLIS' (MRS.) WOMEN of ENGLAND, their Social Duties and Domestic 
Habits. New Edition. Foolscap, 5s. cloth. 

— DAUGHTERS of ENGLAND, their Position in Society, Character, and 
Responsibilities. Foolscap, 5s. cloth. 

— YOUNG LADIES' READER; or. Extracts from Modem Authors, adapt- 
ed for Educational or Family use; with Observations on Reading Aloud, 
as connected with Social Improvement, and Remarks prefixed to the Di- 
visions of the work. Foolscap, 4s. 6d. cloth. 

EVERETT'S LIFE of SAMUEL HICK (the Village Blacksmith), late of 
Micklefield, Yorkshire. Eighteenth Thousand. 18mo. 3s. 6d. cloth. 

— MEMOIRS of the LIFE, CHARACTER, and MINISTRY of WILUAM 
DAWSON, late of Bambow, near Leeds. Abridged. 12mo. 4s. cloth. 

— SELECTIONS from the CORRESPONDENCE of WILLIAM DAWSON. 
12mo. 4s. cloth. 

— ADAM CLARKE PORTRAYED. Vols. I. and II. (to be completed in 
8 vols.) Foolscap, 5s. 6d. each, cloth. 

EUCHARISTICA : Meditations and Prayers on the Holy Eucharist, fh>m 
Old Sngllsh Divines. With an Introduction, by SAmrsXi Wilbbbvorce, 
D.D. Lord Bishop of Oxford. 82mo. 2s. 6d. cloth; 5t. mococco. 



-liOvsov: HA1CIZ.T0H, Adams, Am Co, 



UftT OF NEW BOOK8 



FAMILY PRAYERS. By the Author of «* Ezplanstaiy and Fkaetkil Cmb- 
mento on the New Teftament.'' ISmo. 4*. BtL doCh. 

FISK'S (REV. GEORGE) PASTOR'S MEMORIAL of EGYPT, the Red 
Sea, the WilderneBses of Sin and Paran, Motmt Sinai, Jenisakm, tod 
other Principal Localities of the Holy Land, Tisited In 1842 Thiid Edition. 
8to. 10«. 6d. cloth. 

FLETCHER'S (REV. ALEXANDER) GUIDE to PAini.Y DEVOTION; 
eontaiuing a Hymn, a Portion of Scripture with Reflectiona, and a Prayer 
for every Morning and Evening of the Year. 4to. iSa. doth. 

FOSTER'S ESSAYS, in a Series of Letters. Nineteenth Edition. Iboli- 
cap, 5s. cloth ; n«. morocco. 

~ LECTURES, delivered at Broadmead Chapel, Bristol. Foolseap, 6s, doth. 

FRY'S (CAROLINE) "THE LISTENER." Ninth Edition. 2 vols, fools, 
cap, 10«. cloth. 

GRAHAM'S (MISS MARY JANE) MEMOIR. By the Rbv. Chablii 
Bridoxs, M.A. Sixth Edition. Foolscap, 6«. doth ; IQs, morocco. 

GRF-SLEY'S (REV. W.) FRANK'S FIRST TRIP to the CONTINENT. 
Foolscap, is. sewed ; 4«. cloth gilt. 

— HOLIDAY TALES. Square, 2s. cloth. 

GRIFFITH'S (REV. THOMAS) SPIRITUAL LIFE. Fifth Edition. ISmo. Ss. 
HALL'S (SIDNEY) TRAVELLING COUNTY ATLAS; with aU the Co«di 

and Railroads accurately laid down and coloured, and eaieAiUy corrected 

to the present time. (4ff Maps.) 8vo. 16«. tuck. 

— (REV. ROBERT; FIFTY SERMONS, delivered chiefly during the hut 
Five Years of his Ministry; Arom Notes taken at the time by the' Rev. 
Thomas GaiNFi ELD, M.A. Second Edition. l2mo. 7«. clotli. 

HAMILTON'S (REV. JAMES) LIFE in EARNEST. Six Lectures on 

Christian Activity and Ardour. ISmo. Is.Sd. cloth. 

— MOUNT of OLIVES, and other Lectures on Prayer. ISmo. U. 6d. cloth. 

— (REV. R. WINTER, D.D ) PRIZE ESSAY on the INSTITUTIONS of 
POPULAR EDUCATION. Second Edition. 12xao. 7s. dothT 

— SERMONS. Second Series. 8vo. 12«. Bd. cloth. 

HARE'S (REV. AUGUSTUS W.) SERMONS to a COUNTRY CfiKnnv. 
GATION. Sixth Edition. 2 vols. 12mo. 16*. cloth. ^wnujii!.- 

H ARRIS'S (REV. DR.) GREAT TEACHER : Characteristica of our Lord'. 
Ministry. Eleventh Thousand. Crown 8vo. 7«. 6i2. cloth. «•«*«*«■ 

HAYDN'S DICTIONARY of DATES and UNIVERSAL REFERENCE. 
relating to all Ages and Nations ; comprehending every remarkable occur! 
rence, Ancient and Modem — comprising a body of information ClassicaL 
Political, and Domestic, from the earliest accounts to the nrJmg^nt *^^M 
New Edition. 8vo. 18*. cloth. preaent ume. 

HEBER'S (BISHOP) NARRATIVE of a JOURNEY throuirh th« TTPPvn 
PROVINCES of INDIA, flrom CALCUTTA to BOMBAY 1824-1825 
An Account of a Journey to Madras and the Southern ProvincM is^a* 
and Letters written in India. 2 vols. 12mo. 12*. cloth. * ^^ 

HEMANS' (BiRS.) POETICAL WORKS : with a Memoir of her Life bv 
her Sister. 7 vols, foolscap, 5*. each, cloth; or 9*. morocnn vtlv^ 
Volume may be had bound as a distinct Work, if preferred ^^ — 

HENRY'S BIBLE. An Exposition of the Old and New Testament. T)w 
Matthew Hsvkt. With Introductory Remarks by the Rev Kn«A«n 
BiCKERSTETH, Rectorof Watton. 6 vols. 4to. 4/. 14*. ed. dnth "■^^^"' 

HILL'S (REV. ROWLAND) LIFE. By the Rev. Edwin Sidx^ p«..^i. 
Edition. Foolscap, 6* doth. »»»ket. Fourth 

HISTORY in all AGES. An accurate Sumnaiy of the RUt^.*. ^ *v 
World. By the Author of " Geography in aD Ages." «« The l¥i.*2-^!u 
Jews hi all Aget." Twelfth Edition. Foolscap, 7s. doth ""'^^y «'**»« 



-liOVDOH : BAUii.T<m, Aoahb, avd Oo^ 



AND NEW EDITIONS. 



UODSOITS (ARCHDEACON) MORNING DISCOURSES, addressed to the 
Congregation of Christ Church, Birmingham. 8vo. S$. cloth. 

HOFLAND'S (MRS.) SON of a GENIUS. Fourteenth Edition. S«. doth. 

HOOK'S (REV. DR.) CHURCH DICTIONARY. Fifth Edition, with many 
additional Articles, and carefully revised. 12mo. lOs. cloth. 

HOWITTS (WILLIAM) BOOK of (ha SEASONS; or. The Calendar of 
Nature. Sixth Edition. Foolscap, 6«. cloth; 10«. morocco. 

JAMES' (REV. JOHN ANGELL) CHRISTIAN FATHER'S PRESENT to 
his CHILDREN. Fourteenth Edition. l2mo. 5«. cloth. 

— CHRISTIAN CHARITY EXPLAINED ; or, the Influence of Religion 
upon Temper. Fifth Edition. 4«. 

— FAMILY MONITOR; or, a Help to Domestic Happiness. Eighth 
Edition. 5«. 6d. 

— CHRISTIAN PROFESSOR ADDRESSED, in a Series of Counsels and 
Cautions. Fifth Edition. 4«. 

— FLOWER FADED; a short Memoir of CLEMENTINE CUVIER. 
Sixth Edition. 2«. 

— WIDOW DIRECTED to the WIDOWS GOD. Second Edition. Fools- 
cap, 3s. ; or, on a common paper, \s. 6d. 

JAY'S DOIAESTIC MINISTER'S ASSISTANT ; or, Prayers for the Use 
of Families. Sixteenth Edition. 8vo. 9s. cloth. 

JESSE'S GLEANINGS in NATURAL HISTORY. Sixth Edition, arranged 
and adapted for Schools. Foolscap, 6s. 6d. cloth. 

JOWETT'S (REV. WILLIAM) CHRISTIAN VISITOR; or. Select Portions 
of the Bible, with Expositions and Prayers. Designed to assist the 
Friends of the Sick and Afflicted. In 4 vols, foolscap, either of which 
may be had separately, Ss. 6d. each, cloth. 

KEITH'S (REV. DR.) EVIDENCE of the TRUTH of the CHRISTIAN 
RELIGION, derived from the literal Fulfilment of Prophecy; particularly 
as illustrated by the History of the Jews, and by the Discoveries of recent 
Travellers. Thirty-third Edition. 12mo. 7s. 6d.; 24mo. 4s. 6d. cloth. 

KENNEDY'S ANNA ROSS, a Story for Children. Eleventh Edition. 2«. 6d. 

— DECISION ; or, Religion must be All, or is Nothing. 2s. 6d. cloth. 

— DUN ALLAN ; or, Know what you Judge. Sixth Edition. 7s, cloth. 

— FATHER CLEMENT ; a Roman Catholic Stoiy. 4s. 6d.,cioih. 

— PROFESSION is not PRINCIPLE; or, the Name of Christian is not 
Christianity. Seventh Edition. Ss. 6d. cloth. 

KITTO'S BIBLE CYCLOPAEDIA. A Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature. 
By JoHK KiTTO, Editor of the "Pictorial Bible," &c., assisted by various 
able Scholars and Divines. 2 vols, royal 8vo. 60«. cloth. 

LAMBERT'S (MISS) HAND-BOOK of NEEDLE-WORK, Decorative and 
Ornamental, including Crochet, Knitting, and Netting. With Illustrative 
Engravings. Foolscap, 6s. 6d. cloth. 

LAYS and BAfXADS from ENGLISH HISTORY, &c. By S. M. Foolscap, 
2s. 6d. sewed ; 3s. 6d. cloth gilt. 

LEWIS' JOURNAL. IMPRESSIONS of AMERICA and AMERICAN 
CHURCHES ; from the Journal of the Rkv. G. Lewis, one of the Depu- 
tation of the Free Church of Scotland to the United States. 6s. 6d. cloth. 

LINE UPON LINE. A Second Series of " Peep of Day," by the same Au- 
thor. Twenty-third Thousand. 2 vols. ISmo. 2s. 6d, each. 

LOUDON'S (MRS.) LADIES' COMPANION to the FLOWER-GARDEN ; 
being an Alphi^tical Arrangement of all the Ornamental Plants usually 
grown in G«rdens and Shrubberies, with frill Directions for their Culture. 
Fourth Edition, with considerable additions and corrections. Fcap. 6s, 6d. 



-Ii(Mn>ov : Haioxton, Asamb, mxv Co.. 



UST OF NEW BOOKS 



M'CHEYNE'8 (REV. ROBERT MURRAY) MEMOIK and REHAOTS. 
By the Rst. Avdksw A. Bovab, CoUaoe. Sixfeaeoth Thonsaad. U, d, 
MAMMA'S BIBLE STORIES, and SEQUEL. Each Sg.Sd. elatb. 

MANNING'S (ARCHDEACON) SERMONS. New £ditioii. 1 Tob. Sra 
] Ox. 6d. each, boards. 

MARKHAM'S HISTORY of ENGLAND, from tha FInt Invaakm bf the 
Romang to the Accetsion or Queen Victoria. With ConTenaticni at the 
end of each Chapter. New Edition. ISmo. 7s, 6d. cloth. 

— HISTORY of FRANCE, from the Conquest of Gaul hy Jnlina Cesar to 
the Reign of Louis Philippe. New Edition. l2mo. 7s, 6d. doth. 

MARSDEN'S (REV. J. B.) DISCOURSES for the FESTIVALS of the 
CHURCH of ENGLAND. With Notes. 8vo.l2«. cloth. ^^ 

MARTYN'S (REV. HENRY) LIFE. By the Rbt. Johm SAmaaar M.A 

New Edition, enlarged. Fodscap, 6*. cloth. ' 

— LETTERS. New Edition. (Uniform wtth the Life.) ^c^, eg. eloth. 

MINIATURE EDITIONS. 
Uniformly prinied in 82mo. eMh letUred, 

Alleine's Life, U. 6d. 

Beveridge's Private Thoughts npon 
Religion, U. 6d. 

Bogatz]E> 's Golden Treasury, Is. 6d. 

Cecil's Visit to the House of Mourn- 
ing, Is. 
■ Advice to Servants, It. 



Doddiidje's Seven Sermons to Young 

Persons, 1«. 6d. 

Hymns, 2*. 

on R^eueration, 2s. 

Flavel on Providence, It. 6d. 
^'s Husbandry Spiritualizedi 

It. 6d, 

Saint Indeed, Is. 6d. 

Token for Mourners, it. 6d. 



Grosvenor's Mourner, It. 6d. 
Hamilton's Consolatory Address, It. 

MIRIAM ; or, the Power of Truth. A Jewish Tale. By the Author id 



Hart's Hymna, Is, 

Henry's Pleasantnesa of a Relidoos 

Life. 1*. 6d, * 

Ken's Retired Chriatiaa, Is. 6d. 
Mason's Believer'a Pocket CorniM- 

nion. Is. '^ 

OIney Hymns, 2s, 

Pascal's Thow«lita on Religion, It. 6d, 

Romaine's Life of Faith, la. 6d. 

S?^ ®' ^*">» 2#. M, 

T-:|J''^!2> of Faith, Is.M. 

Scougal's Life or God in the Soul of 

Man, Is. 6d, 
Sibbes' Bruised Reed, Is. Sd. 
Thomas i Kempia' ImitaUon of Christ, 

It. 6d. ' 

Walker's Chriatian, Is. 6d. 
Watson on Contentment, is. 



" Influence." Eighth Edition. Foolscap, 6s. doth. 

MORE'S (MRS. HANNAH) MEMOIRS. By Wxlt.tam RoBaaTS Eso. 
New Edition, aliridged. Foolscap, 6t. cloth; lOt. morocco. ' 

MORISON'S (REV. DR.) FAMILY PRAYERS for BVERY MORNING 
and EVENING THROUGHOUT the YEAR. Additional PtaTenftr 
Special Occasions. Royal 8vo. 2lt. cloth. 

NARRATIVE of a MISSION of INQUIRY to the JEWS flrom the CHURCH 
of SCOTLAND in 1839. Ntiieteenth Thousand. 12mo. Ss. 6d. doth. 

NATURALISrS POETICAL COMPANION; with Notes. Selected by the 
Rev. Edward Wilson, M.A. F.L.S. Second Edition, with 57 lUu^za* 
tions by W. H. Paxoa. 12mo. 7s. 6d. cloth ; lOt. 6d. morocco. 

NEWTON'S (REV. JOHN) CARDIPHONIA; or, the Utterance of tbe 
Heart. 24mo. St. 6d. cloth. «i ut iiw 

— LIFE, with Selections from his Correspondence. Foolscap, £«. cloth. 

NURSERY RHYMES, TALES, and JINGLES. £venrm«e iUustiated br 
an elegant Woodcut Border. Small 4to. 7s. cloth ; or Illuminated, lOs 6^ 

PALMER'S (REV. WILLIAM) COMPENDIOUS ECCLESIASTirAT 
HISTORY, from the EARLIEST PERIOD to the PaE«^¥^TTMii 
New Edition, enlarged. 12mo. 4s. 6<<. cloth. — *«-u:«i j.XBfi. 



-LoMsoH : Hahctov, Adams, ajxv Co, 



AND NEW EDITIONS. 



PARTING GIFT to a CHRISTIAN FRIEND. Twentieth Edition. 82mo. 
or 48mo. U. 6d. cloth ; 2s. 6d. silk. 

PAXTON'S ILLUSTRATIONS of SCRIPTURE, ftrom the GEOGRAPHY, 
NATURAL HISTORY, and MANNERS and CUSTOMS of the EAST. 
Third Edition. Revised and greatly enlarged by the Rev. Robert 
Jamiesom. 4 vols, foolscap, 24«. cloth. 

PEEP OF DAY ; or, A Series of the earliest Religious Instruction that the 
Infant Mind ^'s capable of receiving. Fortieth Thousand,. 18mo. 3s. cloth. 

PERFECT PEACE : Letters— Memorial of the late Tohm Warkem Howell, 
Esq., of Bath, M.R.C.S. By the Rev. David Pitcairk, Minister of 
Evie and Rendall. With ap Introduction by the Rev. John Stevsmbom, 
Author of "Christ on the Cross; an Exposition of the Twenty Second 
Psalm." Sixteenth Thousand. Foolscap, 2s. 6d. cloth. 

PHILOSOPHY in SPORT made SCIENCE in EARNEST; being an Attempt 
to Illustrate the First Principles of Natural Philosophy, by the aid of the 
Popular Toys and Sports of Youth. Sixth Edition. Fcap. 8«. cloth. 

PICK'S BIBLE STUDENTS CONCORDANCE; by which the English 
Reader may be enabled readily to ascertain the literal meaning of any 
word in the Sacred Original. Royal 8vo. 35s. cloth. 

PIETAS PRIVATA. The Book of Private Devotion ; a Series of Prayers 
and Meditations; with an Introductory Essay on Prayer; chiefly horn 
the Writings of Hannah More. S2mo. 2s. cloth. 

POEMS and PICTURES; a Collection of Ballads, Songs, and other Poems, 
Ancient and Modem, including both Originals and Selections. With one 
hundred Designs on Wood (besides Border Ornaments, &c.) by Hokslxt, 
Dycs, Cope, Redobave, Selous, Frakklih, Creswick, Pickers- 
GILL, Tenniel, Corbould, &c. Eugravcd by Thompson, Lintov, 
Dalziel, Branston, &c. Small 4to. 42<. cloth ; 52*. 6d. mor. el^ant. 

POLLOK'S TALES of the COVENANTERS. With a Biographical Sketch 
by the Rsv. A. Thomson. Fourth Edition, with Illustrations. 3s. 6d. cl. 

— COURSE of TIME. A Poem, in Ten Books. Eighteenth Edition. 
Foolscap, 7s. 6d. cloth ; 11«. 6d. morocco. 

RICHARDSON'S (REV. JAMES) MORNING and EVENING PRAYERS 
for ONE MONTH, with other occasional Forms for the use of Families. 
Third Edition, enlarged. Foolscap, 3s. cloth; 

RICHMOND'S (REV. LEGH) MEMOIR. By the Rev. T. S. Grimshawb, 
A.M. Eleventh Edition. Foolscap, 6«. cloth. 

~ DOMESTIC PORTRAITURE ; or, the Successful Application of RelU 
gious Principle in the Education of a Family, exemplified in the Memoirs 
of three of the deceased Children of the Rev. Legh Richmond. Sixth 
Edition. Foolscap, 6s. clotln 

ROBERTS' (REV. ARTHUR) VILLAGE SERMONS. New Edition. 
Six volumes 12mo. 4s 6d. each, cloth. 

ROWCROFT'S TALES of the COLONIES; or, the Adventures of an Emi- 
grant. New Edition. Foolscap, 6s. cloth. 

SACRED POETRY. Fifteenth Edition. 2 vols. 32mo. 3s. each, half-bound. 

SCENES of COMMERCE, by Land and Sea. By the late Rev. Isaac 
Taylor, of Ongar. Fourth Edition. 12ino. 7«. 6d. half- bound. 

SCOTT'S (REV. THOMAS) LIFE; including a Narrative drawn up by 
himself, and copious Extracts from his Letters. Ninth Edition, revised. 
Foolscap, 6«. cloth. 

SINCLAIR'S (MISS) HOLIDAY HOUSE. A Series of Tales. Fcap. 5s.6d.ci. 

STRICKLAND'S (MISS) LIVES of the QUEENS of ENGLAND, from the 
NORMAN CONQUEST ; with Anecdotes of their Courts, now first pub- 
lished from Official Records and other Documents, private as well as pidilio. 
10 vols, crown 8vo. 10«. 6d. each, doth. 



•XoKOOH : EamHiIOV, Adams, axtd Co^ 



LIST OF NEW BOOKS. 



TAYL0R*8 HOLT LIVING and DTING; toRethcr with Prayers contain 
ing the whole Duty of a Christian, and the Parts of Devotion fitted to a] 
Oceasioni and furnished for all Necessities. Foolscap, 7s, cloth. 

TATLOR'S (JANE) CONTRIBUTIONS of a a Foolscap, 7*, cloth. 

TENNYSON'S POEMS. New Edition. 2 vols, foolscap, 12«. cloth; oi 
hound in one vol , i6«. morocco. 

THORNTON'S (HENRY, Esa., M.P.) FAMILY PRAYERS. Nineteentl 
Edition. 12mo. S«. cloth. 

THOUGHTS of PEACE for the CHRISTIAN SUFFERER. A Selection o 
Short Passages Arom Scripture and Sacred Poetry. Seventh Edition 
S2mo. 2«. cloth ; 5«. morocco. 

TRUE STORIES from ANCIENT, MODERN, and ENGLISH HISTORY 
12rao. 7$. 6<I. each, half-bound. 

WALKER'S FIFTY-TWO LECTURES on the CHURCH CATECHISM 
including; the Creed, the Ten Commandments, and other Important Sub 
Jects of Practical Religion. A New Edition, with Four additional Sermoni 
on the Creed, by the R«v. John Lawson; and a Brief Introductory 
Memoir, by the Rev. Edwakd Bickxrstrth. 8vo. \2s. cloth. 

WARDLAWS (REV. DR.) CHRISTIAN ETHICS ; or. Moral Philosophy oi 
the Principles of Divine Revelation. Fourth Edition. Fcap. 6«. 6d. cloth. 

— LIFE of JOSEPH, and the LAST YEARS of JACOB. A Book foi 
Youth and for Age. Foolscap, 6«. cloth. 

WEBB'S (MRS.) NAOMI ; or, The Last Days of Jerusalem. Fourth Edition 
Foolscap, 7«. 6d. cloth. 

WEEK (The) ; conUinlng The First and Last Day of the Week, and Th< 
Week Completed. New Edition. 32mo. 2«. 6<2. cloth. 

Bt thb same AuTHoa, avd uvivorm ih size akd paicx : 



Memory's Records. 
Going to Service. 
The Bread of Deceit. 



The Commandment with Promise. 
My Station and its Duties. 
The Guilty Tongue. 

WHITE'S (REV. HUGH) MEDITATIONS and ADDRESSES, chiefly oi 
the Subject of Prayer. Thirteenth Thousand. Foolscap, 5s. cloth. 

WILBERFORCE'S (BISHOP of OXFORD) SERMONS. 12mo. 7*. cloth. 

— AGATHOS; and other Sunday Stories. Tenth Edition. l8mo. 2s. M 
doth. 

— ROCKY ISLAND, and other Similitudes. Eighth Edition. 2s. 6d. cloth 

— (WM.) LIFE. By his Sons. New Edition, abridged. Foolscap, 6«. cloth 

WOODROOFFE'S (MRS.) SHADES of CHARACTER; or. The Infan 
Pilgrim. 2 vols. 12s. cloth. 

— HISTORY of MICHAEL KEMP, the Happy Farmer's Lad. Seventl 
Edition. Foolscap, 4s. cloth. 

WINSLOW (REV. OCTAVIUS) on PERSONAL DECLENSION and RE 
VIVAL of RELIGION in the SOUL. Third Edition. Fcap. 5s. doth. 

WOLFE'S (REV. CHARLES) REMAINS, with a Brief Memoir of his Life 
By the Vek. Ahchdbacon Russell, M.A. Ninth Edition, with an En- 
graving of the Monument in St. Paul's Cathedral to the Memoiy of Sii 
John Moore. Foolscap, 6s. cloth ; lOs. morocco. 

WOMAN'S MISSION. Twelfth Edition. Foolscap, 3*. 6^ cloth. 

WORDSWORTH'S POETICAL WORKS. 7 vols, foolscap, 85*. cloth ; or, 

one volume medium 8vo. 20c. cloth. 

YOUNG LADY'S FRIEND (The). A Manual of Practical Advice and In- 
struction to Young Females entering upon the Duties of Life after qaittins 
School. Fifth Edition. Foolscap, 3«. 6d. doth. 



-LoKDOK : 8. Bentley ft Co., Shoe Lane.. 



{ 



■ I 

i 




..... \ 



